i- 


*-  vs 


r » *-  ■ '  ■  ■■  '   - 


*< 


JV,iL  *'-'\\- -!  *i  '  -»,<••> -J >  J.'  ^' ',  j^s  !^: s- 


1  •       s  ■:      ■ 

'i       t    \ 


DEC  20\Wi 


THREE  BOOKS  OF 


OCCULT  PHILOSOPHY  OR  MAGIC 


BY  THE  FAMOUS  MYSTIC 


/ 


HENRY   CORNELIUS    AGRIPPA 

VON    NETTESHEIM 

COUNSELOR  TO  CHARLES  THE  FIFTH,  EMPEROR  OF  GERMANY,  AND 
JUDGE  OF  THE  PREROGATIVE  COURT. 


T 


BOOK   ONE  — NATURAL   MAGIC 

WHICH  INCIiTJDES 

THE  EARLY  LIFE  OF  AGRIPPA,  HIS   SEVENTY-FOUR  CHAPTERS  ON 

NATURAL  MAGIC,  NEW  NOTES,  ILLUSTRATIONS,  INDEX, 

AND  OTHER  ORIGINAL  AND  SELECTED  MATTER. 

EDITED  BY 

WILLIS  F.  WHITEHEAD 


By  Direction  of  the  Brotherhood  of  Magic: 
THE    MAGIC    MIRROR 

A  MESSAGE  TO  MYSTICS  CONTAINING  FULL,  INSTRUCTIONS  ON  ITS  MAKE  AND  USE. 


"  A  quaint  and  curious  volume  of  forgotten  lore."— Poe. 


CHICAGO 
HAHN  &  WHITEHEAD 

I^i^qV*^  ^ 


Copyrighted, 

November  17,  1897,  by 

Hahn  &  Whitehead,  Chicago. 


HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 


6J1 


if   ^   if   ^   ir   i^  -k 

^  THIS  -Cz  WORK    i^ 

•  OF  •  OCCULT  • 
^  PHILOSOPHY,  i^ 
if  OR  <1X  NATURAL  ^ 

i^  MAGIC,  •  BY  ■j:;r 
if  i^  if   ^  if   ^  if  THAT  ^  PURE  if   ^  ir  i^  if   -d  if 
i:i  MYSTIC,  •  THINKER  i^  AND  lir  TEACHER,  *  SCHOLAR,  ^ 

*  STATESMAN,  *  PHILOSOPHER  ^  AND  i:^  AUTHOR,      * 

^   HENRY  ^  CORNELIUS  ^  AGRIPPA   ^ 

•  WAS  i;:?  BROUGHT  i^  FORTH  t;  BY  i^  HIM  *  THOUGH  * 
•5:1?  SLANDER,  i^  EDICT,  *  AND  -j^  ENEMIES  i^  OPPOSED.  -^ 
if   ^  if   i^   if   i^  ic   ^b:e^ lived,  if  ^   ic   i:^  if   ^  if 

iZ  toiled  *  AND  1!^ 

•  TRIUMPHED  IN  * 
•i^  THIS  -Cz  CAUSE,  i^ 
if  iz  TO  ^  THOSE  * 
iz  WHO  •  HAVE  i^r 
if  AiIIrLOVEi^IrFOR  • 
-Cz  TRUTH  •  AND  t!!? 

•  MYSTIC  iz  ART  * 
ir  THIS  •  NEW  -i^ 
if  EDITION  •  IS  • 
^  DEDICATED.  *    -^ 

if  i^  if   -Cz   if   iz  if 


A^rippa. 

Mr.  Henry  Morley,  an  eminent  English  scholar,  in  his  Life  of  Cornelius 
Agrippa,  makes  these  tributary  statements: 

He  secured  the  hest  honors  attainable  in  art  and  arms ;  was  acquainted 
with  eight  languages,  being  the  master  of  six.  His  natural  bent  had  been 
from  early  youth  to  a  consideration  of  Divine  Mysteries.  To  learn  these 
and  teach  them  to  others  had  been  at  all  times  his  chief  ambition.  He  is 
distinguished  among  the  learned  for  his  cultivation  of  Occult  Philosophy, 
upon  which  he  has  written  a  complete  work. 


CONTEI^TS. 


Introductory. 

Editors  Preface 13 

Early  Life  of  Agrippa 15 

Cornelius  Agrippa  to  the  Reader 25 

Agrippa  to  Trithemius 28 

Trithemius  to  Agrippa 31 


Natural  Ma^ic. 

I.  How  Magicians  Collect  Virtues  from  the  Three- 
fold World,  is  Declared  in  these  Three  Books . .     33 

II.   What  Magic  Is,  What  are  the  Parts  thereof  and 

Hoiv  the  Professors  thereof  must  he  Qualified .  .     34 

III.  Of  the  Four  Elements,  their  Qualities,  and  Mut- 

ual Mixtions 38 

IV.  Of  a  Three  fold  Consideration  of  the  Elements .  .     40 

V.    Of  the  Wonderful  Natures  of  Fire  and  Earth.  . .     42   x. 

VI.    Of  the   Wonderful   Natures  of  Water,  Air  and 

Winds 44 

VII.  Of  the  Kinds  of  Compounds,  tvhat  Relation  they 
stand  in  to  the  Elements,  and  tvhat  Relation 
there  is  betwixt  the  Elements  themselves  and 
the  Soul,  Senses  and  Dispositions  of  Men 53 

VIII.  How  the  Elements  are  in  the  Heavens,  in  Stars, 
in  Devils,  in  Angels,  and,  lastly,  in  God  him- 
self      55 

6  LIST   OF   CONTENTS. 

IX.   Of  the  Virtues  of  things  Natural,  depending 

immediately  upon  Elements 58 

X.   Of  the  Occult  Virtues  of  Things 59 

X  XI.  How  Occult  Virtues  are  Infused  into  the  several 
kinds  of  Things  by  Ideas,  through  the  Help 
of  the  Soul  of  the  World,  and  Bays  of  the 
Stars;  and  what  Things  abound  most  ivith 
this  Virtue 62 

XII.  How  it  is  that  Particular  Virtues  are  Infused 
into  Particular  Individuals,  even  of  the  same 
Species 64 

XIII.  Whence  the  Occult  Virtues  of  Things  Proceed . .     65 

XIV.  Of  the  Spirit  of  the  World,  What  It  Is,  and  hoio 

by  way  of  medium  It  Unites  occult  Virtues  to 
their  Subjects 69 

!'      XV.  How  loe  must  Find  Out  and  Examine  the  Vir- 
tues of  Tilings  by  way  of  Similitude 71 

XVI.  Hoiu  the  Operations  of  several  Virtues  Pass 
from  one  thing  into  another,  and  are  Com- 
municated one  to  the  other 74 

XVII.  How  by  Enmity  and  Friendship  the  Virtues  of 

things  are  to  be  Tried  and  Found  Out 75 

XVIII.   Of  the  Inclinations  of  Enmities 78 

XIX.  How  the  Virtues  of  Things  are  to  be  Tried  and 
Found  Out,  which  are  in  them  Specifically,  or 
in  any  one  Individual  by  way  of  Special  Gift .     82 

XX.  The  Natural  Virtues  are  in  some  Things 
throughout  their  Whole  Substance,  and  in 
other  Things  in  Certain  Parts  and  Members.     83 

XXI.  Of  the  Virtues  of  Things  ivhich  are  in  them 
only  in  their  Life  Time,  and  Such  as  Remain 
in  them  even  After  their  Death 85 


LIST   OF   CONTENTS.  7 

XXII.  How  Inferior  Things  are  Subjected  to  Supe- 
rior Bodies,  and  lioiv  the  Bodies,  Actions, 
and  Dispositions  of  Men  are  Ascribed  to 
Stars  and  Signs 87 

XXIII.  How  ive  shall   Know  tvhat   Stains   Natural 

Things  are  Under,  and  tvhat  Tilings  are 
Under  the  Sun,  ivhich  are  called  Solary ...     91 

XXIV.  What    Things   are   Lunary,   or    Under  the 

Power  of  the  Moon 95 

XXV.    What  Things  are  Saturnine,  or  Under  the 

Power  of  Saturn 97     - 

XXVI.    What  Things  are  Under  the  Poiver  of  Jupi- 
ter, and  are  called  Jovial 100    ^ 

XXVII.    What  Things  are  Under  the  Poiver  of  Mars, 

and  are  called  Martial 101    • 

XXVIII.    What  Things  are  Under  the  Power  of  Venus, 

and  are  called  Venereal 102 

XXIX.    What  Things  are  Under  the  Power  of  Mer- 
cury, and  are  called  Mercurial 103 

XXX.  That  the  Whole  Sublunary  World,  and  those 
Things  which  are  in  It,  are  Distributed  to 
Planets 104 

XXXI.  How  Provinces  and  Kingdoms  are  Distributed 

to  Planets 105 

XXXII.    What  Things  are  Under  the  Signs,  the  Fixed 

Stars,  and  their  Images 107 

XXXIII.  TJie  Seals  and  Characters  of  Natural  Things .   110^ 

XXXIV.  How,  by  Natural  Things  and  their  Virtues, 

ive  may  Draw  Forth  and  Attract  the  Influ- 
ences and  Virtues  of  Celestial  Bodies 114   — 

XXXV.   Of  the  Mixtions  of  Natural  Things,  one  with 

another,  and  their  Benefit 115 


8  LIST   OF   CONTENTS. 

XXXVI.  Of  the  Union  of  Mixed  Things,  and  the 
Introduction  of  a  More  Noble  Form,  and 
the  Senses  of  Life 117 

XXXVII.  How,  by  some  certain  Natural  and  Artificial 
Preparations,  We  May  Attract  certain 
Celestial  and  Vital  Gifts 118 

XXXVIII.  Hoiv  We  May  Draiv  not  only  Celestial  and 
y  Vital   but  also  certain  Intellectual  and 

Divine  Gifts  from  Above 121 

XXXIX.  That  We  May,  by  some  certain  Matters  of 
the  World,  Stir  Up  the  Gods  of  the  World 
and  their  Ministering  Spirits 123 

XL.    Of  Bindings;  ivhat  Sort  they  are  of,  and  in 

ivhat  Ways  they  are  ivont  to  be  Done ....   124 

XLI.    Of  Sorceries,  and  their  Poiver 125 

XLII.    Of  the  Wonderful  Virtues  of  some  Kinds  of 

Sorceries 127 

XLIII.    Of  Perfumes  or  Suffumigations;  their  Man- 
ner and  Poiver 132 

XLIV.   The  Composition  of  some  Fumes  appropri- 
ated to  the  Planets 135 

^        XLV.    Of  Collyries,  Unctions,  Love- Medicines,  and 

their  Virtues 137 

XLVI.   Of  Natural  Alligations  and  Suspensions . .   139 

Y^    XLVII.    Of  Magical  Rings  and  their  Compositions .   141 

XL VIII.   Of  the  Virtue  of  Places,  and  what  Places 

are  Suitable  to  every  Star 143 

y        XLIX.   Of  Light,  Colors,  Candles  and  Lamps,  and 
^1                             to  what  Stars,  Houses  and  Elements  sev- 
eral Colors  are  Ascribed 146 

L.   Of  Fascination,  and  the  Art  thereof 150 


LIST   OF   CONTENTS.  '  9 

LI.    Of  certain  Observations,  Producing  ivonderful 

Virtues 152 

LII.  Of  the  Countenance  and  Gesture,  the  Habit  and 
the  Figure  of  the  Body,  and  to  tuhat  Stars 
any  of  these  do  Ansioer;  tahence  Physiognomy, 
and  Bletoposcopy,  and  Chiromancy,  Arts  of 
Divination,  have  their  Grounds  ...    155 

LIII.   Of  Divination,  and  the  Kinds  thereof 158 

LIV.    Of  divers  certain  Animals,  and  other  things, 

luhich  have  a  Signification  in  Auguries 161 

LV.  How  Auspicias  are  Verified  by  the  Light  of  Nat- 
ural Instinct,  and  of  some  Rules  of  Finding 
of  It  Out 169 

LVI.  Of  the  Soothsaying s  of  Flashes  and  Light- 
nings, and  how  Monstrous  and  Prodigious 
Tilings  are  to  be  Interpreted 175 

LVII.    Of  Geomancy,  Hydromancy,  Aeromancy,  and 

Pyromancy,  Four  Divinations  of  Elements . .   177 

LVIII.    Of  the  Reviving  of  the  Dead,  and  of  Sleeping 

or  Hibernating    (luanting  victuals)    Many     /^ 
Years  together 180 

LIX.   Of  Divination  by  Dreams 184 

LX.  Of  Madness,  and  Divinations  ivhich  are  made 
lohen  men  are  awake,  and  of  the  Power  of 
a  Melancholy  Humor,  by  ivhich  Spirits  are 
sometimes  induced  into  Men's  Bodies 186 

LXI.  Of  the  Forming  of  Man,  of  the  External  Senses, 
also  those  Inward,  and  the  Mind;  and  of  the 
Tfiree-fold  Appetite  of  the  Soul,  and  Passions 
of  the  Will 190 

LXII.   Of  the  Passions  of  the  Mind,  their  Original 

Source,  Differences,  and  Kinds 194 


/ 


V 


10  LIST   OF   CONTENTS. 

LXIII.  How  the  Passions  of  the  Mind  change  the 
proper  Body  by  changing  its  Accidents  and 
moving  the  Spirit 195 

LXIV.  How  the  Passions  of  the  Mind  change  the 
Body  by  way  of  Imitation  from  some 
Resemblance;  of  the  Transforming  and 
Translating  of  Men,  and  tvhat  Force  the 
Imaginative  Power  hath,  not  only  over  the 
Body  but  the  Soul 197 

LXV.  Hoiv  the  Passions  of  the  Mind  can  Work  of 

themselves  upon  Another's  Body 200 

LXVI.  That  the  Passions  of  the  Mind  are  Helped  by 
a  Celestial  Season,  and  hoiv  Necessary  the 
Constancy  of  the  Mind  is  in  every  Work. . .   203 

LXVII.  Hotu  the  Mind  of  Man  may  be  Joined  with 
the  Mind  of  the  Stars,  and  Intelligences  of 
the  Celestials,  and,  together  with  them, 
Impress  certain  tvonderful  Virtues  upon 
inferior  Things 204 

LXVIII.  How  our  Mind  can  Change  and  Bind  inferior 

Things  to  the  Ends  ivhich  we  Desire 206 

LXIX.   Of  Speech,  and  the  Occult  Vfrtue  of  Words. .   207 

LXX.   Of  the  Virtue  of  Proper  Names 208 

LXXI.  Of  many  Words  joined  together,  as  in  Sen- 
tences and  Verses;  and  of  the  Virtues  and 

Astrictions  of  Charms 210 

LXXII.    Of  the  wonderful  Power  of  Enchantments . .   213 

LXXIII.    Of  the   Virtue  of  Writing,  and  of  Making 

Imprecations,  and  Inscriptions 215 

LXXIV.  Of  the  Proportion,  Correspondency,  and  Re- 
duction of  Letters  to  the  Celestial  Signs  and 
Planets,  According  to  various  Tongues,  and 
a  Table  thereof 216 


LIST  OF   CONTENTS.  11 

By  Henry  Morley. 

Criticism  on  Agrippa's  Natural  Magic 221 

Agrippa  and  the  Rosicrucians 223 

Exposition  of  the  Cabala 231  _- 

Neio  Table  of  the  Cabala  and  Tarot  (specially  compiled)  .  240 

The  Mirific  Word ' 242 

Beuchlin  the  Mystic 244 

Agrippa  Expounds  Beuchlin 252 

The  NobUity  of  Woman 255 

Original  and  Selected. 

Order  of  the  Empyrean  Heaven 269 

Symbols  of  the  Alchemists 275 

The  Magic  Mirror,  a  Message  to  Mystics 279    > 

Illustrations  and  Etchings. 

Henry  Cornelius  Agrippa Frontispiece 

Title-page  of  1651  Edition,  facing 32 

Grand  Solar  Man,  facing 90 

Calamus 94 

Characters  of  Nature 112 

Divine  Letters 113 

Cabalistical  Table  of  Co-ordinate  Characters 220 

Tree  of  the  Cabala,  three  full-page  etchings,  facing ....  238 

The  Empyrean  Heaven,  facing 268 

Rosicruxiian  Symbol  of  the  Spirit  of  Nature,  facing. .  . .  270 

Symbols  of  the  Alchemists 276 


The  Occult  Philosophy. 

Judicious  Reader:  This  is  true  and  sublime  Occult  Philosophy.  To 
understand  the  mysterious  influences  of  the  intellectual  world  upon  the 
celestial,  and  of  hoth  upon  the  terrestrial;  and  to  know  how  to  dispose  and 
fit  ourselves  so  as  to  he  capable  of  receiving  the  superior  operations  of 
these  worlds,  whereby  we  may  be  enabled  to  operate  wonderful  things  by  a 
natural  power— to  discover  the  secret  counsels  of  men,  to  increase  riches, 
to  overcome  enemies,  to  procure  the  favor  of  men,  to  expel  diseases,  to  pre- 
serve health,  to  prolong  life,  to  renew  youth,  to  foretell  future  events,  to 
see  and  know  things  done  many  miles  off,  and  such  like  as  these.  These 
things  may  seem  incredible,  yet  read  but  the  ensuing  treatise  and  thou 
Shalt  see  the  possibility  confirmed  both  by  reason  and  example. 

—J.  F.,  the  translator  of  the  English  edition  of  1651. 

PREFACE. 


In  the  last  half  of  1509  and  the  first  months  of  1510, 
Cornelius  Agrippa,  known  in  his  day  as  a  Magician, 
gathered  together  all  the  Mystic  lore  he  had  obtained 
by  the  energy  and  ardor  of  youth  and  compiled  it  into 
the  elaborate  system  of  Magic,  in  three  books,  known 
as  Occult  Philosophy,  the  first  book  of  which — Natural 
Magic — constitutes  the  present  volume.  Agrippa  pub- 
lished his  Occult  Philosophy,  with  additional  chap- 
ters, in  1533.  The  only  English  translation  appeared 
in  London  in  1651.  It  is  a  thoroughly  edited  and 
revised  edition  of  this  latter  work  that  we  produce. 
Some  translating  has  been  done  and  missing  parts  sup- 
plied. The  reader  is  assured  that  while  we  have  mod- 
ified some  of  the  very  broad  English  of  the  seventeenth 
century,  that  he  has  a  thoroughly  valid  work.  Due 
care  has  been  taken  to  preserve  all  the  quaintness  of 
the  English  text  as  far  as  consistent  with  plain  read- 
ing. We  have  endeavored  to  do  full  justice  to  our 
author,  the  demands  of  those  purely  mystical,  and  the 
natural  conservatism  of  the  antiquary  and  collector. 
In  this  we  believe  we  have  fully  succeeded. 

The  life  of  Agrippa,  up  to  the  time  of  writing  his 
Occult  Philosophy,  is  also  given,  drawn  mostly  from 
Henry  Morley's  excellent  life  of  Cornelius  Agrippa. 

That  part  of  the  volume  credited  to  Mr.  Morley 
may  be  designated  as  an  honest  skeptic's  contribution 
to  Mysticism,  and  his  chapters  are  produced  entire,  as 
justice  to  both  him  and  Agrippa  cannot  be  done  other- 
wise, and  they  are  an  especially  valuable  part  of  Mys- 
tic literature. 

14  editor's  preface. 

The  table  of  the  Cabala,  newly  compiled  for  this 
volume,  will  be  found  to  possess  superior  features  over 
all  others. 

Following  the  above  we  give  a  chapter  on  the  Em- 
pyrean Heaven,  which  will  explain  much  that  our 
author  has  written.  It  is  derived  mainly  from  an  old 
occult  work  on  "  Physic. " 

The  Symbols  of  the  Alchemists  will  be  found  both 
useful  and  instructive.  The  chapter  on  the  Magic 
Mirror,  which  ends  the  work,  is  believed  to  be  the  best 
contribution  on  the  subject  extant. 

All  the  original  illustrations  and  some  new  and 
selected  ones  will  be  found,  as  also  various  etchings  of 
characters.  That  one  on  the  Empyrean  Heaven  con- 
tains, we  have  cause  to  believe,  some  of  the  very  hid- 
den knowledge  relating  to  the  Lost  Word.  It  is  a 
much  older  plate  than  the  work  it  was  taken  from. 

Some  parts  of  the  volume  will  interest  those  who 
love  to  work  out  hidden  things. 

The  editor  conveys  his  warmest  thanks  to  those 
friends  who  have  encouraged  him  in  the  work — on  the 
Cabala  table,  the  illustration  of  the  Grand  Solar  Man 
and  the  translating — outside  of  which  he  has  not  asked 
or  received  any  help.  This  being  the  case  our  friends 
will  please  excuse  any  particular  thing  that  may  not 
sound  pleasantly  to  the  ear. 

A  general  index  will  be  inserted  in  the  third  and 
concluding  volume  of  the  Occult  Philosophy. 


EARLY  LIFE  OF  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 


At  Cologne,  on  the  14th  of  September,  1486,  there 
was  born  into  the  noble  house  of  Nettesheim  a  son, 
whom  his  parents  called  in  baptism  Henry  Cornelius 
Agrippa.  Some  might,  at  first  thought,  suppose  that 
the  last  of  the  three  was  a  Christian  name  likely  to 
find  especial  favor  with  the  people  of  Cologne,  the 
site  of  whose  town,  in  days  of  Roman  sovereignty, 
Marcus  Agrippa's  camp  suggested  and  the  colony  of 
Agrippina  fixed.  But  the  existence  of  any  such  pre- 
dilection is  disproved  by  some  volumes  filled  with  the 
names  of  former  natives  of  Cologne.  There  were  as 
few  Agrippas  there  as  elsewhere,  the  use  of  the  name 
being  everywhere  confined  to  a  few  individuals  taken 
from  a  class  that  was  itself  not  numerous.  A  child 
who  came  into  the  world  feet-foremost  was  called  an 
Agrippa  by  the  Romans,  and  the  word  itself,  so  Aulus 
Gellius  explains  it,  was  invented  to  express  the  idea, 
being  compounded  of  the  trouble  of  the  woman  and 
the  feet  of  the  child.  The  Agrippas  of  the  sixteenth 
century  were  usually  sons  of  scholars,  or  of  persons  in 
the  upper  ranks,  who  had  been  mindful  of  a  classic 
precedent;  and  there  can  be  little  doubt  that  a  pecu- 
liarity attendant  on  the  very  first  incident  in  the  life 
here  to  be  told  was  expressed  by  the  word  used  as 
appendix  to  an  already  sufiicient  Christian  name. 

The  son  thus  christened  became  a  scholar  and  a  sub- 
ject of  discussion  among  scholars,  talking  only  Latin 
to  the  world.  His  family  name.  Von  Nettesheim,  he 
never  latinised,  inasmuch  as  the  best  taste  suggested 
that — ^if  a  Latin  designation  was  most  proper  for  a 
scholar — he  could  do,  or  others  could  do  for  him, 

2  15 


16  EARLY   LIFE   OF   AGRIPPA. 

nothing  simpler  than  to  set  apart  for  literary  purposes 
tliat  half  of  his  real  style  which  was  already  com- 
pletely Roman.  Henry  Cornelius  Agrippa  von  Net- 
tesheim  became  therefore  to  the  world  what  he  is 
also  called  in  this  narrative — Cornelius  Agrippa. 

He  is  the  only  member  of  the  family  of  Nettesheim 
concerning  whom  any  records  have  been  left  for  the 
instruction  of  posterity.  Nettesheim  itself  is  a  place 
of  little  note,  distant  about  twenty-five  miles  to  the 
southwest  of  Cologne,  It  lies  in  a  valley,  through 
which  flows  the  stream  from  one  of  the  small  sources 
of  the  Roer.  The  home  of  the  Von  Nettesheims,  when 
they  were  not  personally  attached  to  the  service  of 
the  emperor,  was  at  Cologne.  The  ancestors  of  Cor- 
nelius Agrippa  had  been  for  generations  in  the  service 
of  the  royal  house  of  Austria;  his  father  had  in  this 
respect  walked  in  the  steps  of  his  forefathers,  and 
from  a  child  Cornelius  looked  for  nothing  better  than 
to  do  the  same. 

It  is  proper  to  mention  that  among  the  scholars  of 
Germany  one,  who  before  the  time  of  Agrippa  was 
known  as  the  most  famous  of  magicians,  belonged  to 
the  same  city  of  Cologne;  for  there,  in  the  thirteenth 
Century,  Albertus  Magnus  taught,  and  it  is  there  that 
he  is  buried. 

Born  in  Cologne  did  not  mean  in  1486  what  it  has 
meant  for  many  generations  almost  until  now — born 
into  the  darkness  of  a  mouldering  receptacle  of  relics. 
Then  the  town  was  not  priest-ridden,  but  rode  its 
priests.  For  nearly  a  thousand  years  priestcraft  and 
handicraft  have  battled  for  predominance  within  its 
walls.  Priestcraft  expelled  the  Jews,  banished  the 
weavers,  and  gained  thoroughly  the  mastery  at  last. 
But  in  the  time  of  Cornelius  Agrippa  handicraft  was 
uppermost,  and  in  sacred  Cologne  every  trader  and 
mechanic  did  his  part  in  keeping  watch  on  the  arch- 


TROUBLES   OF  THE   JEWS.  17 

bishop.  Europe  contained  then  but  few  cities  that 
were  larger,  busier,  and  richer,  for  the  Rhine  was  a 
main  highway  of  commerce,  and  she  was  enriched,  not 
only  by  her  manufacturers  and  merchants,  but,  at  the 
same  time  also,  by  a  large  receipt  of  toll.  Commerce 
is  the  most  powerful  antagonist  to  despotism,  and  in 
whatever  place  both  are  brought  together  one  of  them 
must  die. 

Passing  by  the  earlier  times  to  about  the  year  1350 
there  arose  a  devilish  persecution  of  the  Jews  in  many 
parts  of  Europe,  and  the  Jews  of  Cologne,  alarmed  by 
the  sufferings  to  which  others  of  their  race  had  been 
exposed,  withdrew  into  their  houses,  with  their  wives 
and  children,  and  burnt  themselves  in  the  midst  of 
their  possessions.  The  few  who  had  flinched  from 
this  self-immolation  were  banished,  and  their  houses 
and  lands,  together  with  all  the  land  that  had  belonged 
to  Cologne  Jews,  remained  as  spoils  in  the  hands  of 
the  Cologne  Christians.  All  having  been  converted 
into  cash,  the  gains  of  the  transaction  were  divided 
equally  between  the  town  and  the  archbishop.  The 
Jews,  twenty  years  later,  were  again  allowed  to  reside 
in  the  place  on  payment  of  a  tax  for  the  protection 
granted  them. 

In  1369  the  city  was  again  in  turmoil,  caused  by  a 
dispute  concerning  privileges  between  the  authorities 
of  the  church  and  the  town  council.  The  weavers,  as 
a  democratic  body,  expressed  their  views  very  strong 
and  there  was  fighting  in  the  streets.  The  weavers 
were  subdued;  they  fled  to  the  churches,  and  were 
slain  at  the  altars.  Eighteen  hundred  of  them,  all 
who  survived,  were  banished,  suffering,  of  course, 
confiscation  of  their  property,  and  Cologne  being 
cleared  of  all  its  weavers — who  had  carried  on  no 
inconsiderable  branch  of  manufacture — their  guild  was 
demolished.     This  event  occurred  twenty  years  after 


18  *  EARLY  LIFE   OF   AGRIPPA. 

the  town  had  lost,  in  the  Jews,  another  important 
part  of  its  industrial  population,  and  the  proud  city 
thus  was  passing-  into  the  first  stage  of  its  decay. 

In  1388  an  university  was  established  at  Colog-ne, 
upon  the  model  of  the  University  of  Paris.  Theology 
and  scholastic  philosophy  were  the  chief  studies  culti- 
vated in  it,  and  they  were  taught  in  such  a  way  as  to 
win  many  scholars  from  abroad.  Eight  years  after- 
wards, churchmen,  nobles,  and  traders  were  again  con- 
testing their  respective  claims,  and  blood  was  again 
shed  in  the  streets.  The  nobles,  assembled  by  night 
at  a  secret  meeting,  were  surprised,  and  the  final  con- 
quest of  the  trading  class  was  in  that  way  assured. 
A  new  constitution  was  then  devised,  continuing  in 
force  during  the  lifetime  of  Cornelius  Agrippa. 

The  Von  Nettesheims  were  likely  to  be  on  better 
terms  with  the  archbishop  than  with  the  party  who 
opposed  him,  and  they  were  in  the  emperor's  service. 
This  must  have  influenced  the  early  years  of  Agrippa. 
In  these  early  years  he  displayed  a  rare  aptitude  for 
study,  and,  as  Cologne  was  an  university  town  and 
printing,  discovered  shortly  before  his  birth,  was  car- 
ried on  there  in  the  production  of  Latin  classics,  the 
writings  of  ascetics,  scholastics,  and  mystics  like 
Thomas  Aquinas  and  Albertus  Magnus,  it  was  only 
natural  he  should  avail  his  eager  desire  for  knowledge 
at  these  sources.  .  He  was  remarkably  successful  in 
the  study  of  European  languages  also,  becoming  pro- 
ficient in  several.  Thus  his  years  of  home  training 
were  passed  until  he  arrived  at  the  age  when  princes 
are  considered  fit  to  be  produced  at  court.  He  then 
left  Cologne  and  became  an  attendant  on  the  Emperor 
of  Germany,  Maximilian  the  First,  whom  he  served 
first  as  a  secretary,  afterwards  for  seven  years  as  a 
soldier.  At  the  age  of  twenty  he  was  employed  on 
secret  service   by  the   German  court.     At  this  time 


FORMS  A  MYSTIC   BROTHERHOOD.  19 

Spain  was  in  a  chaotic  political  condition.  Ferdinand, 
the  widower  of  Isabella,  was  excluded  from  the  crown 
after  his  wife's  death,  that  inheritance  having  passed 
with  his  daughter  Joanna,  as  a  dower,  to  her  husband 
Philip,  who  was  the  son  of  Maximilian.  In  Septem- 
ber, 1506,  Philip  died,  shortly  before  having  declared 
war  against  France.  Thus  it  was  that  Cornelius  went 
to  Paris,  ostensibly  to  attend  the  university  there,  but 
in  reality  to  keep  Maximilian  advised  of  the  important 
news  regarding  the  French.  In  the  capacity  of  secret 
service,  in  which  he  was  engaged  more  than  once,  he 
showed  himself  abundantly  able  to  preserve  diplo- 
matic secrets,  though  concerning  his  own  affairs  he 
was  open,  frank,  and  free.  Thus  he  is  silent  in  regard 
to  official  duties  at  this  time.  In  attending  the  uni- 
versity Agrippa  came  in  contact  with  several  other 
minds  who  had  a  love  for  the  occult — mystics  who 
found  in  him  a  natural  leader  to  guide  them  into  the 
realms  of  the  unknown.  With  these  he  organized  a 
secret  band  of  Theosophists,  or  possibly  Rosicrucians. 
Among  these  mystics  was  one  more  prominent  as  the 
friend  of  Agrippa,  who  might  be  regarded  as  second  in 
leadership,  an  Italian  by  the  name  of  Blasius  Caesar 
Landulphus,  who  afterwards  became  noted  in  medi- 
cine, and  also  a  professor  in  the  University  of  Pavia. 
Among  them  were  MM.  Germain,  advocate,  and  author 
of  a  history  of  Charles  V.,  etc.;  Gaigny,  theologian, 
linguist,  Latin  poet,  and  successively  procurator,  rec- 
tor, and  chancellor  of  the  Paris  University;  Charles 
Foucard,  M.  de  Molinflor,  Charles  de  Bouelles,  canon, 
professor  of  theology,  and  author  of  works  on  meta- 
physics and  geometry,  among  which  he  treated  of  the 
quadrature  of  the  circle  and  the  cubication  of  the 
sphere,  and  other  unusual  matters;  Germain  de  Brie, 
canon,  linguist,  and  writer  of  Greek  verse;  MM.  Fasch, 
Wigand,  and  Clairchamps;  and  Juanetin  Bascara  de 


20  EARLY  LIFE  OF  AGRIPPA. 

Gerona,  a  young-  Catalonian  nobleman,  temporarily  at 
Paris  while  on  his  way  to  the  court  of  Maximilian, 

Disturbances  in  Spain  had  spread  to  Arag^on  and 
Catalonia,  and  in  the  district  of  Tarragon  the  Catalo- 
nians  had  chased  one  of  their  local  masters,  the  Senor 
de  Gerona,  the  last  named  of  the  secret  band  above. 
Agrippa  and  his  friends  devised  a  plan  whereby  Gerono 
could  be  restored  to  his  estates.  The  capture  of  a 
fortification  known  as  the  Black  Fort  was  necessary 
to  the  enterprise,  and  to  effect  this  a  daring  stratagem 
was  decided  upon.  As  the  whole  province  of  Tarragon 
could  thus  be  held  against  the  rebellious  peasantry  it 
was  believed  the  emperor,  Maximilian,  would  sanction 
the  enterprise  in  behalf  of  his  kin,  and  Gerona  went 
to  the  German  court  for  this  purpose.  Agrippa  also 
returned  to  Cologne  for  a  season  early  in  1507. 

It  was  over  a  year  afterwards  when  the  plans  of  the 
conspirators  were  carried  out.  The  Black  Fort  was 
captured,  as  planned,  by  a  stratagem.  After  remain- 
ing there  for  a  time,  Agrippa  was  sent  with  some 
others  to  garrison  the  place  of  Gerona  at  Villarodona. 
Landulph  had,  meanwhile,  gone  to  Barcelona,  and  it 
and  it  was  deemed  prudent  that  Gerono,  the  peasants 
of  the  whole  country  being  now  in  arms,  should  join 
him  there.  Gerona  was,  however,  captured  by  the 
infuriated  rustics,  who  immediately  organized  them- 
selves in  great  force  to  storm  his  castle  and  extermi- 
nate the  garrison  there,  who,  in  Gerona 's  absence,  were 
under  the  charge  of  Agrippa.  Timely  warning  of  the 
attack  was  conveyed  to  the  garrison.  To  escape  by 
breaking  through  the  watches  of  the  peasantry  was 
madness,  to  remain  was  equally  futile.  But  one  way 
of  escape  presented  itself — an  old,  half -ruined  tower 
three  miles  distant,  situated  in  one  of  the  mountain 
wildernesses  which  characterize  the  district  of  Vails. 
The  tower  stood  in  a  craggy,  cavernous  valley,  where 


ADVENTURES   IN   SPAIN.  21 

the  broken  mountains  make  way  for  a  gulf  containing- 
stagnant  waters,  and  jagged,  inaccessible  rocks  hem 
it  in.  At  the  gorge  by  which  this  place  is  entered 
stood  the  tower,  on  a  hill  which  was  itself  surrounded 
by  deep  bogs  and  pools,  while  it  also  was  within  a 
ring  of  lofty  crags.  There  was  but  one  way  to  this 
tower,  except  when  the  ground  was  frozen,  and  these 
events  happened  in  the  midsummer  of  1508.  The  way 
among  the  pools  was  by  a  narrow  path  of  stone,  with 
turf  walls  as  hedges.  The  site  of  the  tower  made  it 
inexpugnable  in  summer  time.  It  was  owned  by  an 
abbot,  who  gave  them  permission  to  occupy  and  fortify 
it.  This  they  accordingly  done,  having  a  poor  bailiff, 
in  charge  of  the  place,  for  company. 

The  retreat  to  the  tower  was  safely  accomplished 
under  cover  of  night.  Gerona's  place  was  sacked  the 
next  day  by  the  peasants,  who  sought  fiercely  for  the 
German,  as  they  termed  Agrippa.  The  hiding  place  of 
the  conspirators  becoming  known,  the  flood  of  wrath 
poured  down  towards  the  tower,  but  the  strength  of 
the  position  was  then  felt.  With  a  barricade  of  over- 
thrown w^agons  the  sole  path  to  the  besieged  was 
closed,  and  behind  this  barrier  they  posted  themselves 
with  their  arquebuses,  of  which  one  only  sufficed  to 
daunt  a  crowd  of  men  accustomed  to  no  weapons 
except  slings  or  bows  and  arrows.  The  peasantry, 
discovering  that  the  tower  was  not  to  be  stormed,  set- 
tled down  to  lay  strict  siege  to  the  place  and  thereby 
starve  its  little  garrison  into  surrender. 

Perilous  weeks  were  passed  by  the  adventurers,  but 
more  formidable  than  actual  conflict  was  the  famine 
consequent  on  their  blockade.  Perrot,  the  keeper, 
taking  counsel  with  himself  as  how  to  help  his  guests 
and  rid  himself  of  them  at  the  same  time,  explored 
every  cranny  of  the  wall  of  rock  by  which  they  were 
surrounded.     Clambering  among  the  wastes,  with  feet 


22  EARLY  LIFE   OF   AGRIPPA. 

accustomed  to  the  difficulties  of  the  mountain,  hei  dis- 
covered at  last  a  devious  and  rugged  way,  by  which 
the  obstacles  of  crag  and  chasm  were  avoided  and  the 
mountain  top  reached.  Looking  down  from  there  he 
saw  how,  on  the  other  side,  the  mountain  rose  out  of 
a  lake,  known  as  the  Black  Lake,  having  an  expanse 
of  about  four  miles,  upon  the  farther  shore  of  which 
his  master's  abbey  stood.  He  found  a  way  to  the  lake 
through  a  rocky  gorge,  but  from  there  to  the  abbey 
was  a  long  way,  and,  to  men  without  a  boat,  the  lake 
was  a  more  impassible  barrier  than  the  mountain.  He 
returned  to  the  tower,  where  the  little  garrison  heard 
the  result  of  his  explorations.  It  was  seen  that  a  boat 
was  necessary  to  effect  an  escape,  and  to  procure  that 
a  letter  would  have  to  be  sent  through  the  ranks  of 
the  vigilant  besiegers,  whose  sentries  were  posted  at  all 
points,  and  who  allowed  no  one  to  approach  the  tower; 
not  even  the  good  abbot  himself,  who  had  vainly  tried 
to  turn  the  peasants  from  their  purpose. 

Under  these  circumstances  the  ingenuity  of  Agrippa 
was  severely  tested,  and  he  justified  the  credit  he  had 
won  for  subtle  wit.  The  keeper  had  a  son,  a  shepherd- 
boy,  and  Agrippa  disfigured  him  with  stains  of  milk- 
thistle  and  the  juice  of  other  herbs,  befouled  his  skin 
and  painted  it  with  shocking  spots  to  imitate  the 
marks  of  leprosy,  fixed  his  hair  into  a  filthy  bunch, 
dressed  him  like  a  beggar,  and  gave  him  a  crooked 
branch  for  a  stick,  within  which  there  was  scooped  a 
hollow  for  the  letter.  Upon  the  boy  so  disguised — a 
fearful  picture  of  the  outcast  leper — the  leper's  bell 
was  hung,  his  father  seated  him  on  an  ox,  and  led  him 
by  night  across  the  marshes  by  the  ford,  where  he  left 
him.  Stammering,  as  he  went,  petitions  for  alms,  the 
boy  walked  without  difficulty  by  a  very  broad  road 
made  for  ham  among  the  peasantry,  who  regarded  his 
approach  with  terror  and  fled  from  his  path.     The  let- 


THE  ESCAPE.  ■  23 

ter  was  safely  delivered,  the  boy  returning"  the  next 
day  with  the  desired  answer,  ringing  his  bell  at  the 
border  of  the  marsh  at  dark  for  his  father  to  bring 
him  in.  Agrippa  and  his  companions  spent  the  night 
in  preparations  for  departure.  Towards  dawn  they 
covered  their  retreat  by  a  demonstration  of  their  usual 
state  of  watchfulness,  fired  their  guns,  and  gave  other 
indications  of  their  presence.  This  done,  they  set 
forth,  in  dead  silence,  carrying  their  baggage,  and 
were  guided  by  Perrot,  the  keeper,  to  the  summit. 
There  they  lay  gladly  down  among  the  stones  to  rest, 
while  their  guide  descended  on  the  other  side  and 
spread  a  preconcerted  signal,  a  white  cloth,  upon  a 
rock.  When  he  returned  they  ate  the  breakfast  they 
had  brought  with  them,  all  sitting  with  their  eyes 
towards  the  lake.  At  about  nine  o'clock  two  fisher- 
men's barks  were  discerned,  which  hoisted  a  red  flag, 
the  good  abbot's  signal.  Rejoicing  at  the  sight  of 
this,  the  escaped  men  fired  off  their  guns  in  triumph 
from  the  mountain-top,  a  hint  to  the  besieging  peas- 
antry of  their  departure,  and,  at  the  same  time,  a  sig- 
nal to  the  rescuers.  Still  following  Perrot,  they  next 
descended,  along  ways  by  him  discovered,  through  the 
rocky  gorge,  to  the  meadows  that  bordered  the  lake. 
Entering  the  boats,  before  evening  they  found  them- 
selves safe  under  the  abbot's  roof.  The  day  of  this 
escape  was  the  14th  of  August,  1508.  They  had  been 
suffering  siege,  therefore,  during  almost  two  months 
in  the  mountain  fastness. 

Cornelius  Agrippa  being  safe  could  quit  the  scene, 
and  done  so  without  waiting  to  see  how  the  difficulty 
would  be  solved  between  the  Catalonian  peasants  and 
their  master.  It  perplexed  him  much  that  he  had  no 
tidings  of  Landulph,  his  closest  friend.  The  abbot 
advised  him  to  go  to  court  again,  but  Agrippa  replied 
that  he  had  no  mind  to  risk  being  again  sent  upon 


24  EARLY  LIFE   OF   AGRIPPA. 

hazardous  missions.  After  remaining"  several  days  in 
the  abbey  he  set  out,  with  an  old  man  and  his  servant 
Stephen,  for  Barcelona.  Antonius  Xanthus,  the  com- 
panion of  Agrippa,  had  seen  much  of  the  rough  side 
of  the  world,  was  useful  as  a  traveling  companion, 
and  became  a  member  of  Agrippa  's  secret  league. 

Not  finding"  Landulph  at  Barcelona  the*  traveled  to 
Valentia.  From  there  they  sailed  for  Italy,  and  by 
way  of  the  Balearic  Islands  and  Sardinia  they  went  to 
Naples,  where,  disheartened  by  not  finding  Landulph, 
they  shipped  for  Leghorn,  and  then  traveled  to  Avig- 
non. There  they  learned,  from  a  traveling  merchant, 
that  Landulph  was  at  Lyons.  The  friends  now  corre- 
sponded, Cornelius  writing  December  17th — nearly  four 
months  after  he  had  left  the  abbey  in  search  of  his 
friend,  the  24th  of  August.  We  may  imagine  many  of 
the  things  these  friends  wrote  each  other.  It  was  the 
suggestion  of  Agrippa  that  all  the  members  of  their 
league  be  called  together  that  they  might  be  absolved 
of  their  oaths  regarding  the  Spanish  conspiracy  and 
to  resume,  once  more,  their  former  pleasant  relations. 
He  also  hoped  that  Landulph  might  be  able  to  visit 
him  at  Avignon  and  talk  their  secrets  over,  as  he  was 
unable  to  leave  for  Lyons,  his  funds  being  exhausted, 
until  after  the  lapse  of  a  little  time. 


The  foregoing  account,  which  has  been  condensed 
from  Mr.  Henry  Morley's  excellent  Life  of  Cornelius 
Agrippa,  is  continued  in  that  part  of  this  volume  that 
starts  with  the  heading  of  "Agrippa  and  the  Rosicru- 
cians. "  Agrippa 's  life  now  becomes  so  interwoven 
with  mysticism  that  we  give  Morley's  account  in  full. 
The  next  chapters  in  his  life  are  replete  with  the  frui- 
tion of  his  mystic  nature,  its  full-blown  flower  being 
The  Occult  Philosophy,  or  Three  Books  of  Magic, 
the  writing  of  which  completes  his  early  life. 


CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA  TO  THE  READER. 


I  do  not  doubt  but  the  title  of  our  book  of  Occult 
Philosophy,  or  of  Magic,  may  by  the  rarity  of  it  allure 
many  to  read  it,  amongst  which,  some  of  a  disordered 
judgment  and  some  that  are  perverse  will  come  to  hear 
what  I  can  say,  who,  by  their  rash  ignorance,  may  take 
the  name  of  Magic  in  the  worse  sense  and,  though 
scarce  having  seen  the  title,  cry  out  that  I  teach  for- 
bidden Arts,  sow  the  seed  of  heresies,  offend  the  pious, 
and  scandalize  excellent  wits;  that  I  am  a  sorcerer, 
and  superstitious  and  devilish,  who  indeed  am  a  Magi- 
cian: to  whom  I  answer,  that  a  Magician  doth  not, 
amongst  learned  men,  signify  a  sorcerer  or  one  that  is 
superstitious  or  devilish;  but  a  wise  man,  a  priest,  a 
prophet;  and  that  the  Sybils  were  Magicianesses,  and 
therefore  prophesied  most  clearly  of  Christ;  and  that 
Magicians,  as  wise  men,  by  the  wonderful  secrets  of 
the  world,  knew  Christ,  the  author  of  the  world,  to  be 
born,  and  came  first  of  all  to  worship  him;  and  that 
the  name  of  Magic  was  received  by  philosophers,  com- 
mended by  divines,  and  is  not  unacceptable  to  the 
Gospel.  I  believe  that  the  supercilious  censors  will 
object  against  the  Sybils,  holy  Magicians  and  the 
Gospel  itself  sooner  than  receive  the  name  of  Magic 
into  favor.  So  conscientious  are  they  that  neither 
Apollo  nor  all  the  Muses,  nor  an  angel  from  heaven 
can  redeem  me  from  their  curse.  Whom  therefore  I 
advise  that  they  read  not  our  writings,  nor  understand 
them,  nor  remember  them.  For  they  are  pernicious 
and  full  of  poison;  the  gate  of  Acheron  is  in  this 
book;  it  speaks  stones — let  them  take  heed  that  it 
beat  not  out  their  brains.     But  you  that  come  without 

26  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

prejudice  to  read  it,  if  you  have  so  much  discretion  of 
prudence  as  bees  have  in  gathering*  honey,  read 
securely,  and  believe  that  you  shall  receive  no  little 
profit,  and  much  pleasure;  but  if  you  shall  find  any 
thing's  that  may  not  please  you,  let  them  alone  and 
make  no  use  of  them,  for  I  do  not  approve  of  them, 
but  declare  them  to  you.  But  do  not  refuse  other 
things,  for  they  that  look  into  the  books  of  physicians 
do,  together  with  antidotes  and  medicines,  read  also 
of  poisons.  I  confess  that  Magic  teacheth  many 
superfluous  things,  and  curious  prodigies  for  ostenta- 
tion; leave  them  as  empty  things,  yet  be  not  ignorant 
of  their  causes.  But  those  things  which  are  for  the 
profit  of  men — for  the  turning  away  of  evil  events,  for 
the  destroying  of  sorceries,  for  the  curing  of  diseases, 
for  the  exterminating  of  phantasms,  for  the  preserv- 
ing of  life,  honor,  or  fortune — may  be  done  without 
offense  to  God  or  injury  to  religion,  because  they  are, 
as  profitable,  so  necessary.  But  I  have  admonished 
you  that  I  have  writ  many  things  rather  narratively 
than  affirmatively;  for  so  it  seemed  needful  that  we 
should  pass  over  fewer  things,  following  the  judg- 
ments of  Platonists  and  other  Gentile  Philosophers 
when  they  did  suggest  an  argument  of  writing  to  our 
Y'  purpose.     Therefore  if  any  error  have  been  committed, 

or  any  thing  hatli  been  spoken  more  freely,  pardon  my 
youth,  for  I  wrote  this  being  scared  a  young  man,  that 
I  may  excuse  myself,  and  say,  whilst  I  was  a  child  I 
spake  as  a  child,  and  I  understood  as  a  child,  but  being 
become  a  man,  I  retracted  those  things  which  I  did 
being  a  boy,  and  in  my  book  of  the  vanity  and  uncer- 
tainty of  Sciences  I  did,  for  the  most  part,  retract  this 
book.  But  here,  haply,  you  may  blame  me  again,  say- 
ing, "  Behold,  thou,  being  a  youth,  didst  write,  and 
now,  being  old,  hast  retracted  it;  what,  therefore,  hast 
thou  set  forth?  "    I  confess,  whilst  I  was  very  young,  I 


ADDRESS  TO  THE  READER.  27 

set  upon  the  writing-  of  these  books,  but,  hoping*  that 
I  should  set  them  forth  with  corrections  and  enlarg-e- 
ments — and  for  that  cause  I  g"ave  them  to  Trithemius,  a 
Neapolitanian  Abbot,  formerly  a  Spanhemensian,  a 
man  very  industrious  after  secret  thing's.  But  it  hap- 
pened afterwards  that,  the  work  being-  intercepted, 
before  I  finished  it,  it  was  carried  about  imperfect  and 
impolished,  and  did  fly  abroad  in  Italy,  in  France,  in 
Germany,  through  many  men's  hands;  and  some  men, 
whether  more  impatiently  or  imprudently  I  know  not, 
would  have  put  it  thus  imperfect  to  the  press,  with 
which  mischief,  I,  being-  affected,  determined  to  set  it 
forth  myself,  thinking-  that  there  mig-ht  be  less  danger 
if  these  books  came  out  of  my  hands  with  some  amend- 
ments than  to  come  forth,  torn  and  in  fragments,  out 
of  other  men's  hands.  Moreover,  I  thought  it  no 
crime  if  I  should  not  suffer  the  testimony  of  my  youth 
to  perish.  Also,  we  have  added  some  chapters  and 
inserted  many  things  which  did  seem  unfit  to  pass  by, 
which  the  curious  reader  shall  be  able  to  understand 
by  the  inequality  of  the  very  phrase,  for  we  were  un- 
willing to  begin  the  work  anew  and  to  unravel  all  that 
we  had  done,  but  to  correct  it  and  put  some  flourish 
upon  it.  "Wherefore,  I  pray  thee,  courteous  reader, 
weigh  not  these  things  according  to  the  present  time 
of  setting  them  forth,  but  pardon  my  curious  youth  if 
thou  find  any  thiug  in  them  that  may  displease  thee. 


When  Agrippa  first  wrote  his  Occult  Philosophy  he 
sent  it  to  his  friend  Trithemius,  an  Abbot  of  Wurtz- 
burg,  with  the  ensuing  letter.  Trithemius  detained  the 
messenger  until  he  had  read  the  manuscript  and  then 
answered  Agrippa 's  letter  with  such  sound  advice  as 
mystics  would  do  well  to  follow  for  all  time  to  come. 
Trithemius  is  known  as  a  mystic  author  and  scholar. 


28  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 


AGRIPPA  TO  TRITHEMIUS. 

To  R.  P.  D.  John  Trithemius,  an  Abbot  of  Saint  James,  in 
the  Suburbs  of  Herbipolis,  Henry  Cornelius  Agrippa  of 
Nettesheim  sendeth  Greeting: 

When  I  was  of  late,  most  reverend  father,  for  a 
while  conversant  with  you  in  your  Monastery  of  Herb- 
ipolis,  we  conferred  together  of  divers  things  concern- 
ing Chemistry,  Magic,  and  Cabala,  and  of  other  things, 
which  as  yet  lie  hid  in  Secret  Sciences  and  Arts;  and 
then  there  was  one  great  question  amongst  the  rest — 
Why  Magic,  whereas  it  was  accounted  by  all  ancient 
philosophers  to  be  the  chiefest  science,  and  by  the 
ancient  wise  men  and  priests  was  always  held  in  great 
veneration,  came  at  last,  after  the  beginning  of  the 
Catholic  Church,  to  be  always  odious  to  and  suspected 
by  the  holy  Fathers,  and  then  exploded  by  Divines, 
and  condemned  by  sacred  Canons,  and,  moreover,  by 
all  laws  and  ordinances  forbidden?  Now,  the  cause, 
as  I  conceive,  is  no  other  than  this,  viz. :  Because,  by 
a  certain  fatal  depravation  of  times  and  men,  many 
false  philosophers  crept  in,  and  these,  under  the  name 
of  Magicians,  heaping  together,  through  various  sorts 
of  errors  and  factions  of  false  religions,  many  cursed 
superstitions  and  dangerous  rites,  and  many  wicked 
sacrileges,  even  to  the  perfection  of  Nature;  and  the 
same  set  forth  in  many  wicked  and  unlawful  books,  to 
which  they  have  by  stealth  prefixed  the  most  honest 
name  and  title  of  Magic;  hoping,  by  this  sacred  title, 
to  gain  credit  to  their  cursed  and  detestable  fooleries. 
Hence  it  is  that  this  name  of  Magic,  formerly  so  hon- 
orable, is  now  become  most  odious  to  good  and  honest 
men,  and  accounted  a  capital  crime  if  any  one  dare 
profess  himself  to  be  a  Magician,  either  in  doctrine  or 


CORRESPONDENCE  WITH  TRITHEMIUS.  29 

works,  unless  haply  some  certain  old  doting  woman, 
dwelling-  in  the  country,  would  be  believed  to  be  skill- 
ful and  have  a  divine  power,  that  she  (as  saith  Apu- 
leis  the  satirist)  "can  throw  down  the  heaven,  lift  up 
the  earth,  harden  fountains,  wash  away  mountains, 
raise  up  ghosts,  cast  down  the  Gods,  extinguish  the 
stars,  illuminate  hell,"  or,  as  Virgil  sings: 

She'll  promise  Uj  her  charms  to  cast  great  cares, 
Or  ease  the  minds  of  men,  and  make  the  Stars 
For  to  go  back,  and  rivers  to  stand  still, 
And  raise  the  nightly  ghosts  even  at  her  ivill; 
To  make  the  earth  to  groan,  and  trees  to  fall 
From  the  mountains 

Hence  those  things  which  Lucan  relates  of  Thessala 
the  Magicianess,  and  Homer  of  the  omnipotency  of 
Circe.  Whereof  many  others,  I  confess,  are  as  well  of 
a  fallacious  opinion  as  a  superstitious  diligence  and 
pernicious  labor;  for  when  they  cannot  come  under  a 
wicked  art  yet  they  presume  they  may  be  able  to  cloak 
themselves  under  that  venerable  title  of  Magic. 

These  things  being  so,  I  wondered  much  and  was  not 
less  indignant  that,  as  yet,  there  had  been  no  man  who 
had  either  vindicated  this  sublime  and  sacred  discipline 
from  the  charge  of  impiety  or  had  delivered  it  purely 
and  sincerely  to  us.  What  I  have  seen  of  our  modern 
writers— Roger  Bacon,  Robert  of  York,  an  Englishman, 
Peter  Apponus,  Albertus  [Magnus]  the  Teutonich, 
Arnoldas  de  villa  Nova,  Anselme  the  Parmensian, 
Picatrix  the  Spaniard,  Cicclus  Asculus  of  Florence, 
and  many  other  writers  of  an  obscure  name— when 
they  promise  to  treat  of  Magic  do  nothing  but  relate 
irrational  tales  and  superstitions  unworthy  of  honest 
men.  Hence  my  spirit  was  moved,  and,  by  reason 
partly  of  admiration,  and  partly  of  indignation,  I  was 
willing  to   play  the   philosopher,    supposing  that  I 


30  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

should  do  no  discommendable  work — seeing*  I  have 
been  always  from  my  youth  a  curious  and  undaunted 
searcher  for  wonderful  effects  and  operations  full  of 
mysteries — if  I  should  recover  that  ancient  Magic  (the 
discipline  of  all  wise  men)  from  the  errors  of  impiety, 
purify  and  adorn  it  with  its  proper  lustre,  and  vindi- 
cate it  from  the  injuries  of  calumniators;  which  thing, 
though  I  long  deliberated  of  it  in  my  mind,  I  never 
durst  undertake;  but  after  some  conference  betwixt 
us  of  these  things,  at  Herbipolis,  your  transcending* 
knowledge  and  learning,  and  your  ardent  adhortation, 
put  courage  and  boldness  into  me.  There  selecting" 
the  opinions  of  philosophers  of  known  credit,  and 
purging  the  introduction  of  the  wicked  (who,  dissem- 
blingly,  and  with  a  counterfeited  knowledge,  did  teach 
that  traditions  of  Magicians  must  be  learned  from 
very  reprobate  books  of  darkness  or  from  institutions 
of  wonderful  operations),  and,  removing  all  darkness, 
I  have  at  last  composed  three  compendious  books  of 
Magic,  and  titled  them  Of  Occult  Philosophy,  being"  a 
title  less  offensive,  which  books  I  submit  (you  excel- 
ling in  the  knowledge  of  these  things)  to  your  cor- 
rection and  censure,  that  if  I  have  wrote  anything 
which  may  tend  either  to  the  contumely  of  Nature, 
offending  God,  or  injury  of  religion,  you  may  condemn 
the  error;  but  if  the  scandal  of  impiety  be  dissolved 
and  purged,  you  may  defend  the  Tradition  of  Truth; 
and  that  you  would  do  so  with  these  books,  and  Magic 
itself,  that  nothing  may  be  concealed  which  may  be 
profitable,  and  nothing  approved  of  which  cannot  but 
do  hurt;  by  which  means  these  three  books,  having 
passed  your  examination  with  approbation,  may  at 
length  be  thought  worthy  to  come  forth  with  good 
success  in  public,  and  may  not  be  afraid  to  come  under 
the  censure  of  posterity. 

Farewell,  and  pardon  these  my  hold  undertakings. 


CORRESPONDENCE   WITH  TRITHEMIUS.  31 


TRITHEMIUS  TO  AGRIPPA. 

John  Trithemms,  Abbot  of  Saint  James  of  Herbipolis,  for- 
merly of  Spanhemittj  to  his  Henry  Cornelius  Agrippa  of 
Nettesheim,  health  and  love: 

Your  work,  most  renowned  Agrippa,  entitled  Of 
Occult  Philosophy,  which  you  have  sent  by  this  bearer 
to  me,  has  been  examined.  With  how  much  pleasure 
I  received  it  no  mortal  tongue  can  express  nor  the  pen 
of  any  write.  I  wondered  at  your  more  than  vulgar 
learning- — that  you,  being  so  young,  should  penetrate 
into  such  secrets  as  have  been  hid  from  most  learned 
men;  and  not  only  clearly  and  truly  but  also  properly 
and  elegantly  set  them  forth.  Whence  first  I  give  you 
thanks  for  your  good  will  to  me,  and,  if  I  shall  ever 
be  able,  I  shall  return  you  thanks  to  the  utmost  of  my 
power.  Your  work,  which  no  learned  man  can  suffi- 
ciently commend,  I  approve  of.  Now  that  you  may 
proceed  toward  higher  things,  as  you  have  begun,  and 
not  suffer  such  excellent  parts  of  wit  to  be  idle,  I  do, 
with  as  much  earnestness  as  I  can,  advise,  in  treat  and 
beseech  you  that  you  would  exercise  yourself  in  labor- 
ing after  better  things,  and  demonstrate  the  light  of 
true  wisdom  to  the  ignorant,  according  as  you  yourself 
are  divinely  enlightened.  Neither  let  the  considera- 
tion of  idle,  vain  fellows  withdraw  you  from  your  pur- 
pose; I  say  of  them,  of  whom  it  is  said,  "  The  wearied 
ox  treads  hard,  "  whereas  no  man,  to  the  judgment  of 
the  wise,  can  be  truly  learned  who  is  sworn  to  the 
rudiments  of  one  only  faculty.  But  you  have  been  by 
God  gifted  with  a  large  and  sublime  wit,  and  it  is  not 
that  you  should  imitate  oxen  but  rather  birds;  neither 
think  it  sufficient  that  you  study  about  particulars, 
but  bend  your  mind  confidently  to  universals;  for  by 


32  DEDICATED  TO  HERM ANNUS. 

SO  much  the  more  learned  any  one  is  thought,  by  how 
much  fewer  things  he  is  ignorant  of.  Moreover,  your 
wit  is  fully  apt  to  all  things,  and  to  be  rationally 
employed,  not  in  a  few  or  low  things,  but  many  and 
sublimer.  Yet  this  one  rule  I  advise  you  to  observe — 
that  you  communicate  vulgar  secrets  to  vulgar  friends, 
but  higher  and  secret  to  higher  and  secret  friends  only: 
Give  hay  to  an  ox,  sugar  to  a  parrot  only.  Understand 
my  meaning,  lest  you  be  trod  under  the  oxen's  feet,  as 
oftentimes  it  falls  out.  Farewell,  my  happy  friend, 
and  if  it  lie  in  my  power  to  serve  you,  command  me, 
and  according  to  your  pleasure  it  shall  without  delay 
be  done;  also,  let  our  friendship  increase  daily;  write 
often  to  me,  and  send  me  some  of  your  labors  I  earn- 
estly pray  you.     Again  farewell. 

From  our  Monastery  of  Peapolis,  the  8th  day  of  April, 
A.  D.  MDX. 


In  January,  1531,  Agrippa  wrote  from  Mechlin  to 
Hermann  of  Wied,  Archbishop  of  Cologne,  to  whom 
he  dedicated  his  Occult  Philosophy.  In  this  letter  he 
says:  "Behold!  amongst  such  things  as  were  closely 
laid  up — the  books  Of  Occult  Philosophy,  or  of  Magic,''' 
"  a  new  work  of  most  ancient  and  abstruse  learning;  " 
*'a  doctrine  of  antiquity,  by  none,  I  dare  say,  hitherto 
attempted  to  be  restored."  "I  shall  be  devotedly 
yours  if  these  studies  of  my  youth  shall  by  the  author- 
ity of  your  greatness  come  into  knowledge,"  "seeing 
many  things  in  them  seemed  to  me,  being  older,  as 
most  profitable,  so  most  necessary  to  be  known.  You 
have  therefore  the  work,  not  only  of  my  youth  but  of 
my  present  age,"  "having  added  many  things." 

The  etching  inserted  at  this  place  is  made  from  the 
title  page  of  the  only  complete  English  edition  of  the 
Occult  Philosophy  of  Magic  heretofore  published. 


THREE  BOOKS 

OF 

Occult  Philofophy, 

WRITTEN  BY 

Henry  Comelim  Agrlppa, 

NETTESHEIM, 

Counfeller  to  G  h  a  r  l  e  ^  the  Fifth, 

Emperor  of  Germany : 

AND 

ludge  of  the  Prerogative  Court* 


Tranflated  out  of  the  Latin  into  the 
Englifb  Tongue^  By  ^*  F. 


Zomiofjy  Ptinted  by  R,  W.  for  Gregory  Moute^  and  are  to 

be  Told  at  the  Sign  of  the  three  Bibles  neer  the 

Weft-end  of  'Pmls.  i6%i. 


THE  FIRST  OF  THREE  BOOKS  ENTITLED 

OF 

OCCULT  PHILOSOPHY  OR  MAGIC 

WRITTEN  BY  THAT  FAMOUS  MAN 

HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA,  Knight, 

AND  DOCTOR  OF  BOTH  LAWS,  COUNSELLOR  TO  CESAR'S  SACRED 
MAJESTY,  AND  JUDGE  OF  THE  PREROGATIVE  COURT. 

T 


BOOK  ONE.  — NATURAL  MAGIC. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Hoio  Magicians  Collect  Virtues  from  the  Three-fold  Worlds 

is  Declared  in  these  Three  Books. 

Seeing  there  is  a  Three -fold  World — Elementary, 
Celestial  and  Intellectual — and  every  inferior  is  gov- 
erned by  its  superior,  and  receiveth  the  influence  of 
the  virtues  thereof,  so  that  the  very  Original  and 
Chief  Worker  of  all  doth  by  angels,  the  heavens,  stars, 
elements,  animals,  plants,  metals  and  stones  convey 
from  Himself  the  virtues  of  His  Omnipotency  upon 
us,  for  whose  service  He  made  and  created  all  these 
things:  Wise  men  conceive  it  no  way  irrational  that  it 
should  be  possible  for  us  to  ascend  by  the  same  de- 
grees through  each  World,  to  the  same  very  original 
World  itself,  the  Maker  of  all  things  and  First  Cause, 

34  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

from  whence  all  things  are  and  proceed;  and  also  to 
enjoy  not  only  these  virtues,  which  are  already  in  the 
more  excellent  kind  of  things,  but  also  besides  these, 
to  draw  new  virtues  from  above.  Hence  it  is  that 
they  seek  after  the  virtues  of  the  Elementary  World, 
through  the  help  of  physic,  and  natural  philosophy  in 
the  various  mixtions  of  natural  things;  then  of  the 
Celestial  World  in  the  rays,  and  influences  thereof, 
according  to  the  rules  of  Astrologers,  and  the  doc- 
trines of  mathematicians,  joining  the  Celestial  virtues 
to  the  former:  Moreover,  they  ratify  and  confirm  all 
these  with  the  powers  of  divers  Intelligences,  through 
\  the  sacred  ceremonies  of  religions.  The  order  and 
process  of  all  these  I  shall  endeavor  to  deliver  in 
these  three  books :  Whereof  the  first  contains  Natural 
Magic,  the  second  Celestial,  and  the  third  Ceremonial. 
But  I  know  not  whether  it  be  an  unpardonable  pre- 
sumption in  me,  that  I,  a  man  of  so  little  judgment 
and  learning,  should  in  my  very  youth  so  confidently 
set  upon  a  business  so  difficult,  so  hard  and  intricate 
as  this  is.  Wherefore,  whatsoever  things  have  here 
already,  and  shall  afterward  be  said  by  me,  I  would 
not  have  anyone  assent  to  them,  nor  shall  I  myself, 
any  further  than  they  shall  be  approved  of  by  the 
universal  church  and  the  congregation  of  the  faithful. 


CHAPTER  II. 

What  Magic  is,  What  are  the  Parts  thereof,  and  How  the 
Professors  thereof  must  be  Qualified. 

Magic  is  a  faculty  of  wonderful  virtue,  full  of  most 
high  mysteries,  containing  the  most  profound  con- 
templation of  most  secret  things,  together  with  the 
nature,  power,  quality,  substance  and  virtues  thereof, 
as  also  the  knowledge  of  whole  Nature,  and  it  doth 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  35 

instruct  us  concerning  the  differing  and  agreement  of 
things  amongst  themselves,  whence  it  produceth  its 
wonderful  effects,  by  uniting  the  virtues  of  things 
through  the  application  of  them  one  to  the  other,  and 
to  their  inferior  suitable  subjects,  joining  and  knitting 
them  together  thoroughly  by  the  powers  and  virtues 
of  the  superior  Bodies.  This  is  the  most  perfect  and 
chief  Science,  that  sacred  and  sublimer  kind  of  Phi- 
losophy, and  lastly  the  most  absolute  perfection  of  all 
most  excellent  Philosophy.  For  seeing  that  all  regu- 
lative Philosophy  is  divided  into  Natural,  Mathemat- 
ical and  Theological:  (Natural  Philosophy  teacheth 
the  nature  of  those  things  which  are  in  the  world, 
searching  and  inquiring  into  their  causes,  effects,  times, 
places,  fashions,  events,  their  whole  and  parts,  also 

The  Number  and  the  Nature  of  those  things, 

Called  Elements — ivhat  Fire,  Earth,  Aire  forth  brings; 

From  ivhence  the  Heavens  their  beginnings  had; 

Whence  Tide,  ivhence  Bainboiu,  in  gay  colors  clad. 

What  makes  the  Clouds  that  gathered  are,  and  black, 

To  send  forth  Lightnings,  and  a  ThundWing  crack; 

What  doth  the  Nightly  Flames,  and  Comets  make; 

WJiat  makes  the  Earth  to  swell,  and  then  to  quake; 

WJiat  is  the  Seed  of  Metals,  and  of  Gold; 

Wliat  Virtues,  Wealth,  doth  Nature^s  Coffer  hold. 

All  these  things  doth  Natural  Philosophy,  the 
viewer  of  Nature,  contain,  teaching  us,  according  to 
Virgil's  Muse: 

Whence  all  things  floiv — 
Whence  Mankind,  Beast;  ivhence  Fire,  ivhence  Rain  and  Snow; 
Wlience  Earthquakes  are;  why  the  whole  Ocean  beats 
Over  his  banks  and  then  again  retreats; 
Whence  strength  of  Herbs,  whence  Courage,  rage  of  Brutes 
All  kinds  of  Stone,  of  creeping  Things,  and  Fruits, 


36  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

But  Mathematical  Philosophy  teacheth  us  to  know 
the  quantity  of  natural  bodies,  as  extended  into  three 
dimensions,  as  also  to  conceive  of  the  motion  and 
course  of  celestial  bodies. 

As  in  great  haste, 
What  makes  the  golden  Stars  to  march  so  fast? 
What  makes  the  Moon  sometimes  to  mask  her  face. 
The  Sun  also,  as  if  in  some  disgrace? 

And,  as  Virgil  sings: 

How  tW  Sun  doth  rule  with  twelve  Zodiac  Signs, 
The  Orb  thafs  measured  round  about  with  Lines — 
It  doth  the  Heavens^  Starry  Way  make  known, 
And  strange  Eclipses  of  the  Sun  and  Moon; 
Arcturns  also,  and  the  Stars  of  Bain, 
The  Seven  Stars  likewise,  and  Charles,  his  wain; 
Why  Winter  Suns  make  towards  the  West  so  fast; 
What  makes  the  Nights  so  long  ere  they  be  past? 

All  which  are  understood  by  Mathematical  Philos- 
ophy. 

Hence,  by  the  Heavens  ive  may  foreknow 
The  Seasons  all;  times  for  to  reap  and  soiv. 
And  when  ^tisfit  to  launch  into  the  deep. 
And  when  to  war,  and  when  in  peace  to  sleep; 
And  when  to  dig  up  trees,  and  them  again 
To  set,  that  they  may  bring  forth  amain. 

Now  Theological  Philosophy,  or  Divinity,  teacheth 
what  God  is,  what  the  Mind,  what  an  Intelligence,  what 
an  Angel,  what  a  Devil,  what  the  Soul,  what  Religion, 
what  sacred  Institutions,  Rites,  Temples,  Observa- 
tions, and  sacred  Mysteries  are.  It  instructs  us  also 
concerning  Faith,  Miracles,  the  virtues  of  Words  and 
Figures,  the  secret  operations  and  mysteries  of  Seals; 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.   .  37 

and,  as  Apuleius  saith,  it  teacheth  us  rightly  to  under- 
stand and  to  be  skilled  in  the  Ceremonial  Laws,  the 
equity  of  Holy  things  and  rule  of  Religions.  But  to 
recollect  myself.) 

These  three  principal  faculties*  Magic  comprehends, 
unites  and  actuates;  deservedly,  therefore,  was  it  by 
the  Ancients  esteemed  as  the  highest  and  most  sacred 
Philosophy.  It  was,  as  we  find,  brought  to  light  by 
most  sage  authors  and  most  famous  writers;  f  amongst 
which  principally  Zamolxis  and  Zoroaster  were  so 
famous  that  many  believed  they  were  the  inventors  of 
this  Science.  Their  track  Abbaris  the  Hyperborean, 
Charmondas,  Damigeron,  Eudoxus,  Hermippus  fol- 
lowed. There  were  also  other  eminent,  choice  men,  as 
Mercurius  Tresmegistus,  Porphyrins,  lamblicus,  Ploti- 
nus,  Proclus,  Dardanus,  Orpheus  the  Thracian,  Gog  the 
Grecian,  Germa  the  Babylonian,  Apollonius  of  Tyana. 
Osthanes  also  wrote  excellently  of  this  Art,  whose 
books  being  as  it  were  lost,  Democritus.  of  Abdera 
recovered,  and  set  them  forth  with  his  own  Commen- 
taries. Besides,  Pythagoras,  Empedocles,  Democritus, 
Plato,  and  many  other  renowned  Philosophers  trav- 
elled far  by  sea  to  learn  this  Art;  and  being  returned, 
published  it  with  wonderful  devoutness,  esteeming  of 
it  as  a  great  secret.  Also  it  is  well  known  that 
Pythagoras  and  Plato  went  to  the  Prophets  of  Mem- 
phis to  learn  it,  and  travelled  through  almost  all 
Syria,  Egypt,  Judea,  and  the  Schools  of  the  Caldeans 
that  they  might  not  be  ignorant  of  the  most  sacred 
Memorials  and  Records  of  Magic,  as  also  that  they 
might  be  furnished  with  Divine  things.     Whosoever, 


*  Natural,  Mathematical  and  Theological  (Spiritual)  Philosophy. 

+  The  author  here  gives  a  valuable  list  of  mystic  writers  and  teachers  up 
to  A.  D.  1509.  At  this  date  Agrippa  was  a  "  teacher  of  theology  "  at  Dole, 
France,  where  he  "attracted  great  attention  by  his  lectures;  but  having 
by  his  bitter  satires  on  the  monks  drawn  upon  himself  the  hatred  of  that 
body,  he  was  accused  of  heresy,  and  obliged  to  leave,"  going  to  Cologne. 


38  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

therefore,  is  desirous  to  study  in  this  Faculty,  if  he  be 
not  skilled  in  Natural  Philosophy,  wherein  are  dis- 
covered the  qualities  of  things,  and  in  which  are  found 
the  occult  properties  of  every  Being,  and  if  he  be  not 
skillful  in  the  Mathematics,  and  in  the  Aspects,  and 
Figures  of  the  Stars,  upon  which  depends  the  sublime 
virtue  and  property  of  every  thing;  and  if  he  be  not 
learned  in  Theology,  wherein  are  manifested  those 
immaterial  substances,  which  dispense  and  minister 
all  things,  he  cannot  be  possibly  able  to  understand 
the  rationality  of  Magic.  For  there  is  no  work  that  is 
done  by  mere  Magic,  nor  any  work  that  is  merely  Mag- 
ical, that  doth  not  comprehend  these  three  Faculties. 


CHAPTER  III. 

0/  the  Four  Elements^  their  Qualities,  and  Mutual  Mix- 
tions. 

There  are  four  Elements,  and  original  grounds  of  all 
corporeal  things — Fire,  Earth,  Water,  Air — of  which 
all  elemented  inferior  bodies  are  compounded;  not  by 
way  of  heaping  them  up  together,  but  by  transmuta- 
tion and  union;  and  when  they  are  destroyed  they  are 
resolved  into  Elements.  For  there  is  none  of  the 
sensible  Elements  that  is  pure,  but  they  are  more  or 
less  mixed,  and  apt  to  be  changed  one  into  the  other: 
Even  as  Earth  becoming  dirty,  and  being  dissolved, 
becomes  Water,  and  the  same  being  made  thick  and 
hard,  becometh  Earth  again;  but  being  evaporated 
through  heat,  passeth  into  Air,  and  that  being  kindled, 
passeth  into  Fire;  and  this  being  extinguished,  returns 
back  again  into  Air;  but  being  cooled  again  after  its 
burning,  becomes  Earth,  or  Stone,  or  Sulphur,  and  this 
is  manifested  by  Lightning.  Plato  also  was  of  that 
opinion,  that  Earth  was  wholly  changeable,  and  that 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL   MAGIC.  39 

the  rest  of  the  Elements  are  changed,  as  into  this,  so 
into  one  another  successively.  But  it  is  the  opinion  of 
the  subtler  sort  of  Philosophers,  that  Earth  is  not 
chang-ed,  but  relented  and  mixed  with  other  Elements, 
which  do  dissolve  it,  and  that  it  returns  back  into 
itself  again.*  Now,  every  one  of  the  Elements  hath 
two  specifical  qualities — the  former  whereof  it  retains 
as  proper  to  itself;  in  the  other,  as  a  mean,  it  agrees 
with  that  which  comes  next  after  it.  For  Fire  is  hot 
and  dry,  the  Earth  dry  and  cold,  the  Water  cold  and 
moist,  the  Air  moist  and  hot.  f  And  so  after  this  man- 
ner the  Elements,  according  to  two  contrary  qualities, 
are  contrary  one  to  the  other,  as  Fire  to  Water,  and 
Earth  to  Air.  Moreover,  the  Elements  are  upon 
another  account  opposite  one  to  the  other:  For  some 
are  heavy,  as  Earth  and  Water,  and  others  are  light, 
as  Air  and  Fire.  Wherefore  the  Stoics  called  the 
former  passives,  but  the  latter  actives.  And  yet  once 
again,  Plato  distinguisheth  them  after  another  man- 
ner, and  assigns  to  every  one  of  them  three  qualities, 
viz.,  to  the  Fire  brightness,  thinness  and  motion,  but 
to  the  Earth  darkness,  thickness  and  quietness.  And 
according  to  these  qualities  the  Elements  of  Fire  and 
Earth  are  contrary.  But  the  other  Elements  borrow 
their  qualities  from  these,  so  that  the  Air  receives  two 
qualities  of  the  Fire,  thinness  and  motion,  and  one  of 
the   Earth,    viz.,    darkness.     In    like   manner    Water 


*  Agrippa  teaches  here  and  in  the  chapter  following  that  matter,  or  sut)- 
stance,  however  much  its  elementary  forms  may  change,  is  eternaii,  thus 
denying  the  dogma  that  God  "  created  '"  all  things  "  out  of  nothing." 

t Tabular ly  stated:    proper        mean 

QUALITY.      QUALITY. 

Fire  is  —  hot     and    dry. 

Earth  is.,  dry     and   cold. 

Water  is . .  cold    and  moist. 

Air  is moist  and    hot. 

As  to  these  qualities— Fire  is  contrary  to  Water,  and  Earth  to  Air.  This 
exposition  of  the  "qualities"  astrologers  should  note,  for  while  the  books 
give  the  same  matter  the  "  proper  "  and  "  mean  "  qualities  are  not  given. 


40  HENRY  CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

receives  two  qualities  of  the  Earth,  darkness  and 
thickness,  and  one  of  Fire,  viz.,  motion.  But  Fire  is 
twice  more  thin  than  Air,  thrice  more  movable,  and 
four  times  more  bright;  and  the  Air  is  twice  more 
bright,  thrice  more  thin,  and  four  times  more  movable 
than  Water.  Wherefore  Water  is  twice  more  bright 
than  Earth,  thrice  more  thin,  and  four  times  more 
movable.*  As  therefore  the  Fire  is  to  the  Air,  so  Air 
is  to  the  Water,  and  Water  to  the  Earth;  and  again,  as 
the  Earth  is  to  the  Water,  so  is  the  Water  to  the  Air, 
and  the  Air  to  the  Fire.  And  this  is  the  root  and 
foundation  of  all  bodies,  natures,  virtues  and  wonder- 
ful works;  and  he  which  shall  know  these  qualities  of 
the  Elements,  and  their  mixtions,  shall  easily  bring  to 
pass  such  things  that  are  wonderful,  and  astonishing, 
and  shall  be  perfect  in  Magic. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

Of  a  Three-fold  Consideration  of  the  Elements. 

There  are,  then,  as  we  have  said,  four  Elements, 
without  the  perfect  knowledge  whereof  we  can  effect 
nothing  in  Magic.  Now  each  of  them  is  three-fold, 
that  so  the  number  of  four  may  make  up  the  number 
of  twelve;  and  by  passing  by  the  number  of  seven 
into  the  number  of  ten,  there  may  be  a  progress  to  the 
supreme  Unity,  upon  which  all  virtue  and  wonderful 
operation  depends.  Of  the  first  Order  are  the  pure 
Elements,  which  are  neither  compounded  nor  changed, 
nor  admit  of  mixtion,  but  are  incorruptible,  and  not  of 
which,  but  through  which  the  virtues  of  all  natural 
things  are  brought  forth  into  act.  No  man  is  able  to 
declare  their  virtues,  because  they  can  do  all  things 
upon  all  things.     He  which  is  ignorant  of  these,  shall 


*Tlie  unity  of  ttie  contrasts  between  the  four  elements  is  here  shown. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.     -  41 

never  be  able  to  bring  to  pass  any  wonderful  matter. 
Of  the  second  Order  are  Elements  that  are  com- 
pounded, changeable  and  impure,  yet  such  as  may  by 
art  be  reduced  to  their  pure  simplicity,  whose  virtue, 
when  they  are  thus  reduced  to  their  simplicity,  doth 
above  all  things  perfect  all  occult  and  common  opera- 
tions of  Nature;  and  these  are  the  foundation  of  the 
whole  Natural  Magic.  Of  the  third  Order  are  those 
Elements,  which  originally  and  of  themselves  are  not 
Elements,  but  are  twice  compounded,  various  and 
changeable  one  into  the  other.*  They  are  the  infalli- 
ble Medium,  and  therefore  are  called  the  middle  nature, 
or  Soul  of  the  middle  nature:  Very  few  there  are  that 
understand  the  deep  mysteries  thereof.  In  them  is, 
by  means  of  certain  numbers,  degrees  and  orders,  the 
perfection  of  every  effect  in  anything  soever,  whether 
Natural,  Celestial  or  Supercelestial;  they  are  full  of 
wonders  and  mysteries,  and  are  operative,  as  in  Magic 
Natural,  so  in  Divine:  For  from  these,  through  them, 
proceed  the  bindings,  loosings  and  transmutations  of 
all  things,  the  knowing  and  foretelling  of  all  things 
to  come,  also  the  driving  forth  of  evil  and  the  gaining 
of  good  spirits.  Let  no  man,  therefore,  without  these 
three  sorts  of  Elements,  and  the  knowledge  thereof, 
be  confident  that  he  is  able  to  work  any  thing  in  the 
occult  Sciences  of  Magic  and  Nature.  But  whosoever 
shall  know  how  to  reduce  those  of  one  Order  into 
those  of  another,  impure  into  pure,  compounded  into 
simple,  and  shall  know  how  to  understand  distinctly 
the  nature,  virtue  and  power  of  them  in  number, 
degrees  and  order,  without  dividing  the  substance,  he 
shall  easily  attain  to  the  knowledge  and  perfect  oper- 
ation of  all  Natural  things  and  Celestial  secrets. 


*Such  as  heat,  light  and  electricity;  astral  magnetism,  attraction  and 
vibration;  form,  number  and  color;  occult  principles  of  natural  law;  the 
immutable  attributes  of  time,  space  and  substance. 


42  HENRY  CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

CHAPTER  V. 

Of  the  Wonderful  Natures  of  Fire  and  Earth. 

There  are  two  things,  saith  Hermes,  viz.,  Fire  and 
Earth,  which  are  sufficient  for  the  operation  of  all 
wonderful  things:  the  former  is  active,  the  latter  pas- 
sive. Fire,  as  saith  Dionysius,  in  all  things,  and 
through  all  things,  comes  and  goes  away  bright;  it  is 
in  all  things  bright,  and  at  the  same  time  occult  and 
unknown.  When  it  is  by  itself  (no  other  matter  com- 
ing to  it,  in  which  it  should  manifest  its  proper  action) 
it  is  boundless  and  invisible,  of  itself  sufficient  for 
every  action  that  is  proper  to  it,  movable,  yielding 
itself  after  a  manner  to  all  things  that  come  next  to 
it,  renewing,  guarding  Nature,  enlightening,  not  com- 
prehended by  lights  that  are  veiled  over,  clear,  parted, 
leaping  back,  bending  upwards,  quick  in  motion,  high, 
always  raising  motions,  comprehending  another,  not 
comprehended  itself,  not  standing  in  need  of  another, 
secretly  increasing  of  itself,  and  manifesting  its  great- 
ness to  things  that  receive  it;  Active,  Powerful,  Invis- 
ibly present  in  all  things  at  once;  it  will  not  be  affronted 
or  opposed,  but  as  it  were  in  a  way  of  revenge,  it  will 
reduce,  on  a  sudden,  things  into  obedience  to  itself; 
incomprehensible,  impalpable,  not  lessened,  most  rich 
in  all  dispensations  of  itself.  Fire,  as  saith  Pliny,  is 
the  boundless  and  mischievous  part  of  the  nature  of 
things,  it  being  a  question  whether  it  destroys  or  pro- 
duceth  most  things.  Fire  itself  is  one,  and  penetrates 
through  all  things,  as  say  the  Pythagorians,  also 
spread  abroad  in  the  Heavens,  and  shining:  but  in  the 
infernal  place  straitened,  dark  and  tormenting;  in 
the  mid  ivay  it  partakes  of  both.  Fire,  therefore,  in 
itself  is  one,  but  in  that  which  receives  it,  manifold; 
and  in  differing  subjects  it  is  distributed  in  a  different 
manner,  as  Cleanthes  witnesseth  in  Cicero.     That  fire. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  43 

then,  which  we  use  is  fetched  out  of  other  things.  It 
is  in  stones,  and  is  fetched  out  by  the  stroke  of  the 
steel;  it  is  in  Earth,  and  makes  that,  after  digg^ing  up, 
to  smoke;  it  is  in  Water,  and  heats  springs  and  wells; 
it  is  in  the  depth  of  the  Sea,  and  makes  that,  being 
tossed  with  w^inds,  warm;  it  is  in  the  Air,  and  makes 
it  (as  we  oftentimes  see)  to  burn.  And  all  animals  and 
living  things  whatsoever,  as  also  all  vegetables,  are 
preserved  by  heat;  and  everything  that  lives,  lives  by 
reason  of  the  inclosed  heat.  The  properties  of  the 
Fire  that  is  above,  are  heat,  making  all  things  fruitful, 
and  light,  giving  life  to  all  things.  The  properties  of 
the  infernal  Fire  are  a  parching  heat,  consuming  all 
things,  and  darkness,  making  all  things  barren.  The 
Celestial  and  bright  Fire  drives  away  spirits  of  dark- 
ness; also  this,  our  Fire  made  with  wood,  drives  away 
the  same,  in  as  much  as  it  hath  an  analogy  with  and 
is  the  veliiculum  of  that  Superior  light;  as  also  of  him 
who  saith,  "I  am  the  Light  of  the  World,"  which  is 
true  Fire,  the  Father  of  Lights,  from  whom  every 
good  thing,  that  is  given,  comes;  sending  forth  the 
light  of  His  Fire,  and  communicating  it  first  to  the 
Sun  and  the  rest  of  the  Celestial  bodies,  and  by  these, 
as  by  mediating  instruments,  conveying  that  light  into 
our  Fire.  As,  therefore,  the  spirits  of  darkness  are 
stronger  in  the  dark,  so  good  spirits,  which  are  Angels 
of  Light,  are  augmented,  not  only  by  that  light,  which 
is  Divine,  of  the  Sun,  and  Celestial,  but  also  by  the 
light  of  our  common  Fire.  Hence  it  was  that  the  first 
and  most  wise  institutors  of  religions  and  ceremonies 
ordained  that  prayers,  singings  and  all  manner  of 
divine  worships  whatsoever  should  not  be  performed 
without  lighted  candles  or  torches  (hence,  also,  was 
that  significant  saying  of  Pythagoras,  ''Do  not  speak 
of  God  without  a  Light  "),  and  they  commanded  that 
for  the  driving  away  of  wicked  spirits,  Lights  and 


44  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

Fires  should  be  kindled  by  the  corpses  of  the  dead, 
and  that  they  should  not  be  removed  until  the  expia- 
tions were  after  a  holy  manner  performed  and  they 
buried.  And  the  great  Jehovah  himself  in  the  old  law 
commanded  that  all  his  sacrifices  should  be  offered 
with  Fire,  and  that  Fire  should  always  be  burning 
upon  the  altar,  which  custom  the  priests  of  the  altar 
did  always  observe  and  keep  amongst  the  Eomans. 

Now  the  basis  and  foundation  of  all  the  Elements  is 
the  Earth,  for  that  is  the  object,  subject,  and  recepta- 
cle of  all  Celestial  rays  and  influences;  in  it  are  con- 
tained the  seeds  and  seminal  virtues  of  all  things; 
and  therefore  it  is  said  to  be  Animal,  Vegetable  and 
Mineral.  It  being  made  fruitful  by  the  other  Elements 
and  the  Heavens,  it  brings  forth  all  things  of  itself. 
It  receives  the  abundance  of  all  things  and  is,  as  it 
were,  the  first  fountain  from  whence  all  things  spring. 
It  is  the  center,  foundation  and  mother  of  all  things. 
Take  as  much  of  it  as  you  please,  separated,  washed, 
depurated,  subtilized,  if  you  let  it  lie  in  the  open  air 
a  little  while, (it  will,  being  full  and  abounding  with 
heavenly  virtues,  of  itself  bring  forth  plants,  worms 
and  other  living  things,  also  stones,  and  bright  sparks 
of  metals.  In  it  are  great  secrets,  if  at  any  time  it 
shall  be  purified  by  the  help  of  Fire,  and  reduced  unto 
its  simplicity  by  a  convenient  washing.  It  is  the  first 
matter  of  our  creation,  and  the  truest  medicine  that 
can  restore  and  preserve  us. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

Of  the  Wonderful  Natures  of  Water,  Air  and  Winds. 

The  other  two  Elements,  viz..  Water  and  Air,  are 
not  less  efficacious  than  the  former;  neither  is  Nature 
wanting  to  work  wonderful  things  in  them.     There  is 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  45 

SO  great  a  necessity  of  Water,  that  without  it  no  liv- 
ing- thing-  can  live.  No  herb  nor  plant  whatsoever, 
without  the  moistening  of  Water  can  branch  forth. 
In  it  is  the  seminary  virtue  of  all  things,  especially  of 
animals.  The  seeds  also  of  trees  and  plants,  althoug-h 
they  are  earthy,  must  notwithstanding-  of  necessity  be 
rotted  in  Water  before  they  can  be  fruitful;  whether 
they  be  imbibed  with  the  moisture  of  the  Earth,  or 
with  dew  or  rain  or  any  other  Water  that  is  on  pur- 
pose put  to  them.  For  Moses  writes,  that  only  Earth 
and  Water  bring-  forth  a  living  soul.  But  he  ascribes 
a  twofold  production  of  things  to  Water,  viz,,  of 
things  swimming  in  the  Waters,  and  of  things  flying 
in  the  Air  above  the  Earth.  And  that  those  produc- 
tions that  are  made  in  and  upon  the  Earth  are  partly 
attributed  to  the  very  Water,  the  same  Scripture  tes- 
tifies, where  it  saith  that  the  plants  and  the  herbs  did 
not  grow,  because  God  had  not  caused  it  to  rain  upon 
the  Earth.  Such  is  the  efficacy  of  this  Element  of 
Water  that  spiritual  regeneration  cannot  be  done 
without  it,  as  Christ  himself  testified  to  Nicodemus. 
Very  great,  also,  is  the  virtue  of  it  in  the  religious 
worship  of  God,  in  expiations  and  purifications;  yea, 
the  necessity  of  it  is  no  less  than  that  of  Fire.  Infi- 
nite are  the  benefits,  and  divers  are  the  uses  thereof, 
as  being  that  by  virtue  of  which  all  things  subsist, 
are  generated,  nourished  and  increased.  Thence  it 
was  that  Thales,  of  Miletus,  and  Hesiod  concluded 
that  Water  was  the  beginning  of  all  things,  and  said 
it  was  the  first  of  all  the  Elements,  and  the  most 
potent,  and  that  because  it  hath  the  mastery  over  all 
the  rest.  For,  as  Pliny  saith.  Waters  swallow  up  the 
Earth,  extinguish  flames,  ascend  on  high,  and  by  the 
stretching  forth  of  the  clouds,  challenge  the  Heaven 
for  their  own;  the  same  falling  become  the  cause  of  all 
things  that  grow  in  the  Earth.     Very  many  are  the 


46  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

wonders  that  are  done  by  Waters,  according  to  the 
writing's  of  Pliny,  Solinus,  and  many  other  historians 
of  the  wonderful  virtue  whereof.  Ovid  also  makes 
mention  in  these  verses: 

Horned  Hammon's  Waters  at  high  noon 
Are  cold;  hot  at  Sun-rise  and  setting  Sun. 
Wood,  put  in  hub'' ling  Athemas  is  Fir^d, 
The  Moon  then  farthest  from  the  Sun  retired; 
Ciconian  streams  congeal  his  guts  to  Stone 
That  thereof  drinks,  and  what  therein  is  thrown, 
Crathis  and  Sybaris  (from  the  Mountains  roVd) 
Color  the  hair  like  Amber  or  pure  Gold. 
Some  fountains,  of  a  more  prodigious  kinde, 
Not  only  change  the  body  but  the  minde. 
Who  hath  not  heard  of  obscene  Salmacis? 
Of  tN  Ethiopian  lake?  for,  luho  of  this 
But  only  taste,  their  tvits  no  longer  keep, 
Or  forthiDith  fall  into  a  deadly  sleep. 
Who  at  Clitorius  fountain  thirst  remove 
Loath  Wine  and,  abstinent,  meer  Water  love. 
With  streams  opposed  to  these  Lincestus  floives — 
They  reel,  as  drunk,  ivho  drink  too  much  of  those. 
A  Lake  in  fair  Arcadia  stands,  of  old 
CalVd  Pheneus,  suspected  as  tivofold — 
Fear  and  forbear  to  drink  thereof  by  night — 
By  night  unwholesome,  wholesome  by  day -light. 

Josephus  also  makes  relation  of  the  wonderful 
nature  of  a  certain  river  betwixt  Arcea  and  Raphanea, 
cities  of  Syria,  which  runs  with  a  full  channel  all  the 
Sabbath  day  and  then  on  a  sudden  ceaseth,  as  if  the 
springs  were  stopped,  and  all  the  six  days  you  may 
pass  over  it  dry  shod;  but  again,  on  the  seventh  day 
(no  man  knowing  the  reason  of  it),  the  Waters  return 
again  in  abundance  as  before.  Wherefore  the  inhab- 
itants  thereabout    called    it   the   Sabbath-day  river, 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  47 

because  of  the  Seventh  day,  which  was  holy  to  the 
Jews.  The  Gospel  also  testifies  to  a  sheep-pool,  into 
which  whosoever  stepped  first,  after  the  Water  was 
troubled  by  the  Angel,  was  made  whole  of  whatso- 
ever disease  he  had.  The  same  virtue  and  efficacy  we 
read  was  in  a  spring  of  the  Jonian  Nymphs,  which 
was  in  the  territories  belonging  to  the  town  of  Elis, 
at  a  village  called  Heraclea,  near  the  river  Citheron: 
which  whosoever  stepped  into,  being  diseased,  came 
forth  whole  and  cured  of  all  his  diseases.  Pausanias 
also  reports  that  in  Lyceus,  a  mountain  of  Arcadia, 
there  was  a  spring  called  Agria,  to  which,  as  often  as 
the  dryness  of  the  region  threatened  the  destruction 
of  fruits,  Jupiter's  priest  of  Lyceus  went,  and  after 
the  offering  of  sacrifices,  devoutly  praying  to  the 
Waters  of  the  Spring,  holding  a  Bough  of  an  Oak  in 
his  hand,  put  it  down  to  the  bottom  of  the  hallowed 
Spring.  Then  the  Waters,  being  troubled,  a  Vapor 
ascending  from  thence  into  the  Air  was  blown  into 
clouds  with  which,  being  joined  together,  the  whole 
Heaven  was  overspread;  v/hich  being  a  little  after 
dissolved  into  rain,  watered  all  the  country  most 
wholesomely.  Moreover,  Ruffus,  a  physician  of  Eph- 
esus,  besides  many  other  authors,  wrote  strange  things 
concerning  the  wonders  of  Waters,  which,  for  ought  I 
know,  are  found  in  no  other  author. 

It  remains  that  I  speak  of  the  Air.  This  is  a  vital 
spirit,  passing  through  all  beings,  giving  life  and  sub- 
sistence to  all  things,  binding,  moving  and  filling  all 
things.  Hence  it  is  that  the  Hebrew  doctors  reckon 
it  not  amongst  the  Elements,  but  count  it  as  a  Medium 
or  glue,  joining  things  together,  and  as  the  resounding 
spirit  of  the  World's  instrument.  It  immediately 
receives  into  itself  the  influences  of  all  celestial 
bodies  and  then  communicates  them  to  the  other  Ele- 
ments, as  also  to  all  mixed  bodies.     Also  it  receives 


48  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

into  itself,  as  it  were  a  divine  looking-glass,  the  spe- 
cies of  all  things,  as  well  natural  as  artificial,  as  also 
of  all  manner  of  speeches,  and  retains  them;  and  car- 
rying them  with  it,  and  entering  into  the  bodies  of 
men,  and  other  animals,  through  their  pores,  makes 
an  impression  upon  them,  as  well  when  they  sleep  as 
when  they  be  awake,  and  affords  matter  for  divers 
strange  Dreams  and  Divinations.  Hence  they  say  it  is, 
that  a  man  passing  by  a  place  where  a  man  was  slain, 
or  the  carcass  newly  hid,  is  moved  with  fear  and 
dread;  because  the  Air  in  that  place,  being  full  of  the 
dreadful  species  of  manslaughter,  doth,  being  breathed 
in,  move  and  trouble  the  spirit  of  the  man  with  the 
like  species,  whence  it  is  that  he  comes  to  be  afraid. 
For  everything  that  makes  a  sudden  impression,  aston- 
isheth  nature.  Whence  it  is,  that  many  philosophers 
were  of  opinion  that  Air  is  the  cause  of  dreams,  and 
of  many  other  impressions  of  the  mind,  through  the 
prolonging  of  Images,  or  similitudes,  or  species  (which 
are  fallen  from  things  and  speeches,  multiplied  in  the 
very  Air)  until  they  come  to  the  senses,  and  then  to 
the  phantasy,  and  soul  of  him  that  receives  them, 
which  being  freed  from  cares  and  no  way  hindered, 
expecting  to  meet  such  kind  of  species,  is  informed  by 
them.  For  the  species  of  things,  although  of  their 
own  proper  nature  they  are  carried  to  the  senses  of 
men,  and  other  animals  in  general,  may  notwithstand- 
ing get  some  impression  from  the  Heaven  whilst  they 
be  in  the  Air,  by  reason  of  which,  together  with  the 
aptness  and  disposition  of  him  that  receives  them, 
they  may  be  carried  to  the  sense  of  one  rather  than  of 
another.  And  hence  it  is  possible  naturally,  and  far 
from  all  manner  of  superstition,  no  other  spirit  com- 
ing between,  that  a  man  should  be  able  in  a  very  little 
time  to  signify  his  mind  unto  another  man  abiding  at 
a  very  long  and  unknown  distance  from  him ;  although 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  49 

he  cannot  precisely  give  an  estimate  of  the  time  when 
it  is,  yet  of  necessity  it  must  be  within  twenty-four 
hours;  and  I  myself  know  how  to  do  it,  and  have  often 
done  it.*  The  same  also  in  time  past  did  the  Abbot 
Tritenius  both  know  and  do.  Also,  when  certain 
appearances,  not  only  spiritual  but  also  natural,  do 
flow  forth  from  things  (that  is  to  say,  by  a  certain 
kind  of  flowing-s  forth  of  bodies  from  bodies,  f  and  do 
gather  strength  in  the  Air),  they  offer  and  shoiv  them- 
selves to  us  as  well  through  light  as  motion,  as  well 
to  the  sight  as  to  other  senses,  and  sometimes  work 


♦This  is  conclusive  evidence  tliat  telepathy  or  mind  transference  lias 
been  known  and  practiced  for  hundreds  of  years.  Tlie  metliod  of  mind 
transference  is  frequently  carried  out  unawares,  and  may  be  performed 
in  various  ways.  When  two  persons  are  in  natural  sympathy  with  each 
other  it  is  a  comparatively  easy  matter  if  they  are  of  a  nervous  or  sensi- 
tive temperament.  Writing  a  letter,  and  then  burning  it,  the  while  fixing 
the  mind  firmly  upon  the  person  addressed  and  willing  that  the  letter  be 
answered  is  one  method.  Mentally  addressing  a  crystal  vessel  of  water 
with  the  palms  of  the  hands  extended  over  the  glass,  the  while  picturing 
the  absent  person  clearly  in  the  mind's  eye,  and  then  pouring  the  water 
into  a  stream  or  the  ocean,  will  carry  a  message  to  one  at  sea.  Burying  a 
stone,  slate  or  piece  of  metal  in  the  earth,  at  the  time  of  the  new  moon,  on 
which  a  message  is  inscribed,  will  influence  those  who  labor  in  the  earth  or 
work  in  like  metals,  especially  if  Saturn  or  Uranus  be  in  strong  aspect  to 
the  earth  through  the  sun.  The  air  method  is  the  best  of  all,  and  was  that 
undoubtedly  used  by  Agrippa  as  he  makes  mention  of  the  matter  in  this 
place :  Go  out  into  the  open  air,  or  to  an  open  window,  and  face  the  quar- 
ter wherein  the  person  is;  or,  if  the  quarter  be  unknown,  face  in  turn  each 
of  the  four  cardinal  points,  and  audibly  call  the  name  of  the  person  with 
whom  communication  is  desired,  the  same  as  though  the  party  was  in  an 
adjoining  room,  three  times,  earnestly,  and  each  time  with  added  force. 
While  doing  this  extend  the  arms  and  hands,  as  in  appeal,  the  while  clearly 
picturing  the  person's  features  in  the  mind,  and  will,  determinedly  and  per- 
sistently, that  your  call  and  message  be  heard.  Then  speak,  as  though  the 
person  stood  before  you,  shortly,  firmly  and  decidedly.  Having  done  this 
listen  for  a  reply,  which  will  come  as  though  one  were  speaking  to  the  mind 
without  the  aid  of  the  ear.  Do  not  imagine  a  reply  as  that  will  not  help 
but  rather  hinder  communication.  Of  course,  in  most  cases,  it  is  necessary 
that  there  should  exist  a  sympathetic  bond  or  tie  of  some  kind  between  the 
parties.  This  art  may  be  developed  by  practice,  by  lovers  especially,  to  an 
astonishing  degree.  It  will  be  found  very  helpful  to  set  certain  times  for 
such  development.  With  practice,  after  mind  communication  has  been 
accomplished,  spoken  messages  and  other  noted  conditions  may  be  dis- 
pensed with,  and  it  will  be  merely  necessary  to  will  and  think— projecting 
the  message  astrally. 

t  The  astral  body  from  the  material  body. 


50  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

wonderful  thing's  upon  us,  as  Plotinus  proves  and 
teacheth.  And  we  see  how  by  the  south  wind  the  Air 
is  condensed  into  thin  clouds,  in  which,  as  in  a  looking- 
glass,  are  reflected  representations  at  a  great  distance 
of  castles,  mountains,  horses  and  men  and  other  things 
which,  when  the  clouds  are  gone,  presently  vanish. 
And  Aristotle,  in  his  Meteors,  shows  that  a  rainbow  is 
conceived  in  a  cloud  of  the  Air,  as  in  a  looking-glass. 
And  Albertus  saith  that  the  effigies  of  bodies  may,  by 
the  strength  of  nature,  in  a  moist  Air  be  easily  repre- 
sented, in  the  same  manner  as  the  representations  of 
things  are  in  things.  And  Aristotle  tells  of  a  man  to 
whom  it  happened,  by  reason  of  the  weakness  of  his 
sight,  that  the  Air  that  was  near  to  him  became,  as  it 
were,  a  looking-glass  to  him,  and  the  optic  beam  did 
reflect  back  upon  himself,  and  could  not  penetrate  the 
Air,  so  that  whithersoever  he  went  he  thought  he  saw 
his  own  image,  with  his  face  towards  him,  go  before 
him.  In  like  manner,  by  the  artificialness  of  some 
certain  looking-glasses,  may  be  produced  at  a  distance 
in  the  Air,  beside  the  looking-glasses,  what  images  we 
please;  which  when  ignorant  men  see,  they  think  they 
see  the  appearances  of  spirits,  or  souls;  when,  indeed, 
they  are  nothing  else  but  semblances  kin  to  them- 
selves, and  without  life.  And  it  is  well  known,  if  in  a 
dark  place  where  there  is  no  light  but  by  the  coming 
in  of  a  beam  of  the  sun  somewhere  through  a  little 
hole,  a  white  paper  or  plain  looking-glass  be  set  up 
against  that  light,  that  there  may  be  seen  upon  them 
whatsoever  things  are  done  without,  being  shined 
upon  by  the  sun.  And  there  is  another  sleight  or  trick 
yet  more  wonderful:  If  any  one  shall  take  images 
artificially  painted,  or  written  letters,  and  in  a  clear 
night  set  them  against  the  beams  of  the  full  moon, 
whose  resemblances,  being  multiplied  in  the  Air,  and 
caught  upward,  and  reflected  back  together  with  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  51 

beams  of  the  moon,  any  other  man  that  is  privy  to  the 
thing,  at  a  long-  distance  sees,  reads  and  knows  them 
in  the  very  compass  and  circle  of  the  moon;  which  Art 
of  declaring  secrets  is  indeed  very  profitable  for  towns 
and  cities  that  are  besieged,  being  a  thing  which 
Pythagoras  long  since  did  often  do,  and  which  is  not 
unknown  to  some  in  these  days;  I  will  not  except  my- 
self. And  all  these  and  many  more,  and  greater  than 
these,  are  grounded  in  the  very  nature  of  the  Air,  and 
have  their  reasons  and  causes  declared  in  mathematics 
and  optics.  And  as  these  resemblances  are  reflected 
back  to  the  sight,  so  also  sometimes  to  the  hearing,  as 
is  manifest  in  the  Echo.  But  there  are  more  secret 
arts  than  these,  and  such  whereby  any  one  may  at 
a  very  remote  distance  hear  and  understand  what 
another  speaks  or  whispers  softly. 

There  are  also,  from  the  airy  element.  Winds;  for 
they  are  nothing  else  but  Air  moved  and  stirred  up. 
Of  these  there  are  four  that  are  principal,  blowing 
from  the  four  corners  of  the  Heaven,  viz. :  Notus  from 
the  South,  Boreas  from  the  North,  Zephyrus  from  the 
West,  Eurus  from  the  East,*  which  Pontanus  compre- 
hending in  these  verses,  saith: 

Cold  Boreas  from  the  top  of  Hympus  Mows, 
And  from  the  bottom  cloudy  Notus  flows. 
From  setting  Phoebus  fruitful  ZepWrus  flies, 
And  barren  Eurus  from  the  Sun^s  up-rise. 

*  Marcus  Manilius,  of  Rome,  time  of  Augustus,  and  author  of  the  poem 
entitled  '' Astronomica,"  thus  writes  of  the  Cardinal  Winds  (Five  Books  of 
Manilius,  London,  1697) : 

East.  West,  and  North,  and  South,  on  either  side, 

These  Quarters  lie  oppos'd,  the  World  divide : 

As  many  Winds  from  these  four  Quarters  file, 

And  fight  and  rattle,  thro'  the  empty  Sky: 

Rough  Boreas  from  the  North,  bears  Frost  and  Snows, 

And  from  the  East,  the  gentle  Eurus  blows. 

Wet  Auster  from  the  torrid  South  is  thrown, 

And  pleasing  Zephj-rus  cools  the  setting  Sun. 


52  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

Notus  is  the  Southern  Wind,  cloudy,  moist,  warm  and 
sickly,  which  Hieronimus  calls  the  butler  of  the  rains. 
Ovid  describes  it  thus: 

Out  flies  South-wind,  tvith  dropping  wings,  wJio  shroivds 
His  fearful  aspect  in  the  pitchie  clouds, 
His  white  Haire  streams,  his  Beard  big -sworn  tvith  showers; 
Mists  hinde  his  Broivs,  rain  from  his  Bosome  powres. 

But  Boreas  is  contrary  to  Notus,  and  is  the  Northern 
Wind,  fierce  and  roaring",  and  discussing"  clouds;  makes 
the  Air  serene,  and  binds  the  Water  with  frost.  Him 
doth  Ovid  thus  bring  in  speaking  of  himself: 

Force  me  befits:  with  this  thick  clouds  I  drive; 
Toss  the  blew  Billows,  knotty  Okes  up-rive; 
Congeal  soft  snow,  and  beat  the  Earth  ivith  haile: 
When  I  my  brethren  in  the  Aire  assaile, 
(For  that's  our  Field)  we  meet  with  such  a  shock, 
That  thundring  Skies  with  our  encounters  rock 
And  cloud-struck  lightning  flashes  from  on  high. 
When  through  the  Crannies  of  the  Earth  I  flie 
And  force  her  in  her  hollow  Caves;  I  make 
The  Ghosts  to  tremble,  and  the  ground  to  quake. 

And  Zephyrus,  which  is  the  Western  Wind,  is  most 
soft,  blowing  from  the  West  with  a  pleasant  gale;  it 
is  cold  and  moist,  removing  the  effects  of  Winter, 
bringing  forth  branches  and  flowers.  To  this  Eurus  is 
contrary,  which  is  the  Eastern  Wind,  and  is  called 
Apeliotes;  it  is  waterish,  cloudy  and  ravenous.  Of 
these  two  Ovid  sings  thus: 

To  Persis  and  Sabea,  Eurus  flies; 
Whose  gums  perfume  the  blushing  Morne^s  up-rise: 
Next  to  the  Evening,  and  the  Coast  that  glows 
With  setting  Phoebus,  floiv'ry  Zephyrus  blows; 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  53 

In  Scytliia  Jiorrid  Boreas  Jiolds  Jiis  rain, 
Beneath  Boites,  and  the  frozen  Wain; 
The  land  to  this  opposed  doth  Auster  steep 
With  fruitful  showres  and  clouds  which  ever  weep. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

Of  the  Kinds  of  Compounds,  ivhat  Relation  they  stand  in  to 
the  Elements,  and  tvhat  Relation  there  is  betwixt  the  Ele- 
ments themselves  and  the  Soul,  Senses  and  Dispositions 
of  Men. 

Next  after  the  four  simple  Elements  follow  the  four 
kinds  of  perfect  Bodies  compounded  of  them,  and  they 
are  Stones,  Metals,  Plants  and  Animals:  and  although 
unto  the  generation  of  each  of  these  all  the  Elements 
meet  together  in  the  composition,  yet  every  one  of 
them  follows,  and  resembles  one  of  the  Elements, 
which  is  most  predominant.  For  all  Stones  are  earthy 
for  they  are  naturally  heavy  and  descend,  and  so  hard- 
ened with  dryness  that  they  cannot  be  melted.  But 
Metals  are  waterish  and  may  be  melted,  which  natural- 
ists confess,  and  chemists  find  to  be  true,  viz.,  that 
they  are  generated  of  a  viscous  Water,  or  waterish 
argent  vive.  Plants  have  such  an  affinity  with  the 
Air,  that  unless  they  be  abroad  in  the  open  air,  they 
do  neither  bud  nor  increase.     So  also  all  Animals 

Have  in  their  Natures  a  most  fiery  force, 
And  also  spring  from  a  Celestial  source. 

And  Fire  is  so  natural  to  them,  that  that  being  extin- 
guished they  presently  die.  And,  again,  every  one  of 
those  kinds  is  distinguished  within  itself  by  reason  of 
degrees  of  the  Elements.  For  amongst  the  Stones 
they  especially  are  called  earthy  that  are  dark  and 


54  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

more  heavy;  and  those  waterish  which  are  transpar- 
ent and  are  compacted  of  water,  as  crystal,  beryl  and 
pearls  in  the  shells  of  fishes;  and  they  are  called  airy 
which  swim  upon  the  water,  and  are  spongeous,  as  the 
stones  of  a  sponge,  the  pumice  stone  and  the  stone 
sophus;*  and  they  are  called  fiery  out  of  which  fire  is 
extracted,  or  which  are  produced  of  fire,  as  thunder- 
bolts, fire-stones  and  the  stone  asbestos.  Also  amongst 
Metals,  lead  and  silver  are  earthy;  quicksilver  is  wa- 
terish; copper  and  tin  are  airy;  and  gold  and  iron  are 
fiery.  In  Plants  also,  the  roots  resemble  the  earth  by 
reason  of  their  thickness;  and  the  leaves  water, 
because  of  their  juice;  flowers  the  air,  because  of 
their  subtility,  and  the  seeds  the  fire,  by  reason  of 
their  multiplying  spirit.  Besides,  they  are  called 
some  hot,  some  cold,  some  moist,  some  dry,  borrowing 
their  names  from  the  qualities  of  the  Elements. 
Amongst  Animals  also,  some  are  in  comparison  of 
others  earthy,  and  dwell  in  the  bowels  of  the  earth, 
as  worms  and  moles,  and  many  other  small  creeping 
vermin;  others  are  watery,  as  fishes;  others  airy, 
which  cannot  live  out  of  the  air;  f  others  also  are  fiery, 
living  in  the  fire,  as  salamanders,  and  crickets,  such 
as  are  of  a  fiery  heat,  as  pigeons,  ostriches,  lions,  and 
such  as  the  wise  man  calls  beasts  breathing  fire. 
Besides,  in  animals  the  bones  resemble  the  earth,  flesh 
the  air,  the  vital  spirit  the  fire,  and  the  humors  the 
water.  And  these  humors  also  partake  of  the  Ele- 
ments, for  yellow  choler  is  instead  of  fire,  blood  instead 
of  air,  phlegm  instead  of  water,  and  black  choler,  or 
melancholy,  instead  of  earth.  And  lastly,  in  the  Soul 
itself,  according  to  Austin,  the  understanding  resem- 
bles fire,  reason  the  air,  imagination  the  water,  and 
the   senses   the   earth.     And    these    senses    also   are 


♦  Probably  meerschaum  (sea-froth),  or  sepiolite,  one  of  the  bisilicates. 
t  Birds  in  general  are  undoubtedly  here  meant. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL   MAGIC,  55 

divided  amongst  themselves  b}^  reason  of  the  Ele- 
ments, for  the  sig"ht  is  fiery,  neither  can  it  perceive 
without  fire  and  light;  the  hearing"  is  airy,  for  a  sound 
is  made  by  the  striking  of  the  air;  the  smell  and  taste 
resemble  the  water,  without  the  moisture  of  which 
there  is  neither  smell  nor  taste;  and  lastly,  the  feel- 
ing is  wholly  earthy,  and  taketh  gross  bodies  for  its 
object.  The  actions,  also,  and  the  operations  of  man 
are  governed  by  the  Elements.  The  earth  signifies  a 
slow  and  firm  motion;  the  water  signifies  fearfulness 
and  sluggishness,  and  remissness  in  working;  air  sig- 
nifies cheerfulness  and  an  amiable  disposition;  but  fire 
a  fierce,  quick  and  angry  disposition.  The  Elements, 
therefore,  are  the  first  of  all  things,  and  all  things 
are  of  and  according  to  them,  and  they  are  in  all 
things,  and  diffuse  their  virtues  through  all  things. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

How  the  Elements  are  in  the  Heavens,  in  Stars ,  in  Devils, 
in  Angels,  and  lastly  in  God  himself. 

It  is  the  unanimous  consent  of  all  Platonists,  that 
as  in  the  original  and  exemplary  World,  all  things  are 
in  all;  so  also  in  this  corporeal  world,  all  things  are 
jn^alU  so  also  the  Elements  are  not  only  in  these  infe- 
rior bodies,  but  also  in  the  Heavens,  in  Stars,  in  Dev- 
ils, in  Angels,  and  lastly  in  God,  the  maker  and  origi- 
nal example  of  all  things.  Now  in  these  inferior 
bodies  the  Elements  are  accompanied  with  much  gross 
matter;  but  in  the  Heavens  the  Elements  are  with 
their  natures  and  virtues,  viz.,  after  a  celestial  and 
more  excellent  manner  than  in  sublunary  things.  For 
the  firmness  of  the  Celestial  Earth  is  there  without 
the  grossness  of  water;  and  the  agility  of  the  Air 
without  running  over  its   bounds;    the   heat  of   Fire 


56  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

without  burning,  only  shining"  and  giving"  life  to  all 
things  by  its  heat.  Amongst  the  Stars,  also,  some 
are  fiery,  as  Mars  and  Sol;  airy,  as  Jupiter  and  Venus; 
watery,  as  Saturn  and  Mercury;  and  earthy,  such  as 
inhabit  the  eighth  Or&*  and  the  Moon  (which,  notwith- 
standing, by  many  is  accounted  watery),  seeing,  as  if 
it  were  Earth,  it  attracts  to  itself  the  celestial  waters, 
with  which,  being  imbibed,  it  doth,  by  reason  of  its 
nearness  to  us,  pour  out  and  communicate  to  us. 
There  are,  also,  amongst  the  Signs,  f  some  fiery,  some 
earthy,  some  airy,  some  watery;  the  Elements  rule 
them  also  in  the  Heavens,  distributing  to  them  these 
four  threefold  considerations  of  every  Element,  viz., 
the  beginning,  middle  and  end :  So  Aries  possesseth 
the  beginning  of  fire,  Leo  the  progress  and  increase, 
and  Sagittarius  the  end.  Taurus  the  beginning  of  the 
earth,  Virgo  the  progress,  Capricorn  the  end.  Gemini 
the  beginning  of  the  air.  Libra  the  progress,  Aquarius 
the  end.  Cancer  the  beginning  of  water,  Scorpius  the 
middle,  and  Pisces  the  end.  Of  the  mixtions,  there- 
fore, of  these  Planets  and  Signs,  together  with  the 
Elements,  are  all  bodies  made.  Moreover,  Devils  also 
are  upon  this  account  distinguished  the  one  from  the 
other,  so  that  some  are  called  fiery,  some  earthy,  some 
airy,  and  some  watery.  Hence,  also,  those  four  Infer- 
nal Rivers — fiery  Phlegethon,  airy  Cocytus,  watery 
Styx,  earthy  Acheron.  Also  in  the  Gospel  we  read  of 
hell  fire,  and  eternal  fire,  into  which  the  cursed  shall 
be  commanded  to  go;  and  in  the  Revelation  we  read 
of  a  lake  of  fire,  and  Isaiah  speaks  of  the  damned 
that  the  Lord  will  smite  them  with  corrupt  air.  And 
in  Job,  they  shall  skip  from  the  waters  of  the  snow  to 
extremity  of  heat;  and  in  the  same  we  read,  that  the 


*  A  supposedly  transparent  envelope  or  azure  sphere  inclosing  the  earth 
and  other  like  spheres,  within  which  were  carried  the  planetary  bodies. 

t  The  twelve  "  houses  "  or  divisional  parts  of  the  Zodiac. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC,  57 

Earth  is  dark,  and  covered  with  the  darkness  of  death 
and  miserable  darkness.  Moreover,  also,  these  Ele- 
ments are  placed  in  the  Angels  in  Heaven  and  the 
blessed  Intelligences.  There  is  in  them  a  stability  of 
their  essence,  which  is  an  earthly  virtue,  in  which  is 
the  steadfast  seat  of  God;  also  their  mercy  and  piety 
is  a  watery  cleansing  virtue.  Hence  by  the  Psalmist 
they  are  called  Waters,  where  he,  speaking  of  the 
Heavens,  saith,  Who  rulest  the  Waters  that  are  higher 
than  the  Heavens.*  Also  in  them  their  subtile  breath 
is  Air,  and  their  love  is  shining  Fire.  Hence  they  are 
called  in  Scripture  the  Wings  of  the  Wind;  and  in 
another  place  the  Psalmist  speaks  of  them.  Who 
makest  Angels  thy  Spirits  and  thy  Ministers  a  flaming 
fire.  Also  according  to  orders  of  Angels,  some  are 
fiery,  as  Seraphim,  and  Authorities  and  Powers; 
earthy,  as  Cherubim;  watery,  as  Thrones  and  Arch- 
angels; airy,  as  Dominions  and  Principalities.  Do  we 
not  also  read  of  the  original  maker  of  all  things,  that 
the  earth  shall  be  opened  and  bring  forth  a  Savior? 
Is  it  not  spoken  of  the  same,  that  he  shall  be  a  fount- 
ain of  living  Water,  cleansing  and  regenerating?  Is 
not  the  same  Spirit  breathing  the  breath  of  life;  and 
the  same,  according  to  Moses'  and  Paul's  testimony, 
a  consuming  Fire?  That  Elements,  therefore,  are  to 
be  found  everywhere,  and  in  all  things  after  their 
manner,  no  man  can  deny:  First  in  these  inferior 
bodies  seculent  and  gross,  and  in  celestials  more  pure 
and  clear;  but  in  supercelestials  living,  and  in  all 
respects  blessed.  Elements,  therefore,  in  the  exem- 
plary world  are  Ideas  of  things  to  be  produced,  in 
Intelligences  are  distributed  powers,  in  Heavens  are 
virtues,  and  in  inferior  bodies  gross  forms. 


See  Psalm  cxlviii.,  4:  "  Waters  that  be  above  the  Heavens."  Gen.,  i.,  6-9, 
is  also  noteworthy.  The  Watery  Triplicity  of  the  Zodiac  may  properly  be 
termed  as  "Waters  above  the  Heavens,"  or  Celestial  Waters. 


58  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Of  the  Virtues  of  things  Natural,  depending  immediately 

upon  Elements. 

Of  the  natural  virtues  of  things,  some  are  Element- 
ary, as  to  heat,  to  cool,  to  moisten,  to  dry;  and  they 
are  called  operations,  or  first  qualities;  and  the  second 
act:  for  these  qualities  only  do  wholly  change  the 
whole  substance,  which  none  of  the  other  qualities 
can  do.  And  some  are  in  things  compounded  of  Ele- 
ments, and  these  are  more  than  first  qualities,  and 
such  are  those  that  are  maturating,  digesting,  resolv- 
ing, mollifying,  hardening,  restringing,  absterging, 
corroding,  burning,  opening,  evaporating,  strengthen- 
ing, mitigating,  conglutinating,  obstructing,  expelling, 
retaining,  attracting,  repercussing,  stupefying,  bestow- 
ing, lubrifying  and  many  more.  Elementary  qualities 
do  many  things  in  a  mixed  body  which  they  cannot  do 
in  the  Elements  themselves. ,  And  these  operations 
are  called  secondary  qualities,  because  they  follow  the 
nature  and  proportion  of  the  mixtion  of  the  first  vir- 
tues, as  largely  it  is  treated  of  in  physic  books.  As 
maturation,  which  is  the  operation  of  natural  heat, 
according  to  a  certain  proportion  in  the  substance  of 
the  matter,  so  induration  is  the  operation  of  cold;  so 
also  is  congelation,  and  so  of  the  rest.  And  these 
operations  sometimes  act  upon  a  certain  member,  as 
such  which  provoke  water,  milk,  the  flow,  and  they 
are  called  third  qualities,  which  follow  the  second,  as 
the  second  do  the  first.  According,  therefore,  to  these 
first,  second,  and  third  qualities  many  diseases  are 
both  cured  and  caused.  Many  things  also  there  are 
artificially  made,  which  men  much  wonder  at;  as  is 
Fire  which  burns  Water,  which  they  call  the  Greek 
Fire,  of  which  Aristotle  teacheth  many  compositions 
in  his   particular   treatise   of    this   subject.     In    like 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  59 

manner  there  is  made  a  Fire  that  is  extinguished  with 
oil,  and  is  kindled  with  cold  water,  when  it  is  sprinkled 
upon  it;  and  a  Fire  which  is  kindled  either  with  Rain, 
Wind  or  the  Sun;  and  there  is  made  a  Fire  which  is 
called  burning"  Water,  the  confection  whereof  is  well 
known,  and  it  consumes  nothing"  but  itself.  And  also 
there  are  made  Fires  that  cannot  be  quenched,  and 
incombustible  Oils  and  perpetual  Lamps,  which  can  be 
exting"uished  neither  with  wind,  nor  water,  nor  any 
other  way;  which  seems  utterly  incredible,  but  that 
there  had  been  such  a  most  famous  Lamp,  which  once 
did  shine  in  the  Temple  of  Venus,  in  which  the  stone 
Asbestos  did  burn,  which  being"  once  fired  can  never 
be  extinguished.  Also,  on  the  contrary.  Wood,  or  any 
other  combustible  matter  may  be  so  ordered,  that  it 
can  receive  no  harm  from  the  Fire;  and  there  are 
made  certain  confections,  with  which  the  hands  being" 
anointed,  we  may  carry  red-hot  iron  in  them,  or  put 
them  into  melted  metal;  or  go  with  our  whole  bodies, 
being  first  anointed  therewith,  into  the  Fire  without 
any  manner  of  harm;  and  such  like  things  as  these 
may  be  done.  There  is  also  a  kind  of  flax,  which 
Pliny  calls  Asbestum,  the  Greeks  call  Asbeson,  which 
is  not  consumed  by  Fire,  of  which  Anaxilaus  saith, 
that  a  tree  compassed  about  with  it  may  be  cut  down 
with  insensible  blows,  that  cannot  be  heard. 


CHAPTER  X. 

Of  the  Occult  Virtues  of  Things. 

There  are  also  other  virtues  in  things,  which  are 
not  from  any  Element,  as  to  expel  poison,  to  drive 
away  the  noxious  vapors  of  minerals,  to  attract  iron 
or  anything  else;  and  these  virtues  are  a  sequel  of  the 
species  and  form  of  this  or  that  thing;  whence  also 


60  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

they  being  little  in  quantity,  are  of  great  efficacy; 
which  is  not  granted  to  any  Elementary  quality.  For 
these  virtues,  having  much  form  and  little  matter,  can 
do  very  much;  but  an  Elementary  virtue,  because  it 
hath  more  materiality,  requires  much  matter  for  its 
acting.  And  they  are  called  Occult  Qualities,  because 
their  causes  lie  hid,  and  man's  intellect  cannot  in  any 
\.  way  reach  and  find  them  out.  Wherefore  philosophers 
have  attained  to  the  greatest  part  of  them  by  long 
experience,  rather  than  by  the  search  of  reason:  for 
as  in  the  stomach  the  meat  is  digested  by  heat,  which 
we  know,  so  it  is  changed  by  a  certain  hidden  virtue 
which  we  know  not:  for  truly  it  is  not  changed  by 
heat,  because  then  it  should  rather  be  changed  by  the 
fire-side  than  in  the  stomach.  So  there  are  in  things, 
besides  the  Elementary  qualities  which  we  know, 
other  certain  imbred  virtues  created  by  Nature,  which 
we  admire  and  are  amazed  at,  being  such  as  we  know 
not,  and  indeed  seldom  or  never  have  seen.  As  we 
read  in  Ovid  of  the  Phoenix,  one  only  bird,  which 
renews  herself: 

All  Birds  from,  others  do  derive  their  birth, 
But  yet  one  Foiule  there  is  in  all  the  Earth, 
CalVd  hy  tN  Assyrians  Phoenix,  xoho  the  wain 
Of  age  repairs,  and  soivs  her  self  again. 

And  in  another  place — 

^gyptus  came  to  see  this  wondrous  sight; 
And  this  rare  Bird  is  welcomed  ivith  delight. 

Long  since  Matreas  brought  a  very  great  wonder- 
ment upon  the  Greeks  and  Romans  concerning  him- 
self. He  said  that  he  nourished  and  bred  a  beast  that 
did  devour  itself.  Hence  many  to  this  day  are  solic- 
itous what  this  beast  of  Matreas  should  be.  Who 
would  not  wonder  that  fishes  should  be  digged  out  of 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL   MAGIC.  61 

the  Earth,  of  which  Aristotle,  Theophrastus,  and 
Polybius  the  historian,  makes  mention?  And  those 
thing's  which  Pausanius  wrote  concerning*  the  Singing" 
Stones?  All  these  are  effects  of  Occult  Virtues.  So 
the  ostrich  concocts  cold  and  most  hard  iron,  and 
dig-ests  it  into  nourishment  for  his  body;  whose  stom- 
ach, they  also  report,  cannot  be  hurt  with  red-hot 
iron.  So  that  little  fish,  called  echeneis,  doth  so  curb 
the  violence  of  the  winds,  and  appease  the  rage  of  the 
sea,  that,  let  the  tempests  be  never  so  imperious  and 
raging,  the  sails  also  bearing  a  full  gale,  it  doth  not- 
withstanding by  its  mere  touch  stay  the  ships  and 
makes  them  stand  still,  that  by  no  means  they  can  be 
moved.  So  salamanders  and  crickets  live  in  the  fire; 
although  they  seem  sometimes  to  burn,  yet  they  are 
not  hurt.  The  like  is  said  of  a  kind  of  bitumen,  with 
which  the  weapons  of  the  Amazons  were  said  to  be 
smeared  over,  by  which  means  they  could  be  spoiled 
neither  with  sword  nor  fire;  with  which  also  the  gates 
of  Caspia,  made  of  brass,  are  reported  to  be  smeared 
over  by  Alexander  the  Great.  We  read  also  that 
Noah's  Ark  was  joined  together  with  this  bitumen, 
and  that  it  endured  some  thousands  of  years  upon  the 
Mountains  of  Armenia.  There  are  many  such  kind  of 
wonderful  things,  scarce  credible,  which  notwith- 
standing are  known  by  experience.  Amongst  which 
Antiquity  makes  mention  of  Satyrs,  which  were  ani- 
mals, in  shape  half  men  and  half  brutes,  yet  capable 
of  speech  and  reason;  one  whereof  St.  Hierome  report- 
eth,  spake  once  unto  holy  Antonius  the  Hermit,  and 
condemned  the  error  of  the  Gentiles  in  worshiping 
such  poor  creatures  as  they  were,  and  desired  him  that 
he  would  pray  unto  the  true  God  for  him;  also  he 
affirms  that  there  w^as  one  of  these  Satyrs  shewed 
openly  alive,  and  afterwards  sent  to  Constantine  the 
Emperor. 


62  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

CHAPTER  XI. 

How  Occult  Virtues  are  Infused  into  the  several  kinds  of 
Things  l)y  Ideas,  through  the  Help  of  the  Soul  of  the 
World,  and  Bays  of  the  Stars;  and  what  Things  abound 
most  ivith  this  Virtue. 

Platonists  say  that  all  inferior  bodies  are  exempli- 
fied by  the  superior  Ideas.  Now  they  define  an  Idea  to 
be  a  form,  above  bodies,  souls,  minds,  and  to  be  one, 
simple,  pure,  immutable,  indivisible,  incorporeal  and 
eternal;  and  that  the  nature  of  all  Ideas  in  the  first 
place  is  in  very  Goodness  itself  {i.  e.),  God,  by  way  of 
cause;  and  that  they  are  distinguished  amongst  them- 
selves by  some  relative  considerations  only,  lest  what- 
soever is  in  the  world  should  be  but  one  thing  without 
any  variety,  and  that  they  agree  in  essence,  lest  God 
should  be  a  compound  substance.  In  the  second 
place,  they  place  them  in  the  very  Intelligible  Itself 
{i.  e.),  in  the  Soul  of  the  World,  differing  the  one  from 
the  other  by  absolute  forms,  so  that  all  the  Ideas  in 
God  indeed  are  but  one  form,  but  in  the  Soul  of  the 
World  they  are  many.  They  are  placed  in  the  minds 
of  all  other  things,  whether  they  be  joined  to  the 
body  or  separated  from  the  body,  by  a  certain  partic- 
ipation, and  now  by  degrees  are  distinguished  more 
and  more.  They  place  them  in  Nature,  as  certain 
small  Seed  of  Forms  infused  by  the  Ideas,  and  lastly 
they  place  them  in  matter,  as  Shadows.  Hereunto 
may  be  added,  that  in  the  Soul  of  the  World  there  be 
as  many  Seminal  Forms  of  things  as  Ideas  in  the  mind 
of  God,  by  which  forms  she  did  in  the  Heavens  above 
the  Stars  frame  to  herself  shapes  also,  and  stamped 
upon  all  these  some  properties.  On  these  Stars  there- 
fore, shapes  and  properties,  all  virtues  of  inferior 
species,  as  also  their  properties  do  depend;  so  that 
every  species  hath  its  Celestial  Shape,  or  figure  that 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  63 

is  suitable  to  it,  from  which  also  proceeds  a  wonderful 
power  of  operating,  which  proper  gift  it  receives  from 
its  own  Idea,  through  the  Seminal  Forms  of  the  Soul 
of  the  World.  For  Ideas  are  not  only  essential  causes 
of  every  species,  but  are  also  the  causes  of  every 
virtue,  which  is  in  the  species;  and  this  is  that  which 
many  philosophers  say,  that  the  properties  which  are 
in  the  nature  of  things  (which  virtues,  indeed,  are  the 
operations  of  the  Ideas)  are  moved  by  certain  virtues, 
viz.,  such  as  have  a  certain  and  sure  foundation;  not 
fortuitous,  nor  casual,  but  efficacious,  powerful  and 
sufficient — doing  nothing  in  vain.  Now  these  Virtues 
do  not  err  in  their  actings,  but  by  accident,  viz. ,  by 
reason  of  the  impurity  or  inequality  of  the  matter: 
For  upon  this  account  there  are  found  things  of  the 
same  species  more  or  less  powerful,  according  to  the 
purity  or  indisposition  of  the  matter;  for  all  Celestial 
Influences  may  be  hindered  by  the  indisposition  and 
insufficiency  of  the  matter.  Whence  it  was  a  proverb 
amongst  the  Platonists,  that  Celestial  Virtues  were 
infused  according  to  the  desert  or  merit  of  the  matter: 
Which  also  Virgil  makes  mention  of  when  he  sings: 

Their  natures  fiery  are,  and  from  above, 
And  from  gross  bodies  freed,  divinely  move. 

Wherefore  those  things  in  which  there  is  less  of  the 
Idea  of  the  matter  (1  e.),  such  things  which  have  a 
greater  resemblance  of  things  separated,  have  more 
powerful  virtues  in  operation,  being  like  to  the  opera- 
tion of  a  separated  Idea.  We  see  then  that  the  situa- 
tion and  figure  of  Celestials  is  the  cause  of  all  those 
excellent  Virtues  that  are  in  inferior  species.* 


*  An  Idea  of  a  pure  Element,  whetlier  the  element  be  of  time,  space  or 
matter,  is  an  idea  that  pertains  exclusively  to  such  element,  corelating  with 
it  as  perfectly  as  the  idea  is  perfect.  As  such  idea  must  be  evolved  in  an 
intelligent  use  of  such  element,  so  ideas  are  essential  to  occult  experiment. 


64  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

CHAPTER  XII. 

How  it  is  that  Particular  Virtues  are  Infused  into  Particular 
Individuals,  even  of  the  same  Species. 

There  are  also  in  many  individuals,  or  particular 
things,  peculiar  gifts,  as  wonderful  as  in  the  species, 
and  these  also  are  from  the  figure  and  situation  of 
Celestial  Stars.  For  every  Individual,  when  it  begins 
to  be  under  a  determined  Horoscope,  and  Celestial 
Constellation,  contracts  together  with  its  essence  a 
certain  wonderful  virtue  both  of  doing  and  suffering 
something  that  is  remarkable,  even  besides  that  which 
it  receives  from  its  species;  and  this  it  doth  partly  by 
the  influence  of  the  Heaven  and  partly  through  that 
obedientialness,  of  the  matter  of  things  to  be  gener- 
ated, to  the  Soul  of  the  World,  which  obedientialness 
indeed  is  such  as  that  of  our  bodies  to  our  souls.  For 
we  perceive  that  there  is  this  in  us,  that  according  to 
our  conceptions  of  things  our  bodies  are  moved,  and 
that  cheerfully,  as  when  we  are  afraid  of  or  fly  from 
any  thing.  So,  many  times  when  the  celestial  souls 
conceive  several  things,  then  the  matter  is  moved  obe- 
diently to  it.  Also  in  Nature  there  appear  divers 
prodigies,  by  reason  of  the  imagination  of  superior 
motions.  So  also  they  conceive  and  imagine  divers 
virtues,  not  only  things  natural  but  also  sometimes 
things  artificial,  and  this  especially  if  the  Soul  of 
the  operator  be  inclined  towards  the  same.  Whence 
Avicen  saith,  that  whatsoever  things  are  done  here, 
must  have  been  before  in  the  motions  and  conceptions 
of  the  Stars  and  Orbs.  So  in  things  various  effects, 
inclinations  and  dispositions  are  occasioned  not  only 
from  the  matter  variously  disposed,  as  many  suppose, 
but  from  a  various  influence  and  diverse  form;  not 
truly  with  a  specifical  difference,  bat  peculiar  and 
proper.     And  the  degrees  of  these  are  variously  dis- 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  65 

tributed  by  the  first  cause  of  all  thing's.  God  himself, 
who  being  unchangeable,  distributes  to  every  one  as 
he  pleaseth,  with  whom,  notwithstanding,  second 
causes.  Angelical  and  Celestial,  co-operate,  disposing 
of  the  corporeal  matter  and  other  things  that  are 
committed  to  them.  All  virtues,  therefore,  are  infused 
by  God,  through  the  Soul  of  the  World,  yet  by  a  par- 
ticular power  of  resemblances  and  intelligences  over- 
ruling them,  and  concourse  of  the  rays,  and  aspects  of 
the  Stars  in  a  certain  peculiar  harmonious  consent. 


CHAPTER  XIII. 

Whence  the  Occult  Virtues  of  Things  Proceed. 

IT  IS  well  known  to  all  that  there  is  a  certain  virtue 
in  the  Loadstone  by  which  it  attracts  iron,  and  that 
the  Diamond  doth  by  its  presence  take  away  that  vir- 
tue of  the  Loadstone.  So  also  Amber  and  Jet,  rubbed 
and  warmed,  draw  a  straw  to  them;  and  the  stone 
Asbestos,  being  once  fired,  is  never  or  scarce  extin- 
guished. A  Carbuncle  shines  in  the  dark;  the  stone 
Aetites  put  above  the  young  fruit  of  women  or  plants 
strengthens  them,  but  being  put  under,  weakeneth. 
The  Jasper  stauncheth  blood;  the  little  fish  Echeneis 
stops  the  ships;  Rhubarb  expels  choler;  the  liver  of 
the  Chameleon,  burnt,  raiseth  showers  and  thunders. 
The  stone  Heliotrope  dazzles  the  sight,  and  makes  him 
that  wears  it  to  be  invisible;  the  stone  Lyucurius 
takes  away  delusions  from  before  the  eyes,  the  per- 
fume of  the  stone  Lypparis  calls  forth  all  the  beasts, 
the  stone  Synochitis  brings  up  infernal  ghosts,  the 
stone  Anachitis  makes  the  images  of  the  Gods  appear. 
The  Ennectis,  put  under  them  that  dream,  causeth 
oracles.  There  is  an  herb  in  Ethiopia  with  which, 
they  report,   ponds  and  lakes  are  dried  up,  and  all 


66  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

things  that  are  shut  to  be  opened;  and  we  read  of  an 
herb,  called  Latace,  which  the  Persian  kings  give  to 
their  embassadors,  that  whithersoever  they  shall  come 
they  shall  abound  with  plenty  of  all  things.  There  is 
also  a  Scythian  herb  with  which,  being  tasted  or  at 
least  held  in  the  mouth,  they  report  the  Scythians  will 
endure  twelve  days'  hunger  and  thirst;  and  Apuleius 
saith  that  he  was  taught  by  an  Oracle  that  there  were 
many  kinds  of  herbs  and  stones  with  which  men 
might  prolong  their  lives  forever,  but  that  it  was  not 
lawful  for  men  to  understand  the  knowledge  of  those 
things  because,  whereas  they, have  but  a  short  time  to 
live,  they  study  mischief  with  all  their  might  and 
attempt  all  manner  of  wickedness;  if  they  should  be 
sure  of  a  very  long  time,  they  would  not  spare  the 
Gods  themselves.  But  from  whence  these  virtues  are 
none  of  all  these  have  shewed  who  have  set  forth 
huge  volumes  of  the  properties  of  things,  not  Hermes, 
not  Bochus,  not  Aaron,  not  Orpheus,  not  Theophras- 
tus,  not  Thebith,  not  Zenothemis,  not  Zoroaster,  not 
Evax,  not  Dioscorides,  not  Isaaick  the  Jew,  not  Zach- 
arias  the  Babylonian,  not  Albertus,  not  Arnoldus;  and 
yet  all  these  have  confessed  the  same,  that  Zacharias 
writes  to  Mithridites,  that  great  power  and  human 
destinies  are  couched  in  the  virtues  of  Stones  and 
Herbs.  But  to  know  from  whence  these  come,  a 
higher  speculation  is  required.  Alexander  the  peripa- 
tetic, not  going  any  further  than  his  senses  and 
qualities,  is  of  the  opinion  that  these  proceed  from 
Elements,  and  their  qualities,  which  haply  might  be 
supposed  to  be  true,  if  those  were  of  the  same  species; 
but  many  of  the  operations  of  the  Stones  agree  neither 
in  genere  nor  specie.  Therefore  Plato  and  his  scholars 
attribute  these  virtues  to  Ideas,  the  formers  of  things. 
But  Avicen  reduceth  these  kinds  of  operations  to 
Intelligences,  Hermes  to  the  Stars,  Albertus  to  the 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  67 

specifical  forms  of  things.  And  althoug-h  these  authors 
seem  to  thwart  one  the  other,  yet  none  of  them,  if 
they  be  rightly  understood,  goes  beside  the  truth; 
since  all  their  sayings  are  the  same  in  effect  in  most 
things.  For  God,  in  the  first  place,  is  the  end  and 
beginning  of  all  Virtues;  he  gives  the  seal  of  the  Ideas 
to  his  servants,  the  Intelligences;  who,  as  faithful 
officers,  sign  all  things  intrusted  to  them  with  an 
Ideal  Virtue;  the  Heavens  and  Stars,  as  instruments, 
disposing  the  matter  in  the  mean  while  for  the  receiv- 
ing of  those  forms  which  reside  in  Divine  Majesty  (as 
saith  Plato  in  Timeus)  and  to  be  conveyed  by  Stars; 
and  the  Giver  of  Forms  distributes  them  by  the  Min- 
istry of  his  Intelligences,  which  he  hath  set  as  Rulers 
and  Controllers  over  his  Works,  to  whom  such  a 
power  is  intrusted  in  things  committed  to  them  that 
so  all  Virtues  of  Stones,  Herbs,  Metals,  and  all  other 
things  may  come  from  the  Intelligences,  the  Govern- 
ors. The  Form,  therefore,  and  Virtue  of  things  comes 
first  from  the  Ideas,  then  from  the  rnling  and  govern- 
ing Intelligences,  then  from  the  aspects  of  the  Heavens 
disposing,  and  lastly  from  the  tempers  of  the  Elements 
disposed,  answering  the  influences  of  the  Heavens,  by 
which  the  Elements  themselves  are  ordered,  or  dis- 
posed. These  kinds  of  operations,  therefore,  are  per- 
formed in  these  inferior  things  by  express  forms,  and 
in  the  Heavens  by  disposing  virtues,  in  Intelligences 
by  mediating  rules,  in  the  Original  Cause  by  Ideas  and 
exemplary  forms,  all  which  must  of  necessity  agree  in 
the  execution  of  the  effect  and  virtue  of  every  thing. 

There  is,  therefore,  a  wonderful  virtue  and  operation 
in  every  Herb  and  Stone,  but  greater  in  a  Star,  beyond 
which,  even  from  the  governing  Intelligences  every 
thing  receiveth  and  obtains  many  things  for  itself, 
especially  from  the  Supreme  Cause,  with  whom  all 
things  do  mutually  and  exactly  correspond,  agreeing 


68  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

in  an  harmonious  consent,  as  it  were  in  hymns,  always 
praising"  the  highest  Maker  of  all  things,  as  by  the 
three  children  in  the  fiery  furnace  were  all  things 
called  upon  to  praise  God  with  singings.  Bless  ye  the 
Lord  all  things  that  grow  upon  the  Earth,  and  all 
things  which  move  in  the  Waters,  all  fowls  of  the 
Heavens,  beasts  and  cattle,  together  with  the  sons  of 
men.  There  is,  therefore,  no  other  cause  of  the  neces- 
sity of  effects  than  the  connection  of  all  things  with 
the  First  Cause,  and  their  correspondency  with  those 
Divine  patterns  and  eternal  Ideas  whence  every  thing 
hath  its  determinate  and  particular  place  in  the  exem- 
plary world,  from  whence  it  lives  and  receives  its 
original  being:  And  every  virtue  of  herbs,  stones, 
metals,  animals,  words  and  speeches,  and  all  things 
that  are  of  God,  is  placed  there.  Now  the  First  Cause, 
which  is  God,  although  he  doth  by  Intelligences  and 
the  Heavens  work  upon  these  inferior  things,  doth 
sometimes  (these  mediums  being  laid  aside,  or  their 
officiating  being  suspended)  works  those  things  imme- 
diately by  himself,  which  works  then  are  called  Mira- 
cles. But  whereas  secondary  causes,  which  Plato 
and  others  call  handmaids,  do  by  the  command  and 
appointment  of  the  First  Cause,  necessarily  act,  and 
are  necessitated  to  produce  their  effects,  if  God  shall 
notwithstanding,  according  to  his  pleasure,  so  dis- 
charge and  suspend  them,  that  they  shall  wholly  desist 
from  the  necessity  of  that  command  and  appointment; 
then  they  are  called  the  greatest  Miracles  of  God. 
So  the  fire  in  the  Chaldeans'  furnace  did  not  burn  the 
Children.  So  also  the  Sun  at  the  command  of  Joshua 
went  back  from  its  course  the  space  of  a  whole  day; 
so  also  at  the  prayer  of  Hezekiah  it  went  back  ten 
degrees,  or  hours.  So  when  Christ  was  crucified  the 
Sun  was  darkened,  though  at  full  Moon.  And  the  rea- 
sons of  these  operations  can  by  no  rational  discourse, 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC,  69 

no  Magic,  or  occult  or  profound  Science  whatsoever 
be  found  out  or  understood,  but  are  to  be  learned  and 
inquired  into  by  Divine  Oracles  only. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 

Of  the  Spirit  of  the  World,  What  It  Is,  and  hoio  by  way  of 
medium  It  Unites  occult  Virtues  to  their  Subjects. 

Democritus  and  Orpheus,  and  many  Pythagoreans, 
having  most  diligently  searched  into  the  virtues  of 
celestial  things  and  natures  of  inferior  things,  said: 
That  all  things  are  full  of  God  and  not  without  cause. 
For  there  is  nothing  of  such  transcending  virtues, 
which  being  destitute  of  Divine  assistance,  is  content 
with  the  nature  of  itself.  Also  they  called  those 
Divine  Powers  which  are  diffused  in  things,  Gods; 
which  Zoroaster  called  Divine  Allurements;  Synesius, 
Sj^mbolical  Inticements;  others  called  them  Lives,  and 
some  also  Souls,  saying  that  the  virtues  of  things  did 
depend  upon  these,  because  it  is  the  property  of  the 
Soul  to  be  from  one  matter  extended  into  divers  things 
about  which  it  operates:  So  is  a  man  who  extends  his 
intellect  unto  intelligible  things,  and  his  imagination 
unto  imaginable  things;  and  this  is  that  which  they 
understood  when  they  said,  viz. :  That  the  Soul  of  one 
thing  went  out  and  went  into  another  thing,  altering 
it,  and  hindering  the  operations  of  it:  as  the  diamond 
hinders  the  operation  of  the  loadstone,  that  it  cannot 
attract  iron.  Now  seeing  the  Soul  is  the  first  thing 
that  is  movable  and,  as  they  say,  is  moved  of  itself; 
but  the  body,  or  the  matter,  is  of  itself  unable  and 
unfit  for  motion,  and  doth  much  degenerate  from  the 
Soul,  therefore  they  say  there  is  need  of  a  more  excel- 
lent medium,  viz.,  such  a  one  that  may  be,  as  it  were, 
no  body,  but,  as  it  were,  a  Soul;  or,  as  it  were,  no  Soul, 


70  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

but,  as  it  were,  a  body,  viz. ,  by  which  the  soul  may  be 
joined  to  the  body.  Now  they  conceive  such  a  medium 
to  be  the  Spirit  of  the  World,  viz.,  that  which  we  call 
the  quintessence,  because  it  is  not  from  the  four  Ele- 
ments, but  a  certain  first  thing,  having  its  being  above 
and  besides  them.  There  is,  therefore,  such  a  kind  of 
spirit  required  to  be,  as  it  were  the  medium,  whereby 
Celestial  Souls  are  joined  to  gross  bodies,  and  bestow 
upon  them  wonderful  gifts.  This  Spirit  is  after  the 
same  manner  in  the  body  of  the  world,  as  ours  is  in 
the  body  of  man.  For  as  the  powers  of  our  soul  are 
communicated  to  the  members  of  the  body  by  the 
spirit,  so  also  the  Virtue  of  the  Soul  of  the  World  is 
diffused  through  all  things  by  the  quintessence:  For 
there  is  nothing  found  in  the  whole  world  that  hath 
not  a  spark  of  the  virtue  thereof.  Yet  it  is  more,  nay, 
most  of  all,  infused  into  those  things  which  have 
received  or  taken  in  most  of  this  Spirit.  Now  this 
Spirit  is  received  or  taken  in  by  the  rays  of  the  Stars, 
so  far  forth  as  things  render  themselves  conformable 
to  them.  By  this  Spirit,  therefore,  every  occult  prop- 
erty is  conveyed  into  herbs,  stones,  metals,  and  ani- 
mals, through  the  Sun,,  Moon,  Planets,  and  through 
Stars  higher  than  the  Planets. 

Now  this  Spirit  may  be  more  advantageous  to  us  if 
any  one  knew  how  to  separate  it  from  the  Elements; 
or  at  least  to  use  those  things  chiefly  which  do  most 
abound  with  this  Spirit.  For  these  things,  in  which 
this  Spirit  is  less  drowned  in  a  body  and  less  checked 
by  matter,  do  more  powerfully  and  perfectly  act,  and 
also  more  readily  generate  their  like;  for  in  it  are  all 
generative  and  seminary  virtues.  For  which  cause 
the  Alchemists  endeavored  to  separate  this  Spirit 
from  Gold  and  Silver;  which  being  rightly  separated 
and  extracted,  if  thou  shalt  afterward  project  it  upon 
any  matter  of  the  same  kind  {i.  e.),  any  metal,  presently 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  71 

will  turn  it  into  Gold  or  Silver.  And  we  know  how 
to  do  that,  and  have  seen  it  done:  but  we  could  make 
no  more  Gold  than  the  weight  of  that  was  out  of  which 
we  extracted  the  Spirit;  for  seeing-  that  [gold]  is  an 
extense  form,  and  not  intense,  it  cannot  beyond  its  own 
bounds  change  an  imperfect  body  into  a  perfect;  which 
I  deny  not,  but  may  be  done  by  another  way. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

How  we  must  Find  Out  and  Examine  the  Virtues  of  Tilings 
by  ivay  of  Similitude. 

It  is  now  manifest  that  the  occult  properties  in 
things  are  not  from  the  nature  of  the  Elements,  but 
infused  from  above,  hid  from  our  senses,  and  scarce  at 
last  known  by  our  reason,  which  indeed  come  from  the 
Life  and  the  Spirit  of  the  World,  through  the  rays  of 
the  Stars;  and  can  no  otherwise  but  by  experience  and 
conjecture  be  inquired  into  by  us.  "Wherefore,  he  that 
desires  to  enter  upon  this  study  must  consider  that 
every  thing  moves  and  turns  itself  to  its  like,  and 
inclines  that  to  itself  with  all  its  might,  as  well  in 
property,  viz..  Occult  Virtue,  as  in  quality,  viz.,  Ele- 
mentary Virtue.  Sometimes  also  in  substance  itself, 
as  we  see  in  salt,  for  whatsoever  hath  long  stood  with 
salt  becomes  salt;  for  every  agent,  when  it  hath  begun 
to  act,  doth  not  attempt  to  make  a  thing  inferior  to 
itself,  but,  as  much  as  may  be,  like  and  suitable  to 
itself.  Which  also  we  manifestly  see  in  sensible  ani- 
mals, in  which  the  nutritive  virtue  doth  not  change 
the  meat  into  an  herb  or  a  plant,  but  turns  it  into  sen- 
sible flesh.  In  what  things,  therefore,  there  is  an 
excess  of  any  quality  or  property,  as  heat,  cold,  bold- 
ness, fear,  sadness,  anger,  love,  hatred,  or  any  other 
passion  or  virtue  (whether  it  be  in  them  by  nature  or, 


72  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

sometimes  also,  by  art  or  chance,  as  boldness  in  a 
wanton),  these  things  do  very  much  move  and  provoke 
to  such  a  quality,  passion  or  virtue.  So  fire  moves  to 
fire,  and  water  moves  to  water,  and  he  that  is  bold 
moves  to  boldness.  And  it  is  well  known  amongst 
physicians  that  brain  helps  the  brain,  and  lungs  the 
lungs.  So  also  it  is  said  that  the  right  eye  of  a  frog 
helps  the  soreness  of  a  man's  right  eye,  and  the  left 
eye  thereof  helps  the  soreness  of  his  left  eye,  if  they^ 
be  hanged  about  his  neck  in  a  cloth  of  its  natural 
color.  The  like  is  reported  of  the  eyes  of  a  crab.  So 
the  feet  of  a  tortoise  helps  them  that  have  the  gout 
in  their  being  applied  thus — as  foot  to  foot,  hand  to 
hand,  right  to  right,  left  to  left. 

After  this  manner  they  say  that  any  animal  that  is 
barren  causeth  another  to  be  barren,  and  of  the  ani- 
mal especially  the  generative  parts.  So  they  report 
that  a  female  shall  be  barren  if,  betimes,  drink  be 
made  of  a  certain  sterile  animal,  or  anything  steeped 
therewith.  If,  therefore,  we  would  obtain  any  property 
or  virtue,  let  us  seek  for  such  animals,  or  such  other 
things  whatsoever,  in  which  such  a  property  is  in  a 
more  eminent  manner  than  in  any  other  thing,  and  in 
these  let  us  take  that  part  in  which  such  a  property 
or  virtue  is  most  vigorous;  as  if  at  any  time  we  would 
promote  love,  let  us  seek  some  animal  which  is  most 
loving,  of  which  kind  are  pigeons,  turtles,  sparrows, 
swallows,  wagtails,  and  in  these  take  those  members 
or  parts  in  which  the  vital  virtue  is  most  vigorous, 
such  as  the  heart,  breast,  and  also  like  parts.  And  it 
must  be  done  at  that  time  when  these  animals  have 
this  affection  most  intense,  for  then  they  do  provoke 
and  draw  love.  In  like  manner,  to  increase  boldness, 
let  us  look  for  a  lion,  or  a  cock,  and  of  these  let  us 
take  the  heart,  eyes  or  forehead.  And  so  we  must 
understand  that  which  Psellus  the   Platonist  saith, 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  73 

viz.,  that  dogs,  crows,  and  cocks  conduce  much  to 
watchfulness,  also  the  nightingale  and  bat  and  horned 
owl,  and  in  these  the  heart,  head  and  eyes  especially. 
Therefore,  it  is  said,  if  any  shall  carry  the  heart  of  a 
crow  or  a  bat  about  him,  he  shall  not  sleep  till  he  cast 
it  away  from  him.  The  same  doth  the  head  of  a  bat, 
dried  and  bound  to  the  right  arm  of  him  that  is  awake, 
for  if  it,  be  put  upon  him  when  he  is  asleep,  it  is  said 
that  he  shall  not  be  awaked  till  it  be  taken  off  from 
him.  After  the  same  manner  doth  a  frog  and  an  owl 
make  one  talkative,  and  of  these  specially  the  tongue 
and  heart.  So  the  tongue  also  of  a  v/ater-frog,  laid 
under  the  head,  makes  a  man  speak  in  his  sleep;  and 
the  heart  of  a  screech-owl,  laid  upon  the  left  breast  of 
a  woman  that  is  asleep,  is  said  to  make  her  utter  all 
her  secrets.  The  same  also  the  heart  of  the  horned 
owl  is  said  to  do,  also  the  suet  of  a  hare,  laid  upon  the 
breast  of  one  that  is  asleep.  Upon  the  same  account 
do  animals  that  are  long  lived  conduce  to  long  life;, 
and  whatsoever  things  have  a  power  in  themselves  to 
renew  themselves  conduce  to  the  renovation  of  our 
body  and  restoring  of  youth,  which  physicians  have 
often  professed  they  know  to  be  true;  as  is  manifest 
of  the  viper  and  snake.  And  it  is  known  that  harts 
renew  their  old  age  by  the  eating  of  snakes.  After 
the  same  manner  the  phoenix  is  renewed  by  a  fire 
which  she  makes  for  herself;  and  the  like  virtue  there 
is  in  a  pelican,  whose  right  foot  being  put  under  warm 
dung,  after  three  months  there  is  of  that  generated  a 
pelican.  Therefore  some  physicians  by  some  certain 
confections  made  of  vipers,  and  hellebore,  and  the  flesh 
of  some  such  kind  of  animals,  do  restore  youth,  and 
indeed  do  sometimes  restore  it  so,  as  Medea  restored 
old  Pileas.  It  is  also  believed  that  the  blood  of  a  bear, 
if  it  be  sucked  out  of  her  wound,  doth  increase  strength 
of  body,  because  that  animal  is  the  strongest  creature. 


74  HENRY    CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

How  the  Operations  of  several  Virtues  Pass  from  one  thing 
into  another,  and  are  Communicated  one  to  the  other. 

Thou  must  know  that  so  great  is  the  power  of  nat- 
ural things  that  they  not  only  work  upon  all  things 
that  are  near  them,  by  their  virtue,  but  also  besides 
this,  they  infuse  into  them  a  like  power,  through 
which,  by  the  same  virtue,  they  also  work  upon  other 
things,  dS  we  see  in  the  loadstone,  which  stone  indeed 
doth  not  only  draw  iron  rings,  but  infuseth  a  virtue 
into  the  rings  themselves,  whereby  they  can  do  the 
same,  which  Austin  and  Albertus  say  they  saw.  After 
this  manner  it  is,  as  they  say,  that  a  wanton,  grounded 
in  boldness  and  impudence,  is  like  to  infect  all  that 
are  near  her,  by  this  property,  whereby  they  are  made 
like  herself.  So  Paul  saith  to  the  Corinthians,  Evil 
communications  doth  corrupt  good  manners.  There- 
fore they  say  that  if  any  one  shall  put  on  the  inward 
garment  of  a  wanton,  or  shall  have  about  him  that 
looking-glass  which  she  daily  looks  into,  he  shall 
thereby  become  bold,  confident,  impudent  and  wanton. 
In  like  manner,  they  say,  that  a  cloth  that  was  about 
a  corpse  hath  received  from  thence  the  property  of 
sadness  and  melancholy;  and  that  the  halter  where- 
with a  man  was  hanged  hath  certain  wonderful  prop- 
erties. The  like  story  tells  Pliny:  If  any  shall  put  a 
green  lizard,  made  blind,  together  with  iron  or  gold 
rings,  into  a  glass  vessel,  putting  under  them  some 
earth,  and  then  shutting  the  vessel,  and  when  it 
appears  that  the  lizard  hath  received  his  sight,  shall 
put  him  out  of  the  glass,  that  those  rings  shall  help 
sore  eyes.  The  same  may  be  done  with  rings  and  a 
weasel,  whose  eyes  after  they  are,  with  any  kind  of 
prick,  put  out,  it  is  certain  are  restored  to  sight  again. 
Upon  the  same  account  rings  are  put  for  a  certain  time 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  75 

in  the  nest  of  sparrows  or  swallows,  which  afterwards 
are  used  to  procure  love  and  favor. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

Hoio  by  Enmity  and  Friendship  the  Virtues  of  things  are  to 
be  Tried  and  Found  Out. 

In  the  next  place  it  is  requisite  that  we  consider 
that  all  things  have  a  friendliness  and  enmity  amongst 
themselves,  and  every  thing  hath  something  that  it 
fears  and  dreads,  that  is  an  enemy  and  destructive  to 
it;  and,  on  the  contrary,  something  that  it  rejoiceth 
and  delighteth  in  and  is  strengthened  by.  So  in  the 
Elements,  Fire  is  an  enemy  to  Water,  and  Air  to  Earth, 
but  yet  they  agree  amongst  themselves.  And,  again, 
in  Celestial  bodies,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  the  Sun  and 
Moon  are  friends  to  Saturn;  Mars  and  Venus  enemies 
to  him.  All  the  planets  besides  Mars  are  friends  to 
Jupiter,  also  all  besides  Venus  hate  Mars;  Jupiter  and 
Venus  love  the  Sun;  Mars,  Mercury  and  the  Moon  are 
enemies  to  him.  All  besides  Saturn  love  Venus. 
Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn  are  friends  to  Mercury;  the 
Sun,  Moon  and  Mars  his  enemies.  Jupiter,  Venus  and 
Saturn  are  friends  to  the  Moon;  Mars  and  Mercury  her 
enemies.  There  is  another  kind  of  enmity  amongst 
the  stars,  viz.,  when  they  have  opposite  houses,  as 
Saturn  to  the  Sun  and  Moon,  Jupiter  to  Mercury,  and 
Mars  to  Venus.  And  their  enmity  is  stronger  whose 
exaltations  are  opposite,  as  of  Saturn  and  the  Sun,  of 
Jupiter  and  Mars,  and  of  Venus  and  Mercury.  But 
their  friendship  is  the  strongest  who  agree  iu  nature, 
quality,  substance  and  power,  as  Mars  with  the  Sun, 
as  Venus  with  the  Moon,  and  as  Jupiter  with  Venus; 
as  also  their  friendship  whose  exaltation  is  in  the 
house  of  another,  as  that  of  Saturn  with  Venus,  of 


76  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

Jupiter  with  the  Moon,  of  Mars  with  Saturn,  of  the 
Sun  with  Mars,  of  Venus  with  Jupiter,  and  of  the 
Moon  with  Venus.  And  of  what  sort  the  friendships 
and  enmities  of  the  superiors  be,  such  are  the  inclina- 
tions of  things  subjected  to  them  in  those  inferior. 
These  dispositions,  therefore,  of  friendship  and  enmity 
are  nothing*  else  but  certain  inclinations  of  things  of 
the  one  to  another,  desiring  such-and-such  a  thing  if 
it  be  absent,  and  to  move  towards  it  unless  it  be  hin- 
dered; and  to  acquiesce  in  it  when  it  is  obtained,  shun- 
ning the  contrary  and  dreading  the  approach  of  it, 
and  not  resting  in  or  being  contented  with  it.  Her- 
aclitus,*  therefore,  being  guided  by  this  opinion, 
professed  that  all  things  were  made  by  enmity  and 
friendship. 

Now  the  inclinations  of  Friendship  are  such  in  all 
Vegetables  and  Minerals,  as  is  that  attractive  virtue 
or  inclination  which  the  loadstone  hath  upon  iron,  and 
the  emerald  upon  riches  and  favor,  the  jasper  upon 
the  birth  of  any  thing,  and  the  stone  achates  upon 
eloquence.  In  like  manner  there  is  a  kind  of  bitumi- 
nous clay  that  draws  fire,  and  leaps  into  it,  whereso- 
ever it  sees  it.  Even  so  doth  the  root  of  the  herb 
aproxis  draw  fire  from  afar  off.  Also  the  same  incli- 
nation there  is  betwixt  the  male  palm-tree  and  female; 
whereof,  when  the  bough  of  one  shall  touch  the  bough 
of  the  other,  they  fold  themselves  into  mutual  em- 
braces; neither  doth  the  female  palm-tree  bring  forth 
fruit  without  the  male.     And  the  almond  tree,  when 

*  Sometimes  given  as  Heracleitus,  a  Greek  philosoplier  who  lived  about 
500  B.  C.  He  was  known  as  the  "  weeping  philosopher,"  so  impressed  was  he 
by  the  weaknesses  of  mankind.  Only  fragments  of  his  philosophical  work, 
"Peri  Physeos  "  (On  Nature),  remain.  These  fragments  go  to  show  that 
Heraclitus  held  "  fire  to  be  the  first  principle  of  all  phenomena,  and  the 
original  substance  out  of  which  they  have  all  been  evolved."  Agrippa,  in 
the  above,  throws  further  light  on  his  philosophy.  The  fragments  of  the 
teachings  of  Heraclitus  were  collected,  at  Berlin,  in  1805,  while  Agrippa 
wrote  some  three  hundred  years  earlier. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  77 

she  is  alone  is  less  fruitful.  The  vines  love  the  elm, 
and  the  olive-tree  and  myrtle  love  one  the  other;  also 
the  olive-tree  and  fig--tree. 

Now,  in  Birds  and  Animals,  there  is  amity  betwixt 
the  blackbird  and  thrush,  betwixt  the  crow  and  heron, 
betwixt  peacocks  and  pig-eons,  turtles  and  parrots. 
Whence  Sappho  writes  to  Phaon: 

To  Birds  unlike  oftimes  joyned  are  white  Doves; 
Also  the  Bird  thaVs  green,  black  Turtle  loves. 

Again,  the  whale  and  the  little  fish,  his  guide,  are 
friendly.  Neither  is  this  amity  in  Animals  amongst 
themselves,  but  also  with  other  things,  as  with  Metals, 
Stones  and  Vegetables:  So  the  cat  delights  in  the 
herb  catnip  and  rubbeth  herself  upon  it,  and  there  be 
mares  in  Cappadocia  that  expose  themselves  to  the 
blast  of  the  wind.  So  frogs,  toads,  snakes,  and  all 
manner  of  creeping  poisonous  things,  delight  in  the 
plant  called  pas-flowxr,  of  whom,  as  the  physicians 
say,  if  any  one  eat,  he  shall  die  with  laughing.  The 
tortoise,  also,  when  he  is  hunted  by  the  adder,  eats 
origanum,  and  is  thereby  strengthened;  and  the  stork, 
when  he  hath  eat  snakes,  seeks  for  a  remedy  in  origa- 
num; and  the  weasel,  when  he  goes  to  fight  with  the 
basilisk,  eats  rue — whence  we  come  to  know  that  orig- 
anum and  rue  are  effectual  against  poison.  So  in 
some  Animals  there  is  an  imbred  skill  and  medicinal 
art;  for  when  the  toad  is  wounded  with  a  bite  or  poi- 
son of  another  animal,  he  is  wont  to  go  to  rue  or  sage 
and  rub  the  place  wounded,  and  so  escapes  the  danger 
of  the  poison.  So  men  have  learned  many  excellent 
remedies  of  diseases  and  virtues  of  things  from  brutes; 
so  swallows  have  shewed  us  that  sallendine  is  very 
medicinable  for  the  sight,  with  which  they  cure  the 
eyes  of  their  young;  and  the  pyet,  when  she  is  sick, 
puts  a  bay-leaf  into  her  nest,  and  is  recovered.     In 


78  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

like  manner,  cranes,  jackdaws,  partridges,  and  black- 
birds purge  their  nauseous  stomachs  with  the  same, 
with  which  also  crows  allay  the  poison  of  the  chame- 
leon; and  the  lion,  if  he  be  feverish,  is  recovered  by 
eating  of  an  ape.  The  lapwing,  being  surfeited  with 
eating  of  grapes,  cures  himself  with  southernwood;  so 
the  harts  have  taught  us  that  the  herb  ditany  is  very 
good  to  draw  out  darts;  for  they,  being  wounded  with 
an  arrow,  cast  it  out  by  eating  of  this  herb;  the  same 
do  goats  in  Candy.  So  hinds,  a  little  before  they 
bring  forth,  purge  themselves  with  a  certain  herb 
called  mountain  osier.  Also  they  that  are  hurt  with 
spiders  seek  a  remedy  by  eating  of  crabs.  Swine  also 
being  hurt  by  snakes  cure  themselves  by  eating  of 
them;  and  cows,  when  they  perceive  they  are  poisoned 
with  a  kind  of  French  poison,  seek  for  cure  in  the  oak. 
Elephants,  when  they  have  swallowed  a  chameleon, 
help  themselves  with  the  wild  olive.  Bears,  being 
hurt  with  mandrakes,  escape  the  danger  by  eating  of 
ants.  Geese,  ducks,  and  such  like  watery  fowl,  cure 
themselves  with  the  herb  called  wall-sage.  Pigeons, 
turtles,  and  hens,  with  the  herb  called  pellitory  of  the 
wall.  Cranes,  with  bulrushes.  Leopards  cure  them- 
selves, being  hurt,  with  the  herb  called  wolf's-bane; 
boars,  with  ivy;  hinds,  with  the  herb  called  cinnara. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 

0/  the  Inclinations  of  Enmities. 

On  the  contrary,  there  are  Inclinations  of  Enmities, 
and  they  are,  as  it  were,  the  odium,  and  anger,  indig- 
nation, and  a  certain  kind  of  obstinate  contrariety  of 
nature,  so  that  any  thing  shuns  its  contrary  and  drives 
it  away  out  of  its  presence.  Such  kinds  of  inclinations 
hath  rhubarb  against  choler,  treacle  against  poison, 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.     .  79 

the  sapphire  stone  against  hot  boils  and  feverish  heats 
and  diseases  of  the  eyes;  the  amethyst  against  drunk- 
enness, the  jasper  against  flux  of  blood  and  offensive 
imaginations,  the  emerald  and  angus  castus  against 
lust,  achates  against  poison,  piony  against  the  falling 
sickness,  coral  against  the  ebullition  of  black  choler 
and  pains  in  the  stomach.  The  topaz  against  spiritual 
heats,  such  as  are  covetousness,  lust,  and  all  manner 
of  excesses  of  love.  The  like  inclination  is  there  also 
of  ants  against  the  herb  origanum;  and  the  wing  of  a 
bat  and  the  heart  of  a  lapwing,  from  the  presence  of 
which  they  fly.  Also  origanum  is  contrary  to  a  cer- 
tain poisonous  fly,  which  cannot  endure  the  Sun,  and 
resists  salamanders,  and  loathes  cabbage  with  such  a 
deadly  hatred  that  they  destroy  one  the  other.  So 
cucumbers  hate  oil,  and  will  run  themselves  into  a 
ring  lest  they  should  touch  it.  And  it  is  said  that  the 
gall  of  a  crow  makes  men  afraid  and  drives  them 
away  from  where  it  is,  as  also  certain  other  things. 
So  a  diamond  doth  disagree  with  the  loadstone,  that 
being  set  by  it,  it  will  not  suffer  iron  to  be  drawn  to  it; 
and  sheep  fly  from  frog-parsley  as  from  some  deadly 
thing,  and  that,  which  is  more  wonderful.  Nature  hath 
pictured  the  sign  of  this  death  in  the  livers  of  sheep,  in 
which  the  very  figure  of  frog-parsley,  being  described, 
doth  naturally  appear.  So  goats  do  so  hate  garden 
basil  as  if  there  were  nothing  more  pernicious.  And 
again,  amongst  animals,  mice  and  weasels  do  disagree; 
whence  it  is  said  that  mice  will  not  touch  cheese  if 
the  brains  of  a  weasel  be  put  in  the  rennet,  and  besides 
that  the  cheese  will  not  be  corrupt  with  age.  So  a 
lizard  is  so  contrary  to  scorpions  that  it  makes  them 
afraid  with  its  very  sight,  as  also  it  puts  them  into  a 
cold  sweat;  therefore  they  are  killed  with  the  oil  of 
lizards,  which  oil  also  cures  the  wounds  made  by  scor- 
pions.    There  is  also  an  enmity  betwixt  scorpions  a<.nd 


80  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

mice;  wherefore  if  a  mouse  be  applied  to  a  prick  or 
wound  made  by  a  scorpion,  it  cures  it,  as  it  is  reported. 
There  is  also  an  enmity  betwixt  scorpions  and  stala- 
bors,  asps  and  wasps.  It  is  reported,  also,  that  no 
thing-  is  so  much  an  enemy  to  snakes  as  crabs,  and 
that  if  swine  be  hurt  therewith  they  eat  them  and  are 
cured.  The  Sun,  also,  being  in  Cancer,  serpents  are 
tormented.  Also  the  scorpion  and  crocodile  kill  one 
the  other;  and  if  the  bird  ibis  doth  but  touch  a  croco- 
dile with  one  of  his  feathers,  he  makes  him  immova- 
ble. The  bird  called  bustard  flies  away  at  the  sight  of 
a  horse,  and  a  hart  runs  away  at  the  sight  of  a  ram, 
as  also  of  a  viper.  An  elephant  trembles  at  the  hear- 
ing of  the  grunting  of  a  hog,  so  doth  a  lion  at  the 
sight  of  a  cock;  and  panthers  will  not  touch  them 
that  are  anointed  all  over  with  the  broth  of  a  hen, 
especially  if  garlic  hath  been  boiled  in  it.  There  is 
also  enmity  betwixt  foxes  and  swans,  bulls  and  jack- 
daws. Amongst  birds,  also,  some  are  at  perpetual 
strife  one  with  another,  as  also  with  other  animals,  as 
jackdaws  and  owls,  the  kite  and  crows,  the  turtle  and 
ring-tail,  egepis  and  eagles,  harts  and  dragons.  Also 
amongst  water  animals  there  is  enmity,  as  betwixt 
dolphins  and  whirlpools,  mullets  and  pikes,  lampreys 
and  congers.  Also  the  fish  called  pourcontrel  makes 
the  lobster  so  much  afraid  that  the  lobster,  seeing  the 
other  but  near  him,  is  struck  dead.  The  lobster  and 
conger  tear  one  the  other.  The  civet  cat  is  said  to 
stand  so  in  awe  of  the  panther  that  he  hath  no  power 
to  resist  him  or  touch  his  skin;  and  they  say  that  if 
the  skins  of  both  of  them  be  hanged  up  one  against 
the  other,  the  hairs  of  the  panther's  skin  fall  off. 
And  Orus  Apollo  saith  in  his  hieroglyphics,  if  any  one 
be  girt  about  with  the  skin  of  the  civet  cat  that  he 
may  pass  safely  through  the  middle  of  his  enemies 
and  not  at  all  be  afraid.     Also  the  lamb  is  very  much 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  81 

afraid  of  the  wolf  and  flies  from  him.  And  they  say- 
that  if  the  tail  or  skin  or  head  of  a  wolf  be  hanged 
upon  the  sheep-coate  the  sheep  are  much  troubled  and 
cannot  eat  their  meat  for  fear.  And  Pliny  makes 
mention  of  a  bird,  called  marlin,  that  breaks  crows' 
egg's,  whose  young  are  so  annoyed  by  the  fox  that  she 
also  will  pinch  and  pull  the  fox's  whelps,  and  the  fox 
herself  also;  which  when  the  crows  see,  they  help  the 
fox  against  her,  as  against  a  common  enemy.  The 
little  bird  called  a  linnet,  living  in  thistles,  hates 
asses,  because  they  eat  the  flowers  of  thistles.  Also 
there  is  such  a  bitter  enmity  betwixt  the  little  bird 
called  esalon  and  the  ass  that  their  blood  will  not  mix 
together,  and  that  at  the  braying  of  the  ass  both  the 
eggs  and  young  of  the  esalon  perish.  There  is  also 
such  a  disagreement  betwixt  the  olive-tree  and  a 
wanton,  that  if  she  plant  it,  it  will  either  be  always 
unfruitful  or  altogether  wither.*  A  lion  fears  nothing 
so  much  as  fired  torches,  and  will  be  tamed  by  nothing 
so  much  as  by  these;  and  the  wolf  fears  neither  sword 
nor  spear,  but  a  stone — by  the  throwing  of  which,  a 
wound  being  made,  worms  breed  in  the  wolf.  A  horse 
fears  a  camel  so  that  he  cannot  endure  to  see  so  much 
as  his  picture.  An  elephant,  when  he  rageth,  is  qui- 
eted by  seeing  of  a  cock.  A  snake  is  afraid  of  a  man 
that  is  naked,  but  pursues  a  man  that  is  clothed.  A 
mad  bull  is  tamed  by  being  tied  to  a  fig-tree.     Amber 


*This  illustration  of  a  natural  antipathy  said  to  exist  between  a  wanton 
and  an  olive-tree,  as  well  as  other  illustrations  herein  of  the  occult  virtues 
of  things,  may  he  regarded  as  somewhat  fanciful,  hut  the  reader  will  be 
able  to  bring  to  mind  plenty  of  natural  phenomena  that  fully  prove  the 
leading  truths  that  Agrippa  here  seeks  to  convey.  For  instance,  the  writer 
knows  one  person  of  whom  it  may  be  justly  claimed  that  every  plant  grows 
that  he  touches,  while  his  mother,  rendering  the  same  care,  finds  it  impos- 
sible to  raise  a  plant.  All  women  know,  who  have  had  the  experience,  that 
at  certain  times  each  month  they  cannot  make  pickles  that  will  not  spoil. 
The  explanation  of  these  things  are  found  in  the  occult  virtues  of  Nature; 
the  inherent  sympathy,  amity  or  antipathy  in  all  things  to  all  other  things, 
which  Agrippa  so  admirably  sets  forth. 


82  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

draws  all  things  to  it  besides  garden  basil  and  those 
things  which  are  smeared  with  oil,  betwixt  which 
there  is  a  kind  of  a  natural  antipathy. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

How  the  Virtues  of  Things  are  to  he  Tried  and  Found  Out, 
which  are  in  them  Specifically,  or  in  any  one  Individual 
by  way  of  Special  Gift. 

Moreover,  thou  must  consider  that  the  Virtues  of 
things  are  in  some  things  according  to  the  Species,  as 
boldness  and  courage  in  a  lion  and  cock,  fearfulness 
in  a  hare  or  lamb,  ravenousness  in  a  wolf,  treachery 
and  deceitfulness  in  a  fox,  flattery  in  a  dog,  covetous- 
ness  in  a  crow  and  jackdaw,  pride  in  a  horse,  anger  in 
a  tiger  and  boar,  sadness  and  melancholy  in  a  cat,  lust 
in  a  sparrow,  and  so  of  the  rest.  For  the  greatest 
part  of  Natural  Virtues  doth  follow  the  Species.  Yet 
some  are  in  things  Individually;  as  there  be  some  men 
which  do  so  wonderfully  abhor  the  sight  of  a  cat  that 
they  cannot  look  upon  her  without  quaking;  which 
fear,  it  is  manifest,  is  not  in  them,  as  they  are  men. 
And  Avicen  tells  of  a  man  that  lived  in  his  time,  whom 
all  poisonous  things  did  shun,  all  of  them  dying  which 
did  by  chance  bite  him,  he  himself  not  being  hurt;  and 
Albertus  reports  that  in  a  city  of  the  Ubians  he  saw 
a  wench  who  would  catch  spiders  to  eat  them,  and 
being  much  pleased  with  such  a  kind  of  meat,  was 
wonderfully  nourished  therewith.  So  is  boldness  in  a 
wanton,  and  fearfulness  in  a  thief.  And  upon  this 
account  it  is  that  philosophers  say  that  any  particular 
thing  that  never  was  sick  is  good  against  any  manner 
of  sickness;  therefore  they  say  that  a  bone  of  a  dead 
man,  who  never  had  a  fever,  being  laid  upon  the 
patient,   frees   him  of    his   quartan.     There   are  also 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  83 

many  sing*ular  virtues  infused  into  particular  things 
by  Celestial  bodies,  as  we  have  shewed  before. 


CHAPTER  XX. 

The  Natural  Virtues  are  in  some  Things  throughout  their 
Whole  Substance^  and  in  other  Things  in  Certain  Parts 
and  Members. 

Again  thou  must  consider  that  the  Virtues  of  things 
are  in  some  things  in  the  whole  (1  e.),  the  whole  sub- 
stance of  them,  or  in  all  their  parts,  as  that  little  fish 
echeneis,*  which  is  said  to  stop  a  ship  by  its  mere 
touch;  this  it  doth  not  do  according  to  any  particular 
part,  but  according  to  the  whole  substance.  So  the 
civet  cat  hath  this  in  its  whole  substance,  that  dogs, 
by  the  very  touch  of  his  shadow,  hold  their  peace. 
So  salendine  is  good  for  the  sight,  not  according  to 
any  one  but  all  its  parts;  not  more  in  the  root  than  in 
the  leaves  and  seeds,  and  so  of  the  rest.  But  some 
Virtues  are  in  things  according  to  some  parts  of  it, 
viz. ,  only  in  the  tongue,  or  eyes,  or  some  other  mem- 


*The  belief  that  the  Echeneis,  a  fish  of  the  Remora  or  Sucker  family, 
has  the  power  of  stopping  ships  was  formerly  quite  prevalent.  In  Good- 
win's translation  of  Plutarch's  Morals,  volume  three,  we  find  the  following 
story:  "Chaeremomanus,  the  Trallian,  when  we  were  at  a  very  noble  fish- 
dinner,  pointing  to  a  little,  long,  sharp-headed  fish,  said  the  echeneis  (ship- 
stopper)  was  like  that,  for  he  had  often  seen  it  as  he  sailed  in  the  Sicilian 
sea,  and  wondered  at  its  strange  force,  for  it  stopped  the  ship  when  under 
full  sail,  until  one  of  the  seamen  perceived  it  sticking  to  the  outside  of  the 
ship,  and  took  it  off."    Oppian  says,  describing  its  occult  virtue: 

"But  though  the  canvas  bellies  with  the  blast. 
And  boisterous  winds  bend  down  the  cracking  mast, 
The  bark  stands  firmly  rooted  on  the  sea 
And  all  unmov'd,  as  tower,  or  towering  tree." 

Pliny  says:  "Why  should  our  fieets  and  armadas  at  sea  make  such  tur- 
rets on  the  walls  and  forecastles,  when  one  little  fish  is  able  to  arrest  and 
stay,  per  force,  our  goodly  and  tall  ships?"— Nat.  Hist.,  Vol.  XI.,  p.  41.  Ovid 
writes,  "There,  too,  is  the  little  sucking  fish,  wondrous  to  behold,  a  vast 
obstruction  to  ships,"  and  Lucan  says  the  echeneis  stops  ships  on  the  ocean. 


84  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

bers  and  parts;  so  in  the  eyes  of  a  basilisk  is  a  most 
violent  power  to  kill  men  as  soon  as  they  see  them. 
The  like  power  is  there  in  the  eyes  of  the  civet  cat, 
which  makes  any  animal  that  it  hath  looked  upon  to 
stand  still,  to  be  amazed,  and  not  able  to  move  itself. 
The  like  virtue  is  there  in  the  eyes  of  some  wolves, 
who,  if  they  see  a  man  first,  make  him  amazed  and  so 
hoarse,  that  if  he  would  cry  out,  he  hath  not  the  use 
of  his  voice.  Of  this  Virgil  makes  mention  when  he 
sings : 

Moeris  is  dumb,  hath  lost  his  voice,  and  why  ? 
The  Wolf  on  Moeris  first  hath  cast  his  eye. 

So  also  there  were  some  certain  women  in  Scythia, 
and  amongst  the  Illyrians  and  Triballians,  w^ho  as 
often  as  they  looked  angrily  upon  any  man,  were  said 
to  slay  him.  Also  we  read  of  a  certain  people  of 
Rhodes,  called  Telchines,  who  corrupted  all  things 
with  their  sight,  wherefore  Jupiter  drowned  them. 
Therefore  witches,  when  they  would  after  this  manner 
work  by  witchcraft,  use  the  eyes  of  such  kind  of  ani- 
mals in  their  waters  for  the  eyes,  for  the  like  effects. 
In  like  manner  do  ants  fly  from  the  heart  of  a  lapwing 
and  not  from  the  head,  foot  or  eyes.  So  the  gall  of 
lizards,  being  bruised  in  water,  is  said  to  gather  wea- 
sels together;  not  the  tail  or  the  head  of  it.  The  gall 
of  goats,  put  into  the  earth  in  a  brazen  vessel,  gathers 
frogs  together;  and  a  goat's  liver  is  an  enemy  to  but- 
terflies and  all  maggots.  Dogs  shun  them  that  have 
the  heart  of  a  dog  about  them;  and  foxes  will  not 
touch  those  poultry  that  have  eaten  the  liver  of  a  fox. 
So  divers  things  have  divers  virtues  dispersed  vari- 
ously through  several  parts,  as  they  are  from  above 
infused  into  them  according  to  the  diversity  of  things 
to  be  received;  as  in  a  man's  body  the  bones  receive 
nothing  but  life,  the  eyes  sight,  and  the  ears  hearing. 


PHILOSOPHY   OP  NATURAL  MAGIC.  ,  85 

And  there  is  in  man's  body  a  certain  little  bone,  which 
the  Hebrews  call  LVZ,  of  the  bigness  of  a  pulse  that 
is  husked,  which  is  subject  to  no  corruption,  neither  is 
it  overcome  with  fire,  but  is  always  preserved  unhurt, 
out  of  which,  as  they  say,  as  a  plant  out  of  the  seed, 
our  animal  bodies  shall  in  the  resurrection  of  the  dead 
spring  up.  And  these  Virtues  are  not  cleared  by  rea- 
son, but  by  experience. 


CHAPTER  XXI. 

Of  the  Virtues  of  Tilings  ivhich  are  in  them  only  in  their 
Life  Time,  and  Such  as  Remain  in  them  even  After  their 
Death. 

Moreover,  we  must  know  that  there  are  some  prop- 
erties in  things  only  whilst  they  live,  and  some  that 
remain  after  their  death.  So  the  little  fish  echeneis 
stops  the  ships,  and  the  basilisk  and  catablepa  kill 
with  their  sight  when  they  are  alive;  but  when  they 
are  dead  do  no  such  thing.  So  they  say  that  in  the 
colic,  if  a  live  duck  be  applied  to  the  abdomen  it  takes 
away  the  pain  and  herself  dies.  Like  to  this  is  that 
which  Archytas  says:  If  you  take  a  heart,  newly 
taken  out  of  an  animal,  and,  whilst  it  is  yet  warm, 
hang  it  upon  one  that  hath  a  quartan  fever,  it  drives 
it  away.  So  if  anj^  one  swallow  the  heart  of  a  lap- 
wing, or  a  swallow,  or  a  weasel,  or  a  mole,  whilst  it  is 
yet  warm  with  natural  heat,  it  shall  be  helpful  to  him 
for  remembering,  understanding,  and  for  foretelling. 
Hence  is  this  general  rule,  viz. :  That  whatsoever 
things  are  taken  out  of  animals,  whether  they  be  any 
member,  the  hair,  nails,  or  such  like,  they  must  be 
taken  from  those  animals  whilst  they  be  yet  living; 
and,  if  it  be  possible,  that  so  they  may  be  alive  after- 
wards.    Whence  they  say,  when  you  take  the  tongue 


i 


86  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

of  a  frog,  you  must  put  the  frog"  into  the  water  again; 
and  if  you  take  the  tooth  of  a  wolf,  you  must  not  kill 
the  wolf;  and  so  of  the  rest.  So  writes  Democritus,  if 
any  one  take  out  the  tongue  of  a  water-frog,  yet  liv- 
ing, no  other  part  of  the  body  sticking  to  it,  and  she 
be  let  go  into  the  water  again,  and  lay  it  upon  the 
place  where  the  heart  beats  of  a  woman,  she  shall 
answer  truly  whatsoever  you  ask  her.  Also  they  say, 
that  if  the  eyes  of  a  frog  be  before  sunrising  bound  to 
the  sick  party,  and  the  frog  be  let  go  again,  blind,  into 
the  water,  they  will  drive  away  tertian  ague;  as  also 
that  they  will,  being  bound  with  the  flesh  of  a  night- 
ingale in  the  skin  of  a  hart,  keep  one  always  watchful 
without  sleep.  Also  the  ray  of  the  fork-fish,  being 
bound  to  the  navel,  is  said  to  make  a  woman  have  an 
easy  travail,  if  the  ray  be  taken  from  the  fish  alive 
and  it  put  into  the  sea  again.  So  they  say  the  right 
eye  of  a  serpent,  being  applied,  doth  help  the  water- 
ing of  the  eyes  if  the  serpent  be  let  go  alive.  And 
there  is  a  certain  fish  or  great  serpent,  called  Myrus, 
whose  eye,  if  it  be  pulled  out,  and  bound  to  the  fore- 
head of  the  patient,  is  said  to  cure  the  inflammation 
of  the  eyes;  and  that  the  eye  of  the  fish  grows  again; 
and  that  he  is  taken  blind  who  will  not  let  the  fish 
go.  Also  the  teeth  of  all  serpents,  being  taken  out 
whilst  they  are  alive,  and  hanged  about  the  patient, 
are  said  to  cure  the  quartan.  So  doth  the  tooth  of  a 
mole,  taken  out  whilst  she  is  alive,  being  afterwards 
let  go,  cure  the  toothache;  and  dogs  will  not  bark  at 
those  that  have  the  tail  of  a  weasel  that  is  escaped. 
And  Democritus  relates  that  the  tongue  of  a  chame- 
leon, if  it  be  taken  from  her  alive,  doth  conduce  to  a 
good  success  in  trials,  and  is  profitable  for  women  that 
are  in  travail,  if  it  be  about  the  outside  of  the  house, 
for  you  must  take  heed  that  it  be  not  brought  into  the 
house,  because  that  would  be  most  dangerous. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  87 

Moreover,  there  be  some  properties  that  remain  after 
death,  and  of  these  the  Platonists  say,  that  they  are 
thing's  in  which  the  Idea  of  the  matter  is  less  swal- 
lowed up.  In  these,  even  after  death,  that  which  is 
immortal  in  them  doth  not  cease  to  work  wonderful 
thing's.  So  in  the  herbs  and  plants,  pulled  asunder 
and  dried,  that  Virtue  is  quick  and  operative  which 
was  infused  at  first  into  them  by  the  Idea.  Thence  it 
is  that  as  the  eag"le  all  her  life  time  doth  overcome  all 
other  birds,  so  also  her  feathers,  after  her  death, 
destroy  and  consume  the  feathers  of  all  other  birds. 
Upon  the  same  account  doth  a  lion's  skin  destroy  all 
other  skins;  and  the  skin  of  the  civet  cat  destroys  the 
skin  of  the  panther;  and  the  skin  of  a  wolf  corrodes 
the  skin  of  a  lamb.  And  some  of  these  do  not  do  it 
by  way  of  a  corporeal  contact,  but  also  sometimes  by 
their  very  sound.  So  a  drum  made  of  the  skin  of  a 
wolf  makes  a  drum  made  of  a  lamb-skin  not  to  sound. 
Also  a  drum  made  of  the  skin  of  the  fish  called  rochet 
drives  away  all  creeping  things,  at  what  distance 
soever  the  sound  of  it  is  heard;  and  the  strings  of  an 
instrument  made  of  the  intestines  of  a  wolf,  and  being 
strung  upon  a  harp  or  lute  with  strings  made  of  the 
intestines  of  a  sheep,  will  make  no  harmony. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

Hoiu  Inferior  Things  are  Subjected  to  Superior  Bodies,  and 
how  the  Bodies^  the  Actions,  and  Dispositions  of  Men  are 
Ascribed  to  Stars  and  Signs. 

It  is  manifest  that  all  things  inferior  are  subject  to 
the  superior,  and  after  a  manner  (as  saith  Proclus)  they 
are  one  in  the  other,  viz. ,  in  inferiors  are  superior  and 
in  superiors  are  inferior:  So  in  the  Heaven  are  things 
terrestrial,  but  as  in  their  cause,  and  in  a  celestial 


88  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

manner;  and  in  the  Earth  are  things  celestial,  but 
after  a  terrestrial  manner,  as  in  an  effect.  So  we  say 
that  there  be  here  certain  things  which  are  Solary 
and  certain  which  are  Lunary,  in  which  the  Sun  and 
Moon  make  a  strong  impression  of  their  virtues. 
Whence  it  is  that  these  kind  of  things  receive  more 
operations  and  properties,  like  to  those  of  the  Stars 
and  Signs  which  they  are  under.  So  we  know  that 
Solary  things  respect  the  heart  and  head  by  reason 
that  Leo  is  the  house  of  the  Sun,  and  Aries  the  exal- 
tation of  the  Sun.  So  things  under  Mars  are  good  for 
the  head  and  secrets  by  reason  of  Aries  and  Scorpio. 
Hence  they  whose  senses  fail  and  heads  ache  by  rea- 
son of  drunkenness,  find  cold  water  and  vinegar  good 
to  bathe  the  head  and  secrets.  But  in  reference  to 
these  it  is  necessary  to  know  how  man's  body  is  dis- 
tributed to  Planets  and  Signs.  Know,  therefore,  that 
according  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Arabians,  the  Sun 
rules  over  the  brain,  heart,  the  thigh,  the  marrow,  the 
right  eye,  and  the  spirit;  also  the  tongue,  the  mouth, 
and  the  rest  of  the  organs  of  the  senses,  as  well  inter- 
nal as  external;  also  the  hands,  feet,  legs,  nerves,  and 
the  power  of  imagination.  That  Mercury  rules  over 
the  spleen,  stomach,  bladder,  womb,  and  right  ear,  as 
also  the  faculty  of  the  common  sense.  That  Saturn 
rules  over  the  liver  and  fleshy  part  of  the  stomach. 
That  Jupiter  rules  over  the  abdomen  and  navel,  whence 
it  is  written  by  the  Ancients,  that  the  effigy  of  a  navel 
was  laid  up  in  the  temple  of  Jupiter  Hammon.  Also 
some  attribute  to  him  the  ribs,  breast,  bowels,  blood, 
arms,  and  the  right  hand  and  left  ear,. and  the  powers 
natural.  And  some  set  Mars  over  the  blood,  the  veins, 
the  kidneys,  the  bag  of  the  gall,  the  buttocks,  the 
back,  motion  of  the  sperm,  and  the  irascible  power. 
Again  they  set  Venus  over  the  kidneys,  the  secrets, 
the  womb,  the  seed,  and  concupiscible  power;  as  also 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  89 

the  flesh,  fat,  belly,  breast,  navel,  and  the  venereal 
parts  and  such  as  serve  thereto;  also  the  os  sacrum, 
the  back-bone,  and  loins;  as  also  the  head,  and  the 
mouth,  with  which  they  give  a  kiss  as  a  token  of  love. 
Now  the  Moon,  althoug-h  she  may  challenge  the  whole 
body,  and  every  member  thereof  according  to  the 
variety  of  the  Signs,  yet  more  particularly  they 
ascribe  to  her  the  brain,  lungs,  marrow  of  the  back- 
bone, the  stomach,  the  menstrual  and  excretory  parts, 
and  the  left  eye,  as  also  the  power  of  increasing.  But 
Hermes  saith:  That  there  are  seven  holes  in  the  head 
of  an  animal,  distributed  to  the  seven  Planets,  viz. : 
The  right  ear  to  Saturn,  the  left  to  Jupiter,  the  right 
nostril  to  Mars,  the  left  to  Venus,  the  right  eye  to  the 
Sun,  the  left  to  the  Moon,  and  the  mouth  to  Mercury. 

The  several  Signs,  also,  of  the  Zodiac  take  care  of 
their  members:  So  Aries  governs  the  head  and  face; 
Taurus,  the  neck;  Gemini,  the  arms  and  shoulders; 
Cancer,  the  breast,  lungs,  stomach  and  arms;  Leo,  the 
heart,  stomach,  liver  and  back;  Virgo,  the  bowels  and 
bottom  of  the  stomach;  Libra,  the  kidneys,  thighs  and 
buttocks;  Scorpius,  the  secrets;  Sagittarius,  the  thighs 
and  groins;  Capricornus,  the  knees;  Aquarius,  the  legs 
and  shins;  Pisces,  the  feet.*  And  as  the  triplicities 
of  these  Signs  answer  one  the  other,  and  agree  in 
celestials,  so  also  they  agree  in  the  members;  which  is 
sufficiently  manifest  by  experience,  because  with  the 
coldness  of  the  feet  the  belly  and  breast  are  affected, 
which  members  answer  the  same  triplicity;  whence  it 
is,  if  a  medicine  be  applied  to  the  one  it  helps  the 
other,  as  by  the  warming  of  the  feet  the  pain  of  the 
belly  ceaseth.     Remember,  therefore,  this  order,  and 


*The  several  parts  of  the  physical  body,  it  will  be  seen,  run  in  order 
from  the  head  to  the  feet  in  their  correspondence  with  the  twelve  Signs  or 
Houses  of 'the  Zodiac,  from  Aries,  the  first  house,  to  Pisces,  the  twelfth  and 
last.  The  Zodiac,  as  a  whole,  in  symbolizing  all  parts  of  a  complete  man. 
typifies  a  perfect  celestial  being  known  as  the  Grand  Solar  Man. 


90  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

know  that  things  which  ace  under  any  one  of  the 
Planets  have  a  certain  particular  aspect  or  inclination 
to  those  members  that  are  attributed  to  that  planet, 
and  especially  to  the  Houses  and  exaltations  thereof. 
For  the  rest  of  the  dignities,  as  those  triplicities  and 
marks  and  face,  are  of  little  account  in  this.  Upon 
this  account,  therefore,  peony,  balm,  clove-gilly- 
flowers, citron-peel,  sweet-marjoram,  cinnamon,  saf- 
fron, lignum  aloes,  frankincense,  amber,  musk,  and 
myrrh  help  the  head  and  heart,  by  reason  of  the  Sun 
and  Aries  and  Leo.  So  doth  ribwort,  the  herb  of 
Mars,  help  the  head  and  secrets  by  reason  of  Aries 
and  Scorpio;  and  so  of  the  rest.  *Also  all  things 
under  Saturn  conduce  to  sadness  and  melancholy; 
those  under  Jupiter  to  mirth  and  honor;  those  under 
Mars  to  boldness,  contention  and  anger;  those  under  the 
Sun  to  glory,  victory  and  courage;  those  under  Venus 


*NoTE  ON  Punctuation:  We  find  all  semicolons  used  in  this  sentence 
in  the  English  edition  of  1651.  Mr.  Henry  Morley,  in  his  "Life  of  Cornelius 
Agrippa"  (London,  1856),  Vol.  L,  page  140,  in  a  note  referring  to  a  quotation 
he  makes  there  from  the  Latin  edition  of  Agrippa  of  1531,  says:  "I  have 
preserved  the  punctuation  in  this  passage  to  show  the  use  of  the  colon 
"before  semicolons  were  invented."  The  passage  Mr.  Morley  quotes  from 
the  Latin  edition  of  1531  ("De  Occulta  Philosophia  Lihri  Tres,"  Antwerp, 
Belgium,  one  book  only  of  which  was  published  of  the  three)  contains  six 
colons,  whereas  the  English  edition  of  1651  (see  etching  for  title  page),  also 
used  by  Mr.  Morley,  and  published  complete  one  hundred  and  twenty  years 
later,  contains  none.  This  indicates,  apparently,  the  general  period  when 
semicolons  were  invented  and  came  into  use.  The  characters  of  punctua- 
tion are  supposed  to  have  been  generally  invented  and  introduced  near  the 
close  of  the  fifteenth  century  by  Aldus  Manutus,  a  noted  printer  and  pub- 
lisher of  Venice.  The  semicolon,  as  above,  originated  later  on,  between  1531 
and  1651.  Further,  the  m-dash,  "  — ,"  as  now  used,  is  of  comparatively  mod- 
ern introduction.    I  fail  to  find  a  single  m-dash  in  the  English  edition  of 

Agrippa  of  1651,  though  3-m-dashes,  " ,"  were  occasionally  used  before 

quotations  from  the  poets.  Eight  years  later,  in  1659, 1  find  the  2-m-dash 
used,  in  the  second  edition  of  Lilly's  "Christian  Astrology,"  page  60,  thus: 

"His  least 30."    As  this  was  an  ordinary  paragraph,  of  itself,  it  shows 

that  they  did  not  at  that  time  use  the  m-dash  but  were  evolving  towards  it. 
The  truth  regarding  punctuation  is  that  it  has  slowly  and  steadily  evolved, 
especially  since  the  art  of  printing,  to  its  present  status.  The  object  of 
punctuation,  primarily,  is  to  present  a  writer's  thought  clearly,  concisely, 
and  correctly,  by  pointing  out  his  salient  words,  using  the  "  marks  "  like  an 
artist  does  his  "  hues,"  to  give  prominence  and  pith  thereto. 


GRAND   SOLAR  MAN. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  91 

to  love,  lust  and  concupiscence;  those  under  Mercury 
to  eloquence;  those  under  the  Moon  to  a  common  life. 
Also  all  the  actions  and  dispositions  of  men  are  dis- 
tributed according-  to  the  Planets;  for  Saturn  governs 
old  men,  monks,  melancholy  men,  and  hidden  treasures 
and  those  things  which  are  obtained  with  long  jour- 
neys and  difficulty;  but  Jupiter  governs  those  that  are 
religious,  prelates,  kings  and  dukes,  and  such  kind  of 
gains  that  are  got  lawfully;  Mars  rules  over  barbers, 
chirurgeons,  physicians,  sergeants,  butchers,  execu- 
tioners, all  that  make  fires,  bakers,  and  soldiers,  who 
are  every  where  called  martial  men.  Also  do  the 
other  Stars  signify  their  office,  as  they  are  described 
in  the  books  of  Astrologers. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

How  we  shall  Know  luliat  Stars  natural  Things  are  Under, 
and  what  Things  are  Under  the  Sun^  which  are  called 
Solary. 

Now  it  is  very  hard  to  know  what  Star  or  Sign  every 
thing  is  under;  yet  it  is  known  through  the  imitation 
of  their  rays,  or  motion,  or  figure  of  the  superiors. 
Also  some  of  them  are  known  by  their  colors  and 
odors;  also  some  by  the  effects  of  their  operations, 
answering  to  some  Stars.  So,  then,  Solary  things,  or 
things  under  the  power  of  the  Sun,  are,  amongst  Ele- 
ments, the  lucid  flame;  in  the  humors,  the  purer  blood 
and  spirit  of  life;  amongst  tastes,  that  which  is  quick, 
mixed  with  sweetness;  amongst  metals,  gold,  by  rea- 
son of  its  splendor,  and  its  receiving  that  from  the 
Sun  which  makes  it  cordial;  and  amongst  stones,  they 
which  resemble  the  rays  of  the  Sun  by  their  golden 
sparklings,  as  doth  the  glittering  stone  aetites,  which 
hath  power  against  the  falling  sickness  and  poisons. 


92  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

So  also  the  stone  which  is  called  the  Eye  of  the  Sun, 
being"  of  a  figure  like  to  the  apple  of  the  eye,  from  the 
middle  whereof  shines  forth  a  ray;  it  comforts  the 
brain  and  strengthens  the  sight.  So  the  carbuncle, 
which  shines  by  night,  hath  a  virtue  against  all  airy 
and  vaporous  poison.  So  the  chrysolite  stone,  which 
is  of  a  light  green  color,  in  which,  when  it  is  held 
against  the  Sun,  there  shines  forth  a  golden  star;  and 
this  comforts  those  parts  that  serve  for  breathing,  and 
helps  those  that  be  asthmatical;  and  if  it  be  bored 
through,  and  the  hole  filled  with  the  mane  of  an  ass, 
and  bound  to  the  left  arm,  it  drives  away  idle  imagi- 
nations and  melancholy  fears,  and  puts  away  foolish- 
ness. So  the  stone  called  iris,  which  is  like  crystal  in 
color,  being  often  found  with  six  corners;  when,  under 
some  roof,  part  of  it  is  held  against  the  rays  of  the  Sun 
and  the  other  part  is  held  in  the  shadow,  it  gathers  the 
rays  of  the  Sun  into  itself,  which,  whilst  it  sends  them 
forth,  by  way  of  reflection,  makes  a  rainbow  appear  on 
the  opposite  wall.  Also  the  stone  heliotrope,  green 
like  the  jasper  or  emerald,  beset  with  red  specks, 
makes  a  man  constant,  renowned  and  famous;  also  it 
conduceth  to  long  life;  and  the  virtue  of  it,  indeed,  is 
most  wonderful  upon  the  beams  of  the  Sun,  which  it 
is  said  to  turn  into  blood  {i.  e.),  to  appear  of  the  color 
of  blood,  as  if  the  Sun  were  eclipsed,  viz.,  when  it  is 
joined  to  the  juice  of  a  herb  of  the  same  name,  and  be 
put  into  a  vessel  of  water.  There  is  also  another  vir- 
tue of  it  more  wonderful,  and  that  is  upon  the  eyes  of 
men,  whose  sight  it  doth  so  dim  and  dazzle  that  it  doth 
not  suffer  him  that  carries  it  to  see  it,  and  this  it  doth 
not  do  without  the  help  of  the  herb  of  the  same  name, 
which  also  is  called  heliotrope  {i.  e.),  following  the  Sun. 
These  virtues  doth  Albertus  Magnus  and  William  of 
Paris  confirm  in  their  writings.  The  stone  hyacinth 
also  hath  a  virtue  from  the  Sun  against  poisons  and 


PHILOSOPHY    OF   NATURAL   MAGIC.  93 

pestiferous  vapors;  it  makes  him  that  carries  it  to  be 
safe  and  acceptable;  it  conduceth  also  to  riches  and 
wit;  it  strengthens  the  heart;  being-  held  in  the  mouth 
it  doth  wonderfully  cheer  up  the  mind.  Also  there  is 
the  stone  pyrophylus,  of  a  red  mixture,  which  Alber-  (X, 
tus  Magnus  saith  ^sculapius  makes  mention  of  in  one 
of  his  Epistles  unto  Octavius  Augustus,  saying  that 
there  is  a  certain  poison  so  wonderfully  cold,  which 
preserves  the  heart  of  man  (being  taken  oat)  from 
burning,  so  that  if  for  any  time  it  be  put  into  the  fire 
it  is  turned  into  a  stone,  and  this  is  that  stone  which 
is  called  pyrophylus,  from  the  fire.  It  hath  a  wonder- 
ful virtue  against  poison,  and  it  makes  him  that  carries 
it  to  be  renowned  and  dreadful  to  his  enemies.  But, 
above  all,  that  stone  is  most  Solary  which  Apollonius 
is  reported  to  have  found,  and  which  is  called  pantaura, 
which  draws  other  stones  to  it,  as  the  loadstone  doth 
iron,  and  is  most  powerful  against  all  poisons.  It  is 
called  by  some  pantherus,  because  it  is  spotted  like 
the  beast  called  the  panther.  It  is  therefore  also 
called  pantochras,  because  it  contains  all  colors,  and 
Aaron  calls  it  evanthum.  There  are  also  other  Solary 
stones,  as  the  topazius,  chrysopassus,  the  rubine,  and 
balagius.  So  also  is  auripigmentum,  and  things  of  a 
golden  color  and  very  lucid. 

Amongst  plants,  also,  and  trees,  those  are  Solary 
which  turn  towards,  the  Sun,  as  the  marigold,  and 
those  which  fold  in  their  leaves  when  the  Sun  is  near 
upon  setting,  but  when  it  riseth  unfold  their  leaves  by 
little  and  little.  The  lote-tree  also  is  solary,  as  is. 
manifest  by  the  figure  of  the  fruit  and  leaves.  So  is 
peony,  sallendine,  balm,  ginger,  gentian,  and  dittany; 
and  vervain,  which  is  of  use  in  prophesying  and  expi- 
ations, as  also  driving  away  evil  spirits.  The  bay-tree 
also  is  consecrated  to  Phoebus,  so  is  the  cedar,  the 
palm-tree,  the  ash,  the  ivy  and  vine,  and  whatsoever 


\ 

HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 


repel  poisons  and  lightnings,  and  those  things  which 
never  fear  the  extremities  of  the  winter.  Solary  also 
are  mint,  mastic,  zedoary,  saffron,  balsam,  amber, 
musk,  yellow  honey,  lignum  aloes,  cloves,  cinnamon, 
calamus,  aromaticus,  pepper,  frankincense,  sweet-mar- 
joram, also  libanotis,  which  Orpheus  calls  the  sweet 

perfume  of  the  Sun. 

Also  amongst  animals 
those  are  called  Solary 
which  are  magnanimous, 
courageous,  ambitious  of 
victory  and  renown — as 
the  lion,  king  of  beasts; 
the  crocodile,  the  spot- 
ted wolf,  the  ram,  the 
boar;  the  bull,  king  of 
the  herd,  which  was  by 
the  Egyptians  at  Heli- 
opolis  dedicated  to  the 
Sun,  which  they  called 
Verites;  and  an  ox  was 
consecrated  to  Apis  in 
Memphis,  and  in  Her- 
minthus  a  bull  by  the 
name  of  Pathis.  The 
wolf,  also,  was  conse- 
crated to  Apollo  and 
Latona.  Also  the  beast  called  baboon  is  Solary, 
which  twelve  times  in  a  day  (viz.,  every  hour)  barks, 
and  in  time  of  ^quinoctium  micturateth  twelve  times 
every  hour;  the  same  also  it  doth  in  the  night,  whence 
the  Egyptians  did  engrave  him  upon  their  fountains.* 


CALAMUS  (sweet -flag). 


*Mr.  Morley  notes  here  in  reference  to  the  "baboon  that  "Hermes  Tris- 
megistus,  or  a  writer  in  his  name,  taught  that  the  common  division  of  time 
was  suggested  to  man  hy  the  habits  of  this  sacred  animal."  Life  of  Henry 
Cornelius  Agrippa,  Volume  I.,  page  132. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  95 

Also,  among"st  birds,  these  are  Solary:  The  phoenix, 
being  but  one  of  that  kind;  and  the  eagle,  the  queen  of 
birds;  also  the  vulture,  the  swan,  and  those  which  sing 
at  the  rising  Sun  and,  as  it  were,  call  upon  it  to  rise, 
as  the  cock  and  crow;  also  the  hawk,  which,  because 
it,  in  the  divinity  of  the  Egyptians,  is  an  emblem  of 
the  spirit  and  light,  is  by  Porphyrins  reckoned  amongst 
the  Solary  birds.  Moreover,  all  such  things  as  have 
some  resemblance  of  the  works  of  the  Sun,  as  worms 
shining  in  the  night,  and  the  beetle.  Also,  according 
to  Appious'  interpretation,  such  things  whose  eyes 
are  changed  according  to  the  course  of  the  Sun  are 
accounted  Solary;  and  things  which  come  of  them. 

And  amongst  fish,  the  sea-calf  is  chiefly  Solary,  who 
doth  resist  lightning;  also  shell-fish  and  the  fish  called 
Pulmo,  both  of  which  shinS  in  the  night;  and  the  fish 
called  Stella,*  for  his  parching  heat;  and  the  fish 
called  strombi,  t  that  follow  their  king;  and  margari,J; 
which  also  have  a  king,  and,  being  dried,  are  hardened 
into  a  stone  of  a  golden  color. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

What  Things  are  Lunary,  or  Under  the  Poiver  of  the  Moon. 

These  things  are  Lunary,  amongst  the  Elements, 
viz. :  The  earth,  then  the  water,  as  well  that  of  the 
sea  as  of  the  rivers;  and  all  moist  things,  as  the 
moisture  of  trees  and  animals,  especially  they  which 
are  white,  as  the  whites  of  eggs,  fat,  sw^eat,  phlegm, 
and  the  superfluities  of  bodies.     Amongst  tastes,  salt 


*  Stella— a  star— Star-fish ;  the  Asterias  or  sea-star.  One  peculiarity  of 
this  radiate  animal  is  that  so  long  as  it  has  any  one  of  its  usual  five  points 
remaining,  it  will  restore  any  others  that  may  have  been  destroyed. 

t  strombi— Strombite.  A  mullosk,  of  the  genus  Strombus,  possessing 
a  spiral  shell  with  a  broad,  wing-like  lip.    Ordinarily  known  as  a  sea-snail. 

JMargari— Margarite— Margaritaceas.    Pearl-fish;  the  pearl  oyster. 


96  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

and  insipid;  amongst  metals,  silver;  amongst  stones, 
crystal,  the  silver  marcasite,  and  all  those  stones  that 
are  white  and  green.  Also  the  stone  selenite  {i.  e. ,  the 
Moon,  Lunary),  shining  from  a  white  body,  with  a  yel- 
low brightness;  imitating  the  motion  of  the  Moon, 
by  having  in  it  the  figure  of  the  Moon,  which  daily 
increaseth  or  decreaseth  as  doth  the  Moon.  Also 
pearls,  which  are  generated  in  shells  of  fishes,  and 
stalactites,  formed  from  the  droppings  of  water;  also 
the  beryl,  or  aqua-marine,  greenish  and  six-sided. 

Amongst  plants  and  trees,  these  are  Lunary,  as  the 
selenotropion,  which  turns  towards  the  Moon  as  doth 
the  heliotropion  towards  the  Sun;  and  the  palm-tree, 
which  sends  forth  a  bough  at  every  rising  of  the  new 
Moon.  Hyssop,  also,  and  rosemary,  agnus  castus,  and 
the  olive-tree,  are  Lunary.  Also  the  herb  chinosta, 
which  increaseth  and  decreaseth  with  the  Moon,  viz., 
in  substance  and  number  of  leaves,  not  only  in  sap 
but  in  virtue — which,  indeed,  is  in  some  sort  common 
to  all  plants,  except  onions,  which  last  are  under  the 
influence  of  Mars,  and  have  contrary  properties. 

As  amongst  flying  things  the  Saturnine  bird  called 
a  quail  is  a  great  enemy  to  the  Moon  and  Sun,  Lunary 
animals  are  such  as  delight  to  be  in  man's  company, 
and  such  as  do  naturally  excel  in  love  or  hatred,  as  all 
kinds  of  dogs.  The  chameleon  also  is  Lunary,  which 
always  assumes  a  color  according  to  the  variety  of  the 
color  of  the  object — as  the  Moon  changeth  her  nature 
according  to  the  variety  of  the  Sign  which  it  is  found 
in.  Lunary  also  are  swine,  hinds,  goats,  and  all  those 
animals,  whatsoever,  that  observe  and  imitate  the 
motion  of  the  Moon,  as  the  baboon,  and  the  panther, 
which  is  said  to  have  a  spot  upon  her  shoulder  like  the 
Moon,  increasing  into  a  roundness,  and  having  horns 
that  bend  inwards.  Cats  also  are  Lunary,  whose  eyes 
become  greater  or  less  according  to  the  course  of  the 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  97 

Moon;  and  those  things  which  are  of  like  nature,  as 
catamenial  blood,  of  which  are  made  wonderful  and 
strang-e  things  by  magicians.  The  civet  cat,  also, 
changing  her  sex  with  the  Moon,  being  obnoxious  to 
divers  sorceries;  and  all  animals  that  live  in  water  as 
well  as  on  land,  as  otters,  and  such  as  prey  upon  fish. 
Also  all  monstrous  beasts,  such  as  without  any  mani- 
fest seed  are  equivocally  generated,  as  mice,  which 
sometimes  seem  to  be  generated  of  the  putrefaction  of 
the  earth.  Amongst  fowl,  geese,  ducks,  didappers, 
and  all  kind  of  watery  fowl  as  prey  upon  fish,  as  the 
heron,  and  those  that  are  equivocally  produced,  as 
wasps  of  the  carcasses  of  horses,  bees  of  the  putre- 
faction of  cows,  small  flies  of  putrefied  wine,  and  bee- 
tles of  the  flesh  of  asses.  But  most  Lunary  of  all  is 
the  two-horned  beetle,  horned  after  the  manner  of  a 
bull,  which  digs  under  cow-dung  and  there  remains 
for  the  space  of  twenty-eight  days  (in  which  time  the 
Moon  measures  the  whole  Zodiac),  and  in  the  twenty- 
ninth  day,  when  it  thinks  there  will  be  a  conjunction 
of  their  brightness,  it  opens  the  dung  and  casts  it  into 
water,  from  whence  then  come  beetles. 

Amongst  fish,  these  are  Lunary:  jElurus,  whose 
eyes  are  changed  according  to  the  course  of  the  Moon, 
and  whatsoever  observes  the  motion  of  the  Moon,  as  the 
tortoise,  the  echeneis,  crabs,  oysters,  cockles  and  frogs. 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

What  Things  are  Saturnine,  or  Under  the  Poiver  of  Saturn. 

Saturnine  things,  amongst  Elements,  are  earth  and 
also  water;  amongst  humors,  black  choler  that  is  moist, 
as  well  natural  as  adventitious  (adiist  choler  excepted). 
Amongst  tastes,  sour,  tart,  and  dead-like.  Amongst 
metals,  lead,  and  gold,  by  reason  of  its  weight,  and 
tke  golden  marcasite.     Amongst  stones,  the  onyx,  the 


98  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

ziazaa,  the  camonius,  the  sapphire,  the  brown  jasper, 
the  chalcedon,  the  loadstone,  and  all  dark,  weighty, 
earthy  things.  Amongst  plants  and  trees,  the  daffo- 
dil, dragon's- wort,  rue,  cummin,  hellebore,  the  tree 
from  whence  benzoin  comes,  mandrake,  opium,  and 
those  things  which  are  never  sov/n,  and  never  bear 
fruit,  and  those  which  bring  forth  berries  of  a  dark 
color  and  black  fruit,  as  the  black  fig-tree,  the  pine- 
tree,  the  cypress-tree,  and  a  certain  tree  used  at  buri- 
als, which  never  springs  afresh  with  berries,  rough,  of 
a  bitter  taste,  of  a  strong  smell,  of  a  black  shadow, 
yielding  a  most  sharp  pitch,  bearing  a  most  unprofit- 
able fruit,  never  dies  with  age,  deadly,  and  dedicated 
to  Pluto.     As  is  the  herb  pas-flower,*  with  which  they 


*Pas,  from  the  latin  word  "passus,"  meaning  step,  pace,  or  "right  of 
going  foremost;  precedence."  Thus  the  pas-flower  means  a  plant  blooming 
ahead  of  other  flowers.  A  co-ordinate  word  is  "  pascha,"  meaning  to  "  pass 
over,"  giving  the  name  "  Passover,"  or  the  feast  of  Easter.  "  Pasch  "  comes 
from  and  means  the  same  as  "  pascha,"  and  we  read  of  the  "pasch  "  egg, 
stained  and  given  to  children  at  Easter,  as  also  of  the  "  pasch  "  flower  of 
Easter.  The  Easter  flower  was  also  known  as  the  Pash-flower,  Paschal- 
flower,  and  Pasque-flower — "pash"  and  "  pasque  "  meaning  Easter,  and 
"  paschal "  pertaining  thereto.  This  indicates  that  the  pas-flower  in  the 
above  text  is  identical  with  the  pasque-flower,  of  the  genus  Anemone,  hav- 
ing large  purple  flowers,  which  usually  bloom  about  Easter,  stepping  fore- 
most in  their  order  of  blooming  as  regarding  other  flowers.  Agrippa  also 
makes  mention  here  of  the  pas-flower  as  being  an  emblem  of  mourning  as 
the  ancients  used  it  to  "  strow  the  graves  before  they  put  the  dead  bodies 
into  them."  While  the  ancients  may  have  held  the  pas-flower  as  sacred  to 
the  rites  of  burial,  the  sense  of  its  use  as  the  Easter  flower  would  indicate 
that  it  was  also  used  as  an  emblem  of  great  joy,  and  signified  a  new  life 
for  the  departed  through  a  new  birth  or  resurrection.  A  true  understand- 
ing of  the  meaning  of  the  feast  of  the  Passover  or  Easter  will  show  this: 
Easter-day  is  always  the  first  Sunday  after  the  fourteenth  day  of  the  calen- 
dar moon  which  comes  upon  or  next  after  the  21st  of  March;  so  that  if  the 
fourteenth  day  comes  on  a  Sunday,  Easter-day  will  be  the  Sunday  after. 
Easter  corresponds  to  the  Passover  of  the  Jews,  and  ".most  nations  still  give 
it  this  name  under  the  various  forms  of  pascha,  pasque,  paque,  or  pask." 
The  feast  of  the  Passover  was  instituted  by  the  Jews  "  to  commemorate  the 
providential  escape  of  the  Hebrews,  in  Egypt,  when  God,  smiting  the  first- 
born of  the  Egyptians,  passed  over  the  houses  of  the  Israelites,  which  were 
marked  with  the  blood  of  the  paschal  lamb."  With  the  Christian  church 
it  is  observed  to  commemorate  the  "resurrection  of  Christ."  The  Old 
High  Germans  celebrated  the  day  in  honor  of  Ostara,  the  goddess  of  light 
or  SPRING,  whence  they  called  April  (the  month  of  or  following  Easter) 
Ostarmanoth.    The  Anglo-Saxons  called  the  same  month,  Eastermonadh, 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  .  99 

were  wont,  anciently,  to  strow  the  graves  before  they 
put  the  dead  bodies  into  them;  wherefore  it  was  law- 
ful to  make  their  garlands  at  feasts  with  all  herbs  and 
flowers  besides  pas-flowers,  because  it  was  mournful 
and  not  conducing  to  mirth.  Also  all  creeping  ani- 
mals, living  apart,  and  solitary,  nightly,  sad,  contem- 
plative, dull,  covetous,  fearful,  melancholy,  that  take 
much  pains,  slow,  that  feed  grossly,  and  such  as  eat 
their  young.  Of  these  kinds,  therefore,  are  the  mole, 
the  wolf,  the  ass,  the  toad,  the  cat,  the  hog,  the  bear, 
the  camel,  the  basilisk,  the  hare,  the  ape,  the  dragon, 
the  mule,  all  serpents  and  creeping  things,  scorpions, 
ants,  and  such  things  as  proceed  from  putrefaction  in 
the  earth,  in  water,  or  in  the  ruins  of  houses,  as  mice 


from  Eastre,  their  name  for  the  same  goddess,  and  their  paschal  feast, 
Eastran  or  Easter.  March  was  named  from  Mars,  the  god  of  war,  and  was 
originally  the  first  month  of  the  j'^ear  as  it  was  in  March  that  the  Sun  came 
to  Aries,  the  first  House  of  the  Zodiac,  emblemized  by  the  lamb,  as  the  ram 
was  the  first  animal  to  forage  for  food  and  procreate ;  and  the  Sun  entering 
the  first  House  was  the  vernal  equinox,  or  the  first  day  of  spring,  the  first 
season  of  the  fruitful  year,  and  therefore  March,  being  the  advent  month 
of  light  and  fecundity,  was  esteemed  as  the  first  month  of  the  year.  The 
first  full  month  of  light  and  spring,  when  every  fetter  of  winter  was  riven 
and  spring  was  opened  wide  and  fixed,  was  April,  from  aperio,  to  open;  and 
also  from  the  Greek  word,  aphros— foam— from  which  Venus  was  said  to 
have  sprung,  and  hence  this  month  was  sacred  to  her;  no  doubt  Ostara  and 
Eastre  were  identical  with  her.  As  Easter-day  falls  the  first  Sunday  after 
the  fourteenth  day  of  the  calendar  moon  which  comes  upon  or  next  after 
the  21st  of  March,  Easter-day  usually  comes  in  April  and  dates  its  arrival 
from  the  aspect  of  the  Moon  to  the  arbitrary  date  of  March  21.  This  is  a 
very  significant  fact  and  is  fully  confirmed  as  such  when  we  find  that  the 
21st  of  March  is  the  usually  precise  date  when  the  Earth,  in  its  annual  move- 
ment around  the  Sun,  enters  Libra,  causing  the  Sun  to  apparently  enter  the 
opposite  House  or  Sign  of  Aries,  ending  winter  and  ushering  in  spring,  for 
the  first  day  of  spring  always  comes  when  the  Sun  enters  Aries.  Aries  is 
the  House  of  the  lamb,  and  with  the  birth  of  spring  the  lamb  is  resurrected 
or  brought  to  life  anew,  while  winter  is  dead,  the  Sun  having  passed  over 
the  meridian  line  between  winter  and  spring.  Further,  the  word  Easter 
corresponds  with  Aries,  for  it  springs  from  the  word  East,  and  Aries  is  the 
Eastern  part  of  the  Zodiac.  Therefore  March  21st  is  the  true  Eastern-day, 
but  the  celebration  of  the  return  of  spring  is  fitly  deferred  until  the  first 
Sun-day  after  about  a  lunar  cycle,  so  as  to  partake  of  the  first  fruits  of  the 
spring  season.  In  view  of  the  foregoing,  therefore,  the  ancients  used  the 
pas-flower  at  the  grave  as  an  emblem  of  the  passing  over  of  the  winter  of 
old  age  and  the  resurrection  of  the  spirit  to  eternal  light  and  immortal 
youth.    Used  as  such  the  pas-flower  or  pasque-flower  typified  joy  and  hope. 


100  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

and  many  sorts  of  vermin.  Amongst  birds,  those  are 
Saturnine  which  have  long-  necks  and  harsh  voices,  as 
cranes,  ostriches,  and  peacocks,  which  are  dedicated  to 
Saturn  and  Juno.  Also  the  screech-owl,  the  horned- 
owl,  the  bat,  the  lapwing,  the  crow,  the  quail,  which 
is  the  most  envious  bird  of  all.  Amongst  fishes,  the 
eel,  living  apart  from  all  other  fish;  the  lamprey,  the 
dog-fish,  which  devours  her  young;  also  the  tortoise, 
oysters,  cockles,  to  which  may  be  added  sea-sponges 
and  all  such  things  as  come  of  them. 


CHAPTER  XXVI. 

What   Things  are  Under  the  Power  of  Jupiter,  and  are 

called  Jovial. 

Things  under  Jupiter,  amongst  Elements,  are  the  air; 
amongst  humors,  blood  and  the  Spirit  of  Life;  also  all 
things  which  respect  the  increase,  nourishment,  and 
vegetation  of  the  life.  Amongst  tastes,  such  as  are 
sweet  and  pleasant.  Amongst  metals,  tin,  silver  and 
gold,  by  reason  of  their  temperateness.  Amongst 
stones,  the  hyacinth,  beryl,  sapphire,  emerald,  green 
jasper,  and  those  of  airy  colors.  Amongst  plants  and 
trees,  sea-green,  garden  basil,  bugloss,  mace,  spike, 
mint,  mastic,  elecampane,  the  violet,  darnel,  henbane, 
the  poplar-tree,  and  those  which  are  called  lucky  trees, 
as  the  oak,  the  sesculus,  or  horse-chestnut,  which  is 
like  an  oak  but  much  larger;  the  holm  or  holly-tree, 
the  beech-tree,  the  hazel-tree,  the  service-tree,  the 
white  fig-tree,  the  pear-tree,  the  apple-tree,  the  vine, 
the  plum-tree,  the  ash,  the  dogwood  tree,  and  the 
olive-tree,  and  also  oil-tree.  Also  all  manner  of  corn, 
as  barley  and  wheat;  also  raisins,  licorice,  sugar,  and 
all  such  things  whose  sweetness  is  manifest  and  sub- 
tile, partaking  somewhat  of  an  astringent  and  sharp 


PHILOSOPHY   OF    NATURAL  MAGIC.  101 

taste,  as  are  nuts,  almonds,  pine-apples,  filberts,  pista- 
chio-nuts, roots  of  peony,  myrobalan,  rhubarb,  and 
manna;  Orpheus  adds  storax.  Amongst  animals,  such 
as  have  some  stateliness  and  wisdom  in  them,  and 
those  which  are  mild,  well  trained  up,  and  of  good 
dispositions,  as  the  hart  and  elephant;  and  those  which 
are  gentle,  as  sheep  and  lambs.  Amongst  birds,  those 
that  are  of  a  temperate  complexion,  as  hens,  together 
with  the  yolk  of  their  eggs.  Also  the  partridge,  the 
pheasant,  the  swallow,  the  cuckoo,  and  the  stork  and 
pelican,  birds  given  to  a  kind  of  devotion,  which  are 
emblems  of  gratitude.  The  eagle  is  dedicated  to 
Jupiter — she  is  the  ensign  of  emperors,  and  an  emblem 
of  Justice  and  Clemency.  Amongst  fish,  the  dolphin, 
the  fish  called  anchia  or  anchovy;  and  the  sheath  or 
sheat-fish,  by  reason  of  his  devoutness. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

What  Things  are  Under  the  Power  of  Mars,  and  are  called 

Martial. 

These  things  are  Martial:  Amongst  Elements,  fire, 
together  with  all  adust  and  sharp  things.  Amongst 
humors,  choler;  also  bitter  tastes,  tart  and  burning  the 
tongue,  and  causing  tears.  Amongst  metals,  iron  and 
red  brass;  and  all  fiery,  red,  and  sulphureous  things. 
Amongst  stones,  the  diamond,  loadstone,  the  blood- 
stone, the  jasper,  the  stone  that  consists  of  divers 
kinds,  and  the  amethyst.  Amongst  plants  and  trees, 
hellebore,  garlic,  euphorbium,  castanea,  ammoniac, 
radish,  the  laurel  or  sweet-bay,  wolf's-bane,  scam- 
mony;  and  all  such  as  are  poisonous,  by  reason  of  too 
much  heat,  and  those  which  are  beset  round  about 
with  prickles,  or,  by  touching  the  skin,  burn  it,  prick 
it,  or  make  it  swell,  as  cardis,  the  nettle,  crow-foot; 


102  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

and  such  as,  being  eaten,  cause  tears,  as  onions,  asco- 
lonia,  leeks,  mustard-seed,  and  all  thorny  trees;  and 
the  dogwood-tree,  which  is  dedicated  to  Mars.  And 
all  such  animals  as  are  warlike,  ravenous,  bold,  and  of 
clear  fancy,  as  the  horse,  mule,  goat,  kid,  wolf,  leop- 
ard, and  wild  ass.  Serpents,  also,  and  dragons,  full  of 
displeasure  and  poison.  Also  all  such  as  are  offensive 
to  men,  as  gnats,  flies,  and  the  baboon,  by  reason  of 
his  anger.  All  birds  that  are  ravenous,  devour  flesh, 
and  break  bones,  as  the  eagle,  the  falcon,  the  hawk, 
and  the  vulture;  and  those  which  are  called  the  fatal 
birds,  as  the  horn-owl,  the  screech-owl,  castrels,  and 
kites;  and  such  as  are  hungry  and  ravenous,  and  such 
as  make  a  noise  in  their  swallowing,  as  crows,  daws, 
and  the  pie,  which,  above  all  the  rest,  is  dedicated  to 
Mars.  And  amongst  fishes,  the  pike,  the  barbel,  the 
fork-fish,  the  fish  that  hath  horns  like  a  ram,  the  stur- 
geon, and  the  glacus,  all  which  are  great  devourers 
and  ravenous. 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

What  Things  are  Under  the  Poiver  of  Venus,  and  are  called 

Venereal. 

These  things  are  under  Venus:  Amongst  Elements, 
air  and  water.  Amongst  humors,  phlegm,  with  blood, 
spirit,  and  seed.  Amongst  tastes,  those  which  are 
sweet,  unctuous,  and  delectable.  Amongst  metals, 
silver,  and  brass,  both  yellow  and  red.  Amongst 
stones,  the  beryl,  chrysolite,  emerald,  sapphire,  green 
jasper,  carnelian,  the  stone  aetites,  the  lazuli  stone, 
coral,  and  all  of  a  fair,  various,  white,  and  green  color. 
Amongst  plants  and  trees,  the  vervain,  violet,  maiden- 
hair; valerian,  which  by  the  Arabians  is  called  phu! 
and  tithymal,  for  its  fragrant  and  sweet  smell;  also 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  .  103 

thyme,  the  gum  ladanum,  amber-gris,  sanders  or  red 
sandal-wood,  coriander,  and  all  sweet  perfumes;  and 
delightful  and  sweet  fruits,  as  sweet  pears,  figs,  pome- 
granates, which,  the  poets  say,  were,  in  Cyprus,  first 
sown  by  Venus.  Also  the  Rose  of  Lucifer  was  dedi- 
cated to  her;  also  the  Myrtle-tree  of  Hesperus.  More- 
over, all  luxurious,  delicious  animals,  and  of  a  strong 
love,  as  dogs,  conies,  odorous  sheep  and  goats,  both 
female  and  male,  which  generate  sooner  than  any  other 
animal;  also  the  bull,  for  his  disdain,  and  the  calf,  for 
his  wantonness.  Amongst  birds,  the  swan,  the  wag- 
tail, the  swallow,  the  pelican,  the  bergander,  which 
are  very  loving  to  their  young.  Also  the  crow,  and 
the  pigeon,  which  is  dedicated  to  Venus;  and  the 
turtle-dove,  one  whereof  was  commanded  to  be  offered 
at  the  purification,  after  bringing  forth.  The  sparrow 
also  was  dedicated  to  Venus,  which  was  commanded  in 
the  law  to  be  used  in  the  purification,  after  the  lep- 
rosy, a  martial  disease,  than  which  nothing  was  of 
more  force  to  resist  it.  Also,  the  Egyptians  called 
the  Eagle  by  the  name  of  Venus,  because  she  never 
fails  to  answer  the  call  of  her  mate.  Amongst  fishes, 
these  are  venereal:  The  lustful  pilchard,  the  lecher- 
ous gilt-head,  the  whiting,  for  her  love  to  her  young, 
and  the  crab,  fighting  for  his  mate. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 

What  Things  are  Under  the  Power  of  Mercury,  and  are 

called  Mercurial. 

Things  under  Mercury  are  these:  Amongst  Ele- 
ments, water,  though  it  moves  all  things  indistinctly. 
Amongst  humors,  those  especially  which  are  mixed, 
as  also  the  animal  spirit.  Amongst  tastes,  those  that 
are   various,  strange,  and   mixed.     Amongst   metals, 


104  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

quick-silver,  tin,  and  the  silver  marcasite.  Amongst 
stones,  the  emerald,  achate  or  agate,  red  marble,  and 
topaz,  and  those  which  are  of  divers  colors  and  vari- 
ous figures  naturally;  and  those  that  are  artificial,  as 
glass;  and  those  which  have  a  color  mixed  with  green 
and  yellow.  Amongst  plants  and  trees,  the  hazel, 
five-leaved  grass,  the  herb  mercury,  fumitory,  pimper- 
nel, marjoram,  parsley,  and  such  as  have  shorter  and 
less  leaves,  being  compounded  of  mixed  natures  and 
divers  colors.  Animals,  also,  that  are  of  quick  sense, 
ingenious,  strong,  inconstant,  and  swift;  and  such  as 
become  easily  acquainted  with  men,  as  dogs,  weasels, 
apes,  foxes,  the  hart  and  mule;  and  all  animals  that 
are  of  both  sexes,  and  those  which  can  change  their 
sex,  as  the  hare,  civet  cat,  and  such  like.  Amongst 
birds,  those  which  are  naturally  witty,  melodious  and 
inconstant,  as  the  linnet,  nightingale,  blackbird,  lark, 
thrush,  the  gnat-snapper,  the  bird  calandra,  the  par- 
rot, the  pie,  the  bird  ibis,  the  bird  porphyrio,  the  black 
beetle  with  one  horn,  and  the  sea-bird  trochilus,  which 
goes  into  the  crocodile's  mouth  for  its  food.  Amongst 
fishes,  the  fish  called  pourcontrel,  for  deceitfulness 
and  changeableness;  the  fork-fish  for  its  industry,  and 
the  mullet,  also,  that  shakes  off  the  bait  on  the  hook 
with  his  tail. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

That  the  Whole  Sublunary  World,  and  those  Things  which 
are  in  It,  are  Distributed  to  Planets. 

Moreover,  whatsoever  is  found  in  the  whole  world 
is  made  according  to  the  governments  of  the  Planets, 
and  accordingly  receives  its  virtue.  So  in  fire,  the 
enlivening  light  thereof  is  under  the  government  of 
the  Sun;  the  heat  of  it  under  Mars,  in  the  Earth;  the 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  105 

various  superficies  thereof  under  the  Moon  and  Mer- 
cury, and  the  starry  heaven;  the  whole  mass  of  it 
under  Saturn.  But  in  the  middle  Elements,  air  is 
under  Jupiter,  and  water  under  the  Moon;  but  being 
mixed,  are  under  Mercury  and  Venus.  In  like  manner 
natural  active  causes  observe  the  Sun,  the  matter  the 
Moon,  the  fruitfulness  of  active  causes,  Jupiter;  the 
fruitfulness  of  the  matter,  Venus;  the  sudden  effecting" 
of  any  thing.  Mars;  and  Mercury,  that  for  his  vehe- 
mency,  this  for  his  dexterity  and  manifold  virtue. 
But  the  permanent  continuation  of  all  things  is 
ascribed  to  Saturn.  Also,  amongst  vegetables,  every 
thing  that  bears  fruit  is  from  Jupiter,  and  every  thing 
that  bears  flowers  is  from  Venus;  all  seed  and  bark  is 
from  Mercury,  and  all  roots  from  Saturn,  and  all  wood 
from  Mars,  and  leaves  from  the  Moon.  Wherefore,  all 
that  bring  forth  fruit,  and  not  flowers,  are  of  Saturn 
and  Jupiter;  but  they  that  bring  forth  flowers  and 
seed,  and  not  fruit,  are  of  Venus  and  Mercury;  those 
which  are  brought  forth  of  their  own  accord,  without 
seed,  are  of  the  Moon  and  Saturn.  All  beauty  is  from 
Venus,  all  strength  from  Mars,  and  every  planet  rules 
and  disposeth  that  which  is  like  to  it.  Also  in  stones, 
their  weight,  clamminess  and  slipticness  is  of  Saturn, 
their  use  and  temperament  of  Jupiter,  their  hardness 
from  Mars,  their  life  from  the  Sun,  their  beauty  and 
fairness  from  Venus,  their  occult  virtue  from  Mercury, 
and  their  common  use  from  the  Moon. 


CHAPTER  XXXI. 

How  Provinces  and  Kingdoms  are  Distributed  to  Planets. 

Moreover,  the  whole  orb  of  the  earth  is  distributed 
by  kingdoms  and  provinces  to  the  Planets  and  Signs: 
For   Macedonia,  Thracia,  Illyria,  Arriana,  Gordiana, 


106  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

India,  many  of  which  countries  are  in  the  lesser  Asia, 
are  under  Saturn  with  Capricornus;  but  with  Aquarius 
under  him  are  the  Sauromatian  Country,  Oxiana,  Sog- 
diana,  Arabia,  Phazania,  Media  and  ^thipoia,  which 
countries,  for  the  most  part,  belong  to  the  more  inward 
Asia.  Under  Jupiter,  with  Sagittarius,  are  Tuscana, 
Celtica,  Spaine,  and  happy  Arabia;  and  under  him, 
with  Pisces,  are  Lycia,  Lydia,  Cilicia,  Pamphylia, 
Paphlagonia,  Nasamonia,  and  Lybia.  Mars,  with 
Aries,  governs  Britany,  France,  Germany,  Bastarnia, 
the  lower  parts  of  Syria,  Idumea,  and  Judea;  with 
Scorpio,  he  rules  Syria,  Comagena,  Cappadocia,  Meta- 
gonium,  Mauritania,  and  Getulia.  The  Sun,  with  Leo, 
governs  Italy,  Apulia,  Sicilia,  Phenicia,  Chaldea,  and 
the  Orchenians.  Venus,  with  Taurus,  governs  the 
Isles  Cyclades,  the  seas  of  little  Asia,  Cyprus,  Parthia, 
Media,  Persia;  but,  with  Libra,  she  commands  the 
people  of  the  Island  Bractia,  of  Caspia,  of  Seres,  of 
Thebais,  of  Oasis,  and  of  Troglodys.  Mercury,  with 
Gemini,  rules  Hircania,  Armenia,  Mantiana,  Cyrenaica, 
Marmarica,  and  the  lower  Egypt;  but,  with  Virgo,  he 
rules  Greece,  Achaia,  Creta,  Babylon,  Mesopotamia, 
Assyria,  and  Ela,  whence  they  of  that  place  are  in 
Scripture  called  Elamites.  The  Moon,  with  Cancer, 
governs  Bithivia,  Phrygia,  Colchica,  Numidia,  Africa, 
Carthage,  and  all  Carchedonia. 

These  we  have,  in  this  manner,  gathered  from  Ptol- 
emy's opinion,  to  which,  according  to  the  writings  of 
other  astrologers,  many  more  may  be  added.  But  he 
who  knows  how  to  compare  these  divisions  of  prov- 
inces according  to  the  Divisions  of  the  Stars,  with  the 
Ministry  of  the  Ruling  Intelligences,  and  Blessings  of 
the  Tribes  of  Israel,  the  Lots  of  the  Apostles,  and 
Typical  Seals  of  the  Sacred  Scripture,  shall  be  able 
to  obtain  great  and  prophetical  oracles,  concerning 
every  region,  of  things  to  come. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL   MAGIC  107 

CHAPTER  XXXII. 

What  Things  are  Under  the  Signs,  the  Fixed  Stars,  and 

their  Images. 

The  like  consideration  is  to  be  had  in  all  things 
concerning'  the  Figures  of  the  Fixed  Stars:  Therefore 
they  will  have  the  terrestrial  ram  to  be  under  the  rule 
of  the  celestial  Aries,  and  the  terrestrial  bull  and  ox 
to  be  under  the  celestial  Taurus.  So  also  that  Cancer 
should  rule  over  crabs,  and  Leo  over  lions;  Virgo  over 
virgins,  and  Scorpio  over  scorpions;  Capricornus  over 
goats,  Sagittarius  over  horses,  and  Pisces  over  fishes. 
Also  the  celestial  Ursa  over  bears,  the  Hydra  over  ser- 
pents, and  the  Dog  Star  over  dogs,  and  so  of  the  rest. 
Now,  Apuleius  distributes  certain  and  peculiar  herbs 
to  the  Signs  and  Planets,  viz. :  To  Aries,  the  herb 
sage;  to  Taurus,  the  vervain  that  grows  straight;  to 
Gemini,  the  vervain  that  grows  bending;  to  Cancer, 
comfrey;  to  Leo,  sow-bread;  to  Virgo,  calamint;  to 
Libra,  mug-wort;  to  Scorpio,  scorpion-grass;  to  Sagit- 
tarius, pimpernel;  to  Capricornus,  the  dock;  to  Aqua- 
rius, dragon's-wort;  to  Pisces,  hart-wort.  And  to  the 
Planets  these,  viz.:  To  Saturn,  sengreen;  to  Jupiter, 
agrimony;  to  Mars,  sulphur-wort;  to  the  Sun,  mari- 
gold; to  Venus,  wound- wort;  to  Mercury,  mullein;  to 
the  Moon,  peony.  But  Hermes,  whom  Albertus  fol- 
lows, distributes  to  the  Planets  these,  viz. :  To  Saturn, 
the  daffodil;  to  Jupiter,  henbane;  to  Mars,  rib- wort;  to 
the  Sun,  knot-grass;  to  Venus,  vervain;  to  Mercury, 
cinque-foil;  to  the  Moon,  goose-foot.  We  also  know 
by  experience  that  asparagus  is  under  Aries,  and  gar- 
den basil  under  Scorpio;  for  of  the  shavings  of  ram's- 
horn,  sowed,  comes  forth  asparagus;  and  garden 
basil,  rubbed  betwixt  two  stones,  produceth  scorpions. 
Moreover,  I  will,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  Hermes, 
and  of  Thebit,  reckon  up  some  of  the  more  eminent 

108  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

Stars,  whereof  the  first  is  called  the  Head  of  Algol, 
and,  amongst  stones,  rules  over  the  diamond;  amongst 
plants,  black  hellebore  and  mug-wort.  The  second 
are  the  Pleiades,  or  Seven  Stars,  which,  amongst 
stones,  rule  over  crystal  and  the  stone  diodocus; 
amongst  plants,  the  herb  diacedon,  and  frankincense 
and  fennel;  and  amongst  metals,  quicksilver.  The 
third  is  the  star  Aldeboran,  which  hath  under  it, 
amongst  stones,  the  carbuncle  and  ruby;  amongst 
plants,  the  milky  thistle  and  matry-silva.  The  fourth 
is  called  the  Goat  Star,  which  rules,  amongst  stones, 
the  sapphire;  amongst  plants,  horehound,  mint,  mug- 
wort  and  mandrake.  The  fifth  is  called  the  great  Dog 
Star,  which,  amongst  stones,  rules  over  the  beryl; 
amongst  plants,  savin,  mug-wort  and  dragon's-wort; 
and,  amongst  animals,  the  forked  tongue  of  a  snake. 
The  sixth  is  called  the  lesser  Dog  Star,  and,  amongst 
stones,  rules  over  achate  or  agate;  amongst  plants,  the 
flowers  of  marigold  and  pennyroyal.  The  seventh  is 
called  the  Heart  of  the  Lyon,  which,  amongst  stones, 
rules  over  the  granate  or  garnet;  amongst  plants,  sal- 
lendine,  mug-wort  and  mastic.  The  eighth  is  the  Taile 
of  the  lesser  Bear,  which,  amongst  stones,  rules  over 
the  loadstone;  amongst  herbs,  over  succory  or  chicory, 
whose  leaves  and  flowers  turn  towards  the  north;  also 
mug- wort  and  the  flowers  of  periwinkle;  and,  amongst 
animals,  the  tooth  of  a  wolf.  The  ninth  is  called  the 
Wing  of  the  Crow,  under  which,  amongst  stones,  are 
such  stones  as  are  of  the  color  of  the  black  onyx  stone; 
amongst  plants,  the  bur,  quadraginus,  henbane  and 
comfrey;  and,  amongst  animals,  the  tongue  of  a  frog. 
The  tenth  is  called  Spica,  which  hath  under  it,  amongst 
stones,  the  emerald;  amongst  plants,  sage,  trifoil,  peri- 
winkle, mug-wort  and  mandrake.  The  eleventh  is 
called  Alchamech,  which,  amongst  stones,  rules  over 
the  jasper;  amongst  plants,  the  plantain.     The  twelfth 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  109 

is  called  Elpheia;  under  this,  amongst  stones,  is  the 
topaz;  amongst  plants,  rosemary,  trifoil  and  ivy.  The 
thirteenth  is  called  the  Heart  of  the  Scorpion,  under 
which,  amongst  stones,  is  the  sardonius  and  amethyst; 
amongst  plants,  long  aristolochy  and  saffron.  The 
fourteenth  is  the  Falling  Vultur,  under  which,  amongst 
stones,  is  the  chrysolite;  amongst  plants,  succory  and 
fumitory.  The  fifteenth  is  the  Taile  of  Capricorn, 
under  which,  amongst  stones,  is  chalcedony;  amongst 
plants,  marjoram,  mug-wort  and  catnip,  and  the  root 
of  mandrake. 

Moreover,  this  we  must  know,  that  every  stone  or 
plant  or  animal,  or  any  other  thing,  is  not  governed 
by  one  star  alone,  but  many  of  them  receive  influence, 
not  separated,  but  conjoined,  from  many  stars.  So 
amongst  stones,  the  chalcedon  is  under  Saturn  and 
Mercury,  together  with  the  Taile  of  Scorpion,  and 
Capricorn.  The  sapphire,  under  Jupiter,  Saturn  and 
the  star  Alhajoth;  tutia  is  under  Jupiter  and  the  Sun 
and  Moon;  the  emerald,  under  Jupiter,  Venus  and 
Mercury  and  the  star  Spica.  The  amethyst,  as  saith 
Hermes,  is  under  Mars,  Jupiter  and  the  Heart  of  the 
Scorpion.  The  jasper,  which  is  of  divers  kinds,  is 
under  Mars,  Jupiter  and  the  star  Alchamech.  The 
chrysolite  is  under  the  Sun,  Venus  and  Mercury,  as 
also  under  the  star  which  is  called  the  Falling  Vultur. 
The  topaz,  under  the  Sun  and  the  star  Elpheia;  the 
diamond,  under  Mars  and  the  Head  of  Algol.  In  like 
manner,  amongst  vegetables,  the  herb  dragon  is  under 
Saturn  and  the  celestial  Dragon;  mastic  and  mint  are 
under  Jupiter  and  the  Sun,  but  mastic  is  also  under 
the  Heart  of  the  Lyon,  and  mint,  under  the  Goat  Star. 
Hellebore  is  dedicated  to  Mars  and  the  Head  of  Algol; 
moss  and  sanders  to  the  Sun  and  Venus;  coriander  to 
Venus  and  Saturn.  Amongst  animals,  the  sea  calf  is 
under  the  Sun  and  Jupiter;  the  fox  and  ape,  under 


110  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

Saturn  and  Mercury;  and  domestical  dogs  under  Mer- 
cury and  the  Moon.  And  thus  we  have  shewed  more 
things  in  these  inferiors  by  their  superiors.* 


CHAPTER  XXXIII. 

Of  the  Seals  and  Characters  of  Natural  Things. 

All  Stars  have  their  peculiar  natures,  properties, 
and  conditions,  the  Seals  and  Characters  whereof 
they  produce,  through  their  rays,  even  in  these  infe- 
rior things,  viz.,  in  elements,  in  stones,  in  plants,  in 
animals,  and  their  members;  whence  every  natural 
thing  receives,  from  a  harmonious  disposition  and  from 
its  star  shining  upon  it,  some  particular  Seal,  or  char- 
acter, stamped  upon  it;  which  Seal  of  character  is  the 
significator  of  that  star,  or  harmonious  disposition, 
containing  in  it  a  peculiar  Virtue,  differing  from  other 
virtues  of  the  same  matter,  both  generically,  specific- 
ally, and  numerically.  Every  thing,  therefore,  hath 
its  character  pressed  upon  it  by  its  star  for  some  par- 
ticular effect,  especially  by  that  star  which  doth  prin- 
cipally govern  it.  \  And  these  Characters  contain  and 
retain  in  them  the  peculiar  Natures,  Virtues,  and 
Roots  of  their  Stars,  and  produce  the  like  operations 
upon  other  things,  on  which  they  are  reflected,  and 
stir  up  and  help  the  influences  of  their  Stars,  whether 
they  be  Planets,  or  fixed  Stars,  or  Figures,  or  celestial 
Signs, f]  viz.,  as  oft  as   they  shall   be  made   in  a  fit 


*  Agrippa's  historian,  Mr.  Henry  Morley,  says:  "  Here  ends  the  detail  of 
the  theory  of  Nature,  upon  which  were  based,  so  far  as  concerned  natural 
things,  the  arts  of  sorcery  and  divination.  From  theory  to  practice,  there- 
fore, the  young  student  passes."— "Life  of  Cornelius  Agrippa,"  Vol.  I.,  p.  136. 

tThe  Heavens  in  general  are  mapped  out  into  clusters  and  combinations 
of  stars,  known  as  "constellations,"  and  to  each  constellation  the  ancients 
gave  a  certain  "  figure,"  the  name  of  which  also  named  the  constellation,  as 
Capricornus  (from  "caper,"  goat,  and  "cornu,"  horn)  is  given  the  figure  of 
a  goat  (one  horn  starry) ;  and  this  constellation,  by  being  one  of  the  twelve 
constellations  of  the  Zodiac,  is  further  known  as  one  of  the  twelve  "  Signs." 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  Ill 

matter,  and  in  their  due  and  accustomed  times.  Which 
ancient  Wise  Men  considering- — such  as  labored  much 
in  the  finding  out  of  the  occult  properties  of  things — 
did  set  down  in  writing  the  Images  of  the  Stars,  their 
Figures,  Seals,  Marks,  Characters,  such  as  Nature 
herself  did  describe,  by  the  rays  of  the  Stars,  in  these 
inferior  bodies — some  in  stones,  some  in  plants,  and 
joints  and  knots  of  boughs,  and  some  in  divers  mem- 
bers of  animals.  (For  the  bay-tree,  the  lote-tree,  and 
the  marigold  are  Solary  Plants,  and  in  their  roots  and 
knots,  being  cut  off,  shew  the  Characters  of  the  SunJ 
So  also  in  the  bones  and  shoulder-blades  in  animals; ' 
whence  there  arose  a  spatulary  kind  of  divining  {i.  e.) 
by  the  shoulder-blades;  .and  in  stones  and  stony  things 
the  Characters  and!  Im'ages  of  celestial  things  are  often 
found.  But  seeing  that  in  so  great  a  diversity  of  things 
there  is  not  a  traditional  knowledge,  only  in  a  few 
things,  which  human  understanding  is  able  to  reach: 
Therefore,  leaving  those  things  which  are  to  be  found 
out  in  plants  and  stones,  and  other  things,  as  also  in 
the  members  of  divers  animals,  we  shall  limit  our- 
selves to  man's  nature  only,  which,  seeing  it  is  the 
most  complete  Image  of  the  ivhole  Universe,  containing 
in  itself  the  whole  heavenly  harmony,  w^ill,  without 
all  doubt,  abundantly  afford  us  the  Seals  and  Charac- 
ters of  all  the  Stars  and  Celestial  Influences,  and 
those,  as  the  more  efficacious,  which  are  less  differing 
from  the  celestial  nature.  But  as  the  number  of  the 
Stars  is  known  to  God  alone,  so  also  their  effects  and 
Seals  upon  these  inferior  things,  wherefore  no  human 
intellect  is  able  to  attain  to  the  knowledge  of  them. 
Whence  very  few  of  those  things  became  known  to 
us  which  the  ancient  philosophers  and  chiromancers 
attained  to,  partly  by  reason  and  partly  by  experience; 
and  there  be  many  things  yet  lying  hid  in  the  treasury 
of  Nature.     We  shall  here,  in  this  place,  note  some 


112  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

few  Seals  and  Characters  of  the  Planets,  such  as  the 
ancient  chiromancers  knew  of,  in  the  hands  of  men. 
These  doth  Julian  call  Sacred  and  Divine  Letters, 
seeing  that  by  them,  according  to  the  holy  Scripture, 
is  the  life  of  men  writ  in  their  hands.  And  there  are 
in  all  nations  of  all  languages  always  the  same  and 
like  to  them,  and  permanent;  to  which  were  added  and 
found  out  afterwards  many  more;  as  by  the  ancient, 
so  by  latter  chiromancers.  And  they  that  would  know 
them  must  have  recourse  to  their  volumes.  It  is  suffi- 
cient here  to  shew  from  whence  the  Characters  of 
Nature  have  their  original  source,  and  in  what  things 
they  are  to  be  enquired  after.* 


*Mr.  Morley,  on  page  138  of  his  work,  gives  "  successively,  line  under  line, 
the  divine  letters  of  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Venus,  Mercury,  the  Sun,  and  the 
Moon,"  which  may  he  compared  with  the  figures  made  from  the  1651  edition: 


dfiC 


c'C  ^  ^a  &-uA«NMi> 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL.   MAGIC.  113 

HERE   FOLLOW   THE   FIGURES  OF   DIVINE  LETTERS: 

The  Letters  or  Characters  of  Saturn. 
The  Letters  or  Characters  of  Jupiter. 

The  Letters  or  Characters  of  Mars. 

The  Letters  or  Characters  of  the  Sun. 

The  Letters  or  Characters  of  Venus. 

The  Letters  or  Characters  of  Mercury. 

The  Letters  or  Characters  of  the  Moon. 

3C  0  §=^^ '^-^^^'Ntv^ 


114  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

CHAPTER  XXXIV. 

How,  by  Natural  Things  and  their  Virtues,  We  may  Draw 
Forth  and  Attract  the  Influences  and  Virtues  of  Celestial 
Bodies. 

Now,  if  thou  desirest  to  receive  virtue  from  any 
part  of  the  World,  or  from  any  Star,  thou  shalt  (those 
things  being  used  which  belong  to  this  Star)  come 
under  its  peculiar  influence,  as  wood  is  fit  to  receive 
flame  by  reason  of  sulphur,  pitch  and  oil.  Neverthe- 
less, when  thou  dost  to  any  one  species  of  things,  or 
individual,  rightly  apply  many  things  (which  are 
things  of  the  same  subject,  scattered,  amongst  them- 
selves, conformable  to  the  same  Idea  and  Star),  pres- 
ently, by  this  matter  so  opportunely  fitted,  a  singular 
gift  is  infused  by  the  Idea,  by  means  of  the  Soul  of  the 
World.  I  say  "  opportunely  fitted,"  viz.,  under  a  har- 
mony, like  to  the  harmony  which  did  infuse  a  certain 
virtue  into  the  matter.  For  although  things  have 
some  virtues,  such  as  we  speak  of,  yet  those  virtues 
do  so  lie  hid  that  there  is  seldom  any  effect  produced 
by  them.  But,  as  in  a  grain  of  mustard-seed,  bruised, 
the  sharpness  which  lay  hid  is  stirred  up;  and  as  the 
heat  of  the  fire  doth  make  letters  apparent  to  the 
sight  which  before  could  not  be  read,  being  writ  with 
the  juice  of  an  onion,  or  with  milk;  and  as  letters 
wrote  upon  a  stone  with  the  fat  of  a  goat,  and  alto- 
gether unperceived,  when  the  stone  is  put  into  vinegar 
appear  and  shew  themselves;  and  as  a  blow  with  a 
stick  stirs  up  the  madness  of  a  dog  which  before  lay 
asleep — so  doth  the  Celestial  Harmony  disclose  vir- 
tues lying  in  the  water;  stirs  them  up,  strengtheneth 
them,  and  makes  them  manifest;  and,  as  I  may  so  say, 
produceth  that  into  Act  which  before  was  only  in 
Power,  when  things  are  rightly  exposed  to  it  in  a  Celes- 
tial Season.     As  for  example:     If  thou  dost  desire  to 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  115 

attract  virtue  from  the  Sun,  and  to  seek  those  things 
that  are  Solary,  amongst  vegetables,  plants,  metals, 
stones,  and  animals,  those  things  are  to  be  used  and 
taken  chiefly  which  in  a  Solary  order  are  higher.  For 
these  are  more  available.  So  thou  shalt  draw  a  sin- 
gular gift  from  the  Sun,  through  the  beams  thereof, 
being  seasonably  received  together,  and  through  the 
Spirit  of  the  World. 


CHAPTER  XXXV. 

Of  the  Mixtions  of  Natural  Things^  one  with  another,  and 

their  Benefit. 

It  is  most  evident  that  in  the  inferior  nature  all  the 
powers  of  superior  bodies  are  not  found  comprehended 
in  any  one  thing,  but  are  dispersed  through  many 
kinds  of  things  amongst  us;  as  there  are  many  Solary 
things,  whereof  every  one  doth  not  contain  all  the 
virtues  of  the  Sun;  but  some  have  some  properties 
from  the  Sun,  and  others  othersome.  Wherefore,  it  is 
sometimes  necessary  that  there  be  mixtions  in  opera- 
tions, that  if  a  hundred  or  a  thousand  virtues  of  the 
Sun  were  dispersed  through  so  many  plants,  animals, 
and  the  like,  we  may  gather  all  these  together,  and 
bring  them  into  one  form,  in  which  we  shall  see  all 
the  said  virtues,  being  united,  contained.  Now,  there 
is  a  twofold  virtue  in  commixtion;  one,  viz.,  which  was 
first  planted  in  its  parts,  and  is  celestial;  the  other  is 
obtained  by  a  certain  and  artificial  mixtion  of  things, 
mixt  amongst  themselves,  and  of  the  mixtions  of  them 
according  to  certain  proportions,  such  as  agree  with 
the  heaven,  under  a  certain  constellation.  And  this 
virtue  descends  by  a  certain  likeness  and  aptness  that 
is  in  things,  amongst  themselves,  towards  their  supe- 
riors, and  just  as  much  as  the  following  things  do  by 


116  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

degrees  correspond  with  them  that  go  before,  where 
the  patient  is  fitly  applied  to  its  superior  agent.  So 
from  a  certain  composition  of  herbs,  vapors,  and  such 
like,  made  according  to  the  principles  of  natural  phi- 
losophy and  astronomy,  there  results  a  certain  com- 
mon form,  endowed  with  many  gifts  of  the  Stars,  as, 
in  the  honey  of  bees,  that  which  is  gathered  out  of 
the  juice  of  innumerable  flowers  and  brought  into  one 
form,  contains  the  virtue  of  all,  by  a  kind  of  divine 
and  admirable  art  of  the  bees.  Yet  this  is  not  to  be 
less  wondered  at,  which  Eudoxus  Giudius  reports,  of 
an  artificial  kind  of  honey  which  a  certain  Nation  of 
Giants  in  Lybia  knew  how  to  make  out  of  flowers,  and 
that  very  good  and  not  far  inferior  to  that  of  the  bees. 
For  every  mixtion,  which  consists  of  many  several 
things,  is  then  most  perfect  when  it  is  so  firmly  com- 
pacted in  all  parts  that  it  becomes  one,  is  every  where 
firm  to  itself,  and  can  hardly  be  dissipated — as  we 
sometimes  see  stones  and  divers  bodies  to  be,  by  a  cer- 
tain natural  power,  so  conglutinated  and  united  that 
they  seem  to  be  wholly  one  thing;  as  we  see  two  trees, 
by  grafting,  to  become  one;  also  oysters  with  stones, 
by  a  certain  occult  virtue  of  Nature;  and  there  have 
been  seen  some  animals  which  have  been  turned  into 
stones,  and  so  united  with  the  substance  of  the  stone 
that  they  seem  to  make  one  body,  and  that  also  homo- 
geneous; so  the  tree  ebony  is  one  while  wood  and 
another  while  stone.  When,  therefore,  any  one  makes 
a  mixtion  of  many  matters  under  the  celestial  influ- 
ences, then  the  variety  of  celestial  actions  on  the  one 
hand,  and  of  natural  powers  on  the  other  hand,  being 
joined  together,  doth  indeed  cause  wonderful  things — 
by  ointments,  by  collyries,  by  fumes,  and  such  like — 
which  are  read  of  in  the  books  of  Chiramis,  Archyta, 
Democritus,  and  Hermes,  who  is  named  Alchorat,  and 
many  others. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  117 

CHAPTER  XXXVI. 

Of  the  Union  of  Mixt   Things,  and  the  Introduction  of  a 
More  Noble  Form,  and  the  Senses  of  Life. 

Moreover,  we  must  know,  that  by  how  much  the 
more  noble  the  form  of  any  thing  is,  by  so  much  the 
more  prone  and  apt  it  is  to  receive,  and  powerful  to 
act.  Then  the  virtues  of  things  do  then  become  won- 
derful, viz.,  when  they  are  put  to  matters  that  are 
mixed,  and  prepared  in  fit  seasons,  to  make  them  alive, 
by  procuring  life  for  them  from  the  Stars,  as  also  a 
sensible  Soul  as  a  more  noble  form.  For  there  is  so 
great  a  power  in  prepared  matters,  which,  we  see,  do 
then  receive  life  when  a  perfect  mixtion  of  qualities 
seems  to  break  the  former  contrariety.  For  so  much 
the  more  perfect  life  things  receive,  shews  by  how 
much  their  temper  is  more  remote  from  contrariety. 

Now,  the  Heaven,  as  a  prevalent  cause,  doth  (from 
the  beginning  of  every  thing  to  be  generated,  by  the 
due  concoction  and  perfect  digestion  of  the  matter), 
together  with  life,  bestow  celestial  influences  and 
wonderful  gifts,  according  to  the  Capacity  that  is  in 
that  Life  and  sensible  Soul  to  receive  more  noble  and 
sublime  virtues.  For  the  Celestial  Virtue  doth  other- 
wise lie  asleep,  as  sulphur  kept  from  the  flame,  but  in 
Living  Bodies  it  doth  always  burn,  as  kindled  sulphur; 
and  then  by  its  vapor,  like  the  lighted  sulphur,  it  fills 
all  the  places  that  are  next  to  it. 

So  certain  wonderful  works  are  wrought,  such  as  are 
read  of  in  the  book  of  Nemith,  which  is  titled  a  Book 
of  the  Laws  of  Pluto,  because  such  kind  of  monstrous 
generations  are  not  produced  according  to  the  Laws 
of  Nature.  For  we  know  that  of  worms  are  generated 
gnats;  of  a  horse,  wasps;  of  a  calf  or  ox,  bees;  of  a 
crab,  his  legs  being  taken  off  and  he  buried  in  the 
ground,  a  scorpion;  of  a  duck,  dried  into  powder  and 


118  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

put  into  water,  are  generated  frogs;  but  if  the  duck  be 
baked  in  a  pie,  and  cut  into  pieces,  and  then  put  into 
a  moist  place  under  the  ground,  toads  are  generated 
of  it.  Of  the  herb  garden  basil,  bruised  betwixt  two 
stones,  are  generated  scorpions;  and  of  the  hairs  of  a 
catamenial  person,  buried  under  compost,  are  bred 
serpents;  and  the  hair  of  a  horse's  tail,  put  into  water, 
receiveth  life  and  is  turned  into  a  pernicious  worm. 
And  there  is  an  art  wherewith,  by  a  hen  sitting  upon 
eggs,  may  be  generated  a  form  like  to  a  man  (which  I 
have  seen  and  know  how  to  make),  which  magicians 
say  hath  in  it  wonderful  virtues;  and  this  they  call 
the  true  mandrake.  You  must,  therefore,  know  which 
and  what  kind  of  matters  are  either  of  Nature  or  Art, 
begun  or  perfected,  or  compounded  of  more  things, 
and  what  celestial  influences  they  are  able  to  receive. 
For  a  congruity  of  natural  things  is  sufficient  for  the 
receiving  of  influence  from  those  celestial;  because, 
when  nothing  doth  hinder  the  Celestials  to  send  forth 
their  lights  upon  Inferiors,  they  suffer  no  matter  to  be 
destitute  of  their  virtue.  Wherefore,  as  much  matter 
as  is  perfect  and  pure,  is  not  unfit  to  receive  the  celes- 
tial influence.  For  that  is  the  binding  and  continuity 
of  the  matter  to  the  Soul  of  the  World,  which  doth  so 
daily  flow  in  upon  things  natural,  and  all  things  which 
Nature  hath  prepared,  that  it  is  impossible  that  a  pre- 
pared matter  should  not  receive  life,  or  a  more  noble 
form.  

CHAPTER  XXXVII. 

How,  by  some  certain  Natural  and  Artificial  Preparations, 
We  may  Attract  certain  Celestial  and  Vital  Gifts. 

Platonists,  together  with  Hermes,  say,  and  Jarchus 
Brachmanus  and  the  Mecubals  of  the  Hebrews  confess, 
that  all  sublunary  things  are  subject  to  generation  and 


PHILOSOPHY  OP  NATURAL  MAGIC.  119 

corruption,  and  that  also  there  are  the  same  things  in 
the  Celestial  World,  but  after  a  celestial  manner,  as 
also  in  the  Intellectual  World,  but  in  a  far  more  per- 
fect and  better  fashion  and  manner,  and  in  the  most 
perfect  manner  of  all  in  the  Exemplary.  And,  after 
this  course,  that  every  inferior  thing  should,  in  its 
kind,  answer  its  superior  thing,  and  through  this  the 
Supreme  Itself,  and  receive  from  heaven  that  celestial 
power  they  call  the  quintessence,  or  the  Spirit  of  the 
World,  or  the  Middle  Nature;  and  from  the  Intellect- 
ual World  a  spiritual  and  enlivening  virtue,  transcend- 
ing all  qualities  whatsoever;  and,  lastly,  from  the 
Exemplary,  or  original.  World,  through  the  mediation 
of  the  other,  according  to  their  degree  receive  the 
original  power  of  the  whole  perfection.  Hence,  every 
thing  may  be  aptly  reduced  from  these  Inferiors  to  the 
Stars,  from  the  Stars  to  their  Intelligences,  and  from 
thence  to  the  First  Cause  itself — from  the  series  and 
order  whereof  all  Magic  and  all  Occult  Philosophy 
flows:  For  every  day  some  natural  thing  is  drawn  by 
art,  and  some  divine  thing  is  drawn  by  Nature,  which, 
the  Egyptians,  seeing,  called  Nature  a  Magicianess 
(^.  e.),  the  very  Magical  power  itself,  in  the  attracting 
of  like  by  like,  and  of  suitable  things  by  suitable. 

Now,  such  kind  of  attractions,  by  the  mutual  corre- 
spondency of  things  amongst  themselves,  of  superiors 
w^th  inferiors,  the  Grecians  called  sympathies.  So  the 
earth  agrees  with  cold  water,  the  water  with  moist 
air,  the  air  with  fire,  the  fire  with  the  heaven  in  water; 
neither  is  fire  mixed  with  water,  but  by  air;  nor  the  air 
with  the  earth,  but  by  water.  So  neither  is  the  soul 
united  to  the  body,  but  by  the  spirit;  nor  the  under- 
standing to  the  spirit,  but  by  the  soul.  So  we  see 
that  when  Nature  hath  framed  the  body  of  an  infant, 
by  this  very  preparative  she  presently  fetcheth  its 
spirit  from  the  Universe.     This  spirit  is  its  instrument 


120  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

to  obtain  of  God  its  understanding  and  mind  in  its 
soul  and  body,  as  in  wood  the  dryness  is  fitted  to 
receive  oil,  and  the  oil,  being  imbibed,  is  food  for  the 
fire,  the  fire  is  the  vehicle  of  light.  By  these  exam- 
ples you  see  how  by  some  certain  natural  and  artificial 
preparations  we  are  in  a  capacity  to  receive  certain 
celestial  gifts  from  above.  For  stones  and  metals 
have  a  correspondency  with  herbs,  herbs  with  animals, 
animals  with  the  heavens,  the  heavens  with  Intelli- 
gences, and  they  with  divine  properties  and  attributes 
and  with  God  himself,  after  whose  image  and  likeness 
all  things  are  created. 

Now,  the  first  image  of  God  is  the  world;  of  the 
world,  man;  of  man,  beasts;  of  beasts,  the  zeophyton 
or  zoophyte  {i.  e.),  half  animal  and  half  plant;  of  the 
j  zeophyton,  plants;  of  plants,  metals;  and  of  metals, 
I  stones.  And,  again,  in  things  spiritual,  the  plant 
agrees  with  a  brute  in  vegetation,  a  brute  with  a  man 
in  sense,  man  with  an  angel  in  understanding,  and  an 
angel  with  God  in  immortality.  Divinity  is  annexed 
to  the  mind,  the  mind  to  the  intellect,  the  intellect  to 
the  intention,  the  intention  to  the  imagination,  the 
imagination  to  the  senses,  and  the  senses,  at  last,  to 
things.  For  this  is  the  band  and  continuity  of  Nature, 
that  all  superior  virtue  doth  flow  through  every  infe- 
rior with  a  long  and  continued  series,  dispersing  its 
.  rays  even  to  the  very  last  things;  and  inferiors, 
I  through  their  superiors,  come  to  the  very  Supreme  of 
all.  For  so  inferiors  are  successively  joined  to  their 
superiors,  that  there  proceeds  an  influence  from  their 
head,  the  First  Cause,  as  a  certain  string  stretched  out 
to  the  lowermost  things  of  all;  of  which  string,  if  one 
end  be  touched  the  whole  doth  presently  shake,  and 
such  a  touch  doth  sound  to  the  other  end;  and  at  the  mo- 
tion of  an  inferior  the  superior  also  is  moved,  to  which 
the  other  doth  answer,  as  strings  in  a  lute  well  tuned. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  121 

CHAPTER  XXXVIII. 

How  we  may  Draio  not  only  Celestial  and  Vital  but  also 
certain  Intellectual  and  Divine  Gifts  from  Above. 

Magicians  teach  that  celestial  gifts  may,  through 
inferiors  being-  conformable  to  superiors,  be  drawn 
down  by  opportune  influences  of  the  heaven;  and  so, 
also,  by  these  celestial  gifts,  the  celestial  angels  (as 
they  are  servants  of  the  stars)  may  be  procured  and 
conveyed  to  us.  lamblichus,  Proclus  and  Synesius, 
with  the  whole  school  of  Platonists,  confirm  that  not 
only  celestial  and  vital  but  also  certain  intellectual, 
angelical  and  divine  gifts  may  be  received  from  above 
by  some  certain  matters  having  a  natural  power  of 
divinity  {i.  e.),  which  have  a  natural  correspondency 
with  the  superiors,  being  rightly  received  and  oppor- 
tunely gathered  together  according  to  the  rules  of 
natural  philosophy  and  astronomy.  And  Mercurius  || 
Trismegistus  writes,  that  an  Image,  rightly  made  of  i, 
certain  proper  things,  appropriated  to  any  one  certain 
angel  will  presently  be  animated  by  that  angel.  Of 
the  same,  also,  Austin  (St.  Augustine)  makes  mention 
in  his  eighth  book,  De  Civitate  Dei  (the  City  of  God). 
For  this  is  the  harmony  of  the  world,  that  things 
supercelestial  be  drawn  down  by  the  celestial,  and 
the  supernatural  by  those  natural,  because  there  is 
One  Operative  Virtue  that  is  diffused  through  all 
kinds  of  things;  by  which  virtue,  indeed,  as  manifest 
things  are  produced  out  of  occult  causes,  so  a  magician 
doth  make  use  of  things  manifest  to  draw  forth  things 
that  are  occult,  viz.,  through  the  rays  of  the  Stars, 
through  fumes,  lights,  sounds,  and  natural  things 
which  are  agreeable  to  those  celestial,  in  which,  aside 
from  their  corporeal  qualities,  there  is,  also,  a  kind  of 
reason,  sense  and  harmony,  and  incorporeal  and  divine 
measures  and  orders. 


122  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

So  we  read  that  the  ancients  were  wont  often  to 
receive  some  divine  and  wonderful  thing  by  certain 
natural  things:  So  the  stone  that  is  bred  in  the  apple 
of  the  eye  of  a  civet  cat,  held  under  the  tongue  of  a 
man,  is  said  to  make  him  to  divine  or  prophesy;  the 
same  is  selenite,  the  moon-stone,  reported  to  do.  So 
they  say  that  the  Images  of  Gods  may  be  called  up  by 
the  stone  called  anchitis;*  and  that  the  ghosts  of  the 
dead  may  be,  being  called  up,  kept  up  by  the  stone 
synochitis.  The  like  doth  the  herb  aglauphotis  do, 
which  is  also  called  marmorites,  growing  upon  the 
marbles  of  Arabia,  as  saith  Pliny,  and  the  which 
magicians  use.  Also  there  is  an  herb  called  rhean- 
gelida  with  which  magicians,  drinking  of,  can  proph- 
esy. Moreover,  there  are  some  herbs  by  which  the 
dead  are  raised  to  life;  whence  Xanthus  the  historian 
tells,  that  with  a  certain  herb  called  balus,  a  young 
dragon  being  killed,  was  made  alive  again;  also,  that 
by  the  same  herb  a  certain  man  of  Tillum,  whom  a 
dragon  killed,  was  restored  to  life;  and  Juba  reports, 
that  in  Arabia  a  certain  man  was  by  a  certain  herb 
restored  to  life.  But  whether  or  no  any  such  things 
can  be  done,  indeed,  upon  man  by  the  virtue  of  herbs 
or  any  other  natural  thing,  we  shall  discourse  in  the 
following  chapter.  Now,  it  is  certain  and  manifest 
that  such  things  can  be  done  upon  other  animals.  So 
if  flies,  that  are  drov/ned,  be  put  into  warm  ashes  they 
revive.  And  bees,  being  drowned,  do  in  like  matter 
recover  life  in  the  juice  of  the  herb  catnip;  and  eels, 
being  dead  for  want  of  water,  if  w^ith  their  whole 
bodies  they  be  put  under  mud  in  vinegar  and  the  blood 
of  a  vulture  being  put  to  them,  will  all  of  them,  in  a 
few   days,   recover   life.     They   say  that   if   the   fish 


*Tliis  was,  in  all  probability,  some  mineral  that  resembled  Dr.  Dee's  cel- 
ebrated stone,  wbicb  was  cannel-coal,  a  black  mineral  coal  suflaciently  hard 
to  be  cut  and  polished,  and  used  by  him  as  a  Magic  Mirror. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  123 

echeneis  be  cut  into  pieces  and  cast  into  the  sea,  the 
parts  will  within  a  little  time  come  tog-ether  and  live. 
Also  we  know  that  the  pelican  doth  restore  her  young 
to  life,  being  killed,  with  her  own  blood. 


CHAPTER  XXXIX. 

That  loe  may^  by  some  certain  Matters  of  the  Worlds  Stir 
Up  the  Gods  of  the  World  and  their  Ministering  Spirits. 

No  MAN  is  ignorant  that  evil  spirits,  by  evil  and 
profane  arts,  may  be  raised  up  as  Psellus  saith  sorcer- 
ers are  wont  to  do,  whom  most  detestable  and  abomi- 
nable filthiness  did  follow  and  accompany,  such  as 
were  in  times  past  in  the  sacrifices  of  Priapus,  and  in 
the  worship,  of  the  idol  which  was  called  Panor,  to 
whom  they  did  sacrifice  with  shameful  nakedness. 
Neither  to  these  is  that  unlike  (if  it  be  true  and  not  a 
fable)  which  is  read  concerning  the  detestable  heresy 
of  old  churchmen,  and  like  to  these  are  manifest  in 
witches  and  mischievous  women,  which  wickednesses 
the  foolish  dotage  of  women  is  subject  to  fall  into. 
By  these,  and  such  as  these,  evil  spirits  are  raised. 
As  a  wicked  spirit  spake  once  to  John  of  one  Cynops, 
a  sorcerer:  "All  the  power,"  saith  he,  "of  Satan 
dwells  there;  and  he  is  entered  into  a  confederacy  with 
all  the  principalities  together,  and  likewise  we  with 
him;  and  Cynops  obeys  us  and  we,  again,  obey  him." 
Again,  on  the  contrary  side,  no  man  is  ignorant  that 
supercelestial  angels  or  spirits  may  be  gained  by  us 
through  good  works,  a  pure  mind,  secret  prayers, 
devout  humiliation,  and  the  like.  Let  no  man,  there- 
fore, doubt  that  in  like  manner  by  some  certain  mat- 
ters of  the  world,  the  gods  of  the  world  may  be  raised 
by  us,  or,  at  least,  the  ministering  spirits,  or  servants 
of  these  gods,  and,  as  Mercurius  saith,  the  airy  spirits 


124  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

\  (not  supercelestial,  but  less  hig^her).  So  we  read  that 
the  ancient  priests  made  statues  and  images,  foretell- 
ing things  to  come,  and  infused  into  them  the  Spirits 
of  the  Stars,  which  were  not  kept  there  by  constraint 
in  some  certain  matters,  but  rejoiced  in  them,  viz.,  as 
acknowledging  such  kinds  of  matter  to  be  suitable  to 
them,  they  do  always  and  willingly  abide  in  them,  and 
speak  and  do  wonderful  things  by  them;  no  otherwise 

'  than  evil  spirits  are  wont  to  do  when  they  possess 
men's  bodies. 


CHAPTER  XL. 

Of  Bindings;  what  Sort  tJiey  are  of,  and  in  what  Ways  they 

are  wont  to  be  Done. 

We  have  spoken  concerning  the  virtues  and  wonder- 
ful efficacy  of  natural  things.  It  remains  now  that  we 
understand  a  thing  of  great  wonderment — and  it  is  a 
binding  of  men  into  love  or  hatred,  sickness  or  health, 
or  such  like.  Also  the  binding  of  thieves  and  robbers, 
that  they  cannot  steal  in  any  place;  the  binding  of 
merchants,  that  they  cannot  buy  or  sell  in  any  place; 
the  binding  of  an  army,  that  they  cannot  pass  over 
any  bound;  the  binding  of  ships,  that  no  winds,  though 
never  so  strong,  shall  be  able  to  carry  them  out  of  the 
haven.  Also  the  binding  of  a  mill,  that  it  can  by  no 
force  whatsoever  be  turned  round;  the  binding  of  a 
cistern  or  fountain,  that  the  water  cannot  be  drawn  up 
out  of  them;  the  binding  of  the  ground,  that  it  cannot 
bring  forth  fruit;  the  binding  of  any  place,  that  noth- 
ing can  be  built  upon  it;  the  binding  of  fire,  that 
though  it  be  never  so  strong,  can  burn  no  combustible 
thing  that  is  put  to  it.  Also  the  bindings  of  lightnings 
and  tempests,  that  they  shall  do  no  hurt;  the  binding 
of  dogs,  that  they  cannot  bark;  the  binding  of  birds 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  125 

and  wild  beasts,  that  they  shall  not  be  able  to  fly  or 
run  away.  And  such  like  as  these,  which  are  scarce 
credible,  yet  often  known  by  experience.  Now,  there 
are  such  kind  of  bindings  as  these  made  by  sorceries, 
collyries,  unguents,  and  love  potions;  by  binding  to  or 
hanging  up  of  things;  by  rings,  by  charms,  by  strong 
imaginations  and  passions,  by  images  and  characters, 
by  enchantments  and  imprecations,  by  lights,  by  num- 
bers, by  sounds,  by  words,  and  names,  invocations, 
and  sacrifices;  by  swearing,  conjuring,  consecrations, 
devotions,  and  by  divers  superstitions,  and  observa- 
tions, and  such  like. 


CHAPTER  XLI. 

Of  Sorceries,  and  their  Power. 

The  force  of  sorceries  is  reported  to  be  so  great  that 
they  are  believed  to  be  able  to  subvert,  consume  and 
change  all  inferior  things,  according  Virgil's  muse: 

Moeris  for  me  these  herbs  in  Pontus  chose, 
And  curious  drugs,  for  there  great  plenty  grows; 
I,  many  times,  tvith  these  have  Moeris  spied 
Changed  to  a  ivolfe,  and  in  the  ivoods  to  hide; 
From  Sepulchres  ivould  souls  departed  charm. 
And  Corn  J)ear  standing  from  another^ s  Farm. 

Also,  in  another  place,  concerning  the  companions 
of  Ulysses,  whom 

The  cruel  Goddess,  Circe,  there  invests 

With  fierce  aspects,  and  changed  to  savage  Ijeasts. 

And,  a  little  after, 

When  love  from  Picus,  Cerce  could  not  gaine. 
Him,  with  her  charming -laand,  and  hellish  hane^ 


126  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

Changed  to  a  bird,  and  spots  his  speckled  icings 
With  sundry  colors 

Now,  there  are  some  kinds  of  these  sorceries  men.- 
tioned  by  Lucan  concerning  that  sorceress,  Thessala, 
calling  up  ghosts,  where  he  saith: 

Here  all  Nature's  products  unfortunate: 
Foam  of  mad  Dogs,  which  waters  fear  and  hate; 
Guts  of  the  Lynx;  Hyena's,  knot  imbred; 
The  marrow  of  a  Hart  with  Serpents  fed 
Were  not  tvanting;  no,  nor  the  sea  Lamprey, 
Which  stops  the  ships;  nor  yet  the  Dragon's  eye. 

And  such  as  Apuleius  tells  of  concerning  Pamphila, 
that  sorceress,  endeavoring  to  procure  love;  to  whom 
Fotis,  a  certain  maid,  brought  the  hairs  of  a  goat  (cut 
off  from  a  bag  or  bottle  made  with  the  skin  thereof) 
instead  of  Baeotius'  (a  young  man)  hair.  Now  she, 
saith  Apuleius,  being  out  of  her  wits  for  the  young 
man,  goeth  up  to  the  tiled  roof  and,  in  the  upper  part 
thereof,  makes  a  great  hole  open  to  all  the  oriental 
and  other  aspects,  and  most  fit  for  these  her  arts,  and 
there  privately  worships;  having  before  furnished  her 
mournful  house  with  suitable  furniture,  with  all  kinds 
of  spices,  with  plates  of  iron  with  strange  words 
engraven  upon  them,  with  parts  of  sterns  of  ships  that 
were  cast  away  and  much  lamented,  and  with  divers 
members  of  buried  carcasses  cast  abroad — here  noses 
and  fingers,  there  the  fleshy  nails  of  those  that  were 
hanged,  and,  in  another  place,  the  blood  of  them  that 
were  murdered,  and  their  skulls,  mangled  with  the 
teeth  of  wild  beasts.  Then  she  offers  sacrifices  (their 
enchanted  entrails  lying  panting),  and  sprinkles  them 
with  divers  kinds  of  liquors;  sometimes  with  fountain 
water,  sometimes  with  cows'  milk,  sometimes  with 
mountain  honey,  and  mead.     Then  she  ties  those  hairs 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.    •  127 

into  knots,  and  lays  them  on  the  fire,  with  divers 
odors,  to  be  burnt.  Then  presently,  with  an  irresist- 
ible power  of  magic,  and  blind  force  of  the  g"ods,  the 
bodies  of  those  whose  hairs  did  smoke,  and  crash,  did 
assume  the  spirit  of  a  man,  and  feel,  and  hear,  and 
walk,  and  come  whither  the  stink  of  their  hair  led 
them,  and,  instead  of  Baeotius,  the  young  man,  come 
skipping  and  leaping  with  joy  and  love  into  the  house. 
Austin  also  reports  that  he  heard  of  some  women  sor- 
ceresses, that  were  so  well  versed  in  these  kind  of  arts, 
that,  by  giving  cheese  to  men,  they  could  presently 
turn  them  into  working  cattle  and,  the  work  being 
done,  restored  them  into  men  again. 


CHAPTER  XLII. 

Of  the  Wonderful  Virtues  of  some  kinds  of  Sorceries. 

Now  I  will  shew  you  what  some  of  the  Sorceries 
are,  that  by  the  example  of  these  there  may  be  a  way 
opened  for  the  consideration  of  the  whole  subject  of 
them.  Of  these,  therefore,  the  first  is  the  catamenia, 
which,  how  much  power  it  hath  in  sorcery,  we  will 
now  consider;  for,  as  they  say,  if  it  comes  over  new 
wine  it  makes  it  sour,  and  if  it  doth  but  touch  the 
vine,  it  spoils  it  forever;  and,  by  its  very  touch,  it 
makes  all  plants  and  trees  barren,  and  they  that  be 
newly  set  to  die;  it  burns  up  all  the  herbs  in  the  gar- 
den and  makes  fruit  fall  off  from  the  trees;  it  darkens 
the  brightness  of  a  looking-glass,  dulls  the  edges  of 
knives  and  razors,  and  dims  the  beauty  of  ivory.  It 
makes  iron  presently  rusty;  it  makes  brass  rust  and 
smell  very  strong;  it  makes  dogs  mad  if  they  do  but 
taste  of  it,  and  if  they,  being  thus  mad,  shall  bite  any 
one,  that  wound  is  incurable.  It  kills  whole  hives  of 
bees,  and  drives  them  from  the  hives  that  are  but 


128  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

touched  with  it.  It  makes  linen  black  that  is  boiled 
with  it;  it  makes  mares  cast  their  foal  if  they  do  but 
touch  it,  and  makes  asses  barren  as  long  as  they  eat 
of  the  corn  that  hath  been  touched  with  it.  The  ashes 
of  catamenious  clothes,  if  they  be  cast  upon  purple 
garments  that  are  to  be  washed,  change  the  color  of 
them,  and  takes  away  colors  from  flowers.  They  say 
that  it  drives  away  tertian  and  quartan  agues  if  it  be 
put  into  the  wool  of  a  black  ram,  and  tied  up  in  a  sil- 
ver bracelet;  as,  also,  if  the  soles  of  the  patient's  feet 
be  anointed  therewith,  and  especially  if  it  be  done  by 
the  woman  herself,  the  patient  not  knowing  of  it. 
Moreover,  it  cures  the  fits  of  the  falling  sickness;  but 
most  especially  it  cures  them  that  are  afraid  of  water, 
or  drink  after  they  are  bitten  with  a  mad  dog,  if  only 
a  catamenious  cloth  be  put  under  the  cup.  Besides, 
they  report,  that  if  catamenious  persons  shall  walk, 
being  nude,  about  the  standing  corn,  they  make  all 
cankers,  worms,  beetles,  flies,  and  all  hurtful  things, 
to  fall  off  from  the  corn;  but  they  must  take  heed  that 
they  do  it  before  sun-rising,  or  else  they  will  make  the 
corn  to  wither.  Also,  they  say,  they  are  able  to  expel 
hail,  tempests,  and  lightnings,  more  of  which  Pliny 
makes  mention  of.  Know  this,  that  they  are  a  greater 
poison  if  they  happen  in  the  decrease  of  the  Moon, 
and  yet  much  greater  if  they  happen  betwixt  the 
decrease  and  change  of  the  Moon;  but  if  they  happen 
in  the  eclipse  of  the  Moon  or  the  Sun,  they  are  an 
incurable  poison.  But  they  are  of  greatest  force  of 
all  when  they  happen  in  the  first  early  years,  even  in 
the  years  of  virginitj^,  for  if  they  do  but  touch  the 
posts  of  the  house  there  can  no  mischief  take  effect  in 
it.  Also,  they  say,  that  the  threads  of  any  garment 
touched  therewith  cannot  be  burnt,  and  if  they  be  cast 
into  the  fire  it  will  spread  no  further.  Also,  it  is  said, 
that  the  root  of  peony,  being  given  with  castor  oil 


PHII.OSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  129 

smeared  over,  using  the  catamenious  cloth,  cureth  the 
falling  sickness.  Moreover,  if  the  stomach  of  a  hart 
be  burnt  or  roasted,  and  to  it  be  put  a  perfuming  made 
with  a  catamenious  cloth,  it  will  make  cross-bows  use- 
less for  the  killing  of  any  game.  The  hairs  of  a  cata- 
menious person,  put  under  compost,  breed  serpents; 
and,  if  they  be  burnt,  will  drive  away  serpents  with 
their  smell.  So  great  a  poisonous  force  is  in  them 
that  they  are  poison  to  poisonous  creatures. 

There  is,  also,  hippomanes,  which  amongst  sorceries 
is  not  the  least  taken  notice  of,  and  it  is  a  little  ven- 
emous  piece  of  flesh  as  big  as  a  fig,  and  black,  which 
is  in  the  forehead  of  a  colt  newly  foaled,  which  unless 
the  mare  herself  presently  eat,  she  will  never  after  love 
her  foal  or  let  it  suckle.  And  for  this  cause  they  say 
there  is  a  most  wonderful  power  in  it  to  procure  love, 
if  it  be  powdered  and  drank  in  a  cup  with  the  blood  of 
him  that  is  in  love.  There  is  also  another  sorcery  of 
the  same  name,  hippomanes,  a  venemous  humor  of  the 
mare  in  her  mating  season,  of  which  Virgil  makes 
mention  when  he  sings: 

Hence  comes  that  poison  which  the  Shepherds  call 
Hippomanes,  and  from,  the  Mares  doth  fall, 
The  ivoeful  hane  which  cruel  stepdames  use, 
And  with  a  charme  ^mongst  powerful  drugs  infuse. 

Of  this  doth  Juvenal,  the  satirist,  make  mention: 

Hippomanes,  poysons  that  boyled  are,  and  charmes 
Are  given  to  Sons  in  lata,  with  such  like  harmes. 

Apollonius,  also,  in  his  Argonautica,  makes  mention 
of  the  herb  of  Prometheus,  which  he  saith  groweth 
from  corrupt  blood  dropping  upon  the  earth,  whilst 
the  vulture  was  gnawing  upon  the  liver  of  Prometheus 
upon  the  hill  Caucasus.  The  flower  of  this  herb,  he 
saith,  is  like  saffron,  having  a  double  stalk  hanging 


130  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

out,  one  further  than  the  other  the  length  of  a  cubit; 
the  root  under  the  earth,  as  flesh  newly  cut,  sends 
forth  a  blackish  juice  as  it  were  of  a  beech,  with 
which,  saith  he,  if  any  one  shall,  after  he  hath  per- 
formed his  devotion  to  Proserpina,  smear  over  his 
body,  he  cannot  be  hurt  either  with  sword  or  fire. 
Also  Saxo  Gramaticus  writes,  that  there  was  a  certain 
man,  called  Froton,  who  had  a  garment  which,  when 
he  had  put  on,  was  such  he  could  not  be  hurt  with  the 
point  or  edge  of  any  weapon.  The  civet  cat  also 
abounds  with  sorceries,  for,  as  Pliny  reports,  the  posts 
of  a  door  being  touched  with  her  blood,  the  arts  of 
jugglers  and  sorcerers  are  so  invalid  that  the  gods 
cannot  be  called  up,  and  will  by  no  means  be  per- 
suaded to  talk  with  them.  Also,  that  they  that  are 
anointed  with  the  ashes  of  the  ankle-bone  of  her  left 
foot,  being  decocted  with  the  blood  of  a  weasel,  shall 
become  odious  to  all.  The  same,  also,  is  done  with 
the  eye,  being  decocted.  Also,  it  is  said,  that  the 
straight-gut  is  administered  against  the  injustice  and 
corruption  of  princes  and  great  men  in  power,  and  for 
success  of  petitions,  and  to  conduce  to  the  ending  of 
suits  and  controversies,  if  any  one  hath  never  so  little 
of  it  about  him;  and  that  if  it  be  bound  unto  the  left 
arm,  it  is  such  a  perfect  charm  that  if  any  man  do  but 
look  upon  a  woman,  it  w^ill  make  her  follow  him  pres- 
ently; and  that  the  skin  of  the  civet  cat's  forehead 
doth  withstand  bewitchings.  They  say,  also,  that  the 
blood  of  a  basilisk,  which  they  call  the  blood  of  Sat- 
urn, hath  such  great  force  in  sorcery,  that  it  procures 
for  him  that  carries  it  about  him  good  success  of  his 
petitions  from  great  men  in  power,  and  of  his  prayers 
from  God,  and  also  remedies  of  diseases,  and  grant  of 
any  privilege.  They  say,  also,  that  a  tyke,  if  it  be 
pulled  out  of  the  left  ear  of  a  dog,  and  if  be  it  is  alto- 
gether black,  hath  great  virtue  in  the  prognosticating 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  131 

of  life,  for  if  the  sick  party  shall  answer  him  that 
brought  it  in,  and  who,  standing  at  his  feet,  shall  ask 
of  him  concerning  his  disease,  there  is  certain  hope  of 
life;  and  that  he  shall  die  if  he  make  no  answer. 

They  say,  also,  that  a  stone  that  is  bit  with  a  mad 
dog  hath  power  to  cause  discord,  if  it  be  put  in  drink, 
and  that  he  shall  not  be  barked  at  by  dogs  that  puts 
the  tongue  of  a  dog  in  his  shoe  under  his  great  toe, 
especially  if  the  herb  of  the  same  name,  viz.,  hound's- 
tongue,  be  joined  with  it.  And  that  a  membrane  of 
the  secondines  of  a  dog  doth  the  same;  and  that  dogs 
will  shun  him  that  hath  a  dog's  heart.  And  Pliny 
reports  that  there  is  a  red  toad  that  lives  in  briers  and 
brambles,  and  is  full  of  sorceries  and  doth  wonderful 
things,  for  the  little  bone  which  is  in  his  left  side, 
being  cast  into  cold  water,  makes  it  presently  very 
hot;  by  which  also  the  rage  of  dogs  is  restrained,  and 
their  love  is  procured  if  it  be  put  in  their  drink;  and, 
if  it  be  bound  to  any  one,  it  stirreth  up  desire.  On  the 
contrary,  the  little  bone  which  is  on  the  right  side 
makes  hot  water  cold,  and  that  it  can  never  be  hot 
again  unless  that  be  taken  out;  also  it  is  said  to  cure 
quartans  if  it  be  bound  to  the  sick  in  a  snake's  skin, 
as  also  all  other  fevers,  and  to  restrain  love  and  desire. 
And  that  the  spleen  and  heart  is  an  effectual  remedy 
against  the  poisons  of  the  said  toad.  Thus  much  Pliny 
writes.  Also,  it  is  said,  that  the  sword  with  which  a 
man  is  slain  hath  wonderful  power  in  sorceries.  For 
if  the  snaffle  of  the  bridle,  or  spurs,  be  made  of  it, 
they  say  that  with  these  any  horse,  though  never  so 
wild,  may  be  tamed  and  gentled;  and  that  if  a  horse 
should  be  shod  with  shoes  made  of  it,  he  would  be 
most  swift  and  fleet,  and  never,  though  never  so  hard 
rode,  tire.  But  yet  they  will  that  some  certain  char- 
acters and  names  should  be  written  upon  it.  They 
say,  also,  if  any  man  shall  dip  a  sword,  wherewith  men 


132  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

were  beheaded,  in  wine,  and  the  sick  drink  thereof,  he 
shall  be  cured  of  his  quartan.  They  say,  also,  that  a 
cup  of  liquor  being  made  with  the  brains  of  a  bear, 
and  drank  out  of  the  skull,  shall  make  him  that  drinks 
it  to  be  as  fierce  and  as  raging  as  a  bear,  and  think 
himself  to  be  changed  into  a  bear,  and  judge  all  things 
he  sees  to  be  bears,  and  so  to  continue  in  that  madness 
until  the  force  of  that  draught  shall  be  dissolved,  no 
other  distemper  being  all  this  while  perceived  in  him. 


CHAPTER  XLIII. 

Of  Perfumes  or  Suffumigations;  their  Manner  and  Foiver. 

Some  suffumigations,  also,  or  perfumings,  that  are 
proper  to  the  Stars,  are  of  great  force  for  the  oppor- 
tune receiving  of  celestial  gifts  under  the  rays  of  the 
Stars,  in  as  much  as  they  do  strongly  work  upon  the 
air  and  breath.  For  our  breath  is  very  much  changed 
by  such  kind  of  vapors,  if  both  vapors  be  of  another 
like.  The  air,  also,  being  through  the  said  vapors 
easily  moved,  or  affected  with  the  qualities  of  inferiors 
or  those  celestial,  daily;  and,  quickly  penetrating  our 
breast  and  vitals,  doth  wonderfully  reduce  us  to  the 
like  qualities.  Wherefore,  suffumigations  are  wont  to 
be  used  by  them  that  are  about  to  soothsay  or  predict 
for  to  affect  their  fancy  or  conception;  which  suffumi- 
gations, indeed,  being  duly  appropriated  to  any  certain 
deities,  do  fit  us  to  receive  divine  inspiration.  So  they 
say  that  fumes  made  with  linseed,  flea-bane  seed,  roots 
of  violets,  and  parsley,  doth  make  one  to  foresee  things 
to  come  and  doth  conduce  to  prophesying.  Let  no 
man  wonder  how  great  things  suffumigations  can  do  in 
the  air,  especially  when  he  shall  with  Porphyrins  con- 
sider that  by  certain  vapors,  exhaling  from  proper 
suffumigations,   airy  spirits  are  presently  raised,   as 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  133 

also  thunderings  and  lig-htnings,  and  such  like  things. 
As  the  liver  of  a  chameleon,  being  burnt  on  the  top  of 
the  house,  doth,  as  is  manifest,  raise  showers  and 
lightnings.  In  like  manner  the  head  and  throat  of  the 
chameleon,  if  they  be  burnt  with  oaken  wood,  cause 
storms  and  lightnings.  There  are  also  suffumigations 
under  opportune  inliuences  of  the  Stars  that  make  the 
images  of  spirits  forthwith  appear  in  the  air  or  else- 
where. So,  they  say,  that  if  of  coriander,  smallage^ 
henbane,  and  hemlock,  be  made  a  fume,  that  spirits 
w^ill  presently  come  together;  hence  the}^  are  called 
spirits'  herbs.  Also,  it  is  said,  that  a  fume  made  of 
the  root  of  the  reedy  herb  sagapen,  with  the  juice  of 
hemlock  and  henbane,  and  the  herb  tapsus  barbatus, 
red  Sanders,  and  black  poppy,  makes  spirits  and 
strange  shapes  appear;  and  if  smallage  be  added  to 
them,  the  fume  chaseth  aw^ay  spirits  from  any  place 
and  destroys  their  visions.  In  like  manner,  a  fume 
made  of  calamint,  peony,  mints,  and  palma  christi, 
drives  away  all  evil  spirits  and  vain  imaginations. 

Moreover,  it  is  said  that  by  certain  fumes  certain 
animals  are  gathered  together  and  also  put  to  flight, 
as  Pliny  mentions  concerning  the  stone  liparis,  that 
with  the  fume  thereof  all  beasts  are  called  out.  So 
the  bones  in  the  upper  part  of  the  throat  of  a  hart, 
being  burnt,  gather  all  the  serpents  together;  but  the 
horn  of  the  hart,  being  burnt,  doth  with  its  fume  chase 
them  all  aw^ay.  The  same  doth  a  fume  of  the  feathers 
of  peacocks.  Also,  the  lungs  of  an  ass,  being  burnt, 
puts  all  poisonous  things  to  flight;  the  fume  of  the 
burnt  hoof  of  a  horse  drives  away  mice;  the  same  doth 
the  hoof  of  a  mule;  with  which,  also,  if  it  be  the  hoof 
of  the  left  foot,  flies  are  driven  away.  And,  they  say, 
if  a  house  or  any  place  be  smoked  with  the  gall  of  a 
cuttle-fish,  made  into  a  confection  with  red  storax, 
roses,  and  lignum-aloes,  or  lignaloes,  and  if  then  there 


134  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

be  some  sea-water,  or  blood,  cast  into  that  place,  the 
whole  house  will  seem  to  be  full  of  water  or  blood; 
and  if  some  earth  of  plowed  g^round  be  cast  there,  the 
earth  will  seem  to  quake.  Now,  such  kinds  of  vapors, 
we  must  conceive,  do  infect  any  body  and  infuse  a  vir- 
tue into  it,  which  doth  continue  long,  even  as  any  con- 
tagious or  poisonous  vapor  of  the  pestilence,  being- 
kept  for  two  years  in  the  wall  of  a  house  infects  the 
inhabitants,  and  as  the  contagion  of  pestilence,  or 
leprosy,  lying  hid  in  a  garment,  doth  long  after  infect 
him  that  wears  it.  Therefore  were  certain  suffumiga- 
tions  used  to  affect  images,  rings,  and  such  like  instru- 
ments of  magic  and  hidden  treasures,  and,  as  Porphy- 
rins saith,  very  effectually.  So,  they  say,  if  any  one 
shall  hide  gold  or  silver,  or  any  other  precious  thing, 
the  Moon  being  in  conjunction  with  the  Sun,  and  shall 
fume  the  hiding  place  with  coriander,  saffron,  henbane, 
smallage,  and  black  poppy,  of  each  a  like  quantity, 
bruised  together,  and  tempered  with  the  juice  of  hem- 
lock, that  which  is  so  hid  shall  never  be  found  or 
taken  away;  and  that  spirits  shall  continually  keep  it, 
and  if  any  one  shall  endeavor  to  take  it  away  he  shall 
be  hurt  by  them  and  shall  fall  into  a  frenzy. 

And  Hermes  saith  that  there  is  nothing  like  the 
fume  of  spermaceti  for  the  raising  of  spirits.  Where- 
fore, if  a  fume  be  made  of  that  and  lignum-aloes,  red 
storax,  pepper-wort,  musk,  and  saffron,  all  tempered 
together,  with  the  blood  of  a  lapwing,  it  will  quickly 
gather  airy  spirits  together,  and  if  it  be  used  about 
the  graves  of  the  dead,  it  gathers  together  spirits  and 
the  ghosts  of  the  dead. 

So,  as  often  as  we  direct  any  work  to  the  Sun,  we 
must  make  suffumigations  with  Solary  things,  and  if 
to  the  Moon,  with  Lunary  things,  and  so  of  the  rest. 
And  we  must  know  that  as  there  is  a  contrariety  and 
enmity  in  stars  and  spirits,  so  also  in  suffumigations 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  135 

unto  the  same.  So  there  is  also  a  contrariety  betwixt 
lignum  aloes  and  sulphur,  frankincense,  and  quick- 
silver; therefore  spirits  that  are  raised  by  the  fume  of 
lignum  aloes  are  allayed  by  the  burning  of  sulphur. 
As  Proclus  gives  an  example  of  a  spirit,  which  was 
wont  to  appear  in  the  form  of  a  lion,  but,  by  the  set- 
ting of  a  cock  before  it,  vanished  away  because  there 
is  a  contrariety  betwixt  a  cock  and  a  lion,  and 'so  the 
like  consideration  and  practice  is  to  be  observed  con- 
cerning such  like  things. 


CHAPTER  XLIV. 

The  Composition  of  some  Fumes  approjjriated  to  the  Planets. 

We  make  a  suffumigation  for  the  Sun  in  this  manner, 
viz. ,  of  saffron,  ambergris,  musk,  lignum  aloes,  lignum 
balsam,  the  fruit  of  the  laurel,  cloves,  myrrh,  and 
frankincense;  all  which  being  bruised  and  mixt  in  such 
a  proportion  as  may  make  a  sweet  odor,  must  be  incor- 
porated with  the  brain  of  an  eagle,  or  the  blood  of  a 
white  cock,  after  the  manner  of  pills  or  troches. 

For  the  Moon  we  make  a  suffumigation  of  the  head 
of  a  dried  frog,  the  eyes  of  a  bull,  the  seed  of  white 
poppy,  frankincense,  and  camphor;  which  must  be 
incorporated  with  catamenia,  or  the  blood  of  a  goose. 

For  Saturn,  take  black  poppy  seed,  henbane,  root  of 
mandrake,  the  loadstone,  and  myrrh,  and  make  them 
up  with  the  brain  of  a  cat  or  the  blood  of  a  bat. 

For  Jupiter,  take  the  seed  of  ash,  lignum  aloes,  sto- 
rax,  the  gum  benjamin  or  benzoin,  the  lazuli  stone, 
and  the  tops  of  the  feathers  of  a  peacock;  and  incor- 
porate them  with  the  blood  of  a  stork,  or  a  swallow, 
or  the  brain  of  a  hart. 

For  Mars,  take  euphorbium,  bdellium,  gum  ammo- 
niac, the  roots  of  both  hellebores,  the  loadstone,  and 
a  little  sulphur;   and  incorporate  them  all  with  the 


136  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

brain  of  a  hart,  the  blood  of  a  man  and  the  blood  of  a 
black  cat. 

For  Venus,  take  musk,  ambergris,  lignum  aloes,  red 
roses  and  red  coral,  and  make  them  up  with  the  brain 
of  sparrows  and  the  blood  of  pigeons. 

For  Mercury,  take  mastic,  frankincense,  cloves,  and 
the  herb  cinque-foil,  and  the  stone  achate,  and  incor- 
porate them  all  with  the  brain  of  a  fox  or  weasel,  and 
the  blood  of  a  magpie. 

Besides,  to  Saturn  are  appropriated  for  fumes  all 
odoriferous  roots,  as  pepper-wort  root,  etc.,  and  the 
frankincense  tree;  to  Jupiter,  odoriferous  fruits,  as 
nutmegs  and  cloves;  to  Mars,  all  odoriferous  wood,  as 
Sanders,  cypress,  lignum  balsam  and  lignum  aloes;  to 
the  Sun,  all  gums,  frankincense,  mastic,  benjamin, 
storax,  ladanum,  ambergris  and  musk;  to  Venus,  sweet 
flowers,  as  roses,  violets,  saffron,  and  such  like;  to 
Mercury,  all  the  peels  of  wood  and  fruit,  as  cinnamon, 
lignum  cassia,  mace,  citron  or  lemon  peel,  and  bay- 
berries,  and  whatsoever  seeds  are  odoriferous;  to  the 
Moon,  the  leaves  of  all  vegetables,  as  the  leaf  indum, 
and  the  leaves  of  the  myrtle  and  bay-tree. 

Know,  also,  that  according  to  the  opinion  of  the 
magicians,  in  every  good  matter,  as  love,  good  will, 
and  the  like,  there  must  be  a  good  fume,  odoriferous 
and  precious;  and  in  every  evil  matter,  as  hatred, 
anger,  misery,  and  the  like,  there  must  be  a  stinking 
fume,  that  is  of  no  worth. 

The  twelve  Signs,  also,  of  the  Zodiac  have  their 
proper  fumes,  as  Aries  hath  myrrh;  Taurus,  pepper- 
wort;  Gemini,  mastic;  Cancer,  camphor;  Leo,  frank- 
incense; Virgo,  Sanders;  Libra,  galbanum;  Scorpio, 
opopanax;  Sagittarius,  lignum  aloes;  Capricornus, 
benjamin;  Aquarius,  euphorbium;  Pisces,  red  storax. 
But  Hermes  describes  the  most  powerful  fume  to  be 
that  which  is  compounded  of   the  Seven  Aromatics, 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  137 

according  to  the  powers  of  the  Seven  Planets — for  it 
receives  from  Saturn,  pepper-wort;  from  Jupiter,  nut- 
meg; from  Mars,  lignum  aloes;  from  the  Sun.  mastic; 
from  Venus,  saffron;  from  Mercury,  cinnamon;  and 
from  the  Moon,  the  myrtle. 


CHAPTER  XLV. 

Of  CoUyries,    Unctions,  Love- Medicines,  and  their  Virtues. 

Moreover,  collyries  and  unguents,  conveying  the 
virtues  of  things  natural  and  celestial  to  our  spirit, 
can  multiply,  transmute,  transfigure,  and  transform  it 
accordingly,  as  also  transpose  those  virtues  which  are 
in  them  into  it;  that  so,  it  cannot  act  only  upon  its 
own  body,  but  also  upon  that  which  is  near  it,  and 
affect  that  by  visible  rays,  charms,  and  by  touching  it 
with  some  like  quality.  For  because  our  spirit  is  the 
subtile,  pure,  lucid,  airy,  and  unctuous  vapor  of  the 
blood,  it  is  therefore  fit  to  make  collyries  of  the  like 
vapors,  which  are  more  suitable  to  our  spirit  in  sub- 
stance, for  then,  by  reason  of  their  likeness,  they  do 
the  more  stir  up,  attract,  and  transform  the  spirit. 
The  like  virtues  have  certain  ointments  and  other  con- 
fections. Hence  by  the  touch  sometimes  sickness, 
poisonings,  and  love  is  induced;  some  things,  as  the 
hands  or  garments,  being  anointed.  Also  by  kisses, 
some  things  being  held  in  the  mouth,  love  is  induced; 
as  in  Virgil  we  read  that  Venus  prays  Cupid 

That  ivhen  glad  Dido  hugs  him  in  her  lap 
At  royal  feasts,  crown'd  with  the  cheering  grape^ 
When  she,  eiTibracing,  shall  sweet  kisses  give. 
Inspire  hid  flame,  with  deadly  J)ane  deceive. 
He  would 

Now  the  sight,  because  it  perceives  more  purely  and 
clearly  than  the  other  senses,  and  fastening  in  us  the 


138  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

marks  of  things  more  acutely  and  deeply,  doth  most 
of  all  and  before  others,  agree  with  the  phantastic 
spirit,  as  is  apparent  in  dreams,  when  things  seen  do 
more  often  present  themselves  to  us  than  things  heard, 
or  any  thing  coming  under  the  other  senses.  There- 
fore, when  collyries  or  eye-waters  transform  visual 
spirits,  that  spirit  doth  easily  affect  the  imagination, 
which  indeed  being  affected  with  divers  species  and 
forms,  transmits  the  same  by  the  same  spirit  unto  the 
outward  sense  of  sight;  by  which  occasion  there  is 
caused  in  it  a  perception  of  such  species  and  forms  in 
that  manner,  as  if  it  were  moved  by  external  objects, 
that  there  seem  to  be  seen  terrible  images  and  spirits 
and  such  like.  So  there  are  made  collyries,  making 
us  forthwith  to  see  the  images  of  spirits  in  the  air  or 
elsewhere;  as  I  know  how  to  make  of  the  gall  of  a 
man,  and  the  eyes  of  a  black  cat,  and  of  some  other 
\  things.  The  like  is  made  also  of  the  blood  of  a  lap- 
wing, of  a  bat,  and  a  goat;  and,  they  say,  if  a  smooth, 
shining  piece  of  steel  be  smeared  over  with  the  juice 
of  mug-wort,  and  made  to  fume,  it  will  make  invoked 
spirits  to  be  seen  in  it.  So,  also,  there  are  some  suf- 
fumigations,  or  unctions,  which  make  men  speak  in 
their  sleep,  to  walk,  and  to  do  those  things  which  are 
done  by  men  that  are  awake;  and  sometimes  to  do 
those  things  which  men  that  are  awake  cannot  or  dare 
not  do.  Some  there  are  that  make  us  to  hear  horrid 
or  delectable  sounds,  and  such  like.  And  this  is  the 
cause  why  maniacal  and  melancholy  men  believe  they 
see  and  hear  those  things  without  which  their  imagi- 
nation doth  only  fancy  within;  hence  they  fear  things 
not  to  be  feared,  and  fall  into  wonderful  and  most  false 
suspicions,  and  fly  when  none  pursue th  them;  are  also 
angry  and  contend,  nobody  being  present,  and  fear 
where  no  fear  is.  Such  like  passions  also  can  magical 
confections  induce,  by  suffumigations,  by  collyries,  by 


PHILOSOPHY   OP   NATURAL  MAGIC.  139 

unguents,  by  potions,  by  poisons,  by  lamps  and  lights, 
by  looking-g-lasses,  by  images,  enchantments,  charms, 
sounds  and  music.  Also  by  divers  rites,  observations, 
ceremonies,  religions  and  superstitions;  all  which  shall 
be  handled  in  their  places.  And  not  only  by  these 
kind  of  arts  are  passions,  apparitions  and  images  in- 
duced, but  also  things  themselves,  which  are  really 
changed  and  transfigured  into  divers  forms,  as  the 
poet  relates  of  Proteus,  Periclimenus,  Acheloas,  and 
Merra,  the  daughter  of  Erisichthon.  So,  also,  Circe 
changed  the  companions  of  Ulysses;  and  of  old,  in  the 
sacrifices  of  Jupiter  Lyc^us,  the  men  that  tasted  of 
the  inwards  of  the  sacrifices  were  turned  into  wolves 
which,  Pliny  saith,  befell  a  certain  man  called  Demar- 
chus.  The  same  opinion  was  Austin  of,  for,  he  saith, 
whilst  he  was  in  Italy,  he  heard  of  some  women  that 
by  giving  sorceries  in  cheese  to  travelers,  turned  them 
into  working  cattle,  and  when  they  had  done  such 
work  as  they  would  have  them,  turned  them  into  men 
again;  and  that  this  befell  a  certain  priest  called 
Prestantius.  The  Scriptures  themselves  testify  that 
Pharao's  sorcerers  turned  their  rods  into  serpents  and 
water  into  blood,  and  did  other  such  like  things. 


CHAPTER  XLVI. 

Of  natural  Alligations  and  Suspensions. 

When  the  Soul  of  the  World  by  its  virtue  doth  make 
all  things  that  are  naturally  generated  or  artificially 
made  to  be  fruitful,  by  infusing  into  them  celestial 
properties  for  the  working  of  some  wonderful  effects, 
then  things  themselves — not  only  when  applied  by 
suffumigations,  or  collyries,  or  ointments,  or  potions, 
or  any  other  such  like  way,  but  also  when  they,  being 
conveniently  wrapped  up,  are  bound  to  or  hanged 

140  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

about  the  neck,  or  in  any  other  way  applied,  althoug'h 
by  never  so  easy  a  contact — do  impress  their  virtue 
upon  us.  By  these  alligations,  therefore,  suspensions, 
wrapping's  up,  applications,  and  contacts,  the  acci- 
dents of  the  body  and  mind  are  changed  into  sickness, 
health,  boldness,  fear,  sadness,  and  joy,  and  the  like. 
They  render  them  that  carry  them  gracious  or  terrible, 
acceptable  or  rejected  honored  and  beloved  or  hateful 
and  abominable.  Now  these  kind  of  passions  are  con- 
ceived to  be  by  the  above  said  to  be  infused,  and  not 
otherwise,  like  what  is  manifest  in  the  grafting  of 
trees,  where  the  vital  virtue  is  sent  and  communicated 
from  the  trunk  to  the  twig  grafted  into  it  by  way  of 
contact  and  alligation.  So  in  the  female  palm-tree, 
when  she  comes  near  to  the  male  her  boughs  bend  to 
the  male,  and  are  bowed,  which,  the  gardeners  seeing, 
bind  ropes  from  the  male  to  the  female,  which  becomes 
straight  again,  as  if  she  had  by  this  connection  of  the 
rope  received  the  virtue  of  the  male.  In  like  manner 
we  see  that  the  cramp-fish,  or  torpedo,  being  touched 
afar  off  with  a  long  pole,  doth  presently  stupefy  the 
hand  of  him  that  toucheth  it.  And  if  any  shall  touch 
the  sea-hare  with  his  hand  or  stick  will  presently  run 
out  of  his  wits.  Also,  if  the  fish  called  stella,  or  star- 
fish, as  they  say,  being  fastened  with  the  blood  of  a 
fox  and  a  brass  nail  to  a  gate,  evil  medicines  can  do 
no  hurt  to  any  in  such  house.  Also,  it  is  said,  that  if 
a  woman  take  a  needle  and  beray  it  with  dung,  and 
then  wrap  it  up  in  earth  in  which  the  carcass  of  a  man 
was  buried,  and  shall  carry  it  about  her  in  a  cloth 
which  was  used  at  the  funeral,  that  she  shall  be  able 
to  possess  herself  so  long  as  she  hath  it  about  her. 

Now,  by  these  examples,  we  see  how,  by  certain 
alligations  of  certain  things,  as  also  suspensions,  or 
by  a  simple  contact,  or  the  connection  or  continuation 
of  any  thread,  we  may  be  able  to  receive  some  virtues 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  141 

thereby.  It  is  necessary  that  we  know  the  certain  rule 
of  Alligation  and  Suspension,  and  the  manner  which 
the  Art  requires,  viz. ,  that  they  be  done  under  a  cer- 
tain and  suitable  Constellation,  and  that  they  be  done 
with  wire,  or  silken  threads,  with  hair,  or  sinews  of  cer- 
tain animals.  And  things  that  are  to  be  wrapped  up 
must  be  done  in  the  leaves  of  herbs,  or  the  skins  of 
animals,  or  Jine  cloths,  and  the  like,  according  to  the 
suitableness  of  things — as,  if  you  would  procure  the 
Solary  virtue  of  any  thing,  this  being  wrapped  up  in 
bay  leaves,  or  the  skin  of  a  lion,  hang  it  about  thy 
neck  with  a  golden  thread,  or  a  silken  thread  of  a 
yellow  color,  whilst  the  Sun  rules  in  the  heaven — so 
thou  shalt  be  endued  with  the  Solary  virtue  of  that 
thing.  But  if  thou  dost  desire  the  virtue  of  any  Sat- 
urnine thing,  thou  shalt  in  like  manner  take  that  thing 
whilst  Saturn  rules,  and  wrap  it  in  the  skin  of  an  ass, 
or  in  a  cloth  used  at  a  funeral  (especially  if  you  desire 
it  for  sadness),  and  with  a  black  thread  hang  it  about 
thy  neck.     In  like  manner  we  must  conceive  of  the  rest. 


CHAPTER  XL VII. 
Of  3Iagical  Rings  and  their  Compositions. 

Rings,  also,  which  were  always  much  esteemed  of 
by  the  ancients,  when  they  are  opportunely  made,  do 
in  like  manner  impress  their  virtue  upon  us,  in  as 
much  as  they  do  affect  the  spirit  of  him  that  carries 
them  with  gladness  or  sadness,  and  render  him  court- 
eous or  terrible,  bold  or  fearful,  amiable  or  hateful;  in 
as  much  as  they  do  fortify  us  against  sickness,  poi- 
sons, enemies,  evil  spirits,  and  all  manner  of  hurtful 
things,  or,  at  least,  will  not  suffer  us  to  be  kept  under 
them.  Now,  the  manner  of  making  these  kinds  of 
Magical  Rings  is  this,  viz. :     When  any  Star  ascends 


142  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

fortunately,  with  the  fortunate  aspect  or  conjunction 
of  the  Moon,  we  must  take  a  stone  and  herb  that  is 
under  that  Star,  and  make  a  ring-  of  the  metal  that  is 
suitable  to  this  Star,  and  in  it  fasten  the  stone,  putting 
the  herb  or  root  under  it — not  omitting  the  inscriptions 
of  images,  names,  and  characters,  as  also  the  proper 
suffumigations;  but  we  shall  speak  more  of  these  in 
another  place,  where  we  shall  treat  of  Images  and 
Characters. 

So  we  read  in  Philostratus  Jarchus  that  a  wise  prince 
of  the  Indies  bestowed  seven  rings  made  after  this 
manner  (marked  with  the  virtues  and  names  of  the 
seven  planets)  to  Apollonius;  of  which  he  wore  every- 
day of  the  week  one  thereof,  distinguishing  them-  in 
their  order  according  to  the  names  of  the  days,  as  is 
set  forth  by  astrologers,  viz.,  Sunday,  the  ring  marked 
with  the  virtues  and  inscribed  with  the  name  and  seal 
of  the  Sun,  that  planet  which  ruleth  over  Sunday  and 
from  which  the  day  taketh  its  name;  Monday,  the  ring 
of  the  virtues,  seal  and  name  of  the  Moon;  Tuesday, 
that  inscribed  unto  Mars;  Wednesday,  that  unto  Mer- 
cury; Thursday,  that  inscribed  unto  Jupiter;  Friday, 
that  unto  Venus,  and  Saturday^  that  unto  the  planet 
Saturn,  seeing  as  Saturday  is  the  last  day  of  the  week 
and  hath  correspondence  with  the  last  end  of  life, 
and  is  ruled  by  Saturn  which  carries  the  sickle  of 
death;  and,  it  is  said,  that  Apollonius,  by  the  benefit 
of  these  seven  magical  rings,  lived  above  one  hundred 
and  thirty  years,  as  also  that  he  always  retained  the 
beauty  and  vigor  of  his  youth.  In  like  manner  Moses, 
the  law-giver  and  ruler  of  the  Hebrews,  being  skilled 
in  the  Magic  of  the  Egyptians,  is  said  by  Josephus  to 
have  made  rings  of  love  and  oblivion.  There  was 
also,  as  saith  Aristotle,  amongst  the  Cireneans,  a  ring 
of  Battus  which  could  procure  love  and  honor.  We 
read  also  that  Eudamus,  a  certain  philosopher,  made 


PHII.OSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  143 

rings  against  the  bites  of  serpents,  bewitchings,  and 
evil  spirits.  The  same  doth  Josephus  relate  of  Solo- 
mon. Also  we  read  in  Plato  that  Gygus,  the  king-  of 
Lydia,  had  a  ring  of  wonderful  and  strange  virtues, 
the  seal  of  which,  when  he  turned  it  toward  the  palm 
of  his  hand,  rendered  him  invisible;  nobody  could  see 
him,  but  he  could  see  all  things;  and,  by  the  oppor- 
tunity of  which  ring,  he  deceived  the  queen  and  slew 
the  king,  his  master,  and  killed  whomsoever  he 
thought  stood  in  his  way;  and  in  these  villainies  no 
one  could  see  him;  and,  at  length,  by  the  benefit  of 
this  ring  he  became  king  of  Lydia  himself.* 


CHAPTER  XLVIII. 

Of  the  Virtue  of  Places,  and  lohat  Places  are  Suitable  to 

every  Star. 

There  be  wonderful  virtues  of  places  accompanying 
them,  either  from  things  there  placed,  or  by  the  influ- 
ences of  the  Stars,  or  in  any  other  way.  For,  as  Pliny 
relates  of  a  cuckoo,  in  what  place  any  one  doth  first 
hear  him,  if  his  right  foot-print  be  marked  about  and 


*  Notwithstanding  tlie  many  exaggerated  accounts  like  this  one  of  King 
Gygus,  the  editor  desires  to  give  his  unqualified  assent  as  to  the  occult  prop- 
erties of  specially  prepared  Magical  Rings.  When  a  hoy  he  got  a  copy  of  an 
old  hook  entitled  "  The  History  and  Poetry  of  Finger  Rings,"  which  contains 
much  curious  information  on  the  subject,  and  from  that  time  to  this  he  has 
"by  personal  experiment,  and  much  study  in  connection  with  other  occult 
arts  that  hear  upton  the  matter,  became  confident  that  rings  may  be  made 
that  will  insure  man}'-  good  things  to  their  possessors— warding  off  and  cur- 
ing diseases,  guarding  against  evil  transits  and  other  dangerous  influences, 
and  those  which  will  favorably  influence  one's  station  in  life,  and  procure 
other  ardently  desired  things  and  ends.  The  Masonic  ring  will  gradually 
take  on  occult  power  if  its  owner  yields  intelligent  assistance  on  every  call, 
methodically  performing  his  regular  society  duty,  thereby  infusing  his  ring 
with  Masonic  virtues.  Of  course,  a  properly  prepared  ring  may  seemingly 
fail  of  its  specified  object,  but  we  are  inclined  to  believe  that  they  are  help- 
ful, however  little  their  effect  may  be  noticed,  in  every  case.  We  warn  our 
readers  against  the  numerous  charlatans  who  sell  so-called  Magical  Rings. 
Magical  Rings  are  never  sold  as  such.  Whatever  virtue  may  exist  in  a  ring 
the  owner  alone  confirms  and  binds.    All  that  any  other  person  can  do  is 


144  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

that  place  dug"  up,  there  will  no  fleas  be  bred  in  that 
place  where  it  is  scattered.  So  they  say  that  the  dust 
of  the  track  of  a  snake,  being  gathered  up  and  scat- 
tered amongst  bees,  makes  them  return  to  their  hives. 
So,  also,  that  the  dust  in  which  a  mule  hath  rolled 
himself,  being  cast  upon  the  body,  doth  mitigate  the 
heat  of  passion;  and  that  the  dust  wherein  a  hawk 
hath  rolled  herself,  if  it  be  bound  to  the  body  in  a 
bright  red  cloth,  cures  the  quartan.  So  doth  the  stone 
taken  out  of  the  nest  of  a  swallow,  as  they  say,  pres- 
ently relieve  those  that  have  the  falling  sickness,  and 
being  bound  to  the  party,  continually  preserves  them, 
especially  if  it  be  rolled  in  the  blood  or  heart  of  a 
swallow.  And  it  is  reported  that  if  any  one  shall  cut 
a  vein,  being  fasting,  and  shall  go  over  a  place  where 
any  one  lately  fell  with  the  fit  of  a  falling  sickness, 
that  he  shall  fall  into  the  same  disease.  And  Pliny 
reports  that  to  fasten  an  iron  nail  in  that  place  where 
he  that  fell  with  a  fit  of  the  falling  sickness  first  did 
pitch  his  head,  will  free  him  from  his  disease.  So 
they  say  that  an  herb,  growing  upon  the  head  of  any 
image,  being  gathered,  and  bound  up  in  some  part  of 


to  properly  instruct  how  such  a  ring  should  be  made  and  worn.  Any  so- 
called  "  prophet"  or  "oracle  "  that  now  disgraces  and  perverts  true  occult 
art  will  most  probably  lay  claim  to  this  knowledge,  as  will  those  astrologers 
and  "gifted"  pretenders  in  America  who  hide  their  crude  acquirements 
and  practices  behind  high-sounding  names.  I  say  "in  America,"  because 
in  England  even  eminent  practitioners  are  prohibited  by  British  law  from 
doing  work  for  the  public  and  are  forced,  for  self-protection,  to  serve  under 
assumed  names.  Such  a  condition  not  prevailing  in  this  country  it  is  safe  to 
regard  those  who  assume  titles  as  either  charlatans  or  who  act  from  a  very 
superficial  knowledge.  There  may,  possibly,  be  honorable  exceptions  to  this 
rule,  but  we  doubt  it.  Consult  yourself,  therefore,  regarding  a  personal 
occult  ring,  selecting  the  metal,  stone  and  design  that  you  are  most  pleased 
with.  Then  you  have  made  a  proper  start,  and,  in  a  great  many  cases,  need 
go  no  further;  thus  every  plain  gold  marriage  ring  becomes  a  magical  ring. 
As  the  courtship  is  exalted  so  will  be  the  potency  of  the  ring.  The  wife  may 
often  owe  her  security  to  the  marriage  ring  and  should  always  wear  it. 
To  lose  the  marriage  ring  portends  evil,  and  another  one,  heavier  and 
engraven  with  the  first  names  of  the  couple— like  "Jack"  and  "Mary  "—and 
the  marriage  date,  should  be  procured  as  soon  as  circumstances  will  permit. 
Every  ring,  being  a  circle,  contains  occult  force  and  sj^mbolizes  the  eternal. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  145 

one's  garment  with  a  red  thread,  shall  presently  allay 
the  headache;  and  that  any  herb  gathered  out  of  the 
brooks  or  rivers  before  Sunrising,  and  no  body  seeing 
him  that  gathers  it,  shall  cure  the  tertian  if  it  be 
bound  to  the  left  arm,  the  sick  party  not  knowing 
what  is  done. 

Amongst  places  that  are  appropriated  to  the  Stars, 
all  stinking  places,  and  dark,  underground,  religious, 
and  mournful  places,  as  church-yards,  tombs,  and 
houses  not  inhabited  by  men;  and  old,  tottering,  ob- 
scure, dreadful  houses;  and  solitary  dens,  caves  and 
pits;  also  fish-ponds,  standing  pools,  sewers,  and  such 
like,  are  appropriated  to  Saturn.  Unto  Jupiter  are 
ascribed  all  privileged  places,  consistories  of  noble- 
men, tribunals,  chairs,  places  for  exercises,  schools, 
and  all  beautiful  and  clean  places,  an(3.  those  sprinkled 
with  divers  odors.  To  Mars,  fiery  and  bloody  places, 
furnaces,  bakehouses,  shambles,  places  of  execution, 
and  places  where  there  have  been  great  battles  fought 
and  slaughters  made,  and  the  like.  To  the  Sun,  light 
places,  the  serene  air,  kings'  palaces  and  princes' 
courts,  pulpits,  theaters,  thrones,  and  all  kingly  and 
magnificent  places.  To  Venus,  pleasant  fountains, 
green  meadows,  flourishing  gardens,  garnished  beds, 
stews,  and,  according  to  Orpheus,  the  sea,  the  sea- 
shore, baths,  dancing  places,  and  all  places  belonging 
to  women.  To  Mercury,  shops,  schools,  warehouses, 
exchanges  for  merchailts,  and  the  like.  To  the  Moon, 
wildernesses,  woods,  rocks,  hills,  mountains,  forests, 
fountains,  waters,  rivers,  seas,  seashores,  ships,  high- 
ways, groves,  granaries  for  corn,  and  such  like.  On 
this  account  they  that  endeavor  to  procure  love  are 
wont  to  bury  for  a  certain  time  the  instruments  of 
their  art,  whether  they  be  rings,  images,  looking- 
glasses,  or  any  other,  or  hide  them  in  a  stew  house,  so 
that  they  will  contract  some  virtue  under  Venus,  the 


146  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

same  as  those  things  that  stand  in  stinking  places 
become  stinking,  and  those  in  an  aromatical  place 
become  aromatic  and  of  a  sweet  savor. 

The  four  corners  of  the  earth  also  pertain  to  this 
matter.  Hence  they  that  are  to  gather  a  Saturnine, 
Martial,  or  Jovial  herb  must  look  towards  the  East  or 
South,  partly  because  they  desire  to  be  oriental  from 
the  Sun,  and  partly  because  of  their  principal  houses, 
viz. :  Aquarius,  Scorpio  and  Sagittarius  are  Southern 
Signs,  so  also  are  Capricornus  and  Pisces.  But  they 
that  will  gather  a  Venereal,  Mercurial  or  Lunary  herb 
must  look  towards  the  West  because  they  delight  to  be 
western,  or  else  they  must  look  towards  the  North 
because  their  principal  houses — viz.,  Taurus,  Gemini, 
Cancer,  Virgo — are  Northern  Signs.  So  in  any  Solary 
work  we  must  look  not  only  towards  the  East  and 
South  whilst  plucking  it,  but  also  towards  the  Solary 
body  and  light. 


CHAPTER  XLIX. 

Of  Light,  Colors,  Candles  and  Lamps,  and  to  what  Stars, 
Houses  and  Elements  several  Colors  are  Ascribed. 

Light  also  is  a  quality  that  partakes  much  of  form, 
and  is  a  simple  act,  and  also  a  representation  of  the 
understanding.  It  is  first  diffused  from  the  Mind  of 
God  into  all  things;  but  in  God  the  Father,  the  Father 
of  Light,  it  is  the  first  true  light;  then  in  the  Son  a 
beautiful,  overflowing  brightness,  and  in  the  Holy 
Ghost  a  burning  brightness,  exceeding  all  Intelligen- 
ces; yea,  as  Dyonisius  saith  of  Seraphims,  in  angels 
it  is  a  shining  intelligence  diffused,  an  abundant  joy 
beyond  all  bounds  of  reason,  yet  received  in  divers 
degrees,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  Intelligence 
that  receives  it.     Then  it  descends  into  the  celestial 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  147 

bodies,  where  it  becomes  a  store  of  life  and  an  effectual 
propagation;  even  a  visible  splendor.  In  the  fire  it  is 
a  certain  natural  liveliness,  infused  into  it  by  the  heav- 
ens. And,  lastly,  in  men,  it  is  a  clear  course  of  reason, 
an  innate  knovv^ledge  of  divine  things,  and  the  whole 
rational  faculty;  but  this  is  manifold,  either  by  reason 
of  the  disposition  of  the  body  or  by  reason  of  him  who 
bestows  it,  who  gives  it  to  every  one  as  he  pleaseth. 
From  thence  it  passeth  to  the  fancy,  yet  above  the 
senses,  but  only  imaginable;  and  thence  to  the  senses, 
especially  to  the  sense  of  the  eyes.  In  them  light  is 
a  visible  clearness;  and  is  extended  to  other  perspicu- 
ous bodies,  in  which  it  becomes  a  color  and  a  shining 
beauty;  but  in  dark  bodies  it  is  a  certain  beneficial 
and  generative  virtue,  and  penetrates  to  the  very  cen- 
ter where  its  beams,  being  collected  into  a  small  place, 
become  a  dark  heat,  tormenting  and  scorching,  so  that 
all  things  perceive  the  vigor  of  the  light  according  to 
their  capacity — and  all  light,  joining  to  itself  an  en- 
livening heat,  and,  passing  through  all  things,  doth 
convey  its  qualities  and  virtues  to  all  things.  Great 
is  the  power  of  light  to  mar  or  make  enchantments. 
So  a  sick  man,  uncovered  against  the  Sun  or  the  Moon, 
their  rays  become  charged  with  the  noxious  qualities 
of  the  sickness  and,  penetrating,  convey  them  into  the 
body  of  another,  and  affect  that  with  a  quality  of  the 
same  kind.  So  that  from  the  sick  should  be  covered 
deep  from  the  light,  lest  its  occult  quality  doth  infect 
the  well.  This  is  the  reason  why  Enchanters  have  a 
care  to  cover  their  enchantments  with  their  shadow. 
So  the  civet  cat  make  all  dogs  dumb  with  the  very 
touch  of  her  shadow. 

Also,  there  are  made,  artificially,  some  Lights,  by 
lamps,  torches,  candles,  and  such  like,  of  some  certain 
thing  and  fluids,  opportunely  chosen,  according  to  the 
rule  of  the  Stars,  and  composed  amongst  themselves 


148  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

according  to  their  congruity,  which,  when  they  be 
lighted,  and  shine  alone,  are  wont  to  produce  some 
wonderful  and  celestial, effects,  which  men  many  times 
wonder  at.  So'Pliny  reports,  out  of  Anaxilaus,  of  a 
poison  of  mares  which,  being  lig'hted  in  torches,  doth 
monstrously  represent  a  sight  of-  horses'  heads.  The 
like  may  be  done  with  flies,  which,  being  duly  tem- 
pered with  wax,  and  lighted,  make  a  strange  sight  of 
flies;  and  the  skin  of  a  serpent,,  lighted  in  a  proper 
lamp,  maketh  serpents  appear.  *  They  say  that  when 
grapes  are  in  their  flower,  if  any  one  shall  bind  a  vial 
full  of  oil  to  them,  and  shall  let  it  alone  until  they  be 
ripe,  and  then  the  oil  be  put  in  a  lamp  and  lighted,  it 
makes  grapes  to  be  seen;  and  so  with  other  fruits.  If 
centaury  be  mixed  with  honey,  and  the  blood  of  a  lap- 
wing, and  be  put  in  a  lamp,  they  that  stand  about  will 
look  much  larger  than  they  are  wont;  and  if  it  be  lit 
in  a  clear  night  the  Stars  will  seem  to  scatter  one  from 
another.  Such  force,  also,  is  in  the  ink  of  the  cuttle- 
fish that  it,  being  put  into  a  lamp,  makes  blackamoors 
appear.  It  is  also  reported  that  a  candle,  made  of 
some  Saturnine  things,  being  lighted,  if  it  be  extin- 
guished in  the  mouth  of  a  man  newly  dead,  will  after- 
wards, as  oft  as  it  shines  alone,  bring  a  feeling  of  sad- 
ness and  great  fear  upon  them  that  stand  about  it. 
Of  such  like  torches  and  lamps  doth  Hermes  speak 
more  of,  also  Plato  and  Chyrannides,  and  of  the  latter 
writers,  Albertus,  in  a  certain  treatise  of  this  particu- 
lar thing. 

Colors,  also,  are  a  class  of  lights,  which,  being  duly 
mixed  with  things,  are  wont  to  expose  such  things  to 
the  influence  of  those  Stars  to  which  the  colors  are 
agreeable.  And  we  shall  afterwards  speak  of  some 
colors  which  are  the  Lights  of  the  Planets,  by  which 
even  the  natures  of  Fixed  Stars  themselves  are  under- 
stood, which  also  may  be  applied   to  the  flames  of 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  149 

lamps  and  candles.  But  in  this  place  we  shall  relate 
how  the  colors  of  inferior  mixed  things  are  distributed 
to  divers  planets.  All  colors  as  black,  lucid,  earthy, 
leaden,  or  brown,  have  relation  to  Saturn.  Sapphire 
and  airy  colors,  and  those  which  are  always  green, 
clear,  purple,  darkish,  golden,  or  mixed  with  silver, 
belong  to  Jupiter.  Red  colors,  and  burning,  fiery, 
flaming,  violet,  purple,  bloody,  and  iron  colors,  resem- 
ble Mars.  Golden,  saffron,  purple,  and  bright  colors, 
resemble  the  Sun.  But  all  white,  fair,  curious,  green, 
ruddy,  betwixt  saffron  and  purple,  resemble  Venus, 
Mercury  and  the  Moon.  Moreover,  amongst  the  Signs 
of  the  Zodiac,  known  as  the  Houses  of  the  Heaven, 
the  first  and  seventh  hath  the  color  white;  the  second 
and  twelfth,  green;  the  third  and  eleventh,  saffron; 
the  fourth  and  the  tenth,  red;  the  fifth  and  ninth,  a 
honey  color;  and  the  sixth  and  eighth,  black. 

The  Elements,  also,  have  their  colors,  by  which 
natural  philosophers  judge  of  the  complexion  and 
property  of  their  nature.  For  an  earthy  color,  caused 
of  coldness  and  dryness,  is  brown,  and  black,  and 
manifests  black  choler  and  a  Saturnine  nature.  Blue, 
tending  towards  whiteness,  doth  denote  phlegm.  For 
cold  makes  white;  moisture  and  dryness  makes  black. 
Reddish  color  shews  blood;  but  fiery,  flaming,  burning 
hot,  shews  choler,  which,  by  reason  of  its  subtilty  and 
aptness  to  mix  with  others,  doth  cause  divers  colors 
more;  for  if  it  be  mixed  with  blood,  and  blood  be  most 
predominant,  it  makes  a  florid  red;  if  choler  predomi- 
nate, it  makes  a  reddish  color;  if  there  be  an  equal 
mixtion,  it  makes  a  sad  red.  But  if  adust  choler  be 
mixed  with  blood  it  makes  a  hempen  color;  and  red,  if 
blood  predominate;  and  somewhat  red  if  choler  pre- 
vail; but  if  it  be  mixed  with  a  melancholy  humor  it 
makes  a  black  color;  but  with  melancholy  and  phlegm 
together,  in  an  equal  proportion,  it  makes  a  hempen 


150  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

color.  If  phlegm  abound,  a  mud  color;  if  melancholy, 
a  bluish;  but  if  it  be  mixed  with  phlegm  alone,  in  an 
equal  proportion,  it  makes  a  citron  color;  if  unequally, 
a  pale  or  palish.  .Now,  all  colors  are  more  prevalent 
when  they  be  in  silk,  or  in  metals,  or  in  perspicuous 
substances,  or  in  precious  stones,  and  in  those  things 
which  resemble  celestial  bodies  in  color,  especially  in 
living  things. 


CHAPTER  L. 

Of  Fascination,  and  the  Art  thereof. 

Fascination  is  a  binding,  which  comes  from  the 
spirit  of  the  witch,  through  the  eyes  of  him  that  is  so 
bewitched,  and  entering  to  his  heart.  Now  the  instru- 
ment of  fascination  is  the  spirit,  viz.,  a  certain  pure, 
lucid,  subtile  vapor,  generated  of  the  purer  blood  by 
the  heat  of  the  heart.  This  doth  always  send  forth, 
through  the  eyes,  rays  like  to  itself.  Those  rays,  be- 
ing sent  forth,  do  carry  with  them  a  spiritual  vapor, 
and  that  vapor  a  blood  (as  it  appears  in  swollen  and 
red  eyes),  whose  rays,  being  sent  forth  to  the  eyes  of 
him  that  looks  upon  them,  carry  the  vapor  of  the  cor- 
rupt blood  together  with  itself;  by  the  contagion  of 
which  it  doth  infect  the  eyes  of  the  beholder  with  the 
like  disease.  So  the  eye,  being  opened  and  intent 
upon  any  one  with  a  strong  imagination,  doth  dart  its 
beams  (which  are  the  vehiculum  of  the  spirit)  into  the 
eyes  of  him  that  is  opposite  to  him;  which  tender  spirit 
strikes  the  eyes  of  him  that  is  bewitched,  being  stirred 
up  from  the  heart  of  him  that  strikes,  and  possesseth 
the  breast  of  him  that  is  stricken,  wounds  his  heart 
and  infects  his  spirit.  Whence  Apuleius  saith,  "Thy 
eyes,  sliding  down  through  my  eyes  into  mine  inward 
breast,  stir  up  a  most  vehement  burning  in  my  marrow. ' ' 


PHILOSOPHY   OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  151 

Know,  then,  that  men  are  most  bewitched  when,  with 
often  beholding-,  they  direct  the  edge  of  their  sight  to 
the  edge  of  the  sight  of  those  that  bewitch  them;  and 
when  their  eyes  are  reciprocally  intent  one  upon  the 
other,  and  when  rays  are  joined  to  rays  and  lights  to 
lights,  the  spirit  of  the  one  is  joined  to  the  spirit  of 
the  other  and  fixeth  its  sparks.  So  are  strong  liga- 
tions made,  and  so  most  vehement  loves  are  inflamed 
with  only  the  rays  of  the  eyes;  even  with  a  certain 
sudden  looking  on,  as  if  it  were  with  a  dart  or  stroke, 
penetrating  the  whole  body,  whence  then  the  spirit 
and  amorous  blood,  being  thus  wounded,  are  carried 
forth  upon  the  lover  and  enchanter,  no  otherwise  than 
the  blood  and  spirit  of  the  vengeance  of  him  that  is 
slain  are  upon  him  that  slays  him.  Whence  Lucretius 
sang  concerning  those  amorous  bewitchings: 

The  body  smitten  is,  but  yet  the  mind 

Is  wounded  with  the  darts  of  Cupid  blind. 

All  parts  do  Sympathize  V  tW  ivound,  but  know 

The  blood  appears  in  that  which  had  the  blow."^ 

So,  great  is  the  power  of  fascination,  especially 
when  the  vapors  of  the  eyes  are  subservient  to  the 
affection.  Therefore  witches  use  collyries,  ointments, 
alligations,  and  such  like,  to  affect  and  corroborate 
the  spirit  in  this  or  that  manner.  To  procure  love 
they  use  venereal  collyries,  as  hippomanes,  the  blood 
of  doves,  or  sparrows,  and  such  like.  To  induce  fear, 
they  use  martial  collyries,  as  of  the  eyes  of  wolves, 


*  Again,  in  speaking  of  the  power  of  Venus,  the  goddess  of  peace,  over 
Mars,  the  god  of  war,  he  says: 

On  thy  soft  bosom  he— 
The  warlike  field  who  sways— almighty  Mars, 
struck  by  triumphant  Love's  eternal  wound, 
Reclines  full  frequent.    With  uplifted  gaze 
On  thee  he  feeds  his  longing,  lingering  eyes. 
And  all  his  soul  hangs  quivering  from  thy  lips. 


152  HENRY   COJINELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

the  civet  cat,  and  the  like.     To  procure  raisery  or  sick- 
ness, they  use  Saturnine  things,  and  so  of  the  rest. 


CHAPTER  LI. 

Of  certain  Observations,  Producing  wonderful  Virtues. 

They  say  that  certain  acts  and  observations  have  a 
certain  power  of  natural  things;  that  they  believe  dis- 
eases may  be  expelled,  or  brought  thus  and  thus.  So 
they  say  that  quartanes  may  be  driven  away  if  the 
parings  of  the  nails  of  the  sick  be  bound  to  the  neck 
of  a  live  eel,  in  a  linen  cloth,  and  she  be  let  go  into 
the  water.  And  Pliny  saith  that  the  parings  of  a  sick 
man's  nails  of  his  feet  and  hands  being  mixed  with 
wax,  cure  the  quartan,  tertian,  and  quotidian  ague; 
and  if  they  be  before  Sunrising  fastened  to  another 
man's  gate,  will  cure  such  like  diseases.  In  like  man- 
ner, let  all  the  parings  of  the  nails  be  put  into  the 
caves  of  ants,  and  the  first  ant  that  begins  to  draw  at 
the  parings  must  be  taken  and  bound  to  the  neck  of 
the  sick,  and  by  this  means  will  the  disease  be  cured. 
They  say  that  by  wood,  stricken  with  lightning,  and 
cast  behind  the  back  with  one's  hands,  any  disease 
may  be  removed;  and,  in  quartanes,  a  piece  of  a  nail 
from  a  gibbet,  wrapped  up  in  wool,  and  hung  about 
the  neck,  cures  them;  also,  a  rope  doth  the  like  that 
is  taken  from  a  gallows  and  hid  under  ground  so  that 
the  Sun  cannot  reach  it.  The  throat  of  him  that  hath 
a  hard  swelling,  or  imposthume,  being  touched  with 
the  hand  of  him  that  died  by  an  immature  death,  will 
be  cured  thereby.  They  say,  also,  that  a  woman  is 
presently  eased  of  her  hard  labor  if  any  one  shall  put 
into  her  bed  a  stone  or  dart  with  which  a  boar  or  a 
bear  or  man  hath  been  killed  with  one  blow.  The 
same  doth  a  spear  that  is  pulled  out  of  the  body  of  a 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  153 

man,  if  it  shall  not  first  touch  the  ground;  also,  they 
say,  that  arrows,  pulled  out  of  the  body  of  a  man,  if 
they  have  not  touched  the  earth,  taken  and  stealthily 
placed  under  any  one  lying*  down,  will  procure  love. 
The  falling  sickness  is  cured  by  meat  made  of  the  flesh 
of  a  wild  beast,  slain  in  the  same  manner  as  a  man  is 
slain.  A  man's  eyes  that  are  washed  three  times  with 
the  water  wherein  he  hath  washed  his  feet  shall  never 
be  sore  or  blear.  It  is  said  that  some  do  cure  diseases 
of  the  groin  with  thread  taken  out  of  a  weaver's  loom 
and  t3dng  into  it  seven  or  nine  knots,  the  name  of  some 
widow  being  named  at  every  knot.  The  spleen  of 
cattle,  extended  upon  painful  spleens,  cures  them  if  he 
that  applies  it  saith  that  he  is  applying  a  medicine  to 
the  spleen  to  cure  and  ease  it.  After  this,  they  say, 
the  patient  must  be  shut  into  a  sleeping  room,  the 
door  being  sealed  up  with  a  ring,  and  some  verse  be 
repeated  over  nineteen  times.  The  water  of  a  green 
lizard  cures  the  same  disease  if  it  be  hanged  up  in  a 
vessel  before  the  patient's  bed-chamber  so  that  he 
may,  as  he  passes  in  and  out,  touch  it  with  his  hand. 
And  a  little  frog  climbing  up  a  tree,  if  any  one  shall 
spit  in  his  mouth,  and  then  let  him  escape,  is  said  to 
cure  the  cough.  It  is  a  wonderful  thing,  but  easy  to 
experience,  that  Pliny  speaks  of,  that  if  any  one  shall 
be  sorry  for  any  blow  that  he  hath  given  another,  afar 
off  or  nigh  at  hand,  if  he  shall  presently  spit  into  the 
middle  of  that  hand  with  which  he  gave  the  blow,  the 
party  that  was  smitten  shall  presently  be  freed  from 
pain.  This  hath  been  approved  of  in  a  four-footed 
beast  that  hath  been  sorely  hurt.  Some  there  are  that 
aggravate  the  blow  before  they  give  it.  In  like  man- 
ner, spittle  carried  in  the  hand,  or  to  spit  in  the  shoe 
of  the  right  foot  before  it  be  put  on,  is  good  when  any 
one  passeth  through  a  dangerous  place.  They  say 
that  wolves  will  not  come  to  a  field  if  one  of  them  be 


154  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

taken  and  his  blood  let  by  little  and  little  out  of  his 
legs,  being  unbroken,  with  a  knife,  and  sprinkled 
about  the  outside  of  the  field,  and  he  himself  be  buried 
in  that  place  from  whence  he  was  first  drawn.  The 
Methanenses,  citizens  of  Trezenium,  accounted  it  as  a 
present  remedy  for  preserving  of  vines  from  the  wrong 
of  the  southern  wind,  having  always  found  it  by  most 
certain  experience,  if,  whilst  the  wind  blows,  a  white 
cock  should  be  pulled  to  pieces  in  the  middle  by  two 
men,  both  of  whom,  each  keeping  his  part,  must  walk 
each  way  around  the  vineyard,  until  both  meet  in  the 
place  from  whence  they  began  their  circuit,  and  must 
in  that  place  bury  the  pieces  of  the  cock.  Also,  if 
any  one  shall  hold  a  viper  over  a  vapor  with  a  staff, 
he  shall  prophesy,  and  that  the  staff  v/herewith  a 
snake  was  beaten  is  good  against  female  diseases. 
These  things  Pliny  recites.  It  is  said  that  in  gather- 
ing roots  and  herbs  we  must  draw  three  circles  round 
about  them  first,  with  a  sword,  and  then  dig  them  up, 
meanwhile  taking  heed  of  any  contrary  wind.  Also, 
they  say,  that  if  any  one  shall  measure  a  dead  man 
with  a  rope,  first  from  the  elbow  to  the  biggest  finger, 
then  from  the  shoulder  to  the  same  finger,  and  after- 
wards from  the  head  to  the  feet,  making  thrice  those 
mensurations;  if  any  one  afterwards  shall  be  measured 
with  the  same  rope,  in  the  same  manner,  he  shall  not 
prosper,  but  be  unfortunate  and  fall  into  misery  and 
sadness.  Albertus  of  Chyrannis  saith,  that  if  any 
woman  hath  enchanted  thee  to  love  her,  take  the 
gown  she  sleepeth  in  out  of  doors  and  spit  through  the 
right  sleeve  thereof,  when  the  enchantment  will  be 
quitted.  And  Pliny  saith,  that  to  sit  by  women  far 
with  child,  or  when  a  medicine  is  given  to  any  one  of 
them,  the  fingers 'being  joined  together  like  the  teeth 
of  a  comb,  is  a  charm;  so  much  the  more  if  the  hands 
be  joined  about  one  or  both  knees.     Also,  to  sit  cross 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  155 

leg"ged  is  sorcery;  therefore  it  was  forbidden  to  be 
done  in  the  counsels  of  princes  and  rulers,  as  a  thing- 
which  hindered  all  acts.  And,  it  is  said,  if  any  one 
shall  stand  before  a  man's  chamber  door,  and  call  to 
him  by  name  and  the  man  answer,  if  then  he  fasten  a 
knife  or  needle  on  the  door,  the  edge  or  point  being 
downward,  and  break  it,  he  that  be  in  the  room  shall 
be  unable  of  his  intention  so  long  as  those  things 
shall  be  there. 


CHAPTER  LII. 

Of  the  Countenance  and  Gesture,  the  Habit  and  the  Figure 
of  the  Body,  and  to  lohat  Stars  any  of  these  do  Answer — 
whence  Physiognomy,  and  Metoposcopy,  and  Chiromancy, 
Arts  of  Divination,  have  their  Grounds. 

The  countenance,  gesture,  motion,  setting  and  figure 
of  the  body,  being  accidental  to  us,  conduce  to  the 
receiving  of  celestial  gifts  and  expose  us  to  the  supe- 
rior bodies,  which  produce  certain  effects  in  us,  like 
unto  the  effects  following  the  methods  of  gathering 
hellebore,  which,  if  thou  pullest  the  leaf  upward  when 
gathering  it,  draws  the  humors  upward  and  causeth 
vomiting;  if  downward,  it  causeth  purging,  drawing 
the  humor  downward.  How  much  also  the  counte- 
nance and  gesture  of  one  person  doth  affect  the  sight, 
imagination  and  spirit  of  another  no  man  is  ignorant. 
So  they  that  are  parents  discover  those  impressions  in 
their  children  of  their  previous  conditions,  and  that 
which  they  did  then  do,  form  and  imagine.  So  a  mild 
and  cheerful  countenance  of  a  prince  in  the  city  makes 
the  people  joyful;  but  if  it  be  fierce  or  sad  doth  terrify 
them.  So  the  gesture  and  countenance  of  any  one 
lamenting,  doth  easily  move  to  pity.  So  the  shape  of 
an  amiable  person  doth  easily  excite  to  friendship. 

n 


156  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

Thou  must  know  that  such  like  gestures  and  figures, 
as  harmonies  of  the  body,  do  expose  it  no  otherwise 
to  the  celestials,  than  odors,  and  the  spirit  of  a  medi- 
cine, and  internal  passions,  also,  do  the  soul.  For  as 
medicines  and  passions  of  the  mind  are  by  certain  dis- 
positions of  the  heaven  increased,  so  also  the  gesture 
and  motion  of  the  body  do  get  an  efficacy  by  certain 
influences  of  the  heavens.  For  there  are  gestures 
resembling  Saturn  which  are  melancholy  and  sad,  as 
are  beating  of  the  breast  or  striking  of  the  head;  also 
such  as  are  religious,  as  the  bowing  of  the  knee,  and  a 
fixed  look  downwards,  as  of  one  praying;  also  weep- 
ing, and  such  like,  as  are  used  by  the  austere  and 
Saturnine  man;  such  an  one  as  a  satirist  describes: 

With  hanged  down  head,  tvith  eyes  fixed  to  the  ground, 
His  raging  words  bites  in,  and  muttering  sound 
He  doth  express  with  pouting  lips. 

A  cheerful  and  honest  countenance,  a  worshipful 
or  noble  gesture  or  bearing,  clapping  of  the  hands  as 
of  one  rejoicing  and  praising,  and  the  bending  of  the 
knee  with  the  head  lifted  up,  as  of  one  that  is  wor- 
shiping, are  ascribed  to  Jupiter. 

A  sour,  fierce,  cruel,  angry,  rough  countenance  and 
gesture  are  ascribed  to  Mars. 

Solary  are  honorable  and  courageous  gestures  and 
countenances;  also,  walking  abroad,  a  bending  of  the 
knee,  as  of  one  honoring  a  king  with  one  knee  bent. 

Those  under  Venus  are  dances,  embraces,  laughters, 
and  those  of  an  amiable  and  cheerful  countenance. 

Those  Mercurial  are  inconstant,  quick,  variable  and 
such  like  gestures  and  countenances. 

Those  Lunary,  or  under  the  Moon,  are  such  as  are 
movable,  poisonous,  and  childish  and  the  like. 

As  we  have  spoken  above  of  gestures  so,  also,  are 
the  shapes  of  men  distinct,  as  follows: 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  157 

Saturn  bespeaks  a  man  to  be  of  a  black  and  yellow- 
ish color,  lean,  crooked,  of  a  rough  skin,  great  veins, 
the  body  covered  with  hair,  little  eyes,  of  a  frowning 
forehead,  a  thin  beard,  great  lips,  eyes  intent  upon 
the  ground,  of  a  heavy  gait,  striking  his  feet  together 
as  he  walks,  crafty,  witty,  a  seducer  and  murderous. 

Jupiter  signifies  a  man  to  be  of  a  pale  color,  darkish 
red,  a  handsome  body,  good  stature,  bold,  of  great 
eyes  (not  black  altogether)  with  large  pupils,  short 
nostrils  not  equal,  great  teeth  before,  curled  hair,  of 
good  disposition  and  manners. 

Mars  makes  a  man  red,  with  red  hair,  a  round  face, 
yellowish  eyes,  of  a  terrible  and  sharp  look,  jocund, 
bold,  proud  and  crafty. 

The  Sun-  makes  a  man  of  a  tawny  color,  betwixt 
yellow  and  black  dashed  with  red,  of  a  short  stature 
yet  of  a  handsome  body,  without  much  hair  and  curly, 
of  yellow  eyes,  wise,  faithful  and  desirous  of  praise. 

Venus  signifies  a  man  to  be  tending  towards  black- 
ness, but  more  white,  with  a  mixture  of  red,  a  hand- 
some body,  a  fair  and  round  face,  fair  hair,  fair  eyes, 
the  blackness  whereof  is  more  intense,  of  good  man- 
ners and  honest  love;  also  kind,  patient  and  jocund. 

Mercury  signifies  a  man  not  much  white,  or  black, 
of  a  long  face,  high  forehead,  fair  eyes,  not  black,  to 
have  a  straight  and  long  nose,  thin  beard,  long  fingers, 
to  be  ingenious,  a  subtile  inquisitor,  a  turncoat,  and 
subject  to  many  fortunes. 

The  Moon  signifies  a  man  to  be  in  color  white,  mixed 
with  a  little  red;  of  a  fair  stature,  a  round  face,  with 
some  marks  in  it;  eyes  not  fully  black,  frowning  fore- 
head, and  kind,  gentle  and  sociable. 

The  Signs,  also,  and  the  faces  of  Signs,  have  their 
figures  and  shapes  which,  he  that  would  know,  must 
seek  them  out  in  books  of  Astrology.  Lastly,  upon 
these   figures  and   gestures,   both  Physiognomy   and 


158  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

Metoposcopy,  arts  of  divination,  do  depend;  also  Chiro- 
mancy, foretelling-  future  events,  not  as  causes  but  as 
signs,  through  like  effects,  caused  by  the  same  cause. 
And  although  these  divers  kinds  of  divinations  may 
seem  to  be  done  by  inferior  and  weak  signs,  yet  the 
judgments  of  them  are  not  to  be  slighted  or  condemned 
when  prognostication  is  made  by  them,  not  out  of 
superstition  but  by  reason  of  the  harmonical  corre- 
spondency of  all  the  parts  of  the  body.  Whosoever, 
therefore,  doth  the  more  exactly  imitate  the  celestial 
bodies,  either  in  nature,  study,  action,  motion,  gesture, 
countenance,  passions  of  the  mind,  and  opportunity  of 
the  season,  is  so  much  the  more  like  to  the  heavenly 
bodies  and  can  receive  larger  gifts  from  them. 


CHAPTER  LIII. 

Of  Divination,  and  the  Kinds  thereof. 

There  are  some  other  kinds  of  divinations,  depend- 
ing upon  natural  causes,  which  are  known  to  every  one 
in  his  art  and  experience  to  be  in  divers  things,  by 
which  physicians,  husbandmen,  shepherds,  mariners, 
and  others,  do  prognosticate  out  of  the  probable  signs 
\  of  every  kind  of  divination.  Many  of  these  kinds  of 
divination  Aristotle  made  mention  of  in  his  book  of 
Times,  amongst  which  Auguria  and  Auspicia  are  the 
chiefest,  which  were  in  former  time  in  such  esteem 
amongst  the  Romans  that  they  would  do  nothing  that 
did  belong  to  private  or  public  business  without  the 
counsel  of  the  Augures.  Cicero  in  his  Book  of  Divi- 
nations largely  declares  that  the  people  of  Tuscia 
would  do  nothing  without  this  art.  Now,  there  are 
divers  kinds  of  Auspicias,  for  some  are  called  Pedes- 
tria  {i.e.),  which  are  taken  from  four-footed  beasts; 
some  are  called  Auguria,  which  are  taken  from  birds; 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  159 

some  are  Celestial,  which  are  taken  from  thundering-s 
and  lig-htnings;  some  are  called  Caduca  (1  e.),  when 
any  fell  in  the  temple,  or  elsewhere;  some  were  sacred, 
which  were  taken  from  sacrifices;  some  of  these  were 
called  Piacula,  and  sad  Auspicia,  as  when  a  sacrifice 
escaped  from  the  altar,  or,  being  smitten,  made  a  bel- 
lowing-, or  fell  upon  another  part  of  his  body  than  he 
should.  To  these  is  added  Exauguration,  viz.,  when 
the  rod  fell  out  of  the  hand  of  the  Augure  with  which 
it  was  the  custom  to  view  and  take  notice  of  the 
Auspicium. 

Michael  Scotus  makes  mention  of  twelve  kinds  of 
Auguries,  viz.,  six  on  the  right  hand,  the  names  of 
which,  he  saith,  are  Fernova,  Fervetus,  Confert,  Em- 
ponenthem,  Sonnasarnova,  and  Sonnasarvetus;  and  six 
on  the  left  hand,  the  names  of  which  are  Confernova, 
Confervetus,  Viaram,  Herrenam,  Scassarnova,  and 
Scassarvetus.     Expounding  their  names,  he  saith: 

Fernova  is  an  augury  when  thou  goest  out  of  thy 
house  to  do  any  business,  and  in  going  thou  see  a  man 
or  a  bird  going  or  flying,  so  that  either  of  them  set 
himself  before  thee  upon  thy  left  hand,  that  is  a  good 
signification  in  reference  to  thy  business. 

Fervetus  is  an  augury  when  thou  shalt  go  out  of  thy 
house  to  do  any  business,  and  in  going  thou  find  or  see 
a  bird  or  a  man  resting  himself  before  thee  on  the  left 
side  of  thee,  that  is  an  ill  sign  concerning  thy  business. 

Viaram  is  an  augury  when  a  man  or  a  bird  in  his 
journey,  or  flying,  pass  before  thee,  coming  from  the 
right  side  of  thee,  and,  bending  toward  the  left,  go 
out  of  thy  sight,  that  is  a  good  sign  concerning  thy 
business. 

Confernova  is  an  augury  when  thou  dost  first  find  a 
man  or  a  bird  going  or  flying,  and  then  rest  himself 
before  thee  on  thy  right  side,  thou  seeing  of  it,  that  is 
a  good  sign  concerning  thy  business. 


160  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

Confervetus  is  an  augury  when  first  thou  find  or  see 
a  man  or  a  bird  bending*  from  thy  right  side,  it  is  an 
ill  sign  concerning  thy  business. 

Scimasarnova  or  Sonnasarnova  is  when  a  man  or  a 
bird  comes  behind  thee  and  outgoeth  thee,  but  before 
he  comes  at  thee  he  rests,  thou  seeing  of  him  on  thy 
right  side,  it  is  to  thee  a  good  sign. 

Scimasarvetus  or  Sonnasarvetus  is  when  thou  see  a 
man  or  bird  behind  thee,  but  before  he  comes  to  thee 
he  rests  in  that  place,  thou  seeing  of  it,  is  a  good  sign. 

Confert  is  an  augury  when  a  man  or  bird  in  journey- 
ing or  flying  shall  pass  behind  thee,  coming  from  the 
left  side  of  thee,  and,  bending  toward  thy  right,  pass 
out  of  thy  sight,  and  is  an  evil  sign  concerning  thy 
business. 

Scassarvetus  is  when  thou  see  a  man  or  a  bird  pass 
by  thee,  and  resting  in  a  place  on  thy  left  side,  is  an 
evil  sign  to  thee. 

Scassarnova  is  when  thou  see  a  man  or  a  bird  pass 
by  thee,  and  resting  in  a  place  on  thy  right  side,  is  an 
augury  of  good  to  thee. 

Emponenthem  is  when  a  man  or  a  bird,  coming  from 
thy  left  side,  and  passing  to  thy  right,  goeth  out  of 
thy  sight  without  resting,  and  is  a  good  sign. 

Hartena  or  Herrenam  is  an  augury  that,  if  a  man  or 
a  bird  coming  from  thy  right  hand,  shall  pass  behind 
thy  back  to  thy  left,^and  thou  shall  see  him  resting 
anywhere,  this  is  in  evil  sign. 

The  ancients  did  also  prognosticate  from  sneezings, 
of  which  Homer  in  the  seventeenth  book  of  his  poem 
of  the  Odyssey  makes  mention,  because  they  thought 
that  they  proceeded  from  a  sacred  place,  viz.,  the 
head,  in  which  the  intellect  is  vigorous  and  operative. 
"Whence,  also,  whatsoever  speech  came  into  the  breast 
or  mind  of  a  man  rising  in  the  morning,  unawares,  is 
said  to  be  some  presage  and  an  augury. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  161 

CHAPTER  LIV. 

Of  divers  certain  Animals,  and  other  things,  which  have  a 
Signification  in  Auguries. 

All  the  Auspicia,  or  auspices,  which  first  happen 
in  the  beginning"  of  any  enterprise  are  to  be  taken 
notice  of.  As,  if  in  the  beginning  of  thy  work  thou 
shalt  perceive  that  rats  have  gnawn  thy  garments, 
desist  from  thy  undertakings.  If  going  forth  thou 
shalt  stumble  at  the  threshold,  or  if  in  the  way  thou 
shalt  dash  thy  foot  against  any  thing,  forbear  thy 
journey.  If  any  ill  omen  happen  in  the  beginning  of 
thy  business,  put  off  thy  undertakings,  lest  thy  inten- 
tions be  wholly  frustrated,  or  accomplished  to  no  pur- 
pose, but  expect  and  wait  for  a  fortunate  hour  for  the 
dispatching  of  thy  affairs  with  a  better  omen.  We 
see  that  many  animals  are,  by  a  natural  power  imbred 
in  them,  prophetical.  Doth  not  the  cock  by  his  crow- 
ing diligently  tell  you  the  hours  of  the  night  and 
morning,  and,  with  his  wings  spread  forth,  chase  away 
the  lion?  Many  birds,  with  their  singing  and  chatter- 
ing, and  flies,  by  their  sharp  pricking,  foretell  rain; 
and  dolphins,  by  their  often  leaping  above  the  water, 
warn  of  tempests.  It  would  be  too  long  to  relate  all 
the  passages  which  the  Phrygians,  Cilicians,  Arabians, 
Umbrians,  Tuscians,  and  other  peoples,  which  follow 
the  auguries,  have  learned  by  birds.  These  they  have 
proved  by  many  experiments  and  examples.  For  in 
all  things  the  Oracles  of  things  to  come  are  hid,  but 
those  are  the  chiefest  which  omenal  birds  shall  fore- 
tell. These  are  those  which  the  poets  relate  were 
turned  from  men  into  birds.  Therefore,  what  the  daw 
declares,  hearken  unto  and  mark,  observing  her  set- 
ting as  she  sits;  and  her  manner  of  flying,  whether  on 
the  right  hand  or  left;  whether  clamorous  or  silent; 
whether  she  goes  before  or  follows  after;  whether  she 


162  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

waits  for  the  approach  of  him  that  passeth  by,  or  flies 
from  him,  and  which  way  she  goes.  All  these  things 
must  be  diligently  observed.  Orus  Apollo  saith  in  his 
Hieroglyphics  that  daws  that  are  twins  signify  mar- 
riage, because  this  bird  brings  forth  two  eggs,  out  of 
which  male  and  female  must  be  brought  forth;  but  if, 
which  seldom  happens,  two  males  be  generated,  or 
two  females,  the  males  will  not  go  with  any  other 
females,  nor  females  with  any  other  males,  but  will 
always  live  without  a  mate,  and  solitary.  Therefore 
they  that  meet  a  single  daw,  divine  thereby  that  they 
shall  live  a  single  life.  The  same  also  doth  a  black 
hen  pigeon  betoken,  for  after  the  death  of  her  mate, 
she  always  lives  single.  Thou  shalt,  also,  as  carefully 
observe  crows,  which  are  as  significant  as  daws,  yea, 
and  in  greater  matters.  It  was  Epictetus  the  Stoics' 
philosopher's  judgment,  who  was  a  sage  author,  that 
if  a  crow  did  croak  over  against  any  one,  it  did  betoken 
some  evil,  either  to  his  body,  fortune,  honor,  wife,  or 
children.  Then  thou  shall  take  heed  to  swans,  who 
foreknow  the  secrets  of  the  waters,  for  their  cheerful- 
ness doth  presage  happy  events  not  only  to  mariners, 
but  all  other  travelers,  unless  they  be  overcome  by 
the  coming  over  of  a  stronger  bird,  as  of  an  eagle, 
who,  by  the  most  potent  majesty  of  her  sovereignty, 
makes  null  the  predictions  of  all  other  birds  if  she 
speaks  to  the  contrary;  for  she  flies  higher  than  all 
other  birds,  and  is  of  more  acute  sight,  and  is  never 
excluded  from  the  secrets  of  Jupiter;  she  portends 
advancement  and  victory,  but  by  blood,  because  she 
drinks  no  water  but  blood.  An  eagle  flying  over  the 
Locresians,  fighting  against  the  Crotoniensians,  gave 
them  victory;  an  eagle  setting  herself  unawares  upon 
the  target  of  Hiero,  going  forth  to  the  first  war,  be- 
tokened that  he  should  be  king.  Two  eagles  sitting 
all  day  upon  the  house  at  the  birth  of  Alexander,  of 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  163 

Macedonia,  did  portend  to  him  an  omen  of  two  king- 
doms, viz.,  Asia  and  Europe.  .  An  eagle,  also,  taking  off 
the  hat  of  Lucias  Tarquinius  Prisons,  son  to  Demara- 
thus  the  Corinthian  (and,  by  reason  of  some  discord, 
being  come  into  Hetraria  and  going  to  Rome)  and  then 
flying  high  with  it,  and  afterwards  putting  it  upon  his 
head  again,  did  portend  to  him  the  kingdom  of  the 
Romans.  Vultures  signify  difficulty,  hardness,  and 
ravenousness,  which  was  verified  in  the  beginning  of 
the  building  of  cities.  Also  they  foretell  the  places  of 
slaughter,  coming  seven  days  beforehand;  and  because 
they  have  most  respect  to  that  place  where  the  great- 
est slaughter  shall  be,  as  if  they  gaped  after  the 
greatest  number  of  the  slain,  therefore  the  ancient 
kings  were  wont  to  send  out  spies  to  take  notice  what 
place  the  vultures  had  most  respect  to.  The  phoenix 
promiseth  singular  good  success,  which  being  seen 
anew,  Rome  was  built  very  auspiciously.  The  pelican, 
because  she  hazards  herself  for  her  young,  signifies 
that  a  man  should,  out  of  the  zeal  of  his  love,  undergo 
much  hardship.  The  painted  bird  gave  the  name  to  the 
city  of  Pictavia,  and  foreshowed  the  lenity  of  that  peo- 
ple by  its  color  and  voice.  The  heron  is  an  augury  of 
hard  things.  The  stork  also  is  a  bird  of  concord  and 
makes  concord.  Cranes  gives  us  notice  of  the  treach- 
ery of  enemies.  The  bird  cacupha  betokens  gratitude, 
for  she  alone  doth  express  love  to  her  dam,  being  spent 
with  old  age.  On  the  contrary,  the  hippopotamus,  that 
kills  his  dam,  doth  betoken  ingratitude  for  good  turns, 
also  injustice.  The  bird  origis  is  most  envious,  and 
betokens  envy. 

Amongst  the  smaller  birds,  the  pie  is  talkative  and 
foretells  guests.  The  bird  albanellus  flying  by  anyone, 
if  from  the  left  to  the  right,  betokens  cheerfulness  of 
entertainment;  if  contrary  wise,  betokens  the  contrary. 
The  screech  owl  is  always  unlucky,  so  also  is  the  horn 


164  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

owl,  who,  because  she  goes  to  her  young  by  night, 
unawares,  as  death  comes  unawares,  is  therefore  said 
to  foretell  death;  yet,  sometimes,  because  she  is  not 
blind  in  the  dark  of  the  night,  doth  betoken  diligence 
and  watchfulness,  which  she  made  good  when  she  sat 
upon  the  spear  of  Hiero.  And  Dido,  when  she  saw  the 
unlucky  owl,  pitied  ^neas,  whence  the  poet  sang: 

The  Owl,  sitting  on  top  of  the  house  alone, 

Sends  forth  her  sad  complaints  with  mournful  tone. 

And  in  another  place. 

The  slothful  Oivl  by  mortals  is  esteemed 
A  fatal  omen 

The  same  bird  sang  in  the  capitol  when  the  Roman 
affairs  were  low  at  Numantia  and  when  Fregelia  was 
pulled  down  for  a  conspiracy  made  against  the  Romans. 
Almadel  says  that  owls  and  night-ravens,  when  they 
turn  aside  to  strange  countries,  or  houses,  betoken  the 
death  of  the  men  of  that  country  and  those  houses,  for 
those  birds  are  delighted  with  dead  carcasses  and 
perceive  them  beforehand.  For  men  that  are  dying 
have  a  near  affinity  with  dead  carcasses.  The  hawk 
is  also  a  foreteller  of  contention,  as  Naso  sings: 

We  hate  the  Hawk,  because  that  arms  amongst 
She  always  lives 

Lelius,  the  embassador  of  Pompey,  was  slain  in 
Spain,  amongst  the  purveyors,  which  misfortune,  a 
hawk  flying  over  the  head,  is  said  to  foretell.  And 
Almadel  saith  that  these  kinds  of  birds  fighting 
amongst  themselves,  signify  the  change  of  a  kingdom; 
but  if  birds  of  another  kind  shall  fight  with  them  and 
are  never  seen  to  come  together  again,  it  portends  a 
new  condition  and  state  of  that  country.  Also,  little 
birds,  by  their  coming  to  or  departing  from,  foreshew 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL,  MAGIC.  165 

that  a  family  shall  be  increased  or  lessened;  and  their 
flight,  by  how  much  the  more  serene  it  is,  by  so  much 
the  more  laudable  shall  the  change  be.  Whence  did 
Melampus,  the  Augure,  conjecture  at  the  slaughter  of 
the  Greeks  by  the  flight  of  little  birds,  when  he  saith: 
"Thou  see  now  that  no  bird  takes  his  flight  in  fair 
weather. "  Swallows,  because  when  they  are  dying 
they  provide  a  place  of  safety  for  their  young,  do 
portend  a  great  patrimony  or  legacy  after  the  death  of 
friends.  A  bat,  meeting  any  one  running  away,  signi- 
fies an  evasion;  for,  although  she  have  no  wings,  yet 
she  flies.  A  sparrow  is  a  bad  omen  to  one  that  runs 
away,  for  she  flies  from  the  hawk  and  makes  haste  to 
the  owl,  where  she  is  in  as  great  danger;  yet  in  love 
she  is  fortunate,  for  being  stirred  up  with  affection  she 
seeks  her  consort  hourly.  Bees  are  a  good  omen  to 
kings,  for  they  signify  an  obsequious  people.  Flies 
signify  importunity  and  impudence  because  being  often- 
times driven  away  they  do  continually  return.  Also 
domestic  birds  are  not  without  some  auguries,  for 
cocks,  by  their  crowing,  promote  hope,  and  the  jour- 
ney of  him  that  is  undertaking  it.  Moreover,  Livia, 
the  mother  of  Tiberius,  when  she  was  great  w^ith  him, 
took  a  hen's  egg  and  hatched  it  in  her  bosom,  and  at 
length  came  forth  a  cock  chick  with  a  great  comb, 
which  the  auguries  interpreted  that  the  child  that 
should  be  born  of  her  should  be  a  king.  And  Cicero 
writes  that  at  Thebais,  cocks,  by  their  crowing  all 
night,  did  presage  that  the  Baeotians  would  obtain 
victory  against  the  Lacedaemonians,  and  the  reason  is 
according  to  the  augury's  interpretations  because  that 
bird  when  he  is  beaten  is  silent,  but  when  he  himself 
hath  overcome,  crows.  In  like  manner,  also,  omens  of 
events  are  taken  from  beasts.  For  the  meeting  of  a 
weasel  is  ominous;  also,  the  meeting  of  a  hare  is  an  ill 
omen  to  a  traveler,  unless  she  be  taken.     A  mule  also 


166  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

is  bad  because  barren.  A  hog"  is  pernicious,  for  such 
is  his  nature,  and  therefore  signifies  pernicious  men. 
A  horse  betokens  quarrelings  and  fightings,  whence 
Anchises,  seeing  of  white  horses,  cries  out  in  Virgil: 

With  war  are  Horses  arm^d,  yea,  threaten  war. 

But  when  they  are  joined  together  in  a  chariot, 
because  they  draw  with  an  equal  yoke,  they  signify 
that  peace  is  to  be  hoped  for.  An  ass  is  an  unprofit- 
able creature,  yet  did  Marius  good,  w^ho,  when  he  was 
pronounced  an  enemy  to  his  country,  saw  an  ass  dis- 
daining provender  that  was  offered  to  him,  and  running 
to  the  water,  by  which  augury  he,  supposing  he  saw  a 
way  of  safety  showed  to  him,  entreated  the  aid  of  his 
friends  that  they  would  convey  him  to  the  sea,  which 
being  granted,  he  was  set  into  a  little  ship  and  so 
escaped  the  threats  of  Silla  the  conqueror.  If  the 
foal  of  an  ass  meet  any  one  going  to  an  augury,  he 
signifies  labor,  patience  and  hinderances.  A  wolf 
meeting  any  one  is  a  good  sign,  the  effect  whereof  was 
seen  in  Hiero  of  Sicilia,  from  whom  a  wolf,  snatching 
away  a  book  whilst  he  was  at  school,  confirmed  to  him 
the  success  of  the  kingdom,  but  yet  the  wolf  makes 
him  speechless  whom  he  sees  first.  A  wolf  rent  in 
pieces  a  watchman  of  P.  Africanus  and  C.  Fulvius  at 
Minturn,  when  the  Roman  army  was  overcome  by  the 
fugitives  in  Sicilia.  He  signifies  perfidious  men,  such 
as  you  can  give  no  credit  to,  which  was  known  in  the 
progeny  of  Romans.  For  the  faith  which  they  long 
since  sucked  from  their  mother  the  wolf  and  kept  to 
themselves  from  the  beginning,  as  by  a  certain  law  of 
nature,  passed  over  to  their  posterity.  To  meet  a  lion, 
seeing  she  is  amongst  animals  the  strongest  and 
striking  terror  into  all  the  rest,  is  good.  But  for  a 
woman  to  meet  a  lioness  is  bad,  because  she  hinders 
conception,  for  a  lioness  brings  forth  but  once.     To 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  167 

meet  sheep  and  goats  is  g"ood.  It  is  read  in  the  Osten- 
tarian  of  the  Tuscians,  if  this  animal  shall  wear  any- 
unusual  color,  it  portends  to  the  emperor  plenty  of  all 
things,  together  with  much  happiness.  Whence  Virgil 
to  Pollio  sings  thus: 

But,  in  the  meadoivs,  Bams  shall  scarlet  dear, 
And  changing,  sometimes  golden  fleeces  ivear. 

It  is  good  also  to  meet  oxen  treading  out  corn,  but 
better  to  meet  them  plowing,  which  although  breaking 
the  way,  hinder  thy  journey,  yet  by  the  favor  of  their 
Auspicium  will  recompense  thee  again.  A  dog  in  a 
journey  is  fortunate,  because  Cyrus,  being  cast  into  the 
woods,  was  nourished  by  a  dog  until  he  came  to  the 
kingdom;  which,  also,  the  angel,  companion  of  Tobit, 
did  not  scorn  as  a  companion.  The  castor,  because 
he  biteth  himself  sorely,  so  as  to  be  seen  by  hunters, 
is  an  ill  omen  and  portends  that  a  man  will  injure  him- 
self. Also,  amongst  small  animals,  mice  signify  dan- 
ger, for  the  same  day  that  they  did  gnaw  gold  in  the 
capitol,  both  the  consuls  were  intercepted  by  Hannibal 
by  way  of  ambush,  near  Tarentum.  The  locust  mak- 
ing a  stand  in  any  place,  or  burning  the  place,  hinders 
one  from  their  wishes  and  is  an  ill  omen;  and  on  the 
contrary  the  grasshopper  promotes  a  journey  and 
foretells  a  good  event  of  things.  The  spider  weaving 
a  line  downwards,  is  said  to  signify  hope  of  money  to 
come.  Also  the  ants,  because  they  know  how  to  pro- 
vide for  themselves,  and  to  prepare  safe  nests  for 
themselves,  portend  security  and  riches,  and  a  great 
army.  Hence,  when  the  ants  had  devoured  a  tame 
dragon  of  Tiberius  Caesar,  it  was  advised  that  he 
should  take  heed  of  the  tumult  of  a  multitude.  If  a 
snake  meet  thee,  take  heed  of  an  ill-tongued  enemy; 
for  this  creature  hath  no  power  but  in  his  mouth.  A 
snake  creeping  into  the  palace  of  Tiberius,  portended 


168  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

his  fall.  Two  snakes  were  found  in  the  bed  of  Sem- 
pronius  Glracchus,  wherefore  a  soothsayer  told  him,  if 
he  would  let  the  male  or  the  female  escape,  either  he 
Or  his  wife  would  shortly  die;  and  he,  preferring"  the 
life  of  his  wife,  killed  the  male  and  let  the  female  go, 
and  within  a  few  days  he  died.  So  a  viper  signifies 
lewd  women  and  wicked  children;  and  an  eel  signifies 
a  man  displeased  with  everybody,  for  she  lives  apart 
from  all  other  fishes,  nor  is  ever  found  in  the  company 
of  any.  But,  among"st  all  Auguries  and  Omens,  there 
is  none  more  effectual  and  potent  than  man  himself, 
and  none  that  doth  signify  the  truth  more  clearly. 
Thou  shalt,  therefore,  diligently  note  and  observe  the 
condition  of  the  man  that  meeteth  thee,  his  age,  pro- 
fession, station,  stature,  gesture,  motion,  exercise, 
complexion,  habit,  name,  words,  speech,  and  all  such 
like  things.  For  seeing  there  are  in  all  other  animals 
so  many  discoveries  of  presages,  without  all  question 
these  are  more  efficacious  and  clear  which  are  infused 
into  man's  soul;  which  Tully  himself  testifies,  saying, 
that  there  is  a  certain  Auspicium  naturally  in  men's 
souls  of  their  eternity,  for  the  knowing  of  the  courses 
and  causes  of  things.  In  the  foundation  of  the  city 
of  Rome  the  head  of  a  man  was  found  with  his  whole 
face,  which  did  presage  the  greatness  of  the  empire, 
and  gave  the  name  to  the  Mountain  of  the  Capitol. 
The  Brutian  soldiers  fighting  against  Octavius  and 
Antonius,  found  an  Ethiopian  in  the  gate  of  their 
castle,  and  though  they  slew  him  as  a  presage  of  ill 
success,  yet  they  were  unfortunate  in  battle,  and  both 
their  generals,  Brutus  and  Cassius,  were  slain. 

The  meeting  of  monks  is  commonly  accounted  an 
ill  omen,  and  so  much  the  rather  if  it  be  early  in  the 
morning,  because  these  kind  of  men  live  for  the  most 
by  the  sudden  death  of  men,  as  vultures  do  by 
slaughters. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  169 

CHAPTER  LV. 

How  Auspicias  are  Verified  by  the  Light  of  Natural  Instinct^ 
and  of  some  Rules  of  Finding  of  It  Out. 

AusPiciA  and  Auguria,  which  foretell  thing-s  to  come 
by  animals  and  birds,  Orpheus,  the  divine,  himself,  as 
we  read,  did  teach  and  show  first  of  all,  which  after- 
wards were  had  in  great  esteem  with  all  nations. 
Now  they  are  verified  by  the  light  of  natural  instinct, 
as  if  from  this  some  lights  of  divination  may  descend 
upon  four-footed  beasts,  those  winged,  and  other  crea- 
tures, by  which  they  are  able  to  presage  to  us  of  the 
events  of  things;  which  Virgil  seems  to  be  sensible  of 
when  he  sings: 

Nor  think  I  Heaven  on  them  such  knowledge  states, 
Nor  that  their  prudence  is  above  the  Fates. 

Now,  this  Instinct  of  Nature,  as  saith  William  of 
Paris,  is  more  sublime  than  all  human  apprehension, 
and  very  near,  and  most  like  to  prophecy.  By  this 
instinct  there  is  a  certain  wonderful  light  of  divination 
in  some  animals  naturally,  as  is  manifested  in  some 
dogs,  who  know  thieves  by  this  instinct  and  men  that 
are  hid,  unknown  both  to  themselves  and  men,  and  find 
them  out  and  apprehend  them,  falling  upon  them  with 
a  full  mouth.  By  the  like  instinct  vultures  foresee 
future  slaughters  in  battles,  and  gather  together  into 
places  where  they  shall  be,  as  if  they  foresaw  the 
flesh  of  dead  carcasses.  By  the  same  instinct  par- 
tridges know  their  dam,  whom  they  never  saw,  and 
leave  the  partridge  which  stole  away  her  dam's  eggs 
and  sate  upon  them.  By  the  same  instinct,  also,  cer- 
tain hurtful  and  terrible  things  are  perceived,  the  soul 
being  ignorant  of  them,  whence  terror  and  horror 
ceaseth  when  men  think  nothing  of  these  things.  So 
a  thief,  lying  hid  in  a  house,  although  no  one  knows 


170  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

or  thinks  of  his  being  there,  strikes  fear  and  terror 
and  a  troublesomeness  of  mind  into  the  inhabitants  of 
that  house,  although,  haply,  not  of  all,  because  the 
brightness  of  this  instinct  is  not  common  to  all  men, 
yet  possessed  of  some  of  them.  So  an  evil  person, 
being  hid  in  some  large  building,  is  sometimes  per- 
ceived to  be  there  by  some  one  that  is  altogether  igno- 
rant of  their  being  there.  It  is  mentioned  in  history 
that  Heraiscus,  a  certain  Egyptian,  a  man  of  a  divine 
nature,  could  discern  evil  persons,  not  only  by  his  eyes 
but  also  by  their  voice,  he  hearing  them  afar  off,  and 
thereupon  did  fall  into  a  most  grievous  headache. 
William  of  Paris  also  makes  mention  of  a  certain 
woman  in  his  time  that,  by  the  same  instinct,  per- 
ceived a  man  whom  she  loved  coming  two  miles  off. 
He  relates,  also,  that  in  his  time  a  certain  stork  was 
convicted  of  unchastity  by  the  smell  of  the  male,  who, 
being  judged  guilty  by  a  multitude  of  storks  whom  the 
male  gathered  together,  discovering  to  them  the  fault 
of  his  mate,  was,  her  feathers  being  pulled  off,  torn  in 
pieces  by  them.  The  same  doth  Varro,  Aristotle  and 
Pliny  relate  concerning  horses.  And  Pliny  makes 
mention  of  a  certain  serpent,  called  the  asp,  that  did 
such  a  like  thing,  for  she,  coming  to  a  certain  man's 
table  in  Egypt,  was  there  daily  fed,  and  she,  having 
brought  forth  some  young,  by  one  of  which  a  son  of 
her  host  was  killed,  after  she  knew  of  it,  killed  that 
young  one,  and  would  never  return  to  that  house  any 
more.  Now,  by  these  examples,  you  see  how  the 
lights  of  presage  may  descend  upon  some  animals,  as 
signs,  or  marks  of  things,  and  are  set  in  their  gesture, 
motion,  voice,  flying,  going,  meat,  color,  and  such  like. 
For,  according  to  the  doctrine  of  the  Platonists,  there 
is  a  certain  power  put  into  inferior  things  by  which,  for 
the  most  part,  they  agree  with  the  superiors;  whence 
also  the  tacit  consents  of  animals  seem  to  agree  with 


PHILOSOPHY   OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  171 

divine  bodies,  and  their  bodies  and  affections  to  be 
affected  with  their  powers,  by  the  name  of  which  they 
are  ascribed  to  the  deities.  We  must  consider,  there- 
fore, what  animals  are  Saturnine,  what  are  Jovial  and 
what  Martial,  and  so  of  the  rest;  and,  according"  to 
their  properties,  to  draw  forth  their  presages;  so  those 
birds  which  resemble  Saturn  and  Mars,  are  all  of  them 
called  terrible  and  deadly,  as  the  screech  owl,  the 
hawlet,  and  others  which  we  have  mentioned  before; 
also  the  horn  owl,  because  she  is  a  Saturnine,  solitary 
bird,  also  nightly,  and  is  reputed  to  be  most  unfortu- 
nately ominous,  of  which  the  poet  saith: 

The  ugly  Owl,  ivhich  no  bird  ivell  resents, 
Foretells  misfortunes  and  most  sad  events. 

But  the  swan  is  a  delicious  bird,  under  Venus,  and 
dedicated  to  Phoebus,  and  is  said  to  be  most  happy  in 
her  presages,  especially  in  the  auspices  of  mariners, 
for  she  is  never  drowned  in  water,  whence  Ovid  sings: 

Most  happy  is  the  cheerful,  singing  Swan 
In  her  presages 

There  are  also  some  birds  that  presage  with  their 
mouth  and  singing,  as  the  crow,  pie,  and  daw,  whence 
Virgil : 

This  did  foreshow 

Oft  from  the  hollow  holm  that  ominous  Crow. 

Now,  the  birds  that  portend  future  things  by  their 
flying  are,  viz.,  buzzards,  the  bone -breakers,  vultures, 
eagles,  cranes,  swans,  and  the  like,  for  they  are  to  be 
considered  in  their  flying,  whether  they  fly  slowly  or 
swiftly;  whether  to  the  right  hand  or  to  the  left;  how 
many  fly  together.  Upon  this  account,  if  cranes  fly 
apace,  they  signify  a  tempest;  and,  when  slowly,  fair 
weather.     When  two  eagles  fly  together,  they  are  said 

172  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

to  portend  evil,  because  two  is  a  number  of  confusion. 
In  like  manner  thou  shalt  enquire  into  the  reason  of 
the  rest,  as  this  is  shown  by  number.  Moreover,  it 
belongs  to  an  artist  to  observe  a  similitude  in  these 
conjectures,  as  in  Virgil,  Venus,  dissembling,  teacheth 
her  son,  ^neas,  in  these  verses: 

All  this  is  not  for  naught, 


Else  me  in  vain  my  parents  Augury  taught; 

Lo!  twice  six  Swans  in  a  glad  company 

Jove^s  bird  pursued  through  the  etherial  Sky 

In  Heaven'' s  broad  tracks;  noiv  earth  in  a  long  train 

They  seem  to  take,  or  taken,  to  disdain; 

As  they  return  with  sounding  wings  they  sport, 

And  Heaven  surrounding  in  a  long  consort. 

Just  so,  I  say,  thy  friends  and  fleet  have  gained 

The  port,  or  with  full  sails  the  Bay  obtained. 

Most  wonderful  is  that  kind  of  auguring  of  theirs, 
who  hear  and  understand  the  speeches  of  animals,  in 
which,  as  amongst  the  ancients,  Melampus,  Tirefias, 
Thales,  and  Apollonius,  the  Tyanean,  who,  as  we  read, 
excelled,  and  whom,  they  report,  had  excellent  skill  in 
the  language  of  birds;  of  whom  Philostratus  and  Por- 
phyrins speak,  saying,  that  of  old,  when  Apollonius 
sat  in  company  amongst  his  friends,  seeing  sparrows 
sitting  upon  a  tree,  and  one  sparrow  coming  from  else- 
where unto  them,  making  a  great  chattering  and  noise, 
and  then  flying  away,  all  the  rest  following  him,  he 
said  to  his  companions  that  that  sparrow  told  the  rest 
that  an  ass,  being  burdened  with  wheat,  fell  down  in 
a  hole  near  the  city  and  that  the  wheat  was  scattered 
upon  the  ground.  Many,  being  much  moved  with  these 
words,  went  to  see,  and  so  it  was,  as  Apollonius  said, 
at  which  they  much  wondered.  Porphyrins,  the  Pla- 
tonist,  in  his  third  book  of  sacrifices,  saith  that  there 
is  certainly  a  swallow  language,  because  every  voice 


PHILOSOPHY   OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  173 

of  every  animal  is  significative  of  some  passion  of  its 
soul,  as  joy,  sadness,  or  anger,  or  the  like,  which 
voices,  it  is  not  so  wonderful  a  thing,  could  be  under- 
stood by  men  conversant  about  them.  But  Democritus 
himself  declared  this  art,  as  saith  Pliny,  by  naming 
the  birds,  of  whose  blood  mixed  together  was  produced 
a  serpent,  of  which  whosoever  did  eat  should  under- 
stand the  voices  of  birds.  And  Hermes  saith  that  if 
any  one  shall  go  forth  to  catch  birds  on  a  certain  day 
of  the  Kalends  of  November,  and  shall  boil  the  first 
bird  that  he  catcheth  with  the  heart  of  a  fox,  that  all 
that  shall  eat  of  this  bird  shall  understand  the  voices 
of  birds  and  all  other  animals.  Also,  the  Arabians 
say  that  they  can  understand  the  meaning  of  brutes 
who  shall  eat  the  heart  and  liver  of  a  dragon.  Pro- 
clus,  also,  the  Platonist,  believed  and  wrote  that  the 
heart  of  a  mole  conduceth  to  presages.  There  were 
also  divinations  and  auspices  which  were  taken  from 
the  inwards  of  sacrifices,  the  inventor  whereof  was 
Tages,  of  whom  Lucan  sang: 

And  if  the  Inwards  have  no  credit  gained, 
And  if  this  Art  hy  Tages  was  hut  feigned. 

The  Roman  religion  thought  that  the  liver  was  the 
head  of  the  inwards.  Hence  the  soothsayers  enquir- 
ing after  future  things  in  the  inwards,  did  first  look 
into  the  liver,  in  which  were  two  heads,  whereof  the 
one  was  called  the  head  for  the  city,  the  other  for  the 
enemy;  and  the  heads  of  this,  or  another  part,  being 
compared  together,  they  then  gave  judgment  and  pro- 
nounced for  victory;  as  we  read,  in  Lucan,  that  the 
inwards  did  signify  the  slaughter  of  Pompey's  men 
and  the  victory  of  Caesar's,  according  to  these  verses: 

In  the  imuards  all  defects  are  ominous — 

One  part  and  branch  of  the  entrails  doth  increase. 


174  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

Another  part  is  weak,  and  flagging  lies, 
Beats,  and  moves  with  quick  pulse  the  arteries. 

Then,  the  bowels  being  finished,  they  search  the 
heart.  Now,  if  there  were  a  sacrifice  found  without  a 
heart,  or  a  head  was  wanting  in  the  liver,  these  were 
deadly  presages,  and  were  called  piacularia.  Also,  if 
a  sacrifice  fled  from  the  altar,  or,  being  smitten,  made 
a  lowing,  or  fell  upon  any  part  of  his  body  than  he 
ought  to  do,  it  was  the  like  ominous.  We  read  that 
when  Julius  Caesar  on  a  day  went  forth  to  procession 
with  his  purple  robe,  and  sitting  in  a  golden  chair  and 
sacrificing,  there  was  twice  a  heart  wanting.  When 
C.  Marius  Utica  was  sacrificing,  there  was  wanting  a 
liver.  Also  when  Caius,  the  prince,  and  M.  Marcellus, 
C.  Claudius  and  L.  Petellius  Coss,  were  offering  sacri- 
fices, that  the  liver  was  consumed  suddenly  away  and, 
not  long  after,  one  of  them  died  of  a  disease,  another 
was  slain  by  men  of  Lyguria,  the  entrails  foretelling 
so  much;  which  was  thought  to  be  done  by  the  power 
of  the  Gods,  or  help  of  the  devil.  Hence  it  was 
accounted  a  thing  of  great  concernment  amongst  the 
ancients  as  oft  as  any  thing  unusual  was  found  in  the 
inwards,  as  when  Sylla  was  sacrificing  at  Laurentum, 
the  figure  of  a  crown  appeared  in  the  head  of  the  liver, 
which  Posthumius,  the  soothsayer,  interpreted  to  por- 
tend a  victory  with  a  kingdom,  and  therefore  advised 
that  Sylla  should  eat  those  entrails  himself.  The 
color,  also,  of  the  inwards  is  to  be  considered.  Of 
these  Lucan made  mention: 

Struck  at  the  color  Prophets  ivere  tvith  fear, 
For  with  foul  spots  pale  entrals  tinged  were. 
Both  black  and  blue,  tvith  specks  of  sprinkled  blood 
They  were 

There  was  in  times  past  such  a  venerable  esteem  of 
these  arts  that  the  most  potent  and  wise  men  sought 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  175 

after  them;  yea,  the  senate  and  kings  did  nothing- 
without  the  counsel  of  the  Augures.  But  all  these  in 
these  days  are  abolished,  partly  by  the  negligence  of 
men  and  partly  by  the  authority  of  the  fathers. 


CHAPTER  LVI. 

Of  the  Soothsayings  of  Flashes  and  Lightnings,  and  how 
Monstrous  and  Prodigious  Things  are  to  be  Interpreted. 

Now,  the  soothsayings  of  flashes  and  lightnings; 
and  of  wonders,  and  how  monstrous  and  prodigious 
things  are  to  be  interpreted,  the  prophets  and  priests 
of  Hetruscus  have  taught  the  art.  For  they  have 
ordained  sixteen  regions  of  the  heavens  and  have 
ascribed  Gods  to  every  one  of  them,  besides  eleven 
kinds  of  lightning,  and  nine  gods  which  should  dart 
them  forth,  by  showing  rules  for  understanding  the 
signification  of  them.  But  as  often  as  monstrous, 
prodigious  and  wondrous  things  happen,  they  do 
presage,  as  is  most  certain,  some  great  matter.  Now, 
their  interpreter  must  be  some  excellent  conjector  of 
similitudes,  as  also  some  curious  searcher,  and  of  them 
who  at  that  time  are  employed  about  the  affairs  of 
princes  and  provinces.  For  the  celestials  take  such 
care  only  for  princes,  peoples  and  provinces  that 
before  the  rest  they  might  be  prefigured  and  admon- 
ished by  stars,  by  constellations  and  by  prodigies. 
Now,  if  the  same  thing,  or  the  like,  hath  been  seen  in 
former  ages,  we  must  consider  that  very  thing  and 
what  happened  after  that,  and  according  to  these,  to 
fortell  the  same,  or  the  like,  because  the  same  signs 
are  for  the  same  things,  and  the  like  for  like.  So 
prodigies  have  come  before  the  birth  and  death  of 
many  eminent  men  and  kings,  as  Cicero  makes  men- 
tion of  Midas,  a  boy,  into  whose  mouth  whilst  he  was 


176  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

sleeping",  the  ant  put  corns  of  wheat,  which  was  an 
omen  of  great  riches.  So  bees  sat  upon  the  mouth  of 
Plato  when  he  was  sleeping  in  the  cradle,  by  which 
was  foretold  the  sweetness  of  his  speech.  Hecuba, 
when  she  was  bringing  forth  Paris,  saw  a  burning 
torch,  which  should  set  on  fire  Troy  and  all  Asia. 
There  appeared  unto  the  mother  of  Phalaris  the  image 
of  Mercury  pouring  forth  blood  upon  the  earth,  with 
which  the  whole  house  was  overflowed.  The  mother 
of  Dionysius  dreamed  she  brought  forth  a  satyr, 
which  prodigious  dream  the  event  that  followed  made 
good.  The  wife  of  Tarquinius  Priscus,  seeing  a  flame 
lick  the  head  of  Servius  Tullius,  foretold  that  he 
should  have  the  kingdom.  In  like  manner,  after  Troy 
was  taken,  ^neas  disputing  with  Anchises,  his  father, 
concerning  a  fight,  there  appeared  a  flame  licking  the 
head  of  the  crown  of  Ascanius  and  doing  him  no  hurt. 
Which  thing,  seeing  it  did  portend  the  kingdom  to 
Ascanius,  persuaded  him  to  depart,  for  monstrous  pro- 
digies did  forerun  great  and  eminent  destruction.  So 
we  read  in  Pliny  that  M.  Attilius  and  C.  Portius,  being 
consuls,  it  rained  milk  and  blood,  which  did  presage 
that  a  very  great  pestilence  should  the  next  year  over- 
spread Kome.  In  Lucania  it  rained  spongeous  iron, 
and  in  the  year  before  Marcus  Crassus  was  slain  in 
Parthia,  with  which,  also,  all  the  soldiers  of  Lucania, 
being  a  very  numerous  army,  were  slain.  L.  Paulus 
and  C.  Marcellus,  being  consuls,  it  rained  wool  about 
the  castle  of  Corisanum,  near  which  place,  a  year  after, 
T.  Annius  was  slain  by  Milus.  And  in  the  wars  of 
Denmark,  the  noise  of  arms  and  the  sound  of  a  trumpet 
was  heard  in  the  air.  And  Livy,  concerning  the  Mace- 
donian wars,  saith,  in  the  year  when  Annibal  died  it 
rained  blood  for  two  days.  Concerning  the  second 
Punic  war,  he  saith  that  water  mixed  with  blood  came 
down  from  heaven  like  rain  at  the  time  when  Annibal 


PHILOSOPHY   OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  177 

did  spoil  Italy.  A  little  before  the  destruction  of 
Leuctra,  the  Lacedemonians  heard  a  noise  of  arms  in 
the  temple  of  Hercules,  and  at  the  same  time  in  the 
temple  of  Hercules  the  doors  that  were  shut  with  bars 
opened  themselves,  and  the  arms  that  were  hanged  on 
the  wall  were  found  on  the  ground.  The  like  events 
may  be  prognosticated  of  other  like  things,  as  often- 
times in  times  past  something  hath  been  foretold  of 
them.  But  concerning  these,  also,  the  judgments  of 
the  celestial  influences  must  not  be  neglected,  concern- 
ing which  we  shall  more  largely  treat  in  the  following 
chapters. 


CHAPTER  LVII. 

Of  Geomancy^  Hydromancij,  Aeromancy,  and  Pyromancy, 
Four  Divinations  of  Elements. 

Moreover,  the  Elements  themselves  teach  us  fatal 
events;  whence  those  four  famous  kinds  of  divinations, 
Geomancy,  Hydromancy,  Aeromancy,  and  Pyromancy, 
have  got  their  names,  of  which  the  sorceress  in  Lucan 
seems  to  boast  herself  when  she  saith; 

The  Earth,  the  Aire,  the  Chaos,  and  the  SMe, 

The  Seas,  the  Fields,  the  Rocks,  and  Mountains  high 

Foretell  the  truth 

The  first,  therefore,  is  Geomancy,  which  foreshows 
future  things  by  the  motions  of  the  earth,  as  also  the 
noise,  the  swelling,  the  trembling,  the  chops,  the  pits, 
and  exhalation,  and  other  impressions  thereof,  the  art 
of  which  Almadel,  the  Arabian,  sets  forth.  But  there 
is  another  kind  of  Geomancy  which  divines  b}^  points 
written  upon  the  earth  by  a  certain  power  in  the  fall 
of  it,  which  is  not  of  present  speculation,  but  of  that 
we  shall  speak  hereafter. 


178  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

Now  Hydromancy  doth  perform  its  presages  by  the 
impressions  of  waters,  their  ebbing  and  flowing,  their 
increases  and  depressions,  their  tempests,  colors,  and 
the  like;  to  which,  also,  are  added  visions  which  are 
made  in  the  waters.  A  kind  of  divination  found  by 
the  Persians,  as  Varro  reports,  was  that  of  a  boy  who 
saw  in  the  water  the  effigies  of  Mercury,  which  fore- 
told, in  a  hundred  and  fifty  verses,  all  the  events  of 
the  war  of  Mithridates.  We  read,  also,  that  Numa 
Pompilius  practiced  Hydromancy,  for  in  the  water  he 
called  up  the  gods  and  learned  of  them  things  to  come. 
Which  art  also  Pythagoras,  a  long  time  after  Numa, 
practiced.  There  was  of  old  a  kind  of  Hydromancy 
had  in  great  esteem  amongst  the  Assyrians,  and  it  was 
called  Lecanomancy,  from  a  skin  full  of  water,  upon 
which  they  put  plates  of  gold  and  silver  and  precious 
stones  written  upon  with  certain  images,  names  and 
characters.  To  this  may  be  referred  that  art  by  which 
lead  and  wax,  being  melted  and  cast  into  the  water,  do 
express  manifest  marks  of  images  of  those  things  we 
desire  to  know.  There  were  also  in  former  years 
fountains  that  did  foretell  things  to  come,  as  the 
fathers'  fountain  at  Achaia,  and  that  which  was  called 
the  water  of  Juno,  in  Epidaurus;  but  of  these  more  in 
the  following  chapter,  where  we  shall  speak  of  Oracles. 

Hither  also  may  be  referred  the  divination  of  fishes, 
of  which  kind  there  was  use  made  by  the  Lycians  in  a 
certain  place  which  was  called  Dina,  near  the  sea;  in 
a  wood  dedicated  to  Apollo,  was  a  hollow  in  the  dry 
sand,  into  which  he  that  went  to  consult  of  future 
things  let  down  roasted  meat,  and  presently  that  place 
was  filled  with  water  and  a  great  multitude  of  fish,  and 
strange  shapes,  unknown  to  men,  did  appear;  by  the 
forms  of  which  the  prophet  foretold  what  should  come 
to  pass.  These  things  doth  Atheneus  more  at  large 
relate  in  the  history  of  the  Lycians. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  .  179 

After  the  same  manner,  also,  doth  Aeromancy  divine 
by  airy  impressions,  by  the  blowing  of  the  winds,  by 
rainbows,  by  circles  round  about  the  moon  and  stars, 
by  mists  and  clouds,  and  by  imaginations  in  clouds  and 
visions  in  the  air. 

So  also  Pyromancy  divines  by  fiery  impressions,  and 
by  stars  with  long  tails,  by  fiery  colors,  by  visions  and 
imaginations  in  the  fire.  So  the  wife  of  Cicero  fore- 
told that  he  would  be  consul  the  next  year  because, 
when  a  certain  man,  after  the  sacrifice  was  ended, 
would  look  in  the  ashes,  there  suddenly  broke  forth  a 
flame.  Of  this  kind  are  those  that  Pliny  speaks  of — ■ 
that  terrene,  pale  and  buzzing  fires  presage  tempests, 
circles  about  the  snuffs  of  candles  betoken  rain,  and  if 
the  flame  fly,  turning  and  winding,  it  portends  wind. 
Also  torches,  when  they  strike  the  fire  before  them  and 
are  not  kindled.  Also  when  a  coal  sticks  to  a  pot 
taken  off  from  the  fire,  and  when  the  fire  casts  off  the 
ashes  and  sparkles;  or  when  ashes  are  hard  grown 
together  on  the  hearth,  and  when  a  coal  is  very  bright. 

To  these  is  also  added  Capnomancy,  so  called  from 
smoke,  because  it  searcheth  into  the  flame  and  smoke; 
and  thin  colors,  sounds  and  motions  when  they  are  car- 
ried upright,  or  on  one  side,  or  round,  which  we  read 
of  in  these  verses  in  Statius. 

Let  Piety  &e  bound,  and  on  the  Altar  laid, 

Let  us  implore  the  Gods  for  divine  aid. 

She  makes  acute,  red,  towring  flames,  and  bright^ 

Increased  by  th^  aire,  the  middle  being  white; 

And  then  she  makes  the  flames  toithout  all  bound, 

For  to  ivind  in  and  out,  and  to  run  round 

Like  a  Serpent 

Also  in  the  ^thnean  Caves  and  Fields  of  the 
Nymphs  in  Apollonia,  auguries  were  taken  from  fires 
and  flames — joyful,  if  they  did  receive  what  was  cast 


180  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

into  them,  and  sad,  if  they  did  reject  them.  But  of 
these  things  we  shall  speak  of  in  the  following  chap- 
ters, amongst  the  answers  of  the  Oracles. 


CHAPTER  LVIII. 

Of  the  Reviving  of  the  Dead,  and  of  Sleeping  or  Hibernat- 
ing (wanting  victuals)  Many  Years  together. 

The  Arabian  philosophers  agree  that  some  men  may 
elevate  themselves  above  the  powers  of  their  body  and 
above  their  sensitive  powers;  and,  those  being  sur- 
mounted, they  receive  into  themselves — by  the  perfec- 
tion of  the  Heavens  and  the  Celestial  Intelligences — a 
Divine  Vigor.  Seeing,  therefore,  that  all  the  Souls  of 
men  are  perpetual,  and,  also,  that  all  the  Spirits  obey 
the  perfect  Souls,  Magicians  think  that  perfect  men 
may,  by  the  powers  of  their  soul,  repair  their  dying 
bodies  (with  other  inferior  souls,  newly  separated)  and 
inspire  them  again:  As  a  weasel,  that  is  killed,  is 
made  alive  again  by  the  breath  and  cry  of  his  dam; 
and  as  lions  make  alive  their  dead  whelps  by  breath- 
ing upon  them.  And  because,  as  they  say,  all  like 
things,  being  applied  to  their  like,  are  made  of  the 
same  natures;  and,  also,  every  patient,  subject,  and 
thing  that  receives  into  itself  the  act  of  any  agent  is 
endowed  with  the  nature  of  that  agent  and  made  co- 
natural  with  it.  Hence  they  think  that  to  this  vivifi- 
cation,  or  making  alive,  certain  herbs,  and  Magical 
confections  (such  as,  they  say,  are  made  of  the  ashes 
of  the  PhcBnix  and  the  cast  skin  of  a  Snake)  do  much 
conduce;  which,  indeed,  to  many  may  seem  fabulous, 
and  to  some  impossible,  unless  it  could  be  accounted 
approved  by  an  historical  faith.  For  we  read  of  some 
that  have  been  drowned  in  water,  others  cast  into  the 
fire  or  put  upon  the  fire,  others  slain  in  war,  and  others 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  181 

otherwise  tried,  and  all  these,  after  a  few  days,  were 
alive  again,  as  Pliny  testifies  of  Aviola,  a  man  per- 
taining" to  the  consul,  of  L.  Lamia,  Cselinus,  Tubero, 
Corfidius,  Gabienus,  and  many  others.  We  read  that 
^sop,  the  tale-maker,  Tindoreus,  Hercules  and  Palicy, 
the  sons  of  Jupiter,  and  Thalia,  being  dead,  were 
raised  to  life  again;  also  that  many  were,  by  phy- 
sicians and  magicians,  raised  from  death  again,  as  the 
historians  relate  of  -^sculapius;  and  we  have  above 
mentioned,  out  of  Juba,  and  Xanthus  and  Philostratus, 
concerning  Tillo,  and  a  certain  Arabian,  and  Apollo- 
nius  the  Tyanean.  Also  we  read  that  Glaucus,  a  cer- 
tain man  that  was  dead,  the  herb  dragon-wort  restored 
to  life.  Some  say  that  he  revived  by  the  putting  into 
his  body  a  medicine  made -of  honey,  whence  the  prov- 
erb, Glaucus  was  raised  from  death  by  taking  honey 
into  his  body.  Apuleius,  also,  relating  the  manner  of 
these  kinds  of  restorings  to  life,  saith  of  Zachla,  the 
Egyptian  prophet,  that  the  prophet,  being  favorable, 
laid  a  certain  herb  upon  the  mouth  of  the  body  of  a 
young  man,  being  dead,  and  another  upon  his  breast; 
then,  turning  toward  the  East,  or  rising  of  the  propi- 
tious Sun,  he  prayed  silently  (a  great  assembly  of  peo- 
ple striving  to  see  it),  when,  in  the  first  place,  the 
breast  of  the  dead  man  did  heave,  then  a  beating  in 
his  veins,  then  his  body  filled  with  breath,  after  which 
the  body  rose  and  the  young  man  spoke.  If  these 
accounts  are  true,  the  dying  souls  must,  sometimes 
lying  hid  in  their  bodies,  be  oppressed  with  vehement 
extasies  and  be  freed  from  all  bodily  action;  so  that 
the  life,  sense,  and  motion  forsake  the  body,  and  also 
that  the  man  is  not  yet  truly  dead,  but  lies  astonied, 
and  dead,  as  it  were,  for  a  certain  time.  And  this  is 
often  found,  that  in  times  of  pestilence  many  that  are 
carried  for  dead  to  the  graves  to  be  buried,  revive 
again.     The  same  also  hath  often  befell  women  by 


182  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

reason  of  fits  of  the  mother.  And  Rabbi  Moises,  out 
of  the  book  of  Galen,  which  Patriarcha  translated, 
makes  mention  of  a  man  who  was  suffocated  for  six 
days,  and  did  neither  eat  nor  drink,  and  his  arteries 
became  hard.  And  it  is  said,  in  the  same  book,  that  a 
certain  man,  being  filled  with  water,  lost  the  pulse  of 
his  whole  body,  so  that  the  heart  was  not  perceived  to 
move,  and  he  lay  like  a  dead  man.  It  is  also  said  that 
a  man,  by  reason  of  a  fall  from  a  high  place,  or  great 
noise,  or  long  staying  under  the  water,  may  fall  into 
a  swoon,  which  may  continue  forty-eight  hours,  and  so 
may  lay  as  if  he  were  dead,  his  face  being  very  green. 
And  in  the  same  place  there  is  mention  made  of  a  man 
that  buried  a  man,  who  seemed  to  be  dead,  seventy-two 
hours  after  his  seeming  decease,  and  so  killed  him 
because  he  buried  him  alive;  and  there  are  given  signs 
whereby  it  may  be  known  who  are  alive,  although  they 
seem  to  be  dead,  and,  indeed,  will  die,  unless  there  be 
some  means  used  to  recover  them,  as  phlebotomy,  or 
some  other  cure.  And  these  are  such  as  very  seldom 
happen.  This  is  the  manner  by  which  we  understand 
magicians  and  physicians  do  raise  dead  men  to  life,  as 
they  that  were  tried  by  the  stinging  of  serpents,  were, 
by  the  nation  of  the  Marsi  and  the  Psilli,  restored  to 
life.  We  may  conceive  that  such  kind  of  extasies  may 
continue  a  long  time,  although  a  man  be  not  truly 
dead,  as  it  is  in  dormice  and  crocodiles  and  many  other 
serpents,  which  sleep  all  winter,  and  are  in  such  a  dead 
sleep  that  they  can  scarce  be  awakened  with  fire. 
And  I  have  often  seen  a  dormouse  dissected  and  con- 
tinue immovable,  as  if  she  were  dead,  until  she  was 
boiled,  and  when  put  into  boiling  water  the  dissected 
members  did  show  life.  And,  although  it  be  hard  to 
be  believed,  we  read  in  some  approved  historians, 
that  some  men  have  slept  for  many  years  together; 
and,  in  the  time  of  sleep  until  they  awaked,  there  was 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  183 

no  alteration  in  them  so  as  to  make  them  seem  older. 
The  same  doth  Pliny  testify  of  a  certain  boy,  whom, 
he  saith,  being  wearied  with  heat  and  his  journey, 
slept  fifty-seven  years  in  a  cave.  We  read,  also,  that 
Epimenides  Gnosius  slept  fifty-seven  years  in  a  cave. 
Hence  the  proverb  arose — to  outsleep  Epimenides. 
M.  Damascenus  tells  that  in  his  time  a  certain  country- 
man in  Germany,  being*  wearied,  slept  for  the  space  of 
a  whole  autumn  and  the  winter  following-,  under  a 
heap  of  hay,  until  the  summer,  when  the  hay  began 
to  be  eaten  up;  then  he  was  found  awakened  as  a  man 
half  dead  and  out  of  his  wits.  Ecclesiastical  histories 
confirm  this  opinion  concerning  the  seven  sleepers, 
whom  they  say  slept  196  years.  There  was  in  Nor- 
vegia  a  cave  in  a  high  sea  shore,  where,  as  Paulus 
Diaconus  and  Methodius,  the  martyr,  write,  seven  men 
lay  sleeping  a  long  time  without  corruption,  and  the 
people  that  went  in  to  disturb  them  were  contracted, 
or  drawn  together,  so  that  after  a  while,  being  fore- 
warned by  that  punishment,  they  dared  not  disturb 
them.  Xenocrates,  a  man  of  no  mean  repute  amongst 
philosophers,  was  of  the  opinion  that  this  long  sleep- 
ing was  appointed  by  God  as  a  punishment  for  some 
certain  sins.  But  Marcus  Damascenus  proves  it,  by 
many  reasons,  to  be  possible  and  natural,  neither  doth 
he  think  it  irrational  that  some  should,  without  meat 
and  drink,  avoiding  excitements,  and  without  consum- 
ing or  corruption,  sleep  many  months.  And  this  may 
befall  a  man  by  reason  of  some  poisonous  potion,  or 
sleepy  disease,  or  such  like  causes,  for  certain  days, 
months  or  years,  according  to  the  intention  or  remis- 
sion of  the  power  of  the  medicine,  or  of  the  passions 
of  their  mind.  Physicians  say  that  there  are  some 
antidotes,  of  which  they  that  take  too  great  a  potion 
shall  be  able  to  endure  hunger  a  long  time;  as  Elias,  in 
former  time,  being  fed  with  a  certain  food  by  an  angel, 


184  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

walked  and  fasted  in  the  strength  of  that  meat  forty 
days.  And  John  Bocatius  makes  mention  of  a  man  in 
his  time,  in  Venice,  who  would  every  year  fast  four 
days  without  any  meat;  also,  a  greater  wonder,  that 
there  was  a  woman  in  lower  Germany,  at  the  same 
time,  who  took  no  food  till  the  thirteenth  year  of  her 
age,  which,  to  us,  may  seem  incredible,  but  that  he 
confirmed  it.  He  also  tells  of  a  miracle  of  our  age, 
that  his  brother,  Nicolaus  Stone,  an  Helvetian  by 
nation,  who  lived  over  twenty  years  in  the  wilderness 
without  meat  till  he  died.  That  also  is  wonderful 
which  Theophrastus  mentions  concerning  a  certain 
man,  called  Philinus,  who  used  no  meat  or  drink 
besides  milk.  And  there  are  also  grave  authors  who 
describe  a  certain  herb  of  Sparta,  with  which,  they 
say,  the  Scythians  can  endure  twelve  days'  hunger, 
without  meat  or  drink,  if  they  do  but  taste  it,  or  hold 
it  in  their  mouth. 

CHAPTER  LIX. 

Of  Divination  dy  Dreams. 

There  is  also  a  certain  kind  of  divination  by  dreams 
which  is  confirmed  by  the  traditions  of  philosophers, 
the  authorities  of  divines,  the  examples  of  histories 
and  by  daily  experience.  By  dreams  I  do  not  mean 
vain  and  idle  imaginations,  for  they  are  useless  and 
have  no  divination  in  them,  but  arise  from  the  remains 
of  watchings,  and  disturbance  of  the  body.  For,  as 
the  mind  is  taken  up  about  and  wearied  with  cares,  it 
suggests  itself  to  him  that  is  asleep.  I  call  that  a 
true  dream  which  is  caused  by  the  celestial  influences 
in  the  phantastic  spirit,  mind  or  body,  being  all  well 
disposed.  The  rule  of  interpreting  these  is  found 
amongst  astrologers,  in  that  part  which  is  wrote  con- 
cerning  questions;    but    yet    that    is    not    sufficient. 


PHILOSOPHY   OP  NATURAL   MAGIC.  185 

because  these  kinds  of  dreams  come  by  use  to  divers 
men  after  divers  manners,  and  according-  to  the  divers 
qualities  and  dispositions  of  the  phantastic  spirit. 
Wherefore,  there  cannot  be  given  one  common  rule  to 
all  for  the  interpretation  of  dreams.  But,  according 
to  the  doctrine  of  Synesius,  seeing  there  are  the  same 
accidents  to  things,  and  like  befalls  like,  so  he  which 
hath  often  fallen  upon  the  same  visible  thing,  hath 
assigned  to  himself  the  same  opinion,  passion,  fortune, 
action,  and  event.  As  Aristotle  saith,  the  memory  is 
confirmed  by  sense,  and  by  keeping  in  memory  the 
same  thing,  knowledge  is  obtained;  as  also,  by  the 
knowledge  of  many  experiences,  by  little  and  little, 
arts  and  sciences  are  thus  obtained.  After  the  same 
account  you  must  conceive  of  dreams.  Whence  Syne- 
sius commands  that  every  one  should  observe  his 
dreams  and  their  events,  and  such  like  rules,  viz. ,  to 
commit  to  memory  all  things  that  are  seen,  and  acci- 
dents that  befall,  as  well  in  sleep  as  in  watching,  and 
with  a  diligent  observation  consider  with  himself  the 
rules  by  which  these  are  to  be  examined;  for  by  this 
means  shall  a  diviner  be  able,  by  little  and  little,  to 
interpret  his  dreams,  if  so  be  nothing  slip  out  of  his 
memory.  Now,  dreams  are  more  efficacious  when  the 
Moon  overruns  that  Sign  which  was  in  the  ninth  num- 
ber^ of  the  nativity,  or  revolution  of  that  year,  f  or  in 
the  ninth  Sign  from  the  Sign  of  Perfection.  I  For  it  is 
a  most  true  and  certain  divination,  neither  doth  it  pro- 
ceed from  nature  or  human  arts,  but  from  purified 
minds,  by  divine  inspiration.  We  shall  now  discuss 
and  examine  Prophesying  and  Oracles. 


*"Nintli  Number.  "—The  Ninth  House  of  the  Horoscope,  known  as  the 
House  of  Science  and  Religion. 

+  "  Revolution."— When  the  Sun  has  attained,  as  to  the  Earth,  its  original 
position,  or  the  place  it  occupied  at  the  moment  of  birth. 

t"  Sign  of  Perfection."— This  is  the  First  House  of  the  Horoscope:  that 
House  of  the  "Heaven,"  or  Zodiac,  "rising"  at  birth;  the  eastern  horizon. 


186  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

CHAPTER   LX. 

Of  Madness,  and  Divinations  which  are  made  when  men  are 
awake,  and  of  the  Power  of  a  Melancholy  Humor,  by 
which  Spirits  are  sometimes  induced  into  Men^s  Bodies. 

It  happens  also,  sometimes,  that  not  only  they  that 
are  asleep,  but  also  they  that  are  watchful,  do,  with  a 
kind  of  instigation  of  mind,  divine;  which  divination 
Aristotle  calls  ravishment,  or  a  kind  of  madness,  and 
teacheth  that  it  proceeds  from  a  melancholy  humor, 
saying-  in  his  treatise  of  divination:  Melancholy  men, 
by  reason  of  their  earnestness,  do  far  better  conject- 
ure, and  quickly  conceive  a  habit,  and  most  easily 
receive  an  impression  of  the  celestials.  And  he,  in  his 
Problems,  saith  that  the  Sibyls,  and  the  Bacchides,  and 
Niceratus  the  Syracusan,  and  Ammon,  were,  by  their 
natural  melancholy  complexion,  prophets  and  poets. 
The  cause,  therefore,  of  this  madness,  if  it  be  any- 
thing" within  the  body,  is  a  melancholy  humor;  not 
that  which  they  call  black  choler,  which  is  so  obsti- 
nate and  terrible  a  thing,  that  the  violence  of  it  is 
said,  by  physicians  and  natural  philosophers  (besides 
madness,  which  it  doth  induce),  to  draw  or  entice  evil 
spirits  to  seize  upon  men's  bodies.  Therefore,  we 
understand  a  melancholy  humor  here,  to  be  a  natural 
and  white  choler.  For  this,  when  it  is  stirred  up, 
burns,  and  stirs  up  a  madness  conducing  to  knowledge 
and  divination,  especially  if  it  be  helped  by  any  celes- 
tial influx,  especially  of  Saturn,  who  (seeing  he  is 
cold  and  dry,  as  is  a  melancholy  humor,  hath  his  influ- 
ence upon  it)  increaseth  and  preserveth  it.  Besides, 
seeing  he  is  the  author  of  secret  contemplation,  and 
estranged  from  all  public  affairs,  and  the  highest  of 
all  the  planets,  he  doth,  as  he  withcalls  his  mind  from 
outward  business,  so  also  make  it  ascend  higher,  and 
bestows  upon  men  the  knowledge   and  presages  of 


PHILOSOPHY   OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  187 

future  things.  And  this  is  Aristotle's  meaning  in  his 
book  of  Problems.  By  melancholy,  saith  he,  some 
men  are  made,  as  it  were,  divine,  foretelling  things  to 
come;  and  some  men  are  made  poets.  He  saith,  also, 
that  all  men  that  were  excellent  in  any  science,  were, 
for  the  most  part,  melancholy.  Democritus  and  Plato 
attest  the  same,  saying  that  there  were  some  melan- 
choly men  that  had  such  excellent  wits  that  they  were 
thought  and  seemed  to  be  more  divine  than  human. 
So  also  there  have  been  many  melancholy  men  at  first 
rude,  ignorant  and  untractable,  as  they  say  Tynnichus, 
Hesiod,  Ion,  Calcinenses,  Homer,  and  Lucretius  were, 
who  on  a  sudden  were  taken  with  a  madness  and  became 
poets,  and  prophesied  wonderful  and  divine  things, 
which  they  themselves  scarce  understood.  Whence 
Plato,  in  Ion,  saith  that  many  prophets,  after  the  vio- 
lence of  their  madness  was  abated,  do  not  well  under- 
stand what  they  wrote,  yet  treated  accurately  of  each 
art  in  their  madness;  as  all  artists,  by  reading  of 
them,  judge.  So  great  also,  they  say,  the  power  of 
melancholy  is  of,  that,  by  its  force,  celestial  spirits 
also  are  sometimes  drawn  into  men's  bodies,  by  whose 
presence  and  instinct,  antiquity  testifies,  men  have 
been  made  drunk  and  spake  most  wonderful  things. 
And  this  thing,  they  think,  happens  under  a  three-fold 
difference,  according  to  a  three-fold  apprehension  of 
the  soul,  viz.,  imaginative,  rational,  and  mental;  they 
say,  therefore,  that  when  the  mind  is  forced  with  a 
melancholy  humor,  nothing  moderating  the  power  of 
the  body,  and,  passing  beyond  the  bounds  of  the  mem- 
bers, is  wholly  carried  into  imagination,  it  doth  sud- 
denly become  a  seat  for  inferior  spirits,  by  which  the 
mind  oftentimes  receives  wonderful  ways  and  forms  of 
manual  arts.  So  we  see  that  any  most  ignorant  man 
doth  presently  become  an  excellent  painter,  or  con- 
triver of  building,  and  to  become  a  master  in  any  such 

188  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

art.  But  when  these  kinds  of  spirits  portend  to  us 
future  things  they  show  those  things  which  belong  to 
the  disturbing  of  the  Elements  and  changes  of  times, 
as  rain,  tempests,  inundations,  earthquakes,  slaughter, 
great  mortality,  famine,  and  the  like.  As  we  read  in 
Aulus  Gelius  that  his  priest,  Cornelius  Patarus,  did, 
at  the  time  when  Caesar  and  Pompey  were  to  fight  in 
Thessalia,  being  taken  with  a  madness,  foretell  the 
time,  order  and  issue  of  the  battle.  But  when  the 
mind  is  turned  wholly  into  reason  it  becomes  a  recep- 
tacle for  middle  world  spirits.  Hence  it  obtains  the 
knowledge  and  understanding  of  natural  and  human 
things.  So  we  see  that  a  man  sometimes  doth  on  a 
sudden  become  a  philosopher,  physician,  or  an  orator, 
and  foretells  mutations  of  kingdoms,  and  restitutions 
of  ages,  and  such  things  as  belong  to  them,  as  did  the 
Sibyl  to  the  Romans.  But  when  the  mind  is  wholly 
elevated  into  the  understanding,  then  it  becomes  a 
receptacle  of  sublime  spirits  and  learns  of  them  the 
secrets  of  divine  things,  such  as  the  Law  of  God,  and 
the  Orders  of  Angels,  and  such  things  as  belong  to  the 
knowledge  of  things  eternal  and  the  ascent  of  souls. 
It  foresees  things  which  are  appointed  by  predestina- 
tion, such  as  future  prodigies  or  miracles,  the  prophet 
to  come,  and  the  changing  of  the  law.  So  the  Sibyls 
prophesied  of  Christ  a  long  time  before  his  coming. 
So  Virgil,  understanding  that  Christ  was  at  hand  and 
remembering  what  the  Sibyl,  Cumasa,  had  said,  sang 
thus  to  Pollio: 

Last  times  are  come,  Cumcea  's  prophesie — 
Noiv  from  high  heaven  springs  a  neiu  progenie, 
And  times  Great  Order  noiv  again  is  born, 
The  Maid  returns,  Saturnian  Realms  return. 

And,  a  little  after,  intimating  that  original  sin  shall 
be  of  no  effect,  he  saith: 


PHILOSOPHY  OP  NATURAL.  MAGIC.  189 

If  any  prints  of  our  old  vice  remain' d    , 

By  thee  tJiey^r  void,  and  fear  shall  leave  the  Land; 

Re  a  God^s  life  shall  take,  luith  Gods  shall  see 

Mixt  Heroes,  and  himself  their  object  l>e; 

Rule  ivith  paternal  power  th^  appeased  Earth 

He  shall 

Then  he  adds,  that  thence  the  fall  of  the  Serpent, 
and  the  poison  of  the  tree  of  death,  or  of  the  knowl- 
edge of  good  and  evil,  shall  be  nulled,  saying: 

The  Serpent  shall 


And  the  deceitful  Herb  of  Venom  fall. 

Yet  he  intimates  that  some  sparks  of  original  sin 
shall  remain,  when  he  saith: 

Some  steps  of  ancient  fraud  shall  yet  be  found. 

And  at  last  with  a  most  great  hyperbole  cries  out 
to  his  child,  as  the  offspring  of  God,  adoring  him  in 
these  words: 

Dear  race  of  Gods,  great  stock  of  Jupiter, 
Behold !  the  World  shakes  on  its  ponderous  axe, 
See  earth,  and  heavens  immense,  and  Ocean  tracts, 
How  all  things  at  th^  approaching  Age  rejoice! 
0,  that  my  life  would  last  so  long,  and  voice, 
As  would  suffice  thy  actions  to  rehearse. 

There  are  also  some  prognostics  which  are  in  the 
middle,  betwixt  natural  and  supernatural  divination, 
as  in  those  who  are  near  to  death,  and,  being  weakened 
with  old  age,  do  sometimes  foresee  things  to  come, 
because,  as  saith  Plato,  by  how  much  the  more  men 
are  less  hindered  by  their  sense,  so  much  the  more 
accurately  they  understand,  and  because  they  are 
nearer  to  the  place  whither  they  must  go  (and  their 
bonds  being,  as  it  were,  a  little  loosed,  seeing  they  are 


190  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

no  more  subject  to  the  body)  easily  perceive  the  light 
of  divine  revelation. 


CHAPTER  LXI. 

Of  the  Forming  of  Man,  of  the  External  Senses,  also  those 
Inward,  and  the  Mind;  and  of  the  Threefold  Appetite  of 
the  Soul,  and  Passions  of  the  Will. 

It  is  the  opinion  of  some  divines  that  God  did  not 
immediately  create  the  body  of  man,  but  by  the  assist- 
ance of  the  heavenly  spirits  compounded  and  framed 
him;  which  opinion  Alcinous  and  Plato  favor,  thinking" 
that  God  is  the  chief  creator  of  the  whole  world,  and  of 
spirits,  both  good  and  bad,  and  therefore  immortal- 
ized them;  but  that  all  kinds  of  mortal  animals  were 
made  only  at  the  command  of  God;  for,  if  he  should 
have  created  them,  they  must  have  been  immortal. 
The  spirits,  therefore,  mixing  Earth,  Fire,  Air,  and 
Water  together,  made  of  them  all,  put  together,  one 
body,  which  they  subjected  to  the  service  of  the  soul, 
assigning  in  it  several  provinces  to  each  power  thereof; 
to  the  meaner  of  them,  mean  and  low  places:  as  to 
anger,  the  midriff;  to  desire,  the  womb;  but  to  the  more 
noble  senses,  the  head — as  the  tower  of  the  whole 
body — and  then  the  manifold  organs  of  speech.  They 
divide  the  senses  into  the  external  and  internal.  The. 
external  are  divided  into  five,  known  to  every  one,  to 
which  there  are  allotted  five  organs,  or  subjects,  as  it 
were,  foundations;  being  so  ordered  that  they  which  are 
placed  in  the  more  eminent  part  of  the  body,  have  a 
greater  degree  of  purity.  For  the  eyes,  placed  in  the, 
uppermost  place,  are  the  most  pure,  and  have  an  affin- 
ity with  the  nature  of  Fire  and  Light;  then  the  ears 
have  the  second  order  of  place  and  purity,  and  are 
compared  to  the  Air;  the  nostrils  have  the  third  order, 


1i 


PHILOSOPHY  OP  NATURAL  MAGIC.  191 

and  have  a  middle  nature  betwixt  the  Air  and  the 
Water.  Then  the  organ  of  tasting,  which  is  grosser, 
and  most  like  to  the  nature  of  Water.  Last  of  all 
the  touching  is  diffused  through  the  whole  body,  and 
is  compared  to  the  grossness  of  Earth.  The  more  pure 
senses  are  those  which  perceive  their  objects  farthest 
off,  as  seeing  and  hearing;  then  the  smelling,  then  the 
taste,  which  doth  not  perceive  but  that  which  is  nigh. 
But  the  touch  perceives  both  ways,  for  it  perceives 
bodies  nigh;  and  as  sight  discerns  by  the  medium  of  the 
Air,  so  the  touch  perceives,  by  the  medium  of  a  stick 
or  pole,  bodies  hard,  soft  and  moist.  Now  the  touch 
only  is  common  to  all  animals.  And  it  is  most  certain 
that  man  hath  this  sense,  and,  in  this  and  taste,  he 
excells  all  other  animals;  but  in  the  other  three,  he  is 
excelled  by  some  animals,  as  by  a  dog,  who  hears,  sees 
and  smells  more  acutely  than  man;  and  the  lynx  and 
eagles  see  more  acutely  than  all  other  animals  and 
man.  Now  the  interior  senses  are,  according  to  Aver- 
rois,  divided  into  four,  whereof  the  first  is  called  com- 
mon sense,  because  it  doth  first  collect  and  perfect  all 
the  representations  which  are  drawn  in  by  the  outward 
senses.  The  second  is  the  imaginative  power,  whose 
office  is,  seeing  it  represents  nothing,  to  retain  those 
representations  which  are  received  by  the  former 
senses,  and  to  present  them  to  the  third  faculty  of 
inward  sense,  which  is  the  phantasy,  or  power  of 
judging,  whose  work  is  also  to  perceive  and  judge  by 
the  representations  received,  what,  or  what  kind  of 
thing  that  is  of  which  the  representations  are;  and  to 
commit  those  things  which  are  thus  discerned  and 
adjudged,  to  the  memory  to  be  kept.  For  the  virtues 
thereof  in  general,  are  discourse,  dispositions,  perse 
cutions,  and  flights,  and  stirrings  up  to  action,  but  in 
particular,  the  understanding  of  intellectuals,  virtues, 
the  manner  of  discipline,  counsel,  and  election.     This 


^ 


192  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

is  that  which  shows  us  future  things  by  dreams,  whence 
the  fancy  is  sometimes  named  the  phantastical  intel- 
lect. For  it  is  the  last  impression  of  the  understanding-, 
which,  as  saith  lamblicus,  is  that  belonging  to  all  the 
powers  of  the  mind,  and  forms  all  figures,  resem- 
blances of  species,  and  operations,  and  things  seen, 
and  sends  forth  the  impressions  of  other  powers  unto 
others.  And  those  things  which  appear  by  sense,  it 
stirs  up  into  an  opinion;  but  those  things  which  appear 
by  the  intellect,  in  the  second  place,  it  offers  to  opinion; 
but  of  itself  it  receives  images  from  all,  and,  by  its 
property,  doth  properly  assign  them,  according  to 
their  assimilation;  it  forms  all  the  actions  of  the  soul, 
and  accommodates  the  external  to  the  internal  and 
impresses  the  body  with  its  impression.  Now  these 
senses  have  their  organs  in  the  head,  for  the  common 
sense  and  imagination  take  up  the  two  forward  cells  of 
the  brain,  although  Aristotle  placeth  the  organ  of  the 
common  sense  in  the  heart;  but  the  cogitative  power 
possesseth  the  highest  and  middle  part  of  the  head; 
and,  lastly,  the  memory  the  hindmost  part  thereof. 
Moreover,  the  organs  of  voice  and  speech  are  many,  as 
the  inward  muscles  of  the  breast  betwixt  the  ribs,  the 
breasts,  the  lungs,  the  arteries,  the  windpipe,  the  bow- 
ing of  the  tongue,  and  all  those  parts  and  muscles  that 
serve  for  breathing.  But  the  proper  organ  of  speech 
is  the  mouth,  in  which  are  framed  words  and  speeches, 
the  tongue,  the  teeth,  the  lips,  the  palate  and  the 
like.  Above  the  sensible  soul,  which  expresseth  its 
powers  by  the  organs  of  the  body,  the  incorporeal 
mind  possesseth  the  highest  place,  and  it  hath  a  double 
nature — the  one,  which  inquireth  into  the  causes,  prop- 
erties, and  progress  of  those  things  which  are  con- 
tained in  the  Order  of  Nature,  and  is  content  in  the 
contemplation  of  the  truth,  which  is,  therefore  called 
the  contemplative  intellect.     The  other  is  a  power  of 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  193 

the  mind  which,  discerning'  by  consulting  what  things 
are  to  be  done  and  what  is  to  be  shunned,  is  wholly 
taken  up  in  consultation  and  action,  and  is  therefore 
ealled  the  active  intellect.  This  order  of  powers, 
therefore,  Nature  ordained  in  man,  that  by  the  exter- 
nal senses  we  might  know  corporeal  things,  and  by 
those  internal  the  representations  of  bodies,  as  also 
things  abstracted  by  the  mind  and  intellect,  which  are 
neither  bodies  nor  any  thing  like  them.  And,  accord- 
ing to  this  three-fold  order  of  the  powers  of  the  soul, 
there  are  three  Appetites  in  the  soul:  The  first  is 
natural,  and  is  an  inclination  of  nature  unto  its  end,  as 
of  a  stone  downw^ard,  which  is  in  all  stones;  another 
is  animal,  which  the  sense  follows,  and  it  is  divided 
into  that  irascible  and  that  concupiscible;  the  third  is 
intellectual,  and  is  called  the  will,  differing  from  the 
sensitive  faculty  in  that  the  sensitive  is,  of  itself,  of 
those  things  which  may  be  presented  to  the  senses, 
desiring  nothing  unless  in  some  manner  comprehended. 
But  the  will,  although  it  be  of  itself  of  all  things  that 
are  possible,  yet,  because  it  is  free  by  its  essence,  it 
may  be  also  of  things  that  are  impossible,  as  it  was  in 
the  devil  (desiring  himself  to  be  equal  with  God)  and, 
therefore,  is  altered  and  depraved  with  pleasure  and 
with  continual  anguish,  whilst  it  assents  to  the  inferior 
powers.  Whence,  from  its  depraved  appetite,  there 
arise  four  passions  in  it,  with  which,  in  like  manner, 
the  body  is  affected  sometimes.  Whereof  the  first  is 
called  oblectation,  which  is  a  certain  quietness  or 
assentation  of  the  mind  or  will,  because  it  obeys,  and 
not  willingly  consents  to  that  pleasantness  which  the 
senses  hold  forth;  which  is,  therefore,  defined  to  be  an 
inclination  of  the  mind  to  an  effeminate  pleasure. 
The  second  is  called  effusion,  which  is  a  remission  of, 
or  dissolution  of  the  power,  viz.,  when  beyond  the 
oblectation,  the  whole  power  of  the  mind  and  intention 


194  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

of  the  present  good  is  melted,  and  diffuseth  itself 
to  enjoy  it.  The  third  is  vaunting  and  loftiness, 
thinking  itself  to  have  attained  to  some  great  good, 
in  the  enjoyment  of  which  it  prides  itself  and  glorieth. 
The  fourth  and  the  last  is  envy,  or  a  certain  kind  of 
pleasure  or  delight  at  another  man's  harm,  without 
any  advantage  to  itself.  It  is  said  to  be  without  any 
advantage  to  itself,  because,  if  any  one  should,  for  his 
own  profit,  rejoice  at  another  man's  harm,  this  would 
be  rather  out  of  love  to  himself  than  out  of  ill  will  to 
another.  And  all  these  four  passions,  arising  from  a 
depraved  appetite  for  pleasure,  the  grief  or^perplexity 
itself  doth  also  beget  very  many  contrary  passions,  as 
horror,  sadness,  fear,  and  sorrow  at  another's  good 
without  his  own  hurt,  which  we  call  envy,  or  sadness 
at  another's  prosperity,  just  as  pity  is  a  certain  kind 
of  sadness  at  another's  misery. 


CHAPTER  LXII. 

Of  the  Passions  of  the  Mind,  their  Original  Source,  Differ- 
ences, and  Kinds. 

The  passions  of  the  human  mind  are  nothing  else  but 
certain  motions  or  inclinations  proceeding  from  the 
apprehension  of  any  thing,  as  of  good  or  evil,  conven- 
ient or  inconvenient.  Now  these  kind  of  apprehen- 
sions are  of  three  sorts,  viz.,  Sensual,  Rational,  and 
Intellectual.  According  to  these  three  are  three  sorts 
of  passions  in  the  soul;  for  when  they  follow  the  sen- 
sitive apprehension  then  they  respect  a  temporary 
good  or  evil,  under  the  notion  of  profitable  or  unprofit- 
able, or  delightful  or  offensive,  and  are  called  natural 
or  animal  passions.  When  they  follow  the  rational 
apprehension,  and  so  respect  good  or  bad,  under  the 
notions  of  virtue  or  vice,  praise  or  disgrace,  profitable 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  195 

or  unprofitable,  or  honest  or  dishonest,  they  are  called 
rational  or  voluntary  passions.  When  they  foUow  the 
intellectual  apprehension,  and  respect  good  or  bad, 
under  the  notion  of  just  or  unjust,  or  true  or  false, 
they  are  called  intellectual  passions,  or  syncrisis,  the 
faculty  of  choosing  from  comparison.  Now,  the  sub- 
ject of  the  passions  of  the  soul  is  the  concupitive 
power  of  the  soul,  and  is  divided  into  that  concupisci- 
ble  and  that  irascible,  and  both  respect  good  and  bad, 
but  under  a  different  notion.  For  when  the  concupis- 
cible  power  respects  good  and  evil  absolutely,  love  or 
lust,  or,  on  the  contrary,  hatred  is  caused.  When  it 
respects  good,  though  absent,  so  desire  is  caused;  or 
evil,  though  absent  or  at  hand,  and  so  is  caused  hor- 
ror, flying  from,  or  loathing;  or,  if  it  respects  good, 
though  present,  then  there  is  caused  delight,  mirth  or 
pleasure;  but  if  evil,  though  present,  then  sadness, 
anxiety,  or  grief;  but  the  irascible  power  respects  good 
or  bad,  under  the  notion  of  some  difficulty,  to  obtain 
the  one,  or  to  avoid  the  other,  and  this  sometimes  with 
confidence.  And  so  there  is  caused  hope  or  boldness; 
but  when  with  diffidency,  then  despair  and  fear.  But 
when  that  irascible  power  riseth  into  revenge,  and  this 
be  only  about  some  evil  past,  as  it  were,  of  injury  or 
hurt  offered,  there  is  caused  anger.  And  so  we  find 
eleven  passions  in  the  mind,  which  are:  love,  hatred, 
desire,  horror,  joy,  grief,  hope,  despair,  boldness,  fear, 
and  anger.  


CHAPTER  LXIII. 

Hoiv  the  Passions  of  the  Mind  change  the  proper  Body  by 
changing  its  Accidents  and  moving  the  Spirit. 

The  phantasy,  or  imaginative  power,  hath  a  ruling 
power  over  the  passions  of  the  soul  when  they  follow 
the  sensual  apprehension.     For  this  doth,  of  its  own 


196  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

power,  according*  to  the  diversity  of  the  passions,  first 
of  all,  change  the  proper  body  with  a  sensible  trans- 
mutation, by  changing  the  accidents  in  the  body,  and 
by  moving  the  spirit  upward  or  downward,  inward  or 
outward,  and  by  producing  divers  qualities  in  the 
members.  So  in  joy,  the  spirits  are  driven  outward; 
in  fear,  drawn  back;  in  bashfulness,  are  moved  to  the 
brain.  So  in  joy,  the  heart  is  dilated  outward,  by 
little  and  little;  in  sadness,  is  constrained,  by  little 
and  little,  inward.  After  the  same  manner  in  anger 
or  fear,  but  suddenly.  Again,  anger,  or  desire  of 
revenge,  produceth  heat,  redness,  a  bitter  taste  and  a 
looseness.  Fear  induceth  cold,  trembling  of  the  heart, 
speechlessness  and  paleness.  Sadness  causeth  sweat 
and  a  bluish  whiteness.  Pity,  which  is  a  kind  of  sad- 
ness, doth  often  ill  affect  the  body  of  him  that  takes 
pity,  though  it  seems  to  be  the  body  of  another  man 
so  affected.  Also,  it  is  manifest  that  amongst  some 
lovers  there  is  such  a  strong  tie  of  love  that  what  the 
one  suffers  the  other  suffers.  Anxiety  induceth  dry- 
ness and  blackness.  And  how  great  heats  love  stirs 
up  in  the  liver  and  pulse,  physicians  know,  divining 
by  that  kind  of  judgment  the  name  of  the  one  that  is 
so  beloved  in  an  heroic  passion.  So  Naustratus  knew 
that  Antiochus  was  taken  with  the  love  of  Straton- 
ica.  It  is  also  manifest  that  such  like  passions,  when 
they  are  most  vehement,  may  cause  death.  And  this 
is  manifest  to  all  men,  that  with  too  much  joy,  sadness, 
love,  or  hatred,  men  many  times  die,  and  are  sometimes 
freed  from  a  disease.  And  so  we  read  that  Sophocles, 
and  Dionysius,  the  Sicilian  tyrant,  did  both  suddenly 
die  at  the  news  of  a  tragical  victory.  So  a  certain 
woman,  also,  seeing  her  son  returning  from  the  Canen- 
sian  battle,  died  suddenly.  Now,  what  sadness  can 
do  is  known  to  all.  We  know  that  dogs  oftentimes 
die  with  sadness  because  of  the  death  of  their  masters. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL  MAGIC  197 

Sometimes,  also,  by  reason  of  these  like  passions,  long 
diseases  follow,  and  are  sometimes  cured.  So,  also, 
some  men  looking"  from  a  hig-h  place,  by  reason  of 
great  fear,  .tremble,  are  dim-sighted  and  weakened,  and 
sometimes  loose  their  senses.  So  fears  and  falling- 
sickness  sometimes  follow  sobbing.  Sometimes  won- 
derful effects  are  produced,  as  in  the  son  of  Croesus, 
whom  his  mother  brought  forth  dumb,  yet  a  vehement 
fear  and  ardent  affection  made  him  speak,  which  natu- 
rally he  could  never  do.  So  with  a  sudden  fall,  often- 
times life,  sense,  or  motion,  on  a  sudden,  leave  the 
members,  and  presently  again,  are  sometimes  returned. 
And  how  much  vehement  anger,  joined  with  great 
audacity,  can  do,  Alexander  the  Great  shows,  who, 
being  circumvented  with  a  battle  in  India,  was  seen  to 
send  forth  from  himself  lightning  and  fire;  the  father  of 
Theodoricus  is  said  to  have  sent  forth  out  of  his  body 
sparks  of  fire,  so  that  sparkling  flames  did  leap  out 
with  a  noise.  And  such  like  things  sometimes  appear 
in  beasts,  as  in  the  horse  of  Tiberius,  which  was  said 
to  send  forth  a  flame  out  of  his  mouth. 


CHAPTER  LXIV. 

Hoiu  the  Passions  of  the  Mind  change  the  Body  by  way  of 
Imitation  from  some  Resemblance;  of  the  Transforming 
and  Translating  of  Men,  and  what  Force  the  Imaginative 
Poioer  hath,  not  only  over  the  Body  but  the  Soul. 

The  foresaid  passions  sometimes  alter  the  body  by 
reason  of  the  virtue  which  the  likeness  of  the  thing 
hath  to  change  it,  which  power  the  vehement  imagi- 
nation moves,  as  in  setting  the  teeth  on  edge  at  the 
sight  or  hearing  of  something,  or  because  we  see,  or 
imagine,  another  to  eat  sharp  or  sour  things.  So  he, 
which  sees  another  gape,  gapes  also;  and  some,  when 


198  HENRY  CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

they  hear  any  one  name  sour  things,  their  tongues 
waxeth  tart.  Also,  the  seeing  of  any  filthy  thing 
causeth  nauseousness.  Many,  at  the  sight  of  a  man's 
blood,  fall  into  a  swoon.  Some,  when  they  see  bitter 
meat  given  to  any,  perceive  a  bitter  spittle  in  their 
mouth.  And  William  of  Paris  saith  that  he  saw  a 
man,  that  at  the  sight  of  a  medicine,  was  affected  as 
much  as  he  pleased;  when,  as  neither  the  substance  of 
the  medicine,  nor  the  odor,  nor  the  taste  of  it  came  to 
him,  but  only  a  kind  of  resemblance  was  apprehended 
by  him.  Upon  this  account,  some  that  are  in  a  dream 
think  they  burn  and  are  in  a  fire,  and  are  fearfully 
tormented,  as  if  they  did  truly  burn,  when,  as  the  sub- 
stance of  the  fire  is  not  near  them,  but  only  a  resem- 
blance apprehended  by  their  imagination.  And  some- 
times men's  bodies  are  transformed,  and  transfigured, 
and  also  transported;  and  this  oft  times  when  they  are 
in  a  dream,  and  sometimes  when  they  are  awake.  So 
Cyprus,  after  he  was  chosen  king  of  Italy,  did  very 
much  wonder  at  and  meditate  upon  the  fight  and  vic- 
tory of  bulls,  and  in  the  thought  thereof  did  sleep  a 
whole  night,  and  in  the  morning  he  was  found  horned, 
no  otherwise  than  by  the  vegetative  power,  being 
stirred  up  by  a  vehement  imagination,  elevating  corn- 
ific  humors  into  his  head  and  producing  horns.  For  a 
vehement  cogitation,  whilst  it  vehemently  moves  the 
species,  pictures  out  the  figure  of  the  thing  thought  on, 
which  they  represent  in  their  blood,  and  the  blood 
impresseth  the  figure  on  the  members  that  are  nour- 
ished by  it;  as  upon  those  of  the  same  body,  so  upon 
those  of  anothers.  So  the  imagination  of  a  woman 
with  child  impresseth  the  mark  of  the  thing  longed 
for  upon  her  infant,  and  the  imagination  of ^  a  man,  bit 
with  a  mad  dog,  impresseth  upon  his  body  the  image 
of  dogs.  So  men  may  grow  gray  on  a  sudden.  And 
some,  by  the  dream  of  one  night,  have  grown  up  from 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  199 

boys  into  perfect  men.  Hereto,  also,  may  be  referred 
those  many  scars  of  King  Dagobertus,  and  marks  of 
Franciscus,  which  they  received — the  one,  whilst  he 
was  afraid  of  correction,  and  the  other,  whilst  he  did 
wonderfully  meditate  upon  the  wounds  of  Christ.  So, 
many  are  transported  from  place  to  place,  passing  over 
rivers,  fires  and  unpassable  places,  viz.,  when  the  spe- 
cies of  any  vehement  desire,  or  fear,  or  boldness,  are 
impressed  upon  their  sprits,  and,  being  mixed  with 
vapors,  do  move  the  organ  of  the  touch  in  their  origi- 
nal, together  with  phantasy,  which  is  the  original  of 
local  motion.  Whence  they  stir  up  the  members  and 
organs  of  motion  to  motion,  and  are  moved,  without 
any  mistake,  unto  the  imagined  place,  not  out  of  sight, 
but  from  the  interior  phantasy.  So  great  a  power  is 
there  of  the  soul  upon  the  body,  that  whichever  way 
the  soul  imagines  and  dreams  that  it  goes,  thither 
doth  it  lead  the  body.  We  read  many  other  examples 
by  which  the  power  of  the  soul  upon  the  body  is  won- 
derfully explained,  as  like  that  which  Avicen  describes 
of  a  certain  man,  who,  when  he  pleased,  could  affect 
his  body  with  the  palsy.  They  report  of  Gallus  Vibius 
that  he  did  fall  into  madness,  not  casually,  but  on  pur- 
pose, for,  whilst  he  did  imitate  madmen,  he  assimi- 
lated their  madness  to  himself  and  became  mad  indeed. 
And  Austin  makes  mention  of  some  men  who  could 
move  their  ears  at  their  pleasure,  and  some  that  could 
move  the  crown  of  their  head  to  their  forehead  and 
could  draw  it  back  again  when  they  pleased,  and  of 
another  that  could  sweat  at  his  pleasure.  And  it  is 
well  known  that  some  can  weep  at  their  pleasure,  and 
pour  forth  abundance  of  tears;  and  there  are  some  that 
can  bring  up  what  they  have  swallowed,  when  they 
please,  as  out  of  a  bag,  by  degrees.  And  we  see  that 
in  these  daj^s  there  are  many  who  can  so  imitate  and 
express  the  voices  of  birds,   cattle,  dogs,   and  some 


200  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

men,  that  they  can  scarce  at  all  be  discerned.  Also 
Pliny  relates,  by  divers  examples,  that  women  'have 
been  turned  into  men.  Pontanus  testilieth  that  in  his 
time,  a  certain  woman  called  Caietava,  and  another 
one  called  Aemilia,  who,  many  years  after  they  were 
married,  were  changed  into  men.  Now,  how  much 
imagination  can  affect  the  soul  no  man  is  ignorant, 
for  it  is  nearer  to  the  substance  of  the  soul  than  the 
sense  is,  and  therefore  acts  more  upon  the  soul  than 
the  sense  doth.  So  women,  by  certain  strong  imagi- 
nations, dreams,  and  suggestions,  brought  in  by  certain 
magical  arts,  do  often  bind  themselves  into  a  strong 
affection  for  any  one.  So  they  say  that  Medea,  by 
a  dream,  was  filled  with  love  for  Jason.  So  the  soul 
sometimes  is,  by  a  vehement  imagination  or  specula- 
tion, altogether  abstracted  from  the  body,  as  Celsus 
relates  of  a  certain  presbyter,  who,  as  often  as  he 
pleased,  could  make  himself  senseless  and  lay  like  a 
dead  man,  so  that  when  any  one  pricked  or  burnt  him 
he  felt  no  pain,  but  lay  without  any  motion  or  breath- 
ing; yet  he  could,  as  he  said,  hear  men's  voices,  as  it 
were,  afar  off,  if  they  cried  out  aloud. 


CHAPTER  LXV. 

How  the  Passions  of  the  Mind  can  Work  of  themselves  upon 

Another's  Body. 

The  passions  of  the  soul  which  follow  the  phantasy, 
when  they  are  most  vehement,  cannot  only  change 
their  own  body,  but  also  can  transcend  so  as  to  work 
upon  another  body;  so  that  some  wonderful  impres- 
sions are  thence  produced  in  elements  and  extrinsical 
things,  and  they  can  thus  take  away  or  bring  some 
disease  of  the  mind  or  body.  For  the  passions  of  the 
soul  are  the  chiefest  cause  of  the  temperament  of  its 


PHILOSOPHY   OF  NATURAL  MAGIC.  201 

proper  body.  So  the  soul,  being  strongly  elevated, 
and  inflamed  with  a  strong  imagination,  sends  forth 
health  or  sickness,  not  only  in  its  proper  body,  but 
also  in  other  bodies.  So  Avicen  is  of  the  opinion  that 
a  camel  may  fall  by  the  imagination  of  any  one.  So 
he  who  is  bitten  with  a  mad  dog  presently  falls  into 
a  madness,  and  there  appear  in  his  body  the  shapes  of 
dogs.  So  the  longing  of  a  woman  with  child  doth  act 
upon  another's  body  when  it  signs  the  infant  in  the 
womb  with  the  mark  of  the  thing  she  longs  for.  So 
many  monstrous  generations  proceed  from  monstrous 
imaginations  of  women  with  child,  as  Marcus  Damas- 
cenus  reports  that  at  Petra  Saneta,  a  town  situated 
upon  the  territories  of  Pisa,  there  was  a  wench  pre- 
sented to  Charles,  king  of  Bohemia,  who  was  rough 
and  hairy  all  over  her  body,  like  a  wild  beast,  whom 
her  mother,  affected  with  a  religious  kind  of  horror 
by  the  picture  of  John  the  Baptist  (which  was  in  the 
chamber  she  occupied),  afterwards  brought  her  forth 
after  this  fashion.  And  this,  we  see,  is  not  only  in 
men,  but  also  is  done  among  brute  creatures.  So  we 
read  that  Jacob,  the  patriarch,  with  his  speckled  rods 
set  in  the  watering  places,  did  discolor  the  sheep  of 
Laban.  So  the  imaginative  powers  of  peacocks,  and 
other  birds,  whilst  they  be  mating,  impress  a  color 
upon  their  wings.  Whence  we  produce  white  pea- 
cocks, by  hanging  white  clothes  around  the  places 
where  they  mate.  Now,  by  the  above  examples,  it 
appears  how  the  affection  of  the  phantasy,  when  it 
vehemently  intends  itself,  doth  not  only  affect  its  own 
proper  body,  but  also  anothers.  So  also  the  desire  of 
witches  to  hurt  doth  bewitch  men  most  perniciously 
with  steadfast  looks.  To  these  things  Avicen,  Aris- 
totle, Algazel,  and  Gallen  assent.  For  it  is  manifest 
that  a  body  may  most  easily  be  affected  with  the  vapor 
of  another's  diseased  body,  which  we  plainly  see  in  the 


202  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

plag-ue  and  leprosy.     Again,  in  the  vapor  of  the  eyes 
there  is  so  great  a  power  that  they  can  bewitch  and 
infect  any  that  are  near  them,  as  the  cockatrice  or 
basilisk  which  kill  men  with  their  looks.     And  certain 
women  in  Scythia,  amongst  the  Illyrians  and  Triballi, 
killed  whomsoever  they  looked  angry  upon.     There- 
fore, let  no  man  wonder  that  the  body  and  soul  of  one 
may,   in  like  manner,   be  affected  with  the  mind  of 
another,  seeing  the  mind  is  far  more  powerful,  strong, 
fervent,  and  more   prevalent  in  its  motion  than  the 
vapors  exhaling  out  of  bodies;  neither  are  there  want- 
ing  mediums   by  which  it   should    work,    neither  is 
another's  body  less  subject  to  another's  mind  than  to 
another's  body.     Upon  this  account,  they  say  that  a 
man,  by  his  affection  and  habit  only,  may  act  upon 
another.     Therefore,    philosophers    advise    that    the 
society  of  evil  and  mischievous  men  must  be  shunned, 
for  their  soul,  being  full  of  noxious  rays,  infects  them 
that  are  near  with  a  hurtful  contagion.     On  the  con- 
trary, they  advise  that  the  society  of  good  and  fortu- 
nate men  be  endeavored  after,  because  by  their  near- 
ness they  do  us  much  good.     For  as  the  smell  of  musk 
doth  penetrate,  so  something  of  either  bad  or  good  is 
derived  from  anything  bad  or  good  by  those  that  are 
nigh  to  them;  which  may  continue  a  long  time.     Now, 
if  the  foresaid  passions  have  so  great  a  power  in  the 
phantasy,  they  have  certainly  a  greater  power  in  the 
reason,  in  as  much  as  the  reason  is  more  excellent  than 
the  phantasy;  and,  lastly,   they  have   much   greater 
power  in  the  mind;  for  this,  when  it  is  fixed  upon  God 
for  any  good  with  its  whole  intention,  doth  oftentimes 
affect  another's  body,  as  well  as  its  own,  with  some 
divine  gift.     By  this  means  we  read  that  many  mira- 
cles were  done  by  Apollonius,  Pythagoras,  Empedocles, 
Philolaus,  and  many  prophets  and   holy  men  of  our 
religion,  which  things  we  shall  now  consider. 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL   MAGIC.  203 

f 

CHAPTER  LXyi. 

That  the  Passions  of  the,  Mind  are  Helped  by  a  Celestial  Sea- 
son, and  hoiv  Necessary  the  Constancy  of  the  Mind  is  in 
every  Work. 

The  passions  of  the  mind  are  much  helped,  and  are 
helpful,  and  become  most  powerful  by  virtue  of  the 
Heaven,  as  they  agree  with  the  Heaven,  either  by  any 
natural  agreement  or  by  voluntary  election.  For,  as 
saith  Ptolemy,  he  which  chooseth  that  which  is  the 
better  seems  to  differ  nothing  from  him  who  hath  this 
by  nature.  It  conduceth,  therefore,  very  much  for  the 
receiving  of  the  benefit  of  the  Heavens,  in  any  work,  if 
we  shall,  by  the  Heaven,  make  ourselves  suitable  to  it 
in  our  thoughts,  affections,  imaginations,  deliberations, 
elections,  contemplations,  and  the  like.  For  such  like 
passions  do  vehemently  stir  up  our  spirit  to  the  like- 
ness of  the  Heavens  and  expose  us  and  ours  straight- 
away to  the  Superior  Significators  of  such  like  passions; 
and,  also,  by  reason  of  their  dignity  and  nearness  to 
the  Superiors  do  much  more  partake  of  the  Celestials 
than  any  other  material  things.  For  our  mind  can, 
through  imagination  or  by  reason  of  a  kind  of  imita- 
tion, be  so  conformed  to  any  Star  as  suddenly  to  be 
filled  with  the  virtues  of  that  Star,  as  if  it  were  a 
proper  receptacle  of  the  influence  thereof.  Now,  the 
contemplating  mind,  as  it  withdraws  itself  from  all 
sense,  imagination,  nature,  and  deliberation,  and  calls 
itself  back  to  things  separated,  unless  it  exposeth 
itself  to  Saturn,  is  not  of  present  consideration  or 
enquiry.  For  our  mind  doth  effect  divers  things  by 
faith  (which  is  a  firm  adhesion,  a  fixed  intention,  and 
a  vehement  application  of  the  worker,  or  receiver)  to 
him  that  co-operates  in  any  thing,  and  gives  power  to 
the  work  which  we  intend  to  do.  So  that  there  is 
made,  as  it  were,  in  us,  the  image  of  the  virtue  to  be 

204  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

received,  and  the  thing  to  be  done  in  us,  or  by  us.  We 
must,  therefore,  in  every  work  and  application  of 
things,  affecf  vehemently,  imagine,  hope,  and  believe 
strongly,  for  that  will  be  a  great  help.  And  it  is  veri- 
fied amongst  physicians,  that  a  strong  belief,  and  an 
undoubted  hope  and  love  towards  the  physician  and 
medicine,  conduce  much  to  health;  yea,  more,  some- 
times, than  the  medicine  itself.  For  the  same  that  the 
efficacy  and  virtue  of  the  medicine  works,  the  same 
doth  the  strong  imagination  of  the  physician  work, 
being  able  to  change  the  qualities  in  the  body  of  the 
sick,  especially  when  the  patient  placeth  much  confi- 
dence in  the  physician,  by  that  means  disposing  him- 
self for  the  receiving  of  the  virtue  of  the  physician  and 
physic.  Therefore,  he  that  works  in  Magic  must  be  of 
a  constant  belief,  be  credulous,  and  not  at  all  doubtful 
of  obtaining  the  effect.  For,  as  a  firm  and  strong 
belief  doth  work  wonderful  things,  although  it  be  in 
false  works,  so  distrust  and  doubting  doth  dissipate 
and  break  the  virtue  of  the  mind  of  the  worker,  which 
is  the  medium  between  both  extremes;  whence  it  hap- 
pens that  he  is  frustrated  of  the  desired  influence  of  the 
superiors,  which  could  not  be  joined  and  united  to  our 
labors  without  a  firm  and  solid  virtue  of  our  mind. 


CHAPTER  LXVII. 

How  the  Mind  of  Man  may  be  Joined  with  the  Mind  of  the 
Stars,  and  Intelligences  of  the  Celestials,  and,  together  tvith 
them,  Impress  certain  ivonderful  Virtues  upon  inferior 
Things. 

The  philosophers,  especially  the  Arabians,  say  that 
man's  mind,  when  it  is  most  intent  upon  any  work, 
through  its  passion  and  effects,  is  joined  with  the  mind 
of  the  stars  and  intelligences;  and,  being  so  joined,  is 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  205 

the  cause  of  some  wonderful  virtue  being  infused  into 
our  works  and  things;  and  this,  because  there  is  in 
the  mind  an  apprehension  and  power  of  all  things,  so 
all  things  have  a  natural  obedience  to  it,  and  of  neces- 
sity an  efficacy;  and  more  to  that  which  desires  them 
with  a  strong  desire.  And  according  to  this  is  verified 
the  art  of  characters,  images,  enchantments,  and  some 
speeches,  and  many  other  wonderful  experiments  as  to 
everything  which  the  mind  affects.  By  this  means, 
whatsoever  the  mind  of  him  that  is  in  vehement  love, 
affects,  hath  an  efficacy  to  cause  love;  and  whatsoever 
the  mind  of  him  that  strongly  hates,  dictates,  hath  an 
efficacy  to  hurt  and  destroy.  The  like  is  in  other 
things,  which  the  mind  affects  with  a  strong  desire. 
For  all  those  things  which  the  mind  acts  and  dictates 
by  characters,  figures,  words,  speeches,  gestures,  and 
the  like,  help  the  appetite  of  the  soul  and  acquire 
certain  wonderful  virtues;  as  from  the  soul  of  the 
operator,  in  that  hour  when  such  a  like  appetite  doth 
invade  it,  so  from  the  opportunity  and  celestial  influ- 
ence, moving  the  mind  in  that  manner.  For  our  mind, 
when  it  is  carried  upon  the  great  excess  of  any  passion 
or  rirtue,  oftentimes  presently  takes  of  itself  a  strong, 
better  and  more  convenient  hour  or  opportunity,  which 
Thomas  Aquinas,  in  his  third  book  against  the  Gentiles, 
confesseth.  So  many  wonderful  virtues  both  cause 
and  follow  certain  admirable  operations  by  great 
affections  in  those  things  which  the  soul  doth  dictate 
in  that  hour  to  them.  But  know  that  such  things  con- 
fer nothing,  or  very  little,  to  the  author  of  them,  and 
to  him  which  is  inclined  to  them,  as  if  he  were  the 
author  of  them.  And  this  is  the  manner  by  which 
their  efficacy  is  found  out.  And  it  is  a  general  rule  in 
them,  that  every  mind  that  is  more  excellent  in  its  love 
and  affection  makes  such  like  things  more  fit  for  itself, 
becoming  efficacious  to  that  which  it  desires.     Every 


206  HENRY  CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

one,  therefore,  that  is  willing  to  work  in  Mag"ic  must 
know  the  virtue,  measure,  order,  and  degree  of  his  own 
soul,  in  relation  to  the  Power  of  the  Universe 


CHAPTER  LXVIII. 

How  our  Mind  can  Change  and  Bind  inferior  Things  to  the 
Ends  luhich  tve  Desire. 

There  is  also  a  certain  virtue  in  the  minds  of  men 
of  changing,  attracting,  hindering,  and  binding  to  that 
which  they  desire;  and  all  things  obey  them  when  they 
are  carried  into  a  great  excess  of  any  passion  or  vir- 
tue, so  as  to  exceed  those  things  which  they  bind. 
For  the  superior  binds  that  which  is  inferior,  and  con- 
verts it  to  itself;  and  the  inferior  is,  by  the  same  rea- 
son, converted  to  the  superior,  or  is  otherwise  affected, 
and  wrought  upon.  By  this  reason,  things  that  receive 
a  superior  degree  of  any  star,  bind,  or  attract,  or  hin- 
der things  which  have  an  inferior,  according  as  they 
agree  or  disagree  amongst  themselves.  Whence  a 
lion  is  afraid  of  a  cock,  because  the  presence  of  the 
Solary  virtue  is  more  agreeable  to  a  cock  than  to  a 
lion.  So  a  loadstone  draws  iron,  because,  in  its  order, 
it  hath  a  superior  degree  of  the  Celestial  Bear. 

So  the  diamond  hinders  the  loadstone,  because,  in 
the  order  of  Mars,  it  is  superior  to  it.  In  like  man- 
ner any  man,  when  he  is  opportunely  exposed  to  the 
celestial  influences  (as  by  the  affections  of  his  mind 
and  due  applications  of  natural  things),  if  he  become 
stronger  in  a  Solary  virtue,  he  binds  and  draws  the 
inferior  into  admiration  and  obedience — in  the  order  of 
the  Moon,  to  servitude  or  infirmities;  in  a  Saturnine 
order,  to  quietness  or  sadness;  in  the  order  of  Jupiter, 
to  worship;  in  the  order  of  Mars,  to  fear  and  discord; 
in  a  Venus  order,  to  love  and  joy;  in  a  Mercurial  order, 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  207 

to  persuasion  and  obsequiousness,  and  the  like.  The 
ground  of  such  a  kind  of  binding  is  the  very  vehe- 
ment and  boundless  affection  of  the  soul  with  the 
concourse  of  the  celestial  order.  But  the  dissolutions 
or  hinderances  of  such  a  like  binding  are  made  by  a 
contrary  effect,  and  that  more  excellent  or  strong;  for 
as  the  greater  excess  of  the  mind  binds,  so,  also,  it 
looseth  and  hindereth.  And,  lastly,  when  the  mind 
feareth  Venus,  it  opposes  Saturn;  when  Saturn  or 
Mars,  it  opposes  Venus  or  Jupiter;  for  astrologers  say 
that  these  are  most  at  enmity,  and  contrary  the  one  to 
the  other  (i.  e.),  causing  contrary  effects  in  these 
inferior  bodies.  For  in  the  Heavens,  where  there  is 
nothing"  wanting,  and  where  all  things  are  governed 
with  love,  there  can  in  no  wise  be  hatred  or  enmity. 


CHAPTER  LXIX. 

Of  Speech,  and  the  Occult  Virtue  of  Words. 

It  being  shown  that  there  is  a  great  power  in  the  \ 
affections  of  the  soul,  you  must  know,  moreover,  that 
there  is  no  less  virtue  in  words  and  the  names  of 
things,  and  greatest  of  all  in  speeches  and  motions;  by 
which  we  chiefly  differ  from  the  brutes,  and  are  called 
rational;  not  from  reason,  which  is  taken  for  that  part 
of  the  soul  which  contains  the  affections  (which  Galen 
saith  is  also  common  to  brutes,  although  in  a  less 
degree),  but  we  are  called  rational  from  that  reason 
which  is,  according  to  the  voice,  understood  in  words 
and  speech,  which  is  called  Declarative  Reason;  by 
which  part  we  do  chiefly  excel  all  other  animals.  For 
logos,  in  Greek,  signifies  reason,  speech,  and  a  word. 
Now,  a  word  is  two-fold,  viz.,  internal  and  uttered. 
An  internal  word  is  a  conception  of  the  mind  and 
motion  of  the  soul,  which  is  made  without  a  voice; 


208  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

as  in  dreams  we  seem  to  speak  and  dispute  with  our- 
selves, and  whilst  we  are  awake,  we  run  over  a  whole 
speech  silently.  But  an  uttered  word  hath  a  certain 
act  in  the  voice,  and  properties  of  locution,  and  is 
brought  forth  with  the  breath  of  a  man,  with  opening 
of  his  mouth  and  with  the  speech  of  his  tongue;  in 
which  nature  hath  coupled  the  corporeal  voice  and 
speech  to  the  mind  and  understanding,  making  that 
a  declarer  and  interpreter  of  the  conception  of  our 
intellect  to  the  hearers;  and  of  this  we  now  speak. 
Words,  therefore,  are  the  fittest  medium  betwixt  the 
speaker  and  the  hearer,  carrying  with  them  not  only 
the  conception  of  the  mind,  but  also  the  virtue  of  the 
speaker,  with  a  certain  efficacy,  unto  the  hearers;  and 
this  oftentimes  with  so  great  a  power,  that  often  they 
change  not  only  the  hearers  but  also  other  bodies  and 
things  that  have  no  life.  Now  those  words  are  of 
greater  efficacy  than  others  which  represent  greater 
things — as  intellectual,  celestial,  and  supernatural;  as 
more  expressly,  so  more  mysteriously.  Also  those 
that  come  from  a  more  worthy  tongue,  or  from  any  of 
a  more  holy  order;  for  these  (as  it  were  certain  signs 
and  representations)  receive  a  pov/er  of  celestial  and 
supercelestial  things,  as  from  the  virtue  of  things 
explained,  of  which  they  are  the  vehicle,  and  from  a 
power  put  into  them  by  the  virtue  of  the  speaker. 


CHAPTER  LXX. 

Of  the  Virtue  of  Proper  Names. 

That  the  proper  names  of  things  are  very  necessary 
in  Magical  Operations,  almost  all  men  testify.  For 
the  natural  power  of  things  proceeds,  first,  from  the 
objects  to  the  senses,  and  then  from  these  to  the  imag- 
ination, and  from  this  to  the  mind,  in  which  it  is  first 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  209 

conceived,  and  then  is  expressed  by  voices  and  words. 
The  Platonists,  therefore,  say  that  in  this  very  voice, 
or  word,  or  name  framed,  with  its  articles,  that  the 
power  of  the  thing,  as  it  were  some  kind  of  life,  lies 
under  the  form  of  the  signification.  First  conceived  in 
the  mind,  as  it  were  through  certain  seeds  of  things, 
then  by  voices  or  words,  as  a  birth  brought  forth;  and 
lastly,  kept  in  writings.  Hence  magicians  say,  that 
the  proper  names  of  things  are  certain  rays  of  things, 
everywhere  present  at  all  times,  keeping  the  power  of 
things,  as  the  essence  of  the  thing  signified,  rules,  and 
is  discerned  in  them  and  know  the  things  by  them,  as 
by  proper  and  living  images.  For,  as  the  great  oper- 
ator doth  provide  divers  species  and  particular  things 
by  the  influences  of  the  Heavens,  and  by  the  elements, 
together  with  the  virtues  of  planets,  so,  according  to 
the  properties  of  the  influences,  proper  names  result 
to  things  and  are  put  upon  them  by  him  who  numbers 
the  multitude  of  the  stars,  calling  them  all  by  their 
names;  of  which  names  Christ  in  another  place  speaks, 
saying,  "Your  names  are  written  in  Heaven.  '  Adam, 
therefore,  that  gave  the  first  names  to  things,  know- 
ing the  influences  of  the  Heavens  and  properties  of 
all  things,  gave  them  all  names  according  to  their 
natures,  as  it  is  written  in  Genesis,  where  God  brought 
all  things  that  he  had  created  before  Adam,  that  he 
should  name  them;  and  as  he  named  any  thing,  so  the 
name  of  it  was;  which  names,  indeed,  contain  in  them 
wonderful  powers  of  the  things  signified.  Every 
voice,  therefore,  that  is  significative,  first  of  all  signi- 
fies by  the  influence  of  the  celestial  harmony;  secondly, 
by  the  imposition  of  man,  although  oftentimes  other- 
wise by  this  than  by  that.  But  when  both  significa- 
tions meet  in  any  voice  or  name,  which  are  put  upon 
them  by  the  said  harmony,  or  men,  then  that  name  is 
with  a  double  virtue,  viz.,  natural  and  arbitrary,  made 


210  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

most  efficacious  to  act  as  often  as  it  shall  be  uttered  in 
due  place  and  time,  and  seriously,  with  an  intention 
exercised  upon  the  matter  rightly  disposed,  and  that 
can  naturally  be  acted  upon  by  it.  So  we  read  in  Phi- 
lostratus,  that  when  a  maid  at  Rome  died  the  same  day 
she  was  married,  and  was  presented  to  Apollonius,  he 
accurately  inquired  into  her  name,  which  being  known, 
he  pronounced  some  occult  thing",  by  which  she 
revived.  It  was  an  observation  amongst  the  Romans, 
in  their  holy  rites,  that  when  they  did  besiege  any 
city,  they  did  diligently  enquire  into  the  proper  and 
true  name  of  it,  and  the  name  of  that  God  under 
whose  protection  it  was;  which  being  known,  they  did 
then  with  some  verse  call  forth  the  Gods  that  were  the 
protectors  of  that  city,  and  did  curse  the  inhabitants 
of  that  city,  so  at  length,  their  Gods  being  absent,  did 
overcome  them,  as  Virgil  sings: 

That  kept  this  Realm,  our  Gods 


Their  Altars  have  forsook,  and  'hlest  abodes. 

Now  the  verse  with  which  the  Gods  were  called  out 
and  the  enemies  were  cursed,  when  the  city  was 
assaulted  round  about,  let  him  that  would  know  find 
it  out  in  Livy  and  Macrobius;  but  also  many  of  these 
Serenus  Samonicus,  in  his  book  of  secret  things, 
makes  mention  of. 


CHAPTER  LXXI. 

Of  many  Words  joined  together,  as  in  Sentences  and  Verses; 
and  of  the  Virtues  and  Astrictions  of  Charms, 

Besides  the  virtues  of  words  and  names,  there  is 
also  a  greater  virtue  found  in  sentences,  from  the  truth 
contained  in  them,  which  hath  a  very  great  power  of 
impressing,    changing,  binding,   and   establishing,   so 


PHILOSOPHY  OF  NATURAL.  MAGIC.  211 

that  being  used  it  doth  shine  the  more,  and  being- 
resisted  is  more  confirmed  and  consolidated;  which 
virtue  is  not  in  simple  words,  but  in  sentences,  by 
which  anything  is  affirmed  or  denied;  of  which  sort  are 
verses,  enchantments,  imprecations,  deprecations,  ora- 
tions, invocations,  obtestations,  adjurations,  conjura- 
tions, and  such  like.  Therefore,  in  composing  verses 
and  orations  for  attracting  the  virtue  of  any  star 
or  deity,  you  must  diligently  consider  what  virtue  any 
star  contains,  as,  also,  what  effects  and  operations, 
and  to  infer  them  in  verses,  by  praising,  extolling, 
amplifying,  and  setting  forth  those  things  which  such 
a  kind  of  star  is  wont  to  cause  by  way  of  its  influence, 
and  by  vilifying  and  dispraising  those  things  which  it 
is  wont  to  destroy  and  hinder,  and  by  supplicating  and 
begging  for  that  which  we  desire  to  get,  and  by  con- 
demning and  detestirig  that  which  we  would  have 
destroyed  and  hindered;  and  after  the  same  manner  to 
make  an  elegant  oration,  and  duly  distinct,  by  articles, 
with  competent  numbers  and  proportions.  Moreover, 
magicians  command  that  we  call  upon  and  pray  by  the 
names  of  the  same  star,  or  name  to  them  to  whom  such 
a  verse  belongs,  by  their  wonderful  things,  or  mira- 
cles, by  their  courses  and  ways  in  their  sphere,  by 
their  light,  by  the  dignity  of  their  kingdom,  by  the 
beauty  and  brightness  that  is  in  it,  by  their  strong  and 
powerful  virtues,  and  by  such  like  things  as  these.  As 
Psyche,  in  Apuleius,  prays  to  Ceres,  saying,  "I  beseech 
thee  by  thy  fruitful  right  hand,  I  intreat  thee  by  the 
joyful  ceremonies  of  harvests,  by  the  quiet  silence  of 
thy  chests,  by  the  winged  chariots  of  dragons,  thy 
servants,  by  the  furrows  of  the  Sicilian  earth,  the 
devouring  wagon,  the  clammy  earth,  by  the  place  of 
going  down  into  cellars  at  the  light  nuptials  of  Pros- 
perina,  and  returns  at  the  light  inventions  of  her 
daughter,  and  other  things  which  are  concealed  in  her 


212  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

temple  in  the  city  of  Eleusis,  in  Attica. ' '  Besides,  with 
the  divers  sorts  of  the  names  of  the  stars,  they  com- 
mand us  to  call  upon  them  by  the  names  of  the  Intel- 
ligences ruling"  over  the  stars  themselves,  of  which  we 
shall  speak  more  at  large  in  their  proper  place.  They 
that  desire  further  examples  of  these,  let  them  search 
into  the  hymns  of  Orpheus,  than  which  nothing  is 
more  efficacious  in  Natural  Magic,  if  they,  together 
with  their  circumstances,  which  wise  men  know,  be 
used  according  to  a  due  harmony  with  all  attention. 
But  to  return  to  our  purpose.  Such  like  verses,  being 
aptly  and  duly  made,  according  to  the  Rule  of  the  Stars, 
and  being  full  of  signification  and  meaning,  and  oppor- 
tunely pronounced  with  vehement  affection  (as  accord- 
ing to  the  number  and  the  proportion  of  their  articles, 
so  according  to  the  form  resulting  from  the  articles) 
and,  by  the  violence  of  imagination,  do  confer  a  very 
great  power  in  the  enchanter,  and  sometimes  transfers 
it  upon  the  thing  enchanted,  to  bind  and  direct  it  to  the 
same  purpose  for  which  the  affections  and  speeches  of 
the  enchanter  are  intended.  Now,  the  instrument  of 
enchanters  is  a  most  pure,  harmonical  spirit — warm, 
breathing,  living,  bringing  with  it  motion,  affection, 
and  signification;  composed  of  its  parts,  endued  with 
sense,  and  conceived  by  reason.  By  the  quality,  there- 
fore, of  this  spirit,  and  by  the  celestial  similitude 
thereof  (besides  those  things  which  have  already  been 
spoken  of)  verses,  also,  from  the  opportunity  of  time, 
receive  from  above  most  excellent  virtues;  and,  indeed, 
are  more  sublime  and  effiacious  than  spirits,  and  vapors 
exhaling  out  of  the  vegetable  life,  such  as  herbs,  roots, 
gums,  aromatical  things,  and  fumes  and  such  like. 
And,  therefore,  magicians  enchanting  things,  are  wont 
to  blow  and  breathe  upon  them  the  words  of  the  verse, 
or  to  breathe  in  the  virtue  with  the  spirit,  that  so  the 
whole   virtue   of  the   soul   be   directed   to   the   thing 


PHILOSOPHY   OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  213 

enchanted,  being*  disposed  for  the  receiving  of  said 
virtue.  And  here  it  is  to  be  noted  that  every  oration, 
writing,  and  words,  as  they  induce  accustomed  mo- 
tions by  their  accustomed  numbers,  proportions,  and 
form,  so  (besides  their  usual  order)  being  pronounced, 
or  wrote  backwards,  move  unto  unusual  effects. 


CHAPTER  LXXII. 

Of  the  loonderful  Poiver  of  Enchantments. 

They  say  that  the  power  of  enchantments  and  verses 
is  so  great,  that  it  is  believed  they  are  able  to  subvert 
almost  all  Nature.  Apuleius  saith  that  with  a  magical 
whispering,  swift  rivers  are  turned  back,  the  slow  sea 
is  bound,  the  winds  are  breathed  out  with  one  accord, 
the  Sun  is  stopped,  the  Moon  is  clarified,  the  Stars  are 
pulled  out,  the  day  is  kept  back,  the  night  is  pro- 
longed; and  of  these  things  Lucan  writes: 

The  courses  of  all  things  did  cease,  the  night 
Prolonged  luas,  Hioas  long  before  Hioas  light; 
Astonied  loas  the  headlong  World — all  this 
Was  by  the  hearing  of  a  verse. 

And  a  little  before: 

Thessalian  verse  did  into  his  heart  so  flow, 
That  it  did  make  a  greater  heat  of  love. 

And  elsewhere: 

No  dregs  of  poison  being  by  him  drunk- 
His  ivits  decayed  enchanted 

Also  Virgil,  in  Damon, 

Charms  can  command  the  Moon  doivn  from  the  Skie; 
Circe^s  Charms  changed  Ulysses''  company. 
A  cold  snake,  being  charm'd,  burst 


214  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

And  Ovid,  in  his  untitled  book,  saith: 

With  charms  doth  withering  Geres  dye, 

Dried  are  the  fountains  all, 
Acorns  from  OJces,  enchanted  Grapes, 

And  apples  from  trees  fall. 

If  these  things  were  not  true,  there  would  not  be 
such  strict  penal  statutes  made  against  them  that 
should  enchant  fruit.  And  Tibullus  saith  of  a  certain 
enchantress: 

Her  ivith  Gharms  dratving  Stars  from  Heaven,  I, 
And  turning  the  course  of  rivers,  did  espy; 
She  parts  the  earth,  and  Ghosts  from  Sepulchers 
Draios  up,  and  fetcheth  bones  aivay  from  th''  fires, 
And  at  her  pleasure  scatters  clouds  V  th''  Air, 
And  makes  it  Snow  in  Summer  hot  and  fair. 

Of  all  which  that  enchantress  seems  to  boast  herself 
in  Ovid,  when  she  saith: 


') 


At  will,  I  make  sioift  streams  retire 
To  their  fountains,  whilst  their  Banks  admire; 
Sea  toss  and  smooth;  clear  Glouds  with  Glouds  deform. 
With  Spells  and  Gharms  I  hreak  the  Viper^s  jaw, 
Gleave  solid  Bocks,  Gakes  from  their  seizures  draiv. 
Whole  Woods  remove,  the  lofty  Mountains  shake, 
Earth  for  to  groan,  and  Ghosts  from  graves  awake, 
And  thee,  G  Moon,  I  draw 

Moreover,  all  poets  sing,  and  philosophers  do  not 
deny,  that  by  verses  many  wonderful  things  may  be 
done,  as  corn  to  be  removed,  lightnings  to  be  com- 
manded, diseases  to  be  cured,  and  the  like.  For  Cato, 
himself,  in  country  affairs,  used  some  enchantments 
against  the  diseases  of  beasts,  which  as  yet  are  extant 
in  his  writings.  Also  Josephus  testifies  that  Solomon 
was  skilled  in  those   kinds  of  enchantments.     Also 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  215 

Celsus  Africanus  reports,  according"  to  the  Egyptian 
doctrine,  that  man's  body,  according*  to  the  number  of 
the  faces  of  the  Zodiac  Sig"ns,  was  taken  care  of  by  so 
many,  viz. ,  thirty-six  spirits,  whereof  each  undertake 
and  defend  their  proper  part,  whose  names  they  call 
with  a  peculiar  voice,  which,  being"  called  upon,  restore 
to  health  with  their  enchantments  the  diseased  parts 
of  the  body. 


CHAPTER  LXXIII. 

Of  the  Virtue  of  Writing,  and  of  Making  Imprecations ,  and 

Inscriptions. 

The  use  of  words  and  speech  is  to  express  the 
Inwards  of  the  mind,  and  from  thence  to  draw  forth 
the  secrets  of  the  thoughts,  and  to  declare  the  will  of 
the  speaker.  Now,  writing  is  the  last  expression  of 
the  mind,  and  is  the  number  of  speech  and  voice,  as, 
also,  the  collection,  state,  end,  continuing,  and  iter- 
ation, making  a  habit,  which  is  not  perfected  with  the 
act  of  one's  voice.  And  whatsoever  is  in  the  mind,  in 
voice,  in  word,  in  operation,  and  in  speech,  the  whole 
and  all  of  this  is  in  writing  also.  And  as  nothing 
V7hich  is  conceived  in  the  mind  is  not  expressed  by 
voice,  so  nothing  which  is  expressed  is  not  also  writ- 
ten. And,  therefore,  magicians  command  that  in  \ 
every  work  there  be  imprecations  and  inscriptions 
made,  by  which  the  operator  may  express  his  affection; 
that  if  he  gather  an  herb,  or  a  stone,  he  declare  for 
what  use  he  doth  it;  if  he  make  a  picture,  he  say  and 
ivrite  to  what  end  he  maketh  it,  with, imprecations  and 
inscriptions.  Albertus,  also,  in  his  book,  called  the  / 
Speculum,  doth  not  disallow  this,  without  which  all  our 
works  would  never  be  brought  into  effect,  seeing  a 
disposition  does  not  cause  an  effect,  but  the  act  of  the 


216  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA'S 

disposition.  We  find,  also,  that  the  same  kind  of  pre- 
cepts was  in  use  amongst  the  ancients,  as  Virgil  testi- 
fies when  he  sings: 

/  ivalJc  around 
First  ivith  these  Threads — in  number  luhich  three  are — 
^Bout  tN  Altars,  thrice  I  shall  thy  Image  hear. 

And  a  little  after: 

Knots,  Amaryllis,  tie!  of  Colors  three, 

Then  say,  "  These  bonds  I  knit  for  Venus  &e." 

And  in  the  same  place: 

As  ivith  one  fire  this  clay  doth  harder  prove. 
The  luax  more  soft;  so,  Daphnis,  ivith  our  love. 


CHAPTER  LXXIV. 

Of  the  Proportion,  Correspondency,  and  Reduction  of  Letters 
to  the  Celestial  Signs  and  Planets,  According  to  various 
Tongues,  and  a  Table  thereof. 

God  gave  to  man  a  mind  and  speech,  which  (as  saith 
Mercurius  Trismegistus)  are  thought  to  be  a  gift  of  the 
same  virtue,  power,  and  immortality.  The  omnipotent 
God  hath  by  his  providence  divided  the  speech  of  men 
into  divers  languages,  which  languages  have,  accord- 
ing to  their  diversity,  received  divers  and  proper  char- 
acters of  writing,  consisting  in  their  certain  order, 
number,  and  figure,  not  so  disposed  and  formed  by  hap 
or  chance,  nor  by  the  weak  judgment  of  man,  but 
from  above,  whereby  they  agree  with  the  celestial  and 
divine  bodies  and  virtues.  But  before  all  notes  of 
languages,  the  writing  of  the  Hebrews  is,  of  all,  the 
most  sacred  in  the  figures  of  characters,  points  of 
vowels,  and  tops  of  accents;  or  consisting  in  matter, 
form,  and  spirit. 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  217 

The  position  of  the  Stars  being  first  made  in  the  seat 
of  God,  which  is  Heaven,  after  the  figure  of  them  (as 
the  masters  of  the  Hebrews  testify)  are  most  fully 
formed  the  letters  of  the  Celestial  Mysteries,  as  by 
their  figure,  form,  and  signification,  so  by  the  numbers 
signified  by  them,  and  also  by  the  various  harmonies  of 
their  conjunction.  Whence  the  more  curious  Mecubals 
of  the  Hebrews  do  undertake — by  the  figure  of  their 
letters,  the  forms  of  characters,  and  their  signature, 
simpleness  or  composition,  separation,  crookedness  or 
directness,  defect,  abounding,  greatness  or  littleness, 
crowning,  opening  or  shutting,  order,  transmutation, 
joining  together,  revolution  of  letters,  and  of  points, 
and  tops,  by  the  supputation  of  numbers,  and  by  the 
letters  of  things  signified — to  explain  all  things;  how 
they  proceed  from  the  first  cause,  and  are  again  to  be 
reduced  into  the  same.  Moreover,  they  divide  the  let- 
ters of  their  Hebrew^  alphabet,  viz. ,  into  twelve  simple, 
seven  double,  and  three  mothers,  which,  they  say,  sig- 
nify as  characters  of  things — the  Twelve  Signs,  Seven 
Planets,  and  Three  Elements,  viz.,  Fire,  Water,  and 
Earth;  for  they  account  Air  no  element,  but  as  the 
glue  and  spirit  of  the  elements.  To  these,  also,  they 
appoint  points  and  tops.  As,  therefore,  by  the  aspects 
of  Planets  and  Signs,  together  with  the  Elements  (the 
working  spirit  and  truth),  all  things  have  been  and  are 
brought  forth.  So,  by  these  characters  of  letters  and 
points,  signifying  those  things  that  are  brought  forth, 
the  names  of  all  things  are  appointed,  as  certain  Signs 
and  vehicles  of  things  explained,  carrying  with  them 
everywhere  their  essence  and  virtues.  The  profound 
meanings  and  Signs  are  inherent  in  those  characters, 
and  figures  of  them,  as  also  numbers,  place,  order,  and 
revolution;  so  that  Origenes,  therefore,  thought  that 
those  names,  when  translated  into  another  idiom,  do 
not  retain  their  proper  virtue.     For  only  the  original 


218  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA'S 

names,  which  are  rightly  imposed,  because  they  sig- 
nify naturally  and  have  a  natural  activity.  It  is  not 
so  with  them  which  signify  at  pleasure,  which  have  no 
activity  as  they  are  signifying,  as  they  are  but  certain 
natural  things  in  themselves.  Now,  if  there  be  any 
language  whose  words  have  a  natural  signification,  it 
is  manifest  that  this  is  the  Hebrew;  the  order  of  which 
he  that  shall  profoundly  and  radically  observe,  and 
shall  know  to  resolve  proportionably  the  letters 
thereof,  shall  have  a  rule  exactly  to  find  out  any  idiom. 
There  are,  therefore,  two  and  twenty  letters,  which 
are  the  foundation  of  the  world,  and  of  creatures  that 
are,  and  are  named  in  it,  and  every  saying  and  every 
creature  are  of  them,  and  by  their  revolutions  receive 
their  name,  being,  and  virtue. 

He,  therefore,  that  will  find  them  out,  must  by  each 
joining  together  of  the  letters  so  long  examine  them, 
until  the  voice  of  God  is  manifest,  and  the  framing  of 
the  most  sacred  letters  be  opened  and  discovered;  for 
hence  voices  and  words  have  efficacy  in  magical  works, 
because  that  in  which  Nature  first  exerciseth  magical 
efficacy  is  the  voice  of  God.  But  these  are  of  more 
deep  speculation  than  to  be  handled  in  this  book.  To 
return  to  the  division  of  the  letters:  of  these,  amongst 
the  Hebrews,  are  three  mothers,  viz.,  ^,  ),  {^;  seven 
double,  viz.,  J^,  ^,  ^,  ^,  ^,  3,  3.  The  other  twelve, 
viz.,  ^,  p,  ^,  y,  0,  ;i,  ^,  ^,  ^,  n,  ;,  n-  are  simple. 

The  rule  is  the  same  amongst  the  Chaldeans,  and,  by 
the  imitation  of  those  above,  also  the  letters  of  other 
tongues  are  distributed  to  the  Signs,  Planets,  and  Ele- 
ments, after  their  order.  For  the  vowels  in  the  Greek 
tongue  answer  to  the  Seven  Planets,  and  the  others  are 
attributed  to  the  Twelve  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  the  Four 
Elements,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  World.  Amongst  the 
Latins  there  is  the  same  signification  of  them.     For 


PHILOSOPHY  OF   NATURAL  MAGIC.  219 

the  five  vowels  A,  E,  I,  O,  U,  and  J  and  V,  consonants, 
are  ascribed  to  the  Seven  Planets,  and  the  consonants, 
B,  C,  D,  F,  G,  L,  M,  N,  P,  R,  S,  T,  are  answerable  to 
the  Twelve  Sig-ns.  The  rest,  viz.,  K,  Q,  X,  Z,  make  the 
Elements.  H,  the  aspiration,  represents  the  Spirit  of 
the  World.  Y,  because  it  is  a  Greek,  and  not  a  Latin 
character,  and  serving  only  to  Greek  words,  follows 
the  nature  of  its  idiom. 

But  this  you  must  not  be  ignorant  of,  that  it  is 
observed  by  all  wise  men,  that  the  Hebrew  letters  are 
the  most  efficacious  of  all,  because  they  have  the 
greatest  similitude  with  celestials  and  the  world,  and 
that  the  letters  of  the  other  tongues  have  not  so  great 
an  efficacy  because  they  are  more  distant  from  them. 
Now  the  disposition  of  these  the  following  table  will 
explain.  Also  all  the  letters  have  double  numbers  of 
their  order,  viz.,  extended,  which  simply  express  of 
what  number  the  letters  are,  according  to  their  order; 
and  collected,  which  re-collect  w^ith  themselves  the 
numbers  of  all  the  preceding  letters.  Also  they  have 
integral  numbers,  which  result  from  the  names  of  let- 
ters, according  to  their  various  manners  of  numbering. 
The  virtues  of  which  numbers,  he  that  shall  know, 
shall  be  able  in  every  tongue  to  draw  forth  wonderful 
mysteries  by  their  letters,  as  also  to  tell  what  things 
have  been  past,  and  foretell  things  to  come.  There 
are  also  other  mysterious  joinings  of  letters  with  num- 
bers, but  we  shall  abundantly  discourse  of  all  these  in 
the  following  books.  Wherefore  we  will  now  put  an 
end  to  this  first  book. 

The  table  above  referred  to,  on  the  following  page, 
is  from  the  English  edition  of  1651.  The  reader  will 
also  find  a  table  of  the  Cabala  elsewhere  in  this  volume. 
At  this  place  we  insert  Mr.  Henry  Morley's  appro- 
priate criticism  on  Agrippa  's  book  of  Natural  Magic. 

V 

n 

B 

B 

B 

^ 

d 

P 

C 

ax 

^ 

<;;^ 

rA: 

D 

ss 

M> 

z 

F 

SI 

^ 

^ 

K 

G 

1TJ7 

"a 

>;) 

A 

L 

M 

JSiS 

> 

^ 

M 

OK 

t) 

jsa 

N 

N 

•+^ 

5? 

<^ 

n 

P 

^ 

!r 

s 

p 

R 

if^ 

t? 

<s> 

& 

S 

X 

ts> 

T 

T 

fi 

n 

^ 

A 

A 

^ 

^ 

-5i^ 

e 

E 

-cy^ 

n 

<>0 

H 

I 

O 

a 

r& 

I 

O 

? 

a 

XL 

o 

V 

$ 

Y 

IcotiC 

t^ 

ti 

zs 

Vcsn 

T^a 

K 

;^ 

© 

K 

,  Aqua 

% 

o 

.M. 

a 

Aer 

§ 

X 

Ignis 

^ 

C3 

X 

z 

Spus 

r 

H 

^ 


HENRY  MORLEY'S  CRITICISM. 


Little  disguised  by  Hebrew  admixture,  and  little 
pervated  by  the  speculations  of  the  Platonists  of  Alex- 
andria, Philo  the  Jew,  Plotinus,  and  lamblichus,  whom 
the  young"  student  quotes  most  frequently,  we  have 
again  the  Attic  Moses,  Plato,  speaking  through  a 
young  and  strong  heart  to  the  world.  Very  great  was 
the  influence  of  Plato  in  this  period  of  wakening  to 
thought.  Nothing  was  known  by  experience  of  Nature, 
for  little  had  been  learnt  since  the  time  when  Plato, 
theorising  upon  Nature,  owned  it  to  be  impossible  to 
arrive  at  any  certain  result  in  our  speculations  upon 
the  creation  of  the  visible  universe  and  it  authors; 
"wherefore,"  he  said,  "even  if  we  should  only 
advance  reasons  not  less  probable  than  those  of  others, 
you  should  still  be  content.  "  In  this  spirit  alone  Cor- 
nelius Agrippa  taught  his  age :  ' '  There  are  these  mar- 
vels well  accredited;  there  is  this  cumbrous  and  dis- 
jointed mass  of  earthly,  sensible  experience,  which 
there  is  no  way  of  explaining  left  to  me  but  one.  I 
accept  the  marvels,  foolish  as  they  seem;  they  are  as 
well  accredited  as  things  more  obviously  true.  With 
God  all  things  are  possible.  In  God  all  things  consist. 
I  will  adopt  Plato's  belief,  that  the  world  is  animated 
by  a  moving  soul,  and  from  the  soul  of  the  world  I 
will  look  up  to  its  Creator.  I  cannot  rest  content  with 
a  confused  mass  of  evidence;  I  will  animate  with  my 
own  soul,  and  a  faith  in  its  divine  origin,  the  world 
about  me.  I  will  adopt  the  glorious  belief  of  Plato, 
that  we  sit  here  as  in  a  cavern  with  our  faces  held  from 
looking  to  the  cavern's  mouth,  down  which  a  light  is 
streaming  and  pours  in  a  flood  over  our  heads,  broken 

222  HENRY  MORLEY'S   CRITICISM. 

by  shadows  of  things  moving  in  the  world  above. 
We  see  the  shadows  on  the  wall,  hear  echoes,  and 
believe  in  all  as  the  one  known  truth  of  substance  and 
of  voice,  although  these  are  but  the  images  of  the 
superiors.  I  also  will  endeavor  to  climb  up  out  of  the 
cave  into  the  land  flooded  with  sunlight.  I  connect 
all  that  we  see  here  with  Plato's  doctrine  of  superior 
ideas,  I  subdue  matter  to  spirit,  I  will  see  true  knowl- 
edge in  apparent  foolishness,  and  connect  the  meanest 
clod  with  its  divine  Creator.  I  will  seek  to  draw  down 
influences,  and  to  fill  my  soul  with  a  new  strength 
imparted  by  the  virtue  of  ideas  streaming  from  above. 
The  superior  manifest  in  the  inferior  is  the  law  of 
Nature  manifested  in  the  thing  created.  My  soul  is 
not  sufficient  for  itself;  beyond  it  and  above  it  lie 
eternal  laws,  subtle,  not  having  substance  or  form,  yet 
the  cause  of  form  and  substance.  I  cannot  hope  to 
know  them  otherwise  than  as  ideas;  to  unborn  genera- 
tions they  will  be  revealed,  perhaps;  to  me  they  are 
ideas,  celestial  influences,  working  intelligences.  I 
believe  in  them,  and  I  desire  to  lay  open  my  soul  to 
their  more  perfect  apprehension.  They  are  not  God, 
though  God  created  them;  they  are  not  man,  though 
they  have  by  divine  ordainment  formed  him.  The 
more  I  dwell  upon  their  qualities,  the  more  I  long  for 
the  divine,  the  more  shall  I  be  blessed  by  the  reception 
of  their  rays.  The  more  intensely  I  yearn  heavenward, 
the  more  shall  I  bring  down  heaven  to  dwell  in  my 
soul. " 

So  we  may  hear,  if  we  will,  the  spirit  of  the  young 
inquirer  pleading  to  us  from  across  the  centuries,  and 
if  our  own  minds  ever  yearned  for  an  escape  from  the 
delusions  of  the  grosser  sense  and  the  restriction  set 
by  crowds  on  free  inquiry,  there  is  no  true  heart  that 
will  not  say:     "  You  labored  well,  my  brother.  " 


AGRIPPA  AND  THE  ROSICRUCIANS. 


The  secrets  to  be  talked  over  between  Cornelius  and 
his  friend  related  to  that  study  of  the  mysteries  of 
knowledge  in  which  the  Theosophists  assisted  one 
another.  Secret  societies,  chiefly  composed  of  curi- 
ous and  learned  youths,  had  by  this  time  become 
numerous,  and  numerous  especially  among"  the  Ger- 
mans. Not  only  the  search  after  the  philosopher's 
stone,  which  was  then  worthy  to  be  prosecuted  by 
enlightened  persons,  but  also  the  new  realms  of 
thought  laid  open  by  the  first  glance  at  Greek  litera- 
ture, and  by  the  still  more  recent  introduction  of  a 
study  of  the  Hebrew  language,  occupied  the  minds  of 
these  associated  scholars.  Such  studies  often  carried 
those  who  followed  them  within  the  borders  of  forbid- 
den ground,  and  therefore  secrecy  was  a  condition  nec- 
essary to  their  freedom  of  inquiry.  Towards  the  close 
of  the  sixteenth  century  such  associations  (the  founda- 
tion of  which  had  been  a  desire  to  keep  thought  out 
fetters)  were  developed  into  the  form  of  brotherhoods 
of  Rosicrucians :  Physician,  Theosophist,  Chemist,  and 
now,  by  the  mercy  of  God,  Rosicrucian,  became  then 
the  style  in  which  a  brother  gloried.  The  brother- 
hoods of  Rosicrucians  are  still  commonly  remembered, 
but  in  the  social  history  of  Europe  they  are  less  to  be 
considered  than  those  first  confederations  of  Theo- 
sophists, which  nursed  indeed  mystical  errors  gathered 
from  the  Greeks  and  Jews,  but  out  of  whose  theories 
there  was  developed  much  of  a  pure  spiritualism  that 
entered  into  strife  with  what  w^as  outwardly  corrupt 
and  sensual  in  the  body  of  the  Roman  Church,  and 
thus  prepared   the   way  for  the   more  vital   attacks 

224  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA 

of  the  Reformers.  When  first  Greek  studies  were 
revived,  the  monks  commonly  regarded  them  as  essen- 
tially adverse  to  Roman  interests,  and  the  very 
language  seemed  to  them  infected  with  the  plague  of 
heresy.  In  the  Netherlands  it  became  almost  a  prov- 
erb with  them  that  to  be  known  for  a  grammarian  was 
to  be  reputed  heretic.  Not  seldom,  indeed,  in  later 
times,  has  John  Reuchlin,  who,  for  his  Greek  and 
Hebrew  scholarship  was  called,  after  the  manner  of 
his  day,  the  Phoenix  of  Germans,  and  who  was  the 
object  of  an  ardent  hero  worship  to  men  like  Cornelius 
Agrippa,  been  called  also  the  Father  of  the  Reforma- 
tion. Certainly  Luther,  Erasmus,  and  Melancthon  had 
instruction  from  him;  by  him  it  was  that  Schwartzerd 
had  been  taught  to  call  himself  Melancthon;  and  many 
will  remember  how,  after  his  death,  Erasmus,  in  a 
pleasant  dialogue,  raised  his  old  friend  to  the  rank  of 
saint,  and  prayed  to  him,  "Oh,  holy  soul,  be  favorable 
to  the  languages;  be  favorable  to  those  that  love  hon- 
orers  of  the  languages;  be  propitious  to  the  sacred 
tongues. ' '  But  Reuchlin — for  the  taste  of  smoke  in  it, 
Reuchlin  quasi  Reeki,  his  name  was  turned  into  the 
Greek  form,  Capnio — Reuchlin,  or  Capnio,  never 
passed  as  a  reformer  beyond  detestation  of  the  vices 
of  the  priesthood.  Like  Cornelius,  who  began  his  life 
before  the  public  as  a  scholar  by  an  act  of  homage  to 
his  genius,  Reuchlin  loved  liberty  and  independence, 
cherished  the  idol  of  free  conscience,  but  never  fairly 
trusted  himself  to  its  guidance.  To  the  last  an  instinct 
of  obedience  to  the  church  governed  his  actions,  and 
the  spiritual  gold  he  could  extract  from  Plato,  Aris- 
totle, or  the  wonderful  Cabala  of  the  Jews,  was  in  but 
small  proportion  to  the  dross  fetched  up  with  it  from 
the  same  ancient  mines. 

'  A  contemporary  notion  of  the  Reformation,  not  with- 
out some  rude  significance  in  this  respect,  is  said  to 


AMONG  THE   ROSICRUCIANS.  225 

have  been  obtruded  upon  Charles  V.  by  a  small  body 
of  unknown  actors,  who  appeared  before  him  in  1530, 
when  he  was  in  Germany.  He  had  been  dining"  with 
his  brother  Ferdinand,  and  did  not  refuse  their  offer  to 
produce  a  comedy  in  dumb  show.  One  dressed  as  a 
scholar,  labelled  Capnio,  brought  before  the  emperor 
a  bundle  of  sticks — some  crooked  and  some  straight — 
laid  them  down  in  the  highway,  and  departed.  Then 
entered  another,  who  professed  to  represent  Erasmus, 
looked  at  the  sticks,  shook  his  head,  made  various 
attempts  to  straighten  the  crooked  ones,  and  finding 
that  he  could  not  do  so,  shook  his  head  over  them 
again,  put  them  down  where  he  had  found  them,  and 
departed.  Then  came  an  actor,  labelled  Luther,  with 
a  torch,  who  set  all  that  was  crooked  in  the  bundle 
blazing.  When  he  was  gone  entered  one  dressed  as  an 
emperor,  who  tried  in  vain  to  put  the  fire  out  with  his 
sword.  Last  came  Pope  Leo  X.,  to  whom,  grieving 
dismally  over  the  spectacle  before  him,  there  were  two 
pails  brought;  one  contained  oil,  the  other  water.  His 
holiness,  to  quell  the  fire,  poured  over  it  the  bucketful 
of  oil,  and  while  the  flame  attracted  all  eyes  by  the 
power,  beyond  mastery,  with  w^hich  it  shot  up  towards 
heaven,  the  actors  made  their  escape  undetected. 

Now,  it  was  over  the  crooked  sticks  of  Capnio,  and 
many  other  matters  difficult  of  com^Drehension,  that 
Cornelius  and  his  confederates  w^ere  bent  in  curious 
and  anxious  study.  "The bearer  of  the  letters,"  said 
Landulph,  in  excusing  himself  on  the  plea  of  illness, 
from  a  winter  journey  to  a  friend  at  Avignon — "the 
bearer  of  these  letters  is  a  German,  native  of  Nurem- 
berg, but  dwelling  at  Lyons;  and  he  is  a  curious 
inquirer  after  hidden  m3^steries,  a  free  man  restrained 
by  no  fetters,  who,  impelled  by  I  know  not  what 
rumor  concerning  j^ou,  desires  to  sound  j^our  depths." 
That  the  man  himself  might  be  sounded,  as  one  likely 


226  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

to  have  knowledg-e  of  some  important  things,  and 
that  if  it  seemed  fit,  he  should  be  made  a  member  of 
their  brotherhood,  was  the  rest  of  the  recommenda- 
tion of  this  person  by  Landulph  to  his  friend  Agrippa. 
At  Lyons  were  assembled  many  members  of  his 
league,  awaiting  the  arrival  of  the  young  soldier-phi- 
losopher. His  early  taste  for  an  inquiry  into  mysteries 
had  caused  him  to  take  all  possible  advantage,  as  a 
scholar,  of  each  change  of  place  and  each  extension 
of  acquaintance  among  learned  men  who  were  posses- 
sors of  rare  books.  He  had  searched  every  accessible 
volume  that  might  help  him  in  the  prosecution  of  the 
studies  that  had  then  a  fascination,  not  for  him  only, 
but  for  not  a  few  of  the  acutest  minds  in  Christendom. 
At  that  time  there  was,  in  the  modern  sense,  no  natu- 
ral science;  the  naturalists  of  ancient  Greece  and 
Rome  being  the  sole  authorities  in  whom  the  learned 
could  put  trust.  Of  the  miraculous  properties  of 
plants  and  animals,  and  parts  of  animals,  even  at  the 
close  of  the  sixteenth  century,  careful  and  sober  men 
placed  as  accepted  knowledge  many  extravagant  ideas 
on  record.  At  the  beginning  of  the  century,  when  a 
belief  in  the  influences  of  the  stars,  in  the  interferences 
of  demons,  and  in  the  most  wonderful  properties  of 
bodies,  was  the  rule  among  learned  and  unlearned — 
Luther  himself  not  excluded  from  the  number — an 
attempt  to  collect  and  group,  if  it  might  be,  according 
to  some  system,  the  most  recondite  secrets  of  what 
passed  for  the  divine  ordering  of  Nature,  was  in  no 
man's  opinion  foolish,  though  in  the  opinion  of  the 
greater  number  criminal,  Belief  in  the  mysteries  of 
magic,  not  want  of  belief,  caused  men  to  regard  with 
enmity  and  dread  researches  into  secrets  that  might 
give  to  those  by  whom  they  were  discovered  subtle 
and  superhuman  power,  through  possessing  which  they 
would  acquire  an  influence,  horrible  to  suspect,  over 


SOLDIER  AND  SCHOLAR.  227 

their  fellow-creatures.  Detaching  their  search  into 
the  mysteries  of  the  universe  from  all  fear  of  this  kind, 
the  members  of  such  secret  societies  as  that  to  which 
Cornelius  belonged  gathered  whatever  fruit  the}^  could 
from  the  forbidden  tree,  and  obtained  mutual  benefit 
by  frank  exchange  of  information.  Cornelius  had 
already,  by  incessant  search,  collected  notes  for  a 
complete  treatise  upon  magic,  and  of  these  not  a  few 
w^ere  obtained  from  Reuchlin's  Hebrew-Christian  way 
of  using  the  Cabala. 

From  Avignon,  after  a  short  stay,  Cornelius  Agrippa 
went  to  Lyons,  and  remaining  there  some  weeks,  com- 
pared progress  with  his  friends,  and  no  doubt  also 
formally  divested  himself  of  any  further  responsibility 
connected  with  the  Spanish  enterprise.  Towards  the 
end  of  this  year,  a  friend  at  Cologne,  Theodoric, 
Bishop  of  Cyrene,  wrote,  expressing  admiration  of 
him,  as  of  one  among  so  many  thousand  Germans  who 
at  sundry  times  and  places  had  displayed  in  equal 
degree  power  to  labor  vigorously  as  a  man  at  arms  as 
well  as  man  of  letters.  Who  does  not  know,  the 
bishop  asks,  how  few  of  many  thousands  have  done 
that?  He  envies  those  who  can  thus  earn  the  wreath 
of  Mars  without  losing  the  favor  of  Minerva,  and  calls 
the  youth  "in  arms  a  man,  in  scholarship  a  teacher.'^ 
To  escape  the  soldier's  life  of  bondage  seems  to  be 
now  the  ambition  of  the  scholar.  With  the  world 
before  him,  in  the  twenty-third  year  of  his  age,  well 
born,  distinguished  among  all  who  knew  him  for  the 
rare  extent  of  his  attainments,  Cornelius,  attended  by 
his  servant,  Stephen,  quitted  his  friends  at  Lyons,  and 
rode  to  Authun,  where  he  was  received  in  the  abbey  of 
a  liberal  and  hospitable  man,  physician,  theologian, 
and  knight  by  turns,  M.  Champier,  who,  having  been 
born  at  Saint  Saphorin-le-Chateau,  near  Lyons,  w^as 
called    Symphorianus   Champier,  or   Campegius,  and 


228  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA 

who,  not  content  with  his  own  noble  ancestry,  assigned 
himself,  by  rig-ht  of  the  Campegius,  to  the  family  of 
the  Campeggi  of  Bologna,  and  assumed  its  arms.  He 
studied  at  Paris  Litera  humaniora,  at  Montpellier  medi  ■ 
cine,  and  practiced  at  Lyons.  He  lived  to  obtain 
great  fame,  deserving  title,  and  losing  after  his  death 
all.  It  was  not  until  five  years  after  this  visit  from 
Cornelius  Agrippa  that  Symphorianus,  acting  as  body 
physician  to  the  Duke  of  Lorraine,  was  knighted  on  the 
battle-field  of  Marignano.  Among  his  writings,  those 
which  most  testify  his  sympathy  with  the  inquiries  of 
Cornelius,  are  a  book  on  the  Miracles  of  Scripture,  a 
Life  of  Arnold  of  Villeneuve,  and  a  French  version  of 
Sibylline  oracles.  This  Champier  then  sympathized 
with  the  enthusiasm  of  the  young  theosophist,  and 
under  his  roof  the  first  venture  of  Cornelius  before  the 
world  of  letters  seems  to  have  been  planned.  In  the 
last  week  of  May,  we  find  that  he  has  sent  Stephen  to 
fetch  DeBrie  from  Dole,  has  summoned  Antonius  Xan- 
thus  from  Niverne,  and  wishes,  in  association  with 
Symphorianus,  to  arrange  a  meeting  with  Landulph, 
at  any  convenient  place  and  time.  He  has  something 
in  hand  concerning  which  he  wishes  to  take  counsel 
with  his  comrades.  A  few  days  afterwards  he  and 
Landulph  are  at  Dole  together;  and  while  Cornelius 
has  left  Dole  for  a  short  time  to  go  to  Chalon  (sur 
Saone),  his  friend  sends  word  to  him  that  he  has 
engaged  on  his  behalf  the  interest  of  the  Archbishop 
of  Besancon  (Antony  I.,  probably  not  an  old  man, 
since  he  was  alive  thirty  years  afterwards),  who  desires 
greatly  to  see  him,  and  boasts  that  he  can  give  infor- 
mation of  some  things  unknown  perhaps  even  to  him. 
The  archbishop  is  impatient  to  see  the  person  who  has 
stored  up  from  rare  books,  even  those  written  in 
Greek  and  Hebrew,  so  great  a  number  of  the  secrets 
of  the  universe.     Landulph,  to  content  him,  antedates 


PREPARING  TO  LECTURE.  229 

the  time  appointed  for  his  friend's  return,  and  while 
reporting"  this,  adds  that  there  are  many  at  Dole  loud 
in  the  praise  of  Cornelius,  and  none  louder  than  him- 
self. The  influence  of  his  associates  is  evidently  at 
work  on  his  behalf  among"  the  magnates  of  the  town 
and  university  of  Dole,  and  learned  men  in  the  adjoin- 
ing towns  of  Burgundy,  for  it  is  at  Dole  that  he  has 
resolved  to  make  his  first  public  appearance  as  a 
scholar,  by  expounding  in  a  series  of  orations  Reuch- 
lin's  book  on  the  Mirific  Word.  At  Chalon,  however, 
Cornelius  fell  sick  of  a  summer  pestilence,  from  which 
he  was  recovering  on  the  eighth  of  July.  As  soon  as 
health  permitted  he  returned  to  Dole,  where  there  was 
prepared  for  him  a  cordial  reception. 

Dole  is  a  pretty  little  town,  and  at  that  time  pos- 
sessed the  university  which  was  removed  in  after  years 
to  Besancon.  Its  canton  was  called,  for  its  beauty 
and  fertility,  the  Val  d 'Amour;  and  when  Besancon 
was  independent  of  the  lords  of  Burgundy  Dole  was 
their  capital.  A  pleasant  miniature  capitol,  with  not 
four  thousand  inhabitants,  a  parliament,  a  university, 
a  church  of  Notre  Dame  whereof  the  tower  could  be 
seen  from  distant  fields,  a  princely  residence— Dole  la 
Joyeuse  they  called  it  until  thirty  years  before  Cor- 
nelius Agrippa  declaimed  his  orations  there;  but  after 
it  had  been,  in  1479,  captured  and  despoiled  by  a 
French  army,  it  was  called  Dole  la  Dolente. 

Mistress  of  Dole  and  Burgundy  was  Maximilian's 
daughter,  Margaret  of  Austria,  who,  in  this  year  of 
Agrippa's  life,  was  twenty-nine  years  old.  She  was 
already  twice  a  w^idow.  When  affianced  twice — once 
vainly  to  France,  a  second  time  to  Spain,  and  likely  to 
perish  in  a  tempest  before  reaching  her  appointed  hus- 
band— she  had  wit  to  write  a  clever  epitaph  upon  her- 
self. Her  Spanish  husband  died  almost  after  the  first 
embrace,  and  she  had  since,  after  four  years  of  wedded 


230  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

happiness,  lost  her  true  husband,  Philibert  of  Savoy. 
She  was  twenty  four  years  old  when  that  happened, 
and  resolved  to  make  an  end  of  marrying.  In  1506, 
after  the  death  of  Archduke  Philip,  her  father  Maxi- 
milian being-  guardian  of  his  grandson  Charles  the 
Fifth,  made  Margaret  his  governor  over  the  Nether- 
lands, and  appointed  her  to  rule  also  over  Burgundy 
and  the  Charolois.  Thus  she  came  to  be,  in  the  year 
1509,  mistress  at  Dole.  A  clever,  lively  woman, 
opposed  strongly  to  France,  and  always  mindful  of  the 
interests  of  that  house  of  Austria,  to  which  the  family 
of  young  Agrippa  was  attached,  Margaret  was  well 
known  for  her  patronage  of  letters  and  her  bounty 
towards  learned  men.  It  would  be,  therefore,  a  pleas- 
ant transfer  of  his  loyalty,  Agrippa  thought,  from 
Maximilian  to  Margaret,  if  he  could  thereby  get  rid  of 
what  he  regarded  as  camp  slavery  under  the  one,  and 
earn  the  favor  of  the  other  in  the  academic  grove.  To 
earn  Margaret's  good- will  and  help  upon  the  royal 
road  to  fortune  was  one  main  object  of  Cornelius  when 
he  announced  at  Dole  that  he  proposed  to  expound 
Reuchlin's  book,  on  the  Mirific  Word,  in  orations,  to 
which,  inasmuch  as  they  were  to  be  delivered  in  honor 
of  the  most  serene  Princess  Margaret,  the  whole  pub- 
lic would  have  gratuitous  admission. 

Poor  youth !  he  could  not  possibly  have  made  a  more 
genuine  and  honest  effort,  or  one  less  proper  to  be 
used  by  evil  men  for  the  damnation  of  his  character. 
Margaret  was  the  princess  to  whom  of  all  others  he  was 
able  to  pay  unaffected  homage,  and  Reuchlin,  then  the 
boast  of  Germans,  was  the  scholar  of  whom  before 
every  other  he,  a  German  youth,  might  choose  to  hold 
discourse  to  the  Burgundians.  Of  Reuchlin,  ^gidius, 
chief  of  the  Austin  Friars,  wrote,  that  he  "  had  blessed 
him  and  all  mortals  by  his  works.  "  Philip  Beroaldus, 
the  younger,  wrote  to  him:     "Pope  Leo  X.   has  read 


THE   CABALA.  231 

your  Pythagorean  book,  as  he  reads  all  good  books, 
greedily;  then  it  was  read  by  the  Cardinal  de'  Medici, 
and  I  am  expecting  next  to  have  my  turn. ' '  This  book, 
which  had  been  read  by  the  Pope  himself  with  eager 
pleasure,  was  a  wonder  of  the  day,  and  was  in  the  most 
perfect  unison  with  the  whole  tone  of  Agrippa's  mind; 
he  really  understood  it  deeply,  it  was  most  dear  to  him 
as  a  theosophist,  and  he  was  not  to  be  blamed  if  he 
felt,  also,  that  of  all  books  in  the  world  there  was 
none  of  which  the  exposition  would  so  fully  serve  his 
purpose  of  displaying  the  extent  and  depth  of  his  own 
store  of  knowledge. 


EXPOSITION  OF  THE  CABALA, 

Mainly  upon  what  was  said  and  written  by  Cornelius 
Agrippa  in  this  twenty-third  year  of  his  age  has  been 
founded  the  defamation  by  which,  when  he  lived,  his 
spirit  was  tormented  and  the  hope  of  his  existence 
miserably  frustrated — by  which,  now  that  he  is  dead, 
his  character  comes  down  to  us  defiled.  This  victim, 
at  least,  has  not  escaped  the  vengeance  of  the  monks, 
and  his  crime  was  that  he  studied  vigorously  in  his 
salad  days  those  curiosities  of  learning  into  which,  at 
the  same  time,  popes,  bishops,  and  philosophers,  ma- 
ture of  years,  inquired  with  equal  faith  and  almost 
equal  relish,  but  less  energy  or  courage.  For  a  clear 
understanding  of  the  ground,  and  of  the  perils  of  the 
ground,  now  taken  by  Cornelius  Agrippa,  little  more 
is  necessary  than  a  clear  notion  of  what  was  signified 
by  Reuchlin's  book  on  the  Mirific  Word;  but  what  has 
to  be  said  of  Reuchlin  and  his  book,  as  well  as  of  other 
matters  that  will  hereafter  concern  the  fortunes  of 
Cornelius,  requires  some  previous  attention  to  a  sub- 
ject pretty  well  forgotten  in  these  days  by  a  people 


232  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

rich  in  other  knowledge;  we  must  recall,  in  fact,  some 
of  the  main  points  of  the  Cabala. 

This  account  of  the  Cabala  is  derived  from  German 
sources,  among  which  the  chief  are  Brucker's  Historia 
Philosophice  and  the  KdUbala  Denudata,  a  collection  of 
old  cabalistical  writings  arranged  and  explained  by 
Christian  Knorr  von  Rosenroth.  The  traditions,  or 
Cabala,  of  the  Jews,  are  contained  in  sundry  books, 
written  by  Hebrew  Rabbis,  and  consist  of  a  strange 
mixture  of  fable  and  philosophy  varying  on  a  good 
many  points,  but  all  adhering  with  sufficient  accuracy 
to  one  scheme  of  doctrine.  They  claim  high  and  re- 
mote origin.  Some  say  that  the  first  Cabala  were 
received  by  Adam  from  the  angel  Raziel,  who  gave 
him,  either  while  he  yet  remained  in  Paradise,  or  else 
at  the  time  of  his  expulsion,  to  console  and  help  him, 
a  book  full  of  divine  wisdom.  In  this  book  were  the 
secrets  of  Nature,  and  by  knowledge  of  them  Adam 
entered  into  conversation  with  the  Sun  and  Moon, 
knew  how  to  summon  good  and  evil  spirits,  to  inter- 
pret dreams,  foretell  events,  to  heal,  and  to  destroy. 
This  book,  handed  down  from  father  to  son,  came  into 
Solomon's  possession,  and  by  its  aid  Solomon  became 
master  of  many  potent  secrets.  A  cabalistic  volume, 
called  the  Book  of  Raziel,  was,  in  the  middle  ages, 
sometimes  to  be  seen  among  the  Jews. 

Another  account  said  that  the  first  cabalistical  book 
was  the  Sepher  Jezirah,  written  by  Abraham;  but  the 
most  prevalent  opinion  was,  that  when  the  written 
law  was  given  on  Mount  Sinai  to  Moses,  the  Cabala, 
or  mysterious  interpretation  of  it,  was  taught  to  him 
also.  Then  Moses,  it  was  said,  when  he  descended 
from  the  mountain,  entered  Aaron's  tent,  and  taught 
him  also  the  secret  powers  of  the  written  word;  and 
Aaron,  having  been  instructed,  placed  himself  at  the 
right  hand  of   Moses,  and  stood  by  while  his  sons, 


THE   CABALA.  233 

Eleazar  and  Ithamar,  who  had  been  called  into  the 
tent,  received  the  same  instruction.  On  the  rig-ht  and 
left  of  Moses  and  Aaron  then  sat  Ithamar  and  Eleazar, 
when  the  seventy  elders  of  the  Sanhedrim  were  called 
in  and  taught  the  hidden  knowledg"e.  The  elders 
finally  were  seated,  that  they  mig"ht  be  present  when 
all  those  among-  the  common  people  who  desired  to 
learn  came  to  be  told  those  mysteries;  thus  the  elect 
of  the  common  people  heard  but  once  what  the  San- 
hedrim heard  twice,  the  sons  of  Aaron  three  times, 
and  Aaron  four  times  repeated  of  the  secrets  that  had 
been  made  known  to  Moses  by  the  voice  of  the  Most 
High. 

Of  this  mystical  interpretation  of  the  Scripture  no 
person  set  down  any  account  in  writing,  unless  it  was 
Esdras;  but  some  Jews  doubt  whether  he  did.  Israel- 
ites kept  the  knowledge  of  the  doctrine  by  a  pure  tra- 
dition; but  about  fifty  years  after  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem,  Akiba,  a  g"reat  rabbi,  wrote  the  chief  part 
of  it  in  that  book,  Sepher-jezireh,  or  the  Book  of  the 
Creation,  which  was  foolishly  ascribed  by  a  few  to 
Abraham.  A  disciple  of  the  Rabbi  Akiba  was  Rabbi 
Simeon  ben  Jochai,  who  wrote  more  of  the  tradition 
in  a  book  called  Zoar. 

The  truth  probably  is,  that  the  literature  of  cabal- 
ism,  which  is  full  of  suggestion  derived  from  the  Neo- 
platonics  of  Alexandria,  began  with  the  Jews  of  Alex- 
andria under  the  first  Ptolemys.  In  the  book  of 
Simeon  ben  Schetach  it  went  to  Palestine,  where  it  at 
first  was  little  heeded;  but  after  the  destruction  of 
Jerusalem  it  gained  importance,  and  then  Rabbis 
Akiba  and  Simeon  ben  Jochai  extended  it.  It  is  indis- 
putable that  Aristotle  had  been  studied  by  the  writer 
of  the  Sepher-jezireh,  the  oldest  known  book  of  the 
Cabalists.  The  Cabala  went  afterwards  with  other 
learning  to  Spain,  and  that  part  of  it  at  least  which 

234  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

deals  with  Hebrew  anagrams  cannot  be  traced  to  a 
time  earlier  than  the  eleventh  century.  Many  rabbis 
— Abraham  ben  David,  Saudia,  Moses  Botril,  Moses  bar 
Nachman,  Eliezer  of  Garmiza,  and  others — have  writ- 
ten Hebrew  books  for  the  purpose  of  interpreting  the 
system  of  the  Cabala;  but  it  was,  perhaps,  not  before 
the  eighth  century  that  it  had  come  to  receive  very 
general  attention  from  the  Jews. 

The  Cabala  consisted  of  two  portions,  the  symbol- 
ical and  the  real;  the  symbolical  Cabala  being  the 
means  by  which  the  doctrines  of  the  real  Cabala  were 
elicited. 

In  the  Hebrew  text  of  the  Scriptures,  it  was  said, 
there  is  not  only  an  evident,  but  there  is  also  a  latent 
meaning;  and  in  its  latent  meaning  are  contained  the 
mysteries  of  God  and  of  the  universe.  It  need  scarcely 
be  said  that  a  belief  in  secret  wisdom  has  for  ages 
been  inherent  in  the  Oriental  mind,  and  in  the  Scrip- 
tures, it  was  reasoned  by  the  the  later  Jews,  all  wis- 
dom must  be,  of  necessity,  contained.  Of  divine 
authorship,  they  cannot  be  like  ordinary  works  of  men. 
But  if  they  were  taken  only  in  the  natural  sense, 
might  it  not  be  said  that  many  human  works  contain 
marvels  not  less  surprising  and  morality  as  pure.  No, 
it  was  said,  as  we  have  entertained  angels,  and  regarded 
them  as  men,  so  we  may  entertain  the  words  of  the 
Most  High,  if  we  regard  only  their  apparent  sense  and 
not  their  spiritual  mystery.  And  so  it  was  that 
through  a  blind  excess  of  reverence  the  inspired  writ- 
ings were  put  to  superstitious  use.  • 

The  modes  of  examining  their  letters,  words,  and 
sentences,  for  hidden  meaning,  in  which  wholly  con- 
sisted the  symbolical  Cabala,  were  three,  and  these 
were  called  Gemantria,  Notaricon,  Themura 

Gemantria  was  arithmetical  when  it  consisted  in 
applying  to  the  Hebrew  letters  of  a  word  the  sense 


THE   CABALA.  235 

they  bore  as  numbers,  letters  being-  used  also  for  fig- 
ures in  the  Hebrew  as  in  the  Greek.  Then  the  letters 
in  a  word  being  taken  as  numbers  and  added  up,  it  was 
considered  that  another  word,  of  which  the  letters 
added  up  came  to  an  equal  sum,  might  fairly  be  sub- 
stituted by  the  arithmetical  gemantria.  Figurative 
gemantria  deduced  mysterious  interpretations  from 
the  shapes  of  letters  used  in  sacred  writing.  Thus,  in 
Numbers  x.,  35,  Beth  means  the  reversal  of  enemies. 
This  kind  of  interpretation  was  know^n  also  by  the 
name  of  Zurah.  Architectonic  gemantria  constructed 
-words  from  the  numbers  given  by "  Scripture  when 
describing  the  measurements  of  buildings,  as  the  ark, 
or  temple. 

By  Notaricon  more  words  were  developed  from  the 
letters  of  a  word,  as  if  it  had  consisted  of  so  many 
abbreviations,  or  else  first  and  last  letters  of  words, 
or  the  first  letters  of  successive  words,  were  detached 
from  their  places  and  put  side  by  side.  By  Themura, 
any  word  might  be  made  to  yield  a  mystery  out  of  its 
anagram;  these  sacred  anagrams  were  known  as 
Zeruph.  By  the  same  branch  of  the  symbolical  Cabala 
three  systems  were  furnished,  in  accordance  with 
which  words  might  be  transformed  by  the  substitution 
of  one  letter  for  another.  The  first  of  the  systems, 
Albam,  arranged  the  letters  of  the  alphabet  in  tw^o 
row^s,  one  below  another;  the  second,  Athbath,  gave 
another  couple  of  rows;  the  third,  Athbach,  arranged 
them  by  pairs  in  three  rows — all  the  pairs  in  the  first 
TOW  being  the  numerical  value  ten,  in  the  second  row 
a  hundred,  in  the  third  a  thousand;  any  one  of  these 
forms  might  be  consulted,  and  any  letter  in  a  word 
exchanged  for  another  standing  either  in  Albam,  Ath- 
bath, or  Athbach,  immediately  above  it  or  below  it,  or 
on  the  right  hand  of  it  or  the  left. 

This  was  the  symbolical  Cabala,  and  the  business  of 

236  HENRY  CORNIELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

it  was  to  extract,  by  any  of  the  means  allowed,  the 
hidden  meaning  of  the  Scriptures.  The  real  Cabala 
was  the  doctrine  in  this  way  elicited.  It  was  theoret- 
ical, explaining  divine  qualities,  the  ten  sephiroth,  the 
fourfold  cabalistical  worlds,  the  thirty-two  footprints 
of  wisdom,  the  fifty  doors  to  prudence,  Adam  Kadmon, 
&c.  ;  or  it  was  practical,  explaining  how  to  use  such 
knowledge  for  the  calling  of  spirits,  the  extinguishing 
of  fires,  the  banishing  of  disease,  and  so  forth. 

The  theoretical  Cabala  contained,  it  was  said  by 
Christian  students,  many  references  to  the  Messiah. 
Its  main  points  were:  1 — The  Tree;  2 — The  Chariot  of 
Ezekiel;  3 — The  Work  of  Creation;  4— The  Ancient  of 
Days  mentioned  in  Daniel.  It  concerns  us  most  to 
understand  the  Tree.  The  Chariot  of  Ezekiel,  or 
Maasseh  Mercabah,  was  a  description  of  prefigure- 
ments  concerning  ceremonial  and  judicial  law.  The 
doctrine  of  Creation,  in  the  book  Levischith,  was  a  dis- 
sertation upon  physics.  The  Ancient  of  Days  treated 
of  God  and  the  Messiah  in  a  way  so  mystical  that 
cabalists  generally  declined  to  ascribe  any  meaning  at 
all  to  the  direct  sense  of  the  words  employed.  Of 
these  things  we  need  say  no  more,  but  of  the  Cabalist- 
ical Tree  it  will  be  requisite  to  speak  in  more  detail. 

It  was  an  arrangement  of  the  ten  sephiroth.  The 
word  Sephiroth  is  derived  by  some  rabbis  from  a  word 
meaning  to  count,  because  they  are  a  counting  of  the 
divine  excellence.  Otherwise  it  is  considered  an 
adaptation  of  the  Greek  word  Sphere,  because  it  rep- 
resents the  spheres  of  the  universe  which  are  succes- 
sive emanations  from  the  Deity. 

In  the  beginning  was  Or  Haensoph,  the  eternal  light, 
from  whose  brightness  there  descended  a  ray  through 
the  first-born  of  God,  Adam  Kadmon,  and  presently, 
departing  from  its  straight  course,  ran  in  a  circle,  and 
so  formed  the  first  of  the  sephiroth,  which  was  called 


THE   CABALA.  237 

Kethei,  or  the  crown,  because  superior  to  all  the  rest. 
Having  formed  this  circle,  the  ray  resumed  its  straight 
course  till  it  again  ran  in  a  circle  to  produce  the  sec- 
ond of  the  ten  sephiroth,  Chochma,  wisdom,  because 
wisdom  is  the  source  of  all.  The  same  ray  of  divine 
light  passed  on,  losing  gradually,  as  it  became  more 
distant  from  its  holy  source,  some  of  its  power,  and 
formed  presently,  in  like  manner,  the  third  of  the 
sephiroth,  called  Binah,  or  understanding,  because 
understanding  is  the  channel  through  which  wisdom 
flows  to  things  below — the  origin  of  human  knowledge. 
The  fourth  of  the  sephiroth  is  called  Gedolah  or 
Chesed,  greatness  or  goodness,  because  God,  as  being 
great  and  good,  created  all  things.  The  fifth  is  Gebu- 
rah,  strength,  because  it  is  by  strength  that  He  main- 
tains them,  and  because  strength  is  the  only  source  of 
justice  in  the  world.  The  sixth  of  the  sephiroth, 
Thpereth,  beauty  or  grace,  unites  the  qualities  of  the 
preceding.  The  four  last  of  the  sephiroth  are  succes- 
sively named  Nezach,  victory;  Hod,  honor;  Jesod,  or 
Schalom,  the  foundation  or  peace;  and  finally,  Mal- 
cuth,  the  kingdom.  Each  of  the  ten  has  also  a  divine 
name,  and  their  divine  names,  written  in  the  same 
order,  are  Ejeh,  Jah,  Jehovah  (pronounced  Elohim), 
Eloah,  Elohim,  Jehovah  (pronounced  as  usual),  Lord 
Sabaoth,  Jehovah  Zebaoth,  Elchai  (the  living  God), 
Adonai  (the  Lord).  By  these  circles  our  world  is  sur- 
rounded, and,  weakened  in  its  passage  through  them, 
but  able  to  bring  down  with  it  powers  that  are  the 
character  of  each,  divine  light  reaches  us.  These 
sephiroth,  arranged  in  a  peculiar  manner,  form  the 
Tree  of  the  Cabalists;  they  are  also  sometimes 
arranged  in  the  form  of  a  man,  Adam  Kadmon,  accord- 
ing to  the  idea  of  the  Neoplatonics  that  the  figure  of 
the  world  was  that  of  a  man's  body.  In  accordance 
with   another   view    derived   from   the   same   school. 


238  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

things  in  this  world  were  supposed  to  be  gross  images 
of  things  above.  Matter  was  said  by  the  cabalists  to 
have  been  formed  by  the  withdrawal  of  the  divine  ray, 
by  the  emanation  of  which  from  the  first  source  it  was 
produced.  Everything  created  was  created  by  an 
emanation  from  the  source  of  all,  and  that  which 
being  most  distant  contains  least  of  the  divine  essence 
is  capable  of  gradual  purification;  so  that  even  the 
evil  spirits  will  in  course  of  time  become  holy  and 
pure,  and  be  assimilated  to  the  brightest  of  the  emana- 
tions from  Or  Haensoph.  God,  it  was  said,  is  all  in 
all;  everything  is  part  of  the  divine  essence,  with  a 
growing,  or  perceptive,  or  reflective  power,  one  or  all, 
and  by  that  which  has  one  all  may  be  acquired.  A 
stone  may  become  a  plant;  a  plant,  a  beast;  a  beast, 
a  man;  a  man,  an  angel;  an  angel,  a  creator. 

This  kind  of  belief,  which  was  derived  also  from  the 
Alexandrian  Platonists  led  to  that  spiritual  cabalism 
by  which  such  Christians  as  Reuchlin  and  Agrippa 
profited.  It  connected  them  by  a  strong  link  with  the 
divine  essence,  and  they,  feeling  perhaps  more  dis- 
tinctly than  their  neighbors  that  they  were  partakers  of 
the  divine  nature,  and  might,  by  a  striving  after  purity 
of  soul  and  body  win  their  way  to  a  state  of  spiritual 
happiness  and  power,  cut  themselves  off  from  all  com- 
munion with  the  sensuality  that  had  become  the 
scandal  of  the  Church  of  Rome,  and  keenly  perceived, 
as  they  expressed  strongly,  their  sense  of  the  degraded 
habits  of  the  priests.  It  was  in  this  way  that  the 
Christian  Cabalists  assisted  in  the  labors  of  the 
Reformation. 

Little  more  has  to  be  said  about  their  theory,  and 
that  relates  to  the  four  Cabalistical  Worlds.  These 
were  placed  in  the  four  spaces  between  the  upper 
sephiroth.  Between  the  first  and  second  was  placed 
Aziluth,  the   outflowing,  which  contained  the  purest 


CROWN 


CELESTIAL 


GREATNESS 
FIRST  TO  FOURTH  SEPHIROTH. 


TIPHEROTH 


CELESTIAL 


THE    HEXAD 


^above  the  Firmament;  the  Univer- 
sal Hyle:  the  First  Matter; 

the  Abyss.  /  / 

THIRD  TRIAD     \    YELLOW 


SPLENDOR 


FIRMNESS 


■^ 

S.        JESOD         / 

/^Y^^y, 

ASTRAL 

A                A     IsUNS 

.  /\red /\  / 

>v     r\i  C^E   y^ 

FOUND/\TION 

FOURTH   TO   NINTH   SEPHIROTH. 

I 


EH 

n 

a 
-«{ 


JESOO 


ASTRAL 


lU 


SUNS 


F0UN0/^TlON 


MALCHUTH 


FIRE  (Oxygen) 

THE  WORLD  OF  DARKNESS- 
THE  ABODE  OF  EVIL. 

O 


MAN  THE  SYNTHESIS 


EARTH  (Carbon) 


KINGDOM   UNEOUILIBRATEO 
NINTH  AND  TENTH  SEPHIROTH. 


THE  CABALA.  239 

beings,  the  producers  of  the  rest.  Between  the  sec- 
ond and  third  sephiroth  was  the  world  Briah,  or  the 
thrones,  containing"  spirits  less  pure,  but  still  not  ma- 
terial. They  were  classed  into  wheels,  lightnings, 
lions,  burning  spirits,  angels,  children  of  God,  cheru- 
bim. Their  prince  was  called  Metatron.  The  world  in 
the  next  interspace,  called  Jezireh,  angels,  approached 
more  nearly  to  a  material  form;  and  the  fourth,  Asiah, 
was  made  wholly  material.  From  this  point  density 
increases  till  our  world  is  reached.  Asiah  is  the  abode 
of  the  Kli,ppoth,  or  material  spirits  striving  against 
God.  They  travel  through  the  air,  their  bodies  are  of 
dense  air,  incorruptible,  and  they  have  power  to  work 
in  the  material  world.  With  Catoriel,  Adam  Belial, 
Esau,  Aganiel,  Usiel,  Ogiel,  Thomiel,  Theumiel,  for 
captains,  they  fight  in  two  armies  under  their  chiefs 
Zamiel  and  Lilith.  Their  enemies  are  the  angels,  who 
contend  against  them  with  two  armies,  led  by  Meta- 
tron and  Sandalphon.  Lilith  is  the  begetter  of  the 
powers  striving  against  light. 

The  nature  of  man's  soul,  said  Cabalists,  is  three- 
fold— vegetative,  perceptive,  intellectual — each  em- 
bracing each.  It  emanates  from  the  upper  sephiroth, 
is  composed  of  the  pure  elements — for  the  four  ele- 
ments, either  in  their  pure  and  spiritual  or  their  gross 
form,  enter  into  all  things — is  expansive,  separates 
after  death,  so  that  the  parts  return  each  to  its  own 
place,  but  reunite  to  praise  God  on  the  sabbaths  and 
new  moons.  With  each  soul  are  sent  into  the  world  a 
guardian  and  an  accusing  angel. 


Note:  Mr.  Morley's  excellent  summary  of  the  Kabbala  Denudata  may 
be  regarded  as  fully  authentic  although  he  writes  from  the  standpoint  of 
an  unbeliever.  The  Tree  of  the  Cabala  (divided  into  three  plates  to  facili- 
tate comparison),  by  Dr.  Pancoast,  gives  the  more  modern  rendition  of  the 
Cabala.  We  introduce,  on  the  two  following  pages,  a  newly  arranged  table 
of  the  Cabala  (Hebrew  letters)  renderings  in  English  letters,  symbols,  tarot 
emblems,  etc.  This  table  is  the  plainest  in  its  terms  of  all  others.  Follow- 
ing the  table  the  Cabala  is  continued  under  the  title  of  "  The  Miriflc  Word." 


240  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

A  NEWLY  ARRANGED  TABLE 


NUMERICAL 
ORDER. 

HEBREW  LETTERS. 
Form.           Name. 

CORRESPONDING      NUMERICAL 
ENGLISH.                  VALUE. 

i{ 

Aleph 

A 

Beth 

B,  BH,  BY 

Gimel 

G,  GH 

n 

Daleth 

D,  DH 

n 

He 

H 

Vau 

V,  W 

Zayin 

Z 

n 

Cheth 

CH,  KH,  HH,  H 

D 

Teth 

T 

"» 

Yodh 

Y,  I,  J 

.     11 

D 

Caph 

C,  CH,  K,  KH 

b 

Lamed 

L 

D 

Mem 

M 

J 

Nun 

N 

D 

Samech 

S 

V 

Ayin 

0,  GHH 

D 

Phe 

P,  PH 

1! 

Tsadhe 

TS,  TZ 

p 

Koph 

K,  Q 

Resh 

R,  RH 

W 

Shin 

S,  SH 

n 

Tau 

T,  TH 

Bt^^  Five  Hebrew  Letters,  Caph,  Mem,  Nun,  Phe,  and 


THE   CABALA. 

OF  THE  TAROT  AND  CABALA. 


SYMBOLS. 

TAROT  MEANINGS. 

CLASSES. 

Bull 

The  Magician 

Mother 

House 

High  Priestess 

Double 

Erect  Serpent 

The  Empress 

Double 

Door  or  Hinge 

The  Emperor 

Double 

Window,  Virginity 

The  Hierophant 

Single 

Nail,  Hook 

The  Lovers 

Single 

Weapon 

The  War  Chariot 

Single 

Fence 

Justice 

Single 

Scrotum 

The  Hermit 

Single 

Male  Organs 

Wheel  of  Fate 

Single 

Hollow  of  Hand,  Cube 

Strength 

Double 

Ox-goad,  Whip 

The  Suspended  Man 

Single 

Water 

Death 

Mother 

Fish 

Temperance 

Single 

Pillar,  Egg 

The  Demon 

Single 

Eye 

Lightning-struck  tower 

Single 

Mouth 

The  Star 

Double 

Fish-hook,  Dart 

The  Moon 

Single 

Back  Scull 

The  Sun 

Single 

Head,  Sphere,  Circle 

Judgment 

Double 

Tooth 

The  Zany 

Mother 

Cross 

The  Universe 

Double 

Tsadhe,  denote  500,  600,  700,  800,  and  900,  when  final. 


242  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

THE  MIRIFIC  WORD. 


Now,  as  the  creative  light  runs  round  each  upper 
world  before  coming"  to  ours,  it  comes  to  us  charged 
with  supernal  influences,  and  such  an  idea  lies  at  the 
foundation  of  cabalistical  magic.  By  what  secret  to 
have  power  over  this  line  of  communication  with  supe- 
rior worlds  it  is  for  practical  cabalism  to  discover. 

The  secret  consisted  chiefly  in  the  use  of  names. 
God,  it  was  said,  gave  to  all  things  their  names;  He 
could  have  given  no  name  that  was  not  mystically  fit; 
every  such  name,  therefore,  is  a  word  containing  divine 
power,  and  especially  affecting  that  thing,  person,  or 
spirit  to  which  it  belongs.  The  Scripture  tells  us  that 
there  are  names  written  in  heaven;  why,  it  was  said, 
should  they  be  written  there,  if  they  be  useless. 
Through  the  knowledge  of  such  divine  names,  it  is 
affirmed,  Moses  overcame  the  sorcerers  of  Egypt,  Elias 
brought  fire  from  heaven,  Daniel  closed  the  mouths  of 
lions.  But  of  all  names  by  which  wonders  can  be 
wrought,  the  Mirific  Word  of  Words  (here  we  come  to 
the  main  thought  of  Reuchlin's  book,  and  to  the  cen- 
tral topic  of  the  oratory  of  Cornelius)  was  the  con- 
cealed name  of  God — the  Schem-hammaphoraseh. 
Whoever  knows  the  true  pronunciation  of  the  name 
Jehovah — the  name  from  which  all  other  divine  names 
in  the  world  spring  as  the  branches  from  a  tree,  the 
name  that  binds  together  the  sephiroth — whoever  has 
that  in  his  mouth  has  the  world  in  his  mouth.  When 
it  is  spoken  angels  are  stirred  by  the  wave  of  sound. 
It  rules  all  creatures,  works  all  miracles,  it  commands 
all  the  inferior  names  of  deity  which  are  borne  by  the 
several  angels  that  in  heaven  govern  the  respective 
nations  of  the  earth.  The  Jews  had  a  tradition  that 
when  David  was  on  the  point  of  fighting  with  Goliath, 


THE   MIRIFIC  WORD.  243 

Jaschbi,  the  giant's  brother,  tossed  him  up  into  the 
air,  and  held  a  spear  below,  that  he  might  fall  upon 
it.  But  Abishai,  when  he  saw  that,  pronounced  the 
holy  name,  and  David  remained  in  the  air  till  Jaschbi 's 
spear  no  longer  threatened  him.  They  said,  also,  that 
the  Mirific  name  was  among  the  secrets  contained  in 
the  Holy  of  Holies,  and  that  when  any  person  having 
entered  that  shrine  of  the  temple  learnt  the  word  of 
power,  he  was  roared  at  as  he  came  out  by  two  brazen, 
lions,  or  bayed  by  brazen  dogs,  until  through  terror  he 
lost  recollection  of  it.  Some  Jews  accounted  also  by 
a  fable  of  this  nature  for  our  Savior's  miracles.  They 
said  that,  having  been  admitted  within  the  Holy  of 
Holies,  and  having  learnt  the  sacred  mystery,  he  wrote 
it  down  upon  a  tablet,  cut  open  his  thigh,  and  having 
put  the  tablet  in  the  wound,  closed  the  flesh  over  it  by 
uttering  the  name  of  wonder.  As  he  passed  out  the 
roaring  lions  caused  the  secret  to  pass  from  his  mind, 
but  afterwards  he  had  only  to  cut  out  the  tablet  from 
his  thigh,  and,  as  the  beginning  of  miracles,  heal 
instantly  the  wound  in  his  own  flesh  by  pronouncing 
the  Mirific  Word.  Such  Jewish  details  were,  of  course, 
rejected  by  the  Christians,  who  accepted  the  essential 
principles  of  the  Cabala. 

As  the  name  of  all  power  was  the  hidden  name  of 
God,  so  there  were  also  names  of  power  great,  though 
limited,  belonging  to  the  angels  and  the  evil  spirits. 
To  discover  the  names  of  the  spirits,  by  applying  to 
the  Hebrew  text  of  Scripture  the  symbolical  Cabala, 
was  to  acquire  some  of  the  power  they  possessed. 
Thus,  it  being  said  of  the  Sodomites  that  they  were 
struck  with  blindness,  the  Hebrew  word  for  blindness 
was  translated  into  Chaldee,  and  the  Chaldee  word  by 
one  of  the  symbolical  processes  was  made  to  yield  the 
name  of  a  bad  angel,  Schabriri,  which,  being  written 
down,  was  employed  as  a  charm  to  cure  ophthalmia. 


244  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

A  common  mode  of  conjuration  with  these  names  of 
power  was  by  the  use  of  amulets,  pieces  of  paper  or 
parchment  on  which,  for  certain  purposes,  certain 
names  were  written.  At  his  first  entrance  into  the 
world  such  an  amulet,  with  the  names  ' '  Senoi,  Sanse- 
noi,  Semongeloph,"  upon  it  was  slipped  round  the 
neck  of  the  new-born  child,  so  that  the  infant  scarcely 
saw  the  light  before  it  was  collared  by  the  genius  of 
superstition. 

Another  mode  of  conjuration  consisted  in  the  use, 
not  of  names,  but  of  the  Psalms  of  David.  Whole 
volumes  were  written  upon  this  use  of  the  Psalms. 
The  first  of  them,  written  on  doeskin,  was  supposed  to 
help  the  birth  of  children;  others  could,  it  was  thought, 
be  so  written  as  to  make  those  who  carried  them 
invisible;  others  secured  favors  from  princes;  others 
extinguished  fires.  The  transcription  of  a  psalm  for 
any  such  purpose  was  no  trifling  work,  because,  apart 
from  the  necessary  care  in  the  formation  of  letters, 
some  having  a  mystical  reason  for  being  larger  than 
others,  it  was  necessary  for  the  copyist,  as  soon  as  he 
had  written  down  one  line,  to  plunge  into  a  bath. 
Moreover,  that  the  charm  might  be  the  work  of  a  pure 
man,  before  beginning  every  new  line  of  his  manu- 
script, it  was  thought  necessary  that  he  should  repeat 
the  plunge. 


REUCHLIN  THE  MYSTIC. 

Such  were  the  mysteries  of  the  Hebrew  Cabala, 
strangely  blending-  a  not  unrefined  philosophy  with 
basest  superstitition.  It  remains  for  us  to  form  some 
just  opinion  of  the  charm  they  had  for  many  Christian 
scholars  in  the  first  years  of  the  sixteenth  century. 
Reuchlin,  or  Capnio,  was  of  such  scholars  the  leader 
and   the   type;  as   such,  indeed,  he   was  accepted  by 


REUCHLIN   THE  MYSTIC.  245 

the  young  Cornelius  Agrippa.  He  was  the  greatest 
Hebrew  scholar  of  his  day,  and  had  become  so  by  his 
own  natural  bent.  Born  at  Pfortzheim,  of  the  poorest 
parents,  two  and  thirty  years  before  Agrippa  came  into 
the  world,  taught  Latin  at  the  town  school,  and  win- 
ning in  his  youth  a  ducal  patron  by  his  tunable  voice 
as  chorister  in  the  court  chapel  at  Baden,  by  his  quick 
ivit,  and  his  serene,  lively,  amiable  temper,  he  never 
afterwards  lacked  powerful  assistance. 

The  life  of  Reuchlin  is  the  story  of  the  origin  of 
Greek  and  Hebrew  studies  among  learned  Europeans. 
He  was  sent  with  the  Margrave's  son,  afterwards 
Bishop  of  Utrecht,  to  Paris.  The  fall  of  Constanti- 
nople, in  1453,  had  caused  fugitive  Greeks  to  betake 
themselves  to  many  European  cities,  where  they  some- 
times gave  instruction  in  their  language.  Reuchlin,  at 
Paris,  learned  Greek  from  a  Spartan,  who  gave  him 
instruction  also  in  caligraphy,  and  made  him  so  clever 
a  workman  with  his  pen,  that  he  could  eke  out  his 
means  and  buy  books  with  money  earned  as  a  Greek 
copyist.  He  studied  Aristotle  w^ith  the  Spartan.  Old 
John  Wessel,  of  Groningen,  a  disciple  of  Thomas  a 
Kempis,  taught  him  Hebrew,  and  invited  him  to  a 
direct  study  of  the  Bible.  At  the  age  of  twenty  he  was 
engaged  by  publishers  to  write  a  Latin  dictionary, 
w^hich  he  called  Breviloquus.  At  the  age  of  twenty  he 
taught  Greek  publicly,  laying  his  main  stress  on  a 
study  of  the  grammar;  the  good  sense  he  spoke 
emptied  the  benches  of  the  sophisters  around  him, 
and  produced  complaints  from  old-fashioned  profess- 
ors. It  was  then  urged  that  all  the  views  disclosed  in 
Greek  books  were  essentially  opposed  to  the  spirit 
and  belief  of  Rome.  The  monks  had  no  commerce 
with  the  language;  and  when  they  came  to  a  Greek 
quotation  in  a  book  that  they  were  copying,  were  used 
to  inscribe  the  formula  ''Graeca  sunt,  non  leguntur. " 

246  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

Reuchlin  maintained  his  ground,  at  twenty-five  wrote 
a  Greek  grammar,  lectured  at  Poictiers,  and  was  made 
licentiate  of  civil  law.  His  notion  of  law  studies  was 
expressed  in  a  formula  that  has  been  applied  in  other 
terms  to  other  things:  In  his  first  year  the  young  law- 
yer knows  how  to  decide  all  causes,  in  the  second 
begins  to  be  uncertain,  in  the  third  acknowledges  that 
he  knows  nothing,  and  then  first  begins  to  learn.  In 
the  last  of  these  stages  of  progress  the  licentiate  of 
Poictiers  repaired  to  Tubingen,  and  practiced  as  an 
advocate  with  such  success  that  he  made  money  and 
married.  At  Tubingen,  Reuchlin  won  the  confidence 
of  Eberhard  of  the  Beard,  became  his  private  secre- 
tary and  one  of  his  privy-councillors,  and  went  with 
him  to  Rome  in  1482,  his  age  then  being  eight  and 
twenty.  At  Rome  he  distinguished  himself  as  an  ora- 
tor before  the  Pope,  and  was  considered  to  speak  Latin 
wonderfully  well  for  a  German.  After  his  return  to 
Germany,  John  Reuchlin  remained  with  Eberhard  in 
Stuttgard,  became  assessor  of  the  Snpreme  Court  at 
the  age  of  thirty,  and  a  year  afterwards  was  elected 
proctor  for  the  body  of  the  Dominicans  throughout  all 
Germany,  which  unpaid  office  he  held  for  nearly  thirty 
years.  At  the  age  of  thirty-one  he  received  at  Tubin- 
gen his  doctorate,  and  in  the  year  following,  that  is  to 
say,  in  the  year  of  Cornelius  Agrippa's  birth,  he  was 
sent  with  two  others  to  Frankfort,  Cologne,  and  Aix- 
la-Chapelle,  on  the  occasion  of  the  coronation  of  Max- 
imilian as  Roman  emperor.  Then  it  was  that  Maxi- 
milian first  became  acquainted  with  him.  Reuchlin 
had  then  a  house  at  Stuttgard,  and  was  known  as  a 
great  cultivator  of  the  learned  languages,  while  he 
was  also  high  in  the  favor  of  his  own  prince,  and  in 
constant  request  as  a  practitioner  of  law.  In  1490  he 
was  sent  to  Rome  on  another  mission,  and  on  his  way 
through  Florence  enjoyed  personal  intercourse  with 


REUCHLIN   THE   MYSTIC.  •  247 

Giovanni  Pico  di  Miranclola,  the  scholar  who,  although 
a  determined  antag"onist  to  the  astrologers,  was  a 
great  friend  to  cabalism  and  the  introducer  of  the 
cabalistic  mysteries  into  the  favor  of  Italian  scholars. 
By  him  Reuchlin  was  further  stimulated  to  the  love  of 
Hebrew  lore.  When,  two  years  afterwards,  Reuchlifi 
was  at  Linz  on  state  business  with  the  Emperor  Fred- 
eric III.,  it  was  something,  indeed,  that  the  base-born 
scholar  was  raised  to  the  dignity  of  count  palatine, 
but  it  was  more  to  Reuchlin  that  the  court  physician 
was  a  learned  Jew,  Jehiel  Loans,  who  perfected  his 
intimacy  with  the  Hebrew.  His  aim  then  was,  above 
all  things,  first  to  study  the  original  text  of  the  Old 
Testament,  and  secondly  to  read  the  writings  of  the 
Cabalists.  The  emperor,  whose  life  was  then  about  to 
close  (he  died  while  Reuchlin  was  at  Linz),  saw  here 
another  way  of  gratifying  the  agreeable  and  kindly 
scholar,  for  he  not  only  made  Reuchlin  a  count  pala- 
tine (his  arms  were  a  golden  altar,  from  which  smoke 
arose,  with  the  inscription  "  Ara  Capnionis"),  but  he 
also  presented  to  him  a  very  ancient  Hebrew  Bible, 
written  carefully  on  parchment,  a  treasure  then  w^orth 
three  hundred  gold  crowns,  which  is  to  be  seen  still  in 
the  library  of  the  Grand  Duke  of  Carlsruhe,  where  it 
is  regarded  as  the  oldest  of  its  kind  in  Europe.  With 
the  knowledge  imparted  by  Jehiel  Loans,  and  the 
actual  text  in  which  all  mysteries  lay  hidden,  Reuch- 
lin went  home  enriched  as  much  as  he  had  been 
ennobled.  Hebrew  writing  w^as  at  that  time  very  rare, 
and  was  to  be  met  with  chiefly  in  the  hands  of  Jews. 
At  Hebrew  Reuchlin  labored,  collecting  Hebrew  books 
and  works  expounding  the  Cabala,  whenever  possible; 
and  eventuajjj^  he  gave  life  in  Germany,  as  Giovanni 
Pico  di  Mpandola  was  giving  life  in  Italy,  to  the 
cabalfs£SH  philosophy,  the  great  impulse  to  this  Ger- 
magit;(|jaiFa.l  being  the"  publication  of  the  book  on  the 


248  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

Mirific  Word.  It  first  appeared  at  Basle,  in  the  year 
1495,  the  author's  age  then  being  forty-one.  It  was 
not  published  at  Tubingen  till  1514.  The  book  was 
regarded  as  a  miracle  of  heavenly  wisdom.  Philip 
Beroaldus  told  of  the  Pope's  enjoyment,  and  wrote 
word  also  to  its  author  that  he  had  caused  not  only  men 
of  letters,  but  even  statesmen  and  warriors,  to  betake 
themselves  to  studying  the  mysteries  of  the  Cabala. 

The  death  of  Reuchlin's  patron,  Eberhard  the  elder, 
soon  after  his  elevation  to  the  rank  of  duke  in  1495, 
was  followed  by  a  period  of  misrule  in  the  little  state. 
One  of  the  first  acts  of  Eberhard  the  younger  was  to 
release  his  favorite,  a  dissolute  priest,  named  Hol- 
zinger,  from  the  prison  in  which  he  had  been  kept  by 
the  good  counsel  of  Reuchlin;  and  for  the  further  dis- 
comfiture of  the  scholar  this  man  was  appointed  chan- 
cellor over  the  university  of  Tubingen.  Reuchlin  of 
course  resigned.  He  had  been  long  wanted  at  Heidel- 
berg, and  went  there  to  be  cherished  by  a  new  patron 
in  the  Elector  Palatine.  He  showed,  as  usual,  his 
lively  energy  by  the  establishment  of  a  Greek  chair, 
w^hich  the  monks  pronounced  upon  the  spot  to  be  a 
heresy;  and  by  venting  his  wrath  against  Holzinger  in 
a  Latin  comedy,  denouncing  dissolute  priests,  which 
he  called  Sergius,  or  the  Head  of  the  Head.  It  was 
written  to  be  acted  by  the  students.  A  Latin  comedy 
was  then  a  rare  thing  in  the  land;  and  the  news  that 
John  Reuchlin  had  written  one  was  noised  abroad. 
Prudent  friends  counseled  him  to  beware  of  such 
unscrupulous  and  powerful  enemies  as  he  would  make 
if  he  attacked  abuses  of  the  priesthood;  he  submitted 
to  advice,  and  as  he  was  notoriously  answerable  for  a 
comedy,  and  gossip  must  be  satisfied,  he  suddenly 
composed  a  substitute  for  that  first  written.  When, 
therefore,  the  day  of  the  performance  came,  it  was 
found  that  the  Greek  professor  had  composed  a  comedy 


REUCHLIN   THE   MYSTIC.  249 

against  abuses  in  his  own  profession;  it  was  a  castiga- 
tion  of  dishonest  advocates.  Scenica  Progymnastica 
the  piece  was  called. 

After  two  years  of  misrule  Eberhard  the  younger 
took  its  consequences;  he  was  then  deposed,  and  Hol- 
zinger,  the  monk,  sent  back  to  prison.  "When  the 
bricks  are  doubled,  Moses  comes,"  said  Reuchlin,  and 
returned  to  his  old  post  at  Tubingen.  Hitherto  his 
life  of  study  had  not  been  unprofitable,  nor,  much 
benefit  as  he  received  through  patronage,  was  it  a 
life  wanting  independence.  "Whatever,"  he  says,  "I 
spent  in  learning,  I  acquired  by  teaching.  " 

An  anecdote  of  this  good-humored  scholar  may  be 
here  interpolated,  which  displays  his  character  in  half 
a  dozen  points  of  view.  He  was  detained  once  in  an 
inn  when  it  was  raining  very  heavily,  and  of  course 
had  his  book  with  him.  The  rain  had  driven  into  the 
common  room  a  large  number  of  country  people,  who 
were  making  a  great  noise.  To  quiet  them  Reuchlin 
called  for  a  piece  of  chalk,  and  drew  with  it  a  circle 
on  the  table  before  which  he  sat.  Within  the  circle  he 
then  drew  a  cross,  and  also  within  it,  on  the  right  side 
of  the  cross,  he  placed  with  great  solemnity  a  cup  of 
water,  on  the  left  he  stuck  a  knife  upright.  Then 
placing  a  book — doubtless  a  Hebrew  one — within  the 
mysterious  circle,  he  began  to  read,  and  the  rustics 
who  had  gathered  round  him,  with  their  mouths  agape, 
patiently  waited  for  the  consequence  of  all  this  con- 
juration. The  result  was  that  Reuchlin  finished  com- 
fortably the  chapter  he  was  reading  without  being  dis- 
tressed even  by  a  whisper  of  disturbance. 

In  the  year  1502  Reuchlin  was  elected  to  the  post  of 
general  judge  of  alliance  under  the  terms  of  the  Sua- 
bian  league.  His  office  was  to  adjudicate  in  all  mat- 
ters of  dispute  among  confederates  and  vassals,  con- 
cerning the  interests  of  the  emperor  as  Archduke  of 


250  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

Austria,  the  electors  and  princes.  There  was  a  sec- 
ond judge  for  prelates,  counts,  and  nobles,  a  third  for 
imperial  cities.  This  post  he  held  during"  eleven  years; 
he  was  holding  it,  therefore,  at  the  time  when  the 
young  Cornelius  Agrippa  undertook  to  comment  pub- 
licly at  Dole  upon  his  book  concerning  the  Mirific 
Word,  Reuchlin  then  being  fifty-five  years  old,  and  at 
the  summit  of  his  fame,  high,  also,  in  the  good  esteem 
of  Maximilian.  Three  years  before  this  date,  not- 
withstanding the  great  mass  of  legal  business  entailed 
on  him  by  his  judicial  office,  Reuchlin  had,  to  the 
great  help  of  all  students,  published  a  volume  of  the 
Rudiments  of  Hebrew,  which  included  both  a  gram- 
mar and  a  dictionary.  This  book,  he  wrote,  "cost  me 
the  greatest  trouble,  and  a  large  part  of  my  fortune." 
Cornelius  no  doubt  had  learnt  his  Hebrew  by  the  help 
of  it,  and  was  already  deep  in  studies  which  a  few 
years  afterwards  brought  the  monks  of  Cologne  into 
array  against  Reuchlin  himself,  their  hostility  some- 
what embittered  by  an  inkling  of  the  Latin  comedy 
that  was  not  to  be  quite  suppressed.  Cornelius,  how- 
ever, was  the  first  to  feel  the  power  of  such  enemies. 
By  the  Epistolae  Obscurorum  Virorum  the  monks  were 
destined  to  come  off  much  worsted  from  their  battle 
against  Reuchlin  and  the  scholars  who  defended  his 
fair  name.  Of  their  fortune  in  the  battle  fought 
against  Cornelius  Agrippa  it  is  one  part  of  this  history 
to  tell. 

Reuchlin  wrote  at  a  later  period  (1517)  a  book  upon 
the  cabalistic  art.  If  it  is  written  God  created  heaven 
and  earth,  he  interpreted  that  to  mean  spirit  and  mat- 
ter, the  spirit  consisting  of  the  angels  and  ministers 
by  whom  the  ways  of  man  are  influenced.  Magic,  he 
said,  dealt  with  evil  spirits,  but  the  true  Cabala  only 
with  the  good.  He  believed  in  astrology;  and  so, 
indeed,  did  Luther  and  Meiancthon;  Giovanni  Pico  di 


REUCHLIN   THE   MYSTIC.  251 

Mirandola  at  Florence,  while  adopting"  the  Cabala, 
was  very  singular  in  his  hostility  to  a  belief  in  influ- 
ences of  the  stars.  His  own  faith  in  cabalism  Reuch- 
lin  enforced  thus:  God,  out  of  love  to  his  people,  has 
revealed  the  hidden  m3^steries  to  some  of  them,  and 
these  could  find  in  the  dead  letters  the  living"  spirit. 
For  Scripture  consists  of  sing^le  letters,  visible  signs, 
which  stand  in  a  certain  connection  with  the  angels, 
as  celestial  and  spiritual  emanations  from  God.  By 
the  pronunciation  of  the  one,  the  others  also  are 
affected;  but  with  a  true  Cabalist,  who  penetrates  the 
whole  connection  of  the  earthly  with  the  heavenly, 
these  signs,  rightly  placed  in  connection  with  each 
other,  are  a  way  of  putting  him  into  immediate  union 
with  the  spirits,  who  through  that  are  bound  to  satisfy 
his  wishes. 

In  his  book  called  Capnio,  or  the  Mirific  Word, 
expounded  at  Dole  by  Cornelius  Agrippa,  Reuchlin 
placed  the  Christian  system  in  the  center  of  old 
heathen  philosophies,  considering  many  of  the  doc- 
trines of  Pythagoras  and  Plato  as  having  been  taken 
from,  not  introduced  into,  the  wisdom  of  the  Cabalists. 
The  argument  is  stated  in  the  form  of  dialogue,  which 
is  immediately  preceded  by  a  summary  of  its  intention 
that  may  very  well  suffice  here  for  a  summary  of  its 
contents:  "Receive,  then,  in  this  book  the  argument 
on  the  Mirific  Word  of  three  philosophers,  whom  I 
have  feigned  to  be  holding  such  dispute  among  them- 
selves as  the  controversies  proper  to  their  sects  would 
occasion,  as  to  the  best  elucidation  of  the  hidden 
properties  of  sacred  names.  Out  of  which,  great  as 
they  are  in  number  and  importance,  occasion  will  at 
last  be  the  more  easily  afforded  for  selecting  one  name 
that  is  above  all  names  supremely  mirific  and  beatific. 
And  thus  you  may  know  the  whole  matter  in  brief. 
Sidonius,  at  first  ascribed  to  the  school  of  Epicurus, 


252  HENRY   CORNELIUS   AGRIPPA. 

but  found  afterwards,  nullius  jurare  in  verba  magistri, 
an  unfettered  philosopher,  travels  about  to  satisfy  his 
thirst  for  knowledge,  and  after  many  experiences, 
enters  Suabia,  where  he  meets  in  the  town  of  Pfortz- 
heim"  (Reuchlin's  birthplace)  ''two  philosophers — 
Baruch,  a  Jew,  and  Capnio"  (Reuchlin  himself),  ''a 
Christian,  with  whom  he  disserts  upon  many  systems, 
and  presently  upon  the  knowledge  itself  of  divine  and 
human  things,  upon  opinion,  faith,  miracles,  the 
powers  of  words  and  figures,  secret  operations,  and 
the  mysteries  of  seals.  In  this  way  question  arises 
concerning  the  sacred  names  and  consecrated  charac- 
ters of  all  nations  which  have  anything  excellent  in 
their  philosophy,  or  not  unworthy  in  their  ceremonies; 
an  enumeration  of  symbols  is  made  by  each  speaker 
zealously  on  behalf  of  the  rites  cherished  in  his  sect, 
until  at  last  Capnio,  in  the  third  book,  collects  out  of 
all  that  is  holy  one  name,  Jehosua,  in  which  is  gath- 
ered up  the  virtue  and  power  of  all  sacred  things,  and 
which  is  eternally,  supremely  blessed." 


AGRIPPA  EXPOUNDS  REUCHLIN. 

Here  was  a  vast  theme  for  the  oratory  of  a  youth  of 
twenty-three,  and  it  was  one  also  that  enabled  him  to 
display  the  whole  range  of  his  learning.  The  newly 
recovered  treasures  of  Greek  literature;  the  study  of 
Plato,  that  had  lately  been  revived  by  Marsilius  Fici- 
nus  in  Italy;  the  study  of  Aristotle,  urged  and  helped 
in  France  by  Faber  Stapulensis  (d'Etaples),  appeared 
to  bring  the  fullest  confirmation  of  the  principles  of 
the  Cabala  to  men  ignorant,  as  all  were  then,  of  the 
Greek  source  of  more  than  half  the  later  mysticism  of 
the  Hebrews,  which  attributed  to  itself  an  origin  so 
ancient.     That  he  had  acquired  so  early  in  his  life 


AGRIPPA   EXPOUNDS  REUCHLIN.  253 

Hebrew  and  Greek  lore,  that  he  was  deeply  read  in 
studies  which  were  admired  from  afar  only  by  so  many 
scholars  of  his  day,  and,  thus  prepared,  that  he  dis- 
cussed mysteries  about  which  men  in  all  ages  feel 
instinctive  curiosity,  and  men  in  that  age  reasoned 
eagerly,  would  alone  account  sufficiently  for  the  atten- 
tion paid  to  the  young  German  by  the  university  of 
Dole.  Moreover,  while  fulfilling  his  own  private  pur- 
pose, he  appeared  also  to  the  loyalty  of  the  Burgun- 
dians,  by  delivering  his  orations  to  all  comers  gratui- 
tously, for  the  honor  of  the  Princess  Margaret,  their 
ruler,  and  opening  them  with  her  panegyric.  The 
young  orator  being  also  remarkable  for  an  effective 
manner  of  delivery,  the  grave  and  learned  men  who 
came  to  his  prelections  honored  him  by  diligent 
attendance.  The  exposition  was  made  from  the  pul- 
pit of  the  gymnasium,  before  the  parliament  and  mag- 
istracy of  Dole,  the  professors  and  the  readers  of  the 
university.  Simon  Vernet,  vice-chancellor  of  the  uni- 
versity, dean  of  the  church,  and  doctor  in  each  faculty, 
was  not  once  absent.  The  worthy  vice-chancellor,  or 
dean,  appears,  indeed,  to  have  taken  an  especial  inter- 
est in  the  fame  of  their  visitor.  He  had  himself  a 
taste  for  public  declamation,  and  to  a  friend  who  was 
urging  on  Cornelius  that  he  should  seek  durable  fame 
rather  by  written  than  by  spoken  words,  expressed  a 
contrary  desire  on  his  behalf.  He  preferred  orator 
to  author.  When  Cornelius  had  complied  with  the 
request  of  another  friend,  who  wished  to  translate  into 
the  vernacular  his  panegyric  upon  Margaret,  praising 
his  orator}^  for  the  perfect  fitness  of  each  word  em- 
ployed in  it,  and  its  complete  freedom  from  verbiage, 
and  desiring  that  through  a  translation  the  illustrious 
princess  might  be  informed  how  famously  Cornelius 
had  spoken  in  her  honor,  and  so  be  the  more  disposed 
to  reward   him  with  her  favor,  the  translation  came 


254  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA, 

back  with  a  note,  saying  that  the  vice-chancellor  had 
been  its  censor  and  corrector.  Vernet  was  diligent,  in 
fact,  on  the  young  scholar's  behalf,  and  his  interests 
were  seconded  by  the  Archbishop  of  Besancon.  Not 
a  syllable  was  whispered  about  heresy.  The  friend 
who  urged  Cornelius,  in  spite  of  the  dean's  contrary 
counsel,  to  become  an  author,  gave  a  familiar  example 
from  his  own  experience  of  the  vanity  of  spoken 
words.  He  had  declaimed  publicly  from  memory,  and 
without  one  hitch,  upwards  of  two  thousand  two 
hundred  verses  of  his  own  composition,  yet,  because 
they  were  not  printed,  earned  only  a  temporary  local 
fame.  Of  the  value  of  the  written  word  evidence  very 
soon  afterwards  was  enclosed  to  Cornelius  by  that 
other  friend  who  had  translated  his  oration.  Zealous 
to  do  good  service,  he  had  caused  a  copy  of  the  pane- 
gyric to  proceed,  by  way  of  Lyons,  on  the  road  to 
royal  notice,  and  delighted  the  aspirant  after  patron- 
age by  enclosing  to  him  flatteries  from  John  Perreal,  a 
royal  chamberlain,  probably  the  same  learned  French- 
man who  became  known  twenty  or  more  years  later  as 
Johannis  Perellus,  translated  into  Latin  Gaza  on  the 
Attic  Months,  and  wrote  a  book  about  the  Epacts  of 
the  Moon.  i 

To  the  youth  flushed  with  triumph  as  a  scholar  there 
came  also  reminders  of  the  military  life  he  was  so 
ready  to  forsake.  A  correspondent  sent  him  news  of 
a  defeat  of  the  Venetians  by  the  French,  near  Agna- 
dello,  the  first  fruits  of  the  discreditable  league  of 
Cambray.  The  French,  it'  will  be  remembered,  won 
this  victory  while  Maximilian,  their  new  ally,  was  still 
perplexed  by  the  dissatisfaction  of  his  subjects  evi- 
denced during  the  late  diet  at  Worms.  Agrippa's 
friend  wished  to  have  in  return  for  his  news  any 
knowledge  that  his  relation  to  the  emperor  might  give 
him   of    intentions   that   might    be    disclosed    at    an 


THE   NOBILITY   OF   WOMAN.  255 

approaching  diet.  His  real  intentions  were  to  break 
a  pledg-e  by  marching-  against  the  Venetians;  his  fate, 
to  retire  ere  long,  defeated,  from  before  the  walls  of 
Padua.  He  was  renewing  with  his  enemy,  the  King 
of  Prance,  the  treaty  of  Cambra3^  and  sending  a  mes- 
senger to  Spire  to  burn  the  book  in  which  he  had 
recorded  all  the  injuries  and  insults  suffered  by  his 
family,  or  empire,  at  the  hands  of  Prance.  Cornelius 
cared  little  for  Prance  or  Padua;  his  hopes  as  a  scholar 
were  with  Margaret  at  Ghent,  though  she,  too,  being 
another  member  of  the  league,  could  have  employed 
him  as  a  soldier.  Other  hopes,  as  a  man,  he  was 
directing  towards  a  younger  and  a  fairer  mistress.  He 
desired  not  only  to  prosper  but  to  marry. 

The  little  university  of  Dole  favored  the  j^oung  man 
heartily.  His  prelections  had  excited  great  attention, 
and  procured  for  him  the  admiration  of  the  neighbor- 
hood. Prom  the  university  they  won  for  him  at  once 
the  degree  of  doctor  of  divinit}^,  together  with  a 
stipend. 


THE  NOBILITY  OF  WOMAN. 

Angling  for  private  patronage  was  in  the  sixteenth 
century  correlative  to  the  habit  not  very  uncommon  in 
these  days  of  using  baits  to  catch  the  public  favor. 
Men  who  once  lived  by  the  help  of  princes  now  owe 
their  support  to  the  whole  people,  and  the  pains 
bestowed  upon  the  cultivation  of  the  good-will  of  the 
people  in  these  days  are  neither  less  nor  more  to  be 
reprehended  than  the  pains  taken  by  scholars  of  past 
time  to  procure  a  safe  means  of  subsistence  through 
the  good-will  of  a  prince.  It  may  be  said,  with  a  fair 
approximation  to  the  truth,  that  as  much  as  a  man  may 
do  now  with  the  intention  of  deserving  popularity, 
and  not  discredit  himself  in  his  own  eyes  or  those  of 


256  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

the  great  number  of  his  neighbors,  he  might  have  done 
with  as  little  discredit  in  the  sixteenth  century  with 
the  design  of  earning  favor  from  the  great.  We  have 
seen  how,  in  the  case  of  Reuchlin,  a  poor  chorister 
was  fostered  at  first  by  small  princes  of  Germany, 
afterwards  even  by  the  emperor,  and  enabled  to  develop 
into  a  great  Hebrew  scholar,  when  one  patron  died 
having  another  ready  to  befriend  him,  and  enjo5dng 
dignity  and  wealth  with  a  complete  sense  of  independ- 
ence. That  age  was,  in  fact,  as  far  removed  as  this  is 
from  the  transition  period,  during  which  the  patron- 
age of  letters  by  the  great,  extinct  as  a  necessity,  sur- 
vived as  a  tradition,  and  the  system  that  had  once 
been  vigorous  and  noble  became  imbecile  and  base. 

Nobody  at  Dole  was  ignorant  that  the  design  of  Cor- 
nelius Agrippa  was  to  earn  the  patronage  of  Margaret,. 
a  liberal  encourager  of  learning.  Nobody  considered 
it  dishonorable  to  seek  this  by  showing  that  it  was 
deserved.  The  prevalent  feeling  was  so  far  removed 
from  any  such  impression,  that  from  many  quarters  the 
young  man  was  urged  to  magnify  his  claim  on  Marga- 
ret's attention  by  devoting  not  only  the  orations,  but 
also  some  piece  of  writing  to  her  honor.  Even  the 
cordial  vice-chancellor,  desirous  to  advance  the  inter- 
ests of  the  young  orator,  set  aside  his  predilection  for 
the  spoken  word,  and  was  among  the  foremost  in 
admonishing  Cornelius  to  write.  Not  slow  to  profit  by 
advice  that  ran  the  same  course  with  his  inclinations, 
the  new  doctor  of  divinity  set  himself  to  display  his 
powers  as  a  theologian  in  the  true  manner  of  the  day, 
and  with  theological  acuteness  to  combine  a  courtier's 
tact,  by  dedicating  to  the  most  conspicuous  example  of 
his  argument  a  treatise  on  the  Nobility  and  Pre-excel- 
lence  of  the  Female  Sex.  As  I  have  hinted,  too,  there 
was  a  private  example  of  it  known  to  his  own  heart. 

Angling  for  patronage  shown  from  another  point  of 


THE   NOBILITY   OF   WOMAN.  257 

view! — mean  arts  used  by  mean  spirits  to  compel  the 
favor  of  the  rich  and  base.  But  to  secure  the  favor 
of  the  rich  and  noble  the  arts  used  were  not  to  be 
accounted  mean. 

Now  let  us  trace  in  a  brief  summary  the  argument 
for  the  Nobility  of  the  Female  Sex  and  the  Superior- 
ity of  Woman  over  Man,  written  at  Dole,  in  the  year 
1509,  by  a  doctor  of  divinity,  aged  twenty-three.  He 
sets  out  with  the  declaration  that  when  man  was 
created  male  and  female,  difference  was  made  in  the 
flesh,  not  in  the  soul.  He  quotes  Scripture  to  show 
that  after  the  corruption  of  our  bodies  difference  of 
sex  will  disappear,  and  that  we  shall  all  be  like 
angels  in  the  resurrection.  As  to  the  soul,  then,  man 
and  woman  are  alike;  but  as  to  everything  else  the 
woman  is  the  better  part  of  the  creation. 

In  the  first  place,  woman  being  made  better  than 
man,  received  the  better  name.  Man  was  called 
Adam,  which  means  Earth;  woman  Eva,  which  is  by 
interpretation  Life.  By  as  much  as  life  excels  earth 
woman  therefore  excels  man.  And  this,  it  is  urged, 
must  not  be  thought  trivial  reasoning,  because  the 
maker  of  those  creatures  knew  what  they  were  before 
he  named  them,  and  was  One  who  could  not  err  in 
properly  describing  each.  We  know,  and  the  Roman 
laws  testify,  that  ancient  names  were  always  conso- 
nant with  the  things  they  represented,  and  names  have 
been  held  always  to  be  of  great  moment  by  theologi- 
ans and  jurisconsults.  It  is  written  thus  of  Nabal: 
*'As  his  name  is,  so  is  he;  Nabal  is  his  name,  and  folly 
is  with  him."  (1  Samuel,  xxv. ,  25.)  Saint  Paul,  also, 
in  his  Epistle  to  the  Hebrews,  speaks  of  his  Lord  and 
Master,  as  "made  so  much  better  than  the  angels,  as 
he  hath  obtained  a  more  excellent  name  than  they. ' ' 
(Heb.,  i. ,  4.)  The  reader's  memory  will  at  once  supply 
the  next  passage  of  Scripture  quoted,  I  do  not  like  to 


258  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

cite  it.  Agrippa  then  dilates,  as  well  he  may,  on  the 
immense  importance  of  words,  according  to  the  prac- 
tice of  all  jurists;  he  tells  how  Cyprian  argued  against 
the  Jews  that  Adam's  name  was  derived  from  the 
initials  of  the  Greek  words  meaning  east,  west,  north, 
and  south,  because  his  flesh  was  made  out  of  the 
earth,  though  that  derivation  was  at  variance  with 
Moses,  who  put  only  three  letters  in  the  Hebrew^  name. 
For  this,  however,  adds  Agrippa,  Cyprian  was  not  to 
blame,  since,  like  many  saints  and  expounders  of  the 
sacred  text,  he  had  not  learnt  the  Hebrew  language. 

Upon  the  word  Eva  it  is  further  maintained  that  it 
suggests  comparison  with  the  mystic  S3rmbols  of  the 
Cabalists,  the  name  of  the  woman  having  affinity  with 
the  ineffable  Tetragrammaton,  the  most  sacred  name  of 
the  Divinity;  while  that  of  the  man  differed  entirely 
from  it.  All  these  considerations,  however,  Agrippa 
consents  to  pass  over,  as  matters  read  by  few  and 
understood  by  fewer.  The  pre-eminence  of  the  woman 
can  be  proved  out  of  her  constitution,  her  gifts,  and 
her  merits. 

The  nature  of  woman  is  discussed,  however,  from 
the  theologian's  point  of  view.  Things  were  created 
in  the  order  of  their  rank.  First,  indeed,  incorruptible 
soul,  then  incorruptible  matter,  but  afterwards,  out  of 
that  matter,  more  or  less  corruptible  things,  beginning 
with  the  meanest.  First  minerals,  then  herbs,  and 
shrubs,  and  trees,  then  zoophytes,  then  brutes  in  their 
order,  reptiles  first,  afterwards  fishes,  birds,  quadru- 
peds. Lastly,  two  human  beings,  but  of  these  first  the 
male,  and  finally  the  female,  in  which  the  heavens  and 
the  earth  and  their  whole  adornment  were  perfected. 
The  divine  rest  followed,  because  the  work  was  con- 
summated, nothing  greater  was  conceived;  the  woman 
was  thus  left  the  most  perfect  and  the  noblest  of  the 
creatures  upon  earth,  as  a  queen  placed  in  the  court 


THE  NOBILITY   OF   WOMAN.  259 

that  had  been  previously  prepared  for  her.  Rig-htly, 
therefore,  do  all  being-s  round  about  her  pay  to  this 
queen  homage  of  reverence  and  love. 

The  difference  between  the  woman  and  the  man  is 
yet  more  strongly  marked,  says  the  deeply  read  theo- 
log"ian,  because  the  man  was  made  like  the  brutes  in 
open  land  outside  the  gates  of  paradise,  and  made 
wholl}^  of  clay,  but  the  woman  w^as  made  afterwards 
in  paradise  itself;  she  was  the  one  paradisaical  crea- 
tion. Presently  there  follow  Scripture  arguments  to 
show  that  the  place  of  their  birth  was  a  sign  to  men 
of  honor  or  dishonor.  The  woman,  too,  was  not  made 
of  clay,  but  from  an  influx  of  celestial  matter;  since 
there  went  into  her  composition  nothing  terrestrial 
except  only  one  of  Adam's  ribs,  and  that  was  not  gross 
clay,  but  clay  that  had  been  already  purified  and  kin- 
dled with  the  breath  of  life. 

The  theological  demonstrations  Cornelius  next  con- 
firms by  the  evidence  of  some  natural  facts  equally 
cogent  and  trustworthy,  which  were  held  in  that  day  by 
many  wise  men  to  be  equally  true.  It  is  because  she  is 
made  of  purer  matter  that  a  w^oman,  from  whatever 
height  she  may  look  down,  never  turns  giddy,  and  her 
eyes  never  have  mist  before  them  like  the  eyes  of  men. 
Moreover,  if  a  Vy'oman  and  man  tumble  together  into 
water,  far  away  from  ail  external  help,  the  woman 
floats  long  upon  the  surface,  but  the  man  soon  sinks  to 
the  bottom.  Is  there  not  also  the  divine  light  shining 
through  the  body  of  the  woman,  by  which  she  is  made 
often  to  seem  a  miracle  of  beauty.  Then  follows  a 
clever  inventory  of  all  a  woman's  charms  of  person, 
written  with  due  reserve,  which  might  be  here  trans- 
lated, if  the  English  language  had  the  terseness  of  the 
Latin.  In  short,  woman  is  the  sum  of  all  earth's 
beauty,  and  it  is  proved  that  her  beauty  has  sometimes 
inspired  even  angels  and  demons  with  a  desperate  and 


260  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

fatal  love.  Then  follows  a  chain  of  Scripture  texts 
honoring  female  beauty,  which  all  lead  up  to  the 
twenty  thousand  virg"ins,  solemnly  celebrated  by  the 
church,  and  the  admiration  of  the  beauty  of  the  Vir- 
gin Mary  by  the  Sun  and  Moon. 

Texts  follow  that  must  be  omitted,  and  then  the 
argument  takes  anatomical  grounds  of  the  most  ingen- 
ious character,  and  shows  how  every  difference  of 
structure  between  the  man  and  the  woman  gives  to 
woman  the  advantage  due  to  her  superior  delicacy. 
Even  after  death  nature  respects  her  inherent  modesty, 
for  a  drowned  woman  floats  on  her  face,  and  a  drowned 
man  upon  his  back.  The  noblest  part  of  a  human 
being  is  the  head;  but  the  man's  head  is  liable  to  bald- 
ness, woman  is  never  seen  bald.  The  man's  face  is 
often  made  so  filthy  by  a  most  odious  beard,  and  so 
covered  with  sordid  hairs,  that  it  is  scarcely  to  t>e  dis- 
tinguished from  the  face  of  a  wild  beast;  in  women, 
on  the  other  hand,  the  face  always  remains  pure  and 
decent.  For  this  reason  women  were,  by  the  laws  of 
the  twelve  tables,  forbidden  to  rub  their  cheeks  lest 
hair  should  grow  and  obscure  their  blushing  modesty. 
But  the  most  evident  proof  of  the  innate  purity  of  the 
female  sex  is,  that  a  woman  having  once  washed  is 
clean,  and  if  she  wash  in  second  water  will  not  soil  it; 
but  that  a  man  is  never  clean,  though  he  should  wash  in 
ten  successive  waters,  he  will  cloud  and  infect  them  all. 

Some  other  marvellous  peculiarities  I  must  omit, 
and  pass  to  Agrippa's  appreciation  of  the  woman's 
predominance  in  the  possession  of  the  gift  of  speech, 
the  most  excellent  of  human  faculties,  which  Hermes 
Trismegistus  thought  equal  to  immortality  in  value, 
and  Hesiod  pronounced  the  best  of  human  treasures. 
Man,  too,  receives  this  gift  from  woman,  from  his 
mother  or  his  nurse;  and  it  is  a  gift  bestowed  upon 
woman  herself  with  such  liberality  that  the  world  has 


THE   NOBILITY   OF   WOMAN.  261 

scarcely  seen  a  woman  who  was  mute.  Is  it  not  fit 
that  women  should  excel  men  in  that  faculty,  wherein 
men  themselves  chiefly  excel  the  brutes? 

The  arg-ument  ag*ain  becomes  an  edifice  of  Scripture 
text,  and  it  is  well  to  show  the  nature  of  it,  though  we 
may  shrink  from  the  misuse  of  sacred  words,  because 
it  is  well  thoroughly  to  understand  how  Scripture  was 
habitually  used  by  professed  theologians  in  the  six- 
teenth century,  and  from  this  light  example  to  derive 
a  grave  lesson,  perhaps,  that  may  be,  even  to  the  peo- 
ple of  the  nineteenth  century,  not  wholly  useless. 

Solomon's  texts  on  the  surpassing  excellence  of  a 
good  women  of  course  are  cited,  and  a  cabalistic  hint 
is  given  of  the  efficacy  of  the  letter  H,  which  Abram 
took  away  from  his  w^ife  Sarah,  and  put  into  the  mid- 
dle of  his  own  name,  after  he  had  been  blessed  through 
her.  Benediction  has  come  always  by  woman,  law  by 
man.  We  have  all  sinned  in  Adam,  not  in  Eve;  origi- 
nal sin  w^e  inherit  only  from  the  father  of  our  race. 
The  fruit  of  the  tree  of  knowledge  was  forbidden  to 
man  only,  before  woman  was  made;  woman  received 
no  injunction,  she  was  created  free.  She  was  not 
blamed,  therefore,  for  eating,  but  for  causing  sin  in  her 
husband  by  giving  him  to  eat;  and  she  did  that  not  of 
her  own  will,  but  because  the  devil  tempted  her.  He 
chose  her  as  the  object  of  temptation,  as  St.  Bernard 
says,  because  he  saw  with  envy  that  she  w^as  the  most 
perfect  of  creatures.  She  erred  in  ignorance  because 
she  was  deceived;  the  man  sinned  knowingly.  There- 
fore our  Lord  made  atonement  in  the  figure  of  the  sex 
that  had  sinned,  and  also  for  more  complete  humilia- 
tion came  in  the  form  of  a  man,  not  that  of  a  woman, 
which  is  nobler  and  sublimer.  He  humbled  himself  as 
man,  but  overcame  as  a  descendant  of  the  woman;  for 
the  seed  of  the  woman,  it  was  said,  not  the  seed  of 
man,  should  bruise  the  serpent's  head.     He  would  not, 

262  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

therefore,  be  born  of  a  man;  woman  alone  was  judged 
worthy  to  be  the  earthly  parent  of  the  Deity.  Risen 
again,  he  appeared  first  to  women.  Men  forsook  him, 
women  never.  No  persecution,  heresy,  or  error  in  the 
Church  ever  began  with  the  female  sex.  They  were 
men  who  betrayed,  sold,  bought,  accused,  condemned, 
mocked,  crucified  the  Lord.  Peter  denied  him,  his 
disciples  left  him.  Women  were  at  the  foot  of  the 
cross,  women  were  at  the  sepulchre.  Even  Pilate's 
wife,  who  was  a  heathen,  made  more  effort  to  save 
Jesus  than  any  man  among  believers.  Finally,  do  not 
almost  all  theologians  assert  that  the  Church  is  main- 
tained by  the  Virgin  Mary? 

Aristotle  may  say  that  of  all  animals  the  males  are 
stronger  and  wiser  than  the  females,  but  St.  Paul 
writes  that  weak  things  have  been  chosen  to  confound 
the  strong.  Adam  was  sublimely  endowed,  but  woman 
humbled  him;  Samson  was  strong,  but  woman  made 
him  captive;  Lot  was  chaste,  but  woman  seduced  him; 
David  was  religious,  but  woman  disturbed  his  piety; 
Solomon  was  wise,  but  woman  deceived  him;  Job  was 
patient,  and  was  robbed  by  the  devil  of  fortune  and 
family;  ulcerated,  grieved,  oppressed,  nothing  pro- 
voked him  to  anger  till  a  woman  did  it,  therein  prov- 
ing herself  stronger  than  the  devil.  Peter  was  fer- 
vent in  faith,  but  woman  forced  him  to  deny  his  lord. 
Somebody  may  remark  that  all  these  illustrations  tend 
to  woman's  shame;  not  to  her  glory.  Woman,  how- 
ever, may  reply  to  man  as  Innocent  III.  wrote  to  some 
cardinal,  "If  one  of  us  is  to  be  confounded,  I  prefer 
that  it  be  you.  "  Civil  law  allows  a  woman  to  consult 
her  own  gain  to  another's  hurt;  and  does  not  Script- 
ure itself  often  extol  and  bless  the  evil  deeds  of  the 
woman  more  than  the  good  deeds  of  the  man.  Is  not 
Rachel  praised  who  deceived  her  father?  Rebecca, 
because   she   obtained   fraudulently  Jacob's  benedic- 


THE   NOBILITY   OF  WOMAN.  263 

tion?  Is  not  the  deceit  of  Rahab  imputed  to  her  as 
justice?  Was  not  Jael  blessed  among-  women  for  a 
treacherous  and  cruel  deed?  What  could  be  more 
iniquitous  than  the  counsel  of  Judith?  what  more  cruel 
than  her  wiles?  what  worse  than  her  perfidy?  Yet  for 
this  she  is  blessed,  lauded,  and  extolled  in  Scripture, 
and  the  woman's  iniquity  is  reputed  better  than  the 
goodness  of  the  man.  Was  not  Cain's  a  good  work 
when  he  offered  his  best  fruits  in  sacrifice  and  was 
reproved  for  it?  Did  not  Esau  well  when  he  hunted  to 
get  venison  for  his  old  father,  and  in  the  meantime 
was  defrauded  of  his  birthright,  and  incurred  the 
divine  hate?  Other  examples  are  adduced,  and  robust 
scholars,  ingenious  theologians,  are  defied  to  find  an 
equal  amount  of  evidence  in  support  of  the  contrary 
thesis,  that  the  iniquity  of  the  man  is  better  than  the 
goodness  of  the  woman.  Such  a  thesis,  says  Agrippa, 
could  not  be  defended. 

From  this  point  to  the  end  Agrippa 's  treatise  con- 
sists of  a  mass  of  illustrations  from  profane  and  Script- 
ure history,  classified  roughly.  Some  are  from  natu- 
ral history.  The  queen  of  all  birds,  he  says,  is  the 
eagle,  always  of  the  female  sex,  for  no  male  eagles 
have  been  found.  The  phoenix  is  a  female  always. 
On  the  other  hand,  the  most  pestilent  of  serpents, 
called  the  basilisk,  exists  only  as  a  male;  it  is  impossi- 
ble for  it  to  hatch  a  female. 

All  evil  things  began  with  men,  and  few  or  none  with 
women.  We  die  in  the  seed  of  Adam  and  live  in  the 
seed  of  Eve.  The  beginning  of  envy,  the  first  homi- 
cide, the  first  parricide,  the  first  despair  of  divine 
mercy  was  with  man;  Lamech  was  the  first  bigamist, 
Noah  was  the  first  drunkard,  Nimrod  the  first  tyrant, 
and  so  forth.  Men  were  the  first  to  league  themselves 
with  demons  and  discover  profane  hearts.  Men  have 
been  incontinent,  and  had,  in  innumerable  instances, 


264  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

to  each  man  many  wives  at  once;  but  women  have  been 
continent,  each  content  with  a  single  husband,  except 
only  Bathsheba.  Many  women  are  then  cited  as  illus- 
trations of  their  sex  in  this  respect,  or  for  their  filial 
piety,  including  Abigail,  Lucretia,  Cato's  wife,  and 
the  mother  of  the  Gracchi,  the  vestal  Claudia,  Iphi- 
genia.  If  any  one  opposes  to  such  women  the  wives 
of  Zoilus,  Samson,  Jason,  Deiphobus,  and  Agamem- 
non, it  may  be  answered  that  these  have  been  unjustly 
accused,  that  no  good  man  ever  had  a  bad  wife.  Only 
bad  husbands  get  bad  wives,  or  if  they  get  a  good  one, 
are  sometimes  able  to  corrupt  her  excellence.  If 
women  made  the  laws,  and  wrote  the  histories  and 
tragedies,  could  they  not  justly  crowd  them  with  tes- 
timony to  the  wickedness  of  men.  Our  prisons  are 
full  of  men,  and  slain  men  cumber  the  earth  every- 
where, but  women  are  the  beginners  of  all  liberal  arts, 
of  virtue  and  beneficence.  Therefore  the  arts  and  vir- 
tues commonly  have  feminine  names.  Even  the  cor- 
ners of  the  world  receive  their  names  from  women — the 
nymph  Asia;  Europa,  the  daughter  of  Agenior;  Lybia, 
the  daughter  of  Epaphus,  who  is  called  also  Aphrica. 

Illustrations  follow  of  the  pre-eminence  of  woman 
in  good  gifts,  and  it  is  urged  that  Abraham,  who  by 
his  faith  was  accounted  just,  was  placed  in  subjection 
to  Sarah  his  wife,  and  was  told,  "In  all  that  Sarah 
hath  said  unto  thee,  harken  unto  her  voice. ' '  (Gen. , 
xxi.,  12.) 

There  follows  a  host  of  other  illustrations  of  the 
excellence  of  women,  drawn  from  all  sources;  among 
others,  illustrations  of  her  eminence  in  learning. 
''And,"  adds  Agrippa,  "were  not  women  now  forbid- 
den to  be  literary,  we  should  at  this  day  have  most 
celebrated  women,  whose  wit  would  surpass  that  of 
men.  What  is  to  be  said  upon  this  head,  when  even  by 
nature  women  seem  to  be  born  easily  superior  to  prac* 


THE  NOBILITY  OF   WOMAN.  265 

ticed  students  in  all  faculties?  Do  not  the  grammari- 
ans entitle  themselves  masters  of  right  speaking? 
Yet  we  learn  this  far  better  from  our  nurses  and  our 
mothers  than  from  the  grammarians.  For  that  rea- 
son Plato  and  Quintilian  so  solicitously  urged  a  care- 
ful choice  of  children's  nurses,  that  the  children's 
language  might  be  formed  on  the  best  model.  Are  not 
the  poets  in  the  invention  of  their  whims  and  fables, 
the  dialecticians  in  their  contentious  garrulity,  sur- 
passed by  women?  Was  ever  orator  so  good  or  so  suc- 
cessful, that  a  courtesan  could  not  excel  his  powers  of 
persuasion?  What  arithmetician  by  false  calculation 
would  know  how  to  cheat  a  woman  in  the  payment  of 
a  debt?  What  musician  equals  her  in  song  and  in 
amenity  of  voice?  Are  not  philosophers,  mathema- 
ticians, and  astrologers  often  inferior  to  country 
women  in  their  divinations  and  predictions,  and  does 
not  the  old  nurse  very  often  beat  the  doctor?  "  Soc- 
rates himself,  the  wisest  of  men,  did  not  disdain  to 
receive  knowledge  from  Aspasia,  nor  did  Apollo  the 
theologian  despise  the  teaching  of  Priscilla. 

Then  follows  a  fresh  string  of  illustrations  by  which 
we  are  brought  to  a  contemplation  of  the  necessity  of 
women  for  the  perpetuation  of  any  state,  and  the  ces- 
sation of  the  human  race  that  may  be  consequent  on 
her  withdrawal.  Through  more  examples  we  are 
brought  then  to  consider  the  honor  and  precedence 
accorded  by  law  and  usage  to  the  female  sex.  Man 
makes  way  for  woman  on  the  public  road,  and  yields 
to  her  in  society  the  highest  places.  Purple  and  fine 
linen,  gold  and  jewels  are  conceded  as  the  fit  adorn- 
ments of  her  noble  person,  and  from  the  sumptuary 
laws  of  the  later  emperors  women  were  excepted. 
Illustrations  follow  of  the  dignity  and  privileges  of 
the  wife,  and  of  the  immunities  accorded  to  her  by  the 
law.     Reference  is  made  to  ancient  writers,  who  tell 


266  HENRY  CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

how,  among  the  Getulians,  the  Bactrians,  and  others, 
men  were  the  softer  sex,  and  sat  at  home  while  women 
labored  in  the  fields,  built  houses,  transacted  business, 
rode  abroad,  and  went  out  to  do  battle.  Among"  the 
Cantabrians  men  brought  dowries  to  their  wives, 
brothers  were  given  in  marriage  by  their  sisters,  and 
the  daughters  of  a  household  were  the  heirs.  Among 
the  Scythians,  Thracians,  and  Gauls,  women  possessed 
their  rights,  but  among  us,  said  Agrippa,  "  the  tyranny 
of  men  prevailing  over  divine  right  and  the  laws  of 
nature,  slays  by  law  the  liberty  of  woman,  abolishes 
it  by  use  and  custom,  extinguishes  it  by  education. 
For  the  woman,  as  soon  as  she  is  born,  is  from  her 
earliest  years  detained  at  home  in  idleness,  and  as  if 
destitute  of  capacity  for  higher  occupations,  is  per- 
mitted to  conceive  of  nothing  beyond  needle  and 
thread.  Then  when  she  has  attained  years  of  puberty 
she  is  delivered  over  to  the  jealous  empire  of  a  man, 
or  shut  up  for  ever  in  a  shop  of  vestals.  The  law 
also  forbids  her  to  fill  public  offices.  No  prudence 
entitles  her  to  plead  in  open  court. ' '  A  list  follows  of 
the  chief  disabilities  of  women,  ''who  are  treated  by 
the  men  as  conquered  by  the  conquerors,  not  by  any 
divine  necessity,  for  any  reason,  but  according  to  cus- 
tom, education,  fortune,  and  the  tyrant's  opportunity.  " 
A  few  leading  objections  are  then  answered.  Eve 
was  indeed  made  subject  to  man  after  the  fall,  but  that 
curse  was  removed  when  man  was  saved.  Paul  says 
that  "wives  are  to  be  subject  to  their  husbands,  and 
women  to  be  silent  in  the  church,"  but  he  spoke  of 
temporal  church  discipline,  and  did  not  utter  a  divine 
law,  since  ' '  in  Christ  there  is  neither  male  nor  female, 
but  a  new  creature."  We  are  again  reminded  of  the 
text  subjecting  Abraham  to  Sarah,  and  the  treatise 
closes  then  with  a  short  recapitulation  of  its  heads. 
*'We  have  shown."  Agrippa  says,  "the  pre-eminence 


THE  NOBILITY  OF   WOMAN.  267 

of  the  female  sex  by  its  name,  its  order  and  place  of 
creation,  the  material  of  which  it  was  created,  and  the 
dignity  that  was  given  to  woman  over  man  by  God, 
then  by  religion,  by  nature,  by  human  laws,  by  vari- 
ous authority,  by  reason,  and  have  demonstrated  all 
this  by  promiscuous  examples.  Yet  we  have  not  said 
so  many  things  but  that  we  have  left  more  still  to  be 
said,  because  I  came  to  the  writing  of  this  not  moved 
by  ambition,  or  for  the  sake  of  bringing  myself  praise, 
but  for  the  sake  of  duty  and  truth,  lest,  like  a  sacri- 
legious person,  I  might  seem,  if  I  were  silent,  by  an 
impious  taciturnity  (and  as  it  were  a  burying  of  my 
talent)  to  refuse  the  praises  due  to  so  devout  a  sex. 
So  that  if  any  one  more  curious  than  I  am  should  dis- 
cover any  argument  which  he  thinks  requisite  to  be 
added  to  this  work,  let  him  expect  to  have  his  position 
not  contested  by  me,  but  attested,  in  as  far  as  he  is 
able  to  carry  on  this  good  work  of  mine  with  his  own 
genius  and  learning.  And  that  this  work  itself  may 
not  become  too  large  a  volume,  here  let  it  end. " 

Such  was  the  treatise  written  by  Cornelius  at  Dole 
for  the  more  perfect  propitiation  of  the  Princess  Mar- 
garet. Many  years  elapsed  before  it  was  printed  and 
presented  to  the  princess;  doubtless,  however,  the 
youth  read  the  manuscript  to  his  betrothed  very  soon 
after  it  was  written.  Towards  the  close  of  the  year  a 
friend  in  Cologne  wrote  to  Agrippa  of  the  impatience 
of  his  parents  for  their  son's  return,  but  at  the  close 
of  November  another  friend  in  Cologne,  Theodoric, 
Bishop  of  Cyrene,  asking  as  an  especial  favor  for  his 
views  upon  judicial  astrology  so  hotly  opposed  by  Pico 
di  Mirandola,  says  that  his  expression  on  the  subject 
had  appeared  to  him  ambiguous  when  they  conversed 
together.  Probably  he  had  then  been  offering  to  the 
embrace  of  his  parents  not  a  son  only,  but  a  son  and 
daughter,  for  it  is  said  to  have  been  in  the  year  1509, 


268  HENRY   CORNELIUS  AGRIPPA. 

when  all  was  honor  for  him  in  the  present,  all  hope  in 
the  future,  that  Cornelius  vonNettesheim  married  Jane 
Louisa  Tyssie,  of  Geneva,  a  maiden  equal  to  him  in 
rank,  remarkable  for  beauty,  and  yet  more  remarkable 
for  her  aspirations  and  her  worth.  She  entered  with 
her  whole  soul  into  the  spirit  of  her  husband's  life, 
rejoiced  in  his  ambition,  and  knew  how  to  hold  high 
converse  with  his  friends.  The  marriage  was  in  every 
respect  a  happy  one;  there  was  a  world  of  gentleness 
and  loving  kindness  in  Agrippa's  heart.  We  shall 
have  revelation  of  it  as  the  narrative  proceeds.  The 
tenderness  of  his  nature  mingles  strangely,  sadly, 
with  his  restlessness,  his  self-reliance,  and  his  pride. 

So,  full  of  hope  and  happiness,  at  the  age  of  twenty- 
three,  he  took  to  wife  a  maiden  who  could  love  him  for 
his  kindliness,  and  reverence  him  for  his  power.  He 
was  no  needy  adventurer,  but  the  son  of  a  noble  house, 
who  was  beginning,  as  it  seemed,  the  achievement  of 
the  highest  honors.  He  was  surrounded  by  admirers, 
already  a  doctor  of  divinity,  hereafter  to  attain  he 
knew  not  what.  Fostered  by  Maximilian's  daughter^ 
what  might  not  his  intellect  achieve? 

Poor  youth,  even  in  that  year  of  hope  the  blight  was 
already  settling  on  his  life!  While  he  was  writing 
praise  of  womanhood  at  Dole  to  win  the  smiles  of 
Margaret,  Catilinet,  a  Franciscan  friar,  who  had  been 
at  the  adjacent  town  of  Gray  when  Reuchlin  was 
expounded,  meditated  cruel  vengeance  on  the  down- 
chinned  scholar.  At  Ghent,  as  preacher  before  the 
Regent  of  the  Netherlands  and  all  her  court,  Catilinet 
was  to  deliver  ii^  the  Easter  following  the  Quadragesi- 
mal Discourses.  Against  the  impious  Cabalist  he  was 
preparing  to  arouse  the  wrath  of  Margaret  during 
those  same  days  which  were  spent  by  the  young  student 
in  pleasant  effort  to  deserve  her  kindness. 

Now  it  was  that  Agrippa  wrote  his  books  on  Magic. 


ORDER  OF  THE  EMPYREAN  HEAVEN. 


There  is  a  God,  all-powerful,  all-intellig-ent  and 
supremely  perfect;  eternal  and  infinite;  omnipotent 
and  omniscient;  who  endures  from  eternity  to  eternity, 
and  is  present  from  infinity  to  infinity. 

But  though,  from  the  nature  and  perfections  of  the 
Deity,  he  is  invisibly  present  in  all  places  and  nothing 
happens  without  his  knowledge  and  permission;  yet  it 
is  expressly  revealed  in  Scripture,  and  admitted  by 
all  wise  and  intelligent  authors,  that  he  is  visibly 
present  with  the  angels  and  spirits,  and  blessed  souls 
of  the  departed,  in  those  mansions  of  bliss  called 
Heaven.  There  he  is  pleased  to  afford  a  nearer  and 
more  immediate  view  of  himself,  and  a  more  sensible 
manifestation  of  his  glory,  and  a  more  adequate  per- 
ception of  his  attributes,  than  can  be  seen  or  felt  in 
any  other  parts  of  the  universe;  which  place,  for  the 
sake  of  pre-eminent  distinction,  and  as  being  the  seat 
and  center,  from  whence  all  things  flow  and  have  their 
beginning,  life,  light,  power,  and  motion,  is  called  the 
interior  or  Empyrean  Heaven. 

The  position  and  order  of  this  interior  heaven,  or 
center  of  the  Divinity,  has  been  variously  described, 
and  its  locality  somewhat  disputed  among  the  learned; 
but  all  agree  as  to  the  certainty  of  its  existence. 
Hermes  Trismegistus  defines  heaven  to  be  an  intel- 
lectual sphere,  whose  center  is  everywhere,  and  cir- 
cumference nowhere,  but  by  this  he  meant  no  more 
than  to  afiirm,  what  we  have  done  above,  that  God  is 
everywhere,  and  at  all  times,  from  infinity  to  infinity, 
that  is  to  say,  without  limitation,  bounds,  or  circum- 
ference.    Plato   speaks  of   this    internal    heaven    in 

270  THE   EMPYREAN  HEAVEN. 

terms  which  bear  so  strict  a  resemblance  with  the 
books  of  Revelation,  and  in  so  elevated  and  magnifi- 
cent a  style,  that  it  is  apparent  the  heathen  philoso- 
phers, notwithstanding  their  -worshiping  demi  or  false 
gods,  possessed  an  unshaken  confidence  in  one  omnipo- 
tent, supreme,  overruling  power,  whose  throne  was  the 
center  of  all  things,  and  the  abode  of  angels  and 
blessed  spirits. 

To  describe  this  interior  heaVen,  in  terms  adequate 
to  its  magnificence  and  glory,  is  utterly  impossible. 
The  utmost  we  can  do  is  to  collect,  from  inspired 
writers,  and  from  the  words  of  Revelation,  assisted 
by  occult  philosophy,  and  a  due  knowledge  of  the 
celestial  spheres,  that  order  and  position  of  it,  which 
reason  and  the  divine  lights  we  have,  bring  nearest  to 
the  truth.  That  God  must  be  strictly  and  literally  the 
center  from  whence  all  ideas  of  the  Divine  Mind 
flow,  as  rays  in  every  direction,  through  all  spheres 
and  through  all  bodies,  cannot  admit  of  a  doubt. 
That  the  inner  circumference  of  this  center  is  sur- 
rounded, filled  or  formed,  by  arrangements  of  the 
three  hierarchies  of  angels,  is  also  consonant  to  rea- 
son and  Scripture,  and  forms  what  may  be  termed  the 
entrance  or  inner  gate  of  the  empyrean  heaven, 
through  which  no  spirit  can  pass  without  their  knowl- 
edge and  permission,  and  within  which  we  must  sup- 
pose the  vast  expanse  or  mansions  of  the  Godhead, 
and  glory  of  the  Trinity,  to  be.  This  is  strictly  con- 
formable to  the  idea  of  all  the  prophets  and  evangel- 
ical writers.  From  this  primary  circle,  or  gate  of 
heaven,  Lucifer,  the  grand  Apostate,  as  Milton  finely 
describes  it,  was  hurled  into  the  bottomless  abyss; 
whose  office,  as  one  of  the  highest  orders  of  angels, 
having  placed  him  near  the  eternal  throne,  he  became 
competitor  for  dominion  and  power  with  God  himself  J 

The  circles  next   surrounding   the   hierarchies,  are 


\/'ym^.  oft/i/UnltMftfcU-  J/imtcfMitm*^'. 


THE   ANIMA  MUNDI.  271 

composed  of  the  ministering  ang-els  and  spirits  and 
messengers  of  the  Deity.  In  positions  answering  to 
the  ideas  of  the  holy  Trinity,  and  intersecting  all 
orders  of  angels,  are  seated,  in  fullness  of  glory  and 
splendor,  those  superior  angels,  or  intelligent  spirits, 
who  answer  to  the  divine  attributes  of  ♦  God,  and  are 
the  pure  essences  or  stream  through  which  the  will 
or  fiat  of  the  Godhead  is  communicated  to  the  angels 
and  spirits,  and  instantaneously  conducted  to  the 
Anima  Mundi.  Round  the  whole,  as  an  atmosphere 
round  a  planet,  the  Anima  Mundi,  or  universal  Spirit 
of  Nature,  is  placed;  which,  receiving  the  impressions 
or  ideas  of  the  Divine  Mind,  conducts  them  onward, 
to  the  remotest  parts  of  the  universe;  to  infinity  itself; 
to,  and  upon,  and  through,  all  bodies,  and  to  all  God's 
works.  This  Anima  Mundi  is  therefore  what  we 
understand  of  Nature,  of  Providence,  of  the  presence 
of  God,  and  the  fountain  or  seat  of 'all  second  causes, 
being,  as  it  were,  the  Eye  of  God,  or  medium  between 
God  and  all  created  things.  Next  to  the  Anima 
Mundi,  is  that  vast  region  or  expanse,  called  the 
ethereal  heaven,  or  firmament,  wherein  the  fixed  stars, 
planets,  and  comets,  are  disposed;  and  wherein  the 
celestial  bodies,  and  the  comets,  move  freely  in  all 
directions,  and  towards  all  parts  of  the  heavens. 

To  illustrate  what  has  been  stated  above  a  plate  is 
here  inserted  of  the  Interior  Heaven,  with  the  differ- 
ent orders  of  the  Spirits  and  Essences  of  the  Divine 
Mind,  distinguished  by  their  proper  names  and  charac- 
ters, in  the  original  Hebrew  and  Iberian  text,  as 
pointed  out  in  the  manuscripts  of  ancient  and  learned 
philosophers.  This  plate  shows  in  what  manner  the 
rays  or  beams  of  Divine  Providence  pass  from  the 
center  or  seat  of  the  Godhead,  through  all  the  differ- 
ent orders  of  angels  and  spirits,  to  the  Anima  Mundi, 
and  from  thence  to  all  the  celestial  bodies,  planets, 


272  THE   EMPYREAN   HEAVEN. 

and  stars;  to  our  earth,  and  to  the  remotest  parts  of 
infinite  space,  constituting*  what  is  termed  celestial 
influx,  or  that  faculty  in  nature  by  which  the  quality 
and  temperature  of  one  body  is  communicated  to 
another. 

Theologists  have  divided  angels  into  different  ranks 
or  classes,  which  they  term  Hierarchies,  a  word  signi- 
fying- to  rule  in  holy  things.  Ancient  authors  give  nine 
orders  of  these  celestial  spirits — Cherubim,  Seraphim, 
Thrones,  Dominions,  Principalities,  Powers,  Virtues, 
Angels,  and  Archangels — and  these  they  class  into 
Three  Hierarchies,  appointing  them  their  respective 
offices  in  the  performance  of  the  word  and  will  of  God. 

The  rabbis  and  cabalistical  writers  have  defined  one 
rank  of  angels — or  the  Intelligences — as  superior  to 
all  the  foregoing  nine  orders  of  spirits,  and  which 
answer  to  and  are  contained  in  the  ten  distinguishing 
names  of  God,  and  are  the  pure  essences  of  the  Supreme 
Spirit,  or  the  Divine  Diffusion  through  which  the  mirific 
Word  and  Will  are  communicated  to  the  angels  and 
blessed  spirits,  and  through  which  providence  extends 
to  the  care  and  protection  of  Nature. 

The  first  of  these  divine  essences  is  Jehovah,  and  is 
peculiarly  attributed  to  God  the  Father,  being  the 
pure  and  simple  essence  of  the  Supreme  Divinity, 
flowing  through  Hajoth  Hakados,  to  the  angel  Metrat- 
ton,  and  to  the  ministering  spirit  Reschith  Hagalalim, 
who  guides  the  Primum  Mobile,  and  bestows  the  gift 
of  being  upon  all  things.  To  this  spirit  is  allotted  the 
office  of  bringing  the  souls  of  the  faithful  departed 
into  heaven;  and  by  him  God  spake  to  Moses. 

The  second  is  Jah,  and  is  attributed  to  the  Person 
of  the  Messiah,  whose  power  and  influence  descend 
through  the  angel  Masleh  into  the  sphere  of  the  celes- 
tial Zodiac.  This  is  the  Spirit  of  Nature,  the  Soul  of 
the  World,  or  the  Omnific  Word  which  actuated  the 


ORDERS   OP   ANGELS.  273 

•chaos  and  divided  the  unwroug"ht  matters  into  three 
portions:  Of  the  first  and  most  essential  part  was  the 
Spiritual  World  composed;  of  the  second  was  made 
the  visible  heavens  or  the  Celestial  World;  and  of  the 
third  part  was  formed  the  Terrestrial  World,  out  of 
which  was  drawn  the  elemental  quintessence,  or  first 
matter  of  all  things,  which  produced  the  four  elements 
of  Fire,  Water,  Air,  and  Earth,  and  all  the  creatures 
which  inhabit  them,  by  the  agency  of  a  particular 
spirit  called  Raziel,  who  was  the  ruler  of  Adam. 

The  third  is  Ehjeh,  and  is  attributed  to  the  Holy 
Spirit,  whose  divine  light  is  received  by  the  angel  Sab- 
bathi,  and  communicated  from  him  through  the  sphere 
of  Saturn.  This  is  the  principium  generationis,  the 
beginning  of  the  ways  of  God,  or  the  manifestations 
of  the  Father  and  the  Son's  light  in  the  supernatural 
generation.  And  from  hence  flow  down  all  living 
souls,  entering  the  inanimate  body,  and  giving  form  to 
unsettled  matter. 

The  fourth  is  El,  through  the  light  of  whom  flows 
grace,  goodness,  mercy,  piety,  and  munificence,  to  the 
angel  Zadkiel,  and,  thence  passing  through  the  sphere 
of  Jupiter,  fashioneth  the  images  of  all  bodies, 
Ijestowing  clemency,  benevolence,  and  justice  on  all. 

The  fifth  is  Elohi,  the  upholder  of  the  sword,  and 
left  hand  of  God,  whose  influence  penetrates  the 
angel  Geburah,  and  thence  descends  through  the 
sphere  of  Mars,  giving  fortitude  in  war  and  affliction. 

The  sixth  is  Tsebaoth,  who  bestoweth  his  mighty 
power  through  the  angel  Raphael  into  the  sphere  of  the 
Sun,  giving  motion,  heat,  and  brightness  to  it,  and 
thence  producing  metals. 

The  seventh  is  Elion,  who  rules  the  angel  Michael, 
and  descends  through  the  sphere  of  Mercury,  giving 
benignity,  motion,  intelligence,  and  eloquence. 

The  eighth  is  Adonai,  whose  influence  is  received  by 

19  .    _  , 


274  THE  EMPYREAN  HEAVEN. 

the  angel  Haniel,  and  communicated  throug-h  the 
sphere  of  Venus,  giving-  zeal,  fervency,  and  righteous- 
ness of  heart,  and  producing  vegetables. 

The  ninth  is  Shaddai,  whose  influence  is  conveyed 
by  cherubim  to  the  angel  Gabriel,  and  falls  into  the 
sphere  of  the  Moon,  causing  increase  and  decrease  of 
all  things,  like  unto  the  tides  of  the  sea,  and  govern- 
ing the  genii  and  natural  protectors  of  man. 

The  tenth  is  Elohim,  who  extends  his  beneficence  to 
the  angel  Jesodoth,  into  the  sphere  of  the  Earth,  and 
dispenseth  knowledge,  understanding,  and  wisdom. 

The  three  first  of  these  ten  names — Jehovah,  Jah, 
and  Ehjeh — express  the  essence  of  God,  and  are  proper 
names;  but  the  other  seven  are  only  expressive  of  his 
attributes.  The  only  true  name  of  God,  according  to 
the  cabala,  is  the  name  of  four  letters — the  Tetragram- 
maton — Yod-he-vau-he. 

In  the  exterior  circle  of  the  celestial  heaven,  occu- 
pied by  the  fixed  stars,  the  Anima  Mundi  hath  her 
particular  forms,  answering  to  the  ideas  of  the  Divine 
Mind;  and  this  situation  approaching  nearest  to  the 
Empyrean  Heaven,  the  seat  of  God,  receives  the  spir- 
itual powers  and  influences  which  immediately  pro- 
ceed from  him.  Hence  they  are  diffused  through  the 
spheres  of  the  planets  and  heavenly  bodies,  and  com- 
mimicated  to  the  inmost  center  of  the  Earth  by  means 
of  natural  law,  or  the  Spirit  of  the  World,  that  rules 
the  terrestrial  world. 

While  many  ancient  authors  have  contended  on  the 
definition  and  meaning  of  the  word  Nature,  yet  they 
all  in  reality  mean  one  and  the  same  thing,  only  giv- 
ing different  explanations  of  the  same  ideas;  and  if 
their,  arguments  are  closely  pursued  and  compared 
with  each  other,  they  will  all  tend  to  show  that  the 
Anima  Mundi  and  the  Soul  of  the  Universe  is,  what 
they  mean  by  Nature. 


SYMBOLS  OF  THE  ALCHEMISTS. 


This  volume  would  be  incomplete  without  the  sym- 
bols of  the  Alchemists,  as  they  naturally  pertain  to 
Natural  Magic,  and  occasionally  prove  of  great  value. 
The  London  Pharmaceutical  Journal,  an  excellent 
authority,  gives  the  symbols  we  here  introduce. 

Nowadays  chemists  write  their  formulas  and  work 
out  their  processes  by  means  of  symbols,  and  the 
alchemists  used  also  signs  and  hieroglyphics  to  repre- 
sent the  then  known  elements,  metals,  and  other  sub- 
stances in  common  use. 

The  so-called  elements — Fire,  Water,  Air,  Earth — 
were  represented  by  special  symbols,  here  represented. 
The  metals  were  supposed  to  be  influenced  by  the 
planets  to  a  certain  degree,  and  were  represented  by 
the  corresponding  signs  of  the  Zodiac.  Various  other 
articles  also  had  their  symbols,  which  served  as  a 
means  of  shorthand  at  a  period  when  caligraphy  was 
little  known  or  employed.  Gold,  for  instance,  was 
associated  with  the  Sun  because  of  its  brightness  and 
perfection,  for  it  was  always  held  to  be  the  noblest  of 
metals.  The  symbol  applied  to  it  embodies  these 
qualities.  Silver  resembles  the  Moon  in  lustre,  and 
the  origin  of  the  crescent  needs  no  explanation.  Iron 
was  dedicated  to  Mars,  being  the  metal  from  which 
implements  of  war  were  made,  Mars  being  the  god  of 
war,  probably  owing  to  the  blood-red  color  of  the 
planet.  Saturn  was  the  slowest  of  the  planets,  and 
lead,  being  the  dullest  and  most  despised  of  metals, 
was  therefore  accorded  to  Saturn.  Quicksilver  was, 
of  course,  most  appropriate  to  Mercury,  the  messenger 
of  the  gods. 

SYMBOLS  OF  THE  ALCHEMISTS. 


Dr.  Pereira  derives  all  these  symbols  from  gold 
and  the  Greek  cross,  taken  to  represent  acrimony  the 
supposititious  substance,  which,  combined  with  gold, 
produced  other  metals.  Copper,  for  instance,  has  the 
sign  of  gold  on  top,  and  that  of  acrimony  underneath. 
Quicksilver  derived  its  symbol  from  that  of  silver  on 
the  top,  because  of  its  color,  that  of  acrimony  beneath, 
and  gold  between,  because  gold  was  supposed  to  lurk 
in  all  metals.  Iron  was  supposed  to  contain  acrimony 
of  a  different  nature  from  that  of  the  other  metals, 
being  represented  in  this  symbol  by  the  barbed  spear- 
head. Fire  and  Water  being  antagonistic  are  repre- 
sented by  the  same  symbol,  one  being  inverted.  Air, 
which  was  supposed  to  be  a  modification  of  fire,  has  a 
modified  fire  symbol,  whilst  the  fourth  hypothetical 
element  has  for  its  symbol  that  of  air  inverted. 
These  are  based  on  Aristotle's  doctrine,  which  taught 
that  the  four  elements  had  each  two  qualities,  one  of 
which  was  common  to  some  other  elements. 

SYMBOLS  AND   SIGNIFICATIONS. 
Fire.  Air.  Water.  Water.  Earth. 


Lead.         Tin. 


Iron.  Gold.         Copper.       Mercury.        Silver. 


^^    i   O  g    §    C 


Antimony.    Arsenic.  Aqua  Vitae. 


Borax. 


To  Purify. 


Cinnabar.    Caput  Mortuum.         An  Oil.  Saltpeter.    Magnet. 

•*^-  §  @  X.-o%  CD  A 


SYMBOLS   OF   THE   ALCHEMISTS.  277 

Sal  Ammo-  A  Gov-  To  To 

niac.  Sulphur.  Tartar,    ered  Pot.      Sublime.        Precipitate. 


t  ^-'^'i'^ 


Roman  Symbol        To  To  Aqua 

Spirits  of  Wine.  for  Denarius.       Digest.  Distill.  Portis. 

♦%-V  DC   8    Y   V 

Aqua  Regalia.    Brick.       To  Calcine.  Camphire.  Ashes.       Cerusse. 

^  ^  Q/i  ♦♦<^  -E  T 

Lime.  Quicklime.  Cinnabar.  Wax.         Hartshorn. 

OG    %    Ct>t>  ^   CC 

A  Crucible.  Oil. 

-,  Crystal.         A  Gum.       , " .  '^ 


Sublimated    Preciptated 
Steel  Filings.       Litharge.        To  Lute.        Mercury.       Mercury.          Nitre. 

</3   ^   $^  1^  0 

Realgar.  /  Sal  Ammo- 

Sand.       Soap.        Sal  Alkali.  niac. 


Salt.  Tallow.    Vinegar.  Verdigris.    Vitriol       Urine.      Day.    Night. 


-sir**  •  -k   i^         ^  ••• 

•  •      •  •         • 

•  •   •         •  •  •         • 

-k  ^  • 

ii  a.  -Ct  ii  -C? 

"Sir    ^  T^ 

^  k  • 

-k  ii  it  it 


A  MESSAGE  FROM  THE  STARS. 


I  stood  at  eventime.    The  never-ending  plain 
AH  empty  looked  and  void.    Yet,  as  I  ^azed  a^ain. 
An  army  bivouacked.    Unnumbered  points  of  li^ht 
Bespoke  a  force  Supreme— invincible  for  Ri^ht. 


THE  MAGIC  MIRROR. 


A  Message  to  Mystics  by  Direction  of  the  Brotlier- 

hood  of  Ma^ic. 

STATEMENT   BY   THE   EDITOR. 

The  Editor  wishes  to  state,  plainly  and  positively, 
that  he  knows  the  Art  of  Magic  to  be  a  truth;  and, 
further,  that  he  knows  of  the  existence  of  the  Astral 
Brotherhood  of  Magic,  an  occult  organization  both 
here  and  in  the  unseen  world. 

He  has  received  the  following  Message  to  Mystics  in 
regard  to  the  Magic  Mirror,  that  wonderful  instrument 
so  long  used  by  advanced  Mystics  for  communication 
between  the  two  worlds,  and  gives  it,  as  it  comes  to 
him,  by  direction  of  the  unseen  Brotherhood. 


To  THE  Mystics  of  Earth,  the  Astral  Brother- 
hood OP  Magic  send  Love  and  Greeting: 

• 

Until  the  Astral  Fire  is  kindled  by  the  Lord  on  his 
Sacred  Altar  in  Egypt  there  is  work  for  us  to  do  pre- 
paratory thereto. 

The  chains  of  centuries,  of  cycles,  and  of  ages,  are 
riven  at  length  by  their  own  heart-eating  rust.  No 
bond  that  comes  of  darkness  can  endure  the  full  dawn 
of  the  Day. 

To  carry  this  work  into  full  success  we  must  have 
true,  tried,  and  capable  brothers  on  the  Earth  who 
will  act  in  concert  with  us  for  the  uplifting  and  educa- 
tion of  Humanity. 

No  man-made  law  can  set  aside  or  annul  the  Laws 
of  Nature.  The  educated  Mystic — who,  of  all  the 
children  of  Earth,  acts  unselfishlj^ — is  Nature's  own 
true  instrument  in  human  advancement.     He  is  the  one 

280  THE  MAGIC  MIRROR. 

who  has  met  and  overthrown  error  and  arrogance  in 
high  places,  who  has  denied  the  Divine  Right  of 
Kings,  who  has  uprooted  the  rule  of  the  despot  and 
tyrant,  who  has  lead  humanity  with  the  potent  weapon 
of  thought  to  triumph  over  superstition  and  ignorance, 
and  who  will  finally  be  the  means  of  ending  the  reign 
of  the  Beast  who  exists  only  for  a  time,  and  times, 
and  half  a  time. 

Before  the  truths  of  our  Brotherhood  the  bonds  and 
shackles  of  mankind  are  destined  to  melt  as  snow 
beneath  the  Sun  of  Aries. 

• 
•• 

You  need  not  ask  if  whether  or  no  you  are  a  Mystic. 
Every  soul  contains  within  itself  the  attributes  of 
divinity.  They  may  be  repressed  and  crucified  to  the 
loss  of  the  soul,  or  they  may  be  made  to  bloom,  like 
'the  lotus,  to  a  beauty  and  power  that  may  set  the 
more  inferior  limitations  of  existence  at  any  length. 

Are  you  selfish?  This  is  the  question  you  should 
ask  yourself.  This  is  the  deep,  underlying  condition 
we  most  must  combat.  Can  you  lay  this  selfish  in- 
stinct aside  to  work  for  the  good  of  all  in  place  of  the 
aggrandizement  of  self?  If  so,  then  we  welcome  you 
to  our  Brotherhood.  We  reach  out  to  you  a  hand  over 
the  infinite  spaces,  from  the  dim,  forgotten  centuries, 
and  recognize  you  as  brother  and  comrade. 

• 
•• 

The  reign  of  absolute  justice,  truth,  and  goodness 
comes,  at  length,  to  every  peopled  world.  To  such 
culmination  the  march  of  mankind  is  marked  with 
every  vicissitude  that  the  changes  of  fixed  forces  may 
imply.  When  such  a  state  has  been  accomplished  the 
planetary  forces  that  before  indicated  so  much  of  sor- 
row and  suffering  are  found  to  be  needful  to  the  per- 
fect social  organization.     The  force  of  war  is  then 


A  MESSAGE  TO  MYSTICS.  281 

turned  into  the  force  of  perpetuity,  the  force  of  delay 
and  obstruction  and  slow  decay  to  the  force  of  steady, 
sure  and  safe  advancement. 

The  Infinite  Intellig^ence  is  also  infinitely  good.  We 
cannot  judge  justly  otherwise  by  a  set  of  limited  com- 
parisons. All  evil  in  the  end  becomes  either  extinct 
or  developed  good. 

•• 

If  these  words  stir  thee  within  it  is  the  answering 
cry  of  the  true  Ego — the  Astral  self  recognizes  the 
vibrations  of  the  eternal.  It  rests  wholly  with  you  if 
this  recognition  shall  go  by  unf ruitfully. 

If  you  would  act  consider  well  our  advice.  "Be  ye 
wise  as  serpents  but  harmless  as  doves. "  There  is 
much  in  this  command.  A  bulb — before  it  becomes  a 
blooming  plant — lies  secret  and  silent  in  the  earth. 
It  finds  in  this  condition  its  only  opportunity  of  exist- 
ence. Antagonistic  forces  pass  it  by  as  it  lies  hid  in 
its  work  of  self-development.  So  must  your  reason 
develop — hid  in  yourself.  Money  will  not  buy  knowl- 
edge, nor  can  it  destroy  knowledge.  Mysticism  cannot 
'be  measured  with  money.  Your  reason  must  spring  to 
life  from  within.  There  is  no  problem  too  sacred  for 
investigation,  and  it  is  the  peculiar  province  of  the 
Mystic  to  desire  to  reason  on  all  problems  with  the 
utmost  carefulness.  The  health  of  youth,  the  energy 
that  an  ardor  for  truth  inspires,  mark  his  movements. 
No  laggard,  no  dotard,  no  waiting,  shiftless  soul  may 
hope  to  overtake  the  nimble  feet  of  esoteric  truth. 
The  Mystic  must  possess  an  intelligence  that  brightens 
with  attrition.  No  obstacle  should  daunt  him,  no  wall 
should  bar  him,  no  cord  or  chain  should  bind  him  in 
his  intellectual  development  and  search  for  truth.  He 
should  acquire  facts  as  a  miser  does  his  wealth — to 
hold — his  memory  his  strong  box;  but,  unlike  the 
miser,  he  can  give  of  his  store  and  yet  retain  his  all. 


282  THE  MAGIC  MIRROR. 

Purity  of  purpose  and  of  the  physical  being-  is  a  nec- 
essary condition  in  traveling  the  rugged  path  of  Mystic 
development.  "We  cannot  enter  into  diseased  condi- 
tions. We  may  set  those  forces  in  operation  that  will 
assuage  deep-seated  sorrow  and  physical  suffering, 
but  we  cannot  promise  to  bring  music  out  of  inharmo- 
nious notes.  To  try  to  do  so  would  result  in  deep 
injury  to  ourselves.     Be  pure. 

The  Mystic  who  lives  a  pure  life,  does  not  dissipate 
his  forces.  The  dissolute  man  does.  The  unspent  ger- 
minal forces  give  the  individual  a  pitrp^e  aura,  which 
envelops  him  at  all  points.  This  is  broken  down  and 
destroyed  by  those  acts  which  result  from  animal 
instincts.  With  this  aura  unimpaired  the  Mystic  pos- 
sesses the  power  necessary  to  the  practice  of  Magic. 
Take  heed,  therefore,  that  this  force  is  preserved. 

• 
•• 

We  now  propose  to  indicate  the  path  of  communica- 
tion. Should  you,  having  filled  all  necessary  condi- 
tions, fall  short  of  this  end,  do  not  be  cast  down.  To 
those  who  are  faithful  will  be  given  much.  Some  other 
time — the  occasion  not  now  having  arisen — we  shall 
handle  this  problem.  Even  if  no  apparent  results 
are  obtained — persevere,  if  necessary,  for  years. 

While  capacity  will  mark  the  degree  of  advance- 
ment of  the  true  Mystic,  the  principle  of  co-ordination 
will  signify  the  degree  of  communication.  To  enter 
into  such  relations  with  us  he  must  place  himself  in  a 
class  of  vibratory  forces  that  co-ordinate  with  our 
own.  To  attain  this  condition  he  should  carefully  fix 
a  practical  ideal  in  his  mind  of  the  kind  of  life  a  true 
Mystic  should  live.  He  should  examine  himself  like 
he  would  a  parcel  of  goods,  seeking  both  inferior  and 
superior  qualities,  and  note  each  hindrance  and  virtue. 
Then  let  him  plan,  like   a  general,  the  attack  and 


A  MESSAGE   TO   MYSTICS.  283 

defense  of  an  ideal  Mystical  life.  Having"  done  this, 
live  the  ideal  life.  Until  you  so  live,  do  not  expect  to 
rise.  As  the  ideal  life  is  lived  many  questions  arise, 
and  we  here  furnish  the  answers  to  a  few.  Right  and 
pure  thoughts  are  essential.  They  will  drive  away 
and  destroy  all  vain  and  frivolous  fancies.  Aspire 
and  you  will  be  inspired.  Do  the  work  you  find  ready 
to  do;  do  not  defer  a  good  action  or  a  laudable  ambi- 
tion. The  time  to  do  a  thing  is  when  the  ambition 
takes  hold  of  the  mind.  Then  natural  ardor  sustains 
the  energy,  and  a  clear  conception,  undimmed  by  pro- 
crastination, act  most  effectively  for  success.  Thus 
thinJcing  a,Tid  doing,  in  the  ideal  life  of  a  Mystic,  you  will 
make  rapid  progress  to  a  point  where  we  may  be  able 
to  establish  communication  with  you. 

• 
•  • 

Having  arisen  to  life  you  are  now  in  a  condition  to 
seek  relations  with  us  through  the  Magic  Mirror.  The 
wise  Mystic  makes  his  own  mirror.  Not  that  it  can- 
not be  made  for  him,  but  that  if  be  makes  one  himself 
it  will  more  surely  co-ordinate  with  his  own  person- 
ality, and  it  will  not  prove  a  bar  to  communication 
like  one  impregnated  with  the  selfish  and  perverted 
forces  of  some  other  person  whose  sole  object  is  of  a 
financial  nature.  Procure  the  following  materials 
with  which  to  make  the  Magic  Mirror: 

One  6^x8^  concave  glass,  free  from  flaws. 
Small  amount  of  turpentine  asphaltum. 
One  pint  of  spirits  of  turpentine. 
Suitable  one-inch  hair  brush. 
A  box  to  hold  the  Mirror. 
Half  a  yard  of  new  cloth. 

The  total  cost  of  the  above  materials  shouia  not 
exceed  one  dollar.  A  plush-covered  case  for  the  mir- 
ror should  not  be  much  more.     There  are  no  superior 


284  THE  MAGIC   MIRROR. 

materials  in  existence  with  which  to  make  a  Magic 
Mirror.     The  superior  mirrors  are  always  dark. 

If  the  size  of  the  Mirror  seems  too  small,  one  8x10 
may  be  procured.  The  turpentine  is  to  clean  the 
glass  and  brush  with — not  to  dilute  the  asphaltum. 
The  brush  should  be  neiu,  like  everything  else  used. 
The  box  may  be  of  cardboard  or  wood,  clean  and  fresh. 
The  cloth  should  be  agreeable  to  the  touch  and  sight. 
You  may  select  any  color  or  shade  you  like  best;  it  is 
used  to  wrap  the  Mirror  with  when  not  in  use. 

• 
•• 

With  these  things  you  will  enter  a  room  that  has  been 
thoroughly  set  in  order,  free  from  taint  of  any  kind. 
Let  the  day  and  surroundings  be  bright  and  cheerful, 
with  nothing  to  disturb  the  agreeable  conditions. 

Now,  with  a  neio  piece  of  cloth,  clean  the  glass  well 
with  turpentine.  This  is  also  necessary  to  make  the 
asphaltum  adhere  well  to  the  back.  Clean  the  brush 
well,  also,  with  turpentine,  some  of  which  may  be 
poured  into  a  saucer  for  the  purpose.  Now  carefnlly 
coat  the  convex  side  of  the  glass  with  the  asphaltum, 
beginning  at  one  end  of  the  glass  and  working  gradu- 
ally to  the  other.  Lay  the  coating  on  smoothly  and 
evenly,  not  stopping  for  any  other  purpose  until  it  is 
finished.  Do  not  go  back  over  your  work.  Any  im- 
perfection in  the  coating  is  to  be  remedied  by  another 
coat  on  another  day — three  such  coats  being  usually 
necessary  to  make  the  glass  opaque. 

The  coating  being  finished,  you  will  now  magnetize 
the  mirror  as  follows:  With  the  right  hand,  held  with 
the  palm  about  three  inches  over  the  glass,  you  will 
describe  a  circular  motion  for  a  minute  or  so  and  then 
do  the  like  with  the  left  hand.  The  line  of  motion 
made  by  the  hands  will  intersect  each  other,  you  will 
find  if  you  do  it  properly,  on  that  side  of  the  glass 


A  MESSAGE   TO   MYSTICS.  '  285 

farther  from  you,  like  two  wheels  running*  in  contrary 
directions.  Whatever  motions  you  feel  impressed  to 
make  outside  of  these  here  specified  you  may  follow 
with  confidence,  as  they  pertain  to  your  own  individu- 
ality, only  do  not  try  to  g"ive  any  special  movement  to 
the  hands  for  fancy's  sake  only.  The  palms  of  the 
hands  should  be  held  over  all  parts  of  the  glass.  A 
slow  movement  is  better  than  a  fast  one,  and  at  times 
both  hands  may  be  held  perfectly  still  over  the  ends  of 
the  glass.  It  is  not  the  movement  of  the  hands  that 
magnetizes  the  coating  of  asphaltum,  but  the  aura  of 
the  individual.  The  asphaltum  is  a  substance  that 
will  absorb  the  vital  aura  in  itself,  more  so  than  any 
other  material  thing",  and  the  movements  of  the  hands 
should  be  such  as  will  give  the  substance  an  oppor- 
tunity to  absorb  the  magnetic  aura  in  an  even  and 
orderly  manner. 

When  the  magnetic  process  is  finished  you  will  be 
well  aware  of  the  fact.  The  hands  will  feel  as  though 
exhausted — and  so  they  are,  their  aura  having  been 
absorbed  by  the  Mirror. 

Let  the  mind  be  actuated  by  pure  and  lofty  aspira- 
tions and  desires  when  you  make  your  Mirror.  Let 
care  and  worry  and  self  be  forgotten  by  employing 
the  mind  wholly  with  the  work  in  hand  and  the  pur- 
poses for  which  the  Mirror  is  being  made.  It  is  well 
to  read  this  article  over  carefully,  in  fact,  just  before 
you  undertake  the  work. 

When  you  have  given  the  Mirror  its  coat  of  asphal- 
tum and  magnetized  it  as  above,  you  will  place  it  in 
the  box  on  the  cloth,  and  set  it  away  to  dry,  taking 
care  that  it  has  a  place  of  even  temperature,  and 
where  it  will  be  protected  from  the  curious.  Tempo- 
rarily, a  new  sheet  of  heavy  paper  may  be  used  under 
the  glass,  as  some  of  the  asphaltum  may  run  over  the 
edge  and  soil  the  table  or  cloth.     Leave  the  paper 


286  THE   MAGIC   MIRROR. 

sticking  to  the  under  edge  of  the  glass,  until  you  have, 
on  three  different  occasions,  re-coated  and  re-magne- 
tized the  Mirror.  It  will  then  be  found  opaque  and 
ready  for  use. 

This  part  of  the  matter  being  accomplished,  you 
will  cleanse  the  brush  in  the  turpentine,  working  it  in 
the  fluid  as  long  as  any  of  the  asphaltum  remains. 
When  clean  lay  it  aside  for  future  use.  Clean  the 
china  with  turpentine  also. 

• 
•• 

The  ideal  mystical  life  must  not  be  relaxed.  Keep 
it  steadily  in  force.  Examine  the  events  of  each  day 
nightly  and  note  every  failure  and  lapse,  resolving  how 
to  avoid  future  lapses  of  the  same  kind. 

The  ideal  life  will  briug  you  new  joys,  peace  of 
mind,  and  the  inspiration  of  truth  and  goodness. 
You  will  feel  a  growth  of  your  soul.  The  astral  man  is 
now  unfolding.  As  you  succeed  in  attainment  so  you 
you  will  bring  to  yourself  higher  and  purer  forces  and 
aspirations.  With  these  comes  power — the  power  that 
will  some  day  rejuvenate  the  world — when  each  will 
give  according  to  his  ability  and  will  receive  accord- 
ing to  his  capacity. 

This  unfoldment,  this  progress,  this  uplifting,  this 
power — all  these — cometh  from  within.  A  legion  of 
angels  might  stand  ac  your  beck  and  call  and  no  result 
follow  their  ministrations.  The  Ego  must  unfold  from 
within.  With  a  heart  on  fire  for  humanity,  and  a  mind 
aspiring  for  truth,  and  a  hand  eager  to  engage  in  good 
works — all  these  resulting  from  the  ideal  life — you 
need  and  shall  have  our  companionship. 

In  the  first  place  you  must  give  us  an  opportunity  to 
communicate  with  you.  This  calls  for  certain  condi- 
tions. You  must  secretly  observe  the  regular  duty  of 
sitting  at  certain  specified  times.     We  say  secretly. 


\ 


A  MESSAGE  TO  MYSTICS.  287 

This  is  for  your  own  protection.  The  curious  should 
know  nothing  of  the  matter.  Set  stated  times  for 
developing"  in  the  use  of  your  Magic  Mirror.  Let 
nothing  interfere  with  j^our  sittings  except  sickness  or 
death.  Do  not  disappoint  us  if  you  do  not  wish  to 
disappoint  yourself.  Twice  or  three  times  a  week  is 
often  enough.  Once  a  week  will  answer  in  some  cases. 
Make  your  sittings  from  thirty  minutes  to  an  hour  and 
a  half,  always  commencing  to  sit  at  the  same  time  of 
day.  A  neat,  comfortable  room  should  be  used.  No 
one  else  should  be  present.  The  mind  should  be  com- 
posed, and,  above  all,  patient.  Let  the  room  be  dark. 
You  should  not  be  able  to  see  the  mirror,  though  you 
gaze  at  it,  or  rather  into  it.  Sit  comfortably,  not 
bending  forward,  holding  the  mirror  in  both  hands. 
If  the  Mirror  is  boxed,  let  the  thumbs  touch  the  glass. 

As  soon  as  any  Mystic  is  known  to  be  doing  this  he 
is  visited  by  members  of  the  Brotherhood  and  neces- 
sary data  secured.  His  capacity,  ability,  surround- 
ings, vibratory  forces,  periods  of  sittings,  and  other 
necessary  matters  are  all  carefully  noted.  A  report  is 
made  of  this  and  it  is  recorded.  To  establish  commu- 
nication a  brother  must  be  found  whose  vibratory 
forces  co-ordinate  with  the  sitter,  and  who  will  volun- 
teer to  be  a  companion  to  him  and  to  establish  com- 
munication with  him  at  stated  intervals.  Sometimes  it 
may  seem  a  long  while  before  the  right  companion  is 
found.  But  if  the  sitter  will  be  patient,  regular  and 
faithful,  he  may  expect  that  the  Brotherhood  is  inter- 
ested in  him  and  keeps  him  in  sight.  Many  times  the 
Mystic  will  be  visited  by  those  of  us  who  could  not 
communicate  with  him  owing  to  some  peculiar  physi- 
cal condition.  We  shall  note  his  efforts  and  will  help 
to  bring  him  in  communication  with  us. 

When  a  brother  volunteers  as  a  companion  results 
soon  come  on  the  mirror.     At  first  a  milky  film  will 


288  THE  MAGIC   MIRROR. 

appear — a  sort  of  white,  cloudy  appearance — which 
is  the  manifestation  of  the  materialization  of  forces. 
This,  clearing-  away,  a  star  may  ]ye  seen  to  travel 
across  the  firmament  of  the  glass.  This  is  the  first 
sign  of  success,  and  the  Mystic  should  preserve  his 
calmness,  and  not  become  too  eager  for  developments. 
When  these  results  come  you  may  know  that  we  are 
with  you;  that  we  have  measured  you,  and  have  rec- 
ognized you.     The  veil  of  Isis  is  about  to  rise. 

Knowing  how,  you  should,  if  possible,  make  a  Mir- 
ror for  anyone  who  desires  you  to  do  so.  Let  them 
apply  to  you  through  their  astral  influence  and  not  by 
reason  of  an  advertisement.  You  should  never  solicit 
the  making  of  a  Mirror.  Should  you  charge  for  the 
work,  you  should  not  ask  over  five  dollars  for  the 
three  coats  of  asphaltum.  Make  the  Mirror  invaria- 
bly as  if  it  were  for  your  own  use,  and  deliver  the  one 
you  make,  no  matter  how  much  you  may  have  become 
attached  to  it.     Instruct  the  recipient  to  let  no  one 

handle  it  but  himself. 

• 
•• 

The  work  here  undertaken  will  never  end  short  of 
the  well-being  of  Humanity.  We  care  not  for  color, 
clime,  or  creed.  All  humanity  must  be  made  to  know 
that  they  are  brethren,  and  that  the  only  true  good  of 
each  lies  in  the  permanent  welfare  of  all. 


Those  Mystics  who  endeavor  to  follow  the  require- 
ments of  the  Ideal  Life  as  here  indicated  by  the  Broth- 
erhood of  Magic  will  receive  additional  information 
in  regard  to  inquiries  and  other  matters  upon  address- 
ing the  editor  in  care  of  the  publishers  as  below. 

HAHN  &  WHITEHEAD, 
Postoffice  Box  336,  Chicago,  III. 


Deacidified  using  the  Bookkeeper  process, 
Neutralizing  agent:  Magnesium  Oxide 
Treatment  Date:  Nov.  2004 

PreservationTechnologies" 

A  WORLD  LEADER  IN  PAPER  PRESERVATION 

1 1 1  Thomson  Park  Drive 
Cranberry  Township,  PA  16066 
(724)  779-21 1 1