Ty a eR re et A RR ls ST ea mb ape ges eel ny Clee doles metsta nee DR A te ape etice Ne ey ne ome nylon anne ener = oa le 
- _ = Stas 


THE LIERARY Pai. 
BRIGHALi YOUNG UNIVERSITY 
PROVO, UTAH 


1 
> 
% 
$ 
, 
mig 
ah 


x 


aa . 
Plays SF te 
“ate Key 


PNR NE By 
Laer, A 
Fev R as 


. ah Seon 
pe Si iiesy bf ¥ 
j Aah 


1 


y 


ees et 
gc hae eee are To 
= Cd 


[4s g | * Astrology for All’’ Serves.—Vol. III. 


(Formerly issued as How to Judge a Nativity, Part I.) 
FOURTH EDITION 


“The Reading of the Horoscope” 


Price 15/- nett. 


Published by 
“MODERN ASTROLOGY ’’ OFFICE, IMPERIAL BUILDINGS, LUDGATS CIRCUS, &.C. 
1928. 


The Trade Supplied by 
L. N. FOWLER & CO., 7 Imperial Arcade, London, &.C. 


“TOE LIBRARY 
Biiodial: YOUNG UN] VERSIT¥ 
Sail RO VO: UTAH 


PREFACE 


In Astrology for All, the first book of this Series, a considerable 
amount of information regarding the zodiac and the planets has been 
given, while in the succeeding volume the method of casting the 
horoscope was thoroughly gone into with full minuteness in every detail. 
The present work will consist of the methods used in judging the 
horoscope when it has been accurately cast. 

The books comprising this Series have been so arranged that the 
student may have a special book dealing with each stage of his study, 
and thus avoid confusing the mind with that which does not directly 
belong to the department under consideration. In all former books on 
Astrology too much has been attempted in one volume, and no branch 
of the subject has ever received the full elucidation it deserves ; though 
in fact no book ever will or can contain all that is to be known 
concerning this science. or Astrology is the most comprehensive study 
conceivable, a science which no mortal mind could invent, being the 
direct work of immortals who came from other worlds to instruct our 
infant humanity. 

Astrology is one of seven keys required to unlock the door of the 
inner temple, but it is not the Astrology that is universally practised, for 
although this is a wonderful and useful study, it is only a key to the 
outer temple through which the aspirant must pass and the lessons of 
which he must learn ere he can prepare for the wisdom that is to be 
his when he shall pass into that inner temple to which the many may 
be called but only the few are chosen. Our world has never been 
without teachers ready and willing to instruct those who make the 
necessary conditions by fitting themselves to receive that knowledge, 
which is carefully guarded until humanity has grown strong enough to 
receive it. The divine mysteries are only for those who are ready 
to renounce the material world and claim their divine right to be heirs 
to the knowledge the Teachers have to impart. 

4 


vi PREFACE TO THE FIRST EDITION 


In dealing with the general rules for judgment in the following 
pages, an attempt is made to strike a higher note than has hitherto 
been struck, and although it is not the highest, it is quite high enough 
for the present. What is here written has not been copied from 
other books, a practice which seems to have been adopted by the majority 
of writers on Astrology, but is the result of deep thought and practical 
experience, which I am anxious to share with my fellow students; and 
to those who like myself have become absorbed in its study this fragment 
of learning is offered in the hope that it will help them to judge a 
horoscope more correctly than would otherwise be the case. For it 
strikes the note of the New Astrology, the foundation of which has been 
already laid by the establishment of Modern Astrology, the desire of 
which is to purify and re-establish the ancient science of Astrology, 
which, through planetary symbology, seeks to explain the One Universal] 
Spirit in its varied manifestations. 

ALAN LEO. 


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 


Since the issue of this series of Astrological text books, many students 
have expressed their desire to have a Short History of Astrology, with 
a list of the famous names of those who are known to have been its 
sincere students. This, not merely to satisfy idle curiosity, but to add 
more weight and dignity to the science and to meet the sceptical minds 
of those who in this present day of uncertainty and doubt require 
evidence of this kind; and also, where necessary, to relieve the anxiety 
of those who have more faith in traditions and historical data than 
belief in original and first hand thought. For such as these the 
following remarks are made in this edition. 


THE HISTORY OF ASTROLOGY. 


Astrology has undoubtedly been known to all nations throughout the world 
from time immemorial and its history appears to be coeval with that of the earth, 
since it can be traced through every existing nation and through them again to 
the great nations of the past whose glory and splendour we are only just 
beginning to realise. 

Through Egypt and ancient Chaldea ; through Japan and ancient China, 
and from Thibet to.early Hindustan we find Astrology has passed round the 
globe always retaining the same symbology, the same zodiac, and also the same 
ancient traditions. Who invented it? No ONE KNOWS. 

- Egyptian history is full of Astrological lore, and there is now very little doubt 
that it was the religion of the Chaldeans. From Clemens Alexandrinus we learn 
that: ‘The Egyptians follow a certain peculiar philosophy of their own, which 
may be best declared by setting down the order of their religious processions. 
First therefore goes the Precentor, carrying two of Hermes his books along with 
him ; the one which contains the Hymns of the gods, the other Direction for the 
kingly office. After him follows the Horoscopus, who is particularly instructed in 
Hermes his Astrological books, which are four. ‘Then succeeds the Hierogrammateus, 
or sacred scribe, with feathers upon his head, and a book and rule in his hands, 
to whom it belongeth to be thoroughly acquainted with the Hieroglyphics, as 
with Cosmography, geography, the order of the Sun, and Moon, and five planets, 
the chorography of Egypt and description of the Nile,’ etc. 

The whole of the Egyptian philosophy was evidently based upon Astrology. 
The existence of Egyptian Astrologers in the time of Joseph is beyond question, 
and in those days there is no doubt that Pharaoh had faith in his wise men, or 
astrologers, to interpret his dreams. 


vii 


viii PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 


“In our own Scriptures, both Old and New Testaments, we find abundant 
evidence of the knowledge of the Science of Astrology. Knowing as we do that 
the Chaldeans were the great teachers of historical times, and that their religion, 
science and art was Astrology, we can readily understand that Abram living in Ur 
of the Chaldees, Isaac married to a Chaldean wife, Jacob, who lived 21 years in 
Padam Aram, and his sons brought up by Chaldean mothers, were all thoroughly 
acquainted with the ideas and terms of Astrology. In those times, the twelve 
signs of the Zodiac were the twelve typical things, and so we find Joseph in his 
dream likening himself and his family to the Sun, Moon and twelve Stars (or 
Zodiac.) Likewise, Jacob blesses his twelve sons, and in those blessings we find a 
very striking analogy to the characteristics of the twelve signs of the Zodiac. 

“If we take the account written by Moses, an Initiate, of the Creation, Fall, 
Flood, etc., we find that it sets down for the people the traditions of the faith as 
received from Mesopotamian sources and couched in Astrological terms. For 
example: ‘And God said Let there be lights in the firmament of heaven . . . and 
let them be for signs, and for seasons and for days and for years.? (Gen i.) 
Again ‘And God made two great lights, the greater light to ru/e by day, and the 
lesser light to rule by night.’ (Gen. 1.) 

“‘ Later we find the Israelites soon after leaving Egypt being met by Balaam, a 
Chaldean of Pethor, an Astrologer and prophet in communication with the angel 
of the Lord who had been engaged by Balak the enemy of Israel to curse Israel. 
(Numbers xxii.) The Chaldean custom on such ceremonial occasions, was to build 
altars and sacrifice to the seven planefs. ‘Thus we find that Baalam three times 
built seven altars, on each of which he offered sacrifices and then prophesied of 
the Star which was to arise out of Jacob. 

“‘In the prophetical books we find frequent mention of the Star worship of 
Israel. Zephaniah speaks of ‘Them that worship the hosts of Heaven upon the 
housetops.’ Isaiah speaks of the multitude of Astrological consultations. 
Jeremiah speaks of the ‘cakes to the ‘queen of heaven.’ These prophets and 
others utter warnings against the use of the lower side of Astrology, but those 
who understood the higher teaching not only used it but defended it. Of these 
the accounts given in the books of Ezekiel and Daniel give wonderful examples. 
The Book of Daniel is a remarkable instance of the assimilation of Chaldean 
knowledge by a faithful Jew, and we find Daniel’s proficiency immediately 
attributed to God. ‘As for these four children God gave them skill in all 
learning and wisdom, and Daniel had understanding in all visions and dreams.’ 
In Daniel’s visions there are several references to Astrological ideas, and in the 
Apocalypse in the New Testament, we find many allusions to the Astrological 
visions of Daniel and Ezekiel. 

“In no part of the Christian Scriptures do we find Astrology mentioned 
disapprovingly, and nowhere is the study of Astrology forbidden though we do 
find warnings as to its proper use. On the contrary we find from the Song of 
Deborah and Barak a victory attributed to the courses of the Stars for in Judge v. 
we read ‘They fought from heaven ; the stars in their courses fought against 
Sisera.” 

“‘Coming to the New Testament, the story of the Magi, those of the Birth of 
Christ, and of the events accompanying the Crucifixion, show that the people of 
that time had a star lore which perfectly harmonised with their theology, and 
therefore could not fail to look for Astrological accompaniments to such great 


PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION ix 


events as the Birth, Life, and Death of the Messiah. Chaldean learning was alse 
diffused among the early Christians, and it has been said that the writer of the 
Apocalypse must have been an Astrologer of the Chaldean school, who used terms 
with which Asiatic Christians were familiar, and who could turn to the books of 
Ezekiel and Daniel for confirmation to convince his Hebrew readers. ‘The Book 
of Revelation which has been the greatest of all puzzles to theologians and divines 
has been said to be a great horoscope of the World’s Destiny and to contain 
within this vast horoscope the smaller horoscopes of the nations.” 

Long before the Christian era astrology was known, not only as a science but 
also as a religion. Zoroaster, the greatest legislator of the Magi or wise men of 
Chaldea was also an Astrologer. Zoroaster means a ‘Son of the Stars.’ Belus 
who reigned over Babylonia was for some time reputed to be the founder of the 
science of the stars, his wisdom in this direction being so great. There is now 
no doubt that Astrology was more studied and understood in Chaldea than in 
any other country in the world, and there is now abundant evidence that the 
Chaldeans were star or sun worshippers and believed in the spirits and intelli- 
gences ruling over the stars. Calisthenes who accompanied Alexander when he 
conquered Babylon found that astronomical calculations had been made for many 
thousands of years of the past dating as far back as the great Atlantean flood, 

In ancient Persia there were many celebrated astrologers whose fame still 
lingers, one of these Gjamasp was surnamed Al Hakim—the Wise. He was a 
brother of King Gustasp, and is said to have predicted the coming of the Messiah. 
Dr Thomas Hyde in his account of the famous Persian doctors writes of him as 
‘follows :—Of these, the sixth was Gjamasp, an Astrologer, who was counsellor to 
Hystespis. He is the author of a book entitled ‘Judicia Gjamaspis” in which 
is contained his judgment on the planetary conjunctions, and therein he gave 
notice that Jesus should appear; that Mohammed should be born; that the 
Magian religion should be abolished, etc. 

Major-general Sir —Thomas Malcolm, in his History of Persia writes :-— 
‘They (the Persians) study astronomy chiefly for the purpose of becoming skilled 
in Judicial Astrology ;—a science in which the whole nation from the monarch 
to the peasant has the greatest faith.’ 

From Egypt Astrology was carried into Greece. As early as the thirteenth 
century before the Christian era, the position of the stars with regard to the 
circles of the spheres was established with great exactness, and it has been said 
that during the century when the Egyptians were measuring and observing the 
heavens for astrological purposes, the Greeks were ruthless barbarians. 

One of the earliest and most famous of the Astrologers of Greece was 
Anaximander, the friend and disciple of Thales. . He was born 610 B.c. and 
introduced the sphere, sundials and geographical charts brought from Egypt. He 
taught that the fixed stars were centres of other Solar systems perhaps more 
extensive and glorious than our own. He also regarded the planets as the homes 
of great intelligences. 

Pliny tells us that Anaximander was an able astrologer and foretold the 
earthquake which overthrew Lacedzomon. 

Of Thales it is stated by Seneca, that he was an astrologer, and that 
foreseeing there would be a dearth in that region of the country, where olives 
were principally cultivated, bought them up and enriched himself at the expense 
of those who would not believe him. 


x PREFACE TO THE THIRD EDITION 


Anaxagoras, also an astrologer, who said that he preferred a grain of wisdom 
to heaps of gold, was preceptor to Socrates and Euripides and gave the greater 
part of his life to the study. Many fulfilled predictions are related of him. 

Pythagoras also practised Astrology ; Plato was learned in it, so also were 
Porphyry and many other intelligent Greeks. 

Proclus believed in it, and Hippocrates the father of the art of Medicine 
declared that the man who did not well understand Astrology was rather 
deserving to be called a fool than a physician. 

Coming down to the Roman empire we find a long list of great men who 
were firm believers in Astrology and amongst them are Propertius, Pliny, Galen, 
Macrobius, Virgil, Horace, Nigidius, Figulus, and Cicero. 

In Arabia Astrology flourished for many centuries and all the eminent men of 
the time appear to have been believers in Astrology. The sixth Caliph 
Mamoonorrasheed appears to have had many ancient works on Astrology 
translated into Arabic. ‘Then we have the famous Albumazar of Bulah, a pupil 
of Alkurdi a Jew who was a professor of Judicial Astrology at Bagdad. 

Amongst the great names of intelligent men who were renowned Arabian 
astrologers we find Messahala, Albategnius, Alfaganus, Hely, Holy Aben Rodoan 
and Alphero. No one can go through the histories of China, India, Siam, or 
Ceylon without being struck with the facts that Astrology has flourished in all 
ages before the materialistic period of our times. Even Dr. Brewster had to 
admit that in China from the days of King Fohi, about two thousand seven 
hundred and fifty two years before Christ, astronomy was solely studied for 
astrological calculations, and that their Emperors were chosen on account of their 
attainments in Celestial Philosophy. 

So far as Indian history is concerned we may go back three thousand one 
hundred and two years B.c., and the Tirvalore Tables, used solely for Astrological 
purposes. It is even stated that the religions of the Siamese and the Buddhists 
have been founded upon astrology. Coming down to our own times we find such 
a remarkable list of names of those who actually openly confessed their belief in 
astrology that it will probably be as well that a list is now given of more modern 
astrologers. Roger Bacon, Cardan, Nostrodamus, Tycho Brahe, Lord Napier, 
Kepler, Cornelius Agrippa, Valentine Naibod, Bishop Robert Hall, Sir Edward 
Kelly, Dryden, Sir George Wharton, Placidus de Titus, Sir Christopher Heydon, 
Geerge Wichell Astronomer Royal, Vincent Wing, William Lilly, Dr. Salmon, 
Flamstead, Le Duc de Volney, George Digby, Earl of Bristol, Elias Ashmole 
founder of the Ashmolean Museum, Culpeper, Milton, Dr. Dee, Dr. Starkey, 
Dr. Partridge, Dr. Moore, Sir Richard Steele, Colley Cibber, Guido Bonatus, 
Emerson, Worsdall, Sir Kenelm Digby, Sir Robert Holburn, Mr. Blake, Sir 
Thomas Gresham, Rt. Hon. W. Pitt, Wilson, Melancthon, Sir Matthew Hale, 
Lord Bacon, Archbishop Usher, Dr Richard Garnett of the British Museum and 
a great many others whose names may not be mentioned. Indeed there are 
people living to-day whose names would come as a great surprise to many, who are 
very earnest and loyal students of astrology, but from what has been said in this brief 
sketch it will be seen that if some devoted student with the time at his disposal 
could go through the world’s history it would be found that there has always been 
a universal belief in Astrology, and quite sufficient evidence to establish the truth 
of the statement that Astrology is in a word the history of the world. 

Azan Leo, 


DETAILED TABLE OF CONTENTS 


(The numbers refer to the pages) 


PAGE 
Prerace To First Epirion =. : . . : . v 
Reg ey pee Ts a ‘ é , , é ‘ Vii 
Introduction : i : : : ‘ , XVil 
CHAPTER | 
Tue Twertve Houses or roe Horoscope 
Diagrams representative of the four quarters of the day, snd of the 
‘Solar Chord’ at Dawn, Sunset, Noon and ainsnsai ', 85 4,4,5 
Kama, Manas, and Kaina-Manas ; : : 6 
The Nature af each of the Twelve Houses . . Fy 859,10 
CHAPTER II 
Tue Twetve SiGNs oF THE Zopiac : ‘ ‘ ; 1] 
Signs versus Constellations (_foorno/e) ; é : : 12 
The four triplicities. ‘The three qualities.. ‘The seven tendencies 14 
Table of Signs, Elements, Qualities and Polarities 16 
The Fiery Signs:— 17, 2, 17, f 18; the Watery Sinus 1B 
1G, W190, 34 205) the Airy Bits: le ee ay 4 Soa | 
23; the Earthy Signs: —ys 24, & 24, NY ‘ , 25 
Table of the active principles of each sign . . 2 26 
CHAPTER III 
Tue Luminarigs AND THE Pranets . . : , we 27 
‘Table of Signs, and Rulers : : , : ; 27 
The five senses as ruled by the planets. ‘ : ‘ 30 
Mars and taste, 30. Saturn and hearing, 32. Venus and touch, 
Jupiter and smell, 35. Mercury and sight, 36. Uranus 
and clairvoyance, 36. Neptune and psychometry . : 37 
CHAPTER IV 
Tue Aspxcrs ‘ : . 39 
Conjunction, 40. Parallel of declination : : 42 


Diagrams representative of the trine and the square : ; leh 2, 43 


xi 


xii CONTENTS 


PAGE 
Good and Evil Aspects. Why the square is malefic and the trine 
benefic) . : i : : ; 43 
The ‘orbs’ of the planets : 47 
The meaning of the planets when in  onjunction, 49 opposition 
or square, 543 semi-square or sesquiquadrate, 58; trine or 
sextile, 59 ; semi-sextile, quintile, quincunx, 62. The Moon’s 
application to or separation from any aspect 63 
Important Note on the respective values of the same aspect between 
two different pairs of planets ; ; ‘ : 66 
CHAPTER V 
Tuer Turee Centres: Sun, Moon, anp AscENDANT . : 5 68 
Importance of Sun, Moon and Ascendant contrasted : 68, 69,70 
The Influence of the Sun in the Twelve Signs. u ‘ ‘fe 
The influence of the Moon in the Twelve Signs . ; : 79 
Appearance as denoted by the Rising Sign 86 
Diagram of the Zodiacal Man, sigan the Part of the Body rated 
by each Sign : 4 p 89 
CuHaAptER VI 
Tue AscenDaNT or Risinc Sicn. ‘THe Firsr House . é go 


The Influence of each Sign as Ascendant:— 92, & 93, O 94, 

95 95, §, 96, MY 97, == 98, M_ 99, f 100, ¥$ 101, <3 102, 103 
Planets risingin the Ascendant: *# 105, HI ite h 106, Ms 106, 

g 107, © 108, $ 108, 9 109, D 109 
Description of Personal Appearance : 110 
Description of Personal a Pe as modified by planets rising 

in:— I12, § 113, IT 114, 95 116, de 118, 

119, M 121, f 122, Yh 12a fosoiag, Fs 126 


Cuapter VII 


Tue Ruuinc Pianer 129 
Birth-data of : —Gladstone, King Edward VIL, , Chamberlain, Balfour, 
Kaiser Wilhelm I1., Queen Wilhelmina of Holland, Tsar Nicholas, 
King George and Queen Mary, Victor Emanuel III of Italy, Franz 


Joseph of Austria, Alfonso XII. of Spain, Lord Rosebery : 129 
Influence of Solar Aspects to :—*# 131, fii £39, et ssp ia 

5 134, 2 134, % . . . 135 
The Ruler’s Position :—in Sins. 136; in Houses i : 137 


Cuaprer VIII 


Heatru ano THE Hyztec. Lenctu or Lire anp rue APHETA . : 138 
The Fylte i; : 140 
Disease as indicated by: ~ pisiny Sign, 141 ; ; Planets Rising : 142 


CONTENTS 


The Apheta and Anareta ° ° : . ° 
Houses versus Signs m ° ° . ° ° 
An Illustrative Horoscope ‘ : . ° 


CuHaptTer [X 


Tue Szconp Housz. Weary anp Finance, aND Herepirary Position 
Planets and Money ; : : ‘ 
The Part of Fortune. ; ; ; ° ‘ 


CHAPTER X 


Tut Turrp House. Breruren anpD Rexartives, SHortT Journeys, THE 
Minp . : ‘ 
Planets in the third 4s 158, Hi 159, h 159, 160, ¢ 160, 
@ 161, 9 161, § 161, ) : : 
The Sign on the Cusp : : : 


CuHaPTeR XI 


Tue Fourtu Housz. Environment, Home, Parents ; THE Enp oF Lire 
Planets in the fourth :—*# 166, HI 166, ae 166, oh We 3d 167, 
@) 168, 9 168, % 168, p ; 
Parentage . : 
An Illustrative Horoscope ; : : 


CuaptTer XII 


Tue Firrn House. Cuitpren, Enterprise, Specutations, Gains, Love 
AFFAIRS, ETC. : ‘ 7 : t : : 
Planets in the fifth:—%* 172, HI 172, h 173, ¥Y 173, 

3 174, © 174, 9 174, 9 175,) - ; . : 
The Sign on the Cusp . ‘ j : ; ‘ 
Children F : : , , . 


CuaprTer XIII 


Tue SixrH House. Sickness, Servants, Work, ETC. . ; : 
Planets in the sixth :—*# 178, Hi 178, h ee LTO ns 270; 
MG) BOO, 2. Ee0,, Oy be ty) : , 
Judging sickness ; : / ; ‘ ‘ 


CuHaPprer XIV 


Tue Seventh House. Marriacz, ParTnersHips, ENEMigs, etc. n 
The meaning of the word marriage or ‘union ’ 
The four factors concerned in all cases of union . 
Planets in the seventh :—*# 186, HI 186, h 186, ay 187, 3 187, 
OED fe OTE OR Pe 188, D : 
Women’s Marriages and Men’s Marriages 
Best time for consummation 
Planets as rulers of the seventh : 
Influence of eleventh house on marriage matters . 


Xill 
PAGE 


14.4. 
146 
150 


151 
154 
156 


158 


162 
163 


164 


169 
169 
171 


17% 


175 
176 
176 


178 


181 
182 


184 
18¢ 
185 


188 
190 
191 
192 
193 


Xiv CONTENTS 


PAGE 
CHAPTER XV 
Tue Ercuta Hovusz. Dearu, anp THE Dream ConsclousNgss . 195 
Planets in the eighth baie 197, Hi 197, h shia’ ish 3 198, 
© 198, 2 199 ¥ 199, ) . . 199 
An Illustrative Horoscope : : : . : 201 
CHAPTER XVI 
Tue Ninru Hovusg. Puitosopny anp TRAVEL 202 
Planets in the ninth :—*# 202, Hi a8 h 20% Y 203, 3 204, 
© 204, 2 204, ¥ 205, ) hte 
CuaPrer XVII 
Tre Mip-Heaven or Tentu House . . . ° a 207 
Action the child of thought and desire. ‘gar 
_ Planets in the tenth :—*? 209, HI 209, h nia Usa 19, 3 210, 

Ce) 211, Set b uO 211.) 4 ; : " 212 
Profession or Employment Bae : : 212 
Influence of any signs holding a majority ‘of the planets . . 213 
The planetary professions : gia : ° 214 
Employments denoted by Mercury’s aspects ee . . 215 

CuaptTerR XVIII 
Tue EveventH House. Frienps, Hopes anp WIsHES . ‘ 217 
Its connection with the seventh 217 
Planets in the eleventh :—'t? 218, HI aie h 218, Ti 219, 3 219, 

C210, Foe tO ey 2 eae) 5 ho Ay 
Indications of friendship or enmity in two ‘0 horoscopes : : 221 
Necessity for viewing the horoscope as a whole . . ° 224 
Seven distinct types of individuals in the world . ° . 224 

CHAPTER XIX 
Tue Tweitrra House. Tue ‘ House or Setr-Unpoing’ . ° 226 
The Cardinal, Succedent and Cadent Houses analysed 226 
Planets in the twelfth :—t*# 227, Hl 227, hk 228, Y 228, 3 

725, (2) 229, 9230, Oo 230, 9 : 230 
The relate values of Houses, Signs, oo Rulers of Signs 231 
A Table of the True Value sonieape to each House of the 

Horoscope : 231 


CHAPTER XX 


A COMPENDIUM OF PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS 232 
Neprune and iam) 233; h 233, Y 233, 3 234, © 234, - 

235, 9 235,) . ne eae 

Uranus and :— h 236, Y 237, is 230) © 238, Ny Deo . 239, ) 240 
SaTURN in:—% & TT 241, a SY ™ 242, =~ 1) 4. Rae 

oe HE 244 . : : 245 

» and:—V 245, d 247, © 248, 9 249, 8 251, ) 253 

Jurivsrin:— 8 OF 255,95 {) ty = 256,m f KW < 257, 258 


CONTENTS xv 


PAGE 


Jurirer and :— g 258, © 259, ? 261, ¥% 262, ) ; 264 
Mars in:— % 265, I op SL, 266, ny = sit mM F ¥3 268, 
os HK 269 
9» and :—®©) 270, ° 270, 8 271, ) ‘ ‘ ‘ 273 
Note on the Nature of Mars. : : 274 
Tue Sun in :— & 1195§}, etc. (see pp. 72 et sey.) 
» and :—*t?, Hi, etc. (see under Neprunz, Uranus, etc.) ; ) 292 
Vunus in :—7 6 TT 275,95 2 my 276, = mM tKV ue oo 278 
» and:—@ 278, § 279, ) 279 
Mercury in:— 8 II @ §Q np 281, <M tes 282 
» and:—t! 283, HI 283, h 283, ¥ 284, é 284, ) 
284, 2 285,) . 285 
Tut Moon in:—? & I @& a etc. (see pp. 79 et SEQ, "also pp. 
299, 291) 
» and :—@©) (see p. 292) 
Important Nore R&GARDING ASPECTS ‘ ‘ ° : 286 
CHAPTER XXI 
Conctupinc Remarks ON JupGMENT . : ; : : 287 
Modifying influence of Decanates : ‘ . ‘ 287 
The Polarities of the Sun and Moon, etc. ‘ 288 
The Individual and Personal Characters (see also PP. 30%, 307) ‘ 289 
‘Dhe ‘root of merit’). 290 


The Solar and Lunar Positions and Aspects (see pp. 72 to 85, and 

PP- 234, 236, 238, 240, 248, 253, 259, 264, 270, 273, 

278, 279, 284, 285, 292 respectively) 
The Disposition produced by the Moon in the Planetary Signs. 290 
The Relationship of the Moon to the Sun by Aspect : : 292 


CHAPTER XXII 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES: Illustrated by 
reference to the Nativity of the late King Edward VII. 294 
A Zodiacal Arrangement of the Horoscope ; ; 296 
The Nativity of the late King Edward VII. . 297 
ScHEME FoR THE DguingaTion oF a Nariviry : I.—The Ascendant 
299 II.—The Ruling Planet, 300 III.—The Ruler’s 
Position, 301 IV.—Rising Planets, 302 V.—Rising Planets 
in Signs of the Zodiac, 303 VI.—Individuality, 303 VII.— 
Personality, 307 VIII.—Mental Characteristics, 311 [X.— 
The Twelve Houses : i Activities, 315 ; ii Finance, 315 ; ili 
Travel, 317; iv Environment, 318; v Enterprise, 319 ; vi 
Sickness, 320; vii Marriage, 3213; viii Legacies, 322 ; 
ix Philosophy, 3233; x Profession, 324; xi Friends, 325 ; 
xil Occultism : 326 
SUMMARIES :—(a) Planets Ridus,. Setting, ‘Above or + Below, 427 ; (3) 
Planets in the Triplicities, 327; (c) Planetsin the Quadruplicities 328 
~ Tapuxation or Kinc Epwarp’s Horoscope ‘ : i 329 
A CenTILogvuy . ; ° ‘ ‘ : 331 


xvi TABLE OF THE ZODIACAL SIGNS 


THE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC 


NorTHERN opposite to SOUTHERN 
bo 1. P Aries (+ ¢. F.) (A. c -++) Libra eh wal 
‘= 2. % Taurus(— / E.) (W.f —) Scorpio m 8 §& 
oO 3. IY Gemini(+ m. A.) (F.m. +) Sagittarius f 9g & 
8 4. a Cancer (— ¢. W.) (E.c. —) Capricorn WS 10 = 
eee) Leos. (+ ZB) (A.f +) Aquarius sc ir 2 
om 6, ny Virgo (— m.E.) (W. m. —) Pisces H 12 3 
F., Fiery E., Earthy A., Airy W., Watery 
c., cardinal Si, fixed m., mutable 
++ positive — negative 
1, 2, 3 = Intellectual Trinity 7, 8, 9= Reproductive Trinity 
4, 5, 6= Maternal Trinity 10, 11,12=Serving Trinity 
Parts of the body ruled by the Signs 
1” Aries HEAD <= Libra LOINS AND KIDNEYS 
% Taurus NECK AND THROAT TL Scorpio | GENERATIVE SYSTEM 
Il Gemini aRMS AND LuNGS f Sagittarius THIGHS 
5 Cancer sTOMACH V8 Capricorn KNEES 
SK Leo HEART so Aquarius LEGS AND ANKLES 
ty Virgo BOWELS } Pisces FEET 
Cardinal Signs HEAD Fiery Signs viTairy 
Fixed. 4, TRUNK Earthy ,, | BONES AND FLESH 
Mutable ,, LIMBS Airy 4, BREATH 


Watery ,, BLOOD 


| Should there be found in this work technical expressions with which the 
reader 1s as yet unfamiliar, he should refer to the Comprehensive Glossary 
in Manual No. 7 (Shilling Series) entitled ‘ Horary Astrology.’| 


INTRODUCTION 


A LITTLE practice only is necessary to become proficient in casting 
horoscopes. The judgment of the map when cast, however, is an 
entirely different matter, and it may be safely stated that there are very 
few competent to judge a horoscope, although nearly every one is 
competent to make all the calculations necessary for that judgment, 
and while it is true that practice will in time bring a certain amount 
of proficiency, there will always be a certain number of horoscopes 
which will baffle the understanding of the student, and the beginner 
will sooner or later come to a dead wall, so to speak, which for a time 
bars all further progress. In all probability this will arise from lack 
of experience, or the failure to blend certain positions and aspects which 
no reference to text-books or former study will elucidate. 

This statement, that anyone can cast a horoscope but few can read 
it, at once marks the fundamental difference between the astronomer 
and the astrologer; the former can do all the work of observing, 
tabulating, calculating, etc., but appears to be quite unable to make 
a practical application of the observed phenomena. 

The secret of this great difference lies in the fact that while the one 
is careful to study the objective and external state of things, the other 
pays more attention to the subjective or internal conditions. Now both 
of these aspects of Nature demand due study, and the true scientist is 
he who possesses the faculties which enable him to appreciate this truth ; 
but to find these two qualifications in one person is, at our present stage 
of evolution, a most difficult task. It seems almost impossible to convert 
an astronomer into an astrologer ; for this reason,—that he uses the mind 
that is confined for its functioning to the concrete brain, and he is 
thus limited to the objective world for his information.,. This explains, 
then, the reason why comparatively few are able to judge a horoscope ; 
for the cause-seeking faculty needs to be developed in the astrologer, 


XVii 


XVill INTRODUCTION 


whilst the perceptive organs alone need to be well-developed in the 
astronomer. 

None save those who have well-developed reason coupled with 
clear perception and a good memory, can ever hope to become com- 
petent astrologers. The very name of the science suggests such 
a requirement, for Astrology means * the reason of the stars.’ Astron= 
star: Logos=reason. 

To those who really ¢himk, there is nothing in the least unreasonable 
in Astrology, but they must think for themselves and not allow others to 
think for them if they would find out where the reason lies. They must 
also be prepared to take a far wider view of life than those who are still 
bound by custom and the personal opinions of others. The why and 
wherefore must ever be uppermost in the mind, and not the lazy 
indifference which drifts on aimlessly and carelessly, trusting to fate, or 
what is so often miscalled Providence, to carry them safely through 
their difficulties. 


It will thus be seen that only those who are awakening to their 
responsibilities in life are likely to become interested in such a subject 
as Astrology, and it usually happens that the first step that is taken 
towards a study of the science is caused by an enquiry concerning the 
inequalities of life. The awakening soul prompts the question Why? 
and the mind is sent in search of an answer to the problem. Why am I 
here?—What have I come to this earth for?—Why are some persons born 
poor, others rich, some weak, others strong ?—asks the soul rising above the 
illusions it sees mirrored on every side. The mind then goes in 
search of the answers to these important questions. For a time it 
will find comfort in various ways, sometimes in philosophy or religion, 
but no answer comes that entirely satisfies, for the simple reason that 
the answer must eventually come from within the man himself. 

The Soul of every human being is immortal ; it is a fragment of the 
eternal Being Who is the spiritual essence at the root of all manifested 
life, therefore, without an actual beginning or ending. Each Soul in 
the far past began a pilgrimage through which it was destined to become 
a separate and fully self-conscious individuality. It has reached the 
present stage of evolution after many lives spent in various physical 
bodies, sowing and reaping for the purpose of experience and to become 
perfectly and fully individualised; so that instead of being at the mercy 


INTRODUCTION xix 


of circumstances in the future it may guide and direct its own evolution 
and, rising above the matter in which it has been ensouled, and using 
the various vehicles it has acquired, consciously and with set purpose, 
it may eventually transmute all external forces coming from the OnE 
Great Lire and use them for future development in the grand scheme 
of evolution that lies before the soul in its upward journey toward 
self-perfection. Then, possessed of all powers like unto the * Father in 
Heaven’ who sent it forth, it will become eventually like unto Himself, 
all-wise, all-powerful, and all-loving. Each horoscope marks a step in 
that glorious evolution, and by representing the character and environ- 
ment of the Soul shows the stage reached by the Ego in that particular 
birth. 

If the fact of reincarnation be doubted the following questions should 
be asked: Is it not more reasonable to suppose that a soul requires 
many earth lives in order to learn all that the earth has to teach, rather 
than to think that one earth life only is necessary to fit it for eternal dam- 
nation or everlasting bliss ? No person who has ever carefully pondered 
the matter, can see love or justice in causing a soul to be once born into 
a wretched, diseased and immoral family, where no opportunity is 
offered for spiritual development, and then condemning it to unceasing 
punishment for its unwise actions while in the body. Why should one 
soul be born of moral and pure parents, and another of evil and corrupt 
parents, if only ove life on earth is given itin which to grow and develop ? 

In no other system of thought is this problem so reasonably 
answered as in that known under the title of Astrology. The Sun, Moon, 
and planets are symbols conveying ideas to those minds able to appre- 
ciate what they mean. Thesymbols connected with Astrology constitute 
the most simple and beautiful imagery we can cenceive, and in 
them has been preserved from the beginning of our solar system to the 
present day the truth of man’s past andhis future. The Sun is the body 
of the Lord and ruler over the solar system, therefore not only the 
symbol of life and light, but the actual source of all vitality, heat and 
motion in the system of which it is the centre. The planets are the 
reflections of the seven spirits before the Throne, they are His messen- 
gers and the agents who carry out His will. The Zodiac is the medium 
through which are transmitted the vibrations coming from the Sun as 
centre and reflected, or modulated, by the planets. 

As each soul comes into the world the note which belongs to it is 


xx INTRODUCTION — 


struck upon the celestial harp, and the heavens reverberate with its sound. 
Not a soul is born but an angel or Deva ministers to its birth, and just 
as no sparrow falleth to the ground without the Father in Heaven 
knowing it, so doth the Father know the life and manifestation of each 
individual. Each soul is attracted unto its appointed place, and each has 
its own special mission to fulfiland its own particular lesson to learn; all 
souls are one in essence, fragments of the great Soul; in manifestation all 
souls are different, some are older in manifestation, some are younger, 
some have grosser and others finer bodies or vehicles, each taking the 
one best suited for the work in hand. . 

Each soul manifests through a body of activity, or Physical Body; 
a body of feeling and emotion or Astral Body ; and a thought or Mental 
Body. These three bodies St Paul has mentioned in 1 Cor. xv. 

The nativity indicates what we have sown in the past and how we 
shall reap what we havesown. It is a chart which should be used as 
a guide in life. In it are concealed our capabilities, and our character, 
therefore our destiny. There is no study so interesting, instructive 
or useful as this, to those who are blending the objective with the 
subjective, or to those who would set their feet upon the path of the 
occultist or mystic, for it dispels all doubts with regard to the evolution 
of the soul and helps us more easily than any other known method to a 
scientific comprehension of ourselves and others. 

Every student of Astrology should be thoroughly familiar with its 
symbology, for in the symbology we have all the required aid to help the 
intuition. Having committed to memory the opinions of the various 
writers upon the subject, and fully grasped the general meaning of each 
symbol, the student would do well to concentrate the mind as often as 
possible upon one of the symbols, trying to extract all the knowledge he 
can from the thought currents originally set in motion connected with 
that symbol; then gradually light will come into the mind, and more 
will be known in this way than can ever be ebtained from books. 

The first map for a student to study should be Ais own. 


HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


CHAPTER I 
‘THE TweELtve Houses or THE Horoscope 


Tue earth revolving upon its own axis once in twenty-four hours causes 
the sun to be viewed from the earth in various positions from sunrise ta 
sunset; and in order to obtain a clear conception of the twelve houses it 
will be convenient to treat the matter, for the moment, as though the 
earth were the centre instead of the sun, although we know very well 
that the Sun is really the centre of our planetary system. 


Diacram No. 1 
Noon 


Du VN 


MIpNIGHT 


2 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


Adopting this course of regarding the earth as the centre for our 
present purpose, we will imagine the sun at daybreak rising on the 
eastern horizon, or, as we say, upon the Ascendant; with the earth’s 
revolution, as the day wears on, at noon the sun willarrive at the zenith 
or what is called the Mid-heaven; and as the earth continues to revolve 
the sun will be carried to the western horizon at sunset. These three 
important positions in apparent time and space are produced by thie sun’s 
rising, culminating, and setting, and they mark the three cardinal points 
through which pass the cusps of the first, tenth and seventh houses. 
(See fuller explanation given in pp. 5 to 10 of What is a Horoscope ?) 

At midnight the sun will be directly under the earth at the furthest or 
lowest cardinal point, the whole making the four cardinal points or ‘angles,’ 
as they are termed. These four successive positions of the Sun, making 
the four quarters of the day, are shownin Diagram 1 ; they are ready due, 


Diacram No. 2 DAWN 


East Point 
or 
ASCENDANT 


Cusp of = § 
First House %. 


THE IWELVECHOUSES OF THE: 'HOROSCOPE 3 


of course, to the rotation of the earth on its axis in the direction indicated 
by the arrow. Out of these angles all the other divisions are obtained. 

When the sun rises, the chord of the solar arc will pass through the 
earth to what is known as the ‘cusp’ of the seventh house or western 
angle. The solarrays will also form a triangulum, and each side of this 
triangle will measure 120° of the circle, which is a third of the whole 360°. 
The Divine Archer takes his bow and shoots: what we have termed the 
‘chord’ may be called His arrow of light and the ‘triangulum’ the bent 
string of His bow, quivering with the impulse. The rays ofthis triangle 
will pass over and under the earth, the lower ray marking off the cusp 
of the fifth division or the Fifth House, and the upper the ninth division 
or Ninth House, as illustrated in Diagram No. 2, in which roman 
numerals indicate the house cusps. 


Each of the cardinal points will, in a similar way, be connected with 
the other divisions, the two ‘chords’ together forming the Mundane 


Diacram No 3. SUNSET 


VW est Point 
or 
DegsceENDANT 


| Cusp of 
# Seventh House 


4 HOW TO JUDGE ‘A NATIVITY 


Cross which squares the circle, forming an aspect of opposition and 
discord, whereas each triangle forms the trine, an aspect of peace and 
harmony. 

The divisions formed from the First House or AScENDANT are of the 
nature of the Fiery triplicity, the first house being of the nature of the 
vital heat, the fifth the generative fire, the ninth the mental or spiritual 
fire. The whole key to the nature of the twelve houses and indeed to 
the twelve signs as well, is beautifully expressed in this symbology. 

At noon the solar chord passes directly to the northern angle, the 
cusp of the fourth house, and the triangle is formed in the second and 
sixth houses. This triangle is related to the Earthy triplicity, denoting 
hereditary honour, fame, worldly position, finance and service (Diagram 4). 

The chord from the western angle unites with the chord from the 
ascendant and the triangle is formed in the third and eleventh houses. 


South Point or Mip-Heaven, Cusp of ‘Tenth House 


Diagram No 4. NOON 


- ) tHE PWELVE (HOUSES OF (THE HOROSCOPE 5 


This angle is of the nature of the airy triplicity, the seventh house 
denoting relation, such as marriage and partnership, brethren and kindred, 
friends and acquaintances. (See Diagram 3, facing Diagram 2.) 

The fourth angle returns the chord to the mid-heaven, and the 
triangles are formed in the eighth and twelfth houses. This triangle is 
of the nature of the Watery triplicity, the fourth house denoting the 
psychic conditions, and that which has to do with the end of life, also 
death and the withdrawal from the material world. (See Diagram 5.) 


It will be seen by the foregoing that the whole of the twelve houses 
have a symbolical basis, the succedent and cadent houses having their 
root in the cross of the four angles, representing what are known in the 
East as the three ‘Gunas’—Tamas, Rajas, and Sattva—interpreted as 
Stability, Activity and Rhythm respectively. If these four diagrams are 


Diacram No. 5. MIDNIGHT 


North Point or Navir, Cusp of Fourth House 


6 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


carefully traced or copied out on thin tracing paper and then superposed, 
the manner in which this cross is formed, and the inter-relationship of 
the Twelve Houses, will be shown ina very striking manner. 


Every nation in the past has held the cross in the highest reverence. 
It is the geometrical basis of religious symbolism in connection with all 
the great world saviours. On the cross of matter spirit is crucified.* 
The cross in motion forms a wheel, or circle, called the Svastika; from 
the centre of the cross the sacred fire or Fohat crosses the circle 
horizontally and vertically, like two lines of flame. The Sun at the 
centre of the solar system represents the spiritual point in the universe 
to which all humanity is being drawn, the denser matter, or the physical, 
being farthest removed as it circles round the Sun. But regarding the 
earth as the centre for astrological purposes, humanity is shown as 
chained to the cross of matter until the spirit of the Christ is born 
within, which entirely reverses the spheres. 

To understand the mysteries hidden behind astrological symbology, 
not only purity of life but great depth of thought is required, for in it is 
concealed the history of the races of this globe, and in fact the whole 
history of our earth as a planet; but for the purpose of more clearly 
understanding the nature of the twelve houses we may see in its 
geometrical symbology three great activities connected with human 
destiny, aS we wiil now explain. 

Kama, Kama-Manas, and Manas are three Sanskrit words which 
denote the character of the three angles connected with the first, tenth 
and sever.th houses. 

Kama presides over the first house or ascendant, being concerned 
with the birth of the animal man, his desire nature, love of life and 
physical conditions. 

Kama-Manas, presiding over the tenth house or meridian, denotes 
the blending of the mind with the desire nature, the animal with the 
god, thus representing the animal-human soul. 


* In mystic writings, Enoch, the representative of the spiritual and physical or 
dual nature in man, is the centre of the astronomical cross: at the upper point or 
apex of the triangle is the Eagle, at the base of the lower angle on the left stands 
the Lion and on the right the Bull, these being the four fixed signs <>, M_, , U- 


THE TWELVE HOUSES OF THE HOROSCOPE 7 


Manas, ruling over the seventh house, denotes the pure mind or 
reason and the clear intellect of the human soul. 
The first angle, corresponding to sunrise, suggests spirit, 
life and force made subject to matter, the circle under the 
cross; consciousness blinded by matter. 
The second angle, corresponding to the culmination of 
the Sun upon the meridian, suggests the native balanced 
half way between spirit and matter, neither wholly one or the 
other, the cross over the ha/f circle; self-consciousness. 
The third angle, corresponding to the setting of the Sun, 
denotes the triumph of the spirit over matter, the union of 
the life of the separated one with the consciousness of the 
spirit, the circle over the cross ; super-consciousness. 
The fourth angle is the great mystery, the occult centre in which all 
the forces are gathered together for work in the unseen worlds. 


From each of these angles the other houses receive their value, the 
cardinal points denoting the root of the life to be expressed. . 

The AscenpantT or First House shows the quality of the life forces, 
the material brought to the front, so to speak. The personality with 
the desires are shown by this house. The Fifth House will find 
its expression through the stream of natural fire coming from the first, 
and so governs offspring, enterprise and emotional impulses. The Ninth 
House shows the life forces running upward toward the highest thought 
of which the nature is capable, and signifies all matters connected with 
science, philosophy and religion. From the idea of the mind being 
able to transmit itself away from the brain limitation this has come to 
be the house of travel, dreams, and metaphysics, also of thought- 
transference, etc. 

The Tenth House or Mip-HEaven, or Upper Meridian, the apex of 
the earthy triangle, denotes the fame and honour and worldly status of 
the native, the parentage and hereditary tendencies, and governs all 
matters connected with profession, business, employment, and worldly 
occupation. The Second House shows the outcome of the labour or 
profession in financial advantage, remuneration and monetary condition 
generally. The Sixth House shows the service required, and governs 
all matters connected with servants and helpers and those who are 
often inferiors. It is the house of employment and ceremonial magic. 


8 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


The Seventh House or Descenpant denotes relation. All partner- 
ships and unions of every kind are shown by this house, and thus it 
is the house of marriage, and of the Individuality. The Third 
House denotes relatives and kindred arising from unions, and also the 
expression through the brain of the union with the subjective and 
objective mind. It has also come to have some relation to short journeys, 
owing to its connection with the concrete or brain mind, which cannot 
travel far from the objects with which it is connected. The Eleventh 
House denotes the friends and acquaintances arising from unions, etc. 
Hopes and wishes are also indicated by this house. 

The Fourth House, or Napir, or Lower Meridian, denotes the 
environment, the life of the householder, also hidden and secret matters 
either connected with parentage or domestic affairs, and shows the 
conditions at the close of life. The Eighth House denotes death, and 
all matters connected with dissolution, and indicates the nature of the 
death the native will meet, and all expectations connected with the death of 
others; also re-generation or re-birth, or the raising of any faculty signified 
-to a ‘higher octave.’ The Twelfth House is the house of confinement, 
or matters that, having their root in the fourth, spring out of parentage, 
inheritance and unseen affairs connected with the inner or psychic life ; it 
is therefore called the house of occultism and (physical) *self-undoing.’ 

The Cardinal or ‘Angular’ houses or angles show all things that 
must be expressed outwardly, such as physical matters connected with 
the external life; (Rajas—activity). The Fixed or ‘Succedent,’ ze., 
second, fifth, eighth and eleventh houses, indicate matters connected with 
the feelings and emotions, not yet ripe for physical expression, but 
maturing for future development; (Zamas—stability). The Mutable or 
*Cadent,’ z.¢., third, sixth, ninth and twelfth, show all matters latent in 
the mind and affairs brought over from past lives and not yet ready for 
final expression in the physical world; (Sattva—rhythm). 

In the reverse order of the above, the Cadent, Succedent and 
Cardinal divisions may be said to represent thought, feeling and action, 
or spirit, soul and body. 

The houses to the left of the meridian are called ovzental, easterly or 
rising; those on the right are called occidental or descending. They 
represent respectively the objective and subjective. The six houses 
above the horizon, 7th to 12th, correspond to the ‘life’ side of the 
universe: the six below, 1st to 6th, correspond to its ‘form’ side. 


THE TWELVE: HOUSES) OF THE \HOROSCOPE 9 


Having partially explained the rationale of the twelve divisions, 
each house will now be seen to have a definite meaning, out of which a 
greater number of minor influences will arise. 

The following is the general nature of each house :— 


I. First House.—Personality, natural disposition, worldly outlook generally. 
Physical experiences as obtained through the five senses. ‘The parts of the body 
denoted are the Aead and face. 

II. Second House—Finance, monetary prospects. Desires caused by tenth- 
house influence affecting moral growth. ‘The parts of the body denoted are the 
throat and ears. 

Ill. Third House-—Relatives and kindred, travelling, intellect derived 
from education and study, and minor impressions made upon the physical 
brain. The parts of the body denoted are the neck, arms and shoulders and the 
lungs. 

IV. Fourth House—Hereditary tendencies; home and domestic life; 
parentage, environment, and the general state of things at the close of life. ‘The 
parts of the body denoted are the breasts, stomach and digestive organs. 

V. Fifth House.—Offspring ; generative powers, sensations and pleasurable 
emotions arising from the senses, worldly enterprise and energy. ‘The parts of 
the body denoted are the (vis, heart and back. 

VI. Sixth House—Service and attachments arising from the expression of 
the tenth house, therefore servants and inferiors in social rank. ‘This house also 
denotes sickness arising from worry and anxiety. It is also the house of 
phenomenal magic arising from the powers of the southern angle. ‘The parts of 
the body denoted are the dowels and solar plexus. 

VII. Seventh House-—Unions, marriage, partnerships, individual character 
and humane tendencies. ‘The parts of the body denoted are the veins and 
kidneys. 

VIII. Eighth House-—Death, all matters pertaining to legacies or affairs 
connected with death. It is also what is termed an occult house, owing to its 
relation to the fourth, which denotes the psychic tendencies. ‘The parts of the 
body denoted are the secret parts and the generative system. 

IX. Ninth House.—Higher mentality, scientific, philosophic and religious 
tendencies. It also denotes long journeys, dreams and the image-making power. 
The parts of the body denoted are the thighs and hams. 

X. Tenth House.—Profession, business ability, fame, honour and material 
reputation. All worldly activities and moral responsibilities are shown by this 
house. ‘The parts of the body denoted are the kmees. 

XI. Eleventh House.—F¥riends, acquaintances, hopes, wishes and aspirations. 
The parts of the body denoted are the /egs and ankées. 

XII. Twelfth House—Occult tendencies. Its connection with the fourth 
house shows the psychic thought inheritance from the past and the result as either 
joy or sorrow. ‘This may be said to be the most critical house of the twelve. 
The parts of the body denoted are the feet and ‘oes. 


These twelve houses or divisions are like spokes of a great wheel 
running from the hub at the centre, which represents the nucleus of the 


Lo HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


experiences gained from each of the twelve houses. The nature of the 
particular experience will be shown by the sign of the zodiac occupying 
each house, and the quality of these signs we will study in the next 
chapter; but the nature of each house should be understood apart from 
the signs, and then it will not be difficult to comprehend what follows. 
When the mind has retained a clear picture of the nature of each 
house the student may endeavour to imagine a line running from each 
of the twelve divisions or houses to the centre of the map, endeavouring 
to think of the native as remaining in the centre with all these forces 
playing around him, with a natural tendency always to be drawn more 
toward the first house and grasp at this spoke of the wheel more than any 
of the others, while at the same time being drawn in other directions and 
influenced by the outside conditions affecting each spoke of the great wheel. 


It must be understood that the manner of describing the formation 
of the Twelve Houses which has been adopted in this chapter is 
symbolical or figurative. It has been chosen because the Sun exerts a 
special influence when at each of the four angles of the heavens related 
to the four quarters of the day, an influence specially related to that of 
the houses concerned. But the Twelve Houses are always simultaneously 
present, and exert their several influences according to the signs and 
planets which occupy them, whatever may be the hour of the day or 
night, no matter whether the Sun is upon an angle or not, though of 
course the presence of the Sun in any house will accentuate the influence 
of that house. 

It should also be thoroughly grasped that there exists the most 
intimate correspondence between the signs and the houses, between 
Aries and the First House, Taurus and the Second House, and so on. 
Hence the influence of a planet in Aries will correspond to that of the 
same planet in the First House—will correspond to it, though it will not 
be exactly the same. Perhaps ahint as to the difference may be given 
in the suggestion that the houses relate to physical matter, and the signs 
to astral matter. But it must be kept in mind that the influence of the 
signs is greater than that of the houses, and that the former will 
overbear the latter. 

Thus spring ‘corresponds’ to sunrise, for it is the dawn of the 
year, even as sunrise is the dawn of the day. But there are many days 
during the year. 


CHAPIER’ II 
Tue TweEtve SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC 


In the previous chapter we were concerned with the twelve mundane 
houses, or the twelve equal divisions of the circle of observation, an 
imaginary circle drawn round the earth from East to West and passing 
overhead and underfoot through the zenith and the nadir, the observer 
being in the centre.* We shall now proceed to consider the twelve 
signs of the zodiac. The word zodiac means a group of animals, and 
the twelve signs are really so many types of beings, symbolised in 
various ways among various nations. 

We have now to consider the movement of the earth from the 
standpoint of the sun as centre; that is, we have to regard the annual 
revolution of the earth 7” zfs orbit round the sun, whereas in our first 
chapter we merely considered the rotation of the earth on its axis, by 
which movement the Sun appears to pass round the earth once daily. 

Now the earth completes its circuit round the Sun in one year, or 
twelve months; and hence the space passed through by the earth in one 
month—that is, one-twelfth of the circle—is analogous to one of the 
Mundane Houses (in fact there is an exact correspondence between 
them, as has been said already). These twelve divisions are called 
the Twelve Signs of the Zodiac; so we can see that practically the 
Zodiac is really the orbit of the Earth, as explained in Chapter XII of 
Casting the Horoscope. But as we are obliged to view everything from 
the Earth, we have to consider how this will appear from our standpoint. 
This is fully explained in the first chapters of the book just referred to, 
but it may be briefly put as follows :— 

As the earth pursues its yearly course round the sun, an observer 

* 'This description of the mode of reckoning the twelve houses requires some 
qualification, it is true, but it would lead us too far from our present purpose to 
go into the matter fully here ; it is thoroughly explained in the second book of 
this series, Casting the Horoscope. 


Iz 


12 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


on our globe seems to see the sun changing its place among the stars 
to the rate of about 1° per day, and thus describing one complete circle 
in the year. Now itis this circle of the ecliptic, or the sun’s apparent 
path round the earth, which is what the western astrologer means when 
he speaks of the zodiac. It is divided into twelve equal parts, the 
signs of the zodiac, which correspond as just stated to the twelve 
mundane houses; the first sign to the first house, the second sign to 
the second house, and soon. ‘The zodiac commences at that point at 
which the Sun crosses the equator in its northern path, which it does 
about March 21st each year.* 

The Twelve Houses of the Horoscope govern the physical frame- 
work, and the fate connected with environment; that which may be 
overcome by the inherent will of the native. The Twelve Signs of the 
Zodiac are the covering of the twelve houses and give the colouring 
and quality to the twelve divisions of the horoscope, being more related 
to the psychic and inner nature. Their relation to each other may be 
understood in this way: if we think of the fouses as transparent 
vessels, each having its own shape and pattern according as it is 
angular, succedent or cadent, oriental or occidental, above the horizon 
or below,—then the szgzs will supply the contents of such vessel, giving 
a special substance, colour and quality to each house. 

Everywhere throughout Nature there is analogy, or rather, a 
reflection of attributes, from that which is above to that which is 
below—As above So below runs the Hermetic axiom. Thus we find 


* The signs of the zodiac must not be confused with the constellations of the 
zodiac. ‘The constellations are groups of fixed stars, the twelve central groups 
being called by the same names as the twelve signs, although they do not cover 
the same areas of the heavens. The Hindus and some other oriental nations 
work by these constellations, but the western astrologer always calculates im terms 
of the signs, and when he speaks of ‘the zodiac’ he always means the ecliptic or Sun’s 
path. In the Tetrabiblos of Claudius Ptolemy, (Ashmand’s translation, published 
1822, 1896) we read on page 32 : ‘The beginning of the whole zodiacal circle 

. is... the sign Aries which commences at the Vernal Equinox,’ and the 
translator goes on to say :—‘ This shows the futility of the objection raised 
against Astrology, that the signs have changed and are changing places. It is 
clear from this sentence that Ptolemy ascribes to the 30 degrees after the vernal 
equinox, that influence which he has herein mentioned to belong to Aries ; 
to the next 30 degrees, the influence herein said to belong to Taurus; and so of 
the rest of the Zodiac ... Ptolemy himself seems to have foreseen this 
groundless cig of the aden! and has written, in the 25th chapter of this 
book, what ought completely to have prevented 


THE TWELVE SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC 13 


the division of the twelve signs into the three primary qualities, 
er quadruplicities, has its correspondence in the twelve houses, the 
Cardinal or movable signs corresponding to the angles, the Fixed 
signs to the succedent houses, while the Mutable or common signs will 
be similar in nature to the cadent houses. Again the four triplicities 
correspond to the four angles, while the four quarters of the day, dawn, 
noon, sunset and midnight, have their similitude in the four seasons, 
Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter. The fiery signs are related to 
spring by Aries, the middle of summer by Leo, and the end of autumn 
by Sagittarius; the beginning of summer is signified by the watery 
sign Cancer, the middle of autumn by Scorpio, and the end of winter by 
Pisces; the commencement of autumn by the airy sign Libra, the 
middle of winter by Aquarius, and the end of spring by Gemini; the 
entrance of winter by the earthy sign Capricorn, the middle of spring by 
Taurus, and the end of summer by Virgo.* 

The signs, like the houses, also govern the various parts of the body, 
as follows: Aries, head and face; Taurus, throat and ears; Gemini, 
neck, arms, shoulders and lungs; Cancer, breast and stomach ; Leo, heart 
and back; Virgo, bowels, liver and pancreas; Libra, groin and kidneys; 
Scorpio, secret parts; Sagittarius, thighs; Capricorn, knees; Aquarius, 
ankles; Pisces, feet. 

The zodiac is also divided into thirty-six decans or decanates, each 
sign containing three decanates. But these must be considered later, 
for it will be first necessary to understand the nature of each of the 
twelve signs before we can comprehend their parts. 


Taking the circle of the twelve signs and dividing them into angles 
or triplicities in a similar manner to that adopted in the last chapter, 
we shall find a deeper meaning attached to each sign than has hitherto 
been explained by astrological writers. 

The main classes into which we shall divide the twelve signs will 
comprise the ‘triplicity’ and ‘quality,’ uniting as far as possible the 
quality belonging to each triplicity. In each of the four triplicities or 
trigons the three qualities are harmoniously blended, and hitherto no 
clear explanation has been given as to the nature of either triplicity or 
quality ; and yet upon acorrect understanding of these factors rests the 
fundamental basis of Natal Astrology. 


* ‘These are for the northern hemisphere. 


14 HOW TO JUDGE ‘A NATIVITY 


The four triplicities are Fire, Air, Water and Earth—Spirit, Space, 
Time and Matter—and in this order we shall study them. 

The three qualities are Cardinal or movable, Fixed, and Mutable or 
common. 

These seven tendencies or powers are each governed by a lord, angel 
or Deva. 

The four triplicities govern the four castes. They are also the 
indicators of the force, active and energetic, represented by the fiery 
signs; the quality of solidity and stability denoted by the earthy signs; 
powers of extension and expansion indicated by the airy signs: and 
finally the plasticity and mobility shown by the watery signs. 

The three qualities or quadruplicities, cardinal, fixed and mutable, 
represent what are known by the Hindus as Rajas (activity), Tamas 
(stability) and Sattva (rhythm). They may be likened to the three 
phrenological temperaments, the motive, the vital, and the mental.* 

These three qualities in terms of consciousness may be described as 
consciousness in general, instinctual consciousness, and self-conscious- 
ness; or again as activity (Rajas, cardinal), stability or will (Tamas, 
fixed), and wisdom (Sattva, mutable). ; 


There are also three modes of motion that may be compared with 
the three qualities and three groups of signs: Translation, Rotation and 
Vibration. Of these, translatory motion means movement from one place 
to another, but the real idea underlying it is that the motion is continually 
tending to go onward without stopping, as indicated by Newton’s law of 
motion; and this pairs off with Rajas and the cardinal or movable signs. 
Rotary or vortical motion is the most stable of the three and compares 
with Tamas and fixed signs. Vibration, of course, is movement to and 
fro, like a pendulum or clarionet reed; Sattva, rhythm, mutable signs. 


* The phrenological ‘ temperaments’ are quoted by way of a guide as to what 
is meant, since the other words will convey little meaning to the reader at present. 
But they should not be taken in too rigid a sense, since different writers apply 
these terms somewhat differently. In fact, it would appear that some 
phrenologists, studying humanity from the ‘life’ side, see the three gua/ities in 
manifestation, and name them : others, studying humanity from the ‘ form” side, 
see the four elements represented, and name them. Unfortunately the latter 
class use the same terms as the former, plus a fourth; and consequently, since 
each class is unconsciously viewing mankind from a different standpoint, consider- 
able confusion arises. Atleast, this would seem to be the explanation of the 
discrepancies that prevail. 


THEVEWELVE SIGNS) OF (THE / ZODIAC 15 


The Cardinal signs govern the head as a centre of consciousness in 
the same manner as the angles. They divide the circle of the zodiac 
into four quarters, answering to the four quadrants of the horoscope. 
Their chief characteristic is activity, which shows out in any department 
of life to which it may be directed, physical, emotional or intellectual. 
In each of these directions they are signs of external contact, bringing 
the native into continual touch with the outer world, and wice versé, 
directing constant impacts from the environment upon the native. They 
bring the greatest amount of outward experience; they are the most 
diffuse and the least concentrated. In a way their influence may be 
regarded as continually passing from angle to angle or from cardinal 
point to cardinal point, across the four fields of their unceasing motion. 

The Fixed signs are associated with the heart and desire. They 
contain the same amount of motion as the former signs, but tend to 
gather it into a fixed centre, and so make less outward show. Inertia 
and stability characterise them. They bring experiences evolving out 
of themselves, repetitions of the same conditions taking place over and 
over again until turned outward by the movable signs or modified and 
harmonised by the common. 

The Mutable or common signs are associated in the animal body with 
limbs, lungs, and bowels. Just as vibratory motion passes from one 
point to another and back again, linking together the two extremes of 
its motion, so these signs stand for everything whether in the body or 
in consciousness that is intermediate between the head or intellect and 
the heart or will. They correspond, as we have seen, to cadent houses, 
which stand for means of communication, servants, agents, journeys, and 
for other matters in which the idea of an influence uniting two extremes 
can be plainly discerned. They are dual in nature and fluctuating in 
character, as are the men that are born of them. 

These three qualities, operating through three groups of signs, 
correspond to the three phases of man’s own being: will in motion, or 
action; feeling, emotion, passion, intuition, or instinct ; and thought or 
reason. But this correspondence must not be applied in too hard and 
fast a manner, for each quality can operate on each plane. Thus we 
have the slow-moving will, the extremely active will, and the balanced 
or harmonised will ; and so with the other two classes, the feelings and 
the thoughts. 

The student will find it an interesting task to trace this symbology 


56 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


out in planetary and zodiacal positions. For instance, taking the Sun 
as will, its position in fixed, cardinal, or mutable signs indicates the 
three types just mentioned, and there is a good and a bad interpretation 
of each. Then the Moon may be taken as an indicator of the feelings, 
which would have three corresponding classes, each with a good and a 
bad side. Finally, the Ascendant may be taken as signifying the type of 
mental activity most natural to the body through which the soul acts 
while functioning in this world; and here would be the same three 
modes, according to the sign rising. 


TaBLE OF Houses, ELEMENTS, QUALITIES AND POLARITIES 


House Sign Symbol Element Quality Polarity 
1, ARIES m” Fire Cardinal or movable Male 
2, ‘Taurus 8 Earth Fixed Female 
3. GEMINI at Air Mutable or common Male 
4, CANCER ere) Water Cardinal or movable Female 
5. Lo NX Fire Fixed Male 
6. Virco my Earth Mutable or common Female 
7, Lipra a Air Cardinal or movable Male 
8. Scorpio ™ Water Fixed Female 
g. Sacirrarius f Fire Mutable or common Male 
ro, Capricorn y§ » Earth Cardinal or movable Female 
11. AQUARIUS 233 Air Fixed Male 
12... . Pisces v4 Water Mutable or common Female 


The column here for convenience headed Polarity refers to the 
division of the signs into two groups. The odd signs are all positive 
male day signs, and the even are negative female night signs. They 
refer to the duality shown everywhere in nature. Thus the words 
positive, male, and day convey precisely the same idea only expressed 
differently, and refer to the force or life side of things; while the words 
negative, female, and night signify the matter or form side. 


We will now consider the signs separately, taking them in groups 
as just described. : 


THE FIERY SIGNS 
I. ARIES, THE RAM LIL 
First sign of the zodiac; first fiery sign, first cardinal sign 


This sign represents undifferentiated consciousness. It is a chaotic 
and unorganised sign, in which impulse, spontaneity, and instinctiveness 
are marked features. Its vibrations are the keenest and most rapid, 
but without what may be called definite purpose, except towards 
impulsiveness and disruption. It signifies explosiveness, extravagance, 
and all kinds of excess. Its influence is more directly connected with 
the animal kingdom, in which life is full and without the directive 
power of fully awakened self-consciousness. It is a sign of force, 
combat, strength, energy and vigour. Its tendencies are always 
diffusive, periphrastic, superabundant, changeful and digressive. Its 
natives are enthusiastic, pioneering, ambitious, militant, enterprising, 
independent, assertive, and self-willed. The influence of Aries needs 
the steadying and controlling power of the fixed signs in order to make 
it practical and bring it within bounds. When blended in this way it is 
greatly improved. When combined with the common signs it is less 
practical and methodical than with the fixed but is very rapid, compre- 
hensive, and subtle. Its most distinguising characteristic is aefiviy, 
with a desire to be at the head, and to command. It is the sign of 
ambition, and projective energy. 


V. LEO, THE LION V. 
Fifth sign of the zodiac; second fiery sign, second fixed sign 
This is the sign of the central will, the inner consciousness, beyond 
the brain mind. The life forces of the fiery triplicity starting in Aries 


are in this sign matured, directed, and controlled, and the chaos and 


disruption of the life energies brought into more harmony and order. 
B 17 


18 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


Stability of the life currents, and the transmutation of consciousness 
from head to heart, is shown in this sign; the work of nourishing, pre- 
serving and sustaining being one of the chief Leo characteristics. 
This is the sign of power, vitality and organising ability. It is the 
principal focus of the Prana or Solar Breath, hence gives the greatest 
stability of life and more ‘Vril’ or Vim than any other sign. 

In contrasting the two fiery signs, Aries is the centre of heat and 
the creative forces, and Leo that of vitality and generation. Its most 
distinguishing characteristic is the desire to give, or to rule, with a 
fondness for lavish outlay, and the instinct of /oyalty. It is the sign of 
organisation, and concentrative energy. 


IX. SAGITTARIUS, THE ARCHER IX, 
Ninth sign of the zodiac; third fiery sign; third common sign 

This is pictorially represented by a man who is half horse shooting 
an arrow from his bow. This sign suggests the passage of conscious- 
ness from one state to another. It is a sign of vibration, transmutation, 
and interchange, on any plane to which its energies may be directed ; 
and all the activities tabulated in the books as belonging to this sign 
and its corresponding house may easily be interpreted by applying this 
method. The diffusion and differentiation of Aries are unified and 
centralised in Leo, and transmuted into mental light in Sagittarius. 
Leo is the fifth zodiacal sign, and oriental works describe five ‘Life 
Breaths’ or currents of vitality flowing through the body, each one 
associated with a planet. Sagittarius is the ninth sign, and the nine 
Muses of the Greeks are so many modes of mind, the higher mind which 
manifests as genius and transmutes consciousness from the abstract 
mental state to the manifested physical brain, or which bridges over 
the gulf between life in the body and life out of the body. Hence this 
is the sign of the prophet. In its best interpretation, the activities of 
this sign are directed towards a higher state of existence, in which 
aspiration and devotion are the keynotes. The dual nature of the 
sign shows the objective and subjective halves of the intuitional 
consciousness, and between these two states the life forces are 
constantly vibrating. Its most distinguishing characteristic, perhaps, 
is its love of sport and travel, having the attribute of sympathy. 

Aries is the architect, the pioneer, Leo the organiser, the vitaliser, 
Sagittarius the builder, the executant. 


THE WATERY SIGNS 
Iv. CANCER, THE CRAB IV. 
Fourth sign of the zodiac; first watery sign, second cardinal sign 


Cancer is the fourth sign of the zodiac. It is symbolised by the 
crab, which can live equally as well in water as on land: it also goes 
through a metamorphosis in the earlier stages of its existence. This 
sign is at the head of what may be termed the psychic trinity, and to 
this psychic basis all expression of this sign may be related. It has the 
tendency to retain and hold the effect of the vibrations made upon it, 
and like a lake it reflects all that is mirrored upon it. This sign is 
concerned with sensation, and all consciousness that affects the feelings 
and emotions, from the most external physical sensation to that internal 
sensitiveness which is the first germ of the astral senses. It is a sign 
of receptivity and assimilation, and memory, in which impressions are 
retained, each wave creating a greater oscillation under the vibrations 
awakening the inner sensitiveness belonging to this sign. Its most 
distinguishing characteristics are its keen desire for sensation, power, or 
fame, and its power of insistence. 

Of the three watery signs, Cancer presides over the ocean, Pisces over 
rivers, and Scorpio over lakes, ice, and stagnant waters. In another 
interpretation Cancer stands for the great restless stream of astral 
matter, formative and plastic, changeable as the Moon, the mother of all 
living, and Proserpine, the queen of the dead. 


VIII. SCORPIO, THE SCORPION VIII. | 
Eighth sign of the zodiac, second watery sign; third fixed sign 
Scorpio is the eighth sign of the zodiac. It is symbolised by the 
serpent or scorpion and sometimes by the eagle. This sign presides 


over all liquids of a thick and heavy nature, viscid oils, poisons, sewage, 


stagnant pools, chemicals, mineral waters, ice, etc. This will at once 
19 


20 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


convey the idea thgt it is a sign in which liquids are solidified, the rotary 
motion connected with the fixing quality being very marked in this sign. 
The psychic germ born of the vibrations in Cancer is brought to the 
solid state corresponding to awakening consciousness, and thus all the 
feelings and sensations of the sign are made potent and persistent. 
Both vice and virtue are very pronounced in this sign and nothing with 
which Scorpio is actively concerned is weak or ‘milk and water.’ 

Just as rotary motion makes firm and stable an otherwise unstable 
body, such as a top, so the kind of soul that belongs to Scorpio gathers 
its experiences into a very clearly marked kind of personality, fixed and 
emphatic, whether for good or for evil, strong and unyielding. Along 
the evil side there are seen pride, jealousy, malice, personal ambition, 
envy and hatred; and along the good side perseverance, courage, both 
physical and moral, and practical ability. When the inner psychic side 
is awakened it brings out in a very remarkable way the mystical, occult, 
and higher sensitiveness shown in the sign, and the soul becomes as. 
keenly active on the virtue side as the personal is capable of being in 
the vice tendencies. Its most distinguishing characteristic is intensity, 
or, as it might be put, ‘ passionateness.’ 

Cancer as the head of this triplicity sets quivering in a semi- 
conscious manner the sensations that are to be constantly repeated and 
made stable in Scorpio, therefore, in common with the central or fixed 
sign in each triplicity this is one of the critical signs, in which either 
will or desire is the strongest element. 


XII. PISCES, THE FISHES XII 


Twelfth sign of the zodiac; third watery sign, fourth mutable sige 

Pisces is the twelfth sign of the zodiac. It is symbolised by two 
fishes swimming in diverse directions. This sign may be compared to 
the Waters of Lethe, or oblivion. Asa sign of the transitory order it 
denotes the transference of consciousness once again to the physical 
body, or—to higher planes of being. It is the end of the watery signs. 
and represents the ocean in connection with the watery element to which 
it belongs. This sign is the ‘Universal Solvent.’ In Cancer sensation 
and feeling are awakened; in Scorpio they are concentrated and 
intensified; and in Pisces all is turned into emotion, which like the 
ocean is deep, silent, and inexpressible, except in what may be called 


THE WATERY SIGNS 21 


universal love and sympathy. As the feet are lifted from the ground, 
so is the emotion denoted by Pisces lifted from the earthy taint and made 
more universal. Some idea of the nature of this sign may be gathered 
from the fact that Pisces is a sign concerned with hospitals and philan- 
thropic institutions, wherein sympathy and benevolence are expressed. 
The dual nature of the sign shows us what we might expect, namely, 
that failure to reach the higher sympathies produces emotional derelicts 
and those whose psychic nature attracts the lowest entities and thus 
opens the way to obsession, melancholia and hopeless despondency. It 
denotes either passive or active sympathy, a negative and mediumistic 
tendency to fruitless and wasted emotion, or a positive, active sympathy, 
the ideal of which is conveyed in the sentence ‘Love your neighbour as 
yourself,’ and if asked Why? the answer would be: * Because he is 
yourself.” Its most distinguishing characteristic is permeability. 


THE AIRY SIGNS 
VII. LIBRA, THE BALANCE VII. 


Seventh sign of the zodiac; second airy sign; third cardinal sign 


Libra is the seventh sign of the zodiac. It is symbolised by a pair 
of scales or the balance. It is the first of the extensive or expansive 
signs, vibratory in its action, and volatile or diffusive in its nature. 
Like all the cardinal signs it marks the beginning of any tendency to 
vibrate in a particular manner. The fiery signs are connected with 
energy, the watery signs with mobility and sensation, the airy signs 
with expansion and mentality. The airy signs are distinctly connected 
with mind and mental experiences, and the human tendencies apart from 
the animal are the marked features of all expressions from this triplicity. 
The sign Libra separates by its mode of motion the mind from the 
senses, and balances the one against the other, the vibrations between 
the two tending to equalise and balance the consciousness in this 
direction. It is also the sign in which neither higher nor lower mind 
predominates, the subjective and objective mind being equalised and 
causing the mind to tend more toward comparison and justice than 
toward any definite bias. Its most distinguishing characteristic is 
conjugality or ‘unifiableness’ usually manifesting as the desire to 
please, or in its highest aspect as devotion. 


XI. AQUARIUS, THE MAN XL 
Eleventh sign of the zodiac; third airy sign; fourth fixed sign 


Aquarius is the eleventh sign of the zodiac. It is symbolised by 
‘The Man,’ who is pictorially represented as pouring water from a 
vase on the earth. As a fixed air sign it represents concentration of 
mind and the attempt to fix the mental vibrations received through 
Libra. The human and mental nature of this airy sign is shown by the 


22 


THE AIRY SIGNS 23 


symbol ‘Man,’ Sanskrit man—to think. In the order of the zodiac it 
shows that point where the circle is left for the spiral and man begins 
his mental ascent, having attained to that stability which the fixed 
quality produces. The inertia of this sign is, at our present stage of 
evolution, more in evidence than the stable and permanent expression 
of the man who has controlled the lower nature ready for the higher 
self-conscious ascent into the entirely human conditions. The most 
characteristic feature of Aquarius is its love of human nature; and there 
is always some attempt to blend art and science in this sign. As the 
last of the fixed signs it has been symbolised by two serpents, the one 
the serpent of wisdom and the other the old Adam or serpent of the 
earth. In this symbology lies the mystery of human destiny. 


Ill, GEMINI, THE TWINS III. 


Third sign of the zodiac; first airy sign, first mutable sign 


Gemini is the third sign of the zodiac. It is symbolised by the 
twins, which signifies its dualistic nature. Being an airy sign it is 
connected with a mental expression of the zodiac, and through its 
mutable nature we see the transference from one state of mind or 
consciousness to another, the objective or concrete to the subjective 
and abstract, and vice versa. It is often symbolised as two upright 
columns, denoting the gateway to knowledge and the hall of learning. 
In its objective expression it denotes material education and brain 
intellect ; subjectively it is concerned with higher thought and some- 
times the super-conscious mind. In its esoteric symbology it is repre- 
sented by two apes, one of which is the chattering ape and imitator, 
the other the divine ape in whom thought is more superhuman and 
transferred from the concrete to the sublime and transcendental; or, 
in other words, the ordinary common worldly intellect is shown, and 
also the originality of genius in which mind is working direct from the 
mental plane. The most characteristic feature of Gemini is its duality, 
shown in a love of quick alternations from grave to gay, like a child. 
In the zodiac Aquarius may be termed the Father-Man, Libra the 
Mother-Woman, and Gemini the Child. 


THE EARTHY SIGNS 
X. CAPRICORN, THE GOAT X. 


Tenth sign of the zodiac, third earthy sign; fourth cardinal sign 


Capricorn is the tenth sign of the zodiac. It is symbolised by the 
goat, and sometimes by the crocodile. The vibrations connected with 
this cardinal sign are decidedly physical, and denote the awakening of 
physical consciousness through ambition and temporal power. The 
goat is a mountain climber, and as the apex of the earthy triangle 
the influence of Capricorn is strongest on the physical plane, therefore 
the tendency will be to bring out all practical and material experiences, 
which will become manifested in the outer world of action through the 
vibrations of this sign. It has both a benefic and malefic aspect, and 
can only be truly interpreted by those who see the hidden wisdom 
concealed in mythology and exoteric symbolism. The goat is an 
expression of the external nature of Capricorn, and the crocodile, which 
can live as well in water as on land, symbolises the internal nature of 
this sign. This sign marks the beginning of practical experiences and 
brings all things to a natural and matter-of-fact standpoint. The most 
characteristic feature of Capricorn is its instinct for business and politics 
—~in fact for all things which have to do with the world at large. Its 
watchword is definition. In its highest sense it is ideals made practical. 


Il. TAURUS, THE BULL IL. 
Second sign of the zodiac; first earthy sign, first fixed sign 


Taurus is the second sign of the zodiac. It is symbolised by the 
bull. It belongs to the earthy triplicity and is rotary in its mode of 
motion. It is a sign giving solidity and strength to the physical group 


of signs. The practical aims and ambitions of Capricorn are gathered 
24 


THE EARTHY SIGNS 25 


up and unified in Taurus, bringing gain from labour and the fruit of 
action. In this sign great powers of retention, conservation, secretive- 
ness and concentration are exhibited, the power to retain and hold being 
a marked feature of the sign. Of all the fixed signs, Taurus is the most 
retentive, the life forces being held by matter more securely than in any 
other sign, and speech is often the only expression the life forces can 
make through thissign. The most characteristic feature of this sign is its 
instinct for finance, and its watchword is practicalness. It is the sign of 
concentrated physical energy and its highest expression is found in song 
and praise, as the result of concentrated emction. The true symbol of 
Taurus appears to be a serpent coiled in a circle; much latent energy 
and captive power is indicated by this symbol. 


VI. VIRGO, THE VIRGIN VI. 
Sixth sign; second earthy sign; second mutable sign 


Virgo is the sixth sign of the zodiac. It is symbolised by a virgin, 
and sometimes pictorially represented by three ears of corn. This sign 
denotes the ultimate perfection of the physical experiences, which are 
translated and transformed into self-consciousness in common with all 
the mutable signs. Symbolised by the virgin, it explains the necessity 
of physical purity to achieve the self-consciousness connected with the 
sign. This is the sign of Service, the cream of Capricorn and Taurus, 
and the outcome of industry and labour. It is a sign connected with 
criticism and analysis, to finally bring forth discrimination and wisdom. 
When failure to bring forth the fruit of the consciousness indicated by 
the physical signs occurs, then subservience and weakness (Virgo), 
ambition and selfishness (Capricorn), or sloth and obstinacy (Taurus), 
may result. The discrimination of Virgo, in its best aspect, comes from 
mental sympathy; the good and the true within recognising the same 
without. This, in the undeveloped soul, may show as unintelligent 
repetition or servile response, the automatic echoing of good and evil, 
false and true alike, according to the fashion of the day or the impress 
of a stronger personality. One of the most characteristic features of 
Virgo among the cultivated types is its love for biographical details and 
statistics, and its tendency to quote authorities. A typical Virgo woman | 


t 


26 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


ence wrote that her favourite recreations were ‘blue books and 
biographies.’ 


The following table explains the nature of each of the signs, 


Sign. Symbol.| Characteristic. Description. - Ruler. 


Quality. Element. 


Lrpra =< | Perception Cardinal . The Balance. ? 
GEMINI TU | Reason. Mutable .| Air The Twins . % 
Aquarius «¢ | Memory Fixed . | Air The Man h 
ARIES my | Intuition Cardinal .| Fire .| The Ram é 
| Sacirrarius f | Introspection | Mutable .| Fire  .{ The Centaur. Y 
| Lxo Q, | Faith Fixed . | Fire The Lion © 
Cancer 90 | Feeling Cardinal .| Water , | The Crab y 
Pisces } | Emotion Mutable .| Water .| The Fishes Y 
Scorrio | Attachment .| Fixed .| Water .| The Scorpion 3} 
Capricorn V% | Absorbtion Cardinal ./| Earth The Goat h 
Virco ny | Circulation Mutable .| Earth .| The Virgin . fe) 
Taurus % | Secretion Fixed . | Earth The Bull 2 


CHAPTER III 


Tue LuMINARIES AND THE PLANETS 


Tue houses, or divisions, of a horoscope we compared to vessels, 
and the signs of the zodiac to their contents, giving colour and substance 
toeach house. Metaphorically speaking, the planets in a similar manner 
give the aroma and quality to the whole. 

Each house and each sign has a lord or ruler in the planet governing 
that house or sign, but the planets have more definite relationship to the 
signs than to the houses. So that the sign specially related to any 
planet is termed the ‘house’ of that planet, this not referring to the 
mundane circle but to the zodiac. Dividing the twelve signs into pairs 
one half becomes lunar and the other solar, each planet having one 
station in both divisions. Again each planet is weak in certain signs 
and powerful in others. 

Besides the two luminaries, the Sun and Moon, there are seven 
planets :—Uranus, HI; Mercury, %; Venus, 2; Saturn, h; Mars, ¢ ; 
Jupiter, ?/; Neptune, *t’. The following table of signs and rulers shows 
also planets specially powerful and weak in each sign. 


LUNAR SOLAR 
Weak Strong Exalted Sign Ruler Sign Exalted Strong Weak 
h % wry? CN POL 3 h 
yf h § 3° Ee. Foal PRR h Y 
3 Y ey a See h21° u d 
) Y ©19° ee ARR | © ? 
9 “y ey" cents sata ox = fe) 
© Hi sey 5 HBP rsi9e19 ) 


No signs have been allotted to either HI or *{ as houses, but for the present 
they may be taken as substitutes for the Sun and Moon. 


27 


28 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


A planet has power in its own house, and in certain houses has a 
stronger influence for good or ill, also a weaker influence in other signs. 
The ‘detriment’ of a planet is the sign opposite to its own ‘house’; 
its ‘fall’ is the opposite degree to its ‘exaltation.’ 

In the column which is headed ‘exalted’ the number of degrees 
shown indicates the particular degree at which the planet receives 
exaltation. The true sense of the term ‘exaltation’ cannot at pre- 
sent be explained, but there can be no question that planets in 
their exaltation signs do exert a more refined and a more powerful 
influence than elsewhere. As for the exaltation degrees, they have 
been handed down by tradition, and since whenever such tradition has 
been traced back to its source, it is discovered to be founded upon a 
truth in nature, we shall do well to accept these degrees with respect, 
and endeavour if we can to penetrate the reason the ancients had in so 
fixing them. Thus, the exaltation degree of the Sun Y 19° is very 
close to, and perhaps identical with, the commencement of the Zodiac of 
the Consteilations. 


The planets are the vitalising centres in each nativity, therefore it 
is necessary to know the special influence of each planet and the nature 
of their vibrations in each sign and house. When we speak of a planet’s 
influence, it is the vibration coming from the spirit and life of the planet 
with which we are concerned, and not the physical medium through 
which it is acting, the physical planet being useful only as a means by 
which we may locate its position for astrological purposes. The special 
influence coming through each planet has been described by ancient 
astrologers who were evidently taught by those who knew, for as we 
have just hinted, modern students have found by study and practice that 
in the main, all that has been stated by their predecessors is true, with 
regard to the nature of each planet. A few students, looking more 
deeply into the esoteric side of the study, have discovered that there are 
higher vibrations than those generally attributed to the influence of the 
planets, but the failure of those coming under any particular planet to 
respond to these higher vibrations has caused this side of the study to be 
neglected. It seems incredible to those who study Astrology in the light 
of philosophy that any one should be found capable of believing that 
planetary influence emanates from the visible physical heavenly bodies 
only, or that a materialistic explanation could ever be fully explanatory 


THE LUMINARIES AND THE PLANETS 29 


of the multitudes of facts recorded in the experience of every astrologer. 
That there is a physical influence there is no need to deny, although we 
must also remember that no scientific explanation of it is yet forth- 
coming.’ But in Astrology we have to step beyond the threshold of the 
physical universe and recognise the reality of that indwelling spiritual 
life and consciousness of which visible phenomena are merely outward 
manifestations, whether in the planet or the atom. We must study the 
subject from the philosophical and religious standpoint, and to do this 
with any degree of satisfaction the whole subject must be approached 
with a feeling of reverence and a true sense of humility. 

THE Sun, we are taught by those who are seeking the Path of 
Wisdom, is the body of God, the Logos of this solar system, through 
which He gives His Love, Light and Life. 

In astrologic study THE Sun gives to every living organism its 
Prdna, or life and heat, each individual specialising his own store from the 
cosmic Prdna. Every living thing is plunged into a great ocean of life— 
God’s life; and every organism, whether great or small, appropriates to 
itself some of this universal life which is ever flowing from the Sun, the 
vehicle through which the Solar Logos is manifesting. 

Tue Sun, giving life, light and heat to the world, stands in each 
nativity as the symbol of vitality and activity, mind and intellect, love 
and feeling. In one word it represents the centre of each separate 
individual character as the sum total of himself, by absorbing into 
himself as much of the influence of the solar rays and the planetary 
vibrations as possible during his previous physical manifestations. THE 
Moon acts as the vehicle, or link of communication between the Sun and 
each living thing. In Astrology the Moon is the representation of the 
Fersonality, the portion of the individual that is manifested during the 
one life period, and as such the Moon’s position and aspects become the 
most important when judging a nativity. If the Moon has no aspect 
whatever with the Sun, or is in much affliction with this luminary, then 
the life forces do not flow evenly, the mentality is not so sharp and clear, 
and the feelings are apt to be distorted; but the principal effect of the 
affliction is to hinder the flow of the life-current and thus affect the 


1 Since the first Edition of this work was published, in 1903, the scientific 
basis of Astrology has been definitely laid down. ‘Those who wish to enquire 
further into the matter are referred to The Foundations of Physical Astrology by 
G. E. Sutcliffe, member of the Leeds Astronomical Society. 


#0 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


general health. These two centres formed by the Sun and Moon 
become very important, the Sun lighting the mind by day, and the 
Moon, receiving the borrowed light of the Sun, illuminating by night. 
The permanent and vital conditions of each life are denoted by the Sun, 
and the fleeting and impermanent personal conditions are indicated by 
the Moon, this latter luminary thus representing the focussing point of 
a nativity. The five planets, Mercury, Venus, Mars, Jupiter, and 
Saturn, act in the ordinary human being more or less through the 
five senses. Uranus and Neptune, representing the higher octaves, 
are at present not quite so much in evidence, being more concerned with 
evolution at a later stage. | 


The planetary vibrations are allied to the senses approximately as 
follows: Mrrcury, sight; VENus, touch; Mars, taste; JupiTErR, smell; 
Saturn, hearing; Uranus governs the inner sight (clairvoyance), and 
NeEptuneE, inner touch (psychometry). It is probable that Vulcan, a 
planet to be rediscovered at a future date, governs the inner hearing 
(clairaudience). 

As concrete representatives of the Sun and Moon in the lower world 
Saturn and Mars become what have been termed ‘malefic planets.’ 
They are the disseminators of what we consider evil thoughout the 
world, and Astrology can throw considerable light upon this so-called 
evil that abounds, for it is through the individual and personal manifes- 
tation of the two great forces in nature known as heat and cold, motion 
and inertia, that we see the abuse of these two useful states or conditions 
of matter. The wise astrologer does not recognise evil as a permanent 
factor in any nativity, but fully understands how the attitude of the mind 
and feeling may produce the abuse of any special planetary vibration, 
which will then become vice and misfortune, pain and disease. 

If the natures of the two ‘malefic’ planets are carefully studied from 
a philosophic point of view, their exact value in each nativity will be 
much more clearly understood. 


Mars is the planet of focussed force, and out-going impulse. Physical 
heat and motion are more under the direct influence of Mars than any 
other planet. He governs the sense of taste in its widest application. 
All the animal propensities, sensations, passions, desires and appetites 
come under the vibration of Mars. Long and careful study and a 


THE LUMINARIES AND THE PLANETS 31 


considerable amount of first hand experience which has been tabulated 
for many years have convinced the author that Mars is the ruler over the 
animal nature in man; and the task set for humanity is not only that of 
subjecting, ruling and controlling the animal nature, but also its trans- 
mutation into a higher force than that which ministers to the animal 
soul. 

There is an occult teaching that the whole of the animal kingdom is 
under the guidance of one Group Soul, and as each animal becomes 
specialised, and in time is sufficiently individualised to break away from 
the Group Soul, it takes with it into the human kingdom its special 
nature and peculiar characteristics as an animal; and its evolution at the 
stage of either a savage or a more highly evolved but still very young 
ego is also under the influence of the planet Mars, more or less, until the 
vibrations from the other planets form a greater attraction than the plane 
of Mars and the purely animal nature. It is when the war between the 
animal and the God begins that the human being suffers, and the evil of 
Mars through passion and the rebellious senses is recognised. Animals 
in their natural state are not evil, but when the struggle between will 
and desire begins, and the personal man follows the blind impulse of his 
senses, then Mars becomes truly malefic. 

This requires very little demonstration, for when the animal has full 
sway man becomes brutal, savage and violent, and when the gratification 
of the sensational and selfish desires is the strongest incentive to action, 
the animal in man, to obtain its object, becomes cruel and uncontrolled. 
It is only when the God in man grows stronger that the animal is held in 
check, trained and finally transcended. Force and energy are at all 
times necessary on the physical plane, and without the martial influence 
humanity would be tame and inactive, therefore muse will make the 
vibrations of Mars as beneficial as abuse will make them evil. Each 
planet portrays a particular virtue, and that of Mars, strength, acts 
more especially through the muscular system; and we can easily see 
that a good muscular system is necessary for any great display of 
physical strength and energy. 

Psychologically, the influence of the ein Mars is greater and 
more potent through the psychic nature, acting more directly upon 
the sensational and emotional nature. When acting physically the 
Solar influence also is necessary to give vitality and full life to the 
whole system, but psychically the force of Mars acts directly without the 


eh HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


aid of the solar rays. It will be seen by the foregoing how Mars wil} 
become an evil influence in any nativity where the animal side is 
uncontrolled. Misfortune and disaster, accident and fever, will be the 
result of over-excitement, impulse, rashness and over-indulgence in 
sensation. In fact, to control the animal passions and appetites is to 
control and guide the vibrations coming from the planet Mars. Force 
will have its outlet in some form or other, and a man may use his forces 
and energy either to slay his fellows, or to save them, to become a 
swashbuckler, or a hero; or he may use it as an energy socially and 
mentally. 

The strength absorbed from the planet Mars will do much to improve 
an otherwise weak nativity, and in no position in a horoscope can Mars 
be said to be an evil influence unless the nature is wholly depraved. 
Men who have strong and personal natures will, by transmuting the 
force and turning the direction of the currents, become ambitious and 
energetic and thus raise themselves to a higher state of refinement and 
progress. Knowledge of the nature and influence of Mars, the position 
by house and sign and the aspects, will inform the student of the 
direction in which the force is working; this will be illustrated later. 


The mext so-called evil planet is Saturn. The nature and influence 
of this planet is cold and binding, exactly opposite to that of the fiery 
Mars. Let us imagine that in the process of separation from the block 
essence of the Group Soul, the individualised animal, which consists of 
a vaporous mass of matter, is crystallised or condensed and enclosed 
in a film which comes directly under the vibrations of Saturn. The 
contents of this film impregnated by the solar ray will have all the latent 
qualities of the martial force, but now under certain limitations and 
restrictions and made the vehicle upon which the higher forces are to 
play. Being impregnated with the divine spark, which is now in germ, 
it will unfold all the latent potentialities of the imprisoned God within, 
through time and space, until it is strong enough to burst through the 
shell or body in which it was individualised. 

The vibrations from Mars will ever force onward impulsively and 
blindly, but the vibrations from Saturn will be continuously binding and 
limiting. It can be seen that these two extremes of heat and cold, life 
and form, will be inimical to each other until the life is controlled by the 
form and the form expanded by the life and balance obtained as a result 


THE LUMINARIES AND THE PLANETS 33 


of the struggle between the two. In the early stages of the contest the 
life will be merely conscious, but gradually se//consciousness will result 
from the limitations imposed upon the life by the form. 

Saturn governs the sense of hearing, a negative or receptive sense. 
The listener suggests patience, forbearance, silence and caution. The 
planetary vibration of Saturn restricts, limits, crystallises and binds 
everything; holding, restraining, fashioning and solidifying all that 
comes under its sphere of influence. Sat-urn is, figuratively speaking, 
the urn that holds the Sa¢#. This Sanskrit word Sat signifies ‘that one 
ever-present reality in the infinite world; the divine essence which 2s, 
but cannot be said to exist.’ In this sense Saturn governs the encircling 
limit of the consciousness, the ‘ring pass not’ for each individual in 
manifestation. 

In life, impulse and outrush—ever attracted by the sensations and 
feelings towards external objects—are checked and restrained by the 
nature of the form which limits them. It is therefore the vibrations of 
Saturn that cause each human personality to know itself as a separate, 
distinct and self-conscious entity. Saturn, as ruler of the personal ego, 
is the planet of fate, for it represents the personal Will, the lower brain- 
mind, and is practically the ego in manifestation in the physical world, 
and also the next world to it, which is concerned with the state of the 
consciousness immediately after death. In these two worlds Saturn 
and Mars have the greatest power, for Mars is concerned with all the 
animal tendencies and Saturn directly with the animal-human soul. 

The highest states signified by the vibrations of Saturn in the 
physical world are physical purity and justice, which produce the 
virtues of chastity, economy, thrift, industry, perseverance, prudence, 
veneration, and love of truth. When the vibrations of Saturn are 
perverted through the personality, miserliness, meanness, envy, 
covetousness and extreme selfishness result. 

The two benefic planets art Venus and Jupiter. Venus and 
Jupiter are the respective counterparts of Mars and Saturn, and they 
should always be considered in nativities as such. All the martial 
influence, giving force, energy and strength, is eventually to be trans- 
‘muted into sympathy, gentleness and charity. The only real difference 
between these two planets, Mars and Venus, arises from the special 
vibrations. Mars is attracted from without through desire and impulse. 


Venus causes all action to come from within, and instead of feeling 
c 


34 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


rushing outwards to objects and becoming captive to externals, it moves 
from within through the ego’s direct intuitive power. The vibrations of 
Venus directly affect the higher part of the nature through the human 
soul and higher mind. In the physical world Venus presides over 
the sense of touch, which sense is not related to one special part of 
the body, but the whole. All the distinctly human and refining 
qualities come under the influence of Venus, the whole of the tendencies 
of this planet’s vibration being to centralise and draw in from the 
objective world the experience necessary to awaken the inner and 
more subjective centres of consciousness. Venus is on the side of Will 
and the Immortal Trinity, and all vibrations that are assimilated are 
made permanent soul possessions. Mars on the contrary is on the 
side of the Mortal and Impermanent—that is, until the force is turned 
inward, when it passes into the ray of Venus. Venus preserves, 
nourishes, rebuilds, and all who come fully under the influence of this 
planet are capable of living purely and appreciating beauty and goodness 
to the full.. It will be necessary to avoid mistaking the vibrations of 
Mars for those of Venus, also to know which of these two planets has 
the stronger influence in each nativity. Mars is the planet of physical 
generation and its influence is always acting through the senses. 
Venus is the planet of creation, ever tending to act through the Soul 
and not the senses. The love shown by Venus always sanctifies and 
makes for harmony through conjugality, friendship and soul union. 
Mars denotes feeling that is personal and selfish, and Venus that which 
is impersonal and unselfish. The influence of Mars when perverted 
makes men seek to injure, and never allows them to forget the value 
of personal importance. Venus injures none, and those coming directly 
under its vibration sink the personal element in love for others, through 
pure love and true sympathy. The adverse influence of Mars causes 
men to insult and patronise, while that of Venus always makes for 
protection and true charity. 

In some mysterious manner a ray from Venus touched the life of 
the animal on its first separation from the group soul. The ‘Sons of 
Mind’ who came from the planet Venus gave to infant humanity its 
first germ of that true mind which is in its essence immortal, and 
through this the period of man’s evolution was considerably shortened, 
for by receiving this divine spark the seed of the human soul was 
implanted in the animal man, who would otherwise have spent count- 


THE LUMINARIES AND THE PLANETS 35 


less ages in acquiring that which these beneficent beings through 
their love and compassion gave to humanity. 

JUPITER is termed the Greater Fortune. Its vibrations are concerned 
with the form side of manifestation and like Saturn it symbolises 
the vehicle which holds the life. St Paul has stated that we have a 
terrestrial body and a celestial body. Jupiter’s influence in the sub- 
jective world is just as important as that of Saturn’s influence objectively, 
but there is a wide difference between the effects of their vibrations. 
Saturn contracts and acts microscopically. Jupiter expands and has no 
limit to its expansion. Mind and feeling are condensed and focussed in 
the limiting form of Saturn, and expanded, broadened, and extended 
through the ever-increasing form of Jupiter. In these two extremes we 
have all the elements of pleasure and pain, joy and sorrow, increase and 
decrease, bondage and freedom, expansion and contraction. The life is 
evolving as well as the forms, and the contraction and expansion are 
necessary to harden and soften and finally temper the consciousness of 
the evolving ego. The good fortune under the influence of Jupiter acts 
from the subjective world by way of the accumulated experiences, the 
essence or cream of which is under the guiding influence of this planet. 

In the physical world Jupiter governs the sense of smell. Scent 
pervades the atmosphere and is dispersed through it, being expansive, 
as is the influence of the planet presiding over it. 

The whole of our present moral and social age is more directly under 
Jupiter’s influence. The success promised by Jupiter may be traced 
to the best side of the character, wherein hope and the power to 
expand and enlarge are prominent. Saturn gives financial gain and 
prosperity through economy, chrift, perseverance, and industry, but 
Jupiter when concerned with financial success brings gain through the 
social life, and those under the most favourable influence of Jupiter can 
accomplish more in one day than the ordinary Saturnine man could 
achieve in a year. 

Sooner or later it must be realised that character is destiny. ‘That 
is why so much stress is always laid upon the fact that the nativity must 
be fully understood before ‘directions’ can be interpreted. We each 
bring our character with us as a result of past efforts, aspirations and 
opportunity. The sum total of our past is probably indicated by the 
planet Jupiter. Each individuat is encircled by an aura, the boundary 
ef which comes directly under the vibration of Jupiter. We expand and 


36 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


increase the size and quality of that aura during each earth life, and, 
whether in objective manifestation on the physical world or in heaven, 
in the subjective worlds, this aura is our own and contains our whole 
history, the result of the past and the possibilities of the future; in this 
sense Jupiter is the ruler over the celestial and immortal body. 


Mercury is known as the ‘convertible’ planet. It is neither 
positive nor negative, but doth. It is the planet of the adept, being the 
planet of adaptation in the widest sense of the word. Mercury is termed 
the Winged Messenger of the Gods, and takes upon himself the vibra- 
tions of all the other planets. It is, in one word, the planet of Reason. 
In the physical world Mercury governs the sense of seeing. It has also 
a very close relationship with the mind. The four planets we have been 
dealing with are each more or less in affinity with either the //e or the 
form, but Mercury has an influence over both. It has also a subjective 
as well as an objective influence, and all planets may be said to be 
powerful or weak, according to the strength of Mercury. Mercury, 
accompanying the soul into Hades, represents the silver thread of 
memory, upon which are strung the beads which represent the person- 
alities of its earth lives. In every nativity Mercury will represent the 
ego in physical manifestation, the actor, playing the part allotted to him 
during each separate earthly existence; and at the close of each life 
Mercury represents the knowledge gained, as Memory, the cream of 
which is rendered a permanent possession of the ego as Wisdom. 


The planet Uranus has less influence at the present day than any 
other planet except Neptune. It is the planet of the coming race, for its 
vibrations will then be more important than to-day. It is thought by 
the author to represent the fully individualised Ego, and as such is the 
houseless wanderer half-way between earth and heaven. Its vibrations 
are different from those of any other planet, governing all things that are 
not bound by convention or limited entirely to the form side of things 
to such an extent as to make the form more important than the life. It 
appears to govern all things that are original, eccentric, and free to act 
apart from any conventional groove or accepted custom. It has been 
found to exercise the greatest influence for good over advanced thinkers 
—those who act independently, and from within more than from without. 
It seems to have little or no effect upon those who are bound or limited 


THE LUMINARIES (AND THE. PLANETS 34 


by opinion or custom, and to come fully under its influence the limitations 
of Saturn must have been passed and the form side of life conquered 
more or less. No definite or precise rules can be laid down with regard 
to Uranus; the most elaborate plans and calculations may be upset in 
an instant of time by the vibrations of this planet. Sudden and un- 
expected events will occur, and act in an almost unknowable manner, 
which makes it impossible to judge accurately exactly what will happen 
under his vibrations. It is now certain that the ancients knew of the 
planet Uranus, but only those who were as far removed from the 
ordinary humanity as the poles came under its fluence, and that for an 
occult and esoteric reason that cannot be explained at present. 

In the outer world of human activities Uranus appears now to 
be exercising more sway. Electrical and mechanical enterprises and 
inventions of all kinds, railways, educational ‘short cuts,’ index systems, 
the comparative study of religions, etc., etc., are all more or less under 
his direct influence and illustrate his peculiar mission—to cause man 
to seek by the destruction of a /esser form the added life and intelligence 
dwelling in the higher form of which that lesser form was an integral 
though separated part; in short, regeneration as distinguished from 
generation. 


NeEptTuNE, the last discovered planet, has, on the whole, but a faint 
influence upon our earth and its inhabitants. The undeveloped psychic 
who is unable to control the mediumistic tendencies induced from with- 
out, and those who are easily obsessed or of very weak will, always 
subject to changing impressions, will in one sense come under Neptune 
as will also those who are very highly advanced psychically. Experience 
tends to prove that the influence of an afflicted Neptune as a rule is 
undesirable. There is a possibility of there being such a thing as a lost 
personality, metaphorically speaking, and such may be in some peculiar 
manner under this influence. Depravity and exceptional immorality seem 
to be under the influence of Neptune, but many years must elapse 
before sufficient tabulation is made to warrant a reliable opinion 
concerning Neptune’s vibrations. 


Much fuller information on these and the other planets will be 
found in the next volume of this series, where a separate chapter is 
devoted to each. The beginner, however, will do well to leave these 


38 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


‘until he arrives at the book in the natural course of his studies; other- 
wise, he will find himself bewildered with a multitude of ideas for 
which he has not yet prepared due receptacles. What has been given 
above is quite sufficient at his present stage, and will furnish him with 
clear fundamental ideas regarding the natures of the planets, ideas which 
will form a substantial foundation upon which he can subsequently 
erect any superstructure which the processes of his thought, aided by 
further reading, and matured by his own experience and observation, 
may incline him to devise. 

To those who have carefully studied the series of Introductory 
Manuals issued by the Author, this caution will not, of course, apply, 
as they will (or should) have already optained a clear outline idea ot the 
essential natures ot the planets. 


CHAPTER IV 


In the first volume of this series, Astrology for All, Chapter VII, 
a list was given of the aspects formed between the heavenly bodies 
as they pass along the zodiac, and for convenience sake this list may 
here be repeated in the following form :-— 


Symbol Name Distance Nature 


g . Conjunction 0° or 360° Variable 

wd Semi-sextile 30° Feebly good 

L Semi-square 45” Somewhat evil 
% Sextile 60° Good 

a Square (or Quadrate) go° Evil 

Ps Trine 120° Good 

ql Sesquiquadrate 135° Somewhat evil 
A Quincunx 150° Feebly evil 

8 Opposition 180° Evil 


The formation of these aspects will be made clear to the mind by 
the following illustration. At the time of the New Moon, the Moon 
and Sun are in conjunction, z¢., they occupy the same degree of the 
zodiac, but as the Moon moves faster than the Sun, they very soon 
separate, and in fact two-and-a-half days later the Moon is 30° further 
on in the zodiac than the Sun is, and five days later 60° further on; 
hence they are said to be respectively in ‘semi-sextile’ and in ‘sextile’ 
to each other at these dates. Seven days after the New Moon they are 
go° apart or in ‘square’ to each other, this being the date of the First 
Quarter. Ten days after, they are in ‘trine,’ and when half a month 
has elapsed we have the Full Moon, which means that the Moon is 
opposite to the Sun, 180° away, or in ‘opposition’ to the Sun. ~ After 
that, the aspects given in the above list are re-formed in the reverse order, 
namely, A G AD * ZV, until 30 days from our starting point we have 


the Sun and Moon again in conjunction, or, a New Moon. In just the 
39 


40 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


same way, we find a similar cycle of aspects occurring between any two 
planets, the faster of the two gradually passing from the conjunction to 
the square of the other, thence to the opposition, and again to the con- 
junction once more; in fact the two series of events are precisely 
analogous, though we must not forget that the Moon or a planet may 
be in square to the Sun, or to some other planet, at the same time that 
it is in trine to a third and in sesquiquadrate to a fourth. 

To the aspects just enumerated may be added the Parallel of 
Declination, when the two bodies are the same distance, whether 
north or south, from the equator; its nature is variable, like the 
conjunction. The following minor aspects are taken into account 
by some astrologers, but in reality their influence, if they have any, is 
so slight as to be negligeable. 


Semi-decile, 18° Decile, 36° Quintile, 72° Biquintile, 144° 


Those who pay attention to them believe them to be slightly good; 
the ancient astrologers ignored them, and the moderns may safely do 
the same. Omitting these, it will be seen that the table of aspects may 
be divided into three sections, the good, the evil, and the variable. Let 
us consider the latter first. 

Conjunction is when two heavenly bodies are together at the same 
point of the zodiac. It therefore stands, symbolically if not practically, 
for union, synthesis, the blending of two in one. What effect the union 
will have depends upon the nature of the combined planets. When two 
forces meet, the resultant varies according to the angle between them 
and the strength of each force. When two notes are sounded together 
upon a musical instrument, the resulting sound depends upon whether 
the two sets of vibrations harmonise or not. And so with planetary 
conjunctions. If we suppose the planets to transmit their influence by 
means of vibrations sent through the subtle ethers of the solar system, 
the effects detected by the astrologer in a horoscope will vary according 
to whether the waves of the one supplement or contradict those of the 
other. 

Planets, as we know, may be divided for convenience into three 
classes; first those which are in the main benefic—Jupiter and Venus; 
second, those which are very often malefic, more or less—Mars, Saturn, 
Uranus, and Neptune; third, those which may be descrived as more or 


THE ASPECTS 41 


less neutral and variable -Sun, Moon, and Mercury. A benefic planet 
is one the influence of which harmonises and blends sympatheticaily 
with our own, the Earth. Jupiter and Venus both stand, at least in 
relation to our humanity, for growth, increase, harmony, balance, the 
avoidance of extremes; while the so-called malefics bring about exactly 
those extremes which it is desirable to avoid; at least that is their effect 
when considered as malefics, although as we have seen in a previous 
chapter there are various ways of interpreting planetary influence. 
Broadly speaking, the conjunction of a neutral planet with a benefic is 
good and tends to harmony both in terms of fate and of character. The 
conjunction of a neutral planet with a malefic is exactly the reverse: 
Mars tending to extremes of heat, disintegration, and impulse, Saturn 
to coldness, selfishness, devitalisation, and isolation; Uranus being 
moderately Saturnian in its degree of cold, with an added tendency to 
suddenness and reversal, while Neptune along with some sensitiveness 
and intuition gives sensuousness and instability. The conjunction of 
one benefic and one malefic is neither wholly good nor wholly evil, but 
strikes a mean between the two; and that of two benefics or two malefics 
is neither so good nor so bad as might be expected. 

To take an illustration, when Mars is in conjunction with Saturn the 
result should, theoretically, be a harmonious unity, but really is not so, 
for the combination is in effect not unlike the influence of the planet 
Uranus in some respects. If we look upon Mars as heat and Saturn as 
cold, the effect upon the weather is less cold than Saturn and less hot 
than Mars, and to this extent the two may be regarded as modifying one 
another. But in spite of this they do not blend or unify; they act 
irregularly as if now one and now the other had obtained control, 
reminding one of a gusty and chilly day with spells of heat at intervals. 

In terms of character the result'is similar. If we look upon Saturn 
as caution and Mars as boldness the resulc is not that prudent balance 
of judgment which is to be desired: to some extent the caution is 
_modified and the boldness restrained, but now and again one or the other 
will operate with an irregular vigour ail the greater for having been held 
back. If the conjunction takes place in one of the houses of Mars or 
Saturn the effect is very much more harmonious. 

Again, if we take Mars as the senses and Venus as the soul, when 
they are in conjunction and Venus is the stronger by sign, as in the 
earthly or airy triplicity, the soul will contro] and refine the senses and 


42 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


will gain in feeling and emotion; but if they are in a fiery or watery 
sign there will be more danger of the senses and passions enslaving 
the soul. Jupiter may be taken as the higher mind, sympathy, benevo- 
lence, and growth; Saturn as the lower mind, separateness, caution, and 
limitation; and if these are in conjunction in the watery or fiery 
triplicity, which strengthens Jupiter’s influence, the former characteristics 
will overpower the latter and will gain by the process in definiteness, 
practical application, method, perseverance, and will power; while if 
Saturn is the stronger through being placed in the airy or earthy 
_triplicity, the combination will show less of the elasticity and expan- 
siveness of Jupiter and more of the rigidity and contraction of Saturn. 


DiaGram No. 6 


If the reader acquires a thorough familiarity with the nature of the 
planets, it will not be a difficult matter to see how the one must modify 
the other when any two are in combination; and the result may be 
expressed either in terms of fate or in terms of character, for these are 
really convertible as has been explained before. 

The Parallel of Declination is generally regarded as the same in 
nature as the conjunction. When, however, two planets are in parallel 
and in some definite aspect at the same time, it is best in practice to 
interpret the combination in terms of the aspect, whatever it may be 


THE ASPECTS me 


good or bad. If there is no aspect, the parallel may be treated as a 
conjunction, but it will not be so strong, and will act rather as an 
inclining than a determining influence. 

The remaining aspects in the table, it will be seen, are all definitely 
good or bad, and not variable like the conjunction and parallel. 

The Good Aspects are all based upon a threefold division of the 
circle of the zodiac, as in Diagram 6. ‘Thus the trine, 120°, is a third of 
the circle, the sextile, 60°, is half a trine, and the semi-sextile, 30°, half 
a sextile. 

The Evil Aspects represent the circle halved or quartered, as in 
Diagram 7. Thus the opposition, 180°, is half the circle, the square, 90°, 


DiacraM No. 7 


is a quarter of the circle, and the semi-square, 45°, and sesquiquadrate, 
135°, are respectively half a square and a square and a half. 

The question is certain to be asked here as to why the threefold 
and fourfold divisions of the circle should be the one good and the other 
evil? Ifa given planet, say Jupiter, is on the whole more good than 
evil, so far as its influence upon the inhabitants of this earth is concerned, 
why, even when it is in square to a given point in the horoscope, should 
its good side be entirely suppressed and only its evil side be allowed to 
manifest, so far as that point is concerned ? 


44 HOW TO; JUDGE iA NATIVITY 


The question is not at all an easy one to answer, and we can do 
little more than indicate analogies. The religious philosophy of the 
mystic assures us that there is a basic three-fold mode of operation 
underlying the whole universe, and that it can be stated in terms of 
consciousness and in terms of force working through matter. The 
former aspect of it is seen in the continually recurring doctrine of the 
divine Trinity found in nearly all religions; and the latter side in the 
Hindu teaching as to the “three qualities” or modes of operation of 
force when involved in matter and termed Rajas, Tamas, and Sattva. 
If, then, three is the basic number underlying, permeating, creating and 
sustaining the whole universe, the astrological doctrine of the harmonious 
nature of those aspects based upon a three-fold division of the zodiac, 
falls into line with this general philosophy of things. We are apparently 
justified in conjecturing that the angle of 120° harmonises with the 
material constitution of the solar system and with the modes of opera- 
tion of vitality, consciousness and force. ‘The evil aspects are based 
upon a wholly different mode of vibration, and start from numbers two 
and four instead of number three. It is philosophically impossible to 
suppose that there is such a thing as radical evil anywhere, evil 
deliberately planned and worked into the universal scheme of things by 
the Creator. All the evil we know of or can imagine is the result either 
of ignorance or of distorted free-will, which itself perhaps is only another 
name for a higher form of ignorance. Good is harmony, evil is discord. 
In music, two notes harmonise if their vibrations accord with one 
another; and if they do not, discord is the result. We seem, therefore, 
bound to suppose that aspects based upon the square represent clash, 
conflict and discord; and that the soul which finds itself surrounded by 
forces working in this fashion has itself created the discord from which it 
is now suffering. The effect, although temporarily painful, is spiritually 
good, because the soul learns by its own experience to distinguish 
between that which will produce discord and that which will produce 
harmony; so that the clash and conflict of opposition end in wisdom. 

This may be illustrated in practical Astrology. The opposition 
aspect is when two planets are situated at exactly opposite points in the 
zodiac. Let us suppose that these are Venus and Mars. In this case 
the soul and the senses will be at war and the person will suffer. He 
will find it a hard task to preserve a straight course morally through 
life; his passions will be continually overstepping the bounds of 


THE ASPECTS 45 


moderation, especially in the direction of sex. When he truly realises 
this, and that it is a highly undesirable phase of character, he will have 
made a big step in the knowledge of the difference between good and 
evil, wisdom and foolishness. But mere knowledge will not of itsel 
suffice to undo the harm done ; action, will, is necessary. A strong will 
may gradually rein in the runaway passions, and the knowledge acquired 
will direct them into the right path. This may take a lifetime or even 
more to accomplish, but the result is good, doubly good indeed, for 
there is an increase of wisdom and a greatly increased strength of will 
brought out by the continual effort at self-control. If Venus is elevated 
or is otherwise the stronger of the two, the task will be rather easier 
than it otherwise would be. 

All oppositions, and in fact all evil aspects, may be resolved along 
somewhat similar lines to the foregoing. In some, such as Saturn 
afflicting Jupiter, it is partly selfishness and partly lack of practical 
ability that has to be got rid of. In all those in which Mars is one of 
the two, trouble will arise from an excess of energy, a lack of gentleness 
or prudence or of consideration for others, in those matters that are 
signified by the other planet. When Mercury is one of the two, the 
reason will be at fault; as, for instance, when Mercury opposes Jupiter, 
intellect and emotion clash at times and trouble will be brought about 
by action based upon impulse, although that impulse might be highly 
creditable if it were controlled by common-sense. And here, as else- 
where, the particular shade of the misfortune will depend upon which of 
the two is the stronger or higher up in the horoscope. With Venus it is 
the emotions, affections, and social qualities that contribute to the 
trouble and that need regulation. With the Sun it may be pride that 
has to be restrained, or the laws of health that must be studied and 
obeyed. With the Moon it may again be the bodily health that will 
cause trouble, or the mind may be wrongly impressionable in some 
direction, or the psychic and mediumistic side of the nature lacks 
contro}. 

Along these lines of tendencies of character nearly all Astrology may 
be interpreted, that which centres round the good aspects—which will 
here represent balanced and wise phases of character—as well as that 
resulting from the evil ones—-which stand for excess or defect. The 
planets may thus be looked upon as faculties or powers in human nature, 
and good or bad aspects as men’s wise or foolish use of them—their 


46 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


virtues and vices, in short. That these are innate in the character and 
date back to birth shows, not that this view is unsound, but that the 
real origin of tendencies resulting in such aspects must be traced back 
beyond birth to a previous state of existence. 

The question. will doubtless be asked as to how we are to interpret 
those aspects or directions that coincide with events which seem to be 
mere fate, good or evil, and not directly brought about by any operation 
of character in this life. The probability is that such events are really 
fewer than it is natural for astrologers to suppose; nevertheless it 
cannot be denied that they exist. An eldest son may inherit an entailed 
estate; another man may be killed in an earthquake; a third may suffer 
through the negligence of a parent or nurse in infancy; and none of 
them may be in the slightest degree responsible for the event. Here we 
must see the result of action in a state of existence preceding birth, and 
in the aspects found in the horoscope merely the methods adopted by 
the superhuman Controllers of human evolution to ensure that the 
adequate effect should follow the cause that had previously been started, 
so that the soul may reap as it has sown and learn the right lesson. 
That many such lessons cannot be understood and finally appreciated 
until after death, when the whole life is impartially summed up from the 
point of view of the onlooker instead of the actor, does not detract from 
the reasonableness of this interpretation, but only shows how long drawn 
out is the evolution of the soul, and how impossible it is to compress 
that evolution into a few years of existence on this physical plane. 


To return to the table of aspects at the beginning of this chapter, it 
may be noted that the 7rime is by far the strongest of the good aspects; 
it stands for progression and harmony, and may be compared to Jupiter, 
the greater benefic. It seems to bring even better fortune than a con- 
junction with a benefic planet. The Sexti/e aspect is appreciably weaker, 
but is nevertheless good, and may be compared to Venus. The Sem: 
Sextile is extremely weak and may be compared to Mercury, the ‘con- 
vertible’ planet; not much is lost if it is omitted from consideration. 

Of the evil aspects, the Opposition and Square may be compared to 
Saturn and Mars respectively. The opposition separates, and causes 
rivalry, antagonism, duality, in this respect being not unlike the mutable 
signs in its influence. The square acts somewhat like the fixed signs; 
it alternately crystallises and limits into a settled habit, and disrupts 


THE ASPECTS AT 


and shatters bya sudden shock. The Sem-Square and Sesquiquadrate are 
weaker than the square and not so lasting, but are similar to it in nature, 
and may be compared to the cardinal signs as being disintegrative or 
dispersive ; or to continue our planetary illustration they may be likened 
to a blend of Saturn and Mars, the former by square and the latter by 
opposition. 


We have next to consider the question of ‘Orbs.’ In ancient 
times it was taught that each planet had an ‘orb’ or ‘sphere’ of influence 
which extended beyond its own body out into space in all directions; in 
fact, it might be termed the ‘aura’ of the planet ; and that the influences 
or ‘rays’ of the planets were mingled as soon as the peripheries of 
these ‘orbs’ came into contact—or into aspecting distance, as the case 
might be. The latest researches in scientific Astrology seem to be 
approaching an actual physical explanation of this statement, and there 
can be little doubt that it is the true basis of the ‘orbs’ employed by 
astrologers, and will thus explain why orbs should differ for each planet, 
as well as for every aspect. But we are here concerned with the 
practical application of the term, which indicates how many degrees of 
‘approach’ and ‘departure’ may be allowed before and after any aspect 
becomes technically complete. In this, experience can be the only real 
teacher and the following hints must be accepted as such, and not taken 
as hard and fast rules. | 

For conjunction or opposition allow 12° when the Sun aspects the 
Moon, about 10° when either luminary aspects a planet, and about 8° for 
planets aspecting each other. 

For square and trine about 8° all round may be allowed. For 
sextile about 7°. For semi-square and sesquiquadrate 4°. For semi- 
sextile and quincunx 2°. For the parallel of declination 1°. 

These are the outside limits. In all cases the closer an aspect is, 
the stronger it is, and vice versa. An aspect that is only just within orbs 
is very weak. In some cases two planets that are widely apart by 
aspect may be brought closer together by a third planet ; for instance, if 
the Sun is at o° Y and the Moon at 10° the aspect is a wide opposition 
and not very important; but if Mars were at 5°25 it would not only be 
in square to both but would render the opposition worse than it otherwise 
would be. 

_If three planets are so arranged that two of them are equally distan’ 


48 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


from the third, the effect seems to be much the same as a parallel and is 
therefore good or bad according to the nature of the planets. Whether 
there is any limit to this kind of influence by position is uncertain. Of 
course, if the three are in some recognised aspect to each other, good or 
bad, the effect will be according to the nature of that aspect. 


The general character of the various positions and aspects will now 
be explained. Before judging the nature of each aspect it should be 
noted which planet is the ‘significator’; that is, whether the planet 
aspecting, or the planet aspected, is ruler of the horoscope—or of the 
special house under consideration as the case may be. 

The influence of the planets when in conjunction is shown in the 
accompanying list, which is arranged in the following order, ? Hl h 7 
$ © 2 ¥ ). This is the order of their distance from the Sun and 
hence their rate of movement; Neptune, of course, being the farthest 
and slowest; and it is the order that will be adopted throughout this 
volume. 

The first column shows the influence when the significator is the 
slower planet of the two: the second column shows the influence when 
the significator is the guicker planet of the two.” 

To avoid needless repetition each aspect is only given once, namely 
under the heading of the slower of the two planets between which it is 
formed, and this should be remembered when the book is used for 
reference. Thus suppose we want to find the effect of an aspect between 
Mars and Jupiter, we look under Jupiter, since that is the slower of 
the two; and there we find the effect, both when Mars is significator and 
when Jupiter is significator. Similarly if we want to find an aspect 
between Mars and Mercury, we look under Mars, if between Venus and 
the Moon, under Venus, and so on. 

Although the influence of any given aspect will be shown out most 
strongly in the life when one of the two planets between which it is 
formed is the ruler of the nativity, yet the general nature of its influence 
upon the whole character will be much as here described, even when 
neither planet is ruler of any important house, or placed in any prominent 


ec a biereccisniatn scapes 


* See Important Note at end of this chapter, p. 66. 


THE. ASPECTS: \CONJUNCTIONS 49 


position ; so that the descriptions which follow will still serve as a guide, 


if taken 


in a somewhat modified sense. 


Only they will represent 


characteristics, or events, more or less latent in the life and awaiting 
suitable ‘directions’ to stir them into activity. 


NEPTUNE 
in conjune- 


CONJUNCTIONS 


When slower planet ts signifcator 


tien with 


i 


Inspirational, quaint, marvel- 
lous, antiquated, mystifying. 

A dominating will. 

Dreamy, imaginative, medium- 
istic. 

Psychic dangers, black magic. 

The mind brought under the 
influence of the internal 
will : concentration. 

Religious, philanthropic, loving. 

Ceremonial magic, imagination. 

Religious to an extreme, danger 


of megalomania. Love of 
financial scheming. 
Visionary, chaotic, uncertain 


notions. 

Danger from water or drink. 

Extreme egotism. 

Paradoxical, impressionable, 
often clairvoyant tendencies, 
peculiar morals. 

Clairvoyance, seership. 

Feelings expressed strangely, 
and liable to extremes in love 
attachments. 

Intuitive, sympathetic, unprac- 
tical. 

Self-deceptive, affected, imper- 
manent moods. 

Travelling, love of change, sen- 
suous, sensitive to the poeti- 
cal and humorous. 


When quicker planet is significator 


NEPTUNE * 


Latent genius, ready for expression, 
transcendental tendencies. 

Practical mysticism, intuition. 

Intense, psychic, clairaudient tenden- 
cles. 

Loss of position, scandal, 

Circumscribed conditions, death-bed 
maledictions, curses, legacies of hate, 
odium, misrepresentations. 

Devotional, poetic, artistic. 

Love of beauty in colour and form. 

Precocious, occult genius, recovered 
lore from higher planes, remem- 
brance of former lives. 

Mysterious, shady, clandestine, 
scure, secretive. 

Gambling instinct, marks the turfite, 
sharper, juggler. 

Psychicism, mysticism, romance. 

A strange character, difficult to under- 
stand ; idealistic. 

A practical mystic. 

Spiritualistic, _mediumistic, psychic, 
amorous. Ecstatic, sexual entangle- 
ments, musical inspirations, liaisons. 

Fastidious, visionary, abnormal, in- 
quisitive, psychic. 

Inspirational, dreamy, mediumistic. 

Superstitious, idyllic, visionary, sensi- 
tive to the finer forces of nature; 
active sub-consciousness ;_ revealing 
through dreams. 


ob- 


ce er terrence te AAR THe 


* See footnote on next page. 


50 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


When slower planet is significator 


URANUS 
in conjunc- 
tion with 


h_ Profound power of contempla- 
tion ; strongly mental. 
Ambitious, determined,  re- 
served. 
Y% Original, inventive, deep musi- 
cal ability, occult tendencies. 
Peculiar religious views, imagi- 
nation. 
Eloquent, persuasive. 
¢ Extremist, enormous latent 
energy, capable of remark- 
able expressions, dangerous 


possibilities. 

Self-willed, impulsive, uncon- 
trollable, 

Egotistical, fanatical, an ex- 
tremist. 


@) Headstrong, socialistic or re- 
forming tendencies; some- 
times revolutionaries. 

Strong personality, firm, power- 
ful magnetism. 

9  Idealistic, peculiar affections, 
experimental in feelings. 

Imagination, wounded affec- 
tions, emotional, ardent. 

Hyper-sensitive, idiosyncratic, 
esthetic, aloof. Sometimes 
deep-rooted egotism. 

§ Witty, intuitive, abrupt and 
critical. 

Intellectual, witty, wilful, origi- 
nal, changeable. 

Agility in all departments, 
bodily, mentally and emotion- 
ally. Somewhat of a casuist 
in ‘argument. 


URANUS 


When quicker plauet is significater 


* 


Inventive, imaginative, intelligent, un- 
rivalled, singular. 

Engineering talent, marked powers of 
concentration. | 

Inspirational, marvellous, devotional, 
aspiring. 

Dramatic power, sense of dignity. 

True perceptions, religious interests, 
catholic opinions. 

Restless, excitable, eccentric, schem- 
ing, erratic, violent, peculiar, enig- 
matical. 

Ability to control natural forces, 
highly explosive in temper, inquisi- 
tive, restless, eccentric, wrong 
headed and dangerous if not well 
supported. 

Intuition, independence, originality, 
This position is not good for females, 
bringing trouble through peculiar 
magnetic and psychic conditions. 

In women, romantic marriage. 

Mirthful, romantic, musical, artistic, 
humorous, intuitive, independent, 
original. 

Artistic, dramatic ability, sensuous, 
jealous, sex entanglements; con- 
duces to separation, estrangement 
and divorce. 

Inventive, humorous, unconventional, 
eccentric, profound, metaphysical, 
occult. 

Genius for figures, mentally alert, 
inventive, rapid intuition, uncon- 
ventional, progressive, mechanical 
and electrical ability, embracing 
quickly new ideas. 


* The influence of Neptune and Uranus being as yet comparatively little 
understood, the opinions of three students who have devoted special attention te 
these two planets were invited. ‘These, where not coinciding, are printed in 


detached sentences. 


THE ASPECTS: CONJUNCTIONS 51 


When slower planet is significator 


) Roving, enquiring, capable of 
forming rapid and correct 


When quicker planet is significator 


Eccentric, bohemian, erratic, nomadic. 


Liable to be ‘swept off his feet’ by 


judgments. some oufré attachment or some un- 
Mediumistic, impressionable, scrupulous friend. Peculiar in 
nervous, subtle. temper. 
SATURN es 
im conjunce SA TURN 
tion with 
Y% Grave, studious, careful, acquisi- Profound, contemplative, religious, 


tive, pious, respectful, honest, 
placid, conservative, 

d Penetrating, intense, audacious, 
covetous, uncompromising, 
contemptuous, indiscreet. 

© Deficiency of moral courage, re- 
serve, fear, despondency, 
avarice, lack of sympathy, 
inertia,poor circulation, weak, 
constitution, and danger of 
disgrace or serious misfortune 
and failures. 

Q Sensual, sad, variable, callous, 
rude, morose, greedy, pernici- 


ous. 
& Serious, determined, austere, 
thrifty, apprehensive, 


methodical, laborious. Re- 
markably studious. 

) Submissive, passive, fretful, re- 
pining, peevish, degenerate, 
sad, gloomy, melancholic, 
timorous, lethargic, cold, 


apathetic, disappointing. 


thoughtful, reliable, discreet, econo- 
mic, thrifty. 

Reproachful, absconding, avaricious, re- 
pulsive, coercive, malicious, out- 
rageous. 

Caution, diplomacy, austerity, econ- 
omy, success through responsibility, 
and positions of trust. This position 
is not good for the general health 
and constitution, But it is more 
favourable than when Saturn is 
significator. 

Deception, cunning, antipathy: the 
nature is demoralising, mercenary, 
perverse. 

Subtle, diplomatic, reserved, shrewd, 
cautious, acquisitive, firm, patient, 
exacting, persevering, authoritative, 
zealous. 

Suspicious, timid, bashful, moody, 
sensitive, shy, miserable, hypochon- 
driacal, = unfortunate, indigent, 
morbid. Given to looking on the 
dark side of things. 


UPITER 
Pedi JUPITER 
tion with 
g Extravagant, speculative, trust- Enthusiastic, approbative, liberal, 
ful, heroic, profligate, cour- rash, presumptive, prodigal, 
ageous, expansive. choleric. 


©) Pride, liberality, extravagance, 
love of display, conceit, osten- 
tation, success through 
superiors and the favour of 
persons in authority. 


Honesty, generosity, candour, sym- 
pathy, magnanimity, success through 
ambition, marriage or social advan- 
tages. This is a very favourable 
position. 


52 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


When slower planet is significator 


JuPITER 
im conjune- 
tion with 


9  Ideality, chastity, piety, charity, 
consistency, congruity, polite- 
ness, content, peace, 
bliss. 

% Unsophisticated, hopeful, re- 
liable, prudent, just, bright, 
humane, devoted, upright, 
dignified, prosperous. 

) Flexibility, exhilaration, joyous, 
hopeful, confident, fruitful, 
gracious, fortunate. 


When quicker planet is significator 


Harmony, elegance, munificence, re- 
finement, gentleness, compassion, 
sincerity, vivacity, purity, fortune, 
happiness. 

Judicious, philanthropic, genial, genu- 
ine, utilitarian, contented, mirthful, 
moral, discriminative, discreet, success- 
ful. 

Sympathetic, generous, 
humane, forbearing, popular. 
native is fortunate. 


charitable, 
The 


Mars 
in conjune- Mars 
tion with 
© Strong character, heroism, Bold, fearless, rash, passionate, specu- 


courage, defiance, fortitude, 
intrepidity, resentment, in- 
dignation, anger. This posi- 
tion is much more favourable 
than when the Sun is signi- 
ficator, as a rule. 

@ Passionate, fascinating, ecstatic, 
sensational, susceptible, pro- 
pagative, impetuous, fickle. 

§ Enterprising, industrious, com- 
bative, pugnacious, destruc- 
tive, mechanical, credulous, 
supercilious. 

)  Profligate, adventurous, iras- 
cible, contentious, destruc- 
tive, profane. 


lative, over-assertive, dogmatic, 
irreverent, sceptical, exaggerative. 
This position gives great vitality, 
a strong constitution, with danger 
of feverish and _ inflammatory 
complaints. 

Amorous, impressionable, vain, for- 
ward, convivial, sportive, epicurean, 
immodest, sentimental. 

Exaggerative, unsympathetic, impudent, 
assuming, irritable, argumentative, 
inconsiderate, rebellious, too sharp 
and deceptive. 

Over-confident, rash, impulsive, rest- 
less, irritable, impudent, perverse, 
domineering. 


Sun 
in conjunes THE SUN 
tion with 
@ Fond of pleasure, amiable, Extravagant, fond of show, pleasure 


courteous, luxuriant, affec- 
tionate, easily led, cheerful. 
Y Ambitious, quick-witted, intui- 
tive, ingenious, thoughtful, 
intelligent. 
) Aspiring, ambitious, conserva- 
tive, impressive. 


and ease-loving, kind, sympathetic, 
amorous, apathetic, mutable. 
Adaptable, —_ aspiring, intellectual, 
studious, reliable. Interested in 
mechanics or manufactures. 
Mutable, self-centred, harmless, inert, 
indifferent. 


THE; ASPECTS ;; CONJUNCTIONS 53 


Venus VENUS 


in eongjune- 
tidn with 


9% Graceful, cultured, refined,sym- Linguistic, musical, artistic, efficient, 


pathetic, affectionate, charm- grateful, courteous, attractive, ap- 
ing, felicitous, chaste, cheerful. preciative, idealistic. 
) Affable, approbative, plausible, Ease-loving, effeminate, careless, fond 

mirthful, affectionate, imag- of pleasure, luxury and comfort, 
Inative, inoffensive. fortunate. 

_MeEnrcury MErcuRY 

im conjune- 

tion with 


) Versatility, keen wit, ingenious Ingenuity, comprehension, mutability, 
mind, quick perception, curi- quick intellect, memory, receptivity 
osity, intuitiveness. to new ideas. 


These interpretations are only intended to be general indications, 
for much depends upon the sign and house wherein the conjunction 
takes place as to its action upon the character or destiny. In the 
above list the meaning of the conjunctions has not been given so fully 
nor so explicitly as one could wish, but where so many have to be dealt 
with it is obvious that great detail would be out of place, and that hints 
only can be given. 


We now come to the evil aspects, which are the square and the 
opposition. The word ‘evil’ is only used here for convenience, since it 
is customary among students to divide aspects and influences into what 
are termed ‘good’ and ‘evil’—by which is usually meant favourable or 
unfavourable from a material standpoint. It would be far better to use 
the words harmonious and discordant, which convey the real idea more 
closely. Anyone who knows anything of music is aware that discords 
are no less necessary in a composition than concords, and that a true 
artist can utilise the very harshest tones in such a way as to produce 
a beautiful effect. And thus also the Great Musician is capable of using 
all those planetary vibrations which we term ‘evil’ in such a way as to 
further His great scheme of beauty and progress. In a minor degree 
man has this power too, and by learning how to control the discordant 
vibrations playing through him he can utilise them for high purposes: 
in the horoscopes of great characters we usually find some powerful 
oppositions or squares, in addition to some of the more harmonious 
aspects. In a general sense the squares and oppositions give grit 


54 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


and energy, but in the main they give adverse conditions and trying 
circumstances, with an uphill fight against fate. 

For the rest, it must be understood that these aspects are ‘evil’ 
only in the sense of abuse of the influence through ignorance or by 


a perverted expression of its true nature. 


The following is the general effect of squares and oppositions when 


either planet is ruler, or significator. 


EVIL ASPECTS? OPPOSITIONS OR SQUARES 


When slower planet is significator 


NEPTUNE 
in opposition 
or square with 

Hi Unreliable in feeling and action. 

I) Deceptive, revengeful and sus- 
picious. 

Y~—-Strange ill-fortune, pride, loss 
of friends, profound realisa- 
tions. 

&  Rebeilious, discontented, con- 
tentious. 

@) Losses through traps, schemes, 
plots, frauds, tricks, enemies 
and psychic conditions. 


2  Depraved feelings, lack of 
sympathy. 

%  Fraudential, kleptomaniacal and 
cunning. 
Strange notions, changeable 


moodsand fanciful tendencies. 


Uranus 
in opposition 
or square with 
ky Miuisfortunes through lack of 
opportunities or the power to 
make use of them. 

% Enthusiastic through bias or 
fixed opinions. 

d Rude and rebellious, over active 
or diffusive, quarrelsome, un- 
forgiving. Ever restless and 
unsettled. 


hen quicker planet is significator 


NEPTUNE 


Erratic, strange and peculiar. 
Resentful, cold and _ selfish ; 
sufferings through enmity. 
Strong religious and mystical tenden- 
cies, deep love-nature. 

A strange emotional nature. 

Excitable, changeable, unreliable in 
temper and apt for quarrels. 

Tragedies, obsessions, _treacheries, 
vendettas, spirit voices, temptations, 
trances, weird dreams, low magic. 

Deficient in nutritive quality, strange 
love affairs. 

Questionable habits, shifty and de- 
ceptive ways, 

Weird, morbid, fretful, hypochondriac, 
sensuous, strange, psychic, dreamy. 


strange 


URANUS 


Eccentric, peculiar, faddy, liable to 
sudden reversals of fortune and 
strange fits of temper. 

Deficient in social qualities, strange 
feelings, separative. 

Fanatical, defiant, erratic, irritable, 
fanciful, ungovernable, eccentric, 
odd, uncertain, dislocated, in- 
temperate. 


THE ASPECTS: 


Phen sloer planet is significator 


Uranus 
in opposition 
or square with 


@). Losses through strangers, associa- . 


tions, societies, love affairs, 
marriage, partnerships and 
independence. 
© Romantic, and liable to be 
affected magnetically for good 
or ill by others. 
Strange monetary troubles. 
% Distorted mind, exacting and 
self opinionated. 
Difficult to convince and apt 


to remain perversely in- 
different to reason. 
Magnetic, curious, sensuous, 


bohemian, romantic, erratic, 
wilful, abrupt, irritable, in- 
dependent, unsettled. 


EVIL, ASPECTS 


When quicker planet is significator 


Obstacles, disappointments, abruptness, 
fluctuations, enmities, jealousies, 
liaisons, intrigues, separations, es- 
trangements, calamities, disasters. 

Jealous, unrestrained in feeling, easily 
influenced and led astray, curious, 
imaginative, visionary, | wonder- 
loving. 

Bigoted, stubborn, unruly, wayward, 
rambling, deficient, notional, diffu- 
sive, sceptical, unforgiving, con- 
ceited, conventional, unsuccessful 
and unfortunate. 

Losses through strangers, lack of 
balance, sudden changes, peculiar 
habits, and unreasonable notions. 
A romantic love-affair. 


SATURN m 
i opposition SATURN 
mr square with 
% Unfortunate, wavering, liable Unlucky, impressionable, weak-willed, 


to great opposition, liable 
to reversals and very heavy 
losses. 

g Cruel, scornful, deceptive, hos- 
tile, calculating, perfidious, 
fateful. 

© Insincere, untrustworthy, timid, 
superficial, unjust, torpid, 
biassed, gloomy, desponding, 
unstable. 

Losses through lack of fore- 
sight, hesitancy, fear. 

Q Sensual, unjust, parsimonious, 
hostile, covetous, jealous, 
exacting, weak. 

S Cunning, deceitful, treacherous, 
miserly, misanthropic, over- 
reaching, grasping, jealous, 
unhappy, dull. 

Losses through theft, fraud, 
forgery and schemers. 

p) Melancholic, covetous, mean, 
apathetic, stupid, super- 
stitious, ambiguous, miserly, 
phlegmatic, self-centred. 


indecisive, affected by circumstances 
and environments, mistrustful, de- 
ficient in hope and confidence, 

Revengeful, malicious, hasty, violent, 
vindictive, rash, selfish, treacherous, 
cowardly, uncompromising. 

Malicious, suspicious, covetous, boast- 
ful, cowardly, fearful, solitary, selfish, 
exacting. 

Losses through land, property, in- 
heritance, and superiors, or through 
governmental action. 

Deceptive, diplomatic, avaricious, des- 
pondent, approbative, imprudent, 
thoughtless. 

Narrow-minded, over-anxious,  dis- 
contented, fanciful, suspicious, mis- 
trustful, perverse, peevish, carping, 
envious, selfish, apprehensive. 

Losses through elders, lack of enter- 
prise, fear and over-economy. 

Unfortunate, cold, repining, resentful, 
peevish, discontented, listless, pre- 
judiced, suspicious, apprehensive, 
deceitful, insincere. 


56 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


When slower planet is significator 


p— (continued) 
Losses through misfortune, fate, 


Jack of ambition, and_ ill- 
health, 


Jurrrer 
im eppesition 
or square with 

¢ Ungrateful, unconscientious, un- 
forgiving, unkind, unhappy, 
impolite, discourteous, ignor- 
ant, irreligious, cruel, vain. 

Losses through impulsive action 
and waste. 

©  Hypocritical, mistrustful, prodi- 
gal, vain, many -sided, 
affluent, empirical. 

Losses through errors of judg- 
ment, false securities, and 
obstinacy. 

Q Vain, sensual, over-liberal, dis- 
honest, given to luxury and 
extravagance. 

%  Imitative, susceptible, declara- 
tive, wavering, diffusive, un- 
certain. 

Losses through misjudgments, 
letters and travels. 

)  Exuberant, convivial, respectful, 
commiserate, liberal, impres- 
sionable. 

Losses through society, the 
opposite sex, and speculation. 


When quicker planet is significator 


Losses through fear, mistrust, hesitancy, 


lack of enterprise, energy, and 


perseverance, 


JurireR 


Wasteful, prodigal, insincere, atheis- 
tical, unfaithful, proud, cynical, 
insolent, rash and foolhardy. 

Losses through the law, wild or sense- 
less conduct, giving way to. desires 
and passions. 

Proud, haughty, pleasure-loving, ex- 
travagant, bombastic, fond of dis- 
play and ostentation. 

Losses through social intercourse, 
advice of friends, extravagance and 
legal affairs. 

Extravagant, lavish, conceited, over- 
demonstrative, fond of questionable 
pleasures, given to flattery. 


Incompetent, deceptive, involved, 
satirical, lacking in true judgment, 
impressionable. 


Losses through the law, church and 
social affairs. 


Thriftless, profuse, excessive, over- 
confident, affable, presumptuous, 
pretentious. ’ 


Losses through acquaintances, travel, 
and misplaced confidence. 


Mars 
im opposition MARS 
or square with 
©) Destructive, turbulent, gruff, Impulsive, approbative, headstrong, un- 


irritable, overbearing, vain, 
disruptive, self-willed. 

Losses through hasty conduct, 
over-liberal actions, accidents, 
fevers, and the opposite sex. 

@ Vain, boastful, offensive, rude, 
sensual, dissipated, disreput- 
able, indecerous. 

Losses through excesses 
errors of living. 


and 


ruly, irrelevant, arrogant, adventurous, 
forceful, discordant. 

Losses through rash conduct, wild and 
unfortunate speculations and un- 
fortunate enterprises. 

Forward, intrepid, sensuous, aspiring, 
fickle, daring, imprudent, impulsive. 

Losses through rash conduct and the 
opposite sex, who exercise great 
power over native. 


THE) ASPECTS >: EVEL ASPECTS 57 


When slower planet is significator 


% Energetic, active, artful, daring, 
skilful, zealous, nervous, 
fluent, anxious, demonstrative, 
shrewd, vindictive. 

Losses through impulse, hazard- 
ous enterprises, litigation, 
correspondence, and relatives. 

) Aggressive, proud, headstrong, 
obstinate, wilful, cantanker- 
ous, irritable, unfeeling, hard, 
severe, exacting, ardent, 
jealous. 


When quicker planet is significator 


Mischievous, argumentative, reprobate, 
careless, untruthful, sarcastic, resent- 
ful, defiant, fearless, impatient. 

Losses through wrangling, disputation, 
contention, strife, and mismanage- 
ment; also through abortive pro- 
jects. . 

Contentious, self-confident, masterful, 
boastful, adventurous,  indelicate, 
precipitate, fallacious, deceitful. 

Losses through rash and hasty con- 
duct, indiscreet speech and strong 


Losses through impolite and opposition. Danger from savage 
unsympathetic manner. animals. 
ii Tue Sun 


in. opposition 
or square with 


% | Between these planets and the Sun no strongly adverse aspects can be 
9J formed; the semi-square between Sun and Venus is somewhat prodigal 


in effect. a 


yp Mutable, changeable, irresolute, Ambitious, venturesome, egotistical, 


sensitive, volatile, lethargic. 

Losses through subordinates, 
inferiors, common _ people, 
and poor general health. 


Venus 
& eppesition 
er square with 


Losses 


patronising, compelling, immoderate. 
through disappointment, _ ill- 
health and over-confidence. 


Enmity with autocrats. 


VENUS 


% No adverse aspect between Venus and Mercury can be formed save the 
semi-square, which is slightly disharmonious but adverse chiefly in the 
sense of being unfavourable to art, to which the sextile aspect strongly 


inclines. 

Improvident, untidy, erratic, 
animated, ceremonial, partial, 
impetuous, vain. 

Losses through display, conten- 
tion, and pleasure. 


MERCURY 
in opposition 
or square with 


py  Impressionable, mutable, opin- 
ionative, imaginative, specu- 
lative, obscure, politic, mis- 
apprehending, indecisive, 
dexterous. 
Losses through false notions, 
personal sensitiveness, do- 
mestic affairs and removals. 


Sensuous, careless, amorous, touchy, 
morbid, fickle, sentimental, pliable, 
comic. 

Losses through dissipation, loose habits, 
indolence, thoughtlessness. 


MERCURY 


Changeable, vague, impractical, absent- 


minded, vacillating, tricky, fanciful. 
Somewhat poetical in temperament, 
but finding fancies running counter 
to ideas. 
Losses through the public, correspond- 
ence, litigation, sureties, inferiors, 
and business transactions. 


58 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


Care must be exercised in using any of the above aspects, for they 
may be much modified and improved by sign and position, also by other 
more favourable aspects. Ina minor degree they will apply also to the 
semi-square or sesquiquadrate aspect, which are as it were weaker 
expressions of the same influence, as explained on p. 47. 


re ner rere, 


We have next to consider the ‘good’ aspects by which we mean 
those that are definitely harmonious and favourable in their action in 
every sense. But what has been said under the heading of ‘evil’ 
aspects should not be lost sight of when considering the nature of the 
‘good’ aspects. Just as nothing 7 ztse/f is evil, so nothing in itself is 
good, but may be perverted; and instances can be found where, ina 
weak horoscope, the good influences are made ‘ducks and drakes of’ 
so to speak, being used simply to minister to personal gratification or 
selfish indulgence. Yet such cases are comparatively rare, and, harking 
back to our musical simile we may say that, in a general sense, the good 
aspects are like the passages of smooth, sweet harmony that follow on 
the turbulent first movement of a symphony, where the soul appears to 
dwell for a while in a calm and undisturbed atmosphere, in which strength 
is gathered and balance restored after the turmoil of battle. Every 
great nation has shown its most marked periods of artistic productiveness 
shortly after a series of struggles for constitutional or political emancipa- 
tion, the strength developed in the former being balanced by the sense 
of beauty cultivated in the latter: and in the same way we may think of 
the favourable or ‘good’ aspects as designed to harmonise the nature, 
just as the ‘evil’ ones are intended to stimulate it to achievement. 


THE ASPECTS: GOOD ASPECTS 59 


GOOD ASPECTS: TRINES OR SEXTILES 


NEPTUNE 


When slomer planet is significator 


NEPTUNE 
in sextile 
or trine with 


Hl 
h 


Nore 


The good aspects of Neptune 
are much less powerful in 
é their effect than the conjunc- 
: tions or afflictions, when 
Neptune is significator. Ina 
general sense they act in much 
©) the same way as when the 
aspecting planet is significa- 
tor. It is only very rarely 
that either Neptune or Ura- 
e nus can be regarded as the 
true ruler of the ascendant 

or other house. 


When quicker planet is significator 


Deep spiritual nature and profound 
occult ability. A strange life with 
many vicissitudes. 

Great powers of concentration and 
penetration. Subtle and astute. 
Tenacious and acquisitive, if cold 
by nature, then very cold. 

Kindly and genial nature, hospitable 
and generous. Rather given to 
pleasure and apt to be extravagant. 

Abundant and agreeable magnetism. 
Strong sense of colour. Inclined 
towards emotionalism. Artistic and 
somewhat sensuous. 

Mystical tendencies and poetic tem- 


perament. Generally fortunate on 
the whole. Knows the value of 
secrecy. 


Devotional nature very strong and 
capable of great things. In a weak 
horoscope this increases the sen- 
suous tendencies. 

Poetic and inspirational. Skill in 
scheming, designing, or constructing 


plots. Generally bestows some 
literary faculty and imaginative 
power. 


Dreamy and fanciful nature, sensitive, 
delicate and impressionable, sym- 
pathetic. Fond of the sea. 


HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


60 
When slower planet is significator 
URanvus 
in sextile 


or trine with 


h 
Y 


Nore 


The good aspects of Uranus 
are much less powerful in 
their effect than the conjunc- 
tions or afflictions, when 
Uranus is significator. In a 
general sense they act in 
much the same way as when 
the aspecting planet is signi- 
ficator. It is only very rarely 
that either Neptune or Ura- 
nus can be regarded as the 
true ruler of the ascendant 
or other house. 


When quicker planet is significator 


URANUS 


Intuitive, occult, mystical, altruistic, 
broad-minded, sincere. 

Powerful magnetism, fertility of re- 
source, contempt of danger. Re- 
markable love adventures. 

Originality, quick perception, enter- 
prise, intuition, talent, intellectuality. 
Gain through inventions, travel and 
antiquities. 

Fascinating, magnetic, attractive, 
musical and pleasure-loving. 

Occult, metaphysical, contemplative, 
studious, profound, original. Gain 
through inventions, antiquities and 
uncommon pursuits. 

Adaptable, alert, scientific, firm, 

Responsible, original. Gain through 
travel, the occult arts and mentality. 


SATURN 
SATURN 
in seatile 
or trine with 
% Religious, truthful, zealous, Serious, profound, philosophical, con- 
wise. Gain and prosperity in templative, meditative, sincere, of a 


Oy 


life, good fortune, steady 
accumulation of wealth. 

Fearless, capable, temperate, 
vigilant. 

Austere, persistent, persevering, 
careful, subtle, circumspect, 
premeditative, tactful, frugal. 
Gain through land, property, 
labour and care. 

Calm and steadfast disposition, 
gentle but persevering and 
capable of enduring much. 

Reserved, slow, steadfast, sus- 
picious, indifferent, ponder- 
ous. Gain through laborious, 
mental, scientific and re- 
sponsible pursuits. 

Acquisitive, wary, remorseful, 
serious, particular, sedate. 


steady nature and capable of apply- 
ing continuously to study. 

Considerate, determined, self-reliant, 
persevering, concentrative. 

Authoritative, responsible, diplomatic, 
sincere, just, considerate, pertina- 
cious, methodical, conservative, gain 
and honour through _ responsible 
posts. 

Modest, retiring, chaste, careful, sincere, 
frugal, unobtrusive, constant, faith- 
ful. 

Steady, painstaking, thorough, deter- 
mined, occult, zealous, chaste, 
prudent, impartial, curious, medita- 
tive. Gain through secretarial work 
of a responsible or political nature. 

Reserved, misgiving, provident, stable, 
patient, apprehensive. 


THEV ASPECTS «: GOOD) ASPECTS 61 


When slower planet is significater 
JUPITER 
tn sextile 

or trine with 


d Well disposed, generous, free, 
earnest, aspiring, command- 


ing. 

©) Unreserved, hopeful, genial, 
refined, confident, reliant, 
discriminative. Gain by in- 


vestment, social affairs, pub- 
lic office, business, or in- 
heritance. 

¢ Kind, religious, amiable, loving, 
generous, well-disposed, pure. 
Gain, good fortune, and 
general success in life through 
peace and a noble disposition 
which fortune favours. 

% Eloquent, straightforward, genu- 
ine, cordial, sound in judg- 
ment, rational, explicit, ex- 
pressive. Gain through the 
law, church or stage, pros- 
perity and success through 
critical acumen. 


When guicker planet is significator 


JUPITER 


Confident, courageous, pushful, honour- 
able, heroic; cheerful, somewhat 
over enthusiastic. 

Honourable, philanthropic, munificent, 
spiritual, trustworthy, prosperous, 
frank. Gain by favour of superiors 
and those in good social position, 
also through own natural and frank 
disposition. 

Successful, sociable, hospitable, virtu- 
ous, sincere, benevolent, good. 
Gain through social popularity and 
agreeable disposition, and through 
sensible judgment generally. Rather 
devotional nature. 

Fertile, discriminative, fruitful, virtu- 
ous, sincere, honest, just, unaffected, 
lucid, intuitive, spiritual. Gain 
through partners and by a _ well- 
balanced judgment, also through 
religious affairs. Some artistic and 
literary ability. 


y Fortunate, truthful, sincere, Successful, honourable undertakings, 
kind and social. popular and philosophical. 
M 
in psp Mars 


/ 


or trine with 
@© Dignity, exaltation, expansion, 
activity, generosity, vitality, 


faithfulness. Gain through 

enterprise, ability and 
courage. 

@  Pleasure-loving, adventurous, 

_ enterprising, sensuous, de- 

monstrative. Gain through 

pleasure and that which 


ministers to the pleasure of 
others. 

% Confident, industrious, bright, 
constructive, energetic, ex- 
peditious, Gain through the 
wit, speech and action. 

) Changeable, enterprising, self- 
reliant, competitive, impcri- 
ous, contentious, Gain 
through self-assertion, daring, 
and what is called ‘ cheek.’ 


Courage, ambition, enterprise, pene- 
tration, authority, determination 
protection. Gain through military 
or medical affairs. Much energy, 
both physical and mental. 

Vain, impressionable, susceptible, 
amorous, confident, aspiring. (Gain 
through partners and those of the 
opposite sex and through agreeable 
manners. There is always some 
artistic feeling. 

Ingenious, shrewd, enthusiastic, dili- 
gent, expert, practical, clever, fluent, 
mercurial. Gain through enterprise 
and promptitude. 

Ambitious, energetic, 
intrepid, defensive, domineering. 
Gain through general _ practical 
capacities and enterprise. There 
ts usually mechanical ability. 


adventurous, 


62 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 
When slower planet is significator When quicker planet is signifieator 


SUN THE SuN 


in se.rvtile 
er trine wilh 


@  Candour, willingness, felicity, Sociability, liberality, affection, deli- 


devotion, love, preservation. cacy, appreciation, respect, modesty, 

(Note.—This applies to the \/ cheerfulness. Gain through friend- 
of course, since it is impossible ships, marriage, legacies, and 
jor © and 2 tobein J or %.) pleasure. 

% (No aspect.) (No aspect.) 

) Success, good health, recogni- Favoured by fortune, noble-minded, 
tion, ambition, sincerity, in- persevering, and enterprising. Gain 
domitable will, dignity, hon- by the good-will of superiors and 
our, loyalty, competence. through governmental service. ‘This 
Gain through speculation, is in every sense a good posi- 
investment, authority and tion and greatly improves the 
position. horoscope. 

VENUS VENUS 


in sevtile 
o¢ trine wilh 


*%  Affable, pleasing, well-disposed, Prudent, judicious, mirthful, artistic, 


peaceful and joyous. Gain eloquent, courteous, harmless, 
by literary or poetic gifts, innocent. Gain through music, 
and through young people. art, drama and pleasure. 

}) Accomplished, approbative, es- Gentle, receptive, artistic, refined, 
timable, amiable, loving, affectionate, agreeable, attractive. 
dainty, vivacious. Gain Gain through agreeable personality 
through pleasure, females, which renders native a general 
and the negative or form side favourite ; also through clothing, 
of life ; a favourite with the delicacies, etc., and the favour of 
public but changeable. the well-born. 

Mgrcury MERCURY 


in sextile 
or tvine with 


) Dramatic, intellectual, adroit, Subtle, imitative, circulative, repro- 


thorough, expedient, reminis- ductive, representative, insinuative, 
cent, comprehensive, reason- sensitive, anecdotal, versatile, ex- 
able, capable, intuitive. Gain pressive. Gain through ready wit, 
through agencies, transit, journalistic ability, nimbleness and 
literature and the public. general adaptability. 


These aspects are not always as good as represented, since the 
influence will vary somewhat, according to sign and position, and 
other aspects may tend to counteract; but speaking generally they are 
harmonious and fortunate. If read in a somewhat restricted sense they 
may be held to apply also to the semi-sextile aad quintile aspects, but 
though slightly good these are very weak and perhaps better omitted 
from consideration altogether. The quincunx or inconjunct (A) is by 


HE ASPECTS 63 


some considered good, but this is doubtful; it is better to regard it as 
‘resolvent’ in its action, modifying and translating or transmuting the 
influence of one planet towards that of the other. 


With regard to all aspects, particular attention should be paid to the 
application of the swifter moving planet, aspects in process of formation 
by application being far more important than aspects from which the 
swifter planet is separating, especially if the latter is the significator. 
The following explanation will illustrate this idea. 

If Venus is the ruling planet, and first applies to the conjunction of 
Mercury while separating from the square aspect of Saturn, the appli- 
cation will be of primary importance, and the separation secondary, even 
if the separating aspect is closer than the application ; for the separation 
indicates a lesson that has been learned and the application a lesson 
that is to be learned, either in this life or the next.* Ifthe ruler has just 
left one aspect, and applies to another, give the principal value to the 
influence forming. The separating from any aspect to Saturn and 
applying to Jupiter is favourable for health, wealth and happiness ; but if 
the Moon separate from any aspect of Jupiter and apply to Mars or 
Saturn it is unfavourable. 

Several astrologers have noticed the effects of the luminaries and 
the planets separating from certain planets and their application to 
others, but the AZoon’s influence is the principal one to note in these 
cases, and the following separations and applications of the Moon denote 
the general effects of the applications. 


THE Moon’s APPLICATIONS 


4 to Hi Exceptional experiences, a remarkable life. 
44... fy Unfavourable environment, repression and serious obstacles. 


yt ,, ¥% Rising fortune, social aid, powerful friends. 

yt 4, S$  Chequered career, misfortunes, failing fortune. 

4t 5, © Success and fame, honours and growing fortune. 

tt | 9 Helpful friends, prosperity and a happy life. 

ts 4, & A changeful life, fluctuating fortune, many struggles. 


* This consideration explains the old rule that a planet is more ‘powerful’ 
when separating than when applying ; for we can see that its effect, as shown :n 
the character and actions, will of course be more pronounced. 


S 
a 


SOIT IITS SEE es 


QAOOAODOOD SGAABAAA LER RRRR 


40 10 40 +O +0 4040 


AQYBR IEG WOR TEE wo OraSHeG aOR miOawdEk «amo OQar yok 


HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


Tue Moon’s AppLicaTIONS—Continued 


Many enemies, deprivations, sorrowful experiences. 

Loss of liberty, danger of poverty, many disappointments 

Success in foreign lands, sudden good fortune. 

A disturbed life, misfortunes through misconduct or fateful tendencies 
Separations, estrangements, romantic attachments. 

Strange pleasures, unexpected success, good abilities. 

Diplomatic, adventurous, liable to pass through a remarkable career. 


Danger of imprisonment, deserved or otherwise, uncertain character. 
Sudden reversals, intrigues, liaisons and many dangers. 

Good fortune, health and position, 

Accidents, disasters, ill-luck. 

Improving fortune through perseverance. 

A jealous partner, disappointments. 

Losses through deceit and treachery. 


Declining fame and fortune, many reversals. 

Romance and sudden fortune, _ 

Misfortunes, sickness and sorrow, 

Gain by adventure and brave deeds. 

Success, health and fortune. 

Gain and honour by marriage. 

Gain through literature, travel, the law, church, and the young. 


An uneven career, suffering through impulsive acts. 

Violent temper, grave dangers through rash and thoughtless conduct, 
Misfortune, disease and misery. 

Gain through favours and powerful friends. 

Gain through enterprise and courage. 

Dangers from the opposite sex and passion. 

Loss through fraud, deceit and bad temper. 


Forlorn hopes, sorrow through superiors, peculiar experiences. 
Peculiar episodes, sudden adventures, flashes of intuition. 
Falls, collapses, chronic complaints. 

A fortune by speculation or investment. 

Sudden disasters, strange misfortunes. 

Successful love affairs, gain through art or music. 

Gain through intellect, science and invention. 


Loss of friendships, disappointments, dual experiences. 
Extremes of fortune, remarkable experiences. 
Disappointments, disgrace, scandal. 

Noble and lofty aspirations, a peaceful life. 
Dangerous attachments, misfortunes. 

Good health, success and prosperity. 

Spiritual progress, a useful life. 


THE ASPECTS 65 


Tue Moon’s Appiications—Continued. 
Mental disabilities, degenerating tendencies, sadness, 
Latent genius, a clever mind, some original talent. 

Cynical tendencies, pessimistic views, hard nature. 
Intuitive, gain through application and honest endeavours. 
Self-important, conceited, selfish, and too assertive. 
Expanding mind, high aspirations, full nature. 

Musical, artistic, cheerful, good nature, successful, 


If the Moon separates from no planets but applies first to any 


aspect, the following is the general influence. 

Psychic and weird experiences. 

Sudden gain and loss through adventure. 
Misfortune, sorrow and depression. 

Prosperity, wealth and happiness, kind and good. 
Indiscretion, loss through impulse and rash acts. 
Gain from superiors, noble disposition. 

Good fortune, social gain, nice disposition. 

i Clever, intellectual, but not over fortunate. 


The above can be considerably expanded by a knowledge of the 
sign, house, and nature of the aspect. 


HO HO A HO HOC 4K 40 
HOC) HR OS Hok 


to 


> 
2? 
99 
9 
99 
>? 


be fi nf i ik ee fe 
1X40 OH RW SH oft 


Those who have realised how essential it is that any hints as to the 
nature of planetary influences, aspects, etc., should not be accepted 
too matter-of-fact and literal a sense, will, it is hoped, forgive a further 
insistence on this point for the sake of their fellows who have not. 

It cannot be too strongly impressed upon the student that the 
planetary influences, aspects, etc., are primarily of a super-materia! 
nature ; so that a description of their true influence cou/d not be accurately 
expressed in words, which are material things. And although in the 
progress of his study the difference between the influence of one planet 
and another, one aspect and another, and so on, will gradually take 
definite shape in the student’s mind, yet he will never be able adequately 
to portray his idea in words,—however much he may try to do so.— 
any more than the effect a beautiful sunset has upon a sensitive mind 
can be fully expressed even in the most poetic language: for thought 
and feeling are always in advance of, and transcend, language. This 
difficulty of description, then, is more or less inevitable, but the intuitive 
mind will be able to grasp much of what is meant by the aid of the hints 
that have been given, and they will therefore serve their purpose well 
enough, no doubt. -It is only because the author has found by experi- 
ence that beginners are too apt to take what is said as a hard and fast 


rule, invariable in all cases, that he has felt this caution to be necessary. 
£ 


IMPORTANT NOTE 


It should be remembered in studying the foregoing lists that the 
conjunctions or aspects which appear first in each list are those formed 
petween the slowest planets ; they are therefore slow in formation and in 
dissolution and remain in operation for a lengthy period. Thus the 
conjunction of *# and HI will continue within “orbs” for a period of 
several years. At the last conjunction, for instance, i approached within 
an orb of 8° of *# as early as April, 1817, but it did not reach completion 
till March 2ist, 1821, and did not pass out of orbs until the end of 
December, 1825—a period of practically nine years, during the whole of 
which time these planets may be said to have been ‘within orbs of a 
conjunction.’ 

From this consideration we learn two things. First, that the orbs 
we allow for an aspect would seem to require a certain amount of 
restriction in the case of the more distant planets. Second, that since 
during a period of four or five years (halving the above soas to be on the 
safe side) every person born would have these two planets within orbs ofa 
conjunction, it must follow that the influence of such conjunction must 
be exceedingly general in its effect and must affect the community more 
than the individual: and we should therefore expect to find it indicating 
merely general tendencies rather than specific qualities: nor should we 
look for strong effect in the personal life of the native, unless (a) the aspect 
were very near completion, in which case it might be expected to have a 
marked effect on the character, and hence on the career, or (0) the planets 
forming such aspect occupied one of the angles, and would thus show out 
in the environment and personal fate. As an instance of the former, we 
may mention Sir Richard Burton and Mr Joseph Wallace, both born on 
March aist, 1821, and both having *? 6 HI in the second house of the 


nativity. The horoscopes, and incidents in the lives, of these two very 
66 


\ 


IMPORTANT NOTE 67 


remarkable people will be found in the issues of Mopern Astro.ocy for 
August, 1907, and October, 1905, respectively. 

These remarks will likewise apply to the oppositions and also, with 
suitable modifications, to the squares and trines as well. They are very 
important and should always be borne in mind when attempting to 
judge the relative values of a number of conjunctions or aspects. 

It should never be forgotten that ‘the greater includes the less’ and 
“the whole is greater than its part.’ For example, suppose a conjunction 
of the Moon and Sun to occur during the time that the Sun is in con- 
junction with, say, Mars: it might in a sense be said to take place within 
the soli-martial conjunction; and all events happening during the course 
of that lunation would therefore be coloured by the predominant 
influence of the © 6 6, under whose egis, as it were, it was 
ushered in. 


It is the PRINCIPLE here outlined that is the most important thing to 
be taken account of, and it is not necessary to enlarge upon it; the 
intuitive student will readily discern how to apply it. But by way of a 
guide and in order to assist the mind the approximate interval, during 
which any conjunction or opposition between any of the superior planets 
4t Hi hk % S$ remains within the 8° orb which has been given as the 
outside limit, may be stated as follows: *? and HI, nine years—H and h 
two years—h and ¥, one year— ¥ and 4¢, very variable, according to 
the position of the earth at the time, but say one month— h and ‘’, same 
as h and H— 7 and HW, sameas ¥Y and h— 6 and h,sameas 6 and 2. 
These periods are only approximate, but will serve as a rough guide in 
dealing with ¢6sand 6's; for Us or As take one third of these times. 

For the other conjunctions and aspects, the Ephemeris for the year 
of birth will, of course, show exactly how long they remain in force. 


CHAPTER V 
Tue THree Centres. Sun, Moon, anp ASCENDANT 


REFERENCE has already been made to the importance of the Sun, 
Moon, and Ascendant, three centres representing three vital points not 
only in the body or outer man, but also in the character and inner man. 
They are equalising and balancing powers, which adjust the ebb and 
flow or contraction and expansion in every horoscope. They have also 
other correspondences in religious philosophy, but here we need not 
follow them at present: for this side of the subject the reader is 
referred to The ‘Reason Why’ in Astrology, by Mr H. S. Green, which 
forms No. VI. of the Shilling Series of Astrological Manuals. 

- (1) The first of these centres is THE Sun, taken according to the 
zodiacal sign in which it was placed at birth. It represents the Indi- 
viduality, or the soul of the man, divested of all outer ephemeral 
phases and moods. It corresponds in its highest interpretation to the 
very basis of the nature, the very sense of existence itself, upon which is. 
built up that idea of J am I which is the root of individuality. To the 
character it gives power, authority, dignity, will, resolution, self-reliance. 
In the body it corresponds to the heart and its associated blood-vessels. 
It is the source of all vital energy, no matter whether coming directly 
from the Sun or indirectly through the Moon or the Ascendant. It is 
the centre of the being, both in body and soul. It corresponds to the 
Fixed Signs. 
em Among the planets Mercury is the messenger of the Sun, trans- 
mitting its influence outwards. In the character Mercury therefore 
represents the mind, which is the first outer garment of the individuality. 
In the body, vital energy is transmitted along the nerves: and Mercury 
stands for the cerebro-spinal nervous system mainly, along with such 


organs as the hands and tongue, which are concerned with the outward 
68 


THE THREE CENTRES. SUN, MOON, AND ASCENDANT 69 


expression of intelligence. Two further degrees are seen in Venus and 
Mars. Mars represents an expanding force, rushing from the centre, 
awakening desire and the outgoing energies. It may be said to represent 
the will of the Sun definitely directed outwards; and this in the average 
undeveloped humanity is desire, a reaching forth after something 
attractive: but in the more developed and harmoniously balanced man 
it becomes will power, an enormous force when properly controlled and 
guided by intelligence and wisdom. Venus harmonises and balances, and 
gives the longing for harmony and balance. This shows outwardly as the 
love between the sexes, which in unbalanced and irregularly developed 
humanity is capable of many distortions; but in a higher degree of 
evolution will transcend sex completely and become universal love, pity, 
and sympathy—the keynote of the Saviours of the race. The most 
matter-of-fact influences attributed to Venus in the books may be 
interpreted in this way; for the love of pleasure is only the wish to 
remove discords; and a fondness for society and for all beautiful and 
attractive things that are sources of happiness, is but the same striving 
after harmony, though often mistaken and ill-judged in its methods. 
Venus thus acts as a kind of representative of the Sun; what the planet 
balances and harmonises (=) is gathered up and passed inward (8) to 
the solar centre, there to become a permanent possession of the soul, its 
own for all eternity. Venus thus not only stands for love, peace, and 
harmony, but even acquires a signification in connection with property, 
which is seen in its rulership of Taurus, the second zodiacal sign ; its 
other associated sign, Libra, representing harmony and balance. 

(2) The second of the three centres is THE Moon, which has to be 
judged partly by the sign in which it is placed and partly by its distance 
from the Sun. The Moon signifies all things intermediate, and hence the 
Personality (which is the intermediary between the Ego and the physical 
earth of which it desires experience); the shifting and fluctuating 
personality in general, with its feelings emotions passions, pleasures and 
pains, and the life of the senses. In the body, it corresponds to all 
glandular structures and soft tissues, to the physiological life, to the 
power of growth, renewal, reproduction. 

Looking upon the body as built up of materials obtained from all 
the sub-divisions of the physical plane, the Moon stands for the etheric 
double of the physical body, or that counterpart of the body which is 
built up of the ethers of the physical plane. This double it is that forms 


70 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


a channel for the inflowing vital currents, signified by and derived from 
the first centre, the Sun; and this explains the part the Moon’plays in 
matters of health and the hyleg. The double is in close touch with the 
nervous system, the Moon’s influence over which is well-known astro- 
logically, although it has probably a closer correspondence with the 
sympathetic than with the cerebro-spinal system. The Moon plays an 
important part in matters of mediumship, for the double represents the 
missing link between the living and the dead; we live in our physical 
material body, and the dead on the astral or psychic plane; and the 
double is a kind of link or bridge between the two. Just as the Moon 
never leaves the neighbourhood of the earth, so the double can never go 
far from the body; and its separation at all is to be deprecated; such 
separation is generally indicated by the prominence of the Moon, Saturn, 
and Neptune in a horoscope. The double has a mechanical activity of 
its own in sleep, as it is a kind of receiver for all sorts of telepathic 
thought-currents, which register themselves automatically in the brain of 
the sleeper and so disturb and confuse the true experiences that might 
otherwise come through from the soul. It has been found that remark- 
able dreams are most usually experienced when the Moon is rising, 
culminating, or setting; but sometimes Uranus or Neptune may be 
found in these positions. 

The Moon corresponds in a general way to the mutable or inter- 
mediate signs, and may be regarded as a mean between the contraction 
of Saturn and the expansion of Jupiter, the two extremes already 
explained in Chapter III. The Moon lends itself to either of these 
influences. When in conjunction with Jupiter, there is the extreme 
of growth, fertility, and expansion, whether in terms of body, emotions, 
or mind; but the conjunction with Saturn, if taken alone, produces just 
the contrary effect, limiting the flow of the vital current in all three 
departments of the being. A good aspect from Saturn to the Moon, 
however, is of very great benefit; for the good aspects, as we have seen, 
signify harmony, and in this case Saturn, instead of merely limiting or 
suppressing, regulates and controls, and reduces that which is under its 
control to law and order. 

(3) The third of the three centres is the Ascenpant. It gathers up 
the influences of the twelve mundane houses into one, and stands for the 
body in general and for the head and brain in particular as the controlling 
centre of the body. Mind cannot manifest itself on this plane without a 


THE THREE CENTRES. SUN, MOON, AND ASCENDANT 71 


physical vehicle, a brain and body; and even then it can only express 
what that vehicle allows it to express. There may be and often are 
important parts of the character that are shut out by limitations of the 
physical brain, and which consequently are never manifested. The 
brain does not make the mind, but it does limit and condition its mani- 
festation. This vehicle, built up and handed on to the child by its 
parents, is represented by the twelve houses in general and the Ascendant 
in particular. It is the centre of inherited traits of character, inborn 
disposition, and parentally derived tendencies. The inner man has to 
take it as it is given him—for he does not fashion it for himself—and 
make the best use he can of it. The Ascendant thus stamps itself upon 
the man very distinctly. It can always be recognised very clearly in 
early life; but if the man breaks away from ancestral tendencies, 
developes self-reliance and the knowledge and power to mould his own 
future and to act for himself, the influence of this centre may be modified, 
may yield itself, so to speak, more and more, and become blended first 
with that of the Moon and afterwards with that of the Sun; if either 
luminary should be rising the ‘blend’ will be particularly strong. 

As ruling the brain, the Ascendant has a great deal of sympathy 
with the planet Mercury, and therefore has much influence over the flow 
of the vital currents through the nervous system. It will be remembered 
that the sixth house, which has health and disease for one of its mean- 
ings, corresponds to Virgo and Mercury. The civilised man of to-day 
lives mostly in his nervous system, and whatever affects or governs the 
nerves has an important influence upon health. This shows why the 
Ascendant is of importance when considering the question of health and 
longevity. 

The Ascendant corresponds to cardinal (movable) signs. 

These three centres may be regarded in two ways. Firstly, con- 
sidered as more or lest separable units, they may be arranged vertically 


thus: 
% Tue Sun—lIndividuality. 


2) Tur Moon—Personality. 
(3) Tue Housszs (of which the Ascendant is the first)—Body. 


In this classification the zodiac (ecliptic) would be included as part 
of the Sun’s influence; and the planets would be grouped around either 
the Moon or the Sun, although in reality they are all specialised powers 
of that great Life that functions behind the Sun. 


72 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


Secondly, when considered as three centres in a living man clothed 
in a physical body, they assume a horizontal classification. 


Bopy 
PO a rt TaN SAVE MED ete cto ate tre ei ase 
Ascendant Moon Sun 
Brain Stomach and physiological life Heart 
Intellect Senses Vitality 


Will 


The Ascendant is that which moves most quickly ; it corresponds to 
translatory motion and the guna called Rajas. The Sun moves most 
slowly, and corresponds to rotary motion and Tamas. The Moon is 
intermediate, and corresponds to vibratory motion and Sattva. 

In the first volume of this series, entitled Astrology for All, full 
particulars were given of the 144 polarities of the Sun and Moon. In 
order to complete the subject, those of the Ascendant should, strictly 
speaking, be included. This, however, would multiply the above 
number by 12, and although much greater detail would be possible, the 
extent of the work obviously precludes its being undertaken here. 

Any one of the three centres—the Sun, Moon, and Ascendant—may 
be in either a cardinal, a mutable, or a fixed sign; and this gives 9 as 
the smallest number of combinations possible. If these same positions 
are considered in relation to each other, the number is increased to 27. 
If the three centres are taken not with regard to the qualities but to the 
elements, fire, earth, air, and water, we have 12 as the result, which 
would correspond to the zodiacal signs. Again, if these are considered 
in relation to each other, there are 84 possible combinations. All these 
are included within the 1728 which represent the total permutations. 
All should be tabulated and studied, although space will not permit of it 
here. The Sunand Moonin each sign, however, are severally discribed 
and later on the ascendant also, while the character and appearance due 

p each planet rising in any sign forms part of our next chapter. 


THe INFLUENCE OF THE SUN IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 


© m This position is generally fortunate, both © m T 
for those things signified by the Sun as well as for those coming under 
Aries and the first house. It contributes to health, vitality, and length 
of life. It gives strength of will, energy, activity, self-confidence, 
wilfulness, and some rashness. The native will acquire some position 


THE THREL CENTRES. SUN, MOON, AND ASCENDANT 73 


of authority or responsibility, no matter whether he move in a humble 
sphere, or in a more public one. He will be independent in manner, 
and capable of directing others, acting as head or chief—this not 
because he aims at mere popularity or notoriety, but because he feels 
himself capable of command, nd assumes such a position naturally. 
Some kind of responsibility will fall upon his shoulders, either in little 
things or in great, according as to whether the rest of the horoscope does 
or does not back up this indication. The.’e is a natural inclination to 
religion, though the latter is sometimes more “ational than devotional ; 
but he will also be independent and positive in ~uanner, enthusiastic, 
sometimes militant, and, if carried to excess, intolerant of opposition. 
He is generally magnanimous, and his anger soon passes away. ‘There 
is a tendency to travel and exploration, also to scientific worsa. It 
favours a martial occupation, a pioneer, explorer, or leader. Toa slight 
extent it is favourable to the father for the birth of sons, and for marriage 
and the husband in a female horoscope. If afflicted, it may cause 
excitability, mental over-work, insomnia. 
© in &% This is favourable for the acquisition of money © 7 & 

and property generally. Such may come through business, through 
inheritance from a parent, through investments, stocks, and shares, or 
public undertakings. Ifa female, may gain through the husband. The 
children gain in money or possessions through the parents or their 
relatives. It is good for the acquisition of houses and lands, and for 
those whose occupation is connected with these, and with the earthy 
element generally. It is fortunate for the father, and tends towards 
matriage. The native is warm-hearted and amorous; but there is some 
slight liability to be misled in the affections, to bestow them too readily, 
or to be drawn into a /aison. He is firm, patient, obstinate; is very 
set upon achieving his end; pursues his object with great determination, 
even if it should lead him away from the lawful track. He is rather 
ambitious, and desirous of assuming a prominent position, and frequently 
occupies some more or less isolated or reponsible position. ‘This 
influence may lift the native up somewhat and give the favour of those 
in authority, orin a higher sphere of life. In abad horoscope, there may 
be notoriety rather than fame, and bad temper rather than firmness, 
and it is then apt toincrease selfishness. There is some inclination for 
poetry, music, painting, or the like. Native is usually generous and 
free, but sometimes quite the opposite tendency shows itself, and he is 


74 ‘SHOW TO ‘JUDGE’ A* NATIVITY 


extremely careful in money matters. This position is good for vitality, 
but in an afflicted horoscope may tend towards fits, convulsions, or 
effusion of blood on the brain. 

© in UW This strengthens the intellect, and inclines the © 7” 
native to the pursuit of literature, science, or art, and to following some 
occupation connected with these. It favours educational, secretarial, 
and clerical work, writings, documents, letters; literary work of a short 
er ephemeral kind, such as in magazines, newspapers, pamphlets, or 
small books; work connected with messengers, means of transit, the 
post-office, etc. The mind is versatile, and fond of change, but positive 
and strong. Native is somewhat ambitious and aspiring, and may turn 
to public work connected with education, local politics, or public speaking 
and lecturing. He is fond of moving about, of walking, and of short 
journeys, principally by land. He makes friends among literary people, 
and others signified by Gemini, and may join some society or association, 
the activities of which are those of Gemini. He may be the cleverest 
or best educated, or best known of his family. It sometimes gives 
several brothers or sisters. This position slightly favours the birth of 
twins, two love affairs, and two marriages in a female horoscope. The 
children gain through their parents, relatives or friends. 

© in 95 This is good for money or property gained from © i @ 
the parents. Money may be gained through some occupation connected 
with the water or liquids, with house or land property or shipping, with 
acting or public performing. To a slight extent it inclines to such 
occupations as detective, gaoler, policeman, worker in hospital or poor- 
house, or some public occupation not refined or not popular, or not in 
very good repute, plebeian. At some period of his life native will live near 
water. It is slightly unfavourable for a strong constitution and longevity, 
for the parents, and for marriage in a female horoscope, but if marriage 
occurs, money may be gained through the husband. The native is 
attached to home and family life and the mother, and prospers with house 
and land property. He is easy-going, fond of pleasure and amusements. 
In a bad horoscope, this position may incline to dissipation and evil 
courses ; it weakens the will somewhat, and renders the native untrust- 
worthy: threatens obstacles and disappointment in life. It favours the 
birth of children, but if much afflicted they may be sickly or not 
prosperous. 

© m 8 This position brings out strongly the qualities © am Q 


THE THREE CENTRES. SUN, MOON, AND ASCENDANT 75 


of the Sun. The native is ambitious, aspiring, and capable of filing 
positions of authority and responsibility ; is fond of exercising authority 
and stands a good deal on his dignity, but is generous and magnanimous, 
affectionate and sympathetic. This position favours all who rule over, 
direct, or employ others; also actors, public performers, schoolmasters 
and instructors, and those who follow occupations that oblige them to 
come to the front to amuse, instruct or direct others. The native is 
generally found in some more or less prominent or responsible position, 
whatever his sphere of life: itis difficult for him to act in subordinate 
capacities unless he has others under him, or unless the indications of 
serving are prominent in the horoscope. He is very kind-hearted, 
sociably inclined, and fond of cutting a figure in society; and is 
susceptible in affairs of the heart. This position is fortunate for the 
father, for health and longevity, and for marriage in a female horoscope. 
It favours the birth of a son. It contributes to the manifestation of 
genius if other positions support it. 
© in WY This position is favourable for the acquisition of © i ™ 

money through some occupation wherein the native acts as subordinate, 
or where he is more or less under the command of a chief or superior; 
some post in which he is not the sole head, but is responsible to some 
master. He may be one of the rank and file, a worker, but is more 
likely to be a manager with others under him, but himself responsible to 
ahead. In some cases this may take the form of partnership. He does 
not make a good master when left to himself ; there is some defect in his 
administration; want of self-confidence, or bad judgment or some other 
cause. He is most fortunate when he receives advice, help, or direction 
‘from someone else. He is liable to suffer through servants or sub- 
ordinates, unless the Sun is well-aspected, when he may benefit 
considerably through them. It tends to literary, medical, or scientific 
work, books, reading, secretarial or clerical work; and he may make 
money by some occupation connected with these. Itis slightly unfavour- 
able for health, and the constitution of the native, as well as of the father 
or son. Itis rather unfavourable for marriage and the husband in a 
female horoscope, and there may be misfortune in love. -It slightly 
favours money from parental relatives, and occupations of the earthly 
element. The disposition is rather serious or subdued, and may be 
melancholy at times, not sufficiently reliant, hopeful, or self-assertive, 
feeling disappointment keenly. He may be looked upon as either very 


76 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


judicial and impartial, or as vacillating and not to be depended upon, 
according to the nature of the horoscope. 

© iz == The native is rather popular and generally © m= 
liked; is sociable, affectionate and romantic; fond of company, and easily 
makes friends, especially with the opposite sex. He has some taste and 
ability for science and the fine arts, poetry, music or painting, and may 
excel in one of these directions. This position tends to bring about an 
early engagement or marriage, unless some other part of the horoscope 
forbids it; but there is likely to be some trouble connected with either 
or both events, such as disappointment in love or disharmony in marriage 
(chiefly in a female horoscope). The native can be independent if 
necessary, but is seldom or ever overbearing or proud. Is kind and 
sympathetic, and likes to awaken brotherly and friendly feelings in others, 
and often gives way to others for the sake of peace. Is just, sincere, 
and impartial; sometimes very intuitive, and may manifest genius in 
some direction. There is a dash of the democratic and brotherly spirit 
in him, no matter what his opinions or position in life. It is favourable 
for joining societies, associations, companies, partnership. Itstrengthens 
the link of affection between the native and his brothers and sisters. It 
inclines slightly to travel, especially short journeys by land. It favours 
sociability, good humour, and a buoyant, hopeful spirit. 

© in™_ This increases the vitality; but if the horoscope © zw Mm 
shows much affliction, and other testimonies coincide, there is liability 
to an early or sudden death. Native is liable to accidents, illnesses and 
death of the nature of Mars and Scorpio, especially if the Sun is hyleg. 
A death may occur in his family, or among those closely concerned 
with it, shortly before or after his birth. This position is unfavourable 
for the parents (especially father) and for the husband (in a female horo- 
scope): it may cause the death of these, or separation or estrangement 
from them. It promises children, but threatens the death of one 
(especially son). The native may gain money or estate by marriage, 
partnership, or inheritance, but this position of the Sun tends to extrava- 
gance, and if afflicted native may lose heavily in any of these ways. 
It favours martial occupations and those coming under Scorpio and the 
eighth house. It tends slightly to the occult and to all mysterics and 
hidden things, whether those of the chemist, the physiologist, the 
detective, or what not. It gives firmness, determination, and obstinacy. 
The native resists outside influences, and all changes that do not originate 


THE THREE CENTRES. SUN, MOON, AND ASCENDANT 77 


with himself, though in order to carry out his own purposes he may 
inaugurate great and revolutionary changes, constructive or destructive. 
He has much pride and self-confidence, with energy and activity, and 
may come to the front on this account. He is sometimes passionate, 
with a strong temper. This position shows contradictory influences of 
good and bad, rise and fall, which may be seen in different horoscopes 
according to the aspects, and sometimes in the same horoscope at 
different times; the native may follow some plebeian or unpopular 
occupation, and rise considerably therein; or vice versd, he may occupy 
some eminent position and not succeed therein. In some way the 
apparent contradiction will work itself out. 
© inf The native is goodnatured, generous, judicial, © mt 
and impartial. He is naturally religious and sincere, and may be very 
intuitive and mystical, original in his work, an inventor or discoverer, 
and he becomes known for some special work he has done. Even when 
he does not follow the religion of his neighbours, he is generally honest 
and sincere in his opinions. He is restless in mind and body, hopeful 
and enthusiastic. He may follow more than one occupation or pursuit 
at a time, or change his occupation. He is suited for occupations of 
the nature of the ninth house. This position is favourable for health 
and the birth of sons, and inclines to travelling and voyaging and 
change of residence. It strengthens the intuition, and may exist with 
genius. 
© in VS The native is ambitious and aspiring, desirous of © im V5 

power and fame, and is well fitted for leading, commanding and directing 
others, whether for good or evil. He often makes a prominent figure in 
his sphere of life, or he may rise in the world and gain celebrity (or 
notoriety). Sooner or later he occupies some position of importance or 
responsibility where he has to guide others or act as head over others. 
He has few confidants or intimate friends, and may become isolated 
through fate or misfortune, and lonely. He is thoughtful and subtle, 
serious and reserved, may be wanting in buoyancy and hopefulness, and 
is somewhat conservative in his tendencies and respect for conventional 
opinions, although if Mars be prominent this may be altogether changed. 
He often succeeds well as manager for another, or in some large enter- 
prise where he is the head or all but the head, such as in wholesale 
trading, banking, or in the direction of some company. He makes a 
good master and good servant, unless there are contrary testimonies, but 


78 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


prefers the position of master. There may be a good deal of self and 
selfishness in him. This position is not good for health or longevity, but 
other influences may counteract this. Itisalsounfavourable for marriage 
and the health of the husband (in a female horoscope) and threatens the 
ill-health or death of a child (probably son). 
© ins The native is popular, sociable and makes © mse 
friends readily. He is to some extent democratic and broad minded in 
his sympathies, although at the same time cautious and prudent. He 
often leads a more or less public life, where he comes before the many 
rather than the few. He is interested in educational or political affairs, 
or popular movements for the benefit of the many, and may follow some 
more or less intellectual pursuit. He is patient and persevering, skilful, 
humane, intelligent, and may rise considerably in life above the sphere 
of his birth, mainly by his own exertions. He is original and self 
reliant, and yet makes many friends, by whose help, advice or favour in 
some way he benefits. In large or in small things, for good or evil 
fortune, he is pretty sure to be known as a reliable worker, and to come 
to the front as such; but it is necessary for him to have his own way, as 
he is independent and dislikes control. He will join some partner, 
society, association, club, or community or some movement bringing 
one or many others to join with him in acommon cause. The position 
is slightly unfavourable for the father, it favours the birth of sons but 
brings trouble with one of them. It inclines slightly to bring about 
marriage, but is slightly unfavourable to the husband (in a female 
horoscope) and may cause some trouble in married life, or in love 
matters. It is slightly unfavourable for vitality and long life unless 
contra-indicated by aspect or mundane position. 
© in This gives a restless, changeable disposition, © im 

often too retiring and not sufficiently self-reliant. The native is either 
quiet and unambitious, or, if he essays great things and positions of 
importance, either does not gain them or does not retain them. He 
may be upheld in a high position by the influence of others or by 
association with someone. There is a lack of self-initiative, and he is 
greatly influenced by persons and circumstances instead of moulding 
them to his will. If he is a leader, he is to some extent a mere figure- 
head, expressing the views of his party rather than forcing his own upon 
them. It indicates the server rather than the ruler, and points out 
occupations which are humble or somewhat plebian, or which do not 


THE THREE CENTRES. SUN, MOON, AND ASCENDANT 79 


af 
entail prominence, as well as the natural occupations of this sign and 
the twelfth house. There may be at some time in life a good deal of 
unpopularity or hostility shown to the native, or he may have moments 
of considerable depression and anxiety; it threatens many obstacles 
and misfortunes in life. He is sociable and good humoured, but rather 
easily influenced by others. Is usually sincere and religious, but liable 
to change his religion or occupation, or may have two occupations at 
once ; is wanting in perseverance. ‘This position is slightly unfavourable 
for vitality and a sound constitution, also for the father and for marriage 
(in a female horoscope). <A child is likely to die or prove unfortunate. 
It is not very good for love affairs, and causes hindrances and obstacles. 


There may be gain by marriage, legacy or partnership. 
! 


Tue INFLUENCE OF THE MOON IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 


)w Y  Anenthusiast in some direction; impulsive, )m T 
aggressive and militant in manner, sometimes irritable and liable to fits 
of anger. Insists on having his own way; disobedient to superiors; 
independent and self-reliant. Somewhat volatile or changeable, and 
depending upon impulse: disliking conventionality or discipline. May 
achieve popularity or notoriety. May be placed in some position in 
which he exercises authority over a number of people or is head over 
many. He will be at the head of some undertaking, or will be in some 
way prominent in his sphere of life. ‘There is some liability to feverish 
diseases and affections of the head, especially if the Moon is hyleg. He 
will go more by intellect than intuition. The mother will play a promi- 
nent part in the life in some way, often not a sympathetic or fortunate 
one; and there is likelihood of differences between the native and his 
parents, or the latter may die early or be separated from him. This 
position favours pursuits of the nature of Mars, independent or original 
ventures. The native wlll strike out a path for himself or at least 
attempt to do so; and much that he does, both wrong and right, will 
be unexpected by his friends and contrary to their advice. Mysticism 
or occultism of some kind may show in his life; or the tendency may 
take the form of a necessity for secrecy in some of his affairs; his occu- 
pation may sometimes involve secrecy or mystery or be of low class; 
though this is very contrary to his nature. He may meet with 
unpopularity or threatened scandal of some kind. 


Bo HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


) 2 8 Quiet and unimpulsive: persisent, determined, ) mm & 
and not to be thwarted in his aims. Somewhat hopeful, ambitious, and 
desirous of excelling. Following established customs, conservative by 
nature, resisting change and outside influences. This position gains 
friends for the native, and favours the acquisition of money, houses, or 
land. It favours occupations of the nature of the earthy element; 
dealing in land, houses, heavy goods, old established businesses ; or the 
native may succeed to the father’s business and gain or inherit from 
a parent. In some cases the native may support the mother, or she 
benefits financially through the native. Sometimes the occupation may 
be one considered low class, plebian, or unpopular, involving secrecy 
or mystery; but it will generally be remunerative; and unless contra- 
dicted elsewhere in the horoscope, the native will prosper financially. 
This position of the Moon is favourable for occupations of water and 
liquids, and for living near rivers or on the coast; and slightly good for 
money derived from companies, wholesale trading, associations, societies, 
etc. It is slightly favourable for marriage and short journeys, also for 
singing, music, painting: for gaining friends and joining societies. The 
native will have more sisters and brothers, and will usually be friendly 
with them throughout life. He is somewhat sensuous and material, but 
sociable and of good disposition. 

) tz W Strengthens the intellect, and makes the native ) am 0 
a lover of books, of study, of scientific and literary pursuits ; and inclines 
him to some occupation of the nature of Mercury and the third house. 
He is active in mind and body; changes his residence frequently, or has 
more than one house; often goes on short journeys; travels, or is out 
and about a good deal; is often out-doors, walking or riding, etc., or 
calling on other people. Heis skilful and dexterous with his hands and 
arms. Is able to live by his wits, and may gain money as messenger, 
traveller, salesman, speaker, clerk, writer, designer, journalist, engraver, 
artist, sculptor, or by study and literature. May have more than one 
occupation, or may change his occupation. May have step- (or adopted) 
mother or brothers and sisters. The mind is prone to change, and 
there may: be irresolution, or lack of preservance; in a bad horoscope 
this may show as underhandedness, subtlety, lack of straightforwardness 
and honesty, especially in matters of the second, third, and fourth 
houses. Money may be gained through the mother, or her side of the 


family (or lost if the Moon is afflicted). Native resembles the mother | 


THE THREE CENTRES. SUN, MOON, AND ASCENDANT &1 


Grentally or bodily. If the Moon is much afflicted, will suffer through 
matters of Gemini and the third house. 

) iz 25 The native is fond of ease andcomfort at home, ) zz 95 
is homely in his habits, and attached to his home. It attaches him to his 
mother, whom he may take after. He is friendly and sociable in manner, 
is imaginative, emotional and changeable. He is influenced greatly by 
his surroundings, is sensitive to outside influences, and to some extent 
falls in readily with the ways and methods of others, adopts the sugges- 
tions of others, sympathises with the joys and sorrows of others, and 
takes on his colouring from outside, to some extent. He is most 
fortunate when acting under the direction of, or in accordance with, the 
advice of someone else. But this may be greatly modified if positive 
signs or planets are prominent in the figure; under the influence of 
Mars, or martial signs, especially, he may show much positiveness and 
independence. There is some ability for acting, mimicking, expressing 
the thoughts and emotions of others ; also for music, painting or poetry. 
This position relates somewhat to mediumship, psychism, and the astral 
plane generally. The nativeis drawn to the watery element; lives near 
water or travels by water; deals in liquids; and is fortunate with house 
or land property and shipping. This is a fruitful position and increases 
the number of children. 

) zz SL One of the signs of rulership. It tends to uplift ) a 2 
the native, to put him in positions of responsibility, or prominence, and 
to give him authority over others as head, or manager, or director. It 
is favourable for money matters, for inheritance from a parent, or 
pecuniary help from those wealthier than the native; and it gives the 
favour of those in higher ranks of life than the native. It may give 
money through any occupation of the Fifth House. It gives some love 
of luxuries, pleasures, perfumes, jewels, fine clothes, etc. Native is 
ambitious, desirous of occupying a prominent place, and does not 
hesitate to come before the public. He is honourable, generous in money 
matters, high minded, candid, and warm hearted. He is susceptible in 
affairs of the heart, a favourite with the opposite sex, and a sincere lover. 
It favours intuition and genius; it gives love of music, poetry or painting. 
The position is rather unfavourable for the father, and it will co-operate 
with any other influence in causing trouble to the father and superiors 
through the native. 


) zz ™ The native has good intellectual powers and is ) i MR 
r 


Ra HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


capable of following some intellectual pursuit; he has a good memory 
and learns easily. Itis good for any occupation of the nature of the 
Sixth House, and, to a less extent, of the Third also. It covers a great 
variety of occupations; servant, manager, agent, or subordinate in any 
capacity; any occupation connected with grain or food-stuffs, such as 
farmer, miller, grocer, malster, confectioner; and any connected with 
drugs or medicine, chemist, druggist, herbalist, analyst, doctor, dispenser, 
etc.; and to less extent those of the Third House. He makes a trust- 
worthy and fortunate servant and himself is fortunate through servants 
or those under him. This position, taken alone, tends to make him 
quiet and easy going, somewhat irresolute, not ambitious or pretentious. 
It does not favour sound health, and is not good for the mother; it tends 
to affections of the body or of that part governed by the house in which 
the Moon is situated. He has many friends, especially female friends. 
May belong to some company, firm, society, or association. There is 
likelihood of many short journeys and work as secretary, messenger, clerk, 
traveller, schoolmaster, etc. 
) wx = This position favours marriage, more especially ) 7 = 
in a male horoscope, and makes the native popular and attractive with the 
opposite sex, and it conduces to general popularity. It gives fondness 
for music, poetry, and the fine arts generally, and much ability in this 
direction. The native is affectionate, good natured, kind in manner and 
easily gains friends. It is fortunate for the parents, especially mother 
and for the inheritance from parents, especially mother; also for house 
and property. The native is fond of company, society and friends. 
Much of his fate and many events of his life will come about through his 
association with other people; he will be greatly swayed and influenced 
by other people; generally by some one person. It tends strongly to 
partnership, not merely in business, but in almost all affairs of life. He 
works with another person in nearly all undertakings; and, without 
necessarily being irresolute, depends largely upon some one else, and 
can get along best in almost all things when associated with someone. 
The marriage may be helped or hindered (according to aspects) by a 
parent, either of the native or the marriage partner. The same may ~ 
be said of the occupation and position in life. There may be some 
difference either in age or social position between the native and the 
marriage or business partner. 
Din M The native is very firm and determined, self-reliant, ) zz ™ 


THE THREB CENTRES. SUN, MOON, AND ASCENDANT 83 


and assured, and well able to stand alone and fight his own battles. ~ He 
is abrupt and plain spoken, positive, energetic and capable of hard work, 
though also fond of the good things of the world and of easy living. He 
is conservative and averse to change, especially if forced upon him from 
without; he is difficult to influence and may be very obstinate; and yet 
for his own purposes he will sometimes appear very revolutionary and 
changeable, and will advocate or carry out great and revolutionary 
changes. He is sometimes irritable, angry, and revengeful; this being 
a very bad position if backed up by other evil influences. This is a 
fruitful sign and increases the number of children, but threatens the 
death of, or trouble through one. If hyleg, it gives considerable vitality, 
but with liability to feverish diseases, especially of the lower bowel, 
bladder, and other adjacent parts. The position is not favourable for 
the mother and her side of the family. It does not favour morality, and 
may give habits of drinking; it often causes a coarseness in speech or 
manner, and threatens some scandal to the native; it rather tends 
against fineness of feeling and refined instincts. It inclines to medium- 
ship, psychism and occultism. A death occurs in the native’s family, or 
in the ranks of their close associates, shortly before or soon after his 
birth or early in his life; and he has much to do with death, acts as 
executor, is frequently brought into relation with the dead, or may follow 
some occupation bearing upon the dead. It attracts to the opposite sex 
in any horoscope; favours marriage in a male horoscope, but threatens 
disharmony in the married state or in the relations with the opposite sex. 
It slightly favours money by inheritance, marriage, or partnership, but 
there is trouble in connection with it and loss through high expenditure 
or wastefulness, especially if bad aspects coincide; or he may be called 
upon to spend freely for his family or others. 

ed ) ax f This gives a quick, restless and unsettled manner, ) zz f 
either to the body or mind; the native is active in body and fond of 
physical exercise, sports, athletics, is a quick walker and worker. He is 
inclined to travel, and changes his abode frequently, and will probably 
go a voyage at least once in his life. His disposition is sincere and 
honourable, kindly and good humoured. There is a strong inclination 
to the occupation and affairs of the Ninth House, and these are sure to 
be prominent in the life history. The native is religious and sincere in 
his belief even if it be unorthodox. There is some inclination for 
mysticism, psychism, and the occult; he is a natural teacher or preacher, 


84 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


and may have something of the prophet in his nature. The intuition is 
increased and made more sensitive, and there may be some psychic gift, 
such as clairvoyance. There is a tendency to dreaming and somnam- 
bulism. There may be talent or even genius for religion, philosophy, 
music, poetry, etc. In the lower type of horoscope the animal side of 
the sign will show rather than the religious, and then occupations and 
amusements connected with shipping and horses will be prominent in 
the life. He is a faithful worker or servant, and himself benefits by 
servants or those under him. He may have two occupations or may 
change his occupation. May have a step-parent or be adopted. 
) a V8 This tends to bring the native before the public ) a 

for good or evil, popularity or notoriety, though it usually has some 
drawback attaching to it; he may achieve relative fame or notoriety, or 
may move in some sphere that brings him before many people. If well 
aspected, he may be very popular as the head of some undertaking, may 
attract attention as a prominent or responsible person in some way, for 
something he has done or with which he is associated; but if badly 
aspected, the publicity signified by this position may be of an unpleasant 
nature. It gives some degree of rulership, generalship and administrative 
ability, which is intensified if the Sun is in a sign or house having a 
similar power, or if a congenial sign is rising. There is always some 
drawback or difficulty attaching to the occupation or to the fame or to 
the position the native gains; he may raise up enemies, open or secret, 
or his reputation may suffer, with or without his having deserved it. 
There is some trouble connected with the parents; one dies, or there 
may be differences, inharmony, or separation, or the birth may be 
illegitimate, or the native badly brought up by the parents. These 
troubles will not all be traced in each case, but some one of them will 
nearly always be found. It slightly favours marriage but there is also 
some drawback here: the marriage partner may die, or there may be 
disharmony; there may be differences in age, social position, or 
possessions. According to aspects, a parent may help or hinder the 
marriage prospects. The native is rather fond of show, is rather selfish, 
careful with money matters, calculating and cautious, and knows how to 
influence others, but is often cold by nature and thinks too little of the 
feelings of others. If the horoscope is a good one, the more undesirable 
characteristics of this position may be obviated. If other influences. 
assist, he may attain very considerable fame or prominence. 


THE THREE CENTRES. SUN, MOON, AND ASCENDANT 85 


) in <= This gives some inclination for astrology, fortune ) mm = 
telling, dreaming, visions, mediumship, mysticism, and the occult 
generally. Subjects that are unusual, original, eccentric, and novel, 
attract the native. He may become a freemason, or join some secret or 
mystical society, association or brotherhood. He is broad and humani- 
tarian in his sympathies; fraternises readily with those who are congenial 
to him, is easily drawn into the company of such, and will be found in 
some club, society, association, or group of those similarly minded. He 
has an inclination for political, educational, and scientific work, and may 
join any movement or public body relating to these ; has some inclination 
for local politics and municipal affairs. He is sociable and sympathetic 
in manner, and desirous of the good opinion of others, and yet may be 


very independent, unorthodox, and unconventional at times. It increases . 


the imagination, intuition, and mental sensitiveness generally. To a 
slight extent it favours benefit and inheritance from females or the 
mother’s side of the family, from partnership in business, and from 
occupations and affairs of the nature of the Fourth House, but these will 
suffer greatly under bad aspects. It is slightly unfavourable for marriage 
(in a male horoscope) and for the mother. It is slightly unfavourable 
for the constitution, especially the nervous system. If the Moon is 
afflicted the eyesight may suffer. } 

Din 4 The native is quiet, retiring, and easy going, is Dmx 
restless and fond of variety, easily changes his mind, is irresolute and 
not always to be depended upon, is rather easily discouraged, and meets 
with obstacles, misfortune, and opposition in life. It favours travelling 
especially by water, and change of residence. It gives a liking for reading 
of a romantic or emotional kind, for poetry and music that appeals to the 
emotions and feelings. As speaker, writer, composer, the native is 
fluent, copious, imaginative, and diffuse. Heinclines to be religious but is 
hkely to be more emotional than intellectual ; his opinions being felt rather 
than reasoned out. He is sometimes wanting in buoyancy and hope, is 
too serious or too easily depressed, and may lack matter-of-fact common 
sense and humour. There may be a tendency to intemperance or 
dissipation, laudanum drinking, etc. Mediumship, clear dreaming, and 
various psychic powers may manifest themselves. It softens the frame 
and increases the fleshy and glandular structures and is not favourable 
for robust health. The native’s birth may bring trouble to the mother, 
There is danger from secret enemies: the native may himself not be 


86 HOW: TO "JUDGE. AS NATIVITY 


quite straightforward; and there is liability to detention in hospital, 
poorhouse, prison, etc. ; but the worst effects will not follow unless there 
are accompanying bad aspects or other indications. 


It has been shown in a previous chapter that each house is, as it 
were, coloured and modified by the sign on its cusp. In considering 
the influence of the Ascendant, therefore, it is necessary to take into 
account the modifications introduced by each sign when rising. These 
may be, in each case, arranged under the two heads of Personal 
Appearance and Character. The descriptions that follow apply to the 
rising sign alone; when a planet rises in that sign modifications are 
introduced according to the nature of the planet; and in giving 
descriptions of personal appearance it is also usually necessary to take 
into account the influence of the sign containing the Moon. It has been 
found by experience that when the Moon is decreasing in light (going 
from full to new) the native is sometimes better described by the setting 
than by the rising sign, but it is still uncertain precisely when this 
occurs; it apparently varies according to the rules governing the pre- 
natal epoch, which are not as yet completely understood. If no planet 
is rising the sign occupied by the lord of the ascendant should be 
specially noted, for in any case it has a strongly modifying influence not 
only on the character and temperament, but even on the appearance as 
well. | 


APPEARANCE AS DENOTED BY THE Risinc SIGN 


Ariss, (.—Mliddle stature or rather above it; spare body ; long face and 
neck; head broad at temples and narrow at chin; bushy eyebrows; sharp 
sight ; eyes grey to greyish-brown ; rough or wiry hair, varying in colour from 
dark to sandy ; sandy whiskers ; ruddy complexion ; sometimes going bald at the 
temples. Motive temperament. 

Mental tendencies : courage, energy, impulse, ambition, pride, combativeness, 
activity, ardour. 

Taurus, % .—Stature, middle to short, inclining to plumpness; square face 
and square build of body; short strong neck ; forehead, nose, lips, cheeks, and 
mouth all full ; heavy jaw; dark eyes and hair, the latter sometimes curling ; 
often stoops; round and prominent eyes ; hands plump, short and broad. 

_ Mental tendencies: constant, persevering, determined, conservative, 
obstinate ; can be agreeable, affectionate, sociable and loving; but can be also 
very unreasonable, prejudiced, and wrong-headed, and when angry will stop at 
nothing. Proud and ambitious of power. Are good plodding workers, but in 
the unrefined types sometimes very slow, indolent, and sensuous. 

Gemini, I1.—Tall, slender, and erect figure ; long face, nose and chin; 


THE THREE CENTRES. SUN, MOON, AND ASCENDANT 87 


arms and fingers long; dark hair; sanguine complexion; hazel eyes, quick 
sight ; quick and active walk. Mental temperament. 

Mental tendencies: good all-round mental abilities; quick at learning, fond 
of reading and writing; can receive a good education ; inclination for music, 
drawing, paiating, dancing, languages; manual dexterity ; active mentality ; 
lively, ingenious, and quick-witted ; good disposition. Sometimes shy and retiring. 

Cancer, 95.—Not above average height ; round face; full cheeks ; some- 
times double chin ; grey or light blue eyes; pale complexion ; vital temperament ; 
tendency to stoutness; sometimes an awkward or heavy walk; short nose, 
sometimes prominent at tip. 

Mental tendencies: very changeable, fond of novelty, fond of travelling 
and yet usually attached to relatives and the home; cautious, prudent, careful 
with money, desirous of possessions; sympathetic; some psychic or occult 
tendency sometimes shows out. Usually lacking in combativeness, but if Mars is 
prominent may become very much the reverse. 

Leo, §2.—Tall; large bones and muscles; broad shoulders; hair light in 
colour, with a tendency to baldness; head full-sized and round ; grey eyes; 
florid or ruddy complexion ; upright walk ; motive temperament ; square build 
of body in middle age. 

Mental tondencies: self-confident, ambitious, proud, fearless, generous, 
open, candid, honourable, warm-hearted, fond of power and distinction ; dignified 
when opposed, and despising enemies ; impulsive, but faithful and unchanging ; 
determined and persevering. 

Virco, Ny.—Average height or rather above it; face and forehead round ; 
dark hair, eyes, and complexion ; moderately plump; well-formed. Usually 
mental-motive temperament. 

Mental tendencies : good mental abilities, in some respects very like Gemini, 
ingenious, active mind, sympathetic, quiet, retiring, fond of learning, methodical, 
critical, thoughtful ; sometimes rather undecided and vacillating. 

Lisra, <+.— Tall, well-formed body, slender in youth but tending to stout- 
ness in middle age ; hair smooth, brown to black; eyes blue or brown; round 
face, good complexion; features regular, often good looking. Mental-vital 
temperament. 

_ Mental tendencies: cheerful, genial; fond of society, company and amuse- 
ments; good-natured, humane; loving but changeable, attracted by many 
rather than one. Good mental abilities, but oftener showing in an imaginative 
or artistic direction than as pure intellect. 

Scorpio, M.—Average height; hair dark, sometimes growing thick and 
curling or waving; prominent brows and perceptive faculties: aquiline or 
Jewish type of nose and profile ; often square type of face and build of body. 
Motive-vital temperament. ‘Tendency to stoutness. 

Mental tendencies: self-reliant, wilful, courageous, determined ; energetic 
and active when roused but at other times indolent ; very fixed and obstinate 
and difficult to influence; angry and revengeful when provoked. Some are 
very practical, executive and matter-of-fact, good business men and desirous of 
money. Others have a strong inclination for occultism or mysticism in some 
form. ‘The sign also inclines somewhat to chemistry, surgery or practical 
scientific research as apart from theory. They make good soldiers and sailors. 

Sacirrarius, f.—Tall, slender, well-formed; hair brown or chestnut; 


88 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


ryes blue or hazel; oval face; fresh complexion ; inclining to baldness near 
vemples. Motive-mental temperament. 

Mental tendencies: generous, good-hearted, cheerful, charitable, somewhat 
rmpulsive, active and enterprising, sympathetic and humane. Fond of travelling, 
voyaging, out-door sports and exercises. Inclination to religion or philosophy. 
Just, truthful, candid. 

Capricorn, )%.—Stature average to short ; sometimes bony and thin ; long 
or prominent nose; in profile hatchet-faced ; thin neck, long chin; dark or 
black hair, usually not plentiful; thin beard. Motive or motive-mental 
temperament. 

Mental tendencies: ambitious, persistent ; a strong sense of self-importance 
and often much selfishness; great desire for pomp or power or wealth, or 
self-aggrandisement ; disposition cold, sometimes despondent; subtle, much 
mental ingenuity and fertility ; quiet and reserved but determined. Changeable 
and capricious. Ability for managing and organising ; firmness ; self-possession ; 
self-control. ‘They succeed:rather by perseverance and plodding than by intense 
or spasmodic effort. Not remarkably sociable or affectionate. ‘Self’ and 
‘mentality’ characterise the sign. Children and young people often unfortunate. 
The sign shows out much more favourably and characteristically in middle and 
old age. Other things being equal, if the native lives past the middle age, 
Capricorn favours old age and tenacity of life; but it is quite the reverse with 
infants. | 

Aquarius, <.—Middle stature, strong and well formed; square build of 
figure ; tendency to stoutness; good complexion ; sometimes good looking ; 
hair varies from light to dark ; face long and fleshy. 

Mental tendencies : good intellectual and practical abilities ; good disposi- 
tion; patient, self-controlled, quiet, humane, constant, persevering; fixed 
opinions, not easily altered ; ingenious, inventive, fond of knowledge ; sometimes 
inclining to psychic matters. 

Pisces, }{.—Stature middle to short; fleshy person and face; pale com- 
plexion, full eyes; tendency to double chin; small and short limbs; hair 
plentiful, dark. Vital temperament. 

Mental tendencies: easy-going and good-natured; indolent; uncertain, 
changeful ; emotional, charitable, affectionate ; sometimes diffident and reserved 
or secretive. 


RULES FOR DESCRIBING THE PERSONAL APPEARANCE 


(2) Note carefully the degree of the ascending sign, and modify the whole 
sign by the decanate rising. Remember that persons who are tall are born in 
the first decanate of the sign rising, those of average or medium height in the 
middle of the sign, and those who are short or below the average in the last degrees. 

(2) Note the planet or planets rising in or near the ascendant; the nearer 
they are to the cusp, the greater will be their modification of the rising signs’ 
influence. : 

(c) Note the aspects of planets to the ascendant, for they colour or influence 
the rising sign. 

(2) When several are rising in the ascendant make no attempt to give an 
accurate description, as it cannot be determined owing to the impossibility of 
combining all the varied influences. 


THE THREE CENTRES. SUN MOON, AND ASCENDANT 89 


Tur ZopracaL Man 


CHAPTER ¥i 
Tue AScENDANT oR Ryistnc Sicn. JHE First House 


THE sign, and more especially the particular degree, of the zodiac 
rising upon the eastern horizon at birth is known as the ASCENDANT. 
This term also embraces the whole of the first house, and in the author’s 
opinion about 15° above the first house may be considered as included 
in the ascendant.* 

The ascendant rules the personal appearance and to a considerable 
extent also the health, mind, and disposition. It is that part of the 
horoscope which has more to do with the physical body and its material 
wants than any other portion. The five physical senses find their outlet 
through this ascendant, and much depends upon the nature of the sign 
rising and any planets in the ascendant, if such there are, as regards the 
expression of the Ego in the physical world. 

Fiery Sicns rising denote good vitality, much force and energy, 
giving enough stamina to sustain life under adverse aspects and 
planetary positions; in a general sense they give good health. The 
disposition is to be hasty; impulsive; ambitious; proud; enterprising ; 
commanding, with more desire to lead than serve; argumentative; 
quick-tempered ; self-confident; and generally fortunate. The mind is 
aspiring; free; independent; acute; and penetrative. 

The decanate and degree rising will show the particular mental 
endency. 


* The 15° here spoken of is strictly speaking 15° of Oblique Ascension and not 
of the Zodiac, but in a great many czses half a sign will be near enough. A 
simple way of getting a good idea of tne limit is to subtract ome hour from the 
Sidereal Time at Birth and see in the Table of Houses what degree is then 
rising at the place of birth. The degree (which will at birth be found in the 
twelfth house, of course) may then be taken as forming the limit of influence of 
the first house, as above suggested. 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISINGSIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE 491 


Airy Siens rising denote less vitality, and not so much robustness 
as the fiery signs, the artistic temperament usually predominating. 
The disposition is to be cheerful; amiable; sympathetic; well spoken ; 
gentle; neat; courteous; perceptive; ingenious; and well-informed. 
The mind is cultured; musical; imaginative; refined; fond of reasoning 
and generally very well balanced, intellectual, and non-assertive. 

The decanate and degree rising will show the particular mental, 
tendency. 

WATERY SIcns rising denote less recuperative power, inability to 
manufacture sufficient ‘Prana,’ and a tendency to weak constitution. 
The disposition is to be slow; effeminate; fearful; shy; backward; 
inert; lacking energy, and generally unwilling to act; conceited. The 
mind is receptive; dreamy; mediumistic; impressionable; psychic. 

The decanate and degree rising will show the particular mental 
tendency. 

EarTHY SIGns rising denote good general health, but not too much 
vitality or an over-strong constitution. They give the motive tempera- 
ment generally. The disposition is to be cautious; premeditative ; 
secret ; careful; stubborn; suspicious; economical; self-protective and 
slow. The mind is practical; objective; scientific; methodical and 
steady. 

The decanate and degree rising will show the particular mental 
tendency. ‘ 

Fixed Signs rising denote fixity of purpose; determination; pride; 
power; resolution; faithfulness; persistency; self-reliance; patience; 
dogmatism ; independence; austerity, and reliability. 

Cardinal Signs rising denote energy; enterprise; enthusiasm ; 
activity ; self-assertion; independence; ambition ; changeableness; and 
the true pioneer spirit. 

Mutable Signs rising denote versatility; sensitiveness; sympathy ; 
impressionability ; inconstancy ; lack of energy; love of detail; restless- 
ness ; want of tact; aimlessness and indecision ; an anxious nature. 

The expression of the ascendant will be considerably modified, or 
accentuated, by the planets rising, positions and aspects of the ruling 
_ planet, the signs containing the majority of the planets, the aspects of 
the planets to the ascendant, etc. But the whole nativity, as well as 
the ascendant, affects the mind. 

The rising sign has its own special influence upon the native’s 


92 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


expression of himself in the physical world, though it has more relation 
to his environment, early surroundings, and hereditary tendencies, than 
to his inherent character. It is said that the rising sign influences 
female births more than males, also that throughout the whole of a 
female’s life the ascendant has major influence, especially if the rising 
sign is a negative or feminine sign. In the author’s opinion it is certain 
that during the first seven years the child is entirely governed by the 
ascendant and the lunar position, for it takes seven years for the Ego to 
gain control over his lower vehicles; but from this age onward environ- 
ment and surroundings are gradually dominated until they are finally 
mastered and fresh impulses set in motion. The rising sign should be 
carefully studied and its ruler’s influence noted, also any planets that 
may be rising or near the ascendant, as all these separate influences 
have to be synthetised by the astrologer. 


THE RISING SIGN 


[Nore.—Whatever the Rising Sign may be, pay special attention to the 
corresponding house, tf Aries, the first house, Taurus the second and 
so on. | 


I. Aries rising denotes a frank, open, out-spoken, and free-handed 
disposition.. The fate will be precipitated by the native’s impulsive and 
headstrong tendencies, also his fearless pioneering and progressive 
spirit. He will be ambitious and desirous of rising in the world and 
will not miss many opportunities, nor be thwarted by obstacles or 
failure. He will often say more than he means, being enthusiastic, 
energetic, enterprising, progressive, and aspiring. He will be fond of 
acquiring knowledge, keen in all intellectual pursuits, fond of debate 
and argument, and always at the front. These remarks apply to Aries 
as a whole, but more especially to the first decanate.* 

The second decanate of Aries rising modifies the Martial element of 
the sign and brings more reason and sympathy into the nature, being 
the decanate of harmony. It strengthens the intellect and gives more 
fruitfulness to this otherwise barren sign. It lessens the tendency to 


* See p. 6 of Everybody's Astrology. ‘The decanate is one-third of a sign or 
10°, the first is of the same nature as the sign itself and the next is of the nature 
of the next sign of the same triplicity; eg. Arie, 1°—10° =7-, 
10° —20° = 7-2, 20° — 30° = (-f; and so on with the other signs. 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE 93 


ambition and to rashness, but does not entirely correct the impulsiveness. 
The fate will be influenced by ambition and emotion, and also through 
speculative tendencies. The vitality is increased and the character 
strengthened morally. 

The third decanate rising strengthens the general tendency of Aries 
to prevision, stimulates the ideality and adds to the impulsiveness. It 
adds to the desire for demonstration and expression, and brings the 
native to a condition in which the philosophic and religious side of life 
is entered upon. It makes the whole sign more fortunate, and brings a 
desire to travel and to see foreign lands, with success from abroad. 

When the first decanate of Aries rises, study the planet Mars as 
ruler, noting its position and aspects carefully. When this decanate 
rises Mars will be very powerful in the first, fifth or ninth houses, and 
the aspects to Venus and the Sun must be carefully judged. 

When the second decanate of Aries rises, the Sun will be part ruler 
in addition to Mars, and the aspects of the Sun to Mars will be most 
potent and of life-long effect. If either the Sun or Mars be rising, or in 
the fifth house, the fate will be marked and the life most eventful, but 
the rise and fall, honour or degradation will depend very considerably 
upon the Sun’s position and aspects. Note also the condition of the 
fifth house. 

When the third decanate of Aries rises, Jupiter will be part ruler of 
the horoscope in addition to Mars, and as these two forces are opposite 
in nature some contest beween materiality and religion or between the 
lower and higher nature will considerably affect the life. Note carefully 
the position and aspects of Jupiter and pay especial attention to the 
ninth house. 

II. Taurus rising denotes a diplomatic, secretive, obstinate and 
self-wiiled disposition. The fate will be slow to develop, as the native 
will not move hurriedly, tending to become fixed, and too biassed for 
great expansion. He will be practical, dogmatic, determined, resentful, 
persistent and stolid. He will evince strong likes and dislikes, take 
sudden prejudices and show much reserve and diffidence. He will never 
become over-expressive, but will maintain a silent ambition for personal 
success, and will act from preconceived motives with decision and per- 
severance. He will be physically magnetic, fond of ease, stubborn, and 
rather too self-centred These remarks apply more especially to the 
first decanate. 


94 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


The second decanate of Taurus rising awakens the internal nature 
of the sign, giving the native more intuition, discrimination and practical 
business ability, but at the same time there is a tendency to be more 
critical as well as intuitive, and aithough clever the native will have 
many strong temptations to become selfish and over-acquisitive. The 
fate will be influenced by external and concrete matter-of-fact experi- 
ences. The finer vibrations of this decanate denote keen appreciation, 
sterling qualities, musical talent and excellent business ability. The 
coarser tendency makes the native too exacting and a carping 
critic. 

The third decanate of Taurus rising denotes more ambition, with an 
inclination to run in a groove, or become too conventional, thus making 
it a laborious and over-cautious influence, but it chastens the Taurean 
nature, strengthening the intellectual qualities and stimulating the 
reason, and hence tending to lessen the intuitive nature of the sign 
Taurus. The fate will greatly depend upon the early environment, as 
there is less power to break away from early training and parental 
influence. The fortunes will be affected by the innate self-control and 
organising power which this decanate bestows upon the native. Chastity 
is the keynote of success for this decanate. 

When the first decanate of Taurus rises study the planet Venus, her 
position and aspects; also the tenth and sixth houses. 

When the second decanate of Taurus rises Mercury will be part 
ruler, and the position of this planet must be studied in its connection 
with Venus; also the condition of the sixth house, and its bearing on 
the general horoscope. | 

When the third decanate of Taurus rises the influence of Saturn 
will greatly affect the life. Misfortune is denoted if Saturn afflicts either 
Venus or Mercury, but the reverse if the aspects are good. The M.C. 
should be especially noticed with this decanate, and the indications of 
moral stamina carefully considered. 

III. Gemini rising denotes a kind, willing, humane, intellectual 
and expressive disposition. The fate improves when restlessness and 
diffusiveness are overcome. The whole life will advance through educa- 
tion and intellectual attainments. The native will exhibit much 
curiosity and a desire to learn and will show signs of cleverness with 
inventive abilities, which may be turned to advantage or abused, accord- 
ing to the horoscope. The duality of this sign signifies either the 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE 95 


chattering ape or the divine ape of intelligence: the magpie and the 
parrot, or the student and the scholar. 

The second decanate of Gemini rising balances the whole sign, 
giving perception, foresight and real artistic ability. It also gives an 
opportunity to blend head and heart, reason and intuition. The fate will 
depend upon the philosophical attitude, which will decide whether the 
native will become a mere imitator and copier of others, or one who 
awakens the spiritual tendencies which are latent within. The finer 
vibrations of this decanate give the tendency to cultivate clairvoyance, 
and the artistic abilities. The lower vibrations will show in lack of 
continuity and in indolence or indecision. 

The third decanate of Gemini rising greatly improves the whole 
sign, but a great deal will depend upon the environment at birth, as 
to whether the finer qualities of the sign are encouraged or kept latent. 
The fate is generally influenced by guardians or friends, and it often 
happens that there is something connected with the parentage which 
affects the whole life. Persons born under this decanate are generally 
successful in dealing with the public. 

When the first decanate of Gemini rises study the planet Mercury, 
and note especially the condition of the third house. 

When the second decanate of Gemini rises study Venus and 
Mercury as joint rulers, also the condition of the seventh house. 

When the third decanate of Gemini rises study the planet Saturn or 
Uranus and the eleventh house. 


When either Artes, Taurus, or Gemini ascends the native belongs 
to what may be termed the Intellectual or forceful and assertive Trinity ; 
hence his or her dominant keynote will be knowledge, and progression 
through the mind or intellect. 


IV. Cancer rising denotes an imaginative, fanciful, receptive and 
tenacious disposition. The fate is bound up with domestic ties, family 
interests and impressionable attachments, and much will depend upon 
environment and general surroundings with regard to the progress that 
will be made by the native. The native will exhibit a certain amount 
of timidity, reserve and mistrust, which will give rise to morbid and 
fanciful conditions, with a liability to go to extremes and become 
somewhat exacting and over-cautious. The virtues of this sign are 
economy, receptivity, and tenacity. 


96 ‘+ HOW: TO JUDGE | A: NATIVITY 


This sign gives the native power to experience every kind of 
sensation, from the lowest physical sensation to the highest feelings of 
emotion, and all the misfortunes and troubles the native experiences 
may be traced to this emotional and hyper-sensitive nature. 

The second decanate of Cancer rising awakens the psychic and 
mystical tendencies of the sign Cancer, but also gives a certain amount 
of control over the sensations. It increases the tenacity of the sign, 
and denotes determination, love of power, ambition, and less internal 
receptivity. The fate is influenced by conventional notions, acquisitive- 
ness, and pride. 

The third decanate of Cancer rising improves the whole sign and 
denotes a very hospitable and sympathetic nature. The native will be 
studious and intuitive, having a keen love of acquiring knowledge. 
Two distinct types are born under this decanate: the over-anxious, 
hysterical, and hyper-sensitive; and the kind, mentally active and 
useful worker for the good of others. If the Moon is afflicted at birth 
the former tendency is shown, with some liability to obsession, but if 
Jupiter is very strong the latter qualities will predominate. 

When the first decanate of Cancer rises the Moon’s influence will 
affect the nativity principally, and also in a lesser degree the fourth, 
eighth and twelfth houses will specially influence the life. 

When the second decanate of Cancer rises the planet Mars and 
the eighth house must be noted. Malefics in the eighth house will then 
give a liability to a fatal or tragic end. 

When the third decanate of Cancer rises the planet Jupiter must be 
noted and the twelfth house. If the Moon is much afflicted note care- 
fully the influence of Neptune and the fourth house. 

V. Leo rising denotes a fearless, frank, generous, and ambitious 
disposition. The fate develops rapidly, and an eventful life is the 
outcome of the love of power and the organising ability which the native 
manifests. Downfalls are the result of hasty and passionate impulses, 
but the native recovers his balance through firmness, endurance, and 
self-control. The native is generally sincere, honourable, and magnani- 
mous, but he often displays much pride, and is generally austere and 
positive. If indiscreet and inclined to give way to the emotional side of 
his nature there is grave danger of becoming demoralised through 
passion and sensuality. This sign gives great vitality and a splendid 
physique, the body being strong, and generally very healthy. When 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE 9} 


exceptions to this rule occur it will be found that the Sun is afflicted or 
badly placed. 

The second decanate of Leo rising denotes a liability to go to 
extremes, making the native more demonstrative, active, and at times 
very rebellious. It awakens the philosophical side of the nature when 
the horoscope denotes the possibility, but weakens the will-power of the 
sign as a whole, if the Sun is not well placed and in good aspect with 
Jupiter. 

The third decanate of Leo rising strengthens the will-power of the 
sign and adds to the impulsive and persistent side of Leo. In the 
advanced types it gives opportunities to unite head with heart, and 
through the intellect strengthens the higher emotions, giving zeal and 
ardour to the general activities, with a quiet determination that is 
unequalled. The fate is to a great extent under the control of the 
native, whose will-power is often controlled by the reason and illuminated 
by the intuition. 

When the first decanate of Leo ascends note carefully the first aspect 
to which the Sun applies, for the whole career of the native will be 
affected by this influence. Note also the fifth house. 

When the second decanate of leo ascends note the position and 
aspects of Jupiter, also the ninth house and its occupants. 

When the third decanate of Leo ascends note the aspects of Mars, 
and its position by house and sign; give also especial attention to any 
planets near the cusp of the ascendant. 

VI. Virco rising denotes a quiet, reserved, retiring, and receptive 
disposition. The fate depends upon opportunity. The native, although 
lacking in determinative ambition, is persevering and ingenious, but he 
rarely dominates his environment or moves entirely unaided and helped 
by others. This sign gives more than the usual amount of selfishness 
common to the negative signs, but it is often counteracted by sympathy 
for the troubles of others and by the sense of justice which the native 
develops when the intelligence awakens. He is very orderly, critical, 
systematic and often self-centred, and is rarely understood on first 
acquaintance. The native thrives best in a business atmosphere, and 
generally prefers scheming and the exercise of his ingenuity to hard 
work; although never lazy or afraid to work, he prefers to use his wits 
whenever they will serve, and to improve upon the discoveries or 


inventions of others. 
G 


98 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


The second decanate of Virgo rising awakens the independence of 
the nature, and makes the native thoroughly practical and well adapted 
for all business pursuits; it also gives some artistic inclinations, or 
musical ability. The fate is largely governed by the social element or 
the political world, in which distinction is generally sought and obtained. 
Wealth is acquired through industry, thrift, and by adopting practical 
common-sense methods in business organisation. 

The third decante of Virgo rising accentuates all the business and 
practical tendencies of the sign Virgo, and adds intuition to the mental 
qualifications for acquiring wealth and where business enterprise is con- 
cerned. It is a fortunate decanate for the fate, and only affects the 
general disposition by adding determination to all the Virgo character- 
istics. There is usually considerable artistic ability. 

When the first decanate of Virgo ascends, the ruling planet is 
Mercury; the fate depends largely upon the condition of the sixth 
house, or the aspects of Mercury, and also considerably upen planets 
rising, if any. 

When the second decanate of Virgo ascends study the position of 
the planet Saturn and the mid-heaven, also the planet that Saturn 
afflicts ; if afflicting Mercury the native is very unfortunate. 

When the third decanate of Virgo ascends the planet Venus and her 
distance from Mercury should be considered; the nearer these planets 
are the better will be the fortunes ; if in exact conjunction great prosperity 
is denoted. Note also the second house. 


The signs Cancer, LEo, and Vireo belong to the preservative and 
maturing or Maternal Trinity. The keynote of such natives will 
generally be emotion, and progression through the moral sentiments. 


VII. Lisra rising denotes a courteous, affable, kind, and affectionate 
disposition. The fate is largely in the hands of others, and there is very 
small ability to mould or alter circumstances, the natives being con- 
trolled principally by feeling and intuition more thanreason. The native 
is keen of observation, fond of comparing, and generally very artistic, 
refined and truly sympathetic. ‘There is not much energy or incentive 
to action, and consequently the life tends to run in a groove and the 
native is very much disposed to lean on others. 

The second decanate of Libra rising accentuates the sympathetic 
side of the nature, and increases the love of approval and general adapta- 


PHE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE 99 


tion of the sign Libra. The native may become remarkably intuitive, 
and generally takes a keen delight in social intercourse, loving and 
appreciating all that pertains to the social side of life. The fate is 
affected by friends and associates, so much so as to make the native a 
slave to friends and attachments. Such lives are generally bound up 
with others, although they may be strangers in their own homes by the 
peculiarity of their magnetic conditions. 

The third decanate of the sign Libra rising weakens the influence 
of the sign as a whole, and tends to make the life more or less unfortu- 
nate. The fate is affected by the state of the mind indicated by the 
horoscope; when restlessness and lack of continuity are shown the 
native is a smatterer, and although curious and apparently intellectual 
is often very foolish and ignorant, lacking ‘common sense.’ If the 
horoscope is favourable there is a tendency to improve the fate through 
educational attainments. 

When the first decanate of Libra ascends the planet Venus and the 
conditions of the seventh house affect the native chiefly. 

When the second decanate of Libra ascends the planet Saturn 
decides the general welfare for good or ill, but in the horoscopes of very 
advanced egos Uranus influences the life, especially if the native is free 
from family ties or attachments of all kinds. Note the eleventh house 
especially. 

When the third decanate of Libra ascends the aspects of Mercury 
and the occupants of the third house affect the native. 


VIII. Scorpio rising denotes a reserved, shrewd, secretive and 
proud disposition. The fate is either tragic and unfortunate; or very 
favourable and exalted. There appear to be two classes born under this 
sign, the extremely ignorant and the highly mystical; the former are 
inquisitive, deceitful, jealous and treacherous, while the latter are 
prudent, self-controlled, and highly dignified. In many respects this is 
truly the ‘accursed sign’ and it generally produces natives of one 
extreme or theother. A greatdeal will depend upon planetary positions 
as to the class of ego attracted to this sign, the strongest and the weakest 
characters being born under its influence, the weakest being those who 
have no control over their animal senses, while the strongest are pene- 
trative, mystical and intelligent. 

_'Yhe second decanate of Scorpio rising accentuates the extremes of 
Scorpio, as mentioned above. The fate is usually unfortunate and often 


100 How TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


disastrous. If the native is born into a poor environment under this 
decanate, he rarely succeeds in raising himself above mediocrity. 

The third decanate of Scorpio rising wakens the sensitive nature of 
the sign Scorpio, and gives a keen desire for attachment, thus breaking 
up a great deal of the selfish side of the sign as a whole. When the 
horoscope denotes it the love of the occult or of psychic phenomena is 
very marked. Generally speaking it increases the jealous tendencies of 
Scorpio. 

When the first decanate of Scorpio ascends note carefully the 
strength and position of Mars, the eighth house and its occupants. If 
the planet Mars is below the earth and afflicting the luminaries the 
character of the native is very considerably weakened. If Mars is above 
the earth, but not setting, it is improved. Planets rising in Scorpio will 
affect the whole horoscope: if the Sun rises it is considerably benefited; 
if setting, the reverse. See to the fourth and twelfth houses. 

When the second decanate of Scorpio ascends note aspects 
between Mars and Jupiter; if in affliction the native is very unfortunate, 
and not well disposed. Observe also the twelfth house. 

When the third decanate of Scorpio ascends note the aspects between 
the Moon and the planet Mars, also the contents of the fourth house. 
The horoscope is improved if the Moon is well placed and favourably 
aspected, but the reverse if much afflicted. 


IX. SaGITTARIUS rising denotes an open-minded, honest, sym- 
pathetic and generous disposition. The fate is dualistic and usually 
divided into two extremes of fortune and misfortune. The native is 
highly impressionable, though fond of liberty and independence. He 
is often reckless, extravagant and careless. When undeveloped he is 
thoughtless, erratic and rebellious, but when awakened he is philo- 
sophical, a lover of law and order, peaceful, and more intuitive than 
imitative. 

The second decanate of Sagittarius rising accentuates the impulsive 
and headstrong tendencies of the sign as a whole and gives great 
liability to go to extremes and exhaust the mental and physical energy. 
When the native is deficient in self-control this decanate increases 
the excitability, which opens the way for brain troubles and nervous 
disorders. 

The third decanate of Sagittarius rising awakens the best half of 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE 1o1 


the dual sign Sagittarius, and quickens the intuitive and inspirational 
nature of the sign, giving the ability to prophesy and to foresee the 
future. It increases the love nature of the sign and makes the native 
very demonstrative and ardent in affection, falling in love often and 
readily expressing his sympathetic, sensitive and kind-hearted nature. 

When the first decanate of Sagittarius ascends note the aspects to 
Jupiter and the ninth house, its occupants, and aspects to them from 
other planets. 

When the second decanate of Sagittarius ascends pay especial 
attention to the planets rising, and the aspects between Mars and 
Jupiter, also the position of Mars, and any planets near the cusp of the 
first house. 

When the third decanate of Sagittarius ascends note carefully the 
planet the Sun makes first application to; any aspect to Jupiter is 
favourable, but if the aspect is adverse and Jupiter not well placed the 
native will be unfortunate though endowed with splendid abilities. See 
also to the condition of the fifth house. 


Lispra, Scorpio and SacitTrarius denote imitative ability and the 
power to reform and renew, forming what may be called the 
utilitarian or Reproductive Trinity. 


X. Capricorn rising denotes an ambitious, persevering, plodding 
and persistent disposition. The fate is affected by the moral growth 
and the power to organise, and to rise above the difficulties of the early 
environment. The native is generally reserved, firm and self-reliant 
and anxious to be at the head of affairs. It usually happens that some 
position of trust or responsibility advances the native’s interests, and 
according to the self-possession, tact and prudence displayed the native 
advances and makes successful progress, gaining recognition and fame 
or honour. | 

The second decanate of Capricorn rising tempers the ambitious 
tendencies of Capricorn and gives more plodding persistency, and 
inclines towards conservative and orthodox conditions. It adds to the 
firmness and reserve of the sign as a whole, which however unbends in 
social life. 

‘The third decanate of Capricorn rising modifies the self-reliance of 
the sign, but quickens the intellectual and mental qualifications, and if 


102 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


the native has received a good education he will prove to be a most 
useful and important member of society. Circumstances will rule the 
native, however, much more than his ability to rule his own destiny. To 
the awakened this decanate gives a great desire to become a utilitarian 
and to serve others; to the unawakened incapacity and servility. 

When the first decanate of Capricorn ascends Saturn is the chief 
planet to study. If above the earth, increase of ambition. If below the 
earth, persistency without ambition. If rising, self-control. If setting, 
misfortunes and many obstacles beset the path. Note the tenth house 
and any planets it may contain. 

When the second decanate of Capricorn ascends note the position of 
Venus and the second house, also the aspects between Saturn and Venus. 

When the third decanate of Capricorn ascends note the position of 
Mercury and the sixth house. If Saturn afflicts Mercury, lack of wit 
and enterprise; if well aspected, industry and patient endeavour to rise 
through merit. 


XI. Aguarius rising denotes a refined, sympathetic, and humane 
disposition. The fate depends upon the nature of the friends and 
acquaintances the native gathers around him, as he is easily influenced 
by his associates. He has the ability to read character, and study 
human nature, but does not always act upon his own intuitions, and 
although quiet and determined, his sympathies often over-rule his reason 
and intuition. There are very few born under this sign that are able 
to reach up to its high standard of refinement and purity, and those who 
respond to the higher vibrations of this sign have overcome the animal 
nature and live in the pure mind apart frem all lower sensational and 
animal tendencies. The undeveloped Aquarian is often harmless and 
true, with good and kind intentions, but easily led by companions, so 
often sins without the desire or wish to fall into error. 

The second decanate of Aquarius rising lessens the tendency to 
drift, as it makes the mind active and inclines towards intellectual attain- 
ment, but does not give sufficient continuity or concentration to qualify 
for any literary or educational work, and favours mechanical and physical 
activities in the business world more than mental pursuits. The fate is 
often affected by relatives and companions. 

The third decanate rising improves the Aquarius nature, giving more 
balance and a higher standard of intellect, with very refined tastes and 
clear discrimination. This decanate leads the native towards the occult 


THE ASCENDANTOR RISING SIGN. THE FIRSTHOUSE 103 


and mystical side of life, and often awakens the clairvoyant faculty. The 
fate is affected by marriage or love affairs, yet the native is not zuclined 
towards marriage and prefers a celibate life. 

When the first decanate of Aquarius ascends Saturn is the ruling 
planet, but if Uranus is strongly placed this planet will also largely 
share in the destiny. Note well the eleventh house. 

When the second decanate of Aquarius ascends note the position 
and aspects of Mercury and the third house. 

When the third decanate of Aquarius ascends note the aspects 
between Venus and Uranus, if any, also the position and strength of 
Venus and the seventh house. 


XII. Pisces rising denotes a restless, anxious, impressionable, and 
mediumistic disposition. The fate is rarely under the native’s control, 
some impelling force behind the native seeming to push him on toward 
good or ill unconsciously. He has dual experiences of extreme nature, 
and is often torn between two different emotions. He is kind and just, 
but tends to encourage the romantic and sentimental side of his nature, 
and rarely understands himself or the emotions that play through him 
from time to time. He is easily psychologised, and suffers from varying 
moods, being receptive to the mental atmosphere around him. He is 
inclined to be secretive, is very receptive and at times inspired. 

The second decanate of Pisces rising awakens all the latent sensi- 
tiveness of the sign Pisces and gives the keenest internal aspirations to 
become a channel through which the good forces may flow. It lessens 
the methodical tendency of Pisces, but increases the inclination towards 
economy and usefulness, giving more persistency and ability to utilise 
the virtues of Pisces without passing through all its vices. This decanate 
strengthens the whole sign, and gives more ambition, with the internal 
power necessary to rise through merit and adaptability. 

The third decanate of Pisces rising gives a liability to encourage the 
weaker side of the sign, in which selfishness, jealousy, conventionality, 
and the material side of life are cultivated. If the horoscope is favour- 
able there is a possibility of the personal element being modified, but if 
the horoscope is weak the pride of personal qualifications is apt to carry 
the native beyond the limits of fear for consequences, and tends to make 
the Pisces nature hard and unfeeling. The psychic tendencies of this 
decanate are unhealthy and difficult to understand. 


104 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


Wheu the first decanate of Pisces ascends note the position of 
Jupiter and planets near the ascendant, also the ninth house. 

When the second decanate of Pisces ascends pay special attention to 
the Moon’s place and aspects, also note the position of Neptune; if this 
planet is angular it will have some influence over the life. Also the 
fourth house. 

When the third decanate of Pisces ascends note carefully the position 
of Mars; if this planet afflicts Jupiter the native will suffer great tempta- 
tion and may wreck his life by his conduct. Note carefully the condition 
of the eighth house. 


The signs Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces comprise the Serving 
Trinity. 


The Ascendant describes the native’s personal appearance, his 
temperament, inherited brain-mind, and peculiar habit of thinking or 
receiving thought from the thought-sphere around him, also his personal 
disposition and idiosyncrasies; in short, his personality in physical form. 
It may be partially summed up in the word TEMPERAMENT. Any planet 
rising will modify the nature of the ascending sign. 

The Sun rising will increase the pride and ambition, give greater 
firmness and stability, and raise the native beyond his sphere of birth. 
The Moon rising will likewise give ambition, but it will affect the mind 
and intellect more than the character, making it more flexible and less 
firm and determined. Mercury will give greater adaptability, quicker 
comprehension, and the power to respond to the mental requirements of 
the surroundings: but it will not affect the ascending sign so much as 
other planets, for this planet is specially liable to become coloured by 
the sign it is in. Venus rising will increase the cheerfulness and artistic 
ability, and make the disposition affectionate and responsive to the 
emotional side of the nature; it usually gives a more or less comely 
form and attractive disposition. Mars will make the personality more 
consequential, increasing the impulses, sharpening the intellect, and 
adding fire and dash to the rising sign. Jupiter rising will give more 
power, greater executive ability and wider sympathies, increasing the 
social faculties. Saturn will give more depth and meaning to the sign 
rising, accentuating its main characteristics, and tending to focus and 
consolidate the general tendencies denoted by the sign. Uranus rising 
will bring out all the eccentricities of the sign, and accentuate al! its 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE 105 


qualities, either for good or ill: it is dispersive in its influence. Neptune 
will affect the psychic side of the sign, and will awaken its talent, 
idealism tingeing the whole personality with a dreamy ethereality which 
has a peculiar fascination: it is resolvent in its influence. 


PLANETS RISING 


ae Neptune rising in the twelve signs ty 


NEPTUNE rising gives psychic ability, and when the native is advanced 
he acts under inspiration; having the power to see far into the future; 
when perverted, however, this influence acts most disastrously, giving 
mediumistic and receptive tendencies which open the way for obsession 
and strange phantasies. The influence of Neptune is not yet fully 
known by modern astrologers, and much of the information current with 
regard to its nature is purely speculative. Its general influence tends 
to the tzversion of moiives. 


gy Imaginative ; subtle; poetical ; changeable ; full of schemes and plans, 
% Artistic ; refined ; sensuous ; musical ; some artistic genius. 

i Humorous; inventive ; literary ; comprehensive mentality ; poetic. 
go Wayward ; difficult to know ; emotionally changeable ; sympathetic. 
§ Romantic love nature ; capable of going to great lengths ; ; enterprising. 
ny Extremely sensitive ; retiring ; mysterious: artistic ; reserved. 

<= Poetical and visionary ; gentle and refined ; somewhat sensuous. 

TM Mysterious; elusive ; fond of self-concealment ; proud. 

f Inspirational ; utopian in ideas ; sympathetic ; highly imaginative. 

¥3 Crafty ; subtle and designing ; apt to be extremely selfish. 

«2 Broad-minded ; humanitarian ; deep insight into human nature. 

}{ Fond of dumb animals; sympathetic ; some crazy notions. 


Hi Uranus rising in the twelve signs bel 


Uranus rising always causes the native to be somewhat original or 
eccentric, and quite different from the everyday type. It gives a keen 
interest in all things occult, curious, profound, or metaphysical. To 
the most advanced of humanity it gives genius and the power to see 
ahead mentally farther than the ordinary individual. Those who cannot 
respond to the higher vibrations of this planet are very independent, 
and usually rather abrupt, as it acts directly upon the nervous system, 
and so stirs into great activity the personal magnetism. All persons 
born with Uranus rising are much in advance of the period in which 


106 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


they live, and usually become pioneers of reform, being attuned to a 
higher octave of thought than the majority can understand. It tends 
to the mversion of tdeas. 


7 Abrupt; ambitious ; changeable ; inventive ; thorough. 

% Considerate ; determined ; occult and mystical ; devotional. 
i Curious; fond of everything mystical, occult, and progressive. 
a5 Eccentric; restless; peculiar ; impatient and fanciful. 

©, Liberal; fond of freedom ; independent and aspiring. 

my Economical; quiet ; antiquated ; eccentric ; psychic. 

<= Romantic ; restless; scientific; perceptive; refined. 

Mm Artful; secretive ; superstitious ; inventive ; shrewd. 

f Turbulent; rebellious; enthusiastic ; over-generous, and free. 
y§ Insinuative ; romantic ; acquisitive ; restless, and unsettled. 
sco Odd ; impressionable ; scientific or metaphysical ; clever. 


% Novel; fanciful; desponding ; psychic ; silent. 


h Saturn rising in the twelve signs h 


SATURN rising is considered to be very unfortunate; but much 
depends upon the sign in which it is placed, and its aspects. It gives 
the native industry, perseverance, thrift, and economy. It awakens the 
contemplative, thoughtful, and deeply religious side of the nature, giving 
a quiet devotion which is both unassuming and considerate. When 
rising it gives humility and patience, but when perverted it causes the 
native to be harsh and severe, stubborn and miserable. Saturn is the 
planet of d:mutation, and governs the form side of power, giving the 
ability to undertake great responsibilities, and to organise successfully. 


Deceptive ; stubborn : contentious ; shrewd ; exaggerative. 
Envious ; sullen ; conventional ; proud ; stubborn. 
Progressive; mathematical ; scientific ; perceptive ; occult. 
Remorseful ; jealous ; peevish ; discontented ; unhappy. 
Enduring ; cautious ; powerful ; chaste and prudent. 
Captious ; melancholic ; retentive ; studious, and reserved. 
Improvident ; opinionative ; scientific ; liable to reversals. 
Avaricious ; contemptuous ; jealous; proud; resentful. 
Teachable ; sensitive ; hasty ; honest ; trustworthy. 
Indifferent ; suspicious ; discontented ; serious ; over-cautious, 
«2 Observant ; penetrative ; thoughtful; proficient ; profound. 
Nonchalent ; uncertain ; indecisive ; sensitive ; unfortunate. 


a =e 38 ao 3 


a 


} 


Jupiter rising in the twelve signs- y 


R 


Jupirer rising in the ascendant is always a more or less fortunate 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE 107 


influence. It gives the native power and dignity and fits him to become 
a leader in the social and also the business world. Jupiter governs the 
internal power in which the Will is exercised and the motive, strengthened 
by the moral and religious, element. It gives fortune and success when 
free from affliction, but even when afflicted its influence is not wholly evil. 
The worst tendency of Jupiter is to make those who pervert its influence 
hypocrites and deceivers, especially in the social and religious world. 


7  Judicious ; ambitious ; enterprising ; determined ; successful. 
% Upright; just ; sincere ; compassionate ; attractive. 

T Reverential ; well-disposed ; refined ; literary ; mathematical. 
o5 ©6Intuitive ; ambitious ; fortunate and sympathetic. 

SR, Social; magnanimous; proud; powerful ; prudent. 

ty Dictatorial ; covetous ; aspiring ; industrious ; deceitful. 

=<: Intuitive; obliging ; considerate, and a great lover of justice. 
MN. Conceited ; determined ; haughty ; overbearing, and careful. 
f Truthful; humane; social; refined ; courteous; kind. 

v8 Invidious ; autocratic ; severe, and often disrespectful. 

«2 Operative; cheerful; peaceful ; merciful, and very humane. 

» Nutritive ; studious ; deserving ; hospitable; mirthful. 


é Mars rising in the twelve signs dé 


Mars gives strength and courage to the native, and when rising 
always makes him confident of his abilities; sometimes too conse- 
quential and assertive. This planet governs the desire nature and is ever 
eager for pursuit and disposed to destroy. It is only when the strong 
influence of Mars is perverted and used selfishly that Mars becomes a 
‘malefic’ planet, and then because the animal nature is stronger than 
the god within. Mars and Venus are polar opposites, the one tending 
to rush outward and distract, the other drawing inward to nourish and 
preserve. When placed in the ascendant at birth much depends upon 
the aspects Mars meets as to what will be the influence exerted. 


Daring ; argumentative ; prone to righteous indignation. 
Invetcrate ; obstinate ; fearless ; can be led but not driven. 
Severe ; tactful ; sharp; acute, and mentally clever. 
Tenacious ; changeable ; unruly; peevish ; unfortunate. 
Reformative ; commanding, argumentative ; generous. 
Affable ; scientific ; original ; irritable ; diplomatic. 
Captivating ; well-balanced ; courteous ; unfortunate in love, 
Tricky ; passionate ; inventive ; clever, but resentful. 
Invincible ; rebellious ; aspiring ; talkative ; generous. 
Organising ; brave; tactful; adventurous ; ingenious. 
Nervous ; mentally resourceful ; clever and occult. 

Satirical ; generous ; sympathetic ; mediumistic ; acquisitive 


SPS PSopnas 


y 


108 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


© The Sun rising in the twelve signs ©) 


Tue Sun rising strengthens the constitution, giving abundant vitality, 
recuperative power, and making the general health good provided the 
Sun is not heavily afflicted. The Sun rising improves the carriage, 
adding importance and dignity to the personality; the native nearly 
always presents a commanding appearance, and impresses others with 
his innate power and authority. 

It never fails to endow the native with faith and confidence, and 
through his natural ambition he rises to positions of trust and influence 
especially if the moral growth has been encouraged, and if the planetary 
positions are harmonious. 

In a weak horoscope it denotes arrogance and pride and a great 
deal of egotism, but the will is always strengthened and if the Sun is 
unafflicted the native will desire to do right and act morally. 


“ Commanding; combative ; ambitious ; loyal ; defensive. 
%  Over-confident; autocratic; diplomatic ; resolute ; solid. 
tr Noble; refined ; contented; studious; thoughtful. 

os Sensitive ; receptive ; conscientious ; anxious ; tenacious. 
9 Thorough ; ambitious ; just ; honourable ; magnanimous, 
my Ingenious; industrious ; critical; acquisitive ; agreeable. 
<> ‘Tractable ; courteous ; intuitive; retiring ; imaginative. 
Ni Unbending ; dignified ; contentious ; diplomatic ; determined. 
f True; generous ; proud ; confident ; inspirational. 

v8 Illustrious ; moral ; self-controlled ; practical ; persevering. 
sz Obedient ; cheerful ; sincere ; faithful ; idealistic. 

}{ Negative; methodical; hospitable ; peaceful; honest. 


2 Venus rising in the twelve signs ? 


Venus rising refines and beautifies the Jove nature, and indeed its 
effect when in the ascendant is altogether beneficial and fortunate for the 
native. It denotes artistic or musical accomphshments, and gives an 
affectionate and devoted disposition. It favours the social life and 
makes the native attractive and desirable. It is only when afflicted that 
the good influence of Venus is hindered, and then it is more often owing 
to the simple and trustful nature engendered by this planet. Venus 
governs the affectional and binding side of the nature, and when the 
emotions are purified and refined it elevates the affections to the plane 
of the Soul, separating them from the senses and thus making the love 
of the native z#mortal. 


— 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE 10g 


Idealistic ; impressionable ; generous ; artistic ; expressive. 
Nice ; kind-hearted ; sociable ; fond of pleasure and art. 
Thoughtful ; considerate ; inventive ; sympathetic ; genuine. 
Economical ; changeable in affection ; easily influenced. 
Romantic ; eager for popularity ; musical ; fortunate in love. 
Chaste ; given to extremes in affection, or intrigue. 
Encouraging and helpful to others ; equable in affection. 
Seductive ; jealous ; always liable to extremes. 

Sincere ; impressionable ; fascinating ; dual love affairs. 
Irresolute ; fickle in affection ; when attached, devoted. 
Obliging ; chaste ; isolated ; idealistic and romantic. 

Natural and thoughtful where affection is concerned. 


KRATSPeORAas 


Mercury rising in the twelve signs 
g 


Mercury denotes the menial capacities, and is therefore very potent 
when placed in the ascendant. In general it gives business ability, but 
being a convertible planet it is greatly affected by the influence of 
aspects. It largely absorbs the nature of the sign in which it is placed, 
being further modified or intensified by the influence it receives from 
other planets. Its influence is most potent in the earlier part of life, 
especially during the period of youth. When the mind is shown to 
be more active than the senses, being given over to learning, Mercury 
is very greatly affected by the influence of the first planet whose aspect 
it meets in the horoscope. 


22 
) 


Clever ; optimistic ; fiery ; exaggerative ; fluent in speech. 
Adhesive ; obstinate ; plodding ; musical and intuitive. 
Perceptive ; shrewd ; mathematical ; scientific ; amiable. 
Adaptable ; changeable ; restless ; discreet ; versatile. 
Bombastic ; determined ; ambitious ; organising. 
Intellectual ; literary ; capable ; ingenious ; eloquent. 
Learned ; musical or artistic; refined ; fine comparison. 
Ingenious ; fond of occult, mysticism, or secrecy. 
Talkative ; passionate ; inspirational ; ambitious ; aspiring. 
Irritable ; suspicuous ; discontented ; penetrative ; scientific. 
Eloquent ; gifted ; metaphysical; fond of useful work. 
Superficial ; imitative ; of few ideas but many schemes. 


XFIT SP SORna 


Tue Moon rising influences the temperament, making it more pro- 
nounced and having the stamp of heredity more clearly defined. It 
affects the functional arrangemenis according to the sign it occupies. it 
never fails to make the native ambitious or fond of fame and public 
recognition and gives a desire for change, a love of novelty, and much 


110 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


curiosity. The native has a very receptive and clear mind, according 
to the nature of the aspects which the Moon applies to from the ascen- 
dant. It lifts the native upward in life, and brings many benefits and 
advantages either from the public or through the social world, into 
which the native’s domestic interests largely enter. It denotes great 
activity and a very eventful or changeful life. 


= 
2 


Touchy ; aspiring ; impulsive ; penetrative ; mental. 
Earnest ; sympathetic ; peaceful; intuitive ; vital. 
Mysterious ; secretive ; ingenious; fond of intrigue ; motive. 
Persuasive ; sensitive ; sociable ; capable ; attractive. 
Enthusiastic ; persevering ; dignified ; intuitive and orderly. 
Reasonable ; expressive ; analytical ; psychic; quiet. 
Accomplished ; courteous ; perceptive ; mirthful and kind. 
Martial ; selfish ; jealous; proud; revengeful. 

Energetic ; passionate ; aspiring; kind and generous. 
Notorious ; anxious for fame ; covetous ; cautious; selfish. 
Tolerant ; inoffensive ; imaginative ; active; inventive. 
Sympathetic ; dreamy ; inconstant ; quiet and hospitable. 


pa ee 


ATS 


ps 


DESCRIPTION OF PERSONAL APPEARANCE 


As regards personal appearance the student is often in great diffi- 
culty to make up his mind as to the type of body represented by any 
map he may be studying. Experience will be his only true teacher, and 
only hints and suggestions can be given. The descriptions which follow 
are intended merely to form a nucleus from which the student’s own 
powers of observation and inference may develop a fund of ideas and 
conceptions which will serve as a basis for judgment of this question 
when at any time a horoscope may come before his notice. 

In studying these descriptions, which are adapted and amplified 
from a very complete list given in a series of ‘lessons’ which came into 
the author’s possession many years ago, it must be remembered that not 
every one of them is founded upon the direct observation of the writer. 
No observer is likely to be personally acquainted with 108 different 
people, each born with a different planet rising in a different sign, and 
therefore it is clear that a considerable amount of judicious inference, 
added to comprehensive observation, must have gone to the compiling of 
this list. But that need be no impediment to its usefulness or discredit 
to its accuracy ; for, as his powers of observation grow and his experience 
widens, the student will find growing up in is own mind conceptions, 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE 111 


more or less definite, but still unmistakable, of the appearanre con- 
ferred by various planets in the different signs, and he will be sooner or 
later in a position to formulate his ideas in some similar manner. 
And the fact that he can do this, even in ever so small a degree, will 
give him confidence in accepting tentatively the descriptions now to be 
set down. 

It may be said that in the main the Ascendant or Rising Sign 
furnishes the matrix of the whole bodily appearance; this is very con- 
siderably modified, however, by the sign occupied by the ruling planet. 
As an instance may be taken the late Queen Victoria, who though born 
with Sun and Moon both rising in Gemini, and Mercury in Taurus, 
displayed a markedly 7aurean appearance, the influence of this sign 
becoming increasingly marked as years went on. ‘The general bodily 
type associated with each of the Twelve Signs has been given already 
and need not be repeated. 

In addition to the Rising Sign and the sign occupied by the ruling 
planet, the Sun and Moon also greatly influence the appearance, through 
the signs which they respectively occupy. In men the influence of the 
Sun is more to the front, as a rule, and in women the Moon; but both 
have their effect and may be discerned by a little attention, even when 
not obvious at a first glance. Where Leo rises, the appearance 
inclines more to that of the sign occupied by the Sun, and the 
influence of the Moon is less marked. Where Cancer rises, on the other 
hand, the influence of the sign occupied by the Moon is usually para- 
mount, not infrequently obscuring to a considerable extent the sign 
occupied by the Sun; indeed, even the typical ‘Cancer’ appearance 
is often hardly to be traced, so strong is the influence of the Moon’s 
sign." 

Where two or more planets are found in the ascendant the descrip- 
tions of each should be taken and the results blended. It must be 
remembered that a strong aspect from some other planet will greatly 
modify the influence, coarsening or refining according to the inherent 
nature (a) of the aspecting planet and (4) of the sign in which it is 
placed. 


me 


* By ‘typical’ Cancer appearance is meant the contour and expression to be 
noted in those who have the Moon in Cancer at birth, whether in the ascendant 
or not : see description of Moon rising in Cancer on p. 117. 


112 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


Note.—It is not always that a planet is found rising in the ascendant 
but the descriptions that now follow can be used as well for the Ruling 
Planet and the sign it occupies, as for a planet rising in the sign; bear- 
ing in mind, of course, that the Rising Sign itself determines the actual 
type of body—whether tall, sturdy, thick-set, fragile, bony, muscular, etc 
--the ruler’s sign merely modifying this in a secondary way, much as 
negro blood ‘peeps out’ in a mulatto or quadroon. It is in the blending 
of these influences that the student will develop that artistic faculty 
which is so essential to his progress. He should note the difference 
produced by the several planets in any sign, and see how each modifies 
the inherent nature of the sign in a way that is peculiar to itself. 


PLANETS RISING IN 


ARIES 


ttt The influence of this planet when rising in this sign modifiesthe *# 
general type but little, save that it detracts considerably from the great positiveness 
of appearance and manner which Aries usually shows, giving a more dreamy or 
introspective look to the eyes; sometimes the latter are very indrawn in 
expression. ‘The body is somewhat slighter in build, and the complexion very 
delicate and the skin sometimes semi-transparent. Much depends on the position 
of Mars in this case. Low types are unscrupulous, ready in resource, liars, ready 
to do anything for notoriety. 

Hi A child born under the influence thus produced becomes a tall, HI 
thin, but well-made person, with a somewhat ruddy complexion. Disposition 
inventive, inquisitive, and fond of science. [Extremely positive mind, not easily 
overcome. Conjugality slight, and prone to become selfish. A masterful person 
and a born leader of thought in whatever sphere he may move. Something of a 
revolutionist, and ever a champion of individual freedom. 

hk =Medium height, with a not very handsome complexion, high fore- h 
head, full dark eyes, and very little beard. A wonderfully clever person 
according to his own estimation, and one whom it is not wise to offend; one 
who will make himself a leader in some way, being exceedingly ambitious. 
Much depends upon the positions of the Sun and Mars, as to whether the 
ambition is of a noble type or otherwise; if the Sun also rises in Aries, the 
disposition is much improved. 

Y% A person of about medium height, rather long visage, ruddy com- 7 
plexion, and light brown hair. He has a noble, loving disposition; he is a 
benefactor to all that seek his friendship, and a despiser of discords and 
quarrelling, fond of travelling, and of large ideas in most matters. There is 
some tendency to pride or undue egotism in this position, unless the general 
tendency of the horoscope counteracts. 

S$ Medium height; strong, well-built, bony individual; swarthy ¢ 
complexion, red, or sandy curly hair. Disposition daring, determined, resolute. 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THEFIRSTHOUSE 1 13 


a confident sort of individual, caring for nothing and nobody ; must be first in 
spite of any consequences ; loves war and contention, consequently there is no 
peace for long together where such an one is. Excellent as a pioneer in any 
worldly enterprise, since the native is boundless in resource with a constant 
flow of ideas. 

© A strong and well-made person, of moderate stature, with light © 
brown or gold coloured hair, a noble and commanding disposition, possessing 
much boldness and daring. ‘This position, other things being equal, shows as a 
rule the best side of the Aries nature, and gives one who is truly a pioneer fired 
with noble ideals. But note the position of Mars. 

9 A person of slender form, moderate stature, rather light hair, and 9 
light grey eyes. Disposition extravagant, wasteful, fond of pleasures, company, 
sports and gambling, in which he is not very successful. Inconstant in love ; 
and ruled by partners. ‘The inner ideals are lofty but unpractical. 

% Short stature, or below the medium height, thin, with a poor & 
complexion, light brown hair. Alert and ‘jumpy’ in manner. The disposi- 
tion is rather quarrelsome, fond of disputes and contentions, will not scruple to 
tell any amount of falsehoods in order to accomplish his designs. In those more 
advanced, a very active mind incessantly busy with various projects; idealistic 
and often unpractical, very discontinuous in thought. 

) Thin, medium height, somewhat slightly built, active, mobile, ) 
changeable in the extreme: (but note position of Mars, if in a fixed sign this 
changeableness is much modified). Rash, eager, active, self-opinionated, 
“cocksure’ ; ready in ideas, too much so for strict truthfulness, bold, dauntless, 
enterprising. ‘Ihe character depends very much on the Sun’s position, and the 
temperament upon that of Mars, also aspects. ‘The hair is usually light, unless 
there are aspects from Saturn, the eyes somewhat hard, but bright and over- 
flowing with ‘magnetism.’ Ambitious to lead, always in the front, and not 
seldom in the way. Very difficult to deal with. Always starting new things 
and never (or rarely) finishing them. 


PLANETS RISING 


TAURUS 


ttt This sign is decidedly sympathetic to the planet, which tendsto ‘*f 
add further grace and charm to its own inherent beauty. There is an 
indescribable charm of manner and acuriously winning smile. Rich creamy 
complexion, full flexible neck, soft seductive voice. Temperament musical, 
artistic and esthetic, with a strong tendency to the sensuous. This is the 
better type. Lower types are brutal and sensual with depraved tastes and large 
appetite for coarse pleasures. 

Hi Rather short stature, with a dull, dark complexion, a boastful, HI 
conceited person, and a great eater. This is rarely a favourable position for 
this planet, and the rest of the horoscope must be looked to before forming any 

ment; consider especially the Sun’s position and whether in favourable 
aspect to Uranus. 

% Apt to be of aclumsy, awkward, ungraceful appearance ; dark hair hh 
and sallow complexion. This is not a favourable position unless very well 


H 


114 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


aspected, there is a strong tendency to gratification of the senses, and a disposition 
to go to great lengths in securing the object of desire. 

7 Below the average height, not quite proportionate, of a dark 7 
swarthy complexion and dark brown hair, wise and judicious in his ideas, a 
lover of the opposite sex, and possessing an amiable disposition. ‘This is a rather 
favourable position for Jupiter, especially for worldly prosperity, unless much 
afflicted. ‘The disposition is as a rule excellent, however. 

¢ Rather below the middle height, with an obscure, dark complexion, 
large mouth, broad face and dark hair. ‘There is no peace-making about this 
individual ; he will be found to be a treacherous, dissembling sort of person, 
that is no good to himself or anyone else. ‘This as a rule, but there are great 
possibilities in this position when the horoscope as a whole shows a highly 
developed moral character and a well-balanced nature. 

© Broad and fleshy face, large nose and mouth, rather short stature, © 
the hair a dull brown, grey or hazel eyes. Disposition bold, resolute, confident 
without reason, delights in contentions, fighting, etc., in which he is frequently 
successful, not that he or she necessarily joys in strife, but glories in overcoming 
obstacles. Much firmness and endurance. 

@  Well-proportioned, medium stature, moderately good complexion, 9? 
dark brown hair, and blue or grey eyes. A good moral disposition, kind and 
obliging, always ready to do a kindly action to a neighbour, fortunate in most 
undertakings, and much respected. A very favourable position, unless ill- 
aspected. 

% Middle stature, stout and somewhat corpulent, dark brown hair, & 
dark tawny complexion. ‘This is not a good position, unless accompanied by 
other planets ; a slow-witted person, with, however, some skill in weaving tales. 

) Middle stature, sometimes quite short: body compact and usually ) 
well-proportioned ; face, at any rate, generally neat and clear-cut or ‘trim’ 
looking, with a smooth skin, sometimes dusky ; deliberate in movement, and 
takes very short steps when walking. ‘This is one of the best positions, as 
regards beauty, for the Moon rising; if well aspected, especially by Venus, 
there is often great comeliness and personal charm. ‘The nature is personally 
more fixed than with the Moon rising in any other sign, and there is often great 
obstinacy. The feelings are strong and usually very personal, and there is a 
great tendency to brood over real or imaginary wrongs or insults. ‘There is 
usually good health, unless badly aspected, but with a tendency to ‘lock up’ 
poisonous matters in the system unless sufficient exercise is taken, and as these 
natives are naturally very indolent and do not take much exercise this may 
result in various diseases. Plain living is essential for their health. 


PLANETS RISING IN 
GEMINI 


{+ Light, graceful and volatile in appearance. Excellent mimics and t# 
actors. Rapid, clusive smile, many quaint conceits. Large expressive eyes, 
luminous skin, great vocal range in speaking, now high, now low. Very musical 
and with some talent for poetry. Sensuous and insouciant. Fond of nonsense 
verses, leariques, etc. Low types are irresponsible, seldom actively harmful, 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISINGSIGN. THEFIRST HOUSE 115 


but sure to find their way into evil company and prone to mischievous acts, 
theft, etc.; chatterers. 

Ki =A person of tall stature, generally light hair and eyes, with an HI 
eccentric disposition ; passionately fond of science, quick and active in all his 
movements. Will be a genius in some direction, probably science. 

hkh_ Rather above the average height, with black or very dark hair; h 
ingenious, but not always of a good disposition. There is ability for concen- 
tration in mental pursuits, if well aspected by Mercury; but suspicion and 
over-carefulness are apt to prove a great hindrance to native’s success. ‘This 
position is sometimes an impediment to the moral nature, inclining to cupidity. 

~~ Tall and well-composed person, with a kind and pleasant expression 7 
of countenance, with dark brown hair and dark grey eyes; a really well- 
disposed, kind, and obliging person, of a good moral character, judicious in all 
things, fond of science and of female company. ‘There is an inclination to science 
and philosophy and usually some literary or poetical ability. 

$ Tall,slight, active, but well-proportioned person,somewhat swarthy ¢ 
complexion, dark brown hair, grey or hazel eyes. Of a wandering, unsettled 
disposition, fond of strife, disputes, or rather arguments, but chiefly for the sake 
of argument more than with the desire to arrive at truth. 

© A person of a large organisation, high coloured or sanguine © 
complexion, and although of large stature, well composed, of uniform structure, 
brown hair, and generally large eyes. ‘The disposition is good on the whole, 
elegant in manners, of a kind and polished deportment, possesses a contented 
mind, not easily offended, and rather unfortunate in his business transactions. 
Given to travel; strong inclination to science and art or commerce, with a 
tendency to blend the two ; literary ability. 

@ Slender form, tall but well-proportioned, medium brown hair, and @ 
good complexion. The disposition is loving, free, just and merciful. The 
native is ambitious to be charitable, which he is to the utmost of his ability ; 
detests mean or unjust actions and delights in good company. Is rather 
inconstant in love, has many ‘dualistic’ love-episodes and is likely to marry 
twice or to carry on two amours simultaneously. 

% Mercury rising in Gemini, which is said to be the house of this § 
planet because the nature of the planet and that of the sign sympathise with 
each other, consequently produces better effects in this sign than in any other, 
except my. Students should bear in mind that this is the case with ali the 
other planets when in their own mansions, except the malefics; hence when 
Mercury is in this sign and on the ascendant at the time of an individual’s 
birth, without any counteracting influences in operation to interfere therewith, 
it produces a person rather tall, well composed, with nice even features, good 
complexion, rather light brown hair; disposition on the whole good, very 
ingenious, fond of learning, particularly arts and sciences of almost any kind, 
extremely apt in acquiring anything that he may set his mind upon. If Mercury 
be well aspected with Jupiter or Saturn, it gives a superior judgment and under- 
standing. There is often poetical and musical ability and always wit and fluency 
of speech, unless Mercury is badly afflicted. 

- )~) Fairly tall; slight, nervous build of person, active in movement, ) 
gesticulating freely with the arms when speaking. Lively and frequent if not 
incessant talker, and somewhat shallow in opinions and ideas (but see position 


116 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


of 9 and fh); much given to move about from place to place, to change from 
one subject or occupation to another, and to go on from one task to another 
while the first is as yet unfinished (usually returns to it again after a time, 
however, in which they differ from Moon in Aries, which as a rule does not). 
The arms are long and the hands narrow and nervous, the fingers moving 
restlessly. Exceedingly receptive to ideas and equally ready either to teach or 
to learn. 


PLANETS RISING IN 


CANCER 


ttt Slight, hypersensitive body, inconstant, very emotional, ever posing *$! 
or assuming identity of others. Artistic, inspirational, temperament of an 
April day, smiles and tears readily alternating, easily impressed by others and 
exceedingly unreliable as to temper. Very magnetic and attractive in a subtle 
and unusual way. In low types, a tendency to live on others; something of a 
parasite. 

Hi Short stature, stout, dark hair, and pale complexion. One who Hi 
will come before the public. Difficult to rely on, very capricious as regards 
feeling, and rarely remaining for long in one house or locality. | 

hk Rather short stature; of a pale, thin-looking countenance, with h 
nothing pleasing in expression or form of body. ‘The disposition is not at all to 
be desired, it being peevish, somewhat malicious, and much inclined to a fretful 
self-indulgence. ‘There is a great love of ease and a tendency to inactivity. In 
low types, sottish. Business interests are sacrificed to home cares, and public 
convenience sacrificed for private gain. 

% About middle height, oval face, pale complexion, and dark hair; 2 
ambitious, aspiring disposition, aiming at great and high attainments, pleasant 
in manners, but fond of ‘having a finger in the pie.’ Jupiter is exalted in this 
sign, so that this position may be considered in every sense favourable, unless. 
Jupiter is greatly afflicted. If in aspect to Mars, there will be many amours. 
This position is favourable for public offices, as native is sure to be popular. 

3d Short stature, awkwardly formed ; pale complexion, dusky brown ¢ 
hair. A restlessly active, ‘mind-hungry’” individual, a promoter of quarrels and 
contentions. ‘There is a constant passion for notoriety, and a craving for position 
and power. | 

© Small in stature, of an unhealthy appearance, the face somewhat © 
defective, medium brown hair. ‘The disposition is pleasant and agreeable, fond 
of company, particularly that of females, delights in almost any kind of sport or 
pastime ; generally speaking, a free, jovial, and good-humoured sort of person 
that does not easily take offence. ‘There is a strong love of power, notoriety 
or both, and a liking for popular measures in politics: somewhat of a lover of 
shibboleths. 

Short stature, rather stout, round face, pale complexion, light  ? 
brown hair, and blue eyes. ‘The disposition is very changeable and unsettled ;. 
never to be depended upon. Somewhat vain and idle, but fond of good 
company. Kindly and well-disposed, and desirous of popular esteem. 

® If without any counteracting influence, produces a small, mean- &% 
looking person, with small eyes, thin face, sharp nose, and dark hair; usuaily a 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISINGSIGN. THE FIRSTHOUSE 117 


‘very remarkable memory. ‘The disposition is malicious, deceitful, knavish, crafty, 
etc., one that is qualified for any kind of dissimulation, particularly so if Mars 
has an evil aspect with Mercury at the same time. 

) This is a strong position for the Moon, since Cancer is its own sign jp 
and it therefore is ‘lord of the ascendant rising in the ascendant.? Much 
depends on the Moon’s aspects—more perhaps here than anywhere. Appear- 
ance : small stature, small round face, crab-like or rabbit-like in expression, the 
septum of the nose appearing to view below the nostrils, many slight sensitive 
lines on either side of the nose; pale skin, pores very open. Exceedingly 
sensitive disposition, responsive to every breath of feeling or opinion, very 
sympathetic towards suffering and apt to take on other people’s magnetic 
conditions and to absorb disease from them. Apt to repine and become peevish 
or querulous, fanciful and unduly careful both about themselves and those related 
to them. ‘Think much of public opinion, and are eager to be in the swim, while 
yet timid and retiring in actual behaviour—a strange contradiction. ‘There is 
great tenacity and power of holding on to a given desire or idea, and a remark- 
able power of memory. Very psychic nature. Fond of power and firmly bent 
on attainingit. Interested in ancient customs. ‘The most noteworthy character- 
istic is a certain quivering sensitiveness (like an aspen leaf). Frequently become 
stout, or rather bulky, after middle life. Highly emotional always, and very 
acquisitive ; fond of ‘collecting.’ 


PLANETS RISING IN 
LEO 


t## = Slighter than the usual Leo build, fiery, emotional or idealistic *# 
nature, brilliant eyes, highly romantic ideas, extravagant ideals in regard to 
love, catholic tastes, somewhat of a ‘Timon of Athens,’ and something of a 
salamander also. In low types, unbridled passions. 

Hi A large, strong, well-made individual; light hair and sandy H 
whiskers. His disposition is very independent, but generous and resolute. 
There is usually some genius associated with this position, but the passions are 
strong and subtle. ‘The nature is unconquerable. 

h_ A firmly set, square-built, bony individual, that allthe high-livingin hh 
the world could not make fat. Has little personally attractive about him; his 
disposition, on the whole, is moderately good, but rather passionate. This 
gives great business capacity, if well supported in other directions, capable of 
managing and controlling large enterprises, Great power of concentration of 
mind and will. 

Y% Atall person, well made, ruddy complexion, and light hair; afine, 7 
noble-looking person, one who delights in all humane and manly actions; very 
ambitious of honour and with a full sense of his own importance. A good 
governor or magistrate, if other positions in the horoscope support. 

6 Of full stature, strong and well-built, large head and face, fulleyes, ¢ 
light brown or flaxen hair, hot and hasty in temper, yet free and generous in 
disposition ; delights in fire-arms, shooting, wars, surgical operations. An 
ardent lover, but too prone to mistake passion for love and intensity for depth. 

@ When the Sun holds this position in a nativity, it conveys at once ©) 

_ tothe mind of an astrologer a person of full and well-proportioned structure, 


118 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


full face, large eyes, light brown or yellow hair, and ruddy complexion. Dis- 
position good, faithful, just, and courteous to all men to the utmost of his 
ability ; one who is very ambitious of honour. A ruler indeed; but if ill 
aspected by Jupiter, proud and overbearing withal. i 

9 Moderate height, well and evenly made, round face, full eyes, light 9 
brown or sandy hair, the face spotted or freckled. Disposition proud, haughty, 
and passionate. Generous and kindly but too fond of pleasure and hence 
extravagant. Exceedingly ardent in love. Fully persuaded of own abilities. 

% A person of large stature, round face, also dark hair and com- Y 
plexion. Disposition proud, haughty, and passionate, artistic and a good 
mimic. This position gives ability for the drama, also for writing romances of 
love and adventure. 

) This also is a strong position for the Moon, but depends almost en-  ) 
tirely for its character upon the Sun’s position. Body moderately tall, long back, 
upright carriage, fearless demeanour, bold and free, but not elastic movements. 
Eyes large and well opened, air enthusiastic and convincing, manners agreeable 
and entertaining. This is a good example of the blend of the fiery and the fixed 
tendencies ; there seems a great flexibility and adaptability in these natives, for 
they are impulsive and enthusiastic where their projects are concerned, but this 
will be found to be an appearance only: for they are almost entirely self-motived 
and are very difficult to move either by persuasion or argument, being in reality 
surprisingly stubborn except where their own enthusiasms are concerned. But 
they are admirable workers, and when allowed to go their own way manage 
things excellently, putting their heart into ail they do and doing everything in a 
way that can only be described by the word ‘thorough.’ ‘They are impulsive, 
but their impulses come from within, and are not the result of contact from 
without (as in the case of Aries for instance). 


PLANETS RISING IN 
VIRGO 


tt Shy, sensitive and retiring, very like the usual Virgo type but with + 
very wistful eyes; curious tastes, fond of enquiring into ancient customs and 
peculiar religious rites ; more sense of humour than usually displayed by Virgos. 
Neat appearance, brown eyes, very luminous and mobile, delicate ears, abundant 
hair and wavy. Medium height, tending to shortness.) Demure and somewhat 
mysterious, full of schemes and never thoroughly to be known. In low types, 
deception, theft and illicit pleasures. 

Ft Short, dark, and thin; independent, ingenious but very eccentric. HI 
There is often genius for music with this position. In any case there is some 
journalistic ability, with a taste for science and antiquarianism or out-of-the- 
way investigations and research. A hunter-up of obscure details and statistics. 

h Tall, slight person; dark hair and dark swarthy appearance; in- h 
clined to study and reading, particularly news of a melancholy nature. He is 
of a quiet moody disposition, given to fits of depression. ‘This position is more 
favourable for Saturn than for Virgo; but there is much ability for painstaking 
work where the rest of the nativity shows a refined nature. 

¥% <A moderate-sized person, with dark hair and complexion, a scien- / 
tific expression of countenance, much given to study. Even-tempered disposition, 


f 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE rg 


careful with money, ambitious of honour and position. Only moderately 
successful and rarely marries. ‘This is a somewhat unfavourable position for 
Jupiter. 

d When fully developed, of medium height, proportionately made, ¢ 
rather dark or swarthy complexion, brown hair. One that requires to be treated 
courteously, easily offended and somewhat resentful. Disposition anything but 
affable, but energetic and capable, a busy worker and a most useful servant 
when judiciously managed. A somewhat psychic type of mind, but very 
intellectually disposed. 

©. A large, but well-proportioned person, i.e., when fully developed; © 
the hair dark brown and plentiful, the complexion moderately good. ‘The 
disposition on the whole also good ; very ingenious, agreeable, and pleasant in 
company, not very ambitious, but rather severe with those who offend him. 
Very careful of own interests and rather apt to develop selfishness as life 
advances. 

@ Moderately tall, well composed, with an indifferent complexion, ? 
dark brown hair, and dark eyes, In disposition subtle, cunning, careful of own 
interests, artistic, very ingenious and active ; personally very fastidious in tastes, 
and dainty, and apt to look down on others less refined and to misinterpret their 
actions. 

®% A tall and slender person, well-made, hair and complexion dark. § 
His disposition is ambitious, scientific, quick intellect ; the organ of language 
well developed, consequently his tongue can always find something to talk 
about ; it has one great advantage over many, viz., it is seldom out of employ- 
ment, and if Mercury is well aspected at the time of birth it will find a good 
deal of very useful and beneficial work to do. ‘This position increases the. 
talkativeness of Virgo but somewhat lessens its tendency to prudishness or 
fault-finding and the native is less priggish. 

) The Moon is well placed in Virgo. These people have a medium jp 
stature, very neat appearance, colour of hair, eyes, etc., usually tending to a 
general drown tinge, the skin being as a rule yellowish-brown, with a good colour. 
Small features, well made, but delicate; good eyes but wistful rather than 
inspiring in expression: the body movements are Mercurial. Very neat in 
dress, economical withal, generally cover up the neck (distinction from Sagit- 
tarius and Jupiter, which always leave it bare). Quiet and demure—‘ mouse- 
like’—in manner, trim and orderly in methods, rather prim and always very 
precise in ideas. Are keen to notice differences, and are rather hard on ‘ evil- 
doers.’ 


PLANETS RISING IN 


LIBRA 


4+ Usually of great beauty ; ethereal appearance and large liquideyes; tf 
taller than the usual type of Libra native. Lofty ideals and rather visionary 
notions, advanced ideas of altruism. Compassionate and forgiving, eloquent 
and poetic, intuitional. In low types, morbid cravings for sexual indulgence. 

Hi Strong, well-made person, light brown hair, fair sanguine com- Hi 
plexion, quick at learning, fond of science ; hot tempered and independent. 


120 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


Usually unfortunate in marriage, owing to peculiar notions or extreme inde- 
pendence. But the eccentricity of Uranus is rendered more moderate and 
adaptable here than in perhaps any of the signs. 

h Saturn, when rising in the ascendant in Libra, represents a person hh 
above the average height, well and uniformly made, with a good complexion, 
high forehead, medium brown hair; very independent and somewhat cold and 
reserved. Saturn is exalted in this sign and exhibits some of his best charac- 
teristics, love of justice and devotion to duty, when the character as indicated 
by the horoscope as a whole is good. 

2 Near the medium height, inclining to be tall, gracefully and beauti- 7 
fully formed, with a very pleasant expression of countenance, light brown hair 
and blue eyes. Disposition good, loving, kind, pleasant, and obliging. A large 
circle of friends and admirers, particularly those of the opposite sex. ‘This is 
perhaps one of the best positions for Jupiter for worldly success and popularity. 
But consider his aspects. 

g Rather tall in stature, well composed, fair and sanguine complexion, ¢ 
oval visage, and light brown hair; cheerful and pleasant expression of coun- 
tenance. Delights to be in the company of the opposite sex, very approbative 
and uxorious. Often proves a promoter of disunion and yet rarely a positively 
quarrelsome or disagreeable person, so that this quality appears more as a 
misfortune than as a fault. 

© Moderate height, straight and upright when walking, complexion © 
rather fair, light brown hair, the eyes full and blue. Disposition very appro- 
bative, amiable and good on the whole; rather unfortunate in his affairs through 
life. Apt to be too yielding under pressure, and inclined to lean on others. 
Usually a very loveable nature, but sometimes very exclusive and distant. 

2 Fairly tall, well proportioned, good sanguine complexion, with 9? 
dimples in the cheeks, and light brown hair. Disposition very good, a lover of 
morality and respectability, courteous, civil, obliging ; one who delights in doing 
good to others. ‘This is perhaps the most favourable position of any for a 
female horoscope. ‘The love-nature is polarised toward the higher emotions and 
is elevated to the plane of the mind. 

% Shows the person, when fully developed, to be of moderate stature & 
and proportionate, complexion fair, but sanguine, blue eyes, and light brown 
hair. ‘The disposition is extremely good in every respect, a person that loves 
justice, virtue, and morality in all their forms, very fond of learning and of good 
company. Fond of poetry, and very fluent, eloquent, and agreeable speaker. 

) This position gives, on the whole, the most ‘likeable’ personality of —) 
any sign in the Zodiac. Being cardinal and yet Venusian it is sufficiently definite 
to be interesting and yet plastic enough to adapt itself to others and willing to 
do so; being airy, it is essentially refined and concerned only with the higher 
emotions. Graceful, somewhat undulating carriage, medium height, rather tall 
than short, somewhat bird-like—dove-like—in figure and movements, easy and 
courteous in speech (in a peculiarly graceful way that mo other sign possesses), 
and willing to be interested in all subjects that please the companion. In a 
word, this position makes a delightfully ‘companionable’ person. ‘The eyes are 
frequently grey—dove grey—and there is a fondness for silver-grey or light 
blue in the apparel. The word apparel, as distinguished from the more homely 
expression ‘clothing,’ is peculiarly appropriate in speaking of this sign, to 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN)! THE FIRST HOUSE | 122 


which gracefulness and elegance so peculiarly belong. ‘The eyes have a gentle 
and wistful melancholy when in repose. 


PLANETS RISING IN 
SCORPIO 


tt "There is a great tendency for the evil side of this planet’sinfluence ‘}# 
to be shewn here, manifesting as depravity of an extraordinary kind. But in the 
higher types there will be a strange incomprehensible aloofness, a nature difficult 
to understand, silent and unexpressed ; the feelings will be subtle, deep and 
poignant. There is here capacity either for great suffering or for great and 
deliberate cruelty. Such a position is likely to produce one who has a great 
genius for delving into Nature’s deeper secrets and for making researches into 
obscure byways of science, folk-lore or medicine—the latter especially. The 
appearance is striking and rather forbidding, the eyes mysterious and 
impenetrable and the brow heavy. ‘The sex nature is exceedingly strong in 
such natives, but where the regenerative nature of Scorpio is enabled to overcome 
it, its powerful influence is exerted in probing hidden matters, psychic, 
intellectual or spiritual. 

Hi A short, thick-set person, with broad shoulders, dark swarthy com- HI 
plexion, dark hair and eyes. In disposition exceedingly passionate and intense. 
Difficult to understand or to work with; a close and subtle reasoner and 
debater, ardent in research and investigation of all physiological or medical 
subjects and capable of attaining eminence on these lines. Uranus is by many 
considered to be exalted in this sign. 

h_ Short stature, thick set, dark obscure complexion, and dark hair; h 
of a somewhat quarrelsome disposition, one who has great difficulty in con- 
trolling jealousy and resentment, especially the latter. Proud, masterful and 
ambitious of power, usually possesses much psychic ability and displays an 
interest in occult matters, especially psychical research. 

Y% Middle stature, rather fleshy and stout, swarthy complexion, dark 7 
eyes. A boastful disposition, but fortunate in most transactions. Benefits 
through partners. Has great skill in achieving own ends and is somewhat 
resentful. A fruitful mind. 

$ Medium height, broad flat face, dark swarthy complexion, black ¢ 
or very dark and curly hair. This is a revengeful, deceitful, malicious, quarrel- 
some person, who ought at all times to be treated courteously, for he is very 
ingenious in contriving means to attain his ends or purposes, also in the pro- 
fession he may follow as a trade or business. In an otherwise strong horoscope 
this position denotes a capable surgeon where the intellectual abilities are of 
an appropriate character, also one suitable for position of authority as governor 
of a gaol, inspector of police, or other managerial capacity where strenuousness 
and force of personal will are necessary. 

© _ Person when fully developed of middle stature, stout and well © 
mide, full and fleshy face, swarthy complexion, medium brown hair. Of an 
ingenious and ambitious nature, very clever in wars and contentions, also in 
surgical operations, chemistry. Strong and commanding personality, resentful 
of injuries, and suspicious of the motives of others. A trustworthy overseer 
and can be relied upon to keep a secret. 


122 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 
¢ Middle stature, stout, and well-built ; face broad and dark, dark 9 


brown hair, and dark grey eyes. In disposition contentious, quarrelsome, 
envious; a person rather to be avoided. This is not at all a favourable 
position for Venus, but it gives strong sex control. The native will rule his 
partners. 

% About middle height, proportionate and strong body, dark curly &% 
hair, dark eyes and complexion. Ingenious and active mind, rather too fond of 
company, particularly that of the opposite sex; a great aptitude for making 
stinging speeches, when annoyed. 

) Appearance here will greatly differ according to sex, males having a_ )) 
firmer and more strongly built body than females born with this position. In 
males the form tends to be somewhat bulky and in some cases coarse grained ; 
features not good, the nose usually badly formed or with a broken appearance ; 
temper uncertain, and quarrelsome. In females, body is often slight and wispy, 
with something of a moth-like appearance, eyes large and hollow and expression 
unsatisfied-looking, wistful or yearning ; the nature is uncertain and treacherous, 
or at least unreliable, prone to violent changes of taste or liking, fast friends one 
day, bitter enemies the next. Both these indications may be greatly modified by 
good aspects or good solar position ; but something of these tendencies is sure to 
remain. There is often a great deal of the lower or less admirable kind of pride 
in the nature ; it is hard for them to forgive, yet easy to be ungrateful. ‘These 
people always have curious experiences to pass through in regard to sex. 


PLANETS RISING IN 
SAGITTARIUS 


ttt The planet is thoroughly ‘at home’ in this sign, owing to its ‘*# 
Jupiterian nature, and hence a fairly harmonious expression of its influence may 
be expected. Tall, fine looking, with large gleaming eyes, sensitive humorous 
lips, frank and engaging manners, and a genius for ‘putting themselves in 
another's place, ’ they are sure to be universal favourites. ‘This is perhaps one of 
the best signs for the expression of Neptune’s influence, and inclines the native 
strongly to a study of religion and folk-lore ; or he is of a mystical turn of mind. 
Even in the low types, the native is as a rule nothing worse than what is termed 
‘an unmitigated bounder,’ full of resource and wild-cat schemes, Utopian com- 
munistic ideas and other frothy enterprises. 

Hi Atall, straight, and well-composed person, with a noble, intelligent- Hi 
looking countenance, rather light hair, grey or clear blue eyes, large and gleam- 
ing, and of moderately good complexion; of an ambitious disposition, yet 
generous and good hearted. ‘There is usually genius in either art, science or 
philosophy. Great intuition in regard to Astrology may be looked for from this 
position. 

h_ A person of rather large structure, dark hair, and moderately good h 
complexion. A kind, courteous, benevolent person, one who will not pass by 
an offence easily, but who will, nevertheless, soon be reconciled. This is a 
good position for the planet and indicates a strong natural love of either science, 
philosophy or religion. Rarely distinguished-looking, however; but this is 
usually true of those born with Saturn rising, except in the airy signs, 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THEFIRST HOUSE 123 


% This sign is one of the houses of Jupiter, and the effects produced Y 
by the great benefic when placed in this sign are better than if placed in any 
other. Represents a person of moderately tall stature, oval visage, medium 
brown hair, ruddy complexion ; well-formed head, organs of which are evenly 
developed. Possessing a good, honest, truthful, loving disposition ; a true and 
sincere friend, just in all dealings, and very fortunate in his passage through life. 
There is usually a strong leaning to the church or towards military life. Fond 
of sport and a great lover of horses. 

gd Apperson of rather tall stature, well proportioned, good complexion, ¢ 
dark brown hair, and dark eyes. A regular merry, jolly sort of a person, very 
fond of company, rather passionate, delights in military operations, railway enter- 
prise, etc. Fond of travel, sport and new ideas. Apt to be superficial in thought 
and to profess knowledge rather than to possess it. Capable of ‘drawing a bow 
at a venture’ with telling effect. 

© ‘Tall stature, well and proportionately made, oval visage, sanguine © 
complexion, light brown hair. Disposition proud, haughty, very ambitious of 
honour, but very pleasant in manners; delights in justice. Talkative and 
argumentative, fond of travel, games, sports and pastimes of all kinds ; somewhat 
religious withal, or else militantly anti-episcopal. 

@ Rather above the average height, well and proportionately built, 9 
light hair, oval visage, grey or hazel eyes. The disposition is good. A pleasant 
person, possessing agreeable and obliging manners; noble and brave; rather 
proud; passionate, but is soon appeased. Venus has great sympathy with 
Sagittarius, as has Jupiter similarly with Libra. 

% A tall person, well composed, rather long visage, large nose, san- § 
guine complexion, and dark hair. A very active, busy-bodyish kind of person, 
loquacious and frequently shallow-minded, sharp and intelligent in small 
matters, rather conceited and vain of his abilities and eager to display his talents. 

) ‘This is a somewhat favourable position for the Moon, and its better ) 
qualities are usually manifested. Appearance, tall, slight (sometimes bulky and 
fleshy, but only when other influences in the horoscope strongly indicate this), 
lithe and active, strong muscles, or rather abundant nervous force to stimulate 
them into action, quick in movement, light and graceful in bearing and free and 
pleasant in speech. Large well-opened eyes, somewhat dreamy and _ psychic 
looking nevertheless, long slender neck. Particular as to clothes as a rule, given 
to a certain fastidiousness regarding linen, and fond of wearing brown leather 
boots, and gaiters or spats; in fact, there is, in general, a slight tendency to 
‘horsiness’ of appearance, not necessarily of an unrefined type. General 
bearing ‘smart’ and ‘well groomed.’ Quick in ideas, ready and fluent in 
speech though sometimes diffident, they are entertaining comrades and good 
fellow-travellers. Prone to overdo themselves where exertion is concerned, and 
sometimes apt to assume a knowledge they do not possess. Humorous, loving 
and generous. 


PLANETS RISING IN 
CAPRICORI 


ttt Capricorn is by some held to be the house of Neptune, but it is  *! 
doubtful if at the present stage of humanity this sign offers great facilities for 


124 | HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


the expression of its influence, being too hard and dry in its nature. ‘The 
appearance is dark and magnetic, hair smoother and finer than usual in this sign, 
skin dusky, eyes usually of a curious dark blue or bluey grey. ‘Temperament 
idealistic, full of plans for political or economic progress, or, in the less advanced 
types, selfish, crafty, and relentless in carrying out predetermined ambitions. In 
low types, sottish and slavish, given to drink and low company, but with some 
genius in certain directions, guileful, readily planning and cleverly executing 
schemes of great ingenuity. 

Hi About middle height, evenly made, high forehead, short, thin neck, HI 
light hair, and small steely eyes. In disposition self-opinionated, haughty, 
ostentatious, possessing a very exalted opinion of himself. This must be judged 
according to the other positions in the horoscope, aspects, etc., for there is the 
possibility of a very lofty type of mind and character here, 

h Athin, slender person of about middle height, with a long visage, hh 
dark sallow complexion, dark hair, and small eyes; disposition reserved, cold 
and indifferent, an individual of but little conversation, and when once offended 
not easily appeased. Very melancholy in manner, and with little self-esteem 
or faculty of ‘hope,’ but very ambitious and persistent when once decided on 
a course of action. Diplomatic in the extreme, and capable of political work if 
in an otherwise good. horoscope. 

% This sign being Saturnine is not by any means a comfortable 7 
vehicle for the expression of Jupiter, who shows himself to much better advan- 
tage in Aquarius. ‘The stature is moderate, carriage fairly independent, manner 
somewhat truculent but good natured, air grand and somewhat disdainful or 
condescending. Successful in public matters and capable in_ organisation. 
Rather rebellious against authority and desirous of being chief. 

d Small, thin structure, small head, black or dark hair, and dark pale ¢ 
complexion. Disposition moderately good, quick, active and ingenious mind, 
usually fortunate in undertakings. Very ambitious and capable, a_ useful 
worker in engineering or organising departments, but a rather questionable 
person to select as a subordinate, for he is apt to turn master, and will certainly 
scheme towards that end. 

© Under this influence we generally find a person ‘of small stature, ©) 
or below the medium height, pale complexion, thin and ill-proportioned, medium 
brown hair, long visage. Disposition determined, resolute, undaunted ; 
possesses a ae amount of morality, benevolence, etc., and is fond of eR 
society, Persistent ambition and political ability are marked features of this 
position. 

9 Medium height, thin face and pale complexion, dark brown hair 9? 
and dark eyes, good features. Very ambitious of place and _preferment, 
desirous of achieving lasting distinction, but unwilling to use strenuous means, 
and preferring subtlety to open contest. ‘There are great possibilities in this 
position, only too seldom realised. In lower types, a person who speaks very 
highly of himself and what he does, which is not much worth talking about ; he 
is fond of drink and many of the great evils connected therewith, and not very 
fortunate in his transactions. 

% Indicates a little, lean, thin-faced individual, dull and obscure & 
complexion, brown hair. Of a nervous, irritable, peevish nature, and one that 
is not very fortunate. There is great ability for diplomacy, if well aspected, 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISING SIGN. THE FIRSTHOUSE 125 


and in any case much subtlety of mind ; the mental outlook is often narrow, 
however. 

) This is not a favourable position, except where the individuality is J) 
very strong. Otherwise the native is apt to become ‘cranky,’ small-natured, 
narrow-minded and mean, though the position of Saturn in Leo or Sagittarius 
would lessen this tendency. ‘The figure is usually somewhat small and cramped, 
the face long and thin, peaky-looking, the nose somewhat Jewish in type, the 
skin sallow and unhealthy looking or parchment-like ; the corpse-like complexion 
to which this lunar position inclines is especially marked in ill-health and old 
age, giving a ‘leaden’ (h rules lead) tinge to the skin. The native is both 
cautious and subtle, very watchful of self-interests or, in the higher types, the 
interests of the community. ‘The eyes are dull and patient, capable of a steady 
fire when settling down to work in the face of difficulties, for the energy and 
enthusiasm of Capricorn rise in direct proportion to the disappointments or 
rebuffs encountered. ‘This is a fine position for those who can make a good 
use of it, but they have first to overcome the timidity and to learn to understand 
their own natures. The heads of the great Jewish banking houses furnish 
admirable instances of the favourable expression of the Capricorn qualities, 
but with this position they are usually only displayed in a very feeble and 
puny way, though the instinct towards them can be clearly discerned. 


PLANETS RISING IN 
AQUARIUS 


ttt Neptune expresses itself well in this sign, which is airyand mental, ‘ft 
yet concerned with the deeper feelings of the heart. Appearance generally 
fair, eyes large and luminous, middle stature, not short, body well covered, 
delicate complexion and abundant hair, somewhat flaxen, blue eyes of a some- 
what sapphire tint. This position should, other things being favourable, 
produce a genius in art, music or sociology ; not so much a ‘leader’ as the 
founder of a ‘school’ which would endure after him. ‘The artist and poet 
William Morris had Neptune in Aquarius at birth, and very probably rising, 
and his life was characteristic of this influence. In low types, shiftless and 
improvident, given to imposing on others, plausible and deceitful. 

Hi One of middle stature, evenly composed, rather light brown hair, HI 
and very good features. Large and lustrous eyes. ‘The disposition is indepen- 
dent, somewhat eccentric, but ingenious and given to curious pursuits and 
investigations. Science and art go hand in hand with this position ; and such 
a person, if other aspects, etc., corroborate, should be capable of contributing 
some remarkable sociological work of some kind for the advancement of 
humanity. 

kh Medium height, rather stout, very dark hair and complexion. In h 
disposition he is kind, courteous, ingenious ; fond of science; but he thinks more 
of himself than he has any right to. Self-reliant and masterful, inclined to 
diplomatic or secret service work if other planetary positions are in suitable 
agreement. 

Y This planet when rising in Aquarius has a very good effect upon ¥ 
the individual who is then born. ‘The person attains to middle stature, and is 


126 *, HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


well formed; medium brown hair, long face, and a very good expression of 
countenance. Disposition pleasant, merry, obliging, fond of good and respect- 
able company, a feeling which is reciprocated. ‘This position enables the native 
to manifest the true Aquarius nature more harmoniously than any other at our 
present stage of evolution. 

g Of middle stature, proportionately made, sandy, reddish, or laxen 6 
hair, ruddy complexion. Has a quarrelsome disposition and inclines to cultivate 
it. Delights in cantankerousness and peculiarity, and seems to find pleasure 
in proving his dissimilarity to other people. Rarely a favourite with the other 
sex. 

© Produces a corpulent person, well and evenly composed, middle © 
height, generally good complexion, round visage, light brown hair. In disposi- 
tion very ambitious and aspiring, particularly for rule and authority ; he must be 
first and foremost in everything, whatever he may be engaged in. Interested in 
art and science and all sociological schemes. 

@ A handsome, well-composed person, with a beautiful fair com- 9? | 
plexion, light brown hair and dark blue eyes. ‘The disposition is very courteous, 
obliging, always ready to lend a helping hand in any case of need; naturally a 
perfect peace-maker, and a despiser of any kind of evil. A very favourable 
position, denoting one well constituted to be a helper to humanity. 

% Person rather fleshy, of middle stature, full and long face, medium 
brown hair. Disposition good, kind, loving, and generous ; a genius in every 
sense of the word, one who is much respected by all who know him. Much 
more steady in disposition and in mental matters than Mercurial people enerally 
and very humane as well as scientifically inclined. 

-) This is not a very favourable sign for the Moon to manifest in, ) 
being a sign both Saturnine and fixed, and such natives are likely to be in 
general unfortunate, being not well able to express the higher side of Aquarius 
through lack of power (unless other planets occupy the sign), and tending to be 
misunderstood as to their ideals, while the lower side of the sign will have a 
proportionately greater hold on them. In appearance, of medium height, slight 
in build yet resembling sturdier people in their walk and movements ; long face, 
with high forehead and usually broad chin with considerable depth below the 
lips, sometimes a long upper lip, short straight nose, spreading out towards the 
tip ; pale, colourless complexion, flaxen or sandy hair tending to brown; if 
strongly aspected by Saturn or Uranus, dark or coal-black. A strange nature, 
difficult to understand ; obstinate in maintaining own way of life, at times given 
to perverse and wayward instincts, Curious in tastes, with out-of-the-way 
hobbies, interested in ancient customs, folk-lore, obscure superstitions, original 
and often eccentric in ideas. Well able to manage other people as a rule, having 
a curious instinct of human nature and an ability for playing on the feelings of 
others; in unfavourable types this is likely to lead to the native becoming a 
social parasite. 


PLANETS RISING IN 
PISCES 


ttt Pisces is usually regarded as the house of Neptune, and therefore ‘## 
we should expect a harmonious expression of its influence. Quiet, order-loving 


THE ASCENDANT OR RISINGSIGN. THE FIRST HOUSE 127 


and humane, sensitive and impressionable, with a keen instinct for beauty and a 
love of poetry and idealistic conditions generally. Inspirational and poetic. 
These are they who ‘ bring good tidings’ and whose ‘ feet are beautiful upon the 
mountains.’ Appearance, meditative or inspired, skin pearly, eyes deep and 
unfathomable, manner mild. In low types, dissolute, drunken, and lazy, but 
with some happy knack or gift that usually suffices to keep them from starving, 
either through exercise of artistic talent, or the bounty of others. 

Hi When the planet Uranus rises at birth in the last sign of the twelve, Hi 
viz., Pisces, it represents a person below the medium height, stout, with dark 
pale complexion, dark hair and eyes. He is neither a handsome nor an agreeable 
person by any means. Uranus is, on the whole, badly placed in this sign of the 
Zodiac, and the more unfavourable side of its nature is likely to be exemplified, 
the native being eccentric, cantankerous, wantonly peculiar and irregular, given 
to unnatural tastes and generally unsatisfactory. Of course good aspects 
otherwise may modify this or even redeem it altogether. 

hk About middle height, dark hair, dark pale complexion, and full h 
eyes. Subtle and difficult to know, capable of dissembling and hypocrisy. In 
low types, inclined to vice and intemperance. In an otherwise good horoscope 
well dispesed and devotional in mind, but very unfortunate, in worldly 
concerns. 

7. The native realises beneficial influences, which are much admired 2 
by those who observe them. Represents a person below the average height, of | 
stout build, moderately good looking ; of a studious, ingenious disposition ; a 
lover of music, mirth, company, and pleasure. A somewhat Johnsonian 
character. Jupiter in this sign gives success upon the water, dealing in liquids, 
etc. It favours shipping enterprises, institutions, such as hospitals, asylums, 
hotels, and places where the public are catered for as regards their physical 
well-being. 

¢ Below the average height, stout, rather obscure complexion, and 6 
light brown hair. The disposition is rarely good, being frequently hypocritical, 
dissembling, and given to associating with inferiors. This position rather 
inclines to vicious habits, drinking and general dissoluteness. In a strong 
horoscope this will of course be much modified or entirely transmuted into 
loving-kindness and energy in philanthropic schemes. 

© Short stature, somewhat corpulent, round visage, complexion (©) 
moderately good, light brown hair, fond of games and sports of a harmless, 
innocent nature, fond of the opposite sex and rather improvident. Hospitable 
and kind to dumb animals. Generally good swimmers and always fond of the 
water. Somewhat religious-minded. 

@ Venus rising in the sign Pisces at the time of birth, generally 9 
produces a person of middle stature, fairly formed, round visage, rather fair 
complexion, and light brown hair. ‘The disposition, on the whole, is moderately 
good ; just in all transactions, ingenious, and witty in conversation; a delighter 
in peace and tranquillity. Venus is exalted in this sign, and usually when 
rising bestows physical beauty as well as a well-balanced understanding and 
harmonious temperament. * 

% Mercury rising in Pisces at the time of birth, produces a person of 9% 
small stature, pale thin face, dull brown hair, oad grey eyes. A gossip; fond 
of rather low company, particularly that of the opposite sex; through this 


128 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


latter trait he seldom rises in life. In higher types an inspirational mind of 
no great fixity or mental grasp. 

) The Moon, being a plastic, receptive planet, is not unfavourably ) 
placed in this sign, and bestows when well aspected a pleasing personality, 
refined, sympathetic and artistic, well adapted to express the emotions by 
intellectual means; much however depends upon the positions of the Sun and 
Jupiter, the ruling planet. In appearance rarely perfectly formed, the lower 
portion of the body being not well shaped and somewhat clumsy in movement, 
walk indifferent, feet pointing far apart, reminding one of a fish’s tail. Features 
imperfectly formed, and mouth generally loose and ill-finished. Complexion 
soft, and in favourable instances of a peculiar opalescent or mother-of-pearl 
tint and lustre; eyes soft and mild. General nature soft and yielding, passive, 
more ready to suffer than to act, timid and given to forebodings. Very sym- 
pathetic, and in the higher types truly hospitable and compassionate. In the 
lower types of humanity this position represents a ‘derelict,’ one who con- 
sumes without producing. Pisces has sometimes been termed, not without 
eason, the ‘dust-bin of humanity”; in some cases the apparent failure means 
a real advance in soul growth, but just asin other departments of life there 
are some kinds of rubbish fit only for fuel, so we may at times find it in the 
‘dust-bin.’ 


CHAPTER VII 
Tye Ruringc PLANET 


Tue ‘ruling planet’ is either the lord of the ascending sign, or else that 
planet which is strongest or most prominent in the horoscope. No hard 
and fast rule can be given to indicate which this will be; and this is 
one of the many points that must be left to the judgment of the 
astrologer. Sometimes one planet seems to dominate the whole of the 
character and destiny ; while in other cases two or even more may have 
equal sway. Planets in the four angles have the first claim to con- 
sideration, as they are always important; and of them the first house is 
the most important and the fourth the least. If any planet is rising, it | 
will be part ruler; if more than one rises, then that which is strongest 
by sign, or is nearest to the cusp of the ascendant. If no planet rises, 
the lord of the ascendant is ruler, and of considerable importance; but 
attention must also be given to any planet close to the cusps of the 
tenth and seventh houses as well as to any that may be in close aspect 
to the degree rising. The planet that is in closest aspect to the Sun is 
always important, as will be seen from illustrations that follow. 

All these points must be taken into consideration by the astrologer 
and carefully weighed with a view to determine which of them is entitled 
to rank as ruling planet, but in every case where there is the least 
doubt, the lord of the ascending sign should be considered as the RULING 
PLANET, for that planet will be the native’s representative through life 
and no other. Experience will soon render this a matter of comparative 
ease. The following examples will serve to indicate how it is done :— 

Gladstone (born about 8 a.m., 29th December, 1809, Liverpoo/) had 
Sun and Mercury rising in Capricorn, and they may be considered as 
having been approximately equal in importance. The former planet 
gave him vitality, dignity, ambition, and force of character; and the 
latter, learning and eloquence. 

_ King Edwa d VII (orn 10-48 a.m. 9th November, 1841, London) has 
jupiter riging »n its own sign, Sagittarius. This gave King Edward 
I 129 


130 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


the Peacemaker that geniality and bonhomie for which he was so famous. 
Saturn is also strong because, like Jupiter, it is rising in its own sign; 
and this planet has brought gravity, thoughtfulness, and some reserve. 
The best side of Saturn’s influence is seldom fully seen until after 
middle age. 

The Right Hon. Joseph Chamberlain (orn 2.45 a.m., 8th July, 1836, 
London) has Mercury rising in Cancer, a very characteristic position, 
giving subtlety, adaptability, and eloquence. 

The Right Hon. A. J. Balfour (Lorn about 9-30 a.m. 25th July, 1848, 
Haddington) has the Sun in Leo on the cusp of the eleventh house in 
close conjunction with Jupiter and Venus. This makes a very fortunate 
combination; the Sun being probably the strongest. 

The Kaiser, William II (d0rn about 3 p.m., 27th January, 1859, 
Berlin) has a very strong Martial influence in his horoscope for two 
reasons. Cancer rises; the Moon ruling the ascendant is in the martial 
sign Scorpio; Mars, its ‘dispositor’ (¢e., ruler of the sign it is in), is in 
the mid-heaven. \ 

Queen Wilhelmina of Holland (Jorn 6-30 p.m., 31st August, 1880, 
S. Gravenage) has a horoscope that illustrates the difficulty sometimes 
experienced in deciding which out of several planets is the strongest; 
for she has five planets in angles, and another, the Moon, dignified by 
being in its own sign. Probably Jupiter is the strongest, as it rules the 
rising sign, and ‘s in the first house. 

The Tzar, Nicholas II (Jorn noon, 18th May, 1868, St Petersburg) 
has Virgo rising, and Mercury in Gemini in the mid-heaven, which 
makes it the strongest planet in the horoscope. 

’ King George V (Jorn 1-18 a.m., 3rd June, 1865, London) has Neptune 
rising in Aries in close sextile with the Sun; and this renders it 
powerful. Jupiter is also strong from being elevated in its own sign. 

Queen Mary (dorm 11-59 p.m., 26th May, 1867, London) has 
Jupiter as the strongest planet. It is in Pisces intercepted in the 
ascendant in dexter square to the Sun. Venus and the Moon are also 
both important. 

King Victor Emanuel III of Italy (born 10-45 p.m. 11th November 
1869, Naples) has Jupiter in the mid-heaven in aspect to the Sun; but 
Mercury and the Sun are also strong. 

The Emperor Franz Joseph of Austria (born 8-23 a.m., 18th August, 
1830, Vienna) has Libra rising, no planet in the ascendant ; Venus in 


THE’ RULING PLANET 131 


the mid-heaven must therefore be considered strong. Mars is also 
strong because setting in Aries; and the Sun is important because in 
its own sign, Leo. 

Alfonso XII, King of Spain (born 0-30 p.m., 17th May, 1886, Madrid) 
has Virgo rising with Mars close to the cuspof the ascendant. Mercury 
is also important because lord of the ascendant and in mundane trine 
thereto from the cusp of the ninth house. Jupiter is in the lower part 
of the ascendant in close trine to the Sun. 

Lord Rosebery (orn 3 a.m., 7th May, 1847, London) has the end of 
Pisces rising, and Aries intercepted in the ascendant containing Uranus 
and Mercury therein. Lord Rosebery is not ‘lucky’ enough for a Prime 
Minister. His best aspects come from the third house (speaking or 
writing) instead of the tenth or eleventh. 


INFLUENCE OF SOLAR ASPECTS 


When Leo rises the Sun is the ruling planet in the majority of 
cases ; but if amy planet rises in Leo it will be the ruling planet unless 
the Sun is very powerfully placed in the map. The Sun as ruler gives 
dignity, power, loyalty, ambition, vitality, and a very strong and 
powerful magnetism. When well-placed and favourably aspected it 
brings success in life. 

The planet that is in nearest aspect to the Sun (even when the Sun 
is not the ruling planet, nor even angular) must always have considera- 
tion, for that planet will often denote the whole life history, and in many 
cases is a far more potent factor in a horoscope than the ruling planet or 
even the Sun’s position. 

The conjunction of the Sun with any planet will give it more life 
and force wherewith to act according to its nature. 

The opposition of the Sun to any planet will also draw out the 
characteristics of that planet so that its influence becomes paramount. 
The square of the Sun to any planet denotes obstacles to be overcome, 
persons who have influence over the life, and vices or weaknesses in the 
character. The trine aspect will show the direction and nature of the 
fortune and success promised by this aspect. After noting the 
ascendant, this solar influence should be carefully considered in all 
nativities. 


The conjunction of the Sun with the planet NEPTuNE gives a very 


132 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


peculiar nature, difficult to understand. There appears to be a certain inner 
receptivity to the psychic influences of the invisible worlds, which may 
show itself in the form of inspirational faculties of some kind, artistic or 
prophetic: but the nature of this influence is not properly understood. 
The nature is usually strongly magnetic, and there is in the higher types 
a mystical tendency of a very pure kind, but in less advanced egos the 
same tendency is likely to exhibit itself in adherence to strange or 
fantastic religious sects, peculiar and inflated ideas, especially regarding 
sex and marriage. ; 

The square is very insidious in its influence, leading to peculiar 
involved conditions in the environment, plots, and secret machinations 
of unknown enemies, etc. It has a very hampering and tantalising 
influence, seeming to deprive the native of the just reward of worthy 
efforts; for this reason it appears to be closely associated with what may 
be termed the ‘psychic’ karma of the native. Its influence is rarely 
manifested fully in the outer personal life, and appears to relate more to 
the inner life of feeling, emotion and consciousness. In those less 
advanced it appears indicative of a depraved moral nature, and cravings 
for illicit pleasures. 

The opposition is in its general nature similar, though here the 
opposing influences, instead of being diffused over a wide field, seem as 
a rule concentrated in some one person, family, society, or state of 
circumstances, and the native is, as it were, balanced between effort and 
failure. There is often a high spiritual influence about such a position, 
the renunciation which such native is called upon to undergo, or the 
isolation to which he is condemned, seeming to be for the purpose of 
refining the inner nature. The mystical tendency of Neptune is more 
especially marked under this aspect, and such characters often possess 
a peculiar individual charm that is quite indescribable, as shown, for 
instance, in the writings of William Sharp, better known as ‘Fiona 
Macleod.’ 

The trine or sextile aspect is a decidedly favourable influence and 
usually bestows some of the charm alluded to, though it is doubtful 
whether such strong characters are found, asa rule, with this as with 
the other positions just given. The favourable aspect of the Sun to 
Neptune is a good ‘stand-by,’ denoting a general ‘good fortune’ in the 
wider sense, almost equivalent to that of the trine of Jupiter. 

The nature of Neptune is imperfectly understood at present, but a 


THE RULING PLANET 133 


fuller account of its influence is given in a later work of this 
series. 


The conjunction of the Sun with Uranus gives a powerful mag- 
netism, but it is often more evil than good and there are very few born 
with this conjunction who do not spoil their lives either by over- 
sensitiveness, impulse, eccentricity, and wilfulness, or by coming into 
contact with those who lead them into difficulties. 

If the horoscope shows the power to appreciate this conjunction, it 
denotes the inventive faculty, love of reform, and the ability to live 
without being bound by convention or arbitrary restrictions, thus 
bringing success in exceptional and unique ways. 

The square is evil, and denotes great troubles, over which the native 
has no control whatever. 

The opposition brings great troubles in married life, separations, 
divorce, intrigue, illicit connections, and sad and uncommon experiences 
generally. 

The trine aspect is very good and rarely fails to bring the native a 
successful career through his ingenuity and inventiveness. 

The conjunction of the Sun with the planet Saturn brings responsi- 
bility into the life, but it is only when they are in a congenial sign that 
it is really fortunate. A great deal depends upon the actual power of 
Saturn in the nativity, for if Saturn absorbs the life from the Sun, and 
dons its golden garment, then expect much diplomacy, with quiet and 
persistent purpose, in which feeling has no part, but a powerful deter- 
mination is gradually and progressively manifested. A conjunction of 
the Sun and Saturn in common signs is not good; in the fixed signs it 
denotes subtle pride or much dignity and a keen sense of honour and 
justice ; in the cardinal signs intellectual pride and dignity, and a some- 
what cold and unsympathetic nature, not from lack of feeling but more 
often from want of breadth of thought. In weak characters the native 
is very selfish or much bound by ignorance. In strong characters there 
is large tact, and a great deal of consideration for others which comes 
from knowledge and experience. 

The opposition of the Sun and Saturn is very evil, causing many 
obstacles, disappointments and failures in life, and denotes a retardation 
of progress through separations, deaths, and loss of credit. Ifin mutual 
reception the evil is much lessened (Lord Salisbury ; the German Kaiser 
William II). 


134 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


The square aspect of the Sun and Saturn brings domestic affliction, 
limitations to progress through the conditions of the home life, parents 
and family, and through various difficulties over which the native can 
have no control. 

The trine aspect, or even sextile, of Sun and Saturn will steady the 
whole nature, so that good progress may be made. It brings responsi- 
bility that is not difficult to discharge, and causes the native to make 
that steady progress upward which may be slow but is yet sure. 

The conjunction of the Sun with the planet JupiTeR gives success 
through hope, the advent of a teacher or helper, the favour of some 
powerful person, new social advantages, or exceptional opportunities. 
Increase of good name and fortune through philosophy, religion, or travel 

The square or opposition of the Sun and Jupiter is not altogether 
unfortunate, but it retards progress, and gives rather indirect than 
obvious success. It will bring some losses, but often gain follows the 
loss, in exemplification of the proverb that it is an ill wind indeed that 
blows vo good. ‘The signs from which these aspects operate will have 
much to do with the effect. 

The trine aspect of the Sun to Jupiter is the best possible influence 
and assures a fortunate and successful career, acting in a more material 
sense than the conjunction, with all that the conjunction indicates in 
addition. 

The conjunction of the Sun with the planet Mars gives great force 
of character, and a hasty and fiery temper, though not lasting; love 
of enterprise, fits of ambition without sufficient stability to continue 
ambitions long enough to make final success assured. Forceful and often 
rash and over-venturesome. 

The opposition of the Sun to the planet Mars will bring separations, 
deaths, litigation, opponents that are powerful, and a career that is full 
ofextremes. It is against any permanent success, for sudden and serious 
obstacles come into the life to mar its progress. 

The square brings domestic worries, and a liability to violent 
changes, feverish attacks and many troubles. 

The trine aspect gives success through enterprise, speculation, 
industry, courage, and adventure. 

The Sun approaching the conjunction of VENus gives love of 
pleasure; generosity ; warm feelings or strong passions; a very fruitful 
and successful career through life, with many domestic and social 


THE RULING PLANET 135 


advantages. Ifthe Sun is separating from Venus, fewer social desires and 
a more temperate passional nature, with less liability to indulge the latter. 

When the Sun is in conjunction with Mercury, or Mercury is in 
advance of the Sun, there are shown adaptability, fertility of resource 
and the power to fit into the environment or to rise above it as required ; 
but in this case the Sun and Mercury must be in a sign congenial to the 
nature of both, and not afflicted. If the Sun had just left the trine 
aspect of a planet before it came to the conjunction of Mercury, give 
first attention to the trine (or even in a square opposition) in preference 
to the conjunction. If the Sun is in 15° and Mercury 20° of asign, for 
instance, and Uranus in 10° of a sign forming a *, LJ or A thereto, 
count the aspect to Uranus as most important, although separating by 
5°. The reason for this is obvious; Mercury is convertible, and there- 
fore not so strong as Uranus to affect the Sun. Ifthe Sun is in advance 

of Mercury there is less concentration and more pliability and 
changeableness. 

The conjunction of the Sun with amy planet accentuates the individual 
character, the planet colouring the Sun, so to speak, and the Sun adding 
life and activity to the planet, making its influence very pronounced. 

The square aspect brings domestic limitations which may be traced 
to inherited fate. The character is often altered and modified by this 
aspect. Persons bound by parentage, customs, habit or family ties will 
have a square aspect denoting the bondage. 

The trine brings success into the life through the contented frame 
of mind which the harmony of this influence denotes. It is the aspect 
that fits in with the ordinary idea of ‘luck,’ for it corresponds to 
prosperity that comes without effort. 

The opposition is a separative or more properly a dalcncing aspect, 
which often shatters the prospects by causing sudden and often un- 
looked for changes, separations, and disappointments. 

It will thus be seen that to a great extent character is destiny. 

The semisquare and sesquiquadrate are disintegrative and weaken- 
ing in their effects, causing friction and waste of power, like sand in the 
bearings of a machine. 


THe Ruter’s Position 


We may now proceed to a consideration of the ruling planet in 
regard to its position in the zodiac; first, when free from affliction by 


136 


HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


aspect, secondly, when afflicted, either by conjunction or bad aspect 
with the malefics, or by the unfavourable aspect of the Sun or other 


planets. 


KHA-ApPaseua«s 


Ruler in the Signs, and well aspected or unafflicted 


Independent ; ambitious ; self-willed ; intellectual. 
Determined ; self-reliant ; plodding ; enduring; careful ; curious. 
Imaginative ; idealistic ; studious; sensitive ; intuitional. 
‘Tenacious ; sensitive ; mediumistic ; conscientious. 
Generous ; persistent ; organising ; determined ; powerful. 
Thoughtful ; discriminative ; industrious; retiring ; refined. 
Harmonious ; intuitive ; contemplative ; imaginative. 
Proud ; jealous ; stubborn ; acquisitive ; sympathetic. 
Charitable ; ambitious ; dignified ; self-reliant ; prophetic. 
Persevering ; practical ; calculating ; reasonable ; religious. 
Sympathetic ; sincere; faithful; honest ; intelligent. 
Methodical ; receptive ; philanthropic ; modest ; logical. 


The fiery signs are the most fortunate and give independence and 
ambition. The earthly do not give such good fortune, but they cause 
the native to be practical and persevering. ‘The Airy signs give more 
fortune and also much refinement and intellectuality. The Watery signs 
are the least fortunate, giving sensitiveness and often lack of energy. 

The Cardinal signs show ambition, forcefulness, love of change, and 
reform. The fixed signs give reserve power and determination. The 
Common signs intellect, sympathy, and versatility, with some instability. 


KP¥A-S paergnas 


Ruler in the Signs, and afflicted 
Passionate ; hasty ; headstrong; impulsive ; liberal, 
Obstinate ; jealous; lethargic ; dogmatic ; conceited. 
Conceited ; diffusive ; lacking in continuity ; irritable. 
Sensational ; over-sensitive ; faddy ; whimsical ; peevish. 
Proud ; domineering ; sensual; prodigal ; too passionate. 
Selfish ; over-critical ; deceptive ; shy ; revengeful. 
Dreamy ; fanciful ; separative ; timid ; cowardly. 
Vindictive ; stubborn ; very proud ; jealous ; and deceitful. 
Irritable ; over-assertive ; rebellious ; self-opinionative. 
Over-subtle ; treacherous; unreliable ; dishonest ; sullen. 
Irregular ; wavering ; romantic ; scheming ; tricky. 
Lazy ; unreliable ; shifty ; procrastinative ; spiteful. 


Care should be taken to judge accurately the nature of the affliction. 
A planet is weak when out of dignities and when in square, semi-square, 
sesquiquadrate or opposition with the malefics, in a general sense; but 
the afflictions often give grit and force, though this depends upon the 
house as well as sign. 


THE RULING) PLANET 137 


Ruler in the Houses, and unafflicted 


I. Success in life through merit and personal effort. Dignity and 
honour created by determination and strength of character. 
II. Financial successes and prosperity through increased turn-over, 
Noble thoughts ; also the power to make money. 
III, Success through learning, and mental abilities, Gain by travel and 
through relatives and kindred. 
IV. Inheritance; heredity ; experiences at the close of life ; psychic 
experiences, 
V. Successful enterprises; love of pleasure. Gain through children, 
enjoyment, and investments, speculation, etc. 
VI. Gain by inferiors and through own industry in employment and in 
business. 
VII, Gain by marriage, partnerships, and sometimes through opponents. 
The native is often helped by others. 
VIII. Gain through partner, marriage, co-workers, legacies, and through 
deaths. ‘The native is drawn toward the occult and mystical. 
IX. Gain from foreign affairs, travel, science, religion, etc. 
X. Success in life, gratified ambition, honour and fame; _ public 
appointments. 
XI. Help and gain through friends ; social success. 
XII. Gain through institutions, asylums, occult and mystical affairs. 


Note carefully the good aspects and where they come from. 


Ruler in the Houses, and weak or afflicted 


I. Loss and trouble through rash and foolish conduct, the native 
standing in his own light. Self-inflicted sorrows. 
II. Trouble in connection with finance. Monetary difficulties. 
III. Loss and trouble through misconception, errors in judgment, 
removals, and fruitless travel; trouble through brethren and education. 
IV. Domestic troubles, inharmonious home surroundings, losses at the 
close of life. 
V. Trouble through the opposite sex, losses through investment or 
speculation, and risk in enterprise. 
VI. Ill-health, troubles through inferiors, many moods, wrong emp oy- 
ment and errors in method. | 
VII. Trouble through marriage, partnerships, opponents, litigation and 
much opposition. 
Vill. ‘Trouble in connection with money left by will or legacy, and un- 
pleasant death ; relatives or friends die or separate from native. 
IX. Losses through foreign affairs, long journeys, religious matters and 
scientific failures. 
X. Dishonour, loss of credit, difficulties with superiors, scandal, ill- 
repute, trouble with profession. 
XI. Losses through friends and acquaintances, false hopes and wishes 
defeated. 
XII. Confinement, lack of progress, slow development, enemies. 


' 


CHAPTER VIII 
HEALTH AND THE Hytec. Lencty or LIFE AND THE APHETA 


THERE are three factors necessary for the continued existence of a 
living human body. 

(1) First of all comes the visible dense Physical Body, composed 
of solids, liquids, and gases. It is born at birth and dies at death, and 
is all that the average man knows anything about; it is what is meant 
when the word ‘body’ is used without any qualification. In the 
horoscope it is indicated by the twelve mundane houses in general, of 
which the ascendant is taken as the synthetic representative. Its symbol 
is that of “Mother Earth,’ ®, from which it is derived: (this symbol is 
also used for the ‘Part of Fortune,’ it should be remembered). 

(2) Secondly, there is the so-called Etheric Double. This is com- 
posed of the subtle invisible ethers of the physical plane. It is the 
ethereal companion of the dense physical body, of which it is the exact 
duplicate, and like it is born at birth and dies and decays at death. In 
the horoscope it is represented by the Moon, ), which is its symbcl; 
and like that body it has an important influence upon the nervous 
system. 

(3) Thirdly comes the Vital Energy, conveniently called prdna. 
This is derived from the Sun, ©, which is its representative in the 
horoscope, and is poured out through the whole solar system to animate 
and sustain all things. Every living body appropriates as much of this 
energy as it can, by means of an organ situated in the Etheric Double 
and corresponding to what we know in the physical body as the spleen. 
Its central reservoir is the brain (which it will be remembered is governed 
by the ascendant) and it passes all over the body along the course of the. 
nerves. In a normally healthy person there is usually an excess of it, 
and the surplus is radiated away from the surface of the body in all 
directions; such radiation helps to drive away unhealthy emanations 
which might otherwise effect a lodgment and cause disease. When too 


little of it is appropriated by the double, various abnormalities follow, 
138 


HEALTH AND THE HYLEG 139 


from mere lack of energy and vitality up to actual disease of various 
kinds. | 

These three factors, as represented by the Ascenpant, Moon, and 
Sun in the horoscope, must all be taken into account in considering the 
question of health. If all three are well aspected, health and a fair 
length of life are a certainty. If any one of the three is badly aspected, 
especially if the afflicting planet is a malefic or is ruler of the fourth, 
eighth or twelfth house, or is situated therein, ill-health of the type 
indicated by the afflicting planet is liable to result at some time in life, 
and to be severe or slight according to the nature of the affliction. 
Hindu writings inform us that prdava, after entering the body, is divided 
into various currents or streams, and that each is governed by a planet. 
At present there is too little information available, both from scientific 
and from occult sources, to enable us to go into much detail on the 
subject; but the probability is that sooner or later not only the physical 
body, but the ‘double’ and the vita! energy (grdna) also will be recog- 
nised as having sub-divisions corresponding to the planets; and the 
task of recognising the source and nature of disease will then be greatly 
simplified. 

If the Sun is afflicted, the flow of the vital energy will be disturbed 
according to the nature of the afflicting planet and the signs concerned; 
Mars and Jupiter causing a feverish or disorderly superabundance, and 
Saturn and Uranus quite the reverse. Particulars under these heads 
have been given previously. (Chapter V.) 

If the Moon is afflicted it indicates that the subtle vehicle con- 
veying the life forces contains some abnormality that is liable to set up 
disease at some time in life, the precise period being indicated by the 
Progressed Horoscope, which forms the subject of a later treatise of this » 
series. 

When the AscenpDant is afflicted, the health is also liable to suffer, 
according to the nature of the affliction and the sign rising; but in this 
case one of the so-called malefics in the ascendant is not necessarily bad 
for health unless it ts evilly aspected. 

The part of the body affected will be either that indicated by the 
sign and house, or else that governed by the point afflicted. The Sun 
governs the heart and vitality; the Moon, the breasts, stomach, glands, 
the nervous system in part and the feminine functions; and the 
Ascendant, the head, and whatever part is indicated by the rising sign. 


140 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


‘The part of the body so governed is always liable to be more or less 
affected; for instance, if the Moon is in opposition to Saturn the diges- 
tive functions may suffer, quite irrespective of the part of the horoscope 
occupied by the Moon. But when it comes to deciding whether those 
portions of the body indicated by the sign and house will also suffer, and 
if so which, that governed by the sign or that by the house, the answer 
is not always easy to give. Some observations on this problem are 
given later on in the chapter. 

Sometimes it is possible to collect testimonies from two or even 
three different parts of the horoscope all pointing in the same direction. 
For instance, although an afflicted Sun may indicate some heart affec- 
tion, yet it is seldom serious unless there is also an affliction of either 
Leo or the fifth house (both of which have relation to the heart). Again 
an afflicted Mercury may indicate lability to some nervous or mental 
disorder; but experience shows that in cases of grave diseases of this 
class either the Moon or the ascendant is usually afflicted as well, 
(sometimes both). It is always advisable to seek for corroboration of this 
sort, and to balance up the good and evil testimonies against each other. 
For each part of the body there is more than one indicator; thus the 
lungs are governed by Gemini, the third house, and by Mercury (chiefly 
when in an odd sign or house). If one indicator is afflicted and the 
others well aspected, especially by benefics, no disease may show itself— 
or not until late in life. With such positions it is sometimes found that 
the disease is in the family and has shown out in a parent or relative, 
but may not affect the native. If, however, two or more of the indi- 
cators are severely afflicted, or even if one only is afflicted by two or 
more strong bad aspects and receives no support at all by good aspects 
(more especially from benefics) disease is almost certain to show itself. 


THe Hy.Lec 


The Hyleg is that point in the horoscope upon which health and 
life depend, and has to be carefully considered when estimating the pro- 
bable length of life and the constitutional strength. The Ascendant, 
Sun, and Moon, have all three to be taken into account when dealing 
with this subject. It is first necessary to consider briefly the influence 
of the rising sign upon health. 

The cusp of the Ascendant should be treated as if it were one of the 
heavenly bodies, and aspects should be calculated to it from each of the 


fo) Saale 
go 
tt 
wae 


HEALTH AND THE HYLEG 141 


planets, its declination being also noted. The declination of the cusp of 
the Ascendant is that which the Sun would have if it were in the same 
degree of the zodiac, and therefore may be found from the ephemeris. 

The Ascendant is a/ways an important factor in the question of health, 
even when it is not what is technically called ‘hyleg’; and its influence 
varies according to the nature of the rising sign and the aspects to the 
cusp of the ascendant. Good aspects preserve the health and increase 
the vitality ; bad aspects threaten accidents or ill-health at some period 
of life according to the nature of the afflicting planet and the sign in 
which it is placed. The positive (odd) signs rising always tend to give 
a good measure of vitality, particularly Leo, Libra, and Sagittarius; the 
negative (even) signs, on the other hand, are not quite so vigorous, Virgo 
being the most favourable for health. Cancer, Capricorn, and Pisces 
give feeble vitality, more especially in infancy. Scorpio gives much vital 
energy but also extreme liability to infectious diseases. Of the children 
that die in infancy a great many come under Capricorn and Scorpio 
because, when afflicted, the former sign gives a weakly constitution, and, 
the latter leaves the native liable to many of the infectious disorders of 
childhood. . 

This only happens under bad aspects; for, in general, any sign will 
give good health when the cusp of the ascendant is well fortified, and 
Capricorn and Scorpio, if receiving good aspects, may give great tena- 
city of life in old age. It sometimes happens that hereditary influence 
may be seen in the rising sign, and that not only in matters of health but 
alsoin events. Thus, when Scorpio rises, an important death may occur 
among the relatives or close associates of the parents a few months 
before or shortly after the child’s birth; when Libra rises, a marriage; 
when Sagittarius rises, a journey, or religious matters may come 
prominently forward ; and so on with affairs signified by the other signs. 

In matters of health, positive signs act similarly to the Sun when 
hyleg, and negative signs to the Moon; but when afflicted each sign may 
cause its own particular type of disease according to the planet ruling 
it and the part of the body it governs. 

Disease as indicated by the Rising Sign 

- The head is lable to suffer and the native will be affected with tooth- 
ache, neuralgia, gumboils, measles, small-pox, ringworms, and vertigo. When 
the ascendant is much afflicted by either Mars or Jupiter, danger of epilepsy, 
apoplexy, and insanity. 

% The throat is liable to be affected, and the native suffers from quinsy, 


142 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


diphtheria, sore throat, abscesses, etc. If the descendant is much afflicted there 
is danger of heart disease, fits, and sudden death. 

tl The chest and lungs are the most sensitive parts of the body, hence 
the native is liable to suffer from asthma, bronchitis, consumption and nervous 
disorders. If the ascendant is much afflicted there is danger of brain fever, 
hypochondria, and diseases arising from impure blood. 

95 The stomach and digestive organs are easily disordered, giving the 
native a tendency to suffer from indigestion, asthma, coughs, and wasting or 
chronic diseases. If the ascendant is much afflicted there is danger of pleurisy, 
gastric troubles, and dropsy, or even cancer. 

QR, The loins and back are the weakest parts of the body, giving a liability 
to lumbago, syncope, palpitation, fevers, and eye affections. If the ascendant 
is much afflicted there is danger of jaundice, small-pox, rheumatic fever, and 
heart disease. 

my ‘The bowels are liable to give trouble, causing the native to suffer from 
spasms, colic, dysentery, or chronic constipation. If the ascendant is much 
afficted there is danger of consumption of the bowels, cholera, and strangulation 
of the urine. 

<= The kidneys or bladder will give trouble, causing the native to suffer 
from debility, weakness in the back, and ulcers. If the ascendant is much 
afflicted there is danger of diabetes, Bright’s disease and spinal trouble. 

The secret parts are liable to weakness, causing the native to suffer 
from piles, gravel, ruptures, and venereal diseases. If the ascendant is much 
afflicted there is a liability to fistulas, gravel, stone, strange blood poisonings, 
and peculiar diseases generally. 

ft The thighs and buttocks are liable to become affected. ‘The native is 
liable to suffer from blood disorders, tumours, gout, and fevers. If the ascen- 
dant is much afflicted there is danger of accidents, rheumatism, and violent 
hurts. 

v8 The knees are the parts of the body that first show signs of weakness. 
The native is liable to suffer from rheumatism, cutaneous complaints, eczema, 
and colds. If the ascendant is much afflicted there is danger of chronic 
disorders affecting the chest and giving rise to hysteria and general debility. 

<< There is a liability to nervous disorders and affections of the blood. 

}% The native is liable to suffer from gout, impure blood, and boils; also 
from ailments arising from cold or damp feet and from bunions, etc, 


Disease as indicated by Planets Rising 


tf Neptune rising predisposes to melancholia, weird fancies, mental 
complaints and, when much afflicted, obsession. 

Hi Uranus rising gives a tendency to incurable and uncommon disorders, 
chiefly affecting the nerves and psychic aura. 

h Saturn rising gives a liability to suffer from chill, cold, poor circulation, 
obstructions, constipation, and chronic disorders such as rheumatism and wasting 
diseases. 

Y¥ Jupiter rising aftects the blood and liver. 

3 Mars rising affects the muscular system and increases the liability to 
feverish and inflammatory complaints. 

@ The Sun rising (i.e., in the ascendant) if free from affliction, will give 


HEALTH AND THE HYLEG 143 


great vitality and strengthen the constitution, the Sun being more or less hyleg 
wherever it may be placed ; but if afflicted, then the recuperative power is not 
good. 

Venus rising affects the generative and nutritive system. 

® Mercury rising gives nervous and mental troubles, the health depending 
a great deal upon the general surroundings. 

) The Moon rising gives liability to dropsical complaints, and to chronic 
irregularities of the system. 


Fiery signs rising predispose the native to inflammatory conditions 
of the system, to fevers, and to sudden illnesses generally—acute, but of 
short duration. 

Airy signs rising denote a tendency to nervous troubles, debility, and 
illnesses arising from over-exertion, exhaustion, etc. 

Watery signs rising give a liability to tumours, cancerous growths, 
mucous discharges, colds, and moist humours. 

Earthy signs rising denote rheumatic, gouty, and windy complaints, 
with a tendency toward chronic disorders. 

CARDINAL SIGNS rising incline to ailments affecting the head, stomach, 
kidneys, and all movable or functional disorders. 

Fixep Siens rising incline to ailments affecting the heart, throat, 
generative system, and all chronic or organic troubles. 

MuTABLE SiGns rising incline to affections of the lungs, limbs, 
breathing apparatus, and all kinds of mervous disorders. 

The decanate rising will sometimes show the root of the disease, 
or the weakest part of the system: for instance, the third decanate of 
Libra rising denotes a tendency to nervous diseases, brain fever, ete. 

The second decanate of Libra, poor circulation, flatulency, 
rheumatism, etc. 

If the rulers of the rising sign and of the decanate are in mutual 
affliction then the nature of the decanate should be carefully studied, as 
also the house governed by its ruler. 

The rules for ascertaining which point is hyleg are much in dispute 
among astrologers, though nearly all are agreed that the Sun, Moon, 
and Ascendant are the three points from which choice must be made ; 
but while serious affliction of any one of these three may result in disease 
sooner or later, yet the idea is that the length of life (apart from the 
liability to disease) is more dependent upon one of these points than 
upon the other two, and that this one (which is spoken of as ‘the hyleg’) 
varies in different horoscopes. 


i HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


The oldest rules for ascertaining which point is hyleg are those of 
Ptolemy. According to this system, the hylegiacal places are houses 
I, VII, LX, X, XI. If the Sun is in one of these places it is always 
hyleg; if it is not there and the Moon is, the latter is hyleg; and if 
neither is there the cusp of the ascendant is hyleg. There has, how- 
ever, scarcely been an astrologer who has not suggested some more or 
less important alteration of these rules. Ptolemy himself would some- 
times allow the strongest planet in the horoscope to be hyleg. In our 
own day ‘ Raphael’ has suggested that the Sun is always hyleg with a 
man and the Moon with a woman. ‘Others have doubted whether one 
body ever can be hyleg to the entire exclusion of the other two, point- 
ing out that it is not uncommon for all three to be afflicted by direc- 
tion at death; and they have drawn from this the conclusion that the 
hylegiacal office may be shared among the three. Others would allow 
the lower half of the twelfth house to be a hylegiacal place, especially 
for the Sun. 

The student may be safely left to put all theories to the test of 
practical experience and draw his own conclusions; but in the meantime 
the following summary would probably obtain the assent of a large 
number of astrologers. 

1. The Sun, Moon and Ascendant are three centres upon which life 


depends. 
2. The Moon governs child-birth and the feminine functions, and _ its 


se 


position and aspects are therefore far more important in the horoscope of a 
woman than in that of a man. It is also alleged to exercise considerable 
influence with very young children of both sexes, probably for the first seven 
vears of life. 

3. The centre indicated by the Ptolemaic rule given above is always 
fmportant, whether it be exclusively hyleg or not. 


THe APHETA AND ANARETA 


The Aphela is an Arabic word used to signifiy that which supports 
life. Generally speaking any planet is aphetical that is in good aspect 
to the hyleg ; but aspects from planets in the first, fifth, ninth and tenth 
houses or from the lords of these, are especially to be desired. Jupiter 
and Mars impart energy and exuberant vitality when in good aspect to 
the hyleg, and indicate that vital force is rapidly generated. This not 
only causes a quick recovery after any exhausting labour or illness, but 
also tends to keep even infectious diseases at bay, and carries the native 


HEALTH AND THE HYLEG 145 


through dangers that would prostrate or-kill other people. The good 
aspects of Saturn (and probably Uranus also) are extremely important 
to people who have passed middle age, as they regulate and harmonise 
the flow of the vital fluid, and, other things being equal, help greatly in 
carrying on the life into old age; but it is thought that they are less 
important with children. ‘The same remarks apply to a well-aspected 
hyleg in the Saturnian signs, Capricorn and Aquarius. 

The Anarefa is that which takes away life. Generally speaking any 
planet is anaretic that afflicts the hyleg; but evil aspects from planets 
in the fourth, sixth, eighth and twelfth, or lords of these, are particularly 
bad for health. In this case the afflicting planets reverse the qualities 
that are indicated by good aspects. Mars and Jupiter in affliction of the 
hyleg increase heat in the system and give liability to diseases arising 
from fever, plethora, excesses; and this is worse in the case of the Sun 
than of the Moon, because the former body is naturally hot whereas the 
latter is cool. Saturn, and probably Uranus also, when afflicting deplete 
the system, lower the vitality, and lead to diseases arising from cold and 
from enfeebled constitution; they destroy that unity of action, that co- 
operation of functions, upon which the well-being of the body depends. 
Rheumatism, consumption, ague, cancer, paralysis, etc., have been 
known to be produced by them. They are worse when afflicting the 
Moon than when in bad aspect to the Sun, because the natural heat of 
the latter body can hold out against their action longer than the former. 

In all these cases any planet in its own sign or house or in one in 
which it is well placed, has its malice very greatly lessened and its 
good aspects much increased in value. 

The question of the probable length of life must also be considered 
here. It is impossible to judge this solely by directions, because if the 
constitution .is strong the native will live through evil periods that would 
kill one with a weak hyleg. A general inspection must therefore be 
made of the hylegiacal point or points in the horoscope of birth before 
the astrologer takes the question of directions into account at all. In 
fact this careful review of the birth map should have first consideration, 
not only when dealing with health but with all the other subjects with 
which the astrologer is called upon to deal, such as marriage, wealth, 
etc. Directions are always of secondary importance to radical indic- 
ations; and it is highly probable that a fuller knowledge of the subject 


may enable us to judge not merely the events of the life but also the 
K 


146 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


times of their occurrence from the birth map alone, without needing to 
have recourse to any of the present-day systems of directing. 

In dealing with this question of the probable length of life, it is con- 
venient to divide natives, roughly speaking, into three classes: those 
that die young, in infancy or childhood; those that live to middle age; 
and those that endure to old age. ‘These are only intended as rough 
approximations for the convenience of the student, and not as scientific 
divisions. If the three points, Sun, Moon, and Ascendant, are all well 
aspected and free from affliction, or if that one of them which is ascer- 
tained to be hyleg is in this fortunate condition, old age may fairly be 
regarded as highly probable, and any evil directions in early life, although 
they may cause temporary illness, will not kill. If the reverse positions 
are found, however, and afflictions by far outnumber the good aspects, 
then death in early life will certainly result. But when the position and 
aspects of the hyleg are neither wholly evil nor wholly good; when the 
affliction is not so serious as to indicate death in infancy, and yet the 
hyleg is not so strong as to point to old age, the life may be conveniently 
regarded as likely to terminate in middle age. Considerable experience 
is necessary to enable the student to balance up the various indications 
in the way that is desirable here, for no book can possibly cover all the 
combinations and great variety of positions and aspects that are actually 
found in horoscopes. ‘The astrologer, too, will be wise to be extremely 
cautious in positively predicting death; not merely because the subject 
is a difficult one, but also because such a prediction is not a little alarm- 
ing to most people; for the average person has not yet evolved to the 
point of regarding ‘peaceful and soothing death’ as a friend, and the 
announcement of his approach is likely to prove very unsettling, to 
diminish the vitality, and to increase the power of disease. 


HousEs versus SIGNS 


Since the first edition of this book was published we have often 
been asked what is the difference between the influence of houses in com- 
parison with that of the szgms: for instance, say in one horoscope 
Saturn, afflicted, is in the second house; in another horoscope Saturn, 
similarly afflicted, is in Taurus: what is the similarity and what is the 
difference; will both natives suffer from disease of the throat, or only 
ene: and if both, which will be the greater sufferer? And we have 
been asked to give a series of delineations of the effects of each planet in 


HEALTH AND THE HYLEG 147 


each one of the twelve houses (similar to those given in the next book 
of this series, where the influence of each planet in every sign is 
described), so that the reader can be in nodoubt. Now, in the first place, 
considerations of space preclude the adoption of this course, and secondly, 
it is not quite certain whether such a series would be of much practical 
help after all. This for a reason which we will try to make 
clear. 

The relationship between signs and houses, as has been repeatedly 
stated, is that of ‘correspondence,’ or analogy, being similar to the 
relationship of one octave to another on the pianoforte—each house 
corresponds to each sign only because it is, in a kind of way, ‘the same 
thing only different ’—that is, the xoumenon behind each is identical, and 
only the plane of manifestation varies. That being soit is easy to see 
that one influence can be exalted or degraded to the other; just as 
personal interests may be expanded so as to serve the community, or 
public needs may be sacrificed to benefit an individual—these things we 
see around us in daily life. Consequently, it depends very much upon 
the individual how the influence will work out; thus, Saturn in Taurus 
may operate in one case exactly as would Saturn in the second house ; 
and, vice versa, Saturn in the second house may in some cases act just 
as would Saturn in Taurus with the majority of people. 

To take another instance, Mars in Aries or in the Ascendant. Both 
these positions incline to impulsiveness, rashness and ardour, also to 
enterprise and activity—the former as arule more individual, the latter 
more personal. But a strong character who has the latter position may, 
by living up to the best that is in him, refine this position till it corre- 
sponds more to the former, and instead of throwing away his strength in 
fruitless anger or passion, or in fitful impulse, may spiritualise it and 
exalt it into energy, enterprise and activity, turned into the direction of 
intellectual pursuits. On the other hand, one with Mars in Aries might, 
by constantly yielding to the lower impulses signified by this position, 
gradually reduce himself to the condition usually described by Mars in 
the Ascendant, fitful, passionate, egotistical and foolishly self-sufficient. 
These two cases are only chosen for the purpose of illustrating the 
principle involved, of course ; but it is true in actual life, and will be well 
understood by any who have made a continued study of a few characters, 
strong and weak, whose horoscopes are well known to them. 

Now this is not only true in regard to character, but the same prin- 


148 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


ciple applies also to health. The physical plane is the plane of outward 
effects, in which causes, whether physical, emotional, mental or spiritual, 
work themselves out; and no ‘cause,’ that is, no force which has been set 
in motion, on any plane, can fail to produce its effect sooner or later on 
the physical plane. But it may be held in suspension, either for a 
shorter or longer period. 

The true cause of ill-health, disease or constitutional infirmity, is 
disharmony, i.¢e., some infraction of nature’s laws (or God’s laws in other 
words), on some plane or other, either in this or a previous life, which 
the universal Spirit of Harmony seeks to adjust by getting rid of the dis- 
cordant element. This can only be got rid of by being thrown down- 
ward and outward, by being ‘precipitated,’ as the chemist would say, 
into the physical plane and thus filtered out of the nature—for the true 
seat of disease is in the mind. 

Now this process may be brought about gradually and almost 
imperceptibly, or it may be hastened considerably, or it may be brought 
about almost instantaneously. Usually, the former is the case, and 
ill-health manifests itself slowly ; where much activity of mind or soul 
is displayed the process is expedited, as we see in the cases of those 
with a predisposition to consumption. But in some cases, as is well 
known to those who are familiar with many who have had a spiritual 
quickening, the turning of the inner nature steadfastly and irrevocably 
towards harmony and truth, throws all the discord and disharmony 
of the nature outwards and downwards, first into the mind, then the 
emotions, and, as a last resort, on to the physical plane in the form of 
bodily disease. And thus that particular sickness of the soul is got rid 
of for ever. 

It does nor . low, of course, that any such crisis of intellectual, 
moral or spiritual quickening will necessarily be followed by physical 
disease. That will depend upon (a) the available inner discord to be 
externalised, (4) the soul-force which expels it and the suddenness with 
which it is thrown iu:to action, and (c) the readiness of response, or 
elasticity, of the body; also, of course, in a very great measure upon 
the hygienic conditions to which that body is subjected. ‘Nor is 
it essential that the expulsive force spoken of need be of a very high 
spiritual order, for the same principle holds good where the influx is. 
merely one of physical vigour; in short the whole question is merely 
one of grdna or the life-energy, whatever be the plane of manifestation 


HEALTH AND THE HYLEG 149 


upon which it is first called into being. Where the revulsion is sudden 
and violent, the physical body is not always able to endure the strain 
and death results ; but such cases are, as may be supposed, rare. 

The truth of this principle is well-known in all Natural Cure insti- 
tutions, where the first symptoms of the commencement of the cure is 
that the patient /ee/s much worse—the latent poison in the system has 
been stirred into activity, and is on its way to expulsion through the shiz 
(Cardinal Signs, physical world), usually resulting in a rash technically 
known in hydropathic establishments as the ‘crisis.’ 

Now the bearing of all this upon the reading of a nativity will not 
need very much further elucidation. Suppose we have Jupiter on cusp 
of ascendant and Saturn on cusp of fourth; this is a mundane square 
and indicates misfortune and repressive circumstances. But suppose at 
the same time these planets are in zodiacal sextile, as in the horoscope on 
p. 68 of Modern Astrology (Vol. IIl., New Series)? This we should 
judge as indicating that the objective and subjective minds were in good 
accord, indicating a well-balanced and well-disposed nature, truthful, 
reliable, and trustworthy ; the native himself says, ‘it has always seemed 
to me to denote that my character is better than my circumstances,’ and 
by the strength of his character he has overcome the adverse circum- 
stances. Suppose it had been the other way about, mundane sextile and 
zodiacal square, then the circumstances would have been good and the 
character different, and the result would have been precisely the 
reverse, in all probability ; the character, very weak and shiftless, would 
have wasted excellent opportunities and squandered wealth. 

In this way it can be seen how the /ouses are always (or at least as 
a rule) negative, in a sense, as compared with the szgms, the latter repre- 
senting the ‘life’ poured into the ‘form’ signified by the houses. Sup- 
pose, then, in this last illustration, the soul of the native in some way 
received a great quickening so that the inner weaknesses were cast off 
by the awakeni.uy spirit, then the discord indicated by the zodiacal square 
would be as it were suddenly precipitated, and the disasters and mis- 
fortunes (in a worldly sense) which so often follow in the train of a 
spiritual awakening would very soon make their appearance; had the 
planets ruled or been in houses specially concerned with health, this 
would probably result in some disease of the stomach (fourth house). 

The circle of the houses and the circle of the signs mark progressive 
limitations, and also progressive powers. As the attempt is made to 


KO HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


transcend the one the forces of the other at once flow in, and should 
this attempt be made too suddenly, or should fixed habits and conven- 
tional states of mind prove too inelastic, disharmony and henceillness or. 
disease will result. Butin the history of the Soul they might be written 
down as *‘ growing pains.’ 


AN ILLUSTRATION | 
x Lae. o X{I I II Ill 
WH2g4 TH. te aaa 2 N18 f21 

© ») fe) ? fe) Uf h i i, 

Seok CO WpYOE OPP TE Pee oe ree an cena eee 

The above is the horoscope of a female born at 2.42 a.m. 13th 
December, 1835, London. The Moon in this nativity is hyleg and 
afflicted by square © and 6, Z kh. The Sun is also afflicted by 
conjunction with Mars. 

The native died 17th November, 1855, under the following 
‘Directions’:—Ascendant Z 6, bringing into action ) 0 ¢ at birth; 
Mars at the time of death was transiting the place of the Moon at birth. 
The Moon by secondary direction was applying to the opposition of the 
Sun and Mars, and was therefore in square to its own place at birth. 
The Sun had also arrived at the opposition of Jupiter’s progressed 
place and Venus ruler of the first and eighth was in square to Saturn 
Jord of the fourth. In this case death had been predicted, the 
astrologer finding it inevitable. } 


CHAPTER IX 
THE Seconp HousE—WEALTH AND Finance, AND Herepirary Posirion 


In any horoscope money matters are judged largely, but not exclusively, 
from the state of the second house. As we have seen elsewhere, this 
house belongs to the triad of tenth, second and sixth: and of these 
the tenth house or mid-heaven is concerned toa great extent with occu- 
pation. business. profession; the sixth with servants, employees, situa’ 
tions, positions or spheres of activity in which money may be earned; 
and the second with money. In addition, the eighth house has to do 
with money inherited, legacies, and money coming to the native through 
other people (chiefly through the business or marriage partner); and in 
a similar way the twelfth and fourth houses may be considered to have a 
similar reflex influence, as it were, of the sixth and tenth houses. The 
question of money cannot therefore be judged exclusively from the second 
house, for these others have also to be taken into consideration and 
judged in their relation to each other and to the horoscope as a whole, 
nevertheless the second house must be allowed final voice in the matter. 

In dealing wlth this, as with any other house, the usual order is to 
be followed: ; 

(1) Consider any planet in the house, whether strong or weak, 
whether well or ill aspected and by what planets, also what other house 
or houses it rules by sign. The normal state of affairs, in theory at 
least, is for a planet in the second house to indicate gam through events, 
occupations, or persons signified by the planet, quite irrespective of 
whether it is a ‘benefic’ or a ‘malefic.’ If it is uniformly well aspected, 
this probability will be a certainty; but any bad aspect will be a 
source of difficulty, delay, or loss, according to the closeness of the 
aspect and the nature of the planet that throws it. For instance, if 
Mars is in the second house and well aspected, the native will gain 
money by his own exertions, through people who are born under Mars 


or under the planets with which Mars is in good aspect; by the dead 
15r 


152 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


(legacies); and by the occupations that come under this planet, such as 
that of soldier, surgeon, butcher, worker in metals, chemicals, etc. But 
if Mars is badly aspected, there may be loss through any or all of these 
channels, and also through those signified by the afflicting planet. If 
there is a mixture of good and evil aspects, the good luck will of course 
come through the planets that throw the good aspects. In any case 
there will be a tendency to give away, spend, or in some way scatter 
money, owing to the inner nature of the planet Mars, irrespective of its 
aspects. The general influence of the planets and signs over money is 
given below. | 

(2) Secondly, if no planet is in the house, that ruling the sign on 
the cusp of the house is sure to be important, and must be considered 
much as Mars in the instance just given. Here again the natural 
tendency is for the native to gam through the lord of the second house, 
according to its nature, to the part of the horoscope in which it is 
situated, and to the planets that are in good aspect to it: and only to 
lose if weak by sign or badly aspected. For instance, if the lord of the 
second is in the third house and well aspected, there will be gain through 
matters signified by that house, such as brothers and sisters, short 
journeys, writings, mental work, and the occupations associated with 
the third house. The inherent nature of the planet that rules the second 
house must also be taken into account, and the sign in which it is 
placed. A gentleman born under Libra has Scorpio on the cusp of the 
second house; Mars, the ruler of Scorpio, is in Capricorn in the third 
house; he holds an appointment as Medical Officer of Health in a large 
health resort. Here Scorpio and Mars agree with the nature of the 
occupation, and Capricorn being the tenth sign of the zodiac signifies a 
public appointment; and the third house influence may perhaps be 
detected in the reports he has to issue at intervals. Another, who has 
Virgoon the cusp of the second and Mercury in Capricorn in the sixth, 
holds a scientific appointment under Government. Another, who has 
the lord of the second in the seventh, has benefited through his wife 
and is also in partnership. Another, who has the lord of the second in 
conjunction with the lord of the third, incurred debts that were paid by 
a brother. Another, who has the lord of the second in Libra in the 
eleventh, has received financial assistance from friends ; but it is squared 
by Saturn from the eighth house, and he separated from his wife, to 
whom he had to pay an allowance which he found it very hard to earn. 


4 


THE SECOND HOUSE 153 


Instances like these might be multiplied to almost any extent if it were 
necessary ; bt the student will soon find from personal experience that 
the general principles here given are reliable. 

(3) Thirdly, it is necessary to take into account those planets that 
have a general signification in connection with money and property, 
whether they have any dignityin the second house or not. If Venus or 
Jupiter is in good aspect to Saturn or the Moon, the influence is very 
favourable for wealth, especially if one ef them is ruler of the second or 
tenth. Probably the most favourable aspect for money is the trine of 
Jupiter to Saturn, and the least fortunate a square or opposition between 
these two planets. Of course, any good aspect signifies good luck of 
some sort, but unless one of the two planets has dignity in the second or 
tenth, or has some inherent signification in connection with possessions, 
the good luck indicated may have no financial significance. A good 
aspect to Venus, for instance, might give popularity and social success 
and bring no monetary prosperity: yet a trine or sextile from Venus 
to Saturn is extremely favourable for the accumulation of money. 

The Moon in good aspect to the Sun, again, is a general indication 
of good fortune, paternal harmony, the favour of the family and of 
superiors and employers; but it may not produce much in the way of 
money unless one of the two is in the second or tenth; otherwise the 
success indicated will come mainly through the houses in which the 
two are placed. If benefics are strong, angular, and elevated, it is a good 
sign, also if malefics are well aspected; but whether the good signified 
will come through money and occupation or not depends upon their 
position by house and rulership. Saturn and the Moon are the two 
bodies that tend to accumulate and pile up money by caution, prudence, 
and thrift; this if carried to excess may become miserliness: but when 
afflicting each other they are very unfortunate, money is hard to earn, 
and property is Jost. Jupiter and Venus bring money by good luck, 
popularity, relatives, and friends; Mercury, by occupations of the nature 
ofthe third and sixth houses; the Sun and Mars by personal exertions 
and legacies, although they both part with money easily. Jupiter or the 
Moon in good aspect to Saturn may also bring legacies. Jupiter and 


Venus are not of much use in the second house if they are seriously 
afflicted. 


154 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


PLANETS AND Money 


NEPTUNE denotes gain through navigation, and the sea generally 


also through secret service, the turf, hospitals, asylums, institutions, 


swimming baths and lavatories ; also through public establishments in 
which the unfortunate and afflicted portions of humanity are confined. 
Money may be gained in peculiar and questionable ways, sometimes 
through fraud and deception, blackmail or ways that are not considered 
exactly straightforward. ‘Bubble’ schemes come especially under the 
influence of this planet, also misrepresentation, ‘bogus count’ business, 
etc. \ 

Uranus denotes gain through antiquities ; old and curious objects; 
through unique employments of a purely mental character, especially 
those occupations in which the occult and mystical side of things are the 
main feature. It is the planet which brings gain through astrology, 
clairvoyance, mysticism and the occult generally. Writers of extra- 
ordinary fiction in which the imagination is of an exalted kind; organists 
or musicians who have a touch of genius in their composition come 
under Uranian influence; also high-class mechanics, inventors, origi- 
nators and composers. In a general sense railway employees of all 
grades come under the influence of the planet Uranus. 

The aspects, good or ill, of Uranus to Neptune are so comprehensive 
in their nature as to affect rather the life as a whole (unless, indeed, the 
influence remain latent) than any one department in such a way as could 
be particularly indicated. : 

SATURN denotes gain by labour; method; responsibility; land; 
building; farming; heavy trading, such as contracts or time periods; 
minerals ; carrying in transit ; removals; storage ; shipping of merchan- 
dise; public appointments; investments, stocks, shares, companies 
(chiefly when in good aspect to Jupiter or Venus). 

Saturn in good aspect to Uranus indicates gain in connection with 
antiquities, archeological research, museum work, and all out-of-the-way 
investigations where much application is required; dealing in antique 
furniture or curios; also in connection with societies. Saturn in afflic- 
tion with Uranus: sudden and unexpected losses in connection with 
societies, companies, stocks and shares, etc. 

‘ JupirEer relates to religious affairs; Government offices; manage- 
ments; legal affairs; trusts; banking; churches; charity and charit- 
able institutions ; to some extent, also, to the higher forms of education 


THE “SECOND. HOUSE 155 


and cultivation, such as philosophy, professorships in science, literature, 
or religion, etc. ; it also has a bearing upon voyages and shipping. 

Jupiter in good aspect with Saturn or Uranus is favourable for 
monetary prospects, and gives good fortune and success in life if the 
luminaries are not afflicted at birth. Jupiter in affliction with Saturn 
produces many monetary difficulties and sometimes much poverty. 

Mars denotes gain through strength and force; engineering; 
mechanics; cattle-dealing; breeding; stock farming; timber, coal, 
slate, iron; steel; drugs; chemicals; mining; sanitation; hygiene; 
surgery; soldiers, and, to some extent, sailors ; if well aspected it some- 
what favours money by legacy or marriage. If favourably placed it 
may enable the native to earn money easily, but it will also incline him 
to spend freely. 

Mars in affliction with Jupiter denotes loss through extravagance, 
over-liberality, waste, and often prodigality. Mars in affliction with 
Saturn: great poverty and difficulty in acquiring wealth. Mars in 
affliction with Uranus: peculiar and sudden losses. Mars well aspected 
is favourable for money matters, as it increases the personal acquisitive 
tendencies. 

THE Sun indicates money derived from the father or his side of the 
family, from superiors, and from the holding of responsible positions or 
official appointments, also through social influence. Its occupations are 
mainly those indicated by the sign in which it is placed. Like Mars, it 
may give money through the native’s own labour, but it also parts with 
money easily. 

Venus denotes gain through social condition ; friendships ; society ; 
marriage; pleasures; amusements; finery; domestic affairs ; jewellery ; 
adornments; upholstery; millinery; hosiery; wearing apparel; hotels; 
restaurants. Its good aspects to Saturn are fortunate for the accumula- 
tion of money, for money invested, and for banking. 

Venus in good aspect to the Moon denotes gain through social 
intercourse, and public gatherings and the general public. In good 
aspect to Jupiter : profitable dealings with friends and influential persons, 
also gain through travel and foreign affairs. In good aspect with 
Uranus: gain through peculiar and exceptional circumstances, strangers 
and acquaintances. 

Venus in affliction with Mars denotes waste, impulsive, over-liberal 
tendencies, and losses through carelessness and extravagance generally. 


156 HOW. FO: JUDGE A. NATIVITY 


Venus in affliction with Saturn: fear of poverty, losses which the 
native has no power to prevent, wasting of substance, and monetary 
difficulties. In affliction with Uranus: sudden and very unexpected 
financial losses. 

Mercury denotes gain by writing, speaking, travelling, clerks, 
agencies, commissions, discounts, dividends, interest, and paper money 
generally. 

It is good for success in all commercial undertakings; scientific 
pursuits ; trading; publishing; advertising; distributing; and circu- 
lating ; also occupations in which special skill or training is required ; 
examinations, teaching. It relates to brothers, sisters, cousins, and to 
some extent servants. 

Mercury in good aspect to the Moon denotes gain through the 
general public, learning and quick perception, ability and capacity. It 
brings opportunity, and the necessary application to take advantage. of 
circumstances. Mercury in good aspect to Venus: gain through refine- 
ment and good taste. In good aspect to Mars: gain through industry, 
skillandingenuity. In goodaspect to Jupiter: through sound judgment, 
intuition, and moral principle. In good aspect with Saturn: gain 
through tact and diplomacy, caution and perseverance, and the power of 
profound thought. In good aspect with Uranus: through inventive- 
ness, originality and speculation, or unusual enterprise. 

Tue Moon indicates money derived from the mother or her side of 
the family, from females, or from inferiors through the employment of 
labour. It indicates subordinate positions, the employee rather than 
the employer, unless it is elevated or rules the mid-heaven; and it has 
a general signification of occupations that are connected with the water 
or liquids, with the masses and the general public rather than with 
superiors or the few. It gives more thrift and prudence in money 
matters than does the Sun. If elevated, angular, or well aspected, it 
may signify factories or businesses where many hands are employed. 


@ Tue Part or Fortune @ 


It is held by many that the ‘Part of Fortune’ indicates inherited 
wealth, property accruing, or worldly fortune in a general sense. This 
point is found as follows :—Add the longitude of the Ascendant to that 
of the Moon and subtract that of the Sun, adding the circle of 360° if 
necessary: the operation is best performed by expressing the longitude 


THE SECOND HOUSE 157 


in signs, degrees and minutes. For instance: Suppose © 18° 4’, 
DVS 26° 4’, Asc. U20°29/; then say 


Signs Degrees Minutes 


Asc. 2 20 29 
+) 9 26 + 
12 16 33 
—©) fo) roy 4 
Part oF Fortune ‘sabiig 28 ore 29 46 @Bin & 28°29! 


{t is advisable here to reflect upon the metaphysical significance of 
this so-called ‘imaginary’ point: the old rule is worded ‘As the ) 
is to the © so is the ® to the ascendant.’ That is, the Part of Fortune 
stands in the same relationship to the ascendant as the Moon does to the 
Sun. Now we have already seen that the Moon supplies the vehicle for 
an expression of the Solar life: similarly, then, we should regard the ‘Pars 
Fortune’ as indicating the ~abulum for the sustenance of that general 
synthesis of the personal life controlled by the ascendant. Hence the 
reason for allotting to the Part of Fortune chief control of the pecuniary 
well-being of the native is readily seen. This point of the horoscope is 
a matter greatly neglected by many modern writers, which is regrettable. 

To recapitulate:—When a judgment upon the financial prospect 
indicated by any nativity is desired, a careful study must be made of the 
second house in allits bearings. First; any planet posited therein and 
the aspects it receives, also the nature of the planets whence the aspects 
are derived, and their position in the nativity. Secondly; the sign on 
the cusp of the second, its ruler, position and aspects. Thirdly; since 
finance is not concerned onv/y with the second house, the positions and 
mutual aspects of the Sun and Moon, as indicators of the individual and 
personal fate respectively, must be considered—also those of Jupiter and 
Venus, natural significators of good fortune. 

Moreover, the signs of the zodiac have also some influence over 
finance. The Cardinal Signs give money through fame and public 
recognition, also through enterprise and adventure. The Fixed Signs 
bring gain through government or authoritative influence, and the 
Common Signs through service and ordinary means. Shoulda horoscope 
show the majority of planets in one of these groups, more especially if 
the Sun, Moon, or Ascendant be also included, particularly the latter, 
the fortunes will show out the prevailing influence. 


CHAPTER X 


Tue Turrp Hovuse--BretHrREN AND RELATIVES, SHORT JOURNEYS, 
THE Minp 


Tue First House has a very decided influence over the physical body 
as a whole, governing what we may term the general temperament. 
The Second House has also a decided influence in this respect, having 
considerable sway over the emotional and desire nature. The Third 
House in the same way has a definite influence over the mind; these 
three houses analogically coming under the dominant rulership of the 
three planets Mars, Venus and Mercury respectively. 

In the Tutrp Houses, which we are now to consider, we study all 
that relates to movement, transition, and change. It is also related to 
the seventh house, as previously shown, and thus governs relatives and 
kindred; but, generally speaking, it rules all affairs that seriously affect 
the mind, and the mental tendencies. _ 

The planets occupying the third house will first be considered, the 
customary order being adopted. 

NEPTUNE in the third house, imaginative, fanciful, and weird 
mental tendencies; fondness for spiritualistic phenomena and matters 
pertaining to the occult and mystical side of things; poetical fancies; 
dreamy state of mind. 

Only a few can respond to the higher vibrations of the planet 
Neptune ; but those who have any tendency to allow their nature to 
become depraved and degraded seem to come under an influence from 
this planet which appears to be the inversion of a very high moral grade. 
In a great number of cases already investigated, and afflicted Neptune in 
the third appears to denote imbecility or weak intellect, depraved tastes, 
and morbid fancies. Troubles of a peculiar nature appear to affect 
the relations, and troubles on journeys are very probable. 

Up to the present the influence of Neptune does not usually appear 


to be favourable, and until the work of tabulation with regard to this 
158 


THE THIRD HOUSE 159 


planet is complete, no definite statement can be made with regard to its 
influence. 

Uranus in the third house denotes an inventive, ingenious, and 
curious mind; given to study mystical and metaphysical subjects ; 
unconventional and very liberal mental tendencies ; fond of abstruse and 
profound studies. In a weak horoscope this position denotes bohemian 
tastes, wild and erratic scherues and projects formulated by the brain, 
and unaccountable and strange mental attitudes. In a progressive horo- 
scope it widens the mental vision and broadens the intellectual view of 
life. In the advanced types of humanity it raises the mind into higher 
thought and prepares the way for altruistic ideas, and social or mental 
reforms. To all it gives a touch of the eccentric or a flash of genius, 
especially in music or oratory, with, in the latter, a distinctly epigram- 
matic tendency. It gives a love of Astrology and kindred subjects, 
power to hypnotise, heal and use the mesmeric forces for the benefit 
of others. It denotes the possibility of awakening clairaudient or 
clairvoyant faculties, and tends to make the native a distinct and 
unique character, especially in mental expression. 

This position denotes some strange experiences with or through 
relatives ; sudden and unexpected journeys; travels for adventure and 
new discoveries. 

When in aspect with Neptune, especially if afflicted, these tendencies 
are accentuated. 

SATURN in the third house indicates a despondent, slow and laborious 
mind ; plodding, careful, cautious and fearful. It favours secrecy, and 
mental pursuits where tact and patience are required, but much depends 
upon the nativity as to how Saturn in the third house will affect the 
mind. In a poor horoscope it will tend to make the native deceitful, 
cunning and over-acquisitive, and if badly aspected will show as follows, 
according to the afflicting planet: 2%, hypocrisy and treachery; 6, 
unreliable and prone to give way to violent fits of passion; ¢, depraved 
tastes and lack of refinement; §, thievish and dishonest tendencies ; 
© or ), a weak intellect, inclined to fret, pine, and become very 
discontented. 

This position gives a liability to melancholia, insanity and morbid 
tendencies. It is an unfavourable position for dealings with relatives, 
and often brings much sorrow through them. It is not good for travel 
and denotes loss, delay and disappointment in connection with journeys, 


160 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


also many unprofitable changes—unless very well aspected, when 
responsibility and a strong sense of duty are shown. 

JUPITER in the third house shows a religious and philosopnical 
mind, kind and sympathetic mentally, with abilities above the average; 
sincere and courteous in speech and writing; earnest, thoughtful and 
considerate in all matters of correspondence and exchange of thought. 
This position favours those who are naturally social and readily able to 
adapt themselves to all average conventional requirements. It denotes 
a hopeful, cheerful and contented mind, but gives no striking mental 
ability unless in good aspect with the Sun, Moon or Mercury, but even 
if no planets are in favourable aspect it is especially good for the mental! 
faculties. , 

This position promises much gain, and many benefits through and 
from relatives; also prosperous and fruitful journeys, and generally 
financial success through travelling. 

The position of Jupiter in the third in Fzery Signs is good for sociai 
success; Larthy Signs, good for business, commerce, and speculative 
enterprise; Azry Signs, good for the mind and mental pursuits ; Watery 
Signs, good for voyages and travel by water. But it is unfavourable for 
all things if afflicted by the planet Mars. 

Mars in the third house denotes a turbulent and forceful mind, the 
native being usually over-energetic and impulsive mentally, possessing 
a keen, alert and sharp lower mind, but apt to lack control and balance. 
The only aspects that moderate and temper the influence of Mars ‘in 
this house are those of a favourable nature from Saturn or Mercury, 
and under some conditions those coming from Uranus, when great 
mental energy and keen inventive genius are denoted. 

The afflictions of the various planets to Mars in the third house 
are very critical, especially afflictions from Uranus, which has a certain 
violent tendency. All persons with Mars in the third are liable at some 
period of their lives to a touch of brain-fever, or some over-balancing of 
the mental faculties—unless this planet is placed in the sign Capricorn, 
the only sign in which the fury and impulse of Mars are lessened and 
brought more under control. 

Many troubles through relatives are denoted by this position, and 
dangers through travel and unfortunate journeys are very marked if the 
planet Mars is afflicted. The turbulent tendencies of Mars in the third 
are modified considerably when a negative or passive sign rises at birth, 


THE: PHIRD) HOUSE TO’ 


Tue Sun in the third house bestows magnanimity of mind, with 
some pride, and ambitious tendencies. Firm and self-reliant in all 
mental pursuits, always aiming at success, seeking honour and fame 
through mental qualifications, and ever desirous of benefiting others 
mentally. } 

When in good aspect to Ii, inventive, constructive, and reformative 
mental tendencies; h, the mind is profound and authoritative, com- 
manding respect and obedience; ¥%, religious or philosophical, very 
kind and considerate; ¢, militant, and at times aggressive. 

This position gives success in travel, and in dealing with relatives, 
by whom the native is respected and sometimes feared. 

If the Sun is much afflicted in the third house it denotes great pride 
and arrogance, and a domineering and over-ambitious mind, causing 
trouble and sorrow to others, according to the sign upon the cusp of the 
third house and the sign in which the Sun is placed. 

If the native is born under any of the positive signs it is more 
fortunate. The Moon in good aspect with the Sun promises important 
beneficial changes every seven years of the life. 

Venus in the third house is very favourable, giving much love of 
art and refined literature, poetry, music, painting and all the higher 
attributes of the mind and mental faculties. The mental qualifications 
are of the highest, making the mind bright, hopeful, peaceful and 
harmonious. When Venus is in good aspect to the Moon or in con- 
junction with Mercury this position considerably modifies an otherwise 
adverse horoscope, for the mind is naturally inclined to be pure and free 
from vice or evilintent. When afflicted the mind is over-sensuous and 
inclined too much to pleasure and gay society, but not wholly unfortunate 
unless Mercury and the Moon are also in adverse aspect. 

It is a position very favourable for travel and gives many journeys 
taken for pleasure, or those out of which pleasure eventually comes. 
It denotes favourable relatives, and success or gain through their 
aid. 

Persons born under positive signs are favoured mentally by this 
position, and those born under negative sigus gain more through the 
feelings and emotions; therefore the former may have literary and 
poetical ability and the latter musical talent and ability to draw or paint. 

Mercury in the third house indicates one fond of learning, studious, 


and generally mirthful, alert, and active mentally. [Eager to investigate 
1 


162 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


science, or any new thought, fond of reading, literature and all things 
that enlighten and tend to expand the understanding. This house is 
wholly mental, being (analogically) the positive station of Mercury: 
it therefore gives a love of writing and speaking, and tends to quicken 
all expressions of the mind in every form. The following are the 
indications when we find Mercury in good aspect to: ‘’, humorous, 
dreamy, poetical and mystical in thought; HI, intuition and a love of 
advanced thought; h, profound and deep thought; 4%, judgment and 
reason is denoted; ¢, mechanical or mathematical skill. 

If Mercury is afflicted the mind is wayward and prone to worry and 
fret. If afflicted by: *#, vague or morbid fancies and impracticable 
schemes; HI, precipitate and ‘ wrong-headed,’ or cantankerous; h, much 
melancholy is denoted; 2%, danger of hypocrisy and deceit; ¢, untruth- 
fulness or exaggeration. 

Much will depend upon the sign on the third as to how the affliction 
of Mercury will affect the mind, for in some cases this affliction denotes 
reform and eccentricity though with good motives; but generally it is a 
very unfortunate affliction, giving some liability to insanity. 

Mercury in the third-house denotes gain by travel through the 
expansion of the mind, if well aspected. It also denotes much thought 
or anxiety concerning the affairs of relatives. 

THE Moon in the third house shows native to be changeable and 
inconsistent in mental pursuits; very curious and inquisitive; fond of 
enquiring into all kinds of knowledge, ever possessing a fund of informa- 
tion and superficial learning, but lacking in continuity and stability. 
Fond of publicity, and eager to know all that is going on under any 
conditions. Much depends upon the aspects of the Moon from the 
third house to the various planets as to whether the above will be 
modified or accentuated. 

, The Moon in good aspect with: , adds a touch of genius, or 
insanity, according to sign and aspects to other planets; HI, increases 
the love of the romantic and awakens the imaginative faculties, tending 
to quicken thought and lead the mind into original study; h, steadies 
and adds firmness and prudence to the mental qualifications; ¥Y, adds 
to the social inclinations and gives donhomie,; 6, quickens the love of 
enterprise and adventure; ©, strengthens continuity and the mental 
faculties; 9, refines the mind and raises it above the average; § 


y 


quickens the wit and stimulates the mental ability. 


THE THIRD HOUSE 163 


This lunar position gives much concern with respect to the affairs 
of relatives, also gives much travel, love of change and a tendency to 
take many journeys. 

It is an unfavourable position for the mind when the Moon is 
afflicted, especially by Mars or Saturn. 


The sign occupying the cusp, or generally ruling the third house 
when no plants are therein, has considerable influence over what is 
known as the lower brain mind, that part of the universal mind which is 
imprisoned in the brain, and therefore the state of this lower brain mind 
when each sign of the zodiac occupies the cusp of the third house will 
now be considered. 


Acute, selfish, intellectual, impulsive, ambitious and aspiring. 

Obstinate, determined, receptive, jealous, acquisitive and sensuous. 

Intelligent, fond of detail, refined, methodical but discontinuous. 

Indolent, peevish, impressionable, fanciful, negative and very sensitive. 

Ambitious, high-spirited, passionate, enterprising and fearless. 

Subtle, laborious, selfish, keenly alive to own interest, fond of science. 

Just, well-balanced, sincere, artistic, refined and fond of comparison. 

Secretive, very subtle, curious, mystical, shrewd, proud, and suspicious. 

Cultured, prophetic, impulsive, rebellious, religious, sympathetic. 

Crafty, cunning, ambitious, jealous, subtle, penetrative, reflective, 

Refined, artistic, concentrative, constant, faithful, scientific, intuitive. 

Receptive, capable of understanding, but somewhat superficial or 
methodical in expression, and often dreamy and far too impressionable 
and mediumistic. 


K§FALS |p ZOGR«3 


Cardinal Signs on the cusp of the third house, or if planets occupy 
cardinal signs in this house, the mind is ambitious, changeable, aspiring, 
and very enterprising. 

Fixed Signs give the mind a fixed and determined attitude, perse- 
vering, plodding, persistent, proud, authoritative, and difficult to convince 
or impress. 

Mutable Signs make the mind more impressionable, receptive, 
methodical, systematic, painstaking, and easily affected by surroundings. 


The third house should not, however, be relied upon alone when 
giving a judgment of the mind and mental qualifications, for the 
luminaries and Mercury must also be carefully considered. Indeed, the 
whole horoscope may in a sense be said to represent the mind. 


CHAPTER XI 


Tue Fourta HousE—EnNvironMENT, Homer, PARENTS ; 
THE Enp oF LIFE 


Tue fourth house relates to the ‘grave,’ the end of life, one of the 
parents—usually the father, according to Western astrologers, though 
the Hindus say the mother, since the fourth house corresponds to 
Cancer—and denotes also the environment, residence and family 
conditions in which the native dwells. 

A few words may not be out of place here in regard to both the 
fourth and tenth houses, regarded from a more or less metaphysical 
point of view. The fourth house may be briefly summarised as the 
personal environment, the tenth house as the individual environment. 
Passing in review a moment the four angles of the figure and _ their 
corresponding signs T, 95, ==, V4, we can see very well how this is. 
Firstly, the oriental half of the map, fourth to tenth (reckoned backwards) 
indicates, as has been said in an earlier chapter, the objective side of 
existence, of which the ascendant, representing the personal man or 
woman, is the most obvious and sharply focussed expression. The 
occidental portion of the map, tenth to fourth, on the other hand, repre- 
sents the subjective side of the nature, which finds its external concrete 
expression in the partners, domestic and business, to which the native is 
drawn. In the same way, therefore, that the fourth house represents in 
a general sense the centre or focus of the personal or domestic environ- 
ment, the tenth house represents the focus of the zndividual or business. 
environment. 

Looked at in this way, a horoscope becomes exceedingly interesting 
when we study it from the standpoint of business or marriage. A certain. 
humorist has hinted that ‘marriage is woman’s business,’ but without 
any cynicism, real or assumed, we can see that viewed in this light there 
is a certain basis for the suggestion. A young man’s start in life is. 
reckoned from the time when he first sets out in business (tenth house, 


business, honours, ideals, ambition); and similarly a young woman’s. 
164 \ 


THE FOURTH HOUSE 165 


start in life dates from marriage, when she removes to the house provided 
by her husband (10th house, fourth from the seventh, ze., the husband’s 
domestic environment). The veal factor in both cases is the same, the 
personal or outer self (first house), usually domiciled in the fourth, is 
removed thence and commences to take up its abode in the tenth, the 
domicile of the individuality or alter ego, the (relatively) higher self, the 
‘better half.’ 

If we regard the true Man as represented by the centre of the map, 
we shall thus see him crucified, as it were, on the four angles of the 
figure; the first house representing the personal, or limited self, the M.C. 
the aspirations and ambitions, the seventh attraction to another self and 
the fourth as a synthesis of the whole carried into the invisible planes. 

We can see then how the life of the average City man continually 
passes, as it were, round the circle, ebbing and flowing from the fourth 
to the tenth as he journeys (either in thought or by train) from home to 
business, and back again; while at the same time there is a perpetual 
transverse current from first to seventh, activity to rest, and from rest 
to activity once more. And thus the most ordinary and prosaic factors 
of life may become interesting when viewed as visible manifestations of 
universal principles. 

Turning for a moment to the signs, if we call Cancer the Tent we 
may fitly term Capricorn the Temple; Cancer the house of the Moon, 
the home of the personality (Y), Capricorn the house of Saturn, the 
shrine of the Ego, the home of the individuality (==). And in this 
connection it is interesting to note that there is a planet suspected to 
exist beyond the orbit of Neptune whose period is 360 years or there- 
abouts, ze, a year for every one of our days; to this planet, then, 
Saturn, whose period is thirty years, stands as our Moon is to the Sun, 
since he would make twelve revolutions in that time, and therefore his 
period would be but a ‘month’ in the ‘year’ of the other: so that, if 
true, this would make the analogy still closer. 

Descending now from these speculations to the more practical and 
detailed consideration of the fourth house of the horoscope let us first 
consider the effect of planets, severally, when in this house. It may 
here be remarked that the Nadir or cusp of the fourth is the magnetic 
point to which all the influences below the horizon seem drawn as to a 
focus; any planet in this house will therefore serve as a centre for the 
magnetic forces, and hence the influence of such a planet tends to 


166 HOW TO JUDGE A NALIVITY 


become progressively manifest as life advances. In any family, other 
things being equal, that member who has a planet in the fourth house 
will be the most influential in the home and will form, as it were, the 
pivot about which all domestic matters will turn. 

NEPTUNE in the fourth house denotes an unfavourable close to the 
life, living under some peculiar restraint or in some especial retirement 
in the latter portion, or placed in unpleasant positions at the end. It 
denotes very unusual and unique domestic conditions. Not infrequently 
the native is compelled to reside in houses or localities where the 
magnetic conditions are unfavourable or exhausting, and he or she is 
always liable to a certain amount of psychic vampirisation by others. 
It is probable that all who have Neptune in the fourth have something 
in the nature of a skeleton in the cupboard in connection with their 
family affairs. The native may be subject to fraud or be guilty of 
fraudulent action toward the end of his life. If the horoscope is not a 
very favourable one, then troubles of various kinds are denoted by this 
position. It isa position which gives uncommon and exceptional events, 
the exact nature of which none can accurately predict. 

If afflicted by the luminaries, the health suffers; and if afflicting 
Mercury, the mind is disordered. | 

The good aspects to Neptune will bring peculiar benefits and some 
psychic experiences. , 

Uranus in the fourth house denotes sudden and tragic or exceptional 
experiences at the end of life. It is not a good position for Uranus, and 
nothing definite can be predicted with regard to the close of life, for 
reversals and sudden changes are shown. To those who seek to lead 
the occult life denotes isolation or expansion of consciousness upon 
higher planes, but only where the horoscope shows occultism or mysticism 
can this be judged. | 

If Uranus afflicts the luminaries, danger of paralysis and sudden 
death is shown; if afflicting Mercury, insanity or mental shocks to the 
nervous system ; and if Mars, tragedy and violence. 

This position denotes trouble in the home life, estrangement from 
parents, a chequered career, and many family troubles. There is 
usually some peculiar source of disharmony in the domestic conditions 
throughout life. Uranus in any angle favours a bohemian or peculiar 
life, the native being unconventional and somewhat eccentric. 

Saturn in the fourth house denotes the development of acquisitive- 


THE, FOURTH, HOUSE 167 


ness and a desire to live a very retired and secluded life, or heavy 
responsibilities which bind and fetter the native to his detriment or 
hinder his progress. It is not good for worldly success unless well 
aspected. It is unfavourable for domestic or family affairs, and denotes 
an environment that is not altogether satisfactory or to the native’s 
liking. 

If afflicted, Saturn in the fourth house is very unfortunate, denying 
or preventing any gain by inheritance, and if very much afflicted denotes 
poverty and privation at the close of life. Nothing turns out wholly 
successful under this position of Saturn, and the native’s life is more or 
less under the law of fate, in which free-will appears to be the smallest 
element. 

If well aspected this position indicates occult tendencies and asceticism 
at the close of life, and turns the mind from worldly interests. 

Jupirer in the fourth is a most favourable position for gain by 
inheritance, and denotes property, wealth and prosperity toward the 
close of life. It promises a happy home, very peaceful and successful 
domestic surroundings, and denotes favours from parents and benefits 
through or from them which considerably help the native. Enterprises 
and business undertakings have a successful issue. 

If well aspected by the luminaries it will counteract many other 
defects in the horoscope, and shows the probability of great gain and 
fortune at the close of life, or great spiritual advance. 

If well aspecting Mars a religious end to the life is denoted: and if 
Saturn or Uranus are in good aspect, occult tendencies are denoted. 

If afflicted, Jupiter in the fourth house denotes extravagance, waste 
of money in the household, and troubles through parents and their 
affairs. Mercury in affliction denotes lawsuits, and the luminaries 
afflicting, danger of apoplexy or sudden heart troubles. 

Mars in the fourth is a very unfavourable and unfortunate position, 
causing the close of life to be perilous and fraught with many trials and 
troubles. It denotes quarrels with parents, and many disputes in the 
home life, domestic affairs going wrong and causing much unpleasant- 
ness and many misunderstandings, with probable strife, and if Mars is 
afflicted by either Saturn or Uranus, danger of violence and a sudden 
derminus vile. 

If Mars is well aspected in this house it will show energy and 
force, and much enterprise, but a liability of error through impulse is 


168 HOW TO’ JUDGE A’ NATIVITY 


also shown. Mercury afflicted by Mars from the fourth house denotes 
feeling and passion to be in excess of thought and reason. Uranus 
afflicting Mars, there is a danger of suicide or insanity, which may be 
hereditary. This position of Mars denotes inherited tendencies, and 
shows a life that is more or less fatalistic. Troubles through the 
dwelling-house and house property ; danger of fire and accidents therein. 
It sometimes gives an unruly nature. 

Tue Sun in the fourth house shows success at the end of life, 
realised ambitions, hopes and desires when the life is nearing the close. 
It denotes a good heredity with which pride of ancestry is connected. 
It promises gain by inheritance or some benefits coming through, ar by 
means of, the parentage. It is a position that favours enquiry into the 
secret and hidden things in nature, such as occultism, mysticism, and 
thoughts connected with the higher mind or individuality. 

If well aspected by Jupiter or Saturn and the Moon, gain of property 
or financial benefits by inheritance. If afflicted, trouble through one or 
both parents, and obstacles in life. It also shows that the native may 
exceed his income and incur heavy debts through extravagance, or by 
living beyond the sphere of life to which he belongs. 

VeENus in the fourth denotes a peaceful end to the life amid comfort, 
and successful achievement to hopes and wishes. It promises gain by 
inheritance, concord and happiness from parents, and a satisfactory 
home life. This is a very favourable position for all affairs of a 
domestic nature, and is a sure token of a good finish at the close of 
life. 

If afflicted it is not so very disastrous, except that it affects finance 
and denotes grief and sorrow at the close of life when in a sign that is 
not congenial to the nature of Venus. If afflicted by: Hl, some sudden 
reversals of fortune or extraordinary experiences; 6, carelessness and 
looseness of morals, or a tendency to be extravagant at the latter part 
of the life. 

Venus in the fourth house in good aspect with the luminaries is 
very fortunate and makes the whole life a success, fortune favouring the 
termination of all transactions, tending to bring all undertakings to a 
successful issue. 

Mercury in the fourth denotes changes of residence, worry and 
anxiety concerning home and domestic affairs, and great difficulty in 
settling or avoiding frequent disturbance. 


THE FOURTH ‘HOUSE 169 


If afflicted by: HI, mental distress and strange change of fortune 
with much difficulty in remaining for any length of time in one place; 
h, thefts and frauds; ¢, the victim of sharp practice and treachery. 

If in good aspect to: I, denotes a considerable expansion of con- 
sciousness toward the close of life; h, considerably steadies the tendency 
to change, and brings gain from parents; © or ), lessens the tendency 
to adverse change, and promises the retention of the mental faculties at 
the close of life. It indicates ability that lacks opportunity, but if 
Jupiter is in good aspect with Mercury then opportunity comes at the 
end. 

Tue Moon in the fourth house denotes much fluctuation of circum- 
stances and many changes of residence at the close of life. It is only a 
favourable position when the Moon is well aspected at birth, when it 
denotes probable gain by inheritance and some reputation or popularity 
through one or both of the parents. It is a frequent indication of 
adoption, or early separation from the home sphere. 

If the Moon is afflicted: by FH, sudden adverse changes, unexpected 
turns of fortune, difficulties in the home life and a chequered career ; 
h, a sure sign of poverty or much disappointment, with small ability to 
succeed in life and prosper; d, reversals of fortune through impulsive 
conduct and rash action; © or %, loss through theft and deception is 
denoted. | 

If the Moon in the fourth is well aspected a peaceful end is promised 
but this position indicates many changes, and often frequent removals, 
with no certainty of a settled abode. 


The fourth house in quite a general sense denotes the parents, their 
condition and affairs. In considering the question of parentage, with 
regard to the father the Sun and the planet Saturn should have careful 
consideration. It is difficult to convey the ideas relating to the Sun and 
"Saturn as significators of the father to those who are not familiar with 
the mystical side of the subject, but to those who understand that there 
is a life and form side to everything the idea is expressed in the fact that 
through the Sun comes the spiritual heredity which is connected with 
the Ego, and through the limitations of Saturn are conveyed the Karmic 
or fatalistic and physical tendencies. 

In the same way Venus and the Moon represent the mother and 
her conditions, Venus denoting the nutritive and preservative quality, 


170 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


and the Moon the formative tendencies, the habits and peculiar 
hereditary inclinations. 

The Sun represents the father, or life and health aura, also the 
higher mental and moral merits; Saturn the Kama-Manas or crystallised 
personal legacy of the previous life: (that which is bred in the doze). 
Venus represents the feelings and higher emotions and the human 
qualities, the cream of all past experiences; the Moon the animal and 
personal inclinations, the watery and fluidic part of the personal 
man. 

The position of the Sun and Venus will denote the moral and purely 
mental or human tendencies of the joint parents. The aspects to these 
two significators will improve or modify their conditions ; if there should 
be much affliction it weakens the moral stamina transmitted from the 
parents to the native. | 

The position of Saturn and the Moon denotes the worldly and 
material condition of the parents and the early environment of the native. 

The signs upon the cusps of the tenth and fourth houses, their 
rulers and the aspects between them, will denote the attitude of the 
parents toward each other and their influence upon the native, especially 
if the ruler of the ascendant is considered in its relationship with the 
rulers of the tenth and fourth. 

If both the luminaries are well aspected by the benefic planets the 
native is usually born into a good environment. Ifthe luminaries are 
afflicted by the malefic planets, then adverse fortune and more or less 
obscurity are denoted. Careful judgment and much practice are needed 
before a correct opinion can be formed regarding the parents and their 
affairs. ah 
If the Sun and Saturn are very well aspected, and either or both 
angular, long life to the father is denoted. If these significators are 
better placed,or above Venus and Moon, the father will outlive the 
mother. The significators exalted, dignified, and weil aspected, favour 
‘the parent described. If occidental (in the western half of the map) 
longer life to the father is denoted than when oriental. 

It is never safe, of course, to judge the affairs of the parents from \ 
the native’s map alone, but general ideas may be obtained as to the 
sympathy or otherwise existing between the native and his parents. In 
many cases pretty reliable results may be obtained by taking the tenth 
house as the ascendant of the mother, and counting the houses round in 


Dither ty OUSE 171 


the usual manner, and similarly by treating the fourth house as the 
ascendant of the father, etc. 

The author has known cases where the place of the Sun in the 
native’s horoscope has represented the nativity of the father, and the 
place of Venus that of the mother, but in any of these cases the affairs 
of the parents should be judged only from after the birth of the native. 


AN ILLUSFRATION 
Xx XI XII I II II 
Il1o ao16 R18 NYS 2=6 M5 
© ») ° ¢ re) y h Hi «cs 
aa. 008 f22 si W27R m22 1 P22tR 2th 
In the above nativity, which is that of ‘Viscount Hinton,’ the 
‘organ-grinding earl,’ the unsuccessful claimant to the Poulett peerage, 
—‘if the meridian be made the ascendant, and the nativity be turned 
round so that the sign Gemini is made the first house, we shall have 
a symbolical map of the mother, who will be represented by Mercury 
with the planet Mars rising in the ascendant. Students may learn a 
great deal by this arrangement. The ruler of the tenth is in the fourth 
in the planet’s fall, indicating the mother’s honour. The ruling planet 
Mercury is in opposition to the planet Mars from the ascendant. She 
is described as a rebellious, thoughtless and impulsive woman, high- 
spirited, careless and reckiess.—Modern Astrology, Vol. VI (Old 
Series) p. 49. 


CHAPTER XIl 


® 
Tue Firrh House—CuiLpren, ENTERPRISE, SPECULATIONS. 
Gains, Love AFFAIRS, ETC. 


TueE fifth house relates to pleasure, society and social inclinations 
also the emotions and feelings. It may be regarded as a material repre- 
sentation of the eleventh house, which governs hopes and wishes, and 
often denotes their worldly fulfilment. It shows the nature of the native’s 
love affairs, courtships, and the affections which spring from the feeling 
and emotional side of the nature; it represents the seat of the physical 
and magnetic attractions between the sexes. It is also concerned with 
speculative affairs and all matters of enterprise and activity prompted 
by the desire nature; having a direct and what may be termed a lunar 
reflection from the eleventh house, which denotes the internal nature 
of the desires, hopes and wishes. 

NEPTUNE in the fifth house denotes strange and abnormal conditions 
relating to sex matters. It is not a favourable position for any who 
have not definitely decided to choose platonic love in preference to the 
ordinary love attachments. All manner of evils arise from this position 
in connection with courtship and matters pertaining to the opposite sex. 

If Neptune is afflicted in the fifth troubles are severe, many dangers 
being threatened, and unless the horoscope as a whole shows an innate 
love of purity the animal tendencies will override the human. 

If Neptune is well aspected it tends to bring experiences in con- 
nection with the opposite sex which will be beneficial to the progress of 
the native. 

Uranus in the fifth house causes strange and peculiar experiences 
in connection with the feelings and emotions, romantic love affairs, and 
unconventional ideas with regard to sex union. This position favours 
free love, and gives a tendency to ignore the legal tie, and act from an 
independent motive. It is not good as regards children and shows 


separation from offspring and much anxiety through them. If afflicted 
17a 


THE FIFTH HOUSE 173 


many domestic troubles are shown, and some inconstancy and intrigue 
or liaison denoted. 

Uranus in the fifth causes trouble and scandal through children, 
and is very unfavourable for all matters in which the senses play a 
prominent part. If with Venus, sometimes homo-sexual instincts. 

If well aspected by the luminaries, secret love affairs of an 
ideal character are denoted; in good aspect with Mercury, ex- 
ceptional correspondence and successful intercourse with the opposite 
Sex. 

SATURN in the fifth house denotes hindrance, delay and disappoint- 
ment in love affairs and causes the native to become attracted to persons 
who are older and more serious in nature and disposition. If evilly 
aspected, death of the loved one is probable, or some heavy sorrow in 
connection with the object of the affections. This is not a good position 
for bold speculations but is much more favourable for well-secured 
investments, especially in land, mines, or buildings. It denotes trouble 
through offspring, and lack of interest in pleasures or entertainments. 
It considerably tempers the affections. 

If afflicted by Mars or Venus, danger of unnatural affections and a 
lack of real sympathy or feeling is denoted, This is avery unfavourable 
position where Saturn afflicts the luminaries. 

JUPITER in the fifth house is a very favourable position, showing 
reasonable and legitimate affection, in which the senses are under 
control and the sympathetic side of the nature is expressed. It promises 
much success in courtship, and gain through the opposite sex. Itisa 
very good position for speculation, investment and financial enterprise. 
This position also promises good and dutiful children and much happiness 
through them. 

In a female horoscope this position often denotes an attachment to 
a widower, or toaman who has had a former engagement which has 
affected his life to some extent. It favours love affairs with the religious 
minded or socially inclined. | 

If afflicted by the luminaries or any of the planets the good influence 
of Jupiter is much modified, but if well aspected the life is successful, 
and there are many opportunities to become prosperous and happy 
through gratified affection. 

If either of the luminaries be in trine aspect to Jupiter in the fifth, 
a fortune is likely to come to the native either through speculation, 


174 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


lotteries, or what are called games of chance; but other influences 
should also be studied. 

Mars in the fifth house denotes a very unsettled and inharmonious 
home life, in which discord and disputes are frequent. Impulsive, 
sudden, and unfortunate attractions towards the opposite sex, and an 
over-ardent, emotional nature is shown by this position. It inclines 
toward rash speculation, and if much afflicted shows gambling and 
prodigal tendencies. 

If Mars and Jupiter are in evil aspect there will be a waste of the 
vital forces through unrestrained feelings, and if Venus is also in 
affliction ruin through the opposite sex is denoted. 

If afflicted by Uranus, foolish and unreasonable infatuations are 
denoted. 

Even if well aspected, Mars in the fifth shows extravagance, and 
excess of feeling. It is not good for children, kills one of them, and 
shows much trouble and danger through them. 

Tue Sun in the fifth house denotes success in speculation and 
matters of enterprise, also gain through children, pleasure, society and 
entertainments. It is favourable for courtships and promises a success- 
ful and honourable attachment. Thisis not a fruitful position, however, 
and often denies offspring or brings trouble to the native at the birth of 
children. 

If the Sun is afflicted in the fifth it is very evil, and denotes much 
loss through speculation or enterprise, and trouble in courtship through 
pride and jealousy. Afflicted by Uranus or Mars it denotes tragedy and 
very sorrowful love experiences. 

If well aspected it considerably improves the nativity, giving 
success towards the close of life, and gain through children. 

Venus in the fifth house denotes successful love affairs, the capacity 
to fully enjoy and extract the full measure of joy out of life. It gives 
ability to entertain others and much success in connection with enter- 
tainments, concerts and social gatherings and shows general domestic 
felicity. It promises gain through speculation, investment and general 
enterprise. This position of Venus favours a fruitful union, and 
gives children who are specially endowed with artistic or musical 
talents. : 

If Venus is afflicted by: ‘3, strange courtships; Hl, very romantic 
attachments; h, disappointment in love affairs and grief or sorrow in 


THE FIFTH HOUSE 175 


connection with the feelings; 6, there will be extravagance in matters 
of pleasure, or ungratified affection. | 

Venus well aspected in the fifth is a sure token of a happy and 
successful love attachment ; but much depends upon the sign ruling the 
fifth house as to the expression of Venus in this house. 

Mercury in the fifth house tends to bring anxiety in connection 
with love affairs, and shows that the mind is liable to become absorbed 
in feeling and emotion. It denotes some fatalistic affair in connection 
with children, with much worry and perplexity of mind concerning their 
affairs. 

When well aspected by Jupiter or Saturn, however, it is very good 
for speculation or enterprise. If afflicted by Mars or Uranus scandal 
and ill-repute in connection with love affairs is shown, and danger of 
separation, breach of promise actions or divorce. It also denotes 
trouble to the object of the affections, and the mind is generally con- 
cerned about the welfare of others who minister to the feeling and 
emotional side of the nature. 

This position of Mercury is always improved if in good aspect with 
the Moon. 

Tue Moon in the fifth house denotes much fluctuation in all specu- 
lative affairs, and much activity and change in allenterprise. It gives a 
love of pleasure and a peculiar aptitude to gain pleasure out of amuse- 
ment. It denotes changeable and fickle affections, and an engagement 
with the opposite sex which may quite absorb the life even although the 
obiect of the native’s affection may be not in the least worthy of the 
affection or attention shown. It promises a child who will have fame or 
notoriety, and indicates that the life of the native will be bound up in 
some peculiar manner with a child or children. 

When afflicted this is an unfavourable position for children or love 
affairs, and often denotes intrigues and liaisons, the state of the morals 
depending upon the nature of the affliction. | 

The fifth house is generally an index to the state of the lower 
feelings, the sensations and passional tendencies, the sign upon the cusp 
of this house indicating the past experiences and thus denoting the 
nature of the emotions. The first, fifth and ninth houses represent the 
personal man in a very marked degree, showing his present, past and 
future consciousness symbolically. In the harmony of the signs with 
the houses, one of the four triplicities will usually be found influencing 


176 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


all three of these houses. Thus when Aries rises Leo usually governs 
the fifth, and so on with each sign in succession, the sign upon the cusp 
of the fifth having a direct relationship with those on the first and ninth. 
The influence of each sign when on the cusp of the fifth house is as 
follows: 

¢ Impulse and mental realisation out of sensation. 

% Strong feelings and sensations. 

Il Dual love affairs in which mind seeks to abstract itself from sensation 

o5 6. Imprressionable feelings, with receptivity to the feelings of others. 

§ Strong passions and ardent feelings, many love episodes and experiences. 

My Discrimination in love affairs, and receptivity. 

<= Refined and pure emotions. 

I Self-control in sex matters but secret inclinations towards opposite sex. 

f  Dualistic experiences with a strong desire to rule the senses. 

y§ Ambitious love nature, with a tendency to absorb the feelings of others. 

<2 Very constant and faithful in attachments. 

}€ Plastic and impressionable love nature. 

Aspects to the cusp of the fifth house, as well as to planets in this 
house, should be noted, for the fifth house is very important in all 
out-of-sight matters; it shows the inner feelings, and leads from mere 
sensation up to the highest emotions, to be finally expressed in the 


ninth house as sublime philosophy or religious devotion. 


CHILDREN 


Much care is needed with regard toa judgment of the fifth house, 
and although it denotes children in a general sense the joint horoscopes 
of husband and wife should be considered ' efore any definite judgment 
is given with regard to offspring. 

The old astrological rule with reference to children is that the tenth 
and eleventh houses, together with the houses opposite to them, ze. fifth 
and fourth, must have consideration, also the aspects of planets to the 
cusps of these houses and to any planets that are in them. The Moon, 
Jupiter and Venus together or singly in any of these houses promise 
children, or rather a fruitful union in this respect, while the Sun, Mars 
and Saturn either deny offspring or denote but few and those to be 
reared with difficulty. Mercury acts, as usual, according to aspects and 
position ; if oriental he promises children, if occidental he denies them. 

Malefics in the fifth house nearly always cause barrenness in a woman 
or sterility in a man, ane if children are born they are either too delicate 
to live, or if reared cause endless trouble; bw: in this case the aspects 


THE FIFTH HOUSE 177 


to the malefics should be well considered. Benefics in the fifth house 
bring children and much pleasure through them. 

The rules are as follows :—) in 8, WM, or <a moderate family. 
Ifin 0, 95, m, for a large family; in this respect 0 and f are very 
fruitful signs often denoting twins. If in 7, St, or V8 there is small 
chance of a family. 

Much skill is required in judging childrev from a horoscope and it is 
never safe to go by the horoscope of one sex alone, for it sometimes 
happens that an unfruitful horoscope in one case is made fruitful by 
blending with that of another. 


CHAPTER XIII 
Ter SixtH House.—Sickness, SERVANTS, Work, ert. 


Tue sixth house is connected with the mid-heaven and the second 
house and relates to work and servants, also to sickness, and the con- 
dition of the physical body. It is an unimportant house if no planets 
are found in it, or if the sign upon the cusp has no definite indication 
relating to sixth house affairs. In some cases it is necessary to study 
the ruler of this house, but only when so placed or aspected as to show 
marked signs of importance. In all cases where a planet occupies this 
house it will have some direct bearing upon the work in which the native 
is engaged, the inferiors he contacts and the sickness or ill-health he is 
liable to suffer. In an indirect way it governs uncles and aunts or the 
relatives of the father. 

NEPTUNE in the sixth house is very unfavourable for health, denoting 
atrophy, incurable diseases, and strange complaints that are inherited. 
If much afflicted it denotes serious ill-health through debauchery and 
evil habits, especially if afflicting Venus or Mars. It is not good for 
work and often brings enforced idleness or a chronic state of inertia. It 
inclines to mediumistic tendencies and is favourable for psychic pheno- 
mena, but there is always a danger of serious reaction resulting from 
this position. It is not good for dealing with inferiors and denotes 
hatred, or intense dislike from servants orinferiors. If well aspected the 
influence of Neptune may be improved but it is not a good position for 
this strange planet, and seems to produce very curious and peculiar 
disorders which in most cases seem-to result from astral causes; that is, 
due to evil influences or negative conditions affecting the native directly 
from the astral plane. 

Uranus in the sixth house denotes peculiar and exceptional com- 
plaints arising from nervous agitation and environment. Very few are 
sensitive enough to fully appreciate the psychic tendencies of this posi- 


tion, but in those who are very receptive it awakens the psychic ta cuities 
178 


tiie ora tit FOUSE 179 


and brings abnormal development of some kind, according to the other 
conditions in the nativity. Nearly all the ailments may be traced to the 
nervous condition, for it is supposed that Uranus has much influence 
over the etheric double, which is the medium through which the prana 
or vital force is conveyed to the body. If much afflicted in this house 
there is danger of insanity or hypochondria, epilepsy and hallucination. 
If well aspected diseases are curable by electricity, massage, etc., but if 
much afflicted diseases become incurable. 

This position makes the native an unwilling servant and is not good 
for service of any kind, unless the soul has awakened, when the native 
elects to become a servant of humanity. Much will depend upon the 
sign ruling the sixth house as to how this influence will operate. To 
some it brings great opportunity, to others it is a curse, extremes ruling. 

SATURN in the sixth house is very unfavourable for health and 
denotes much sickness, which is often the result of circumstances and 
conditions over which the native has little or no control. It causes sick- 
ness through privation and want or neglect, and causes many sorrows 
and disappointments through the state of the health. If afflicted by Sun 
or Moon a chronic state of ill-health is shown. e 

This position causes sickness through cold and inability to recuperate 
readily. It brings rheumatism and diseases that are difficult to cure. 

This position is not favourable for work, or employment, nor is it 
good for servants and inferiors, through whom the native suffers losses. 
The good aspects to Saturn have very little effect upon this position, 
which often makes the life unfortunate and a burden to the native. 

JupireR in the sixth house denotes good health and little danger 
of sickness, except such as arises through excess and over-indulgence. 
lf sick, the native is well and carefully nursed and sometimes gains 
through his sickness. 

The native makes a good and faithful servant and either inherits or 
gains through his employer, with whom he may become partner or whose 
full confidence he shares. He would gain by and through servants if he 
employed them, for profit through inferiors is denoted by this position. 

Jupiter afflicted in this house affects the blood and the liver. If 
much afflicted the health will suffer through intemperance and over- 
indulgence. This influence generally brings gain directly or indirectly 
through the religious tendencies. 

Mars in the sixth house denotes a liability to suffer in health through 


180 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


carelessness or indiscreet action; there is a tendency to inflammatory 
complaints when Mars is afflicted by Sun and Jupiter, and danger of 
suicide or some fatal accident when afflicted by Uranus, this latter being 
a very evil influence. 

This position denotes much energy in all work, and the native is 
generally an enthusiast where work is concerned. It is not favourable 
for servants, and causes the native annoyance and worry in connection 
with them; they gain through his generosity and often take advantage 
of his liberal treatment. 

In this case it is perhaps best for the native to become his own 
master, as he is apt as a servant to do too much for others and impair 
his health through his energy and his impulse. If Mars is well aspected 
in this house it gives an abundance of animal spirits, and much rude 
physical health. 

THE Sun in the sixth house is not good for the health of the native, 
the vital forces of the Sun having less power while in this house, but 
unless afflicted the native is careful and generally knows how to safeguard 
his health. 

If afflicted by Saturn or Uranus the constitution is weak and the 
recuperative power is not good. | 

If in good aspect with Mars or Jupiter it favours the health, and 
indicates the best kind of work to be that connected with the medical 
profession. It denotes some promotion while in the employ of others, 
gain through serving others, and promises employment that is dignified 
and ennobled by the good that may be done to others. 

It is not a position that favours opportunity, and in the case of those 
who work for work’s sake only may show talent and ability lacking the 
opportunity to find a fitting or appreciated expression. 

VeENus in the sixth house is very favourable for health if not seriously 
afflicted. The health is liable to be affected through excess of any kind, 
especially pleasure. If temperance is observed, especially after marriage, — 
the health will be good and little trouble will be experienced in this 
direction. Should the native fall ill he will be carefully nursed, and 
may gain in several ways indirectly through his sickness. 

This position denotes gain through servants, and brings pleasure 
and happiness through them. It makes work a pleasure, or rather 
in many cases pleasure becomes work. The native is by no means 
industrious but has a faculty for making his work in life a pleasure which 


THE SIXTH HOUSE 181 


absorbs him. No planet in the sixth house, not even Venus, favours 
the native being his own master, but should he become so he would 
obtain good and faithful servants to work for him. 

Mercury in the sixth house denotes mental troubles, and danger of 
nervous breakdown. This position affects the health when the nativity 
shows much worry or anxiety, and the native is always liable to be over- 
strung or easily affected physically by his surroundings and environment. 

If afflicted by: Mars, there is danger of insanity through excitement 
or lack of control over the impulses: Saturn, the mind becomes im- 
paired through over-anxiety. Uranus afflicting Mercuryin the sixth rarely 
fails to unbalance the native, causes him to commit rash acts and some- 
times denotes suicide. All afflictions to Mercury in the sixth house are 
dangerous and tend to ruin the health through the condition of the mind. 
This position denotes an energetic mental worker, but fails to bring 
the best outlet for the mental energies. The native though fitted to be 
master can only hope to succeed as servant, and should be concerned 
with either chemistry, writings, books or clerical work. With this 
position there is some danger of chronic dyspepsia. 

TueE Moon in the sixth house denotes a liability to suffer in healtr 
through changes and fluctuating causes ; it is particularly inimical during 
the infantile stage, andifmuch afflicted shows danger ofan earlydeath. The 
health is always liable to break down when under adverse lunar influences. 

If afflicted by: Sun or Uranus, the digestion is usually impaired by 
this position, and the native becomes a dyspeptic; Mars, inflammatory 
complaints; Saturn, chronic diseases are shown. Good aspects to the 
. Moon lessen the tendency to suffer in health, but it is not a good posi- 
tion for the Moon so far as health is concerned. 

This position makes the native a better servant than master, and 
shows ability to serve others and win the good fellowship of equals; it 
favours domestic service, and gives many opportunities to enjoy life if 
employed as man-servant or maid in families of good position. It shows 
success in work of a light, watery, or fluctuating nature, but often gives 
a strong desire to come before the public professionally. 


The body is the physical medium through which we express our- 
selves upon the physical plane, therefore it becomes essential to know 
«he kind of dietary most suitable for the physical welfare of the native. 
The sixth house is peculiarly related to food, and the nourishment of the 


182 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


physical body; thus ill-health often results through inattention to the 
diet most suited to the body. 

If the native has Mercury in the sixth house, it will be found that 
he has many fads and fancies with regard to diet, unless that planet is 
very well aspected or occupying the sign Virgo, when he will make a 
study of the laws of hygiene; but if afflicted this will be carried too far 
and the native become a faddist, over-dainty and lacking in common- 
sense with regard to diet. Saturn in the sixth often inclines the native 
to become too ascetic and prone to adopt periods of fasting and privation, 
thus going against the very necessary requirement of this indication that 
a generous and nourishing diet should be adopted; in such a case the 
room where meals are taken should be sunny and its temperature 
warm. Mars in the sixth has a tendency to cause the native to over- 
indulge and eat too much, but it generallly denotes a very healthy 
appetite. Jupiter in the sixth sometimes causes ill-health through surfeit 
and the love of feasting. Venus in this house sometimes denotes a 
danger of excess through a love of nice things to eat and drink, but 
generally its influence is temperate, especially if in Libra. The Moon 
will cause the native to be whimsical and fanciful in his eating, and 
over-fond of liquids and moist foods. 

The signs occupied by the planets will in the majority of cases 
modify the influence, and in some cases accentuate the foregoing. In 
all cases where the Moon or Mercury occupies the sixth, reading, worry 
and anxiety should be avoided at meal times. Cases have been known 
where natives have suffered considerably through the magnetic condi- 
tions of those who have been present at meal times, showing the 
extremely psychic nature of this house. Again, persons with Saturn in 
the sixth, or even ruling the sixth, will be magnetically affected by the 
occupants at the same table during meals, while those having Jupiter in 
the sixth or ruling this house will be benefited by others joining at a meal 
- -probably owing to the social element that Jupiter always tends to give. 

Similar remarks apply, though in a lesser degree, when by progres- 
sion after birth the radical position of such planet has descended into 
the sixth house. In one case the progression of Saturn’s place into the 
sixth house in this way caused the native to suffer much discomfort and 
annoyance from being obliged to take meals in chilly, draughty and 
sunless apartments and in undesirable surroundings. 

When judging sickness from the sixth house care should be taken 


THE SIXTH HOUSE 183 


to note the general state of health, the constitution, and liability to 
functional disorders. No definite statement should be made from the 
sixth house or planets in that house with regard to sickness, unless ill- 
health is shown by the nativity, such as the affliction of the luminaries, 
etc. ; then note carefully the indications of the sixth house. Changes in 
the system and a liability to ill-health will arise when the planets in the 
sixth are aspected by the luminaries, but this may be caused by good 
aspects as well as those which are considered evil. A malefic may 
occupy the sixth house and yet the native will enjoy general good health ; 
but there will come a time when the health will break down, and then 
the malefic influence in the sixth will affect the native, either temporarily 
or permanently, according to the original indications. 

It is generally true that the part of the body denoted by a sign of 
the zodiac is affected whenever the malefic planets are found in that 
sign of birth, but especially if in the sixth house. If the native suffer 
from any inflammatory complaint the sign occupied by Mars will show 
that a mark or scar will be left upon that part of the body after illness. 
Should the native suffer from rheumatic fever and Mars occupy the sign 
Capricorn upon the cusp of the sixth, then a mark or scar would be left 
upon one or both knees, and in all probability the fever would expend 
itself chiefly through that part of the body. If Saturn occupies the sixth 
then that part of the body governed by the sign holding Saturn would 
be the weak or fatal part. Similarly with Uranus; if Uranus occupies 
Leo in the sixth there may be liability to heart disease, etc. 

The sixth house may be considered a psychic house, in which the 
psychic tendencies of the native are indicated. All forms and ceremonies 
in which the native is interested are usually shown by this house, it 
being the house of phenomenal or ceremonial magic. It is, however, a 
house in which much may be said to be latent, and unexpressed. Saturn 
and Jupiter in the sixth incline to form and ceremony; in the physical 
world this sometimes expresses itself in uniformed servants connected 
with the household, or the commoner types of liveried servants. The 
finer grades of the physical or earthy triplicity combine to operate 
through the influence of this sixth house. 

The remarks in this chapter may be considerably amplified and 
usefully extended by a study of Medical Astrology, Manual No. 9, in 
which Heinrich Daath has dealt with sickness and disease in a most 
satisfactory manner. 


CHAPTER XIV 
THe SEVENTH House.—MArRIAGE, PARTNERSHIPS, ENEMIES, ETC. 


MarriaGE is the chief influence of the seventh house. The seventh 
house in every horoscope is the complement of the first, and represents 
the unifying of all that is separated or isolated in the ascendant; it 
indicates the subjective side of the nature as distinguished from the 
objective side indicated by the first house: * and successfully to unify all 
that is denoted by the first and seventh means an enlarged experience 
which can be gained in no other way. In the abstract, it means the 
blending of Mars and Venus, Mercury and Jupiter, or the luminaries 
and Saturn. In other words it signifies the transmutation of the passions 
into pure love, the exchange of intellect for wisdom and the perfect 
individualisation of the conscious Self. 

Just as there is to be a divine marriage of the Personality with the 
Individuality when man attains to the perfection he is destined to reach; 
so on a minor scale, on the physical plane, the union of the sexes is a 
commencement of that unification which is eventually to unite the self 
to all other selves. The triangle that has its apex in the ascendant, 
when interlaced with the opposite triangle that has its apex in the 
seventh, symbolises the formation of the divine tetractys, or the union 
of opposites. | 

We have been considering hitherto the first half of the circle in the 
six houses that are under the earth, these being chiefly concerned with 
the Personality, starting full of life and force from the ascendant, and 
culminating in the sixth, where the life is either expended through 
sickness or work, or transmuted through the psyche or Soul into the 
human stage where the true individual begins. The chord from the 
first to the seventh houses divides the dark from the light half of the 
circle, the animal from the human, the latent from the active, the 
objective from the subjective. It is true that the one is but the reflection 


* See remarks in early part of Chapter XI. 
184 


THE SEVENTH HOUSE © 185 


of the other, but from the seventh house the dividing line leads onward 
to the ‘ascending arc’ ef human progress, and to the broad daylight 
of the solar half of the circle, which is not only less limited and restricted 
in its expression but more potent and real than that which is fore- 
shadowed by the dark and lower half. 

Each house directly or indirectly affects the native in a definite 
manner according to a fixed law; but the house alone is not wholly 
responsible for the event. In the order of the signs Venus governs the 
seventh and the second, love and money; but although Venus is the 
planet most active in the majority of cases when marriage takes place 
no hard and fast rule can be applied in every case of marriage, and it is 
therefore advisable that the student should carefully study what is meant 
by the term marriage. In our own country, forinstance, marriages take 
place at any time, and at any age. In India, on the other hand, 
marriages are arranged from birth, and in the majority of cases the native 
has no voice m the matter. In all parts of the world marriage laws differ, 
and the work of the astrologer is by no means an easy task when 
marriage is the subject for consideration. 

If the word ‘union’ is substituted for marriage many grave errors 
will be avoided, for it is possible to see a union of the sexes when it is 
difficult to be sure that a legal marriage has been contracted. 

In the course of practice an astrologer hears some very remarkable 
stories. In one instance the author was aware of a case where a highly 
respectable couple lived together as married, without having passed 
through the legal ceremony, for many years without the fact being in 
the least suspected. In another case a housekeeper had formed a union 
with her master which lasted for over twenty years. Three months 
before the birth of a child she was forced to marry a man she disliked to 
save herself from public dishonour. Cases are on record of marriage 
and separation taking place on the same day; and in fact the whole 
subject is one that requires the most careful judgment before any definite 
prediction can be safely made. 


There are four factors concerned in all cases of union; the Sun, the 
Moon, Mercury and Venus. 

In a male horoscope, note the planets to which the Moon, Mercury 
and the ruling planet make first application: they will describe the 
partner. Ina female horoscope substitute the Sun for the Moon. 


186 HOW TO JUDGE ‘A NATIVITY 


These three significators respectively represent the mental, psychic, 
and physical unionsor attachments. Ifa planet is found in the seventh 
house it will describe the partner and give what is practically the history 
of any union. : 

NeprunE in the seventh house denotes peculiar and exceptional 
unions, and in some cases marriage to cripples or deformed persons. 
Extremes of good and evil seem to be the latent possibilities of the 
planet Neptune; therefore grave risks are run by the native who has . 
this position. It may bring about a platonic union or one that is the 
very reverse; long expected happiness often meets with disappointment 
at the last moment, though often the seeming misfortune proves a boon, 
this depending on the aspects Neptune receives at birth. If Neptune is 
much afflicted in the seventh then marriage is inadvisable unless excep- 
tional experiences along this particular line are required. If well 
aspected much of the evil is mitigated, but in all cases it is a very 
doubtful and uncertain position, showing marriages that are unique and 
out of the common. 

Uranus in the seventh house denotes romantic attachments, hasty 
and impulsive engagements. It also denotes the possibility of marriage 
to a genius, or to an original character. This influence may be very 
good or very evil according to the horoscope. There is an element of 
uncertainty about this position and the unexpected usually happens to 
those who have this influence operating at birth. To them romantic 
love is always the spice of life, and they often end by marrying the last 
person they thought they would marry. If well aspected, the marriage 
partner turns out to be a true friend of the native and has original and 
ingenious methods of ministering to the domestic comforts. If afflicted 
the partner brings about ruin, and eventually separation or grievous 
misunderstanding. 

SATURN in the seventh house shows a faithful partner or marriage 
to a person older than the native. Saturn is exalted in Libra, and as 
this sign is equivalent to the seventh house Saturn in the seventh 
denotes faithfulness and sincerity on the part of the marriage partner. 
It does not give affection of the demonstrative and emotional order, but 
it makes love a duty and gives stability to the affections, which become 
permanent and enduring. If Saturn is much afflicted in this house then 
sorrow and grief may be expected in the married life. If well aspected 
the marriage partner is prudent, steady, persevering and industrious, 


THE SEVENTH HOUSE 187 


though not especially fortunate. If Saturn and the Moon are afflicted 
in the seventh the domestic happiness is spoilt. 

JuPpiTeR in the seventh house promises a good and faithful partner 
and much happiness in the marriage state, also success and gain 
resulting from marriage. It brings social advantages after marriage 
and financial prospects, the partner having independent means in which 
the native shares. | 

This position often denotes marriage to one who has been previously 
married or a partner older and more religiously inclined than the native. 
If afflicted lawsuits and litigation are threatened by this position, but 
principally when the affliction is from Mars or Uranus. Marriage is 
delayed if afflicted by Saturn and may be denied if the luminaries afflict. 
When well aspected all goes well in the marriage state, and marriage 
often turns the life into pleasant paths and favourable conditions. 

Mars in the seventh house when afflicted denotes quarrels and un- 
pleasant conditions in the marriage state. It is very unfavourable in a 
male horoscope, denoting a wife that is combative and over-forceful. In 
a female horoscope it is also evil and is somewhat disastrous to the 
husband, showing the probability of a violent death. If Mars is afflicted 
in the seventh, separation through the uncontrolled temper and passion- 
ate nature of the partner is denoted. Even when well aspected this is 
not a good position for marriage, Mars ever tending to extremes and 
excess, in affection as in other things. It is more favourable in a 
female horoscope than in a male nativity, females represented by Mars 
being far too masculine and forceful, while males represented by Mars 
express the force as energy and enterprise. Note the szgn occupied by 
Mars. 

THE Sun in the seventh house in a male horoscope denotes a proud 
but honourable partner, and progress in life through marriage. Ina 
female horoscope it is not so important unless the Sun is ‘void of 
course,’ 7.¢., makes zo aspect during its progress from its place at birth 
before quitting the sign it is in. This position causes marriage to take 
place towards middle life, and denotes happiness in the married state. 

If the Sun is much afflicted in the seventh, marriage will be delayed 
or strong opposition will be experienced. Lasting attachments and 
firm friendships are formed when the Sun occupies the seventh house, 
and when the Sun is in good aspect to the Moon or Jupiter from this 
house much domestic happiness is shown. If afflicted it is disastrous 


} 
t 


} 


188 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


according to the nature of the aspect and the position of the afflicting 
planet. 

VeENus in the seventh house promises a happy marriage; the partner 
will be attractive and pleasing and generally fortunate. ‘Venus joys in 
the seventh’ is an old aphorism, for the seventh is the house and home 
of the planet Venus. 

The afflictions to this planet must be very severe to cause unhappi- 
ness in the marriage state, though they may delay or hinder marriage; 
but the position of Venus alone is sufficient to ensure happiness, or a 
partner whose influence upon the life is beneficial. Success socially and 
financially comes after marriage and the help and assistance brought 
into it by the partner’s influence is such as to improve the whole of the 
future life of the native. If well aspected the whole of the life will turn 
upon marriage, but the best aspects will be those of the Moon and 
Jupiter, even the good aspects of Mars, Saturn and Uranus tending te 
act adversely upon the pure influence of Venus. 

MeERcuRY in the seventh house denotes a partner who is quick- 
witted, clever, and not always to be relied upon. If afflicted a life of 
bickering and wrangling is shown. If well aspected the partner will be 
shrewd, active and progressive. Marriage usually takes place as the 
result of much correspondence or travelling, and the partner is generally 
younger than the native, and may be a cousin. The fact of Mercury 
being a convertible planet renders it important that the aspects of other 
planets to Mercury be considered carefully, and also the sign Mercury 
occupies must be taken into account. When unaspected care will be 
necessary in judging the influence of Mercury in the seventh house. If 
much afflicted legal troubles in connection with marriage are shown, and 
the possibility of much worry, anxiety, and difficulty arising out of 
misunderstandings either through speech, travelling or correspondence. 

Tre Moon in the seventh house in a female horoscope denotes 
some romance in married life and a partner whose affections fluctuate. 
Unless the Moon is well aspected this is not a very favourable position. 
It should not be taken as the sole significator in a male horoscope, but 
it must be considered as an important factor in producing marriage. 

It favours early marriage, and if alone in the seventh without 
aspects marriage will probably take place between twenty-four and 
twenty-eight. The marriage partner will be fond of change and travel 
and not always constant in affection. If afflicted, it denotes tragedy or 


THE SEVENTH HOUSE 189 


an early death for the partner. The sign occupied by the Moon must 
be studied, for the Moon will be coloured by the sign it is in almost as 
much as by the aspects it receives from the planets. 


Although the seventh is principally the house of marriage, at the 
same time it also governs legal affairs, opponents, and that which is 
farthest removed from the native. It is the house of partners and 
co-workers, and, from a still higher standpoint, the house of the Individu- 
ality during the period of manifestation as contrasted with the Personality. 
The blending of these two is the true marriage, of which all unions on 
the physical plane are but material representations. 

There are several rules for judging marriage, some of which we shall 
now consider. 

The best testimony for a marriage that will be harmonious and 
successful is the interchanging of the luminaries. The Sun of the native 
in the same place as the Moon of the partner or the Moon near the 
partners Sun, is an admirable testimony of a happy union, or even a 
good aspect between the luminaries in the two horoscopes is very 
favourable. 

In male horoscopes if the seventh house and its ruler do not offer 
a clear judgment note the application of the Moon, and in a female 
horoscope the Sun. 

The ruler of the first and seventh houses should be in good aspect 
to each other; when afflicting, especially by square, disharmony and 
trouble are shown. | 

In a female’s horoscope note carefully the Sun’s application to the 
planets,—the planets to which the. Sun applies denoting the men she 
will meet, favour, become engaged to, or marry. The planet, with the 
sign that it is in, will describe the men she will meet. Do not attach 
much, if any, importance to those planets from which the Sun is 
separating. It is not advisable to recommend marriage to the man 
described by the planet to which the Sun forms an adverse aspect; but 
this may be counteracted by a good aspect between Mars and Venus, 
which always hastens marriage. Saturn afflicting Venus delays and 
hinders it, causing much trouble in love and courtship. 

The Sun’s application to any planet is very important when 
considering female horoscopes with regard to marriage. If the Sun 
applies to any aspect of Uranus or Saturn, or to both, and these two 


190 ss HOW “TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 

planets aspect each other, marriage will tend to be unhappy or unfortu- 
nate. It denotes a late marriage, if any, or an exceptional union. This 
is especially evil if the luminaries are in affliction at the same time, and 
it denotes widowhood. 

The Sun separating from a parallel of Uranus, Saturn, or Mars, is 
an unfavourable testimony for marriage, giving liability to widowhood. 
If the Sun applies to these three planets by favourable aspects it will 
denote several suitors, or more than one marriage. 

The Sun applying to the conjunction of Jupiter, and a trine aspect 
to Saturn, favours more than one union. When the Sun is in a double- 
bodied sign, either Gemini, Sagittarius, or Pisces, and makes several 
applications, more than one union is denoted. 

Similarly also both for males and females when the lord of the 
seventh or Venus occupies a double-bodied sign. 

Women’s MarriaGes: Should the Sun be between the cusps of the 
tenth and seventh or the fourth and first, women marry early in life, or 
to men younger than themselves. Should the Sun be between the cusps 
of the first and tenth or the seventh and fourth, women marry late in 
life or to men older than themselves. 

Men’s MarriaGEs: Should the Moon be oriental * or between the 
conjunction and first quarter, or between the opposition and last quarter, 
men marry early in life or to women younger than themselves. Should 
the Moon be occidental * or between the last quarter and conjunction, or 
between the first quarter and opposition, men marry late in life or to 
women older than themselves. 

With men marriage is difficult to bring about when the Moon or 


* Nore.—Oriental and Occidental. 'The above use of these terms, although © 
familiar to those acquainted with medizval writers in Astrology, may prove rather 
puzzling to others. 

The two words literally mean rising and falling, and in a general sense planets 
jn the left-hand half of the map (i.¢., in the space occupied by houses X., XI., 
XIL., I, II., HI.) are said to be oriental or rising, those in the opposite half 
(houses IV., V., VI., VII., VIII., IX.) occidental or: falling. [Latin : orior, 
oriori, to become visible, appear, arise ; occido, occidere, to fall, fall down, die or 

erish. 
i an in regard to the Sun, he is said to be oriental in houses XIJ., XI., X. or 
VL, V., IV., and occidental when in the opposite houses; the reason being that 
when the Sun has reached the seventh house cusp heis then decoming visible in the 
opposite hemisphere of the world, and when he has passed the fourth house cusp 
he has culminated and is therefore setting in that hemisphere, or falling down. 
Similarly with the Moon also.. 


THE SEVENTH HOUSE 191 


Venus is in Aries, Leo, Virgo or Capricorn, and sometimes Gemini 
owing to its duality. If these signs are cadent and afflicted by Saturn, 
it is more difficult. The Moon afflicted by Sun, and Saturn and Moon in 
the occidental side of the map, results in hindrance or delay to marriage, 
often in no marriage at all. Planets in barren signs or cadent houses, 
with much affliction, are against marriage. When the Moon isin double 
signs, such as Gemini, Sagittarius or Pisces, then more than one 
marriage is shown: note also Venus the same, or a double-bodied sign 
on the seventh. | 

The kind of partner is shown by the planet the Moon applies to. 
Thus: if the Moon applies to Uranus, little domestic comfort; to Saturn, 
a partner, grave, serious, industrious, poor, careful, laborious and some- 
times cold in temperament—if Saturn weak, then one of poor birth, ete. ; 
to Mars, one who will be masterful, bold, proud, and conceited, often 
quarrelsome and disputatious ; to Jupiter, virtuous, peaceful, harmonious, 

-etc.; to Venus, cheerful, good-looking and happy; to Mercury, clever, 
sensible and witty—but if afflicted look out for tongue, for speech will be 
quick and fluent and not always choice. 

Judge of the descriptions according to the planet occupying the 
seventh and the sign of the cusp thereof: if no planet in seventh, then 
judge by lord of sign on cusp and the sign which said planet occupies. 

The Moon in any adverse aspect to, or in parallel of declination with 
Mars will cause discord, disruption, struggles for mastery, and a great 
deal of discontent and hasty speech and quarrelling; to Uranus, separa- 
tion, sudden estrangement, unfaithfulness and extraordinary experiences. 
If either of these planets is in the seventh or in fiery signs the evil will 
be accentuated. The planets to which the Moon applies describe the 
women the native will meet, affecting or being affected, according to the 
aspects. The true partner is the one described by the planet to which 
the Moon first applies. 

Uranus in particular is a very important planet to study with regard 
to love affairs, for this planet affects the magnetism of the native when 
he comes into contact with those who have the power to influence his 
emotional nature. Where the Moon is applying to or forms any aspect 
to Uranus, the native should guard against a sudden or hasty marriage, 
as in such a case he is almost certain to meet someone after marriage to 
whom he will become attached. et 


Marriage is best consummated when Jupiter is transiting one of the 


192 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


angles. The time of marriage is seen when the significators by pro- 
gression form a complete aspect, when the luminaries are in aspect to 
Jupiter or Venus, or passing through the seventh house. In some 
horoscopes marriage is very clearly seen, in others it is difficult to 
discover. Theprogressed Moon, passing through the radical or progressed 
seventh, is sure to awaken amatory feelings on the part of the native. 


The following descriptions will apply in a modified sense where the 
planet described is ruler of the seventh house, if there be no planet 
occupying the house. 

NEPTUNE: usually signifies strange relations in the marriage state. 
clandestine attachments, seduction, or a platonic union, according to 
general tone of horoscope. Often marriage is unexpectedly delayed or 
prevented at the last moment, or an engagement from which much was 
hoped falls through. 

Uranus: is not good for partnerships and denotes trouble through 
strangers and opponents. It is as a rule an exceedingly unfortunate 
position. 

SATURN: is very evil for partnerships or litigation, and denotes 
some very persistent enemies or opponents, by whom the native loses. 
Steadiness and patience need to be cultivated. 

JupirER: should give success through partnerships, also in legal 
affairs, and gain, either directly or indirectly, through litigation. 

Mars: very unfavourable for legal disputes, denoting much loss, 
trouble and annoyance, with great difficulty in bringing litigation toa 
termination. The native is usually somewhat turbulent or quarrel 
some in disposition, and tends to get himself into trouble by truculent 
behaviour. 

Tue Sun: gives success in legal affairs, and will help the native in 
all litigation or matters in which the law may be invoked. It denotes 
opponents who will act from a sense of justice and a love of right, and 
although powerful they will act generously and with magnanimity. If 
afflicted, the opposition that the native will meet may be severe but the 
solar influence will help as well as make the opposition powerful. If 
well aspected, gain through lawsuits, and a successful issue to all affairs 
of a legal nature is shown. It favours settlement by arbitration or | 
mutual consent. 

VENUS: is very favourable for partnerships, and denotes success in 


THEYSEVENTH | HOUSE 193 


litigation if not very much afflicted; otherwise it always gives 
disappointment. 

Mercury: gives a liability to much litigation if once started ; trivial 
and petty worries and quarrels, much wordy warfare and unprofitable 
correspondence: law should be avoided altogether unless Mercury is 
well aspected by Jupiter. If afflicted this denotes much annoyance from 
opponents who are better ignored than noticed. Lawyers and solicitors 
are best avoided, especially if Mercury is much afflicted, as it denotes 
them to be incompetent or untrustworthy, and therefore likely to cause 
much trouble and loss. 

Tue Moon: not favourable for legal affairs, and shows danger of 
much loss and trouble in connection with litigation. It makes the 
native unpopular and denotes female enmity, and opposition of a public 
nature, which, if the Moon is afflicted, will bring notoriety and ill-repute. 
It will be well for the native to avoid law even if the Moon is well 
aspected, for then he would gain only fame or public notice, but would 
in all probability lose financially. | 


In considering the question of marriage it is advisable to take into 
account the indications afforded by the e/eventh house as well as those © 
of the seventh. It seems probable that good or bad aspects thrown to 
the marriage significators from planets in the eleventh house are respec- 
tively much better and much worse than from any other part of the 
map except the seventh house. Cases are known in which the marriage 
partner is born under the sign on the cusp of the native’s eleventh 
house, or under the rulership of a planet in that house. The eleventh 
house seems to have much to do with ideal attachments and the higher 
side of the love nature which is less personal. 

According to the old rules the Moon and Venus must be carefully 
considered in all cases of marriage. If tbe Moon and many planets are 
placed between the first and tenth houses or the seventh and fourth, 
then an early marriage is denoted, or in a male horoscope (if marriage 
has not taken place before middle life) men will marry women much 
younger than themselves. If the Moon is in any of the other 
portions men to marry late in life or else to women older than them- 
selves. 

If the Moon is aspected by Saturn, or if very near the Sun, 


marriage is delayed; also if the Sun and Moon are in affliction. If 
N 


194 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


the Moon is occidental and afflicting the Sun marriage is rarely 
consummated. 

Happy marriages are those where the Moon, Jupiter and Venus are 
all in good aspect, with the Sun free from affliction. 

The Moon in Gemini, Sagittarius, or Pisces points to more than one 
marriage especially if oriental, or angular. 

In a male horoscope the wife is always described by the planet to 
which the Moon first applies, for instance if to Saturn, she will be 
grave, serious, and thoughtful, if to Jupiter, cheerful and fortunate, to 
Mars, self assertive and hard to please, to Venus, good-looking and a 
pleasing companion, to Mercury, clever and sensible. In a female 
horoscope the Sun is to be taken as the Moon in a male horoscope in 
this respect. The description of the wife (husband) is that of the planet 
forming the nearest aspect to the Moon (Sun), and partakes largely of 
the sign which that planet occupies. 

If none of these rules can be applied judge well the seventh house 
and the planets aspecting the cusps. 

In FemaLteE Horoscopes the Sun, Venus, and Mars are the chief 
significators. A good marriage is made if the Sun is in good aspect to 
Mars, and Mars well placed, but if the Sun has no aspect to Mars and 
is afflicted by Saturn, then marriage is hard to find. If the Sun is 
oriental a woman marries early, or to men younger than themselves as 
already stated, but if occidental then a late marriage or to men who are 
their elders. More than one marriage is shown if the Sun is in Gemini, 
Sagittarius, or Pisces. Venus afflicting Saturn denotes trouble in the 
marriage state. 


CHAPTER XV 
Tue Eicaras House—DeEatuH, AND THE DREAM CONSCIOUSNESS 


Tuis house belongs to the triangle of fourth, eighth, and twelfth; 
which have as their correspondences Cancer, Scorpio and Pisces, ruled 
by the Moon, Mars and Jupiter. These form the watery, psychic, or 
astral subdivision of the zodiac and indicate channels through which 
influences (good or bad) may flow down upon the man from the next 
interior plane of being, as well as ways by which he may himself contact 
that plane. 

Of these three, the eighth house is generally considered to have a 
direct bearing upon death and all matters connected therewith, such as 
the goods of the dead, legacies, occupations connected with death, 
executorships, coroners, surgeons, medical officers of health, sanitary 
officers or inspectors, slaughter-houses, butchers. It also has relation 
to some forms of mediumship and occultism, generally of a practical 
executive kind. 

The sign on the cusp of the eighth house, planets in the house, or 
failing these, the lord of the house, usually indicate the kind of death 
the native will die. But it is necessary to exercise the greatest caution 
in judging this point because it is seldom that any one indication can be 
trusted if taken alone. ‘lhe influences of the eighth house must be 
considered in connection with those of the ascendant, the hyleg, and the 
health generally ; and the principles laid down in the chapter on health 
must be carefully borne in mind when considering the probable duration 
of life and date of death. Death is usually led up to by a train of evil 
directions, but before deciding that those will be fatal it is necessary to 
ascertain whether the positions at birth promised short, medium, or long 
life. Ifthe health indications at birth were good and promised long life, 
no evil directions in youth or early life will kill; but on the other hand 
if the hyleg was weak at birth a comparatively minor direction may 


prove fatal. When it has been decided that death will not occur until 
195 


196 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


middle or old age, directions involving the eighth house and falling out 
in early life may act in various ways. 

(1) The native’s health may be temporarily upset, but not to the 
point of proving fatal; and even this may not be serious unless at least 
two or three hylegiacal points (Sun, Moon, and Ascendant) are 
afflicted together. 

(2) A death may occur among the relatives or associates of the 
native. This is a very common result of these directions, but it should 
be remembered that the death will not always be in the native’s own 
family. A relative by marriage, an associate by employment, a friend, 
anyone whose death will decidedly affect the native, emotionally or other- 
wise—any of these may fulfil the direction according to the planets, 
signs and houses involved. 

(3) Or the disturbing events may occur among those affairs, other 
than death, which are governed by the eighth house. 

The following cases will prove instructive in connection with this 
point :— ) 

A gentleman born under Scorpio, with Virgo on the cusp of the 
eleventh house and Mercury in the eighth house afflicted in Gemini, 
was greatly disturbed by the death of a college companion, and was 
suddenly called upon to take a short journey to attend the deathbed. 

A gentleman whose Moon was progressing through the eighth 
house, lost a parent, and at the same time passed through some strange 
spiritualistic experiences. 

A lady, while the Sun was progressing through the eighth house 
and forming bad aspects there, was involved in long continued trouble 
and anxiety arising out of a will, and her own health was seriously 
upset. | 
A gentleman who had the Moon in the eighth house at birth, in his 
twenty-eighth year (when the progressed Moon returned to this posi- 
tion), lost by death his mother and a female friend, both very suddenly, 
and within a few days of each other. 


The death maty be judged to be by natural means unless there are 
very marked indications to the contrary. When Sun and Moon are 
both afflicted by malefics and the latter elevated, there is a probability 
of violent death, although it will need no little skill to distinguish 
between this and a sudden but natural death, such as heart disease. 


THE EIGHTH HOUSE 197 


Speaking generally, the malefics are more prominent and thie 
afflictions are heavier in cases of violent death. The malefics mixing 
their rays, especially Mars, with either Uranus or Saturn, increase the 
likelihood of suddenness or violence. Taurus and Scorpio are signs that 
act suddenly and violently when afflicted, and to a less extent Aries and 
Capricorn. When the ascendant is involved the native may be, inten- 
tionally or unintentionally, the cause of his own death; when the twelfth 
house, there may be treachery or assassination (if a violent death is 
indicated), or death may occur in a hospital, asylum, etc.; if the 
eleventh, it may happen at the residence of a friend, or through a love 
affair (especially if fifth and seventh are also involved); if the tenth, it 
may be a public death; if the ninth house, a. death while travelling, or 
when at a distance from home; and so on, according to the nature of 
the houses involved in the affliction. 

NEPTUNE in the eighth house gives liability to a very strange and 
peculiar death, possibly through trance, with some danger of being buried 
alive; or death after a long period of unconsciousness or from overdose 
of soporific drugs, etc. In some cases it denotes cremation after death, 
and when very well aspected the probability of carrying the conscious- 
ness through from the physical brain to the astral while in waking 
consciousness. This is not a good position for gain by marriage, 
although in some cases it denotes gain by a legacy or in some peculiar 
manner through others. When afflicted it denotes chaotic dreams and 
weird fancies, nightmares, ete. 

Uranus in the eighth house denotes danger of paralysis, or death 
through epileptic fits and uncommon nervous disorders. It denotes a 
death quite out of the ordinary, which is often sudden and quite 
unexpected. Unless Uranus is well aspected at birth it is likely to 
cause much worry and annoyance in connection with money that may 
be left, and usually causes the unexpected to happen with regard to 
deaths. If well aspected it may bring sudden benefits and gain through 
the marriage partner. This position arouses a keen interest in occultism 
and mystical subjects, and the native is generally absorbed in some of 
the problems concerning the after-death state. It often causes the 
native to have uncommon dreams. Uranus has a natural sympathy 
with Scorpio, and hence is not so badly placed in this house. 

SATURN in the eighth house denotes a slow and often a lingering 
death from some chronic, or long-standing ailment. When much 


198 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


afflicted fatal accidents occur and sometimes there is danger of drowning 
when Saturn occupies a watery sign in this house. If well aspected this 
position indicates a long life, and denotes death in old age from natural 
causes. This is not a good position for gain by marriage or through 
partners, neither does it promise gain by will or legacy, but generally 
disappointment with regard to any money that may be left by others. 
In some cases this position gives a deep interest in occult subjects. It 
is not good for the remembrance of dreams. 

JUPITER in the eighth house denotes a very peaceful and a perfectly 
natural death. It denotes, when afflicted, heart trouble and danger of 
death through blood poisoning, also through tumours, cancer and 
consumption. When not afflicted this is a very good position for 
finance after marriage, and generally denotes gain through a wealthy 
partner. It also gives gain by legacy, and through the deaths of others. 
It generally causes the native to take a deep interest in occult subjects, 
especially those dealing with aftcr-death states. In some cases the 
native is able to remember remarkable dreams and can often relate the 
details of impressions made upon the brain during sleep. 

Mars in the eighth house indicates a liability to a violent or sudden 
death. If much afflicted this is a very evil position, but Mars alone in 
this house will not kill the native, although the end whenever it comes 
will be sudden and after an illness of short duration or by shock or 
accident. It will be necessary to note the sign Mars occupies at birth: 
ifa watery sign there is danger of death by drowning, if a fiery sign 
death by fire or violence, if an airy sign mental affliction; when in an 
earthy sign Mars is not so evil. This position causes much trouble in 
connection with finance after marriage, either the partner is extrava- 
gant or wastes money foolishly. 

Tue Sun in the eighth shows that the middle period of life will be 
critical; and if malefics afflict, danger of violent or sudden death. If 
well aspected, the life is prolonged and vitality increased. This position 
is liable to affect the heart. Death may occur through hereditary or 
constitutional weakness, or it may be an honourable death due to some 
self-sacrifice or heroic deed. If the Moon afflicts the Sun the eyesight 
may be affected, and the health is. liable to be disturbed by malefic 
transits. Ifthe Sun is afflicted there is some likelihood of the premature 
death of the father; or of the husband, in a female horoscope: if well 
aspected, there may be money inherited from both these. 


THE EIGHTH HOUSE 199 


VeENus in the eighth house denotes a peaceful and easy death, but if 
afflicted death may be caused through pleasure, or its pursuit. If much 
afflicted kidney troubles may cause death, or diabetes and obesity or 
urinary troubles. This position promises financial gain by marriage or 
partnerships. It also denotes gain by legacy or through money that 
may be left by will or the goods of those who have passed from the 
physical into the next plane of existence. This position is favourable 
for the progress of the native at middle life or when finally settled in 
the domestic sphere by marriage or otherwise. 

Mercury in the eighth house indicates a liability to brain and 
nervous disorders, which may be either the direct or indirect cause of 
death; this is an unfavourable position if Mercury is much afflicted by 
either Mars, Saturn, or Uranus. It generally denotes the consciousness 
to be active and fully awake at the time of death, but does not appear to 
be the direct cause of death, the afflicting planet being the cause accord- 
ing to its nature and aspect. This position denotes worry in connection 
with partner’s financial affairs, and to a female difficulty in obtaining 
money from her husband, or if Mercury is afflicted, quarrels in connec- 
tion with finance. It also indicates an enquiring mind concerning occult 
subjects, and an inclination to study hidden and metaphysical problems, 

Tue Moon in the eighth house denotes a death of a more or less 
public nature, death by drowning, shipwreck, public calamity, or 
in the presence of many people. Afflicted by Mars, danger of sudden or 
violent death; by Saturn, a lingering or very grievous end; by Uranus, 
a peculiar, sudden or extraordinary death; by Neptune, tragedy, danger 
from water. Well aspected, possibility of inheritance through women, 
or by the mother’s side of the family. Some likelihood of early death of 
the mother, or of the wife (in a male horoscope). In a woman’s horo- 
scope it tends to increase the number of children, but threatens the 
death of one or more, especially if afflicted. If there is any tendency to 
occultism, this position will increase it and give practical ability for some 
form of psychism, such as clear dreaming, mediumship, etc. Every 
seventh year is apt to be a critical period for the life, especially if the 
Moon is afflicted. 


In no case should death be judged by position alone; when the 
native has passed the infantile stage, death is, in nearly all cases, 
caused by a train of evil directions. Ifthe directions occur from fiery 


200 HOW TO, JUDGE; A. NATIVITY 


and airy signs the death is more liable to be violent and sudden than 
when the affliction occurs from earthy or watery signs. 

The earthy signs are more directly connected with the physical 
body, the watery signs with the etheric double, which is the finer mould 
into which the physical was cast at birth. The fiery signs are connected 
with the vitality or vital forces, and the airy signs with the nervous 
system, the brain and the mind generally. 

The planets also have a significance apart from the sign they may be 
in. Neptune usually signifies a very mysterious death in some way. 
Sometimes the native dies in an unknown manner, or disappears and is 
never heard of again. But these are extreme cases. Uranus denotes 
sudden and peculiar deaths either through some new invention, by 
explosion, or diseases that are incurable, or where ignorance with regard 
to the ailment causes the native to have wrong treatment, etc. Uranus 
rarely kills unless very severely afflicted, and then is most probably an 
‘ndirect cause of death. Saturn, death by suffocation, falls, bruises, 
rheumatism, consumption, and all cold, wasting, and lingering diseases. 
Jupiter, death by diseases of the liver and blood, according to the sign 
it occupies. Mars, death by suicide, fever, inflammations, violence and 
accidents. The Sun when denoting death affects the vital centres such 
as the heart, etc. Venus, death by poison, wasting diseases, diabetes, 
skin disease and venereal disorders. Mercury, diseases of the brain, 
melancholy madness, and nervous disorders. The Moon denotes death 
by drowning, phlegmatic and cold complaints in which the functional 
arrangeinents are disordered. 

The sign upon the cusp of the eighth house, and the signs containing 
the majority of the planets, must have careful consideration in all 
questions of death. 

A critical period is always reached when the luminaries are in 
conjunction, square or opposition. 

Much skill is required, not only to discover the time of death, but 
also the nature of the disease causing death, and the blending of 
influences is always necessary. Saturn, Mercury and Venus are directly 
concerned with the physical body : Saturn governing the bony structure, 
the skeleton; Mercury the brain and nervous system; Venus the flesh 
and generative system. It is true that each planet governs a special 
part of the body, but in the main Saturn, Mercury and Venus are chief 
rulers of the physical conditions. 


TEE EIGHTH. HOUSE 201 


AN ILLUSTRATION 


x XI XII it II IT 
$2329 2 619 O54. I51g St7 
© )) ? ¢ 3 y h id 4 


SEE Se Od Sisk sotte Yi WoR) at «FR. Wark 

Cases of violent death are always very plainly shewn in horoscopes 
where both luminaries are afflicted by the ‘malefic’ planets. In the 
above nativity the Moon is hyleg and ruler of the horoscope of which 
Venus is part ruler, owing to her position near the Ascendant. It is 
the horoscope of a female born at 1 a.m. 8/ 8/ 30., Lat. 50.30 N and 
Long 2.30 W. She was executed for murder on the 2oth April, 1849. 

Here we find both malefics afflicting the luminaries. The condition 
of the mind is shown by the third house and the sesquiquadrate aspect 
of ) 6d &,to ¥ ¢ h- Death by violence is here clearly marked by 
the affliction of the luminaries. The Moon is much afflicted and has 
no good aspects, applying to 6 ¢6 LJ) ¥ LJ) 9 Q ®& and hk and 
separating from ( ©. The © is @ Hl and applies to no good aspects. 


CHAPTER XVI 
Tre Nints House—PHILosopHy AND TRAVEL 


Tue ninth house is the house of philosophy, the higher mind, and 
hence of all that concerns the scientific and religious attitude of the 
native. It is the house of the subjective and abstract mind as opposed 
to the objective and concrete brain mind, represented by the third 
house. The third house, representing the smaller and slower mind 
which has its range in the physical world only, also represents short 
journeys and travelling by land; while the ninth house, signifying the 
wider and less limited mind, also represents transit that is rapid, long 
journeys, sea voyages, foreign travel, etc. ‘The third house governs 
eaucation ana studies of the minor and more conventional order, the 
ninth house philosophy and deep thinking. The third is the house 
of perception and learning, the ninth the house of reason and intuition. 
The ninth house has some connection with legal matters, probably 
owing to its being governed by Jupiter in the natural order of the signs. 
It may also be taken to represent relatives of the marriage partner, and 
many conditions which lie entirely outside of the native’s immediate 
environment. 

- The ninth is a house that represents the future more than the past 
(fifth) or present (first), and in this respect it governs dreams, visions, 
prophecy, imagination and thought, also intuition and pure reason; 
these faculties are expressed in accordance with the development of the 
native, and also according to the planet occupying the house, this being, 
as In the case of all houses above the earth, more important than the 
ruler of the house itself. 


Neprune in the ninth house denotes very peculiar and generally 
psychic persons whose minds are absorbed in phenomena and strange 
theories. It is not a good position unless free from affliction; alone in 
this house or badly aspected it is likely to cause the native much trouble 


—if not in waking consciousness then in dreams or through fancies. 
Panes) 


THE NINTH HOUSE 203 


It gives a weird and uncanny tendency to the mind, which is impression- 
able, easily influenced and liable to be quickly psychologised. This 
position appears to act beneficially only when all the other evils in a 
nativity are exhausted and then froma psychic more than a material 
standpoint. 

Uranus in the ninth house depends entirely upon the composite 
horoscope, 7.¢., the horoscope as a whole. In some nativities it will 
denote inventive genius or intense love of metaphysical studies, and a 
keen delight in all occult subjects; in other nativities it will give an 
aversion to all that relates to metaphysics. There can be no worse 
position for Uranus when in opposition, square or conjunction with the 
planet Mars. If the luminaries afflict it will give a very eccentric and 
peculiar mind, much trouble through travel, law and occult arts. In 
the very advanced it denotes a highly original and progressive mind; 
in the undeveloped it denotes a ‘crank’ who does more harm than good 
with his absurd notions. 

SATURN in the ninth house denotes a studious and meditative mental 
attitude towards all higher thought pursuits. It favours the scientific 
and philosophical more than the religious mind and often causes the 
native to investigate astrology, metaphysics, and psychic studies 
generally. In the unawakened it denotes some stupidity with regard 
to higher thought questions and tends to produce self-deception, and a 
very crafty and subtle mentality. If afflicted by Mars or Uranus it tends 
to produce madness, or grave mental affliction. This is not a good 
position for voyages, travels or foreign affairs. If Saturn is in good 
aspect with the Sun from this house it denotes the true religious spirit 
and makes the native faithful to whatever causes he espouses. 

JUPITER in the ninth house is the ideal position for the philosopher 
or saint, unless afflicted, when religious fervour and devotion will take 
the place of philosophy of the metaphysical order. If afflicted: by 
Mars, a tendency to go to extremes in religious matters, also legal 
troubles and danger of shipwreck or accidents abroad ; by Saturn, self- 
deception and trouble through overstepping the bounds of reason. If in 
good aspect to the Sun, Moon or Mercury this is a splendid position for 
the higher mind, giving true intuition, and the ability to forsee clearly. 
This position brings true dreams and a very peaceful state. It is favour- 
able for travel and residence abroad, also for clerical, legal, philanthropic 

and religious affairs. 


204 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


Mars in the ninth house denotes an over-enthusiastic nature with 
regard to religious and philosophical subjects, and tends to destroy 
reason or to allow impulse and desire to overrule the mind. If much 
afflicted it gives fanatical, irregular, bigoted or sceptical opinions on 
religious matters; if well aspected a zealous and enterprising mind. 
This is not a good position unless the native is shown to exercise self- 
control, when it will probably destroy any preconceived or orthodox 
beliefs, and give liberty and freedom of thought, which will be far from 
conventional or stereotyped. Much will depend upon the sign Mars 
occupies. In the fiery signs there will be rebellious tendencies and 
over-much impulse. In the earthy signs the position is better than in 
the watery signs, but when in the airy signs there will be grave tendency 
to overstep the boundary of reason. This position gives some danger 
from voyages, travels, litigation, etc. 

Tue Sun in the ninth house denotes a very austere mind, firm and 
self-reliant, inclined to investigate scientific subjects with an unbiassed 
and clear judgment. It gives success in matters connected with the 
church and the law, and those in which the mind is engaged in higher 
problems dealing with the masses rather than the few. This position 
promises success abroad, or residence in foreign countries, also through 
travel and social intercourse. The more cosmopolitan the native, the 
greater will be the advantages arising out of this position; if orthodox 
or conventional, the position shows some tendency to become bigoted in 
religious belief, also to become proud and over confident. May rise to 
some position of responsibility in matters signified by the ninth house. 
If afflicted: by Mars or Uranus, fanatical or extreme enthusiasm in 
religious faith, legal difficulties and trouble in foreign countries; by 
Jupiter, hypocritical tendencies and poor success in religious affairs ; by 
Saturn, an over-bearing and hard mind, too imperious and full of false 
pride, which warps and hinders the progress of the native, the social 
benefits promised by the Sun in this house being considerably limited. 
If well aspected: by Mars, patriotism, courageous defence of right, and 
a great deal of righteous indignation when moved to expression; by 
Jupiter, sincere and true ideas concerning religion and a very philo- 
sophical spirit; by Saturn, a strong love of justice with a steady mind 
and power to undertake much responsibility. 

VeENus in the ninth house denotes a very refined and artistic mind, 
loving every form of mental improvement and giving a very keen appre- 


THE NINTH HOUSE 205 


ciation of all that pertains to mental culture. This position will improve 
every horoscope, for it denotes a kind and sympathetic disposition and 
real ability to help and assist others. It gives the native a love of 
music, art, high-class literature and social intercourse with intellectual 
persons. It denotes success abroad, gain through travel, also through 
shipping, yachting, boating, etc., and pleasure through these, coupled 
with a very contented disposition. If afflicted it denotes disappointment 
in connection with ideals, and creates an internal longing for the unat- 
tainable ; but very little harm will come to the native who has this 
position at birth. 

Mercury in the ninth house denotes a love of knowledge, an en- 
quiring and studious mind. Unless well aspected this position is not 
altogether favourable, but if the horoscope indicates power to concen- 
trate, the position is improved. If afflicted it denotes a tendency to 
worry, and to become engaged in too many things ai one time, also to 
wander and take aimless journeys. It causes the native to entertain 
many contradictory opinions and to waver and become far too indecisive 
for his own good. If well aspected it gives literary ability, and a keen 
appreciation of art, science, and all things which help to improve the 
mind. If unaspected it is not likely to affect the native to any marked 
degree, but in this case much will depend upon the sign it is in. 

Tue Moon in the ninth house denotes a keen imagination, a mind 
receptive to higher thought ideals, and the ability to study or understand 
metaphysical subjects. It gives a love for travel and denotes many 
changes in the life and those chiefly of a beneficial and improving 
nature. If afflicted: by Mars, affects the religious tendencies, either 
giving over-enthusiasm, or peculiar and unorthodox views; by Saturn, 
sorrow and grief through religious difficulties; by Uranus, a tendency to 
become too romantic, dreamy and visionary. If well aspected: native 
is fond of investigating new subjects, and is generally penetrative and 
very reflective; gains success through travel and takes a deep interest 
in all modern modes of transit. This position denotes an ingenious 
mind, inventive, full of plans and progressive ideas. If afflicted by the 
Sun this is an evil position, tending to cause brain troubles. 


The ninth house may be said to be the home of the metaphysical 
and occult mind in which the subconscious mental state is concerned, 


and wherein are denoted dreams and all that pertains to the intangible, 
\ 


206 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


the subjective, and the idealistic side of life. It is the house in which 
the //fe side is more in evidence than the form, through the medium of 
what may be definitely known as the Higher Mind. It always denotes 
that which is to be the unfolding of what is possible in the future, and 
all planets in this house have a higher vibration than when placed in 
any other, but particularly so far as the mind apart from the brain is 
concerned. It is true that this is a cadent house and therefore not con- 
sidered so important as the angles, but it denotes the unexpressed, the 
motive behind the act, the thought behind the speech. When it denotes 
the acts of the native’s life he will have so far advanced as to become 
a true magician, therefore the most the majority can hope to express 
from this house is speech, which is thus the true Vach, the gift of 
prophecy; the power to become clairvoyant with that clear vision which 
sees the future will be denoted by the mysterious potency which this 
house gives to planets found in it at birth. 

A very good illustration of the ninth house in connection with travel 
will be found in the horoscope of Stanley Conder, Publ in Manual 
No. 12, My Friends’ Horoscopes. 


CHAPTER XVII 
Tue Mip-HEAven or Tentu House 


Tus is the house of honour, reputation, profession, business or 
occupation, and represents the public standing or worldly position of 
the native. It may be taken as the apex of the horoscope, or that 
portion which is thrust out most prominently into the busy life of the 
world. Good and evil must both alike find expression, and culminate 
in honour or dishonour; and the culminating point is the tenth house. 
An action may be said to be the child of thought and desire, which 
are its parents. The impulse to action first arises in one of these two, 
either thought or desire; the other—whichever it may be—dquickly 
responds; but the action cannot take place until circumstances permit. 
It is conceived by the coming together of thought and desire; it then 
lies in gestation for a longer or shorter period ; and when circumstances 
are favourable, its birth as an action is a certainty. Of the innumerable 
potential actions thus conceived, a few come to birth during the present 
life and produce their effects. A very great many, however, are thwarted 
or held back by circumstances ; and because, when once conceived, their 
birth is a certainty, they are carried over by the soul into a future incar- 
nation, and there take effect as actions, inevitable and unavoidable. 
Regarded as indicative of actions, therefore, the horoscope at birth may 
be said to be the necessary outcome of those thoughts and desires that 
remained unexhausted at the death of the last personality. Present 
action is past character coming outward; present character is future 
action in the germ. Every astrologer knows that the indications of 
future actions can be detected in the horoscope of birth; and this there- 
fore becomes a clue to the thoughts and desires of the past. For 
instance, an afflicted Venus shows that the affections were selfish or 
badly regulated; and the same planet well placed and aspected indicates 
that they were unselfish and good. The cause was started in the past 
and the effect is found in the present. Mr Gladstone was born with 
the Sun and Mercury rising in Capricorn; showing in the past a mind 


207 


208 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


oving oratory and intellectual pursuits, and ambitious of power and 
distinction: and these causes, brought over into the present, resulted in 
such fated actions and inevitable events as are familiar to all. 

The abuse of any principle, power, or quality, will sooner or later 
find us labouring under the adverse side of the influence proceeding from 
the planet corresponding to that principle ; and this may either happen 
in this life or it may be delayed until the future. There are certain 
streams of living ‘essence’ on the way down towards expression in the 
lower kingdoms of nature; and there are other streams tending upward 
towards expression in the higher kingdoms. The ether is permeated 
with this ‘essence’ on these downward and upward arcs, and man can 
absorb or be temporarily influenced by either, according to his receptivity 
and his mental attitude. The world is filled with love, compassion, and 
beneficent influences from beings higher than man; but it is also 
clouded with man’s own selfish, lustful, and passionate thoughts. 
Everything ruled by the forceful, animal and downward activity of Mars 
varies sympathetically with the aspects of that planet in the zodiac; and 
on certain days this force is more powerfully present in the atmosphere 
than on others. It may be that we give way to a fit of anger, jealousy, 
envy or resentment on a day when the Moon is afflicted by Mars; and 
then the passions within are reinforced and strengthened by the influence 
without. On the return of the Moon to the same affliction, or even at 
its next aspect by Mars, we shall be liable to repeat our former action. 
This, if often recurring, becomes a definite tendency, mood, or habit, and 
even a part of ourcharacter. But, on the other hand, if the passions are 
firmly reined in, the transits of Mars and the Moon’s evil aspects to that 
planet will have no dangers for us. If we continually give way to dis- 
content, peevishness or melancholy, we shall find ourselves coming more 
and more under the influence of Saturn, until, in some future birth, 
Saturn will sit darkly in our horoscope. 

The ordinary man is generally content to drift aimlessly along, 
sometimes finding himself so fortunate as to be in harmony with the 
surrounding influences, and at other times beaten and buffeted by 
adverse storms. In each case he is slowly learning a lesson, that certain 
qualities and actions are to be cultivated and certain others are to be 
avoided. The more highly evolved man has passed through this stage 
of comparative indifference, and has entered upon another in which he 
sets himself very deliberately to avoid or control that which tends to evil, 


THE MID-HEAVEN OR TENTH HOUSE 209 


and to work in harmony with those influences which result in good 
because they proceed mediately through the great hierarchies of star 
angels and ultimately from God Himself. In doing so he knowingly 
plans his own future, rearranges his own horoscope, and controls the 
forces at work therein. 

Planets rise, culminate, and set ; and it is the culminating point, the 
mid-heaven, that is the most critical so far as planetary influence in 
worldly life is concerned. The horoscope ‘progresses’ with the lapse of 
each day after birth; and the influences concentrated in the ascendant 
are in this way elaborated, distributed, and carried round the circle of 
the heavens and enabled to produce their effects just at the right time 
and through the channel appropriate to each. 

The probability is that each horoscope is taken up afresh where 
it was laid down in the last life; so that, with certain exceptions and 
modifications, the birth horoscope represents either the progressed map 
or the death figure of the past. This has not yet been definitely proved, 
but it is the most feasible hypothesis. 


NEPTUNE in the tenth house denotes a very strange career, unless 
the native is very undeveloped, in which case it will have little or no 
effect upon the life.. It is possible to obtain benefit from this position, 
but this planet must be well aspected, and free from any affliction; 
afflicted it is likely to cause much trouble, especially affecting the honour, 
often bringing undeserved scandal. No definite statement can be made 
as to the exact manner in which Neptune will affect the native when 
placed in the M.C., or, indeed, in any other house, but when in an angle 
it is reasonable to expect its influence to affect the physical conditions 
more than the psychic or mental. 

Uranus in the tenth house denotes a chequered career, fortune 
and misfortune alternately. If Uranus is free from affliction the native 
becomes a unique character, and invents or originates a new line 
of activity for himself, breaking away from limited and conventional 
customs. This position denotes a curious life of ups and downs with 
many important changes of environment. If much afflicted the native is 
singularly unfortunate, and must make up his mind to be content to be 
a ‘failure’ in life. It is a position indicating a critical stage in the 
evolution of the native, in which the ‘root of merit’ is either firmly 


established or shaken from its centre. The native follows uncommon 
re) 


210 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


employments, has his own code of honour, and prefers to be a law unto 
himself, following the dictates of a higher law than that made by man. 
SaTuRN in the tenth house denotes a precarious condition at some 
period of life. Saturn is essentially the planet of fate, and to all who are 
born with Saturn in the mid-heaven this text may be quoted—‘ And 
Satan took Him up into a high mountain and showed Him all these 
things.’ The elevation of Saturn gives some power, pride, ambition, 
and persistent desire for material objects and worldly welfare. If well 
aspected the native will rise by his own perseverance and industry far 
above the sphere into which he was born. If afflicted, he will rise only 
to fall again, or will over-reach himself by a lack of proportion or ability 
to judge the limits to which he can expand. The affliction of the 
luminaries from Saturn in the M.C. brings dishonour or scandal, and 
many obstacles to progress; good aspects strengthen the character, but 
render progress slow and liable to interruption and delay. Saturn has 
power and dignity in the M.C., but much depends upon sign and 
aspect, for the unfolding of Saturn is proverbially slow, though sure. 
JUPITER in the tenth house denotes much success and prosperity. 
The moral standard is very high, and the native holds a very secure and 
important position at some period of his life. This is one of the best 
positions for financial and social success. If afflicted: by Mars, legal 
troubles are threatened and heavy losses at certain periods; by Saturn, 
the good influence of Jupiter in the M.C. is vitiated, and almost rendered 
nil ; by Uranus, grave reverses of fortune, and a liability to become in- 
volved in serious difficulties. Ifthe luminaries afflict Jupiter it hinders 
social success, and brings difficulty in connection with travel and changes 
of position; but when well aspected thereby much success is denoted, 
' both social and financial. This position generally shows good birth, 
and help through relatives. Jupiter has less power in airy or earthy © 
signs when in the M.C., and has chief potency in either fiery or watery 
signs, especially Sagittarius and Cancer. } 
Mars in the tenth house denotes an ambitious and masterful 
spirit. It is favourable for success in business or profession, since the 
energy of the native is able to carry him through the turbulent and 
stormy periods he will experience in the business world. The native 
does not prosper when in business for himself, unless in an occupation 
of the nature of Mars, and this planet well aspected. The animal and 
passional side of the nature is likely to override the intellectual, and 


THE MID-HEAVEN OR TENTH HOUSE 211 


impulse or feeling to be much more prominent than reason. The native 
will not escape scandal or ill-repute, whether deserved in the present life 
or not. If afflicted by Uranus, the native either becomes immoral or is 
carried away by impulse and commits some rash act. Afflicted by 
Saturn the native is vindictive, resentful, and unforgiving, or over- 
critical and sceptical. Afflicted by Jupiter, improvident and wasteful, 
or over-enthusiastic and self-deceptive. If well aspected the native is 
courageous and brave, but acts more from impulse and instinct than 
reason. 

THe Sun in the tenth house denotes honour and success in life, a 
good moral heredity, and the favour of persons of power and position. 
It gives fortune and prosperity toward the middle portion of life; right 
means of livelihood, and the ability to become independent, prosperous, 
and successful in whatever business, profession, or occupation the native 
may follow. If much afflicted it denotes arrogance and pride and 
position held under protest or by right of birth more than by right of 
merit. If well aspected distinction, authority and permanent success in 
life. This position causes the native to occupy places of trust, im- 
portant posts of honour or responsibility, which will be maintained or 
lost according to sign and aspect. It favours the vital temperament, 
governmental positions, and generally denotes good birth or favourable 
hereditary conditions. 

Venus in the tenth house denotes success in life and high moral 
stamina. It favours artistic or musical pursuits and gives general 
prosperity, also the favour and good esteem of exalted persons. The 
native has merit and ability, is generally very well disposed and succeeds 
through possessing a pleasant and agreeable manner. If in trine or 
sextile aspect with Jupiter the native will have some social distinction, 
or good reputation with great financial success at some period of life. 
If afflicted, the influence of Venus is not materially affected but there is 
a lack of opportunity to express ability. The adverse aspects of the 
Moon are not favourable to Venus, and they affect this benefic planet 
more unfavourably than the aspects of the planets, but on the other 
hand the favourable aspects of the Moon to Venus are particularly 
good. This position favours marriage, money and friendships, also 
those occupations, arts or businesses where the needs of women are 
catered for, such as milliner, modiste, fancy confectioner, etc. 

Mercury in the tenth house denotes success or failure according to 


212 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


sign and aspects. It generally gives ability to successfully undertake 
commissions and agencies, or causes the native to adopt several pro- 
fessions and undertakings. If well aspected this position denotes tact 
and a clear mind with fertility of resource. If much afflicted, cunning 
and deception, with inclination to act dishonestly or indiscreetly, the 
moral standard being sacrificed for mental interests, while tact and 
diplomacy become deceit and craftiness, according to the sign Mercury 
occupies. Afflicted by Mars, without any good aspects to mitigate, 
untruthfulness and impulsive speech are denoted; afflicted by Saturn, 
without other mitigating influences, tendencies to commit forgery and 
embezzlement. Mercury has very little dignity in the M.C. unless very 
well aspected and in a good sign. It may give fluent speech and re- 
tentive memory. | 

Tue Moon in the tenth house denotes fame and publicity, fluctua- 
tion and change in business, or occupation. Ephemeral success 
without permanent stability or assured position. If afflicted this will 
bring notoriety and scandal. If well aspected many advantageous and 
desirable changes. In cardinal signs it denotes great ambition anda 
very active life. In fixed signs more stability and perseverance, but less 
activity and change or progress. In mutable signs less fortune and more 
ability without adequate opportunity. If afflicted by Mars this position 
will bring scandal of a public nature or discredit which will injure the 
native’s future. If afflicted by Saturn, many difficulties and obstacles 
to overcome. If well aspected by Jupiter, much success and prosperity. 
Birth is generally poor or in an indifferent environment. 


PROFESSION OR EMPLOYMENT 


It is not necessary to fix the attention solely upon the tenth house 
to discover the business, profession or employment that the native will 
follow. In the present state of civilisation many persons follow profes- 
sions for which they are not qualified or naturally fitted. In such cases. 
unless able to adapt themselves to their environment and take an interest 
in the occupation followed, it is likely to be undertaken either as a 
necessary but unwelcome means of livelihood or else from merely 
sordid motives. The planet or planets in the mid-heaven will, in the 
majority of cases, denote the trade, business or profession, but when 
none are found in this part of the nativity, the houses and the signs. 
containing the majority of the planets must be carefully considered. 


THE MID-HEAVEN OR TENTH HOUSE 213 


The sixth house is especially related to a business or profession followed 
through pressure of necessity, or force of circumstances, rather than 
from choice or direct ambition. 

A Nativity with the majority of the planets in: 


Frery signs gives ingenuity and energy, and fits the native to study 
mechanics and to follow any trade or profession in which fire is a necessary 
element in the production of the goods handled, sold, or worked with. 

Arry signs denote skill in some literary occupation, scientific pursuits 
or any profession wherein the mind and brain are more exercised than the 
body. It would make the native a lawyer, writer, mathematician, 
draughtsman, designer, artist, clerk, reporter, teacher, novelist, poet, etc. 

Warery signs favour all employments in which liquid is used, from 
mineral waters to wines and spirits, or from washing clothes to sailing 
yachts. Also emotional acting, elocution, etc. 

EarTHY signs give employment in connection with buildings, mining, 
and all laborious, heavy and slow work in which time, labour and persever- 
ance are required. Virgo inclines to chemistry, Taurus to agriculture or 
finance, Capricorn to administrative or political positions, 


CarpinaL signs denote ability to take up pioneer work, to engage in 
callings that are new, inventive, and of a public nature. It fits the native 
to undertake new enterprises, and also to adopt those professions that 
require speed, ingenuity, quick wit, tact and diplomacy. It also denotes 
that the native will be aspiring and ambitious, never resting until he is his 
own master or at the head of whatever pursuit he follows. 

Frxep signs give the native ability to plod and work industriously, and 
to succeed best where he can exercise patience, endurance and quiet 
determination. It favours employment under government, civil service, 
ancient institutions, old-established businesses, and professions that are stable 
and conventional. It inclines to the medical profession, or the navy. 

Moras_e signs fit the native to become a better servant than master ; 
an agent, messenger, clerk, traveller, teacher, editor, speaker: but unless 
the nativity shows exceptional success he would do best in the employ of 
others. It sometimes denotes occupations in which uniform is worn, or 
work in institutions and public companies or where public commodities 
are dealt with. 


The task of deciding which planet, house, or sign will best signify 
the occupation is not an easy one. As has been pointed out, not only 
do many people, perhaps most, follow pursuits they find more or less 
distasteful, but some change their occupation more than once, and 
others carry on two or more lines of activity at the same time, such as 
business and politics, or business and preaching. If many plancts are 
in one sign, things signified by that house and sign are sure to be forced 
forward, but whether they will be fortunate or otherwise depends upon 
the nature of the combination, 7.e., whether it is more benefic or malefic. 


214 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


As a general rule people like occupations at which they succeed, and 
dislike those at which they fail, and whether they will do the one or the 
other depends upon whether or no benefic planets and aspects pre- 
dominate in any given combination. If there are not several planets in 
one sign, it is as well to count those in the groups of signs, cardinal, 
fixed, mutable, etc., as just given. It must be remembered, however, 
that a smaller number of planets in an angular sign (especially first or 
tenth) may outweigh a larger number in a sign not angular. The 
strongest planet in the map should be carefully considered, also that 
which is closest to the Sun or in closest aspect to the Sun; attention 
being paid to whether such planet is angular, whether it has dignity in 
tenth, or second, whether it is strong by sign and fortunate by aspect, 
and whether it is elevated or not. The consideration of signs and groups 
of signs usually gives a better indication than the planets alone, because 
these may change their nature according to sign. 

For instance, Mars in Scorpio may indicate a soldier or sailor: but 
Mars in Gemini one who fights with his mind only, a debater, political 
speaker, barrister, etc. | 

NEPTUNE appears to favour the sea in all its varied means of 
finding occupation and work. It has also to do with spiritualism, 
psychism, etc. In regard to business, those interested in the cotton 
industry are, it is said, frequently found to have this position at birth. 

Uranus fits the native to follow uncommon and original pursuits, 
to study inventions, reconstruct, and undertake new and improved 
methods, to create new professions or adopt unique plans of work, etc. 

SATURN fits the native to undertake grave responsibility, also to 
follow pursuits that require deep study or patient planning; architects, 
land surveyors, contractors, miners, builders, holders of public positions 
and offices, municipal or state officials, etc., are signified by Saturn. 

JUPITER gives success as merchants, physicians, lawyers, ministers, 
bankers, and persons in whom much trust and confidence are placed, 
also in all employments of a lucrative and fruitful nature in which other 
people’s money is principally concerned, such as trustees, stockbrokers 
and money-changers, etc. 

Mars, employments and professions in which muscular energy is 
necessary, hazardous and skilful occupations in which there is always an 
element of risk and danger ; such as soldier, surgeon, dentist, worker in 
metals, chemist, engineer, sailor, agitator, etc. 


THE MID-HEAVEN OR TENTH HOUSE 215 


THE Sun will give love of power, with ability to rule and command, 
and will fit the native for government employment and professions or 
business to which much dignity and honour are attached. 

Venus, refined and artistic occupations and all business directiy 
concerned with females, adornment, finery, jewellery, amusements, 
pleasure, luxury, etc. 

Mercury, literature, agencies, clerical work, and all employments 
requiring study, skill, and ingenuity. 

Tue Moon will give ability in business or employments of a 
fluctuating and changing nature, such as a seafaring life or travelling 
about from place to place, from hawking goods to advertising on the 
largest scale, dealing in novelties, etc. 

In addition to the ruler it is necessary also to note the planet in 
closest aspect thereto, and also to pay special attention to the planet 
Mercury, which as ruler of the mental faculties has a very important 
influence over the business abilities and chances of success. 

Mercury in conjunction with Uranus will cause the mind to be 
more inventive and will bring the mental conditions to those of Uranus. 
When partaking of Saturn’s nature there will be more organising power 
and ability to manage others, also to study deep and grave subjects 
such as chemistry, science, etc. When partaking of Jupiter’s nature, 
philosophical tendencies, and ability to put the mind into profitable 
undertakings. When partaking of the nature of Mars the wit is 
sharpened and the profession is more of the commercial and enterprising 
type. The following hints will be serviceable. 


EMPLOYMENTS DENOTED BY MERCURY’S ASPECTS 


ttt 4. Inclines towards some pursuit of an artistic nature, where the 
zsthetic instincts can have full play. There is usually ability for either music or 
painting. 

ut JA. Similar to conjunction, but influence not so marked. 

#0],9. This is rather a deceptive influence, and natives will be vague or 
nnpractical, or, worse still, deceitful. They usually have certain fundamentally 
wrong notions. Subtle and plausible, full of schemes. 

Hi ¢. Inventors, novelists, lecturers, patent agents, electricians, magnetic 
healers, mesmerists, astrologers and psychologists. 

Hix<,A. Metaphysicians, advanced scientists, chemists of the progressive 
order. Investigators, explorers, teachers, divines, and world reformers. 


Hydropaths. 


216 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


HIT] 2. Hypnotists, antiquarians, dealers in antiquities and curiosities, 
astronomers, reporters, sensational novelists and those who are oddities, 
eccentrics and cranks, generally having distorted views and notions. 

h 6. Organisers, managers, solicitors, government officials, stationers, 
surveyors, detectives, and those who follow secretive and diplomatic occupations. 

h»,A. Architects, builders, contractors, lawyers, scientists, mining 
engineers, coal merchants, geologists, and those whose employment requires care, 
skill, and sound judgment. 

hO,¢. Bookbinders, printers, carpenters, potters, bricklayers, miners, 
and those who labour with body as well as mind, particularly with the hands and 
brain combined, such as dyers, etc. 

Y% 4. Munisters, ambassadors, judges; councillors, merchants, philosophers, 
and those who exercise judgment and combine the social element with the 
mental, feeling and thinking. 

4<¢,/\. Barristers, bankers, town councillors, government officials, and 
all those who occupy posts of trust, distinction and honour employing their 
minds for social welfare and the common good. 

YO, . Clothiers, provision dealers; drapers, upholsterers, officers, and 
those who cater for the public, or who hold the lower government offices, where 
unpleasant duties are performed. 

& 6. Sculptors, carvers, artists in wood, engravers, cricketers, footballers, 
wrestlers, strong men, mechanics, soldiers, etc. 

6 ,2¢Z\. Chefs, stewards, publicans, and those who attend to the tastes of 
others. It also denotes surgical instrument makers, and all who combine skill 
with mental and muscular work. 

60],¢. Butchers, cattle-men, tanners, masons, labourers, iron workers, 
and those who may be skilful, but have to follow coarse and low callings, in 
which grime and dirt play a prominent part, such as scavengers, lavatory 
attendants, etc. 

° $. Musicians, painters, artists, speakers, and those who minister to the 
minds of others. Somewhat similar to the conjunction with Neptune. 

© These act largely through the sign and house in which they are 

do} \ placed. 


Each ruler may be joined with other planets, and combinations 
made according to the ingenuity of the student. Practice will suggest 
many occupations which will appeal to the native. Do not judge 
forgers, or those who live by sharp practice or by their wits, unless % is 
afflicted by both ¢ and h without any signs of moral stamina in other 
directions. Saturn and Mars will make the employment more practical 
and laborious than Jupiter or Venus, but at the same time the whole 
horoscope must be well weighed before a definite and decisive opinion 
can be given. 

As a general significator of avocation, Saturn, being the ruler of 
Capricorn, the natural tenth house in the order of the signs, is important 


and should have a very careful consideration. 


’ CHAPTER. XVIIf 
Tue ELeventH House—Frienps, Hopes and WISHES 


Tuts house is that of friends, acquaintances, hopes, wishes, aspira- 
tions. It belongs to the triangle of the seventh and third houses, and 
has a great deal in common with both of these. By secondary influence 
it stands to the seventh house as the fifth stands to the first ; that is, it 
is the fifth house of the marriage partner, and therefore has to be taken 
into account when considering questions concerning children and the 
other affairs of the fifth house. Taken by itself, free from affliction, it 
may be considered a benefic house, as its natural tendency seems to be 
towards good fortune, pleasure, happiness and prosperity; and benefics 
in this house or planets well aspected will benefit the native, socially or 
otherwise, and lift him up in the world, according to the nature of the 
planet. It has a great deal of sympathy also with the tenth house; and 
is often found containing strong or fortunate planets in the horoscopes 
of persons who are prominent in politics, in municipal affairs, or who in 
business matters are concerned with the many rather than the few, 
through factories, companies, associations, stores, societies, etc. 

Its connection with the seventh house is shown in the fact that, in 
some cases, as alluded to in Chapter XIV, the lover or marriage 
partner is more accurately described by the eleventh house than by the 
seventh, as it stands for friendships that may end in marriage. But as 
a matter of fact, any house under consideration should be judged along 
with the other two that are in trine toit. For instance, if the eleventh 
house is examined in a question concerning friends, its relation to the 
seventh will show open friends, and to the third, secret or private friends 
Good aspects between planets in these three houses or between their 
rulers are extremely fortunate in the matters governed by them; the 
affairs signified are strengthened and benefited greatly ; friends will hold 
firmly to the native and he will have pleasure and good luck through 
them, his family ties will be strong and fortunate, and marriage will 
benefit him socially. 


217 


218 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


Any planet in the eleventh house, whether good or bad, has some 
significance in connection with the class of persons the native will be 
likely to meet as friends or acquaintances; but if bad aspects prevail 
the acquaintanceship will be followed by trouble. For instance, if 
Mercury is in the eleventh, writers, literary people, learned persons, and 
those born under Mercury or its signs will bulk largely in the native’s 
life. If Venus, musicians, artists, actors, etc.; and those born under 
Taurus and Libra; and many pleasant friendships and acquaintances 
will be made in social life. When there is no planet in the house, the 
sign on the cusp will often indicate the class of persons with whom the 
native will come in contact as acquaintances, and the position of its ruler 
must therefore be taken into account also. But asarule the influence 
of this house is lessened when there is no planet in it. 


NEPTUNE in the eleventh house denotes unfavourable attach- 
ments, which rarely produce any lasting or satisfactory friendship. If 
much afflicted there is serious trouble and danger from friends and 
acquaintances. It signifies unique friendships, good or bad. 

Uranus in the eleventh house denotes peculiar and remarkable 
friendships ; the native will meet with those who will either benefit or 
injure him considerably. Sudden and unusual attachments will be 
formed, and also sudden and unexpected estrangements. Much will 
depend upon the aspects formed by Uranus, also the general planetary 
positions, Uranus will denefit the native if he is able to respond to its 
vibrations, for this planet has more affinity with the eleventh house than 
with any other of the twelve. In one case it brought a fortune toa 
nurse who attended a sick man on a battlefield, although it gave her 
a serious disappointment through a drunken lover. It requires great 
skill to judge the true influence of Uranus. 

SATURN in the eleventh house shows few friends, and these are 
liable to forsake the native, or give him advice rather ilian practical 
help; still the native will have a few faithful friends amongst those 
older or more thoughtful than himself, and if Saturn is well placed this 
will prove of real service to him. 

This is an evil position if Saturn is afflicted by the Sun, Moon or Mars. 
If in the Cardinal signs failure is denoted, and probably ruin through 
acquaintances. If in Fixed signs, the early part of the life is subject 
to much delay and hindrance. In the Common signs, the native rarely 


THE: ELEVENTH’ HOUSE 219 


achieves his ambitions. This is not a good position for marriage, 


7 


relatives or superiors. 

JUPITER in the eleventh house denotes many true and fortunate 
friends, by whom the native will always benefit. This position gives a 
love of social life, and causes the native to do much that will bring him 
friends and helpers. If in conjunction or good aspect with: 


ttt Mystical acquaintances and friends. Sometimes indicative of great 
wealth. 

Hi Remarkable enlightenment and assistance by means of religious, 
philosophic or highly-connected people, or occultists. 

A lasting attachment, from which much good will come. 

If afflicted by this planet, a lawsuit ; whereby the native will gain or 
lose according to the general tendency of the horoscope. 

Denotes fame and renown to the native, bringing very distinguished 
and honourable friendships. 

Much intuition and splendid judgment. 

Many benefits through travel and the public generally. 


eae G) Os 


In the Fixed signs Jupiter in the eleventh house denotes pride and 
egotism ; in Cardinal signs, enterprise and progress; in Mutable signs, 
religious and domestic experiences. 

Mars in the eleventh house shows few real friends, but several 
acquaintances whose influence upon the native is notin any way likely 
to add to his reputation. If Mars is in a watery or airy sign this 
position denotes friends who will turn enemies. [If afflicted by: 


ttt Dipsomaniacs or very questionable characters. 

Hi Very tragic and fateful friendships. 

h_ Violence or grievous injury. 

If afflicting Jupiter, lawsuits and financial loss through friends. If 
Mars is strong by sign and aspect, but not the ruling planet, the native’s 
friends will overrule and dominate him, and their advice will tend to 
bring about his ruin: it is an unfavourable position unless the horoscope 
denotes a considerable amount of mind control. ; 

THE Sun in the eleventh house is a favourable position. It gives 
the good-will of elders, superiors, masters, those who are more powerful 
or of higher rank or standing than the native. If in business, he rises 
through association with these and benefits by them, even though they 
may not be his friends in the sense of manifesting affection for him. If 
in some profession or public occupation he is likely to rise in the same 
way and be a man of some note. Socially it gives some degree of 
ambition, ostentation, respect for dignitaries, superiors, and the fashions 


229 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


and customs of good society. The native will gain in reputation and 
esteem through his friends; will make the acquaintance of prominent 
people and those who hold important posts; will have definite ambitions 
and desires, and—if well aspected—sufficient strength of will or good luck 
to carry them out. It is a good position for material welfare and general 
prosperity, for increase of reputation, and for the holding of public 
appointments or positions of responsibility. It generally denotes a 
loyal mind and honesty of purpose, with a sense of self-esteem, 
dignity, superiority and worth, and gives success about middle life or 
soon afterwards. 

VENUS in the eleventh house denotes much gain and help through 
friends, whose desire will be to forward the interests of the native, and 
who will help him by thoughts of kindness and goodwill, as well as by 
action. The planets aspecting Venus are important. If in conjunction 
or good aspect with: 


© Gain and prosperity through friends, especially women. 
) Love of pleasure, society, amusements, popularity. 


If applying to the conjunction of: 


ts A very remarkable love affair or attachment, where extreme disparity of 
age or other unusual features exist ; platonic love. 

Hi A romantic and extraordinary love attachment, the result of some great 
fascination. 

A fatalistic and very sad attachment. 

Great joy and happiness through friends. 

Passionate attachments and impulsive affections. 

Danger of deception through clever men. 


1X OA 2 


If afflicted by Mars or Saturn, unfortunate friends. But no harm 
will ever come to this native through his friends unless he is inclined to 
go to excess in pleasure and indulgence. | 

Mercury in the eleventh house denotes friends who appeal to the 
mind more than the feelings, also in a general sense those who are 
younger than the native; but if afflicted, deceitful and false friends are 
shown. The sign Mercury occupies will show the nature of the friends. 
When in: 


Quarrelsome and assertive acquaintances. 
Dogmatic and stubborn yet faithful friends. 
Clever and accomplished friends. 

Peculiar attachments to inferiors. 

Noble friendships and much help from others. 
Learned friends who are clever and well disposed. 


msahnas 


THE ELEVENTH HOUSE 221 


Artistic friendships and good acquaintances. 
Treacherous and mischievous acquaintances. 
Friends showy and clever but shallow. 
Crafty and untrustworthy acquaintances. 
Faithful and sincere friendships. 

Talkative and inquisitive acquaintances. 


KAS | 


The native should be careful not to become surety for others if 
Mercury is afflicted, especially if by Jupiter. 

Tue Moon in the eleventh house, if fairly well placed and aspected, 
gives a large number of acquaintances, either of a social and domestic 
character, or among the general public, equals, and inferiors: more 
acquaintances than friends in fact. It is good for family life and for the 
sociable and domestic side of the nature, giving ability to fraternise and 
mix easily with other people: it is also good for the native’s children. 

It is necessary to note the sign that the Moon occupies when in this 


house, also the nature of the aspects formed. When in: 

1 Romances and adventures in connection with friends. 

% Intrigues and sensuous acquaintances. 

11 Dual attachments, friendly disposed relatives. 

95. ©6F riends in the domestic circle, strange experiences. 

Q, Ardent affections, poetical and idealistic friends. 

ty Peculiar friendships, attachment to inferiors. 

== Marriage to a friend. It favours platonic unions. 

Mm Secret attachments, fatal attachments, tragedy. 

Loyal friendships, gain through attachments. 

v8 Inconsistency and deception amongst acquaintances. 
ss Varied friendships, faithful attachments. 
€ 


Hospitable friends, mediumistic acquaintances. 

If the Moon is afflicted by Mars or Saturn sorrows and losses through 
friends will occur. 

_ Although the eleventh house in general represents friendships, yet 
these are not to be judged exclusively from this house, for the horoscope 
of another may so blend as to produce a lasting friendship that is not 
wholly shown by the eleventh house. The luminaries in favourable 
accord in two nativities will produce sympathy, while if, moreover, 
the ascendants be in good aspect to one another a lasting and firm 
friendship will result; again, acquaintance will ripen into friendship if 
in two horoscopes the ruling planets are in favourable aspect to each 
other. 

Friendships will occur between two persons when the ruler of one 
transits the ascendant of another. Saturn’s transits will bring friends 


are HGW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


wlio are older than the native and whose influence will be according to 
the nature of the aspects formed. 

Jupiter will bring friendships arising out of religious or social inter- 
course, and which are likely to be both pleasant and beneficial. Mars 
and Venus friendships awaken the emotional side of the nature and, if 
between opposite sexes, lead to amours or attachments in which the 
feelings or passions are aroused. In all friendships Venus will be the 
planet most affected, by its own position, and by the planet which in 
another horoscope occupies the same place; for Venus is the planet of 
union and of communion. 


tt being a negative planet of the nature of Venus herself, is most affected 
by its opposite, Mars, and often produces a strong sympathy or 
affinity of a remarkable character, if only the senses are not allowed 
free rein. 

HI will cause strange romantic attachments which do not always end 
happily, unless there is great self-control, the feelings being very 
violently affected, 

}, will cause affinity through some sorrow, fatalistic tendency, or ties 
connected with the past, which will steadily cool the affections, 
bringing them to a critical stage from which grave issues will spring. 

will bring social affinity and friendship through hospitality. 

will produce a strong attachment in which feeling and emotion are 
chiefly concerned ; but this chiefly in opposite sexes. 

in one horoscope on the place of Venus in another will produce a happy 
and pleasurable friendship. 

will give affinity in music, art, or mental intercourse. 

in one horoscope will have a similar effect, tending to make friendship 
more permanent and lasting. 


Wx Gy Oe 


Mars on the place of Venus will produce magentic attraction in which 
the senses will sooner or later play a prominent part, while Saturn on 
the place of Venus will produce a mental fascination, in which the mind 
will play a more prominent part than the senses. 

If the benefic planets are in sympathy in two horoscopes friendship 
and true affinity will result, but if the malefic planets are in adverse 
aspect in two horoscopes then enmity or discord will be the outcome of 
acquaintanceship. Similarly with the luminaries, according as they 
are aspected either by benefics or malefics. 

In this way friends or enemies may be judged from the nativity by 


noting the planets in aspect to the Sun or Moon. Saturn afflicting © 


either will denote trouble and probably sorrow from persons older than 
the native, or who are of the nature of Saturn (according to the sign it 


—— 
: 
_— 


THE ELEVENTH: ROUSE 223 


is in at birth). Mars afflicting the luminaries will denote trouble and 
pain through martial persons, according to the sign and house in which 
Mars was placed at birth. | 

The following case will illustrate this, showing how fate will punish 
by affinity. A lady who has Saturn elevated above all the other planets 
in the sign Cancer in the mid-heaven, and afflicting her ruling planet, 
has all her life (now fifty years) suffered through the influence of her 
father, and the weaker he became (h in SS) the more acutely did she 
suffer. The bond of affection between them was the Sun in the father’s 
horoscope on the place of the Moon in his daughter’s nativity. They 
were alternately attracted and repelled—loving and hating each other 
at intervals. 

Careful judgment will reveal all enemies to be overcome, by the 
position of the malefics, and the aspects they form to any of the planets 
in the nativity. It is always safe to consider true friends to be shown 
where the benefics in one horoscope occupy the place of the luminaries 
or ascendant in the other, and, similarly, enemies by the malefics. It is 
also important to notice that those who are seeking to rule their stars 
overcome their enemies by /ove, and ever seek to return good for evil; 
but in the less evolved this will not be the case. 

In regard to attractions between two individuals—more especially, 
perhaps, between those of opposite sex-—it must be remembered that 
Nature is ever seeking to supply deficiencies and to counterbalance 
excess. Hence, any given native, or any given portion of a horoscope, 
will always be most strongly attracted by his or its ofposie, even as the 
seventh house is opposite to the first. We must therefore expect to find 
the greatest attraction between opposite planets: thus, Mars will attract 
Venus, and wee versd; Saturn, Jupiter; the Sun, the Moon; and so on. 
Not only so, but one nativity, as a whole, may attract another as a whole, 
although there may be no specific points of contact discernible. For 
instance, when one nativity shows a strong predominance of the Martial 
and Jupiterian characteristics, however these may be displayed,—by the 
two planets rising, or in reception, or by Martial and Jupiterian signs 
being prominent,—such a person will be strongly attracted to one whose 
nativity shows a marked excess cf the Venusian and Saturnian qualities. 
And such an attraction, being more general than particular in its nature, 
is likely to prove more lasting and deeper in its effects than such as are 
signified merely by the sympathy of one pair of planets. 


so HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


In this, as in all other departments of Natal Astrology, it is ever 
necessary to keep a watchful eye upon the horoscope as a whole, when- 
ever concentrating special attention on any detail. But the above con- 
siderations will throw light on many problems of mutual attraction that 
are likely to come before the student, and which may puzzle him because 
the cause of the attraction is not immediately apparent. 

It must be remembered that Nature is greater than Man, and has 
her own problems to solve, which are more important than his, and that 
she works more largely by generals than by particulars. Thus, when it 
becomes necessary that the custom of inter-marriage in a clan or tribe 
should be broken up, some individual will be found powerfully attracted 
to one outside that clan or tribe, and the whole weight of tradition, 
custom, and tribal prejudice, with its weapons of disinheritance and 
ostracism, will be found powerless to prevail against this new attraction. 
Instances of this kind, of course, are comparatively rare, but they serve 
to show that Nature, ‘ever careful of the type,’ cares nothing for 
individual interest or prejudice. 

This is a fitting place to state the fact of there being seven distinct 
types of individuals in the world, each type being directly or indirectly 
connected with its own planetary ray, all persons thus being more or 
less influenced by the planetary spirit to whom they belong. And until 
this truth is recognised, and the fact known that although we are all one 
in essence as ‘ Divine Fragments,’ yet all are ‘coloured’ differently, there 
must continue to be sympathies and antipathies. This accounts for the 
pronounced Martial types having very little sympathy for the Saturnine 
types, and vice versd. It is difficult for the unevolved to understand 
that it is the decree of Nature te produce distinctions for purposes of 
evolution, and until the Jaw of magnetic vibration is understood this law 
will continue to distress many other wise well-disposed folk. Hatred is 
often the result of magnetic conditions affecting each person discordantly, 
while on the other hand affinities expressing true friendship are those 
produced by the rhythmic interblending of the rays, resulting in 
harmonious vibration. 

The value of Astrology is here demonstrated, for true friendship is 
rarely found when the planets Mars or Saturn in one horoscope are 
found upon the luminaries or the planets Jupiter and Venus respectively 
in another; thus :— Saturn on Sun or Venus, Mars on Moon or Jupiter. 


If it should be found impossible to agree with those who are vibrating 
} 


THE ELEVENTH HOUSE 225 


differently or discordantly, it is always best not to force the friendship, or 
serious consequences in the end will surely result. Cultured and refined 
persons often sacrifice themselves, and make great effort in seeking to 
harmonise themselves with others with whom they find themselves in 
antipathy. In many cases, however, this antipathy is a true safeguard 
and a protection, and it is therefore rarely wise to force the good feeling 
until the time is ripe to blend the magnetism. This time will come, for 
‘to understand all is to pardon all.’ 


CHAPTER XIX 
Yur Twectrtra House—rTHE “Houser or Srerr-Unporne’ 


THE twelfth house is generally supposed to be the house of sorrow, 
enemies, imprisonment and misfortune. This is probably owing to its 
being one of the houses belonging to the psychic trinity; and, as the 
cadent houses of that triangle, it is the least fortunate of the three. 

Before concluding our consideration of the twelve houses it will be 
as well if we analyse the value of the cardinal, succedent, and cadent 
houses. By doing so we shall obtain a clearer understanding as to why 
the twelfth house should be thought so very unfortunate. 

The Cardinal houses or ‘Angles’ represent the physical body, and 
all that is expressed by action in the outer or external world; they are 
quick, acute, active, energetic, open. They concern the head chiefly. 

The Succedent houses are less physical and material in their nature, 
being more in sympathy with the feelings and emotions. They govern 
principally the trunk of the body, and the heart is thus affected more 
than any other part. These succedent houses are not as plainly expressed 
in the outer or physical world as are the cardinal houses, but they are 
more closely related to the inner strength of the character. 

The Cadent houses are the least expressed of any signs; they 
govern the mind and thought more than emotion or action, and are more 
closely related to the /imbs of the body than the other signs. 

In the mutable signs we may trace the birth of thought and intel- 
lectual conceptions apart from worldly knowledge or practice; therefore 
all influences connected with the mutable signs are, more or less, latent. 
The third, sixth, ninth and twelfth signs in the order of the signs are 
common or mutable signs and in the order of the twelve houses are the 
‘cadent’ houses; these are ‘unfortunate,’ owing to their latency or 
lack of practical external expression. 4 

In Natal Astrology, influences coming from these cadent houses are 
often accompanied by lack of opportunity and inability to bring practical 
worldly success or reward, no matter how great the merit or skill, I¢ 


226 


a 


THESTWELE TH HOUSE 227 


other words, they lack power. In the succedent houses and signs there 
is more power, but it is sometimes silent power awaiting favourable 
expression; while in the cardinal signs and houses whatever power or 
merit there is in the native is expressed. Now in common with the 
other houses, the twelfth house may be either fortunate or unfortunate, 
but only with regard to that which the house denotes. But, for the 
reasons stated, when afflicted it is most unfortunate. 

The fourth house denotes psychic power, which will become 
occultism, ‘white’ or ‘black’ according to the status or development of 
the native psychically or spiritually. The eighth house is related to the 
astral world, in which psychic feeling is intensified after the death of the 
physical body. ‘The twelfth house is related to the psychic mind, in 
which receptivity or mental sensitiveness to the unseen worlds is 
awakened ; therefore it is known as the house of self-undoing, which in 
some cases may mean the breaking up of the concrete physical condi- 
tion by a leaning toward the occult side of things. The twelfth house, 
then, may denote sorrow in matters of an external or purely physical 
type; trouble and difficulty in matters of an emotional character; — 
annoyance, worry and anxiety in matters intellectual or mental—but in 
this relation it may also bring joy and peace. It is the house of the 
voluntary recluse as well as of the pauper, the invalid and the prisoner. 
It is also the house of enemies, or may show the native to be his own 
worst enemy.* It is the most mysterious of all the twelve houses. 

NEPTUNE in the twelfth house exerts an influence which is very 
difficult to foresee when good, or to guard against when evil. When 
afflicted, the native is in danger of all sorts of secret enmity, underhand 
conduct from others, and treachery. When well aspected he benefits 
through affairs that are kept secret, and through matters that even his 
friends do not suspect; its influence is then good for all secret concerns 
and occupations, detective work. private agencies, etc., as well as for 
occultism. This is not altogether a bad position for Neptune, being 
related to the sign Pisces, with which this planet has much sympathy. 

Uranus in the twelfth house is unfavourable for all except those 
who are inclined to act from occult or from psychic motives, in which 
case it favours mysterious, romantic, and out-of-the-common actions. 
For those who have unfortunate horoscopes it is evil, denoting confine- 


_ * This may be generally judged when the same sign is on cusps of both twelfth 
and first. 


228 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


ment in hospitals or public institutions, etc., and threatening somewhat 
similar dangers to those indicated by Saturn in this house. If much 
afflicted there may be trouble or danger from psychic sources, and the 
native may lose money or reputation, or both, if he follows a Uranian 
eccupation. He should be very careful as to his methods of investigating 
psychic matters. 

SATURN in the twelfth house denotes one who is very reserved and 
fond of solitude, with strong inclinations to become a recluse. It is an 
unfavourable position for all save those who love to work in secret and 
live by themselves. If much afflicted the native easily makes enemies, 
and may suffer imprisonment or enforced confinement at some period of 
his life. If afflicted by: 

HI Persistent enmity of powerful persons, loss of honour and reputation, 

social degradation. 


dg Danger of suicide or other tragic end. 


© or ) Sorrow through death of loved ones, and a tendency to despond 
and suffer from melancholia. 
% Danger of hypochondria or mental delusions. 


The good aspects in this position give acquisitiveness and a love of 
secretly hoarding money. 

JUPITER in the twelfth house denotes success in occult studies, and 
a respect for the sacred and ancient beliefs. It also gives success ina 
quiet and mysterious manner of which the general public are unaware. 
It enables the native to gain either directly or indirectly through his 
enemies, or to turn them into friends, even against their will. This 
position gives dual love affairs; or some peculiar experience in connec- 
tion with the affections which is evidently beneficial to the native. It 
will bring success toward the middle or latter portion of the native’s life, 
and tends to bring him secret aid and help from good friends, even when 
afflicted. It makes him charitable and philanthrophic and willing to 
help others. It is good for physicians, clergy, officers of public institu- 
tions, hospitals, etc. The native is benefited through the philanthropy 
of others and by public institutions. It is unfavourable when Jupiter is 
in Scorpio or Virgo. 

Mars in the twelfth house denotes strange and unfortunate adven- 
tures, in which grave dangers to the native are to be apprehended if he 
is shown to act more from impulse than reason; to decide this the 
position and aspects of Mercury must be studied. The native is liable 
to false imprisonment, treachery through misplaced affection, and 


THE TWELFTH: HOUSE 229 


injuries from enemies. In some cases this position denotes poverty, or 
a difficulty to make headway, especially if Mars is placed in Libra or 
Pisces. Those having this position would do well to avoid spiritualistic 
seances, mediumship, etc., for there may be danger of obsession. If 
afflicted by: 

}Hd1_ Detention in an asylum ; tendencies to violence. 

hs Imprisonment is shown. 


Y% Ruin financially and socially. 
) A sad end to the life. 


The good aspects of the Sun and Venus improve this position; but 
it is more unfortunate than favourable, unless Mars rules the fourth, in 
which case the native may create his own dignity. 

Tue Sun in the twelfth house denotes that one-third, if not more, 
of the native’s life will be unfortunate and liable to obscurity; but from 
misfortune and sorrow he will rise to success, principally by his own 
efforts. He will have strong leanings towards the occult and psychic 
side of life, will be estranged from his parents, and will be one apart 
from his family. If the Sun is afflicted by Mars, Saturn or Uranus, the 
whole life will be one of sorrow and affliction, but if well aspected by 
Jupiter or Saturn the native will be capable of much self-sacrifice and 
endurance. Care must be taken to note the sign the Sun occupies; if 
in a watery sign the mediumistic tendencies are accentuated. Sorrow 
through things indicated by the sign generally comes to the native. 
Thus, when in: 

Trouble through persons in authority, and tragedy. 
Occult ability, indirect gain through secret enemies. 
Misfortunes through relatives and in travel. 

Gives a keen interest 1n all occult studies. 

Secret love affairs, trouble through the opposite sex. 
Psychic tendencies, a love of magic and phenomena, 
Painful separations, loss of honour and credit. 
Powerful enemies, long voyages, a tragic end. 
Sorrow through death of loved ones, enemies. 
Misfortune in marriage and in love affairs. 


Occult tastes, keen intuition, ill-health. 
Strange enemies, fondness for spiritualism. 


na tee Eee eas ae a 


The Sun gives faith, and generally denotes faith in matters con- 
cerning the house in which the Sun is placed. If the Sun is not afflicted 
by the Moon, the native generally emerges from obscurity and makes 
the latter part of the life very eventful and fortunate; but all persons 


230 ' HOW TO! JODGE AO NATIVITY 


born with the Sun in the twelfth house are more or less eccentric, or 
possess uncommon tastes and inclinations. 

VENUs in the twelfth house inclines to romance, and denotes obscure 
or clandestine love affairs. The native will be involved in a strong 
attachment, which will escape the notice of others unless the planet 
Venus is afflicted by Mars or the Moon; if well aspected, a fortunate 
love affair will lend interest to the native’s life. This position often 
causes an early marriage, but brings the native into contact with those 
who may have power to influence the affections after marriage; where 
Venus is afflicted by Saturn, divorce or separation will result as the out- 
come of this second attachment, but if well aspected the native has the 
power to love unselfishly, and will do much for those heloves. This is 
a dangerous position if Venus is in either Scorpio or Capricorn, and also 
in some cases, when in Aries or Cancer. 

Mercury in the twelfth house denotes a peculiarly subtle mind, one 
loving risks and dangerous adventures of a secret nature ; if well aspected 
the native has ability for occultism, and is well able to investigate 
mysteries or to follow unusual modes of thought. If afflicted, the native, 
although possessed of undoubted ability, will lack opportunity ; in fact 
this position usually gives efficiency and practical knowledge which it is 
found difficult to express. In many cases the native underrates his own > 
powers and is sadly lacking in self-esteem and this, if Mercury be afflicted 
by Mars or Jupiter, will lessen his conscientiousness. The sign Mercury 
occupies will considerably modify its influence. 

Tue Moon in the twelfth house denotes a life in which restrictions 
and limitations play a prominent part. This is the ideal position for a 
monk or nun, a hospital surgeon or nurse, for it favours all out-of-sight 
sympathy or work. The native will either carry the secret of another, 
or have some secrets of his own which would injure him if known to 
others. This position gives a love of occultism, mystery or romance. 
Unless the Moon is very well aspected it is not good, causing the native 
to be lacking in firmness or stability of character and hence far too 
easily led by others ; it somewhat inclines to mediumship or interest in 
spiritualism. If under any spell of the opposite sex, he or she will be 
indiscreet in love affairs and inclined to allow the senses to dominate the 
reason; this causes the native to act foolishly, and to suffer financial loss 
thereby. If the Moon is afflicted by Mars or Uranus, much worry and 


trouble will be caused by the native’s own folly. 
/ 


THE TWELFTH: HOUSE 231 


GENERAL REMARKS ON CHapters VI to XIX 


As a conclusion to this detailed consideration of the Twelve Houses, 
it will be well to draw the student’s attention to the relative values of 
(az) houses, (0) signs, and (c) rulers of signs, when judging a nativity. 

Those people who come solely ur chiefly under the influences of (a) 
the houses and their rulers alone, apart from the signs occupying them 
or the planets governing those signs, are such as are entirely bound by 
heredity and environment and who live more or less the life of the senses 
—who, in fact, are utterly ‘conventional’; while on the other hand 
those who move with the progressive nature of things are not so much 
limited by the houses, being more influenced by the nature either of (4) the 
desires, indicated by the signs of the zodiac, or (c) the mental conditions, 
described by the planets in those signs; or even, in the case of the truly 
original, by the planets themselves, apart from all reference to the signs 
they occupy. The latter will be more fully treated of in the second part 
of this work. 

The following table will well repay study; it indicates the true value 
appertaining to each house of the horoscope: 


Nature Element 


Individual 


Temporal 


Relative 


Terminal | 


This table represents the whole scheme. The cross denotes the 
body ), denotes the soul, and © the spirit. The elements fire, earth, 
air, and water, are respectively shown by a triangle, a square, horizontal 
lines, and the triangle reversed. There are many other considerations 
arising out of this plan of the twelve houses, which the intuition of the 
reader will discover. 


Note :—The First Edition of How to Judge a Nativity, Part I, ended 
with this Chapter; the remainder ts additional 


CHAPTER XX 
A Comprenpium oF PLANETARY Positions AND ASPEcTs * 


THe readings here given of the Destiny and Influence of the several 
Planets in each of the Twelve Signs, and their mutually modifying effect 
when in aspect, are based on the assumption that the planet in question 
is angular, well-aspected, or otherwise dignified in the horoscope, more 
especially when either rising or culminating; and particularly, of course, 
when ruler of the nativity. If, on the other hand, the said planet is 
weak by position, or much afflicted by aspect, its influence is so restricted 
and hampered thereby that the descriptions given can only be said to 
apply, if at all, as regards their less desirable characteristics. 

It is just in such cases that the faculty of judgment must be brought 
into play; to determine, for instance, how far bad position or aspects 
will debilitate the favour of a ‘benefic,’ or to what extent favourable 
aspects and a powerful position will moderate the misfortunes attaching 
to a ‘malefic.’ This faculty, however, has to be acquired by each 
student for himself; it cannot be imparted by another. 

Little useful purpose would be served by giving the influence of the 
two distant planets Neptune and Uranus in this chapter, which would 
only take up space which can ill be spared. Moreover, they have been 
already given in Astrology for All, (pp. 191 to 200), to which work 
the reader may be referred for further information. The aspects to 
these planets will be given, however, since they are not given in that 
work. 


‘THe Aspects or NEPTUNE 


‘The whole question of Neptune’s influence is at present in such an 
uncertain condition that the following notes on the planet’s aspects do 
not profess to be other than tentative suggestions, to be corrected and 
added to as future experience may dictate. 

The conjunction appears to be neither wholly good nor wholly evil. 


a A ee 


* ‘These were originally printed in Hew to Judge a Nativity, Part 11. 


232 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND: ASPECTS: NEPTUNE 233 


‘*s’ and HI. This influence is very difficult to elucidate; for. apart 
from their obvious influence upon matters signified by mundane house 
and zodiacal sign, there does not seem to be much effect other than that 
upon mystical and occult affairs and out-of-the-way subjects and 
occupations. When in good aspect, the native will benefit through 
these, or will be favourably inclined to them or will come in contact with 
other people who follow such pursuits. 

In bad aspect, he may be interested in such matters, but there will 
be obstacles and trouble of the nature of the signs and houses involved. 
The intuition is increased considerably, especially if the aspect is from the 
third or ninth houses, and various psychic gifts may be cultivated. It 
increases thoughtfulness and seriousness and may give some inclination 
to religion: it bestows ingenuity and originality of mind. The good 
aspect is decidedly favourable for those who actually study psychic 
matters. 

‘ and h.—In good aspect the influence is not unlike that of Hl 
just mentioned, especially if f is the more elevated of the two. It is 
good generally for occupation, worldly standing, preserves the goodwill 
of acquaintances and the public, and wards off enemies. It increases 
concentration, intuition, depth and clearness of thought. Benefits those 
who follow psychic or unusual occupations, also those connected with 
the water ; sensitives, psychics, etc., may meet with considerable success 
not only in developing their gifts but also in utilising them practically. 
It inclines somewhat to the company of serious or elderly people, and 
benefits through them. Itcontrols and sobers the instincts and passions, 
such as drink, sex, etc. It seems probable that it may favour money, 
property, investments, shares, legacies. 

In bad aspect, the above indications will be more or less reversed, 
and trouble or danger may attend any of these matters, generally acting 
through the signs and houses occupied by the two planets. Disrepute, 
ill-favour, scandal, are to be feared. 

‘ and Y%.—In good aspect this refines and purifies, but at the same 
time strengthens, the feelings and all the social and emotional side of 
thenature. It favours courtesy, honour, candour, sincerity, gentlemanly 
feeling benevolence, sympathy. It increases the devotional and 
religious aspirations, although these may be directed into psychic, semi- 
occult, or unusual channels. If the aspect is close or the planets 
prominent some marked psychic experience, dream or vision, etc., may 


444 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


be met with; astral travellings out of the body; pre-natal reminiscences. 
It somewhat favours travelling. It improves the’ artistic, poetic, 
zesthetic side of the nature, and, if other positions co-operate, may aid in 
giving a touch of genius in matters pertaining to religion, poetry, music, 
art, or the stage. It increases the imagination ; and its general tendency 
is towards growth, increase and fertility in whatever department of the 
horoscope it may influence. 

‘The bad aspects between these two planets are probably not very 
serious, but they may throw obstacles in the way of any of the matters 
mentioned above or cause some little trouble through them, as well as 
through those signified by house position. 

and &.—This influence is not easy to determine, as the two 
planets do not seem to have a great deal in common; in fact they 
appear in some respects almost polar opposites, the one typically negative 
and the other extremely positive. When in bad aspect they are apt to 
increase the instincts, emotions, and passions too much; to give undue 
tendency towards pleasure, sensation, self-indulgence; and to slightly 
coarsen the nature. There may be danger arising out of the relations 
with the other sex, scandal and disrepute; danger from the water and 
liquids, also of poisoning and contagious diseases. Ifthe native dabbles 
in psychism, there will be astral delusions and deceits and risk of 
obsession. He will be liable to foolish ideas and habits from which no 
reasoning can free him. Butif Mars be dignified by sign or well placed, 
none of these dangers need be at all serious. 

The good aspects seem even more difficult to interpret than the evil 
ones. The feelings and emotions are apparently quite as much 
stimulated, but they operate through benefic and legitimate channels. 
There are activities, ardours, and enthusiasms manifesting through 
matters signified by sign and house. It is good for sailors and for occu- 
pations connected with the water. It increases generosity and kindly 
impulses. It has a bearing upon occult powers of the practical or 
ceremonial kind. | 

%$' and ©. In good aspect this must tend to bring good fortune 
through whatever occupations may be signified by the planet; but, un- 
fortunately, very littleis known of these. It probably influences pursuits 
connected with the water, travelling, speculating; also activities that 
give amusement and pleasure, theatres, concerts; and is beneficial for 
events of the fifth house generally, and perhaps for legacies. It 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: NEPTUNE 225 


intensifies but also refines the feelings and emotions; there is love of 
pleasure, but it runs in legitimate channels; love of refinement, luxury, 
elegance. The aspect tends towards generosity, kindness, sympathy. 

When in bad aspect there is some instability and danger of reversal 
in matters of occupation, power, rulership. The favour of superiors and 
those in authority is not to be depended upon ; the reputation may suffer ; 
the native’s schemes collapse, perhaps through no fault of his own, his 
ambitions are thwarted, his efforts come tonought. Events signified by 
the houses containing the two are sure to suffer seriously. Native may 
fill posts of responsibility but is seldom at the head of his department, 
and is often subordinate to others, by whom he is liable to be opposed 
and checked. It tends towards excesses and lax morality. Its influence 
upon health seems also in the direction of excess, plethora; but it is 
alleged to cause fainting, syncope, and sometimes coma or trance. 

and 2. In good aspect, the native is easily moved to admiration 
of the opposite sex, and is emotional and romantic in love affairs, and 
easily caught by beauty. There may be more than one love affair or 
marriage. It is good for partnership and general prosperity, and contri- 
butes towards benefit and pleasure through friends, associates, popularity. 
There is love of beauty in art, music, the stage, etc., with a strong 
emotional or sensuous element in it. May contribute towards genius if 
other positions concur. Good for occupations of Neptune. 

In bad aspect, fickleness or deceit in love or marriage on the part 
of one or other of the parties; danger of scandal; instability or want of 
good faith on the part of marriage or business partner. Loss of money 
through false confidence, deceit, fraud; obtaining of money by false 
pretences. 

tY and %. In good aspect a versatile mind, changeable, embracing 
many subjects and not lingering long over one; ingenious, inventive, 
intuitive, fertile in resource. Gives aptitude for psychic studies, ability 
to get ideas from astral sources; crystal-gazing, psychometry, automatic 
writing, trance or inspirational speaking. Gives some understanding of 
interior planes of being, and attraction to subjects connected with them, 
and success in practising them. Attracts to unconventional healing and 
hygienic methods, faith-healing, curative mesmerism, etc. The pleasures 
and the emotions are chiefly mentalin character. There is clear dream- 
ing and ability to remember dreams. If any ability for poetry, music, 
etc., exists, this aspect will support and increase it. 


236 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


3 


lin bad aspect, any or all the above subjects may attract quite as 
much, but will be attended by obstacles and misfortune. The memory 
is apt to be poor, and the native in some respects unpractical. He 
changes his opinions, vacillates, or even holds contradictcry views. 
Danger of trouble, duplicity, underhand conduct. Trouble through 
servants and possible dishonesty, slander, libel or scandal. Both aspects 
promote changes and travelling. 

“ and ). In good aspect, increases the imagination, makes the 
emotional side of the nature active and fertile. The native lives largely 
in the emotions and feelings, is swayed by passing moods and impulses, 
lives in them, learns from them, and expresses himself through them. 
Fortunate for acting, music, art, etc., and for most psychic studies and 
occupations, mediumship, crystal gazing, etc. Gives sympathy with 
the mother and possible benefit through her. Favours offspring. 

Any aspect increases the impressionability, and this may blend with 
the higher side of the mind in emotional, imaginative, or devotional 
activities ; or may show as love of the things of sense—luxuries, exquisite 
tastes, colours, odours, etc.; while in bad aspects and in a severely 
afflicted horoscope, may tend from the sensuous to the sensual. Serious 
affliction brings trouble through any of the above sources, largely 
depending upon the house in question; bad luck from females; hinders 
marriage in a male horoscope; threatens incurable diseases; brings 
trouble at the close of life ; danger from deception, fraud, or slander. 

These influences will be accentuated should either planet be the ruler. 
(Neptune, however, is very rarely the ruler of any horoscope —see Dp. 37.) 


Tue Aspects or URANUS * 


Hl and h. Any good aspect will deepen and intensify the nature in 
some respect, but this may vary according to the type of horoscope. 
With some, it increases the strength of the will, gives a very fixed and 
unchanging nature, one that can form its plans a long way ahead and 
spend a lifetime in carrying them out. It concentrates the mind, gives 
thoughtfulness and seriousness, ability to plan and control, formulate 
and reduce to order and method. This general tendency may operate 
either through the feelings and emotions (fire and water), or the reason- 
ing mind (air and earth), according to position by sign and the type of 


* The influence of aspects between Uranus and Neptune is given on p. 233. 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: URANUS 237 


horoscope ; its good influence giving control and orderliness in either 
direction. Whether the inward power thus shown will be carried out 
into actual practice in daily life, depends a good deal upon whether the 
influences in the horoscope are chiefly positive or negative. It attracts 
somewhat in the direction of psychism and occultism, and gives some 
success in these matters ; but here either angular position or the good 
aspects of the Moon or Mercury are usually necessary if the influence 
is to amount to much in actual life. The effect as regards health is to 
conserve the vitality and prolong life, especially after middle age; but 
probably this will not operate greatly unless one or both are in good 
aspect to the luminaries or the ascendant. If favourably placed, its 
power of concentration and control may be brought to bear upon business 
and worldly affairs with fortunate results. 

In bad aspects these planets are extremely likely to affect the health 
injuriously, either sooner or later, according to directions. Their mere 
presence in the same sign, even if not in conjunction, is liable to weaken 
that part of the body ruled by the sign or the house, unless well aspected 
by Sun, Moon, or Ascendant. Their diseases are long-continued, com- 
plicated, and frequently incurable. The general tendency under bad 
aspects will be much the same as under good ones, but misapplied, 
wrongly-used, inverted, or attended by bad luck. For instance, when in 
opposition or square, there may be as much strength of will, control, and 
force of character as when in trine, but the result may be continual bad 
luck in those matters signified by whichever is the weaker of the two; 
or, in a thoroughly evil type of horoscope, the powers may be deliber- 
ately used for wrong ends, producing a dangerous criminal; or, again, 
in an unevolved nature, the outcome may be indolence, sloth, tamasic 
inertia that never progresses, never improves. This may show mentally 
or morally, according to sign, or, if angular, in practical life: but the 
evil effects are not usually serious except when other testimonies concur, 
either by radical position or by direction. 

Kl and Y. In good aspect it is fortunate for all matters signified 
by the two planets. The higher side of the mind is opened, and there 
may be an impulse towards philosophy, the higher sciences, and 
originality of thought. The religion is of a mystical, poetic, imaginative 
or occult type. The native may succeed in or receive worldly benefit 
from pursuits bearing upon any of these matters, depending upon posi- 
tion by sign and house. If Uranus is angular, there may be success 


238 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


through following one of the Uranian occupations or studies. The 
influence is believed to be good for money, legacies, and general worldly 
success, as well as for all affairs arising out of the ninth house, either 
those connected with the churches and religious movements, or with law, 
philosophy, and mystical affairs, or foreign travel. 

In evil aspect, these same concerns and tendencies are to the fore, 
but they occasion trouble and loss, and entail suffering. 

HI and 3 In good aspect, energy, impulse, activity, and power, 
manifesting through matters signified by the houses involved, qualified 
by the signs. The mind is generally very alert and quick to act; the 
will is vigorous and emphatic; a good deal of determination and energy 
are thrown into whatever is undertaken. The tendency is to increase 
the mental pride and self-will. The native is original, enterprising, re- 
sourceful, and practical in those matters involved by the aspect; 
ambitious, difficult to turn aside or thwart, and in general gets his own 
way. ‘The aspect increases the will-power, mental activity, and positive- 
ness of character. It is allied to wit, sarcasm, irony, and destructive 
criticism. In psychic matters it interferes. with the development of 
those gifts that are promoted by passivity, such as mediumship, clair- 
voyance, trance, etc., but inclines to those requiring mental activity 
and a positive will. 

In bad aspect, there is the same energy, will-power, and positive- 
ness, but acting erratically, unwisely, imprudently. There is apt to be 
much spasmodic self-will, lack of mental balance and sobriety of judg- 
ment, intolerance of opposition or control, dislike of all restraint. It 
signifies unfortunate events that come about with startling suddenness ; 
and it tends to disturb and upset all matters signified by the houses 
involved. This position strongly predisposes to physical violence if 
either planet is angular, and is in any case of a turbulent character, 
needing strong self-discipline on the part of the native to overcome its 
evil influence. 

Hl and ©. In good aspect is fortunate for any of the Uranian 
occupations, bringing good luck and success through them. It is also 
said to be fortunate for public appointments, and for matters connected 
with national or municipal public bodies, membership in those bodies, 
or offices held under them. It is good for societies, associations, and 
brotherhoods. It preserves the health in old age and lengthens the 
life. It gives benefit through uncommon methods of healing, such as 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: URANUS 239 


electricity, hypnotism, etc. It somewhat increases the positive side of 
the nature, self-reliance, independence of character. If mental signs 
are involved it may co-operate with any other indications in an in- 
tellectual direction, giving originality and a fertile mind. 

In bad aspect, it tends to upset the health, according to the sign 
and house involved. There may be quite as much inclination for 
Uranian matters as with the good aspects, but the influence acts unfor- 
tunately and in an erratic, unbalanced fashion, much as with the evil 
aspects from Uranus to Mars. It endangers domestic (especially 
parental) harmony ; is bad for public position, popularity, the good will 
of the world generally ; and causes broken ties of all sorts in business, 
marriage, and friendship. 

Hl and 2. In good aspect, gives many friends and acquaintances, 
increases the popularity, and sometimes gives an attractive and magnetic 
personality. The love of beauty is increased, the emotions are lifted up 
towards the intellect, and there may be ability for music, poetry, art, 
etc., or liking forany of these. It brings good fortune through friends 
and the public, and success through any occupation or pursuit signified 
by either planet. The love nature is increased, and it tends to promote 
happiness in marriage if other testimonies concur. It conduces to 
worldly prosperity in a general way, but mainly through such matters 
as are governed by the two planets. 

In bad aspect, friends and acquaintances and especially the opposite 
sex cause trouble. Love matters are involved, marriage hindered, and 
sometimes scandal threatened. There is, in some cases, fickleness in 
love, broken promises and vows; or the native may suffer from these at 
the hands of the lover or marriage partner. It tends to bring trouble or 
loss through the occupations governed by either planet. 

Hl and §. In good aspect, the mind is active, original, quick, 
fertile, inventive, and intuitive. Intellectual power is increased, and 
there may be success and good luck in following any of the Mercurial 
or Uranian occupations, studies, or activities. The mind does not 
always pursue the beaten track, but makes its own rules, follows its own 
laws, and obeys its own inner nature. Wit is increased, ingenuity pro- 
moted, and a tendency given to discoveries and inventions, intellectual 
or practical. It gives benefit from study, education, mental pursuits, 
and travelling. It often inclines strongly in some Uranian or semi-occult 
direction. 


240 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


In bad aspect the mind may be just as active and the tendencies 
similiar to the above ; but there will be an irregular or erratic action, and 
all matters signified by position and rulership will be hindered and liable 
to result unfortunately. 

HI and). In good aspect, generally inclines to one or more of 
the Uranian studies or occupations, and brings considerable success 
through them, whether followed as a private hobby or a public occupa- 
tion. When the native does not take up such matters himself, he is 
generally brought into contact with those who do, and the result is for 
his interest or profit. If in a man’s horoscope, he may marry a wife 
having these tastes, or form friendships with such people. In a woman’s 
horoscope, she may benefit in health from uncommon methods of medical 
treatment, mesmeric or otherwise. It favours travelling. 

In bad aspect and in a man’s horoscope, the influence is bad for 
marriage and the family ; troubles and irregularities of all sorts follow, 
from mere disappointment in love to separation or the formation of 
irregular attachments. In a woman’s horoscope, it is not good for 
health and if the Moon is in a hylegiacal position, it is bad in this 
respect with either sex. With females, it is bad for childbirth and the 
children and home life; and the emotions and feelings are apt to be 
erratic, fickle, changeable and irregular. There will be trouble, bad 
luck, or loss from any Uranian occupation that may be taken up. It 
will unite with any other influence in upsetting the nervous system and 
causing mental disturbances of various kinds, from mere nervousness up 
to more serious irregularities. It tends to upset the stomach and diges- 
tive system. Thereis trouble or danger from the water and any place 
or occupation of the Moon. Any aspect is likely to cause either travell- 
ing or changes of residence, good or bad, and perhaps also changes of 
occupation. 


} 


THE FATE OF SATURN IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 


[The following refer to Saturn as ruler of the nativity or when the 
strongest planet by position, etc., as well as applying in a general sense to 
ALL who have the position at birth, since Saturn is the planet of Fate.) 


h . Troubles, difficulties and obstacles in the first half of life. 
Sorrows in connection with finance, friends amongst relatives, honour or 
dishonour in connection with domestic affairs according to environment. 
Gain or loss through the death of uncles and aunts, according to house 
and aspects of Saturn. A jealous partner, or marriage to an elder; 
danger of poverty through marriage. Strange diseases of an internal 
nature, with suicidal tendencies if Mercury is afflicted at birth. Some 
religious experiences. Reserve and acquisitiveness at close of life, 
retirement with a competence if Jupiter is well placed: few journeys, 
and those few fraught with danger. Ambition for success, with the 
promise of prosperity through industry and perseverance. 

h &. Economical, reserved, fond of solitude, prudent and diplo- 
matic. Gain by industry and frugal methods. Sorrow and loss through 
relatives: brethren occult or mystically inclined: a few faithful friends 
in the domestic circle: anxiety through children and their affairs. Aunts 
and uncles abroad, from whom there are expectations with faint prospect 
of realisation. Death of marriage partner, or financial troubles through 
marriage. Liability to treachery, and secret opposition. Sickness 
through foreign travel. Gain through judicious investment. Peculiar 
domestic experiences: disinclination to travel: fondness for mysticism 
and secret societies. 

h OU. Dual experiences; liable to self-deception; subtle and 
resourceful. Liable to false imprisonment or treachery through domestic 
attachments: deceitful friends: trouble through relatives, and dishonour 
through inferiors or common and public pursuits. Marriage to a foreigner, 
or an alliance made abroad. A strange death: liable to violence or to 
succumb through the jealousy of others. Unfortunate in legal affairs 
and fated to suffer through lawyers or solicitors. Sickness through pro- 


fession or employment, and sorrow through children and their affairs. 
Q 24 


Pen HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


An unfavourable end, hastened by the action of relatives or powerful 
opponents. Gain from two sources and by questionable means. 

h 9. Peevish and somewhat discontented nature, repining and 
fretful disposition, always liable to domestic trouble and family discords. 
Anxiety, grief and disappointment through love-affairs, and sorrow 
through children. Unfortunate and unprofitable experience with 
inferiors, and sickness caused by impure magnetism. Honour or dis- 
honour through marriage, according to position and aspects: a partner 
who rises through merit or industry. Death in a foreign land, or by 
drowning. Occult tendencies or sincerity in religious affairs. Oppo- 
nents who affect the honour or reputation. Trouble in partnerships; 
griefs through the loss ofa relative : sickness of friends and acquaintances. 
Pleasure from psychic sources. Difficulties at the close of life. Gain 
through the occult arts. 

h St. Disregardful of pleasure, enterprising, ambitious, deter- 
mined: overcomes obstacles by perseverance and by will-power. 
Sorrow and secret enmity from inferiors; treachery of servants and 
hatred from them. Marriage to a friend, and the realisation of hopes 
and wishes through the partner. Honour through deaths and secret or 
governmental positions, gain from foreign affairs, and philosophic 
tendencies. Liable to death through overwork or heart-disease; and 
death of employers. Partnership with friends and acquaintances who 
turn to opponents; a few faithful and sincere friends amongst equals 
or superiors in birth. Psychic ailments and danger of infection, (crowds 
should be avoided). An enterprising and speculative tendency, with 
prospects of a fortune by speculation or gain through domestic affairs. 
A powerful intellect and good judgment, with faith in religion or the 
subjective world. 

h ty. Discriminative, discreet, and cautious: suffers through 
psychic conditions, and by bashfulness or excess of reserve; fond of 
science or occult studies. Difficulties in the first portion of life; disin- 
clination to marry, troubles and misfortunes through marriage. Occult 
friends and secret alliances; gain through religion, philosophy, or 
employers who are religious, also from foreigners. Death of friends and 
acquaintances, unfortunate partnerships, liability to headaches or to 
mental diseases. An occult mind, fond of all deep and scientific studies ; 
more intuitive than intellectual. Romantic courtships, and gain by 
investment or enterprise. 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: SATURN 243 


h =. Refined tastes, intellectual tendencies, and ability to com- 
pare, arbitrate, and unify; if much afflicted at birth a fatality to cause 
separations and destroy unions, especially if Venus is afflicted or weak 
in the nativity. Sorrow or grief through the death of a secret friend, or 
of a female to whom there was a deep attachment; female enmity at 
some period of the life, particularly at the ages of 21, 35, and 42. 
Religious or philosophical friends: strange experiences through friend- 
ships made abroad: fickle fortune through marriage, and opposition in 
profession or employment. Liability to a tragic death, producing 
notoriety or fame according to environment. Career considerably 
affected by marriage and the marriage partner’s influence: gain by 
labour or through employment rather than by luck or ability : speculative 
and imaginative intellect. Serious damestic troubles and misfortunes 
at the close of life; occult pleasures, and gains and losses thereby. 
Emotions should be easily balanced by the mind. 

.h Mm.  Acquisitive, passionate, self-willed, the selfish instincts 
being well developed; jealous, independent and resourceful, shrewd 
and cautious. Great tenacity and love of life. Disregard for religion 
except in form: fond of secret and hidden things: generally bound by 
religious heredity or custom. Friends amongst elders, or ambitious 
persons who have power: secret alliances and intrigues. Honour 
through friendships, and the realisation of hopes and wishes through 
cleverness and subtlety. Voyages or foreign residences: success after 
difficulties. Liability to sudden death; gain through partnerships or 
through opponents, also losses through determined opposition. Psychic 
intellect: shrewd, rather than intellectual, mentality. Gain or loss 
through speculation in public companies and popular enterprises, or 
through life policies and the death of others; carefulininvestments. Sad 
love affairs and secret domestic ties ; inferior kindred, poor and jealous. 
A solitary end, full of mystery. 

h f. Philosophical, religious, honest, fearless, and plain spoken. 
Dual life of popularity and seclusion, according to environment. 
Troubles through public affairs, honour and reputation. Occult 
tendencies, humanitarian views, and many public friends and supporters. 
Promotion and advancement in life from unassuming conditions, ability 
to create own dignity, and prophetic insight with regard to future 
welfare. Death amid good surroundings, with religious thoughts at 
the close of life. Opponents in mental pursuits; capacity to overcome 


sn HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


mental conditions by intuition, or by a philosophic attitude. An inclina- 
tion towards public service and the welfare of others, or towards labour 
for domestic welfare. An independent worker, free from influences of 
inferiorsin thought. Gain by judicious investment: fortunate children: 
liable to nervous breakdown or failure at close of life. A religious mind, 
free from mercenary taint or sordid motives. 

h ¥. Ambitious, careful of self-interest; melancholic, cautious 
and apprehensive. Fated to be treacherous or unfaithful to friends, and 
destined to sorrows through acquaintances: easily influenced through 
inferior friendships. Anxious to rise in life, and through tact or 
diplomacy gencrally succeeding, if Saturn is not heavily afflicted at 
birth ; but will gain more financial success abroad than in native land. 
Liable to death through some chronic ailment affecting the mind. 
Opposed to marriage, or unfortunate in choice of partner through lack 
of correct judgment in love affairs: liable to attachments to inferiors ot 
the opposite sex and to become seriously entangled. Losses through 
speculation or investment, and sufferings through selfish children. An 
unfortunate end to existence, in which many painful realisations are 
borne home: the mind is liable to taint from hereditary tendencies, and 
there is danger of tragic mental states at the close of life. 

h «. Refined, reserved, intellectual, humane, serious, thoughtful 
and well disposed. Suffers at the hands of others passively without 
much resistance: makes friends without effort, and is faithful to those 
selected. Gains through profession or employment by quiet and per- 
sistent determination, and generally secures good financial prospects. 
Refines the mind by study and appreciative observation, and is 
thoroughly practical in all mental states of consciousness: is inclined to 
join societies for mutual benefit. Faithful in love affairs; generally 
marries well. Avoids sickness through a study of the laws of hygiene, 
or by temperance and food reform. Generally forms some pure romantic 
attachment or lasting tie. The end of life is generally better than the 
beginning, and takes place amid refined surroundings, the intellect 
having been improved by experience and study. 

h ». Sorrows and disappointments in life: forms en batenatente 
ties and is seriously handicapped by attachments generally beginning 
romantically and ending tragically, or with misfortune and disaster: the 
native is usually himself the cause of his bad luck and trouble through 
lack of hope or true courage, and proves to be his own enemy through- 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: SATURN 245 


out. He acquires a disregard for money or suffers losses through friends 
and acquaintances. He rarely creates his own dignity; and cannot 
maintain it when gained, unless the horoscope is very favourable. He 
has occult leanings, and rebels against orthodox religion. His death is 
often tragic, and sometimes occurs through suicide or grief. He is un- 
fortunate in marriage or has an ailing partner; servants cause trouble 
after marriage. He is separated from his children, or they suffer in 
health. His end is spent in retirement or seclusion, his mind being 
engrossed with psychic matters. 


Tue Aspects oF SATURN * 


h and U%. This combination of influences is most difficult to 
elucidate clearly. In good aspect, it is good for the occupations, 
pursuits, and general affairs of the four signs ruled by the planets, and 
for the houses in which they are placed, as well as those on the cusps of 
which the four signs are situated. It is fortunate for money and possess- 
ions derived from any of these sources, and gives some desire for re- 
spectability and for the good opinion of the world. The native wishes 
to stand well with superiors, elders, and those around him, and will 
generally succeed in this. He will have independence and originality, 
and yet defer a good deal to custom and formality. He is likely to rise 
in religious or political spheres, and he has considerable ambition, but 
unless Jupiter is very strong there is some likelihood of his religion being 
tinged with unorthodoxy, which may have its origin from a variety of 
sources—doubt, indifference, self-seeking, ambition, worldliness, deep 
thought, or pessimism. It gives much strength of character, and ability to 
overcome obstacles. There is likelihood of long journeys or voyages, 
and of acquaintances or friends abroad; his occupation will take the 
native abroad, or he will have to do with a foreign country; he may also 
travel with or for friends, or on account of matters rising out of the 
twelfth house. It upholds the native’s credit and reputation, helps to 
uplift him in the world, and to give honour, esteem, and general 
prosperity: there is a good deal of ‘self’ in the aspect, although it is 
modified by the justice, benevolence and devotion of Jupiter. He gains 
through the father, or sometimes the father through him, and it tends 


* The aspects of Saturn to Neptune and to Uranus are given on pp. 233 and 
236 respectively. 


246 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


genetally to make the relations of the two to one another satisfactory. 
He gains the respect of friends, who are usually honourable and of good 
class. His fortune through societies, associations, and companies is 
good, both pecuniarily and otherwise. The effect of this aspect varies, 
being in some horoscopes democratic and others aristocratic ; but it isa 
very good influence for any man holding a public position or appointment, 
whether among the classes or the masses. Similarly, the native may 
follow either a great and public career, or one just the reverse, obscure, 
humble or plebeian ; but in either case he will acquit himself worthily. 
It diminishes the likelihood of enemies and of harm from them, and 
upholds the native in adversity. He will receive or bestow, according 
to the station in life, charity and benevolence; and good arising out of 
homes, hospitals, and other medical, religious or charitable institutions 
will form a feature in his career. Toa less degree it is good for matters 
in the third house, in so far as these are not contradicted by the four 
signs ruled by the planets. It inclines slightly to travelling ; and is also 
slightly good for writings, mental ability, capacity for education, etc. 
Whether the aspect makes for a public and honoured, or merely an 
obscure but worthy existence, must of course be judged, in this, as in 
other cases, by the horoscope as a whole, and by the solar aspects, etc. ; 
also according as the aspect in question comes from cardinal, succedent, 
or cadent houses, and according to which planet (if either) is above the 
horizon. 

The conjunction is generally considered benefic; but it seems open 
to doubt whether it is uniformly so under all circumstances; and a good 
deal must depend upon which planet of the two is the stronger by 
sign. 

In bad aspect this combination brings obstacles and misfortune 
through the four signs ruled. It is unfortunate for money and occupa- 
tion, especially any coming under these signs, more particularly if either 
sign is on the cusp of the second house. It threatens a downfall in the 
world through loss of money or credit, and trouble, pecuniary or other- 
wise, through the father. There will be social difficulties and trouble 
through societies, companies, friends, and matters of the eleventh house. 
The native is never or seldom orthodox in religion, and there are troubles 
indicated in connection with study, education, travel, voyaging; also 
matters of the twelfth house, enmity, opposition, treachery. In some 
cases he will be in danger of prison, or will be supported by charity or 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: SATURN 247 


be the inmate of a workhouse or charitable institution. He will be the 
victim of dishonesty, or will himself be not quite straightforward in 
money matters. 

h and $. Itis more than usually difficult to disentangle the good 
and evil effects in the aspects of these planets; and very much will 
depend upon the sign rising, and the general state of the horoscope, 
whether tending to good or evil. The trine is, of course, the best of the 
good aspects. Some consider the square the worst of the evil aspects, 
while most incline to the opinion that the opposition is worse than the 
conjunction ; bearing in mind what has been said of Saturn representing 
the mind and Mars the senses, the reason of the latter judgment will 
be at once apparent, for here they are in conflict, and discord must 
inevitably arise. 

In conjunction or bad aspect there will be much ambition, and 
notoriety in some form, accompanied or followed sooner or later by 
danger, difficulty, and trouble to life and honour. It is bad for the 
parents: the death of one or both under painful circumstances is 
threatened; and there may be separation from, or disputes with, a 
parent. Wounds and accidents are threatened, and danger of sudden 
or violent death, either to the native ora parent. Danger of death from 
enemies or during war, or at the hands of the State, or while in the 
service of the State. The honour and reputation are imperilled: the 
native will meet with ‘some great reversal or downfall; he will encounter 
hostility, opposition and criticism, even from his own friends, and the 
chances are he will not hold for Jong an honourable place in public 
opinion. He may not succeed at his occupation, and is sure to meet 
with serious difficulties in it. He either has few friends, or they “lay 
him false. There will be some severe complaint of any part of the 
body ruled by the four signs, or by the signs and houses in which the 
two planets are placed, and death may result from it. It is bad for 
peace of mind; the native is hot-headed and rash: the temper may 
range from mere recklessness or irritability (which may be partly hidden 
or overlaid by the influence of benefics) to anger, passion, and uncon- 
trollable rage. If unmodified by other influences, the native is 
indifferent to the feelings of others, and will be hard, cruel, spiteful, and 
revengeful.~ It is bad for legacies (except perhaps the conjunction ina 
favourable sign) and brings trouble through companies, associations, 
societies, etc.: if either planet be well placed by sign or in a favourable 


ad 


248 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


house, however, much of the malice may be abated. In some cases, 
sinstead of the native suffering in the ways indicated above, he will 
himself be the cause of such suffering in others, ¢.g., instead of suffering 
from false friends, he may himself be a false friend, etc. In all cases 
note must be taken of the houses ruled by Saturn and Mars, since they 
will afford the key to the manner in which the latent disharmony will 
eventuate. | 

In the case of a good aspect, the worst results of the bad aspects will 

not be seen, but there will be a good deal in the character that is unde- 
sirable. It promotes ambition in the native, love of rule and mastery, 
bravery, carelessness both of his own safety and that of other people. 
Will face danger recklessly, either because he does not see it or hasa 
contempt for it. It hardens the nature somewhat, but gives great energy 
of a more or less turbulent and overbearing kind. If influencing the 
religion, this may make the native militant or fanatical, whether for or 
against. In mental signs similar characteristics will show, and if 
Saturn is strong by house or elevation, much subtlety will be added to 
the power of the aspect. Subtle to scheme, and quick to execute, the 
native will combine quickness or apparent changeableness with dogged 
' perseverance. He will be a leader, a pioneer, daring and, it may be, 
over-bearing and contemptuous of others. This may help to lift him 
into fame, power, or prominence of some kind, but it is attended by 
undesirable circumstances or danger. 

Most of what is here attributed to the good aspect may be seen in 
the case of bad aspects also, if the benefics are strong or elevated so as 
to tone down the more undesirable effects. 

h and ©. In any aspect tends to give a strong personality, one 
who goes his own way irrespective of the feelings or desires of others, 
who is not affected by the protests or opinions of others, and who is 
with difficulty thwarted or turned aside. He is capable of organising, 
controlling, governing and directing others. He is to some extent a 
natural leader; is subtle, often most so when seeming to be frankest, 
and does not mind isolation or positions of responsibility. He is 
ambitious, and if the fire and energy of Mars are added to the subtlety 
and controlling power of Saturn, nothing can turn him aside; he will 
work out his purposes successfully in the face of the greatest obstacles, 
and is certain to obtain leadership or mastery over others and positions 
of prominence or responsibility, even though in a small sphere. There. 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: SATURN 249 


is a tendency to pride, dignity and isolation, and to whatsoever lifts a 
man up or separates him from his fellows. 

In good aspect, his schemes, plots, and ambitions meet with success; 
he has much self-control, and the more undesirable Saturnian qualities 
may avoid expression. It brings the favour of superiors; the native will 
rise in life and associate with those somewhat above himself; he will be 
pretty sure to join some society or association or to form one of a group 
of persons banded together fora common purpose. In money matters 
it inclines to companies and rings, and slightly to partnerships; the 
native may be in partnership with his father or with one of his own 
sons; but if his own master he will rule autocratically, and take the 
advice of none. It brings benefits to sons, but limits the number of 
children. It favours money from the father. The native may obtain 
municipal or similar local honours. 

In conjunction or bad aspect, the native is frequently confronted 
with obstacles and delay, and unless in mutual reception* it is very 
unfortunate for all things signified by the two planets, bringing misfor- 
tunes in business, loss of public favour, likelihood of the father’s death, 
loss of father’s money or separation from or disagreement with him; 
and the same of a child (probably son): the native incurs opposition, 
enmity and jealousy ; his ambitions are frequently thwarted, and he meets 
with reverses or downfall: he will be autocratic, boastful, selfish, or 
careless of the feelings of others, cold and unsympathetic. It has an 
injurious influence upon the heart and the vitality generally. It may 
bring the disfavour of others, social unpopularity, and the enmity of 
superiors and those in high positions. 

Any aspect may incline to marriage or a love affair with one ina 
different position of life (probably higher, but sometimes lower). Ifbad, 
lack of sympathy and disharmony in love and marriage; the parent 
(probably father) may intervene to delay or break off a love affair. In 
any case there will be some little difference in age between husband 
and wife. 

h and 2. In good aspect this is very good for money matters, 
giving a tendency to prudence, thriftiness, economy, and carefulness. It 


— 


* ‘Mutual reception’ is when each of two planets is in a sign governed 
by the other—eg., © in «, h in §t, which was the case with Lord 
Salisbury. 


250 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


favours the accumulation and prevents the wasting of money. In some 
cases it will go rather too far in this direction, and result in a lack 
of generosity and a hoarding up of money approaching miserliness. 
Money or property is acquired through the native’s father, by his 
own exertions, or by marriage; also through occupations of the tenth 
and eleventh houses. There is considerable business ability and tact, 
and the native makes the best financial use of any occupation he may 
follow, or any opportunity he may have. He may be very successful as 
a financier, in either a small or a large way, depending upon the environ- 
ment of birth. He gains through companies, societies, associations, 
banking, investments, etc.; generally speaking, through the aged, or 
_ those considerably older than himself, and through superiors in position. 
His gains do not come so much by favour as by method, by business 
instincts, prudent manipulations, or by mere inevitableness. There will 
be some little difference either in age or social position, or both, between 
the native and the marriage or business partner. The union will 
probably be with one in a higher social position: it may be for money 
or position or ambition; and will be brought about or assisted, directly 
or indirectly, by a parent, guardian or superior. There will be gain of 
friends by marriage. It is an aspect favourable for pleasure, social 
intercourse, and popularity; and it gives faithfulness in friendship and 
love. To a less extent, moreover, it favours the gain of money by 
superior positions or occupations coming under the ninth house; through 
friends of the mother, and through careful speculation for financial ends 
rather than for pleasure, though there may also be gain through occupa- 
tions of the fifth house and of the earthy element; success in business 
or occupation through partnership or association with another person; 
partnership with the father or association with him in some pursuit 
or purpose; marriage with a relation; membership in societies or 
associations coming under the ninth house ; good fortune, pecuniary and 
otherwise, for the children. 

In bad aspect, all matters referred to under the good aspect suffer, 
and, generally speaking, all things signified by the four signs also. 
Money is lost through the parents (father) and occupation ; little or none 
is inherited; severe loss in business, or even bankruptcy, is threatened. 
If the moral sense is deficient, which must be judged from the horoscope 
as a whole, there will be dishonesty: or if otherwise, the native will 
suffer through the dishonesty of others. Money is lost through invest- 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: SATURN , 251 


ments, speculations, financial operations, companies, societies, farming, 
building, gardening. To a less extent, too, it is bad and brings loss 
through all occupations and matters of the fifth and ninth houses, It 
threatens unpopularity or hostility from some quarter: reversal, down- 
fall, misfortune through elders, seniors, parents, and relatives: trouble 
in partnership and marriage; interference of parents, guardians, or 
seniors ; marriage delayed or not contracted until over twenty-eight: 
trouble in marriage through difference in age or social or pecuniary 
position: trouble, financial or otherwise, through children and friends. 

The conjunction is partly good and partly bad, and exhibits influ- 
ences and characteristics from both; Venus benefiting Saturn, while 
Saturn impedes Venus. 

h and §. In good aspect this will make the native very successful 
at some occupation of the third or sixth houses; he will gain power, 
responsibility or fame through writing, speaking, or in connection with 
intellectual work, drugs, hygiene, medical works. He will occupy some 
responsible post as agent, traveller or servant, or may himself have 
many such under him; and will exercise a good deal of power or 
authority in this way according to his position in life. Either he him- 
self or one of his brothers or sisters will rise considerably above the 
ordinary in capacity for education, intellectual ability, or some matter of 
the third or sixth houses. This is.a good influence for the mind, memory, 
and reasoning powers; it gives orderliness and method. The native 
will make friends and acquaintances among people whose character or 
pursuits come under the third or sixth houses, and to a less degree the 
ninth. He will belong to, or be associated with, or start, some club, 
society, association or union coming under the third or sixth houses, or 
to a less degree the ninth, and may be of some importance therein: will 
be secretary, servant, agent, or representative in some way for his 
father, or will be associated in occupation with a brother or sister; 
but if so there is unlikely to be equality between them, for one will 
dominate the other. He may derive benefit from drugs; will be cleanly 
in habits, and observant of sanitation; and very particular with regard 
to food. He will have others under him; will pull the strings and direct 
others. May own or have to do with merchant vessels, means of trans- 
port by short journeys, vehicles, post-office, telegraph, and general 
affairs of the third house, also the distribution of food-products, drugs, 
and affairs of the sixth house. He will be a vigorous and capable 


252 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


master of his servants and those under him, exercising both persuasion 
and compulsion. 

In a slighter degree such aspect gives the possibility of a legacy 
from brethren or friends, or money by association with them, and from 
societies, clubs, etc. It inclines slightly to travelling, more especially 
in connection with business, but chiefly to intellectual pursuits. The 
native is an investigator of mystical or occult subjects; may possess 
psychic powers of some kind, more or less mental; and may gain some 
eminence, responsibility or mastery in religious matters or affairs of the 
ninth house, probably as agent or superintendent for another. Will 
study or write on subjects coming under the ninth house, and will travel 
because of eleventh house matters. 

The conjunction is partly evil but not wholly so, and is distinctly 
beneficial for the mind, making it concentrative, careful and precise. 
Two planets like these that have their houses in trine cannot bealtogether 
evil when in conjunction. This influence would seem to be intermediate 
between the good and evil aspects. The same remarks apply to the 
conjunction of Saturn and Venus. 

In bad aspect, matters signified by the four signs ruled by the 
planets suffer; misfortune, hindrances and obstacles attend these activi- 
ties. Native will be very ambitious in spheres of activity coming under 
the eleventh, third and sixth houses, and may exhibit much selfishness 
and desire for mastery. His desires in these respects are frequently 
thwarted and often entirely overthrown. He meets with much criticism 
and opposition, open or hidden, and will suffer from slanders, false 
reports, back-biting, forged letters or documents, unfriendly writings, 
etc.; or may himself descend to these methods. There will be trouble 
in his education and all matters pertaining to school, study and books. 
The death of father or brethren, or their ill-health, or separation or 
estrangement from them, will occasion him sorrow or loss. The aspect 
is bad for digestion, and may cause affections of the bowels or digestive 
tracts, or, to a less degree, of any part of the body signified by the houses 
of these planets. It causes trouble between master and servant; the 
native will be for long in a relatively subordinate position, or, if a master, 
will suffer through those under him: he will be a strict and harsh master, 
or will suffer under one himself. It brings trouble through false friends, 
societies, associations; also from servants, messengers, travellers, 
and generally through people following any occupation of the 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: SATURN 253 


four signs ruled by the planets; and to a less extent from the ninth 
house. 

h and). In good aspect, is good for the parents, brings benefits 
to the native from them, and vice versa. It gives prudence, caution.and 
circumspection ; respect for law and order, with somewhat conservative 
tendencies. The native possesses the ability to organize and systematise; 
he combines self-reliance with subtlety and diplomacy; and influences 
other people easily, more by tact and method than by force. It is 
favourable for public advancement, for success in the occupation, for the 
attainment of posts of responsibility, and for gaining the respect of people 
generally. It is beneficial for matters and occupations of the fourth, 
tenth and eleventh houses. To a less extent it favours marriage and 
partnership, in which the approval or help of parents, seniors or friends, 
public repute or official position play a part: but there will be some 
difference in age, tastes or position between the native and his partner. 
It slightly favours legacies from parents. 

In conjunction or bad aspect, it is bad for parents and for the 
native’s associations with them, whether natural parents, step-parents, 
or those of the marriage partner; one of them may be sickly or may die 
early, or there may be separation or differences of opinion or tastes, 
either between the parents themselves or the native and one or both of 
the parents. (In some cases it accompanies illegitimate birth, although 
if taken alone it would not be asufficient indication, of course.) Itis very 
unfortunate for affairs and occupations of the fourth, tenth and eleventh 
houses, and trouble is certain to arise through them. The native’s good 
name will be in danger at some time of life; he may suffer from slander 
or public attacks or open opposition or persecution; something will be 
done or said by himself or others to bring him into disrepute and obloquy, 
and he may be in danger of imprisonment. He meets with frequent 
reversals and rebuffs; his undertakings do not succeed; he incurs the 
disapprobation of seniors, and may meet with a great downfall, while the 
latter part of life is likely to be unfortunate or full of disappointment. 
His greatest success or highest rise is quickly followed by failure or down- 
fall, or is thwarted by death. There will be a good deal of selfishness, 
strong personal ambition, and love of mastery in his character, and he 
will work subtly and sometimes unscrupulously or dishonestly. [n some 
cases this influence merely keeps the native relatively in the background 
or in obscurity, often afflicting him with despondency and self-mistrust ; 


254 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


while in others he will be lifted up in the world, and for a time may 
attain his highest ambition, though this is generally quickly followed by 
reversal; which of these two will occur must of course be judged from 
the sign occupied, the other lunar aspects, and the horoscope as a 
whole. It may produce a disorder of some part of the body according 
to the signs or houses in which the planets are placed: it sometimes 
causes cancer. It may bring trouble through friends, societies and 
companies. To a less extent it is unfavourable for matriage and 
legacies. 


THE INFLUENCE OF JUPITER IN THE TWELVE SIGNS* 


| Jupiter’s primary influence in the world is connected with the social and 
the refined domestic element: success is brought about through favour or influ- 
ence and by everything arising out of favourable social standing, either in 
one's own or a higher iene 


Y% . Ambitious, enthusiastic, aspiring, fortunate. Gain by voyages, 
also by shipping and secret means. Intellectual friends and fortunate 
acquaintances made through travel; honour and fame gained through 
family ties and domestic relationships. Successful speculation or in- 
vestment in foreign securities, success in law and gain through children. 
Legacies from aunts or maternal side of the family. An ambitious 
partner, and an heroic death. Pleasure from religious associations. 
Honour and position at the close of life. Friends amongst relatives, 
and gain from enemies. 

Y &. The nature is peaceful, dignified, reserved and firm. There 
is sorrow through relatives, but on the other hand gain through friends 
connected with the family circle. Position obtained through investment 
and speculation, or through the care of children. Health is affected by 
travel abroad, also financial prospects. Gain by marriage, the partner 
being moreover interested in mystical subjects. A faithful worker for 
religious, philanthropical or philosophical causes; chaste in affection, 
gaining socially through love affairs and individually through personal 
efforts. The friends in the domestic sphere of life are spiritually minded. 

¥% OO. A high-minded, prophetic nature, successful in attention to 
perfection of detail. Occult thoughts, domestic concerns, and friends of 
noble birth all play a great part in the life, and honour is achieved 
through modest undertakings or obscure pursuits. Marriage to a cousin 


* Norz :—Jupiter does not act upon the life with any appreciable power until 
the fortieth year and onwards: if above the earth at birth its influence begins 
earlier than when below. The particulars here given refer of course to its normal 
influence unafflicted ; they will naturally be subject to the ast modification when 
Jupiter unafflicted is either lord of the horoscope or otherwise powerfully placed. 


255 


256 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


or distant relative: clear dreams (leading to clairvoyance or inner per- 
ception): religious opponents: professions that are either unprofitable 
or unpopular: joy in friendships and sorrows in the domestic sphere; 
mental culture through self-education ; and psychic tendencies at end of 
life. 

Y% o5, The native is sympathetic, loving, kind and popular, or 
indeed famous, overcoming enemies by love and an enterprising spirit; 
makes friends of inferiors and those willing to serve. ‘Fame or reputa- 
tion and social success through marriage: mystical in religious thought. 
Public approval and renown through public work: work in accordance 
with hopes and wishes. Pleasure through psychic or occult studies or 
interests. Gaih through intellectual ability or exercise of mental power. 
A notable end; death occurring abroad, peacefully and with honour. 

% SY. Proud and powerful, but loyal and noble-spirited. Joy in 
overcoming enemies. Marriage toa friend having influence. Successful 
in secret service and diplomatic pursuits; fitted for detection or judgment 
of criminals, and dealing with strange occurrences. Generous opponents 
who become friends. Capable of a great degree of natural enjoyment. 
Fortunate in all speculative and especially in mining affairs. An 
intuitive mind and strong religious principles. Success in domestic 
affairs. An honourable death. 

Y% ny. Common parentage. Discriminative in choice of friends, 
prudent in speech and successful in business pursuits. Secret love 
affairs and a marriage in some way peculiar. Friends among mystics 
or strange characters. Honour in religious or philosophical studies. 
Foreign associations or travels abroad on business undertakings. 
Legacies from friends and marriage to a social inferior. Love of service. 
Gain by investment and in mercantile pursuits, also literature and 
speculative dealings in second-hand things. _A philosophically critical 
mind. 

7% =~, Compassionate and harmonious, a steadfast lover of justice 
and mercy. Involved in trouble through death, and in the sorrows of 
others from good motives. Conscientious and pure-minded friends, or 
friends amongst those who are scientists, philosophers or divines. Gain 
through partnerships or by marriage. Gain also by joining with others 
in connection with some profession. Lasting friendships made abroad, 
and legacies from strangers, or gain through public institutions, hospitals 
and asylums.: A well-balanced mind; a happy marriage and fruitful 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: JUPITER 25 


union. Gain from inferiors or through servants; good children. Gain 
from commerce and science, or the employ of agents. Successful enter- 
prise through clear perceptions ; and a peaceful end, united with family, 
and amid good domestic surroundings. 

Y Mm. Pride of birth; deep emotions; powerful will; jealous 
enemies, and peculiar intrigues with superiors. Connections with 
Government or Government officials. Entrusted with secrets in con- 
nection with the profession, or with information that affects the honour 
of others. Possessing power with associations and societies. Gain 
through litigation or by marriage: also through arbitration or by death 
of partner, and through public investments, mining, etc.: singular 
family experiences. Liability to gout, blood-poison and _ hereditary 
diseases: heart troubles at the close of life. Notoriety through children. 
Unsound or questionable speculations. Curious mental fascination for 
chemical experiments. A friendship of a critical and peculiar nature; 
long voyages and strange adventures abroad, and a liability to a tragic 
death through social or political connections. 

% ff. Prophetic, sympathetic, impressionable; philosophical or 
religious. Unfortunate in profession or business pursuits where social 
interests are involved. Gain in common pursuits where detail is con- 
cerned more than principles; gain also through legacies or marriage 
partner, or through a sick relative. Fond of speculation and games of 
chance. If afflicted there is danger of a gambling spirit. Two love 
affairs or marriages, one probably to a relative. Gain through deaths. 
A peacemaker. 

¥% VS. Ambitious; somewhat orthodox; a lover of organising and 
management. Creates his own dignity or social sphere. Concerned by 
and involved in the sorrows of friends whose misfortunes have caused 
their confinement in some way. Gains through (orthodox) religion or 
by foreign affairs and the death of relatives or kindred. Opposed to 
or unsympathetic towards mystic or occult thought. Finds pleasure in 
physical service and the idea of ‘duty,’ obtaining in this way joy out 
of work. Gains credit and honour through commercial enterprise. 
Parents are concerned in some way with the marriage; and the domestic 
sphere in general largely affects the honour and profession. Somewhat 
conventional in mind, and enthusiastic for education on materialistic 
lines. 


Y <e, Social and humanitarian views, and a broad and philosophica! 
R 


358 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


mind, tolerant and sympathetic. More philosophical than religious. 
Much concerned with public institutions. Many friends gained through 
own personal influence. Gain by profession and employment in associa- 
tions, societies, etc.; also by inheritance. A marriage of love. A 
student of the laws of hygiene. Takes a pleasure in public work. A 
somewhat sudden end. 

Y% ». Hospitable, fond of all dumb animals, deeply interested 
in all philanthropic work, work for the sick and suffering, etc. Gain 
through hospitality to friends. Elevation through kindred, hereditary 
influences in a religious direction ; interested in spiritualistic phenomena. 
Generous to opponents. Marriage to an inferior. Hazardous and 
risky investments. Gain through associations and public companies, 
or through mining speculations. Mentally very concerned regarding 
honour and profession. Quiet and religious end. 


Tue Aspects or JUPITER * 


Y and 6. In good aspect, a great deal of energy and enterprise 
are thrown into all occupations signified by Jupiter’s signs. There is 
some degree of self-reliance and originality in matters signified by the 
planets: the native launches out into new undertakings or lines of 
thought; does not hesitate to forsake the beaten track; and may be, 
if only in a small way, a pioneer in his work: is a lover of freedom and 
justice, and one likely to espouse the cause of the weak, the poor, or 
those suffering from injustice. This will especially be noticed in religious 
affairs, but more or less in all matters of the ninth and twelfth houses. 
Fond of travel and exploration, he will succeed well in any occupation 
connected with sailing, shipping, travel; also in the mechanical occupa- 
tions connected with the ninth house. There is some degree of pride, 
ambition, and jealousy of position; but the native will ever be open- 
handed, free and straightforward. A legacy or money through the 
relatives of the marriage partner or through the marriage partner of a 
brother or sister is likely. Native arouses others to activity, seeks to 
lead, guide, or teach them for their good; champions others, whether a 
forlorn hope or not. The aspect in general inclines somewhat to irregular 
forms of religion, and slightly to the occult: it frees from captivity, 
servitude or bondage. 


* The aspects of 7 to *H, HI, and hk are given on pp. 233, 237 and 245 
respectively. 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: JUPITER 259 


The conjunction is partly good and partly evil. 

When in bad aspect, this position tends to irreligion, unorthodoxy, 
lack of devoutness and carelessness of established forms of religion. [ts 
general influence is injurious for religion, morality, law, order, honesty, 
and upright living. Much will, however, depend upon which planet is 
the stronger, and whether by elevation, house, or sign; for if Jupiter is 
elevated or otherwise strong, the extreme evil results need not be 
expected. There is a liability to feverish diseases, diseases of the 
blood and blood-vessels and of any part of the body ruled by the four 
signs concerned. ‘Trouble will come through religion, and any matter 
or occupation allied thereto; and through any affair or calling relating 
to the eighth, ninth, and twelfth houses; shipping, voyages, the goods 
of the dead, any occupation connected with the dead, prisons, asylums, 
charitable institutions. He will suffer from dishonesty, treachery, 
underhand dealing, desertion, severance of bonds and ties, misrepresen- 
tation ; or in some cases (according to the relative power of ¢ over 7/) 
he may bring about these himself, or be accused of these things, perhaps 
unjustly. He is often himself the cause, indirectly perhaps, of the 
misfortunes that befall him under this aspect. There is some danger of 
death by drowning, or on a voyage, or while absent from home, or in a 
distant country. In past ages this might have signified death through 
religious persecution ; but there is little likelihood of things proceeding 
to such extremity in modern times. Mediumistic or psychic practices 
may injure health, or such power may appear during or result from 
ill-health. The native will be in great danger of death once, or more 
than once, during his life. There is danger of trance being mistaken for 
death, death by misadventure, by enmity or treachery; death during 
restraint, imprisonment, or in a charitable institution. To a slighiter 
extent it signifies loss of a legacy: extravagance in money matters; loss 
of money, sometimes through dishonesty or deception either on his own 
part or at the hands of someone else; loss of money through affairs or 
occupations of the twelfth house. Trouble and loss through pleasures 
and speculations arising out of the fifth and ninth houses, horse-racing, 
boating, travelling, etc. Death or danger to health may occur in con- 
nection with any of these. Danger of psychic diseases, obsession, ete. 
The tendencies to the latter are, however, very slight. 

Y and ©. In conjunction or good aspect, it conduces to kindness, 
sympathy, sincerity and honesty. It inclines somewhat to religion, and 


260 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


may give some degree of prominence or eminence therein, as well as 
good fortune in affairs of the ninth house generally, occupations or 
amusements connected with religion or places of worship, travelling, 
shipping, horses, amusements and games. It increases the vitality— 
almost too much so, inclining to plethora, in the case of the conjunction, 
—the most vitalising aspects in general being those of Mars and Jupiter 
to the Sun and Moon, when the luminaries are free from bad aspects 
from other planets. It slightly favours legacies, either to the native or 
to his father or children; he benefits by any occupation of Leo and the 
fifth house, and is likely to rise to some position of responsibility in 
whatever occupation he pursues. It increases the social and benevolent 
instincts and humanitarian feelings, and is favourable to the prosperity 
of father and children, or for help received by the native from them. It 
is somewhat beneficial for love and marriage, but more for love than 
marriage. It is good for nursing, and all charitable work such as that 
connected with hospitals and charitable institutions; also for work 
connected with the poor and the lower classes generally. 

In bad aspect, it is less good for health; it may weaken the heart 
and bring about any of the Jupiter diseases; but unless the horoscope 
is a bad one for health these will not be important, or may not appear 
until the latter part of life. It introduces obstacles and misfortune into 
all matters signified by the two planets and by the fifth and ninth 
houses. There will be trouble in love, trouble connected with children, 
religion, travelling, shipping, horses, amusements, games; but none of 
these need be very serious unless backed up by other influences in the 
horoscope. It is slightly unfavourable for the life of the children (sons 
especially) and father ; one may die, or there may be disagreements or 
unavoidable separation. The native’s religious opinions will prove at 
variance with those of his superiors, father or son. He may require 
charitable assistance, or at some time of life may be the inmate of a 
charitable institution, and if other influences coincide this may help to 
bring the native to a prison, hospital, asylum, etc., at some time in his 
life; but here much depends upon the general state of the horoscope. 
If a nurse or doctor, may suffer from some disease contracted from a 
patient. It inclines somewhat to duplicity or a double life, which need 
not necessarily be of the native’s own seeking; in some cases it may be 
forced on him against his will. It may co-operate with other influences 
that tend towards dishonesty, irreligion, or lack of straightforwardness, 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECIS: JUPITER 2€y 


“a 


or the native may suffer from these qualities in others rather than possess 
them himself. In this respect the predominance of the Sun or Jupiter, 
as the case may be, will afford the clue. None of Jupiter’s bad aspects 
are very serious, however, unless there are other influences or indica- 
tions, pointing in the same direction. 

tand@ In good aspect all four signs ruled by the planets benefit. 
Money and possessions come through ninth house activities, by religion 
and occupations relating in any way to it or to the Church; by travels, 
journeys, shipping, or occupations relating to these ; by intercourse with 
foreign countries or people from a distance; by activities of the twelfth 
house and matters connected with prisons, hospitals, asylums, nursing, 
charitable institutions, etc. The native is honest, sincerely religious, 
pious, virtuous, sympathetic, and honourable. There is genius of some 
kind, imaginat’on, and the love of beauty; but in what form, whether 
sensuous, intellectual, artistic, spiritual, poetic, or musical, etc., depends 
a good dea: upon the signs and houses the planets are in, and also very 
largely upon the Mercurial and Lunar positions. It inclines to partner- 
ship, association, or marriage with a person coming some way under 
the ninth or twelfth houses by birth, character, or occupation ; or witha 
person from a distance, or of a different nation. It gives social and 
general popularity, esteem, and respect, and is extremely fortunate for 
love and marriage. It inclines to acts of charity, and the native will be 
fortunate in receiving charity or the help of sympathetic benefactors 
when needed. Toa slighter degree there may be money by legacy by 
matters connected with the dead, or with what may be called religio- 
occultism, and by any matters that are a combination of seventh and 
ninth houses, by the brethren of the business or marriage partner. 
Money will be gained through two. different occupations or sources, 
either both at once or successively by a change in the occupation, or 
from two businesses; also from trade-unions, companies, associations, 
etc., chiefly those that are local or limited in their scope and that do not 
appeal to a great number of people, or that bear upon activities of the 
twelfth house. There is a likelihood of two love-affairs, attachments or 
marriages ; of a love-affair or marriage with a relative or with a relative 
of the business or marriage partner ; also of third or ninth house activities 
carried on in connection with someone else (such as literary collabora- 
tion, etc.); and of a secret marriage or love-affair, or of one with 
someone very different to the native in station (probably lower). 


x02 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


When in bacl aspect, the native suffers through matters signified by 
the four signs, and trouble may come through anything referred to 
under the head of the good aspects. There will be either loss of money 
or money troubles of some kind arising directly or indirectly out of the 
ninth and twelfth houses, their occupations and mental characteristics. 
Money may be lost through easy good-nature, through fondness for 
ornaments, fine clothes or luxuries, through deceitful friends or acquaint- 
ances, through companies, societies, or associations, through carelessness 
and lack of business instinct, or through fraud and deception ; the aspect 
is also slightly unfortunate for money as related to the third, sixth and 
eighth houses. There will be similar troubles through partnership and 
marriage, or arising out of the ninth and twelfth houses, such as religion, 
voyages, foreign countries, etc., and due to deceit, concealment, treachery, 
desertion, persecution, abandonment or separation ; to a less extent, also 
out of the third and eleventh houses. The fact of Jupiter’s hquses being 
both double will cause various troubles, such as loss of money through 
divided interests, through carrying on two occupations at the same 
time, or through change of occupation; while in seventh house affairs, 
flirtation, jilting, two or more love-affairs or marriages——or even, ina 
bad horoscope, faithlessness, breach of promise, bigamy or divorce-— 
will figure in some way. 

Y% and %. Ingood aspect, and in the world of mind, this harmonises 
the influences of intellect and devotion, or science and religion, bringing 
the one to the support of the other and smoothing away antagonism, and 
will develop its influence in many ways according to the native’s station 
in life. According to the general status of the horoscope it will give a 
profoundly religious temperament, accompanied by a broad intellect and 
a philosophical mind, or by much learning; or, it may merely eventuate 
in ability to aim, steer or drive well: in any case, however, the power of 
judgment will be well marked (unless other aspects contradict, that is), 
and whatever his course, the native will steer it with both skill and ease. 
It inclines to tolerance and broad-minded views in the domains of 
religion and intellect, strengthening both the intellect and the religious 
sentiments, and inclining to honesty, straightforwardness, candour, con- 
scientiousness, mental balance, equanimity, good judgment. It enables 
the native to see all menas his brothers, to see the germs of truth in the 
most diverse opinions; and thus it may act in various ways between 
the two extremes of a large-hearted toleration and philosophical indiffer- 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: JUPITER 262 


ence. It gives harmony and good will between brethren and relatives, 
with mutual good fortune or good offices to or from either. It broadens 
the mind out towards general principles instead of confining it to 
details; it tends to versatility and the study of many subjects rather 
than one, and helps the native to be in some measure all things to all 
men. It may be one of the factors in genius and intuition; and some- 
what inclines to the mystical or philosophical aspects of religion, and 
slightly also to dreams, visions, psychic-writing, astral wanderings out 
of the body, and various forms of occult powers. It gives journeying 
and travelling, and changes generally, both physical and mental. There 
is the possibility of the higher cultivation of the mind, the perception of 
beautyin its higher aspects, and copious yet well-ordered imagination. 
It is good for health and digestion, and generally for any matter or 
occupation signified by the four signs ruled by the planets. 

The conjunction is mainly good, but it may vary a good deal 
according as to which of the two planets is the stronger; it adds 
much to the native’s self-confidence and may be found associated with 
overweening conceit. 

In bad aspect, the various meanings of the combination may be 
brought out just as clearly as with the good aspects, but they will 
generally be accompanied by obstacles and trouble in various degrees. 
The third and ninth houses, in short, will be found more or less at 
variance: and this may vary from a very pronounced religious scepticism 
or even atheism to a much milder questioning spirit which requires 
reason or evidence before believing, but which believes sincerely when 
it has them. Much will depend upon which planet is the stronger; if 
Mercury, doubts of some kind will assail; if Jupiter, there may be a 
blind unquestioning faith bordering on unreasoning superstition. The 
‘native will take his religion too severely, from the point of view of a 
student rather than a devotee, or it may be tinged with Calvinistic 
gloom if Jupiter is otherwise afflicted. There will be third or ninth 
house troubles connected with the parents or brethren. Any matters 
signified by the four signs involved will be accompanied by more or less 
misfortune according to the nature of the planets. There will be some 
tendency to vacillation of mind, and the native may throw over old 
opinions and adopt new ones more than once in his life. It tends to 
weakness of any part of the body ruled by the four signs, and there will 
be a good deal of journeying or travelling at some time of life. The 


264 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


native is liable to suffer from libels, slanders, false reports, or any kind 
of deceit affecting matters signified by Mercury. He may suffer from 
visions or hallucinations due to an over-active mind, or brought on by 
the use of drugs. 

% and). In good aspect, increases the imagination and intuition, 
and is sometimes the accompaniment of genius. It increases vitality 
and fertility, both of mind and body. It inclines to honesty, religion, 
justice, compassion and sympathy. It is fortunate for all matters of the 
fourth, ninth and twelfth houses, and for things connected with the 
watery element; also for the mother and her attitude to the native. It 
gives children, possibly twins. Ifthere are inclinations to psychism or 
occultism, this willlend its influence for good. Money is gained through 
the ninth house or by legacy from the mother’s side of the family. It is 
good for friendship and all social feelings; and it greatly improves and 
ripens the character. The conjunction is almost wholly good, but some- 
what inclines to excess, either in love of pleasure or in enthusiasm and 
* go.’ 

In bad aspect, it may bring illness of mother or lack of sympathy 
between her and the native, or separation from her. Possibility of a 
step-mother or of adoption. It is unfavourable for offspring, and puts 
obstacles in the way of all matters and occupations of the fourth, ninth 
and twelfth houses. The native will show duplicity and deception, or 
lack of straightforwardness, or may perhaps suffer from them in others, 
in matters signified by the two planets. In extreme cases, if the rest of 
the horoscope accords, the native will either be dishonest or suffer from 
the dishonesty of others. There will be trouble through religion, 
voyages and the watery element; moreover the native may suffer from 
slander. or be accused of wrongdoing he has never committed. This 
aspect 1s unfavourable for health, especially in women. 


THE INFLUENCE OF MARS IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 


[The following refer more particularly to Mars as ruling planet, or when 
angular and a strong planet in the nativity, also in a general sense as 
indicating the instinctive 1mpulses of the native. The special influence of 
each decanate is indicated. | 


é& . Positive, idealistic, enthusiastic, loyal and independent. 
Secluded or obscure means of livelihood. Gain from private sources. 
Intellectual friends. Employment in connection with the home. Pleasure 
in religious activity. Financial losses through marriage, and difficulty 
to consummate union. Liability to inflammatory and mental complaints. 
An enterprising and philosophical spirit. Troubles through parents. 
Self-interest strongly marked. More favourable for males than females. 
The above remarks apply to the whole sign generally, and in a more 
particular sense to the first ‘decanate’ (space of 10°). Mars in the 
second decanate gives amours, intense feelings, heroism, love of adven- 
ture, anda fearless disposition, fond of argument, enterprise and pleasure. 
In the third decanate, fluency of speech, impulsiveness, enthusiasm and 
much independence; love of sport or active outdoor pleasures, with a 
keen sense of enjoyment and love of travel. 

6 %. An enterprising spirit. Acquisitive, determined, reserved, 
proud and resentful. Keen instinctual consciousness. Suffers keenly 
through relatives and legal affairs. A friend of famous or notorious 
persons. Liability to loss of honour through love affairs. Both gain 
and pleasure from occupation. Peculiar religious views, more mysuical 
than orthodox. Unfavourable unions or partnerships ; tragic or unfor- 
tunate marriage, and ill-health through religious enthusiasm. An early 
love affair. Strange experiences concerning children. Some connection 
with associations at close of life. Gain by efforts and perseverance; 
but the native will have many powerful opponents. These remarks 
apply to the whole sign generally, and in a more particular sense to the 
first decanate (space of 10°). Mars in the second decanate gives a quick 
wit, tactful methods, a keen sense of self-interest, and good business 

265 


| 


266 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


foresight. In the third decanate, diplomacy and quiet ambition, with 
power to organise, manage and direct. 

36 U. Keen mentality, and an acute intellect, with strong educa- 
tional leanings. Sorrowful home episodes. Pleasure-loving friends by 
whom the native is greatly influenced. Scandal or discredit caused 
through inferiors or confederates. Marriage to a relative or to a religious- 
minded partner. More than one union. Liability to death from lung 
troubles. Better fitted to serve than rule. Involved in two attachments 
at the same time. An unfavourable end, surrounded by adverse relatives. 
Quickwitted, and a gainer by ‘wits’ or sharp perception. The above 
applies to the whole sign generally, and in a more particular sense to the 
first decanate (space of 10). Mars in the second decanate gives clear © 
perceptions, ability to undertake legal actions with skill and success, but 
is unfavourable for love affairs, and unions with the opposite sex. In 
the third decanate sharpens the insight, and gives ability to study 
science or chemistry to advantage; it inclines towards humanitarian 
tendencies, and refines the senses. 

“g 9. Ambitious and industrious, but unfortunate and changcable, 
though very domesticated. Many worries and sorrows. Romance in 
speculation: unfortunate children: friendship of servants. Power to 
resist sickness. Scandal or ill-repute through marriage. Struggle for 
home maintenance. Sea voyages and enterprising business journeys. | 
Changes in religious views. <A taste for occult and mystical studies, 
hypnotism, etc.; small persistence therein, however. A discontented 
partner, causing many troubles in married life. Gain through servants 
and agencies. Pleasure through psychic matters. Difficulties at the 
close of life. Gain through mental effort, travel and public concerns ; 
also from relatives. These remarks apply to the whole sign generally, 
and in a more particular sense to the first decanate (space of 10°.) Mars 
in the second decanate gives passionate tendencies, with a love of travel 
and long voyages, also martial inclinations. In the third decanate, 
a quiet nature, thoughtful and peaceful, and a very inoffensive and 
harmless disposition. 

3 St. Choleric, impulsive, fearless, enterprising, honest. Trouble 
through inferiors. Secret taste for occult phenomena. Secret alliances; 
ardent affections, anda partner whoreciprocates. Friendship of partners. 
Hazardous occupations. Gain by government pursuits or responsible 
posts. Broad religious views, and enthusiastic impulses, or free-thought 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: MARS © 267 


tendencies. Death while still in office, or labour to the end of life. 
Peculiar ailments of an inflammatory or tumorous character. <A 
speculative nature, and one fond of adventure ; passionate in both love 
and pleasure; fond of music, with some real ability for its study. 
Financial success at close of life. Idealistic and fond of mental pursuits. 
Gain through public appointments, or the musical profession. The 
above applies to the whole sign generally, and in a more particular sense 
to the first decanate (space of 10°). Mars in the second decanate inclines 
to travel, independence of action, a taste for philosophical argument, and 
much religious enthusiasm. In the third decanate it denotes a deter- 
mined will, a keen sense of justice, love of inventions, ready mechanical 
ability, and a responsive nature. 

3 my. Shrewd, quick-witted and acquisitive. Secret union with 
inferiors. Death of friends and helpers. Profession abroad, or gain in 
occupation out of native land. Profit through trading in common things 
and foreign produce. Orthodox religious views. Gain through insur- 
ance and other associations, societies, or public dealings, generally as 
the result of others’ losses. Peculiar ties. Power to resist disease by 
study of hygiene or care in diet. Gain by speculation and investments, 
or by keen judgment in Stock Exchange matters. A quiet end, but 
liable to be affected by relatives, of whom the native usually has many 
poorer than himself. Has ability to make a fortune by speculation. 
The above remarks apply to the whole sign generally, and in a more 
particular sense to the first decanate (space of 10°). Marsin the second 
decanate gives tact, fivesse, discrimination and quiet ambition, with 
ability to make opportunities. In the third decanate it gives a stubborn 
nature, and very obstinate tendencies with great reserve and pride. 

$6 =~. Clear vision, refined tastes, idealistic temperament. Troubles 
concerning deaths, and losses of many related to the home circle. Makes 
many friends of a philosophical or religious type. Succeeds in partner- 
ship with others. Follows refined occupations, but suffers through 
competitors. Pure in religious views. Has the opportunity to become 
clairvoyant. Survives enemies. Developes much perception. The 
native finds purification of emotions through marriage and the grave 
responsibilities it throws upon him. Unfortunate in monetary affairs 
through servants andinferiors. Many and intelligent children. Pleasures 
connected with the affairs of relatives. Involved in domestic affairs at 
the close of life. An intuitive mind of a speculative character. Gain 


268 HOW TO JUDGE ‘A (NATIVITY 


from business and professional pursuits. The foregoing applies to the 
whole sign generally, and in a more particular sense to the first decanate 
(space of 10°). Mars in the second decanate is good for associations 
and societies, out of which the native gains pleasure; it also shows love 
of humanitarian ideals, and gives refined children. In the third decanate 
it inclines towards educational pursuits, and quickens the mentality 
generally. 

6 M. Quick and acute in judgment-—good or evil according to 
the quality of the nativity. Intrigues, secret missions, legal troubles. 
Liability to seclusion or confinement. Government office or work of a 
peculiar nature in which associates and accomplices are concerned. 
Prominent in society work or in confederations, or even plots. Sea 
voyages, in which important work of a private nature or own employ- 
ment is concerned. Indirectly cause of own death. <A designing 
intellect, and often intense devotion to study, in which magical practices 
or spiritualistic or mesmeric phenomena play a prominent part. [ond 
of hazardous enterprises. Gains by public losses. Liability to a sudden 
or violent end. Unfortunate journeys. Financial gain by marriage. 
The above remarks apply to the whole sign generally, and in a more 
particular sense to the first decanate (space of 10°). Mars in the second 
decanate gives romantic courtship and unfortunate speculations. In 
the third decanate long journeys, necessitated by domestic conditions; 
publicity abroad. 

3 f. Impulsive in speech and action, enthusiastic, and at times 
rash and thoughtless. Unprofitable employment, or risk in connection 
with profession; favourable for professions connected with the occult 
arts, in which inspirational or prophetic tendencies bring success. Many 
friends of a refined and intuitive character. Liable to secret scandal 
and ill-repute, often undeserved. Fond of travel and adventure. Gain 
by will or legacy, also by marriage. More than one union. Concern 
regarding health of domestic circle. Fond of pleasure, particularly of 
outdoor exercise. Improvement of mind by marriage. Gain by social 
means. Dual experiences at close of life. These remarks apply to the 
whole sign generally, and in a more particular sense to the first decanate 
(space of 10°). Mars in the second decanate is exaggerative, and liable 
to over-estimate and risk too much. In the third decanate it renders 
the native honest and straightforward, and very ambitious. 

3 V8. Quietly ambitious, enterprising, industrious and acquisitive. 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: MARS 269 


Involved in difficulties through friends and acquaintances. Liable to 
suffer in honour through enemies of a secret and designing nature. 
Honour or fame in profession. Capable of much responsibility and 
endeavour. A lover of duty. Gain through foreign affairs, also by 
travel. Survives relatives, but rarely gains through them. Gains 
socially through marriage, which produces an important change in the 
life. Sickly children. Industrious servants. Liable to an early en- 
tanglement with an inferior. Marriage greatly affects the close of life. 
Subtle intellect and gain by intuition. Fond of the occult. Slow to 
learn, but sure in the assimilation of knowledge. The above applies to 
the whole sign generally, and in a more particular sense to the first 
decanate (space of 10). Mars in the second decanate is good for 
speculation and acquiring wealth. In the third decanate it bestows 
good business ability, and a fondness for commerce and science. 

«3. Intellectual, quick-witted, scientific. Interested in humani- 
tarian work, and associated with quiet schemes for public good. Con- 
nected with others in hospitable work. Gains many friends in the social 
world through merit and ability, also in profession, and obtains financial 
success through public work. Makes a good director, or responsible 
official in connection with public companies. Capable of blending 
science and philosophy. Sincere in religion. Gain through parents 
or relatives. Honourable marriage, and faithful in affections. Refined 
and faithful servants. Pleasure through union or partnerships. Fond 
of literature and intellectual studies. Death in a strange land or 
surrounded by strangers. This applies to the whole sign generally, and 
in a more particular sense to the first decanate (space of 10°). Mars in 
the second decanate gives joy in intellectual pursuits, but some danger 
of gambling tendencies. In the third decanate, success in marriage; 
high mentality. 

36 . Affectionate, receptive, humane, sympathetic. Occult 
tendencies, or, if the horoscope denotes it, misfortune. Gain from 
friends financially. [Fond of detail; follows ordinary pursuits but is a 
true dreamer; many changes either in disposition or in plans and 
views; pleasure in psychic pursuits; in an evil horoscope death through 
pleasure. Delays in marriage; two attachments; liable to disappoint- 
ment in love-affairs, or early death of children. Mental occupation; or 
some employment requiring uniform. Help from friends. Liable to 
consumptive tendencies. Uneventful end. The above remarks apply 


270 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


to the whole sign generally, and in a more particular sense to the first 
decanate (space of 10°). Mars in the second decanate gives joy in 
psychic or occult pursuits. In the third decanate, liability to early 
death, or life in foreign lands. 

“In adepraved horoscope this is an unfortunate position; in a refined 
horoscope it denotes occult inclinations. 


Tue Aspects or Mars* 


¢ and @®. In any aspect, this increases the animal passions and 
vigour of the body. In good aspect, the native has much ‘fire,’ great 
energy and vigqur, and achieves much ; he pushes his way with intensity 
of purpose, and having also much perseverance he is seldom thwarted. 
He has the ability to command and control others, but more through 
energy and strength of will than through subtlety of purpose. This 
position gives ability in games or pursuits involving muscular exercise 
rather than skill,—although if Mars is in an airy sign this same martial 
energy may take an intellectual direction: it strongly favours all Mars 
occupations; also legacy from a parent (probably father); and the birth 
of sons. 

In conjunction or bad aspect, there is likelihood of the death of, 
separation from or disfavour of a parent (probably father), and a child 
(probably son). The native is too precipitate, rash, aggressive, proud 
or over-bearing, and loses the esteem of superiors, parents or the public 
on this account. In conjunction, may receive a legacy: in bad aspect, 
less chance of it, and is troubled through the goods of the dead; this 
latter more especially if one or both planets are in negative signs. His 
health or life may be in danger from martial diseases, accidents, surgical 
operations, assaults, quarrels, etc. There is some possibility of heart 
disease. 

If Mars or the Sun be dignified by sign, the evil is lessened, and 
there is an accession rather of energy and executive power than of 
destructiveness, quarrelsomeness, or precipitancy. 

3 and 2. In good aspect this is fortunate for money, whether 
earned by the native’s own exertion, gained by partnership, by associa- 
tion with someone, by marriage, or by legacy. It favours money by 


* The aspects of Mars to *, HI, h, 2, are given on pp. 234, 238, 247, 258 
respectively. 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: MARS 27s 


any occupation of the four signs or houses ruled, especially the first and 
eighth; occupations involving personal energy, personal responsibility, 
personal initiative; all those ruled by Mars; any occupation connected 
with the dead or the goods of the dead in any way, or directly or indirectly 
with marriage. The native will part with money freely in social life 
and may launch out freely in business, for advertisement, for show, for 
good fellowship; it is, in fact, apt to be ‘easy come, easy go’; money 
is earned or spent in connection with the opposite sex, ornaments, finery, 
adornment, art, music, singing, the stage, etc. It is also fortunate for 
love, marriage, social popularity and attachments in general. The 
marriage or attachment will be to one signified by either of the two 
planets, but more especially Mars; and to one following any occupa- 
tion of the four houses, but more especially those of the first and 
eighth. The marriage will be either for money, or to a moneyed person, 
or a marriage of passionate attachment; otherwise, love at first sight, 
or an early or quick marriage. The native will be very susceptible to 
the attractions of the opposite sex. 

The conjunction is largely evil but not always wholly so; for a good 
deal depends upon which planet is the stronger, and whether the sign 
and house harmonise with either of the planets or not. 

In bad aspect there will be loss of money from carelessness, 
extravagance, or dishonesty of some kind, and this may come through 
any matter signified by the four signs or the houses they occupy in the 
horoscope; from launching out too freely in enterprises, from the fault 
or misfortune of the marriage or business partner, or from the dishonesty 
or misfortune of any person associated with the native. There is 
likelihood of the loss of a legacy, or money troubles connected with 
matters pertaining to the dead; the loss of money by marriage or 
through the opposite sex; or else loss through dissipated habits. It is 
bad for love and marriage and for all association with the opposite sex ; 
the lover or marriage partner may die, or there will be separation 
or desertion. In extreme cases, where the rest of the horoscope 
accords, there will be danger to health or life to or from the opposite 
sex. The native manifests, or suffers from, jealousy; love turned 
to hatred; loss and opposition from former friends; or is involved 
in quarrels and enmity, secret or open. His popularity, social or 
otherwise, is endangered at times. 

3 and %. In good aspect, this combination sharpens the wits. 


272 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


makes the mind quick, bright, alert and lively, and gives humour, wit, 
sarcasm and satire. It throwsa great deal of energy, force and activity 
into all matters signified by the third and sixth houses. It gives some 
manual dexterity in the direction of drawing, designing, carving, 
sculpture, and all that is necessary for music, conjuring, etc., and for 
many kinds of mechanical work. It is fortunate for any activity of the 
third or sixth houses that depends upon energy, activity and individual 
enterprise; this combination tending to make such activities arise 
spontaneously from within the mind rather than impressed from without 
by force of circumstances. It gives ability and some inclination for 
alchemy, chemistry, science, and investigation of the mysteries and 
secrets of nature, for medicine, drugs, sanitation, engineering. It is 
slightly favourable for joining literary or occult societies or associations, 
or for making friends signified by either of the four signs ruled by the 
planets. Legacies may be received from, or money gained through, 
association with persons signified by the third or sixth houses. It is 
good for health and digestion, and the native benefits in health by drugs 
and sanitary methods, and may be inclined to use them frequently. The 
last four sentences apply more especially when the aspect falls from 
negative signs. 

* The conjunction is partly good and partly bad; it partakes to a 
large extent of the nature of the evil aspects, but may also show much 
of the good. 

In evil aspect, while rendering the mind acute and active, as with 
the good aspects, and giving wit, dexterity of mind and hand, there is 
danger of overwork mentally, excitement and rashness. It gives good 
intellectual powers, but tends to the matter-of-fact, argumentative, or 
materialistic, rather than the imaginative or spiritual. If a writer or 
speaker he arouses opposition, criticism and ill-will; sometimes by his 
sharp tongue or pen or injudicious actions ; sometimes by little apparent 
fault of his own. Liable to scandalous reports, discreditable rumours, 
libel; or to originate such about other people, according to the general 
tone of the horoscope. Likely to disagree or quarrel with brethren, 
associates, friends. It brings trouble or obstacles through the affairs 
governed by the four signs, and accident, disease or malformation of any 
part of the body signified by these signs, the nervous system especially, 
such as neuralgia, sieeplessness, headache, etc. Danger while travelling, 
whether by land or water; also from wounds, from surgical operations, 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: MARS _ 273 


drugs, tools, instruments, electricity, scientific experiments, etc.; may 
contract some drug ‘habit’; danger from quarrels, and from servants 
or inferiors ; possibility of suicide. Death of brethren, friends, agents, 
servants. If other influences in the horoscope co-operate, but only in 
this case, such an aspect as this may unhinge the mind or cause 
delusions or mania of a violent type. 

3 and). In good aspect, greatly increases the activity, energy 
and vitality. If there is bad health indicated elsewhere, this will go far 
to counteract it and to preserve health and life. The native is capable 
of hard work, and works quickly. He accomplishes his ends more 
through his energy than subtlety, and influences people more by his 
activity and pushing ways than through agreeableness or insinuating 
manner, although all these may be present if indicated elsewhere in the 
horoscope. Enterprising and fruitful of resource, the native will not 
shrink from positions of publicity or responsibility. This position brings 
good fortune through the mother, and the possibility of a legacy or 
money from her on her side of the family. It is favourable for the 
dwelling-house and house-property, and for a prosperous close to life ; 
it gives a good deal of activity, intelligence and preservation of the 
senses to the last in old people. It favours fertility in offspring, and 
gives strength to the whole system, muscular and circulatory; it is good 
for those who have to work with their muscles, athletes, labourers, and 
for occupations carried on in the open air. It gives some likelihood of 
money or possessions through marriage or partnership. It is good for 
occupations of the fourth and eighth houses, also for those of the water 
and the watery element generally, and for martial pursuits. If religion 
is prominent in the horoscope, this may lend its influence in the same 
direction, according to its own nature. 

In conjunction or bad aspect, the native is imprudent, rash and 
hasty; his temper is quick, and he says and does things that he soon 
regrets. He is frequently in mental or physical conflict with other 
people, and constantly finds himself differing from others and at variance 
with them, perhaps much to his own surpriseand regret. He dislikes 
being hampered or fettered by restrictions, and often breaks rules and 
regulations of all kinds, careless of the consequences, inciting others to 
do the same. This position gives strong and ill-regulated passions, 
which may bring the native much sorrow; these may act in many direc- 


tions, but bad temper, drink and sex impulses need specially guarding: he 
Ss 


274 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


may incur public scandal in some degree in connection with any of these, 
although sometimes this may be quite as much if not more someone 
else’s fault than his own. It may bring trouble of some kind in the sex 
relation, whether married or not, and disorders affecting the sex organs, 
lower bowel, or bladder, also the head or eyes. It brings trouble 
through the mother and her side of the family, her illness or death, or 
separation from her; also through the house or dwelling-place, and 
house property. It may cause maladies affecting the breasts, digestion, 
head and nervous system, and sometimes cancer. It gives liability to 
a martial death, one rather sudden, or from fever, accident, excitement, 
rupture of a blood-vessel, wounds, surgical operations; danger from 
water and fire, scalding, drowning, burning. Loss of an expected 
legacy ; loss of money through marriage or partnership, through robbery, 
deceit or the bad advice or action of others. If the aspect is strong the 
native is likely to arouse enmity and opposition and to incur strong 
disapproval from many people. It may make him excitable and nervous. 

The evil effects, so far as they influence character and disposition, 
may vary very greatly according to the general condition of the horo- 
scope, the prominence of benefics, the sign rising, etc. With prominent 
benefics and an otherwise good horoscope, the character may suffer very 
little, and the effects work out through mere ‘bad luck,’ fate, or what 
the Easterns term Karma. 


Notr.—Mars sometimes seems to act, in good as well as evil, more 
through the influence of other people and association with them than 
from the native’s own action or initiative; good or evil comes to the 
native from the action of other people. This is, of course, the female 
(Scorpio) or negative action of Mars. In its male (Aries) and positive 
nature, the native influenced by Mars is himself the direct or indirect 
cause of his own fortune or misfortune, and not other people. 


THE INFLUENCE OF VENUS IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 


[The following judgments apply more to the planet Venus when Ruler or 
when in the Seventh than when otherwise placed, although they have a general 
application also as indicating the subjective ideals. | 


? ™. Idealistic, imaginative, affectionate, demonstrative, ardent. 
Changeable in feelings, romantic in love. Secret attachments, fluctuat- 
ing finance; friends among relatives. Mental attractions to the opposite 
sex. Prominent domestic affairs, involving some risks in regard to 
honour?or reputation. Pleasure through foreign travel; philosophical 
friendships. Financial gain through the death of inferiors, and maternal 
relatives : happiness and joy in marriage. Liable to strange sicknesses. 
Pleasure from religious or philosophical studies, also from foreign travel. 
Feelings affected by the father and his affairs. Intellectual friendships; 
gain through secret and occult affairs. ‘This position gives an ideal love 
nature, which seeks union for the realisation of the inner self apart from 
the senses, and the native is anxious to obtain a mental if not a Sou/ 
OUnton. 

9 &%. Strong feelings and deep emotions. <A lover of form, and 
very responsive to physical attractions ; more intuitive than intellectual. 
Sorrowful emotions produced by relatives and their restrictions; true 
friendships and attachments in the domestic circle; honourable love 
affairs. Orthodox religious tendencies. Loss of marriage partner ; one 
union. Sickness in travel. Fixed in feelings; psychic or weird mental 
conditions. Gain from profession and through personal efforts. Se//- 
Control in matters of love is the inward desire. 

? I. Dual love affairs. Gain through relatives. Peculiar love- 
intrigues necessitated in some manner by home life or domestic ties, 
many loving friends ; honour affected by inferiors for good or ill. Success 
with affairs abroad in connection with marriage ; many relatives through 
marriage ; more than one union. Attachments or marriage to members 
of the clerical or judicial profession. Sickness through profession or 


business pursuits; gain by speculation, through the help and advice of 
275 


276 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


friends. Heart sorrows at the close of life. Travel for pleasure; and 
gain through secret and obscure methods. A religious or philosophical 
love-hfe is ever sought rather than the sensual or worldly. 

2 95. Fickle love affairs; love of home; affectional attractions. 
Secret love affairs; friendships amongst inferiors. Honour, fame, or 
notoriety through marriage; death of partner in a foreign land. Love 
of mystical religion or partner with occult tendency. A union with one 
who has repute or social standing. Affection from inferiors, pleasure in 
psychic things, and gain from unpopular sources or by obscure methods. 
Power to create own domestic atmosphere; gain through ingenuity or 
mental receptivity, or by sensing public needs and supplying them. 
Gifted in the occult arts, or in matters related to the astral or psychic 
world; fortunate as amedium. The desire nature is polarised towards 
Ideai love. | 

? St. Ardent in affection, extravagant, and fond of social display. 
Secret attachments with inferiors ; marriage to a friend or brought about 
through the influence of friends. Liable to dishonour through jealousy, 
or failure of duty through attachments. Capable of a soul union or 
philosophical affection, which is sometimes termed free love. Liable to 
death in order to save honour. One lasting affection at close of life. 
Very intuitive where affection is concerned. Fond of speculation, and 
generally fortunate in speculative ventures when impulse is avoided. 
Gain through inheritance. Mentally clever or intuitive. Mysterious 
domestic arrangements at the close of life. The goal sought is 
Conjugality . 

? ny. Pure in affection; the love of chastity being innate. Secret 
marriage or /aison, intrigue or tragedy in connection with love affairs ; 
honour affected through dual attachments. Travels abroad in connec- 
tion with business affairs, or to safeguard reputation. Loss of friends 
by death, causing much sorrow. Marriage to an obscure person, or one 
who has secret troubles ; love-sickness, or entanglements with inferiors. 
Gain by speculation and the help of partner in monetary affairs. Strange 
experience at close of life; concern regarding relatives; mind occupied 
at close of life with affections, which latter occasion much correspon- 
dence or perhaps travel. A liability to be always involved in secret 
attachments or unions that are private and undiscovered. The ‘law of 
opposites’ operates here in a marked degree to bring a realisation of 
the inward purity, which is very difficult to maintain in the outer 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: VENUS) 277 


world owing either to ties of the past or the inner desire to make the 
Love universal rather than particular. 

¢ ==. Pure and refined in affection; a simple love nature; many 
sorrows through death of loved ones; philosophic friends. Honour or 
position and social gain through marriage; native survives partner. 
Love affairs and attachments to cousins or relatives. Marriage for love, 
and financial sacrifices in consequence, for marriage will bring unusual 
domestic responsibilities ; a fruitful union and intellectual children being 
however shown. The inner desire is for true Peace. 

? M. Jealous love nature. Pride of caste. Probable marriage to 
one who has been previously married. Risky attachments; self-control 
in matters connected with the feelings; failure in social affairs. Mystical 
friends, or friendships with persons of doubtful repute. Attacks upon 
honour through friends or acquaintances. Sea voyages, and romantic 
adventures during travel. Liable to death by poison, or by suicide 
through passion and unhappy alliances. Financial gain through unions ; 
secret enmity of servants or blood relations ; death of children or trouble 
through their affairs. Liable to heart affection at close of life. Power 
to read character or sit in judgment upon others; gain by secret alliance. 
The inner desire is for Purification of the sex-nature. 

? f. Light-hearted and impressionable; fond of pleasure; much 
involved in love affairs affecting honour. Powerful friends and lasting 
affections ; hospitable connections, generous and loyal intentions. Gain 
by legacies and through marriage; more than one union; fond of service 
in home life. Successful in investments or speculations; loving children, 
who gain social success. Intellectually improved through marriage; 
some prophetic tendencies. Strange enemies. A peaceful end. The 
inner desire is for [//umination. 

2 ¥S. Ambitious love nature; restricted affections; careful of 
honour. Liable to treachery through associates; friendly with strange 
characters, and those who have doubtful reputations. Capable of 
obtaining fame and distinction through skilful use of affections; gain 
through diplomatic alliances. Gain through foreign travel. Legacies 
from relatives. Marriage is often one of convenience or for social stand- 
ing; there are disappointments in love, and coldness or indifference of 
partner, intrigues with inferiors and unhealthy attachments; little or 
no domestic happiness. Mental affliction through secret attractions, 
Allowances from abroad. The inner desire is for Excellence. 


278 HOW TO JUDGE. A NATIVITY 


2 <s. Faithful in affection; platonic unions; romantic and secret 
attachments. Power to win friends easily, and to form easy acquaint- 
ance with strangers. Gain through social affairs and through acquaint- 
ances. Philosophical views of love life; reserved in opinions and sincere 
in religious convictions. Money by inheritance or through public 
connections. Marriage for pure love; very refined inclinations. Friends 
amongst inferiors. A happy love attachment, and the probability of a 
long courtship. Some tragedy or shock at close of life, or change of 
consciousness of some kind. Fond of mental companionship. Gain 
indirectly through enemies. The inner desire is for Soul Communion. 

? . Hospitable, sympathetic and easily impressed, philanthropic, 
or engaged in work connected with institutions; strongly attached to 
persons weak or afflicted. Gain through friendships: honour amongst 
relatives. Travel for business purposes. Inspirational or psychic, a 
true dreamer or medium. Gain from attachments, financially. Dis- 
crimination in love affairs; sickness after marriage and liability of 
affection to one not worthy of support. Gain through the help of friends. 
A peaceful mind; intuition in business affairs. A good end but some- 
what involved. The inner desire is for Compassion. 


Tue Aspects or Venus * 


2 and ©. Inconjunction, the native is a very warm-hearted lover 
and a general favourite with the opposite sex; he or she probably falls 
in love ‘at first sight,’ and usually the marriage is one of affection. 
Such people seldom remain single; they seem almost invariably to 
marry, no matter how bad the afflictions may be in other parts of the 
horoscope. ‘The nativeis fond of society and friends, and is kind-hearted 
and sympathetic, but may be too much attached to ease, luxury and 
comfort. This position is favourable for parents’ money, for money 
derived from parents, and for money earned through business, profession 
or public occupation. It gives some liking for poetry, music and the 
fine arts generally, and some ability in this direction. The native is 
likely to rise in his occupation and to do well by it. He is popular and 
has many friends; may marry money, though not necessarily for money. 
The semi-square is not very important, but it will co-operate with any 


* ‘The aspects of Venus to the slower planets are to be found on the following 


pages “aes of 235, i 239, h 249, ¥ 261, 3 270. 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: VENUS 279 


other aspect in causing delay or misfortune in all matters mentioned 
above. (The 6 Vand Z are of course the only possible aspects.) 

2 and ¥%. In good aspect or conjunction, this is fortunate for 
money, property and possessions; and these (to put it briefly) may be 
obtained through any of the activities of the third or sixth houses. In 
a secondary degree money may be obtained through pleasure, luxury, 
the theatre, singing, and through sources of the fifth house generally. 
It is fortunate for marriage and partnership, which may be with one 
coming to some extent under the third or sixth house in character or 
occupation, or to a slighter extent under the ninth or twelfth; and the 
native may marry twice or have two attachments. It gives fondness 
for society, an amiable and good-humoured manner, and general popu- 
larity, especially with the opposite sex. It is fortunate for all matters 
of the third house; goodwill between brethren; money earned by the 
wits, by speaking or writing ; it is good for invention, and gives manual 
dexterity which may be turned to account in any of the arts, drawing, 
painting, music, sculpture, etc. 

It is favourable for intuition and the inspiration of genius, and gives 
some talent for music, poetry, or kindred pursuits. It gives good brains, 
wit, mirth, buoyancy, good temper, hopefulness. It is good for all 
matters of the sixth house; for food, digestion, health; for benefit from 
doctors or medical affairs, and money therefrom; for good relations with 
servants and subordinates, also when the native occupies such a position 
himself; for goodwill between relations (uncles, aunts, cousins, etc.). 
The native is inclined to marry a cousin or some relation. 

The only bad aspect between Mercury and Venus is the semi-square, 
and this is not important. It may, however, put obstacles in the way 
of any of the affairs signified by the four signs ruled by the two planets ; 
money, marriage, partnership, writings, brothers, journeys, servants, 
health, etc., and will reverse or hinder those activities previously referred 
to under the good aspects. 

2 and). Inconjunction or good aspect, it is very favourable for 
all matters signified by the second, fourth, and seventh houses; for 
money and possessions ; for money through a parent or parents (probably 
from mother); for money through things of the third and eleventh 
houses; for money through houses, land and fruits of the earth. It is 
fortunate for friends, partners and marriage, and gives social and general 
popularity. The occupation will be profitable and yet at the same time 


280 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


either unrefined or of low class or caste, plebeian, or involving secrecy. 
The partner (business or marriage) will differ in age or social position 
from the native, but help or approval comes from parents (especially 
mother). 

In bad aspect, it brings trouble and loss through money, possessions 
and property ; itis bad for parents’ money (especially mother), and for 
any attempt to earn money through the eleventh, third or fourth houses; 
money may be lost through such matters. The native may suffer in 
reputation or pocket through some unpopularity, through some slur 
being cast upon him, or his business or pursuits; or through slander or 
scandal, whether deserved or not; or through attaching himself to un- 
popular movements or causes. It brings trouble through partnership, 
love and marriage; and the trouble may arise from any of the causes 
just referred to—social or general unpopularity, disapproval of parents, 
difference in age or position, or from something arising out of the 
occupation. 


THE INFLUENCE OF MERCURY IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 


[The following judgments apply to the mental qualifications quite as 
much as to the influence of Mercury when Ruler. | 


& 7. A quick, active, impulsive and argumentative mind; given 
to over-estimate or exaggerate, and in making statements to add an 
unconscious ‘colouring’; given also to a change of opinions. It 
inclines to hasty speech, and rash projects; but it gives clever and 
inventive methods of thought, with liberal views and expressive 
characteristics. 

8 &. A practical, solid, firm and determined mind, somewhat 
obstinate and stubborn and inclining to dogmatism ‘or over-fixity of 
opinion. It denotes decided fancies, and strong likes and dislikes, with, 
however, much intuition; and it moreover bestows the gift of discreet 
silence or very diplomatic speech. The mind is generally cheerful, 
refined and musical. 

6 . A clever, dualistic and inventive mind, with power of clear 
thinking and freedom from decided bias, or over-much prejudice. It 
denotes latent wit and humour, and a love of detail, with a fondness for 
travel and the acquisition of knowledge. 

% oo. A discreet, tactful, and diplomatic mind, with ability to 
change opinions without fear. It gives a clear and well-defined intellect, 
with the power to argue and reason and also to adapt oneself to condi- 
tions and surroundings. 

& §. <A determined, governing, organising and controlling mind, 
with power to take large and extensive views, coupled with a somewhat 
dogmatic tendency: there is much positive assurance, and a high degree 
of faith and conviction in noble ideals. It denotes a confident, ambitious, 
persistent, and at the same time intuitive intellect. 

% ty. A good intellect, discriminative, scientific, cautious and 
prudent. It gives versatility and practicalness, coupled with intuition, 


and an innate love of mystery; but it tends always towards criticism, 
282 


282 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


and at times scepticism—-a desire to know thoroughly before 
conviction. 

9 =<, A quiet and dispassionate mind, fond of comparison, and 
displaying both judgment and temperance. ‘This position refines the 
mind, and gives a taste for mental pursuits that are broad and catholic 
in their scope. 

% m. <A shrewd, keen and critical mind, curious, suspicious and 
mistrustful; fond of occult and mystical subjects, but ever intent on 
gaining knowledge and mental power, which is only acquired when the 
senses have been purified. 

% ff. <A prophetic, generous and ambitious mind, which is very 
independent and often rebellious. It gives a love of philosophising and 
inclines to great freedom in speech, with some tendency towards rash- 
ness and impulse. 

% v8. <A tactful, suspicious and critical mind, inclined to be dis- 
contented, though ever studious and careful. It gives a patient and 
economical disposition, which is only seen at its best when the mind is 
active and industrious: it then awakens a keen interest in science and 
supplies painstaking effort towards perfection of intellect. , 

§ sc. A refined and intuitive mind, faithful and persistent, pene- 
trative, observant and keen in its judgment of human nature, and having 
considerable powers of concentration and abstract thought. It gives a 
love of metaphysics, and also humanitarian principles. 

% 3. A quiet, flexible and impressionable mind, with great 
absorbing tendencies and the power to memorise and adapt the mind to 
requiremements. There is, however, little depth or breadth of thought, 
the mind being more intuitive than actively intellectual. There is a 
liability to be easily psychologised by becoming over-receptive. 


Tue Aspects or MERcuRY 


[Some of these aspects have been treated of before, under the heading 
of the various planets; but as the description here given is more especially 
directed to the mental tendencies, they have been included with the others. ] 

9% alone. When in its own sign, Gemini or Virgo, Mercury might 
theoretically be supposed to exhibit mind fer se, uninfluenced by any 
special mode. In practice, however, this never happens; because the 
heavenly body with which it is in closest aspect has then to be taken as 
significant of the type. 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: MERCURY 283 


% and ‘$Y. The mind gains in receptivity, plasticity, adaptability, 
and intuition. Any tendencies in the direction of the higher mental 
emotions and powers of imagination will be increased and may work out 
in various directions, art, poetry, music, etc., according to the general 
type of horoscope. Under affliction there may be lack of concentration, 
absence of mind, dreaminess, or irresolution; but the above-mentioned 
tendencies may even then show out, nevertheless. With both Uranus 
and Neptune there will be some psychic or occult inclinations or 
experiences. 

% and WA. In any aspect the mental power is much increased, and 
may gain either in activity or profundity according to the type of 
horoscope. There is originality, ingenuity, and inventive ability. 
Generally some distinct ability for such subjects or pursuits as are indi- 
cated by Uranus is shown, and they may be taken up with interest and 
successfully carried out, unless the aspects are very adverse. It givesa 
stimulus to literary ability and to almost all Mercurial activities. 

% and h. The effects of this combination may vary a good deal 
according to the type of horoscope, the aspect, and the relative strength 
of the two influences. At its best it gives a very comprehensive and 
profound mind, capable of achieving much in whatever direction it is 
turned. The memory is good and strong, and the judgment sound and 
sensible. If the mind is directed outwardly toward the world, it looks 
for practical results and has abilities suitable for politics, local or muni- 
cipal, and for large private or general public undertakings, official 
positions of all kinds, and public appointments. The judgment necessary 
for dealing in speculative commercial or financial ventures is often 
present; and there are prudence, caution, and sobriety of judgment. 
The mind is made up slowly, but there is much strength of will and 
steady persistence when a determination has been arrived at. When 
directed inwards, or turned towards more purely intellectual pursuits, 
similar characteristics are shown along these lines; there is a compre- 
hensive grasp of subject, concentration and continuity of thought, ability 
for dealing with profound and abstruse subjects, and skill in reducing 
them to order and system for the use of others. If Mercury is much 
afflicted these qualities may be lessened and the mind be slow or un- 
practical, while if Mercury and the Moon are both seriously afflicted by 
malefics there is danger of mental weakness and instability. Under 
affliction there may be more or less disappointment, mental gloom, errors 


a8 4 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


of judgment, fear, hesitation, lack of initiative, procrastination, lack of 
candour, etc. 

§ and %. This may tend in one or two directions. Firstly, the 
mind may go out towards mankind, showing interest in all studies, 
pursuits, or occupations that relate the native to his fellow men. It 
shows in various ways, from cordiality, sociability, good nature—the 
prudent adviser, the helpful friend—up to the wider operations of 
philanthropy and benevolence in the world at large. Secondly, from 
a more strictly intellectual point of view, there is ability for and a 
tendency towards religious or philosophical studies, varying, of course, 
according to opportunity and the degree of cultivation of the mind. At 
its best, the profoundest philosophy, the most exalted sense of religion, 
and the widest scientific generalisations can be appreciated. The judg- 
ment is ripe, the mind is fruitful, honest and honourable. In less 
developed souls the same tendencies to human intercourse and to 
religion or the cultivation of the mind may be exhibited, but in a less 
exalted degree. : 

% and 6. Here the fire and passion of Mars are blended with the 
intellect. In undeveloped natures, this means that the reason is con- 
stantly in danger of being swept aside by storms of passion, desire, 
anger, prejudice, or self-will. In higher natures, the mind overcomes 
such impulses and utilises them as energies to subserve its own ends. 
It often shows as a restless activity of mind that is never satisfied and 
never at peace. There is liveliness, resource, wit, irony, sarcasm, 
ingenuity, and promptness. There may be much strength of will in 
some cases, but it is usually more due to vigour and energy than to 
patience and steadfastness, The mind is separative and scattering, but 
the energies are such that great results can be achieved in a short time. 
Pride, harsh criticism and fault-finding are sometimes shown, and 
there is a tendency to exaggeration and even untruthfulness in some 
tases. 

% and ©. This is seen when the planet is in Leo or is in close 
conjunction (say 5°) with the Sun. Strength and vitality are given to 
the mind as a whole rather than to any subdivision of it. Prompt 
response to new ideas does not occur so readily as with some of the 
combinations; but any habit of mind once established is likely to be 
held tenaciously, faithfully adhered to, not easily given up—never under 
compulsion, though perhaps under persuasion. Mental firmness, mental 


PLANETARY POSITIONS AND ASPECTS: MERCURY 245 


continuity, mental conservatism and mental energy are shown. New 
and unfamiliar modes of thought are apt to be rejected, misunderstood, 
or entirely overlooked simply because they are new; but if some relation 
to familiar methods is perceived they are slowly accepted and then very 
exhaustively examined and held. Some degree of mental dignity or 
pride is shown, some considerable appreciation of the sublime or the 
dramatic. 

When this type is due to the close conjunction with the Sun, there 
is practically no danger of mental instability (unless congenital) and the 
mind remains active and powerful to extreme old age. When it arises 
from the position of Mercury in Leo, much depends upon aspect. At its 
best, the mind may exert much control over the body and influence it 
beneficially in illness. 

8 and 2. This may be taken as a tendency on the part of the 
mind to combine with the emotions, to be influenced and modified by 
them, and to harmonise and co-ordinate them in its turn. It lends 
itself to a variety of uses of all degrees of superficiality or profundity, 
according to circumstances. Mental buoyancy and hopefulness are 
generally shown ; social qualities are called out and manifested ; and the 
mind has the power to adapt itself to other minds, whether in thelimits 
of family life, or in society, or the world at large. This blend of intellect 
and feeling may be taken as a type of what, when perfected, becomes 
the genius of the poet, musician, or artist. At its best, it means that 
the reason is responsive to impulses superior to reason, as in flashes of 
genius or the ecstatic vision of the seer. In ordinary humanity it 
shows companionability and sympathy. This combination lifts the 
mind higher than any other towards the heaven world. 

% and). There is much less continuity and firmness than with 
the Sun, but more plasticity, variety, change and adaptability. The 
mind responds more readily to new ideas; mental habits are less firmly 
fixed and ingrained; there is a tendency to change opinions, perhaps 
several times during the life, or even to entertain apparently con- 
tradictory ones. Imagination and intuition are increased, also mental 
sympathy and receptivity. 


236 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


IMPORTANT NOTE 


Due allowance should be made for ‘minor’ aspects since they 
have not the same strength and power as the major aspects, which are 
the opposition, square, trine, and sextile. 

Where necessary, it will be needful to make allowance for the 
contradictions that are sure to occur in the different planetary positions. 
If unable to blend these, reference should be made to The Art of 
Synthesis, which forms the succeeding volume of this series. 

This ‘blending’ is really the most important as well as the most 
difficult part of the work of judging a nativity, and calls for natural 
ability as well as wide experience. But until the analytical judgment 
of the horoscope, the study of which this book is designed to facilitate, 
has been thoroughly mastered, any attempt at synthesis would be 
altogether unavailing. In all arts a thorough mastery of the means to be 
employed—of ‘colour values,’ as a painter would say—must be gained 
before any hope of success in achieving a good ‘ general effect’ can be 
entertained. And the synthesising of a horoscope is essentially an art. 


CHAPTER XXI 
CoNncLUDING REMARKS ON JUDGMENT 


In all cases the ‘decanates’* should be studied. If the ascending 
decanate and its rulers are taken fully into consideration, a great deal of 
light will be thrown upon the character of the native, and the attitude 
of mind he will be likely to take under given circumstances. 

It is not a good thing to have the Ascendant, Sun, and Moon all in 
the same triplicity, although at first sight it may appear to be best; for 
the native would be more likely to become lop-sided—either far too 
idealistic or, on the other hand, too materialistic and * practical.’ 

The Decanates of the signs occupied respectively by both Sun and 
Moon will modify or expand the influence of the sign, and will help con- 
siderably in the judgment as to the value of each polarity. Ifthe Sun 
were placed in the second decanate of Aries (which gives a Leo in- 
fluence) and the Moon were in the sign Leo in the first decanate (also a 
Leo influence) the cultivation of the devotional and higher emotional 
part of the nature would constitute the ideal of the native’s life. 
Again, if the Sun held the third decanate of Aries (which is of the nature 
of Sagittarius) and the Moon were placed in the first (f) decanate of 
Sagittarius, the trend of the native’s desires would be towards prophecy 
and philosophy, and this would greatly improve the general tone of th? 
horoscope, according to the triplicity in question. 

The best polarities are those in which the ascendant and the signs 
containing the luminaries differ: there is then more adaptability, and 
less danger of becoming too self-centred and exclusive, too much ‘shut 
up’ within. 

When the Moon is increasing in light—that is, going from the con- 
junction to the opposition—the perceptive and objective side of the con- 


* These, as explained before, are divisions of a sign into three equal parts 
of 10° each. The three decanates of each sign are ruled thus; Aries, Y 
f; Taurus, § my V8; Gemini, Il <<; etc., the first decanate being ever of 
the nature of the sign itself, the second of the next sign of the same triplicity, 
and so on. 
289 


288 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


ad 


sciousness will be more developed than the subjective or reflective ; while 
the contrary is the case when the Moon is decreasing or passing from 
the full to the new. Allowance should be made for this fact when 
judging the horoscope. 

If the Sun meets an important aspect before the Moon, that is, if 
the Sun is nearer to an aspect of importance than the Moon, then the 
Individual Character will be as it were ‘coloured’ by this aspect, and the 
polarity will be affected by it considerably : in the same way the Personal 
Disposition will be coloured if the Moon makes the first important aspect. 
The luminaries applying to aspects affect the polarity more than aspects 
from which they are separating. 

Another important point to consider is the respective elevation of 
the luminaries. If the Sun is above the Moon, rising or setting, the 
Individual Character will be stronger than the personal. If both 
luminaries are be/ow the earth the blending of the luminaries is more 
potent, and the polarity more complicated. The solar influence is 
strongest when the © is above the earth and the lunar when the ) is 
below. 

If both are above the tendency will be for the Sun to gain the greater 
power ; if both are de/ow the Moon. 

_ The polarity is always stronger when the luminaries are rising (ze., 
have not yet reached the point of culmination), and weaker when setting 
(z.e., the culminating point has been passed). The Individual side of the 
character is strongest when the Sun applies to the benefics, and the 
same holds good with regard to the Personality in the case of the Moon. 

Much aid will be given to the judgment if the planets ruling the 
signs holding the luminaries are also studied. If they are in the same 
signs as the luminaries the polarity is very powerful, and the quality of 
that sign is much accentuated. For instance, if Mars is also in Aries 
the influence of the Sun in Aries will partake chiefly of the martial 
character, no matter what the decanate may be; but it will denote strength, 
for either good or evil according to the horoscope. 


Tue Porarities or Sun anp Moon, ETc. 


When the separate parts of each horoscope are dissected and the 
mind has been made familiar with their various portions, an attempt 
must be made to synthesise the whole, by bringing into unity the orm 
which every horoscope indicates. 


CONCLUDING REMARKS ON JUDGMENT 289 


There are six ‘pairs of opposites’ to be considered before making 
the final synthesis, and they represent the positive and negative elements 
in every nativity as follows: The Sun and the Moon; Mars and Venus; 
Jupiter and Saturn; the positive and negative signs; each house and its 
opposite. 

The first of these pairs of opposites and the most important is that 
constituted by the Sun and Moon, which chiefly tends to determine the 
polarity of each horoscope; for it may be considered as synthesising in 
itself the pairs of opposites indicated by 3-?, Y%-h. 

The Individual and Personal Characters are represented by the Sun 
and Moon respectively, and the signs holding these luminaries become 
potent and full of meaning when it is understood that the principal part 
of the judgment is obtained by a correct knowledge of the polarisation 
of the two. For they represent the higher and lower mind, that part of 
the native which is humanising and strictly mental. The Sun represents 
the immortal and real part of the mind, which is as much universal as 
it is individual, and the Moon represents a reflected part of the real mind, 
being the personal and limited portion, which is expressed through the 
brain and which is intimately concerned with all expression on the 
physical plane. ; 

Manag, or universal mind, is represented astrologically by the Sun, 
and it has six different expressions through the six positive signs of the 
Zodiac. ‘The soul or mind of the world is represented by the Moon and 
its six varied expressions through the six negative signs of the Zodiac. 
This blending and interblending of the Sun and Moon through the 
masculine and feminine signs of the Zodiac form as it were the Shuttle 
of Destiny by which the fabric of human fate is woven, and whereby (to 
vary the metaphor) matter may be moulded for the wider expression of 
the Ego, either individually or personally. 

The vitalising power of the Sun upon all that lives upon the earth 
is well known to all, therefore but very little expansion of the imagina- 
tion is required to understand the potent effect the Sun has upon each 
sign of the Zodiac. In fact, as this is the path of the Sun—or, to be 
exact, the earth around the Sun—each sign is more complete, more 
distinctive and more elastic, so to speak, when the Sun passes (or appears 
to pass) through it. This causes the sign in which the Sun is 
placed at birth to be the most actively expressed of the twelve in any 
horoscope, aJl its influence being stamped upon the character of the 


Ty 


290 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


native in a very marked and notable degree. For the individual charac- 
teristics in every native are shown by the sign which the Solar orb 
occupied at his birth, and it is therefore necessary, as has been said 
before, to consider the Sun’s position as the most important factor when 
judging a nativity. 


Silence is Golden - ~ ~ - © 
Speech is Silver - - - - ») 
Thoughts are Things - - - ~ fe) 


The ‘root of merit’ in each individual is astrologically judged by 
the power, position, and aspects of THE Sun, which represents the Silent 
Monitor in all. The Sun is silent but potent, it shines on all, good and 
evil alike, and is the essential ‘music of the spheres’ out of which all 
harmony and order are produced. 

Tue Moon represents the keynote or medium through which the 
chord of harmony vibrates, and echoes that which has been born in the 
silence; while MERcURY is, as it were, the string or thread up and down 
which the silence and the sound are constantly moving as are the 
pulsations in an organ pipe. 

THE Sun is the Source from which the rays of Mercury arise, but 
the Moon is the lens or reflector which catches and condenses them. 


Tue SoLtar AND Lunar Positions AND ASPECTS* 


With reference to these ‘Polarities,’ the value of the Sun in each 
sign as denoting the Individual Characteristics, and similarly also that 
of the Moon in each sign as relating to the Personal Idiosyncrasies, 
and the combinations resulting therefrom have each been very fully 
dealt with in the third revised edition of the first volume of this series, 
Astrology for All, hence it is unnecessary to repeat what has there 
been said, and it will therefore suffice to give the following briet 
summary of 


THE DISPOSITION PRODUCED BY THE MOON IN 
PLANETARY SIGNS 


In the Sun's Sign (S).—Honour, self-confidence, self-reliance, 
dignity, pride, ambition, love of fame, candour, generosity, nobility of 


* The Solar aspects to the various planets are given in Chapter XX . 


CONCLUDING REMARKS ON JUDGMENT 291 


nature, organising ability, tendency to pomp and ceremony. Evil 
aspects may not lessen these qualities necessarily, but they are a little 
apt to turn dignity and pride into conceit, vanity or ostentation. 

In the Moon's Sign (95).—The best side of the Moon’s nature shows 
out here. Sociability, domesticity, family and parental love, attraction 
to the mother, accessibility, fellow-feeling, agreeableness, humanity, 
popularity, love of change. ‘The feelings and emotions are active, and 
usually for good. Bad aspects may not do more than bring ill luck 
through this side of the nature. 

In Mercury's Signs (11 and 1).—An open and receptive mind, readi- 
ness to respond to new ideas and take up new subjects, a fertile fancy, 
great love of change, and fondness for travel, with a taste for investiga- 
ting many subjects. Strengthens the mind and enlivens the intellect, in 
any direction indicated by the horoscope. There is ability to learn, 
memorise, write, speak, acquire education, etc. 

In the Signs of Venus (% and =).—Good-humoured, warm-hearted ; 
fond of company, society and amusement; affable, popular, hopeful, 
mirthful; inclined to friendship, love and marriage. Appreciation of 
music, painting, the fine arts, ornamentation, dress, luxury. Mental 
refinement, unless badly afflicted. In Taurus, a tendency to live too 
much in the feelings, sometimes indulging a morbid approbativeness 
or jealousy ; in Libra sometimes a too complacent nature. 

In the Signs of Mars (' and M).—Courage, a positive and forceful 
nature, enterprise, independence, dislike of control, self-reliance, action, 
activity, energy, practical ability, will, determination, masterfulness. 
If there is much affliction by Mars or Saturn, there may be manifested 
rashness, imprudence, impulsiveness, anger, aggressiveness, rebellion, 
recklessness, hastiness, pride, intolerance, obstinacy. 

In the Signs of Jupiter (f and ).—Good-natured, jovial, social, 
benevolent, kind, humanitarian, philanthropic, charitable; hopefulness, 
devotion. faithfulness, openness of mind, inclination to religion or philo- 
sophy, imagination, love of beauty and harmony. In Sagittarius, often 
somewhat careless, ready in promise or boast but indifferent in per- 
formance; in Pisces, sometimes too negative, responding to diseased 
physical or mental conditions by preference, as it were. 

In the Signs of Saturn (V8 and <).—Gravity, thoughtfulness, stead- 
fastness, patience, self-control, restraint. A self-contained nature, far- 
seeing, displaying sobriety of conduct with worldly wisdom ; inclination 


292 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


for practical affairs, such as business, politics, etc.; reserve, dignity, 
ambition, strength of will. Under affliction some of the less favourable 
qualities may be traced: gloom, despondency, selfishness, hardness, 
want of hopefulness, lack of enterprise, worldliness, covetousness, cold- 
ness of nature, lack of humanity, lack of candour. In Capricorn a 
tendency to capricious acts. In Aquarius, often a fickle manner, strange 
tastes, andsome aloofness of mind: in either case a subtle and penetrative 
mind. 


Tue RELATIONSHIP OF THE Moon To THE SuN By ASPECT* 


©) and}. When these are in good aspect, and especially when in 
conjunction, the individual and personal sides of the nature form a 
harmonious blend, and the result is decidedly good. It is also good if 
both are in signs governed by the same planet, or if the lord of the sign 
containing one is exalted in that containing the other. If either or both 
are in good aspect to the cusp of the ascendant or to its lord or toa 
planet in the ascendant, the harmony of the character is considerably 
increased; and actions, intellect, and feelings will be more in accord 
than is the case with the average person of to-day. 

Aspects to planets, however, must be taken into account to some 
extent before pronouncing too confident an opinion ; for even if the two 
luminaries are in good aspect to each other, one may be heavily afflicted 
by planets and the other not; the side of the nature indicated by the 
planet afflicted will then be much less fortunate than the other. This 
consideration it is important to bear constantly in mind. 

When in conjunction or good aspect, the general strength of 
character is increased, there is some amount of self-reliance, personal 
independence, and stability. It promotes usefulness in the home and the 
world, increases the activity and the will. It is good for all social, 
benevolent, and utilitarian movements, broadens the sympathies, gives 
humanitarian impulses, and conduces to popularity and general success. 
The constitution is strengthened and vitality increased somewhat. There 
is a likelihood of offspring and of good fortune through them in respect 
of health, disposition and circumstances. It tends to increase family 
harmony both in youth and age; is good for parents and children; and 


* Norz.—The aspects of the Moon to the various planets are given in Chapter 


XX. 


CONCLUDING REMARKS ON JUDGMENT 293 


favours love, marriage and friendship. It includes the possibility of 
money and success through a variety of sources, through parents or 
children, but also and chiefly through occupations or sources indicated 
by the sign containing the Sun (except when the Moon is the more 
elevated or the stronger of the two). If both are in one sign, the ruler 
of that sign will be very important in the character and fortunes; generally 
for good, unless contradicted elsewhere. 

When in bad aspect, more especially in square-—for the opposition 
merely throws the lunar qualities into special prominence—there will be 
disharmony manifested between the individual and personal character- 
istics; the one will run counter to the other. Which will prove victor, 
and whether it will result in a more, or a less, estimable disposition may 
be judged from the relative power of the luminaries; (1) by mundane 
position, (2) by zodiacal position, congenial or otherwise, or (3) by the 
planetary aspects and the power of the planets concerned, whether by 
position, sign or inherent nature. 

The correct judgment of the polarity, in this sense, of the horoscope 
is really the key to the reading of the whole nativity, and the best powers of 
the student should be concentrated upon it; for it is a subtle and complex 
problem. # 


CHAPTER XXII 
A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 


ILLUSTRATED BY REFERENCE TO THE NATIVITY OF 
THE LATE Kinc Epwarp VII 


Ir is far better to make a complete study of a single nativity than 
to make a desultory examination of a great many. But beginners 
are often so puzzled as to where to commence, that they are apt to 
despair of ever completing a systematic study of any horoscope—whether 
their own or another’s. It is hoped that the following hints may be of 
reai help to all students, and especially to beginners. 

' First of all let us grasp the fact that there are three distinct factors 
in a horoscope, Planets, Signs and Houses. 

THe PLanets, per se, indicate mind, or the mental tendencies, 
inherent mental attributes present as the result of previous activities in 
past lives. 

Tue SIGNs OF THE Zopiac, on the other hand, show the innate feel- 
ings; tendencies to respond to particular emotions, love, joy, anger, 
fear, grief, etc. 

Tue Housts or THE Horoscope indicate the senses, or the matter of 
this physical planet of which our bodies are built up. 

Thus we have the familiar trinity of ‘spirit, soul and body,’ though 
differently expressed. The planets themselves and their aspects may be 
regarded as epitomised in, or synthesised by, the Sun (©), the motive 
power ; the planets, as manifesting through the signs, may be typified by 
the Moon ()), the receptive focus ; and the houses, as influenced by the 
signs, by the Earth (@), the neutral centre. Again, just as the twelve 
houses of the horoscope may be regarded as focused in the ascendant ; 
so the signs may be thought of as focused in Aries, the ‘first house’ of 
the Zodiac; and the planets in %, the ‘convertible’ planet. It will be 


useful perhaps to tabulate these, thus 
294 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 295 


Pianets per se represent Mind and are synthesised in Tue Sun © 
SIGNS ¥s Pm Feelings oP 9 »» LHE Moon ) 
Hovsgs_,, ¥ Sense Organs ,, “ae » LHE Eartu @ 
The centre of consciousness (so to speak) of the Planers isin % 

”? ” ” ”? Signs  tealia 

mr i a » Houses ,, Ascendant 


Having well grounded ourselves in these fundamental ideas, we 
may now proceed to examine some particular horoscope and see how 
we can first analyse it into its various factors, and then synthesise the 
ideas we have gained so as to arrive at a clear understanding of the 
character and fortune signified. 


We will take the late King Edward’s horoscope as a suitable example. 
He was born, according to the official bulletin, 9th November, 1841, 
at 10.48 a.m., at Buckingham Palace. Here again we have three 
essential factors—date, time and place; progressive order of limita- 
tions. The daie shows us the zodiacal position of the Sun and planets ; 
the dme, the position of the Moon; and the p/ace the position of all these 
in relation to the celestial ‘houses.’ Let us examine them in order. 

(:) Tue Date. The Ephemeris shows us that, from 0.0 a.m. to 
12 p.m. on 9th November, 1841, the planets were placed as follows: 


© ) g ? 3 yf h i eo 
Cc a en a 
Way) pes ey tay P19) YS 16") R22" HO" wpe 21" ects” 


This alone tells us a great deal, but we must remember that it will 
all apply to any person born during the twenty-four hours, and on any 
part of the globe. We therefore proceed to study the second limitation. 

(2) THe Time. At 10.48 a.m. G.M.T., on the date in question, we 
find the planets as in the annexed diagram (Fig. 1), which has been 
purposely drawn with Aries in the place of the ordinary ‘first house,’ 
Taurus occupying the second house, and soon. This diagram gives us 
a far better idea of the relative sign-positions of the planets, and of their 
aspects to one another, than any horoscope drawn in the ordinary way. 
It shows the planetary and zodiacal influences focused upon the earth as 
a whole (irrespective of any particular place), at the precise moment we 
are considering. ‘The first thing we notice is that all the planets are, 
analogically, ‘above the Earth’; that is, they are in the latter half of 
the Zodiac. Next, we see that both the Moon and Saturn are just on 


296 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


the ‘angles’ of the <-o° and Vo" (and therefore in square to one 
another). Two other planets are also ‘angular,’ two of the four, ? 
and h, being in their own houses, and one ‘exalted.’ This is all 
testimony of a marked destiny, and of a public position of some kind. 
The Sun is strong in Scorpio, a fixed sign—the fixed signs being 
sympathetically related to the Sun—and in trine to Uranus, a planet of 
power, thus indicating a strong character who will have great sway over 
his associates. The sextile of Mars supports this, so that the square of 
Neptune, a baneful influence, is weakened and rendered less harmful. 


Fig. 11 A Zoptaca, ARRANGEMENT OF THe Horoscope 


All the planets being ‘above the earth’ is evidence of power and influ- 
ence in the native’s own sphere and gives the opportunity of exercising 
sway. No planets are in Aries, the ‘personality’ of the Zodiac, but 
Libra, the ‘individuality’ (Higher Self) is tenanted by Venus, its 
ruler. Hence we deduce that the native is not restricted in his views, 
but broad-minded and sympathetic towards others, a conclusion which 
is corroborated by Jupiter, representative of the Higher Mind, at home 
in the ‘ninth house’ of our symbolical horoscope. 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 297 


All this, we must remember, would be equally true of anyone 
born on any part of the globe at the moment in question, and is there- 
fore not peculiar to our august subject.* Nevertheless, it gives us a 
very fair idea of what, for want of a better word, we must still call the 
‘individuality’ of any person born at this moment. And we will 
therefore now proceed to determine how this ‘individuality’ is likely to 
be expressed through the personal mould indicated by the Houses of the 
Horoscope. ‘This leads us to our third and last limitation, namely : 

(3) THE Piace. The second diagram (/7g. 2) shows a map of the 


Fig, 2. Tur Nariviry oF THE LarE Kinc Epwarp VII 


heavens calculated for this same minute at Buckingham Palace. Now, 
in deciding how far destiny will permit of expression in this physical 
world of the attributes we have deduced from the Zodiacal Horoscope, 
we first turn to the ‘angles’ or cardinal houses of the figure--houses 1, 
A, 'Y, FO wien, as we know, are concerned more particularly with 
manifestation. Here again we find planets * angular ’—three—all of 


* Norz.—The question of Aeredity will be fully dealt with in the succeeding 
volume, The Art of Synthesis. 


298 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


them strong (h in own house; 6 exalted; © in a fixed sign > 3 and 
A 1), and therefore able, we may judge, to overcome the afflictions to 
the Moon and ruling planet (DO h, ¥ () HI); these three last, ), ¥, 
and HI, being hidden away in succedent (fixed) or cadent (mutable) houses. 
We see that the nature is fairly evenly balanced between ©, h and ¢, 
all angular, while the influence of Jupiter, the ruling planet, though 
weakened by its position in the twelfth, a negative and receptive house, 
is nevertheless favourable for bringing to naught the malice of enemies, 
and is potent for deliverance from trouble; but it somewhat impedes the 
general good fortune of the royal native. This same remark will also 
apply to the position of *? and HI, in the second house. Venus, lady of 
the ninth in the ninth, and in trine to Neptune, indicates the good fortune 
and peaceable ministrations attendant on foreign travel, of which we 
have had such abundant instances during the last few years. 


This must suffice as to the general principles to be adopted in the 
judgment of all nativities. In the preceding chapters clear rules have 
been given and these, coupled with what has been said above, will 
furnish sufficient basis for further elaboration. 

Yet there are those who prefer some method that will shorten 
the judgment and explain the order in which the delineation should be 
framed. To satisfy these latter, who will be amateurs in the study of 
Astrology, the method adopted by the author and used exclusively by 
him during the past twenty years, is now published for the first time. 
It is hoped, however, that the simplicity of this plan will not deter the 
student from using his own judgment, and it should only be used asa 
system by which the mind can be trained into giving a spontaneous 
judgment simply and easily. 

For the purpose of economising space and avoiding the confusion 
that many words may produce, the judgments that follow are presented 
in an epitomised form ; yetalthough each delineation has been abbreviated 
to the last degree, the spirit of the judgment is contained in each sentence 
and by reference to the first part of the work may be extended as fully 
as the student may desire. The various headings of the horoscope are 
classified under Roman numerals, and in writing out a fw// delineation it 
is a good plan to devote about one page, on an average, to each heading. 
Foran elementary delineation, however, if the epitomised judgments are 
merely copied out, it will serve as a basis for further work—though (as 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 


pointed out in the Introduction) it is never wise to copy delineations, 
since it cramps the judgment. 

With a view to making these epitomised judgments more practical 
they may be referred to the horoscope of Kinc Epwarp VII, just given. 

It should be made quite clear that they have been written with a 
view to usefulness in a general sense, and not with any special regard to 
the King’s nativity, and that they will therefore require suitable modifica- 
tion in some instances. . 

The following are the abbreviated delineations arranged under 
separate headings in the order in which they should be treated in making 
a detailed judgment of any nativity, each item being numbered for con- 
venience of reference. Those judgments that relate to the King’s 
nativity are tabulated at the conclusion of the chapter, and may thus be 
read through in the order in which they are numbered. 


EL  ASCENDANT SL 


1. V.—-The native has a fiery, active, energetic, and somewhat 
restless body. Disposition: impulsive, enthusiastic, frank, courageous 
and enterprising; ambitious, independent, adventurous, confident, 
liberal, responsive, alert, changeable, and fond of pioneering. 

2. &.—Vital form of body, but stolid, magnetic and sensitive. 
Disposition : affectionate, fond of pleasure, solid, self-centred, obstinate 
but practical; persevering, quiet and firm; reserved, decisive; strong 
bias, keen desires, jealous where affection or honour is concerned. 

3. U.—Mental temperament; body suitable for mental pursuits, 
refined, flexible, highly sensitive, nervous. Disposition: restless, irrit- 
able, anxious, fond of learning, curious, studental, lacking in continuity, 
kind, humane, generous and thoughtful. 

4. %©.—Sensitive body, tenacious and receptive. Disposition: 
imaginative, reserved, impatient, propitious, fond of change, liable to 
extremes, exacting, timid, retiring, mistrustful, over-cautious, showing 
strong attachments, over-sensitive and more or less psychic. 

5. S§.—Fiery body, vital temperament, disease-resisting, splendid 
vitality. Disposition: independent, free, generous, noble-minded, 
fearless, open and sincere, honourable ; proud but magnanimous. 

6. Ny.—Sensitive body, mental-motive temperament, usually fairly 
well balanced. Disposition: flexible, ingenious, studious, practical, 


300 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


quiet, retiring, modest, yet ambitious of merit; reserved, diffident, 
sympathetic, but difficult to understand. 

7, ~~,—Well balanced temperament. Disposition : gentle, courteous, 
affable, obliging, intuitive, even, harmonious; keen sense of justice ; 
good comparison ; somewhat indecisive. 

8. M.—Shortish, somewhat thick but supple body ; strong charac- 
ter. Disposition: reserved, proud, determined; acute perception, with 
keen incisive criticism; fond of the mystic and occult, intelligent, 
dignified, energetic, self-controlled. Either good or bad, seldom or 
never ‘ milk-and-water.’ 

9. f.—Fiery, flexible and wiry body, usually long,* but generally 
well-proportioned, fond of outdoor sport, exercise and all activities. 
Disposition: restless, independent, hopeful, philosophical, irrepressible, 
quick in movement, demonstrative in manner, kind, sympathetic, frank 
and generous ; fond of freedom. 

10. V§.—Heavy body, usually thin and bony ; motive temperament. 
Disposition : enduring, timid, patient, persistent, restraining, economical, 
reserved ; self-possessed ; ambitious, but pessimistic; excellent organis- 
ing ability ; tactful and self-protective. 

11. %%,—Vital-mental type of body, very refined but sensitive. 


Disposition: humane, faithful, artistic, ingenious, determined and 
inflexible, self-controlled; mentally refined; keen student of human 
nature. 

12. .—Plastic, fluidic body; receptive, mediumistic, and inspira- 
tional.. Disposition: restless, impressionable, imitative; hospitable, 
sympathetic, psychic ; very easily influenced by surrounding conditions. 


Il. THE RULING PLANET II. 


13. ‘$.—Denotes transcendentalism, weird tastes and uncommon 
tendencies, or zesthetic and mystical temperament. 

14. H.—Denotes originality, unique experiences, leanings towards 
the occult side of life ; will power, intellectuality ; but when not fully 
manifest, eccentricity, erratic tendencies, with liability to sudden and 
unexpected events. Generally gives a nervously organised temperament 
which is quite uncommon. 


* Nors.—In the King’s case this is modified by the planets rising, also by the 
position of the Sun in a fixed sign, which usually tends to shorten the stature, 
giving more of the ‘vital’ temperament. 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 301 


15. h.—Marks limitations, hindrances, obstructions, delays, dis- 
appointments ; denotes concentration, frugality, perseverance, fortitude, 
patience, thrift, chastity and a meditative temperament. 

16. %4%.—Increases life and vitality; denotes expansion; favours 
prudence, faith, hope and charity. Stimulates courtesy, temperance 
and chivalry, and produces good fortune. 

17. &6.—Denotes independence, self-reliance, courage, quick re- 
sponse, self-confidence, ambitious ; gives impulse, headstrong and wilful 
tendencies, with a fighting and combative spirit. 

18. ©.— Self-reliant, strong-minded, strong willed. 

19. ¢.—Expressive, lovable, agreeable, artistic and fortunate. 
Harmonises well with and responds to higher vibrations. 

20. ¥%.—Depends chiefly upon aspects received from other planets. 
Being colourless it is absorbent, thus affected by sign occupied. Denotes 
adaptability, fertility of resource, ingenuity and flexibility of expression. 

21. ).—Sensitive, fond of form, impressionable and affected by 
surroundings. 

Notrre.—The Sun, Moon, Mercury and Venus as ruling planets 
depend very much upon the signs they occupy and the aspects they 
form with regard to their influence. 


Ill. THE RULER’S POSITION IIL. 


22. In First House.—Progress, self-control, prosperity from personal 
effort and merit.* 

23. In Second House.—Success in financial matters, according to 
ability ; strong thought-force, full of interest in monetary concerns. 

24. In Third House.—Mental abilities according to talent; greatly 
concerned with brethren and relatives; much travelling, changes and 
correspondence, but usually lacking opportunity. 

25. In Fourth House.—Strong domestic ties; occult or psychic 
tendencies; affected by parent’s influence and often handicapped by 
environment. 

26. In Fifth House.—Fond of pleasure, often gains by speculation, 
or judicious investments; much concern with children or their affairs ; 
plenty of vitality. 


* In the example map Jupiter has risen above the ascendant but is well within 
the limits given in the note on p. go. 


302 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


247. In Sixth Hotise.—Unfavourable position ; handicapped through 
sickness or misfortune; best in inferior posts, otherwise gains through 
servants more than through own ability; makes a better servant than 
master. 

28. In Seventh House.—Fortunate position, some fame in life; gains 
best through working with others; good partnerships, but liable to meet 
with strong opponents. Life usually bound up with another’s in some 
special way. 

29. In Eighth House-—Occult tendencies; life affected through 
deaths of others; gain by legacies, or through co-workers. 

30. In Ninth House.— Philosophical, good mental abilities, ‘a true 
dreamer’; fond of travel; success abroad; may rise to high and 
prominent positions. 

31. In Tenth House.—Rise in life to much higher position than 
sphere of birth; achieves honour or fame according to merit, acquires 
responsibility; much ambition and aspiring tendencies. Obtains 
opportunities. 

32. In Eleventh House.—Gain through friends ; strong desires and 
aspirations; rises in life. makes progress through refinement, and 
achieves ambition. 

33. In Twelfth House.—Unfortunate position ; liable to self-undo- 
ing; fond of occultism or spiritualism; lacks opportunities; liable to 
false accusations. Rises out of sorrows according to merit. 

Much of course depends upon nature of ruler, also sign it is in. 
For fuller information see chapters dealing with these houses. For 
Aspects see Chapter IV. 


IV. RISING PLANETS* IV. 


34. ‘$.—Mediumistic and psychic, prone to strange experiences 
and remarkable episodes. If given to depravity, becomes a hopeless 
moral wreck. When developed, is highly receptive to higher forces. 

35. HI.—A unique character, original, inventive, and unconven- 
tional. Inclines to romance or towards eccentricity and peculiar 
behaviour. The undeveloped are abrupt and too independent, the 
developed are profound occult students. 


* A planet is considered a ‘rising’ planet when anywhere between the cusps 
of the second and twelfth houses. 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 303 — 


36. h.—Not a fortunate position; is against worldly prosperity, 
unless very persevering. Denotes obstacles to be overcome, stimulates 
industry, reserve, prudence and economy. Native often stands in his 
own light by the exercise of too much caution or fear. Much depends 
on aspects and sign. (The best signs for this position are = and ?f.) 

37. %.— Brings good luck, mainly through a generous disposition 
that is always buoyant, hopeful and aspiring, promises social success, 
always acts_as_a preserving influence. The most _benefic position, | 


SOLED IIIS, CEEOL ELE OAD Re 0, LR ESN NTE NG INNS ETE ETI TIE OE RIG I EEE 


if not in Gemini or Virgo. 

38 &.—Increases ‘vim’ and confidence, gives also courage, energy 
and impulse. Makes the native consequential and inclined to resort 
to force, with either combative or destructive tendencies. 

39. ©.—Fortunate position; brings dignity and honour, com- 
mands respect and good feeling, produces responsible position, gives 
authority, favours worldly affairs and moral growth. Improves dis- 
position, by enlarging the outlook. 

40. @.-—Favourable position, improves disposition, making it 
agreeable and cheerful. Gain in life through good fortune, assisted by 
others. Ability for music, singing or fine arts. Refines nature, gives 
love of the beautiful, with a tendency to seek pleasure or very refined 
employment. <A most successful position. 

41. %.—Increases mentality and adaptability ; encourages diplo- 
matic tendencies; increases activity and quickness of thought; gives 
literary ability according to aspects, but denotes fluctuating fortune, 
sometimes high up and at other times low down. 

42. ) Disposition mutable, fond of change and novelty; much 
receptivity; gives popularity, power to sense requirments; love of 
travel; imcreases sensitiveness and impressionability. Much depends 
upon aspects. 


V. RISING PLANETS IN SIGNS OF THE ZODIAC V. 


See Chapter VI, pp. 105-110. Forthe Risinc PLanet’s Aspects see 
Chapter IV, p. 49 e¢ seqg., taking the ‘significator’ in this case as the 
Kising Planet. 


vI. INDIVIDUALITY VI. 


In all delineations tHE Sun should be treated as the Individuality 
and considered as the background of the character, characterising the 


+ 


304 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


mora! nature and the motive power at the back of manifestation. The 
following are the characteristics. 


TuHeE SUN IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 


43. %.——Enthusiastic, independent, impulsive, energetic, aspiring, 
idealistic, prophetic, perceptive, loyal, heroic, aspiring and approbative. 

44. %.—Determined, persistent, patient, enduring, practical, con- 
servative, dogmatic or obstinate. Generous or warm-hearted ; reserved, 
but sympathetic, character exceedingly strong, being dignified, cautious 
and careful. 

45. U.—Mentally impulsive, intellectual, literary, ambitious. 
Restless, nervous, volatile, indecisive, mentally active. 

46. 95.—Reserved, economical, tenacious, sensitive, given to 
extremes. Strong incaste. Reverence for ancient customs and ancestry. 
Fond of pewer and somewhat paradoxical, being persistent, although 
retiring. 

47. $St.—Strong willed, generous, earnest, sincere, ambitious; 
proud, or dignified; fond of organising; love of nature; capable of 
great things. 

48. .—Practical, philosophical, constructive, discriminative 
critical, self-protective, diplomatic, ingenious; fond of business and 
generally adaptable. 

49. ==.—Perceptive ability, good powers of comparison, intellectual ; 
love of justice; conscious of trust and confidence, fond of approbation; 
keen insight ; best when associating with others. 

50. M.—Very determined ; strong magnetic power; critical percep- 
tion, ability to judge; failure through exacting, jealous and proud 
tendencies. Inclined to be sharp and sarcastic; not over sympathetic. 
Tenacious and secretive, much self-control; succeeds in government 
office; much silent force within. A strong and powerful character. 
When developed, many admirable qualities; but in the undeveloped 
many vices are exhibited. 

51. f.—Reliant, prophetic, candid, outspoken, devoted and affec- 
tionate; frank, generous, loyal, philosophical; possessed of either a 
religious or intuitive spirit. 

52. V§.—Ambitious, persistent, industrious, persevering, indepen- 
dent, determined; thrifty, prudent, enduring, capable of responsibility 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 305 


trustworthy and reliable. Strong characters are patient and enduring, 
while the weak are servile, cringing, and bound by custom. 

53. *.— Faithful, kind, humane, honest and intuitive; equable, 
dispassionate, constant in affection. Good judges of character; quiet, 
unobtrusive, and capable of making high attainments. 

54. %.—Sympathetic, emotional, lacking in ambition, mediumistic, 
sociable, hospitable; when developed very honest and trustful, but in 
the undeveloped there is much weakness. 


Tue Sun In THE TweLve Houses need not be specified; for it is 
only necessary to remember that the Sun quickens and stimulates every- 
thing in connection with the house in which it is placed, in other words, 
it illuminates all the dark places of that house, and brings out all the 
characteristics denoted by it, usually being fortunate in connection with | 
the house in which it is placed ; that is if free from serious afflictions. 

The Sun’s aspects, however, are very important. Much information 
concerning the Sun has been given in the first part of this work (Ch. V). 
The first major aspect formed by the Sun is always very important, 
since the planet aspected by the Sun is revivified, as it were, and made 
more potent in the nativity. The following are the general aspects 
formed by the Sun: they are grouped under three heads, ADVERSE 
ASPECTS, BENEFIC ASPECTS, and ConjuNcTIoNs, signified by three letters, 
A, B, GC, an arrangement which will be adhered to throughout the 
remainder of the chapter. 

55. © * A.—Gives a liability to treachery, deceit and grievous 
disappointments. 

56. © *t B.—Gives often extraordinary good fortune; a peculiar 
temperament with a love of mysticism and the possibility of much 
expansion of consciousness. 

57. © % C—Gives a strange individuality; if developed, 
clairvoyance or clairaudience or some psychic ability; but in the 
undeveloped, it tends to produce sexual depravity. 

68. © H 4.—Is unfortunate and often very disastrous. Produces 
estrangements, unforeseen and unexpected events; many changes; often 
crashes of a severe character. Nearly always produces unpopularity or 
notoriety at some period of the life. 

59. © H B.—Denotes some genius or originality. It makes the 


individual character self-reliant and resourceful, very independent and 
U 


306 HOW .TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


broadminded, with philosophical or unconventional tendencies. It 
favours popularity. 

60. @ H C.—Denotes a unique character, with a powerful will, 
great constructive ability, much originality, and a commanding 
individuality. 

61. © h A.—Weakens the constitution, brings many limitations 
and disappointments. Health suffers through imperfect circulation, and 
if the moral character is not very strong, some mischievous traits of 
character are developed, such as selfishness, jealousy, and enmity. 

62. © h &.—Denotes success in life through a patient, persevering 
and honest character. Shows success in responsible posts, also through 
aged persons, and is a very steadying influence, which is felt more 
towards the latter part of the life than at the beginning. j 

63. © h C.—Is neither fortunate nor unfortunate, but tends to stop 
the moral growth. Gives power to assume responsibility, and generally 
excellent organising ability as well. If used correctly, promises the 
accumulation of wealth through economy, patience and perseverance 
but increases caution and self-restraining powers. 

64. © ¥ A.—Denotes trouble in connection with social affairs ; 
difficulties in connection with religious matters ; health affected through 
excesses, and unless strict temperance is observed a tendency towards 
extravagance or extremes. In a depraved horoscope this denotes 
hypocrisy. 

65. © ¥Y #.—Promises much good fortune, many social advan- 
tages, a religious spirit, much benevolence and sympathy. It gives 
prosperity in life, favours health, finance and love affairs. 

66. © ¥% C.—Brings many opportunities in life, morally, socially 
and physically. It denotes prosperity, expansive sympathies and 
nobility of character. 

67. © 6 A.—An unfavourable aspect, since it gives a liability to 
feverish tendencies, hasty conduct, and a tendency to become excited 
and careless, thus giving liability to accidents and errors of conduct 
through the desires being stronger than the will. 

68. © 6&6 #&.—Good for the health and vitality. It strengthens the 
constitution, gives much will power, increases the energy and persever- 
ance, causing the individuality to be determined, commanding and 
authoritative. It gives strength to the system, and denotes an 
enterprising spirit. 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 307 


69. © $8 C—A powerful position, denoting a strong will, but 
with sometimes a tendency to exhibit passion or anger, with a liability 
to excess of feeling, and unless self-control is shown by the horoscope 
there is danger of going to extremes and becoming forceful. It denotes 
a dominating and powerful will, with abundance of energy behind it. 

70. © 2 A. (4 ).—Tends to produce disappointments and often 
brings social difficulties, and unless the moral character is very strong it 
weakens the individuality. ) 

71. © 2 B.(V): or © 2 C—Gives a love of pleasure; stimulates 
the artistic faculties; refines the individuality, making the life more or 
less successful. It is generally a fortunate influence, more particularly 
where pleasures are concerned. 

72. © ¥ C.—A doubtful position, sometimes giving good business 
ability by stimulating the intellectual faculty, although it is more often 
than not colourless. 

73. © ) A.—Unfortunate, since it brings obstacles, delays and 
hindrances. Affects the health more or less, owing to lack of constant 
recuperative power. Is against fame or popularity. Sometimes affects 
honour or injures credit. Does not give success with superiors or those 
in authority, and very often affects the eyesight. 

74. © ) B.—Improves the horoscope; brings success through the 
realisation and attainment of desires and wishes. It gives right ambition, 
and prosperity attending effort. It brings fame and recognition accord- 
ing to the ability. Brings success in matters where feeling is concerned, 
adding to the general sincerity of the nature. 

75. © ) C.—Not always a favourable position, except with very 
advanced individuals, for then the individuality becomes very powerful. 
The conjunction is always more favourable for males than females. 


VII. PERSONALITY VII. 


Tue Moon is taken as a general significator of the personality, and 
its position and the sign are important, as the physical activities are 
mostly denoted by them. For fuller information concerning these 
positions see pages 79 to 85. 


Tue Moon 1N THE TWELVE SIGNS 


76. ) %.—Denotes a martial and aggressive tendency; inde- 


308 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


pendence, self-reliance ; sharp, shrewd and observant intellect; aspiring 
nature, hasty in speech; usually impulsive, with a tendency to rebel 
against authority. 

“7, )) &.—Reserved, obstinate, persistent ; kind, sociable, dignified, 
intuitive and capable of endurance. 

“8. ) U.—Literary tastes, active mentally and physically, quick- 
witted ; adaptable. Mental abilities easily developed. 

79. ) 95.—Sensitive, imaginative, economical, receptive; tenacious, 
with psychic tendencies. 

80. ) S{.—Fond of responsibility, persevering, affectionate; faith- 
ful and sincere ; honourable and dignified; kind and affectionate. 

81, ) My.—Critical; business ability; love of hygiene; adaptable, 
clear mind, good memory and educatable. 

82. ) =.—Refined tastes, courteous and obliging manners; 
perceptive and equable. 

83 ) M.—Firm, self-reliant; at times abrupt and masterful; fond 
of secrecy ; interested in plots. Often mystical and fond of the occult. 
At times severely critical, and apt to be revengeful when slighted. 

84. ) f.—Quick and active, fond of demonstration; at times 
rebellious ; prophetic tendencies ; fond of dual experiences. 

85. ) V8.—Love of fame or recognition ; capable of responsibility ; 
often chaste and prudish; fond of economy; very sensitive to mental 
vibrations. 

86. ) *.—Refined, but peculiar tendencies ; sociable, independent; 
fond of appreciation ; capable of studying human nature; fond of secret 
things. 

87. ) .—Very receptive; often mediumistic ; inclined to despond ; 
hospitably inclined; romantic and usually fond of expressing sympathy. 


87a. Reference should now be made to the ‘Polarities’ or the 
Combination of the Sun and Moon in Signs to be found in Chapter 
XVIII of Astrology for All, the first volume of this Series. 

The Moon’s position in the houses is always an important factor 
with regard to inclinations, and the instincts are usually centred in the 
house occupied by the Moon. 


THe Moon IN THE TWELVE Houses 


88. ) m the First House.—Love of fame, activity and change; 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 309 


increases the ambition; gives ingenuity for planning; love of novelty 
and adventure; and some fame or public recognition is acquired, owing 
to the versatility that it usually produces. 

89. ) in the Second House.—Fluctuating fortune; success in public 
affairs; commercial instincts; romantic or imaginative mind; the ability 
to make much out of little, with success in small matters or details. 

90. ) im the Third House.—Love of knowledge; much curiosity ; 
experiences connected with relatives or brethren; successful in in- 
tellectual pursuits; somewhat changeable disposition. 

91. )inthe Fourth House.—Interested in all psychic matters ; love of 
home; ability in domestic affairs; links with parents; fond of the occult 
and mystical; adventures at the close of life. 

92. ) i the Fifth House.—Speculative tendencies; fond of pleasure ; 
ardent affections ; romantic experiences; active sensations. 

93. Dinthe Sixth House.—Wavering tendencies; lackof opportunities: 
troubles concerning health ; attachments to inferiors ; changeable nature 
where work is concerned; better success in the service of others; 
usually fond of ceremonies; indifferent fortune. 

94. )in the Seventh House.—Desire for popularity ; active or roving 
life; fluctuating fortunes ; experiences through attachments with others; 
happy in partnerships, or where dual interests are concerned. 

95. ) in the Eighth House.—Gain through partners and co-workers; 
occult tendencies; experiences in connection with deaths; usually 
a notorious or public death. 

96. ) tthe Ninth House.—Philosophical tendencies; active mind; 
prophetic tendencies; fond of travel; mystical, and given to deep 
studies; peculiar in religious beliefs. 

97. ) im the Tenth House.—Public fame or recognition; fond of 
changes; ambitious; acquires prominent positions; comes into either 
fame or notoriety, according to aspects. 

98. ) im the Eleventh House.—Success through friends and 
acquaintances ; experiences connected with associations or societies; 
strong desires or aspirations; studental tendencies. 

99. )im the Twelfth House.—Strange and often romantic experi- 
ences; liable to extremes, and great changes; often handicapped by 
surroundings or environment. 


The Aspects formed by the Moon are also very important, links 


310 HOW) TO; JUDGE. ANAT IMT Ty 


being formed and attachments made according to the nature of the 
aspects and the planets aspected. As before, the first three letters of 
the alphabet will be used as abbreviations: A for adverse, B for benefic, 
C for conjunction. / 


too. ) % A. Subject to peculiar disappointments ; liable to be 
victimised or psychologised; tendency to depravity through either 
drugs or narcotics; peculiar mind, often very unreliable. 

ror. ) % 8.—Inspirational tendencies; strong sympathies; 
sensuous nature; admiration for physical beauty; sometimes very 
artistic, and possessing a charming personality. 

102. ) * C—A somewhat weird and peculiar nature; difficult to 
understand. Often very psychic or ultra-sensitive. Given to many 
moods and in extreme cases liable to obsession. 

103, ) HI _4.—An unfortunate aspect, bringing sudden difficulties ; 
obstinate; self-willed; liable to eccentricities; peculiar moods and 
erratic tendencies. An undesirable aspect. 

104. ) Hi B.—Original and inventive nature ; constructive powers ; 
fond of occult and mystical. Splendid magnetic or healing power; 
an eventful though favourable life. 

105. ) KL C.—Important changes; somewhat chequered career; 
peculiar disposition ; often abrupt or irritable; but if free from personal 
bias or prejudice may manifest genius. It denotes a strong will and 
powerful magnetism. 

106. ) h A.—Adverse fate; liable to sorrows and misfortunes; 
often discontented or bound by customs; given to despondency, with 
many obstacles to thwart the life. 

107. })) h B.—Success in life through perseverance, patience and 
prudence ; good organising ability, capable of holding responsible posts ; 
faithful and reliable; serious and steady; love of truth and purity. 
Success follows merit. 

108. ) h C.—Disadvantages through early environment; sceptical 
or critical tendencies ; undemonstrative, but usually faithful, sincere and 
just; capable in responsibility. But note aspects formed by both to 
other planets. 

109. ) 7 A.—Extravagantor careless; liable to false accusations ; 
immoderate or wasteful ; liable to be victimised by others. 

110. ) ¥ B.—Fortunate in lite; prosperous; social advancements ; 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 311 


hopeful disposition. Honest or religiously minded ; just and sympathetic. 
Intuitive with a progressive nature. 

111. ) ¥% C.—Successful life; good social qualities; right dignity 
and power; attractive magnetism; powerful friends; sure rise in life. 

Lia. UD iS A.—Unfortunate aspect; trouble in life through impulsive 
action; given to exaggeration; somewhat careless or reckless. Hasty 
temper and given to anger. 

113.. ) 6 #.—Fearless, enterprising and courageous; resolute, 
with plenty of self-confidence; enterprising, generous and resolute; 
cheerful and hopeful. 

114. ) 6 C.—Very impulsive; ardent in desires ; quick in speech; 
over-independent or forceful; very strong feelings and emotions; given 
to rash acts. 

115. ) ? A.—Careless tendencies; unfavourable attachments‘ 
financial losses; tendency to be over-liberal. 

116. ) 2 #—Success in life; refined and artistic tastes; keen 
appreciation of the beautiful; loving disposition; social success; 
ability for music or singing ; honourable attachments. 

117. ) 9 C.—Good environment; fortunate life; fame or recogni- 
tion ; makes pleasurable or sociable attachments ; a free and easy mind. 
But note aspects formed by both to other planets. 

118. ) % A.—Although an unfortunate position it sharpens the 
wits, but gives either a liability to sarcasm or irritability through nervous 
disorders; it produces criticism, giving liability to errors through 
extremes or inaccuracy. 

11g. ) ¥ #8.—Denotes an active brain, quickness of perception ; 
ability to make money; power to study; gives easy expression of 
thoughts and ideas. 

120. ) ¥ C.—Good intellect; quick and accurate perception ; 
fond of knowledge; love of change; much adaptability. 


VII. MENTAL CHARACTERISTICS VIL 


Mercury stands as an indicator of the mental qualifications, and 
expresses the wisdom of the native, either through intellect or conscious- 
ness in any form, as expressed by the sign, aspects and position by 
house. It may be considered as a mirror of the mind, just as the Moon 
#s a reflector of the senses. 


312 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


MERCURY IN THE J WELVE SIGNS 


121. % %.—Denotes quick mental ability; rapid perception and 
observation ; fertile and inventive brain, but prone to be changeable ; 
easily worried or affécted by external conditions. 

122. % &.—Slow mind, plodding, patient and persevering ; mind 
usually affected by feeling. Hencea love of the arts, music and poetry, 
but a mind that is apt to be uncompromising; over firm, yet usually just 
and sincere, although proud and often too rigidly strict. 

123. & W.—Literary tastes, a variable though expansive mind; 
versatile, active and alert: a good conversationalist, speaker or enter- 
tainer. When well aspected gives splendid facility of expression. 

124. % 95.—Changeable, inquisitive, ingenious, perceptive, psychic, 
impressionable, tactful and ambitious. Usually an over-sensitive mind. 

125. & St.—Rational, concentrative; mentally generous; very 
intuitive; capable of mental responsibility; competent to control, 
command or manage; usually fond of mental power. 

126. & T.—Active mind; good and comprehensive memory; 
mentally practical; good at teaching, book-keeping and all common 
every-day pursuits of the mind where method, order and classification 
are required. 

127. % = +.—Eloquent, good comparison and judgment; mentally 
affable, artistic, orderly, just and persuasive. Keen intuition, with very 
humane tendencies. Capable orator or literary exponent. 

128. & M-—Mentally positive ; obstinate and difficult to convince; 
but capable of much enthusiasm or great indignation. Powerful mental 
attitude; with very keen mental likes and dislikes. Always shrewd, 
active and secretive. Clever in detection, having much tact aud 
diplomacy. Often witty but sarcastic, with much concentration and 
power to understand mysteries. 

129. & f—Mentally frank, just and straightforward. Often 
religious-minded or fond of philosophy. Facile in expression, but 
lacking in continuity. Too out-spoken or over-active mentally, the 
mind being very dual; sometimes brilliant and given to prophetic 
utterances. | 

130. §% ¥.—Subtle, cautious, diplomatic; often clever or very 
resourceful. Ambitious, capable of responsibility or organisation. 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 313 


_ Inclined to be sympathetic and orderly. Often methodical, with the 
ability to study deep and profound subjects. 

131. § ¢.—Bright and comprehensive mind; a good memory, 
capable of great mental culture. Fond of science, literature or religion. 
Apt to be fixed in opinions and averse to mental changes. Fond of 
educational pursuits, concentrative, intuitive and usually a student of 
human nature. 

132. % .—Mediumistic or receptive mind, voluble in speech; 
subject to fits of depression; mind often too negative, but capable ot 
versatility, much depending on education and other aspects, as to the 
effect of this position. 


The Aspects to Mercury are important, since that planet is a mirror 
of the mind and, being convertible, Mercury is often a duplicate of the 
aspecting planet. 


133. &% * .4.—An unfavourable aspect for the mind, inclining to 
vague and unpractical imaginations. Visionary or utopian ideas. A 
tendency either to deceive or be deceived, with strong inclinations 
towards the sensuous, and sometimes towards the sensual, side of life 
from the mental standpoint. 

134. & *% &.—Anmind that is very susceptible to higher influences; 
inclined towards romantic experiences; broad mental sympathies. 
Often cultivating high ideals. For the mentally cultured, the power to 
weave beautiful plots or original designs. A good aspect for a novelist. 

135. 9% ‘ C.—A peculiar type of mind, often developing zsthetic 
tendencies. Usually a mind that is paradoxical, dreamy, and given to 
weaving many strange theories that are often more or less unpractical. 

136. §& Hl A.—A mind that is usually sarcastic, or inclined to be 
abrupt or irritable. This aspect disorganises the nervous system, 
owing to the friction that the aspect produces; gives unpopularity, 
difficulties in dealing with strangers, and a mental magnetism that is 
not attractive. 

137. % HH B—An original mind, inventive or given to expressions 
of genius ; aptitude in most pursuits, producing a mental outlook of the 
widest character. It denotes a firm mind; a love of principle; and 
capable of higher thought than the average. Ifthe analytical ability is 
strong it gives much inner perception and a good mental grasp of higher 
subjects. 


314 | HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


138. §% H C.—This position denotes a great deal of nervous energy, 
which inclines towards an abrupt and very independent nature. The 
mind is liable to change very suddenly, but is always ingenious and 
inventive. It denotes either a crank or a profound thinker according to 
the indications of the horoscope as a whole. 

139. % h A.—Somewhat limited intellect; inclination to set up 
barriers, causing lack of breadth; often inclined to be too conservative ; 
generally orthodox. Difficulties in dealings with others. Liable to 
suffer discredit, and often suffers through an unforgiving and jealous 
nature. 

140. ¥% h £#.—Usually a prudent and thoughtful mind, and capable 
of much mental responsibility. Fond of science and profound thought. 
Capable of much concentration, usually serious, earnest and sincere, 
and very faithful in attachments. Highly favourable where a general 
philosophical attitude is indicated. 

141. & h C.—Subtle mind, very concentrative, given to the study 
of metaphysics and occultism. Capable of deep penetration; able mind, 
sometimes too severe, critical or exacting. This position may be equally 
good or bad, according to other aspects. 

142. % 2% A.—Liable to errors of judgment; sometimes prejudiced 
in regard to religion; oftentimes sceptical. Inclined to create false 
impressions; sometimes prone to litigation; and liable to be severely 
criticised. 

143. % % B.—Excellent judgment, broad and philosophic mind; 
mentally intuitive or harmonious; straightforward and conscientious ; 
capable of being wise; very well balanced mentally. 

144. % Y C.—Joyous and hopeful mental attitude; intuitive and 
sincere mind, and capable of great mental expansion. 

145. % 6 A.—Impulsive mind; often over-energetic ; quick wit; 
exaggerated imagination; a fearless intellect, with inclination to assert 
some opinions very freely. It often gives ability to follow scientific 
pursuits, or intellectual ingenuity, but is against really original work. 

146. §% og B—Very energetic mind, acute, sharp and active; much 
mental force; usually a witty, bright and cheerful outlook. Sometimes 
gives ability for drawing or designing, and more often than not gives 
mechanical ability with manual dexterity. | 

147, % 3d C.—Quick wit, cheerfui mind, materialistic or practical 
tendencies; socialistic views. Enterprise and business ability; but 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 315 


often inclined to say more than is wise and to over-estimate or exaggerate. 
The magnifying ability is very great. 

148. § @? A.—Usually an unimportant aspect, but prevents 
intuition or a full development of the artistic tastes. 

149. % ¢ £B.—The mind is softened, and inclined to be merry, 
cheerful, bright; gives a love of music or the fine arts; blends mind 
with feeling. 

150 § 2? C.—A refining position; gives sympathy and apprecia- 
tion; love of reading; an affable disposition; fond of all sociable and 
pleasurable conditions. 


Pee lite OUSES «TX, 


The various houses in the horoscope may now be separately studied 
so far as they affect the fate and fortune of the native. 


THe First House 


This house and the planets in it affect the general activities and that 
which is chiefly concerned with the personality. It has been already 
treated with sufficient fulness in Chapter VI. 


THE SEeconp House 


This is chiefly concerned with finance, means of livelihood, etc., and 
planets in this house cause a strong interest in money matters through- 
out the greater part of the native’s life. 

I51. ‘$.—May be either very good or very evil for finance. Some- 
times natives having this position lose through fraud and deception, 
although money often comes from unexpected sources or through 
following occupations of an uncommon nature. 

152. ii.—Denotes sudden changes of fortune, often bringing 
peculiar and remarkable experiences in financial affairs. Denotes 
success in professions connected with curiosities, old books or curious 
and antique furniture, auctioneering and all matters of an uncommon 
nature. 

153- h.—Not always favourable for money, but denotes gain by 
perseverance, thrift or carefulness. If well aspected brings gain through 
investment in land or property, or through heavy and arduous pursuits. 
Nevertheless money comes in slowly unless obtained by hereditary 
right. 


316 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


154. %.—This is the best position for the accumulation of wealth 5 
generally brings money by legacy or the aid of others; brings gain 
through foreign travel or pursuits connected with land, food or clothing. 
But it is best for all pursuits of an expansive nature, thus favours 
money-lenders, bankers, or those who have the handling of much cash. 

155. o.—Gives success through enterprise; also through legacies 
and inheritance, but denotes waste of money or extravagance and lack 
of carefulness. Usually Mars in the second brings money, which, how- 
ever, is quickly spent. 

156. @©.—Increases financial gain, gives success in government 
affairs, or concerns where much authority is exercised. It favours 
expenditure on a large scale for the purpose of big realisations. Thus 
shows gain by speculation, judicious investments; or gain through 
superiors and a fixed income. 

157. ¢.—Favours acquisition of wealth, denoting good fortune 
and prosperity in any occupation. But always inclines towards pro- 
fessional pursuits, partnerships and refined employments. 

158- %.—-Gain through literary pursuits, agencies, or where 
business versatility is necessary, giving success through commission 
agencies, acting as intermediary, through printing, journalism or any 
profession where adaptability is necessary. 

159. ).—Denotes a fluctuating financial condition, monetary 
prospects waxing and waning like the Moon. It favours success in 
connection with public commodities, public companies and associations 
catering and public wants generally, and favours S.P.Q.R. dealing. | 

159a. Whenno planets occupy the second house, and it is governed 
by a CarDINAL SiGn, it denotes gain through ambition; much activity 
and industry, though there is always a liability to fluctuating fortune 
and changes where money isconcerned. It however favours speculative 
enterprise, and acquisitiveness is usually well developed. 

1596. Ifa Fixep Sicn occupy the second, the liability to fluctuation 
is lessened and there is usually a fixed income, much or little according 
to the position and aspects of its lordorruler. It denotes gain through 
investments and favours unearned incomes. 

159¢. Ifa MuraBLe Sien rule the second, finance is prone to fluctua- 
tion. It favours professional pursuits but gives some anxiety where 
finance is concerned. There is apt to be some indifference regarding 
the accumulation of wealth. 


A SIMFLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 317 


THe Tuirp House 


The third house concerns matters connected with the lower brain 
mind, mental disposition, etc., and is chiefly concerned with travel, 
particularly short journeys; it also affects matters connected with 
relatives, brothers, sisters, etc. Any planet in this house accentuates its 
influence. 

160. ‘'$.—Indifference to travel; inclines to weird experiences; a 
skeleton in the cupboard with regard to relatives, and peculiar episodes 
in connection with brethren. It gives a peculiar type of mind. 

161. HI.—Not altogether favourable for travelling, and usually 
indicates sudden and unexpected journeys. It produces friction between 
relatives and brethren, who act in a peculiar and strange manner. 
Indicates a love of Astrology and all metaphysical subjects. When well 
aspected, it is a good influence. 

162. h.—Not good for travel, denoting hindrances and delays in 
connection with journeys. Itis unfavourable for any agreement between 
relatives, and sorrow often comes through brethren. Gives a serious 
type of mind, fond of the occult and mystical, with the ability to study 
Astrology. 

163. %.—Fortunate for travel, which is undertaken either for 
pleasure or profit. It indicates successful dealings with kindred, and 
success in the social world through brethren; gives a religious type of 
mind. 

164. 6.—Not good for travelling, denoting liability to accidents 
while on journeys, which are usually of an enterprising character. It 
denotes troubles through relatives; scandal or annoyance through 
brethren; and a combative or impulsive type of mind. 

165. ©@.—Favourable for travel, although it does not indicate 
much moving about. Journeys are generally undertaken for important 
purposes, and may have far-reaching results. It denotes a high-spirited 
mind, the prosperity of brethren, and successful dealings with relatives. 

166. ¢.—Makes travel successful and prosperous, journeys usually 
being undertaken in order to improve the mind, which is easy-going, 
pleasure-loving, and more or less artistic. Brethren rise in life and 
dealings with relatives are successful and fruitful. , 

167. %.—Many journeys, with a love of travelling and sightseeing ; 
journeys are also undertaken for business purposes or in search of 


318 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


information. It shows a very active mind and indifferent relations with 
brethren. 

168. ).—Many short journeys, usually through compulsion, either 
for business purposes or between two houses, and unless a fixed sign 
is on the cusp, journeys and changes are frequent. The mind is 
more or less changeable, and there are many experiences connected with 
relatives. 

If no planet occupy the third house the quality of the sign occupying 
the cusp should be studied. 

168a. A CaRDINAL SicN denotes much travelling about, a love of 
change, and many journeys. The mind is ambitious; close ties are 
formed with relatives. 

1686. A Frxep SicGn gives a disinclination to travel about, and any 
travel undertaken is usually compulsory. Tends to make the mind proud 
or austere, and thus gives a liability of estrangements with relations. 

168c. A MuTABLe Sicn shows journeys to be the result of circum- 
stances, and does not denote any definite desire for travel. Sometimes 
residence in foreign countries, however. The mind is usually indecisive. 


THE FourtH House 


The fourth house is usually concerned with the environment, com- 
prising parents, home life, the domicile and domestic affairs generally, 
also the condition at the close of life. Asin the other houses so here, a 
planet or planets occupying this house accentuates its influence over 
the lifeas a whole. If no planet zz the house, that ruling the sign on 
the cusp should be regarded as the main influence concerned. 

169. ‘t.—Uncertainty with regard to birth; peculiar environments, 
probability of unhappiness in the home life, and a strange end. 

170. H.—Eccentricities in connection with parentage; peculiar 
environment; dislike for domestic affairs; sudden changes at the close 
of life; strong leanings towards the occult. 

171. h.—Usually a poor environment; necessity for economy in 
domestic affairs ; the cultivation of acquisitiveness ; with probabilities of 
an isolated old age. | 

172. %.—A good birth with favourable social environment; more 
success at home than abroad; domestic happiness; gain by inheritance 
A prosperous and comfortable end to the life. 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 319 


173. &.—An unfavourable environment; turbulent home life; 
unfavourable domestic surroundings, and difficulties at the close of life. 

174. ©@.—Denotes a good end to the career, a favourable environ- 
ment, and usually a strong character. 

175. @.—Good parentage; peaceful environment; harmonious 
home surroundings; success in the domestic sphere, and a satisfactory 
finish. 

176- %.—An unsettled environment; worries in connection with 
home life and a changeable period at end of life. 

177. ).—Much attachment to home, many doméstic cares and 
worries ; changes and fluctuations in home life; a love of the mystical 
and occult. But much depends upon aspects. 


Tue Firru House 


The fifth house is connected with enterprise and all matters of a 
speculative character, which are supposed to be concerned with pleasure 
and the generative principles. Planets in this house need special study, 
as it may be taken as showing in a special sense the trend of past lives. 

178. *$.—Grave risks in connection with love affairs, fraudulent 
enterprises, or troubles in connection with speculation. If well aspected, 
unexpected gains. This position sometimes favours platonic unions. 

179. Hi.—An enterprising and speculative nature. Sudden and 
unexpected gains and losses. Much romance, but estrangements in love 
affairs. 

180. h.—Keen interest in all enterprises, but sorrowful experiences 
in connection with pleasure, and often indifferent success concerning 
speculation. Trouble through children. 

181. %.—Success in speculation; luck in connection with enter- 
prises ; fruitful issue; success in all pleasures, and social gain through 
children. 

182. 6.—Much energy in connection with enterprise; tendency to 
be rash in speculation, and (especially if afflicted by Jupiter) where a 
gambling spirit is denoted the ‘plunging’ element is very strong. It 
denotes ardent affections, and often entanglements. 

183. ©.—Favourable for all matters of an enterprising nature. 
The speculative interests are very keen and the capacity for enjoyment 
very great. 


320 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


184. @.—Enterprises of a successful character; gain through 
investment or speculation; successful love affairs; a fruitful and happy 
union; gain through children, with a liability to excesses in pleasure. 

185. %.—Denotes love of enterprise, mental interests in speculative 
affairs; some romance; much correspondence connected with love 
affairs, and generally a love of children. 

186. ).—While showing an enterprising tendency, sometimes 
inclines to gambling. Often a love of sensation, with a liability to be 
easily affected or impressed by others. Usually gives a love of pleasure. 


THe SrxtH House 


The sixth house is usually concerned with the state of the health, 
association with inferiors, servants, and the working capacities. Planets 
in this house have much to do with matters of hygiene, and if afflicted 
signify ill-health. 

187. ‘*#.—Peculiar ailments; uncommon disorders; liability to 
obsession, or to be affected by unhealthy surroundings. Frequently 
somewhat morbid or hysterical. 

188. H1.—Peculiar and often incurable complaints; dangers through 
operations ; strange illnesses. Sometimes hysterical or hypochondriacal. 
Sickness generally arises through nervous disorders. Interest in psychic 
matters. 

189. h.—Wasting diseases; sickness following colds or chills ; bad 
circulation, and unless the constitution is strong many long and severe 
illnesses. Industrious worker; trouble in connection with servants or 
inferiors. 

190. Y%.—A speedy and quick recovery from sickness through 
good and proper nursing. If afflicted, a liability to intemperate living 
affecting the blood and liver. Faithful servants and success with 
inferiors. 

191. 3$.—Much energy in connection with work; active servants: 
difficulties with inferiors; illnesses affecting the muscular system. If 
afflicted by Saturn, rheumatic fevers ; generally a tendency to meRcreaay, 
producing feverish and inflammatory complaints. 

192. ©@-—Denotes vital strength; constitution able to resist 
disease ; ability to recuperate. It also denotes gain through inferiors ; 
ability to work hard; but it is not a fortunate position for the Sun. 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 321 


193. ¢.—If afflicted, kidney troubles; sickness through indiscre- 
tion in diet, but successful nursing; usually good servants: success in 
dealing with inferiors. 

194. %.—Nerves affected, or at least highly sensitive. Ill-health 
through worry, usually concerning work. LEasily influenced by inferiors. 
Keen psychic impressions, and mental afflictions if badly aspected. 

195. ).—Disturbs functional arrangements; gives liability to 
indigestion; sickness through too much bathing or travelling; and a 
tendency to absorb impure magnetism. If afflicted, liability to tumorous 
complaints. 

If the lord of the Ascendant is in the sixth, much ill-health may be 
indicated, especially if afflicted there. This position usually produces a 
prodigious worker, and sometimes gives strong socialistic tendencies. 


THE SEVENTH House 


Although the seventh house is chiefly connected with marriage, there 
are matters governed by it that are explained in the first part of this 
work (see Chapter XIV). The following, however, are the general indi- 
cations when planets occupy the seventh; they will also in many cases 
apply to the lord of the seventh, if no planets occupy the house. 

196. ‘s'.—Usually unfavourable for marriage, and uncommon 
experiences generally occur in connection with it. This position is 
favourable for a platonic union if the horoscope as a whole denotes an 
advanced character. } 

197. H.—Estrangements and peculiar episodes in connection with 
marriage, or a union with someone quite out of the common. The 
position of Uranus in the seventh house is often a dangerous position for 
marriage unless the senses are well under control by both parties. 

198. h.—Hinders or delays marriage, but promises a faithful and 
steady partner; one who is industrious, careful, and thrifty, but not 
demonstrative, valuing action more than speech. 

199. %.—Very favourable for a happy union: the partner is 
generally noble, generous and fortunate. If afflicted, too proud and 
lofty in manner. In many cases the partner has been married before 
or had a prior engagement of importance in the past life. 

, 200. 6&.—Denotes much passion, probably a hasty marriage or 
love at first sight. It always hastens marriage, and although there is 


generally affection, reactions are more than probable with this influence. 
x 


322 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


- 201. ©@.—Denotes an ambitious partner and one whose influence 
over the life will be beneficial, promising social and financial gain. If 
well aspected, the partner will be independent, or of sound moral 
integrity, seeking to produce harmony and happiness in the marriage 
state. But if afflicted it denotes trouble through pride, according to the 
nature of the aspect. 

202. ¢.—Promises a happy marriage, benefits both social and 
financial. A fruitful union is denoted and social success assured after 
marriage. The union will be fruitful and successful. 

203. &.—Depends largely upon the aspects which Mercury forms, 
but the partner is shown to be quick, intelligent, fluent in speech, some- 
what critical, and nervous; marriage often takes place to one younger 
than the native. Worries and anxieties after marriage are usually 
denoted. 

204. ).—Indecision with regard to marriage; a partner who is 
sensitive or liable to many moods, but popular and having general 
recognition. This position denotes fluctuation in feeling during the 
marriage state. 

If the lords of the first and seventh are in favourable aspect success 
in marriage is denoted, but if afflicted there is very little harmony. A 
sure sign of friendship is an exchange of the place of the luminaries, 
that is, the Sun in one horoscope on the Moon inthe other. Successful 
physical unions occur when Mars is on Venus or wice versd. 


THe EicgHtH House 


The eighth house is usually connected with legacies, deaths, co- 
workers and occult matters. Planets occupying this house usually 
incline to an interest in occult matters, but if untenanted the life 
gradually tends to run more or less on conventional lines, unless the 
ruler receives strong aspects. 

205. ‘$'.—Probability of money being left that is never recovered ; 
liability to be defrauded of inheritance. Death usually hastened by 
drugs. Liable to trances or a watery death. 

206. Hl.—Unexpected and sudden windfalls; a sudden end to 
existence ; danger of death through operations or among crowds. 

207. h.—Disappointments in connection with legacies; no financial 
gain through marriage or partnership. A slow death, or death through 
old age. © 


= 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 325 


208. %.—Certain gain by legacy, or good fortune through marriage 
and insurance; a natural or peaceful end to life. 

209. 6.—Difficulties concerning wills or legacies, unless well 
aspected. Generally some sudden or unexpected gain. Usually a 
sudden end to the existence; and if much afflicted liability to violence 
or public calamity. 

210. @-—Probability of a legacy from a superior; is favourable 
for occultism; also brings gain from partners and co-workers. Death is 
usually attended with honour. ; 

211. ¢.—Almost certain gain by legacies, or through marriage ~ 
and partnership. Good for insurance, and denotes a peaceful death. © 

212. .—An indifferent position; usually denotes gain through 
goods of the dead, but if afflicted trouble in connection with administra- 
tion or through trustees. Occult tendencies indicated. 

213. ).—Some slight probability of gain through legacies or 
through co-workers. Either notoriety or public attention at death. 


Tue Ninty House 


The ninth house is usually concerned with what is known as 
philosophy or the action of the higher mind. It concerns vital things 
that are not always on the surface, or readily seen. Planets in this 
house have a strong influence upon the subjective consciousness. 

214. ‘s.—Peculiar views; strange and weird dreams and usually 
very peculiar experiences. 

215, l.—Liable to strange or advanced views. A very inventive 
or ingenious mind, given to the higher criticism; but much depends 
upon aspects. 

216. h.—Fond of science; critical mind; unfavourable position 
for long journeys or foreign affairs; tendency towards deception; or 
inclined to be too sceptical in matters of religion or higher thought. 

217. 4%.-—Fond of science, philosophy, or religion. Great capacity 
of unfoldment; and usually the acquisition of much learning through an 
expansive mind, having prophetic tendencies. Generally a ‘true 
dreamer.’ 

218. 6.—An enthusiastic mind; too much independence; danger 
of litigation through disputes ; oftentimes religious fervour. 

219. ©.—Denotes a philosophical attitude of mind; deep feelings 


324 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


with regard to religion; a very broad mind; usually success through 
legal or foreign affairs. Probability of some long journeys. 

220. ¢.—Keen intuitions; favourable dreams; philosophic ten- 
dencies; religious spirit; gain through relatives after marriage. 

221. %.—A very active mind; deep inclination to explore hidden 
mysteries ; quick to learn and appreciate; mind of a metaphysical turn. 

222. ).—Peculiar views; sometimes enthusiastic with regard to 
higher thought matters; but the mind is usually broad, and many long 
journeys or much travel are denoted. But much depends upon aspects 
and the sign the Moon occupies. 

When no planets occupy the ninth house note carefully the ruler, 
also its position and aspects. 


Tue TentH Houser 


The tenth house has to do with fame, honour and profession, and 
usually indicates the ambitions and the responsibilites, also the credit 
and discredit, which are denoted by the occupant of this house or its 
ruler, and the aspects thereto. 

223. ‘*?!.—Strange and uncommon experiences. 

224. it8.—Strange and peculiar professions; original methods; 
subject to popularity and reversals. Some genius or great talent, with 
inventive powers. If free from affliction, a unique reputation ; if afflicted, 
much discredit. 

225. h.—Subject to fatalistic tendencies and limitations connected 
with honour and success. Position secured only by merit and labour. 
If afflicted, liable to serious misfortunes and disasters. If well placed 
by aspects, etc., responsible positions. The native is highly ambitious. 

226. %.—Excellent for success in life. Native rises to high 
positions ; obtains honourable distinction and secures social recognition. 

227. &.—Some mechanical ability; critical positions; sudden loss 
of position ; danger of scandal or discredit ; liable to hold risky positions. 
If afflicted, will abuse responsibility. 

228. ©.—Responsible employments; ambitious tendencies, rise in 
life through honour and integrity. 

229. ¢.—Social success; gain through females; success in life in 
refined possessions and the help of many friends. 

230. %.—Fluctuating tendencies; success in literary, writing or 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 325 


secretarial work. If afflicted, liable to many fluctuations and changes. 
If well aspected, improvement of business ability and mental opportunities. 

231. ).—Fluctuating fortunes; ambitious tendencies; rise in life. 
Aspects denote either fame or notoriety, according to the general tenor 
of the horoscope. 

231a. If no planets occupy the tenth house and a CarDINAL SIGN 
is on the cusp, some fame or reputation is denoted; responsible posts 
may be filled, and ambition brings rising fortune. 

2310. Ifa Frxep SieGn is on the cusp, success through determination 
and effort, or through steady and fixed pursuits. Responsible posts are 
generally held, this position favouring all professions of a permanent 
character, such as the medical and legal professions, governmental 
occupations, etc. 

231c. If a MutasLe Sten, the career tends to be more or less 
uncertain, much depending upon the sign occupied by the ruler of this 
house, its aspects, etc. 


THe EvLevento Housrt 


The eleventh house is concerned with friends, acquaintances, hopes 
and aspirations, and is usually a fortunate house. Planets in or ruling 
this house are largely concerned with the zdeals. 

232. ‘i.—Weird and queer friendships, usually of an unhealthy 
character: liable to be imposed upon by friends. 

233. Hi.—Unique and exceptional friendships; usually of a 
bohemian and remarkable character. Gain in a sudden and unexpected 
manner through friends. As an instance of this may be mentioned the 
following case: A lady friend of the author’s, who was a nurse in the 
Franco-Prussian War, had attended a dying officer, who before his 
death gave her certain information which enabled her to realise a 
fortune in connection with some mining shares. 

234. h.—Some faithful and reliable friends, often elderly persons; 
but usually there are some keen disappointments in connection with 
personal friendships. 

235. %4.—Advancement and success through friends; social benefits 
and financial gain through them. 

236. o&.—Dangerous friendships which are likely to influence the 
native adversely. 


326 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


237. ©.-—Firm and reliable friends; gain through relatives, and 
the realisation of many ambitions. _ 

238  @.—Much success through friends, also gain socially and 
financially through them. 

239. %.—Clever friends and acquaintances, but not much reliance 
should be placed upon them. | 

240. )).—Many acquaintances and few friends. ) 

Note.—The lord of the ascendant in one horoscope in the sign on 
the cusp of the eleventh of the other is always a sure token of friendship 
between two people. 


Tue TwetrrH House 


The twelfth house is considered the most unfortunate, and the term 
‘self-undoing’ is used by the author to describe the change in 
consciousness that usually takes place when planets are placed in this 
house. It is the house of ¢rue occultism. Planets in this house are 
therefore especially important. 

241. ‘s.—Strange and peculiar experiences in connection with 
psychic affairs. It is rarely a favourable position unless very well 
aspected. | 

242. H.—Good for occult matters, but much depends upon aspects. 

243. h.—Unfavourable, denoting many sorrows, painful experi- 
ences, and unforgiving enemies. 3 

244. %.—Favourable for occultism, and the native gains indirectly 
through his enemies, in fact, he always gains through them more or less. 

245. 6.—Unfavourable in this house, and at some period of the 
life either a hospital:-or other public building is occupied. It gives. 
danger of false accusation, and if much afflicted liability to imprisonment. 
Denotes some powerful enemies. 

246. ©.—Good for occult matters, the native overcomes his. 
enemies; improves his worldly affairs and more often than not rises out. 
of obscurity into prosperity. 

247.  ¢.—Favourable in the twelfth, as it dissipates the sorrows of 
this house, giving joy and pleasure in occult affairs. It generally 
denotes, however, secret and romantic love affairs. : 

248. %.—Favours the investigation of spiritualism and occultism, 
but denotes danger through treachery or the evil thoughts of others if 
afflicted. 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 327 


249. )—Is unfavourable; denotes restrictions ; sometimes produces 
confinement, or loss of liberty and freedom. Enemies are troublesome. 


X. SUMMARIES X. : 
(a) Pranets Risinc, Sertinc, ABovE or BELow 


Att horoscopes are best summarised, first by the planetary positions 
taken as a whole (rising, setting, or culminating), and next with regard 
to the nature of the signs holding the majority of the planets. 

250. PLANETS RIsiInc,—ze, in houses XI, XII, I, IH, II,— 
promise a rise in life through the native’s own energy and enterprise, 
indicate opportunities, a fair amount of self-control, and the ability to 
make the most of those opportunities. 

251. PLANETS SETTING,—ze., in houses V, VI, VII, VII, [X,— 
show that the life will be more under the influence of fate, and 
that the influence of others will play an important part in the life of the 
native; also that the exercise of the will will not be so manifest. It 
denotes a certain lack of opportunity. 

252. PLANETS ABOVE THE Horizon,—~.e., in houses VII, VIII, IX, X, 
XI, XII,—denotes success in life, also that as much as can be manifest 
will be exhibited. They indicate ambition, real ability; a self-reliant, 
persevering, aspiring and energetic nature. When the majority are above 
the earth the native nearly always rises above the sphere of his birth. 

253. PLANETS BELOW THE Horizon,—ze., in houses I, II, III, 
IV, V, VI (especially the three last),—promise success in the latter 
half of life, indicating that there is a great deal latent in the native, but 
_ that he will probably pass through life unrecognised and unknown. It 

also indicates that the native succeeds better in the employ of others 
nan by taking responsibility upon himself. 


(6) PLANETS IN THE TRIPLICITIES 


254. The majority of planets in Fiery signs denotes a spirited and 
idealistic nature. It gives the native force and energy; a rich and 
generous nature; plenty of vitality, hope and enthusiasm ; deep emotions 
and an ardent love nature. Usually gives a great deal of courage mentally 
or morally. Planets in those signs are more active than in others. 

255. The majority in Arry signs denotes an inspirational and 
artistic temperament. It endows the native with a refined intellect, 
pure tastes; high ideals and good social abilities. 


328 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


256. The majority of planets in Watery signs denotes a psychic 
or emotional nature; the instinctual consciousness is very keen: and 
the native is always more or less receptive or impressionable; often 
mediumistic, and sometimes passionate; responsive to and usually 
largely affected by circumstances, surroundings and environment. 

257. Ihe majority of planets in Eartuy signs shows a very 
practical and matter-of-fact nature. The native is either scientifically 
or commercially inclined, and in any case takes a very solid and concrete 
view of life. Is rarely quick or brilliant, but more often than not per- 
severing, painstaking and plodding. Generally takes a materialistic 
view of life, requiring a demonstration of theories before they are 
accepted. This position gives great power in the material world, and 
in a strong horoscope would denote a very practical man of affairs. 


(c) PLANETS IN THE QUADRUPLICITIES 


The next consideration is whether the majority of planets are in 
Cardinal, Mutable or Fixed signs. The first have to do with ambition, 
fame and recognition, arising from the Cardinal nature of the signs, 
while socialistic and sympathetic or fickle tendencies are due to a 
predominance of the Mutable signs, whereas pride, determination, and 
love of authority are the result of the Fixed signs. 

258. The majority of planets in CarDINAL SIGNS causes the native 
to hold prominent positions; to exhibit much enterprise and ambition; 
causing him never to be fully satisfied unless he is at the head of things. 
He will love change, will be more or less self-assertive, independent and 
active. Will have many changes in his life, and usually each step in 
life is on to a higher rung of the ladder. He will have high ideals, and 
seek to make them practical; a political trend of mind, rarely being 
satisfied if not ruling others: generally the pioneer spirit will pre- 
dominate. 

259. The majority of planets in Fixep Siens denotes determination, 
firmness, and self-reliance. The native will be either proud or dignified, 
inclined to be austere or autocratic, but will always be dependable and 
reliable. He will be capable of patience and endurance, and will rise in 
life through fixity of purpose and persistent effort. 

260. The majority of planets in Mutas.e Siens indicates either an 
indifferent or mediocre life ; versatility, often much indecision ; a liability 
to be fickle and discontented ; always more or less restless, but with 


A SIMPLE WAY OF READING HOROSCOPES 329 


either intellectual or educational views. The native is always more or 
less demonstrative and capable of very deep feelings and emotions, but 
rarely succeeds in life unaided by others. Or if he does succeed, fails 
to gain sufficient recognition for his labours. Often misses opportunities ; 
is rarely thorough, although often methodical; and seldom if ever 
achieves fame, although he may be possessed of excellent merit. A 
great characteristic of this quality is sympathy, and in spite of their 
unreliability, these people are usually very ‘likeable.’ 

261. When the planets are almost equally distributed throughout 
the three quadruplicities, a well-balanced and fairly even temperament 
is denoted, and in this case more attention should be paid to the planetary 
positions (a) than to the signs they occupy. It is, on the whole, a favour- 
able testimony and generally gives a more or less ‘all-round’ character, 
sound common sense, and good judgment. 


TABULATION 
Horoscope oF Kinc Epwarp VII. 
Description Ref. No. Description Ref. No. 
I. Ristnc Sion f par. 9 VII. % in Sicn par. 129 
DecanaTeE, 3rd (p. 100) ,, — », House xi.(p.220),,  — 
II. Ruiine Pues Y 16 poAspects -\/) Fy, 5; 
Ill. Ruxerin Sicn f (p. 123), “ — raat 59140,145 
oy) SROUSE es 22 Soxt-Lunar Porarity ,, 8724 
», Aspects 7/ ¥ 9, IX. Finance + APS hb 
UY OH (see pp. 261 X. Travet CarninaL ,, 1682 
and 237) nN — XI. Environment 9? ROSIN bed 
IV. Ristnc Praners h g_ ,, 36,38 XII. Enrerrrise ? A GY 
V.~ ,, Puranet’s Sicn 74 XIII. Sickness & 5 194 
sd pp. 244. and XIV. Marriace § yi ees 
— XV. Lecacigs ©) peli ae AO 
mt pea nt) ys. XVI. Puitosopuy 9? Pane es 
3 X* © (fp. 253 XVII. Prorgssion ©) eee 
and 270 iy — | XVIII. Frienps § 5 230 
VI. © in Sicn Mm 50 XIX. Enemies 2/ rey 
», Aspects [_]*#, * 3, ay a XX. Summarigs (2) 51250 
VII. ) in Sicn my mA oe se (4) eg wie 
»» House viil. as 95 - (c) oy 26% 
»» Aspects / ©), 0 8... 73,100 
Olh,x & 106, 119 


Norzt.—As regards the Summary it will be seen that this is a very well- 
balanced horoscope, each quality and triplicity being well represented. 


* Jupiter should here be looked upon rather as the ruler of the twelfth than 
as occupying it, since it is virtually in the first. See note on p, go. 


330 ) HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


If a sheet is prepared in the manner shown, it will be very easy 
to obtain a classification of the various positions in the horoscope, the 
numbers showing the particular paragraph to which reference has to 
be made. In this case the numbers supplied refer to the horoscope 
given on p. 297 and those paragraphs which have corresponding num- 
bers: a few references are also given to the earlier portion of the book. 
If by way of exercise the paragraphs here enumerated are copied 
out, under their respective headings, a skeleton delineation of this 
nativity will be obtained that will well repay further study. By 
carefully weighing the contradictory testimonies, in view of King 
Edward’s known character, the development of the student’s power ot 
judgment will be very materially aided, and he will find himself soon able 
to write out, on the plan here laid down, a full delineation of this 
nativity which shall be clear and consistent. 

The student is very strongly urged to adopt this suggestion, rather 
than to content himself with merely reading the paragraphs enumerated. 
For he can hardly realise until he has done so the benefit that he will 
derive from this discipline of his powers, which will prove far more 
valuable to him than any amount of desultory work. 


A CENTILOQUY 


The ‘ Centiloquies’ of Chaudius Ptolemy and others are famous for containing in a short 
and pithy form the fruit of many years of study. The present Centiloguy is 
intended simply as a help to the student by which he may fix in his mind the gist of 
the teachings given in this book, in the form of a hundred brief aphorisms. To 
cach aphorism is added the page on which more detailed information can be 
found. 


I. The ‘squares’ denote opposition and discord, the ‘triangles’ peace and 
harmony (4). 

II. Astrological symbology conceals within itself the history of the earth as a 
planet (6). 

III. ‘The Ascendant corresponds to sunrise, and suggests spirit made subject to 
matter ; the Meridian corresponds to noon, and suggests balance between spirit 
and matter ; the Descendant corresponds to sunset and suggests the triumph of 
spirit over matter ; the Jmum Coeli is the great mystery, the occult centre (7). 

IV. The Cardinal Houses indicate physical matters connected with the 
external life; the Fixed Houses indicate matters connected with feelings and 
emotions, not yet ripe, but maturing ; the Mutable Houses indicate matters latent 
in the mind, and affairs brought over from past lives (8). 

V. The Cadent, Succedent and Cardinal divisions represent thought, speech 
and action, or spirit, soul and body (6). 

VI. The six houses above the horizon (xii, xi, x, ix, vill, vil) correspond to 
the ‘life’ side of the universe, the six below (vi, v, iv, ili, ii, i) correspond to its 
‘form’ side (6). 

VII. There exists an intimate correspondence between the Signs and the. 
Houses (10). 

VIII. The Houses relate to physical and erhkeric matter, and the Signs to astral 
“matter (10). : 

IX. The influence of the Signs is greater than that of the Houses, and the 
former will ‘overbear’ the latter (p. 10). 

X. The Houses are like transparent vessels, each having its own pattern; the 
Signs supply the contents of such vessels, giving a special substance, colour and 


quality to each house (12). 
331 


332 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


XI. The four triplicities are Fire, Air, Water, Earth; or Spirit, 
Space, Time and Matter. The three qualities are Cardinal, Fixed, and 
Mutable (14). 

XII. The Cardinal Signs govern the head, and their chief characteristic is 
activity (15). 

XIII. The Fixed Signs govern tne heart and will, and their chief character- 
istic is stability (15). 

XIV. The Mutable signs govern the limbs, lungs and bowels, and their chief 
characteristic is adaptability (15). 

XV. Odd Signs are all positive, male, day signs; Even Signs are negative, 
female, night signs (16). 

XVI. Positive signs refer to the force or life side of things, negative signs to 
the matter or form side (16). 

XVII. The Fiery Signs as a whole signify energy, vitality and vigour. Aries 
the originator, Leo the organiser, Sagittarius the executant (17, 18). 

XVIII. The Watery Signs as a whole signify mobility and sensation. Cancer 
the insistent, Scorpio the passionate, Pisces the emotional and sympathetic 
(19, 20, 21). 

XIX. The Airy Signs as a whole signify expansion and mentality. Libra 
the Woman, Aquarius the Father-Man, Gemini the child (22, 23). 

XX. The Earthy Signs as a whole signify completion and achievement. 
Capricorn the practical idealist, Taurus the concentrator, Virgo the discriminator 
(24, 25). 

XXI. Planets in their exaltation exert a more refined and more powerful 
influence than elsewhere (28). 

XXII. The Sun is the vehicle through which the Solar Logos manifests ; in 
the horoscope it represents the Individuality (29). 

XXIII. The Moon is the vehicle of communication between the Sun and 
each living thing ; in the horoscope it represents the Personality (29). 

XXIV. Mars is the planet of focussed force and out-going impulse (30). 

XXV. Saturn is the planet which binds, limits and crystallises (32). 

XXVI, Saturn rules the personal Ego, Mars the animal tendencies (33). 

XXVII. Venus and Jupiter are the respective counterparts of Mars and 
Saturn (33). | 

XXVIII. Venus is the planet whose force comes from within through the. 
Ego’s direct intuitive power (34). 

XXIX. Mars is the planet of physical generation, Venus the planet of 
creation (34) 


A CENTILOQUY 333 


XXX. Jupiter is the planet of expansion, and rules the ‘celestial’ 
body (35). 

XXXI. Mercury is the planet of adaptation, and represents in each life the 
knowledge gained (36). 

XXXII. Uranus is the planet which represents the fully individualised 
Ego (36). 

XXXIII. Neptune is concerned with psychic evolution (37). 

XXXIV, Conjunctions stand symbolically for union and synthesis (40). 

XXXV. Oppositions signify antagonism, rivalry and duality (46). 

XXXV1. Squares alternately crystallise and limit, and disrupt and 
shatter (46). . 

XXXVII. Trines stand for progression and harmony (46). 

XXXVIII. In examining aspects, pay attention to the application of the 
swifter moving planet (63). 

XXXIX. If the ruler has just left one aspect and applies to another, give the 
principal value to the influence forming (p. 63). 

XL. Planetary influences are primarily of asuper-material nature, and cannot 
be accurately expressed in words (65). 

XLI. The Sun represents the Individuality and corresponds to the Fixed 
Signs (68). 

XLII. The Moon represents the Personality, and corresponds to the Mutable 
Signs (69). 

XLIII. The Ascendant represents the physical body and brain, and cor- 
responds to the Cardinal Signs (71). 

XLIV. The Ascendant moves most quickly and corresponds to the Rajasic 
guna; the Sun moves most slowly and corresponds to the Tamasic guna; the 
Moon is intermediate and corresponds to the Sattvic guna (72). 

XLV. Fiery Signs rising denote good vitality, airy signs less vitality but 
more mentality, watery signs a tendency to weak constitution, and earthy signs 
good general health but not much vitality (go). 

XLVI. Fixed signs rising denote fixity of purpose ; cardinal signs energy ; 
mutable signs, versatility (91). 

XLVII. The expression of the Ascendant is considerably modified or 
accentuated by the planets rising (91). 

XLVIII. Whatever be the Rising Sign, pay especial attention to the cor- 
responding house (92). 

XLIX. Aries, Taurus and Gemini belong to the Intellectual Trinity ; their 
keynote is knowledge and progression through the intellect (95). 


it me HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


L. Cancer, Leo and Virgo belong to the Maternal Trinity, and their 
keynote is emotion and progression through the moral sentiments (98). 

LI. Libra, Scorpio and Sagittarius belong to the Reproductive Trinity and 
their keynote is Progression through the power to reform and renew (101). 

LII. Capricorn, Aquarius and Pisces belong to the Serving Trinity, and 
their keynote is Service to Humanity (104). 

LIII. The general influence of Neptune rising tends to inversion of 
motives; that of Uranus, to inversion of ideas (105, 106). 

LIV. Saturn rising denotes limitation, and the form side of power; 
Jupiter rising denotes dignity and the internal power in which the will is 
exercised (106, 107). 

LV. Mars rising denotes a strong desire nature; Venus rising refines and 
beautifies the love nature (107). 

LVI. The Sun rising strengthens the constitution, and gives dignity to the 
appearance (108). 

LVII. The Moon rising influences the temperament, and makes the stamp of 
heredity more clearly defined (109). 

LVIII. Mercury rising is very potent and denotes the mental capacities, but 
it is greatly affected by the influence of aspects (109). 

LIX. The Ruling Planet is either the lord of the ascending sign, or else 
that planet which is strongest or most prominent in the horoscope (129). 

LX. The Sun well aspected and well placed brings success in life (131). 

LXI. In considering the question of health, take into consideration Ascendant, 
Moon and Sun (139). 

LXII. If the Sun is afflicted, the flow of the vital energy will be dis- 
turbed ; if the Moon, the vehicle conveying the life forces is abnormal ; if the 
Ascendant, the health will suffer according to nature of affliction and the rising 
sign (139). 

LXIII. The Hyleg is that point in the horoscope upon which health and 
life depend (140). 

LXIV. Positive Signs rising tend to give vitality, negative signs are not 
quite so vigorous (141). 

LXV. The Apheta is that which supports life, the Anareta that disso 
takes away life (144, 145). 

LXVI. The relationship between signs and houses is that of Berd 
or analogy (147). 

LXVII. In judging the financial prospects in a nativity, study the second 
house in all its bearings (151). 


A CENTILOQUY 335 
LXVIII. The Cardinal Signs give money through fame and public recog- 


nition, the Fixed Signs through Government or authoritative influence, the 
Common Signs through service and ordinary means. (157). 

LXIX. The third house has a definite influence over the mind and is 
analogically under the rulership of Mercury (158). 

LXX, In judging the mental qualifications consider the luminaries and 
Mercury, as well as the third house (163). 

LXXI. The fourth house relates to the end of life, the environment of the 
native, and one of the parents (164). 

LXXII. The signs on the cusps of the tenth and fourth houses, their 
rulers and the aspects between them, will denote the attitude of the parents 
towards each other, and their influence upon the native (170). 

LXXIII. In considering the question of parental influence generally, include 
the Sun and the planet Saturn, with regard to he father, and the Moon and 
Venus with regard to the mother (169). 

LXXIV. The fifth house relates to pleasure, society and social aftairs, also to 
the emotions and feelings (172). 

LXXV. The fifth house is an index to the sensations and_passional 
tendencies, the sign upon the cusp indicating past experiences (175). 

LXXVI. The first, fifth and ninth houses represent the personal man, 
showing his present, past and future consciousness symbolically (175). 

LXXVII. Thesixth houseis connected with the mid-heaven and thesecond house, 
and relates to work, servants, sickness and the condition of the physical body (178). 

LXXVIII. The sixth house indicates the psychic tendencies of the native, 
and is the house of phenomenal or ceremonial magic (183). 

LXXIX. The seventh house is the complement of the first, and represents 
the unifying of all that is separated or isolated in the ascendant (184). 

LXXX. The seventh house signifies the transmutation of the passions into 
love, the exchange of intellect for wisdom, and the perfect individualisation of 
the conscious self (184). 

LXXXI. Any planet in the seventh house describes the partner, and gives 
the history of any union (186). 

LXXXII. From a higher standpoint, the seventh house may be considered 
as the house of the Individuality as contrasted with the Personality ; the blending 
of these two being the true marriage (189). 

LXXXIII. If the seventh house and its ruler do not offer a clear judgment 
in a male horoscope note the application of the Moon, and in a female horoscope, 


the Sun (189). 


336 HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 


LXXXIV. In descriptions of marriage partner, judge according to the planet 
occupying the seventh, and the sign on the cusp: if no planet in seventh then 
judge by lord of sign on cusp, and the sign which said planet occupies (191). 

LXXXV. The eighth house is the house of death, and all matters con- 
nected therewith, and also has relation to some forms of mediumship and 
occultism (195). 

LXXXVI. In all questions of death, the sign upon the cusp of the eighth 
house, and the signs containing the majority of the planets, must be carefully 
considered (200). 

LXXXVII. The ninth house is the house of philosophy, the higher mind ; 
the house of the subjective and abstract mind as opposed to the objective and 
concrete brain mind (202). 

LXXXVIII. The ninth house denotes that which is to be the unfolding of 
what is possible in the future (206). 

LXXXIX. All planets in the ninth house have a higher vibration than when 
placed in any other (206). 

XC. The ninth house denotes the unexpressed, the motive behind the act, 
the thought behind the speech (206). 

XCI. The tenth house is the house of honour, reputation, profession or occupa- 
tion and represents the public standing or worldly position of the native (207). 

XCII. In considering a vocation, take careful note of Saturn, the ruler 
of Capricorn, the natural tenth house in the order of the signs (216). 

XCIII. The eleventh house is that of friends, acquaintances, hopes, 
wishes and aspirations (217). 

XCIV. The twelfth house is the house of sorrow—the house of self- 
undoing (226). 

XCV. Luminaries applying to aspects affect the polarity more than aspects 
from which they are separating (288). 

XCVI. If the Sun is above the Moon, rising or setting, ale Individual 
character will be stronger than the Personal (288). 

XCVII. If both luminaries are below the earth the blending of them is 
more potent and the polarity more complicated (p. 288). 

XCVIII. If both luminaries are above the earth, the Sun gains the greater 
power ; if both are below, the Moon (p. 288). 

XCIX. The polarity is always stronger when the luminaries are rising, 
and weaker when they are setting (288). 

C. If either of the luminaries apply to the benefics, the Individuality 
is stronger if it be the Sun, the Personality if it be the Moon (288). 


Alan Leo’s Astrological Publications 


Astrological Text Books: 15/-, post free 16/-. 


Astrology for All. Requires no knowledge of 


Mathematics. 

Casting the Horoscope. ‘‘ The Astrologer’s 
Baedeker.”’ 

How to Judge a Nativity. Complete Rules for 
Judgments. 


The Art of Synthesis. Showing the relation 
between Planets and Consciousness. 


The Progressed Horoscope. An exhaustive 
treatise on both the Primary and Secondary 
systems of Directing. 


The Key to your own Nativity. 
your own Horoscope. 


Esoteric Astrology. A new presentation of 
Astrology showing the inner meaning. 


How to vead 


A complete Reference Index for this Series has been compiled ; price §/= net. 


Pocket Manuals. 


Postage 8d. 


Everybody’s Astrology, 2/6 

Planetary Influences, 2/-. 

The Horoscope in Detail, 2/6. 

What is a Horoscope and How is it Cast ? 2/-. 
Direction and Directing, 2/-. 

The ‘* Reason Why ”’ in Astrology, 1/6. 
Horary Astrology, 2/6. 

The Degrees of the Zodiac Symbolised, 2/6. 


Medical Astrology, 2/-. 

What do we mean by Astrology, 1/6. 

1001 Notable Nativities, 2/-. 

Mundane Astrology, 1/6. 

Weather Predicting by Astro-Meteorology, 1/6. 


Symbolism and Astrology. Ax introduction 
to Esoteric Astrology, 1/6. 


My Friends’ Horoscopes. Blank Map forms. 
2/6. 


Cloth bound and pocket size, these elemenssry manuals supply the beginner’s need in a way that 
bas met with general appreciation, shown by some alveady having reached the Seventh Edition. 


Valuable Gift Books. 


Postage 6d. 


The Life and Work of Alan Leo: by Bessie Leo. 


Practical Astrology: by Alan Leo. §5/-. 


Rays of Truth: by Bessie Leo. 5/- net. 
Highly Recommended. 
Astrological Essay: by Bessie Leo. 5/- net. 


A Companion to ** Rays of Truth.” 


6/- net. 


The Romance of the Stars: by Bessie Leo. 
A strological Stories. AN IDEAL CHRISTMAS 
GIFT. 3/6 net. 

The Pathway of the Soul: A Study in 
Zodiacal Symbology: by J. H. Van Stone 

3/6 net 


Simple and attractive in style, ave welcome gifts. 


POPULAR SERIES 
2/-, post free 2/8. 
Mars: the War Lord. 
Saturn: the Reaper. 


Jupiter: the Preserver. 
Alan Leo’s last book. 


1/- monidly. 


Modern Astrology, THE ASTROLOGER’S MAGAZINE : 


SIXPENNY BOOKLETS 


Astrology Explained. 

The Astrologer and His Work. 
Exoteric or Esoteric ? 

A New Factor in Education: Astrology. 


(18/6 per annum post free). Specimen 


copy 4d. post free. 


ORDER THROUGH YOUR BOOKSELLER, OR SEND DIRECT TO 


‘Modern Astrology’ Office, Imperial Buildings, Ludgate Circus, London, E.C. 


‘ 


V 


init 
us 


DATE DUE 


a | 

=) 
ee. 
Pisce 


- 1 
s a 
oe 

2 


‘aoe 1 
ae 
hens : 
~~ = 
a6 


DEMCO 38-297 


| 
| 
| 


{ili 


r+ 3° 1197 


INN. 


