The Rational ‘Basis of Astrology. 


As each copy of fhtsbooktsUktly tocotne ift/o the hands of a great 
number of people tr/to here find thetr first introduction to the subject of 
Astrology, or at least their first incentive to a serious consideration 
thereof, it ts thought veil to devote thisfiy leaf to a brief setting forth 
of the jfoundational principles ufion vhtch the science rests, and also of 
the claims of Astrology as a basts for character study There iriU he 
many to vhotn the mere sublimity of the subject will at once appeal, 
bi<f there are others vhase atlitiide of mind is philosophicalratherthan 
devotional, and it ts to these that tee address ourselves here 


The first principle upon which the scieacc of asUolosy rests ts, that 
the whole Uaiverse is actually what the term implies-^ uaity, aod 
that a law which is found u) manifestatioa la one portion of the Universe 
must also be equally operative thnnichont the whole The consequent 
to this major premise ts, that our own solar system being in itself a 
complete whole, those laws which are operab%e among the major 
constituents of that s)*stem, vie, the planetary bodies, are also in force 
among the lesser components of the same system—to wit, ourselves, 
and the other objects on this earth, whether solid, flsid, or gaseons. 
whether human, animal, vegetable or mineral. 

The second principle is, that by a study of the motions and relative 
positions of the planets the operations of these laws may be observed, 
measured, and determined. 

From these two first pnnopJes, aided by present-day observation 
and a imnd capable of a metaphysical grasp of the metaphysical sigmfi 
cance of phenomena, the whole saence of Astrology as now expoonded 
can be deduced. It is a mistake far too prevalent even among thoaghtful 
and unprejudiced people to suppose that the present mterest in Astroli^ 
IS mer^v the decadent revival of an ancient superstition, based entirely 
on accepted tradition. 

Nevertheless, smee Truth ts the same tn alt times, the learmng of 
the ancients, transmitted to us by tradition—largely in the form of myth 
—IS of the greatest value to the modem student Indeed, the astrologer 
who had to depend entirely on the two first principles given above would 




cemmly ha\e & hercuJein iisk before him of observation, tabulition and 
iniuction before be wuld be e\cn so >\eU equipped os the reader ^\bo 
procures an eleincntir> test book such as this and intelligently applies its 
ptmciplcs. Tor \shilc the attributes of the s-aoous planets, Mars, Venus, 
Jupiter and Saturn forinsta{ice,are daily shown to be in entire accordance 
wuh the dicta of the ancicntSj—ibis is a fact that js quite lost sight of by 
the ordinary critic,—yet the arrnal at such conclusions by sheer expen 
mental methods alone would be neatly as long deferred as some of the 
modem fheones about matter lod force, which are seen when understood 
to be after nil mere corollaries of the elementary pnnciples of mechanics, 
already centuncs old 

Havnngthus considered the philosophical, or perhaps one should rather 
say the saeatide grounds far this study, as a means of comprehending 
nature’s laws, i\ e will briefly enumerate the cbims of astrology as regards 
Its practical application to ordinary life It m*iI 1 be noted tlutne have 
carefully avoided all refcreiice to the grandeur of the subject and have 
treated the matter from the dispassionate standpoint of pure reason. 
And, if the principles here alluded to be not considered proven, it is at 
least impossible for the most mgenious casuist to demonstrate their 
impossibility, or reasonably to argue their a pnon unlikelihood 

The Claims of Astrology then are, that it offers first and foremost a 
means of general chancier study entirely surpassing the combined 
adi*antages of ordinary onthropologicU methods, beiog at once more 
comprehensive and more subtle Secoo^y, and this is pre emmeutly 
Its ^entest, its dnine use, a meaos /or the unbiassed examinatioo 0 / 
one s own character, and the roost effective meaos of strengthening it 
Thirdly, A knoiiledge of times and seasons appropriate for certain 
works, and a means of resting ones development of character Lastly 
nod leastly, though unfortunately by many ntsde firstly and solely, a 
means to some extei]t-~-mdced. nitb those specially fitted, to a very 
remarkable eitent—of forecasting future events. 

The utility of the study of this ancient, this syntfiestsed wisdom is 
by no means exhausted in the above condensed statement, but these are 
the chief features ivhicb enCiCle the subject to claim the attention of every 
earnest and thoughtful person 

Finally i\e may and ttiar, while In reality the profoundest of studies, 
it IS so based upon simplicity that anyone can la a short while become 
sufficiently proficient, not only to “^cast a horosMpe” fin itself a mere 
question of reckoning), but also to some exteat to “ judge a uativ ity ” 



Example Chart. 



. 3 // 

_ 

, 

ZSS 
- 2Gr 

_39/ 

... 

.. .--V/ff 

... yar 

«-%i 

CalowMt_ J/SQ 


e^rjr .. 4*4^ 

t^rviuRe ritosrECTs 

I'm. Att^ 

fS>t>S>.fo^a _/ly 

f9ti . 

/«> r/^/A dS» 




Note —This is a reduced facsimile of the Sfecial Chari on 
' p. 283 The Naitmiy from tehtch this Chari has 
Vwn prtparei mii \e )<fardi. on p Xiv, and "ine 
complete Dehneahon on p 284 





Astrology for All " Series. — Vol. VI. 


The Key to Your 

Own Nativity 

by 

ALAN LEO. 


Analytical readings of e\'ery position in a NATivny, based 

ON SCIENTIFIC PRINCIPLES 


Prleo 12/6 nett. 


Pablistied St 

“MODERN ASTROLOOT" OFFICE IMPERIAL BDUDINOS., LlTDOATE CIRCDS. E-C. 
trsds 6appb«d I7 

lu K. FOWLER & CO, 7, InpensI Axcsds, Loo^oo. E.C. 

1920. 




PUDUbllER-S ASS'OU.VCFMFKT 


Re isate Of Tiir ** Asnotoov ♦o« Aix ” Sesies 


lx eaterinK upon a re-Uane ol the »hole of tliJ* Seriei in a unifonn style as 
refrania site biodinr, etc, It hii been deersed expet'ient to do n*ny trith a 
possible source of roafusion A cbanye «f title hat therefore bees decided 
upon in two cases and the tix booVt of tbit ten*t now ataod ax followt — 


Vol I AsTKOtocv rot ALL foraerh 
„ II CasnxG THE llotoscors 
. Ill Howto JCDGE A hATivrrv 
. IV The Art or Sykthesis 
^ Tits I'aecEEstEO HoRoscorK . 

.. VI Thb Key to lour oa x SAtmnr 
VII CaSTERN AiTROlOCt 


.Islrolegy/tr Pari I 

, „ PartJJ 

Hear to Jndfi a Pari I 

..... .. Part II 

TXt PresTittii Itetottefe 


Tk(t taplanauett •* fttfitti te all tefits ej 
IA« Hem Its«* fer lie tnfermation 
and ta/egnarding eJ 
furtkaters 


Readers are re^jnested le notify *k* Anlktr a] any errors tkey may disroter in iLi* 
or etktt Velurnts of the Senes se that they may it remmed in Jnlute edtitens 



rORLWORD 

It mubt not be supposed because tins is termed tlic Sixth Volume 
of the Astrology for All Senes that the study of the fivt. former boohs 
need nccessanly precc'lc the use of tlus On the contrary the steadily 
widening demand for astrological literature necessitated the addition 
ol a simpler \o\umc to tlis now well hneovn senes and the 
favourable reception that vvas accorded <o the first edition of this 
boo’ especially by practical students and professors of astrology shows 
that It filled a real want and supplied information that was needed in 
actual practti»e As stated in the Explanatory Introduction on page 
xm this book is intended for the use of those who have no knowledge 
of Astrology at all as well a^ for those who are already students of some 
experience However a few inquincs that have reached the author 
chiefly from beginners who have not qiutc understood the purpose of 
the work make it desiiablc to explain uhat ft is not as well as what 

ft IS 

What Tiirs Book is box 

This volume is not Intended to give instructions how to cast a 
horoscope or elementary mfoimation concerning the twelve houses 
or the nature ol the signs ol the 7odiac or the things 'igmfied by the 
phnets It IS assumed that the reader de«irmg further acquaintance 
with these matters all of which have been fully explained in the previous 
volumes of this Senes ard fin a wore condensed form) m the smaller 
Astrological Manuals will tefer to those bools 

What this Book Is 

Apart from the more or less mechanical use Uiat may be made of 
the book by those wlio—however ignorant of astrology—have procured 
one of the Special Charts referred to on page 30a and are thereby 
enabled to obtain at once the reading of the boros ope (be it tbejr,^wTi 
or any one else s) this book has a voilue for the student whether 
elementary or advanced In fact the more experienced the student 
the more fully xs he hkelv to apprcaate the advantages to be ^enved 
from its use „■* 

Tothebegmner however it is a smeyni won For having calculated 
a horoscope or having been suppbed with one by someone dse 
knowing someti ing of the meaning of signs houses aspects and planets 
the task of writing out a delineation of it in full is sure to fall to the 
lot of every student who wishes to become practically efRaent In 
order that this may be done it is necessary to hav e the fullest information 
as to the meamng of any and every position and ccanbination that can 
be found in the map the horoscope mus*- be analysed split up into 
all its constituent parts and the sigmficatior of each understood in 
detail The results that follow from their combinations under such 
headings as personal characteristics health occupation mjney matters 
parentage marriage children fnends and so on have then to be 



considered and the mformation fumislicd l>> the combinations of Uic 
\‘anous factors taben into account 

TJus book IS mtendeel to <upplj prcciv'I^ (hat kind of information 
and it is untten not from the pomi of sinv of tJie varnlJst ortho 
philosoplicr or tlic occultist but from that of (he practical astrologer, 
le, one who is actual’y engaged in delineating character and fortune 
It approaches astrol from a standpoint somcuhat similar to that of 
a phj^iognnmjsi or a phrenologist except that it studies the Jiorsocopc 
instead of the personal nppcarsnc«. 

Hou Tilts Book caui to uc ^^Kml s 
It* compilation a\*as the result of the |)opulant> that attended lh( 
ad\cnt of the short Te*st Horoscopes issued in thou-onds at the 
beginning of the present Centura Tjesc in th'^ir simplt^t form 
ongmallj conMsted of desrnptions of character and temperament as 
assoaated with the rising sign the nsing jdanct and the ruler of tlic 
ascendant, and thee met "ith such success that a great demand arose 
for their exten'ion and for much further information of a Similar I ind 
concerning other parts of the horos^pc It uould !ia\*e N-en a hopeless 
task for one pcrvin to cope with the e\er increaMng work thus entailed 
had not arrctliod l<cn dcu<ed b> which asen<*s of anal>tic3l judgments 
could be used to supply tlie kind of information demanded 

The original stock of separate judgments con^sted of oner a 
TitousAst) different mimcogrsplcd slieets each bang subjected to 
continuous careful rcnsion dunng (en jears constant o«e The method 
has thus been subjected to a practicu test that could not ha\t been 
applied in an> other wna and making allowance for occasional 
discrepanaes (sucli as one dealt with in Chapter WXnO it has been 
bond more satisfactory in every resjwt linn the old fashioned 
unsystematic way of givang a more or less hapharard ludgaicnt which 
was liable to vary according to the pervmal equation of the astrolc^er 
and hij frame of mind at the moment of writing 

Out of thcongiEial stock of judgments the best and most ifplicable 
have been selected and are novr given to the vrorld so as to be acccssibl 
to both inquirers and students for general use Given a map of the 
heavens at birth anyone of ordinary intelligence may refer to the 
numbered paragraphs in this book and give an unbiased reading of any 
horoscope equal in v*alue to tliat of a professional astrcIog'‘r—a reading 
moreover that shows in what way the judgment has been arrived at 
thus addii^ greatly to it' value 
N. Alas Leo 

Lorlon Aulumn J917 

LRRATA—p XVII ime 14 froci t<rA F acd 45" should be C and 451 
On p 2S" line 5 frera loo* Hc» la a Salirtly P3rt IT should be 

T4» Iri of Syn/lem 

The First Eomos of Ihs book beirg its ted tn the\e r 1910 exflutr^ 
the reference to ti'year of htng Georges ascenston on page 2S1 The 
prezet t edition is tn a?f respects the same as the forr er 



TABLE OF CONTENTS 


The Rational Basis or A troloc\ it 

UvAAirtr Chart or the Nahm-h of His Majestt King 

GeorCl V ti 

Foreword i\ 

EXPLANATORY INTRODUCTION xiu 

RErER^^CE Chart xxu vmii 

§ 1 —Tie Ruling Planet etc 

CHAP 

I The Asceldast AND Tii*^ Rising Sign I 

II The RuLisr Planet 10 

in The Position of the Rouse Planet in the Houses 15 
IV The Position in the Sicns of the SUN as Ruler 20 

V MOON 25 

\I MERCURY 30 

VII Y'ENUS 35 

VIII 40 

IX JUPITER 45 

X «iATURN 50 

XI The House Position of the Planet URANUS 54 

XII NEPTUNE 50 

§ 2 —inrfmrf infjiv 

XIII Indimdual Charscteristics 62 

f 3 —Personality 

XIV Personal Characteristics 67 

XV The Moon s House Po itiov -2 

§ 4 — Me? talit} 

WI Mental Qualifications "e 

XVII Mercury b House Position 80 

Will THEPOSITIONSANDASPECTSOFTHFSLN YIOON 

AND PLANFTS 84 

SUK 85 Moon 91 MssewRif 91 Venvs 103 1 ars 107 

Jdpiter 111 Saturn 113 Uranuc 116 Neptune IlC 



Xll 


XIX 

§ C —TAe //oMSfs of the Horoscope 

(ll ) FlNANCr 

PACE 

117 

, XX 

(ill) Travel, ttc . 

122 

XXI 

(iv) Cnvironmlnt . . 

120 

XXII 

(v) Enterprise , ... . . 

129 

xxin 

fvi) Sickness. 

132 

XXIV 

(vii) Marriage . . 

135 

XXV. 

Marriage Prospects as Indicated dv Vfnus' 



Position . .. . . 

138 

XXVJ 

(viii) Legacies . . . 

142 

XXVII 

(ix) Philosopid . . 

145 

xxvin 

(x) Profession ...... 

148 

XXTX 

(xi) Friends 

1C2 

XXX 

(XH) Occultism . . 

1D7 

XXXI 

16 ~Sh»i»> ary of ihe Horostope 

Summaries . 

101 


pLAKEtARV PosrrtbK^ 101 TitS iRtfUClTlKS 102 . TliB Qt/AUTIU 
104 SvH ako Moov Positions—CardinaI' KM.Iscxd, 103; 
Mutabui ICO, Tire IOO. Air 107. ^^ATTR, lots. rARTN 109 


XXXII SUPPIXMFNTARY PARAGRAPHS . . .171 

RramcPLAVET 171. PBRsovAtCotoimihr 174. CBveRAt. Aspects 
178, lY^HSTs IV Signs 170 

XXXni “ The BotARinES " . . .. 180 

Sun in Aries 181, Sun xv Taurus 185, SW xv Ceuimx 189, 

Son IV Cancer 103. Sun tv Leo 107, Sun in Virgo 20l 
Sun IN Libra 205 Sun in Scorpio £09. Sun tv Saciitarius 
£13 Sun in Capricorn 210 Sw in Aquarius 220. Sun 
IN TiscEs 224 

XXXIV A Few rxPLAVAToBv Paragraphs ^ 229 

§ —The Profire sston of the Horoscope 

XXXV THE FUTURE PROSPECTS 241 

Solar Aspects 243 , Interplanetary or • Mutual "Aspects 5 

251 $ 258 5 268 7f 264 h 266 Lunar Positions ano As¬ 
pects J m S 267 > in House! 270 Ji In Aspect to O 
274 a 276 $ 270 277 V 278 270 :gl 270 v* 280 

XXXVI Conclusion . . 282 

APPENDIX 

An Example Delinkatjon King George s NAXivm 28-1 

How MAY A King s Horoscope be Known ’ . 301 




EXPLAKATORY INTRODUCTION. 


A VER^ little attention will malte clear the purpose of this book, 
which IS so arranged os to be practically self explanatory It ts intended 
for two classes of readers — 

(i) Those who his-e no knowledge whatever of how to judge a nativity 

fa) Students who tbongh knowing the rules and capable of some in 
depeadeot judgment, requue a handy method of ^Dicklyobtajoioga delloealloo 
as a basis for further exposition • 

Readers in Class (i) 

As for the 6rst doss, those enbrely igsoroot of Astrology, no 
explanation is required They will be readers who bare taken advantage 
of the Offer advertised on p 305, and they will have before them EOLL 
INSTRUCTIONS, sMtb a list of scmbers indicating the paragraphs to be 
studied, and the order m which they should be read Their coarse 
therefore is quite plain, and they may skip the remainder of this Intro* 
duchOD, as It hardly concerns them at theu present stage. But they will 
do well to read the preliminary remarks at the head of each chapter 
before studying the particular paragraph of that chapter set down for 
their perusal The Important Note on p xxi should be read with 
attention 

Readers in Class (2) 

Readers in the second of these two classes, bower er, will naturally 
look for some explanation of the plan of the book, and a few hints as to 
bow to make the best use of it It has been described as self explanatory 

* The necessary roles for Casusg the Horoscope will be foncd in Asttehgffcv AU. 
Ptrt II., of u the smalt ShiUiog Alanoat tPAct u « Here c«f< ani Hew tt it Cast ? 




and there is no doubt that tvithout any introduction an intelligent student 
could manage quite well, for a study of the Example Chart of 
King George’s Horoscope, facing title page, gi\es a very fair idea of 
how the book is used, and a similar chart needs only to be prepared for 
any horoscope of which a Delineation is desired. The number of the 
paragraph required can at once be seen from the Referekce Chart 
on pp. zxu, xzui. 


«r SoPTa Ponr 



Bet perhaps a few additional words of explanation may he useful 
In the ten or twelve years of every day astrological practice, of which 
this book IS the outcome, a scheme of judgment was gradually evolved 
tu which the delineation was treated under sc%en mam heads or sections, 
these being —(l) the Rising SiCM and Ruling Planet, Ruler’s 
House and Sign Position, and Aspects to the Ruler, (2) the Individual 
Charactfristics. as represented by the Sign Position and Aspects of 





the San; (3) the PER«;of?At. Ckaracteristtcs, as indicated by the 
Sign Position and Aspects of the Moon, (4) the MENTAL Qualifica 
TIONS, as shown by the Sipi-Position and Aspects of the planet Mercury 
These four sections composed what may be termed tbe^ground*work of 
the delineation , and (5) a brief treatment \^'as then accorded to each of 
The Houses of the Horoscope under the heading of Finance, 
Travel, Em ironment, etc, judged from either a planet in, or the coadipon 
of the ruler of, the house concerted, folIo\^ed by (6) a Summary of 
the general trend of the horoscope, indicating the main tendencies to 
encourage or repress. Finally a few pages were generally added upon 
(7) the Future Prospects for the ensuing four or five years. 

The Example Chart of Kmg George’s nativity illustrates this 
method of delineation m a very eflechve manner, and it need only be 
pointed out that a certain amount of judgment is called for m selectmg 
the aspects, boose rulers, etc., so as to secure the best "all round ” reading 
of the horoscope The first four items, for instance, are qnite plain 
sailing but when v.e come to the Ruler’s Aspects we find Q S, A 
^O, and we naturally pause to enquire if all of these should be given 
here, and if not, which A little consideration will show that J and 
9 441) will come usefully under beads (2) and (3) as Individual and 
Personal Characteristics, while as for the g A that is of a nature so 
contradictory to J a 7 that it will be better to omit that for the delinea 
bon at dits point, and in fact leave it out altogether to that form, (his 
Neptune infiuence being best treated under head (2) as O 44 P 

The aspects in Chapter XVIII are arranged thus—d,&, 0 ,which 
stand for conjunction, benefic, adverse, the adverse aspects being 
S □ ^ g and perhaps 7\ 

while the benefic are 

A 44 and perhaps ^ 

though 7\ and ^ are perhaps better omitted altogether from consideration 
m most cases. Aspects to the Sun are first given, m this order, 

then aspects of the Moon to those planets following, ? S etc., then 
Mercury to S ^ it, etc. And so on Hence an aspect of any planet to 
the Sun appears as an aspect of the Sun to that planet All this will be 
made quite clear by a little study of the Reference Chart on pp xxn and 
XXIIJ 

It IS better to err on the side of sparseness as regards aspects, that is, 



xvi 

it is better to give too few than too many; pick out the ‘ boldest,* and 
give those only. 

The question next arises as to whether D 8 9 should be included 
under head (3), Personal Characteristics. The answer is. No. T*he 
aspect is not exceedingly close, and it is somewhat modified and cast into 
the shade by J) * d" and by ? rtsing, which latter will be found under 
the “supplementary paragraphs; we therefore content ourselves with 

J only. Again, if 1) Q V came under consideration we should include 
it under Mental Qualifications, rather than under Personal Characteristics, 
as the aspects between the Moon and Mercury have much to do with 
the facility with which the brain is able to express the thoughts. In the 
present case, the delineation of this aspect can usefully be omitted, as 
Mercury is rising and almost within the Ascendant, and hence more 
active than would otherwise be the case, while the Moon too is m close 
touch with the Ascendant by aspect 

These few remarks will probably suffice to make clear all that is 
likely to need explanation. The student is urged to study the Example 
closely, readmg the whole through several times and noting bow the 
balance of the whole judgment t$ maintained. For it is in the first 
making out of the chart that the real art of delineabas consists: the rest 
follows almost automaUcally. 

With regard to the ** Polanues" given in Chapter XXXIII, they 
should be included under head (3), after the Lunai Aspects. It is not 
always necessary to mclude the Polanty, and the student should ‘use his 
ovm judgment as to whether it is of advantage to do so 

The first four heads of the delmeabon being disposed of, the Houses 
come under speoa! consideration as follows'—u,Finance; tit,Travel; 
IV., Environment; v.. Enterprise; vu. Sickness; vii , Slarrtage; 
vui.. Legacies; ix.. Philosophy, x.. Profession, xi, Friends; xii, 
Occultism. The other meanings of each bouse, not included under these 
general terms, come in for a certain amount of incidental treatment in the 
delmeatians. 

The general plan is to take the planet ruling the sign occupying the 
bouse or on its cusp, as ruler. but if there should be a planet occupying 
the house, then take that as ruler in preference to the lord of the sign 
on the cusp; and if more tliaw one planet be in the bouse, then take the 
chief cf them, according to its general strength, as ruler. This plan 



r \111 


TCfnrds the Futurp Prosppcts, sufficient hints are piven m 
the Ciiapter that Jcils with them Here, as elsewhere, wJ it to omit 
needs to be knonn, as well as what to include, and it ts perhaps even 
more important 

In wntmR out n delineition for a fnend, it is ndvisable to b«' e ^tch 
parigrapn a brief cxplanitory title in some sucti fashion is followed on 
the Example Delineation to the Appendix 

Tins, then, concludes the Introduction, ind the student may now be 
left to explore the remainder of the book at his pleasure, assured that 
although m a sense he rruj be said to have before him “ ready made 
judgments,' yet he never need feel that the opportunity for the exercise 
of his own indepfndence of thought and power of combination is wanting, 
or that he is not m n very real manner developing, in proportion to bis 
earnestness and applicauon, the power to Judge a Nativity ” for himself. 


Perhaps a word or two may not be out of place as to the literary 
form which these Delineations take 

Let us consider bow they came to be written A man full of his 
subject IS dictating to a stenograpner, wno follows is rapidly as pen will 
permit and at the end of each page summarily interrupts the speaker who 
has perforce to turn to a new theme Each sentence is thrown out 
white hot from the brain, and caught, as it were, by the paper The 
idea IS everything to the speaker, the form nothing His mind is 
working rapidly, and the quicker bis thoughts can be transferred to paper 
the better, a clerkly finish can be given to them at any time, if necessary. 
And why then, the critic will naturally ask has not this been done ? 

The answer IS simple, but conclusive It has been done During 
the hme the system of Delineationserabodiedin this book was in progress, 
a graduate of London University was employed m its revision, and so 
much modificabon did he at first consider necessary that many paragraphs 
were entirely rewntten The result, however, was altogether dis 
appointing The attempt to express wide and elastic ideas—such as a 

description of the influence of Anes as a Rising Sign for example_in 

precise phraseology was doomed to failure The rewntten paragraphs 
were clear and definite enough too definite, m fact, for when comparison 



XIX 


was made and they were tested alongside the ongmals, it was /onad that 
the> produced upon the reader the effect of a dry statement of fact 
instead of a new and palpitating idea. This was so patent even to the 
scholar in question, that in going throu^ the remainder of the senes be 
confined himself to altermg a word or sentence here and there, realising 
that with all their Lterary shortcomings Uie paragraphs m their onginal 
form were better suited to conv ey the IDEAS intended, than any more elegant 
form mto which literary skill could turn them E\en a certain amount 
of periphrasis "was found to be not without its value in giving what may 
be termed the /eel of the idea which the speaker had desired to convey. 
And the same remark applies to such usages as “ liable ” where “ likely ** 
would be more ‘ correct* and jet fail to suggest the mtended idea so weU. 
He might make the expenment with paragraph 271, and see if be can 
improi e ‘‘ ancient and antiquated, old and anbque ” which he will at first 
condemn as tautological 

Having this experience in mmd, therefore, it will be understood that 
in preparing this book for the press no attempt has bees made to divest 
the Delineations of their ongioal spontaneous and impromptu character, 
for the author has realised that to be too precise is as nusehie%*oas as 
being too I'ague. But it is not pretended that no unprovenent is possible 
and the student can hardly hai e a better exerase, literary or astrological, 
than the endeavour to express m his own wording the ideas he gathers as 
he reads 

It has been said that the delineations were, m the first mstance, 
dictated. The necessit> for brevit> has caused one or two sentences to 
take a form which may at first convey Lttle or no meaning to the 
reader unless he is naturally intuitive, bat a little pondering will usually 
show what IS meant As an instance may be cited '* make the thing 
action when its usefulness has passed by, from paragraph 452, where 
what IS meant is that decision may be postponed nnUl the action decided 
on comes too late to be of any service, but has to be undertaken nei'erthe 
Ipgg. Thought has in the end to become aetiootthat is the law of thought, 
and dilatormess m amving at a decision does not alter that law although 
It may render the action nugatory 

It is found m practice that a delineation in the seco*;t> pePSO’I 
makes as a rule a far more direct and vind appeal to the a\ erage man or 
woman t^a^ if it were put in a more or less impersonal manner For that 



XX 


reason tbesc Delineations have not been re worded m this respect 
(counsels to the contrary notwithstanding), the original “ you ” and " your ’* 
having been retained tbroaghout4 

"Sunrise Horoscopes." 

Should it be desired to give the horoscope of some person whose time 
o! birth IS not known, the best plan is to calculate the horoscope for the 
moment of sunnse * The reason for this being that the moment of 
sunnse at any place is full of a special energy, which to some extent per 
vades the whole day, and hence a horoscope calculated for that moment 
will contain much of truth for every person bom on that day, at that place, 
and would certainly be more correct than any other unless the correct 
horoscope were obtained by * rectification,* which is a long and difficult 
process requiring much skill 

Where a written delineation of soch a horoscope ts being given it wiU 
be well to preface it with paragraph 630 b 


*** A General Reference Chart showing the scheme of the whole 
work will be found on pp xxii, xx%tt, a copy of the Special Chart on p 
283, and an Example Delineation in Pull on p 28i **« 


\ 


* This It easily dose by turning to the Table of Hooses for the birthplace ootiog 
the Sidereal Time at wb cb the degree of the zodiac occupied by the Sun is on the 
cusp of the First House and find ag the tune of day by sabiraci og tb s S T from the 
ST at Kooaasgiven la the Ephemens The horoscope is then caiealated for this 
timeia the osnal vray 

Soppose for ezampte King George (see page xiv) ST when ni}* ts on cnsp of 
First Hoase la the Lalitode of London u so^r 41 and S T at Noon June 3rd, iS6j 
iS447 4c difference 8 6 2 Thatia saanse was aboatS 6 S Sr/err eeae or 3 34 am 
for which time calculate the Sunnse Haroaeope 



IMPORTANT NOTE. 


Apparent Contradictions 

It will often be found that one part of a Delineation will be appar 
antly in direct contradiction to a statement made in another part of the 
same Delineation Those who have made any considerable study of 
Astrology will be fully prepared for this, will imderstand how it happens, 
and will hnd little difficulty in modifying one or other of the conflicting 
paragraphs—as regards its wording, that is to say—so as to remove the 
apparent discrepancy But readers to whom the whole subject is new, 
and who feel, perhaps, something of the same vague astonishment and 
distrust when first confronting a ** horoscope' that the author himself 
felt on a like occasion, may at first be inclmed to think such a discrepancy 
tantamount to actual disproof of Astrolc^, and to fancy all that has gone 
before either " comcidences " or ** genendiDes ’* 

The fact IS, some such contradichons as these exist in every nature, 
and are to be found (if we search deep enough) m even the best balanced 
and broadest minded characters In some these paradoxical contra* 
dictions are more marked, and where that is so Astrology shows the 
nature of the two opposing tendenaes, and points out which is likely to 
wm Some men are parsunooious in the household and extravagant to 
busmess, othe^ large handed at home and niggling at the office —'Why 7 
Astrology, and Astrology alone, sappIiM a clue to such anomahes of 
character 

It IS hardfy the place here to go into such matters of detail Enou^ 
to remind the reader that where be meets with conflicting statements m 
his Delmeation he should remember that such conflictiog tendenaes 
exist ID the character of the person whose Nativity is being studied, and 
that IS order to find out which of two opposing influences is likely to be 
the stronger, it will be well to appeal to the judgment of a more 
espwjtsced. sfjident. 

Where a delineation is being wntten out for a fnend if he is at all 
of a critical temperament, it will be wise to call his attention to any 
discxepanues of this land, rather than leave him to discovn them for 
himself See paragraphs 630 Fa and 630 Fb. 

xzl 



Jlifmna CCJiarl 




PntLosornr 


o VII 3S2 
P VII 3S3 

s vri je4 
f Ml 
3 MI Jfiff 
V MI J(J 7 

•• vir jss 

« VII 369 
U VII 370 


iitftrtmt (Tfcart- 


O VIII 3SJ 
P VIII 3S4 
M ! VIII 3S5 

a * vm JSS 

5 <f VIII JS7 
i; V VIII JSS 
•J k MU 3S9 

V VIII 390 

V vtlt 391 

O 393 
P IX 393 

» IX 

t IX 39S 

* IX 396 

V IX 397 

»> IX 393 

V IX J9P 

*i' IX /CIO 


O XII 426 
P XII «7 
a 9 XII 421 
£ t XII 4.9 
S rf XII 430 
g ~ XII 431 
a ' XII 432 
®H XII 4JJ 
'J MI 434 


SdotlenS 
Rising 436 
Setting 437 
Above 433 
Below 439 


lAiter 442 
Barth 443 

Card 444 
Fixed 44S 
^ Mut 446 

S c AT 447 
SC AM 44S 
X P AC 449 
§,r AM 450 
” M 4C 451 
M & F 452 < 


Or.JT^W 
or ^VJST 
o T I njss 
or r,K,4S9 
or ^41490 
or 1^491 
Or 3i^492 
or i> n^sj 

or 1494 
or -i/vsjgs 
or 3fss4S6 
or 497 
O » U T ^951 
O tf tw jpp I 
O M p D JOO 
O « » O jo; 
o » p Jl 50* 
0 « PmMJ 
OM 3,*:. 504 
Ott pBiJOJ 
o a i t 506 
o a p « J07 
o a p = ioi 

O a p a 509 
on PT5/0 
on p a5/1 
on p D 57^ 
on pas5/5 
on PA 5// 


Oi>i P tii55j 

o ns p / 55/ 

o "s P D 55 J 

o *s P K 555 

o "t P X 557 
O * p r 555 
O A p a 559 

o A p n 550 


O V P n 550 f , „ 

OK P«55/ ^ 

OK PA 525 it. * }‘J 

O K p «v 525 -n » ur V i , 
OK p*5V -- j ,‘T 

OK pin55> 5 a 1*1 

O K p / 525 ^ 

ox i X 629 S> * 


O Si p in 555 • fleeil 

Oa p / 5ss 

o* p .3 557 ® p rf 

O-e- p sf 555 * 

0-«- pK 559 “ 

O ni p r 570 J; O 9 a 

o n P a 57 / ^ * 

o in p n 572 ^ * 

o ni p as 575 w ® ^ 

o m P A 57/ *2 i 

o n p » 575 “ 

O H 5 <v57o O / dC 

om p in577 ) 5 ^ 

o in p / 575 a ^, ** 

O in p w 5791 J; O V a 

O in P * 550 I g * 
Oinpx55/ e.^, <• 


F 4A 453 
PAW 454 
r &E 455 
A & F /55 
A A W /57 
A 4 E 453 
VV4P /59 
W&A 460 
VV 4 E /// 
£ & F a52 
£ 4 A 463 
fc. & W 464 


on pnt5/5 I 07 pr552 wO^a 

I«I$H P*5/5l« o/ pa 555 S * 
Jjio 0 p in5/7 I f O / P n 55/ g a 

-«2S ^ Y O t p«8 555 L, OV 4 

3 PA555 * 

3 00 p«520 a O / pi!i557 a 

£ on PK52/ H 0/ P-* 555 

O® 5 O / pni559 * 

OaspB52| go/p /590 ** 

O a p n 524 £ O / p >7 59 ; j 
O ss p © 525 O / p es 592 9 » a 


S ^ a I*i 

^ * laJi 

' b a IxiiJ 

J a 9 a Ixl* 

1 5 Izv <1 

2 a IzviA 

•u/Va Uvil 
£ 6 Ixviii 

.0 a In* 

MV4i^i J*x 
S a Ixxi 

h K a Ixzii 


W a l*x» 
5 IX*TJ 
a Izzvti 


o XI 4T3 
p XI a// 

9 XI 415 
t XI 4/6 
» / XI 4/7 
S V XI 4/8 
ss V XI 4/9 
f tt XI 420 
^ V XI 42/ . 
Fiery slgii /22 
Earthy 423 
Airy 424 
Watery 425 


O o p A 5’5 
O o p ■* 527 
O as p -i 525 
O «9 p Bi 52!^ 
0«i p / 520 
O a p U 55/ 
O *0 p se 532 
O as p >* $33 
O A p T 55/ 
OA p 8 555 
O A P □ 556 
O A p o 5j7 
O A p A 555 
OA pits 559 
O A p ^ 540 
Oil p BI5// 
O A p / 5/2 
O A p i} 543 
O A 544 
O A p X 545 
O 15 p r 5/5 
O IS p a 547 
O ns ) zr 5/5 
O 1 p © 549 
O ns p A 550 
0 15 P in> 55/ 

O ns p A 552 


04 px 593 M 6 XXVI 

O U p T 59/ 1 ft a XXVII 

O » p V 595 ^ B / a zxviu 

OnjpD 596 3 * *** 

O ►) p ® 597 S a XX* 

0»jpaj98 '“ V U a XXXI 
O W p m 599 ' > 4 x**i 

OH p Si 600 I ^ <i*X*ii 

OH p ni60/ », I ^ a XXXIV: 
O H p / 6021 5 * *x*v 

OH p »603\ S axxxvj 


a svni I s I 

ova xiz StD r Izxvlii 
A X* I ^ ]l V luix 1 

a z*i I S D Izzz 1 

0 9a zzi) S 1> » Isxxi 
i uiii «5 3 A Izxsil I 

a XI V s £ lu»l] I 

S D « Izxziv 

9 » a xx* ?J) »a Ixixv 

b XXVI ^1* * Ixxxn I 
a XXVII 3 ^ W Ixxxvii. I 
B / a zxviu S I> aslxxxvui 
i zx z £ K Izzx X I 


OH psteo/l^ 
OH PK60J t 
0=s P T 606 3 
Oa: p a 607 I I 
0 = pn605 2 
O s p © 609 u 
Osr PA 6/0 S 

Os pi*6// 0 

0 = P-W6/2 £ 

0 » p jn6/J B 

Oss p / 6// g 
0 = PH 6/5 “ 
Oa pa6r6 £ 
Oa PX6/7 
OK PT6/5 

OX p a 6/9 


P ist xc. 
P and xci 
„ P 3 rd xai 
£P 4 »h xciii 
g>P Jth zciv 
> P 6 th xcv 


a xxxvi ^ p 6th xcv 
9 II a xxxvu I ~ P 7lh xevi 
ixzzviu j g p 8th xovii 
« xxxix ^ p 9 th xcv 11 . 

Bio xl •? p loth xcii 

b xh J, p iith c 

a xhi g p lath « 


* V a xlvi g p f / 

o xlvn h J 

a" llviU r? - 

* % a xlix p t a ' 


* P» 0 ,P*CTS-A/«™ , p^g,„, 


PVa exxii 
* exii* 
a ciiv 


A\ ItOSrST TALC SPEEDS BEST BETNC PtAlNtV TOLD 

Shakespeare, ^tng Rtchard JI 



®(j« ?U5 lo gear ohiit JloiibUg. 

5i .—RuUng Planet, etc. 

CHAPTER 1. 

The Ascendant and the Rising Sign 

The term Ascendant is a name for the first of the twelve houses 
of the horoscope It is due east of the place of birth, and the begmniog^ 
or cusp of the house is the eastern horizon The Rising Sign is that sign 
of the zodiac which is on the cusp of the Ascendant at birth This is 
usually the most important sign m the horoscope, and it gives a description 
in general terms of the personal appearance and the character, although 
this IS subject to modification according to the positions of the planets~ 
especially the Ruling Planet, and any planet or planets that may be 
nsmg m or near the Ascendant 

^ Aries 'vas nsmg at your birth This is a cardinal, movable, 
and fiery sign Thisgnes much energy andactivitybothof body 
and mmd, much impulse and enthusiasm, with many changes in the 
course of life You are courageous enterprising, frank and outspoken 
You can face difficulties promptly and bravely, you know your own mind, 
and are seldom at a loss what to do or say when called upon to decide 
You are ambitious, self reliant, and adventurous, and you will wm your 
way m the world largely through these qualities and through your confidence 
m your own ability to succeed You are a great J over of fjpedom and 
independence, and you get along badly when you are m any wa y ham pered, 
restricted, or interfered with You are generous and quickly responsive 
to appeals to the emotions You are a zealous and energetic supporter of 
any pe?son or cause that enlists your sympathies Most of your nusfor 
tunes will arise through too much hastiness and impulse, whether m 
action, in judgment, or in the feelings You are'^mewhat lacking in 
coolness, in calm deliberation, and self restraint, and you do not find it 


See descriptions oo page 8 



2 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWH NATIVITY 


easy to give way to others even when jnstice or prudence demands iL 
Mars IS the ruling planet of the sign Anes 

2 Taurus was nsmg at your birth, a fixed earthy sign In dis 
position yon are loving and affectionate, fond of pleasure, and an 
admirer of beauty m all things The sign Taurus often gives a love of 
music or art, with good taste in colour, m melody, in dress, in ornaments, 
and elegance generally You are cool, self contained, firm, and strong 
willed, a lover of peace, quiet, and harmony You are also practical 
and desirous of putting everything to the test of practice and expenence, 
and you value persons, things, and ideas l^gely for the use to which they 
ran be put You have much perseverance and quiet firmness, are 
somewhat reserved and self centred, and you can show great obstinacy 
upon occasion You do not change very easily, and are a little lacking 
ID adaptability Your course of life tends to move from day to day and 
even from year to year m its accustomed channels with comparatively 
little alteration You are not easily infinenced by other people, bnt are a 
persistent and patient worker m your own way and according to your 
own ideas You are slow to anger but are apt to harbour resentment 
You have fixed opimons, keen feelings and desires, and are capable of 
strong passions, but are also good natured and fond of comfort and 
repose Venus is the ruling planet of the sign Taurus 

g Gemini was nsmg at your birth, a sign belonging to the element 
air and to the common or mutable quality You have good 
mental abilities and an active and flexible mind This is one of the 
utellectual signs and those who are bora under it usually have abilities 
for writing, studying, speaking or thinking You are fend of books and 
reading, you can learn easily from books or lectures, you can apply yOur 
mind to a \'anety of subjects and are ingenious and inventive You are 
suitable for receiving a good education and are adapted for almost any 
literary pursuit or clencal work. You have good reasonmg powers, a 
thoughtful mind, and are fluent either of speech or pen You have 
ability for languages and science and are also fond of travel You have 
comprebensiieness of mmd and a quick adaptability to \’anous pursuits 
and studies, but you are somewhat ladcing m concentration and persever 
ance. You are rather irresolute, uncertain, and changeable at times, do 
not feel sure of yourself and may even hold or express contradictory 


See dctcriptloBS on pare 8 




THE ASCERCART A8D THE EISING SICR 


3 


opinions You are liable to worry and imtatioa and are easily upset by 
little annoyances Yon arc kind, humane and sympathetic, but you know 
what it 15 to ha\e fits of shyness, nervousness, and reserve, when you 
withdraw into yourself Reason and understanding are your strong 
faculties, but you are liable to lack continuity and strength of will 
Mercury is the ruling planet of the sign Gemini 

^ Cancer was rising at your birth, a sign belonging to the element 
water and to the cardinal or movable gnality This gives you 
much sensitiveness and receptivity, active feelings and emotions, and 
love of sensation and novelty You have a strong domestic and social 
nature, warm affections, and are fond of home life You are easily 
influenced by those whom you love or admire, but are apt to be cold, 
T^erv ed, and distrustful to these you do not know well or whom you 
dislike You have an active imagination and fancy, and often live the 
past ov er again in your mind and anticipate the future You have much 
prudence and forethought, are careful and cautious, and have a good deal 
of tenacity and firmness You have some natural ability for trade and 
business management and might gam success in this direction, as you 
have a sense of value and economy You have a practical mmd and you 
out everything ultimately to the test of practical use, and with care you 
may nuke a reputation as a useful and piactical person in your own line 
of life You live a good deal in the senses, and at times are changeful 
and capacious, but you also have patience and perseverance The Moon 
IS the nilec of the sign Cancer 

g Leo was rising at your birth, a sign belonging to the element 
fire and of the fixed i^uality This gives you an open, candid and 
honourable disposition, magnanimous and generous. You have dignity 
and self confidence that will sustain you in trouble and difficulty, and that 
will bring you to the trout in life if you use your opportunities wisely 
You do not under rate your own value, but are ambitious and masterful 
with large and far reaching aims and schemes. You have some degree of 
pnde and fondness for display and ostentation at times, and the sense of 
the dramatic is strong in you You have a warm heart and ardent 
afiections and make a very faithful friend, one not liable to change or 
vacillate You are compassionate, tender and sympathetic, and anxious to 
give hdp to those who need it and to protect those who need protection. 


See dcscnpUom oa page 8 



4 


THE KEY TO YOUR 0%VK RATIVITY 


Your pride is rather easily touched, and anger ts sometimes quick to rise, 
but you are a forgiving enemy and prefer peace to ^var. You have a firm 
strong will and do not readily change your course when you have once 
decided on it, but are capable of persistent effort extended over a long 
period You are cheerful, hopeful, sociable and companionable. Your 
feelings and emotions are quickly roused, you are rather fond of luxury 
and pleasure, and may need to put some curb upon this side of your 
nature. The Sun is the ruler of the sign Leo 

g Virgo Tv-as rising at your birth; a sign belonging to the earthy 
element and to the common or mutable quality. This gives a dis< 
position quiet, retinng, modest and reserved You are careful and prudent, 
and are capable of exercising much forethought before you act. You are 
sympathetic and kind, hut you do not wear your heart on your sleeve; 
and although you are very adaptable and almost capable of being all 
things to all men, you seldom show your real nature openly, and are at 
times difficult to understand. You have good mental abilities, can learn 
readily and are of a studious nature You have a logical mmd, good 
reasoning faculties, and have much adaptability for scientific or literary 
pursuits. but you are able to develope a fair amount of practical ability 
also, and can attend to small details skilfully and methodically. You are 
apt at times to worry unnecessarily, and to vacillate and change your mmd. 
You are diffident and lacking m self confidence and are too ready to give 
way before difficulties You are not sufficiently hopeful. You will work 
best and be most fortunate if you follow a leader and rely upon him. 
Virgo ts the sign of the servant, not the master. Mercury is the ruling 
planet of the sign Virgo. 

^ Libra was rising at your birth, a sign belonging to the element 
air and to the cardinal or movable quality. This gives you a 
courteous, gentle, affable and kind cbsposibon. Your feelings and aSec- 
tions are strongly developed and are likely to play an important part m 
your life. You are able to make many fnends; you associate easily with 
other people; the social side of your nature is actue and your growth 
tbOJ. best be. wnted. bv vt. misefcv Vcsa 'K'XK be. leas. 

you live alone or dissociate yourself from others. You have a refined mmd, 
are fond of beauty and orderliness, with a taste for music orpaintmg Your 
snrroundiDgs influence yon very moch and you are not happy unless they 


See deicriplIoiH on page 8 



T>!r ASCENDANT AND THE RISING SIGN 


5 


are neat, elegant and harmonious* Your mind is susceptible of consider 
able cultii^ation especiall} in connection with the more imaginative and 
idealistic subjects, but you liaie more intuition than reason, and emotion 
and afiection are more to jou than cold intellect You are rather ficWe 
and changeable, jour hhes and dislikes lairy a good deal, and your ideas 
change with jour moods \on are not quite constant either to persons 
or to ideas, and jou are likelj to experience many changes in your life 
Companionship, friendship partnersliip association, and marriage are the 
keynotes of jour nature, and jou will not attain to your fullest possibilities 
Without them Venus is the planet ruling the sign Libra 

g Scorpio was rising at jour birth, a sign belonging to the ele 
merit water and to the fixed quality This gives jou a strong and 
forceful character, positiie and decided You generally know jasur ouai 
mind and are clear and emphatic m your ideas and opinions Irresolution 
IS not usually one of the weakmesses of this sign You are brave and 
courageous and do not sbnok from controversy or dispute if it is thrust 
upon JOU \ou are self reliant and do not shirk responsibility You 
hai e strong likes and dislikes tonxirds both persons and ideas, and you do 
not easily change either jour opioioos or jour habits of life You have 
much strength of mil and although feelings, emotions, and passions 
sometimes swaj jou intensetj, you have much endurance and persistence 
and JOU can work hard and long to achieve your ends \on have a good 
deal of pnde and diguity, and are capable of much anger if either of 
these is wounded \ou should have considerable executive ability and 
are capable of becoming a good practical worker if you turn jour 
attention m this direction You are a good fighter, and the cntical 
sarcastic, and analytical sides of your nature are active You are 
ingenious and resourceful at limes loo brusque and emphatic m manner 
and not sufficiently conciliatory towards those who differ from you, and 
you are ambitious and masterful ^ou have some taste for things 
mystical, occult, curious and secret Mars is the planet that rules the 
sign Scorpio 

Sagittarius -was rising at your birth, a sign belonging to the 
element fire and to the mutable or rammon quality This gives 
you an honourable and open minded disposition, frank and candid. You 
are generous, kind and sympathetic, truthful and just You have much 


See descnptioos oa page 8 



Tiir Knv TO \ouit kativitt 


ArrnoxiMATr DrscniiTioN or Pprsomal ArrirARAKCR 
rKODVcro nv Tiit Sics Kisisc. 

KJ3 -^Theu dt*erif>lioni nrt rontultriibiy tnoJi/ieJ by (f) tht ifen 
tr/iic/i the ^looH occi(/i«« at birth, and {?) the sign in vhich the lord oj 
the AtctnJnnt or Huliiig Planet t» f»lactd They are here gnen as 
general /nut* tncrely To carrectlyjudgeafi'earanee/rom the horoico}^ 
regutres much tktll. 

ARirs Rising proJiiccf a dr> andnther Itin bcxl>, mitldJostature; 
stron^’Umb^,largobone^, a (ace some«hat bice a rom, o(tea dark and usually 
thick eyebrow*^, quick sight, fairly long neck, dark or ' fiery * complexion, 
rough and niryhair. often curly and usually brown, sometimes reddish; 
fairly broad shoulders. The first b.a!f of the sign £i\e5 a uller and 
fuller build, the but half n smaller type and usually much darker. 

Taurvs Rising produces a short, full, vrell set body, fnl) face and 
eyes, short thick neck, full lips, viide nostrils and mouth, sbiomg face 
often someMliat m-arthy, large strong shoulders, short thick broad hands, 
dark <ometimes black liair. usually inclined to be curly especially m the 
front, with often a little tuft on the forehead 

GcMlM RiSlNG Ri\e3 a tall, *'pngbt, straight body, long arms, 
hands and feet generally thin and nervous usually dark complexion dark 
or blackish liair , eyes hazel with a sharp quick actjv e look, and usually 
very bnght 

Cancer Rising gives a moderate stature, full and usually round 
face, pale and Ynth a delicate appearance, features small, and gcnerdly 
a nose of the typo termed cogitaliv-e, sad brown hair, and small grey 
eyes The Moon s sign position greatly affects the appearance and 
indeed the whole character m this case, but those bom under Cancer are 
usually timid and retiring 

Leo Rising Fair stature vnclmmg to fulness of body , usually 
■^eli foTOiei,•Nvtii wpTis’rA.-tsin-OBt, V«r»i^V^w.'i4tTSfvt?A , t?resbj-i^A 
and glowing, with quick sight. and usually of a brown hazel or liazel 
brown colour, plenty of hair of fainsh colour, ranging from flaten to 
brovTn of varying shades, oval to round face, ruddy or sanguine 
complexion, firm step, and usually dignified and autocratic bearing 



THE ASCENPANT AND THE RISING SIGH 9 

Virgo Rising Middle stature, well formed, rather slender, neat 
and compact, sometimes very pnm Dark, ruddy complexion and 
pleasing face, nose long and projecting from the base. The nascunal 
nose IS nnmistakable 

Libra Rising Fair statue, sometimes tall, m the first half of 
the sign , Id the latter half, stouter and shorter A graceful body, well 
termed, hair smooth and glossy, sometimes jet black, though if Venus is 
m a fair sign the hair is quite hght, face round and lovely, fine clear red 
and white complexion, eyes ranging from blue to green, but always large 
and clear Persons bom under this sign are usually very good looking, 
women especially A pleasing and graceful bearing, and \ery polite m 
address 

Scorpio Rising Medium size, thick, w ell set body, strong and 
robust, face square or broad, complexion dark or dusky, hair dark 
brown, usually rough, curling, bushy and plentiful Eyes dark, some 
times grey and rather small, wth a shrewd look Walk is rather snake 
like or smuous, especially m women 

Sagittarius Rising Well formed body, ratber tall, long, o\’al 
face, high forehead and long nose, fine dear eyes, often a dull 
glazed btown, ^ery round and open looking and of an unmistakable 
type, good complexion open countenance. hair chesmut or light brown 
Fond of w*alkiQg and of a good carnage 

Capricorn Rising Short slender body, not as a rule weU formed, 
long thin face, generally plain. Cbm long and often protuding, small 
thin wry neck, hair ^ery dark brown or black, sometimes a blue black, 
and lanky, narrow breast and usually weak knees. 

Aquarius Rising Middle stature sometimes stout and well set, 
robust and strong, long face, good, clear, ^anguine and sometimes \ery 
delicate complexion, hazel eyes, fair hair from fia-xen to hght brown 
This sign gives to males as much personal beauty as Libra gives to 
females. 

Pisces Rising Short stature, tbickish build round shoulders and 
stooping gait ■ large, pale face, clear and luad skin, hair dark or darkish, 
sleepy or fishy or protruding eyes, very mobile features and soft speech 



CHAPTER II. 


TUE Ruuhc Placet 

Wmi each sign of the zodiac one of the planets ts associated as 
lord or ruler of the sign. An account of the Rising Signs has been gnes 
in Chapter I, and particulars of the inBuencc of the planets that rule 
these signs follow here. 

The Suk is ruler of the sign Leo Its inQnesce is to give 
vitality and fire to the whole nature, physically and mentnlly It 
contributes towards digmtyi self reliance, and strength of will; giving 
ambition and a desire to achies'e worthy results m action. You will wish 
to be at the head of aSairs in your own particular sphere, and you will 
not find It congenial to occupy subordinate positions. Von are able to 
organise and manage afiairs and peo p le, and you do not shrink from 
responsibility You ore kind hearted and generous, admiring what is 
noble and scorning what is mean or base The social and aiTectional 
side of your nature is well de\ eloped, and you can easily attract toyourself 
fnends and companions. You like comfort, pleasure, and luxury, and 
you most not let weaknesses either of the heart, or it may be of the desire 
nature, run away with you. Internal harmony realised m outer life is 
the key to this influence, which beloogs chiefly to the individuality 

The Moon is ruler of the sign Cancer Its influence is to 
form, coon^ and sustain, and It pertains to the personoLty The 
domesbc and home loving side of your nature is strong, and >ou are 
drawn towards family and parents. Your imagination is well developed, 
and plays a large part lU your life Feeling and sensation are active 
witliL You^and. am. cathec UahI/5. la chanige. and. flniUiabt tn. ^n: mofrfa. 

from day to day, and to lack e n ergy and persistence. You have the 
ability to become practical and to deal with afiairs as you find them m a 
capable manner You could a dapt yourself to a variet y of subjects 
according to your trainmg, for domestic life, business, practical soence 
to 



THE RUURG FLAHET 


11 


and applied art all supply spheres for the activity of those who are bom 
under the Moon. You are careful and prudent, and inclined to economy 
and foresight in all things, and are practical and capable when you do not 
let your imagination or your feelings run away with >ou 

The planet Mercurv is the ruler of the signs Gemmi and Virgo 
Its infiuence is over the brain and nerves, and it has more to do 
with the mind than with the senses It gives you good mental ability, 
ingenuity and adaptability, fertility of resource and wit, and probably a 
good memory You should be apt at speech and aigument, plausible and 
fluent in conversation, but along with this there sometimes goes a degree 
of subtlety, and secrecy, as welt as reserve or retirement Your whole 
nature will seldom be shown to the world, and there will be one side 
which you will never show even to your most intimate friends Your 
mind IS active but a little lacking in concentration and perseverance, and 
you are liable to occupy yourself with too many subjects, to change a 
little too rapidly, and to have too many irons m the fire You can adapt 
yourself readily to the moods and opinions of people, and can see truth 
under quite opposite disguises Mercury takes upon itself to some extent 
the nature of other planets, therefore you need to pay attention to the 
sign occupied by Mercury at your birth and the aspects it receiv es, for 
these may modify what has been here stated. 

The planet Venus IS the ruler of the signs Taurus and Libra It 
is the planet of love and beauty It strengthens the affections and 
it will make the social side of your nature active and strong You are 
warm hearted and companionable, fond of the society of friends and 
relatives, of a fov ing and peaceable disposition, and favouring all that is 
harmontous and refined You are fond of ease and comfort, of pleasure 
and luxury, and you may need to exerase some restraint over this side 
of your nature Venus generally gives those who are bom under it good 
taste and a love of beauty, of fine surroundings, clothes, ornaments, 
decorations, and on appreciation of neatness and orderliness You 
probably have the ability to develope tbe wthtlic side of your nature 
in tbe direction of singing, music, art, poetry, etc.; if ymu care to do so 
Tbe influence of the planet can also be adapted to a business life, as it 
gives some financial ability and good lock The disposition is usually 
cheerful, hopeful, and good natured, and bnngs popularity and many 
friends. 

Venus IS the chief significator of love and marriage It also has some 



THE RULING PLANET 13 

and gi\es some appreciation of beauty, harmony, imagination, and 
ideality. 

The planet Saturn is therulerof diesignsCapncomand Aquanus 
It tends to give jou a disposition that is sober, senous, and 
thoughtful It IS the planet that naturally rules old age, and its best mflu 
ence is not usually seen until youth is passed It gives you self control, 
reserve and restraint, as well as some natural inclination to frugahty, 
prudence and cautiousness You should also gam from it strength of 
will and a patient, persevering disposition, mth calmness, fortitude and 
serenity. You may at times be a little lacbing in buoyancy and cheerful 
ness, and you do not unbend socially so easily as some persons can, or 
produce so much mirth, fun and jolhty, although you can appreciate these 
when they come your way You have a good deal of practical ability 
and can manage things and persons ably and economically You are 
ambitious, and can form far reaching plans and schemes and spend a 
long time in carrying them out The best lesson that Saturn teaches is 
self control, prudence, patience, chastity, thrift, and the meditative mmd, 
as well as to distinguish between real worth and superfiaal pretentionsness 
Saturn is considered an unfortunate planet owing to its power to 
limit and restrict, it therefore has a binding and restraining infiuence It 
IS the bridge between the emotions and the nund and gov ems them until 
self control is secured 

« * • * 

The above are the seven rulers of the signs of the zodiac accordmg 
to the rules handed down from antiquity In addition to these there are 
two other planets discovered in modem times—Uranus and Neptune 
These are not yet proved to rule any of the signs m quite the same sense 
as the other planets do Uranus is considered by some to have a good 
deal of sympathy with Aquarius, and may perhaps sometimes rule that 
sign but only in the more highly developed of humanity, it is also well 
placed when m Anes and Gemini Neptune seems to have some 
sympathy with Fisces and is perhaps wcff pbced in Cancer a/so 

The planet Uranus gives a strong self reliant and positive dis 
position m which all sides of the nature arc capable of being fuliv 
developed It gives a strong and onginal intellect, one that thinks out 
things for Itself and does not copy other people It gives ability for 
higher mental studies, whether scientvSc, metaphysical, or literary To 
the emotional side of the character it gives force and energy, enthnstasm 


1 


CHAPTER III 


The Position of the Ruling Planet in the Houses 

The mfiuence of the Rulmg Planet, as descnbed in Chapter 11, is 
subject to modification by its position m the houses and the signs and also 
by the aspects it receives from other planets Any Aspects to the Ruling 
Planet (pars 202 to 308} should therefore be considered, jointly with its 
sign and bouse position, under this head as explained in the Introduction 
The meaning of the position of the ruler in the twelve houses is 
given in the present Chapter 

The ruling planet rising in the Ascendant This is a strong 
position and it is fortunate both for characterand events It 
means that the nature of the ruler, which has been previously descnbed, 
may be expected to be very prominent m your character, and to operate 
with the least possible amount of hindrance and obstacle This adds 
strength and uniqueness to the character also, marking you off clearly from 
other types The influence of the ruler will also be seen clearly m the 
events of your life, both those which you cause yourself, and others which 
are brought upon you by the actions of people with whom you come in 
contact If you leam thoroughly the nature of your ruler, you will be 
prepared for the effects it will produce when in this position Its whole 
character is not likely to be shown at once, for the more superficial traits 
belong to youth and the deeper and fuller influences to maturity 

The ruling planet is in the Second House This bnngs financial 
matters and all questions relating to money and possessions 
prominently forw-ard You will havj^aoxieties concerning moneymatters, 
and either you will take considerable interest of your^own accord m 
quesbons of finance or else c ircumsta nces will necessitate your doing so. 
Generally speaking the posibon is a fairly fortunate one and indicates 
ability to gain money through occupations or persons that are signihed by 
the planet and by the sign in which it is placed. This good fortune wiU 
be increased by every good aspect the planet receives but either essene 



18 


THE KEY TO YOOT OWTI SATUITT 


for ps;cbism or occufbsio somebmes accompanies this posibos, and yon 
ma> meet anth unusual experiences in connecbon with spmtoalism or the 
dead. It ts a good position for such people as surgeons, chemists, 
undertakers, coroners, or those who ha^ e to do nith the dead either directly 
or indirectly *” " 

QQ The ruling planet IS in the Ninth House This will attract you 
towards -teligion at some bme in your life and bnng you m touch 
with people connected with religion or churches. You may also interest 
^yourself in philosophy or other profound subjects, as this position has 
much to do with the higher nature and the more abstract side of the mind 
and Its cultivation Yon may to do with author^ip or publicaUon 
eitner on your own account or by associabon with others. You will 
probably trav el a good deal or hav e to do with the sea or shipping, and 
may take a long voyage, and changes involving journeys will come mto 
your life This position enriches and develops the mind and promotes the 
cultivation of faiowledge and wisdkjm. 

The ruling planet ts m the Tenth House. This indicates that 
you'are ambitious, aspinng, enterpnsiDg, and desirous of bolding 
power and gautog recognition, and that you will probably succee d vx 
doing so You are likely to nse in Me, and to achiev e honour, reputaboo, 
fame or position according to the nature of the efforts you put forth. You 
will gam the favour of those who are older or oiotc highly placed than 
yourself, of business, professional, and social supenors, and will benefit 
and denve pleasure from associabon with them. Opportunibes for 
achievement and success will occur to you and, if you live op to the 
possibilities that are m you, you may accomplish muc h . Sometimes this 
indicates a close l«nV vnth the father, or a resemblance to the father in 
appearance, dtsposibon ox occupation. 

22 The ruling planet is m the EleveKTH House. You will have 
many fnends and acquaintances and will be rather a popular 
person in your own sphere of life, kou make fnends easily among people 
who art of the type signified by your ruling planet, they will be congenial, 
and yon will denve both pleasure and benefit from them, as they will 
be wiUmg to help you if yon need assistance at any tune. At the same 
tune yon should exercise seme discnmmabon in choosing fnends, because 
when you are under bad directions yon may sofier through them. Fnends 
are likely to influence yon a good deal in one way or another You have 
some degree of ambition and of desim for success, as well as of worth and 



HODSE POSITIOS OF EULER 

gg^ planet IS in the Twelfth House Th 

a fortunate position, because when you are I *! 
you T\iU be liable to suffer from fraud, imposture enmi^ directions 
n>al,c= Th. evls .ha, f„u„„ f„„ U.~ “ 
impossible to foresee and therefore are unexpected and f ^ 

Sometimes they wiU result from some lack of 

your owTi part and you may yourself be the cause of th on 

reason this house has been called that of “self undo.nir ''“v 
hampered and restricted m your life through this .nfl„ “ 
re=.,aE U,aar.e. hope. o. 3o„e .eRLee of‘'.e.,t:::f "“rit“ 
3e forced upon you a. some time, wiU. or wiUioul your desire T°° 

3eindanEeroffalseaccusations,falsefnends.ore.enfaIse,m “ 

IVhile uader good d.reetions you may receive help aud assistiTc^T”' 
leed It and you will be wilhag ,o afford „ ,p ^a,m ™ 

■ympalhelic and chanuble Some melmation for occultism orT 
natters often accompanies this position. tbe;omiDK of secret siT. 



CHAPTER TV. 


The Position in the Signs of the SUN as Ruler- 

The San is in Aries This increases the energetic^acti\e, and 
impulsive side of j"Our natnre, in so far as the nsicg sign can 
exhibit these qualities. Yon-will be to some extent ambibous and aspiring, 
as «*ell as quick to take adi-antage of your opportnnities. Yon possess 
some mdependence and self confidence, yon are capable of filling positions 
of responsibility and prominence, and can direct and manage other 
people. When yon meet with opposition yon are inchned to be rather 
wfifnl, rash, and pugnacious. Your natural posibon is in the forefront 
and yoa do not readily take a back seat, or snbordinale yonrself to others 
easily Yon are capable of working hard for aqy person or canse that 
a ttracts yon and of sacnfieing much. This is a fairly fortunate position 
for Titahty as well as for nsiog to life. 

gg The Sun ts m Taufos, This increases your self reliance and 
ambition, bntaccompanyxog these there will be mscb perseverance 
and determination, and yon will be more likely to act cautiously than 
impulsively Yon are apt to be rather fixed and unyielding at tunes, not 
suSaently adaptable and responsiie to new ways and ideas. Your 
natural tendency is to follow one course of life for a long tune with 
comparatively little change, but this enables yon to pursue your purpose 
with steadfastne^ patience, and quiet persistence, and yon may achieve 
mnch in this way These charactensbcs may be directed either towards 
pubUc aEatrs or money matters, and will lend to bring you prominence or 
success m the tong run. Yon ore afieciionate and warm hearted, but ran 
also be qmet and self-contained at tunes. 

gg TbeSptajs uiGeMIVI This will increase the mental side of your 
nature, making your mind posibve and strong but also iersatiie, 
restle ss, and fond of change. This may give you some inclination for 
reading, writing, educational, clencal or bteraiy work of some kind, awA 
yon might meet with success m an occupation havmg to do with one of 
these. Yon are syTnpathstic.and intmtive, but are a little lacking in 



SOK ROLER TK STGNS 


21 


continujty and a little irresolute at times You can adapt yourself to 
people readil>, aud understand people, you can also persuade and argue 
with them but are not quite so successful at managing or commanding 
them You ina> tra\el a good deal because of this position, mainly short 
journeys by land The intellectual and scientific side of your nature is 
strong, and you will probably make f rien ds among s uch p eople as writers, 
students, intellectual or literary folk 

The Sun is in Cancer This increases feeling and sensitiveness 
iQ you and gives you an inclination for home life and domesticity 
You are naturally r eserved and cautiou s, and you do not sh ow y our whole 
natwe^n the surface You can make headway in life by the exercise of 
pru dence, ca re and economy, and this position gives some degree of 
business instinct and forethought, also adaptability for practical matters, 
whether in the household, in more public affairs, or in applied science. 
You have tact and management and might achieve success through these 
qualities This is favourable for gain through the parents, and it inclines 
to the acquisition of house or land property and to dealing in these In 
the case of elderly people this positiou is rather good for comfort and 
prosperity m old age Your success in life will depend more than with 
taost people upon a favoura ^ e nviro nmen t, because if circumstances 
, oppose you, you are apt to feel keenly a sense of being hampered, 

) thwarted and restricted 

* The ^liJSoruLEO This gives you ambition, aspiration, ardour, 

and detenninatioti You possess good organising ability, can 
manage and direct other people, are fitted for being at the head of 
affairs, and able to assume authority and command If you exercise 
self control you ma> achieve much success through strength of will and 
personal magnetism and you will find you hav e much advantage over 
other people in these respects You have much sense of personal digmtj, 
but you are warm hearted, good natured, sociable, generous and magnani 
mous This position is likely to lead you into some more or Jess 
responsible or prominent position where you will have to direct or employ 
others, and you are likely to have success therein Your feelings and 
desires are ardent, you have a strong sense of the dramatic, and a love of 
beauty and luxury It is difficult for you to subordinate yourself to 
others or to occupy any position of inferiority, as you are a natural leader 
gg . The Sun is m Virgo This tends to give method, tact and 
ingenuity to your character, you can adapt yourself to people. 



22 


THE KEY TO YOOR OWN NATIVITY 


cnderstaod tliem and ssropathise Tnth them Yon have many sides to 
jour nature and are not tied down to one line of thought or activity only, 
but ha%e a good deal of adaptability and plasticity This position, if 
considered alone, does not gi\e \ery great strength of mil and sometimes 
goes with some d^ee of \’actlta!ion or tendency to change and fluctuate 
both in moods and actions It signifies one i^ho is probabJj better as a 
servant than as a master and who ts most successful v,beD be norLs under 
a superior or with a partner than «hen left quite alone You should have 
good mental abiUties and could cultivate intellectual pursuits w’lth 
success. You ha\e shren'dness, discnmination, and critical abihty; but 
have a tendency to reserve and seriousness, and you sometimes lack 
buoyancy and fire 

The Sun is in Libra This increases the social side of yonr 

nature, and gi\ es you the inclination to associate with other people 
You will probably be more successful in this ^^-ay than by working alone 
Friendship, society, partnership, coHjperation and association with others 
are indicated here Some other person is likely to come into your hfe la 
one of these Vi'aj's or by marriage and influence jour life greatly You 
are aCTectionate and fnendly, and )*oa ha>e a Ime of beauty, ornaments, 
colour, music or art, and you might meet with success m culb^'atmg 
these You should ha^-e good powers of perception and observation, and 
you are mtuitive and critical but just. You are fond of tza^eI and 
change. This position also helps to give cheerfulness, hopefulness, 
good humour and buoyaocy, with smue degree of mdependeece and 
activity 

The Sun is m Scorpio This position mcreases your strength 

of will and positii-eness of character, making j-ou strong, deter 
mined, and firm. You naturally tend to resist outside influences, and are 
not »sily swayed by other people, but rather go on j our own way and 
make up yonr own mind. This also gi\es juu energy, impulse, and some 
amount of combativeness both pbjsicaJ and mental, as well as a tendency 
to wit or sarcasm and criticism of others. You are a generous, faithful, 
and devoted fnend but a dangerous and rather unforgiving enemy You 
have dignity, £eIf*confideDce, and some reserve, you can stand on your 
own digmty and keep your own counsel when necessary This position 
makes the planet liars of importance m jour character and life, and may 
fit you for one of the occupations ruled by this planet. You maj meet 
with success towards the close of life 



SUN RULER IN SIGNS 


23 


^2 The Sun is in Sagittarius. This adds to the sincerity, candour, 
frankness and honesty of your nature, and tends to make you 
just, humane, bene\olent and sociable. It wnll help you to gain friends 
and acquaintances and to •am the confidence of others, by whom you will 
be much infiuenced, and >ou will infiuence them in your turn. You are 
companionable, and your natural instinct is not to live alone but to 
associate a good deal with others, and you have respect for the forms, 
customs, and com entions of society. There is some amount of impulse 
ra your nature, and at times you speak and act a little too hastily, and you 
need to cultiwite foretliougbt and prudence. You have much hopefulness 
and buoyancy, with activity and restlessness of mind and body. You are 
original and inventive, and although fond of change con work hard and 
complete lengthy tasks. There is some likelihood of travelling or 
voyaging. You have taste for beauty in nature and are fond of pleasure. 
You are a respecter of religion and have some philosophical ability. 

Sun IS m Capricorn. This position increases the gravity 
and seriousness of the mind, and tends to thoughtfulness, reserve, 
and self control. You may succeed by cultivating forethought, prudence, 
and tactfulness. You have practical capacity, ability to attend to detail, 
and sufficient strength of will to pursue >our ends persevermgly and 
steadily for years in order to achieve what you desire. You ate desirous 
of power and are fitted for acting as a head or ruler ov er others, although 
you w ould also make a faithful serv ant and worker or manager. You will 
gain more by plodding and quietly working with a given end m mew 
than by excitement or hurry. This position may also tend to isolate you 
somewhat at times either through the force of circumstances or because 
you adopt an attitude of reserve. You need to cultivate cheerfulness 
and resist any tendency to depression. 

The Sun is in Aquarius This planet w ill help to lift you up in 
the world, to bring you before people, so that you will know mam 
people and he Iwvowfw to many, and are likely to have many fciends and. 
acquaintances. You possess ability and power, and will do well to 
cultivate your faculties and ambitions, and not be too retiring or reserved 
You have a strong and independent nature and are capable of standing 
alone and working out your own destiny. This position broadens both the 
mind and the feelings, making you free, humane and spinted, as well as 
endowing you with good intellectual abilities if you will only cultivate 
them You are suited for a public life and would succeed better m some 



24 


THE KEV TO TOITR OWJ? KATn'ITT 


large sphere of actios than in a smaller or more retired one. Vou shoold 
hav e a good memory and be a good judge of character and hnman nature. 
The Son ts in PisCES. This position Increases that side of the 
nature that belongs to feehog. emotion, and sensation, and makes 
these activ e and important m your character. Von are able to sympathise 
with others, and are naturally honuine, charitable, and helpfoJ to those 
who axe m trouble or U1 health. You are easy«goiQg, adaptable, and 
receptive of Impressions; and your success or the rev erse will be largely 
dependent upon the persons with whom you come in contact and your 
environment generally; for jou axe mote likely to mould youiself to 
circumstances than to compel things to your wilL At times you are a 
little apt to worry as well as to show vaallation and a waving 
indecision. You are a respecter of law and order, and have regard for 
social customs. You like comfort and luxury and are an admirer of 
beauty and elegance. 



26 TitF Krv TO Youn o^vH HATm-nr 

easily chanpe from one thing to anolher, Yoo have a good deal of 
\ersalility and changefulness which may at times become lacV of 
persistence and thoroughness. This position inclines you to books, writing, 
study, science, or literature, and gt\es the likelihood of some success in 
one of these directions. You may tra\el frequently, but chiefly short 
jouruej-s, and you are fond of roo\ement, walking, or going about. You 
are active m mmd and body and rnay be skilful with your hands. You 
will gain m tact and diplomacy as life adi-ances and will live more in the 
mind than in the feelings 

The Moon is in Cavcyr With this position you wall be \ery 
greatly influenced by your surroundings and by the people wnth 
whom you come in touch, you will be aery sensitive to inharmonious con 
ditions, and be more liable to be upset by them than most people You 
are attached to home and are very domesticated, and although ctrenm* 
stances may lead you to travel you are alwaj-s happiest m your own home. 
Yon will have many changes m your life and may go a voyage, you like 
variety and your moods and humours vary a good deal from day to day. 
You have some tendency to thrift, economy, and carefulness, you value 
money, and property, and do not like to see them wasted, and you hav e 
some ability for management, whether to domestic affliirs, business, or 
otherwise, and would make a good and useful servant and manager. 
This position often gives a close link writh the mother and her side of the 
family, and you may take after >our mother a good deal 

gjj The Moon is in Le o This gives you ambition, independence, 
self reliance, and a strong and positive will You are very 
desirous of succeedmg la life, and jouare adapted to occupy some position 
of authority or responsibility w here j-ou w ill be at the head and have others 
under you. You have dignity, assertiveness, and amWOon to do great 
things, and if you can odd method and prudence to your enthusiasm and 
energy you may make a name for yourself You have imagination, 
ideality, generosity and candour Yon are a sincere fnend and lover and 
have the ability to make )ourself popular This position is moderately 
fortunate m money matters, but you need to guard against extravagance 
You are fond of pleasure, of tuxunes, of soaety, ornaments and beauty, 
and you hav e a good deal of taste. 

The Moon i s m Virgo This increases your mental abihty and 
especially the practical side of your mind, and fits you for any 
occupation m which adaptability, ingenuity and a grasp of method and 



28 


Tlir KFY TO ^oon OWN NATlVtTT 


spirited ana aspiring, and there ts sometimes with this position some 
danger of injuring the licaith through over ivork or hastiness and 
impulsiveness You are liable to be nther too enthusiastic or anxious 
In svhat you do, whether your activities are social, business, or intcllec 
tual> you tluow too much of yourself into v.hat you do, and you are 
just as eager for the interests of others ns for your oni} There is some 
likelihood of your tra\c1lmg. n tojage is possible, and you may change 
your residence a good many times. A change of occup.ation is possible 
You base the ability to develop* some psychic gift such as clairvoyance, 
dreaming, etc You may Iia\e ability for music or painting or a natural 
attraction to religion 

gg The Moon is in CAritlcoRN Tins gi\ es you a good deal of self 
control and reserve, you liave a tendency at times to wrap yourself 
up m yourself a good deal and not to wear your heart on your sleeve, 
and although other moods may vary with you, this characteristic of being 
self contained and cold will return at times You have patience and 
perseverance m following what you hare set your mmd on, and although 
you may meet with many anxieties and truls you will show much 
persistence You have prudence and caution, also some practical 
administrative ability and business instinct, and are careful and economical 
This position may bnng you before the public in some rvay, as it has 
more to do with the many than the few, and it will attract you towards 
other people by way of association, partnership, friendship or marriage. 
You need to cultivate hopefulness and enthusiasm 

gg The Moon is in AQUARIUS This makes you original and inde 
pendent m your ideas, and may give taste or ability for some 
occult pursuit You are inclined to investigate things that are out of the 
common, and if you do so while under good directions >ou may gain 
oinstderable success in this direction or may develops some psychic faculty 
You have some determination and perseNerance and do not easily change 
your habits This position increases the imagination and intuition and 
gives an insight into human nature It brings you before the many, the 
multitude, and may give many tnends and acquaintances and a good deal 
of social success through which you may rise in the world You liave 
some abilities for political, educational, and scientific work The loss or 
death of a friend may affect you greatly 

The Moon is in Pisces This position increases the emotional 
side of the nature, making the feelings active and receptive You 


67 



MOOK RULER IN SIGNS 


29 


ate impressionable and sensitive and a good deal influenced by your 
sntiovindvngs, especially in domestic or social matters You accommodate 
yourself to people and your comfort is largely dependent upon the kind of 
people v,bo surround you and the circumstances of daily life You are 
quiet and easy going, but changeable and fond of variety, and, so far as 
this position goes, a little Kckrag in energy, resolution and persistence 
You are probably somewhat medmmistic and might develope some psychic 
faculty. When under b-id directions you may incur opposition or enmity 
or suffer from loss, treachery, or underhand conduct There is likelihood 
of travelling, possibly a voyage, and many changes of residence 



CHAPTER VI. 


The PosmoH in the Signs of MERCURY as Roler. 
gg Mercury in Aries. This gives you a fiery, restless and ambi* 
tious type of mmd, quick, witty and enthusiastic, with more 
impulse and energy than prudence or forethought. It will make you 
clever and self assertive, apt and ingenious in argument, prompt in 
decision, fertile m ideas and original. You may gam success through 
these qualities in variohs directions and may make your mark in life. 
Your mmd could be trained in various directions, and you could probably 
become either a speaker or a writer. You are likely to make friends 
among literary people or those associated with books m some way. Yon 
are a little lacking m mental concentration and steadfastness, and are fond 
of change and variety in things of the mind. Yon have some tendency to 
ezaggerabon and to sarcasm and may meet with trouble throogb these 
qualities. A good deal of travelling is likely, cbieSy short journeys 
gg Mercury in Taurus This indicates an mtellect of the patient 
and peisevenng type, not prone to change easily. You are not so 
adaptable or versatile in thought as are some people; it takes a good 
deal to induce you to change your opimoos and bahits of thought, and 
you axe not very prompt in decision ; but when you have once grasped 
what you believe to be right or true yon do not easily give it up, but are 
very tenacious and unyielding. You have a good deal of intuition and 
some taste for music or art, and can take much pleasure m beautiful 
things. Yon are not always so ambibous or energebc as you might be, 
and your (eeliugs axe rather liable to bias your judgment; but you can 
accomplish a good deal m intellectual matters through your persistence 
and determiuabou not to give way. There is some abihty to earn money 
wotinfgi., sbtdies., nr, stoJlAd. onmupbinne.. bTUvJlinig's, 

indicated but mainly for some deiimte purpose such as business, money 
matters, health, etc., rather than mere love of traveL 

Mercury in Ge mini. This strengthens the mteUectnal side 
of your nature, giving you a quick wit, a versatile and ingenious 
SO 



MERCURf RULER W SIGRS 


31 


mind, and an appreciation of all thin^ intellectual. You could take a good 
education and your mind could adapt itself to almost any subject involving 
thought or skill Reading, writing, studies, books, science or literature 
will appeal to you and you may have ability for any or all of these 
subjects You are someabat liable to divide and scatter your energies by 
too much change or by trying to attend to two or more subjects at once 
instead of by concentrating jour mmd on one You will be fond of 
vanety m matters of the mind, and may exhibit some Jack of deaston, too 
much versatility and desultonness You ate fond of travel, especially 
short journeys, and are likely to travel frequently You liave real 
ability and can accomplish much if you concentrate your energies, and 
you might achieve some public success or fame You are original and 
ingenious and would succeed at the study of astrology 

M^ERC yRY,I N_CANCER This adapts the mind to practical and 
utilitarian ends whether lo business or worldly affairs or in science, 
use and purpose are always to the front and some advantage is expected 
to accrue from whatever study the mmd may engage in You have the 
ability to make money through travdling, writings, or study or through 
some occupation in which the mmd is largely engaged You will makei 
fnends among literary or business people and those who are signified byj 
the planet Mercury You have some amount of intuition and you are | 
mentally flexible, changeable and restless, you should have a good 
memory, and your mmd if somelmjes a little slow is sure and tenacious 
Yon are likely to traiel a little, possibly by water, and you may have 
several changes of residence ^Vhe□ under bad directions you may suffer 
or even lose money through house or land and through brothers or sisters 
Mercury in Leo This gives positiveness, vitality, and 
firmness to the intellect You will form great schemes and large 
plane, and will take comprehensive and widely reaching views of things, 
but will not be so apt or ingenious m small matters or little details, for 
these you will be liable to overlook or forget You have imagination and 
ideality, some sense of tbe dramatic and imposing, and might rise con 
siderably m any occupation in which these qualities were needed You 
have strength of mmd, and when jou have once formed your plans j’ou 
are not liable to change but can spend a long time and exert much energy 
m carrying them out, as you have intellectual concentration and power 
You have ability for wxirk m connection with public bodies or enterprises, 
with theatres, concerts, schools, and are capable of managing or directmg 



36 


THE KEY TO lOLl OWS NATIVITY 


sometimes Rues some inconstancy m love matters or else tn-o Io>« aflatrs 
or hso raamages. It forms a hole between jourself and brothers, sisters, 
and cousins, and >*our relations with these should be pleasant and 
harmonious It fa\’oufs travclImK whether for pleasure or ansing 
out of >our occupation, and it is fortanate for money derned from 
writing, books, literature, speaking, education, profession rather than 
business It clears and refines the mind, and inclines you somewhat to 
religion It gii es >ou some «ease of order and method, not only in every 
day matters but m the arrangement and expression of ideas and attention 
to detaiL 

Venus iv Cancer. This position increases the afiectional sid* 
of the nature and renders )*ou home Io\icg, companionable, and 
domesticated, at least ^ far as the feelings are concerned, although you 
may possibly have other and different charactenstics in other departments 
of your nature. You appreciate the comforts and protection of home hfs, 
and )*Qii have the parental instioet to afford help and protection towards 
children or those who are much >'ousger or weaker than yourself This 
jmSueace sometimes bnngs about mamage for the sake of a home or 
‘social comforts. It is fortunate for the acquisition of money or property 
through mamage or partnership, as well as from some family sourea 
either on your own side or on that of the mamage partner You should 
have some amount of business instinct and axe not inclined to waste what 
you extravagantly You could manage money matters and should 

be fortunate in bouse or {and property 

Venus in Leo This gives warm and sincere affections, a very 
deep love nature, and a great amount of faithfolness and constancy 
with It. It may bring about an early mamage, if other circumstances do 
not interfere, and it tends m the direction of “ love at first sight.** It is 
a fortunate tafiuence soaally and may bring >*00 many pleasant fnends 
and acquamtances through whom yon may obtain enjoyment or profiE 
It 1 $ apt to make yon a little extravagant, both m the matter ef the 
feelings, which tend to be too active, and of money matters as well You 
ha\« much generosity, Vrmdness,%E^ uagnasnsuty You a chewftd, 
hopeful nature, fond of pleasure, company and luxury You would 
benefit through any occupation havmg to do with entertainments, public 
affairs, company, society, or the drama, and you could gam through 
speculative mvestments if you add prudence to your enterprise. This 
brings some degree of popularity and the good will of supenors. 



38 


Tiin KEV TO yOUR OWK NATIVITY 


circumstances and may not be your fault altogether. Tliere is some 
likelihood of money by marriage or legacy; but jou may lose money 
through your marriage or business i>artncr when you are under bad 
directions. 

Venus in Sagittarius Tbisgisesimigmationandlove of the 
beautiful and sublime. You ought to have real taste for beauty, 
harmony, and elegance, and might culti^mte this m ^-arious directions, 
through the fine arts, music, poetry, or literature. You lo\e beauty m 
form, ornaments, beautiful clothing and pictures, and )ou*might make 
money at any occupation m which these tastes can be turned t6 account. 
Your atfections are active, romantic, and generous, but you are a little 
liable to fickleness, lacking in caution, and prone to impulse. There is 
some likelihood of two loie aiTairs or marriages. This gives a good deal 
of devotion to the nature, w hich may attract y ou to a person, a cause, or 
to religion You maytraiel a little, especially in connection with your 
occupation or after marriage There is a little danger of love of show, 
ostentation, conientionolity, and ceremony. ' 

Venus in Capricorn. This indicates that although you have 
an affectionate nature you hai e also a good deal of prudence, tact, 
and self control, and are not likely to let your feelings run aivay with you. 
Yon have faithfulness and constancy; and when a person has once iron 
your approml, whether in Io\e or friendship, you do not easily change or 
fo^et. This position sometimes delayrs marriage or interposes some 
obstacle; and, if you are under bad directions this may be caused by 
money matters, worldly position,occupation,*or a parent, but when you 
are under good directions you may benefit considerably from all these 
sources You have practical bnancial ability and could easily leam to 
manage money matters, iniestments, or business. You are likely to nse 
in life, ivitb care, and you ivill win the approval of elders and superiors, 
and may gain popularity and the friendship of people m good standing. 

Venus in Aquarius. This influence should contribute to your 
popularity and social success, and should bnng y ou many friends 
and acquaintances, some of whom may be in a good position m life and 
able to benefit you socially if net in occupation or financial matters It 
IS favourable for love and mamage, bat it is liable to cause delay or 
disappointment, chiefly when you are under bad directions; and at such 
times you may suffer through false friends \Tbis also gives you 
faithfulness and constancy m affection and fr^ndship, and bestows 



MARS RULER IN SIGNS 


41 


prompt »n thought, apt jn v.’ord, and deasive in speech. It tends to give 
mental courage and resource, with some amount of mental combativeness 
and positiveness; inclination to irony, wit, sarcasm, or satire You should 
ha\e critical ability, and could gain skill m writing, speaking, debating, 
and argument; but at times you will be apt to offend other people a 
little by opposition or plainness of speech or vmting, and may get a few 
enemies in this way. You scatter >our energies a little by attending to 
too many things, and you would gam by concentrating on one thing only. 
This position IS liable to cause death of, or estrangement from a brother 
or sister, trouble through letters, literary or educational matters; and 
accidents or death while on a journey or outside the house The lungs 
may be affected. 

Mar s^n_ Cance r. This position gnes on independent spirit and 
some inclination to rebel against rules, regulation's, superiorsT and 
the exercise of authority. You may suffer at times at the hands of 
superiors and perhaps experience something akin to injustice, unfairness, 
or tyranny, or, on the other hand, you may be troubled with insuboidina* 
tiOD or disobedience from servants or employees There is liability to 
some trouble through a parent, probably the mother, disagreement with, 
estrangement from, or early death of such But the position is favourable 
for inheritance from a parent, and gam through bouse or land property or 
an occupation connected with land There is some mclmation for 
travelling, especiallj by water, but liability to trouble or accidents while 
travelling, also to danger from burning, scalding, or fire in the house. 
The stomach and digestion may suffer 
QQ Mars in _L gO This is a strong position for Mars, giving some 
success through matters goierned by the planet It makes you 
energetic, active, and _independen t, and contributes strength of will and 
character. It indicates that you are sincere, honourable, open, candid, 
generous , it fits you for a position of responsibility where you would 
haie to control others, to manage, order, and command Itbnngsjou 
recoguUion and respect from superiors and those m authority, and possibly 
may lift* jou up m life and give honour or preferment It is apt to make 
! you a little too positive or militant tn manner,so that when you are undei 
bad directions you may make enemies and meet with opposition and 
cowtentihn This increases the fire and vihility of the body but gives a 
little liability to fe«rs, accidents, and hig^^tf‘'”"^mre. You may 
suffer Irom social opposition or from family dis ^bete is danger 



UARS RULER IN SIGNS 


43 


the lime being, to the task of acquinng the object or pursuing the idea 
Youcansbo^\ great demotion to a person or a cause and make great 
«5acnfices for \i You are su'a>ed i good deal by pleasures, feelings, and 
moods, bm jou can also be \ ery steadfast, rigid and unchanging You 
have good practical executive ability, and can work hard when you like, 
and you are fitted for any occupation of Mars, such as soldier, surgeon, 
chemist, engineer, etc This position increases the vital energies but 
giv es liability to accidents, fev er, high temperature and infectious disease 
You have a strong sense of dignity ano «ome pride, and will be a little apt 
to offend people at times or tal e offence yourself rather readily, and so 
suffer through enmitj, rivalry, jealousy, opposition There may be gam 
of money through legacy, marriage, partnership or association with 
others, but there is some tendency to extravagance 
QQ Mars IN Sagittarius Tbisgivesjou fire and energy, which 
may operate as much mentally as emotionally, and take the form 
of impulse ardour, and enthusiasm At limes this may carry you away, 
and you may follow an idea or a desire loo far, or go to too great 
extremes lo the pursuit of an object You need restraint, moderation, 
and prudence You have the courage of your ideas and opinions, which 
are not alw’ays those of the people around, but your natural tendency is 
to go your ow*n way at all costs In religion, this position makes one who 
IS either a little unorthodox or who is very active dev'Oted, and perhaps a 
little militant in manner You are a quick and active worker but liable 
to change, or to taxe up too many subjects or to scatter your energies too 
much It favours travel, and chmige of opinion, occupation, and abode, 
also outdoor life, riding, walking or athletics There may be danger 
while iravellmg, and disagreement with brothers and sisters or separation 
A law suit IS possible and quarrels or disputes are probable 

^ Mars IN Capricorn This gives you ambition, determination, 
and ability to make your way m the world and carve out your 
own career You have a good deal of pracbcal executiv e ability, can unjrk 
hard and capably and accomplish much You have a sense of authority, 
are able to direct and control others, and are fitted for some post of 
responsibility It tends to lift you np m the world to give you some 
degree of prominence or mastery over others, even if only in a small way, 
but It also tends slightly to isolate you and to make you more feared or 
respected than loved Mars is strong in Capncorn and gives fitness for 
occupations sigmfied by this planet, such as soldier, sailor, surgeon, 



44 


THE KEV TO \OUR OWK NATIVITY 


chen^ist, engineer, also parliamentary or ofScial state and municipal posi¬ 
tions. WTicn nnder baddirections,you may incur enmit>, cntiasm, rivalry, 
.especially from superiors or public persons, and it is also unfoTtiinate for 
the father, gnmg some danger of separation, disagreement, or his death. 
There is some tendency to rheumatic or allied disorders. 

Mars in Aquarius 'Hus produces a mind that is both quickly 
moving and firm, suiift lo action but unyielding and someubat 
contentious You haie much nervous force and capacity foruork, but 
also, so far as this position is concerned, a good deal of impulse that is 
apt to u-ork rather erratically It tends to make you prompt and decisive 
both m speech and action, but sometimes a little brusque and abrupt 
When under good directions you are very devoted to those friends or 
causes that jou value, and you may gam both pleasure and profit through 
them and nse in life But under bad directions you nriU suiTer much 
through friends or associates, may lose them by death or separation 
or be alienated by difference lo views. There is danger from false fnends 
and of quarrels with fnends You need to cultivate coolness and 
prudence, and learn to give way gracefully to others There is some 
liability to nervous breakdown through overwork 
gg Mars is Pisces lo this position Mats shows less of its fire 
and impulsiveness than it does id most of the signs, and it is 
accompanied by a good deal of reserve You have power and capactiy 
but you do not show jour whole nature on the surface Yoj do not rush 
into action without thought as people under this planet often do, neither 
does tNic gi>e you the iron will and tmyielding spint of some of the signs. 
You knowhow to bide jour time, howto choose suitable moments for 
action; how to wait with some degree of patience, dip'omacy, and subtlety 
to achieve jour end, and you can accomplish much in this way But 
under bad directions j ou will be liable to incur secret enmity and to suffer 
from opposition, criticism, or hostility, generaUy more or less unexpected 
or hidden . jou will lose money through mistakes of judgment, or take 
some false step that will hamper or binder you, bring unpopularity upon 
you, or cause something in the nature of a downfall You should beware 
of giving way to vacillation, indecision, or irresolution 



^6 


THE KEY TO ^OUR OWN VATIMTY 


guide, or tram others sensibly You will Icam b> experience and wll 
possess tact and common sense You will be fond of travelling and are 
likely to mo\e about frequently, even if only short distances You are 
fond of change mentally, and may occupy yourself with more subjects 
than one, or pass from one to another frequently It inclines you to take 
a cntical view of religion, or to view it from the intellectual or philoso 
pbical side The position is good for marriage and for getting on well with 
brothers, sisters, and relatives, but when you are under bad directions 
you may be troubled through these channels and loss or separation may 
follow, but this need not be serious 
97 lyP -tTER IN Cancer This strengthens the imagination and m 
tuition, and gives you some taste for art It is fortunate forfamily 
life, gives peace and harmony »n the borne, constitutes a tie between' 
yourself and your parents, and brings happiness and prosperity You may 
have a legacy from a parent, probably the mother, or her side of the family. 
Von may travel a little and there is a possibility of a vo>age, or you may 
follow some occupation that entails travelling You might benefit through 
houses or land or occupations connected with them You have taste m 
furniture and house decoration and like beauty and elegance m the home, 
and you could understand architecture and gam skill at it It will attract 
you somewhat to the psychic or occult side of things, or perhaps giv e you 
ability to develops some psychic faculty It inclines somewhat to the 
devotional side of religion as well as to mystiusm 

gg Jupiter IN Leo This makes you high minded, honourable, and 
good natured It gives you a strong sense of dignity and fits you 
for positions of honour and responsibility You are likely to gam the 
esteem of supenors and would do well as a head or chief over others. You 
will verj likely rise in life and win respect and esteem,perhaps gam power 
and reputation This should bring you many friends and acquaintances, 
some popularity and social success. You have a sense of your own 
worth and do not undervalue yourself, you appreciate display, show, 
ceremonial, good taste, and sometmies show some amount of ostentation, 
but you do not offend anyone by it because you are generous and 
magnanimous You have deep feeling and a strong love nature Hus 
position increases the vitality and bodily vigour 
gg Jupiter in Virgo Jupiter is not strong in this sign, and its 
fierysidedoesnotshowoutwell here The position is somewhat 
good for business and commercial matters, for success through servants 



JUPITER RULER W SIGNS 


47 


and emploj ees, especially where many are employed or associated, and 
you might gain through partnership But when under bad directions yon 
may ha\e trouble or financial loss through these channelc. You ha\e a 
sense of order, method, and arrancement, bet this position sometimes 
goes wth indifference to personal appearance, carelessness or indolence 
You are more intellectual and philosophical than dei-otional, are entical 
and analytical, and should have ability for saence or for teaching The 
position is not very good for digestion, is liable to affect the liver or 
bowels, and at some time to >oaf life you may be hampered m some 
wa> through a rather lingering complaint There may be tiavel throngh 
business or on accoont of someone else. WTien under bad directions you 
may suffer from fraud, treachery or deceiL 

Jupiter in Libra This mcieases the social side of your 
nature and brings out those qualities that contribute to friendship, 
companionship, and popularity through association with others. You 
should therefore have man) fnends and be a person well known and 
^teemed in j-our own circle, and you may perhaps attract public nobce 
and gain some degree of prominence beyond the ordinary It is also 
fortunate for marriage and paitoership, and for joining soaebes, 
associations, companies or large groups of people whether m bnsiness or 
otherwise It favours travellmg and roj-ages. It mcreases imagination 
o! the mtellectuaJ t)’pe, and ma> give some rebgions feelmg of a mysbeal 
or imaginative kmd , also taste for art, poetry or music. \Vhen )ou are 
under bad duections it may cause some mharmony or mcompatibility lo 
mamage, and something similar m matters of fnendship and partnenhip 
which may show as falseness, treachery, or secrecy 

Jupiter in Scorpio This gives warmth enihnsiasm, and 
ardour to the nature, and locreases the feelings and emotions 
The positive side of these is prominent, so that j-ou wiU have resoarce, 
and strength of will, fitting j-ou to be of considerable practical use m the 
world It gives some financial abibty and good fortune in money matters, 
invKtments, and speculations, with possibility of money through mamage, 
partnership or legacy There will be some mdination to the mj-stical or 
occult m religion, and either some touch of unorthodoxy or else a positive 
and slightly militant disposition \on have some little pnde and sense of 
dignity, and this is apt to be rather easily wounded, although you have 
much good nature and generosity You might have pleasure or profit by 
travelling and occupations connected with the water or liquids, also 



48 


THE KEY TO VOUR 0>VN NATIVITY 


through things having to do ^lUi religion or philosophy and the higher 
education; but ticder bad directions you may ha\e trouble or loss 
through any of these subjects 

Jupiter in Sagittarius This position is a strong and 
fa\ourabIe one for Jupiter and brings out all its active 
characteristics beneficially It is good for the higher side both of the 
intellect and the feelings, for religion, philosophy, Lm, medicine, and 
for the philanthropic and social instincts, ginng benci-olence, compassion, 
generosity, good sense, and humour You have some love of beauty and 
harmony, which could find an outlet through music or art. You have 
some sense of personal dignity and prefer to conform to the manners and 
customs of good society, but jou have also much toleration and good 
nature and can readily be brought to forgive those who offend >DU The 
position is favourable for travelling and voyages It also tends to bring 
peace in home and family life It contnbutes to vitality and bodily 
health 

. _ Jupiter in Capricorn This increases the strength of will and 
also the ability for practical work in the world You probably 
have a good deal of ambition and love of power, in small things or in large, 
and to some extent you are fitted to manage, arrange, and organise 
things and persons, to occupy some prominent or responsible position, to 
be at the head of things This gives a good deal of financial and 
commercial ahihty, adaptation to business life and some good fortune 
therein But >ou might also gam through professional pursuits, through 
travelling, and st is good for those who bold a public or semi public 
position or office, for mone> gamed through these channels and for money 
or legacy from the father, brother or sister, and for working in connection 
with them You are likely to travel and may go a voyage The position 
tends to thoughtfulness and gravity, as well as frugality and econom> 

Jupiter in Aquarius This position will bring jou many 
fnends and acquaintances, some amount of social popularity and 
success, and the good will of those amongst whom you mov e It is fortu 
Yfaeiamiy tnrie tcswitt as m thewmVA -aiii grvus-jAtasrae 
through brothers and sisters It mclines to associating with other people 
m vanous ways, joimng religious bodies, belonging to societies, associa 
tions, brotherhoods, or companies, whether m social or business matters. 
There are strength of wnll, firmness and independence, some dignity and 
seif reliance, and ability to command, control, or manage others. It 



JUPITER RULER IN SIGNS 


49 


gives you some business ability and some success in money matters. It 
IS sometimes accompanied by an attraction to occultism or mystiasm, or 
else to some mysbcal or out ol tbe way form of religion. ^ 

105 This gives you a good natured easy going 

disposition, well disposed to others and inclmed to be charitable 
and benevolent. It is a good position for a medical man, or nurse, also for 
those who have to do with the side or poor eitiier from the point of view 
of practical help, of medicine or of religion It is favourable for religion, 
sometimes of a mystical or occult kind, but sometimes quite orthodox and 
very devout It gives a good deal of imagination and sense of beauty m 
form or harmony, which may attract you to music, art, or poetry. You 
like neatness, beauty, and luxury in the home; and this position tends to 
preserve peace and harmony m home hfe as well as bringing you fnends 
and some amount of social popularity. 



CHAPTER X. 


The Position in the Signs of SATURN as Ruler. 

Saturn in Aries at btrlh tnll bnng you more or less to the 
front, according to your eovironmeot. You are ambibous, 
diplomatic and distrusting, fond of power, and can exercise some authonty, 
are also able to manage others, organise and plan You are very confident 
and assured, hut sometimes manifest austerity, gloominess, and love of re 
tirement It gives self satisfaction and irritability, or had temper when 
provoked Your fate m life, especially your public career, is made largely 
by your own choosing, and thus your misfortunes wtJI often be of your 
own making If you can make truth and toleration your virtues, you 
will gam great power and success, but avoid intolerance and impatience 
Saturn in Taurus at your butb tends to male you firm, per 
sistent and strong willed in pursumg ) our'purpose Itgivesyou 
a slow but quiet and kind nature, yet with a temper easily angered. It ts 
not good for monetary matters in a general sense, for money will come 
slowly or tend to waste away, though you may gam (or, when Saturn is 
afSicted, lose) money through some public venture, stocks, shares, mvest 
ments, banks anA companies, or speculation m these things, there is 
moreover some possibility of your gaining through elderly persons You 
can be careful and economical m money matters and the greatest success 
is promised by thrift and perseverance 

Saturn in Gemini at your birth threatens you with trouble in 
early life also difSculties connected with educahon, clerical or 
literary work, your brethren, and short journeys. You may however, by 
patience, and industry acquire much mtellectual ability Strength of 
character and subtlety of purpose, depth of thought and ability for 
scientific research may be cultivated to advantage. At some time of life, 
when Saturn is well aspected, you will gain success through matters of an 
Intellectual nature, or through your fanuly, but when Saturn is afflicted, 
troubles wjU come from this source. Avoid imtabilitv and bitterness m 
feelmg 



SATURN RULER IN SIGNS 


109 Cancer at your birth is unfavourable for holdm^v, 
possessions or position, and for success or honour, as it brings 

trouble in business or profession, threatening downfall, loss of repute and 
financial loss (especially when Saturn afihcts the Moon, Venus, or Jupiter), 
It conduces to mediumship or occulhsm of some kind Guard against 
notions and impressions, and separate your imagination from fancy You 
are much affected by others and they may dram your vitahty, therefore 
be careful with whom you associate Strengthen your will, and never 
encourage discontent or resentment You vnll seek to avoid responsibility, 
which you will not find desirable Your occupation is hkely to be an 
unpopular one 

110 birth will help you on m life, giving you 
power, authority or responsibility, and m a measure you will stand 

outside the crowd It slightly diminishes your arculation and vitality, 
and may affect the heart It will bring fawiurs from superiors and those 
in the higher ranks of life You are rather firm and self contained 
Troubles may anse through love affairs or your passions, unless you can 
practise chastity without incurring coldness Your principal expenences 
will come through your feelings, and if you can control passion, and slay 
the lion of anger, you will avoid much of your fate 

111 ViRQOatbirthgivesanorderly.cnttcalandanalylical 
' mind of a serious cast, tending to make you original and able 

to deal with profound subjects, this might not show to advantage during 
early life, however This senous tendency may increase at times to 
gloom, when you may be far too diffident and resen. ed There is the 
possibility of disappointment or reversal in your occupation, and your 
ambition may be thwarted, or you may be kept back by unpopular 
occupation, or ill health, or some cause coming from your elders The 
occult significance of this position is ‘ discrimination, by which you may 
gam wisdom, and improve your lower nature 

IN Libra at your birth is rather fortunate,, this being. 

' the sign of Saturn s exaltation It is generally favourable for all 
matters connected with partnerships, especially with those older than 
yourself, bringing you some gam by partnerships, companies, or 
association with othere This position tends to make you rather exacting 
where justice is concerned but as you expand and develope, it will widen 
your sympathies, and make you more considerate, religious and mystical 
Under evil " Directions it reverses friendships, causing some opposition. 



52 


TlIC KE\ TO \OUR OWN KATIVITY 


jealoJisy, selfishness, etc This bein^ the sign of the balance you mil 
have the choice of two courses of ^tion, at some period of your life, 
Vihich will very considerably influence your future 

SATURl^M^CORriO at the tune of your birth increases your will, 
and force of character, also your love of power and authority, 
creating within you a dislike of opposition and restraint It gives you a 
forceful, strong, and even turbulent disposition, unless U is counteracted 
by good influences Its tendency is rather critical It impenls your 
honour and repute and may cause you some unpopularity Downfall 
and collapse are at times threatened. It is not favourable for occultism, 
but It will give you some power tn all things secret, bidden, occult and 
mystical You will tend to become very reserv ed, and self controlled, 
and you should avoid pride and lealousy, these being the two chief 
dangers m your life , 

Saturn in Sagittarios at bir^ mil give you a philosophical 
type of mind, thus making you interested m science, philosophy 
or religion, and as you progress your thinking will be more original, 
clear, and philosopbical, signs of advancement being that you will 
embrace new news as gravely as you may have viewed those which 
you at one time thought to be the ultimate Your mind will be as 
enquiring one, and were you to give yooi mind to religion you could 
become a great dmne, or if to philosophy, a great philosopher, if to 
tiavellmg a great explorer, and if to finance a great financier But 
concentration MUST be practised, ere you can'achieve any of the virtues 
promised by this position It wnll, however, make yon earnest and sincere 
Saturn in Capricorn at your birth will tend to lift you up, 
giving you power, mastery, independence, ambition, and at times 
lonelmess and isolation, but its influence will be modified, according to 
your sphere of life This position sometimes gives fortune m occupation 
or in finanrial affair y, wfith ultimate reversal or collapse under bad 
“Directions.” When Saturn is afflicted jon will be gloomy, senous 
and melancholy It strengthens your personality, briuging ambition, 
love of power, and, unless Jupiter, Venus or the Sun prevent, some 
indifference to the interests of others You should also have a strong 
individuality and tb*' power to raise yourself to a good position in life by 
self control and di. 



} 

SATURN RULER IS SIGNS 53 

and some good fortune connected withassociations, companies, and groups 
of persons, this being a good position for the occult and mystical It gives 
a judgment of human nature, although at times you may be mistaken in 
your friends, and suffer from deceit, etc, against which you should guard 
You would do ^\eIl m connection with some popular movements, and 
matters where money is concerned, or by investment in stocks and 
shares The occult significance promises you progress according to your 
power and ability to respond to the vibrations of Aquarius 

Saturn in Pisces at your birth is nnfa%ourable for occupa 
tions, public position, reputation, and popularity, you may incur 
(H^probnum, or disrepute, deserved or not Superiors, authonties and 
those in position are apt to be unsympathetic, for >ou have critics, 
enemies, and also false friends You will be liable to attacks from 
mfenors, but when Saturn is well aspected benefit will come to you if m 
any way concerned mth hospitals, chantable institutions as>lums, pnvate 
occupations, secret societies, or unpopular pursuits Temperance, toler 
ance and firmness will benefit you greatly, and help you to overcome the 
misfortunes indicated above Strengthen your will, and avoid as far as 
possible making errors m your judgment 



CHAPTER XI. 


The House Position of the Planet URANUb 

It ^ill be easily understood from nbat has been said m Chapter II., 
p 13, that Uranus can seldom or ne^er be regarded as the Ruling Planet 
in any horoscope Indeed m many cases, perhaps most, it will be found 
to exercise little or no effect WTiere it does, it is the p osition by 
house rather than that by sign ivbicb is most marked Tor example, 
Uranus m Cancer m tbe third bouse will show its effect more as regards 
speech and writing and other third bouse and mental matters than as 
regards the feelings and desires, signified by Cancer That is to say 
'in other ^ords that its position by house generally o\erpo\sers its position 
by sign In this chapter, therefore, tbe mfiuence of Uranus m tbe 
twehe houses is gnen rather than that m the signs, as likely to be of 
more me to the student, quite apart from the fact that both Uranus and 
Neptune (in regard to nbicb similar remarks will apply) both mo\e so 
slowly as to remain about seven and fourteen years, respectively, m one 
sign , thus affecting all persons, bom during that time, more or less m a 
similar manner Probably the stgn posttwns of these two occult and 
mystenous planets are more concerned with the particular classes of 
egos commg mto mamfestabon from tune to bme, and the general Karma C 
of such classes, than with the special temperament of individuals This 
however is only a speculabon 

Uranus in the First House This posiboa confers on you 
onginal thoughts, and an uncommon and somewhat bohemian 
character you may display a certam mvenbre genius and will in any 
case be inclined to strike out an entirely new Ime for yourself It will 
bring some reversal of fortune, strange and peculiar events, lifbng you 
'ni^-up-Ut oiie'tune anh'lnen caSnng you bown agam ’rrwlli'Drnig you 
danger of estrangement from those nearest to you, and will break many 
social bes abruptly and suddenly You axe inclined to be somewhat 


See note on page yS 

94 



URANUS IN THE nVELVE HOUSES 


55 


nbrupt and at times too plam spolcen, occasionally too jou are self 
ppinionated and irritable You should restrain also a certain tendency to 
be erratic You are metaphysically inclined, and lo% e the profound and 
wonderful You vnll make some attainments m occultism or the higher 
thought 

Uranus in the Second House This will cause you some 
restlessness of disposition and many changes of fortune bcdden 
gain and sudden losses will make your financial afiairs more or less 
uncertain at all times You may gam a large fortune through some 
speculation or imention and suddenly lose it all You would gam by 
railway shares also by investments in inventions, by unique and 
extraordinary v entures or large liability companies, but you will need to 
be guarded, as you may lose as much as you gam There is no certainty 
with Uranus m regard to finance though good aspects are generally 
beneficial The operation of this influence m the mental plane will 
cause you to have many profound thoughts during life, and you may 
become deeply interested in astrology 
120 Third House This will make your mmd 

somewhat peculiar, eccentnc,^inventive and curious It gives 
>ou abdity'lo study deep and profound subjects, and >ou are generally 
inventive and ingenious m your methods This position causes you to 
receive many strange letters also to have an extensive and varied corres 
pondence, probably with those who study metaphysics or are engaged in 
occult pursuits You will have a very great amount of correspondeace 
(much at tunes and little at others), and there is some liability of compli 
cations through letters or sudden receipt of news You will be fond of 
travel, will have difficulties with your kindred and will hold strange or 
peculiar views and hence are liable to be severely cnticised by others 

Uranus in the Fourth House This will affect your home 
life, and bring you many changes of a very unexpected and 
probably abrupt nature \ou will be liable to strange experiences m 
your residence, m the house you were bom or even the town or country 
m which you reside You are liable to disputes or strange scenes with 
j'our parents or with fellow residents You must be very careful as life 
advances to avoid strange and mcurable diseases. You should always 
seek to have bannomous conditions near you, and should be careful with 


Sec dole oo page 



56 


THE KE\ TO ^OUR 0^yN NATIVITT 


nhom you associate, especially m old age Your end will probably be 
rather sudden and quite unexpected. , 

122 ^ Fifth House. This position will give yon 

\ery strange love»afiairs, bringing you many very romantic and 
peculiar adventures m this connection, nnd you should be very careful 
in choosing your acquaintances of the opposite sex, or your friendships 
may be abused- It will bring yon estrangement from those you love • 
yet 5on may be drawn mto very peculiar pleasures and strange expen 
ences concerning axalled pleasure You should be guaidrf in your 
speculations as jon would have very sudden losses and sodden gam^- 
Your children would cause you much trouble and would be reared with 
difficulty; but should they survive they will either leave you entirely or 
bring you either discredit or anxiety by their strange and peculiar 
behaviour 

^22 Uranus is the Sixth House at > our birth This is not good 
for your health. It vnll bnng you some nervous disorders, and 
may bnng some strange or incnrable complaint that it would be 
difficult to eradicate, in fact, the tendency of any ill health would be 
towards incurable diseases. You must, bon-ever, be careful to avoid 
hypochondria or oervous disorders, which would give you much misery 
and unnecessary suffering of a mental tcic± You should be guarded u 
your dealings with servants and infenors, as yon would have much worry 
and anxiety and possibly sudden loss connected with them. They would 
bnng yon discomfort and annoyance, and would be unable to mmister in 
any way to jmur comfort or happiness. You are liable to sadden and 
strange accidents. 

^ 2 ^ Uranus IS THE Sev'EHth House at your birth. This causes 
very strange and peculiar events in connection with marriage, or 
partnerships. Either your partner will hav e nndergone some strange and 
remarkable expenences, or you will have form^ some impulsive 
attachment which is likely to bnng many complications. You tdll be m 
danger of separation, either by estrangement, div'orce, or sodden loss of 

you are very well equipped, and well ^le to bold your own, as you 
would meet with much persistent opposition You should exercise care 


See oMe os pa^e jS 





• URANUS IN THE TWELVE HOUSES 57 

in all dealings with strangers and all eccentric and peculiar persons would 
be best avoided This position mcbnes to platonic unions 

Uranus in the Eighth House This position has a peculiar 
and occult significance and it should cause you to take a very 
profound and sincere interest m all things that relate to other planes of 
exist^ce_be<!ide this physical earth It causes you to have at times very 
‘dear dreajns, and it interests you considerably m after death states 
From a physical standpoint it will give you inoneyjn a peculiar and 
unexpect^^manner by will or legacy, or by marriage or co v,*orkers, or 
in some exceptional way It is not altogether favourable for the nature 
of one’s death, as it shows a very abrupt and sudden end But much 
will de pend upon the_aspects to Uranus at birth, and those received by 
this planet as your horoscope progresses hence no definite or precise 
information can ever be given with regard to this position 

Uranus in the Ninth House This position is a good 
testimony for all matters concerned with metaphysics, astrology, 
occultism, or for imaginative work It inclines towards originality and 
invention, and favours dealing m curios and antiques, or the study thereof 
It gives you a prophetic tendency, and it also causes you to have strange 
dreams, dreams which sometimes come to you as warnings or even as 
revelations You are liable to accidents (or good fortune, according to 
the aspects of Uranus) while travelling, especially on long railway 
journeys, or abroad You will incline to reform m religious and scientific 
matters 

Uranus in the Tenth House is a position which gives you 
sudden changes m your position of a quite unexpected character 
Now up, and now down, you sometimes enjoy great credit and at other 
times suffer from ill repute Your employers pass through peculiar 
difficulties, and you become involved with them in some manner You 
have a tendency all your life to follow some very onginal avocation, and 
do well m pursuits of an eccentric or uncommon nature Your life will 
de tail* ot' romance ann’pecuilarepiswdas ncoiy wihcih rn'Er sTsswiaitai’ 
with your calUng You should avoid all dealings with public bodies and 
public questions as far as possible, unless the aspects to Uranus are 
favourable 


See note on patre 5S 




58 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVIT/ 


128 Eleventh House ^\In brmg you your truest 
friends from those inclined towards occult or metaphysical studies 

It brmgs the friendship of original thinkers, inventors and eccentnc 
characters Some of your acquaintances may be decidedly bohemian m 
temperament or e\en (when Uranus is badly aspected, and A\hen under 
any alBiction) ad\ enturers You will have hopes and ivishes very different 
to those of most people, and you wall love the weird, profoimd and 
wonderful It will bring the friendship of those who have romantic 
love affairs, and you will hear some very strange stones from your fnends 
Your fnends will be those of adv’anced thought, and original methods and 
directly or indirectly such wiU help you 

129 IN THE Twelfth House is an unfortunate position 
as it may bring you exile or estrangement either from your 

country, or else from your friends or relatives You would do well to 
avoid eccentnc people, and to have no dealings wnth those who are not 
perfectly straightforward This position will possibly bring you some 
romantic and disastrous adventures with strangers, or perhaps m con 
nection with other persons with whom you may be acquainted and you 
should be very careful to guard against treachery Be prepared for 
sudden surpnses tn connection with all things of a secret nature 


Note —Unless there is some */ro«g aspect between Uranus and one 
ot the nearer planets, it is not likely to exercise much mSuence whatever 
,its position 



CHAPTER Xll 


The HousE.PosiTioN of the Planet NEPTUNE. 

The rermrVs upon the planet Neptune on p. 14 of Chapter 11. 
should be ^\ell studied before giving any attention to the meaning of its 
house position as here briefly outlined The opening paragraph of 
Chapter XI. should also be read in this connection. Much less is known 
about the nature of Neptune than of Uranus, and the following observa 
tions should therefore be regarded as someubat tentative, and taken 
as hints rather than deflmte pronouncements. 

jgQ Neptune in the First House at the time of your birth, wdl 
affect your life m an uncommon manner. You will be medium- 
istic and romantic, or psychically inclined. Some \ ery strange experi¬ 
ences and also some remarkable episodes will occur m your life. It is 
only the very feu who cAn m any nay respond to the subtle spiritual 
Mbrations of the planet Neptune, and they are the souls that live the 
purest lives. You must be on your guard against hypnotic suggestion, 
and should be very choice in your associates and acquaintances You 
will in all probability, have some very remarkable dreams, which you 
should endeavour to remember You will not escape being very 
mediumistic at times 

Neptune in the Second House will give you strange 
experiences unth regard to financial affairs. It may give you 
some ability to sing or study music, and will incline your thoughts to the 
mystical side of life. It wU, however, be a weak influence unless 
powerfully aspected by other planets, especially the luminaries. It gives 
some taste for the weird and eene. 

Neptune in the Third House will cause strange events m 
your family history; one of your relatives, probably a brother or 
sister, will be of a strange and uncommon character. Your mmd will be 


See 


on page 



60 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVm 


subject to peculiar fancies or inspirations; remarkable experiences may 
come to you while tra\elhng It would be well to act %ery discreetly 
with regard to correspondence Strive to develope a positive attitude of 
mind, and do not neglect to cultivate the scientihc as well as the artistic 
side of your mind 

Neptune in the roURTii House will bring peculiar episodes 

at the clo<e of life It may aOect domestic affairs by bringing 
uncommon occurrences, or you may have family ties of an exceptional 
character This position tends to render you mediumistic. Take note of 
the psychic conditions of the houses in which you may be called upon to 
li%e 


Neptune in the Fifth House warns you agamsr strange 
magnetisms It may bring you peculiar children, or very strange 
pleasures either mystical or otherwise Strive to cultivate the spintual 
side of your nature, and remember that the purely sensuous appreciation 
of beauty also has its dangers. 

^gg Neptune in the Sixth House threatens you with uncommon 
ailments. You are liable to catcb complaints from others and 
suffer through impure magnetism You are liable to suder from the 
fraudulent action of servants or infenors 


136 Seventh House denotes strange relationships 

with the opposite sex, and a very peculiar or uncommon marriage 
Beware of being too easily swayed by others, and always see that your 
intellect approve the choice of your feelings 


^g^ Neptune in the Eighth House does not appear to be an 
important influence, and nothing definite is known concerning iL 
It has probably some conneetton with the state of consciousness c nn? 
sleep ^ 

^gg Neptune in the Ninth House promises very remar ^ 
dreams and sometimes visions, and a mystical outlook on 


Neptune in the Tenth House seems to produce pecu^ 
• a\ocations, and uncommon pursuits. It may bnng unexpec^^ 
bonoors or discredits. 


See note OB page Cl 



NEPTUNE IN THE TWELVE HOUSES 


61 


Neptune inthe Eleventh House denotes strange fnend'^hips 
and very peculiar associations It inclines to clear vision, or 
clairvoyance. 

Neptune in the Twelfth House denotes powerful enemies, 
and much treachery through seeming friendship. It gives psychic 
tendencies. 


Note—U nless there is some s/ro«g aspect between Neptune and 
one of the nearer planets, it is not likely to exercise much influence 
whatever its position 



$ 2^^1ndivtduaUfy 
CHAPTER XIII. 
iRDrvrouAL Characteristics. 

The Indi^dnal Characteristics are symbolised by the position of 
THE Sun. The Sun is the source of the “vital force" m the Solar 
System, and Is specialised in the Sign through which its rays are passing 
month by month, this force or mdnence being again modified by the 
solar aspects, and, in a somewhat lesser degree by the other planetary 
positions also. Any Aspects to theSun (pars 202 to 225) should therefore 
be considered, jointly with its sign position, under this head, unless 
the Rising Sign happens to be Leo, m which case the solar aspects 
will already have received consideration m Section 1 under the beading of 
Aspects to the Ruler. 

The Sun is the significator of the individuality, the fixed basis of the 
nature, and its position has an important modifying influence upon the 
type of character indicated by the rising sign. In the personality the 
Sun chiefly rules the vital force. 

A full description of the Individual Characteristics has already been 
published in Aairology for All, page's 13 to 47, and the following there¬ 
fore must be looked upon only as abbreviated descriptions condensed 
within the limits suitable to our present purpose 

142 Aries. The “ vital principle " of the Sun’s ray in this 

Sign endowed you with a fiery, untameable and aspiring spirit 
It ^ves a strong character, makiog you energetic, enthusiastic, somewhat 
wilful and at bmes impulsive and rash. You are independent, fond of 
liberty and responsibility ".you loveapprox’al, and desire to be appreciated, • 
working well under encouragement, but you will refuse to be over driven. 
You are naturally very magnanimous, also generons and loyal to all your 
friends. You are idealistic, intuitive and prophetic, at times liable to go 
to extremes and over-estimate: but jmu will be a bom pioneer, possessing 
' 6a 



INDIVIDUAL CHARACTERISTICS 


63 


splendid foresight, rapid perceptive judgment, loyalty, vigour and heroism, 
and will always delight in leading others 
143 Taurus The **vital principle” of the Sun’s ray m 

this sign will make you determined, persistent, patient and 
enduring, executive, practical, rather conservative, and at times a little 
dogmatic and obstinate There is a tendency for you to become more 
authontative, quiet, reserved, firm and inflexible as your life advances 
Beneath all your firmness will be a warm heart, and you wll ever be 
well disposed and generously minded Your internal character will be 
rather dignified, cautious and careful, but although you will be slow in 
coming to decision, your judgment will be practical and solid Internally 
the negative principle will be well developed, making you affectionate, 
kind and sympathetic. , ^ 

Sun in Gemini The vitalising principle of the solar rays in 
this sign will make you quickwitted mentally impulsive, and 
inclined ,t o be.i mperative You will be i ntellect ual, interested in 
literature, science or art, and also somewhatambitious and aspiring You 
should cultivate concentration if you would become clever, for you have 
latent _^ ility in connection with literature or public speaking There 
will be restlessness in your internal character, which will lead to 
nervousness and ^nitability. and when not guarded against there will be 
a tendency for you to become volatile, indecisive and unreliable It will 
be well for your comfort and happiness in life, if you Jeam to avoid 
worry and restlessness A study of thought control would enable you to 
turn much of your intellectual ability to good account 

Sun in Cancer The “vital principle of the Sun’s ray 
passing through this sign will make you fond of your home and 
family, inclined to make strong ties, with sensitive feelings regarding 
them- You will beMather retinng, shy and reserved, and not much 
inclined to push yourself forward This position will make you love the 
piemones oLthe.past, antiquities, ancient customs, and incline you to 
tOTnante You will btYtcononucal jjsisvsttnt, able to hold on 

where others lacking your tenacity would let go Any over sensiti\eness 
will mjure you keeping you back in life also any extremes ahere sensa 
tion 15 concerned will be injunous to you in many u-ays. Ecdeaiour to 
distinguish between your own and the feelings of ofliers 

Sun in Leo The “ vital pnnciple of the solar force passing 
through this sign will make you generous, uarm hearted and will 



G4 


Tlir KFY TO YOUR OttK VATIVm 


pve yott a loving natare. You will have deep emotions and a firm willi 
but when uncontrolled, the d^ires will be impulsive and the feelings 
easily afTccted You should try and strengthen >our mil and live m the 
higher side of your nature if you would realise its nobility and mag¬ 
nanimity. You will be internally generous, sincere, earnest, persevering 
and much inclined to self perfection This sign will give you affection, 
unselfishness, ambition, pride and love of poner Its dangers are 
cowardice, prevarication, love of pomp and show and a hasty temper 
You are a lover of justice, also of the natural pleasures of life, but should 
avoid all excess of feeling and emotion 

Sun IN Virgo The “vital principle” of the Sun’s ray passing 
through this sign will give you an industrious character, and 
make you practical, philosophical, constructive and discriminative It 
will endow you with criticism, self protection, caution, diplomacy and 
ingenuity, but there witl be much sensitiveness in your nature, a 
retiring, quiet and thoughtful attitude resulting The more you encourage 
discrimination, the wiser you will become, for yonr inherent quality is 
discniAination, but you should avoid too much reserve or indecisiveness, 
or you may find yourself becoming too cold and unsympathetic on the 
one hand, or too vacillating on the other You are active and business 
like m character, iDcImed to be fully alne to your own interests, and 
will know just how far it wiU be wise to exert yourself along practical 
Imes. 

Sun IN Libra The “vital’or solar influence m this sign denotes 
balance, justice, equilibnum, impartiality Your internal nature 
will be just, and inwardly you will love harmony and order This 
position gives you the power to compare, and thus enables you to give 
an all round and dispassionate judgment, yet makes you very sensitive as 
well, for you feel all the surroonduig vibrations very keenly But you 
have a kind and amiable nature, are always courteous and obliguig, and 
your inner character will be equable, pure, perceptive, and docile, ever 
seeking to learn from what you observe As your intuition expands with 
increasei parity o5 \i3e, your vfih grows stronger anS you wii^ ^earn much 
through compansim, through perception, and through your sensitive 
feelings 

Sun in Scorpio This is a fixed and watery sign, and the 
“ vital pnnciple ” of the Solar mfluence passing through this 
sign will make yon a firm and powerful character, arising from the silent 



INDIVIDUAL CHARACTERISTICS 65 

fora wilhin, eivioB you also oocoU loamoss You possess maBnotio 
power, criUcal perception and ability to judge keenly, but when not fully 
under control your character will be lather eiactmg, jealous and proud. 
You wiU have strong likes and dishkes, and can be very reserved and" 
dignified, though when vexed you are apt to be sharp and sarcastic if not 
actually cruel You will, however, have much self control, determinahon, 
tenacity and secretiveness, and as life advances there will come a stronger 
desire to investigate the occult and mystical Avoid pride, cultivate 
sympathy, and endeavour to see things from others’ standpoints as well 
as your own 

160. Sagittarius The “vital principle ” of the Sun’s ray 

passing through this sign at your birth denotes that you are 
intuitive, prophetic, self reliant, bright, hopeful and happy m disposition, 
though somewhat restless and over active, and at times far too candid, 
out spoken and assertive If you are not careful you will say and express 
more than is wise In your internal nature you have a religious spint 
and you naturally possess much real deiotion and affection You will be 
very frank, honest, generous and loyal to those to whom you are attached, 
and will ever seek to become philosophical, but you should add some 
scientific knowledge as a solid basis to all your thoughts and actions 

Sov IN Capricorn The "vital principle” of the Sun’s ray 
passing through this sign will make you an ambitious, persistent 
industrious, and persevering character, posses u g mdependei ce, self> 
reliance, determination, thnft and prudence, with the abiiit} tc acquire 
wealth and possessions Your character will tend to become more patient 
enduring and economical, you wiU respect age and ancient customs, 
possess a strong individuality, and have a love of the mystical This 
sign will increase your ideality, and give yon a love of beauty. It -will 
also give you’ a love of justice, chastity and perfection, and you will 
surely succeed through your sterling traits of character This sign gives 
you the ability and power to undertake responsibilities, and also tends to 
steady the whole character, and make it trustworthy and reliable 

Sun in Aquarius The “vital principle operating through 
this sign will make you patient, cautious, faithful and determined, 
intuitive and refined There is much in this sign that cannot be lived 
until the mind is withdraviTi from the animal conditions, it being one of 
the distinctly human signs yet even those who are unable to live up to 
It fully, intuitively feel that there is a lofty standard to be reached You 



66 THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 

possess 3 kmd, buimne, honest, quiet and eqmble nnture, and as life 
ad%’ances wU become a good reader of character and judge of human 
nature, as >oa wiU be dispassionate in your judgment, since emotion will 
not often sway you. You can easily make yourself at home with 
strangers. 

Sun in Pisces The “vital pnnciple ’* of the Sun's ray passing 

through this sign tends to make ya\i trustful, honest and humane, 
ha\nng much sympathy in your nature especially for dumb animals. You 
feel deeply, and also \ery keenly, though your emotions may be %ery 
rarely expressed, moreover you have a desire to be at peace with all. 
You possess but little ambition, and are rather lacking in self reliance; a 
little more will and assertiveness should be shown at times This sign 
somewhat inclines you tov.'ards mediumship, but makes you sociable, 
good humoured, sincere and inclined to be religious Being very 
sympathetic you will always delight in hospitable and social undertakings. 
You will do well not to pay undue attention to details. 



5 S*-~-PenonaU{y» 


CHAPTER XIV. 

Personal Characteristics. 

The personal characteristics are symbolised by the position of the 
Moon in each of the twelve signs. It is the ' sensitive spot,' so to speak, 
of the horoscope. It is the magnetic vortex into which are collected the 
various influences of the planets, and there changed into personal 
cliaracUrisiics. 

A fall description of these characteristics will be found In Aslrology 
for All, pp. 63 to 70. Those here given are more or less condensed. 
It should always be remembered that tbe aspects formed by the Moon 
are quite as important as her sign*positiOD. if not more so. Tbe lunar 
aspects will be given in due coarse; an aspect to the Moon accentuates, 
‘neutralises, or modifies, the tendencies shown by the sign>position, 
according to the nature of the aspect. Any Aspects to the Moon (pars. 
226 to 246) should therefore be considered, jointly with its sign* and house* 
position, under this head ; unless the Rising Sign happens to be Cancer, 
in which case the lunar aspects will already have received consideration in 
Section 1 under the heading of Aspects to the Ruler. 

The Moon is tbe significator of tbe personality and of the more 
changeable and fluctuating moods and feelings. It has some influence 
upon the bodily form and appearance. It somewhat modifies the indica¬ 
tions of the rising sign, especially to all matters that are naturally ruled 
by the Moon. 

164 Aries. This will give your personal character a 

martial and rather aggressive tendency. It will mcrease your 
personal independence and make you very self-reliant, rebelling against 
authority, and wishing to lead or ccmtrol and be at the head of things. 

It will give you a keen intellectual catore, making you sharp, shrewd and 
*7 



68 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATrYTTY 


observant You will be aspiring, very assertive, and folly coasaous of 
your own ability but npless you cultivate control, wll be irritable and 
hasty m temper, insisting npon having your own way at all costs It 
•will be well for you to study tolerance and to avoid over doing things 
also to gnard against impulsive speech and hasty action 

Moon is Taurus This indicates a reserved, persistent aod 
determined personality, tt will give you some amount of ambition, 
acquisitiveness, and the ability to persevere in spite of obstacles, and a 
desire to nphold ancient customs. The hfoon is exalted in the sign 
Taurus and greatly increases the love nature, giv*ing you patience, and 
endurance, and also, if not controlled, some pride But the virtues of this 
posibon are firmness, stahility, and generosity You will be very intnitive, 
and also feel very deeply at times. There will be a tendency for you to 
be firm and somewhat obstinate, bnt your disposition will be good, land 
and soaable. 

166 Gemini This will considerably strengthen your 

intellect, giving you a love erf books and saentific or bterasy 
pursuits, and thus yon may greatly improve your personal character It 
will incline you to be active in mind and body, and will also sharpen 
your wits, giving you the ability to follow more than coe occupation at a 
tune and also to adapt yourself to new surroundmgs. You should avoid 
going to extremes, however, for at times you may be unpolstvely 
generous, while at others you may be parsimonious and thizs miss 
oppoitnnibes. If you avoid superficiality, you may become very clever, 
having both insight and capacity This posibon w-il] cause you to have 
doal experiences in the course of your life. 

^g^ Moos w» Cancer. This denotes a personality much attached 
to home life and family bes. This posibon of the Moon will 
much mcrease the emobonal nature, making you extremely sensitive. It 
will expand your sympathies and accentuate all your feelings. You will 
possess a lively imaginabon, bnt you should avoid becoming fanafuL 
Your memory will be very good if cmlbvated, and towards the close of 
■yotn -ytra -wi!i betomfc v&xith. isAestsAed vn ^isyslijc TMAters. Vw. tJsa 

to be appreciated, and {eel things that are said of you very keenly Yon 
will be fond of change, yet inclined to be careful and economical. Thu 
posibon gives a great deal of recepbvity, therefore it is essential that 
you rmx and associate only with pure minded and cheerful persons, or 
yon may find yourself liable to ** moods often undesirable ones. 



68 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


observant You will be aspmng, very assertive, and fully conscious of 
your own ability but upless you cultivate control, will be imtable and 
hasty in temper, insisting upon having your own way at all costs It 
will be well for you to study tolerance and to avoid over doing things 
also to guard against impulsive speech and hasty action 

165 Taurus This indicates a reserved, persistent, and 
determined personality, it will give you some amount of ambition, 

acquisitiveness, and the ability to persevere in spite of obstacles and a 
desire to uphold ancient customs. The Moon is exalted in the sign 
Taurus and greatly increases the love nature, gn ing you patience, and 
endurance, and also, if not controlled, some pride Butthevirtnes of this 
position are firmness, stability, and generosity You will be very intuitive, 
and also feel very deeply at times There will be a tendency for you to 
be firm and somewhat obstinate, but your disposition will be good, kind 
and sociable 

166 Gemini This will considerably strengthen your 
intellect, giving you a love of books and scientific or literary 

pursuits, and thus you may greatly improve your personal character It 
will incline you to be active m mind and body, and will also sharpen 
your wits, giving you the ability to follow more than one occupation at a 
time and also to adapt yourself to new surroundings You should avoid 
going to extremes, however, for at tunes you may be impulsively 
generous, while at others you may be parsimonious and thus miss 
opportunities If you avoid superficiality, you may become very clever, 
having both insight and capacity This position will cause you to have 
dual experiences in the course of your life 

Moon in Cancer This denotes a personality much attached 
to home life and family ties This position of the Moon will 
much increase the emobonal nature, making you extremely sensitive It 
will expand your sympathies and accentuate all your feelings. You will 
possess a lively imagination, but you should avoid becommg fanafuL 
Your memory will be very good if cultivated, and towards the close of 
yom hie you will become mndi mterested in psyeSnc matters You like 
to be appreciated, and feel things that are said of you very keenly You 
will be fond of change, yet inclined to be careful and economical This 
position gives a great deal of receptivity, therefore it is essential that 
you mix and associate only with pure minded and cheerful persons, or 
you may find yourself liable to " moods, often undesirable ones 



TERSOKAt. CHARACTERISTICS 


6^ 


168 Leo. The influence of this position on your persona] 

character, is such as to lift you upward in life, and make you 
food of responsibil ity and_m anagement« You will be nobly ambitious, 
veiy^persevering, warm-hearted,Jijnd, aflMtionate, generous, honourable, 
and v^^straightforward in all your dealings, always gwf^mng candour 
to being secretive and insincere. You have a generous love nature, and 
will be faithful in all your affections, but are rather susceptible in affairs 
of the heart. You possess a poetical soul, and love music, the fine arts, 
and alI.,.^ngs^h3rmonious. You are intuitive and your ima ginati on is 
very fe rtile and will be helpful to you. If once^ pride and self-will have 
been overcome, you w ill have few failings. " 

150 Virgo. This gives you good intellectual powers and 

the capaaty t o follow in t ellectual p ursuits; it also gives you a 
good_inemory, enabling you to leam readily. It tends to make you 
trustworthy in all yt^ur undertakings for others. This very useful 
position will make you quiet, easy-going, and not over ambitious: although 
you will be somewhat ^r^cal ond.keeq in business matters. Your 
personality will be humane and refined, not over-assertive, eager tojollow 
hygieiuc,studies, and to adopt all practical measures for improvement. 
You may become very discriminative as life advances; for this is the 
quality yon are to realise, when you have passed through sufficient 
experience. 

Moon in Libra. This position confers upon you personally a 
refined character. It will make you love ease and pleasure, the 
arts, and social gatherings. You will always be kindly, genial, affable, 
and courteous, and ivill try to preserveahappy disposition. You will like 
approval, and life will be sweet to you when yon are appreciated, but not 
so when you remain unnoticed. You will be just as well as generous, and 
lo\e order and refinement. You ha\e good powers of imitation and 
perception, and lo\e of comparison. Ahvays endeavour to be even- 
V, -rU. inJi hst -w-ih ‘ro -carry 
comparison too far, and activity may at times be beneficial. You have 
some artistic tastes. * 

161 Scorpio. This will make you firm, determined, self- 

reh^ant; well able to stand alone m life, and to fight your oira 
^ttles.. .«t times ^ou will be'-abrupt or too plain sp^«,°so t^t^ou 
should alway;:^ he careful in speech not to wound others, as whenever you 
are annoyed your words are apt to be sharp and sometimes unkind. I 



PLKSO'IAL CHARACTERISTICS 71 

tion This position inclines you personally to science, combined with 
philosoph} and literoiy pursuits You are \erj sensitive to the mental 
conditions of other persons. In connection with associations and 
societies you i\ould do well 

165 IN Pisces This will g«e you a quiet, retiring, and at 

times irresolute personality. You must therefore try not to be 
easily discouraged, for jou will meet with obstacles in life, and they 
should tend to make >ou less negati\e and receptive You will have a 
tendency to be mediumistic and silently emotional, and you may become 
very psychic and too easily influenced Avoid depression, and cultivate 
all the hope you can, never fearing that you may grow too decisive; 
firmness and independence are good for you, as you will not abuse them. 
Yon will love all that has to do with feeling and hospitality, and if you 
try to analyse your own impressions you will often know the conditions 
of those around ;>ou You will be fond of mystical subjects, and the 
romantic and emotional side of life 



THE UOOH IN THE HOUSES 


73 


1 his IS not a good position for constancy or concentration, except when 
in a fixed sign, tbe mind being too changeable and fond of activity. It 
gi\*es you a loxt of curiosities and a liking for many uncommon pursuits, 
wntb an aptitude for living by >*our a\its even, if necessary You have a 
love of knowledge, much curiosity, andtheability totake upmanj subjects 
You are fond of your relatives and all matters to do with brethren and 
sisters will have prominence in your life Your mind at times will be 
full of desire, and anything monotonous will easil> tire you. Intellectual 
pursuits will provade the best vehicle for your energies 

The Moon in the Fourth House at the time of your birth 
IS important, and it will cause vou to be far more active, and 
your life* more eventful, at the close than at the beginning At the close 
of life you will incline toward mysticism and occult things, taking a very 
deep interest in alt psychic matters, your mind growing more receptive, 
and probably at times rather medmmistic. It will cause many changes, 
and wnW break or make ties when you least desire it It tends towards 
increased economy in domestic affairs and interest in home life You 
will probably inhent or benefit boancially through this position 
170 Moon in the Fifth House shows that you will gam by 
experiences connected with pleasure or sensation, and out of 
sensational matters, probably directly connected with tbe feelings, will 
come on exceptional experience probably needed to free you from tbe 
meshes of the senses You will be fortunate in connection with schools, 
or matters to do with children, amusement, etc, and at times with all 
matters connected with speculative affairs It makes you very ardent in 
all matters of the heart, for you put much feeling into all that gives 
pleasure to yourself and others there is however a tendency to be fickle 
in love affairs and you will come m contact with those who are not so 
constant in their affections It will bring you much romance 


The Moon in the Sixth House shows that your chief 
experience will come through psychic things. You are ^u« 
sBvai-i’.v? Jin,v^DBcial work committed to.vour chaiye., but 

do better under the guidance of a stronger influence than your 
own It will keep you back in life, and wiU prevent you from being| 
fully appreciated At times you are irresolute and wavering, and will 
lose opportunities m consequence. Your health will suffer through this 


position and* fail_y ou when requir^ probably through overwork or 
worry, as this will affect the mind and react ow the bods You will 



CHAPTER XV. 


The li!ooN*s House-Positios. 

The House Position of the Moon is most importnnt la eTer7 
horoscope, quite apart from its tnSaence upon the personal characteristics 
as indicated hy its Sign posnon already described. It shows the direction 
which those activities indicated by the personal disposition are likely to 
take. The following paragraphs give a description of the Moon’s 
isflnence in each of the twelve houses, 
jgg The Moov ls the Ascemdamt at your birth shows a love 
fame, activity and change. You will seek to be at the head 
things mentally, or take a promiaeot part in all that coocerss yon. It 
makes jou >er7 ambitious, aspinng, and also mgemoas, fond of planning 
and taking up ongioal and novel ventures. It gives you an imaginative 
brain, lovug change, novelty and adventure This position brings popu 
lanty, bnt also opposition and liabihty to scandal through and from infenors 
and the public. It will bang yon into some fame, or public recognition 
through your own merit or ability You will do well with common things, 
snch as novelties and public commodities or those things that appeal to 
the public taste and fancy 

The Moon is the Second Hodse of yournativity will cause 
tmance to fluctuate. Success in life will come tbrou^ dealing 
in pubbc commodities, or in connection with liquids, or concerns where 
there IS a quick and rapid turnover It generally indicates receptivity 
where money is concerned, and the public mind is generally felt in regard 
to flnancial nrovemenls. All matters public or commercial should b* 
attractive to you, and yon are fitted to bold publicoSce. It promises 
success through travd, but your fortunes axe liable to many changes, 
therefore your efforts should be directed to a fluctuating business or a 
profession m which water or movement plays a prommeni part. Your 
mind IS ingenious, active, and full of imaginatioo or ro m a n ce. 

The Moon isTHETlttRD Hodse of your nauvity will bnog 
you many adventures in hfe^ with constant change and travelling 
7» 


168 


a. 2, 



THE MOON IN THE HOUSES 73 

Tins isnotagocxl position for constancy or concentration, except when 
in a fixed sign, the mind being too changeable and fond of activity It 
gncs jou a lox’c of curiosities and a liking for nnny uncommon pursuits, 
with an aptitude for living by your wits even, if necessary You have a 
love of knowledge, much curiosity, andtheability to take up many subjects 
You are fond of your relatives, and all matters to do with brethren and 
sisters w ill have prominence in your life Your mind at times will be 
full of desire, and anything monotonous mil easily tire you Intellectual 
pursuits will provide the best vehicle for your energies 
jgg The Moov in the Fourth House at the time of your birth 
IS important, and it will cause you to be far more active, and 
your life more eventful, at the close than at the beginning At the close 
of life you will incline toward mysticism and occult things, taking a very 
deep interest in all psychic matters, your mind growing more receptive, 
and probably at times rather mediumistic It will cause many changes, 
and will break or make ties when you least desire it It tends towards 
increased economy m domestic affairs and interest in home life You 
will probably inherit or benefit ftoaocially through this position 

The Moon in the Fifth House shows that you will gam by 
experiences connected with pleasure or sensation, and out of 
sensational matters, probably directly connected with the feelings, will 
come an exceptional experience probably needed to free you from the 
meshes of the senses You will be fortunate m connection with schools, 
or matters to do with children, amusement, etc, and at times with all 
matters connected with speculative affairs It makes you very ardent in 
all matters of the heart for you put much feeling into all that gives 
pleasure to yourself and others, there is however a tendency to be fickle 
in love affairs and you will come in contact with those who are not so 
constant m their affections It will bring you much romance 

TiiL Moon in thc Sixth Housf shows that your chief 
experience will come through psychic things You are ^ust J 
wnrtb ij ■n.carj.'>t»ng. out any special work committed to your charge., biw 
you can do better under the guidance of a stronger influence than yo^ 
own It will keep you back in life and wU prevent you from 
fully appreciated At times you are irresolute and wavering, andX,j|* 
lose opportunities in consequence Your health will suffer througVjIji^ 
position and ■> fail ^ _oo v^en requir^ probably through over^j^ 
worry, as this will affect the mind and react on the body 



THE MOON IN THE HOUSES 75 

maintain, there being liability to change It arp-akens all latent ambition 
and stimulates business instincts You will not be entirely happy unless 
you hold a prominent position in whatever sphere you move, therefore you 
will surely rise in life This position nearly always brings fame, some 
times notoriety , therefore you should guard against scandal, slander and 
treachery, using care in dealings with mfenors or those jealous of your 
position 

The Moon in the Eleventh House of your nativity tends 
^ * to bring jou several fnends and acquaintances, some reliable 
and^others quite the reverse You will gam through soaeties,associations I- 
and through utilitarian affairs You wU be^ciable and easy to under 
stand and attract You have very strong fancies and desires, losing the 
occult and mystical, possessing ability for astrology, and kindred subjects 
If you can control your senses you will become an excellent judge of 
character , therefore try to study and cultivate this useful art It givesa 
refined influence to the nativity, being very favourable for receptivity to 
the conditions of others, also bringing help aad favours from the public 
generally. 

The Moon in the Twelfth House at the time of jour birth 
' will bring many secret affairs into jour life, mclinmg you towards 
mediumship and psychic phenomena You will be drawn into romance, 
or be very strongly influenced by it, and all that is weird and mjstical 
will possess fascination for you Be always guarded against false 
accusation and treachery, or anything that may cause you to run the nsk 
of losing your liberty, for you will make some enemies dunng the course 
of your life You will take some long voyages when directions indicate 
or favour them It is not a favourable position for the Moon, except for 
things that do not give prominence to your personality 



4 

CHAPTCR KVl 
MEVTAt QUAUPICATJOSS. 


The position of the planet MrPCLR\ in each horoscope denotes the 
mind and hence the mental qualifications. This position is modified 
aspects, more especially any aspect to the Moon, ahich affects 
lucidity and clearness of the capaaty for mental expression. Fortl 
since htercnry ts also related to the nervous system, and the Moon to the 
brain in a general sense, good or bad aspects between these two planets 
will have a bearing upon the general nm*ous condition, svbether serene 
and well regulated, or hypersensitive, fidgetty, imtable, etc,* 

Any Aspects to Mercury (pars. 247 to 2fi4) should therefore be 
considered, jointly with its sign and bouse positios, under this bead, 
unless the Rising Sign happens to be Virgo orGexmnj, m which case the 
said aspects will already have received consideration in Section 1 cnder 
the heading of Aspects to the Ruler 


178 Aries. Your mental faculties will be quickened 

You will be quick to perceive and observ'e, poissessing a fertile 
and lovenbve brain, good at onginating designs and quick in all mental 
work. You have active mental combabveness, and your mind will 
always be alert and aspinng Avoid anxiety and mental excitement, for 
this will result m brain trouble, neuralgia, or severe headaches. You can 
appreciate all intellectual pursuits, and respect persons who are mentally 
clever btudy moderation in expression, concentration and coatmuity of 


ideas. If y*ou can do this your success is assured, for you have the 
ability to lead mentally, and most sieople wiU look up to you, believing m 
your intelligence. \ 

Merctjrv IV TacROS indicates that you are slow to make np 
your mind, but tha\ it is immovable when once it is made up 

* Urxatu bti some inSaeacf ee the aervoex •yttea tni xSicfioQi be weea 
Uraan* »ad Mercury (more exp^elly d>e xjure eip«el) are jeneraJly *..eompaii ed 
fay a dlitarbed and aoaewhar fayiYricaJ aervoai leaperaaent 


? 



MENTAL QUALIFICATIONS 


77 


You can, however, exercise much pabenc* and perseverance m all mental 
pursuits, and it mates you disposed to be sociable, friendly and affectionate 
It also inclines you towards religion, and gives you a taste for art, music 
or i>oetry You can exercise much endurance m all you undertake 
mentally, and I judge that you possess good memory This position of 
Mercury in a fixed sign, make you just, constant, firm, industrious, 
strict, sincere, and uncompromising, but you must guard against a danger 
of becoming mentally obstmate 

Mercury in (iEMINi This will bring to the front all 
“mercurial affairs, giving yon the ability to write, and study 
You would however learn more by travelling, than by studying or reading, 
for Mercury in Gemini is rather against concentration, the mind having 
a difficulty to fix itself on one subject at a bme, therefore, travel is the 
best means for the expansion of yxiur mind Mentally, you will be 
variable, and able to engage in two disbnet pursuits or studies, which 
adds considerably to your versatility Your mind is active and alert, and 
you could become a good conversationalist, speaker, or entertainer, having 
a ready wit and a more or less dexterous facility of expression 

Mercury IN Cancer will cause you to be active and somewhat 
' changeable You will also be very in genious , and inquisitive, 
grasping many subjects, and taking a wide, comprehensive vie w of things. 
Cultivate ^ur memory, and make your mind strong, and alert You will 
act wisely to investigate occult subjects, as you could easily become psychic 
ora “true dreamer, and manifest occult gifts of some kind. You possess 
mtuibon tact, talent and although ambitious, you tend to draw friends 
from thoM who rank l ower than yourself, and sometimes also from 
persons engaged m investigating mystical subjects. You are fond of the 
water and may gam through travelling by it j 

Mercury in Leo This posihon considerably strengthens the 
rational mind it makes you very strong and posihve, yet 

kind hearted, generous and at tunes easy going/ This position will 
enable you to hold some post of responsibility, gifing you the ability to 
manage and control others You have keen Appreciation of mental 
harmony, while there is a wisdom possessed by wu that comes from the 
heart more than from the head so that this pos/jon makes jon mentally 
intuitive You should exercise care to avoid tMtx work, or brain fag, as 
you are inclined to be too thorougb and towdetemuned where mental 
work IS concerned You would however, nje advan 



78 


THE KEY TO TODB OWJ, SATIVITY 


tageoosly in parsnits connected with the conmand, control, or management 
of others. You ha% e the aatocratic type of micd. 

Mercury is Virgo Yonr mmdTnU be active andcomp^e* 
hensi%e. Yoa learn readily and Io\e saentific m% estigation; 
you have a \ ery good memory, and can turn all year studies to good 
account. Yon vrould be pmctical in any capacity, bat yoa are apt to 
have too many things on hand atabme. This position is somewhat 
opposed to public success, although much may be done quietly in a sphere 
where yon have cot to take the lead. teachmg, literary work, book 
keeping, agenaes, etc., would be successful pursuits for joj- mind. If 
you can avoid being drawn to a lower mental lev cl by others, you wiH 
attam to real ability and nse through merit as liie advances. 

^g^ MepcCRV Ih Libra makes your mind well balancedandreSned, 
and indicates that >ou have ability for reading, wnting and study, 
and an eloquent tongue. It favours studying wttn others, but does not 
indicate great depth or much staying power, but it isgood for comparison 
and judgment, though ooless the other planets denote energy, there is sot 
much inclination to u-ork or «tt.dy hard witn the mind. Your nusd is 
afiable, imitasve,'artistic, neat and orderly, and your disposition humane, 
just and persuasive Your intuioon is good, and }on appreciate art 
Yoa have poetical ability, and with suitable training woidd become 
piufioest in oratory or lilerature. 

185 Scorpio will locmie you to be somewhat positive, 

obstinate and difncult to conviuce. But you may be moved to 
much enthmiasm by any cause you espouse, and to great resentment or 
hatred by a real or fancied wTong You are shrewd and active la mind, 
somewhat sarcastic, and may have a ready flow of language. You love 
secrecy, and will never be ^ort of tact and diplomacy, as jou p osses a 
miTifl capable of understanding mysteries. This position will also give 
yon some tnamtal dexterity, and make you ingenious and fertile of 
resource, with the ability to invent or discover You could pursue a tram 
of thought with much ccncentation. 

^gg Mercury IS SAcrTTAEitTS. This wiiJ give you a jas^ straigir* 
forward, and generous wund. In rdigioa or philosophy vou 
will be very earnest, although at tunes liable to change. Vou will be 
able to study more than one subject at a time, but will not possess much 
coutmuity. Religioa, philosophy and saence will always interest you. 
and y o u love reading or\ writing on all deep and thoughtful subjects 



MENTAL QUAUFICATIONS 


79 


When you speak it is to the point, and your words will often bear 
prophetic significance This position of Mercury gives diplomacy, but 
your tact would be more useful in any subordinate position in life than 
where you had full responsibility * 

Mercurv in Capricorn will make your mind subtle and 
cautious, diplomatic and profound This position makes the 
mind really clever, and gives you the power to keep your own counsel and 
use tact in argument It ^vlll bring you honour and recognition in all 
mental pursuits You iyiII rise in life through ambition, aided by tact 
and resourcefulness, and you need never fear to undertake responsibility 
and organisation You have a systematic and orderly mind, enabling 
you to work methodically You will be thorough mall your mental work 
You will ha\e the ability to study astroIog> and kindred subjects. It 
will alw-ays be to your adrantage to cultn-ate straightforwardness m 
thought 

Mercury in Aquarius adds to the strength of your intellect, 
gi\nng you a good memory, and a strong and comprehensive 
mmd It increases any tendency to mental culture or science, literature or 
religion, but you are inclined to have fixed opinions, being averse to 
change, and not very easily influenced You are capable of clear mental 
work, can be original and with good education could do great things 
Mercury is very strong in this sign, gi>nng a power of concentration 
which may be beneficially cultivated It also strengthens the intuition 
and gives some ability to study and judge human nature You can 
entertain others, and would have much soaal success if you gave your 
mind to the entertaining or the instruction of others 


189 Mercury in Pisces Your m.nd will be very receptive, 
inclined to be somewhat mediumistic, able to sense things/ 
without being able to gi; e an explanation as to how the knowledge wa^ 
obtained, in fact a mind that can act diplomatically, quietly and withaj^^ 
a systematic manner This is a position which giv es ability for soeak/ 
singing or writing, but the common and everyday affairs of I,fe 

moreadv’antageoustoj'outhantnepeculiaroruncommon Therei^I 

of spiritualism and mysticism, and the mmd is able to dip mt * T® 
mysteries, and discover some of the secrets of the soul 
however, It times, a tendency, to be rather too indifferent tv 
not sufi.civntly active m mmd You should guard if 
superficialities. gam/t mental 



CHAPTER XVn 


^ IfEBcuRV s House Posmov 

Mercury is tiie chief ruler of the nerv'ous system and of the 
intellect Its posihoQ by sign (Chap. XVI) indicates the type of 
mteilect, while its position by house, now to be described, shows the 
dlrectioo m which the intellect wiU seek expression, or in other n’ords the 
most suitable direction in which to turn for healthy and benehaal mental 
exercise. 

Mercury ik the First House. This will accentuate the 
mental characteristics, making you qnick mtted, sharp and keen, 
gifted ra wntiog and in sTxakmg, quick at retort and repartee, and also 
liable to a little exaggeratioa at times, and to some sarcasm It will 
make you mentally enthusiastic, and when you are under the influence of 
much feeling, you will be rather exatahle. You ate clerer and possess a 
subtle wit, and an excellent power of adaptability to arcomstanees, hut 
yon should aiuid restlessness and inquisibreaess and exerase control 
over your thoi.Ehts. This influence will tend to make you a prolific 
writer, with a sery fertile mird that 15 quite onginal anH inventiie 

Mercury iv the Secosd House. This is favourable for 
gaining by correspondence, letters and writing also for floanoal 
success in literary pursuits, and ra professional and artistic aflairs generally 
Although a good position for \ferctiry on the whole, and when taaler 
favourable directions you would be successful as regards travel and »hcrt 
jcomeys, it is on the other hand not very fa\onrabIe when affiicted. 
You have mental abilities for finance and would gam either by trading, 
or through scientific pursuits, lect ur e s, etc. But you should gi.ard 
against theft and fraud, as at some time of your life you may be the 
victini of sharp practice. 

Mercury is the Thiro House ccnsiderably accentuates yoor 
mental ability It tends to quicken y o ur mind, making yon 
stcdious^and capable of embracing many subjects. At the same time it 
will enalJ^e you to readily charge from one subject to another, making 



MERCURY IN THE HOUSES 


61 


jou versatile, and competent to deal with Mercxinal subjects It will 
give you a taste for teadmB, make you very fond of cunosities and give 
you the ability to study astrology and kindred subjects It is one of the 
strongest positions for Mercury, giving clearness of intellect and penetra 
tive thought To appreciate this the power of coucentration must have 
been cultivated ^' 

Mercury in the Fourth House of your nativity will con 
siderably modify this planet’s general influence It mil bring 
many changes,"'especially in business, and you may frequently change 
your piacT of residence You would do better by travelling than by 
settling down This position will bring you in touch with occultism or 
bring you work in connection with the occult It will be well to be 
careful of what >ou read as the mind acts on the body very quickly m 
your case You should love the water, and your mmd would expand 
while travelling You can miprove your mental powers by constancy 
and concentnlion » 

194 ^Iercury in the Fifth House will mike jonr mmd some 
what easy going, fond of pleasure and at times inclined to self* 
indulgence It makes you fond of children, music, poeirj, singing and 
the drama You should not over study or you will affect the heart Your 
mmd is loving and affectionate, but you should guard against inconstancy 
and excess in pleasure You must never be carried away by speculation, 
or a gambling spirit may be encouraged You >;liouid be good at mimicry 
and there is some latent ability for acting Children bom to you would 
be intellectual and very clever 

196 Sixth House favours the study of hygiene 

and medicine It warns you against over study or over worry 
as this would affect your health If you worry you will have many 
petty annoyances, and this will give a tendency to acute nervous troubles 
or dyspepsia You may have much trouble through inferiors at times 
when Mercury is afflicted You have some capacity for occultism, but 
fame should never be sought, and all should be done unnoticed or you 
might become unpopular You should be content to engage your mind 
m comparatively obscure and unknown subjects This position gives 
great danger of loss through servants or inferiors at some time of life 
196. Seventh House will tend to keep your 

mind exercised on matters pertaining to partnerships, marrnge 
and things concerning others more than yourself Be careful to avoid 



82 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


wrangling or disputes, or you may find yourself involved m much dispu 
tation and may be dravn into litigation over what may appear to be 
tnfles This position is not good for argument as your opponents would 
probably be too strong for you It threatens loss and bnngs worries and 
anxieties, and if jou allow yourself to be imposed upon you may suffer 
from vexation Your partners would be clever and quick witted, but 
sharper than yourself. 

Mercury in the Eichth House will make jour mind more 
positive and it will be difficult for you to be convinced against 
your will It inclines your mind to mystiasm and occultism, and there 
IS a tendency to look below the surface for the cause of things- It gives 
you an enquiring mind, making you at times anxious regarding the 
solvings of problems, and concerned as to a future life, unbl the truth is 
known concerning the after-death state Your mind is Lkely to be over 
anxious m this position and your ingenuity and resourcefulness increased, 
Do not wear yourself out by over mental activity, anxiety or worry 

Mercury in the Ninth House. This position will give you 
a splendid imnd for saence or philosophy, and discnnunation m 
regard to religioa. It wiU help you m literary pursuits and give you 
a genexal all round knowledge of many subjects, your mind will alwasrs 
be active and fond of knowledge. You would do well abroad or by 
taking long journeys. You will succeed much better if you practise 
concentratiOD and do not allow your thoughts to wander, or take up too 
many subjects at a time You have the ability to study astrology 
occultism, and all subjects of a metaphysical nature 

Mercury in the Tenth House will keep your mind exerased 
m matters to do with eroploymeots or position m life It gives 
you an ambitious and somewhat restless mmd but mclines towards 
hterature or Mercurial pursuits. It is good for commercial affairs, also 
for recognition from those who have influence m the literary world. You 
should gam through commission work, agencies and such details as come 
under the influence of hlercury It increases diplomacy and ambition 
and gives success m government emp’ioymems, suen as £ne civfi service. 
You may nse m life through your mental abilities, but do not become 
over anxioQS. 

200 Eleventh House strengthens the intellect, 

giving a firmer, stron ger and more comprehensive mind. It 
gives saentific and literary ability and increases the power of conceotra 



UERCURY IN THE HOUSES 


83 


tion, enabling you to fir your ideas It strengthens the whole mmd, 
and according to your education will make it original and expansne 
The intuition is improved and there is some latent tendency toivards 
mysticism, or a religion which appeals to the head as well as to the heart 
If you cultii-ate character reoding you may become an excellent exponent 
of that art You will be much attached to your fnends, but soma of 
them may deceive you, or involve you in trouble and anxiety. 

Mercury in the Tivelfth House tend to keep you 
back in life and not allow you to exercise your mind as fulij as 
you should You ma> suffer from secret enmity or slander, deserved or 
not. You mil be in some temporary danger of mental affection at some 
time of life and it would be well not to let yourself be drawn into any 
unwise scheme, especially where ivntings are concerned. Be careful not 
to put your hand to papers unthinkingly, and never let your mind be 
overtaxed or worried as it would affect the brain You might easily 
over nde enmity by being careful in speech and action* 



CHAPTER XVIII. 


Tnn Position*} and Aspects of the Sun, Moon and Planets 


Apart altogether from the influence of the Sign Positions and 
House Positions of planets, their aspects to each other and to the 
luminaries (Sun and Moon), and the mutual aspect of the two latter, have 
a most important bearing upon the reading of a horoscope It is a safe 
thing to say that a Nativity in \^hich there are not one or two signiflcant 
■strong aspects—whether benefic or malefic need not concern us for the 


moment,—is a very weak one 


Aspects are roughly classed as benefic ” and " malefic," as shown 
in the table on p 62 of Astrology /or All, but it should not be 
hastily supposed by the beginner that ** bad' aspects are necessarily to 
be turned from with loathing On the contrary, there are few strong 
characters whose horoscopes do not show one or more ‘afflictions' of this 
*kmd Perhaps “comfortable* and uncomfortable,’ though hardly 
>dignified words, might be usefully substituted for ‘good’ and 'bad'm 
this connection For the benefic aspect s tend t owards a harmonious 
expression of the quahties ruIedT^the planets concerned, whereas the 
male^ aspects, while aflectmg the very same qualities, fend to a mam 
festation that is abrupt, awkward, excessive or violent, in other words 
either under or over done 

For instance, an aspect between Mercury and Saturn disposes the 
t mmd to senousness, if a benefic aspect, towards study and contem 
plation, with a calm and reflective outlook on life if on the other hand 
an afflicbon, then the tendency will be rather towards gloom and 
suspiciousness m ordinary matters, hypercnhcalness and carping, the 
mind being rather over-disposed to look upon the " dark side ’ of things 
But it IS the same forces that are being dealt with, and for those who 
learn to "rule their stars" a ‘bad’ aspect controlled is found to furnish 
a reservoir of power which would perhaps hardly be voluntarily exchanged 
for the most favourable and harmonious ‘good’aspect A good aspect 
may oftentimes be likened to the model boy at school, who gives no 


«4 



ASPECTS TO THE SUM 


85 


trouble but excels it his v.-orJ<. nnd becomes a useful member of society, 
vvhile the bad aspect is like the younff rascal tvhois the despair of his 
teachers rebellious md naughty and jet perhaps with the seeds of 
greatness ^^lthln him which time will bnng to fruit It is not the good 
or bad aspects, so mucli as the u ejn ade of .the m, that marks the strong 
soul 

With these few preliminary remarks we may turn to a considerabon 
of the general effects of each aspect, as found working in the majonty 
of horoscopes 

ASPECTS TO THE SUM 

2 Q 2 lurtunanes in coNjoscnoK is not a favourable position, 
excepting for those who have made great attainments, and are 
me^ng the personality into the individuality, but it marks a stage 
wherein both the individuality and the personality will take their many 
experiences coloured by the different aspects that the lummanes meet in 
your nativitj It has a tendenc> to limit your experiences in certain 
directions but in the ev ent of the individuality becoming stronger than 
the personality, the influence will not be quite so m^unous, but should 
the personality assert itself too freely the influence cannot be good as the 
animal soul would absorb too much of the solar vitality without that 
freedom of expression indicated when the Moon is free from the Sun 

The DENEFIC aspect of the bun with the Moon improves your 
nativity This will bring jou success in manywa>s and help 
you to the attainment of man> of your desires and wishes you will be 
rightly ambitious and aspiring while prosperity will attend any efforts 
that you will make to earn success m life You will obtain acknowledg 
meat, and recoi,nition in the sphere in which you move in accordance 
with the vise >ou make of your own abilities This influence will also 
greatly improve >'Our disposition and will add to your vitality You wiU 
obtain success in all affairs that may relate to the heart, for, m affection, 
you will be extremely sympathetic and sincere 
2 ^^ The Sun and Moon in ADVERSE aspect at your nativity is not 
fortunate, as it will bnng obstacles into your life and cause 
delays and hindrances to your hopes washes and desires It is not good 
for vitality or health which may at Dmes suffer You would do well not 
to look for popularity, as it will tend m some way to react upon you 
Use all caie in safeguarding year honour, avoidmg e ery action that 



86 


TIIE KEi TO YOOR OWTl NATIVITY 


\^-ould be likely to injare yoar credit In any way: in this respect yon 
sboiild cxerase caution and diplomacy m oU dealings with your superiors 
or with those in authority. Preserve your eyesight 

The Sun in CONJUNCTION with the Mercurial planet isadoubtful 
position, and it is only those who are more individual than 
ptftonaX who can answer fo its vibration it then gives much mental 
ability, ivith clear thinking of a high order But when the personal side 
of the nature predominates, this position is powerless to act To make 
this position active and prohtable all personal bias must be ehminated, 
and the w isdom of the soul alloived to transcend the intellect For it is a 
position that faimurs the subjective consciousness, or intelligence, more 
than the concrete or objectse display of knowledge With the majonty 
this position remains a mere latent possibility, until the soul is developed. 

206. to the small size of Mercury's orbit the Sun can only form 
with this planet a tc«<ri BENEFIC aspect which is unimportant, and 

207. also a weak adverse aspect which is of very little importance. 
The Son m cosjusenos with the beautiful planet Venus will 
awaken all joyous and blissful nbranons in you, so that all other 

aspects and positions of an adietse nature will be >ery greatly tnodihed 
To awaken this mduence to the full, however, it wall be necessary to hve 
more to the individual side of the nature than the personal It is a 
position that touches the more momentous aSairs of life and brings 
matters connected walh pleasure, joy or success into activity. The 
irtistic side of your nature may be stimulated and cultivated to advantage, 
and you may associate wath others with full conBdence that much joy and 
hanpiness will follow It is a very fortunate mSuence 

The Sun at jour birth was in somewhat BENEFIC aspect to the 
planet Venus, which although it wiU not have a very strong 
Influence on your outward circumstances yet renders your inner nature 
more harmonious, and more inclmed towards gentle and peaceable 
methods than wrould otherwise be the case It shows yon to be mtemalJy 
Vtmng and harmonious, willmg to ««e the best m trtheis and always 
endeavouxmg, so far as you can, to address yourself to that higher portion 
of their nature. There is always a certam love of art, or of artistic and 
elegant surroundings, connected with tins influence, and it has a generally 
refining influence on the zmnd and on the Individual part of your self 

The Sun at your birth formed an aspect with Venus which was 
ADVERSE in Its nature, and this wiU prevent an easy flow of the 



ASPECTS. TO THE SUN 


87 


Mftues and benefits which Venus usually bestows when unafHicted at 
birtb. It will cause you to have some disappointments m connection 
with your feelings, and at certain periods of your life monetary troubles 
and also some social difficulties 'wtU make your environment not altogether 
as easy as it is-ould have been had the Sun been free from this affliction. 
Hoi^e\er, it is not altogether a disastrous aspect m its nature, though it 
does not give that contentment or ease o^imnd so ewential_to_success and 
prosperity Be very guarded m all your dealings with persons who are 
likely to in any way affect your feelings and emotions as there is a 
liability for yo u to be disappointed and th warted id you r hopes and 
wishes, particularly where your feelings are in any way at the mercy of 
others. 

With the Sun, and the planet Mars, m conjunction there will 
* be a struggle between your will and desires during this life, the 
Sun representing the will, and Mars the desires This will be felt 
through passion or anger, arising from over abundant vitality at times, 
and periodic heats causing a very feverish condition of the blood, exciting 
Jou to impulsiveness, or excess of feeling, and, while it will give you 
courage and some strength, it is not a desirable conjunction unless great 
self control is exercised, much depending upon yourself whether WILL or 
desire gam the mastery. The domtn^ng and ruling element is strong m 
you, and this wdl give you Tiucu of character, and the power to 
command or control others 

2'±2 planet Mars in beneV^C aspect, is remarkably 

good for your health and vitality geneilkHy It will give you 
ctsnrage, and a strong constitution Your iviU power aO'i desire nature 
are blended, which wll enable you to force your wiiy m life with an 
(intensity of purpose, energy, and perseverance that wmS Idom, if ever, 
be thwarted You can control and command others, you Vu generally 
carry your point through energy and strength of will moreVsn through 
tact and diplomacy. You may accompbsh great things if ^i let your 
individual nature act more often than the personal desires anV. wishes 
This very pow erfiil influence often gives too much hfe, and it is n«issary 
to either have plenty of exerase, or live an active life to distnfcite it 
through the system evenly 

213 “ ADVERSE aspect with Mars shows that there i 

some amount of conflict between your individual will ^nd ^ ^ 
desire nature, and between these two influences you will suffer 



ASPECTS TO THE SUN 


89 


not good for your health so far as the blood is concerned, and it would be 
as well if you used some care in diet, for your Iner will not always be in 
good working order, and this wnll affect your life and spirits, and make 
you at times melancholy and despondent This aspect hinders your 
social adi’ancement. 

Sun m CONJUNCTION with the ponderous planet Saturn 
will give >ou some measure of power m life, but, at the same 
time, you may be raised into powref only to be brought to a fall, unless 
>ou can keep a humble spirit, and not aim too high , for this position is 
one of the most critical, giving great responsibility and power, in some 
directions, but with the liability to assume rather more than is at all 
times mse You will have many and various opportunities to study the 
virtues of thrift, economy, latience, and perseverance The steadying 
and restraining qualities are in evidence in your individual nature You 
are cautious, and at times rather fearful, and should never allow yourself 
to become too reserved or despondent, or you may through this lose 
opportunities 

The Sun lo a BENEfic aspect with the planet Saturn is a 
fortunate influence. It will tend to make you steady, patient, 
persevering, prudent, and honest, and possessing these traits of character 
} ou will command respect, and w ill be able to bold some v ery responsible 
posts m Me if you care to seek them Persons older than yourself will 
benefit >ou, and those who hold very important positions in life will 
befriend you if you require their help Your moral nature will be 
strengthened more and more as you progress m life, and you will become 
more and more conscientious Moreov er, your health w ill improv e as life 
advances and if abstemious, you will probably live to a very considerable 
a.<e 

The Sun m adverse aspect with the planet Saturn is a very 
unfortunate position, somewhat weakening your individual 
character, and bnnging many sorrows into jour life. You will m some 
manner be hmited and cramped, and unable to achieve j'our ambitions, 
either through the interference of your elders or through lack of due 
opportunity delays and hindrances will upset your plans and thwart 
your progress. Your health will also be affected at times, owing to the 
imperfect circulation of your blood, therefore av'oid cold as much as 
possible By improving your moral nature you will improve >ourgeneral 
and financial condition Exterminate selfishness, jealousy and enmii) 



88 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWS NATIVITY 


should therefore try to strengthen jnur individnal will, not allowing 
j'ourself to be earned away by desires that you cannot attain. I think 
you TS'OQld do T^ell to avoid excitement of all kinds, and it may be 
necessary at certain periods of jour life to guard against acadents. 
Before__u^«goingjDperations of any kind you should deliberate very 
carefully, and you should also guard against fire and fire arms. Yon are 
constitutionally liable to feverish complaints, and are apt to be too hasty 
in general 

2 ^^ The Sun in CONJUSCTIOS with the benehc planet Jupiter will 
bnng jou into touch wth those v^b^abons that will awaken the 
mdiy ideal sid e of j our nature, and allow yon to live to the noblest side of 
your being You ill prosper through this position and find many oppof 
tunities^to progress, both mentallj, morally, and also physically. The 
soaal element vvnll bring you into touch vath those who hold good and 
permanent positions m life, and the help of others will be at hand when 
ever it may be desired New undertakings prosper, and the constructive 
ability IS strengthened. The hie forces wiU abound, and j-ou wall have 
as much vitality as jou can well use up It wall therefore be necessary 
to live temperatel) This positiou strengthens the moral tone, also 
expands the feelings, sympathies and emotions. 

2^5 ^ BESEFic aspect with the planet Jupiter at 

your nativity This good-iortune into your 

hfe, and waU in all probaW;jy jg^ate >ou to a brg^poation or ^eaUy 
im prove yonr social sta t-, ,, i.f, You will pos«eAs the 

true religious spirit, ^ genuine good feeling, making you benevA lent 
and sympathetic tJjose with whom you come in contact. You 
meet with the^^ccess in life that you deserve, and nearly all yMcr 
undertakinr ,^,jj quj \ery satisfactorily You will be of ajioiwf^ 
and ch^ j] (hsposition under your difEcuIties, and will generally se^ 
your jour arcumstances quickly and with case Health, 

fiaancctni Jove nfla irs are all strengthened under this becefic aspect. 

The Sun in ADV'ERSE aspect with the planet Jupiter is not 
^ favourable, although Jupiter is the most fortunate of the planets 
Tb aspect will cause some delay in the good promised you by tho«e 
a'jrs governed by Jupiter, and also some trouble arising out of all those 
togs from which you would expect benefit to accrue You must he 
ireful m your dealings with religions people, also in your dealings or 
ifrespondence with those persons whom you love. This tniluence is 



ASPECTS * TO THE SUK 


89 


not good for your health so far as the blood is concerned, and it would be 
as well if you used some care m diet, for your liver will not always be m 
good wxirking order, and this will affect your life and «:pints, and make 
you at times melancholy and despondent. This aspect hinders your 
. social advancement. 

The Sun in CONJUNCTION with the ponderous planet Saturn 
will give you some measure of power in life, but, at the same 
time, you may be raised into power only to be brought to a fall, unless 
you can keep a humble spirit, and not atm too bigb , for this position is 
one of tlie most critical, giving great responsibility and power, m some 
directions, but with the liability to assume rather more than is at all 
times wise You will have many and various opportunities to study the 
virtues of thrift, economy, patience, and perseverance The steadying 
and restraining qualities are in evidence in your individual nature You 
are cautious, and at times rather (earful, and should never allow yourself 
to become too reserved or despondent, or you may through this lose 
opportunities 

218 ^ BENEFIC aspect with the planet Saturn is a 

fortunate mdueoce It will tend to make you steady, patient, 
persevering, prudent, and honest, and possessing these traits of character 
you will command respect, and will be able to hold some very responsible 
posts in life if you care to seek them Persons older than yourself will 
benefit you, and those who hold very important positions m life will 
befriend you if you require their help Your moral nature will be 
strengthened more and more as you progress in life, and you will become 
more and more conscientious Moreov er, your health will improv e as life 
advances and if abstemious, you vnll probably live to a very considerable 
a^e. 

2^2 The Sun in ADVERSE aspect with the planet Saturn is a very 
unfortunate position, somewhat weakening your individual 
character, and bringing many sorrows into your life. You will in some 
manner be limited and cramped, and unable to achieve your ambitions, 
either through the interference of your elders or through lack of due 
opportunity delays and hindrances will upset yoitf plans and thwart 
your progress. Your health will also be affected at times, owing to the 
imperfect circulation of your blood, therefore avoid cold as much as 
possible By improving your moral nature you will improv e your general 
and fioanaal condition Exterminate selfishness, jealousy and enmity 



90 


THE KEV TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


220 CONJUNCTION wjth the planet Uranas adds a 

certain amount of onginality to your horoscope, this position 
making your individuality somewhat unique and exceptional. You will at 
some time of life be called upon to play a prominent part in all matters 
wnth which you ha\e concern, when the inventive faculties will be fully, 
ezerased, and all your ingennity taxed to the full. But you will be able to 
grapple with any difficulty that comes lotoy our life if you only free yourself 
entirely from bias and limitations; for your constructive ability is 
remarkable, and you may either invent or create both physically and 
mentally. 

22J BENEFIC aspect of the Sun with the planet Uranus is an 
influence \ery favourable to all those who can fully respond to 
this high \*ibrabon, for it bestows considerable inventive genius and 
much originality, Tna^nng the individual character self reliant and 
resourceful. Hence you will have an independent spint, and lose to 
carry out your own plans, which you will usually see clearly and 
accurately. You have decided magnebc poaer and can exercise over 
others a eertam fasanabon which will make it easy for you to influence 
them. You will tend to become very broad minded, philosophical, uncon* 
ventional, bberal and free, and you will be sympalbebcally m^ed 
towards all occult subjects 

222 “ ADVERSE aspect with the planet Uranus at your 

birth IS unfortunate and disastrous. You will have some \er'^ 
strange experiences, and may be estranged from, or lose those you Im e, 
and thus experience sorrows. You should do all you possibly can to 
think carefully before you act, and never allow yourself to be earned 
away by impulse, or the fasemabon of others. Try to know your fnends/ 
before you trust them, and never allow strangers to influence you | 
Unexpected and unforeseen events will come into your Lfe, upsetbng all 
your plans and arrangements. 

The Sun at your birth was la CONJUNCTION with the weird 
and httle known planet Neptune This will render your life 
different in many ways to that Of most ptopft, and vnll brwg many 
, strange expenences to you, depending in their nature upon how far you 
'ean*respond to the SDintjpL.UPiversal_Love which this rmghty planet 
represents. You will indulge in dreams on a lofty scale and will treasure 
secret schemes either for your own benefit or that of other people The 
conjunction of the planet Nepone with the Sun frequently confers upon 



aspects: to the moon 


91 


those born under this influence a peculiar and subtl? charm of manner 
whicli renders tliera strangely attractive to others. You should bevi-are 
of surrendering your o^\•n individuality to others, and should be careful to 
avoid all dubious experiments wilh drugs, anssthetics or hypnotism. 

225 Sun Vp-as m a BE*tEFlC aspect with Neptune, indicating 
that the influence of this mystical planet is beneficial to your 
spiritual growth, and probably you will And your greatest expansion of 
coDsaousness u ill anse out of experiences which you would have a great 
difficulty in adequately describing to others. The real paradoxes of life 
will be always more or less present to your consciousness, and certain 
truths that can only be expressed in the form of a paradox will always 
have a special meaning and reality for you, if you can nse to the highest 
side of this influence You will be, in the general sense of the word, 
lucky (though you may not consider yourself so), and you will be much 
liked by other people as a rule. You should, bov. ever, beivare lest tiie 
sensuous side of life dominate you. 

22 g The Sun was m affuction with the planet Neptune at your 
' birth This will render you liable at all times to deceitfulness 
and treachery from those about you, or from stranger*. You are bkely 
to be called upon to forego many things upon which you may have set 
your heart, and grievous disappointments are likely to befall you. You 
should regard this as resulting from your having disturbed the harmony 
of nature by violating the law of love, or compassion, so that these losses 
you are called upon to endure furnish the only means of restoring the 
lost equilibrium, or harmony. In this way you will come under the 
higher influence of this aspect, which will enable you to raise your 
consciousness to a higher level so as to sense the divine life permeating 
the whole of Nature 


Aspects to the Moon. 

The Moon m conjunction with the planet Mercurj will give 
you a splendid intellect, and endow you wth quick, and accurate 
perception The animal and the rational mind are both blended, but 
the rational will always cause you to lean more to the human side 
of hfe than to the animal. The more you allow reason to guide 
you, the more you will realise life and its purpose, and this is 
one of the necessary things for students to accomplish You may 



92 


TUB KEY TO YOUR OWN KATIVITY 


cdlh'ate truth and honesty to advantage; for, by so doing, you will 
awaken the mind to its highest perception. TTius you will quicken the 
mind and gather knowledge, at a much more rapid rate than by allomng 
the usual glamour of Mercury to fascinate you with the fragraeals so 
highly prized by smaller minds. 

22 ^^ Moon and Mercury were in besefic aspect at your birth. 

This aspect wall endow you with the best mental abilities and 
make your brain acute and active. You nnll succeed in life through your 
wit and quickness of perception. You possess the ability to make money 
and should do well with papers and wTiting*^ This aspect will enable 
you to appreciate life and make the best of it, as you are intelligent and 
able to think for yotu^elf You should cultivate your mtrution, also your 
fine memory, which is a feature of this aspect when it is active and not 
latent You have the ability to speak or write and can very easily 
express yxiur thoughts and ideas. 

223 The Moon and Mercury were id adverse aspect at your birth 

This aspect is rather uafoitunafe for your progress through life. 
But it wnll sharpen your wit, and make you %ery cute, but, at the same time, 
somewhat sarcastic when put out or lo any way upset Your nervous 
system wall not always be m good order, and this may cause you to be a 
little erratic and changeable You will incur cnticism, and your opinions 
will be often at variance with those of others. Bc^very careful when 
^ignii^ papers, for you will be liaWc.tojmake mistakes mffnnection with 
letters and correspondence Avoid going to extremes, and see that your 
expressions are clear, and always accurate 
220 The Kloon in covjUNcnov %vitli the pleasure Joiing Venus 

will give you a good envnronment whilst you allow this vibration 
to be the one mo«t m evidence You ntll be fond of refined and probably 
artistic pursuits, and should be fortunate and successful m the majinty 
of the undertakings that may engage your attention. You have a loving 
dispostbon, and also a very pleasing personality The personal or 
external side of your life will be the best, and is in many respects very 
different from the internal or individual side, so that you will leam in 
this life more through pleasure and social life than by going inward to the 
mind or the purely intellectual side of development. You should have 
an easy passage through life. 

The Moon and the planet V’enus were m BENEFIC aspect at 
* your birth, which is most favourable, promising you a successful 



ASPECTS. TO THE UOON 


93 


journey through life, and very good opportuni ties for success You will 
be refin ed and.artistic, will possess good taste , and a keen appreciation 
of all that is^g ood and b^ufifid Ypu.will be loving and will thus attract 
those who will bring some happiness into your life, and become a social 
success You '\sill never be short of friends nor will you ever be poor 
vvhile this good aspect asserts its influence over you. The opposite sex 
will be drawn to and benefit you in many ways. You will be musical, 
and fond of singing 

The Moon and Venus are in adverse aspect, bringing sorrow 
and disappointment, especially in your domestic affairs Your 
feelings will be affected, and you will be in danger of acting carelessly, 
and may expect disappointments, and also disagreement with the opposite 
sex Any matters having to do with pleasure are better avoided, for 
little happiness or pleasure is indicated You w ill do well to practise 
restraint, avoiding excess of feeling, gnef, or sorrow. This aspect usually 
causes some extravagance, oi excess in scpjne way, and also sometimes 
affects the health. but it is, however, an influence that can be overcome 
by care, and by avoiding conflict with the feminine sex generally. 

The Moon in CONJUNCTION with the fiery and forceful planet 
' Mars will cause you to commit impulsive acts, and to resent all 
control and authority. In fact it is a very rebellious and unfortunate 
position for the Moon You will see life through red glasses, and have 
such a strong personal bias, that you may become very intolerant, hasty 
and rash (unless you impose a check upon your out going energies) and 
thus bring trouble on yourself, through your strong feelings and emotions 
Guard your speech, and do not let your fearlessness carry you too far. 

It has been found true by long expenence that “discretion is the better 
part of v’alour,’ and you will never lose by pondering well over the above 
quoted statement Your independence and forcefulness will bring you 
misfortune, therefore do not allow feeling to over ride your reason 
„ The Moon and the planet Mars were m benefic aspect at your 
‘ birth This aspect vivU make you. t earless , enterptvsmg, and 
courageous You can exhibit much pluck and endurance, being resolute 
and full of that^ confidence m yourself which will enable you to deal 
successfully with others You ateif^ly^«mpetent to undertake anything 
upon which you set your mind It is a very hopeful aspect, provided 
you are not too free and generous, as you may then tend to become rather i 
prodigal or too extravagant This Influence will «trengthen and tone up 



94 


TttE KEY TO YOUR OWK NATIVITY 


your constitutioa, enabling you to resist disease It will also mabe you 
bright a£d cheerful, improving your disposition 
20 ^ The Moon and the planet Mars were m ADVERSE aspect at the 
time of your birth This is a very unfortunate aspect, tending 
to make you rather unfortunate in life and at times this result vail be 
brought about by impulse and your own rash actions. You should 
never rush out too quickly nor say mote than you really mean, 
as you will find yoorself given to exaggeration and to enlai^ng 
upon circumstances You have some \ery strong likes and dishkes, and 
will often be resentful, and say and do things you are sure later on 
to regret. A\oid being careless and reckless and do not let yourself 
be earned away by passion or anger You will gam by practising 
self control 

2 gg The Moon m conjunction with the benefic planet Jopiter will 
make your life fortunate, peaceful and successful, whatever 
di 0 iculties you may have to contend with m life, you will eventually 
attain to success. You have some splendid social qoalibes, latent oractiie, 
and much hope to carry you through all your undertakings. Yon have 
soScient dignity and power, enabling you to occupy a promment posihon, 
and you will, eventually, attract some recognition. You will obtam 
much personal success m life, and your environment will be sndi as to 
maintain it. Persons boTO Under this amjunction generally gravitate to 
good circunistaaces, and surroundings, all of which go to make die life 
progress favourably You are well disposed and this will win you the 
aid of powerful fnends. 

The Moon and the planet Jupiter were in peNeFIC aspect at the 
tune of your birth, one of the most favcpuzab!e.aspMts that can 
occur m any nativity It will bnog prosperity into your life, and also 
some social advancement. This aspect denotes a splendid vitality as it 
fertilises both the inmd and body You are mentally honest and intuitiie 
gnA progressive, with a religions spirit, and will become more and mote 
just and sympathebc as your life adianccs. You possess a very hopeful 
disposition, and this wAl be &e means of your attracting &ose persons 
who will be beneficial to you and your interests 

The Moon and the planet Jupiter were in ADVERSE as pect at 
the tune of your birth. This aspect will not allow the benefic 
planet Jupiter to bestow upon you all the blessing for which it is noted. 

In some manner it will tend to waste your substance, and, either through 



aspects; to the moon 


95 


ejc^vaeance^or carelessness, you will have financial loss or 
difficulty in obtaining as much money as you would like to possess. You 
will n«d to be very careful m all your dealmgs with others, for there is 
some danger of your heme the v«tim.ol-fraud, or of suirenug through 
the ^sation_of„others; therefore always d eal wit h others lo the mosi 
st^ghtforwardjimnner possible, avoiding assoc iation wiTh those whom 
you Cann ot trust. Temperance m all things is advisable. 

28 g. CONJUNCTION of the Moon with the planet Saturn will, m 
many respects, restrict and hamper your progress in life. Your 
early environment has not gi%en you the social and personal adiantages 
required, to m any Vi-ay allow you to make much impression upon sur¬ 
roundings. This position IS generally \ery unfortunate, but it is usually 
so owing to the reserve and fear which it gives^to personalities under its 
influence You must avoid becoming too critical and sceptical, or you 
will attract an atmosphere round you that will be repellant and thus 
cause others to mistrust you and also to suspect your motives You are 
not in any rvay demonstrative, but you can be faithful and sincere, just, 
and fond of responsibility. 


239. Saturn at the time of your birth were 

to BENEFIC aspect. The saturnine virtues are purity, truth 
and sincerity, and this aspect will therefore aid you to become prudent,' 
thrifty, faithful and reliable in character. You possess the capacity for 
organisation and can hold responsible posts in life. You will be success 
ful m your dealings with elderly persons, and all your actions will be 
j'ustly tempered, systematic and orderly. This aspect gives much 
patience and a contemplative spirit, and by the practise of meditation 
you can attain to great things You have good tact and forethought, and 
I judge that you will become very senous and steady 


240. planet Saturn in adverse aspect, astrologi. 

cally considered, is generally the worst aspect that can occur ini 
a nativity, mid being the aspect of fateTas-a-troIe it brings misfortune 1 
and sorrow into the life You wiH do well to exterminate all the selfish 
ness from your nature, avoiding discontent, as this aspect bmits and 
binds those who come imder its mllueoce Therefore the best way to 
coimteiact Its force for evil is to sacrifice the lower nature as quickly ns 
possible. Your hfe will be thwarted by others, especially elders and 
supenots. Your health too will be agaiost yon, but this mil anse ’/ 
despondency or very poor circulation. Cultivate HOPE. ^ 



96 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIYITY 


The Moon m COSjONcnoR wjth the msrstic planet Uranus wil 
cause you, at some penod of your life, to make %«y^imj»rtant 
changes of^ soraev^hat sudden and unforeseen character You will have 
a chequered career, and this will be owing to a peculiar disposition, which 
IS indicated by the nature of Uranus. Your very powerful magnetism 
will affect others, and, at times, to your disadvantage You are apt to be 
rather abrupt, and also imtable Never allow ^y eccentncities to stand 
in the way of your progress, for alUiough you have inventive or 
uncommon abilities, jou may lose in personal disposition much that 
would carry jou further forward in evolution This position gives a 
t ouch of geniu s to those who are free from all prejudices and personal 
bias, but not otherwise ' 

2^2 Moon and the planet Uranus were in penefic aspect at 
your birth, and this will give you much loi e of all occult matters, 
especially astrology and kindred subjects You are original in all your 
ideas and should have some mventiveoess or constructiveness You have 
magnetic and healing power, and if you practise or try to cultivate 
concentration you may accomplish much with your life Yon will break 
away from ail com ention when your higher mind begins to awake and to 
shake off the fetters that limit tbe mind to the brain and surrounding 
condibons. You are quite able to stnke out new paths for yourself, and 
your character is m many respects unique. 

2^2 The Moon and the planet Uranus were in aspect at the 

time of your birth This is an unfortunate aspect, leading you 
^mto some sudderPtroubles o r difficulties You wiU do nell to be careful 
'in^ all ^our dealingsjwirt strangers, and shou ld avoid alLchance a^^n ■ 
tanceships. exercise some fascination over you, 

and there is a possibility of one to particular causing you much sorrow 
and trouble This nipect gives a liability to accidents, or, very strange] 
and unlocked for^ experiences. You will always be liable to do things; 
that yon may afterwards regret There is some tendency towards^ 
eccentnaty, and you wiU be considered a crank in your peculiar way, as 
■yon -wilt Vcrvfc icme mrotmie 10(1 •c taw otniun lieas Vi Yimus. 

2 ^^ The Mojn at your birth was id coNjUKCTtov with the we.fd 
and mystenoiis planet Neptune, and jmor life is likely to be full 
of strange and peculiar expenences, especially at those times when other 
planets progress to aspects of Neptune Yon should distinguish between 
seosation or impulse, and thought or debberate desire, or you may 6sd 



aspects: to mercury 


and active. Do not over-estimate or exaggerate, for there is danger > 
your magnifying things too much, and thus becoming too hopeful. 

Mercury and the •planet Mars were in BBNEFIC aspect at yoi 
nativity. This will considerably energise your mind, making yt 
acute, sharp, and active. You possess much mental force, and could tui 
>our abilities to good account in almost any direction you wish, providt 
)OU cultivate concentration. You are witty, bright, and cheerful, and 
inclined you could be somewhat sarcastic and satirical; but you general! 
try to abstain from hurting otheb with your ivnt. You are doubtle: 
clever at drawing, sketching, and designing, for you have splend' 
mechanical ability, also manual dexterity, making you good at conjunr 
and also the technique of music. Moreover, your objective consciousne: 
is very extensive, keen and alert. 

252 2 nd the planet Mars were in ADVERSE aspect at yot 

nativity. This i$ by no means a favourable aspect for yoi 
mind, as it tends to make you impulsive, and over energetic. You hav 
a great deal of active or latent sarcasm in your nature, with p quick wi 
and a very subtle mind. However, you have intellectual ingenuity, an 
ability to follow scientific pursuits. You are vety courageous, bu 
somewhat too venturesome at times. 

In speech you are apt to be hasty and it would be well for you to b> 
discreet both when wriCmg or speaking, for you are apt to say more thai 
you mean, and inclined to assert your opinions too freely. 

The planet Mercury, m^ONjUNCTlON with the benehc Jupiter 
’ will endow you with a very joyous and hop eful _mentaLattitude 
causing you to see the bright and happy side of life whenever you le 
your mind assert itself. But you should lake care that you never allow 
the influence of others to destroy that intuitive pottioa of your mini 
which knows, in a manner peculiar to yourself. You have a devout, and 
in many respects religious mind, and if you have entirely risen supenoi 
to the narrow, limited and orthodox side of religious thought, you will b< 
able to obtain a great amount of benefit and help spiritually by the 
practice of meditation and contemplation. You will be {qttunate m more 
senses than one, but it wiU be owing chiefly to the^ound^state of youi 
mind that you will be able to achieve your greatest fortune and success 
ID life. 

25<I planet Jointer were in beNEFic aspect at youi 

nativity, on e of th e^best ^spects i n re gard to the mmd that can 



ASPECTS TO MERCURY 


101 


towards life You will ha\e a certain unobtrusive power over others and 
wvU lend to be serious and faitbtnl m all jour attachments. 

268 planet Saturn were in ATATCttsE aspect at the 

time of jour birth This wUI make the life rather unfortunate, 
especially if you worry It is an aspect that causes hindra nces and 
delays and also the advers e attitude of others to you, and especially those 
who arelolder than''>ourself You will experience disappointments in 
life, therefore never seek to get into responsible posts, for you may be 
severely criticised, and sufTer loss of credit, etc., through false reports 
about jou You must be very careful with regard to what^papers you 
"slgnT^lso cautious in speech You are somewhat unforgiving, and 
tncUned to be nthertwvere on wrong doers Avoid worry,v 

259 CONJotfcnoK with the mystical planet Uranus 

at your birth, a favourable position for all forms of original 
thinking, for inventive and ingenious schemes, and for all that pertains 
to new thought, and what is teemed originality You must however 
avoid becoming what the world terms a " crank, or you will find yourself 
out of touch with others and liable to be misunderstood You will at 
times have too much nervous energy, making you irritable and erratic, 
and perhaps too regardless of the feelings and opinions of others. This 
position inclines towards an abrupt and independent manner, unless you 
can control your mmd, which will at times prove too sudden m its changes 
for your good 

Mercury and the planet Uranus were m benefic aspect at 
your birth, which is one of the best aspects that Mercury can 
have, for those who are making mtellectual and spiritual progress, since 
It bestows an occult and original turn of mind and fits one to study 
astrology and the deepest metaphysical subjects You are inventive, 
hav e a wide mental outlook, and as life advances you wiU grow more 
deeply interested m the higher thought The analytical faculty is strong, 
but you are intuitive and possess an inner perception that enables you to 
understand your surroundingstjvatWy Thvs vs s. good aspect lot teaveUing, 
or making new acquaintances 

Mercury and the planet Uranus were m ADVERSE aspect at the 
tjme of your birth, an unfortunate aspect, making the mind rather 
critical and at times erratic Yon should be careful in^your dealings with 
stringers and also with reigrd .t o.the papers you sign You will be 
cnu<a ^ and find others againstjfpujBrheD_YOU least expect it. but this 



ASPECTS TO VENUS J03 

If Iht lower effect is thus overcome, this uspect may be made beneucuil 
you, since it always gites some poetical or musical tendencies, foi the 
mind IS rendered tery sensitive to subtle emotional impulses. Gi.mv 
wy to Uie sensuous side of life would have a very bad effect upon your 


Aspects to Venus 


266 “'“I Ustu in conjunction will cause you to 

have very eseepuonal and ppnetfuUikes and disbles and it is 
quite possible that love at lirst s ight will affect your emotional nature 
and stir up the feelings You ate somewhat impuls ive, where feeling is 
concerned, and although v_ery_generous hglujiearted and Jice, at the 
same time, you ate likely to make mistakes m regard to your own feelings 
Never be rash or inipeluous in your affections and ever reflect before 
commuting yoursell in speech or action m your dealings with the opposite 
sex This position will nuke you lighthearted, merry and cheerful, 
and will ever keep you up, however Trying your circuinstances'nuy'be 
Avoid impulsne action 


266. Aspect with Mats is a fortunate aspect lu 
many respects, especially for emotional affairs, and all the events 

in life that are connected wilh feeling You will be ardent in your 
affections and likely to gam through, or by, those to whom you may be 
attached You are inclined to be free and liberal with your money, and 
social nutters generally wall have much attraction for you You will be 
rather fortunate in financial matters and will either gam by will, or 
legacy, or through your assocutions with others It favours love affairs 
and IS also generally beneficial m niatiugc, unions, or partnerships 

267. ' ““ "" ’’'“A" ■“ “ adverse aspect in your 

nativaty Although this is an unfortunate aspect it will m many 

ways sUmulate your feehngs making your emotional nature very keen 
and active It is rather an improvident aspect, tending to make yon over 
generous and impulsive, and through this you may lose finanaally and 
through excess of feeling may m some way be imposed upon You 
should be ^rded in all your dealings with the opposite sex and never 
let yoursell be drawn into any scheme or plan that might be misconstrued 
This aspect IS not favourable for love, or marriage, denotinn dv„» 
from quarrels and jealousy It spoils financial prospects ° ^ 



104 


THr KhV TO VOUR OWN NATIVITY 


2G8 ‘0 CONjOKCTION tilth the benefic phnet 

jwpiter IS n \ery fnv*ounible and harmonious posUion, it bnnjts 
success ^In life at certain times t^hco the lummattes are favourably 
n‘^*>***y* This position alone is not 
very powerful, Eo tint more of Its real influence will be felt under 
direction', for then the natnuy vidl have pTOKTts<ved to the neceswy 
position, 10 make the mfliience of these two benefic planets active; but 
until then tlicj may remain latent. It »s n Nood and propitious position 
for "locial nflairs and in rotne respects favounble for financial under- 
takmps, but as I Lav e said abov e a v cry great deal depends upon the future 
Directions 

2 gg Tlie planets Venus and Jupiter were uj DrSEPlC aspect at the 
time of 1 our birth. This aspect will bring you some gain, either 
through religious persons, or by will or legacy. It is one of the most 
harmonious and peaceful aspects, greatly improving the nativity by 
holding other aspects of an adverse nature in check. You would gam by 
travel under this aspect .and your loveaflairs will tend to run smexithly, 
so that mamage should be happy and prosperous Much sorrow that 
would 10 the ordinary waj fall on you ival) be av erted by this benefic 
loflueoce, and a certam amount of philosophy is promised by this aspect, 
which will be of great help to you. 

The planets Venus and Jupiter were in aDVFRSE aspect at the 
time of your birth This posuioa is in general ununportant, 
though it denotes some losses through carelessness m monetary affairs, 
but only to those who ore n iturally improvident and extravaigant. You 
will do well to use care »i all relationships with females m connection 
with religious matters, for diflerences of opinion and unpleasantness are 
likely to arise through religions controversy This aspect tends to bring 
deceit into your life, and >our best course would therefore be to act with * 
perfect straightforwardness in your dealings with others, more especially 
in all family or domestic affairs 

The CQNjUNCTtON of Venus and Saturn is a peculiar, and a 
somewhat unique position, and very difficult to interpret, owing 
to the fact that but few are able to respond to the vibrations caused by 
this position It should make you exceedingly fond of the mystical, and 
all things that are ancient and antiquated, old and antique You respect 
ancient customs, and tend to be somev hat conservative, and possess " 
peculiar kind of intuition, nhich nukes vou npiiear to be shrewd and verj 



ASPrCTS TO VENUS 


105 


far seeing. It should make you rather thrifty, and a keen judge of 
financial matters, stimulating your economy, prudence and chastity, but it 
^slU bnng you disappointments and sorrow in matters of feeling 
2,^2 planet Saturn were in benefic aspect at your 

natwity Tins vs a \ery hign vibration for the plmiet Venus, 
the purifying and steadying influence received from Saturn tending to 
make permanent many of the harmonious virtues denoted by Saturn It 
will make you a steady character, giving you a lov e of thrift and wise 
economy, aUov.mg you to accumulate wealth if you should ever desire to 
do so You have tact, and good abilities, also the power to conserve 
your energies You are a very faithful friend, and would be most sincere 
m all your attachments, thus attracting towards you those whom you can 
love with sincerity, and who will reciprocate your love 
2 ,yg Venus and the planet Saturn were in adverse aspect at the 
time of your buth, and this will bring much disappointment and 
sorrow into your life You will have some financial losses, or difficulty 
m ever obtaining the amount of money you desire It is not a favourable 
aspect in money m many ways, and any expectations that you may have 
will not be fully realised Be careful m your business transactions with 
others and see that your moral standard is the highest you can reach 
Never lend money without good security, or sign legal papers This 
aspect has an unfavourable influence on all matters connected with love 
and the affections, causing disappointment, gnef and delay 

The planet Venus in CONJUNCTION with the mystic Uranus will 
bnng either romance ot a pleasant change of an unexpected 
nature into the life This position has a tendency to in some way weaken 
the deeper side of the feehng and emotional nature It causes attach 
ments of an uncommon type to arise, and seems to be a purifier of the 
love or soul principle, but only those who have cast off the animal 
instincts can possibly respond to these very keen vibrations But it is a 
condition that must awaken all that is latent m the Soul If unable to 
respond, it must pass you by. waiting for la more fitting occasion On 
the material plane this position e>i^ sudde^and unexpected wealth, 
legacies, win dfall s,^etc. 

^ Venus and the mjstical planet Uranus were in BENEFIC aspect 
* at your nativity This influence is very favourable for all 
matters coming into your life that are ir^any way onginal a nd free fro m 
convention You hold some rathe r advan ced views, and particul^lj is 



THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


case 10 all 0>o<e nutlers antct the lienrfj and feelings. 

IS a ^uc h.op^cnihince m you wtiicb v.ill work itself out when you 
..let with those wlio^e rtuignclism Is strong enough to ph) upon your 
notions, and affect those^slLmtions connected with the Io%c life You 
will have sudden -fioa nen f gains, ant! may also bate some vcryjmexjieetcd 
travels, removals or changes coming into your life ^ 

Venus and the mystical planet Uranus were in ADVERSE aspect 
at the tune of birth 'riiis is not a fortunate iniluence for love 
affairs. You will be faM.iiiated or in sonic way affected by the magnetism 
of those of the opi>osite <.cx who tiiay be attracted to you Sudden and 
unexpected disappomlincnts are threatened you, aI<o sudden financial 
losses, which you should guard against by avoidmg risky sfieculatioD 
You cannot be too careful in all dealings with strangers, also in all affairs 
jcoanected with love and marriage There is some danger threatened you 
through jealousy and triachery Tins asjiect caus^ sejorations, divorce 
and many estrangemeats from friends and loved ones 

The COSjuvcTIos of the planets Venus and Neptune is on the 
whole good adding something of a mystical touch to the mind 
and elevating and broadening the sympathies and affections, that is, 
where the low cr side of the Venus nature is not brought into play For 
the mfluence of Neptune, where it is nor elexatiag is of the most baleful 
kind, it IS therefore necessary that you should purify your emotional 
nature by eiery means lu your power, seeking ever tlie highest and most 
unselfish type of love which Neptune truly represents, lor when the 
lower side of the nature is hied lo, this position renders possible very 
great degradation, proportionate lo the elevation that may be achieved 
if the higher influence is consistently sought Neptune is in this respect 
the planet of retiunctahon 

^rjQ BENCFic aspect between the planets Venus and Neptune 

broadens your sympathies and refines your love nature, rendering 
you deeply sensitive to tbe^beauty.of oature, and easily won over to 
lofty ideals ofhfe^d conduct It will, however, be much more difficult 
to bve^ut these ideals in practical life, for you have some tendency to 
jremam a dreamer of beau tiful jreams , and you should endeavour to 
realise m some practical form, the beautiful ideas with which you feel 
yourself filled This might take the thought of either decorative or 
pictonal art, music, drama, or the more practical fields of work, such as 
nursing, etc, according to the general tendencies of the horoscope You 



ASPECTS; TO MARS 


107 


will always love the sea, though you may not, perhaps, be a good 
sailor. 

2^9 ADVERSE aspect between the planets Venus and Neptune is 
very senous and unfortunate, affecting the whole of the emotional 
life, these two planets representing personal and universal love respec¬ 
tively ; and the conflict between the two means that jou need to purify 
your love nature from the selfish element, seeking to make that which is 
personal universal. There is a dangerous side to this aspect, and that is 
the tendency it brings to fall completely under the sway of the senses. 
You yourself will know if there is any fear of this in your own case, but 
if so you should battle against it with all the strength of your nature, for, 
when evil, the effect of Neptune is most insidious. Avoid all narcotic 
drugs as you would the plague. 

Aspects to Mars. 

The planets Mars and Jupiter in CONJUNCTION is not good for 
Jupiter. In many respects it may be considered a good position 
so far as Mars is concerned, but as Jupiter is robbed of all bis virtue, by 
this counterfeit of the spirit Mors, it will make you liable to p rodigal ity 
and over-generosit y. Troubles and loss will arise from either waste or 
extravagance. Avoid law and any expenditure exceeding receipts, and 
certainly impulse and the display of prodigious energy, or enthusiasm; 
for this position will make you somewhat oier.Je alous, and indinedjo 
e xtremes, in_ feeling. You cannot live too temperately, and should avoid 
disputes over religion and legal affairs. It will also affect the state of 
your blood. 

The planets Mars and Jupiter were in bfnefic aspect at your 
* birth. This position causes some extni\ag.ance, with a tendency 
to be over-generous and liberal, and therefore it will not always be 
beneficial to you where money is concerned. You have some pnde and 
dignity m )our nature,al<so self-reliance; in many respects you are a 
pioneer, putting great energ> and enthusiasm into all you do. You are 
enterprising, courageous, and very fortunate in many ways through your 
strong and venturesome spirit; but recklessness and over liberality should 
always be avoided. You love freedom, independence, strength and 
justice, and will never allow yourself to be imposed upon. 

planets Jupiter and Mars were in ADVERSE aspect at your 
birth. This is in many respects a very unfortunate aspect. It 



■nin icrv to vooa own kativjtt 

caie in all U»o«^ maticta ».htch afTccl the heart, and fethnfft. 
. e Is a touch_ofjfVnt^ce in you which aill v.ofL itself out nhen you 
Let with those >shose nuRnetisin is sttoof enough to j»la> upon your 
notions, and affect those tihrations connected with the Icne life You 
wilt have ^dden fiiuncLsrgams, and ma> nlsoha\ e some % cry untsp ected 
tra vel^ removals or tlianges coming into ) our life ^ 

276 mystical planet Uranus Here in adverse aspect 

at the time of birth Tins is not a fortunate influence for love 
affairs. You will he fascinated or in some nav affected b> the magnetism 
of those of the opposite vei vrliotna> be attracted to you. Sudden and 
unexpected clisa^rjiuinttncnts are threatened you, al<o sudden financial 
losses, wliidi you should guard against by avoiding risky speculation. 
You cannot be too oreful in alt dealings with strangers, also m all aifaus 
^connected nith love and nurxiage There is some danger threatened y*ou 
|tbrough jealousy and treachery lliis aspect caus^ sejamdons, divorce 
|and many estrangements from friends and loved ones 

The COVJI.SCTIOS of the planets Venus and Neptune is on the 
whole good adding something of a mystical touch to the mind 
and elevating and broadening the sympathies and affections, that is, 
where the loner side of the Venus nature i$ cot brought into play Tor 
the influence of Neptune nbere it is nor elevating, is of the most baleful 
kind. It IS therefore necessary that you should punfy your emotional 
nature by every means in your poner seeking ever the highest and most 
unselfish type of love nbicb Neptune truly represents, rornhentbe 
lower side of the nature is lived in. this position renders possible very 
great degradation, proportionate to the elevaiion that nay be achieved 
if the higher influence is consistently sought Neptune is m this respect 
the planet of remincialion 

^TjQ The SENEFlc aspect betneen the planet< Venus and Neptune 
broadens your sympathies and refines your love nature, rendering 
you deeply sensihve^to the,beauty of nature, and easily won over to 
lofty ideals of life and conduct. It will, however, be much more difficult 
to live out these id^ls in practical life, for you have some tendency to 
jremain a drea mer of beaut if o!_d£»rns, and you should endeavour to 
realise m some practical form, the l^utifnl ideas wntb which yon feel 
yourself filled- This might take the thought of either decorative or 
pictorial art, music, drama, or Uie more practical fields of work, such as 
cursing, etc., according to the genera] tendencies of the horoscope. You 



ASPECTS TO MARS 


107 


Will always love the sea, though you may not, perhaps, be a good 
sailor 

gryg The ADVERSE aspect between the planets Venus and Neptune is 
very serious and unfortunate, affecting the whole of the emotional 
life, these two planets representing per^mal and universal love respec 
lively , and the conflict between the two means that you need to purify 
your love nature from the selfish element, seeking to make that which is 
personal universal There is a dangerous side to this aspect, and that is 
the tendency it brings to fall completely under the sway of the senses 
You yourself will know if there is any fear of this in your own case, but 
if so you should battle against it with all the strength of your nature, for, 
when evil, the effect of Neptune is most insidious Avoid all narcotic 
drugs as you would the plague 

Aspects to Mars 

ggjj The planets Mars and Jupiter in CONJUNCTION is not good for 
Jupiter In many respects it may be considered a good position 
so far as Mars is concerned, but as Jupiter is robbed of all his virtue, by 
this counterfeit of the spirit Mars, it will make you liable to p rodigalit y 
and over generosjt y Troubles and loss will arise from either waste or 
extravagance Avoid law and any expenditure exceeding receipts, and 
certainly impulse and the display of prodigious energy, or enthusiasm , 
for this position will make you somewhat ov er zea lous and mclinedjo 
e xtrem es in feeling You cannot live too temperately, and should avoid 
disputes over religion and legal affairs It will also affect the state of 
your blood 

The planets Mars and Jupiter were in bfnefIC aspect at your 
birth This position causes some extravagance, with a tendency 
to be over generous and liberal, and therefore it will not always be 
beneflcial to you where money is concerned You have some pride and 
dignity m your nature, also self reliance, in many respects you are a 
pioneer, putting great encrg> and enthusiasm into all you do You are 
enterprising, courageous, and very fortunate m many ways through your 
strong and venturesome spirit, but recklessness and over liberality should 
always be avoided You love freedom, independence, strength and 
justice, and will never allow yourself to be imposed upon 

The planets Jupiter and Mars were in adverse aspect at your 
birth This is in many respects a very unfortunate aspect It 



108 


THE KEY TO YOUtt OVv*i SATIMTY 


deootes financuU Joss, either through extravagance, or prodigality of sone 
load Vou are inclined to be far loo generous and if you came into 
much wealth would be more likely to become a spendthrift than a miser 
You should alway-s avoid IitigatiOD, or you would be involved in the loss 
of heavy sums of money, and in all probability find that IcraI a^rs were 
disastrous for you in all respects. Stdl* you are very enthusiastic m 
whatever you e«;pou<« and v.nll throw much energy into all you undertake 
See that your blood is pure, or the health will sufTer 
2 Q 2 Th® cosjUHCTios of the two so called malefic planets Saturn 

and Mars is generally considered a very evil posiPon. but as 
the true astroli^y teaches that there is no real evil, but only that which 
IS relative, it is witbm your power to make this a good position and this 
you may do by allowing your ambition to conquer your senses, but 
beware of escape from one danger to fall into another, for the mind is 
much more dangerous to cope with than the senses. It will give you a 
strong and very powerful will, and a fearlessness that will be favourable 
if selfishness is kept out of it You wtU be able to hold very unique and 
also responsible posts, where skiU and courage are necessary, but do sot 
become ov er ambitious 

The planets Mars and Saturn were in BChEFiC aspect at the 

time of your birth. This aspect will cause you to be ambitious 
and make you persev enng and eager to excel m whalev er enterprise you 
undertake You are brave, courageous and fearless with regard to 
danger, and you not only possess force of character but tactfulness also. 
There is much of the hero spirit lo you and you love to be at the bead of 
things and w-ould make a very capable leader This aspect promises you 
success, espeaally m the direction of improving and strengthening your 
character, and by you will have success in life, and wm the 

admiration of those who are able to help you. It indicates that the 
desires and the lower or personal mind aiv working m harmony, nod it is 
therefore a splendid aspect for the achievement of your w^shes. Do not 
let It make you selfish, however 

Mars was m apveRse aspect with Saturn at your hutb, a very 

unfavourable aspect to those who have not leamt to practise 
fnll self^ontroL At tiroes the aspect will tend to make you express 
much more than is wise, and you will not only use sarcastic, and very 
bitter speech, but you will incline to use words that are not over dhoice 
especially if you are seriously annoved. You have much courage, but 



ASPECTS TO WARS 


109 


Will be rather reckless where danger is concerned You have the making 
of the " Hero ” in you, but I fear that you are apt to risk your life upon 
the impulse of the moment, when under any great enthusiasm You 
have a very strong desire nature, and when roused to anger, will be 
violent 

The CONJUNCTION of the planets Mars and Uranus will give you 

plenty of energy but also a rather irntable temperament* Your 
nervous system will at times be over charged with life or magnetism and 
this will make you too active and probably excitable and far too energetic 
for your own good It will give you a love of all my stical subjects, 
especially astrology, and the metaphysical side of things Be always on 
your guard against sudden impulse, rash tendencies, or violent expressions 
and actions, for this is the position that caints one away, either by 
enthusiasm, strange, and unaccountable mental conditions, or blind 
impulses It IS one of the most dangerous aspects when the soul is m 
any way unbalanced, therefore, actdisgreetly. 


The planets Mars and Ui^us were in benefic aspect at the 
* time of your birth Tbis^ wonderful aspect to those who can 
respond to the^vibrations of the mystical planet Uranus It gives much 
ISidifinetgy.idental and physical It stimulates thoughts of^onginality. 
and therefore makes of those who can respond, geniuses m some direction 


It favours inventors and those who ca^invent and construe^ It is an 
aspect that gives confidence and self reliance, making those under its 


influence reformers, fond of all progress and advancement You are in , 
all ways broadminded, liberal, and ^arl ess^of public opinion, and j 
may even become an enthusiast in metaphysics, philosophy, or j 
astrology 


Mars and the mystical planet Uranus were in adverse aspect 
at the time of birth This influence tends to make you some 
what erratic or eccentric. You are enthusiastic and at times irritable, 
inclining to be over energetic, also too forceful All this arises from an 
overwrought condition of the nervous system, which Uranus governs 
'You sbodfo ehdeavour'to'be more calm, not so rashly inclined, and should 
never allow yourself to become excited This aspect is likely" to bring 
you legal ^trouble s and dangers in connection with the opposite sex It is 
unfortunate, owing to the fact that most events during your life will tend 
to be sudden an d unexpected Avoid ent ering into and guard 

ng-imst exp cging yonnelf to any opdMjiability t o acc i^nts - 



110 


Tltr Key TO VOUR OWN NATIVITY 


280 CONJUNCTION of Ihc phncts Mars and Neptune is a very 
peculiar and remarkable one, giving >ou an extraordinary fund of 
energy, boundless resources, and a capacity to enter upon tremendous 
enterprises. It is not nUogclbtt a favourable position, nevertheless, for 
there IS a tendency for any bom under this influence to become “top* 
heavy,” to undertake more than he can or will perform and to over* 
cstimile his own importance. Nevertheless, the position in itself is good, 
and if the right attitude of mind is maintained, and due regard is always 
paid to the rights and opinions of others, this influence is a tremendous 
power for accomplishment, and hence for good. You will need to 
beware of becoming .a “ crank,” and you should be very careful that your 
big ideas do not run away with you. Attendance at spiritualistic circles, 
etc, would not have a very beneficial effect upon >ou. 

200 planet Neptune were in UENTFic aspect at your 

birth, a favourable influence, adding to your general executive^ 
capacity, and rendering you something of a geneml favourite with your 
fellows, since the personal mvgnetism which it supplies is abundant and 
agreeable This aspect gives great breadth of scope to the ambitions, 
and renders you capable of planning great things Whether you can 
fully carry out the great schemes will depend largely upon the aspects 
of the Sun, Moon and Mercury, and also upon your natural determination 
and fixity. For there is a certain amount of changeableness in this 
aspect It gives a very keen sense of colour, and in good combination 
with good genera] aspects to the Moon or Mercury gives special ability 
in painting 

The ADVERSE aspect between the planets Mars and Neptune is 
decidedly unfavourable, lendenng you prone to intemperate 
enthusiasms of various kinds, and driving y-ou at times into company you 
would be wiser to avoid You should strive to overcome any tendency 
to go to excess in any special direction, whether mentally or emohonally, 
or m your physical habits—in short, all forms of intemperance should be 
eschewed You are liable at some time of jour life to come into violent 
conflict with the lower classes, and you should beware of nursing a 
prejudice against them If the intemperate tendencies spoken of are 
controlled this aspect becomes of great benefit, adding a great deal of 
physical energy and enabling you to cope with large demands upon your 
capacity Avoid all narcotic drugs, and do not go m for sensational 
experiments. 



ASPECTS TO JUPITER 


111 


Aspects to Jupiter 

2^2 CONJUKCTIOK of the pUnets Situm and Jupiter may be 
said to be a favourable condition for Saturn, but not for Jupiter 
Saturn being a negative planet is more likely to absorb the influence of 
Jupiter, which is a positive planet Its effect upon your life will be pood, 
i{ you can cultivate hope and allow the joyous side of your nature full 
play, but if you become too careful and economical it will wirp jour 
nature and cause you to become over ambitious and near sighted where 
your real interests are concerned If religion should m any way nflect 
your life, see that you ate real and sincere m all that you are supposed 
to belle^e, for there is some danger of self deception from this position 
222 The ponderous planets Jupiter and Saturn in BENEFIC aspect, at 
the time of your birth i$ a \ery fortunate jposition for these \ ery 
important planets, and the nature of their \ibratvoo will be such as to 
assist you under any trying circumstances that you may ha\e to pa^s 
through It beoeflts your financial prospects, and mitigates any other 
'influence that is not favourable in this respect and makes jour path 
through life much smoother You have, deep within you, the true 
religious spirit, and also a reverence for that which you know is your 
supenor You can be ongina], also very charitable and beneiolent, and 
you will never come to want, or suffer great misery Happiness will come 
to you as life advances. 

22 ^ Jupiter in adverse aspect with Saturn is not a favourable 
aspect, excepting that Saturn gams m influence by partaking of 
some of Jupiter’s ray Its effect upon your life will be to cause you to 
d“spond at a penod when probably your liver is upset or chilled It is 
not a good aspect for your financial affairs At times you will have 
losses. It would, therefore, be as well never to lend money without 
secunty, or to be a responsible party to engagements involving 
financial nsk. Mentally it would be well to ever act m a perfectly 
straightforward manner, there being a liability to false and libellous 
accusations at some period of life Be careful m dealing with religious 
people- 

295 The CONJUNCTION of Jupiter with the mystical planet Uranus 
will affect you only la that way, or rather direction m which you 
have any latent genius, for Uranus cannot benefit Jupiter except by 



J12 


TJIF Kry TO YOUR OVVV NATIVITY 


a\%aVcn\nB whatescr there may be latent »n the Tiatoie, and Jupiter’s 
conjunction can only cause a tcmpenie medium for the vibration of 
Uranus to come throuRh to you. To those who are musical or artistic 
the influence is most fa\ourable as its nature is such as to touch the 
higher part of the nature more th.an the lower or more materialistic. To 
those who are religious and philosophical in thought it allows the 
spintual vibrations to be felt, but it is a purely subjectn e influence 
and is thus more e\il than good to the unawaJcened who could not 
appreciate the vibntion coming through 
296 r^'^nel Uranus were in UEVEnc aspect at your 

birth Tins IS an important aspect to those who are adi’asciog 
IQ thought, and those who are^^i^inal, or inclined towards the meta 
physical and occulL This aspect, in a general sense, will_ bnng you 
some s udden and unexpected gams, either by will, or legacies. You will 
eithe?< ^vent som ething, or strike out to an entirely new direction, and 
thus become fortua.ate, but m all you do to gam through this influence an 
element of the unexpected must enter, but its tendency is more toward 
onginajity la the thought sphere , and to_tba^o vefcoming of the coo* 
ventional^and^or^odox. It adds a great deal of enthusiasm toall yoor 
undertakings 

The benefic planet Jupiter in adverse aspect with the mystical 
planet Uranus, is m nowise a fortunate vibration, for it spoils the 
good promised by Jupiter, and tends to rob you of the jo>'S and blessings 
which the benefic Jupiter gives You will have \ery sodden and 
unexpected losses throughout your life, and will be in danger of 
litigations and costly disputes. It wiU lie well for yon to avoid strangers, 
and ha^e very little to do with public companies or assoaaticms and 
societies You will have some sudden change of opinion which ma> 
affect you subjects elr or ohjectnely Unnecessary travelling should be 
avoided as far as possible or great care taken to avoid accidents. 

2 gg The planets Jupiter and Neptune are in coNjuSenOH, a strange 
and imusual influence which when prominent in a horoscope 
usually brings peculiar religious tendencies, the religious nature peihaps 
being a little over developed Indeed, * megalomania ’* has by some 
been thought to be the outcome of this position, and you would be wise 
to strengthen the purely mental and scientific part of your nature, as well 
as the common sense side, m order to conteract the excessive sensibility 
of your sympathies, and the desire that you feel to go out in Io%e towards 



ASPECTS TO SATURK 


113 


all Om exuberance might be said to be the keynote of this position 
and therefore you should take patns to keep your winged Pegasus within 
bounds Nevertheless, the enthusiasm and breadth of view bestowed by 
this influence is in itself a splendid thing, and if you use due moderation 
you can become of great service to your fellows Remember, however* 
that there are other points of views than your own, and do not be 
tempted to assume undue authimty over others 
2 gg The BENEFic aspect of Ju piter toj he planet Neptune is a very 

fortunate position both for your worldly prosperity and also for 
your spiritual welfare, if you are able to take ad\'aatage of it in this direo- 
tion Beneficial influences will flow towards you, and you may makewhat 
use of them you will—spiritual or temporal There is some tendency to 
extravagance, howei er, in this influence, and you should seek to correct 
this by disciplining yourself in other lines of thought such as science, or 
mathematics, in order that the sensuous and emotional nature (which is 
likely to be very strong) may'not assume too great a sway Financial 
schemes are likely to bulk largely in your life directly or indirectly You 
should take care to practise what are termed the sterner virtues, also 
simplicity and frugality 

The ADVERSE aspect between the planets Jupilcr and Neptune 

IS not altogether a favourable position and seems to indicate that 
some of the faculties represented by Jupiter, such as superstition, self 
esteem and personal pride need to be spiniuaiised and transmuted into 



ASPECTS URANUS AND NEPTUNE 


115 

expenericed in the form of severe IimitAtions of personal liberty, either 
through the influence of some enemy or through other circumstances over 
which you have no control, which will thus have the effect of throwing 
you m upon yourself and making you reflect deeply 

The planets Saturn and Neptune were in benefic aspect at 
your birth, indicating an ability for concentrating the efforts in 
one special direction with very great persistence, in fact, this aspect of 
Itself bestOM'S a wonderful power of perseverance m spite of obstacle*' 
and defeats, where its influence is fully utilised There will always be 
a certain liking in your nature for the strange and the uncommon, and 
you will be capable of pursuing your own nay quite contentedly, whether 
it IS approved of by others or not It bnngs some tendency towards 
hardness into the nature, and you should stnve to expand your sympathies 
and seek to develop your love for others, in order to counteract this 
Music will aliiays have a strange effect upon your inner nature 
gg The ADVERSE aspect between the planets Saturn and Neptune 
IS an uncommon and strange position that is likely to bring you 
into remarkable situations at some time or other during your life It is 
a very lofty vibration, to the true nature of which present day humanity 
cannot hope fully to respond, and much of its influence may pass over 
your head, so to speak It is not altc^ether favourable, and appears to 
indicate that there is some ** kink, as it were, m the inner nature that 
tune and circumstances may declare, or which, perhaps, may never come 
to fruition m this life but remain entirely unsuspected You should 
always guard against the subtler fonnsof selfishness, which are especially 
likely to beset you The cultivation of the psychic faculbes would not 
be good for you There is always some melancholy tendency associated 
with this position 

Aspects between Uranus and Neptune 

The CONJUNCTION of the distant, pondetousand mystical planets 
* Uranus and Neptune is a position that can occur hut once in a 
century, although owing to the position of the Earth in its orbit varying 
roughout the year, the aspect will become complete and then be 
re formed several fames during twoor three years, (this also applies to the 
opposition) The nature of this aspect is in the main similar to the 
beaefic aspect described below, but is of an even more powerful character 



116 


THE KET TO TOOK OWN NATnm 


Newrthcle*:^ unless wry strongly placed by bouse posiljon («^ Ch \I) 
this conjunction will not show out scry markedly in the nature unless 
there are aspects to it recen*ed from other planets such as Saturn, Mar< 
Of Mercorj 

gQQ The BESEFIC aspect between the two most distant planets cf oar 
system, Neptune and Unmus, is an i&nuence that will base little 
actual bearing upon jour outer life, its eTects being more directed upon 
the inner nature or character It indicates that the sobjectne and the 
objectis e elements of the nature are in a harmoniously balanced conditton, 
and that consequent!) the outer life is the less likely to be disturbed by 
sudden outpoanngs of energy initiated from vntbin. UTiiJe this may be 
looked upon as a very fortunate position in itself, >-00 should not count 
too much upon it in the sense m which the word fortunate is ordinarily 
used, since this influence is too far removed from our physical life to 
have much direct e^ect upon it, and consequently the aspects of the 
other planets, in )oar natint), will be relatively much mere pemerfo! 

gog^Tbe ADt'ERSE aspect between the two outermost planets of our 
system, Uranus and Neptune, at your birth is an mduenee 
which wiU have but little direct effect upon your outer life. But in 
regard to your inner nature this aspect indicates that there is going on 
within you a certain amount of strcrele betwee n the subjective and 
objectiv'e elements in your nature, and this is likely at certam bmes to 
lead you to very sudden and unexpected changes 10 your thought, and 
perhaps m )*our habits as welL This struggle will always be going on, 
more or less, and may therefore reflect itself to a certam extent m the 
outer life, for yon will always be placed m pcsiUons where yon are 
forced to choose between a t em poral and a spintual gam 



§ $.-^The Houses of the Horoscope. 


CHAPTER XIX. 

Fikance 

The general financial fortunes are judged from the c hief p lanet 
occupying the Second House, or, if no planet be there, by the ruler of the 
sign OQ Its cusp 

An alternative method, where there is no planet in the Second 
House, IS to judge by the quality of the sign occupying it or on its cusp, 
as given m paragraphs 318 320, or by the angular position of Venus or 
Jupiter. Which of these latter methods is to be employed must be decided 
by the student's own judgment, but if in any doubt use 318 ZZO To give 
a full and accurate judgnieot of the financial character of a horoscope 
requires much experience, as well as considerable powers of judgmeat* 
but the general tendencies as regards money matters can easily be seen 
in this way 

The Son, at the time of your nativity, governed matters 
connected with finance This proimses you gam through matters 
in which Government is directly, or indirectly concerned, fitting j ou to 
hold any important post, either onder government, or for some leading 
firm The financiil prospects are hopeful; you will eventually gam 
through superiors, and may obtain favours that will benefit you 
financially At some period of your life, you wil) gain by speculation, or 
through judicious investment All financial plans and projects, with 
which you are m any way cvrticcshould be on a large scale The 
influence favours a fixed income, but it is a.'visable to watch expenditure 
The Moon governing the second mansiou of your nativity is an 
indication that you will have fluctuations iv monetary aflairs, 
your finance waxmg and waning Idee the moon It is tb»refore evident 
that if occupation is necessary, pursuits where a rapid turnover is the 
mam feature are best m every way for you Success by ttivesltnir in 
**7 



116 


TJIE KFV TO VOUR OWN NATUITV 


pablic companies aod associitions is shewn, bat particular attention 
should be given to all businesses concerned with public commodities, or 
those catering for the general public In some form or other You can be 
easily impressed with regard to the public's wants and requirements 

Mercury go\ems the house of finance in your nati\aty,and thus 
promises gam through literary matters, agencies, papers, etc ; in 
short, all stationery occupation m which the mind is more employed than 
the body You have good business abilities, and >ou are inventive as 
well as rather acquisitive where money is concerned, but you should 
guard against fraud and theft, and also be cautious in signing all financial 
documents You would do well in all professions Vrhere a quick and 
rapid moicment is required, and journalism or businesses and professions 
connected with printing, commission, agencies, etc, would furnish the 
most remunerative mode of income for you 

Venus governing the second house of your nativity ts very 
favourable m regard to your financial afliurs, and shews that you 
will have a great deal of success m all monetary concerns Matters 
g overned by thej hnet-Venus wi ll_ b rin g yo u fortune Md prosperity. 
Venus favours music, smgmg, and the fine arts, and all those , things 
wh ich mi nisterJojhejileasure and ^ppmess of others You will alv.*ays 
be more or less, fortunate in your dealings of a financial nature^ and you 
will either gam bj^egacy, or through yourprofession, business oriTartner,. 
m fact. It doe^not matter m which direction you turn your attention for 
gam, you will pi ways.be.more or less successful 

'Mars governing your house of wealth, though favourable in many 
ways IS at the same time uafortunate, owing to the nature of 
Man, which has always more or less a wasteful tendency You will gam 
through others in some way, either by will, legacy or inheritance, also 
through partners and co workers but you must expect losses, either 
through your oam or another s extravagance You are apt to be very 
reckless at times about monetary .mu should never lend money 

without security, or you will lo^e it You ran be practical where money 
•fi> wiRren/fei, tfxwqA *tAiere >001 vway -ytm "JiiA 'you 'JuvU/i 

prosper on the whole, for you have the ability to make money quickly, 
and in earning mpney you will find roach joy and pleasure 
314 Jupiter governs the second bouse of your horoscope bnnging 
V y^ou good fortune m matters connected with finance You 
wi^<-mever be poor and may through right action accumulate wealth 



FINANCE 


119 


Jupiler bemg th= most beneficent of planets promises the best of fortnne 
m connection with those tbmgs he presides over or governs financially 
may gam through Joreign affairs or b?‘£ravel: also m pursuits 
connected mth the landrlood, clothmg and those things needful for the 
^forts ot_others Under any favourable "directions" to the hene& 
Jupiter you would hare very great success in life, gaming by legaaes or 
gifts, and by or through pleasure and wealthy persons. 

316, go'emmg the second house of jour natal figure is not a 

very favourable sigmficator as it causes delays and hindrances 
to progress and financial advancement Gam however is promised by 
jindustry, slow plodding perservance, and by carefulness, thrift and 
|economy. Through purity of molive^ypu ,may acquire wealth in time, 
and by careful investment m ta^of'prop'efiy, and all things that are 
solid and concrete, you may have mote than ordinary success It is not a 
favourable signification for those who are not bom mto a good environ 
raent, as it denotes more labour and teal hard wort than good fortune in 
tancial matters You are, however, very just m your monetary 
anairSe ^ 


316. governing the second house of your nativity denotes 
some very great and suWeqjdiangesinjamLiotJunes You will 

have some peculiar and remaikable expenences m your financial affairs 
and you should be very careful m matters of a speculative or unceitain 
nature This is a favourable posiuon for those who dealm curiosities 
and all antique furniture, or oWLbool-s and cunos, etc. It is also favour’ 
able, and unfav ourable, fodfailwny affiurs, therefore, care will be necessary 
in all matters of this nature, sudden loss and sudden gam being promised 
with much uncertainty as to result. mdeed aU your monetaiy affairs tend 
to uncertainty 

317. Neptune governing your second house will tend to bring you 
financial loss, either by the fraudulent conduct of others, or by 

in\’esting m companies or affairs that will turn out disastrously, therefor^ 

It will be well for you to be careful ra dealing with others You must 
guard against signing papers likely to bring upon you financial loss and 
difficulties Financial benefits accruing to you will come about m most 
peculiar ways, either by a vision or dream, or contact with peculiar 
persons, and you may gam from some totally unexpected source a^ 
come mto money by the most odd and eccentric means, or else b 
folIoiMng some occupation of an uncommon nature. ^ 



120 


Till KE^ TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


gjQ A Cardinal Sign mlmg the fmanciaJ house of yourniiixity 
ambition with r^pird to financial success in life is shon-n, you 
Will expend much cnerRy in acquinnR wealth, and will accumubte more by 
your own activity and industry tlian bj any other means. You are thus 
capable of nsiuB to high ixisitiotvs in life, whenever there is a financial 
incentive to go onward Clianges are good for >011 uhcrc finance Is at all 
concerned, and there IS a certain amount of Bpeculitive enterpnse about 
j*ou which enables j^ou to foresee quickly where most money may be 
made, and the kind of investments and underLikings tikely to prove 
profitable Acquisitiveness is well developed, 
gjg A riXFD Sign occupying the cusp of the second house of your 
nativity indicates a tendenev for >our income to remain fixed, 
and not to fluctuate as is the case when the other signs occupy the second 
Investments will be better for >ou than speculative affairs, although 
when under good “ directions ** you would have some success in specula 
tion, but }ou arc more likel> to be satisfied with a fixed Income tlian to 
entertain risks or incur hsbihiies that would seriously affect your income 
There is some indication of your being indifferent where money matters ' 
are concerned and you would be more contented than most persons if you 
were assured a fixed and steady income 10 preference to uocertamty and 
doubt with regard to finance 

320 ^ Mutable Sign ruling the financial house of )mur nativity, 
monetary affairs are likely to fluctuate more or less through your 
life You will have more than one W’ay of acquinng an income though 
this is not the best of influences to govern financial prospects You wiU 
make money best by everyda>, unimportant undertakings, either business 
or professional, but in all probability you will lose financial opportunities 
either by indecision or by entenng upon some occupation for which you 
are not quite adapted Your mind will m some way be much exercised 
with regard to jour financial aSairs, aod you will worry and become 
over anxious with regard to your money matters Speaking generally, 
you will gam most when you do not seek to come too prominently to the 
front, and by occupations or investments of an mdifierent, obscure or 
common place nature 

The Angular Position of Venus w yournativity willalways 
benefit you m your financial a&irs and you will neyecjeally 
want and become impoverished excepting when the directions" in 



FINANCE 


i2\ 

your natal figure are exceptionally adverse, but this :s no reason why you 
should not have fortune and also success m life, so far as your monetary 
prospects are concerned Venus m an tmgle gives money t^mage, or 
through ^^nds, also through profession, and the female sex in a general 
way. This influence causes those who have it to their horoscopes to be, 
what IS called lucky '*, therefore you will be successful in all monetary 
affairs, and finance generally. 

822 Angular Position of Jupiter is a sure Indication of 
success in all matters connected with finance, and as the angles 
represent things that are made manifest, at some period of your life, you 
will be able to accumulate wealth, or come into possessions, either .by 
lawful rig ht, or by inheritance There will, of course, be some periods 
uhen your financial affairs may not be so good as at other times, but as a 
general rule, throughout the whole course of your life, you will have 
nothing whatever t o fea r so far as finance is concerned This planet gives 
thTgre^stTortune during the middle portion of the life In all monetary 
n,ff?n rs, Thursday is probably your best and most fortunate ctay. 



CHAPTEIl XX. 


TRA\Pf, FTC. 

The Third House In a general sense mdicates travel; It also affects 
the mind and shews its capacity, etc; untso shows the natives relatives, 
especially brethren and sisters and the inHuence they will have upon his 
or her life 

Where there is no planet in the Third House, either the planet 
ruling the sign occupying tlie house, or the quality of the sign itself 
(332 334) should be considered (Compare second paragraph of 
Chapter XIX.1 

222 The Sus governing the third bouse of your nativity is rather 
favourable for any travelling that you may take during life, bnt 
in a general sense it does not indicate much moving about.^ You may 
come into contact with or meet persons of high and noble birth while 
taking^oumeys, as the Sun signiSes alt things connected with rank ond 
high estate All your travels should have some high mission connected 
with them, or you may have some commission to perform that 
necessitates your moving from place to place occasionally You have a 
very high spirit and agree well with your brethren, and benefit by or 
through them in some manner The mmd is broad and generally 
impartial and there is agreement with relatives 
22 ^ The Moon has mflneoce over your third bouse and travelling, 
this luminary controlling your journeys, travels and changes You 
will be very fond of travelling, and you rvill journey and travel about a 
great deal either from choice, or compulsion, and for many reasons, there 
being a tendency to be moved about from town to town, or between 
business and home, both long and short distances being easily covered 
Most of your mental experience this earthhfe will come through travelling, 
and you much prefer change and movement to any monotony You will 
come into touch with the general public whilst travelling, and should be 
very^ receptive to the conditions of others 



TRAVEL, ETC 


123 


g2g Mercury governs the third house of your nativity This is an 
indication of much activity m all matters connected with travel, 
and you will take many journeys, and do a great deal of moving about 
during your bfe time You have a great love of travelling and sight* 
seeing and may be engaged m some pursuit that necessitates a constant 
changing and moving about on youc part. You will gam information, 
and especially more experience, also obtain many benefits in this 
direction This influence is good for your mental and physical activities, 
but It IS against the acquirement of concentration to enable you to 
become permanently successful, your mind being rather over active at 
times, therefore you should endeavour to cultivate concentration 
g2g Venus baimg rule over the third bouse of your natinty, makes 
travel, changes, and remoi’als pleasant and profitable You 
should not only gain by travelling, but mil also find your chief enjoy 
ment and your greatest pleasure in the journeys you uill take dnrmg 
your life This position of Venus very greatly improves your nand, and 
It denotes that you are artistic, and love the beaubful, especially m 
Nature You will agree with relatives and brethren generally, either 
gaming through them or bemg also of some mutual benefit to them, 
directly or indirectly You will at some time of your life travel for 
pleasure, oi profit, this position of Venus being very favourable 

Mars ruling your third bouse is not good for travelling on any 
journeys that may be taken for business or pleasure It 
threatens some accidents, or severe trials through circumstances that 
may arise whilst travellmg In a general sense this planet has not a 
good influence, causing the mind to be at most times very hasty and 
impulsive, and thus it is likely that you may directly, or indirectly cause 
accidents to happen This influence also denotes trouble by, or through 
relatives, brethren causing yon annoyance and making disputes You 
shonid always be guarded in your speech and correspondence This 
position Witt give you plenty of mental courage when necessary to use it 
Jupiter ruling the third bouse of your nativity is very fortunate 
for all matters connected mth travel espeaally upon what are 
comparative short journeys m our time It will bring you m contact 
with lery helpful and beneficial influences, and, when travelling for 
either pleasure or gam, you will have success and profit This division 
of the heavens is also concerned with brethren and the state of the brain 
mmd With Jupiter the most benefic planet placed m the third all these 



124 


THE KEY TO VOUB OWN MATIN m 


matters wil) be in a way peacefut and successful Your kindred will be 
wcU disposed, your mmd religious, and your menial condition ccoendly 
harmonious You may practice meditation with adiantage 

Satuiik governing the third bouse of your nativity wilt cause 
hindrance and delay In connection with your travelling and any 
journeys that you may undertake You will do well to prepare for 
disappointments in connection with teasel You will gam nuny expert' 
ences that will come through rorrow or grief in connection with travel 
This influence is against your agreement with relaines or brethren, and 
it IS probable that you will be estranged from them or sufler through their 
actions, their attitude toivirds you at times being cold and distant You 
will have a love of the occult and mystical, and should seek to dip into 
those matters that favour psychic things, it gives you (be ability to study 
astrology and kindred subjects thoroughly 
830 ^ the ihiti house IS noi iltoceiber a favourable aspect 

for travelling, for it is an lodicaiion of scrnie sudden and 
uoexpected journeys through life )ou will love to be travelling and 
roaming about and you will 6od it dilbcult to settle down permanently 
m one place for very long Your miod will be (juite original and tn no 
way conNcotional It indicates that you will have friction with your 
relatives, or someone connected with you by family lies will be eccentric 
and uncommon You will be very fond of astrology and metaphysical 
subjects It Will be as well for you to guard against accidents while 
travelling or rambling 

Neptune occupying the third bouse ot your nativity shows that 
you will meet with some extraordinary expenences during travel 
You may meet with very peculiar misadventures This is not altogether 
a good or hopeful position moreover, so fir as your relatives are 
concerned for some of them may be in some manner strange characters, 
either of a very good or very bad type, but very difficult to understand 
Enough IS not known about the induence of Neptune to be positive as 
to how his vibrations will act in any nativity With some, his nature is 
decidedly evil, and only those who are at all spiritually advanced can 
(eel his influence lu connection with tbe third house affairs 

ggg CaroiNAL SignS occupy the houses of travel, therefore there is 
no doubt that you will do much travellmg during tbe course of 
your journey through hfe, for tbe Cardinal signs not only give a love of 



TRAVELS, ETC. 


125 


change, and moving about, but also the opportunities to travel Under 
certain "directions you will be forced to make changes and undertake 
journeys and these will prove more or less profitable in accordance with 
the nature of the influence that may be operating at the time You will 
act n tsely by endeavouring to discover the position and aspects of the Moon 
before you start upon any important journeys, for much will depend upon 
the lunar orb and also her conditions as to the happiness you will meet 
with whilst travelling 

ggg Fixed Signs govern the houses of travel at the time of birth, 
and this is an indication of either v ery little travel coming into 
your life, or a disinclination to move far from your native place There 
fore all travel may be more or less compulsory, or the result of 
circumstances over which you have no control, which may be seen from 
a study of that part of the horoscope dealing with the future, and called 
" Directions There are times when it would be best for you to avoid 
travel, or to take journeys purposely, it being evident that your 
experience is to be gained from a fixed and stationary position There 
will of course be times when to travel rnay be absolutely necessary, and 
this will be marked in the “ Directions * 

334 StONS having rule over your travel you will be quite 

indifferent as to travelling, but circumstances will decide thu 
matter for you, and all your louroeys and even removals will be produced 
from outside causes more than through your own initiative The mutable 
influences with regard to travel are marked by indectston It is thus 
difficult to amve at any definite and clear idea as to when you will travel, 
or if any journeys will be undertaken by you , but there does seem more 
indication of long than short journeys, the common or mutable signs being 
more connected with foreign lands than the native place of birth 



CHAPTER XXr. 


Environment 

The Fourth House is concerned with the end or resticjr pJace o/ 
things, and therefore governs home, also the close of life It affects all 
home and domestic a&airs and indicates the general state of the 
environment, and more especially the surroundings towards the loiter 
part of life 

ggg The Son, having rule over the fourth house of yonr nativity, 
promises a somewhat glonous coding to your career You will 
either come into contact vvith powerful people who wnll assist you, or 
your life v.iU be made more sonny through conditions that you yourself 
have set in motion However, the close of life is shown to be better 
than the early part, and you Will, individually, be benefited and reap the 
fruit of what you have sown m your earlier years This inflnence of the 
Sun manifests according to the sign into which its ray passed at your 
birth, more at the finish of what you undertake than at the beginning, and 
shews that your ventures will have a satisfactory termination 
gQQ The MOOV gov eming the fourth bouse of your nativity will bnng 
many changes tow^d the close of life, and indicates a tendency 
for things to fluctuate lu a general sense, so that whatev er your under 
takings will be always expect uncertainty towards the finish You will 
have domestic cares and worries at the end of your existence, and wnll 
probably be rather unsettled and not fixed m your post or conditions- 
Changes and fluctuations are strongly marked, but they will be changes 
necessary for you to obtain many of taose realisations that will help 
/arward your occult groivth You are foo3 of the iBysticaf and aU tbinga 
concerning the other worlds 

Mercury governs^our -fourth house and denotes that you will 
probably have some^nental worry at the close of your life You 
should be very careful m pealing with sharp witted and very clever 
oersons as years advance. .and jt would also be well to use discriminatioo 



ENVIRONUEftT 


127 


in regard to any papers you may have to sign at any period The end of 
all the affairs with which you have anything to do will require the exercise 
of your'^mental abilities, but your mind should ever be Jceen and alert, and 
well able to cope with any difRcnities with which you may have to deal 
Probably you will be interested in or concerned with young life as you 
advance m years. ^ 

ggg Venus having the principal induence over the fourth house 
promises you a very peaceful and happy period towards the close 
of your existence, m so far as worldly goods and comfort is concerned 
You will find yourself in better arcnmstances and with more harmonio us 
surroundings at the close of your life, than formerly, and may be 
‘surrounded by those who will be much attached Ho you, and willing to 
make your life all that you could desire at its close This influence also 
brings matters in which you may at any time be interested, to a very 
satisfactory issue, especially whenever the planet Venus is well aspected 
by " directions " or meets the good aspects of other planets 
839 fourth house of your nativity promises you 

some disputes and difEcutties lo connection with domestic affairs 
and warns you to be careful of troubles, which at certain periods of your 
life will arise out of turbulence, or mharmony It is not a good influence 
for the environment into which you may be thrown This is not at all 
good for the parents, or those who may have any authority or control 
over you, and rather favours removal from residences than remaining too 
long in one place 

Jupiter having influence over the fourth house of your nativity 
promises you a g^id environment at the c lose o f your life, m 
fact, the end of your life is the, best, and a good terminatio^to j’our 
existence is very plainly marked It wil! be much better for you to 
remain m, or near your native land and home, than to reside in a foreign 
country, or to travel from your home for success You will gam m all 
those transactions that have to do viith social or home affairs and 
domestic life generally This influence shows some good coming to you | 
from parents, and promises you inheritance Every year of your !ifa.i 
should be more and more prosperous, and comfort secure at the end 
341 governing the fourth house of your nativity warns you 

to guard against over carefulness, there being an inclination for 
you to be acquisitive, and also anxious to acquire Health, more 
particularly as your life advances You will not be over generous with 



128 


THE KEf TO YOUR OWN NATIVITT 


thin influence, and may become rather resen ed and more sectaded as 
life progresses: and tov-ards its dose jou are liable to be left alone, and 
not surrounded with those to » hom you ate most attached. This influence 
always fa%ours economy, and will enable you to sate money and 
accumulate better than any other influence m the horoscope, and there is 
no need to ad% ise yotl to take care for old age as you are indioed to be 
quite careful enough m that direction. 

Uranus having rule o\er the fourth house of your nativity 
indicates that the latter portion of jour life is to be somewhat 
peculiar and eccentric. You wll take up studies towards the close ot 
life of which in the earlier part you had little if any idea. This position 
of the planet Uranns is not altogether fax-onrabte, as it indicates some 
sodden surprises and tmexpected events in the closing jears of life, and 
)'Ou may come into some enx*ironment that )’ou will not be able to 
respond to unless jou base made great progress in occult matters. You 
hat e some ability to study astrology and kindred subjects. 

NErruhE was m the fourth house of your naiunty This is an 
indication of some pecutmr experiences towards the close of your 
life. It IS diiKcolt to speak with any degree of certainty or definiteness 
tn regard to this planet as but little is known of its nbration; bat in a 
general sense some peculiar experiences on mediumistic or spmtoalistic 
Imes will most probably come to you, and you may live lo a house that 
IS haunted, or .where there are some xcry peculiar phenomena, or else be 
drawn to those places where influences that are out of the common are at 
work. Therefore you will do no haim by cbangtng your residence from 
tune to time. 



CHAPTER XXII. 


Enterprise 

The Fifth House is one that indicates all speculative things where 
there is scope for individual eSbrt and initiative, it is therefore imown as 
the house of enterprise It is the house of the heart, and therefore 
signifies those things into which the heart enters largely—love affairs, 
pleasure seeking, speculations and alt forms of enterprise, children, and 
the artistic creative capacity 

The Sun has influence over the fifth house of your horoscope 
and this is very favourable for matters of an enterprising nature 
in a general sense, but much ^V 1]1 depend upon the solar aspects with 
regard to the success that you wiU have in your enterprise You have 
speculative ustinct and should be able to invest money to your advantage, 
but It should be in big concerns or with a considerable amount of capital 
to be what you would desire In many respects you have the capacity 
to take kmdJy to pleasure and should be able to take all your enjoy 
ments in a nght royal fashion, as you love to do things on a very grand 
scale You would gam by children 

The Moon having rule over the fifth house of your horoscope 
indicates a great amount of enterprising spirit, but it is of asome 
what fluctuating character In all of your investments and matters of 
a very enterprising and speculative nature, deal with those concerns that 
affect the general public, or have the good of the populace as their 
concern This influence is rather inclined to favour gambling, and those 
matters that are risky, and common, or what may be termed ** chance, ’ 
wherein the element of uncertamty prevails, so that many of year 
enterprises will be of a fluctuating kind with little or no permanency 
attached to them You will be deeply concerned regarding children at 
some penod of life 

Mercury having rule over the fifth house of year horoscope 
indicates much mental enterpnse It favours quick and rapid 
»*9 


396 



130 


THF KLr To lOOK OWS *.ATIVITy 


achoti fe7fh rcgird tosjxjcuhtjve matters I»o{« warns you affoinst signing 
or accepting an> jxipcrs and documents with \ lucli you are not tho-oiiRhly 
acquainted You will iia%c much corrc<pondence with regard to Io%e 
nOairs, and some romance nilj come m your way, either through macb 
reading, or through activity of jour mmd Vou will do well to live 
purely, and toa\oid any of those speculations that may be turned into 
gambling All your investments should be with those concerns that 
have a rapid turnover Y’ou should have much to do with young 
children 

Vfsus having rule over the fifth house of jour nativitj, promises 
jou success in all monetary afTiirs connected with investment, 
and also speculation Vou vvill invest jour monej to advantage, and in 
all matters connected with pleasure you are shewn to have gam This is 
a fortunate and in a general sense very favourable house, and being under 
the influence of Venus, love and pleasure should brmg you happiness, 
your capacity for enjojaneot and pleasure is very great, and few can 
enjoy as sincerely a$ you This lofluence promises a fruitful and also 
happy union with one of the opposite sex, also happiness from children 
and their affairs Avoid excesses to pleasure 
S98 having rule over the fifth house of your nativity, denotes 

much energy and an enterprising spirit, and if you avoid impulse 
in matters of speculation, also with regard to certain investments, you 
may apply jour energy to advantage in speculative matters, but you 
should carefully avoid gambling or any nsky enterpnses where you have 
to rely upon the honesty of others You are somewhat free in matters 
connected with pleasure, and ardent m your afTections, with a tendency 
to involve yourself with the opposite sex if you are not cautious m 
dealing with them This influence indicates some pais or some trouble 
through children, and warns you against all rash conduct in your 
enterpnses 

Jupiter having control over the fifth house of yonr nativity, 
promises you fortune and success through speculation, invest 
mests and enterpnses, apart from the actual labour to acquire wealth. 
Under any favourable directions, you should be very snccessfnl m 
speculation and by judicious investment may, eventually, amass wealth 
in various ways You should have much social joy and pleasure in your 
hfe, and children will bnng you gam, and also happiness. The fifth 
house IS the bouse of pleasure, and being under the influence of Jupiter, 



CHAPTER XXIII. 


SiCKNrss 

TlIP Sixth House of each nativity is concerned with sickness It is 
also the house of work or labour, and of service generally It denotes 
the sicknesses one is liable to if general health is not maintained 

ggg The Sun haMng dominion over the sixth house of your nativity, 
you should not have many sicknesses during your life, but those 
you do have may be rather long and difficult to cure They will anse 
chiefly from the state of the eoostitutioo, which w’tU have received some 
shock, or have been impaired by some radical trouble You wiJ/, however, 
obtain good attention when ill, and if proper treatment is adopted you 
should be able to recuperate Sun baths will be good for you and plenty 
of fresh air will do you more good than drugs or physic, the Sun being 
the best curative medium for all who ore sick or indisposed. You should 
gam through inferiors. 

The Moon governing your house of sickness indicates trouble 
from functional more than any organic complaints You should 
le very careful with regard to diet, as most of your troubles will arise 
from mdigestioc, or stomachic complamts Never dnnk too much dmd 
or indulge m too much bathing, and be most particular to avoid too many 
starchy foods and indigestible substances Sickness may be produced 
through travellmg, or too many changes, but especially through impure 
magnetisms and unhealthy environmeots, therefore, see that you have 
fresh air, and that those with whom you associate are magnetically pore 
The Moon governing the sixth house tends to give you tumourous 
complaints, etc. 

ggg Mercury having rule over the sixth house of your nativity, 
most of your ills m life will arise through nervous and also 
^Mntal troubles You should be careful never on any account to worry, 
j{\ou value your health at all, because a nervous breakdown is threatened 
yoi^^ any time when the mind lets you give way to worry and imtabihty 
*3» 



SICKNESS 


133 


All jour sicknesses will generally anse from the condition of your mmd 
and the nervous system You will have some psychic impressions that 
will m certain directions affect you, and there is more depending u^n the 
peaceful condition of your rmniJ than yon will ever estimate. This 
influence is a dangerous one when mental troubles press heavily, affecting 
the mind 

ggg Venus having dominion over your sixth house, shows some 
tendency for the generative system to suffer through excesses, or 
indiscretion with regard to diet and habits of bvmg It will, therefore, 
be well to use temperance in all things, and if you should be led to 
indulgence in any way, remember that you may trace your indisposition 
to this fact The kidneys, throat, and generative system will be liable to 
attack when health fails. 

Qgj Mars governing the sixth house indicates troubles ansisg from 
excesses and shows that the muscular system has been weakened 
in some manner, and to strengthen it the mind must be healthily 
employed You cannot be too careful m your habits, and should Uve 
purely and quietly, and never exceed temperate limits, for yoo will be 
liable to feverish and loflammatory troubles with some danger of 
operations, accidents, and violent diseases 

gg Jupiter governing the sixth boose is very favourable for all 
* cases of sickness, as it indicates a speedy recovery through good 
and proper ruling Your sicknesses wiU anse through surfeit> and the 
condition of the blood, the liver, etc. Keep the blood pure, avoid drugs 
and live hygieoically, and you will then quickly recover from any 
sicknesses from which you may be suffering You may escape any 
liability to sickness by a study of temperance in all things 

g Saturn govenung yonr sixth house shows danger of much 
sickness at certain periods of your life, sickness that is liable to 
be lingenng, and cured with difficulty Cold will mjunously affect you, 
and you -mil tend to suffer from asthma, also liver and stomach troubles, 
owing to the condition of the system generally Study your diet and 
Keep up the circulation by adequate exercise 
ggQ Uranus govenung your sixth house indicates a tendency to 
peculiar complaints likely to become incurable You should m 
all cases avoid operations, hypnotic treatment will not always be 
advisable for you. although m cases that require special attention, 
electrical, or extraordinary methods of tmatment may be useful Avoid 



134 


THE KF^ TO YOOR OWK NATIVITY 


hjstena, for there is some danger of hypochondria shown Generally 
speaking, the position shows liability to peculiar nenous diseases 
gg^ Neitune bcing^connected with your sicknesses will cause yon 
to suffer from peculiar ailments, and uncommon disorders; 
therefore special treatment will be required, should you ever be senously 
indisposed, for it is highly probable that you w*ill suffer from what may 
be termed astral sickness, or disorders that arise mentally, these affecting 
you astrally. Great care should be taken when afUicted by any serious 
ill health, to see that all your surroundings are harmonious, and not likely 
to attract unhealthy and injunous conditions The mind should be kept 
balanced, and ail tendencies tonards hysteria eradicated, and eserything 
done to pre^ent hypochondria, etc. 



CHAPTER XXIV. ’ 

Marriage 

The Se\ enth House, in quite a general ivay, denotes marriage On 
this question a good deal of mdu idtial judgment is necessary, for the 
aspects to the luminaries, and certain other considerations largely affect 
marriage But m a general sense the planet nearest to the cusp of 
the se\eiith house or failing that the planet ruling the sign on its cusp, 
has most to do >vith marriage 

"Where there is no planet m the seventh, or near its cusp, the position 
of Venus should be considered as descnbed m the next chapter Para 
graphs 630 Ca and 630 Gb m Chapter XXXII also ha\e to do i^ath 
marriage and ma> be needed m exceptional cases, as there explained 

Sun governs the seventh hpuse of jour nativity, the house 
of marriage This signifies a fortunate and an ambitious partner, 
and one whose influence iviil be beneficial m your life You mil m some 
\vay gam through marriage financially, and also socially Your partner 
ivill be very independent, but of great moral integrity, and one who scorns 
to do anything mean or not exactly straightforward It is not the best 
signification for harmony, but there will be every opportunity for affection 
to increase, and also happiness produced by success This influence 
somehmes delays mamage or makes it \ery difficult to bring about, 
either through pnde or position 

ggg The Moon governs the se>enth house of your nativitj, the 
house of marriage This is rather a fa\ curable testimony for 
your mamage, and although it maj not be considered a soaal success yet 
It may be a happy marriage You will have several opportunities to 
marry, but you will incline to wa\er or be undeaded about iL Your 
partner will be sensitive and also inclined to several moods and changes 
You should try to guard against outside influences which may senously 
affect j-our mamage prospects Dark and probablj short persons will be 
attracted to you, or those ubo are \ery fascinating and magnetic. 

>3S 



136 THE KLV TO YOOR OWN NATlvm 

864 Mfrcury Bovenss the cevenlh house of your niuvity and is 
therefore the indicator of marriige This deooles jour partner 
to be \ery quick and intelligent, fluent m speech and apt to be rather 
out spoken at times, but cntical and nenous. Some norry and unsettle 
meat is denoted by this mflueace, and it faiours a marmge with a 
partner younger than yonrself. There is likely to be much cones 
jiondeacc m connection with your mamoge and it u'ould be wcU to be 
cautious with regard to letters os it is probable that trouble may come 
Ihtongh papers or Tmling Mercury is a very peculiar planet when the 
signtflcator of mamage partners. 

ggg Venus governs the seventh bouse of your nativity, the house of 
mamage This is a very favourable significator and promises a 
partner who is not only happy and well disposed, bat one who mil bring 
some fortune into your life destined to benefit jou financially and 
socially. Your mamage should be a happy one and all your rclabon 
ships aiter mamage «hould be most harmonious and peaceful Venus is 
the planet eoi*eraing all love aflairs, and tends to improve the life 
according to the house she governs. It will tend to make jour union 
fruitful and all children should bnog with them blessings, greater joy, 
fortune and happiness. 

366 governing the seventh house of your nativity, the house of 

mamage, is not the most favourable planet to rule ov er the aflairs 
connected tvilh matrimony. Mars being more ccnceroed with passion, 
etc^ rVian love. You mil do wisely to avoid a hasty mamage, or falbng 
m love at sight. It as a rule promises a very early mamage, and some 
times oim'e than one union. You wJI, in all probability, marry one who 
IS very ardent in f eetmg and afTectioo, and one who will desire to bold 
the rems and rule the roost SbU, the martial type is aSectionate, 
although at tunes given to anger and assertiveness. The person most 
likely to attract you will be bold and fearless, and full of courage. 

Jupiter governs yonr seventh house, the house of mamage. 
This IS a favourable testimony for a happy union, for Jupiter 
IS a benefic planet and promises success, and modi happiness in all things 
over which be rules. Your partner will be very noble and also very 
generons, and fortune should smile upon you after your mamage. It 
sometimes indicates a partner who is rather proud, though always high 
mmded. If you marry under the best " directions,” much success will 
come to you after mamage, the umon bemg fruitful and prosperous. 



MARRIAGE 


137 


This position sometimes indicates that the partner has either been 
previously married, or, it may be, is senior by a few years Still, on the 
whole It IS the best of positions 

Qgg Saturn governs the seventh bouse, the house of marriage, m 
your nativity This planet tends to delay or hinder the marriage 
prospects Should mamage take place hoisever, it promises a faithful 
and steady partner, one who is just though rather grave and serious, very 
industrious, persevenng, careful, thnfty and economical There is some 
probability of your partner being older than yourself, with a tendency to 
court responsibility It is notavery faioumble tesbmony for prosperity, 
but it denotes a faithfulness iD the mamage state, although care should 
be taken not to allow coldness to spring up between you at any time, for 
your partner will not be over demonstrative m affection, and will prefer 
action to speech and loving deeds in preference to the use of many words 
of endearment 

ggg Uranus governs the «e\enth house m your nativity This 
mystical planet wiU bring some very peculiar expenences mto^ 
the mamage state, and it is very probable that it may bring you disap* 
pomtment, or estrangement It always threatens separation from those 
who are loved, and this will occur either before or after mamage Sudden 
and very unexpected events occur m all cegioos that Uranus governs, and 
there are more divorce cases under his dominion than any other planet, 
therefore see that your partner is onginal and fond of metaphysical 
subjects You will then know the right person described by Uranus, 
who favours mystics, etc. 

370 Thisplanet 

IS one o! the most recently discovered, and therefore w e cannot as 
yet be fully acquainted with its mfiuence It is supposed to sound a 
much higher and more spintual vibration than any of the other planets, 
and in this respect is said to favour those kinds of marriages that are 
more the result of soul union, than of the senses Sut, it has been found 
also, that the planet Neptune is also concerned with the lowest conditions, 
as well as with the highest, and may cause some very strange and 
uncommon unions, indicating mairiage with people who are either crippled, 
or else afflicted in some way pi " sally, mentally, or morally 



136 THE KLY TO YOUR OWH NATIVITY 

864 MfRCURV governs the seventh house of your naUNnty and is 
therefore the indicator of marriage. This denotes j‘our jurtner 
to be very quick and intcllipcnt, fluent in speech and apt to be raiher 
out-spoken at times, but critical and nervous. Some v.orry and unsettle- 
Rient is denoted by this influence, and it favours a marriage uatb a 
partner younger tliaa yoorself. There is likely to be much corres¬ 
pondence in connection T/ith your marnage and it would be nell to be 
cautions with regard to letters as it is probable Uiat trouble may come 
through papers or writing. Mercury is a very peculiar planet when the 
aignificatOT of marriage jiartners. 

ggg Venus RO\ems the seventh house of your nativity, the house of 
marriage. This is a very favourable Bigni/icafor and promises a 
partner who is not only happy and well disposed, but one who will bring 
some fortune into your life destined to benefit you financially and 
socially. Your maniage should be a happy one and all your relation¬ 
ships after marnage should be most harmonious and peaceful. Venus is 
the planet governing all love afiairs, and tends to imptovo the life 
according to the house she governs. It will tend to make your union 
fruitful and all chitdrea should bnug with them blessings, greater joy* 
fortune and happiness. 

866 governing the seventh house of your nabvjty, the house of 

raamage, is not the most favourable planet to rule q\ er the affairs 
connected with rnatnreony, Mars being more concerned with passion, 
etc., than love. You will do wisely to avoid a hasty marriage, or falling 
in love at sight. It as a rule promises a x-ery early numage, and some¬ 
times more than one union. You will, m all probability, marry one who 
is very ardent m feeling and affection, and onewhowiU desire to bold 
the reins and rule the roost. Still, the martial type is affectionate, 
although at times gnen to anger and assertiveness. The person most 
likely to attract you will be bold and fearless, and full of courage. 

Jupiter governs your seventh house, the bouse of marnage. 
This IS a favourable testimony for a happy umon, for Jupiter 
is a benefic planet and promises success, and much happiness in all things 
over which he rules. Your partner will be very noble and also very 
generous, and fortune should smile upon you after your marnage. It 
sometimes indicates a partner who is rather proud, though always high- 
miaded. If you marry under the best "directions.” much success will 
came to you after marruige, the unica being fruitful and prosperous. 



MARRIAGE 


137 


This posihon sometimes indicates that the partner has either been 
previously married, or, it may be, is senior by a few years Still, on the 
whole it IS the best of positions 

368 governs the seventh house, the honse of marriage, m 
your nativity This planet tends to delay or hinder the marriage 

prospects Should marriage take place however, it promises a faithful 
and steady partner, one who is jnst though rather grave and senous, very 
industrious, persevering, careful, thrifty and economical There is some 
probability of your partner being older than yourself, with a tendency to 
court responsibihty It is not a very fa%ounibIe testimony for prospenty, 
but it denotes a faithfulness in the mamage state, although care should 
be taken not to allow coldness to spring up beti\een you at any time, for 
your partner will not be over demonstratite in affection, and will prefer 
action to speech and loving deeds in preference to the nse of many words 
of endearment 

369 governs the seventh house m your nativity This 
mystical planet will bnog some \er> peculiar expenences into, 

the mornage state, and it is very probable that it may bring >ou disap< 
pomtment, or estrangement It always threatens separation from those 
who are loved, and this will occur either before or after mamage Sudden 
and very unexpected events occur in all regions that Uranus governs, and 
there are more divorce cases under bis domimon than any other planet, 
therefore see that your partner is original and fond of metaphysical 
subjects You will then know the right person described by Uranus, 
who favours mystics, etc. 

NEPTUNEgovemsthesevenlhhouseofyournativity Thisplanet 
is one of the most recently discovered and therefore v e cannot as 
yet be fully acquainted with its inffuence It is supposed to sound a 
much higher and more spintual Mbralion than any of the other planets, 
and iQ this respect is said to favour kinds of mamages that are 
more the result of soul union, than of the senses But, it has been found 
•ilfift,, ‘haiv’hft. qJaaftJv. *11/1. JjVKesAoindtfinns., 

as t\ell as with the highest, and may cause some very strange and 
uncommon umons, indicating mamage rvith people who are either cnppled, 
or else afflicted in some way, pi -** sally, mentally, or morally 



CHAPTER XXV. 


Marriage Prospects as ikdicated dv the iosition of Venus 
tK Ttcc Signs. 

As stated tn previous chapter, there arc other influences than 
the position and aspects of the Lord of the Seventh that affect marriage, 
of these, one of the chief is the position and aspects of the planet Venus. 

Vfnus in Aries is a powerfnl influence, but it threatens sron 
iMth some dangers in connection with love aflairs. You will 
mclme to be somewhat fickle, and have several courtships or love 
attachments, owing to >our desire for change, and will, if you are not 
careful, become too fond of romance, etc. Eventually )’du will have 
sorrow, or sadness, m connection with affairs of the heart, for you are 
liable to make mistakes m regard to marriage, either through some hasty 
decision or fay the fact of your becoming involved and entangled with 
another to such a degree that you will be forced into a marriage. You 
are liable to impulse and there is also a tendency for you to fall in love at 
first sight. 

g,y2 Venus in Taurus will give you some trouble In conoeebon 
with your love aflairs, but at the same time you should gam 
rinancially and also socially through your mamage. This position of 
Venus indicates that you have a very strong love nature, with an loclma 
tion to let your feelings influence your decision greatly, your eroobons 
being much stronger than your mind Some happiness will eventually 
come to you through your mamage, but this appears to be more along 
the lines of finance than through reciprocal afleebon You will, in all 
probability, have only one love afiair throughout the course of your life, 
for you are more fixed than fickle and possess a very deaded attachment 
to those whom you love, therefore you should be careful upon whom you 
bestow your love. 

Venus in Gemini, the dual sign will bnng two love affairs into 
your life, and through this you wiU have some trouble, and also 

t9« 


878 



MARRIAGE PROSPECTS 


139 


sorrow , because it is quite likely that you will have two attachments 
running at the same time Relatives will also affect your love affairs, 
and they will exercise a deaded influence o\er your marriage This will 
bring you troubles and difficulties, and it will be extremely difficult for 
you to avoid being involved in more than one lo’ie affair at the same 
time, this planet in Gemini always gtiing dualism, and more often than 
not, two unions with members of the other sex There is some danger 
of jealousy, and also trouble ansmg from correspondence, in connection 
with your matrimonial affairs 

' Venus in Cancer, the house of the Moon, indicates that there 


IS some tendency for you to be rather ^ckie in your affections 


and, until you .becorne r cally.nthichcd, you are liable to have many loi e 

{ affairs You will be attracted to those older than yourself, and also to those 
who have had love affairs with others You may_m eet vnth your future^ 
partn^er while travelh^Jfer oecome xery much attached to one who is not 
of the same social standing as yourself Vou must avoid all change 
ability and inconstancy in mailers of the heart, or you will be habit to 
disappointments and sorrows id connection with your love emotions You 
are more receptive to the feelings of others than you suspect, and easily 
influenced through them 

Venus in Leo promises you a very successful marriage, and a 
considerable amount of happiness will come into your life through 
your marriage partner Through your marriage you will be elevated to 
a higher position m life than that which you held at birth, and wiU attain 
to reputation and social advantages which will considerably minister to 
your welfare m the world This influence favours marriage, and 
quickens tne emotional ndlure to such an extent that your feelings are 
easily appealed to, producing attachments at the first opportunity It also* 
lessens your liability to make errors in all matters of the heart, tho^ 


perceptions being very keen and active m this direction 


876 


Venus in Virgo shows that you will be m some way av erse to 


mamage, giving greater preference to a life of freedom than legal 
union with another Therefore there will be some liability either to a 
platonic attachment or to clandestine unions This unique position, 
however, gives an internal love for celibacv it is not altogether favour 
able tor union w ith the opposite sex It mdicates attachments to inferiors, 
or to those m a lower station of the social scale than your own, and also 
the inability to gam the iffections of those supenor to yourself by birth. 


MARRFAGE PROSPECTS 


141 


jour affections, and thus bring yourself into critical positions, whereby 
your honour may be affected It will require a great deal to touch the 
depth of your emotions because you either have great control over the 
^ feelings or they may be difficult to awaken to their fullest extent 
1 Jealousy may cause you to suffer keenly, for when your affections are 
{ awakened you will become remarkably attached 

gg^ Venus in Aquarius, a Saturnian sign, has some tendency to 
delay mamage, and will probably bnng you some disappoint 
meets, etc, in your love affairs, and this will arise through your intuitions 
being so keen as to guard yon from making mistakes m relation to 
marriage It also has a tendency to intensify the desires for a celibate 
life, for you ivould have your love chaste, and free from all trace of the 
senses In some cases, secret connection with the opposite sex anses 
from Venus m the sign Aquarius, and it seems to favour those attach 
ments, rather than legal unions It generally produces a very faithful 
attachment, and sometimes causes long courtships, or fnendships of a 
Platonic nature You will lo\e one formerly a fnencL 
gg 2 Venus in Pisces, a dual sign, and the exaltation of this planet, 
should bnng you success in love affairs, if you do not have more 
than one attachment going on at the same time For, this sign being a 
mutable one, is likely to cause two attachments and this would bnng you 
slander or difficulty m connection with nvals It is, however, just possible 
that you may marry more than once, and should you survive your first 
partner, this will most certainly be the case This influence favours all 
attachments having their origin ui matters connected with sickness, or, 
institutions, and it promises a happy marriage if it is undertaken under 
benefic " Directions You may meet the one who will affect your life 
seriously, under rather peculiar circumstances 



CHAPTER XXVI 


Legacies. 

The Eighth Hoase of each nativity gcnems Jeganes, and money 
commg from others. «ych as co workers, partners, etc. It ts 
concerned with occult affairs, mystenous and secret ucdertakmgs, it 
indicates the sex tendenaes. 

ggg The Sun go^ emiog thc cigfath boosc of yonr nativity promises 
a legacy, most likely from some person holding a position m life 
superior to your own or it is probable that you ma) gam a legacy from 
a relati% e. In a general sense the Sun has not much digsit> m the eighth 
house, but it is a favourable positioo for occuJtissi or matters connected 
nth the deeper things of life Materially it generally promises gam 
through marriage or bj Imkiog yourself with others, such as partners or 
co-workers, and denotes that you would do better in sharing undertakings 
with others ihan by taking the sole responsibility upon yourself 
gg^ The Moo^ gmeniing the eighth house of your nativity there 
exists a slight possibility of your gaming by legacy, and very 
probably Irom someone viho will not be directly related to yon, or else 
you will gam something by public donation, or throogb affair s m which 
the general pubbe are mterested, and are desirous of rewarding you for 
some service, or pubbe good that you will have done. It also favours 
your gaming through partners and co-workers, or by those who may be 
concerned with you m pubbe undertakings, 
ggg Mercery filling tfac cightb bouse of your cabvnty is a shgfat 
testimony of gam by will or legacy durmg some portion of your 
^e This position favours your gaming through co-workers or partners, 
but nothmg definite can ever be pred.cted from a horoscope when 
Mercury rules the eighth houses with regard to the goods of the dead, 
owing to the very changeable nature of this planet. Your mmd may be 
exercised concerning anv money that may left you or vou mavbave to 
*4* 



* LEGACIES 143 

act as 'idministrator, executor, or trustee for someone at some period of 
your life, and may gain pecuniarily by so doing 
ggg Venus having rule over the eighth house of your nativity, 
promises you certain gam by will or legacy You will in some 
way or other benefit through the deadi of others, also by mamage, 
partnerships, and co workers When this planet is well placed, or 
aspected by “ direction you will, m all probability, gam money through 
others It IS a very favourable influence if you are in any way connected 
with others wherever monetary matters are concerned You should 
procure an insurance upon all things in which there is any liability, or 
nsk of any descnption This influence promises you a very peaceful 
end, and preservation from accidents at the close of life, or any sudden 
termination to your existence, being a beneAc influence 

Mars has chief influence over all matters connected with the 
eighth house of your nativity, the house concerned with deaths, 
wills or legacies You may or may not, gam money by the death of 
others, but if you should it would be sudden, and m some nay unexpected, 
for Macs is not a good planet to be concerned with money matters 
You would find that you had been probably buoyed up by some false 
hope, and would not gam so much as you had been led to expect Your 
'wn terminus vitas will be somewhat sudden although you may live to a 
age, but it will be advisable to guard against accidents and not to 
>ny more nsk than is absolutely necessary You would be drawn to 
olic calamities, etc 

ggg Jupiter having the chief influence over the eighth house, the 
house concerned with deaths wills, legacies and matters 
pertaining to the terminus you wiU gam by legacy or the goods of 
the dead, or through marriage partners, and also through co-workers. 
This influence brings you good fortune through other persons, and either 
through insurance, or m some direct or indirect manner you may gamJby 
the lo ss^Lothers You will have a very peaceful end to your existence, 
dying a natural and easy death There is no better influence than that 
coming from the planet Jupiter, and all be presides over comes to good 
m the end 

ggg Saturn ruling the eighth boose of your nativity, the house 
connected with deaths and with money left h} others, is m no 
way favourable for your interests in these matters You will be dis 
appoi nted in you^ expectations cooccmed with money coming to you 



CHAPTER XXVI 


Legacies 

The Eighth House of each nativity governs legacies, and money 
coming from others, such as co workers, partners, etc It is also 
concerned with occult affairs, mysterious and secret undertakings, it 
> indicates the sex tendencies 

ggg The Sun governing the eighth house of your nativity promises 
a legacy, most bkely from some person bolding a position m life 
superior to your own or it is probable that you may gam a legacy from 
a relative In a general sense the Sun has not much dignity in the eighth 
house, but it is a favourable position for occultism or matters connected 
with the deeper things of life Materially it generally promises gam 
through marriage or b) linking yourself with others, such os partners or 
CO vorkers, and denotes that you would do better m sharing undertakings 
^vIth others than by taking the sole responsibility upon yourself 
gg^ The Moon governing the eighth house of your nativity, there 
exists a slight possibility of your gaming by legacy, and very 
probably from someone ivho will not be directly related to you, or else 
you will gam something by public donation, or through affairs m which 
the general public are interested, and are desirous of rewarding you for 
some service, or public good that you wiU have done It also favours 
your gaming through partners and co workers, or by those who may be 
concerned wnth >ou m public undertakings, 
ggg Mercury rulmg the eighth house of your nativity is a slight 
testimony of gam by will or legacy during some portion of your 
jfe This position favours your gaming through co workers or partners, 
but nothing definite can ever be predicted from a horoscope when 
Mercury rules the eighth house, with regard to the goods of the dead, 
owing to the lery changeable nature of this planet ^our mmd may be 
exercised concerning any money that may be left you or > ou may hav e to 
»1* 



* LEGACIES 143 

act as administrator, executor, or trostee for someone at some period of 
your life, and may gain pecuniarily by so doing, 
ggg Venus having rule over the eighth house of your nativity, 
promises you certain gam by will or legacy. You will m some 
way or other benefit through the death of others, also by marnage, 
partnerships, and co workers When this planet is well placed, or 
aspected by “ direction " you will, in all probabilit}, gain money through 
others It is a very favourable influence if you are in anyway connected 
with others wherever monetary matters are concerned You should 
procure an insurance upon all things m which there is any liability, or 
nsk of any description This influence promises you a very peaceful 
end, and preservation from accidents at the close of life, or any sudden 
termination to your existence, being a beneflc influence 

Mars has chief influence over all matters connected with the 
eighth house of your nativity, die house concerned with deaths, 
wills or legacies. You may or may not, gain money by the death of 
others, but if you should it would be sudden, and m some way unexpected, 
for Mars is not a good planet to be concerned with money matters 
You would find that you had been protebly buoyed up by some feist 
hope, and would not gam so much as you bad been led to expect Your 
'wn tenuinus vitss will be somewhat sudden, although you may live to a 
age, but It will be advisable to guard against accidents, and not to 
*ny more nsk than is absolutely necessary. You would be drawn to 
jhc calamities, etc. 

ggg Jupiter having the chief influence over the eighth house, the 
bouse concerned with deaths, wills, legacies, and matters 
pertaining to the terminus vtftt, you will gam by legacy or the goods of 
the dead, or through marnage, partners, and also through co-workers 
This influence brings you good fortune through other persons, and either 
through insurance, or in some direct or indirect manner you may gam by 
theJ.oss.oCjothers You will have a very peaceful end to your existence, 
dying a natural and easy death There is no better influence than that 
coming from the planet Jupiter, and all he presides over comes to good 
iQ the end. 

ggg^ Saturv mling the eighth house of your nativity, the house 
' connected with deaths and with money left bj others,is lo no 
way favourable for your interests m these matters. You will be dis 
appoin^rf^^m you^expectations concerned with money coming to you 



144 


THC KEY TO VOUR OWN NATIVITY 


from others, also, with regard to money by mamage, or through partner¬ 
ships and CO workers Vou may have money left to you, but the 
indications for this are not strongly marked m your horoscope Your 
own terminus Vitcs will be slow, and you wiJJ also have much t/me to 
ponder, before the final end comes to relieve you from jour physical 
^ body You will Ine to an advanced age, and should be fully conscious 
at the end of your life 

890 planet, has control over the eighth house of 

your nativity, the house of deaths, wills and legacies This 
influence brings about ^udden and imexpected^ev ents You will not 

obtam all that may be left yon, and may gam nothing whatever, or 
unexpectedly come into money Nothmg is sure where this planet is in 
any way concerned, and it seems in some way to be concerned w^th that 
portion of th^ fate pver^which one^has n_o^coatrol and whi^ waits for 
so me o pportunity to reward or punish Your terminus vitae will be 
somewhat of a sudden nature, and I do not thmk that you wall have any 
long illness at the close of your life Avoid operabons and crowds; ' 

Neptune presides over the eighth house of your nativity This 
is the portion of your boroscepe connected with matters con 
cemmg death or the leaving of the physical body, by all with whom 
you are related, as well as your own terminus \ ties It is not beneficial 
for any money or legacy that may be left to you, as you will be v ery 
liable to be the vicbm of fraud, or not get that to which you are entitled. 
You should take every precaution not to have any drugs administered to ' 
you, or any experiments made upon jou at any tune, for everythmg that 
the planet Neptune governs is shrouded m mystery, and peculiar 
happenings occur m connection with ail those matters m which he is 
concerned- There is some liability of your going mto very deep sleeps 
or becommg entranced. A watery death is sot improbable 



CHAPTER XXVII. 


PHILOSOPHy. 

The Ninth House of every nativity denotes the scientific, phiJosophic 
and religious tendencies of tite native It is the house of the higher 
mind" It aisQ .denotes travel or long journeys from home, journeys 
which result in a broadening of the mtod, expanding the ideas and draw 
iDg one aivay from the patty and bourgects Such journeys need not 
□ecessanly be great as measured in leagues, it depends upon the general 
environment To one, a journey from Slocomhe to London will produce 
a greater change in the mental outlook, than another might expenence 
ID going to New York and back. 

ggg The Sun having rule over the ninth bouse of your natmty 
promises you success to all philosophical matters You have 
very deep feelings with regard to religion and spiritual affairs, and your 
thoughts^are lofty, and ennoblmg You can lake very broad_yiews of 
life generally and are not bound too much by conventionality This 
influence will bring you success from all ninth house affairs, such as the 
law and foreign affairs, also long joiroeys^akrosd and those things which 
wncernthe higher mind There is behind you a good spiritual influence, 
and as your faith increases you wtU learn to come in touch with the 
higher part of your real self 

ggg The Moon has chief rule over the ninth house in your nativity. 
You will be drawn toward the higher life and, although you may 
have peculiar news in regard to religion, at the same tune you wiU be 
earnest ano become enthusiastic in all matters peitaming to the higher 
tnougbt. It will never be diSicult for you to change your mmd m regard 
to any religious view that you may hold and in this way you wiU escape 
orthodoxy or limitation to your religious feelings. Yon could become 
very philosophical, as you are indined to take broad views and the min d 
is more to you than the senses 


■43 



146 


THE KEY -TO VOITR OWV SATIVITY 


TiIercury ha\’ing dominion over the omth house of j^ur nati jty 
IS an indication that your higher nuad is often more actne 
the loner You have, m a ceitaio direction, the abJity to become a 
philosopher, but not uabi yon hare more concentration and continoit} 
You are %ery quick m yoor perceptions and sery intnitiie, so that you 
may very much impro^'c j'our mmd danng the present life, beir^ in 
many respects quick to leam and appreciate- You will take "yjme long 
%oyages, or tra\el m foreign coontnes, for this influerce is an indication 
that you are fond of travel, especially long jonmeys. You ba%e a 
metaphysical turn of mind, and lo\e ro>stical subjects 
ggg Vesus governing j-oor ninth house, the house of philosophy and 
the higher mmd, will bnng you peace either through religion, or 
through a deeper inner knoT^ ledge about the siul and after death states, 
which will bnng happiness and peace e\entna]!> You are very 
philosophical in >our tendencies, and possess an intuition that will help 
you in any problems that come before you in life s journey You ha\e 
the ngbt spint and attitude towards all matters relating to the higher 
mind, and will make much real and permanent progress this life, m your 
soul attainments- You will have good relatives through marriage, and 
may gam through them m some way, this being a good influence, 
ggg Mars having the Rovemment of yojr ninth bouse, the house of 
all matters coming under the head of philosophy, is not very 
favourable to peace and calm, as would be expected were any other 
planet in power over this por t io n of the horoscope. But it shows yrou to 
be enthusiastic in all that you put your mmd and heart into and you 
will combat or argue against any system of thought that does not meet 
with your full approval You are very independent in your thoughts and 
feelings, where rebgion or philosophy are concerned Avoid litigation or 
disputes, and do not become too expressive or too outspoken m matters of 
religion, or you will suffer 


gQY rules over the nmtb bouse of your natmty, the house 

of science, philosophy, religion This influence inclines you 
to philosophy and wisdom, m its widest sense. You wiU not be so 
saentiflc, as philosophical and arbstic, for you incline more to accept the 
bjpad^outlines than the limited and precise details of the higher mind. 
\ou would succeed in foreign lands, and probably gam in some way 
through foreignaSairZ This influence favours all legal affairs, and also 
religious matters m general It gives yon some pro phetic tendencies and 



PHILOSOPHY 147 

the^^^r to dream correctly and atso to bring the dreams through mto 
the physical brain Take note of them 
398 n‘Dth house of your nativity, the house 

of religion and philosophy Saturn is the planet of stability and 
concentration, and this position indicates a grave enthusiasm in all the 
rebgious questions that n ill occupy your mind You will be philosophical 
and hold very advanced views concerning all matters connected with the 
higher mind, and all subjects of a metaphysical nature will prove of deep 
interest to you *11113 position of the planet Saturn is, how e\ er, unfavour 
able for legal affairs, or for travel where long journeys and foreign affaus 
are concerned Truth is the best means of your awakening the qualities 
of this ninth house 

Uranus, the mystical and occult planet, occupied the ninth 
house of imur nativ ity This indicates the interest you have in 
astrology and kindred subjects. You hold very advanced views, and jou 
do not cling to those that are orthodox and conventional You have a 
very ingenious and ini cntne miad, with a great deal of originality m 
your character You can e ^lore the region of the unknown, and obtain 
joy and pleasure from all those thoughts and subjects that are considered 
in our day " far fetched ' and “ superstitious, but no matter how much 
critics may look on you as a cran k, your th ought _i5_of Jhe adva nced and 
ptog resswr.t ype You may cultivate the higher cnticism to advantage, 
but be sure that it is the higher cnlicism and impersonal 
^ KePTUNe ruling the ninth bouse of >our nativity, indicates a 
peculiar and somewhat advanced view of life, with a mental 
attraction towards psjchical affairs, and perhaps to spiritualistic pbeno 
mena, and also all kiodred subjects You will have some very true and 
remarkable dreams. At times you will dream things that have no 
connection with or are not in any vvay relateiJ to, affairs of daily life, 
but at other times iou may bavre warnings our dreams that wall bo 
useful, but to “ dream true ” sucwessfuUy, you must live an ideally pure 
life The relatives of your partners will have strange histones, and you 
will do well to avoid litigation, and legal affairs in all forms, to be haj^y 
m life 



CHAPTER XXVHI. 


Profession. 

TiIE Tenth House governs honour, profession and the ambitions 
generally. Avocation is not, houever, judged soUly Rom the tenth 
house, the Sun and Moon must be taken into consideration and also 
tj^e slronge^^planet The second and houses ha've some share 
m the matter, too, the second indicating the general financial success 
ease in mtkihg income, etc., and the sixth showing (he degree of what 
may be termed “ drudgery *' But the tenth house is emphatically that 
which concerns the vocaltott, that in which one's ideals are to a 
considerable extent m>olved, and towards which one’s best efforts tend 
It IS the house of ambition 

If there is no planet m the tenth house, it is best to judge by the 
quality of the sign on the M C (paragraphs 410 412) The remarks m 
the second paragrapK^ofnCEaptcr XIX. will also apply here, mutatis 
mutandis 

The Sun, having influence over matters concerned with your 
occupation in life, is very favourable, but much will depend upon 
your opportunities to rise to the height of the Sun and all it indicates. 
This you may judge from the solar aspects and the sign that the Sun 
occupied at your birth as described under “Individual Charactenstics.” 
Your individual and real character wiU be concerned in all the pursuits in 
life with which you are in any way engaged, but in a general sense you 
are best adapted to be your ow n master and not in the employment of 
others, unless it be in Government enoplcqr, which in your case would be 
the best, for you can exercise authority 

Th e^M oon is concerned with all your pursuits m life, and her 
influence favours all emidoyments of a common, or public and 
universal character You should follow those professions which have to 
do with catering for the public at large, and those in which a popular or 
w ell known demand is made You will have much fluctuation in your 
»4* 



PROFCSSfOM 


151 


pursuits In life; therefore it will be as well if you 
almost any calling or en\ironment necessary to win success oul®l* adapted, 
or common thmgs Do not seek any trade or any profession which 
fixity and permanency as its base, but where change and fluctuation art*’^ 
the order of the day, S P Q R ts the motto for this position 
403 tenth house of your nativity. This 

denotes that all Mercunal professions will be best for you,' 
such as literary work, writing and secretanal pursuits It is not 
altogether a fawurable influence for permanency with regard to profes 
sions, and some changes may be experienced throughout your life A 
light employment is better suited for you, and where travel or movement 
IS required }ou will be in jour element There are many professions 
coming under the rule of Mercury, such as printing, writing, boolcsellmg, 
stationery, etc , but all those pursuits where the mind is exercised, such 
as an agent, interpreter or teacher, etc mil be best suited for you 
^ Venus go\ emmg the tenth house of your nativity promises you 
success in all matters that are concerned with the pleasure of 
others Your employment in life should have some connection with the 
female sex, for Venus favours women and all their requirements The 
occupations under the influence of Venus are too numerous to describe, 
but, generally speaking, they are those which deal with objects and 
subjects that give pleasure to others AH those professions that are light 
aod refined will be best suited to you so far as gain and enjoyment is 
concerned You mil meet with success in life through this position, and 
you mil have many good friends to help you 
405 presides over the part of your nativity concerned with 

profession Mars is the planet governing warfare and all 
matters of an external nature also where much energy is required You 
should possess some mechanical ability, you would then have success in 
all matters where mecaamcal skill and enterprise is necessary You 
would also be successful as a chemist, or doctor, and in any pursuit 
where fire is used for working purposes Hiere are many occupations 
under the riile dt the pianet'Aiars, arib lney are so numerous {nat it is 
almost impossible to enumerate them all, but you will be able to judge 
for what you are best fitted, by noting the positions and aspects of the 


planet Mars / 

Jupiter has chief rule over the tenth house, and therefpf^ 
indicates that you will follow honourable professions b^nbich 



.HE EEV TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


a financially and socially. You will gam through religious 
;oreign concerns. This planet denotes success in all matters 
which he presides, so that your occupations Mill be to your taste, 
jd likely to bring >ou joj and happiness. There are many pursuits that 
you may folIo^^ to advantage from a judge to a merchant, according to 
^your abilities, but so far as trade is concerned you Mill do well tn 
justnesses that clothe and supply the general public with provisions, etc. 

407 profession or occupation, and this 
denotes power and authority in some way, but bnngs most 

fortun e and_sucee 5s_thrQ i igh_tn^'^tiy_aDd_perse\ erance You svilf either 
^hold a leading position cr have some kind of responsibility placed upon 
r you. This Saturnine influence is not good for business matters as there 
IS always some danger threatened, either through the injury of others or 
the failure to carry to a successful issue whatever projects you have in 
hand Saturn fav ours gam by labour more than by good fortune Afatters 
reqmnng patience, tact and caution succeed better than any other methods, 
therefore you should seek the pursuits requiring these qualifications 

408 having rule over the tenth house of your nativity, 
signifies that the pursuits for which you are best fitted and 

adapted wiU be found amongst all those professions that are onginal and 
ingenious in tlieir nature, such as advertising, or those of an inventive 
nature and those which call forth all the activities of the higher mind. 
This Uraman influence will, however, upset maD> of your plans until y’ou 
get mto the right groove You will eventually find th.it y’ou will have to 
mark out your own career, for after many ups and downs you will come to 
realise that you have onginal talent, and either adopt an uncommon 
profession, or become an mventor and originator of work. 

Neptune having some concern with professions and employ¬ 
ment in your horoscope, indicates that you should follow those 
pursuits that are rare, unique and uncommon In a general sense this 
planet governs all things of an inspirational and psychic nature, and we 
find mediums and all uncommon persons in the professional world under 
this planet. It bestows upon some a literary genius, and upon others 
artistic ta'te^of a peculiar nature. It is dtScult, if not impossible, to 
^hit”opon any''special or permanent profession to recommend with 
*'onfidence, especially as so little is actually known about Neptune, most 
lA ideas about this mysterious planet being at the present time more 
- of a speculativa nature. 



CHAPTER XXIX. 


FRffirtDS 

THE Eleventh House governs friendships, hopes and wishes, and 
the desire for Union It is closely related to the seventh house and 
indirectly with the third, and all that it denotes is synthesised m the 
planet Uranus 

' '"Should there be no planet in the Seventh, then judge by the tnpliaty 
to which the sign which occupies it belongs, (paragraphs 422 425) 

The Sun has chief rule o\er the eleventh house of your natii ity, 
the house of friends and acquaintances, hopes and nnshes This 
IS a \ ery fai'ourable position for you in a general sense, so far as fnends 
are concerned, and it will also enable you to realise many of your hopes 
tind V, ishes during life You are capable of making some very firm fnends 
in a good position, and they will be willing to help you m several ways. 
You will make many fnends during your life, b> whose help, advice, or 
faiour, you will in some way benefit Associations, and joining with 
others, IS one of the many ways by whicb success could easily be yours. 
This position will help you to cultivate hope, and general good wiU 
to all 

The Moov governs the eleventh bouse of your nativity, the 
bouse of fnendship and acquaintance, and this will cause you to 
have many fnends, some among the general public, and many who will 
be willing to help you Your chief enpenences will come to you through 
your connection with friends and associates, for you fraternise very easily 
with those who are congenial to you Your career will be greatly 
afiected by your fnends who will play a very important part in your life 
You will be likely to come is contact with some very peculiar and 
eccentnc people Your best fnends will be found amongst those bom 
between June 21st and July 21st of any year 

Mercury governs your boose of fnends, and much depends 
upon the aspects to ?.lCTCury and the other planets as to how far 
this IS a favourable position or otherwise It is probable that you will 
have many acquamtances, but only a few fnends in the true sense of the 
* 5 * 



FRIENDS 


153 


wort. Someof>-oiirac:qua.ntancos loay profos fneodship for you but 
It will be os well to be on the look out for any msmoer.ty or deceit, for 
Mercury unless well uspected ever inclines to be fickle and unreliable 
You may have friendship with mgenious persons, and those who ate 
connected with literary work will probably be your best and truest 
friends, but be cautious in all your dealings with acquaintances until yon 
are quite satisfied that they come under the good side of the dual planet 
Mercury, when they will make clever friends whose advice will be 
•Ipfu! and useful to you. 


Mars governing the eleventh house of your nativity is not 
altogether ifavourable for friendships, lor it indicates some 
disputes and quarrels between yourself and friends, at some period of 
your hfe You will become acquamted with medical, or militarj men or 
persons who are ambitious and enterpnsmg, but avoid senous disputes 
or wrangling, and be guarded in your choice oSlhcquaintances This 
infinence denotes a strong desire nature, and implies that you have very 
potent hopes and wishes, but many of your desires will only be gratified 
by your own energies, and through much foice and earnest endeavour 
Do not become surety for anyone, or lend your friends money, etc o 
you will lose both frieods and money * ’ ^ 

418 Jupiter govereing your house of friends is very good and a 
very happy testimony that you wiH never be in want of a fne d 
throughout your life, and those friends wUI not only be very wilha 
also able to help you, whenever you mayrequire their aid You uilfha 
friends or acquaintances amongst religious persons, or those who are 
philosophically inclined, very well disposed and anxious to do 
good they can to others Your friends will be found amongst those b^rn 



154 


TItE KFV TO \OVJt OWS 'NATIVITY 


under the planet Jupitor. or cenerally speakinp, from No%efnber 2l8t to 
December 21st in my jear You will realise many of your hopes and 
w-ishe*! during this life, if )ou vull think clearly. 

SATtEW goieming the eleienth house of jour nativity, will bnng 
<^>ine very faithful and reliable friends into >our life, but some 
trouble m connection v.ith jour friends and acquaintances is also denoted 
You will have friends amongst the aged, in a general sense, or those who 
are much older than yourself You will have some bitter disappoint 
ment«, in connection with either friends and acquaintances, and you will 
not alwajs realise jour hopes and wishes v ith regard to them Some of 
jour so called friends are liable to desert you. when jaiu most require 
their aid, therefore do not relj too much upon all jour friends, this 
influence giving but few real friends 

Uranus having rule over the eleventh bouse of your nativaty, 
jironiises a rare and exceptional friendship and indicates fJiat 
persons who are interested in the side of life connected with the mystical 
and the occult will lielpjouatsotiiepenodoflifesjoumey Thisiolluence 
gives friends and acquaintances of the romantic or bobemiao order, 
some V ery strange or fascinating and remarkable experiences in connection 
with friendships are denoted bj this I’ranian influence You have 
abthtj to stiidj human nature, and will be drawn to original persons, and 
those who think more llian the average individual W^ite travelling,you 
will meet those most likelj to become jour w-arniest friends ^ 

^ 2 ^ Neptunc presiding over the eleventli bouse m jour nativity the 
bouse of fnends, wiH bring jou many peculiar and strange 
acquaintances and nianj weird or remarkable experiences will occur 
through them It would be well for >ou to know the persons with whom 
you associate and mix as j ou will find them rather difficult to in any way 
understand This position usually brings those coming under its influence 
into contact wath persons who are physically or mentally deformed It 
will draw you toward the psychic and spiritualistic side of life and j-our 
mends or acquaintances wall influence you in this direction You should 
avoi& 'hypnolists, mesmerists, etc Ttio position indicates a 'Kiminvhat 
mystical turn of mind, and shows the fulfilment of your hopes m a manner 
quite difierent to your expectations 


The Fierv Triplicity has chief rule over the eleventh house 
in your horoscope, bnngingjou some very energetic and useful 



156 


Till' hrv TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


425 Watcrv Tripucity hu chief nile over the eleventh 
hou^ic in >our nativity, therefore you will ha\e man) emotional 
friends, some of whom will have much sorrow and many troubles of their 
own You will never be able to place implicit reliance upon )our friends 
and acquaintances, as they will be as unstable as water and liable to 
much fluctuation m feeling and afTcclion Some will be dreamy and 
sensitive, and others will be ps)chic and niedmmistic, while others again 
will not be firm or in any way self reliant, so that jou will see that >ou 
arc very liable to be imposed upon by }Our friends at some period of your 
life Never become surety for another or lend mone> unless you are 
quite certain that your help will not be abused and lead to evil results 
You can be practical where your friends and acquaintances are concerned 
tf ^aiu do not become too much influenced by their feehnes. 



CHAPTER -OG. 

Occultism 


The Twelfth House is one of mystery. ih,, . 
and mutable influeuce it is 
actual physical manifestation It has been called 
H2j°'.°g." Ikerefore It represents occnlt.sm'and all that*^°-^--5S'' 
and m an occult sense it may be said of ifiis house that 
must be. ''^“^tever can be 

Should there be no planet in the twelfth house use ™ 
unless the sien Leo occupies it, in which case use 426 435 

-426 '■““Shf your nativity,.^ 

ence for all matters of an occult nature and ^ 
deep interest in all things that are psychic, or beyond tbl''* 
at the same time you are m some manner restricted or 1 But 

unable to express yourself to the fuU, owing to the coadm 
your birth or eniinroament, which are not at all favou 
to worldly welfare Therefore let your life be one of a‘ 

^ner, more than to the outer, for you will then come 

who are wiUing to assist you m the ngbt directioIT 
ouse IS nsmg, and therefore you are promised much ° 
idly afiairs as your life ad\-ances. *™P”^'^entia 

427. of your nativity uhr 

mg occult tendenaes, IS at the same tune not very 
personabty, because you may be obscured or kept m the baeJe 
at some penod of your life will either suffer confinement with 
or some place where yoor liberty and freedom is restricted*^ h 
house havmg to do with all those matters connected with th ^ 
Therefore it favours self undoing, or matters that are concerned** 
occult more than mundane things. Also you should never se^ 
yourself too much to the front, bnt most be contented to pass thm ° 
more or less unknown and unrecognised. ^f« 

>37 



OCCULTISM 


159 


self'Xmdoin^, and you will yet talce your life in hand and endeivour to 
understand much of your inner nature, for you will have a faith in 
mystical affairs 

432 Saturn is so placed as to have principal influence over all 
matters of an occult nature m your nativity, and probably you 

will yourself be the cause of ycaur own self undoing, and may come into 
the occult life through perseverance, patience, and forethought But you 
may also experience sorrow, difliculty and delay, in connection with the 
occult life , but whatever you attain to will be permanent, so that your 
(iifUculties Will only tend to make you build for the future on a very firm and 
solid basis You are in man) respects much drawn towards the mystical 
and occult, and should be able to take up the study of astrology and 
kindred subjects, but use caution in occult matters 

433 ^*^anu s is concerned with all matters of an occult nature m 
jour nativity, and all mystic subjects will have a special 

fascination and interest for you You possess the ability to enter upon 
the study of astrology and kindred subjects, and a love of the meta 
physical is deeply buried within your nature, therefore you should seek 
to awaken this from latency and bring it into activity \ou may be 
brought to a realisation of the higher truths by some remarkable crashes, 
or through strange and unexpected experiences which may come into your 
life, but nevertheless, amidst all the strange experiences in your career, 
you wnll ev cr be brought nearer and nearer to the truth, and may, at 
{ength, make very rapid progress 

NErTUNE hav mg chief influence over the twelfth house of your 
nativity, will bring you into contact with peculiar and weird 
experiences, m connection with what is called occultism You will 
uther come into touch with mediums, or study spiritualism, and will 
probably also meet with some very peculiar persons holding strange views 
oQ occult lines It watnsyou, however, to be careful m your dealings with 
psychic matters, for you will come in contact with larious grades of 
psychic phenomena, at different periods of your life, but these various 
influences can only operate, in the highest condition, when a pure life is 
led, and the tendency is towards higher thought and purity of motive 

Your twelfth house, the house of occultism and secret aflairs, 
was NOT OCCUPIED by any planet at your birth, therefore its 
influence over your life was not so strong as would have been the case 



162 


TIIE KE\ TO YOOR SATIVITY 


helping yoa or advising you. It may seem as though >oa had less free 
will than others, whose planets are rising at birth, but m reality it Jias a 
far more important meaning than this, for it means the mergmg of the 
Personality into the Indiwduality, whenever jou are ready to realise the 
^•alue of this sorrender 

The majority of the planets m your natinty were Above THE 

Horizos at the time of your birth TTus will bnngout all the 
latent possibilities denoted by those planets, allowing >xiu to express their 
influence easily , therefore you will meet with some success m life and 
adi-ance in many ^ys, bcjond the sphere of jour birth. The elevatiaa 
o' the planets also denotes a certam amount of ambihon and the abihty 
to stand alone, making yon more self reliant, aspiring, energebc, and 
perseienng You will ha\e some very fortuiate periods, and gni-yecc 
will come to you, whenei er you exert yourself, and determine to 
the most of the opportunities that will be yours. 

The majority of the planets at vour birth were Below the 
H 0 R 120 V This denotes that the latter years of your life will 
be the more soccessfol There is a great deal that is latent in you that 
you cannot well express, and you will not ba\e >ery many opportunities 
in life to improve your positton therefore you should seize every 
opportunity that comes m your way loo will succeed better by 
working with others, and by steady persistence, ihan by great show and 
enterprise, and I think you Vi-oold do much belter by allowing others to 
take responsibility than by asserting yourself, yon work best un 
recognised and unknown There is more in you than you are aware. 


439 


The Triplicities. 


440 


The majority of the planets were in Fiery Signs at jour birth 


which is an indication of a \ery spirited and jdealistic nature. 
You possess a great amount of force and energy and a full, nch and 
generous nature plenty of vitality and enthusiasm and also mncb hope 
and activity ^ou have deep emotions ean love ardently, and also 
display much passion and are never lacking m spirit. Lme of th* 
heroic and intensity of purpose is a very marked feature of your charactet 
and disposition- Von will always put a great deal of yourself into all 
yon do and feel but you should avoid impulse or rashness, and always 
thmk carefully before you speak or act. 



164 


Tin KEV TO YOUR OWS NATIVITY 


are a " Pioneer,” and will alw’ays aspire to take the lead m any concern 
m V, hich j ou are at all interested You are m manj respects self asserts e, 
independent, and very active You will have some fame during your 
life, and >ou are, or will be, a noted person in the sphere in which you 
move There is a certain love of change in you, which will make you 
sometimes capricious and uncertam, but, nevertheless, changes are good 
for you. * 

) 345 majority of the planets were m Fixed Signs at your birth, 
and this IS a favourable indication of ^our solidaritv, reliability 
and patience At times you will be very firm and rigid, and if this is 
carried to any excess, >ou wjU become dogmatic and even obstmate 
But in a very general sense it gives you self reliance, and a certain 
amount of independence , for at the root of your character there is some 
pride and dignity, because, although you will not be prepared to adnut 
it you can be austere and m some ways autocratic You will be kind, 
hovever, owing to your feelings, of which you ha^e a full share You 
are persistent, sure and reliable 

^ 446 majority of the planets were in Mutable Signs at your 
tune of birth This denotes that you are versatile, although at 
the same time rather too indecisive and not sufficiently firm and deter 
'mined. But you are sympathetic, and somewhat mchned to be sensitive 
although if you would make your life more useful, you should cultivate 
more thoroughness or you will be inconstant and have a feeling of want 
and discontent with yourself You have a somewhat fickle nature and 
should try to pull yourself up to the standard of firm self reliance, which 
would make your life much more happy and successful You^are at 
times very restless and uncertain but are always fond of intellect and 
intellectual pursuits 

The Position of the SUN and MOON in the Signs 

The Sun in a Cardinal and the Moon in a Fixed sign 
wiU cause you to be mtemally aspinng and ambitious, but 
externally unable to respond quickly to the inner vibrations This may 
cause some obstmate tendencies to be displayed in your personality 
This quality makes you an earnest character, possessing much ability, 
but although you have the necessary steam, you will not always feel 
disposed to allow it to move you forward. In fact you often stand m 
your own light through the failure to personally answer to the internal 



SUMMARIES 


165 


and real promptinp'? from the higher part of yourself It seems as if you 
possess internal nit and quick perception, but not theponerto understand 
until opportunities nave passed. 

The Sun in a Cardinal and the Moon in a Mutable sign 
vrill give jtiu internal aspirations and amoitions, but the lack ol 
opportunities to carry them intoacbve manifestation, and th»«s may anse 
through indifference to the internal desires, for the combmatiOD of these 
different qualities is not altogether bannonised, the one shomng an actiie 
tendeac>, the other quite the reverse But there is this adi’antage about 
the above, which is of value it will cause jou to steady the individual 
characteristic and calm down much of the internal enthosiasm. This 
may not be so beneficial from a material standpomt; but from the pomt 
of view of the higher life and the Soul, there is wisdom in this 
arnuigeiiient Where principle is concerned, be decisive, and neier 
sacrifice the ideal for the sake of detail. 

The Sun is a Fixed and the Moos is a Cardinal sign in 
} our natn tty will gii e you more individual firmness than ) ou will 
be able to express dunng life, the personal element being changeable and 
less permanent You could be internally satirical, and externaUy mtty, 
a combination that should quicken your mentality to a great extent, and 
gi\ e you some measute of power over your external condibons You are 
ambitious enough to be able to make your way m life, and will seek to 
rule, or to be at the head of things generally You will be mdependeot, 
and self reliant, and possess an internal restraint over yourself which 
wall enable you to pursue with steady purpose any object you desire, 
your formative will being strong and persistent. You have strong 
cbaractenstics. 

The Sun in a Fixed and the Moon in a Mutable sign m 
sour horoscope, shows that you have a blendmg of the humorous 
and satincal tendencies, although the one may somewhat counteract the 
other Internally you will be capab'e of much more than you are able to 
accomplish extcmallj, probably through the lack of opportunity Intern 
ally you are firm, steady and fixed, but your external cosdibons are m a 
measure restless and mdecisi^e. This maj be the cause of some lack of 
ambition, and a tendency to let things drift, without enough energy being 
put forth to alter these existing ccnditions. Therefore you will not attain 
to fame or great things m this life, unless your life is joined with anoiher 



166 


THE KE^ TO YOUR OWS NATIVITV 


more ambitious loternal decision and externa! \vavenng are your dangers, 
while determination and intellect are your salvation 

The Suk in k Mutable and the Moon in a Cardinal sign 
at the time of your birth u ill make you personally desirous of fame 
and recognition, but you w ill often lack the necessary internal incentive to 
enable you to carry out your different plans and aspuations You should 
not let 5 ourself be too changeable or individually too uncertain Try to 
remember that dunng this life you are weaving the web of jour future 
destiny, and that although you may not be able to cany out everything 
you plan in this life, you will, m the future that lies before jou baie 
the opportunity to reap all that you have hitherto sowm Your nature 
seems to be internally peaceful, whilst on the surface you are o^er active, 
and somewhat too precipitate Nevertheless, you wull learn much more 
through your outward activity than through the inner conditions which 
are apt to be too uncertain to be relied upon 

The Son in a Mutable and the Moon in a Fixed sign in 
your horoscope will give you internal indecision, and external 
resolve, so that you maj be personally bxed and determined upon any 
course of action, and yet when driven to the point may be so very 
undecided as to waver, and thus let many an opportunity pass jou by 
It will be to your advantage to think very carefully ere you male up 
your mind definitely, but when once made up it would be well to carry 
out your ongioal plan, or you wnll have to make the thing action when its 
usefulness has passed by It seems as if jou would have to learn the 
lesson of being 6rm, but not stubborn ^ou will not obtain much fame 
and recognition in this life and wnll do well to be ever patient 

The Sun in a Fiery and thf Moov in as Airy «iiga at 
birth IS one of the best influences it is m everj waj harmonious 
It will allow JOU to control jour emobons, and to see things from the 
intellectual standpoint, beside having the motive force behind to raise 
your ideals to the highest point You can be philosophical and very 
sincere, but may live a little too much in the subjective world You will 
tbmk and also feel in advance of jour surroundings, and if you can make 
your actions harmonise wnth jour ideal, you wiU indeed make very great 
progress during this present earth life. The quality of jour brain is such 
as to allow you to expand m every waj, and jou should try to realise 



SbktMARiSS 167 

that many of jour present limitations may be overcome by your own 
individual effort 

The Sun in a Fiery and the Moon in a Watery sign 
at your birth indicates the asrandency of the higher emotions 
o\er the lower, and this reaiij means that any tendency of yours to 
encourage the sensational element, is to Ine m the lower half of your 
being You will be very receptive to jour surroundings, and will often 
take on the conditions of other persons and think that their conditions 
are your own. You are positiie to the higher life, and should remember 
that the true mediumistic spirit is to give allegiance to the higher Self 
and not allow the habits of mind and body to entirely dominate the sonL 
You are personally inclined to be impressionable, but when pushed to the 
centre of j ourself can be firm and determined 

The Sun in a Fiery and the Moon in an Earthy sign at 
your hirth are contrarj elements. You wnll find that you are 
indmdually much in ad\ ance of your personal conditions and surround 
mgs. and the purpose of this seems to be to teach you to be thorough, 
and far less on the enthusiastic or emotional plane, and to help you make 
jour splendid ideals practical and real You will have plenty of oppor 
tunity to culti%'ate patience, and to avoid impulse and over generosity. 
Internally you are entirely different to your external nature and this is 
owntig to the fact that you are to acquire the much needed balance 
between the two states of being You should try to understand this 
great difference in yourself, and leam the lessons of both sides, one 
being expansn e, and the other contractive—therefore extremes 

The Sun in an Air\ and the Moon in a Fiery sign at your 
birth shows that you are far too personally impulsive for your 
inner or individual conditions This may cause you to precipitate 
matters, when it would probably have been better to await fitting 
opportunities You will look upon the world from a refined and idealistic 
standpoint, and will make great progress during the life that still awaits 
you m the future, and you have little to fear mentally, for you have the 
ability to carve your own way through the world, but should remember 
tliat haste, and also hurry are not the best means to adopt to gam 
success. You are very intuitive, internally sensing the best m all things, 
and you are fortunate m possessing a personality that is in harmony with 
yOur individual tendencies 



m 


THE KEY TO YOOR OT\*R RATIVITY 


The Sun ^\As in an Airy and the Moon in a Watery sign 
at jour birth, the former representing what is knovm as the 
Individual part of your being, and the latter the Personal conditions. 
There is some mharroony shown by rhis Yon will lO ail probability 
allow the Personal element to almost dominate you entirely and If so yoa 
will be very receptive, and alw easily affected and impressed by your 
surroondings and conditions The higher part of your nature will be 
rarely manifested, unless you overcome your moods Check all tendency 
towards sensation, and the lower emotional feelings. You will have some 
periods of inspiration and uplifting, that will be qmte out of keeping with 
the surroundings and environment and give you opportunities to grow 
spiritually 

The Sun tVAS is an AiBt and the Moon is an Earthy 
sign at your birth thus you will tend to be internally volatile, 
and externally practical, so that a somewhat inharmonious condition is 
denoted by the combioabon of these twa But it is quite possible that 
you may make a good use of your life by permitting the practical side of 
your nature to carry out the dictates of your Higher or Inner Self Von 
wiU by accuracy and careful study realise through the objective world, 
some of the ideals and suhjecbve states of your Soul Po not allow 
yourself to be too matter •of fact, or too cnbcal for you have stored up 
m the inner part of your nature, many gems of aitisbc beauty Though 
your expenences dunog this life may be on pnrpose to solidify, yet you 
have tnspiratiOQS within, which youshouldnever forgeU 

^gg The Sun was in a Watery and the Moon is a Fiery 
sign at your birth, and these are not the most eongemal elements 
to blend. It is a testimony that you wilj be personally ahead of your 
mdividnal stale and by the general expenences of this hfe wall tend to 
raise your emotions and feelings upward to a higher plane The 
emotions will often swwy you, and your dangers will be through impulses 
that are unchecked, often carrymg you far beyond the place of safety, 
where feeling is concerned. You are mtemally med i o m isbc and 
externally positive and the reverse of what you would wish to be and 
this will often cause you to reflect upon conduct that is contrary to your 
innermost desires, and thus give nse tO discontent. 

The Sun was iv a Watery and the Moon in an Airy sign 
at y our birth. This denotes that internally and individually, j oa 



SUUUARISS 


169 


are more emotionil thin you ar© personally, but you ha\e the ability and 
also the opportunity during this life to reason upon your sensations, and gam 
sufficient control over them and thus e^ oh e more rapidly thin if you hid 
a less refined per'^onahty. You would be able to express your soul through 
punting or my professionil work wherein the feelings or emotions could 
guide the mwil Your conditions for progress are helped by your surround 
ings and environment, but deep within you there is i receptivity, which 
bnngs you in touch with unseen forces and this is the motive power of all 
your,actions You are inspirationil and may become psychic, especially 
if you live purely 

Tur Sun t%As in a Waterv and the Moom m an Earthy 
sign at your nativity, and therefore harmony between your 
Individual and Personal conditions will be ohtimed from this unity of 
the elements Personally you will be objective practical, perseveringand 
fond of science, but internally you will be inclined to dream or be 
restless, and not so practical therefore tlie opportunity will be given you 
this life to make many of the mtemal conditions more solid You will 
always be receptive, and never too positive, but you may tend more 
towards the external than will be altogether good for your progress You 
will lears much by studying the laws of hygiene and also by study of 
scientific matters There is a certain amount of complexity in you, and 
this makes you a difficult subject to know 

462 Earthy and the Moon in a Fiery 

sign at your nativity This in an indication that a practical, 
solid, determined, internal nature governs the personal characteristics 
But with the fiery personality, you will often go beyond your individual 
desirec- and thus find a difficult path opening up before you, the 
ideal which you pursue being much ahead of your own true growth 
This will tend to bring you many opportunities to break up crystallised 
ideas of the past, so that you may progress m the future You will often 
act upon impulse and regret the action after its consummation The two 
extremes ro your nature will be a great problem to you, until you realise 
that you are sowing in the present for future reaping A tendency to be 
internally slow, and externally quick, sums up much of the life in a few 
words 

The Sun was in an Earthy and the Moon in an Airy 
S ign at your nativity Your inner nature will be much more 



170 


THE KEY TO YOOR OWS NATIVITY 


practical than the external, the latter bems more \’olatiIe, causing you to 
be much more refined externally than jou are internally You will, 
oamg to this, find yourself amidst surroundings which will not altogether 
harmonise with 3 *our individual requirements. The whole tendency of 
your life will be to refine the inner nature and eliminate any crystallised 
conditions of the i^t. The virtues of Truth and Justice will become 
very attractne as you realise more concerning the complexity of your 
nature, for }ou are complex inasmuch as }ou are negative internally, and 
positive externally, giving nse to extremes. 

The Sun WAS in an Earthy and the Moon in a Watery 

■964 

sign at your nativity This will gi\ e j ou a receptiv e tempera 
ment causing >au to obtain impressions from without, and inchntng you 
to the side of life which is easily influenced by mixing the surroundmE^, 
and their conditions, with yourself, so that ) 0 u identify >ourself with 
your feehngs and emotions. Never allow yourself to be hypnotised by 
others or you will absorb the whole of their conditions and lose much of 
your will power You will teod to become internally practical, but 
externally restless It will be well for you to draw yourself out of 
sensations, or you may become a slave to a habit or custom to your soul s 
detriment and progress onward You should cultivate firmness, and 
enueavour to strike the balance between fluidity and rigidity 



CHAPTER XXXII. 


SUPPLrMl-NTAR^ l*Ak^GR\rHS 

“Supplementary ''paragraphs are to be used judiciously where the 
horoscope shews the necessity of adding them, for the purpose of 
strengthening it or filling in gaps, after carefully considering the effect 
the additions w ill have upon the whole reading They should be sparingly 
used, and not given indiscriminately. 

The “rising planet" will of course be that which is on the eastern 
side of the imp nnd nearest the cusp of the ascendant, for the nearer the 
ascendant, the more does the power of the using planet tend to be thrown 
into the field of consciousness and brought under the control of the will. 
It IS not advisable to give this page unless there is a planet either m the 
first or twelfth houses, or else m the former half of the second or latter 
half of the elei enth The rising planet’s influence will be much modified 
b) the sign m which it rises, its distance from the ascendant and the 
aspects It receues from planets m other houses, etc 

The paragraphs described as “ personal colouring ” are suitable for 
persons ha\ing a special interest m psjchic matters and anxious for any 
information concerning the aura, wishful to know what are suitable and 
harmonious colours to wear, etc, etc, m fact for any w ho have a special 
interest m colour In the niajonty of cases, the ‘ personal colouring " 
paragraph need not be included, but where there are no lunar aspects to 
tabulate, this paragraph serves usefully to supplement what the reader 
might otherwise feel to be a somewhat scanty treatment of thePersonality 
Beginners are advised to omit the paragraphs in this chapter 
altogether. 


The Rysimg Playlet. 

Thf Sun rising at the lime of your birth is a very fortunate posi- 
,,on bringing dignity and honour into the life and upholding you 
uuder any stress and strain that you may be called upon to pass through. 



172 


THE KEY TO \OOR 0\\N NATIVITY 


You niJl command respect and good feeling from those around 50 U, so 
that jou are able to hold responsible positions, and to exercise some 
authorit) o\er others This is not only a fortunate position for A\orIdly 
affairs but also very favourable for year moral Rro%rth You will scorn 
all mean or sordid actions, but will ever stri\e to do right only for the 
sake of right, and therefore you must in time merit the esteem of others 
The Moon rising at the time of >our birth mil give you a 
mutable disposition you mil be a lo\ er of change and noxeky 
This position wall make you very recepti\ e, not only to the thought 
spheres of others, but to your own surroundings also feeling will play a 
prominent part m your life It is important for >ou to exercise great 
care with regard to jour companions and acquaintances for there is 
some liability for you to become easily psychologised and quickly 
infiuenced by them You will love travel and may be a little restless 
sometimes much will depend upon your eaviroomest and home hfe 
howe^ er You are i ery sensitive and somewhat impressionable 

Mercury nsmg at the time of >-our birth is good for jour 
mentality you will be very sharp and acute, also active and 
quick both m your thoughts and actions This position will render you 
10 many ways a unique character, for not only will you have splendid 
imitative powers, but you can be “ all things to all men You will be 
shrewd and diplomatic and \ ery well able to argue for or against anything 
ac<xirdiDg to jour inclinations you also possess literary ability, so the 
mmd will ne^er fail to find out some device to keep }ou busy Like 
quicksilver, which Merenrj represents, you will nse or fall just like a 
barometer, according to that environment in which you may be placed 

Venus rising at the tune of your birth is very favourable, 
giving you a very pleasant, agreeable and cheerful disposition 
It Will bring good fortune into your life, and you will be loved and 
respected by all you come in contact with You have ability for music, 
or smgmg, and you love art, and everything beautiful or refined. \ou 
would have success in such matters as give pleasure to others, and you 
should always seek for very refined employments, and take up with those 
pursmts that minister to the happiness of others not only to reach 
success m life, but also because your sunny infiuence w ill be beneficial to 
them The planet Venus rising gives one of the best dispositions. 

469 rising at the time of your birth will give >ou plenty of 

iim and confidence to yourself, and you will never be short of 


SUrrLEMCNTARV TARACRAPHS 173 

what the world calls " plock *’ Yoa will be courageous, energetjc, and, 
at times, somewhat consequential and inclined to assert yourself needlessly 
so that you must a%oid giving way to impulses and doing things rashly, 
also jumping to conclusions You will rise m life by your own efforts, 
and can push yourself forward well enough when occasion demands; still 
you should try to conserve some of jour energies, so as to reserve your 
force for the period when it may be more to your ad\-antage to use it 
In other words, always ihtnk before acting 
470 J*^*’*'*'^*^ at the time of jour birth is very faiourable for 
your success in life, promising you good fortune and bringing 
jou what IS termed " good luck This however, chiefly arise from 
a noble and generous disposition, and from the fact that you possess both 
benevolence and sympathj Your buoyant, hopeful and inspiring nature 
will readily wan the confidence of others, who will constantly wish you 
well Y*u w ill be a success socially and you need nev er fear any social 
undertaking provided hope doe^ not fail you, the more hopeful you 
become, the more will you come under this beneflc influence You may 
create for yourself a splendid future 

Saturk rising at the time of your birth is net fortunate, so far 
as your worldly prosperity is concerned, as it indicates that the 
environment into which you were bom was not the most favourable for 
progress or prospenly you will have many obstacles to contend with, and 
your success depends more upon your own efforts than upon any help 
from outside You are industnous and plodding, and you can be 
very persevering and economical, also prudent and reserved Your goal 
eventually will be Chastity and Justice the more you cultivate moral 
virtues the nearer will you approach the true saturnine qualities, 
Meditation, Contemplation, Truth 

472 Uranus nsmg at the time of your birth (especially if in the first 
house) marks your nativity as one quite out of the common, for 
Uranus is the planet of onginalify, invention, and oft times of genius also 
It will however, at times, cause you to be considered peculiar, strange, 
and eccentric, inclining you to be abmpt and very unconventional This 
position has much to do with your love of the mj'stical, and it also gives 
you the ability to study astrology and metaphysical subjects. You love 
everything that is wonderful and profound Some romance will come 
into your life, or some very sudden and unlooked for change, with either 
reversals of fortune, or unexpected gam or benefit 



174 


THE KFY TO YOOK 0\\\ VATIVITY 


Neptune nsms at the time of your birth, will affect jour life m 
an uncommon mannner You will be romantic and mediumistic, 
or psychically inclined. Some \ery stranRe experiences and also some 
remarkable episodes will occur m your life It is only the \ ery few who 
can in any way respond to the subtle, spiritual \ibrattons of the planet 
Neptune, and they are the souls that Ii\e the purest lues You must be 
on your guard against hj^notic suggestion, and should be \ ery choice in 
your associates and acquaintances You will in all probability ha\e 
some very remarkable dreams, which you should endeavour to remember 
You will not escape being \ery mediumistic and hjperscnsitive at times. 

Personal Colouring 

The Moon occupying the sign Aries at birth, jour personal 
Aura will be tinged inth a bright red, or scarlet and pink colounng 
This will cause you to look upon the world through rosy spectacles, 
making your personal bias more telescopic than microscopic Therefore 
you will have to make a few of your ideals mdre practical and stable 
than IS your usual wont, for it will cause you to be venturesome, specula 
tive, and at times a little too enthusiastic and over imaginative It will 
tend to make you enterprising high spirited and well able to organise, 
plan and scheme, so that jou will ne\er be at a loss through lacking to 
seize all the opportunibes that will come m your way dunng your present 
life For you will colour all things more or less Red, and this will give 
you hope and the energy required to carry out all your projects 

The Moon occupying the sign Taurus at your birth will tinge 
your personal aura a pale blue which will make you look upon 
the world through blue coloured spectacles, and this will tend to accentuate 
the afiectional part of yonr nature and give you that stability and 
affection which will cause you to look upon the world from a more 
hopeful and bii,ucr standpoint than would have been the case had you not 
this blue colounng in your aura. It will make you sociable pleasant and 
food of giving pleasure to others, stimulating your affections and thus 
making you more deraonstrabve kinder hearted and’more tender and 
sympathetic than is the case with those who have not as much of the blue 
colonr a their aura. Of course aJl the other influences in your nativity 
will tend to modify this considerably, and the aspects of Venus will 
accentuate it, therefore endeavour to discover the qualitj of Venus in 
your nativity and how it acts upon you from this standpomt “■ 



surPLrMrNTAR\ paragraphs 


17S 


The Moon occupying ihe sign GcMiHI at your birth will brinR a 
certain amount of the pale yellow ray into your aura, but as this 
IS a tluM sifrn, the colounns will depend very considerably upon the 
strenpth of jour intellect, or the direction m which you are turning it, for 
while this j cllow mj gu es the elements of w isdom, at the same time the 
mind may be used for more or less selfish ends, and whenever there is a 
tendency to be undecided and not sufficiently concentrated, then there is 
a danger of there being orange patches, as it were, in the aura, instead of 
the clear and bright jellow which Gemini should give Now, much will 
depend upon Mercury and its aspects in your nativ itj as to how far this 
yellow ray will affect you, and 1 would strongly advise you to practice 
continuity and try to extricate your mind from the sensations which will 
come to jou from the mimal side of your nature, for the more you punfy 
this yellow, the keener will be your intellect, especially for all matters of 
a refined nature 

The Moon occupying the sign Cancpr at your birth, will tmgc 
your persona! aura with a j«le vio let ra y, and as this will colour 
the whole of jour life, you will look over the world through this violet ray 
of the spectrum which will heighten your sensitiveness, and make you 
much more keenly alive to your surroundings and environment afiecting 
you very considerably when Ihrowm in contact with other peopJe, 
inasmuch as the violet riy tends to absorb the colours from the other 
planets and generally is affected considerably bj the various planets in 
the nativity It will mvke you highljr’«ensitive vcry keen to feel all the 
impressions around you and the psychological conditions into which you 
will be thrown, especially if you study occult subjects, and give your 
mmd to matters connected with the psychic world, you should live as 
purely as you can if you would have this colour purified, for much 
depends upon your habits of life as to how far this influence will 
permeate the whole of your aura 

The Moon occupying the sign LeO at your birth will tinge 
your personal''aura with the orang^ray This will give you 
much vitality and w ill greatly strengthen your health aura, for it will 
enable you to throw off disease quickly, and will in many way's give yoy^ 
that brightness, hope and joyousness which will enable you to look uj^ 
life from a far more cheerful standpoint than the majority are able to^o 
But you should remember that this will be chiefly owing to the fa^^hat 
your vitality is strengthened considerably by this orange ray, do 



176 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


not abuse its strength by giving way to pleasure wnich Leo has ever a 
ttndeacy to lead one into It will gt\e you the ability to study art and 
music, and at times gives poetic teodences v.heneve^the orange ray js 
sufficiently punfied to enable it to blend with the other colours in the 
aura, as would be seen by the planetary positions in the nativity 

The Moon occupying the sign ViRCt) at your birth will tinge 
your aura with a pale orange ray and cause you to become wiser 
the more that you absorb its colouring, for yon will vieu the world chieflv 
from the standpoint of knowledge, and this will cause you to be somewhat 
critical and analytical, but the yellow ray will ever be stimulating you to 
discriminate, and the more )ou can use this faculty of discrimination, 
which the yelloiv ray gives j-ou, the more you will be able to overcome 
the more or less animal tendencies into which we are all bom This is a 
purely human colounug and tends to make one more refined, with a desire 
to bve more to the mental side of the nature than the animal, for the ray 
coming through Virgo, the sign of the Virgin, is that of purity, and those 
who are ready to wear the v ellow robe are always these who have dis 
cnminated suSaeotly so as to be able to view all things with equanimity 
Without using the lower cntiosm 

The Moon occupying the sign LIBRA at your birth will tinge 
your persoual aura with light sky blue, making you compassionate 
affectiouate, sympathetic and generally kind hearted At the same tim e 
you must be careful not to let other people’s minds and conditions aifec^ 
you too much, for those who have this colour in their aura have a tendency 
to be swayed by environment and psychic emanabons. It will make you 
very refined and religiously inclined, tending to bring out all the finer 
qualibes which belong to the planet Venus which this colour is directly 
under, therefore all arbsbc pursuits will tend to accentuate this porbos 
of your aura and you will vnew the world generally from a more halanr*^ 
standpomt than the inajontf This ray will strengthen your powers of 
comparison, and the more balanced you become, the more will you lean 
towards the side of jusbee and tend to harmonise yourself under the 
Venus principle. Therefore try to discover as much as possible the 
Strength and influence of the planet Venus in your cabvity 

The Moon occopying the sign Scojipjo at your birth taages your 
personal aura with a deep zed and this causes you to have a very 
strong personal aura which may be easily moved to passion, pnde, or 
jealousy, and knowing that these weaknesses are commg to you through 



St7PrLEMPKTAR\ PARACRArilS 


177 


(his red ny, >on should try (o change its colour from the deep heaxy red 
to the finer and more rosy qualities nhich evenlinlly lend to the spiritual 
red or crimson Now, to do this, jon should study your own nature 
thorouchly md use all the self control which Scorpio usually gives Vou 
will eser ha\e a belief m the mystic side of tivngs, but will also incline 
to he careful of jonr own interests, and if the other colours of your aura 
do not chnuge the deep red into a brighter shade, there will be a danger 
of ^our liecoming far too personal, for this accentuates everything 
connected with the personality 

The Moon occupjing the sign SAr.iTTARiUS at birth, will colour 
your personal aura wth the Indigo ray and much will depend 
upon the influences coming from (he o(hcr plauets as to how far this 
indigo will be afTected, for it is of a deeper and stronger colour than 
any other sign in which the Moon may be placed, therefore much will 
depend upon Jupiter s position as to how this influence will afliect you, 
but if you overcome any tendency to rebel against the law and order of 
your being the more you will be able to purify this colour and realise its 
spiritual mnuence It will cause yo*u to feel more or less all religious 
vibrations and will pul you in sympathy with everything to do with the 
religious side of life, and if this is not the case, you may know you have 
not brought yourself under the true Indigo ray which is chiefly governed 
by Jupiter Your past lives have had much to do with your present con 
ditions. therefore try never to rebel against circumstances, endeavouring 
(0 harmonise them * 

^gg The Moon occupying (he sign CAPRICORN at your birth, will 
colour your aura with tight green and tend to considerably 
accentuate the other colours lo your aura And through this you will 
clearly perceive the conditions that are around you, for this colour 
absorbs to some extent the red pven off by the planet Mars thus tending 
to purify you and cause you to lean more towards the ascetic life, and if 
you can refine this green until it becomes like the fresh green of young 
trees, yon will be able to cultivate all those enduring and refining qualities 
which are signified by the green colour It will tend to make you fond 
of know ledge to rise higher than the sphere in which you were bora, for 
It generally makes one diplomatic, careful and prudent 
^g^ The Moon occupying the sign AguARlUS at your birth, will tinge 
your personal aura with many colour, m fact, this is the ooly^ 
sign of tne zodiac that may be said (o represent the tartan, or the “coa 



176 


THE KEY TO YOOR OWN NATIVITY 


not abuse its strength by giving way to pleasure wnich Leo has ever a 
tendency to lead one into It tvill gne you the ability to study art and 
music, and at times gives poetic tendenc es whene\er the orange ray is 
sufBoently punhed to enable it to blend with the other colours in the 
aura, as would be seen by the planetary positions in the nativity 

The Moon occupying the sign ViRCO at your birth will tinge 
your aura with a pale orange ray and cause you to become wiser 
the more that you absorb its colouring, for you will view the world chiefly 
from the standpoint of knowledge, and (his will cause you to be somewhat 
critical and analytical, but the yellon ray will ever be stimulating you to 
discriminate, and the more you can use this faculty of discrimination, 
which the yellow ray gives you, the more you will be able to ov ercome 
the more or less animal tendencies into which we are all bom. This is a 
purely human colounog and tends to make one more refined, with a desire 
to live more to the mental side of the nature than the animal, for the ray 
coming through Virgo, the sign of the Virgin, is that of purity, and those 
who are ready to wear the >elIow robe are alwa3r5 those who have dis 
cnmioated sufficiently so as to be able to new all things with equanimity 
without using the lower cntiasm 

The Moon occupying the sign LIBRA at your birth will tinge 
your personal aura with light slcy blue, rnaln n^ you compassionate 
affectionate, sympathetic and generally kind hearted. At the same tune 
yon most be careful not to let other people’s minds and conditions affec^ 
yon too much, for those who hav e this colour m their aura have a tendency 
to be swayed by environment and psychic emanabons. It will make you 
very refined and religiously inclined, tending to bring out all the finer 
qualities which belong to the planet Venus which this colour is directly 
onder, therefore ah artistic pursuits will tend to accsntoate this pcrtioD 
of your aura and you will view the world generally from a more balanced 
standpomt than the majonty This ray wall strengthen your powers of 
comparison, and the more balanced you become, the more will you lean 
towards the side of justice and tend to harmozuse yourself under the 
Venus pnnaple. TherefOTe try to discover as much as possible the 
strength and influence of the planet Venus in your nativity 

The Moon o ccu p y ing the sign Scorpio at your birth tinges your 
personal aura with a deep red, and this causes you to haveavery 
strong personal aura which may be easily moved to passion, pnde, or 
jealousy, and knowing that these weaknesses are coming to you through 



SUPPI-nMPNTARV rARAGRAPHS 


177 


this red ny, jou should try to change its colour from the deep heavy red 
to the finer nnd more rosy rjuahties \ihich eventunlly lead to the spiritual 
red or crimson Non, to do this, you should study your onn nature 
thorouRhly and use all the self control which Scorpio usually gives You 
■ttiH e\er ha\ea belief in mystic side of llvngs, but will also incline 
to be careful of jonr onn interests, and if the other colours of your aura 
do not change the deep red into a brighter shade, there mil be a danger 
of your beconung far too personal, for this accentuates everything 
connected with the personality. 

^Q2 Moon occupying the sign SACtTTARtUS at birth, will colour 
your personal aura with the Indigo ray, and much mil depend 
upon the influences coming from the other planets as to how far this 
indigo mil be affected, for it is of a deeper and stronger colour than 
any other cign in nhich the Moon may be placed, thereforo much will 
depend upon Jupiter s position as to how this influence will affect you, 
but if you overcome any tendency to rebel against the law and order of 
your being, the more you mil be able to purify this colour and realise its 
spiritual influence It mil cause >cm to feel more or less all religious 
vibrations and will put you in sympathy iMth everything to do with the 
religious side of life, and if this ts not the case, you may know you have 
not brought yourself under the true Indigo ray which is chiefly governed 
by Jupiter Your past lives have had much to do mth lOur present con 
ditions, therefore try never to rebel against circumstances, endeavouring 
to harmonise them * 

The Moon occupying the sign CAPRICORV at your birth, will 
colour your aura with light green and tend to considerably 
accentuate the other colours to your aura. And through this you will 
clearly perceive the conditions that are around you. for this colour 
absorbs to some extent the red given off by the planet Mars, thus tending 
to purify you and cause you to lean more towards the ascetic life, ano if 
you can refine this green, until it becomes like the fresh green of young 
trees, you will be able to cultivate all those enduring and refining qualities 
wh/zch vit v/s7fffA'L hv thn lyxm. rx^ix. lA wiJi tneui tft v}^a yoic Coir/i 
of knowledge, to rise higher than the sphere in which you were bom, for 
It generally makes one diplomatic, careful and prudent 

The Moon occupying the sign AQUARlVS at your birth, will tinge 
i OUT personal aura with many colour, m fact, this is the only 
sign of tne zodiac that may be said to represent the tartan, or the "coa 



jyg the key to your nativity 

of many cotears " This is owing to the fact that it is merging oat of the 
green into I'anegated colours in which all seem to be blended, and those 
who can respond to this lery wonderful combinaUon. may make their 
lues remarkably nscful and beneficial It gives that keen judgment of 
human nature which enables one to see the world from many standpoints, 
and if you can cultivate tolerance, and endeavour to live up to the sixth 
race pnnaple, which is that of harmony and Onion, yon wiU indeed hav e 
done much dunng the present life with the aura which surrounds you. 
But very few can respond to this remarkable colouring, and only those 
who are living to the human side of their nature can really respond to 
this vibration 

The hloon occnpying the sign PISCES at your birth, will tinge 
your personality with a silvery grey colour which has more to do 
with the psjchic world than the physical. Il vnU make yon very 
receptive therefore, and incline yon to become either mediumisnc, or so 
imoressionable as to receive thoughts and feelings from the astral plane, 
which wiU considerably affect the whole ol your hfe Now, the purer 
von can live, the more refined will this colour become, and as it has some 
relation to the planet Neptune, much will depend upon the associations 
that yon form, and the companions wrUi whom > ou associate. Endeav our 
to hve as much as possible m the higher side of your nature, as you have 
some very hopeful and loudly feelings, and your nature is geneiaUy 
snuoatheUc and veiy easily influenced by good suiroundings. It will 
™ke you especially tender to all dumb animals, or those who are m pain 
or snffenng. as this lay awakens the sv mpathetic side of the nature 
Generai. Aspects 

Under this same beading of Supplcmentarj Paragraphs may be con 
fitdered a matter that else might easily be overlooked, the 

consideration of planetary aspects other than those to nder A 

menfs reflection wiU show that if the system explained in t^s book 
Xe foUowed quite blindly, some very important influences might easily 

, Mng m the Chart as descnhed elsewhere we can see tot 

L ipect as Mars square Sannn would have no pioagraph allotted 

jexher aspects. 



SUPPLEMEKTAW PAEAGUAPHS 


179 


It quite true ih\t in such a nativity, Mercury being ruler, the 
influence of ^ O b u-ould be very much obscured, its influence would be 
almost negligible m comparison with what it would be in a nativity 
where either Mars or Saturn was ruler Still, it would make itself felt to 
a certain extent * 

It IS at this portion of the Chart, then, that such an aspect should 
come in for consideration Any powerful aspect, a square opposition or 
conjunction, etc., between really stgotflcant planets should be entered 
under this head , not more than two however, or three at the outside, as 
the reader IS likely to be confused by a number of aspects The " boldest" 
should bo selected, and any other tending to conflrm it or (should it so 
happen) neutralise it added * 

These aspects need not necessarily be kept to this particular part of 
the delineation, in fact any of these Sapplementaiy Paragraphs may be 
inserted wherever it appears desirable, — which will depend on 
urcumstances, of course 


FcjtRETs IN Signs 

In the same way any planet st^gly placed, ej^er as regards house 
OS,.sign, may be taken as S P 

Thus suppose in any nativity Mars is to Anes, and therefore essen 
tially dignified Then, even though Mars be not the ruler, and though it 
receive no upect, still " The Influence of Mars should find a place in 
the delineation , for Mars lu Anes is an influence'’'^atdoesnot hide its 
light under a bushel The same will hold good of any plane^njts exalti" 
tioiT e g , ®, S K And likewise also of'^^^lanetMgu^ , eg, S 

in H or 52 in the 10th or 4tb bouse wiU show out powerfully in the h/e 

Sbll, here as elsewhere, no bard and fast rule will always avail 
The student must ever rely upon the develonment of his own mdgmenl. 


* It woald be absurd to take tf A V for Instance la most cases since this aspect re. 
mains in force so long as to be fouad lO ibe horoscopes of nearly at] people boro dunog a 
certain year Not unless e iher planet is aag ilar or in some special way thrown lo * 
prom nence should such an aspect as fh » be laelnded in the delineation Slmi 
remarks apply lo aspect* betweeB h «»d ? w U and •, 



182 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIMTY 


and finish one thing before starling another, and do not scatter your forces 
too much You cannot be loo practical and should cultivate the “ every 
day ” virtues, for this is a \ery idealistic combination 

Blending the individual and personal characteristics it Mil! be seen 
that the active centres of your horoscope are Aries Cancer, 
from which it may be judged that you are aery sensitive to mharmomous 
conditions, and especially those arising from other persons Although 
you have a very clear reasoning mind you are apt to worry and become 
over anxious, particularly if hnancial conditions are not as satisfactory as 
you wish You love science and all that pertains to the mind You 
would command success in life as a writer, for you have splendid image 
making faculty, retentive memory and logical ability You will never be 
quite happy unless you are at the head of all that you undertake, and you 
desire to excel in everything you do You will suffer m life through 
the magnetic conditions of others, therefore be very choice in your 
acquaintanceships 

Q Blending the individual and persona! characteristics, the mam 
centres of your horoscope are Aries Leo This will giv e you a 
very keen and intuitive mind, both reason and intuition will seek to 
unite in you, and at tunes your thought will reach ahead of the race in < 
which you are living The combination of your individual and personal 
characteristics shows that j ou possess a very warm and sympathetic love 
nature, but you are rather sensitive to the feelings of others and cannot 
bear disapproval If you could but live up to all that your nativity 


indicates, you would have a marvellous image making faculty so much 
so that you could by practice visualise clearly and carry a mental picture 
of all that you had once seen You have deep spmtual inclinations and 
can be very ongmal in your ideas, but probably have not yet realised to 
the full all that your nature is capable of Live always to your highest, 
and allow the intellect to draw you from the thraldom of the senses 

Blending the individual and personal characteristics, the chief 
^9^* centres of your horoscope are Aries Virgo, from which it may 


be judged that you have a very discrunioative and cntical romd. You 
re capable of engaging in scientific thought and could study to advantage 
ex^t sciences. You love order, system and method, this m reality 
from your clear, logical and reasomng brain You can, however, 
sceptical and would require evidence m all things before you 
be very bebef, and this especially where religious matters are 

gave your wiuiua 



CHAPTER XXXlir. 


The "Polarities.” 

It has been remarked elsewhere that the “ Polarities,” as they are 
often termed, or in other words the combination or blendmg of the 
Solar and Lunar sign positions, ha\e been already given m an earlier 
volume of this senes to which the reader was referred. Bat after the 
former part of this book was actually m type it was decided to 
mclade them, m a somewhat condensed form, in the present work; and 
that for two reasons. First, bediuse it was thought desirable that this 
book should be quite «elf contained,and secondly, because the “ polanbes” 
given in the earlier book are put in the third person instead of, as here, 
the seeond^which might cause mconvenience to those who wish to give 
a written delineation to fnends 

The choice of this word may perhaps seem strange at first, but it is 
designed to convey the idea of the two ’ poles' of man's nature repre' 
seated by the terms fodividuality and Personality, and it is the particular 
mode in which the man is thus * polarised ’ that such a phrase as ” the 
polarity of Sun in Aries and Moon m Taurus ” is intended to express. 

The proper place for the Polanty m a horoscope debneation is 
just alter the Lunar Aspects in §3 The Solar positions and aspects 
indicate the individual powers and linutabons, as do the Lunar posibons 
and aspects the personal, the Polanty, then, in quite a general 
fashion desenbes the blending of the individual and the personal—that 
combinabon of character and disposition which may in a pracbcal sense 
be termed the every day man himself It is a very important part of the 
horoscope, and may be looked upon as the ‘ mmor focus ’ of the whole, 
just as the Summary is the * major focus.* It should of course be 
remembered that the remarks here given are bnef and cannot pretend to 
more than hint at the true powers of each combinabon or ' polanty.*’ 
The student should always sbive to develop hts ovn powers of 
blending two or more diSerent influences; there is no other way to 
beconle an astrologer 

tSo 



CHAPTER XXXXlf. 


The ** PoLAnmEs.” 

It has been remarked elsewhere that the “ Polarities,” as they are 
often termed, or m other mirds the comhinabon or blending of the 
Solar and Lunar sign positions, have been already given in an earber 
volume of this senes to which the reader was referred. Bat after the 
former part of this book was actually in type it was decided to 
inclade them, m a somewhat condensed form, m the present work; and 
that for two reasons. First, becaase it was thought desirable that this 
book should be quite contained, and secondly, because the "polarities" 
given m the earlier book are put m the third person instead of, as here, 
the second—which might cause mconvenience to those who wish to give 
3 wntten delineation to fnends 

The choice of this word may perhaps seem strange at first, but it is 
designed to convey the idea of the two * poles ’ of man's nature repre* 
seated by the terms lodividuabty aod Personality; and it is the particular 
>Hod£ m which the man is thus * polarised' that such a phrase as ' the 
polanty of Sun in Aries and hloon in Taurus '* is intended to express. 

The proper place for the Polarity in a horoscope debneabon is 
just after the Lunar Aspects in 53 The Solar posiUons and aspects 
indicate the mdividual powers and Iinutabons, as do the Lunar posibons 
and aspects the personal, the Polanty, then, in quite a general 
fashion describes the blending of the individual and the personal—that 
comhinabon of character and disposihon which may m a pracbcal sense 
be tenned the every day man himself. It is a very important part of the 
horoscope, and may be looked upon as the * minor focus ’ of the whole, 
just as the Summary is the ‘major focus.’ It should of course be 
remembered that the remarks here given are bnef and cannot pretend to 
more than hint at the true powers of each comhinabon or polanty.” 
The student sbonld alw'ays stnve to develop his own powers of 
blending two or more difierent influences; there is no other way to 
beconfe an astrologer 



POLARITIES OF THE SUN IN TAURUS 


185 

and should therefore try to be more self reliant; for while you love 
harmony it is necessary to remember that we can each, more or less, make 
it for ourselves 

Polarities of the Sun in Taurus 

498. the influence of the Sun to Taurus and the Moon m 

Aries representing your individual and personal character, it 
may be judged that you have the ability to begin and accomplish great 
undertakings, with some adaptation to mechanics, mathematics and things 
of a constructive nature generally You must try not to be too exacting, 
not to demand too much of others, and if you make laws of life try to see 
that they are just You are liable to go to extremes and are a little 
headstrong You have also a certain amount of dignity, and a respect for 
education and knowledge of a practical kind Your chief danger will be 
an inclination to be too stiff necked and too much disposed to lay doivn 
the law You are exceedingly conscientious, however, and \ery positive 
and, what is more useful, open to reason and reflection Your personal 
nature will often be restrained from within 

Blending the influence of the Sun in Taurus and the Moon also 
in Taurus, representing the individual and personal character, it 
appears from this combination that you ire an exceedingly independent 
character, %ery hopeful and buoyant, withanimauoD of thought, brilliancy 
and vivacity You have excellent self control in everything, but like to 
be within your own sphere and are not inclined to travel, or to take up 
with new enterprises You ha\e a fairly determined nature and a very 
strong character in most ways, and, other things being equal, are capable 
of making great attainments in life in the financial world, as also in other 
directions, and becoming a very useful member of society You are not 
so much affected by the mtiuences of others, but are desirous of living 
your own life in your own way, independently 

Blending the influence of the Sun m TAURUS and the Moon m 
Gemini, representing your individual and personal characteristics. 

It may be judged that you are endowed with some artistic ability with a* 
tendency towards, and an l□dlDauoo for, scientific knowledge You have 
also some mechanical ability You love order and beauty, but have a 
somewhat restless nature, liking to rule and be at the head of things 
You hav e great physical endurance and can accomplish more than many 
people around you, but you must avoid obstinacy, self will and any 



186 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


inclination to dominate others- Yon have ability to take up almost any 
profession or department of business. You have also capacity for pubhc 
speaking and, other things in >our nativitv agreeing, would succeed as an 
orator, havnng great linguistic abihty. ^ 

gQj Blending the influence of the Sun in TAURUS and the Moon in 
<^Cascer, representing the individnaJ and personal character, il 
can be seen from this combination that >ou are evceedmgly sensitive, 
economical, verj persistent'and active in 5 our undertaking*^, v bether of a 
business nature or otherv.ise, but somewhat anxious about'^monetary 
affairs. Yoor thoughts centre around jour^home and are generally 
engrossed in that sphere. You should ever seek to act from reason 
jather than from sensation or emotion, because you are endowed with a 
'clear mind and ability to reason, provided y ou do not allow the sensational 
side of the nature to over nde your mmd You have a very active 
imagination and should be careful of what mental energies you set up 
and the kmd of romances you read and dramatic entertainments yon 
attend. Yon are much attached to family and home life. 

QQ 2 Blending the influence of the Sun in Taurus and the Moon in 
Leo, represeotmg your individual and personal character, it 
would appear that you will be subject to great extremes in your natnre, 
and that y ou are liable to be very easily influenced by your associates. You 
may be frequently deceived and misled by placing confidence m unde« 
serving persons, as you are somewhat over confiding where feeling is 
concerned. You will requu^e to subordinate your sensations and emotions 
to the reins of reason and self-control, or your hfe is 10 danger of being 
made very unhappy You should try and realise that love lies m action 
more than expression, and that really the strongest and deepest love is 
apart from sensation and emotion altogether 

You have a powerful imagination and will at times hav e strange 
and vivid dreams. 

gjjg Blending the influence of the Son m TauruS and the Moon in 
. * Virgo, representing the mdividcal and per'*ocal character, it can 

be seen from ihig ccmbmation that you have fine intuitions and 
discriminative power You will be fond of learning and an admirer of 
hteratnre, but have a good business mind notwithstanding You will 
have somewhat acute judgment and will be accurate and precise m ei ery- 
thing If you cannot get exactness, you are apt to be impatient when it 
cannot be obtamed m each and every direction. You are exceed-sgly 



POLARITIES OF THE SUN IN TAURLb 


187 


critical and are apt to cnticise those whose capacities do not come up to 
your own As a rule you will succeed in most things \ou undertake, but 
you must try to be just and not be tCK> intolerant of others It is as 
natural for you to be critical and see defects and imperfections m others 
as It IS for some to see the good 

Blending the influence of the Sun in Taurus and the Moon m 
Libra, representing the mdividual and personal character, it may 
be judged that you have a very sincere, positive and decided character, 
quick in decision and extremely determined when that decision js reached 
You will work not only by law but also by intuition This combination 
IS sometimes apt to give a little conceit and some seventy of nature, with 
a certain amount of separateness, although you have much kindness and 
love for those whom you regard, which will eventually lead to unity 
You sometimes make peculiar decisions which you expect others to abide 
by You are somewhat jealous and have the capacity for either love or 
hatred strongly marked, and do not readily forget an injury , but you are 
very conscientious and a law unto yourself You will be able to modify 
many of the defects in your character by the combination of the positive 
and negative Venus elements 

gQg Blending the influence of the Sun in Taurob and the Moon in 
Scorpio, representing your mdmdual and personal character, 
you will see from this combinatioo that you have a very strong passional 
nature, one that needs restraint m several directions You are very 
positive and determined, and at times somewhat lacking in,forbearance 
You think a great deal of educational attainments in others and have ab 
innate love of the mystical and psychic, and a desire to understand 
something of the hidden mysteries of life You must try to avoid pnde, 
conventionality and selfishness, for these are the three special weaknesses 
of this combination You can be exceedingly firm and have a strong 
will, and if you choose to exercise it you can, so to speak, eradicate weeds 
from the garden of your own personal character The Venusian and the 
Martial mfluences are blended lo your naUvnty, representing the higher 
and lower natures 

Blending the influence of the Sun in TAURUS and the Moon 
in Sagittarius, representing your individual and personal 
character, you may leam from this combination that you are liable to go 
to great extremes in anything yon undertake and wnll be very positive 
and decided m all you do You are mclined to be hasty to speech and 



188 


Tlir KEY TO YOOR OWN NATIVITY 


too ready to act on trapul<?e, or from the first thought that comes mto 
your mind You are altogether too quick la your impulses and if you 
gave way to anger would become very intolerant. Yours is a combina 
non that needs a great amount of self control You should cultivate 
dignity and self restraint You have good executive ability and in many 
^vays are very practical, but are someubat too liable to be swept away by 
feeling, emotion and impulse 

Blending the influence of the Sun in Taurus and the Woon 
in Capricorn, representing your individual and personal charac¬ 
teristics, It may be judged that you have a very positive, determined and 
independent nature, with ability to turn the mind to either general 
pnnciples, business interests, music, or art You will haie a great love 
of wealth and grandeur, and will desire to obtain position and honour m 
public life , you have also a disposition to reason and plan well, and to 
be cautious before taking action At the same time you are very 
independent, and yet curiously conventional You have excellent abihty 
for organising, a strong ivUJ, power of self control, and ability to control 
others You could remain quite unraoied even under exciting arcnm* 
stances This combination therefore fits you more for public than pn\'ate 
life 

Blending the influence of the Sun m Taurus and the Moon m 
Aquarius, representing the individual and personal character, it 
may be argued from this combination that you have a disposition and 
aptitude for pleasing people You can easily form acquaintance with 
strangers, for you ba\e a good deal of tact and confidence, and this will 
give you personally a great deal of pleasure Other things being equal, 
—that is, your power to respond to the i ibrations,—^you are well adapted 
for a literary calling and have a strong inclination in that direction You 
hke to come into touch with the pubbc and would prefer public work to 
that of a pnvate kind, and will have unusually good ideas as to what 
would please or displease the public. You will make many fnecds and 
acquaintances, and be desirous of forming associations The motive 
power 'beiuoii you is ileep Reeling, anh fne power to express fnis will 
depend upon your own detennmatjon as affected by your feelings 

Blending the influence of the Sun in TAURUS and Afoon m 
Pisces representing your individual and personal character, it 
n^y be judged that you Inve a lery practical, mechanical and ingenious 
mmd, and a disposition to be consUntly doing something Your internal 



POLARITIES OF TIIE SUN IN CrMINI 189 

nature is restful, but your external nature is often more active, malonpf 
you at times dissatisfied, therefore, unless controlled, jou wall become 
combative and somewhat irritable You have an inclination to study and 
to reason, also the ability to make money and save it TTiere is some 
latent desire to investigate phenomena not connected with this plane of 
matter, and having a receptive nature you like to be orderly and have a 
rule of life, as it were, but you will sometimes feel there are many 
obstacles m your way and that everything is against you Try to be 
fcope/ul, sttd oeivr guv way to despandeacy or despair. 

Polarities of the Sun in Gemini 

Blending the influence of the Stm in GfminI and the Moon m 
Aries, representing the individual and per'sonal character, it is 
clear from this combination that you have a strong will and aspiring 
D^ind, a love of knowledge and a good understanding You are fond of 
books and can express thoughts contained therein You are somewhat 
ambitious and worldly, yet capable of making very high attainments 
There is one danger to be avoided, and that is going to extremes You 
must not allow yourself to become too independent, and it would be as 
well for you to realise the necessity of sometimes bending to circumstances. 
You are somewhat dismchned for conventionality and do not like set 
rules and customs You have, however, the power to carry out most 
things you desire and the capacity for self conl^ol if you wish to exercise 
it 

Blending the influence of the Sun in Gemini and the Moon in 
Taurus, representing your mdivudual and personal character, it 
may be judged that you are intelligent, far seeing and sensible, with a 
determined and persistent character You are somewhat liable to be led 
by feeling and emotion, and therefore you should try to overcome the 
sensabonal side of your nature, which would tend to lead you away from 
reason You have an energetic, active nature, and desire to be at the 
head of things You have also a very strong love of Nature and a desue 
to study her w orkings. You should have through this combination, a foil 
share of vitality and vigour You have ability for studying medicine and 
in some ways are a natural doctor, for hygienic methods and the study of 
the laws of health appeal to you strong!> The more you can rea-^a 
upon your sensations the more will you realise your inner and true nature. 



190 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


Blending the influence of the Sun in GEMINI and the Moon also 
m Gemini, representing your individual and personal character. 
It will be understood from this combination that you have an independent 
character, great clearness of thought, and that you are fairly well balanced 
You must avoid any tendency to self conceit or Jack of sympathy with 
others, as you ha^ e a determination to carry out the inclination of your 
own mind, at times, regardless of the effect it may ha\ e on others You 
are not easily turned from your own decisions but there is in you a certain 
duality, springing from the combination of Gemmi with Gemini, which 
will sometimes make you want to do two things at a time All things in 
connection with the literary world will attract you You have a very 
clear mind capable of becoming illuminated, and possess quick perception 
and keen observation Strive to leam to hold the balance between the 
objective and subjective, the material and the spiritual, the transitory and 
the eternal 

613 influence of the Sun ui GeminI and the Moon m 
Cancer, representing your individual and personal character, it 

may be judged that you are active, loteliigent, economical, and anxious 
generally about business, family matters or borne affairs You are some 
what restless and inclined to seek sympathy from others, with a cunous 
longing for an unknown something and the sympathies of others do not 
seem to meet or satisfy that longing You have a great degree of 
sensitiveness to other people s coaditions, thus making you liable to sense 
their feelings You would succeed if you turned your mmd to business 
matters, or matters to do with the home and domestic sphere You will 
ever be receptive to the psychological conditions of others but should 
endeavour to control your feelings and emotions, or you will find yourself 
becoming liable to too many moods and changes of opinion 

614 Blending the influence of the Son m Gemim and Moon in Leo, 
representing jour individual and personal character, it would 

appear from this combination that you are somewhat lacking m energy 
and determination , especially in business directions . Thus you will not 
6 e so successful' as you coui'a’ fie, profiafiiV owing I'o atepimufencyainf a 
feeling of inefficiency, to counteract this, beco me as practical as you 
p ossibl y can You will have a tendency towards poetry and music, with 
a love of pfcilosophical pursuits and a desire to study religious questions. 

You will also have the elements of a growing faith, with a belief m the 
supernatural, and will feel at times that some peculiar destiny or imseeo 


POLARITIES OF THE SUN IH GEMiHl 191 

force rs^hindenng jou jn life You will have a desire to r ea ch o ut for 
love from the opposite sex and will be in danger in this direction unless 
very careful are sympathetic, kind hearted, and have at times,’ 

spiritual mclinabons and aspirabons, and some very high ideals f 

Blending the influence of the Sun m Gemini and Moon in Virgo, 
representing your individual and personal character, it may be 
judged that you have a veiy^studious and mathematical mind, being 
critical and analytical, and this will, in all probability, give you a desire to 
stud' Nature, anatomy, physiology and hygiene, or even chemistry and 
medicine You have a keen loyejif beauty in form and nature also a 
love of honour You are very orderly and tidy, and neatness in your 
su'troun*ugs is essential to your comfort, yon are also very particular 
about keeping things m order when yon once get them so Yon have a 
very strong will and are_somewhat difficult to please, being so ejtremely 
^ical, huryTu must try not to be too cnbcal and irritable You have 
a desli^to investigate phenomena of a psychic nature 
'— "“^linaing the influence of the Sun in GEMINI and Moon in Libra, 
representing your individual and personal character, this is a 
combination which shows that yon have a peculiar spiritual tendency with 
a love of the occult and the unseen, also a very intuitive and far seeing 
mind You have great accuracy and guickness of decision and will 
appreciate the study of nature and philosophy You have good imiUtive 
po'vets and these will enable you to bold your own in all departments of 
life but you are more especially fitted for literary pursuits You often 
come to your decisions guickly through intuition rather than reason, and 
have a wonderful appreciation of beauty, art, and everything of an 
ennobling character You are lurble to be alTected by others, and It IS 
essential that you associate with pure persons if not, you wall absorb much 
ol their influence and perhaps be led to think that it is your own Learn 
to distinguish between your own views and opinions and those of others 
Blending the influence of the Sun in GEMINI Bad Moon in 
Scorpio, representing the indi'idual and personal character.it 
may be judged that you ate positive, determined and imitative, but are 
however able to conceal your disposition and keep it out of sight so that 
if you wished you could appear very different from what you really are 
You are not very sensitive and if annoyed could be somewhat harsh 
You could, however, rule in some pnblic posibon You are very deter 
mined and can use Uct and subUety if necessary to gam your desires. 



192 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


You are someuhat inclined to nrgoe, and have a \ ery strong passional 
nature, yet you can use self control in this direction if you choose to do 
so. You are capable of very keen criticism and can sense the weakness 
of others 

618 influence of the Sun in Gemini and the Moon in 

Sagittarius, representing the individual and personal character, 
it would appear from this combination that you are far too active, both 
mentally and physically, also over expressive, overdoing all things, 
indeed, if rest, calm and quiet are not at limes enforced there will be 
serious danger to the life You are inclined to be mentally although not 
physically combative, and there ts some danger to the brain and a 
threatening of nerve trouble in this combination You have some 
prophetic ability, and will at times “dream true”or have intuitions of 
some coming event You arc somewhat inclined to religious thought, 
with innate aspiration and some devotion It would be well to impress 
upon yourself the necess)t> of always taking plenty of rest and 
repose 

Blending the influence of the Suo in Gemim and the Moon in 

Capricorn, representing your individual and personal character, 

It IS clear from this ccmhinatiou that you have a careful, practical and 
active mind, with considerable business ability You are somewhat 
suspiaous and distrustful, and will be subject to some disappomtment 
unless you assiduously culbvate your intuitjons You love beauty, 
grandeur and eloquence, also elegance, and would be inclined to work 
very hard for a position of eminence and honour You are qualified'for 
a busiiKss life, much more so than for a domestic sphere Honoar is 
exceedingly dear to you, and in some ways jou are very conventional 
You are industrious, plodding and bard worlang 
g 2 Q Blending the influence of the Sun in Gemim and the Moon in 

Aquarius, representing the individual and personal character, it 
would appear from this combination that you will succeed well in any 
public sphere, having natural qualifications for dealing with the public- 
Your life will only be satisfied tn its expression in some position where 
there is a great deal of activity, excitement and change. You are well 
fitted to take the bead of things. «■ have others under you, and m partner 
ships or associations with others you would gam success. Other things 
being equal, you would do well m politics, oratory and medicine You 
get on well with strangers and easily make fnends 



POLARITIES OF THE SON IN CANCER 


193 


Blending the influence of the Sim m Gemivi and the Moon in 
Pisces, representing the mdividual and personal character, it 
would seem that you have a very studious imod, but are somewhat too 
restless and anxious, which wll tend to result in dissatisfacbon There 
IS sometimes an inclmabon to feel that you are being opposed in your 
undertakings, and this causes an unsatisfied state of mmd It is necessary 

for you to have harmonious surroundings, and when you have subordinated 
your lower nature to the control of the will, the tendency will be towards 
study and research, enabling you to make great attainments. You will 
be somewhat drawn to mediumship, spiritualism and psychic phenomena 
You should try to understand the difference between your Personalili 
and Individuality 

Polarities of the bUN iv Cancer. 

522 influence of the Sun in Cascer and the Moon in 

Aries, representing the indiMdual and personal character, it ma\ 
be judged that jou haie a very determined will and indomitable persis 
tence in whatever you undertake, with a natural desire for supremaci, 
and capacity to lead and control in the mental world. There is a danger 
sometimes of going to extremes with a difficulty to change, even under the 
dictates of reason You will Ime an miute hatred of being controlled a* 
e\en influenced by the mind or will of another, which wiU make yon liable 
to many mistakes and losses through life You will prefer to deal with 
general principles rather than mlh the mioub£ of daily life. The danger 
of this combination is that it gives a <iJeni stahbom i er^i'tencj Be 
careful to avoid extremes m work 

g23 Blending the mflnence of the bui lo Ksetn and the Moon in 
Taurus, representing your individual and per'^onal chara'^ter, it 
would seem from this combinarion that jou will be somewhat inclined to 
allow the sensation.-il part of >oor nat ire to influence vou too much You 
have a great love of the sublime and grind m nature, but this combination 
renders you too liable to be ps> cliologiscd bj th^ mentil and physical 
conditions of others, which does jou grave injury Vou must alinys 
cultivate m yourself positive self control, and resist the power of other 
people’s'mfluencc, realising t?iatb> will vot tin face the most unpleasant 
conditions with a determinvtion to nse saper or to iticm As you are So 
lable to take on the conditions of others jou should try to study yourself 
and become a gm!u.He in the school of self knowledge 



194 


THE KEY TO YOLR OWN KATIVITT 


525 mfluence of the Sun in Cavcer and the Moon m 

GtMlM, representing your individjal and persona! character, it 
ma> be judged that you have a great thirst for knowledge m al] directions, 
allied to great actmty and energy You will either desire to enter into 
the sphere of art or to take up educational pursuits, and will have some 
inclination towards public life, either m speaking or writing There is 
too much of duality, however, m this combination, giving a disposition to 
worry about small things, the mind, nevertheless is able to receive 
illumination indirectly as well as through education Sbll you should 
tr^ also to realise the feeling and emobonal sid« of >our nature, as well 
as the intellectual, for a true understanding of j ourself vvnll be of great 
value to >ou. You have perhaps too keen a desire for knowledge of an 
intellectual kind 

ggg Blending the influence of the Sun m Cavcer and the Moon also 
m Cancer, representing the icdividua) and personal character, it 
may be concluded from this combmayon that >ou have a clear, keen 
mtellect, and that your intentions are also v*r> reliable You will prefer 
general pnnciples to details. This combmation needs ah the educational 
help It can get, as with it you can enter upon almost any sphere of life 
you may desire. \ou are opposed to being subjected to the laws and 
rules of others, and can be very independeot and «elf suiHcient. Yet you 
are very sensitive to the condmoas and feelings of others, and at times 
mclined to be a little d'^ondent \ou will need to underctnnd the 
lawa of life, and should try to edocate the sensabonal side of your 
nature. 



Leo, representing the individual and personal character, it may 
be judged that you arc far too receptive and sensitive to the condition of 
other imnds and feelings so much so, that they affect your own con 
siderably You have strong feelings and if you are considered unreliable 
it IS because 5 on are so sensihv e to other people that they affect your will 
In this combination you have really more desire for fn'»ndsb»p, love 
sociability, affection, ease and pleasnre, than for hard mental work You 
have a great deal pf quiet power, and an intuitive underctanding that 
does not come to you through the brain centres, lou have a large heart 
and are capable of great dev’otion to tho«eyou love, and when you 
have turned your sensitiveness irttcanl you will make great prc^re= 
indivndually , 



POLARITIES OF THE SUN IN CANCER 195 

527 the influence of the Sun in CA^CER nnd the Moon m 

\'lRGO, represenljo" the mdnidual and personal character, it 
may be ]udged that you ha\e a keen, cntical, discnminating nature in all 
matters to do with the emotions You are somewhat changeable and 
cunously psychic. You have an inclination towards the study of 
anatomy and physiology, and you could take up literary work and become 
an author You have a strong passional nature, and should be very 
careful to lead an absolutely pure life, othervvise you are liable to spoil 
your career You should realise the law of use and abuse, and that tlie 
greatest good lies m the balance between the two extremes , for though 
you have a good intellect, desire for pleasure is keen You have a very 
keen critical sense, but do not allow it to cause you to become 
unsympathetic or separative 

ggg Blending the influence of the Sun in Cancer and the Moon in 
Libra, representing the individual and personal character, this 
combination shows that you have a very flne intuition and keen percep 
tion You are domestic and social If you live a pure life you will 
possess a floe well balanced mind, with clear intuitions and prophetic 
insight, capable of perceiving not only present conditions but events yet 
to come You could become a very fine ideahitic writer, with keen 
perception in all matters relating either to the domestic or social life, but 
you will liave to subjugate your passional nature so that the force, other 
wise wasted, could be called into action for the use of the mmd You 
should seek to discipline your will and practise seif control 
ggg Blending the influence of the Sun m Cancer and the Moon la 
Scorpio, representing the individual and personal character, it 
may be judged that you are somewhat inclined to be conventional, but 
have^^eat aptitude fox public work and the power of making money 
In many cases you may be very severejowards your^oppopents, and you 
•in. an. w j ujy Yo)i.w»J). hajvt mnrh.seJf.'-nnted.'wwi 

your passional nature, a very deten iunedLwill much persuasiv^ tact, and 
•the ability to get your.own way You must avoid being too severe or 
vindictive, also try to overcome pnde and jealousy You are more 
especially fitted for an external and public life, although you will he 
•interested tn psychic and peculiar subjects'hking to see the interior of 
things generally 

"Biroding the influence of the Sun in CAscnt and the Moon in 
Sacitt\R 1 US, representing the individual and personal character 



196 


THE KE^ TO YOUR OWN 


It would appear from this cembinatioa that 5 ou ha\e an o\er energetic 
and active peraonal nature good mechanical abilitj, great industry and 
en«Tgj, but too much activatj for your indivodnal stamina. You should 
t>e content to do onl> half of what you desire to do, otherwise you might 
mdnce trouble with your physical form including disease of the digestive 
organs and stomachic affections generally You have good intuitive 
ability, can often foresee coming e\ ents, and will occasionally hav e strange 
and peculiar iLearns You will be drawn to science and rehgion, and these 
two factors will find some expression in your life, but unless you check 
your activity and seek repose you will greatly shorten your life The 
personal conditions are sixh as to awaken the indivndnal charactenstics for 
the purpose of inner realisation 

Blending the influence of the Son m Cancer and the Moon m 

Capricorn, represeutiflg your individual and personal character 
isbcs. It may be judged that vou have an idealistic nature, together with 
practical business tendencies. There will be «ome oppos bon between 
your inner nature and its outer workings, resslung m a peculiar feehrg 
of uncertamty \ ou will try to produce the ideal condibons that you 
feel inwardly, in manifestabon around you, and so are placed as jt were 
between the external and the intemaL You may be ccsasidered eccentnc 
in some ways, as you are sotnebmes oncertam of what you are gourg to 
do yourself but if y ou cannot always express j our thoughts to your own 
satisfaction, you would be very successful in any bcsiaess entezpnse you 
might engage m. This oombrsaboa gives sore* musical ability, the 
sense of bearing being keen m you O' easv to d*ve!op 

Blending the influence of the Sun in CvvCER and the Moon m 

Aquarius, representing your indindnal and personal character, 
this combination jDd.cates that yon are ven tmthful, and dislike prevan 
cabon, bat you also dislike being blamed and disapproved of \ou are 
adapted for public wo k particularly partnerships, soaebes and co-cpera 
boa- 'ioa are canboas and do not readily give a deasive Ves o' Ivo but 
usaallf take time to consider You wotJd not readily give a pro^t se» 
unless 3 on intended to cany it out- You are likely to make many fneris 
m life and would succeed very well m any business cr wo*! that htot-ght 
you in touch with large bodies of people, 1 ou are disposed to self 
justiacaboa, and ev er desire to give sabsfacbon in aav pos t on m which 
yoj raa> b“ placed. You are de*grm.aed, though eaoboas and careful in 
speech and action. 



rOLAKITIf S OF TIIL SON IN LLO 


197 


633 mflucncc of the Sun in CANCrR and the Moon in 

Pisces, representing the induidua} and persoml character, u 
would appear from this combination that >ou lia\e a bright, active mind, 
a keen sense of the inner meaning of words, and tlul you can readily 
understand the mmd and thoughts of others You have a keen sense of 
the fitness of things You should almys keep your mind active and 
never go day dreaming or let yourself become medmmistic, hysterical or 
imaginative Von will be industrious and studious, having an immense 
hungering for knowledge. With mental activity you should always 
combine suitable enjoyment and diversion, so as to keep the system in 
good health You wall desire to embody your ideals practically, and will 
be very careful about derails. You can easily sense and feel the mental 
conditions of others but should not let this sympathetic and receptive 
side of your nature go to extremes 

PouAKiTii s or Tiic Sun in Leo 

584 mflucnce of the Sun m Lro and the Moon in Aries, 

‘ rpprcsv.nling your ladividuil and personal character, it may be 
judged that you will be apt to go to too great extremes in all things If 
you believe u thing is right or wrong, you will be as immovable as it is 
possible to be kind and non combative, but persistent and if you engage 
in study, philosophy or business, you will carry it to the utmost extreme 
If religious, your zeal will be unbounded therefore you must be careful 
to always nnintain an equal balance between bnm and heart, or brain 
trouble might ensue It is well for you to listen to reason and subject 
your will to it, as you are over tenaaous and your extreme tenacity often 
forces you into positions and conditions you would rather not take up, 
but having determined to do so you will carry them through to the end 
635 Blending the influence of the Sun in LEO and the Moon in 
Taurus, representing your mdivndual and personal character, it 
IS clear from this combination that you have good business intuitions, but 
you will greatly prefer the realm of the mind, and therefore mental 
philosophy will probably engage your attention \ou will love to study 
nature m all its departments esjiecially human nature mental and 
physical You would, other things being equal, succeed well m the 
medical profession , m any case you will love the study of hygiene and 
think very much about the laws of health ^ou have a strong love nature 



198 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


and are exceedingly detcrniined Yea will be rather anxious to succeed 
in life, and if >ou are w«e m regard to the restnint of sensation and 
emotion jou should be successful This combination gives good health 
ggg Blending the influence of the Sun m Lco and the Moon in 
Gemini, representing the individual and personal character, it 
wiU be apparent that you are very active and almost inclined to overdo 
your powers, either physicall>, mentally or emotionailv All matters 
dealing with education will appeal to you and you have ability to take up 
almost any branch of it, you are al<o fond of art and have some coo 
structive ability You like to have a law by which to work and this law 
to be absolute and undeviating ^ou should be careful to restrain and 
guide your nature, ev er hav ing in view the usefulness of all that you do, 
and remember that by taking care not to overstrain any part of your 
system you wnll be using your powers wisely and to the best advantage 
Blending the influence of the Sun in Leo and Moon in Cancer, 
representing your individual and personal character, it tuav be 
judged that you have great sympathy and are very senshve to the 
thoughts of those you love, but there is a liability to go to extremes 
You are sometimes changeable tn moods, at one time buoyant and 
happy, and at others sad and depressed You are almost too sensitive, as 
you are liable to be wounded by a thoughtless word or look You have 
much business energy, and adear, logical and scientific tendency of mind, 
with some qualifications for a literary life but you will always have a 
great love and thoughtfulness for home and family, having a strong love 
nature 

ggg Blending the mfliience of the Sop in LEQ^and the Moon al v ? m 
LeQ. representing the individual and personal character, it will 
be seen from this combinatioii that you have a very independent, clear 
minded and intuitive nature, which is not readily affected fay the likes 
and dislikes of others. You are capable of standing alone, going your 
own way and prosecuting your own aims and wishes, thereby making 
great attainments m life. You are always able so to speak, to under 
stand your own feehngs and nund apart from others. There is only one 
danger, and that is that yon may become rather too selfi«h and self 
centred, shut up as it were within yourself "iou will be very intuitive 
and have a strong desire nature, and it would be as well for you to tram 
that nature to seek the noblest things in life You will reali'^c all that 
this combination means the more von allow your elf to LXPVVD 



206 


THE KE^ TO '^OUR OW\ NATIVITY 


actne and positive mind, an undercurrent of dissati«faction You 
wnll desire an unknou-n somellniig. jou cannot jourself tell uhat. You 
hav e a lov e of, and inclination for^ the study of science and religion, but 
this combination uill only mtensifi all the activity of your Leo nature 
and make jou an extremist- You will have a desire for law, order and 
rule, and an intolerance of any devaation from what jou consider the 
right m your own mind- Tr> tohaveatime for work, a time for rest, 
and a time for recreation^ or yoa will cause «enotis phj'Sical exhaustion 
from doing Icm much 

Blending the influence of the Sun m LEO and the Moon in 
Capricorn, representing your mdividoal and personal character, 
this combination shows vou to be well adapted for business or trading, 
and that >oa could taVe on a somewhat large concern, other things being 
equal kou wiU have considerable power to male mone>, and were it 
not for the Leo nature behind, would be rather selflsh You are inclined 
to juds* others by ) ourself, and can sometimes be a bttle hard or 
exacting *^00 are a great loverof mustcaDdhannony and a d)«cordaBt 
note will cause vnu pain You must try not to be too fastidious m a 
phvsical worl I that is not an ideal world. You will have much ambition 
and a great desire to be at the head of tbiDS«. and could become as 
excellent manager on a large scale 

Blending the influence of the Sun m Leo and the Moon m 
AqUARics representing your individual and personal character, 
it will be seen from this combioatiOD that >on have a strong desire to 
mix with the public, fpn please people readdy, form acquaintances easily, 
and have "^ame inclmation for travel If the other conditions of your 
horoscope and the planetary influences agree, you are adapted for a pubhc 
life. O’’ some career which will enable you to trav eL \ ou must be m 
large citi^ where tb- multitude is lou would also be successful m. 
forming as^x-iatious societies, institutions and organisations generally 
Yonr sympathies are strong and wiU run out to the many You have a 
strong liking for society, and would be unable to live comfortably m a 
quiet country town or village. 

Blending the nfluerce of the Sun in LEO and the Moon ra 
Pisces representing vonr indnndcial and personal character, it 
may be judg'd that v m w ill have aa lacJinatioa for «tud> and research, 
but the outcome d u-, very largely upon jour own attitude and unless 
Other placetarv coiditioos hamionise, this polaitv will male joa very 



POLARITIES OF THE SUN IN VIRGO 


201 


restless, al\\'ajs gi\nng jou a desire to be moving, walking, or travelling 
You are liable to some dissati^jfaction in your family relations and are 
prone to worry over details and small matters, which is nevertheless 
quite foreign to your mtema) natnre, for that is harmonious, ideaLstic 
and expansive You have a keen desire, however, for knowledge, mid if 
you took up any mechancial work you would be diligent, accurate and 
practical in it You love detail, and if you can overcome the spirit of 
unrest which sometimes dwells in you, you may make great attainments 
in mental spheres 

Polarities of the Son in Vxrgo 

Blending the influence of the Sun m Virgo and the Moon in 
Aries, representing the mdividnal and personal character, this 
combination indicates that you have a great deal of mental strength, 
firmness and stability, with a keen sense of order and harmony, which 
would be much disturbed by disorderly surroundings There is, however, 
a tendency to be rather too intense and sometimes too obstinate, and 
through your desire to be at the bead of whatever you engage in, you 
will be inclined to overdo yourself, to live too much m your brain, and m 
that would sufier much through your ejes, which would grow weak 
by over ws*. You have great mtellectaal ability' but are somewhat too 
stubborn for your own good. You have a keen sense of the ridiculous 
and can be very mirthful 

Blending the influence of the Sun lo Virgo and the Moon in 
Taurus, representing the individual and personal character, this 
IS a combination denoting that yon have a fine intuitive mmd and ability to 
take care both of body and brain You act more or le*ss from the higher 
intuitional faculbes within yon, which guide you in the affairs of life 
You are keenly sensitive to the onspoken thoughts and intentions of 
othera, have keen msight in relabon to the future of business transactions, 
and vnli be rarely surpnsed at the result. You are rather loo active (or 
yoor own good, your enei^ somewhat exceeding your strength, but >our 
keen percepbon of the laws of hygiene tends greatly to counteract this. 
You have good business ability and would be successful therein, this 
being a very prachcal and commonsense-ginng combinabon 

Blending the influence of the Sun m Virgo and the Moon m 
Gemini, represcnhng the individual and personal character, this 
combinabon shows that you havea very active mind and a great readiness 



202 


THE KEY TO YOUR OW\ NATIMTV 


of speech, yet there js a JjabiJitv of >our being too rapid in speech which 
might cause you to find utterance difficult You are very artistic, with 
great love of the beautiful, much aptness for education and a desire for a 
public life You have good constructive and mechanical abihty The 
difficulty of this combination is that you ore too active and it inclines you 
to nervous difficulties in consequence You have some duality in your 
composition although you ha\e a very'«;trong will This is a somewhat 
peculiar combination, and inclines to over much attention to detail, 
endeavour to reach out to the ptmciples underlying methods 
549 influence of the Sun in Virgo and the Moon in 

Cancer, representing the individual and personal character, it 
may be judged that you have a great love of beauty, harmony and 
peaceful surroundings, indeed, these things are absolutely essenUal to 
your well being You are so exceedingly sensitive to inharmonious 
conditions that discordant surroundings would affect your health You 
ha\ean ideal in your imagination of a world that is very different from 
this, and often find it hard to endure your present coMronment You axe 
disposed to be economical and industrious, anxious cooceming those 
dependent on you, and about laying bv for the future You are very 
kmd to your own immediate circle,—indeed, somewhat exclusive, yet 
your love of family could be extended to a larger field 
ggQ Blending the influence of the Sun in ViKCO and the Moon in • 
Leo, representing the individual and personal character, it would 
appear m this combination that you have a strong and deep love nature, 
which IS apt to control all your thoughts and actions Your love, though, 
enn be turned from one object to another, for the fact is that you have 
imaged an ideal passion, which creates the desire for some unattauiable 
condition With this polarity you <hould try and realise that your 
emotional nature is somewhat unbalanced, and if you are not careful you 
may often jump from the frying pan mto the fire where the heart is 
concerned It would be well for you to make the most of life and 
develop conjugality as far as yoiir nature wnll allow you, so that you may 
not be over balanced through your strong feelings 

Blending tlic influence of the Sun in ViRCO and the Moon also 
m Virgo, representing your individual and personal cliaracter, 
this IS a combination denoting that you have a great love of nature and 
harmony , and arc innately pure and faithful You are capable of being 
very devoted to another, and yet are a very independent and self reliant 



POLARITIES OE THE SUN IN VIRGO 203 

cinracter You have an insight somewhat amounting to the gift of 
forekno\vledge, and thoughts are apt to come to you in audible words, 
reporting a knowledge of what is to come Your organic quality is very 
fine, and you must have surroundings of beauty, harmony and love m 
which to grow, as refinement is the very breath of life to you, for you 
have an innate dread of anything coarse or common, or that which is not 
refined and pure Tolerance and compassion for others should be your 
watchwords, or you may become too reclusive and unsympathetic 
ggg Blending the influence of the Sun m Virgo and the Moon in 
Libra, representing your individual and personal character, this 
combination indicates that you are remarkably perceptive, yet inclined to 
philosophical reasoning, independent in your thought, and that when the 
other planetary indications coincide you will be able to wnte on philoso¬ 
phical and scientific or occult subjects You must beware of too great 
mental strain or activity or you may suffer with your eyes You are 
very fond of reading, and quick and lotaitive m learning You have the 
ability to * catch on' to general ideas lo regard to philosophy and science 
and to formulate and utilise them as your own Everything will depend 
m your case upon the control you exercise over your emotions and 
sensations This combination shows extremes between the inner and 
the outer nature 

Blending the influence of the Sun in Virgo and the Moon in 
* Scorpio, representing your individual and personal character, it 
may be judged that you are somewhat inclined to be conventional, 
imitative, etc , but you will be persistent in your own chosen course of 
life You must guard against selfishness and an inclination to be some 
what careless of the feelings of those around you You mcTine to social 
life but really prefer the society of your own sex You are somewhat 
quick tempered, and do not readily forgive This combination, however, 
gives you that positive nature likely to bring you success in the outer 
world It is of the utmost importance lo you to have a thorough 
education and the mind well trained and disciplined As you are so 
imitative it Vr’ould be well for you to be careful m your choice of 
companions There is a very strongpsychicelement m your combination 
which can only be advantageously developed by cultivatmg the minfl 

Blending the influence of the Sun in Virgo and the Moon m 
Sagittarius, representing the mdividual and personal character, 
it IS apparent from this combination that jou ha\e on exceedingly acti%e 



204 


TJIC KEY TO ^OUR OWN NATIVITY 


ortrani<«tion both physically and tteiftilly, in fact yoii are somewhat too 
intense You concentrate all the powers of your body and mind upon 
whatever you desire to do, and often push it to an extreme far be>ond 
reason You have a great love for work and are extremely executive, 
inaction would be death to you You wotild make a good teacher, 
especially if yon restrained your impulses and did not jump to conclusions 
Yon have a desire for religions and scientific thought, and a leaning 
towards the study of hygiene and mental and moral philosophy You 
must be careful not to speak too hastily or sharply, for when- you give 
way to impulse you are apt to go to extremes, 
ggg Blending the influence of the Son m VIRGO and the Moon in 
Capricorn, representmg the individual and personal character, 
this combination shows that you have considerable business ability, wath 
deaded musical inclinapoos Yon have a practical mind, are fond of 
activity, busmess, society, oinsic, and public entertainments generally 
Yon are somewhat independent and rather opposed to restraint or control 
lYon are more inclined for pubhc than for private life, yet would take a 
pride m the possession of a stately home Public recognition and honour 
m the world’s eyes mean much to you You like to be profiaent in what 
you do, yet are perhaps more mcimed to generahse than to go into details. 
You will like to be at the head of things generally, 
ggg Blending the influence of the Sun in Virgo and the Moon m 
Aquarius, representmg the individual and personal character, 
this is a combination denoting that you will have a great love of society, 
order, mental and physical harmony, etc. You have superior tact and 
the ability to adapt yourself to others, and therefore you will not have 
much difficulty in pleasmg people In a busmess of a constructive 
character, or m some musical or artistic pursuit, you would be very 
efficient and almost «ure to succeed You are very acOv e physically and 
mentally, your intellect is clear and bright, and you have the ability to 
control the persons with whom yon associate You have a fair love of 
home, a wide range of busmess ability, and are more suited for city than 
lor coimtry hfe 

Blending the influence of the Sen in Virgo and the Moon in 
Pisces, representing the individual and personal character, this 
combinabciQ mdicates that yon have a practical business nund, good 
constructive ability, a great deal of industry and adaptation to literary 
pursuits. You have a desire to obtain and utilise knowledge m many 



POLARITIES OF THE SUN IN LIBRA 


205 


w^ys You are somewhat restless, however, and have a love of variety, 
t|ierefore it may be judged that there is some desire for travel You will 
lq>e power and personal respect and will be remarkably sensitive to 
bhiiie You have a very high ideal of the love life, and should be verj 
careful m the choice of a partner You are somewhat drawn to ychic 
and I eculiar phenomena, and desire to investigate the occult 

Polarities of the Sun in Libra 

ggg Blending the influence of the Sun in Libra and the Moon in 
Aries, representing the individual and personal character, it may 
be judged that you have a strong will and great powers of self control under 
all circumstances, with ability to conceal thoughts feelings and emotions 
You have also power to control others, and can put great intensity into 
your speech You would be firm and reliable m all conditions and 
positions This combination increases the mental powers and somewhat 
illuminates them You have great perception, together with reason, and 
can reflect as well as observe As you can so greatly influence and even 
psychologise others, you will need to cultivate the moral nature, kindness 
and sympathy 

ggg Blending the influence of the Sun in Libra and the Moon m 
Taurus, representing your individual and personal character, 
this combination denotes that you will be quiet and harmonious, yet 
persistent m busmess, with goad coatinoity, carefulness patience and 
perseverance You are very tenacious in your undertakings generally, 
particularly m whatever you judge to be right You are very sensitive 
and susceptible to the influence of others, also very intuitive internally, 
yet with this combination you wiU show great ability for philosophy and 
science You must be careful to reahse yourself apart from others anH 
control over sensitiveness You have a great love of hygiene and inter es t 
in hygienic conditions, which will be a useful field of study for you- You 
have a fairly strong will, and some abihty for medical work- 
ggp Blending the influence of the Sun in Libra and the Moon in 
Gemini, representing the individual and personal character, it is 
manifest that you have an active, restless mind, well adapted to shme m 
all intellectual and educational spheres. Yon have high aspirabons, with 
some taste for the fine arts, also constructive power and mathematical 
ability In some ways you are an encyclopsedia of knowledge, but must 
guard against extremes, as you are restless and mclmed to take too much 



POLARITIES or Tlin SUK IN SCORPIO 


209 


POLARITItS OF THE SUM IK ScORPIO 

670 'nfluence of the Sun in SCOEPIO and the Moon m 

Arifs, representing your individual and personal chnraete this 

IS a combination denoting that you are inclined to be rather too hard at(d 

pos'tiie "ith a tendency to go to sreat evtremes ,n anger, having too 
aiuch physical and mental •Eombattveness You are someuhat jealous 
lUd you need uheu ,n any employment to be uhere you can control others’ 
>y your will Hoiveier, proiided you can keep your will under the 
lontrol of reason you would be capable of bolding responsible positions, 
fou will be disposed to gratify your feelings sometim'es, utterly regardless 
if the consequences. Your feelings and passions are very strong and 
ou need to cultii-ate to the loll aU your reason in order to govern your 
ersonality For this combination, Ibe golden rule of doing as one w ould 
e done by should be strictly adhered to 

S71. ■'i' influence of the Sun in Scorpio and the Moon m 

Tadrus, representing the individual and personal character there 
i no doubt that you are very fond ol the study of nature, and love order 
lythm, dancing, music, and all that makes for harmony Other things’ 
eing equal this position gii es the ability and the intmtion fitbng you for the 
udy of medicine You have a studious and somewhat mtellectual mind 
his polarity tends to bring the Scorpio nature mm submission to law 
id custom k oil dislike to be blamed and greatly desire those you love 
i approve of you You have a large amouul of coujugatity aud the 
ipacity to lose very strongly aud deeply You are very fixed and 
itermmed wheu your m.ud ,5 made op You will be auxious to provide 
r the welfare of those to whem you are atoched and wdl be careful 
id thoughtful about the feelings of others 

51,2 Blending the mflueuce of the Sun m Scorpio and the Moon in 
GEllIm, represenbng your mdividoal and personal character it 
ay be said that you have a great love of art and science and are’an 
rairer of mental ability and oratorical power m others. You love to teach 
d aspire towards high attainments m education You would be imlik 1' 
follow any system of thought which was unpopular, aud would he veZ 
•cumspect in your external life and habite. Yoa are a , 

d <3 pn.fied, and n-ould dislike hard physical labour or any conation'"f 
e in which ease aud a good social positmu were not concoimtauts You 



rouiUTUs or the sun is scorpio 


211 


pmctical at»J cl'*ir mind, and may make excellent uxe of the critical 
facultx if yoti will intn yoir^elf to »ecojm'« the Rood as well as the 
imperfect m Ihinp^ and people 

Illendinj; the Infloenco of the Sun m SCORPIO and the hfoon m 
I^IPKA, reprewnlmc the tndnidual and persoaxl character, this 
comhiration in iicates that 5 mi ha\e an inner penetration, with an inclma 
tion to doubt, <can and lalerrnc'ite the future, which wall deietop >our 
Intuition and sometimes, when the other planetary influences arc 
(avonraWe, (a\*our cUirNO^-ant vision Ymt base a tendenc> to blend 
reason with intuition, which promotes diimit> of cliarncter, with some 
nobiltti of feelinj; and disposition kou haie buimess perception and a 
predisposition to aucceeil therem Vou have alio some literary ability 
and lo\e of seterKe, and fairlj Rood judgment Vour perceptiie power is 
ver> Veen, and you hav*e the ability to take on both physical and 
metaphysical forms of thouRhl. predisposing to success ta life Therefore 
this is on the whole a pood combination 

llIefidinR the influence of the Sun in SCORPIO and the hfooa in 
Scorpio, tepteientmK your indiiidual and personal character, it 
Is manifeit that you will be lery firm, disposed to independence and self 
reliance, itandinR alone m the world and seeking few intimate fnesds. 
\ou are somewhat rnaterulisiic in thoi^tht and feeling and seldom get 
beyond the realm of the fiie senses, but )ou are lery clear and logical m 
practical thins:* Subjects of business, goi emtnent, and thtsse concerning 
education interest you ^ou are somewhnt conventional inclined to 
lenerate and support established institutions, and hvi-e little inclination to 
take adiice from others or be led by them \oii hxie a certun amount 
of pride and dignity, and some self sufficiency, great powers of criticism 
and anal>*is together with a strong will Cultnate s>mpath> 

578 influence of the Sun in Scorpio and the Moon in 

SacITTAFIUS, representing your individual and personal character, 

It maybe judged that you love law and order, but are inclined at times 
to be sarcastic and cutting in language being liable to speak out what 
fir«t comes into your mind, without regard of consequences. You will 
like public life but you must beware of being too hasty and reckless. 
Much self-control and culture are necessary to bring j-oor very intense 
nature into subjection One of the greatest troubles arising from this 
coTTibination will be jealousy, and you may suffer greatly if you allow 
jealous thoughts to dominate you Never suffer yourself to become 



rOLARITIES or TllL SUN IN bACITTARIUS 213 

to'wards pnde and dignity, which will pull up the lower, the whole blend, 
however, is psychic. 

Polarities or the Sun in Sagittarius 

6S2 influence of the Sun in Sagittarius and the hfoon 

m Aries, representing your .individual and personal character, it 
appears from this combination that you hive greit will power and mental 
energy, and ate very determined \ou should never be m too much 
hurry, but take time to do things Try to be more thoughtful and rather 
less active. You will have to le\m lo overcome your activity and 
excitability. Work is good for you m moderation, but there is a limit to 
bodily endurance, and this combination is oue tint requires you to take 
atre of your personal self, if you do not, you will suffer greatly from 
nervous difficulties and headaches ^ou liave good mentality, and if you 
abstain from over exertion will be successful in life 
ggg Blending the influence of the Sun in Sagittarius and the Moon 
in Taurus, representing the individual and personal character, u 
may be judged that you are very thoughtful, kind and sympathetic, and 
have a great desire to help those who are suffering You have a natural 
inclination towards hygienic habits, and will be inclined to study and 
practise the laws of health, either as nurse or doctor You are almost 
inclined to go to extremes when your sympathies are powerfully excited 
\ou will be very sensitive, peculiarly so, and would rather not meet 
strangers or many people You do not care for the public or public 
places, therefore you will not be anxious to form new acquaintances You 
love Nature and have a taste for natural science m all its departments 
You are m many ways prophetic, and have a generous nature 

Blending the influence of the Sun in SAGITTARIUS and the Moon 
in Gemini, representing the individual and personal character, 
this IS a combination denoting that you have a great love of order and 
beauty, also much educational and artistic ability You have musical 
gifts and may, if you make any effort, succeed in becoming proficient m 
this direction There is one point concerning which a warning should be 
given, and that i.» your intense and excessive activity, for this will, if not 
kept in check, cause nervous exhaustion You are more adapted for 
mental rather than physical pursuits, and any business of an intellectual 
nature you could do well at, or any work connected with literature You 



214 


TIIE KEY TO YOUR ^ATInTY 


ha\"e much duality in your nature and will always feel yourself wanting 
to do two things at a time. Se^ rest and recuperation, cr you will 
sufier from cer^’ous and neuralgic troubles 
ggg Blending the influence of the Sun in SAGITTARIUS and the Moon 
in Cancer, representmg your mdividnal and personal character. 
It will appear from this combination that }ou ba\e a \er} economical and 
mdostnot^ nature, with a great io>e of fanul>, «o that you will always 
be anxious about jour dear ones, and will like to feel that you bare 
a little money laid by ” for a ramy daj *' Be careful m your circle of 
acquaintances, and in dealing with the opposite sex, as their mfloence is 
likely to pro%e a strong one in your bfe, and if yon were to form an 
nnhapiiy or unworthy alliance your whole nature would be blighted. 
Study the character of people, a rut do cot fall in lore with the form 
You are likely to cling tenaaously to the object of your love, somenhat 
careless of consequences. 

686 ^ influence of tb* Sun in SACnTARiUS and the Moon 

m Leo, representmg your tndindoaJ and personal character, it 
may be judged that you have a strongly acOve emottonal imture, and are 
capable of very deep and ardent feeling You hare some psychic gifts, 
and could become very mediomisoc. You will have at tunes curious and 
remarkable dreams and visions, and u you hav'e much faith and 

belief Yon have the power to coming changes of a public nature, 
as you feel the condition of the public mind, as well as the mmds of your 
friends and acquaintances. You are disposed always to act from your 
feelings, and your acbnties are mamlj of the timer or heart nature. You 
are very Vtnd and noble hearted, and sympathetic, but rather too s e n si tive 
at times, a cross word or look affects your heart greatly You will act 
and speak from the heart, being moved by your impulses rather than by 
thought. 

Blending the influence of the Sun m Sagittarius azul the Moon 
in ViPGO, representing your indiYidual and personal character, 
thi« combination shows you are fond of harmony and take great 
mterest m and are devoted to music, and you could become successful 
m the musical profession. You are very discriminative and are capable 
of studying mechanics, and the fine artt Yon have 

refined tastes, some prophetic power, and an often foretell coming 
events. You sbonld never combat or argue, as it injures the higher side 
of the nature antt prevents *Nat and harmony which is the soul s 



POLARITIES OF THE SUN IN SAGITTARIUS 


215 


atmosphere for growth Do not be too critical Always seek to be 
hopeful and cheerful and never allow yourself to worry 
ggg Blending the influence of the Sun m SAGITTARIUS and the Moon 
in Liora, representing your individual and personal character, 
the indications arc that you have fine intuition and perception, and ability 
to quickly weigh everything m the balance of reason You can be cool, 
quiet, yet prompt and active both mentally and physically. You have a 
fine business mind, and adaptability for tliought, education and science 
You are mentally very independent Your perceptions are accurate and 
your judgment generally correct, especially where perception is one of 
the faculties in making your decision Tins is a good combination, givmg 
intuition and reason, and ability to decide with accuracy You have the 
capacity to attain wisdom 

ggg BlcndiHg thc influence of the Sun m SAGITTARIUS and the Jloon 
in Scorpio, representing your individual and personal character, 
one would judge that you have a positive, determined character; much pnde, 
and a tendency towards conventionality You must be careful in your 
speech, and avoid using hard and sarcastic language You will succeed 
well at any phy sical employment, for you have much personal ability, 
but you nther hek judgment and reliability You have a somewhat 
sharp temper at times and like to argue, are strong and impetuous, but 
as with many others your *’ bark is worse than your bite " You will 
need to exercise care in your choice of associates as they are liable to 
lead you astray It will be well for you to carefully consider this point 

Blending the influence of the Sun in SAGITTARIUS and also the 
Moon m Sagittarius, representing your individual and personal 
character, it may be judged that you have a well balanced nature, both 
mentally and physically, and are free and independent You will incline 
to be very liberal, rather careless, yet withal prompt and industrious 
You have a generous nature, taking it all through, a clear and decisive 
mind, and are but little affected by surroundings or associates You have 
a faithful nature, patient and persevenng You have an excellent 
business mind, and are thorough, though more adapted for general 
principles than the minutiae of things You will at some period of 
your life be drawn towards science and religion 

Blending the influence of the Sun in SAGITTARIUS and the 
Moon in Capricorn, representing your individual and personal 
character, this is a combination showing an excellent business mind 



216 


TItE KEY TCI \OUR OWN NATrVITY 


fertile and executive and abounding with plans and schemes. You are 
practical and thorough, but more inclined for business than social or 
domestic life, as the business element is very strong m you you will 
make all things bend to that You hare a quick ear for, and probably a 
great love of, music, which if developed would amount to almost a 
passion You will love the bcaubful and grand, and things must be on a 
large scale for you. 

If you turn your attention to art you will do fairly well, but I think 
that business wall be more likely to absorb your mind. 

QQ2 the influence of the Sun m SAGITTARIUS and the 

Moon in Aquarius, representing the individual and personal 
character, this combination denotes that you hav e keen, activ e, and alert 
perceptions and are well adapted to enter into any business pursuit, for 
you can readily and quickly form pleasant and profltable acquaintances. 
You would have much success Bnancially by selling commodities, and can 
on the whole be fairly fortunate at money making You must, however, 
endeavour to live a very pure life, or you are liable to spoil yonr 
mtuittons and consequently come to grief through misplaced confidence 
You Will not feel satisfied with domestic life, but will yearn for a sphere 
of public activity All business work attracts you greatly, and you have 
the capacity to form large associations and great undertakings. 

Blending the influence of the Sun in SagittaRIOS and the Ufoon 
in Pisces, representing your mdivndual and personal character. 

It may be judged that you will be very anxious and careful m whatever 
direcbon your mind may turn You are studious and love books, and 
hav e also some constructive and mechanical skill You are very faithful 
and industnous, but mclioed at tunes to be fretful and worry, are hard 
working and persevering, and not inclmed for many changes. You will 
love the quiet of the country, and will not desire a pnbhc life or be eager 
to come before the masses. What you do, you will do well and 
thoroughly and you can attend to details You are not particularly self 
confident, and are rather inclined to under estimate your abilities. You 
■wcmlii wi^ to erfittva t e c ou c eii ti a tTO D amd e o trtjpcrfty. 

Polarities of the Svs jn Capricorn. 

Blending the mfloence of the Son in Capricorn and the Moon 
in \RIES, representing your individual and personal character, 
one would judge you to have a very active brain, foil of ideas and plans. 



rOLARITins OI TUI sun in capkicorn 


217 


and a practical and \ery perM<itent iniiul wlncli will enable jou to carry 
thc'^e ideas into daily practice. You lia\c a great deal of pride in your 
composition, willi \erj liiyh ideals and aspirations. You generalK feel 
>our own ideas are rigbt, and are at times inclined to force them into 
operation You lia\t large ideas of intellectual allainments and some 
egotism You lia\e not so imtcli capacity for detail, but have an 
unbending will, which will carry you into any position you desire to 
occupy eventuallj. 

595 influence of the Sun in CAPRICORN and the Moon 

in Taurus, representing your individual and personal character, 
it IS manifest that you liave a very powerful and persistentmmd and are 
somewhat combative, with a strong idea of and adherence to social cus¬ 
toms genemily You have strong and ardent feelings also a desire and 
ad.aptation for the study of hygiene and the laws of health. You are 
\ ery sensitu e, and the mentil conditions of others affect you You have 
innately some spiritual feelings, and if you cultivate your mental nature 
w tU be earnest and realous in all educational pursuits, with plans for the 
elevation of hum.anity. You desire to be at the head of things and ore 
well adapted to le.ad and manage 

ggg Qlendmg the inditence of the Sun in CAPRICORN and the Moon 
in Glvini, representing your individual and personal character, 

It will be seen from tins combination that you have a very studious and 
intensely active mmd, with a love of science, literature, oratory and the 
hne arts. You are a good organiser and excel m laying out plans You 
have ideals at times far beyond your power and ability to execute, 
and Will thus be fond of building castles in the air. You will be 
a good speaker if you cultivate the faculty You will m many ways 
prefer a public life to a domestic one You could be successful in a 
literary profession, or a position where the intellect could be used, and 
are not so well adapted for physical labour You have a keen sense of 
the value of words 

Blending the influence of the Sun in CAPRICORN and the Moon 
m Cancer, representing your mdmdual and personal character, 
this combination shows you to have a great love for and aspiration 
towards beauty, elegance, ideality and grandeur You love accomplish¬ 
ments and people who are clever. You are exceedingly careful and 
cautious, at times too much so You are very prudent and careful 
where money is concerned You must not carry economy too far 



218 


THr KEY TO YOUR OWN VATHITY 


however, and should avoid becoming too anicious about monetary afTairs 
You are very sensitive and feel all that goes on around you You wiU 
always desire power and to be at the head of things You have ability to 
attend to details of things and can always do so without effort You 
will as time goes on tend to balance the feelings and the intellect 
598 influence of the Sun in CAPRICORN and the Moon 

in LbO, representing the individual and personal character, it 
would appear that you lia\e a strong love nature and must be guarded 
where the feelings, appetites and passions are concerned You are very 
spontaneous in action and ardent and zealous in all you do You will 
not care about control or self restraint as you have an exceedingly strong 
will, but if Jou submit your will to your reason and intuition you will 
become a bright, Lind and philanthropic person, zealous m good works 
and plans for the protection of the poor and needy You are apt to be 
too liberal with your money for your own good You have some adapt 
ability for the religious element, and would desire to understand spintual 
things Love and honour will be the principal pivots upon which your 
(ate will turn, and between love and duty your most vivid expenences 
wdl be realised 

Blending the influence of the Sun m CAPRICORN and the Moon 
in Virgo, representing your individual and personal character, it 
ma> be said that this is a splendid blend of the earthy tnphcity, and will 
cause you to develop a very thoughtful and discnminative mind, and will 
give you the ability to follow either literary or scientific pursuits easily 
Your mind will be orderly, logical and both analytical and critical, and 
there are few branches of study that your mind could not enter It 
would enable you to bold responsible positions with tact and diplomacy, 
and also gives you that business type of brain which can fully understand 
value, and estimate objects at their true worth. All other things being 
favourable in your nativity this is an excellent polarity for expression, as 
It will tend to make you thorough and painstaking, although at times you 
may be lacking m initiative. You could study the laws of hygiene to 
advantage, and providing you do cot become too retiring and reserved you 
would be able to realise the true meanmg of service 
QQQ Blending the influence of the Sun in CAPRICORN and the Moon 
in Libra, representing your individual and personal character, it 
may be said tliat >ou are keen and intuitive, with ability for literary 
pursuits. Yo I would be tborough m business, for j our plans and 



POLARITIES OF THF SUV IN CAPRICORN 219 

arrangements are carefully thought out so as to mal e them successful 
You ha\ e a good deal of foresight, and a desire for metaphysical and 
spiritual things and if you cultivate thought control and live purely you 
could often discern e\ ents beforehand \ ou ha\ e some pou er for public 
speaking, and usually turn your energies and faculties into the interior, 
so that m speech you would sometimes say much that you nere not 
aware you 1 new until the moment of utterance Your perception is very 
good and you ha%e reason and coolness as well This is a blending of 
Saturn and Venus, indicating chastity, refinement and sincerity 

Blending the influence of the Sun m Capricorn and the Moon 
in Scorpio, representing your individual and personal character, 
it may safely be said that you are very reserved, positive and dignified, 
and ha\e far more inclination to write your thoughts than to speak them 
You are rather inclined to be conventional and apt to develop a command 
ing positu eness, and sometimes may be a little too exacting where others 
are concerned You will somewhat dislike manual labour but have 
great ability to manage, arrange, plan and organise You must beware 
of anger, for when you are once offended with people you wiU sot desire 
to hate anything more to do with them, yet you tvill not let them see it, 
as you can conceal your feelings The Saturnine and Martial influences 
in your horoscope are very pronounced, making you an exceptionally 
strong character 

QQ 2 influence of the Sun in Capricorn and the Moon 

•n Sagittarius, representing your individual and personal 
character, one would judge that you will have great mental activity and 
be inclined to act on the first thought or impulse without maturing it, or 
makmg it practical, consequently you will be liable to business failure 
and mistakes You will have through your individuality a great love of 
grandeur and elegance, and are therefore liable to be somewhat too 
extravagant and to lack due appreciation of money You are over lavish 
where finance is concerned, and will have to be careful m this respect or 
you may become poor Industry and economy should be cultivated, or 
you are not likely to be successfnl as you might othenMse be You love 
oratory, and expression through speech You wll also be fond of nature 
generally Both contraction and expansion are denoted by this 
coirbiaation 

603 influence of the Sun in Capricorn and the hfoon 

also m Capricorn, representing the individual and personal 



220 


TUL K£^ TO lOUR OWS ^ATI\m 


character, you ace^bom to hi\e a clear active brain, much concentrabou 
of purpose, and abdit> to carry forward all you begin. You are not 
adapted for physical labour, but to general business and planning, 
management, etc. You love order, harmony and elegance, and desire to 
maintain such surroundings »f possible. You are v cry independent and 
not disposed to be amfidenbal or take on mbmate friendships. For the 
most part you turn all your attenbon to business and educabonal 
subjects You have excellent powers of self control You are not over 
partial to family life, still you will make it very harmonious Do not 
allow yourself to become too distant or frigid towards strangers or 
inferiors. 

Blending the influence of the Sun in Capricorn and the 'Moon m 
Aquarius, representing your individual and personal character, 
it may be judged that you have a very active, restless nature, with some 
pode. You could not be sabsfled with a lonely or quiet conntry life, you 
must come before the mulbtude if possible. You have ability for all 
mercantile pursuits, and some taste for political economy You will like 
home and family y et the world almost beRer It would be w ell for you 
sot to engage m any form of partnership unless you could join with those 
who are m a good postbon, for a public or more external life would be 
much more congenial to you tbao^ quiet one You have ability to form 
accurate judgments of human nature, and could make some very high 
attainments if you gave yourself up to a study of your own inner nature, 
ggg Blending the influence of the Sun in Capricorn and the Moon 
in Pisces, representing your mdividoal and personal character, 
you are shown to have a persevering and mdustnous nature, which 
makes you studious and economical. loving science and general knowledge, 
but yon may be at times almost over anxious and too inclined to worry. 
You are not much given to generaLsabons, but are good m all matters of 
detail, and you will always be wanting to know the use of the thing 
Yon have mechanical ability, and would make a gpod superintendent or 
overseer in any kind of business. You are very independent m character 
and acbon, yet sympathebc and kindly, and you will seek to be thorough 
IS what you undertake. 

Polarities of the Sun is Aquarius. 

Blending the influence of the Sun in AQUARIUS and the Moon 
’ in Aries, representing the individual and personal character, it 



POLARITIES OF THE SUN IN AQUARIUS 


221 


may be judged thaX you have a very decided character, disposed to push 
any issue to great extremes You have a quick nature but are sometimes 
inclined to be a little stubborn and obstinate You do not always disclose 
your plans and decisions to others, and like to hold full control m any 
sphere in which you may be engaged You have great self control in 
almost any department of life, and like to have your owm sphere of 
business occupahon You will always be disposed to lead, and will have 
to guard against being too extreme in your views You are very keen, 
quick witted and shrewd, and have a very strong will, disliking to be led 
or controlled in any way by others It would do you no harm if you 
endeavoured to become a little more plastic 

Blending the influence of the Sun m AQUARIUS and the Moon 
m Taurus, representing the individual and personal character, 
this combination denotes that you will be very sensitive to physical and 
mental surroundings and that you have the ability to judge both human 
and animal nature You will be lery active and practical m business 
matters, and exceedingly industnous id all the minutiae of life You can 
be very loving and harmonious as a compan on and would make a very 
good partner You are inclined to be over anxious about those under 
your care, having all their needs at heart You will have a cunous love 
of farming, and similar pursuits, having a passion for Nature m all her 
moods, so that you are quite hippy when alone This combination gives 
a great deal of determination and brings faithful fnends who will befriend 
you financially if necessary 

_ g Blending the influence of the Sun in AQUARIUS and the Moon m 
GemiM, representing your individual and personal character, it 
may be seen that you have a love of intellectual pursuits and an mclina 
tion for public speaking You will be very interested in all educational 
matters, will have great constructive power, and will desire to excel in 
whatever you undertake If you study you will be quick to understand 
and comprehend, but you are not likely to adopt too confining a profession. 
You are orderly, and greatly love refinement You are somewhat 
inclined to be nervous, and should be careful not to overdo yourself either 
physically or mentallj There is some duality in your personal nature 
and also some restlessness, but you are capable of much mental 
advancement 

Blending the influence of the Sun m Aquarius and the Moon in 
Cancer, representing yout individual and personal character. 



222 


TIIC KEY TO VODR OWS VAT lVilV 


one woold judge thatyouTnllbe^^ry indostnoasand econonucaJ.carrying 
jour eccaonjy into xerj small thiogs and that j”ou biW Joxe Joiowledge 
and desire to acquire it You Bill be \ery susceptible to the diseases and 
conditions of others all through bfe. ^You ba\e soire self control, jet 
cone too much You should therefore be careful in jrour choice of 
associates or fnends, as you are liable to be led % eiy much by what they 
do, although you ha\e a fair amount of firmness m other respects, you 
will ha\e to remember that you are \ery susceptible to the psjcholc^cal 
influence of others. Leam to discriminate between your conditions 
those of others. 

Blending the mflnence of the Sun m AQUARIUS and the Moon in 
Leo, representmg jour mdividoal and personal character, I find 
from this combmapon that you have great londness and sympathy and a 
^c^y dei'Ohonal nature. You can Ime very deeply, almost worshipping 
the one to whom jou have grvea joar afieclioas. You are so feeder 
hearted that you axe not so well adapted for the rush and bnstle of tows 
and aty life as for the quieter and more natural life of the country Yon 
will be easily led by associates, and so susceptible to psychological control 
and so hable m extremes that you wiU be wise to try to realise the 
character of others ere yea gti e your bean to them, and so sai e yourself 
much snffermg ^ on are liable at tunes to go to extremes m your views, 
and to be deceii ed and misled m love afiair« Be guarded where your 
afiections are concerned. 

Q Blending the ufiuence of the Sun lo AQUARIUS and the Moon m 
V[RGO, representing your mdividual and personal character, one 
would judge rou to ba^ e a clear logical mind. % ery seusiti%'e m regard to 
the opinions of others. You have some pnde, yet ha%e personal ability, 
and will be very capable of rendenng service to another You ha^e 
«ome constructive ability and a eataral adaptation to trade. This 
combination Bill g»%e jou a tendency towards the study of anatomy, 
physioI<s?v and hj’giene and maJfe® for carefulness m diet and habits, 
ieo Me ssd are Xo haie sr/ijca) reascoisg rJear powts sa 

your arguments. Yen arc economical and ««vu:g, yet ha% e large idealitj 
You will be inebsed to the practical thu^ of bfe and bbe to turn all 
things to use, and are, in the mam, a nblitaxian 

Blending the influence of the Son in AQUARIUS and the ^fooa ra 
Libra, representing jwir tcdividual and personal character, it 
nay be said that wzU be very Irees, qmclr, acbve and discruninatiTe^ 



223 


rOLARITIES OF TIIF SVft IN AQUARIUS 


weighing up and balancing the qualities an<f conditions of things Your 
perceptue ability is very good, though you are almost wholly governed 
by intiution, and thus will exhibit superior mental qualities You will 
have ability and foresight in any pursuit in which you are engaged You 
have some occult ability or spiritualistic power and often get visions of 
things to come. You are a good judge of character and can read the 
disposition of others at a glance, and form quick and accurate judgments. 
This combination should give you some musical ability. 

613 the influence of the Sun in AQUARIUS and the Moon m 

ScoRno, representing your individual and personal character, I 
find from this combination that jou will be very keen, quick, and adapted 
for trade and the driving of bargains You have some selfishness and a 
strong, quick temper i\hen aroused, and will be inclined to remember any 
injury received This is a combination in which one needs to discipline 


the lower nature, as the personality is very strong, inclining you at times 
to be too hard and unaccommodating You will be fairly successful in 
literary, educational or public life if other planetary conditions are 
favourable You are somewhat conservative, and yet have a desire for 
the Uncommon, the wonderful and the extraordinary You will desire to 
know what lies at the back of things, and will be disposed to try and 
ferret out Nature’s secrets 

Q. - Blending the influence of the Sun in AQUARIUS and the Moon m 
Sagittarius, representing the individual and personal character, 
fhis combination shows that you will be very active in physical and 
mental pursuits, and that you must be careful always to speak and act 
With due thought nnd preparation as it may be judged that you are 
somewhat too hasty and premature for your own good, and a little liable 
to go to extremes m all you undertake You have fine constructive 
power and some artistic ability, also a keen conventional sense of right 


and wrong You will be industrious in whatever you may engage in, very 
neat and orderly, with a strong love for home, family, and fnends, etc 
- Bland,„B tha Influenca of lb. Sun ,n AQU.KfUU und the Moon .n 

CPU,CORN, r=nreaanbnB,b..nd,..dual and par^nal ebaraotar, 

It may be judped from tbis combmabon that you are very active, nervous 
bud excitable, both in brain and body Von have some inclination and 
adaptability for public life, also for mercantile pursuits, but,on prefer a 
bnsines, on a larpe scale and laren tpuisactions generally Yon would 
-ever be happy unless in some sphere afford,ng opportnoil, and great 



222 TUC KE\ TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 

one would judg® industrious and economical, carrying 

your economy into \ery small things and that you will lo\e knowledge 
and desire to acquire it You will be very susceptible to the diseases and 
conditions of others all through life ^You have some self control, yet 
none too much You should therefore be careful in your choice of 
associates or fnends, as you are liable to be led very much by what they 
do, although you have a fair amount of firmness m other respects, you 
w ill ha\ e to remember that you are \ ery susceptible to the psychological 
influence of others Learn to discriminate between your conditions and 
those of others. 

Blending the influence of the Sun in AQUARIUS and the Moon m 

Leo, represcntmg jour individual and personal character, I find 
from this combination that you have great kindness and sympathy and a 
very devotional nature You can love very deeply, almost worshipping 
the one to whom you have given your affections You are so tender 
hearted that you are not so well adapted for the rush and bustle of town 
and city life as for the quieter and more natural life of the country You 
will be easily led by associates and so susceptible to psychological control 
and so liable to extremes that you wiU he wise to try to realise the 
character of others ere jou give your heart to them, and so save yourself 
much suffering You are liable at times to go to extremes in your views, 
and to be deceived and misled in love affairs Be guarded where your 
affections are concerned 

Blending the influence of the Sun m AQUARIUS and the Moon in 
611- Virgo, representing your individual and personal character, one 
would judge vo’u to have a clear logical mmd. v ery sensitive in regard to 
the opmions of others You have some pnde, yet have personal ability, 
and -mil be very capable of rendering service to another You have 
^me constructive ability and a natural adaptation to trade This 
combination will give you a tendency towards the study of anatomy, 
phjsiologj and hygiene and makes for carefulness in diet and habits. 
You like and are disposed to have cnlical reasoning and clear points in 
your arguments You are economical and sav mg, y et hav e large ideality 
You will be mclmed to the practical things of life and like to turn all 
things to use, and are, in the mam, a ablitanan 

Blending the mfluence of the Sun in AQUARIUS and the Moon in 

Libra, representing your individual and per««nal character, it 
may be said that you will be very keen, quick, activ^e and discriminative, 



POLARITIES OP THE SUN IN AQUARIUS 22 

weighing up and balancing the qualities anJconditions of things Yoo 
perceptive ability is very good, though you are almost whollj goveme 
by intuition, and thus will exhibit superior mental qualities You wi 
have ability and foresight in any pursuit m ahich you are engaged Yo 
have some occult ability or spiritualistic power and often get lasions c 
things to come You are a good judge of character and can read th 
disposition of others at a glance, and form quick and accurate judgments 
This combination should give you some musical ability 

Blending the inBuence of the Sun in AQUARIUS and the Moon ii 
Scorpio, representing your individual and personal character, ] 
find from this combination that >ou will be very keen, quick, and adaptec 
for trade and the driving of bargains You have some selfishness and t 
strong, quick temper when aroused, and will be inclined to remember anj 
injury received This is a combination m which one needs to disciplin« 
the lower nature, as the personality is very strong, inclining you at times 
to be too hard and unaccommodating You will be fairly successful in 
literary, educational or public life if other planetary conditions are 
favourable You are somewhat conservative, and yet have a desire for 
the uncommon, the wonderful and the extraordinary You will desire to 
know what lies at the back of things, and will be disposed to try and 
ferret out Nature's secrets 

Blending the influence of the Sun m AQUARIUS and the Moon lu 
Sagittarius, representing the individual and personal character, 
this combination shows that you will be ver> active id physical and 
mental pursuits and that you must be carefol always to speak and act 
with due thought and preparation as it may be judged that you are 
somewhat too hasty and premature for your own good, and a little liable 
to go to extremes in all you undertake You have fine constructive 
power and some artistic ability also a keen conventional «ense of right 
and wrong You will be industrious in whatever you may engage in, \ ery 
neat and orderly, with a strong lore for home family, and friends, etc 

Blending the influence of the Sun in AQUARIUS and the Moon in 
Capricorn representing the individual and personal character, 
it may be judged from this combinahoa that you are \ery active, nervous 
and excitable both in brain and body You have some inclination and 
adaptability for public life also for mercantile pursuits, but you prefer a 
business on a large scale and large transactions generally on would 
never be happy unless in some sphere affording opportunitj and great 


224 


TJin KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


activity for brain and body You have a strong idea of honour and some 
class prejudice You must try to control your excitability or your health 
vnll suffer You will love music, and if it were not that this combination 
rarely makes a student, you could become clever and proficient therein 

616 Sun in Aquarius and the Moon 
also in Aquarius, teprcsenlmR the individual and personal 

character, this combination denotes that you have an active, prompt and 
positive mind, with clear perception as to a definite business or public 
career You will be independent frank and expressive and display great 
discretion and wisdom This is a good combination as it harmonises and 
intensifies the Aquarius nature, making you a good representative of this 
sign of the zodiac You will be apt to tie yourself to one pursuit m life, 
and vvnll desire some kind of work that brings you into touch with the 
public, and this you will be well fitted for You have a capacity for 
business and you will be a good judge of human nature, >n short a good 
character reader You will readily take to strangers who will soon 
become friendly to you This is one of the most refined of the 144 
polarities and shews much ideality and artistic ability 

617 influence of the Sun m Aquarius and the Afoon in 
Pisces, representing the individual and personal character, it 

may be seen from this combination that you are endowed with great 
perseverance, activity, and carefulness, but are adapted for mental nther 
than physical labour You will love books and incline very much to all 
literary pursuits You have a very high sense of honour and integrity of 
character, yet you wall be over anxious concerning your career and 
success in life You wll be successful in the mmutisc and details of life, 
(or you have formed a habit of economy Be careful not to overdo your 
self or you may suffer from nervous debility Try and be as hopeful as 
you can and do not let despondency or worry overtake you, for there is 
some tendency in this direction 

POLARITiES OF THE SUN IN PiSCES 

618 blending the influence of the Sun in Pisces and the Moon in 
Aries, representng your individual and personal character, one 

would judge that you have an active and restless but very determined 
nature, and that you can be very self willed, headstrong, positive and 
difficult to govern You have one of those natures that cannot be forced, 
but IS more easily led than driven You have a very great love of 



tolarihes op toe sun in pisces 


225 


knowledge and much strength, self*reliance and self control, yet there is a 
danger of your doing too much and neakeniog your nervous system. 
You should try to tram yourself to habits of moderation, remembering 
that you are m a physical vehicle and that you must use this vehicle well 
or you will find it fail you at the time you most need its services. 

Blending the influence of the Sun m PISCES and the Moon in 
Taurus, representing your individual and personal character, 
this combination shoivs that you are \ cry quiet and easy going externally, 
although very active internally. You have strong desires and feelings 
and an intense love of Nature, with an interest m medicine and the 
natural sciences This combination intensifies the honour and integrity 
of the Pisces nature, making you considerate of the welfare of others as 
well as your own. You are subject to melancholy, but are persistent in 
all you take up Always try to become as hopeful and joyous as possible. 
You are very sensitive to the conditions of others and often isolate 
yourself from them, preferring a quiet occupation wtere you can remain 
alone 

Blending the influence of the Sun in Pisces and the Moc® m 
Gluini, representing your individual and personal character, it 
may be judged that you have a great love of knowledge and a disposition 
to usefulness This combination intensifies the activities of the Pisces 
nature, and sometimes increases the anxious worrying nature Pisces 
gives. You should ever strive to look on the bright side of things and 
encourage the cultivation of a joyous, happy spirit, remembering that 
it IS weak and unworthy to indulge in forebodings and morbid imaginings, 
and thus you may counteract the somewhat unfavrourabte tendency of this 
polanty 'Always keep the bright side of hfe before you if you would 
avoid brain troubles and nervous restlessness It would be well for you 
to get as many educational advanUges as possible, for you are abls to 
profit by these 

. Blending the influence of the Sun m Pisces and the Moon m 
Cancer, representing the individual and personal character, it is 
manifest that you will have a very sensitive nature and a disposiUon to 
excessive industry that may lead you at times to overtax your strength. 

You have a great love of knowledge and wish to see educational institu¬ 
tions prosper, you will also be greatly interested m the education of the 
family and improvement of home interests You are more inclined to 
generalise than to enter into details You have a strong and persistent 



POLARITIES OF TIIE SUN IN PISCES 227 

L 

de‘:pondmg endencies Cultu'ate all the hope and compassion you can, 
and strive for " bahnee " in all things 
625, influence of the Sun m Pisces and the Moon m 

Scorpio, representing the individual and personal character, it 
maj be judged that you are very qute^ thoughtful, and often inclined to 
be a btUe reserved You are at times, according to circumstances, 
conventional, with some pride in personal more than individual ability. 
You love great attainments and educatioo, but this combination is not 
altogether a harmonious one, and you must be careful not to become too 
bard or positive, for the dregs of the lower self are strong, and it will be 
somewhat difficult for you to overcome the lower nature as the personality 
IS very powerful and strong You will be inclined towards a public life 
and are a supporter of established systems and public institutions It is 
everything to you to live a pure and chaste life, as you are very receptive 
to the magnetic sphere of others, bemg receptive to evil as well as good 
when the personality is uppermost 

626 influence of the Sun in Pisces and the Moon in 

Sagittarius, representing the individual and personal character, 
it would appear that you have a very active, restless nature, tending to 
extremes in many directions You are internally excitable and irritable 
With no great power of self control You have some constructive ability, 
a tendency towards art and an inclination to investigate religious thought 
You are excessively industrious and are perhaps too active and thus liable 
to impair your health You should try to be thoughtful and careful in 
speech and action and avoid extremes m all things When prompted to 
rebel against irksome restnclions remember that it is necessary to 
respect the rights and feelings of others Be careful of your health 
Try to keep your own secrets 

gg- Blending the influence of the Sun m Pisces and the Moon m 
‘ Capricorn, representing the individual and personal character. 

It may be judged from this combination that jou have decided business 
talent and ability, with an mclmation to speculate and enter into more 
business schemes than you can bring to matuntj You are disposed to 
deal with general prmciples rather than details and minutiae, and may 
sometimes fall short in many of your undertakings on account of this 
disposition Other planetary conditions conducing, you will have great 
lo>e for music and the fine arts Superintendence and management 
are your forte You will be disinclined to work with jour bands, and are 



228 


THE KEY TO lOOE OWN NATHTTY 


better fitted for mental points. Yo-r love of knowledge Les la a 
basin ess directioa. 

g 2 g Blending tte infioeace of tbs Saa m Pi«CES and the Voon ja 
Aquarius, representing }onriadi«dtal and pe^^naJ character, 
this combination indicates that you ta\ e a cneerfal, bappj mind, and can 
fcrm acqi.aintances and make fnend» qcicLJv ^oa would soon tcm 
strangers into fnends. You are adapted fc- all lands of m^Tanble 
psnsnits, and indeed for any work lha* bnngs rcn befo-e th* pnbjc. Yon 
are fond of tra\ e! and change, and wdl not care abont th* confinement of 
a home- Yoa are cot so mach iccLn^ to stcd> as to in.x with, and be 
of semce to hnmanitv a*- targe, kca nl! never be haopy away from 
pcblic Lfe, and \oa are well adapt*^ for it- konr hopes, dssi-es and 
wishes are very «trcng, and yon often see them gratified, 
ggg Blending the laficence of the Sja to Pi«CE5 and th** ifcon also 
in PjscES, representing yosr mdividsal and personal character. 

It may be jndged that yon are very «ctnre and perserenng to all year 
cndertalangs, bot lank confidence a yoar powers and abilities, kou will 
be shat sp, as it were, withm yosr own sphere of tnonght, and may at 
times become morbid and asxiociL boo have a lore of mtellectoal 
psrsoits and some ladinabta towards psbhc speaking, bos can .attend 
to detaJs all you tmde’take will be dcce tixTonghly Gcard against 
melancholy n*wer *sl yonrself despeed c" yocr health will *:o£er If 
yon follow thts adnee it will add much to the comfo^ of life, for 
polarity generally grres old age. 



^30 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


ith D* ^, 8 b • How IS the consecutive reading of paragraphs 233 and 
likely to strike the reader, will he not say that what is git.cn with 
one hand is taken away with the other? In such cases paragraph Fa 
meets the difficulty, and m a similar %vay Fb can be used where such a 
position occurs as, say, Anes rising and Moon in Capricorn,—where every¬ 
thing said about the Yising sign appears to be contradicted by the 
descnption of the Moon's influence In this way the reader is led to 
analyse his own nature , and it is by no means certain that a judgment in 
which the astrologer attempted to combine the two influences and gave a 
joint description would prove half so useful in the end as drawing atten¬ 
tion to the two warring influences and describing each separately 

Paragraph Ga is for use in the comparatively rare cases when the 
significant luminary is " void of course ” (v c ) , that is, passes out of the 
sign it is m before making any aspect to another planet The Sun 
IS the marriage significator m a woman’s horoscope, and the Moon 
in a n^'s, but any judgment on this matter must not omit consideration 
of the seventh house, for if there is a planet therein it is better as a rule 
to take that as the significator, as described in Chapter XXIV, If the 
Sun or Moon or other marriage sigmficator ts in one of the " double bodied " 
signs (d h ), paragraph Gb may be used, but a little tact is necessary in 
deciding this, as it is not always wise to hint at the possibility of a second 
marriage 

With regard to paragraph H, similar remarks will apply to what has 
just been said about £, and the student should exercise htsown discretion 
as to when it is advisable to employ it Mercury retrograde is very much 
less eager and alert, far less keenly mental, than when movung swiftly, 
similarly too in the case of Venus and Mars, the slower planets are 
perhaps somewhat less severely handicapped by retrogradation 

The next paragraph, /, is sometimes useful to introduce before the 
Summary, especially in delmeations intended for readers unfamiliar with 
thedistmcbon between the two words generally recognised in Tbeosophical 
literature, and in these books 

Paragraphs J and K are General Summaries, respectivefy adverse 
and btnefic, and may precede the pars from Ch XXXI 

Paragraphs L, M and N, are mtroductory of the Putube Pros 
PECTS, dealt wnth in the next chapter, and explain themselves The 
<cami» may be said of O, P and 0, which are genera! summaries of the 
Future Prospects, respectively mfverae (a) benefic (b) aad^mixed (m), 



I 

A FEW EXPLANATORY PARAGRAPHS ’ 231 

the latter being for use in those cases where the aspects are various and 
of a contradictory nature, so that as a whole they can neither be termed 
fortunate nor unfortunate, 

Paragrapli /? explains itself. It adds hnisb to a delineation, and is 
%vorth the trouble of copying out. 

The last paragraph m this chapter, S, may be found useful in 
certain cases, either as supplementary or alternative to Ac It may 
come either at the beginning or end of a delineation, and is distinctly 
useful in the case of the sceptical friend who is apt to parry every home 
truth with * Oh yes, but you knew that about me all along, so that’s no 
proof of Astrology." It relieves the writer from any personal responsi*, 
bihty for the opinions quoted on the one hand and on the other will 
perhaps gam a more respectful hearing for the delineation, from a certain 
type of person, than if it were supposed to be the work of ‘only an amateur.’ 
Though to be sure ne are all but "amateurs" at present, and will be 
for many years to come, wher^ Astrology is concerned. 


Introduction.—(«). 


630. Students of Astrology are convinced that it is a perfect system 
^ ^ of study whereby an understanding of the Delphic oracle Man, 
know Thyself may be obtained But the stars only incltne, they do not 
compel, and it is the attitude of the soul that decides the result, for;— 

One ship drives east and another drives west 
With the self same winds that blow 
Tis the set of the sails 
And not the gales 
Which tells the way to go 

Like the winds of the sea are the ways of fate 
As we voyage along tfarongb life 
Tis the set of the soni 
That decides its goal 
And not the calm or the strife. 

That IS, by knowledge, and will, we may rule our stars through our 
own inherent character It has been said that Character is Destiny. 
and It is m this belief that the following dehneaUon is v.ntten , n is in 
this spirit also that it should be studied 




232 


THE KEY TO YOOR OWK NATIVITV 


INTRODUCTIOK.—(6). 

630. The True Purpose of Astrology to serve as a guide through 
^ ^ physical life, but the soul must have awakened before the real 
value of a horoscope can be fully appreciated. The writer believes that 
Character is Destiry and that we, m our past lives, have woven the 
web of destiny by our own thinking, and thus to-day are weaving the 
web of cur future horoscope. AH sin is a result of ignorance or non¬ 
knowledge, therefore to KNOW ourselves is to become wise and thus to 
master fate. All fate, good or evil, is made originally by our own 
thoughts and actions and has its roots to our character. The horoscope 
IS the indicator of the Diinne L.aw to acdon and thus helps us to discover 
much of our destiny. 

[The following paragraph may usefully be added to the " Introduc¬ 
tion, ’’ sn certain cases.] 

630. A ward or two will loake plam the principle adopted in this 
^ ® Dehueatica. Each planetary position or aspect is separately 
noted and its general effect described, entirely apart from that of any 
other aspect, though where any two tend to conflict a cote to that 
efliect is added. In this way is gained an analytical presentment of the 
character and fortunes which could not otherwise be arrived at, and 
the analytical horoscope thus obtained can of course be “ synthesised " at, 
any time. An mterestmg account of this system, and the reasons which 
led to its adopbon, will be found in Modem Astrology for December, 
1903, under the title of “The History of the Test Horoscope’* The 
article alluded to was wntten in reply to a enbe who had objected that 
no such system of dehccabon could give accurate results, since two 
people having the »me aspect woidd receive exactly the same dehneation 
as regards that parbcular aspeert. But the pomt is, not whether two 
people may be told the same thing iw;ardmg some details of the faeroscop* 
but whether the deltneaboa as a whole ts true 

T’REFACE. 

(Where birth time is uncertain.) 

630. The following delmeabon of yoar nabvityis the best Judgment 
B that can be given you, from the scanty data supplied Astrology 
depends upon fixed laws, but yoo wiU easily see that it is no easy task to 



A FEW EXPLANATORY PARAGRAPHS 233 

deliaeate all that concerns your particular horoscope •when there is any 
uncertainty as to the actual star under which you were bom However, 
everyflung has been done to make the reading as reliable as possible, for 
the pages have been so arranged that the faulty portion will be in what 
immediately follows, so that tbe latter half of the judgment will be found 
to be the more correct, especially that which refers to the Planetary 
Positions, and the Summary 

‘ “What Sign am I Born Under’” 

♦ 680. The following quotation from Everybody's Astrology will serve 
^ to clear up an element of doubt that often anses in connection 
with this queshon 

Astrologers use the expression ‘under* any sign, or 'under the 
influence of’ any sign in three quite different ways, as follows 

(/) When under the Sun’s laflueuce through that sign, * e, tbe SVK 
IS m that sign at birth 
(2} ^Vhen the Moon is m that sign at birth 
(3) When bom under a certain sign of the Zodiac, t e , that sign is 
00 the bonzoD at birth C' Rising Sign ) 

• Thos, in the case of any given mao or woman for (/) it 

would merely be necessary to know tbe month of birth, for (2) it would 
also be needful to know tbe very day, and for (J) the actual time and 
place of birth This fact giies us a bmt as to tbe relative importance of 
the three senses m which the phrase is used. 

In the popular articles on Astrology nhich appear from time to time 
in the weekly papers tbe term ” born under such and such a sign usually 
refers to the sign occupied by the Sun, and not to the Rising Sign, a 
pracUce which is to be regretted as it often causes confusion. 

What is JIeant the Term “Risirg Sics,” 

080. Each point of the zodiac nses, culminates, and sets once in every 
D 24 hours, this is caused by the turning of the earth on its axis. 

The zodiac, consisting of 360 degrees, is divided into 12 “signs,* or 
portions of 30 degrees each, and the sign vhich 15 on the Eastern honzon 
at birth is known as thh Rising Sign or Ascendant. (See Everybody’s 
Astrology, pp 93,94) 

The “Rising Sign” describes your form and temperament, your 




234 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


disposition and general tastes and likings It denotes the /orrn fitted for 
the environment, and it is the most important point in your natinli to 
consider. Next comes the planet uhich governs >our *stgn, your ** Rulins 
Planet,” together with any planets that may' be rising upon the Eastern 
Horizon at birth; and after that the Sun and Moon- 

A Minor Aspect. 

630. The foregoing aspect is one of those minor positions bctr een 
^ the two planets mentioned from which it is never safe to expect 
any strongly marked influence, for it almost enprely depends for its effect 
upon powerfiul"directions” or the progression of planets to a place m 
your nativity where the aspect can be stim uhted info action. It is only 
noted for the purpose of giving you some idea of its expression when 
moved into actaon cither by “transits” or by the period spoken of being 
reached, when you can either set it more acbvely m motion or seek to 
control its influence fay an exercise of the Will However, the influence 
IS there as described, but in what may be termed a more or less latent 
condition. 

COSTRADICTORY PARAGRAPHS. 

{Conjitcting Aspects.) 

630. The remarks in the two previous pages are sLghtly contradictory 
T R there being two opposing aspects to the same planet You vail 
nopce that one aspect is benefic in its nature and the other adverse, 
and much will depend npon yourself as to which is to dominate yoar life 
tin your past bfe you probably set two causes in motion, one having good 
Iresults, the other harmful, and so jou JK>w^m7 to\eap_ the_ result of 
f your past sowing. The future action of these aspects will eventually 
depend your own mental attitude towards them- The tendency of 
the evil aspect may be accentuated by encouraging that attitude of mmd, 
while the good aspect may overpower the evil if you mil allow its 
inSuence to guide you in &e n^tft imtsJcitia. 

(Contrary Injluetices^ 

630. The remarks m the foregoing paragraph-shoald be taken m con- 

Tb jnactiQnwithwhathaspreviotisIybeensaidcinthishead IfyouwiJJ 

carefnlly weigh the two statements, conflicting though they may appear at 



A TEW E\PL.4NATOR\ PARAGRAPHS 


235 


first sight, you will easily be able to see how far each is true m its otvu 
particular sphere Now it lies with you yourself to adjust the balance 
between these wamng mfiuences, b^ strengthening ^he weaker points of 
your character and by^nddmg yonr^f of^undw^predi^cpons in,any one 
direction, so that harmony may be restored It is in the close study of 
confhctiog influences of this character that the very greatest value and 
use of astrology lies, and you would be well advised to pav very special 
attention to this part of your horoscope, for it is not unhkely that upon 
this point the most momentous events of your life will turn 

Marriage —(v c ) 

630. The Sun (Moon) m your nativity applies to none of the planets 
^ ^ efe it leaves the sign that it is m This is somewhat against 
marriage and signifies delay and bmdrante and the possibility of either 
a dismclmation on your part to marry, or lack of a suitable opportunity 
This solar (lunar) position is distmctly unfavourable for marriage therefore 
I judge it will be m many respects best for you to live a single life 
Probably you will not or cannot mate with the man (woman) likely to 
matfo you happy, but should you become acquainted with a person m 
whose horoscope the Moon (Sun) was in the same degrw as your Sun. 
(Moon), marriage might be advised In any case you would do wisely toj 
give any contemplated marriage very careful consideration 

Marriage —(d b ) 

680 The planets concerned with marriage in your nabvitj are placed 
m what are termed “double signs, indicating that jou will in 
all probability marry more than once or senously entertain two pro 
spective alliances before coming toa definite decision this influence being 
more favourable to onion with others than the desire to live «i)nKle and 
free from domestic bes You have the right kind of nature to enabll you 
to love and appreaate home life, and 1 judge that jou will be more 
happy mamed than single. ^Vhen marriage planets occupj 'double 
signs a dual experience seems to be quite necessary for the soul s progress, 
so that m some way mamed life wiU probably be known to you la two 
distinct phases 



'’38 


THF Kn TO YOUR OWM NATIMTY 


or any piven >ear of life It is wise in certain cases to haie the 
Directions calculated, for often detailed adwee be gnen for each 
month m any year. 

The “Future Prospects” which follow give a rough outline of your 
Directions for the ensuing . . year{s) 

Your Future Prospects (c) 

630. Although any attempts to gi\e accurate predictions ivith regard 
^ to the future arc based upon astro'ogical laws, at the same 
time it mast be remembered that astrologers are very far from being 
I infallible These words of the l^^se Ptolemy to his pupils should be 
well pondered “Judgment must be regulated by tby'self, as well as 
by the Science For it is not possible that particular forms of events 
should be declared by any person, however scientific, _smee the u nder 
standingconceives only a certain general idea of some sensible'eventTand 
not Its particular form It is, therefore, necessary for bun wh'o piictis^ 
herem to adopt inference They only who are inspired by the Deitv can 
predict particulars.” 

Future Prospects—S ostMARv U) 

630. You are now underatrainofnitberevij mfiuences, though it should 
0 be remembered that these are of a secondary or mmor nature as 
compared 'with the radical influences to be found in >our horoscope at 
birth- It wxU be well for 50 U to act as discreetly and as carefulJj as vou 
can during this penod, avoiding all new undertakings, also doing nothing 
that IS likely to meur displeasure from others, or give your mind anxiety 
For you are now by your mental artihide shaping ^our future, and much 
depends npon the nature of jour present thoughts and your attitude 
towards circumstances, for this will determine the fate that you wiU reap 
from the present sowing The lunar aspects now m operation are 
holding in solnbon fate that at length may crystallize into action in the 
foture 

Future Prospects—Summary (0) 

630 You are now under a train of becefic influences, and all seem<: to 
P go well wnth you [Thereisnospeoal aspect that calls for more 



A FEW ETPLARATORY PARAQRAPns 


239 


comment than another, for all the lunar and solar applications are now 
good} ; though to know the precise nature of the good lunar aspects it 
would be necessary to irn^e a further study of the matter This should 
be done at any time that your mind is desirous of tikmg advantage of any 
special date, for while these good influences are in operation will be the 
most favourable opportunity for jou to commence any new undertakings 
that you ha\e been in any way contemplating This is the time to sow 
good seed for future profitable reaping Therefore make the most of it, 
for good “ directions ’ unaided by effort accomplish little 


Future Prospects—Summary (W) 

630. In the foregoing paragraphs the Solar, Planetary and Lunar 
Q influences have been bnefly outlined The Moon’s passage 
through each sign and house will indicate the tendencies of your fate 
during that period , mthin (he scope of these influences, you poasess a 
certain amount of freewill, enabling you to act m the way that will be 
wisest under existing circumstances ** The stars tncUne, they do not 
compel ' You see the aspects and oatore of their influences therefore it 
lies chiefly with you to guide aflairs and act accordingly So the general 
tendency of the directions having been pointed out it wtU be fitting to 
conclude with the ancient dictum —tempus omma revelat 


Conclusion. 

630. As time goe^ on yon wUl have opportumbes to awaken that 
^ which IS latent in your naUvity, and m accordance with ydur 
earnestness and adaptability you will be enabled to live up to all that 
your planets mciicate YoamayntftTws^irreeiiiewWieti 
charactensbcs perhaps, yet if your birth bme has been correctly taken 
every word should appeal to yon Astrologers believe that" Character is 
Destiny," and that during this life we must work to develop our 
characters. In the far future wearedestmed to take an active part m the 
management of the world s evolubofl, and to this end we should fit ourselves, 
for eventually we must become perfect. 



236 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


A Retrograde Planet. 

680. This planet is "retrograde,*' that is, moving backward in the 
® Zodiac, which is found by astrologers to very greatly debilitate 
its influence. Retiogradation, as is well known, is only an appearance 
due to the Earth moving forward at a greater rate than the retrograde 
planet, when the latter is m a certain position in relation to the Earth and 
to tile Sun; but it is found to have a very hampering and restricting 
effect upon planetary influence, and this effect niust be taken into account 
in Its bearing upon ‘the remarks given on the foregoing page. It is 
noteworthy that all the planets can under certain circumstances become 
retrograde, but the Sun and Moon never do. 

Individuality and Persoijalitv. 

630. Before summarising your horoscope It should first be explained 
3 that the nativity is divided into two parts: one half dealing with 
the internal or higher, subjective or " Individual ’• part of the nature; and 
the other concerned with the lower, external or objective manifestabon, 
generally termed the “ Personal." To go fully loto the matter, however, 
demands a more detailed treatment than is (wssible m this class of 
horoscope, so that we will pass on to a study of lie elements predomina¬ 
ting at your birth and their general influence. Should you desire fuller 
information, in such books as How to Judge a Nativity and The Art of 
Synthesis^ the subject is gone mto more folly. 

, General Summary. (A.) 

680. Yours is not altogether a fortunate nativity, for there are many 
^ cross aspects, hnngicg obstacles lo life But the strongest souls 
often have the most to fight against, for it is they who realise life's 
purpose, and by taking up their cross and working off their past accumu- 
lated debts win freedom in the near future. So tliat looked at from the 
occult standpoint the most adverse oatmties are the most progressive, 
since an unfavourable environment gives opportunities for the soul to 
grow stronger and more self-relianL In the ftjregoing delineation an' 
effort has been made to condense and explain youf natal influences as 
succinctly and lucidly as possible, and you should weigh carefully all that 
been said. [The fellomog so mmar y should he well pondered.] 



A FE>\ EXPLANATORY, PARAGRAPHS 


237 


General SutfUARV (B.) 

830. Yoa have a fa^■Qurab!e nativity, and will have opportmiities to 
^ develop your character, and use your mental faculties wisely. 
You will gam by studying your horoscope, for you have the ability to 
profit by the good mfiuences operating at your birth, the planetary 
positions giving you some power in the world, no less potent because it 
may not be open and public. The judgment has been given as succinctly 
and lucidly as possible, and jou should ponder well what has been said, 
so as to catch any inner meaning that may attach to any paragraph, 
remembering that the whole delineation is given with the mam view of 
helping 5 QU to progress [The (oUownng is a bnef judgment of the 
whole combinations denoted by the naovity.} 

Your Future prospects. («) 

630. In the previous pages there has been given a leadmg of your 
^ Past and present conditions, the whole of which has been judged 
fro'm the nativity Eiery horoscope tsprogressne, however, and several 
paragraphs now follow givmg a bnef outline of the most important infiu 
ences in operation during the ensuing years The respective influences are 
strongest during the year menboned, but overlap to a certain extent into 
the previous *and succeeding years Should you require details for any 
year, “ directions ’’ need to be calculated, as explauned elsewhere It 
should be menboned that the most important aspects are those formed to 
the Sun, next those formed between the planets, and lastly those formed 
by the Moon. 


Your Future Prospects. (6) 

Dfrtchons 

680. In certain horoscopes the word ** Directions ” may be mentioned, 
® and as those vmfamihar with astrological terms may not onder- 
stand what is meant, it may be well to give a brief explanabon The 
^rd ** Direcbons ’’ is used in reference to a judgment given upon the 
planetary posibons since the-time rf birth, it being necessary to erect a 
fresh horoscope for every year after birth, so that by a study of the pro 
pressed posibons we may discover the possibilibes and influences operating 



<’38 


THF KrV TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


or any given >ear of life It is wise m certain cases to have the 
Directions calculated, for often detailed advice can be given for eac h 
month m any year. 

The ruture Prospects " which follow give a rough outline of your 
Directions for the ensuing . . year(s) 

Your Puture Prospects (c) 

630. Although any attempts to give accurate predictions with regard 
^ to the future are based upon astrological Ians, at the same 
time It must be remembered that astrologers are very far from being 
tnfalhble These words of the wise Ptolemy to his pupils should be 
well pondered "Judgment must be regulated by thyself, as well as 
by the Science For it is not possible that particular forms of events 
should be declared by any person, however saentific, _smce the under 
standing conceiv es only a certaia general idea of some sensible event,Imd 
not Its particular form It is, therefore, necessary for him wh'S'piactise^ 
herein to adopt inference They only who are mspu’ed by the Deit} can 
predict particulars " * 

Future Prospects—Summary {a) 

630. You are now under a train of rather evil influences, tholigh it should 
® be remembered that these are of a secondary or minor nature as 
compared ‘with the radical influences to be found m your horoscope at 
birth It will be well for jou to act as discreetly and as earefullj as you 
ran doTing this period, avoiding all new undertakings, also doing nothing 
that is bkely to incur displeasure from others, or give your mind anxiety 
For you are now by your mental attitude shaping your future, and much 
depends upon the nature of your present thoughts and your attitude 
towards circumstances, for this will determine the fate that you will reap 
from the present sowing The lunar aspects now m operation are 
holding in solution fate that at length may crystallize into action in the 
future. 


Future Prospects—Slmm^rv (B) 

Q30 You are now under a tram of benefic mfluecces, and all seem*? to 
P go well with you [Thereisnospeaal aspect that calls for more 



A FEW EXPLARATOEY PARAGRAPHS 


239 


commest t han another, for all the Ittoar and solar applications are now 
good] , though to know the precise nature of the good lunar aspects it 
would be necessary to make a further study of the matter This should 
be done at any time that your mind is desirous of taking advantage of any 
special date, for while these good influences are in operabon will be the 
most favourable opportunity for you to oimnjence any new undertakings 
that you have been in any way contemplabng This is the time to sow 
good seed for future profitable reaping Therefore make the most of it, 
for good “ directions ’ unaided by effort accomplish little 


Future Prospects—Summary ( JII ) 

630. In the foregoing paragraphs the Solar, Planetary and Lnnar 
0 influences have been briefly outlined The Moon’s passage 
through each sign and bouse will mdicate the tendencies of your fate 
dunog that penod, within the scope of these influences, yon possess a 
certain amount of freewill, enabling you to act m the way that will be 
msest under exisbog circumstances ** T/ie stars incline, tAey do not 
compel' You see the aspects and nature of their influences therefore it 
lies chiefly with you to guide aflairs and act accordingly So the general 
teodescy of the directions having been pointed out it will be fltbngto 
conclude with the ancient dictum —tempus omnia revelat 


CONCLUSIOR 

630. As bme goe? on yon will have opportnnihes to awaken that 
® which IS latent m your nabvity, and in accordance with your 
earnestness and adaptability you will be enabled to live np to all that 
your planets mdicate You may not re<»gnise the whole of the foregoing 
charactensbcs perhaps, yet if yonr birth bme has been correctly taken 
every word should appeal to yon Astrologers believe that “ Character is 
Desbny," and that dunng this life we must work to develop our 
characters. In the far future wearedestmed to take an active part in the 
management of the world s evolution, and to this end we should fit ourselves, 
for eventually we must become perfect. 



FUTURE PROSPECTS—SOLAR ASPECTS 243 

It therefore wants lO** of the Sun’s place at birth, equivalent to 
ten months later, and so we wxite down "Moon conjunctton Sun, 
September, 1911." 


The paragraphs which follow explain themselves 
The student will be well advised to give these paragraphs on Future 
Prospects very sparingly 'v\ben furnishing the delineation of a horoscope. 
He should pick out two or three of the leading aspects in the years just 
ahead, and content himself with them Where there are no aspects to 
radical planets, the same pamgiaphs may be used with but trifling 
modification for as pects of th e progressed planets among themselves 
Thus, in our example hfercur> is in £113 7 and Venus m n 10 10, and 
they are therefore just separating from the sextile, a benefic aspect, 
which was complete on July I5th, 1865, measuring to the year 1907 The 
aspe^_^f^the progressed planets among themselves, however, are 
found to_be.le s s effec tive in^most^cases t han t hose of progressed planets 
to ra dical * 

They are numbered with Roman Numerals, to prevent any possible 
confusion with the paragraphs m the other part of the book relatmg to 
aspects m the horoscope of birth. To find a given aspect quickly, turn 
up the paragraph number m the Chart at the beginning o/ book 

SOLAR ASPECTS 

j The CONJUNCTION of the Sun ai^ h^oon is at all times an impor* 
taut conjuncUon, the Sun being ‘ the greater light that rules by 
day ”. the Moon the lesser ruler by night From any point of view, the 
luminaries in conjunction is important enough, but from the esoteric and 
internal standpoint it wakens the lower part of the nature and brings more 
power into the life To those who have not a strong, healthy constitution 
It impairs the health, bnnging too much vitality into the system, and 
when It IS going to aBect tCe’neaJln injunouSiy'tne eyes usullij 'pegin to 
suffer, a sure sign that important changes are at work m the system, 
warning sufficient to be noticed by the wise It often marks an important 
epoch m the life when changes are about to take place either in the 
environment or the general conditions 

The Sun having progressed to a BENEFIC aspect with the Moon, 
you have now come under favourable and prosperous influences. 



^ 7 .—The PtogressicH of tkt Horctcope, 


CHAPTER XXXV. 

Tnr Future Prospects. 

The Future Prospects, or periods of good and bad fortune operating 
in every nativity, may easily be obtained by noting the progression of the 
planets from their radical positions and obseriing the aspects the 
progresse d plane ts fo rm to^rtie^^cal positions 

The progressed horoscope is obtained by counting each day after 
buth, m the ephemens, as a year of life This method is fully explained 
m Volume V of this senes, The Progressed Horoscope , and a detailed 
delineation is there given for all the progressed planetary positions that 
can occur in a lifetime 

The method of using the present abbreviated system of delineations 
IS as follows ~ 

( 1 ) The planetary positions as given m the Ephemens for the day 
succeeding the day of birth, show the preq^essed positions for the first 
year of life, those for the second day after birth, the second year of life, 
and so on, counting forward a day for a year * 

( 2 ) Note the age of the person for whom the delineation is being 
made, count forward to the day corresponding to that age, and see whether 
any planet on tliat date is m a s pect aty' planet m the horoscope of 
bjjth, and if so, whether »t is a conjunction, a benefic of'^“ malefic 
aspect. Then refer to the paragraph giving the delineation of that 
aspect. 

( 3 ) Similarly for the next day (year), and the next, and so on 

ft IS quite unnecessary as a rule to calculate the exact date to which 
the aspect measures when complete, for every solar or planetary aspect 
lasts roughly speaking fm about three years, one year before that m which 

, • For this ihe ordinary Cpheinrns mast be used si ih# contlen<i».d _ 

In pr All P^rl // . is not sutlaNe conaen<^d tyheraerW gi»en 

Q 



PUTURE PROSPECTS—SOLAR ASPECTS 


24J 


be strongly inclined towards all things concerned with correspondence 
and literature This should be rather a successful period as the mind 
will be more acute and acbve, and some illrnmnahon -will come into your 
brain by this aspect You should stnve to make the most of it, as 
it alisays denotes an expansion of the mind and consciousness, and 
bnngs you the opportunity for much activity although much depends 
upon the position of Mercury and his aspects at your birth 

yI The Sun has progressed to an ADVERSE aspect with the planet 
Mercury, and this will produce some anxieties and worries, or 
cause your affairs to proceed less smoothly than usual It is not a senous 
afSiction that is operating, for the Sun and Mercury are always so closely 
cotmected that it is difficult for their adverse aspects to produce more than 
minor troubles, in which the mind is generally unsettled, and given to 
broodmg or fretting over matters that are not m reality as senous as they 
look at first sight It will be well to avoid controversy or any actions 
that would mvolve you in legal disputes, whilst this affliction is operating 
The penod now under consideration will, however, be very much what 
you yourself make it by your thoughts and actions 
’ The CONJUNCTION of the Sua with the beautiful planet ^enijs 

will now bring you pleasurable unions of oil kinds, you will form 
unions with others, or make lasting attachments which will bind you to 
those you love and desire to be united with, both in mind and body This 
conjunction can only be fully appreciated by those who are refined and 
value art and beauty for its own sake, music and the fine arts engaging 
the attention of those who have suffiaent of the Venus nature in them to 
come under this excellent arajunction You will now have opportmiibes 
to enjoy life from its pleasurable^side more than has hitherto been your 
wont Now is the time to make your life as happy as your environment 
wiU allow for fortune will bnng you many opportunities to enjoy to the 
full, all you are able to take 

The Sun has progressed to a BENeFIC aspect with the planet 
Venus, a very faiourable and mdeed often one of the most 
fortunate of aspects Jt bnngs pleasure and success, new friends and 
attachments, and tends generally to unions or the making of new and 
lasting ties All things go well under an aspect of this nature and new 
undertakings prove satisfactory and m all n-ays beneficial The Sun 
giving life and new energy to all that it affects by its rays, causes the 
beneficent influence of Venus to be translated in the most favourable 



Future prospects—solar aspects 


245 


be strongly inclined towards all thmgs concerned with correspondence 
and hteratiKe This should be rather a successful period as the tninA 
will be more acute and active, and some illumination will come into your 
brain by this aspect You should stnve to make the most of it, as 
it always denotes an expansion of the mind and consciousness, and 
brings you the opportunity for much activity although much depends 
upon the posibon of Mercury and his aspects at your birth 

^ The Sun has progressed to an adverse aspect with the planet 
Mercury, and this will produce some anxieties and womes, or 
cause your affairs to proceed less smoothly than usual It is not a serious 
affliction that is operating, for the Sun and Mercury are always so closely 
connected that it is difficult for their adverse aspects to produce more than 
mmor troubles, in which the mind is generally unsettled, and given to 
brooding or fretting over matters that are not in reality as serious as they 
look at first sight It will be well to avoid controversy or any actions 
that would mvolve you m legal disputes, whilst this affliction is operabsg 
The period now under consideration will, however, be very much what 
you yourself make it by your Noughts and actions 
' The CONJUNCTION of the Sun with the beautiful planet Venus 

will now bring you pleasurable umons of all kinds, you mil form 
unions with others, or make lasting attachments which will bind you to 
those you love and desire to be united with, both in mind and body This 
conjunction only be fully appreciated by those who are refined and 
value art and beauty for its own sake, music and the fine arts engaging 
the attentioii of those who have suffiaent of the Venus nature in them to 
come under this excellent conjunction You wdl now have opportunities 
to enjoy life from its plcasurable,side more than has hitherto been your 
wont Now IS fhe time to make your life as happy as your environment 
will allow for fortune will bring you many opportunity to enjoy to the 
full, all you are able to take 

, The Sun has progressed to a bENefic aspect with the planet 
Venus, a very favourable and indeed often one of the most 
fortunate of aspects, dt brmgs pleasure and success, new friends and 
attachments, and tends generally to unions or the making of new and 
lasting ties. All things go well under an aspect of this nature and new 
undertakings prove satisfactory and in all ways beneficial The San 
giving bfe and new energy to all that it affects by its rays, causes the 
beneficent influence of Venus to be iranslated la the most favourable 



246 


THE KF\ TO \OUK OW> SATIVITY 


manner poeefble, and thus all latent benefits, and oppo'tcnjties will now 
have the m'*dium through v.hichgood of some kind will be brought about, 
and if jour “directions are now favourable it will be a splendid penod 
of your life. 

The Sun has now progressed to an adj'erse aspect with the 
planet Venus, and althongh this planet is benefic, the adverse 
aspect th® Sun will keep back many good infiuences, and instead of 
blessings being showered upon you, it will rather be the negabon of these 
things that is indicated fay this aspect. If you are careful in j’our actions, 
avo’d extremes and Ine within j-onr income, the aspect wall no* be so 
senous as it might if you committed acts that would allow the aspect to 
act adier«elv \on cannot be too temperate, or caubous m avoiding 
extremes and extravagance, and taking care not to gi\ e ofience to others. 

\ death is likely to occur in jirar circle 

^ The cosjUNcnoN of the Son with the fieTrand impulsive planet 
JkTars Will now quicken all jonr Ii/e force, bnuging an abondasce 
of fire and life into your cousntubon, the efore much will m e* ery way 
depend upon your mod® of bring and the power of restiamt which you 
possess, for it is necessary to restrain and check the forceful and impulsive 
tendency of Mars when la eonjonctiOD with the Son To the entrained 
there is danger of aceid®&ts throt.gh impulse, to the reckless and careless 
danger of fe\er and fevensb te3d®ncies. For those who are easQy 
exated there is danger of quarrels and to all alike it will m a measure 
awaken that which is latent within, and stimulate mto acbvity the whole 
forces of the animal side of the n atur e. It will gi%e renewed health to 
those who are temperate, infiammatory terdencies to those who give way 
to impulse, aT>d those lacking thought are easily unbalanced. 

The pr^ression of th® planets in your nabn^ since birth hag 
DOW produced a benefic aspect between the San and the placet 
hlars. This mflueace will strengthen your physical coasbtuboa, increase 
jour \Ttabt%, awaken all yoar latent energies. You are now coming 
into a lerj active penod you will make the acquaintance of martial 
men, or those who are positme and a£serti\*e. *i oar afkiirs will tend to 
go well, and you wll ha>e more vitality and hopefulness than usual. 
You will be mo-e dauntless, intrepid, and tsebned to entertain adventures 
and new eaterp-ises. kou will now begin to assert your personabty to 
your own advantage will and dec.re gomg hand m hand to further and 
promote jour material welfare. 



FUTURE PROSPECTS—SOLAR ASPECTS 


247 


The Sun and the planet Mars having progressed to an adverse 
aspect will produce troubles of a martial nature The nature of 
its influence will depend to a great extent upon your own attitude and 
state of progress However, it warns you generally to take care of your 
health, and to guard against acadents and all inflammatory complaints. 
It tends in some manner to injore the body, therefore it is necessar) that 
you should avoid exatement and rash action Mentally, it tends towirds 
impulse, rashness m speech, and a rather turbulent state of mmd, but its 
nature may be judged by the lunar influences operatmg at this period 
The inner meaning of the aspect is conflict between the will and 
the desires 

The CONJUKCTIOR of the Sun with the benefic planet Jupiter, 
marks an epoch in your life which it will be well for you to fully 
undenVind, and appreciate You have now reached a stage wbepem >ou 
ma wake a c hoice of great sptntual and moral de%elopmeat, or, material 
and worldly advancement Your vital forces will be renewed, and your 
mind wiU become salm„and.peaceful, so that you wiU be able to take 
advantage of ^e^pportumt^ and preferment that will cow come jnj'our 
yfAy This influence is one that will have lasting eff ect and you will do 
wis ely in commencin g any undertaking, fresh.venture o^importaat 'tep 
which may now present itself You will And all your affairs and projects 
tendin^to turn out well, and the soaal side of your life will also impro\ e, 
advancement and progress being the kejmote of this benefic and fortunate 
conjunction Make the most of all your opportunities, and make liay 
while the Sun shines 

The Sun is now m benefic aspect with the fortunate Jupiter, 
a good influence lasting for a period long enough in duration for 
you to feel its benefiaal effects. You have now ami-ed at a stage in 
yonr e%olution wherein opportunities will come to you, not only to 
de\elop the best side of your nature, but also to greatly improve your 
moral and social standing with the world You wiU assuredly gam either 
wofiiliy success or 5ptrfiudiTfrogv»S5V’niirrt»pv/irou‘a»*hftj yirtaiglntA'j'uir, 
desires and washes, much of this influence depeadmg upon your power to 
TC'tpond to the opportunities Uval come m your way However, alt rew 
and fresh undertakings commenced at Uns period will succeed and y ou 
may expect eventual prosperity This may be nude the h«tj-enod of 
vour life, if your opportunities are u*ed rightly and the fullest advantage 
taken 




248 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITy 


With the Sun and Jupiter now m ad'v'ERSE aspect by progression 
}ou must be careful with regard to your health, especially so far 
as the condition of the blood is concerned This aspect tends to waste 
and extra\’agance, and will bring obstiwles into your life in connection 
with religious afiairs or matters of the heart It will be well to see that 
your expemliture does not exceed your mcome or you may be mvolved m 
legal troubles or difficulties in which finance will play a prominent part 
As regards health, your liver ts likely to suffer. “Moderation in all 
things ' should be your watchword while under this miluence, which may 
be made beneficial if you use discretion and self control 

The CONJUNCTION of the Sun and^tum is now m operation, 
one of the most important and powerful positions that can take 
place at any penod of the life. It marks a cnbcal stage in jour life, 
bringing you a grave and senoos responsibility and marked changes that 
will in many ways affect your future life and destiny If yon find your 
mind depressed or tending to take a gloomy xiew of things take it as a 
sign of danger that is threatening you and avoid all new osdertakisgs, or 
those in which there is nsk involved, in fact be more than usually on the 
alert for trouble and disaster geseraUy. You will, under this conjuncbos, 
be liable to some severe illness arising from imperfect and interrupted 
circulation of the blood, spnnging from colds, chilis, or congestion, the life 
forces being checked by the Satonune influence. 

The Son has now progressed toa BENEFIC aspect with the planet 
Saturn, bringing you many benefits and opportunities. You will 
now have the possibility of gaming more recognition for your efforts, and 
vvnll find yourself coming in touch with wiser and older men and women 
than yourself and with persons of influence, also forming friendships that 
will be lasting and beneficiaL You should now prepare to come under 
one of the best directions of your life, for this influence generally lasts 
several years, other aspects mitigate it. Ton will find jourself 

more contemplative and thoughtful, and also more patient, prudent and 
virtuons, and possessed of much more <clf control. 

. The Sun and Saturn m ADVERSE aspect will tend during this 
penod to bnng>ou trouble and disappointment, hindenng your 
progress affecting also your general health as well, while the good lunar 
influences will all tend to be nullified and hindered by this enl aspect 
Vou roust take great care of your health, avoiding chills or cold, and 
should embark on no new undertalungs or fresh effort in business nutters 



FUTURE PROSPECTS—SOLAR ASPECTS 


249 


or enterprise During aU this period it ivill be as well to act cautiously, 
doing nothing likelj to cause scandal, or disgrace of any sort A death 
may occur within your circle about this time Avoid giving any offende 
to elderly persons, especially superiors, for the whale period tends to be 
very unfortunate 

The co'ljUNCTiov of the Sun with the mystic planet Uranus 
will now bring great changes and remarkable experiences into 
your life They may be sudden and extraordinarv, according to your 
response to this unique influence, but it will not pass without bringing 
you either an inner, or outer change, or some sudden and unforeseen 
e\ent To those who are seeking to raise their consciousness to a higher 
level it IS one of the opportunities of a lifetime, but to the person who has 
not yet,realised the true purpose, and vital import of life it will simply 
bring some external clianges which tend to break up and alter existing 
conditions, so that it will be as well for you now to examine yourself, 
and he prepared for either internal or external change according to your 
stage of development, which can be seen by a study of your nativity, or 
youTseU 

The Sun has now progressed to a benefic aspect with Uranas 
which promises you much expansion of consciousness either 
produced through successful journeys, voyages, or by travelling or through 
changes, through publicity or making acquaintance with those who will 
benefit you, and coming m contact with those who have a wider know 
ledge than yourself and also a greater influence oi er others. This aspect 
sometimes brings unprecedented benefits, or affairs of a sudden and 
unexpected nature that eventually lead to good To those who can fully 
respond it signifies a mystical penod, when new thoughts and ideas come 
to the mind bringing originality, foresight, etc. You will awaken some of 
your inner faculties. 

j The Sun has progressed to an ADVCi SE ispect with Uranus, an 
influence depending upon those lunar influences m operation 
ithnngs very sudden and unevpected diffi.culb.es.. 
obstacles to progress and sorrow following upon any impulsive, or rash, 
action If you act in any way without thought this aspect will faring you 
many senous troubles, which may then cause some unlooked for change, 
and the sudden break up of existing conditions But this influence does 
not operate upon all alike, and it is difficult to deal with it alone, it being 
necessary to study the lunar aspects, and positions The unlooked for 



FUTURE PROSPECTS—MERCURY 


251 


INTERPLANETARY OR "MUTUAL" ASPECTS 
Mercury 

The planet ^ Meretuy has reached the conjunction of the 
benefic Venus It is on the whole a very good position, but acts 
rather upon the mind and the higher feelings and emotions than upon the 
senses or physical environment Hence if the full advantage of this 
very exalted position is to be reaped, your mind must be very refined and 
inclmed towards the higher things of life For it is an mfiuence tbrongh 
which the mind and feelings are blended, and only those who are pure in 
their intentions can absorb the good influence that wll come from Venus 
at this conjunction If however the general directions operating at this 
time permit you wtU now have some favourable opportunities to benefit 
your circumstances either by coming into a better environment, or by 
meeting persons who are favourably disposed towards you 
xxtI planets Mercury and Venus are now in benefic aspect, 
which will improve your mmd, cause you to seek for knowledge, 
and greatly improve your mental condition It cannot be said to be a 
powerful influence, as indeed, it is not, still, it is more or less favourable, 
and helps considerably to break up any adverse aspect that may be 
operating It should cause you to see clearly your way out of difficulties, 
and bring help m some way from those who will be inclined to benefit 
you It also favours correspondence, l^al affairs and financial matters 
generally, but especially mental conditions and all those matters where 
the mind is engaged in refined artistic work 

^ jj The general tendency of the ADVERSE aspect between the planets 
Mercury and Venus seen in operation is to cause the mind and 
feelings to be temporarily separated, the mental conditions tending to go 
against the feeling or emotional side of the nature This will often bring 
errors of judgment and a general condition in which affairs for the lime 
may go adversely so far as minor details are ooncemed It will cause 
you to mildly criticise, and feel somewhat out oI gear in parts of your 
composition It will be to your ad'.auitage to carefully \ratch your 
affairs, more especially where correspondence is concerned, 
avoiding litigation and general dealings with solicitors. 

The planets Mercury and Mars are now m covjUNCnov, a 
position that will sbr jour mental conditions into great activity. 



254 


THE KEV TO \OVR OW'K KATIVITY 


To all >t will give opportunities to exercise patience and endurance, also 
to think. 

XXXT ** *” operation a BES'Enc aspect b^cen the rrental 

ruler Mercury and the slow and steady planet Saturn, which anil 
b'lng )OU under a r«t>od of deep and earnest thought, so that a change 
will come over your demeanour and you will ponder more deeply the 
inner things of life, using 3 our reOectire powers more fully. You will 
come into contact with those older tHan yourself, grave and senous 
persons or those who have a purpose tn life, so that you yourself will be 
inclined to become more earnest By the study of things relaung to the 
occult side of life 3 *onr mmd «nU become steadier and more concentiative, 
and you will tend to become more meditative, ihojghtfal and studious. 

The ADVERSE aspect in operatiou dunrg this period between 
Saturn and Mercury is an influence likely to cause worry, 
anxiety, much difficulty in matters ccmnected with eorre«pondence, 
wnungs, etc. Therefore jou must use care in dealing with solicitors, 
trustees, or persons concerned at all witb literary affairs and matters of 
correspondence. This is a rather adverseaspect, apt to cause disappoint* 
ments, and tending to bnog some treachery or unforeseen difficulty into 
your life nhich will make )ou anxious and easily upset. Thus it vnll be 
well to offend none Be careful la speech, also very particular tu 
matters of correspondence and 10 dealings with infencrs, the aged, 
partners, etc. 

The CONJUNCTION of Mercury with the plan®: Cranus is a very 
impiortaat conjunction as it will avi-akea the rretnphy^cal, and 
occult tendencies m you and mclise vour nund towards asUulogical and 
londred subjects. It marks, however, a penod in which care must be 
exercised, for besides giving onginaJity of thought and mvenbve 
inclinations, it also tends to bung some eccentncily, and the excitation of 
the mind, nhich at tunes is unsafe when mental balance has cot been 
cultivated, as it tends to quicken the vibrations too rapidly, and thus 
brings about nervous disorders, and «evere headaches, but to those who 
are seeking higher mental development, this is the period to gather those 
higher thoughts which will come in iheir way, whether sought after or 
not, for this position of ilercury creates better fatalities for receiving 
occult knowledge than any other in which Mcrtairv is concerned. 

. . The mental planets Mercury and Uranus having progressed to 
XXKYiu.^ BESEFIC aspect, a very good penod is denoted while the 



FUTURE PROSPECTS—MERCURY 


255 


influence lasts,—generally several years This influence will a^vakeo 
interest in occult study, and cause you to exhibit some originality m your 
mental pursuits , it will also quicken your mmd, makuig it witty, active, 
philosophical or original You will be drawn to occulbsm, and could now 
take up a study of Astrology to advantage You will be able to manage 
all your affeirs with prudence, and so arrange matters as to bnng yourself 
into favourable conditions enabbng you to make the most of all your 
opportunities You wiU gam »n many ways under this exceptional 
influence 

During this penod an adverse aspect is formed between your 
mental ruler. Mercury, and Uranus Whenever Mercury and 
Uranus come into mutual affliction, the mmd generally becomes lery 
sarcastic and altogether unsettled in its condition In all probability you 
will be attached to some unpopular pursuit or else take up some work or 
study that will bnng to you discredit from fnends and acquamtances, and 
you will tend to hold peculiar views generally Therefore, keep your 
mental balance, avoiding extremes m thought, and all imtabie and 
excitable tendencies 

^ The CONJUKCTION of the planets Neptune and Mercury is now 
m operation, and this ts sure to have some special influence upon 
your mmd, the nature of which may be gathered from what has been said 
concerning the mental charactensbes geneially, although it will depend 
largely upon the susceptibility to the Neptunian influence which is 
indicated by the horoscope as a whole The good influence of this 
vibration is to exalt the mind by the play upon it of the broader sym 
pathies and the higher emotions—the loner is to incline the mind to 
nebulous and visionary fancies or, worse still, to nefarious schemes and 
VICIOUS imaginings But the true mfluence is to exill the mind to the 
highest possible conceptions of poetry and philosophy 

^jj The planets Mercury and Neptune are now in benefic aspect 
a favourable influence for those who can respond to it, inclining 
the mind towards the refined sensuous side of art, and, lo the case of those 
who are by nature spiritually inclined, also lo the mystical view of life 
In any case you are likely to take an added interest m symbolic studies, 
such as mystery plays, mythological dramas, folklore and kindred sub 
jects, and if you wish to derive the highest benefit from this aspect, you 
will take care that the sensuous beauty of art or poetry does not blind y ou 
to Its spiritual meaning The nervous system ts benefited by this aspect, 



FUTURE PROSPECTS—MERCURY 


25? 


umination which is so much desired by all who are more spiritually 
an worldly minded But to those who have not these aspirations it 
arks a period of profit and gam according to the mental abilities shown 
the natiVity at birth You should endeavour to make the most of this 
snefic conjunction 

ixxU planets Mercury and Jupiter have now progressed to a 
BENEFic aspect The planet Mercury governing knowledge, and 
ipiter wisdom, you may now tutn much of the knowledge you possess 
to fruit and wisdom by calm reflection, and by meditation upon all that 
^es under your notice, throughout this period You will find your 
• 't will be well to listen to your intuition, as your mind 
' e m a better condition than it has ever been before You will gain 
uc by study, and also by your philosophical attitude to all that interests 
lUr higher thought, for wisdom is the goal to be sought Financial 
a»rs should improve, especially pursuits m which the mind is 
oployed 


planets Mercury and Jupiter have now progressed to an 
^ adverse aspect, and this will probably inchne you to err in 
^ ^ent or cause you to have losses, arising from your condition of 
»or through correspondence or legal affairs You should act with 
I ®3ution during this period, and avoid law, and also be as careful in 
"writings as is possible Think and judge very carefully before acting, 
u may make some senous error m judgment which would bring 
^^pecuniary losses Your mind will be rather cloudy while under this 
care will be needed m signing anything of importance, 
ould not borrow or lend under this aspect, but watch all financial 
carefully 


axiv, CONJUNCTION of Mercury with the planet Saturn will tend 
^ to solidify your imnd, and thus cause you to be more practical 
ntical, with a thoughtful and grave attitude towards things You 
ood sorrows, if you allow a materialistic or desponding 

ind you, for there is an evil side to this conjunction when the 

j ^®03pted by Saturn to become lu any way concrete, or disposed to 
® ^ "^o those who have not nsen above the personal and 

their nature this period will bring many annoyances, 
^0^, anxiety, and depression, but to the thoughtful student it is 
owing to Its concentrative power, and the opportunity it gives 
on greater responsibilities, and become more earnest and thorough 



256 THE KEV TO YOWR OWV NATIVITY 

and some short tnp or excursion mideat this time is Iikelj to live Jong \n 
jour memory. 

xlli ADVCRsn aspect between Mercury and Neptune which 15 

now in opcnfion is Iibety to have an unsatisfactory and perhaps 
distrc'sinR effect upon the mind, inclining it to morbid imaginings, 
baseless fears and questionable tastes. Much depends, boTvever, upon 
the aspects reccixcd by these two planets at birth, and if you wish for 
^further information on this point I should ad^ase you to study what is 
said about Neptune in Hoto to JuJi;e (t Nativity, Part II, as u ts not 
possible to go fully into the matter here You should be careful to see 
that jour mind is fully self posscsscil, and not unduly influenced by 
others Kemember th.at it is essential to allow principles, and not 
impulses, to regulate one s thinking 

Venus 

xliil CONJUNCTION of Venus with the planet Mars is a very 

ntcrestmg conjunction, indicating the guckening of the senses, 
and the association awth the opposite sex produced by a magnetic and 
passional attraction ubich causes jou to fascinate and physically affect 
those who are psychically or emotionally attracted to jou. The conjunc 
tioD wnll bring you attachments, or unions with others which you will be 
unable to avoid unless you have gamed control o\eryour own feelings 
and emotions, and m any case you will be more easily persuaded to live 
more in your feelings than m your mind You will be drawn toward 
pleasures of x’anous kinds, and if you avoid impulsive conduct, you will 
expenence a feeling of exhilaration which wiU be pleasurable and 
beneficial to all with whom you come 10 contact. More physical ties and 
unions are formed under this conjunction than any other aspect, therefore, 
the present penod is an important one for jou, and if you stndy the 
above thoroughly the position will aid you 

The planets Venus and M-irs have arrived at a benefic aspect 
with each other, and this tends to very much excite your feelings 
and emotions, or to stimulate them into activity You xviU now be more * 
inclined for pleasures, and social intercourse, or to the exchange of 
pleasantries with the opposite sex, and the tendenaes of the period will 
be such as to bring you into toudi with those who will exate your 
nature with pleasure, awakening all your feelings and also causing you 
to express yourself through the avenues of the senses, in accord with the 



FUTURE PROSPECTS—VENUS 


257 


surroundings „d those circumstances m which you mavhpnl, a r 

good for all love affairs and, m a general sense, is benLcia^ for matt 
financial, pleasurable and social. " 

j,,. The planets Venus and Mam being non in *dve 1!SE ns„, . 
denotes a conflict between the higher and lower emot 
nnder this influence the feelings are, as a rule' 0 ”^ “a 
troubles arise from any impulsive action in connection with the emot ' 
and their connection with mattem of a physical nature Thus t 
of allkmdsis advisable, and particutar car. should be paid to e3?“ 
as there may be monetary loss through some extraiagance, or flTh 
generosity It is by no means a favourable aspect, espSaflv T 
feelings are concerned, as desire may carry you mto acts of , a ' 

which you will regret in your calmer LmeL “<‘-™.on, 

llvl. '''''' OONUmcTlott of Venus with the benefie and for*,.. . 

planet Jupiter is not a very important conjunction, but it add V 
he fortunes at the time of ns opemtion, and brings momuL! c 
If. ttan would bo the case if the position a ere not so beneficialTnl 
It will bring you some opportunity to gam financially or socially nreh u? 
msm social advantages or pleasurable association with otherrmU n„ h' 
the lorder than was formerly the case It is in many respects i 
likes and attraction and there is not enough of the differinn .1 
make the conjunction pronounced, but it is of course mom •“ 

than adverse, so that my judgment enables me to conclude 
and peaceful penod is no?\ before you while the rood ^ 

operation 'conjunction is m 


xlYli. Venus and Jupiter have now progressed to, 

BENEFic aspect, and during this period they n ill favo 
lessings and will bnnc vou suc»m;c m ___ '"Jouvinth 


many blessings and will bring you success m many 
larly through your social intercourse with others To 
benefit of this aspect it will be well for you to make as ^ 
acquaintances as you can, especially among the opposite'w”^ ^"eads and 
conduct during this penod will be sober and circumsnert 
prudence and forethought, and thus aiding your physi^’ ^^adiog to 
moral progress But much depends upon the lunar aso ♦’ and 

at the present time Pacts m operatiog 


xlylU. tbis period, Venus and Jupiter are m adv, 

and although this aspect is not altogether impon- ^ect 
being benefics, it still indicates some extravagance c 


■‘acrcasctj 


‘ planets 


®*Pendi 



S58 


Tlir KE^ TO ^OUR OWN NATIVITY 


turc, and m^l{ers m connection TMth socnl life will not go so easily as 
formerly, and jou may find expenditure a little heavier than usual 
Generally, it is an aspect under uhtch cnrefulne-is and prudence should 
be exercised Avoid conflict with reli^ous bodies or pereons connected 
therewith It is not altogether good for travel, but all these things may 
l)c overcome casilj, owing to the planets being benefic There is no 
absolute fate indicated b> these aspects 

The pbnet Venus since >our birth has progressed to the 
CONJUNCTION of Saiums place in your nativity This is not 
wholly an adverse influence, although it will cause a great deal of trouble 
and afiliction to tho':® whose horoscopes are strongly marked by Saturn s 
position It will bring you inlocontact with persons older than yourself, 
and will also considerably steady your feelings and emotions For the 
events now coming into your life will be of such a nature as to make you 
reflect and lead you to preserve a calm attitude m your afiairs, thus 
tending to make you more senous You will find your«eIf placed in a 
far more responsible position than any you have hitherto held. Yoa will 
also be more acquisitive, persevering, patient and endunog while the 
events now occurring will teach you and add to the soul, qualities which 
Venus can only acquire by a conjunction with the ‘ solidifying Saturf 

The planets Venus and Saturn are now m DENcriC aspect with 
each other, bringing an influence into your life, which will favour 
and benefit you as you are able to respond to the several opportunities it 
will afford. You will be unusually careful, prudent, and economical, and 
you will also gam through elderly persons, partners and domestic aflairs, 
your feelings and affections being more steady and reliable than formerly 
In some way you may gam honour and credit and financial aflairs will 
improve with you, bnngmg gam through others, for the general tendency 
is toward financial gam. This influence will also benefit your mental 
conditions, making you very intuitive 

Venus and Saturn have now progressed to a mutually ADVERSE 
aspect, which will cause you to suffer losses, and to meet with 
sorrow and disappomtment. "Be ready lor adverse circumstances, and 
conditions likely to be m any way unfavourable to you so far as material 
things are concerned It is an aspect that usually causes gnef through 
the loss by death of someone in the family circle, or it produces a 
great -disappomtment, with difficulties of progress. It is a period when 
temperance and care m living should be exercised as the kidneys and 



FUTURE PROSPECTS—VENUS 259 

circulatory system are liable to disorder It will be well for jou to be 
guarded m all your acquaintanceships with others 

jjj The CONJUNCTION of Venus with the planet of mjstery, Uranus, 

will bring same roiraiticorvery unusual attachmentinto your life. 

This IS the position that awakens the dormant or latent slumbering 
feelings that have hitherto lam in your composition unknown or unheeded. 
This IS one of those powerful conjunctions which at the first opportunity 
may aw’aken a streak of genius, and to those who are musicalJv inclined 
It stirs the soul to expression hitherto undreamed of, and w hatev er latent 
power may be hidden m you, it is now that you should search your inner 
nature for its revelation To those who are still deep in the throes of the 
materialistic world, it is an unfortunate aspect, yet it awakens to a real 
sensing of the world that is beyond the outer and physical To all it 
marks a crisis of some kind, but more often it is a ensis m feebng than 
in any other direction 

yjj The influence of Venus and Uranus, now in benefic aspect, is 
especially good for those who are natunlly intuitive and inclined 
towards metaphysical and occult subjects, as it raises the feelings and 
higher emotions to a much higher condition of expression, almost 
eliir nating the selfish element and giving a feeling of love and goodwill 
to all It also widens the mental sympathies and I judge that you will 
feel more for strangers, will come into direct soul communion with 
persons of broader views than yourself, while materially, it wull brihg 
you into the society of those who will draw out the affectional side of 
your nature, as your nugnetism will now draw others round you 

liv There is dunne. this period an adverse aspect between the 
planets Uranus and Venus This is an influence chiefly acting 
on love affairs, or matters connected with the opposite sex. though it is 
liable to concern finance as well, to some extent It will be well for you 
to be careful just now m all dealings with the other sex or you may 
become involved in difficulties or sorrows which you yourself would seek 
to avoid, since a peculiar fascination will tend to draw you into vanous 
complications eventually leading to scandal It is well to be forewarned, 
for this aspect usually tends towards some secret alliance or peculiar 
experience affecting feeling and emotion, therefore act wnth prudence in 
all things. 

Venus has by progression arrived at the conjunction of the 
^ distant and mystenous planet Neptune, and this is an laflucace 



262 


Tlir KF^ TO ^OUR OWN NATIVm 


and then much change and activity will be experienced During this 
period 3fi3ur ambitions will increase and the passional side of yotir nature 
will be stirred up This aspect usuall> ushers in an entirely new state of 
afliurs, the nature of winch will be indicated bythe‘'directiQns’ operating 
Bt this period of your existence 

mj Tlie two planets Mars and Saturn having now progressed to a 
DENI FIC aspect, jou will come under veiy powerful influences, 
which will greatlj increase your enefg>, and may make you more 
venturesome, persevering, earnest, and self reliant Your mind will 
become much more coungcous and there will also be a tendency for you 
to embark on undertakings which at other times, you may have dreaded 
A certain steadiness will come into your character and your influence to 
others will be more beneficial than it may liave been before This 
position indicates that you ore non entering upon a period of success, and 
you may safely take the necessary steps to secure better conditions and 
greater progress 

Izlil planets Mars and Saturn have now progressed (oan adversi- 
aspect the former representing the emotional nature, the latter 
the selfish mental, or concrete conditions Tlierefore the two will struggle 
one against tlie other, and you may be called on to decide between feeling 
and the impulse of your tmonons, and reason It is thus a somewhat 
critical period in which you yourself must decide as to the best line of 
action to pursue in whatever cnsis, no matter Iu3w small, that may come 
tinder your notice k ou should avoid impulse, and paradoxical as it may 
seem, also avoid premeditation where feeling is concerned, or you may 
become verv selfish 

The progression of your lioioscope has now brought about the 
CONJUNCTION of the planets Mars and Uranus, a very important 
and eventful position, and one that calls for considerable self control 
The nervous energies will be brought up to a high pitcii, and the whole of 
the psychic nature will receive an unwonted stimulus, which may result 
in those intermittent flashes of clairvoyant or other astral perceptions that 
are sometimes classed as haJluciuations. How this influence may result 
will largely depend upon the innate punty of the nature, but in any case 
it IS sure to mark a memorable penod m your life Beware of giving 
to enthusiastic impulses, subject all your projects to the calm 
scrutiny of reason and try to maintam a firm and dispassionate attitude 
whatever troubles may beset you 



FUTURE PROSPECTS—WARS 263 

The planet Mars is now in BENFfic aspect with Uranus, which 
indicates ^a. very lactive penod with regard to good thought, 
denoting that the mind may be turned to metaphysical subjects, thus 
gn mg you a tendency to be more ongmal tlian usual This is the penod 
for using the inventive faculties, also for quickening your perception and 
in generally toning up the whole condition of your mind But as a role 
this influence has more to»do with other planes than this, and it is very 
probable that you may come into touch with some higher knowledge, 
either dunng sleep, or through the influence of others It is a good tune 
for investigating all kinds of metaphysical subjects, especially astrology 
The planets Mars and Uranus are now m AtivERSE aspect, 
which will bring misfortunes upon you, and good fortune accord¬ 
ing to your power to respond to the peculiar vibrations produced by these 
two forceful planets In a general sense there will be a great deal more 
activity in your nature, and you will find your mind more inclined to 
irritability and nen ous tension- U will also make you wish to investigate 
mystical and occult matters or enter upon uncommon, and original 
pursuits It will be a period m which difficulty may come^and it will be 
favourable or not according to your actions and mental attitude to events 
that may be occurring Avoid all excitement, and minimise the risk of 
sudden accidents 

Mars has now armedatthe COSJUNCTIOS of the planet Neptune, 
and this is likely to bring you some peculiar experiences as it is 
not altogether a favourable influence, owing to the contrary nature of 
these two planets Beware of trusting too confidently to your impulses at 
thirtime, and shvm"wild cal schemes, being careful not to undertake 
any work that you are not justified m entering upon with a reasonable 
expectation of success For a new born spirit of confidence is likely to 
come upon you at this time and unless you exercise discretion you may 
court idisaster Let moderation be your watchword lo all things, in play 
as well as m work 

Mars and the planet Neptune are now m beNEFIC aspect, and 
this IS a very favourable influence, when things tend to go 
smoothly with you and your general concerns prosper well Your 
physical energy will increase and your personal magnetism become more 
attractive so that people will deal readily with you and you will find 
yourself agreeably served by all mfenors, servants and the common 
people generally. Beware of losing your sense of caution, however, and 



260 


Tirr hn\ to lour oi\s vativiti 


the exact nature of T^hich it is iIifHcuU to foretelJ, depending much ca 
50ur sensilnene^s to Ncptunes influence, and also on how far yoa axe 
able to transcend the rrcrely personal influence of this position, which 
tnclmes to an indulgence of the sensuous side of the nature. But its true 
meaning is to exalt and extend the love nature bc)ond all the limitations 
of selfishness into that pure devotion which seeks no return fo* the love 
which It freclj bestows, and it is quite possible that a new conception of 
love ma> dawn upon you at this time Beware of yielding to worldly 
considerations, however, if jou would secure the greatest advantages of 
this mfljcnce 

jyl The planets Neptune and Venus have now progressed to a 
DESEFIC aspect, and this although not of very great effect in 
ordinary matters, is likely to bring )*ou some happiness and pleasure at 
this time Things wall go smoothly with you, your affairs will prosper 
and the more you can raise yourself above personal aims and wishes the 
more will your happiness increase Your sympathies will be broadened 
and your mental outlook enlarged, while art and poetry will seem to open 
a new world to >*otL Much, however, depends upon the strength of 
Neptune in the nativity, and on your abihty to respond to the higher s^de 
of Its influence. You wiU gam in dealings with those of a lower sc(^ 
tank than yourself 

The progression of your horoscope has brought Venus into an 
« aDV'erse aspect with the planet Neptune, and as this is an 
inflaeoce to which the majonty of mankind cannot fully respond at 
present, it is likely to be somewhat unfavourable for you. It is diffcolt 
to give prease adnee, but speaking generally you should beware of being 
placed m a false position through any unwise act of your own, or through 
undue influence of others—la short, beware of all things that are not 
perfectly open and straightforward, whether in monetary matters or in 
afiairs of the heart. Beware of “grasping at shadows ', for Neptune 15 
the planet of illusion, whereby we are taught to distinguish between the 
real and die unreal, the pennanent and the diangmg, and this aspect is 
likely to bnng you some experience of the hollowness of earthly pleasures. 

Mars . 

The planets Mars and Jupiter are now m cof^JU^CTION, a 
position that promises you an tmnsnal ac cess of enthusiasm 



262 


T»r Kr\ TO %OUR OWH HATlVm 


and then much cfunge and nctuity t^iU be experienced During ih{« 
period your ambitions hiII increase and the passional side of ycnir nature 
will be stirred up Tins asjiect usuall> ushers in an entirely new state of 
alTaus, the nature of nhich wiU be indicated by the*' directions** operating 
at this period of your existence 

1 x 11 planets Mars and Saturn having now progressed ton 

OLNM ic aspect, }ou v\ill come under very powerful influence*, 
which will greatly increase >-our eneo;>, and may nuke jou more 
aenturcsome, persevering, earnest, and self reliant. Vour mind will 
become much more courageous and there will also be a tendency for >ou 
to embark on undertakings which, at other times, jou may have dreaded 
A certain steadiness will come into >our character and your influence to 
others wall be more beneficial than « maj have been before This 
position indicates tliat >ouare now entering upon a period of success, and 
you may safcl> take the necessary steps to secure better conditions and 
greater progress 

UUi The planets Mars and Saturn have now progressed to an adversf 
aspect, the fonner representing the emotional nature, the latter 
the selfish mental, or concrete conditions Therefore the two will struggle 
one against the other, aud >ou may be called on to decide between feeling 
and the impulse of )Our emotions, and reason It is thus a somewhat 
cntvcal period in whicli you yourself must decide as to the best line of 
action to pursue in whatever crisis, no matter how small, that may come 
under your notice You should avoid impulse and paradoaicai as it may 
seem, also avoid premeditation where feeling is concerned, or you may 
become very selfish 

Ixiv progression ol your horoscope has now brought about the 

CONJUNCTION of the planets Mars and Uranus, n very important 
and eventful position, and one that calls for considerable self control 
The nervous energies will be brought up to a high pitch, and the whole of 
the psychic nature will receive an unwonted stimulus, which may result 
ID those intermittent flashes of clairvoyant or other astral perceptions that 
are sometimes classed as ballucmations How this influence may result 
will largely depend upon the innate punty of the nature, but in any case 
It IS sure to mark a memorable period in your life Beware of giving 
way to enthusiastic impulses, subject all your projects to the calm 
scrutiny of reason, and try to maintain a firm and dispassionate attitude 
whatever troubles may beset you 



263 


FUTURE PROSPECTS—MARS 


The pknet Mars is »ow m BFNEFJC aspect w.th Uranus which 

very .active penod with regard to sood thought 

denoting that the mind may be turned to metaphysical subjects, thus 
pviug jou a tendency to be more ongmal than usual This is the period 
for using the imentive faculues, also for guiekemng your perception and 
in generally toning up the whole condition of your mind But as a rule 
this influence has more to-do ,wth other planes than this, and ,t is very 
probable that you may come into touch w„h some higher knowledge 
either dunng sleep, or through the mflueuce of others It ,s a good time' 
for mvesb|piting all kinds of metaphysical subjects, especially astrology. 

Iivl. I’lniets Mars and Uranus are now m adverse aspect 
which will bring misforlonea upon you, and good fortune accord’ 
mg to your power to respond to the peculiar vibrations produced bv these 
two forceful planets In a general sense, there ivill be a great deal more 
BCtivUj, ,n your nature, and you will find your mind more inclined to 
irritability and neraous tension. It will also make you wish to investigate 
mystical and occult matters or enter upon uncommon, and origi J 
pursuits It will be a period m which diOiculty may come-aud it wdl 
favourable or not according to your actions and meuul attitude to events 
that may be occurring Avoid all excitement, and minimise the risk of 
sudden accidents 

liYil. '■'vis has now “m'ed at the co\junctiov of the planet Neutune 

and this is likely to bring you some peculiar experiences as ,i 
not altogether a faiourable influence, owing to the contrary nature r 
these two planets Bewatre of trusting too confidently to your irau 1 
this time and shun “wild cat schemes, being careful not to undemk.' 
any work that you are not josufied in entering upon with a reason^ 
expectation of success For a new bom spirit of confidence is hk l ^ 
come upon you at this tune and unless you exercise discretion voj ^ 

court .disaster Let moderation be your watchword m all lhm„ T'' 

as well as m work *y 


liYiii ■’’•'net Neptune are now m ucNEpic asnect a u 

this IS a very favourable influence, when things 
smoothly with you and your general concerns prosper well v 
physical energy will increase and your personal magnetism her 
attractive, so that people will deal readily with you and vou°"''llT'^' 
yourself agreeably served by all mfenore, servants and th 
people generally Beware of losing your sense of caution, hovv 



264 the kev to voor own HATIVITy 

feommg .nvohed .n more thru, you cm reusouubly erpect ,o curry 

^rioeef "'a ° •“ «<^™sauce ubout 

Ilil. plr^ets Murs end Neptune hut e now arrived at an ADVERSE 
aspect and althoueh the direct influence of the latter planet upon 
huumnity IS at present but sliebt. jou are Iilely to be somewhat adt eisely 
imputed by It at this time Beware of emohonal extiatauances of any 
kmd. Do not run undue risks in any attempts to add to yourmcome 
and seek to curtad unnecessary expenses, for there is a decidedly prodical' 
tendency about this mflnence Be carefnl m yonr dealings with what 
are known as the “lower classes,” with servants and mth all social 
mfenors, for you are likely to come mto antagonism with them at this 
time to your hurt. 


JOPITERe* 

iTT. ponderous planets Jupiter and Saturn are now in bevehc 
aspect to each other This is a >ery fortunate posmon, bnngmg 
you success and good fortune You will now be able to undertake any 
responsibility and commence any new \enture nbjch it will be to j-our 

adi-antage to engage m All things tend to go well when Jupiter and 
Saturn are m harmonious \nbratiOD It nromises you some finan r- , ^} 
gain and many privileges and opportunities according to jour porter to in 
any vray respond to the -vnbratioD It is an mdicaUon of honour-and 
favours m dealing with persons older than yourself, or those possessing 
pov\er and authonty You may get help from such persons and win 
their favour 

l„, The planets Jupiter and Saturn have now progressed to an 
ADV'ERSE aspect This promises no success in any matter 
connected with the law or where finance is concerned, for it threatens 
you with troubles and isith difficulties, and altogether hmders your 
progress, involving loss of friends, with many unpleasant expenences. 

It will be well to avoid any new undertaking under the aspect avoid 
also, giving way to feelmgs of depression, by checking every tendency 

• AT# / —The co'«jir’«cTiox of Jopjier and Satuni is rayelj> fomed It ra»r be 
treated Ibe same as a beneho aspect The aspects of Jopuer and Nepinoe aTe''Dot 
important and majr be ne^tccted except perhaps the sqaare which ma; be treated 
moch the same as the affliction to (Jranos. Sera/ » foolm^u to Sarvait. p 366. 


FUTURE PROSPECTS—JUPITER 265 

tott-ards melancholia or hypochondria Avoid everything that is likely to 
result in compUcalions, which this adverse aspect usually bnngs about. 
You may suffer also through your liier and by blood disorders Take 
abundant exercise, w ith light diet 

The CONJUKCTION of the planets Jupiter and Uranus is at times 
favourable, and at others very much the opposite, for it may 
bring you \er> sudden gam and success, but it mil also bring equally 
sudden losses and misfortune. This is an influence most difficult to 
gauge at our present state of evolution Uranus is an uncertain planet, 
bringing beneflt only to those who are students of occult and mystical 
subjects To speculators or investors it may mean either fortune or 
rum, which can to a certain extent be known by studying all the 
Directions' in operation But even then the calculations require very 
great care, to see bon the conjunction will act, for it bnngs good luck 
which IS often followed by bad, etc 

IxxUL pbiBCt Jupiter having progressed to d beVEFXC aspect with 
the mystic Uranus, creates an aspect that very few persons can 
hope to fully respond to It simply means that the ‘ ' Of Higher 

Mind IS able tojnXorm the personality of higher things and aonore 
advMi ^ state of existence ItsjvaWos^ll the intuitive faculties, and 
gives a peculiar, higher Kind of mentality which sometimes is summed 
up m the words “ whatever is, is best, this being the expression that one 
coming fully under the influence would be most likely to use in all the 
affairs of daily life Matenally it_givei benefits through touches of 
genius or mvenUveuess, and originality 

Ihe planets Jupiter and Uranus are m adverse aspect at the 
* present time, and as these planets move slowly, their adverse 
and unfortunate influence is likely to remain m force for some time, 
therefore commence no new undertakings, avoid speculation, and do not 
act impulsively where money or financial matters are concerned Avoid 
conflict with religious persons, also keep dear of those who are possessed 
of strange notions and are eccentric and erratic This will not be a good 
period to deal with strangers, and you would act wisely to hve quietly, 
and avoid all excitement for things will nov tend to go wrong under 
the slightest provocation and discretion will be the better part of v alour 



266 


THE KE^ TO ^OUR OWV NATIVITY 


Saturn.* 

TheCOVjuvCTiONof Saturn with the planet Uranusi«not a vfrv 
important conjunction, but it will act %er> powerfully if you 
ha\e any ^ery important “Directions” operating about this time. It 
will be neces'ary to make many calculations, coming under the heading 
of “ Directions ” before anything definite can be said about its influence 
However, it will in a general sense cause >ou to investigate the occult 
and mystical side of things, and incline jour mind toward /Vstrologj, and 
science generallj. The attitude of jour mind will undergoa change with 
regard to former conventional ideas that jou ma> have held, and if these 
changes in your mind are not too sudden you will have opportunity to 
look deeper, and more toward the subjective side of life than formerly 
There are but a few vho can tinderstaod the importance of this great 
conjunction, and thej are the full) awakeoed 

The pr^ress of the planet Saturn to a CESEFIC aspect with 
Uranus is remarkably good, sbov mg some advaneefnent along 
occult lines, and an awakening of the lower nature towards higher things 
Dunng the period that this influence operates yon wall have oppor 
tunity to come in touch with advanced people, and wui be brought in 
contact with metaphysical subjects, and will, m all probability, take an 
interest in all things that are deep and profound This influence is 
peculiarly beneficial to those who can respond to all matters connected 
with higher thought, and 1 judge that you will gam from its influence 

The ADVERSE aspect of Saturn with Uranus, which becomes 
completed during this period, is unlikely to affect you in any 
immediate manner at this time, for its influence will probably have begun 
to make itself felt earlier and the completion of Uie aspect will therefore 
probably only mark one of tbe,muioi crises m the chain of events to 
which this aspect will give rise. On those who are not yet capable of 
responding to the true nature of this influence at any time, it will 
probably have httlc effect, but it tends always to bring a complete separa* 

• Both Joplter and Sainra ia the projrewed horoscope more so iJowly that they 
are ooable fexnpt very rarely) to form any aspect by progression which b not within 
“orbs at tHrth l^s shonld be borne is mmd when sind/iog the paragraphs here 

*”*The pngreisfon of Saturn to an aipeci sHth Narrext i* so rare and Its lafluence 
so obscure as to make it unnecessary to iocltide tt in soeh a book as this It may be 
inierprcted in tnncb the same general sense as ihe aspect to Uranns 



FUTURE rROSPECTS—MOON IN SIGNS 


267 


tion between custom and tradition on tbe one hand, and originality and 
independence on the other, so th'vt you will be forced to decide whether 
you will go with the inijonty, or be “in the right with two or three” 
rather than prove false to a principle 

LUNAR POSITIONS AND ASPECTS 

The Moon progressing through the Signs 

Ixxviil *5 passing through the sign Aries, so all matters to do 

with the jnental.^sphere will be prominent during this time In 
character you will be somewhat assertive, enterprising and impulsive,^ 
desiring to be at the very head of things, wanting very much to rule and 
lead Mentally >on will be more irritable than you usually are and 
certainly more active and nmbitious ^ou will find yourself prone to 
make changes and desirous of altering existing conditions Your 
personality will be stronger, and the life force more abundant than usual 
You should therefore avoid rashness or too much enthusiasm 
Ixzlx period the Moon will be in Taurus, and Jinancial 

matter s may now engage your attention You will try to be 
more practical and fixed, not desiring to change so much as to settle 
peacefully It will, however, cause your feeling s to be more than usually 
excited, and a kind of $enaious tendency will pass over you You should 
carefully guard against locimatioDS to obstinacy or dogmatism, and 
should try to learn the true nature of what is called obeAence This 
influence tends to make you more determined, although feeling maybe 
too strong to allow you to exercise all your will, the negative influence 
being more powerful thaathe positive 

The Moon passing by progression through Gemini will cause 
many dual experiences to come under your notice You may 
now enter on have two quite contrary 

experiences This influence will cause you to reason upon your sensa 
tions and feelings occasions also will anse that will require you to take 
decided attitude, yet you wdl tend to waver and be undecided 
Experiences m connection withCrelatives and''travel will engage your 
attention, and you may incline to^leaming and be more eager for 
knowledge than usual but all your experiences will be more or less of a 
dual nature This being a Mutable sign you can expect nothing very 
definite or fixed, the mind being now difficult to concentrate 



268 


THE KEV TO YOUR 0%\K VATIVm 


jjmiL ‘'foon has now progresstd to the sijjn CASCfR, a sign 
go%cnimg home hfe and nil dome*»ic afTnrs also the negative 
sidfl of life gcnemlljr During this period domestic matters will come 
mach under >our notice and j-ou will gam eapcnccce ihrouglj them 
You Will make new. ties and attach yourself to people or objects. You 
will become \crj sensitne, mclmed to moods, able to feel the %nbfations 
passing round >ou, but much wll depend upon the arcurnstaaces m 
which jou are placed, as to how the Moons pasiage through t>ii$ sign 
affects you In character jou will hate the opportunitj to become more 
tenaaous, but also to become much more impressionable and receptive 
Ixxzil "'hilst the Moon passes through the sign Leo >our condition 
will be light hearted and harmonious. You will take greater 
delight in pleasure, and possibly seek it more than usual This sign 
goieming alt matters to do with the heart it wall cause yon to haie 
>-anous ezpeneoces to connection with the feelings, such as social a£airs 
and matters connected with the jo>ous side of life ^ ou will be inclined 
to speculate or mtest money and your mmd nnll tend to improve also 
This IS a good sign for the lunar orb to be passing throogb, being better 
able to meet adverse aspects, and accentuating the good You are now 
under an mflueoce that allows the aspects to express themseh es positii ety 
through which the Moon is now progressing, VlRCO, 
will tend to make you express whatever discnminame powers 
)oa possess, and also accentuate your critical ability Your mind will be 
engaged upon s'onous undertakings and all business matters should 
increase, and much activ'ity is denoted in cozmection therewith This 
sign is not so good for your health and you must not despond or become 
melaschol), as your tnmd is apt to become rather too sensitive and 
critical and to see thmgs less hopefully than is good for you. You may 
now interest yourself in a study of hygiene to advantage. You wdl be 
drawn more toward persons below you lo the social sphere and may do 
much to benefit them at this penod. 

^ ^ The Moon is now passmg through Libra While m this sign 
matters dealing with partnerships and mamage may occupy your 
attention, you will have more intercourse with strangers and fnends 
than formerly, and will in some way be benefited by linking yourself with 
another Your mind will be more equable and artistic, more afiable and 
coorteous, and much more inclined to look at things from a balanced 
point of view It would be well to use caution m regard to legal afiairs. 



FUTURE TROSPECTS—MOON IN SIGNS 269 

Vour faculty of comparison should be much improved, and jou should 
be able to judge how. maUets w.ouId be likely to end You h2\e bow a 
good opportunity to become more tolermt and look at things impersonally 
During this period the Moon will be passing through the sign 
Scorpio Your mind will be very curious nnd mil tend to 
enquire into the mjstical and long to know the hidden things of nature, 
but j ou w lU also ha^ e a tendency to be i^r^ than usuaIIy>-dogmattc and 
should gutrd ag ninst jealousj or any condition that rvould 
cause >ou to fi\e in the loner mind~ It mil, howe\cr, gi\e you powers 
of self control, and you maj be raised to a higher condition of thought in 
which you mil e\entuall> seektolixe. You may be attracted to some 
strange characters whilst the Moon is passing through the sign Scorpio 
A los^n your circle is probable, this being the sign connected with what 
IS called death 

Lnxvi Moon is passing through the sign Sagittarius, the 

* house of Jupiter, you will find your energies increasing, and 
you ml] tend to much activity You will incline to higher thought, and 
a more philosophical spirit wdl non take possession of you than is usual 
tojou Long journeys may also be undertaken during this penod, and 
your mind may be anxious m regard to tra\el Still it is a good position, 
being the house of Jupiter, thus the evil aspects mil not affect you so 
much os they would in any other sign You must a\oid be ing rebellious, 
and ji y^to unde rstand tbe meaning of law, and hannony, this being the 
sign that makes for prophecy, philosophy, science, and religion 
IxxxtU Moon is passing through tbe sign CAPRICORN you 

w'lll tend to become more ambitious as well as anxious for 
recognition, will make some efforts to advance yourself both sooally and 
financially and therefore your mind will be prone to change, because you 
will desire to improve your general sunoundmgs, yourself included You 
mil be much more contemplative and thoughtful, though more practical 
at the same time, you will also incline to look upon tbe graver side of 
life, and will come in touch with elderly persons and take much thought 
regarding your actions But much depends on the aspects of tbe Moon, 
this being the sign of her fall, in which she has little pow er unless affected 
by the aspects from other planets, which can only be seen by a study of 
the “ Directions " now in operation 

IxxxYiil Moon has now progressed to the sign AqdARIUS. Yon 
mil come more m touch with groups of persons, associations 



270 


TJin KI'V TO VOUR OWN NATIVITY 

nnd EOCict.es nnd come into contact with many friends, or acquaintances 
Your hopes and .>l5hes v.II mcrea-^?. and you u.ll find yourself more’ 
refined and artistically inclined. al«« in possession of humanitarian ideas, 
tendmc to greatly improve jour peneml surroundings and conditions; 
you will also be able to concentnte .ind think more deeply. This is a’ 
good position for the Moon; it gives you the ability to study human 
nature, the personality becoming now more anxious to gam a knowledge 
of humanity than at any other lime of life, You will have opportunities 
to refine jour lower nature and obtain more control over jour mind 
Uxxlx. progressed to the sign PisCFS, indicating a very 

receptive period, dual experiences, not altogether fortunate. 
Sorrows and disappointments may arise, and jou will not always regard 
things from the bright side. You will be inclined to look into spiritualism 
or to study the occult, hut you must avoid giving way to a more dreamy 
state than usual, as this is not a practical sign. You will now find 
jourselfvery much interested m psychism, or will have certain expen. 
ences in connection with public institutions, asylums and large buildings. 
You should be very careful to do nothing to give efience to ethers. This 
Sign awakens the inner and softer side of the character, and usually 
makes the mind very receptive and inclined to be mcdiumistic.oraflfected 
by other minds. 

The Moon Passing through the Houses* 

The Moon in her passage through the First House of jrour 
nativity will now awaken (he personality into fuller activity, and 
you will find yourself gaming more special and personal experiences 
which will affect, not only your environment, but also your mind and to 
some extent your disposition. You will feel most keenly the vibrations 
around you, and will desire changes, or may feel somewhat restless and 
unsettled You will also come more prominently to the front, advanang 
your interests and seeking to stimulate the energetic side of your nature 
more than was formerly the case. You may now either travel or 
m ake re movals, or make desirable changes in your surroundings and 
environment. 

* The house posilioos here referred to are of course those of the birth boroseon 
The poslUou of the Moon in the houses of the progressed horo core is comnsraiiv»i 
onimportaut - ^- 


rm t j I mspFCTs—Moos iv Housrs 271 

■xz\ 'toon Ins now procrrssod In thr Srcovn Housp of your 

horo^cop<* nntl whilst it is passing Ihrotigh tins house your 
financial ftlTitrs will he the cause of more concern than before, and you 
will either ha\e more to do with finance or votir income will fluctuate 
nnJ cause >our mind to he more than ustialK taken up with monetary 
or business affairs. Tins has also to^do—W-ifh the thoughts in some 
w-a>,^3s it IS a sticcedent house m whicH'^lhe__thQughls are matured, 

! ut not immeiiiateU brought into ncitrm Vou will m all probability 
pass through s ome exp enences that smH arrest your attention a nd cau se 
sou t o think, itisserj probable that these will be occasioned by your 
finanaal affairs more than by any other means, therefore you should be 
prepared for some changes m this respect 

The Moon h> progression since your hirth has passed into the 
Third Ifousr of>our nativity, the house of mind You will 
now find >'our mental powcrs-iocrcase and become more actise than 
usual You wall either take some special joumej, or travel during this 
penod, or the third hou*e having connection with relatives and brethren, 
>ou may espect to he concerned with their affairs more or less, during 
the time tliat the Moon takes to pass through the third house Removatls, 
but more prolahly iravellinK will now occupy much of your time and 
attention This will be a good penod wherein to study and energise your ^ 
mind, either by reading or b> engaging in those mental pursuits which 
lend to improve the mind generally 

xcHI Lunar orb is now occupying the FOURTH HOUSE of your 

nativity by progression since >oiir birth this house being 
connected with home and domestic affairs also the end of things. You 
may now expect some changes either removals or alterations, variable 
conditions, etc., which will tend, in a certain measure to upset your plans 
Domestic and home affairs will now be very active, and you will m all 
probability have fresh occupants in your residence or abode, or have 
persons in the same house as yourself who will in some manner affect 
you. In manj respects this is rather an unimportant house for the Moon 
to be passing through by progression except for the fact that it generally 
has more to do wnth the parents or elderly persons and home affairs 
particularly 

During this period the Moon s position by progression will be m 
the Fifth House of your radical figure This influence will 
incline you to matters of enterprise and will cause an activity is your 



272 


TllP KPy TO ^OUR OWV > ATIVITT 


scnsatiOtuJ conditions, and thus a waken yo ufjdceirc- niture tn many ways. 
Vouwill be more than tisitally anxious to have pleasures and will either 
invest and spcculite or desire to increase your income You mil be 
drawn toward social patherinirsand favour entertainments and pleasurable 
undertakings, etc, the fifth house signifying pleasures, profit and success, 
also all matters connected with children and their afiairs. You will now 
m all probability be concerned with some or all of these various indications, 
according to yonr ability to respond or restrain 

[ The Moon s position is now that of the SrxTH House of the 

natal chart therefore all matters connected with the sixth house 
of your nativity wnll come to the front It will be as well for you to 
safeguard your health, for sickness being often threatened whenever the 
Moon passes through this house necessitates the nse of caution This 
house has also some connection wath phenomenal magic and matters 
relating to the psychic world It is also the house that is concerned with 
your mfertors servants, and those who rank m a tower social scale thaw 
yourself, but the chief influence is generally that of health You should 
take care to live carefully, and never allow yourself to become despondent 
This period inclines to obscunty, and not much good fortune. 

The Moon to her revolution by what is termed secondary 
direction, or progression, has passed mto the Sevektii House of 
^our horoscope This will bring you in contact with partn ers, or those 
with whom your life will be linked in some way, as the se\ enth house of 
the nativity IS the house of unions, and it is often found that when the 
Moon passes through this part of the horoscope marriages take place in 
the family, or some binding partnership is entered upon It will bring 
you more before the public than nsual, or yon will take some very 
prominent position which vnll make yroo noted in the sphere in which yon 
move Avoid all legal dispntes, for this is the hoise that is often 
productive of lamuits and litigation 

The Lunar orb is now id the EIGHTH House of your radical 
figure This is the house of deaths wills legacies and all 
matters that are connected with the dead and their affairs Semcpne in 
your circle may pass over during the i»ssage of the Moon through this 
house. You will gain money through c» workers, or the goods of the 
dead. This is rather a cnb^^position for jour afiairs although it will j 
bring you nearer to the occuh life, and it is quite probable that you wilJ 
put your mind into occult and mystical matters much more deeply than 



FUTURr PROSPECTS—MOON IN HOUSES 


273 


you h;vvc hitheilo done You 'uiU either become a member of some 
occult school, or else find jourself more than usually psychic and 
mystical This is a position uhich often brings the news of death 
XCtIH Moon has now progressed to the Ninth House and in 
passing through this portion of j our horoscope it will incline your 
mind and thought toward philosophical and scientific pursuits You will 
either take a long journey or traiel dunng the operation of this influence 
It indicates that your mental vision will be undened, and jour outlook 
vnU be more philosophical than usual You will come in contact with 
either religious persons or some very deep thinkers You will be active 
and alert, and will study deeper subjects than formerly The ninth 
house IS connected with what is termed the “ higher mind," wherein the 
soul is more earnestly concerned with the subjective experiences than the 
objective and concrete Vour aspirations will now tend to quicken 
xcix Moon IS now in the tenth house of your nativity, the 
Midheaien, vrhich has chief coocern with honour, profession, 
and external matters generally You will now come more to the front 
than formerly, obtaining either publiaty, advancement or recognition from 
your efforts Yon should seek to make all the progress that you can, for 
you will be able to command authority, and have far greater opportunities 
to ad\*ance m life, and make jour activities more useful than hitherto 
This position sometimes brings success, also the acquisition of power and 
responsibility The whole of your horoscope is strengthened by this 
progressed position of the Moon, and much depends upon your abilities 
as to bow it wnll benefit you, but it brings opportunity • 

P The hfoon has progressed into the ELEVENTH HOUSE of your 
Nativity, the house concerning desires, hopes, wishes, and 
friendships, etc. You will now meet with new fnends, and find yourself 
coming in contact with assoaatious and groups of people You will 
make many new acquaintances and have many opportunities to form 
some permanent friendships This is m many respects a favourable 
position for the Moon and some success wiH come to you while the Moon is 
in this house You will now use your mind to advantage in artistic 
matters, and your desires will be more likely to be fnlfiUed, as this house 
favours all wishes You will find yourself more than usually drawn 
toward the study of human nature and character 

jjj The Moon has now by progression passed into lee mystenous 
TWELFTH HOUSE. You wiU now have some troubles and 



FUTURE PROSPECTS—LINAR ASPECTS 277 

can be o\ercome by care, and by avoiding conflict wiib the feminine sex 
generally. 

The Moon in C0NJU^CTI0N with the planet Mars is not a 
favourable position, and much will depend upon whether you 
stop to think before you act, or whether impulse prompts all your actions 
dunng the penod that it is in operation It is one of the most unfortunate 
periods of a life, bnnging a habilitj to accidents, disputes, and danger of 
many misfortunes through associates or deilmgs with the opposite sex 
To some persons this injunction marks the most unfortunate and 
disastrous epoch m the life, but only those who will not stop to think 
carefully ere action is taken To all, however, it is a period to guard 
against, nothing of importance being undertaken while this conjunction 
lasts The health is liable to sufler from fevensb conditions, and 
functional disorders are threatened while it is operating, therefore more 
than usual caution and discretion ate necessary to avoid mishaps The 
overplus of physical energy that accompames this position may be 
advantageously used if applied to existing conditions Seek to control 
restlessness 

The Moon has now advanced to a benefJC wpect with the 
planet Mars, which will tone up your adairs in general, and give 
you an mclinaHon^to crav el or take journeys, your mind being more than 
* usually active and prone to changes, evercise, and activity generally 
You will he more cirageous, loving freedom and seeking independence 
But you must ^oid^erythmg impulsive, and not act rashly in any way, 
for your inclinations will (end very strongly in the direction of doing 
things suddenly and from impulse The positive element predominating, 
all matters connected with the male sex will prove beneficial to you 
Business adairs will also go well, your activuty allowing you to embark 
upon nw schemes and uudertakmgs The emotional side of your nature 
Will now be activ e 

cxil! Moon has now reached an adverse aspect wnth Mars 
This infiuence generally causes a feverish state of the blood, and 
gives a liability to fevers, and accidents of ^me kind, and li you are at 
all impulsive you will be liable to several dangers It makes you mentally 
inclined to dispute, you will, under provocation, be likely to rush into 
litigation, therefore avoid being over hasty and rash m your judgments 
He cartful if you travel to avoid nsk'of accidents and avoid all impulses 
and excesses Po nothing bumedly, and lake tune to think before you act. 


278 


THE KEY TO YODR OWN NATIVnT 


as yoa may now get into troable tfaroagh hastiness All that happens to 
you dancg this penod will be partiall> the result of impulsn e thought or 
action, and any tendency to be rash m speech wall bring trouble upon you. 
Avoid over stimulating foods 

The CONJUNCTION of the Moon with the planet Jupiter is a very 
benefit and fortnnate influence, which will make this period one 
of the important portions of your life Vour general hcaltfi and prosperity 
will improve, and soaal intercourse with others vill be advantageous and 
profitable. To those v,ho are seeking spiritual adv’ancement, this is the 
best penod for aspiration and higher thoogbt It forms the ape* point of 
the benefit lofloence, and brings many blessi''gs which only thc^e who 
are sensitive to the perfume of the inner and more subtle vibrations can 
appreaate. But for those also who are seeking worldly welfare this is 
the tune not only to commence new undertakings, but also to make the 
best of existing conditions, success following all efforts that may be made 
to bnng prosperiC) and financial gam Honours, preferment and fame 
come to those who have the natal marks of elevation and promotion 
indicated for this time 

The Moon and Jupiter in besepic aspect will make this,penod 
a very successful one, nearly ^1 >yur effo rts bejjg Attended,widi 
prospenty and success. Your mind will be free and generous, frank and 
joml, and your bo?y healthy Yon are now eotenug on a hopeful and 
promismg penod, dnnng which yon wiU form some^hoaojrable acdbe^ 
ficial attachments and faendsbips. Yon may now embark on any senous 
undertakings for future gam and happiness and generally all will go w ell 
Your mmd will be more mcUned to higher thought, and your mental and 
moral character improve You may now push all important matters 
well forward, for eventnal success “ Make ha> while the sun shines ’ 

The Moon is now in adverse aspect with Jupiter, indicating 
some monetary losses or financial changes. It is a bad influence 
for n^w undertakmgs, or having anything to do with bnsicess, unless 
extreme care is used. All speculaboa should now be avoided, also 
dealings with «oliators or with persons in autbonty, holding property, or 
govenung bodies. Matters to do with law are likely to catis* you loss, 
an d >on are apt to be extravagant and over free during the penod of this 
direction. It is not by any means a good aspect for finance, so do not 
borrow or lend, beware also of letting expenditure exceed receipts. 
Keep your blood pure, or your health may suffer 



280 


IJII KL\ TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 

This mllucnce may act menially, emolionally. or physically, but ils ult, 
mate will be some chansc, m all probability of a temporary nature, either 
m consciousness or m your environment. It will be a favourable time to 
^ertamjiewjliought or to come into touch with advanced views m order 
that your mental outlook may be widened, and your sphere of influence 
^expanded With some it signifies a romance, or new enterprises, and 
with all It tends to increase the personal magnetism and attract those who 
are responsive to its higher rate of vibration For Uranus is the planet of 
mysteries, jvonders^and developmem, therefore pay great attention to 
your conditions while under this influence 

The Moon is now in benefic aspect to Uranus, a position which 
promises some sudden or unexpected benefits, and perhaps some 
strange or uncommon travelling Removals or changes are promised 
which will prove beneficial, and any adventures you may engage in 
should turn out Vi ell You «ill find your mind more than usually eager, 
more inclined for out of the way studies, and disposed to look into the 
deeper side of life, while your disposition will be somewhat uoconven 
tional, seeing things from a new sundpomt, hence this influence is 
favourable for the study of Astrology Your magnetic power will 
increase and you will have influence over others, bringing you success 
with societies and public bodies, 

cxxli Moon and Uranus being now in ad\hrse aspect your 
affairs are likely to go unexpectedly wrong, entailing disappoint 
ment and disagreeable consequences You should be cautious, and guard 
®§£iSlt^®ccideiits while travelling to fact, it is advisable to avoid tr^el 
if possible while under this influence, there being some liability to unto* 
ward events Bg.gu arded in spee ch, as you will tend to be more brusque 
than usual and your mmd either more aggressive, or troubled and anxious 
It IS an unfortunate aspect, denoting a very critical time, when matters go 
wrong unexpectedly and things over which you have no control turn out 
adversely Avoid dealing with public bodies, societies and associations 
Take ^xtra p ain s tQ u nderstandAnotber s point of,yiew, for you may tend 
to be hasty and make mistakes at this time 

cxxlli arrived at the conjunction of the planet 

Neptune, and you are sure to feel this influence in some 
peculiar psychic way, though possibly it will not bring any marked change 
of circumstances in its tram Its real effect will depend very largely on 
your sensitiveness to the Neptunian infl uence, and whether this affects 



FUTURE PROSPECTS—LUVAR ASPECTS 


281 


you physjcally, erootjonally or mentally To the majority of people \ery 
little if anything happens under this conjunction, sav e perhaps that they 
meet vnth some uncommon person or undergo some insignificant but 
peculiar and uncommon experiences The emotional nature is sure to be 
strangely sbrred at this time, and you should be very careful that you are 
not led into mdiscreet acts that your calmer judgment would not approve 
The Moon is now in BENEFIC aspect with the planet Neptune, 
and this is favourable in the mam, though greatly subject to 
the general influences in operation as to the way in which it acts Your 
personal conditions are now likely to be Itarmonious and you will get on 
well noth those with whom you are brought into contact Probably 
some excursion or seaside trip will bring a week or two of pleasant 
experiences, for the sea generally has some bearing, direct or indirect, 
upon all matters under the influence of Neptune, the planet being related 
to the deeper emotions of human nature, symbolised by the sei Do not, 
hoaever. expect too much lasting good from this aspect, which is only 
transient 

cxjy Moon has now arrived at an Al>%ni«^c aspect with Neptune, 
and this will or will not affect you, in accordance with your 
sensitiveness to the Neptunian vibrations It is an influence that 
passes many people entirely by, but it <hiefly affects the psychic or 
emotional nature It is rather unfortunate m the mam, rendering one 
liable to fraud and deception, or to be victimised in some way, and you 
should be on your guard while it operates, being careful not to place 
yourself unduly under the influence of any person, or group of persons, of 
whose bona fidtt you are not quite sure Bemre of bogus schemes 
offenng great returns for a small outlay, and do not allow yourself to bo 
peatly influenced by " personal magnetism ” 



ciiAiTrn \\\vi. 


COSCLVSIOS 

In order thal lljis booV may b* u«eJ to the best advantaj^e a special 
Chart should be p’epared,* similar to that printed on the follow irg r““rf. 
the numbers of the piragraphs. ns Ei%e^ id the RFrERESCE CflAkT at 
the beffmnme of llie tjook. should then be carefully filled in opposite to 
the descriptions as in the Lxample Chart facinR title F'*?® 

When the sjwcial Chart sheet lias l>cen prepared, rcftrence should 
be made to the \-ariojs paragraphs containtnc the required delineations 
The) may be read from the book, or written out in their order so as to 
form a complete delineation The whole readin/j may however be 
considerably amplified and extended by reference to the other rolomes 
of this senes, to the following order 
Asirelogi for All, Part / .for — 

Delinealtens basedontbe Rislnc Sifn.pp 164 164 
lodiridjal and Personal Cbaracterutin „ ij 47 
Tbe Moon in (be sfCBs n 6) 70 

The PoUntles • n 156 

Atsotbeplaoetsand (belr sicn posibocs „ zB^ajS 

Atlrolagy for All, Part It Tlie Horoscope may be correctly east 
from the Condensed Epheroens from 1850 to 1911 

//out to Judge a Vofii ity. Part I , may be referred to for further 
details concerning each of the twelve bouses and the planetary posibons 
with their aspects 

llov to Jxidge a iiaU\%ty Part it, m like manner may be turned 
to for a full description of the pLanets, and for useful hints upon the 
synthesismg of a horo;,cope Finally 

The Progressed Itoroeeope may be studied if it is desired to 
examine the Future m detail 


• special ebaru tMy be obtained from tb« oC'ce 6* Htdtni Atinleff at the 

tollowui ra ie>oa(2i Cd 50 at tr £d ssatii po5 free 
aSa 



283 


The Key to Your Own Nativity 

Special Chart 


• Dticrtflieii oj Numhtr of t 

Pora’ra^k Pjra»r*/i I 

Introduction 
Si Rising Sign 
Ruling Plasrt 
Ruler s House 
Ruler s Sigo 
Rulers Aspects 
hxUt Far 
$3 INDIMOUALITY 
Sun IB SlgB 
Suns Aspects 

§3 Pbrsonalitt 
Moon in Sign 
Moon in Mouse 
Moon s Aspects 

Pouritt 

5^ Mental Qoalimcations 

Mercury in bign^ 

Mercury in House~ 

Mercury t Aspects 


DntrtfUtn of Nam'/r p/ 

Poragrafh 

§5 Finance 
Travel 
Envirqmient 
Entirprise 
SiCksess 
Marriage 
Legacies.. 

pHILOSOPlir 

PROPESSIO** 

Friesps 
O cet LTISM 

Para tjfis 
Rising, PUael 
Personal Colo irinp 
' Planet in S gn- 
Extra I jr 

^6 Sl-WUART 

Planetary lotitioni 
Oual yr- 
O P~ 

Ettia I or 

SjPUTURF 1 KosrnrTs 

i tar Atft t pd r, tf \ 


I 



ArrEVDit 


285 


would find the apparent familiarity void of offence, considering the 
purpose which the delineation is intended to serve And therefore the 
paragraphs are reproduced word for word, the same as m the earlier 
chapters, the Delineation thus being strictly representative of the value 
and use of the book 

The following Delineation may therefore be regarded as a model or 
pattern for beginners to imitate when drawing up delineations for their 
fnends 

In cases where a written delineation is given, it is well worth While 
to arrange that every paragraph has a page to itself As each contains 
]ust about enough to go comfortably on a page of an ordinary exercise 
book, there need be no difficulty about this, and the advantage of having 
the readers attention concentrated on one paragraph at a time is obvious 
To use only the right hand page, leading the left blank, also makes for 
clearness and besides leaves room for additions or comments to be made 
without spoiling what has been written Indeed, most 'vho have tned this 
plan are agreed that it is false economy to write on both sides of the paper 
But each reader will find out for himself the plan that snits him best 
No method suits all eijually well, and these hints are only offered as 
suggestions which may appeal to some 


THE NATIVITY OF HIS MAJESTY KING GEORGE V. * 

iNTRODDCTION 

630 The True Purpose of Astrology is to serve as a guide through 
A b physical life, but the soul must have awakened before the real 
value of a horoscope can be fully appreciated The writer believes that 
Character is Destiny and that wo, m our past lives, have woven the 
web of destiny by our own thinking, and thus to day are weaving the 
web of our future horoscope AH sm is a result of ignorance or non 
knowledge, therefore to KNOW ourselves is to become wise and thus to 
master fate All fate, good or evil, is made originally by our own 
thoughts and actions and has its roots in our character The horoscope 


• The reader is r»T t" h'**’ ihransft this delineallon what is tai 

on p 384 



286 THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 

IS the indicator of the Divine in action and thus helps us to discover 
much of our destiny, 

"WnAT Sign am I Born Under?” 

630 The following quotation from Everybody's Astrology will sene 
C to clear up an element of doubt that often arises m connection 
with this question 

“Astrologers use the expression ‘under* any sign, or ‘under the 
influence of ’ any sign in three quite different ways, as follows 

(7) When under the Sun’s mflueacd through that sign, i f , the SUN 
IS in that sign at birth 

(2) When the Moon is in that sign at birth 

(3) When bom under a certain sign of the Zodiac, t e , that sign is 

on the horizon at birth ("Rising Sign ') 

.Thus, tn the case of any given man or woman for (f) it 

would merely be necessary to know the month of birth, for (2) it would 
also be needful to know the very day, and for (3) the actual time and 
place of birth This fact gives us a bint as to the relative importance of 
the three senses in which the phrase is used ' 

In the popular articles on Astrology which appear from time to time 
IS the weekly papers the term " bom under ” such and such a sign usually 
refers to the sign occupied by the Sun, and not to the Rising Sign, a 
practice which is to be regretted as it often causes confusion 

WifAT IS Meant by the Term "Rising Sign ’ 

630 Each point of the zodiac rises, culminates, and sets once >□ every 
D 24 hours, this is caused by the turning of the earth on its axis 
The zodiac, consisbng of 360 degrees, is divided into 12 “signs,’ or 
portions o' 30 degrees each, and the sign which is on the Eastern honzon 
at birth is known as the RISING SlCK or Ascendant (See Oxerybody’s 
Astrology, pp 93, 94 ) 

The "Rising Sign” describes your form and temperament, your 
disposition and genera! tastes and likings It denotes the form fitted for 
the environment, and it is the most important point in your nativity to 
coosider Next comes the planet which governs your sign, your " Ruling 
Planet,* together with any planets that may be rising upon the Eastern 
Horizon at birth, and after that the Sun and Moon 




APPENDIX 


287 


The Ascendant or Rising Sign 

Aries was nsiog at your birth This is a cardinal, movable 
and fiery sign This gives much energy and activity both of body 
and mind, much impulse and enthusiasm, with many changes in the 
course of life You are courageous, enterpnsing, frank and outspoken 
You can face difficulties promptly and bravely you know your own mind, 
and are seldom at a loss what to do or say when called upon to decide 

You are ambitious, self reliant, and adventurous, and you will win your 

way m the world largely through these qualities and through your confidence 
in your own ability to succeed You are a great lover,of freedom and 
independence, and yougef along badly when you are in any way hampered, 
restricted, or interfered with You are generous and quickly responsive 
to appeals to the emotions You are a zealous and energetic supporter of 
Any person or cause that enlists your sympathies Most of your misfor 
tunes will arise through too much hastiness and impulse, whether in 
acbon, in judgment, or in the feehngs. You are somevkbat lacking in 
coolness, m calm deliberation, and self restraint, and you do not find it 
easy to give way to others even when justice or prudence demands it. 
Mars IS the ruling planet of the sign Anes 

The Ruling Planet 

The planet Mars IS the ruler of the signs Anes and Scorpio It 

IS the planet of fire, energy, and expansion Itgnesyouadisposi 
tion that IS ardent, active, positive, impulsive, and impetuous You are a 
lover of freedom and mdependeitce, and cannot endure restraint confine 
ment or delay You are generous and frank, an admirer of openness, 
bravery and courage, both physical and moral "iou have macb self 
confidence, and are usually able to hold your own easily, oeing prompt in 
word an/l action You need to beware of being too rash and headstrong, 
for you are rather inclined to oe aggressive and self willed, and you are 
likely to bring many troubles upon yourself through this. You have a 
good deal of pnde which is easily wounded, and you do not find it easy 
to remain cool and self restrained under provocation You are an active 
and energetic worker and can accomplish much in a short tim*, and jou 
have it m you to become very practical and capable m the world if you 
exercise a little self discipline 



AprENDIX 


287 


The Ascendant or Rising Sign 

j Aries was hsidr at your birth This is a cardinal, movable 
and fiery sign This gives much energy and activity both of body 
and mmd, much impulse and enthusiasm, with many changes m the 
course of hfe You are courageous, enterpnsmg, frank and outspoken 
You can face difficulties promptly and bravely. you know your own mmd, 
and are seldom at a loss wliat to do or say when called upon to decide 
You are ambitious, self reliant, and adventurous. and you wll win your 
way m the world largely through these qualities and through your confidence 
m your own ability to succeed You are a great lover.of freedom and 
independence, and you get along badly when you are in any way hampered, 
restncted, or mterfered with You are generous and quickly response e 
to appeals to the emotions You are a zealous and energetic supporter of 
any person or cause that enlists your sympathies Most of your misfor 
bines Will anse through too much hastiness and impulse, whether in 
action, m judgment, or in the feebngs You are somewhat lacking m 
coolness, in calm deliberation, and self restraint, and you do not find it 
aasy to give way to others even when justice or prudence demands it. 
Mars IS the ruling planet of the sign Aries 

The Ruling Planet 

jy The planet Mars IS the ruler of the signs Aries and Scorpio 
IS the planet of fire, energy, and expansion Itgiiesyouadisposi 
tion that IS ardent, active, positive, impulsive, and impetuous You are a 
lover of freedom and independence, and cannot endure restraint, confine* 
ment or delay You are generous and frank, an admirer of openness 
bravery and courage, both physical and moral Vou have much self 
confidence, and are usually able to hold your own easily, oeing prompt m 
word and action You need to beware of being too rash and headstrong 
for you are rather inclined to oe aggressive and self wnlJcd , and you are 
likely to bring many troubles upon yourself through this Ycu have a 
good deal of pnde, which is easily wounded, and you do not find it easy 
to remain cool and self restrained under provocation You are an active 
and energetic worker and can accomplish much in a short time and 
have it in you to become very practical and capable in the world if vo 
exercise a little self discipline ' 



APPFKDIX 


289 

ways stimulate youf feelings, making your emotional nature very keen 
an active. It is rather an improvident aspect, tending to make you over 
^nerous and impulsive, and through this you may lose financially, aiid 
roug excess of feeling may in some way be imposed upon Viju 
s odd be guarded m all your dealings with the opposite sex and never 
et yourself be dra^vtl mto any scheme or plan that might be misconstrued. 
This aspect is not /avourable for love, or marriage, denoting dangers 
quarrels and Jealousy. It sPoilsfinanctdl prospects (SeespeciaJ 

note) 

The Rising Planet 

473 rising at the time of your birth, will affect your life iq 

an uncommon manner. You will be romantic and medmmistic, 
or psychically incLitied Some very strange experiences and also some 
remarkable episodes will occur in your life. It is only the very few who 
can m any way respond to the subtle, spiritual vibrations of the planet 
Neptune, and they are the souls that live the purest lives You must be 
on your guard against hypnotic suggestion, and should be i ery choice in 
your associates and acguamtasces. You will in alt probability have 
some very remarkable dreams, which you should endeavour to remember. 
You Will not escape being very mediumistic and hypersensitive at times. 

Individual Characteristics 

144 Gemini The vitahsmg pnociplc of the solar rays m 

this sign Will make you quick witted, mentally impulsive, and 
inclined to be imperative You witl he intellectual, interested m 
literature, science or art, and also somewhat ambitious and aspinng. You 
should cultivate concentration if you would become clever, for you have 
latent ability in connection with literature or public speaking There 
will be restlessness m your internal character which will lead to 
nervousness and imtability, and when not guarded against, there will be 
a tendency for yon to become \oIatile, indecisive and unreliable. It will 
be well /or your eoxrdoTt and bappmc^ in life, if you learn to avoid 
worry and restlessness A study of thought control would enable you to 
turn much of your intellectual ability to good account. 

2 J 2 The Sun and the planet Mars in benefic aspect, is remarkably 
good for your health and vitality generally. It will give you 
courage, and a strong constitution Yonr will power and desire nature 



290 


THE KEY TO TOOK OVTS hATWlTT 


are blended, which will enable yon to force Jtinr way ta life with an 
intensity of pcrpo^ energy, and perseserasce tha* will 'eldoai, if e^er, 
be thwarted. \ on can control and command others, yoa will generally 
carry jour point throngh energy and strength of will more ihan ihrongh 
tact and diplomacy Yon may accomplish great things if yon let your 
indindoal nature act more often than the personal desires and wishes 
This very po w erful influence often gives too mnch life and it is necessary 
to either have plenty of ezerase, or live an active life to distnbute it 
throi.gh the system evenly 

22^ The Sun was in a besefic aspect with Neptune indicahng 
♦hat the influence of this mysjcal planet is beneficial to your 
spintnal growth and probably you will find your greatest expansion of 
conscionsness will anse ont of experi'mces which yon would have a great 
difficulty in adequately describing to others. The real paradoxes of life 
will be always mote or less present to your cesasooesness, and certain 
truths ihai can only be expressed m the form of a paradox will always 
bave a special meaning and reality for yon. if yon can nse to the highest 
side of mfluence Von wtU be. tn the general sense of the wo*d, 
loclcy (thoogb yon may cot consider yourself so), and yon wiK be 
much liked by other people as a role Yon sbonld, however, beware lest 
sensQons sid* of life dominate you. 

Persoval Characteristics 

MOO^J n Libra This position confers upon yoa personally a 
refined character It will make you love ease and pleasure, the 
arts, and social gatherings. You will always be kindly, genial, afiable, 
and courteous, and will try to preserve a happy disposition- You will like 
approval, and life will be sweet to you when you are appreciated, but not 
so vrtien yon remam unnoticed. You will be just as well as generous, and 
love order and refinement. Yoa have good powers of imitatioa and 
perce p ti on , and love of compansoa. Always endeavour to be even 
tempered, and try to keep the "Balance.” It WiH no* be well to carry 
comparison too far, and activity may at times be benefioal- You have 
smne artistic 

The moov I'r the Sevevth House win bnog you into 
■72- dHmalsrdatioowillilhepnbtc. and yoo will b. popular myonr 
own Rjhere. tboosii at titnss you ntay tara to ctBteod with soata public 



APPENDIX 


291 


opposition You mil come into contact with those who travel much, and 
make acquaintance with some ^ho lead Bohemian or roving lives Your 
chances of success in law will fluctuate, at times going well, at other 
times adversely, according to the aspects Another life will surely be 
mixed up with your own, causing >ou anxiety as well as pleasure and 
happiness, for your fortunes will always be strangely bound up with those 
of another, either in marriage, partnerships, or where there is more than 
a single and separate interest 

The Moon and the pKnet Mars were in BENEFIC aspect at your 
birth This aspect will make >ou fearless, enterprising, and 
courageous You can exhibit much pluck and endurance, being resolute 
and full of that confidence in yourself which will enable you to deal 
successfuHj with others You are fully competent to undertake anything 
upon which you set jour mind It Is a very hopeful aspect provided 
you are not too free and generous, ns you may then tend to become rather 
prodigal or too extravagant This influence will strengthen and tone up 
your constitution, enabling you to resist disease It will also make you 
bright and cheerful, improving your disposition 
The Polarity 

^ Blending the influence of the Sun in Gemini and Moon m Libra, 
representing your individual and personal character, this is a 
combination which shows that you have a peculiar spiritual tendency with 
a love of the occult and the unseen also a very mtuitn e and far seeing 
mind You have great accuracy and quickness of decision and will 
appreciate the study of nature and philosophy You have good imitative 
powers and these will enable you to bold your owm in all departments of 
life but you are more especially fitted for literary pursuits You often 
come to your decisions quickly through intuition rather than reason, and 
have a wonderful appreciation of beauty, art, and everything of an 
ennobling character You are liable to be affected by others, and it is 
essential that you associate with pure persons, if not, you will absorb much 
of their influence and perhaps be led to think that it is your own Learn 
to distinguish between your own Views and opinions and those of others 
Mental qualifications. 

Mercury IN Taurus indicates that you are slow to make np 
your mind, but that it is immovable when once it is made np 


179 



292 


THE LEY TO YOUR OWH VATUITY 


Yon can, bowexer, exercise moch patience and perseverance in all mental 
pnrsmts.and it makesjou disposed to be soaabIe,fneo(Ilyandaffectionate. 

It also inclines you towards rebpoa, and gives you a tas‘e for art, music 
or poetry. You can eierase mneh endurance in all you undertake 
mentally, and I judge that you possess good memory This position of 
Mercury in a fixed sign, makes you just, constant, firm, industnous, 
strict, smeere, and uncompromising, but you must guard against a danger 
of becoming mentally obstinate. 

jgj Mercury iv the Second House. This is favourable for 
gaming by correspondence, letters, and writing, af<o for fiT>anfiaT 
success m literary pursuits, and in professional and artistic afiairs generally. 
Although a good position for Mercury on the whole, and trben ■under 
favourable directions yon would be successful as regards travel and short 
journeys, it is on the o*her hand not very faroaiable when afflicted. 
You ha\e mental abilities for finance and would gam either by trading, 
or through saetrttfic pursuits, lectures, etc. But you should guard 
agoirtsi ihefl and fraud, as ai soms Urns of your lift you may hf the 
vtettm ef sharp prociiee (See speoal note on p 500 ) 

Mercury m cosjusenos with Venus is a very good posmea, 

* refining the mental qcaLoes and caosisg your rwmd to be 
sympathetic, artistic and poetical you are thus able to appreciate all 
matters connected with art- Possessing a good eye for co’our, and lonng 
all things beautiful, you naturally inclme to pamting, music, poetry or 
smging, everything m fact that is likely to give pleasiu^e to yourself and 
others. Saence is not likely to attract you, but you delight in reading, 
especially the lighter form of nteratcre, though your mind will not be 
very coacentiative or stcdicus. You will be well-disposed and a&dile in 
disposmon, ever choosing the social and pleasurable side of life, not the 
laborious. 


FZKANCE. 

Mercury governs the bouse of finance in your natmty, and thus 
promises gam throogh literary matters, agencies, papers, etc., in 
short, all statienerr occupation m which the mmd is more employed than 
the body You have good business abilities, and you are mventive as 
^rell as rather acqmsitiTe where money is concerned, but you «hotiJd 
guard against fraud and theft, and also be cautioas m signing all financial 



APPENDIX 


293 

documents. You would do well m all professions where a quiet and 
rapid movement is required, and journalism or businesses and professions 
connected w ith printing, commission, agencies, etc, would furnish the 
most remunerative mode of income for you. 

Travel. 

323 governing the third house of your nativity is rather 

favourable for any travelling that >ou may take dunng life, but 
m a general sense it does not indicate much raovmg about You may 
come into contact with or tneet persons of high and noble birth while 
talcing journeys, as the Sun signifies all things connected wth rank and 
high estate All your travels should have some high mission connected " 
with them, or ) ou may have some commission to perform that necessitates 
>our moving from place to place occasionally You have a very high_^ 
spirit and agree well with your brethren, and benefit by or through them 
m some manner The mind is broad and generally impartial and there is 
agreement vnth relatives 

Environment 


342 


Uranus having rule over the fourth bouse of your nativity 


indicates that the latter portion of your life is to be somewhat 
peculiar and eccentric You will take up studies towards the close of | 
life of whicli m the earlier part you bad little if any idea This position , 
of the planet Uranus is not altogether favourable, as it indicates some 
sudden surprises and unexpected events in the closing years of life, and 
you may come into some environment that you will not be able to respond 
to unless you have made great progress in occult matters You have 
some ability to study astrology and kindred subjects 
Enterprise 

Mars having rule over the fifth house of your nativity, denotes 
much energy and an enterprising spirit, and if you avoid impulse 
m matters of speculation, also with regard to certam investments, you 
may apply your energy to advantage m speculative matters, but you 
should carefully avoid gambling or any nsky enterpnses where you have 
to rely upon the honesty of others You are somewhat free in matters 
connected with pleasure, and ardent m jour affections, with a tendency 
to involve yourself with the opposite sex if you are not cautious in 



294 


THE Ki.Y TO TOOK OWK I.ATmTT 

5 dealing with them. This influence indicates some pain or some trouble 
I through children, and warns yoa against all rash conduct in your 
^ enterpnses. 

SICIlNESS 

Mercury ha\ang mle over the sixth house of yonr natinty 
most of jour ills in life will anse through nenom and also 
mental troubles. You should be careful oese*’ on any account to Rorry, 
if you salu* your health at all, because a ner\ ous brealtdown is threatened 
jon at any time »hen the mind lets jou giie^i-ay to worry and irritability 
All jour sicknesses will generallj anse from the condition of > our mind 
and th* nenous system 'iou will have some psychic impressions that 
will in certain directions aflect jou and there is more depending upon the 
peacefol condition of your mmd than you wiU ever estimate This 
influence is a dangerous one nben mental troubles press heavnly, aflectmg 
the mind. 

Marruce. 

Satcr-S governs the s-venth house tie bouse of mamage, in 
your nativity This planet tends to delay or hinder the mamage 
prospects. Should mamage take place however, it promises a faithful 
fnA steady partne", one who is just though rather grave and ®enous, very 
industnocs, persevenng, care'uJ, ihnftj and economicaL There is some 
probabilitj of your partner being old-r than jourself, with a tendency to 
oiurt respousibiUty It is nota very favourable testimony for prosperity, 
but It denotes a faithfulness m th'' mamage state, although care should 
be tak-m net to allow co’dness to spneg up between you at any time, for 
your partner will not be ov er demonstrative in afieetion, and will prefer 
action to speech and loving deeds in preference to the nse of many words 
of endearment. 

Legacies. 

Mars has chief mflaecce over all matters connected with the 
eighth house of your oaOnty, the bouse concerned with deaths, 
wiHs or legaaes. You may or may no^ gam money by the death of 
others, but if you should it would be •udden, and w some waj unexpected, 
for Mars is not a good planet to be coaeemed with money matters. 

You would find that yoa had been probably buoyed op by some false 



APFEHDIZ 


295 

hope, and would cot gam so much as you bad been Jed to expect Yonr 
own terminus xtice wll be somewhat sudden, although you may live to a 
good age, but it will be advisable to guard against accidents, and not to 
run any more nsk than is absolutely necessary. You would be drawn to 
public calamities, etc. 

PnitOSOFHV. 

357 Jupiter rules o\er the moth bouse of your nativity, the house 

! of science, philosophy, and religion This influence inclmes you 
to philosophy and wisdom, in its widest sense You will not be so 
scientific, as philosophical and artistic, for you mclme more to accept the ' 
^ broad outlines than the limited and precise details of the higher mind. 
You would succeed in foreign lands, and probably gain m some way 
I through foreign aflairs. This influence favours all legal aflairs, and also 
religious matters in general It gives you some prophetic tendenaes and 
the power to dream correctly and also to bnsg the dreams through into 
the physical brain Take note of them. 

Profession 

Saturn has rule over your profession or occupation and this 
denotes poiier and authority in some \vzy, but brings most 
fortune and success through industry and perseverance You will either 
hold a leading position or ha\e some kind of responsibility placed upon 
you This Saturnine influence is not good for business matters as there 
is always some danger threatened, either through the injury of others or 
the failure to carry to a successful issue whatever projects you have in 
hand. Saturn fa\ ours gam by labour more than by good fortune Matters 
requiring patience, tact and caution succeed better than any other methods, 
therefore you should seek the pursuits requiring these qualifications 

Friends 

Saturn governing the eleventh house of your nativity, will bring 
some very faithful and reliable fnends into your life, but some 
trouble in connection with your fnends and acquaintances is also denoted 
You uill have friends, in a general sense, amongst the aged or 
those who are much older thanioursd/ (See note, p. 300) You mil 
have some bitter disappointments, m connection with either fnends and 



594 


THE Ktr TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


dealing With them This iniluecce indicaltes some pain or some trouble 
through children, and warns you against all rash conduct in your 
enterprises. 

StCRNESS 

Mercury haMng rule o\er the sixth house of your natmty 
most of your ills in life wall arise through nervous and also 
mental troubles. You should be careful neser on any account to worry, 
if you \’alue your health at all, because a nervous breakdown is threatened 
you at any time when the mmd lets you give way to worry and irritability 
AU your sicknesses will generally an«e from the condition of your mind 
and the nervous system You will have some psychic impressions that 
will in «ttai*v directions affect you, and there is more depending upon the 
peacefnl condition of your mmd than you will ever estimate This 
influence is a dangerous one when mental troubles press heavily, affecting 
the mind. 

Marriage. 

Saturn governs the seventh bouse, the house of marriage, in 
your nativity This planet tends to delay or binder the mamage 
prospects. Should mamage take place however, it promises a faitMul 
steady partner, one who is yust though rather grave and senous, very 
lodustnons, persev enng, careful, tbnfty and economicaJ There is some 
probability of your partner being older than yourself, with a tendency to 
court responsibility It is nota very favourable testimony for prosperity, 
but It denotes a faithfulness m the mamage state, although care should 
be taken not to allow coldness to spnog op between you at any tune, for 
your partner will not be over demonstrative in aSeebon, and will prefer 
action to speech and loving deeds in preference to the use of many words 
of endearment. 

Legacies 

Mars has chief influence over all matters connected with the 
eighth house of your nativity, the house concerned with deaths, 
wills or legacies. Yon may or may not, gam money by the death of 
others, but if you should it would be •uddeo, and in some way unexpected, 
for Mars is not a good planet to be coneemed with money matters. 
Yon would find that yon had been probably buoyed up by some false 



APPENDIX 


295 

bope, and would not gam so much as jou had been led to expect Your 
own terminus \itx v.iU be somei^hat sudden, although you may live to a 
good age, but it will be ad«sable to goard against accidents, and not to 
run any more nsk than is absolutely necessary You would be drawn to 
public calamities, etc. 


PniLOSOPHY. 

Jupiter rules over the ninth house of your nativity, the bouse 

I of science, philosophy, and rehgion This influence inclines you 
to philosophy and vvasdom, in its widest sense You will not be so 
scientific, as philosophical and artistic, for you incJme more to accept the 
broad outlines than the finiitcd and precise detailsof the higher mind 
You would succeed m foreign lands, and probably gam m some way 
j through foreign afTairs This influence favours all legal affairs, and also 
religious matters in general It gives you some prophetic tendencies and 
the power to dream correctly and also to bring the dreams through into 
the physical brain Take note of them 

Profession 

Saturn has rule over your profession or occupation and this 
denotes power and authority m some way, but brings most 
fortune and success through industry and perseverance You will either 
hold a leading position or have some kind of responsibility placed upon 
you This Saturnine influence is not good for business matters as there 
IS always some dinger threatened, either through the injury of others or 
the failure to carry to a successful issue whatev er projects you have in 
hand Saturn favours gam by labour more tiian by good fortune Matters 
requinng patience tact and caution succeed belter than any other methods, 
therefore you should seek the pursuits requiruig these qualifications 

Friends 

Saturn governing the eleventh house of your nativity, will bring 
some very faithful and reliable fnends into your life, but some 
trouble m connection wnth your friends and acquaintances is also denoted 
You will hme fnends, in a general sense amongst the aged or 
those who are much older thanyourself (Sea note, p 300) You will 
have some bitter disappointments, m connection with either fnends and 



APPENDIX 


297 


ness in love, and, although the feelings are strong, the nature is fixed and 
not liable to change easily. Both likes and dislikes are maintained 
tenaciously, and while you can be an enduring friend jou are also rather 
loth t© give up feelings of prejudice or hostility The social side of your 
nature is well developed and you can gain friends and be popular in jour 
ovm cude. If you apply yourself to business or financial matters this 
position would be fortunate because it would help to win you the good 
opinion of people with whom you dealt and so w-ould smooth your path. 
It IS slightly favourable for money matters generally, especially through 
legacy, partnership, or marriage You have some ability for dealing with 
money, but you can also be generous and kind. 

Individuality and Personality. 

630. Before summarising your horoscope it should first be explained 
f that the nativity is divided into two parts one half dealing with 
the internal or higher, subjective or '* Individual" part of the nature; and 
the other concerned with the lower, external or objective manifestation, 
generally termed the “ PersoooL'* To go fuUy into the matter, however, 
demands a more detailed treatment than is possible in this class of 
horoscope, so that we will pass on to a study of the elements predomma* 
ting at your birth and their general influence Should you desire fuller 
information, in such books as Hov> to Judge a Naltvity and The Art of 
Synthesis, the subject is gone into more fully. 

* General Summary. 

630. You have a favourable nativity, and will have opportunities to 
K develop your character, and use your mental faculties wisely. 
You will gam by studying your horoscope, for you have the ability to 
profit by the good influences operating at your birth, the planetary 
positions giving you some power id the world, no less potent because it 
may not be open and public. The judgment has been given as succmctly 
and lucidly as possible, and you sboold ponder well what has been said, 
so as to catch any inner meaning that may attach to any paragraph, 
remembering that the whole delineation IS given with the main Mew* of 
helping you to progress. [The following is a bnef judgment of the 
whole combinations denoted by the nativity.] 

The majonty of the planets were RISING AND NEAR THE 
Eastern Horizon at the time of jour birth This dendtes 



298 


TKE KEY TO YOCR OWK HATlVXTy 


that > ou wUl nse m life by year energy, enierpnse, and perseverance, 

and attain to a good position m tibicb you wiU have power and authority 
in the sphere in which jou may be moving You uiU have man y 
opportunities, and the ability to seize them, thia you will prosper and 
ad\-ance The majority of the planets nsing at birth, denotes ability and 
self-control, and enables those who are bom at this time to have the 
vibrations of the planets to their hand, so to speak, and thus you will 
make good use of the operating force? around your ascendant 

The majority of the planets were in Airy Signs at the time of 
your birth. This will give you an inspiratiooal and also an 
artiste temperament You are esseatiaPy refined and can Iise much 
more in the mind t ht*" in *he sen«<s. You may lo\ e sensuous pleasures, 
but you will abhor all things sensual Your soul is aJne and you have 
that very rare quality of feelmg things with yojr mind. You have 
good intellectual ability and could study with ease, but it is the artistic 
Side of hfe that appeals to you more than the saentidc, cnless it be the 
philosophically intellectual aspect of science You have splendid ideals, 
&i^ cay subjecQvely cultivate exquisite tastes. 


YOUR Future Prospects 


Directions 


630 In certain horoscopes the wird ‘ Daections” may be mentioned, 
and as those unfamiliar with astrological teims may cot under 
stand what is meant, it may be well to gi\e a bnef explanabon The 
word “Directions' is used lU refereoce to a judgment given upon the 
planetary positions since the time of bjtb. it bemg necessary to erect a 
fresh horoscope fe- every year after birth, so that by a study of the pro¬ 
gressed posmoas we may discover the possibiliUes and influences operating 


for any given year of hfe- I* « “ certain cases to have the 

Directions calculated, for often detailed advice can be given for each 
month m any year 

The “ Futnre Prospects " whidi follow give a rough outhne of your 
Dxfectioiis for the ensumg three years. 

630 Although any attempts to give accurate predictions with regard 
// to the future are based upon astrological laws, at the same 
timl It mst b. 



300 


THE KE\ TO TOUr OWs t.\TJ\in 


upco the Inflox of the Solar life into the Ltnar pefsomliiy wl *reby the 
latter receives n new ehnnre of life Tins cbanrc is LsuaJJy preceded by 
a period of more or less uncertainty and indecision, the cornng events 
castiof their sladoves before, as it were It indicates chacpes in the 
sjstem and is sometimes accompanied by an indisposition of some kind 
whcrcbj the sjstem is accommodated to the new life flowing into it. 
This change is more benefiaal as a rule to males t hrrn to females. Be 
caxeful of the health at this penod, and avoid all indiscretions m diet, etc. 


CONCLUSIOV 

630 As time goes on you will have opportunities to awaken that 
i? which 1 $ latent in your nativity, and m accordance with jour 
earnestness and adaptability yon will be enabled to live up to all that 
your planets indicate Voa may not recognise the v, ho'e of the foregoing 
characteristics perhaps, yet if your birth time has been correctly taken 
every word should appeal to you. Astrologers behev e that Character is 
Destiny," and that during this life we most work to develop our 
characters. In the far future we are destined to take as aetivepart in the 
management of the world s evolution,and to this end we should flt ourselves, 
for eventually we must become perfect. 


Speciae Note to ntis Nativity—^T hose sentences that are m 
Italics m deliseatiou would be emitted when w-ntingoat the judgment, 
owing to their contradicting that which has gone before, or is due to 
other aspects, as for instance 267 7 d tf refines the mind and modifies 
the O of S and g, improviDg the/etc nature and freeing it from the 
martial sense strain as noted in 247 Paragraph 473 is the top note, so 
to speak, of the horoscope, its receptive tendencies modify tne otner 
or postUve notes, and it will act like sweet music in tunmg np 
the whole nature 

Then again 191 is much improved by the one that follows 247 
Paragraphs 436 and 441 shew bow tb» summaries fall appropriate to the 
horoscope and great care should always be taken in choosing them 



APii:lfDlX 


301 


Ho\\ ^^AY A King’s Horoscope be Known ? 

One question sure to nse to the ]ips on coming to the end of this 
delineation of King George's horoscope, is How are we to tell that 
a given horoscope is that of a monarch ^ The answer may be given 
plamly, u>e cannot tell —that is, we cannot tell if the horoscope is iHaf 
of a person actually of Royal blood, though it can certainly be seen at 
once if it IS the nativity of a bom ruler 

But before going further it may be interesting to give an account 
of the astrological “doubles' of Kings George III and George IV, 

I In Iizphzt\s Manual of Astrology (R C Smith), published in 
1837, and printed by Thomas Tegg d. Son, 73, Cbeapside, we find the 
following on p XVI 

“ In the newspapers of February, 1820, the death of a Mr Samuel 
Hemmmgs was noticed It was stated that be had been an ironmonger 
and prosperous m trade—that he was bom on the 4th of June 1738, at 
nearly the same moment as hts late majesty, GEORGE THE THIRD, and 
in the same parish of St Martins in the Fields that he went into 
busmess for himself in October, 1760, when his late majesty came to the 
throne, that he mamed on the 8th of September 1761, the same day as the 
kmg, and finally, after other events of bis life had resembled those which 
happened to the late king, that he died on Saturday, January 29th, 1820, 
on the same day and nearly the same hour as htS late majesty " 

II In a book entitled Shadow hand, o'r the Seer, by Mrs E 
Oakes Smith, and published in 1852 by Fowler d. Wells, of 131, Nassan 
Street, New York, on p 89 we find the following statement 

“ 1 lately found, in an old astrological work, the horoscope of the 
Prmce of Wales (George THE FOURTH), together with that of a little 
chimney sweep, ushered into the world the same day and hour that 
witnessed the birth of the slip of royalty.andwho was therefore christened 
by the name of ‘ Pnnce George' One child wrapped in purple, the other 
tolled m Its sooty blanket yet the same stars, indicating a similarity of 
destiny, and lo result whimsically venfied Of the career of the Pnnce 
of Wales It IS unnecessary to speak—his \ices, hts follies, his perjunes 
were all royal and hts fellow, the sweep, was not a jot behind him The 
broom and scraper were found as ill adapted to the hands of one as the 



302 


THr JEY TO YOUR OV.?^ VATIVITY 


sceptre to the h\nd8 of the other The pnrents of ‘ Pnnce Georpc,’ tired 
of his proflipnc), fthich shimed their profe<5ion, fimlly established him 
as a ttllon chandler He svis now a ruler, with apprentices and cotcnes 
about him, and could follow the bent of his Remus He was handsome, 
courteous, gallant, a Bpendthnft, and n gamester, as testified before the 
age of twenty, the fortune and reputation of the family having suffered 
much through his tendencies of this kind He soon became famous in 
his orvn sphere, dressed m the best style of his class, was the idol of the 
women, the essence of politeness the greatest bettor and gamester at all 
the races and fairs within ten miles of London, and finally kept the best 
asses, and ran the best donkey races of the day All this time his royal 
compeer was working out a destiny perfectly analogous, except that one 
IS ‘high life above, the other below,stairs ’—the one races wnth a blood 
horse, the other with a donkey ftut all glory must have an end, the 

Prince of Wales became bankrupt, and the Prince George ‘smashed’_ 

the very day that the stud of Hit Royal Highness, Pnnee of Wales, 
was sold by Tatiersall, the facing donkeys and pomes of the other 
'Pnnee George' uere pul to the hammer SiC TRANSIT gloria 
MUND lt' 

To these instances might be added a third, the late King Edward 
Vll, for m the Manchester edition of the Daily Sketch for the 
Saturday followriog his death there appeared an account of a similar 
astrological “ double,' an inhabitant of Walthamstow, bom 9/ll/'41, died 
May 6th, 1910, the same day as King Edward, and various incidents of 
parallel fortune w'ere noticed There is also the well known case of 
the Kaiser's “double," an artisan whose children have been bom on the 
same dates as those of William II. and who has in sundry other ways 
reflected in his own career the fortunes of his Royal patron—for on the 
story coming to His Majesty s ears be bestowed the Royal bounty upon 
him. 


'These facts serve to illustrate a very important point in Natal 
Astrology, namely that in certain rare instances two people are bom at 
the same time m the same locality, and therefore have the same horoscope 
Yet while we see that theit lives nm strangely parallel, they are not 
identical Thus, at a certain time Pnnce George inherited the throne of 
England, but his contemporary, tte ironmonger, merely went mto 
business on his own account. In each case there was an accession of 



APPERDIX 


303 


honour and responsibility, to the prince a crown, to the tradesmia 
independence 

' The horoscope shows t he^m bom.tendencies, and by its progression 
It shows t he tim es at which opportunities will present themselves for the 
froition of those tendencies—opportunities of expansion, honour—occasions 
of self examin-vtion, suffering or disgrace 

In other words, the horoscope shows the influences at work, be the 
subject peer or peasant, but to tbe peer honour means the purple, to the 
peasant at best but the parish council Tbe horoscope is written in a 
symbology t hat " peaks oLj>rtticiPteSj not particulars and the same 
planetary map may disclose to the astrologer the character of an infant, 
the fate of a nation, or the whereabouts of a missing child, according to 
the method of interpretation 

Hence it is essential to remember when considering the delineation 
of a horoscope, that all references to environment and fortune are 
PBLATIVE to the social and civil sphere into which tbe native is bom 
Just as the mmifestation of character—though not the character itself— 
will be modified by education or lack of it, so tbe benefic influence of 
Jupiter will work upon a larger or smaller social and finaneial scale 
according to the sphere into which the native is bom It must be borne in 
mind that physical heredity counts for something that there is a some 
thing real m “ blue blood,’ and that though it is said that a strong soul 
may under some circumstances deliberately choose a cramped and 
plebeian environment, yet in spite of tbe spiritual strength that can be 
gained thereby there will never be the same degree of success as ihe 
world counts success, where a lowly birth is chosen Even the divine 
must work with physical implements and even in the hands of a great 
artist a dull chisel is but a duU chisel 

At the same time there is truth in the saying that '* a live dog is better 
\V.wri -b, -iMiA The viixx is. %. culac even. il tis SJiJavecIs. he hJiA 

a group of fishermen, and Astrology can say if the nativity shows power 
to rule, and favourable opportunity to exercise that power In this sense, 
we can say that it is possible to tell a Royal Horoscope at sight Not 
otherwise 



ASTROLOGY MADE EASY. 


How to Read Your Nativity for Yourself. 

A Special Chart has been prepared for use JIil Kej to Your Own 

Nattnty ’* by which anjone wathout pre\ious stud} may read his own horoscope 
for lumsclf 

First purchase the book, either direct or through j our bookseller for 12^0 then 
send for the speail Chart wth explanation enclosing 2/6 (or tf abroad its equivn 
Imt in foreign currency), with daU t%m£ and place of birth or, if you aJreadj 
possess a Map of the He.avens at \our birth and the Chart in tl e book is not 
immediatel} dear to }"ou send the Map and One shilling only for the special Chart 
alone 


How to Read Your Own Progressed Horoscope. 

A Similar Chart has been prepared for use witli ITie Progressed Horoscope 
The Fee for calculating the Directions for an\ «ingle ) ear and filling in the parti 
culars in the Direction Chart is 3/6 The calculations may be obtained for an} 
number of y eats past present or future at 3/6 each 

These calculations are exceedingly \aluabJc for those who study their owti 
tendencies Wlien making apphcntion for them please either guote nuinber ol 
Horoscope, or supply birth data. Directions are unreliable when birth time is 
unknown 

Many professional astrologers are now usinsr th«e two books Tlie Re} to 
Your Own Nativity and The Progressed Horoscope 


To be had from “ Modem Astrology ** OHice, 

40, Imperial BoUdmgs. Lndgate Circus, London, E C 


305 



ALAN LEO'S ASTROLOGICAL TEXT BOOKS.—VOL. 1. 


ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 


/* (K’ltkotU CalfHlalions' 

FODBTH EDmOJf: ElflARQED. 

^ Price 12/6, post free 13/-. 

To stud> Astrology it is no Jongrr e^ntia) to take verbal lessons or to seek a teacber as 
manj suppose There was a time, less than a century ago, before the advent of Alan Leo’s 
Astrological Text Books when a teacher teas required It is only fair to add that the mathe* 
matical side of Astrology was then considered the f>nwpat desderatnm, and the art of icdgiog 
a nativity a question of indn-idual ability that did not concern the teacher to any appreciable 
extent. But with this book you do nor require a teacher At that tune, bower er the teachers 
themsehes were students and few rf them were inclined to impart their knowledge to others 

Astrology for Al’ L-i a popular book and no technicahbes are entered into, but on the other 
hand all necessa r y explanations are given without either diflascness or ambigmty Its Urge 
sale increasingly testifies to the growth and spread of the public interest in Astrology The 
aim throughout has been to give the reader a comprehensive grasp of the main outhnes of 
Astrology, and to keep steadfastly before him the digiutv and grandeur of the subject. 
SiMPUCiTY. Dikectvess and TiJonotcirsESs have been the mai^ objects kept in new. and 
a complete dehneaocn of the twelve major types and the 14t sub-types bom each year being 
given, the Cbarvcter and Tempebvmevt of AXiiOIfE bom buwxo the past sixtv sears 
may be knovm at a glance 

The reader is spared a long histoncal introduebon. and volozsisous quotations from 
** authorities ‘ in support either of statements made or of Astrology to geaerid For the 
author beheves that practical men will care little what the onaeots said regarding Astrology 
IF XT BE KOT TRUE TO OAV, and he preaches that which he doth know and te*tifies to that 
which be bath seen '* 


CONTOIS 

INTRODUCnOX Chapters—I First steps el«nents of astronomy II The Earth 
andtheSun the Ecliptic and Signs of the Zodiac III The Son and the Zodiac. Important 
Ivote on sunrise horoscopes and rectificaboo IV—XV The Personal and locuvidaal 
character given by the Twelve Signs. Anes Taurus Gemini. Cancer, Leo Virgo. Libra, 
Scorpio, Sagittaxus Capncom, Aquanus Pisces X\ I The nature of the Twelve Signs of 
the Zodiac XSlI The Moon and the Zodiac. XVIll The Sob Lunar Combinabons on 
Polanbes Xote on spint soul and bodv XIX, How to find the JUsing Sign XX De* 
luieaboDS based upon the Rising Sun XXI tVbat is a horoscope and how is it cast ? 
XXII The Planets and their posibous in the Twelve Signs XXlII The character and 
destiny ol »eh degree of the Zodiac. XX1\ The Lunar and PUneta^ poaboss from 1850 
to 1909 explauabon of this use. examples and conclusion APPEXPIX Poor Lectures 
on Astrology, dehvered in Alay and June 1900 (revised and siinpliiied) 

Astrology for All is the btle of the first of asenes of seven large books, none containing less 
than 300 pages wntten xnth the express purpose of revealing the mystenes connected with the 
hitherto misunderstood word Astrology truly interpreted ’ The Misdom of the Stars." 


This book IS now m the fourth edibon is enbrely free of all calcnlabou, requires no know¬ 
ledge of mathematics and can be read throughout by the most simple-minded or by the keenest 
intdlect, and what is very much to the purpose the troth of the sUtements it contains can 
be proved by each individual reader, indeed the mo>t TOnfinned xepbc cann^ot help being 
amared at the accuracy ol its delincabons The mirids of TWme w-vu be vujuved by its perusal, 
and all must benefit by the mstmebon it gives 

To those who know nothing whatever about Astrology, whether bias^, l^^udiced. or of 
open mind, it is the first book to be read since it carries with it the proof of its own sUtements 
Itfuhy explains the individual and personal charaetembes of all persozu bora at aw Tni* and 
__ i «rJi nUneta infiuence. and the means whereby each reader may 


.3 a clear desenpbon of each pUnets mfiuence. and the means whereby e 
e the special influeoces aflecting his own hie 


To be had from “ Kodnri Astrologj *’ OtSc*. 

40. Xmpectal BoHdisn, LndcaU Cirenj. Loadoa. C.C, 

- 306 



ALAN LEO’S ASTROLOGICAL TEXT BOOKS—VOL II. 


CASTING THE HOROSCOPE 

{Cahulattms and Fphem''ns) 

THIRD EDinOir REVISED 

Pnce 12/6, post free 13/- 

The thoughtful mveshgatof will naturally b“ desirous of going thoroughly into all the details 
connected with tho calculation of a horoscope so that he can satisfy ^mself of the truth of 
Astrology by makiog a test of its Uaims through a practical examination into either his own 
nativity or that of a fneni known to lum If he u a careful man b- will desire that thu 
e-camination shall be self-conducted and that^e shall have to take nothing on authonty 
so that in the end he can come to a deaded conclus on about the matter—a conclusion that 
he can feel is a just and warrantable one based upon h.» own independent miestigatlon To 
serve such the present volume is especially fitted since rules are giien wherebj a horoscope 
may be calculated from the ’'laultcat Almanic alone 

Casting tht Horoscope is dcaigued to serve iwo classes or KbAOERS For tho^e who are 
already keen and eager students Sbction \ offers practical information concerning the tech 
nique of astrological calculations which is inA-aluable while on the other hand to tiio^e m the 
early stages Sbctiov B gives in simple language the koow-ledgc they want —See Table of 
Contents Complete information is given regarding the calculation of majis of the heavens for 
nnv part of the habitable globe with clear explanations of the astronomn^ terms likely to be 
met with m any works the student may wish to consult The book also contains an 
EenEMERis reoM 18 j0 to 1013 Vow an Ephemens for sixty > ears would in the ordmsxy way 
cost the purchaser TniiSB Pouvos whereas ttus l<uok costs no more than Twelve Shiluvcs 
AND SntPENCe COUPLCTB 

COOTENTS 

Explanatory Diagrams Introductory preface Useful information SECTION A 
CHAriBRa—I The ephemens and the lofonnation it supplies 11 bidereal time what 
it means and why it differs from clock time III Local time as a factor in the horoscope 
The houses of die horoscope V A few definitions M Th* calcuiauon of the horo¬ 
scope la detail Standards of Time la vanous parts of the wort 1 VU A simple method 
wherein to calculate a correvt horoscope for any place by means of th* Table ol Ascendants 
Vill The time of birth methods of rectification I\ Logarithms and then u»- X The 
trigonometrical method Nl The recufication of a horowotw- when birthtime isappmzimaie 
orunknown XII Vanousm tholsot hoisedivvow XllI The real 7.o>1 a lU beanng 
on the phenomenon of retrograd itioo SCCTlOb U CiiArrERS—1 How to use the Con 
densed Lphemens for practical work where great precision is required II A few lemons in 
elementary astronimy \PPENDl\ i Secondary directions and their relauon topnmarv 
directions lor purposes of reclincatioo u Methods oi house division iii Lxact deter 
mmations of planets inunUiue positions n The real Zodiac some comments v The 
relationofepoch to birth ii il iw tofindan wnUn >wn ascendant the Von Point method 
VU How to calculate the Mkiis place for any jiast or future dste via How to find the 
portions of Uranus and Neptune 1 r any date prior to 1800 with an example U How tn 
calculate the planets pbces for my past or future date x Solution of spheneal tnangl* 
General Survey of Vtavdabd Time TABLtS Etc Conpensso Lfiiiueiis of 
planetary and lunar positions for the years 18.10-1913 TabiM of Houses for London and 
Ivew \ork SideresI Time f ir ea h day at Noon A Table of Ascea fants for earh degree of 
Latitude from 0* to "0® Sundry Tables useful for cnosUnt reference PerpetuaJ Table of 
nlinetari hours for All Places last of boi Ics for studv 

This 'work has received seieral important additions having be«n e ilargnl to fuIJv taict lU 
original sue and is n iw ma le so thoroughly oroplete as to be quite lNDisi-Kss«Bi.a to every 
student of Astrology No astrolopcaf book ever publtshed has had »urh a rapid sale as this 
work In fact it has been termed “The AltroJiwet’f Whiflaker ” 

The folio vmg is from a letter of a well known avtrofvger tl e roatbematicun employed In 
the calcuiauon of the annuil I phemerfs — I»o you In •» 1 think so much d e U» k thsi 
I must purchase a copy 1 convidcr il on the wh »e—foivking to the ira^tant subject it deals 
with the lucid trcitment of the wirae the general get up and very moderate pnce—I condd-r 
U I sav almost perfection , 

The book is therefore an indispensable requisite f r all wro intend to make any senous 
studv of the subject \nd even fi r tl jse who are in Ittposed lu enter trto intri anes ol cal 
culation to an rphen-ms for tort viali leirsin- small a I ull an t at so k.^r a peifs 
(» no slight boon 

To ba bad from “ Kodera AstTolocf *’ OfOea. 

40. Imrarlal fialldinra. Ladrata QrawA homiam, Z.C. 



ALAN LEO'S ASTROLOGICAL TEXT BOOKS.—VOL. III. 


HOW TO JUDGE A NATIVITY 

(Scientijic and AnaSyltcal) 

THmD EDraOH: REVISED AlTD GREATLY ENLARGED. 

Pnce 12/6, post free 13/-. 

The Casting of the Hotoacope is alter all hot the mechanical part of Astrology, for anyone 
eaerasing patience, intlnstry and pcrseierance may become a capable laJciilator' There are 
few, boirever, competent to Jodge a Natiwty when it is cast And many desiring a true 
delineation of their own horoscopes, or those of others, are often disappointed through the 
incompetence of unskilled professors 

Is It not belter to profit by your oten mistakes than to pay dearly for the mistakes of others ’ 
Surely 1 Then make the attempt to be jour own Astrologer For instance, having once 
learnt the Alphabet of Astrologj—lU symbology—this book explains th» true meaning of the 
several sjmbols It is not a ihacnlt book to read, the reading, apart from the idea of study, 
being pleasant, instrnctive and profitable. from this point of view alone it is well worth the 
money 

The book » not a repeubon of what other wnters have said on the subject It m unique 
new and startlinglj true A standard work especially designed to instruct the beginner and 
draw forth the latent intoition of the reader 


COHTENTS ,, 

Cbapt**s—I The Twelve Houses of the Horcscopes 11 The Twelve Signs of the 
Zodiac III The Lumiaancs and the Planets IV The Asp^ V The Three Centres* 
Son, Moon and Ascendant. VI The Aseefidaator RisiogSigs The First House VTl The 
Rulmg Planet Vllf Health and the Hyleg Length of Life and the Apbeta IX The 
Second Uoose Wealth and Finance, Hereditary Posbon X The Third House Brethren 
and KeUbves, Short Journeys the 'find XI The Fourth House • Environment Home, 
Parents, theEndoflufe XII The Fifth Mouse Children Eaterpnse Speculabons Gams 
Love Afiai^ etc , etc XIII The Sixth House Sickness, Servants Work, etc. XIV The 
Seventh House Mamagc, Partnerships Ececnies etc XV The Eighth House Death 
and the Dream Consciousness. X^^ The Ninth House PtulosophyandTravel XVII The 
Mid Heaven or Tenth House. * XVIII The Eleventh House Fnends Hopes and Wish« 
XIX. The Twelfth House The ' House of Self Undoing ' XX \ CoMPmroiirw or PtA«fE- 
TARY Posmoxs AMI Asncis XXI Concloding Remarks on Judgment. XXll KSjuti.'e 
Way of Revdivc Horoscopes Illustrated by reference to the Nativity of King Edward VII 

Houta /iMfgr a A’aiiniyu not only 3 Standard Text Book, the only one of Its kind in exist¬ 
ence, but furnishes a storehouse of general mformation coacermsg planetary and rodiacal 
influences 

The work of Judging a Xabvity is divided into two parts in the first of which the nabvity 
IS dealt with almost entirely in its purely ttotenc atpeef The judgment is cliiefly mundane 
and pracbcal by far the greater porbon of the reading given rclabog merely to the ordinary 
occupations anij \-icissitutles of hie these bemg entered into with g-eat minuteness All the 
necessary rules and references are given lo detail with a view to help the student to give a 
reliable reading of an> naavitj There is no work in existence that deals so eihaosbvely with 
the matter Ueviaon and re-arrangement have made this a perfect book foe the purpose for 
which It -was wntten Much addibonal matter has bOT inclod~d which adds greatly to its 
value, including a Scheme for the Dehneatioa ct Bay Nabvity 


To b« bad Zrom ** Koden Astrology ^ Office, 

dfk Xmptrul Bdldiacs. LndgtU OrcBS, E.C. 



ALAN LEO'S ASTROLOGICAL TEXT BOOKS.~VOL. IV. 


THE ART OF SYNTHESIS 

{iHtuUiie Judgment) 

THIRD EDITION: REVISED. 

Price 12/6, post free 13/-, 

Tlie Scientific aspect of Astrology is exlianstivety dealt witb in How to Judge a hahvtiy, 
which deals with the analysis ol the horoscope into its coniponent parts, ceplaimng in detail 
each part and the rclatirn of the part to the whole To sammanse or synthestse the nativity 
is a dillerent matter depending for its success largely on the intuition of the student The 
iNTOiitVE rendering of Astrology, so far as it concerns individuals, is de.arly explained by 
examples .and illustrations in the present work which marks an entirelv new departure in 
Natal \strology 

SciEvcr is generally limited to an investigation of all things pertaining to the objective 
woild, tliuugh it must be admitted that some saentists are now groping after things that are 
not cognisable through phvaical sight The Saeotist who depends only upon his brain mind 
must be limited according to its capaaty for cogmboo of things that are made manifest 

iMTOiTiON is soul penetration. it sees through the veil that divides the subjectiie from 
the objective universe and bnngs to the brain mind knowledge which that mind cannot itself 
obtain from the obiective world 


CONTENTS. 

PREFACE INTRODUCTION Chaiiers—1 Mars and the Planets II Planets and 
Coosoousnesa III The planets and the seven pnnapics personality and individuality 
IV The Sun, life giver V The Moon, Mother Vi Mercury the Thinker VII Venus, 
the Unifier VIII Mars, the Energiser IX Jupiter the Uplifter X Saturn, the 
Subduer XI Uranus, the Awakener Xll Neptune, the Mystic XIII The/nativity 
and Its relation to heredity XIV Character is Destiny XV The nse and fall of planets 
XVI Methods of synthesis XVII The quadrupfinties. or qualibes,' s^thesised 
XVIII The tnplicities synthesised Exauples op Horoscopes APPENDIX The occult 
significance of flie planet Uranus An Astro Theosophical Ciossiry 


Astrology as a science deals wiUi all tbtog<> considered practical that can be demonstrated 
to the phy«»I senses As a science it can be loiesUgated by anyone free from prejudice, just 
as the researches of a chemist in his laboratory can be followed by anyone similarly equip^d 
The Saentist who is groping after tbir^ unseen is only searching for the character of all things 
_prototypes Astrology as an art rebes upon lotuition, or Soul \tisdom to reveal that char¬ 
acter that IS concealed in e\ try nativity Truly has it been said that Character is Dfstivy 
In this book the author has spared no pains to make the whole subject understandable 
and every possibihty of bewlderment has been removed by explaining carefully and concisely 
all those difficult problems concerning temperament and character that ha\e hitherto been 
Ignored by other ivnters on the subject 

A separate chapter is devoted to each of the planets, wth special treatment of the 
" myste^planets ^ Uranus and Neptune while the relation between Planets and Consuous- 
ness has b«n made clear in a simple manner The art of synthesis is gradual!} unfolded, and 
examples from vanous horoscopes are Xonushed. including the naUvitics of several people 
-whose fame is world wide The book is published at a pnee far below its real \alue to those 
‘students who can appreciate the esolenc side of Astrolc^ There is also added an Astro- 
‘ Theosophical Glossary which greatly increases its usefulness. 


To be had from “ Modem Astrology " Offiea. 

40, Imperial Boildisgs, Lodgale Circus, Loudon, E.C. 



ALAN LEO'S ASTROLOGICAL TEXT BOOKS—VOL V 


THE PROGRESSED HOROSCOPE 

SECOND EDITION REVISED 

Price 12/6^ post free, 13/- 


The most sensible and thoughtful of human beings are those who look alicad and prepare 
fuf ^ coming good or ill the weak and timid fear to face the future lacing 


“""A?"? ® understand them In order that something may 

be known of the influences that arc coming study your own future for vourself _ 

Bv fyurehastnff a //thv n/Toir ^ 


w 


By purchasmg a e^y o/Tirn Progressed Horoscope 

By obtaining tkt CaleMlaltons Jor any particular year you wish to look up either 
calculating them personally or having them computed by a first-class mathe 
malician with an accompanying explanation which is non technical Jor which 
an itKiuiive/e« «/3s fli oniy tt cAarged—Sfg ^ 3V7 
By referring the explanation to The Progressed Horoscope in tthich booh is 
to be found a detailed account of alt the influences operating durin” that particular 

■” <'•’ 

„ ?' >11» a unique ..ork founded upon lie uulhor s 

own mdmduil itudy and ekpenence and it sea forth the oojy system o( bireetuig that 
can be used umversally the one that has proved most satisfactory in the neactical^rv day 
work of the past twenty yearn _ y m me peacPcat every oay 

CONTENTS 

PREFACE INTRODUCTION HOROSCOPE OF AUTHOR Part T The Pro 
ORB8SBD Horoscope Chapters—I Heredity Environment Charanlv^’TT r>,«!?f,.fi7T 
Dcatmy III \Vhy Directions sometimes fail IV v 

system VI The degression of the horoscope VII How to caJenMt. In 
slope VIII How to calculate duecuons Tx The protested 

and Mrs Annie Besant X Considerations to be borne in mind u^*”^** 2^ ^**522-2^*7 
XI Sub divisions of signs Table of Aspects Part 11 Th* E 
paragraphs i" this pari are numbered for convenience of reftrtnee\ 

grossed descendant XIII Solar assets XIV MuW woects The pro 

vwr tP. tu. pnfei >...,«*« .w—r.rrP®'“ XV Lunar noiiDons and 


aspects XVi Directions to the nud heaven and ascead«?''’*?Q„,,^X L«nar positions and 
Part III SotAft nssotOTiots akd TRahsits CHAPrsM-Xvn *? 

birthday maps XVJII Transits over Son Moon and Planeu vtv^ revolutiMS or 
houses with an lUustrabon from the authors nabvtty p.^x jv Tranafs through 

CHAPTERS—XX Tngcraometneal formols and tables XXI T},. Directiovs 

dane directions to angles XXIII Solar and ianar mundane dirprfSf*'’^ XXII Mun 
ThfiralleN and rant naMlIels XXV Zodiacal direcbnna ♦ev XXIV Mundane 


parallels and rapt parallels XXV Zodiacal directions to aneles Mundane 

tions between Sun Bloon and Planets without latitude XXVII xk Zodiacal clirec 

XXVIII On equating arcs of direction measures of time APPCNDirpc^™* ivith latitude 
horoscope in detail ii The relation between pnonaiy and secondlXT^ * The progressed 
gcstion ui How to calculate the actual day on which a given asnect flu ® s“S 

way of calculating primary direcDng Cenerai Inoer ^ ‘ mus due jv A simple 

This book b> Its simplicity appeals to the untrained studeut boi n 
will fnd it a sine qua non There is given a Detailed and nJ, advanced student 

POSSIBLE Progressed Aspect Solar IMotWal ahd Lohar their 

destiny being fully described thus enabling any student to Xottn a firm character and 

on wl ich to base his own indii'idual judgment of any progressed 1°^*^ foundat on 

Interpret There arc also chapters deahng wth Travsits m a neve) and . * » 
the esotenc as well as the exotenc meaning bemg given making the sahJ?* k manner 
and useful and finally a complete Handbook on Primary Direct ons n/ ***** interesting 
all who study Astrology in any form This section alone suffices to value to 

unique as no treatment of the subject has ever before been published m quite 

-th^ IS the only one of Its kind m existence “ Itw no 


Special Inclosive pnee Book, Map o! Prt^ressed Horoscope, and v . 

ol Calcnlatjons, 16s Se« (Adv., p 317) fi^Planation 


I, b. h.d tofo - «oJ.n. AAoIc«y " 

310 ""lovfon.E.a 



ALAN LEO'S ASTROLOGICAL TEXT BOOKS—VOL. VI. 


THE KEY TO YOUR OWN NATIVITY 


SECOSD EDITION. 

Price 12/6, post free I’ij- 


the professors, who though having just wit enough to delmeate ahorcLo^ tom 

T'' ®*>“‘“ble. have but a very superfiaal knowlS^e If 
V*®. **P*"«*f« judgment '‘Inch tilne and practice lloae 
^ *k "2®’ therefore liable to make many senous mistakes Wth the publication 

of this book, houeier it is now possible to read not oalj TouaOws but Ani*Nati\iti 
tom a senes of numbered Dslineatjons that have been in dail> use for over ten years md 
have been continually improved and tested by sevcrat competent astrolocers until further 
revision has been deemed unnecessary 


CONTENTS. 

The rational basis of Astrology (feui/Mou) Example chart of llis Majestv Kmc 
ueorge V (/roidtotece) boreaard Expianatorv Iktroduction Kersacser Ciiakt 
S * — Ku/itif P/atut tie Chafisrs—I The ascendant and the nsing sign II The 
ruling Planet III The position of the mime planet in the houses IS'-X The position iu * 
the Signs of the Sun Moon. Mercury, Mars Venus Jupiter baturn KJ-XII The houu 
positions of the planets Uranus and Neptune J 2'^J>idiii<iuihiy \lll Individual char 
Bctenstics { 3-^Prrrenisiity XIV Perscoalcbaxactenstics XV The Moon s house nositlca 
i i-^Mentality XVI Mental Qualifications XVll Mercur> s house jxvMtioo Wilt The 
TOSiUons and aspects of the Sun Moon and Ilanets { S Hatsts o/ lA* 

Itoroseope XIX rinaace XX Travel etc XXI EnviroBment XXII knieronse 
XXIII Sickness XXIV Marriage XXV Marriage as indicated by the nosiuoo of Venus 
XXVI Legacies XXVII Philosophy XXVIII rrofessioos XXI\ Fneods X\X 


Occultism i 6‘-^umfttary ef Iht KofOfeott XXXI Summaries XXXII Suppiementary 
pmgraphs XXXIII The polarities XXIN A few explanatory paragraph ! 7 — 
' “ ..... ...... . . prospects X.XXVI C* 


TAe Progression of tAe Horoscope XXXV The future prospects 'X.XXVI‘Conclusion 
APPENDIX An Example Debneation KiogCeorget nativity How may a Kings boro* 
scope be Imown f 


A word or two wiU make plain the pnnciple adopted lo this system of dcbneation I ath 
planetary position and aspect is separately noted and tu general etfret deicnbed entirely 
apart from that of any other aspect {tAongk wAet* »my tm tend to ccnflict a nc.* lo lAas tgtd 
may b* added) In this way is gamed an analytical presentiment of the character and abilities 
which could not otherwise be arrived at, and the analytical horoscope thus obtairol can of 
course be ‘synthesised at any lime An interesting account o( this tyiiem and the reasons 
which led to its adoption will bo found in \Sodern Astrology for December 1003 under the title 
of The History of the Test Horoscope The article aJtuded to was written In reply lo a 
cntic who had objected that no such sptem of delineation could give accurate rnult* ume 
two people having the same aspect would receive eaacUy the same delmeatioo as regards lha* 
particular aspect But the point is not whether two people may be told the same thing 
regarding some details of the horoscope b«t whether the dehneauon as a wb le ii frtw 

No one can estimate the true value of this uniijne book until be has tnrd it upon hi* o-n 
nativity, or npon that of some persons mtimaiely known to him It is soiatty vatUAHia 
rOR TUK Xovjca and for the most fXOnCIBHT ASTROLDCKB 


Bv the use of this book any person of avrrsgn fnlelligerte mav become ti. «i 
One Mn leam more tom this bMk in one hour than tom any other in a lacnlh 
lor yonrseli or for a fnead and when you has* bought It. undy u 


I Atili.Kfrt 
Huy a copy 


To b« bad Iran " Kodtro AitrelocT ” 

40 layenal BuMian. taigiis arens. lemdeo, E.e. 
311 


THREE GOOD BOOKS 


PRACTICAL ASTEOLOSY. 

Alan Lbos first booV on .Vstnlog) revised and enUr^^ed Mtnniy wnttea Ccntiios 
llie horoscope of Mrs Anrur Besant. and several other well known persons Full cl useful 
and 1051100111*6 lessons on esotenc Imes 

Price 3/6. port free 3/12. 


RAYS OF TRUTH. 

Bl MRS LrO 

The Religious Aspect of Astrology u here put forvardina senesof very interesting chapters 
on fate and destiny Eierjbody who reads thu book la charmed with the /uad manner in 
which some of the deepest problems in life are treated 

Pace 36 port free 311. 


ASTROLOGICAL ESSAYS. 

A series of excellent essaj s dealing with vanoos problems of Astrology from a pltifosophicsi 
aspect The highest praise has bees given to this Look It shoold be is every iibran 

Price 3 6. pest free 3/U. 


EPHEMERIS. 

Ephemeris for ANy YEAR from ISOO ,}/- each. 


OTHER P0fiUCATZ0N5 


Hali-Cxows SsRies 
fae Pathway or the Soci. 

ByJ if Vak Stoke 

1 HF itOMANCE OK THE STAXS 

By Bessie Eeo 

hxESH SlOELlGMTS OK ASIXOtOflY 

, By C G M Adam 


J^KULAR Series 1/6 post bee 
AIars The Mar Lord 

B> Alas Leo 

Saturn The ItEArER 


By ALA’S Leo 
J uriTRE The Preserver 

post free 1>B> By Alak Leo 


Sxrwrwt YfWfKixn 


LSOTEMC OR LXOTEWC A SYMPOSIUM 

A New Factor in toccAnos Astxoloov 
The WORE o*'L odge 


ASTROLOCY LXPLAISED 

Tice Astrolocer ako Jlis Work 
The Aetrolocer s Anhual for 1909 


«.*MWQce lade* to the Whole Sene* of Volumes of the Astrology for \J1 
A C0=rfrte _pSe 6/ Jt h so arranged « to be equally useful to those 

SS VoS of Iho ~ •>«>« P»«- 





TO KEEP IN TOUCH WITH CURRENT 
ASTROLOGICAL THOUGHT, SUBSCRIBE TO 


"MODERN ASTROLOGY 

THE ASTROLOGER'S JIAGAZINE. 

(Estabusubd 1690) 

< Founded by ALAN LEO. 


ONE SHILLING MONTHLY. ANNUAL SUSSCRIPIION l£/8. 


MoasRH AsTROiooy. fouodfd by ALAN LEO m 1890 under tbe btJe of " Tbe Astrologer s 
Magauae ” (title changed 1893} has appeared ccntuioously month by month ever suce— 
29 years—under his guidance and editorship The present editor is thoroughly a sympathy 
with the u-ork and prepared to carry it on on the lines laid donm by the late Founder, uho 
was the Founder moreover not only of this magazine, bul of the whole moiement covered by 
the term " Modem Astrology " 

(1) A speaal line is to include matter requmng no special tech.vical astrological 
K^0^VLEDCE for its comprehension, as as articles of interest exclusively to the advanced 
student, thus catenng for many classes of readers Answers to Questions ” is a Department 
of speaal interest both to students and to those merely interested in Astrology The active 
help of all readers is invited, and expected 

(2) This Magazine is cxdusnely astrological in its scope, and does not seek to attract 
those whose interests are largely engaged m other fields of activity though the help of such 
either in the form of criticism or advice, is always welcomed, and their goodwill it is hoped 
ever to merit 

JiN B —Send for a Specimen Copy post free for Twopence, and read it. then send for another, 
and read that You will then probably become an Annual Subsenber 


To bo had from “ Modem Astrology ” Office. . , . ^ 

40, Imperial Buildings. Lndgate Circus, London. X.C. 


31S 



ALAN LEO'S ASTROLOGICAL TEXT BOOKS—VOL VII. 


ESOTERIC ASTROLOGY 

[A Slvdy tn Human Nature) 

HHAL BOOK OP THE SEETES 

Pnce 12/6, post free 13/- 

Descnptioos are n$ete&i to explaio the value of this remarkable book In nhich many 
clugrams and illustrations are given to faalitate tbe uoderstandiog of a profound subject. 

Tbe work deals with Natal Astrology in a manner never before attempted by any wntcr 
on Astrology It la divided into three parts in the first part theoretical aspect of Esotenc 
Astrology is explained In the second past the practicat side of Esotcnc Astrology is demon 
strated by many Examples and Completed Explanations The third part treats of the sub¬ 
division of tbe Zodian esotenc meaning of astrological terms lo ordinary use etc., etc 


COSTENTS 

FIRST PART PREFACE INTRODUCTION CtiAMEas—I —Astrological symbology 
II Occult A&Uoi)om> III Sphere of I&Doenca tV The sigufieanee of caste and soaal 
distinctions V The housea and their importaece M The bouses (eonunoedl Vll Tbe 
sodiac esotencally considered Mil Tbe meaning of aspect JX Fire X Tbe Lunar 
aora and its significance XI Tbe planet to relation to commitsoaeis Xll TlafieUry 
mfiuenee and gestation \III Strong and weak characters XJV The angelic host 
SECOND PART ExFtJl^ATOKV Duokams and lucsnATtvn Horoscofb CaApraas— 
XV Esotenc value of tbe polarities XVI Tbe star of the personaht> XVII The star of 
the individuality XVIIl Examples of Esotenc Astrology XIX A remarkable human 
document with an esotenc interpretaboa of tbe oabvity THIRD PART Note on an 
Esotenc Glossary Chapisxs —X\ The threefold and fourfold divisions NXI Further 
divisions of the Todiac XXII The fourfold divisioa of Signs XXIIl Esoten** meaning oi 
astrological terms in ordinary use XXIV The growth of the Ego XXV Cowctusiow 
Tbe corse and tbe blessing of Astrology 


For the first time in the history of Astrrtogy an enurely new method of^reading horoscopes 
IS given. Th- IjtDiviDnAL aao Persoval Stars of all persons are explained by^ a senes of 
' Star Maps -showing bow tbe age of the soul may be astrologually discovered It shows 
bow the Horoscope may be changed into a Star the Star into a Pentagon, and the 
Pentagon into a triangle 

If yon havemadeastndy of Alan Leo* other books you will be able to appreciate the value 
of this book and will not be disappointed with your purchase It is a book to be read first, 
and afterwards carelnUy studied 


To he had from “Hodeni Astrology ” Otbee, 

40, Imperial Botldings, Lodgsie Cress, Londwi. E,C. 

312 




ALAN LEO’S ASTROLOGICAL MANUALS 

POCKET EDmONS, SEATLY BOUND IN CLOTH. 

Price, at present 1/6, Post Free 1/8 


WHAT DO WE BIEAN BY ASTROLOGY P t— A baoiJar ihs enqmrer A fitiiag book to place 
m the hands of those who know nothing whatever about the subject Second Edition 
fLANETARY INFLUENCES:— A simple and explanalory manual For those who desire to 
grasp the meaning of planetary Influences without arduous study Second Edition 
revised 


WHAT IS A HOROSCOPE AND HOW IS IT CASTP:— Steps in the practical study of 
Asirolor^ It fully explains the meaning of a horoscope and is entirely free from 
calculations ot any description 1 ourth Edition 

The horoscope in detail :—a vade mecum for eiery siu lent A complete supplement 
to a kat IS a Horoscope and How is tl Cast ? Third Edition 

DIRECnONS AND DIREGTINO.4 r tntrodutUon la predictive Astrology dealing with ICing 
Ldward s and King George s Nauvity aod Directions Second Edition 

THE “REASON WHY” IN ASTROLOGY*—Wn explanation of astrological preespt and 
pracliee A philosophical treatise on Astrology full of suggestive and ilJumisating 
ideas Second Edition 

MY FRIENDS' HOROSCOPES:— A book of blank Mop Farms Well bound and can be earned 
in the pocket without injury blank page faces each map 

A THOUSAND AND ONE NOTABLE NAHTITIES ’.—The horoscopes of remarkable people 
obtained from authentic sources This is the book for students m search of horoscopes 
for study or reference Second Edition 

HORARY ASTROLOGY. —How to obtain an answer to anv question This Manual explains the 
art of divination by Horary Astrology There is also a {oU glossary of astrological 
terms 

medical ASTROLOGY: —An introduction to the study of Astrology in relation to physical 
health A new and entirely onginal work 

THE DEGREES OP THE ZODIAC SYMBOLISED symbotiral interpretation of each degree 
0 the Zodiac Each degree of the Zodiac is symbolised and explained by two distinct 
Svstemc: Third Editisn . ' tr J 


MUNDANE ASTROLOGY '—A pnmer of National Astrology 

SYMBOLISM AND ASTROLOGY -A si«pte .atroduction to the inner side of Astrology. 
EVERYBODY'S ASTROLOGY ~A book for a , w . . 

there is given a complete senes ^ r A ve^ popular Manual in which 

,yp« ol p.™.. W S„„h S„°' 


To he had from “ Modem Astrology ” 

Impenal Bmldlngi, Ludgate Circuit London S C. 
313 



THREE GOOD BOOKS 


PRACTICAL ASTROLOGY. 

Ala** Legs first IxxjJc on .Utrolog} rented ao«| enlarged Nranl> wntten Ccntala* 
the borojcope of Mrs \nnie Beunt, and several otiier well known persons l-oll of 
and instructm lessons on esoteric lines 

Fnce 3 1 , port fr«« 3 /II. 


RAYS OF TRUTH. 

nr MRS LFO 

The KdigiottSiVspectof Astrology u here jnit forward in a «ne> of\erj interesting chapters 
on fate and destiny Everjbody who reads this book is charmed with the load manner in 
which some of the deepest probletns in life are treated 

Price 3'S post Ireo ant. 


ASTROLOGICAL ESSAYS. 

A senes of excellent <^}*s deahng with vanoasprobleou of Astrology from a pSulg»opbieal 
aspect. Tlie highest praise has been given to this book It thoold be 10 eiery bbran 

Pne« 9' 8 , post tree 8/11. 


EPHEMERIS. 

EwTEMERis roB ANY YEAR from ISOO, 1/- each. 


OTHER POBUCAnoirS 


Hal»-C«ow> Saaies 
The Pathwav or sue Son. 

B> J IL Vak Stone 
The Houaace of the Stars 

By Besste Leo 

tassa SioEXJCHTS os Asteoioci 

. By C G 41 Aoak 


Forrtjue Sexies I/i> pint hee 
Mass Tee Was Loso 

By \laa Leo 

Satl'B'i The Reapes 

By Ala> Leu 
JvnreK The I'besebvxs 

post free I/Si By Alah T-sf* 


SixTEvjrr Boosixjs. 


bsQtEMc os ExoTEsic *—^A SYiepositm 
A New Factor u. tnccAnos Asteoiogy 
The More of the ' Herhes Lodge i 


AsnoLOCY Explarteo 

The Astrologer aad His M ork 

The Astroloces s AHhoal for |909 


A Comolete Reference index to tie >Mioiet>eneso» vommesoixne Asiroiogy jot *ui ■ 
gfn e* Of ^alf-Gomea Text Books.—PU c* Itis so arranged as to be equally Bsefol to those 

who hare bat Ohe Volatae of the Senes as to tho* who possess Att. 


314 






TO KEEP IN TOUCH WITH CURRENT 
ASTROLOGICAL THOUGHT, SUBSCRIBE TO 


“MODERN ASTROLOGY” 

THE ASTROLOGER’S MAGAZINE. 

(Estabushsd 1890) 

Founded by ALAN LEO. 


ONE SHILLING MONTHLY. ANNUAL SUBSCRIPTION 12/8. 


Modern Astrology, founded by ALAN LEO in 1800 under the title of *’ The Astrologer's 
Magauno' (title changed 1892) has appeared ccntinucusl} month by month ever nnee— 
29 years—under his guidance and editorship The present editor is thoroughly m sympathy 
tnth the work and prepared to carry it oo on the lines laid down by the late Founder nho 
ti'as the Founder moreover not only of this magarme. buf of the whole tnoiement covered bv 
the term ' hlodem Astrology ' ^ 

(H A special line u to include matter rcquinng no spsual tecrnical astrological 
KNOWLEDGE for its Comprehension a» ttell as articles of interest exclusively to the advanced 
student, thus catering for many classes of readers Answers to Questions *’ u a Department 
of special interest both to students and to those merely interested in Astrology The active 
help of all readers is invited, and expected 

(2) This Magarme is cxdusnely astrological in its scope and does not seek to attract 
those whose interests are largely eogaged lo other fields of activity, though the help of such 
either in the form of criUcism or advice, is always wrelcomed, and their goodwill it is hen^H 
eyer to merit- • 

r^NQ—Send for a Specimen Copy poet free for Twopence aodreadll. then send foranother 
and read that You wall then probably become an Annual Subscriber ‘ 


To b« had from “ Modem Aifrolmrr *’ Otfiea. 


40. Imperil! BoUdiags. Lodgite Cireni, londna. » 

NIK 



“MODERN’ ASTROLOGY” OFFICE 

Established 1890 by AEAN LEO. 


PUase read iare/uUy and sava unnecessary correspciutcKce. 


PARTICUIARS —The offices of flfooERS Astrology are open for the ej^ress 
purpose of teaching astrology m all its branches and mainly in that branch which 
<ieal> wth Character Building and the opportuiuties for progress and success 
in life as well as the disabihties that have to be o\ erconie by personal effort, -and 
by showing how and where effort may be made stronger than destiny and .the-'' 
spiritual life unfolded through an understanding of the vehicles of consaouaness 
loiown as the mental, emoDonal and physical bodies This particular branch 
teaches all that can be known astrologically concerning personal Fate and 
Freewill 

LESSONS —To ensure a thorough training an espeoaJly interesting course of 
Correspondence Lessons have been prepared with much thooght and care bj 
Alan teo who is assisted by a competent and expenencod secretary Tliese 
leasoTLsinay be obtained m Senes or m Sections, on ^sy terms to sort ^ classes / 
See next page 

INSTITUTE —For persons requiring ora] instruction classes are held, and 
special lectures are given by qualified Astrologers 

BOOKS—To facihtate thia teaching many instructive boofe have been 
written of vrfucb there are fourteen mani^, well bound pocket sire, dealing with 
the elementary and more advanced studies published at one shifluig each There 
are alyi sevm large Standard Text Books designed to teach and help the student 
beside othere of an ethical and ph2osophic^ nature See pages 30ft to 314 

SIAG\ZINE —^There is also a Magazine issued monthly, pnee one shilling 
which IS solely devoted to the search for troth concerning astrology See over 
leaf 

CALCULATIONS —^To meet the requirements of those who are not fond of 
hgures and have not the tune or inclination to make calculations there is a 
department for erecting Horoboopes, Prt^tssed Maps Ptunary and Se^oadary 
Directions, Rectifications, etc. etc. 


Tobohadfrmn “ Mbdeta Astrology " Office, 

40, Imperial Bugginga. tudgate Circus, London, E.C. 

ZIB 




ALAN LEO’S ASTROLOGICAL 
CORRESPONDENCE COURSES. 


SECTION I contains — , s d 

Senes I —Lessons in tiie Casting of i Horoscope- - -110 

„ II —Complete Judgment Lessons — 

(a) Analysis - 
(i) Synthesis 

•> III —Lessons relating to Esotenc Astrology - - - -110 


The whole of SECTION I contains 28 Complete Lessons Any of 
the above Senes, maj be obtained at an inclusive fee of 21/-, or the 


Whole Section for ](4 4s 
■’^-^ECTION II contains — 

Series IV —L'essons in Rectification - - - - - -110 

V— , Secondary Directions - - - 1 1 0 

.. VI— , Primary Direction* - - - - -110 


The whole of SECTION II contains 21 Complete Lessons Any of 
the above Senes mav be obtained at an inclusive fee of 21/, or the 
Whole Section for £3 Ss 


SECTION III contains — 

Senes P/7—Lessons in the Art of Synthesising _ _ ^ 

„ P/77—A Complete Reading of a Nativity - - - 

„ 7X—Special Final Lessons 

Tlie whole of SECTION III contains 21 Special Lessons and the 
inclusive fee for the Whole Section is £3 3® 


1 1 0 
I 1 0 
1 1 0 


N B —^Tlie Fee for the whole course is jflO 10s if the lessons are retained 
if returned ^6 0s in Great Bntain and £7 7s abroad 


Individual attention is given by a qualified teacher and an effiaent staff 
Certificates and Diplomas are awarded to successful students 


TESTIMONIAL 

' I have much pleasure in testifying to the thoroughly practical and compre 
hensive nature of the Lessons In ray opinion they are umque both in the 
simple and lucid manner in which the mathematical problems are dealt with as 
well as in the descnptions and explanations in which the real essentials of the 
subject are given ivjthout any superfluous paddmg thus enabling the mind to form 
and retain clear and well-defined images of the different planetarj types and 
combinations The Senes dealing with Judgment and S5'nthesis has also rrov ed 
of great assistance in aiding and stimulating the intmtive faculties"—H E 
IKSIAN (R»o * Janeno) 


To he bad bora “ Modem Aitrology ” OtHce, 

40. Impetial BuUdiivi. Led^ats Cims. Z«iu!ofl, B.C. 

317 






