J 



Astrology for 
all 



Alan Leo 



Harvard College 

Library 




FROM THE BEQUEST OF 

SUSAN GREENE DEXTER 



Digitized by GoOglc 



.ASTROLOGY, 

FOR 

ALL 

TO WHICH IS ADDED A COMPLETE SYSIKM 
OF PREDICTIVE ASTROLOGY FOR ADVANCED 

STUDEN I S 

BY 

ALAN LEO 

" Be hamble if thon woutd'st attain to Wisdom, 

He humbler still wlien Wisdom thou hasl mastered." 

Vmcs of the SUmi* 



l*oiiLi8HKi> AT 9, LvNcaoFT Gakubms, West HAitParaAD, LontKiN, N.W» 

1899 

(A a rights rf^rved 



L. KOWLEK <k Co., 
7t LOHDAL ARlAUK, i.LDOATB ObMW% 



Digitized by Google 



^ ' ^ * ^ 7 ^ , I 



MMIVARD COUEG^ LtBMIIV 
DEXTER FUND 



Uigitizeo by LiOOglc 



INTRODUCTION 

M \\v attempts have been mack' to brin-,' the study of Astrology 
within the reach of all persons endowed with an active mind ; but, 
owing to the magnitade of the subject, and the great amount of time 
and labour refjuired to rpdiire :\ metaphysical scienre into terms of 
natural philosophy, the object has hitherto been only partly achieved. 
In the present work a final attempt is made by the author to reach 
the muhitmie of earnest and thinking searchers after truth; whose 
numbers are steadily increasing, and especially those uho wish to 
have some practical demonstration of the widespread l>elief that a I 
wise Ruh;r is behind all manifestation of life, j^niiding and influencing 
humanity towards a perfect ending — the Millennium — in which perfec- 
tion is the goal. 

The dav is past for writiiii^ a defence of Astro!of,'y, rtnii no , 
amount of argument will ever convince the sceptic, who is either too 
perverse or too indolent to investigate so gran<l a sdence as Astrology, 
a scienre whirh explains the law that [governs all tilings. The best 
test that can be applied to this, as to all other subjects where first 
hand knowledge is required, is that of experience. 

Reason, thouf^ht, and experience are the ba^is upon which the 
system adopted in this work is built. The ripened fruit of tuany 
years* toil and practice are offered to those who are sufficiently thirsty 
for the knowh'ci^e tliat Astrology brings to mankind, and the main 
object of the present publication is that of ^satisfying a demand made 
by the growing students of Astrology for rnore light. 

As rKoi.oGv is the oldest of all sciences. Its history can In- traced 
so far into the past that it becomes a hopeless task to actually dis- 
cover when and where it had its origin. From Babylonia and the 
Chaldeans we And a belief in Astrology spreadinj,' throughout the 
whole world. Once the religion of a great and mighty race, it taught 
its people wisely, lifting their aspirations by faith, hope and rever- 
ence through the media of the planetary spirits to the saprme One 
and Universal Spirit, the Logos of the .solar system. 

Since the days of happy Chaldea, whose wise priests by the ex- 
pansion of their consciousness could reach the shining ones, the star 
of Astrology appears to have waned, and for the muhitude to have 
entirely disappeared. Its rediscovery is due to the spiritual activity 
that is again reviving the wisdom religion taught by Pythagoras and 
his earnest follower*;, and now once airain we hope to see the star of 
Stars slowly risin;^^ toaj^aiu sliine in all the splendour of its beuelic'fcnt 
glory. 

Berosus, the Chaldean priest, to whom a statne with a gilt 
tongue was erected at Athens, translated the Uiiimmatton oj Hd, an 
early Babylonian work, and introtluced Astrology into Greece. The 
Greeks held the old traditions for a time, but it became more an art 
than a science with them, and had so far waned that little trace of ' 
the original Astrolo[;y can l)e found, and it was left totfae Romans 
to finally destroy the little life that was left in it as an exoteric study. 



Digitized by Google 



iv 



IMTKUDUCTIUN 



In spite of strong governmental opposition it Hourished in the 
early days of the Roman Kmpire, but through ilie pandering 
of its expouents to political exigencies it became corrupted, and 
sank into what was known as judicial Astrology, finally becoming 
nothing more than a form of divination by which horoscopes were 
cast for the hour. By this time the knowledge of Uranus, 
the astrologer's star, had entirely disappeared, and substitutes 
were used in horary Astrolo?:^y to supply the place of the mystic 
planet ; the old traditions were also lost, or became so corrupted and 
distorted, that Astrology could no longer be called a science, but a 
miserable form of fortune-telling divination. 

To restore the Astrology of the Chaldeans is the only hope that 
is left for all who would make Astrology a practical and beneficial 
study. With all due respect to the modern exponents of the science, 
we are bound to admit that their study has been mixed with too 
many terms and definitions belonfring to horary Astrology, a system 
from which no comparisons can be drawn when considering the 
methods of astrological practice taught by the wise men of the east. 

The discoveries of Egyptologists prove that the Egyptians had no 
claim to the invention of^ Astrology, they were taught by the Chal- 
dean priests, who beUeved that " An affinity existed between the stars 
and the souls of men ; that the ethereal essence is Divine ; that the 
souls of men are taken from this reservoir, and return tu it at ileatli ; 
and that the souls of the more eminent of mankind are converted into 
stars.** With them, " the soul was a spark taken from the stellar 
essence," a belief held also by the ;^reat Pythagoras, 
j When we come to consider that Astrology was the beginning 
V of most that we hold valuable in art, literature, religion and science, 
and know that the constellations were our first pictures, also that 
astronomy, and (oa certain extent matiiematics, sprang from Chaldean 
Astrology, we may judge of its value to buirianity, and wonder not at 
its survival amidst the fall of nations and decline of mighty races. 

The truth can never be destroyed, and when we recognise in 
I Astrology the law of the Supreme Ruler of our solar system, we need 
some courage (to say nothing of mental ability,) before we commence 
the task of learning the harmony of that law ; and yet, the same 
energy that is expended in seeking to refute it, if turned in the direc- 
tion of learning its first principles, would unbar the gate that leads to 
its understanding. For the hrst time since the glorious days of wise 
Chaldea, an attempt is made in the following pages to place before 
the world the true Chaldean system of Astrology, freed from the limi- 
tations of bigotry, prejudice and selfish motives. That truth has 
been preserved in its symbology, and so plain are its symbols that he 
who runs can read. The time has come to again reveal the hidden 
meanint^ concealed so loncf in circle, cms?, and star. \\'e have com- 
menced the task in these pages, by removing some of the debris that 
has fallen around the title during the past ages, and one desire alone 
prompts our writing, the desire to serve humanity, and <jive to those 
who possess an eager intellect and a pure iuve of truth, some of the 
crumbs that have fallen from the table of those wise occultists whom 
the author is truly grateful to know as teachers. 



Digitized by GoOgle 



^atrologt) for 

CHAPTER 1. 
First Stsps. — Astronomy. 

Bbforr enterini; upon a study of Astrology it is advisable to have 
some clear ideas concerning the Solar System^ and these may be 
obtained without going into all the elaborate details connected with 
Astronomy. A general undersitandina of its broad outlines is there- 
fore all that is necessary, and without becoming proficient in niathe- 
trntics anyone of ordinary education may .follow quite easily all we 
shall have to s;iy upon the subject. 

Astronomy gives a knowledge of the celestial bodies, their 
magnitudes^ motions, distances, periodSt ecUpst-s, size, weight, order, 
etc., and generally takes us beyond the solar system far away in 
space, amid the fixed stars, which are now, by nearly all astronomers, 
believed to be central suns of other solar systems. 

The Universe contains an infinite nunjl)er of these solar 
systems, eich moft or Ir^s great than our own. When we realise 
{his the vision must widen, our minds expand, and aar hearts be- 
come filled with wonder and reverence for that Great Supiuiuc and 
unknowable Power, that is the primary cause of all the glory that 
fills space, and supports the grand whole. But no amount of specu- 
la lion concerning other solar systems can reveal the true state of 
things in the broad expanse of the heavens. It, therefore, lieconies 
HI I tofitable ! > i;- , at our present stage, to confine our attention to 
the soiar system of which we form a part, leaving the fixed stars, with 
iheir immense distances and magnitude, out of our consideration. 

If we dr;iw a ciiclc and consider it the boundary of all the space 
vvitlun, and place in the centre a single dot, we shall ha\e focussed 
our attention upon a miniature copy of ourselves in space. If we 
could now expand our imagination and think of our Sun as being in the 
centre of an enormous ring, the boundary circle extending millions of 
mites into space, embracing the whole solar system, we might begin 
to realise what the circumference of a solar system means. It will he 
well to ponder over this wonderful system. In the days of Chaldea 



Digitized by Google 



2 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



the Sun was recognised ab ihc iiutueaud bouicc ol ihc puiiial unergy, 
from which came all life and light, being the prime moving spirit, in 
fact the centre, or as we would term it for practical purposes,' the body 
of the Logos of the solar system. From this glorious body radiates 
the light which illuminates the whote system, and there can be no 
grander conception of God than this idea of the Logos who siistaios 
the whole of His universe through His n)anifeStation. "In Him WC 
live, and move, and have our heinfj," truly. 

All narrow and higoted cuiJception.>- uf religion must f.i<K iiUo in- 
significance when we realise that the Sun is the light, and tlie hfe, of 
the whole system. 

Can we wonder at the Chaldeans' worship of the Sun when they 
knew that the Father pours forth His spirit over the whole world ; 
they worshippe d that Spirit, seeking to become fdled with it by 
such love and devotion as we now seem to be incapable of; their civi- 
lisation \va<^ at its hcii^'ht thousands of years ago, for lime is past 
our reckoning wln ri dt-.din«,' with the stars and r\ oIution. 

It is now astronf)niicaily accepted that the whole solar system 
was a vast heated nebulous mass which, cooling down, threw off huge 
portions, finally becoming planets or worlds, forming a complete 
system of worlds revolving round the Sun. 

We cannot full\' estimate what we owe to Pythagoras, who 
upheld the belief that the Sun was at rest at the centre of the uni- 
verse, and that the heavenly Imdifs all iuomiI round that centre. 
Thi> knowledt^'f he had i^'ained fi ( .ni t in- Chal(l(Mns, but it was not 
generally accepted, and llial which is known as tin- I'toleniaic syslfin 
later on became hrmly established, and so strong a huid had this idea 
upon the people about the year 1500, that it was first folly, then mad- 
ness, and finally impious heresy, to assert that the earth was not 
stationaiy. 

About the year 1507 Copernicus began to restore the Pytha- 
gorean system, completing his work altout thirty years later. But 
Europe was now under the bondage of prcjudire and ignorance, and 
the same fate awaited this pcnins as that allot did tu -ither great philo- 
sophers, and tlie levived system met with nothing but opposition, and 
later, Galileo, the champion of the Copernican doctrine, through religi - 
ous bigotry, was made to renounce bis lielief before the Inquisition. Yet 
Galileo persevered and wrote his celebrated DialogneSf which had their 



t 



Digrtized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



3 



after efTect, !nit at the time, reawakened the an^^er of the Inquisitors, 
and rU seventy years of age Galileo was brought before tliat dread 
tribunal and escaped the fata! peimity only to be imprisoued in one of 
liieir loathsome dungeons, where, to save his life, at Rome in the Con- 
vent of Minerva, on June 22nd, 1633, he signed a documentfin which he 
profeases ** with sincere heart and faith unfeigned to abjure, execrate 
and detest the error and heresy of believing and teaching that the* 
Sun is the centre of the world and immovable, and that the earth is . 
not the centre, and moves, a doctrine repugnant to Holy Scripture." 

Hut the good work had begun, and the reformation finished it, 
and in our time we are returnin{» to the truths taught thousands of 
years ago. Astrology has always l>een based upon the fact that the 
Sun is the centre of the solar system. It could not be a solar sys- 
tem otherwise. Revolving round the Sun, then, we have several 
planets. The first is yet to be discovered by astronomers, called 
Vulcan. Then Mercury, who perfcMriua a revoltttion round the Sun 
in 88 days, 23} hours, which makes the length of his year. The 
distance of this planet from the Sun is about thirty-six million miles; 
he is a small planet sliining with a pale bluish light, but he is never 
more than about 30 degri.ej^ from the Sun, and is. therefore, rarely 
visible to the naked eye. This piatiei was typically known as Hermes, 
also as the winged Messenger of the Gods, by the mythologists. The 
Chaldeans called him Nebo, and he has always been the planet of 
warning. It is interesting to note that this planet is destined to be- 
come the future physical home for the majority of our humanity, 
and he belongs to our chain of worlds. His symbol ismadeHhus : 

V'eims, next in order from the Sun, is nearly si\ty-se\'en million 
miles distant from the centre, and makes one annual revolution in 224 
days, 17 hours; the length of this pliuel sday is almost similar to our 
own. She is the bright eveiuiig star, often seen about sunset, and 
when she rises before the Sun she .is the morning star. We learn 
from those more advanced that she is inhabited, and her humanity has 
advanced to a very high stage toward perfection : for each planet is a 
physical world for the purpose of evolution, as we shall learn later. 

Venus was known as Aphrodite — when the morning star as 
I.urifer, and at r'^ evening Vesper. Her symbol is a circle surmount* 
ing the cross. 

I he Karth is the ne.\t in order of the planets and our distance is 




Digitized by Google 



4 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



about ninety-two million miles from the Sun. The earth moves once 
round the Sun in what we know in time as one year, and also rotates 
upon hot own axis once m 24 hours ; this is important to remember* 
There is also another motion which arises from the precession of 
the equinoxes, which is equal to about 50 seconds in a year. There 
is also the decrease in the obliquity of the ecliptic of about 52 seconds 
in a century. 

The earth is surrounded by a substanre of inixt-d teases called 
the atmosphere, by which lij^lit is reriected and dispersed. This 
atmosphere, from being dense at the surface, becomes more rarefied 
as distance increases. In this atmosphere, or air, we breathe, and 
in it arise the phenomena of lightning, thunder, wind and rain. 
The clouds are the vapours which rise from the earth and these 
condense, to fall in showers, as their spedfic gravit}' is then greater 
than that of the atmo^thm. The earth was known as Rhea, 
and the symlwl is a cross within a circle <B. The Moon is a 
satellite of the earth, making,' a revolution around us ui an elliptical 
orbit in 29^ days, she also appears to revolve from one point in the 
heavens to the same point again in 27 days, 7 hours, 43 minutes; she 
is 240,000 miles from the earth. The Moon is an important body in 
Astrology, and should be very carefully studied astronomically. 

The Moon may be called the mother of the earth, for all life that 
once existed there, together with its water and atmosphere, has been 
drawn off hy the earth, the Moon being the physical globe in a past chain 



of worlds connected with our evolution ; she has been best known 



as Luna or Isis. Her symbol is the half-circle or the cre'icent. 



Next to our eaith is the planet Mars, whu is about 139 million 
miles from the Sun, has a year of 687 of our days, and his day is 
about 45 minutes longer than our own. He has been known as the 
god of war and hunting, and by the names of Ares and Nimrod ; his 
mission appears to have beer. 1 to dispel terror and fear. His symbol 
is the circle under the cross Q. This planet belongs to our chain 
of worlds. 

The circles of the Asteroids come next, the principal planets, 
which are small, l>eing \ esta, Juno, Ceres, and Talhis. The swarm 
of Asteroids are said to l>e raw material for another planetary system. 

Next we come to the largest orb next to the Sun in our solar 
system, Jupiter, who is about 475 million miles from the centre, and 




ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



takes twehe yertrs in goinj,' rounci the Sun; his day consists of 
about ten hours. Jupiter is the next brightest planet to Venus, and 
is accompanied by four satelUtes. It » in conna of preparation for 
its tiumanityt being at present uninhabited. This planet has 
been known as Zeus, bis symbol is the half circle over the 
cross. 

Saturn, the next planet in order, is 877 million miles from the 
centre, and he takes nearly thirty \ ears to revolve round the Sun ; the 
lenj^tli of his (l.iv is cner twelve hours, he is surrounded by rin^js, 
and lune Mouns. Saturn was tiie son of IJranub, and was known 
Hs Chronos. His symbol is the half circle under the cross. 

Beyond Saturn is Ucanus, comnxmly called Herschel after its 
. re-discoverer. His distance from the Sun is about i ,754 million miles ; 
he revolves round the solar orb once in 84 of our years, being accom- 
panied by six satellites. He was known as Ouraaus. 

Next to Uranus comes Neptune, the most distant planet as yet 
discovered, who revolves round the Sun at a distance of about 2,747 
millions of indf s, .md his year is < <]ual to 1^5 of our years. 

Beyond Neptune there are two other planets, as yet unknown to 
physical science. 



7 



.\STRONOMICAL Ta&LK 



N«me of HlaiMi. ^ 



Mercury - 
Venus 

The Karth 
Mars 

Jupiter • 
Saturn • 
Uranus • 
Neptune • 



9 

U 



tXuance from ihc 
Sun. 


t.>uni«.ttrr. 


K'.>talioii. 




MKlll of 


Hourly 
Orbil. 


1 

Moon*. 

1 


Mila. 


MUes, 


Days. 


Hrs. Mins. 


Miles. 






J,<M><> 


HH 




5 


105.000 


0 


6f>.ii 1.500 


7.510 










0 






.<ft5l 




0 




I 




4..J.JO 






J7 




i 




88.390 


4-333 




55 


28.744 


: 4 




7 1 .«JOO 


'0,730 


10 






9 




Ji.ooo 


J0.OH7 


*} 






1 4 


2,746.271.200 




60,127 








> t 

1 



The I .■oth'> nil ,111 ilisl.Of from the Moon jS.tjixi tnilrs. 
Tlje variation of distance of the Moon front the Earth is 26.000 miles, 
whilst that of the Karth from the Sun j,sno,ooo miles. 

' 4 



Digitized by Google 



6 



ASTKOLOUY KUR ALL 
CHAPTER II. 



Thb Earth and the Zodiac 

Tub Earth revolves around the Sun, making one complete circait 

around that centre in apf l iod of 363] days, which we term one year. 
In this revohition round the Sun, the sol.u (jrli is seen from the 
earth throui,'h one of th« twelve sif^ns of the zodiat . Tiic a';tionomi- 
ral and astrological yc.it ( tdnniriu es about the 21st of Man h in each 
year, at this time the ;^uu is said to enter the sign Aries, the first sign 
ot the zodiac, and then passes through the whole twelve signs con- 
tained in the 360 dq^rees of the circle ; this journey of the earth 
around the Sun which causes that luminary to appear in these signs 
each month takes a period of a little over 365 days. This marks off 
one distinct division so far as the zodiac is concerned, and gi\ es us 
the primary considerations of the signs through wliich the Sun's ray 
passes, and hy this we judge the internal f>r individual characteristics 
of the person i>orn in that panitulai luoath ; tliis «?ives us tut-lve 
kinds of people, twelve types that stand out very clearly and dchnite, 
the definiteness being the more marked as the Sun's rays pass through 
the middle degrees of each sign, a sign consisting of exactly 30 
degrees. 

The earth also revolves once upon her own axis every ,'4 hours, 
and this causes each portion of the earth to pass through the whole 
twelve si^'ns of the /rnliHc once in each day of 24 hours, a frc^h 
sign ri^ini; upon tlit asceiulant at tlie placir ot ijirth every two 
hours, and one separate degree of the zodiac every four nunuies ; by 
this we have an entirely different individual born every four minutes 
in time. It should be remembered that time and space are described 
in terms of minutes and degrees respectively. Every four minutes 
of time equals 1 degree in space, thus every 15 degrees in space are 
equal to one hour in time, and yj degrees, or one w hole Sign of the 
zodiac, e<iuals Iwu liuurs in time, and from this it will he seen that a 
given point on the earth will he two hours in passing thioujj;ii one sign 
ot liie zodiac, hut the Sun takes one mouth to pass tlirough the sign. 
It can now be seen that the earth is one day of 24 hours passing 
through the 2odiac containing twelve signs, and the Sun takes 
one year to pass through the circle. These two separate apparent 
motions of the earth and Sun must be clearly thought out, and the 



Digitizeo by LiOOglc 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



7 



astronomical Jdn t ot t!ie two revulutiuns ol tiie earili n.MnLMnl)«.'ietl ; 
oace round the Sun, and unce upon her own axis, the toriner taking 
a year of twelve months, and the lattM* a day of 24 hours ; ** a day is 
as a year in the sififht of the Lord." 

There is still another motion through the Kodiac which we ntust 
consider, making three motions- in all — that is, the motion of the 
Moon arounti the earth, once every lunar month of 38 days. The 
Moon takes .;J, days tn pass tlirouj^'h each sijjn. makini,' the complete 
circuit in a tnooneth or lunar month, a consideraiiou that we will take 
up latet on. 

It n»ust be now < lcaily understood that there are three very im- 
portant considerations with regard to the signs of the zodiac. First, 
the position of the Sun each month, caused by the annual revolution 
of the earth round the Sun, passing through the signs each month. 

given in detail at the end of this chapter. Secondly, the Moon's 
place in the zodiac each month ; and hnally, the earth's daily revolu- 
tion upon her own axi**. 

The zodiac is <jnr ul tlie most important faciurs to l>eLOiiir ilior- 
oughly acquaiiUL-d with, this hemg the track, or belt, through whicli all 
the planets pass ; it is commonly known as the ecliptic, cutting, as it 
were, the equator at the spot that is called the first point of Aries. 
The signs of the zodiac should never be confused with the twelve con- 
stellations of the same name ; at certain periods of the world's evo- 
lution the signs and the constellations correspond, but this will be 
thoroughly explained in its proper place. The diagram, the signs of 
the zodiac, and the paragraph that follows them should now be well 
studied. 




Digitized by Google 



8 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



The twelve zodiacal signs and their symbols are : — 

A. T Aries . B. a Libra . 

8 Taurus) Northern ill Scorpio ' | Southern 

n Gemini Si^^ns / Sagittarius Signs 

^ Cancer i Spring and 1^ Capricorn I'Autumn and 

St Leo I Summer ss Aquarius I Winter 



tQc Virgo 



X Pisces 



N.B. —The Signs are not bodies, but spaces of thirty degrees 
each, and divide the Ecliptic, or apparent track of the planets round 
the earth, into twelve equal parit. ; and tiie measurement of both this 
Circle and the Equator D^ns when they cross each other as the Sun 
ascends northward ; consequently we measure the distance from that 
point (called the Vernal Equinox, or first point of Aries) on the 
Ecliptic, and call it Longitude. If a Star be a little North or Soutli 
of the H( liptic, or Sun's apparent track, we call the distance from the 
Ecliptic Lauuide. The Lon^iuuie of the Stars is measured by signs 
and degrees, but on the Equator by degrees only, which is called 
right Ascension ; and their distance from the Equator is called 
Declin:ilion. 

The measurement of this /one or belt extending 22^ degrees on 
each side of thr Eclipiii called the zodiac is by seconds, minutes, 
degrees and signs as lullows ; — 



6o Seconds (") 
6u Minutes 
30 Degrees 
60 

90 »» 
360 „ 



I Minute (') 

I DeitreeO 

I Sign 

I Sextant 

I Quadrant or Right Angle 

1 Circle or Circumference 



The Sun appears to enter the various signs of the zodiac on the 
dates given in the following table, which should be committed to 
memory. 

Sign Sun appears 

Aries, the Ham 



r 

^ Tauri's, the Hull 

n Gemini, the Twins 

^ Canckr, the Crab 

Si Leo, the Lion 

vt ViRco, the Virjfin 

^ Libra, the Halanrr 

III ScoKPio, the Scorpion • 

f Sacittarius, the Archer 

CArRicoKNi's. the Coat 
JOT AguARii'S, the Water- Ivearer 
H Pisces, the Fishes 



TO I'n I I K 

March 21 
April 20 
May 
June 
July 
Aug. 
Sept. 
Oct. 
Nov. 
Dec. 
Jan. 
Feb. 



11 

21 
22 

«3 

23 
23 
20 
21 
20 

19 



A\n Lp.avbs 

April 19 
May 
June 
July 



20 
31 
22 



i Spring 



Oct. 231 

Nov. 22: 



I Signs 
/ Summer 



Autumn 



Dec. 

Jan. 
Feb. 



21 



I Signs 



Winter 

t9 



Digitized by Gopgle 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



9 



CHAPTER 111. 
Thb Sun and tmb Zodiac 

The Sun is the centre of all life, force or energy, and represents 
the Positive and primal fount of all «xi$teiice. In the Sun are con- 
tained all the colours of the solar spectrum. Every form of existence 
maniliesting in the solar system ts bathed in the solar rays, from which 
is drawn the life that is at the centre of its existttice, all frf which 
may be summed up in the term " Positive Life." 

The Moon represent?; the Negative influence, her light being that 
which is borrowed from tlie Sun, having no light of her own, except 
that which she collects as a reliector. 

These two great principles of positive and negative are symbols 
of the spirit and soul ; the father and mother. The former is the 
constructive, enorgising, and creative principle, the latter the preserv- 
ing, moulding, and formative condition. The Sun is the root of all 
things in manifestation, without the Sun there would be no life, light, 
heat or motion in the physical world. In occultism the Sun is known 
as the veliicle or body of the i-ogos of the solar system, therefore as 
the highest physical and mental influence that we can know, while 
using our brain consciousDess as a means of cognition. 

There is bat one life, and that thi life of the Logos. We, as 
units, are bathed in that onb life. " In Him we live and move, and 
have our being." The planetary spirits and the planetary bodies have 
their own specialised forms of this onb life, and, humanity in its turn, 
holds this life in a separate form while moving in the great whole. 
The holding of this life, or consciousness, constitutes the individual, 
who individualises the speciai ray of the great All-consciousness, and 
thus knows himself as I, the Ego. It is this specialisation of the 
rays of consciousness, or solar life, that makes the individuality. 
This work of building up the individuality, as it is called, has taken 
vast cycles of time to accomplish, requiring many earth lives and phy- 
sical embodiments to produce the wonderful results that we are 
familiar with to-day. Potentially we are sons of God, a spark from 
the great flame, sent forth from the bosom of the Father to become 
Hke unto Hmi, each to acquire a definite self-consciousness and main- 
tain a separate centre from which the individual creative powers 
may become manifest. When this great truth is realised, we shall 



Digitized by Google 



TO 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



understand the meanin};; of the word sacrtficr, and turn our thoughts 
in adoration and devotion to those (in-at Ones who have f,'uided us in 
this grand scheme of evolution to the point of self-consciousness. 

The Sun may stand to us as a symbol of spirit, and the Moon as 
matter, the two acting in unison as spirit-matter, or life and form. It 
we can think of these two factors as positive and negative, we shall 
find it easier to understand all that followd with regard to planetary 
influence, as it is called. 

The one great power and central principle is the Sun, and all 
other symbols are but representatives of the modifications of this 
universal principle. Each planetary system will he, so to speak, a 
modification of the consciousness of the logos. Each ts a centre of life 
and force ioi the solar system. 

The sodiac, as explained in the last chapter, is divided into twelve 
equal parts called ngns of 'the zodiac, each containing thirty degrees 
of space. It is in reality an imaginary circle passing round the 
earth in the plane of the equator, the first point being called Aries o^. 
These twelve signs are positive and negative alternately, in their 
nature, and contain a certain specialised inlluetue of tlu ir own, each 
having a lord or ruler from which the nature of its influence is ob- 
tained. In the fidlowing diagram the nature of these signs are 
indicated. 



PoiMve SIgni. 




Aries 


T 


Taurus 




Gemini 


n 


Cancer 


e 


Leo 


a 


Virgo 




Libra 




Scorpio 


"i 


Sagittarius 


t 


Capricorn 


^' 


Aquarius 




Pisces 






We now come to a very important part of our study, in which 
we consider the Sun's apparent passage through the twelve signs of 



uiyiiizud by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



It 



the jtodiac, caused by the earth s rotation round the bun. From 
the Sun's position each month we may judge of the character 
of each individual, and we shall learn that, more or less, each 
person bora during the period in which the sun passes through 
a particular sign of the 2odiac will take on the character* 
tsttcs as delineated in the following chapter. This will in- 
dicate the character of tlie IsDivinrAL then l)om, and by the 
same rule when the Moon is found in these sif^iis at lurth the Pekson- 
ALITY will be described. Later on we sliall exphiin the planetary 
influence in each sign, and alsu extend Lhe main features of this 
chapter into greater detail, fully explaining the above diagram. 

CHAPTER IV. 

The Individual and Personal Charactbr op the StcN Aries 

T hfarch 70th to Aprit noth T 

This sign governs the head and fare, hence the consciousness 
making the character of the Aries individual will always express 
itself through the head ; this sign is the head of the fiery tripiicity, and 
belongs to the cardinal signs. We find persons bom under the rule of 
this sign always looking forward, they are leaders in ideals and 
pioneers of advanced thought. Tb^ have great mental energy but 
are inclined to he very headstrong and impulsive. They are always 
prophetic, and love to predict things that will happen. They 
can look ahead into the future and foresee things with remarkable 
clearness of vision. When treed from other influences and not sla\es 
to their personality, ihcy become truly clairvoyant, and are remark- 
ably gifted in this direction. This sign gives extreme ideality, and 
those bom under it are more ideal than practical. They are alwa)s 
lull of new schemes and plans, ever exploring and originating. They 
are fond of constant change, loving novelty, romance and specula- 
tion and nearly always live in a world of theory. They are very 
hi):,'hly strung, sometimes hyper-sensitive and are remarkable for 
their perception. They seem to live more in the perceptive region of 
their bram than the reHeclive, and thev are rarely deceived where 
perception is concerned. They are extienieiy sensiti\e persons, with 
all the senses fully alive, excepting one ; with them the consciousness 
being more readily expressed in the head, they have keen sight. 



Digitized by Google 



12 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



Mnse, taste and hearingt but from the &ct of thdlr being more alive 
in the head they do not /mI, and aze therefore less sensitive to touch 
in other parts of the body. They are very self-willed and often self* 

opinionated, and it is rxceedingly difficult to restrain them, as they 
are always inclined to act upon impulse without waiting to mature 
their plans. They are frank and outspoken by choice, hut often com- 
bative and assertive, 'i'hey are generous from impulse, and are fond 
of reason and argument. Tliey can tie both sceptical and credulous, 
but the former mood often sways them. They are decidedly laddng in 
caution, being far too venturesome and often running to great ex- 
tremes, at times even lackbg in discretion, but never in seal and 
enthusiasm. 

They are ambitious persons, who lo%'e to engage in great enter- 
prises. With them the intellect is the main feature, but they always 
fmd it ditlicuit to understand their own emotions and feelings. They 
are too often inclined to fly off at tangents and will rash into danger 
somewhat recklessly. When not living up to the highest strength of 
thdr character, they have a tendency to jealousy, they expect 
loyalty from others and may be somewhat exacting in this re* 
spect. When fully individualised, these persons make very grand 
characters, especially in all pioneer work, their enthusiasm rarely 
l)eing daunted by obstacles. W'lien their mind is made up they seek 
to overcome all opposition, more by their dominant will and masterful 
spirit than by simple perseverance. They are interested in all matters 
that are occult and metaphysical, and love to live in'a world of theory ; 
always intellectual, they make splendid companions, bemg affable, 
genial and witty. They are never at a loss for a word, and make 
excellent conversationalists; as a host or hostess they are full of 
little plans for making tliose around them happy, aud they can always 
be relied upon to provide plenty of entertainment. 

They love harmonious surroundings, and, possessmg artistic tastes, 
they generally seek to make their environ meat as beautiful as pos^ble. 
It is not easy to deceive those born during the period of this sign's 
influences, and were they to cultivate their clairvoyant talent they 
would be remarkable for their powers of psychometry, or what is 
generally termed intuition. They sense others in a remarkable way, 
going straight to the core with those in whom they are interested. 
Tneir mental sympathies are always quick to respond to the least 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



13 



good which they may find in others. They are sometimes too hopeful 
with regard to their enterprises, and fjenerally over estimate. 
They are good at all work that doe t ot require sustained effort, 
and where things are required quickly and promptly, they are the 
people who can do them best, but their mission in life is to inspire 
and lead, as they are directors and promoters, designers, prophets 
and teachers. 

The head being the most sensitive part this will be the first to 
{^ve out, as it were ; therefore, when the health fails in the Aries 
person, severe headaches result. As Aries governs the face also, the 

eyes sufTer when the system is depleted, and they are h'able to suffer 
from neuralgia. This being the liead of the cardinal signs, the 
stomach and kidneys suffer by reilex action, it is essential for the 
physical well-being of the Aries character that they have plenty of 
fresh air, also daily exercise; the best cure for all their physical 
aiknents is peace, quiet, and rest. Amidst harmonious surroundings 
they can recuperate and recover that which to them is essential — 
balance. 

They will do best in life as organisers, leaders, architects, 
designers, company promoters, phrenologists, character readers, 
agent*?, brokers, appraisers, auctioneers, surveyors, salesmen, 
detectives, guides, and couriers, travelling companions, house and 
estate agents, inspectors, foremen, managers, lecturers, novelists, 
writers of short stories, photographers, reformers, elocutionists. 

The Aries types would marry well with those born in Sagittarius 
from November 20th to December aoth, provided the planetary in- 
dications on the joint horoscopes were harmonious, but the Aries 
person would benefit most by union with those horn in Leo from 
July aoth to August 20th, as the opportunity would then be offered 
of joining head with heart. Tlje Leo's being more practical than the 
Aries, a better blend would be obtained from this union. The liery 
and airy triplicities being in sympathy, it is out of these the best 
unions will arise, the Aries person would, find those bom on earth 
or water too practical or too emotional to suit his idealistic tenden- 
cies. The Aries person. really requires to unite with those who can 
draw out his conjugality, which is more iatettt in this sign thanany 
of the others. 

We may sum up this sign of the zodiac, which governs ali persons 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



born from March 2nth to April 20th, as belon^rinp to the intellectual 
trinity. Their aim in life always appears to be to live in the mind 
and intellect , tiiis makes of them very independent characters with 
clear and decided ideas, with a spirit that is dauntless, fearless and 
aspiring. Their greatest fault when pervertiog their gifts is deception, 
and they are often clever enough to deceive successfully ; but when 
strongly individualised, their independence enables them to rise above 
mean and petty action, and their pathway is always on the road to 
clear thought, which finally leads to the perfected intuition. 

CHAPTER V. 

The Inoividijal and Personal Char.\ctir of the bioN Taurus 
2f April Mak to May 20tk H 

This sign is the first of tlu furthy triplicity and the first the 
jixed signs, and in this sign is concealed will and desire, both ot winch 
express themselves, more or less, in the character of the Taureans. 
This being the sign of solidity it makes those born in it exceedingly 
solid, practical, and substantial. They are exactly the reverse of all 
that has been said in the foregoing sign, Aries being all that is ideal- 
istic, while Taurus is all that is practical. 

The Taureans are slow, plodding, patient, enduring, persistent, 
executive and mritter-of-fact persons. They arc remarkable for their 
conservatism, and they ne\ er seem to waste their forces like the 
Aries types, who scatter them broadcast. Persons possessing the 
Strongest wills are born under this sign, but when living for themsdves 
exclusively, they become as obstinate as it is possible for them to be. 
They can be very determined, persistent and dogmatic ; they usually 
speak with a quiet, firm, inflexible and almost authoritative tone. 
Possessing a considerable amount of physical vitality, the Taureans 
bf-come very furious and violent when severely an«;fered, Init as they 
are usually slow, careful and cauliuus. it takes a \ erygreat deal to excite 
them, although when very excited they stand beside themselves with 
rage. They can do a great amount of good by their steady, building 
capacity, being capable and able to carry out all plans entrusted to 
them. 



Diglized by Google 



ASTROI-OGY FOR ALL 



15 



They have perseverance, are steady, patient and enduring. 
They can be secretive and very reserved, but make faithful friends 
10 all whom they give allegiance. They are excellenl coinpanions to 
those possessing ideas, and as co-workers they are reliable, sincere 
and trustworthy. They always seem to possess a great amount of 
stored-up energy which makes' them very tenacious, holding on 
till something comes to set them free or liberate their stored-up 
forces. 

As masseurs and healers they are unequalled. They hIw^vs 
benefit persons deficient in vitality, havin^^ the power 10 magnetically 
heal and soothe those who-are nervous and irritable. 

Schalater is an illustration of what we mean. This wonderful 
person healed thousands of his countrymen and obtained a world* 
wide reputation. He was born with his Son In Taurus, and it was 
said of him chat he had only to magnetise a handkerchief, or any- 
thing that he touched, to enable his magnetism to be felt by 
others. 

The mental and physical vitality of the Taiireans is tremendous, 
and persons possessing the finest physiijue are often born under this 
sign. They are fearless and generous, and when the V enus side of the 
sign is not ovor active they mA no store on wealth excepting to do 
good with it. 

When they concentrate their thoughts they have immense power, 
and WILL then has the ascendancy ovw desire, but when the latter is 
most in evidence they become very worldly and incline to take 
pleasure in the good thinj^s of this life, being fond of feasting and 
comfort. The Taureans make the best psychic mediums, and they 
may be contrasted with the .Aries types by the fact that they are 
more inclined to live in their feelings than in their minds. The true 
Taurean may be said to be one great, feeling indtvidual, but as the 
sign belongs to the earthy tripHcity, it is more often physical and 
objective than subjective feeling. Taurus governs the neck, and as 
this is so constituted as to serve the head which turns upon it, it may 
be said that they make better servants than masters. Being trust- 
worthy they make excellent public servants and representatives of 
governing bodies, and they are often chosen by the public as officials, 
and those who may l>e considered the people's servants. 

Taurus governs the throat, hence this may be said to be the 



Digrtized by Google 



i6 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



most sensitive part of their organism, but as this sign is the first of 
the hxed group of signs, the heart is often affected by sympathy, and, 
belonging to the earthy triplicity, they would suffer from dropsy 
and tumorous afflictions. 

The throat, however, should always have the first attentknit and 
exhaustion through speech or singingshould heavoided. They are more 
inclined to suflbr through too much physical force than too little, and 
when giving way to what is sometimes their greatest fault, la/iness, 
they nurse many disorders that produce rapid, fatal results. When 
the Venus side of their nature is in excess, they are liable to apoplexy 
and sudden death. It would seem as though they were benefited 
best by those things that would assist the Aries types, and it would 
be better for them to exchange magnetism with others and seek to 
obtain a more equal distribution of the life forces. They often pass 
out of their bodies earlier than it would be expected through a kind 
of magnetic stagnation, and if they were to energise their minds a 
little more, and live less in the feelings, they would be greatly benefited 
in health. All tendencies to become morbid should at once be dissi- 
pated, as they bring a desponding and melancholic tendency. 

These persons have the abihty to get money for others, and 
Taurus being the second mga of Ae xodiac, which governs finance, 
they are best suited for all professions in which the handling of much 
money is concerned. They would therefore make good bankers, 
stockbrokers, treasurers, cashiers and speculators. When living 
more in the personal element, they are best adapted for mechanical 
and laborious pursuits, or where they are required to work slowly, 
steadily and patiently. They are good at ail executive work, but 
when living more in the mind than the body they are excellent 
singers and sometimes capable actors. They would also succeed 
well in life as ooagnetic healers, doctors, and nurses, also in all agri- 
cultural pursuits, such as farmers, fruit-growers, as gardeners, 
builders, etc., also bill discounters, financial agents, book-binders, 
manufacturii^ chemists, compositors, dressmakers, florists, French 
polishers, house painters and decorators, japanners, collectors, insur- 
ance agents, taxidermists, etc. 

It would be well for these persons to marry those bora ui ai;y if 
the other earthy or watery signs, that is, so far as mental or physical 
marriage is concerned. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



We may say of the Taureans that they poises?? more vitality than 
any of the twelve types, and they appear to suffer from an over- 
abundance of life rather than a depletion of u. The words "to 
him that hath shall be given," seem to be applicable to these persons, 
and it is quite nataral for them to be reserved, conservative and 
secretive. It would be difficult, without a knowledge of planetary 
configurations at the time of their birth, to say whether they would 
be dominated by will or dbsirb. Either one or the other would 
tend to predominate, but in all cases they would lean more to the 
objective and concrete than the suhiective and idea!, and owing to 
this they often pass through a period ot materialistic thought 
which leaves a strong impression on their future actions. They 
appear to be born to realise the practical demonstration of the 
working of the law. 

CHAPTER VI. 

Thb Individual and Personal CHARACTBa op thb Sign Gbmini 

n May Toik to June 7X3ih n 

This is the first sigu of the any tripiicity, also the first of the 
mutabfe signs. The airy tripiicity governs the mental conditions of 
humanity, hence we find those born in this sign living more in the 
mmd. but, owing to the sign belonging to the mutable group, they 
are dualistic — ^this being the main feature of the mutable signs, and 
from this comes the tendency to express two cooditioas and an incli* 
nation at times to be r ither ea«;ily influenred on one sitie or tho other. 
Gemini ^'o\(.Tns the iuiiofs, also the hanils and arms, hence it may he 
seen that one liand may act diflferently to tbe other. Thest; persons 
are rarely content with a single occupation or pursuit, and seem to 
delight in having two things in hand at tbe same time. They can 
very quickly adapt themselves to surroundings or environment and 
they are remarkable for their versatility, but they are very sensitive 
and have the ability to reason upon and analyse their sensa< 
tions. Tliey love chani^e and diversity, and they are always the 
best persons to rely upon in an etnerf^ency, as they can instantly re- 
spond to tlie rc'iiuirements of the moment. They lovt; variety of 
thought and all mental pursuits, and these they sometimes carry into 
extremes ; they seem to take an especial delight in leaving their work 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



unfinished. They will take up one thin{*, partly finish it, and then 
on to anotlier, which they also fet:l inclined to leave uiihnisiieil ; there- 
fore their i>est work is done when co-operatmg with others, and wnen 
working in unity with those who understand their pecotiarities 
they are capable of great atUtinments in life, but the spirit of 
diversity often makes them experience two extremes during their life. 

They can be genwous and also somewhat careful and near. They, 
can present a bold front and assertive attitude, and yet be timid and 
highly nervous. They are consiervativp an<} profjressive, and alto- 
gether quite dualistic subjects, which makes them di£&cult for others 
to understa^nd. 

We have known persons born in this sign who have expressed a 
de^re to be in two places at the same moment, but on the whole 
they are rather impulsive, and this generally decides the line they 
shall take. They appear to be unable to stand any worry or 
anxiety, which quite unnerves them : yet when left alone to work out 
their own designs, in accordance with their own peculiar methods, 
they can do a great amount of useful work. They must, however, 
first realise that they consist of many compartnietits, so to speak. 
Wijeii they change their times for working and thinking, and, in 
fact, live in a life of change, they can succeed very well ; they 
must have diversity ; this may make them appear to their friends very 
fickle and indecisive, but it is their particular way of working, there- 
fore perfectly legitimate to them. Throughout the whole of their life 
they must expect dual impressions and many contradictory states of 
consciousness, and being very sensitive, nervous, and highly-strung, 
they should try to analyse the particidar mood they happen to be in, 
and it would be well for them to endeavour not to be swayed by tlie 
mental thought-splieres of others. They are somewliat ambitious, 
but it is more a mental ambition for refinement and better conditions. 

All those born in this sign possess fine organic quality, and the 
ability to become very clever. ' They are certainly quick-witted and 
mentally impulsive, and they seem to draw a great deal on what is 
really an inspirational nature. The chief characteristics of their in- 
di\ iduality are force and motive ; vvlien they seek to discover their 
motives for their actions they may be considered very progressive, 
but when they live the unbalanced personal life, they become very 
diffusive, indecisive and unreliable. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



19 



The sign Gemini governs the lungs, arms, hands, and the 

shoulders, and their disease or iU>bealth is mostly caused by excess of 
activity and worry ; this bring*; nervous disorders, which belong to 
the airy triplicity, and consumptive tendencies belont^ing to the 
mutable signs, therefore their concern should be less activity and 
excitement, and a freedom from all anxiety and worry. It sometimes 
becomes necessary for them to study the laws of hygiene with regard 
to diet, and they require plenty of sleep. 

These persons succeed best in all work where the hands are 
employed; they make excellent book-keepers, clerles and commercial 
travellers; they love variety of employment or posts where the mind 
can be engaged in two avocations at the same time. Their best outlet 
is in the literary world, and as editors, reporters and newspaper men 
they have splendid facilities. They also have the ability to come 
in touch with the public mind, they can therefore cater well for 
the public literary taste. Their professions should be accountants, 
solicitors, attendants, post office officials, clerks, decorative artlMs, 
school-masters, guides, journalists, lecturers, milliners, photogra* 
phers, postmen, railway employees, secretaries and translators. 

These persons would do well to marry those born in the airy or 
fiery triplicities. 

We may sum up the Gemini type of person born between May 
20th and June 20tb as dualistic and restless, intellectual and sensa- 
tional, nervous and irritable ; like the air, to which triplicity they 
bdmig, th^ must ever be moving from place to place or thought to 
thought. Forming as they do the last of the intellectual trinity, 
they seem to be able to express the two foregoing signs in themselves, 
and if we were to think of Aries as the father and Taurus as the 
mother, (jemini may be considered as the child of these twain, In- 
deed, it would seem as if they were ever trying to blend the ideal 
with the practical, the hie with the form. All that is contained in 
the spirit-matter of the podtive and negative union of Aries with 
Taurus is seeking an expression in the consciousness of Gemini. 
They are, as it were, placed between two poles, and are ever bmng 
called upon to decide towards which side they shall lean. The ex- 
perience of their life is obtained from duality, out of which motive 
is tp be evolvmi. 



ASTKOLOGV FOR ALL 



CHAPTER VII. 

Thb Individual and Pbrsonal Crakactbr op thb sign Cancbr 

S J»iu 3xs^ to July 2iH. o 

Tub sign Cancer b^ns the mftternsl trinity. It is the first of 
the watery tripUcity and the second of the cardinal signs. This sign 
governs the breast and stomach. It is one of the most sensitive signs 
of the 2odiac» and belonging as it does to the maternal trinity, it 
governs all home and domestic affairs in which the feelings play a 
prominent part. Persons born in thi< sif^n are characterised as being 
slow but sure. They are best described i)y the crab, whose tenacity 
is proverbial ; this creature moves forward l)y going backward, and it 
has come to be looked upon as a sign of retrogression. The main 
feature, however, of this sign is the power of retentive memory. The 
Cancer individual has the most remarkable memory of any given by 
the twelve dgns, and it is no difficulty for them to recall minute 
incidents of the past. This makes them somewhat antiquated, as 
they love to dwell on past events, or to go over in their memory 
throiif^h p.ist occurrences, and throufjh this they often become some- 
what limited and hindered, particularly where attaeliinent to family 
is prominent in the life. Their highly sensitive nature makes 
them feel very keenly everything that affects the other members 
of the family, and for them domestic affiiirs become a kind of brake 
on their own individual progress. They are rather approbative, 
love to be approved of, and always yearn for the sympathy of 
others. They are very timid, reserved, and shy, and iear ridicule 
or disapproval very much, and this makes theiu somewhat con- 
ventional, with a great dread and fear of public opinion. This 
binds tliem to clan or sect and makes them studious of Caste." 
When attached to the Catholic faith they are very sincere and earnest 
in all ritaalistic observances. They are also fond of banding together 
into sects, and when moving along the higher lines of conventionality, 
men become freemasons and members of occult and secret communi- 
ties, and women are drawn to mystical and occult meetings. When 
fully individualised these persons are remarkable for their ima^^ination, 
but when runnin;.,^ to the personal side of their life they become 
very fanciful, romantic, superstitious, and fond of the unseen. From 
sensation they work through feeling to the highest emotional, and it 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



21 



becomes very diJlicult to find harmonious persons born in this sign ; 
on the side of feeling they are truly wonderful people, but this feel* 

ing may carry them into the worst forms of sensationalism or upward 
into the plane of the emotions. Beinjij exceedinuiy sensitive, their 
feelings are very easily \voun<ie(i. They possess a psyt ^'ift in their 
feelings, being able easily to feel the impressions around tiiem. They 
are economical and very fond of saving, wbicb trait runs into almost 
all the details of tbeir Hie, as tbey are very fond of saving letters, 
books, and all kinds of cUrios. They board up curios to a remarkaUe 
extent, being fond of all that is antique and connected with age and 
the past. They can become very conservative and certainly respect 
aj^e and custom. They are persistent and exceedin^^'Iy tenariotis ; they 
are apt, however, to live more in the personal side of their nature than 
is good for their well-Ueinf,' and that of those around them, Imt they 
possess a certain amount of tact, which assists them cousiderahiy. 
When fully individualised these persons possess a great love of power, 
and once havii^ gained it they seem to have the ability to hold 
it. Thtiy are not so ambitious as they are lovers of fame and public 
recognition, and this they desire, as they seek a world-wide approval. 
They can rake up from the past things that others have long forgotten. 
When acting along personal lines only they are inactive and inclined 
to be indolent and somewhat grasping. 

As this sign governs the stomach, this organ will be a sensitive 
part of the system, and when the personal element is strong, we shall 
find these persons snfTering from weak digestion and gastric troubles. 
They require to be careful in diet, there being a tendency to soffier 
from fermentation in the stomach. Worry and anxiety with them are 
frequent causes of indigestion, which produces a defective circulation, 
and brings in its train constipation, congestion, rheumatism and 
chronic disorders. They are liable to suffer from fancied ailments, 
and to l)ecome hypochondriac. 

They are always nervous when ailing, and generally fear the 
worst results of any functional disorders, and in this respect they 
become so morbid that they actually produce the illness they imagine 
themselves suffering from. 

Their cure is a healthy imagination and freedom from all anxiety, 
especially with regard to domestic affairs. 

A Cancer person is best adapted in life to those pursuits which 



Digitized by Google 



22 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



em!irace the caterinj^ for the m;isses. and he should be engaged in 
professions in which the ^(eneral pubHc are largely concerned. They 
make splendid liistorians, being able to write up the past with a com- 
parative accuracy. As the Aries types would do well as leaders in the 
militexy world, at captains, gaiterals, etc., so will the Cancer types 
do well as naval Captains and in ail prolessions connected with the 
sea. They make good nurses, caterers and hotel keepers, barmaids, 
confectioners, actors atid actresses, companions, cooks, laundresses, 
dealers in second-hand clothing, second>hand -bookBellers, dress- 
makers, matrons, midwives, mineral water manufacturers, researchers, 
stewardesses, and succeed best in all matters of a Htictuating and 
public nature, in commodities that change hands often, and in 
matters of small profits and quick returns. 

In sommarising the character of the Cancer portion of humanity, 
we may best illustrate the character of this type by observing that 
they are seeking to become perfectly individualised, and for this 
purpose tenacity is one of their chief characteristics. They are very 
reserved and sensitive, sympathetic and tenacious, persistent and 
impatient, impressionable and emotional. It is necessary for them 
to become at times what the world calls sf^lhsh that they may pro- 
tect their individaaliiy, but when this has been attaiued they are 
self-possessed, self-reliant and strong characters, in which power 
becomes the marked feature. This sign completes the first lour signs 
in the zodiac, in which the four trtplidties, fire, earth, air and water, 
€o-mingIe, as it were; it is symbolic of the film or auric ^g that 
contains the whole. 

CHAPTER VIU. 
The Individual and Personal Character of thu Sign Lbo 
St J**fy to August 2otk St 
Lbo is the middle sign of the maternal trinity, the second of the 
fiery triplicity, and also the second of the fixed sij^ns, therefore it may 
be said to hold the central point in the zodiac, and when joined with the 
next sign it certainly contains the essence of the whole twelve signs. 
Leo governs the heart, therefore it will be from this centre that the 
character of (hose born in this sign must be judged. 

Standmg, as this sign does, in the centre, we shall sometimes find 



Digitized by Gopgle 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



the forces of the heart ronnbg upward or downward, but only 
in those who are folly individualised, or, as it is termed, 8elf*consciou», 
shall we find the consciousness centred in the heart ; generally 
speaking, the emotions are fully active in the Leo characters. They 
are forceful and highly magnetic, and possessinf,' an abundance 
of vitality, they carry with them an aura that is beneficial 
to all. They are genuinely kind, warm-hearted and loving, but 
usually like to express their love in action, their emotional nature 
being deep and of the heart. They can be impulsive and diffosive, 
but it is usually the impulse of a generous nature. They possess a 
very attrai^ve individuality and are always decided characters. 
They are usually very practical with regard to their ideals, as they 
prefer to live them rather than talk of them. Whilr the Aries nature 
usually spins wonderful ideals in thought and ever seems to be strain- 
ing after the un-itt;nnahle. the Leo types are silently and <]uietly 
seeking to make liicm realities. This cumes from their wonderful 
faith, which they inherently possess, and their motto is generally, 
** Whatever is, must be best," but this comes when the Leo nature is 
awakened and the desire has been sent out to unify the individual 
will with the Supreme Will. Being the centre of the fiery tripUctty 
they possess a very strong love nature, which makes them very ardent 
and sincere in their affections. As the second of the fixed signs they 
have more unity of will and desire, and in contrast with the Taureans, 
act more on the side of will than that of desire. The Leos love to 
rule, but it is more from the heart and motive than from the head. 
They are philanthropic and always obey the impulses of the heart 
where sympathy is concerned. This sign produces individuals who 
are more thorough than any of the other signs, and they seem to 
combine the practical with the philosophical and the ideal ^v:th the 
real. When self- controlled they are wonderful indi\ iduals, lieing 
^ able to inliuence great numbers. They have the power to send their 
thoughts to any distance, and when conserving their energies, heal 
through sympathy. They seem to radiate from their centre a beauti- 
ful warmth Mke the Sun, which is ruler of their sign. But when 
tuning their forces downward and living to the personal ndfe of life 
they are very amative, with very strong pasnons. It is sometimes 
found that the weakest and the strongest individuals come out of this 
sign. The weakest are those who are easily led through their feel- 



Digitized by Google 



44 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



in;,'s. wliicl) is often caused by associating with those who take 
advantage uf their Leo nature ; they then fall into dissipation and may 
become dissolute characters, but withini the true s|Hritual fire is ever 
burning, and phcenix-like they rise out of the dead ashes of them- 
selves to greater and nobJer things. This sign is known by astro- 
logers as the house of the Sun, and it is through this sign that the 
rays of the Sun become more powerful and more fully charged with 
potent life and enerpy. When these persons seek to become self- 
conscious they seem to make more rapid strides in this direction than 
those born under other signs, and possessing as they do such very 
sensitive natures, they are able to readily respond to spiritual 
influences; their faith then becomes marvellous, and the whole of 
their life seems to be devoted to doing good to others. 

Leo governii^ the heart, causes this part of the system to be the 
centre, most easily affected when the character is inharmonious and 
the life running to discord and disorder instead of peace and progress ; 
they then suffer thronf:;h the circulation, which sets up many troubles 
of a more or less feverish nature, and this in turn reacts upon the mind, 
bringing gloom and despondency. It is essential for the well-being 
and perfect health of all Leo persons that they have a certain time, 
if only a few minutes each day, when they can be quite alone and at 
perfect rest. This enables them to start the machinery from the 
heart at an even and harmonious rate of vibration. Their best 
medicine is love, peace, and harmony. 

All Leo persons succeed best where they have authority, or bold 
some high and responsible position, but in trades or professions they 
will do best as jewellers or goldsmiths, as writers of love stories or 
dramatic sketches. They would also make excellent musicians and 
poets. Although they possess great strength 'and vitality they are 
not fond of laborious work, and they can oply be really happy in 
positionsof trust and management. 

We may sum up the Leo person as a firm and self-controlling 
individual and one who is ever aiminj^ at hi<,'h and noliU- things. They 
are all born with a nobility of character which can only be cotrnter* 
acted by contradictory planetary mtluences. 

They are generous to a fault, faithful, sincere and earnest, and 
although somewhat ambitious and persevering it is nearly always 
turped in the direction of self-perfection. This sign gives the in- 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



tuitions of the heart, and as the centre of the maternal trinity it holds 
and binds all the others by the power of love. 

CHAPTER IX. 
Thb Individual and Personal Character op the Sign Virgo 

The sign Virgo is tbe second of the earthy triplicity, the second 
of the mutable signs, and the turning-point from the northern to the 
southern signs. This sipn is specially characterised for its self-con- 
taining qualities ; it is out of this sign that wisdom is to be born for 
the tnujorily ol individualities. Belonging to the earthy tripiiciiy, we 
might suppose that too much of the earthy element would come into 
thtax make up^ but this sign represents the virgin soil, the spirit* 
matter, as it were, which yields the most readily to the vibrations 
passing through it from the other signs. The individuals bmii in 
this sign ate constructive and able to make the most of their condi* 
tions; they are more generally found in the business world, particu- 
larly in pursuits which provide for the ^'enerai welfare of the whole 
of the community. As characters they are philosophical, and nearly 
always seem to blend the ideal with the practical in a marvellous man- 
ner, this makes them very discriminative, giving tliem large muKming 
powers and very ingenious methods of working. They are the most 
critical of all individuals, but they usually turn this criticism also 
upon themselves. They are self-analytical, and seem to be always 
taking themselves to pieces. They are careful and cautious, and 
usually act somewhat methodically, or with much apparent fore- 
tliought. They arc very industrious, persistent, and tend more 
toward the practical than the ideal. They are usually precise in de- 
tails, and can readily put right any errors and defects in their own 
cbaractM, but they are also extremely sensitive, not from a sympa- 
thetic standpoint* but more from a moital attitude. They are very 
introspective, and may be said to know themselves much better than 
those born under the other signs. They possess that keen intellect 
which comes from experience more than from education ; they have 
remarkable tact and ingenuity, but they are usually fully aware of all 
their attainments, and are int iined to be somewhat proud of them. 
When running uloug personal lines, these persons become more selfish 
than those of the other signs, since they are always alive to their own 



Digitized by GoOgle 



26 



ASTKOLOGV FOR ALL 



interests; tliej then become rather materialistic, and tend to carry 
the practical too hi into sc^ttcism and doubt, while they expect 

from others what they are not willing to give ; they then aedt to absorb 
all the good things in life for themselves, and may attain great worldly 
snccess, as they possess all the ability to enable them to attain their 
desired altitude. They may be said to have many faults when running 
to the personal side of their naiuie ; uud ihey become very domineer- 
ing, using their good intellectual abilities to the detriment of others, 
and a certain hardness takes possossiott of them, which causes them 
to identify themselves almost exdusivdy mth the external world : but 
when Uving move in their individuality, or becoming what is termed 
more setf-coosdous, they are really very splendid characters, becoming 
discriminative and wise, and often possessinf^ the power to psycho- 
metrise and sense the psychic conditions from a higher standpoint. 
They are capable of making wonderful proj^ress in spiritual develop- 
ment and usually seek tu live the most chaste lives, becoming like 
their symbol, a virgin in purity. This sign acts to the maternal 
trinity in exactly the same way as Gemini acts to the intellectual, 
seddng to express in itself the unum of Cancer and Leo. 

Those born in this sign possess great recuperative powers. 
They are rarely sick or ill, and may attribute much, if not al!, of their 
ill-health to their own habits of life ; beinp natural students of the laws 
of hygiene, they know how to live properly. They should always 
avoid drugs of every kind, as, being very sensitive physically, they 
readily absorb the poisons of drugs into their system, which speedily 
affect their circulation. They are mon sensitive to the vibrations 
around them than persons of oth«r signs ; they feel the changes in 
atmospheric conditions afanost directly they begin, and their bodies act 
like barometers, expressing to the sensitive soul within every change 
that takes place in their surroundings. Their best medicine for all 
disease is to be alone with Nature and to have around them har- 
monious conditions. They may do well to study diet and to be par- 
ticular with regard to foods and the magnetisms surruundmg them. 

The Virgo type may be summed up as retiring, ingenious, 
discriminative, active and mercurial; they always seem to have 
their wits about them, and are generally self-possessed ; they seem, 
however, to be capable of extremes of good and so-called evil, 
being much smarter than the majority of those around them; 



Digitized byj^VS^^ 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



«7 



anrl when living only for themselves they are capable of outwitting 
others for the sake of personal gain, but they generally act with a full 
consciousnessof what they are doing. This arises from their inventive 
genius, and being alive to all the advantages and disadvantages, they 
can so readily adapt themselves to the requirements of those around 
them that they make excellent entertainers and splendid social com- 
panions, and when they succeed in letting go the personal element 
they are really very beautiful characters. 

Persons born in this sij^n can readily adapt themselves to almost 
any environment, but they have their best success in life in the 
business world. All commercial affairs succeed under their int^enious 
management. They are good providers, and do remarkably well in 
all matters connected with food stuffs. They are natural chemists, 
therefore succeed in all matters connected with chemistry. They 
have also a fondness for general literature, and have success in literary 
pursuits from author to printer. They make excellent agents, and in 
fact are quite ready to follow any avocation in which activity and 
general mental ability help them to succeed in life: but their great- 
est success is to be found more in the business than the professional 
world. They like to handle solid materials, and to deal in mer- 
chandise allows their mental discrimination full scope for all its 
activities. 

CHAPTER X. 

Thb iNDIVlOUAL AND PlCRSONAt. CiMKACrtK oi- rHE SiGN LiBRA 

-!s Seftiiiil-n 21 st to Dctobfr 2oth ^ 

LiBKA, the sifT^ (^f the balance, the equalising sign of the zodiac, 
is the second of the airy triplicity» and the third of the cardinal signs. 
The individuality of this sign is expressed in justice, equilibrium, 
balance, order and dispassionate judgment* Those bom in this «gn 
are remarkable for their powers of comparison ; they seem to be able 
to weigh and balance all things mentally, as though they were in- 
spired. Extremes may be found in this sign as in all the cardinal 
signs, but sooner or later opportunities come into the life to take an 
impartial and impassionate view. It is the aim of the individuality 
working through this sign to seek eijuilibrium, and this causes them 
to love harmony so much, that they feel exceedingly sensitive until 
the whole of thnr. organism is in a state of balance. They have 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



always a kind and aniia!)le disposition, expressing the Venus side of 
their nature more than any other ; this makes them courteous, agree- 
able and very pleasant persons. They are remarkable ior their per- 
ceptive faculties, and there is a great amount of inspiration in this 
»gOt so that sooner or l^ter the Libra individuals come to realise that 
there is an unseen as well as a seen world; this makes them remark* 
ably intuitive, as they are able to draw from both sources. These 
persons possess the most perfect forms produced by any of the signs, 
through which their soul is able to express itself better than through 
any other medium. Each of these signs is best studied by knowing its 
oppositcs, and in Libra we get the balance of Aries, which makes tlie 
spiritual perceptions the keenest and the most manifest, so tiiat ihey 
seem to have the ability of getting occult knowledge through inner 
perception. Their psychic gifts are obtained from the thought>realms, 
and not from the emotional planes, and this enables them, when fully 
individualised, to temperately expound the hidden knowledge con- 
tained in the one great World-r digion. They seem to accept fate in 
a way that others are not capable of, and realise the justice of all 
things. When working along personal lines these persons live more 
to the form-side of life; they then become exceedingly approbative 
and very sensitive; they are rather impatient and inclined to be 
somewhat careless, but their p«rsonal faults and failings are such as 
may be easily forgiven, as they are usually very eveu'tempered and 
amenable to the good influences that generally surround them. 

When unbalanced, these persons would suffer from the ftam' 
plaints common to the cardinal signs. The reins and kidneys would 
be the most sensitive parts of their organism ; their best medicine would 
be music, harmony and retirement, but they usually possess the 
intuition exactly how to bring their physical conditions into a state 
of equilibrium. 

These persons would do best in life as overseers or in positions 
of refinement, where they can quietly and calmly manage aflhirs 
through their large perceptives. They make excellent librarians and 
secretaries. They would also be good stage managers, and musical 

directors, and successful in any profession where th^y could preserve 
harmony or bring it ai>out in others. They would lie proficient in all 
artistic Hrrangemeiili> and would succeed as decorators, arrangers, 
housekeepers and such like. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



29 



To sum up tbt individuality of the LibrianB we may consider 
them as inspirational and perceptivecharacters,atways leaningmoiv to 
the spiritual side of life than the purely physical. They are <;ensitive 
so fnr as the persoaality is concerned, when not fully self-conscious, 
but they are always just and generous. They seem to be ever striving 
to manifest that which must be attained by all humanity — compassion. 
These persons possess knowledge which seems to be the cream of all 
the mental characteristics of the preceding sign, and with them it 
may be said that the balance of their individuality brings them into 
real touch with the highest form of mind that we have any conoep< 
tbn of, which can only be expressed as a refined mental condition 
which is not dependent upon the brain for its physical manifostation. 

CHAPTER XI. 

Thk Individual and Psrsonal Charactbr of thb Sign Scorpio 

Scorpio is the third of the fixed signs and the second or middle 
of the watery triplicity. Its s]rmbol is known as the scorpion, whose 
sting becomes the most prominent feature in evolving through this 

sign. We may find characters born in this sign from the lowest and 
most degraded to the highest and most exalted, and in this sign 
there appears to be more scope for extremes of character t)ian in any 
otlier. The Scorpio character is somewhat decided and unmistakable, 
being rarely, if ever, vacillating or feeble. It would seem as though 
there were two types, the evil and the good, evolving within this sign. 
It is the eighth sign of the zodiac and marks the higher octave, as it 
were, after the balance has been turned. It would seem as though 
the worst products of Scorpio were the failures from the preceding 
seven signs, whereas the strongly individualised types would be those 
who had succeeded in learning the mystery of this sign. The sting of 
the scorpion must he extracted In fore real progress onward through 
the other signs can be successfully accomplished. When living the 
purely personal life, living only for the self, the Scorpio types of 
humanity are very uncompromising and exacting beings, and their 
vindictiveness and fault-finding tendencies can be carried to abnormal 
degrees. Lost and ignorance mark ihe character of the undeveloped 
Scorpio nature. 



Digitized by Gopgle 



30 



ASTROU>GY FOR ALL 



This sign governs the gensfative system, snd when the life forces 
are SCattM'ed and wasted through excesses of sensuality, these cha> 
racters become like devils, working mischief far and wide, regardless 
of the suffering which they cause to others. When evil they are 
unmistakably evil, and with the thorous^hness characteristic of the 
fixed signs they plunge into siu wiui a <:iehgiii ihai those burn 
under otho* signs are incapable of, but when they axe regenerate or 
self-conscioas, th^ may reach a great height of exaltation. The 
generative force within them may be turned Into psychical faculty, 
the **vril** with which they abound is turned into shrewdness and 
penetration, and they become the true mystics whose awakening 
vision quickly sen<?e<; the future possihilitief? that He before the soul. 
They l>econie gifted with what is called second sight, or c Liir voyance, 
and plunge into occultism with a 2cal and earnestness that is un- 
equalled. Those who are individualised in Scorpio are remarkable for 
their keen judgment; they can criticise perfectly and impartially, and 
they are able to give their judgment in a decisive and clear manner. 
They are very quick in thought, and can at once see the purpose and 
meaning of the things they are criticising. When awakened there 
are no better types of humanity than those born in this sign, for they 
then realise what they may become ; but when unawakened they 
criticise for the sake of criticism, and thus become tlie most exacting 
and undesirable persons ; when running along the lower levels they are 
always mixed up m some tragedy or disastrous aifair. Th^ can be 
very jealous, severe, hard and cruel, but when all this force is turned 
upward and the passbns have been conquered and temperance 
learned, they are a benefit to others through the great magnetic power 
they have for healing. A great deal might be said of Scorpio that 
would be extremely difficult for the majority to understand. The few 
that are awakened alone can appreciate the wonderful possibilities of 
this sign. They have remarkable powers of attachment and seem to 
contain in themselves the silence of Pisces and the tenacity of Cancer, 
Scorpio's companion watery signs. They are generally marked for 
their very dignified manner, and though always affable and courteous, 
they ate ready at 'any moment to stand upon their dignity. They can 
be very abrupt and brusque when they wish, but they are always 
nmenable to approval. They have the power of self-control to a 
very considerable extent, even to the power of controlling the whole of 



AS] KOl.OGY FOR Al.I. 



their a«x nature, turning it into the highest spiritual development ; 
they are then as it were a huge engine with steam up, ali re;uly to start 
upon a very long journey, but these persons ;ire powerless to move or 
make any progress until they have overcome their very tiresome iind 
trying personality. 

The iU-bealthof the persons born in the sign Scorpio arises out of 
the nature of the fixed and watery 8i^» which ^ves rise to iuflamma* 
tory compbiints. They snfier from peculiar and uncommon disorders, 
which usually affect them in some secret part. They are liable to 
gout and affections of the heart, hut the whole of their disorders may 
be corrected by conservinf,' their Hfe forces, as the\' possess unbounded 
vitility and the power of recuperation to a very niarUed degree. 

As magnetic healers and doctors they had their best outlets to 
(fain success. They have a peculiar knowledge of chemicals and 
succeed as dyers and chemists, or in any business connected vnth 
oils. They make good surgeons and dentists, also detectives, and 
are well fitted for employment where nerve and pluck are required. 
When living in the personal life they have success as butchers, smiths, 
and those who work in metals. They possess the dramatic ability 
common to the fixed signs. 

We might sum up those persons born in the sign Scorpio as very 
determined, reserved, tenacious and secretive. They are firm and 
somewhat proud, and capable of unmistakable traits of character 
that cause them either to be very much liked or very much disliked. 
Their somewhat suspicious nature causes them to be distrustful, but 
amidst all their apparent evil traits of character, they have that grit 
and backbone which enables them to make higher attainments than 
those born in the other signs. The wisdom of the serpent lies con- 
cealed in this sipn, and thpy may Ix^coine so discreet, wise and 
prudeni as to possess a genius that is extraordinary. It has been 
said ** the greater the animal the greater the man," and it may be that 
in the animal passions there lie the germs of the spiritual force, 
which, when sent upwards, may achieve great and mighty things. 
That which seemed latent will and desire in the sign Taurus becomes, 
in this sign, expressed energy. The Scorpio man's desires are potent 
and charged with the power to attain the object of his desires, but 
when the desires are subservient to the will, there are none mure 
powerful or determined. As stated, more could be said on this 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



sign, but that is reserved for another chapter ; in conclastoo, it may 
be said of them that they have reached the point that decides 
their future progress. 

CHAPTER XII. 

The Individual and Personal Character op the Sign 

Sagittarius 

Sagittarius is the sign of the archer, who stands ready to shoot 
from his bow the arrow which is said to never fail in hitting themarlc, 

which means that they have the power of prophecy for their 
special feature. There is an idea of freedom conveyed in the symbol 
of the archer, and of these individuals it may be siid that they always 
aim for \.hv. hii^liest. If wu t an judge of the individualised Scorpio 
cluiracler now standing prepared to shoot from the bow his self- 
generated thoughts, we can imagine that this sign will fulfil all the 
mysticism contained in the preceding sign. Sagittarius is the last of 
the Aery triplicity and the third of the mutable signs ; it therefore 
represents the union of qualities of the head and heart, now sent upward 
in d( vntion to the Heart of all things. When fully individualised, 
those born in tliis si-^n are great lovers of law and order. They are 
very intuitive, very proplietic, and possess the power of sendintj their 
thoughts on the wireless teUgraph to any distance tliat they wish. 
The seer and the prophet are born in this sign, and we find these 
individuals to be the most self-confident and self-rdiant of any ot the 
signs when awakened. They are always looking forward with a 
bright, hopeful, and happy disposition, which mak^ them full of hope 
and full of joy for the future. They know intuitively that the future 
state is far better than any that have preceded it; this lends them the 
power of inspiration, which makes them ahvay«; enterprisincf, pro- 
gressive, and prophetic. Thi y seem to possess one thought at a lime 
and that thought carries thetn on tu tiie goal they wish to reach. 
They have a decisive way of expressing themselves which can never 
lie mistaken, for behind it is the intuition that knows. . It may be said 
of those born in this sign that their failings are those that can be easily 
forgiven ; the worst evils have been left for the sign Scorpio to work 
out. When personal they may be very personal; they are then 



Digitized by Gopgle 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



3i3 



restlfles and inclined to.bex)ver*ftGtive» yecy highly strung and nervonsi 
with a tendenc]f to become petnlant and irritable. The personal 
Sagittarian is a blnnt, bnisquev and outspoken character, and he 

may become very ^acting and somewhat domineering. W hen 
perverted their nature is exceedingly rebellious, np' er willing tO 
stibmit to the least restraint, and when angered they know just where 
to hurt their victim, which arises from their ability to sense the 
weakest bpols in others ; then, with the arrow fully charged with hurt- 
ful speech, they know just how and where to wound. 

There are.very Uvf at our present stage who can express all that 
-lies concealed in this sign. This being the ninth sign of the zodiac, 
the house of gwt or teacher, we may foresee what humanity is to 
become by a knowledge of this sign. It represents, first, science, 
.then philosophy, and finally the true rellf^ion : and we find the 
Sagittarians leading to one -or other of these three attributes. 

The scientist may remain experimenting in the regions of science, 
quite unconscious of the phiiosopfiy and religion that ate ever 
close to him ; and the philosopher may go on philosophising without 
attempting to turn his energies Into devotion. As th^ third of the 
mutable signs, we may at our present stage find many indecisive 
characters born in this sign, who are quite uninteresting and often 
very indolent persons. We- may again find a great majority led on 
by teai hers whom they are content to allow to shoot their arrow-s 
for them; but the awakened Sa;,'ittarian is tlie true marksman who 
stiuots his own arrows from his own l>uw ami tiiaiks out in thought 
the ideal that he himst:lf ^^ill seek to climb to. The Sagittarians 
have nearly always dear mental pictures, .and they . are able 
to image that which they wish to see. It is the sign oi the 
future, the promise of a coming l)umanity, whose thoughts will no 
longer .be scattered, but directed . to the goal . which all mubt 
reach. 

Sagittarius being a mutable sipn, and having sympathy with 
Gemini, its opposite, the lunj^'s would be the hrst part of the ^,yste^^ 
to show signs of weakness ; but this would lie produced by the over- 
activity of the Sagittarian, who would scatter bis forces and thus 
deplete the vitality. Walking exercise will always be the best for 
those born in this sign, they would then be able to recuperate and 
draw into themsdives the vitality needed, but in this they should be 



Digitized by Google 



0 



34 ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 

careful not to over-exert themselves. Being naturally fond of sports 
and all outdoor exercises, they usually live healthy lives, but they are 
mom liable to accidents than the other signs, and more often saBsr 
in this way than from disease. 

Born in the fiery triplicity, in common with the fiery signs, they 
make good military men ; we mi<;ht think of the Aries as the common 
soldier, Leo as the captain, and Suf^ittarius as the general or com- 
mauder. The common soldier would rush headlong into the fight 
with the impulse and impetuosity characteristic of his nature; 
the Leo captain, with, his determination and decision and practical 
thoroughness, would ho able to lead and direct with perfect control ; 
white the Sagittarian commander, with his foresight and prevision,, 
could command, knowing just where to direct the energies of his 
forces. The Sagittarians make good teachers, clergymen, law- 
yers, astronomers, photographers, designers, inspectors, equestrians, 
horse dealers, sportsmen (professional and amateur), and advance- 
agents. 

To sum up the character of the Sagittarian individual, we may 
consider him as an introspective, impressioaable, active and enter* 
prising person, always frank, honest, generous and sincere ; loyal to 
whomsoever he becomes attached, and generally wise in his love ex- 
pressions. Although not so demonstrative as the Aries, or as steady 

J and fixed as the Leo, still the Sagittarian is expressive in his feelings. 

I The Sagittarians make splendid cliaracters when allowed perfect 
freedom. Beinu; lovers of lib<;rty, tlieycan recognise the law of order 
and harmony ; htit when bound or placed under any restraint, they be- 
come fretful, irritable and rebellious, and it is then difficult to restrain 
or pacify them. They will never willingly hurt, but when pushed to 
extremes are inclined to say much more than they mean. They always 
like to do one thing at a time, and are in this quite different to 
their opposite sign, which seems to desire to leave things uuhnished; 
but not so the Sacfittarian, who, being of one thought and one mind, 
likes to accomplish that which is in his mind. The persons born in 
this sign may reach to a great height of prophecy, and they may 
make great attainments in the world on spiritual lines. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 35 

CHAPTER Xm. 

The Individual and Personal Character of the Sign Capricorn 

Dumber 2ist to January 20th yf 

Capricorn is the last of the cardinal signs, and also the last oi 
the earthy triplicity and the first of what is well termed the serving 

trinity. 

This is the tenth sign of the zodiac and the completion of the 

circuit from Aries to Capricorn. In this sign is contained the perfect 
number, and all the attributes of the perfect raan are to be found con- 
cealed in this sign, which in a few words is conveyed in the expression 
" And whosoever will be chief among you let him be your servant." 
This sign represents a high mountain 00 which a goat is seen to be 
steadily climbing towards the top; but many symbols conld be used to 
pourtray the wonderful power that is concealed in this, the strongest 
of all the signs. H we were to trace the Sun in his journey from the 
first point of Aries which starts the spring, until the si|^'n Capricorn 
was reached, and with it consider the unfolding of the life forces until 
maturity was reached, we should have in Capricorn a consunimation of 
character that would be well-nigh perfect. The Capricornians, when 
individualised, are impartial, just and accurate, aiming to be precise, 
exact and constant, fulfilling all things with a persistent, persever- 
ing and industrious nature. They are assiduous, arduous and care- 
ful, zealous and diligent, ever enduring with a calm, earnest patience, 
and a grave reflective demeanour. 

They seem to have brought the economy of Cancer to a kind of 
perfection, and they know how to be frugal and thrifty without lieiug 
mean; when fiiUv individualised they are very contemplative, re- 
served, deep iind profound. They are always independent characters, 
possessing ci i^uiet self-reliance and determination, and when living 
up to thdr highest ideal are the true swvants of humanity; but 
when not awakened, and living to the personal side of thdr nature^ 
they pass through the extremes of all these virtues. They are always 
more or less self*cooadotts, and seem to know the state of conscious* 
ness they are in more readily than those born in the other signs. 
When personal thuy arc melancholu-, doubtful and sceptical, and in- 
clined to be very indiflerent and perverse ; and when working on the 



Digitized by Google 



36 



ASTROLOGY FOR ACL 



lower leveU tbcy are constantly repining and expressing a tieavy, 
morose, cold aud distant nature, so that their despondency and gloom 
carry them into an obscurity that is painftil to themselves and ail 
who are connected with tbem* When very backward in their de> 
velopment they become miserly* avaricious, deceptive and dishonour* 
able. Capricornian individuals are capable of attaining great 
heights, as they possess both ambition and endurance, and with their 
punctual attention to details, and their thrifty and acquisitive 
methods, they can buikl while others are dreaming of the work. 
They make the most of all their opportunities, and being self-reliant 
they accomplish their ends. 

It would seem as though all the ideals conceived of in the pre- 
ceding sign become beautiful crystals when manifesting in Capricorn. 
With their practical conception of things, they know bow to produce 
in the concrete the ideal that is in their minds. 

AH their ill-health appears to arise fron) despondency and melan- 
ciujlia, and tliey may gradually sink into a niorlnd condition from 
which spring numerous complaints which would appear to have their 
seatin the stuypatheticdisarrangement of their digestive system. Their 
counteracting medicine is hope and cheerful sotiety, and a change 'of 
scenery and surroundings becomes essential when they have given 
way to th^r greatest enemy, despondency. 

Many of those born in the sign Capricorn rise in life through 
their own efforts and personal merit ; they acquire wealth by a steady 
and patient indtistfy. Great wealth is often found with this sign, and 
some of the greatest aristocrats have In-'-n horn lirtween the above- 
mentioned dates. They are successful ui ali i.uui and buiidiug specula- 
tionst and are best adapted Ua general and practical work connected 
with the earth. They are successful in agriculture and' in matters 
connected with the soil. They have great ambitions and are able to 
undertake very large contracts with success ; and the pursuits tney 
are best adapted for would be builders, upholsterers, designers and 
decorators, and all professions of a scientific nature. They make 
good scientific researchers and writers ; and in any avocation where 
steady apphcation aud industry are required, they are the persons to 
succeed. Large speculations, elaborate enterprises, and huge under- 
takings, are best conducted by the Capricornians. 

We iiiay sum 'up the character of the persons bom in this sign 



Digitizeo by LiOOglc 



ASTROLOGY POR ALL 



37 



by oonstdering them as truly Satornian individuals ; aod they range 
from atl that is icy-cold, limited and barren, up to the calm, cool, 
ccmtemplative meditator on things divine. A great number of 
persons born in this sign favour a concrete or ceremonial religion. 

Tbey are always more or less ambitious, and in some way or 
other are ever seeking to display their independence. Althouph 
bome uf the strongest characters are born in tiiis sign and are thus 
able to serve the world to advantage, there are also many who ape 
humility. 

In studying Capricorn we may learn much from the nation which 
is said to be chiefly under its influence— the Indian race. In this 
country we find great learning, great wealth, great power, and ^'reat 
position ; but we have also great servility and, amongst the lower 

castes, a crinpinR humility which is distressing to those who can 
reaiii>e how low tfie mighty have fallen. In common witli the earthy 
signs, those born under Capricorn can be extremely seihsb ; but tbeir 
virtue lies in patience, contemplation and reflection. 

CHAPTER XIV. 
Thb Individual and Personal Character of the Sign Aouarius 

January iist to February 20th SS 

AguARit s is the last of the airy triplicity, also the last of the 
fixed signs and the centre of the servin;,' trinity. Nothinj,' tiiat could 
be said of this sipfn at our present sta^^'e of evolution could possibly 
convey the idea of the slate of evolution to be reached when the 
whole of humanity advances to the condition of this sign. Its symbol 
is the man commonly known as the water-bearer, and that which the 
perfpcted man will be in the concrete or the objective world will also be 
attained in the subjective world by the Aquarian. If we combine the 
fixed nature of this sign with the airy triplicity, \vc have the idea of 
fixed air, from which we may deduce the fact that the thoughts 
may become (ixed and i oncenlrated, and thus hecotne tlie real. 
Aquarian mdividuaib are Uctermined, patient, quiet, unobtrusive and 
iRithfal. They have the power of omcentrating their thoughts, and 
are generally philosophic and scientific They lead toward the uti* 
conventional, and thus become excellent reliwmers ; they have bright 
and clear intellects, and persevere patiently with all their pursuits. 



Digitized by GoOglc 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



They are persons one feels one can depend upon, and they insinre 
trust by their equable dispositions. They are nearly always kind, 
humane and retiring. They are exceedingly fond of art, music and 
literature; but seem to have more ability for scientific studies, and 
in this they are helped considerably by their intuitive and penetrat- ' 
ing nature. When fuily individualised, they have a great love for all 
humanitarian undertakings and concerns that produce harmony for 
the many ; this gives theiu marked social tendencies, and makes 
them delight in giving pleasure to others. They possess Uterary and 
artistic ability above the average, and are always more or less in* 
clined toward the occult sciences. They make splendid researchers 
on scientific lines. When awakened, they are patient in devotion, 
and careful in their thought, and develop excellent memories for 
subjective ideas. The main feature of this sign is the remarkable 
ability that it gives for the study of human nature; the Aquarian 
individuals are born character-readers, and tliey are rarely mistaken 
in their judgment. They seem to cmitain the essence of the airy 
triplicity and possess a mentality of the highest and most refined 
quality, which makes them natural clairvoyants, clear reasoners, 
and careful students. When living along the purely personal lines, 
they are somewhat chaotic, diffusive, deceptive, tricky and clever for 
their own ends, conceited, somewhat egotistical, apt to use their 
inflexible wills in the direction of selfish mental desires, and uu lined 
to be vacillating and capriciuus, often boasting of things they cannot 
perform. There are very few true Aquarians amongst us as yet. 
Their day is, however, approaching, and we may catch a glimpse of 
what we may expect, when studying the lives of Dickens, Edison, 
Ruskin, and George Peabody ; in the clairvoyance of Swedenborg ; 
and in tne science of Darwin ; all of whom were born in this sign. 
We may thus gain some idea of what the future humanity may be. 

Defective circulation is the chief cause of the troubles common 
to the Aquarians, when nor living lieaithy and progressive lives. 
They have more mental vuaiiiy, as it were, than physical, therefore 
exercise and fresh air is thmr finest medicine. Beautiful scenery and 
harmonious surroundings, and the concentration of their thought upon 
good health and perfect circulation, will do much to benefit them 
physically. 

The Aquarians succeed best in life in all pursuits where steady 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



.39 



application of the mind and the concentration of thought are necessary ; 
they make good artists, design«rs, and musicians. They have inven* 
tive genius, and are responsible for more inventions for the benefit of 
humanity than any of the other signs. They would have success in 
all employments connected with electricity» or as writers, or in con- 
nection with railways. 

The Aquarians may be sumnned upas honest, steady, discrimina- 
tive, and truly intelligent individuals. They are noted for the 
integrity and sincerity they possess; the intense and fixed love 
nature of the fixed signs combined wit^i the refined mental quality of 
the airy signs. They are faithful in their love until the end, the love 
generally living in the higher mind. They succeed in life where 
others would fail, and have clear conception?; of all they undertake. 
They are studious and thoughtful, and at the same time versatile. 
They can retain whatever knowledj^e they acquire, and are dis- 
criminative enougii to turn all liieir forces iu the best direction. 
They are acquisitive without being miserly* and are inclined to leave 
their possessions for the benefit of humanity. They seem to readily 
take to strangers, and rarely consider that others are in any way 
strange to them, and through their excellent ability to read and 
j'ldf^e human character they rarely make mistakes in their estimate 
of others. They all pK>ssess the latent ability to become " the Man " 
that their sign symbolises, and when they have united their grand 
mentality with their polar sign Leo, in which is contained all the 
feelings, love, and emotions of the heart, they are then able, like the 
water-liearer, to pour out upon the earth the living waters of life 
which nourish and susUin all around them. Light and life await 
those who break away from the personality and live in the 
individuality of this sign. 

CHAPTER XV, 

Ttts Individual amd Pbrsonal Character of thb Sign Piscbs 
K Ftibnuuy aiif to Monk Tioik 

This is the last sign of the zodiac, the sign of the hsbes. It is 
the last of the watery and mutable signs. Its symbol represents two 
fishes tied together, one swimming in one direction and the other in 
the opposite. Is some reapers this sign represents the fiiilures of 



Digrtized by Google 



40 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



humanity, and for th» reason it is somewhat difficult .to express all 
that is conveyed in the symbol of this sign. 

There can be no such thiog as a real failure; but if we were 
to think of a progression through all the s^s, and then think of the 
sipi^n Pisces as representing^, on the one hand, those who had 
succeeded in extracting the virtue from eacii, and, on the other hand, 
those who had failed to a< ( (jinpUsh, we mit^ht olnain some idea of 
what is meant by the term often apphed to tiiis sign of " self-undoing.'' 
We do get apparent failures in life indicated by this sign ; and these 
are the persras who may be said to live an entirely personal life» to 
the total exclusion of the individual, tbtax consciousness, as it were, 
futtcticMiing only on the very lowest levels of maniEested liSe, They 
are then over-restless and over-anxious, lacking life and energy, 
rtppnrently undecided how to art. and always waitinj^ for an 
opportunity. It is exceedin^^iy diihcult to interpret this sign with any 
degree of clearness, for not one in tifty born in it will ever 
admit bis own character. They nearly always pretend to be some- 
• thing different from what they really are, and as they are usually 
hampered with an over-abaodaDce of self-esteem and a(q)robativene88 
combined, it becomes very difficult for them to admit their failings. 
A considerable amount of the personal Pisces character appears to 
arise from a lack of decision, and being very receptive to all the 
conditions that are around them, they find it very difficult to become 
fully individualised, and therefore are usually a l)undle of incon- 
sistencies tied with the cord of discontent. There are more mediums 
born in this sign than in all the others put together ; in fact, they are 
so very roediumistic that they rarely know themselves from other 
people, and are ever ready to attribute their failings to the conditions 
that are around them. They are more easily obsessed than any of 
the otho' types, and are so exceedingly psychic and receptive as to 
draw many, spirits around them, who live quite peacefully in tlieir 
floatmi; aura. rovsessin»^ very strong; eniolions they become nuich 
attached to their friends, quietly accepluig iheir advice and opinion 
and endeavouring to act upon it whenever it is convenient. They 
are very changeable and imaginative, or probably, what is more 
correct, fanciful ; and love to live in a world of romance. They are 
fond of sensational novels, and greedily devour everything of an 
exciting nature. Sgme of the worst types are apt to take to 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



41 



drink under any severe anxiety and worry, mid to give way to the 
worst forms of temptation. When becoming individualised and 
more self-controiled, they are very patient, gentle and submissive 
persons, possessing a quiet' understanding ; as they awaken and 
unfdd, tb^ become -deeply interested in occult- phenomena. 

Their character^ as it grows, becomes more confiding* mor'e 
trustfol, but rarely self reliant ; although they are capable of being 
very honest, amiable, loving and kind, v ith m abundance of sym- 
pathy, especially to all dumb animals. I hey are ever apt to be 
more timid than bold, and it will usually he found that where self- 
esteem is lacking, approbativeness will take its place, and vtce verm. 
It is essential that they live pure and clean lives, as they are more . 
magnetic and tiable to absorb evil influences than any of the other 
agns. The dualistic nature of Pisces makes it very difficult to ex- 
tract the good from that which appears bad; they love roaming 
about ; are sometimes rather fastidious and too fond of detail ; 
but are, however, very hospitable, and seek to do all in their power 
to make those dependent on them comfortable and happy. As ' 
caterers, hotel proprietors, nurses and those who minister to the 
welfare of others generally, they tind their J*»fU in life. i 

The Pisces individuais seem tO'be more liable to consumption 
than the other mutable signs ; but they seem to cause this themselveSt 
by despondency and melancholia. When wonriedp their digestive 
conditions are disordered, and this produces many other troubles. 
Through being over-anxious and worrying they often weaken their 
system and suffer from functional disorders. To preserve their 
health they should be \ cry cleanly in their habits, avoiding all inipiue 
magnetisms and infectious diseases. 

The Piscurians are generally food of the sea, and they succeed 
best in lifo in all pursuits connected with the sea, or water, and as sea- 
captains or naval men they are in their right vocation. They are 
good travellers and advance agents ; they make good novelists, book- 
keepn's and accountants ; and are successful as painters, and any 
employment that brings some kind of change, or where attention to 
details is necessary, and where they may complete the work of others. 

It would be dithcult to find the word that would express the 
Pisces individual, excepting it be that they are excellent mdiums^ 
and are able to receive some of the impressions coming from the pre> 



Digitized by Gopgle 



4* 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



ceding signs. They are emotional and seeretivei, patient and medita- 
tivci kind and generous, imitative, receptive, and peaceful when 

livinpr up to the best of their nature. They seem to possess a pecu- 

har undetstandinf^ of their own, and love to investigate phenomena. i 
They are nearly all more or less drawn to spiritualism, or the in- ; 
vestigatiun of the unseen. If it be true that they come under the 

planet Neptune, which is supposed to govern Pisces to a consider- 
able extent, then it is not to be wcmdered at that the sign is difficult 
to express ; but as there are extremes in all the signs, we may expect 
in this, as in the others, some very good, and also some weak 

characters. 

In the foregoing chapters the nature of the Sun's influence while i 
vitahzing each sign of the Zodiac has been given for each of the 
twelve months of the year, and the same delineations, when modified, 
will also give a descriptioa of the personality when the Moon is being 
carried through either of the signs, as will be explained in the suc- 
ceeding chapters. 

A word of explanation with regard to the term Individuality may 
he necessary to those who have not yet distinguished between the 
individual part of man's nature, and that which we recognise as the 
personality. The Sun represents to us the pure mind, or what is 
termed in Sanscrit, Manas. It is the human p>ortion, as distinct from 
the animal. The Personality, as represented by the Moon, is what is 
known in the Eastern Philosophy as Kama-Manas, or the mind 
linked with desire, generally known as the Animal-Man. 



Digitized by GoOglc 



'ASTKOLOGY -FOK ALL 



43 



CHAPTER XVI. ■ • 

Thb Natukb of tub Twblvb Signs of tub Zopuc 




Wb may now examine t>ie signs of the zodiac as a whole, also in 
various divisions, a correct knowledge of the zodiac being essential 
before proceeding further. The twelve sipns of the zodiac play a 
most important part with regard to the deHneation of nativities, and 
unless tlie true nature of each sign is thoroughly understood, a correct 
judgment cannot be given ; therefore, it is necessary throughout these 
lessons to study the twelve signs as exhaustively as possible. 

It is impossible to understand the twelve signs as one whole, 
without perfect knowledge ; but we may know a great deal of the 
whole by studying the signs in part. Taken in their entirety, t! < 
signs of the zodiac represent : firstly, the desire-nature, composed of 
the feelin<z«, passions and emotions of the world's humanity ; secondly, 
the whole of tlie personal consciousness that is dependent upon the 
senses for its experiences, generally spoken of as common-sense. 

We shall begin to study the parts, separating' the twelve signs 
into pairs of positive and negative ; then into four groups, known as 
tripticities ; finally into three distinct divisions, known as qualities, 
which we may arrange as follows : 





ASTROLOGY 


f6r all 






Ntrtktm Signs 




Symbol: 


T 


b 


a 


Sign: 


Aries 


Taurus 


Gemini 


TripUcUy : 


Fiery 


Earthy 


Airy 


Oualitv : 


Cardinal 


Fixed 


Mutable 


Pole : 


Positive 


Negative 


Positive 


Power : 


Cardinal 


Succeedent 


Cadent 


Character : 


Ram 


Bull 


Twins 


Parts of Body : 


Head 


Throat 


Lungs 


No. 


I. 


II. 


III. 


Symbol: 


9 


a 


W 




Cancer 


Leo 


O 


Triplicity : 


Watery 


Fiery 


Earthy 


Quality : 


Cardinal 


Fixed 


Mutable 


Pole : 


Negative 


Positive 


Nepati ve 


Power : 


Cardinal 


Succeedent 


Cadent 


Character : 


Crab 


Lion 


Virgin 


Parts of Body; 


Stomach 


Heart 


Bowels 


No. 


IV. 


V. 


VI. 




Saahin Signs 




Symbol : 






t 




Libra 


Scorpio 


Sagittarius 


Triplicity : 

* * 


.\iry 


Watery 


Fiery 


Oualitv : 


Cardinal 


Fixed 


Mutable 


Pole : 


Positive 


Negaiive 


1 'ositive 


Power : 


Cardinal 


Succeedent 


Cadent 


Character : 


Balance 


Scorpion 


Archer ' 


Parts of Body : 


Reins 


Secrets 


Thighs 


No. 


. VIL 


VIII. 


IX. 


Syni!)ol : 


u 




K 




Capricorn 


Aquarius 


Pisces 


Triplicity 


Earthy 


Airy 


Watery 


Oualitv : 


Cardinal 


Fixed 


M utable 


t^oie * 


Negative 


Positive 


Negative 


Power : 


Cardinal 


Succeedent 


Cadent 


Character : 


Goat 


The Man 


The Fishes 


Parts of Body i 


Knees 


Ankles 


Feet 


No. 


X. 


XL 


Xii. 



ASTKOLOGY FOR ALL 45 

Examioia^ the agns in groups, we may become better acquainted 

with their meaning, until we are finally able to expand our know- 
ledge of each separate sign and ascertain its true value. The 
grouping of these two divisions will now assist us. 

[Groups of TriplicitUs Quality of Signs 

Fiery Signs T Si t Cardinal T ^ ^ 

Earthy „ » nj? >y Fixed » SI ni -sr 

Airy „ a ^ Mutable u rgt t )i 
Watery „ 35 m K 
We may now discover the meaning of the triplicities by separat- 
ing them i pairs, as follows: 

Posit' e ( T S\, f Fiery and ) The ideal and 

Group i Aries, Leo, Sagittarius Ardent f intuitive woild 

Negative f ni « H Watery and ) The astral and 
Group \ ScorpiOt Cancer^ Pisces Plastic ( psychic wqrld. 

The fiery signs represent energy, force and life, and govern the 
passions and higher emotions, the iui^ht st feelings in which warmth 
and activity are expressed. They liave a tendency to expand, burn 
up and refine al! the dross nut of the nature, and expend in force the 
best part of the eaiotions, the dircrtion of the eiier'^y depentlinj? upon 
the strength of the will bt-lunJ, as seen by the planetary indications. 

The watery signs represent the receptive part of the nature 
which is inactive, unless moved by desire or tmpuise from without. 
They govern the personal feelings and sensitive part of the nature, 
and in undeveloped types sensation is needed to enable those under 
their influence to realise that they are attached to their personality ; 
hut in the more evolved, the feelings are instinctive, givint; ri?e to 
intuition, and the psychic nature is more active. The watery signs 
govern the negative and more depentient sicie of the desire naturf ; 
they se(k afTection, while the tiery signs prefer to give it — liie latter 
are the pursuers, the former the receivers. 

The next pair are composed of airy and earthy signs, and their 
nature may be learned by comparison. 

Positive I n ^ ~- Airy and | The mental and 

Group ( Gemini, Libra, Aquarius Intellectual 1 artistic world. 

Negative! S Vj' Earthy and * The physical and 

Group (Virgo, Taurus, Capricorn Solid i objective world. 



Digitized by Google 



46 ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 

This group is composed of the signs that have more to do with 
the mind than the feelings, particularly the positive signs of the 
group befottgtng to the airy triplicity. We may analyse these six 
signs in the same way as the former group, the airy signs representing 
the intellectual, educational, mental, artistic or professional charac- 
teristics, and the earthy the practical, business and political side of 
life. The former live more in the intellectual world and think out 
the plans for the future; the latter carry them out m detail by i)rac- 
tical, solid, matter-of-fact methods. Our reniarks might be extended 
to great length along these lines, but we have a very simple method 
of learning the exact value of each agn apart from groups, and this 
is obtained by studying the qualities, which are Cardinal, Fixed 
and Mutable, as follows:'-; 

QmUify SigHS Ef^nsatn 

Cardinal T O ^ Intellect, Ambition and Ideality. 

Fixed If SI in ^ Will, Power and Purpose. 

Mutable n ik ^ X Emotion,' Flexibility and Restlessness. 

The first lour signs of the zodiac, T It n ft, are physical signs. 
The four middle signs, St iq; i& ni, are psychic sign^ and the last 
four signs, f irf ^ x . are spiritual signs, but until the true nature of 
each sign is fully understood they must be considered in a general 

sense only. 

Examining the signs separately, we find Aries belongs to the 
positive, cardinal and fiery group. We have thus at once a clue to 
the nature of the sign Aries. In its positive condition we see that it 
is an expressive sign ; and we gather from its fiery nature that it 
gives an inclination to act independently and to assert its force ; and, 
from its cardinal nature, we may judge that it is an acute sign, giving 
prominence to all that it indicates. In rnakinti: a distinction between 
the positive and negative signs, we may consider the former as 
more directly concerned with the life f^ide of evolution, and the nega- 
tive signs as being more closely connected with the form side. The 
energies and life-giving properti^ are represented by the positive 
signs, and the media, or form, through which the life works, by the 
nc^^ve signs. We find in the table that the sign Aries governs the 
head, and that its character is ram-like, and from this we may judge 
that the activities are more easily expressed through the head. The 



ASTROLOGy FOR ALL 



,47 



ram butts his way ihrough obstacles, and those in whon^ the Aries 
Datura is the Ittding chancteristic an knows as pioneers, ;of daunt- 
1m6 courage, and fiery entfaosiasm. On reference to the gr^np of 
triplicities we find that Aries is grouped with those signs governiof; 
the positive emotions. Passing now to the table of qualities, we find 
Aries a cardinal sign, giving ambition, progress and ideality. It 
does not re(|iiire much judgment to obtain a final idea regarding 
Arin'^. As this sif^'n governs the^bead, we may easily come to ihe 
conciusioa that Irom the Aries nature we shall expect to fimi the 
mental emotions the most prominent part of their charactei;. The 
life forces working through the head will stimulate the higher eiuo- 
tioiis» producing ideality and clear thought. It may be that in un- 
devttl<^>ed cases, as can be seen by planetary influences, this 
nature, when perverted, will be passionate, combative and deceptive ; 
but in any case this sign endows those who come under its influence 
with the higher aspirations which may be either for internal develop- 
ment or external wellare. 

We may now study the second ngn of the zodiac, Taurus, the 
first of the earthy triplicity in the order of the signs. This is a 
native sign, and we have classed it under the group of " Negative- 
mind," belonging to those signs concerned with the objective and 
lower mind. Being earthy in nature it is dependent upon physical 
objects for expression. Its triplicity and quality give us the idea of 
hxcd earth, and bull-like character. In the body it governs the neck 
and tiiroat, that part of the physical anatomy upon which the head 
rests and turns. It would not be difficult to associate either great 
willpower or obstinacy with this sign, and one or the other is sure 
to he expressed by the Taurean nature. Slow to move, they, however, 
move to purpose when aroused ; quiet and inoffensive, patient and 
enduring, always acting with deliberation and rigid movement, we 
can easily form the idea of obedience as the main characteristic of 
this sign. Duly and obedience are the high keynotes of the Taurus 
nature, but when undeveloped, then obstinacy and a surly, slothful 
indifference may be expected, yet in any case we may consider that 
Taurus is the sign of solidarity. 

Gemini, the third sign of the zodiac, is the first of the airy tripli« 
city, and it is mutable in quality. AU the mutable «gn$ are g«ierally 
termed common signs by astrologers, there being nothing definite or 



48 ASTROU>GT POR ALL 

fixed about them. They are each composed of two rharacters: the 
twins; the virgin with the ears of corn; the archer, naif man, half 
horse ; and the fishes. Some idea of this duality may be gathered 
from the study of Gemini. This is a positive sign of the airy tri- 
plicity, and we have placed it with those governing the positive mind 
or the subjective and higher mind. The Hindoos symbolise this 
sign by a beautiful woman, amoroys and fond of onmments, also a 
man clad in armour, thus indicating the double nature of the sign. 
The Icey to its nature is obtained from the knowledge that, although 
an airy sign, it belong;?; to the mutable group ol signs, all of which 
t)Kl(jnf( to rhanf»e, indecision and iniital)ility. We may connect this 
Sign with education and the higher mental conditions, but still inde- 
cisive and impermanent. If we may now use comparison to help us 
in obtabing a clear idea with rc^rd to this sign, we may think of 
the other airy signs for a moment. Libra is of the cardinal quality, 
and thus more pronounced and active in expression, and from the 
following illustration we may at once learn to distinguish between 
these sirens, Gemini and Libra. The Libra type of mind loves colour 
and expresbion, and .in artist in whom the Libra fjuality is at live 
would paint in colours, while the Gemini artist would prefer plain 
line drawing, pen' and ink sketches, or crayon work. The mind of 
the Gemini nature is plain, but dedd^ly more professional than 
business4ike ; the work, however, although refined, would always be 
mechanical. 

There are two distinct natures in the Gemini, and it would 
seem as though the mind had not completely ^evert•d itself from the 
lower senses, and we can endorse one astrolot^ical wi iter's comment 
on this sign, that the Getnini persons reason from tiieir sensations. 
To understand the nature of the sign Gemini, two clear, ideas are 
necessary : first, that it is a positive, airy sign ; sec(»d, that it is also 
a common or mutable sign, and from these two factors we know, that 
it is a sign that causes restlessness and a constant desire for diange. 
It gives quickness in movement, and when governing those who are 
developed, it gives aptitude in abstract things; but when those who 
are undeveloped come under its influence, it causes irritability, inde- 
cision, and a highly imjiiLSsionalile nature. We find many litciaiy 
persons who cater for the public taste, such as newspaper men, re- 
porters, coilectors of news iaid scrappy details, coming under this 



Digitizeo by LiOOglc 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



49 



sign. The sign Gemini seems to lack concentration, altiioiigh there 
is often motive behind all its actions; but the worst trait of 
character with which it endows its children is diffusion. They may 
be subject to many extremes and moods, but ihey never lack versa- 
tility, which makes those born under the influence of this sign the 
best perBons to call upon in an emergency. 

"We'now come to the loiirth sign of tbe zodiac, Cancer, the first 
of the watery tripKcityp and tbe second of the cardinal signs. This 
sign we have placed with those concerned with the negative emotions. 
The sign Cancer is the most receptive and sensitive sign of tbe 
zodiac. This sign may be likened to a limpid lake, and its ripples 
may be caused either by movement from within or injection from 
without. It is first negative and then acute, nearly always requiring 
action to come from without to stimulate and awaken it; latency. 
From this we may judge that it is the sign which has precedwoe in 
all personal matters. The Moon has her greatest affinity with this 
sign ; it is, thereioce, the most plastic, and all tbe ptfsoml feelings 
and emotions that spring out of sensation, fancy, and the best 
imagination arise from the condition of this ?^ign. Like the lake, 
It reflects and gives back an image of all that is reflected into it, and 
from this simile we can understand why the Cancer person has a 
most retentive nnemory. It is only when the lake is clear and tree 
from disturbance that images can be correctly reflected, and by the 
same analogy, it is only when the feelings are impersonal and nn-> 
biased that they reflect tbe true conditions of the soul. If not taken 
in too literal a sense, the three watery signs may be considered as 
representing the three aspects of the soul, animal, human and spiri- 
tual. Cancer in a f^eneral sense is the negative half of Leo, and 
reprei-ents the sensitive human soul ; but this is not to be taken as a 
hard and iast rule, for the sign is one of form, and represents the 
film or thdl only. * There is one feature about this sign that may be 
learned from the cnb, its physical representative, and that is, ten- 
acity. The Cancw persons can hold on, cmb-tike, and they will 
suffer extremely before they will let go. When undeveloped, they 
retain feelings connected with the lower emotions, and are then often 
peevish, morose and sour-tempered persons ; but when advanced, and 
receptive to the very best influences, they know how to economise 
and make excellent providers from their nourishing, succouring and 



Digrtized by Google 



ASTROM^SY yo|C. AI.I. 



sustaioiug condition, which is always the disposal of those who 
require their protectioo. Weaikness . and strength are combined in 
this sign, as we can sep by the Ulusstration that the crab may be as 
easily crushed as it is difficult to reltease ooe's-self from the nip of its 
claw. Cancer gives a iove of fome more than ambitioo. The nega- 
tive cardinal signs prefer greatness to descend upon them rather 
than to achieve it. When pure, the Cancer types of humanify are 
\ery psychic, and from their receptive condiiion they become in- 
tuitive and absorb the conditions of others, readily sensing the psychic 
atmosphere around them- Their greatest faqlt when undeveloped is 
their inactivity^ and they need a stimulus from without to move them 
to action. The first feeling in the savage is hunger, which awakens 
the dormant feelings that eventually make the growing ego hungry 
for food for the nfiind as well as food for the body ; a centre has tO be 
formed, and the first centre is that which is formed in the breast, 
where all the finest feelings reside, to be eventually expressed by the 
true Cancer nature, which is the motherhood or maternal principle. 
If sensitive and easily wounded, they are also loyal and conservative 
in isegarjd to their ties and duties. 

The fifth sign of the zodiac, Leo, is a fi^y, podtive sign, ruling the 
heart. This is the central sign of the fiery triplicity, and from its 
fixed nature we may judge that the higher emotions are the chief 
centre of activity. In all the fixed signs we may expect either indif- 
ference and obstinacy, or firmness and fixity of purpose. Power and 
austerity are the marked characteristics of the Leo nature, and the 

; will is usually more internal than external; it is a sign oi strength 
and magnanimity. The passional nature is keen and ardent, all the 
feelings coming direct from the heart. From its position as centre of 
the fiery signs, it is more potent and full of meaning than the other 
fiery signs (this applies to the central sign of each triplicity). Love 
of power and command are the chief Leo characteristics ; they live in 
a world of their own creation, and nothing seems too great for their 
ideality. Being full of faith they accoinph'sh and achieve by persis- 
tent determination; to them their wui is law. When developed, 
they carry around them the most harmonious vibrations of the twelve 

. signs, and have the power to soothe and heal. This sign prompts the 
higher emotions and gives love of honesty and the higher morality. 
When undeveloped, the characteristics are pride, arrogance and ex- 
treme passion. 



i^iijui^cd by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



51 



In desliiig ^th^Hfgo, the sixtli sign of the xodaac, we first note tiiat 
it IB A neiQBtivB eirtfayt mutAble ng6, governing the objective nund. It 
is the oestral agn of the earthjr triplidt j, end, in commoo with the 
earthy ^ignS) it governs the practical and solid side oi formative life. It 
is a sign conferring upon its subjects industry and the ability to follow 
many different pursuits, and the powers of adaptability to circum- 
stance and environment. In this sig^n are provided all the require- 
ments o£ the business nature. The mind is full of feeling of the 
objective type* and the whote nature is very psychic, pliable and 
instinctive. 

TliiB completes the general description of the first six signs of 

the zodiac. The remaining six may be briefly dealt with, a repeti- 
tion of the method for judgment being tmnecessary. 

Libra is the centre of the airy signs, and cardinal in quality. It 
denotes balance, justice and equilibrium. It is an ambitious and 
aspiring sign, reiined, harmonious, and expansive in nature, Intel- 
lectoally, it gives wonderful powers of perception and comparison, 
and when developed, those who are nnder its influence are compas* 
sionate and lovers of unity and equality. This sign represents the 
stake of consciousness that is between the higher and the lower 
emotions ; the dispassionate and equalised state of the intellect, the 
pure mind, free from the senses: it represents the point in human 
evolution in which the mind is weighed in the balance, Libra being 
the central sign of the zodiac 

Scorpio is a fixed sign, and the centre <d the negative watery 
signs. It is the sign of reserved force and power. This may be 
termed a formative sign. Moulded by feelings, the character is of 
the strongest type, the worst as well as the best characters being 
formed nnr!er the influences of tUs sign. In the undeveloped we 
find pride, jealousy, and secret! veness, and the power for evil works 
in the direction of hatred and vindictiveness. In the developed we 
find the powers of the magician concealed, Scorpio being the most 
mystical of signs. 

Sagittarius is the ninth sign of the sodiae. It is a mutable, 
fiery, positive agn. In common with the mutable signs, two natures 
are often expressed, and those under their influences are iropressioa* 
able, and very sensitive through the emotions. This sign is half 
human and half animal, the first half tending to religion and the 



V 



52 ASTROLOGY FOR A1.L 

bigiier emotions, and the latter ha-Tf to matters cotitiected witn sports 
and external pleasures. Ib the undevdoped . we find catetesAoess, 

restlessness and extremes. 

Capricorn, a cardinal, earthy and ne^'alive sign, is the tenth 
sign of the zodiac. The nnibitions nature of this sif^n is symbolised 
by the goat, who must reach the highest summit of the mountain. 

This is the most IcHrmative of the earthy signs ; it gives perseverance, 
industry, prudence, patience and thoughtfulnese. The undeveloped 
are capriciousi crafty t suspicions and exacting. 

Aquarius, the eleventh sipn of the zodiac, is a fixed, aiiy, positive 
sign, of the nature of fixed air ; it gives concentration and firm- 
ness. The symbol of this sign is the man, thus denoting' it to be 
the most humane of the twelve signs. It gives intuition, faithfulness^ 
and marked artistic tendencies. 

Pisces is the twelfth and last sign of the Zodiac It is a watery, 
mutable, negative sign. It is the most dual of the signs. The emo* 
tions are deep and silent. A marked feature of this sign is the love 
for dumb animals that its natives poasess. They are always kind and 
hospitable ; but often very mediumistic and psychic. 

In this cIiHpter \vt: have gained a deeper insight into the nature of 
the zodiac ; luit there is much more to learn regarding these signs 
that will require otlier chapters ; all that lias been said should be well 
studied, as it will save much labour and difficulty in connection with 
judgment of nativities. We shall again take up these signs in the 
chapter on decanates and||the rulers of signs. We may now pass on 
to a consideration of the Moon in the signs, wid the poative and 
negative centres. 

It is now essential to memorise the symbols of the signs of the 
zodiac and their numerical order as follows : 

Name 
Symbol , 

Numerical 
Order 

Name . Libra Scorpio Sagit&rllls Capricorn Aquarius Pisces 
Symbol ^ in i ' yf «« x 

^C*d«*^ VII. VIII. . IX. . . X... XL XII 



Aries 


Taurus 


Gemini 


Cancer 


Leo 


Virgo 


T 


'» 


n 


0 


a 




I. 


11. 


III. 


IV. 


V. 


VI. 



e 



Digitized by GoQgle 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



53 



CHAPTER XVIL 

The Moon and the Zodiac 

The Sun rules by day and the Moon rules by night. The Sun 
rei>re8ents the positive life«giving principle, and the Moon the negative 
or receptive. A great portion of humanity at the present time is 
preparing to emerge from the illusive fascination of the ^T> (in's 

influence, but it will be many centuries ere the majority is frte from 
its limitations. We have said in previous chapters that the cieiinea- 
tions for the Sun's apparent passat^e ^hrou^h the signs each nnntli 
would also indicate the character of the personality when the Mooo 
was posited in that sign at birth, and with certain modifications this 
IS true. The Sun represents the heart, the higher emotions, the 
purer part of our nature, and the character which is at the root of 
our being ; whilst the Moon represents the brain; the senses, and the 
part of our nature which cognises and gains experiences from the 
physical and objective world. The distinction between the two 
luminaries is very marked and defuiitc, although they represent two 
halves of one whole. Objectively we see the light from the Moon 
when she is above the earth and the Sun below, and subjectively we 
know that when the personality is strong and the individuality weak, 
the lunar nature is in evidence. Strong personalities are full of 
desire and self-hood, whilst strong individuals are more expansive, 
broad, liberal, and magnanimous, "^he former cling to form, 
perception, and objecis, the senses are more scnsiti\e. keen, and 
active : whilst the latter are not so bound by the senses, in inj( more in 
the mind and the hit^her emotions, the subjective world being of 
more importance than ihe objective; refiectioD, thoughtfulness, and 
will-power are stronger than desire and impulse. 

Until the student of human nature has learned to distinguish 
between the character asleiqyressed by the heart and the brain, he will 
find it difficult to discover how much individual character there is 
a:r rt from the personal, and how much is personal and how much 
iiidivuUial ; pirtirularly at the present time, when, comparatively 
speaking;, tht re are so few who know themselves. As a general rule, 
the Moon piaced higher in the heavens than the Sun is an indication 
that the personality is the stronger. When both Sun and Moon are 
above the earth, both characters may be strong. In nocturnal 



Digitized by Google 



54 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



horoscopes, that is, when the birth takes place after sunset, the 
Moon is more often above the earth ; but it will also happen that 
both luminaries are below, and both may therefore be weak and the 
life correspondingly unfortunate. All this, howeveti will be explained 
in the judgment of horoscopes. 

Wf may now proceed to give a few hints as to the nature of the 
personality when the Moon is passing through the twelve signs. 

THB M€X>M IN ARIES 

This makes the person an ^enthusiast in some direction ; impul- 
sive, aggressive and miHtant in manner, sometimes irritable and liable 
to fits of anger. Insists on having his own way ; disobedient to 
superiors ; independent and self-reliant. Somewhat volatile or 
chanjTPable, and dependent upon impulse; disliking conventionality 
or (iiscipliae. lie ntay achieve popularity or notoriety. May be 
placed in some positbn in which he exercises authority over a num- 
ber of people or is head over many. He will be at the head of some 
undertaking, or Mill be in some way prominent in his sphere of life. 
He will go more by intellect than intuition. The mother will play a 
prominent part in the life in some way, often not a sympathetic or for- 
tunate one ; and there is likelihood of differences !>etween the native 
and his parents, or the latter may die eariy or be separated from him. 
This position favours nnlitary pursuits, independent or original 
ventures. He will strike out a path for himself or at least attempt to 
do so; and much that he does, both wrong and right, will be tmex> 
pected by his friends and contrary to their advice. Mysticism or 
occultism of some kind may ^ow in his life ; or the tendency may 
take the form of a necessity for secrecy in some of his affairs ; his 
occupation may sometimes involve secrecv or mystery or bo of low 
class, though this is very contrary to his nature. He may meet with 
unpopularity or threatened scandal of some kind. 

THB MOON IN TAURUS 

The personality is quiet and unimpulsive ; persistent, determined, 
and not to be thwarted in his aims. Somewhat hopeful, ambitious, 
and desirous nf excelling. Follows established customs, conserva- 
tive by nature, resists chanj^e and outside influences, i iiis lunar 
position f(ams friends lor the native, and lavours the acquisition of 
mooey, houses, or land. It fevours occupations of the nature of the 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



55 



earthy element; dealing' in land, hon^p?^, heavy floods, old established 
businesses; or the native may siicceeU to ilie father's business and 
gain or inherit from a parent. 

Sometimes the occupation may be one considered low class, 
plebeian, or unpopular, involving secrecy or mystery; but it will 
generally be remunerative, and the native may prosper financially. 
It is fiftvourabie for occupations of water and ]i(]uids, and for living 
near rivers or on the coast; and slightly pood for money derived 
from c oinpanies, wholesale trading, associations, societies, (. tc. The 
native is somewhat sensuous and material, but sociable and of {,-ood 
disposition. It is slightly favourable for singing, music, painting ; for 
gaining friends and joining societies. 

1111. MOON IN GKMINl 
Tliis lunar position strengthens the intellect, and makes the 
native a lover of books, of study, of scientific and literary pursuits; 
and inclines him to some occupation of a mercurial nature. He is 
active in mind and body ; likely to change bis residence frequently, 
or has more than one house ; often goes on short journeys ; travels, 
or is out and about a good deal ; is often out doors, walking or riding, 
etc., or calling on other people. He is skilful and dexterous with his 
hands and arms. Is able to live by his wits, and may gain money as 
messenger, traveller, salesman, speaker, clerk, writer, designer, 
journalist, engraver, artist, sculptor, or by study and literature. May 
have more than one occupation, or may change his occupation. The 
mind is prone to change, and there may be irresolution, or lack of 
perseverance; in a bad horoscope this may show as underhanded- 
ness, subtlety, lack of straightforwardness and honesty, especially in 
matters of the second, third and fourth houses. 

THB MOON IN CANCBR 

This indicates a personality fond of ease and comfort, homely 
in his habits, and attached to his fsmily. It attaches him to his 
mother, whom he may resemble. He is firiendly and sociable in 
manner, is imaginative, emotional and changeable. I le is influenced 

greatly by his surroundini^f, is sensitive to outside influences, and to 
some extent falls in readily with the ways and methods of others, 
adopts their suj^'gcstions, sympathises with the joys and sorrows 
of others, and lakes his colouring from outside to some extent. 



Digitized by Google 



56 ASTROLOGY FOK ALL 

He is most fortunate when acting under the direction of, or 
in accordance with, the advice of someone else. But this may be 
greatly modified if positive signs or planets are prominent in the 
nativity ; under the influence of Mars, or martial signs, espedally, 
he may show much positiveoese and independence. There is some 
ability for acting, mimicking, expressing the thoughts and emotions 
of others ; also for musir, paintinj: or poetry. This position relates 
somtwhat to mediumship, psychisiii, and tlie astral plane generally. 
The natn e is drawn to the watery element ; lives neai water or travels 
by water ; deals in liquids ; and is fortunate with house or land 
propet ty and shipping. 

THB HOON IN LBO 

This lunar positiott tends to uplift the native, to put him in 
positions of responsibility or prominence, and to give him authority 
over others as bead, or manager, or director. It gives ibe &vour of 

those in higher ranks of life than the native. Heis ambitious, desirous 
of occupying a prominent place, and does not hesitate to come before 
the public. He is hononralilc, p( !iprr)i!s in money matters, high 
minded, candid, and warm hearted. He is susceptible in affairs of 
the heart, a favourite with the opposite sex, and a sincere lover, ft 
favours intuition and genius ; it gives love of music, poetry, or painting. 
It gives some love of luxuries, pleasures, perfumes, jewels, line clothes, 
etc. 

THB MOON IN VIRGO 

The native has good intellectual powers and is capable of follow- 
ing some intellectual pursuit ; lie has a good memory and learns 

easily. Ii cover? a ^resA variety of occupations: servant, manager, 
apent. or subordinate in any capacity; any occupation connected with 
grain or food stutTs, such as farmer, miller, grocer, maltster, con- 
fectioner; and any connected with drugs or medicine, chemist, 
druggist, herbalist, analyst, doctor, dispenser, etc. He makes a 
trustworthy and fortunate servant and himself is fortunate through 
servants or those under him. This position, taken alone, tends to 
make him quiet and easy going, somewhat irresolute, not ambitious 
or pretentious. He has many friends, especially female friends. 
May belong to some company, firm, society, or association. There 
is likelihood of many ^hnrt jour.neysand work as secretary, messenger, 
clerk, traveller, schoolmaster, etc. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 57 
TMB MOON IN LIBRA 

This position favours general popularity. It ^i\es fondness for . 
music, poetry, and the fine arts generally, and nuicli ability in this 
direction. The native is affectionate, f^ood-iiatured, kind in manner 
aad easily f,'ains friends. The native is fond of company, society and 
friends. Much of his fate and many events of tiis life will come about 
through his association with other people ; ho will be greatly swayed 
and inflneiioed by other people ; generally by some one person. It 
tends strongly to partnership, not merely in business, but in almost 
all affairs of life. He works with another person in nearly all under* 
takings; and» without necessarily being irresolute, depends largely 
upon someone else, and can get along best in almost all things when 
associated with someone. The same may be said of the occupation 
and position in life. 

THE MOON IN SCORPIO 

This lunar position makes the native very firm and determined, 
self-reliant* and assured, and well able to stand alone and fight his 

own battles. He is abrupt and plain spoken, positive, energetic and 
capable of hard work, thoiijjh also fond of the good things of the 
world and of easy living. He is conservative and averse to change, 
especially if forced upon him from without ; he is difficult to influence 
and may be very obstinate : and yet for his own purposes he will 
sometimes appear very revolutionary and changeable, and will advo- 
cate or carry out great and reVblutionary changes. He i& sometimes 
irritable, angry, and revengeful; this being a very bad position if 
backed up by other evil influences. It does not favour morality, and 
may give habits of drinking ; it often causes a coarseness in speech or 
manner, and threatens some scandal to the native; it rather tends 
against fineness of feeling and refined instincts, it inclines to 
mediumship, psychism and occultism. A death occurs in the native's 
family, or in the ranks of their close associates, shortly before or 
soon after his birth or early in his life ; and he has much to do with 
death, acts as executor, is firequently brought into relation with the 
dead, or may follow some occupation connected with the dead. It 
attracts to the opposite sex in any horoscope; favours marriage in a 
male iioroscope, Imt threatens disharmony in the married state or in 
the relations with the opposite sex. 



Digitized by Google 



58 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



THE MOON IN SAGITTARIUS 

This porition gives a quick, restless and unsettled manner, other 
to the body or mind ; the native is active in body and food of physical 

exercise, sports, athletics, is a quick walker and worker. He is 
inclined to travel, and changes his abode fre(]tiently. His c!isf)osition 
is sincere and honourable, kindly and good-humoured. The native is 
religious and sincere in his belief even if it be unorthodox. There is 
some inclination for mysticism, psychism, and the occult ; be is a 
natural teacher or preacher, and may have something of the prophet in 
his nature. The intuition is increased and made more active, and 
there may be some psychic gift, such as dairvoyince. There is a 
tendency to dreaming and somnambulism. There may be talent or 
even jrenius for rt-liginn, philosophy, music, poetry, etc. In the 
lower type of horoscope tlic animal side of the si^n will show rather 
than the religious, and then occupations and amusements connected 
with shipping and horses will be prominent in the life. He is a faith- 
ful worker or servant, and himself benefits by servants or those under 
him. He may have two occupations or may change his occupation. 

THE MOON IN CAPRICORN 

This tends to bring the native before tiie public for good or evil, 
popularity or nuloriely, ^hough it usuaJly has some drawback attach- 
ing to it ; he may achieve relative fame or notoriety, or may move in 
some sphere that brings him before many people. If well aspected 
at birth; he may be vety popular as the head of some undertaking, 
may attract attention as a pronunent or responsible person in some 
way, for soniething he has done or with which he is associated ; but 
if bndly nspected in the nativity, the publicity signified by this 
position ujay be of an unpleasant nature. It gives some degree 
of rulership, generalship, and administrative ability, which is 
intensified if the sun is in a cardinal sign, or if a cardinal s%n is 
rising. There is always some drawback or difficulty attaching to the 
occupation, to the fame or to the position the native gains; he 
may raise up enemies, open or secret, or his reputation may suffer, 
with or without his having deserved it. The native is somewhat fond 
of show, is rather selfish, careful with money matters, calculating and 
canliuiis, and knows liuw lu int1iicnr«' others, l)Ut is often cold by 
nature and thinks loo little of the leehngs of others. If the horoscope 



Digrtized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



59 



is a good one, the more undesirable characteristics of this position 
may be obviated. If other influences assist, he may attain verjr 
considerable fame or prominence. 

THB HOON IN AQUARIUS 

This lunar position gives some inclination for astrology, fortune 
telling, dreaming, visions, mediumsbip, mysticism, and the occult 
generally. Subjects that are unusual, original, eccentric, and novel, 
attract the native. He may become a freemason, or join some 
secret or mystical society, association or brotherhood. He is broad 
and humanitarian in his sympathies ; fraternises readily with those 
who are congenial to him, is easily drawn into the company of such, 
and will be Ibund in some dub, sodety, association, or group of those 
similarly minded. He has an inclination for political, educational, and 
scientific work, and may join any movement or public body relating 
to these ; has some inclination for local politics and municipal afTairs. 
He is sociable and sympathetic in manner, and desirous of the good 
opinion of others, and yet may be very independent, unorthodox, and 
uncuaveatioaal at times. It mcreases the imagination, intuition, and 

mental sensitiveoess generally. It is slightly un&vouraUe fax the 
constitution, espedally the nervous system. If the Moon is afflicted 
the eyesight may suffer. 

THB MOON IN PISCES 

The native is quiet, retiring, and easy-going, is restless and fond of 
variety, easily changes his mind, is irresolute and not always to be de- 
pended upon, is rather easily discouraged, and meets with obstades, mis* 
fortune and opposition in life. It gives a liking for reading of a romantic 

or emotional kind, for poetry and mustc that iqq)eals to the emotions 
and feelings. As speaker, writer, or composer, the native is fluent, 
copious, imaginative, and diffuse. He inclines to he reliijious, hut is 
iikeiy to be more emotional than intellectual; to feel rather tlian to 
reason out. He is sometimes wanting in buoyancy and hope, is too 
serious or too easily depressed, and may lack matter-of-fact common 
sense and humour. There may be a tendency to intemperance or dis- 
sipation, laudanum drinking, etc. Mediumship, clear dreaming, and 
various psychic powers may manifest themselves. It softens the 
frame and increases tiie fleshy and glandular structures and is not 
favourable for robust health. There is danger from secret enemies ; 



Digrtized by Google 



60 ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 

the native may himself Qot be quite 9traigbtfbrwtrd ; and tbeie is 
liability to detention in hospital, poor house, prison, etc*; bat the 
worst effects will not follow unless there are acoomfMinying bad as- 
pects, or other indications in the nativity. 

W e may now definitely establish in our mind the idea that the 
Sun represents the positive centre, from which the true life is flowing, 
and that the Moon is representative of the receiver, or the negative 
and magnetic point. 

CHAPTER XVIIL 

The Solar- Lunar Combinatioms . 

It often happens that the birth time is not accurately known any 
further than the day of the rnontli and year, this rendering; it impos- 
sible to cast the horoscope. When this is the case, the Sun in the 
signs as delineated in Ciiapter IV. will j,'ivc us some indication as to 
the individual character, but it is often found that these individual 
characteristics have to be considerably modified. It then becomes 
necessary to know what sign the Moon occupied on the day of birth, 
and to enable those who do not know the time on the day they were 
born, the Moon's position is given in the chapters that follow from 
the year 1850 to 1900. 

It is quite true that the solar position considerably intluences the 
permanent or moral character of the native, also that the Moon exer- 
cises a considerable amount of influence, according to the sigo she is 
in, over the personal character or that part of the consciousness that 
is expressed through the brain, and When the foregoing chapters have 
been carefully studied so as to know the exact value of these solar 
and lunar positioos» it becomes a simple matter of blending these two 
influences together to discover the characteristics of those born on 
certain days. The foUowinj^ blendinj^ of the Sun and Moon in the 
variou> si-ns, which may in- called solar and lunar combinations, will 
apply to all persons burn on those days irrespective of the other 
planetary positions, but modified to a considerable extent by the rising 
sign, which will be dealt with separately in the succeeding chapters. 

The principle upon which these solar-lunar combinations are based 
is to make the Sun the positive, primary, and life*giving element, and 
the Moon the negative or jiuiarv and formative element, and when 
the nature of the sign is thoroughly understood, it can easily be seen 



Digitized by Google 



AStROLOGY FOR ALL 



6r 



how for the lile side, as represented by the Sun, influences the 
character, or 'how far the form «de, as represented 'by the Moon, 
aflects the pfcrionality. And to save much confusicm, the student 
should Impress the fact on his mind that the Sun represents the life 
side, governing the individual, and the Moon the form side, govern- 
inpf the whole of the personal and physical characteristics. These 
two symbols blended together represent spirit-matter, the one being 
dependent on the other for expression. The following biend of the 
life and form principles should now be carefully studied. 

THB SUN IN ARIES 

I. • 

The Sun's apparent passage through the celestial sign Aries has 
been thoroughly described in Chapter IV., therefore it is only neces- 
sary to now observe that the primary characteristics of the Sun in 
this sign are force and energy, and the fundamental basis of the 
character will consist of an ambitious, aspirin^,', enthusiastic nature; 
and during the month that the Sun remains in this sign, the twelve 
lunar positions will either considerably modify this primary influence 
or accentuate it, and increase its manifestation. But without the 
Moon to focus the rays of the Sun and collect the influences that are 
constantly being distributed, the individual character would always 
be flying off at a tangent, having no medium through which it could be 
focussed. fiut in studying each one of these combinations it will be 
well to remember that the solar force is the primary influence, the 
lunar centre always being a negative, secondary, and expressive 
aspect. 

THB SUN AND MOON IN ARIXS 
— (Co»jUMCit»H) 

This is equivalent to the Sun and the Moon being in conjunc- 
tion, or in the first house of the horoscope, and with regard to cha- 
racter, will act in a similar manner. This position of Sun and Moon 
will accentuate the con.sciousness m the brain, giving great activity 
of thought and quickness uf peri tiptiou, with strung inclinations to 
exciteiueni, endowing tiiose Dotn under this combination with an 
intense desire to be at the head of all things; to be intellectual 
leaders and pioneers in all mental affairs. The Sun will in this case 
be stronger than the Moon, the sign Aries being of a fiery nature, and 



Digitized by Google 



6<r ASTROl.OGV FOR ALL 

not watery like the Moon. Over- work, excessive worry, intense ts- 
citement, and too much activity would tend to prwJiue diseases of the 
brain, and if persisted in, wonld finally produce mental derangement. 
This combination increases the self-esteem and iuve of approbation, 
and through too much independence brings changes in life and many 
tcoubles foUoiviD|f on impulsive actioii aed radi conduct. It will 
cause those under its influence to gravitate to positions of trust and 
responsibilily, or where responsibility is undertaken. 

THB SUN- IN ARIES AND MOON IN TAURUS 

I.-II. (Sinistef Si4m-s*xiiU) 

The Sun is exalted in the sign Aries, and the Moon in the sign 
Taurus. This combination strengthens the positive and negative 

elements, and produces a very strong character. The physical side 
of the nature is practical; but with- the force of the Sun in Aries 
behind it, the character becomes a very determined one, the ideal and 
practical bein^ very well blended. The disposition is composed of 
the Martial V'enusian elements, and tlie sensuous nature is called into 
activity. The intellect and intuitions are very marked, but there is 
a great tendency to be self-willed and dogmatic. The magnetic 
forces are very powerful, and all the senses very keen, the Moon in 
Taurus supplying what the Son in Aries usually lacks. It is a 
splendid combtiuUion for mental expression, and the nature tends to 
become harmonious; but there is a preat deal of sensitiveness. Those 
born under this combination may become mental and physical 
healers, especially along the lines ol hygiene. This sign gives an 
abundance of vitality. It tends to make the life fortunate, the per- 
sonality being able to carry out the ideals of the Aries individuality. 
This is a good pontton for financial success in life, also for pbsi* 
tions of trust and authority. 

THB SUN IN ARIES AND MOON IN GSMINI 

1.-111. {SittisUr SextiU) 
This combination gives a considerable amount of mental activity 
and manual dexterity, and there is apt to be a great deal of restless* 
ness and over-exertion. The nature is a very changeable one, loving 
variety and expression ; but there is a lack of determination and tena- 
city of purpose. This combination gives refinement and artistic ten- 
dencies, and makes those under its iiiiiuence good novelists and 



L/'iyitiz-L 



« 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 63 

dover writers of fictbn. Ttie diutUatic tendencies of the Mora cnnae 
much of the qualities of Aries to be wasted, and there is oftoi more 
said than is done. It. is not a very reliable combination until 
thought-control has been practised, but it favours mechanical ability. 
Over-activity and excitement will tend to produce nervous troubleSi 
and rest will often be required to restore harmony to the system. 
This position is f^ood for travel and all literary undertakings and 
promises some success in life through mental efforts. 

THB SUN IN ARIBS AND MOON IN CANCER 

I.-IV. {SmisUr Sqmrt) 

This is an exceedingly sensitive combination, giving a consider- 
able amount of ambition and a love fame ; but the Moon being re- 
ceptive in the sign Cancer, it adds to all the splendid i^als of the 
Aries nature. It increases the intuitive and psychic faculties, ex« 

pands the imagination, improves the memory and strengthens the 
brain. The sensitiveness of this combmation causes those born 
under it to feel very keenly the surrounding conditions, but they are 
easily able tu reason and arrive at correct conclusions when not too 
approbative ; there is generally a great deal of anxiety, especially 
in regard to domestic afiairs or matters connected with home lifo. 
Care in diet is necessary for the successful expression of this com- 
bination, as the health is often marred by worry and anxiety. It 
gives success in life through matters connected with horticulture, and 
gives ability to design and plan, especially in architecture. 

THB SUN IN ARIBS AND MOON IN LBO 

I.-V. (Sinisier Trim) 

This combination gives remarkable intuition, a very atfectionate 
and warm heart, but an innate sensitiveness to the surrounding 
thought sphere. It is a harmonious blend and acts more upon 
the feelings, stimulating the heart into greater activity, the brain 

feeding the heart as it were, this causing the intuitions and spiritual 
aspirations to be very keen. This very harmonious combination 

gives a tendenry to religious thought, clear thinking, and correct 
mental impressions. The metaphysical is easily encouraged, and 
there is a certain amount of originality of thought and action. Ex- 
tremes in affairs of the heart will act injuriously and the health would 



Digitized by Google 



64 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



be seriously impaired through disappointment? in the love life. This 
position brings success through ambition and favours all matters 
connected with music and the drama. 

THB SUN IN ARISS^ND MOON IN VIRGO 

I.-VI. — {Sinskr imeot^uiiet^ 

This combinatioa stimulates the critical and discrimiaative tend- 
ency of the Moon in Virgo. It exalts the practical nature and 
brings out all the scientific characteristics. The solar poution con- 
siderably improves the lunar characteristics and makes tile mind 

more logical and more accurate in its judgments. It gives a con- 
siderable amount of ability in all literary pursuits, but also awakens 
all the exacting tendencies, althoiif^h it dispels some of the melan- 
cholic attributes of Virgo. It intensities the expression of all 
Studies, and gives a considerable amount of musical ability, especially 
io expression. It strengthens the love of chemistry and hygiene of 
the Virgo nature and success In hydropathic affairs. It often gives 
greater ability than there is opportunity to use profitably. Success 
comes through holding some servile po4»ti<m. 

THB SUN IN ARIES AND MOON IN LIBRA 

I.-Vil. {Opposition) 

We have now reached what is practically the opposition of the 
Sun by the Moon ; therefore all that is contained in the Aries nature 
may find its expression in the equilibrium and balance of the- sign 
Lifwa. This is a j^ooci position for all those who use comparison, 
and It lends lu bring reflection and perception to a state of balance. 
It causes a keenly seontive nature, and one who is very receptive to 
the surrounding mental atmosphere. It brings out all matters related 
to music and the fine arts ; gives a love of recognition, and benefits 
the life when it co<operates with Others. It makes those born under 
it good counsellors and advisers, and fits them for the legal profession 
or all matters where arbitration and judgment are required, usually 
the judgment is unbiassed and carefully weighed. This position 
tends to bring out tlie clairvoyant faculties. It will bring somefuuie 
or recognition, and place those under its influence in prominent 
positions* 



Digltizedby Google 



ASTROLOGY FOK ALL 
THB SUN IN ARIBS AND MOON IN SCOKPIO 



65 



I.-VIII. {Dexter inconjunct) 

Thif! is not a good combination, the martial element being very 
strongly marked, increasing the passions and mcltning the nature to 
be rather hard, dogmatic, positive, and even jealous. It causes the 
life principle of Aries to be expressed on physical lines, giving revolu- 
tionary tendencies, and making those nnder its influence easily 
excited, irritable, angry, and revengeful. In cases where the rising 
sign indicates it, and the planetary positions are fiivourable, it in* 
clines to mysticism and the occult ; but there ts a danjjer of psychic 
faculties being somewhat abused. Children born under this com- 
bination should have a good education and be taught to be less 
combative and forceful, and also to live pure lives. This is not a 
good position for the health. It favours success by assertion and 
aggressiveness. 

THB SUN IN ARIBS AND MOON IN SAGt-TTABlUS 

I.- IX. {Dexter Trine) 

This is a very good combination, the fiery tripiicity being well 
represented. It gives a very quick, sympathetic and inspirational 
nature, but a tendency to go to extremes, especially in physical 
matters. . There is always a certain amount of restlessness and in> 
clination to do things hastily, especially in speech. It intensifies the 
religious inclinations. It strengthens the sincerity and btraightfor* 
wardness of thp personality, and gives very strong tendencies to 
prophesy or speak unconsciously, yet accurately, in regard to the 
future. It f^ives impulse, some exapf^eration, and a tendency to go 
to excess. This combination gives some skill in musical perform- 
ance, and fits those under its influence to become good teachers or 
preachers. It is good for travelling and exploratioo. It brings 
benefit through the Church and religious matters. 

THE SUN IN ARIES AND MOON IN CAPRICORN 

I.-X. {Dexter Square) 

This combination gives an intense love of fame. The Saturnine 
cjualities of the Moon are accentuated, and the personality made 
exacting and inclined to tluciuating moods. It gives remarkable 
imsgination and splendid ability in all practical methods conc^ed with 



Digitized by Google 



66 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



gaining popularity. Tht"? combination increases the inquisitiveness of 
the personality, and gives a very determined and positive nature 
Cleverness is much appreciated, and persons in a higher rank of 
sodety are sometimes worshipped. This is a very sensitive com- 
bination, and the brain is a very receptive one, especially to the 
moital conditions of others. Tact and diplomacy are ofken over- 
ridden by impulse and sdf-assertiveness. It weakens the self-esteem 
but increases the love of approbation. It causes those under its in- 
fluence to aim for leadership, and to rule or domineer over others. 
It favours uncommon pursuits, and brings success through force of 
character. 

THE SUN IN ARIES AND MOON IN AgUARlUS 

I.-XI. (De*ttr SixtiU) 

This combination gives ability to study human nature. It brings 
out all the pleasing characteristics of the Moon in Aquarius, making 
the personality somewhat original and at limes eccentric. It inten- 
sifies the artistic and enterprising characteristics and gives some 
ability in iiteraty niaicers, a bright, clear mind, well able to express 
itself. The imagination, intuition and mental seniritiveness are much 
increased, and there is a love of educational and scientific work. It 
intensliies the independence, but gives the ability to deal with others 
Sttccessliilly. Determination and enterprise are combined, the Aries 
nature is steadied and its influence made very reliable. This is a 
fortunate influence in all matters connected with associations, public 
bodies, local governments; it also brings help and assistance from 
friends and acquaintances. 

THE SIN IN AKlIiS AND MOON IN PISCES 

I.-XII. {Dexter Semi-sextile) 

This combination is not altogether a harmonious one, the action 
of the Sun being too stronf; for the Innar position, which produces a 
discontented, restless, and often worrying nature. But it tones down 
considerably the impulsiveness of Arifs, and when the two are work- 
ing harmoniously, it increases the yenerosity and the spirit of evolu- 
tion. It gives a love of the occult, the profound and mysterious, but 
usually much sorrow comes into the life, which causes those born 
under it to think more deeply than most of the combinations under 
Aries. In this combination the personality may be very receptive to 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



67 



ali the impressions coming from the higher nature ; but the person* 
ality must be peaceful and harmonious, othtfwise the ficMrce trill be 
too ^rong and be inclined to cause the Moon to receive too many evil 
impressions. It f»ives success in connection with public institutions, 
asylums, and some authority in a quiet and unobtrusive manner, it 
is also favourable for all veterinary work. 

THB SUM IN TAURUS 
II. 

The Sun in Taurus will make the indiWdual character behind 
each lunar expression more firm, plodding, enduring and determined, 
but there will be a tendency to move slower and act more cautiously, 
quietly and practically than when the bun was in Ariei>. We have 
now the expression of the Sun from the exaltation of the Moon, 
and each combination will tend to strengthen the personality more 
than the individuality, which may often lay behind the personal 
expression. 

THB SUN IN TAURUiS AND MOON IN ARIBS 

II.-I. {Dixter Smi-^exHk) 

This combination gives a very strong personatity. There is a 
tendency to be impulsive, headstrong and rather too dogmatic. The 

abilities are not under-rated and there is a considerable amount of per- 
sistency, tenacity and exactitude. There is plenty of reserve power 
l>eliiiid all the force that is expended, and when those born under this 
combination make up their minds to carry out any purpose in life, 
they nearly always succeed ; but they expect a great deal from 
Others and manifest a stubborn desire to make others conform to their 
requirements— the moral nature is usually very strong. 

This combination gives success In life through energy and the 
desire to excel. It favours enterprisst the spirit of daring and 
all matters where a determined will is required. It gives good con- 
structive power and the ability to organise. Prosperity is obtained 
through perseveraoce. 

THB SUN IN TAURUS AND MOON IN TAURUS 

(CoMfimeium) 

This combination gives a considerable amount of determination, 
and those born under its influence are not easily thwarted in their 



Digitized by Google 



68 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



{nurpose. They possess ft great amount of self-control, but are lather 

too self-contained, too reserved, and often secretive ; but they are re- 
markably strong characters, fearless, persistent and hopeful, possess- 
ing much feeling and an affectionate nature. They easily attain to 
great success in the hnancial world and appear to have a disregard 
for finance although they cannot help being often very much mixed 
up with it. This combination is the most practical and solid of the 
preceding influences* bnt there is a danger of becoming too obstinate. 
When obedience is observedi tliey make very fine characters/ There 
is a tendency, however, to become too self-centred, and too reserved 
or determined. 

TH£ SVK IN TAURUS AND MOON IN GBMtttI 
tI.*III. {Sinisftr Smi-sextiU) 

The restlessness of Gemini is considerably steadied by the 
Taurus quality, and owing to this there is less diffusion, and more 
initiative force ; there is, however, an inclination towards despon* 
dency and self-esteem, which is due to some superficial tendencies 

that have not been eradicated. Those under this combination are 
inclined to be somewhat selhsh and apt to be assertive ; but the in- 
tellectual tendencies give them good abilities, piving ability to write 
and speak, in some cases the powers ot language and musical ex- 
pression are easily developed. It is, however, not a very harmonious 
combinatiQn, and usually the acquisitive tendencies are very large. 
Nervous disorders will have to be guasded against, and temperance 
is advisaUe. 

THE SUN IN TAURUS AND MOON IN CANCER 

Ii..IV. {SmsUf Ssxtile) 

This is a rather negative combination, the sensitiveness oi 
Cancer is accentuated somewhat, and the emotional nature is very 
easily excited, especially in matters runnected with the home 
life. Tins combination not only increases the sensili\eness and 
sometimes the reserve and uiiiidity, but it also produces much 
economy and some anxiety with regard to the ftiture welfare. The 
imagination is very keen, and there is some tendency to go to ex- 
tremes, especially when influenced by others. This combination 
sometimes gives inactivity, and increases the powers of sensation, 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 6^ 

but it is a lucky or fortunate oombinafioo, ^viog 'gain thn>uglt pro- 
perty and probably inheritance. 

THE SUN IN TAURUS AND MOON IN LEO 

II. •V. (Simster Sfmn) 

The emotional and sensational nature is much increased under 

this combination ; there is a purest tendency to ex^^^erate, over- 
estimate and go to extremes, also to be easily inHuenced in all 
matters connected with speculation, probably lo gansbling and sensa- 
tional pleasure. The affections are sometimes easily drawn into 
unfortunate channels, and there b very often a tendency to express 
keen likes and dislikes. Care will be necessary to avoid over-indul- 
gence, especially in the appetites, which may become abnormal unless 
checked. The moral nature may he strengthened considerably 
towards the close of the life, but the early portion is often one in 
which either psychic tendencies; or sensations play a very prominent 
part. The adectional nature is ardent and at times passionate ; 
excesses should be avoided. Tiiere is some poetic abiHty, the imagi* 
nation l)cing \rry vivid. 

THE SUN IN TAt KLs AST* MOON IN VIRGO 
1 1 . - \' I . I Simsier Trim;) 

The critical fatulf.p'- are accentuated by the practical Taurean 
nature which is behind tat; pcrsunality, and this cumbination gives 
US some of the very best business types of character. In all busi* 
ness pursuits they are very persistent, precise, and pronounced in 
their judgments. This is a very successful combination, being a< 
harmonious blend of the earthy triplicity, which brings out all the 
practical tendencies, and Virgo being the ruler of the business world, 
the personality has liere the opportunity and facility for expression. 
The moral nature is firm, giving much conscientiousness to assist the 
personal character. Behind much apparent pliability there is a 
fixed determination, which gives great success in life in all business 
pursuits. 

THE SUN IN TAURUS AND MOON IN LIBRA 

II.-VIL {SinisUr Jmonjunet) 

This is an inharmonious combination, and there is usually a con> 
siderable amount of bias and one*sided judgment in the nature, the 
blending of an earthy individuality and an airy personality is not 



Digrtized by Google 



7© 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



very favourable. It tends to increase the sepaiativf tendencies and 
usually causes the personality to arrive at faulty decisions, which are 
often the result of another's influence in the life. It gives a certain 
amount of determination, but it is usually of a stubborn nature. 
Tbose born under this influence are apt to be guided by their feelings 
rather than by their reason. There is likely to be much individual 
jealousy and vindictiveness displayed, especially towards strangers 
and opponents. The personality is apt to be very afTaMe, a{;rceable 
and more refined and polished than the individual character, but the 
determination that is behind the personality will oiten carry the point 
where either merit or persuasion has not succeeded. This combina- 
tion depends very much on the planetary positions. 

THE SUN IN TAURUS AND MOON IN SCORPIO 

1 1. -VIII. (Opposition.) 

This position gives a certain amount of vanity, self-esteem, and 
the feelings are very strong and intense. There is much reserve and 
often a grezt deal of secretion and concentrated force. A good edu- 
cation is very necessary for this combination, otherwise there is a 
tendency to be far too easily influenced by environment and surround- 
ing conditions. Pride and jealousy may cause the downfall of those 
who are born under this combination ; but there is always a con- 
siderable amount of determination for f^ood or evil, and unless the 
latter is restrained the nature will becotne a very selfish one. Success 
in life will come througii persistent determination and dogged self- 
reliance and stubborness. 

THE SUN IN TAURUS AND MOON IN SAGITTARIUS 

II.- IX. (Dexter Inconjutut) 

The determination behind the Sagittarius personality will incline 
those bora under its influence very greatly to go to extremes in all 
things. It gives a tendency to Impulsive action and hasty speech« 
and when provoked a very great deal more is said than is probably 
thought or meant, and there may be a tendency to be very unkind 
and argumentative when put out. This is not a good combination 
unless planetary positions counteract it, the personality being far too 
impulsive for the individual nature, but there is aspiration, and a love 
of science, also a tendency toward philosophy and religion, which 
improves the nature. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



71 



THB SUN IN TAURUS AND MOON IN CAPRICORN 

{Dexter T fine) 

This is a very practical combination, piving caution and a ten- 
dency 10 make very careful and well-laid-out plans and schemes. 
The whole character is very independent and determined, and the 
ambitions are keen, but more concerned with conservatism and conven- 
tidnality, having to do with physical objects and personal surround- 
ings. This is a very succesafiil combinatiMi of the earthy tripHcity, 
making those bora under it exceamvely practical and well able to 
build up a fortune. They are especially adapted for a public life, or 
where the energies are put to good uses in carving out a proi^wrous 
career; they will possess ^reat attainments, aspire to reach preat 
heights, are tilled with ambition and are able to exert tlie personal 
for the purpose of achieving physical attainments. This gi\ cs ability 
to deal with big schemes, become successful organisers and to carry 
out huge plans. 

1 

THB SUN IN TAURUS AND MOON IN ADUAR1US 

n.*Xl. (Dtxter Situut*) 

This is a practical combination, giving thoroughness, carefulness, 
prudence and caution, with a considerable amount of reserve. It 
gives honesty of purpose, sincerity and refinement, and those bom 
under this combination are able to concentrate their thoughts, be* 

come \'ery industrious, persevering and successful. This combina- 
tion tends towards eccentricity, and causes those born under it to 
become very self-centred. 

THB SUN IN TAURUS AND MOON IN PISCB8 

II.'XII. {Ehifkr Sixtile) 

This is not quite so unfortunate as the combination of Sun in 
Aries and Moon in Pisces. It steadies the mind more, gives less 
inclination to restlessness ; but in some respects increases the com- 
bativeness. Those born under this combination are very hospitable, 
very receptive to the wants and. requirements of others, kind and 
pliable and very well disposed. This is a fortunate combination, 
and success comes easily. It increases the mediumistic tendencies 



Digitized by Google 



72 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



and gives receptivity to psychic inHiiences. The disposition is easily 
aifected and inclined towards good living, peace and harmony. 

THB SI N IN GBHINI 
III. 

The Sun in Gemini as the motive force behind the lunar expres* 
sions will give a dtialistic, restlcias and irritable tendencyp with the 
desires always running on intetlectuai lines. The individual character 

will be more dualistic in its expression, and there is less permanency 
than in the foregfoing solar positions. The willpower is strong, there 
is some pride and love of pedigree. 

THB SUN IN GBUINl ANO MOON IN ARIBS 

Ill.-I. {Smister SixtiU) 

This will give a very intellectual nature, and make those bom 
under this combination fond of intellectttal pursuits* studious, 
and fond of expressing their thoughts, but there is a danger of 
the personality going to some extremes and becoming too in- 
dependent, also somewhat too changeable. But it is a very strong 
and powerful combination, especially in all intellectual matters. It 
gives a very ambitious spirit and strensjthens the assertivcncss. The 
nature is a very positive one, and somewhat lacking in sympathy and 
feeling. There is a liability to live too much in the head, this 
giving danger of brain troubles, and there is also a tendency to be- 
come erratic, and express a great amount of self-will. 

THB SUN IN GEMINI ANT> MOON IN TAURUS 
III. '11. {Sinister Semi-uxith) 

This combination gives a considerable amount of sensitiveness, 
much determination and firmness. It is a very sensitive combina- 
tion, and causes the feelings and ambitions to lie strong and powerful, 
owing to the intellect that is mixed up with the sensational nature. 
There is apt to be a conaderable amount of energy, and perseverance, 
and determination. The Gemini characteristics are very much 
strengthened by this combination, and there is not so much change* 
ability, restlessness, and irritability, hut it is not altogether a favour- 
•able combination. It gives gain through relatives and literary 
pursuits. 



Digrtized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



73 



THE SUN IN GEMINI AND MOON IN GBMINI 

Ill.-ill. (CMjunetum) 

This combination indicates a considerable amoaat of wilfulness, 
activity and restlessness, and a tendency to meastire all ihinj^s from 
an intellectual standpoint. There is a certain amount of self-esteem 
and independence, and the feelings are not so active as in the other 
combinations of this polarity. The motive temperament will dominate. 
There is mudi dextarity in all matters where the hands are employed. 
There is an inclination for the Moon to express the Sun very clearly 
in this combination, giving refinement, artistic tendencies and literary 
ability. 

THS SUN IN GSmNI AND MOON IN CANCBR 

III.-IV. (Smi-sexiOt) 

This combiaation gives a strong inclination towards economy 
and thrift in the home life, also in all matters concerned with the wel- 
fare of others, but it is a very sensitive and anxious combination* 

There is likely to be a f»reat deal of travellint^, also much restlessness 
and a lonj^ins,' for sympathy from others, but the artistic and imagin- 
ative faculties are well developed. The receptive nature is very 
easily affected and upset by surrounding conditions. This position 
gives success in all matters refi^arding transit and pubKc affairs, 

THE SUN IN GBMINI AND MOON IN LEO 

III.-V. (Sextile) 

The Leo personality suffers by this combination, as there is not 
sufficient firmness in the backLjroutid to support the \,eo indications ; 
theretoie there is likely to be too nmch impulse, and the affections are 
very easily moved. The imagination is active, and there is poetical and 
dramatic ability. This combination gives a kind of weird tendency, 
and there is at times a liability to hypochondria. The affections are 
keen, but there is much love of display. There is some literary 
alnlity in the direction of fiction, etc. 

THB St;N IN GEMINI AND MOON IN VIRGO 

III..VI. {Squads) ' 

This is a very good combination, the Mercurial elements coming 
out very forcibly, inclining the mind to be studious, critical and 
analytical. It gives a great love for chemistry, humanitarian views. 



74 



r 

ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



and inclines to the «tiKly of the law?^ of hycriene. It is a very sensi- 
tive combination, however, with regard to the mind ; tliere is apt to 
be some mistrust and melancholic tendencies, and if worry or anxiety 
be given way to, the nervous system may suffer considwably. Per- 
sons born under this combination may obtain great benefit through 
nursing and serving others, also by their clever criticism, but should 
avoid irritability, which is apt to mar the finer qualities. It gives a 
stron? will, but some suhtltny, and when perverted there is a 
liability to duplicity and indecisioD. 

THB SDN IN' GEMINI AND MOON IH LIBKA 

III.-VII. (Trme) 

This i'^ a very good conihination, built up on the airy triplicity. 
It gives mucii relinement and a syinpathelu; nature ; it also increases 
the intuitions, gives a great amount oi foresight, sharpness to the 
perceptive faculties, inclines to study, gives ability for public writing 
and a great amount of imitativeness. It is necessary for those born 
under this combination to live purely. The faculty of comparison is 
well developed and there is some probability of becoming popular. It 
gives success in artistic pursuits. 

THB SUN IN GBMINI AND MOON IN SCORPIO 

III.-VIII. (Ineenjunct) 

This is by no means a good combination, there being very little 

harmony between the common and fixed signs. It accentuates the 
critical faculties, which are rather hard and severe, flicre is a ten-, 
deocy to combativeness, much determination, and a desire to pull 
down without rebuildint!: ; it •^ivc'? arj^anientiv eii -ss, assertiveness, 
over-sensitiveness, jealously, pride, and self-esteem. 

THK SUN IN GEMINI iVTJ MOON IN SAGITTARIUS 

1 11. -IX. {Opposition) 

This is not always a good combination, owint,' to these two signs 
giving too much activity and restlessness, lacli of continuity, too 
much force, and nervousness. There is apt to be waste of mental 
energy, much enthusiasm, exceptional force of character and a great 
deal of excitement ; the personal character appears to be far in excess 
of the individual, but tlie higher and lower minds are both active, 
and may benefit each other, the lower aspiring for light by devotion. 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



75 



TUB SUN IN GEMINI AND MOON IN CAPRICORN 

1 11 . - X . ( Inconjunct) 

This is a very good business coTn!>tiuition, and it i^ives Sritari;ine 
ballast an<l steadiness lo the Mercunai tm It-nry. 1 he inilivnUiality 
is quick, but the personality ofiea slow, therefore there may be a lack 
of harmony, but by labour, perseverance, and patience, a great deal 
of good work may be done by the personal character for the build- 
ing up of the individuality. This combination gives mental temper- 
ament, a love of science, some tact and diplomacy, and often much 
ingenuity. 

THB SUN IN GEMINI AND MOON IN AQVARtUS 

ill.- XI. {Trine) 

This is a very good combination of the airy triplicity. It gives 
a great deal of mental and physical activity. Tlio'^c horn under this 
cornbinafion are ^oo<l character readers, also i n ,H t luitnUs of meta- 
physics; they are able to get along very weii uuii strangers, but 
should always avoid excitement. The artistic faculty may be culti- 
vated. Success will come through co-operation with others, also 
through science and art. 

THB SUN IN GBMINI AND MOON IN FISCBS 

III.XII. {Sqm) 

This intensifies the restlessness and causes a great deal nf irrita- 
bility, but it gives a great desire for knowledge, which often comes 

psychically. There is frequently a great deal of dissatisfaction, 
yearning for the unattainable, disconitnl and peevishness. This is ;i 
psychic combination, producing great receptivity, ,'ind an inclination 
to dip into hidden mysteries; the mind becomes vtiy receptive to the 
mysterious and weird ; it also gives success iu writing strange and 
uncommon novels, and out-of-the-common pursuits. 

THE SUN IN CANCER 

IV, 

This is not a strong position for the individttality, therefore the 
personal characteristics may pull considerably away from the higher 
qualities. Tenacity, attachment and the clinging desire for objects are 
very marked. It makes the individualcharacter exceedingly sensitive, 
impressionable, and highly emotional, often lacking in self-reliance, 



76 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



and giving a yearning towards feeling. There is power to pqfcho- 
raetrise and sense the genera! conditions of others. It gives a very 
tenacious moral character. The signs of awakening wiU be shown in 
activity and power. 

THB SUN IN CANCER AND MOON IN ARIBS 

IV.-l. {Square) 

This combination gives a great deal of activity, much persis- 
tency, a liability to become heid^tronij and to extremes, a love of 
fame, ambition, ami a di->irc io lead nnd be at the head of things. 
The parents n»<iy aliecl ilie lite very considerably. Tiiere is a great 
deal of impulse in the personal character, which will briug many 
sorrows into the life. Success will come through public affairs and 
fame will be sought. 

THE SUN IN CANCBft AND MOON IN TAURUS 

IV.-II. (SextiU) 

This gives a considerable amount of sensitiveness, but all the 
higher faculties are stimulated. There are some morbid tendencies 
in this combination, and self>control must be piractised before success 
can be obtained. This gives a very psychic nature, keen intuitions, 
and great receptivity. The nature is imaginative, impressionable, 
and very easily affected by others. Good company should always be 
chosen. This omblnalion nialces good m(•l!iuIn^ and gives the 
ability to ps^ychometrise. There is a ceiuin amount of fortune 
attached to this combination. It favours the sympathetic tempera* 
ment. 

THE SUN IN CANCeX AND MOON IN GEMINI 

IV.-lll. (Smi'UxtiU) 

This gives a personality very susceptible of education, and makes 
the brain exceedingly sensitive and receptive to the higher part of the 
nature. There is a great love of knowledge and a great deal of activity 
and energy, especially in literary matters and travel. Artistic ten* 

dencies in the home life may be displayed. Success will come 
through the help and assistance of relatives. 

THE SON IN CANCtK AND MOON IN CANCER 

IV. -IV. (Conjnuction) 
Fancy and itnagination will be manifest ip this combination. 



Digitized by Go 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 77 

and there is a great liability to go to extremes. It gives independence 
and conservatism, or a clinging to ancient customs and habits ; there 
is also much changeability. Inertia will produce laziness, but when 
other planetary influences allow, the tenacity and motive power will 
be great. 

THB SUN IN CANCKR ASn MOON IN LEO 

IV.-V. {Semisextiie) 

This combination pives very keen and sensitive feelinps. It 
awakens the animal side of the nature, and there is a liability to go to 
extremes; restlessness, especially where love is concerned. It gives 
great love of the drama, and sometimes a love of sensation and 
ardent feelings; the aliectional nature is very strong and loves 
romance. 

THB SUN IN CANCKft AND UOOM IN VIRCO 

IV.-VI. (SextiU) 

This gives a very sensitive and passive nature, with a certain 
amount of discrimination in all matters where the feelings and emotions 
are concerned. There is a liability to go to extremes and to worry, 
especially where business matters are concerned. The nature is 
receptive, and mediumistic; at times there is a liability to obsession, 
the nature being very receptive to psychic influences. 

THB SUN IN CWCRR AND MOON IN LIBRA 

IV..Vli. {Square) 

This gives more balance to the sensitive and emotional nature of 
Cancer, and increases the perception and directions, particiilarl\ in 
matters connected with the home life; it stinmlatcs the ideality, 
giving harmony and balance to the internal feelings. It also ijives 
ability for writing, and a love of coming before the public for fame 
or recognition. 

THE SUN IN CANCER AND MOON IN SCORPIO 

IV.-VIII. (Trine) 

This combination enables the personality to have a sulidityiiij; 
effect ;upon the sensitive nature of Cancer, making it harder and 
sometimes selfish; there is apt to be much vindictiveness and 
jealousy and pride, especially in matters connected with the feelings. 
It gives a love of display and attracts towards the opposite sex ; the 



Digitized by Google 



78 ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 

niaLjnetisiii is erisily ^tiniuhited towards sensation. It gives success 
in uiagiccil uiid psychic altairs. 

THE SUN IN CANCER AND MOON IN SAGITTARIUS 
IV. -IX. {IlUPnjUHCt) 

This is a very inharmonious combination, the personality being 
far too active for the in(3i\ iduality, but it stimulates thi; emotional 
and devotional nature. It gives too much activity with re^^ard to 
speech, a restless nature and a constant yearning for the unattain- 
alile. This combination gives some psychic gifts and the ability to 
prophecy and bring through Into the brain dreams, etc. It nnay lead 
to inspirational speaking. It will bring saccess from foreign affairs 
and religious matters. 

THK SUN IN CANCffR AND MOON IN CAPRICORN 
IV.-X. {OppesiUen) 

This makes the individual character more practical, more am- 
bitious, and gives aptitude for business and practical pursuits. But 
it gives an inability to express the internal feelings. Many obstacles 
will come into the life, but the ambitions will be keen and there will 
be a great love of fame and a desire to lead and govern. 

THB SUN IN \N( P.R AND MOON IN AQUARIUS 

IV.-Xi. {liuonjwuf) 

This vk not a very harmonious combination, but it gives abiMty in 

all matters connected with associations and some degree of success in 
public life. Persons horn under this combination arc apt to be very 
tactful, careful and diplomatic ; it hts the Hte more for externahties 
than for the interior. It gives ability for pamting and some artistic 
faculties. The eyesight may need protection. 

THE SUN IN CANCKK AND MOON IN PISCES 

IV.-XII. {Trim) 

This is a very harmonious combination of the watery triplicity, 
awakening the emotional nature, and making the mind very receptive ; 
it gives mediumistic tendencies, a liability to hysteria, much fancy, 

and a desire to obtain knowledge. Psychic faculties maybe developed 
and there will be an interior knowledge of the public mind and its 
requirements. It gives success in life. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



79 



THE SUN IN LEO 

V. 

The Sun in Lea gives a good moral nature ; it makes the indi- 
viduality vexy sincere and ardent in all matters of affection, firm, 
self-reliant, sincere, magoanimoust noble-minded, austere, and de- 
temnined. All combinations from this solar centre will be strengthened 
by the individuality. Many of the experiences of the life will be jn 
connection with love af&trs, and matters of the heart and inner 
feelings. 

THB SUN IN LEO AND MOON IN AaiRS 

V.-l. (Triiu) 

This is a harmonious combination of the fiery triplicity, an J with 
the Moon ninth sign from the Solar Centre there is n love of pliilosopli y 
and a tendency towards rclif,Mous thought, niiu h idealitv, (ielermina- 
, tion, and love of being leaders and at the head of ihinj^s. It ^,'ives a 
very persistent, dominant, enthusiastic, and industrious nature, with 
much combat iveness, though the combativeness of Aries is subdued 
by the Leo influence. There is a necesnty for restraint where feeling 
is concerned. It gives success in life. 

THE SUN IN LKO AND MOON IN TAURUS 

v.- 1 1. {Square) 

This gives a very determined nature, with an inclination to put 
the heart into physical things. It strengthens the business intuitions, 
gives fortune in finance, and makes good bankers and stockbrokers ; 
it also gives a love of hygiene, and a strongly vitalised constitution. 
There is much strength in this combination ; the character becomes 
very firm and at times obstinate. 

THE SUN IN LBOAND MOON IN GEMINI 

V.^in. (Sextih) 

This givcR great activity to the personal nature, with much de- 
termination behuid it, urging the lunar tendencies to greater activity, 
and some restraint will be needed. It inclines towards music and 
the drama, gives ability for writing and poetry, the hands being ever 
ready to express the heart. This combination makes gifted and 
clever persons. 



Digitized by Google 



8o ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 

THB SUN IN LBO AND MOON IN CANCER 

V..IV. {tma^wut) 

This cauMS much sensiUveaess and much sorrow to the love 
affairs. It also givra a (cadency to g;o to extremes and restraint will 
be n<!cessary in sexual affairs. This is a rather good eombinatioa 
for the mind, the lirain being receptive to influences from the heart ; 

it stimulate"; the love emotions and makes the feelings very keen and 
sensitive, and rather too ardent and attached to the object of affec- 
tion. It gives success in life hnancialiy. 

THB SUN IN LBO AND MOON IN LBO 

V..V. {CvHjtmdion) 

This gives a very independent nature, and makes those bom under 
it rather self-centred, somewhat proud, but very kind-hearted and 

generous ; they are capable of holding their own under many diffi- 
culties, hut there is a tendency to p;o to extremes. It often f»ives too 
much reserve and a threat desire ior alTeclion from others. This com- 
bination gives much intuition, and abihty as teachers or work in con- 
nectioM with schools, concerts, pleasure parties and amusements of 

various kinds. 

THE SUN IN LEO AND MOON IN VIRGO 

V.-VI. {Semi-sextiU) 

The Moon is in the first house from the Sun. This gives 
good business instincts, chastity, ideality, but a tendency to be very 
critical, restless and anxious. This combination gives ability for 
music, literature, chemistry, hygiene, and many subjects where the 
ideal and practical are blended. It also fits those under its influence 
to hold responsible subordinate posts as head servants either in public 
or private life. It is a successful combination. 

THB SUN IN LEO AND MOON IN UBRA 

v.-vii. (SixHuy 

This gives much intuition, spiritual inclinations, a love of class- 
ifying and harmonising, with ability to foresee the future by the 
strong intuitional impressions which come from the individuality. It 
Strengthens the affections, gives compassion and a desire to do some 
public good. This is a very harmonious and successful combination. 



Digitizea by Coogle 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



8l 



THE SUM IN LBO AND MOON IN SCORPIO 

V.-VIIL (5fiMHv) 

This OHnbinattoD gives much love of show* ansteritx, an inclina- 
tion to be rather hard and at times proud and arrogant. But persons 
born under this influence have very often thuir internal nature hidden 
under a hard exterior. There is danger of goin^' to excesses in love 
affairs, or where sensation is concerned, and a reckless or careless life 
will injure or disease ilie heart. 

TKB SUN IN LEO AND UOON IN SAGITTARIUS 
V.-IX. {Trine) 

This is a very good combination, belonging to the fiery triplicity, 
but it gives much restlessness, j^reat inclination to go to extremes, 
especially in religious matters, or matters of the heart. The Moon 
is in the fourth house from the Solar Cenire, therefore in perfect har- 
mony with it. There is a great love of pleasure, much hope and joy 
in the nature, this being a hopeful and successful combination. 

THE SUN IN LEO AND MOON IN CAPRICORN 

V.-X. (Incoujmwt.) 

This tends to harden the interior nature, giving much ambition 
and exactitude. The personality is iacliued to be rather grasping, 
selfish, and too practical externally, but innde the heart is always 
pulling away from externals. This being the fifth house from the 
Sun the circulation is apt to suffer. It gives great love oi power and 
leadership, and 'ability to organise, govern and rule others. The 
ambitions are very keen and determined. 

THB SUN IN LBO AND KOON IN AQUARIUS 
V.-XI. (Oi^'«NM) 

This combination is equal to the Moon being in opposition to the 
Sun. It acts as a sevrath house influence, causing the personality to 
go out to many indiscriminately ; it gives intuition and ability to 
judge human nature quickly, and some very marked occult tendencies. 
It gives refinement and much determination and will-power. 

*THB SUN T\ LEO AND MOON IN PISCBS 

V.-Xll. {InconjuHct) 
There is very little harmony in this combinatiOD, as the brain 



Digitized by Google 



88 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



is often negative to the internal feelings, therefore there is often dis- 
content and dissatisfaction. There is some tendency to occultism, 
mediumsbip and inspirational speaking, poetry and strange writ- 
ing. The nature is inclined to become dreamy, and at tim^ too 
passive. 

THE SUN IN VIRGO < 
VI. 

This gives a practical individuality and a discriminative nature. 
It tends to lead the whole oC the lunar expressicms more into practical 
methods, where the discriminative faculties can be called out as fully 
as possible ; it also connects the personality with maternal and family 
affairs, the home instincts being strongly marked. 

THB SUN IN VIRGO AND MOON IN ARIBS 

• VI. -I. {htconjunct) 

This ^ives very keen mental abilities, and tends to fit one to take 
lead in any business affairs. The personahty is mirthful, witty, active, 
sharp, impulsive and ijuick to forcsc;^, but the solid nature of the 
solar inriucnce behind it enables the whole combination to work 
harmcmioasty. There is a tenancy to live too mi^ in the head, 
and the nature may be somewhat lacking in sympathy, and selitshness 
will express itself when the will is thwarted; this works out in 
sarcasm. 

THB SUN IN VIRGO AND MOON IN TAURUS 

. V1..II. (Jnm) 

This combinakicm in the earthy triplidty brings out all the intai> 
tive faculties and strengthens the scientific or practical ability, 
giving keen perceptions and fitting those under its influence to be 

very competent in the business world. It fpves much receptivity to 
the surroundin;^ thought-sphere, and some poetic instinct. This com- 
bination will give some reserve and secretion, and there will be a 
tendency to be over-cautious. 

THE SUN IN VIRGO AND MOON IN GivMlNl 

VI.-III. {Square) 

Tliis quickens the spcccii and intellect, giving ability for and 
bringing into activity all the mental expressions, but belonging to the 
common group, there is often loss of opportunity in the life, arising 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FDR ALL 



83 



from some iiresolution. It will, however, bring those born under 
this combination into eminent position, which mayor may not be 
held. Friendship and hospitality are marked features in this com- 
bination. 

THB SUN In VIRGO AND MOON IN CANCBR 

VI.-IV. (StxHk) 

This quickens the sensitive nature of the Moon in Cancer, but 
it also awakens the anxious side of the nature; it stimulates the 
activities on domestic lines. This is a very receptive combination 
and somewhat over>sensitive. It gives an economical, persevering 

and industrious nntnre, wit!i very stronp leanings to everythin;,' per- 
taining to the home life and family affairs, witli some tendency to- 
wards conservatism or sectarianism. This combination increases 
the economical tendencies of Cancer. 

THB SUN IN VIRGO AND MOON IN LEO 

VI..V. (SmusexUli) 

This stimulates the afl^tional and emotioDal nature of the Moon 
in Leo. but behind the personality there .is not much fixity ; therefore 
there is anxiety fiir fresh loves and there will be many love episode in 

the life. This combination softens the critical side of the Virgo nature, 
and stimulates the psychic side of the solar position. Excess of feel- 
ing in relipious matters is very harmful from this combination, the 
imagination being very k^n and vivid. 

THE SUN IN VIRGO AND MOON IN VIRGO I 

VI.- VI. {CwjuncHoH) 

This quickens all the Virgo nature, giving great love of every* 
thing of a maternal nature, where kindred and the home life is con- 
cerned. This combination increases the impressional nature, dis- 
crimination, independence, self-reliance, and foresight, but there is a 
tendency to be self-contained and somewhat self-centred. It is a 
somewhat harmonious blend, but both luminaries being in a common 
sic:n, there is a tendency to be methodical, although refined and 
pohsiicd. All melancholic tendencies should be avoided, and the 
combination may produce a depressing influeace. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



THE SUN IN VIRGO AND MoON IN LIBRA 

VI.. VI I. {Semt-sexiiU) 

This combination fi^^ives independence of thought, ability for 
writing, philosophic and scientific. It quickens all the perceptive 
faculties of Libta, and gives great ability in ail matters where fine 
jttdgmmit and perception is- required. It strengthens the intuition, 
imagbation, ambition, but gives a very clear mentality, etc. 

THE SUN IN VIRGO AND UOON IN SCORPIO 

Vl.-Vin. {SexHle) 

This is a rather selhsh combination, inciiuing one to be hard 
and somewhat careless as to the feelings of others, excepting those 
of their own family or those who minister to their personal com- 
fort. The sympathies are not very keen, and jealousy is liable to 
be easily aroused, and there is :i tendency to be rather unforgiving 
and severe with wrong doers. Criticism and judgment are very keen. 
This combination is f^ood for nil matters connected with industry, 
persistency of character, and self-reliance strengthens the Virgo 
nature in this respect. 

THB SUN IM VIKGO AND MOON IN SAQITTARtUS 

VL.IX. {Sgiun) 

The Moon in Sagittarius tends to make the personality inclined 
towards philosophy, very intuitive, with a stronp^ desire to teach 
others; but there is a tendency to be too impulsive and apt to 
make hasty judgment ; it is a successful tombination, especially where 
the acquisition uf wealth is concerned. Dual tendencies are often 
found in this sign, such as rdigious instincts and commercial enter- 
prise, philosophy and love of power, etc., etc. 

THS SUN IN VIRGO AND MOON IN CAPRICORN 

VI.-X. {Tnm) 

This IS the most practical of all coinbiuaiions, and while there is 
much independence and a tendency to lean towards 'materialistic 
and sdfish lines of thought, ^there is splendid ability and a desire 
to accumulate wealth either in the prdiessional or business world 
This combination acts similarly to the conjunction of Mercury and 
Seturn in nativities, giving shrewdness and a calculating mind. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



85 



THE SUN IN VIRGO AND MOON IN AQUARIUS 

VI.-XI. (Inconjunct.) 

This intensifies the intuitive faculties, quickens the psychic im- 
pressions, but often acts alonp practical lines and gives ability for 
business piirs«its, especially in trading with large companies, asso- 
ciations and huge concerns. The discriminative faculties are well 
developed, and there is much ability to judge human nature. This 
combiiuttion also gives reserve and some sdentsfic ability, and an in* 
cttnation to investigate psychic matters. The higher side of the 
Virgo nature is quickened. 

THB SUN IN VIRGO AND MOON IN PISCBS 

VI.-XII. \0pp9sUUm) 

This makes the personality mediumistic and receptive to the 
requirements of the individuality, but it gives restlessness and a great 

love of change and novelty. There is apt to be much dissatisfaction, 
also irritability. This combination is not favourable for the health ; 
it also gives a lack of self-reliance, and there is a danger of being 
somewhat superticial, although there is always a hospitable nature 
displayed. 

THB SUN IN UBRA 

VII. 

This ^'ives a very harmonious individuality, with a tendency to act 
through perception more than through reflection. 1 he spiritual 
qualities of the sign are called out, and the higher mind seeks to 
equalise all the various combinations of the Moon. There is a keen 
love of justice and great power of comparison, but there is also a cer> 
tain sensitiveness in this sign, and very ambitious desires, especially 
on intellectual lines of thought and action. 

THE SUN IN UBRA AND MOON IN ARIBS 

VII.-l. {Oppnititm) 

Reason and perception are well blended in this combination, and 

there should be a great amount of mental refineir.ent and much 
ability in all mental pursuits. The personality is active, and the in- 
dividuality quiet. The will power is fairly stronc'. t ut there is liable 
to be some head troubles. This combination ih likeiy to produce an 
inharmonious marriage, few lieing able to respond to the ideals of 



86 



ASTROLOGY FOE ALL 



this cornl>ination. There is much power in this blend, and those 
possessing it can obtain much intluence over others. Physically 
this combination is very good for all who love athletics. It brings 
success in all gymnastic affairs^ the spine and muscular system 
being very supple. 

TMS SUM IN LIBRA AND MOON IN TAURUS 

vn.4I. (Ineoiiftmct) 

The Venus nature is well harmonised in this sign. Persever* 
aiicie» eodurance^ patieoce and caution may be manifested ; there is 
also some psychic power and inventive ability, but the personality is 

apt to be somewhat receptive to physical surroundings and condi- 
tions: it fit?; those under its irifluence to undertake hus^e hutldinf^ 
s^:heme^. The combination gives gaiu through partners or through 
marriage. 

THE SUN IN LIUKA AND MO(*N IN GEMINI 
ViLIlI. (/m;.vj 

This is a harmonious combination of the airy triplicity, giving re- 
fioeoaent, artistic tastes and musical abihty. It gives a great iuve of 
knowledge, inteniufies the oratorical and Intellectual aspirations, but 
also gives a liability to go to extremes, especially in mental pursuits. 
Some indecision may be displayed, and a want of stability, but this 
may ea^ly be overcome; thought and feeling are blended in this com- 
bination, which gives great influence over others, especially b matters 
of speech. 

- THE SUN IN LIDRA AND MOON IN CANC8R 

VH.-IV. {S(iuan) 

This combination on the cardinal group intensifies the sensitive* 

ness and tlic eniotiona! nature; it gives anxiety, especially with re- 
gard to home affairs. It also gives some changeability, Init iiv lines to 
progress; there is some psychic ability and inspiraliun, winch may be 
latent owing to tlie ambitious tendencies of the cardinal signs. 

THE SUN IN LIBRA AND MOON IN LEO 

VII. -V. (SextiU) 

This is a very go<xi combinalion with regard to the feelings of 
the personality, as it intensifies the spiritual and refining influences. 
It tends to balance the individual and personal nature and bring 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



87 



harmony. It gives a strong inclination to spiritual things, and some- 
times makes the nature rather too idealistic. There is poetic and 
musical ability, and either the artistic or nioial nature will have many 
opportunities for development. 

THB SUN IN LinRA AND MOON IN VIRGO 
VII.-VI. (Semi-sfx(tU) 

This combination es a critical personality, which is softened 
consideralily by the powers of comparison. It f^ives much receptivity 
and lutuuion ; it tends to lead the mind into physical, practical 
matters and gives mtuitiiHi in tnudness affairs. It is a refined cona> 
binatioa and prodoces an attractive personality. 

THE SUN IN LIBRA AND MOON IN LIBRA 

VII.-VII. (ConjtmcHon) 

Although this gives a very clear perception, it is not a very good 
combination, and there is apt to be too much reliance upon others or 
inability to move forward on their own initiative. This combination 
brings dreams and the power to see vision^. It is good for the dispoai* . 
tion, making it affable, courteous, obliging and weU-disposed. There 
is much foresif^ht and mental sensitiveness, as well as humani- 
tarian views and a desire to «lo i^'ood, but this combination is very 
often spoilt by a self-centring inclinatioQ which makes the idealism 
of the dreamy order, aod fails to accomplish that which it regards as 
the ideal. Much depends upon the planetary influences as to how 
this combination wilt act. 

THE SUN IN LIBSA AMD UOON IN SCORPIO 

Vn..VIlI. {StmisextUt) 

This gives a love of approbation, an ambitious nature, and makes 
the native fully aware of bis own abilities, inclined to be somewhat 
combative, although not as courageous as would seem, owing to the 
individuality seeking to harmonise and soften the hard posttiveness 
of Scorpio. When the personality has the greatest power there will 
be a display of energy, industry, and ambitious tendencies. 

THB SUN IN LIBRA AND MOON IN SAGITTARIUS 

VH.-IX. {Stxtih) 
This is a very good combination, although the personality is 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



inclined to be rather too reckless and careless, over-active and ex- 
' citable. It inteniifies the activity of the brahi and ah» hicr»a«i the 
rapidity of speech. This combination gives prophetic talents, ability 
for preaching and public speaking, and in many jnirsttits brings sue* 
cess in life. 

THB SUN IN LIBRA AND HOON IN CAPRICORN 

VIL'X. (Sim) 

This gives some masical ability. This is a good combinatton, but 

the mind is apt to be too practical for the solar influence, leading it 
into the external world. It is a good combination for popularity 
and public recognition. 

THB SUN IN LIBRA AND MOON IH AQUARIUS 
VII.-XI. (irnu) 

This is a very harmonious combination of the airy triplicitv It 
gives power to psychometrise, and splendid foresight, especially in all 
matters connected with humanitarian principles, large businesses, 
associationb, and public companies. It gives ability to judge human 
* nature and enables the mind to concentrate. The disposition is kind, 
gentle and humane. 

THB SON IN LIBRA AND MOON IN MSCBS 

VII.-XII. (5mM«) 

This gives a great deal of restlessness, together with industry and 

perseverance, but there is apt to be much tendency to dream rather 
than to be practical. It inclines towards medinniship, which is always 
dangerous with this combination ; when the mind is occupied in 
practical and physical occupations the nature is improved. 

THE SUN IN SCOKHIO 

The Sun in the sign Scorpio gives a very firm, determined, and 
reserved individuality, witii inclination to be very dignified, secretive, 
and full of desire, it gives pride to the individuality. Its tendency 
is to give much self-control to each of the lunar indications ; the 
individuality may be very well disposed or very selfish, according to 
progress. Soorpb is a sign of strength, independence, and industry. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



89 



THE SUN IN SCORPIO AND MOON IN ARIES 

V 1 1 1 . - 1 . [Inconjunct) 

This givf<; stubbornness and a liability to go to e.\trc:iies of 
anger ; also mucli jealousy, impulse, and positiveness. It makes strong 
characters who are rather dogmatic, self-assertive, and full of very 
keen likes and dislikes. The passional nature is often very strongt. 
and there is a liability to become' rather tyrannical, and too forceful. 

THE SUN IN SCORPIO AND MOON IN TAURUS 

VIII.'II. {Opposition) 

This is by no means a good omibination, ahhoui^ the lunar 
tendencies will be to reduce some of the posiiivmess of the Scorpio 
nature. It makes good medical men, and gives remarkable intuition 

or instinct with regard to disease. It increases the approbativeness 
and love of display of the Scorpio nature, without which the com- 
bination would not be so good. It gives success in business pursuits, 
and a very firm and determined nature. 

TH£ SUN IN SCORPIO AND MOON IN GKUINI 

VIII.-III. {Im-onjunct.) 

This is by no means a ^oo<\ combination, as the persunnlity is 
inclined to great extremes and is easily drawn into reckless habits. 
It gives a love of cleverness, smartness, and shrewdness ; it makes 
very good critical writers, reviewers, and literary critics. It is not a 
good combination for the health. 

THE SUN IN SCOKPIO AND MOON IN CANCER 

VIII.-IV. 

This is a harmonious combination of the watery triplicity, but 
there is a great liability to be easily drawn into mistakes through the 
feelings and sensatiras, and those under this combination are very 
easily led by others into acts of folly. Early marriage could be 
recommended for this combination, the powers of attachment being 
very strong, and the life may thus be influenced for good. 

THB SUK IM SCORPIO AND MOON IN LEO 
VIII. -V. 

This is an inharmonious combination, inclining the mind to 
romance and love affairs of an unhealthy nature, increasing all the 



Digitized by Google 



90 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



passions and desires, and making the feeling?; very intense and very 
acute. It gives pride, some arrogance, and much love of power. 
The emotions are very keen and active. 

THB SDN IN SCORPIO AND HOON IN VIRGO 

VIII..VI. (SgxHU) 

This is the most critical of all the twelve signs. It gives literary 
ability, a great deal of firide, much paanon, and liability to become 
very sarcastic and bitter in speech. It is a good combination for a 
doctor or chemist, or one who is inclined toward scientific discoveries. 
Females make ^ood nurses. Those under this oombinaticm may be- 
come too practical. 

THB SUN IN SCORPIO AND MOON IN LIBRA 

VIII.-VII. {Smi-^uxHU) 

This gives a tendency to second sight, indinations towards the 
occalt and mjfstical, the love of all that is psychic, romantic and won- 
derful, and leanings towards metaphyaocs, mystical brotherhoods, and 
higher thought. A great deal depends upon planetary influences as 
to the working of this combinationj in some cases there will be no 
occalt ability, but business foresight instead. 

THB SUN IN SCORPIO AND MOON IN SCORPIO 
VIII..VII]. (C«l9lfW<MN) 

This combinaiion gives much self reliance and independence, in- 
clinations towards materialism, ability to govern others, but always a 
tendency to over-ride, domineer and master. It gives much pride 
and A great amount of reserve. There is a tend«icy to be inquisitive 
and search into hidden secrets. Those under this combination are 
well able to assume responsibility. 

THB SUN IN SCORPIO AND MOON IN SAGITTARIUS 
VIII.-IX. (Smi-sixtile) 

Tins combination gives much combativeness, sarcasm, explosive 
and indiscreet speech. There is strong impulse, and an inclination 
towards rash conduct. When angry they are terrifying. There is a 
tendency to combine occultism and religion. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



THB SUN IN SCORPIO AND MOON IN CAPRICORN 

VIII.-X. (Srrtile) 

This intensifies the pride of Scorpio; gives strong inclinations 
towards self-indulgence, but a great amount of patience, perseverance 
and endurance. It inclines towards ambition with deterniiaation 
behind itt and high attainments may be reached. The tendency of 
this combination is toward materialistic thought. It makes capital 
dramatic critics. ' 

THB SUN IN SCORPIO AND MOON IN AQUARIUS 

VIII..XI. (Square) 

This gives ability for Government employments ; a tendency to 
mix in large concerns; mnch conservatism, pride, a keen desire* 
nature ; a love of external appearances, wealth and grandeur ; there 
is also some love of the occult and mysterious. 

THB SUN IN SCORPIO AND UOON IN PISCES 

VIII.-XII. (Trim) 

This combination gives a very restless and anxious nature, in« 

clined to mathematics. It makes mediumship easy, but in many re- 
spects it is rather a weak combination for the morals. . There is a 
tendency toward deception and duplicity. 

THB SUN IN SAGITTARIUS 
IX. 

The Sun in the sign Sagittarius inclines the individual towards 
science, philosophy and religion. It gives much activity, and a rest- 
less spirit, but also one who is frank, honest, sincere, loyal, ami a \o\er 
of liberty. It givt-s a tendency to prophecy through any of the 
twelve signs that the Moon may be placed in. In undeveloped egos 
there will be a rebellious and doniinative spirit, but in the advanced 
souls a love of law and order. 

THE SUN IN SAGITTARIUS AND MOON IN ARIBS 
IX. -I. {Trine) 

This is a combination of the fiery triplicity. It intensifies the 
activity, but inclines the mind to he always rusliinsf out impulsively ; 
this is apt to give exactitude, .iuU discontent , nuich restraint is needed, 
otherwise excitability will be expressed and too much mental Miergy. 



Digitized by Google 



92 ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 

There will be great desire to excel, and Minetiines over-remch ; the 
passional nature is often active, and the personality is very strong and 
tends to over-ride restraint. 

THE SUN IN SACITTARIUS AND MOON IN TAURUS 

IX.-II. {ItKonjutict) 

This is a sympathetic combination and the reserve of Taurus, 

etc., lessen? the impulsi vmipss of Sat,nttariu'^, expands the sympathies 
an<i also ^'ives iiiore stability to tht- foresif,'ht which is nearly always 
rt'lmble. It is a fortunate combination lor worldly success, the fore- 
sight of Sagittarius being used for practical ends. 

THE St;N IN SAGirrAKiUS AND MOON IN GEMINI 

IX.-II I. (Opposition) 

This combination quickens ihe aclivitiesof Safjittarius. It gives 
a liakMlity to become hasty in speech, over excited, and too active. It 
gives a love of education, but there are many obstacles in the life to 
overcome. It inclines to a highly nervous condition which may 
induce nervous disorders or consumptive tendencies. It favours the 
motive temperament and gives a love of travel. 

THB SUN IN SAGITTARIUS AND MOON IN CANCSR 

IX.>IV. {Inamfuttet) 

This is by no means a harmonious combination, fire and water 
not being agreeable combinations, and many mistakes are apt to be 

made in life through the sympathetic impulsiveness of the individu- 
ality which is easily expressed throuj^h the personal, etnotional, 
psychic and imaig;inative i haractcristics ot Cancer. It gives intuition 
and confers the gift of prophecy and true dreaming, but inclines 
toward sensation. 

THE SUN IN SAGITTARIUS AND MOON IN LBO 

IX.-V. (7riw) 

This is a splendid combination of the fiery triplicity ; it awakens ' 
^tfaer the passional or the spiritual side of the nature, the latter 
giving great ability to foresee the future and to protdiecy. It tends 
to make the mind very proud, quick and alert, with the ability to 
sense other minds. This is the most affcctional combination of this 
group, the heart being very active. Tiie love nature can go out to 
many, but there is apt to be much confusion in l^his combioation. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 93 
- THB SUH IN 8AGITTAKIUS AN0 MOOH IN VIRGO 

IX.-VL iS9im») 

This gives ttKcellent discriminative powers; intuition ; language; 
refinement ; love of harmony, ability to intellectaally Inresee with 
regard to material things. The higher mind is active and tends to 
make the personality critical, but bright and dear in thought and 
speech* 

THB SUN IN SAGITTARIUS AND MOON IN LIBRA 

IX.-V11. iSexHle) 

In this combination the personal characteristics tend to equalize 
and modify the impulse of Saj^ittarius. This combination awakens the 
ambitions and ^'ives a fairly strong' personaHty. It fjives very quick 
and accurate perception and powers of comparison and equilibrium. 
It also gives some refinement, artistic and murical ability. 

THB SUN IN SAGITTARIUS AND MOON IN SCORPIO 

iX.-VIII. {Semi-SextiU) 

This is a good combination, the martial Jupiterian influence pre- 
dominatinpf. There is apt to be much sarcasm in speech; pride, 
much temper, cornbativeness, impetuosity \ but where the mind is led 
into the occult great attainments may be made. It gives much 
perseverance and persistracet plenty of enngy and a denre fax in- 
dependsnoe. 

THB SUN IN SAGITTARIUS AND MOON IN SAGITTARIUS 
IX«-IX. (C«^iNW<i«l*) 

This comtMoatiott gives too much indepradence, too much firee- 
dom, and a tendency to become reckless and rebellious, while at the 
same time there are some conservative tendencies. It quickens the 

mental and physical powers. Sagittarius |ts well expressed by this 
combination, bringing out the love of travel, science, philosophy, and 
religion. 

THB SUN IN SAGITTARIUS AND MOON IN CAPRICORN 

IX. -X. {Semi-SexUle) 

The personal characteristics steady the individuality and ^ive 
musical al>!li!v : it aw;\l<ens the personal nalure into grcaipr activity, 
givmg auibiuou in matters of higher thougiit, etc. L'iicre is some 



Digitized by Google 



1 



94. ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 

liaUlity to rhangeaMaacw, tut tb« mind is industrious and practical, 
though often very seosualk This oooibiimtion gives inftuenee in 
religious matters. 

THB SUH IN SAGITTARIUS AND MOON IN AQUARIUS 

IX. -XI. {Sextile) 

This quickens the intuitions, gives ability to deal with the multi- 
tude, associations and public bodies, but there is a liability to over- 
exertion. It is a good combination for c; nunercial life, or where the 
personality comes prominently before others. 

TH* SUN IK SAGITTARIUS AND MOON IN PISCES 
IX. -XII. {Square) 

This combination gives too riuich an. \iety, restlessness and inclin- 
ation to worry, but causes the prophetic nature to come through the 
personality wlien it is restful and mediumistically inclined. It gives 
a religious tendency and an inclination to be charitable, but there is 
a lack of initiative, and worjc is best carried out when under the 
direction of others. It is not a good combination for the health. 

THS SUN IN CAPRICORN 

X. 

This gives a very ambitious individuality, possessing much inde- 
pendence, much strength of character, keen luve of justice and a 
desire to attain to the highest position possible. There is much 
self-rehancc and determination expressed through this sign, which 
considerably strengthens the various personalities attached to it. 

THB SUN IN CAPRICORN AMD HOON IN ARIRS 

X. -I. (Square) 

This dives much ambition, a desire to be at the head of every- 
thing, much determination, independence, and self-assertion, with 
egotistical tendencies. It quickens all the Aries vibrations, giving 
an intense love of music. It brings the native into prominence, 
especially in governmental aJTairs or where great responsibility is 
required. 

THB SUN IN CAPRICORN AND MOON IN TAURUS 

X.4I. (Trim) 

This gives a very persistent mind, much firmness and self-oontiol, 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 95 

a desife to elevate and improve others, with a certain amount of oon- 
sorvatism. It is the most practical of this set of oomtnoations, giving 
ability to acquire wealth and the power to do good with it. 

THB SUN IN CAPRICORN AND MOON IN GBMINI 

The steady carefulness behind the activity of Gemini causes this 
combination to be studious, and very much inclined to give expression 
to the thoughts behind the personality. This combination is good for 
ambassadors, scientific writers, and speakers. 

THB SUN IN CAPRICORN AND MOON IN CANCBR 

X.-IV. {O^posUkm) 

This mcreases the smsitiveness of Canc^, gives a strong inclina- 
tion towards economy, thrift, and prudence, but also a certain amount 
of seliishness. There is a love of change and a desire for high attain* 

mcnt5; in the physical world. It gives a love of economy, much 
tenacity, and the desire to travel. 

TUB SUN IN CAPRICORN AND MOON IN LBO 

ft 

X..V. (ineonjunct) 

This is not a very harmonious combination, the personal tenden- 
cies being towards aflection, against the internal ambitious instincts^ 
But conjugality could be well expressed by this combination. There 
IS a love of ostentation and display; the ideals are very high with re- 
gard to the surroundings. 

THE SUN IN CAPRICORN AND MOON IN VIRGO 

X..VI. (TtwM) 

This is an excellent combination of the earthy triplicity, the 
critical and analytical tendencies of Virgo bmng considerably softened 
by the meditative and contemplative Capricorn nature. It gives 
sfdendid ability to judge and criticise, and intensifies the .discrimina- 
tive fMulties, giving ability for literary employments. 

THB SUN IN CAPRICORN ANP MOON IN UBRA 
X.-VII. (S^MOW) 

The well'balanced brain of the punonal indications of Ljhra will 
have behind it the careful thoughtfulness of Capxioom, which will 
give ^lendid intuition, comparison, carefiil focevght and a love of 



Digitized by Google 



96 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



the metaphysical. This combinatioa gives a love of popularity and 
desire for fame. 

THB SUN IN CAPRICORN AND MOON IN SCORPIO 

X..V11. iStxHU) 

This is by no means a good combination, giving much secrecy, 
tact, and diplomacy. It intensifies the selfishness and hardness of 
the Scorpio nature. It is the combination that would iimke a good 
surgeon, soldier or military leader ; it tends towards materialistic 
thought, increases the anger and gives some revolutionary feelings. 

THB SUN IN CAPRICORN AND MOON IN SAGITTARIUS 

X.-IX. {Semi-sexfilf) 

This is not a hariTionious combination, hut tlie practical nature 
of Capricorn will steady down the recklessness and impulsiveness of 
Sagittarius and will make the execution better. It is a good combina- 
tion fior explorers and it gives much religious ambition. 

THE SUN IN CAPRICORN AND MOON' IN CAPRICORN 

X.-X. (Conjunction) 

This gives a very thoup[htful character, with some inclination to 
despondency. There is apt to be too much independence at times, 
isolation* with a desire to live a life of loneliness. The feelings are 
not expansive, and there is a tendency to retire inward fu more than 
is good for the character. It gives good busineii> ability, and makes 
the nature acquisitive and somewhat self-centred. 

THE SUN IN CAPRICOKN AND MOON IN AQUARIUS 

X.-XI. (Smi'SsxtiU) 

This gives splendid organising ability, with success in huge and 
gigantic undertakings, public companies, etc. It quickens the per- 
ceptions, gives intuition and the ability to read character accurately. 
Much progress is made in life through careful fiofethought. 

THE SUN IN CAPRICORN AND MOON IN PISCES 

X.-XIL {SeifHk) 

This is rather an unhappy combination and gives much anxiety, 

wi:h desires toward economy and frugality* In some natures it 
gives perseverance and industry, and a f^reat de?:iie for knowledge, 
but with others the personality is indolent,, easy-going and careless. 



Digitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



' 9» 

97 



TRB SUN IN AQUARIUS 

The Son in Aquarii» gives a very refined individuality, loving 
everything of a humanitarian nature, very faithful, sincere, humane 

and just, with very broad sympathies and a desire to embrace the 
whole of humanity. The individuality will be active in awakened souls, 
but in the younj^er members of the race it will not be manifest, and the 
personality will act as though no individuality were behind it. 

THE SUN IN AQUARIUS AND MOON IN ARIBS 
XI.-I. {S^iU) 

This gives a very firm character, quiet, and not very expressive, 
but with real perceptive ability, capable of judging human character, 
persevering in nature, but liable at times to go to extremes in action, 

THB SUN IN AQUARIUS AND MOON IN TAURUS 

This makes an excellent character reader, human nature being 
well developed. It inclines to be practical in all its manifestations 
faithful, ancere, firm, just and reliable. 

THB SUN IN AQUARIUS AND MOON IN CBUINI 

XI..III. (7*rsw) 

This combination belongs to the airy triplicity. It intensifies 

all the intellectual qualities, giving oratorical power, a studious 
mind, well adapted for all literary pursuits. This combination gives 
industry, neatness, and perfection in regard to details. 

THE SON IN AQUARIUS AND MOON IN' CANCBR 

XI.-IV. {fmamjnmty 

This is not a very harmonious combination. It intensifies the 
economical tendencies of Cancer, and gives firmness with regard to all 

matters of a domestic nature. It awakens the sensitiveness of Cancer 
and gives intuition with regard to pvsons with whom there is much 
attachment. 

THB SUN IN AQUARIUS AND MOON IN LBO 

XI.-V. (Oppasitum) 

This intensifies the love nature and gives a strong desire 
to become devoted to one ; there is an inclination to worship those 



Digitized by Google 



98 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



who are loved. This is rather a peculiar combination, giving psychic 
ability and the power to psychometrise. 

THE SUN IN AQUARIITS AND MOON IN VIRGO 

XI.-VI. {Inconfunct) 

This considerably inipruves the characteristics, intensifying the 
love of hygiene, giving neatness, precision, carefulness, and awaken* 
ing all the critical £iciilttes. It gives pnidenoe» practicality, business 
ability, love of science and intellectual pursuits. 

THB SUN IN AUUARIUS AND MOON IN LIBRA 

XI..Vn. {Trine) 

This is a very fine combination of the airy triplicity. It gives 
Splendid powers of judgment, remarkable perception, a very intuitive 
nature and much foresight. It awakens the spiritual side of the 
nature, giving balance and equilibrium to the internal perceptions. 
Success in marriage is indicated in this combination. 

TMB SUN IN AQUARIUS AND MOON IN SCOBPIO 

XI.-VIIL (S^jmm) 

This is by no means a good combination, the Scorpio nature not 
being In harmony with the Aquarian. It inclines to make the nature 
rather hard and revengeful, somewhat over-grasping, too sdf'reliant, 
and somewhat worldly selfish. 

THB SUN IN AQUARIUS AND MOON IN SAGITTAaiUS 
XI.-IX. 

This combination makes the personality rather too quick lor the 
slow, steady individuality, but it adds a little more concentrativenesis 

to the impulsive nature of Sagittarius. There is apt to be much im- 
pulse in speech nnd inclination to be rather abrupt. It gives religious 
or psychic tendencies. 

THB StIN IN AQUARIUS AND MOON IN CAPRICORN 

XI.-X. {Sem-»xtik) 

This combination makes the personality very shrewd, tactful, 
ambitious and eager to attain to great heights, which are often 
reached through favouritism and tlie help of friends. There is much 
solidity of thought and ability for political matters. 



i^iyui^cd by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOK ALL 



99 



THB SUN IN AQUARIUS AND MOON IN AQUARIUS 
XI. -XI. {Conjunction) 

This combination is good for the individuality, giving much re- 
finement, a great deal of discretion, discrimination, and careful 
thought. It intensifies the clearness and brightness of the Aquarian 
intellect, and tones down the self-centring of the luminaries in the 
same sign. 

THB SUN IN AQUARIUS AND MOON IN PISCES 

XI.-XII. 

This M not so bad a combination as the other Pisces natures, as 

it gives much perseverance, carefulness, and awakens the studious side 
of the I'isces nature, l)ut much will depend upon planetary influences 
with regard to this combination. 

THB SUN IN PIBCB8 

XIL 

The Sun in the sign Pisces tends to make the individual nature 
emotional and receptive, meditative and imitative* This is not the 

strongest of the twelve signs, hut it gives a very deep internal nature, 
with strong inclinations towards occult development. There are two 
types of individuals under the sign Pisces, the developed and unde- 
veloped. 

THB SUN IN PISCES AND MOON IN ARIBS 
XI I.- 1. {Semt-sejitile) 

This combination considerablv strengthens the intiividual char- 
acter, adds more force and energy to the Pisces sign, ami gives more 
self-reliance, but at the same time wilfulness and a tendency to be 
more easily led than driven. 

THB SUN IN PI8CBS AND HOON IN TAURUS 

(StxHU) 

This intensifies the negative nature of this combination ; it gives 
a considerable amount of sensitiveness, and a great love of the occult. 
The firmness of Taurus strengthens the vacillation of Pisces, and 
makes a kind, quiet and pleasapt nature. There is a love of money 
indicated. 



ASTROLOGY FOK ALL 



TBM SUN IN P18CIS AND ICOON IN GBUINI 

XII.-III. (SquMi) 

This combination gives' vadllation, a tendency to worry and lack 
of continuity or fixity of purpose ; a great deal of indecision and an 

inclination to restless, over-active mentality. It becomes rather 
fanciful, easily affected by the moods of others. 

THB SUN IN PISCBS AND MOON IN CANCBX 

XII.-IV. {THm) 

This intendfies the imaginative and sensitive nature of Cancer, 
increases the economy, also the receptivity. It is one of the psychical 
combinations, awakening the psychic faculties. The emotional nature 
is very keen, but not lacking in reflection. 

THB SVN IN PISCES AND MOON IN LBO 

Xil.-V. {Jmoi^'uuet) 

This is an inharmonious combination, so far as the physical 
world is concerned, as it f,Mves a continual yearning for the unattain- 
able, or for somethmg that seems far beyond physical realisation. It 
inclines very much to the occult and metaphysical, giving a love of 
everything that is romantic, weird and mysterious. It is an unfor- 
tunate combination, often placing ^hose under its influence in post- 
ticms they cannot maintain, making them erratic and liable to varying 
moods. 

THB SUN IN PISCBS AND MOON IN VIRGO 

XII.-VI. (Opposition) 

Pisces is considerably improved by this combination. The in* 
tuition is active, and the critical nature of Virgo has behind it much 
inspiration. Much may be done in a qutet way. It is a combination 
giving a steady and useful disposition. 

THE SUN IN PISCES AND MOON IN LIBRA 
XII.-VII. 

This gives an equable tendency to the personality, and in- 
clines one to all inspirational and spiritual things, giving the ability 
to weigh up and balance the internal sense of things of Pisces. 
|t Strengthens the peraeptions of the Pisces nature. 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



lOI 



THE SUN IN PISCES AND MOON IN SCORPIO 

XI I. -VI II. (Trine) 

This is by no means a gooi] coml)ination, althou^'h belonging to 
the watery Iriplicity. The Scorpio nature is rather too Imrd and sel- 
fish. It brings misfortunes into the life, and It piakes those under its 
influence inclined to be more jealous, as in this respect it is a com- 
bination more easily affected by others. There are apt to be some 
morbid incHnations and many acts of indiscretion. In some horo* 
copies it indicates treachery. 

THB SUN IN PISCES AND MOON IN SAGITTARIUS 

XI I.- IX. (Square) 

This is an excitable and irritable combination, belon^^ing to the 
common signs. It gives over-activity to the personality, but reduces 
the impulsiveness of Sagittarius, althoiif^h it pi^-es very talkative pro- 
pensities. There is much sympathy m the nature, strong feelings 
of charity and religious sentiment. 

THE SUN IN PISCES AND MOON IN CAPRICORN 

XII.-X. (SsxtHe) 

The personality is apt to lead the individuality captive to the 
malerialibtic desires of the Capricorn nature, which is ever seeking to 
be practical mwe than dreamy. An active life is best for those 
under this combination, and they should be placed in positions of re- 
sponsibility where they can take the lead. 

THB SUN IN PISCES AND MOON IN AQUARIUS 

XII.-XI. {Smi^xUU) 

This gives intuition, ability for business, and pursuits on a 
large scale where intuition may be used. It gives a quiet, retiring, and 
harmless disposition ; in many respects it is a good combination. 

THE SUN IN PISCES AND MOON IN PISCES 

XII.-XII. (CMjunciion) 

This combination gives a hospitable nature, but there is an in- 
dinatiott to be over-anxious and somewhat too restless. It gives 
tnuch responsibihty, and an inclination towards spiritualistic pheno- 
mena. The imagination is very keen, and thereis a tendency to give 
way to melancholia. 



I02 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



CHAPTER XIX. 

Thb Lunar Positions prom 1850 to 1900 

With this chapter we diall conclude the first part of *' Astro- 
logy for All," and in the second part we shall take up the more com> 
plicated details with regard to the planets, casting the horoscope, etc. 
To these who are not sure of the hour of their birth, reference to the 

following tables will enable them to f^ain some general and fairly 
acrnratp idea as to their character, etc., and further study will assist 
them in oblaininj,^ more knowletige of tlieuiselves, as indicated by 
the solar and lunar positions. We may now illustrate the method of 
obtaining knowledge of the character. 

Example : We will suppose A. B. to have been born January ist, 
1850. Reference to Chapter XIII., p. 35, will show us the individual 
character of persons bom between December «tst and January ^h 
of any year, described by the Sun in the sign Capricorn. After 
noting all these characteristics we turn to the table giving the place 
of the Moon for 1850, and we find the Moon is in the sign SI (Leo), 
and in Chapter VIII., p. 22, we have an outline of the personal 
characteristics in general ; a more detailed description showing the 
tendency of the life will be found on p. 36 under the heading of 
** The Moon in Leo ** ; then, if we would blend these two influences, 
we may refer to the solar lunar combinations on p. 95, under the 
heading of The Sun in Capricorn and Moon in Leo.** 

In the tables " The Place of the Moon " the degrees of the 
Moon's place are given for noon of each day. There are 30° in each 
sign ; by simple addition or subtraction the Moon's place may he 
found for any hour in the day, e.^., on the i6th of January, 1850, the 
Moon is in the 29*^ of (A(}uarius) at noon ; therefore at 2 p.m. the 
Moon has changed her sign into H (Pisces). Roughly, the ^ (Moon) 
moves 1^ in two hours. 

It should always be remembered that the rising sign at birth and 
the planetary positions will often greatly mitigate or alter the influence 
of the Sun and Moon, and although the Imninaries symbolise the 
consciousness and its expression, fate and the environment will form 
a prominent feature in many lives, but the main feature of each life 
will he the individual, permanent mood or character, as represented 
by the Sun, which " rules by day, " and the per»onal, changeable and 
sensitive mood or disposition by the Moon, which ** rules by night." 



Diqitized by Google 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



To make our meaning clear, we will look up the individual and per- 
sonal character and its combioation of the Duke of York, who was 
bom June 3rd, 1865. Reference to the table of the place of the Moon, 
1865, shows that on June 3rd» 1865, the Moon was in a (Libra). 
The following is an extract from Chapter VI., representing : 

THB iNOtVIDUAL AND PEKSONAL CHARACTBR OF THS SIGN GEMINI 

a May 3olA to Jnm n^k n 

This IS the first sign of the airy triplicity, also the first of the 
mntable signs. The airy tripHcity governs the mental conditions of 
humanity, hence we find those born in this sign living more in the 
mind, but, owinf^ to the sign belonging to the mutable group, they 
are dualistic — this beinpf the main feature of the miitable signs, and 
from this comes the tendency to express two conditions and an incli- 
nation at times to be rather easily influenced on one side or the other. 
' Gemini governs the lungs, also the hands and arms, hence it may be 
seen that one hand may act diflerently to the other. These persons 
are rarely content with a angle occupation or pursuit, and seem to 
delight in having two thin^ in hand at the same time. They can 
very quickly adapt themselves to surroundings or environment and 
they are remarkable for their versatility, but they are very sensitive 
and have the ability to^ reason upon and analyse their sensa- 
tions. Tiuy love chan<,'e and di\ersity, and they are always the 
best persons to rely upon in an emergency, as they can instantly re- 
spond to the requirements of the moment. They love variety of 
thought and all mental pursuits, and these they sometimes carry into 
extremes ; they seem to take an especial delight in leaving their work 
unfinished. They will take up one thing, partly finish it, and then go 
on to another, which they also feel inclined to leave unfinished ; there- 
fore their best work is done when co-operating with others, and when 
workinf,' in unitv with those who understand their peculiarities they 
are capable ot great attainments in life, but the spirit of diversity 
often makes them experience two extremes during their life. 

They can be generous and also somewhat careful and near. They 
can present a bold front and assertive attitude, and yet be timid and 
highly nervous. They are conservative and progressive, and alto- 
gether quite dualistic subjects, which makes them difficult for others 
to understand, etc., etc., etc. 



Dig'itized by Google 



104 



ASTROLOGY FOR ALL 



We may then read what has been said about the Moon in the 
ZodvAc, Chapter XV 11., and refer to page 57 and the paragraph 
describing the personal characteristics as follows { 

THB UOON IN LIBRA 

This position lavours general popularity. It gives fondness for 
music, poetry, and the fine arts generally, and much ability in this 

direction. The native is affectionate, good-natured, kind in manner 
and easily gains friends. Tiie native is fond of company, society and 
friends. Much of hh fate and many events of his hfe will come about 
through his association with other people; he will be greatly swayed 
and influenced by other people ; generally by boiiie one person, it 
tends strongly to partnership, not merely in business, but in almost 
all affairs of life. He works with another person in nearly all under* 
takings; and, without necessarily h&ag irresolute, depends largely 
upon someone else, and can get along best in almost all things when 
associated with someone. The same may be said of the occupation 
and position in life. By cotnbining these two influences we obtain 
the polarity as described by 

THK SUN IN GEMINI AND MOON IN I.lliRA 

This IS a very good combination, built up un the airy triplicity. 
It gives much rehnement and a sympathetic nature ; it also increases 
the intuitions, gives a great amount of foresight, sharpness to the 
perceptive faculties, inclines to study, gives ability for public writing 
and a great amount of imitativeness. It is necessary for those bom 
under this combination to live purely. The faculty of comparison is 
well developed and there is some probability of his becoming popular. 
It gives success in artistic pursuits. 

It is now necessary to know the environment into which the 
subject was born to judye as to the future. Mucii information may 
be gathered from a study of Chapter XVI., which describes " The 
nature of the twelve signs of the zodiac." Reference to this chapter 
and page 45, shows us that the Duke of York was born in the positive 
group of the Airy triplicity, in cardinal and mutable signs. The last 
paragraph describes the Airy signs, etc., etc. A careful study of this 
chapter will reveal a great deal of the character without knowing the 
actual hirtlitime, and without any elaborate system of mathematics ; 
in fact, \vuliout any figures whatever. If we would know more we 
must study Part if., which explauis the rising sign, planets, etc. 



Digitized by Google 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1850-1851 







reD. 


Marcn 


April 


May 


June 


July 


August 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 








-> * 


0 f 




0 r 


0 f 


0 » 











I 


21 il45 


11 ■^5'' 


19^49 


0 f 20 


8 VI 40 


22 S 17 


24 X52 


12«I5 


3®23 


I2A 9 


5*^ 7 


12 nii5 


2 




25 II 


3 "I 8 




- ' ■; - 


-( H 1 J 


7 T 16 


25 43 


'7 ■»'< 


-"' J 9 


19 9 


25 27 


3 


20 2 


7"l 59 


10 3 


01^47 


2 = J 1 


10 21 


20 1 


9041 


A31 


1 1 "ii 14 


i"l 0 


8/26 


4 


3^30 


20 27 


28 36 


12 40 


14 1 1 


28 40 


3tf II 


24 2 


17 24 


25 48 


'6 37 


21 10 


5 


>f» 33 


2/39 


10 / 52 




20 a 


IIT33 


'to 48 


8ffi45 


2ni22 


10^ 15 


29 56 


31138 




J.) 15 


14 38 


22 53 


' » — JO 


8 K 17 


24 46 


on 54 


23 45 


17 to 


24 29 


12/55 


13 53 


7 




20 31 


4 146 


10 10 


20 42 


0 w 27 


15 25 


8A54 


I ^50 


8ni22 


»5 35 


27 55 


A 

9 


23 51 


819 20 


iC> 34 


OK24 


3T29 


22 35 


00 17 


24 3 


16 21 


21 53 


7W53 


9*47 


9 


5 ' 53 


20 0 


20 24 


12 47 


10 40 


7 n 0 


15 23 


9 tip 3 


0 ni2o 


5/ 0 


20 I 


31 35 


So 


>7 49 


aae o 


lOB 19 


25 27 


0 V 16 


21 54 


OA34 


23 45 


13 52 


17 43 




3 »<22 


II 


29 40 


'J 57 


22 22 


8T28 


14 14 


09951 


'5 39 


8-^ 5 


26 58 


oW 5 


13 44 


'5 14 . 


12 


II VJ JO 


20 2 


4X37 


21 48 


28 31 


21 47 


011S30 


21 57 


9/40 


12 12 


25 32 


27 16 


13 


JO 


8 H 16 


17 3 


5W27 


ijn I 


OA 36 


'5 ' 


5"125 


22 I 


24 6 


7x25 


9T33 


'4 




20 41 


20 49 


19 20 


27 37 


21 10 


29 10 


18 26 


4W 7 


5«55 


19 28 


22 to 


15 


'7 7 


3T 17 


1 ^ T i8 


31123 


I2<IB 1 1 


5"S27 


12^=^53 


' ' 5 


16 I 


>7 43 


IT47 


5 B II 


10 


29 8 


16 7 


26 I 


»7 33 


26 39 


19 24 


26 14 


13 26 


27 50 


29 36 


'4 25 


18 37 


»7 


1 1 1 7 


29 12 


9W 27 


HB45 


IOA37 


3* I 


9"li3 


25 33 


9»37 


11 K38 


27 24 


2039 


IS 


23 38 


12 a J2 


23 5 


'3 57 


25 2 


10 21 


2« 53 


7W29 


21 28 


*3 53 


lOtf 44 


16 43 




oTt3 


20 TO 


«>n53 


OA 5 


Stss 


29 35 


4/18 


19 20 


3»a5 


OT32 


24 34 


1914 


so 


10 7 


ion 5 


20 51 


14 10 


22 35 


I2»1ll < 


16 31 


I s 8 


15 31 


19 9 


8021 


15 5<* 


3t 


2 a 2j 


- 1 «7 


48856 


28 9 


6ri 4 


24 49 


28 34 


12 56 


27 48 


2 « 13 


22 30 


OA 42 


22 


16 3 


89B45 


19 s 


\ 


19 21 


7/14 


1 0 >) 29 


24 47 


lOT 18 


15 31 


6046 


15 24 


23 


on 8 


y 24 


JJI24 


23 51 


2,ntio 


ig 28 


22 20 


6X44 


23 0 


29 2 


21 4 


29 5^ 


24 


14 JH 


8 A 10 


17 43 


9^-29 


15 19 


' •133 


4s: 8 


18 48 


5»55 


I2D44 


5 A 20 


14ns 18 


25 


29 28 


22 5'i 


2 nj I 


22 57 


2n I 


13 30 


'5 56 


IT I 


19 2 


26 34 


19 32 


28 22 


26 


143932 


7ni!33 


16 14 


6in 12 


10/30 


25 21 


27 46 


»3 25 


2023 


10029 


3 m; 3S 


1 2 =5- 1 1 


27 


29 4» , 


22 0 




19 12 


22 47 


7= 9 


9x41 


26 3 


»5 55 


24 29 


17 38 


*5 44 


38 


14A48 


6* 6 


14 10 


1/57 


41^53 


18 57 


21 43 


8M54 


29 40 


8A33 


IA30 


9«l I 


39 


29 41 




a? 44 


14 25 


16 49 


OM47 


3T56 


22 3 


I3«38 


22 40 


13 14 


33 4 




« J mm ff ^ 




•Wl JO 






12 44 


t ^ f 'S 

I u ^3 


31130 








4 * 54 


3' 






*3 5* 








29 9 


19 17 




20 59 




17 30 


IJ M 


Jan. 


Feb. 


March 


April 


May 


June 


July 


August 


Sept, 


Uct. 


Wov. 


Pec. 




* 


0 t 




c * 


0 f 


0 f 








u r 




c r 


I 


29^55 


14=47 


23-34 


8T 7 


II 8 58 


SB 8 


8*59 


3^41 


24 "159 


Oil 36 


x6a» 13 


I8)t 3 


2 


12 vj y 


26 35 


5 K 22 


20 23 


24 54 


15 3 


33 33 


«7 9 


■fit « Ma 

0/23 


13 16 


a» 9 


29 54 


3 


24 U 


8 M 23 


17 13 


2 8 49 


8 n 4 


29 5 


8l« 2 


IHl 18 


31 27 


25 37 


lox 0 


11T49 


4 


6= 9 


20 13 


29 10 


«5 27 


21 24 


IJA 13 


22 27 


15 6 


4 8 


7-43 


21 50 


23 5" 


5 


«7 59 


2 T 0 


1 1 T 14 


2» It) 


4®55 


27 23 


6^42 


28 33 


16 32 


19 39 


3T43 


n y 5 


0 


29 4<' 


' t 11 


23 26 


II II 16 


\o 3O 


ii"S35 


20 45 


1 1 / 40 


28 42 




>5 43 


18 31 


7 


11 *< 33 


2<i 20 


5 W 40 


24 30 


2 A 26 


25 45 


4 "136 


24 30 


105:44 


13 20 


27 50 


I n 12 


o 
0 


23 25 


8»55 


18 2 j 


.^'^ 


16 -'5 


9^52 


18 12 


7^ 4 


22 39 


25 II 


10 B 7 


14 7 


9 


5T25 


21 44 


I 0 13 


21 42 


Onu 33 


23 55 


I /34 


19 20 


4 3« 


7T 6 


22 34 


27 17 


10 


•7 39 


4n55 


14 ao 


5A4» 


14 50 


7'n5o 


14 14 


1*38 


16 22 


19 6 


5 n 12 


io«40 


II 


Ott 12 


18 32 


»7 47 


ao 0 


29 12 




*7 35 


13 4» 


20 13 


I b 12 


19 0 


24 15 


12 


13 7 


2»35 


it«37 


4"i»3« 


13*3<> 




io»>i5 


«5 40 


lOT 7 


13 as 


o«59 


oA 0 


13 


26 27 


'7 5 


25 50 


19 16 


27 57 


18 25 


22 42 


7X33 


22 4 


25 46 


14 10 


21 53 


14 


10 n 16 


I A 56 


10A25 


4r?S 6 


i2.m 9 


1 1025 


4«57 


19 24 


48 n 


8 n 17 


27 32 


5"«54 


15 




'7 ,S 


.•3 18 


i8 52 


26 7 


14 8 


'7 3 


I T 14 


lO li, 


- 1 0 


1 1 A 9 


2Q 0 


lb 




i lie 2 1 


10^824 


311128 


9 ' 47 


26 35 


29 0 


'3 7 


28 4 1 


i»57 


25 0 


4-^11 


'7 


24 6 


'7 34 


25 33 


17 46 


23 5 


8S48 


10 « 52 


25 6 


II 0 18 


1 7 11 


gnji 6 


iM 25 


18 


9.fl 12 


2-34 


10 36 




6H 1 


20 50 


22 43 


7B 14 


24 12 


OA 44 


23 26 


211138 


»y 


24 i« 


17 14 


25 22 


'5 


18 j6 


2M44 


4T35 


19 35 


7 as 2n 


'4 39 


7-56 


lO 47 


20 


9"S "7 


I rit.>8 


9"l45 


28 7 


OSB52 


»4 34 




2013 


21 9 


28 57 


22 37 


0/49 


31 


23 5'* 


'5 «} 


23 40 


X0V543 


12 50 


20 27 


28 42 


'5 '3 


5A17 


'3'' 36 


7'h. 10 


14 39 


22 


8&21 


28 30 


7' 5 


23 0 


24 49 


8T 25 




28 37 


19 SO 


to 3' 


31 47 


•■ft adC 

20 ID 


*3 


22 19 


11/22 


' 30 2 


5= I 


6X40 


20 35 


23 48 


13*27 


4 ■"40 


t3e>3D 


6/ 5 


IBI935 


*4 


5"IS4 


23 5-i 


2-^35 


10 53 


18 31 


3 el 0 


6053 


26 45 


'9 5^ 


28 39 


20 3 


24 36 


25 


to 6 


6 /5 ♦) 


14 4*J 


j8 41 


oT2y 


'5 44 


20 22 


II A28 


5"^ "> 


'3 "I31 


3 111 38 


7«i8 




1/5H 


18 7 


26 48 


10 K 30 


12 37 


28 49 


4«Bi7 


26 29 


20 28 


^8 4 


16 48 


14 44 


27 


14 32 


29 ,S9 


« = 3<^ 


22 25 


25 D 


12 11 If. 


iH 35 


1 1 ''S42 


5"l 24 


(2/11 


29 35 


I ><55 


28 


2f> 53 


"=47 


20 25 


4X^9 


7«30 


26 4 


3A13 


26 55 


19 50 


25 49 


I2SS I 


13 56 


2Q 


9 VJ 2 




2 K 12 


16 45 


20 37 


io<u 10 


18 4 


" -59 


3'59 


8V358 


24 «l 


25 50 


30 


21 3 




14 3 


29 14 


3032 


24 30 


3"5 ' 


26 44 


«7 3« 


21 42 


OK 10 


7T42 


31 


*«57 




26 0 




17 *i 




»7 56 


II "1 5 




4= 5 


1 


«9 37 



Digitized by Google 



THE PI,ACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1852-1853 



UM 


Jan. 




1 

1 


A — ** 

April' 


May 


June 


Joly j 


August 


j 

Sept. 


uct. 




FWm- 


I 


* « jy 


0 » I 
16115^ 




t 

2»A 9 1 


C. f * 

<>^43 


0 / 3O 


0 r 

7»^52 


20s: 5 


t: 1 
I I T25 


0 f 

I3K44 


0 ' 

28 II 26 


e • 


2 


53 


0<35 2 


21 27 


I2nji57 


21 51 


15 10 


21 31 


0 M 40 


23 21 


25 34 


I DOS 39 


15 4! 


i 




'3 37 


5^27 


2K 6 ' 


7 in 2 


29 20 


4 = 5' 


21 1 


5» «3 ! 


711 26 


23 7 


20 51 


4 


y 11 10 


27 37 


'9 5^ 


I \ ■ J'j 


22 7 


I3l'l20 


»7 53 


3T 10 


'7 3 


19 25 


5^53 


T 2 BT 22 




Z2 15 


12 A I 


4n4':^ 


2h 47 


6 / 56 . 


26 50 


OK 35 


15 9 


28 56 


T VD36 


'9 3 


26 14 


9 




36 4a 


»9 5» 


• 3 "155 


21 21 


9*55 


13 0 


27 3 


101156 


•4 3 


2 "I 30 


10^27 


I 


19 33 




3**3 


43 1 


SO '8 


22 39 


35 II 


8 8 53 


23 9 


36 j}3 


10 41 


0 


s 


3<13^ 


so so 


ao 34 


13/ 4 1 


IB 411 


5^ 3 


7TI3 


20 51 


5»40 


lOA 7 


I Alt 


A « «a 


9 


17 30 


11^13 


5"l 20 


26 54 


IS50 


17 13 


19 7 


2D 54 


18 34 


23 5' 


10 5 


24 45 


10 


2RJ 12 


25 4» 


'9 54 


loi^ 17 


14 30 


29 'J 


I 8 0 


»5 9 


I A54 


8 m D 


I "II5 


9/42 


1 1 


16 36 


10 III 5 




■iJ '3 


26 51 


II T 6 


12 56 


27 43 


•5 42 


22 40 


16 Jl 


24 32 


12 


OA ^8 


24 2 


'7 4i j 




8«57 


22 59 


25 " 


10 as 37 


29 59 


7^52 


I / 43 


9 "5 V 


»3 


15 14 


7 ^ 39 


0H59 


10 (j 


20 55 


4 a 54 


7n 15 


23 54 


1411138 


23 9 


16 41 


23 20 


M 


39 22 


irk 


■3 53 


0 M 13 


2T47 


'o 55 


'9 45 


7.J135 


29 35 


n !1x20 


I f) 10 


7— ^ 


'5 


13 11120 


3'^3y 


26 29 


12 ID 


14 38 


29 6 


2 2032 


21 39 


14-39 


23 33 


15 25 


20 3 ' 


ID 


27 7 


16 47 


OS5' 


24 4 


26 31 




»5 37 


6«lt 1 1 


39 40 


0/21 


29 0 


3 ^ 20 


»7 


10 / 41 




21 3 


5T55 


p a So 


34 1 


39 I 


30 35 1 


14*129 


22 45 




lo 4 


10 


24 3 


tiB47 


3»< 7 


'7 47 


20 31 


6&49 


12 A42 


5'^>5 


29 I 


61^42 


35 10 


zo za 


19 


7W«3 


^4 3 


15 5 


29 40 


2 n 42 


19 50 


26 37 


ly 52 


13 / It* 


20 12 


7M4I 


IOV3© 


20 


20 9 


6 M 1 1 


27 0 


II B 37 


15 2 


3A 0 


ionV43 


4 "122 


2" 58 


3=s »0 


19 55 


22 31 


21 


2*53 


ttt 1 > 
lo 13 


«T53 


23 38 


27 31 


16 34 


24 57 


18 40 


IOH25 


10 <> 


1 T59 


4 yf 12 


2i 


'5 24 


OT 9 


20 45 


5 11 45 


lOffi 12 


om iG 


9^ '3 


2 / 4i 




jS j(. 


'3 55 


10 


iS 


27 42 


12 2 


2 B 38 


lo 1 


23 6 


14 9 


23 30 


16 31 


0=: 24 


I" - 53 


25 47 


27 55 


24 


9x50 


23 53 


14 33 


OW27 


14 


28 12 


7 "143 




19 3 


-3 ' 


7 S37 


9 II 55 




21 50 


5 ^45 


26 32 


'3 7 


'9 39 


I2<V25 


21 jO 


13 25 


I K 31 


5T 2 


19 29 


22 4 


26 


3T44 


'7 43 


8n40 


26 5 




36 44 


5/51 


26 32 


13 49 


if> 59 


I □ 24 


4«B24 


*7 


15 39 


29 50 


21 0 


9 A 24 


17 33 


1111117 


19 43 


9»37 


36 0 


38 52 


13 34 


16 36 


a 


Vf 38 


131113 


3«37 




>*43 


as 30 


3*1 34 


22 13 


8T 4 


10B43 


35 30 


*9 4« 


«9 


9 W 28 


24 52 


16 34 


711116 


16 17 


9 '47 


«6 55 


4x45 


20 I 


22 34 


7«45 


12 A 39 


•0 

3" 






5/ 






'9 I CA 

23 50 




17 0 


» 0 34 


A n 26 


20 10 




J* 


^ n c 














■9 ** 




16 aa 




OH K 


UbA 


Jan. 


reb. 


Marcn 


April 


May 


June 


July 


Au^iusl 


bept. 


uct 


iNOV. 


* 




0 1 




U f 


U f 




- — 

" 














I 


3*^53 


«5''l53 


26 1115 1 


igv3 13 


25=46 


12T3** 


15 « 14 


290 4 


»4A39 


I9<V38 


10 "157 


19 1 


2 


6^44 


0 / I 


10 / 50 


20:38 


*>«33 


24 40 


27 2 


iiv 9 


a? 35 


3-^30 


25 55 


4 W 22 


3 


20 47 


14 6 


24 54 


15 48 


21 t 


OH 34 


8 11 50 


23 27 


11 rf 0 


«7 49 


10 / 52 


ig ly 


4 


5'n - 


J s s 


^ i'.' 


28 44 


3T-':, 


iH 23 


20 21 


Ti f; (> 


24 43 


2 iti 2 0 


^.s 42 


3SS 5<> 


5 


19 i4 


iz C ^ 


■1.1 14 


1 1 X 27 


'5 34 


oil 10 


2 <B> 39 


1 6 49 


«^ 38 


It' 34 


loVJ 18 


lo »^ 




3^53 


25 55 


5-38 


24 0 


27 35 


>' 59 


14 46 


I nS52 


22 42 


1 / ^7 


24 36 


I -H 55 


7 


18 23 


9*35 


'** 53 


6t 22 


9 B 30 


23 50 


27 3 


'5 '» 


0 11151 


>5 54 


«st34 


^ 5 '7 


B 

B 


2 1^49 


23 « 


I X 57 


35 


21 20 


5^46 


9^32 


28 39 


21 2 


oVJ 10 


22 12 


2> I ^ 


9 




6x 13 


14 48 


ou 39 


3U 8 


17 50 


22 14 


12 A 20 


, 5' " 


14 13 


. 5*43* 


lOfS* 


10 


tm 9 


19 7 


27 a8 


13 35 


>4 55 


OA 4 


5«Kio 


36 9 


i >9 19 


3o 7 


1 18 33 


33 B3 


II 


»4 53 


»T44 


9T54 


34 35 


26 45 


13 30 


lo 20 


10 >n 7 


3>J22 


II as 48 


: 1T17 


5 tt 30 


13 


38 15 


»4 4 


23 0 


6n 12 


8040 


35 11 


1 ^44 


24 1 1 


17 22 


25 *3 


»3 49 


17 19 


»3 


1 1 K 16 


26 10 


4 B 10 


18 0 


20 45 


8bb 9 


»5 25 


8/22 


IS 17 


8 « 31 


26 9 


29 rt 


14 


23 56 


OB 7 


10 4 


29 5' 


3A 2 


21 28 


29 20 


22 37 


'5 4 


21 34 


0 B 19 


tin 0 


*5 


oT 17 


'9 57 


27 53 


IHB52 


15 3f» 


5- ^ 


13 '13' 


f»H55 


28 43 


4T25 


20 2 1 


22 40 


10 


18 24 


1 114^ 


9n4i 


24 8 


28 32 


19 12 


27 5f' 


21 13 


I 2 M 10 


>7 3 


2 n 15 


4«2>37 


»7 


0 20 


'3 40 


21 33 


<>.fl43 


« I "»53 


3 "137 


■ 2/31 


5 s: 2(1 


25 23 


29 20 


•4 5 


16 2<) 


• u 
10 


12 10 


25 44 


3«B35 


ly 41 


25 4' 


18 20 


27 Ii 


19 30 


8T20 


1 1 B 41 


25 52 


2o 20 


19 


24 0 


Sub 3 


'5 52 


3"» ^ 


9^56 


3/17 


"1^55 


3 « 20 


31 0 


*3 43 


7®39 


IOA30 


30 


5II55 


90 41 


20 30 


>7 4 


24 3<^ 


1 18 20 


1 26 32 


1 5a 


3W24 


5037 


19 30 


23 44 


SI 


>7 59 


3A4* 


II A j3 


I ^ 20 


9 "136 


1 3*J3I 


1 IOS55 


1 o*"* 3 


*5 33 


17 35 


I A3D 


59 II 


22 


OOB 15 


'7 4 


35 2 


ID 10 


24 47 


1 IH II 


, 25 0 


12 54 


27 30 


39 12 


>3 37 


17 55 


*3 


12 47 


01930 






10 / 0 


2*43 


8 n 43 


25 24 


9 II 20 


im I 


3D 3 


° — 57 


'4 


25 30 


14 50 


2 J 21 




25 


16 5 ' 


22 I 


/ 0 37 






8 "5 47 




25 


8^143 


29 15 


I 


I / 38 


91^55 


o*« 34 


4T54 


'9 36 




5ii 8 


21 55 


28 9 


26 


22 7 


13^42 


22 54 


IC' 33 


24 22 


1 13 50 


17 2O 


I 1128 


14 5^ 


17 3f' 


5^30 


12 1*122 


a? 


5'»45 


28 10 


711148 


1 V] 10 


8a24 


: 26 42 


29 40 


13 iG 


27 « 


onjl 26 


10 33 


26 59 


x8 


19 35 


J 2 "135 


22 36 


15 24 


21 59 


9T II 


II B 39 


25 7 


9 A 39 


13 42 


-t "1 2 


" ' 55 


•9 


3«'34 




T t 12 


29 13 


5J< 9 


21 34 


t 23 3« 


1 7«* 5 


j 22 31 


27 25 


»8 53 


1 ^7 4 


30 


17 J* 




21 31 


I3B40 


17 56 


3»23 


t 5D19 


19 16 


5'W47 




3*59 


i3Ut6 


31 


1*145 




5*J3i 




OT25 




17 8 


1 »A43 








1 a? *a 



Digitized by Gopgle 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1854-1855 



DM 

— — 


JM. 


Feb. 

— 


March 




April 


May 


June 


1 

July 


August 


Sept 


Oct. 1 


Nov 


Dec. 


1 


I2s:i3 


» 

2T15 


loT 5 




t 

26 a 9 


— 

28 II If 


' 

I2.fl 9 


- • 
1511S24 




3»n 6 


24/56 


4* 9 


26x58 


c • 

3W31 


2 


26 40 


15 25 


23 >J 


8 It 16 


lOQS 1 


24 12 


27 55 


6 54 


9W»7 


18 32 


IOT37 


16 16 


3 


IOMi9 


, 28 8 


5«58 


20 12 


21 51 


O11127 


10^44 


0/45 


<3 53 


2M55 


24 4 


28 55 


4 


24 10 




18 21 


i<B> 2 


3-5X45 


18 59 


23 54 


14 59 


8*39 


17 13 


7WI5 


IID20 


5 


7T1J 


22 J4 


oil 28 


'3 5« 


15 48 


I ^52 


7»n28 


29 36 


23 29 


IT 32 


20 12 


23 35 


6 


19 5' 


4028 


12 24 


25 45 


28 5 


•5 8 


21 29 


14W3' 


8x14 


>5 14 


2052 


5®4l 


7 


2 u 10 


lO 15 


24 >3 


7.fl49 


I ORB 40 


28 51 


5/56 


29 38 


22 46 


2H 4H 


15 18 


17 40 


8 


14 »3 


28 2 


64s I 


20 7 


23 37 


i3»n 0 


20 46 


14S48 


6T58 


12 8 1 


27 30 


29 33 


9 


26 7 


9«853 


•7 54 


2iit43 


(.-58 


27 34 


5VJ54 


29 49 


20 46 


24 52 


9«»32 


II A 24 


10 


711 54 


21 51 


29 57 


«5 39 


20 43 


12/27 


21 10 


M »<32 


4 « 6 


7n24 


21 27 


23 l6 


11 


19 41 


4SI 0 


12S\. 12 


28 57 


4 "152 


27 33 


6 s 23 


2S 51 


17 2 


19 40 


3 A 19 


5-Tr I J 


12 


I miij 


16 20 


24 43 


12^35 


19 22 


121543 


21 27 


I2T4I 


>9 34 


I «B42 


15 " 


17 19 


13 


I j 22 


28 54 


711131 


26 31 


4/ 3 


27 46 


6h 7 


26 I 


"049 


13 37 


27 10 


29 38 


»4 


ZS ^ 


Ii««4l 


20 36 


to 11142 


18 52 


I2«35 


20 21 


8W54 


23 50 


25 28 


9*RSO 


12^16 


I" 


7A30 


«4 39 


3'S'57 


: 25 I 


3W4a 


«7 3 


4T 5 


21 25 


5*43 


7A22 


21 44 


25 17 


16 


19 47 


7*49 


«7 32 


9/25 


18 24 


II K 7 


17 21 


311 37 


»7 33 


19 21 


4"" 27 


811143 


»7 




21 10 


1 11117 


23 49 


2a: 54 


24 45 


0 8 12 


15 3<i 


29 25 


«"S32 


17 3> 


22 36 


18 


"4 54 


4 tn4i 


>5 9 


. 8V5 9 


17 8 


7T58 


12 41 


>-T -» " 

- ; * / 


1 1 ,a 2j 


'3 57 


0 iii 3> ) 


f. / 57 


19 


27 45 


18 23 


29 8 


22 23 


IX 3 


20 50 


24 53 




23 30 


26 jS 


14 49 


21 40 


20 


10^51 


2/16 


13 / II 


6 = 28 


14 40 


J»23 


6n54 


21 6 


5"1!49 


9'==37 ' 


28 59 


6VJ39 


21 


24 12 


16 20 


27 16 


20 24 


27 58 


15 42 


18 46 


iSl 0 


18 20 


22 52 


13/24 


21 45 


22 


711150 


o»35 


1 J H24 


4K 9 


10x59 


27 49 
9048 


oas35 


"5 0 


I- 5 


611126 


28 0 


6S48 




21 4U 


»4 59 


25 32 


17 42 


2J 45 


13 34 


27 9 


«4 3 


20 13 


I2VJ39 


21 40 


^4 


6/ 5 


29 29 


9 = 40 


IT 2 


6b 17 


21 41 


24 14 


9I1B 28 


27 12 


4 / II 


27 »5 


Shim 


«5 


20 39 


I4JB 0 


*i 44 


14 « 


i« 37 


3«»3i 


6A •» 


21 56 


10 "133 


18 16 


11S43 


20 22 


26 


5V3 27 


28 25 


7»<4» 


27 I 


0047 


13 21 


1 18 8 


4^34 


24 4 


2II27 


25 59 


4T 8 


27 


20 2 ^ 




2 1 27 






1 - It 
- / 11 


0 1 4 


• / 'J 


T / j6 
/ * 4" 


x6 40 


10 K 0 




28 




26 33 


4T59 


22 4 


24 44 


yjl 4 


12 29 


Otn.24 


21 38 


OS 53 


23 45 


0 8 32 


2') 






18 1., 


4 n 16 


6«35 


21 3 


24 52 


13 38 


5VJ4O 


«5 3 


7Tt5 


13 17 


3° 






I a II 


16 18 


18 24 


315 8 


7^28 


27 7 


19 51 


29 9 


20 39 


80 5 


31 


18 38 




13 49 

■ 




OA 14 




20 19 


10/53 




tin 8 




DM 


Jaa. 


Feb. 


Marcb 


April 




June 


July 


AlWiist 

1 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 


I 


n » 
20 IJ 15 


5.n I 


0 1 

JJA47 


a8n»33 


t 

211123 


r . 
22 / I 


OS 22 


24x25 


n 1 

15 « 53 


201147 


6a 6 


« » 
71948 


2 


2«B 19 


I 54 


25 42 


I I 0 


«5 34 


6;^23 


15 U) 


8T55 


29 If 


J9B26 


18 4 


19 38 


3 


14 


28 49 


71H42 


2\ 38 


39 I 


20 52 


0 *« lO 


23 0 


I2U 19 


»5 47 


29 57 


1^31 


4 


2'> I ^ 


IonB47 


'9 49 


6II128 


12 / 42 


5~25 


1 4 46 


6«39 


24 45 


27 55 


II 11(48 


»3 33 


5 


8A 5 


22 50 


2-^2 


19 31 


26 35 


'9 54 


29 3 


19 53 


7® 4 


9A52 


23 41 


25 47 


6 


19 57 


5<! 0 


14 24 


2/46 


lok337 


4X '5 


13T 0 


2048 


19 12 


21 45 


5*42 


811117 


7 


i«)»5*> ; 


17 19 


26 56 


16 14 


24 4O 


18 25 


26 37 


15 25 


I All 


3<«35 


17 52 


21 7 


8 


'3 47 ' 


*9 51 


gin.38 


29 55 


8S59 


2r23 


9W55 


27 49 


' 13 5 


15 98 


omi5 


4/17 


9 


»5 5» 1 

8a 8 ^ 


1211140 


22 35 


i3>J50 


23 14 


16 7 


22 56 


ID'S 2 


-•4 57 


27 24 


12 52 


17 48 


10 


25 50 


5/4« 


27 57 


7»«26 


29 38 


5 "43 


22 7 


6ii»48 


9^27 


25 44 


11^37 


I r 




9 f 25 


!■> I'( 


1 =: I ( "i 


21 35 


12 8 56 


18 iS 


4. a 7 


18 40 


21 38 


8/51 


15 39 




3 "I J 2 


23 26 


J /J 1 J 


^0 42 


5^38 


26 I 


o<r643 


16 2 


0^ ^6 


3 "159 


22 1 1 


29 52 


1.1 


1 (> 40 


71^55 


17 25 


II M 13 


'9 32 


«n55 


12 17 


27 54 


12 36 


16 30 


5H45 


14 s 9 


14 


w/34 


22 48 


1=58 


25 42 


3» 15 


21 3f) 


25 8 


9"P45 


24 43 


29 »4 


19 30 


28 26 


15 


'4 49 


7«5« 


Ifl 47 


loT 5 


If, 45 


4«* Q 


7A 9 


21 36 


611159 


12/11 


3«25 


12 K39 


16 


»9 3« 


23 16 


I M44 


24 15 


29 59 


1 1> 25 


19 5 


3**9 


19 26 


25 23 


17 27 


26 47 


'1 


14*936 


8)C30 


16 41 


8U 8 


12058 


28 34 


oi«56 


15 *8 


2/ 9 


8VJ5I 


I M36 


10T48 


18 


39 55 


23 29 


IT29 


21 41 


25 41 


IOA34 


12 47 


27 36 


15 11 


22 36 


»5 50 


H 41 


»9 


15SB13 


8t 5 


16 0 


4D53 


8«> g 


22 28 


24 38 


9 "157 


28 34 


6as38 


or 6 


8V26 


20 


0 *< 27 


22 12 


08 7 


•7 43 


20 23 


4 nv 20 


^'^35 


22 36 


12)922 


20 57 


14 21 


22 2 


21 


15 i« 


5«49 


IJ 48 


09B 14 


2 ,fl 27 


16 13 


18 42 


5/38 


26 35 


5x29 


28 33 


5U30 


22 


2<) 44 


i« 57 


27 1 




14 23 


28 II 


I m 3 


»9 5 


I I s I I 


20 ■) 


'2K37 


if^ 46 


2i 


IJT40 


1 II 41 


9 n 3^ 


^4 jj 


26 16 


IO-5r2I 


•3 45 


\yi 2 


26 5 


4ir53 


26 31 


I iiStJ 


24 


27 7 


14 5 


22 21 


6.(1 29 


8iT)( 10 


22 45 


26 51 


17 


II H It 


»9 34 


ion 10 


14 40 


25 


io» 9 


26 13 


4® 33 


18 22 


20 II 


511130 


10 / 25 


2 a 19 


26 19 


48 4 


23 31 


27 !6 


26 


22 48 


8is 12 


16 34 


GUI I 7 


2 ^ 22 


18 39 


24 28 


17 29 


IIT19 


18 18 


6 IB 34 




*2 


5ntt 


20 4 1 




12 17 


14 4« 


2/14 


9^ 0 


2K48 


26 3 




19 18 


21 47 


28 


fj 20 


rA55l 


to A 19 


24 27 


27 33 


16 16 


*3 56 


18 5 


IOV23 


15 4» 1 


»A44 


3"»45 


29 


29 21 




22 13 


6^5' 


10 11138 


0VJ42 


9« 7 


iT 9 


24 18 


28 47 


•3 55 


15 36 


30 


II <si6 




415111 


19 29 


24 6 


«5 27 


24 22 


'7 51 


7045 


119B31 


25 35 


27 25 


3S 


33 9 




16 17 




7/54 




9X31 


a» 6 




«3 56 




9*17 



Digitized bv GoogI 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1856-1857 



DM 


Jan 


Feb. 


1 

March 


April 


• 

May 


June 


* t 1 

July j 


August 


Sept. 


Oct. 




Jjtc 




0 P 1 






0 I* 


1 




e » 1 




0 * 






0 9 


I 




6 / ^>■ 


■ '=5 


«9 = 3« 


28 K 17 


21 a 28 


28 11 35 


i6A3« ' 




3 "147 


19/4 


■ 24 'O l^' 


2 




20 s 


I 2 4 


4 w 14 


13T 4 : 


5042 


1 1 9559 


28 53 


'3 '7 


'5 38 


IH33 


7 = 25 


3 


16 0 


1 

3 "1 50 


26 I J 


19 14 


27 53 ' 


19 42 


25 8 


1 1 3 


25 2 ! 


27 35 


14 15 


20 ^- 


4 


54 


iK 6 


10=49 


4T22 


12 » 38 1 


31B26 


7 A 59 


23 I 


, 611150 


9/42 


27 ij 


4 - ij 


5 


12 / IJ 


2 = 47 1 


2; 48 


19 29 


27 II 


16 49 


20 33 


4^52 


18 43 


22 2 


10S30 


18 13 


6 


25 59 


17 46 


li M 0 


4» 27 


II U26 


29 50 


211130 


16 39 


0/47 1 


4«39 ! 


24 7 


an; 


7 


low 9 


a»<54 1 


26 16 . 


19 6 


25 19 


12A30 


14 54 1 


28 27 


«3 7 


17 37 1 


8m 0 


16 35 




24 


18 0 1 


11T26 


3023 


89947 


24 52 


2O 46 . 


ioiii2r 


25 46 


0=59 


22 27 


I « 6 


9 


9=19 


2T54 


26 19 


17 13 


21 50 


61H58 , 


8<v37 1 


22 26 


8W49 


•4 47 


7T 7 


15 45 


10 


24 5 


17 30 


10 » 51 


0 ffi 30 


4A30 1 


18 53 


20 20 


4 / 47 1 


22 20 


29 2 


22 2 


0 n i" 


II 




I »44 


24 56 


»3 34 


16 51 ' 


0^43 


2 in2i 


17 29 


68: 18 


13X40 


7» 5 


«5 5 


12 


23 '7 


15 3& 


8nj5 


26 1 1 


28 57 


12 32 


14 26 


OVJ36 


20 4 ^ 


-'^ 39 


22 8 


29 3: 


«3 


7T35 


2y 5 


21 50 


8J129 


IOni(52 


24 26 


26 48 


I4 10 


5^3» 


»3T49 


7 n 1 


139539 


M 


21 JO 


12II 15 


41042 


20 34 


22 41 


6 in JO 


9/30 


28 10 


20 34 


29 3 


21 37 


27 2j 


»5 


5W 21 


25 « 


17 16 1 


2 ni 2t| 


4 .-30 


18 48 


22 33 1 


12 = 33 


5T43 


14 0 10 


50248 


10 P. 42 


16 


18 51 


7»47 


29 35 1 


14 19 


16 22 


1 / 22 


6V3 0 


27 14 


20 49 


29 1 


19 32 


23 35 


»7 


2U 8 


20 14 


"A43 1 


26 8 


28 21 


14 »4 


»9 49 ' 


12 M 3 


5»43 1 


13030 


2 A48 




18 


t5 »2 


2A3I ' 


23 42 


7'«^57 


IOIII3I 


47 «5 


3 = 57 


26 57 


20 19 1 


27 33 


'5 37 


fS 17 


«9 


28 6 


»4 39 


5"»35 j 


19 51 


22 53 


101^54 


18 17 ; 


"T43 


4033 


II9B 8 


28 4 


0^14 


20 


loTa.)9 ' 


26 41 


17 26 1 


IWI51 


5 / 29 


24 37 


2X45 


26 17 


18 24 


24 16 


io»isX3 


«* 4 


21 


2 J 22. 


Sni j6 




«3 59 


18 1 ; 




17 13 


10 (J 36 


l«B5t 


7A I 


22 9 


23 50 


22 


5 A 44 


20 28 


J I 4 


26 19 


I 10^4 


34 


IT38 


24 38 


'4 56 


19 26 


3^58 


5 •»14» 


23 


17 5'' 


2-^ I<j 


22 3 


8/49 


14 42 


6 t< 41 


15 55 


8 n 21 


27 42 


I tin 36 


»5 44 


17 J7 


2-1 


•29 5'J 


14 4 


4 "155 


2' 33 


28 13 


20 50 


0 U 2 


21 48 


10. 0, 12 


13 34 


27 31 


29 4? 


-!3 


Ilns54 


25 5<i 


17 0 


4*13' 


11-55 


4T5^' 


14 0 


4 -V ' 


11 l>- 


25 25 


9 "124 


12 / : 


2f) 


23 +4 


7 "154 


29 lO , 


17 46 


25 4« 


19 6 


a? 47 


«7 55 


4'»»34 


7^^ 12 


21 25 


24 44 




5=2=31 


20 ) 


11/46 • 


1«I7 


9X5> 


3«il 


11D24 


OA37 


16 12 


18 59 


3/36 


7*938 


28 


17 21 


2/28 


24 33 1 


'5 7 


24 2 


17 12 


24 30 


13 8 


28 24 


011148 


IS 39 


20 46 


29 


29 18 


15 14 


7>J4« 


«9 15 


8T20 


in 8 


80 4 


23 27 


to A 12 


12 41 


28 32 


4= 7 


30 


1 1 1^27 




21 13 1 


MH39 


22 43 


14 57 


21 6 


7ns 3<j 


21 59 


24 40 


1119 18 


17 39 


Jt 


23 




10 1 




7 W 7 




3^.5*' 1 

1 


19 36 


1 
1 


0/ 47 






DM 


Jan. 


Feb. 


Maordi 


April 


M«f 


June 




August 




Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec 




0 # 








0 1 


P t 




0 i 


0 t 




0 f 




1 


15H 7 


8tt 6 


18 46 


104654 


16 A 51 


2^47 


41154 


18/50 


4=42 


9K43 


I u 24 


91156 


2 


29 I 


22 to 


21158 


24 16 


29 30 


14 41 


16 43 


I ^ 0 


18 I 


23 54 


16 36 


25 «5 


3 


IJT I 


6li 9 


16 55 


7A 18 


1 1 HV50 


26 30 


28 37 


13 42 


I X39 


8T25 


1 n52 


I09S2T 


4 


27 7 


20 I 


oua j8 


20 I 


23 57 


8 ini8 


10/38 


26 31 


15 36 


23 12 


17 0 


25 3 


5 


1 1 « 17 


3®45 


'4 5 


2itB30 


5'^54 


20 8 


22 50 


9 = 37 


29 48 


8 b 6 


1 9B52 




(> 


25 J I 


17 '9 


27 «7 


"4 45 


•7 45 


2/ 4 


55^13 


22 58 


14T10 


23 0 


16 19 


23 0 


7 


11 46 


0^141 


loA 15 


26 51 


29 34 


14 7 


'7 49 


6 k 33 


28 37 


711 46 


ofl.20 


61H 13 


8 


-i3 5f> 


13 50 


23 0 


8:^^50 


II 11123 


26 IS 


0=37 


20 18 


J3a 4 


22 17 


13 54 


19 I 


9 


7 » 59 


43 




20 43 


23 14 


8/J38 


13 36 


4T13 


27 28 


6030 


27 2 




to 


21 47 


9HS20 


»7 35 


2iaj4 


. 5/ 9 


1 21 9 


: 26 48 


18 15 


II 0 44 


20 23 


9«»49 


13 38 


1 1 


5 A ly 


21 42 


OA 3 


14 21 


17 9 


3 = 50 


10 n 10 


2 0 21 


25 5» 


3 A 53 


22 17 


as 38 


12 


18 JO 


3^5> 


12 4 


if) 13 


29 18 


«6 43 


23 43 


16 31 


9®45 


17 7 


4^32 


7 "131 


»3 


1 n ly 


15 48 


23 58 


8/ 7 


n W35 


29 5« 


7T2S 


0043 


23 28 


on 3 


»6 37 


19 2t 


M 


'3 49 


27 39 


5"»48 


20 8 


24 4 


13 « 12 


21 24 


'4 ;.3 


<.,^.57 


12 44 


28 36 


I / 11 


'S 


26 1 


y in27 


'7 37 


2 V5 1 8 


05:48 


26 50 


5 w 32 


29 J 


10 12 


25 12 


io»n3o 


»3 4 


If* 


8 ^ 0 


21 18 


29 28 


M 43 


19 48 


10X48 


19 50 


130 0 


1 

' 3"S'3 


7-^29 


22 22 


25 0 


•7 


'9 51 


3 / 'f' 


I I / 2fl 


27 24 


3x8 


25 4 


' 4 II 17 


27 0 


16 ! 


19 38 


4/ >3 




IH 


I 11138 


«5 27 


23 35 


10=27 


16 51 


1 9037 


18 48 


10.041 


28 35 


I "1 (O 


tr, 5 


ig >^ 


19 


1 J 2<) 


27 55 


6>J 0 


23 54 


OT58 


24 24 


1 3®i7 


24 7 


10^^57 


»3 35 


27 59 


I SS22 


20 


25 27 


iolfJ44 


18 46 


7^47 


15 28 


9nt8 


17 38 


7«»i6 


23 7 


25 28 


91^57 


13 44 


21 


7/39 


n 57 




22 6 


o» 19 


1 24 II 


' 1A45 


20 7 


5«a 8 


7/18 


22 2 


26 18 


22 


to 7 


7*35 


13 30 


6T49 


15 24 


1 8fl»54 


1 »5 33 


2^40 


17 2 


«9 9 


4KI6 


9»< 4 


«3 


at555 


21 35 


29 31 


2« 5' 


01135 


-3 19 


28 58 


»4 58 


28 53 


I « 4 


16 43 


22 S 


«4 


»8 J 


, 5^54 


1 13*^57 


7« 4 


»5 42 


7 A 20 


1 t2m I 


27 3 


10/44 


"3 6 


29 27 


5T31 


«5 


29 3' 


; 20 27 


28 43 


: 22 17 


01^34 


20 54 


24 41 


811159 


22 40 


I'y 10 


" 33 


19 IS 


26 


1 3 a 1 1) 


5T f> 


IJT42 


1 71122 


'5 4 


41TC I 


7^ 3 


20 51 


4V544 


7 = 30 


20 4 


3 w 2-1 


27 


27 14 


19 40 


28 45 


: 22 8 


29 6 


j i<j 42 


19 I) 


2/43 


1 17 2 


20 40 


loT 3 


18 3 


2S 


11X21 


4 u 21 


ij«44 


62030 


1 2 CI 31 ) 


29 4 


1 » »1 5 


14 39 


' 29 J8 


i X 55 


24 30 


21157 




25 33 




28 32 


20 24 


25 44 


1 1 ^ 9 


« 57 


26 40 


12 = 35 


'7 J7 


9tf 23 


IS 4 


30 


9T47 




130 I 


3A50 


8i»23 


*3 4 


24 48 


9»J 7 


23 56 


1T48 


H 35 


|«t3 


3t 


43 58 




27 9 




20 43 




6/45 


>I 44 




16 2j 




t9 15 



Digitized by Google 



'THE PLACE Olf THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1858-1650 





J An. 


I CO. 1 




•1 

April 


May 1 


, 1 

J unc ' 


1 

lull- ' 

J"'> 1 




Gam* 


\JkX. 


iNO\ . 




1 


2A59 s 


0 f 
22 nj! 15 


Q * 1 

4 1 




0 # - ! 

10 4 \\t ; 


0 f 
2 = 34 1 


r 

0 K I 2 


24T57 


t 

17 II 23 


0 r 
20^45 ' 


0 f 
Ion)! 3" 


0 r 

24 ^ 3" 


2 


17 19 


5- '4 


12 57 1 


27 55 


O 'l 3 1 


14 3'' 


IH 47 


^ W J .T 


I 4 ' ' 


10 A48 


I 3 I 


7 n\ 10 


3 


I nv 9 


17 5' 


25 33 


9/53 


" 55 


2O 54 1 


I T39 ! 


22 3.; 


10 6 


24 46 


14 55 : 


'9 34 


4 


»4 


0 ni 9 


7'n^53 


21 46 


23 50 


9 X 25 


14 53 


6 II 49 


0A32 1 


011535 


27 48 1 


1/50 


5 


27 20 


12 14 


20 0 




5 — 54 


22 lO ' 


2o 31 


21 24 


'4 57 1 


22 15 


10FH30 ' 


13 5° 


0 


9^57 


24 9 


1 / 5^ 




18 10 


5*^33 


12 a 35 


6q 10 1 


29 '4 1 


5-42 


23 0 


25 50 


7 


22 1 1 


0 * I 


>3 5' 1 


27 41 ' 


0K43 ' 


19 17 


27 6 


21 3 


»3'»i9 


le 50 


5/19 


71053 




4 mi I 


*7 54 


23 45 t 


tos 0 1 


>3 y> 


3 « 3' 1 


I» 05° 


5A54 


27 '* ' 


* "155 


17 27 


19 42 


9 


10 4 


29 51 


7*J43 


22 37 


27 0 


t u ^ i 
10 13 


*7 5 


20 35 


IO&39 


14 38 


29 26 


i«30 


10 


«7 S4 


mw bft v«v 

ll«J57 


19 I 


S** 35 


101^5^ 1 


3 u 10 


124bi8 


4159 


*i 49 


27 5 


1 1 vj 18 


13 »9 


II 


9*45 


34 14 


2S 10 


10 50 


25 » 1 


i» 33 


27 25 


19 1 


D I«l3n 


9/ *9 


23 6 


25 13 


T2 


31 40 


OS! 43 


14 47 


2T4f» 


9 a 5' 


3«65i ' 


12 1(1 lO 


2'<v 30 


19 9 


21 21 


4«5" 


7 16 


'3 


31^42 


19 29 


27 42 


fl A 

10 3/ 


24 52 I 


19 ' 1 


20 4^ 


15 5 ■ 


I / 25 


3>JI5 


16 5^ 


'9 35 


'4 


'5 5* 


2 H 28 


•0 H 57 1 


1 y 27 


10 n 2 


s n - f 1 
3'H3l 


XOtTff52 


20 4 1 


13 28 


'5 0 


2o 5^ 


2T 15 


'5 


20 I I 


IS 4' 


24 32 


I ' » TO 


25 


1 W t 

lo H> 1 


24 2o 1 


II ll| 1 1 


25 23 


26 59 


I I X 22 


15 20 


1 #\ 
1 


1 0 W I^O 


29 6 


8T 23 


0 U 59 


10® 7 


2 njj 1 3 j 


7-37 


23 24 


7 1 6 




24 7 


20 54 


>7 


2 J 19 


I2T43 


22 29 


15 45 


24 44 


'5 42 


20 23 


5/27 


1 ' ) I i J 


21 n 


7T 18 


12 a 59 




On 0 




6U44 


Ottfi21 




40 


2WI49 1 


17 22 


1 ss 10 


3M34 


20 50 


27 3» 


'9 


10 9 


10 V 36 


21 3 


«4 43 


22 4^ 


1 1 ^29 


'5 > 


29 14 


13 30 


10 21 


5 b 6 


i203*> 


20 


21*2} 


24 30 


51126 


25 47 


6ii)i 10 


23 54 


27 2 


1 1 n 0 


23 44 


29 31 


19 30 


27 43 


3t 


*5 5* 


OU4* 


19 44 


12 A 33 


19 I4 


0 m 7 


» ' 5/ 


23 0 


0 K 24 


'3T 4 


41129 


13* * 


22 


29 30 


22 56 


3«a57 


-if* I 
20 1 


' ^59 


lo 10 


20 40 


5x12 


21 22 


27 0 


19 30 


2n 1 2 


23 




7 "IS 1 2 


In 0 


9 1 2 


'4 30 


0 / 0 


21042 


I / 2n 


4T37 


II a 14 


4'J3 30 


13A 8 


24 


27 53 


21 27 


in 54 


22 10 


26 50 


12 2 


M 37 


29 55 


IS 9 


25 42 


19 21 


27 40 


23 


1 2 II 24 




'5 37 


4-55 


9 in. I 


23 54 


2(1 3^ 


' 2 K 35 


I 8 


Ion ^ 


3 A 50 


1 1 IH47 


26 


27 4 


'y 35 


29 9 


17 28 


21 5 


5^47 


8S42 


25 28 


'5 54 


24 50 


18 10 


25 27 


27 


1 1 »48 


3115 22 


1 2 ns iK 


29 52 


3/ 4 


17 41 


20 55 


8T34 


on 1 


903 17 


2n» 4 


8^43 


28 


26 28 


16 51 


25 34 


i2fn 7 


'4 59 


29 39 


3 18 


21 54 


14 12 


23 35 


»5 37 


21 38 


29 


10 A 55 




8-^ 27 


24 15 


2«> 52 


tIB42 


*s ^* 


3tl28 


28 24 


7A40 


2« 51 


4ini6 








21 7 


6/15 






28 "VJ 


my »4 


12036 


21 91 


IT 


16 -iQ 


J' 


S urn 




J It] 3^ 

J "IJ4 








1 1 la 


2 n 11 




en 10 








Jan 


r eu. 


Marco 


April 


May 


J line 


Jul) 


Auf^ust 






Nov 


I'CC. 




o > 


0 » 






0 * 








n p 


u 1 


■Tj f 




1 


10 / 50 


25V324 


3 = 53 


1 8 *f 29 


22T35 


13 11 10 


2 I "Ji 3*^ 


I5HV 1 1 


f) in.17 


»o ' 53 


25 ^^45 


27 S 12 


2 


22 54 


7*»5 


»3 47 


I T 0 


6tf 9 


27 31 




29 43 


19 40 


23 30 


7*37 


9H 0 


3 


4W47 


19 10 


«7 50 


*4 4 


20 2 


12B37 


21 33 


13*50 


2/37 


5*547 


19 25 


*> 55 


4 


10 y> 


I H 10 


.10 K 2 


27 I7 


411 9 


27 2 1 


6 TfB 1 0 


27 31 


15 1 1 


17 50 


I K 1 4 


3T 2 


5 


28 27 


*3 '9 


22 26 


toy 46 


xo 27 


'I A55 


20 2S 


10 >H4^ 


27 27 


29 42 


! '3 9 


■5 25 




1 OSS 1 7 


; 25 37 


5T 2 


24 26 


-> « k 
2 4*^ 


26 1 5 


4^ 23 


23 4' 


9 W 30 


IISS30 


1 25 16 


20 9 


7 


22 9 


1 oT 7 


17 5' 


0 □ 17 


17 9 


1 0 nv 20 


■ r W 

5^ 


0 / 10 


21 23 


1 23 la 


7T37 


1 1 a 15 


u 


4 H 7 


20 52 


0 B 54 


22 16 


I A 25 


! 24 10 


I mi 2 


ih 34 


3=11 


5^11 


20 16 


24 46 


9 


If) I J 


3 » 54 


14 11 


O'l^ 20 


15 35 


1 / -"44 


14 0 


i 01040 


14 59 


1 17 '3 


3 a 14 


0 U 3° 


10 


2» J3 


'7 15 


27 42 


20 27 


29 3'* 


2! 4 


4" 


12 3« 


2<l 49 


1 29 27 


i<> 31 


22 4^ 


1 1 


I I TP 1 0 


n II 'K 

0 u 50 


tin 2(1 


4«3t> 


'3'* 29 


4 "l** 




24 29 


a M 44 


1 1 1 T 54 


0 II 4 


7 ® 1 1 


1 1 




'5 4 


25 24 


18 45 


27 14 


*7 5 


2 1 3^ 




20 47 


24 35 


13 50 


2 1 4^^ 


*3 


7^34 


29 29 


9»35 


*'»54 


10A49 


*9 47 


3*130 


i ■& ^. 
10 u 


2T5y 


7 »30 


27 45 


OA »0 




21 2/ 


I4«t3 


23 30 


10 59 


24 15 


12 J 17 


»5 35 


*9 55 


' '5 22 


20 30 


ii»47 


20 yo 


>5 


51147 


29 9 


8,(1. 26 


0-^59 


7 m3o 


24 36 


27 2^ 


I I ¥ 49 


27 57 


3 n 59 


25 52 


4 ""54 


ID 




14 A 9 


22 59 


, M 49 


1 20 32 


f'>n45 


92: II i 


-J 49 


10 a 44 


17 30 


9 A 57 


19 3 


17 


5^39 


29 f* 


711532 


20 27 


3 / 20 


r U Iff 

IB 45 


21 4 


5T5^ 


23 4'' 


1 ^ 1 1 


24 3 


3 0 


-* W 

I n 


20 55 


I3"''5' 


21 5« 


1 1 "149 


15 54 


0 = 37 


2 52 


18 19 


7 II 2 


'5 ' 


«ni 7 


lu 4^ 


'9 


A 10 


->K f 

I / 


6^12 


24 54 


2o 14 


12 25 


14 45 


0 53 


20 34 


29 0 


22 10 


0 12 1 


2t) 


21 16 


12-^ 19 


20 9 


7/40 


10 10 2 I 


24 13 


26 47 


'3 45 


4^22 


I3fl 7 


6 9 


'3 44 


2 t 


f ) Tf^ 2 


25 55 


3 "1 4 4 


, 20 7 


22 la 


Ok 3 


9T 0 


26 57 


1 0 2o 


27 23 


20 4 


26 55 


22 


20 24 


9 "I 5 


•16 5<) 


2 10 20 


4« 9 


IB 2 


21 ^0 


10 U io 


2 A 50 


1 1 ii)!44 


3 '•152 


9 ' 53 


»3 




21 5^ 


29 47 


14 19 




Of 14 


4 f 20 


24 2n 


1 17 2(> 


26 7 


1 7 *o 


-aft 

22 3^ 


a4 


«7 45 


4/ 7 


i 12/10 


26 11 


27 48 


12 44 


»7 35 


8048 


1 2nit 


iaA29 


0/51 


5««o 


25 


011146 


10 27 


24 20 


8s 0 


9*47 


«5 37 


1 0 ID 


23 29 


1 »7 0 


a4 43 


13 57 


17 29 


26 


13 25 


2« 24 


6^3 28 


19 52 


1 21 59 


8«56 


'5 25 


8A25 


I ^45 


8ni44 


26 46 


29 3^ 


27 


25 47 




18 20 


1 «5i 


4T31 


22 44 


29 5« 


; 23 30 


16 19 


22 27 


91017 


ii»33 


28 


7/55 


22 3 


OK 9 


14 3 


17 25 


611 58 


■ «4®5J 




01135 


5 '49 


21 31 


23 23 


39 


19 53 




II 59 


3J 


oa45 


21 37 


OA 1 


23 32 


14 27 


18 48 


3«32 


1 5 K 10 


30 


«W45 




23 57 


9T23 


14 3» 


1 60332 


15 12 


8^11 


■ 27 53 


I >J24 


'5 24 


: 16 38 


JI 


U 35 




1 6x 6 




2tt 41 


1 


1 o^jg 


1 22 27 


1 


j »3 4« 




128 51 



Digitized by Google 



¥HE place of the moon for the years 1860-1861 



DM 


Ian, 


I-cb. 


March ' 


April 


1 

May 


1 

Iiinc 


Inly 




Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


1 

Dec 




1 » 






a f 










t 


s • 




0 ■ 


I 


• 


27 It 




10 A 46 




1211154 . 


19 / 44 


65147 


21 K 29 


24T 1 1 


ion 13 




2 


23 16 


ion u 


30 2 


25 17 


4^20 


2i6 31 


211346 


18 34 




6tf 14 


22 33 


29 » 


3 


•/ ^ «J 


24 24 


17 s 


loai 5 


18 50 


<0/34 ! 






15 12 


18 22 




<2il4l 


4 


ly I 


83341 


I 33 


2S 4 


3 "13 3 


23 59 


28 6 


12 49 


27 8 


0 II 39 


18 49 


a6 27 


5 




23 2 3 


16 24 


io« 6 


'7 S*^" 


7>^ 4 


io«:24 


24 40 


9 8 10 


13 7 


2 A 9 


10^33 


fi 


i'> ji 


'H,fl23 


I nv 30 


25 I 


2/0 


19 =i" 


Ji 31 


6t 30 


21 21 


23 49 


13 4 7 


24 3 


7 


0^152 


23 34 


16 43 


9 "139 


15 43 


2 s: ^S 


4 ¥ 29 


18 24 


3 n 46 


8® 48 


~V 44 




8 


15 33 


8 nt47 


I ^ 57 


21 S3 


29 0 


14 29 


16 21 


0 a 24 


16 27 


22 7 


14 nt 0 


23 n 




OJ^ 2f) 


23 51 


16 57 


7/44 


1 1 'f% 34 


26 30 


2 .H 1 2 


12 35 


29 29 


5 A 30 


28 33 




10 


'5 23 


8^38 


I n\y 


1 


-4 -■ T 


8 x 22 


10 T 0 


25 2 


12® 56 


19 5« 


13 23 


2.2 1 


II 


onjf 16 


2J 3 


13 48 


3 ^56 




20 13 


22 7 


7048 


26 50 


41931 


28 17 


6 / rsi 


12 


14 57 


7X1 2 


20 31 


16 23 


18 37 


2T 6 


4«20 


20 57 


ir All 


19 26 




20 20 


13 


29 33 


SO 34. 


12 /4S 


28 36 


0x29 


14 7 


16 .49 




25 57 


4A35 


S7 51 


4n 5 






3/42 






13 18 


26 21 


29 39 


x8 33 


llV 3 


19 49 


13 / 13 


17 2^ 


'15 




1') 27 




32 2) 


24 Q 


8 a 49 


1 2 II 30 


2 A 58 


26 20 


4 11 S7 


26 II 


0= JO 


i6 


ioni44 


28 5S 


20 7 


4 K to 


6t 8 


21 37 


26 26 


17 43 


II ^^36 


19 49 


gV342 


13 ri 




23 53 


1 1 H 7 


2S 4 


13 38 


18 17 


4 n 44 




2 nj 4(1 


JI' 42 




47 




:8 


t. / 46 


23 i| 


13 54 


27 53 


0 a 41 


18 10 


^4 41 


17 52 


1 1 11127 


18 14 


3 = 27 


7 4- 


'9 


It) 24 


3— 4 


23 40 


9 T 56 


13 19 


1 53 


9 (1 1 4 


2^54 


25 46 


I V542 


17 47 


1 9 40 


20 


I /] 4>> 




7 t« 27 


2 2 9 


26 13 


13 3< 


23 36 


17 44 


9 / 37 


14 42 


29 53 


I T 33 


21 


■4 3 


28 42 


U) 17 


4 S 35 


9 11 22 


Old 0 


8n \'i 


2 rni5 


22 58 


27 18 


I I M 48 


•J 25 


22 


26 C) 


10 »< 30 


1 T 13 


17 12 


22 44 


14 16 


23 19 


16 22 


5 n 54 


9 — 35 


23 39 


23 21 


23 


8= r. 


22 20 


13 16 


on 0 


60 18 


38 34 


7*^ 49 


0/ 5 


18 28 


21 38 


5T30 




«4 




4T14 


25 27 


»3 i 


30 t 


121932 


32 6 


13 23 


0S46 


3x32 


17 26 


«9 44 


25 


I w 46 


t6 14 


7 a 48 


36 12 


3 A53 


27 7 


6ll| 6 


26 23 


12 30 


15 22 


29 2q 


2 ni6 


26 


'3 33 


28 23 


20 19 


9«35 


»7 5> 


11^17 


19 49 


9» 3 


24 47 


27 12 


TI V 42 


15 6 


27 


23 22 


10 a 43 


3n 2 


*3 11 




25 20 




21 28 


fiV39 


9T 5 


24 7 


28 J2 


2o 


7 r 1 7 




'5 59 


6 .A 59 


16 5 


911113 


lit 26 


3-4' 


i>i 30 


21 3 


6 11 44 


I I E3j 


29 


19 21 


6 II 1 1 


2() 1 2 


21 I 


0-^ iS 


22 S') 


29 2() 


IS 46 


0 T 2 1 


ta 8 




23 M 


30 


I »3« 




I2TO43 


3"«>7 


M 33 , 


6/27 


12>9 I 


27 44 


12 14 


15 21 1 


3«33 1 


9 A 3 


31 


>4 >3 




20 34 




28 46 1 

1 




34 29 


9H38 




27 43 


1 


23 i 


DU 


Jan. 


Feb. 


March 


April 


May 


June 


July 


Angn»l 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dk. 




e r 




D * 


t. , 


— — 

« r 


1 


<i r 


« # 


« t 


ft f 


» f 


« . 


1 


7 lU' 10 


011140 


ioin53 


2H2I 


7~ 24 


22 ¥ 47 


24T45 


8 ri 39 


24 31 


29 Si 54 


22.^ 22 


0/57 


2 


21 21 


'4 47 


23 1 1 


15 33 


19 3O 


4T43 


»• B 39 


20 39 


7,0.58 


I4 ns 19 


7 "1 39 


16 2 


3 


5 33 


28 30 


9/6 


28 27 


2 X II 


16 35 


18 36 


3 33 


21 31 


29 8 


22 58 


• 0 VJ 55 


4 


19 44 


12 / |(« 


22 3t> 


IO»32 


14 14 


28 27 


0 (I 41 


16 32 


0tiji"8 


14 ^ 14 


8/ 6 


15 26 


5 


3 "1 5 2 


25 3'< 


5 H4y 


23 ■ 8 


26 10 


10 a 22 


12 57 


29 4<j 


20 44 


29 26 


22 54 


29 32 


6 


17 55 




f *8 41 




1 8t 2 


' 22 23 


25 26 

*• 


I3A27 


5 — 32 


14 "133 


7WI7 1 


IJSII 




1/50 


: 21 41 


w 


17 14 


1 19 53 


: 41131 


8010 


27 24 


20 23 


29 37 


21 IS 


26 23 


8 


'5 16 . 


4 = 2') 






1 a 46 


16 v> 


21 10 


1 1 I»B 35 


5 "I 9 


14^0 


4 — 41 


9 M 1 1 


0 


29 to 


»(' 57 


26 I 


tiT I 


13 41 


29 18 


4 id 26 


25 55 


19 43 


28 9 


17 44 


31 39 


■ 10 


1 2 n 3 1 


29 19 


8X9 


22 53 


23 42 


1 1 11.59 


17 


10^ 21 


4/ I 


1 1 54 


0 M 27 


IT SI 


It 


23 36 


1 1 ^ 31 


20 1 1 


4 a 40 


7 '1 49 


24 5' 


•J ' 


24 45 


18 I 


25 15 


12 52 


15 52 


12 


k5t26 


2 < t4 


2 T 9 


16 41 


20 3 


7 A 37 




9 "1 4 


• ■'5 43 


8S16 


23 5 


27 46 


13 


21 0 


5T 31 


I4 2 


28 39 


2 ■la 26 


21 17 


2(j 37 


23 15 


'5 7 


21 0 


7T 8 


9 V 36 


14 


3 M 20 


17 23 


2S 54 


101143 


• 5 ' 


4 m! 32 


I 1-^46 


7/17 


28 17 


3 31 


19 5 


21 26 


15 


15 2H 


29 15 


7 a 46 


22 56 


27 30 


18 43 


28 0 


21 7 


II s: 13 


15 51 




3 n 2-'> 


16 


27 27 


118 8 




5^21 


10 A 57 


2^48 


I 2 111 I 3 


4VJ47 


23 57 


28 2 


12 49 


13 t& 


* 


OT2O 

w ■ 


i 23 Q 


t O40 


t8 3 


24 23 


17 6 


26 AO 


18 15 


6H31 


loT 6 


34 40 


27 34 


18 


2t IS 


sOzi 


I3 49 




81VIO 


1MI36 


10/40 


i«3i 


18 55 


32 4 


611 33 


OOBIO 


19 


3« 7 


»7 50 


1 26 13 


I4 33 


1 32 2t 


16 12 


24 44 


14 36 


t T 10 


3 « 59 


18 29 


23 t 


to 


15 II 




8fl557 


28 27 


1 6-«-53 


0/48 


8vi j7 


27 2S 


'3 '7 


'5 50 


o«3i 


4 A 40 


21 


27 27 


13 53 


22 4 


12 "V 50 


21 43 


15 20 


22 19 


lox 7 


25 16 


27 40 


12 41 


1 7 29 


22 


mn 0 


27 33 


5'^ 39 


' 27 38 


6 11143 


29 39 


3 — 44 


22 34 


7 tt 9 


9 II 31 


25 » 


out 33 




22 54 


1 1 ,Q 4 < 


IQ 4 4 


12^^45 


21 43 


13 IO43 


18 <i4 


4T48 


i« 59 


21 25 


7 A 36 


13 52 




6'js 0 


26 17 


4 nt 1 6 


28 3 


6 / 39 


27 26 


I M 46 


i<> 53 


0 II 49 


3«S28 


20 29 


27 29 




irt i.S 
ly 4i5 


1 t Tff I'k 
• I "V 


'9 '4 


I 3 20 


7 1 IK 


iO— 4^ 


14 22 


zei 49 


12 42 


'3 4* 


3"»4J 


T t 

* * *j 


26 


3A47 


2(> 13 


4-29 


, 28 25 


1 5'^34 


23 46 


26 42 


10 U 41 


24 44 


28 13 


17 21 


25 34 


»7 


18 5 


IIS17 


19 49 


15/ 9 


19 24 


<( « 25 


8T49 


22 33 


7TC 0 


IIA 6 


1^:^25 


loni t 


38 


2"»35 


26 13 


1 5*^ 4 


27 25 


2S48 


18 46 


1 20 48 


1 4U28 


»9 34 


24 25 


*5 53 


24 39 




17 12 




20 2 


I1I912 


15 47 


! OT54 


1 2442 


»6 33 


2A33 


8"|it3 


01^43 


9»25 


30 


IA49 




4*37 


24 31 


28 23 


12 52 


14 35 


' 28 52 


15 59 


22 31 


>5 47 


24 10 


3' 


16 ao 




18 43 




1 I0M41 


i 


^a6 32 


1 ii«B3o 


1 


7 A 16 




8i44S 



Digitized by Google 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1862- 1863 



DmI Jan. 



Feb. 



7s 18 
21 O 

»7 »3 

29 47 

12T 2 
24 4 

5»58 
17 48 
9 J8 . 
12 I II 034 

»3 I 23 38 
15 I »8 24 



March , April May | June 



July 



August 



Sept 



Oct Nov. 



Dec. 



I 
2 
3 
4 

5 

6 

7 
8 

«J 
10 
1 1 



16 
•7 



25 

26 

2/ 
2« 
29 
30 

3i 



lA 7 

.14 
18 I 57 10 

Hi I ionj45 

20 I 24 24 

12 

22 I 22 9 

23 I 6m.i4 

24 I 20 25 

4 f40 
'» 57 
3>3«3 
17 24 
1 = 27 
15 '7 
28 50 



I2M 4 

24 58 

7X33 

19 5« 

IW55 
>3 49 

25 39 
7 U 2 1 

ly .It 

1 i; ^ 

«3 55 
2<' 35 
9 A 35 

22 56 

20 30 

4^-36 
18 48 

3 "I 2 
«7 >5 

I /24 

15 2S 

29 2*') 

I3WI7 
27 I 

loss 37 

24 2 

7»<i5 



.!() t 15 

2T59 
15 28 

27 42 

9«45 
21 38 

i " 27 

13 16 

-•7 11 
I) a 18 

21 4I 
4<tl25 

«7 34 
11V 8 

»5 7 

'3"'59 

28 39 
I3nvi8 
27 51 

12/12 
26 19 
loW 12 
23 51 

7«i7 

20 31 

3«33 
if> 25 

29 5 
IIT33 
23 50 



5W57 

»7 54 : 

«9 45 

11032 
23 30 

5® 14 
17 19 
29 40 

12 A22 

25 3" 
9"S 7 
23 12 

7^43 
22 33 

71034 
22 36 

7/3» 

22 12 

61033 
20 34 

4=13 
17 33 

O X jf) 

13 24 

25 58 

8T22 

20 35 
2 a 40 

«4 37 

26 29 



811 17 
20 4 
I SSI 

U 47 
25 52 
8A12 

20 52 
31H56 

17 28 
I --28 

«5 56 
011147 

»3 54 
If 7 
. 16 17 
IVII4 

>5 ,52 

OS 6 

»3 55 

27 19 

10 ¥ 20 
2) 2 
5T28 
17 41 
29 44 

r I 8 39 
23 30 

'7 5 
2« 55 
10^48 



221249 

4 A 59 
17 24 

oi« 5 
'3 7 

26 33 
10^ 24 
24 40 

9 in 19 

24 »7 
9 f 2.S 

24 35 
9«37 

24 24 
8 = 48 

22 47 
6 »♦ 19 

19 2() 

2T 9 
14 33 

2f> 42 
8 H 40 

20 30 
20 18 

»4 5 

25 5<> 

7!B5I 

i '9 54 

I 2A 
14 2<> 



27 A 4 

9nii55 
23 2 

6^27 
20 II 

4 mis 
18 38 

3/17 
18 7 
311 2 
'7 55 
2*37 
17 2 
X K 5 
14 42 
' 27 53 
10T39 
23 5 
5W 14 
17 10 
29 o 
iotl47 
' 22 J7 
: 4® 32 
I 36 
28 51 

. II A 19 
I 24 o 

6 us 54 
20 2 

3^23 



16^57 

oni43 
14 41 

28 50 
13/ >o 

27 38 
I2V3 9 

26 4 1 
Ilss 6 
25 18 

9H 13 

22 46 

5T56 
18 44 

I V 10 

13 19 
25 16 

70 6 

18 54 

0'18 4(i 
12 4ft 

24 5« 

75125 

20 9 
3 "I to 
16 27 

29 59 
13-42 

27 35 
«' »n33 

25 36 



9/41 
23 49 
7W58 

22 7 

6ati3 

20 13 
4K 3 

»7 39 
0T59 
I4 o 
26 41 

9« 5 

21 13 

3D 9 

'4 59 
26 47 

8as39 

20 41 

^fl57 

It 31 
J S 

iini!44 

25 2J 
9AI9 

23 29 

7III46 

22 6 

<> r 25 
20 40 

4W48 



18H48 

2 = 41 

16 26 

OK I 
13 26 

2f> 39 

9T3« 
22 23 

4»53 

17 9 
29 12 
II II 6 

22 34 
4«4t 

16 32 

28 33 
10 A 49 

23 24 
6r»j 22 

19 46 

3^3<> 

17 49 
2 »ll2t> 

17 2 

1/49 

t6 32 
ttj 6 

15 2ft 

29 32 
I 3JS2I 

20 55 



23 i8 
6T 9 

18 47 
t»i3 

«3 29 

25 34 
7030 

19 21 
ia& 8 

'2 55 

24 46 I 
t^A45 I 

18 58 ' 

14 23 

27 43 
1 1 ^ 30 ' 

25 -(3 ' 
101H23 

25 »9 
10/24 i 

25 30 I 

as 9 ' 

9=3' 

23 29 
7M 4 , 

20 17 
3T11 



'5T47 

28 10 

lovai 

23 33 
4018 

16 8 

27 57 

9® 44 
21 34 

3A29 

15 31 
27 45 
ioiijti4 

23 2 

6^ la 
19 48 

3 "151 

18 20 

wit 

16 18 

3>)33 
18 44 

3 = 44 

18 24 
2x37 

16 23 

29 4a 
I2T35 
25 7 

7 a 22 

19 24 



DMl Ji 



I 

2 

3 
4 
5 
b 



7 
8 

9 
10 

IT 

I .: 
«3 
»4 

i<; 
J 
I 



30 

21 

22 
23 
24 
25 

26 

2/ 
28 

29 



Feb. March April May June July 



August 



Sept. 



Oct. 



Nov. 



Dec. 



1D17 

24 53 

i« 33 
OA 30 

12 33 

«4 45 

7'» 7 
19 42 

2^31 

>5 38 
2^) 4 
I2ni52 
-'7 3 
I I / 3'' 
26 26 

18 I tl>930 

19 I 26 37 
"■39 

2fi 25 
10 H 49 

24 4^ 

STI3 

21 12 

3^47 
16 2 

28 2 

9053 
30 I 21 40 

3' I 3*^27 



154517 

27 »5 
9 A 21 

21 38 
4"I! 5 

1 6 44 

29 33 
12*35 

25 49 

9 in 16 

22 58 

6 / 56 
21 10 

5^38 
20 18 

5= 3 

19 48 

4K23 
18 42 
2T38 

If. 7 
29 1 1 
1 1 8 50 
24 8 
Ml 10 
IS 2 

20 50 
I I 1U38 



23Tt32 

5 A 35 

«7 5' 

ont 20 

»3 5 

26 4 

9^15 
22 39 
611112 

>9 53 
3/43 

'7 4' 
i /nlj 

15 5H 
oat 15 

'4 34 
28 52 

13K 3 

27 o 
toT4i 

24 I 

6 a 59 

19 3<' 
11155 
> 3 39 

25 53 

73842 

19 32 
I A 28 

«3 34 

I 25 56 



. . I 

8nB34 

21 32 
4^48 

15 22 

2 ITIIO 

16 9 
0/ 15 

»4 »5 

28 36 

1 2 n 46 
2(^ 55 

1 i = n 

^4 3'> 

8 « 52 

22 35 

or 5 
19 22 
2»a3 

»5 7 

V 35 

9 0 49 
21 31 

3 'Ti 4C> 

15 34 
27 25 

9A21 
21 28 

3«»5o 

16 33 

29 35 



13- I 
26 49 
ioin57 

25 19 

9 ' 3* 
24 28 

33 30 
7«47 

21 32 

5»<43 
19 19 

2T4I 

'5 47 

28 40 

1 1 a 20 
23 46 
6n I 

18 6 
o« 3 

>i 55 

23 44 
5 34 

17 30 

29 36 

11 ni!57 

24 36 

i 7*37 
I 31 3 

4 55 
I 19 II 



3 / 49 
18 41 

3«40 
18 39 

3ar28 
18 2 

2M17 
16 9 
29 40 
1 2 T 50 

25 41 

8 B I'> 

20 3S 

2 II 49 

«4 5> 

26 48 

8«39 
20 29 

2,fllS 

14 to 

26 8 
8m 14 

20 33 
9 

5 

29 25 
1311111 

27 24 
13/ 3 
27 X 



I2VJI3 

27 27 

12 = 34 

27 25 

"I ♦<53 

*3 54 
9T27 

*a 34 

5H 19 

17 45 

29 5'> 

II Us: 

21 3' ' 
5«642 I 

«7 3« 

29 20 I 

1 1. a 13 

23 to 

17 24 
29 4^) 

12-^22 
25 15 

8 m 2i) 

22 f. 

6/ 9 

20 37 
5W28 
20 36 

I 5«5i 
I 21 3 



0 H 3 
2U 39 

4T49 
18 28 

1 « 39 
14 24 
26 4S 

8Q56 
20 32 

2«43 
14 31 

2(> 2 1 

8 a 1 4 
20 12 

2 m 18 

'4 3« 

26 53 

22 8 

18 19 

"5' ; 

'5 44 I 

«4«3^ 
29 24 . 
14 = 25 I 
29 27 

14x20 ! 

28 55 
13T 5 I 



26T47 

10 a 2 

22 50 
50 16 

17 25 

29 22 

Ii«t3 

23 2 
4 A 54 

10 52 
28 58 

1 1 nt 14 

23 41 
(> ^ 19 

19 8 

2ltl 8 

15 20 
38 43 
13/20 

26 10 

iOV3t5 

24 34 
9= 4 

23 41 
8 H 19 

22 51 
7T 9 

21 9 

4«45 

>7 57 



004^' 
"3 «4 
25 25 

7aa25 
19 17 

lA 8 

13 2 

2S 4 
ynj! 16 

19 4a 
2*! 22 

15 17 

28 27 

11 "15' 
25 25 

9 / 10 
23 4 

7>1 4 
21 ti 

5=22 

'9 35 
3«49 

'7 59 
2T 2 

'5 54 

29 31 

12 a 52 

25 53 
8n36 
31 2 

3»»3 



151S 13 

27 7 
SA5<> 
20 53 

2"I!55 

15 y 

27 38 

10*26 

23 34 
7"l I 

20 47 

4 ' 49 

19 2 
31023 
17 46 

2SS 8 

16 24 

0x33 

«4 12 

28 21 

IIT57 

25 21 
8831 

2 1 29 
4D13 

16 43 

29 2 
lIA 9 

23 « 

5A 2 



16A53 
28 46 

I O \rv 4O 

22 57 
5^23 

18 10 

imi9 

14 54 

28 53 

'3/ '5 
27 54 
121044 
27 3^' 

12 = 23 
26 58 

I I » 16 

23 15 

*T53 

22 1 3 

58 17 

18 5 
0041 

13 6 
25 22 

7«B29 

19 31 

I ,fl27 

13 19 
25 10 

7"r 3 
19 I 



Digitized by GoogI 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1864- 1865 



DM 


Jan. 


, Feb. 


March 


April 


May 


June 


July 


August 


Sept. 


' Oci 


' Nov. 


1 Dec 




D > 


I a r 


0 t 


0 » 


0 r 


0 1 


0 t 


0 » 


C r 






0 « 


I 


1^ 8 


1711148 


10 / 35 


23:41 


12 K 6 


4 u 28 


' IOU36 


27 «5 9 


11^54 


'4-39 




z 


13 29 


1/ 8 


24 13 


17 10 


26 25 


*7 56 


23 18 


9AII 


23 46 


1 26 45 


13 53 ! «> 4/ 


3 


26 9 


14 55 


, 811x6 


I K5X 


IOT4I 


lOii 


5049 


21 8 




1 9n 0 


*7 3 , 4*4* 


4 


9"l" 


29 11 


22 44 


1 '6 37 


24 48 


1 14 1} 


, 18 10 


319 I 


17 35 


21 24 


IOV527 18 50 


5 


23 41 


'3>3 55 


7~33 


IT2I 


8«42 


' 27 1 


OA 22 




29 39 


4 ' 1 


24 5 


2-jS 


6 


6/39 


29 I 


22 37 


'5 55 


22 21 


9 15 35 


1 2 25 


26 42 


II in52 


i<> 33 


7=156 17 ' 


7 


21 5 


143:21 


7 >f 48 


0 B 13 


51142 


21 56 


24 ^12 


»^35 


24 19 


o<0 i 


21 50 


I T 1* 


8 


5 ■05" 


42 


22 54 


14 10 


18 44 


4A 5 


6"! 14 


20 34 


7/4 


'3 32 




15 3: 


9 


21 ^ 




7T46 


27 42 


I «27 


16 5 


iS 5 


2 "143 


20 10 


27 23 


20 39 


1 29 -f 


10 


')= i<) 


-'<) 11 


-■- ^5 


101150 


' 3 54 


28 0 


29 58 


15 9 


3V342 


II 3:36 


5T H 


' 1352; 


II 


21 30 


14 T 9 


b 0 16 


23 36 


26 6 


91952 


, IIA38 


1 27 54 


17 42 


26 8 


i «9 39 


i 27 n 


12 


6 k 28 


28 3 


19 49 


61B 2 


8a 7 


21 47 


24 9 


ri / 5 


sar 9 


IOK56 


1 4« 5 


xoii5« 


13 


ai 4 


II 828 


2054 


18 13 


30 3 


3^49 


6 "137 


24 44 


17 0 


25 33 


1 IS «2 j 24 Ifi 


14 


5T14 


24 26 


>5 35 


OA 12 


HII56 


«6 3 


19 27 


81154 


2X 9 


10T51 






t5 


18 57 


70 I 


27 57 


12 6 


n 52 


28 34 


2/42 


23 32 


'7 25 


25 41 


16 8 


20 21 


t6 


2(f 14 


19 19 


TOQS 4 


23 59 


25 55 


II »n25 


16 25 


8=r 33 


2T38 


10 » 16 


*y J'-' 


■>■■ yA 


»7 


15 0 


148 25 


22 I 


5"" 54 


8^ 9 


24 39 


0^37 


23 4'* 


17 37 


-t 30 


1 2 OS 3 1 


IS 20 


18 




13 22 


3 A 53 


'7 55 


20 38 


8/18 


15 13 


<) »( 7 


2 B 16 


>S 1 1 19 




2 — 2* 


19 


ion 7 


25 15 


15 44 


OA 6 


3"125 


22 19 


OS 9 


24 18 


16 28 


21 42 


/ jj 


1 V *^ 


20 


22 ig 


7A 7 


27 38 


12 29 


16 30 


6 V341 


15 15 


9T 12 


0 n 12 


4 (041 


TO JO 




21 


4® 22 


»8 59 


911136 


25 4 


29 54 


21 17 


0 H 20 


23 42 


13 29 


17 18 


1 IfD aT 


3 ^ 


22 


16 21 




21 40 


7"153 


'3 f 35 


6a 0 


15 16 


7V44 


26 21 


29 36 


•J *5# 


1*4 JV 


23 


28 16 


«2 51 


3^53 


20 56 


27 $a 


20 43 


' 29 53 


21 19 


8«53 


IIA4I 


25 20 


1 S9 t 


24 


io,fi 9 


24 54 


16 14 


4/13 


II V)40 


5K18 


■ i4Tt2 


4029 


21 9 


23 57 




. y ii( . . 


25 


22 1 


7* 3 


28 46 


'7 43 




19 42 


28 5 


17 18 


3 A 13 


5 "8 29 




1 *t <*■ 


26 


3"S54 


19 19 


II in28 


I V524 


los 15 


3T50 


11 a 36 


20 49 


J5 9 


17 19 




4 ' ^ 


27 


>5 50 


1 11145 


24 22 


15 17 


24 34 


17 41 


24 46 


12® 7 


27 2 


29 13 


'4 5 


r8 iS 


28 




1 4 2 ■, 


7 * > 


-<i 1') 


> 4'> 


I b 16 


7 n 39 


24 15 




1 1 14 


26 ^ 1 




29 


■*> 59 


27 20 




1 3 = 


■'•^ 57 




20 17 


6,n IS 


20 44 


2) 22 


a 1 u\ 

V * jy 


16 6 


30 


22 iS 




4/530 


27 46 


6T5S 


27 42 


2»43 


18 II 


20.39 


5"142 






ii 


4 '153 




18 27 




20 48 




«5 0 


onf J 




18 13 




• -t J J 


DM 


_i 


Feb. 


Much 


i 

April < 


May 


June 


July 


August 


Sept. 


Oct. 


nov. 


J.MC' 








■ 


0 r . 




9 t 


0 1 




e # 


0 r 






e « 


I 


29=: 22 


22T44 


2 B 14 


22 1157 


271535 


12 nt 37 


14^ 15 


28 m 7 


'4 ^^39 


20S37 


13T 7 


21 « 35 


2 


13 »<4** 


6»45 


If) 30 


6<& 9 


10 A N 


24 30 


26 6 


10 / 34 


28 20 


5 K 5 


2H 15 


6 n 30 


3 


28 6 


20 2 / 


0 II 2 1 


l)^ 59 


22 23 


6-^ 19 


Srn 3 


23 22 


125:27 


19 5f> 


13 8 27 


21 16 


4 


I2T 13 


3051 


'3 49 


I A 70 


4nt 25 


18 9 


20 1 1 


(''^ 35 


26 59 


5T 2 


20 32 


5»45 


5 


26 9 


'f* 59 


26 55 


'3 43 


16 18 


orn 4 


2 / 36 


20 13 


II « 48 


20 13 


13022 


29 50 


6 


9 8 54 


29 54 




>5 46 , 


28 7 


12 8 


1 5 19 


4=15 


26 48 


5 V25 


27 5© 


3A39 


7 


23 28 


I2«}7 


22 14 


7^42 , 


9^55 


24 23 


28 23 


18 35 


IIT48 1 


20 22 


ii«30 


16 41 


8 




25 10 


4.134 


<9 32 , 


21 47 


f 57 


II V348 


3M 8 


26 41 • 


50 I 


25 23 


29 26 


9 


ao 5 


7fl33 


16 43 


I«2I 


3"l45 


•3 45 


25 31 


17 47 


1 1 b 31 , 


19 r6 


8 A 28 


1 1 iTt 4 5 


10 


3« 8 


19 4O 


2« 45 


13 10 


'5 52 ; 


2 V3 49 


9 =: 29 


2T25 


25 42 


3® 5 


21 8 


23 55 


II 


16 0 


I rn;5i 


lont 41 


25 2 ' 


28 9 


16 8 


23 37 


57 


9 n 43 


16 28 


311129 


5<^4'? 


12 


28 


•3 49 


22 33 


611159 


10 / 39 


29 40 


7 *« 51 


I a 17 


23 23 


29 29 


15 34 


17 37 


«3 


11 A 7 


25 4" 


4 >^ 22 


'9 3 


23 21 


1 3=23 


22 6 


15 25 


6 as 44 


I2A 8 


27 28 


29 23 


M 


'i 


7^29 


16 1 1 


I / 17 


6i0 17 


27 16 


6T20 


29 20 


19 46 


24 J I 


16 


1111113 


«5 


5 (IK 26 


19 17 


28 I 


13 42 


19 27 


11 f. 15 


20 30 


IJU 0 


2 A 33 


6 Rc 40 


21 2 


23 10 


16 


17 21 


nil 8 


9 »H5^J 


26 21 


2 s: 52 


25 20 


4 U 34 1 


26 28 


»5 5 


18 39 


2 mso 


it 17 




29 10 


'3 7 


21 59 


9>JI7 


16 31 


9T30 


33 


9«B43 


27 26 , 


OA 32 


14 42 


17 37 


iS 


IOA59 


25 20 


4 / 14 


22 32 I 


OH24 ' 


23 43 


2025 


22 45 


9*936 


12 20 


26 40 


on 0 


>9 


22 50 




i^' 45 


6= 8 


14 31 1 


7«57 


16 10 


5A35 


21 37 


24 7 


8/47 


12 55 


so 


4«l5i 


*o 45 


29 37 


20 7 


28 58 ( 


22 10 


29 46 


18 12 1 


3-31 


5 "155 


21 3 


25 54 


2t 


17 6 


4^5 8 


1 2 VJ 52 


4 M 26 


1 3T23 


6 n 19 


13® 10 


0 ft ; 


15 21 


17 46 


3W29 




22 


29 41 


17 59 


26 35 


'9 5 


28 0 


20 19 


26 2 1 


12 50 


^7 7 


29 41 


16 8 


:22 


23 


12/41 


2S2I 


105:45 


3 T 5S 


12 K 38 


4® 6 


0 A 17 i 


24 53 


8 11154 


1 1 / 44 


28 59 


5>^57 


24 


26 8 


17 7 


25 21 


IS 59 


27 12 


17 3« 


21 5S 


6 46 


20 44 


23 5« 


12s: 4 


19 38 


■ -5 


IOV3 3 


2 K II 


10 X 18 


3 « 59 


1 1 n 34 


0 ,a 50 


4nt22 


I« J J 


2/40 


6<j24 


25 26 




2b 


24 23 


17 24 


25 29 


18 49 


25 39 


13 42 


»€• 33 


011121 


14 48 


19 7 


9H 5 


>7 33 


27 


9= 4 


2T35 


'OT43 


3U23 


9»a3 ' 


26 15 


28 32 


12 9 


27 It ' 


2S 9 


«3 3 


I B47 


28 




»7 34 


25 51 


»7 34 


22 44 1 


8i<i 31 


IO<t23 


24 5 


9*154 


15 33 


7T19 


16 9 


90 


8X55 




WW 44 


IB20 


5 A 4* i 


20 33 


22 It 


6/13 


23 2 


29 22 


21 53 


on 38 


30 


23 45 




25 M 


14 40 


18 17 i 


2*> 26 


4"1 0 


18 38 


6«36 1 


13x33 


6«40 


15 8 


31 


8T23 j 




911 »9 




OH134 1 




'5 57 


tll26 


I 


28 12 


1 


29 32 



Digitized by Google 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1866-1867 



Jan. 



Feb. ] March April May 



> 

7 
■i 

a 
I 
2 
3 

4 

5 

( > 

s 

9 
■a 
1 1 
22 
*J 
»4 

«5 

» « 

ay 

30 

3« 



130^46 
27 42 
1 1 j\ 1 6 
24 27 
7'TK 14 

I ^48 
13 43 

7111 20 
19 II 

1 / 12 
13 36 

8V3 43 
21 48 
5-10 

i» 45 

2 H 31 
16 25 

0T23 
14 25 
28 29 

I2»i4 

36 40 
10U45 

24 4K 
K<u 44 

22 31 

6a 4 
19 33 



I aipat 

i " ' 

27 23 

9-31 I 

21 28 I 

I 3"li7 
I 15 6 

26 58 
8/59 

21 15 

3>J49 
16 44 
om I 

, 13 39 

27 37 
, II X 48 
' 26 10 

IOT35 
24 59 
9a 19 
23 32 

, 7n3(» 
I ai 30 

i« 45 

«<l 5 

I 15 13 

28 7 



ioqt47 

*3 >3 

5^27 

17 30 
29 24 

1 1 iai4 

23 - 
4 ' 53 

16 55 
29 9 
II irJ4i 

24 35 
7«53 

21 37 

5H45 
20 13 

4T57 
19 48 

4 8 39 
ly 23 

3054 

18 9 
aoB 6 

»S 43 

39 2 

I2rfl 4 

24 51 

7"li«4 
'9 45 

13 59 



a5«=55 

»9 35 
I /as 

13 18 

25 20 

7 

20 1 
2SS50 

10 2 
29 41 

13X46 
^ 16 

13T 7 
28 12 

13 ti 22 
28 27 

13 II IQ 

27 51 

1 1 1159 

25 42 
8A59 

21 54 

4^*9 

16 49 

28 57 

10^57 
zi 50 
4>n 40 
16 30 



10/ 13 
22 II 

4 

33 

29 2 

2-( 3.5 

8 » 
22 19 

6T4O 
21 24 

6U«9 
21 39 

6053 
21 37 

6«42 

21 I 

4 A 52 

18 14 

ins 9 
13 42 

»3 57 
7*59 

19 53 
1 11142 

13 30 
25 20 

7/14 

19 14 

1)921 



"] 1 
June July August 



«3'337 
26 3 
8«39 

21 29 

4»«35 

18 O 

■5 54 

o a 23 
15 u 
o a 12 

15 17 
o«i7 

»5 3 
a9 25 

13A20 
26 47 
guv 46 

22 21 

4-^36 

If' 37 
28 30 

ionii9 

22 8 

4/ 1 

16 I 
28- II 
10 1030 

23 o 
5«40 



18S31 

IH35 

14 50 

28 19 

I2T 3 

26 3 

10 B 19 

^4 49 , 
91129 ' 

24 14 I 
80956 

23 26 

7 A 39 

21 29 

4"S54 

17 53 

0^29 I 

12 46 

24 49 , 
6>n43 

18 33 I 
0/24 i 

12 22 
24 28 
6KS46 

19 18 
2a 4 

15 3 
28 15 

IIH39 

35 «4 



8T58 

22 51 

6«52 

21 2 

5ni8 

'9 37 

3 = 57 

15 13 

16 1 1 

29 45 
1211B58 
25 51 

81&24 
20 40 

2 "144 
14 39 

2(> JO 
am 

20 22 
2H32 

'4 56 
27 36 
io«35 

23 52 
7M26 

21 14 

5T14 
19 23 

3«36 

17 50 



Sept. 


r 

Oct. 


1 

Nov. 


Dec. 




1 1 *23 14 




u t 


16 16 


2S 2 


14 


18 A% 


00 22 


"♦*34 


27 10 


aiii4X 


Z«f 22 




9^28 


12 37 

31 


28 12 


J Iff ff '» 


I 

* ' j/ 


24 28 


11^ 50 




^ in ^0 


6/19 




0 ' 1. 1 


I )6 


18 1 \ 






27 20 


0 /J 6 


21 22 




9 / 20 


12 I 


! -"^ 2 




21 II 




I ll ^ 7 






6s 16 








18 a« 

19 




la 36 


37 6 








9S22 


19 4< 








*7 4 


16 18 


18 30 


4 M 47 


10 Til 


28 t6 


OS AO 


18 1 


24 TO 




28 


I T48 






26 28 


16 I 


21 ^4 






0 tt 42 


on 1 


r8 36 


23 47 


15 45 


24 21 




8t 6 


in ) 






22 


16 2a 


24 Vi 


or a 


7W43 1 


1036 


9^11? 


14 27 


22 51 


16 30 


23 39 


29 3 


7 1155 


OA 59 


719 8 


i3«43 

28 21 


22 48 , 
7«s23 ' 




20 18 
3 


12052 


21 j<> 


iinB3i 


15 27 


27 10 


i« 50 1 


24 II J 

1 


27 35 

«mj3 





Jan. 




March 


April 


May 


Jane 




August 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 


I 1 


a » 

21 n\24 


5>125 


13V526 


285:32 


3T I 


2., « 2.\, 


331M6 


0 , 

26 A 44 


i6:!i^37 


20 in 23 


0 r 
41^57 


0 > 
6as47 


2 1 


3/13 


17 31 


25 3& 


" X35 


16 57 


'J H.}-: 


18 33 


II ns 7 


29 44 


2/49 


16 49 


18 36 


3 1 


15 4 


29 47 


7«59 


25 I 


I » 19 


24 4« 


3 A 39 


25 4 


12 in 29 


'5 ' 


28 38 


0x33 


1 1 


59 


I2s: 15 


20 36 


8T47 


16 2 


loss 0 


18 26 


8^35 


24 55 


27 2 


10*30 


12 41 


^ 1 


8«59 


^4 53 


3x31 


22 53 


0057 


24 59 


2 ■1147 


21 40 


7/6 


8H55 


22 30 


25 7 
7T56 


6| 


ai 6 


7x44 


16 42 


7 a 14 


»5 57 


9A37 


16 40 


4in22 


19 7 


20 47 


4X43 




3s 20 


30 46 


OT 8 


21 45 


0051 


23 48 




16 45 


1I13 I 


2 = 42 


17 13 


21 12 


8 


15 4» 


4T 0 


»3 49 


6D18 


«5 33 


7'»33 


»3 5 


28 55 


M 53 


14 44 


or 6 


4»38 




28 13 


17 27 


27 41 


20 49 


29 56 


20 52 


25 43 


10/54 


24 48 


26 58 


13 25 


19 14 


10 


'OH 55 


iw 5 


II « 42 


5®i3 


13A58 


3-^5° 


8 in 5 


22 48 


6*50 


9K28 


27 9 


3055 


II 


23 50 


14 56 


25 50 


»9 25 


27 38 


16 2., 




4W40 


19 I 


22 17 


It u 18 


18 56 


12 


7T I 


29 0 


ion 2 


3A24 


lOnSfS 


28 53 


2/14 


J6 33 


I M 24 


5T27 


25 47 


49B .6 


1.1 


20 30 


'3nt5 


24 14 


17 9 


24 0 


II lit 6 


14 9 


28 31 


14 I 


18 57 


10029 


19 »4 


14 


4 a 19 


27 40 


8026 


011140 


6-^ {8 


23 12 


26 2 


•o=35 


26 53 


2»45 


25 17 


4A^2 


•5 


18 29 


1202 9 


22 34 


'3 58 


l<) 2Z 


5/ n 


7>J54 


22 48 


loT 0 


[6 48 


1042 I 


18 51 


16 


3D59 


26 39 


6A3t 


27 3 


1 11147 


17 7 


19 48 


5H 9 


23 21 


III I 


24 36 


3"B 7 


17 


17 46 


IIA 3 


30 30 




14 2 


29 0 


1*45 


17 42 


6B56 


15 20 


8A55 


17 0 


18 


2 5543 


25 15 


4"t «3 


22 37 


26 II 


low 52 


»3 47 


o<ra6 


20 42 


29 40 


22 59 


o^?9 


19 


17 42 


9IIT! 10 


'7 44 


5 "I 7 


8/13 


22 45 


25 56 


13 34 


41138 


«3"37 ' 


<f"»45 


13 38 


20 


2AJ3 


22 46 


I -^^ 0 


17 27 


20 9 


4 = 41 


8Ht3 


26 37 


>8 43 


aS 7 


20 15 


26 30 


21 


>7 7 


6^ 0 


I4 0 


29 37 


2 V3 3 


16 41 


20 41 


low 5 


2«B53 


12 A 10 


3^31 


9'n.7 


22 


IHH7 


18 52 


26 44 


11/38 


'3 54 


28 49 


3r24 


23 49 


17 s 


26 4 


16 34 


21 33 


23 


'5 2 


I in 2 5 


9»1i3 


23 34 


25 47 


II X 9 


I ft 24 


7050 


I A ^4 




29 26 


3 '49 


24 


28 iS 


13 4' 


21 28 


5VJ26 


7«=44 


23 4" 


-•'> 44 


22 7 


'5 39 


23 24 


i2in 8 


>5 57 


25 


II ^10 


25 45 


3 '33 


17 19 


«9 50 


6T43 


13027 


6<3B 36 


29 49 


f>-^ 50 


24 39 


27 58 


26 


2j JO 


7/40 


"5 30 


29 17 


2x9 


20 4 


27 34 


15 


' 11152 


20 4 


7/ 0 


9>J54 


27 
S8 


5 "151 


«9 33 


27 23 


iia24 


14 46 


3»53 


i2n 5 


5A56 


27 43 


3m. 6 


19 12 


21 45 


17 5« 


1W27 


9W17 


23 46 


27 46 


18 II 


26 54 


20 34 


lift 19 


15 54 


1V314 


3'n34 


29 


^9 44 




21 16 


6 ¥ 27 


u T13 


2 055 


"■55 


5"» 2 


24 39 


28 28 


13 9 


15 ,33 


3" 






3sa6 


'9 31 


25 9 


18 0 


27 0 


19 15 


7"140 


10/49 


24 59 


27 IJ 


3» 


aj 27 




«5 50 




9»34 




13A 0 


3* 7 




33 58 




9)C 9 



Digitized by Google 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1868-1869 









1 


1 








I 


1 


1 






dmI 


1 

Jan. 




Much 


April 


May 


Juoe 


July 


Attiptst 

'- 


Sept. 1 

— - — !- 


Oct. 


Nov. , 

1 


Dec 


I 1 


21 *t 17 




t 

1 

8 a 45 1 


'1- 

2 II 19 




24*559 


* 

4IIB 8 


25^47 




• i 

I / 39 


t? 042 


2 M I 


4x49 1 


21 B 59 


28 n 1 


2 1 


3T39 


22 14 


ir. 5 , 


9A15 


18 8 


9rtl 0 


14 1 1 


29 35 


«3 55 


17 " 1 


5021 


121.. 


3 1 


16 23 


6n 7 


0<2fi 10 1 


23 35 


2^ I 


22 2 


26 31 


11=25 


25 54 


29 45 


iH 55 


26 -. 


4 1 


29 31 


20 27 


14 32 : 


7"i'57 ! 


15 48 1 


4/52 


8;r>42 


23 13 


8t 1 


12 B 31 


2<» 38 


1 1 


i 1 


tj» 8 


5« 9 1 


29 8 


22 If) 


29 24 


»7 «9 


20 43 


5« » 


20 18 


25 3« ' 




25 i. 


6 1 


tr 15 


SO 9 


13 A 54 1 


0-^29 


1 2 11149 


»9 53 


2*38 


16 5a 


2tt4^ 


8042 , 


OA 25 1 


9mr 


7 1 


II 051 


5*t^»9 


28 43 1 


20 29 ' 


25 5« 1 


12VJ 5 


14 27 1 


38 50 


15 31 


22 7 


14 36 




8 1 


26 50 


20 29 


131^28 


4 "114 1 


8/52 


24 6 


26 14 1 




28 30 1 


51644 


38 31 


7^- 


9 1 


I2flB 5 


5"»29 


28 3 1 


17 40 1 


21 29 ' 


5«59 


8H 2 


23 15 


1 1 u 47 ; 


19 35 


12 nc 4 I 


21 1- 


10 1 


27 25 


20 12 


12^20 


0/45 


31^50 


17 48 1 


19 55 I 


5»5' 


25 24 1 


3 A 40 


26 53 


5*" 


II 1 


12.(13** 


4^3« 


2f> 16 


13 29 


15 57 


29 36 1 


1T58 


18 47 


9 1: 2 1 


17 =!~ 


1 t !=- 5 


18 r 


12 1 


27 35 


18 24 1 


9^147 


25 54 


27 53 1 


1 1 28 


14 14 


3U 6 


23 40 


2 ns 25 


25 »3 


I ; 


>3 1 


iznv g 


I "149 


22 54 : 


8Vi 3 


9*43 


23 30 


26 49 


15 50 


8A16 1 


17 I 


9 mi 3 


X5 


>4 1 


26 16 


'4 49 


5/37 


20 0 


21 32 , 


5T47 


9»47 


0^ I 


23 8 


I r^40 


23 0 


27 - 


i< 1 


9^56 


27 26 : 


18 0 


I S51 


3**25 1 


18 24 


23 12 


14 35 


8ns 7 


16 I4 


6/31 


lo/r 1 


16 1 


23 10 


9^43 i 


0)9 8 


13 40 


IS 28, 


t«25 


70 5 


29 29 


aj 6 


o"l37 } 


19 42 


22 


«7 


6«l 3 


21 50 


12 4 


«3 33 


*7 45 I 


>4 33 


21 25 


14 A 36 


7A56 


'5 « 


3*93* 


5« ■ 


18 1 


l« 35 


3W.i'^ ' 


53 54 


7x35 


10T21 


28 47 


6a 8 


29 47 


22 30 


28 27 


15 2 


17 t 


i9 


0/54 




5«42 


19 49 1 


23 20 


1311 7 


21 9 


I4'»i'53 


6m.4i 


1 1 / 46 1 


27 15 


28 5: 


20 1 


13 I 


27 24 


17 34 


2T20 


6»43 


27 4f> 


6^1x7 


29 44 


20 27 


24 41 


9= X4 


10 - . 


21 


25 0 


9=:i4 1 


29 32 


15 10 


20 30 


121*38 


21 24 


14^15 ; 


3 '45 


7<Ji3 


21 5 


22 V 


22 


6>5 53 


21 7 


II K40 


28 19 


403^ 


27 33 


21 


J.S 20 


i(. 37 


19 26 


2 H 52 


4T;- 


23 


i8 44 


3X 7 


24 I 


I 1 » 46 


18 57 


12 A 23 


21 I 


1 i|tii3S 


29 8 


1 = 25 


14 42 


if. r 


24 


o«33 




6T35 


25 30 


3«2 2S 1 


27 2 


5^>9 


25 " 


1 1 20 


13 «6 


26 40 


29 


25 


12 23 


27 33 


19 24 


9n25 


18 0 1 


1 1 "11 26 


19 14 


8/ 0 


23 18 


25 3 




11^5 


20 


24 15 


loT I 


2 »28 


23 30 


2.fl2g 


25 31 


2 "144 


20 29 


5- 9 


6x53 


21 18 


25 > 




6H 13 


22 43 


15 45 


70238 


16 50 


9£^l8 


»3 53 


2 1142 


16 56 


18 50 


4» 6 : 


8D4« 




tS 16 


5«3« 


29 »5 


21 49 


ID* 0 


32 46 


a8 43 


H 43 


28 45 


0T57 


17 14 1 


22 41- 


29 




18 <0 


1 2 D 56 


5 A 58 




S "130 


1 1 1 / IS 


36 36 


10 «< 38 




0 n 43 


# 


30 


12 57 


26 48 


, 20 5 


28 4O 


18 <6 


, 23 34 


8aE25 


22 38 


25 56 , 


14 30 




3> 


«5 41 


1 


I04B50 


! 


I2A22 1 




5W4« 


30 IS 




8»50 






DM 


Jan. 


■ Feb. 


March 


April 


May 


June 




August 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov 
— — ■ — 


Dec 


— — 










r 




______ 


1 " ' 


0 9 


1 - . 

1 ° ' 


0 # 




I 


aiA 7 


14 A 17 


23<v 8 


13/40 


»7>3 44 


2KIO 


1 3T47 


, 7 


! 5« 4 


f iiAf8 


4*»io 


I3"» : 




5i«43 


28 26 


7 "134 


26 50 


OSS 9 


14 2 


1 15 13 


oil 41 


18 43 


25 41 


19 13 


*7 


3 


20 8 


t2lllll 


ai 33 


9<S 13 


12 17 


25 52 


27 47 


13 35 


2, (1 49 


10 mi 29 


4 "121 


12/0 


4 


4-!^-23 


25 34 


5/ 3 


;i 36 


24 13 


7 T 4'' 


10 - , 


2f) 52 


17 21 


25 3f' 


1 ■ > 2 1 


2() to 


^ 


iS 16 


K/ J7 


iS 0 


4= I 


6 H 2 


19 49 


2-: i*t 


10© 35 


2 1^' 1 4 


10^53 


4 / 


10 <1 - 


f» 


' "137 


21 20 


0 V5 4 ; 


15 5") 


17 5" 


20 4 


5033 


24 41 


17 23 


26 10 


18 26 


2 1 = 


7 


>5 2J 


3 <i AO 


13 8 


27 43 


' 29 42 


14 35 


IS 49 


OA 10 


2^37 


1 1 m 1 5 


2 /ii8 


6r - 


H 


2S 35 


Id 4 


25 15 


9^ 


, 11T41 


27 22 


2«25 


23 54 


1 7 44 


25 59 


15 41 


19 - 


0 


"'33 


1 28 10 


1 7«'a 


21 18 


23 50 


; 10II27 


lO 21 


8»iJ47 


2 11138 


10/15 


28 37 


1 


10 


24 i.S 


, m« 0 


1 19 « 


3TI2 


6 » M 


23 48 




' aj 4> 


17 9 


1 \ 


lisr 9 


13 ii 


II 


1 61150 


; 22 0 


0x49 


! »5 »3 


t8 46 


7«24 


1 «4 34 


8:&29 


I / 15 


7W18 


23 23 


25 2: 


12 


1 (I 


, 3X49 


12 37 


27 23 


1034 


2t tl 


; 29 2J 


23 4 


U 53 


20 9 




7TIJ 


13 


1 I S2I 


' »5 37 


24 26 


\ 9W43 


'4 35 


1 5.'^ 7 


i3'»5a 


\ 711121 


28 6 


2 = 38 


17 17 


19 ■■ 


14 


1 13 22 


' 27 26 


•'•T20 


' 22 13 


1 27 47 


1 19 10 


; 28 18 


21 19 


TOVJ57 


«4 51 


29 7 


I J ■ 


»5 


1 25 13 




, 18 19 


4 0 54 


1 I I - - ! M 


3"«i7 


I2''37 


4^5 ') 


.'S 


26 51 


10T38 


I i ' 


16 


1 7 *< J 


21 Ifl 


o«2r> 


' 17 47 


24 44 


17 27 


i 26 4f. 


iS 12 


i = -iT 


8»<45 


22 54 


1 i5 .. 


>7 


1 i« 5« 


3»24 


12 4 J 


0^53 


1 S zH 


1^38 


10 "143 


I /J II 


17 


-0 35 


4W57 


1 8n 1 


18 


1 0T39 


1.5 4^^ 


25 9 


14 12 


22 22 


15 4« 


24 27 


13 54 


29 5*^ 


2T26 


17 S 


20 i" 


«9 


1 >2 35 


28 25 


711 5f> 


27 4-S 


6 It 27 


29 5() 


7/58 


2r. 23 


i 1 1 >* 44 


14 18 


f 29 28 


3--' 


20 


1 24 42 




1 20 48 


. 1»A4« 


20 41 


1 «3n38 


1 »4 


8S42 


23 36 


i «6 «5 


11039 


*7 : 


21 


1 7« 5 


24 50 


i 4-5 


25 52 


5* 3 


»7 31 


\ 4W17 


i 20 50 


I 5T«7 


8WI7 


24 40 




22 


1 19 48 80340 


«7 44 


lontao 


19 30 


"'33 


1 t7 f> 


1 2x52 


1 »7 «9 


20 25 


7«»3i 


14 ^ 


2J 


1 iUf,(^ 22 58 


IA47 


25 2 


3 "I5<i 


25 0 


29 41 


14 48 


1 29 14 


1 2D 40 


so 33 


27 ^1 


24 






1 »6 «3 


9^33 


: 18 «7 


8V311 


12= 3 


2(1 40 


1 II H 13 


15 5 


3A47 


ii-;^- 


25 


1 OJ&33 2; 42 




24 44 


1 2/25 


21 4 


24 14 


8T30 


23 19 


27 40 


17 15 


25 ■ 


76 


1 15 0 7 '^3'' 


If' 3 


9)1(29 


1(1 If) 


3 = 4(1 


(> ¥ 16 20 22 


: 5 n 35 


IO<3S 28 


0x^59 


j lO' 


27 


1 29 4K 23 II 


I i_ 


23 57 


29 4'> 


1 *« <] 


iS II 


2 8 17 


i« 3 


23 32 


14 58 


24 i; 


2S 


1 14.(149 I SkviS 


If> 22 8/4 


12/153 


IS 7 


0 T 2 


14 20 


0 '4; 4 S 


' f>A55 


29 1 2 




29 


1 -^'J 5.") [ 


t in 18 21 44 


1 25 iX 


10 M 


I ' 5.1 


2<' J4 


1 13 53 


20 40 


13^41 


22 4: 


30 


1 14 "TSO [ 


15 53 4-^07 


«= 3 


31 5< 


» 23 4- 


1 911 3 


[ 27 23 


, |8 


28 20 


6/31 


31 


1 29 46 1 
1 


of 1 

1 




1 2<> '3 




: 3051 21 52 

1 1 






1 


20 51 



Digitized by Google 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YFiARS 1670 1871 



DM 


Jao. 
■ — — 


Feb. 


March 



April 



May 


■ 

June 


July 


August 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 




«j » 




0 • 




0 . 


0 1 


n f 


0 » , 


0 r 


0 t 






I 


4^37 


2^ = 


I K 4 


i6T 7 


i8« ,s 


4 m22 


9 A 32 


0^53 


24 "133 


3>5lo 


22 = 50 


26x59 


2 


IS 7 


4 « 40 


13 17 


27 5y 


oil 40 


>6 55 


22 52 




8/43 


iC 46 


5x28 


9T 8 


i 




17 0 


25 23 


9 W5' 


12 48 


29 41 


6»i» 25 


29 21 


22 38 


OS 3 


«7 52 


21 7 


4 


14 12 


29 4 


7T2i 


21 44 


24 58 


t2A40 


20 It 


»3"135 


6»li9 


«3 3 


OT 5 


3» 1 


5 


26 47 


iir 1 


19 «7 


JII4O 


7»I7 


as 56 


4* 9 


27 46 


19 47 


25 49 


12 10 


14 52 


6 


9K 5 


" 53 


I » 9 


*5 43 


19 49 


9 "J 29 


18 17 


II / 51 


3ai 2 


8X23 


24 9 


26 42 


7 


21 II 


4W45 


13 0 


27 56 


2A38 


23 22 


2 "135 


25 50 


16 6 


20 48 


6» 4 


8n35 


K 


3T « 


16 41 


24 55 


10'7«24 


>5 47 


7^35 


16 58 


91^39 


28 58 


3T 4 


17 5f> 


20 31 


y 


'5 I 


28 4O 


61157 


23 II 


29 19 


22 5 


I / 24 


23 >8 


IHC39 


15 12 


29 47 


2 = 33 


10 


ib 54 


nil 4 


19 11 


6, a 23 


1311V17 


611148 


»5 47 


6«45 


24 <:> 


27 M 


" H37 


14 42 


1 1 


« a 51 


23 40 


I <u>4l 


20 I 


27 41 


21 39 


on 4 


»9 58 


6T28 


90 9 


23 31 


27 0 


12 


■so 5u 


Oa 38 


'4 34 


4 ns g 


12-^28 


6/29 


14 9 


2 M 56 


18 37 


21 0 


538 29 


9X129 


13 


J 11 20 


20 0 


27 52 


18 4O 


27 32 


21 12 


27 59 


15 40 


o«37 


2n49 


17 36 


22 13 


M 


•5 5« 


J A 47 


11 A38 


J-4C 


12 »n44 


5«39 


11 = 31 


28 8 


12 3' 


«4 39 


29 56 


51.EI4 


»5 


28 54 


»7 59 


*5 54 


»9 3 


27 55 


'9 45 


24 42 


10T23 


24 21 


26 34 


I2A32 


18 34 


16 


laoBii 


2I«30 




4 "1*4 


12 / 53 


3*27 


7H34 


22 27 


eni2 


8© 38 


25 30 




17 


25 47 


17 IS 


as 3<i 


19 39 


27 29 


16 44 


20 8 


4«a4 


18 8 


zo 56 


81^52 


t6 19 


18 


>) a 40 


i-e: 6 


I0:iV4y 


4/37- 


II >)40 


29 37 


2T25 


16 16 


0014 


3-^34 


22 42 


oin44 


«y 


23 4 


"6 54 


26 2 


19 10 


25 22 


12 -t 111 


'4 J I 


28 9 


12 36 


16 37 




»5 27 


2a 


8 in 2 


I tii34 


iiiri 4 


JWM 


8 = 37 


24 27 


26 2d 


ion 7 


25 19 


om 7 


2t 45 


0/23 


21 


22 23 




25 47 


lO 48 


21 26 


6t V) 


8tS 21 


22 17 


8 A 26 


I4 8 


6 11150 


15 23 


22 


6^45 


0/4 


10/6 


29 5("> 


3*«55 


18 26 


20 15 


40241 


22 I 


28 39 


22 5 


o/J 19 


23 


21 3 


13 51 


23 59 


125:41 


16 8 


0 a 19 


2 n 14 


17 24 


Git 4 


13^34 


7/21 


>5 4 






27 ly 


7/327 


25 7 


28 10 


12 12 


14 23 


0A30 


20 33 


28 45 


22 27 


29 29 


■«5 




10^131 


20 31 


7 " 19 


loT 4 


24 9 


26 45 


13 59 


5^0:21 


'4»n 3 


71014 


13 = 31 


26 


\ i 12 


23 27 


3«'6 


19 21 


21 56 


6ni4 


9^22 


27 SI 


20 21 


29 15 


21 36 


27 6' 


27 


16 54 


Oslo 


'5 46 


iTi? 


3W47 


18 39 


23 17 


131* 2 


511122 


14/11 


5«30 


10x16 


28 


0 >3 25 


18 42 


28 4 


I < in 


•3 4* 




5ii 31 


2(S 29 


20 16 


28 46 


tS 56 


2 « a 


20 


IJ 43 




lOK 13 


25 2 


27 41 


13 34 


19 I 


11^ 3 


4 '54 


I2>5 54 


> 57 


5T28 


30 


26 48 




22 15 


6054 


9 11 46 


26 26 


2"«47 


25 40 


19 13 


26 36 


'4 37 


«7 38 


31 


9S2 41 




4TI3 




22 0 




45 


10 ran 

• 




■ 9«54 

1 




29 37 


DM 


Jao 


Feb. 


March 


April 


May 


JlIM 


Jnly 


August 




Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec. 










0 f 


0 t 


0 « 


» « 


• t 




e ' 


fl f 




t 


tl»29 


250 9 


2<»55 


18 A 14 


231120 


15 in22 


24/5 


17JB 3 


6T47 


to 0 28 


24n43 


26«243 


2 


23 18 


7® i8 




i"»3> 


7"-3' 


0/30 


gV3 10 


I K20 


19 49 


22 45 


60030 


! 8.n37 


3 


511 0 


19 4> 


27 34 


15 14 


22 8 


4^ 


24 7 


15 M 


J M 29 


4U48 


18 18 


I 2U 40 


4 


17 5 


2 A 20 


10 A 23 


29 23 


7"^ 5 


U053 


h = 49 


28 44 


14 49 


16 41 


o.n 10 


1 2 PI 36 


5 


29 « 


15 III 


23 34 


IJ^54 


22 12 


15 50 


23 9 


11T49 


26 55 


28 29 


12 13 


' >5 31 


6 


111321 


2 > -j n 


7'^' 7 


28 39 


7 / 20 


0 = 27 


7M 4 


24 31 


8 n49 


loas 17 


24 32 


28 27 


7 


23 46 


I 1 rit 


21 I 


1 3 "13' 


2 J ^0 


14 40 


20 32 


6 « 52 


20 38 


22 1 1 


7>K u 


11^49 


8 


6A22 


25 41 




2i> 20 


710 4 


28 27 


3V34 


18 57 


2aB27 


4JI16 


20 15 


25 39 


9 


19 II 


9*3J 


19 32 


12 #59 


2t 27 


11x48 




0051 


14 21 


16 37 


3=fi'45 


9"I56 


to 




23 33 


3 "158 


27 25 


5*27 


24 45 


28 33 


12 40 


26 35 


29 18 


17 43 


24 37 


ti 


15 30 


7'n37 


18 23 


"•133 


«9 5 


7T23 


io»38 


24 28 


8A44 


I2IIS22 


2»il 3 


9/37 


12 


29 0 


21 +4 


2/41 


25 24 


2 » 20 


'9 43 


22 32 


6S20 


21 20 


25 50 


16 44 


24 47 


13 


12-44 


5 f 52 


16 52 


«-57 


'5 17 


I B 50 


4 11 21 


18 20 


4 It 15 


9^4' 


1/37 




14 


26 41 


2 0 ij 




22 16 


27 57 


13 4« 


16 8 


0A3I 


17 29 


23 5' 


16 33 


-"S 


'5 


10 m^o 


r. 




5 H 2u 


10T24 


25 5') 


27 57 


12 55 


I - I 


18 niM 


I /3 2»> 


9 = 4'J 


16 


25 u 


IS M 


;S 2'- 


IN \i 


22 39 


7 11 27 


y^SI 


25 34 


14 48 


22 44 


16 7 


24 J3 


»7 




2= 0 


1 J s: 39 


OT52 


4 8 as 


19 15 


21 52 


8ini28 


28 45 


7/16 


0=33 


H <* 12 


18 


24 II 


'5 54 


25 21 


13 2t 


If. 43 


I « 4 


4 <^ 3 


21 37 


i2fH49 


21 43 


14 40 


21 


»9 




29 30 


8hj3 


25 40 


2« 33 


12 56 


16 25 


4-Sr58 ] 


26 56 


6i0 3 


28 27 


4T53 


ao 


*3 8 


12x51 


21 33 


7*' 49 


ion 24 


24 55 


28 58 


18 30 1 


11/ 4 


30 12 


11X55 


17 40 


21 


7«eao 


25 56 


4T21 


«9 49 


23 II 


7A 3 


II n«45 


211I13 


25 12 


4«cii 


as 5 


o« 9 


22 


21 16 


8T4» 


«6 55 


1042 


3®59 


19 2T 


24 46 


16 6 


9W17 


17 57 


7T59 


12 34 


^.^ 


4 «5» 


2t II 


29 16 


'3 30 


15 5' 


1 1 


81a 2 


0/6 


23 20 


IXJ2 


10 39 


24 27 


24 


3 


3 B 24 


II 24 


25 '7 


27 50 


14 43 


ai 34 


14 14 


7 = 20 


14 56 


3« 6 


61123 


25 


0T54 


•5 23 


23 2 2 


7« 6 


lo '.; 0 


27 52 


5 "1 22 


28 2y 


21 14 


28 8 


>5 22 1 


18 13 


26 


JO 2| 


27 17 


"2 


19 2 


22 26 


I I ' 22 


19 26 


I2>54S 


<!, t 0 


iiT 7 


27 28 1 


on 2 


-27 


25 37 


9 II (> 


17 0 


I n 10 


S"^ 12 


25 • 


3/46 


27 10 


iS ,1, 


-4 33 


91127 


1 1 50 




7« i7 


20 57 


28 50 


' 3 if' 


18 21 


911132 


18 19 


1 1 = 2< I 






21 ly 1 


23 40 


^9 


19 29 




to ^£47 


26 23 


•^57 


24 > 


i '^ -1 


25 4' 


',) 






5 1 33 


30 


tU 19 




22 56 


9«»37 


16 0 


9f 2 


»7 47 


9>«4» J 




OU55 , 




17 33 


31 


tj 10 I 1 

1 


S*«4 




OM(30 1 




2«J0 


»3 «4 1 


27 56 1 


IS 53 


14 55 1 


»» 41 • 



Digitized by Google 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1872-1873 





Jan. 




MaiCB 


Apni 


nay 


Jmut 


July 


A. 1.B-ILH.1-I1L t 

AUglUK 


Sept. j 




MOV. 


IMC. 






1 








— • 

^ 1 






! 


0 f 


0 ' 


0 t 


I 


I2n)( 1 


OtTl29 


24 11128 j 


17 W 16 


III, 


>7T34 


22^41 


7"B5' 


22 A 1 1 


25 16 


I2ITl4^ 


19 / 19 


2 


24 35 


»3 59 


8/14 


I s 25 


10 M 18 ^ 


0 29 


4054 1 


19 40 


4'^i5 


7-V52 


26 25 


304'' 


3 


7 27 


-7 47 


22 13 


'5 30 


23 59 


13 9 


10 50 


1 A 30 


10 2a 


20 4 1 


10/15 


iS 2, 


4 


20 40 1 


11/56 


6/J25 


29 45 


7T28 


25 37 


28 54 


13 21 


28 49 


3m4^ 


24 15 


- = 5y 


5 


4"li7 


26 23 


20 47 


13H49 


20 44 


7U53 


100247 ' 


25 18 


1 1 20 


>o 55 


0 0 21 


17 30 


0 


iH 19 


111^ 0 


5SSI8 


27 44 : 


3 b 4!') 


20 0 


22 36 


7 "1119 


24 I 


0 / 10 


22 31 


I 51 


7 


- f 45 


Ail 

20 4 


19 32 


1 1 T 26 




1 1*59 


4 A 26 


19 2S 1 


0 11154 


'3 53 


6tS43 


•5 59 


u 
0 


«7 34 


liac 3 


4X24 


24 32 


29 6 


13 32 


16 17 , 


' — 46 ] 


20 0 1 


27 38 


20 54 


29 52 


9 


aWj9 


*5 57 


So 40 


7W39 


IID25 \ 


25 42 


28 12 1 


14 14 


3 / 20 1 


lt*J34 


5'< 3 


13T3P 


10 


17 5* 


10K36 


2T52 


20 47 


23 32 


7A31 4 ioi«i3 


ao jo 


16 57 


*5 4> 


19 7 


20 54 


II 




«4 54 


16 37 


311 10 


5»3*> 


19 as 


1 32 24 ' 


9*1154 


0*152 


92657 


31* 4 


10 1* 3 


12 


18 ^ 


0 MM _ 

8T45 


, 29 57 


>5 29 


17 21 


1 HP22 


4^47 


23 12 


15 6 


24 20 


16 51 


22 59 


>3 


2 H 42 


23 7 


1 '2 a 53 


27 30 


29 11 


M 31 


17 26 


6/52 


29 38 


0 ^ . il 

8 K 46 


0 a 27 


5 n 43 


'4 


55 


5 e 3 


25 27 


9023 


11 A, 2 




0 11126 


20 5f) 


'4=23 


23 11 


13 4^ 


I S 16 


'5 


0T39 


«7 34 


, 71141 


21 12 


23 > 


8^37 


»3 49 


5025 


29 15 


7T27 


20 54 


Oi.37 


10 


•3 55 


29 46 


; '9 43 


il^ 4 


51HI1 


21 43 


27 39 


20 14 


14 K 6 


21 31 


9U45 


12 49 


17 


26 44 


II tl44 


1-033 


'5 2 


'7 37 


5 "I '3 


'» /55 


53:19 


28 48 


5 » 17 


22 19 


24 52 


IS 


9 12 


23 34 


13 22 


27 13 


0-^ 24 


19 II 


26 36 


20 31 


I3T12 


18 41 


4*39 


6^4*' 


»9 


21 22 


30)20 


2j 12 


91940 




3/33 


ii«38 


5»*39 


27 13 


1044 


10 40 


to 41 


20 


3020 


17 9 


7A 9 


22 20 


27 6 


18 18 


26 5a 


20 33 


iott47 


_ _ 'gf 
14 20 


28 45 


Oi||i3* 


21 


15 to 


29 2 


19 17 


5*3* 




3W18 


, 13s 9 


5T 4 


a3 54 


ao 50 


10 A 37 


12 » 


22 


20 57 


iiA 3 


11940 


59 


25 21 


18 26 


27 17 


19 7 






22 29 


24 26 


*3 


S9B44 


23 19 


14 ig 


am 44 


') ^ 55 


3«3i 


12 K 8 


2 » 41 


18 59 


20 56 


411124 


6^38 


24 


20 34 


5"S45 


27 M 


45 




18 26 


26 33 


15 46 


I9B 6 


2 A4S 


16 28 


IQ 7 


-S 


2 ,0 JO 


18 23 


io->^->5 


ij / 5,S 


V 10 27 


3X 3 


10T31 


2^ 26 


13 2 


14 40 


28 44 




26 


H 32 


1^13 


23 3« 


15 17 


^4 II 


17 17 


23 59 


10 il 46 


24 53 


20 36 


11^17 


'5 9 


27 


20 44 


14 15 


7 11127 


29 39 


8 = 46 


I T 6 


7 « 0 


22 50 


6 A 43 


8ns4i 


24 II 


28 49 


2S 


9"S 5 


«7 29 


21 13 


'31^59 


23 6 


14 31 


19 38 


4»45 


18 38 


20 58 


7ni26 


12/56 


29 


21 j6 


10 H153 


5/ 6 


28 15 


7 K 10 


27 32 


1 n58 


16 34 


01940 


3^30 


21 4 


27 28 


30 


4A20 




»9 3 


t2«B2j 


20 56 


IO» Xj 


"A 


28 23 


12 5* 


16 19 


5^ 3 


tan 19 




17 17 




3*» 9 




4Ta3 1 




, 16 0 






29 25 




27 *X 




Jan. 






Apnl 




June 


! J«iy 


Augoat 


Sept. 


Oct. 


NOV. 


I>ac. 




0 r 


0 t 


0 t 


u ' 


c . 














' — 
0 # 


I 


123:25 


5T42 


MT 3 


3n44 


7m 18 


21 A43 


23"R32 


Sin 3 


25 / 28 


2s:?l 


25 K52 


4 w 29 


2 


27 21 


19 52 


28 24 


16 45 


19 40 


3"ii37 


5-27 


20 35 


9>Jii 


16 57 


IOT37 


IS 40 


3 


12 K 2 


3 « 32 


12 u 15 


29 23 


IA49 


15 30 


; »7 30 


3/29 


23 2J 


1 X46 


25 23 


2n43 


4 


26 22 


10 40 


25 37 


1 1 '043 


13 48 


27 27 


1 29 47 


10 50 


8> 0 


16 49 


10 a 2 


•it 

10 32 


5 


IOTI9 


29 36 


8 032 


23 40 


25 42 


9^33 


12 11122 


0)140 


a3 9 


IT39 


24 26 


OflB 5 


0 


23 52 


12 Q 6 


i " 4 


5^145 


7"V35 


21 51 


25 20 


15 0 


8j<27 


17 0 


8ll3t 


13 19 


7 


7» 4 


24 22 


33e 20 


17 37 


19 32 


4in26 


8/42 


29 46 




I 8 59 


22 14 


20 13 




19 5'' 


30® 20 


15 23 


29 29 


1-37 


17 20 


22 31 


i4»50 


•!'T57 


16 32 


5«»32 


8 A 48 


n 


2 11 36 


18 27 


27 18 


1 1 "! 25 


'3 53 


0/ 3'> 


610 45 


o« 3 


23 49 


0 II 40 


18 27 


21 7 


I ( ) 


15 > 


OA 21 


9 A 10 


23 26 


26 23 


14 ti 


21 20 


'5 15 


8 a 17 


14 20 


1 A I 


3"sii 


1 1 


27 17 


12 14 


21 I 


5-"3*' 


9"! 7 




6= 9 


or 15 


22 16 


27 33 


13 18 


t5 7 


1 2 


9^25 


24 6 


2"»54 


'7 56 


22 8 


i 2 1^ 2 2 


21 4 


«4 54 


5 II 48 


109023 


25 21 


26 57 


'J 


21 27 


6 m' 0 


14 51 


otri20 


5 / 25 


26 45 


5^56 


29 10 


i« 54 


22 52 


7njii5 


8'^-48 


M 


3A24 


»7 55 


26 53 


13 8 


iS 57 


IIS 14 


20 37 


130 0 


i<iS3._, 


5A5 


19 6 


2a 45 


*5 


15 >s 


*9 55 


9^ 2 


26 2 


2>l4I 


*5 43 


• 5T 2 


20 25 


'4 5 


17 7 


OA 57 


2*1152 


10 


27 10 


12 A 0 


21 18 


9/ 9 


16 37 


to K 6 


19 7 


9 0 29 


26 19 


29 I 


12 53 


'5 J3 


»7 


919 2 


24 >3 


3 '^42 


22 29 


0S4 1 


24 21 


2«53 


22 14 


8A22 


IOi^52 


24 58 


27 52 


IB 


20 57 


0 in3?' 


* i^ ■ a 




i| 3' 


1 8T25 


16 20 


4®45 


20 18 


22 43 


7ni*3 


10 / 51 




2^=^57 


19 17 


6 




i>j 5 


' 22 16 


29 30 


'7 4 


2nsil 


4^36 


' »9 42 


24 10 


20 


15 


/ 1 7 


12 / lo 


3«5« 


13 M 19 


58 55 


12 II 25 


29 14 


14 2 


'6 35 


2 / 24 


7048 


21 


27 2<J 


1 '5 4« 


25 32 


18 5 


27 32 


: I9 22 


25 « 


1 1 A. 17 


25 54 


28 41 


15 22 


2 I 4a 


22 


1 0 111 1 I 


29 29 


9VJ 14 


2 K 3 I 


1 1 T40 


2 II 30 


7^40 


23 15 


7^47 


ioni55 


i -:>^ 33 


5 = 47 


23 


2 J 16 


13VJ46 


2? 19 


17 2 


1 25 41 


«5 3« 


20 2 


1 5"^ 9 


»9 43 


23 19 


1 m 58 


20 0 


24 


0/40 


28 29 


7 = 45 


1 T36 


9W 33 


28 28 


2^13 


' 17 0 


» "145 


5 ' 54 


1 25 35 


4 K 15 


as 


20 49 


i3«34 


, 22 29 


16 6 


2j 12 


j »l» 5 


14 21 


1 28 50 


13 55 


18 42 


92124 


18 28 


20 


3*J«9 


28 50 


1 7X«6 


ou 25 


on 37 


ai 3» 


26 20 


1 IOA41 


26 15 


1 1H43 


23 21 


2T38 


27 


20 14 


14W a 


22 27 


14 29 


19 46 


' 5A45 


' 81913 


' 22 36 


8/49 


15 4 


7x27 


'6 43 


28 


5 = 27 


29 16 


7T22 


28 13 


' 2«Bj8 


. »7 50 


20 4 


4"13>< 


21 40 


28 40 


21 38 


0 a 40 


29 


20 48 




22 3 


1 1 11 36 


'5 '4 


29 47 


1-^54 


16 52 


4V553 


I2SS34 


5T54 


'4 3' 


30 


6m 4 




6 8 23 




I 37 35 


. itiiV40 


»3 4« 


29 22 


18 29 


26 45 


20 12 


28 15 


3« 


21 5 




ao 17 


j 24 37 


9^43 




; »5 49 


<«/ IS 




iiMta 




It 050 



Digitized by Gopgle 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1874 1875 



D JM 


Ju. 


VCD- 




Apni 


Maw 


J DBA 


July 


August 


sept. 


WO. 


flOv. 










0 ' 1 


0 I 




0 t 




0 1 


0 > 


» • 


• 1 


« r 


I 


25n 14 


12A43 


21 A43 1 


6^29 


9111 0 


25 / I 


o«54 


23 K 5 


l6U33 


34039 




179^ 


2 


8 


25 ' 


3 "849 


IQ 10 


31 3 


m M mm 

7*J57 


14 40 1 


7T 29 


00 43 


stmt wft 

oflo 10 


26 25 


39 24 


3 


21 27 


7"f 9 


15 40 




3/10 


21 0 


-»ft -»A 1 
28 30 


■a « « ft 

2 1 48 


'4 33 


31 3' 


fi van a T 

OnS 4 I 


I 1 15 


4 




'9 9 i 


27 42 


12 3 1 


15 39 


4-29 1 


I 2 H 38 


5 a 59 


28 8 


4 A 26 


20 44 


23 2 


5 


iC 41 


I ^ I 


9-3' 


24 J 


-•^ 14 


18 3 


26 44 


20 I 


( 1 3C27 


17 4 


2=0=39 


a IM a ft 

4 "14° 


6 


23 57 


12 49 ! 


21 19 


6 / 1 J 


1 1 ill 4 


I M 50 1 


IOT52 




-4 32 1 


29 28 


14 27 


16 37 


7 


1 I IT|> 0 


24 37 , 


3 "I 8 


35 1 


24 9 ' 


t e aft 
15 48 


25 0 


I / 3*^ 


7 '-T- 23 


1 1 "R 39 


26 14 


»ft -a a 

2» 34 


a 


22 55 


6 III 30 1 


15 2 


1 VJ 1 3 


7 s 32 


29 55 


9 B 8 


I Ji' 1 1 


20 I 1 


23 42 


ft m '9 
8 nX 2 , 


lo / 39 


9 


4*45 


10 32 1 


■'7 5 


1 4 II 


21 13 


14 T 12 


23 »3 


14 34 


2l'V27 ■ 


5-37 


19 52 ' 


22 54 


10 


16 34 


0/51 


9 / 22 


27 32 1 


5»<U 


«*ft -sc 

38 35 


7II15 


27 45 1 


14 42 


17 27 


I / 47 , 


5 n 20 


f I 


38 29 


13 30 


21 50 1 


1 1 s 1 7 


'9 3' 1 


13 V 2 


21 II 


10 A 43 1 


26 47 


29 14 


13 49 


t '9 eft 

17 5» 


1 2 


10W134 


26 34 


4V357 


2j 20 


4T 5 


27 29 


419 ^8 


23 27 


8-^44 


1 1 ni I 


26 0 1 


OS 40 


'J 


22 56 1 


lOWJ 7 


IB 23 


10 H 2 ' 


T ft f T 

18 51 


1 1 II 50 


18 32 


5'*57 


20 34 


22 5^ 


9I73I 1 


*3 49 


M 


5 / 3** 


24 9 


2 S 19 


-4 57 


J w 42 


26 0 


I A 51 


19 13 ' 


2 ni2o 


4 ' 43 


20 55 


27 3 


15 


18 44 


0 St 3^ 


16 42 : 


loT 3 1 


I ft 1 « 
18 32 


91JB 54 


H 52 


o-^ 17 


M 7 


16 44 


3 '=44 


lO K 3t 


l6 


2 '/J 16 


1-1 itt 
23 2H 


I K 31 1 


25 '3 


3 n 14 


23 




12 12 ' 


25 57 


28 57 


16 5^ 


- 1 '3 


»7 


It) 13 


0 H 31 


10 30 


lob 16 


17 39 


f)<n.4i 


lOlf 0 


24 0 ' 


7 f "jS 


1 1 VJ 25 


n ^ ■ ft 

0 n 1 0 


8X10 


10 


0 32 


23 37 


IT53 


25 5 


I <tft44 


'9 3' 


22 10 


5>147 


2U t f 


J4 12 


« ■ A 
14 0 


22 22 


»9 


15 6 


OT35 


17 6 


9U33 


15 24 


2 BK I 


4^ 9 


17 38 


2 V5 3*^ 


7 = 23 


oft f T 


6 a 49 


20 


*9 47 


23 «9 


2 a 7 


23 35 


28 39 


14 14 


"5 59 


29 37 


'5 27 


20 58 


I2T5O 


-a a /^U 

21 28 


21 


14 K28 


7»42 


to 40 


9flB 1 1 


II A29 


26 13 


27 48 


tl /50 


28 43 


5K I 


37 40 


60 12 


22 


29 3 


21 44 


III 5 


20 20 


*3 59 


0«a 5 


9 "139 


24 32 


12 S» 31 


19 30 


12842 


20 5^ 


23 


13T25 


5 n 24 


14 56 


3'-<^ 7 


619x1 


19 34 


21 39 


7VJ 17 


36 44 


4 Tr20 


27 49 


5«32 


«4 


•J? }4 


lo 43 


28 23 


15 33 


19 10 


r 11145 


3 ' 53 


20 39 


11X23 


19 27 


1 2 II 50 


19 5' 


•43 


1 1 a 2(> 


i®45 


I I m25 


27 44 


0-:^ I 


'■3 44 


iG 24 


45:26 


26 18 


4 841 


27 36 


3A48 




25 4 


14 32 


24 7 


9n)C44 


1 1 50 


25 54 


29 17 


t ft ift 
18 3" 


1 1 T 24 


19 53 


1 2 'Sy 1 


17 20 




8 II 29 


27 6 


6A34 


21 36 


23 39 


H/ 19 


I2>J32 


3K 9 


26 31 


41152 


25 58 


on{26 




21 42 


9, a 29 


iK 48 


3^25 


5»n34 


21 2 


26 10 


17 54 


II a 30 


19 32 


9A27 


13 7 




4<ic43 




011J151 


15 3 


17 38 


4 >5 2 


los: 6 


2T14 


26 14 


3®47 


22 29 


25 27 


30 


»7 34 




12 48 


a? 4 


29 5* 


17 ao 


t 24 »» 


17 31 


10038 


»7 35 


S"* 5 


7-30 


IT 






*4 4" 




IS / 20 




n ^ 


I M a 
• " 9 




oil u 






Oa 






juarcn 




Man 


_ 


Jwly 






uct. 


nov. 


laiec 


I 


! lltIO 


0 ( 

14 / 40 


1 

22 / 35 


0 * 

8SS32 


0 1 

1 14 X I 


c. » 
A wi A 

0 a 0 


1511 5 


u » 

7A58 


c r 
26 tnj 58 


0 r 

0 nii5 


'4 ' 33 


0 > 
17W 5 


2 


•2 57 


27 5 


4 '"'5 ) 


21 55 


oft M 
28 0 


0 T ft 

21 8 


, 003 2 


21 58 


9^40 


12 21 


26 23 


29 5 


3 


24 50 


9W42 


17 33 


5 **44 


12^42 


6 II 19 


'4 53 


5"* 36 


22 6 


24 '9 


ft 1#« 1 A 
8 iO 10 


11 = 13 


4 


0/32 


22 39 


OSS 34 


19 58 


27 36 


21 30 


29 29 


10 5^ 


. M « ft 

4 rT|.l8 


A » t ra 

0/12 


20 14 


23 33 


1 


19 6 




'3 59 


4^*33 


12 tf 44 


6a&30 


13A42 


1^41 


« A « W 

10 IB 


rft '% 

IB 2 


2S2I 


OX 0 


0 


'W34 


19 30 


*7 4* 


19 25 


27 58 


31 II 


27 39 


14 II 


28 12 


^ 55 


»4 43 


>9 3 


7 


14 10 


3 )r20 


ItK55 


4 26 


1311 7 


5 A26 


ioa|i48 


20 35 


10 / 3 


II VJ55 


27 23 


2X21 


o 


27 17 


17 20 


26 19 


19 26 


SO 2 


1 19 12 


23 4» 


8 ni25 


21 57 


24 6 


10 20 


* A a* 

16 7 


9 


loss 29 


I T 27 


lOT 53 


4 11 18 


1 2 as 34 


2n|l39 


6-^ 1 1 


■an « ft 
. 20 10 


3058 


6ss32 


23 55 


0 b 22 


10 


23 53 


15 37 


25 3' 


18 55 


1 26 41 


1 15 19 


1 ft > 
IS 23 


2/9 


16 12 


19 19 


7T52 


'5 4 


1 1 


7 K 27 


29 4S 


10 V 0 


3TO 12 


10 A 20 


27 47 


0 ni22 


14 3 


28 41 


2 28 


22 J 7 


rtll 9 


1 2 


21 9 


'3 W 57 


24 34 


'7 7 


23 32 


1 9'^5» 


12 14 


26 3 


1 • * M raft 

II S 28 


16 2 


' 7 '"^ 


f - ->fi 

1 •) 28 


'i 


4T5O 


. 28 3 


81152 


0^140 


6 nt 20 


21 56 


24 3 


8VJ15 


24 36 


OX 1 


' 3 


, 0 'J'- 50 


»4 


18 54 


12 U 6 


22 56 


13 52 


18 49 


3WI46 


3/55 


20 40 


8 K 4 


14 22 


7 0 27 


lO 3 


'5 


2WS7 


2D 3 


6046 


26 45 


10 2 


15 30 


17 52 


3*21 


21 50 


29 I 


22 39 


0A57 




17 7 


9W54 


20 23 


9 "822 


13 4 


27 25 


39 57 


16 17 


5T53 


13850 


7«39 


•5 25 


'7 


I 022 


23 36 


3A44 


21 45 


24 59 


9 ' »7 


12VJ14 


29 28 


20 7 


28 43 


22 17 


29 22 


• K 
lo 


15 39 


7ifl 7 


if) ^ T 


3-57 


6 "149 


21 16 


24 42 


I2K54 


48S9 


13031 


6 A 30 


12 nt49 


'0 


29 55 


20 25 




lO 0 


T ft iK 

18 38 


3 22 


7 w 22 


20 31 


19 54 


30 9 


20 15 


Of a S 
25 48 


2(1 


•4® 5 


3"B 2H 


I2np25 


27 56 


0 / 28 


15 3^^ 


. 20 13 


• I0TI9 


1 3 0 18 


1 2 29 


3^ 33 


i - .;4 


i I 


2a 4 


16 15 


24 53 


911149 


1 2 20 


2o 0 


3 H 16 


24 14 


17 }6 


26 30 


16 


20 42 


22 


II A 47 


28 45 


7 " 


2 1 38 


,24 18 


1 IOSC34 


16 30 


ft u « A 

8 8 10 


iaa47 


lOA 12 


29 9 


2 ni47 


23 


25 9 


11-^ 1 


19 10 


3 ' 28 


6 1'J 2 1 


'. 23 19 


29 56 


22 24 


'5 49 


*3 34 


I T 3 1 


'4 43 


24 


Mf) f t 

0 1 1 


23 4 


I "113 


15 20 


1 ft -> 3 
18 33 


» OHIO 


I3T33 


6 II 35 


29 38 


611s 39 


; 2J 4I 


26 35 


as 


20 50 


4'n58 


'3 5 


27 16 


OJK55 


; '9 31 


27 23 


30 47 


13 A 15 


19 28 


5 "144 


! 8/25 


•A 

•V 




lO 47 


' 24 54 


9)922 


13 30 


1 3" * 


II H 26 


50 0 


26 39 


2^ 3 


17 41 


20 16 


27 


15 16 


38 36 


1 6/44 


3C 39 


26 22 


16 50 


25 41 


19 8 


9«W49 


14 27 


29 34 




28 


27 10 


10/ 30 


1 «8 38 


4«W 


9X32 


0058 


ion 6 


3Ato 


32 46 


26 42 


11/26 


14 8 


29 


8 "159 




o>)42 


»7 4 


23 5 


15 26 


24 39 


17 I 


5^29 


8 (1148 


23 17 


26 II 


JO 


20 47 




'2 59 


0x20 


7T 2 


00 10 


9912 


01W37 




' 20 48 


5VJ10 


8SSI9 


3> 


2/41 




25 35 




21 23 




33 41 


13 56 


j 17 5« 


1 «'4a 




20 36 



Digitized by Googl 



THE PLACE OP THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1876- 1877 



DM 


Jan. 


Feb. i March 


April 


May 


liine 

J 


July 

J J 


August 


Sept. 


Oct 


t 

Not. 


1 


1 


» 

3 H 2 


C * 

22T 3 


16 8 23 


Q t 


:8A4i 


8-42 


t 

13 in 10 


28/ <) 


I2SS22 


a > 
15 M 16 


3 a 13 


1 0 ■ 




15 40 


5aj8 


on 23 


23 5<i 


2 nt 19 


21 21 


25 19 


9^58 


24 32 


28 4 


17 16 


25 


i 


28 i4 


19 31 


14 31 


7<^ 57 


15 39 


3HI47 


7/20 


21 51 


6K52 


IIT 9 




101: 


4 


IIT47 


3041 


2« 45 


21 47 


28 45 


16 4 


19 f6 


3*48 


19 23 


24 jl 


\ 16 3 


«3 


5 


as 32 


18 8 


i3«> 2 


5 "8 27 


1 1 *38 


28 13 


1 11 9 


15 49 


2T 8 


858 


0036 




6 




2046 


27 2t 


»8 54 


24 20 


to / 15 


13 2 


27 57 


I S 5 


21 38 


15 5 


34 


7 


*3 47 


«7 32 


n A 3'> 


2 -~ 10 


6 rrv5i 


22 13 


24 54 


ID K 13 


28 16 


5 U 58 


zg 26 


8« . 


8 


8034 


2^1 17 


25 43 


15 12 


19 12 


407 


Os 49 


22 39 


II » 41 


20 5 


1 3 35 


21 5; 


9 


■2J J» 


16 54 


911V 39 


28 0 


I / 24 


15 59 


1- .,S 


5T 17 


25 19 


42B15 


27 3 J 




10 




I nv 15 


23 20 


10 "135 


13 28 


27 51 


i> n 33 


18 9 


9 II 1 1 


i8 27 


II TIE !•> 


IS 


1 1 


2 J 58 


15 15 


t^'^43 


22 5>i 


25 26 


9*45 


13 7 


I a 18 


23 15 


2,fl37 


24 53 


I F 1 


12 




28 51 


19 47 


5/8 




21 45 


25 33 


'4 45 


7E30 


16 44 




li <■• 


IJ 


2J 25 


12^ I 


2ni32 


17 10 


19 12 




STI6 


28 33 


21 54 


OH47 


21 27 


26 1: 


14 


71IS3I 


'4 49 


15 0 


29 j 


im 3 


16 17 


31 19 


12043 
■•1 


6^133 . 14 43 


4 ni2S 




15 


21 6 


7»n.»6 


27 13 


101938 


13 4 


28 39 


4«46 


27 tl 


ae 31 ) *8 31 


17 x8 


21 


lb 


4^13 


19 27 


9/ 


22 52 


25 14 


i2r 3 


18 39 


1 1 i^55 




12^ 7 


S9 35 


K ■ 


«7 


'6 55 


1/26 


21 II 


4-53 


7 >^ 38 


25 35 


2 1159 


2O 48 


10 


25 31 


13 X 21 


' 15 


18 


2<r 17 


1 3 20 


in 4 


17 5 


20 23 


9 W 37 


17 44 


II ,^44 


< lO 


8 "139 


24 3e> 


2(-i 




1 1 in23 


23 1 1 


14 59 


33 


3T32 


24 7 


2 Ji>47 




17 II 


21 32 


6 j<> 


•S = i- 


20 


23 20 


706 


27 I 


12 K 20 


17 9 


<jll 2 


18 u 


1 1 ni, 7 




4/ 8 


18 j5 


20 xJ 


21 


5 / «i 


19 7 


9S14 


25 31 


I » 14 


24 14 


3^12 


25 21 


I ^ n 


16 29 


0= 25 




22 


17 I 


IS17 


21 42 


9T 6 


15 4*' 


9 JJ>32 


18 13 


9^11 


26 13 


28 37 


12 13 


14 i: 


2J 


28 "ij 


13 40 


4^27 


23 4 


Oil 38 


24 4b 


2i«55 


22 33 


8/36 


tOi334 


24 5 


26 J: 


•^4 


10V351 


26 15 


17 31 


7 0 24 


13 44 


9 A 45 


17 ti 


5*136 




33 36 


6»< 6 




as 


22 36 


t 9J< 5 


, OT54 


2» 59 


0052 


34 31 


0^39 


18 13 




4BI7 1 18 30 




s6 


5* 9 


' 22 8 




6n44 


15 sa 


8iqr30 


14 ao 


0/ 33 




16 13 


OT54 






17 31 


5T25 


28 31 


21 2<> 


o,fl37 


22 1 1 


27 16 


12 42 


26 28 


28 16 


M 53 


19 - 




ox 2 


«8 53 


I 2 B 39 


6aa 8 


15 0 


5^26 


9"l5i 


24 40 


8S 2S 




-7 19 


3E- 


•9 


12 44 


a»33 


2& 55 


20 35 


28 59 


1 0 lo 


22 9 


61033 


20 29 


2 * lO 


1 1 I 2 


:: 


3/0 


25 J7 




iiai4 


4 Si 47 








iS 26 


2 M ^4 
^ " ^ J 


Ox 8 


25 33 


1 j i: 


31 


8T43 




as 33 




25 48 




16 13 


0«2t 




IQ SO 




18 3i 


DM 


Jan. 


Feb. 


Marcb 


April 


May 


June 


July 


August 




Uct. 


Nov. 


1 Dv 




D « 


0 f 


0 , 


« • 






■J » 




0 t 


a t 


0 r 




I 


JA4S 


2611B27 


4^20 


2311140 


27/13 


II 5:30 


1 3 X 20 


38T22 


lb n 47 


24 OS 24 


1711032 




2 


18 51 


10-34 


18 35 


f. / , I 


.i -■ 


18 


25 15 


II B 3 


(J J.- 3 j 




I -38 


IO»r t 


J 


JTJJ 


24 13 


2ni24 


19 




5^7 


7T20 


24 b 


14 44 


23 11 


16 24 


23 


4 


17 52 


71127 


15 47 


I i^40 


3 = 33 


17 2 


19 41 


7 II 35 


29 1 7 


7"i'55 


oia46 




5 


I -44 


20 16 


28 44 


'3 45 


15 22 


29 8 


2 B 23 


21 32 


1 4 jl 0 


22 46 


14 ."^7 


20 :'- 


6 


15 1 1 


2/46 


11/19 


25 40 


27 12 


1 1 T30 


15 31 




29 1 2 


7-36 


.52 


3 .0 


7 


28 17 


«5 I 


23 36 


7S29 


9H 7 


24 13 


29 3 


20 41 


14 ^ *v 


22 19 


12/25 


16 16 


H 


II in 3 


27 4 


3*J39 


19 18 


21 T2 


7)131 


13II 7 


5A44 


29 23 


6MI46 


25 36 J 38 }J 


9 


23 34 


8W39 


17 3a 


miaj 3T33 
13 14 ' 16 13 


20 54 


27 33 


30 33 


14^12 


30 30 


8X334 


, ios4r 


10 


5 '52 


20 49 


29 at 


4D52 


t3«22 


6iqi 3 


a8 39 


4/30 


20 51 


i a» *S 


II 


iS t 


2 = 38 


lias 9 


25 29 


29 13 


19 10 


27 22 


21 4 


12 in42 


17 43 


3« 0 


1 4»^3i 


12 




14 27 


23 I 


7T59 


12 »35 


i ^^^44 


1 2 ,n 24 


5^44 


26 17 


01030 


14 57 


' 16 X 


IJ 


" 59 


26 19 


4x58 


20 4.S 


H, I(j 




J- 21) 




') 25 


12 56 


25 46 


28 n 


14 


23 51 


8 k 16 


■17 4 


3 « 4^ 


Ju U 15 




J 2 llji 4 


3 "1-3.) 


22 10 


25 4 


8x34 


loTit 


15 


5=40 


20 19 


29 20 


17 6 


24 25 


17 44 


26 29 


17 23 


4 •134 


7= « 


20 25 


22 


16 


17 29 


2T31 


II T49 


on 38 


8 TO 42 


2 ns 9 


lo-^ 34 


0/27 


lb 42 


18 50 


2T25 


4 >■ .^-.^ 


«7 


29 "9 


14 54 


24 29 


14 22 


23 0 


16 21 


24 iS 


13 10 


28 39 


OK 37 


'4 39 


17 5; 


18 


II << IJ 


27 JO 


7 8 24 


28 15 


7AI7 


O1& 18 


7 "142 


25 36 


iote29 


12 27 


»7 » 




<9 




I0»32 


20 32 


I2SIS 


31 28 


'4 0 


20 47 


7W48 


23 lO 


24 24 


9»S6 


«4 5» 


20 


5Ta7 


n 34 


31154 


26 19 


3i«34 


37 28 


3/36 


19 5« 


4 '* 4 


0T3' 


23 2 


;»< 


SI 


*7 54 


70 6 


17 3t 


loAaS 


»9 3a 


toni42 


16 10 


I «44 


15 5O 


18 50 


<ill 25 


■ J ^■ 


-> 2 


0 » 42 


21 I 


I JJi22 


24 39 


3^23 


23 45 


28 32 


13 34 


27 55 


1 8 23 


20 2 


27 i 


-:j 


'3 55 


5 BS 19 


'5 27 


8 US 50 


17 5 


6/35 


10I044 


25 22 


loT I 


14 9 


3 IB 50 


1 1 A 5" 


- ) 


-7 34 


19 




23 0 


otn39 


19 13 


22 47 


7 K 10 


22 17 


27 9 


>7 40 , 


26 J. 


■^3 


II 1142 


4 A 48 


I4AIJ 


7- 7 


14 2 


I ^ 39 


4x42 


ig I 


4«44 


ion 21 


I .0. 40 


lonni 


26 


26 17 


19 49 


28 4S 


2> 5 


27 13 


13 54 


If' 33 


0T57 


17 23 


23 AA 


'5 S'J 


-4 5' 


27 


I I M 15 


4''S5' 


I3'V2.S 


4 "153 


10/ II 


25 59 


28 21 


J3 0 


on ir> 


•J<B> Its 


29 54 


8A5S 


28 


26 28 


19 44 


27 58 


18 25 


22 53 


7-55 


10 M <S 


25 14 


13 23 


21 I 


I3"t59 


22 31 


29 


nA45 




12 021 


1/40 


5il2I 


«y 45 


21 38 


7W40 


26 46 


4A56 


28 4 


6HJ3 


JO 


s6 57 


1 


a6 28 


1 M 36 


19 35 


1 K32 


3r55 


30 22 


IO«26 


18 58 


13^ 7 


ao J 


3» 


""»53 




IOJIII5 




a9 36 




16 I 


3024 ' 




3'»«» 


4 






I 




J 


i 


1 


J 






J 





Digitizeo by dOO^ic 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1878 1879 



> mI 


Ian. 


Feb 


I 

March i 


I 

April I 


Mav 

i 


lune 

J 


July 


1 

\ugust 


Sept 

r 


Oct 


Nov 


Dec 


L 1 


^ L 
lli / _JO 




12-44 


2LH ^2 


I. 1 
29T13 


• 

15 II 57 


■-■ L 

22.3A 2 


1 

c t 1 
1 

l4nT28 


8 (ti I I 


i 

I 5 / 5'i 


4 — L4 


'-■ t 
7 K 5 


'2. 1 


Z<i 2^ 




24 7 


XT 24 


11 8 31 


29 in 


6A 3 


20 7 


22 22 


22 32 


Hi 32 


12 5 


3 1 


12 /) 4 


22 Ll 


5 f« 56 


2Q rj 


11 I 


1 2 a 36 


211 13 


13^40 • 


6 / 2^ 


12 1^37 


23 48 


0T57 


^ 1 






12 11 


2 a 2S 


611 42 


26 Ll 


4 TV 28 


2ii 2 ; 


IQ 53 


25 2J 


La H 46 


12 18 


5 1 




2a 49 


2<) 3J. 


Ll 43 


IQ. 31 


9 A 56 


l8 44 


12 III 10 


3VI I 


7 — 40 
z. 3 — 


23 3« 


n 41 


Q 1 


lii ^ 


2T37 


Ll r 24 


11 2 


21037 


23 4ii ' 


3^ 0 


2fi I 




19 57 


4T2S 


li 8 39 


J 1 


0 H ^ 


K£ 2JS 


23 30 


9 n 43 




7 mi 50 : 


£2 12 


9/37 


2ii 


I K 58 


ili 12 


lS i6 


h 1 




2£i 22 


i» Ll 


22 42 


22 2fl 


21 58 


1 III I 9 


22 jfi 


IflSS^ 


Ll 52 


2J1 


lU 4 

J. 


2. 1 




^ » 37 


17 i*i i 


5 as j6 


13 fl 2 


f)'^ 1 I 


15 lii 


51^52 


22 52 

ml 




10 a 15 


13 ii 


m 1 




21 i 


on 5 ' 


lii 57 


2£i 58 
si- 


2Q 27 


2<) 2 


iS 48 ; 


4 ¥ 54 


7T35 


22 23 


2ll il 


11 1 




J n 50 


LI iS ■ 


2.^312 


ll at «2 


I"l45 


LJ / 48 


1 — 15 ■ 


111 51 


12 12 


4 II 38 


91a 6 


I-Z 1 


0 W lli 


ij 0 




i£ ^ 


15 ii i 


52 


2h. 13 


13 42 


2ii ii 


1 s :li 


L2 2 


22 la 


LJ 1 




Wis 37 




1 nr ' 


in-^ 2. 


3/4 


9027 


2li 2 


10T35 


IJ 211 


22 is 


5 A 25 


lA 1 




Ll li 


13 !i 


L5 49 ! 


11 50 1 


57 


22 23 


8X 7 


22 2C1 


25 24 


12 2B 19 


lii 51 


i_5 1 


SH 58 


2(} 1.2 


7.n 27 


1 


2 "1 30 




5— 5 


2Q 5 


4 8 2a 


7 Q 35 


li 15 


2 nv 29 


ill 


i2 ^ 


Ll.f) i 




L5 50 1 


2 


'3 52 1 


17 ii 


1 T57 


ifi 12 


19 56 


8 A 26 


Ih 12 


1 7 1 


f) K 52 


2*2 Ifl 






8/18 


2li "47 ' 


12 44 


Li 4S 


2£ 23 


2 •030 


21 51 


0^2J 


LJi 


21 22 


14 in!22 


22 22 


Li 42 


22 Li 


9~23 ' 


1 I M 47 




10 II 40 


15 12 


Sni!41 


'4 il 


IQ 


QA 9 


ill 30 


7"^ 37 


0/ a 


5/343 


2J 42 


23 42 


7 8 JO 


13 13 


2a 12 


12 49 


2ii 56 




11 2 


14 2fi 


22 


Li liJ 


lS iS 


3 4** 


5T33 


iq 41 


6aa 4 


M A59 


4^17 


13 11124 






2<1 I 


2 "^34 


12 13 


1 = 22 


15 4A 


17 25 


2 □. 0 


19 19 


15 5^" 


12 2 


27 53 


^ 


2U il 


M "l 1 1 


21 ^ 


10/548 

^ 1 


Li 52 


27 35 


22 22 


14 3'i 


3il I 


lofft 19 


3 "157 


1^/12 


Hi 




2h 56 


5/^5 


13 12 ; 


25 55 


9T27 


Ll 8 22 


27 34 


17 lU 

—dm 


25 li 


lii 54 


ih 2tj 


24 


IQ 29 


10 / I«i 


22 


5 — 4'^' 


7 K 49 


21 2i 


23 50 




I "^46 


10-^ 1 1 


3/44 


10 /J 25 


25 




23 LL 


2 VI 2 1 


il 42 


12 32 


3J1 


61130 


14 4i 


Ui ii 


25 2li 


l& IS. 


14 i 




LZ 2 


5>J4K 


14 52 


12 U 


I T2ii 


Li ii 


12 32 


9 A 0 


' 57 


1011140 


21^30 


7= '3 
2 J 




0 ; 2| 


lii ^ 


22 u 




Li 21 


23 22 


2^^54 


13 32 


LZ L5 


15 li 


i_5 


2a 2 




14 2i 


OS 1^ 




23 12 


25 12 


11 n 25 


111 40 


8ii» 31 


2 1H27 


m/ 21 


12 il 


2 X 39 




2(» Q 




21 a 


5T a 


78 43 




OA 47 


23 35 


17 22. 


21 33 


12—24 


U 54 


JO 


S /J 42 




2K57 


12 £1 


2a Li 


8b Ll 


Li LL 


^-^ i8 


« / ,'),^ 


8/315 


14 53 


2fi i2 


11 


ii a 




Ll 13 




2U5« 




12 42 


23 3i 




21 2ii 

1 




8T52 


n M 

- 


Ian. 


Feb 


March 


April 


May 


June 


Iiilv 


August 


Sept 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec 


I 


' ! 
20T43 


4 II 3-2 


12 n 27 


28 55 39 


I 

4 rt 3G 


27^27 


<■■ t 
f> / 40 


2SlrJ4l 


■ 

17 X I 


... 

20T25 


u f 

4 n 34 


7'ra35 


2 


8 J7 


111 


•A 47 


12 A 1 


lii 47 


12 11126 


il lS 


L2J£ LZ 


2Q 36 

— 2 mi- 


2 a 29 


16 4^ 


Ic) 40 


3 


Ll iZ 


20 312 


7 73 25 


15 51 


1^ 2fi 


12 30 


S '/J 46 


2S 17 


1 1 T 5 7 


>4 2^ 


2ii <5 


1 A S3 


± 


2h 


12 B42 


2n £2 




lii 27 


12/31 


2a 0 


8 w 3<j 


24 7 


2£i lii 




14 211 




«) 11 1-2 


211 i 


in 53 


24 S() 




27 211 




21 21 


Ha 7 


8n £1 


22 40 


27 2 
12. * 




2.1 5i 




LZ i£l 




lii 2 


L1/5 4S 


!_Z 2i5 


3TSI 


lii 1 


•9 5^' 


5 A 2 


10 S 


- 


1 4 ''^47 


iA i 


2r.l2 


15 15 


4/13 


25 SI 

-■' .2 


0 X 3S 


111 5 


20 52 




1 7 44 

—i. -Z_L 


2 ? ^2 




lii 0 




ill il 


I') 11143 


LU 2 




M 2l! 


2ii 7 


1 1 n 44 


14 1 




7^ 2.1 


'J 






1-^32 


2^ 4.S 


3 3'' 






10 rt \ 
2 


24 44 


2f) 26 


14 24 

— 3 — 3. 


21 4 1 


10 


1 Li ^ 


7 i2 


ih ^ 


in / i_j 


1 7 V' 


5 *^ 23 


HT 2 


21 53 


5 5r) 


9 A 1 3 


2ii 22 


611123 


I_l 


1 iit J 




1 ni S3 


11 51 


LS. 2 


17 49 


211 II 


3 II 50 


lii 24 


22 li 


1 ^ ^ 2 


21 22 




1 ' ^'t i 




39 


8/j42 


14 11 


uT 0 


20 a 


I i SI 


I L^l Li 


(iTtl! S. 


2ii 0 


6 / 32 


Li 


1 ii 


2D ^ 


LJ. 2 


22 5 


2ll il 


12 0 


•3 59 


2ii J 


IJ 2a 

2 


2a 12 


I 3 "1 14 


21 12 


ii 


1 11^22 


4/42 


L5 1^ 






i 2 1 S4 


2 S s < 


10 3 ^2 


2a S 


4 S7 


2il ^ 1 


6V34^ 


L5 


1 i2 ±i 


lii 22 


2illOii 


1 LZ 44 


21 2J 


S 8 4t 


7 " 54 


2J Lii 


I 2 r" 1 I 


10 5"; 


1 t / 47 


21 21i 


Ui 


1 U"l44 




LZ ill 




1 lT24 


' LZ 3^5 


211 3 


(u<\ 24 


2L 32 


S iq i 


2K 45 


5 — 4S 


17 


1 ii 


L5 Ll 


2i m 


' 12 2-1 


i 15 ^ 


12 35 


2 33 25 


12 5J 


11 ^^20 


2a Ll 


13/31 1 ) 


19 37 


IH 


1 7 ' 






H li 


12 2 


II 11 3<) 


15 *' 


4!Tir> 


2ii a 


5 / '3 


27 27 


3x2 


19 


1 15 


Ll S llJ 


2a 


f>T2I 


2 8 1 


Li 54 


27 51 


L2 3« 


1011154 


J. ti-X 


LLS. & 


1^ 1 


■in 


1 5 ^5 2^ 


Li io 


1 3 M 0 


lii i_j 


2a 54 


f") 12 


10. Ci 5f> 


I -!> S2 


2S 32 


4 /I I 4 


24 2i 


2li 38 


2± 


1 ^ i^l 




! Li Ll 




2 n 51 


1 S JS 


24 1 7 


l£t Ll 




la. <i 


7 I S 


IOT58 


Zi. 


1 2=14 


' lis 36 


27 in 


Ll 5<i 


' ' 4 ii 


LA 21 1 


1 7 "^S' 


011135 


24 4 


1 =40 


19 48 


23 4 


2i 


1 Li Ll 


'^T43 


0T20 


1 U 51 


27 2 


14 2ii 


2i 


14 55 


7 1^ 54 


I4 SI 

11. ^ 


2T 7 


5 8 0 


2| 


1 £2 2I 


Li il> 


2J li> 


5 "47 


1 — ' 


il 32 




12 2 


21 27 


12 44 


14 LA 


\Sx ^ 


£i 


1 111 " £5 


£1 12 


! 38 U 


12 12 


1 21 i2 


1 


12 40 


M / 16 


1-15 


LQ M 22 


2fi 


2ii i2 




1 -i^ ill 


tiy 32 


; 13 0 


ill ii 


4,0,27 


1 24 46 

— ^ 3 — 


3 "I52 


27 12 


17 49 


22 i8 


1 a 8 in 


10 II 32 




1 4T4i 


lA 2j 


1 ^ iJ 


1 2 TO L3 


' 11 24 


' is-u 


lii - 


io/J5() 


0 K 40 


5T i 


■ 2Q 2 


■ 22 22 




1 1*^' ill 


OU2J 




11 iii 


n n 40 


■ 22 52 


2/21 


14 35 


L3 


LZ U 


in 53 


4 B 28 








; ^ 53 




Ll lii 


7111 24 


111 38 


ii£ 0 


2i il 


■ 22 L5 


U 41 


Hi 32 


JO 


1 10^24 




3-' u 


2Q 51 


2ii 12 


22 0 


0/548 


21 Ll 


8r 11 


Ll 8 Ll 




, 2ii 15 


11 


1 4^ iJ 




U 13 


1 


1 "''4.1 


1 


1 ii 52 


j U* Li 

i 




23 i 


1 2i 3S 


II A 24 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1880-1881 



ri vf 


J&n. 


r eu. 


March 


April 


wiay 


J une 


July 


.August 


c>epi. 


UCI. 


i\Ov 


1 1 tM- 


I 


24 A a 


14 14 


u « 
S an p -* 

o'n'53 


r, 1 
2 /J 15 




29 '^5' 


3 a 51 


t rr fi 

IS n a 


2 ,n 6 


° t 




,-. 

1 V f > 


2 


6 "1159 


22 U 


ii i 


1^ 


ii 52 


12T25 


La ii 


i2 ii 


Ll ii 


12 £2 


8 m 1 6 


1 i^i i 


3 


2Q LU 


I2ni Z 


7 ' L5 


OS 1 


7M 2 


2J 44 


iZ iZ 


LI ®47 


26 i2 


I ^ 46 


22 i2 


1 Q 


i 


3 -==37 


2(1 1 5 


21 22 


Li. ii 


2Q 6 


~5 a 52 


y II 36 


ii i^ 


9''i!5*' 


li ii 


J / <5 


lii 2 


i 


1 7 22 


LQ / 2() 


5>^24 


2li 52 


2T40 


lis ii 


2-1 2J 




22 50 


22 ii 


22 17 


0 s 


0 


1 W12^ 


k ■ fi 
24 i« 


'9 2Q 




1 5 lu 


0 0 45 


340 1 1 


la Ll 


A ? I 


13^144 


O10 54 


— ^ 


Z 


Li 4^ 


91^3 z 


i=u 


ii z 


iZ i£ 


12 14 


Li 1 


On»47 


12 i^ 


22 0 


21 12 


212 12 


Q 

a 


0/21 


23 24 


l^i ii 


5T55 


L> ^ fi 

2ai» 


24 22 


22 I 


Ii ii 


3 "14 1 


12 £ 12 


5~ii 


13 " ■23 




re A 
ii " 


Z=i5 


0 X 22 


V fi -* r 

in. ii 


21 5Q 


6ra 9 


9A 2 


2fi 32 


12 ii 


2& 12 


19 22. 


4" 


in 


2J2 ii 


21 ij 


ii i2 


0 « ii 


3044 


12 0 


21 23 


9^44 


1/42 


10 S'J 42 


3 K 0 


9T50 


11 


14V340 


5 K 10 


211 yS 


li Z 


Li il 


22 i6 




23 IQ 


ii ii 


il 1^ 


lii 12 


2A 35 


L2. 


22 


la 4i 


9T52 


25 m 


27 21 


12,0 1 


Lii 33 




22 li 


2 = 4i 


22 12 


5 » 2 


ii 


Ii~2i 

27 211 


I T4S 


22 22 


7U i 




24 12 


i2 i2 


2fi 40 


13 "^52 


22 i3 


1 2 T48 


LZ " 


*4 


11 ii 


iWil 


lii ii 


211 ^ 


6 ns 50 


12^46 


4/44 


2a 1 


C jt< 1^ 


ii 14 


20 20 


15 


10 M 57 


2(i i2 


i 


o<»33 


2, a 5q 


12 li 


212 21 


12 i 


l2«Li 


12 42 


B ^ 


1 1 U 2S 


In 




9» 3 


2a iZ 


12 ^ 


L5 " 


n . » /* 

2 50 


10 m 16 


313 iZ 




3T 10 




21 2_l 


LZ 


6T47 


21 11 


10 n 4S 


ii 2<i 


iZ 42 


lfi 36 


il ii 


lii 0 


10 M I& 


lii £2 




3 93 I I 


• ti 
•Ji 




2n59 


22 i{» 


6 iH 42 


Iont34 


0 1^142 


9/5 




il 5 


29 ij 


Ll ii 


16 50 


IR 


I 0 Lfi. 


14 ^ 

2U 41 


^ 

^oe 2a 


12 ii 


ii ii 


Li 12 


ii ii 


*mm fi 

12 


7T3" 


u a 52 


26. 32 


2ii 1^ 


20. 


0 Li 


LU 221 


2 m 10 


7-41 


0/ i 


8V349 


1 ¥30 


2a 48 


24 lii 


" TO 25 


1 0 


ZA. 


25 ^ 


8 3IS 42 


2fl Ii 


Li ii 


21 52 


L5 ° 


ii 42 


L5 ii! 


3a40 


A 11 .1 

c» II 25 




22 > 


22 


0 II 56 


2Q 56 


LLj?t i2 


i2 25 




0 vj 20 


fi •» -mM 


29 21 


111 L2 


12 24 


2 0 


4 "t4i 


Ii 


■ u < s 
m 4o 


26 


ii U 


13-^43 


21 iS 


Li iZ 


2J 12 


12T43 


22 i2 






12 1 




0^47 




7 "^34 


2a 23 


6 / 4<J 


OS 22 


7K27 


ii ii 


• A rr .«fi 
10 11 20 


12 I 


2Sl 1 


22 42 




12 i6 


252 24 


21 2D 


1 3 "1 1 8 


22 1 


'4 iZ 


21 lii 


fi W * f« 




ii i2 


tt Mn 1 3 


12 r~ J_I 




Hi 12 


I2nt53 






710 i 


22 a 


4T39 


2Q « 
2 11 3" 


4«B S 




21 5 


26 i 


21 






£2 il 


liJ L5 


21 42 


12 M 32 


iZ i^ 


ii 5il 


12 5i 


4 1 2 


2 "1 55 


2& 


2Q ^ 




411126 


2& I 


6=Ll 


2h. 9 


0 a LI 


2^ 


iZ ii 


onpig 


12 i!j 


24 12 




i"»4S 


ii ii 


12 4 


I2VJ30 


20 Ll 


9T i 


12 26 


2£l Lfi 


lOA J 


li 6 1 


1 11143 


8/54 


22 


12 i 




^ f 37 


2li ^ 


3H48 


21 ii 


24 2fi 


8® 5 


22 2a 


2li 12 


iL 15 


ii ii 


ii 






i£ 2 




12 0 




611 20 


2a 0 




2^51 




910 2 


T I Vf 


Ian 

J&n. 


rcD. 


Mnrch 


Apni 


.VI ay 


June 


July 


August 


CAnt 

scpi 


WCl. 




L»ec. 


I 


0 r 
24 >1 21 


1. 

I M 54 


24 K 5" 


D f 

'3 " 4" 


i'>II 59 


IJ>. \ 


3 III 20 


• 9'*^ 9 


.1 / 

fir e 

Q-L i 


c t 
111 0 2 


f 

9 H 40 


r — 

G r 
I 0 Q 


2 




I T i 


«T37 


2li jo 


22 Z 


12 5J 


L2 ii 


I "153 


21 4*^ 


0 S 22 


ii 5i 


I » £1 


i 


24 ih 


11 15 


22 4 1 


2J1 4 


I Hi i 


24 4l! 


iZ il 


14 ^ 


5 3 


11 12 


8T i 


L5 1 


i 


» t< 44 


iZ i£ 


i«iZ 


21 Li 


ii 


"342 


10^ 1 


22i 2J 


20 20 


2') 2ii 


22 5 


22» ^ 


5 


22 


44 


IQ i£ 


3® 13 




10 0 


22 42 


12 ' li 


1= 2 


1 4 W 2 


i«ii 


Ll n 0 




6t 14 


ii 


1 U 15 


15 i 


Hi 38 


1 30 


5 '1 5^' 


ih 12 


211 I 


2lj ;|2 


12 21 


23 12 


z 


Hi Hi 


iJl 14 


Li 2^ 


2L; ii 


2^ 


14 21 


12 i2 


1 1 1 5 


5 X 12 


I3T 15 


2 II 37 




L> 


2 0 


LZ 2 


25 21 


8 ,n 4 = 




il i5 


i ' 32 


2I1 La 


2a !j 


27 27 


ii 12 


la Lii 


ii 


14 2J 


2fl i2 


7 'S LQ 


2Q 4<) 


23 22 


LL IILI5. 


L2 52 


11 -ii 


4 T 59 


u a iC 


lfi 


o.ri jj 


LQ 




I07B44 




^ T 0 


i_2 


25 2a 


21^50 


2£i iS 


LU 22 


il il 


1 0 u 24 


12 10 


Li 


a 11 20 


22 




Li i2 


Lii. ii 


9/47 


LZ 5^' 


1 1 ** 55 


3 a 1 8 


7 u 41 


2^ 2£^ 


2 4 1 L 


L2 


2£t 2Q 




LZ 46 


2il Ii> 


3 tn 10 


il 11 


3s to 


^ li 


lii ii 


2a iQ 


M ft ■■> f 1 


i 


Li 


2 0^ a 


LU 2!1 


ii ii 


LI ^ 22 


1 7 u 


9 '"^ 2I1 


■ fi m 

La. 2£L 


1 1 T 5 


i2 li 


2<Ci 38 


iXL La 


12 52 


'4 


Li ii 


2ii i2 


in; l£i 


il -Ml 


t I 20 


IX 2J 




21 5ii 


L2 11 2a 


L4 41 


2^ Li 




ii 


ii 4i 




12 ii 


a 111^4 


Li 4'' 


<2S 111 


LZ i2 


ft 0 2 I 


il i2 


iii iZ 


trt^ fi 
10 a. 


L2 2-2 


Hi 




J H 22 


2 -~ 4 1 


2-2. 1 4 




2 ^ f f> 


2 T 2 


21 12 




."i .11 2.^ 


2_Z. Ill 


il 5^ 


il 




6-^11 


ii il 


□ f Li 


11 ii 


8 >< 19 


li 51 


31152 


12 32 


2a 2a 


4^ 37 


Z "1 55 


la 


1 nT44 


la 4 


2S 52 


2Q 2Q 


2<) 2a 


22 21 


29 12 


LQ ^ 


0 n 21 


J "1 1 7 


LZ 15 


21 12 




14 0 


2 "1 10 


12 11125 


4 


li = il 


fiT 1 


12 B 2 


2a u 


12 IL 


Ll il 


0 III 1 1 


i-i 1 


2Q 


afi 27 

,, - 5" 
0 0 


LS 30 


21i 0 


lS 38 


iZ ii 


l(> 21 


il 41 


9^'-'.5<i 


24. 6 


2il 42 


11 22 


12 il 


21 


22 i 


9/44 


2~i5 




2 Ii 22 


7 n 0 


21 4S 




Q-!>- 14 


iZ 4 


4 "^43 




22 5 


12 / M 


ii iZ 


ih. 5l> 


25 il 


li " 


l£ L! 




■ fi ■ M 

Li 12 


22 0 


1^1 / ii 


LA 2 7 




iI!L2i 


iZ I 


7 'J 39 


I H 0 


9T ^ 


iz ii 


I ^ 


L5 2>i 


0^37 


5 'U I 


25 i 


3= 12 


'4 


12 i2 


1 1 24 


21 ^ 


14 52 


22 2£1 


9 n 53 


LZ 56 


22 2^ 


* -t fi 

Li 


12 15 


9 


I ^ 

LA ^ 


ii 


2 / SI 


2£i 2 




2ii 4') 


5 y 22 


22 0 


ii ii; 


(J "1:24 


ii 40 


I / J_l 


23 32 


2 44 




12 22 




, 2Q 2^ 


i2r 22 


lii La 


JiZi 0 


6 0 j(. 


21 12 


8 m 1 L 


Ii 19 


2=56 


LI 2 


12 


2VJ Z 


£i IZ 


1 4 >< 30 


25 5£> 


f "45 


15 5i 


lii "22 


,-48 


21 4i 


5 


22 11 


I T 1 7 




LZ Z 




1 i2 is 


2« Z 


li Z 


iZ -»*' 


0 'ic 2 I 


\h ij 


5/ 0 


13 /5 0 




Li 5 


i2 


2= '7 


1 


3ri.s 


22 L 


ii LZ 


9.<^ 33 


12 LQ 


2i 12 


Lii 2i 


iZ -i 


22. IL 


2ii li 


30 


LZ 22 


1 


' LZ 2 


4 n3>> 


713 ig 


2^ ii 


ii 25 


1 1 111^8 


2 1 I 


Ll = Li 


4T25 


11 8 42 


ii 










12 li 






ii li 




25 25 




il 44 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1882-1883 



DM 


Jan. 


Feb 


March 




April 


May 


June 


July 


; August 


Sept. 

-: 


i 

Oct 


Nov. 


r Dec 

1 




C I 


0 1 


0 1 


^ » 




0 t 


0 1 




0 t 






0 L 




0 < 


I 


7n27 


23029 


2.0 28 


1611^48 


19^30 


6/24 


1 I2VJ45 


i 6m 4 


29T44 


6038 


1 24 s 16 


26A54 


2 


12 52 


5^127 


14 2Q 


23 48 


'"157 


12 55 


22 L2 


i 3 


LiaSZ 


211 2 


6 A 43 


8 •7 5') 


i 


2M2I 


i 12 21 


26 12 


10^56 


14. 38 


3i^42 


IlS-jO 


i 5T4« 


22 44 


31IA 10 


; 54 


1 2a 48 


i 




23 11 


811V 5 


21 LI 


22 12 


L2 42 


2S1 32 


, 211 ii 


nil 5 


L5 51 


oni54 


: 2 ^ 39 


5 


2S ^ 


1 1115 6 


2a I 


5 "12') 




• »=fV2 


1 1 H 7 


iH l£f 


24 4 


23 L4 


12 lO 


14 11 


Q 




22, 0 


0 


iS. m 


24 0 


1 ih 2 


25 35 


LZ 52 


6^4) 


10 A 23 


24 32 


26 22 


2 




4^57 


i4 1 


0/56 


7«33 


1 OK 25 


9T49 


IIILZ 


12 Z 


22 £3 


6.^t8 


8»n38 


8 


2 HI 25 


12 0 


26 13 




21 12 


; 14 41 


u 48 


14 lU 


I A 20 


4"I! 17 


la 24 


21 0 


<j 


H £2 


211 Li 


^^"135 


22 T 




1 2fi 51 


7831 


22 4 


U 25 


lil a 




3' 38 


1 0 


2h L2 


1 1 ni40 


21 6 


10 .122 


12 22 


12T58 


21 0 


9^37 


25 21 


il 52 


L2 40 


Hi 34. 


u 


8^14 


24 23 




24 22 


3H37 


i 2& 56 


' 41114 


22 0 


7"s'7 




25 4 


22 46 


L2 


2U 22 


7 '32 




asi4 


LZ. 52 


Ifl tl41 


i 12 ih 


4^ii4 


12 2 


21 48 


7'3'^ 


J3>J»3 






21 2 


, 0VJ25 


22 58 


2T20 


, 24 2a 


1 am 6 


ih 21 


1 0 


3 "149 


2a 22 


iii 51 




15 48 


5V3IO 


i4 12 


7*<37 


iL. 40 


7044 


L2 4i 


2a 22 


12 51 


15 55 


3 '<! 29 


105:46 


15 


22 5 




2a 35 


22 2£ 


01355 


20 55 


25 L2 


ioi»t 12 


i± 15 


2a III 


16 ^ 


24 41 


16 


12/49 


4«i2 


rjsifi 


7TI2 


14 52 


1 3SB52 


; 7A30 


22 & 


&"n43 


111/45 




, 8x50 


L2 


22 2 


12 54 


afi 1^ 


ii 51 


2a 4« 


35 


12 38 




la 50 


21 2a 


li 56 


22 58 


12 


Ll >J4I 


5 H in 


13x27 


Ga 2i 


1 L2 a212 


2Q i 


I n» 39 


Li 4« 


I / 9 


61^27 


i2 53 


7T 7 


12 


26 li 


2Q ii 


2il 38 


2fl 11 


25 32 


II A 18 


Ll ±i 


22 41 


Li 44 


12 46 


12 i 


21 L5 


20 




, 5r34 


' 13T3S 


4 n 16 


8 IS 25 


21 23 


25 iA 


2 "147 


ih ^ 


3 = 2_2 


26 2^ 


5 21 




22 £i 


2Q 11 


, 2K 12 


12 36 


21 0 


511120 


7^ '5 


22 1 


10 /J 0 


LZ 22 


I0T54 


12 21 


22 


12 K 2 


4 8 13 


I2H34 


oas32 


?.qi9 


LZ 11 


12 11 


4/40 


ii 42 


1 ^ 54 


21 22 


30211 


li 




12 51 


2(i 2Q 


13 Z 


L5 25 


29 L 


imi'' 


«7 32 


as 3 


lil 32 


2B52 


12 S 


?1 


ilTlii 


LH 2 


9038 


25 25 


22 21 


11 ^ 4 


Ll ^ 


t vj 5 


22 15 


IT 33 


24 U 


0CE44 


25 


23 li 


Li 5i 


22 30 


7A29 


9"S 17 


21 L2 


iii L5 


L5 1 


7M4« 




8n3fi 


'4 5 




SB £1 


2<1 12 


53a 0 


12 25 


21 II 


5!ni4 


<f/ 18 


22 22 


21 3 


L « 30 


22 42 


22 2 




21 




LZ 14. 




.5-10 


L5 


22 42 


y.a:i2 


8T20 


iL. L5 




9A 56 




4 n 12 




20 I s 




L5 l8 


I / 18 




20 2<1 


2 < 27 

, =-1 ±1. 


0 11 41 


Id 10 

111 til 


22 7ft 




12 2 




nsiia 


25 2 


£2 39 


14 44 


21 L2 


14 X47 


8 a 12 


L4 43 


2A 2 


4t«r40 


30 


22 £2 




21 1 


7-14 


1 0 tr\ I ( )J 


2a i4 


5«52 


OT 2 


22 41 


23 12 


L4 42 


lil 42 


il 


11^27 




4"S53 




2J LI 




2Q 52 


L5 4 




1 1 S30 




2a i5 


DM 


Jan 


Feb 


March 


April 


May 


June 

'■ 


July 


August 


1 

Sepi 


Oct 


Nov 


Dec 

— 


I 


0 r 
10-^25 


2iniio 


2/22 


0 1 
191^21 


26j£LI 


t; t 
I9TI3 


2ati 2 ' 


■ - 

^ L 
I9SB38 


L 


10^44 


D » 
2411158 : 


28/0 


2 






14 44 


2S51 


mX 22 


3»50 


L2n2l 


2 A ^9 


13 52 


22 _i6 


6/50 


IOVJ2"> 


i 


4»ni4 


12 22 


22 22 


ifi 42 


24 54 


iS 32 


2fi 32 


i& 5 


2^ 5 


4 "1 24 




22 ^ 


1 


i£l 21 


2^3 35 


101^36 


I H L4 


9T43 


30 II 


102422 


2S 54 1 


Ll 3 


iL. m 


OVJ5O 


5=34 


5 


2a 11 


m Ifi 


24 14 


ifi 3 


24 4i 


LZ 42 


24 11 


1 1 nj 28 


25 54 


22 58 


Li 11 


la 41 


a 


u Lil 


03:24 


8*22 


IT 2 


2«46 . 


"»57 


7 A 34 


?3 4^ 


211141 


y ' 5" 


25 4^1 


1 K43 


1 


24 42 


L4 54 


22 52 


l£ 11 


£4 41 


L5 51 


2fl i2 


5'"5o 1 


12 2a 


21 52 


as;40 , 


L5 11 


a 


8H19 


ia 41 


7»<53 


1 ai4 


9n 26 


22 2h 


inB20 


LZ 44 


1/12 


4i1 Z 


21 ii 


29 J 


2 


22. L2 


I4>f34 


23 1 1 


^ i5 


21 42 


12 A 35 


L5 44 


?2 31 


[1 21 


16 ^ 


5x30 


13T 10 


12 


6ai22 


£2 26 


8TU 1 


IIIL5 ' 


7047 


25 211 1 


22 52 


1 1 >n2i 


25 3« . 


22 36 1 


12 32 


22 32 


LL 


2Q 4J 


14T 2 


21 ifi 


L5 32 


21 12 


7*^ 45 


9^48 


23 Ll 


811 14 


L2S52 


3T59 


12 a 212 


LZ 


5X Q 


2S 36 


8ji 1 


22 22 1 


4 A 25 


12 54 


21 iH 


5/_LZ 


21 L2 


2^ 16 


la 48 


12 51 


13 






22 _JO 1 


12046 


12 a 


1 -r^ 50 


3"! 27 


'7 35 


4«43 


Ll ♦* 2 i 


31152 , 


12 n 13 


14, 


3T55 


2fi ^ 


6n33 


25 46 


22 ii 


U 41 


L5 ^ 


0KJ14 1 


18 ^ 


25 41 


112 4 


22 Z 


15 




ion Q 


2a LI , 


8.(i25 . 


II "1132 


25 22 


ij_ 23 


13 


2 M59 


'0T43 ; 


41H5 


11047 


16 


2J1 H 


21 22 1 


33328 


2Q 42 


U 35 


7 "121 


2/32 


26 41 


12 4** 


25 54 


Li L4 


2h 5 


L2 


IS 52 1 


6ss3o 


16 2^ 


2 "»,').'> 


^^2i} 


i2 2Q 


22 I \ 


la St 32 


2X34 


ua Q 


3 = 53 






2<i 40 1 


12 211 1 


22 5 


14 54 ! 


LZ U 


I ' 30 


"i VJ £1 


24 42 


LZ 33 


2ll 2 , 


la 7 


23 li 


m 


1311 11 ; 


2A 0 ' 


u..a3i ' 


2fi 42 


22 3 


Li 51 


2a 


9»« 5 


2823 


101157 


1 .153 


f)rr20 




26 J2 


14 22 


23 46 


8-. ^0 


1011157 


2fi i2 


13:152 


21 32 


LZ " 


25 23 


LS "1 


IS 11 


21 


^''^41 : 


26 ^ 


5"V53 


2a 25 


22 58 


91^26 


L5 42 


8T15 


I U.41 


f)<a 2 } 


2a 2 


I- 2 


22 






LZ 5i 


2ini5 


5J. a 


22 36 


22 41 


22 42 


L5 52 


22 5^ . 


lonr ji 


u fi 


21 




21 1 1 


22 42 


14 2 


12 11 


5~52 


1 3 « 49 


2 a. u 


22 i2 


tLfi. 2 , 


22 ii 


24 56 




m a 


2^ S6 


11-17 




on 5 


12 34 


2a 1 


21 2^ 


i3itt 2 


lS ^ 


4-^2 


611142 




Onv28 


14 4ii ; 


23 25 


8/16 


L2 51 


3 M 20 


I2T 14 


511 24 


26 21 


I rt 28 ■ 


iH 32 


lS 29 




li i8 


2£i ! 


?"IM 1 


2Q 34 


25 54 


LZ 14 


2£t 24 


1_2 12 


9 A 16 


Ll 44 


23 12 


0/22 




24 32 


8in22 


LZ : 


3i^ 4 




iTlii 


m« 31 


21547 


21 50 25 18 


lotn 5 


Li 21 




6^ 29 




22 1 


L5 5i 


22 41 


L5 ii , 


24 33 


111 ISl 


411^24 






24 ill 


23 


lA 12 




LLl 12. 


^ 51 


6x27 


22 36 ; 


8I131 


22 2il 


lil JO 


ta 35 


< / -19 


2>i 0 


30 


oin 2 




23 35. 


L25:21 

1 


2Q 22 


'3»52 1 


22 22 , 


1 2 A 1 8 


2a 16 


I in22 


L5 50 


12 18 




12 2 1 


1 


6KJ17 1 


4T45 i 


1 


^ i ! 


25 4 1 




Li ^ 




2*23 



4 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1884-18S5 



DMI Jan 



\2 ^ t 

ih. 
f'U 25 

Li il 
i - ' ii 
li i^i 

Ll 

I i o 

n 1 

^"152 
ii i2 

ill In 
^ 11 

Li S'-> 

£^ 
I I S Vi 

8 ¥ 40 
2 



_ __ 

Feb. 


March ; 


- " 1 
April ■ 


May 


- 

I line 


1 

lulv 
J "'J 


August , 


Sept 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec 


-J 1 
6T 2 1 




• 1 
5 1 


0 r 
2 .t\ 0 


20053^ 




0 . 1 


22 ■/} 0 


0 ' 
25;- 18 


14T a ' 


0 ' 

Zl H 24 


20 2 ) 




'mo 


I ^ 2') 


3 ^ 2 


s 11148 


10 


4 s 11 1 
± ii 






6d 37 


i ^ 2_L 


2'i 21 


- 1 ';7 


?S J4 




1 7 <K 


I /1 40 1 


1 7 2Q 

ii_ 1 


ii 11 


I ^ 15 2Q 


il S7 


i Lii ill 


I < 11 ^ I 




1 1 nr 1 0 

* ? 1 


27 7 
ri. i. 


2ij lit 


I ^ t2 

1.4 i4±. 


0 ¥ £2 ! 


6t 10 


* — ^ 


73c 15 


2 II < ^ 


27 II 




'l\ 47' 




11 / I_Z 


2("l !("> 


I ^ 11 

1.1 41 


20 i6 




ii i-S 


1 ii 40 


1 1 :i 2 1 




6-^ i 


jrt 47 ; 
ii. 


21 I4 




27 <0 


3. ^ .111 


2i 12 


' 




2 ^ 1 




iH d 1 


2 / «'j 


1 /) I IS 


21 44 


1 1 T 22 


IQ 41 

ij2 111. , 


I I S 


21 10 


I .1 ^0 


11,. jv^r 


2I1 A K 


0 in ^ 


1 4 iS 


17 1 1 ' 
ii Jj. 


4 •» 1 7 


21 2 1 


4 n fl 


27 ^7 

±i. ii. 


4 S ) 

— i-J-d 


1 H J < 






11 


2^1 24 


20 S4 


1.1.1 J 




ih. ii 


1 1 j; 36 


li ii 


I 2 .1 2^ 


4 4^? 


il 




>> yj 27 


li~ 27 


I T 20 


2 * J I 




2S Li 


o-^ S9 


2^ =;f> 


ii. 


3 ii 






21 I_l 


11 £1 
ii 


7 n s'> 


17 14 

li. =J1 


811126 


Li iS. 


''t ii 


0 12 




1 7 itt 
li. ' 




8 »< Cl 


2S '52 • 






il ii 


25 4^ 

' zx 


2_1 t'> 


li X < 




2^2 il 


IS 21 


2_1 I * 


I_2 M 40 


O'a if> 


14 SO 


4 ^ SQ 




-» - * 


24 42 


H / 4 1 


11 n ii 


ii 7 


4 T <4 


2£L '>4 


20 22 


7.S I s 

ii 


lit 2S . 


- — t 3 


I() 4 \ 


Ji IH4 I 


2< > \ \ 


21 <2 


XI 4 


18 m 


II n i 


4 0 10 


1 1 ng 2 S 


ii ?0 
^ iV 


1 / 4 I 




Ji 




S St 'i4 


24 iU 


ill i 


2 S 2f ) 




24 il 


10 WI46 


14 32 


1 0 n\ J S 


0 / is 




li Ki 


/ • J ^ 


ih. 12 


0 52 


I nt 4 I 


7 ^ 4 
i a 


ii 46 


2 S 24 


■ T "1 


1 7 




1 i^ 




0 n <7 


24 M 
ii ii 


IS 2 

7 


Lli. J J 


4/42 


7 0 lii 


4 / 


24 i 




1 4 47 


ti a. 16 


IS I'l 


S .<! 2S 


1 >1SS 


Ih. U 


IQ U 




6 /J I C" 


22 i.S 
j2_ 


ii ii 


20 




22 ^0 
MA .Xrl 


10— Sf> 


ia J. 


ii 23 




il 






I 2 T40 




14 SO 
i± ^ 






i£i 7 


io>j 17 


i_i Hi 


1 0 '/5 4 5 


1 — ii 


It) 


27 I S 
z-L ii 


ii < 


2l> <0 




^ 1^40 


S / 3 


ii 11 


L z 


2 { 2>l 


I4 iS 


i T I s 


ii S. Ll 




M Q S4 


2 J4 


17 SS 
ii. ii 


10 S 4 


4 =: Li 




ti— 14 


J" S*J 


1 S ^7 


2"' 21 


^ i 


' 2~ ^ " 




2i) S < 
=1^ ii 


' IVI44 


111 2ii 


-J 


.'n 1 


1 1 i4 




■ 1 2 n 3'" 


J ' J / 


1 1 rrv 44 


2" SI 

111. 


1 1 I / 4 S 


I 4 47 

li i£ 


iS 44 


4 T HO 


4 ^ ^7 


ii> Ii 


Li i 


. il ii 


111 ±2 




min 1 


! Li iZ 




11 26 


Hi M 
c 3 




1 0 T 4'J 


^ fl, LQ 


I 2 2D ^0 


^ iTV 2 s 


7 — * 1 


21 




7 — so 


I 24 ^0 
, ±3 ii. 


2T i 




Li 1 


22 u 


3., 


' Li ii 




12 ii 


1 iQ I42 


1 KT 2 


>4 ii 


. lii 2^ 


l£tilii 




1 1 ,a 14 


2ii il 


2tn s 


1 ii 


^ il 


3X S 


ii i 


2ci i£ 




I 


Lti 2 


2i i2 


11-44 


i 




lis 25 


lii ii 


, 6 W 30 


, 141137 




91143 










, y ^ 4.5 


1 


or 2 






Feb 


Marcb 


April 


May 


1 

. June 


July 


August 


Sept 


Oct. 


Nov 


Dec. 



I). Ml Jan 



J 
4 

f» 
0 

s 

9 
lu 
1 1 
12 
13 
Ii 

Li 

Lit 
IJ 
iS 

Li 
in 
il 
22 

Li 
24 

iit 

2S 
_i 
±1 

3« 



131113 
o 17 24 
li ii 

ill ili . 

■ < -n' U 
' * " =i j 

Li 22 
4in42 

:ii ii ■ 

2i 3K 

LLilii 

2i iii 
4011 

111 i ; 
m ' 

1^ 

ii iS 

.3 » 'J 

•2 ii 
0T21 

Ll li 
ill ii 
ma il 

iilil 

2i ih. 

S Ti ii 

li li 
S " 2 1 

11 i 



7IIV2'^ 

il 22 

4-^57 

Li o 

0 11140 

Li " 
li i 
7/ 1 
li il 

0/J44 
Li 

i± ili 

Qg 4'J 
If) <» 

1 ^ 4" 
li £i 

11 11 

1 o T 23 

2j i^ 
Li 

ia ^ 

41154 

• Li i 
3 iit 

: 12 il^ 

2 n 2<.) 

ili ii 
intia 



»3'T!27 

li Li : 

1 2 40 

li li 
stti2(> : 

ii ^ ' 

3/ o 

Ll ili 

2£l ^ 

8/545 

iQ il i 

i=ii 

Li ^ 

£1 li I 

10 •< 14 ' 

: li Ll 

iQ 2 
, 3 8 4*. 

LZ ii 
• lUii 

L5 i£ 
Ql£ i 

14 12 

11 2:2 

1 2 .n 3<> 
il2 i2 

. lorn 2') 

24 2 

7".<4 
ii 

I 



l!2 IS 
2S. i?^ 
»0 / 4^ 
ii iH 

4 1^43 
li, 

ii i2 
IQSjf) 

ii 

i>'-25 I 
Li li 

IT ii 

ii il : 

11 I 

IJ 8 Li 

22 ^ 

12 11 fi , 

if! 3O 

us: i 

2i IV 

9 fl24 
H LZ 

ic £i 

iJlil 

' 22 2i 

12 in 5 
n il 



li ii 
0/J51 

li iL 

H. iZ 

<'=^2 
Li ij 

o »: 4< > 
Li iii 

2£l IJ 

OT 30 
li M 

28 2i 
il i[> 

^'0 44 
il 42 

^"2 35 
il il 

30 i 

3"T3--' 
LZ 2i 

0--34 
Li li 
ih. ii 

Sin43 
i 

< / IS 

ii H 
22 24 



1= i 

Ll il 

2l4 ^8 

0 •< liJ 
21 i^ I 

4T27 

LZ il 

1 8 25 , 

Li il : 
oaii2 

L5 ii 

ooii 29 

La ii '. 

0,^47 ; 

Li ii 
li 5t> 
M'n! S2 
22 ii 
io 

li 17 
i'n49 

Li t) 
O / t't 
Li ii 
2i iQ 

a/ji^ 

IH i 
OSS o 

" ii 



2i=iy 
5« 52 
li (1 

OT31 

li i2 

2£i 30 

mi 2 
H L3 
S II 47 

li ii 

^7537 

ii ii 

>< g 2S 

K np 37 

U 3 

^'^ <0 

Li 3" 
iiiyS 

L5 Z 
22 il 
«> / 26 

ii 2^ 

31017 

Li i> 

£Z 2 

a=i2 

2ii ii 

Li isi 
. 22 li 



lOT i 
ii 

Li i^ 
iHii 

12 iil 

2'3 3ii 
II ii 

LZ i2. 
2"S43 

LZ 12 
I 2- 

ij ill 

ii 22 

11 in 19 

23 ii 

111 n 
li i 

o /j 5 

Ll ^ 

li i2 
i~ii 
LZ ii 

2<J ^ 
I2K I 
H i2 

7T M 

L2 ill 

; - 



29 8 55 
13II4H 

21 i^ ; 

12ra23 

22 o I 

LLiLii i 

ih. £Z 
1 1 rt i 

ii ^ 
0^3' 

U Li 

Li 

Ll Li 
ili 2£ 
H/321 

2Q IJ 

iis *i 

Ll i 

iii 2 
S ft 24 

iQ ii 
3T3'' 
I ^ ii 
I 12 ii 

LiK Ll 

2^ i2 
uiUii 
ii iK 



8045 
iz 58 

7 A 13 

il _J2 
iiliS 



iii 



LZ ii 

I »jUi 

Ll 22 

27 isi 

ILiii 
ii 13 

4 "J 

i£i L5 
1 

= o 

11 i2 

lii iii 

12 i 
I2T 1 

2i ii 

8 8 50 

ii ii 

6D59 

il y 

5ifl3i 

L2 ii 

iiL59 
li 6 



2''l 5 

Li i§ 
22 ^ 
13- li 

ili ii 
<im45 

11 iJ 
3/2S 

12 ii 
oH <2 
li ij 

5=58 

LZ iS 
2y ii 

11 M 49 
2i^ lil 

6T5I 

'9 il 
38 28 

12 2i 
I 0 43 

lii TR 
I aa I 

L5 ii 

O A22 

ii i2 
^ 51 
1211151 

2d 2^ 



9^53 

om. i 
1^ 51 

LiLii 
li 52 
ill 12 

8/J25 

^ 2i 
2.S Itl 

Li i 

25 ii 

"♦*45 
Li i^ 

2T j 

14 il 

22 ii 

ii_a Li 
li Hi 
911 45 

H i2 
92242 

ii ii 

9^152 

Tl i 

I ii a 

; 6^48 
iQ 2 

' i!! & 
1 ii 5i 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1886 1887 



DM 




Jan. 


Feb. 


March 


April 


May 


lune 

y 


July 


August 


Sept 


Oct 


Nov 


Dec 

■ 








0 t 


0 t 


C f 


0 t 




n f 






f' I 




I 


2811126 


14W 5 


22Vi52 


6»<45 


9T 18 


2&B il 


3®44 


27x1 2 


20==: 19 


26 1155 


14 lo 16 


Llissio 


2 


10 / 48 


15 57 


4 = 41 


la ^ 


21 58 


101146 


18 28 


I2n£ LQ 


4 "'n36 


m / 2I1 


2I1 37 


18 25 


1 


Li 1 


7 = 47 


ih 2<2 


IT 0 


4 » 55 


24 S9 


ijn 20 


2fi 52 


la 22 


23 30 


as: ,12 


10 X u 




5 >3 


12 


23 za 


U 25. 


iS 12 


9<2S22 


la II 


1 1 -~ 24 


I / 51 


6>5 la 


2D 36 


22 1 


5 


12 5 




lOK L5 


26 d 


I D45 


li 


2«'lf53 


25 12 


11 50 


la 22 


2 H 24^ 


IT" 55 


& 




Li 2Q 


22 li 


9 » 0 


15 li 


8Jl 10 


12 22 


9 rn.10 


22 2fi 


0= 33 


li 12 


15 58 


7 


10S4CJ 


25 i2 


4T49 


22 S 


2Q 30 


22 42 


I^^S 


22 22 


9VJ48 


L2 22 


2ii i 


2a LZ 


k 




7r 26 


ih ^ 


5U30 




6 "1156 


15 30 


5/28 


21 54 


21 15 


8T 6 


IQ a 54 




4 ^ 25 


12 1^ 


22 21 


12 1 


22 12 


21 0 


22 2 


i& a 


1=51 


6 •< 1 


in 20 


21 51 




1^ Ifi 


2U 2J 


I2U u 


2^50 


II ifl 5 1 


4 5^ 


12 "1 28 


0^334 


Li 41 


12 iJ 


2 a 48 


711 2 


11 


2a 12 


15 LI 


15 Li 


ih 46 


IS 52 


la 36 


15 11 


12 48 


22 22 


22 42 


15 12 


2a 45 


L2 


10T33 


28 ^ 


8n33 


0 A52 




2 in 0 


8/25 


24 52 


9 X 17 


1 1 T53 


2a 32 


4 as37 


Li 


23 £1 


i2n 13 


22. LI 


155 


24 g 




2J 4 




21 I 


2^ a 


1 1 045 


la 40 


lA 


~6a 2 


26 XL 


C<a 2 




8-5. & 


2£ 42 


3W32 


iS li 


if i 


6 fi ii 


25 ij. 


2.0.40 






IOC54 


20 22 


I3ni5I 


22 2 


1 1 / 39 


L5 18 


0 M 29 


15 5 


12 11 


83347 


12 2 


1(1 


311 18 


25 48 


4 A 54 


2a IS 


S ni46 


21 21 


22 55 


L2 Ih 


22 Ih 


2J1 4 


22 ii 


I irc 13 


11 


LZ 4i 


IOA55 


i2 i8 


12-34 


IQ 211 






24 6 


an 37 


15 7 


6,0 22 


li 22 


l& 


23331 




4njf 28 


2S1 ^ 


2 / 40 


12 '5 


21 i5 


5T59 


22 L2 


2a 21 


2Q 12 


2<» 22 




12 32 


Lini! 14 


12 12 


II 11140 


'5 43 


I S22 


3 >• 33 


la 0 


5 0 2 


1 1 9B53 


4"? 23 


11 -^iS 


2Q 


2A,'j8 


2fi 2 


4 t 


24 17 


2a 2Q 


t3 19 


Li 212 


0 b L2 


la 2 


25 ill 


la ii 


22 2i 


21 


lit 14 


10^38 




7 f 33 


lok3S8 


25 2 


i2 Lfl 


L2 32 


I «3(j 


OA 34 


2 ^^44 


Ll lril2 


22. 


^Tt IQ 


21 iA 


2 IIH7 


211 22 


2J 12 


0 K 56 


9T 2 


25 25 


15 24 


23 46 


111 ^ 


21 5i 




lA ^ 


Sin2i 


l£i 2L 


3W 1 


5= '3 


Ifi 46 


2J Lit 


811 33 


29 33 


8np 1 1 


I !n.ii 


8/2^ 




2^2i 


21 3i 


22 i2 


La LZ 


LZ 5 


0T43 


3«42 


22 i 


Mil i 


22 46 


Li 21 


21 40 


11 


1^ i<i 


4/21 


12/34 


22 211 


2a ^ 


12 53 


Lfi 22 


6 as 5 


2a 50 


7-^28 


22 la 


4>343 


2L 


22 12 


16. iS 


25 fi 


9=n 


lOM 45 


2Q 


22 12 


22 22 


lini42 


22 a 


13/ 0 


LZ i" 


22 


<2nt45 


2g 0 


710 2a 


21 2 


22 ^2 


a« iQ 


Lin22 


5-n «6 


2a il 


611141 


2£t 22 




■yfi 


il 22 


1 1 V3 0 


10 21 


2 K52 


4T52 


21 25 


22 12 


2a 19 


13-^49 


2Q 38 


9 Vj 23 


12 12 


20 

£. 


7/53 




IS I ) 


14 40 
.lit ^ / 


17 10 


so 7 


I25B 4 


nc lo 


2a ii 




22 4 


24 2a 


30 


2a 6. 




a 2 


2ll 50 


ow 2 


12 Ll 


2I1 52 


2Q iO 


12 11157 


la 211 


4-2,5 


6m 13 


ii 


2>j a 




21 £1 




Li 12 




12.(1 2 






IW33 




la I 


DM 




J ah 




Feb. 


March 


April 


May 


June 


July 


August 


Sept. 

— 


1 Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec 




n t 


0 t 


0 t 




Q 1 




0 I 








, -J 


a t 


I. 


29 Mi2 


Il» 3 


22»i2 


io<a 29 


17.fl44 


lo-r^ "54 


20111 I 


10V354 


22=5^ 


oTio 


15»21 


18 n 50 


z 


I I rp 4I 


2fi 36 


5U 12 


25 58 


1^148 


2i 22 


4 / 2 


21 il 


inx 2 


12 4J 


. 22 2a 


I Hi 24 




23 il 


9032 


Lii 2 


7 .A 50 




2 "153 


17 53 




22 1 


24 ii 


9 0 38 


14 2 


4 


ll» 2 




I I -1 


22 2 


o-^ 48 


24 2n 


1 V3 30 


12 ll 


IT 56 


!i a 211 


21 i6 


22 1 


5 






14 ii 




15 i2 


8 / 


11 51 


1 X 23 


15 12 


; la 22 


4 s& 24 


10. n 8 


a 


I II 41 


in ^ 


2ii iH 


2J 


0 rriM 
— Lja. 


22 40 


22 55 


Li 112 


22 


on 23 


12 I 


23 2'' 




L5 


■j-fl IS 


' 3 A 30 


6^ ■i4 




0V3 22 


103:40 


li 20 


9831 


12 11 


22 5il 


In 2 


s 


2ii ^ 


2a 2Q 


2A 2^ 


2J Jj 


0/4 


19 41 


21 a 


7T22 


21 22 


21 51 


» 3 Ii 


20 ii 


a 


13^6 


.•,11132 


LiJSli 


7 "I 2 


11 23 


2 5=37 


5 «■ 22 


12 15 


3 n 37 


77529 


211 4(1 


5 >> I 




22 -ii 


2n 35 


2il 48 


ii 55 


2a ih 




17 21 


I a i 


Li 58 


2a 24 


iom!43 


19 25 


LL 


i2,n 10 




14 r!>: 0 


ft / i« ) 


II V341 


27 27 

* —4- 


22 lS 


11 1 


2a 37 


3^1.42 


25 5 


4 21 1 


li 


26 ^ 




2ii i8 


20 (i 


24 40 




11 T 9 


25 Li 


II 9238 


LZ 25 


9^ 49 


la 46 


>J 


1 1 n( 28 


i "1 27 


Li "133 


3 ^32 


7" IS 


21 24 


2 i 2 


7U38 


25 4 


I "B36 


24 5" 


3 ' 3<» 


il 


IS i2 




22 jii 


111 22 


Hi 30 


3TI4 


5 a 1 


2a 22 


"S.P. 58 


Ih. 14 


9 m 5^> 


la 2 


L5 






1 1 / 2(; 


2ii 58 


1 »* 3' 




12 1-2 


312028 


23 la 


I I 5 


25 «i 


2jr)2S 




24 lii 


L5 ic 


21 15 




<3 2i 


27 4 


22 18 


lii 59 


8ns J 


Ii! 32 


la/ 1 


Hi 22 


17 


8111 2 




7V5 


U IQ 


25 Ll 


2U Li 


12 II 22 


o.fl 54 


21 i 


I rn49 


21 il 


OS 5 


m 


il ^ 




211 d 


5 H 1 


7T 0 


21 ii 


25 22 


'5 n 


8^17 


12 ^ 


8 >j 40 


Ll lii 


"j 


5_£ ^ 


21 3 


2S2Q 


111 ^ 


Lii ii 


4 n 13 


80=52 


22 12 


23 22 


I / 56 


22 12 


1 


2£t 


ih ii 


5= Ll 


Ll 22 


2a ii 


o a 58 


LZ S 

—L. 


22 32 




am •'7 


l£i 25 


i=2ii 


8 K 30 


ZI 


I V3 I 


12 11 


2ii L3 




Li Li 


OTP iQ 


6 a V) 


29 22 


25 a 


0^325 


la 2 


2il 40 


12 


13 42 


22 LJ 


8 H 4 


22 22 


25 4" 


■ 3 4S 


2a 54 


'4^17 


7 / 25 


Li 55 


0 K 31 


2T 39 


li 


2ii m 


11 « i 


12 52 


4 a 27 


8n 19 


22 H 


S nt 17 


2a i6 


4 1^40 


'ih 52 


L2 32 


11 11 


21 




n 52 


I T40 


111 £1 


21 LL 




12 u 


U m2i 


12 40 


2=i6 


24 ii 


2li 23 




211 32 


4T40 


13 ii 


22 1 


4'^ 15 


25 IQ 


4 2 


22 22 


OS 21 


ii 55 


6T24 


aa LZ 




2K2<2 


lii 30 


25 22 


1 1 n 38 


LZ 11 


9 nj 1 3 


la 32 


11 


12 ii 


ix I 


la Li 


22 12 


li 


li 2J2 


2Ji 2^ 


2a22 


21 2^ 


"A 57 


23 21 


2 "14.5 


21 12 


21 52 


15 58 


0 a 2 


2 03' 




2h 2 




12 n 


74s 20 


Ll M 


7^1' 




7H47 


7 *: 0 


27 50 


12 6 


Ll 55 




7T55 




2 11 0 


211 32 


za 22 


21 4J 


0/ ,8 


2Q i2 


la 52 


0T40 


24 12 


22 11 


30 


12 12 




Ll il 




I2nr22 


5^54 


U 11 


3=:i£ 




21 32 


6 0 26 


IO'IS24 


22 






22 2i 




2fi 33 


22 42 


15 41 


1 


iB2£i 




21 22 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1888-1889 



DM 


Jan. 


Feb 


March 


April 


May 


June 


July 


August 


Sept. 


Oct 


Nov. 


Dec. 




L 


6JI47 


^< t 
2811H J 


t 

22^35 




16/5 


u * 

231014 


10M56 


•J r 

13T4O 


0 1 
12^15 


0 * 

1 1 '2B44 


0 r 

«5.»^ 5 


0 f 
4^34 


121*127 


2 


2a ifj 


12/v 42 


7'ai8 


OV3 10 


6-34 


li lii 


15 45 


91131 


24 12 


2il 22 


12 12 


12 32 


i 


i m .s6 


26 il 


21 48 


, y 42 


12 12 


5T23 


Z«i8 


21 14 


7AI2 


I2n)! tC 


43123 


12 / S7 


i 


12 4^ 


11 m 6 


0/2 


: 12 4 


2 K i 


i2 20 


12 11 


39S49 


2fl 29 


2fi ii 


12 12 


2& 2 


5 


' -44 


25 14 


12 i8 


2«52 


li. li 


22 li 


I U25 


ih 18 


II ^IX 


4 '54 


13W & 




15. 50 


9 / '3 


31^36 


2i 12 


2 iO 


1112 i 


li 2h 


22 3 


iS 2 


2ti i 


12 52 


12 42 


2 


o.m 2 


2i i 


Ih i2 


5M 2 


8T29 


22 i2 


li 14 


I2A £1 


2!e:27 


nm 3 


4VJ42 


115=42 


8 




6V342 


OS 2 


£2 ill 


2S1 2^ 


4" 53 


7®54 


25 26 


ih i6 


2li 0 


12 I 


25 2h 


S 


^ i5 


2Q ti 


li ii 


12 2J 


2 U Ifi 


ih il 


2Q 2i 




1 "129 


10/44 


28:55 


8x39 


U2 


12 /4g 


i 3-2i 


2i ii 

8m 1 


IIT24 


LI a 


22 2 


3^1 a 


22. 52 


ih I 


25 ifl 


16 2j 


21 29 


U 


2& 52 




2i 2Q 


26 1 


119218 




6^^ S2 


\ 0 / 2S 


9>5l6 


12 29 
12K In 


3T59 


L2 




22 U 


2a 2i 


5«li 


7056 


23 ii 


29 ID 


21 0 


14 12 


23 2 


ih 14 


li 


24. ii 


1 1 M 45 


2T3I 


17 i 


12 55 


6fl 21 


12 nf^o 


vn»3 


2S li 


6s28 


14 42 


2^ l£ 


M 


7 = S'' 


2^ 6 


li 15 

26 i2 


2a 52 


n&i2 


12 12 


2& 17 


12 12 


I2V12Q 


13 ii 


7T 6 


ISO i± 


L5 


^ 0 




10051 


14 Li 


2!Sl£l 


IO^~5 


3 '40 


26 5 


2x30 


12 ifi 


22 & 




i»«45 


LZ 


SB2i 


22 io 


2h i2 


i L5 42 


24 12 

ani26 


12 49 


9 a 28 


L5 1^ 


1 a 12 


3n 56 




1^ 12 


o» u 


2D 1^ 


4®57 


9^11? 


22 2h 


1 1^53 


22 12 


12 4i 


ii \h 


L5 12 




2& 2^ 


li i 


211 2 


12 12 


22 ii 


13^ T 


22. 18 


, L5 42 


1 5»<40 


loT i 


li 9 


12 4£ 

q JB 10 




IOT25 


li i2 


14 Z 


12 55 


5"^ 37 


12 54 


11 L5 


12 36 


Ifi 22 


22 l2 


711 0 


2D 


22 2Q 


5n57 


2h 14 


' I2JI.S4 


12 li 


121134 


21 11 


ii=L2 




4811 


IS io 


21 42 


21 


4 a L2 


iS s 


83236 


2h 2S1 


3-37 


12 15 


6W 2 


26 ii 


li 11 


1^ 22 


0^41 


3A S4 


22 


Ih 2 


one 34 


21 IS 


ions 15 


ih L5 


L2 / 2D 


2Q 21 


9^43 


15 42 


2fi L5 


12 36 


lil Ih. 




2& 2 


Li il 


4 A 24 


14 40 


3"H4 


12 2 


4-22 


22 35 


2«51 


ion i 


14 12 


2S £2 


2i 


ton 22 


2fi ii 


12 i2 


9^3' 




11 1046 


IS i 


5T12 


12 42 


21 54 


6 A so 


11 "543 




22 ii 


«o^i i 


1 nS58 


14 42 


3 '40 


26 i 


J M 27 


12 14 


I U40 


3«»45 


12 12 


li 52 




5«si2 


24 4 




loni 2 


i& 4i 


2-58 


li 12 


12 4i 


11 32 


Li 44 


3 


8-23 


22 


l& 12 


8nv24 


I 20 


2i 21 


V'^33 


li 12 


22 12 


UBli 


li 2j 


12 54 


15 Li 


22 I_£l 






ZX 1 




IQ / 27 


17 s6 


6 x 32 


QT <7 


21 17 




loJi 22 




6 WI32 


22 


15 42 


7-47 


I "139 


23 m 




12 11 


21 i8 


5U29 


12 12 


11 ii 




21 a 


30 


?2 42 




Ifi 4i 


9VJ27 


Li iS 


IT37 


3«48 


12 14 


2Jl 10 


611130 


12 12 


0 


il 






I 




23 18 




L5 41 


12 12 




2Q £2 




21 I 


DM 


Jan. 


Feb 



March 


April 


May 


June 


July 


August 


Sept. 


Oct 


Nov 


Dec 


I 


f>V5 i 


C 1 

12*ii 


LI i 

5^53 


L 

23T52 




a 1 
228 2 




0 f 

II UM5 


C 1 

14^1 


u t 

1 ^ fS 


0 » 

22V\ & 


— 

ivi 5 


14^ 3 


IT 33 


2 


2a ii 


U X 2D 


12 25 


6 a 2Q 


8n59 


23 4 


2d I2i 


14 li 


<Lt 3 


L5 11 


7x45 


ii 36 


i 


5«i2 


14 44 


2T39 


ifi ii 


2Q ill 




811542 


12 il 


2a 2 


22 ih 


21 1^ 


12 lA 




12 42 


7T46 


L5 ik 


oil_j8 


2as3(> 


12 i 


21 22 


0 m28 


4^320 


MaiQ 


4T36 


2«5a 


3 


3 ii 


ia 2h 


2& rj 


12 J2 


LI n 


22 21 


4-^5^2l 


25 25 


lii 32 


22 iS 


12 44 


22 2J. 


ti 




2«42 


ma 3i 


2i 21 


ih ih 


1 1 1^57 


LZ 41 


9 f 32 


i« i 


II M 12. 


0 a 3a 


iii3 


2 


2£i ii 


'4 ii 


22 il 




«,!! 18 


14 55 


I 11124 


2J 8 


LZ 12 


14 52 


ii 2a 


lii 12 


& 


L2TJ2 


2I1 iH 


4 0 37 


la 2 


2Q 35 


8^ 19 


L5 ii 


8/549 


I M47 


8T29 


li 48 


2S 12 


2 


li il 


8 11 38 


m £2 


o (l i 


intL2 


22 m 


0/0 


li 12 


L5 52 


21 16 


8n i 


10023 


LD 


Griii 


2a 2:1 


2Ji ih 


L2 2i 


Ih U 


6in29 


Li 42 


S=2i 


2a 51 


I8i6 


2a 6 


22 111 


LL 


lii ii 


20322 


10^ 10 


25 3 


m 41 


21 L2 


12 50 


13 6 


13T26 


LZ 22 


2<a I 




L2 


oUi5 


14 2i 


22 Li 


8n£ 2 


H'^41 


6/14 


>4>357 


7«33 


2h i2 


12 51 


Li 42 


L5 4« 


Li 


12 25 


ih. ^ 


4^1 ii 


21 i2 


2S (i 


21 2h : 


0= 0 


21 jy 


aa22 


12-U i 


25 36 


12 46 




il 12 


ff-fl 10 


LZ u 




1211154 


6VJ38 


li 52 


5T2-i 


21 i2 


21 0 


7A25 


9'«55 


L5 




21 i6 




la il 


12 55 


21 il , 


2<1 22 , 


IS 32 


4 U II 


5®5o 


13 11 


22 2a 




Ifi 2i 


4 "1 5'.» 


y ii 


i!ni2 


m; 2 


(f^t^ 1 


13x29 


1 a u 


Ih lu 


12 3« 


ins 34 


i^ fi 


LZ 


0,(140 


la iS 


12 M 


12 ih 


2Ji 5 


2D ii 


12 2 


il ^ 


28 0 


22 28 


14 i 


lii 15 


i& 


u s 


t ^ ii 


1 1 ^ 


4/4 


'21055 


4 K49 


10T22 


2h 12 


93348 


1x^127 


2L ii 


I TTl^2 


12 


li 42 


L5 i^ 


li 22 


Ifi 


22 12 


lA 22 


li u 


sun 


21 32 , 


11 4£ 


lO^lI 


L5 5^ 


2D 


8nii43 


12 i2 




^ysih 


11 


IT JO 


5BiU 


2U 1 


3 A 38 


Gnj XI 


li ii 




21 


21 ii 


I3"13J 


2i 1 1 


12 ii 


25 ii 


ii ih 


L2 52 


I JB49 


L5 42 


12 i 


am i 


L5 LZ 


22 




12 


8 / 




8 H 50 


2L 44 


12 42 


Li 38 


2i5 ii 




22 ii 




2i 


IS 4« 


11/44 


22 ii 


ii 12 


21 i(> 


S»i8 


1 1 tl 40 


15 33 


1 1 rm 0 


L5 58 


7/21 


L5 15 




2(nj8 


li ii 


61^50 




4T45 


21 0 


11 12 


7A^8 


14 4 


12 52 


22 ii 


0=42 


il 


ih ^2 


10 yj z 


m i2 


I I H 52 


12 12 


2n54 


5®i,'i 


12 5i 


7->26 


iiini2 


2J5 8 


L5 12 


ih 


0/ -^8 


14 <i 


4=35 


li 52 


22 4£ 


14 44 


LZ 5 


2nv25 


^ 3 


2S i2 


21 il 


0 H I I 




15 25 


.S s: 1 .? 


iS 


7T40 


0 tfi2 


2h ii 


211 2 


L5 m 


4 "I52 


lit tl 


6=?6 


il 22 


Is 


23 18 


22 i» 


IH45 


2D III 


11 54 


8 ia 19 \ 


1 1 n 2 


iH 2 


iS io 


il 11 


2a li 


23 2 


12 






LS 5 


2 « i2 


511 50 


iO. 2 


2i 22 


I t ^ 27 


2 Ml 


««1^53 


4><37 


11T27 


i2 


12 i 




2S Li 


lA 52 


LZ 41 


an i 


5 4^ 


li 4'^' 


ih i2 


2h 1 


ii 


14 14 


il 


«3'=27 1 




LIT LQ 




2ii 




lii 2£i 






lf>15 ID 

i 




Za 2 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1890 -i 891 



DM 


Ian. 


Feb 


March 


April 


1 

May 1 


June 


lulv 


August 


1 

Sept 


1 

Oct. 


Nov 


Dec 


1 


1 

IQ B 24 


4SS 12 




16 Jl 27 


f 

2Q1HIB ; 


1 7 IH21 


0 , ' 

24 / 1 1 
±1 * 12 


0 t 
17a SI 

12 


1 

1 I T 1 1 


0 / 

17 H il 


3® 56 


0 » 

1 


2. 






24 2h : 


811142 


12^14 


I / 2a ! 


gVJ (i 


1 M 4 


25 2S 


01141 


1^ u 


12 5§ 




^ «J 


27 47 




21 II 


2S 20 


IS SI 1 

12 22 ' 


24 lii 


lS 4 


9 « '5 i 


Ll i5 


2ii li. 


2y 48 


4 

3. 


2S 26 




iS 14 


1 S7 


Q ITI 4 


0 11 31 ' 


n s: 16 


2 T40 


22 32 ' 


2L & 


10 A a 


11 ni!4l 




7 u 1(1 




On{ 22 


ih s8 




IS IS 


24 15 


16 SO ■ 


S II 23 


89319 


22 0 


2 V 40 


6 


10 4 




L2 40 


0 III 14 


7 / 0 


2Q so 
iZl 2ii 


~8 K SO 




17 SI 

12. 2_ 


20 2Q 


3 "853 


S^49 


7 

L 


OA 52 


IS SQ 


2S U 


t 1 41 


21 11 


I 4 S 16 

!_± 


21 21 
I2 12 




naa 2 


2 A 12 


IS 53 ' 


la Ll 






2Ji 24 


7^ S 1 


27 ii 


S M 11 


20 2 


7 T 22 ' 




12 I 


14 2 

11 *• 


2& 3 1 


0 n\56 


q 


24 \H ' 


11 ^ 0 


20 47 


Ul / (J 


IQ 50 


11X11 


■>r> c8 1 


8 II so ! 


21 S2 
±J 21 


2S S4 

12 21 


10^ 27 


L4 0 


10 


()aV42 


23 48 


) IIIS2 


2S 1 


4 s 7 


27 7 




21 12 


S A4l 


711152 

10 58 


23 6 


27 25 






6 11)52 


17 Q 


9VI 1 


iS 19 


IOT44 


17 2 




17 31 

i-i- 21 


6m 2 


U / 12 


L2 


1 " 22 






21 a 


2 M 25 


24 4 


20 16 


IS fi 
12 " 


2Q 24 
12 11 


2 -r^ 1 S 


IQ IS 


25 12 


t ) 


M 4 


3 / SI 


14 17 

1 — t_ 


7asi8 


t6 21 


7a a 


II II 36 


26 56 


II 24 


14 44 

_1 3^ 


2/43 


9*340 


Ll 


27 6 


17 SI 




21 10 


OT l-i 


IQ S7 


24 S 


8 A4S 


21 11 
±1 il 


27 2S 
12 i2 


l£ 2^ 


2i m 


( ^ 




2 VII I 


12V] 


S H 4 1 


11 4Q 
L2 32 


2 II 32 




20 36 


S^47 


IfltniS 


0V3 17 


8S44 


lii 


24 21. 


lii SO 




19 SI 


27 IS 


1 4 so 

11 21^ 


la I 


2nv2Q ' 


la 11 


23 Z2 


14 17 

—3. —L. 


2^ la 


• 7 


8/37 


I S44 


IIS 6 




m w 2f> 


27 a 


20 S2 
±2 2z 


14 27 

11 12 


? 0 in 4S 


6/38 


2& 23 


7 K40 


lA 


21 17 


ift 4S 


2S 42 


17 48 


2 1 22 


9 2E 1 2 


1 1 A <12 


2fi ^ I 


11 10 


2^2 4 


12X 11 


21 54 

21 


10 
J 


8 /J Ifj 


I X ■14 


10 H 19 


2 24 


6n i^ 


21 Q 


21 12 


8'^41 


27 
12 




2(2 4S 


5T54 


20 


21 27 




24 40 


14 41 


la 30 

UL -J 


1 .fl 0 


S KB 24 


2i 4 
1 


Q / 38 


L2 21 


lUM SS 
22 


19 40 


2 1 


8 = 41 

- 3^ 


1 T \ 


9T £i 


27 41 


0^ 44 


14 SO 

_1 2il 


17 22 

12. 


3 11138 


23 6 


iss 13 


25 3 

_2 J 


5 fl 12 


22 


-J .2^ 


13 a 


21 3 


10 n zo 


L2 47 


26 40 


20 27 


lH 27 

12 


6VJ52 


I S 4S 

_2 12 


9T S 

^ ' 2 


iS 30 


2 < 


8x38 


2fi 44 


b « 36 


22 41 


24 £1 


8nv IS 


11^41 


29 IS 


2Q 58 


0 M 7 

2 


2_J 0 


2Q i5 


?£ 


£i i 


U H 22 


m 44 


4«647 


OA 31 


2Q ^ 


2i Ii 


ii/ i 


5 = 2i 


H 25 




12U27 


2S 


7T 1 


24 \A 


2ri2H 


16 4 1 


iS 22 


2 SS 


7 ni 4 


2fi S8 


in 5 


2Q 4 


2a 1^ 


25 2 




2Q iO 


6U S4 




2a 34 


om 12 


IS 29 


2Q l& 


U VJ 17 


4X58 


13T28 


3n32 










2li 58 


10J124 


Li 21 


IH 11 


54- 


23 52 


12 51 


U B 58 


iS 32 


12 54 






09352 


8«B53 


22 Ul 




1 1 11142 


12 52 


11 s 1 


4T44 


29 m 


2JI 2 


S2 


28 22 




2Q £2 


\ 2 j 




25 12 


2VJ30 


26 Li 


la 12 


25 15 


1 1 at 44 


11 i 




loDii 




2A31 


lij ^2 




9 / ,l 8 


12 H 


u K25 


38 ii 


8n30 


2J 58 


25 57 

7H48 




22 2^ 




£1 25 




i»a36 




2«34 


2I2 2a 




21 2J 




DM 


Ian. 


Feb 


March 


April 


May 


J une 


lulv 


August 


Sept. 


Oct 


Nov 


Dec 


I 


f. « 
IQnc 4I 




r, / 

4 1112 S 


1 1 m 20 


0 1 

1 "J 50 




n 1 
< T 26 


0 > 

Lifl a 


I 9B S 1 


0 # 
18 A 25 


n 1 

21 nv 17 


0 1 
s 11146 


9/10 


2 


I ^37 


iS 57 


2f) 0 


IS 21 


21 S7 




2S 41 
±2 12 


14 32 
11 21 


oiT)>a6 


3^ 8 


17 S5 


21 sS 


X 

■J 


Li 4i 
AAA J 


20 SO 


8 / SO 


22 lii 


8 M 20 




9 n & 


27 I 
12 


12 22 


14 52 

is S3 


0/12 


5W 1 


4 




22 I 


I IS 16 


22 SI 




22 17 
*^ 12. 


9 A 20 


24 IS 

11 12 


12 40 


la 11 




a 11141 


2il S<> 


sn l8 


2li 14 


7 T 27 




SHIS 


21 11 
*-* 21 


" — 2 


8msi 


2S 2fi 


I S46 




2J. 42 


1 1 V] 13 


to 4 { 


13 H a 


22 1 




iH 1 


1 "t 14 


17 SS 

12 22 


ait 


8H 13 


IS 26 


7 


mJ—L. 2. 


2S S7 


1=15 


2^ lii 


f) t) 30 




0 A 14 


IS 10 


20 47 
Z-Z. 12 


3/ a 


21 22 


2^ la 


K 


10 i 




II) L2. 


1 IT 11 


20 4 J 




12 SS 


27 22 


II in 4 s 


I S 14 
12 4^1 


4S 49 

„ 12 


13 19 


0 


3 W 22 


2 ft 2J. 


4 H 2'> 


2h I 


^ U ^0 


22 1 ^ 


2S 4 
12 1 


') ^ 1 I 


21 S2 


2a lij 


li 34 


27 za 

12- 


10 


lii 3 


1 1 M )0 


19 4S 


IS H ^2 


la I s 


J 0 J < 


7 "I S 


21 1 
" 2 


0 7 1 1 


11/117 


2 K H7 


1 1 T43 


[ 1 


^ J2 




4 T5>j 




, I El £2 


lii ^ 


ICf 0 


1 III 0 


SI 


24 42 


58 


26 2 


12 




U T i^i 


10 S7 




1 4 17 


20 I 


0-<^ SI 


I S 7 
12 2 


1 VJ 56 


as: 12 
" 21 


1 T 14 


m 8 22 


1 1 




2S S8 


4 8 11 


2 1 12 


'jf^ 4^ 


10 


12 44 


2 7 iO 
12 


IS 27 
12 12 


22 48 


16 20 


24 39 


14 


17 48 


1 tJ SI 


lii IS 


6 ■ 2 1 


0 ,n 1 


J-i 


24 44 
11 11 


111 / I j 


23 2& 


1 7 20 


I fl 9 


81149 


1 s 


2 T 17 


2 1 17 


2 □ m 


lM 4^* 


21 E 


•t H ' 


6 m S4 


2 1 22 
12 *^ 


I 1 SS S7 
U 22. 


' i2 ifi 


1 S S4 


22 48 


lii 


IL 24 


on ls 


lis 17 


1 A 1 


3nc 2 




19 2f> 




2a 52 


1 7 T ^7 


0 II 2*2 


61232 


17 


o» b 


lS 

KM .z^ 


: 2ii 0 


1 1 I 


14 SS 


Au 


~2 1 ii 


21 ii 


' 14 K S 

T 2 


22 48 


1 4 4'> 


12 57 


18 


13 11 


1 W 2 I 


' 10 1323 


24 ss 


26 SO 


1 I IU24 


IS 17 
L2 12. 


s SI 40 


20 2S 
I2 12 


2 8 so 


28 41 
— ^ 1_ 


3^ 3 




.J T 




7 2 12 




- 


2^ il 


i 2a SI 


2L) 10 


14 T4 I 


22 IS 
22 


1 2 « 1 1 


'5 48 

—2 


20 


9 II 2U 


■ 2S IS 


► 4 A 11 


iS 40 


21 0 


7 / 1 < 


1 2 /} S S 


S »« 4 S 


20 42 


6 11 SS 


2s la 


2a 15 


il 




70 U 


lii 2S 


0 ^ *.'5 
J 


1 in 2 2 




27 III 


20 S7 
22 


1 I4 8 21 

is 3j 


20 48 


8 A 2 


lont i5 


22 


4 to 15 


la ill 


i^S HI 


1 2 42 


IS S7 


4 '1 24 


12= 0 


f>T 2 


4 1? I4 


20 2£l 


22 25 


2 1 


lii 28 


I nr lit 

* 2—2. 


lore S 


24 


1 2a ^0 


la iO 


2f") 51 


2r) 41-) 


12 U 17 


17 I4 
U- lit 


2 "I IS 


4^17 


li 


ii$ ii 


Ll 


12. i 


7IIIKJ 


1 11/53 


2 = i2 


. I I ♦* 42 


5eL5 


25 31 


212 52 


ii 3i 


Hi 2 


25 


10 A 35 


25 a 


4"^ I 


ili S 1 


1 2S 17 


17 il 


2li 2£i 


19 IS 


•H 'JT. 2a 


12013 


26 25 


1 2a 0 




22 it 


, 7-" 2 


111 5 


1 2/1., 


1 8/5 53 


1 32 


IOT57 


2U5I 


21 J 


i± 12 


S--i<j 


10 in I 


12 


^"1! 24 


m 3 


■ zii m 


ii il 


22 4> 


L5 52 


£5 m 


Ui i 


: 3 A 22 


6n« I_2 


2S1 a 


; 22 Ii 


2« 


\Si \h. 


I mil 


1011134 




(•=.<9 


0T15 


9 8 -1 


: a« 52 


15 io 


lii 2 


2 "I 2 


^lAl 


2!i 


2& 14 




21 2 


1 2 n 14 


1 2U IS 


11 21 


• 22 40 


1 ifK.37 


. £2 22 


22 52 


Li lii 


12 2i 


ili 










1 •* .V> 






il 2 




1 1 ^ so 


2£i 36 


0 r, 39 


ii 


^ !i 




Lit 37 




1 ili u 




, 12 i 


0 n iS 




I 




t 11 ii 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1892 1893 



DM 

— - 


Jan. 

— ' — — 


1 

Feb. 

— — 


March 


April 


May 


June 


July 


August 


Sepi 


1 

1 Oct 


Nov. 


Dec 




fj » 


n 1 




0 _ / 


0 t 


0 t 








0 » 





— 

- ' 


I 


27VJ50 


2QH L2 


14T15 


7" 9 


i3'»40 


La 3 




17 m 0 


1 >) 2Q 


5«LZ 


25x23 


3V 20. 


2 


>i«47 


4T48 


m. 1 


21 U 


22 1 


ii 22 


15 12 


2fi ii 


14 1 


ih 50 


"or 5 




i 


li M 


12 11 


U»3<i 


■ 4^48 


9 A 58 


: 15 2fj 


22 ifi 


11/2 


12 11 


; 2x50 




3 0 2- 


1 


10 li 


1 B 28 


27 12 


• li 2 


i2 il 


2^21 


2»n i 


23 2£ 


mg48 


1 12 12 


m B lii 


iJi ^ 


5 


24 i& 


12 2S 


u 032 




4'^52 


12 in 


21 0 




11 48 


2T 5 


' li 31 


33:22 


6 


St 20 


I U 14 


Si Z 


LJ m 




oin5« 


3/ 1 




9 2 


12 6 


10U32 


ih £. 


Z 




LI 46 




li 50 


24 i2 


L2 50 


Li il 


2SS36 


13 4& 


2 8 13 


25 2iJ 


2 A LZ 


8 


6 b 38 


2ft 2 


2J 




42 


14 48 


?2 il 


ifi 22 


8T32 


12 li 


9 «=,'),') 


1^ 0 


y 




Ii<ai6 


3<1.'i'> 


12 i2 


22 30 


&/<;() 




O H 25 


23 iJi 


2J1 5 


li 5i 




u> 


41123 


?1 14 


Ih 2i 


i-M 


4 "1 10 


ui iL. 


13 il 


1 11 32 


7»58 


ih 38 


7 A 28 




LL 




2 


^ li 


U 41 


l£i 12 


I >140 


7~ lii 


20 0 


22 22 


09748 


2a ii 


£1 22 


12. 




m 38 




£i ii 


2& m 


Li i^ 


2Q il 


I3T22 


6042 


14 36 


^nt 18 


6-5r 2 S 


Li 


Li 0 


2ni! ^ 




2 1122 


1J2 / 12 


22 36 


4.H42 


12 11 


2a 4j 


25 1 


ii li 




lA 


23 a 




4-^5^ 


IS u 


22 2J 


mg50 


i& 32 


U B 'i4 


4®24 


11 A 6 


12 51 


0 liv I <j 


Ii 


US\ i 




lii ^ 


1 / m 


ij2 1 


14 12 


2T41 


26 0 


12 il 


23 52 


9-" 51 


li i 


111 


Hi 11 


8-17 


2a ii 


U LI 


12 41 


7«5r> 


1^ 42 


91158 


lA 1 


f>nj23 


21 42 


2J 52 


11 




2Q 2 


min23 


li 12 


0=138 


21 i8 


0 B '»4 


13 12 


14 3 


Ih 41 


311130 




18 




1 "154 


22 14 


7*158 


Li ii 


5T31 


L5 3 


7as28 


2L 42 


0^49 


L5 1^ 


12 A4 


la 




Li 11 


4 / 12 


2fl ^ 


12 14 


2a ± 


22 12 


2Q 58 


<)nt2 < 


12 48 


22 i 


12 ii 


2n 




25 12 


ifj 11 


3 = 56 


ti )< 15 


4»12 


UJI iK 


4 A 18 


21 li 


11 41 


8/S7 


1 2 VJ 1 3 


21 


Li ii 


7 / 52 


2a 48 


12 30 


li 26 1 




22 21 


12 25 


i^y^ i 


Qinjo 


2Q 5i 


14. 4J 


22 


5^44 


2£t 21 




1 H JO 


«»T55 


3026 




ons IS. 


15 52 


ih 12 


3 VJ 0 


2 = 15 


?1 


12 M 




Jil 112 




11 i« 


12 5i 


24 52 


12 52 


12 il : 


0/4 


15 Ll 


2U Li 




?2 il 


l(. 32 


Sail 


0T42 


y a 3" 


2<ia L2 1 


«,Q?8 


li 21 


2 "139 


>i 51 


12 40 , 


3 i4 


25 


L2/2Ji 




22 42 


li ±h 


14 11 


Ui 12 I 


21 ^ • 


7^ ^i 


21 25 


13 i2 




l£i £i 


2^ 


25 22 


14 i^ 


2 >« 2U 1 




911.2 


OA i 


4"|!^i 


12 i2 


3/12 


5'55<' 


li Ifi 


oT 17 


22 


S 10(41 




22 I<i 


m 3 


U 12 


li 12 


12 2 1 


1 11121 


li 


lii 16 


6«34 




2S 


22 25 


12 


7T3I 


lU 0 


Sis 3 ' 


2tl 2b 


12 11 


y 2 


22 la 


0=51 ' 


2Q 12 ; 


2S IJ 




6 = i2 




i2 li 


L5 3« 


21 5i ' 


om; 2 


II 


11 iZ 


9 /J 31 


lA il 


4TI2 


12 H 




■2^1 iZ 




7 » 1' 




Sfl22 


21 £2 


23 22 


6/ "ji 


22 12 


27 lit 


lii 26| 


12 m 


il 


5x32 




i2 ^ 




la 2^ 




■jl^IO 


la 52 




11 H 6 







DM 


Jan. 


Feb 


March 


April 


May 


June 


July 


1 

August 


Sept. 


Oct 


Nov. 


1 

Dec. 


1 


26 n 43 


18. fi 2 


6 f 

26 A .S'> 


14-13 


12111 3 


0 1 
1 I vj 28 


'J t 

4 = Sf> 


0 I 
22 X 56 


0 ? 
l4Hil 


2^n27 


i6a 24 


i ^ ' 
23115 2 


2 


Iiia2£i 


111144 


10 nc 2i 


2li li 


2a M 


13 2it 


12 23 


1 f.TM 


la 14 


72241 


12 ii 




3 


13 52 


11 i2 


23 5 


8 in 27 


IQ / 44 


25 34 


OK I 


12 li 


12U22 


21 42 


M"T 2 


lii 2^ 


4 


loA 2 


12 12 


.'>^44 


2a 22 


^ il 


2«5o 


L2 51 


3B 211 


1 2l» 32 


,'?^'^43 


2ll 2 


0 in42 


5 


13 51 


10^ 12 


lii & 


2/13 


4^3 24 


m ih 


li 5i 


iZ 22 


10^054 


12 24 


S^-ji 


1 42 


6 


7"1! I ' 


22 30 


011117 


il ^ 


16 22 


3** 1 


ilT If) 


I II 33 


25 z 


^"11 1 


21 22 


14 50 


7 


2a ^ 


4!I112 


L2 Ih 


li 51 


32 


111 2 


22 5i> 


15 55 


9 A 15 


Ui 2Q 


3 "143 


f> / it, 


8 


2^- 


111 It) 


11 I 


7^V2 


LLS 4 


12 14 


6 B Sf> 


OC'28 


23 '4 


12 2h 


L5 54 


Lit 


2 


i4 44 


i& 1 




2Q 3 


13 42 


13T 10 


21 12 


L5 5 


711 I 


12- 18 


22 58 


0 030 




2a £1 


9/18 


IZ IZ 


2-32 


52 


12 21 


5n57 


12 4£ 


2a 31 


11 i5 


9 f 


L2 22 


1 1 


8 m30 


21 52 


12 42 


[i lli 


2a 21 


" » 'i7 


20 ^ 


14 A L. 


3-^43 


7 111 20 


21 42 


14 ii 


12 


20 ih 


4 >5 2 


1 1 "0 


24 IZ 


4T iZ 


2£i il 




2S i2 


111 3i> 


12 il 






LI 


■; ; «■> 


111 36 


14 12 


1 2 ■< 3 


lii 32 


12E 1 


2a 48 


12"! ii 


2<i 11 




15 32 


lii ii 


M 


li 2 


2<J 22 


2^ 


2£l i 


3"^ 24 


IZ L5 


5 A 33 


15 il 


1 1 iri3o 


12 32 


12 25 


0 H 24 


15 


2li () 


t2s:2H 


2a 22 


I0T30 


ifi 22 


125022 


Li 52 


8-<7 


li ii 


15 21 


2*12 


^ i4 


111 


8i^Jo 


25 51 


4 •« 5 


15 li 


3 II 40 


12 13 




21 LI 


i ' 32 


7V3M 


21 41 


15 li 


12 


21 5 


9»« it 


Lii 2 


insj 2 


Li 51 


1 1 A io 


12 li 


3 "137 


i2 14 


Li 2 


4 K 1 1 


8T45 


lii 


3 = 34 


23 23 


2T If' 


15 




li ill 




L5 li 


22 ih 


isli 


12 ^ 


22 ih 


111 


lii 52 


7T25 


11, 4^ 


ion 2 


li 31 


Qnt is 


Li La 


H 32 


I I I4 


LI 31 


oT 19 


Ijh 12 


m. 


0 H Ii 


21 il 


IB 12 


14 15 


2. a S2 


22 la 


li 15 


2_/32 


23 21 


26 S 


li 2 


211 ^ 


21 


LI 32 




L5 il 


() a. 1 1 


llJ 4i 


4^48 


:"U9 


21 22 


5=42 


1) « 6 


2ii 14 


5 " 4^^ 


22 


il 15 . 


hi 18 


0U22 


23 111 


QiS 2 


12 


111 31 


3 ''j '9 


li 10 


22 2ii 


'2W53 


21 0 


13 


10T58 


Jii5ii 


lA 11 


7.0. 0 


ii L 


22 IQ 


1 / 2 < 


15 15 


L <* lli 


CTL4 


12 51 


Ot^ 23 


i4 


14 i2 


lH I 


2iS 54 


in 22 


li 41 


14 HI 1 


u u 


11 11 


'4 33 , 


2a 24 


«3" 3 


21 i2 


15 


8 d 50 


Us. 2 


' 2 ^.S2 


3'^-> 


i^ a 


22 51 


li 2 


loa: 15 


2ii 9 


4»'>^ 


2£ Hi 


f . A 4t> 


2£i 


il 


15 52 


2Ij 35 


lit la 


2U Li 


4 ' 42 


7>2 S 


li 2 


12T 2 


m i2 


133S21 


21 


12 


711 11 


12 


10 A 6 


2ii ii 


2in 1 1 


lli ii 


Ui lii 


0 " 4 


26 h 


411 27 


24 2 


3 "1 37 




21 30 


ij.fl 


23 22 


10-^ v> 


14 4 




1 = 32 


ijl 2a 


laB 24 


12 L5 


12 A 33 


12 LZ 


12 


5«5i , 




6 "1 2^ 


23 a 


15 54 


ion 22 ' 


li li 


2T49 


14 4l! 




2£ 31 


2 2Q 


32 


2a & 1 




12 li 




llAA 


22 3« . 


2ii ii 


lli 12 


<) II a 


lis li 


lOni 2 


15 ifi 


31 


4 A 16 i 




1 - 4v 


1 


Li il 1 


1 


q K 50 . 


OBi2 


1 


2«13 




12 12 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1894-1895 



1 Jan. 


1 

reD. 


Marco 


April 


May 


June 


J"'y ( 


August 


sept 


V-/Ct , 


Nov. 


IJCC. 


u 1 

2 "153 


24 / 12 . 


t 

2 W 30 


i6s 22 


0 ' 

19 K 1 1 


2^12 


C 1 

14051 


^ ( 
8 A 50 


n f 

I ^34 


0 1 
7 nit 1 


□ * 

23 / 35 


0 1 
25 1^5' 


il 


Li* « 


14 22 


2n 42 


2 T 10 


2-1 46 


22 iZ 


14 5 


Li iZ 


2a 22 




2=44 




lii. 2 


in 19 


11 K 17 1 


Li ii 


6 n 29 


I5I&I4 


8 IB 50 


12 i4 


3 / Li 


12 52 


12 ii 


15 3D. 


OS i 




24 1 1 ' 


22 i<2 


-f V -f <2 

21 2a 


0^3" 


li 14 


12. nt 26 


La il 


22 i6 


1X21 


il ?2 




212 ^ 


7T23 


y« 22 


6TO34 


li ill 


7 ^ 25 


15 14 


12 52 


11=37 


il 12 


9 /J 22 


24 26 






il ii 


21 21 


out 2 1 


20 58 


7 '4i 


to vj 1 


23 22 


/ T48 






L5 4£ 


4» i2 


12 n 31 


6,U 27 


14 41 


4UI 5 


Li 5?* 


21 56 


5 K 20 




t<j 26 


2fl 42 


Lii ^ 


22 li 


2a ^ 


2a ii 


Hi ^ 


1 '-Ti? 


4 = i» 


12 42 


2Q 41 




2T Ll 


1 1 T49 




1 12154 




1 1 /V 0 


22 li 


Li 51 


15 11 


oT 5 


i«i^ 




La 0 


25 a 


12 4 


212 2u 




25 4 


1 1 / 26 


15 44 


12 4i 


12 il 


12 2^ 


9x51 


2a 20 


« a 4 1 


I OB 22 


10. n 44 




2 "145 


ii 22 


2=42 


9 5^ 


2n 0 


1 D <4 


^ 21 


ij a ^ 


22 25 


La i£l 


14 4^ 


15 21 


2a LJ 


t^22 


12 i4 


22 Li 


903' 


111 5 


5T a 


25 il 


6 n iq 


i2 S*' 


8 ni 32 


^ a 


2/25 


12 li 


I **39 


4T51 


li 11 


0 9S52 


1 *i n 

La 9 


91133 


2Q 22 


1 3 >fX 5'"> 


22 2 


to 


11 30 


22 2 


ii 52 


12 4§ 


7034 


La 15 




11 54 




iZ ii 


,"5- '7 

12 LQ 


ii 4 


2£i 29 


LLS 1 


2I1 ill 


0 B 58 


2X 56 


0 A 43 




n 'a 29 


la 52 


\i tf} 40 


5 / Hi 


8021 


22 52 


°T53 


'4 15 


6 33 24 


15 12 




24 Li 




23 12 


111 2 


12 ii 


2a ill 


5 K 2 


21 41 


2a 2 


2D 52 


12 52 


14015 


h.n £ 


12 ii 


n 4 1 


Li 45 


29 2(2 


2S 2 


12 li 


iliii 


1 1 n 59 


5 A 15 


14 "t la 


iil 11 


22 4>> 


I "S47 


iX 52 


2fi Ji 


1 1 vj 22 


Ll ^ 


12 41 


12 52 


2a 1 


12 12 


2a 1 


i4'S24 


71H 


Li ii 




8 / 31 


Li Li 


ii 57 
7 


I2T 1 


1 D 22 


10 'IB 2 


3 "1 32 


II -i4 


i2 il 


21 ^2 


i2 41 


L2 13 


m io 


5^ Z 


24 ii 


15 L2 


14 12 


12 li 


il 5£ 


>P. 4 1 




13^17 


0/ 3 


2 >J42 


lii 22 


2a 6 


7 a 43 


29 m 




5 


7111.52 




La ^ 


2I1 \2 


L2 20 


14 i£ 


2a 5^ 


2T25 


21 1 


13 St 20 


22 i^ 


14 ii 


2fi il 


n"i!4.s 


1 iti43 


9m27 


24 2£i 


id 30 


loH 59 


14 52 


4'-LJ2 


12 41 


6"P45 


12 54 


^ / 10 




14 \n. 


22 i 


6 /J 24 


ajS22 


li ii 


12 ii 


la i2 


12 .0 IQ 


2a i2 


iiin i 


Li 12 


10-55 




4 ' 24 




2Q La 


«iT4'> 


LL b 2 


3^ 0 


2li 42 


4^42 




2a 5 




8/42 


iL i2 


OSII 


2 K 22 


la io 


14 4£i 


LZ 52 


II nitL2 


18 22 


"^'47 


loKJ 15 




2Q j8 


2a 32 


L2 a 


14 32 


2U 0 


81158 


2^42 


15 i5 


2ia 0 


12 21 


22 12 


m ii 




10 If] 24 


ii 11 


£2 11 


La 48 


ii ii 


12 42 


9^45 


La Li 


1W42 


i3s;i2 






22 12 


6K34 


loTii 


on 6 


83830 


2nji25 


ii 4« 


2a 21 


Li 5i 


lii 2 










£i ii 


1 


li 4i 






11 / 6 






Jan. 


reD. 


MarcD 


April 


ay 


June 


July 




Sep I 




XT 

Nov. 


l.'CC. 


■J f 
f) k 37 


0 t 
24T44 


0 t 

iw 13 


23 D 40 


0 1 
2 14 


0 t 

2Sni' H2 


; r 

3 "14" 


0 1 
2 W 0 


'J ( 
8 s 5'-' 


:J 1 

1 1 K 20 


0 » 
25T50 


0 > 

29 B 38 


2-L HO 




16 56 


24 


111 212 


9-^ 28 


12 a 


5 KJ30 


2a i2 


li la 


Q 0 15 


12 U 51 


3T34 


2Q 22 


22 50 


2i 23 


011531 


11 LZ 


0 / 2l2 


12 42 


2 X 37 




2Q 51 




L5 54 


3n4S 


13 n 20 




14 45 


011158 


u la 


12 55 


14 25 


12 u 


3 1143 


9®59 




LZ 4i 




2a I 


iii 52 


20. 30 


2ii i 


ii«55 


2ii li 


29 111 


Hi ^ 


ii !« 


LI B 41 


2 m 2 


1 1 2^ L2 


4ni!36 


1 1 1 0 


i ' 


H yj 3H 


ii 42 


St 2 


LI B 36 


0 ^ 2 


7 ■^44 


£5 12 




ii 4i 


ijX 13 


12 12 


Hi ^ 


2-1 0 


5 >* 3'> 


2a 5 


14 Z 


13 2a 


2-1 4J 


911 23 


2JL i 


10, ci 29 


12:54 


LI ntl3 


12 4ii 


J — 113 


12 15 


2 L2 


6 n 51 


12 5 


5nS46 




LZ 


25 22 


La 2^ 


14 5^^ 


1 2 >j 24 


Li IQ 


12 11 


H ii 


12 12 


10 A S3 


12 52 


\l -rm rf. 




ions 33 


2 nV42 


8/21 


14 45 


12 i 
a K 51 


IlT 5 


12 4 


35S i 


14 ii 


3^56 


£1 0 


• LZ ±2 


25 42 


ih 4 1 


21 22 


" = ii 


23 £1 


91156 


ill ii 


9 IV 0 


La 2 


'jn23 


2 24 


lO^S I(J 


0/17 


4 vi 14 


La 50 


20 32 


5W 2fl 


il ^ 


0 23 


li \£L 


2 III 6 


24. ^ 


11! 


24 15 


li 30 


: 1^ 41 


0 M ^O 


2 T 30 


12 50 


6E43 


14 41 


7'^4S 


la u 


y nt 22 


011136 


a "14 7 


2fi i<2 


18 il 


. 12 ia 


ii 12 


0 0 43 


2Q ii 


2a 50 


22 1^ 


0 / 0 




14 I 


22 


«V54n 


"i=il 


24 2Q 


2li ii 


li 0 




I3"I!37 


6 11143 


Li 11 


2-2:54 


22 i 


5 '31 


21 0 


22 ii 


0 T 20 


9 « 15 


12 ii 


12 51 


2a 2a 


21 1 


12 2 


il i3 




La £2 




4 ♦* 33 


li ii 


22 LC 


11 aa 56 


4"«5i 


13^23 


5_^ 2 


ID 12 


ini49 


i2 i 


0 Vj 42 


L4 49 


llj 2^ 


I 8 2 


5 " 3' 


2li ii 


2a 2 


2a 13 


T U F - 


23 la 


L2 45 


4 >1 12 


12 il 


2li jJi 


22 2J 


'4 i 


12 22 


LLfl. 20 


5^ 9 


12 11150 


2 >5 IQ 


5 = 11 


0 / 24 


111 LJ 


24 4^ 


S H 20 


ioT3'l 


17 11 


i^iS 


2U 3M 


2a 2 


12 2 


r ^ * U 

£i LQ 


12 58 




2a i 




2a 2£i 


li 2 


1 1 n 9 


La l6 


LL!Si2 


i"l45 






12 52 


£2 4 




27 


2T34 


£ ^ S7 


25 i^ 


in Q 


2£i 5i 


1 () 0 






1 1 H 52 


2 111 


21 11 


0 X lii 


11 55 


12 2 


940 41 


lA 2 


11^ 42 


2/48 






li 42 


LU Q 


3 K 31 


Li Q 


U. M 


2n37 


14 LZ 


3J!I 2 


2^ TO 


111 u 


ZD 0 




5T28 


J 


La £4 


2^ LQ 


ma 2^ 


111 25 




LZ 55 


111 in 1 3 


12 3 


2=:i£ 


15 54 


12 ii 


L2 ^ 


22 


Gt 19 


25 M 


OTlI 27 


li ii 


2^-27 


24 ii 


1 1 VJ 36 


14 LZ 


12 ii 


12 11 


i4 4i 


9 T 2.» 


lA JO 


(j n 50 


'4 48 


Snr 2 


16 il 


2_/ G 


24 5i 


2ii 2 


9T38 


11 854 


0 « 3 1 


21 45 


I a Ll 


2a ji 


2a iJ 


22 la 


»"\14 


12 52 


5-52 


7 "^ Sft 


21 ii 


11 iS 


Lii i2 




Li 5<S 


4^17 


'i 'l <J 


r>— 21 


14 2 


2<5 33 


12 15 


12 ii 


48 5 


71143 


oTiil 




2li 5« 


La L2 


22 21 


2a II 


22 21 


Ll 52 


12 ii 


IT37 


ifi il 


21 12 






loll 12 


1 


1 1 iiy 29 


1 


IQ / Lti 

1 


ill 




Li iS 


1 


5 4: 0 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1896- 1897 





Jan. 


rCD. 


wiarcn 


•1 

April 


May 


June 


Iiilo 

July 


August 


oepi. 


sjci. 


1 VMf 

' wov. 


1 

1 l-'CC 


I 




IIIU35 


■S^ a 


28 n i 


0 1 

4>5i7 


° t 

2Qg 


(J / 

iiM i 


6» 12 


0 # 

21 n 30 


c t 
23^48 


0 » 

i6iit la 


1 


2 




211 £j 


2Q <^ 


12/12 


LZ 14 


3 K 10 


4T57 


La 40 


45317 


9A 17 


O:^ 48 




i 


12 


1 1 -> 1 


1"153 


25 52 


OS 24 


L5 a 


111 40 


on 55 


17 2a 


il li 


L5 48 




± 






la 15 


9i'3 4 


L2 5i 


27 0 


2a 41 


11 i5 


I A 4 




I ijl 1 


Q / I 


5 


Id ^ 


911129 


iZi2 


21 51 


25 2. 


8T49 


la a i3 


i!2 Li 


L5 Z 




ill La 




/■ 

u 


0 ^ 40 


U 15 


111 li 


4 ■> 16 


0 H 5K 


2a 41 


22 52 


9<zb2o 


la il 


7-3^ 


I / 2a 




2 


>4 5i 


6/44 


£2 5" 


2(i 2^ 


Ifl 4H 


2 B 40 


5 II 26 


ii 2 


Lisi la 


i2 51 


' lfi i2 


22 ii: 


0 


2n 51 


12 55 


12 36 


2h. 22 


OT35 


Li 13 


La 12 


tL£!.38 


29 la 


U in n 

Kill 2 


0I1I45 




3 


12 ni40 


2 '/J 50 


25 4 


10 M 12 


12 ii 


27 u 


I ® I_2 


21 Ll 


14^21 


23 12 


14 11 


12 il 


IQ 


it l& 


L5 ii 


7 -'9 


21 5a 


ii 12 


9047 


L4 4° 


5nB4I 


22 13 


7 '34 




I ."-> 


LI 


9 '45 


22 52 


19 22 


3T47 


iits 2a 


22 .\o 


2a 19 


20 17 


14 4 


22 9 


11= i 


14 14 


12 




10= if> 


I K tq 


L5 i2 


t& ii 


50842 


1 2 A 1 1 




2fl 30 




11 13 


2tl 1 


Li 


0 <^ i 




Li 


£2 i2 


Oil 54 


la 50 


2& 14 


12 12 


12 / 34 


13 L5 


5 X 55 


S T Ll 


14. 


lfi ^ 


4 X 23 




9Bii 


Li 22 


2 n 26 


1 0 nji 24 


3 "156 


2fi 15 


2 ~ 2 


LZ 58 


2Q ^ 


L& 




10 Lu 


6 1*4^ 


21 42 


2ii 12 


IQ i 


ii i2 


La la 


aiiii 


14 41 


29 5i 


1 8 5I''' 




li i» 


2a 5 


li iii 


4 n 0 


a^ 2 


23 51 


0 ^ ^2 


2 / 9 


22 ii 


iZ 0 


IIT43 


13 5J 




?5 52 


9T52 


0 » 22 


lfi 22] 


22 15 


I3IH47 


il 5 


Li 52 


5s 12 


9 K fi 


il 11 


25 ii 


ifi 


7x55 


2X 42 


12 12 


22 3 




£2 51 


7 mis 


22 2Q 


12 12 


21 i 


5 a 2fi 


V rt 

0 II 2 


la 


12 




24 iZ 


1208 5 


12 2 


12^ 1 


21 2a 


12<JS3 


2a 55 


2T57 


12 13 


-£_" 


2D 


I T34 


15 40 


6 ti 56 


25 LZ 


2 Be .50 


26 20 


5 ' '7 


25 ii 


L2H 2 


14 42 


29 27 




il 


13 22 


22 5» 


12 11 


8 A 49 


LZ i 


IQ»»140 


la i 


8-15 


24 2 


26 39 


11 n 32 


L5 41 


iii 


2,5 16 


10 ti 35 


2^24 


22 i3 


I 2 ^ 


ii 52 


2 1040 


2a 42 


5T57 


a a 32 


il 55 


2Zi 4 C 


23 


2 v 21 


2i il 


L5 40 


6np59 


15 5^ 


0/ n 


Ifl 2 


3x2 


LZ S'* 


2a 2a 


^® 2 I 


12 4 ^ 








29 20 


15 


0 tn39 


il 15 


20 a 


L5 L2 


la 11 


2 II 29 


ia 52 


i 


25 


2 II 24 


2a 42 


li.fl2fi 


6-^ 29 


L5 24 


7 >) i 


1 1 S2 so 


i2 ia 


u a ii 


14 15 


I A 45 




2fi 


15 £2 


5 .a 2 


22 52 


21 ±i 


"/ i 


2a 11 


il 14 


9T14 


il iZ 


2fi io 


•4 42 


22 I 


12 


2Q I 


12 42 




6 111.39 


ii 30 


1 


0 M 54 


21 (1 


5 11 20 


996 15 


2o li 


0 1 ^ 


2>i 


I20J557 


4"»49 


12 52 


21 ^6 


m 12 


16 25 


la 2 


2aiO 


LZ 33 


il 55 


iiitt43 


2a 2^ 


22 


22 LZ 


la 58 


13^15 


i2/ L5 


12 V) 20 


2a 52 


IT I 


14 50 


QSTl i 


4 A 53 


ii ii 


i 11142 


ie 


irA55 


d 


2& 2& 


2Q ^ 




1 1 K i 


12 ii 


2S1 50 


12 ii 


lA ii 


io>> 2 


19 10 


11 


^ il 


1 


Li '"26 








ii 44 


911 2 




I "1159 






U Al 




i*eD. 


MRrcu 


April 


May 


J une 


July 


August 


Cava* 

oept. 






L>eC. 




0 r 


0 • 


0 r 


0 . 


0 L 


0 1 






0 » 




0 I 


e < 


I 


10 7 LX 


0S4S 


12.«52 


4T26 


7 21 


22 n I 


252830 


14 "t Q 


fini26« 


l .S /49 




13 X 5^ 


2 


2VJ32 


2L 55 


0 >< 38 




12 li 


4® 5 


8a 12 


iZ 4^ 


2a 46 


o>j i 


21 2a 


2fi. 40 


i 


lfi iS 


4X48 


li li 




I D 5 


*A V A. 

Ill in 


21 U 


1 1 ^6 


5' 2 


ii 0 


4 X 22 


9 T ti 


i 


0 s 22 


12 15 


25 52 


in t) 24 


12 50 


ia iZ 


411 1 


25 1^ 


12 " 


iZ 41 


12 Z 


21 l>j 


s 


Li 5i 


23 42 


7T53 


22 ill 


24 55 


II A a 


IZ 2a 


9 •144 


3>3 13 


UJS. 2 


29 40 


i M Sj 




in 52 


1 1 T56 


12 52 


40. 2 


63357 


11 52 


0-53 


il 52 


17 u 


i4 la 


12 T 2 


15 2J. 


z 


9«39 


li 55 


1 tt 56 


l£i 0 


ia 2 


■m. 1 


14 44 


8 / IS 


05:50 


7K 19 


24 I^ 


iZ 11 


a 

a. 


22 2 


5«42 


Li 42 


^0 

iS 0 


I A 34 


2a 30 


iS ii 


22 ii 


11 il 


2a 2 


fi a 22 


9 11 


y 


4T II 


12 41 


25 41 


10 92 10 


14 12 


i^ 22 


1311113 


0 0 48 


iZ 14 


2T45 


la 22 


2Q S'' 


IQ 


Ill 9 


29 i2 


7n35 


22 


27 21 


La i2 


iZ 4Z 


2a 58 


10K54 


L5 11 


0 D 17 ' 


2 aa 4S 


1 1 


2a 2 


11041 


la 56 


S A 20 


IOns52 


3»ni4 


12 / 20 


1=5Z 


24 52 


12 ii 


L2 u 


Ll 11 


12 


0 a '54 


21 52 


1 3a 40 


La 22 


24 51 


10 Q 


iZ " 


la 4i 


0T33 


9 a 39 


il 5Z ' 


2fi i_£ 


LI 


21 50 


6 as 29 


1 4 L& 


2nj! 2 


9"^ 10 




1 1 rj 40 


2 •< 14 


IQ 2 


il 12 


5^047 


ft n - 

a il i^ 


U 


3n55 


19 22 


27 fl 


til Ii 


24 It 


la 2a 


ih. 12 


15 2£i 


I a Ui 


i-Oii 


IZ 42 


21 ^ 


11 


ID 11 


2 A 36 


0. 23 


0^ 50 


9 >ri22 


3>3 17 


main 


2d .?o 


Ii ii 


L5 ii 


i2 41 


3 "14 I 


111 


2a 42 


ID LI 


24 5 


15 42 


ii 11 


IZ 52 


il i 


IOT57 


25 2a 


27 12 


I ' A 55 i 


Hi i£ 


LZ 


I I 3&2fi 


2J3. 1 


8ni 13 


I in 3 


9 '58 


2tS 11 


7x24 


ii 12 


7 n 12 


908 5 


i4 iZ 


i2 4*; 


Lfi 


21 il 


14 2a 


22 45 


l6 21 


i5 » 


ill 0 


2a ii 


5B 25 


12. 1 


^ 2 


711121 


Li 


13 


7 A 49 




7-34 




9'<J4i 


29 22 


3T I 


12 il 


00858 


3 A 23 


2a ii , 


i2 ll 


2Q 


2-1 22 


13-17 


22 Xi 


IQ 25 


13 54 


12 M I& 


15 2X 


29 tlx 


Li 1 


15 5a 


4^33 


L2 ni Ci 


2_L 


£i 


12 4a 


2!!Lii 


0V334 


Z=l£ 


ii 11 


27 2n 


1 1 U 9 


25 2J 


2fl 5a 


la 5i 


2£i so 


22 


12 I 


12 'I l(> 


22 2^ 


14 52 


2Q 51 


7T 10 


9 b 26 


ii £i 


2LA. 2 


12 "1 27 


3 "l4i 


12/ «i 


2i 




26 il 


6 / sX 


2S il 


3>*45 


13 15 


2L 12 




21 4 


26 25 


Li 42 


i2 i:i 


2i 


1 7 LI 


10/40 


21 13 


ft =41 


lit m 


I LI 


ini2 


12 ii 


4JS.32 


10-^ so 


At m ' 

4_i Z 


I 2 20 


25 


I ni22 


14 ii 


5^ 1 


ii ii 


28 iL 


Li 4 


15 ° 


OA a ' 


la ii ' 


25 ia 


13 ii ; 


22 ICJ 


2fi 


15 il 


&jaL2 


iS 3« 


7X i 


10T35 1 


ii 55 


22 ii 


u 4 


2" TO 


10 11143 


41^30 


'I-.Tt 


22 


52 iA 


2X 


I sr -io 


19 21 


22 ii 


(j U 50 


95227 


ill 2S1 


12 ^ 


ii ii 


13 Li 


25 


2S 




4«52 


LI 45 


1 T30 


4B24 j 


^ 42 , 


21 55 


9'T!=i4 


• "t.-jS j 


10/ 


i=i6 


9*^ 34 




12 52 






Li il 




0'^55 ! 


4 A 36 


ii 46 


lfi iO I 


ii il 


L2 29 i 


22 45 


io 


UVJ41 




9x55 


25 2a 1 


2a ii 


Li Ll 


12 li 


7-^52 


I / 20 


101013 


0x55 


5TJ2 


ii 


25 2a 




22 Li 




IQfl 2 

1 




oin'43 


22 2 


1 


ii la 


1 


IS 0 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1898- 1899 



DM 


Jan. 


1 

Feb. 


March , 


April 


May 


June 


July : 


August 


Sept. 


Oct 


Nov. 


Dec. 




a f 




0 , 1 


0 > 


0 t 


0 * 


0 f 1 


0 t 


0 • 


« * 




e • 


I 


0 » 12 


140 13 1 


22 U 8 


5 A 49 


8nF55 


28^ 4 


3 / 5-: 


2<) -r, 35 


21 H 52 


27T29 


»3n35 


I5«»4i 


2 


12 13 


26 3 ( 


3<»58 


18 13 


22 6 


12 in 34 


20 53 


14S32 


5T50 


lO«32 


25 39 


27 29 


3 


24 6 


73358 


15 54 ' 


0111158 


5-44 


27 26 


6VJ 3 


29 16 


19 24 


23 14 


7®33 


9 A 16 


4 


5056 


20 I 


28 I 


14 7 


19 50 


12 / 32 


21 14 


13x42 


2 0 34 


50j8 


19 21 


21 7 


5 


17 46 


2il 15 


IOj\22 


27 39 : 


4 "119 


27 43 


6si6 


^7 43 


15 20 


17 45 


lA 8 


31* 7 


6 


29 38 


14 41 


23 I 


"-35 


19 6 


12 1950 


21 I 


1 1 T 19 


27 45 


29 41 


13 0 


15 ao 


7 


iiaB35 


27 21 


5"»59 


23 49 


4/ 2 


27 42 


5K22 


24 27 


91153 


119930 


25 » 


27 5a 






1 0 rv I »'i 


Ul 16 


10 in. 17 


18 59 


I2Sl6 


19 18 


7 b 12 


21 4S 


23 18 


71H18 


10^^47 


g 




'J -5 




24 51 


3KJ48 


26 26 


2T47 


19 35 


3«^3''^ . 


3AIO 


19 54 


24 8 


10 


18 12 


6-^46 


16 40 


9/24 


I.S' .'J 


1 0 4 II 


»5 51 


1 1143 


15 25 


17 13 


2^53 


711156 


1 1 


oni!45 


20 20 


0 »»140 


23 51 




23 34 


28 33 


13 38 


27 17 


29 29 


16 17 


22 II 


12 


»3 3' 


4 rn 6 


14 46 


8V1 8 


16 38 


6T34 


10 B 56 


25 27 


9A 16 


12 nrg 4 


o>n 6 


6/49 


13 


26 J2 


18 1 


28 56 


22 14 


OK 17 


19 17 


23 4 


790 14 


21 28 


24 59 


14 17 


21 43 


14 


9y^5o 


2/ 6 


13/6 


6s! 7 


»3 38 


I U 44 


511 2 


19 3 


3'»»54 


8-15 : 


28 44 


6>J46 


15 


23 2O 


16 18 


27 14 


19 48 


26 43 


13 58 


ifi 53 


OA 58 


16 3O 


21 50 


13 1 22 


21 49 


16 


7H2I 


0V337 


II VJ19 


3»( 18 


9T33 


26 2 


28 40 


13 1 


29 34 


5 "14' 


28 2 


6s42 


17 


'I 34 


H 5^ 


25 20 


16 36 


22 1 1 


7n58 


IOA27 


25 14 


12^47 


19 45 


I2V340 


21 21 


tS 


6/ 4 


99 20 




^ 44 


4 ^ 37 


19 50 


23 17 


I '7 39 


26 13 


3/56 


27 9 


5M39 




20 47 


*3 — 37 


23 6 


12T40 


16 53 


I «B38 


4AII 


20 16 


911150 


18 10 


1 1 S26 


19 35 


ao 


5*537 


27 46 


6 k 48 


25 24 


29 0 


'3 25 


16 t3 


3& 6 


23 37 


2VJ24 


25 30 


3T10 


21 


20 27 


II K40 


20 19 


7 « 56 


ion 58 


25 13 


28 21 


16 10 


7/30 


16 34 


9K 19 


16 23 


22 


5- 9 


25 16 


3T37 


20 15 


22 51 


7A 6 


IOIV42 


29 27 


21 30 


OS40 


22 54 


29 17 


23 


'9 37 




16 40 


2 n 23 


4® 39 


19 5 


23 15 


I2TI13S ■ 


5"'^34 


14 41 


6TI4 


I' «55 


24 


3X44 


21 


29 27 


14 21 


16 25 


InBiS 


6^^ 4 


26 4i 


19 43 


28 37 


19 22 


24 19 


25 


17 28 


4U 4 


11 857 


26 1 1 


28 14 


13 39 


I f 1 1 0 


10 / 40 


3 = 56 


12 K 25 


2 H 16 


6n32 


26 


0T47 


16 21 


24 12 


7®50 


10 A 9 


26 31 


2 "135 


24 52 


18 10 


26 5 


14 58 


18 36 


27 


13 41 


28 24 


6ni4 


«9 47 


2Z 14 


9=^^25 


16 21 


9 1^16 


2 X 22 


9T3^' 


27 28 


0 7; . J 2 


2o 


26 1 ^ 


10 n iS 




' A 42 


4'5!3<» 


22 53 


0 / 20 


23 49 


1 0 29 


22 54 


9045 


1 2 24 


29 


8b29 




29 57 


13 48 


17 x8 


611148 


14 55 


8SS27 


OT24 


5W57 


21 52 


24 13 


30 


ao 31 




II 046 


26 II 




21 8 


29 39 


23 5 


14 6 


i« 45 


3«B50 


6A 0 


31 


SB24 




33 42 




14 0 




14W35 


7x35 




I D18 




17 50 


DM 


Tao. 


Feb. 


March 


April 


May 


lone 


July 


AugUit 


Sept. 


Oct. 


Nov. 


Dec 


I 


Q r 

29 A 44 


15-^49 


25^38 


1 5 / 49 


24V331 


17x52 


u r 
25T47 


»3n59 


291ZS 4 


0 t 

1 ni20 




I6€^ y 


0 r 

2oni 0 


2 


1 1 "1146 


28 37 


8iil3<i 


29 36 


8s40 


1T44 


8tt57 


26 12 


10 A 53 


13 18 


28 47 


3 ' 24 


3 


23 59 


1 1 ni43 


21 48 


'3*^33 


22 49 


15 22 


21 50 


1 84s 14 


22 43 


' 25 23 


n in.39 


17 6 


4 


6^28 


25 10 


5/14 


27 40 


6 K57 


28 48 

• 


41128 


ao 10 


411536 


7-<='37 


24 44 


ivj 3 


5 


19 16 


9/ 0 


i8 56 


iiss6 


21 I 


li«59 


16 52 


2A I 


16 33 


20 I 


\ 8/ 2 


i 15 II 


6 


2V\2B 


t3 13 


2VI55 


26 19 


41'59 


24 55 


29 6 


>3 5» 


s8 37 


lit 33 


31 31 


29 26 


7 


i6 5 


7VJ50 


17 13 


10x45 


18 48 


71139 


II4MI 


25 41 


10^47 


1 15 19 


5tTo 


13*43 


» 


Of to 


22 45 


I X46 


25 9 


2 tf 24 


20 8 


23 9 


7"»33 


23 6 


28 14 


18 59 


; *8 3 


9 


14 40 


7-52 


16 32 


9T25 


'5 45 


2«B26 


5A 2 


19 29 


5 "^34 


II / 21 


25=57 


12 K 17 


10 


29 33 


23 2 


I M 23 


23 27 


28 49 


14 32 


16 52 


I ^30 


18 15 


24 4' 


17 2 


26 25 


1 1 


1 4 VI 4 I 


"s - b 


16 13 


7 W ro 


1 1 11 36 


26 30 


28 42 


13 40 


1 / 10 


8VJ15 


I M I4 


IOT26 


12 




22 53 


OT52 


20 31 


24 5 


8a 22 


ionii33 


26 0 


14 23 


22 6 


1 15 30 


24 16 


13 


'5* 7 


7T16 


15 12 


31131 


6'»20 


20 1 1 


22 31 


81H36 


27 56 


6 = 1 1 


-9 47 


7 8 56 


14 


0x6 


21 1 1 


! 29 « 


16 8 


18 22 


2ni 3 


4-^37 


21 29 


II W51 


20 35 


14T 2 


21 25 


15 


14 43 


4 37 


i I 2 w 38 


: 28 27 


OA l& 


14 0 


16 57 


4 ' 45 


26 10 


5K 10 


28 II 


4 1140 


16 


28 55 


'7 34 


1 23 40 


lo»3o 


12 6 


26 7 


*9 34 


18 25 


105:50 


>9 53 


12 w 8 


17 42 


17 


i2T3y 


on 8 


8ni8 


22 24 


23 57 


8d!a9 


1211132 


2VS32 


25 47 


4T37 


25 50 


oajo 


i« 


25 56 


12 22 


90 35 


4 A 14 


5955 


21 0 


25 55 


»7 5 


IOK54 


19 14 


9014 


>3 4 


<9 


8W48 


24 a3 


2«37 


16 4 


18 3 


411113 


9 ' 44 


2ae I 


36 0 


3W37 


22 18 


25 25 


xo 


21 20 


6«i4 


<4 29 


28 . 


0^ -!6 


17 41 


24 0 


17 12 


10T56 


»7 39 


5® 3 


7 A 34 


21 


311 35 


18 0 


! 26 17 


fOBS 7 


13 8 


1 / 33 


■SVJ4I 


2 K 30 


25 31 


tnt7 


•7 30 


'9 34 


22 


15 3» 


29 47 


; 5 


22 2<) 


2(» 12 


' 5 49 


23 4' 


'7 43 


9 b 41 


14 30 


29 43 


I rni28 


23 


27 ^2 




5<) 


6 


9"l3f> 


o'/j 25 


8 = 32 


2T41 


23 22 


27 iS 


' if.!^43 


13 20 


24 




3: 




18 2 


i 2J 22 


'3 '4 


24 4 


'7 15 


6TI3; 




23 ^7 


25 13 


25 


2i 




1 14 i^J 


I in 14 


7 ; 2»> 


0= 9 


9 « H 


I » 21 


19 iO 


, 5*' 


5<IS2<^ 


7- 13 


26 


2.5157 


17 53 


43 


•4 43 


: 21 43 


15 2 


23 54 


14 57 


1 IC44 


3.<>55 


17 24 


19 24 


27 


14 4.S 


0^ 17 


9A 24 


28 25 


CiVJ 10 


29 47 


8T18 


28 4 


>3 5 J 


«5 4^ 


29 2f) 


I msi 


28 


26 4.) 


12 32 


22 18 


12/17 


20 40 


14 l6 


22 14 


101147 


25 49 


27 39 


11-39 


'4 37 


29 


811146 






26 17 


5« 9 


28 27 


3»44 


23 9 


7A39 


9"»33 


24 8 


27 46 


3* 


20 56 




t8 43 


10 19 23 


19 33 


iSTi? 


18 49 


5«i6 


19 29 


21 34 


6l»t54 


II /20 


31 


3^16 




2 /II 

1 




^X48 




1033 


17 13 




3*43 

• 




25 18 



Digitized by Google 



THE PLACE OF THE MOON FOR THE YEARS 1900-1901 



1>M 


Jan 




March i 
1 


1 


" 


2 )< 40 1 


10 5* 49 


3 


24 13 


17 4S 


26 10 


3 




2T4J 


IITI9 


4 


»3 4* 


"7 13 


*6 7 ; 


5 






to»28 


6 


22 59 ' 


»5 « 


24 '9 '; 


7 


7T14 i 


28 18 


7n42 : 


8 


21 II 


II n 13 


20 3<y , 


9 


4 -5 50 


23 51 


3=14 , 


10 


1% II 


^ai 15 , 


15 33 


tl 


I n 17 


in 29 


27 40 


) 2 


'4 9 


fr''.35 


9 -I 39 


'i 


26 4^ 


12 36 


21 33 


14 


98817 


24 32 , 


3n25 


»5 


81 j6 




IS 


16 


3A47 


18 19 


27 II 


17 


IS so 


o^u 




18 


»7 47 


t2 6 


21 s j 


»9 


9 1» 40 


24 5 


3 "115 I 


20 


21 32 


6nil2 


15 29 1 




3^24 


18 32 


27 53 ! 


- - 


1 5 22 


1/ 7 


10/31 




29 


'4 3 


23 26 ' 


24 




27 25 


6<J43 : 


25 


2J j: 


!I >3 15 


20 23 


26 


5^ 35 


« 34 


4*30 


27 


'9 5 


/oa2i 


19 2 


2S 


3W 4 


25 29 


3*56 


39 


17 3« 




19 5 


JO 


2S2I 




4TI0 


3» 


17 20 




19 26 


DM 


Jan. 


Feb. 


March 


1 


— 


I6»i3 


1 


2 




29 21 


8A46 


3 


13 20 




1 «3 


4 


7» 5 


»5 « 


1 3'»49 




20 3^1 


7^30 


16 5 


6 


3 A 51 


>9 47 


, 2S 12 


7 






10^ 10 


S 


27 


»3 47 


22 2 


'y 


1 1 "1 49 


25 37 


311150 


10 


23 57 


7"125 


i 15 38 : 


1 1 


5'^54 


1 «9 «7 


27 29 


12 


n 45 


I / 18 


, 9 / 29 


»3 


29 34 


13 34 


21 43 


»4 


1 1 rryiH 


to 


4WI6 


«5 


23 la 


9li» 


17 12 


16 


5/49 


22 38 


o»J7 


17 


18 «5 




14 30 


IK 


I /3 23 


20 50 


■ 2H 52 ■ 


»9 


14 42 


5 2S 


IJX39 


20 


2.S 24 


20 1 6 


2b 41 


21 


12 = 23 


5T 7 


I3T5I 


22 


37 


19 5i 


^« 57 


2i 


IG »• 3s 


4 3 25 


i3B5» 


24 


25 22 




2N 2'' 


25 


9T4J 


2 n 4t 


1 2 II Vt 


26 


5^ 


1'- 23 


Ifj 2? 


27 


SB 3 


29 49 


92555 


28 


22 0 


139 0 


23 2 


29 


5047 




5A5» 


30 


19 25 




18 25 


31 


2«54 




0^47 



April May June 




Sept. 
• 


Oct. 


Nov. ; 

1 


Dec. 


C t 


# 


e f 1 


e t 


29in 4 


3*315 


23 = 27 


2 T 10 


11/30 


t& 21 


7H42 


16 3i$ 


24 18 


'•9 si 


22 19 


t )f 12 


7M31 j 


MS t , 


7TH 


IS 48 


21 14 ! 


28 32 


22 13 


on 20 


5^27 I 


13 « 26 


7»i5 


14 42 


20 8 


2f> 40 


22 8 


28 4S 


5^11 


I3T5^ 


6045 


12 ©35 


20 26 


29 12 


21 0 


25 b-) 


5T43 


14 a J « 


4«49 


9 A I 


20 51 


47 


18 12 


21 42 


5 1140 


12 0 57 


1 A 10 


4"t 3 


20 5 


26 3S 


13 46 


16 in 


4 n 3 


9*52 


26 3 


2S 7 


»7 35 


22 43 ' 


8« 8 , 


9 — 57 


o«43 


5 A 14 


20 3 1 


SI 48 


13 3a 


17 30 


1^54 


3"14< 


26 3 


29 34 


13 44 


*5 45 


S .0. 22 


II It 30 


25 37 


27 S9 


20 31 


23 23 


7ni36 


10/28 


-■ -• j3 


5^ 13 


19 42 


23 13 


J 4 30 


»7 4 


« /59 


6V3 15 


26 23 


28 


14 26 


'9 33 


S-14 


10 nijft 


27 6 


3= 5 


20 4 


22 59 


9«59 


16 49 


I tii5<) 


5"! 


23 5 


OK 43 


'3 5' 


17 32 


0—25 


'4 43 


25 5a 


o 'l 7 


20 0 


28 48 


8/ 4 ' 


12 56 


3*<50 


13T56 


20 so 


»6 5 


»7 $4 


27 6 




9*34 




II 0 IS 


I 1 

Sept 


Oct 




Dec 


- ' 
14T f> 




- 

23 IS I 


• 

15*535 


C • 


28 3S 


711 35 


29 21 




13 » 3 


21 53 


I2A43 


17 29 


27 20 


5"5» 


2S 42 


29 48 


II 025 


19 30 


8a»2l 


11^53 


25 19 


2 A 50 


20 44 


23 47 


975 I 


15 54 


2-^54 


5"X35 


22 32 


28 42 


14 55 


17 21 


5 A 50 


ii"ti7 


26 48 


29 y 


i^* 57 


23 40 


811137 


II / 0 


I "t5i 


5^52 


20 24 


22 57 


'4 32 


'7 55 


2/12 


5VJ 2 


2-: 0 


29 5' 


14 2 


17 15 


9- '4 


11 in4i 


25 56 


29 39 


21 iS 


23 27 


7/J58 


129214 


j J"li3 


5/ 14 


20 10 


25 3 




'7 3 


2*33 


8k 5 


26 47 


29 0 


13 17 


21 2(> 


36 


iiW 7 


28 19 


5T 5 


20 32 


23 3t 


II H44 


19 4 


'"'^42 


6=16 


25 35 


3 a 23 


15 0 


19 25 


9T51 


18 I 


27 5^* 


3« I 


25 30 


2 11 54 


I I c I I 




<) U 2<) 


17 


24 55 


IT35 


24 40 


2®5< 


9 X 4 


16 27 


on 54 


17 42 


*3 35 


» tS3J 


25 0 


2 At3 


8r22 


16 45 


9*50 


16 20 


23 17 


insi 


24 17 


29 58 


8ti 13 


16 48 


8* 16 


U"* 9 








25 Si 



May June July August 



1 2 ns 59 

25 2 
6as9 
t8 52 

OMUI 

12 29 

24 >9 
6/13 

18 15 

o)^ 30 

> J - 

23 50 
9=14 

22 59 
7KI3 

a* 5» 

6T5» 

22 2 
7 « 16 

22 22 
7U 12 

21 39 
5-41 

19 17 

2 n 2S 

«5 17 
27 47 
lo^i 2 

22 6 

4A 1 



15^52 ■ 
27 41 
911130 , 

21 21 

3/i6| 
; 15 18 j 

27 30 

9'^ 53 

22 31 
5 = 2" 

'■^ -ti 
I 2 <\ 2 « 

16 23 
I OT47 1 

15 30 ' 

0«28 
»5 3« I 

on34 
'5 25 ' 
29 5.; 

14 Of 9 

27 53 

1 1 A 1 1 
24 4 

Cot 35 

15 50 

12 44 
24 32 

6n|20 
18 12 



0/ 8 
12 13 

24 28 
6WM 

«9 34 

2B26 

«5 33 
28 56 
1 2 V 34 

26 29 
10T39 

25 4 
9 a 40 

24 23 

9n 6 

23 45 
8«io 
22 18 

6n 2 

19 23 

2 n; 19 

'4 53 

27 S 
9-^ <) 

1 1 2 
2 ni5i 
14 40 

26 35 

8/39 

20 55 



3W24 
16 9 
i "9 9 

I2B23 

»5 50 

I 9 29 
23 17 

7T14 

21 if 

5 e 29 
19 4*' 
I 4n 5 

15 25 

i 2^40 
I 16 46 
I 0A38 
I 14 13 

27 27 
; I0III20 

22 52 

5^ 7 
i: 9 

2'.» I 

10 11150 
22 40 

4 / 3 -^ 

16 47 
29 12 

I »»W55 
*A 57 
I 8«l8 



2i»S7 

5K49 

19 51 

3T58 

18 8 

2« 18 

16 26 

on3« 

'4 33 

25 2>_» 
I2C19 

26 I 

9 ^". 3' 
22 47 

5'Tt46 
1» 29 

0*55 

r3 

25 5 
'^'"155 

15 43 

0/33 
12 31 
24 42 

70 10 

20 o 

3=«4 

16 s» 
ojtSO 

'5 6 
29 34 



71 17 A C 55 3 



Digitized by Google 



biyiiizeo by GoOglc 






3 2044 018 901 785 




THE BORROWER WILL BE CHARGED 
AN OVERDUE FEE IFTHIS BOOK IS NOT 
-HETURNED TO THE UBRARY ON OR 
BEFORE THE LAST DATE STAMPED 

BELOW. NON RECEIPT OF OVERDUE 
NOTICES DOES NOT EXEMPT THE 
BORROWER FROM OVERDUE FEES. 







^7 
'*^'9 1989 • 





Digitized by Google 



