OF  ST 


TH! 


if 


The 
Message  of  the  Stars 

MAX  HEINDEL 

AND 

AUGUSTA  FOSS  HEINDEL 


AN  ESOTERIC  EXPOSITION  OF 

MEDICAL  AND  NATAL  ASTROLOGY 

EXPLAINING  THE  ARTS  OF 

PREDICTION  AND  DIAGNOSIS  OF  DISEASE 


THIRD  EDITION 

Enlarged  and  Revised.     $2.50  Postfree 


JRostcructan 

INTERNATIONAL   HEADQUARTERS 

MOUNT  ECCLESIA,  OCEANSIDE,  CALIFORNIA 

LONDON : 

L.  N.  FOWLER  &  CO.,  7  IMPERIAL  ARCADE 
LUDGATE  CIRCUS 


Copyright  1918 

by 
MAX  HEINDEL 


FELLOWSHIP  PRESS 
Oceanside,  California 


CHAPTER  I. 
EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC 

IT  IS  a  matter  of  common  knowledge  among: 
mystics  that  the  evolutionary  career  of  mankind  is1 
indissolubly  bound  up  with  the  divine  hierarchies, 
who  rule  the  planets  and  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  and 
that  the  passage  of  the  Sun  and  the  planets  through 
the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  marks  man's  progress 
in  time  and  in  space.  Therefore  it  is  not  to  be  won- 
dered at,  that  in  the  course  of  their  investigations  into- 
the  spiritual  development  of  mankind,  the  writers' 
have  also  encountered  much  that  deals  with  the  Zodiac 
which  is  the  boundary  of  our  evolutionary  sphere  at 
the  present  time.  So  much  has  been  perceived  in 
the  memory  -of  nature  that  sheds  light  upon  obscure 
passages  of  the  Bible,  and  notes  have  been  made  from 
time  to  time  of  different  points,  but  how  to  collect 
and  collate  these  dissociated  writings  into  a  united 
whole,  has  been  a  great  problem  for  a  long  time. 
Even  now,  the  writers  know  and  feel  that  what  they 
have  to  bring  forth  is  only  a  very,  very  weak  attempt 
to  set  before  the  students  that  great  body  of  facts 
which  have  come  to  them  through  the  memory  of 
nature.  They  feel,  however,  that  this  will  give  a  new 
meaning  and  more  profound  to  the  old  symbols,  and 
3 


2029C34 


4  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

that  by  passing  on  what  has  been  found  they  put 
themselves  in  line  to  perceive  more  light. 

Concerning  the  future  evolution  of  planets;  the 
Rosicrueian  Cosmo  Conception  teaches,  on  page  256, 
that  "when  the  beings  upon  a  planet  have  evolved 
to  a  sufficient  degree,  the  planet  becomes  a  Sun,  the 
fixed  center  of  a  Solar  System.  When  the  beings 
there  have  evolved  to  a  still  greater  degree,  and 
consequently  it  has  reached  its  maximum  of  bril- 
liancy, it  breaks  up  into  a  Zodiac  and  becomes,  so  to 
speak,  the  womb  of  a  new  Solar  System,  thus  the 
Great  hosts  of  Divine  beings  who,  until  then,  were 
confined  upon  that  Sun  gain  freedom  of  action  upon 
a  great  number  of  stars  whence  they  can  affect,  in 
different  ways,  the  system  which  grows  up  within 
their  sphere  of  influence.  The  planets  or  man-bear- 
ing worlds  within  the  Zodiac  are  constantly  being 
worked  upon  by  these  forces  but  in  various  ways  ac- 
cording to  the  stage  they  have  reached  in  evolution. 
Our  Sun  could  not  have  become  a  sun  until  it  sent 
out  from  itself  all  the  beings  who  were  not  sufficiently 
•evolved  to  endure  the  high  rate  of  vibration  and  the 
:  great  luminosity  of  the  beings  who  were  qualified 
for  that  evolution.  All  the  beings  upon  the  different 
planets  would  have  been  consumed  had  they  re- 
mained in  the  Sun.  This  visible  Sun,  however, 
though  it  is  a  place  of  evolution  for  beings  vastly 
above  man,  is  not  by  any  means,  the  Father  of  the 
other  planets,  as  material  science  supposes.  On  the 
contrary,  it  is  itself  an  emanation  from  the  central 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC         5 

Sun,  which  is  the  invisible  source  of  all  that  IS  in 
our  solar  system. 

"Our  visible  Sun  is  but  the  mirror  in  which  are 
reflected  the  Rays  of  energy  from  the  Spiritual  Sun, 
the  real  Sun  is  as  invisible  as  the  real  man." 

From  this  teaching  it  is  apparent  that  the  great 
spiritual  hierarchies  which  are  now  guiding  our  evo- 
lution, have  had  their  training  for  this  path  in  pre- 
vious schemes  of  manifestation,  also  that  what  they 
are  now  doing,  we  shall  some  day  do  for  others. 
Already  the  foremost  among  our  race  are  treading 
the  path  of  initiation,  and  have  thereby  advanced 
into  other  stages,  far  beyond  the  general  status  of 
present  humanity.  It  has  been  learned  that  those 
who  have  gone  through  the  Mercurial  School  of  the 
lesser  Mysteries,  and  have  graduated  from  the  School 
of  the  Greater  Mysteries  are  now  preparing  human 
evolution  in  the  Jupiter  Period.  They  have  entered 
the  planet  Jupiter,  by  way  of  one  of  the  Moons, 
which  serves  as  a  stepping  stone.  Others  there  are, 
unfortunately,  who  have  gone  the  other  way.  We 
,  read  in  the  Rosicrucian  Cosmo-Conception,  that  even 
as  the  whole  population  of  the  earth  were  at  one 
time  expelled  from  the  present  Sun  because  of  their 
inability  to  keep  up  with  the  vibrations  of  the  beings 
thereon,  thus  hindering  them  and  being  hindered 
themselves,  so  also  it  became  necessary  in  the  Lemur- 
ian  Epoch,  to  expel  a  number  of  the  stragglers  upon 
earth.  Thus  the  Moon  was  cast  out  into  space  to 
revolve  as  a  Satelite  around  our  present  planet. 


6  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

Those  unfortunates  are  gradually  degenerating  ana 
the  time  will  come  when  they  will  all  go  to  the  planet 
Saturn,  which  is  the  door  to  Chaos.  Thence  they 
will  be  expelled  to  inter-planetary  space  to  await  the 
time  when,  in  a  new  system,  there  will  be  a  favorable 
condition  for  their  further  evolution. 

The  Gate  of  Life  and  Death 

Thus  the  Zodiac  and  the  planets  are  as  a  book 
in  which  we  may  read  the  history  of  Humanity  dur- 
ing past  ages,  and  it  also  gives  a  key  to  the  future 
which  is  in  store  for  us.  In  the  famous  Zodiac  in 
the  Temple  of  Denderah,  Cancer  is  not  pictured  as 
we  have  it  in  modern  days.  There  it  is  a  beetle,  a 
scarab.  This  was  the  emblem  of  the  soul,  and  Can- 
cer has  always  been  known  in  ancient  times,  as  well 
as  among  modern  mystics,  to  be  the  sphere  of  the 
soul,  the  gate  of  Life  in  the  Zodiac  whence  the  spirits 
coming  into  rebirth,  enter  our  sub-lunary  conditions. 
It  is  therefore  aptly  ruled  by  the  Moon  which  is  the 
planet  'of  fecundation,  and  it  is  noteworthy  that  we 
find  Capricorn,  which  is  its  opposite,  ruled  by  Saturn 
the  Planet  of  Death  and  Chaos,  who  is  mystically 
depicted  as  "the  reaper  with  his  scythe  and  hour 
glass  in  hand."  These  two  opposite  signs  are  there- 
fore turning  points  in  the  soul's  career.  Cancer  and 
Capricorn  mark  the  highest  ascent  of  the  Sun  into 
the  Northern  Hemisphere,  and  its  lowest  descent 
into  the  South.  Observations  show  us  that  during 
the  summer  when  the  Sun  is  in  the  sphere  of  Cancer 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC        7 

and  allied  signs,  fecundation  and  growth  are  the 
order  of  the  day.  But  when  the  Sun  is  in  the  South, 
in  Capricorn,  we  have  winter,  when  nature  is  dead. 
The  fruits  of  the  summer  are  then  consumed  and 
assimilated  by  us.  As  a  circle  dance  of  the  Sun 
among  the  twelve  signs  determines  the  seasons  of 
the  year  when  direct,  causing  the  germination  of 
myriads  of  seeds  cast  in  the  earth,  also  the  mating 
of  the  fauna,  which  then  makes  the  world  alive  with 
the  sights  and  sounds  of  manifested  life,  and  at  an- 
other time  leaves  the  world  dumb,  dull  and  drear 
in  winter's  gloom,  under  the  sway  of  Saturn,  so  by 
the  slower  backward  movement,  known  as  the  Pre- 
cession of  the  Equinox,  does  it  produce  the  great 
changes  which  we  know  as  Evolution.  In  fact,  this 
processional  measure  of  the  sun  marks  the  bii'th  and 
death  of  races,  nations  and  their  religions,  for  the 
pictorial  Zodiac  is  a  symbolical  presentation  of  our 
past,  present  and  future  development. 

Capricorn 

Capricorn,  the  goat,  is  not  a  goat  at  all  as  we 
know  that  animal,  but  part  fish  and  part  goat.  Its 
Saturnine  rulership,  and  the  fact  that  it  receives 
the  Sun  as  the  dawn  of  each  New  Year,  naturally 
by  analogy  associates  it  with  the  beginning  of  pre- 
cessional  epochs.  It  represents  the  stage  in  evolution 
covering  transition  from  fish,  through  amphibia  to 
the  mammalian  form.  The  belligerency  of  the  goat 
is  well  known,  and  an  apt  symbol  of  the  struggle  for 


8  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

existence,  in  which  the  weak  perish  unless  able  to 
outdistance  their  foes.  This  phase  of  the  matter  is 
sometime?  expressed  in  the  symbol,  when  drawn  as 
part  fish  and  part  antelope.  Jacob,  in  the  thirty- 
third  chapter  of  Deuteronomy,  pronounces  blessings 
upon  his  children,  which  symbolize  the  twelve  signs. 
There  he  speaks  of  Naphtali  as  a  'Und'  let  loose; 
this  a  very  apt  symbol  of  Capricorn,  for  when  the 
Sun  is  there  at  each  winter  solstice,  it  is  starting  a 
race  through  the  circle  of  twelve  signs,  which  it  must 
complete  in  a  given  time — a  year. 

Sagittarius 

When  the  Sun  leaves  Capricorn,  by  precession, 
it  enters  the  sign  Sagittarius,  and  this  is  pictured 
in  the  symbolical  Zodiac  as  a  Centaur,  part  horse 
and  part  man.  Thus  it  shows  aptly,  the  fact  that 
we  have  evolved  through  the  animal  stage  into  the 
human.  The  centaur  is  in  the  act  of  drawing  his 
bow,  showing  that  there  is  something  for  which  the 
human  spirit,  on  its  pilgrimage  through  matter,  is 
seeking,  that  it  aspires  to  something  that  lies  beyond 
it,  as  a  lofty  ideal,  for  the  bow  points  upward  to  the 
stars. 

Scorpio 

The  next  step  in  human  unfoldment  is  not  so 
much  along  the  physical  lines  as  along  the  mental, 
its  nature  is  shown  by  the  Sun's  passage  through  the 
sign  Scorpio,  which  is  pictorially  represented  as  a 
serpent  or  scorpion,  emblems  of  cunning  and  sub- 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC         9 

tility.  It  is  plain  from  this  symbol  that  the  first  fac- 
ulty of  the  mind  evolved  by  infant  humanity  was 
cunning,  and  we  still  see  that  that  is  a  characteristic 
trait  among  the  lower  races,  the  lower  classes  and  the 
lower  natures  even  among  our  present-day  humanity. 

Libra 

But  when  the  Sun  enters  the  sign  Libra,  'The 
Scales"  by  precession,  the  balance  of  reason  gives 
him  a  new  start  upon  the  evolutionary  path.  Under 
the  care  of  divine  instructors  man  had  at  that  time 
advanced  to  the  point  where  because  of  this  new 
faculty,  reason,  he  could  be  made  fully  responsible 
to  nature's  laws,  and  thus  reap  what  he  sows,  that 
he  may  learn  the  lesson  of  life  by  actual  experience, 
be  able  to  reason  out  the  connection  between  cause 
and  effect  and  in  time  learn  to  govern  him,self  upon 
the  path  of  progress. 

Virgo 

Thus,  under  the  guidance  of  the  spiritual  hier- 
archies, focused  through  the  signs  of  Capricorn,  Sag- 
ittarius, Scorpio,  and  Libra,  were  his  physical,  moral 
and  mental  attributes  acquired,  and  he  was  equipped 
to  commence  the  spiritual  side  of  his  evolution.  The 
germ  of  this  progress  is  hidden  in  the  celestial  virgin, 
the  sign  Virgo,  which  is  the  vehicle  of  the  immacu- 
late conception,  the  heavenly  mother  of  Christ ; 
not  of  one  Christ  only,  but  of  many.  This  is  one  of 
the  most  sublime  signs  of  the  Zodiac  and  one  of  the 


10  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

most  mystic,  so  fraught  with  hidden  meaning  that 
its  full  import  cannot  be  fully  understood  save  when 
viewed  by  the  internal  light  of  spiritual  illumina- 
tion. Yearly,  at  the  Winter  solstice,  the  immaculate 
Madonna  is  ascendant  at  midnight,  when  the  new 
born  Sun  commences  to  rise  to  the  task  of  growing 
the  grain  and  grape,  to  save  humanity  from  the  cold 
and  famine,  which  would  inevitably  result  were  he 
to  remain  in  the  southern  declination.  The  Sun  is 
therefore  an  apt  symbol  of  the  Savior,  born  to  feed 
his  flock  on  the  spiritual  bread  of  life.  But,  as  we 
must  have  eyes  attuned  to  light  to  see  the  sun,  so 
must  the  Christ  be  born  within.  As  Angelus  Silesius 
says : 

"Though  Christ  a  thousand  times  in  Bethlehem  be  born 
And  not  within  thyself,  thy  soul  will  be  forlorn. 
The  Cross  on  Golgotha  thou  lookest  to  in  vain 
Unless  within  thyself  it  be  set  up  again." 

Therefore,  by  the  p  recessional  passage  of  the 
Sun  through  the  sign  Virgo,  the  germinal  impulse 
was  given  towards  the  birth  of  Christ  within.  'The 
mystic  marriage'  of  the  lower  self  to  the  higher,  'the 
immaculate  conception,'  and  'the  divine  motherhood' 
which  nourishes  deep  in  its  bosom,  unseen  by  a  scof- 
fing world,  'the  new  born  Christ,'  is  an  actual  expe- 
rience of  a  growing  number  of  people.  And  with- 
out the  celestial  prototype,  fructified  by  the  solar 
precession,  this  would  be  an  impossibility;  neither 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC       11 

has  this  ideal  been  realized  in  such  fullness  during 
the  past  ages  as  today.  The  reason  of  this  will  ap- 
pear when  we  take  up  the  joint  consideration  of 
opposite  signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

Leo 

A  great  future  is  in  store  for  this  offspring  of 
the  celestial  virgin.  Listen  to  the  wonderful  pro- 
phecy of  Isaiah:  "For  unto  us  a  child  is  born,  unto 
us  a  Son  is  given,  and  the  government  shall  be  upon 
his  shoulders  and  his  name  shall  be  called  Wonder- 
ful, Counsellor,  the  Mighty  God,  the  Everlasting 
Father,  the  Prince  of  Peace.  Of  the  increase  of  His 
government  and  peace  there  shall  be  no  end." 

Humanity  is  to  rise  to  a  wonderful  spiritual 
height  and  this  is  symbolized  by  the  Sun's  preces- 
pional  passage  through  the  Royal  sign  Leo,  pictor- 
ially  represented  by  the  king  of  beasts,  the  lion.  This 
is  an  apt  allusion  to  the  King  of  Creation,  who  will 
then  embody  the  three  great  virtues  of  the  Master 
Man,  Strength,  Wisdom  and  Beauty. 

It  is  wonderful  to  see  how  the  various  phases  of 
the  religions  given  to  the  Great  Aryo-Semitic  Race 
from  the  time  they  were  "called  out"  in  the  later 
third  of  the  Atlantean  Epoch,  to  the  end  of  the 
Aquarian  Age,  when  a  new  race  will  have  been  defin- 
itely born.  This  aspect  of  the  Zodiac  will  form  the 
subject  of  our  next  article.  It  will  shed  light  on 
many  of  the  most  obscure  passages  of  the  Bible,  as 
only  study  of  this  Cosmic  Science  can. 


12  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

When  we  consider  the  Zodiac  in  its  religious  as 
well  as  its  evolutionary  aspects,  by  means  of  the  six 
pairs  of  opposite  signs  into  which  the  twelve  may 
be  divided,  we  also  commence  with  Cancer  and  Cap- 
ricorn, for  the  reason  given  in  the  previous  article, 
namely:  that  these  are  the  solstitial  points  where 
the  Sun  reaches  its  highest  and  lowest  declination. 

Considered  in  this  manner,  we  find  that  there 
are  two  sets  of  three  pairs  of  signs,  namely,  Cancer 
and  Capricorn,  Gemini  and  Sagittarius,  Taurus  and 
Scorpio.  In  these  three  pairs  of  signs  we  may  read 
the  history  of  human  evolution  and  religion,  in  the 
early,  the  middle  and  the  latter  third  of  the  Atlan- 
tean  Epoch.  In  the  other  three  pairs  of  signs :  Aries 
and  Libra,  Pisces  and  Virgo,  Aquarius  and  Leo;  we 
find  the  key  to  man's  development  during  the  Aryan 
Epoch.  This  is  also  divisible  into  three  distinct 
periods,  namely:  the  Aryan  Age,  from  Moses  to 
Christ,  which  comes  under  Aries-Libra;  the  Piscean 
Age,  which  takes  in  the  last  two  thousand  years  un- 
der Pisces- Virgo  Catholicism,  and  the  two  thousand 
years  which  are  ahead  of  us,  called  the  Aquarian 
Age,  where  the  signs  Aquarius  and  Leo  are  illum- 
inated and  vivified  by  the  solar  precession,  for  the 
upliftment  of  the  Son  of  Man  (Aquarius),  by  the 
Christ  within,  the  Lion  of  Judah  (Leo),  to  the 
estate  of  Superman. 

It  must  not  be  thought,  however,  that  the  Atlan- 
tean  Epoch  only  lasted  while  the  Sun  by  precession 
went  through  Cancer,  Gemini,  and  Taurus,  a  period 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC       13 

of  only  six  thousand  and  a  few  hundred  years;  far 
from  it;  but  there  are  spirals  within  spirals  and  re- 
capitulation takes  place  in  the  epochs  and  races,  so 
that  we  may  know  what  is  the  general  destiny  by 
looking  at  the  Sun's  passage  through  these  signs  and 
therewith  taking  this  import  and  symbolism  into  con- 
sideration. It  may  also  be  said  that  the  further  we 
advance  the  smaller  do  the  spirals  become,  the  shorter 
the  time  in  which  a  given  improvement  is  made,  be- 
cause of  the  proficiency  we  attained  in  former  ages, 
and  therefore  it  is  extremely  probable  that  this  pres- 
ent is  the  last  lap,  that  the  coming  Aquarian  Age  is 
the  final  preparatory  school  day  which  will  fit  us  for 
the  new  age,  the  Sixth  Epoch,  and  that  will  begin 
when  the  Sun  by  precession  enters  Capricorn. 

This,  of  course,  would  mean  that  the  Second 
Advent  must  take  place  just  before  that  time,  ana 
though  it  seems  to  us  that  so  many  signs  point  that 
way,  this  is  a  mere  surmise  and  may  not  have  any 
truth  in  it  at  all.  Thousands  of  people  have  been 
misled  during  all  the  ages  that  we  know  of,  to  think 
that  Christ  would  soon  be  here ;  it  is,  however,  better 
that  we  are  looking  forward  to  it  than  if  we  should 
say  with  some,  that  it  will  never  take  place.  In  that 
case  the  Great  Day  will  find  us  unprepared  and  we 
should  find  ourselves  among  the  stragglers  who 
are  unfit  to  attend  the  wedding  feast  of  the  higher 
Self  to  the  lower  because  lacking  the  "soul- 
body  ' '  which  is  the  ' '  wedding  garment ' '  that  enfolds 
them. 


14  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

Cancer-Capricorn  (HE — V3) 

The  Sun's  passage  by  precession  through  the 
sphere  of  Cancer  with  its  opposite  sign  Capricorn, 
designates  the  early  third  of  the  Atlantean  period, 
which  was  intensely  watery,  as  the  whole  earth  was 
surrounded  by  a  dense  drenching  fog,  and  the  Niebe- 
lung,  or  "Children  of  the  Mist,"  lived  then  in  the 
basins  of  the  Earth.  Cancer  was  not  then  repre- 
sented by  the  same  symbol  as  today ;  in  ancient  times, 
it  was  pictorially  figured  as  a  beetle  or  scarab.  This 
was  the  signature  of  the  soul,  for  then  mankind 
was  much  less  body  than  soul. 

The  sign  Cancer  is  watery  in  its  nature,  and  the 
fish  part  of  Capricorn  in  the  opposite  also  helps  to 
symbolize  this  state  of  life  under  water  when  the  Sun 
went  through  the  watery  sign  Cancer  by  precession. 
The  Moon,  the  planet  of  fecundation,  points  mystic- 
ally to  this  period  of  germination,  when  mankind 
first  commenced  to  exercise  the  Creative  function  at 
the  dictates  of  desire  inculcated  by  the  Lucifer  Spir- 
its. Thus  they  opened  the  Gate  of  physical  Life 
through  Cancer,  and  strayed  into  the  terrestrial 
sphere,  but  opposite  stood  Saturn,  the  ruler  of  Cap- 
ricorn, ready  to  slay  them  with  his  scythe,  and  usher 
them  through  the  Gate  of  Death  back  into  the  spir- 
itual realms  where  they  are  at  home. 

Capricorn  was  the  opposite  of  Cancer  and  em- 
bodied the  ideal  that  as  the  goat  climbs  the  moun- 
tains so  man  must  leave  the  basin  of  Atlantis  and 
come  up  from  the  mist. 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC       15 

Gemini-Sagittarius  ( U —  t  ) 
Our  condition  during  the  middle  third  of  the 
Atlantean  Epoch  is  illustrated  in  the  Sun's  passage 
through  the  sign  Gemini,  the  twins,  which  aptly  rep- 
resent infant  humanity.  During  this  age  the  division 
of  soul  from  soul  by  the  veil  of  flesh,  which  we  call 
the  body,  became  more  noticeable,  for  the  atmosphere 
had  already  cleared  to  a  considerable  extent,  and  the 
faculties  of  the  spirit  had  become  more  focused  in 
its  physical  instrument.  With  this  delusion  of  the 
personal  self,  there  came  at  once  the  idea  of  'me' 
and  'thee',  'mine'  and  'thine',  our  individual  inter- 
ests commenced  to  clash  with  those  of  others,  so  that 
a  tragedy  such  as  that  recorded  between  Cain  and 
Abel  became  possible.  Nor  was  the  shedding  of  blood 
confined  to  human  beings,  for  we  learn  from  the 
Bible  that  "Nimrod  was  a  mighty  hunter".  This 
savage  ideal  was  expressed  in  the  Celestial  Centaur, 
Sagittarius,  with  his  bow  and  arrow. 

But  both  of  these  pairs  of  opposites:  Cancer- 
Capricorn  and  Gemini-Sagittarius,  may  be  consid- 
ered pre-historic  hieroglyphics  of  a  development  ac- 
complished in  Sidereal  years,  long  past,  though  none 
the  less  important  on  that  account.  Our  own  times, 
with  the  development  prescribed  for  them,  are  sym- 
bolically represented  in  the  four  pairs  of  signs  within 
the  fixed  cross:  the  Bull,  the  Lion,  the  Serpent  and 
the  Man. 

For  that  reason  the  two  pairjs  of  opposites  com- 
prising the  fixed  signs,  Taurus-Scorpio,  and  Leo- 


16  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

Aquarius,  are  mentioned  in  the  Bible,  and  we  shall 
find  that  our  modern  systems  of  religion  are  full  of 
allusions  to  the  signs  which  lie  between  them,  namely, 
the  three  pairs  of  opposites:  Aries-Libra,  Pisces- 
Virgo,  and  Aquarius-Leo.  These  three  pairs  of  oppo- 
sites are,  as  already  stated,  emblematic  of  the  devel- 
opment in  the  early  third  of  the  Aryan  Epoch,  the 
Sun  by  precession  went  through  the  sign  Aries,  the 
middle  third  of  the  Aryan  Epoch  finds  the  Sun  in 
Pisces,  by  precession,  and  during  the  last  third  of 
this  Epoch  the  Sun  will  go  through  the  sign  Aqua- 
rius. Then  the  solstitial  point  Capricorn  will  see  the 
inauguration  of  a  new  cycle  or  age. 

The  spiritual  preparation  for  this  development 
commenced  about  thirteen  thousand  B.  C.  when  the 
Sun  by  precession,  was  in  the  sign  Libra,  the  Bal- 
ance, the  last  time,  and  different  phases  of  this  germ- 
inal impregnation  of  the  people  then  living  were 
carried  on  during  the  precessional  travel  of  the  Sun 
through  Virgo,  Leo,  and  culminated  in  Cancer  about 
eight  thousand  B.  C.  when  the  last  of  Atlantis  was 
destroyed  by  water,  substantially  as  related  by  the 
Egyptian  priests  to  Plato,  and  we  shall  see  presently 
how  those  germinal  ideals,  given  to  humanity  in  those 
far,  by-gone  days  have  grown  and  flowered  into  fac- 
tors of  human  development  and  spiritual  Standards 
of  the  greatest  importance. 

Taurus-Scorpio   (  b  — Til ) 
In  the  latter  third  of  Atlantis,  Egoism  had  df- 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC      17 

veloped  to  a  far  greater  degree  than  before,  the  spir- 
itual sight  had  been  lost  by  the  larger  majority  of 
the  people  who  then  lived  entirely  on  the  material 
plane  and  gloried  particularly  in  their  material  pos- 
sessions. 

The  Bull  was  very  properly  worshiped  by  them, 
it  was  an  emblem  of  strength  necessary  to  conquer 
the  material  world.  It  was,  on  account  of  its  pro- 
digious strength,  an  invaluable  aid  in  all  their  work. 
The  proverb  about  "the  flesh  pots  of  Egypt"  has 
remained  illustrative  to  the  present  day,  to  show 
how  abundantly  that  animal  supplies  their  physical 
need  of  food,  and  the  milk  of  the  female  was  also 
an  important  article  of  diet.  The  possession  of  many 
cattle  was  therefore  ardently  desired  by  the  ancient 
infant  nations,  and  the  worship  of  the  Bull  was  in- 
augurated under  the  solar  precession  through  Tau- 
rus during  earlier,  sidereal  years,  and  was  continued 
to  the  comparatively  modern  times,  when  the  Sun 
by  precession  went  through  the  sign  of  the  Celestial 
Bull  for  the  last  time. 

At  that  point  when  the  Sun  entered  the  sign  ot 
the  Lamb,  Aries,  the  Aryan  religions  were  inaugur- 
ated. The  Religion  of  the  Lamb  is  to  hold  sway  for 
the  next  sidereal  year,  while  the  Sun  by  precession 
passes  around  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  as  the 
religion  of  the  Bull  has  held  dominion  during  the 
previous  celestial  year  from  the  time  the  Sun  entered 
Taurus,  until  it  left  the  same  sign  on  its  next  passage. 

New  religions,  however,  are  not  revealed  in  their 


18  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

fullness  at  the  beginning;  they  are  started  and  go 
through  a  period  of  gestation  long  before  the  religion 
which  they  are  to  succeed  comes  into  material  exist- 
ence, and  similarly,  an  ancient  religion  about  to  be 
abrogated  survives  long  after  the  religion  which  suc- 
ceeds it  has  become  the  official  source  for  upliftment 
of  humanity.  The  original  Semites,  chosen  to  inaug- 
urate the  worship  of  the  Lamb,  Aries,  during 
the  Aryan  Epoch,  were  taken  from  'Egypt,' 
the  home  of  the  Bull  'Taurus.'  Not  our  modern 
'Egypt'  however.  The  story  of  Pharaoh,  who  en- 
deavored to  prevent  their  emigration  and  was 
drowned,  has  reference  to  Atlantis  which  was  sub- 
merged thousands  of  years  before  Moses  is  supposed 
to  have  made  his  escape  with  the  Israelites  through 
the  'Red  Sea.'  The  facts  underlying  the  story  are 
that  a  multitude  of  people  left  the  land  where  the 
bull  'Taurus'  was  worshiped,  (Atlantis  or  Egypt) 
whose  inhabitants  were  drowned,  to  seek  a  'prom- 
ised land'  beyond  the  water  which  then  engulfed 
an  'ungodly  nation.'  There  they  were  dedicated  to 
worship  the  'Lamb'  Aries.  This  lamb  had  been  slain 
in  'Egypt'  (Atlantis)  ;  through  its  blood  these  pio- 
neers had  been  preserved  from  death,  and-  it  was 
thus  "the  Lamb,  slain  from  the  foundation  of  the 
(present)  World"  which  we  call  the  Aryan  Epocli. 
Noah's  escape  presents  another  phase  of  the  same 
occurrence  relating  that  the  mists  which  had  envel- 
oped Atlantis  condensed  to  rain,  and  flooded  the 
basins  of  the  earth,  leaving  a  clear  atmosphere  in 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC       Ifr 

which  the  Rainbow  was  seen  for  the  first  time  at  the 
opening  of  the  New  Age,  the  Aryan  Epoch,  where 
a  new  Covenant  was  made  with  the  pioneers  of  the 
polity  then  ushered  in. 

Atlantis  was  the  home  of  the  Bull,  Taurus,  and 
when  the  Sun,  by  precession,  was  leaving  that  sign 
the  last  time,  the  Religion  of  the  Lamb  Aries  was 
definitely  ushered  in.  Thenceforth,  the  worship  of 
the  Bull  was  abrogated  and  when  any  of  the  pioneer 
race,  brought  out  from  the  ancient  Atlantean  dis- 
pensation by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb,  Aries,  backslid 
and  worshiped  the  Taurean  'Calf,  they  acted  con- 
trary to  the  law  of  progress  and  were  therefore 
'Idolaters',  and  an  abomination  to  the  divine  hier- 
archs  whose  task  it  was  to  guide  them  during  the 
ages  preceding  the  advent  of  Christ.  On  account, 
of  repeated  transgressions  many  were  'lost',  and 
they  are  the  Jews  of  today  who  still  retain  their 
Atlantean  traits  (see  'Cosmo  Conception). 

Apart  from  the  Astrological  key,  the  Bible  is: 
truly  a  closed  book,  but  with  this  key,  the  matter  is 
different.  In  the  Old  Testament  reference  is  made 
to  two  classes  of  animals:  Bulls,  which  were  Tau- 
rean, and  Sheep  and  Goats,  which  were  Arian.  These 
alone  were  used  as  Sacrifices.  ( Turtle  doves  were 
permitted  as  a  concession  to  poverty).  All  the  prin- 
cipal characters  of  the  Old  dispensation  were  shep- 
herds (Arian)  and  Christ  also  announces  Himself 
as  the  Great  Shepherd. 

In  the  New  Testament  we  find  another  animal, 


20  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

the  Fish,  attaining  great  prominence,  and  the  apos- 
tles were  called  to  be  'Fishers  of  Men,'  for  then  the 
sun  by  precession  was  nearing  the  cusp  of  Pisces, 
the  Fish,  and  Christ  spoke  of  the  time  when  the 
Son  of  Man  (Aquarius)  shall  come.  Thus  our  evo- 
lutionary journey  is  mapped  out  in  the  hidden  astro- 
logical allusions  of  the  Bible. 

The  student  now  has  a  line  on  the  march  of 
events,  which  it  is  well  to  keep  in  mind. 

Jesus  taught  the  multitudes  in  parables  but  ex- 
plained the  mysteries  of  the  Kingdom  to  His  disci- 
ples. Paul  gave  meat  to  the  strong,  but  the  milk  of 
doctrine  to  the  multitude,  for  there  has  always  been 
an  exoteric  and  an  esoteric  side  in  every  religion. 
If  we  take  Taurus,  the  sign  of  the  Bull,  to  symbolize 
the  worship  of  that  animal  as  practiced  in  Egypt, 
Persia  and  other  countries  at  that  time,  then  we 
shall  find  that  the  opposite  sign,  Scorpio,  symbolizes 
the  esoteric  doctrine  of  the  priesthood,  which  were 
the  guardians  of  these  ancient  Atlantean  Mysteries. 

In  this  connection  we  will  note  first  that  the  sign 
Scorpio  is  represented  in  the  pictorial  Zodiac  by  a 
;Scorpion  or  Serpent,  and  we  wish  to  impress  par- 
ticularly on  the  student's  mind  that  the  Scorpion 
"has  its  sting  in  the  tail,  while  the  Serpent  has  the 
•venom  in  its  teeth.  This  is  very  significant,  as  we 
shall  see  presently. 

On  looking  up  the  word  "serpent"  in  the  Bible, 
we  shall  find  that  there  are  about  seven  words  that 
have  thus  been  translated;  but  one  of  them,  which 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC       21 

was  borrowed  from  Egypt,  is  Naja.  This  word  is 
found  on  the  old  tablets  in  the  ancient  temples  of 
Egypt  where  Osiris,  the  Sun  God,  is  hailed  when 
arising  from  the  primordial  deep.  He  was  then 
crowned  with  glory  and  has  the  Urasus  Naja,  an 
emblem  of  cosmic  wisdom.  The  Urasus  was  a  part 
of  a  serpent's  body,  with  its  head  protruding  from 
a  point  in  the  forehead  just  above  the  nose,  where 
the  human  spirit  has  its  seat;  and  Christ  therefore 
referred  to  the  ancient  Serpent-Initiates,  when  He 
said:  "Be  ye  wise  as  serpents." 

In  ancient  Egypt  the  King  wore  a  crown  adorned 
by  a  double  serpent,  Uraeus  or  Naja,  which  seems  to 
protrude  from  his  forehead  when  the  crown  was 
placed  upon  his  head.  This  was  to  symbolize  the  fact 
that  he  held  the  double  office  of  King  and  Priest  by 
virtue  of  his  sublime  wisdom.  In  India,  also,  the 
guardians  of  the  Mystery  Teachings  were  called 
Nagas  or  Serpents.  In  the  Icelandic  'Eddas",  the 
Northern  Vedas,  Siegfried,  the  truth  seeker,  slays 
the  serpent,  tastes  of  its  blood  and  then  becomes 
wise.  Nor,  to  elaborate  on  the  statement  made  above, 
is  it  necessary  to  go  outside  our  own  religion  for 
proof  that  the  serpent  is  the  symbol  of  wisdom,  for 
the  Christ  Himself  said:  "Be  ye  wise  as  serpents." 
The  serpent  is  certainly  not  sufficiently  sagacious  to 
warrant  a  literal  meaning  of  this  saying;  but  when 
we  understand  that  when  the  creative  fire  is  drawn 
upwards  through  the  serpentine  spinal  cord  it  vi- 
brates the  pituitary  body  and  the  pineal  gland,  con- 


22  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

necting  the  Ego  with  the  invisible  worlds  by  opening 
up  a  hidden  sense,  the  allusion  is  perfectly  clear. 

There  is,  however,  a  lower  phase  of  spiritual 
development,  symbolized  in  ancient  times  by  placing 
the  Uraeus  or  serpent  at  the  navel,  to  show  that  the 
mediumistic  faculties  in  the  solar  plexus  had  been 
developed.  Mediumship  is  a  negative  phase  of  spir- 
itual sight  or  hearing  possessed  by  a  person  con- 
trolled by  an  outside  intelligence  who  then  prophe- 
sies. This  undesirable  phase  of  seership  was  repre- 
sented in  the  Zodiac  by  the  symbol  of  the  Scorpion, 
which  has  the  sting  in  its  tail.  In  the  Serpent 
Initiate  the  Creative  Cosmic  Fire  was  drawn  up- 
ward through  the  head  to  serve  a  spiritual  end;  in 
the  Medium  the  creative  energy  is  expressed  for 
selfish,  sensual  ends  through  the  procreative  organ 
ruled  by  Scorpio. 

The  point  between  the  eyebrows,  whence  the 
serpent  of  wisdom  protrudes,  is  the  seat  of  life, 
whereas  all  that  opens  the  womb  is  subject  to  the 
sting  of  death,  contained  in  the  Scorpion's  tail. 

If  we  now  turn  writh  this  information  to  our 
Bible,  we  shall  find  that  a  great  many  things,  pre- 
viously obscure,  will  become  clear.  As  said,  the 
Egyptian  word  for  this  Uragus  or  serpent  is  Naja 
and  it  was  borrowed  by  the  Israelites  who  expressed 
the  negative  faculty  of  mediumship  by  affixing  the 
feminine  ending  "oth":  Naioth,  while  those  who  are 
able  to  function  consciously  in  the  spiritual  worlds 
were  given  the  positive,  male  plural  ending  "im," 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC       23 

and  were  called  Nairn.  If  we  read  the  nineteenth 
chapter  of  first  Samuel  with  this  understanding  we 
shall  readily  see  that  the  incident  there  narrated 
was  of  a  mediumistic  nature.  David  had  become 
afraid  of  Saul  and  he  went  with  Samuel  to  "Naioth." 
This  is  supposed  by  Bible  translators  to  be  a  place, 
and  maybe  a  village  was  so  named.  But  if  that  was 
the  case,  it  was  because  the  people  who  lived  in  that 
place  were  Naioth,  or  mediums.  They  were  called 
prophets  in  the  chapter  before  us,  and  it  is  signifi- 
cant that  as  soon  as  anyone  came  within  their  camp, 
he  commenced  to  prophesy  or  speak  under  control. 
Even  Saul,  who  came  there,  anxious  to  get  David 
away  that  he  might  slay  him,  was  seized  by  the 
spirits  and  prophesied,  to  the  amazement  of  all 
present. 

In  the  New  Testament  we  are  told  that  the 
Chirst  went  to  the  city  of  Nain  and  there  raised  the 
Son  of  a  Widow.  In  the  Latin  Testament,  this  city 
was  not  called  Nain,  but  Nairn.  And  it  is  very  sig- 
nificant that  all  three,  Nairn,  Naioth  and  Endor, 
where  the  sorceress  that  assisted  Saul  is  supposed 
to  have  lived,  are  in  the  same  locality  by  Mount 
Tabor. 

Every  Free  Mason  knows  that  the  brethren  of 
that  Order  are  called  "Sons  of  the  Widow."  And 
it  is  stated  in  the  Bdble  that  Hiram  Abiff,  the  Master 
Builder  of  Solomon's  Temple,  was  the  Son  of  a 
Widow,  a  cunning  craftsman.  We  cannot  in  the 
present  article  repeat  the  Masonic  Legend  which  tells 


24  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

the  reason  why.  This  we  have  given  in  the  books  on 
"Free-Masonry  and  Catholicism"  and  also  in  our 
book  on  the  Rosicrucian  Philosophy.  But  suffice 
it  to  say  that  in  the  Bible  story  to  which  reference 
has  been  made,  we  have  one  of  the  Nairn,  a  Widow's 
Son  or  initiate  of  the  old  Serpent  School,  for  the 
priests  of  Egypt  were  "pliree  messen,"  children  of 
light.  Each  had  within,  the  ancient  Serpent  Wis- 
dom. But  a  new  religion  was  being  inaugurated, 
and  it  was  necessary  to  raise  the  ancient  Initiates 
to  the  Mysteries  of  the  Coming  Age.  Therefore  the 
Christ,  the  Lion  of  Judah,  Lord  of  the  new  Kingdom, 
went  to  the  Widow's  Son  of  Nairn  and  raised  him 
up  by  the  strong  grip  of  the  Lion's  paw.  And  we 
may  here  emphasize  that  the  first  Initiate  under  the 
new  system  was  Hiram  Abiff,  the  highest  Initiate  of 
the  old  system,  who,  by  this  new  initiation  given  him 
by  the  Christ,  became  a  Christian,  pledged  to  bear 
the  Rose  and  the  Cross,  which  were  the  symbols  of 
the  New  Mystery  Teachings  of  the  Western  World 
and  he  was  then  given  the  symbolical  name:  Chris- 
tian Rosenkreuz. 

Thus  from  the  time  when  the  Sun  enters  the 
sign  Aries  by  precession,  it  became  a  crime  for  the 
chosen  people  to  worship  the  bull  exoterically,  or  to 
partake  of  the  esoteric  Serpent  wisdom.  And  for 
a  similar  reason  it  is  Idolatry  when  people  of  the 
West  take  up  the  Eastern  religions,  Hindooism, 
Buddhism  and  kindred  teachings.  For  in  the  Aryan 
Epochs,  only  the  Aryan  Religions,  the  religions  of 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC       25 

the  Lamb,  have  the  proper  effect  on  the  human  evo- 
lution. All  previous  systems  are  detrimental  to  the 
Western  people ;  and  in  time  those  also  who  are 
now  in  the  East,  the  Orientals,  will  be  forced  to  em- 
brace this  religion,  or  be  left  far  behind  in  evolution. 

THE  ARYAN  AGE 
Aries — Libra  (T — ^=) 

The  Aryan  Age  may  be  divided  into  three  eras; 
but  they  are  all  served  by  the  religion  of  the  Lamb. 
The  first  division  covers  the  time  when  the  Sun,  by 
precession,  goes  through  the  sign  Aries,  the  Lamb. 
Jesus  was  born  when  the  Vernal  equinox  was  in 
about  seven  degrees  of  Aries;  so  the  twenty  degrees 
which  lie  on  the  other  side  belong  to  the  Old  Testa- 
ment period,  when,  as  we  say,  the  chosen  people 
were  in  captivity  and  lost  in  the  wilderness  of  the 
wrorld ;  the  new  religion  had  not  then  found  its  place. 
Then  the  Christ  came  and  inaugurated  this  new  teach- 
ing definitely.  He  came  not  to  destroy  the  old  pro- 
phets and  the  law,  but  to  give  us  something  higher 
when  they  shall  have  been  fulfilled.  The  sign  op- 
posite Aries  is  Libra,  the  scales  or  balance  of  Jus- 
tice; and  therefore  we  are  told  in  the  new  religion 
that  there  will  come  a  day  of  judgment  (=a=),  when 
Christ  shall  appear  to  give  to  every  man  according 
to  the  deeds  done  in  the  body. 

Pisces — Virgo  (^ — Tlfl) 
Christ  was  the  Great  Shepherd    (T),   but  He 


26  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE    STARS 

called  His  disciples  to  be  "fishers  of  men,"  for  the 
Sun  by  precession  was  then  leaving  the  sign  of  the 
Lamb  and  entering  Pisces,  the  sign  of  the  fishes. 
Therefore  a  new  phase  of  the  Aryan  religion  was 
opening  up.  The  Bishop's  mitre  is  also  in  the  form 
of  a  fish's  head. 

The  New  Testament,  therefore,  does  not  mention 
the  Bull  or  the  Lamb,  but  references  to  the  fishes  are 
numerous.  We  also  find  the  celestial  virgin  (n£) 
prominent  and  the  wheat  ear  of  Virgo  is  the  Bread 
of  Life,  resultant  from  the  immaculate  purity.  Thus 
Christ  fed  the  multitude  on  fish  (Pisces)  and  loaves 
(Virgo). 

Before  the  time  of  Christ,  the  new  religion  of 
the  Lamb  (Aries),  could  get  no  foothold.  Moses,  the 
erstwhile  leader,  could  not  bring  the  chosen  people 
to  the  "promised  land."  That  was  reserved  for 
Joshua,  the  son  of  Nun.  Joshua  is  the  Hebraic  for 
"Jesus"  and  the  Hebrew  word  "Nun"  means 
"fish"  (Pisces).  It  was  thus  foretold  that -the  re- 
ligion of  the  Lamb  ( T )  would  attain  prominence 
during  the  precessional  passage  of  the  Sun  through 
the  sign  Pisces,  the  fishes. 

This  prophecy  has  been  fulfilled,  for  during  the 
two  thousand  years  which  have  elapsed  since  the 
birth  of  Jesus,  the  Western  religion  has  been  taught 
by  a  celibate  priesthood,  worshiping  an  immaculate 
virgin,  symbolized  by  the  celestial  sign  Virgo,  which 
is  the  opposite  of  Pisces.  This  same  priesthood  has 
also  enjoined  the  eating  of  fish  and  forbidden  the  use 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC       27 

of  flesh  ( T  8  )  on  certain  days.  When  the  children 
of  Israel  left  the  flesh  pots  of  Egypt,  where  the  Bull 
(  b  )  was  slain,  they  left  it  by  the  blood  of  the  Lamb 
(  T ) .  But  in  the  Piscean  dispensation  no  shedding 
of  blood  is  enjoined  and  flesh  eating  is  condemned 
as  a  sin  at  certain  times,  for  man  is  now  taught  to 
forsake  the  lusts  of  the  flesh  and  also  lusting  after 
the  flesh. 

This  ideal  was  tried  under  the  Aryan  dispensa- 
tion, when  the  chosen  people  were  yet  in  the  Wilder, 
ness,  so  called,  but  without  success;  they  would  not 
have  the  heavenly  manna.  Now,  however,  man  is 
being  weaned  from  the  cannibalistic  practice,  and 
in  the  seven  hundred  years  which  remain  before  the 
Aquarian  age  is  definitely  ushered  in,  we  will,  in  all 
probability,  have  made  great  strides,  both  in  over- 
coming the  lust  of  the  flesh  and  the  lust  after  the 
flesh.  For  Virgo,  the  immaculate  celestial  virgin, 
and  the  ears  of  wheat  contained  in  the  sign,  show 
both  these  ideals  as  profitable  to  soul  growth  at  the 
present  time.  Jupiter,  the  planet  of  benevolence  and 
philanthropy,  which  rules  Pisces,  has  been  a  promi- 
nent factor  in  promoting  altruism  during  the  past 
two  milleniums. 

Aquarius — Leo    ( £? — SI ) 

It  is  often  said,  and  rightly  so,  that  the  boy  is 
father  of  the  man.  And  on  the  same  principle  we 
may  say  that  the  Son  of  Man  is  the  Super-Man; 
therefore,  when  the  Sun  by  precession  enters  the 


28  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE    STARS 

celestial  sign  Aquarius,  the  water-bearer,  we  shall 
have  a  new  phase  of  the  religion  of  the  Lamb,  ex- 
oterically ;  and  the  ideal  to  be  striven  for  is  shown  in 
the  opposite  sign,  Leo. 

The  Moon,  which  is  the  habitat  of  the  autocratic 
Race  Ruler  and  Lawgiver,  Jehovah,  is  exalted  in 
Taurus,  the  sign  of  the  Bull,  and  all  Race  religions, 
even  the  Mosaic  phase  of  the  Aryan  religion  of  the 
Lamb,  demanded  a  sacrificial  victim  for  every  trans- 
gression of  that  law.  But  the  Sun  is  exalted  in 
Aries,  and  when  the  great  Sun  spirit,  Christ,  came 
as  High  Priest  of  the  Aryan  religion,  He  abrogated 
sacrifice  of  others  by  offering  up  Himself  as  a  per- 
petual sacrifice  for  sin. 

By  looking  to  the  mother  ideal  of  Virgo  during 
the  Piscean  Age,  and  following  the  Christ's  example 
of  sacrificial  service,  the  immaculate  conception  be- 
comes an  actual  experience  to  each  of  us,  and  Christ, 
the  Son  of  Man,  Aquarius,  is  born  within  us.  Thus, 
gradually,  the  third  phase  of  the  Aryan  religion  will 
be  ushered  in  and  a  new  ideal  will  be  found  in  the 
Lion  of  Judah,  Leo.  Courage  of  conviction,  strength 
of  character  and  kindred  virtues  make  man  truly  the 
King  of  Creation,  worthy  of  the  trust  and  the  con- 
fidence of  the  lower  orders  of  life  as  well  as  of  the 
love  of  the  Divine  Hierarchs  above. 

This,  the  mystic  message  of  Man's  evolution,  is 
marked  in  naming  characters  upon  the  field  of 
heaven,  where  he  who  runs  may  read.  And  when  we 
study  the  revealed  purpose  of  God,  we  shall  in  turn 


EVOLUTION  AS  SHOWN  IN  THE  ZODIAC       29 

Icam  to  conform  intelligently  to  that  design,  thereby 
hastening  the  day  of  emancipation  from  our  present 
cramped  environment  to  the  perfect  liberty  of  free 
Spirits,  risen  superior  to  the  law  of  Sin  and  Death, 
through  Christ,  the  Lord  of  Love  and  Life. 

It  is  for  us  to  decipher  this  message,  and  solve 
the  Riddle  of  the  Universe. 


CHAPTER  II. 

THE  MEASURE  OF  AMENABILITY  TO  PLANETARY 
VIBRATIONS 

WHEN  judging  a  horoscope  it  is  of  prime  im- 
portance that  we  take  into  consideration  the  so- 
cial and  racial  standing  of  the  individual,  for  configu- 
rations which  are  of  great  significance  in  the  horo- 
scope of  an  educated  Caucasian,  may  mean  little  or 
nothing  in  the  figure  of  a  Chinese  Coolie  and  vice 
versa.  Neglect  of  this  factor  would  inevitably  lead 
to  false  conclusions,  as  we  shall  now  explain. 

It  is  a  mystic  maxim  that  the  lower  in  the  scale 
of  evolution  a  being  is  placed  the  more  certainly  it 
responds  to  the  planetary  rays,  and  conversely  the 
higher  we  ascend  in  the  scale  of  attainment  the 
more  the  man  conquers  and  rules  his  stars,  freeing 
himself  from  the  leading  strings  of  the  Divine  Hier- 
archies. This  yoke  was  not,  however,  placed  upon 
man  in  order  to  restrain  him  needlessly,  but  just  as 
we  in  our  ordinary  life  restrain  a  child  from  doing 
things  in  ignorance,  which  would  hurt  it,  and  maybe 
cripple  it  for  life,  so  also  are  we  restrained  by  the 
Divine  Hierarchies  through  the  planetary  aspects 
in  such  a  manner  that  we  do  not  hurt  ourselves  be- 
yond recovery  in  the  Great  School  of  Life. 
30 


PLANETARY  VIBRATIONS  31 

But  coupled  with  this  guidance  there  is  of  course 
the  measure  of  free  Will,  which  grows  as  we  evolve. 
The  child  in  our  midst  has  really  very  little  free 
will,  it  is  subjected  not  only  to  its  parents  but  to 
the  servants,  if  such  there  be  in  the  household,  and 
to  everybody  with  whom  it  is  associated,  all  exercise 
control  over  it  for  its  own  good.  As  the  child  grows, 
this  measure  of  restraint  is  by  degrees  relaxed,  in 
the  course  of  years  the  child  will  learn  to  exercise 
its  free  will.  This  method  has  been  followed  by  the 
Divine  Hierarchies  in  the  case  of  man.  Infant  Hu- 
manity was  absolutely  guided  by  Divine  rules  with- 
out having  any  Will  at  all,  "Thus  shalt  thou  do,  or 
not  do,"  were  injunctions  laid  upon  them  which 
must  be  implicitly  obeyed,  otherwise  the  Divine  dis- 
pleasure was  at  once  shown  by  such  strenuous  mani- 
festations as  appealed  to  infant  humanity's  mind, 
namely,  lightning,  thunder,  earth-quakes  and  great 
visitations  of  plagues.  This  was  for  their  collective 
guidance;  for  individual  restraint  there  were  strict 
laws,  commandments  and  ordinances.  Tribute  must 
be  paid  continually  to  the  Divine  Leader  and  offered 
up  on  the  altar  as  sacrifices,  and  for  every  offense 
against  the  law  a  certain  sacrifice  of  material  goods 
must  be  made.  Fear  was  the  dominant  keynote  of 
that  dispensation:  for  "The  fear  of  the  Lord  is  the 
beginning  of  righteousness."  This  regime  was  car- 
ried on  under  the  planetary  conditions  of  Mars  and 
the  Moon.  Mars  being  the  home  of  the  dominant 
Lucifer  Spirits,  gave  to  mankind  the  energy  neces- 


32  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

sary  that  evolution  may  be  accomplished;  this  mar- 
tial energy  was  of  the  very  greatest  importance,  par- 
ticularly of  course  in  the  earlier  stages.  The  Moon, 
which  is  the  home  of  the  Angels,  under  their  Divine 
Leader  Jehovah,  gave  to  infant  humanity  that  child- 
like brain-mind  which  is  amenable  to  rulership,  and 
bends  itself  readily  before  authority. 

These  with  Saturn  were  the  only  planetary  rays 
which  affected  mankind  as  a  whole  during  the  Le- 
murian  epoch,  and  if  a  horoscope  were  erected  for 
any  of  the  people  who  lived  then,  it  would  be  un- 
necessary to  enter  the  places  of  the  other  planets, 
because  they  could  not  respond  to  their  rays.  Even 
today  a  great  part  of  mankind  has  not  evolved 
very  far  beyond  that  point,  a  large  class,  particularly 
among  those  we  speak  of  as  the  lower  races,  and  even 
the  lower  classes  of  our  western  world  are  dominated 
principally  by  these  planetary  rays.  Under  their 
impulses  they  act  with  automatic  certainty  in  a 
specific  manner,  and  it  is  possible  to  predict  exactly 
what  they  will  do  under  a  certain  aspect  of  these 
planets,  because  they  live  entirely  in  their  emotions 
and  are  scarcely,  if  at  all,  responsive  to  the  intellec- 
tual vibrations  of  Mercury.  Neither  can  they  ap- 
preciate such  emotions  as  signified  by  Venus  or  its 
octave,  Uranus;  they  respond  solely  to  the  lower  na- 
ture, the  animal  passions.  They  move  under  the  im- 
pulses of  Mars  and  the  Moon  respecting  sex  and  sus- 
tenance. Their  pleasures  are  of  the  lowest  and  most 
sensual  nature,  they  live  like  animals.  Altogether 


PLANETARY  VIBRATIONS  33 

in  the  physical,  their  creed  is  eat,  drink  and  be 
merry.  Their  desires  may  be  expressed  as  "wine  and 
women,"  for  they  have  not  yet  awakened  to  the 
charm  of  song,  neither  has  beauty  had  a  chance  to 
enchant  the  savage  heart  at  this  stage  of  development 
for  that  comes  from  the  Venus  rays  which  are  be- 
yond such  people.  Woman  is  to  the  man  of  that 
stage  only  a  beast  of  burden  and  a  convenience. 

Meanwhile  "Father  Time"  represented  by  the 
planet  Saturn,  keeps  the  score,  and  wields  over  them 
the  whiplash  of  necessity  to  drive  them  forward  on 
the  evolutionary  path,  meting  out  to  each  the  fruits 
of  his  labor  at  the  harvest  time  between  lives.  When 
the  man  has  cultivated  the  savage  virtues  of  bravery, 
physical  endurance,  etc.,  he  dreams  in  the  post-mor- 
tem existence  of  new  fields  to  conquer,  he  sees 
where  he  was  lacking  and  why  his  desires  were  frus- 
trated because  of  lack  of  implements.  Gradually 
the  constructive  martial  ray  and  the  Saturn  cunning 
fertilize  the  lunar  brain  which  he  is  building,  so  that 
in  time  he  learns  to  make  the  crude  implements  nec- 
essary for  the  attainment  of  his  primitive  ambitims. 
Even  today  we  see  the  same  cunning  traits  of  char- 
acter, the  same  crude  crafts  displayed  in  and  by  the 
lower  races  for  the  purpose  of  irrigating  land,  min- 
ing ores  or  milling  grain.  All  those  earliest  imple- 
ments were  the  result  of  the  planetary  rays  of  Sat- 
urn, Moon  and  Mars,  impinging  on  the  primitive 
biuin  of  infant  humanity. 

A  little  further  along  the  path  of  evolution,  in 


34  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

the  Atlantean  epoch,  the  Lords  of  Venus  and  the 
Lords  of  Mercury  came  to  the  earth  for  the  purpose 
of  giving  a  further  impulse  to  the  mental  and  emo- 
tional development.  It  was  the  task  of  Venus  to 
combat  the  lower  emotions  and  raise  the  brutish  ani- 
mal passion  of  Mars  to  the  softer  and  more  beautiful 
Venus-love.  She  was  to  add  beauty  to  strength,  and 
to  attain  that  ideal  the  Lords  of  Venus  fostered  the 
plastic  arts,  painting  and  sculpture,  these  were  not 
taught  men  of  the  general  public  at  that  time;  the 
ideals  which  are  to  be  developed  in  a  race  are  al- 
ways first  taught  to  the  most  advanced  ones  in  a 
mystery  temple,  and  at  that  time  initiation  included 
no  spiritual  instruction,  but  consisted  of  an  educa- 
tion in  the  liberal  arts.  Sculpture  taught  how  the 
beautiful  may  be  incorporated  in  physical  form.  It 
called  attention  to  the  body  and  idealized  the  softly 
curved  lines.  The  result  is  now  incorporated  in  our 
own  race  body,  for  it  should  be  thoroughly  under- 
stood that  in  a  mystery  school  an  ideal  is  not  taught 
today  simply  to  be  forgotten  tomorrow  or  the  next 
generation,  but  ideals  are  inculcated  so  that  in  time 
they  may  become  a  part  of  the  very  life,  soul  and 
body  of  the  race.  Compare  the  race  body  of  the 
Indian,  the  Bush-man,  the  Hottentots,  etc.,  with 
that  of  the  modern  civilized  man,  and  you  will  find 
that  there  is  indeed  beauty  added  to  strength. 

It  may  be  objected  that  we  are  degenerating 
compared  with  what  is  shown  in  the  Hellenic  Arts, 
but  that  is  positively  not  so,  it  is  rather  that  we 


PLANETARY   VIBRATIONS  35 

have  not  yet  attained  to  that  highest  ideal.  In  an- 
cient Greece  the  mystery  temples  occupied  a  much 
more  prominent  position  than  today,  the  beautiful 
form  was  idolized  to  the  detriment  of  the  mind  not- 
withstanding the  fact  that  she  had  a  Plato  and  a 
Socrates.  The  Lords  of  Mercury  who  had  charge 
of  the  development  of  mind,  at  the  time  when  the 
Lords  of  Venus  exercised  their  great  influence  on 
the  emotions,  had  not  then  been  able  to  make  a  uni- 
versally strong  impression  on  the  early  humanity. 
We  are  well  aware  even  today  that  it  hurts  to  think, 
but  it  is  easy  to  follow  the  emotions.  At  the  pres- 
ent time  the  middle  class  of  the  west  is  much  fur- 
ther advanced  than  the  ancient  Greeks  because  of 
the  influence  of  these  two  planetary  rays  in  our 
lives.  Woman  naturally  excels  in  the  highly  im- 
aginative Venus  faculty,  because  of  her  part  in  th& 
creative  function  which  aids  in  moulding  the  body 
of  the  race.  On  that  account  her  figure  has  the1 
graceful  curves  which  naturally  express  beauty, 
while  man  has  the  worldly-wise  intellect  fostered  by 
the  Lords  of  Mercury,  and  is  the  exponent  of  reason, 
the  creative  agency  of  physical  progress  in  the 
world's  work. 

We  always  long  for,  admire,  and  aspire  to  what 
we  lack.  In  days  of  savagery  when  kicks  and  cuffs 
were  her  daily  fare  woman  longed  for  a  caress  from 
her  lord.  The  Venus  ray  gave  her  beauty  and  made 
her  an  adept  in  the  feminine  arts  which  have  conquer- 
ed the  masculine  heart,  so  that  now  he  plays  the 


36  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

role  of  protector  on  the  plea  that  woman  is  not  men- 
tally competent ;  meanwhile  he  is  becoming  that 
which  he  admires  in  her;  he  is  more  gentle  and 
kind,  Venus  is  conquering  Mars,  but  the  Mercury 
delusion  of  intellectual  superiority  needs  another  in- 
fluence to  conquer  it.  And  this  woman  is  now  at- 
tracted by  the  aspiration.  As  she  mastered  martial 
brutality  by  Venus  beauty,  so  also,  will  she  free  her- 
self from  Mercurial  bondage  by  Uraman  intuition. 

To  primitive  man,  driven  by  the  whip-lash  of 
Saturnine  necessity,  when  not  by  the  animal  lust 
and  passions  of  Mars  and  the  Moon  the  World  looks 
gloomy.  Fear  is  the  key-note  of  his  extistence;  fear 
of  animals ;  fear  of  other  men ;  fear  of  the  naturt 
force.s;  fear  of  everything  around  him.  He  must 
«ver  be  watchful  and  on  the  alert,  vigilance  is  eter- 
nally the  price  of  safety.  But  when  evolution  makes 
him  amenable  to  the  influence  of  Venus  and  Mer- 
cury, they  soften  his  emotions  and  brighten  the  men- 
tality; he  begins  to  feel  love  and  reason  as  factors  in 
life.  The  Sun  also  begins  to  brighten  his  outlook 
upon  life,  and  sunshine  in  the  nature  of  man  dur- 
ing this  phase  of  his  evolution  partly  dispels  the 
cloud  of  Saturn.  Thus,  by  degrees,  as  he  evolves  and 
becomes  responsive  to  the  music  of  the  spheres,  one 
;  string  after  another  in  the  celestial  harp  strikes  the 
kindred  chord  in  the  human  soul  and  makes  him 
amenable  to  its  vibrations,  so  that  as  a  tuning  fork 
which  is  struck,  awakens  the  music  in  other  tuning 
forks  of  even  pitch  within  reasonable  distance,  the 


PLANETARY   VIBRATIONS  37 

planets  in  our  solar  system  have  in  evolutionary  suc- 
cession struck  various  chords  that  have  found  an 
echo  in  the  human  heart. 

But  the  strings  on  the  celestial  Lyre  of  Apollo 
are  not  all  in  harmony,  some  are  in  actual  discord, 
and  while  man  responds  to  some  he  must  necessarily 
remain,  at  least  partially,  unresponsive  to  others.  In 
fact,  before  it  is  possible  to  respond  perfectly  to 
the  rays  of  Venus  it  is  necessary  for  man  to  conquer 
Mars  to  a  considerable  degree,  and  bring  him  under 
control  so  that  certain  undesirable  martial  traits  in 
his  nature  will  be  kept  in  the  background,  while  oth- 
ers, which  may  be  valuable,  are  retained.  The  Venus 
love  which  is  willing  to  give  all  for  the  loved  ones 
cannot  dwell  side  by  side  in  the  heart  with  the  Mars 
ray  which  demands  all  for  self.  Therefore  the  sav- 
age must  learn  to  conquer  himself  in  a  certain 
measure  ere  he  may  become  the  more  civilized  fam- 
ily man  of  modern  times.  Under  the  unrestrained 
passionate  rays  of  Mars  and  the  Moon,  parents  bring 
children  into  the  world  and  leave  them  to  take  care 
of  themselves  almost  as  animals  do,  for  they  are  pro- 
ducts of  animal  passion.  The  females  are  bought  and 
sold  as  a  horse  or  cow  or  else  taken  by  force  and  car- 
ried away.  Even  so  late  as  the  mediaeval  dark  ages, 
the  knight  often  carried  away  his  bride  by  force  of 
arms,  practically  in  the  same  manner  that  the  male 
animals  battle  for  the  possession  of  the  female  at 
mating  time. 

Thus  we  see  that  the  first  step  toward  civiliza- 


38  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE    STARS 

tion  requires  that  a  man  conquer  one  or  more  of  the 
planets  to  a  certain  degree  at  least.  Unbridled  pas- 
sion such  as  generated  by  the  primitive  Mars  rays 
is  no  more  permissible  under  the  regime  of  mod- 
ern civilization,  neither  is  the  tenet  that  "might  is 
right"  any  longer  admissible,  save  in  wars  when  we 
return  to  barbarism.  The  Mars  quality  of  physical 
prowess,  that  at  one  time  made  it  a  virtue  to  attack 
others  and  take  away  property,  is  no  longer  admir- 
ed in  the  individual.  It  is  punished  by  various 
means,  according  to  law,  though  it  is  still  effective 
as  far  as  nations  are  concerned,  who  go  to  war  under 
this  primitive  impulse  in  order  to  secure  territorial 
aggrandizement.  However,  as  said,  Mars  has  been 
conquered  to  a  great  degree  in  civil  and  social  life 
in  order  that  the  Venus  love  might  take  the  place 
of  the  Mars  passion. 

As  previously  noted,  the  children  of  primitive 
man  Avere  left  to  their  own  resources,  as  soon  as  they 
had  been  taught  to  defend  themselves  in  physical 
warfare.  With  the  advent  of  Mercury  another 
method  is  observable.  The  battle  of  life  nowadays, 
is  no  longer  fought  with  physical  weapons  alone. 
Brain,  rather  than  brawn  determines  success.  There- 
fore the  period  of  education  has  been  lengthened  as 
mankind  advanced,  and  it  aims  principally  at  men- 
tal accomplishments  because  of  the  Mercurial  rays 
which  accompany  the  Venus  development  of  mod- 
ern civilization.  Thus  man  sees  nature  from  a  more 
sunny  side  when  he  has  learned  to  respond  to  the 


PLANETARY   VIBRATIONS  39 

Sun,  Venus,  Mercury,  Mars,  Moon  and  Saturn,  even 
if  only  in  a  very  slight  measure. 

But  although  these  various  stages  of  evolution 
have  gradually  brought  man  under  the  dominance 
of  a  number  of  planetary  rays,  the  development  has 
been  one-sided,  for  it  has  aimed  to  foster  interest 
solely  in  things  over  which  he  has  a  proprietary 
right:  liis  business,  his  house,  Ms  family,  7m  cattle, 
farm,  etc.,  are  all  vitally  important,  and  must  be 
taken  care  of.  His  possessions  must  be  increased, 
if  possible,  no  matter  what  happens  to  the  possess- 
ions, family,  etc.,  belonging  to  anyone  else,  that  is 
not  his  concern.  But  before  he  can  reach  to  a  high- 
er stage  of  evolution  it  is  necessary  that  this  desire 
to  appropriate  the  earth,  and  retain  it  for  himself 
if  possible,  must  give  way  to  a  desire  to  benefit  his 
fellowmen.  In  other  words,  Egoism  must  give  way 
to  Altruism,  and  just  as  Saturn  by  wielding  the 
whip  lash  of  necessity  over  him  in  his  primitive  days 
brought  him  up  to  his  present  point  of  civilization, 
so  also  Jupiter,  the  planet  of  altruism,  is  destined  to 
raise  him  from  the  state  of  man  to  superman  where 
he  will  come  under  the  Uranian  ray  in  respect  to 
his  emotional  nature,  where  passion  generated  by 
Mars  will  be  replaced  by  Compassion,  and  where  the 
childlike  consciousness  of  Lunar  origin  is  replaced 
by  a  Cosmic  consciousness  of  the  Neptunian  ray. 
And  therefore  the  advent  into  our  lives  of  the  Jupi- 
terian  ray  marks  a  very  distinct  advance  in  the  hu- 
man development.  As  taught  in  the  Rosicrucian 


40  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Cosmo-Conception,  we  are  to  advance  from  our  pres- 
ent Earth  period  into  the  Jupiter  period,  and  there- 
fore the  Jupiterian  ray  marks  that  high  stage  of  al- 
truism which  will  then  be  a  prominent  factor  in  our 
relations,  one  with  the  other,  and  it  will  be  readily 
understood  that  before  we  can  really  respond  to  the 
rays  of  Jupiter  we  must  in  a  measure  cultivate  al- 
truism, and  conquer  the  Egoism  that  comes  through 
the  Mercurial  reasoning  power.    We  have  learned  to 
conquer  some  of  the  phases  of  Mars  and  the  Moon, 
we  may  have  also  learned  to  conquer  some  of  the 
lower  phases  of  Mercury  and  Venus;  the  more  we 
have  overcome  these  the  better  we  shall  be  able  to 
respond  to  the  highest  vibratory  forces  emanating 
from  these  planets;  yes,  if  we  strive  earnestly  we 
shall  some  day  be  able  to  overcome  even  the  highest 
stage  of  the  Venus  love,  that  always  attaches  itseli 
to  an  object  which  is  owned  by  us.     We  love  our 
children  because  they  are  ours ;  we  love  our  husbands 
and  wives  because  they  belong  to  us;  we  take  pride, 
Venusian  pride,  in  their  moral     characteristics     or 
Mercurial  pride  in  their  accomplishments,  but  Christ 
set  a  higher  standard:  "Unless  a  man  leave  his  fa- 
ther and  mother  he  can  not  be  my  disciple."     The 
idea  that  we  should  neglect  our  fathers  and  mothers 
or  that  we  must  hate  them  in  order  to  follow  Him 
was  far  from  His  mind,  of  course,  but  father  and 
mother  are  only  bodies;  the  soul  that  inhabits  this 
body  of  the  father  and  mother  is  to  be  loved,  not 
the  mere  physical  garment.     Our  love  should  be  the 


PLANETARY   VIBRATIONS  41 

same  whether  the  person  'is  old  or  young,  ugly  or 
beautiful.  We  should  look  for  the  beauty  of  the 
soul,  for  the  universal  relationship  of  all  souls  and 
not  mind  so  much  the  relationship  of  the  bodies.  Who 
is  my  mother  and  my  brothers,  said  the  Christ,  and 
pointed  to  his  disciple.s,  those  who  were  at  one  with 
Him  in  that  great  work.  They  were  closer  to  Him 
than  anyone  else  could  be,  because  of  the  mere  phys- 
ical relationship.  This  attitude  constitutes  an  up- 
ward step  from  the  Venus  love  which  places  the  em- 
phasis on  the  physical  garments  of  the  loved  ones 
and  leaves  out  of  consideration  the  soul  that  is  with- 
in. The  Jupiterian  love  on  the  other  hand  takes  cog- 
nizance only  of  the  soul,  regardless  of  the  body  it 
wears.  The  Mercurial  or  reasoning  phase  of  men- 
tality is  also  changed  by  response  to  the  altruistic  Ju- 
piter. Cold  calculation  is  out  of  the  question.  One 
who  feels  the  expansive  ray  of  Jupiter  is  big  heart- 
ed, first,  last  and  all  the  time,  and  in  every  respect ; 
big  hearted  where  his  emotions  are  concerned,  his 
love;  big  hearted  where  all  the  things  of  the  world 
are  concerned.  "A  jovial  fellow,"  is  an  apt  expres- 
sion. He  is  welcomed  and  loved  by  everyone  he 
meets  because  he  radiates  not  the  common  selfish- 
ness, but  a  desire  to  benefit  others  that  breeds  in  us 
a  feeling  of  trust,  diametrically  opposed  to  the 
sense  of  distrust  we  instinctively  feel  when  we  come 
in  contact  with  a  Saturn-Mercury  man. 

It  is  a  matter  of  actual  experience  to  astrolo- 
gers endowed  with  spiritual  sight  that  every  man's 


42  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

planetary  rays  produce  certain  colors  in  his  aura, 
in  addition  to  the  basic  color  which  is  the  stamp 
of  the  race  to  which  the  man  belongs.  The  man  with 
the  thin,  sickly  blues  of  a  commingled  Saturn  and 
Mercury,  is  to  be  pitied  rather  than  censured  for  the 
avarice  and  gloom  which  are  his  constant  attitude  of 
mind;  he  sees  everything  in  the  world  through  the 
auric  mirror  which  he  has  created  around  himself; 
he  feels  that  the  world  is  cold,  hard  and  selfish,  that 
therefore  it  is  necessary  for  him  to  be  more  selfish 
and  more  cold  in  order  that  he  may  protect  himself. 
On  the  other  hand,  when  we  see  the  divine  blue  ray 
of  Jupiter  tinted  with  perhaps  the  fine  gold  of  Uran- 
ia n  nature  we  realize  how  differently  such  an  exalted 
individual  must  view  the  world  from  that  sordid 
way  of  seeing  and  judging  things.  Even  those  who 
have  the  faintest  Jupiterian  tinge  are  in  a  world 
filled  with  sunshine,  flowers  blooming,  everything  in 
nature  is  gay  and  glad.  And  by  looking  at  the  world 
through  such  an  atmosphere  they  call  forth  from 
other  sources  a  similar  response,  as  the  tuning  fork 
previously  mentioned  generates  in  another  of  an 
even  pitch. 

After  what  has  been  said  it  will  not  be  difficult 
to  understand  that  the  Uranian  characteristics, 
where  love  becomes  compassion,  give  wisdom  that 
is  not  dependent  upon  reasoning,  a  love  that  is  not 
fixed  upon  one  object  alone,  but  includes  all  that 
lives  and  moves  and  has  its  being ;  it  is  similar  to  the 
characteristics  that  are  to  be  evolved  by  humanity 


PLANETARY  VIBRATIONS  43 

during  the  Venus  period  when  perfect  love  shall 
have  cast  out  all  fear,  when  man  shall  have  conquer- 
ed all  the  lower  phases  of  his  nature  and  love  shall  be 
as  pure  as  it  is  universally  inclusive. 

When  these  Uranian  vibrations  are  felt  by  ad- 
vance in  the  higher  life  through  aspiration,  there  is 
great  danger  that  we  may  throw  away  the  fetter  of 
law  and  anticipation,  before  we  are  really  ready  to 
govern  ourselves  by  the  law  of  Love  divine,  that  we 
may  disregard  the  laws  that  are  in  the  world,  that 
we  may  not  render  unto  Caesar  that  which  is 
Ceasar's,  whether  in  obedience  or  coin,  that  we  may 
not  be  careful  of  avoiding  the  appearance  of  evil, 
that  we  may  think  that  we  have  so  far  transcended 
the  ordinary  stage  of  humanity  that  we  can  live  as 
super-humans,  that  the  passion  of  Mars  has  in  our 
case  been  changed  to  Uranian  compassion,  which  is 
sexless,  and  under  these  misapprehensions,  many 
people  who  endeavor  to  tread  the  path  disregard  the 
laws  of  marriage  and  enter  into  relationships  as  soul- 
mate  and  affinity.  They  feel  the  Uranian  ray,  but 
cannot  quite  respond  to  its  sublime  purity,  there- 
fore they  experience  a  counterfeit  Venusian  sensa- 
tion which  usually  ends  in  adultery  and  sex-perver- 
sion, so  that  instead  of  the  natural  animal  passion 
of  Mars  having  been  transmuted  to  the  compassion 
of  Uranus  it  has  as  a  matter  of  fact,  degenerated  into 
something  that  is  far  worse  than  the  fullest  sex  ex- 
pression of  the  martial  rays  committed  in  a  frank  and 
proper  manner.  This  is  a  danger  that  cannot  be 


44  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

too  strictly  guarded  against  and  it  behooves  every- 
one who  endeavors  to  live  the  higher  life  not  to  try 
to  aspire  to  the  Uranian  rays  until  he  at  first  be- 
come.s  thoroughly  imbued  with  the  altruistic  vibra- 
tions of  Jupiter,  for  more  misery  is  brought  into  the 
world  by  those  who  have  aspired  too  high  and 
fallen  low,  than  by  those  who  are  not  .sufficiently  as- 
piring. Pride  goes  before  a  fall,  is  an  ancient  and 
very  true  proverb,  which  it  behooves  every  one  of 
us  to  take  to  heart.  The  Christ  took  part  in  the 
marriage  at  Cana.  Marriage  is  a  regular  Christian 
institution,  and  must  exist  until  abolished  in  the 
kingdom  to  come,  because  the  bodies  we  have  will 
not  wear  out  and  therefore  there  will  be  no  need  of 
marriage  to  generate  new  ones. 

Let  it  also  be  understood  that  although  the  min- 
ister who  marries  cannot  mate,  the  finding  of  the 
mate  should  be  done  before  the  marriage  ceremony 
is  undertaken  and  not  after. 

As  we  have  seen  in  the  foregoing;  Mars,  Venus 
and  Uranus  mark  three  stages  in  the  emotional  de- 
velopment of  man.  During  the  stage  where  he  is 
only  amenable  to  Mars,  animal  passion  reigns  su- 
preme and  he  seeks  unrestricted  gratification  of  all 
his  lower  desires  in  the  intercourse  with  his  fellow- 
man  but  particularly  with  the  opposite  sex;  during 
the  stage  where  he  becomes  amenable  to  the  rays  of 
Venus,  love  softens  the  brutality  of  his  desires  and 
the  animal  passions  are  somewhat  held  in  leash;  he  is 
even,  under  the  higher  phases  of  this  planet,  ready 


PLANETARY  VIBRATIONS  45 

to  sacrifice  himself  and  his  desires  for  the  benefit  and 
comfort  of  the  loved  ones.  When  he  has  evolved  to 
the  point  where  he  can  feel  the  rays  of  Uranus,  the 
passion  of  Mars  gradually  turns  to  compassion ;  there 
the  love  of  Venus  which  is  only  for  one  particular 
person,  becomes  all  inclusive  so  that  it  embraces  all 
humankind  regardless  of  sex  or  any  other  distinction, 
for  it  is  the  divine  love  of  soul  for  soul  which  is  above 
all  material  considerations  of  whatever  nature. 

The  mentality  also  evolves  through  three  stages 
according  to  the  amenability  of  the  person  to  the 
vibrations  of  the  Moon,  Mercury  and  Neptune. 
While  man  is  only  amenable  to  the  lunar  influence, 
he  is  childlike  and  easily  guided  by  the  higher  pow- 
ers, which  have  led  him  through  the  various  stages 
mentioned  in  our  previous  chapters.  Under  the 
stellar  ray  of  Mercury  he  gradually  develops  his  in- 
tellectual powers  and  becomes  a  reasoning  being.  As 
such,  he  is  placed  under  the  law  of  cause  and  effect, 
made  responsible  for  his  own  actions,  so  that  he  may 
reap  what  he  has  sown  and  learn  thereby  the  ex- 
perience.s  that  life  has  to  teach  him  under  the  pres- 
ent regime.  Being  inexperienced,  he  makes  mistakes 
in  whatever  direction  indicated  by  the  afflictions  to 
Mercury  in  his  horoscope  and  consequently  he  suf- 
fers a  corresponding  penalty  of  sorrow  and  trouble. 
If  he  has  not  the  mentality  to  reason  on  the  connec- 
tion between  his  mistakes  and  the  sad  experiences 
growing  from  them,  during  his  life  time,  the  pano- 
rama of  life,  which  unfolds  in  the  post-mortem 


46  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE    STARS 

state,  makes  this  clear,  and  leaves  with  him  an  es- 
sence of  "right  feeling"  which  we  know  as  "con- 
science. ' ' 

This  conscience  keeps  him  from  repeating  past 
mistakes,  when  the  feeling  generated  has  become  suf- 
ficiently strong  to  overbalance  the  tendency  to  yield 
to  the  particular  temptation  which  caused  him  suf- 
fering. Thus  he  gradually  develops  a  spiritual  con- 
sciousness which  is  above  and  beyond  human  reason, 
but  which  nevertheless  is  also  connected  with  reason 
in  such  a  manner  that  when  the  result  has  been 
reached,  the  man  who  has  this  Cosmic  Consciousness 
knows  the  reason  why  such  and  such  a  thing  is  and 
must  be,  or  why  he  ought  to  take  a  certain  action. 
This  Cosmic  Consciousness  is  developed  under  the 
ray  of  Neptune  and  differs  from  that  intuitional 
right  feeling  developed  under  the  ray  of  Uranus  in 
the  very  important  fact  that  while  the  person  who 
has  developed  the  Uranian  quality  of  intuition  ar- 
rives at  the  truth  instantaneously  without  the  ne- 
cessity of  thinking  over  the  matter  or  reasoning,  he 
is  unable  to  give  anything  but  the  result ;  he  cannot 
connect  the  various  steps  of  logical  sequence  where- 
by the  final  result  was  reached.  The  man  or  woman, 
however,  who  develops  the  Neptune  faculty,  also  has 
the  result  of  any  question  immediately  and  is  able 
to  tell  the  reason  why  that  result  is  the  proper  and 
right  one. 

The  Faculty  of  intuition  built  up  from  the  Mar- 
tial base  of  passion,  through  the  Venusian  stage  of 


PLANETARY   VIBRATIONS  47 

love,  and  the  Uranian  ray  of  compassion,  depends 
upon  the  ability  of  the  person  involved  to  feel  very 
intensely.  By  love  and  devotion,  the  heart  is  attuned 
to  every  other  heart  in  the  universe  and  in  this  way 
it  knows  and  feels  all  that  may  be  known  and  felt 
by  any  other  heart  in  the  universe,  thus  it  shares 
the  divine  omniscience  that  binds  Our  Father  in 
Heaven  to  His  children  and  through  the  direct 
heart  to  heart  touch  with  that  omniscience  the  per- 
son obtains  the  result  of  whatever  problem  is  placed 
before  him. 

The  noblest  men  of  all  ages,  Christian  saints 
of  the  most  transcendent  spirituality,  have  attained 
their  wonderful  development  through  the  spiritual 
rays  of  this  planet  because  of  the  intense  feeling 
of  Oneness  with  the  divine  and  with  all  that  lives  and 
breathe.8  in  the  universe. 

But  there  are  others  who  are  not  thus  consti- 
tuted and  they  are  not  able  to  walk  that  path.  These, 
through  the  Moon,  Mercury  and  Neptune  have  de- 
veloped their  intellect  and  attained  the  same  re- 
sults plus  the  Neptunian  power  of  idealization. 

This  is  a  very  important  point  and  it  is  only 
brought  out  in  the  Western  Wisdom  Teachings,  for 
while  it  was  formerly  taught  that  the  spirit  involves 
itself  in  matter  and  thereby  crystallizes  itself  into 
form  which  then  evolves,  the  Western  Wisdom 
Teachings  tell  us  that  there  is  in  addition  a  third 
factor  in  universal  advancement,  namely:  Epigene- 
sis;  the  faculty  whereby  the  spirit  may  choose  a 


48  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

course  that  is  altogether  new  and  independent  of 
what  has  gone  before.  We  see  the  expression  of 
this  in  all  kingdoms  relative  to  form,  but  in  the  hu- 
man kingdom,  epigenesis  expresses  itself  as  genius, 
a  creative  instinct,  which  makes  man  more  akin  to 
the  divine  than  any  other  of  his  accomplishments. 
This  is  developed  under  the  Neptune  ray  when  that 
planet  is  well  placed  in  the  horoscope.  There  is 
of  course  also  such  a  thing  as  an  evil  genius,  a  des- 
tructive faculty  developed  under  an  afflicted  Nep- 
tune. 

Only  the  most  sensitive  people  in  the  world 
feel  the  rays  of  Uranus  and  Neptune  at  the  present 
time.  To  feel  these  vibrations  the  connection  be- 
tween the  dense  physical  body  and  the  vital  body, 
which  is  made  of  ether,  must  be  rather  loose  for  where 
these  two  vehicles  are  firmly  'interlocked  the  person 
is  always  of  a  materialistic  turn,  and  cannot  respond 
to  the  higher  and  more  subtle  vibrations  from  the 
spiritual  world.  But  when  the  stellar  rays  from 
these  two  planets  impinge  upon  a  person  whose  vital 
body  is  loosely  connected  with  the  physical,  we  have 
what  is  called  a  sensitive.  The  direction  and  qual- 
ity of  this  faculty  depends  upon  the  placement  and 
the  aspect  of  the  two  planets  mentioned  however. 
Those  who  are  particularly  under  the  domination  of 
an  adverse  aspect  of  the  Uranian  ray,  usually  de- 
velop the  more  undesirable  phases  of  clairvoyance 
and  mediumship.  They  easily  become  the  prey  of 
entities  from  the  invisible  world  who  have  no  regard 


PLANETARY   VIBRATIONS  49 

for  their  victims'  desire,  even  if  in  a  weak  manner 
these  should  protest.  Such  mediums  are  generally 
used  in  simple  trance  communications  and  in  a  few 
cases  known  to  the  writer  have  lived  very  beautiful 
and  happy  lives  because  of  their  implicit  belief  in 
the  spirits  that  dominated  them.  In  these  cases  the 
spirit-controls  were  of  a  better  class  than  usually 
met  with.  But  as  this  Uranian  faculty  is  built  up 
through  Mars  and  Venus,  passion  is  prominent  in 
such  natures  and  under  the  influence  of  obsessing 
spirits  many  of  these  people  are  driven  into  gross 
immorality.  Vampirism  and  kindred  disreputable 
practices  are  also  engendered  by  the  perverse  use  of 
the  Uranian  ray  in  mediums. 

Neptune  may  be  said  to  represent  the  invisible 
worlds  in  more  positive  aspects  and  those  who  come 
under  the  evil  rays  of  this  planet  are  therefore 
brought  in  touch  with  the  most  undesirable  occu- 
pants of  the  invisible  wrorlds.  Actual  obsession 
whereby  the  owrner  of  a  body  is  deprived  of  his  vehi- 
cle takes  place  under  the  ray  of  Neptune  and  no 
materializing  seance  could  ever  be  held  if  it  were 
not  for  this  stellar  vibration.  Magic,  white  or  black, 
can  never  be  put  to  practical  use  save  under  and  be- 
cause of  this  Neptunian  vibration.  Apart  from  this 
ray  it  will  remain  theory,  speculation  and  book  learn- 
ing. Therefore  the  Initiates  of  every  Mystery  School. 
Spiritual  Seers  who  have  full  control  of  their  faculty, 
and  Astrologers  are  amenable  in  varying  degrees 
to  the  ray  of  Neptune.  The  Black  Magician  and  the 
4 


50  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Hypnotist,  who  is  a  twin  brother  to  him,  are  also  de- 
pendent upon  the  power  of  this  stellar  ray  for  use 
in  their  nefarious  practices. 

The  highest  human  development  at  the  present 
time,  namely:  the  soul  unfoldment  which  is  under- 
taken in  the  mystery  temples  through  initiation,  Is 
directly  the  result  of  the  Neptune  ray,  for  just  as 
evil  configurations  lay  men  liable  to  assault  by  in- 
visible entities,  so  the  good  configurations  of  Nep- 
tune are  particularly  required  to  enable  a  man  to 
unfold  by  initiation  his  whole  soul  powers  and  be- 
come a  conscious  agent  in  the  invisible  worlds. 
Let  us  remember,  however,  that  good  or  evil  config- 
urations are  not  the  result  of  chance  or  luck,  but  the 
horoscope  shows  the  tendencies  of  the  coming  life;  it 
shows  what  we  have  earned  by  our  past  living  and 
therefore  what  we  are  entitled  to  in  the  present  life. 

Moreover  it  should  always  be  kept  in  mind  that 
fhe  stars  impel  but  do  not  compel;  because  a  man  or 
woman  has  an  evil  configuration  of  Neptune  or  Ura- 
nus it  is  not  unavoidable  that  they  should  go  into  ac- 
tive evil  Mediumship  and  Black  Magic  and  thereby 
make  life  harder  for  themselves  in  the  future.  Their 
opportunity  to  do  so  and  the  temptation  will  come 
at  certain  times  when  the  heavenly  time  markers 
point  to  the  right  hour  on  the  clock  of  destiny.  Then 
it  is  time  to  stand  firm  for  the  good  and  for  the 
right;  being  forewarned  through  a  knowledge  of  As- 
trology one  is  also  forearmed  and  may  the  easier 
overcome  when  such  an  aspect  culminates. 


PLANETARY   VIBRATIONS  51 

Thus  we  have  seen  that  man  is  amenable  to 
the  planetary  rays  in  an  increasing  measure  as  he 
advances  through  evolution,  but  the  more  highly  he 
becomes  developed  spiritually  the  less  he  will  allow 
the  planets  to  dominate  him,  while  the  younger  soul 
is  driven  unresistingly  along  the  tide  of  life  in  what- 
ever direction  the  planetary  vibrations  propel  him. 
It  is  the  mark  of  the  advanced  soul  that  it  keeps 
the  true  course  regardless  of  the  planetary  vibra- 
tions. Between  these  two  extremes  there  are  naturally 
all  gradations,  some  are  amenable  to  the  rays  of  one 
planet,  more  to  another,  and  the  bark  of  life  of  such 
men  and  women  is  driven  upon  the  rocks  of  sorrow 
and  suffering,  that  they  may  learn  to  evolve  within 
themselves  the  will  power  that  finally  frees  them 
from  all  domination  by  the  ruling  stars,  as  Goethe,, 
the  great  mystic  said : 

"From  every  power  that  holds  the  world  in  chains, 
Man  liberates  himself  when  self-control  he  gains."' 

And  it  may  be  asked,  have  we  run  the  gamut 
of  vibrations  when  we  have  learned  to  respond  to  all 
the  seven  planets  which  are  mythically  represented 
as  the  seven  strings  on  Apollo's  Lyre?  In  other 
words  is  Neptune  the  highest  vibration  to  which  we 
shall  yet  respond?  The  Western  Wisdom  Teachings 
tell  us  that  there  are  two  more  planets  in  the  uni- 
verse which  will  be  known  in  future  ages  and  that 
these  will  have  an  influence  in  developing  qualities 
of  so  transcendent  a  nature  that  we  cannot  now  un- 


52  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

derstand.  The  number  of  Adam,  man  or  humanity, 
is  nine,  and  there  are  nine  rungs  upon  the  stellar 
ladder  by  which  he  is  ascending  to  God;  up  to  the 
present  time  he  has  climbed  only  five  of  these  rungs; 
Mercury,  Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  and  not 
even  the  vibrations  of  these  he  has  by  any  means 
learned ;  Uranus  and  Neptune  are  slowly  coming  into 
our  lives;  they  will  not  become  active  in  the  same 
manner  and  to  the  same  degree  that  for  instance, 
the  Moon  and  Mars  are  at  the  present  time  until 
many  ages  have  passed.  But  even  when  we  have 
learned  to  respond  to  them  there  are  two  more  of 
which  we  shall  know  something  later  on;  it  is  the 
opinion  of  the  writers  that  these  are  probably  not 
felt  by  any  except  those  who  have  graduated  from 
the  Greater  Mystery  School  and  the  Hierophants  of 
that  sublime  institution. 

In  conclusion  of  this  article  on  the  Amenability 
of  Man  to  Planetary  Vibrations  we  quote  from  the 
Eosicrucian  Mysteries  the  article  on  Light,  Color  and 
Consciousness : 

' '  Truly,  God  is  One  and  Undivided.  He  enfolds 
within  His  Being  all  that  is,  as  the  white  light  em- 
braces all  colors.  But  He  appears  three-fold  in  mani- 
festation, as  the  white  light  is  refracted  in  three  pri- 
:mary  colors:  Blue,  Yellow  and  Red.  Wherever  we 
;jree  these  colors  they  are  emblematical  of  the  Father, 
;Son  and  Holy  Spirit.  These  three  primary  rays  of 
Divine  Life  are  diffused  or  radiated  through  the  Sun 
and  produce  Life,  Consciousness  and  Form  upon 


PLANETARY   VIBRATIONS  53 

each  of  the  seven  light  bearers,  the  planets,  which 
are  called  the  "Seven  Spirits  before  the  Throne." 
Their  names  are:  Mercury,  Venus,  Earth,  Mars,  Ju- 
piter, Saturn  and  Uranus.  Bode's  law  proves  that 
Neptune  does  not  yet  belong  to  our  solar  system  and 
the  reader  is  referred  to  "Simplified,  Scientific  As- 
trology" by  the  present  writer,  for  mathematical 
demonstration  of  this  condition. 

"Each  of  the  seven  planets  receives  the  light  of 
the  Sun  in  a  different  measure,  according  to  its  prox- 
imity to  the  central  orb  and  the  constitution  of  its 
atmosphere,  and  the  beings  on  each,  according  to 
their  stage  of  development  have  affinity  for  some  of 
the  solar  rays.  They  absorb  the  color  or  colors  con- 
gruous to  them,  and  reflect  the  remainder  upon  the 
other  planets.  This  reflected  ray  bears  with  it  an 
impulse  of  the  nature  of  the  beings  with  which  it 
has  been  in  contact. 

Thus  the  divine  Light  and  Life  comes  to  each 
planet,  either  directly  from  the  Sun,  or  reflected 
from  its  six  sister  planets,  and  as  the  summer 
breeze  which  has  been  wafted  over  blooming  fields 
carries  upon  its  silent,  invisible  wings  the  blended 
fragrance  of  a^multitude  of  flowers,  so  also  the  subtle 
influences  from  Tlie  Garden  of  God  bring  to  us  the 
commingled  impulses  of  all  the  Spirits  and  in  that 
vari-colored  light  we  live  and  move  and  have  our 
being. 

"The  rays  which  come  directly  from  the  Sun  are 
productive  of  spiritual  illumination ;  the  reflected 


54  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

rays  from  other  planets  make  for  added  conscious- 
ness and  moral  development  and  the  rays  reflected 
by  way  of  the  Moon  give  physical  growth. 

"But  as  each  planet  can  only  absorb  a  certain 
quantity  of  one  or  more  colors  according  to  the  gene- 
ral stage  of  evolution  there,  so  each  being  upon 
earth,  mineral,  plant,  animal  and  man  can  only  ab- 
sorb and  thrive  upon  a  certain  quantity  of  the  vari- 
ous rays  projected  upon  the  earth.  The  remainder 
do  not  affect  it  or  produce  sensation  any  more  than 
the  blind  are  conscious  of  light  and  color  which  ex- 
ists everywhere  around  them.  Therefore  each  be- 
ing is  differently  affected  by  the  stellar  rays,  and  the 
science  of  Astrology,  a  fundamental  truth  in  nature, 
is  of  enormous  benefit  in  the  attainment  of  spiritual 
growth. ' ' 


CHAPTER  III. 
WERE  You  BORN  UNDER  A  LUCKY  STAR? 

HAVE  you  ever  looked  through  a  kaleidoscope 
at  the  patterns  formed  there  by  the  many 
little  pieces  of  varicolored  glass,  and  noticed  how 
the  slightest  disturbance  of  the  position  changes  the 
pattern?  Also,  do  you  realize  that  it  will  be  im- 
possible, or  almost  so,  to  duplicate  any  pattern,  no 
matter  how  much  you  were  to  turn;  there  is  such  a 
variety  of  effect.  Similarly  when  you  look  into  the 
heavens  night  after  night  you  will  notice  changes 
among  the  planets,  in  fact  such  is  the  variety  of 
changes  that  occur  among  them  that  it  would  be  im- 
possible to  duplicate  the  position  which  they  hold 
relatively  to  one  another  while  you  are  reading,  for 
almost  twenty-six  thousand  years.  Thus  in  the 
planetary  kaleidoscope  there  is,  we  might  say,  an  in- 
finity of  patterns.  When  we  realize  that  human  be- 
ings are  entering  the  world  constantly  and  that  each 
being  is  stamped  at  the  first  complete  breath  with 
the  planetary  pattern  then  in  the  sky,  everyone  must 
necessarily  be  different  from  everybody  else.  Nor 
should  this  statement  of  the  stellar  influence  create 
doubt  when  we  consider  that  wireless  waves  of  dif- 
ferent lengths  and  different  pitch  sent  out  from  a 
55 


C6  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

tiny  man-made  contrivance  can  make  themselves  felt 
and  register  by  mechanical  operations  involving  ex- 
penditure of  energy  many  thousands  of  miles  from 
their  source.  The  planetary  vibrations  from  those 
great  orbs  in  the  heavens  make  themselves  felt  mil- 
lions of  miles  as  surely,  as  easily,  and  with  equal 
certainty.  We  know  that  the  angle  of  the  solar  ray 
determines  whether  it  is  winter  or  summer.  We  also 
know  the  effect  of  the  Moon  upon  the  waters,  and  it 
is  within  the  experience  of  all  that  we  feel  more 
buoyant  when  the  atmosphere  is  clear  and  dry  than 
when  it  is  moist  and  murky.  And  what  determines 
these  atmospheric  conditions  but  the  planets,  the 
circling  stars? 

When  we  look  up  at  this  planetary  kaleidoscope 
from  time  to  time  we  see  in  the  heavens  various  con- 
figurations which  are  pronounced  lucky  or  unlucky 
according  to  whether  they  are  formed  between  so- 
called  benefics  alone,  such  as  Venus,  Jupiter  and  the 
Sun,  or  planets  said  to  be  malefic  such  as  Saturn, 
Mars  or  Uranus.  When  Jupiter  and  Venus  are 
in  close  conjunction  near  the  midheaven,  it  is  a 
foregone  conclusion  that  those  who  come  into  the 
world  under  this  configuration  will  enjoy  a  measure 
of  good  fortune  far  above  the  average,  and  such  per- 
sons would  therefore  be  considered  "lucky"  in  the 
extreme.  On  the  other  hand  there  are  times  when 
Saturn  and  Mars  occupy  the  zenith  position  for 
souls  that  are  born  to  suffer. 

But  why  should  one  suffer  and  another  be  born 


WERE  YOU  BORN  UNDER  A  LUCKY  STAR?  57 

under  a  lucky  star?  Why  do  the  stars  give  good 
fortune  to  one  and  misfortune  to  others,  and  if  we 
are  born  to  "luck,"  whether  good  or  bad,  what  is 
the  use  or  where  is  the  incentive  to  individual  effort? 
If  there  is  a  law  of  nature  which  is  established  be- 
yond doubt  it  is  surely  the  law  of  Cause  and  Effect. 
Every  cause  must  produce  an  adequate  effect  and 
nothing  which  we  see  as  an  effect  can  be  without 
a  pre-existent  cause.  Moreover,  if  this  is  a  universal 
law  it  must  apply  to  the  conditions  of  birth  as  well 
as  to  subsequent  life.  Following  up  this  idea  the 
next  question  is:  If  our  birth  under  a  lucky  or  un- 
lucky star  is  the  effect  of  some  prior  cause,  what  may 
that  be,  or  where  and  how  was  that  cause  generated? 
To  that  there  can  be  only  one  answer;  that  we  must 
have  made  the  causes  in  some  previous  existence 
which  now  result  in  our  birth  under  a  lucky  or  an 
unlucky  star.  Thus  by  induction  a  belief  hi  As- 
trology requires  also  a  belief  in  a  previous  existence 
as  well  as  in  future  lives,  for  while  we  are  now  reap- 
ing in  our  horoscopes  the  effects  of  our  past  lives 
we  are  also  by  our  acts  laying  the  foundations  for  a 
new  horoscope  which  can  only  be  worked  out  in  a 
future  life.. 

"How  closely  luck  is  linked  to  merit 
Does  never  to  the  fool  occur; 
Had  he  the  wise  man's  stone,  I  swear  it, 
The  stone  had  no  philosopher," 

said   Mephisto   sarcastically   in   "Faust"   and   it   is 


58  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE    STARS 

true.  If  we  are  born  under  a  lucky  star  it  shows  that 
we  have  earned  the  good  fortune  thereby  Indicated, 
by  forethought,  kindness,  and  our  other  virtues  ex- 
pressed in  previous  lives,  for  we  cannot  have  friends 
unless  we  are  friendly  ourselves.  If  we  happen  to 
have  Saturn  and  Mars  instead  of  Yenus  and  Jupi- 
ter near  the  zenith,  it  shows  that  in  the  past  we 
ourselves  have  not  been  kindly  and  friendly  or  we 
could  not  now  express  the  opposite  traits.  But  this 
is  just  the  point  where  the  study  of  Astrology  should 
help  us.  It  shows  our  limitations  for  the  present  and 
it  points  out  the  obvious  remedies  and  how  to  'build 
for  the  future.  Can  the  leopard  change  its  skin1? 
No.  Can  the  lion  cease  to  prey?  Absolutely  impos- 
sible. Can  the  flower  cease  to  bloom  or  the  mineral 
to  crystallize  ?  Certainly  not ;  because  they  are  under 
laws  which  are  unchangeable  as  the  laws  of  the 
Medes  and  Persians.  They  have  neither  choice  nor 
prerogative  but  must  obey  the  dictates  of  the  group 
spirit  which  guides  them  along  their  path  of  evolu- 
tion. But  in  this  respect  we  differ  radically  from 
those  lower  kingdoms,  we  have  both  choice  and  pre- 
rogative. We  may  do  whatsoever  we  ivill  and  that 
is  a  factor  which  is  never  shown  in  the  horoscope,  a 
factor  that  may  be  made  to  play  an  all  important 
role  in  every  life.  It  is  not  enough  to  be  born  under 
a  lucky  star  to  have  a  lucky  life,  for  the  horoscope 
shows  only  the  tendencies  and  the  person  who  is  so 
well  endowed  will  without  question  have  an  abund- 
ance of  opportunities  to  make  his  life  fortunate  in 


WEEE  YOU  BORN  UNDER  A  LUCKY  STAR?  59 

the  very  highest  degree.  But  only  insofar  as  he  ex- 
erts himself  to  grasp  opportunity  on  the  wing,  will 
that  which  is  foreshadowed  in  his  horoscope  come  to 
pass.  And  similarily  with  the  person  who  is  af- 
flicted by  the  conjunction  of  two  malefics  in  the  mid- 
heaven  or  anywhere  else  in  the  horoscope.  By  his 
will,  and  the  exercise  of  choice,  which  are  his  divine 
birthrights,  he  may  rule  his  stars  and  make  of  the 
unlucky  horoscope  a  fruitful  life  from  a  far  higher 
standpoint  than  the  other.  The  bark  that  has  been 
tossed  by  the  tempest  harbors  a  joy  when  the  haven 
of  safety  is  reached  that  is  not  equaled  on  the  ship 
that  has  always  sailed  on  smiling  seas. 

"Who  never  ate  his  bread  in  sorrow, 
Who  never  passed  the  midnight  hours 
Weeping,  waiting  for  the  morrow, 
He  knows  not  yet  ye  heavenly  powers." 

From  the  higher  standpoint  those  who  are  liv- 
ing in  the  lap  of  luxury  are  to  be  pitied  when  their 
lucky  stars  give  them  all  the  good  things  of  this 
world  and  cause  them  to  forget  that  they  are  stew- 
ards and  that  the  day  is  coming  when  their  souls 
shall  be  required  of  them  with  an  account  of  their 
stewardship.  They  shall  then  be  forced  to  confess 
that  they  have  failed  to  use  the  substance  entrusted 
to  them  in  the  proper  manner;  while  others  un- 
der the  strain  and  stress  of  life,  expressed  by  the 
horoscopical  squares  and  oppositions,  have  wrung 
from  their  unlucky  stars  a  measure  of  victory. 


60  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

What  wonder  then  if  the  king's  messengers,  the  cir- 
cling stars,  take  from  the  unfaithful  steward  that 
which  he  had  and  give  to  the  other,  changing  their 
adversity  to  prosperity  in  later  lives.  Thus  the 
pendulum  of  luck  and  loss,  success  and  failure 
changes  through  many  lives  till  we  learn  to  make  our 
own  "luck"  by  ruling  our  stars. 

"A  god  can  love  without  cessation, 
But  under  laws  of  alteration 
We  mortals  need,  in  changing  measure, 
Our  share  of  pain  as  well  as  pleasure." 

And  it  is  this  necessity  for  change  that  is  ministered 
unto  us  by  the  circling  stars  which  form  configura- 
tions that  we  call  good  or  evil,  though  they  are 
neither  from  a  higher  standpoint,  for  no  matter  how 
good  the  horoscope ;  by  progression  of  the  stars  evil 
configurations  are  sure  to  come  and  no  matter  how 
evil,  there  are  always  new  opportunities  for  good 
given  by  aspects  of  the  Sun,  Venus  and  Jupiter  to 
our  planets  at  birth.  All  that  we  have  to  do  is  to 
grasp  the  opportunity,  help  our  stars,  that  our  stars 
may  help  us. 

AMULETS,  BIRTH-STONES  AND  PLANETARY  COLORS 

In  the  windows  of  jewelers,  and  in  the  cheap, 
ready  made  horoscopes  one  may  often  read  that  it 
is  'lucky'  for  people  born  in  a  certain  month  to 
wear  a  particular  stone  or  color.  It  means  business 


AMULETS,  BIRTHSTONES,  ETC.  6i 

to  the  jeweler  and  the  astrological  prestidigitator 
who  produces  "your  horoscope"  by  a  turn  of  the 
wrist  from  a  box  when  you  tell  him  in  what  month 
you  were  born.  Both  buy  their  instructive  (?)  liter- 
ature at  a  nominal  price  per  thousand,  the  principal 
cost  being  paper  and  printers'  ink;  there  are  no  fur- 
rows in  their  foreheads  from  deep  and  earnest  study 
of  the  problem. 

But  as  the  counterfeit  coin  argues  the  existence 
of  the  genuine,  so  also  the  fallacious  information 
flippantly  dispensed  by  people  who  cater  to  the 
sense  of  mystery  and  wonder  which  is  deeply  im- 
bedded in  human  nature  argues  the  existence  of  a 
genuine  science  of  mineralogical  correspondences 
with  the  stellar  rays  impinging  upon  all  who  inhab- 
it our  sub-lunar  sphere,  and  when  this  is  rightly  un- 
derstood and  used,  that  which  is  loosely  termed  luck 
results ;  but  then  it  is  not  really  luck  in  the  sense 
understood  by  the  majority  of  people,  for  then  it  is 
the  result  of  accurate  knowledge  scientifically  used, 
and  therefore  the  outcome  is  as  inevitable  as  that  wa- 
ter runs  down  hill. 

The  philosophy  of  planetary  colors  and  miner- 
alogy is  that  each  of  the  Creative  Hierarchies  which 
is  active  in  evolution  works  with  the  various  classes 
of  beings  from  mineral  to  man,  and  is  responsible  for 
the  progress  made  by  all.  In  the  course  of  this 
work  each  Hierarchy  naturally  imparts  to  the  be- 
ings with  whom  it  labors  some  of  its  own  nature  and 
vibration.  Thus  each  group  of  minerals,  each  spe- 


62  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

cies  of  plant  and  animal,  vibrates  to  a  certain  key- 
note which  blends  the  vibration  of  the  Group  Spirit, 
and  the  particular  sign  and  planet  with  which  he  is 
most  nearly  attuned. 

It  has  been  taught  by  the  Elder  Brothers  in 
the  Rosicrucian  Cosmo-Conception,  that: 

The  Archangels,  who  were  human  in  the  Sun 
Period  when  the  present  animals  started  their  evo- 
lution with  a  mineral-like  existence,  are  now  the 
Group  Spirits  of  the  animals. 

The  Angels,  who  were  human  in  the  Moon  Per- 
iod when  the  present  plants  commenced  their  evo- 
lution with  a  similar  mineral  constitution  are  now 
the  Group  Spirits  of  the  plants.  Man,  who  reached 
the  human  stage  in  the  Earth  Period,  is  now  work- 
ing with  the  new  life-wave  which  started  its  evo- 
lution on  the  Earth  as  minerals.  He  is  not 
far  enough  advanced  to  assume  the  role  of 
Group  Spirit,  that  is  reserved  for  the  future.  In 
the  Jupiter  Period  he  will  give  them  life  as  plants 
have,  in  the  Venus  Period  he  will  bring  out  their 
desires  and  emotions  as  animals,  and  in  the  Vulcan 
Period  he  will  give  them  a  mind  and  make  them 
human.  That,  however,  is  all  in  the  future.  At  pres- 
ent he  is  working  with  them  to  the  best  of  his  abil- 
ity, smelting  them  into  iron  bridges,  ships  and  skel- 
eton skyscrapers;  he  is  pulling  them  into  wires  which 
wind  around  the  world ;  he  is  grinding  from  them 
gems  that  glitter  and  grace  the  great  in  our  social 
structure,  and  thus  he  is  gradually  establishing  an 


AMULETS,  BIRTHSTONES,  ETC.  63 

intimate  relationship  with  them  and  preparing  to 
take  charge  of  their  evolution  as  a  Group  Spirit  at 
some  future  time. 

It  is  well  known  to  students  of  Astrology  that 
an  astrological  reading  based  upon  the  month  in 
which  an  individual  is  born  is  worthless,  for  all  the 
people  born  in  the  same  month  do  not  have  the  same 
experiences  by  any  means,  but  if  we  consider  the 
day,  the  year  and  the  place  we  get  a  horoscope  that 
is  absolutely  individual  and  totally  different  from 
the  horoscope  of  anyone  else  in  detail  —  and  this 
is  the  point  which  concerns  us  for  the  present  argu- 
ment— the  ruler  is  not  the  lord  of  the  sign  the  Sun 
is  in,  except  for  children  born  at  Sunrise,  when  the 
Sun  is  on  the  Ascendant.  It  is  ike  ruler  of  the 
rising  sign,  THAT  is  the  determinator  with  regard 
to  our  mineralogical  affinity,  because  at  the  moment 
of  conception  when  the  seed-atom  of  our  present 
physical  mineral  body  was  deposited  the  Moon  was 
in  that  particular  sign  and  degree,  (or  its  opposite), 
and  acted  then  as  a  focus  of  forces  which  have  since 
crystallized  into  the  vehicle  we  now  wear. 

The  following  table  shows  the  affinity  of  each 
of  the  twelve  signs  with  certain  gems,  metals  and 
colors,  and  in  that  chart  there  are  the  elements  for 
making  an  effective  talisman  by  any  individual  who 
has  the  knowledge  of  how  to  cast  a  horoscope,  and 
blend  the  ingredients  according  to  the  requirements 
of  the  case.  We  have  no  scruples  about  telling  how 
this  is  done,  for  it  may  help  some  to  help  themselves 


64 


THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 


and  others.  The  only  harm  it  can  do  is  if  some  un- 
scrupulous person  starts  to  make  them  for  coin,  and 
even  then,  if  he  is  conscientious  about  the  work,  who- 
ever obtains  it  will  not  be  cheated,  the  re-action  will 
be  upon  the  one  who  prostitutes  the  spiritual  science 
for  material  gain. 


BIRTH-STONES  AND   COLORS. 

Gems  ruled  by 
the   signs. 

Sign 
Rulers 

Metals 

Colors. 

T 

Amethyst,    Diamond 

o" 

Iron 

Red 

0 

Moss  Agate,  Emerald 

9 

Copper 

Yellow 

n 

Crystal,  Aqua  Marine 

9 

Mercury 

Violet 

05 

Emerald,  Black  Onyx 

J 

Silver 

Green 

oQ 

Ruby,  Diamond 

o 

Gold 

Orange 

rn? 

Pink  Jasper,  Hyacinth 

$ 

Mercury 

Violet 

-n- 

Diamond,  Opal. 

9 

Copper 

Yellow 

m, 

Topaz,   Malachite. 

a* 

Iron 

Red 

x* 

Carbuncle,    Torquoise 

V 

Tin 

Blue 

vr 

White  Onyx,  Moonstone 

"? 

Lead 

Indigo 

w/v 

vw 

Saphire,  Opal. 

5 

Lead 

Indigo 

H 

Chrysolite,    Moonstone 

H 

Tin 

Blue 

To  forestall  a  question  we  may  say  that  ancient 
astrologers  who  had  studied  this  aspect  of  the  science 
have  tabulated  several  hundred  minerals  of  which 


AMULETS,  BIRTHSTONES,  ETC.  65 

the  planetary  affinities  had  been  noted,  but  these 
works  have  been  mutilated  in  the  course  of  time,  and 
are  now  not  available.  Paracelsus  also  and  Agrippa, 
made  considerable  study  of  this  subject,  and  with 
very  important  results,  but  the  wider  view  is  outside 
the  scope  of  this  work,  so  the  authors  confine  their 
remarks  to  the  essentials,  and  indicating  the  way 
which  others  may  follow  farther  if  they  feel  so 
inclined. 

To  illustrate  how  the  mineral  elements  may  be 
used  to  advantage  let  us  take  the  following  example. 
Suppose  that  in  a  certain  horoscope  we  find  Sagit- 
tarius rising  with  its  lord  Jupiter  on  the  Ascendant. 
Jupiter  is  then  the  ruling  planet  and  so,  according 
to  our  chart  turquoise  is  his  birthstone,  tin  is  the 
metal  with  which  he  has  affinity,  and  blue  is  his 
color.  That  means  that  it  will  help  him  express  him- 
self if  he  wears  a  turquoise,  an  amulet  of  tin,  and 
dresses  in  blue  whenever  consistent  with  custom. 
That  is  true  to  a  certain  extent,  but  it  is  only  a  small 
part  of  the  truth,  and  it  is  by  no  means  the  best  use 
that  may  be  made  of  this  knowledge. 

To  indicate  the  better  way,  let  us  suppose  that 
this  person's  figure  shows  severe  afflictions  by  Mars 
and  Saturn. 

Mars  afflicts  three  planets;  his  metal  is  iron. 
Venus  is  the  opposite  of  Mars;  her  metal  is  copper, 
and  consequently  copper  is  an  antidote  for  the  mar- 
tial vibrations. 

Saturn  afflicts  one  planet ;  his    metal    is    lead. 


66  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

Jupiter  is  his  opposite  and  therefore  the  Jupiter 
metal,  tin,  is  an  antidote  for  the  saturnian  vibrations. 

With  this  in  mind  an  amulet  may  be  compound- 
ed of  tin  and  copper;  not  exactly  in  the  ratio  of 
three  to  one,  but  with  a  mind  on  the  bulk  of  the 
various  planets,  their  density  and  the  strength  of 
the  aspects  it  is  desired  to  overcome,  a  matter  which 
involves  further  study.  The  work  itself  should  be 
done  under  auspicious  planetary  conditions.  A 
Mars'  amulet,  designed  to  give  energy  to  one  with  a 
weak  figure  would  be  most  successful  if  made  in  a 
Mars-hour  on  a  Tuesday  when  both  the  Sun  and 
Moon  are  in  martial  signs  as  happens  in  April  and 
November.  The  same  with  amulets  made  for  other 
planets.  (See  the  Tables  of  Planetary  Hours,  in  our 
Simplified  Scientific  Astrology.) 

A  gem  or  an  amulet  made  on  these  principles 
is  a  focus  for  the  stellar  rays  of  the  planets  they 
represent,  and  infuses  vibrations  of  their  nature  into 
our  auras  all  the  while  we  are  wearing  it,  just  as 
surely  as  the  wireless  receiver  attuned  to  a  cer- 
tain pitch  catches  the  waves  within  its  range,  and 
we  may  blend  the  colors  in  the  same  manner  to  ob- 
tain help  from  them.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  it  is 
the  complimentary  color  which  is  seen  in  the  desire 
world  that  produces  the  effect  of  the  physical  colors. 
If  it  is  desired  to  restrain  one  whose  Mars  is  too 
prominent,  the  gems,  colors  and  metals  of  Saturn 
will  help,  and  such  a  person  should  have  as  little  to 
do  with  iron  (tools,  machinery,  etc.,)  as  possible, 


BEST  TIME  TO  BE  BORN  67 

but  if  we  want  to  help  someone  who  is  moody  and 
taciturn,  we  may  use  the  gems,  colors  and  metals  of 
Mars  to  advantage.  In  the  final  analysis  the  mat- 
ter resolves  itself  into  a  question  of  judgment  and 
common  sense.  With  these  and  the  knowledge  'con- 
cerning the  essentials  here  given  anyone  may  use  it 
to  advantage. 

WHEN  is  THE  BEST  TIME  TO  BE  BORN? 

In  the  light  of  occult  investigation  of  some  of 
the  modern  methods  it  appears  that  Birth  is  an  ad- 
vent we  are  powerless  to  control,  when  we  seem  to 
do  so  in  a  slight  degree  we  are  really  the  agents  of 
Destiny  to  accelerate  or  delay  till  the  proper  mo- 
ment has  arrived.  This  view  is  also  justified  by  the 
author's  experience  in  Horary  Astrology.  The 
philosophy  of  Horary  Astrology  is  that  at  the  time 
one  is  impelled  to  ask  a  question  concerning  an  im- 
portant matter  the  heavens  contain  also  the  answer 
and  a  figure  set  for  that  time  will  contain  the  so- 
lution to  the  problem.  But  it  should  be  particularly 
noted  that  the  time  to  set  the  figure  is  when  the  in- 
quirer asks  the  question  of  the  astrologer,  when 
this  is  done  in  person;  when  it  is  done  by  mail  the 
astrologer  sets  the  figure  for  the  time  he  reads  the 
question  in  the  letter. 

On  a  number  of  occasions  we  have  received  let- 
ters containing  questions  which  bore  marks  of  hav- 
ing been  delayed  by  flood  or  fire,  but  the  figure  cast 


68  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

for  the  moment  of  reading  gave  the  answer,  showing 
that  the  delay  had  a  part  in  the  plan,  nor  should  it 
surprise  us  that  the  great  Intelligences  which  are  the 
ministers  of  Destiny  foresee  and  make  allowance  for 
contingencies  beyond  the  grasp  of  the  human  mind, 
and  when  the  infinite  mind  bestowrs  equal  care  when 
designing  the  anatomy  of  a  fly,  mouse  and  lion,  may 
we  not  conclude  that  a  similar  attention  to  the  min- 
utiae prevails  in  all  departments  of  life  and  that 
when  we  seem  to  delay  or  accelerate  birth  we  are 
really  aiding  nature  to  take  its  predetermined  course 
as  said  in  the  opening  sentence  of  this  article. 

Nevertheless  people  often  ask  the  astrologer 
when  is  the  best  time  to  be  born ;  young  astrologers 
also  frequently  want  to  know,  not  that  they  have  any 
idea  of  controlling  birth  but  so  that  on  seeing  a 
horoscope  or  being  told  a  person's  time  of  birth  they 
may  make  quick  mental  calculation  to  determine  a 
good  or  bad  horoscope.  Such  a  judgment  would,  of 
course,  be  founded  only  on  the  position  of  the  sun 
.by  sign  and  approximate  house,  hence  general  in 
the  extreme.  It  may  be  said  however  that  other 
planetary  positions  being  equal,  it  is  better  to  be 
born  when  the  Moon  is  increasing  in  light  from  the 
new  to  the  full  than  when  she  is  decreasing  from 
the  full  to  the  new  for  the  growing  Moon  always  in- 
creases vitality  and  furthers  our  affairs. 

It  is  best  to  be  born  in  April  or  August  when 
the  life-giving  Sun  is  in  its  exaltation  sign  Aries  or 
Leo,  its  home,  for  then  we  enter  the  sea  of  life  on 


BEST  TIME   TO   BE  BORN  69 

the  crest-wave  and  are  backed  in  the  battle  of  ex- 
istence by  an  abundant  fund  of  vim  and  energy. 

It  is  also  good  to  be  born  in  May  and  July  when 
the  life-light  of  the  Sun  is  focused  through  the  ex- 
altation sign  and  home  of  the  Moon,  Taurus  and 
Cancer,  especially,  as  said,  when  the  lesfser  light  is 
increasing  for  those  configurations,  also  furnish  an 
abundance  of  vitality  which  is  such  a  great  asset 
in  physical  life. 

With  respect  to  the  time  of  day  most  favorable 
for  birth  it  may  be  said  that  children  born  about 
sunrise,  or  during  the  forenoon  from  8  to  12 
while  the  Sun  is  traversing  the  hou.ses  of  friends 
and  social  prestige  are  the  'luckiest'  for  they  are 
helped  on  every  hand.  Children  born  between  noon 
and  midnight  are  less  'lucky'  the  nearer  the  Sun 
comes  to  Nadir,  and  then  the  'luck'  turns  again  for 
the  children  born  in  the  early  morning  while  the 
Daystar  is  ascending  towards  the  eastern  horizon. 
They  will  have  to  carve  their  own  way  in  the  world, 
but  opportunities  will  be  given  them  In  abundance. 

We  may  therefore  sum  up  our  conclusions  by 
saying  that  it  is  best  to  be  born  at  Sunrise  or  in  the 
forenoon,  preferably  in  April  or  August  when  the 
Moon  is  increasing  in  light. 

Finally  it  should  always  be  borne  in  mind  that 
there  is  no  'luck,'  in  the  commonly  accepted  sense, 
but  that  what  we  have  or  lack  in  any  respect  is  due 
to  our  own  actions  in  the  past  and  that  in  the  future 
we  may  have  what  we  now  lack  by  proper  application. 


CHAPTER  IV. 

READING  THE  HOROSCOPE 

Introductory 

WHEN  the  student  of  Astrology  has  learned 
to  cast  the  horoscope  correctly  by  the  study 
of  our  "Simplified  Scientific  Astrology,"  or  another 
reliable  textbook,  the  next  and  most  important  part 
is  to  read  its  message.  Astrology  means  "Star  Logic" 
and  we  must  seriously  advise  the  student  not  to  de- 
pend too  much  on  authorities  but  to  try  to  under- 
stand the  basic  nature  of  each  planet,  the  influence 
of  signs,  houses  and  aspect/3;  then  by  a  process  of 
reasoning  to  combine  these  and  thus  develop  his  own 
intuition  which  will  serve  him  far  better  than  the 
ability  to  quote  like  a  poll  parrot  what  some  one  else 
has  said. 

We  would  also  advise  the  younger  astrologer 
not  to  bother  too  much  with  the  personal  descrip- 
tions indicated  in  the  horoscope.  It  is  foolish  to 
spend  hours  perhaps  to  find  out  what  the  one  for 
whom  a  horoscope  is  cast  can  see  in  a  moment  by 
looking  in  a  glass.  We  give  descriptions  of  the  dif- 
ferent types,  but  do  so  for  the  purpose  of  aiding  the 
student  to  determine  at  sight  the  probable  sign  and 
70 


READING   THE   HOROSCOPE  71 

planet  rising  when  a  client  comes  who  does  not  know 
his  birth  hour.  There  are  people  for  instance,  who 
have  the  face  of  a  sheep  just  as  perfect  as  possible. 
If  such  a  one  is  in  doubt  about  the  birth  hour  we 
would  at  once  look  to  Aries  and  experimentally  try 
how  that  would  fit  with  the  other  characteristics  of 
that  person,  if  we  did  so  we  should  probably  find  our 
guess  correct  in  every  case.  Thus  also  the  other  signs 
and  planets  in  signs  exhibit  distinguishing  charac- 
teristics of  valuable  aid  to  the  student  in  the  direc- 
tion mentioned. 

The  student  should  also  endeavor  to  cultivate 
perfect  confidence  in  the  science  of  Astrology.  There 
is  nothing  empirical  about  character  reading  and 
diagnosis..  In  those  respects  it  is  plain  as  A  B  C. 
Predictions  may  fail  because  the  Astrologer  is  un- 
able to  determine  the  strength  of  will  of  the  person 
for  whom  he  predicts,  but  the  latent  tendencies  are 
always  accurately  foreshown.  The  writers  have 
found  that  where  they  do  not  personally  know  the 
people  whose  characters  they  read,  their  delineations 
are  much  deeper  and  more  accurate  because  then 
personal  bias  and  impressions  are  absent  and  the 
mystic  scroll  of  the  heavens  more  easily  read. 

There  are  three  factors  which  bring  to  us  the 
mystic  message  of  the  stars ;  the  houses,  the  signs  and 
the  planets. 

The  houses  are  divisions  of  the  earth;  each 
house  represents  a  department  of  life;  the  signs  are 
divisions  of  the  heavens  which  by  their  placement 


72  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

relative  to  the  houses  indicate  our  basic  temperament 
and  attitude  towards  life,  and  the  planets  are  the 
messengers  of  God  which  by  their  motion  through 
the  houses  and  signs  bring  to  us  the  opportunities 
for  soulgrowth  which  we  need  for  our  individual  de- 
velopment. It  is  therefore  necessary  for  one  who 
wishes  to  learn  to  read  a  horoscope  to  become  thor- 
oughly acquainted  with  these  three  factors  both 
separately  and  in  their  various  combinations.  The 
following  descriptions  may  help  to  convey  this 
knowledge : 

THE  HOUSES 

As  said  in  the  introductory  remarks,  "the 
houses  are  divisions  of  the  earth,"  and  therefore 
they  are  also  called  "Mundane  Houses,"  to  dif- 
ferentiate between  them  and  the  "Celestial  Houses" 
composed  of  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac ;  but  gen- 
erally they  are  designated  as  "houses"  only. 

It  is  the  angle  of  the  stellar  ray  which  de- 
termines its  effect  in  our  lives,  those  which  are  in 
the  East  affect  our  physical  constitution,  planets  in 
the  South  near  the  zenith  are  factors  for  good  or  ill' 
where  our  social  position  is  concerned.  If  a  planet  is 
setting  in  the  West  at  the  time  of  our  birth  its  angle 
strikes  us  in  such  a  manner  as  to  draw  us  to  a  cer- 
tain type  of  marriage  partner,  and  the  planets  un- 
der the  earth,  in  the  North,  have  an  effect  upon  our 
condition  in  the  latter  part  of  life.  Let  us  suppose 
for  illustration  of  the  point  that  someone  is  born 


BEADING  THE  HOROSCOPE  73 

at  sunrise  on  a  day  when  the  Sun  and  Jupiter  are  in 
conjunction.  Then  they  strike  him  from  the  east- 
ern angle  and  give  him  a  splendid  vitality.  Another 
born  on  the  same  day  at  noon  when  Jupiter  and  the 
Sun  are  in  the  zenith  position  may  have  a  very  poor 
and  weak  body  if  other  planets  in  the  East  are 
adverse,  but  if  the  ray  of  the  Sun  and  Jupiter  falls 
on  his  birth  figure  from  the  South  he  will  certainly 
attract  attention  in  his  social  sphere  and  be  the  re- 
cipient of  public  favor  and  honor.  Another  born  on 
the  same  day,  when  the  Sun  and  Jupiter  are  setting 
in  the  West  may  be  an  outcast  if  planets  in  the  East 
and  South  decree,  but  the  benefic  ray  of  the  Sun  and 
Jupiter  from  the  Western  angle  will  make  him  be- 
loved of  his  mate  and  successful  in  partnerships. 
These  facts  have  been  ascertained  by  observation  and 
tabulation.  Therefore  the  twelve  sections  of  the  cir- 
cle of  observation  as  seen  from  the  birthplace  are 
truly  said  to  rule  or  govern  various  departments  of 
life  and  thus  people  born  on  the  same  day  may  have 
the  most  diverse  experiences. 

The  houses  may  be  variously  grouped  according 
to  the  influence  they  exercise  in  our  lives;  there  are 
''angular,"  ' ' succeedent "  and  "cadent"  houses, 
also  personal,  spiritual,  material,  social  and  mystical 
houses. 

Of  the  angles,  the  first  house  governs  our  per- 
sonal self,  and  its  opposite  the  seventh  house,  rules 
the  one  who  is  nearest  and  dearest  to  us,  namely,  the 
marriage  partner.  The  fourth  house  determines 


74  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

conditions  in  our  home  and  its  opposite  angle,  the 
tenth  house,  shows  our  social  standing  in  the  com- 
munity where  we  live.  Thus  the  angles  show  collect- 
ively the  sphere  of  our  activities  in  life. 

Of  the  succeedent  houses  the  second  shows  our 
financial  status  with  regard  to  that  which  we  ac- 
quire by  our  own  efforts  and  the  opposite  succeedent 
house,  the  eighth,  shows  whatever  we  may  receive 
from  others  as  legacies,  etc.  The  other  succeedent 
houses,  the  fifth  and  eleventh,  show  how  our  income 
may  be  spent,  for  the  fifth  house  indicates  the 
children  of  our  body  who  have  a  legitimate  claim  to 
a  share  of  our  income,  and  the  eleventh  house  shows 
the  children  of  our  brain,  our  hopes,  wishes  and  as- 
pirations which  also  draw  upon  our  resources. 

Of  the  two  pairs  of  cadent  houses  the  sixth  is 
the  house  of  voluntary  service  which  we  perform  as 
our  share  of  the  world's  work  for  an  equivalent 
share  in  the  world's  wealth,  and  the  twelfth  house 
shows  how  we  may  be  compelled  to  labor  without 
remuneration  under  prison  restraint  if  we  do  not 
work  willingly.  The  sixth  house  shows  also  the  state 
of  our  health  and  the  twelfth  tells  if  hospital  treat- 
ment is  necessary. 

The  other  pair  of  cadent  houses,  the  third  and 
ninth,  show  whether  our  life  and  work  will  confine 
us  to  one  place  or  require  travel  and  changes  of 
residence.  In  this  respect  the  third  house  shows 
short  journeys  and  the  ninth  house  long  travels. 

The  personal  houses  comprise  the  first,  fifth  and 


READING  THE   HOROSCOPE  75 

ninth.  The  first  house  rules  the  constitution  and 
peculiarities  of  the  physical  body.  Planets  and  signs 
in  that  house  put  their  stamp  on  it  to  make  or  mar 
according  to  the  part  of  its  self-generated  destiny. 
Our  fifth  house  shows  the  quality  of  the  love-nature 
of  the  soul  and  the  line  of  its  expression  if  it  follows 
the  line  of  least  resistance ;  and  the  ninth  house 
shows  as  much  of  the  spirit  as  we  can  apprehend  in 
our  present  limited  state 

The  material  trinity  of  houses  consists  of  the 
second,  sixth  and  tenth  and  shows  the  worldly  pos- 
sessions of  man,  his  means  of  obtaining  them  and 
the  enjoyment  they  bring  him.  Wealth,  or  its  re- 
verse, is  shown  by  the  second  house,  health,  without 
which  there  can  be  no  joy  in  any  worldly  possession, 
is  shown  by  the  sixth  house ;  and  the  public  prestige 
which  is  the  chief  source  of  gratification  to  the  aver- 
age human  being,  is  shown  by  the  tenth  house. 

The  social  houses  are  the  third,  seventh  and 
eleventh  houses  and  in  them  are  shown  the  nature  of 
our  relations  with  various  classes  of  souls  we  meet 
in  life.  Brothers  and  sisters  to  whom  we  are  bound 
by  the  tie  of  blood  are  shown  by  the  third  house,  the 
companion  of  our  heart  with  whom  our  blood  blends 
in  another  way,  is  shown  by  the  seventh  house,  and 
the  friends,  more  precious  than  pearls  to  whoever 
has  earned  friendship,  are  designated  by  the  eleventh 
house. 

The  fourth  and  last  trinity  of  houses  is  com- 
posed of  the  fourth,  eighth  and  twelfth.  In  them  are 


76  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

hidden  the  mysteries  of  the  antenatal  life  of  the 
spirit,  with  the  post  mortem  experiences  immediately 
following  the  terminus  vitae.  On  the  material  plane 
the  fourth  house  signifies  our  condition  in  the  latter 
part  of  life,  the  twelfth  shows  the  sorrow  which  im- 
presses us  with  the  worthlessness  of  material  things 
and  the  eighth  indicates  the  nature  of  our  exit  from 
the  world's  stage. 

An  illustration  may  further  help  the  student  to 
understand  how  the  heavens  influence  our  life 
through  the  twelve  houses.  Suppose  we  are  out 
driving  and  our  road  follows  the  seacoast,  but  a  mile 
or  so  inland.  A  breeze  is  blowing  from  the  ocean 
and  as  it  passes  over  the  country  separating  us  from 
the  sea,  it  brings  upon  invisible  wings  messages 
from  that  land,  which  evoke  pleasure  or  aversion  ac- 
cording to  their  nature.  In  one  place,  an  aroma  of 
new  mown  hay  fills  us  with  delight;  perhaps  we  arc 
nauseated  by  the  noxious  smell  of  jasmine  on  the 
next  stretch  of  our  journey;  and  later  become  really 
ill  from  the  stench  of  stagnant  marsh-water.  But 
then  we  enter  a  forest,  and  soon  its  grateful  pine 
balm  restores  the  normal  health  and  spirits. 

In  our  journey  from  the  cradle  to  the  grave  we 
carry  the  twelve  houses  with  us  in  the  auric  atmos- 
phere surrounding  us,  as  the  air  envelops  the  flying 
earth.  Each  house  mirrors  part  of  the  life;  each 
holds  some  of  our  life  lessons;  each  represents  how 
we  have  worked  or  shirked  before  in  a  given  depart- 
ment of  life's  task.  At  the  appropriate  time  of  life 


READING   THE   HOROSCOPE  77 

we  reap  from  each  house  what  we  have  sown  in  past 
lives.  That  is,  unless  we  forestall  the  harvest  in 
time.  Is  our  eleventh  house  afflicted,  do  friends  be- 
tray and  forsake  us,  do  they  leave  us  heartsick,  or 
nauseate  us  like  the  scent  of  jasmine  and  stagnant 
marsh- water?  Then  let  us  examine  the  horoscope, 
for  it  reveals  what  is  hidden  in  our  auric  atmos- 
phere. The  friends  saw  us,  and  we  them,  through 
the  eleventh  angle,  and  something  ill-smelling  must 
be  there.  It  may  be,  we  long  to  be  befriended, 
more  than  to  befriend  others.  Let  us  cease  to  be  like 
the  sickly,  debilitating  jasmine,  and  seek  to  emulate 
the  sturdy  strength  of  the  invigorating  pine  tree; 
then  we  shall  find  friends  flocking  around,  admiring 
our  strength.  Not  all  have  such  sturdy  natures,  but 
we  can  attract  equally  by  kindliness,  as  soothing  to 
sorrowing  hearts  as  perfume  of  new  mown  hay  to 
the  sense,  and  thus  we  may  rid  the  house  of  friends 
of  affliction. 

After  the  foregoing  explanations,  the  houses  may 
now  be  said  to  influence  the  affairs  of  life  as  follows : 

First  House  rules  the  physical  body  and  its  consti- 
tution and  appearance ;  it  determines  conditions 
in  the  childhood  home  while  the  person  is  un- 
der control  of  the  parents. 

Second  House  rules  the  money,  financial  fortunes; 
it  shows  what  the  person  acquires  by  individual 
effort  and  to  a  certain  extent  what  use  he  will 
make  of  it. 


78  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Third  House  rules  brothers  and  sisters,  neighbors, 
the  instinctual  mind,  writings,  short  journeys 
and  conveyances  of  travel. 

Fourth  House — That  one  of  the  parents  who  exer- 
cises the  least  influence  in  the  person's  life,  con- 
ditions in  the  latter  part  of  life,  houses,  lands, 
mines;  everything  pertaining  to  the  earth. 

Fifth  House — Love,  courtship  and  licentiousness,  the 
legitimate  and  illegitimate  attraction  and  inter- 
course between  the  sexes  prior  to  wedlock, 
children,  educational  institutions,  books  and 
newspapers,  sports  and  amusements,  stocks  and 
speculations. 

Sixth  House — Health,  service  to  be  rendered  by  the 
person  and  also  the  condition  and  faithfulness 
of  those  who  serve  him. 

Seventh  House — The  marriage  partner,  the  public 
in  general,  competitors,  partners,  opponents  in 
litigation,  rivals. 

Eigthth  House — Death,  legacies,  the  marriage  part- 
ner's finances,  occult  abilities  or  faculties  latent 
but  nearly  ready  for  manifestation. 

Ninth  House — Religion,  spiritual  experiences  and 
aspirations,  dreams  and  visions,  long  travels, 
law. 

Tenth  House — The  parent  who  exercises  most  in- 
fluence in  the  person's  life,  the  honor  and  social 


READING   THE   HOROSCOPE  79 

standing  of  the  person,  the  government,  judge  or 
employer. 

Eleventh  House — Friends,  companions  and  well- 
wishers,  hopes,  wishes  and  aspirations,  generally 
of  a  material  nature,  also  stepchildren. 

Twelfth  House — Confinement  in  hospitals  or  prison, 
secret  enemies  and  plots;  sorrow  and  self  undo- 
ing. 

THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  ZODIAC 

On  either  side  of  the  Sun's  path  there  are  a 
number  of  fixed  stars  which  are  so  grouped  that  they 
may  be  conceived  as  forming  twelve  constellations, 
and  as  they  have  certain  characteristic  influences 
ancient  sages  named  them  for  the  animals  which  ex- 
press similar  traits.  These  constellations  are  called 
the  natural  Zodiac  and  for  all  practical  purposes 
it  may  be  said  that  they  occupy  permanent  positions 
relative  to  the  other  fixed  stars  of  the  firmament. 
This  circle  is  divided  into  twelve  sections  starting  at 
the  first  degree  of  Aries,  which  is  occupied  by  -the 
Sun  at  the  vernal  equinox. 

On  account  of  the  precession  of  the  equinox  the 
Sun  does  not  cross  the  equator  at  the  same  point 
each  year,  but  it  has  been  found  that  the  first  30  de- 
grees from  the  point  where  the  Sun  does  cross  the 
equator  at  the  equinox  have  a  similar  effect  to  that 
ascribed  to  the  constellation  Aries;  the  next  thirty 
degrees  radiate  a  Taurian  influence  and  so  with  the 


80  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE    STARS 

other  ten  sections  of  thirty  degrees  each.  Therefore 
the  twelve  sections  measured  from  the  vernal  equinox 
are  used  exclusively  in  Astrology  and  called  signs 
of  the  Zodiac,  to  differentiate  them  from  the  con- 
stellation. (For  a  thorough  elucidation  of  the  sub- 
ject see  "Simplified  Scientific  Astrology,"  under  the 
caption  "Intellectual  Zodiac.") 

These  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac  are  variously 
divided  according  to  their  effect  on  humanity  into 
Cardinal,  Fixed  and  Common  signs,  also  into  Fiery, 
Earthy,  Airy  and  Watery  signs.  What  that  influence 
is  we  shall  endeavor  to  elucidate  in  the  following  sec- 
tions. 

The  Cardinal  Signs 
Keyword  "Activity." 

The  Cardinal  Signs  are  Aries,  Cancer,  Libra  and 
Capricorn.  These  signs  are  called  Cardinal  be- 
cause when  the  Sun  is  in  them  he  is  in  one  of  the 
four  corners  of  the  heavens;  at  a  turning-point, 
where  he  is  forced  to  take  another  direction.  In 
Aries  he  is  as  far  East  as  he  can  go,  Cancer  is  the 
tropical  point  of  the  North  where  he  gives  the  most 
perpendicular  ray  at  the  Summer  Solstice,  and  con- 
sequently the  greatest  heat.  Libra  is  the  extreme 
Western  point  of  his  path,  where  he  turns  awav 
from  the  Northern  Hemisphere,  and  in  midwinter,  at 
Christmas,  he  is  in  Capricorn  at  the  farthest  point 
South,  where  his  horizontal  ray  leaves  the  people  of 
the  North  in  winter's  icy  grip.  The  effect  of  the 


READING  THE   HOROSCOPE  81 

angles,  the  first,  fourth,  seventh  and  tenth  houses,  is 
similar  to  the  effect  of  the  cardinal  signs  because 
these  houses  are  at  the  East,  North,  West  and  South 
points  of  the  horoscope.  The  nature  and  effect  of 
cardinal  signs  and  angles  may  be  summed  up  in  the 
words  "Action"  and  "Initiative"  (though  each  acts 
differently  from  the  other),  therefore  planets  placed 
in  cardinal  signs  and  angles  give  zest  to  life  accord- 
ing to  the  nature  of  the  particular  planet,  sign  and 
angle. 

Zodiac  means  circle  of  animals  and  the  symbols 
of  three  of  the  cardinal  signs  are  animalistic:  Aries, 
the  Ram ;  Cancer,  the  Crab ;  and  Capricorn,  the  Goat. 
The  fourth  represents  the  ideal  towards  which  this 
class  must  strive :  Libra,  the  Scales.  None  need  poise 
so  much  as  those  under  the  impulsive  influence  of  the 
cardinal  ray;  therefore  the  Balance  was  set  in 
heaven  to  direct  their  aspirations. 

The  Fixed  Signs 
Keyword  "Stability" 

The  Fixed  Signs  are  Taurus,  Leo,  Scorpio  and 
Aquarius.  Three  symbols  of  the  fixed  signs  are  also 
bestial,  violent  and  virulent;  Taurus,  the  Bull; 
Leo,  the  Lion;  and  Scorpio,  the  Scorpion.  The 
human  figure  of  Aquarius,  the  Waterbearer,  shows 
us  the  ideal  towards  which  this  class  must  strive.  In- 
stead of  fighting,  preying  upon,  or  poisoning  others 
in  the  struggle  for  existence  they  must  learn  to  be- 
come humane,  to  be  friends  instead  of  foes  to  all. 

6 


82  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

The  influence  of  the  fixed  signs  rouses  the  de- 
sire nature,  giving  stamina  and  persistence  in  action. 

When  fixed  signs  are  on  the  angles  (the  first, 
fourth,  seventh  and  tenth  houses),  they  exert  a  well 
nigh  irresistible  force,  impelling  the  individual  along 
a  certain  line.  He  may  be  slow  and  plodding,  but  is 
sure  to  be  persistent  in  whatever  he  undertakes,  and 
whatever  talent  he  may  possess  in  a  certain  direc- 
tion will  be  exploited  to  its  fullest  extent.  Setbacks 
which  would  take  the  courage  from  a  person  with 
cardinal  signs  do  not  daunt  the  man  with  fixed  signs 
on  the  angles,  he  knows  no  defeat,  and  therefore 
he  usually  gains  his  goal  in  the  end  and  achieves 
success  by  Concentration  upon  one  point,  and  Per- 
sistence in  following  his  chosen  path.  On  the  other 
hand  such  people  are  conservative  to  the  last  de- 
gree. They  may  see  and  desire  improvements  in  vari- 
ous lines,  but  are  exceedingly  slow  to  adopt  measures 
to  accomplish  the  desirable  end;  they  never  do  so 
until  thoroughly  satisfied  that  a  certain  method  will 
meet  the  requirements.  In  other  words,  people  with 
fixed  signs  on  the  angles  ' '  look  before  they  leap  ; ' ' 
they  look  a  long  time  and  very,  very  carefully,  but 
on  the  other  hand,  when  they  have  once  been  won 
over  to  a  certain  cause  they  are  faithful  unto  death, 
and  no  more  ardent  advocates  can  be  found;  their 
zeal  is  almost  fanatical.  On  the  whole,  people  with 
fixed  signs  may  be  said  to  be  the  most  reliable  people 
in  the  world,  either  for  good  or  bad. 


READING   THE   HOROSCOPE  83 

The  Common  Signs 
Keyword  ' '  Flexibility ' ' 

Gemini,  Sagittarius,  Virgo  and  Pisces  are  called 
common  -  signs,  their  intrinsic  nature  is  best  ex- 
pressed by  the  keyword,  Flexibility. 

The  forces  working  through  the  cardinal  signs 
impinge  upon  the  dense  body  and  stir  it  to  action. 

The  power  of  the  common  signs  is  mental  and 
spiritual,  it  gives  purpose  to  action  and  incentive  to-1 
nobility  of  life. 

Therefore  people  influenced  by  stellar  forces 
focused  principally  through  cardinal  signs  are  the 
workers  of  the  world,  not  the  toilers,  but  executives „ 
who  accomplish  things  industrially,  and  who  bring 
into  concrete  existence  great  schemes,  or  small,  of 
value  in  the  world's  work.  The  common  signs  are 
all  double;  two  of  them  are  human:  Gemini,  the 
Twins,  and  Virgo,  the  Virgin;  the  third,  Sagittarius, 
the  Centaur,  is  partly  human;  and  only  the  fourth 
symbol,  Pisces,  the  Fishes,  is  taken  from  the  lower 
kingdom.  None  are  violent,  however,  but  intensely 
moral,  intellectual  and  spiritual  symbols. 

Unstable  as  reeds  they  are  swayed  hither  and 
thither;  nothing  appeals  to  them  permanently,  they 
desire  nothing  as  much  as  change.  No  matter  how 
well  placed,  they  can  seldom  resist  the  lure  of  an 
opening  in  another  city,  the  farther  away,  the  bet- 
ter. Therefore  the  old  maxim:  "a  rolling  stone 
gathers  no  moss,"  applies  particularly  to  this  class, 


84  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

for  their  roving  habits  usually  keep  them  poor.  They 
spend  as  fast  as  they  earn,  or  faster.  Thus  these 
people  drift  upon  the  sea  of  life  propelled  by  the 
currents  of  circumstances.  Outside  conditions  domi- 
nate them  as  they  lack  stamina  to  assert  their  own 
individuality. 

The  foregoing  in  true  of  the  great  majority  who 
are  under  the  rule  and  influence  of  common  signs, 
they  respond  to  the  lower  phase  simply  because  the 
higher  side  is  too  high  for  all  but  a  very  few  at  our 
present  stage  of  development.  Those  who  make  a 
success  in  the  world  because  prodded  by  the  cardinal 
and  fixed  influences,  call  them  indolent  and  good-for- 
nothing,  but  were  they  bereft  of  the  cardinal  or 
fixed  energy  which  goads  them  to  action,  and  placed 
under  the  common  ray,  they  would  soon  realize  the 
lack  of  powrer  and  learn  compassion  for  those  who 
must  so  live  all  their  life.  What  then  is  the  lesson 
these  people  have  to  learn? 

^Comparative  Effect  of  Cardinal,  Fixed  and  Common 
Signs  on  the  Angles 

While  the  nature  of  the  cardinal  signs  is  such 
that  their  rays  stir  our  latent  forces  into  Action, 
and  promote  change,  the  most  prominent  quality  of 
the  fixed  signs  is  Stability.  But  the  student  must 
beware  of  confounding  stability  and  inertia.  The 
action  impelled  by  the  rays  of  cardinal  signs  may  be 
changed  into  other  channels  with  considerable 
facility,  all  they  want  is  expression;  the  direction  in 


READING   THE   HOROSCOPE  85 

which  they  express  themselves  is  a  secondary  con- 
sideration. Not  so  with  the  fixed  signs,  when  their 
ray  impels  to  action  in  a  certain  direction  it  is  next 
to  impossible  to  stay  the  force  or  change  it.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  they  deny  expression  in  certain  lines, 
the  obstruction  is  almost  insurmountable. 

People  of  the  fixed  class  lack  ability  to  make 
their  inventions  commercially  useable,  a  task  for 
which  the  cardinal  class  is  eminently  fitted.  Thus 
these  two  classes  work  hand  in  hand  and  between 
them  they  have  transformed  the  wilderness  of  the 
world  to  a  condition  of  comparative  comfort,  their 
efforts  of  improvement  are  continually  carried  on, 
and  in  time  the  primitive  desert  will  be  made  to 
bloom  like  a  rose. 

As  material  success  depends  on  ability  to  cope 
with  material  conditions,  the  cardinal  class  is  par- 
ticularly fortunate,  for  it  is  the  chief  executive  fac- 
tor in  the  world's  work,  and  reaps  a  ready  reward 
therefor.  The  fixed  class  is  not  so  prominently  be- 
fore the  public,  labors  in  laboratories  and  works  ex- 
perimentally to  complete  the  processes  and  perfect 
the  models  which  are  later  used  in  manufacture. 
Therefore  they  also  are  potent  powers  in  life,  and 
share  the  material  and  financial  success  of  the  car- 
dinal class. 

The  common  class  is  a  sharp  contrast.  Forces 
focused  through  common  signs  are  mental,  therefore 
people  ruled  by  them  are  averse  to  strenuous  physi- 
cal action  which  is  the  forte  of  the  cardinal  class; 


86  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

they  labor  only  when  lashed  by  the  whip  of  neces- 
sity. They  are  also  incapable  of  the  slow  but  sus- 
tained effort  put  forth  by  the  fixed  class  and  are 
easily  discouraged  by  obstacles.  Thus  they  are 
leaners  and  not  lifters.  Toilers  who  do  the  bidding 
of  the  inventive  and  executive  classes  are  recruited 
from  people  ruled  by  common  signs.  There  is  one 
sphere,  however,  where  they  shine,  according  to  their 
ability  to  think.  Being  averse  to  work  they  have 
created  a  vantage-ground  whence  they  may  reap  the 
benefits  of  the  toil  of  others,  of  their  inventive  facul- 
ties and  executive  skill.  To  do  this  they  become  pro- 
moters who  bring  inventor  and  manufacturer  to- 
gether, agents  who  mediate  between  buyer  and  seller, 
peddlers,  venders  and  all  other  middlemen  who  go 
between  producer  and  consumer  and  live  on  a  com- 
mission, also  literary  men  who  devote  their  talent  to 
purposeless  fiction  belong  to  the  class  actuated  by  the 
lower  phases  of  the  force  in  the  common  signs. 

The  cardinal  class  is  active,  the  common  is  rest- 
less, the  fixed  class  is  rigid,  the  common  is  flexible. 

The  Four  Triplicities 

The  effect  of  the  "Triplicities"  is  most  marked 
in  the  rising  sign  and  when  the  majority  of  the 
planets  are  grouped  in  one  of  them. 

A  fiery  sign  (Aries,  Leo  or  Sagittarius),  on  the 
ascendant,  gives  much  vitality,  but  it  also  makes  the 
person  prone  to  fevers  and  inflammatory  disorders, 
and  when  the  majority  of  the  planets  are  in  fiery 


READING   THE   HOROSCOPE  87 

signs  they  make  it  very  difficult  for  the  person  to 
"keep  cool"  physically  and  mentally. 

A  watery  sign  (Cancer,  Scorpio  or  Pisces)  ris- 
ing, gives  much  less  stamina  and  predisposes  to 
digestive,  urinary  and  catarrhal  troubles.  If  a  per- 
son has  many  planets  in  watery  signs  his  problem  is 
to  generate  enough  energy  to  keep  warm,  for  this 
grouping  gives  a  listless,  indigent  disposition,  ex- 
cept Scorpio  be  rising  or  many  planets  are  in  that 
sign. 

Airy  signs  rising  (Gemini,  Libra  and  Aquar- 
ius), gives  a  nervous  temperament  and  makes  the 
person  liable  to  disorders  of  the  lungs,  heart  and 
kidneys.  Many  planets  in  these  signs  give  people 
literary  and  artistic  inclinations. 

Earthy  signs  rising  (Taurus,  Virgo  and  Capri- 
corn), give  fair  vitality  but  a  secret  fear  of  disease 
arrests  the  vital  processes  in  the  body  and  poisons 
these  people  so  that  they  become  victims  of  chronic 
ailments  oftener  than  any  of  the  other  groupings. 
The  throat,  stomach  and  intestines  are  specially 
threatened;  rheumatism  and  gout  are  also  frequent- 
ly experienced.  When  a  person  has  many  planets  in 
earthy  signs  it  favors  the  acquisition  of  material 
wealth. 

The  Sun,  The  Moon  and  The  Ascendant 

We  stated  in  our  opening  paragraph  that  there 
are  Three  Great  Factors  which  convey  to  us  the 
Mystic  Message  of  the  stars  in  general,  namely,  the 


88  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

"houses,"  the  "signs"  and  the  "planets."  There 
are  also  three  factors  which  play  a  specially  import- 
ant part  in  the  individual  horoscope,  namely  the 
Sun,  the  Moon  and  the  Ascendant,  which  may  be  said 
to  represent  the  spirit,  the  soul  and  the  body. 

Properly  viewed  the  Sun,  Moon  and  Ascendant 
are  not  really  three  separate  horoscopical  principles 
but  represent  two  composite  parts  which  when  united 
constitute  the  human  being.  The  "rising  sign"  and 
the  "first  house"  together  form  an  avenue  for  the 
fecundating  influences  of  the  Moon  which  there 
crystallize  and  form  the  etheric  matrix  that  moulds 
the  physical  particles  from  the  maternal  body  into 
a  new  vehicle,  hence  the  astrological  maxim  that  the 
ascendant  at  birth  (or  its  opposite)  is  the  Moon's 
place  at  conception.  This  composite  body  is  the  part 
of  the  human  being  which  is  born  and  dies  after  a 
relatively  evanescent  period  of  existence. 

The  other  and  immortal  part  of  composite  man 
which  consists  of  the  Ego  and  its  finer  vehicles  is  rep- 
resented in  the  horoscope  by  the  Sun  and  the  Moon. 
The  specific  influence  of  these  planets  will  be  de- 
scribed when  we  have  considered  the  rising  sign. 

Tke  Rising  Sign 

As  taught  in  "Simplified  Scientific  Astrology" 
it  is  the  angle  of  the  stellar  ray  which  determines  in 
what  department  of  life  it  will  be  most  prominently 
active,  and  it  has  been  found  by  observation  that  the 
sign  rising  or  ascending  on  the  eastern  horizon  when 


READING   THE   HOROSCOPE  89 

a  child  is  born  is  the  principal  factor  in  determining 
the  basic  constitution  and  form  of  the  physical  body. 
Further  investigations  have  shown  that  the  reason 
of  this  fact  is  that  at  the  time  of  conception  when  the 
seed-atom  was  planted  in  the  ovum  the  Moon,  which 
is  the  Cosmic  agent  of  fecundation,  projected  its  fer- 
tilizing ray  through  the  sign  and  degree  which  later 
rises  at  the  moment  of  birth,  (or  its  opposite).  For 
that  reason  the  rising  sign  and  degree  continue  to 
be  the  avenue  of  ingress  of  the  life-forces  which 
build  the  body  of  the  babe  until  the  severance  of  the 
umbilical  cord,  and  the  nature  of  the  rising  sign  is 
thus  indelibly  stamped  upon  the  new  vehicle  and  re- 
tained all  through  life. 

In  this  connection  it  should  be  noted  that  con- 
ception is  not  necessarily  coincident  with  tho 
physical  union  of  the  parents,  sometimes  two  weeks 
or  even  more  elapse  ere  the  auspicious  moment 
awaited  by  the  Kecording  Angels  or  their  agents 
strikes.  At  that  time  cosmic  conditions  are  such  that 
they  will  form  a  body  which  will  facilitate  the  ex- 
pression of  the  Ego  seeking  re-embodiment  and  aid 
it  to  work  out  its  self-generated  destiny.  It  should 
also  be  remembered  by  students  that  the  moment  of 
delivery  is  not  the  time  of  birth  from  the  astrological 
point  of  view.  The  inhalation  of  the  first  complete 
breath  usually  accompanied  by  a  cry,  is  the  moment 
when  the  incoming  Ego  receives  its  stellar  baptism. 
This  renders  it  ever  after  susceptible  to  the  influence 
of  the  particular  configurations  of  the  stars  at  that 


90  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

moment,  and  therefore  the  stars  affect  each  indi- 
vidual differently  from  all  others,  not  even  the  horo- 
scopes of  twins  are  alike.  It  is  also  strongly  em- 
phasized that  according  to  this  explanation  we  do 
not  have  a  certain  "fate"  because  we  were  born  at  a 
certain  time,  but  we  are  born  at  a  particular 
time  because  we  have  a  certain  self -generated  des- 
tiny to  work  out.  That  is  a  very  important  distinc- 
tion for  it  substitutes  divine  law  for  divine  caprice, 
it  eliminates  the  element  of  "luck"  and  inspires 
man  to  mastery  of  "fate"  by  working  with  the  Law. 
If  we  have  made  our  present  horoscope  by  our  past 
actions  in  a  past  life  logically  we  are  now  preparing 
for  future  embodiment  and  may  make  it  what  we 
choose.  If  we  strive  to  strengthen  our  body  now;  to 
overcome  our  faults;  to  cultivate  new  virtues;  the 
Sun  of  our  next  life  will  rise  under  much  more 
auspicious  conditions  than  those  under  which  we 
now  live  and  thus  we  may  truly  rule  our  stars  and 
master  our  fate. 

When  the  last  three  degrees  of  a  sign  are  rising, 
or  when  the  first  three  degrees  ascend  at  the  time  of 
birth  the  person  is  said  to  be  born  ' '  on  the  cusp ' '  be- 
tween two  signs  and  then  the  basic  nature  of  the 
signs  involved  are  blended  in  his  or  her  body.  Thus 
a  person  born  when  the  three  last  degrees  of  Aries 
or  the  first  degrees  of  Taurus  were  ascending  would 
be  neither  purely  Aries  nor  Taurus  but  a  mixture  of 
the  qualities  of  the  two  signs. 

The  nature  of  the  rising  sign  is  also  modified  by 


READING   THE   HOROSCOPE  91 

the  presence  of  planets.  The  Sun  and  Mars  increase 
vitality  if  well  aspected  but  if  afflicted  they  incline 
to  fever  and  inflammatory  disorders  but  they  also 
favor  rapid  recuperation,  they  make  the  nature  alert 
and  energetic.  A  well-aspected  Jupiter  rising  also 
increases  vitality  but  inclines  to  corpulence ;  if  the 
planet  is  afflicted  that  makes  the  circulation  sluggish 
and  thus  gives  a  tendency  to  disorders  of  the  blood. 
The  foregoing  remarks  about  Jupiter  apply  to  Venus 
in  a  lesser  degree.  Saturn  rising  lowers  the  vitality 
and  favors  chronic  ill-health  in  later  life,  but  at  the 
same  time  he  gives  such  a  tenacious  hold  on  life  that 
though  the  person  may  pray  to  be  released  he  can- 
not die.  Mercury,  Moon,  Uranus  and  Neptune  make 
the  body  more  high-strung  and  nervous  than  the 
average,  usable  specially  to  pioneers  in  music,  litera- 
ture, higher  thought,  science  and  the  electrical  arts. 
Planets  placed  in  the  twelfth  house  are  con- 
sidered as  being  on  the  ascendant  if  within  six  de- 
grees thereof,  so  are  all  planets  in  the  first  house  no 
matter  how  far  from  the  rising  degree,  but  if  a  sign 
is  intercepted  in  the  first  house  planets  placed  there- 
in will  not  have  as  strong  an  influence  in  the  life  as 
where  the  sign  occupies  the  cusp. 


CHAPTER  V. 

THE  INFLUENCE  OF  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS 
Aries,  the  Ram 

ARIES  is  mythologically  represented  as  a  ram  and 
the  symbol  describes  most  accurately  those  born 
under  its  influence,  a  pointed  and  protruding  sheep- 
like  nose,  wide  forehead,  pointed  chin  and  the  re- 
sultant triangular  face  noted  in  many  people,  are 
unmistakable  indications  of  their  rising  sign,  light 
brown  or  reddish  tint  of  the  hair  is  a  pronounced 
characteristic  of  the  Arian,  the  body  is  slender  and 
well  formed,  if  the  first  part  of  the  sign  is  rising  the 
body  is  shorter,  and  the  complexion  darker  than  given 
by  the  latter  degrees. 

Planets  in  the  rising  sign  will  modify  the  de- 
scription, however,  and  the  student  must  use  his 
knowledge  of  the  character  of  the  planets  in  con- 
junction with  the  description  of  the  Sign.  The  Sun 
and  Mars  make  the  complexion  more  florid,  the  Moon 
and  Saturn  make  it  paler  and  darker,  Jupiter  and 
Venus  make  the  body  more  portly.  Saturn  shortens, 
Uranus  and  Mercury  lengthen  it.  This  applies  to 
all  the  signs,  but  is  especially  marked  when  a  planet 
rises  in  the  sign  it  rules.  Mars,  in  Aries  rising  would 
92 


INFLUENCE   OF   THE   TWELVE    SIGNS         93 

give  fiery  red  hair  and  a  face  full  of  freckles.  The 
Sun  rising  in  Leo  would  give  a  florid  complexion  with 
flaxen  hair,  but  if  Saturn  were  there,  instead  it  would 
shorten  the  body  and  darken  the  hair. 

Aries  people  are  bold,  selfconfident  and  impuls- 
ive; they  aim  to  lead,  dislike  to  follow,  are  always 
ready  to  take  the  initiative  in  any  movement  that 
appeals  to  them,  but  often  lack  persistence  to  carry 
their  projects  to  a  conclusion  over  serious  obstacles. 

The  Sun,  and  Mars  the  Ruler,  rising  in  Aries 
would  intensify  the  above,  but  as  a  thorough  explan- 
ation has  been  given  under  the  heading  "The  in- 
trinsic natures  of  the  Planets,"  the  student  is  re- 
ferred thereto.  We  may  mention  here  however,  as  a 
peculiarity  that  Aries  people  live  through  fevers 
when  others  succumb.  "We  have  known  their  hair 
to  fall  out,  and  the  temperature  to  remain  four  de- 
grees above  maximum  for  many  hours,  without  fatal 
result. 

Taurus,  the  Bull 

Taurus  is  represented  by  a  Bull  in  the  Zodiac, 
and  the  bodies  generated  under  this  sign  are  usually 
short  and  stocky.  They  have  a  strong  neck  with 
the  bump  of  amativeness  well  developed,  large 
lobe  of  the  ear,  heavy  jaws,  full  face;  nose  short 
and  stubby.  Dark  eyes  and  wavy  hair  frequently 
give  them  considerable  beauty.  The  eye  of  the 
Taurian  may  never  dart  bolts  of  fire  such  as  those 
wherewith  the  Arian  would  annihilate  his  enemies; 


94  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

it  is  softer,  but  under  provocation  it  becomes  sul- 
lenly expressive  of  the  passive  resistance  where- 
with these  people  win  their  battles.  It  then  marks 
the  difference  between  the  impulsive  Aries  and  the 
stubborn  Taurus.  The  inner  phalange  of  the  thumb 
is  large  and  heavy,  the  calves  well  developed  and 
the  foot  chubby.  In  walking  the  Taurian  usually 
plants  his  heel  first,  and  heaviest. 

Taurus  people  are  pre-eminently  "thorough  and 
steadfast ' '  in  everything  they  do :  In  love,  in  hate, 
in  work  or  play,  they  persist  in  a  given  direction, 
and  neither  reason  nor  argument  will  turn  them. 
They  are  verbose  and  argumentative  in  defense  of 
their  actions  or  opinions;  they  grasp  new  ideas  slow- 
ly, with  difficulty  and  conservatively,  but  once  com- 
prehended and  espoused,  they  always  remember 
what  they  have  learned  and  defend  their  opinion  to 
the  last  ditch. 

The  Sun  rising  in  Taurus  gives  an  unusually 
firm  physique,  and  accentuates  the  Taurus  pride  in 
strength.  The  Moon,  being  the  planet  of  fecundity, 
is  exalted  in  this  exceedingly  fruitful  sign;  hence 
people  with  the  Moon  in  Taurus  have  large  families, 
particularly  if  the  configuration  is  in  the  fifth 
house,  for  that  designates  children. 

Venus,  the  ruler  of  Taurus,  rising  in  that  sign, 
makes  the  form  beautiful  as  well  as  strong,  it  also 
gives  artistic  ability  and  musical  inspiration. 


INFLUENCE   OF   THE   TWELVE   SIGNS         95 

Gemini,  the  Twins 

When  Gemini  is  rising  the  body  generated  is 
tall  and  slender ;  the  arms  and  limbs  are  particularly 
long,  fingers  slender,  hair  dark,  eyes  hazel.  Gemini 
people  are  quick,  active  and  alert  in  all  their  move- 
ments, habitual  restlessness  is  noticeable  in  the  ex- 
pression of  the  eyes,  which  differs  in  that  respect 
from  more  fixed  tendencies  of  the  eyes  of  those  born 
under  the  two  preceding  signs,  although  of  course 
we  do  not  mean  that  the  Arian  always  looks  angry 
and  the  Taurian  stubborn,  nevertheless,  there  is  a 
settled  tendency  in  those  directions  noticeable  when 
these  people  are  not  occupied  in  a  certain  direction, 
but  the  Gemini  person  has  an  expression  which  Ls 
much  more  vivid,  changeable  and  past  finding  out. 
They  have  acutely  enquiring  minds,  always  want  to 
know  the  reason  why,  but  often  lack  persistence  to 
follow  clews  to  the  end,  and  thus  meet  disappoint- 
ment. Being  tactful  they  avoid  giving  offense  even 
under  provocation,  and  are  therefore  generally 
liked  by  all;  though  their  own  affections  are  not 
deep.  Two  distinct  classes  are  born  under  this  sign, 
one,  too  fond  of  reading,  should  cultivate  indepen- 
dent thought,  instead  of  repeating  other  people's 
ideas,  or  aping  their  manners;  the  other  is  scientific, 
well  balanced  and  reserved;  a  model  for  any  person. 

The  Sun  rising  in  Gemini  brings  out  all  the 
noblest  traits  of  the  sign,  it  makes  the  nature  more 
settled  and  contented,  gives  more  persistence  and  a 
particularly  healthy  and  active  body. 


96  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

Mercury,  the  ruler,  rising  in  Gemini,  sharpens 
perception,  gives  ability  as  a  writer,  or  speaker,  but 
makes  the  person  born  with  that  configuration  ex- 
tremely irritable,  vacillating,  fond  of  change  of 
scene  and  employment.  They  are  best  fitted  for 
traveling  salesmen. 

Cancer,  the  Crab 

The  chief  peculiarities  of  the  crab  are  a  clumsy 
body,  slender  limbs  and  powerful  claws;  people 
born  with  Cancer  rising  express  them  all.  They 
have  a  large  upper  body,  augmented  in  later  years 
by  a  prominence  of  the  abdomen  acquired  by  over- 
eating. The  mandible  or  lower  jaw  is  powerfully 
hinged  to  the  cranium,  the  face  is  therefore  widest 
between  the  ears,  the  mouth  is  also  large,  and  the 
whole  construction  similar  to  the  crab's  claw.  The 
face  is  full,  the  hair  brown,  the  eyes  blue,  com- 
plexion pale  and  sickly,  for  the  Cancer  person  has 
the  least  vitality  of  any.  The  limbs  are  extremely 
slender  in  proportion  to  the  large  upper  body,  so 
the  structure  appears  "top  heavy,"  and  they  walk 
with  a  "rolling"  gait. 

Cancer  people  are  very  fond  of  the  home  and 
its  comforts,  they  are  quiet,  reserved  and  adapt 
themselves  to  conditions,  hence  they  are  easy  to  get 
along  with,  their  anger  is  shortlived,  and  they  hold 
no  spite.  Though  lacking  in  physical  prowess,  they 
are  no  hypocrites,  but  always  have  the  courage  of 
their  convictions;  they  voice  and  defend  them  too. 


INFLUENCE   OF   THE   TWELVE   SIGNS         97 

The  Sun  rising  in  Cancer  brings  out  and  accen- 
tuates all  the  good  qualities  mentioned  above,  it 
gives  more  ambition  and  pride;  also  increases  the 
vitality,  and  is  a  particular  boon  to  people  with 
Cancer  rising  in  that  respect,  on  account  of  their 
very  low  life  force.  Cancer,  with  its  ruler,  the 
Moon,  governs  the  stomach  and  hence  alimentation ; 
Leo  and  its  ruler,  the  Sun,  have  charge  of  the  heart 
and  circulation.  If  these  signs  and  planets  are  well 
placed  in  the  horoscope,  they  counteract  most  other 
afflictions  and  a  long  lease  of  life  is  assured,  but  if 
they  are  afflicted,  much  sickness  results  unless  intel- 
ligent care  is  applied  to  modify  the  omen. 

The  Moon,  the  ruler,  rising  in  Cancer,  will  give 
much  instability  to  the  nature,  and  Jupiter  being 
exalted  will  bring  fortune  and  fame. 

Leo,  the  Lion 

The  lion  is  the  king  of  beasts  and  even  in  cap- 
tivity is  an  embodiment  of  stateliness  and  pride. 
The  typical  Leos  of  the  Zodiac  also  express  pride  in 
every  movement  and  a  stateliness,  which  will  not 
escape  attention  of  the  keen  observer,  the  expansive 
chest,  the  massive  shoulders,  the  strong  arm  and  the 
large  head  contrast  considerably  with  the  more 
slender  but  still  muscular  under  body,  and  as  Aries 
has  the  sheep  face,  so  the  typical  Leo  has  certain 
feline  features.  The  complexion  is  florid,  eyes  large 
and  full,  blue  or  grayish  in  color,  they  express 
laughter,  cheerfulness  and  content.  The  whole 


98  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE    STARS 

frame  is  well  knit  and  strong,  having  great  endur- 
ance and  recuperative  power. 

It  is  really  wonderful  how  the  symbology  of  the 
signs  is  brought  out  in  the  different  kinds  of  people 
born  under  them.  People  who  are  born  under  Leo 
always  want  to  be  noted;  they  are  aggressive  and 
want  to  attract  attention  everywhere  they  go.  They 
aim  to  be  leaders;  never  followers. 

Leo  rules  the  heart,  and  it  is  a  marked  character- 
istic that  people  with  Leo  rising  unafflicted,  have 
hearts  bigger  than  their  pocketbooks;  they  give  gen- 
erously of  their  time,  money,  or  knowledge  without 
thought  of  self.  If  the  Sun  rises  in  Leo,  this  trait 
becomes  almost  prodigality,  but  if  Saturn  is  there  to 
afflict  instead,  he  will  counteract  it  so  that  they  will 
either  circumscribe  their  gifts  with  conditions  to  such 
an  extent  that  they  retain  practical  control,  or  they 
will  spend  their  means  on  themselves. 

Leos  are  honest  and  faithful;  being  child ren- of 
the  day  star,  they  -love  light  and  truth,  are  above  sub- 
terfuge and  aim  straight  at  their  object.  Their  will 
is  firm  to  attain  by  honorable  means.  They  make 
good  orators  and  hold  their  audiences  by  personal 
magnetism.  They  are  very  attractive  to  the  opposite 
sex,  and  the  lower  nature  should  be  held  firmly  in 
check,  otherwise  serious  trouble  and  heartache  may 
ensue.  The  French,  as  a  race,  are  ruled  by  Leo,  and 
afford  ample  illustration  of  this  point. 

The  Sun  rising  in  Leo,  unafflicted,  gives  a  body 
of  wonderful  strength,  vitality  and  recuperative 


INFLUENCE   OF   THE   TWELVE    SIGNS         99 

power ;  superior  in  its  wiryness  to  the  body  generated 
by  the  Sun  in  Taurus ;  but  if  Mars  is  afflicted,  palpi- 
tation of  the  heart  will  ensue.  Saturn  will  cause  re- 
gurgitation  unless  care  is  taken  in  early  years  to 
avoid  strain. 

Virgo,  the  Virgin 

People  born  when  Virgo  is  rising  are  above  mid- 
dle stature.  The  upper  part  of  the  head  is  much  more 
developed  than  the  lower,  the  weak  chin,  showing 
lack  of  will  and  the  large  brain  indicating  greatness 
of  intellect,  are  therefore  earmarks  of  the  Virgo.  The 
face  is  thin,  the  complexion  sallow,  the  hair  brown 
and  the  eyes  hazel  or  grey.  The  feet  are  small,  the 
toes  turn  inwards  and  give  these  people  a  peculiar 
labored  walk. 

Virgo  people  are  very  quick  and  active  in  youth, 
they  learn  with  facility,  but  do  not  work  hard  for 
knowledge ;  they  seem  to  breathe  it  in  without  an 
effort.  They  acquire  linguistic  and  elocutionary 
powers  most  readily,  are  fluent  writers  but  often 
cynical,  cold  and  unforgiving  when  they  have  been 
injured.  They  are  extreme  in  their  food,  and  make 
hygiene  a  fad ;  they  often  fancy  that  they  have  every 
imaginable  disease,  because  Virgo  is  the  sixth  sign 
and  has  a  certain  affinity  with  the  sixth  house,  de- 
noting health  and  disease. 

Mercury,  the  ruler,  is  also  exalted  here  and  gives 
pronouncement  of  all  the  good  which  otherwise 
might  be  expected  from  the  Sun. 

Virgo  people  are  slender  in  youth,  but  when  the 


100  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

Sun  of  Life  passes  the  Meridian  and  begins  to  throw 
its  shadows  toward  the  East,  we  find  in  them  a  ten- 
dency toward  corpulence  of  body,  particularly  of 
that  part  ruled,  by  Virgo,  namely,  the  abdomen. 
They  neglect  to  take  exercise,  and  naturally  on  this 
account  a  sluggish  condition  of  the  intestines  may 
set  in  which  retains  the  poisons  in  the  body  and  robs 
life  of  its  joys  and  makes  one  indifferent.  In  this 
fact  lies  the  greatest  danger  of  the  Virgo  people. 
Once  they  get  into  the  rut  of  sickness,  they  actually 
"enjoy"  poor  health.  They  love  to  talk  over  their 
symptoms  with  other  people,  and  they  resent  any 
thought  or  suggestion  given  to  them  that  they  are 
not  sick,  or  that  they  can  get  well.  The  presence  of 
Saturn  in  Virgo,  or  the  sixth  house,  accentuates 
this  tendency  in  the  very  highest  degree,  and  there- 
fore it  is  an  almost  infallible  sign  that  the  native  will 
have  or  be  subject  to  chronic  illness,  the  nature  of 
this  disease  being  denoted  by  the  aspect,  and  the  af- 
flicting planets. 

Jn  order  to  deal  successfully  with  Virgo  people 
-w~hen  they  have  once  become  subject  to  disease,  and 
get  them  out  of  it  at  all,  it  is  necessary  to  be  firm 
almost  to  the  verge  of  cruelty.  But  though  one  may 
seem  cruel  in  enforcing  upon  them  the  regime  that  is 
necessary  to  bring  them  away  from  themselves,  this 
is  really  the  greatest  kindness  that  can  be  shown,  for 
once  these  people  are  in  the  grip  of  sickness  they 
stubbornly  refuse  to  let  go ;  they  will  resort  to  the 
most  cunning,  even  childlike  schemes  to  excite  eym- 


INFLUENCE   OF   THE   TWELVE    SIGNS       101 

pathy,  particularly  from  strangers,  and  they  will  re- 
sent any  effort  to  show  them  that  they  are  not  help- 
less invalids.  At  the  very  slightest  suggestion  of  a 
hopeful  nature,  they  sometimes  lose  their  temper  in 
the  most  unwarranted  manner.  But  when  at  last 
they  are  given  the  deaf  ear  by  everybody,  when  peo- 
ple who  are  in  their  immediate  environment  can  be 
persuaded  to  show  them  no  sympathy,  then  they  may 
come  to  themselves.  They  need  a  shock  to  bring 
them  out  and  away  from  their  condition.  And  until 
they  get  that  they  never  can  be  cured. 

The  Virgos  make  splendid  nurses,  if  they  can 
keep  from  taking  on  the  conditions  of  the  patient. 
The  Virgo  people  never  can  bear  to  see  blood  shed  or 
touch  dead  things.  They  feel  bodily  injury  to  others 
more  than  harm  done  to  themselves,  and  are  in 
fact  splendidly  described  by  the  word  chicken- 
hearted. 

Libra,  the  Scales 

Elegance  may  be  said  to  express  in  one  word  the 
physical  peculiarities  of  the  Libran.  The  body  is 
slender  and  graceful  in  youth;  it  becomes  more 
plump  as  life  advances,  but  even  the  portliness  of 
the  Libra  body  is  pleasing.  The  complexion  is 
smooth  and  clear,  eyes  are  soft  and  blue  with  a  kind 
expression;  the  mouth  is  unusually  well  formed  and 
the  teeth  particularly  fine  and  even. 

Libra  people  have  extremely  strong  conjugal 
affection,  so  strong,  in  fact,  that  it  overshadows  all 


102  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

other  considerations.  The.  Leos  love  their  families, 
but  their  hearts  take  in  all  the  world  besides ;  not  so 
the  Librans,  they  are  ready  for  any  sacrifice  to  give 
comforts  to  those  in  their  own  immediate  home  circle, 
but  they  are  also  prepared  to  sacrifice  anyone  else's 
family  for  their  own,  if  necessary. 

In  most  other  traits  the  Librans  express  aptly  the 
symbolism  of  their  sign:  a  pair  of  scales,  and  their 
characteristics  might  be  expressed  in  the  word: 
"Changeability."  They  are  people  of  "moods,"  be- 
cause Saturn  is  exalted  here  and  weighs  upon  the 
mind ;  the  changes  are  sudden  and  extreme ;  they  may 
follow  a  fad  with  as  much  zest  as  if  their  life  de- 
pended upon  it,  and  then,  without  a  moment's  warn- 
ing, drop  it  and  take  up  something  entirely  opposite ; 
there  are  no  halfway  measures  in  the  swing  of  the 
scales.  Being  naturally  given  to  change,  they  are 
most  adaptable  to  circumstances,  and  do  not  fret 
over  reverses,  but  set  about  to  restore  their  fortunes 
with  vim  and  vigor. 

Aries  aiid  Libra  may  be  said  to  be  the  battlefields 
of  the  Sun  and  Saturn :  Life  and  Death,  Joy  and 
Sorrow.  The  Sun  is  exalted  in  Aries,  and  vanquishes 
Saturn;  hence  the  intrepidity  of  Aries  people.  In 
Libra  the  scales  tip  the  other  way,  there  Saturn  is 
exalted,  and  conquers  the  Sun;  this  gives  a  softer 
tone  to  the  Libran,  whose  kindly  politeness  contrasts 
markedly  with  the  Arian's  brusque  address.  Venus, 
the  ruler  of  Libra,  is  not  alone  responsible  for  this 
trait,  for  Taurus  people  are  blunt,  though  Venus 


INFLUENCE   OF   THE   TWELVE    SIGNS       103 

rules.     Venus  rising  in  Libra  gives  artistic  ability, 
Saturn  turns  the  mind  in  scientific  directions. 

Librans  usually  have  well  shaped  hands  and 
feet,  and  are  very  proud  of  them. 

Scorpio,  the  Eagle 

The  nose  is  the  most  prominent  feature  of  the 
Scorpio ;  it  is  large,  heavy,  and  hooked,  resembling 
the  bill  of  the  eagle ;  the  brows  are  bushy,  the  eyes 
sharp  and  piercing;  the  jaw  is  very  heavy;  the  glint 
of  the  eye,  and  the  set  of  the  jaw  indicate  the  great 
determination  which  is  the  most  prominent  charac- 
teristic of  the  Scorpio.  The  face  is  angular,  complex- 
ion murky,  and  hair  dark,  with  a  peculiar  ruddy 
tinge  noticeable  when  the  sun  shines  on  it.  The 
teeth  are  large  and  subject  to  early  decay.  The  body 
is  short  and  thickset,  with  a  short,  thick  neck  re- 
sembling that  of  the  opposite  sign :  Taurus. 

Scorpio  people  always  stand  up  for  their  rights, 
and  never  submit  to  imposition,  though  prone  to  ride 
roughshod  over  others.  They  are  full  of  worries 
over  things  that  may  happen,  but  never  do,  and  thus 
make  life  a  burden  to  those  around  them.  Sarcasm 
that  stings  like  a  scorpion  is  aye  upon  the  tip  of  their 
tongue,  yet  their  love  is  strong,  and  their  aspirations 
lofty.  Thus  there  are  two  natures  struggling  in  the 
Scorpio  and  they  need  much  sympathy  and  forbear- 
ance from  their  friends.  In  the  hour  of  danger  they 
never  flinch,  but  perform  deeds  of  heroism  with  a  dis- 
regard of  self  that  amounts  to  foolhardiness.  The 


104  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

mind  is  sharp,  cool  and  collected,  therefore  Scorpio 
men  make  good  army  officers  and  excel  in  surgery. 
The  Scorpio  woman  has  a  large  family. 

The  Sun  in  Scorpio  accentuates  the  good  traits; 
and  gives  a  love  of  mysticism ;  but  Mars,  the  ruler, 
brings  out  the  worldly  side  of  the  sign,  it  makes  scof- 
fers and  sceptics. 

Sagittarius,  the  Centaur 

People  born  with  Sagittarius  rising  are  even 
taller  than  those  born  under  the  opposite  sign,  Gemi- 
ni, the  men  in  particular  have  large  hands  and  feet. 
The  size  and  weight  of  the  bony  frame  is  often  too 
much  for  the  ligaments  of  the  spine  to  support,  .and 
so  these  people  develop  a  decided  stoop  in  later  years 
The  face  is  long  and  well  formed,  the  nose  well  pro- 
portioned, dark  kindly  eyes,  with  dark  chestnut  hair. 
The  body  is  very  active,  but  requires  much  rest,  as 
the  recuperative  powers  are  below  the  requisite. 

The  symbol  of  this  sign  shows  that  there  are  two 
widely  different  classes  born  therein.  One,  desig- 
nated by  the  animal  body  of  the  Centaur,  is  frankly 
in  f or  "  a  good  time, ' '  they  are  sporty,  soldiers  of  for- 
tune, of  roving  proclivities,  fond  of  games  of  chance, 
and  ready  to  risk  their  all  on  the  turn  of  a  card,  the 
speed  of  a  horse,  or  a  game  of  ball,  while  Aries  or 
Scorpio  people  may  become  pugilists,  and  Taurus 
people  take  up  wrestling  as  a  profession.  The  sports 
of  Sagittarius  have  no  element  of  cruetly  in  them; 
sometimes  when  afflicted  they  may  be  criminals,  their 


INFLUENCE  OF  THE  TWELVE   SIGNS       105 

crimes  are  never  violent,  however,  but  rather  results 
of  their  indulgence  of  the  animal  nature. 

The  other  class  is  the  extreme  opposite;  symbol- 
ized by  the  human  part  of  the  sign.  Here  is  the  man 
rising  above  the  animal  nature,  bending  the  bow  of 
aspiration  and  aiming  at  limitless  space,  signifying 
the  loftiest  longings  of  that  immortal  spark  of  in- 
cipient divinity  we  call  the  soul.  Law  abiding,  of  the 
highest  morals,  honored  pillars  in  the  church,  be- 
loved rulers  of  state,  famed  for  integrity,  benevo- 
lence and  justice. 

The  Sun  rising  in  this  sign  is  sure  to  bring  pre- 
ferment even  to  those  born  in  lowly  and  obscure  cir- 
cumstances, and  accentuate  all  good  shown  in  the 
sign;  so  will  Jupiter,  the  ruler. 

Sagittarius  rules  the  thighs  and  therefore, 
naturally,  configurations  from  this  sign,  if  accidents 
are  indicated,  may  be  placed  in  those  regions.  And 
it  is  a  notable  fact  that  Sagittarians  are  very  liable  to 
broken  bones  under  circumstances  where  people  with 
other  signs  seldom  meet  injury. 

In  the  eighth  degree  of  Sagittarius  we  have  the 
fixed  star  Antares,  which  has  a  very  evil  effect  upon 
the  sight.  Two  other  nebulous  spots  in  the  Zodiac 
have  a  similar  influence.  One  is  Ascelli  in  Leo  6,  the 
other  Pleiades  in  Taurus  29.  The  Sun,  or  Moon,  in 
one  of  those  places  and  adversely  configurated  with 
one  of  the  malefics,  Saturn,  Mars,  Uranus  and  Nep- 
tune gives  trouble  in  the  eyes,  according  to  the  na- 
ture of  the  evil  aspect.  Or,  vice  versa,  if  Saturn, 


106  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Mars,  Uranus  and  Neptune  are  in  one  of  the  nebu- 
lous spots  adversely  configurated  to  the  Sun  or  Moon 
a  similar  trouble  will  be  experienced.  Should  a 
planet  like  one  of  the  last  named  be  in  retrograde  mo- 
tion the  aspect  is  much  worse,  for  when  the  planet 
has  ceased  to  retrograde  and  goes  direct  in  the 
Zodiac  again,  it  will  pass  over  which  ever  one  of 
these  nebulous  spots  it  is  close  to  a  second  time  and 
thereby  cause  an  added  damage.  There  may  be,  how- 
ever, a  compensating  side  to  this  aspect,  for  it  some- 
times happens  that  while  an  evil  configuration  to 
one  of  these  nebulous  spots,  and  Antares  is  the 
worst,  deprives  a  person  of  his  or  her  sight,  a  benevo- 
lent configuration  awakens  in  them  a  second-sight 
which  will  mitigate  the  loss  in  a  degree  which  only 
those  who  have  that  sight  can  appreciate. 

The  Sagittarian  must  learn  to  realize  his  ideals 
within  instead  of  seeking  them  without.  We  are  in 
this  school  of  experience  for  the  purpose  of  overcom- 
ing, and  it  is  not  by  running  away  from  one  place  to 
another  that  we  gain  experience.  By  staying  in  one 
place,  by  doing  our  very  best  to  attain  our  ideals 
where  we  are,  we  make  our  ideals  come  true. 

Capricorn,  the  Goaf 

Capricorn  rising  gives  a  short,  slender,  narrow- 
chested  body  with  a  thin  neck,  thin  silky  dark  hair, 
a  pale  peaked  face  with  small  blinking  weak  eyes. 
The  chin  pointed  and  turned  upwards,  the  nose 
pointed  and  turned  downwards,  an  impediment  in 


INFLUENCE   OF   THE   TWELVE    SIGNS       107 

the  speech,  ill  formed  lower  limbs  and  an  awkward 
walk.  The  vitality  is  very  low,  and  these  children 
are  reared  with  great  difficulty,  but  once  infancy  is 
past,  they  exhibit  a  tenacity  that  is  truly  amazing, 
and  often  become  very,  very  old ;  they  seem  to  dry  up 
into  a  mass  of  wrinkled  skin  and  bone  that  is  all  but 
imperishable,  this,  on  account  of  the  Saturn  ray 
which  rules  Capricorn.  It  is  noticeable  also,  that  all 
who  have  that  planet  prominent  in  the  nativity  show 
the  before  mentioned  wrinkling  of  the  skin;  even 
though  they  may  retain  corpulence  conferred  by 
other  configurations. 

Ambition  and  suspicion  are  ruling  characteris- 
tics, an  inordinate  desire  for  recognition  of  their 
claims  to  superiority  and  advancement,  also  suspi- 
cion that  others  are  trying  to  subvert  or  withhold 
the  coveted  prize,  are  ever  with  these  people.  It 
causes  them  much  unnecessary  worry,  and  may  re- 
sult in  habitual  melancholy,  particularly  if  Saturn 
is  afflicted.  They  ought  to  seek  amusement  outdoors, 
read  funny  stories  and  otherwise  try  to  cultivate  a 
sense  of  the  humorous  from  childhood,  for  this  is  one 
of  the  saddest  signs,  and  needs  all  possible  encour- 
agement. 

Capricorn  people  are  successful  in  detective 
work,  where  secret  practices  are  used  to  trap  others ; 
and  persistence  is  required  to  ferret  out  a  mystery, 
for  they  never  give  up.  The  afflicted  Capricorn  is 
very  revengeful,  and  if  by  Mars,  may  shed  blood  to 
satisfy  a  grudge.  The  Sun  rising  brings  out  the  Jus- 


108  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

tice,  Purity  and  Honor  of  the  sign,  makes  Captains  of 
Construction  such  as  forward  the  great  enterprises 
of  the  world. 

Aquarius,  the  Water  Bearer 

The  stateliness  and  pride  of  those  born  under 
the  sign  of  Leo  are  not  missing  in  the  typical 
Aquarian,  but  while  in  the  Leo  these  qualities  are  of 
a  lower,  more  beastly  nature  agreeable  to  the  sign, 
they  are  manly  pride  and  stateliness  in  the  true 
Aquarian.  Libra  generates  a  beautiful  body  but 
more  effeminate  as  it  were,  whereas  the  Aquarian 
beauty  is  truly  manly  or  womanly,  the  fearless  eye  is 
kindly  and  drooping  eyelashes  are  peculiar  to  this 
sign.  The  forehead  is  square,  and  the  well  developed 
poise  tells  of  intellect,  the  large  domed  head  shows 
the  spiritual  side  of  the  nature  and  the  chin  is  suf- 
ficiently developed  to  give  purpose  to  all  actions. 
Thus  the  typical  Aquarian  is  the  highest  grade  of 
humanity;  but  therefore,  also  exceedingly  rare,  for 
the  variants  produced  in  each  sign  from  the  typical, 
by  the  interposition  of  one  or  more  planets  are  so 
different  that  the  type  is  often  unrecognizable  in  the 
majority  of  its  features.  Aquarians  are  most  loyal  to 
friends,  therefore  they  attract  manv,  keep  them 
through  life,  and  are  much  benefitted  by  them.  Like 
Capricorn,  this  sign  is  ruled  by  Saturn,  and  he  gives 
to  the  Aquarian  the  same  retiring  nature  and  tend- 
ency to  melancholy  which  marks  the  Capricornian, 
but  also  the  persistence  in  following  a  given  course, 


INFLUENCE   OF   THE   TWELVE   SIGNS       109 

and  whatever  financial  success  comes  to  these  people 
is  the  result  of  continued  and  patient  effort ;  Aquar- 
ians are  very  deliberate  and  longsuffering ;  they 
never  act  in  a  hurry,  and  therefore  seldom  have 
cause  to  regret  their  actions,  save  when  reason  has 
been  stilled  through  play  upon  their  sympathies,  for 
under  such  circumstances  they  are  readily  imposed 
upon.  The  love  nature  is  very  strong,  but  they 
are  not  as  demonstrative  as  the  Leo.  It  is  note- 
worthy that  the  qualities  of  opposite  signs  are  always 
reflected :  Leo  in  Aquarians,  reflects  love ;  Taurus 
mirrors  the  passion  of  Scorpio,  the  Gemini  body  is  a 
reflex  of  the  bony  Sagittarius  frame,  etc. 

The  Sun  and  Saturn  bring  out  more  prominently 
the  good  traits  of  Aquarius,  for  this  sign  where  he 
rules  and  Libra  where  he  is  exalted,  are  therefore 
under  his  most  benign  influence.  The  Sun  in  Aqua- 
rius adds  much  hope  and  life  to  the  nature,  and  thus 
counteracts  the  melancholy  trait  previously  men- 
tioned. 

Pisces,  the  FisTies 

The  typical  Piscean  is  short,  flabby  and  fleshy 
with  a  waddling  gait  not  unlike  those  born  under  the 
sign  Cancer,  but  differs  from  them  by  having  a 
stouter  body.  The  feet  are  often  turned  in,  but 
larger  than  those  born  under  Virgo.  The  body  is 
weak  and  deficient  in  recuperative  force.  The  com- 
plexion is  medium,  the  eyes  blue,  watery  and  expres- 
sionless, the  ncse  is  large  and  flat. 


110  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

There  is  a  strong  tendency  to  mediumship 
among  the  Pisces  people,  and  therein  is  a  danger 
greater  than  any  other  on  earth.  No  one  should  "sit 
for  development"  and  degenerate  into  the  tool  of 
low  spirits,  but  a  Pisces  person  in  particular  is 
"lost"  if  taken  control  of.  They  cannot  free  them- 
selves, neither  in  this  life  or  the  next,  because  gener- 
ally inert  and  devoid  of  will  power.  They  are  timid, 
and  even  the  men  are  tearful  on  the  slightest  provo- 
cation; they  love  leisure  more  than  comfort,  and  do 
no  work  when  not  absolutely  necessary  to  keep  body 
and  soul  together.  They  love  change  of  scene,  rove 
about  considerably,  generally  in  an  aimless  manner. 
Being  fond  of  good  things  to  eat  and  drink,  particu- 
larly the  latter,  and  lacking  will  to  curb  their  appe- 
tite when  afflicted,  they  frequently  indulge  their 
craving  to  such  an  extent  that  they  become  habitual 
drunkards. 

The  Sun  rising  in  Pisces  gives  more  energy  and 
ambition,  Jupiter,  the  ruler,  strengthens  the  morals, 
and  Venus  exalted  in  this  sign,  gives  great  musical 
talent,  but  accentuates  the  tendency  to  alcoholic  in- 
dulgence, which  mars  the  lives  of  so  many  splendid 
musicians. 

When  many  planets  are  in  Pisces,  the  person 
will  have  a  hard  life,  because  he  or  she  will  not  want 
to  take  up  their  life's  burden,  but  love  to  dream, 
they  become  recluses ;  they  seek  to  master  the  hidden 
arts,  occultism  and  mysticism ;  are  not  guided  by  rea- 
son, but  rather  by  their  likes  and  dislikes,  and  unless 


INFLUENCE   OF   THE   TWELVE    SIGNS       111 

they  can  find  an  occupation  that  is  otherwise  isolated 
from  the  ordinary  business  and  trend  of  life  they 
will  feel  out  of  place.  They  are  prone  to  incur  the 
enmity  of  people  with  whom  they  come  in  contact  in- 
timately; nobody  seems  to  get  along  with  them,  and 
everybody,  whether  they  show  it  or  not,  will  take  a 
dislike. 

There  is,  ho\vever,  a  higher  side  to  Pisces,  the 
person  who  finds  himself  with  Pisces  on  the  ascend- 
ant is  at  the  end  of  one  cycle  of  progress  and  at 
the  beginning  of  a  new.  He  stands,  as  it  were,  upon 
the  threshhold  of  something  higher.  Therefore,  he  is 
usually  not  able  to  live  up  to  the  possibilities  of  the 
sign  which  requires  self-sacrifice  and  non-resistance 
in  absolutely  Christlike  fashion.  The  tendency  is 
therefore  to  drift  upon  the  sea  of  life  and  dream 
dreams  of  future  greatness.  This  tendency  must  be 
counteracted  by  every  effort  of  the  will,  for  other- 
wise life  will  be  a  failure,  and  later  the  stern  whip  6f 
necessity  will  be  applied  to  goad  him  or  her  into  ac- 
tion. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

THE  INTRINSIC  NATURE  OF  THE  PLANETS 

THE  nature  of  gun  powder  which  causes  it  to  ex- 
plode under  certain  circumstances  is  neither  good 
nor  bad,  the  quality  of  its  action  is  determined  by  the 
way  its  power  is  used.  When  it  furthers  the  welfare 
of  the  community  it  is  called  good,  and  evil  when 
used  in  a  manner  derogatory  to  our  well  being;  so 
also  with  the  planets,  they  are  neither  good  nor  evil, 
each  has  its  intrinsic  nature  and  acts  in  a  manner 
consonant  therewith  save  as  modified  by  the  circum- 
stances under  which  its  powers  are  exerted.  When 
we  know  the  nature  of  a  sign  and  the  nature  of  a 
planet,  we  may  combine  the  two,  and  thus  obtain  the 
correct  reading  of  the  stellar  script  by  our  own  rea- 
soning instead  of  depending  upon  authorities.  For 
instance,  the  Sun  is  hot,  full  of  vital  force,  and 
exercises  an  influence  that  buoys  us  up  in  body  and 
spirit.  When  its  rays  fall  upon  us  with  moderate 
strength  it  makes  us  stronger  and  more  cheerful,  for 
there  is  an  atmosphere  of  generosity,  out-going  love 
and  kindliness  in  the  Sun.  Thus  if  the  Sun  at  birth 
is  in  the  weak  sign,  Cancer,  naturally  the  effect  would 
be  to  modify  the  weak  constitution  described  in  the 
foregoing  signature  of  the  signs ;  the  heat  of  the  Sun 
112 


INTRINSIC  NATURE  OF  THE  PLANETS      113 

would  give  a  more  florid  complexion  to  the  Cancer 
person,  the  general  health  and  recuperative  powers 
would  be  materially  augmented,  not  to  speak  of  the 
changes  that  would  be  manifested  in  the  disposition, 
giving  more  ambition,  hopefulness  and  buoyancy  to 
the  temperament.  Suppose,  on  the  other  hand,  that 
the  Sun  is  in  Aries  when  that  sign  is  rising  at  the 
birth  of  a  person,  then  the  fire  of  the  Sun,  added  to 
the  fire  of  the  sign  Aries,  will  increase  the  boldness 
and  the  intrepidity  of  the  person  to  such  a  degree 
that  it  may  become  foolhardiness,  particularly,  if 
Mars,  the  ruler  of  Aries,  is  also  there  and  increases 
the  warlike  tendencies.  Those  are  characteristics, 
but  the  physical  body  will  also  suffer  from  this  ex- 
cessive heat,  the  blood  will  race  through  the  veins  of 
such  a  person  like  a  Niagara  of  liquid  fire,  and  fevers 
would  be  a  frequent  experience,  as  the  superabund- 
ance of  vitality  burns  out  the  physical  casement. 
Were  the  cold,  slow  and  sluggish  Saturn  there  in- 
stead of  the  Sun  and  Mars,  he  might  squelch  almost 
all  of  the  Aries  characteristics  both  mental  and 
physical.  If  we  consider  Aries  symbolized  by  a 
stove  in  which  a  fire  is  burning,  it  would  make  the 
same  difference  whether  the  hot  Mars,  or  the  cold 
Saturn,  were  placed  there,  as  it  makes  a  difference 
whether  we  pour  oil  or  water  into  the  stove.  Simi- 
larly, all  the  other  planets  produce  various  results, 
according  to  their  intrinsic  natures  and  their  various 
combinations.  For  the  sake  of  lucidity  and  ready 
reference,  let  us  first  set  down  the  word  which  de- 


114  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

scribes  best  the  most  salient  characteristics  of     each 
planet. 

The    Sun    Life 

Venus     Coalition 

Mercury     Reason 

The  Moon    Fecundation 

Saturn    Obstruction 

Jupiter    Idealism 

Mars Dynamic  Energy 

Uranus Altruism 

Neptune    Divinity 

In  the  foregoing,  the  essential  natures  of  the 
planets  have  been  given ;  where  they  are  well  aspected 
by  another  planet  these  natural  characteristics  are 
enhanced  so  far  as  the  benefic  planets  are  concerned, 
but  when  evilly  aspected,  the  nature  of  Venus, 
which  is  love  and  rhythm,  becomes  folly,  licentious- 
ness and  sloth;  the  philosophy,  law-abidrag  tenden- 
cies, mercy  and  lofty  aspirations  of  Jupiter  turn  into 
lawlessness,  disregard  of  others,  a  ad  low  pursuits; 
the  lofty  spirituality  of  the  Sun  will  express  itself 
as  just  animal  spirits  and  physical  health.  In  regard 
to  the  planets  of  the  lower  nature,  good  aspects  of 
Mars  turn  the  desires  toward  constructive  objects, 
and  well  regulated  activities,  while  evil  aspects  are 
responsible  for  the  destructive  expression  of  the  de- 
sire nature.  Saturn,  when  well  aspected,  gives  me- 
chanical and  executive  ability  capable  of  directing 


INTRINSIC  NATURE  OF  THE  PLANETS      115 

the  desire  nature.  It  shows  the  brainy,  persevering 
man  able  to  cope  with,  and  conquer,  material  obsta- 
cles; the  organizer  and  the  promoter;  the  scientific 
investigator,  who  follows  material  lines.  As  Jupi- 
ter, well  aspected,  denotes  the  high-minded  philoso- 
pher, the  worthy  law-giver,  the  sincere  and  ardent 
priest,  in  fact,  all  who  have  high  and  lofty  aspira- 
tions, so  Saturn,  when  evilly  aspected,  denotes  the 
evilly-minded,  creed-bound  sectarian,  the  material- 
ist, and  enemies  of  society,  whether  church  or  state. 
As  Jupiter  gives  the  lofty,  expansive  and  benevo- 
lent mind,  so  Saturn,  evilly  aspected,  gives  a  sarcas- 
tic, concrete  and  narrow  tendency. 

It  is  wonderful  to  contemplate  how  the  planet- 
ary forces  balance  each  other  so  perfectly  that  uni- 
versal equilibrium  is  maintained  despite  the  disturb- 
ances of  the  1500  millions  which  inhabit  the  earth 
alone,  not  to  speak  of  other  spheres.  Every  moment 
of  time  our  actions,  individually  and  collectively,, 
interfere  with  terestrial  equipoise,  and  were  not  this 
instantly  restored,  the  earth  must  leave  its  orbit,  fly 
off  at  a  tangent  and  destroyed.  Nor  are  physical 
disturbances  most  potent  in  disturbing  or  restoring 
balance,  it  is  a  fallacy  to  confound  solidity  and  rig- 
idity with  strength,  as  most  thoroughly  explained  in. 
our  lecture  No.  19 :  The  Coming  Force.  A  train  has 
no  strength  itself,  but  must  be  solid  because  it  is 
operated  upon  by  an  invisible  gas  called  steam. 
There  is  no  force  in  a  rigid  hammer ;  but  when  driven 
by  a  column  of  flexible  liquid,  like  water,  backed  by 


116  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

an  clastic  cushion  of  compressed  air,  the  force  stored 
In  the  air  drives  the  powerful  hydraulic  ram  irresist- 
ibly through  whatever  comes  before  it.  Likewise 
subtle  invisible  stellar  rays  are  the  factors  which 
maintain  our  ponderous  planet  in  its  path,  and 
spiritual  disturbances  generated  by  mankind  are 
naturally  the  most  subtle  force  which  interferes  with 
the  earth's  equipoise. 

Therefore  each  planet  has  its  opposite,  and  ev- 
ery time  we  radiate  the  quality  of  one  planet,  we 
call  forth  a  counter  current  of  corresponding  force, 
and  by  the  action  and  reaction  of  those  forces  in  and 
upon  us  and  our  environment  we  learn  the  lessons  of 
life.  Do  we  vibrate  to  the  love  ray  of  Venus,  instantly 
Mar.s  comes  to  tempt,  and  tries  to  turn  love  to  lust, 
but  it  depends  upon  US  whether  we  remain  steadfast 
in  virtue  or  yield  to  vice.  Do  we  court  the  ideal  of 
Jupiter;  do  we  aim  to  elevate  the  standards  of 
-church  or  state,  instantly  the  Saturnine  forces  invite 
.to  self-aggrandizement  and  appeal  to  the  passion  for 
power.  With  us  it  lies  to  remain  true  to  the  ideal  and 
reap  laurels  that  last  through  eternity,  or  yield  to  the 
promise  of  present  gain  of  worthless  gold  which  we 
repay  in  sorrow  when  Saturn  turns  and  becomes  the 
chastiser.  Each  horoscope  shows  the  tendencies  in 
even  the  humblest  life,  and  opportunity  continu- 
ally knocks.  May  we  all  be  prepared  to  meet  it  as 
spiritual  astrologers. 


HOW  TO  TEST  THE  HOROSCOPE  117 

How  to  Test  the  Horoscope 

It  sometimes  happens  that  a  momentary  mental 
aberration  causes  even  the  best  of  mathematicians  to 
make  a  mistake  in  his  figures  and  if  an  error  occurs 
when  casting  a  horoscope  an  immense  amount  of 
labor  may  be  wasted  before  it  is  discovered.  There 
is  an  easy  method  of  verifying  the  figure  in  the  main 
points  by  a  glance  at  the  position  of  the  Sun  which 
the  cautious  astrologer  never  neglects  to  make  use  of, 
and  we  would  specially  recommend  it  to  beginners 
who  are  naturally  more  prone  to  miscalculate  than 
those  who  have  long  experience. 

When  you  have  calculated  the  place  of  the  Sun 
and  entered  it  in  its  proper  house  and  sign,  note  at 
once  if  its  position  coincides  with  its  actual  place  in 
the  sky  at  the  time  of  day  when  the  child  was  born. 
If  the  birth  occurred  about  sunrise,  the  Sun  must  be 
near  the  ascendant;  if  in  the  middle  of  the  forenoon 
the  Sun  should  be  somewhere  in  the  eleventh  house, 
if  near  noon  the  Sun  will  be  found  near,  the  Mid- 
heaven  in  a  correctly  cast  horoscope,  and  in  the 
middle  of  the  afternoon  it  is  in  the  eighth  house.  A 
child  born  near  sunset  has  its  sun  close  to  the  cusp 
between  the  sixth  and  seventh  houses,  and  if  the 
birth  occurs  about  9  p.  m.,  the  Sun  will  be  in  or  near 
the  fifth  house.  When  birth  is  at  midnight  the  Sun 
is  near  the  nadir,  and  a  child  born  about  3  o'clock 
in  the  morning  has  the  Sun  in  or  near  the  second 
house. 

If  you  find  that  the  Sun  is  in  its  proper  position 


118  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

relative  to  the  houses,  you  may  confidently  proceed 
with  your  calculations  and  place  the  other  planets. 
If  not,  you  have  made  a  mistake  which  must  be  cor- 
rected before  you  go  further. 

When  someone  hands  you  a  horoscope  calculated 
by  another  astrologer  and  asks  you  to  read  it,  look 
first  at  the  time  of  birth  and  then  see  if  the  Sun  is  in 
its  proper  position  relative  to  the  houses,  and  the 
light  sign  as  determined  by  the  month,  for  if  you 
start  to  read  from  an  improperly  cast  horoscope  you 
lay  yourself  liable  to  ridicule.  Suppose  Saturn  were 
on  the  ascendant  and  you  accuse  that  person  of  be- 
ing melancholy;  when  he  denies  the  indications  and 
you  discover  that  Mars  and  Mercury  should  be  there 
in  Scorpio,  it  is  not  probable  that  he  will  accept 
your  explanations;  he  will  more  likely  sneer  at  as- 
trology and  astrologers;  nor  can  we  deny  that  from 
his  point  of  view  such  condemnation  is  justified. 
Therefore  be  careful  to  look  at  the  Sun.  Other  mis- 
takes may  occur,  but  that  is  the  most  serious  and  the 
most  easily  detected. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

THE  CHILDREN  OF  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS 

The  Children  of  Aries 
Born  March  20th  to  April  21st. 

ARIES  is  the  home  of  Mars,  the  planet  of  dyna- 
mic energy,  and  is  also  the  exaltation  sign  of  the 
life-giving  Sun,  hence  it  is  a  very  fountain  of  life 
and  vitality  as  manifest  in  the  sprouting  of  the  mil- 
lions of  seeds  which  break  through  the  earth's  crust 
at  that  time  and  change  the  white  winter  garment 
to  a  flower-embroidered  carpet  of  green,  and  make 
the  forests  a  bridal  bower  for  the  mating  beasts 
and  birds. 

This  great  vital  force  also  finds  its  expression 
in  the  children  of  Aries,  they  bubble  over  with  life 
and  energy  to  such  an  extent  that  it  is  often  very 
difficult  to  curb  them  sufficiently  to  hold  them  with- 
in the  bounds  of  safety  and  common  sense.  They 
are  self-assertive  and  aggresive  to  a  degree,  always 
in  the  lead  for  they  scorn  to  follow,  turbulent  and 
radical  in  all  their  thoughts,  ideas  and  actions. 
They  are  venturesome  to  the  verge  of  foolhardiness. 
119 


120  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

We  also  find  that  they  are  greedy  for  the  fruits  of 
their  labor,  they  never  can  get  enough,  but  no  mat- 
ter how  much  they  earn  they  are  generally  poor 
for  they  spend  as  lavishly  and  as  thoughtlessly  as 
they  earn.  They  make  splendid  foremen  and  over- 
seers, for,  being  so  full  of  vital  energy  and  ambition 
themselves,  they  have  a  faculty  of  infusing  their  en- 
ergy into  their  subordinates  or  forcing  them  to  work 
when  necessary.  But  being  too  impulsive  and  reck- 
less they  lack  the  ability  to  originate  for  themselves. 
They  are  serious  and  ardent  in  all  they  undertake; 
they  cannot  go  into  anything  half-heartedly,  and 
therefore,  if  they  once  espouse  a  cause,  social,  poli- 
tical or  religious,  they  will  work  for  that  cause  with 
all  the  vim  and  vigor  of  their  energetic  nature.  But 
if  on  the  other  hand  an  Aries  child  becomes  addicted 
to  a  vice  the  whole  intensity  of  its  nature  is  turned 
towards  the  gratification  of  that  particular  part 
of  its  lower  nature.  Therefore  parents  with  Aries 
children  have  a  great  responsibility  to  set  before 
them  by  precept  and  example  the  noblest  and  best 
form  of  conduct  of  which  they  are  capable,  for  this 
is  probably  the  most  impressive  sign  in  the  zodiac, 
and  the  habits  formed,  the  lessons  learned  in  child- 
hood and  youth  will  generally  cling  to  the  person 
through  life  and  make  him  either  very  good  or  very 
bad.  Be  particularly  careful  to  inculcate  abstinence 
from  alcoholic  liquors,  for  if  an  Aries  child  becomes 
addicted  to  that  vice  he  is  beyond  saving  and  often 
becomes  subject  to  delirium. 


CHILDREN  OF  THE  TWELVE   SIGNS         121 

Children  of  Taurus 
Born  April  21st  to  May  22nd. 

On  the  21st  of  April  the  Sun  enters  the  zodiacal 
sign  of  the  Bull,  Taurus,  and  remains  in  that  sign  un- 
til the  20th  of  May  and  therefore  children  born  be- 
tween those  dates  partake  in  a  great  measure  of  the 
characteristics  of  this  sign.  Taurus  is  ruled  by  Venus 
the  planet  of  love,  and  therefore  the  children  of  Tau- 
rus have  a  basically  amicable  and  kind  disposition, 
but  when  they  once  have  conceived  an  idea  they  cling 
to  it  with  stubbornness,  they  are  very  resentful  of 
contradiction  and  very  difficult  to  convince  that  they 
have  made  a  mistake,  but  when  once  one  has  suc- 
ceeded in  showing  them  that  they  are  wrong  their 
inherent  love  of  justice  and  truth  will  prompt  them 
to  acknowledge  their  mistakes  and  try  to  rectify 
them.  They  have  a  very  strong  and  determined 
will  so  that  when  they  set  up  a  goal  for  themselves 
or  have  made  up  their  minds  to  do  anything  they 
keep  on  working  with  patience  and  persistence  until 
they  usually  make  a  success  of  whatever  they  under- 
take. They  also  have  good  executive  ability  and  are 
able  to  take  leading  positions  where  they  have  oth- 
ers under  their  command.  Although  they  are  ami- 
cable and  agreeable  when  in  the  company  of  others 
they  have  a  strong  tendency  to  seek  solitude  and  to 
become  very  self-centered.  They  seem  to  set  up  un- 
consciously a  barrier  between  themselves  and  other 
people  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  become  intimately 


122  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

acquainted  with  them.  Taurus  children  are  very 
keen  in  their  desires  for  material  possessions  and 
they  are  usually  very  fortunate  also  in  acquiring 
them  for  besides  having  good  earning  power  them- 
selves they  are  often  the  recipients  of  inheritance. 
But  they  do  not  want  wealth  for  the  sake  of  hav- 
ing it  as  much  as  for  the  pleasure  and  comfort  which 
they  can  get  out  of  it ;  they  are  mainly  very  fond  of 
comforts  and  luxuries,  art,  music,  drama  and  other 
refining  influences  of  life. 

The  children  of  Taurus  have  an  abundance  of 
vitality  to  start  with,  but  they  are  very  apt  to  go 
to  excess  in  work  or  play,  waste  their  energy  and 
become  ill  as  a  consequence.  They  are  particularly 
attracted  to  the  pleasure^  of  the  table.  They  revel 
in  rich  foods  which  later  give  them  a  tendency  to 
digestive  troubles,  enlargement  of  the  liver,  heart 
disease  and  congestion  of  the  kidneys.  These  dis- 
eases are  very  apt  to  make  them  uncomfortable  in 
later  life,  therefore  parents  should  inculcate  in  them 
above  all  things  the  virtue  of  frugality,  not  only  by 
precept,  but  by  example,  for  these  Taurus  children 
are  very  quick  and  they  will  readily  see  that  ''mo- 
ther and  father  tell  me  to  eat  little  but  they  eat  all 
they  want  themselves."  They  should  also  be  taught 
to  take  plenty  of  exercise  as  a  means  to  promote 
health,  for  the  children  of  Taurus  are  rather  indo- 
lent in  their  manner.  However,  as  said  before,  they 
have  a  most  wonderful  vitality  particularly  if  they 
are  born  at  sunrise  and  although  they  may  become 


CHILDREN  OF  THE  TWELVE   SIGNS         12b 

subject  to  the  diseases  mentioned  they  will  have  a 
long  life  and  a  fair  measure  of  general  good  health, 
wealth  and  happiness. 

Children  of  Gemini 
4     Born  May  22nd  to  June  22nd. 

The  children  of  Gemini  are  wonderfully  quick- 
witted and  bright;  they  also  have  the  ability  to  ex- 
press themselves  clearly  and  to  the  point,  therefore 
they  are  always  good  company.  Conversation  never 
lags  when  they  are  present,  in  fact  they  are  some- 
times given  to  monopolizing  it  entirely,  but  then 
they  are  often  so  interesting  that  other  people 
are  glad  to  listen.  They  acquire  learning  very 
rapidly  and  are  very  well  informed  on  most  sub- 
jects. They  have  a  good  memory  so  that  what  they 
have  won  is  not  lost,  that  is  of  course,  provided  the 
horqscope  is  otherwise  well-aspected  and  configur- 
ated. Where  it  is  seriously  afflicted  we  find  the 
faults  of  the  Gemini  pointing  in  the  opposite  direc- 
tion; then  they  may  be  inveterate  chatterboxes, 
shunned  by  everybody  who  can  possibly  get  out  of 
their  way.  The  great  point  to  remember  with  these 
children  is  that  they  have  the  ability  of  expression 
and  a  great  deal  may  be  done  during  the  days  of 
childhood  to  mould  the  character  in  such  a  way  that 
it  expresses  itself  in  a  manner  that  is  congenial  and 
to  the  general  benefit  of  the  child  and  its  surround- 
ings, and  will  be  of  help  to  it  later  in  life. 

The  children  of  Gemini  are,  generally  speaking, 


124  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

of  a  very  kind  and  affable  disposition,  easy  to  get 
along  with.  They  are  able  to  adapt  themselves  to 
other  people  and  to  circumstances  so  that  they  be- 
come all  things  to  all  men  and  in  that  way  they  usu- 
ally make  many  friends  and  few  enemies.  They  are 
of  a  roving  disposition  and  love  to  travel  about  from 
one  place  to  another  and  they  excel  in  scientific  or 
clerical  activities,  as  agents  or  representatives  of 
others  where  their  Mercurial  talents  find  an  avenue 
of  expression. 

From  the  moral  point  of  view  it  is  not  good  to 
have  a  flexible  nature.  The  children  of  Gemini  are 
only  too  easily  made  victims  of  flattery  and  there- 
fore apt  to  be  led  unconsciously  into  paths  of  wrong- 
doing. It  should  be  the  aim  of  the  parents  of  these 
children  to  hold  before  them  very  seriously  the 
straight  and  narrow  path  and  emphasize  the  idea  in 
their  minds  that  that  is  never  to  be  swerved  from 
under  any  consideration. 

The  children  of  Gemini  are  very  high-strung  and 
nervous  and  therefore  they  are  easily  worried  and 
irritated,  which  reflects  upon  their  actions  and  upon 
their  bodily  health.  On  that  account  parents  with 
children  born  in  this  month  ought  to  be  lenient  with 
them  in  their  flashes  of  temper  for  they  are  very 
quick-spoken  under  wrath;  they  need  a  soothing  an- 
swer rather  than  reproof,  in  order  that  they  may  be 
helped  to  overcome  while  they  are  young  and  to 
strengthen  their  moral  constitution  in  that  respect 
When  the  horoscope  of  a  Gemini  child  is  afflicted 


CHILDREN  OF  THE  TWELVE   SIGNS         125 

there  is  very  apt  to  be  some  disorder  of  the  lungs 
and  Gemini  children  will  be  much  helped  if  they  are 
taught  proper  breathing  exercises  and  calisthenics. 
It  will  at  least  minimize  the  tendencies  and  may 
entirely  overcome  them.  Gemini  children  usually 
grow  very  tall  and  straight.  They  are  fine-looking 
people  with  a  quick  walk  and  brisk  movements,  but 
they  may  be  either  light  or  dark  complexioned  ac- 
cording to  the  placement  and  configuration  of  the 
other  planets. 

The   Children  of  Cancer 
Born  June  22nd  to  July  23rd. 

The  watery  sign  Cancer  is  one  of  the  weakest 
in  the  zodiac  so  far  as  vitality  goes  and  when  that 
is  upon  the  eastern  horizon  of  a  person's  horoscope 
it  always  gives  a  rather  weak  body,  but  usually  this 
does  not  apply  to  the  children  born  during  the  time 
when  the  Sun  is  in  Cancer,  for  the  Sun  is  the  giver 
of  life,  and  these  children  are  therefore  more  for- 
tunate with  respect  to  vitality  than  those,  children 
who  have  Cancer  rising. 

The  children  of  Cancer  are  usually  very  timid 
and  retiring,  yet  they  want  and  need  friendship  and 
sympathy;  though  they  are  very  sensitive  about 
seeking  it,  yet  when  they  get  well  acquainted  they 
can  at  times  be  very  exacting  with  their  friends, 
even  autocratic  in  their  ways  of  ordering  them  about. 
At  the  same  time,  it  must  be  said  they  are  very  con- 
scientious in  all  things  entrusted  to  them,  and  use 


126  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

considerable  discretion  in  whatever  they  do,  so  that 
one  may  safely  trust  them  to  keep  a  secret  or  exe- 
cute a  commission.  The  sign  Cancer  is  ruled  by  the 
restless  Moon,  and  therefore  changes  of  residence,  po- 
sition, vocation,  and  of  all  matters,  are  quite  frequent 
in  the  lives  of  these  children.  At  the  same  time  they 
cannot  be  called  fickle  and  flippant  for  they  are  very 
tenacious  whenever  they  have  undertaken  to  do  a 
certain  work  or  undertaken  a  certain  obligation; 
then  they  stay  by  it  until  it  is  finished.  Neither  do 
they  run  haphazard  into  anything;  in  fact,  there  are 
times  when  they  are  inclined  to  be  too  cautious.  Es- 
pecially where  there  is  danger  of  injury  they  are  al- 
most cowards,  and  they  are  often  given  to  anxiety 
and  worry. 

The  Children  of  Leo 
Born  July  23rd  to  August  24th. 

The  sign  Leo  is  ruled  by  the  life-giving  Sun,  and 
it  is  called  the  royal  sign  of  the  Zodiac;  therefore  it 
confers  upon  the  children  which  are  born  under  its 
influence  a  noble,  ambitious  and  aspiring  nature. 
They  are  of  the  Master  breed  and  make  good  leaders 
but  poor  followers.  Being  of  a  noble  and  lofty  char- 
acter themselves  they  scorn  mean  and  sordid  things, 
nor  will  they  stoop  to  do  a  low  act  even  under  great 
provocation  or  the  strong  urge  of  self-interest.  The 
love  nature  is  very  strong  and  ardent.  No  inconven- 
ience or  sacrifice  is  too  great  to  serve  those  they  love. 
They  are  loyal  and  true  friends  through  thick  and 


CHILDREN  OF  THE  TWELVE   SIGNS         127 

thin.  Leo  is  a  fixed  sign  and  gives  its  children 
considerable  will  power,  so  that  they  are  usually 
able  to  win  their  way  to  the  top  despite  all 
handicaps  and  obstacles.  They  are  very  fixed  in  their 
opinions  and  if  they  espouse  any  cause  they  will  usu- 
ally stay  by  it  and  work  for  it  in  a  most  enthusiastic 
manner.  They  never  do  anything  half-heartedly,  for 
Leo  being  a  fiery  sign  endows  them  with  power,  vi- 
tality and  enthusiasm.  Leo  also  gives  its  children  a 
good  memory.  The  foregoing  tendencies  are  indi- 
cated when  the  Sun  is  fairly  well  aspected  in  the 
horoscope ;  but  if  it  is  afflicted  by  Mars,  or  any  of 
the  malefics,  the  nature  is  changed,  so  that  the  per- 
son becomes  bombastic,  blustering  and  domineering, 
one  not  to  be  trusted  in  any  department  of  life,  and 
an  unfaithful,  amorous  husband  or  wife,  a  disloyal 
friend^  one  who  will  not  hesitate  to  stoop  to  any 
meanness.  He  is  then  just  as  bad  as  the  Leo  with 
the  well  aspected  Sun  is  good,  this  on  the  principle 
that  the  brightest  light  always  casts  the  deepest 
shadow.  The  principal  fault  of  the  Leos  is  a  quick 
temper,  but  they  do  not  hold  spite,  and  when  shown 
to  have  been  in  the  wrong  they  are  always  ready  to 
apologize  and  make  amends.  They  are  magnanimous, 
even  to  their  bitterest  enemies. 

The  'Children  of  Virgo 
Born  August  24th  to  September  23rd. 
Virgo,  the  Sixth  sign  of  the  zodiac,  is  ruled  by 
Mercury,  the  planet  of  reason,  expression  and  dex- 


128  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

terity.  It  is  said,  and  with  considerable  truth,  that 
love  is  blind,  for  were  one  to  see  faults  in  the  beloved 
one  the  master  passion  never  would  find  expression. 
Therefore  the  children  of  Virgo  who  are  governed 
so  much  by  intellect  are  not  sympathetic,  but  in- 
clined to  be  cynical,  critical  and  skeptical  of  any- 
thing that  is  not  scientifically  demonstrable  to  the 
reason  and  senses.  They  are  very  quick  mentally, 
though  only  too  often  inclined  to  "strain  at  a  gnat," 
and  though  they  seldom  "swallow  the  camel,"  they 
get  into  a  rut  where  they  become  narrow-minded  and 
bigoted.  They  are  rather  lazy  themselves  and  fond 
of  taking  things  easy,  but  they  like  to  drive  others, 
and  can  be  very  masterful  with  subordinates.  On 
that  account  they  often  cause  enmities  of  a  lasting 
nature,  but  whenever  they  become  friendly  with  any 
one  they  also  make  very  good  friends  and  treat  their 
friends  well.  The  Mercurial  disposition  infused  by 
this  sign  brings  many  changes  of  environment  and 
therefore  new  associations  and  friendships  are  con- 
stantly being  formed.  They  are  very  acquisitive  and 
always  looking  out  for  ways  and  means  of  bettering 
themselves  financially,  socially  and  economically. 
It  may  also  be  said  that  they  deserve  promotion  for 
they  are  industrious  to  a  degree  where  they  see  that 
a  reward  may  be  gained  thereby.  They  are  also  very 
ingenious  and  versatile,  fond  of  the  study  of  science, 
particularly  chemistry,  diet  and  hygiene,  and  many 
among  them  become  extreme  food  faddists.  As  Virgo 
Is  the  Sixth  sign  these  people  take  on  Sixth  house 


CHILDREN  OF   THE   TWELVE   SIGNS         129 

characteristics  and  are  therefore  very  sensitive  to 
suggestions  of  ill  health,  so  that  if  they  ever  become 
enmeshed  in  the  tentacles  of  disease  they  frequently 
lack  the  necessary  will  power  to  extricate  themselves; 
with  the  result  that  they  then  usually  become  chronic 
invalids  or  perhaps  rather  they  think  themselves  so, 
for  it  may  be  said  that  these  people  seem  to  resent 
any  effort  to  cheer  them  up  and  get  them  out  of  the 
clutches  of  their  particular  illness,  real  or  fancied. 
They  seem  in  fact  to  enjoy  bad  health,  and  they  are 
always  looking  for  sympathy,  though  as  we  noted 
in  the  beginning  of  this  reading,  they  are  very  slow 
to  grant  the  same  to  others.  If  they  can  keep  out  of 
the  clutches  of  disease,  they  often  become  excellent 
nurses  and  have  a  splendid  influence  upon  the  sick, 

The  Children  of  Libra 
Born  September  23rd  to  October  24th. 
Libra  is  the  Seventh  sign  of  the  zodiac  and  the 
children  which  are  born  under  that  sign  are  ruled 
by  the  planet  of  love,  Venus.  The  symbol  of  Libra 
in  the  pictorial  zodiac  is  a  pair  of  scales  and  this 
instrument  describes  graphically  their  principal 
characteristic.  The  children  of  Libra  are  very  ardent 
in  anything  they  do;  they  take  up  a  vocation  or  an 
avocation  with  a  zeal  and  enthusiasm  which  for  the 
time  being  excludes  all  other  things  from  their  con- 
sideration, but  after  a  while  they  may  drop  it  just 
as  suddenly,  take  up  something  else  as  a  trade,  a 
fad  or  a  hobby,  and  pursue  that  with  an  equal  en- 

9 


130  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

ergy  and  absorbing  interest.  This  is  in  fact  one  of 
their  principal  faults,  as  they  find  it  very  difficult 
to  settle  down  to  anything  definite,  and  continue  it 
with  patience  and  persistence  until  they  have 
achieved  success. 

Libra  is  the  sign  when  the  Sun  changes  from 
the  northern  to  the  southern  hemisphere;  it  crosses 
the  equator  there,  and  consequently  the  Sun  is 
very  weak  at  that  point.  It  is  the  great  life-giver 
going  down  into  the  dark  winter  months,  and  there- 
fore Saturn,  the  planet  of  darkness,  is  exalted  in 
Libra.  Thus  we  find  two  natures  very  markedly  ex- 
pressed in  children  that  are  born  under  this  sign ;  one 
is  of  the  Sun,  which  is  cheerful  and  optimistic, 
the  other  is  that  of  Saturn,  which  is  morose  and 
melancholy.  And  this  expresses  itself  in  the 
changeable  nature  of  the  Libra  children;  sometimes 
they  are  up  in  the  seventh  heaven,  optimistic  and 
enthusiastic,  cheerful  and  happy,  then  as  suddenly 
and  without  any  seeming  cause  the  scale  swings  and 
they  seem  to  be  down  in  the  dumps  of  worry  and 
melancholy  just  as  if  they  had  not  a  friend  in  the 
world.  As  a  matter  of  fact  they  make  many  friends, 
for  they  have  a  basically  kind  disposition  en- 
gendered by  the  Lady  of  Libra,  Venus,  but  they  al- 
so have  a  quick  temper,  though  fortunately  they  do 
not  hold  spite.  They  are  exceedingly  fond  of  pleas- 
ures in  general  and  particularly  lean  toward  art 
and  music. 


CHILDREN  OF  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS         131 

The  Children  of  Scorpio 
Born  October  24th  to  November  23rd. 
Scorpio  is  ruled  by  Mars,  the  planet  of  dynamic- 
energy,  and  therefore  the  children  born  during  that 
month  when  the  Sun  is  passing  through  this  sign  are 
filled  with  a  force  that  must  have  an  outlet  some- 
where or  somehow.  They  partake  of  all  the  Martial 
qualities,  either  good  or  bad,  according  to  the  way 
the  Sun  is  placed  and  aspected,  and  they  are  always 
ready  to  take  up  an  argument  or  a  fight,  either  on 
their  own  behalf  or  for  someone  else ;  they  are  never 
content  with  half  measures,  either  they  go  to  one- 
extreme  or  the  other,  good  or  bad.  Those  who  show 
the  good  side  of  Scorpio  have  splendid  constructive 
and  executive  abilities.  They  are  brusque  but  honest 
and  just,  indefatigable  workers,  and  always  ready 
to  sacrifice  themeslves  for  the  good  of  others  by  re- 
belling against  oppression  or  in  other  Ways  unself- 
ishly working  for  the  cause  they  have  espoused.  But 
those  who  show  the  bad  side  of  Scorpio  not  only  re- 
fuse to  work  themselves  but  become  demagogues 
who  incite  others  to  anarchy  and  lawlessness  and  de- 
struction. These  people  are  social  fire-brands  and 
very  dangerous  to  the  community.  But  there  is  one 
redeeming  feature  about  them  and  that  is  that  they 
are  not  underhanded,  whatever  they  do  is  open  and 
aboveboard.  The  children  of  Scorpio  usually  hare 
a  very  uncertain  temper  and  a  sarcastic  tongue  that 
bites  like  the  sting  of  the  scorpion,  when  they  turn 
that  side  of  their  nature.  Therefore  the  parents  of 


132  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

these  children  should  take  them  in  hand  as  early 
as  possible  and  teach  them  self-control  by  every 
means  within  their  power;  also  strive  to  soften  the 
Mars  ray  and  instill  into  them  a  more  kindly  spirit. 
This  may  be  very  difficult  because  the  sign  Scorpio 
gives  a  very  determined  nature,  still,  in  childhood's 
years  it  is  plastic  to  a  certain  extent  and  can  be  best 
worked  upon  then.  They  have  a  very  strong  and 
vivid  imagination,  with  a  clear,  sharp  and  pene- 
trating mind,  also  a  personal  magnetism  that  makes 
them  very  attractive  to  those  with  whom  they  come 
in  contact.  They  seem  to  be  most  contented  in  mili- 
tary life  where  there  is  sharp  and  strict  discipline. 
Particular  care  should  be  taken  to  teach  these  child- 
ren sex  hygiene,  for  the  sign  Scorpio  rules  the  gene- 
rative and  eliminatory  organs,  whose  functions  are 
stimulated  by  the  presence  of  the  Sun  in  Scorpio, 
so  that  if  the  person  is  not  morally  and  physically 
clean,  much  trouble  may  be  expected.  These  child- 
ren also  make  excellent  surgeons  and  if  they  are 
taught  to  use  surgery  only  for  constructive  purposes 
they  can  do  a  great  deal  of  good  in  the  world.  All 
this  depends  in  a  considerable  measure  upon  the  early 
training,  for  there  is  a  destructive  side  to  the  Scorpio 
nature  which  would  make  it  very  dangerous  from 
the  spiritual  viewpoint  for  such  a  person  to  take 
up  a  vocation  that  offers  scope  for  malpractice;  he 
would  then  contract  a  very  heavy  debt  under  the 
law  of  consequence,  which  must  be  paid  back  in  sor- 
row and  suffering  either  in  this  or  later  lives. 


CHILDREN  OF  THE  TWELVE   SIGNS         133 

The   Children  of  Sagittarius 
Born  November  23rd  to  December  22nd. 

Sagittarius  is  ruled  by  Jupiter,  the  great  bene- 
fic  planet,  and  it  may  be  said  generally  that  those 
who  are  born  while  the  Sun  is  in  this  sign  from  No- 
vember 23rd  to  December  22nd  are  well  liked 
in  the  society  where  they  move.  They  are  of  a 
hearty  and  jovial  disposition,  princes  among  men, 
hail-fellows-well-met,  and  their  acquaintances  are 
generally  glad  to  see  them.  There  are  two  very  dis- 
tinct classes  born  under  this  sign.  In  the  pictorial 
zodiac,  Sagittarius  is  represented  as  a  centaur,  half 
horse  and  half  man,  and  one  class  of  those  who  come 
to  birth  under  its  influence  are  well  described  by 
the  animal  part  thereof,  for  they  are  of  a  sporty  na- 
ture, ready  to  gamble  on  the  speed  of  a  horse  at  long 
odds  or  to  stake  their  last  dollar  on  a  game  of  cards. 
They  are  fond  of  a  "good  time  right  straight 
through"  and  their  moral  nature  is  of  low  grade, 
aptly  described  by  the  animal  part  of  the  symbol, 
so  that  they  have  no  scruples  with  respect  to  the 
indulgence  of  their  appetites,  passions  and  desires. 
They  are  lacking  in  respect  for  both  the  law  and  or- 
dinary morals,  hence  they  are  often  found  among 
the  criminal  class.  But  those  children  of  Sagittarius 
who  are  symbolized  by  the  human  part  of  the  cen- 
taur, aiming  the  bow  of  aspiration  at  the  stars,  are 
as  different  as  day  is  from  night,  for  they  are  ex- 
tremely idealistic,  moral  and  law-abiding,  noble 


134  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

characters  who  win  the  respect  of  society  in  general 
and  particularly  all  with  whom  they  come  into  in- 
timate contact.  Therefore  they  become  in  time  the 
pillars  of  society  and  receive  positions  of  honor  and 
preferment  in  the  State  or  Church  as  judges  or  di- 
vines. They  are  very  orthodox  and  conservative 
in  their  opinions  and  punctilious  to  a  fault  in  their 
observance  of  all  customs  and  traditions  of  the  times 
wherein  they  live,  but  they  are  not  progressive,  for 
they  value  the  opinions  of  their  contemporaries  very 
highly  and  are  seldom  induced  to  espouse  any  pro- 
gressive ideas  which  might  jeopardize  the  respect  of 
the  community  enjoyed  by  them.  They  are  firm  be- 
lievers in  the  necessity  of  red  tape.  Withal,  how- 
ever, they  are  charitable  and  benevolent,  tender  and 
sympathetic;  they  can  always  be  relied  upon  to  aid 
any  altruistic  movement,  and  though  they  are  of 
a  kindly  nature  and  endeavor  to  avoid  quarrels 
in  their  own  behalf,  they  sometimes  fight  with 
great  zeal  and  courage  for  others  who  have  been  in- 
jured and  in  whose  behalf  their  sympathies  have 
been  enlisted,  hence  they  make  admirable  lawyers. 

The  Sagittarians  are  usually  excellent  conver- 
sationalists and  they  have  a  quick  and  ready  wit  and 
are  fond  of  indulging  in  oratory.  Their  memory  and 
interesting  way  of  relating  experiences  always  hold 
the  audience.  They  are  very  proud  and  have  great 
confidence  in  themselves. 


CHILDREN  OF  THE   TWELVE   SIGNS         135 

The  Children  of  Capricorn 
Born  December  22nd  to  January  20th. 

..  ,  Capricorn  is  ruled  by  Saturn,  the  planet  of  ob- 
struction, therefore  the  vitality  of  these  children  is 
very  low  and  they  are  difficult  to  raise,  but  once  in- 
fancy is  passed  the  Saturnine  persistence  makes  it- 
self felt  and  they  cling  to  life  with  an  amazing  ten- 
acity so  that  they  often  become  very  old.  They  are 
very  much  subject  to  colds  and  their  principal 
source  of  danger  is  falls  and  bruises.  The  children  of 
Capricorn  are  usually  bashful  and  timid  in  the  pres- 
ence of  strangers  but  when  they  have  become  used 
to  people  they  show  their  domineering  nature  and  en- 
deavor to  make  everybody  around  them  conform  to 
their  will.  The  Saturnine  quality  of  the  sign  makes 
them  jealous  and  suspicious  of  the  motives  of  others. 
Therefore  they  are  very  fond  of  detective  work. 
They  will  follow  a  trail  with  unerring  instinct  and 
unwavering  perseverance  that  never  gives  up  as  long 
as  there  is  the  remotest  chance  of  success.  It  is  good 
to  be  friends  with  Capricornians  and  bad  to  make 
enemies  of  them,  for  they  find  it  very  hard  to  for- 
give a  real  or  fancied  offense  or  injury  and  always 
brood  over  any  wrong  done  to  them.  On  the  other 
hand,  if  they  once  give  their  confidence  or  friendship 
they  are  also  consistent  in  that  direction.  They  are 
very  ambitious  and  anxious  to  have  their  services 
recognized  by  other  people  and  they  have  a  splendid 
executive  ability  because  of  the  unusual  qualities  of 


136  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

forethought  and  concentration  conferred  by  Saturn. 
They  are  born  leaders  and  organizers  but  chafe  un- 
der restrictions  and  dislike  particularly  to  take  or- 
der^ from  others.  When  they  are  placed  in  such  a 
subordinate  position  and  cannot  have  their  own  way 
they  become  gloomy,  taciturn,  moody,  pessimistic, 
irritable,  and  given  to  worry.  The  children  of  Cap- 
ricorn usually  have  a  disinclination  for  marriage  and 
are  seldom  at  ease  if  they  enter  into  that  state.  The 
union  is  usually  childless  or  children  are  few. 

The  Children  of  Aquarius 
Born  January  20th  to  February  19th. 

The  children  of  Aquarius  are  of  a  rather  shy, 
retiring  nature.  They  like  to  keep  their  own  com- 
pany and  counsel  more  than  is  good  for  them,  for 
if  this  bent  in  their  nature  is  allowed  full  swing  it 
has  a  tendency  to  breed  melancholy  and  make  them 
recluses.  They  have  a  quiet,  unassuming  manner 
which  gains  many  friends  for  them  and  their  home 
life  is  usually  ideal.  They  are  generally  affectionate 
and  of  a  very  sweet  and  kind  disposition,  and  are  al- 
ways ready  to  defer  to  the  opinion  of  a  loved  one 
and  ready  to  yield  a  point  for  the  sake  of  harmony. 
Besides,  Aquarius  being  a  fixed  sign  they  are  very 
constant  in  their  affection  as  well  as  in  other  things. 

Aquarius  is  an  intellectual  sign  and  its  children 
usually  have  a  good  mentality,  because  the  Saturnine 
rulership  gives  depth  to  the  mind,  and  the  Uranian 
ray  gives  them  intuition  and  an  inclination  towards 


CHILDREN  OF  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS         137 

science,  literature  and  philosophy.  They  are  re- 
markably persistent  in  whatever  they  undertake,  and 
therefore  usually  succeed  in  the  long  run.  As 
Aquarius  is  the  llth  sign  it  partakes  also  of  the 
qualities  ruled  by  the  llth  House;  therefore  the 
children  of  Aquarius  are  usually  well  liked  among 
their  associates  and  have  many  friends.  The  child- 
ren of  Aquarius  are  very  proud  and  jealous  of  the 
esteem  of  others.  Their  principal  fault  is  that  on 
account  of  Saturnine  traits  they  are  somewhat  giv- 
en to  worry.  Like  the  Leos  they  are  strong  in  their 
likes  and  dislikes ;  they  will  do  anything  for  those 
who  have  won  their  affection,  but  resent  any  attempt 
to  drive  them,  and  under  such  conditions  are  ex- 
tremely stubborn;  in  fact  they  are  very  set  in  their 
mental  attitude,  once  an  opinion  has  been  formed  it 
is  not  easily  changed.  They  are  so  very  sensitive  to 
the  mental  condition  around  them  that  it  affects  their 
physical  well  being  perhaps  more  than  they  are 
aware  for  this  is  one  of  the  most  sensitive  signs. 

The  Children  of  Pisces 
Born  February  20th  to  March  20th. 
The  children  of  Pisces  are  of  a  marked  negative 
disposition,  subject  to  varying  moods,  and  are,  like 
the  children  of  Aquarius,  very  sensitive  to  the  men- 
tal atmosphere  in  their  environment.     For  that  rea- 
son it  is  of  the  greatest  importance  that  parents  of 
these  children  should  guard  them  during  childhood 
against  the  influences  of  bad  companions,  for  the  old 


138  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE    STARS 

proverb  about  "bad  company  corrupting  good  man- 
ners" applies  with  ten-fold  strength  to.  these  child- 
ren, and  they  will  absorb  good  or  evil  with  equal  fa- 
cility. So  until  they  have  learned  to  choose  for 
themselves  the  good  things,  it  is  especially  necessary 
for  their  natural  guardians  to  shield  them.  They 
also  have  a  strong  tendency  to  mediumship  and  if 
they  are  taken  into  seances  there  is  a  great  danger 
that  they  may  become  controlled.  Moreover,  having 
such  an  extremely  flexible  nature  they  can  never  ex- 
ert sufficient  will  power  to  free  themselves  from  the 
influence  when  once  they  have  been  subjected  to  it. 
and  it  may  ruin  their  whole  life. 

These  children  are  very  peaceable  in  disposition 
and  suffer  injury  rather  than  fight  for  their  rights, 
not  because  they  do  not  care,  for  they  are  very  jealous 
especially  when  born  in  the  latter  part  of  the  sign, 
but  the  Piscean  nature  is  always  averse  to  exertion, 
and  generally  they  do  not  want  to  take  the  trouble 
to  fight  for  their  rights.  In  plain  English  they  are 
lazy.  Therefore  the  parents  should  see  that  a  cer- 
tain amount  of  work  is  allotted  to  them  during  the 
earliest  years,  for  it  is  then  that  the  habits  are  formed 
and  the  nature  is  the  most  plastic.  They  can  learn 
to  be  diligent  with  much  less  effort  at  that  time  than 
during  the  later  stages  of  life.  But  once  the  children 
of  Pisces  have  commenced  doing  a  piece  of  work  it 
will  probably  be  a  surprise  to  others  to  watch  them 
and  see  the  methodical  way  they  go  at  it,  making  ev- 
ery move  count  until  the  task  has  been  completed 


CHILDREN  OF  THE  TWELVE   SIGNS         139 

with  seemingly  very  little  effort  on  their  part.  Hon- 
esty is  another  of  the  virtues  of  the  Pisces  children; 
they  are  usually  dependable  and  close-mouthed,  so 
that  they  may  be  trusted  with  secrets  in  full  confi- 
dence that  they  will  not  betray  the  trust. 

The  children  of  Pisces  are  generally  kind  and 
sympathetic,  cordial  and  suave  in  manner,  qualities 
which  will  of  course  bring  them  many  friends.  They 
are  notoriously  fond  of  good  things  to  eat,  they  re- 
vel in  rich  foods,  but  are  also  prone  to  be  fond  of 
drink.  If  these  tendencies  are  allowed  to  work 
themselves  out  they  will  of  course  ruin  the  life,  and 
besides  bring  on  a  train  of  disease.  Therefore  the 
parents  of  these  children  should  endeavor  by  pre- 
cept and  example  to  teach  them  the  simple  life,  fru- 
gality and  control  of  the  appetite  during  the  years 
when  habits  are  formed,  besides  guarding  them 
against  too  strenuous  exercise  which  even  the  child- 
ren of  Pisces  will  not  shun  in  childhood  when  the 
abundance  of  life  force  impels  them.  Then  later  in 
life  these  lessons  will  not  be  without  their  fruit.  The 
chances  are  that  the  child  which  by  the  help  of  the 
parent  has  learned  in  childhood  to  rule  its  stars  will 
be  both  healthy  and  hearty,  respected  and  loved  be- 
cause of  good  habits,  and  in  full  enjoyment  of  life.  In 
short,  these  children  need  a  very  careful  bringing  up 
to  save  them  from  the  evil  tendencies  and  bring  out 
the  good,  but  that  is  just  what  such  souls  come  to 
parents  for.  Their  necessity  is  the  parents'  oppor- 
tunity to  make  a  great  and  wonderful  soul  growth. 


CHAPTER  VIII. 
THE  SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE 

THE  Sun,  being  the  center  of  the  solar  system, 
is  recognized  by  all  as  the  physical  life-giver, 
even  when  they  do  not  believe  in  anything  superphy- 
sical ;  it  is  patent  to  everyone  from  personal  observa- 
tion that  the  horizontal  ray  of  the  morning  sun  affects 
us  differently  from  the  perpendicular  noon  ray,  and 
that  in  summer  the  rays  carry  a  life-force  which 
not  only  brings  forth  the  verdure  upon  the  fields, 
but  also  affects  the  human  temperament,  and  en- 
dows us  with  vital  energy,  courage  and  a  hopeful 
spirit  foreign  to  the  dark  and  gloomy  winter  months. 
This  gloom  is  permanently  noticeable  in  the  tem- 
perament of  people  living  in  the  far  north,  where 
the  absence  of  sunlight  makes  life  a  struggle  that 
saps  the  spirit  of  frolic,  while  in  countries  where 
abundance  of  sunlight  lessens  the  care  of  existence 
the  temperament  is  correspondingly  vivacious 
and  hopeful  and  sunny. 

In  the  horoscope,  the  angle  of  each  planetary 
ray  at  birth  determines  the  department  of  life  it 
will  affect.  If  the  child  is  born  at  the  noon  hour 
when  the  sun  is  at  Zenith  the  daystar  will  appear 
in  the  10th  house  of  the  horoscope  and  bring  pre- 
ferment professionally.  If  the  child  were  born  at 
140 


THE   SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  141 

midnight  when  the  sun  is  directly  under  the  place 
of  birth  its  influence  would  be  through  the  Fourth 
House,  and  it  would  brighten  the  old  age  of  the 
child  then  born. 

There  are  three  unfortunate  angles  for  the  sun: 
Children  born  shortly  after  sunset  have  it  in  the 
Sixth  House,  which  indicates  sickness,  and  as  the 
Sun  is  life-giver  this  position  lessens  the  vitality 
and  recuperative  power.  Birth  in  the  middle  part 
of  the  afternoon  places  the  Sun  in  the  Eighth  House. 
This  is  the  house  through  which  the  death-deal- 
ing forces  act,  and  logically,  the  Lord  of  Life  is  out 
of  place  in  the  House  of  Death.  The  Second  House 
shows  what  income  we  obtain  by  our  own  efforts, 
and  as  the  Eighth  House  is  opposite  the  Second  it 
reveals  the  sources  of  revenue  for  which  we  do  not 
personally  exert  ourselves,  that  is  to  say,  legacies, 
pensions  or  grants  of  a  public  nature.  We  have 
known  people  with  the  Sun  in  the  Eighth  House 
to  acquire  vast  sums,  millions  in  one  case,  by  specu- 
lation in  municipal  necessities.  Such  persons  are 
often  threatened  by  death  and  sometimes  have 
many  hairbreadth  escapes,  but  even  with  the  best 
of  aspects  to  the  Sun,  a  ripe  age  is  seldom  attained. 

When  a  child  is  born  shortly  after  sunrise  the 
Sun  is  in  the  Twelfth  House,  which  is  the  avenue 
whence  we  reap  our  sorrows,  and  it  has  been  our 
experience  that  the  early  life  of  such  a  person  is 
encompassed  by  trouble  of  one  kind  or  another. 

When  the  ascendant  of  a  person  is  in  doubt  and 


142  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

the  place  in  the  Zodiac  which  seems  to  fit  neares^ 
brings  the  Sun  into  the  Twelfth  House,  the  writer 
has  often  found  that  the  exact  ascendant  may  be 
ascertained  by  asking  the  person  if  his  child- 
hood's life  was  clouded  by  poverty  of  the  parent  and 
consequent  limitation  for  a  number  of  years  just 
after  birth.  This  in  all  cases  where  it  has  been 
found  that  all  other  events  fitted  in  the  horoscope 
proved  a  successful  method  of  determining  the  true 
ascendant,  so  that  the  number  of  degrees  from  the 
ascendant  to  the  Sun,  the  latter  located  in  the  Twelfth 
House,  would  indicate  the  years  of  poverty,  for  the 
Twelfth  House  makes  for  limitation  in  that  respect, 
especially  when  the  Sun  is  there  at  birth.  When  the 
Sun  by  progression  has  passed  through  the  Twelfth 
House  and  comes  into  the  ascendant,  things  begin 
to  brighten  for  the  person  involved,  and  when  in 
time  it  passes  through  the  Second  House  he  will 
have  a  period  of  financial  success;  but  as  stated 
the  Sun  in  the  Twelfth  House,  just  above  the  as- 
cendant, usually  makes  a  very  poor  home  for  the 
child  during  the  early  days  of  life.  If  Pisces  is  there 
the  cause  will  generally  be  found  in  slothfulness  and 
a  desire  for  drink  on  the  part  of  the  parents,  which 
makes  them  thus  neglect  their  offspring. 

The  qualities  imparted  by  a  well  placed  Sun 
are  dignity,  strength  of  will  and  courage,  both  phys- 
ical and  moral,  a  lofty  pride  and  a  keen  sense  of 
honor  and  responsibility  which  makes  a  person  emi- 
nently reliable,  a  sterling  honesty  and  a  hatred  of 


THE  SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  143 

anything  small,  underhanded  or  tricky.  It  makes 
him  steadfast  in  love,  staunch  in  friendship  and  gen- 
erous even  to  enemies.  A  dignified,  exalted  or  well 
placed  Sun  brings  friendship  from  people  in  a  posi- 
tion to  bestow  substantial  favors  and  aids  the  person 
materially  in  his  endeavors  to  advance  in  life. 

When  the  Sun  is  afflicted  and  weak  by  sign  and 
position  the  opposite  qualities  are  manifested ;  bom- 
bastic self-assurance  and  bluster,  love  of  adulation 
and  a  desire  to  rule  or  ruin,  but  no  courage  to  face 
opposition ;  indulgence  of  the  lower  nature  and  a 
waste  of  the  vital  force  with  a  consequent  loss  of 
health  and  strength.  When  the  Sun  is  weak  the 
person  is  not  to  be  depended  on;  he  regards  his 
promises  as  pie-crusts,  made  to  be  broken,  and  be- 
cause of  these  traits  such  people  always  remain  in 
obscurity. 

In  the  world  at  large  the  Sun  signifies  employ- 
ers and  those  in  immediate  authority  over  the  per- 
son such  as  judges,  and  other  government  officers, 
and  when  the  exigencies  of  life  bring  a  person  in 
contact  with  them  he  will  receive  at  their  hands 
Whatever  treatment  is  merited  by  his  Sun. 

The  Sun  being  masculine  is  significator  of  the 
marriage  partner  in  a  woman's  horoscope  (and  the 
feminine  Moon  serves  a  similar  purpose  in  a  man's 
figure),  hence  a  well  placed  Sun  is  one  of  the  indi- 
cations that  a  man  will  make  a  good  husband,  and 
an  unaspected,  weak  or  afflicted  Sun  gives  him  a 
tendency  to  neglect  his  hearth  and  home. 


144  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE    STARS 

As  general  significator  of  health  the  Sun  rules 
principally  in  masculine  figures,  (and  the  Moon  in 
feminine  horoscopes),  but  both  lights  and  import- 
ant. It  may  be  said  however,  that  the  health  of  a 
man  is  not  so  much  endangered  by  afflictions  of  the 
Moon  as  by  a  weak  Sun,  and  vice  versa,  a  woman  suf- 
fers more  if  her  Moon  is  afflicted  than  if  her  Sun 
is  evilly  aspected. 

THE  SUN  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES. 
Ol  The  Sun  in  the  First  House 

The  Sun  is  the  source  of  vitality  and  the  First 
House  signifies  our  constitutional  condition 
and  the  home  of  our  childhood,  hence  the  Sun 
well  aspected  in  the  First  House  adds  to  the 
vitality  of  the  rising  sign  and  augments  the 
recuperative  powers.  It  brightens  life  during 
the  days  of  childhood  and  stabilizes  the  nature, 
making  the  person  more  cheerful  and  compan- 
ionable, ambitious  to  succeed  in  life,  courageous 
in  overcoming  obstacles.  The  outlook  on  life 
is  joyful  and  optimistic,  hence  the  chances  of 
success  are  increased.  People  with  the  Sun  in 
this  position  love  to  lead  and  exercise  authority 
over  others;  they  are  very  jealous  of  the  e.steem 
of  the  community,  upright  and  honest  in  their 
dealings. 

When  the  Sun  is  afflicted  in  the  First  House 
it  lowers  the  vitality,   makes  the  person  timid 


THE  SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  145 

and  vacillating,  lacking  in  courage  and  ambi- 
tion; hence  the  chances  of  a  successful  life  are 
slim  unless  many  other  good  aspects  modify 
this  condition. 

©2  The  Sun  in  the  Second  House 

This  shows  the  person  will  find  favor  with  peo- 
ple in  a  position  to  further  his  material  pros- 
perity and  will  by  their  help  gain  a  comfortable 
living,  but  it  also  gives  a  tendency  to  squander 
money  on  the  principle  that  ''what  comes  easy 
goe.s  easy."  Unless  this  trait  is  curbed  it  may 
bring  about  financial  stringency,  for  it  is  not 
so  much  what  we  earn  that  counts  as  what  we 
spend.  We  shall  be  poor  with  an  income  of  a 
million  if  we  spend  two. 

03  The  Sun  in  the  Third  House 

This  favors  travel  and  makes  the  person  bright 
and  observing,  eager  to  investigate  conditions 
and  things,  for  it  imparts  a  scientific  turn  to  the 
mind.  It  is  a  good  position  for  writers  as  it 
helps  to  bring  them  to  public  notice  and  favor. 

04  The  Sun  in  the  Fourth  House 

In  one  sense  this  is  a  very  unfortunate  position 
because  it  deprives  the  person  of  the  help  of 
the  solar  influence  during  the  major  portion  of 
life,  which  is  on  that  account  a  constant  uphill 
struggle,  but  as  the  Fourth  House  rules  the  lat- 
10 


146  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

ter  part  of  life  it  is  always  a  consolation  to  see 
that  the  declining  years  will  be  brightened  by 
the  Sun  of  success.  That  should  make  the  bur- 
dens lighter  to  bear. 

O5  The  Sun  in  the  Fifth  House 

The  Fifth  House  rules  courtship,  children,  pleas- 
ure, education  and  publications;  when  the  Sun 
is  there  it  favors  all  these  except  children.  It 
makes  the  person  a  favorite  with  the  opposite 
sex,  gives  him  much  enjoyment  of  life,  also  suc- 
cess as  a  teacher,  publisher  or  editor,  but 
strangely  enough,  though  the  Sun  rules  the 
heart  whence  spring  our  children,  his  position- 
in  the  Fifth  House  is  distinctly  unfavorable  for 
their  begetting.  This  is  especially  so  if  the  fiery 
Fifth  sign  Leo  is  on  the  cusp.  Then  the  fervent 
heat  of  passion  seems  to  scorch  the  human  plant 
ere  it  has  time  to  grow.  This  tendency  is  modi- 
fied to  some  extent  when  a  watery  sign  is  on 
the  cusp,  but  when  one  of  the  partners  has  the 
Sun  in  the  Fifth  House  the  offspring  is  never 
prolific. 

©6  The  Sun  in  the  Sixth  House 

Seeing  that  the  Sun  is  the  Giver  of  Life  it  is 
evident  that  when  it  is  confined  in  the  Sixth 
House  it  is  debilitated  and  the  vital  flow  is  ob- 
structed; therefore  people  who  have  the  Sun  in 
that  position  are  particularly  liable  to  disease 


THE   SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  UT 

and  slow  to  recuperate.  On  that  account  their 
diseases  are  frequent  and  long-drawn-out  to  an 
extent  which  often  amounts  to  chronic  inval- 
idism. 

If  the  person  is  an  employee  of  someone  else 
he  will  be  efficient  in  his  work;  he  will  have  nc 
difficulty  in  obtaining  well-paid  positions  but 
he  will  be  very  touchy  towards  his  employers 
and  make  frequent  changes  under  the  pretext 
that  his  abilities  are  not  sufficiently  appreciated. 
If  he  is  an  employer,  this  position  of  the  Sun 
is  good  for  sucess  in  business,  but  indicates  trou- 
ble with  servants  who  will  be  domineering. 

If  other  configurations  in  the  horoscope  en- 
able the  person  to  shake  off  the  grip  of  sickness 
the  Sun  in  the  Sixth  House  gives  great  ability 
in  chemistry,  preparation  of  health-food,  and 
makes  the  person  a  capable  nurse  or  healer. 

07  The  Sun  in  the  Seventh  House 

Partnerships  are  often  unsuccessful  because  of 
the  selfishness  of  the  participants  but  he  who  has 
the  Sun  in  the  Seventh  House  will  have  no  rea- 
son to  complain  in  that  respect  for  he  will  al- 
ways attract  someone  with  a  high  sense  of  honor 
when  in  need  of  a  partner,  and  as  marriage 
is  the  most  intimate  of  all  partnerships,  the  Sun- 
in  the  Seventh  House  is  a  particularly  fortunate 
configuration  in  that  respect,  for  it  will 
bring  the  person  a  mate  who  is  absolutely 


148  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

steadfast  and  true,  one  who  may  indeed  be  de- 
pended upon  as  a  helpmeet  in  all  the  exigen- 
eie,s  and  vicissitudes  of  life  till  death  do  part. 
As  there  is  no  earthly  treasure  equal  to  such  an 
enduring  love  this  is  perhaps  the  best  of  all  so- 
lar positions. 

Should  the  person  be  unfortunate  enough 
to  become  involved  in  litigation  the  Sun  in  the 
Seventh  House  insures  the  favor  of  the  judge 
and  a  successful  outcome. 

O8  The  Sun  in  the  Eighth  House 

The  Eighth  House  is  the  angle  of  incidence 
through  which  the  death  dealing  forces  act,  and 
as  the  Sun  is  the  giver  of  life  it  is  evident  that 
this  position  is  extremely  detrimental  as  far  as 
vitality  is  concerned,  and  it  often  brings  a 
promising  life  to  an  early  termination.  It  al- 
so often  happens  that  when  genius  has  gone 
begging  all  through  life  and  passed  the  portal 
of  death  in  obscurity  it  gains  belated  recogni- 
tion, fame  and  immortality  through  this  posi- 
tion of  the  Sun. 

As  the  Second  House  signifies  the  financial 
condition  of  the  person  and  shows  what  he  does 
with  the  money  he  earns,  so  the  Eighth  shows 
what  comes  to  him  apart  from  his  own  efforts, 
that  is  to  say,  inheritances,  the  wealth  of  the 
marriage  partner,  etc.  Therefore  the  Sun  in 
the  Eighth  House  shows  an  increase  of  wealth 


THE  SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  149 

after  marriage  but  also  a  tendency  of  the  mate 
to  be  over-generous  and  squander  the  means. 

O  9  The  Sun  in  the  Ninth  House 

This  position  brightens  the  mind  and  fills  the 
person  with  high  ideal/3  and  lofty  ambitions. 
It  makes  him  generously  tolerant  of  other  peo- 
ple's opinions — noble  and  kind-hearted.  There 
is  an  inner  urge  to  solve  the  problems  of  life 
and  learn  the  'whys'  and  'wherefores,'  hence  the 
mind  turns  naturally  toward  philosophy,  reli- 
gion and  law.  And  as  we  always  excel  in  the 
things  we  love,  people  with  the  Sun  in  the  Ninth 
House  make  excellent  statesmen,  lawyers  and 
ministers  of  God.  They  shine  in  all  intellectual 
and  scientific  pursuits.  Their  mission  often 
takes  them  into  foreign  lands. 

0 10  The  Sun  in  the  Tenth  House 

This  is  one  of  the  surest  signs  of  general  suc- 
cess in  life.  The  person  rises  by  the  favor  of 
those  above  him  in  the  social  scale  and  obtains 
positions  of  responsibility  and  trust.  He  is  much 
respected  in  the  community  and  often  honored 
by  election  to  public  office,  and  he  may  always 
be  depended  upon  to  justify  the  trust  reposed 
in  him. 

Gil  The  Sun  in  the  Eleventh  House 

This  is  a  good  sign  that  the  hopes,  wishes  and 


150  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

aspirations  of  the  person  will  be  realized;  it  at- 
tracts people  in  a  position  to  befriend  him  and 
with  an  inclination  to  do  so. 

G12  The  Sun  in  tJie  Twelfth  House 

This  is  the  signature  of  the  lonely  soul  who  as  a 
recluse  shuts  himself  off  from  his  fellows.  It 
brings  with  it  a  danger  of  conflict  with  the  au- 
thorities or  an  inability  to  fit  in  with  the  family 
conditions  and  on  account  of  the  ensuing 
trouble  the  person  goes  into  voluntary  or  en- 
forced exile,  living  his  life  henceforth  a  stranger 
among  strangers.  Even  when  such  drastic  con- 
ditions do  not  prevail,  the  first  third  of  the  life 
is  usually  wasted  in  vain  efforts  to  find  a  bal- 
ance and  settle  down  to  some  life  work. 

Like  the  Sixth  House  position  of  the  Sun. 
this  also  favors  work  with  the  sick  in  hospitals, 
chemistry  and  laboratory  work,  or  work  with 
prisoners ;  it  gives  a  love  of  the  occult  and  leads 
to  curious  lines  of  research. 

THE  SUN  IN  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS. 
G  T  The  Sun  in  Aries 

Aries  is  the  exaltation-sign  of  the  Sun  and  hence 
this  is  the  most  powerful  position  of  the  central 
orb.  There  it  radiates  a  vital  force  of  unex- 
ampled strength  which  gives  to  the  person  a 
wonderful  fund  of  energy  wherewith  to  with- 


THE   SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  151 

stand  the  onslaughts  of  disease  and  should  he 
be  taken  ill  his  powers  of  recuperation  will 
quickly  free  him  from  the  clutches  of  sickness. 
People  with  this  configuration  are  principally 
liable  to  fevers  on  account  of  the  fervent  heat 
of  the  Sun  in  Aries.  As  Aries  rules  the  head 
the  excessive  heat  often  dries  up  the  scalp  so 
that  the  hair  cannot  grow  and  the  person  be- 
comes bald. 

0  8  The  Sun  in  Taurus 

A  favorable  position  for  the  financial  fortunes 
but  it  also  gives  a  tendency  to  extravagance,  es- 
pecially in  dress,  and  makes  the  person  ex- 
tremely fond  of  the  opposite  sex,  sometimes  with 
detrimental  results.  It  gives  great  physical 
strength  and  the  person  loves  to  show  off  that 
people  may  admire  his  prowess.  Taurus  rules 
the  larynx  and  therefore  the  Sun  in  Taurus  adds 
strength  to  the  vocal  organ  and  gives  the  person 
a  strong,  pleasant  voice. 

O  IE  The  Sun  in  Gemini 

Gemini  is  a  Mercurial  sign  and  third  in  the  ga- 
mut, hence  this  position  gives  a  blended  influence 
of  the  Sun,  Mercury  and  the  Third  House.  This 
favors  expression  for  Mercury  as  it  is  the  planet 
which  stirs  the  vocal  chords  and  produces 
sound  in  the  Taurian  larynx;  it  also  favors 
writings  and  travel;  the  mind  is  brightened  by 


152  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

the  Sun  in  Gemini  and  when  it  is  necessary  or 
expedient  to  travel  the  person  gains  thereby 
physically  and  mentally.  It  gives  a  pleasant,  af- 
fable disposition  which  makes  him  generally 
liked  among  his  associates. 

O  ED  The  Sun  in  Cancer 

Cancer  is  the  fourth  sign  and  is  ruled  ny  the 
Moon,  innce  the  Sun  in  Cancer  Is  a  mixture  of 
the  Sun.  Moon  and  fourth  House  influence.  In 
the  radical  horoscope  (where  Aries  is  in  the 
Ascendant)  this  is  the  nadir,  and  vitality  is  at 
,  its  lowest  ebb,  therefore  the  person  with  the  Sun 
in  Cancer  is  apt  to  be  indolent  even  when  not 
sickly  at  all.  He  is  harmless  and  avoids  quarrels, 
hence  harmonious  and  agreeable  in  the  home  so 
long  as  he  is  not  asked  to  work  too  hard.  This 
position  of  the  Sun  makes  the  first  part  of  the 
life  barren  of  fruits  but  brings  success  in  the 
later  years.  Cancer  is  a  psychic  sign  and  there- 
fore the  Sun  in  Cancer  gives  a  tendency  toward 
the  occult,  often  with  psychic  experiences. 

O5V  The  Sun  in  Leo 

The  Sun  in  Leo  gives  a  masterful  nature  with  a 
large  measure  of  self-control,  a  keen  sense  of 
honor  and  a  never-failing  integrity.  The  per- 
son aspires  to  rule  others  but  would  scorn  to 
take  a  mean  advantage  or  to  do  anything  to 
others  that  would  not  be  in  strict  accord  with  the 


THE  SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  153 

golden  rule;  the  affections  are  deep  and  lasting. 
People  with  the  Sun  in  Leo  are  staunch  defend- 
ers of  those  they  love,  but  equally  strong  in  their 
aversions.  Leo  is  the  sign  which  rules  the  heart 
and  whatever  people  with  the  Sun  in  Leo  do  is 
done  with  a  concentration  of  purpose  which 
compels  success.  They  make  fine  friends  and  if 
one  must  have  an  enemy,  a  Leo  will  prove  more 
honorable  and  magnanimous  than  any  other. 

The  Sun  in  Virgo 

This  is  a  combination  of  the  solar,  mercurial  and 
Sixth  House  influence.  It  shows  the  successful 
middleman  between  the  producer  and  consumer, 
subtle,  extremely  quick  to  see  what  will  work 
to  his  advantage  in  the  promotion  of  business, 
pleasant  and  sociable,  agreeable  to  all  from 
whom  he  expects  to  gain,  but  domineering  to 
employees  and  fellow  workers;  a  smooth  talker 
but  not  necesarily  insincere;  he  merely  looks  out 
for  number  one. 

The  Sun  in  Virgo  makes  good  chemists, 
nurses  and  doctors,  not  surgeons  but  drug-doc- 
tors; they  are  firm  believers  in  medicine  and  lots 
of  it. 

O  ===  The  Sun  in  Libra 

Libra  is  ruled  by  Venus  and  it  is  the  seventh  sign 
hence  the  Sun  in  Libra  combines  the  influence 
of  Venus  with  that  of  the  Sun  and  the  Seventh 


154  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

house,  with  the  result  that  the  person  loves  tre 
marriage  partner  so  devotedly  that  he  ex- 
cludes everyone  else;  for  of  a  person  with  that 
configuration  it  may  truly  be  said  that  "the 
Sun  rises  and  sets"  in  the  marriage  partner. 

Libra  is  also  the  exaltation  sign  of  Saturn, 
and  his  influence  is  there  at  its  best,  giving  a 
tint  of  construction  to  the  art  of  Venus.  This 
is  brought  about  as  ability  for  the  architecture 
and  the  finer  branches  of  decorative  construction 
when  the  Sun  is  in  Libra.  This  configuration 
also  gives  a  fine,  sonorous  voice  and  vocal  talent. 

T~he  Sun  in  Scorpio 

This  gives  the  person  a  very  blunt  and  brusque 
manner  with  a  tendency  to  ride  rough  shod  over 
anybody  or  anything  that  stands  in  the  way  of 
his  desires;  an  overweening  egoism  and  a  feel- 
ing that  he  knows  better  than  anybody  else;  ex- 
tremely cruel  and  indifferent  to  the  sufferings 
of  other  people  or  creatures.  It  is  the  sign  of 
the  vivisectionist,  the  surgeon,  the  soldier  and 
the  butcher,  also  sea-captains. 

This  configuration  is  good  for  gain  by  mar- 
riage but  gives  a  tendency  to  extravagant  ex- 
penditure. 

The  Sun  in  Sagittarius 

This  gives  lofty  ideals  and  a  noble  aspiring  dis- 
position aiming  to  rise  by  raising  others.  It 


THE  SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  155 

makes  the  person  benevolent,  philanthropic  and 
therefore  beloved  among  his  associates.  He  is 
often  the  recipient  of  honors  and  appointments 
to  positions  of  trust,  and  missions  of  a  delicate 
nature,  nor  could  a  better  selection  be  made,  for 
such  people  are  the  souls  of  honor.  This  config- 
uration also  brings  success  in  religion,  law  and 
statesmanship  for  it  gives  an  expansive  mind 
fitted  to  grapple  with  the  greater  problems  of 
life. 

OV3  Tlie  Sun  in  Capricorn 

This  is  a  good  sign  that  the  person  will  rise  in 
life  by  the  aid  of  the  good-will  of  people  in  a 
higher  position  than  he;  it  also  shows  that  he 
will  merit  their  trust  and  acquit  himself  well  in 
a  position  of  responsibility  and  trust;  it  makes 
him  careful,  prudent,  faithful  and  honest. 
Judges  with  that  configuration  cannot  be  bought 
but  will  administer  justice  as  they  see  it,  to  all 
comers,  and  it  gives  an  all-round  love  of  fair 
play  and  wins  for  those  who  have  it  the  respect 
and  esteem  of  all  in  their  circle  of  environment. 

O^  The  Sun  in  Aquarius 

This  is  a  combination  of  the  Sun,  Uranus  and 
the  Eleventh  House  influences.  It  gives  the  per- 
son an  intuitive  perception  of  the  inner  nature 
of  things  and  a 'touch  with  the  forces  and  ideas 
of  the  spiritual  realms  which  leads  him  to  take 


156  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

up  when  possible,  new  and  advanced  cults,  or 
methods  of  healing  such  as  Naturopathy,  Elec- 
tro-therapy, Astro-therapy,  Magnetic  Healing, 
etc.  He  is  also  drawn  to  scientific  research  and 
ultra-intellectual  or  strange  religions.  This  con- 
figuration gives  popularity  and  firm  friends 
among  people  who  are  in  a  position  to  bestow 
favors  and  further  the  person's  attainment  of 
his  ambitions. 

0  X.  The  Sun  in  Pisces 

Gives  a  retiring  disposition  and  favors  success 
in  occupations  removed  from  the  public  gaze 
such  as  prisons,  hospitals,  institutions  for  the 
poor,  etc.  If  the  person  incurs  enmity  of  oth- 
ers he  will  be  vindicated  in  whatever  they  may 
do  to  hurt  his  reputation.  People  with  the  Sun 
in  Pisces  have  a  strong  tendency  towards  psy- 
chism,  mediumship  and  the  occult  in  general. 

THE  SUN  IN  ASPECT  WITH  OTHER  PLANETS 

9  P  6  O  Venus  parallel  or  conjunction  to  t~he  Sun 
calls  out  the  artistic  side  of  the  nature,  making 
the  person  fond  of  music,  art  and  poetry ;  it 
strengthens  the  love  nature  and  if  the  config- 
uration occurs  in  the  Seventh  House  it  is  a  posi 
tive  testimony  of  unalloyed  marital  bliss.  In 
the  Second  or  Eighth  Houses  it  leads  to  ex- 
travagance of  the  person  or  his  mate ;  in  Scorpio 


THE   SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  157 

it  is  not  good  for  the  morals  and  in  Pisces  it 
leads  to  intemperance.  This  aspect  strengthens 
the  constitution,  increases  the  popularity  and 
makes  smooth  in  social  intercourse  so  that  the 
person  has  many  friends  and  keeps  them. 

As  the  orbit  of  Venus  is  so  small  she  never 
forms  the  sextile,  trine,  square  or  opposition  to 
the  Sun. 

£  P  6  O  Mercury  parallel  or  conjunction  to  the  Sun. 
These  are  the  only  aspects  ever  formed  and  are 
good  for  the  memory  and  mentality  provided 
Mercury  is  not  closer  to  the  Sun  than  three 
degrees,  for  then  he  is  'combust'  and  his  good 
qualities  are  burned  up  in  the  Sun's  rays.  It  is 
most  fortunate  to  have  Mercury  rise  before  the 
Sun  at  birth  for  he  is  the  Lightbearer  who  holds 
the  torch  of  reason  before  the  Spirit  which  in 
the  horoscope  is  symbolized  by  the  Sun.  When 
he  rises  after  the  Sun  the  mentality  is  not  nearly 
so  keen  (unless  other  good  aspects  favor). 

D  P  6  O  The  Moon  parallel  or  conjunction  to  Sun. 
No  matter  in  what  sign  or  house  the  conjunc- 
tion of  the  Lights  occurs  the  person  will  be  so 
.strongly  marked  with  the  characteristics  of  that 
sign  that  lacking  knowledge  of  his  true  Ascena- 
ant  even  the  most  competent  astrologer  is  likely 
to  be  misled  and  judge  him  to  be  born  with  the 
sign  rising  in  which  the  conjunction  took  place, 
and  whatever  matters  are  ruled  by  the  House  in 


158  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

which  the  conjunction  occurs  will  play  a  very 
important  part  in  the  life.  In  the  First  House 
he  is  an  out  and  out  egotist  with  very  little  love 
for  others  save  in  so 'far  as  they  serve  his  ends;, 
in  the  Seventh,  his  world  pivots  on  the  mate;  in 
the  Tenth  House  or  sign  he  will  sacrifice  all 
other  considerations  to  rise  in  public  life ;  in  the 
Twelfth  House  or  sign  it  will  give  a  strong  tend- 
ency to  intemperance  which  will  bring  trouble; 
in  the  Third  and  Ninth  Houses  it  will  brighten 
the  mind  and  induce  travel  from  which  he  will 
benefit ;  in  the  Second  House  it  will  bring  wealth,, 
especially  if  in  good  aspect  with  Jupiter. 

But  if  the  conjunction  of  the  Sun  and  Moon 
is  closer  than  three  degrees  it  has  a  tendency  to- 
deplete  the  vitality  and  if  the  conjunction  is  also- 
a  solar  eclipse,  and  the  child  survives,  this  will 
be  particularly  noticeable,  all  through  life.  Peo- 
ple who  have  such  close  conjunction  or  eclipses 
become  listless,  disspirited  and  out  of  sorts  every 
time  there  is  a  new  Moon.  It  does  not  seem  to- 
interfere  with  the  good  effects  in  other  depart- 
ments of  life. 

D  *  A  O  The  Moon  sextile  or  trine  to  the  Sun.  The- 
good  aspects  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  make  for  gen- 
eral success  in  life,  health,  fair  financial  condi- 
tions, good  home  surroundings  with  faithful 
friends,  and  esteem  in  the  community;  they  fa- 
vor a  rise  in  life  because  of  the  person's  innate 


THE  SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  159 

ability,  which  either  gains  for  him  the  recogni- 
tion of  people  in  a  position  to  help  him  rise,  or 
impels  him  to  carve  his  own  way. 

D  n  <9  O  Tine  Moon  square  or  opposition  to  Sun  makes 
the  person  vascillating  and  unsettled  in  dispo- 
sition, changeable  and  unable  to  pursue  a  settled 
course  in  life,  rash  to  plunge  into  something  but 
lacking  the  persistence  or  continuity  of  purpose 
to  carry  anything  to  a  successful  conclusion.  For 
that  reason  such  people  become  failures  in  life, 
especially  in  their  dealing.s  with  women  and  peo- 
ple higher  in  the  social  scale  such  as  employers, 
the  authorities,  judges,  etc.  They  always  have 
difficulty  in  obtaining  employment  and  keeping 
their  positions  when  they  obtain  one,  for  they 
are  hyper-sensitive  and  ready  to  take  offense, 
with  or  without  provocation.  These  configura- 
tions also  affect  the  health,  rendering  the  body 
liable  to  cold  and  making  recuperation  slow  when 
sickness  has  overtaken  the  person. 

V  *  A  O  Saturn  sextile  or  trine  to  Sun  endows  the 
person  who  is  fortunate  enough  to  have  it  with 
some  of  the  finest  faculties  in  the  gamut,  for  it 
brings  out  the  best  qualities  in  the  two  planets. 
It  gives  foresight,  method  and  organizing,  ex- 
ecutive and  diplomatic  ability  with  the  moral 
stamina  to  carry  any  project  determined  on  to 
a  successful  conclusion  despite  delays  and  ob- 
stacles. Yet  the  person  makes  no  enemies  in  so 


160  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

doing,  for  this  configuration  also  makes  him  the 
soul  of  honor,  kind  and  considerate;  he  would 
never  stoop  to  do  anything  mean  for  he  is  so 
sincere  and  just  in  his  dealings  with  all  men, 
but  on  the  other  hand,  when  he  believes  a  certain 
course  of  action  to  be  right,  he  will  never  swerve 
therefrom  though  heaven  and  earth  be  moved 
against  him.  These  aspects  bring  success  in  po- 
litical or  judicial  positions  also  in  connection 
with  mining  or  agriculture.  The  person  often 
benefits  by  legacy,  but  recognition  and  success 
is  generally  delayed  till  middle  life. 

J?  P  6  D  <?  O  Saturn  parallel,  conjunction-,  square  or 
opposition  to  the  Sun  has  a  very  detrimental 
effect  where  the  resistance  is  fundamentally  low ; 
in  Gemini  and  Sagittarius  it  gives  a  tendency  to 
tuberculosis.  It  does  least  damage  in  the  fixed 
signs  where  the  resistance  is  greatest,  but  when 
sickness  does  get  a  grip  on  the  person  it  hangs 
on  like  grim  death,  for  it  lessens  the  power  of 
the  body  to  throw  off  disease  quickly,  hence  re- 
cuperation is  very  slow, 

These  aspects  are  extremely  adverse  to  that 
which  is  generally  termed  success,  but  they  give 
an  abundance  of  experience,  so  they  are  excel- 
lent from  the  standpoint  of  the  soul.  It  may  be 
truly  said  of  the  person  who  has  them  that  "the 
best-laid  plans  of  men  and  mice  gang  aft  agley, ' ' 
for  no  matter  how  carefully  he  may  plan  his  af- 


THE  SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  161 

fairs  he  will  be  subjected  to  delays  and  meet  ob- 
stacles which  will  thwart  his  desires.  His  mar- 
riage is  unhappy  and  usually  ends  in  divorce 
or  early  death  of  the  partner.  He  has  difficulty 
in  finding  and  keeping  employment,  trouble  with 
employers  and  authorities,  a  feeling  as  if  he  is 
held  in  leash  all  his  life  and  denied  expression  in 
any  direction.  These  are  the  outward  experiences 
but  they  are  generated  by  the  inner  nature,  and 
until  that  changes  he  must  suffer  the  whiplash 
of  necessity.  In  the  first  place  he  has  a  tenden- 
cy to  crawl  into  a  shell  and  shut  himself  in  and 
others  out.  He  is  a  pessimist  and  a  kill-joy,  has 
little  or  no  regard  for  the  feelings  of  others  and 
is  very  obstinate.  In  the  horoscope  of  a  woman 
it  signifies  marriage  to  one  much  older  who  will 
hold  her  with  a  very  tight  rein,  it  augers  death 
of  the  husband  and  often  several  marriages 
which  are  terminated  by  death  or  divorce. 

These  configurations  often  bring  legacies, 
but  either  there  is  trouble  and  litigation  over 
the  bequests,  or  the  person  squanders  the  estate 
after  he  receives  it.  If  Saturn  is  in  his  exalta- 
tion sign,  Libra,  the  latter  part  of  the  life  may 
be  better  because  the  person  has  taken  the  les- 
sons of  life  to  heart  and  mended  his  ways. 

If  <5P*Ao  Jupiter  conjunction,  parallel,  sextile  or 
trine  to  Sun.  The  conjunction  gives  a  tendency 
to  apoplexy,  especially  if  it  occurs  in  Aries,  but 

11 


162  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

with  that  exception  we  may  say  that  these  config- 
urations are  sure  indications  of  health,  wealth 
and  happiness.  They  give  the  person  an  abund- 
ance of  vitality  which  is  proof  against  very  se- 
vere onslaughts  of  disease,  and  even  when  partic- 
ularly favorable  planetary  influences  succeed  in 
breaking  down  his  resistance,  recovery  will  be  so 
rapid  as  to  seem  miraculous.  This  nearly  im- 
pregnable condition  of  health  is  all  the  more  un- 
assailable because  it  is  backed  by  a  disposition 
at  once  sunny  and  jovial  and  that  latter  charac- 
teristic also  makes  the  fortunate  possessors  of 
these  aspects  beloved  by  all  with  whom  they  come 
in  contact.  Everybody  is  glad  to  .see  the  person 
with  the  perpetual  smile,  but  they  do  more  than 
"smile" — they  earn  the  friendship  universally 
bestowed  upon  them  by  deeds  of  kindness,  by 
words  of  sympathy,  cheer  or  hope  as  the  occasion 
may  demand.  They  are  trusted  by  everybody 
because  they  never  betray  a  trust  and  they  have 
clear  heads,  good  judgment  and  executive  abil- 
ity so  that  they  are  well  fitted  to  help  others. 
These  characteristics  also  favor  their  own  finan- 
cial fortunes,  so  they  accumulate  wealth,  but 
theirs  is  never  ' '  tainted  money ; ' '  they  never 
benefit  by  the  loss  of  others.  They  are  relig- 
iously conservative  and  may  be  aptly  described 
as  "pillars  of  society."  They  shine  particularly 
in  governmental  offices. 


THE  SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  163- 

U  D  8  O  Jupiter  square  or  opposition  to  the  Sun  is 
bad  for  the  health  because  it  gives  a  tendency 
to  indulge  in  bad  habits.  The  person  is  far 
too  fond  of  the  so-called  "good  things  of" 
life,"  and  very  selfish  in  satisfying  his  own. 
comforts,  he  never  exercises  himself  or  denies 
himself  so  the  circulation  becomes  sluggish  and. 
as  these  people  have  a  superabundance  of  blood 
it  is  productive  of  various  noxious  growths  and 
kindred  disorders,  sometimes  a  fit  of  anger  raises 
the  bloodpressure  to  such  a  point  that  a  vessel 
bursts  and  ends  the  life  or  leaves  the  person 
henceforth  a  useless  wreck. 

These  aspects  give  a  bombastic  haughty  dis- 
position with  an  inordinate  love  of  display  and 
thus  induce  to  extravagance  both  in  social  and. 
business  affairs  with  the  result  that  the  person, 
sometimes  finds  himself  involved  in  debt  which 
he  cannot  pay  and  then  it  is  but  a  step  to  the 
bankruptcy  court.  A  false  pride  often  prevents 
these  people  from  working  honestly  for  others,, 
they  would  rather  prey  upon  the  public  as  gam- 
blers, followers  of  races  and  other  so-called 
sports  where  there  is  an  opportunity  to  swindle 
people  and  get  what  they  call  an  "easy"  living 
until  they  land  in  the  meshes  of  the  law.  Child- 
ren with  these  aspects  should  be  given  special 
training  in  self-restraint,  thrift  and  honesty; 
they  will  have  a  tendency  to  scorn  and  scoff  at 


164  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

religion,  but  perhaps  the  memory  of  a  devout 
mother  may  help  to  keep  them  straight. 

<£  P  6  *  A  O  Mars  parallel,  conjunction,  sextile  or 
trine  to  Sun.  The  conjunction  gives  a  tendency 
to  fever,  especially  if  it  occurs  in  Aries,  the  sign 
which  governs  the  head,  but  it  is  curious  that 
people  with  that  configuration  seem  also  to  be 
able  to  endure  a  much  higher  temperature  than 
others,  and  come  unscathed  through  such  a  siege 
of  sickness  as  would  have  ordinarily  proved  fa- 
tal. With  that  exception  these  aspects  all  pro- 
duce a  super-abundance  of  vital  energy  which 
assures  their  possessor  of  the  most  radiant  health 
all  through  life,  it  strengthens  the  constitution 
and  makes  the  person  able  to  endure  the  harder 
tasks,  it  gives  him  a  dauntless  determination  and 
courage  to  face  the  greatest  odds.  Given  a  plan 
to  follow  he  may  be  trusted  to  overcome  all  phy- 
sical obstacles  for  he  has  both  executive  and  con- 
structive ability  together  with  an  indomitable 
will  which  refuses  to  recognize  defeat.  The  dis- 
position is  frank  and  open  but  blunt  and  often 
brusque,  they  are  too  intensely  bent  on  what- 
ever they  want  to  do  to  waste  time  in  politeness 
and  suavity,  they  brush  the  conventionalities 
aside  without  compunction  and  are  therefore  not 
liked  by  people  of  too  fine  sensibilities ;  they  are, 
however,  men  and  women  of  action  and  the  fore- 
most factors  in  the  world's  work;  but  for  their 


THE  SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  165 

enterprise   and   energy   the  world   would   move 
much  more  slowly. 

Aspects  to  the  Sun  and  Mars  are  absolutely 
necessary  to  give  zest  to  life,  even  adverse  as- 
pects are  better  than  none,  for  where  these  plan- 
ets are  unaspected  the  person  is  listless,  vapid 
and  he  will  never  amount  to  anything  no  matter 
how  good  the  figure  may  be  in  other  respects. 

D  S  O  Mars  square  or  opposition  to  the  Sun  also 
endows  the  person  with  an  abundance  of  en- 
ergy and  the  faculty  of  leadership,  but  it 
is  turned  to  purposes  of  deviltry  and  de- 
struction. The  courage  implanted  by  the  good 
aspects  becomes  foolhardiness,  the  person  has  a 
loud,  overbearing,  swaggering  manner  and  is 
ready  to  fight  at  the  drop  of  a  hat,  he  is  always 
in  opposition  to  constituted  authority  and  ready 
to  rebel  wherever  he  sees  a  chance.  He  has  an 
extremely  fiery  temper  but  holds  no  resentment. 
On  account  of  these  qualities  he  is  universally 
disliked  both  by  employers  and  his  fellow-work- 
ers, always  in  hot  water  and  never  stays  long 
in  any  place  for  he  is  an  agitator  and  trouble- 
maker. These  aspects  also  dispose  to  accidents 
in  which  the  person  may  be  maimed,  also  to  gun- 
.shot  and  knife-wounds,  to  scalding-burns  and  to 
fevers,  inflammatory  complaints,  boils  and  erup- 
tions. 


166  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

J?  *  A  O  Uranus  sextile  or  trine  to  the  Sun  makes 
the  person  intuitive,  original,  inventive  and  inde- 
pendent in  his  manner  of  conduct  and  per- 
sonal appearance,  with  respect  to  food  and 
certain  mannerisms;  he  is  what  people  call 
eccentric  and  conspicuous,  yet  not  offensively 
so,  given  to  pursuits  and  studies  which  people 
consider  "queer"  such  as  occultism  and  astrol- 
ogy, but  also  delving  into  the  unknown  realms 
after  nature's  secrets  concerning  electricity. 
He  often  becomes  a  successful  inventor  if  other 
aspects  give  the  mechanical  ability  to  work  out 
his  schemes.  Uranus  rules  the  ether  and  now 
that  we  are  nearing  the  Aquarian  age  his  vibra- 
tions will  in  increasing  measure  bring  to  our  ken 
methods  of  using  nature's  finer  forces  and  the 
people  with  the  Sun  sextile  or  trine  Uranus  will 
be  the  media  who  attract  and  interpret  them  for 
us  as  the  aerials  and  receivers  in  a  wireless  sta- 
tion collect  and  transcribe  the  messages  carried 
by  the  ether  waves  to  which  they  are  attuned. 
The  person  often  rises  in  life  through  the  friend- 
ship of  people  above  him  in  the  social  scale.  He 
is  of  a  very  high-strung  temperament  but  has 
himself  well  under  control,  and  rarely  shows 
temper  or  anger.  He  is  an  out  and  out  idealist. 

V  P  6  D  8  O  Uranus  parallel,  conjunction,  square 
or  opposition  to  Sun  makes  the  person  very  high- 
strung,  nervous  and  of  uncontrolled  emotions, 


THE  SUN,  GIVER  OF  LIFE  167 

ready  to  fly  into  hysteria  on  any  or  no  provoca- 
tion. It  predisposes  to  all  nervous  disorders 
such  as  St.  Vitus  dance,  epilepsy  and  lack  of  co- 
ordination. It  makes  him  impulsive  and  unre- 
liable, without  regard  for  the  conventionalities, 
highly  impatient  of  any  human  restraint  upon 
his  liberty  and  committed  to  the  theory  of  affini- 
ties, soulmates  and  free-love,  hence  an  undesir- 
able marriage  partner  and  likely  to  figure  in 
divorce  proceedings  or  scandals  of  an  even  worse 
nature. 

There  is  also  danger  of  trouble  on  account 
of  connection  with  anarchistic  plots  where  the 
inventive  faculty  may  find  scope  in  the  con- 
struction of  explosives  and  infernal  machines. 
Unless  these  aspects  are  modified  by  other  eon< 
figurations  tncse  people  are  among  the  most  dan- 
gerous to  society.  They  are  liable  to  accidents 
from  lightning  and  electricity,  and  all  through 
life  they  meet  disappointment  in  every  direction. 

*  A  O  Neptune  sextile  or  trine  to  the  Sun  fa- 
vors the  possibility  of  developing  the  spir- 
itual faculties,  for  he  intensifies  the  spirit- 
ual vibrations  in  the  aura.  Many  people  with 
these  configurations  hear  the  harmony  of  the 
spheres  and  if  Mercury,  the  lower  octave  of  Nep- 
tune gives  the  requisite  dexterity  they  become 
musicians  of  high  inspirational  nature.  In  oth- 
ers is  breeds  a  love  of  the  occult  which  leads 


168  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

them  into  the  higher  life  but  they  usually  ap- 
proach it  from  the  intellectual  standpoint  of 
psychic  investigators,  a  few  live  the  life  and  ob- 
tain first-hand  knowledge. 

tp  6  P[H  6"  O  Neptune  conjunction,  parallel,  square 
or  opposition  to  the  Sun  also  brings  the  person  in 
touch  with  the  denizens  of  the  invisible  world  by 
raising  the  vibrations  in  his  aura,  but  these  con- 
figurations attract  the  undesirable  element  such 
as  met  at  the  ordinary  spiritualistic  seance.  In  a 
watery  sign  Neptune  induces  the  person  to  drink 
to  excess  and  then  the  added  acceleration  of  the 
vibratory  rate  frequently  causes  him  to  perceive 
the  ugly,  gruesome  forms  abounding  in  the  low- 
er realms  of  the  invisible  world,  which  are  real 
elemental  entities  and  not  figments  as  believed 
by  people  who  hear  him  tell  what  he  sees  dur- 
ing delirium  tremens. 

These  aspects  also  make  the  person  liable  to 
be  swindled  by  sharpers  and  confidence  men,  too 
easily  hoodwinked. 


CHAPTER  IX. 
VENUS  THE  PLANET  OF  LOVE 

IN  THE  13th  Chapter  of  Paul's  First  Epistle  to  the 
Corinthians  we  find  a  eulogy  of  'love.'  The  word 
used  in  the  authorized  version  is  'charity,'  but  it 
ought  to  be  read  as  '  love. '  ' '  Love  suff ereth  long  and 
is  kind,  love  vaunteth  not  herself,  is  not  puffed  up, 
believeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things  .  .  .  Whether 
there  be  prophecies  they  shall  fail,  whether  there  be 
knowledge  it  shall  vanish  away."  He  concludes  that 
in  time  faith  and  hope  will  pass  away  because  we 
shall  know  the  things  in  which  we  now  have  faith 
and  our  hopes  will  have  been  realized,  but  love,  he 
contends,  remains  forever.  The  keynote  of  Venus  is 
'love,'  'harmony,'  and  'rhythm,'  and  if  we  want  to 
know  her  nature  we  may  profitably  read  that  chapter 
and  substitute  'Venus'  for  'Love'.  Venus  vaunteth 
not  herself,  is  not  puffed  up,  seeketh  not  her  own,  re- 
joices not  in  iniquity  but  in  the  truth,  beareth  all 
things,  believeth  all  things,  endureth  all  things. 
These  sayings  are  all  true  when  applied  to  Venus  for 
she  furnishes  the  unifying  bond  between  all  members 
of  the  human  family  in  whatever  relationship  they 
may  be  placed.  It  is  the  love-ray  of  Venus  piercing 
deeply  the  heart  of  the  mother  which  breeds  in  her 
the  tender  care  wherewith  she  nourishes  her  offspring 
169 


170  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

through  helpless  infancy.  Venus  sounds  the  love 
call  of  the  youth  and  the  maiden,  gives  and  takes, 
smoothing  out  all  the  difficulties  in  the  conjugal  ca- 
reer. She  is  ever  burning  incense  upon  the  altar  of 
affection  and  from  her  garden  of  love  come  the 
flowers  which  scent  even  the  most  sordid  souls  with 
celestial  perfume  and  raise  them  for  the  time  being 
to  the  stature  of  gods. 

But  when  Venus  is  afflicted,  all  these  sublime 
qualities  become  tainted  and  take  a  hideous  aspect 
according  to  the  nature  of  their  affliction.  Squares 
and  oppositions  turn  to  lust  which  makes  the  per- 
son revel  in  sensual  gratification,  the  perception  of 
beauty  which  expresses  itself  as  art  becomes  sloven- 
liness, the  tendency  to  self-sacrifice,  the  giving  of 
oneself  for  others  is  turned  to  selfishness  and  the  per- 
son will  then  seem  to  use  others  to  escape  any  task 
or  effort  not  to  his  or  her  liking,  laziness  is  one  of 
the  most  prominent  characteristics  of  an  afflicted 
Venus. 

Being  feminine,  Venus  never  reaches  out  toward 
others,  but  exerts  a  magnetic  energy  which  draws 
them  to  her.  Therefore  she  represents  in  the  male 
horoscope  those  of  the  opposite  sex  to  whom  the  per- 
son is  drawn,  but  in  a  female  horoscope  Venus  de- 
scribes the  person's  own  attraction  for  the  opposite 
sex  and  Mars  the  male  planet  shows  who  will  be  at- 
tracted by  her  charms. 

Venus  is  essentially  dignified  in  Taurus  and  Li- 


VENUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  LOVE  171 

bra.  She  is  exalted  in  Pisces  and  therefore  her  in- 
fluence is  most  powerfully  felt  when  she  is  placed  in 
those  signs.  She  is  weak  and  afflicted  when  placed 
in  either  of  the  martial  signs  Aries  or  Scorpio  where 
she  is  in  her  fall,  or  when  she  is  in  the  mercurial 
sign,  Virgo.  The  best  House  position  i,s  in  the  Sev- 
enth where  her  influence  will  make  the  marriage  se- 
rene and  blissful. 

VENUS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES 

9  1  Venus  in  the  First  House  has  a  tendency  to 
spread  sunshine  over  the  child's  home  and  make 
the  early  life  happy.  It  gives  an  amiable  char- 
acter so  that  the  person  is  well  liked  because  of 
his  social  nature  and  friendly  disposition.  It 
brings  out  the  love  of  music,  art  and  a  desire 
for  pleasure.  That  is  what  may  be  called  "a 
lucky  position"  for  it  makes  the  person  very  at- 
tractive to  all  with  whom  he  or  she  comes  in 
contact  and  in  that  way  it  tends  to  give  general 
succes.8  in  life.  It  is  also  very  good  for  the 
general  health. 

$  2  Venus  in  the  Second  House  is  an  indication  of 
financial  success  in  life.  People  with  Venus  in 
this  position  are  usually  very  popular  and  are 
thus  helped  by  their  friends  to  lucrative  posi- 
tions. At  the  same  time  this  position  makes  the 
person  very  wasteful  and  prodigal  so  that  it 
tends  to  make  him  spend  more  than  he  earns. 


172  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

The  money  is  usually  squandered  on  pleasure, 
dress  and  ornaments  for  self  by  a  woman  and 
for  an  amour  by  a  man,  and  not  infrequently 
leads  to  abuses  which  undermine  the  health. 
This  position  also  shows  gain  by  dealing  in 
things  ruled  by  Venus,  such  as  dress  goods, 
jewelry,  music,  etc. 

$  3  Venus  in  the  Third  House  has  a  particularly 
beneficial  effect  upon  the  mind,  making  the  per- 
son cheerful,  optimistic  and  inclined  to  look  at 
everything  from  the  bright  side  of  life.  It 
gives  a  love  of  music,  art,  literature  and  every- 
thing that  has  a  refining  influence,  an  unusual 
facility  to  express  oneself  in  a  happy  and  appro- 
priate manner,  either  in  speech  or  writing.  It 
gives  love  of  travel ;  the  person  will  enjoy  him- 
self on  his  journeys  and  benefit  by  them.  It 
also  makes  relations  with  brothers  and  sisters 
and  neighbors  and  the  people  in  one's  immediate 
environment  congenial. 

$  4  Venus  in  the  Fourth  House  shows  happy  con- 
ditions in  the  home,  particularly  in  the  latter 
part  of  life.  It  also  indicates  that  an  inherit- 
ance will  be  left  to  the  person  and  that  if  he 
owns  houses  or  lands  he  will  gain  much  by 
them. 

$  5  Venus  in  the  Fifth  House  makes  the  person  un- 
usually affectionate  and  as  a  result  he  or  she 


VENUS,  THE  PLANET   OF   LOVE  173 

usually  experiences  a  number  of  love  affairs  all 
of  which  run  their  courses  smoothly.  It  indi- 
cates that  the  marriage  will  be  fruitful  and  pro- 
ductive of  lovely  and  loving  children.  It  is  a 
fortunate  position  for  teachers  and  people  con- 
nected with  educational  institutions,  also  for 
those  engaged  in  publication  of  literature  and 
for  gain  by  speculation  in  stocks  or  similar  se- 
curities. 

9  6  Venus  in  the  Sixth  House  gives  the  person 
faithful  servants  who  will  work  for  his  interest 
if  he  is  an  employer.  If  he  is  an  employee,  it 
will  make  him  well  liked  by  his  employers  and 
fellow- workers.  It  is  a  fairly  good  position  for 
health  provided  the  person  does  not  abuse  it. 
That  is  to  say,  the  constitution  is  harmonious, 
but  not  very  strong.  If  the  health  is  guarded 
with  care  it  will  remain  in  this  condition  for 
life,  but  a  very  little  abuse  may  turn  the  scales 
the  other  way  and  make  the  person  an  invalid. 

9  7  Venus  in  the  Seventh  House  is  one  of  the  surest 
signs  of  domestic  felicity.  It  signifies  an  early 
marriage  and  an  increase  of  prosperity  after 
that  event.  If  the  person  finds  it  expedient  to 
enter  into  partnership  on  a  business  basis  the 
presence  of  Venus  tends  to  make  this  relation- 
ship harmonious  and  beneficial.  It  is  also  a 
good  sign  that  if  litigation  seems  necessary  some 


174  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

way  will  be  found  to  settle  the  matter  without 
actual  rupture.  This  position  is  good  for  actors, 
singers,  and  others  whose  calling  brings  them 
before  the  public  in  a  vocal  capacity  for  it  en- 
sures a  kind  and  sympathetic  reception  on  the 
part  of  their  audience. 

$  8  Venus  in  the  Eighth  House  will  bring  gain  by 
marriage,  partnership  or  legacy  if  it  is  well 
aspected,  but  if  it  is  afflicted  it  brings  loss  and 
disappointment  in  love,  or  an  extravagant  mar- 
riage partner,  and  legal  trouble  over  a  will. 

9  9  Venus  in  the  Ninth  House  is  a  very  fortunate 
position  if  Venus  is  well  aspected,  for  being  so 
highly  elevated  here  it  exercises  considerable  in- 
fluence on  the  life  and  makes  the  disposition  ex- 
ceedingly kind,  sympathetic  and  helpful  so  that 
by  these  qualities  the  person  becomes  much  es- 
teemed and  sought  after,  particularly  in  chari- 
table or  religious  work,  for  this  position  also 
brings  out  the  devotional  side  of  the  nature. 
It  gives  a  love  of  music,  art  and  drama  as  well 
as  everything  that  has  an  influence  for  soul  up- 
liftment.  Whenever  the  person  journeys  from 
one  place  to  another  for  gain  or  for  pleasure, 
Venus  in  the  Ninth  House  will  smooth  the  path 
before  him  and  make  his  trip  thoroughly  enjoy- 
able. If  Venus  is  afflicted  in  the  Ninth  House 
the  person  will  long  to  do  or  to  be  all  the  fore- 


VENUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  LOVE     175 

going  things,  but  will  find  it  exceedingly  diffi- 
cult, if  not  impossible  to  accomplish  his  de- 
sire. 

$  10  Venus  in  the  Tenth  House  is  one  of  the  best 
signs  of  general  success  in  the  life  when  well- 
aspected.  The  person  who  has  this  position  be- 
comes very  popular,  particularly  with  the  oppo- 
site sex,  and  will  rise  in  the  social  scale  through 
marriage.  It  gives  an  ability  to  avoid  trouble 
in  life  and  extract  from  it  all  the  pleasure  there 
is  in  every  situation.  Comfortable  financial  cir- 
cumstances attend  upon  the  person  all  through 
life  and  foster  a  general  attitude  of  optimism. 
When  Venus  is  afflicted  in  the  Tenth  House  the 
person  is  looked  down  on  by  those  in  his  social' 
environment  and  though  he  tries  to  ingratiate 
himself  with  those  who  are  in  the  charmed  circles, 
he  will  find  himself  left  with  snubs  and  insults. 
A  hasty  or  ill-considered  marriage  is  apt  to 
make  matters  worse  and  bring  him  farther  into 
disrepute,  as  a  scapegrace. 

$  11  Venus  in  tlie  Eleventh  House  if  well-appected 
brings  to  the  person  hosts  of  friends  who  are 
willing  and  anxious  to  aid  him  in  the  realization 
of  his  hopes,  wishes  and  desires,  but  it  depends 
upon  the  nature  and  character  of  the  sign  where- 
in Venus  is  placed  as  well  as  on  the  strength  of 
the  aspects  whether  they  will  be  able  to  do  so 


176  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

or  not.  For  instance,  if  Venus  is  in  the  Eleventh 
House  in  Aries  or  Scorpio,  one  of  the  martial 
signs  where  she  is  weak,  and  aspected  only  by 
sextiles  from  Mercury  and  the  Moon,  very  little 
help  can  be  expected  of  her  compared  to  what 
she  will  give  if  she  is  in  her  own  signs  Taurus 
or  Libra  and  aspected  by  trines  from  the  Sun 
and  Jupiter.  In  the  case  first  cited,  the  friends 
drawn  to  the  person  may  be  ever  so  sincere  in 
their  wish  to  help  but  will  not  have  the  ability. 
In  the  last  case  they  will  exert  a  powerful  in- 
fluence and  will  accomplish  wonders.  If  Venus 
is  afflicted  in  the  Eleventh  House  it  is  very 
often  found  that  the  person  attracts  friends  who 
impose  upon  him  and  work  him  or  her  for  all 
he  is  worth  and  when  they  have  used  him  to  the 
fullest  extent  and  he  cannot  serve  their  purpose 
any  longer  they  throw  him  aside. 

$  12  Venus  in  the  Twelfth  House  if  well-aspected  in- 
dicates that  the  person  will  benefit  from  the 
things  signified  by  this  House,  viz.,  occupations 
connected  with  prisons,  hospitals  or  charitable 
institutions,  or  by  work  in  a  chemical  labora- 
tory or  some  such  secluded  occupation  where  ho 
does  not  come  in  touch  with  the  public.  It  also 
favors  study  and  practice  of  the  occult  and 
gives  a  tendency  to  secret,  clandestine  love  af- 
fairs which  will  probaby  run  smoothly  if  Venus 
is  well-aspected,  but  if  she  is  weak  by  sign,  or 


VENUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  LOVE  177 

afflicted  in  the  Twelfth  House  she  will  cause 
trouble  through  jealousy,  divorce  and  scandal,  or 
sickness  in  confinement  on  account  of  over-in- 
dulgence of  the  passions,  particularly  if  Venus  is 
in  Scorpio  which  govern  the  generative  organs 
or  Taurus  which  gives  the  same  effect  by  reflex 
action,  then  it  signifies  self -abuse. 

VENUS  IN  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS 

5  T  Venus  in  Aries  lends  ardor  to  the  affections  of 
Venus  by  blending  them  with  the  fire  of  Mars 
who  is  ruler  of  Aries  and  for  that  reason  it 
makes  the  person  very  ardent  in  the  expression 
of  affection.  This  usually  leads  to  a  popularity 
especially  among  the  opposite  sex  and  often  re- 
sults in  a  hasty  marriage,  but  that  kind  of  love 
is  not  and  cannot  be  lasting.  Eventually  the 
fire  of  passion  burns  out  the  love  and  marriages 
brought  about  by  this  position  are  then  fruit- 
ful sources  of  domestic  unhappiness.  This  po- 
sition also  inclines  the  person  to  be  rash  and  im- 
pulsive whenever  his  sympathies  are  appealed 
to,  so  that  he  often  helps  an  unworthy  cause. 
Venus  in  Aries  also  inclines  the  person  to  general 
extravagance  in  his  expenditures. 

9  8  Venus  in  Taurus  is  a  splendid  position  for 
there  she  is  essentially  dignified  and  much 
stronger  than  in  the  other  signs  with  the  ex- 

12 


178  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

ception  of  Libra  and  Pisces  where  she  is  also 
essentially  dignified  and  exalted.  It  is  a  very 
favorable  position  for  financial  affairs,  especially 
gains  derived  through  the  person's  own  efforts 
in  whatever  vocation  in  life  he  may  have  chosen. 
It  gives  a  friendly  and  sociable  disposition  with 
the  ability  to  inspire  reciprocal  feelings  in  oth- 
ers. People  with  Venus  in  Taurus  are  very  set 
in  their  opinions  concerning  correct  form  and 
decorum,  correct  in  speech  and  once  they  have 
formed  an  opinion  they  hold  to  it  very  tenacious- 
ly. They  are  generous  but  not  extravagant. 

$  n  Venus  in  Gemini  blends  the  beauty  of  Venus 
with  the  mercurial  ability  to  express  so  that 
people  who  have  this  configuration  are  able  to 
choose  their  words  with  singular  facility  and  in- 
fuse in  them  a  rhythm  which  is  like  music  to  the 
ears  of  a  listener.  Therefore  this  is  one  of  the 
configurations  which  make  poets,  provided  of 
course  that  other  indications  in  the  horoscope 
support,  for  it  should  always  be  remembered 
by  the  student  that  no  single  aspect  or  position 
is  in  itself  sufficient  to  mark  a  prominent  charac- 
teristic. To  do  this  the  whole  horoscope  must  be 
blended.  This  position  has  a  very  refining  in- 
fluence on  the  mind,  inclining  to  a  literary  or 
artistic  career.  It  makes  the  person  beloved  of 
his  brothers  and  sisters,  neighbors  and  other 
people  in  his  immediate  environment.  This  po- 


VENUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  LOVE  17fr 

sition  also  inclines  to  marriage  and  frequently 
to  more  than  one  union.  It  favors  traveling  both 
for  gain  and  pleasure,  especially  short  journeys. 

Venus  in  Cancer  blends  the  characteristics  of 
Venus  with  those  of  the  Moon  and  the  psychic 
watery  nature  of  Cancer.  Therefore  this  posi- 
tion gives  the  person  a  very  fruitful  imagina- 
tion and  he  or  she  is  very  apt  to  come  in  touch 
with  the  inhabitants  of  the  unseen  world  or  at 
least  take  up  some  very  devotional  phase  of  re- 
ligion, but  this  is  dangerous  because  Venus  is 
negative,  attracting  without  selecting  or  discrim- 
inating, hence  liable  to  domination  by  spirit  con- 
trols and  the  dangers  of  mediumship. 

Venus  in  Leo  is  compounding  love,  for  Leo 
rules  the  heart  and  whoever  has  this  position  will 
be  tender-hearted  to  a  degree.  Contrary  to  the 
commonly  accepted  ideas  there  is  a  cruel  streak 
in  Leo,  but  when  Venus  is  there  there  is  no  more 
loving  and  tender  sign  in  the  zodiac,  besides  be- 
ing that  Leo  is  a  fixed  sign  Venus  in  this  posi- 
tion makes  for  an  unparalleled  ability  for  the 
affections  when  once  they  have  been  placed  and 
an  unswerving  loyalty  to  the  object  thereof. 
Being  that  Leo  is  the  fifth  sign  Venus  in  Leo- 
also  gives  success  in  entertainment  or  education- 
al enterprises  and  the  blending  of  the  Venus 


180  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

ray  with  the  solar  brings  favor  from  those  above 
the  person  in  the  social  scale. 

$  tlB  Venus  in  Virgo,  the  Sixth  House  sign  gives  the 
person  a  deep  and  tender  sympathy  for  the  sick 
and  people  with  this  position  make  good  nurses. 
This  position  also  favors  occupation  as  a  chem- 
ist, a  dietician  who  is  concerned  with  the  pre- 
paration of  foods  for  the  maintenance  or  attain- 
ment of  health.  If  the  person  has  employees  or 
subordinates  under  his  management  his  relations 
with  those  people  will  always  be  very  pleasant, 
and  they  will  serve  him  well. 

$  =~=  Venus  in  Libra,  the  Seventh  House  sign  is  es- 
sentially dignified  and  strong.  This  is  one  of 
the  configurations  which  testify  to  a  fruitful 
and  congenial  marriage  or  successful  partner- 
ship. It  gives  musical  and  artistic  ability  and 
makes  the  person  popular  in  public  life.  If  en 
gaged  as  a  speaker  or  singer  it  ensures  an  ap- 
preciative audience  whenever  he  appears  in 
public. 

9  n\,  Venus  in  Scorpio  is  the  worst  position  of  all 
in  which  she  may  be  placed,  for  here  again  the 
love-ray  of  Venus  blends  with  the  martial  fire 
of  passion  in  the  sign  governing  the  genitals  so 
that  if  there  are  no  other  redeeming  and  re- 
straining influences  in  the  horoscope  love  turns 
to  lust  and  an  unbridled  gratification  of  an  ex- 


VENUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  LOVE      181 

aggerated  sexual  desire,  especially  if  the  Moon 
or  Mars  are  there.  This  is  apt  to  undermine  the 
constitution  and  though  that  may  not  be  appar- 
ent for  a  long  time  the  effect  of  such  a  sap- 
ping of  the  vitality  will  some  time  be  felt  and 
cause  a  general  breakdown,  but  that,  of  course, 
is  nothing  compared  with  the  moral  effect  of  the 
practices  indicated  by  this  passion.  It  should  be 
said  furthermore  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  have 
this  configuration  that  it  does  not  matter  whether 
such  abuses  take  place  in  wedlock  or  not ;  Nature 
does  not  care  whether  they  have  been  legalized 
by  man-made  law  or  not.  From  her  standpohr: 
they  are  a  violation  of  the  law  of  life  and  will 
be  punished  whether  sanctioned  by  society  or 
not.  This  position  also  gives  a  love  of  luxury 
and  anything  that  stirs  the  emotions  or  wherein 
the  senses  may  revel.  Curiously  enough  it  also 
sometimes  gives  a  sense  of  deep  religious  devo- 
tion which  then  serves  as  an  outlet  for  the  over- 
charged feelings  of  the  native.  This  position  also 
create/5  jealousy  and  trouble  in  marriage  and  the 
reputation  of  the  person  is  apt  to  be  smirched. 
A  well-aspected  Venus  in  Scorpio  is  liable  to 
bring  a  legacy. 

t  Venus  in  Sagittarius.  This  is  another  of  her 
strongest  positions  for  there  her  qualities  blend 
with  those  of  Jupiter  the  planet  of  benevo- 
lence to  foster  love  and  good-will  among  men. 


182  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE    STARS 

Therefore  also  this  position  indicates  a  genial 
and  optimistic  disposition,  a  sympathetic,  kind 
and  generous  heart,  a  love  of  God  expressed  in 
religious  devotion,  or  love  of  man  shown  by  phil- 
anthropy and  charity.  It  indicates  a  refined 
mind,  cultured,  and  fond  of  drama,  art  and 
music.  It  fosters  the  imagination  and  intuition 
and  like  the  other  double-bodied  signs  Gemini 
and  Pisces,  it  inclines  to  plurality  of  marriages. 

$  V3  Venus  in  Capricorn,  the  Tenth  House  sign, 
gives  social  success  and  popularity,  but  Venus 
does  not  blend  well  with  Saturn,  the  ruler  of 
Capricorn.  There  is  therefore  a  slight  tendency 
to  melancholy  in  people  who  have  Venus  in  that 
position.  Nor  are  they  ever  secure  in  the  favors 
•which  they  receive  from  other  people  or  in  their 
popularity,  for  Saturn  has  a  tendency  to  throw 
them  down  when  they  have  reached  the  highest 
pinnacle.  Therefore,  though  this  position  may 
help  them  to  climb  the  ladder  of  advancement 
in  social  circles  or  in  business  they  are  never 
safe  in  their  position.  This  position  makes  a 
person  very  jealous  of  honor  and  he  takes  it  to 
heart  when  sometimes  Saturn  throws  him  down. 
Venus  in  Saturn's  sign  often  causes  the  person 
to  disregard  the  fact  that  disparity  of  age  is  so 
fatal  to  happiness  in  marriage  and  either  if  he 
marries  young  he  takes  someone  who  is  much 
older  than  himself  for  a  -partner  or  if  married 


VENUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  LOVE      183 

in  later  years  he  selects  someone  who  is  still  in 
the  bloom  of  youth  with  the  almost  inevitable 
result  that  disagreement  and  dissolution  of  the 
marriage  tie  take  place  in  the  course  of  a  few 
ysars.  Frequently  also  people  with  this  position 
oi  Venus  marry  for  business  or  as  a  matter  of 
coavenience.  In  short  Venus  never  reaches  hei 
legitimate  expression  of  love  in  Saturn's  House 
ano  therefore  such  unions  are  always  a  source 
of  sorrow  and  disappointment  to  the  contract- 
ing parties. 

$  £?  Veins  in  Aquarius  indicates  a  blending  of  the 
Urgnian  qualities,  independence,  impatience  of 
restraint,  disregard  of  convention,  desire  for 
originality,  uncompromising  sincerity  and  in- 
tuitxm,  with  those  of  Venus  and  as  a  result  we 
find  that  people  with  this  configuration  refuse  to 
be  lound  by  the  usual  restrictive  rules  of  so- 
ciet;  in  their  love  affairs  and  follow  their 
heart's  inclination  regardless  of  what  others 
may  say  or  think.  They  are  firm  believers  in 
the  theory  of  soul-mates,  affinities,  et  cetera, 
and  liable  to  act  in  the  most  unexpected  man- 
ner tvith  such  startling  suddenness  that  neither 
they  nor  anyone  else  are  able  to  foresee  what 
they  may  say  or  do  next.  But  at  the  same 
time  they  are  so  loving  and  sincere  in  their 
convctions  that  friends  never  fail  them  and 


184 


THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 


whatever  success  they  attain  in  life  is  usually 
due  to  the  effort  of  friends  to  help  them  to 
realize  their  hopes,  wishes  and  aspirations. 

•  Venus  in  Pisces  is  in  her  own  exaltion  sign 
where  she  again  blends  with  the  benefic  ray  of 
Jupiter  and  as  Pisces  is  a  watery  sign  this  posi- 
tion signifies  a  powerful  emotional  nature,  sub- 
dued and  toned  down  by  the  element  of  sorrow 
inherent  in  the  twelfth  house  sign.  'Ihis  po- 
sition therefore,  indicates  someone  capable  of 
feeling  a  sentiment  such  as  that  felt  by  our 
Savior  when  He  said:  "Come  unto  Me  all  ye 
that  are  weak  and  heavy  laden  and  I  \till  give 
you  rest. ' '  Thus  Venus  in  Pisces  indicates  a  na- 
ture yearning  and  aching  to  assist  thlse  who 
are  afflicted  by  bodily  ills  or  sufferi  g  from 
sorrow.  Moved  by  compassion  such  p<bple  of- 


ten  take  up  work  in  a  prison  or  char 
stitution   where   they   find   an   outlet 
compassion.     This  position  also  gives  a 
love  of  music  and  when  other  testimo 
cur   considerable   ability   to   express   e 
cally  or  instrument  ally,  for  music  is 
wonderful   outlet   for  the   deepest   em< 


which  the  human  soul  is  capable.     Pe<ple  with 


Venus  in  Pisces  are  especially  liable 
cial  imposition  on  the  part  of  others  an 
through  an  illegal  marriage. 


ible  in- 
r  their 
intense 
es  con- 
her  vo- 
e  most 
ions  ot 


flnan- 
trouble 


VENUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  LOVE  185 

VENUS  IN  ASPECT  WITH  OTHER  PLANETS 

O  P  d  $  The  Sun  parallel  or  conjunction  Venus 
calls  out  the  artistic  side  of  the  nature,  making 
the  person  fond  of  music,  art  and  poetry.  It 
also  strengthens  the  love-nature  and  if  the  con- 
figuration occurs  in  the  seventh  house  it  is  a  pos- 
itive testimony  of  unalloyed  marital  bliss.  In 
the  second  or  eighth  houses  it  leads  to  extrav- 
agance of  the  person  or  his  mate,  in  Scorpio  it 
is  not  good  for  the  morals  and  in  Pisces  it  leads 
to  intemperance,  but  generally  speaking,  this 
aspect  strengthens  the  constitution,  increases  the 
popularity  and  makes  social  intercourse  smooth 
so  that  the  person  finds  many  friends  and  keeps 
them. 

As  the  orbit  of  Venus  is  so  small  she  never 
forms  the  sextile,  trine,  square  or  opposition 
to  the  Sun. 

$  6  P*  9  Mercury  conjunction,  parallel  or  sextile 
to  Venus.  (Note. — Venus  and  Mercury  are  never 
more  than  76  degrees  apart,  therefore  they  can 
only  form  the  conjunctions,  parallels  and  sextiles, 
but  neither  the  trine,  square  nor  opposition.) 

This  aspect  makes  the  person  cheerful  and 
companionable  with  a  good-natured  disposition 
and  a  desire  for  society.  It  also  gives  ability 
for  music  and  poetry,  especially  if  in  the  Ascend- 
ent and  it  is  a  general  indication  of  success  in 


186  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

salesmanship,  for  such  people  are  suave,  affable 
and  persuasive. 

,D  6  P  *  A  9  The  Moon  conjunction,  parallel,  sextile 
or  trine  to  Venus.  The  Moon  is  a  significator 
or  marriage  for  a  man  and  therefore  the 
good  aspects  between  Venus,  the  planet  of  love, 
and  the  Moon  are  good  indications  of  a  happy 
marriage  when  it  occurs  in  a  man's  horoscope. 
But  in  a  woman's  horoscope  these  aspects  ope- 
rate upon  the  health,  for  the  Moon  is  the  planet 
of  fecundity  and  has  rule  over  the  female  func- 
tions in  particular  which  are  so  large  a  factor  in 
the  health  of  a  woman  this  is  much  strengthened 
by  the  good  aspects  of  the  Moon  and  Venus. 
These  aspects  make  the  person  an  orator  with 
a  fruitful  imagination;  give  love  of  pleasure, 
music  and  art,  an  engaging  personality,  very 
attractive  to  the  opposite  sex,  because  kindly, 
affectionate  and  sympathetic.  This  tends  to  gen- 
eral success  in  life  and  the  person  usually  has 
sufficient  for  the  day  and  the  way. 

D  Q  8  $  The  Moon  square  or  opposition  to  Ve- 
nus is  an  indication  of  trouble  in  marriage  for  a 
man,  because  the  wife  described  by  an  afflicted 
Venus  will  then  be  slovenly  and  of  dissolute  hab- 
its which  will  destroy  domestic  happiness.  In 
a  woman's  horoscope  it  indicates  disturbance 
of  the  female  functions  and  it  also  gives  a  ten- 
dency to  digestive  troubles  and  poor  circulation 


VENUS,  THE   PLANET   OF  LOVE  187 

when  in  the  horoscope  of  either  sex.  These  as- 
pects also  give  a  liability  to  trouble  through  slan- 
der and  public  scandal. 

T?  *  A  9  Venus  sextile  or  trine  to  Saturn.  The 
good  qualities  of  Venus  are  love  and  affection 
and  the  good  qualities  of  Saturn  are  tact,  diplo- 
macy,method,  system,  justice,  thrift  and  econ- 
omy. We  may  therefore  judge  that  when  these 
two  planets  are  configurated  in  good  aspect 
they  make  the  person  faithful  and  true,  just 
and  methodical,  qualities  which  make  for  success 
in  all  departments  of  life.  Therefore  a  person 
with  these  aspects  will  be  much  sought  as  a 
friend  and  adviser,  or  as  a  person  to  be  trusted 
with  any  commission  requiring  sterling  honesty 
and  ability.  It  makes  the  person  simple  in  his 
tastes  and  of  unimpeachable  morality,  and  gives 
honor,  esteem,  health  and  easy  circumstances. 

T?  P  6  D  $  ?  Saturn  parallel,  conjunction,  square 
or  opposition  to  Venus  brings  out  the  evil 
qualities  of  the  two  planets  and  troubles  which 
are  thus  generated  usually  come  through  the  per- 
son's  relations  with  the  opposite  sex.  It  makes 
him  underhanded  and  scheming  to  gratify  his 
passions  often  in  an  unusual  manner  and  his  per- 
verted desires  are  usually  directed  against 
some  one  who  is  much  younger  than  himself.  If 
regular  marriage  relations  are  entered  into  such 
a  person  is  usually  a  demon  in  jealousy  who 


188  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

makes  life  a  burden  for  the  marriage  partner  on 
account  of  his  suspicious  nature.  People  with 
these  afflictions  are  also  stingy  in  all  money  mat- 
ters and  exceedingly  avaricious.  They  have  poor 
business  judgment  and  are  therefore  liable  to 
losses,  failure  and  bankruptcy. 

yPd*A?  Jupiter  parallel,  conjunction,  sex- 
tile  or  trine  to  Venus  is  one  of  the  best  signs 
of  success  and  general  good  fortune.  It  favors 
the  accumulation  of  wealth  and  the  enjoyment 
of  all  the  luxuries  of  life.  It  is  a  good  indication 
of  a  successful  and  happy  marriage,  social  pres- 
tige and  the  respect  of  all  with  whom  the  person 
come.s  in  contact.  It  gives  the  person  a  jovial, 
optimistic,  generous  and  large-hearted  disposi- 
tion, one  who  is  hospitable  to  a  degree,  interested 
and  active  in  philanthropic  measures,  a  liberal 
mind  tolerant  of  the  views  of  others  even  where 
he  differs  radically,  fond  of  pleasure,  traveling, 
parties,  and  capable  of  enjoying  life  to  the  full- 
est extent.  These  aspects  also  give  a  talent  for 
music,  especially  if  either  or  both  are  in  Pisces. 

H  D  <?  5  Jupiter  square  or  opposition  to  Venus 
gives  the  same  luxurious  likings  as  the  good 
aspects,  but  limits  the  ability  to  satisfy  them, 
although  such  people  make  the  most  frantic  ef- 
forts to  present  a  fine  front  to  the  world  and 
they  are  generally  found  out  to  be  shams.  Their 
lack  of  business  ability  is  often  responsible  for 


VENUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  LOVE      189 

failure  and  bankruptcy  and  they  are  very  liable 
to  suffer  losses  through  the  treachery  of  others. 
Love  and  marriage  also  are  sources  of  sorrow 
for  those  whom  Venus  and  Jupiter  are  afflicting. 
They  are  apt  to  be  jilted  before  marriage  or  the 
marriage  partner  will  prove  faithless  and  may 
abscond.  These  aspects  also  produce  an  amorous 
nature  likely  to  take  liberties  regardless  of  the 
laws  of  decency  and  faithless  to  marriage  vows. 
They  make  people  extremely  self-indulgent  and 
in  Pisces  they  predispose  to  drink. 

$  *  A  $  Mars  sextile  or  trine  to  Venus  will  give  an 
ambitious,  aspiring  and  adventurous  nature, 
amorous  and  extremely  demonstrative  in  its  af- 
fection, very  fond  of  sports  and  pleasures.  It 
gives  the  person  an  abundance  of  energy  and 
business  acumen,  consequently  he  has  a  splendid 
earning  capacity  but  he  wastes  money  for  he 
loves  above  all  things  to  make  a  great  outward 
show  and  display.  Being  a  free  spender  he  is 
also  very  popular  among  his  associates,  and  be- 
ing, as  already  said,  of  an  amorous  nature  he 
marries  either  very  early  or  the  marriage  is  a 
very  hasty  one. 

$  6  P  9  Mars  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Venus  does 
not  always  operate  in  the  same  manner,  but  is 
to  be  classed  as  a  good  or  bad  aspect  according 
to  circumstances  and  the  matter  to  be  judged. 
For  instance,  Mars  conjunction  Venus  makes 


190  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

the  person  less  blunt  and  domineering,  more  kind 
and  polite;  it  is  therefore  good  in  that  respect, 
but  the  conjunction  also  strengthens  the  pas- 
sional nature;  especially  if  it  occurs  in  Scorpio 
and  in  the  Twelfth  House  it  leads  to  self-abuse 
so  that  in  those  cases  it  is  decidedly  bad. 

$  n  8  $  Mars  square  or  opposition  Venus.  See 
page  329. 

W  *  A  $  Uranus  sextile  or  trine  to  Venus  makes  the 
person  mentally  alert,  of  quick  intuitive  percep- 
tion and  exceedingly  magnetic,  especially  to  the 
opposite  sex ;  but  he  also  attracts  hosts  of  friends 
who  will  be  a  benefit  and  assistance  to  him. 
These  aspects  give  love  of  art,  music  and  poetry 
and  are  favorable  indications  of  a  happy  mar- 
riage often  at  a  very  early  age,  or  it  is  suddenly 
consummated.  They  also  sometimes  bring  the 
subject  love  of  a  platonic  nature. 

1$  6  P  9  Uranus  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Venus. 
There  is  a  doubt  as  to  whether  this  aspect  should 
be  classed  as  good  or  evil,  which  must  be  settled 
in  the  individual  horoscope  where  it  occurs  for 
it  may  work  either  way,  depending  upon  the 
other  planetary  configurations.  If  Venus  is 
otherwise  afflicted  in  the  horoscope,  for  instance, 
the  conjunction  or  parallel  will  further  accen- 
tuate her  evil  qualities,  but  if  she  is  well  placed 
or  aspected  Uranus  will  bring  out  the  nobler  side. 


VENUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  LOVE      191 

[H  8  9  Uranus  square  or  opposition  to  Venus. 
The  square  or  opposition  always  brings  trouble 
through  the  sex  relation:  a  hasty,  ill-consid- 
ered union,  quarrels,  divorces,  public  scandals 
through  clandestine  intercourse  and  kindred  ir- 
regularities, with  loss  of  friends,  prestige  and 
popularity,  exile  from  home  and  family  and  sud- 
den financial  losses  through  unexpected  or  un- 
foreseen happenings.  There  is  a  general  lack 
of  balance,  an  erratic  personality. 

*  A  5  Neptune  sextile  or  trine  to  Venus  makes 
an  inspirational  musician.  It  gives  a  fertile 
imagination  and  deep  emotions,  a  nature  that  is 
pure  and  chaste,  hence  occasionally  it  leads  to 
platonic  unions  and  companionship  of  the  most 
esthetic  nature. 

6  P  9  Neptune  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Venus 
is  to  be  judged  on  the  same  line  as  indicated  in 
the  case  of  Mars  and  Uranus. 

Q]  8  $  Neptune  square  or  opposition  to  Venus 
makes  the  person  liable  to  sorrow,  loss  and  trou- 
ble, especially  through  the  marriage  partner  or 
anyone  else  in  whom  he  trusts.  People  with  this 
aspect  should  be  particularly  careful  to  avoid 
anything  which  has  in  it  an  element  of  chance 
or  speculation,  for  they  are  sure  to  lose,  espe- 
cially in  dealing  with  large  companies  or  cor- 
porations. 


CHAPTER  X. 
MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  or  REASON 

MYTHOLOGICALLY  Mercury  is  represented  as 
a  "Messenger  of  the  Gods"  and  this  is  in  line 
with  the  occult  facts,  for  when  infant  humanity  had 
been  led  astray  by  the  martial  Lucifer  spirits  and 
fallen  into  generation'  it  became  necessary  for  the 
other  divine  hierarchies  to  take  steps  looking  to  a  fu- 
ture regeneration  and  to  further  that  object  the  Lords 
of  Venus  were  brought  to  the  earth  to  educate  hu- 
manity in  such  a  manner  that  love  might  be  substi- 
tuted for  lust  and  men  might  thus  be  induced  to 
aspire  to  something  higher.  While  the  Lords  of 
Venus  dealt  with  mankind  in  general  the  most  pre- 
cocious among  them  were  taken  in  hand  by  the  Lords 
of  Mercury,  whose  wisdom-teaching  is  symbolically 
embodied  in  the  caduceus  or  'staff'  of  Mercury,  con- 
sisting of  two  serpents  twining  around  a  rod  and 
representing  the  solution  of  the  riddle  of  life: 
"Whence  we  have  come,  Why  we  are  here  and 
Whither  we  are  bound, ' '  showing  the  pupil  the  spiral 
path  of  involution  by  which  the  divine  spark  has 
buried  itself  in  matter,  also  the  spiral  path  of  evolu- 
tion by  which  humanity  will  eventually  again  reach 
the  Father's  bosom,  and  the  short  road  of  Initiation 
192 


MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  OF  REASON       193 

represented  by  the  central  rod  around  which  the 
serpents  twine.  But  to  understand  these  Mysteries 
requires  mind  and  reason.  Mercury  then  is  the  men- 
tal educator  of  men  and  its  place  and  position  in  the 
horoscope  shows  the  status  of  the  person's  mind  for 
whom  it  is  cast. 

Being  the  Messenger  of  the  Gods  to  the  other 
planets  Mercury  has  no  voice  of  its  own  and  is  even 
more  dependent  for  expression  upon  the  aspects  of 
other  planets  than  the  Moon  which  rules  the  in- 
stinctual mind.  So  Mercury  is  really  a  focus  through 
which  the  faculty  of  reason  finds  expression  in  the 
human  being  to  act  as  a  brake  upon  the  lower  nature 
and  assist  in  lifting  us  from  the  human  to  the  divine. 
Many  may  and  do  feel  deeply,  they  may  also  have 
valuable  knowledge,  but  they  will  be  unable  to  give 
expression  or  share  it  with  others  if  Mercury  is  lack- 
ing in  aspects.  Even  a  so-called  evil  aspect  of  Mer- 
cury helps  to  bring  out  what  is  within  and  is  there- 
fore better  than  none. 

When  Mercury  is  so  placed  in  relation  to  the 
Sun  that  it  goes  before  the  luminary  it  has  the  effect 
of  materially  brightening  the  mind,  for  the  Sun  rep- 
resents the  Ego  and  it  may  therefore  be  said  that 
then  its  path  is  illuminated  by  the  lamp  of  reason. 
On  the  other  hand  if  Mercury  is  so  placed  that  it 
rises  later  than  the  Sun  and  thus  follows  behind  the 
luminary  the  Ego  learns  more  by  afterthought  than 
by  forethought  for  it  walks  comparatively  speaking 


13 


194  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

in  the  dark  and  must  learn  a  great  deal  of  its  lessons 
by  experience. 

As  we  have  found  that  it  is  difficult  for  a  number 
of  young  students  to  determine  when  Mercury  goes 
before  or  behind  the  Sun  we  may  say  in  farther  elu- 
cidation of  that  subject: 

When  Mercury  is  in  a  lower  degree  of  the  same 
sign  as  the  Sun  or  in  any  degree  of  the  previous  sign 
then  as  a  matter  of  course  he  rises  before  the  Sun.  To 
illustrate :  If  the  Sun  is  in  twenty  degrees  of  Cancer 
and  Mercury  is  in  five,  ten  or  fifteen  degrees  of  that 
sign  or  if  he  is  in  any  degree  of  Gemini,  then  he  rises 
before  the  Sun. 

But  if  he  is  in  twenty-five  degrees  of  Cancer 
which  is  a  higher  degree  of  the  same  sign,  or  if  he  is 
in  any  degree  in  Leo  which  is  the  succeeding  sign  to 
Cancer,  then  he  rises  behind  the  Sun  and  loses  part 
of  his  good  influence. 

A  retrograde  Mercury  is  also  a  detriment  to  the 
faculty  of  reason.  But  in  the  year  of  life  when  Mer- 
cury by  progression  again  turns  direct,  the  reasoning 
faculties  will  improve  correspondingly.  Mercury  is 
strongest  in  the  airy  signs,  Gemini,  Libra  and  Aquar- 
ius, but  he  is  exalted  and  therefore  most  powerful  in 
Virgo.  Mercury  has  special  rule  over  agents  and  mes- 
sengers, salesmen,  postmen  and  other  common  car- 
riers, people  engaged  in  advertising  or  printing,  liter- 
ary men,  writers,  reporters,  secretaries,  clerks,  stenog- 
raphers and  typewriters,  commission  men  and  other 
middle  men,  demagogues,  confidence-men  and  thieves. 


MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  OF  REASON       195- 
MERCURY  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES. 

$  1  Mercury  in  the  Ascendant,  or  First  House  makes 
the  person  quick-witted  and  sharp  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  sign  rising  and  the  aspects 
of  the  planets  which  he  receives.  The  fiery  signs 
and  the  airy  signs  have  the  strongest  influence 
in  that  respect.  In  Aries  and  Leo  he  is  more  im- 
pulsive than  when  rising  in  Sagittarius,  but 
Gemini,  Libra  and  Aquarius  are  best.  When 
Mercury  is  rising  in  the  watery  signs  Cancer  and 
Pisces  the  intellect  is  dull,  but  rising  in  Scorpio 
where  it  is  fired  by  the  martial  energy  and  armed 
with  the  venomous  sting  of  the  scorpion  it  has 
a  somewhat  similar  influence  to  that  of  Mars  in 
Scorpio  though  not  quite  so  pronounced. 

£  2  Mercury  in  the  Second  House  is  good  for  gain 
through  mercurial  occupations  especially  where 
the  person  is  employed  by  someone  else  so  that 
he  appears  in  a  true  mercurial  capacity  as  agent,, 
messenger,  clerk,  writer  or  whatever  else. 

$  3  Mercury  in  the  Third  House  and  well-aspected 
has  wonderful  influence  on  the  mental  qualities 
of  the  native.  It  makes  the  mind  serene  and  op- 
timistic, inclined  to  study  and  research  work. 
It  gives  fluency  as  a  speaker  and  success  by  short 
journeys  or  travel  and  makes  the  relations  of 
the  person  harmonious  with  his  brothers.  When 
Mercury  is  afflicted  in  the  Third  House  it  in- 


196  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

dines  to  worry  and  pessimism,  trouble  and  an- 
noyance with  sisters  and  brothers  and  when  on 
short  journeys. 

3  4  Mercury  in  the  Fourth  House  gives  instability 
to  home  conditions.  It  signifies  the  homeless 
wanderer  who  is  always  moving  from  place  to 
place  unless  a  good  aspect  to  Saturn  comes  in  to 
steady  him  down.  This  is,  however,  a  good  as- 
pect for  people  engaged  in  mercurial  positions 
which  require  a  stationary  residence,  such  as  li- 
brarian, or  literary  men  engaged  in  newspaper 
work,  employees  in  printing  establishments,  com- 
mission houses,  agencies  and  kindred  occupa- 
tions. If  Mercury  is  afflicted  by  Saturn  the  home 
conditions  of  the  person  will  cause  him  a  great 
deal  of  worry. 

%  5  Mercury  in  the  Fifth  House  centers  the  mind 
upon  education,  amusements,  courtships  and 
children.  If  Mercury  is  well-aspected  by  Saturn 
or  Jupiter  it  gives  depth  to  the  mind  and  makes 
the  person  successful  in  enterprises  connected 
with  education,  publishing  or  public  amuse- 
ments. Good  aspects  from  Mars  or  Venus  give 
success  in  courtship  but  the  adverse  aspects  of 
the  planets  make  the  nature  cruel;  he  is  incon- 
stant in  affection  toward  those  he  professes  to 
love,  inclined  to  worry  over  affairs  of  his 
children,  and  superficial  as  a  teacher.  A  good 
aspect  from  the  Sun  is  an  excellent  indication 


MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  OF  REASON       197 

of  success  in  a  government  position,  in  an  educa- 
tional capacity. 

£  6  Mercury  in  the  Sixth  House  makes  the  mentality 
too  active  for  the  person's  own  good,  for  he  is 
extremely  ambitious  and  therefore  liable  to  over- 
tax himself  to  the  detriment  of  his  health,  and 
the  disability  of  the  nervous  system  is  most  likely 
to  express  itself  by  a  digestive  disorder  in  the 
region  governed  by  Virgo,  the  sixth  sign,  viz: 
the  intestines.  Such  people  are  supersensitive 
to  the  conditions  of  others  which  affects  their 
health,  it  brings  much  trouble  and  worry  in 
dealing  with  servants  or  subordinates.  They  are 
fond  of  the  study  of  hygiene  and  diet  and  meet 
with  considerable  success  in  the  practice  of  the 
chemistry  of  foods,  particularly  if  Mercury  is 
well-aspected.  Adverse  aspects  of  Saturn  to  a 
Sixth  House  Mercury  make  a  chronic  invalid  of 
a  most  melancholy  mind.  The  adverse  aspects 
of  Mars  and  Uranus  are  fruitful  sources  of  sui- 
cide through  brooding  over  disease. 

$  7  Mercury  in  the  Seventh  House  and  well-aspected 
makes  the  person  popular  in  literary  and  scien- 
tific circles.  It  is  a  good  position  for  public 
speakers  and  all  who  are  engaged  in  mercurial 
activities  of  a  public  nature.  But  if  Mercury  is 
afflicted  the  Seventh  House  position  brings  a 
great  deal  of  hostile  criticism  of  a  public  nature 
and  is  liable  to  involve  the  person  in  litigation 


198  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

either  to  defend  himself  against  libel  from  others 
or  on  account  of  libel  committed  by  himself.  A 
well-aspected  Mercury  in  the  Seventh  House  also 
indicates  a  successful  marriage  to  a  relative  or 
an  employee,  but  when  Mercury  is  afflicted  either 
the  person  or  the  marriage  partner  is  of  a  nag- 
ging nature  so  that  the  married  life  is  spoiled 
by  constant  quarrels  and  disputes  on  account  of 
fickleness  and  faithlessness. 

§  8  Mercury  in  the  Eighth  House  when  well-aspected 
gives  gain  through  literary  or  scientific  occu- 
pation, agencies  or  other  mercurial  positions  pro- 
vided they  are  carried  on  in  partnership  with 
someone  else.  This  position  also  indicates  that 
the  person  will  receive  a  legacy  and  it  is  a  good 
indication  of  the  financial  success  of  the  mar- 
riage, but  if  Mercury  is  afflicted  its  position  in 
the  Eighth  House  indicates  financial  troubles 
of  the  marriage  partner  and  litigation  probably 
in  connection  with  a  legacy  left  to  the  person. 

$  9  Mercury  in  the  Ninth  House  and  well-aspected 
gives  love  of  religion,  science,  letters  and  law, 
a  studious  mind  capable  of  delving  deeply  into 
profound  problems  of  life  and  being,  philosophic 
and  philanthropic,  desire  to  travel  if  need  be  to 
the  ends  of  the  earth  in  pursuit  of  knowledge. 
This  position  gives  facility  of  speech  and  writ- 
ing and  success  in  religion,  philosophy,  law  and 
science.  The  mind  is  broad,  flexible  and  adapt- 


MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  OF  REASON   199 

able,  therefore  the  person  is  liable  to  change  his 
views  on  the  various  subjects  which  he  has  stud- 
ied several  times  in  his  life,  but  there  will  always 
be  a  good  reason  for  adopting  another  viewpoint. 
If  Mercury  is  afflicted  in  the  Ninth  House 
he  makes  the  person  exceedingly  unstable  oi 
mind,  changeable  as  a  weather  vane  in  all  his 
pursuits  and  activities.  Such  a  person  will  never 
stay  by  anything  long  enough  to  try  it  out  and 
therefore  he  will  meet  with  a  series  of  disasters 
all  through  life.  Probably  he  may  journey  from 
one  place  to  another  in  search  of  success  but  he 
will  never  find  it  until  he  learns  to  concentrate 
his  energies  upon  one  thing.  This  position  is 
also  a  fruitful  source  of  trouble  with  the  law  or 
legal  affairs. 

g  10  Mercury  in  the  Tenth  House,  well-aspected, 
•  shows  adaptability  and  resourcefulness  such  as 
enables  the  person  to  cope  with  all  the  contin- 
gencies of  life.  It  makes  a  successful  lecturer, 
publisher  or  writer  and  is  also  favorable  to  suc- 
cess in  one  of  the  occult  occupations.  If  Mer- 
cury is  placed  in  one  of  the  airy  signs  the  power 
of  expression  is  much  enhanced.  Frequently 
people  with  Mercury  in  this  position  have  sev- 
eral occupations,  but  usually  they  succeed  best 
in  a  subordinate  capacity. 

$  11     Mercury  in  the  Eleventh  House  brings  a  great 
many  acquaintances  among  literary,  scientific  or 


200  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

other  mercurial  people,  but  none  of  them  are 
sufficiently  steadfast  to  be  relied  upon  unless 
Mercury  is  very  well  aspected.  This  position  has 
a  tendency  to  make  a  person  critical  and  cynical. 
It  sharpens  his  intellect,  however,  and  gives  him 
a  good  flow  of  language. 

g  12  Mercury  in  the  Twelfth  House,  if  well  as- 
pected gives  a  mind  peculiarly  fitted  to  delve 
into  the  mysterious,  occult  or  secret  things.  This 
is  especially  the  case  if  Mercury  is  between  the 
Sun  and  Midheaven,  that  is  to  say  if  Mercury 
goes  before  the  Sun  or  rises  earlier  than  that 
luminary,  for  then  all  the  light  that  is  in  the 
spirit  seems  to  shine  forth  and  make  the  person 
intellectually  keen  and  bright.  Therefore  this 
is  a  good  position  for  detective  work  as  well  as 
scientific  or  occult  research  work.  Chemists  of 
great  ability  have  been  produced  under  this  as- 
pect for  such  people  have  the  faculty  of  going 
into  the  most  minute  details  in  things  which 
seem  microscopic  and  unimportant  to  others. 
When  Mercury  is  in  the  Twelfth  House  and 
afflicted,  especially  by  Saturn  or  Mars,  also  when 
combust  or  behind  the  Sun  there  is  danger  that 
the  mind  may  become  clouded  and  insanity  may 
result.  It  may  also  be  noted  that  the  affliction 
will  differ  according  to  the  way  Mercury  is  as- 
pected. If  by  Mars  or  Uranus  the  subject  may 
be  exceedingly  violent,  if  by  Saturn  he  will  be- 


MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  OF  REASON       201 

come  melancholy,  but  whatever  the  nature,  if 
Mercury  is  afflicted  in  the  Twelfth  House  some 
form  of  limitation  will  restrain  the  spirit,  for  the 
Twelfth  House  is  the  house  of  limitation  and 
confinement. 

Deafness  is  also  the  result  of  this  position 
of  Mercury  when  severely  afflicted  by  Saturn. 

MERCURY  IN  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS 

T  Mercury  in  Aries  makes  the  person  very  ar- 
gumentative, fond  of  disputes,  quick  at  repartee, 
with  a  tendency  to  exaggerate  though  not  neces- 
sarily by  design.  If  well-aspected  he  is  broad- 
minded  and  tolerant  of  the  opinions  of  others, 
of  a  studious  nature  and  quick  to  grasp  things 
and  ideas,  neat  and  orderly.  When  afflicted  Mer- 
cury in  Aries  makes  people  leap  before  they 
look,  the  mind  is  vacillating  and  there  is  a  gen- 
eral recklessness  over  the  person  who  is  then  very 
unreliable  and  devoid  of  all  sense  of  responsi- 
bility. 

b  Mercury  in  Taurus  gives  a  mind  that  is  not 
very  soon  made  up  but  when  it  has  once  arrived 
at  a  conclusion  it  is  almost  as  difficult  to  change 
as  the  laws  of  the  Medes  and  Persians.  However, 
being  based  upon  thought  and  reason  the  judg- 
ment of  these  people  is  also  extremely  reliable. 
They  believe  thoroughly  in  the  ancient  adage 
,that  "Silence  is  golden"  and  are  therefore  close- 


202  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

mouthed.  They  are  good  counsellors  and  can 
be  depended  upon  to  keep  a  secret.  At  the  same 
time  they  are  not  recluses,  but  have  a  pleasant, 
sociable  disposition.  They  are  fond  of  fun  and 
recreation,  they  love  music,  art  and  literature, 
so  they  are  thoroughly  likable  people  if  Mercury 
is  well-aspected.  But  if  Mercury  is  afflicted  they 
become  what  the  Scotch  call  "dour,"  also  ob- 
stinate, stubborn,  secretive  and  avaricious. 

%  n  Mercury  in  Gemini  makes  a  person  fond  of 
change  and  travel.  He  is  always  ready  to  inves- 
tigate some  new  thing,  or  go  to  some  other  place 
for  a  change;  in  short,  almost  anything  that  is 
new  appeals  to  him.  At  the  same  time  if  Mer- 
cury is  well-fortified  they  will  gain  greatly  by 
this  fluidic  state  of  the  mind  for  they  are  shrewd 
and  penetrating  in  their  judgment  so  that  they 
know  a  good  thing  when  they  see  it  and  are  not 
prejudiced  by  preconceived,  set  opinions.  There- 
fore they  are  good  business  men  and  their  ability 
to  see  a  point  makes  them  particularly  good  law- 
yers. They  also  succeed  well  as  traveling  sales- 
men. 

$  IB  Mercury  in  Cancer  gives  a  clear  intellect,  a 
good  memory  and  superlative  adaptability,  so 
that  they  can  fit  into  any  place  or  occupation 
they  may  find  and  also  adapt  themselves  to  the 
opinions  and  ideas  of  others.  They  love  praise 
and  flattery,  therefore  they  are  careful  not  to  do 


MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  OF  REASON       203 

anything   whereby   they   may   forfeit   the   good 
opinion  of  others. 

$  SI  Mercury  in  Leo  gives  a  positive,  strong  and 
persevering  intellect  with  high  ideals  and  aspir- 
ations which  scorns  to  stoop  to  low  and  mean 
acts,  despises  equivocation,  blunt  and  outspoken, 
quick-tempered,  but  kind-hearted  and  sympa- 
thetic. People  with  Mercury  in  Leo  well-fortified 
have  good  organizing  ability  and  make  capable 
leaders.  They  love  children  and  are  also  fond 
of  pleasure.  When  Mercury  is  afflicted  in  Leo 
it  makes  the  person  fickle  and  inconstant  in  his 
affections,  an  unsuccessful  gambler  and  specu- 
lator, a  low  and  sensual  nature. 

$  TIE  Mercury  in  Virgo  is  at  the  zenith  of  his  power 
for  there  he  is  exalted,  consequently  when  well- 
aspected  it  gives  a  clear,  logical,  scientific  mind, 
eloquence  and  the  ability  to  express  oneself 
fluently  in  a  number  of  languages.  It  gives  the 
person  a  comprehensive,  discriminating  outlook 
upon  life,  his  conclusions  are  usually  practical 
and  to  the  point  because  he  also,  like  the  Tau- 
rian  Mercury,  looks  before  he  leaps.  In  short 
this  characteristic  is  in  a  degree  true  of  all  the 
earthy  signs.  When  Mercury  is  afflicted  in  Virgo 
it  makes  the  man  irritable,  petulant  and  selfish, 
always  looking  for  flaws  in  everything  he  comes 
across.  People  with  Mercury  in  Virgo  make  ex- 


204  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

cellent  dieticians  and  chemists.     They  also  have 
an  unusual  dexterity. 

$  =^=  Mercury  in  Libra,  when  well-aspected  gives 
a  broad,  well-balanced  mind  with  a  love  of  art 
and  music  and  an  uncommon  ability  of  expres- 
sion. It  brings  success  as  a  public  speaker  and 
sometimes  as  a  singer.  When  Mercury  is  afflicted 
in  Libra  it  indicates  trouble  by  lawsuits  through 
partnerships  and  an  unfaithful  marriage  part- 


TTL  Mercury  in  Scorpio  gives  a  shrewd  mind,  a 
keen  aspiration,  a  quick  wit  and  a  sharp  tongue 
with  biting  sarcasm  that  can  sting  like  the  scor- 
pion. The  disposition  is  bold  and  stubborn, 
headstrong  and  difficult  to  get  along  with.  But 
these  people  are  extremely  re.sourceful,  daunt- 
less and  able  to  overcome  difficulties  which  would 
crush  others.  They  are  attracted  to  the  occult, 
as  a  needle  is  drawn  to  a  magnet.  When  Mer- 
cury is  afflicted  they  are  subject  to  disappoint- 
ment in  everything  they  undertake,  quarrelsome, 
skeptical  and  cynical,  always  holding  opposite 
views  to  others. 

t  Mercury  in  Sagittarius.  This  is  one  of  the 
strongest  positions  of  Mercury  and  if  he  is  well- 
aspected  it  gives  an  exceedingly  noble  mind  of 
a  religious  and  philosophical  turn,  a  mind  which 
scorns  the  shackles  of  conventions  where  they 


MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  OF  REASON       205 

interfere  with  freedom  of  thought  and  speech 
yet  does  not  fly  into  paths  that  are  contrary  to 
the  commonly  accepted  standards  of  moral  usage 
and  conduct.  It  always  confines  itself  within 
the  boundaries  of  law  and  order  and  people  with 
Mercury  in  this  position  are  therefore  greatly 
respected  in  the  community.  Mercury  in  Sagit- 
tarius makes  the  person  fond  of  travel  to  see  the 
sights  and  scenery  of  nature  and  to  investigate 
the  customs  of  strange  people.  They  are  also 
fond  of  animals  and  pets.  When  afflicted  it  in- 
clines to  lawlessness,  dishonesty,  sophism  and  a 
twisted  character. 

V3  Mercury  in  Capricorn  gives  a  critical  and  pen- 
etrating but  somewhat  suspicious  mind  with  a 
thoughtful  and  diplomatic  disposition.  These 
people  make  splendid  spies  and  detectives,  hav- 
ing the  ability  to  ferret  out  secrets  in  the  most 
uncanny  manner.  They  also  have  the  persist- 
ence of  Saturnians  derived  from  the  sign  Capri- 
corn so  that  they  never  give  up  until  their  object 
has  been  attained.  This  position  also  gives  a 
love  of  science,  particularly  chemistry,  and  they 
are  much  attracted  to  the  occult,  yet  practical 
and  very  thrifty.  They  hold  on  to  what  they  get 
and  always  have  something  on  a  rainy  day. 
When  afflicted  Mercury  in  Capricorn  makes  the 
person  miserly,  cruel,  hard,  malicious,  vindictive 
and  spiteful. 


206  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

$  £?  Mercury  in  Aquarius  gives  the  Uranian  quali- 
ties of  originality  and  independence  and  an  un- 
conquerable love  of  liberty  to  the  mind  so  that 
people  with  Mercury  in  this  position  are  apt  to 
repudiate  all  the  social  conventions  and  live  ac- 
cording to  their  highly  idealistic  conceptions. 
They  often  take  no  heed  of  fashion  and  dress 
in  a  style  entirely  their  own.  They  advocate 
ideas  on  social  subjects  which  are  a  thousand 
years  ahead  of  the  world's  development,  among 
them  the  theory  of  soul-mates  and  affinities 
which  is  causing  so  much  trouble  in  the  world 
today  because  its  advocates  have  not  yet  grown 
to  the  spiritual  stature  where  they  can  separate 
it  from  sex  and  live  the  true  Uranian  love-life 
which  is  altogether  spiritual.  The  foregoing  de- 
lineations apply  particularly  where  Mercury  is 
aspected  by  Uranus  and  the  people  described  by 
them  are  the  extreme  product  of  Mercury  in 
Aquarius.  All  who  have  this  position,  however, 
are  very  intellectual,  they  have  high  ideals  and 
aspirations,  a  love  of  popular  science  and  mathe- 
matics and  are  usually  attracted  to  the  occult 
sciences  also,  especially  to  astrology,  for  they 
have  a  fine  faculty  of  reading  the  horoscope. 
They  are  kind,  sociable  and  fond  of  friends  with 
the  result  that  they  usually  attract  large  num- 
bers of  intellectual  people  to  their  circle  of  ac- 
quaintances. When  afflicted  this  position  makes 


MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  OF  REASON       207 

the  person  disloyal  and  ready  to  prey  upon  his 
friends,  or  criticise  and  slander  them. 

£  M  Mercury  in  Pisces  the  occult  watery  sign, 
seems  to  endow  the  mind  with  a  certain  psychic 
faculty  which  is  not  so  much  intuition  as  imag- 
ination. They  think  or  imagine  that  something 
must  be  so  and  so  and  it  is  a  startling  fact  that 
they  are  usually  correct,  but  this  ability  brings 
them  dangerously  near  to  mediumship  if  Mer- 
cury is  afflicted  or  when  Neptune  the  higher  oc- 
tave of  Mercury  is  in  the  Twelfth  House.  There- 
fore this  is  rather  a  dangerous  position.  If  Mer- 
cury is  afflicted  by  Saturn  this  position  in  Pisces 
makes  the  person  liable  to  gloom  and  the  mind 
will  be  subject  to  constant  worry  with  a  turn 
toward  melancholy.  Usually,  people  with  Mer- 
cury in  Pisces  are  of  a  kindly  and  benevolent  dis- 
position. This  also  is  a  good  indication  that  suc- 
cess may  be  attained  in  chemistry  and  as  a  diet- 
ician by  preparation  of  health  foods. 

MERCURY  IN  ASPECT  WITH  THE  OTHER  PLANETS 

O  P  6  $  Tlie  Sun  in  parallel  or  conjunction  to 
Mercury.  These  are  the  only  aspects  ever  formed 
and  are  good  for  the  memory  and  mentality  pro- 
vided Mercury  is  not  closer  to  the  Sun  than  three 
degrees,  for  then  he  is  "combust"  and  his  good 
qualities  are  burned  up  in  the  Sun's  rays.  It 
is  most  fortunate  to  have  Mercury  rise  before 


208  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

the  Sun  at  Birth  for  he  is  then  the  Lightbearer 
who  holds  the  torch  of  reason  before  the  Spirit 
which  in  the  horoscope  is  symbolized  by  the 
Sun.  When  he  rises  after  the  Sun  the  mentality 
is  not  nearly  so  keen  (unless  other  good  aspects 
favor). 

$  P  6  *  $  Venus  parallel,  conjunction  or  sextile  to 
Mercury.  Venus  and  Mercury  are  never  more 
than  76  degrees  apart,  therefore  they  can  only 
form  the  conjunctions,  parallels  and  sextiles,  but 
neither  the  trine,  square  nor  opposition. 

These  aspects  make  the  person  cheerful  and 
companionable  with  a  good-natured  disposition 
and  a  desire  for  society.  They  also  give  ability 
for  music  and  poetry,  especially  if  in  the  As- 
cendant, and  are  a  general  indication  of  success 
in  salesmanship  for  such  people  are  very  suave, 
affable  and  persuasive. 

J  P  6  *  A  $  The  Moon  in  parallel,  conjunction, 
sextile  or  trine  to  Mercury  gives  a  receptive 
mind  and  a  retentive  memory,  two  very  rare 
qualities  and  therefore  these  aspects,  particu- 
larly the  sextile  and  trine,  are  good  indications 
of  success  in  life,  especially  in  one  of  the  mer- 
curial occupations,  literary,  clerical  or  traveling. 
People  with  these  configurations  are  usually  very 
verbose,  particularly  if  the  conjunction  or  trine 
occurs  in  airy  signs  or  a  sign  of  voice,  for  then 
the  power  of  expression  reaches  a  superlative 


MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  OF  REASON       209 

degree  and  such  people  become  able  linguists  and 
elocutionists,  but  unless  there  is  some  steadying 
influence  people  with  configurations  of  Mercury 
and  the  Moon  are  not  reliable  because  of  their 
tendency  to  change  their  minds  repeatedly  in 
the  most  unexpected  manner.  They  are  inclined 
to  look  upon  the  bright  side  of  life  and  are  fond 
of  pleasure,  particularly  travel. 

n  #  $  The  Moon  square  or  opposition  to  Mer- 
cury gives  a  poor  memory  and  lack  of  mental 
stability  with  a  tendency  to  indecision  and 
worry,  liability  to  brain  storms  and  hysterics. 
These  characteristics  make  the  person  unpopu- 
lar and  as  the  saying  is,  ' '  unlucky. ' ' 

#  A  s>  Saturn  sextile  or  trine  with  Mercury 
acts  as  a  brake  upon  the  flighty  mind  and  gives 
it  a  seriousness,  depth  and  concentration  which 
is  of  inestimable  value  in  life.  The  forethought 
and  profound  reasoning  ability  indicated  by 
these  aspects  insure  success  in  whatever  voca- 
tion the  person  may  pursue.  The  patient  per- 
sistence which  permits  no  temporary  failure  to 
stand  in  the  way  of  ultimate  success,  the  caution 
and  diplomacy  make  such  people  invincible  in 
the  long  run.  Therefore  they  generally  become 
prominent  in  connection  with  some  serious  en- 
terprise such  as  secret  societies,  the  church  or 
even  in  politics  or  government  affairs.  They  are 
in  demand  for  high  positions  in  great  undertak- 


14 


210  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

ings  where  a  steady  hand  is  required  on  the 
helm.  But  they  do  not  usually  shine  publicly 
for  they  are  very  quiet,  subdued  and  serious  in 
their  manner  and  demeanor;  besides  they  are 
absolutely  honest  and  fairminded,  hence  they 
make  the  very  finest  judges  obtainable. 

f?  6  P  $  Saturn  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Mer- 
cury gives  depth  to  the  mind,  and  forethought, 
together  with  all  the  other  good  qualities  enu- 
merated as  resulting  from  the  sextile  and  the 
trine  if  Mercury  is  otherwise  well  aspected,  but 
not  in  so  full  a  measure,  or  at  any  rate  the 
person  does  not  seem  to  be  able  to  externalize 
them  as  readily,  hence  does  not  meet  the  same 
assured  success  as  given  by  the  good  aspects. 
He  also  suffers  from  the  tendency  to  melancholy 
denoted  by  the  square  or  opposition,  especially 
if  the  aspect  occurs  in  one  of  the  common  signs 
or  in  Capricorn,  and  if  in  Gemini  it  interferes 
sadly  with  the  dexterity.  Such  people  drop 
everything  they  take  into  their  hands.  These 
aspects  also  give  an  embarrassing  timidity  and 
if  Mercury  is  afflicted  the  undesirable  qualities 
enumerated  as  resulting  from  the  square  or  op- 
position may  be  looked  for. 

T?  n  <9  %  Saturn  square  or  opposition  to  Mercury 
makes  the  person  subject  to  trouble  and  delays 
all  through  life.  He  is  thwarted  on  every  hand 
by  slander  and  secret  enemies  and  this  condition 


MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  OF  REASON       211- 

in  time  makes  him  bitter  and  sarcastic  with  the 
additional  result  that  he  is  shunned  by  all  who 
can  possibly  get  away  from  him  and  that  in  time 
leads  him  to  become  a  recluse  who  shuts  himself 
away  to  brood  over  his  troubles.  Such  a  person 
sometimes  becomes  subject  to  melancholia  of  a 
most  piteous  character.  These  aspects  also  make 
the  person  cunning  and  untruthful.  They  give 
the  same  desire  to  study  the  occult  conferred  by 
the  good  aspects,  but  there  is  the  great  differ- 
ence that  while  the  good  aspects  of  Saturn  and 
Mercury  incline  him  to  the  study  of  occultism 
from  unselfish  motives,  the  bad  aspects  impel 
him  to  ferret  out  nature's  secrets  for  personal 
power  or  gain. 

6  P  *  A  $  Jupiter  conjunction,  parallel,  sextile 
or  trine  to  Mercury  is  one  of  the  finest  assets  in 
life,  for  it  gives  a  cheerful,  optimistic  disposi- 
tion with  the  ability  to  always  look  upon  the 
bright  side  of  things  and  keep  up  the  spirits  in 
hours  of  adversity.  The  mind  is  broad,  versatile 
and  able  to  reason  correctly  and  to  form  a  re- 
liable judgment  by  careful  deliberation.  These 
people  never  give  a  hasty  decision ;  they  require 
time  to  think  over  whatever  is  presented  to  them, 
but  once  they  have  reached  a  conclusion  that 
will  be  found  incontrovertible.  They  are  suc- 
cessful in  law  or  literature  and  much  respected 
for  their  honesty  and  sincerity.  These  aspects 


212  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

are  particularly  fortunate  for  people  who  travel 
for  business  or  pleasure,  for  they  will  reap  both 
benefit  and  enjoyment  from  a  migratory  mode 
of  life;  it  will  make  them  "healthy,  wealthy  and 
wise"  beyond  the  average,  and  loved  by  every- 
body for  the  vital  vibrations  they  radiate  upon 
whoever  they  meet. 


Jupiter  square  or  opposition  to  Mercury 
gives  a  vacillating  and  wavering  disposition  so 
that  the  person  cannot  make  up  his  mind  when 
more  than  one  course  of  action  is  open,  hence 
people  with  these  aspects  often  lose  their  oppor- 
tunities through  procrastination  and  lack  of 
judgment,  and  they  must  therefore  be  classed 
as  failures  in  life.  They  are  liable  to  scandal 
and  slander  because  of  treacherous  associates. 
They  should  not  travel,  for  it  will  bring  them 
loss  and  trouble.  They  should  also  be  extremely 
careful  in  making  contracts  or  agreements  to  do 
or  deliver  certain  things  at  a  specified  time,  for 
they  will  probably  be  unable  to  fulfill  the  re- 
quirements and  thus  trouble  and  loss  will  result. 

*  A  $  Mars  sextile  or  trine  to  Mercury  gives 
a  keen,  sharp,  ingenious  and  resourceful  men- 
tality. It  makes  the  person  enthusiastic  over 
any  proposition  which  appeals  to  him  and  he 
has  also  the  ability  to  enthuse  others  and  impress 
them  with  his  views  ;  an  indefatigable  worker 
in  any  cause  which  arouses  his  sympathies,  but 


MERCURY,  THE  PLANET  OF  REASON       213 

he  is  no  visionary,  he  is  interested  only  in  con- 
crete matters.  These  people  love  argument  or 
debate,  and  they  have  an  inexhaustible  fund  of 
wit  and  good  humor,  sometimes  blended  with  a 
vein  of  sarcasm  which  always  strikes  its  mark, 
yet  never  viciously  or  maliciously.  They  also 
have  remarkable  dexterity  and  are  able  to  turn 
their  hands  to  whatever  task  is  required  and 
do  it  with  a  speed,  facility  and  expedition  that 
is  astonishing,  to  say  the  least.  They  cannot  do 
anything  slowly  or  by  halves;  whatever  they 
undertake  must  be  done  with  a  rush,  and  they 
put  their  whole  energy  into  it  so  that  they  may 
accomplish  the  task  and  do  it  well,  hence  these 
aspects  give  success  in  life,  in  almost  any  line 
of  endeavor  these  people  may  select,  but  prob- 
ably most  in  literature  or  the  mechanical  arts. 

'  $  6  P  $  Mars  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Mercury 
gives  the  same  mental  energy,  enthusiasm  and 
dexterity  as  the  definitely  good  aspects,  but 
whether  they  are  used  for  constructive  and  good 
purposes  or  for  destructive  and  evil  ends  de- 
pends upon  the  aspects,  house  position  and  sign 
which  they  occupy.  If  the  configuration  occurs 
in  a  sign  where  either  or  both  are  strong  and 
well-placed,  as  Mars  in  Aries  or  Capricorn  or 
Mercury  in  Gemini  or  Virgo,  or  if  they  are  for- 
tified by  good  aspects  from  the  Sun,  Venus  and 
Jupiter,  Mars  conjunction  or  parallel  Mercury 


214  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

will  operate  similarly  to  the  sextile  or  trine,  at> 
stated  in  the  foregoing  paragraph,  which  see. 
But  if  Mars  and  Mercury  are  in  one  of  the 
watery  signs  (Cancer,  Scorpio  or  Pisces),  or  if 
either  or  both  are  afflicted  by  Saturn,  Uranus 
or  Neptune,  the  conjunction  or  parallel  of  Mars 
and  Mercury  will  give  the  same  evil  tendencies 
as  the  square  or  opposition  which  are  defined  in 
the  next  paragraph. 

£  O  8  %  Mars  square  or  opposition  to  Mercury 
makes  people  quickwitted,  sharp  and  alert,  quick 
tempered,  impulsive  and  excitable,  liable  to  jump 
at  conclusions  and  act  before  they  think  with 
the  inevitable  result  that  they  are  always  getting 
themselves  or  other  people  into  trouble,  hence 
they  are  dangerous  associates.  They  are  born 
prevaricators  and  utterly  incapable  of  making  a 
straight  statement.  It  is  just  as  natural  for  them 
to  color  or  exaggerate  their  statements  as  it  is 
to  breathe.  They  are  vitriolic  in  their  wrath 
and  their  tongues  are  more  poisonous  than  the 
bite  of  a  rattlesnake,  hence  they  are  either  feared 
or  hated  by  those  who  are  unfortunate  enough 
to  be  bound  to  them  by  environment;  all  who 
can  shun  them.  They  are  bullies  who  are  bound 
either  to  rule  or  ruin  wherever  they  are,  and 
they  allow  no  obstacle  to  stand  in  their  way 
which  can  be  removed  either  by  force  or  slander. 
They  are  the  acme  of  selfishness,  swagger  and 


MERCURY,  THE   PLANET  OF  REASON       215 

consummate  egotism.  The  foregoing  tendencies 
may  of  course  be  modified  by  other  aspects,  but 
if  they  are  not,  such  people  are  a  menace  to 
society.  If  either  Mars  or  Mercury  are  placed 
in  the  Sixth  or  Twelfth  Houses  or  in  any  other 
position  so  that  the  bad  aspect  acts  upon  the 
health,  there  is  a  liability  to  nervous  prostration, 
brain  fever  or  insanity. 

#  A  $  Uranus  sextile  or  trine  to  Mercury  gives 
an  original,  independent  and  eccentric  mind  im- 
patient of  the  fetters  of  fashion,  tradition  and 
convention.  Such  a  person  is  strenuous  in  his 
efforts  to  hew  a  path  for  himself  in  complete 
liberty.  Therefore  this  is  the  hall-mark  of  the 
pioneer  in  thought  and  invention,  the  sign  of 
genius.  Their  ideas  and  ideals  are  exceedingly 
lofty,  progressive  and  inspiring,  in  fact  too  much 
so  in  the  opinion  of  the  average  man  or  woman 
who  looks  upon  their  actions  as  vagaries,  the  out- 
come of  a  diseased  mind.  Nevertheless  they  have 
plenty  of  friends  on  account  of  their  kindly  and 
sympathetic  nature  and  these  aspects  are  good 
for  a  literary  or  scientific  pursuit,  also  for  in- 
vention, particularly  those  which  have  to  do 
with  air  or  electricity. 

:  d  P  $  Uranus  conjunction  or  parallel  Mercury. 
If  Mercury  is  otherwise  afflicted  the  conjunction 
and  parallel  are  to  be  judged  as  bad  aspects  and 
read  accordingly,  but  if  Mercury  is  otherwise 


216  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

well  placed  and  aspected  the  delineation  given 
for  the  sextile  and  trine  will  apply. 

1$  G  8  $  Uranus  square  or  opposition  to  Mercury 
is  the  hall-mark  of  the  true  crank  or  anarchist 
who  has  extreme  ideas  to  tear  down  the  social 
structure  and  undertake  radical  reforms.  People 
with  these  configurations  are  given  to  ranting 
and  raving  in  public  and  their  language  is  usu- 
ally as  cruel  as  the  measures  they  advocate. 
Whatever  ability  they  possess  is  usually  turned 
to  an  erratic  purpose  and  they  are  often  forced 
to  make  sudden  changes  on  that  account. 

V?  6P#  A  S  Neptune  conjunction,  parallel,  sextile 
or  trine  to  Mercury  gives  a  mind  peculiarly 
adapted  to  the  occult  art,  particularly  if  the 
conjunction  occurs  in  the  Third  or  Ninth  Houses 
or  the  trines  are  from  the  watery  signs  Cancer 
and  Pisces.  Such  people  usually  succeed  in  oc- 
cult science  and  often  develop  a  supernormal  fac- 
ulty. They  are  particularly  good  as  magnetic 
healers. 

tp  D  <?  S  Neptune  square  or  opposition  to  Mercury 
gives  a  chaotic  mind,  liability  to  lack  of  memory, 
indolence  and  a  disposition  to  dream  the  time 
away.  There  is  a  restless  desire  for  fame  and 
an  inability  to  fit  in  anywhere.  Such  people  are 
liable  to  fraud,  deception  and  slander,  also  to 
suicide. 


CHAPTER  XI. 
THE  MOON,  THE  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION. 

FROM  the  Bible  we  learn  that  Jehovah  made  man 
in  His  image.  We  are  also  told  that  angels  vis- 
ited Sarah  and  proclaimed  the  birth  of  Isaac.  They 
also  foretold  the  birth  of  Samson  and  Samuel  and  the 
angel  (not  archangel)  Gabriel  came  to  Mary  of  Beth- 
lehem to  announce  the  birth  of  Jesus.  According  to 
occult  science  also,  Jehovah  and  His  angels  are  the 
guardians  of  the  seed  atoms  which  are  the  basic  fac- 
tors in  fertilization,  and  their  activities  are  directed 
to  the  maintenance  of  plant,  animal  and  human 
life  upon  our  earth.  To  this  end  their  forces  are  fo- 
cused by  the  wandering  Moon  through  the  twelve 
signs  of  the  zodiac ;  they  impinge  upon  the  foetus  in 
a  creative  manner  during  the  period  of  gestation  from 
the  time  of  conception  to  birth. 

Thus  as  the  Moon  measures  the  tides  of  the  earth 
so  also  does  she  measure  the  soul's  passage  from  the 
shores  of  eternity  through  the  waters  of  the  womb  to 
the  world  of  time.  According  to  astrology  Cancer  is 
the  home  of  the  Moon  and  the  ancient  Egyptians  pic- 
tured this  sign  as  a  scarab  or  beetle  which  was  their 
emblem  of  the  soul  and  they  called  Cancer  the  sphere 
of  the  soul,  for  it  is  said  that  through  this  moist 
217 


218  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

watery  sign  fertilized  by  the  lunar  ray  the  seed  atoms 
are  projected  into  the  womb  of  the  prospective  parent 
who  is  thus  prepared  for  the  period  of  gestation  and 
occult  science  adds  to  this  that  the  seed  atoms  of  the 
animal  kingdom,  which  is  still  mindless  and  therefore 
not  amenable  to  lunar  influences  in  that  direction,  are 
projected  through  the  watery  martial  sign  Scorpio 
while  the  seed  atom  of  the  inert  plant  are  poured  in 
through  the  Jupiterian  sign  Pisces  just  before  the 
Sun  enters  Aries  at  the  vernal  equinox  to  awaken  the 
millions  of  plant  seeds  thus  fertilized  which  have  been 
sleeping  in  Mother  Earth.  Thus  the  human  family 
has  the  longest  period  of  gestation,  the  animal  a  some- 
what shorter  and  the  plant  the  shortest  of  all. 

The  Moon  also  measures  the  period  of  postnatal 
growth  so  that  the  period  of  childhood,  measured  by 
the  change  of  teeth  is  complete  at  about  seven  years 
of  age  when  the  Moon  is  square  to  her  place  at  birth. 
The  period  of  puberty  is  ushered  in  at  about  fourteen 
years  of  age  when  the  Moon  is  in  opposition  to  her 
/)lace  at  birth  and  is  marked  by  the  cnange  of  voice 
in  the  boy  and  the  commencement  of  the  menses  in  the 
girl.  At  twenty-one  years  of  age  the  Moon  by  pro- 
gression has  traveled  three  quarters  of  the  circle  of 
the  horoscope  from  its  place  at  birth.  This  finishes 
the  period  of  incubation  and  the  human  being  is  con- 
sidered to  be  full-grown,  capable  of  exercising  a  fran- 
chise and  taking  care  of  his  own  affairs.  Thus  the 
distance  traveled  by  the  New  Moon  during  the  prena- 
tal period  of  gestation  in  the  mother's  womb  and  the 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION     219 

distance  traveled  by  the  progressed  Moon  during  the 
twenty-one  years  of  post-natal  development  in  the 
womb  of  Mother  Nature  correspond  exactly. 

The  Moon,  like  Mercury  has  no  basic  nature  of 
its  own  but  serves  to  focus  the  qualities  of  the  other 
planets  and  signs  upon  the  human  mind.  She  governs 
the  tidal  air  in  the  lungs  and  the  colorless  lymph  in 
the  body,  also  the  digestive  activity  and  the  sympa- 
thetic nervous  system  which  automatically  takes  care 
of  the  process  of  digestion.  She  also  governs  the  cere- 
bellum, the  mammae,  the  feminine  functions  and  par- 
turition as  already  explained. 

People  who  are  strongly  under  the  influence  of 
the  lunar  rays  are  of  an  easy-going,  dreamy,  indolent 
nature,  adepts  as  architects  of  air  castles  which  never 
materialize  or  assume  concrete  shape,  Otherwise  they 
are  very  sociable  and  easy  to  get  along  with.  They 
succeed  best  as  cooks,  housekeepers  or  in  some  domes- 
tic occupation  or  in  one  which  has  to  do  writh  liquids 
or  a  seafaring  life, 

The  Moon  being  female  indicates  the  marriage 
partner  for  a  man  so  that  in  a  male  horoscope  afflic- 
tion of  the  Moon  would  not  be  so  apt  to  cause  trouble 
in  health  as  in  married  life  and  the  horoscopes  of  the 
two  sexes  should  therefore  be  read  differently  with 
respect  to  the  Sun  and  Moon.  If  Saturn  afflicts  the 
Moon  in  a  woman 's  horoscope  it  will  affect  her  health, 
but  the  same  aspects  occurring  in  a  man's  horoscope 
will  cause  him  trouble  in  married  life.  If  the  Sun  is 
afflicted  in  a  man's  horoscope  it  will  affect  his  health 


220  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

but  in  a  woman's  horoscope  it  would  indicate  trouble 
with  her  husband.  At  the  same  time  however  it 
should  not  be  forgotten  that  both  the  Sun  and  Moon 
are  vital  factors  in  the  health  of  both  sexes  but  one 
sex  is  more  affected  by  the  Sun,  the  other  by  the 
Moon. 

The  Moon  is  the  great  time-marker  of  the  uni- 
verse. Without  her  our  lives  would  be  barren  of 
events  for  although  the  Sun  and  the  planets  by  their 
travel  through  the  signs  and  houses  indicate  the  years 
when  certain  tendencies  shown  in  the  horoscope  may 
culminate  in  action,  it  invariably  requires  an  aspect 
of  the  Moon  to  fertilize  the  aspect  and  make  it  bloom 
into  physical  manifestation.  The  Sun  and  the  planets 
may  therefore  be  likened  to  the  hour-hand  on  the 
clock  of  destiny  which  shows  the  year  when  each  phase 
of  our  destiny  is  ripe  for-  the  harvest  and  the  Moon 
may  be  likened  to  the  minute-hand  which  shows  the 
month  when  the  influences  are  due  to  culminate  into 
action.  In  order  to  become  fully  conversant  with  the 
influences  of  the  Moon  we  would  advise  students  to 
read  carefully  the  article  on  eclipses  and  new  Moon 
in  our  Simplified  Scientific  Astrology. 

THE  MOON  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES. 

})  I  The  Moon  in  the  First  House.  When  the  Moon 
is  rising  in  the  First  House  at  birth  and  partic- 
ularly in  a  common  or  cardinal  sign  she  gives  the 
person  then  born  a  very  restless  nature ;  he  is 
constantly  endeavoring  to  change  his  position, 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION     221 

environment  and  occupation,  ensouled  by  an  in- 
insatiable  wanderlust  and  always  ready  to  roam. 
When  the  Moon  is  rising  in  a  fixed  sign  there  is 
a  little  more  stability  to  the  nature  but  even  then 
the  person  will  probably  spend  at  least  part  of  his 
life  in  a  roving  existence.  People  with  the  Moon 
in  the  First  House  are  usually  sensitives,  espec- 
ially if  the  Moon  is  in  the  psychic  signs  Cancer 
or  Pisces.  They  have  a  very  vivid  imagination 
and  are  quite  intuitive.  This  position  of  the 
Moon  has  a  powerful  influence  upon  health  ^spe- 
cially  in  the  female  horoscope  and  the  aspects 
which  the  Moon  receives  determine  the  strength 
of  the  constitution.  It  is  also  a  sign  of  success  in 
such  occupations  as  bring  the  person  in  close 
touch  with  the  public. 

D  2  The  Moon  in  fhe  Second  House  signifies  fluctu- 
ating finances  unless  fortified  by  good  aspects 
from  Jupiter  the  planet  of  opulence  or  Venus 
the  planet  of  attraction.  The  Sun  also  helps  to 
make  matters  more  settled  in  that  respect. 

D  3  Tlie  Moon  in  fhe  Third  House  makes  the  mina 
extremely  fertile  in  imagination  with  a  strong 
liking  for  mental  occupations,  especially  such  as 
do  not  require  continuity  but  are  subject  to  con- 
stant change,  like  editors  and  reporters  on  news- 
papers who  must  always  be  on  the  alert  for  news 
and  roam  hither  and  thither  for  the  purpose  of 
gathering  it.  These  people  love  the  lime-light  of 


222  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

publicity  and  if  the  Moon  is  strengthened  by 
good  aspects  to  Mercury  they  may  reach  a  posi- 
tion of  prominence. 

D  4  The  Moon  in  the  Fourth  House  well-aspected 
indicates  fortunate  home  conditions,  especially, 
toward  the  close  of  life  but  if  the  Moon  is  afflicted 
we  may  judge  the  reverse.  This  position  also 
gives  a  tendency  toward  psychic  experiences 
especially  if  the  Moon  is  in  its  own  sign  Cancer 
or  the  other  watery  sign  Pisces.  It  also  shows 
many  changes  of  residence  which  will  be  fortu- 
nate or  otherwise  according  to  the  other  aspects 
of  the  Moon. 

D  5  The  Moon  in  the  Fifth  House  in  cardinal  or 
common  signs  indicates  a  person  of  very  change- 
able affections,  fond  of  pleasure  and  gambling. 
It  is  a  sign  of  a  fruitful  marriage  particularly 
when  in  Scorpio.  Even  in  a  barren  sign  like  Leo 
the  Moon  will  give  children  when  she  is  placed 
in  the  Fifth  House.  This  question  however, 
should  always  be  judged  from  both  horoscopes 
of  the  prospective  parents,  for  should  one  be  en- 
tirely barren,  the  Moon  in  the  Fifth  House  in 
Leo  or  Virgo  in  the  other  horoscope,  would  not 
be  sufficient  help  to  mend  the  matter. 

D  6  The  Moon  in  the  Sixth  House  is  a  poor  position 
particularly  in  a  woman's  horoscope  and  any 
person  with  the  Moon  in  that  position  will  do 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION    223 

better  in  a  subordinate  position  employed  by 
someone  else  than  in  a  business  venture  of  his 
own.  Should  he  be  placed  in  the  position  of  em- 
ployer he  will  find  it  difficult  to  keep  servants  or 
employees.  They  will  change  constantly. 

D  7  Tlie  Moon  in  the  Seventh  House  if  well-aspected 
is  fortunate  for  success  in  marriage,  partnership 
and  other  dealings  with  the  public  for  it  makes 
the  person  popular.  But  if  seriously  afflicted  it 
indicates  a  fickle,  changeable  marriage  partner, 
loss  through  litigation,  partnership  and  the  gen- 
eral public  who  will  then  hold  the  person  in 
disfavor. 

D  8  The  Moon  in  the  Eighth  House  gives  gain  by 
marriage  and  legacy  if  it  is  well-aspected  and  it 
also  increases  the  number  of  children  though 
there  is  a  chance  that  some  of  them  may  die. 
But  if  the  Moon  is  afflicted  the  financial  fortunes 
will  change  for  the  worse  after  marriage  and  if 
legacies  do  come  they  will  bring  lawsuits  with 
them  whereby  the  person  will  lose. 

D  9  The  Moon  in  the  Ninth  House  when  well-aspect- 
ed gives  a  clean  clear  mind  of  a  serious,  religious, 
legal  or  philosophic  turn  according  to  the  nature 
of  the  aspect.  The  person  will  travel  far  with 
both  pleasure  and  profit  for  himself  and  some- 
time he  will  come  into  the  lime-light  of  publicity. 
This  position  also  gives  a  tendency  to  dreams 


224  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

and  visions  especially  if  the  Moon  is  aspected  by 
Neptune.  If  the  Moon  is  afflicted  the  person  will 
be  too  impulsive  and  jump  to  conclusions  which 
are  to  his  detriment.  If  he  undertakes  to  travel 
he  is  liable  to  meet  much  trouble  in  consequence. 
He  is  also  apt  to  make  an  ill-considered  change 
in  religion  and  be  subjected  to  much  censure 
on  that  account. 

D  10  The  Moon  in  the  Tenth  House  is  a  sign  of  good 
fortune,  popularity  and  prosperity  if  well-as- 
pected.  It  brings  the  person  prominently  before 
the  public  and  ensures  favor  especially  from 
women,  also  the  accumulation  of  property,  it 
makes  the  mind  deep  and  diplomatic,  curious 
and  inquisitive.  When  the  Moon  is  afflicted  the 
person  is  liable  to  incur  hostility  on  the  part  of 
the  public  and  reversals  of  fortune.  Sometimes 
he  becomes  involved  in  public  scandal  and  sub- 
ject to  censure. 

D  11  The  Moon  in  the  Eleventh  House  if  well-aspect- 
ed  gives  many  friends  epecially  among  women, 
but  if  she  is  afflicted  those  who  come  to  the  per- 
son under  the  guise  of  friendship  do  so  in  the 
hope  that  he  may  be  of  benefit  to  them. 

D  12  The  Moon  in  the  Twelfth  House  if  well-aspected 
gives  success  in  such  work  as  is  performed  in  /se- 
clusion away  from  the  public  gaze,  in  prisons, 
hospitals  or  charitable  institntions.  There  is 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION     225 

also  a  liability  to  become  involved  in  clandestine 
love-affairs  but  if  the  Moon  is  well-aspected  the 
person  will  be  able  to  keep  this  a  secret.  If  the 
Moon  is  afflicted  there  is  danger  of  secret  ene- 
mies, trouble  and  persecution. 

THE  MOON  IN  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS 

})  T  The  Moon  in  Aries  gives  a  very  independent 
type  of  mind  which  aims  to  hew  out  its  own 
path  in  life  whether  right  or  wrong  and  is  ex- 
tremely quick  to  resent  any  interference  from 
others.  The  person  is  ambitious  and  aggressive 
but  lacks  forethought,  so  that  he  is  liable  to 
meet  with  numerous  setbacks.  However,  this 
position  gives  a  dauntless  courage  and  such  peo- 
ple are  not  easily  defeated.  When  they  have 
failed  in  one  direction  they  immediately  try 
another  venture  and  in  the  end  their  very  persis- 
tence usually  brings  them  into  prominence  in1, 
their  line  and  gives  them  ultimate  success,  unless; 
the  Moon  is  afflicted,  then  they  are  prone  to  take 
up  one  occupation  after  another  without  giving 
themselves  time  to  try  honestly  to  make  a  suc- 
cess of  one. 

8  D  The  Moon  in  Taurus.  This  is  the  Moon's  ex- 
altation sign  and  her  effect  is  therefore  very  pow- 
erful for  good  if  she  is  free  from  affliction  and 
well-aspected.  Then  the  fixed  nature  of  Taurus 
tones  down  the  changeability  of  the  Moon  which 

15 


226  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STABS 

also  blends  with  the  Venus  ray.  Hence  it  makes 
the  disposition  gentle,  self-reliant  and  deter- 
mined. It  gives  continuity,  forethought  and 
kindness,  therefore  the  person  attracts  all  the 
good  things  of  life,  health  and  wealth,  friends 
and  family,  houses  and  lands  with  the  ability  to 
enjoy  all  these  things  for  it  makes  him  fond  of 
pleasure,  sociable  and  hospitable,  a  lover  of  art 
and  music  and  all  other  things  which  make  for 
the  enjoyment  of  life. 

D  IT  The  Moon  in  Gemini  gives  a  wide-awake  intel- 
lect, fond  of  literature  and  science,  resourceful 
and  able  to  cope  with  emergencies,  broad,  liberal 
and  alert  for  progressive  ideas  which  he  takes 
up  with  avidity.  Hence  such  people  are  much 
attracted  to  literary  occupations,  particularly  in 
the  newspaper  field  where  they  may  flit  from 
one  subject  to  another  as  required  by  their  ex- 
tremely restless  mind.  This  position  also  gives 
an  inordinate  love  of  traveling,  especially  in  po- 
sitions where  one  meets  many  people.  Hence  it 
favors  such  occupations  as  traveling  salesmen, 
canvassers  and  the  like. 

D  <5>  TJi,e  Moon  in  Cancer  gives  a  disposition  which 
is  kind,  sociable  and  sympathetic,  but  indolent 
and  averse  to  effort  whether  physical,  moral  or 
mental.  These  people  love  to  drift  with  the  tide 
and  only  bestir  themselves  when  under  the  whip- 
lash of  necessity.  They  are  often  sensitive  to 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION     227 

psychic  conditions,  especially  if  the  Moon  is 
aspected  by  Neptune  or  Uranus  and  the  nature 
of  the  aspect  determines  whether  the  influence  is 
favorable  or  unfavorable.  This  position  also 
gives  a  love  of  home  and  the  comforts  to  be  ob- 
tained there.  It  promotes  the  digestion  and  con- 
sequently the  health  if  the  Moon  is  well-aspected. 

If  afflicted  it  has  a  tendency  to  give  digestive 
troubles. 

I>  SI  The  Moon  in  Leo. has  an  illuminating  influence 
on  the  mind.  It  gives  a  strong,  self-reliant  ana 
aggressive  disposition  with  ability  of  organiza- 
tion therefore  people  with  the  Moon  in  this  posi- 
tion usually  attain  to  leadership  in  their  imme- 
diate circle.  They  are  honorable  in  financial 
and  social  matters,  fair  and  magnanimous  in 
their  dealings  with  others,  and  very  popular 
with  other  people. 

D  TTR  The  Moon  in  Virgo  increases  the  mental  qual- 
ities if  she  is  well-aspected ;  she  gives  a  retentive 
memory  and  a  love  of  study  along  scientific  or 
occult  lines  and  an  ambition  to  excel.  Chemis- 
try seems  to  be  their  favorite  among  the  sciences 
and  they  excel  as  dieticians.  They  are  rather 
reserved  and  of  quiet  demeanor,  disliking  flat- 
tery or  ostentation,  but  unless  they  devote  them- 
selves to  dietetics  they  are  more  successful  as  the 
servants  or  employees  of  others  than  in  business 
for  themselves. 


228  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

D  =^  The  Moon  in  Libra  is  a  fortunate  position  for 
the  acquisition  of  friends  and  public  popularity 
for  it  makes  the  person  kind,  sympathetic  and 
agreeable,  optimistic  and  fond  of  social  pleas- 
ures. This  position  also  gives  good  reasoning  pow- 
ers and  the  ability  to  form  a  correct  judgment, 
love  of  art  and  music,  sometimes  considerable 
ability  as  a  performer  if  assisted  by  other  aspects. 

D  TTt  The  Moon  in  Scorpio  gives  a  courageous,  in- 
dependent and  energetic  disposition.  The  per- 
son who  has  this  configuration  will  not  tolerate 
interference  with  his  plans  or  submit  to  imposi- 
tion. He  is  often  very  abrupt  in  his  manners 
and  blunt  in  speech,  quick-tempered  and  not  to 
be  coerced  by  threats,  but  singularly  amenable 
to  kindness.  He  has  a  strong  and  stubborn  will 
and  determination  to  carry  out  whatever  he 
undertakes.  This  position  also  gives  a  consid- 
erable attraction  toward  the  occult  sciences  but 
if  afflicted  may  lead  to  excess  in  gratification  of 
the  senses,  trouble  with  women  or  difficulties 
in  parturition. 

D  /  The  Moon  in  Sagittarius  gives  an  alert  and 
active  personality,  a  love  of  walking,  riding  or 
any  other  form  of  physical  exercise,  a  roving 
disposition  and  love  of  travel  in  foreign  coun- 
tries, a  fondness  of  animals,  especially  horses 
and  dogs  and  an  inclination  for  the  £tudy  of 
religion,  law,  philosophy  or  the  science  of  oc- 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION  229 

cultism.  These  people  are  very  optimistic,  good 
humored,  jovial,  and  ideal  companions  unless 
the  Moon  is  afflicted,  then  her  position  in  Sagit- 
tarius is  conducive  of  indolence  and  self-in- 
dulgence. 

D  V3  The  Moon  in  Capricorn,  if  well-aspected,  give* 
abundance  of  help  from  people  who  are  higher 
in  the  social  scale  so  that  whatever  success  there 
may  be  will  come  through  others,  the  person 
being  too  timid  to  push  himself  forward,  besides 
being  of  a  melancholy  turn  of  mind  which  makes 
him  exceedingly  sensitive  to  real  or  fancied 
slights.  If  the  Moon  is  afflicted  it  gives  a  lia- 
bility to  slander  whether  that  is  merited  or  not. 
This  position  also  has  a  detrimental  effect  upon 
the  digestion.  People  with  the  Moon  in  this 
position  often  have  an  insane  fear  of  coming  to 
want  and  therefore  they  become  avaricious  and 
miserly,  denying  themselves  all  comforts  at  the 
present  time  that  they  may  have  something  for 
a  rainy  day.  They  have  very  little  feeling  for 
themselves  and  none  at  all  for  others. 

3)  £?  The  Moon  in  Aquarius  if  well-aspected  gives 
the  person  a  very  vivid  imagination  and  the 
power  of  calling  images  up  before  the  mind's 
eye  in  such  a  manner  that  they  almost  seem 
tangible ;  besides  these  people  are  not  dependent 
upon  the  faculty  of  reason,  for  their  intuition 
is  also  exceedingly  well-developed.  In  disposi- 


230  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

tion  they  are  sociable,  kindly  and  courteous  with 
the  result  that  they  attract  many  friends  and 
are  very  popular  in  their  environment,  and  they 
are  helped  by  their  friends  according  to  the  as- 
pects of  the  Moon.  On  the  other  hand  if  the 
Moon  is  afflicted  this  position  shows  one  of  an 
exceedingly  erratic  mind. 

D  ^  The  Moon  in  Pisces  gives  a  receptive  mind 
and  a  fertile  imagination  with  a  disposition  to 
indolence  and  self-pity,  vacillating  and  faint- 
heartedness, fond  of  dreaming  rather  than  act- 
ing, therefore  sorrow,  trouble  and  self-undoing 
beset  their  path  in  life.  This  position  not  in- 
frequently leads  to  mediumship,  especially  if 
Neptune  is  in  adverse  aspect,  for  these  people 
are  peculiarly  sensitive  to  the  flattery  of  spirit- 
controls  and  love  anything  that  will  stir  their 
emotions.  They  are  also  very  wordy  in  their 
expressions  and  if  a  good  aspect  from  Venus 
and  Mercury  enables  them  to  take  up  music 
they  play  with  extraordinary  inspiration  and 
feeling.  If  the  Moon  is  afflicted  in  Pisces  love- 
affairs  are  apt  to  bring  the  person  into  trouble. 
If  Pisces  be  in  the  Twelfth  House  and  the  Moon 
there  at  birth  this  will  give  a  liability  on  the 
part  of  the  parents  to  drink  and  thus  neglect 
their  children  who  may  then  become  the  wards 
of  charitable  institutions  until  they  reach  ma- 
turity. 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION     231 
ASPECTS  OF  THE  MOON  TO  THE  OTHER  PLANETS 

O  P  6  J)  The  Sun  parallel  or  conjunction  to  the 
Moon.  No  matter  in  what  sign  or  hou.sc  the  con- 
junction of  the  Lights  occurs  the  person  will  be 
so  strongly  marked  with  the  characteristics  of 
that  sign  that,  lacking  knowledge  of  his  true 
ascendant,  even  the  most  competent  astrologer 
is  likely  to  be  misled  and  judge  him  to  be  born 
with  the  sign  rising  in  which  the  conjunction 
took  place,  and  whatever  matters  are  ruled  by 
the  house  in  which  the  conjunction  occurs  will 
play  a  very  important  part  in  the  life.  In  the 
First  he  is  an  out  and  out  egotist  with  very 
little  love  for  others  save  in  so  far  as  they  serve 
his  ends,  in  the  Seventh  his  world  pivots  on  the 
mate,  in  the  Tenth  House  or  sign  he  will 
sacrifice  all  other  considerations  to  rise  in  public 
life,  in  the  Twelfth  House  or  sign  it  will  give 
a  strong  tendency  to  intemperance  which  will 
bring  trouble  in  the  life,  in  the  Third  and  Ninth 
Houses  it  will  brighten  the  mind  and  induce 
travel  from  which  he  will  benefit,  in  the  Second 
House  it  will  bring  wealth,  especially  if  in  good 
aspect  with  Jupiter. 

O#AD  The  Sun  sextile  or  trine  to  the  Moon. 
If  the  conjunction  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  is  closer 
than  three  degrees  it  has  a  tendency  to  deplete 
the  vitality  and  if  it  is  also  a  solar  eclipse  and 
the  child  survives,  this  will  be  particularly  no- 


232  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

ticeable  all  through  life.  People  who  have  such 
close  conjunctions  or  eclipses  become  listless,  dis- 
spirited  and  out  of  sorts  every  time  there  is  a 
new  Moon.  It  does  not  seem  to  interfere  with 
the  good  effects  in  other  departments  of  life. 
The  good  aspects  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  make  for 
general  success  in  life,  health,  fair  financial  for- 
tunes, good  home  conditions  with  faithful  friends 
and  esteem  in  the  community;  they  favor  a  rise 
in  life  because  of  the  person's  innate  ability, 
which  either  gains  for  him  the  recognition  of 
people  in  a  position  to  help  him  rise,  or  impels 
him  to  carve  his  own  way. 

O  D  8  5  The  Sun  square  or  opposition  to  the  Moon 
makes  the  person  vacillating  and  unsettled  in 
disposition,  changeable  and  unable  to  pursue  a, 
settled  course  in  life,  rash  to  plunge  into  untried 
ventures  but  lacking  the  persistence  or  contin- 
uity of  purpose  to  carry  anything  to  a  successful 
conclusion.  For  that  reason  such  people  become 
failures  in  life ;  their  dealings  with  women  and 
people  higher  in  the  social  scale  such  as  employ- 
ers, the  authorities,  judges,  etc.,  are  especially 
unsuccessful,  they  always  have  difficulty  in  ob- 
taining and  keeping  employment  and  keeping 
their  positions  when  obtained,  for  they  are 
hyper-sensitive  and  ready  to  take  offense,  with 
or  without  provocation.  These  configurations 
also  affect  the  health ;  the  body  is  liable  to  colds 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION     233 

and  recuperation  is  slow  when  sickness  has  over- 
taken the  person. 

9  P  6  *  A  D  Venus  parallel,  conjunction,  sextile 
or  trine  to  the  Moon.  The  Moon  is  significator 
of  marriage  for  a  man  and  therefore  the  good 
aspects  between  Venus  the  planet  of  love  and 
the  Moon  are  good  indications  of  a  happy  mar- 
riage when  it  occurs  in  a  man's  horoscope.  But 
in  a  woman's  horoscope  these  aspects  operate 
upon  the  health,  for  the  Moon  is  the  planet  of 
fecundity  and  has  rule  over  the  female  functions 
in  particular,  wrhich  are  so  large  a  factor  in  the 
woman's  health,  and  this  is  much  strengthened 
by  them.  These  aspects  give  oratorical  ability 
with  a  fruitful  imagination,  a  love  of  pleasure, 
music  and  art.  They  give  an  engaging  person- 
ality, very  attractive  to  the  opposite  sex  be- 
cause kindly,  affectionate  and  sympathetic,  and 
they  tend  to  general  success  in  life;  though  the 
finances  may  be  fluctuating  the  person  usually 
has  sufficient  for  the  day  and  the  way. 

9  n  <?  5  Venus  square  or  opposition  to  the  Moon 
are  indications  of  trouble  in  marriage  for  a  man, 
because  the  wife  described  by  an  afflicted  Venus 
will  then  be  slovenly  and  of  dissolute  habits 
which  will  destroy  domestic  happiness.  In  a 
woman's  horoscope  they  indicate  a  disturbance 
of  the  female  functions  and  also  give  a  tendency 
to  digestive  troubles  and  poor  circulation  in  the 


234  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

horoscope  of  either  sex.  These  aspects  also  give 
a  liability  to  slander  and  public  scandal  as  the 
person  so  afflicted  is  fickle  and  inconstant  in  his 
affections,  of  a  sensual  nature  who  loves  to 
flit  from  flower  to  flower  regardless  of  the  sor- 
rows caused  by  playing  with  the  hearts  of  others. 

$  P  6  *  A  D  Mercury  parallel,  conjunction,  sextile 
or  trine  to  the  Moon  gives  a  receptive  mind  and 
a  retentive  memory,  two  very  rare  qualities  and 
therefore  these  aspects;  particularly  the  sextile 
and  trine  a.re  good  indications  of  success  in  life, 
especially  in  one  of  the  mercurial  occupations, 
literary,  clerical  or  traveling.  People  with  these 
configurations  are  usually  very  verbose,  particu- 
larly if  the  conjunction  or  trine  occurs  in  airy 
signs  or  a  sign  of  voice,  for  then  the  power  of 
expression  reaches  a  superlative  degree  and  such 
people  become  able  linguists  and  elocutionists, 
but  unless  there  is  some  steadying  influence  peo- 
ple with  aspects  of  Mercury  and  the  Moon  are 
not  reliable  because  of  their  tendency  to  change 
their  minds  repeatedly  in  the  most  unexpected 
manner.  They  are  inclined  to  look  upon  the 
bright  side  of  life  and  are  fond  of  pleasure,  par- 
ticularly travel. 

V  D  «?  5  Mercury  square  or  opposition  to  the  Moon 
gives  a  poor  memory  and  lack  of  mental  stability 
with  a  tendency  to  indecision  and  worry,  liability 
to  brain  storms  and  hysterics.  These  character- 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION     235 

istics  make  the  person  unpopular  and  as  the  say- 
ing is  "unlucky." 

*  A  D  Saturn  sextile  or  trine  to  the  Moon  im- 
parts all  the  best  saturnine  qualities  to  the  mind 
and  makes  the  person  self-reliant,  serious,  sober 
and  systematic,  careful  and  thrifty  in  business 
affairs  and  gives  success  in  life  through  tactful 
and  diplomatic  dealings  with  others.  Such  peo- 
ple are  eminently  responsible  and  trustworthy 
in  all  matters  of  honor  and  justice  and  gain  great 
esteem  in  the  community  on  that  account.  Their 
patience  and  persistence  are  inexhaustible. 

P  d  D  Saturn  parallel  or  conjunction  to  the 
Moon  is  not  always  to  be  classed  as  a  bad  aspect 
so  far  as  the  mental  qualities  go  for  in  any  cast 
it  deepens  the  mind  and  gives  greater  power  of 
concentration,  but  if  Saturn  is  strong  by  sign, 
in  Libra  or  Capricorn,  and  the  Moon  is  other- 
wise well-aspected,  this  position  will  also  impart 
the  virtues  of  Saturn  though  under  all  conditions 
it  makes  the  mind  gloomy  and  the  person  is  sub- 
ject to  periodical  spells  of  melancholy,  but  if 
Saturn  is  weak  by  sign,  especially  if  he  is  in 
Aries  and  if  the  Moon  is  otherwise  afflicted  then 
his  conjunction  is  to  be  judged  and  read  the  same 
as  the  square  and  opposition. 

The  effect  of  the  conjunction  also  depends 
upon  the  department  of  life  we  are  considering, 
for  instance,  as  already  said,  the  conjunction  of 


236  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

the  Moon  and  Saturn  is  good  for  concentration 
of  the  mind,  but  bad  for  the  digestion,  particu- 
larly in  a  woman's  horoscope;  it  has  also  the 
tendency  to  obstruct  the  menses  with  all  that 
that  implies,  and  in  a  man's  horoscope  it  indi- 
cates the  death  of  the  marriage  partner.  Similar 
distinctions  should  be  made  when  reading  the 
conjunctions  of  the  other  so-called  malefics. 

£  D  8  D  Saturn  square  or  opposition  to  the  Moon 
is  one  of  the  signatures  of  sorrow  in  life  for  it 
makes  the  mind  melancholy  and  full  of  worries 
so  that  the  person  is  constantly  carrying  an 
atmosphere  of  gloom  with  him,  and  as  thoughts 
are  things  this  attitude  of  mind  brings  about 
delays  and  disappointments  in  every  department 
of  life.  Such  a  person  will  experience  difficul- 
ties from  people  and  things  signified  by  Saturn, 
probably  parents,  and  if  he  has  money  he  will 
lose  it  and  have  difficulty  in  getting  more;  thus 
he  will  be  in  poverty  all  his  life.  He  will  make 
more  enemies  than  friends  and  become  subject 
to  slander  and  scandal,  but  the  disfavor  he  meets 
is  undoubtedly  merited  for  these  aspects  make 
the  mind  bitter  and  selfish;  such  people  are 
unscrupulous,  avaricious  and  entirely  unfeeling 
with  respect  to  others,  hence  they  are  under  the 
whiplash  of  Saturn  that  the  sorrow  and  troubles 
which  they  themselves  are  constantly  feeling  may 
make  them  more  mellow.  If  the  aspect  is  six, 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION     237 

five  or  even  four  degrees  from  being  exact  a/id 
if  Saturn  is  in  the  exaltation  sign  Libra  these 
aspects  are  not  quite  so  evil  in  the  latter  part 
of  life.  They  may  then  imply  that  the  person 
has  learned  his  lesson  and  as  a  consequence 
he  may  find  himself  in  easier  circumstances. 
The  adverse  aspects  of  Saturn  to  the  Moon  are 
very  bad  for  the  health,  particularly  in  a 
woman's  horoscope.  There  they  indicate  ob- 
structions of  the  female  functions.  In  the  man's 
horoscope  they  either  deny  marriage  or  indicate 
the  death  of  the  marriage  partner  and  their  gen- 
eral tendency  is  to  obstruct  everything  connected 
with  the  houses  and  signs  wherein  they  are 
placed  in  the  horoscope. 

P  6  *  A  D  Jupiter  parallel,  conjunction,  sextile 
or  trine  to  the  Moon  gives  an  optimistic,  noble 
and  generous  disposition.  The  open-hearted  hon- 
esty, fairness  and  friendliness  of  such  people 
makes  them  universally  popular.  The.se  aspects 
strengthen  both  the  reasoning  faculties  and  con- 
stitution ;  they  give  a  strong  mind  in  a  strong 
body  and  hence  a  powerful  personal  magnetism 
which  may  be  used  to  great  advantage  in  healing 
the  sick.  They  have  lofty  ideals  and  a  fruitful 
imagination  with  the  power  of  acquiring  wealth 
which  will  grow  greater  if  used  in  philanthropic 
enterprises  of  which  these  people  are  prone  to 
dream.  These  are  some  of  the  best  aspects  in 


238  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

•  the  gamut  and  make  for  general  success  in  life 
both  physically  and  spiritually. 

U  n  8  D  Jupiter  square  or  opposition  to  the  Moon 
impairs  the  reasoning  faculties  and  brings  the 
person  trouble  through  litigation,  lack  of  fore- 
thought and  indecision  or  dishonesty.  People 
with  these  aspects  are  too  fond  of  ostentation 
and  display,  extravagant  beyond  their  means  and 
expenditures,  prone  to  take  desperate  chances 
in  gambling  or  speculation  to  rehabilitate  their 
fortunes  and  doomed  to  loss,  slander  and  some- 
times bankruptcy  on  that  account. 

These  aspects  are  also  bad  for  health  in  a 
woman's  horoscope  especially,  indicating  digest- 
ive and  liver  troubles. 

$  *  A  D  Mars  sextile  or  trine  to  the  Moon  gives  a 
wonderful  vitality  and  a  strong  physique  so  that 
the  person  is  able  to  withstand  almost  any  other 
testimonies  of  ill-health  which  are  over-ruled  by 
these  aspects.  The  power  of  endurance  is  in- 
creased to  a  maximum  and  the  person  can  sur- 
vive hardships  to  which  people  ordinarily  suc- 
cumb. They  give  a  resolute,  courageous,  ener- 
getic and  ambitious  mind  of  a  resourceful  and 
eminently  constructive  turn,  and  they  make  the 
person  quick  but  not  precipitate  in  his  decisions. 
Thus  he  gains  the  confidence  and  esteem  of  others 
and  earns  considerable  money  but  the  nature  is 
extremely  free  and  generous  so  that  money  does 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION     239 

not  stay  by  these  people.    They  spend  it  almost 
as  fast  as  they  get  it. 

$  6  Pi)  Mars  conjunction  or  parallel  to  the  Moon 
may  be  either  good  or  bad  according  to  the  sex 
of  the  person  and  the  department  of  life  we  are 
considering.  It  strengthens  the  health  and  the 
vitality,  particularly  in  the  horoscope  of  a 
woman.  In  the  horoscope  of  a  man  it  would 
indicate  a  robust  marriage  partner  of  a  domi- 
neering nature  and .  with  respect  to  the  mind  it 
would  make  the  person  very  impulsive,  particu- 
larly if  placed  in  one  of  the  common  signs  or 
in  the  Third  or  Ninth  Houses.  It  also  gives  a 
very  bad  temper  but  not  so  bad  as  the  square 
or  opposition.  If  Mars  is  in  conjunction  or 
parallel  to  the  Moon  in  Scorpio  there  is  an  ab- 
normal sexual  desire  which  will  not  be  denied 
particularly  if  Venus  is  there  also.  It  makes 
the  nature  very  restless  and  unsettled  for  it  is 
like  mixing  fire  and  water.  In  watery  signs  it 
inclines  to  drink. 

$  D  8  D  Mars  square  or  opposition  to  the  Moon 
gives  a  very  quick  temper  with  a  tendency  to 
hasty  or  impulsive  expression  and  acts  that  may 
cause  the  person  a  great  deal  of  sorrow  and 
trouble.  These  people  resent  rules  or  regula- 
tions or  any  other  measures  that  tend  to  curb 
their  desires  or  the  gratification  of  their  appe- 
tites in  whatever  direction,  but  if  they  are  in 


240  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

authority  they  are  very  domineering  and  exact- 
ing in  their  demands  for  instant  obedience  upon 
the  part  of  others,  nor  do  they  hesitate  to  use 
whatever  physical  force  may  be  necessary  to 
compel  obedience  if  they  think  they  can  do  so 
without  too  great  danger  to  themselves.  Some- 
times they  will  even  take  desperate  chances  to 
satisfy  their  spite  and  having  an  improperly  bal- 
anced mind  they  are  foolhardy  in  their  venture- 
someness  so  that  upon  occasion  they  will  attempt 
to  do  things  which  no  one  with  a  sane  mind 
would  try.  On  account  of  the  foregoing  charac- 
teristics such  people  make  many  enemies  and 
cause  a  great  deal  of  suffering  to  others,  par- 
ticularly among  members  of  their  immediate 
family  who  cannot  very  well  get  away  from 
them.  If  these  aspects  occur  in  watery  signs, 
particularly  with  Mars  or  the  Moon  in  Pisces 
the  person  is  also  an  inveterate  drunkard.  From 
the  standpoint  of  health  they  give  a  tendency 
to  fever  and  accidents,  trouble  with  the  gen- 
erative organs  and  operations  which  are  usually 
unnecessary.  These  people  are  exceedingly 
prodigal  with  their  money  and  are  habitual  pre- 
varicators. 

V  *  A  D  Uranus  sextile  or  trine  to  the  Moon  gives 
great  originality  and  independence  to  the  mind 
which  is  quick,  intuitive  and  very  vivid  in  its- 
imagination,  hence  the  person  has  inventive  abil- 
ity and  is  attracted  to  the  occult  art  and  en- 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF'  FECUNDATION    &jt 

dowed  with  hypnotic  or  magnetic1  'powers,''  also 
the  intuitional  ability  to  study  !  and  '  practise 
astrology.  If  the  life  is  devoted  to  electricity 
as  a  vocation  the  person  will  make  a  success  of  it. 
These  aspects  also  give  a  peculiar  fascination  for 
the  opposite  sex  and  are  likely  to  lead  to  a'  clan- 
destine love  affair  or  an  unconventional  union. 

.  .     •  •  -I.;    ;-  i.-;-li  •:  ' 

6  P  ])  Uranus  conjunction  or  parallel  to  the 
Moon  gives  similar  mental  and  psychic  ,  penden- 
cies and  also  the  liability  to  irregular  love-affairs 
as  the  good  aspects  but  these  tendencies  are  not 
so  pronounced  and  a  clandestine  love-affair  gen- 
erated under  the  conjunction  of  Uranus  and  the 
Moon  may  have  distinctly  disastrous  results  sim- 
ilar to  those  mentioned  under  the  bad  aspects- 
If  the  conjunction  occurs  in  Cancer  4£  favors 
nervous  indigestion;  in  Leo  it  inclines  to  palpi- 
tation of  the  heart,  interferes  with  the  rhythm. 
of  the  heart-beat  and  gives  a  spasmodic  action. 
which  will  probably  prove  fatal  when  it  has  run. 
its  course.  In  Scorpio  it  inclines  to  perverse; 
practices;  in  Sagittarius  the  reflex  action  would 
be  felt  in  the  lungs  and  similarly  with  -the  other 
signs. 

Uranus  square  or  opposition  to  the  Moon, 
makes  the  person  erratic  and  touchy  to  a  de- 
gree, a  walking  powder  magazine  ready  to  ex- 
plode at  any  moment,  overbearing,  conceited,  in- 
tolerant and  shunned  by  all  who  can  possibly 


16 


242  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

get  out  of  his  way.  If  such  people  are  employers 
nobody  can  work  for  them  and  if  they  are  em- 
ployees nobody  will  have  them.  They  never 
remain  very  long  in  any  place,  but  are  either 
discharged  or  gave  up  their  position  on  the 
slightest  provocation.  People  with  these  aspects 
are  attracted  to  the  occult  arts  but  they  never 
make  a  success  at  it  because  of  their  erratic  men- 
tality. Like  the  other  aspects  of  Uranus  and  the 
Moon  the  square  and  opposition  also  indicates 
a  clandestine  attachment  either  on  the  part  of 
the  person  or  the  marriage  partner.  If  it  occurs 
in  the  Seventh  House  of  a  man's  horoscope  it 
proves  the  wife  untrue  so  that  public  scandal  and 
divorce  will  eventually  ensue.  The  bad  aspects 
of  the  Sun  and  Uranus  give  similar  indications 
in  the  horoscope  of  a  woman. 

W  *  A  D  Neptune  sextile  or  trine  to  the  Moon  in- 
creases the  faculty  of  imagination  to  a  superla- 
tive point,  especially  if  either  of  the  planets  are 
in  the  Ninth  House.  Then  it  favors  prophetic 
dreams  and  visions  which  bring  the  person  in 
contact  with  the  invisible  worlds.  It  indicates 
ability  in  the  occult  arts  and  success  in  their 
practice  for  it  makes  the  nature  exceedingly  in- 
spirational and  it  also  gives  a  kind  and  sympa- 
thetic disposition.  The  spiritual  qualities  men- 
tioned may  not  be  apparent  even  to  the  person 
himself  but  then  they  are  latent  and  capable  of 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION    243 

development.  It  is  also  safe  to  say  that  at  some 
time  or  other  during  the  life  people  with  these 
aspects  will  come  in  contact  with  and  be  very 
much  attracted  to  the  occult  whether  the  quali- 
ties of  the  soul  are  subsequently  developed  or  not. 

tp  6  P  D  Neptune  conjunction  or  parallel  Moon  in- 
dicates the  same  strong  psychic  faculties  as  the 
good  aspects,  particularly  if  Neptune  is  placed 
in  the  psychic  signs  Cancer  or  Pisces.  Those 
who  have  been  born  with  the  good  configurations 
of  Neptune  during  the  fourteen  years  when  it 
was  in  the  airy  scientific  sign  Gemini  are  now 
conquering  the  air  and  perfecting  scientific  in- 
vention^ which  will  make  us  marvel,  but  the 
children  who  have  been  born  under  favorable 
configurations  during  the  fourteen  years  Nep- 
tune has  been  going  through  the  psychic  sign 
Cancer  are  now  growing  up  around  us  as  a  band 
of  mystics  and  when  they  have  reached  mature 
years  they  will  astonish  us  with  their  spiritual 
insight  and  power.  Among  other  things  they 
will  develop  the  soul  of  music. 

W  D  &  t>  Neptune  square  or  opposition  to  the  Moon 
are  also  indications  of  soul  qualities  similar  to 
those  given  by  the  good  aspects,  but  under  those 
configurations  the  person  will  be  of  a  negative 
nature  and  is  apt  to  become  the  prey  of  spirit- 
controls  and  subjected  to  mediumship,  therefore 
they  should  not  attend  seances. 


CHAPTER  X. 

SATURN  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW 
Keynote:    Obstruction 

A  FRUITFUL  method  of  acquiring  knowledge  is 
by  comparison  of  similars  and  contrasts  of  oppo- 
sites;    thus    lights   and    sidelights   are   brought  out, 
which  otherwise  may  escape  attention. 

Applying  this  method  to  the  Sun  and  Saturn, 
we  remember  that  the  keyword  of  the  Sun  is  ' '  Life, ' ' 
and  at  the  vernal  equinox  when  the  Sun  is  in  Aries, 
the  sign  of  its  exaltation,  we  may  readily  note  the 
powerful  effect  of  the  crestwave  of  vital  fluid  then 
poured  over  the  earth,  Nature  is  vibrant  with  life, 
which  races  through  the  forms  of  all  kingdoms  and 
endues  them  with  such  abundance  of  vitality  that 
they  are  compelled  to  generate  in  order  to  take  care 
of  the  overflow;  Life  manifests  a,s  motion;  but  the 
keynote  of  Saturn  is  Obstruction,  therefore  that  is 
the  planet  of  decrepitude  and  decay,  and  conse- 
quently when  the  Sun  is  in  Libra,  the  sign  of  Sat- 
urn's exaltation,,  at  the  fall  equinox,  Nature  is  tired 
and  ready  for  its  wintry  sleep.  The  human  frame 
also  is  energized  by  the  solar  life  contained  in  our 
food,  which  enters  our  system  through  the  head  and 
throat,  governed  by  the  exaltation  signs  of  the  Build- 
244 


THE  MOON,  PLANET  OF  FECUNDATION     245 

ers,  the  Sun  and  Moon,  and  is  eliminated  by  the 
activity  of  the  liver  and  kidneys  ruled  by  Saturn 
and  his  exaltation  sign,  Libra. 

In  youth,  when  the  Sun  forces  surge  through  the 
frame,  assimilation  and  excretion  balance,  but  as 
time  goes  on,  "Chronos"  or  Saturn  accumulates  ob- 
structions in  the  organs  of  excretion,  and  elimina- 
tion is  gradually  restricted,  the  avenues  of  life  are 
dammed  up,  and  decrepitude  and  decay  turn  the 
scales  of  life  (Libra)  towards  the  realm  of  death. 

Similarly  in  other  departments  of  life;  where 
the  Sun  makes  the  social  favorite,  by  imbuing  us 
with  optimism  and  a  bright  sunny  smile,  Saturn 
makes  recluses  and  sours  existence  with  frowns  and 
pessimism;  where  the  Sun  furthers  our  worldly  af- 
fairs and  makes  things  run  smooth,  Saturn  causes 
provoking  delays  of  the  most  inexplicable  nature; 
all  the  world  seems  to  conspire  to  frustrate  our  plans. 

In  the  Kingdom  of  God  all  things  are  balanced 
to  produce  the  highest  ultimate  good  to  all,  and  so 
the  influence  of  Saturn  is  used  to  offset  the  exuberant 
life  of  Mars.  The  intrinsic  nature  of  Saturn  is 
obstruction;  he  is  slow  and  persistent  as  Mars  is 
impulsive  and  quick  to  change ;  he  takes  no  chances, 
but  looks  before  he  leaps,  and  his  cold,  calculating 
reason  misses  no  flaws  in  any  scheme. 

In  the  horoscope  of  a  young  soul  Mars  is  dom- 
inant and  the  man  grows  along  physical  lines  much 
as  animals  do  under  the  law  of  the  survival  of  the 
fittest,  but  gradually  the  thumbscrews  of  Saturn  are 


246  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

put  on,  squares  and  oppositions  bring  sorrow  and 
suffering;  Saturn  is  placed  above  Mars  in  the  horo- 
scope, to  frustrate  and  check  him,  till  it  seems  as  if 
every  effort  is  futile  because  of  the  Saturnian  ob- 
struction. 

Elijah  could  not  hear  the  voice  of  guidance  in 
the  fire,  the  storm  nor  the  earthquake,  but  when  the 
tumult  was  over  he  heard  "the  still  small  voice"  to 
cheer  him,  and  likewise  with  us,  while  we  yield  to 
the  unchecked  Mars  impulses  our  lives  are  too  tur- 
bulent to  admit  of  communion  with  the  Higher  Self, 
but  when  the  sorrows  of  Saturn  have  chastened  the 
unruly  Mars  spirit,  when  the  night  seems  darkest, 
as  in  Elijah's  cave,  then  we  also  may  hear  the  voice 
that  shall  speak  peace  after  the  storm. 

The  lash  of  Saturn  is  not  pleasant ;  we  sometimes 
chafe,  fret  and  fume  while  being  thus  held  in  leash, 
but  meanwhile  we  ripen  and  are  more  fitted,  when 
the  obstruction  is  removed,  to  have  or  use  that  which 
Saturn  delayed,  for  as  we  develop  physical  muscle 
by  overcoming  physical  obstacles,  so  we  cultivate  soul 
power  by  the  resistance  spiritually  engendered  by 
Saturn.  The  teaching  which  he  gives  may  be  summed 
up  in  the  motto:  "Patient  persistence  in  well  doing." 

Most  of  us  when  considering  Saturn  in  the  horo- 
scope are  inclined  to  look  upon  him  as  evil  on  ac- 
count of  the  afflictions  he  brings,  but  that  is  only  a 
one-sided  view,  for  there  is  nothing  evil  in  God's 
Kingdom.  What  appears  so  is  merely  good  in  the 
making.  When  we  remember  that  the  destiny  shown 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW         247 

by  our  horoscope  is  of  our  own  making  in  past  ex- 
istences then  we  shall  understand  that  Saturn  only 
marks  the  weak  spots  in  our  horoscope,  where  we 
are  vulnerable  and  liable  to  go  wrong.  When  the 
weak  points  have  been  brought  out  through  tempta- 
tion, and  we  have  yielded,  the  punishment  follows 
automatically  as  a  natural  and  logical  sequence,  for 
every  wrong  act  carries  in  itself  the  seed  of  the  pun- 
ishment which  brings  home  to  our  consciousness  the 
mistakes  we  have  made.  We  must  hold  clearly  before 
our  mind's  eye  that  though  the  planets  incline  to 
a  certain  line  of  action  we,  as  evolving  Egos,  are 
supposed  to  discriminate  between  good  and  evil  and 
choose  only  that  which  is  good.  If  we  fail  in  this 
respect  and  yield  to  the  temptation  the  transgression 
merits  a  just  recompense  under  the  laws  of  nature 
and  these  are  the  things  signified  by  Saturn.  We 
are  not  punished  because  we  are  tempted  but  we  are 
punished  because  we  yielded.  Supposing  for  instance 
that  Saturn  is  in  Cancer,  then  it  is  plain  that  in  the 
past  we  have  yielded  to  an  inordinate  desire  for  food, 
that  in  consequence  our  digestive  organs  have  become 
impaired  and  that  if  we  do  not  learn  frugality  and 
discrimination  in  the  choice  of  our  food  we  shall  be 
punished  by  digestive  disorders.  We  will  then  be 
tempted  to  indulge  in  dainties  and  perhaps  we  will 
have  an  aversion  for  the  simple  foods  which  are  best 
for  us.  The  temptation,  however,  will  cause  no  trou- 
ble to  the  stomach  except  we  yield  and  satisfy  our 
appetite.  Then  the  food,  and  not  an  avenging  Deity, 


248        Vv"J>HE  MESSAGE  *OF  THE   STARS 

automatically  punishes  us  until  we  learn  to  curb  our 
appetites  Similarly  in  other  departments  of  life;  if 
Saturn 'is  on*  the  Ascendant,  in  the  Third  or  Ninth 
Houses"  a'nd  'adversely  aspected  to  Mercury  or  the 
Moon  it  causes'  us  to  brood  over  our  troubles  ana 
fills  our  lives  with  gloom.  It  gives  an  obstruction 
there  to  warn  Us  that  We  should  be  more  sociable  and 
not  turn  our  faces  away  from  the  sunshine  of  life. 
God  is  at  the  helm  of  the  universe,  His  ministers  are 
continually  working  with  Us  for  good,  there  is  really 
no  reason  for  blues  and  if  we  cannot  see  it  today 
Saturn  is  going  to  tighten  his  grip  tomorrow  and 
crush  harder  and  harder  until  with  the  sheer  courage 
of  desperation  we  burst  his  bonds  and  jump  out  into 
the  joy  and  sunshine  of  life. 

If  it  were  not  for  the  chastening,  subduing  in- 
fluence of  Saturn  we  should  be  liable  to  run  amuck 
and  burn  out  the  lamp  of  life  quickly  in  the  exuber- 
ance of  spirits,  but  Saturn  is  well  symbolized  as 
Father  Time  with  his  hour-glass  and  scythe.  He  does 
not  permit  us  to  leave  the  school  of  life  until  the  time 
has  been  run  and  the  harvest  is  ripened.  Further- 
more he  gives  to  humanity  many  of  its  noblest  quali- 
ties. When  he  lays  a  restraining  hand  upon  the 
flighty  Moon  or  Mercury  the  swift  ''messenger  of 
the  gods,"  he  deepens  the  mind  and  makes  it  more 
serious  and  better  able  to  concentrate  upon  the  prob- 
lems of  life.  He  makes  the  mind  resourceful  and 
better  able  to  cope  with  the  difficulties  of  our  exist- 
ence. Tact  and  diplomacy,  method  and  system,  pa- 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF' SORROW    249 

tiencfe  and  perseverance,  honor  and  chastity,  indus- 
try and  mechanical  ability,  justice  and  fair-minded- 
ness all  come  from  Saturn  when  he  is  well-aspected 
and  it  is  only  when  we  transgress  the  principles  for 
which  he  stands  under  the  influences  generated  by 
his  adverse  aspects  that  he  punishes  us  until  he  has 
brought  us  to  our  knees  to  pray  to  our  Father  in 
Heaven  for  forgiveness  and  strength  to  overcome 
our  lower  nature. 

SATURN  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES 

T?  1  Saturn  in  the  First  House  and  well-aspected  is 
a  fortunate  sign  for  no  matter  how  a  person  may 
be  handicapped  in  the  start  of  life  the  ultimate 
success  is  assured  through  the  patience,  persist- 
ence, self-control  and  restraint  of  the  person 
through  a  well-placed  Saturn.  Such  people  have 
a  wonderful  capacity  for  work.  They  seem  never 
to  tire  and  never  to  give  up  no  matter  what  the 
obstacles.  They  have  infinite  confidence  in  them- 
selves and  their  ability  to  accomplish  that  which 
they  undertake  and  therefore  they  eventually 
win.  On  the  other  hand  when  Saturn  is  weak 
and  afflicted  it  makes  the  person  timid  and  averse 
to  undertake  responsibility,  subtile,  secretive  and 
distrustful  of  other  people,  of  a  gloomy  dispo- 
sition and  inclined  to  seek  isolation.  Such  people 
are  usually  shunned  by  others  and  doomed  to 
sorrow,  disappointment,  delay  and  general  trou- 
ble through  life.  This  is  also  a  bad  sign  for 


250  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

health,  particularly  in  the  earlier  years.  Bruises 
to  the  head,  colds,  and  if  Scorpio  is  rising  con- 
stipation; in  Leo  poor  circulation,  in  Cancer 
poor  digestion,  in  Libra  obstruction  of  the  kid- 
neys, renal  calculi  and  other  urinary  difficulties 
and  so  on  with  the  other  signs. 

T?  2  Saturn  in  the  Second  House  when  well-aspected 
and  particularly  in  its  exaltation  sign  Libra, 
brings  money  by  inheritance  and  ability  to  in- 
crease it  by  present  economy,  careful,  conserva- 
tive investments  and  similar  methods.  Some  of 
the  very  wealthiest  of  the  world 's  financiers  have 
had  Saturn  in  this  position.  They  obtain  the 
money  wherewith  to  start  from  ancestors  indi- 
cated by  Saturn  and  from  the  saturnine  ray  in 
this  house  they  derive  the  business  acumen  and 
far-sighted  methods  that  enable  them  not  only 
to  hold  their  own  as  so  many  do  whose  wealth 
comes  through  Saturn  but  also  to  increase  the 
inherited  estate.  If  Saturn  is  weak  or  afflicted, 
however,  the  life  is  sure  to  be  passed  in  poverty. 

f?  3  Saturn  in  the  Third  House  when  well-aspected 
gives  a  serious,  sober  and  thoughtful  mind, 
capable  of  concentration  and  well  able  to  grapple 
with  the  most  profound  sciences  and  other  seri- 
ous subjects  in  life.  It  gives  tact,  diplomacy, 
justice,  honesty  and  all  the  other  saturnine  vir- 
tues of  the  mind. 

When  Saturn  is  afflicted  in  the  Third  House 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW    251 

it  indicates  trouble  with  brethren,  danger  when 
traveling,  delays  and  disappointments  in  obtain- 
ing an  education.  It  also  fills  the  mind  with 
gloomy  forebodings,  worry  and  general  despond- 
ency. 

V  4  Saturn  in  the  Fourth  House,  well-aspected,  shows 
gain  from  inheritance,  also  success  from  invest- 
ments and  administration  of  houses  and  land.s, 
agriculture  or  mining  property  under  careful 
and  economical  management.  The  success  grows 
better  as  life  advances.  When  Saturn  is  afflicted 
in  the  Fourth  House  it  signifies  the  early  death 
of  one  of  the  parents,  inharmony  and  trouble 
in  the  home,  loss  of  property  and  consequent 
poverty.  This  position  whether  well  or  ill  as- 
pected  makes  the  person  a  recluse  in  the  latter 
years  of  life. 

T?  5  Saturn  in  the  Fifth  House  when  well-aspected 
by  the  Sun  and  Jupiter  would  be  good  for  specu- 
lation in  the  things  that  are  ruled  by  Saturn: 
houses,  lands  and  mines.  This  position  and  its 
aspects  would  also  give  the  person  a  chance  of 
appointment  to  public  office,  especially  in  mat- 
ters connected  with  education,  but  if  Saturn  is 
afflicted  in  the  Fifth  House  it  indicates  trouble, 
disappointment  and  delay  in  courtship,  particu- 
larly during  the  earlier  years,  or  else  the  affec- 
tions are  centered  upon  someone  who  is  much 
older  than  the  person  whose  horoscope  is  being 


252  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS7 

•judged.  It  decreases  the  number  of  children 
and  predicts  death  of  those  who  are  born,  also 
that  they  will  bring  a  great  deal  of  trouble  to 
the  person. 

i?6  Saturn  in  the  Sixth  House,  well-aspected,  gives 
the  person  ability  to  handle  employees  and  work- 
men in  general  in  a  most  efficient  manner,  for 
though  such  a  person  is  quiet  and  subdued  he 
is  at  the  same  time  firm  and  serious.  He  has 
a  way  about  him  which  employees  respect  and 
which  calls  for  instant  obedience  to  his  com- 
mands without  causing  the  resentment  called 
forth  by  a  blustering,  bellowing  Mars. 

When  Saturn  is  afflicted  in  the  Sixth  House 
it  means  a  great  deal  of  sickness  in  the  life  and 
if  in  a  weak  sign  like  Virgo  the  person  is  in 
danger  of  becoming  a  chronic  invalid,  for  once 
he  is  in  the  grip  of  sickness  the  recuperative 
powers  are  so  poor  it  is  almost  impossible  for 
him  to  recover.  The  nature  of  the  principal  ill- 
ness will  depend  upon  the  sign  that  is  on  the 
cusp  of  the  Sixth  House  or  of  the  Twelfth,  but 
usually  with  such  people  many  complications  set 
in  after  this.  Thus  a  person  with  an  afflicted 
Saturn  in  the  Sixth  House  finds  it  almost  im- 
possible to  secure  employment  and  it  is  evident 
that  such  a  person  has  indeed  a  hard  life,  being 
unable  to  earn  a  living  when  able  to  be  about. 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW    253 

J?  7  Saturn  in  the  Seventh  House  when  well-aspected 
denotes  a  marriage  partner  endowed  with  the 
saturnine  virtues,  chastity  and  discretion,  tact 
and  discrimination,  prudence  and  economy, 
which  will  be  of  great  help  to  the  person  in  build- 
ing up  his  fortunes  socially  as  well  as  financially 
and  this  is  a  very  fortunate  position  save  for  the 
fact  that  Saturn  in  the  Seventh  House,  whether 
well-aspected  or  afflicted,  indicates  the  early 
death  of  the  partner.  An  afflicted  Saturn  in  the 
Seventh  House  designates  a  glum,  gloomy,  cold 
and  disagreeable  companion  who  is  always  re- 
straining and  obstructing  the  person.  "Don't" 
is  the  word  most  frequently  on  the  tongue.  It 
also  gives  trouble  and  loss  through  litigation  and 
people  with  this  aspect  should  never  go  to  law 
or  enter  into  partnerships  for  they  will  always 
be  subject  to  underhanded  treachery. 

T?  8  Saturn  in  the  Eighth  House  when  well-aspected 
or  placed  in  its  own  signs,  Capricorn  or  Libra, 
gives  gain  by  marriage  or  inheritance  with  the 
ability  to  properly  care  for  whatever  wealth  is 
acquired  in  that  manner.  It  is  also  a  sign  of 
long  life  and  death  from  natural  causes,  but  if 
Saturn  is  afflicted  in  the  Eighth  House  or  weak 
by  sign,  especially  in  Aries  or  Cancer,  the  finan- 
cial prospects  of  the  person  will  be  decidedly 
worse  after  marriage  and  chronic  debility  may 
be  expected. 


254  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

V  9  Saturn  in  the  Ninth  House  when  well-aspected 
gives  a  deep,  serious  and  thoughtful  mind  with 
ability  and  inclination  to  the  study  of  law, 
science  and  philosophy,  physics  or  metaphysics. 
It  is  a  splendid  position  for  a  president  of  a  cor- 
poration or  college,  a  judge  or  a  divine.  Such 
people  always  make  their  mark  in  the  world,  the 
scope  being  naturally  dependent  upon  the  na- 
ture of  the  aspect  and  the  line  of  endeavor  se- 
lected by  the  person. 

When  Saturn  is  afflicted  in  the  Ninth  House 
he  makes  a  narrow-minded  bigot,  critical  and 
sarcastic;  he  also  gives  liability  to  trouble  and 
loss  through  law,  danger  on  voyages  and  trouble 
in  foreign  lands. 

f?  10  Saturn  in  the  Tenth  House  shows  a  strong 
self-reliant  and  ambitions  spirit  with  the  pa- 
tience and  perseverance  which  mark  a  person 
destined  to  rise  in  life.  It  is  the  signature  of 
the  self-made  man,  self-made  by  all  the  sterling 
saturnine  virtues,  tact,  foresight,  honesty  and 
systematic  application  to  business.  Such  people 
are  destined  to  become  captains  of  industry,  pres- 
idents of  banks  or  hold  other  high  positions  in- 
volving great  responsibility. 

When  Saturn  is  afflicted  or  weak  by  sign 
he  nevertheless  gives  the  person  who  has  him 
in  the  Tenth  House  ability  to  rise,  but  when  he 
does  rise  it  is  by  underhanded  trickery  and  ques- 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW    255 

tionable  business  methods  which  in  the  end  bring 
exposure,  downfall  and  dishonor.  It  is  said  that 
Napoleon  had  Saturn  in  the  Tenth  House. 

11  Saturn   in   the    Eleventh   House   when    well- 
aspected    gives    friends    among    the    aged    and 
wealthy  who  will  be  of  benefit  to  the  person  in 
helping  him  to  realize  his  hopes,  wishes  and  am- 
bitions, but  when  Saturn  is  afflicted  he  should 
beware  of  seeking  friends  older  than  himself,  for 
they  will  always  endeavor  to  make  use  of  him 
for  personal  ends  and  desert  him  when  he  is  no 
longer  of  use  to  them. 

12  Saturn  in  the  Twelfth  House  gives  a  secluded 
life  in  a  position  or  occupation  where  the  person 
does  not  come  into  contact  with  the  general  pub- 
lic.    When  well-aspected  it  is  good  for  success 
in    an    official    capacity    in    public    institutions, 
asylums,    hospitals   or   prisons.      When   afflicted 
there  is  danger  of  being  bed-ridden  for  many 
years,  imprisoned,  or  employed  in  obscure  posi- 
tions. 

SATURN  IN  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS. 

T  Saturn  in  Aries  is  weak  and  therefore  unable 
to  express  his  best  qualities  to  their  full  and  le- 
gitimate extent  even  if  well-aspected.  Neverthe- 
less he  gives  a  minor  measure  of  poise,  self- 
reliance,  discretion  and  tact,  industry,  patience 


256  <••  THE   MESSAGE  OF   THE   STARS 

and  perseverance.  But  when  Saturn  is  afflicted 
in  Aries  the  person  is  quickly  angered  and  apt  to 
hold  spite,  of  a  jealous,  malicious  and  vindictive 
disposition. 

T?  8  Saturn  in  Taurus  when  well-aspected  makes  a 
person  slow  of  speech  but  what  he  says  will  have 
weight  and  be  well  worth  hearing.  -It  .gives  a 
quiet  disposition,  slow  to  decide,  but  stubborn  in 
maintaining  a  position  once  taken.  These  people 
are  close-mouthed,  and  may  be  trusted  to  keep 
their  own  and  other  people 's  secrets  well.  When 
Saturn  is  afflicted  in  Taurus,  particularly  by 
Mercury  he  always  causes  trouble  with  the  speech 
and  gives  a  quick  temper,  especially  if  Mars  is 
also  an  afflicting  planet.  This  position  makes 
financial  difficulties. 

T?  n  Saturn  in  Gemini  when  well-aspected  gives  a 
deep,  one-pointed,  orderly  and  scientific  mind, 
adaptable  to  circumstances  and  able  to  cope  with 
all  the  exigencies  of  life.  Love  of  mathematics 
is  usually  pronounced  and  when  literature  is 
taken  up  as  a  vocation  the  more  serious  branches 
devoted  to  industrial  and  mechanical  subjects 
are  preferred.  When  Saturn  is  afflicted  in  Gem- 
ini, it  gives  trouble  through  brothers  and  sisters, 
literature  and  law,  danger  on  short  journeys. 
An  afflicted  Saturn  in  Gemini  also  gives  trouble 
with  the  lungs.  Such  people  should  therefore  be 
particularly  careful  not  to  catch  cold. 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW    257 

Saturn  in  Cancer  is  always  weak  and  his  vir- 
tues therefore  find  it  difficult  to  express  them- 
selves when  he  is  in  this  position.  Nevertheless 
he  gives  reliable  judgment  concerning  houses 
lands,  mines  etc.,  and  gains  by  investing  in  these 
things  when  well  aspected,  he  favors  thrift,  eco- 
nomy and  solid  comfort  in  the  home  with  quiet, 
peaceful  and  comfortable  conditions  in  the  latter 
part  of  life.  He  makes  the  person  frugal  and 
gives  a  good  control  of  the  appetite.  But  when 
afflicted  he  indicates  domestic  infelicity,  the  per- 
son being  held  back  in  life  by  a  gloomy  kill- joy 
partner  who  is  always  restraining  every  ambi- 
tious thought.  Trouble,  sorrow  and  disappoint- 
ment increase  as  the  life  advances  and  to  this  is 
added  ill-health,  for  Saturn  in  Cancer  indicates 
that  the  stomach  is  weak  and  the  gums  subject  to 
pyorrho?a,  hence  there  is  inability  to  properly 
digest  the  food,  so  that  unless  such  people  have 
sufficient  will  to  curb  their  appetite.s  they  be- 
come the  victims  of  chronic  indigestion.  Saturn 
in  Cancer  also  indicates  a  religious  tendency 
and  an  inclination  toward  study  of  the  deeper' 
sciences. 

Saturn  in  Leo  when  well-aspected  gives  favor 
from  people  higher  in  the  social  scale  and  success 
in  obtaining  public  appointments  where  the 
Saturnine  virtues,  tact,  diplomacy,  discretion 
and  system,  honor  and  executive  ability  are  re- 


258  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

quired.  The  constitution  of  these  people  is  not 
overly  strong  but  they  may  maintain  perfect 
health  by  the  conservation  of  energy  as  indicated 
by  Saturn.  When  Saturn  is  afflicted  in  Leo  how- 
ever, they  are  cruel  and  quick-tempered,  jealous, 
and  do  not  scruple  to  stoop  to  underhanded  meth- 
ods to  satisfy  an  ambition.  This  position  also 
indicates  heart  trouble. 

T?TTE  Saturn  in  Virgo  gives  a  studious,  deep,  scien- 
tific mind  fond  of  studying  the  deeper  problems 
of  life.  It  indicates  an  innate  ability  to  manage 
others.  It  gives  a  thrifty,  economical  and  frugal 
nature,  but  when  Saturn  is  afflicted  in  Virgo  the 
mind  usually  centers  upon  disease  and  the  person 
becomes  a  confirmed  hypochondriac.  These  peo- 
ple are  the  best  customers  of  the  patent  medicine 
vendors  for  most  of  their  ills  are  usually  imag- 
inary. This  position  does  however,  carry  with  it 
a  liability  to  intestinal  diseases. 

T?  =2=  Saturn  in  Libra  is  exalted  and  very  strong  and 
therefore  his  good  aspects  bring  out  all  the  fine 
saturnine  qualities  and  on  that  account  secures 
for  the  person  public  esteem  and  recognition. 
The  marriage  partner  is  chaste  and  pure  as 
gold.  This  position  also  brings  good  health  ana 
long  life,  but  when  Saturn  is  afflicted  in  Libra 
the  marriage  partner  is  either  treacherous  or  re- 
moved by  an  early  death.  If  the  person  goes  to 
law  he  will  lose,  become  the  object  of  public  dis- 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW    259 

favor    and    he    will    also    be   subject  to  urinary 
troubles. 

T?  7T\.  Saturn  in  Scorpio  when  well-aspected  gives  a 
rare  mechanical  turn  to  the  mind,  a  resourceful- 
ness under  the  most  difficult  conditions,  an  indom- 
itable courage  and  a  patient  persistence  before 
which  even  the  most  difficult  construction  prob- 
lems must  give  way.  Hence  such  people  make 
exceedingly  able  engineers  and  are  invaluable 
in  all  pioneer  undertakings,  they  blend  the  fire 
of  Mars  with  the  forethought  of  Saturn  and  are 
therefore  invincible.  They  gain  by  legacy,  econ- 
omy and  thrift  and  their  financial  fortunes  are 
much  improved  after  marriage.  Good  health 
and  a  long  life  are  also  indicated,  but  when  Sat- 
urn is  afflicted  in  Scorpio  the  marriage  partner 
is  poor,  dull,  egotistical  and  exacting  and  the 
person  is  liable  to  worry  and  ill-health ;  constipa- 
tion and  piles  are  the  basic  causes  which  then 
affect  the  nerves  and  the  whole  system. 

J?  J.  Saturn  in  Sagittarius  when  well-aspected  gives 
a  charitable  and  philanthropic  disposition  with 
a  desire  to  elevate  humanity  by  self-help  under 
just  laws  and  true  religious  impulse.  It  couples 
all  the  saturnine  virtues  with  the  benevolent 
Jupiterian  spirit  of  aspiration  so  that  such  peo- 
ple always  aim  to  work  for  the  public  good 
according  to  their  ability  and  station  in  life. 
Therefore  they  are  trusted,  honored,  respected 


260  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

and  in  much  demand  for  positions  where  these 
qualities  are  of  value,  in  social,  industrious  or 
religious  circles.  When  Saturn  is  afflicted  in 
Sagittarius  he  makes  the  person  insincere,  cyn- 
ical and  sarcastic,  ambitious  to  fill  positions  of 
trust  and  honor  but  for  selfish  purposes,  liable 
to  become  involved  in  law  and  lose  thereby.  This 
position  also  affects  the  lungs  and  the  person 
should  be  very  careful  not  to  catch  cold. 

T?  VS  Saturn  in  Capricorn  when  well-aspected  is 
strong  and  therefore  his  virtues  are  also  pro- 
nounced. Honesty  and  integrity  as  staunch  as 
the  Rock  of  Gibraltar  and  the  determination  to 
work  toward  the  desired  goal  no  matter  how  long 
it  may  take.  Hence  in  spite  of  all  handicaps  and 
obstacles  people  with  a  well-aspected  Saturn  in 
Capricorn  ultimately  achieve  a  large  measure  of 
success  and  are  generally  esteemed  by  their  con- 
temporaries. But  when  Saturn  is  afflicted  in 
Capricorn  the  mind  is  gloomy  and  the  person 
sees  life  from  a  biased  point  of  view.  There  is  a 
general  sense  of  dissatisfaction  which  sometimes 
develops  into  a  diseased  mind.  These  people  are 
cunning,  underhanded  and  not  to  be  trusted. 

T?  £?  Saturn  in  Aquarius  when  well-aspected  gives 
a  humane  outlook  upon  life,  a  sympathetic  and 
friendly  disposition,  very  distinct  and  deliberate 
speech  and  a  seriousness  in  all  affairs  of  life. 
These  people  therefore  make  friends  among  the 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW    261 

aged,  the  wealthy  and  the  intellectual  who  are 
able  to  help  them  rise  in  life.  But  when  Saturn 
is  afflicted  in  Aquarius  it  makes  the  disposition 
shrewd,  cunning  and  alert  to  prey  upon  others 
by  gaining  their  confidence  and  friendship  and 
such  people  therefore  sink  to  the  lower  levels 
of  society.  This  position  also  carries  with  it  a 
tendency  to  heart  trouble  and  varicose  veins. 

T?  X  Saturn  in  Pisces  when  well-aspected  gives  a 
tendency  to  success  in  some  quiet  peaceful  line  of 
life  where  the  person  does  not  come  into  contact 
with  the  public,  such  as  laboratory  or  research 
work  or  in  connection  with  institutions  for  the 
care  of  wards  of  the  community,  they  are  reg- 
ular "home-bodies"  but  when  Saturn  is  afflicted 
in  Pisces  it  gives  danger  of  confinement  by  a 
chronic  disease  or  liability  to  imprisonment.  The 
person  makes  many  enemies  who  will  be  persis- 
tent in  their  persecution  of  him. 

THE  ASPECTS  OF  SATURN. 

O  *  A  i?  The  Sun  sextile  or  trine  Saturn  endows 
the  person  who  is  fortunate  enough  to  have  it 
with  some  of  the  finest  faculties  in  the  gamut, 
for  it  brings  out  the  best  qualities  in  the  two 
planets.  It  gives  foresight,  method  and  organ- 
izing ability  with  the  moral  stamina  to  carry 
any  project  determined  on  to  a  successful  con- 
clusion despite  delays  and  obstacles.  Yet  the 


262  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

person  makes  no  enemies  in  so  doing,  for  this 
configuration  also  makes  him  the  soul  of  honor, 
kind  and  considerate;  he  would  never  stoop  to 
do  anything  mean  for  he  is  sincere  and  just  in 
his  dealings  with  all  men,  but  on  the  other  hand, 
when  he  believes  a  certain  course  of  action  to 
be  right  he  will  never  swerve  therefrom  though 
heaven  and  earth  be  moved  against  him.  These 
aspects  bring  success  in  political  or  judicial  po- 
sitions, also  in  connection  with  mining  or  agri- 
culture. The  person  often  benefits  by  legacy, 
but  recognition  and  success  is  generally  delayed 
till  middle  life. 

O  6  P J?  The  Sun  conjunction  or  parallel  Saturn. 
This  aspect  has  a  very  detrimental  effect  upon 
health,  especially  in  the  common  signs  where  the 
resistance  is  fundamentally  low;  in  Gemini,  Sag- 
ittarius and  Pisces  it  gives  a  tendency  to  tuber- 
culosis. It  does  least  damage  in  the  fixed  signs 
where  the  resistance  is  greatest,  but  when  sick- 
ness does  get  a  grip  on  the  person  it  hangs  on 
like  grim  death,  for  this  configuration  lessens 
the  power  of  the  body  to  throw  off  disease 
quickly,  hence  recuperation  is  very  slow.  This  is 
especially  true  in  a  man 's  horoscope ;  in  a 
woman's  figure  it  affects  her  husband's  health. 

OG<?  *?  The  Sun  square  or  opposition  to  Saturn. 
These  aspects  are  adverse  to  that  which  is  gen- 
erally termed  success,  but  they  give  an  abund- 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW         263 

ance  of  experience,  so  they  are  excellent  from 
the  standpoint  of  the  soul.  It  may  truly  be  said 
of  the  person  who  has  them  that  "the  best-laid 
plans  of  mice  and  men  gang  aft  agley, "  for  no 
matter  how  carefully  he  may  plan  his  affairs 
he  will  be  subjected  to  delays  and  meet  obstacles 
which  will  thwart  his  desires;  his  marriage  often 
is  unhappy  and  usually  ends  in  divorce  or  early 
death  of  the  partner ;  there  is  difficulty  in  finding 
and  keeping  employment,  trouble  with  employ- 
ers and  authorities,  a  feeling  as  if  he  is  held  in 
leash  all  his  life  and  denied  expression  in  any 
direction.  These  are  the  outward  experiences 
but  they  are  generated  by  the  inner  nature,  and 
until  that  changes  he  must  suffer  the  whiplash 
of  necessity.  In  the  first  place  such  a  person 
has  a  tendency  to  crawl  into  a  shell  and  shut 
himself  in  and  others  out.  He  is  pessimistic  and 
a  kill- joy,  has  little  or  no  regard  for  the  feelings 
of  others  and  is  very  obstinate.  In  the  horo- 
scope of  a  woman  it  signifies  marriage  to  one 
much  older,  a  person  who  will  hold  her  in  a 
very  tight  rein;  it  augurs  death  of  the  husband 
and  often  several  marriages  which  are  terminated 
by  death  or  divorce. 

These  configurations  often  bring  legacies, 
but  either  there  is  trouble  and  litigation  over  the 
bequests,  or  the  person  squanders  the  estate  after 
he  receives  it.  If  Saturn  is  in  Libra,  his  exalta- 
tion-sign, the  latter  part  of  the  life  may  be  better 


264  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

because  the  person  has  taken  the  lessons  of  life 
to  heart  and  mended  his  ways. 

9  *  A  T?  Venus  sextile  or  trine  to  Saturn.  The 
good  qualities  of  Venus  are  love  and  affection 
and  the  good  qualities  of  Saturn  are  tact,  di- 
plomacy, method  and  system,  justice,  thrift  and 
economy,  and  we  may  therefore  judge  that  when 
these  two  planets  are  configurated  in  good  as- 
pect they  make  the  person  faithful  and  true,  just 
and  honorable,  diplomatic  and  tactful,  system- 
atic and  methodical,  qualities  which  make  for 
success  in  all  departments  of  life.  Therefore  a 
person  with  these  aspects  will  be  much  sought 
as  a  friend  and  adviser,  or  a  person  to  be  trusted 
with  any  commission  requiring  sterling  honesty 
and  ability.  It  makes  him  simple  in  his  tastes 
and  of  unimpeachable  morality.  Hence  it  is 
what  one  may  call  one  of  the  luckiest  aspects  in 
the  gamut. 

$  P  6  D  <5"  ^  Venus  parallel,  conjunction,  square 
or  opposition  to  Saturn  brings  out  the  evil  quali- 
ties of  the  two  planets  and  troubles  which  are 
thus  generated  usually  come  through  the  per- 
son's relations  with  the  opposite  sex.  It  makes 
him  underhanded  and  scheming  to  gratify  his 
passions,  often  in  an  unusual  manner,  and  his 
perverted  desires  are  usually  directed  against 
someone  who  is  much  younger  than  himself.  If 
regular  marriage  relations  are  entered  into  such 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW    265 

a  person  is  often  a  demon  in  jealousy  which 
makers  life  a  burden  for  the  marriage  partner  on 
account  of  his  suspicious  nature.  People  with 
these  afflictions  are  also  stingy  in  all  money  mat- 
ters and  exceedingly  avaricious.  They  have 
very  poor  business  judgment  and  are  therefore 
liable  to  losses,  failure  and  bankruptcy.  During 
the  earlier  years  people  with  these  configura- 
tions should  beware  of  dealings  with  older  people 
who  will  be  prone  to  take  advantage  of  them,  but 
later  on  it  will  be  their  turn  to  prey  upon  nu. 
young. 

A  !?  Mercury  sextile  or  trine  to  Saturn  acts 
as  a  brake  upon  the  flighty  mind  and  gives  it 
a  seriousness,  depth  and  concentration  which  is 
of  inestimable  value  in  life.  The  forethought 
and  profound  reasoning  ability  indicated  by 
these  aspects  insure  success  in  whatever  voca- 
tion the  person  may  pursue.  The  patient  per- 
pistence  which  permits  no  temporary  failure  to 
stand  in  the  way  of  ultimate  success,  the  caution 
and  diplomacy  make  such  people  invincible  in 
the  long  run.  Therefore  they  generally  become 
prominent  in  connection  with  some  serious  en- 
terprise such  as  secret  societies,  the  church  or 
even  in  politics.  They  are  in  demand  for  high 
positions  where  a  steady  hand  is  required  on  the 
helm.  But  they  do  not  usually  shine  for  they  are 
very  quiet,  subdued  and  serious  in  their  manner 


266  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

and  demeanor.  They  are  absolutely  honest, 
hence  they  make  the  very  finest  judges  obtain- 
able. 

$  6  P  ^  Mercury  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Saturn. 
These  aspects  also  give  depth  to  the  mind  and 
forethought,  together  with  all  the  other  good 
qualities  enumerated  as  resulting  from  the  sex- 
tile  and  the  trine,  if  Mercury  is  otherwise  well- 
aspected ;  but  not  in  so  full  a  measure,  or  at  any 
rate  the  person  does  not  seem  to  be  able  to  ex- 
ternalize them  as  readily,  hence  does  not  meet 
the  same  assured  success  as  given  by  the  defin- 
itely good  aspects;  he  also  suffers  from  the  tend- 
ency to  melancholy  denoted  by  the  square  or 
opposition,  especially  if  the  aspect  occurs  in  one 
of  the  common  signs  or  in  Capricorn,  and  if  in 
Gemini  it  interferes  sadly  with  the  dexterity; 
srch  people  drop  everything  they  take  into  their 
hands.  These  aspects  also  give  an  embarrassing 
timidity  and  if  Mercury  is  afflicted  the  unde- 
sirable qualities  enumerated  as  resulting  from 
the  square  or  opposition  may  be  looked  for. 

%  G  8  *?  Mercury  square  or  opposition  to  Saturn 
makes  the  person  subject  to  trouble  and  delays 
all  through  life.  He  is  thwarted  on  every  hand 
by  slander  and  secret  enemies  and  this  condi- 
tion in  time  makes  him  bitter  and  sarcastic  witn 
the  additional  consequence  that  he  is  shunned 
by  all  who  can  possibly  get  away  from  him,  and 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW    267 

that  in  time  leads  him  to  become  a  recluse  who 
shuts  himself  away  to  brood  over  his  troubles. 
Such  a  person  sometimes  becomes  a  subject  of 
melancholia  of  a  most  piteous  character.  These 
aspects  also  make  the  person  cunning  and  un- 
truthful. They  give  the  same  desire  to  study 
the  occult  conferred  by  the  good  aspects,  but 
there  is  the  great  difference  that  while  the  good 
aspects  of  Saturn  and  Mercury  incline  to  the 
study  of  occultism  from  unselfish  motives  the 
bad  aspects  impel  him  to  ferret  out  nature's 
secrets  for  personal  power  or  gain. 

*  A  *?  The  Moon  sextile  or  trine  to  Saturn  im- 
parts all  the  best  saturnine  qualities  to  the  mind ; 
it  makes  the  person  self-reliant,  serious,  sober 
and  systematic,  careful  and  thrifty  in  business 
affairs  and  gives  success  in  life  through  tactful 
and  diplomatic  dealings  with  others.  Such  peo- 
ple are  eminently  reasonable  and  trustworthy  in 
all  matters  of  honor  and  justice  and  gain  great 
esteem  in  the  community  on  that  account.  Their 
patience  and  persistence  are  inexhaustible. 

6  P  T?  The  Moon  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Sat- 
urn is  not  always  to  be  classed  as  a  bad  aspect 
so  far  as  the  mental  qualities  go,  for  in  any  case 
it  deepens  the  mind  and  gives  greater  power  of 
concentration,  but  if  Saturn  is  strong  by  sign, 
in  Libra  or  Capricorn,  and  the  Moon  is  otherwise 
well-aspected  this  position  also  will  impart  the 


268  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

virtues  of  Saturn,  though  under  all  conditions 
it  makes  the  mind  gloomy  and  the  person  is  sub- 
ject to  periodical  spells  of  melancholy;  but  if 
Saturn  is  weak  by  sign,  especially  if  he  is  in 
Aries  and  if  the  Moon  is  otherwise  afflicted,  then 
his  conjunction  is  to  be  judged  and  read  the 
same  as  the  square  and  opposition.  The  effect 
of  the  conjunction  also  depends  upon  the  de- 
partment of  life  we  are  considering ;  for  instance, 
the  conjunction  of  the  Moon  and  Saturn  is  good 
for  concentration  of  the  mind,  but  bad  for  the 
digestion,  particularly  in  a  woman's  horoscope, 
where  it  has  also  the  tendency  to  obstruct  the 
menses  with  all  that  that  implies,  and  in  a  man's 
horoscope  it  indicates  the  death  of  the  marriage 
partner.  Similar  distinctions  should  be  made 
when  reading  the  conjunctions  of  the  other  so- 
called  malefics. 

D  []  8  *>  The  Moon  square  or  opposition  to  Saturn 
is  one  of  the  signatures  of  sorrow  in  life,  for  it 
makes  the  mind  melancholy  and  full  of  worries 
so  that  the  person  is  constantly  carrying  an  at- 
mosphere of  gloom  with  him  and  as  thoughts  are 
things  this  attitude  of  mind  brings  about  delays 
and  disappointments  in  every  department  of  life. 
Such  people  will  experience  difficulties  from  per- 
sons and  things  signified  by  Saturn,  probably 
parents,  and  if  he  has  money  he  will  lose  it  and 
have  difficulty  in  getting  more.  Thus  he  will  be 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW         269 

in  poverty  all  his  life.  He  will  make  more  ene- 
mies than  friends  and  become  subject  to  slander 
and  scandal,  but  the  disfavor  he  meets  is  un- 
doubtedly merited  for  these  aspects  make  the 
mind  bitter  and  selfish  and  such  people  are  un- 
scrupulous, avaricious  and  entirely  unfeeling 
with  respect  to  others,  hence  they  are  under  the 
whiplash  of  Saturn  that  the  sorrow  and  troubles 
which  they  themselves  are  constantly  feeling  may 
make  them  more  mellow.  If  the  aspect  is  six, 
five  or  even  four  degrees  from  being  exact  and 
if  Saturn  is  in  his  exaltation  sign  Libra  these 
aspects  are  not  quite  so  evil  in  the  latter  part 
of  life.  They  may  then  imply  that  the  person 
has  learned  his  lesson  and  as  a  consequence  he 
may  find  himself  in  easier  circumstances.  The 
adverse  aspects  of  Saturn  to  the  Moon  are  very 
bad  for  the  health,  particularly  in  the  woman's 
horoscope.  There  they  indicate  obstructions  of 
the  female  functions.  In  the  man's  horoscope 
they  either  deny  marriage  or  indicate  the  death 
of  the  marriage  partner  and  their  general  tend- 
ency is  to  obstruct  everything  connected  with 
the  houses  and  signs  wherein  they  are  placed 
in  the  horoscope. 

*  A  ^  Jupiter  sextile  or  trine  to  Saturn  gives 
a  strong  character  with  a  deep  and  profoundly 
philosophical  mind,  a  benevolent  disposition  with 
a  strong  sense  of  justice  and  fair  play.  All  the 


270  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

virtues  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  are  combined  by 
these  aspects  and  people  in  whose  horoscope  they 
are  found  will  consequently  gain  honor  and  es- 
teem in  the  community  where  they  are.  They 
will  be  looked  upon  as  the  pillars  of  society  and 
gain  prosperity  commensurate  with  the  environ- 
ment in  which  they  are  placed,  for  these  aspects 
give  sound  ^financial  judgment,  the  ability  to 
grasp  opportunity  when  it  is  met,  benevolence, 
devotion  to  duty,  religion  and  all  good  objects 
in  life. 

U  P  6  fy  Jupiter  parallel  or  conjunction  to  Saturn 
has  the  same  beneficent  influence  as  the  sextile 
or  trine,  though  not  in  as  great  a  measure  and 
if  Jupiter  is  weak  by  sign  or  otherwise  afflicted 
the  aspects  will  probably  count  for  very  little, 
but  in  that  case  its  effect  upon  the  arterial  circu- 
lation will  be  obstructive,  giving  a  tendency  to 
schlerosis  of  the  arteries  the  same  as  the  oppo- 
sition and  square. 

U  D  <9  ^  Jupiter  square  or  opposition  to  Saturn 
gives  a  diffident,  vacillating  mind  unable  to  form 
decisions,  always  distrustful  of  others,  indolent 
and  inclined  to  drift  with  the  tide,  often  a  ward 
of  society  either  in  the  poor-house  or  the  prison, 
for  the  character  is  basically  dishonest.  The.se 
aspects  also  give  a  tendency  to  arterio-schlerosis. 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW    271 

$  *  A  J?  Mars  sextile  or  trine  to  Saturn  gives  a 
capable,  determined  and  energetic  nature  capa- 
ble of  intense  and  sustained  action  and 
obtaining  unusual  results  thereby.  The  execu- 
tive ability,  dominant  forcefulness  and  endur- 
ance of  these  people  is  remarkable  and  conse- 
quently they  are  constantly  accomplishing  what 
others  cannot  achieve.  On  account  of  these  qual- 
ities they  always  rise  to  prominent  positions  and 
are  much  esteemed  on  account  of  their  ability 
but  seldom  liked  for  these  aspects  also  make  the 
character  cruel  and  hard.  They  give  a  strong 
physique  and  general  good  health. 

$  6  PCU  8  V  Mars  conjunction,  parallel,  square  or 
opposition  to  Saturn.  These  are  thoroughly  bad 
aspects  indicating  a  selfish,  violent,  harsh  and 
cruel  nature,  quick-tempered  and  vindictive,  ab- 
solutely dishonest  and  untruthful,  unscrupulous 
and  liable  to  public  disgrace  and  imprisonment, 
also  to  accident  and  a  violent  death,  but  if  one 
of  the  planets  is  essentially  dignified  or  exalted 
the  evil  influence  is  not  so  strong.  It  should 
also  be  remembered  that  such  serious  defects 
do  not  result  from  one  aspect  alone  and  if  the 
other  configurations  in  the  horoscope  are  good 
the  foregoing  delineation  will  only  apply  in  a 
very  mild  measure. 

#  *  A  T?  Uranus  sextile  or  trine  to  Saturn  is  for- 
tunate for  a  public  career  in  an  official  capacity 


272  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

for  it  gives  ambition  and  determination  with 
ability  to  concentrate  upon  large  problems  and 
exercise  authority,  plan  and  systematize.  It 
strengthens  the  intuition  so  that  such  people  are 
guided  by  an  interior  insight  when  new  and  im- 
portant steps  have  to  be  taken,  therefore  they 
are  in  demand  and  find  positions  with  large  cor- 
porations where  they  win  their  way  through 
sheer  ability.  The  mind  is  both  mechanical  and 
ingenious,  hence  this  position  often  denotes  the 
successful  inventor,  particularly  along  the  lines 
of  electricity. 

J?  6  P  T?  Uranus  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Saturn 
has  an  influence  like  the  good  aspects  if  the  plan- 
ets are  elevated,  in  angles,  essentially  dignified 
or  exalted,  as  Saturn  in  Libra  and  Capricorn  or 
Uranus  in  Aquarius  or  Scorpio,  but  if  the  con- 
junction occurs  in  signs  where  either  of  the  plan- 
ets are  weak,  like  Aries,  Taurus,  Cancer  or  Leo 
then  the  influence  will  be  detrimental  and  should 
be  judged  the  same  as  the  square  or  opposition. 

t  Uranus  square  or  opposition  to  Saturn 
gives  an  unscrupulous,  dishonest  nature  with  an 
extremely  violent  temper.  The  outbursts  are  as 
sudden  as  a  bolt  from  the  blue  and  exhaust  the 
person  completely.  These  people  are  very  ec- 
centric and  look  at  everything  from  a  peculiar 
angle;  they  are  treacherous,  idle,  indolent  and 
altogether  dangerous  to  the  community.  These 


SATURN,  THE  PLANET  OF  SORROW    273 

aspects  also  indicate  chronic  or  incurable  diseases 
according  to  the  signs  wherein  they  are  placed, 
but  as  said,  if  the  other  indications  in  the  horo- 
scope are  good  the  influence  of  a  single  aspect 
will  not  bring  out  such  evil  characteristics  and 
therefore  the  whole  horoscope  is  to  be  carefully 
considered  before  judging  the  influences  enu- 
merated for  they  may  be  materially  minimized 
by  favorable  indications  in  the  horoscope. 

W  *  A  !?  Neptune  sextile  or  trine  to  Saturn  is  good 
for  success  in  worldly  affairs  for  it  brings  out 
the  saturnine  virtues — honor,  self-reliance,  de- 
termination, etc.,  by  which  the  person  gains  the 
confidence  and  esteem  of  others,  but  the  prin- 
cipal effect  is  spiritual  and  therefore  only 
felt  by  those  who  are  able  to  re.spond  because  of 
other  aspects  in  the  horoscope.  To  them  it  gives 
the  ability  to  delve  deeply  into  occult  and  mys- 
tical subjects,  also  to  become  proficient  in  the 
art  and  practice  of  them. 

^  6  P  *?  Neptune  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Saturn 
has  the  same  effect  as  the  good  aspects  when  it 
occurs  in  a  sign  where  either  of  the  planets  are 
strong  as  Neptune  is  in  Cancer  and  Pisces  and 
Saturn  in  Libra  and  Capricorn. 

W  D  <?  ^  Neptune  square  or  opposition  to  Saturn 
lays  the  person  liable  to  loss  by  deception,  treach- 
ery or  fraud. 

18 


CHAPTER  XL 
JUPITER  THE  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE 

FROM  each  of  the  divine  Hierarchies  which  have 
ministered  at  the  birth  and  evolution  of  humanity 
we  have  received  certain  qualities  and  faculties  upon 
which  we  are  being  nursed  from  nescience  to  om- 
niscience and  from  impotence  to  omnipotence  in  life's 
great  school.  From  the  Lords  of  Venus  we  received 
the  priceless  gift  of  love  which  links  humanity  in  the 
tenderest  affection  of  varying  degrees  and  makes  life 
beautiful.  From  the  Lords  of  Mercury  we  received 
the  no  less  valuable  gift  of  mind  which  enables  us  to 
conquer  the  material  world  and  provide  ourselves 
with  the  comforts  of  life,  but  something  more  is 
needed.  The  divine  spark  within  us  is  ever  seeking 
an  outlet  and  the  greater  the  two  qualities  of  love 
and  intellect  grow  the  stronger  the  upward  urge,  but 
this  cannot  be  fully  satisfied  either  if  the  Spirit 
seeks  to  raise  itself  to  its  divine  Source  through  the 
love  nature  expressed  by  Venus  and  culminating  in 
its  higher  octave  Uranus.  The  religious  fervor  then 
expresses  itself  as  devotion  of  the  most  sublime  na- 
ture but  there  is  still  a  lack.  Feeling  without  knowl- 
edge is  incomplete.  Nor  can  the  inner  urge  be  sat- 
isfied if  through  the  mercurial  channel  of  intellect 
it  attempts  to  raise  itself  to  the  spiritual  perception 
274 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       275 

of  Neptune  the  higher  octave  of  Mercury,  for  though 
the  intellect  be  sharp  as  a  razor  it  is  of  no  account 
when  it  is  devoid  of  love.  It  therefore  follows  that 
only  by  ihe  wedding  of  love  and  intellect  can  wisdom 
be  born.  The  mercurial  knowledge  in  itself,  thougn 
neither  good  nor  evil,  may  be  used  for  one  puprose 
or  the  other.  Even  genius  shows  only  the  bent  of 
this  knowledge.  We  speak  of  a  military  genius,  one 
who  has  a  wonderful  knowledge  of  the  tactics  of  war, 
but  a  man  of  war,  whether  he  be  a  Napoleon  or  a 
common  soldier,  is  not  to  be  classed  a.s  wise  because 
he  deliberately  crushes  the  finer  feelings  of  whicn  we 
take  the  heart  as  symbol.  Only  when  the  mercurial 
faculty  of  mind  is  tempered,  blended  and  balanced 
by  the  heart-born  faculty  of  love  generated  by  the 
Venus  ray,  is  wisdom  born  of  the  union.  And  this 
is  the  quality  which  the  planetary  spirit  of  Jupiter 
is  seeking  to  infuse  into  mankind  to  aid  them  in  their 
spiritual  evolution  that  they  may  rise  above  the 
material  plane  and  soar  to  higher  spheres.  Therefore 
the  Jupiterian  ray  makes  people  humane,  honorable, 
courteous,  refined  and  generous,  law-abiding  and  re- 
ligious, cheerful  and  optimistic.  The  true  Jupiterian 
is  aptly  described  as  a  jovial  fellow,  and  he  is  usually 
large  but  his  heart  is  almost  too  big  to  find  room 
even  within  his  capacious  chest.  The  corners  of  his 
mouth  are  always  turned  upward  with  a  broad  smile 
that  can  only  be  described  as  radiant  and  in  his 
hearty  good-feeling  he  is  so  demonstrative  that  when 
he  shakes  your  hand  the  ligaments  of  your  arm  are 


276  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

almost  sprained.  He  is  "hail  fellow  well  met"  with 
everybody,  always  ready  to  give  anything  or  anybody 
a  boost.  He  seems  actually  grateful  to  you  when  you 
ask  him  to  do  you  a  favor  and  is  never  so  happy 
as  when  working  hard  to  help  others.  He  would  not 
harm  a  child  and  never  gets  angry  on  his  own  ac- 
count but  when  moved  to  righteous  indignation  on 
account  of  the  wrongs  of  others  then  he  may  be  ter- 
rible in  his  wrath,  yet  he  will  never  be  cruel  to  the 
aggressor  or  the  oppressor,  but  show  mercy  and  kind- 
ne.ss  even  to  them  as  soon  as  they  have  been  van- 
quished. Such  is  the  pure  Jupiterian,  but  of  course 
he  is  very  seldom  found  at  the  present  time.  Never- 
theless, an  increasing  number  of  people  are  begin- 
ning to  walk  the  way  of  wisdom  and  show  the  Jupi- 
terian traits. 

It  is  said  that  "Opportunity  knocks  at  every 
man's  door,"  yet  we  often  hear  people  bewail  their 
fate  because  they  "never  had  a  chance."  Saturn 
is  blamed  for  our  misfortunes  when  we  have  learned 
to  study  Astrology;  we  are  so  intently  on  the  look- 
out for  evil  that  we  usually,  forget  to  look  for  the 
good,  and  thus  miss  our  opportunity.  It  takes  Saturn 
thirty  years  to  go  around  the  horoscope,  by  transit, 
and  form  aspects  to  all  planets,  but  Jupiter,  the  most 
beneficent  influence  in  the  solar  system,  goes  around 
once  in  eleven  years  and  thus  the  good  fortunes  which 
he  may  bring  are  at  least  three  times  as  numerous  as 
the  misfortunes  brought  by  Saturn's  evil  aspects. 

As  a  matter  of  fact,  we  get  from  others  just 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       277 

what  we  give,  each  is  surrounded  by  a  subtle  auric 
atmosphere  which  colors  our  views  of  others,  and  the 
thoughts,  ideas  and  actions  of  others  towards  us.  If 
we  harbor  meanness  in  our  hearts,  that  colors  this 
atmosphere  so  that  we  see  meanness  in  others  and  in 
their  actions  towards  us,  we  awaken  this  trait  in 
them,  as  vibrations  from  a  tuning-fork  start  another 
of  the  same  pitch  to  sing.  On  the  other  hand,  if  we 
cultivate  the  Jupiterian  qualities  of  benevolence,  his 
expansive  smile,  his  cordial  attitude  of  mind,  etc.,  we 
shall  soon  feel  the  response  in  our  circle  of  acquaint- 
ances and  the  beneficent  aspect  of  Jupiter  will  then 
have  greater  effect  in  making  our  life  and  work 
pleasant. 

Jupiter  is  essentially  dignified  when  found  in 
Pisces  or  in  Sagittarius  the  sign  of  aspiration.  He 
is  exalted  in  Cancer  the  house  of  the  Moon  for  the 
seed-atom  which  furnishes  the  body  of  the  incoming 
Ego  is  projected  by  the  Moon  in  the  sphere  of  Cancer, 
but  Jupiter  represents  the  spiritual  part  and  there- 
fore he  presides  at  the  ingress  of  the  Ego  itself  into 
the  body.  He  also  rules  the  blood  in  which  the  in- 
dwelling spirit  finds  expression,  though  his  activities 
are  confined  principally  to  the  arterial  circulation. 
He  furthers  assimilation  and  growth,  and  therefore 
he  also  rules  the  liver.  (Saturn  rules  the  gall 
bladder.)  Jupiterians  are  very  fond  of  show  and 
display.  In  their  religious  observances  they  love 
ceremonial  and  they  are  rather  partial  to  the  estab- 
lished church,  but  often  dislike  any  i,sm  not  sane- 


278  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

tioned  by  society  or  correct  form. 

When  Jupiter  is  afflicted  his  influence  makes  the 
person  lawless,  sensuous,  self-indulgent,  gluttonous, 
extravagant  and  careless  in  the  payment  of  his  obli- 
gations, hence  liable  to  loss  of  health,  trouble  with 
the  law  and  consequent  social  disgrace.  An  afflicted 
Jupiter  makes  people  sporty,  fond  of  horse-racing 
and  gambling. 

JUPITER  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES 

Hi  Jupiter  in  the  First  House  when  well-aspected 
is  a  good  sign  of  health  and  general  fortune  in 
life.  It  gives  a  good-natured,  kindly  disposition, 
a  nature  which  breathes  cordiality,  honor  and 
uprightness.  These  people  love  pleasure,  par- 
ticularly out-of-doors,  and  are  fond  of  traveling. 
They  have  considerable  executive  ability  and  are 
therefore  sought  for  positions  of  importance  and 
responsibility.  There  is  an  inclination  to  stout- 
ness in  later  years. 

Jupiter  afflicted  on  the  Ascendant  gives  a 
tendency  to  self-indulgence,  according  to  the 
sign  wherein  he  is  placed.  If  in  Cancer  the  per- 
son becomes  an  inveterate  glutton  and  literally 
makes  a  god  of  his  stomach  with  the  inevitable 
result  that  in  the  course  of  years  he  becomes 
excessively  stout,  the  liver  being  particularly  en- 
larged and  as  a  consequence  he  is  subjected  to 
sickness  of  a  serious  nature.  In  Sagittarius  it 
makes  him  an  inveterate  gambler  who  would 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       279 

stake  his  soul  on  the  toss  of  a  coin.  In  Pisces 
he  becomes  an  incurable  drunkard,  in  Scorpio 
a  sensualist  of  the  worst  nature  and  so  on  with 
the  other  signs.  It  may  also  be  said  that  when- 
ever Jupiter  is  afflicted  on  the  Ascendant  the 
health  suffers  through  some  corruption  of  the 
blood. 

2|  2  Jupiter  in  the  Second  House  when  well-aspected, 
particularly  by  the  Sun  or  Moon,  gives  great 
financial  prosperity  in  life  and  this  is  a  fortunate 
position  in  that  respect  even  when  Jupiter  is 
afflicted,  but  then  the  perosn  is  liable  to  loss 
under  bad  directions.  When  Jupiter  is  unas- 
pected  he  gives  no  help ;  the  person  may  then 
be  poor  and  starve. 

248  Jupiter  in  the  Third  House  when  well-aspected 
gives  a  mind  of  a  highly  optimistic  nature  so 
that  no  matter  what  other  obstacles  there  may 
be  in  life  the  person  who  has  this  position  will 
always  look  at  the  silver  lining  of  the  cloud  and 
in  so  doing  forget  the  cloud  itself.  He  will  have 
exceptional  educational  advantages  and  what  is 
more  the  education  which  he  receives  will  be  of 
great  benefit  to  him.  He  will  be  popular  among 
his  brothers,  sisters  and  neighbors  and  they  will 
help  to  benefit  him.  Success  is  indicated  by 
traveling,  writing  and  publications.  When  Ju- 
piter is  afflicted  in  the  Third  House  the  person 
is  liable  to  be  in  wrecks  and  accidents  while 
traveling,  but  he  will  not  be  injured  though  he 


280  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

escapes  only  by  a  hair-breadth.  If  Saturn  af- 
flicts he  will  become  careless  and  indolent,  thus 
forfeiting  the  respect  and  esteem  of  his  imme- 
diate family,  but  if  Mars  is  adverse  they  will 
mistrust  him  because  of  rash  and  imprudent  acts. 

y4  Jupiter  in  the  Fourth  House  when  well-aspected 
is  most  fortunate  for  the  home  conditions,  espe- 
cially in  the  latter  part  of  life.  People  with 
Jupiter  in  this  position  will  do  better  in  their 
place  of  birth  than  anywhere  else.  They  will 
receive  considerable  help  from  the  parents  and 
probably  an  inheritance  afterwards.  Their  busi- 
ness affairs  will  be  on  a  solid  basis  and  run 
smoothly  so  that  at  the  close  of  life  there  will 
be  a  considerable  accumulation  according  to 
their  station  and  the  opportunities  of  their  en- 
vironment. They  pass  their  days  in  peace  and 
end  them  amid  health,  wealth  and  prosperity. 
But  when  Jupiter  is  afflicted  in  the  Fourth 
House  the  person  should  leave  his  native  town 
as  soon  as  possible  for  then  conditions  there  will 
be  detrimental  to  his  success.  Lavish  and  ex- 
travagant expenditure,  love  of  display  and  kin- 
dred costly  tendencies  will  sap  his  resources  and 
bring  him  into  bankruptcy ;  besides  a  false  pride 
will  keep  him  from  undertaking  a  radical  re- 
form even  when  he  has  awakened  to  the  fact  that 
he  ought  to  do  so  if  he  would  save  himself  and 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       281 

the  only  way  out  of  it  to  make  a  new  start  will 
be  removal  to  another  city. 

K5  Jupiter  in  tlie  Fifth  House  and  well-aspected 
increases  the  number  of  children  and  they  will 
bring  much  profit  and  pleasure  to  the  parents; 
it  gives  popularity  and  good  friends  who  will 
be  a  help  to  the  person,  also  a  sociable  and 
pleasure  loving  disposition.  Gain  by  speculation 
is  foreshown,  high  intelligence  and  success  in  ed- 
ucational work  or  the  publishing  or  newspaper 
business.  These  people  make  fine  teachers  and 
have  a  very  convincing  way  of  putting  things. 
If  Jupiter  is  afflicted  in  the  Fifth  Hou/se,  espe- 
cially in  Sagittarius,  it  gives  a  tendency  towards 
gambling  and  loss  thereby,  a  love  of  sports,  dis- 
inclination for  work,  and  trouble  with  children. 

U  6  Jupiter  in  the  Sixth  House  gives  good  health  and 
success  in  the  care  and  cure  of  the  sick,  faith- 
ful servants,  and  the  respect  and  esteem  of  all 
with  whom  the  person  comes  in  contact  in  the 
course  of  his  occupation.  But  when  Jupiter  is 
afflicted  in  the  Sixth  House  it  gives  a  tendency 
toward  liver  troubles,  enlargement  of  the  liver, 
obesity  and  general  disorders  produced  by  over- 
indulgence of  the  appetite. 

ill  Jupiter  in  the  Seventh  House  gives  a  noble, 
great-hearted  and  sympathetic  marriage  partner 
who  will  bring  the  person  favor,  fortune  and 


282  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

social  prestige.  It  is  an  ideal  indication  for  mar- 
riage, also  for  a  person  seeking  to  take  a  partnei 
or  enter  into  partnership.  He  may  also  be  as- 
sured that  the  partner  will  be  noble,  sincere,  hon- 
est and  trustworthy,  then  success  will  come  by 
co-operation.  It  is  an  ideal  position  for  a  lawyer 
for  it  indicates  success  in  law  and  the  ability  to 
reconcile  opponents.  But  if  Jupiter  \s  weak 
or  afflicted  the  person  will  lose  his  lawsuits  or 
suffer  by  misplaced  confidence  in  his  partner; 
marriage  will  be  delayed  or  denied  and  when 
consummated  trouble  will  arise  through  the  in- 
dolence and  self-indulgent  habits  of  the  marriage 
partner.  Therefore  wisdom  would  dictate  that 
the  person  avoid  such  relationships. 

21 8  Jupiter  in  the  Eighth  House  when  well-aspected 
indicates  financial  gain  by  marriage,  partner- 
ships or  legacy,  but  when  weak  or  afflicted  it 
designates  lawsuits  and  losses  in  connection  with 
these  matters.  A  well-aspected  Jupiter  in  the 
Eighth  House  is  also  a  sign  of  an  easy  and  peace- 
ful termination  of  the  life  when  the  full  course 
has  been  run. 

K9  Jupiter  in  the  Ninth  House  gives  a  peaceful, 
noble,  optimistic  and  kind-hearted  disposition, 
with  religious  tendencies,  broad-minded  and  tol- 
erant of  the  opinions  of  others,  but  favoring  the 
more  orthodox  and  established  lines  of  thought. 
The  person  is  much  esteemed  in  society  and  apt 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       283 

to  occupy  prominent  positions  in  church,  state 
or  in  institutions  of  learning  or  philanthropic 
associations.  This  position  also  gives  a  love  of 
travel  with  pleasure  and  gain  thereby.  But  when 
weak  or  afflicted  by  sign  or  aspect  it  gives  arro- 
gance and  a  love  of  display  which  is  out  of  pro- 
portion with  the  person's  pocketbook,  conse- 
quently there  are  lawsuits  anl  liability  to  social 
discredit.  It  also  shows  danger  when  traveling. 

U 10  Jupiter  in  the  Tenth  House  when  well-aspected 
is  one  of  the  best  indications  of  an  eminently 
successful  and  virtuous  life,  especially  if  he  is 
supported  by  Saturn,  Sun  and  Moon,  for  then 
the  person  will  rise  to  a  high  position  in  the 
church,  state  or  law  and  gain  great  wealth,  honor 
and  social  esteem.  Furthermore  he  will  deserve 
all  he  gets  for  the  character  will  be  of  superlative 
nobility.  But  if  Jupiter  be  weak  or  afflicted  in 
the  Tenth  House,  particularly  by  Saturn  or  the 
luminaries,  it  shows  that  the  character  is  not 
reliable.  The  person  may  rise  but  his  evil  deeds 
will  find  him  out  and  therefore  he  will  experi- 
ence reversals  of  fortune  and  loss  of  prestige. 

Jupiter  in  the  Eleventh  House  and  well- 
aspected  gives  wealthy  and  influential  friends 
who  may  be  relied  upon  to  help  the  person  to 
realize  his  hopes,  wishes  and  ambitions.  It  also 
gives  a  sociable  disposition  and  fondness  of 
pleasure.  In  a  man's  horoscope  it  signifies  that 


284  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

the  marriage  will  be  fruitful  and  that  his  child- 
ren will  be  a  credit  and  a  help  to  him,  but  before 
judgment  is  rendered  in  this  respect  the  wife's 
horoscope  should  also  be  examined  to  see  whether 
it  concurs,  for  if  not  then  the  judgment  must  be 
modified.  When  Jupiter  is  afflicted  in  the  Elev- 
enth House  either  the  person  meets  friends  who 
are  good  and  sincere  in  their  desire  to  help  him 
but  lack  the  ability  or  else  the  friends  whom  he 
attracts  come  to  him  to  be  benefitted.  In  either 
case  he  will  not  be  helped  much  by  friends  but 
must  depend  upon  his  own  resources  to  attain  his 
desires. 

Jupiter  in  the  Twelfth  House  when  well- 
aspected  brings  gain  and  success  through  occupa- 
tions carried  on  in  comparative  seclusion  such  as 
laboratory  work,  work  in  hospitals  or  asylums,  in 
an  executive  capacity  or  a  position  in  one  of  the 
fraternal  orders  which  have  to  do  with  sick  bene- 
fits or  in  the  study  and  practice  of  the  mystical 
or  occult  arts.  If  people  with  Jupiter  in  this 
position  are  personally  indigent  they  receive 
much  bounty  from  people  or  institutions  of  a 
fraternal  or  charitable  nature,  but  if  they  are 
well-to-do  they  give  lavishly  to  these  purposes. 
If  they  have  enemies  they  also  have  a  way  of 
turning  them  to  friends.  If  Jupiter  is  afflicted 
it  makes  the  person  indolent  and  improvident  so 
that  in  time  he  usually  becomes  the  ward  of  one 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       285 

of  the  charitable  institutions  where  he  lives  till 
the  end  of  life  without  either  trouble  or  worry. 

JUPITER  IN  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS. 

U  T  Jupiter  in  Aries  gives  a  high-spirited,  ener- 
getic and  ambitious  mind,  always  on  the  lookout 
and  alert  for  new  and  progressive  methods  usable 
for  advancement  in  the  world's  work,  a  true 
pioneer,  neither  too  conservative  nor  too  impul- 
sive, a  thoughtful,  but  sympathetic  disposition, 
sincere,  honest  and  trustworthy,  somewhat  relig- 
iously inclined,  some  legal  or  literary  ability  and 
a  love  of  out-door  games  and  sports  with  general 
popularity  in  social  and  business  circles.  But  if 
Jupiter  is  afflicted  the  mind  is  not  so  conservative 
and  well-balanced.  There  is  a  tendency  to  rash 
and  impulsive  acts,  impatience  and  temper  are 
shown  under  adverse  circumstances  with  a  con- 
sequent loss  of  esteem  and  popularity. 

24  8  Jupiter  in  Taurus  when  well-aspected  gives 
an  eminently  kind  and  sympathetic  nature  to  all 
people  but  a  deep-seated,  tender  and  warm  love 
for  those  towards  whom  the  relationship  war- 
rants such  expression.  This  position  also  attracts 
wealth  and  gives  a  generous  disposition  to  aid 
in  philanthropic  enterprises ;  yet  Jupiter  in  the 
Second  House  or  second  sign  is  never  lavish  or 
extravagantly  generous  but  rather  conservative 
and  inclined  to  investigate  the  merits  of  any 


286  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

proposition  before  he  extends  a  helping  hand. 
On  the  other  hand  he  is  absolutely  open-handed 
to  those  who  are  near  and  dear  to  him.  His  home 
and  his  family  are  all  in  all.  When  Jupiter  is 
afflicted  in  Taurus  it  inclines  to  extravagant  ex- 
penditures for  show,  display  and  the  gratifica- 
tion of  the  lower  nature.  Such  people  are  great 
gourmandizers,  fond  of  rich  and  savory  foods 
that  tickle  the  palate.  As  a  result  they  often  ex- 
perience financial  difficulties  and  trouble  with 
creditors,  also  such  sickness  as  may  result  from 
the  over  indulgence  of  their  appetites  according 
to  other  indications  of  the  stars. 

n  II  Jupiter  in  Gemini  when  well-aspected  gives 
literary  ability  of  a  high  class  and  if  that  is 
backed  by  the  necessary  education  success  in  this 
line  is  certain.  This  position  also  gives  an  inven- 
tive turn  to  the  mind,  a  love  of  mathematics  and 
an  attraction  towards  the  occult.  Jupiter  in 
Gemini  shows  that  travel  will  bring  both  pleas- 
ure and  profit  and  it  gives  an  honorable,  court- 
eous and  friendly  disposition.  But  if  Jupiter  is 
afflicted  the  person  is  liable  to  meet  with  losses 
and  trouble  when  traveling.  He  will  have  a 
number  of  hair-breadth  escapes  from  accidents, 
legal  and  religious  trouble,  also  difficulties  with 
brothers  sisters  and  close  relatives. 

U  EE  Jupiter  in  Cancer.  The  full  effect  of  Jupiter 
for  good  or  ill  is  never  felt  until  the  middle  life 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       287 

and  this  is  especially  the  case  when  he  is  placed 
in  the  Fourth  House  or  fourth  sign,  Cancer. 
When  well-placed  there  he  gives  an  exceedingly 
kindly  and  courteous  disposition,  one  who  is  at 
peace  with  all  the  world,  endowed  with  a  most 
vivid  and  fruitful  imagination,  a  dreamer  of 
Utopian  dreams  and  a  lover  of  the  occult  and 
mystical.  There  is  also  however,  a  practical 
side  to  the  nature  which  makes  him  ambitious  to 
attain  worldly  success  and  fortunate  in  his  in- 
vestments in  houses,  lands  or  mines,  so  that  he 
will  accumulate  property  and  be  well-to-do  espe- 
cially after  middle  life.  This  position  also  indi- 
cates that  the  person  may  receive  much  help 
from  his  parents  during  life  and  an  inheritance 
after  their  death.  Jupiter  in  Cancer  makes  the 
person  very  fond  of  the  pleasures  of  the  table  but 
if  well-aspected  he  will  probably  keep  himself 
within  such  bounds  that  his  health  does  not  sul- 
fer.  If  however,  Jupiter  is  afflicted  it  inclines  to 
inordinate  gluttony  which  will  eventually  cor- 
rupt the  blood  and  cause  such  disease  and  nox- 
ious growths  as  result  from  that  condition. 

U  SI  Jupiter  in  Leo  gives  a  truly  noble  nature, 
blending  kindness  and  courage,  self-reliance  and 
loyalty,  self-restraint  and  compassion,  mercy  and 
justice.  It  indicates,  in  short,  a  paragon  of  vir- 
tues nowhere  excelled.  It  gives  an  abundance 
of  vitality  and  a  strong  constitution  so  that  it 


288  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

marks  a  leader  physically,  morally  and  spirit- 
ually, nor  will  such  a  person  ever  be  content  to 
follow.  He  craves  positions  of  trust  and  respon- 
sibility, the  greater  the  better.  He  will  always  be 
equal  to  the  occasion  and  never  abu^se  the  confi- 
dence of  those  who  have  placed  him  there.  Such 
people  have  an  innate  culture  and  refinement, 
they  are  fond  of  everything  that  tends  to  the  up- 
lift of  humanity,  religious,  sincere,  sure  to  win 
recognition  and  success  dealing  in  speculative 
investments.  When  Jupiter  is  afflicted  in  Leo 
the  person  becomes  cruel  and  sensuous,  abnor- 
mally fond  of  pleasure  and  subject  to  loss  by 
investments,  speculation  and  gambling. 

HW  Jupiter  in  Virgo  gives  a  cautious,  analytical 
and  practical  nature  with  an  almost  unerring 
faculty  for  discriminating  between  the  seeming 
and  the  real,  to  sift  truth  from  error  and  arrive 
at  facts.  They  cannot  ferret  out  secrets  by  under- 
handed methods  as  Saturn  in  Capricorn  which 
makes  an  ideal  detective,  but  if  Jupiter  in  \irgo 
is  the  judge  no  one  is  clever  enough  to  hide  the 
truth  from  him.  A  well-aspected  Jupiter  in 
Virgo  indicates  succes  with  servants  who  will  be 
found  faithful  and  loyal,  ready  to  do  their  mas- 
ter's bidding.  It  also  indicates  prosperity 
through  business  or  professionl  vocations,  but 
if  Jupiter  is  afflicted  in  Virgo  it  gives  a  cynical, 
carping  and  critical  disposition,  mistrustful  of 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       2S9 

others  and  therefore  liable  to  loss  through  ser- 
vants or  employees.  Such  people  cannot  succeed 
in  business  and  they  will  find  it  extremely  diffi- 
cult to  obtain  or  keep  a  position.  At  any  rate 
they  will  serve  in  a  very  inferior  capacity. 

i£^=  Jupiter  in  Libra  when  well-aspected  gives  a. 
kind,  sympathetic  and  loving  disposition,  a  con- 
scientious, sociable  and  benevolent  nature  and 
an  interest  in  all  that  makes  for  the  uplift  of 
humanity,  music,  art,  literature,  social  inter- 
course, et  cetera.  On  that  account  the  person  is 
popular,  particularly  with  the  opposite  sex  from 
whence  gain  and  benefit  may  be  expected.  Suc- 
cess in  the  busines  and  public  life  are  shown. 
But  if  Jupiter  is  afflicted  in  Libra  undue  indul- 
gence of  the  lower  nature  will  bring  trouble  and 
public  scandal  with  a  consequent  loss  of  popu- 
larity and  prestige. 

U  Til  Jupiter  in  Scorpio  gives  an  ardent,  aggressive 
and  self-reliant  nature,  an  enthusiastic,  construc- 
tive and  resourceful  mind  with  the  ability  to 
meet  all  the  exigencies  of  life  in  an  efficient  man- 
ner and  it  ensures  success  in  practical  everyday 
occupations,  gives  a  large  family  and  plenty  of 
means  to  provide  for  them.  This  position  also 
shows  a  tendency  towards  occult  investigations. 
But  if  tfupiter  is  afflicted  in  Scorpio  it  will  bring 
loss  and  trouble  through  the  indulgence  of  the 
lower  nature  in  an  inordinate  measure,  love  of 

19 


290  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

rich  and   expensive  food  and  sickness   on  that 
account. 

11  /  Jupiter  in  Sagittarius  when  well-aspected 
gives  good  fortune  and  general  success  in  life,  a 
humane,  broad  and  philosophical  mind,  a  rever- 
ent and  religious  disposition.  Hence  people 
with  this  position  rise  to  the  top  and  become 
leaders  in  their  various  spheres  of  life,  finding 
places  of  prominence  in  church  or  state,  scien- 
tific '  or  philosophic  enterprises  or  institutions. 
If  Jupiter  is  afflicted  in  Sagittarius  it  makes 
the  person  sporty,  fond  of  cheap  and  gaudy  dis- 
play, extravagant  and  ready  to  take  a  chance  on 
any  gamble,  loss  of  social  standing  if  born  in  a 
better  environment,  trouble  through  law,  finan- 
cial difficulties,  narrow-minded  sectarian  views 
if  inclined  to  be  religious. 

U  VS  Jupiter  in  Capricorn  gives  an  ambitious 
nature,  self-reliant  and  self -controlled  with  a 
desire  to  rise  to  a  position  of  authority  over  others 
also  the  ability  to  dictate  wisely  and  well.  It 
gives  a  careful,  economical  disposition,  and  an 
.abhorrence  of  waste;  ingenuity,  resourcefulness 
and  some  mechanical  ability.  These  people  are 
trust-worthy  to  a  degree,  sincere  and  honest  in 
all  their  undertakings  and  hold  every  promise 
inviolate,  therefore  they  usually  rise  to  honor, 
esteem  and  general  popularity.  As  already  said 
their  aim  is  to  attain  independence  at  the  head  of 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       291 

some  business,  but  if  they  do  not  succeed  in  that 
and  have  to  work  for  others  they  are  best  suited 
to  be  in  the  employ  of  the  government,  either 
municipal  or  national.  On  account  of  the  im- 
plicit trust  generated  by  their  sterling  charac- 
teristics of  honesty,  sincerity  and  faithfulness 
these  people  are  often  made  the  recipients  of 
confidence  from  friends  who  feel  the  need  of 
sharing  their  troubles  with  someone  who  can  be 
depended  upon  either  to  give  honest,  disinter- 
ested advice  or  else  to  keep  the  secrets  told  them 
inviolate.  If  Jupiter  is  afflicted  in  Capricorn  it 
makes  a  miser  who  will  hoard  all  he  can  scrape 
together  and  deny  himself  all  except  the  barest 
necessities  and  is  consequently  despised  by  all 
who  know  him. 

*  Jupiter  in  Aquarius  when  well-aspected  gives 
a  humane,  optimistic,  original  and  philosophic 
mind,  fond  of  friends  and  the  society  of  others 
particularly  those  who  are  interested  in  science 
or  mysticism,  literature  and  music,  consequently 
he  attracts  people  of  that  nature  and  they  will  be 
a  benefit  to  him  in  helping  him  to  realize  his 
hopes,  wishes  and  ambitions.  He  may  possibly 
obtain  a  position  of  importance  in  some  official 
capacity  with  secret  or  occult  societies.  This  is 
a  good  indication  of  general  success  in  life,  but 
if  Jupiter  is  afflicted  it  makes  the  nature  restless, 
nervous  and  erratic  with  revolutionary  or  anarch- 


292  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

istic  ideas  with  disinclination  for  serious  work 
and  such  people  are  generally  disliked  and  dis- 
trusted. 

U  }£  Jupiter  in  Pisces  gives  a  charitable,  sympa- 
thetic and  hospitable  nature  which  loves  to  min- 
ister to  the  outcasts  of  society.  These  people  are 
veritable  angels  of  mercy  to  all  who  suffer  in 
body,  soul  or  spirit.  They  are  well  known  to 
those  who  are  "sick  or  in  prison."  Being  of  a 
sensitive  nature  and  subject  to  the  influences 
from  the  invisible  world  they  not  infrequently 
have  psychic  experiences  and  become  .students  of 
the  occult.  They  love  music,  art  and  literature 
and  if  well-aspected  by  Venus,  Jupiter  in  Pisces 
will  give  considerable  ability  as  a  performer,  but 
if  Jupiter  is  afflicted  in  Pisces  it  gives  a  vacil- 
lating mind,  a  nerveless,  cowardly  nature  indulg- 
ing in  all  the  vices  in  the  calendar  and  a  gener- 
ally despicable  disposition — a  social  parasite. 

THE  ASPECTS  OF  JUPITER 

O  6  P  *  A  U  The  Sun  conjunction,  sextile  or  trine 
to  Jupiter.  The  conjunction  gives  a  tendency  to 
apoplexy,  especially"  if  it  occurs  in  Aries,  but 
with  that  exception  we  may  say  that  those  con- 
figurations are -sure  indications  of  health,  wealth 
and  happiness;  they  give  the  person  an  abund- 
ance of  vitality  which  is  proof  even  against  very 
severe  onslaughts  of  disease,  and  should  a  par- 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       293 

ticularly  unfavorable  planetary  influence  suc- 
ceed in  breaking  down  the  constitutional  resist- 
ance recovery  will  be  so  rapid  as  to  seem  miracu- 
lous. This  nearly  impregnable  condition  of 
health  is  all  the  more  unassailable  because  it  is 
backed  by  a  disposition  at  once  "sunny"  and 
"jovial"  and  that  latter  characteristic  al.so 
makes  the  fortunate  possessors  of  these  aspects 
beloved  by  all  with  whom  they  come  in  contact; 
everybody  is  glad  to  see  the  person  with  the 
perpetual  smile,  but  they  do  more  than  "smile" 
— they  earn  the  friendship  universally  bestowed 
upon  them  by  deeds  of  kindness,  by  words  of 
sympathy,  cheer  or  hope  as  the  occasion  may  de- 
mand. They  are  trusted  by  everybody  for  they 
never  betray  a  trust ;  they  have  good  clear  heads, 
good  judgment  and  executive  ability  so  that  they 
are  well  fitted  to  help  others.  These  character- 
istics also  favor  their  own  financial  fortunes  so 
that  they  accumulate  wealth,  but  theirs  is  never 
"tainted  money,"  they  never  benefit  by  the  los.s 
of  others.  They  are  conservatively  religious  and 
may  be  aptly  described  as  "pillars  of  society." 
They  shine  particularly  in  governmental  offices. 

O  D  8  n  Tlie  Sun  square  or  opposition  to  Jupiter 
gives  a  tendency  to  indulge  in  habits  which  are 
bad  for  the  health ;  the  person  is  far  too  fond  of 
the  ' '  good  things  of  life ' '  and  very  selfish  in  sat- 
isfying his  own  comforts;  he  exercises  little  and 


294  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

never  denies  himself,  with  the  result  that  the  cir- 
culation becomes  sluggish  and  as  these  people 
have  a  superabundance  of  blood  their  lassitude 
and  indulgence  is  productive  of  various  noxious 
growths  and  kindred  disorders;  sometimes  a  fit 
of  anger  raises  the  blood  pressure  to  such  a  point 
that  a  vessel  bursts  and  ends  the  life  or  leaves 
the  person  thenceforth  a  useless  wreck.  These 
aspects  give  a  bombastic,  haughty  disposition 
with  an  inordinate  love  of  display  and  thus  in- 
duce to  extravagance  both  in  social  and  business 
affairs  with  the  result  that  the  person  sometimes 
finds  himself  involved  in  debt  which  he  cannot 
pay  and  then  there  is  but  a  step  to  the  bank- 
ruptcy court.  A  false  pride  often  prevents  these 
people  from  working  honestly  for  others  so  they 
would  rather  prey  upon  the  public  a,s  gamblers 
and  followers  of  races  and  other  so-called  sports 
where  there  is  an  opportunity  to  swindle  other 
people  and  get  what  they  call  an  "easy"  living 
until  they  land  in  the  meshes  of  the  law.  Chil- 
dren with  these  aspects  should  be  given  special 
training  in  self-restraint,  thrift  and  honesty, 
above  all  religion,  for  they  will  have  a  tendency 
to  scorn  and  scoff  at  religion,  but  perhapp  a  mem- 
ory of  a  devout  mother  may  help  to  keep  them 
straight. 

9  6  P*'Ait     Venus    conjunction,    parallel,   sextile 
or  trine  to  Jupiter  is  one  of  the  best  signs  of 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       295 

success  and  general  good  fortune  in  life.  It 
favors  the  accumulation  of  wealth  and  the  en- 
joyment of  all  the  luxuries  of  life.  It  is  a  good 
indication  of  a  successful  and  happy  marriage, 
social  prestige  and  the  respect  of  all  with  whom 
the  person  comes  in  contact.  It  endows  him  with 
a  jovial,  optimistic,  generous  and  large-hearted 
disposition,  one  who  is  honorable  to  a  degree, 
interested  and  active  in  philanthropic  measures, 
a  liberal  mind  tolerant  of  the  views  of  others 
even  where  he  differs  radically,  fond  of  pleas- 
ure, traveling,  parties,  and  capable  of  enjoying 
life  to  the  fullest  extent;  he  loves  expensive  and 
ultra-comfortable  things,  a  fine  Tiouse,  valuable 
books,  pictures  and  other  rich  appointments. 

]  8  U  Venus  square  or  opposition  to  Jupiter 
gives  the  same  luxurious  likings  as  the  good  as- 
pects but  limits  the  ability  to  satisfy  them;  al- 
though such  people  make  the  mo.st  frantic  efforts 
to  present  a  fine  front  to  the  world  they  are  gen- 
erally found  out  to  be  shams.  Their  lack  of  busi- 
ness ability  is  often  responsible  for  failure  and 
bankruptcy  and  they  are  very  liable  to  suffer 
losses  through  the  treachery  of  others.  Love  and 
marriage  also  are  sources  of  sorrow  for  those 
whom  Venus  and  Jupiter  are  afflicting.  They 
are  apt  to  be  jilted  before  marriage  or  the  mar- 
riage partner  will  prove  faithless  and  may  de- 
sert them.  These  aspects  also  produce  an  amor- 


296  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

ous  nature  likely  to  take  liberties  regardless  of 
tlie  laws  of  decency  and  make  the  person  faith- 
less to  marriage  vows, 

$  6  P*  A  if  Mercury  conjunction,  parallel,  sextile 
or  trine  to  Jupiter  is  one  of  the  finest  assets  in 
life  for  it  gives  a  cheerful,  optimistic  disposition 
with  the  ability  to  always  look  upon  the  bright 
side  of  things  and  keep  up  the  spirits  in  the 
hours  of  adversity;  the  mind  is  broad,  versatile 
and  able  to  reason  correctly  and  to  form  a  relia- 
ble judgment  by  careful  deliberation;  they  never 
give  a  hasty  decision;  they  require  time  to  think 
over  whatever  is  presented  to  them,  but  once  they 
have  reached  a  conclusion,  that  will  be  found  in- 
controvertible. They  are  successful  in  law  or 
literature  and  much  respected  for  their  honesty 
and  sincerity.  These  aspects  are  particularly 
fortunate  for  people  who  travel  for  business  or 
pleasure,  for  they  will  reap  both  benefit  and  en- 
joyment from  a  migratory  mode  of  life;  it  will 
make  them  ''healthy,  wealthy  and  wise"  beyond 
the  average,  loved  by  everybody  for  the  vital 
vibration  they  radiate  upon  whoever  they  meet. 

$  Q]  <?  n  Mercury  square  or  opposition  to  Jupiter 
gives  a  vacillating  and  wavering  disposition  so 
that  the  person  cannot  make  up  his  mind  when 
more  than  one  course  of  action  i§  open,  hence 
people  with  these  aspects  often  lose  their  oppor- 
tunities through  procrastination  and  lack  of 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       297 

judgment;  they  must  therefore  be  classed  as  fail- 
ures in  life.  They  are  liable  to  scandal  and  slan- 
der because  of  treacherous  associates,  and  should 
not  travel  for  it  will  bring  them  loss  and  trouble ; 
they  should  also  be  extremely  careful  in  making 
contracts  or  agreements  to  do  or  deliver  certain 
things  at  a  specified  time  for  they  will  probably 
be  unable  to  fulfill  the  requirements  and  thus 
trouble  and  loss  will  result. 

P  6  *  A  U  The  Moon  parallel,  conjunction,  sex- 
tile  or  trine  to  Jupiter  gives  an  optimistic,  noble 
and  generous  disposition.  The  open-hearted 
honesty,  fairness  and  f riendilness  of  people  with 
these  aspects  makes  them  universally  popular. 
These  aspects  strengthen  both  the  reasoning  fac- 
ulties and  constitution,  so  that  such  people 
usually  have  a  strong  mind  in  a  strong  body  and 
hence  a  powerful  personal  magnetism  which  may 
be  used  to  great  advantage  in  healing  the  sick. 
They  have  lofty  ideals  and  a  fruitful  imagination 
with  the  power  of  acquiring  wealth  which  will 
grow  greater  if  used  in  philanthropic  enterprises 
of  which  these  people  are  prone  to  dream.  This 
is  one  of  the  best  aspects  in  the  gamut  and  makes 
for  general  success  in  life  both  physically  and 
spiritually. 

Q]  8  H  The  Moon  square  or  opposition  to  Jupiter 
impairs  the  reasoning  faculties  and  brings  the 
person  trouble  through  litigation,  lack  of  fore- 


298  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

thought  and  indecision  or  dishonesty.  People 
with  these  aspects  are  too  fond  of  ostentation 
and  display,  extravagant  beyond  their  means, 
lavish  in  their  expenditures,  prone  to  take  des- 
perate chances  in  gambling  or  speculation  to  re- 
habilitate their  fortunes  and  doomed  to  loss,  slan- 
der and  sometimes  bankruptcy  on  that  account. 
These  aspects  are  also  bad  for  health  in  a 
woman's  horoscope  especially;  they  indicate  di- 
gestive and  liver  troubles. 

!?  *  A  U  Saturn  sextile  or  trine  to  Jupiter  gives  a 
strong  character  with  a  deep  and  profoundly 
philosophical  mind,  a  benevolent  disposition  with 
a  strong  sense  of  justice  and  fair  play.  All  the 
virtues  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  are  combined  by 
these  aspects  and  people  in  whose  horoscope  they 
are  found  will  consequently  gain  the  honor  and 
esteem  of  the  community  where  they  are.  Thus 
they  will  be  looked  upon  as  the  pillars  of  society 
and  gain  prosperity  commensurate  with  the  en- 
vironment in  which  they  are  placed,  for  these 
aspects  give  sound  financial  judgment  and  the 
ability  to  grasp  opportunity  when,  it  is  met. 

i?  6  PU  Saturn  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Jupiter 
has  the  same  beneficent  influence  as  the  sextile 
or  trine  though  not  in  as  great  a  measure  and 
if  Jupiter  is  weak  by  sign  or  otherwise  afflicted 
the  aspects  will  probably  count  for  very  little, 
but  in  that  case  its  effect  upon  the  arterial  cir- 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE       299 

culation  will  be  obstructive,  giving  a  tendency 
to  schlerosis  of  the  arteries  the  same  as  the  oppo- 
sition and  square. 

^>  Q3  &  U  Saturn  square  or  opposition  to  Jupiter 
gives  a  diffident,  vacillating  mind  unable  to  form 
decisions,  always  distrustful  of  others,  indolent 
and  inclined  to  drift  with  the  tide,  often  a  ward 
of  society  either  in  the  poor-house  or  the  prison, 
for  the  character  is  basically  dishonest.  These 
aspects  also  give  a  tendency  to  arterio-schlerosis. 

$  *  A  U  Mars  sextile  or  trine  to  Jupiter.  It  is  the 
nature  of  Jupiter  to  be  somewhat  conservative 
and  dignified,  but  when  blended  with  the  fire  of 
Mars  it  gives  enthusiasm  and  an  ability  to  in- 
fluence others  and  imbue  them  with  the  same 
feelings.  It  makes  the  nature  noble,  sincere, 
honest  and  straightforward.  This  aspect  is  also 
good  for  the  financial  prosperity  of  the  person, 
for  both  Mars  and  Jupiter  when  well-aspectea 
give  good  earning  ability  and  favor  accumula- 
tion. Jupiter  is  somewhat  conservative  in  re- 
spect of  expenditures,  Mars  is  too  free,  but  where 
the  Martial  and  Jupiterian  tendencies  are 
blended  by  a  good  aspect  the  result  is  an  ideal, 
generous  nature,  neither  too  lavish  nor  too  con- 
servative, able  to  strike  a  happy  medium.  These 
people  have  much  ingenuity  and  constructive 
ability  and  whatever  they  do  they  put  their 
whole  heart  in  it.  Hence  they  are  successful  in 


300  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

business,  popular  in  society,  fond  of  out-of-door 
sports  and  games.  They  love  to  travel  and  gain 
much  pleasure  by  so  doing.  Mars  rules  the 
haemoglobin  in  the  blood  which  is  so  important 
a  factor  in  health  and  vitality,  therefore  the  good 
aspects  of  Jupiter  and  Mars  increase  the  red 
blood  corpuscles  with  the  result  that  people  with 
these  aspects  have  an  abundance  of  health,  vi- 
tality, power  and  endurance. 

$  P  6  U  Mars  parallel  or  conjunction  to  Jupiter 
strengthens  the  constitution  and  increases  the 
vitality  the  same  as  the  good  aspects.  It  also 
indicates  that  the  person  is  able  to  earn  much 
money  and  uses  it  freely  and  generously,  but  the 
mental  qualities  are  similar  to  those  conferred 
by  the  bad  aspects:  sporty,  swaggering,  tricky, 
deceitful  and  untruthful,  impulsive  in  judgment, 
not  to  be  depended  upon,  and  if  the  conjunction 
occurs  in  one  of  the  watery  signs,  especially  in 
Pisces,  the  person  will  probably  be  a  drunkard, 
though  this  is  not  as  certain  as  with  the  square 
and  opposition. 

$  Q]  8  U  Mars  square  or  opposition  to  Jupiter  is 
the  signature  of  the  gambler  and  if  one  of  the 
planets  is  in  a  watery  sign,  especially  in  Pisces, 
he  will  be  a  drunkard  also,  a  tricky,  dishonest 
and  disreputable  character  who  always  acts 
through  impulse.  With  respect  to  health  we  find 
that  these  people  suffer  principally  from  blood 


JUPITER,  PLANET  OF  BENEVOLENCE      301 

and  liver  complaints,  the  circulation  is  poor  and 
the  blood  is  so  rich  that  there  is  danger  of  apo- 
plexy. 

*  A  U  Uranus  sextUe  or  trine  to  Jupiter  gives 
a  broad,  humane  disposition  and  a  tendency  to 
delve  into  the  occult  arts  and  sciences.  It  favors 
an  association  with  secret  orders  and  gives  prom- 
ise of  prosperity  in  life.  Such  a  person  is  hon- 
est and  sincere,  sociable,  hospitable  and  likely  to 
benefit  a  great  deal  from  influential  friends  in 
an  official  position.  This  position  also  gives  ex- 
ecutive ability  and  success  in  connection  with 
institutions  of  learning. 

P  6  U  Uranus  parallel  or  conjunction  to  Jupiter 
gives  similar  indications  to  the  good  aspects  but 
the  influence  is  not  quite  so  decided,  particularly 
if  either  of  the  planets  is  weak  by  sign  or  other- 
wise afflicted.  In  that  case  it  will  be  found  that 
the  tendencies  conferred  are  more  like  those  of 
the  bad  aspects. 

Uranus  square  or  opposition  to  Jupiter 
gives  an  impulsive  nature  liable  to  act  in  a  sud- 
den or  unexpected  manner  to  his  own  undoing; 
loss  by  speculation,  lawsuits  and  impulsive  ex- 
travagance are  also  indicated,  many  changes 
both  of  occupation  and  residence,  loss  of  friends 
and  reputation. 


302  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

W  *  A  H  Neptune  sextile  or  trine  Jupiter  gives  an 
inspirational,  mystical  nature  and  success  in  an 
occupation  connected  with  occult  orders,  that  is 
to  say  where  the  character  is  sufficiently  devel- 
oped so  that  Neptune  can  make  his  influence  felt, 
for  then  this  position  brings  out  all  the  noblest 
and  most  spiritual  strength  of  both  planets,  and 
occult  experiences  are  not  infrequently  the  re- 
sult. During  the  sleeping  hours  these  people  are 
quite  conscious  in  the  invisible  worlds. 

tp  P  6  U  Neptune  parallel  or  conjunction  to  Ju- 
piter gives  an  influence  similar  to  that  of  the 
good  aspects  when  Neptune  and  Jupiter  are  not 
afflicted,  but  if  they  are  in  a  weak  sign  and  as- 
pecting  the  other  planets  by  square  or  opposition 
then  the  influence  is  similar  to  that  of  the  bad 
<•  aspects  of  Jupiter  and  Neptune. 

Wn#  ^  Neptune  square  or  opposition  to  Jupiter 
indicates  lack  of  control  of  the  emotions.  The 
person  is  sensitive  to  the  low  psychic  influences 
of  the  borderland  between  the  seen  and  the  un- 
seen worlds  but  they  are  of  an  awe-inspiring  and 
disgusting  type,  hence  apt  to  cause  hysterical 
conditions,  such  as  involuntary  trance  and  kin- 
dred disorders  attendant  upon  negative  psy- 
chism.  From  a  material  standpoint  it  gives  dan- 
ger of  fraud  through  speculation  or  large  com- 
panies and  dealing  with  such  predatory  interests 
•should  therefore  be  avoided. 


CHAPTER  XIV. 
MARS  THE  PLANET  OF  ACTION 

FROM  the  Bible  we  learn  that  Jehovah  was  the 
Creator  of  mankind  for  we  find  His  angels  an- 
nouncing the  birth  of  various  notable  personages.  Thus 
the  conclusion  is  inevitable  that  He  and  they  preside 
over  the  generative  function  and  impart  the  quality 
of  fertility  which  at  that  time  was  looked  upon  as  a 
token  of  the  favor  of  God  while  barrenness  was  indi- 
cated as  a  sign  of  His  displeasure.  This  is  in  ac- 
cordance with  the  Western  Wisdom  Teaching  which 
tells  us  that  in  the  earliest  days  when  mankind  was 
still  in  the  making  Jehovah  and  His  angels  guided 
them  to  great  temples  at  the  times  of  year  when" 
planetary  conditions  were  propitious  to  generation, 
and  men  born  under  those  harmonious  conditions 
lived  for  hundreds  of  years  without  sickness  or  dis- 
ease. It  is  noticeable  that  wild  animals  which  are 
still  entirely  under  the  guidance  of  their  group-spirits 
and  mate  only  at  certain  seasons  are  also  immune 
from  sickness.  Jehovah  still  retains  control  over  the 
fertilization  of  the  animals  which  are  attuned  to  His 
lunar  vibrations  through  their  twenty-eight  pairs  of 
spinal  nerves  that  correspond  to  the  twenty-eight 
days  of  the  lunar  revolution  and  His  vehicle  the 
303 


304  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Moon  still  measures  the  period  of  gestation  for  men 
and  beasts. 

But  the  Bible  also  tells  us  of  Lucifer  and  his 
fallen  angels  who  taught  humanity  to  take  the  pre- 
rogative of  creation  into  their  own  hands  and  in- 
stilled into  them  the  passion  that  has  caused  sorrow, 
sin  and  death,  because  the  holy  function  of  genera- 
tion which  was  intended  only  for  temporary  purposes 
of  propagation  and  which  works  so  well  under  pro- 
pitious planetary  conditions  has  been  desecrated  and 
made  subservient  to  the  lusts  of  humanity  at  all 
times  regardless  of  the  stellar  rays.  Yet  it  is  a  mis- 
take to  think  of  the  Lucifer  spirits  as  evil,  for  under 
the  sway  of  the  angels  humanity  was  a  mass  of  mind- 
less automatons  knowing  neither  good  nor  evil  and 
having  no  choice  or  prerogative,  but  since  through 
the  martial  Lucifer  spirits  we  have  learned  to  know 
"good  and  evil  we  are  also  able  by  the  exercise  of 
will  power  to  shun  the  evil  and  choose  the  good,  to 
flee  from  vice  and  cultivate  virtue,  thereby  placing 
ourselves  in  harmonious  co-worker-ship  with  God  and 
nature  and  unfolding  our  divine  possibilities  so  that 
we  may  become  like  our  Father  in  Heaven. 

While  Jehovah  and  His  angels  are  thus  working 
upon  humanity  from  the  Moon  the  Lucifer  spirits 
who  rebelled  against  His  regime  are  located  OR  the 
planet  Mars  and  from  them  also  we  have  received 
and  are  receiving  many  valuable  gifts,  chief  among 
them  fire  and  iron.  It  is  well  known  that  every 
living  body  is  warm,  for  the  Ego  cannot  manifest  in 


MARS,   THE   PLANET   OF  ACTION  305 

the  physical  world  save  through  heat,  or  perhaps  it 
should  be  said  that  heat  is  generated  in  the  mani- 
festation of  the  Ego.  But  without  iron,  which  exists 
in  the  blood  in  the  form  of  hsemoglobin,  there  could 
be  no  oxidation  and  consequently  no  heat.  That  was 
the  condition  previous  to  the  fall,  so-called,  when 
man-in-the-making  was  mindless.  But  then  the  Lu- 
cifer spirits  came  and  infused  iron  into  the  blood, 
which  made  it  possible  for  the  Ego  to  draw  into  its 
vehicles  and  from  that  time  the  Ego  became  an  in- 
dwelling spirit  capable  of  evolving  individuality. 
Thus  had  it  not  been  for  the  Lucifer  spirits  man 
could  not  have  become  man.  It  is  their  fire  and  their 
iron  that  has  made  the  world  what  it  is  today,  good 
and  bad  according  to  the  use  man  has  made  of  it. 
The  solar  force  focused  through  the  Moon  imparts 
vitality  and  the  faculty  of  growth  but  the  rays  of  the 
Sun  focused  upon  us  by  the  martial  Lucifer  spirits 
give  us  dynamic  power  and  are  the  source  of  all 
activity  in  the  world. 

Power  may  be  latent  for  milleniums,  as  exempli- 
fied in  coalbeds,  which  are  reservoirs  of  solar  force ; 
a  furnace  and  engine  are  required  to  transmute  and 
make  it  available  as  dynamic  energy,  but,  once  the 
sleeping  giant  has  been  roused  from  latency  to  po- 
tency it  knows  no  rest  or  peace  till  it  has  expended 
the  last  ounce  of  its  prodigious  strength.  Under 
strict  control,  and  carefully  guided  into  channels  of 
useful  activity,  this  fiery  force  is  the  most  valuable 
servant  of  mankind;  the  most  powerful  agent  in  the 

20 


306  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

world's  work,  an  incomparable  boon  to  humanity. 
But  if  it  escapes  control  the  servant  quickly  takes 
mastery,  its  inimical  power  of  destruction  and  de- 
vastation is  then  as  terrible  a  scourge  as  its  bene- 
ficent use  under  guidance  is  an  inestimable  blessing. 
It  is  as  precious  as  it  is  dangerous;  eternal  vigilance 
is  the  price  of  safety  from  its  ravages,  but  without  it 
the  world  would  be  a  wilderness. 

Mars,  as  a  focus  for  the  latent  solar  life,  trans- 
mutes it  into  desire,  passion  and  what  we  may  call 
animal  spirits.  It  is  a  consuming  fire,  more  danger- 
ous than  all  the  nitroglycerine  ever  manufactured, 
but  also  more  precious  than  any  other  blessing  we 
can  have  or  enjoy. 

The  Hindoo  preacher,  nurtured  in  a  land  gov- 
erned by  Saturn,  the  planet  of  obstruction,  says: 
"Kill  out  desire."  He  dreams  away  his  days  in  des- 
titution, but  as  "temper"  conserves  the  edge  of  the 
steel  that  carves  its  way  through  all  obstructions, 
so  the  well-directed  energetic  desires  of  the  martial 
Anglo-Saxon  have  wrought  a  marvelous  transforma- 
tion in  the  earth;  they  have  reared  a  civilization  be- 
yond all  which  preceded  it,  and  though  perhaps  brutal 
in  many  respects,  there  is  promise  in  that  also,  accord- 
ing to  the  proverb :  ' '  The  greater  the  sinner,  the 
greater  the  saint."  Parents  should  take  a  lesson 
from  the  book  of  nations  and  refrain  from  applying 
the  Saturnine  wet  blanket  to  the  fiery  Mars  spirit 
of  children.  Saturn  always  says  don't,  don't,  his 
aim  is  to  repress  and  obstruct.  A  clear  fire  under 


MARS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ACTION  307 

proper  control  is  useful,  Uut  death  lurks  in  the  smoke 
and  noxious  gases  of  a  smothered  fire;  too  many 
dont's  smother  legitimate  ambition  and  frustrate  ac- 
complishment ;  they  may  drive  the  hapless  victim  into 
ways  of  evil,  for  the  dynamic  energy  of  Mars  must 
and  will  have  an  outlet,  so  beware.  The  worst  faults 
of  Mars  are  impulsiveness  and  lack  of  persistence,  but 
he  breeds  no  hypocrites  like  an  afflicted  Saturn. 

From  Mars  we  receive  a  number  of  our  highly- 
prized  virtues  as  well  as  some  of  our  worst  faults. 
When  well-aspected  he  gives  a  strong  constitution 
and  physical  endurance,  a  positive,  independent  and 
self-reliant  nature,  determined  and  proud,  generous 
and  energetic,  resourceful  and  quick  to  learn,  espe- 
cially when  in  Aries,  Leo,  Scorpio  or  Capricorn,  but 
when  he  is  weak  by  sign  as  in  Taurus,  Cancer,  Libra 
or  aspected  by  squares  or  oppositions  he  makes  the 
person  quick-tempered,  obstinate  and  spiteful,  in- 
clined to  drunkenness  and  criminal  acts,  cruel  and 
hard,  a  bully  and  braggart. 

People  who  have  Mars  prominent  in  their  horo- 
scopes are  eminently  practical  and  play  an  important 
part  in  the  world's  work.  They  are  especially  pro- 
ficient in  occupations  where  iron  and  fire  are  used  in 
constructive  purposes  or  where  sharp  instruments  are 
handled.  Soldiers,  surgeons  and  butchers,  machine 
workers  and  iron  founders,  engineers  and  men  in  kin- 
dred occupations  are  of  the  martial  nature.  They 
also  excel  in  other  positions  where  courage  and  intre- 
pidity are  necessary  qualities. 


308  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

MARS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES 

$  1  Mars  in  the  Ascendant,  or  First  House,  when 
well-aspected  has  a  most  beneficial  influence 
upon  the  constitution,  particularly  if  he  is  in  one 
of  the  fiery  signs,  Aries,  Leo  or  Sagittarius,  or 
in  the  sign  of  his  exaltation  Capricorn,  but  some- 
times when  a  weak  sign  like  Cancer  is  rising  and 
the  other  planets  are  much  afflicted  Mars  in  the 
Ascendant  may  infuse  sufficient  energy  into  the 
body  to  tide  it  over  the  critical  period  of  infancy. 
This  position  also  gives  energy,  ambition,  cour- 
age, self-reliance  and  determination  which  are 
exceedingly  helpful  characteristics  to  win  the 
battle  of  life.  It  indicates  an  enterprising  and 
practical  person  who  will  shun  no  effort  in  order 
to  succeed.  When  Mars  is  afflicted  in  the  First 
House  he  nevertheless  strengthens  the  constitu- 
tion and  gives  muscular  power  and  endurance, 
but  he  makes  the  person  rash,  impulsive,  head- 
strong and  foolhardy.  Thus  they  neglect  the 
ordinary  precautions  to  guard  their  health  and 
become  subject  to  fevers  and  other  inflammatory 
diseases,  alsa  liable  to  accidents  and  loss  of  blood 
by  lesions  of  varying  magnitude,  danger  from 
fire  such  as  burns  or  scalds,  according  to  the  na- 
ture of  the  afflicting  planet.  In  this  respect  the 
Sun  is  usually  productive  of  fevers  and  inflam- 
mations. Jupiter  gives  liability  to  broken  bones 
or  accident  by  railroad  or  rolling  stock,  Uranus 


MARS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ACTION  309 

and  Saturn  falls  and  bruise.s  and  Venus  dis- 
eases caused  by  indulgence  of  the  passional 
nature. 

$  2  Mars  in  the  Second  House  when  well-aspected 
makes  the  nature  free  and  generous  in  finan- 
cial dealings  with  others.  The  person  has  a 
splendid  earning  capacity  and  will  make  a  finan- 
cial success  in  any  business  of  a  martial  nature 
involving  the  use  of  fire,  iron  tools  or  machinery. 
It  is  also  an  indication  of  money  by  marriage 
or  legacy,  but  although  the  money  comes  fast 
and  easy  the  person  will  not  accumulate  wealth 
as  he  is  very  generous  and  fond  of  comfort  and 
pleasure.  When  Mars  is  afflicted  in  the  Seconu 
House  money  will  come  just  as  fast  as  under  the 
good  aspects  at  times,  but  at  other  times  the  bad 
aspects  makes  the  person  outrageously  extrava- 
gant and  inclined  to  be  reckless  in  financial  ven- 
tures, with  the  inevitable  result  that  heavy  losses 
are  incurred  and  the  person  may  find  himself 
without  a  cent  in  the  world.  A  competence  may 
be  made  and  spent  several  times  during  life. 
These  people  never  give  up,  however,  and  .when 
they  have  met  financial  disaster  they  immediately 
start  to  build  up  anew  on  the  ruins  of  the  old. 
They  are  then  usually  successful  for  a  time 
again,  but  they  can  never  learn  to  be  more  care- 
ful and  less  extravagant,  hence  they  are  always 
liable  to  repeated  financial  shipwreck. 


310  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

$3  Mars  in  the  Third  House  when  well-aspected 
makes  the  mind  keen,  bright  and  alert,  fond  of 
argument,  quick  at  repartee,  ingenious,  inventive 
and  resourceful,  with  plenty  of  initiative  and 
constructive  ability.  But  when  Mars  is  afflicted 
in  the  Third  House  it  gives  liability  to  accidents 
on  short  journeys,  a  quarrelsome  nature  spe- 
cially liable  to  get  into  trouble  with  brothers, 
sisters  and  neighbors.  These  people  are  very 
critical  towards  everybody  with  whom  they  come 
in  contact  and  therefore  generally  feared  and 
avoided  when  possible. 

$  4  Mars  in  the  Fourth  House  when  well-aspected 
gives  a  strong  constitution  which  is  maintained 
unimpaired  even  in  old  age ;  the  digestive  faculty 
is  particularly  good  and  consequently  the  health 
and  strength  are  rugged.  It  makes  the  native 
exceedingly  aggressive  in  his  efforts  to  ''feather 
his  nest"  and  accumulate  property  for  old  age 
and  a  rainy  day.  There  is  also  likelihood  of  a 
legacy  from  the  parents.  This  is  a  very  for- 
tunate position,  especially  if  Mars  is  in  Aries, 
Leo  or  Capricorn,  but  if  Mars  is  weak  in  Cancer 
or  Pisces  and  afflicted  by  square  or  opposition, 
digestive  troubles  or  dissipation  will  undermine 
the  vitality  and  the  person  will  become  more 
quarrelsome  and  disagreeable  every  day  he  lives. 
He  will  be  liable  to  accident  by  fire  in  the  home, 
also  to  fevers  and  inflammatory  diseases.  People 


MARS,  THE   PLANET  OF  ACTION  311 

with  Mars  in  this  position  should  leave  their 
native  place  as  quickly  as  possible.  This  may  in 
some  measure  relieve  the  trouble. 

$  5  Mars  in  the  Fifth  House  when  well-aspected 
gives  an  ardent,  demonstrative  love-nature.  It 
makes  the  person  fond  of  athletic  exercises,  sports 
and  muscular  effort,  a  clean,  masterful  man 
much  admired  by  the  opposite  sex  or  a  woman 
who  is  a  real  "pal"  to  her  male  companion. 
These  people  make  excellent  disciplinarians  and 
are  much  beloved  by  their  pupils  if  placed  lu 
positions  as  teachers,  or  better  still  as  principals 
for  they  make  much  better  leaders  than  follow- 
ers. But  when  Mars  is  afflicted  in  the  Fifth 
House  it  makes  the  person  very  fickle  in  his  af- 
fections. It  is  on  with  the  new  love  even  before 
he  is  through  with  the  old,  an  all-around  flirt 
and  therefore  likely  to  get  into  a  great  deal  of 
trouble.  Over-indulgence  of  the  amorous  nature 
is  liable  to  sap  the  vitality  and  create  dangerous 
physical  conditions.  In  a  woman's  horoscope 
there  is  grave  danger  of  difficulty  in  parturition. 
It  also  threatens  danger  of  death  to  a  child  in 
the  horoscope  of  either  sex.  People  with  Mars 
afflicted  in  the  Fifth  House  are  also  liable  to 
loss  through  gambling  and  speculation  in  stocks, 
bonds  and  securities. 

$  6  Mars  in  the  Sixth  House  when  well-aspected 
makes  a  quick,  energetic  worker  who  is  likely 


312  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

to  rise  to  a  prominent  position  in  the  employ  of 
someone  else,  therefore  the  larger  the  firm  in 
which  he  seeks  employment  the  better.  But  he 
should  not  attempt  to  start  in  business  for  him- 
self, for  people  with  Mars  in  the  Sixth  House 
always  succeed  better  when  in  the  employment 
of  someone  else.  This  position  also  increases  the 
vitality  and  should  the  person  on  account  of 
other  planetary  configurations  in  the  horoscope 
become  subject  to  disease  the  dynamic  energy 
and  recuperative  power  of  Mars  will  soon  burn 
out  and  eliminate  the  poisons  from  the  body 
and  leave  it  in  better  health  than  before.  But 
if  Mars  is  afflicted  in  the  Sixth  House  there  is 
a  liability  to  trouble  and  quarrels  with  other 
employees  or  employer.  Should  the  person  be 
in  the  position  of  employer  himself  he  will  al- 
ways be  at  variance  with  his  employees  and  sub- 
ject to  loss  by  theft  and  dishonesty  through 
them.  They  will  waste  his  goods  and  have  no 
regard  for  his  interests.  An  afflicted  Mars  in 
the  Sixth  House  also  gives  a  liability  to  fevers 
and  inflammatory  diseases,  danger  of  burns, 
scalds  and  gun-shots  and  accidents  sustained  in 
the  course  of  employment. 

$  1  Mars  in  the  Seventh  House  when  well-aspected 
gives  a  capable,  industrious  and  aggressive  mar- 
riage partner,  untiring  in  the  promotion  of  the 
welfare  of  the  family,  a  strong  personality  who 


MARS,   THE   PLANET   OF  ACTION  313 

is  bound  to  rule  but  will  do  so  in  a  kindly  man- 
ner. This  applies  to  both  sexes,  for  when  in  a 
man's  horoscope  the  marriage  partner  is  indi- 
cated by  Mars  in  the  Seventh  House  she  also 
will  be  masculine  and  will  want  to  take  the  reins 
of  government  in  her  own  hands.  However,  as 
Mars  in  the  Seventh  House  gives  a  tendency  to 
an  early  union  when  the  parties  are  both  plastic 
they  accommodate  themselves  to  these  conditions 
more  easily  than  if  the  marriage  were  consum- 
mated at  a  more  mature  age.  But  if  Mars  is 
afflicted  in  the  Seventh  House  it  indicates  an 
accident  or  sudden  death  to  the  marriage  part- 
ner who  will  be  of  a  domineering,  quarrelsome 
nature  and  if  one  of  the  watery  signs,  Cancer, 
Scorpio  or  Pisces  is  on  the  cusp  he  will  also  be 
a  drunkard  and  a  sex  fiend.  This  latter  applies 
particularly  if  Mars  is  afflicted  in  Scorpio.  Then 
he  also  brings  on  inflammatory  diseases  of  the 
genitals  or  rectum. 

$  8  Mars  in  tlie  Eighth  House  and  well-aspected 
brings  financial  benefit  through  the  marriage 
partner  or  by  legacy.  In  business  it  is  also  good 
for  gain  by  partnerships,  lawsuits  or  similar 
Eighth  House  matters.  But  when  Mars  is  af- 
flicted in  the  Eighth  House  the  financial  condi- 
tions grow  worse  after  marriage  through  the  ex- 
travagance of  the  marriage  partner.  Business 
partnerships  and  litigation  should  also  be 


314  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

avoided  for  they  are  sure  to  bring  loss.  People 
with  Mars  in  this  position  should  not  delay  mak- 
ing their  will  for  the  end  usually  comes  very  sud- 
denly and  unexpectedly. 

$  9  Mars  in  the  Ninth  House  well-aspected  gives 
a  liberal,  broad  and  progressive  view  upon  all 
problems  of  life.  People  with  Mars  in  this  posi- 
tion are  likely  to  take  up  some  cause  having  for 
its  object  the  social  or  spiritual  upliftment  of 
mankind  in  general  and  become  very  enthusiastic 
workers  in  the  particular  cult  which  has  aroused 
their  sympathies.  They  are  fond  of  a  roving 
life  and  benefit  by  changing  from  one  place  to 
another,  especially  by  travel  in  foreign  lands. 
They  have  a  clean,  clear  and  alert  mentality  and 
a  taking  way  of  presenting  their  views  to  others. 
Therefore  they  make  good  missionaries  in  what- 
ever line  of  propaganda  they  take  up.  But  if 
Mars  is  afflicted  in  the  Ninth  House  he  makes 
people  bigoted  and  fanatical  in  their  views,  reg- 
ular ranters  who  disgust  all  whom  they  try  to 
afflict  with  their  ideas,  whether  they  are  religious 
or  atheistic.  People  with  Mars  in  this  position 
should  never  travel,  but  remain  in  their  native 
place  for  they  will  always  be  in  danger  of  acci- 
dents on  journeys  and  however  much  they  may 
be  disliked  in  their  native  place  they  will  find  a 
still  worse  reception  in  foreign  parts. 


MARS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ACTION  315 

$  10  Mars  in  the  Tenth  House  and  well-aspected  is 
one  of  the  best  signs  of  success  in  life  for  it  gives 
an  ambitious,  enthusiastic  nature  with  an  inex- 
haustible fund  of  energy,  so  that  no  matter  what 
obstacles  are  placed  in  his  way  the  person  is 
bound  to  rise  to  the  top.  It  gives  a  masterful 
nature  and  good  executive  ability  so  that  the  per- 
son is  well-qualified  to  conduct  business  and  com- 
mand others.  These  people  succeed  best  in  mar- 
tial occupations  where  fire,  iron  or  sharp  tools 
are  used  in  a  skilled  manner,  such  as  engineers 
or  machinists,  tailors  or  surgeons,  et  cetera. 
When  Mars  is  afflicted  in  the  Tenth  House  it 
gives  the  same  energy  and  ambition  as  the  good 
aspects  but  the  person  will  then  lack  discrimina- 
tion and  overreach  himself  with  the  result  that 
he  will  incur  the  enmity  of  other  people  who  will 
accomplish  his  downfall  and  bring  him  into  dis- 
repute in  the  community.  Thus  the  life  will  be 
filled  with  strife,  struggle  and  unhappiness  until 
the  person  has  learned  to  hold  himself  in  leash, 
regard  the  rights  of  others  and  abandon  his  auto- 
cratic attitude  and  self-assertion.  This  position 
also  gives  liability  to  accident  and  slander. 

£  11  Mars  in  the  Eleventh  House  makes  people 
leaders  in  their  particular  social  set,  enthusiastic 
in  the  pursuit  of  pleasure,  brings  friends  among 
martial  and  athletic  persons,  energy  and  enthu- 
siasm in  realizing  their  hopes,  wishes  and  aspira- 


316  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

tions.  But  if  Mars  in  the  Eleventh  House  is 
afflicted  it  makes  the  person  touchy  and  sensitive 
towards  friends  with  consequent  unpopularity 
and  he  is  liable  to  overreach  himself  in  his  keen 
desire  to  realize  his  ambitions  in  life. 

$  12  Mars  in  the  Twelfth  House  when  well-aspected 
may  bring  the  person  benefit  from  the  things  de- 
noted by  this  house,  prisons,  hospitals  and  chari- 
table institutions  if  employed  in  an  official  cap- 
acity as  warden,  surgeon  or  administrator  of  an 
estate  or  in  detective  work.  But  if  Mars  is  afflicted 
in  the  Twelfth  House  the  person  is  liable  to 
trouble,  sorrow  and  self -undoing  all  through  life. 
He  will  incur  the  enemity  of  other  people  and 
may  be  confined  in  prison  or  an  insane  asylum. 
If  Cancer  or  Pisces  are  on  the  cusp  of  the  Twelfth 
House  Mars  will  lead  him  to  drunkenness  and 
dissipation.  If  Scorpio  is  on  the  cusp  the  vitality 
will  be  sapped  through  sex  or  self-abuse.  In  any 
case  Mars  afflicted  in  the  Twelfth  House  makes 
a  social  outcast  unless  there  are  other  redeeming 
features  in  the  figure. 

MARS  IN  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS. 

$  T  Mars  in  Aries  gives  an  energetic,  enthusiastic 
nature,  impulsive,  aggressive  and  impatient  of  re- 
straint. No  matter  what  the  obstacles  in  his  path 
he  will  attempt  the  seemingly  impossible  and 
often  these  people  succeed  through  sheer  au- 


MARS,   THE   PLANET   OF  ACTION  317 

dacity.  They  are  original,  resourceful,  have  con- 
siderable mechanical  ability  and  the  more  ven- 
turesome an  undertaking  appears  the  more  it 
appeals  to  them.  This  position  gives  an  abun- 
dance of  vitality  and  a  love  of  sport  and  muscu- 
lar exercise.  The  person  is  just  as  enthusiastic 
in  his  enjoyment  of  recreation  and  pleasure  as  he 
is  in  his  work  and  on  that  account  he  gets  a  great 
deal  out  of  life.  But  if  Mars  is  afflicted  in  Aries 
it  gives  a  violent  temper  and  a  liability  to  acci- 
dents, burns,  scaldings,  fevers  and  inflammatory 
complaints.  The  mind  is  also  threatened. 

Mars  in  Taurus  and  well-aspected  is  a  good 
indication  of  an  early  marriage.  It  shows 
good  earning  power  and  a  free,  generous  dispo- 
sition with  regard  to  finances,  it  gives  an  inte- 
rior strength  of  an  unconquerable  nature  so  that 
the  person  wTill  always  gain  his  ends  by  unflag- 
ging determination  and  a  quiet  persistence  that 
recognizes  no  defeat,  but  presses  on  towards  the 
goal  that  he  has  set  for  himself  despite  all  ob- 
stacles. It  is  also  indication  of  money  by  legacy. 
But  if  Mars  is  afflicted  in  Taurus  it  gives  an  ex- 
ceedingly stubborn,  violent  and  vindictive  nature. 
Such  people  will  pursue  their  own  way  despite 
reason,  argument  or  entreaty  and  if  anyone 
attempts  to  thwart  them  in  their  purposes  they 
never  forgive.  They  also  have  good  earning 
power  but  squander  the  money  foolishly  so  that 


318  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

they  are  very  often  in  financial  difficulties  and 
if  a  legacy  comes  to  them  they  are  more  likely  to 
lose  it  through  legal  trouble  than  not  and  they 
are  sure  also  to  have  domestic  trouble. 

$  n  Mars  in  Gemini  when  well-aspected  gives  a 
keen,  active  and  alert  mentality.  People  with 
Mars  in  this  position  never  beat  about  the  bush. 
They  are  honest  and  outspoken  and  say  just  what 
they  mean  perhaps  at  times  a  little  too  bluntly, 
but  at  any  rate  they  are  no  hypocrites.  They 
love  to  measure  their  wits  against  others  in  de- 
bate and  therefore  this  position  makes  for  success 
in  law  or  literature.  They  also  succeed  in  the  en- 
gineering professions  for  they  are  resourceful, 
ingenious  and  mechanical,  apt  at  learning  and 
quick  to  grasp  a  problem  or  proposition.  But 
if  Mars  is  afflicted  in  Gemini  it  gives  a  cynical, 
sneering,  caustic  and  critical  disposition  and 
makes  these  people  feared  and  shunned  on  ac- 
count of  their  disagreeable  nature.  These  people 
are  also  vacillating  and  unable  to  make  a  decision. 
Thus  they  cannot  be  depended  on  to  stand  by 
their  word  or  their  promises  and  if  they  keep 
an  appointment  once  in  awhile  it  happens  by 
accident.  They  are  always  in  trouble  with  broth- 
ers, sisters  and  neighbors  and  liable  to  accidents 
when  traveling.  It  also  gives  a  predisposition  to 
bronchitis,  inflammation  of  the  lungs,  pleurisy 
and  pneumonia. 


MARS,   THE   PLANET   OF  ACTION  319 

$  <5>  Mars  in  Cancer  and  well-asp ected  gives  a  bold, 
independent  and  fearless  nature  with  a  tendency 
to  rebel  against  restraint,  a  home-loving  dispo- 
sition, very  industrious  and  ambitious  to  gather 
and  protect  all  things  which  make  for  comfort 
and  luxury,  so  that  he  is  a  good  provider  for  the 
home  in  every  respect.  But  at  the  same  time 
people  with  this  aspect  aim  to  exercise  unre- 
stricted authority  over  everything  and  everybody 
within  the  home.  They  tolerate  no  other  author- 
ity there.  This  position  makes  the  temper  rather 
uncertain  and  gives  a  tendency  and  a  desire  for 
change  of  occupation,  so  that  the  person  never 
really  settles  down  to  one  line  of  endeavor  but 
takes  up  a  number  of  vocations  and  drops  them 
as  suddenly.  If  Mars  is  afflicted  in  Cancer  it 
brings  domestic  troubles,  frequent  and  violent 
scenes  and  quarrels  in  the  home  with  a  tend- 
ency to  move  frequently  from  one  place  to 
another,  inflammatory  diseases  of  the  stomach, 
and  digestive  ailments,  also  accidents  by  fire  in 
the  home  through  recklessness  or  carelessness. 

$  SI  Mars  in  Leo  and  well-aspected  gives  an  active, 
industrious  and  honest  nature,  fearless  and  inde- 
pendent in  all  dealings  with  others,  a  keen  sense 
of  honor  and  personal  responsibility,  hence  emi- 
nently fitted  to  occupy  a  position  of  trust  either 
in  a  public  or  private  concern.  These  people  are 
enthusiastic  and  energetic  either  in  work  or  play, 


320  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

lovers  of  sport  and  a  good  time  generally.  They 
are  very  ardent  in  their  admiration  of  the  oppo- 
site sex  and  woo  the  object  of  their  affections 
with  an  intensity  that  carries  all  before  it,  over- 
rides all  obstacles  and  brings  the  matter  to  a 
speedy  consummation.  These  people  never  beat 
about  the  bush  but  say  what  they  mean  in  a  man- 
ner that  is  often  extremely  embarrassing  in  its 
directness.  They  are  strong  and  forceful  in  their 
arguments  either  for  or  against  that  which  they 
believe  or  disbelieve  and  therefore  they  not  infre- 
quently arouse  opposition  on  the  part  of  those 
who  differ  with  them.  They  are  very  venture- 
some and  often  take  a  pride  in  risk  either  in  the 
pursuit  of  pleasure  or  business.  When  Mars  ip 
afflicted  in  Leo  it  gives  a  fiery,  violent  temper 
and  a  liability  to  fever  and  inflammatory  dis- 
eases, palpitation  of  the  heart  and  hallucinations, 
biliousness,  fever  and  there  is  also  danger  of  in- 
ordinate affection,  trouble  in  courtship,  loss  of 
children  and  loss  through  speculations.  An  af- 
flicted Mars  in  Leo  gives  the  same  daring  as  when 
well-aspected  but  the  danger  of  accident  is 
greater  because  the  person  with  the  afflicted  plan- 
ets becomes  foolhardy  and  reckless. 

$  TT#  Mars  in  Virgo  when  well-aspected  gives  an  am- 
bitious nature  and  a  quick  intellect,  able  to  gra.sp 
an  idea  and  elaborate  upon  it.  It  strengthens  the 
mental  qualities  and  gives  a  scientific  turn  to  the 


MARS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ACTION  321 

mind  with  an  ability  to  apply  this  faculty  either 
in  research  work  or  in  business.  The  people  with 
this  aspect  are  therefore  energetic  and  enterpris- 
ing in  many  of  the  world's  industrial  affairs. 
There  their  shrewdness  and  quick-wittedness 
bring  them  success  and  preferment.  This  is  a 
good  position  for  people  who  are  engaged  in  any 
of  the  industries  connected  with  the  sick,  such  as 
nurses,  doctors,  chemists,  the  science  of  sanita- 
tion and  hygiene,  preparation  of  health-foods 
and  kindred  occupations.  If  people  with  Mars 
in  Virgo  are  themselves  overtaken  by  disease 
this  position  gives  them  the  ability  to  recuperate 
quickly  and  makes  them  less  liable  to  become 
chronic  invalids  as  so  many  other  Virgo  people 
are. 

When  Mars  is  afflicted  in  Virgo  it  subjects 
the  mind  to  worry  and  irritability,  with  a  tend- 
ency to  brood  over  troubles  in  life  which  are 
mostly  illusory.  No  matter  how  or  where  such 
people  are  employed  they  are  always  critical  to- 
ward their  fellow-employees  and  the  employer 
and  dissatisfied  with  everything  connected  with 
their  work.  They  are  also  of  a  dishonest  nature 
and  cannot  be  trusted  in  a  position  of  responsi- 
bility. This  position  also  makes  people  over- 
indulgent  of  their  appetites  and  subject  to  in- 
testinal disorders. 

$  =?=     Mars  in  Libra  and  well-aspected  gives  an  ar- 
dent, demonstrative  and  loving  nature  which  is 

21 


322  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

very  greatly  attracted  to  the  opposite  sex  and 
therefore  it  inclines  to  an  early  marriage.  It 
also  gives  an  enthusiastic  love  of  art  and  beauty 
in  all  its  phases  and  it  makes  the  person  very 
popular  with  the  public  or  in  societies  of  a  social 
or  religious  nature.  This  is  an  excellent  position 
for  a  lawyer,  as  it  will  bring  much  activity  in 
this  line  and  it  is  a  good  indication  of  general 
health.  But  when  Mars  is  afflicted  in  Libra  it 
makes  the  person  very  unpopular  and  subject 
to  the  opposition  and  criticism  of  the  community, 
danger  of  public  scandal  on  account  of  unfaith- 
fulness in  this  relation,  for  Mars  in  Libra  always 
produces  a  strong  attraction  toward  the  opposite 
sex  and  if  he  is  afflicted  there  the  nature  is  amor- 
ous and  fickle  with  the  natural  result  that  trouble 
arises  by  playing  with  the  affections  of  others. 

$  TTt  Mars  in  Scorpio  when  well-aspected  gives  a 
keen,  sharp  and  forceful  mentality,  a  rather 
blunt  manner  and  an  imperviousness  to  the  finer 
sensibilities  of  others,  consequently  they  often 
make  themselves  disliked  at  first  until  people  get 
used  to  them  and  realize  that  they  are  not  such 
ogres  as  they  seem.  They  are  very  ingenious 
and  mechanical,  with  indomitable  courage  and 
inexhaustible  energy  which  carries  them  over 
all  obstacles  to  whatever  goal  they  set  themselves. 
In  this  respect  they  are  very  selfish  and  ready 
to  sacrifice  whatever  stands  in  their  way.  They 
make  good  police  officers,  soldiers  and  surgeons 


MARS,   THE   PLANET   OF   ACTION  323 

and  are  able  to  fill  any  other  position  where  a 
dominant  authority  is  required,  or  skill  with 
sharp  tools.  In  a  woman's  horoscope  it  shows 
that  the  husband  has  good  earning  capacity,  but 
is  rather  too  free  and  generous  with  his  means. 
It  also  indicates  the  possibility  of  a  legacy. 

When  Mars  is  afflicted  in  Scorpio  it  brings 
out  the  worst  side  of  the  passional  nature  and 
makes  the  person  an  inveterate  sex-fiend  or  ad- 
dicted to  solitary  vice  that  saps  the  vitality,  and 
unless  corrected  it  is  liable  to  bring  the  person 
to  an  early  grave.  In  a  woman's  horoscope  it 
indicates  that  the  husband  will  squander  his 
money  on  gratification  of  self,  also  that  parturi- 
tion will  be  a  dangerous  event.  In  either  sex 
Mars  in  Scorpio  indicates  a  quarrelsome  nature 
and  a  biting  tongue. 

/  Mars  in  Sagittarius  and  well-aspected  gives 
an  argumentative  disposition  and  fondness  of 
debating  on  subjects  of  a  serious  nature  such  as 
law,  philosophy  and  religion.  It  makes  the  per- 
son candid  and  open  in  all  his  dealings  with 
others,  full  of  enthusiasm  and  ambition,  anx- 
ious to  appear  well  in  the  eyes  of  the  community, 
although  he  would  scorn  to  cater  to  the  ideas  of 
others  where  they  do  not  coincide  with  his  ideas 
of  probity  and  justice.  These  people  make  in- 
teresting and  ideal  entertainers,  especially  in 
later  life  for  they  are  fond  of  traveling  and  are 
keen  observers,  hence  they  always  have  a  fund 


324  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

of  interesting  and  instructive  information  which 
they  are  both  willing  and  anxious  to  impart  to 
their  hearers.  These  people  are  also  fond  of 
sports  and  out-door  exercise,  in  which  they  usu- 
ally excel  and  a  well-aspected  Mars  in  Sagittarius 
is  an  ideal  position  for  a  lawyer.  It  makes  for 
much  success  in  that  direction  by  sharpening  and 
quickening  the  mental  and  oratorical  faculties. 
When  Mars  is  afflicted  in  Sagittarius  he 
gives  a  sharp  tongue  and  a  quarrelsome  dispo- 
sition and  there  is  a  dishonest  streak  in  the  na- 
ture, therefore  such  people  are  often  found  gen- 
erally disliked  in  the  community  and  particu- 
larly in  social  circles,  for  they  seem  to  be  always 
at  variance  with  the  ideas  and  opinions  of  others 
and  adopt  a  most  supercilious  attitude  toward 
those  with  whom  they  disagree.  These  people 
are  also  liable  to  meet  with  accidents  when  they 
travel  and  to  sustain  a  number  of  broken  bones. 

,$  V3  Mars  in  Capricorn  when  well-aspected  adds 
much  strength  to  the  character  for  it  gives  an 
ambitious  and  enthusiastic  disposition  backed 

j  by  an  indomitable  courage  and  a  well-nigh  inex- 
haustible energy  together  with  a  patient  per- 
sistence and  perseverance  that  is  bound  to  over- 
come all  obstacles  and  in  the  end  achieve  the 
desired  goal.  Therefore  people  with  Mars  in  this 
position  are  bound  to  rise  in  life,  particularly 
if  Capricorn  be  placed  in  the  Tenth  House.  It 
invites  the  respect  and  esteem  of  the  community 


MARS,   THE   PLANET   OF   ACTION  325 

so  that  people  with  this  configuration  are  often 
offered  public  appointments  in  addition  to  their 
private  enterprises  and  they  serve  well  in  posts 
of  honor  for  they  are  naturally  fitted  to  take 
great  responsibilities  and  carry  on  great  enter- 
prises. The  wider  their  scope  of  action  the  bet- 
ter they  like  it,  for  they  are  superlatively  effi- 
cient. 

When  Mars  is  afflicted  in  Capricorn  there 
will  be  a  similar  ambition  to  do  great  things  but 
the  person  will  be  rash,  impulsive  and  head- 
strong so  that  he  overreaches  himself  and  takes 
upon  himself  more  than  he  can  carry  through. 
He  will  also  lack  the  persistence  and  persever- 
ance necessary  to  overcome  obstacles  and  as  the 
disposition  will  be  basically  dishonest,  though 
he  may  rise  on  account  of  his  enthusiasm  and 
pretentious  nature  to  some  prominence  he  is  cer- 
tain to  be  shorn  of  his  authority  before  very 
long  and  become  an  object  of  scorn  and  derision 
in  the  community.  There  is  nothing  worse  than 
an  afflicted  Mars  in  Capricorn.  It  also  gives  a 
liability  to  accidents  affecting  the  limbs  and  its 
reflex  action  on  the  part  of  the  body  ruled  by 
the  opposite  sign,  viz.,  the  stomach,  gives  a  tend- 
ency to  gastric  troubles.  People  with  this  afflic- 
tion also  have  a  hasty  temper  and  a  vindictive 
disposition. 

7  Mars  in  Aquarius  when  well-aspected  makes 
the  person  quick-witted  and  intuitive,  ingenious 


326  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

and  original,  enterprising  and  ambitious,  a  hard 
worker  for  success  in  whatever  line  he  chooses 
in  life.  Hence  he  will  gain  friendship  from  oth- 
ers who  are  able  to  help  him  realize  his  hopes 
and  wishes.  These  people  are  also  very  mechan- 
ical and  ingenious,  particularly  in  things  con- 
nected with  the  electrical  science.  They  also  suc- 
ceed well  as  managers,  officials  or  workers  in 
and  for  a  philanthropic  society  or  public  utility 
corporation. 

When  Mars  is  afflicted  in  Aquarius  it  makes 
the  person  too  independent,  bombastic  and  re- 
sentful of  authority,  blunt  of  speech  and  manner 
toward  others,  but  resentful  in  the  highest  de- 
gree if  he  is  not  treated  with  what  he  considers 
proper  respect  and  consideration.  Hence  such 
people  are  very  difficult  to  get  along  with  and 
often  quarrel  with  everybody  around  them. 
There  is  a  tendency  to  loss  through  gambling 
and  speculation.  An  afflicted  Mars  in  Aquarius 
also  gives  a  tendency  to  trouble  with  the  eyes 
because  Aquarius  governs  the  ethers  and  by  re- 
flex action  the  opposite  sign  Leo  may  cause  pal- 
pitation of  the  heart. 

$  ^  Mars  in  Pisces  when  well-aspected  gives  abil- 
ity as  a  detective,  warden  of  a  prison  or  surgeon 
in  a  hospital  and  kindred  positions  where  the 
person  does  not  come  in  direct  contact  with  the 
public,  but  exercises  authority  in  an  obscure 


MARS,  THE   PLANET   OF   ACTION  327 

manner.  It  also  gives  a  tendency  toward  secret 
love  affairs  which  the  person  is  able  to  hide  from 
the  public  eye.  But  when  Mars  is  afflicted  in 
Pisces  the  indulgence  of  clandestine  intercourse 
will  bring  trouble  into  the  life.  There  is  also 
liability  to  suffer  from  the  attacks  of  secret  ene- 
mies and  to  become  enmeshed  in  the  net  of  the 
law  and  suffer  imprisonment,  or  it  may  manifest 
as  an  inordinate  love  of  strong  drink  which  will 
then  cause  imprisonment  and  make  the  person 
a  ward  of  the  community.  Much  trouble  and 
many  misfortunes  are  indicated  because  the  na- 
ture is  untruthful. 

MARS  IN  ASPECT  WITH  THE  OTHER  PLANETS 

O  P  6  *  A  $  The  Sun  parallel,  conjunction,  sex- 
tile  or  trine  to  Mars.  The  conjunction  gives  a 
tendency  to  fever,  especially  if  it  occurs  in 
Aries,  the  sign  which  governs  the  head,  but  it 
is  curious  that  people  with  that  configuration 
seem  also  to  be  able  to  endure  a  much  higher 
temperature  than  others,  and  come  unscathed 
through  such  a  siege  of  sickness  as  would  have 
ordinarily  proved  fatal.  With  that  exception 
these  aspects  all  produce  a  superabundance  of 
vital  energy  which  assures  their  possessor  of  the 
most  radiant  health  all  through  life.  It  strength- 
ens the  constitution  and  makes  the  person  able 
to  endure  the  hardest  tasks,  and  it  gives  him  a 


328  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

dauntless  determination  and  courage  to  face 
the  greatest  odds.  Given  a  plan  to  follow  he 
may  be  trusted  to  overcome  all  physical  obsta- 
cles for  he  has  both  executive  and  constructive 
ability  together  with  an  indomitable  will  which 
refuses  to  recognize  defeat.  The  disposition  is 
frank  and  open  but  blunt  and  often  brusque; 
they  are  too  intensely  bent  on  whatever  they 
want  to  do  to  waste  time  in  politeness  and 
suavity,  therefore  they  brush  the  convention 
alities  aside  without  compunction  and  are  con- 
sequently not  liked  by  people  of  too  fine  sensi- 
bilities, but  they  are  men  and  women  of  action 
and  the  foremost  factors  in  the  world's  work; 
but  for  their  energy  and  enterprise  the  world 
would  move  much  more  slowly. 

O  D  £  $  The  Sun  square  or  opposition  to  Mars 
endows  the  person  with  an  abundance  of  en- 
-  ergy,  and  the  faculty  of  leadership,  but  it  is 
turned  to  purposes  of  deviltry  and  destruction; 
the  courage  implanted  by  the  good  aspects  be- 
comes foolhardiness  and  the  person  has  a  loud, 
overbearing,  swaggering  manner  and  is  ready  to 
fight  at  the  drop  of  a  hat ;  he  is  always  in  oppo- 
sition to  the  constituted  authority  and  ready  to 
rebel  wherever  he  sees  a  chance;  he  has  an 
extremely  fiery  temper  but  holds  no  resentment. 
On  account  of  these  qualities  he  is  universally 
disliked  by  both  employers  and  his  fellow  work- 


MARS,  THE  PLANET   OF  ACTION  329 

ers,  always  in  hot  water  and  never  stays  long 
in  any  place  for  he  is  an  agitator  and  trouble 
maker.  These  aspects  also  dispose  to  accidents 
in  which  the  person  may  be  maimed,  to  gunshot 
and  knife-wounds,  also  to  scalding,  fevers, 
and  inflammatory  complaints,  boils  and  erup- 
tions. 

Aspects  to  the  Sun  and  Mars  are"  absolutely 
necessary  to  give  zest  to  life;  even  adverse  as- 
pects are  better  than  none,  for  where  these 
planets  are  unaspected  the  person  is  usually 
listless,  vapid  and  will  never  amount  to  any- 
thing no  matter  how  good  the  figure  may  be  in 
other  respects. 

A  $  Venus  sextile  or  trine  to  Mars  will  give 
an  ambitious,  aspiring  and  adventurous  nature, 
amorous  and  extremely  demonstrative  in  its  af- 
fection, and  very  fond  of  sports  and  pleasures. 
It  gives  the  person  an  abundance  of  energy  and 
business  acumen,  consequently  he  has  a  splen- 
did earning  capacity,  but  no  matter  how  much 
money  he  makes  it  just  filters  through  his  fin- 
gers, for  he  loves  above  all  things  to  make  a  great 
outward  show  and  display.  Being  a  free  spender 
he  is  also  very  popular  among  his  associates,  and 
being  as  already  said  of  an  amorous  nature  he 
marries  either  very  early  or  his  marriage  is  a 
very  sudden  and  hasty  one.  These  aspects  are 
also  indications  of  money  by  marriage  or  legacy. 


330  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

9  6  P  $  Venus  conjunction  or  parallel  Mars  does 
not  always  operate  in  the  same  manner,  but  they 
are  to  be  classed  as  good  or  bad  aspects  accord- 
ing to  circumstances  and  the  matter  to  be 
judged.  For  instance,  Mars  conjunction  Venus 
makes  the  person  less  blunt  and  domineering, 
more  kind  and  polite,  and  is  therefore  good  in 
that  respect,  but  the  conjunction  also  strength- 
ens the  passional  nature ;  especially  if  it  occurs 
in  Scorpio,  and  in  the  Twelfth  House  it  often 
leads  to  self-abuse  so  that  in  those  cases  it  is 
decidedly  bad.  Therefore  students  must  exercise 
judgment  before  classing  these  aspects. 

9  D  8  $  Venus  square  or  opposition  to  Mars  gives 
a  very  voluptuous  and  sensuous  disposition  liable 
to  gross  exceses  in  the  gratification  of  the  pas- 
sions which  will  sap  the  vitality.  It  is  likely  to 
break  down  the  health  and  constitution,  leaving 
the  person  a  wreck  on  the  sea  of  life  if  it  is  al- 
lowed a  free  rein.  These  people  are  altogether 
too  generous,  especially  where  the  opposite  sex 
is  concerned.  They  are  very  extravagant  and  on 
that  account  spend  more  than  they  can  afford 
on  themselves,  besides  what  they  squander  on 
their  many  amours,  so  that  no  matter  how  much 
money  they  make,  they  are  generally  in  financial 
difficulty,  and  not  infrequently  they  figure  as 
defendants  in  the  debtor's  court.  If  Mars  or 
Venus  are  in  Cancer,  Scorpio  or  Pisces  there  is 


MARS,  THE   PLANET   OF   ACTION  331 

a  tendency  to  such  a  dissolute  and  dissipated 
living;  such  a  craving  for  low  pleasures  that,  if 
indulged,  it  will  drag  the  human  being  down 
below  the  level  of  animals. 

*  A  $  Mercury  sextile  or  trine  to  Mars  gives  a 
keen,  sharp,  ingenious  and  resourceful  mental- 
ity. It  makes  the  person  enthusiastic  over  any 
proposition  which  appeals  to  him  and  he  has 
also  the  ability  to  enthuse  others  and  impress 
them  with  his  views.  He  is  an  indefatigable 
worker  in  any  cause  which  arouses  his  sympa- 
thies, but  he  is  no  visionary,  he  is  interested  only 
in  concrete  matters.  These  people  love  argument 
or  debate,  and  they  have  an  inexhaustible  fund 
of  wit  and  good  humor,  sometimes  blended  with 
a  vein  of  sarcasm  which  always  strikes  its  mark, 
yet  never  viciously  or  malicously.  They  also 
have  remarkable  dexterity  and  are  able  to  turn 
their  hands  to  whatever  task  is  required  and  do 
it  with  a  speed,  facility  and  expedition  that  is 
astonishing  to  say  the  least.  They  cannot  do 
anything  slowly  or  by  halves ;  whatever  they  un- 
dertake must  be  done  with  a  rush,  and  they  put 
their  whole  energy  into  it  so  that  they  may  ac- 
complish the  task  and  do  it  well,  hence  tlaese 
aspects  give  success  in  life,  in  almost  any  line 
of  endeavor  these  people  may  select,  but  prob- 
ably most  in  literature  or  the  mechanical  arts. 


332  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

5  6  P  $  Mercury  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Mars 
gives  the  same  mental  energy,  enthusiasm  and 
dexterity  as  the  definitely  good  aspects  but 
whether  they  are  used  for  constructive  and  good 
purposes  or  for  destructive  and  evil  depends 
upon  the  aspects,  house  position  and  sign  which 
they  occupy.  If  the  configuration  occurs  in  a 
sign  where  either  or  both  are  strong  and  well 
placed,  as  Mars  in  Aries  or  Capricorn,  or  Mer- 
cury in  Gemini  or  Virgo,  or  if  they  are  fortified 
by  good  aspects  from  the  Sun,  Venus  and  Ju- 
piter, Mars  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Mercury 
will  operate  similarly  to  the  sextile  or  trine  as 
stated  in  the  foregoing  paragraph,  wilich  see; 
but  if  Mars  and  Mercury  are  in  one  of  the  watery 
signs,  Cancer,  Scorpio  or  Pisces,  or  if  either  or 
both  are  afflicted  by  Saturn,  Uranus  or  Neptune, 
the  conjunction  or  parallel  of  Mars  and  Mercury 
will  give  the  same  evil  tendencies  as  the  square 
or  opposition  which  are  defined  in  the  next  para- 
graph. 

3  n  8  $  Mercury  square  or  opposition  to  Mars 
makes  people  quick-witted,  sharp  and  alert, 
quick-tempered,  impulsive  and  excitable,  liable 
to  jump  at  conclusions  and  act  before  they  think 
with  the  inevitable  result  that  they  are  always 
getting  themselves  or  other  people  into  trouble, 
hence  they  are  dangerous  associates.  They  are 
born  prevaricators  and  utterly  incapable  of  mak- 
ing an  exact  statement.  It  is  just  as  natural  for 


MARS,   THE   PLANET   OF   ACTION  333 

them  to  color  or  exaggerate  their  statements  as 
it  is  to  breathe.  They  are  vitriolic  in  their 
wrath  and  their  tongues  are  more  poisonous  than 
the  bite  of  a  rattlesnake,  hence  they  are  either 
feared  or  hated  by  those  who  are  unfortunate 
enough  to  be  bound  to  them  by  environment; 
all  who  can,  shun  them.  They  are  bullies  who 
are  bound  either  to  rule  or  ruin  wherever  they 
are  and  they  allow  no  obstacle  to  stand  in  their 
way  which  can  be  removed  either  by  force  or 
slander.  They  are  the  acme  of  selfishness,  swag- 
ger and  consummate  egotism.  The  foregoing 
tendencies  may  of  course  be  modified  by  other 
aspects,  but  if  they  are  not,  such  people  are  a 
menace  to  society.  If  either  Mars  or  Mercury 
are  placed  in  the  Sixth  or  Twelfth  Houses  or 
in  any  other  position  so  that  the  bad  aspect  acts 
upon  the  health,  there  is  a  liability  to  nervous 
prostration,  brain  fever  or  insanity. 

D  *  A  $  The  Moon  sextile  or  trine  to  Mars  gives 
a  wonderful  vitality  and  a  strong  physique  so 
that  the  person  is  able  to  withstand  almost  any 
other  testimonies  of  ill-health  which  are  over- 
ruled by  it.  The  power  of  endurance  is  increased 
and  the  person  can  survive  hardships  to  which 
people  ordinarily  succumb.  It  gives  a  resolute, 
courageous,  energetic  and  ambitious  mind  of  a 
resourceful  and  eminently  constructive  turn. 
It  makes  the  person  quick  but  not  precipitate  in 


334  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

his  decisions.  Thus  he  gains  the  confidence  and 
esteem  of  others  and  earns  considerable  money, 
but  the  nature  is  extremely  free  and  generous 
so  that  money  does  not  stay  by  these  people — 
they  spend  it  almost  as  fast  as  they  get  it. 

})  6  P  $  The  Moon  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Mars 
may  be  either  good  or  bad  according  to  the  sex 
of  the  person  and  the  department  of  life  we  are 
considering.  It  strengthens  the  health  and  the 
vitality,  particularly  in  the  horoscope  of  a 
woman.  In  the  horoscope  of  a  man  it  would 
indicate  a  robust  marriage  partner  of  a  domi- 
neering nature  and  with  respect  to  the  mind  it 
would  make  the  person  very  impulsive,  particu- 
larly if  placed  in  one  of  the  common  signs  or 
in  the  Third  or  Ninth  Houses.  It  also  gives  a 
very  bad  temper  but  not  so  bad  as  the  square 
or  opposition.  If  Mars  is  in  conjunction  or  par- 
allel to  the  Moon  in  Scorpio  it  gives  an  abnor- 
mal sexual  desire  which  will  not  be  denied,  par- 
ticularly if  Venus  is  there  also.  In  watery  signs 
it  inclines  to  drink,  and  in  any  place  it  makes 
the  person  restless  and  unsettled,  for  it  is  like 
mixing  fire  and  water. 

3)  D  8  $  The  Moon  square  or  opposition  to  Mar* 
gives  a  very  quick  temper  and  a  tendency  to 
hasty  or  impulsive  expressions  and  acts  that  may 
cause  the  person  a  great  deal  of  sorrow  and 
trouble.  They  resent  rules  or  regulations  or 


MARS,  THE   PLANET   OF  ACTION  335 

any  other  measures  that  tend  to  curb  their  de- 
sires or  the  gratification  of  their  appetites  in 
whatever  direction.  But  if  they  are  in  authority 
they  are  very  domineering  and  exacting  in  their 
demands  for  instant  obedience  upon  the  part  of 
others,  nor  do  they  hesitate  to  use  whatever  phy- 
sical force  may  be  necessary  to  compel  obedience 
if  they  think  they  can  do  so  without  too  great 
danger  to  themselves.  Sometimes  they  will  take 
desperate  chances  to  satisfy  their  spite.  Having 
an  improperly  balanced  mind  they  are  foolhardy 
in  their  venturesomeness  and  upon  occasion  they 
will  attempt  to  do  things  which  no  one  in  his 
sane  mind  would  try.  On  account  of  the  fore- 
going characteristics  such  people  make  many 
enemies  and  cause  a  great  deal  of  suffering  to 
others,  particularly  among  members  of  their  im- 
mediate family  who  cannot  very  well  get  away 
from  them.  If  these  aspects  occur  in  watery 
signs,  particularly  with  Mars  or  the  Moon  in 
Pisces  the  person  is  also  an  inveterate  drunkard. 
From  the  standpoint  of  health  they  give  a  tend- 
ency to  accidents  by  fire  and  water,  fevers  and 
acute  inflammatory  diseases,  wounds  and  gun- 
shot, diseases  of  the  genitals,  too  copious  menses, 
danger  in  parturition,  and  indigestion. 

*  A  $  Saturn  sexttte  or  trine  to  Mars  gives  a 
determined  and  energetic  nature  capable  of  in- 
tense and  sustained  action  and  obtaining  unusual 


336  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

results  thereby.  The  executive  ability,  dominant 
forcefulness  and  endurance  of  these  people  is 
remarkable  and  consequently  they  are  constantly 
accomplishing  what  others  cannot  achieve. 
Hence  they  always  rise  to  prominent  positions 
and  are  much  esteemed  on  account  of  their  abil- 
ity, but  they  are  seldom  liked,  for  these  aspects 
also  make  the  character  cruel  and  hard.  They 
give  a  strong  physique  and  general  good  health. 

£  6  PD  8  $  Saturn  conjunction,  parallel,  square 
or  opposition  to  Mars  are  thoroughly  bad  aspects 
indicating  a  selfish,  violent,  harsh  and  cruel  na- 
ture, quick  tempered  and  vindictive,  absolutely 
dishonest  and  untruthful,  unscrupulous  and  li- 
able to  public  disgrace  and  imprisonment,  also  to 
accident  and  a  violent  death,  and  if  one  of  the 
planets  is  essentially  dignified  or  exalted  the  evil 
influence  is  much  enhanced.  It  should  also  be  re- 
membered that  such  serious  defects  do  not  result 
from  one  aspect  alone  and  if  the  other  configu- 
rations in  the  horoscope  are  good  the  foregoing 
delineation  will  only  apply  in  a  mild  measure. 

24  *  A  $  Jupiter  sextile  or  trine  to  Mars.  It  is  the 
nature  of  Jupiter  to  be  somewhat  conservative 
and  dignified,  but  when  blended  with  the  fire  of 
Mars  it  gives  an  enthusiasm  and  an  ability  to 
influence  others  and  imbue  them  with  the  same 
feelings.  It  makes  the  nature  noble,  sincere,  hon- 
est and  straightforward.  This  aspect  is  also 


MARS,  THE   PLANET   OF   ACTION  337 

good  for  the  financial  prosperity  of  the  person 
for  both  Mars  and  Jupiter  when  well-a.spected 
attract  money,  but  they  differ  in  regard  to  dis- 
bursement. Jupiter  is  somewhat  conservative  in 
that  respect,  but  where  the  Martian  and  Jupi- 
terian  aspects  are  blended  by  a  good  aspect  the 
result  is  an  ideal,  generous  nature,  neither  too 
lavish  nor  too  conservative,  but  able  to  strike 
the  happy  medium.  These  people  have  much  in- 
genuity and  constructive  ability  and  whatever 
they  do  they  put  their  whole  heart  into  it.  Hence 
they  are  successful  in  business  and  popular  in  so- 
ciety. They  are  fond  of  out-door  sports  and 
games.  They  love  to  travel  and  gain  much  pleas- 
ure by  so  doing.  Mars  rules  the  haemoglobin  in 
the  blood  which  is  so  important  a  factor  in  health 
and  vitality  therefore  the  good  aspects  of  Jupiter 
and  Mars  increase  the  red  blood  corpuscles  with 
the  result  that  these  people  have  an  abundance 
of  health,  vitality,  power  and  endurance. 

U  P  6  $  Jupiter  parallel  or  conjunction  to  Mars 
strengthens  the  constitution  and  increases  the 
vitality  the  same  as  the  good  aspects.  It  also 
indicates  that  the  person  is  able  to  earn  much 
money  and  uses  it  freely  and  generously,  but  the 
mental  qualities  are  similar  to  those  conferred  by 
the  bad  aspects.  The  person  is  tricky,  deceit- 
ful, untruthful,  impulsive  in  judgment  and  not 
to  be  depended  upon.  If  the  conjunction  occurs 

22 


338     .        THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

in  one  of  the  watery  signs,  especially  in  Pisces 
he  will  probably  be  a  drunkard  though  this  is 
not  as  certain  as  with  the  square  and  opposition. 
These  people  are  generally  too  plethoric  and 
liable  to  apoplexy. 

U  D  S  $  Jupiter  square  or  opposition  to  Mars  is 
the  signature  of  the  gambler  and  if  one  of  the 
planets  is  in  a  watery  sign,  especially  in  Pisces 
he  will  be  a  drunkard  also,  a  tricky,  dishonest 
and  disreputable  character  who  always  acts 
through  impulse.  With  respect  to  health  we  find 
that  these  people  suffer  principally  from  blood 
and  liver  complaints,  the  circulation  is  poor  and 
the  blood  is  so  rich  that  there  is  danger  of  apo- 
plexy. 

¥  *  A  $  Uranus  sextile  or  trine  to  Mars  gives  an 
energetic  and  ambitious  disposition,  an  original, 
ingenious,  alert,  intuitive  mind  which  is  re- 
sourceful in  the  highest  degree  and  able  to  cope 
with  great  difficulties  under  trying  circum- 
stances. Therefore  people  with  this  configuration 
are  naturally  of  an  inventive  turn  of  mind  and 
successful  in  bringing  their  ideas  to  realization. 
Their  inventive  genius  expresses  itself  usually 
along  electrical  lines,  aviation  or  other  unusual 
directions  for  this  aspect  is  one  of  the  marks  oi 
the  pioneer  of  the  Aquarian  age,  where  science 
and  invention  will  reach  out  in  directions  that 
are  now  entirely  undreamed-of  even  as  possibil- 


MARS,   THE   PLANET   OF   ACTION  339 

ties.  But  while  these  people  are  dreamers  of 
dreams  they  are  also  practical,  energetic  and  en- 
terprising in  a  sufficient  degree  to  make  their 
dreams  come  true  in  the  world.  They  have  a 
wjde  vision  and  a  noble  nature  which  rises  over 
all  petty  distinctions  of  race,  creed  or  color  and 
recognizes  in  all  human  beings  the  divine  spark 
which  is  the  basis  of  universal  brotherhood. 
They  may  not  be  exactly  religious  in  the  ortho- 
dox sense  of  the  word,  but  their  ideas  are  truly 
cosmic,  hence  they  are  often  mistaken  for  vision- 
aries by  those  who  do  not  understand  them. 

6  PHH  8  $  Uranus  conjunction,  parallel,  sauare 
or  opposition  to  Mars  gives  an  erratic  and  eccen- 
tric disposition,  a  violent  temper  of  the  worst 
nature,  an  unusual  resentment  of  even  the  slight- 
est restraint  and  gives  the  person  a  stubborn,, 
headstrong  and  dogged  determination  t»  go1 
ahead  in  any  line  of  action  upon  which  he  has 
decided  no  matter  what  the  outcome.  He  will 
listen  to  neither  reason  nor  entreaty  but  follows 
his  own  course  in  defiance  of  all.  People  with 
this  configuration  often  become  anarchists  of  the 
reddest  type  for  they  do  not  even  stop  at  the 
shedding  of  blood  if  other  testimonies  in  the  fig- 
ure concur.  They  are  cruel,  hard  and  cold  with- 
out a  spark  of  true  love  though  they  may  be  in- 
flamed with  passion  of  the  most  burning  inten- 
sity. This  is  particularly  the  case  when  Mars  is 


34.0  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

square  Uranus  and  either  planet  is  placed  in 
Taurus  or  Scorpio.  In  a  woman's  horoscope 
Mars  square  Uranus  usually  leads  to  seduction 
no  matter  where  placed,  but  if  in  Taurus  or 
Scorpio  escape  is  almost  impossible.  The  other 
characteristics  of  these  planets  in  either  config- 
uration work  themselves  out  according  to  the 
signs  wherein  they  are  placed  so  that  their  place- 
ment in  Taurus  or  Scorpio  work  upon  the  sex 
which  is  governed  by  these  signs.  When  one  of 
these  planets  is  in  Scorpio  if  the  person  takes  up 
the  profession  of  surgery  he  will  become  very 
cruel  and  unfeeling,  ready  to  operate  for  the 
mere  pleasure  of  causing  pain  and  in  conse- 
quence or  in  pursuit  of  this  passion  he  will  prob- 
ably take  up  vivisection  and  develop  an  unusual 
ingenuity  in  torturing  his  victims.  With  Mars 
or  Uranus  in  Scorpio  or  Pisces  he  will  be  under- 
handed or  tricky  though  he  may  show  a  very 
different  front  to  the  pubilc.  In  Aries  it  will 
make  a  rattlebrain,  in  Gemini  and  Virgo  an  un- 
usually quick  mentality  but  quick  in  seeing  only 
how  to  trick  others,  in  Sagittarius  it  will  make 
the  person  very  materialistic,  atheistic  or  fanat- 
ical against  the  established  religion  or  society, 
thus  the  planets  blend  their  nature  with  each 
individual  sign. 

^  P  6  O  8  $  Neptune  parallel,  conjunction,  square 
or  opposition  to  Mars,  see  page  402. 

tj?  *  A  $   Neptune  sextile  or  trine  Mars,  see  page  402. 


CHAPTER  XV. 
PLANETARY  OCTAVES 

BEFORE  considering  the  effect  of  Uranus  and 
Neptune  in  the  various  signs  and  houses  it  may 
be  expedient  and  illuminating  to  study  their  relations 
to  Venus  and  Mercury  which  are  their  lower  octaves. 
That  such  a  relationship  exists  has  been  .sensed  by 
various  astrological  authors  who  by  speculation  and 
observation  have  learned  a  great  deal  about  these 
two  planets  and  what  they  have  brought  out  does 
great  credit  to  their  sagacity,  but  not  having  had  the 
benefit  of  esoteric  training  it  is  not  to  be  wondered  at 
that  they  have  become  confused  on  certain  points 
which  we  shall  now  explain  so  that  students  of  the 
esoteric  philosophy  may  see  how  these  explanations 
dovetail  into  the  general  philosophy  of  the  Western 
Wisdom  School,  and  thus  bear  out  the  statement  that 
Uranus  is  the  higher  octave  of  Venus  and  Neptune 
the  higher  octave  of  Mercury. 

The  Western  Wisdom  teaching  of  the  Rosieru- 
cians  states  that  man-in-the-making  was  plant-like 
and  bi-sexual  during  the  Hypoborean  Epoch  and 
thus  able  to  create  from  himself  without  the  necessity 
of  having  co-operation  from  anyone  else.  But  at 
that  time  he  was  without  a  brain  and  unable  to  think, 

341 


342  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

therefore  in  the  Lemurian  Epoch  the  angels  directed 
one-half  of  the  sex  force  upward  to  the  part  which  is 
now  the  head  and  used  it  for  the  formation  of  the  brain 
and  larynx.  The  process  is  plainly  traceable  in  the 
antenatal  development  of  the  foetus  which  accounts 
for  the  intimate  relation  between  the  sex  organs,  the 
larynx  and  the  brain,  observable  in  the  change  of 
voice  which  takes  place  when  the  boy  reaches  puberty 
and  the  mental  disability  which  follows  the  unre- 
strained abuse  of  the  generative  function.  Thus 
it  may  be  said  that  the  sex  function  whereby  new 
bodies  are  created  in  the  physical  world,  and  become 
our  physical  children,  is  closely  connected  with  the 
brain  and  larynx  which  man  uses  to  conceive  the  chil- 
dren of  his  brain  and  mind  and  give  them  vocal  ex- 
pression by  the  larynx.  It  is  a  matter  of  common 
knowledge  to  astrologers  that  man  is  incited  to  per- 
form the  generative  function  of  the  begetting  of  phy- 
sical children  by  the  love-ray  of  Venus ;  likewise  that 
the  ray  of  reason  emanating  from  Mercury  is  respon- 
sible for  the  begetting  of  the  children  of  mind  and 
their  vocal  expression  by  the  larynx,  so  that  both 
Mercury  and  Venus  are  creative  in  their  functions, 
one  upon  the  physical  plane,  the  other  upon  the  men- 
tal plane. 

Mercury  is  usually  associated  with  reason  and 
intelligence ;  to  him  is  ascribed  rule  over  the  cerebro- 
spinal  nervous  system,  wrhich  is  the  medium  of  trans- 
mission between  the  embodied  spirit  and  the  world 
without.  Thus  as  Neptune  signifies  the  sub-  and 


PLANETARY  OCTAVES  343 

superhuman  intelligences  who  live  and  move  in  the 
spiritual  realms  of  the  universe,  but  who  work  with 
and  upon  us,  so  Mercury  indicates  the  human  intelli- 
gence focused  upon  the  terrestrial,  physical  world 
wherein  we  live  from  birth  to  death.  Therefore  it  may 
be  said  that  Neptune  is  the  octave  of  Mercury,  but 
there  is  a  deeper  sense. 

Reference  to  a  textbook  of  anatomy  or  physi- 
ology will  show  that  lengthwise  fissures  in  the  spinal 
cord  divide  it  into  three  parts  which  enclose  a  hollow 
tube.  Each  of  these  columns  is  ruled  by  one  of  the 
Hierarchies  in  closest  touch  with  us:  the  lunar,  mar- 
tial and  mercurial;  one  or  the  other  predominating, 
according  to  the  stage  in  evolution  of  the  individual. 
In  the  spinal  canal  the  rays  of  Neptune  kindle  the 
spinal  spirit  fire  whereby  the  human  spirit  is  enabled 
to  pierce  the  veil  of  flesh  and  contact  the  worlds  be- 
yond; this  vision  is  colored  according  to  the  column 
of  the  cord  most  actively  excited.  In  the  childhood 
days  of  mankind  the  creative  force  which  is  now 
turned  outwards  to  build  ships,  houses,  railways, 
telephones,  etc.,  was  used  inwardly  to  build  the  organs 
of  our  body,  and  as  the  surrounding  physical  world 
is  photographed  upon  the  table  of  a  camera  obscura, 
so  the  spiritual  world  was  reflected  in  the  spinal  canal. 
There  man  beheld  the  first  lunar  God  Jehovah,  whose 
Angels  were  his  first  tutors.  Later  a  part  of  the 
Angels  who,  under  the  leadership  of  Lucifer  had  re- 
belled against  Jehovah  and  who  are  now  exiled  on 
the  planet  Mars  forced  entrance  to  the  spinal  cord 


344  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

of  man  and  incited  him  to  abuse  of  the  generative 
function.  The  spiritual  inner  vision  of  mankind 
faded  when  "their  eyes  were  opened  and  they  saw 
they  were  naked,"  then  they  lost  touch  with  the 
higher  self;  they  saw  only  the  person,  and  the  docile 
creature  of  Jehovah  was  soon  transformed  to  a  sav- 
age and  a  brute  under  the  impulses  of  the  Lucifer 
Spirits,  the  hierarchy  of  Mars,  but  by  their  prompt- 
ings man  has  also  learned  to  conquer  material  obsta- 
cles, to  build  outwardly  and  become  architect  of  the 
world. 

To  counteract  the  unmitigated  selfishness  bred 
by  the  Martian  Angels,  and  to  make  mankind  humane, 
our  Elder  Brothers  from  Mercury,  human  like  our- 
selves, whose  high  state  of  evolution  required  the 
high  vibration  generated  and  prevailing  in  close  prox- 
imity to  the  Sun,  were  required  to  invest  the  spinal 
cord  of  man  also,  and  through  their  labors  civiliza- 
tion has  taken  on  a  different  form,  mankind  is  again 
beginning  to  look  inwards. 

At  the  present  time  the  left  cerebral  hemisphere 
is  governed  by  Mercury,  and  the  pineal  gland,  its 
higher  octave,  is  ruled  by  Neptune  who  also  has  do- 
minion over  the  spinal  canal  which  is  the  avenue 
whereby  one  pole  of  the  creative  energy  was  origin- 
ally turned  upward  for  the  building  of  the  brain. 

,  The  ray  of  Neptune  carries  what  occultists  know 
as  the  Father  fire,  the  light  and  life  of  the  Divine 
Spirit,  which  expresses  itself  as  will.  This  it  focuses 
in  the  voluntary  nervous  system  of  the  physical  body 


PLANETARY  OCTAVES  345 

governed  by  its  lower  octave  Mercury  which  acting 
through  the  left  brain  galvanizes  the  body  into  speech 
and  action,  expressing  the  will  of  the  indwelling 
spirit. 

By  this  diversion  of  the  creative  energy  the  hu- 
man being  ceased,  as  already  said,  to  be  a  physical 
hermaphrodite,  a  complete  creative  unit,  and  was 
then  compelled  to  seek  a  mate  in  order  to  propagate 
the  species.  Therefore  the  Son,  the  Cosmic  Christ, 
focused  the  love-ray  of  the  Life  Spirit  upon  Uranus, 
(ruling  the  pituitary  body), who  transmits  it  to  the 
vital  body  where  Venus,  the  lower  octave  of  Uranus 
gives  it  expression  in  propagation  and  growth. 

Between  the  Divine  Spirit  and  Life  Spirit  on 
the  one  hand  and  their  counterparts,  the  physical  and 
vital  bodies,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  Human  Spirit 
ruled  by  the  Sun,  and  its  counterpart,  the  desire 
body,  ruled  by  the  lesser  light,  the  Moon.  But  this  is 
debatable  ground  contested  by  Jupiter  and  Mercury 
on  the  one  side,  Saturn  and  Mars  being  on  the  other. 

The  ray  of  Uranus  is  gradually  forging  a  second 
spinal  cord  by  drawing  the  lower  love-ray  of  Venus 
upward  and  transmuting  it  to  altruism,  conquering 
for  it  the  dominion  over  the  sympathetic  segment 
of  the  present  spinal  cord  and  the  right  cerebral  hem- 
isphere now  ruled  by  the  passionate  hierarchy  of 
Mars,  the  Lucifer  Spirits.  This  work  has  been  com- 
pletely accomplished  by  the  Adepts,  therefore  they 
have  no  need  to  marry  for  each  is  now  a  complete 
creative  unit  on  both  the  spiritual  and  physical 


346  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

planes,  having  turned  the  bi-polar  creative  force, 
masculine  and  feminine,  upward  through  the  double 
spinal  cord,  illuminated  and  raised  in  potential  en- 
ergy by  the  spinal  spirit  fires  of  Neptune  (Will)  and 
Uranus  (Love  and  Imagination).  This  creative  en- 
ergy conceives  in  the  twin  hemispheres  of  the  cere- 
brum, ruled  by  Mars  and  Mercury,  a  vehicle  fit  for 
the  expression  of  the  spirit,  which  is  then  sent  out 
and  objectified  in  the  world  by  the  spoken  creative 
word. 

This  is  the  secret  of  how  the  Adepts  form  a  new 
body  without  going  through  the  womb,  and  some  day 
all  humanity  will  attain  to  this  standard  of  perfection 
as  spiritual  hermaphrodites,  then  we  shall  no  longer 
be  "  a  little  lower  than  the  angels ' '  who  create  by  sim- 
ilar methods  but  we  shall  be  higher  than  they  are  now 
for  we  shall  then  have  the  reason  and  intellect  which 
they  lack,  in  addition  to  the  complete  creative  power. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM 

THE  love  ray  of  Venus  goes  out  to  the  mate  and 
blood  relations  but  by  a  good  aspect  of  Uranus  it 
is  raised  beyond  the  realm  of  sex  love  to  cosmic  pro- 
portions, a  love  such  as  that  which  Christ  must  have 
felt  when  he  wept  over  Jerusalem  and  said  that,  as 
a  hen  gathers  its  brood  under  its  wing,  so  would  he 
have  loved  to  gather  them  to  his  bosom.  The  people 
who  have  this  Uranian  love  therefore  become  build- 
ers of  society  associated  with  every  good  and  up- 
lifting movement.  An  adverse  aspect  of  Uranus  to 
Venus  on  the  other  hand,  has  the  most  degrading 
effect  on  the  Venus  function,  for  it  leads  to  disre- 
gard of  the  laws  and  conventions  of  society  and  to 
perversion  of  the  most  sacred  creative  function. 
Love,  is  a  much  abused  word,  and  the  emotion  thus 
miscalled  is  usually  so  tainted  with  desire  that  it  is 
Martian  passion  rather  than  Venusian  love.  Coali- 
tion, the  keyword  of  Venus,  suggests  a  most  intimate 
union,  a  blending  of  the  very  souls  of  two  or  more 
people  who  compose  a  family.  But  Altruism,  the 
keyword  of  Uranus,  hints  at  such  an  all-embracing 
love  as  our  Saviour  felt.  Thus  Uranus  is  the  octave 
347 


348  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

of  Venus  and  anyone  ready  to  enter  the  path  of  prep- 
aration which  leads  to  initiation  must  gradually  learn 
to  outgrow  the  Venus  love  which  makes  the  imme- 
diate family  all  in  all  and  begin  to  cutilvate  the  all- 
embracing  Uranian  altruism. 

This  goal  is  high  and  those  who  aim  so  high 
often  fall  very  low.  When  we  essay  to  transcend  the 
Venus  love  and  cultivate  the  Uranian  altruism  we 
are  thus  in  great  danger,  and  the  most  promising 
lives  are  sometimes  wrecked  by  the  pernicious  theory 
of  soul-mates,  which  leads  to  clandestine  love  affairs 
and  perversion  of  the  creative  function.  But  remem- 
ber this — altruism  does  not  require  return  of  the 
love  bestowed  upon  others,  it  has  absolutely  no  con- 
cern with  sex ;  it  will  not  lessen  the  love  for  our  fam- 
ily, but  they  being  nearest  to  us  will  feel  the  increase 
of  our  love  to  a  greater  degree  than  those  further 
away,  and  unless  our  love  brings  forth  such  fruit  it 
is  not  Uranian  and  will  not  further  us  upon  the  path 
of  attainment. 

Seeing  that  that  is  so,  we  may  readily  understand 
the  great  majority  of  humanity  cannot  yet  respond 
to  the  higher  side  of  Uranus,  and  its  effect  upon  the 
morals  is  therefore  principally  perversion  of  sex, 
clandestine  love  affairs,  free  love,  and  disregard  ot 
conventionality.  That  is,  of  course,  when  aspected 
by  squares  and  oppositions.  Under  such  conditions 
it  makes  the  person  unconventional  and  erratic,  re- 
bellious at  the  least  restraint,  very  independent  and 
brusque  in  manner,  fond  of  pioneer  work,  and  inves- 


URANUS,  THE   PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM      349 

tigation  of  unusual  things.  They  take  to  the  higher 
mechanics,  electricity,  aviation,  and  the  like,  as  a 
duck  to  water,  and  are  rather  proud  of  their  attain- 
ments. They  find  prominence  in  literature,  science, 
philosophy,  and  especially  in  the  occult  arts.  It 
also  gives  a  high  grade  of  musical  genius  when  con- 
figurated with  Venus,  and  if  Uranus  is  well  fortified 
by  position  and  aspects  it  qualifies  the  person  for 
leadership  in  an  unusual  way.  It  may  also  be  said 
that  the  effects  of  the  Uranian  ray  are  very  sudden 
and  unexpected,  whether  for  good  or  ill ;  it  comes 
like  a  bolt  out  of  the  blue,  and  as  we  respond  most 
easily  to  its  evil  side,  these  effects  are  generally  dis- 
astrous in  nature.  When  Uranus  is  on  the  Acsendant 
it  adds  length  to  the  body,  so  that  the  true  Uranians 
are  usually  very  tall. 

URANUS  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES 

J#  1  Uranus  in  the  First  House,  even  when  well- 
aspected,  makes  the  person  very  odd  and  eccen- 
tric in  his  habits,  so  that  he  seems  to  delight 
in  doing  exactly  the  things  that  are  against  the 
conventions  and  customs,  just  so  that  he  may 
appear  odd.  He  always  finds  an  original  way 
of  doing  things,  different  from  that  of  all  other 
people,  and  is  very  self-satisfied  in  his  opinion 
that  his  methods  and  ideas  are  better  than  any 
one  else's.  If  opposed  he  will  defend  his  ideas 
to  the  last  ditch,  if  Uranus  is  in  any  way  afflicted. 
But  when  Uranus  is  well-aspected  in  the  First 


350  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

House  there  is  usually  a  tolerance  for  the  opin- 
ions of  others,  a  spirit  of  give-and-take  which 
avoids  the  hard  feelings  generated  by  an  afflicted 
Uranus.  Uranus  on  the  Ascendant  also  makes 
the  person  very  restless;  there  are  many  sudden 
changes  in  the  life  and  it  will,  of  course,  depend 
upon  the  aspects  prevailing  at  the  time  whether 
the  changes  are  for  good  or  ill,  but  at  any  rate, 
the  call  of  the  far  fields  that  look  so  green,  are 
constantly  before  the  mind's  eye,  so  that  the 
Uranians  are  always  ready  to  be  the  pioneers 
in  new  undertakings  or  a  new  cause,  just  so  that 
it  is  something  that  has  not  been  tried  before, 
and  so  offers  a  chance  of  risk  and  adventure. 

¥2  Uranus  in  the  Second  House,  which  governs 
finance,  naturally  indicates  a  restless  and  unset- 
tled state  of  the  finances  of  the  person.  There 
will  be  many  ups  and  downs,  and  even  though 
such  a  person  may  have  other  good  aspects  that 
qualify  him  to  reason  accurately  concerning 
other  matters,  it  will  be  found  that  in  the  finan- 
cial department  he  is  unable  to  protect  himself 
against  these  sudden  and  unforeseen  losses,  or 
gains.  For  him  there  is  no  such  thing  as  a  staid 
and  solid  investment,  for  the  most  unlooked-for 
conditions  are  likely  to  turn  up  and  either  net 
him  an  altogether  unlooked-for  increase  or  else 
bring  about  an  equally  unaccountable  loss,  all 
with  such  suddenness  that  there  is  no  way  of 


URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM      351 

changing  the  matter.  Therefore  it  is  absolutely 
impossible  to  give  financial  advice  to  such  people, 
for  even  if  they  invested  in  a  proposition  as  solid 
as  the  proverbial  rock  of  Gibraltar,  it  is  doubt- 
ful if  an  earthquake  would  not  unsettle  it. 

W  3  Uranus  in  the  Third  House.  The  Third  House 
governs  brothers  and  sisters,  neighbors,  educa- 
tion, and  the  mental  or  intellectual  faculties. 
Therefore  this  position  strengthens  the  intui- 
tional abilities  of  the  person,  and  gives  a  certain 
predisposition  towards  what  is  commonly  called 
psychic  faculties.  Uranus  rules  the  ether,  hence 
the  Third  House  position  should  make  it  easy  for 
the  person  to  cultivate  spiritual  sight,  especially 
if  Uranus  is  well-aspected  with  the  Sun,  Moon, 
Venus  or  Mercury.  If  Uranus  is  afflicted  in  the 
Third  House  it  indicates  quarrels  with  neighbors, 
brothers  and  sisters,  probably  a  breaking  up  of 
the  family  ties,  also  that  the  education  will  be 
interfered  with  through  the  erratic,  self-willed 
conduct  of  the  person,  and  the  mind  will  be 
more  or  less  unsettled,  and  changeable  as  a 
weather-vane.  An  afflicted  Uranus  in  the  Third 
House  also  predisposes  to  accidents  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  afflicting  planet,  and  particu- 
larly when  on  short  journeys.  These  people,  it 
may  also  be  said,  are  subject  to  adventures  and 
strange  happenings  on  their  journeys  such  as  do 
not  usually  befall  other  people. 


352  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

J#4  Uranus  in  the  Fourth  House.  People  who 
have  Uranus  in  the  Fourth  House  ought  to  leave 
their  place  of  birth  as  soon  as  possible  for  they 
cannot  succeed  there.  Both  the  parents  and 
their  whole  neighborhood  and  environment  will 
be  antagonistic  to  them.  If  it  so  happens  that 
the  parents  are  wealthy  they  will  try  to  disin- 
herit a  child  with  Uranus  in  the  Fourth  House. 
Even  if  his  Seventh  and  Eighth  Houses  be  well 
fortified,  it  is  very  doubtful  if  he  would  win  in 
a  contest  for  his  share  of  the  patrimony, 
as  the  public  sentiment  in  his  birthplace,  where 
such  a  suit  would  probably  be  tried,  would  be 
so  much  against  him  that  he  would  lose  in  the 
end.  It  would  also  be  disastrous  for  such  a  per- 
son to  marry  and  establish  a  home  of  his  own, 
for  peace,  harmony  and  contentment  cannot 
exist  where  the  spasmodic  and  erratic  Uranus 
is ;  that  is  to  say,  if  it  is  afflicted.  If  it  is  well- 
aspected  it  is  also  doubtful  if  such  a  person 
would  ever  attempt  to  establish  a  home,  for  his 
sympathies  would  be  too  large  and  he  would 
probably  be  identified  with  wider  activities — a 
home  or  homes  on  a  larger  and  more  universal 
scale.  This  position  also  gives  a  very  strong  at- 
traction towards  the  occult  science. 

V  5  Uranus  in  the  Fifth  House.  The  Fifth  House 
rules  educational  activities,  publications,  pleas- 
ures, courtship,  and  childbirth.  The  erratic 


URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM     353 

Uranus  in  this  House  will  in  the  first  place  give 
some  very  unconventional  ideas  concerning  the 
intercourse  and  relation  of  the  sexes  and  usually 
leads  to  a  clandestine  relationship  contrary  to 
the  laws  of  the  land.  A  woman  with  this  con- 
figuration in  her  horoscope  is  particularly  prone 
to  be  taken  advantage  of  even  though  she  may 
not  consciously  be  guilty  of  inviting  undue  ad- 
vances. It  also  makes  parturition  very  difficult 
and  if  a  child  is  brought  to  birth  there  is  danger 
of  loss  by  some  sudden  accident  or  unusual  dis- 
ease. If  other  configurations  in  the  horoscope 
give  a  leaning  toward  literature,  a  person  who 
has  Uranus  in  the  Fifth  House  will  be  found 
to  espouse  some  unconventional  cause,  like  so- 
cialism, anarchism,  or  kindred  movements,  and 
if  Uranus  be  afflicted  by  Saturn,  Mars,  or  Nep- 
tune, the  articles  written  by  him,  or  the  paper 
published  by  him  or  with  which  he  is  connected, 
will  probably  incite  to  bloodshed,  conspiracy, 
and  treachery,  which  will  bring  the  person  into 
trouble  with  the  authorities.  If  on  the  other 
hand,  Uranus  be  well-aspected  from  the  Fifth 
House  in  a  horoscope  indicating  literary  ten- 
dencies, the  ideas  advocated  on  account  of  this 
Uranian  influence  will  probably  be  so  Utopian, 
idealistic,  and  altruistic  that  they  are  beyond 
the  contemporaries  of  the  person.  The  love  na- 
ture will  also  be  of  such  a  high  idealistic  strain 
that  few  if  any  will  be  able  to  respond,  and  this 

23 


354  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

may  also  mitigate  in  a  large  measure  the  physical 
trouble  indicated  in  parturition.  A  person  with 
a  well-aspected  Uranus  in  the  Fifth  House  would 
not  gamble,  and  if  one  who  has  an  afflicted 
Uranus  there  attempted  it,  he  would  naturally 
meet  with  loss,  no  matter  how  careful  he  might 
seem  to  be.  With  respect  to  the  pursuit  of 
pleasure  indulged  in  by  these  people,  we  shall 
find  them  attracted  to  all  new  and  strange  things. 
At  the  present  time  the  most  of  them  are  prob- 
ably longing  for  the  day  when  it  will  be  possible 
for  them  to  race  in  the  clouds  and  drive  aero- 
planes more  recklessly  than  they  are  now  driving 
automobiles. 

¥  6  Uranus  in  the  Sixth  House.  The  Sixth  House 
governs  the  employment  and  service,  also  health 
and  disease,  therefore  the  erratic,  spasmodic 
Uranus  in  the  Sixth  House  predisposes  to  oc- 
cupational diseases  of  a  strange  nature,  asphyx- 
iation, mental  and  nervous  disorders,  such  as 
epilepsy,  and  St.  Vitus  dance.  Even  if  Uranus 
is  well-aspected,  these  tendencies  are  not  en-, 
tirely  abrogated,  at  least,  a  person  with  Uranus 
in  this  position  will  be  very  nervous  and  high- 
strung  under  all  conditions.  With  respect  to 
employers  and  fellow-employees  this  position 
makes  the  person  very  irritable;  he  is  brusque 
and  abrupt  to  all  connected  with  his  work  and 
therefore  liable  to  trouble  in  employment  or  with 


URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM    ^355 

employees.  This  position  gives  a  tendency  to- 
wards mediumship  and  undesirable  phases  of 
psychic  experiences.  If  Uranus  is  much  afflicted 
there  is  also  danger  of  obsession  and  insanity. 

Uranus  in  the  Seventh  House,  indicates  a. 
romantic,  sudden,  or  ill-considered  marriage. 
Sometimes  a  common-law  or  other  irregular  form 
of  union  is  consummated  under  this  configura- 
tion. Often  the  marriage  partner  is  a  person 
never  thought  of  as  a  mate  until  the  Uranian 
ray  impels  to  marriage  on  the  spur  of  the  mo- 
ment. 

People  with  Uranus  in  the  Seventh  House 
are  usually  unfortunate  in  their  marriage  rela- 
tions, because  the  marriage  partner  has  the  spas- 
modic, inconstant,  independent  Uranian  nature,, 
chafes  under  the  limitation  and  cannot  remain 
true  to  any  one  person,  but  becomes  inveigled 
into  clandestine  relations  with  the  result  that 
the  marriage  is  often  dissolved  in  the  divorce 
court  and  separation  and  estrangement  follows; 
there  is  quite  often  a  public  scandal  in  connec- 
tion with  these  affairs,  or  it  may  indicate  the 
death  of  the  marriage  partner,  all  according  to 
aspects. 

People  with  Uranus  in  the  Seventh  House 
should  never  go  to  law,  for  no  matter  how  just 
their  cause  may  be  they  are  most  likely  to  be 
thwarted  or  checkmated  by  some  strange,  un- 


356  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

foreseen  or  sudden  circumstances  whereby  they 
are  apt  to  lose  their  case.  They  should  also 
avoid  public  office  or  position,  for  no  matter  how 
honest  they  may  be  themselves  they  are  likely 
to  become  involved  in  scandal  and  trouble  on 
that  account.  In  short,  this  Seventh  House  po- 
sition of  Uranus  is  bad  for  dealings  of  any  kind 
with  the  public  or  with  law  or  partners. 

J#8  Uranus  in  the  Eighth  House  is  a  good  omen, 
for  it  indicates  that  when  life  has  been  lived  to 
its  fullness  the  end  will  come  suddenly  and  thus 
the  person  will  be  spared  the  long  and  pitiful 
suffering  so  often  incident  to  the  transition  from 
the  physical  to  the  spiritual  worlds.  But  know- 
ing this  it  also  behooves  such  people  to  have  their 
house  in  readiness  and  order,  so  that  when  the 
end  comes  at  30  or  90  they  have  their  affairs  in 
shape. 

This  position  often  brings  an  unexpected 
legacy  through  the  marriage  partner  when  well- 
aspected ;  but  if  Uranus  is  afflicted  the  person 
may  become  involved  in  litigation  on  account  of 
or  in  connection  with  the  estate  of  someone  de- 
ceased. 

People  with  Uranus  in  the  Eighth  House 
often  show  great  interest  in  occult  subjects  and 
become  well  versed  in  mystic  lore.  It  also  gives 
a  predisposition  to  dreams  and  p.sychic  experi- 
ence. 


URANUS,   THE   PLANET   OF  ALTRUISM      357 

J#  9  Uranus  in  tlie  Ninth  House  gives  a  progressive 
and  independent  mind,  of  an  original  and  in- 
ventive turn,  sometimes  amounting  to  genius; 
the  intuition  is  highly  developed  and  these  peo- 
ple indulge  in  constructive  dreams  of  such  a 
nature  as  transform  the  world  in  the  course  of 
time — that  is,  provided  Uranus  is  well-aspected. 
Nevertheless  they  are  generally  looked  upon  as 
cranks  because  their  ideas  are  so  Utopian  and 
far  in  advance  of  our  present  stage  that  the  or- 
dinary human  beings  cannot  grasp  them.  On  the 
other  hand,  if  Uranus  is  afflicted  in  the  Ninth 
House,  particularly  if  by  Mars,  these  people  be- 
come red  anarchists  and  are  not  even  averse  to 
shedding  blood  in  order  to  attain  what  they  be- 
lieve is  the  ideal;  they  become  fanatical  in  what- 
ever cause  they  espouse. 

This  position  of  Uranus  also  indicates  trouble 
in  travel,  particularly  on  voyages,  and  danger  of 
accidents.  It  is  one  of  the  signs  which  make  the 
explorer  and  pioneer  in  the  discovery  and  devel- 
opment of  new  countries. 

Uranus  in  the  Tenth  House  indicates  an  orig- 
inal, eccentric  character,  with  a  contempt  for 
conventions,  who  follows  his  own  ideas  regard- 
less of  what  other  people  say  or  think,  hence 
these  people  are  often  looked  upon  as  black  sheep 
and  estranged  from  their  kindred,  but  this  they 
do  not  seem  to  regard  as  a  misfortune;  they  are 


358  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STABS 

ready  to  offer  up  all,  even  life  itself,  for  absolute 
freedom.  These  characteristics  also  bring  them 
into  public  discredit  and  disfavor.  The  life  is 
full  of  sudden  changes  for  better  or  worse  ac- 
cording to  the  other  planetary  aspects  prevail- 
ing. If  Uranus  is  much  afflicted  these  people 
never, make  a  success  in  life,  but  meet  with  con- 
tinual sorrow,  trouble,  disappointment  and  re- 
verses. When  Uranus  is  well-aspected  genius 
will  come  to  the  fore  and  is  likely  to  find  recogni- 
tion in  some  measure  at  least,  probably  by  pio- 
neer work  of  some  kind. 

Wll  Uranus  in  the  Eleventh  House.  Uranus  being 
lord  of  the  Eleventh  Sign,  Aquarius,  is  more 
at  home  in  the  Eleventh  House  than  in  any  of 
the  others,  therefore  he  exerts  a  strong  influence 
in  bringing  about  strange  and  eccentric  friend- 
ships with  people  of  an  original,  creative,  or  in- 
ventive turn  of  mind  who  will  be  a  benefit  to 
the  person  if  Uranus  is  well-aspected.  This  also 
indicates  that  through  such  friendships  the 
wishes,  hopes  and  aspirations  will  be  promoted 
and  reach  a  succesful  culmination.  If  on  the 
other  hand,  Uranus  is  afflicted  in  this  house, 
friends  are  apt  to  turn  traitors  or  at  least  use 
the  person  for  their  own  selfish  ends  as  far  as 
possible. 

*$  12  Uranus  in  the  Twelfth  House  indicates  loss  of 
reputation,  exile,  and  estrangement  from  one's 


URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM     359 

kin  and  country,  much  sickness  at  various  times 
of  life  and  confinement  in  hospitals,  if  Uranus  is 
well-aspected  or  without  configuration  with  any 
other  planet.  But  if  serious  afflictions  are  found 
it  indicates  confinement  in  prison  at  some  period 
of  the  life,  or  restraint  in  a  sanitarium  on  ac- 
count of  mental  trouble,  also  much  annoyance 
by  the  underhanded  action  of  others.  When 
well-aspected  it  brings  success  in  connection  with 
the  occult  arts  or  occult  institutions,  also  by  the 
invention  of  chemical  processes  which  remain 
secret  with  their  discoverer  instead  of  being  pro- 
tected by  patent.  These  people  are  haunted  all 
through  life  by  a  vague  fear  of  impending  dis- 
aster. 

URANUS  IN  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS 

T  Uranus  in  Aries  gives  an  original,  independ- 
ent nature,  full  of  energy  and  ambition,  ingen- 
ious, resourceful  and  capable  of  coping  with  dif- 
ficulties, especially  those  of  a  mechanical  or  elec- 
trical nature.  These  people  have  a  very  im- 
pulsive, abrupt  and  brusque  manner  which  often 
arouses  resentment  and  opposition  in  others  eveii 
though  no  offense  may  have  been  intended.  They 
are  seldom  satisfied  to  remain  in  one  place,  but 
are  fond  of  changes  and  rove  about  a  great  deal. 
Changes  of  place  and  position  are  often  forced 
upon  them  because  of  the  before-mentioned  blunt 
way  of  speaking. 


360  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

J#  b  Uranus  in  Taurus  gives  a  very  intuitive  na- 
ture but  stuborn  and  self-willed,  so  that  when 
these  people  have  made  up  their  minds  notnmg 
in  the  world  will  turn  them,  but  they  cling  to 
their  purpose  or  idea  with  the  quiet  determina- 
tion and  persistence  which  neither  persuasion 
nor  threats  can  alter.  If  Uranus  is  afflicted  they 
are  suspicious  and  jealous,  also  subject  to  very 
sudden  and  unexpected  reverses  in  financial  af- 
fairs. But  if  Uranus  is  well-aspected  the  oppo- 
site may  be  judged,  and  comfortable  financial 
circumstances  may  be  looked  for. 

¥  IE  Uranus  in  Gemini  gives  a  highly  original,  in- 
tuitive and  versatile  nature,  fond  of  scientific  pur- 
suits in  general,  but  particularly  those  studies 
which  have  to  do  with  electricity,  aviation,  or 
other  similar  out-of-the-way  subjects.  These 
people  are  broad-minded  and  thoroughly  pro- 
gressive, pioneers  in  all  things  new  and  modern. 
Among  other  things  they  generally  have  an  in- 
clination for  the  study  of  occultism  and  astrol- 
ogy. They  are  well  liked  among  brothers,  sisters, 
and  neighbors.  All  this  providing  Uranus  is 
well-aspected ;  but  if  Uranus  is  afflicted  the  mind 
becomes  eccentric  and  full  of  vagaries  which 
make  the  person  a  nuisance  and  a  crank,  disliked 
by  everybody,  particularly  brothers,  sisters  and 
neighbors.  This  also  brings  trouble  and  liability 
to  accident  in  the  course  of  short  journeys. 


URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM      361 

HE  Uranus  in  Cancer.  Cancer  is  a  psychic  sign 
and  when  Uranus  is  there  it  indicates  that  the 
person  is  a  sensitive,,  attuned  to  the  psychic  vi- 
brations and  capable  of  cultivating  these  pow- 
ers, but  whether  for  good  or  ill  depends  upon  the 
aspects.  If  Uranus  is  afflicted  there  is  a  tend- 
ency to  nervous  indigestion  for  Cancer  rules  the 
stomach,  and  if  this  is  not  attended  to  serious 
stomach  trouble  may  be  expected.  These  people 
are  liable  to  separation  from  their  families, 
though  usually  much  against  their  will,  but  as 
they  are  generally  of  a  very  uncertain  temper, 
irritable  and  impatient,  they  are  usually  to 
blame  for  this  condition  and  are  only  getting 
their  just  deserts. 

Uranus  in  Leo  gives  a  very  determined  nature, 
rebellious  and  impatient  of  restraint  or  contra- 
diction, with  strong  likes  and  dislikes,  and  an 
utter  disregard  of  the  conventions  where  the 
passional  nature  is  involved.  The  personality 
is  strong,  forceful  and  self-assertive,  therefore 
these  people  often  incur  the  displeasure  of  others 
and  create  much  opposition.  They  are  very  in- 
constant in  affairs  of  the  heart — ''on  with  the 
new  love"  before  it  is  "off  with  the  old."  In 
a  woman's  horoscope  an  afflicted  Uranus  shows 
difficulty  in  childbirth,  perhaps  the  death  of  a 
child  by  accident  or  in  a  sudden,  unexpected 
manner,  also  a  strong  tendency  towards  palpi- 


362  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

tation  of  the  heart.  When  Uranus  is  well- 
aspected  in  Leo  both  courtship  and  domestic  af- 
fairs run  much  more  smoothly  and  it  indicates 
original  and  inventive  genius,  particularly  along 
educational  or  journalistic  lines,  also  for  enter- 
tainment and  amusement  of  the  public  and  gain 
thereby. 

Uranus  in  Virgo,  when  well-aspected  gives  & 
keen,  original,  scientific  and  mechanical  mind, 
a  strong  and  well  developed  intuitional  faculty 
and  a  keen  business  bent  which  will  make  for 
success  in  life,  financial  gain  by  the  employ- 
ment of  others. 

But  if  Uranus  is  afflicted  in  Virgo,  the  per- 
son is  apt  to  become  subject  to  strange  ailments, 
a  hypochondriac  of  a  fractious  and  irritable  turn 
of  mind,  a  burden  to  himself  and  those  who  have 
to  be  around  him.  This  position  is  also  full  of 
disappointment  in  the  aims  and  ambitions  of 
life,  especially  because  of  limitations  in  the  em- 
ployment or  in  dealing  with  employees,  which 
the  person  seems  unable  to  overcome. 

=  Uranus  in  Libra,  when  well-aspected  gives  lit- 
erary and  artistic  ability  of  an  unusual  and  orig- 
inal nature  where  the  person  follows  independ- 
ent lines  of  endeavor  and  expression,  often  in 
connection  with  occultism.  This  position  also 
gives  a  keen  intuition  and  an  attractive  person- 
ality, a  vivid  imagination.  It  signifies  partner- 


URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM      363 

ship,  union,  or  marriage  to  someone  who  will 
be  of  a  Uranian  character  and  of  much  benefit 
to  the  person. 

But  when  ill-placed  or  afflicted,  Uranus  in 
Libra  brings  sorrow,  trouble,  domestic  difficulty 
and  death  of  the  marriage  partner  by  a  sudden 
or  strange  ailment  or  accident.  Or  perhaps  the 
union  may  be  dissolved  in  the  divorce  court,  for 
people  with  the  temperament  described  by  an 
afflicted  Uranus  in  Libra  simply  cannot  remain 
true  to  one  person.  This  position  al,so  indicates 
trouble  with  the  public  or  the  authorities  on 
account  of  eccentric,  anarchistic,  or  socialistic 
activity. 

\.  Uranus  in  Scorpio,  when  well-aspected  gives 
the  person  a  forceful  and  determined  will,  bound 
to  overcome  all  obstacles  and  achieve  that  which 
he  sets  out  to  accomplish  by  persistence,  persever- 
ance and  dogged  determination;  the  mind  is 
sharp,  shrewd  and  secretive,  capable  of  grasp- 
ing details  and  concentrating  deeply  upon  what- 
ever problem  may  be  in  hand.  There  is  an  orig- 
inality and  mechanical  ability  amounting  to 
genius  and  a  love  for  science,  both  occult  and 
physical. 

But  when  ill-aspected,  Uranus  in  Scorpio 
lays  the  person  liable  to  accidents  and  even  as- 
sassination or  sudden  death  by  explosions,  elec- 
tricity, aeroplanes  and  kindred  unusual  methods. 


364  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

It  also  gives  a  tendency  to  trouble  with  the  gen- 
itals on  account  of  unbridled  abuse  of  the  sacred 
creative  function,  self-abuse  or  perversion. 

*?  }  Uranus  in  Sagittarius  gives  a  very  strong  in- 
tuitive faculty  with  a  tendency  to  dreams,  vis- 
ions, and  a  very  vivid  imagination.  This  posi- 
tion also  gives  a  strong  inclination  towards  an 
out-of-the-ordinary  belief,  including  the  theory 
and  practice  of  the  occult  arts.  When  weii-as- 
pected  this  position  gives  a  strong  grasp  of  the 
religious  and  educational  problems  of  the  day, 
with  a  philanthropic  desire  to  work  for  the  up- 
liftment  of  humanity,  a  desire  to  travel  for  the 
educational  advantages  thereby  to  be  obtained, 
and  success  in  gaining  these  points  under  favor- 
able aspects. 

When  afflicted,  Uranus  in  Sagittarius  gives 
a  very  eccentric  and  erratic  mentality,  particu- 
larly with  respect  to  law  and  religion.  There 
is  a  rebellion  against  the  social  condition  which 
often  brings  trouble  with  the  authorities,  also  a 
de.sire  to  force  one-sided  views  upon  the  world 
despite  all  protests  and  at  all  risk,  characteristics 
which  eventually  bring  discredit  and  disfavor. 

J£  V3  Uranus  in  Capricorn,  when  well-aspected  gives 
an  ambitious  and  enterprising  disposition,  a  se- 
rious, persevering  nature,  and  an  acute  sense  of 
responsibility  ,with  original  ideas  of  business 
that  bring  success,  especially  if  some  line  is  se- 


URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM      365 

lected  that  is  connected  with  the  electrical  or 
aerial  arts. 

If  Uranus  is  afflicted  it  gives  an  erratic  and 
eccentric  mind,  self-willed  and  stubborn,  bound 
to  either  rule  or  ruin,  quarrelsome  and  at  odds 
with  society  in  general  and  relatives  in  particu- 
lar. Hence  this  position  gives  a  great  deal  of 
sorrow  and  trouble  in  life,  frequently  involving 
sudden  changes  of  employment  and  environ- 
ment. 

"  Uranus  in  Aquarius,  when  well-aspected  is  at 
its  very  best,  for  he  is  ruler  of  this  sign  and 
therefore  in  harmony  with  its  vibrations.  Hence 
this  position  strengthens  the  intuition  and  orig- 
inality, and  directs  the  energies  into  humani- 
tarian lines  of  endeavor,  unselfish  devotion  to 
the  cause  of  friendship,  and  a  sincere  desire  to 
help  all  who  are  in  trouble.  These  people  make 
many  friends  and  generally  realize  their  hopes, 
wishes,  and  ambitions  because  they  are  of  such 
an  unselfish  nature  that  they  desire  what  is  good 
for  humanity  at  large  rather  than  that  which 
is  for  personal  gain.  This  position  also  gives 
considerable  mechanical  ability,  originality  and 
inventive  genius. 

But  if  Uranus  is  afflicted  in  the  sign  Aqua- 
rius, though  the  ambitions  may  be  as  strong  and 
sometimes  as  good,  and  as  pure  as  with  a  well- 
aspected  Uranus,  they  will  be  of  such  an  erratic 


366  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STAES 

nature  that  it  is  impossible  to  realize  the  desire, 
and  it  will  bring  trouble  with  friends,  or  pre- 
tended friends,  who  will  seek  to  use  the  person 
for  their  own  selfish  ends,  causing  much  sorrow 
and  disappointment. 

Jtf  X:  Uranus  in  Pisces,  when  well-aspected  indi- 
dicates  a  love  of  the  occult  arts  and  ability  of 
development  along  these  lines.  It  brings  friends 
and  associations  which  favor  these  studies.  But 
when  illaspected  it  leads  to  mediumship,  obses- 
sion, and  even  insanity,  if  this  tendency  to  in- 
tercourse with  spirits  is  followed  to  its  conclu- 
sion. This  position  makes  the  mind  nighty,  er- 
ratic, and  the  person  will  be  subject  to  unex- 
pected misfortune,  scandal,  or  suicide.  All 
through  life,  even  when  fortune  smiles  and  the 
skies  are  clear  to  all  outward  appearance  these 
people  are  haunted  by  a  vague  fear  of  impending 
disaster. 

ASPECTS  OF  URANUS  TO  THE  OTHER  PLANETS 

O  *  A  *&  The  Sun  sextile  or  trine  to  Uranus  makes 
the  person  original,  inventive  and  independent 
in  his  manner  of  conduct  and  personal  appear- 
ance. With  respect  to  food  and  certain  man- 
nerisms, he  is  what  people  call  eccentric  and  con- 
spicuous, yet  not  offensively  so,  given  to  pur- 
suits and  studies  which  people  consider  ''queer" 
such  as  occultism  and  astrology.  But  he  also 


URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM     367 

loves  delving  into  the  unknown  realms  after 
nature's  secrets  concerning  electricity  and  often 
becomes  a  successful  inventor  if  other  aspects 
give  the  mechanical  ability  to  work  his  schemes 
out.  Uranus  rules  the  ether  and  now  that  we 
are  nearing  the  Aquarian  Age  his  vibrations 
will  be  felt  in  increasing  measure  to  bring  to 
our  ken  methods  of  using  nature's  finer  forces 
and  the  people  with  Sun  sextile  or  trine  Uranus 
will  be  the  media  who  attract  and  interpret  them 
for  us  as  the  aerials  and  receivers  in  a  wireless 
station  collect  and  transcribe  the  messages  car- 
ried by  the  ether  waves  to  which  they  are  at- 
tuned. These  people  often  rise  in  life  through 
the  friendship  of  someone  above  them  in  the 
social  scale.  They  are  of  a  very  high-strung 
temperament  but  have  themselves  well  under 
control,  and  rarely  show  temper  or  anger.  They 
are  also  out-and-out  idealists. 

O  P  6  D  8  W  The  Sun  parallel,  conjunction,  square 
or  opposition  to  Uranus  makes  the  person  very 
high-strung,  nervous,  of  uncontrolled  emotions 
and  ready  to  fly  into  hysteria  on  any  or  no  provo- 
cation. It  predisposes  to  nervous  disorders  such 
as  St.  Vitus  dance,  epilep.sy  and  lack  of  co- 
ordination. It  makes  people  impulsive,  unrelia- 
ble, and  lacking  in  regard  for  the  convention- 
alities, highly  impatient  of  any  restraint  upon 
their  liberty  and  committed  to  the  theory  of 


368  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

affinities,  soul-mates  and  free  love,  hence  these 
people  are  undesirable  marriage  partners  and 
likely  to  figure  in  divorce  proceedings  or  scan- 
dals of  an  even  worse  nature.  There  is  also 
danger  of  trouble  on  account  of  connection  with 
anarchistic  plots  where  the  inventive  faculty 
may  find  scope  in  the  construction  of  explosives 
and  infernal  machines.  Unless  these  aspects  are 
modified  by  other  configurations  such  people  are 
among  the  most  dangerous  to  society.  They  are 
liable  to  accidents  from  lightning,  electricity  and 
all  through  life  they  meet  disappointment  from 
the  most  unexpected  quarters. 

$  *  A  ¥  Venus  sextile  or  trine  to  Uranus  makes 
the  person  mentally  alert,  of  quick  intuitive  per- 
ception and  exceedingly  magnetic,  especially  to 
the  opposite  sex ;  but  it  also  attracts  hosts  of 
friends  who  will  be  of  benefit  and  assistance  to 
him.  These  aspects  give  love  of  art,  music  and 
poetry  and  are  a  favorable  indication  of  a  happy 
marriage,  often  at  a  very  early  age  or  suddenly 
consummated.  The  good  aspects  between  Venus 
and  Uranus  also  sometimes  bring  to  the  subject 
love  of  a  platonic  nature  which  then  acts  as  an 
inspiration  in  the  life. 

$  6  P1?  Venus  .conjunction  or  parallel  to  Uranus. 
As  in  the  case  of  Mars  conjunction  to  Venus,  so 
also  in  the  case  of  Uranus  conjunction  to  Venus, 
there  is  a  doubt  as  to  whether  this  aspect  should 


URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM      369 

be  classed  as  good  or  evil.  This  must  be  settled 
in  the  individual  horoscope  where  it  occurs,  for 
it  may  work  either  way,  depending  upon  the 
other  planetary  configurations  and  the  student 
will  therefore  have  to  use  his  judgment  as  to 
how  he  classes  them.  If  Venus  is  otherwise  af- 
flicted in  the  horoscope,  for  instance,  the  con- 
junction or  parallel  will  further  accentuate  her 
evil  qualities  and  act  like  the  square  and  oppo- 
sition, but  if  she  is  well  placed  or  aspected 
Uranus  will  bring  out  the  nobler  side,  like  the 
sextile  or  trine. 

9  D  8  W  Venus  square  or  opposition  .  to  Uranus. 
The  square  or  opposition  always  brings  trouble 
through  the  sex  relation  —  quarrels,  divorces, 
public  scandals  through  clandestine  intercourse 
and  kindred  irregularities,  with  loss  of  friends, 
prestige  and  popularity,  exile  from  home  and 
family  and  sudden  financial  losses  through  unex- 
pected or  unforeseen  happenings.  There  is  a 
general  lack  of  balance,  an  erratic  personality. 


Mercury  sextile  or  trine  to  Uranus  gives 
an  original,  independent  and  eccentric  mind  im- 
patient of  the  fetters  of  fashion,  tradition  ana 
convention.  Such  a  person  is  strenuous  in  his 
efforts  to  hew  a  path  for  himself  in  complete  lib- 
erty. Therefore  this  is  the  hall-mark  of  the  pio- 
neer in  thought  and  invention,  the  sign  of  genius. 
Their  ideas  and  ideals  are  exceedingly  lofty, 


24 


370  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

progressive  and  inspiring,  in  fact  too  much  so 
in  the  opinion  of  the  average  man  or  woman  who 
look  upon  their  actions  and  vagaries  as  the  out- 
come of  a  diseased  mind.  Nevertheless  they  have 
plenty  of  friends  on  account  of  their  kindly  and 
sympathetic  nature  and  these  aspects  are  good 
for  a  literary  or  scientific  pursuit,  also  for  in- 
vention, particularly  those  which  have  to  do 
with  air  or  electricity. 

$  P  6  W  Mercury  parallel  or  conjunction  to 
Uranus.  If  Mercury  is  otherwise  afflicted  the 
conjunction  and  parallel  are  to  be  judged  as  bad 
aspects  and  read  accordingly,  but  if  Mercury  is 
otherwise  well  placed  and  aspected  the  delinea- 
tion given  for  the  sextile  and  trine  will  apply. 

V  D  8  #  Mercury  square  or  opposition  to  Uranus. 
Mercury  in  square  or  opposition  to  Uranus  is  the 
hall-mark  of  the  true  crank  or  anarchist  with  ex- 
treme ideas  to  tear  down  the  social  structure  and 
undertake  a  radical  reform  without  the  ability 
to  build  up  something  better.  People  with  these 
configurations  are  given  to  ranting  and  raving 
in  public  and  their  language  is  usually  as  cruel 
as  the  measures  they  advocate.  Whatever  ability 
they  possess  is  usually  turned  to  an  erratic  pur- 
pose and  therefore  they  are  ostracised  and  dis- 
liked wherever  they  go.  They  are  often  forced 
to  make  sudden  changes  to  escape  the  conse- 
quences of  their  erratic  conduct. 


URANUS,   THE   PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM      371 

*  A  ¥  The  Moon  sextile  or  trine  to  Uranus  gives 
great  originality  and  independence  to  the  mind 
which  is  quick,  intuitive  and  very  vivid  in  its 
imagination,  hence  the  person  has  inventive 
ability;  he  is  attracted  to  the  occult  art  and 
is  endowed  with  hypnotic  or  magnetic  powers, 
also  the  intuitional  ability  to  study  and  practice 
astrology.  If  electricity  is  adopted  as  a  vocation 
the  person  will  make  a  success  of  it.  These  as- 
pects also  give  the  person  a  peculiar  fascination 
for  the  opposite  sex  and  are  likely  to 'lead  to  a 
clandestine  love  affair  or  an  unconventional 
union. 

6  P1?  The  Moon  conjunction  or  parallel  to^ 
Uranus  gives  similar  mental  and  psychic  tend- 
encies as  the  good  aspects  and  also  the  liability 
to  irregular  love-affairs  as  the  good  aspects,  but 
these  tendencies  are  not  so  pronounced  and  a 
clandestine  love-affair  generated  under  the  con- 
junction of  Uranus  and  the  Moon  may  have  dis- 
tinctly disastrous  results  similar  to  those  men- 
tioned under  the  bad  aspects.  If  the  conjunc- 
tion occurs  in  Cancer  it  favors  nervous  indiges- 
tion; in  Leo  it  inclines  to  palpitation  of  the 
heart,  interferes  with  the  rhythm  of  the  heart- 
beat and  gives  a  spasmodic  action  which  will 
probably  prove  fatal  when  it  has  run  its  course; 
in  Scorpio  it  inclines  to  perverse  practices;  in 
Sagittarius  th»  reflex  action  would  be  felt  in 
the  lungs  and  similarly  with  the  other  signs. 


372  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

D  D  8  ^  The  Moon  square  or  opposition  to  Uranus 
makes  the  person  erratic  and  touchy  to  a  de- 
gree, a  walking  powder  magazine  ready  to  explode 
at  any  moment,  overbearing,  conceited  and  in- 
tolerant, shunned  by  all  who  can  possibly 
get  out  of  his  way.  If  such  people  are  employers 
nobody  can  work  for  them  and  if  they  are  em- 
ployees nobody  will  have  them.  They  never  re- 
main very  long  in  any  place,  but  are  either  dis- 
charged or  give  up  their  position  on  the  slightest 
provocation.  People  with  these  aspects  are  also 
attracted  to  the  occult  art  but  they  never  make 
a  success  at  it  because  of  their  erratic  mentality. 
Like  the  other  aspects  of  Uranus  and  the  Moon 
the  square  and  opposition  also  indicate  a  clan- 
destine attachment  either  on  the  part  of  the 
person  or  the  marriage  partner.  If  it  occurs  in 
the  Seventh  House  of  a  man 's  horoscope  it  proves 
the  wife  untrue  and  a  public  scandal  and  divorce 
will  eventually  ensue.  The  bad  aspects  of  the 
Sun  and  Uranus  give  similar  indications  in  the 
horoscope  of  a  woman. 

T?  *  A  W  Saturn  sextile  or  trine  Uranus  is  for- 
tunate for  a  public  career  in  an  official  ca- 
pacity for  it  gives  ambition  and  determination 
with  ability  to  concentrate  upon  the  work  in 
hand  and  to  exercise  authority,  plan  and  sys- 
tematize. It  strengthens  the  intuition  so  that 
such  people  are  guided  by  keen  interior  insight 


URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM     373 

when  new  and  important  steps  have  to  be  taken, 
therefore  such  people  are  in  demand  and  find 
positions  with  large  corporations  where  they  win 
their  way  through  sheer  ability.  The  mind  is 
both  mechanical  and  ingenious,  hence  this  posi- 
tion often  denotes  the  successful  inventor,  par- 
ticularly along  the  lines  of  electricity,  aerial 
navigation  and  kindred  pioneer  lines. 

T?  6  PV  Saturn  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Uranus 
has  an  influence  like  the  good  aspects  if  the 
planets  are  unafflicted,  elevated,  in  angles,  essen- 
tially dignified  or  exalted,  as  Saturn  in  Libra 
and  Capricorn  or  Uranus  in  Aquarius  or  Scor- 
pio, but  if  the  conjunction  occurs  in  signs  where 
either  of  the  planets  are  weak  or  afflicted,  like 
Saturn  in  Aries,  Cancer  or  Leo,  then  the  influ- 
ence will  be  detrimental  and  should  be  judged 
the  same  as  the  square  or  opposition. 

!?  D «?  *  Saturn  square  or  opposition  to  Uranus 
gives  an  unscrupulous  nature  with  an  extremely 
violent  temper.  The  outbursts  are  as  sudden  as 
a  bolt  from  the  blue  and  exhaust  the.  person 
completely.  These  people  are  very  eccentric 
and  look  at  everything  from  a  peculiar  angle — 
treacherous,  idle  and  indolent,  malicious  and  al- 
together dangerous  to  the  community.  These 
aspects  also  indicate  chronic  or  incurable  diseases 
according  to  the  signs  wherein  they  are  placed, 
but  as  often  said,  if  the  other  indications  in  the 


374  .THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

horoscope  are  good  the  influence  of  a  single  as- 
pect will  not  bring  out  such  evil  characteristics 
and  therefore  the  whole  horoscope  is  to  be  care- 
fully considered  before  judging  the  influences 
enumerated,  for  they  may  be  materially  minim- 
ized by  other  favorable  indications  in  the  horo- 
scope. 

"U  *  A  V  Jupiter  sextile  or  trine  to  Uranus  gives  <» 
strong,  independent  and  positive  personality 
with  an  ingenious,  inventive  and  original  turn 
of  mind.  Whatever  he  undertakes  he  will  carry 
to  a  conclusion  or  die  in  the  attempt.  This  posi- 
tion also  gives  a  broad,  humane  and  benevolent 
disposition  and  a  tendency  to  delve  into  the  oc- 
cult arts  and  sciences.  It  favors  association  with 
secret  orders  and  gives  promise  of  prosperity  in 
life.  Such  a  person  is  honest  and  sincere,  so- 
ciable, hospitable  and  friendly  to  all,  hence  likely 
to  benefit  a  great  deal  from  influential  friends 
in  an  official  position.  This  position  also  gives 
executive  ability  and  success  in  connection  with 
institutions  of  learning. 

1i  6  P1?  Jupiter  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Uranus 
gives  similar  indications  to  the  good  aspects  but 
the  influence  is  not  quite  so  decided,  particu- 
larly if  either  of  the  planets  is  weak  by  sign  or 
otherwise  afflicted.  In  that  case  it  will  be  found 
that  the  tendencies  conferred  are  more  like  those 
of  the  bad  aspects. 


URANUS,  THE   PLANET   OF  ALTRUISM      375 

U  D  8  #  Jupiter  square  or  opposition  to  Uranus 
gives  an  impulsive  nature  liable  to  act  in  a  sud- 
den impulsive,  erratic  or  unexpected  manner  to 
his  own  undoing.  Loss  by  speculation,  lawsuits 
and  impulsive  extravagance  are  also  indicated, 
many  changes  both  of  occupation  and  residence, 
•  loss  of  friends  and  reputation.  It  signifies  one 
of  an  ostentatious  nature  given  to  sham  and  cam- 
ouflage and  subterfuge,  generally  disliked  for  his 
insincerity  and  double  dealings;  a  confidence 
man,  bunko  man  or  cheap  gambler. 

$  *  A  #  Mars  sextile  or  trine  to  Uranus  gives  an 
energetic  and  ambitious  disposition,  an  original, 
ingenious,  alert,  intuitive  mind  which  is  resource- 
ful in  the  highest  degree  and  able  to  cope  with 
great  difficulties  under  trying  circumstances. 
Therefore  people  with  this  configuration  are  nat- 
urally of  an  inventive  turn  of  mind  and  success- 
ful in  bringing  their  ideas  to  realization.  Their 
inventive  genius  usually  expresses  itself  along 
electrical  lines,  aviation,  or  in  other  unusual  di- 
rections, for  this  aspect  is  one  of  the  marks  of 
the  pioneer  of  the  Aquarian  Age,  where  science 
and  inventions  will  reach  out  in  directions  that 
are  now  entirely  undreamed  of  even  as  possibili- 
ties. But  while  these  people  are  dreamers  of 
dreams  they  are  also  practical,  energetic  and  en- 
terprising in  a  sufficient  degree  to  make  their 
dreams  come  true  in  the  world.  They  have  a 


376  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

wide  vision  and  a  noble  nature  which  rises  over 
all  petty  distinctions  of  race,  creed  or  color  and 
recognizes  in  all  human  beings  the  divine  spark 
which  is  the  basis  of  universal  brotherhood.  They 
may  not  be  exactly  religious  in  the  orthodox 
sense  of  the  word  but  their  ideas  are  truly  cos- 
mic, hence  they  are  often  mistaken  for  vision- 
aries by  those  who  do  not  understand  them. 

$  6  PD  8  V  Mars  conjunction,  parallel,  square  or 
opposition  to  Uranus  gives  an  erratic  and  eccen- 
tric disposition,  a  violent  temper  of  the  worst 
nature,  an  unusual  resentment  of  even  the  slight- 
est restraint  and  gives  the  person  a  stubborn, 
headstrong  and  dogged  determination  to  go  ahead 
in  any  line  of  action  upon  which  he  has  decided 
no  matter  what  the  outcome.  He  will  listen  to 
neither  reason  nor  entreaty  but  follows  his  own 
course  in  defiance  of  all.  People  with  this  con- 
figuration very  often  become  anarchists  of  the 
reddest  type  for  they  do  not  even  stop  at  the 
shedding  of  blood,  if  other  testimonies  in  the 
figure  concur.  They  are  cruel,  hard  and  cold, 
without  a  spark  of  true  love  though  they  may 
be  inflamed  with  passion  of  the  most  burning  in- 
tensity. This  is  particularly  the  case  when  Mars 
is  square  Uranus  and  either  planet  is  placed  in 
Taurus  or  Scorpio.  In  a  woman's  horoscope 
Uranus  square  Mars  usually  leads  to  seduction 
no  matter  where  they  are  placed,  but  if  in  Tau- 


URANUS,  THE  PLANET  OF  ALTRUISM     377 

rus  or  Scorpio  escape  is  almost  impossible.  The 
other  characteristics  of  these  planets  in  either 
configuration  work  themselves  out  according  to 
the  signs  wherein  they  are  placed  so  that  their 
placement  in  Taurus  or  Scorpio  work  upon  the 
sex  which  is  governed  by  these  signs.  When 
one  of  these  planets  is  in  Scorpio,  if  the  person 
takes  up  the  profession  of  surgery  he  will  become 
very  cruel  and  unfeeling,  ready  to  operate  for 
the  mere  pleasure  of  causing  pain  and  in  conse- 
quence or  in  pursuit  of  this  passion  he  will  prob- 
ably take  up  vivisection  and  develop  an  unusual 
ingenuity  in  torturing  his  victims.  With  Uranus 
or  Mars  in  Scorpio  or  Pisces  he  will  be  under- 
handed or  tricky  though  he  may  show  a  very 
different  front  to  the  public.  In  Aries  it  will 
make  a  rattlebrain,  in  Gemini  and  Virgo  an 
unusually  quick  mentality  but  quick  in  seeing 
only  how  to  trick  others.  In  Sagittarius  it  will 
make  the  person  very  materialistic,  atheistic,  or 
fanatical  against  the  established  religion  or  so- 
ciety. Thus  the  planets  blend  their  individ- 
ual natures  with  the  sign. 

*  A  J?  Neptune  sextile  or  trine  to  Uranus  gives 
inclination  towards  the  occult  or  mystical  side 
of  life,  and  if  either  is  placed  in  the  Tenth 
House  the  person  usually  becomes  a  leader  or 
authority  in  these  lines,  he  wins  at  least  local 
recognition  and  if  other  testimonies  concur  his 


378  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

fame  will  be  national  or  international.  This 
position  will  bring  direct  touch  with  the  spirit- 
ual world  and  success  in  dealing  with  inhab- 
itants of  that  place.  It  i,s  also  productive  01 
dreams  and  visions  of  a  prophetic  and  inspira- 
tional nature.  It  strengthens  the  healing  powers 
and  will  consequently  enable  the  person  to  do 
a  great  deal  of  good  for  his  suffering  fellow-men. 
These  aspects  give  a  highly  developed  intuition 
which  amounts  almost  to  mind-reading.  There 
is  a  love  of  travel  and  exploration  of  the  phy- 
sical world  as  well  as  of  nature's  finer  realms. 
Nor  are  such  people  altogether  dreamers,  they 
have  a  strong  will  with  excellent  executive  and 
organizing  powers  which  will  aid  them  in  real- 
izing their  hopes,  wishes  and  ambitions  to  rise 
in  life  and  be  at  the  forefront  of  whatever  pro- 
fession they  select. 

ty  6  P1?  Neptune  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Uranus 
are  convertible  aspects,  if  the  planets  are  well 
placed  by  sign  and  otherwise  well-aspected, 
their  effect  will  be  similar  to  the  sextile  or  trine, 
though  not  so  pronounced,  but  if  they  are  cadent, 
weak  by  sign,  and  afflicted  they  are  only  a  little 
less  evil  than  when  aspected  by  square  or  oppo- 
sition. 

W  D  &  *&  Neptune  square  or  opposition  to  Uranus 
brings  underhanded,  deceptive  influences  into 
the  life  which  aim  to  undermine  the  reputation 


URANUS,  THE   PLANET   OF  ALTRUISM      379 

and  make  the  person  suffer  scandal  and  public 
disfavor,  sudden  and  unaccountable  reverses  in 
business  are  met  with,  or  trouble  in  social  affairs. 
There  is  the  same  love  of  travel  and  exploration 
as  given  by  the  good  aspects  but  the  person  can- 
not accomplish  his  aims  with  the  same  facility,  or 
if  he  does  it  is  to  his  disadvantage  and  brings 
added  trouble.  He  is  also  drawn  towards  the 
occult  or  mystic  side  of  life,  but  his  path  is  beset 
by  dangers  of  mediumship  and  obsession  and  all 
through  life  he  is  filled  with  premonitions  of 
danger  and  a  vague  dread  of  impending  disaster 
which  he  can  neither  account  for  nor  dispel  by 
will  or  reason,  hence  uncertainty  overshadows 
the  life  as  a  cloud  and  robs  him  of  peace  and 
contentment. 


CHAPTER  XVII. 

NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY 

AS  URANUS  is  the  octave  of  Venus  and  acts 
principally  upon  the  love  nature,  aiming  to 
elevate  mankind  in  matters  personal  and  social,  so 
Neptune  is  the  octave  of  Mercury,  and  altogether 
spiritual  in  its  aims.  As  Mercury  is  Lightbearer  of 
the  physical  Sun,  so  Neptune  is  Lightbearer  for  the 
spiritual  Sun,  (called  Vulcan  by  the  Western  Mys- 
tics). Intellectuality,  ruled  by  Mercury  lifted  us 
above  the  animal  and  made  man  man,  the  Spiritual- 
ity ruled  by  Neptune  will  in  time  raise  us  beyond 
the  state  of  the  human  and  make  us  divine. 

Neptune  really  signifies  what  we  may  call  "the 
gods"  commencing  with  the  supernormal  beings  we 
know  as  Elder  Brothers,  and  compassing  the  innum- 
erable hosts  of  spiritual  entities,  good,  bad,  and  indiff- 
erent, which  influence  our  evolution.  Its  position 
and  aspects  denote  our  relation  to  them;  mal- 
efic aspects  attract  agencies  of  a  nature  inimical  to 
our  welfare,  benefic  configurations  draw  upon  the 
good  forces.  Thus,  if  Neptune  is  placed  in  the  Tenth 
House,  trine  to  the  ascendant,  the  person  involved  will 
have  the  opportunity  to  become  a  leader  or  promi- 
nent in  a  movement  along  mystical  lines  as  denoted 
380 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      381 

by  the  exalted  position  of  Neptune.  His  body  will 
be  capable  of  receiving  the  finer  vibrations,  and  of 
coming  in  touch  with  the  spiritual  world,  as  denoted 
by  the  trine  of  the  ascendant.  On  the  other  hand, 
when  Neptune  is  placed  in  the  Twelfth  House,  whose 
nature  is  passive  and  productive  of  suffering,  that 
position  indicates  that  at  some  time,  perhaps  under 
a  square  from  the  midheaven,  the  evil  forces,  among 
whom  are  spirit-controls,  will  be  drawn  to  that  person 
and  endeavor  to  obtain  possession  of  the  body.  The 
conjunction  of  Neptune  with  the  ascendant  will  make 
the  body  sensitive  and  useable  for  spiritual  purposes, 
as  well  as  the  trine.  Given  the  opportunity  afforded 
by  the  first  aspect  mentioned,  the  man  may  become 
a  pupil  of  a  mystery  school  and  a  factor  for  great 
good  in  the  uplift  of  mankind;  placed  under  the 
affliction  of  the  second  aspect,  he  may  become  a  help- 
less tool  of  spirit-controls:  an  irresponsible  medium. 
But  there  is  one  factor  which  is  never  shown 
in  the  horoscope,  and  that  is  the  will  of  man.  He 
is  bound  at  some  time  in  life  to  meet  with  the  experi- 
ences denoted  by  his  horoscope,  and  the  opportunities 
there  indicated  will  be  placed  before  him  one  by  one 
in  orderly  succession,  as  the  clock  of  destiny  marks 
the  appropriate  time ;  but  how  he,  the  free  and  inde- 
pendent spirit,  meets  that  fated  experience,  no  one 
can  determine  beforehand,  and  the  man  in  whose 
horoscope  the  first  mentioned  benefic  configuration 
occurs  may  not  be  sufficiently  awake  to  the  great  op- 
portunity before  him  to  catch  it  on  the  wing,  it  may 


382  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

have  flown  before  he  realizes  it  was  there.  Yes,  he 
may  never  become  aware  of  the  fact.  On  the  other 
hand,  the  person  in  whose  life  the  square*  indicates 
the  assault  by  spiritual  forces  mentioned,  may  develop 
his  spiritual  muscle  by  resisting  the  onslaught  and 
become  a  victor  instead  of  being  vanquished.  Fore- 
warned is  forearmed. 

Neptune  was  not  discovered  until  1846,  but  we 
should  err  greatly  if  .we  supposed  the  influence  as- 
cribed to  it  fictitious  on  that  account,  for  as  the  per- 
son born  blind  lacks  the  organs  to  see  the  sunlight 
and  colors,  so  most  of  humanity  is  still  lacking  the 
sensibility  which  makes  them  amenable  to  the  vibra- 
tions of  Neptune.  (See  Chapter  on  that  subject,  also 
on  Planetary  Octaves).  But  we  are  gradually  devel- 
oping finer  feelings  and  becoming  more  able  to  re- 
spond to  his  influence.  At  first  these  influences  are 
mostly  felt  by  sensitives  who  become  occultists  when 
of  a  positive  nature  and  mediums  when  negative, 
others  gain  from  it  the  cunning  common  alike  to  the 
criminal  and  the  detective,  or  it  impels  the  weak- 
ling to  take  drugs  which  in  another  manner  pro- 
duces dreams  and  visions  similar  to  those  obtained 
by  the  mediumistic  process. 

Neptune  strong  in  the  figure  gives  a  very  vivid 
imagination  and  an  artistic  nature,  poetic,  musical, 
or  literary,  a  fondness  of  ease,  comfort  and  beautiful 
surroundings.  The  person  is  easily  swayed  by  the 
emotions,  and  when  Neptune  is  afflicted  may  become 
subject  to  trances,  fainting,  hysteria,  or  psychic 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      383 

storms.     There    is    a   love   of    travel,    preferably  by 
water. 

When  Neptune  is  weak  by  sign  or  afflicted  it  also 
inclines  to  drink  or  drugs,  it  robs  the  person  of  ambi- 
tion and  makes  him  an  indolent  loafer  or  cheat,  thor- 
oughly dishonest,  or  if  the  horoscope  is  otherwise 
good  he  may  become  the  prey  of  other  people  who 
will  rob  or  defraud  him.  People  with  an  afflicted 
Neptune  should  particularly  avoid  dealings  with 
large  corporations  or  they  may  be  subjected  to  swin- 
dles of  the  most  fantastic  nature. 

NEPTUNE  IN  THE  TWELVE  HOUSES 

t^l  Neptune  in  tlie  Ascendant,  or  First  House 
Neptune  is  by  nature  occult,  prophetic  and  spir- 
itual. The  Ascendant  signifies  the  body  wherein 
we  function  and  thus  by  combination  of  these 
ideas  we  find  that  Neptune  on  the  Ascendant 
will  give  a  particularly  sensitive  body  capable 
of  feeling  the  finer  vibrations  in  nature,  and  ac- 
cording to  the  aspects  which  the  planet  receives, 
these  will  be  either  good,  bad  or  indifferent.  If 
Neptune  is  strong  and  well  aspected  to  the  Sun, 
Jupiter  or  Uranus,  we  may  judge  that  there  is 
an  intensely  mystical  nature  latent  in  the  per- 
son. Whether  or  not  it  will  be  developed  is,  ol 
course,  another  question  depending  upon  oppor- 
tunity and  environment.  On  the  other  hand,  if 
Neptune  is  afflicted,  it  indicates  a  very  low  men- 


384  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

tality,  perhaps  even  insanity.  In  any  case  the 
nature  is  visionary,  romantic  and  generally  im- 
practical, at  least  from  the  worldly  standard. 
The  prophetic,  inspirational  and  visionary  facul- 
ties are  usually  highly  developed  when  Neptune 
is  unafflicted  in  the  First  House.  There  is  a  love 
of  art  and  music,  a  desire  for  luxury  and  what- 
ever gives  power  and  tone  to  life.  But  when 
Neptune  is  afflicted  in  the  First  House  the  na- 
ture is  indolent,  procrastinating  and  changeable ; 
perverted  tastes  and  desires  come  to  the  front 
and  impel  to  acts  of  indiscretion  which  may 
bring  grave  consequences.  There  is  indication 
of  prostitution  of  the  spiritual  faculties ;  a  de- 
ceptive, dishonest  disposition,  also  a  tendency 
to  mediumship  and  spirit  obsession. 

ty2  Neptune  in  the  Second  House  and  well  as- 
pected  brings  gain  through  all  things  in  which 
water  plays  a  prominent  part ;  also  through  mys- 
tic and  occult  matters  and  societies.  But  if  Nep- 
tune is  afflicted  the  financial  affairs  of  the  person 
will  always  be  in  an  uncertain,  chaotic  state. 

^3  Neptune  in  the  Third  House,  when  well- 
aspected  enhances  the  mental  faculties  to  a  con- 
siderable degree.  It  gives  ability  in  the  direc- 
tion of  inspirational  writing  and  speaking,  high 
ideals,  a  devotional  mind.  But  when  Neptune 
is  afflicted  in  the  Third  House  the  mind  is  of  a 
low  order,  cunning,  sometimes  imbecile  and 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      385 

idiotic,  subject  to  weird  and  uncanny  feelings 
and  perverted  appetites.  Neptune  in  the  Third 
House  also  gives  a  tendency  to  many  journeys, 
frequently  by  water,  but  whether  or  not  they 
are  successful  depends  upon  the  other  aspects. 

Neptune  in  the  Fourth  House,  when  well- 
aspected,  gives  a  spiritual  atmosphere  to  the 
home  with  unusual  conditions  for  soul-growth 
through  the  relationships  there  formed,  but  when 
afflicted  it  brings  fraud  and  deception,  unhap- 
piness  and  distrust,  peculiar  problems  and  many 
changes  of  residence.  There  is  also  a  liability  to 
extreme  poverty  at  the  close  of  life,  even  con- 
finement in  a  public  institution  of  charity. 

Neptune  in  the  Fifth  House,  strong  and  well- 
aspected,  indicates  a  successful  courtship  of  one 
of  a  highly  advanced  spiritual  nature,  success  as 
a  teacher  of  mystic  matters,  and  gain  by  invest- 
ment in  things  ruled  by  Neptune,  aquatic  sports 
and  any  other  business  in  which  the  watery  ele- 
ment is  strong. 

Neptune  in  the  Sixth  House,  well-aspected,  is 
a  favorable  indication  of  latent  psychic  facul- 
ties which  may  be  developed  with  profit  from  the 
spiritual  point  of  view  .  But  when  afflicted  it 
predisposes  to  the  prostitution  of  spiritual  fac- 
ulties by  mediumship,  etc.  Thus  the  person  may 
become  subject  to  spirit  control  and  run  grave 


25 


386  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

danger  of  obsession.  It  also  indicates  trouble 
and  loss  through  employees  and  a  liability  to 
chronic  wasting  diseases  and  deformity.  Usually 
these  tendencies  are  then  accentuated  by  a  sen- 
suous nature  and  a  self-indulgent  manner  of 
living. 

^7  Neptune  in  the  Seventh  House  and  well- 
aspected  indicates  a  marriage  to  one  of  an  oc- 
cult, inspirational  nature,  generally  a  platonic 
union  of  the  most  soul-satisfying  nature,  a  true 
companionship  of  two  who  are  really  mates.  It 
also  shows  success  as  a  public  speaker  on  occult 
or  mystical  subjects.  But  when  afflicted,  Nep- 
tune in  the  Seventh  House  shows  an  emotional, 
mediumistic,  unreliable  marriage  partner,  or 
there  may  be  fraud  or  deception  in  connection 
with  the  marriage,  perhaps  one  of  the  partners 
committing  bigamy.  This  position  also  indi- 
cates one  of  the  parasites  that  prey  upon  the 
public  in  general,  or  of  those  who  become  victims 
of  public  disfavor,  all  according  to  the  nature  of 
the  aspects.  They  show  whether  or  not  this  is 
merited. 

tj?8  Neptune  in  the  Eighth  House,  when  well- 
aspected,  gives  gain  through  the  marriage  part- 
ner, but  not  through  the  ordinary  channels  of 
business;  it  comes  in  a  peculiar  manner.  This 
position  is  also  favorable  for  occult  investiga- 
tion and  often  enables  the  person  who  has  it  to 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      387 

obtain  information  at  first  hand.  But  when  Nep- 
tune is  afflicted  in  the  Eighth  House  it  brings 
loss  by  fraud  or  deception  of  the  marriage  part- 
ner, financial  troubles  with  estates  or  corpora- 
tions and  a  strange,  unusual  ending  to  the  life. 

Neptune  in  the  Ninth  House  is  very  favorable 
for  the  cultivation  of  spiritual  faculties;  when, 
well-aspected,  it  brings  strange  visions  and  un- 
usual intuitional  forebodings  and  presentiments, 
also  profit  and  pleasure  in  connection  with  long 
journeys  or  voyages. 

When  Neptune  is  afflicted  in  the  Ninth . 
House  it  makes  the  mind  fearful  and  anxious,, 
always  on  the  qui  vive  with  vague  forebodings; 
it  inclines  to  travel  but  brings  trouble  in  that 
connection,  also  danger  of  legal  complication  and 
loss  on  that  account. 

Neptune  in  the  Tenth  House,  when  well- 
aspected  indicates  one  of  high  aspirations  and 
inspirations,  spiritually  inclined,  who  has  the 
ability  to  rise  to  leadership,  fame  and  honor,  in. 
connection  with  some  mystical  society  or  in  scien- 
tific research.  This  position  of  Neptune  also  in- 
dicates an  accident  to  one  of  the  parents,  prob- 
ably by  water,  while  the  person  is  still  a  child, 
but  when  the  planet  is  well-aspected  a  legacy 
often  accrues. 

Neptune  in  the  Tenth  House  and  trine  to 
the  Sun  or  Moon  are  sure  signs  of  the  ability  to 


S88  THE   MESSAGE  OF   THE   STARS 

cultivate  the  spiritual  sight  in' this  life.    A  num- 
ber of  well-known  seers  have  this  aspect. 

When  Neptune  is  afflicted  in  the  Tenth 
House  it  indicates  fraud,  deception  and  dishon- 
esty which  in  time  will  bring  their  reward  of 
sorrow,  trouble  and  scandal. 

tpll  Neptune  in  the  Eleventh  House  and  well- 
aspected  shows  a  person  of  high  spiritual  as- 
pirations and  the  ability  to  attract  others  of  a 
similar  nature  who  will  be  of  help  to  him  in 
realizing  his  desires,  hopes  and  wishes.  When 
Neptune  is  afflicted  in  the  Eleventh  House  it 
indicates  deception  and  treachery  on  the  part 
of  people  who  pose  as  friends ;  this  will  bring 
loss  and  trouble.  Therefore  people  with  this 
configuration  should  be  particularly  careful  who 
they  cultivate  and  admit  to  their  friendship. 

tpl2  Neptune  in  the  Twelfth  House,  well-aspected, 
brings  success  in  research  work  of  a  scientific  or 
occult  nature  which  is  carried  on  in  secret  or  far 
from  the  haunts  of  men.  It  also  indicates  a  secret 
soul-satisfying  or  clandestine  but  honorable 
relationship  with  someone  which  will  bring  bene- 
fit to  both  and  it  not  infrequently  happens  that 
this  friend  is  in  the  spirit  world,  but  the  relation 
is  much  more  close  in  such  cases  than  it  can 
«ver  be  between  friends  who  are  both  in  the  phy- 
sical body.  When  Neptune  is  afflicted  in  the 
Twelfth  House  it  gives  a  liability  to  confinement 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      389 
NEPTUNE  IN  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS 

and  restraint  in  a  public  institution  such  as  a 
hospital,  asylum,  or  prison,  on  account  of  secret 
but  powerful  enemies,  a  chronic  and  noisome  dis- 
ease or  insanity  due  to  perverted  practices. 

T  Neptune  in  Aries,  when  well-aspected  fills  a 
person  with  religious  enthusiasm,  though  not  al- 
ways of  the  orthodox  kind,  and  gives  him  the 
energy  and  ambition  to  push  forward  to  the  front 
rank  in  whatever  line  of  thought  and  belief  he 
espouses.  There  is  a  desire  to  elevate  humanity 
to  a  higher  and  more  noble  plane  of  life  and  on 
that  account  this  configuration  or  position  usu- 
ally brings  the  person  forward  as  a  public  char- 
acter of  more  or  less  importance,  according  to 
the  general  aspects  and  tenor  of  the  horoscope. 
But  when  afflicted,  Neptune  in  Aries  brings 
out  the  destructive  tendencies.  There  is  a  sim- 
ilar desire  to  raise  humanity  to  realms  of  hap- 
piness, but  the  methods  are  anarchistic  and  it 
incites  to  murder  of  those  whom  the  person  con- 
ceives to  be  the  enemies  of  society,  by  bomb  plot 
or  assassination,  and  lays  the  person  liable  to 
imprisonment  on  account  of  conspiracy  against 
the  government  or  others  in  authority. 

b  Neptune  in  Taurus  gives  a  kindly,  companion- 
able disposition  and  an  inclination  towards  the 
beautiful  and  artistic  in  nature.  He  is  fond  of 


S90  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

music  and  the  pleasures  of  life.  This  is  also  a 
good  omen  for  the  acquisition  of  land  or  prop- 
erty. But  when  Neptune  is  afflicted  in  Taurus 
it  gives  a  sensuous  and  passionate  nature  ana 
a  strong  tendency  to  gourmandize  which  in  time 
is  bound  to  bring  trouble  and  sorrow  in  its  wake. 

*£  n  Neptune  in  Gemini,  well-aspected,  is  one  of 
the  best  indications  of  unusual  mental  faculties, 
for  Neptune  is  the  octave  of  Mercury  the  planet 
of  mind,  logic  and  reason.  Hence  this  position 
develops  the  occult,  prophetic  and  inspirational 
faculties.  It  makes  the  person  sensitive  to  the 
finer  intuitional  and  inspirational  vibration^  in 
nature.  It  is  the  signature  of  genius  in  one  di- 
rection or  another  according  to  the  other  aspects 
in  the  horoscope.  It  gives  the  gift  of  oratory 
and  unusual  literary  ability,  and  makes  the  per- 
son a  fine  mechanician  or  mathematician;  in 
short,  there  is  no  field  of  endeavor  where  mental 
ingenuity  is  required,  that  the  person  with  Nep- 
tune in  Gemini,  well-aspected,  does  not  excel. 
But  when  Neptune  is  afflicted  in  Gemini  it 
indicates  inability  to  concentrate  to  any  good 
purpose.  The  mind  is  restless,  chaotic  and  wa- 
vering, inclined  to  cunning,  fraud  and  deception, 
or  at  best  it  makes  the  person  a  visionary  and 
a  dreamer  who  is  apt  to  become  the  dupe  of  oth- 
ers. There  is  generally  trouble  with  brothers, 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      391 

sisters  and  neighbors  who  cordially  dislike  the 
person  in  whose  horoscope  this  aspect  is  found. 

ty  2E>  Neptune  in  Cancer,  when  well-aspected,  gives 
an  intuitive,  sympathetic  and  lovable  nature 
quick  to  understand  the  sorrows  and  joys  of 
others  and  ready  to  feel  for  them  or  with  them. 
Hence  these  people  are  generally  very  much 
liked,  both  in  the  home  and  in  their  immediate 
circle  of  acquaintances.  This  position  also  brings 
them  in  touch  with  the  finer  forces  of  nature  and 
enables  them  to  cultivate  such  spiritual  facul- 
ties as  psychometry  and  a  species  of  intuition 
whereby  they  can  get  in  touch  with  whomsoever 
or  whatsoever  they  wish  for  the  help  and  benefit 
of  others.  They  are  very  versatile  in  the  spir- 
itual direction  and  may  reach  great  heights  by 
devotion,  which  is  strongly  expressed  in  them. 
But  when  Neptune  is  afflicted  in  Cancer  it  gives 
a  very  self-indulgent  disposition  which  generally 
exerts  a  baneful  influence  in  the  home,  perhaps 
more  by  inuendo  than  by  direct  malicious  ex- 
pression. This  position  also  gives  peculiar  tastes 
and  appetites  which  are  apt  to  cause  great  trou- 
ble to  the  alimentative  system  and  there  is  a 
strong  inclination  for  drugs  or  drink. 

^  Si  Neptune  in  Leo,  when  well-aspected,  gives  a 
generous,  sympathetic  and  warm-hearted  dispo- 
sition, a  sociable  nature,  fond  of  pleasures  and 
artistic  pursuits.  These  people  have  consider- 


392  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

able  ability  and  success  in  educational  pursuits 
because  of  an  intimate  understanding  of  the 
nature  of  others  and  the  faculty  of  imparting 
to  them  whatever  knowledge  they  possess  them- 
selves. They  are  very  conscientious  in  their  deal- 
ing^ with  others  and  successful  in  affairs  of  the 
heart. 

But  when  Neptune  is  afflicted  in  Leo  it 
makes  the  nature  super-sensual  and  therefore  lia- 
ble to  disappointments  in  love.  These  people  are 
governed  by  impulse  rather  than  by  reason; 
they  lack  the  stamina  to  face  an  issue,  are  cow- 
ardly, fickle  and  not  to  be  depended  upon;  they 
incur  a  general  dislike  among  their  acquaint- 
ances. 

Neptune  in  Virgo.  Mercury,  the  planet  of 
mind,  reason  and  logic  is  exalted  in  Virgo,  and 
the  occult,  prophetic,  inspirational,  spiritual,  de- 
votional and  musical  Neptune  is  the  octave  of 
Mercury,  hence  the  blending  of  the  Mercurial 
and  Neptunian  qualities  produced  by  Neptune 
in  Virgo  give  exceptionally  fine  mental  faculties 
with  the  addition  of  inspiration,  prophecy  and 
devotion  to  the  highest  ideals  when  Neptune  is 
well  aspected,  for  Neptune  adds  gentleness  and 
sympathy  to  the  cold  Mercury,  though  such  peo- 
ple are  rather  odd  in  their  ideas  and  inclina- 
tions, especially  with  respect  to  marriage,  which 
they  usually  regard  from  the  platonic  standpoint. 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      393 

If  Neptune  is  afflicted  in  Virgo  it  gives  hypo- 
chondriac tendencies  and  an  imagination  of  hav- 
ing all  the  ills  and  ailments  in  the  universe  which 
makes  the  person's  life  miserable.  There  is  also 
a  tendency  to  become  the  plaything  of  spirit 
controls,  not  only  with  respect  to  mediumship 
but  such  people  are  liable  to  direct  obsession  and 
when  this  calamity  has  once  occurred  it  is  very 
difficult  to  free  the  body  from  the  obsessing  en- 
tity. 

=  Neptune  in  Libra,  when  well-aspected,  gives  a 
musical,  poetic  and  artistic  temperament  and  in- 
dicates a  union  of  a  highly  spiritual  nature 
which  will  be  of  great  comfort  and  satisfaction 
to  the  person.  When  Neptune  is  afflicted  in 
Libra,  there  is  a  tendency  to  clandestine,  uncon- 
ventional and  illegitimate  relations,  either  of  the 
person  himself  or  of  the  marriage  partner,  ac- 
cording to  the  nature  of  the  aspects  to  Neptune. 
It  indicates  a  weak  and  over-emotional  nature 
which  incurs  and  merits  the  dislike  of  those  in 
its  immediate  environment. 

Neptune  in  Scorpio,  well-aspected,  gives  a  de- 
sire to  delve  into  the  secrets  of  nature  and  thus 
it  is  a  good  position  for  those  who  work  in  scien- 
tific or  occult  research  work.  It  gives  energy, 
enthusiasm  and  inspirational  perception  beyond 
the  realm  of  reason  and  augurs  successful  ac- 
complishment of  whatever  is  undertaken.  But 


394  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

when  afflicted  it  gives  a  terrible  temper,  a  sen- 
suous and  passionate  nature,  an  inordinate  de- 
sire for  drink  or  drugs  and  a  tendency  to  drown- 
ing either  by  accident  or  design. 

^  t  Neptune  in  Sagittarius,  when  well-aspected 
favors  the  inspirational,  devotional  and  religious 
tendencies  in  the  horoscope.  It  brings  dreams 
and  visions,  also  occult  experiences.  There  is  a 
love  of  travel  and  a  great  enjoyment  of  the  plea^s- 
ures  thus  obtained.  When  Neptune  is  afflicted 
in  Sagittarius  the  subject  becomes  liable  to  tears 
and  forebodings;  dreams  of  danger  and  visions 
of  distress  prey  upon  the  mind,  making  life  mis- 
erable. Sometimes  they  have  great  desires  to 
travel  but  are  unable  to  gratify  them,  or  if  they 
do  they  have  trouble  or  accidents  to  contend 
with. 

Neptune  in  Capricorn,  when  well-aspected 
gives  a  serious  and  contemplative  nature,  able  to 
concentrate  upon  whatever  matters  come  before 
it,  hence  such  people  are  successful,  keen  and 
far-sighted  business  men,  usually  on  a  large 
scale,  or  if  the  nature  of  the  other  aspects  in 
the  horoscope  draws  them  toward  secret  work 
they  make  excellent  detectives  capable  of  solving 
the  most  intricate  problems,  or  researchers  along 
psychic  lines;  in  fact  they  excel  in  any  occupa- 
tion where  deep  thought  and  concentration  are 
the  keys  to  success. 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      395 

But  when  Neptune  is  afflicted  in  Capricorn 
it  makes  the  nature  melancholy,  secretive  and 
very  often  deceitful.  These  people  are  generally 
recluses  and  shun  the  society  of  their  fellow-men. 

?  Neptune  in  Aquarius,  when  well-aspected, 
gives  an  altruistic  or  Utopian  disposition  with  a 
desire  to  emancipate  the  whole  world  from  what- 
soever social,  mental,  moral  or  physical  ills  the 
person  may  be  able  to  perceive.  Hence  these 
people  are  usually  too  far  in  advance  of  their 
time  and  age  to  be  understood.  They  are  re- 
garded as  dreamers  and  visionaries,  idealists  and, 
in  a  sense,  dangerous  to  society  because  of  their 
originality  and  independence  of  conventions. 
At  the  same  time  these  people  are  very  popular 
with  the  most  progressive  people  in  society.  They 
easily  apprehend  Nature's  finer  forces  and  are 
therefore  the  pioneers  in  exploration  of  hitherto 
undreamed-of  fields. 

When  Neptune  is  afflicted  in  Aquarius  it 
gives  similar  ideas  and  ideals  in  regard  to  con- 
ventions. But  it  is  only  too  liable  to  bring  such 
people  and  their  ideas  into  discredit  and  dis- 
grace. 

Neptune  in  Pisces,  when  well-aspected  gives  a 
love  of  mysticism  and  as  an  investigator  of  the 
occult.  Sometimes  these  people  develop  their 
spiritual  faculties  and  obtain  first-hand  knowl- 
edge. They  are  compassionate  towards  others, 


396  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

unobtrusive,  retiring  in  their  manner,  well  liked 
also  often  the  recipients  of  aid  from  others,  cheer- 
fully and  willingly  given. 

When  Neptune  is  afflicted  in  Pisces  the  per- 
son is  liable  to  suffer  through  mediumship,  ob- 
session and  deception  of  secret  enemies.  There 
is  danger  of  imprisonment  and  a  tendency  to 
indulge  in  drink  or  drugs  which  will  end  in  sor- 
row and  self-undoing. 

NEPTUNE  IN  ASPECT  WITH  OTHER  PLANETS 

O  *  A  W  The  Sun  sextile  or  trine  to  Neptune  favors 
the  possibility  of  developing  spiritual  faculties, 
for  Neptune  intensifies  the  higher  vibrations  in 
the  aura  and  as  some  express  themselves  best 
through  music  these  aspects  make  them  unusu- 
ally sensitive  to  echoes  from  the  heavenworld, 
which  is  the  realm  of  tone.  Many  people  with 
these  configurations  hear  the  harmony  of  the 
spheres  and  if  Mercury,  the  lower  octave  of  Nep- 
tune, gives  the  requisite  dexterity  they  become 
musicians  of  a  high  inspirational  nature.  In 
others  it  breeds  a  love  of  the  occult  which  leads 
them  into  the  higher  life,  but  they  usually  ap- 
proach it  from  the  intellectual  standpoint  as 
psychic  investigators.  A  few  live  the  life  and 
obtain  first-hand  knowledge. 

O  P  6  D  8  '$  T~he  Sun  parallel,  conjunction,  square 
or  opposition  to  Neptune  also  brings  the  person 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      397 

in  touch  with  the  denizens  of  the  invisible  world 
by  raising  the  vibrations  in  his  aura,  but  these 
configurations  attract  the  undesirable  element 
such  as  are  seen  at  the  ordinary  spiritualistic 
seance.  In  a  watery  sign  Neptune  induces  the 
person  to  drink  to  excess  and  then  the  added 
acceleration  of  the  vibratory  rate  frequently 
causes  such  people  to  perceive  the  ugly  and 
gruesome  forms  abounding  in  the  lower  realms 
of  the  invisible  world,  which  are  real  elemental 
entities  and  not  figments  of  his  fancy  as  believed 
by  people  who  hear  him  tell  what  he  sees  during 
delirium  tremens. 

9  *  A  W  Venus  sextile  or  trine  to  Neptune  makes 
an  inspirational  musician.  It  gives  a  fertile 
imagination  and  deep  emotions,  a  nature  that  is 
pure  and  chaste,  hence  occasionally  it  leads  to 
platonic  unions  and  companionship  of  the  most 
ecstatic  nature. 

$  6  PW  Verius  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Neptune 
is  to  be  judged  on  the  same  line  as  indicated  in 
the  cases  of  Mars  and  Uranus. 

$  n  8  W  Venus  square  or  opposition  to  Neptune 
makes  the  person  liable  to  sorrow,  loss  and  trou- 
ble, especially  through  the  marriage  partner  or 
anyone  else  in  whom  he  trusts.  People  with  this 
aspect  should  be  particularly  careful  to  avoid 
anything  which  has  in  it  an  element  of  chance 


398  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

or  speculation  for  they  are  sure  to  lose,  especially 
in  dealing  with  large  companies  or  corporations. 

$  6  P  *  A  W  Mercury  in  conjunction,  parallel,  sex- 
tile  or  trine  to  Neptune  makes  a  man  peculiarly 
adapted  to  the  occult  art,  particularly  if  the  con- 
junction occurs  in  the  Third  or  Ninth  Houses  or 
the  trines  are  from  watery  signs — Cancer,  Scor- 
pio or  Pisces.  Such  people  usually  succeed  in 
occult  science  and  often  develop  a  supernormal 
faculty.  They  are  particularly  good  as  magnetic 
healers. 

$  n  &  ^  Mercury  square  or  opposition  to  Neptune 
gives  a  chaotic  mind,  liability  to  lack  of  memory, 
indolence  and  a  disposition  to  dream  the  time 
away.  There  is  a  restless  desire  for  fame  frus- 
trated by  inability  to  fit  in  anywhere.  Such  peo- 
ple are  liable  to  fraud,  deception  and  slander, 
also  to  suicide. 

D  *  A  ^  The  Moon  sextile  or  trine  to  Neptune  in- 
creases the  faculty  of  imagination  to  a  superla- 
tive point,  especially  if  either  of  the  planets  is 
in  the  Ninth  House.  Then  it  favors  prophetic 
dreams  and  visions  which  brings  the  person  in 
contact  with  the  invisible  worlds.  It  indicates 
ability  in  the  occult  arts  and  success  in  their 
practice.  It  makes  the  nature  exceedingly  in- 
spirational and  it  also  gives  a  kind  and  sympa- 
thetic disposition.  The  spiritual  qualities  men- 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      399 

tioned  may  not  be  apparent  even  to  the  person 
himself,  but  then  they  are  latent  and  capable 
of  development.  It  is  also  safe  to  say  that  at 
some  time  or  other  during  the  life  persons  with 
these  aspects  will  come  in  contact  with  the  occult 
and  be  very  much  attracted,  whether  the  quali- 
ties of  the  soul  are  developed  or  not. 

D  6  PW  The  Moon  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Nep- 
tune indicates  the  same  strong  psychic  faculties 
as  the  good  aspects,  particularly  if  Neptune  is 
placed  in  the  psychic  sign  Cancer.  Those  who 
have  been  born  with  the  good  configurations  of 
Neptune  during  the  fourteen  years  when  it  was 
in  the  airy  scientific  sign  Gemini  are  now  con- 
quering the  air  and  perfecting  scientific  inven- 
tions which  will  make  us  marvel,  but  the  children 
who  have  been  born  under  favorable  configura- 
tions during  the  fourteen  years  Neptune  has 
been  going  through  the  psychic  sign  Cancer  art* 
growing  up  around  us  as  a  band  of  mystics  ana 
when  they  have  reached  mature  years  they  will 
astonish  us  with  their  spiritual  insight  and 
power.  Among  other  things  they  will  develop 
the  soul  of  music  in  a  hitherto  unprecedented 
manner. 

3)  G  8  ty  The  Moon  square  or  opposition  to  Nep- 
tune is  also  an  indication  of  the  soul  qualities 
similar  to  those  given  by  the  good  aspects,  but 
under  those  configurations  the  person  will  be  01 


400  THE   MESSAGE  OF   THE   STARS 

a  negative  nature  and  is  apt  to  become  the  prey 
of  spirit-controls  and  subjected  to  mediumship, 
therefore  people  with  those  aspects  should  be 
very  careful  not  to  attend  spiritualistic  seances, 
sitting  in  the  silence  or  other  methods  of  occult 
development. 

T?  *  A  W  Saturn  sextile  or  trine  to  Neptune  is  good 
for  success  in  worldly  affairs  for  it  brings  out  the 
saturnine  virtues,  forethought,  honor,  self-reli- 
ance, determination,  system  et  cetera,  by  which 
the  person  gains  the  confidence  and  esteem  of 
others,  but  the  principal  effect  is  spiritual  and 
therefore  only  felt  by  those  who  are  able  to  re- 
spond because  of  other  aspects  in  the  horoscope. 
To  them  it  gives  the  ability  to  delve  deeply  into 
occult  and  mystical  subjects,  also  to  become  pro- 
ficient in  the  art  and  practise  thereof. 

^  6  P  W  Saturn  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Neptune 
has  the  same  effect  as  the  good  aspects  when  it 
occurs  in  a  sign  where  either  of  the  planets  are 
strong  as  Neptune  is  in  Cancer  and  Pisces  and 
Saturn  in  Libra  and  Capricorn. 

T?  D  8  W  Saturn  square  or  opposition  to  Neptune 
lays  the  person  liable  to  loss  by  deception,  treach- 
ery or  fraud  in  worldly  matters  and  if  he  should 
undertake  to  investigate  or  practise  the  occult 
art  he  is  liable  to  become  the  prey  of  spirit-con- 
trols and  be  led  into  mediumship  with  conse- 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      401 

quent    danger    to    the    health,    and   liability   to 
suicide. 

H  *  A  W  Jupiter  sextile  or  trine  to  Neptune  gives 
an  inspirational  mystical  nature  and  ability  to 
fill  a  position  connected  with  occult  orders,  that 
is  to  say,  where  the  character  is  sufficiently  de- 
veloped so  that  Neptune  can  make  his  influence 
felt  for  then  this  position  brings  out  all  the 
noblest  and  most  spiritual  strength  of  both  plan- 
ets, and  occult  experiences  are  not  infrequently 
the  result.  At  any  rate,  during  the  sleeping 
hours  these  people  are  quite  active  and  conscious 
in  the  invisible  worlds  and  often  bring  exper- 
iences back  with  them  as  dreams  or  visions. 

11  6  P  W  Jupiter  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Nep- 
tune gives  an  influence  similar  to  that  of  the 
good  aspects  when  Neptune  and  Jupiter  are  not 
afflicted,  but  if  they  are  in  a  weak  sign  and 
aspecting  the  other  planets  by  square  or  oppo- 
sition then  the  influence  is  similar  to  that  of 
the  bad  aspects  of  Jupiter  and  Neptune. 

y  D  8  ^  Jupiter  square  or  opposition  to  Neptune 
indicates  lack  of  control  of  the  emotions.  The 
person  is  sensitive  to  the  influences  of  the  bor- 
derland between  the  seen  and  the  unseen  worlds 
but  they  are  often  of  an  awe-inspiring  and  dis- 
gusting type,  hence  apt  to  cause  hysterical  con- 
ditions, involuntary  trance  and  kindred  disor- 

26 


402  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

ders  attendant  upon  negative  psychism,  but 
from  a  material  standpoint  it  gives  danger  of 
fraud  through  speculation  or  large  companies 
and  dealing  with  such  predatory  interests 
should  therefore  be  avoided. 

$  *  A  W  Mars  sextile  or  trine  to  Neptune  inten- 
sifies the  emotional  nature  and  gives  a  leaning 
toward  the  study  and  practice  of  occultism  and 
mysticism.  When  other  testimonies  in  the  horo- 
scope concur,  the  martial  energy  directed  toward 
the  psychic  subjects  denoted  by  Neptune  often 
helps  the  person  very  materially  in  his  aim  to 
penetrate  into  the  invisible  worlds  in  a  conscious 
manner. 

$  6  D  P  <§*  ^  Mars  conjunction,  square,  parallel  or 
opposition  to  Neptune  makes  the  nature  coarse 
and  sensual,  impulsive  and  irascible,  militant 
and  extravagant  in  speech  and  action,  self-indul- 
gent to  a  degree  in  whatever  direction  his  pas- 
sions may  lead  him  and  unable  to  exercise  re- 
straint over  himself  in  any  direction.  It  gives  a 
fanatical  spirit  which  may  express  itself  in  either 
religion  or  atheism  and  under  favorable  condi- 
tions such  people  are  liable  to  become  victims  of 
discarnate  spirits  who  may  either  use  them  as 
a  medium  or  by  obsessing  them.  It  gives  a  ten- 
dency to  lawlessness  and  participation  in  anar- 
chistic schemes  or  plots. 


NEPTUNE,  THE  PLANET  OF  DIVINITY      403 

*  A  W  Uranus  sextile  or  trine  to  Neptune  gives 
inclination  towards  the  occult  or  mystical  side 
of  life,  and  if  either  is  placed  in  the  Tenth  House 
the  person  usually  becomes  a  leader  or  authority 
in  these  lines,  he  wins  at  least  local  recognition 
and  if  other  testimonies  concur  his  fame  will  be 
national  or  international.  This  position  will 
bring  direct  touch  with  the  spiritual  world  and 
success  in  dealing  with  inhabitants  of  that  plane. 
It  produces  dreams  and  visions  of  a  prophetic 
and  inspirational  nature,  strengthens  the  healing: 
powers  and  will  consequently  enable  the  person 
to  do  a  great  deal  of  good  for  his  suffering: 
fellow-men.  These  aspects  give  a  highly  devel- 
oped intuition  which  amounts  almost  to  mind- 
reading.  There  is  a  love  of  travel  and  explora- 
tion of  the  physical  world  as  well  as  of  nature's1 
finer  realms.  Nor  are  such  people  altogether' 
dreamers,  they  have  a  strong  will  with  excellent 
executive  and  organizing  powers  which  will  aid 
them  tn  realizing  their  hopes,  wishes  and  ambi- 
tions to  rise  in  life  and  be  at  the  forefront  of 
whatever  profession  they  select. 

6  P  W  Uranus  conjunction  or  parallel  to  Neptune 
are  convertible  aspects  if  the  planets  are  well 
placed  by  sign  and  otherwise  well  aspected,  their 
effect  will  be  similar  to  the  sextile  or  trine, 
though  not  so  pronounced,  but  if  they  are  cadent, 
weak  by  sign,  and  afflicted  they  are  only  a  little 


404  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

less  evil  than  when  aspected  by  square  or  oppo- 
sition. 

J#  H3  8  ^  Uranus  square  or  opposition  to  Neptune 
brings  underhanded,  deceptive  influences  into 
the  life  which  aim  to  undermine  the  reputation 
and  make  the  person  suffer  scandal  and  public 
disfavor,  sudden  and  unaccountable  reverses  in 
business  are  met  with,  or  trouble  in  social  affairs. 
There  is  the  same  love  of  travel  and  exploration 
as  given  by  the  good  aspects  but  the  person  can- 
not accomplish  his  aims  with  the  same  facility,  or 
if  he  does  ,it  is  to  his  disadvantage  and  brings 
.added  trouble  He  is  also  drawn  towards  the  oc- 
cult or  mystic  side  of  life,  but  his  path  is  beset 
l>y  dangers  of  mediumship  and  obsession  and  all 
through  life  he  is  filled  with  a  vague  dread  of 
impending  disaster  which  he  can  neither  account 
for  nor  dispel  by  will  or  reason,  hence  uncer- 
tainty overshadows  the  life  as  a  cloud  and  robs 
Jiim  of  peace  and  contentment. 


CHAPTER  XVIII. 
THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DELINEATION  IN  A  NUTSHELL, 

STUDENTS  of  the  Stellar  Science  will  find  the  fol- 
lowing Table  very  useful  in  delineating  horoscopes 
for  though  the  planets  confer  many  more  character- 
istics than  there  given,  as  shown  in  the  general  read- 
ing which  opens  the  chapter  wherein  the  places  and 
aspects  of  each  planet  is  given,  the  following  key- 
words give  in  a  succinct  manner  the  quintessence  of 
the  characteristics  conferred  by  each  planet  accord- 
ing to  whether  it  is  well  or  ill  aspected. 

When  the  student  has  mastered  the  meaning  of 
the  positions  and  aspects  of  the  various  planets  as 
given  in  the  preceding  chapters  he  may  with  the 
greatest  of  ease  give  a  good  delineation  of  the  effect 
of  each  aspect  by  combining  the  key-words  in  this 
Table  and  elaborating  upon  them.  For  instance,  if 
reading  a  horoscope  where  the  Sun  is  trine  Saturn, 
put  down  the  description  given  in  the  Table  as  fol- 
lows : 

"The  vital,  venturesome  and  authoritative  Sun 
trine  the  deliberative,  persevering,  tactful,  cautious, 
methodical  and  thoughtful  Saturn"  (then  elaborate) 
will  give  John  a  tenacious  hold  on  life  and  endow  him 
with  both  courage  and  caution,  so  that  while  .he  may 
405 


406  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

seem  venturesome  at  times  he  will  always  carefully 
calculate  the  obstacles  to  be  overcome  and  not  attempt 
anything  foolhardy,  but  accomplish  his  object  once 
he  has  decided  to  go  ahead.  He  will  be  systematic, 
orderly  and  methodical,  also  persevering  in  whatever 
he  undertakes  after  due  deliberation  and  forethought, 
hence  his  efforts  will  generally  be  brought  to  a  suc- 
cessful issue.  In  dealing  with  others  he  will  be" 
thoughtful  and  tactful,  hence  usually  able  to  obtain 
his  desires  by  diplomacy.  On  account  of  these  quali- 
ties he  will  be  generally  successful  in  life  and  he  will 
lay  up  a  fair  fortune,  for  Saturn  is  also  the  planet  of 
acquisitiveness. 

In  a  similar  manner  students  may  combine  the 
key-words  of  all  the  other  planets  and  aspects  from 
this  Table  and  elaborate  on  them  as  they  can.  This 
will  enable  them  to  give  a  good  reading  of  any  horo- 
scope with  a  little  practice.  For  further  practical 
demonstration  of  this  method  students  are  advised  to 
study  the  children's  horoscopes  in  Rays  From  the 
Rose  Cross,  where  the  writer  makes  use  of  it  every 
month.  These  horoscopes  are  a  mine  of  instruction 
which  no  student  desiring  to  perfect  himself  in  the 
stellar  science  can  afford  to  be  without.  The  key- 
words will  bring  to  his  mind  what  has  been  said  about 
the  general  nature  of  the  planets  under  considera- 
tion ;  this  he  may  combine  with  the  nature  of  the  signs 
and  houses  where  the  planets  are  placed  if  a  very 
full  reading  is  desired. 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DELINEATION  407 

TABLE  OF  PLANETARY  KEY- WORDS 

O  *  A  The  vital,  venturesome,  dignified  and  author- 
itative Sun. 

O  D  8  The  lazy,  ambitionless,  despotic  and  cowardly 
Sun. 

9  *  A  The  harmonious,  artistic,  beautiful,  lovely, 
cheerful  and  suave  Venus. 

$  n  8  The  dissolute,  sensual,  vulgar,  slothful,  loud 
and  lazy  Venus. 

5  *  A  The  quick-witted,  versatile,  eloquent,  literary, 
adroit  and  dexterous  Mercury. 

$  n  8  The  restless,  shiftless,  profane,  gossipy,  dem- 
agogic, dishonest,  untruthful,  forgetful,  and 
clumsy  Mercury. 

D  *  A  The  magnetic,  imaginative,  plastic  and 
changeable  Moon. 

D  n  8  The  negative,  procrastinating,  dreamy,  vacil- 
lating, visionary,  frivolous,  childish  and  wor- 
risome Moon. 

J?  *  A  The  cautious,  deliberate,  methodical,  perse- 
vering, tactful,  thoughtful  and  thrifty  Saturn. 


408  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

T?  n  8  The  malicious,  materialistic,  melancholy,  pes- 
simistic, avaricious,  obstructive,  secretive  and 
worrisome  Saturn. 

U  *  A  The  law-abiding,  charitable,  conservative, 
reverent,  optimistic,  opulent  and  benevolent 
Jupiter. 

2f  D  8  The  indolent,  procrastinating,  bombastic,  os- 
tentatious, prodigal,  dissipated  and  lawless 
Jupiter. 

$  *  A  The  gallant,  enterprising,  energetic,  enthus- 
iastic and  constructive  Mars. 

$  O  (9  The  coarse,  combative,  egotistic,  discordant, 
destructive,  passionate,  audacious,  impulsive 
and  hot-tempered  Mars. 

J?  *  A  The  advanced,  romantic,  original,  independ- 
ent, liberty-loving  and  inventive  Uranus. 

¥  D  <?  The  licentious,  unconventional,  fanatical  and 
irresponsible  Uranus. 

¥  *  A  The  occult,  prophetic,  inspirational,  spiritual, 
devotional  and  musical  Neptune. 

W  D  S  The  fraudulent,  vague,  deceptive,  dishonest 
and  mediumistie  Neptune. 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DELINEATION  409 

THE  STRENGTH  AND  WEAKNESS  OF  THE  PLANETS 

Sliown   by   Elevation,   Exaltation,   Critical   Degrees, 
Etc. 

The  foregoing  delineation  of  the  effects  and  in- 
fluences of  the  planets  in  the  various  houses  and 
signs,  also  by  aspect  and  position  puch  as  parallel 
and  conjunction,  sextile,  square,  trine  and  opposi- 
tion, are  subject  to  wide  modification  according  to 
the  other  configurations  of  the  horoscope,  and  ac- 
cording to  whether  the  planets  are  essentially  dig- 
nified or  in  their  detriment,  exalted  or  in  fall,  or 
placed  in,  critical  degrees.  The  following  table  of. 
planetary  powers  will  show  at  a  glance  the  signs  in 
which  the  various  planets  are  strong  or  weak;  and 
when  the  student  knows  in  what  sign  a  planet  rules 
or  is  exalted  it  is  only  necessary  to  remember  that 
it  has  its  fall  or  detriment  in  the  opposite  sign.  Thus 
the  Sun  rules  Leo  and  is  exalted  in  Aries.  Hence 
it  is  very  powerful  in  those  signs,  and  as  the  oppo- 
site signs  are  Aquarius  and  Libra  it  is  at  once  appar- 
ent that  when  placed  in  these  signs  the  Sun  is  com- 
paratively weak.  Another  important  factor  which 
it  is  necessary  to  take  into  consideration  is  elevation. 
The  closer  a  planet  is  to  the  Midheaven,  the  more 
highly  it  is  elevated  and  the  more  powerful  it  is. 
Consulting  the  table  of  planetary  powers  we  find  that 
Mars  rules  Aries  and  is  exalted  in  Capricorn.  Let 
us  suppose  that  in  a  horoscope,  Mars  is  found  placed 
close  to  the  Midheaven  in  Aries  or  Capricorn  and 


410  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

square  to  the  Sun  which  is  near  the  Ascendant.  Then 
the  evil  will  be  very  much  greater  than  if  Mars  were 
in  Libra  or  Cancer,  the  signs  of  his  fall  and  detri- 
ment, and  the  Sun  placed  in  the  Midheaven  ele- 
vated above  Mars.  Similarly,  if  the  Sun  were  placed 
in  Aries,  its  exaltation  sign,  close  to  the  Midheaven 
in  high  elevation  and  trine  to  Jupiter  in  its  own  sign, 
Sagittarius,  then  both  planets  are  very  strong  and 
their  effect  would  be  much  more  marked  than  if  they 
were  placed  in  the  signs  of  their  fall  and  debility 
By  memorizing  this  table  and  bearing  in  mind  the 
matter  of  elevation,  the  student  will  be  able  to  form 
a  much  more  accurate  judgment  of  the  effect  of  plan- 
ets in  any  particular  horoscope  than  if  this  is  not 
taken  into  consideration. 

TABLE  OF  PLANETARY  POWERS 
Planet         Rules    Detriment    Exaltation        Fall 
O  £1  £?  T19°  ^ 

$          s  =-=         m.T 


D                 S  Itf  8    3°  111 

i?  V3£?  Z^£V  ^=21°  T 

u  x.  t  ffRn  £515°  vs 

$  Tin.  =^b  V328°  ES 

#                £?  SI                  ni  8 

W                ^  HE                   S  V3 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DELINEATION  411 

CRITICAL  DEGREES 

Another  division  of  the  Zodiac  which  it  is  easy 
to  remember  and  important  to  take  into  consideration 
is  based  upon  the  passage  of  the  Moon  from  the  first 
degree  of  Aries  through  the  twelve  signs.  It  takes 
the  Moon  about  28  days  to  go  around  the  Zodiac  and 
she  moves  with  an  average  velocity  of  13  degrees. 
Thus  if  we  start  with  the  first  point  of  Aries  and 
measure  one  day's  travel,  the  second  day  will  com- 
mence at  the  13th  degree  and  the  third  at  the  26th; 
the  fourth  commences  at  9  degrees  of  Taurus  and 
the  fifth  day  she  starts  at  21  degrees  of  the  same  sign ; 
on  the  sixth  day  she  reaches  4  degrees  of  Gemini ; 
on  the  seventh  day  she  starts  at  17  degrees  of  Gemini 
and  completes  the  first  quarter  by  reaching  the  cusp 
of  Cancer  on  the  morning  of  the  eighth  day.  It  is 
evident  that  she  will  strike  the  same  degrees  of  the 
.signs  composing  the  other  three  quarters  during  the 
three  weeks  it  takes  her  to  complete  the  circuit,  and 
thus  we  may  easily  memorize  the  critical  degrees  in 
the  folowing  manner: 

In  the  Cardinal  Signs — Aries,  Cancer,  Libra  and 
Capricorn,  the  first,  thirteenth,  and  twenty-sixth  de- 
grees are  critical. 

In  tlie  Fixed  Signs — Taurus,  Leo,  Scorpio  and 
Aquarius,  the  ninth  and  twenty-first  degrees  are 
critical. 

In  the  Common  Signs — Gemini,  Virgo,  Sagit- 
tarius and  Pisces,  the  fourth  and  seventeenth  degrees 
are  critical. 


412  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

It  has  been  found  that  when  a  planet  is  within 
orb  of  three  degrees  of  one  of  these  critical  points  it 
exercises  a  much  stronger  influence  in  the  life  than 
it,  would  otherwise.  Therefore  students  will  also  do 
well  to  remember  this  and  should  a  planet  be  in  a 
sign  of  fall  or  detriment,  but  in  a  critical  degree, 
it  is  thereby  strengthened  and  will  do  more  good  or 
bad  according  to  its  nature  and  the  aspect  it  has. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  a  planet  is  in  its  exaltation 
sign,  highly  elevated  and  in  a  critical  degree,  its 
aspects  will  be  exceedingly  powerful  and  make  them- 
selves felt  much  mere  in  the  life  than  would  other- 
wise be  the  case. 

Mercury  Before  and  After  the  Sun 

Another  important  point  which  is  only  too  often 
overlooked  is  the  position  of  Mercury  with  regard  to 
the  Sun.  When  Mercury  is  in  a  lower  degree  of  the 
same  sign  as  occupied  by  the  Sun,  or  in  any  degree 
of  a  preceding  sign,  he  rises  before  the  Sun  and,  so 
to  speak,  carries  the  rays  of  the  Day  Star  forward. 
But  when  he  is  placed  in  a  higher  degree  of  the  same 
sign  as  the  Sun  or  in  the  sign  following  that  occu- 
pied by  the  Sun,  then  he  rises  after  the  Orb  of  Day 
and  is,  so  to  speak,  overshadowed.  Therefore  it  has 
been  found  that  when  Mercury,  the  planet  of  mind, 
logic  and  reason,  rises  before  the  Sun,  it  gives  a 
keener,  better  intellect  than  when  he  follows  the  lu- 
minary. 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DELINEATION  413 

ARE  You  HELPING  YOUR  STARS? 

One  not  infrequently  hears  ^tudents  of  Astrol- 
ogy express  their  annoyance  at  the  way  the  stars 
work.  They  complain  that  the  evil  directions  are 
always  on  time  and  marked  in  their  effect,  while  very 
often  the  good  directions  seem  to  have  little  or  no 
influence  and  they  wonder  why.  Have  you  ever  real- 
ized that  you  cannot  possibly  get  something  for 
nothing,  any  more  than  you  can  create  something  out 
of  nothing.  This  holds  good  whether  you  want  a  loaf 
of  bread,  a  position,  favors,  or  anything  else.  If  at 
any  time  you  seem  to  get  something  without  paying 
for  it,  you  will  have  to  settle  later,  and  settle  with 
interest,  for  it  is  nature's  law  of  Justice  that  nothing 
is  given  for  nothing.  There  must  be  an  equivalent 
in  one  way  or  another;  the  scales  may.be  tipped  in 
one  direction  for  a  long  time,  but  as  surely  as  the 
pendulum  swing.s  equally  to  each  side  of  the  neutral 
point,  so  surely  will  the  scales  of  justice  swing,  anu 
swing  until  the  balance  is  reached. 

This  holds  good  in  Astrology;  it  is  said  that 
"God  helps  the  man  who  helps  himself,"  you  may 
also  say  that  the  stars  help  the  man  who  helps  him- 
self, for  they  are  God's  ministers  and  it  should  always 
be  remembered  that  the  stars  show  tendencies,  they 
mark  times  when  opportunities  are  ripe,  but  they 
never  under  any  circumstances  compel  anyone  to  act 
in  this,  that  or  the  other  manner.  But  neither  are  the 
directions  haphazard  events,  they  are  lessons  and  ex- 


414  THE   MESSAGE  OF   THE   STARS 

periences  for  us,  of  which  we  may  avail  ourselves,  or 
not,  as  we  choose  within  certain  limits.  For  instance, 
the  Moon  comes  to  a  square  of  Mars,  and  it  will  bring 
to  us  an  opportunity  to  lose  our  temper,and  get  into 
trouble  thereby,  then  when  the  trouble  is  over  and 
we  sit  down  to  reflect  on  the  occurrence  we  will  most 
likely  say  to  ourselves,  well  what  fools  we  are  to  allow 
a  little  thing  like  that  to  play  havoc  with  our  happi- 
ness. On  the  other  hand  if  the  Astrological  student 
uses  his  knowledge  in  the  proper  manner,  then  he 
should  know  what  the  effect  of  the  Moon  square  Mars 
will  be,  he  should  resolve  to  be  calm  beforehand  and 
say:  Here  is  an  opportunity  for  me  to  rule  my  stars, 
I  am  going  to  keep  my  temper  well  under  control 
so  that  no  matter  what  happens,  I  am  going  to  main- 
tain my  equilibrium.  Then,  when  the  opportunity 
comes  along  to  lose  his  temper  he  may  stand  firm. 
Although  he  may  feel  the  passions  surging  within,  he 
may  stand  outwardly  quiet,  keep  a  cool  head  and 
when  the  danger  is  past  he  will  have  gained  a  victory 
and  learned  the  lesson  which  it  was  intended  he 
should  learn.  Or  suppose  it  is  a  square  of  the  Moon 
to  Saturn,  this  will  cause  people  to  worry  and  look 
upon  the  dark  side  of  life,but  the  astrological  student 
may  say  to  himself  when  such  a  configuration  is  ap- 
proaching: No,  I  am  not  going  to  worry,  worry  will 
not  help  matters,  it  hinders,  because  it  takes  from 
me  all  my  strength,  wherewith  otherwise  I  could  over- 
come conditions,  I  am  going  to  look  at  the  bright 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DELINEATION  415 

side  of  the  matter  and  see  what  I  can  do  to  remedy 
this  trouble. 

As  a  matter  of  fact  most  of  the  things  we  worry 
about  never  come  to  pass,  and  if  the  student  can  learn 
under  this  planetary  direction,  to  keep  his  equilib- 
rium, to  stop  worrying,  then  he  has  ruled  his  stars 
and  learned  an  important  lesson.  Thus,  if  he  helps 
his  stars  by  learning  the  lessons  which  they  are  en- 
deavoring to  teach  him,  the  evil  directions  will  not 
have  the  same  power  over  him  as  if  he  simply  sits 
down  and  folds  his  hands  saying:  "Well  I  cannot 
help  it,  I  am  under  the  evil  directions  and  naturally 
things  are  bound  to  go  wrong  in  every  particular." 
There  is  in  the  horoscope  a  dominant  factor,  namely : 
the  Individual  will,  bear  in  mind,  that  the  horoscope 
shoivs  only  tendencies  and  it  has  no  power  whatever 
to  compel  you,  compulsion  is  from  within  yourself. 
You,  in  the  final  analysis,  are  the  dominant  factor 
in  that  horoscope,  and  can  by  an  exercise  of  sufficient 
will  power  rule  your  stars.  It  is  admitted  that  we 
are  all  weak,  and  therefore  not  able  to  exercise  the 
necessary  will  power  at  all  times,  but  that  is  exactly 
what  these  evil  directions  are  sent  to  us  to  cultivate, 
a  stronger  and  a  firmer  will  to  do  the  right  thing  at 
the  right  time  and  it  depends  upon  ourselves  whether 
we  shall  be  compelled  by  circumstances  from  without 
or  by  our  own  will  from  within.  Surely  that  is  the 
proper  way,  and  astrological  students  above  all  other 
people  ought  to  be  able  to  guide  their  lives  safely 
amid  the  rocks  and  shoals  of  existence,  because  they 


416  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

have  proper  warning,  they  know  what  is  coming,  and 
they  should  prepare  for  it. 

On  the  other  hand  it  is  asked :  Why  do  the  good 
directions  not  bring  a  corrsponding  measure  of 
benefit?  And  the  answer  to  that  question  is,  for  the 
same  lack  of  co-operation,  it  is  as  absolutely  necessary 
to  help  our  stars  in  the  one  direction  as  to  hinder 
them  in  the  other.  Are  you  out  of  a  position  with 
perhaps  the  family  exchequer  running  low  and  no 
means  in  sight  wherewith  to  replenish  it,  but  your 
hopes  are  centered  upon  a  strong  favorable  direction 
such  as  perhaps  a  trine  of  the  progressed  Moon  to  the 
ruler  of  the  Sixth  House  or  the  Sun!  Under  these 
conditions  you  feel  sure,  from  an  astrological  stand- 
point, that  you  are  going  to  obtain  a  good  position 
which  will  put  you  on  easy  street  ?  Very  well,  you  may 
be  sure  that  the  opportunity  will  come,  but  do  not  ex- 
pect it  to  be  laid  in  your  lap  without  a  single  effort  on 
your  part,  if  a  thing  is  worth  having  it  is  worth  going 
after,  it  is  worth  making  the  very  best  efforts  to  get 
it,  do  not  neglect  any  detail,  dress  yourself  carefully, 
but  not  showily  when  you  go  to  see  the  person  who 
has  it  in  his  power  to  bestow  the  favor,  remember, 
fir.st  impressions  are  important ;  have  all  your  ammu- 
nition ready  in  the  shape  of  recommendations  and 
everything  else  that  you  would  have  were  you  not 
depending  upon  an  astrological  aspect  to  help  you 
get  the  position.  Use  every  proper  means  of  impress- 
ing the  prospective  employer  with  your  ability  and 
you  may  depend  that  your  effort  will  be  successful, 


THE  DOCTRINE  OF  DELINEATION  417 

for  you  have  helped  your  stars,  you  have  grasped 
your  opportunity.  Or,  are  you  about  to  embark  in 
a  business  venture  with  some  one  else  and  you  feel 
very  confident  because  the  Moon  is  trine  to  the  Sun 
and  Venus  in  the  Seventh  House?  Be  careful  that 
you  do  not  lay  aside  your  caution  on  that  account, 
thinking  that  under  such  a  direction  no  one  can  come 
into  your  partnership  who  is  not  all  right.  If  you 
do,  you  neglect  your  part  and  you  will  have  no  reason 
whatever  to  blame  the  stars  if  later  on  it  is  shown  that 
the  person  is  not  all  you  expected  him  to  be.  Nothing 
is  needed  in  the  world  today  in  the  same  degree  that 
we  need  common  sense,  and  this  applies  to  the  depart- 
ment of  astrology,  as  well  as  to  every  other  depart- 
ment of  life.  Opportunity  may  be  likened  to  a  tobog- 
gan slide  between  ourselves  and  our  desires,  it  is 
necessary  for  us  to  make  an  adequate  initial  effort 
in  order  to  launch  our  sled  upon  this  incline,  but 
once  we  have  done  our  part,  then  everything  will  go 
along  swimmingly  under  favorable  directions,  for 
then  the  stars  are  .with  us  to  impress  others  in  our 
behalf,  or  to  strengthen  our  penetrative  power  so 
that  we  may  know  what  is  best  for  us. 

If  you  want  to  know  positively  the  power  of 
directions,  even  transits,  as  we  call  the  actual  posi- 
tion of  the  stars  in  the  sky,  take  an  ephemeris  and 
note  moon's  aspects  for  the  current  month.  When 
the  Moon  is  in  opposition  to  Mars  you  will  find  in 
people  a  general  lack  of  energy  and  ambition,  they 
would  rather  tear  down  than  build.  When  we  have 

27 


418  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STAKS 

a  conjunction  of  Mars  and  the  Moon,  people  will 
be  active  and  energetic,  but  impulse  rather  than 
common  sense  will  govern,  hence  they  will  accomplish 
little  good,  and  may  do  harm  without  intention.  But 
when  the  Moon  and  Mars  are  trine,  there  will  be  a 
general  desire  among  people  to  do  something  of  a 
constructive  nature,  and  they  will  meet  with  success 
in  such  efforts.  And  last,  but  not  least,  when  the 
Moon  is  square  to  Mars  it  will  make  people  irritable, 
quarrelsome,  destructive,  ready  to  fly  at  each  other, 
unreasonable  and  unmanageable. 


CHAPTER  XIX. 

MIND  AND  THE  RULING  PLANET 

WHEN  we  wish  to  study  the  character,  disposi- 
tion and  temperament  of  anyone  we  must  first 
realize  that  the  mind  is  the  keystone  of  the  arch  of  the 
human  personality.  But  character,  disposition  and 
temperament  do  not  depend  so  much  upon  the  quality 
of  mind,  whether  it  is  keen,  sharp  and  alert  or  slow 
and  plodding,  as  upon  what  channels  it  takes  for  its 
expression.  Intellects  of  the  first  magnitude  are 
sometimes  put  to  perverted  use  to  the  detriment  of 
the  community  and  the  individual  who  thus  misuses, 
his  divine  heritage,  while  a  slow  and  very  inferior 
mind  may  minister  to  many  in  lowly  but  loving 
meekness  and  reap  sheaves  of  soul-growth  thereby. 
Thus  it  is  not  sufficient  to  determine  the  quality  of 
the  mentality;  we  must  also  ascertain  what  is  the 
channel  of  its  expression.  To  judge  that  or  any  other 
matter  thoroughly  really  involves  consideration  of 
the  horoscope  as  a  whole,  separately  and  apart  from 
its  bearing  upon  all  other  matters.  But  in  a  general 
way  the  character  and  disposition  may  be  learned 
from  the  Sun,  Moon,  Mercury,  Ascendant  and  the 
ruling  planets. 

It  has  become  the  custom  of  many  astrologers 
419 


420  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE    STARS 

to  take  the  lord  of  the  rising  sign  as  the  ruler  of 
the  horoscope.  That  is  correct  in  Medical  Astrology 
because  the  Ascendant  represents  the  body,  but  when 
we  want  to  judge  the  character  which  is  the  com- 
bination of  all  the  forces  focussed  through  the  horo- 
scopical  wheel  of  life  the  matter  is  different.  Then 
>ve  must  find  what  planet  has  the  most  dominant  in- 
fluence in  the  life  and  that  is  then  the  life  ruler 
regardless  of  whether  or  not  it  is  the  ruler  of  the 
Ascendant.  To  find  that  planet,  look  first  to  the  lord 
of  the  Ascendant.  If  he  is  elevated,  essentially  dig- 
nified or  angular  and  strongly  aspected,  remember,  it 
matters  not  whether  the  aspects  are  good  or  bad  as  long 
as  they  are  close  and  plentiful  (for  if  it  were  only 
the  good  aspects  that  made  the  ruler  then  there  would 
be  only  good  people  in  the  world.  But  we  know  that 
there  are  people  of  all  shades  of  character  and  there- 
fore it  is  necessary  to  select  the  ruler  according  to 
the  aspects,  regardless  of  whether  they  are  good  or 
bad).  But  above  all,  be  sure  to  see  that  the  aspects 
are  close;  if  they  are  good  the  lord  of  the  Ascendant 
is  also  the  ruling  planet,  for  he  will  exercise  the  most 
potent  influence  in  the  life. 

On  the  other  hand  if  another  planet  is  more 
highly  elevated  than  the  ruler  of  the  Ascendant,  if 
it  is  exalted,  essentially  dignified  or  placed  in  an 
angle  and  its  aspects  are  more  plentiful  or  closer  than 
the  aspects  of  the  lord  of  the  Ascendant,  then  judge 
that  that  planet  will  be  the  ruler  of  the  horoscope  and 
exercise  a  dominant  influence  in  the  life  regardless 


MIND  AND  THE  RULING  PLANET  421 

of  the  fact  that  it  is  not  the  ruler  of  the  rising  sign. 
But  if  there  are  two  planets  running  neck-and- 
neck  in  the  race  for  rulership,  so  to  speak,  with  no 
strongly  marked  difference  in  favor  of  one  or  the 
other  so  that  it  is  difficult  to  make  a  choice,  do  not 
utterly  discard  one  and  choose  the  other,  for  then 
they  will  both  be  very  active  in  the  life  and  must  be 
classed  as  co-rulers. 

THE  INFLUENCE  OF  RULING  PLANETS 
Well  Aspected 

O   The  Sun  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  vital,  courageous  and  ambitious 
well-aspected  Sun  is  ruler,  it  gives  dignity  to  the 
whole  nature,  a  lofty  pride  that  would  not  stoop 
to  do  anything  small,  mean  or  degrading,  a  fine 
and  noble  courage  that  may  show  itself  on  oc- 
casion as  much  by  disdainfully  ignoring  the  at- 
tacks of  an  adversary  whom  he  considers  too  far 
beneath  his  notice  as  by  a  fight  to  the  death  for 
a  principle.  There  is  an  intense  craving  for 
recognition  and  leadership  which  will  make  it 
very  difficult  for  him  to  occupy  a  subordinate 
position;  also  an  intense  warm-hearted,  affec- 
tionate and  demonstrative  nature. 

$    Venus  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  refined,  luxurious  and  musical 
well-aspected  Venus  is  ruler  of  the  horoscope 


422  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

it  gives  a  tender,  loving,  even  amorous  nature 
which  craves  love  as  we  all  desire  air,  for  love 
is  the  very  life  breath  of  such  people.  They  are 
extremely  fond  of  children  and  usually  have 
many  pets  which  serve  as  avenues  of  their  ex- 
pression of  love.  They  are  also  pleasure-loving 
and  fond  of  social  intercourse,  neat  and  artistic 
in  their  ideas  and  in  the  decoration  of  their 
home.s.  They  love  jewelry  and  anything  else  that 
adds  beauty  to  the  life,  but  they  are  luxurious 
in  all  their  tastes,  very  amiable  and  much  be- 
loved by  all ;  their  greatest  fault  is  an  inordinate 
love  of  ease  and  an  aversion  to  soil  their  hands. 

%    Mercury  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  Mercury  the  planet  of  reason,  expres- 
sion and  dexterity  is  the  well-aspected  life  ruler 
it  gives  a  keen,  quick-witted  mind  which  craves 
knowledge  as  a  thirsty  man  craves  water  and 
absorbs  it  as  readily,  a  mind  that  solves,  appar- 
ently without  effort,  the  most  intricate  problems. 
Thus  there  is  ability  in  the  various  branches  of 
mental  endeavor,  science  and  literature,  but  these 
people  are  also  very  apt  and  forceful  orators  and 
have  an  extraordinary  dexterity  so  that  they  can 
usually  turn  their  hands  to  anything.  They  are 
fond  of  traveling  and  very  successful  as  sales- 
men and  agents. 


INFLUENCE   OF  RULING   PLANETS         423 

The  Moon  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  romantic,  imaginative  and  restless 
well-aspected  Moon  is  the  life  ruler,  the  people 
born  under  its  influence  are  indeed  rolling  stone^ 
and  far  fields  always  look  greenest  to  them. 
Therefore  they  have  an  overwhelming  desire  for 
travel  and  change  which  generally  does  not  per- . 
mit  them  to  stay  in  one  place  longer  than  neces- 
sary to  earn  the  money  which  will  enable  them 
to  go  to  the  next.  They  have  a  most  vivid  and 
fanciful  imagination  and  a  romantic  nature  en- 
tirely foreign  to  any  practical  endeavor ;  listless, 
restles.8  and  unstable  as  the  tide  that  comes  and 
goes,  flotsam  and  jetsam  upon  the  sea  of  life. 
They  are  generally  mediumistic,  though  usually 
unconsciously  so,  but  are  otherwise  quite  harm- 
less though  utterly  irresponsible  and  untrust- 
worthy where  anything  requiring  an  effort  is 
concerned. 

Saturn  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  serious,  sagacious  and  profound 
well-aspected  Saturn  is  life  ruler,  the  people 
born  under  its  influence  are  of  a  profoundly 
thoughtful,  serious  nature.  They  have  a  keen 
sense  of  responsibility  and  are  full  of  fore- 
thought, hence  trustworthy  and  reliable  advisers ; 
they  are  systematic,  orderly  and  have  good  ex- 
ecutive ability,  frugal  in  their  tastes,  thrifty  and 
saving;  just  to  a  degree,  but  their  justice  is 


424  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

cruel,  hard  and  untempered  by  the  slightest  de- 
gree of  mercy.  They  are  chaste,  sober  and  ex- 
emplary in  their  lives  but  they  have  neither 
mercy  nor  pity  for  those  who  are  unable  to  over- 
come faults  or  habits  or  who  otherwise  become 
delinquent  to  the  laws  of  society.  They  care  lit- 
tle or  nothing  for  pleasure  or  the  society  of  oth- 
ers and  generally  keep  their  own  counsel  and 
company;  they  are  highly  respected,  esteemed 
and  trusted  in  the  community  but  neither  care 
for  nor  merit  the  love  of  their  fellow  men. 

It  Jupiter  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  jovial,  genial  and  generous  well- 
aspected  Jupiter  is  life  ruler,  the  people  born 
under  his  influence  are  ensouled  by  a  great  de- 
sire for  honor,  respect  and  esteem  in  their  com- 
munity. Therefore  they  aspire  to  be  pillars  in 
the  church,  legal  lights,  or  to  fill  an  honored  po- 
sition in  the  pulpit ;  failing  this  they  enter  by 
preference  one  of  the  professions  as  lawyer  or 
doctor.  They  are  cordial,  genial  people  with  a 
jovial  smile  and  a  hearty  handshake  that  makes 
one  glad  to  meet  them  wherever  they  go,  so  they 
are  always  welcome.  They  are  law-abiding  and 
just  but  inclined  to  temper  their  justice  with 
mercy;  and  while  they  themselves  live  lives  be- 
yond reproach  they  are  kind,  forgiving  and 
lenient  to  those  of  a  weaker  morality  whose  lives 
are  smirched  by  sin  and  crime,  hence  they  are 


INFLUENCE   OF   RULING   PLANETS          425 

philanthropic  and  always  ready  to  give  to  char- 
ity and  benevolent  work.  They  are  not  only  re- 
spected and  esteemed  but  beloved  in  the  com- 
munity where  they  reside. 

Mars  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  enthusiastic,  energetic,  construct- 
ive and  militant  Mars  is  the  well-aspected  life 
ruler,  the  people  born  under  the  influence  of  his 
dynamic  rays  are  eager  for  the  fray  and  battle  of 
life.  They  are  ensouled  with  an  ardent  desire 
to  conquer  the  world.  To  them  it  does  not  so 
much  matter  what  they  do  so  long  as  it  affords  an 
adequate  outlet  for  the  constructive  energy 
which,  figuratively  speaking,  threatens  to  burst 
them  unless  released.  The  bigger  and  more  dif- 
ficult the  undertaking,  the  more  they  exult; 
hence  they  become  the  pioneers  and  pathfinders 
of  civilization,  the  engineers  and  contractors  who 
build  our  cities  and  the  highways  and  byways 
that  connect  them,  who  develop  the  resources  of 
the  world  and  turn  them  over  to  others  to  use. 
They  are  extremely  impatient  of  restraint  and 
will  brook  no  interference  with  their  plans  or 
methods.  These  people  govern  other^  and  bend 
them  to  their  will  by  the  whiplash  of  sheer  force 
for  they  have  neither  tact  nor  diplomacy  but 
win  by  the  merit  of  might.  They 'earn  money 
easily  and  spend  it  as  lavishly  and  foolishly. 
They  are  extremely  extravagant  and  when  re- 


426  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

verses  come  they  are  down  and  out  for  the  time 
being  but  they  never  stay  down ;  the  indomitable 
inner  force  soon  accomplishes  rehabilitation  and 
with  it  the  old  reckless  ways  of  living  reassert 
themselves.  They  are  generally  foolhardy  to  a 
degree,  hence  liable  to  accidents  and  a  violent 
end. 

J?   Uranus  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  original,  romantic  and  eccentric 
well-aspected  Uranus  is  life  ruler  the  character 
is  idealistic,  unconventional  and  Utopian.  These 
people  are  generally  out  of  patience  with  the  con- 
ventional ways  of  living  and  determined  in  their 
efforts  and  endeavors  to  break  the  shackles  of 
society  and  live  a  bohemian  life.  They  are  full 
of  fads  and  given  to  unusual  beliefs,  too  ad- 
vanced for  the  majority.  At  the  same  time  they 
are  pioneers  of  a  new  age  in  which  many  of  the 
ideas  we  now  consider  Utopian  will  be  modified 
so  that  they  will  be  held  by  all.  These  people 
are  also  the  inventors  of  the  world,  in  touch  with 
the  higher  worlds  where  ideas  merge  from  the 
Divine  Mind  to  impinge  upon  the  minds  of  those 
who^are  sufficiently  sensitive  to  grasp  them  and 
bring  them  to  birth  for  the  use  of  humanity.  The 
Uranians  are  very  headstrong  and  always  ready 
with  an  argument  to  defend  their  ideas  and  se- 
cure a  convert  to  their  cults;  odd  in  dress,  in 
food,  in  ideas,  they  are  a  class  apart. 


INFLUENCE   OF  RULING  PLANETS         427 

tp  Neptune  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  occult  and  mystical  well-aspected 
Neptune  is  life  ruler  we  have  a  person  of  a  most 
peculiar  power  whose  chief  mark  is  a  strange 
expression  of  the  eye  which  must  be  seen  to  be 
appreciated.  It  is  as  if  he  looked  right  through 
and  through  whatever  is  before  him,  but  it  is 
not  necessary  to  discuss  this  type  for  there  are 
so  few  that  they  are  very  seldom  encountered  by 
the  average  astrologer  and  only  an  occultist  can 
know  and  judge  another  occultist. 

THE  INFLUENCE  OF  AFFLICTED  RULING  PLANETS 

When  the  life  rulers  are  afflicted  by  the  conjunc- 
tion, parallel,  square  and  opposition  from  the  other 
planets,  especially  from  the  malefics — Saturn,  Mars, 
Uranus  and  Neptune — they  affect  the  life  in  an  inim- 
ical manner  which  may  be  outlined  as  follows: 

O   The  Sun  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  cowardly,  arrogant  and  ego- 
tistical Sun  is  life  ruler,  people  born  under  his 
debilitating  influence  are  egotistical  in  the  ex- 
treme, full  of  swagger,  self-importance  and  ar- 
rogance. If  they  obtain  authority  over  anyone 
whom  they  think  they  can  overawe  they  will 
rule  such  dependents  with  a  rod  of  iron,  tram- 
ple upon  their  tenderest  feelings  without  a 
twinge  of  conscience  or  compunction,  but  if  they 


428  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

themselves  come  under  the  authority  of  another 
these  spineless  weaklings  will  then  cringe,  creep 
and  cater  to  the  slightest  whim  of  their  master 
though  they  hate  him  with  an  intense  hatred  that 
is  only  kept  in  check  by  their  fear.  They  whine 
and  wheedle  at  the  faintest  frown  though  ready 
to  spring  and  devour  him  if  only  they  dared.  It 
is  the  signature  of  one  of  the  most  despicable 
characters  in  the  gamut. 

$    Venus  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  slovenly,  slothful  and  lazy  af- 
flicted Venus  is  ruler  of  the  horoscope  the 
persons  are  sensual  and  profligate,  untidy  and 
slatternly,  of  depraved,  perverted  tastes  and  ut- 
terly disreputable  in  their  conduct;  they  are 
social  parasites.  They  use  loud  and  obscene  lan- 
guage and  are  fond  of  music  of  a  clanging,  jar- 
ring nature.  They  love  revelry  and  debauch, 
their  affection  expresses  itself  in  coarse  lusts,  un- 
bridled passion,  free  love  and  moral  perversion. 
They  revel  in  spangles  and  tinsel,  loud,  clashing 
colors  and  cheap  imitations  of  beauty  and  worth. 

%    Mercury  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  untruthful,  dishonest  and  clumsy 
afflicted  Mercury  is  life  ruler  the  people  un- 
der his  influence  are  either  entirely  mentally 
unsound  so  that  they  must  be  confined  for  their 
own  good  in  proper  institutions,  or  they  are  so 
cunning  that  they  are  able  to  hide  their  mental 


INFLUENCE   OF   RULING   PLANETS          429 

bias  and  prey  upon  society  as  thieves,  pick- 
pockets, defaulters  and  criminals  of  similar  na- 
ture. They  are  notoriously  untruthful  and  pre- 
fer misleading  others  to  telling  the  truth,  even 
where  it  is  of  no  benefit  to  them.  They  are  either 
dull  of  comprehension  or  of  such  consummate 
cunning  that  they  seem  to  be  driven  by  a  resi.st- 
less  force  to  get  the  best  of  some  unsuspecting 
person.  They  excel  as  confidence  men,  badgers 
and  in  similar  unsavory  occupations.  They  are 
thoroughly  unreliable  and  dishonest  in  all  their 
dealings;  neurotic  and  perverted,  scabs  on  so- 
ciety. These  people  are  also  inveterate  talkers 
and  always  ready  to  criticise,  slander  or  ruin  the 
reputation  of  others.  They  are  a  menace  to  so- 
ciety in  all  their  activities. 

The  Moon  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  changeable  and  visionary  af- 
flicted Moon  is  life  ruler  it  makes  the  persons 
extremely  restless  and  averse  to  labor  of  any 
kind,  fidgety  and  always  on  the  move ;  if  they 
cannot  travel  from  one  city  to  another,  they 
move  from  one  house  to  another  and  from  one 
situation  to  another  as  often  as  possible  and  they 
infuse  the  same  restlessness  into  whomsoever  they 
come  in  contact  with.  If  the  afflictions  are  very 
severe  the  mind  suffers  and  their  mental  phases 
coincide  with  the  changes  of  the  orb  of  night. 


430  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

i?    Saturn  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  morbid,  melancholy  and  mali- 
cious afflicted  Saturn  is  life  ruler  he  robs  life 
of  all  joy  and  brightness  so  that  the  people  be- 
come recluses  and  melancholy  misanthropes;  so 
miserly  and  avaricious  that  they  will  starve 
themselves  and  forego  the  comforts  of  life  even 
when  they  have  ample  means  to  satisfy  them. 
They  are  cruel,  hard  and  suspicious  of  the  acts 
and  motives  of  others  and  if  they  take  up  work 
as  a  detective  they  become  human  ferrets,  blood- 
hounds who  will  hound  their  prey  to  death  and 
gloat  over  the  misery.  If  any  one  frustrates 
such  people  they  will  hold  spite  forever  and  aim 
to  get  even,  if  it  takes  a  lifetime.  But  the  end 
of  these  people  is  always  bad ;  sometime  or  other 
they  overreach  and  fall  into  the  trap  they  have 
set  for  others.  They  usually  die  an  ignoble  death 
and  the  world  gives  a  sigh  of  relief  when  they 
pass  out. 

H  Jupiter  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  indolent,  bombastic  and  ego- 
tistical afflicted  Jupiter  is  the  life  ruler  the  per- 
son is  often  a  parasite  on  the  social  tree,  a  gam- 
bler, confidence  man  and  speculator,  sporty,  fond 
of  display  and  ostentation ;  he  wears  loud  cloth- 
ing, paste  diamonds  and  cheap  jewelry.  He  is 
usually  met  with  in  pool  rooms,  on  race  tracks 
and  in  similar  places;  playing  poker  or  playing 


INFLUENCE   OF  RULING  PLANETS         431 

the  ponies  are  among  his  favorite  means  of  earn- 
ing a  living;  he  is  very  loud  and  egotistical, 
anxious  to  attract  attention  no  matter  how;  he 
often  figures  in  court  proceedings  on  account  of 
shady  transactions  or  immoral  conduct  or  unpaid 
bills,  for  he  is  an  adept  at  obtaining  credit  for 
everything  he  wants  and  never  pays  the  price  of 
his  expensive  tastes  if  there  is  any  way  of  avoid- 
ing a  settlement  of  his  debts.  Among  the  labor- 
ing class  he  usually  figures  as  a  demagogue  and 
agitator,  inciting  to  strikes  and  riots,  but  he  is 
always  ready  to  sell  out  a  striking  union  to  the 
employers.  We  find  them  among  the  typical 
Italian  padrones,  as  keepers  of  sweat-shops,  and 
in  similar  occupations. 

Mars  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  arrogant,  egotistical  and  fool- 
hardy afflicted  Mars  is  life  ruler  the  person  is  an 
egotist  of  the  first  water,  bound  to  attain  to  his 
wishes  by  force  or  destruction  if  other  means 
fail;  in  fact  he  prefers  to  bulldoze  others  to  do 
his  will  rather  than  to  have  them  submit  without 
a  struggle.  He  is  a  first-rate  slave  driver,  section 
boss  on  the  railway,  in  a  construction  camp  and 
similar  places,  a  liar,  braggart,  bouncer,  or  pugil- 
ist, a  daredevil  willing  to  risk  his  life  and  the 
lives  of  others  at  any  moment  and  in  any  under- 
taking. 


432  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

1$   Uranus  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  stubborn,  erratic  and  independ- 
ent afflicted  Uranus  is  life  ruler  the  men- 
tality is  usually  so  obsessed  in  one  direction  or 
another  that  the  person  becomes  a  fanatic  and 
generally  also  there  is  an  excessive  sensuality 
and  perverted  taste.  They  are  always  ready 
and  anxious  for  an  argument  as  a  means  of  air- 
ing their  ideas  but  they  are  so  hypnotized  by 
their  own  particular  fad  that  they  are  never  con- 
vinced and  can  never  see  when  the  argument 
goes  against  them.  They  always  espouse  the 
most  radical  and  unconventional  ideas. 

tp   Neptune  as  Ruling  Planet. 

When  the  mediumistic,  neurotic  and  self- 
indulgent  afflicted  Neptune  is  life  ruler,  the 
person  is  of  a  dreamy,  neurotic  and  negative 
nature,  apt  to  become  the  medium  of  disem- 
bodied spirits  or  even  obsessed  by  them.  They 
are  likely  to  evolve  psychic  powers  of  a  low  grade 
such  as  involuntary  clairvoyance,  crystal  gazing, 
etc.,  and  if  they  are  unable  to  develop  these  fac- 
ulties they  often  stimulate  mediumship  and  other 
psychic  gifts  for  the  purpose  of  duping  or  de- 
frauding others.  They  have  a  strong  faculty  of 
imitation  and  easily  become  adepts  at  deception. 


INFLUENCE   OF  RULING  PLANETS         433 
THE  SIGNS  AS  MENTAL  SIGNIFICATORS 

When  the  Cardinal  Signs,  Aries,  Cancer,  Libra 
and  Capricorn,  are  on  the  angles,  that  is  to  say,  the 
Ascendant,  Midheaven,  Fourth  and  Seventh  Houses, 
it  is  a  general  indication  that  the  person  is  mentally 
alert,  quick  to  grasp  an  idea,  active  and  enthusiastic 
in  whatever  work  he  undertakes;  one  who  has  organ- 
izing and  executive  ability  and  is  capable  of  carrying 
whatever  enterprise  he  may  start  to  success;  a  bold, 
brave,  indomitable  spirit.  This  is  especially  true 
when  many  planets  are  in  Cardinal  Signs  and  these 
people  may  be  classed  as  the  business  men  of  the 
world. 

When  the  Fixed  Signs,  Taurus,  Leo,  Scorpio  and 
Aquarius  are  on  the  angles  it  indicates  a  thoughtful 
but  slow  and  plodding  type  of  mind  which  requires 
time  to  come  to  a  decision.  They  always  look  before 
they  leap  but  when  they  have  made  up  their  minds 
they  adhere  to  the  course  mapped  out  with  a  remark- 
able patience  and  perseverance  which  in  the  end  in- 
sures success.  They  are  very  reliable  and  can  be  de- 
pended upon  to  keep  their  word  and  meet  their  obli- 
gations. Their  principal  fault  is  that  they  are  too 
apt  to  get  into  a  rut  and  become  narrow-minded. 
They  are  very  original  and  may  be  classed  as  the  in- 
ventors of  the  world.  These  delineations  are  espe 
cially  true  when  many  planets  are  in  Fixed  Signs. 

When  the  Common  Signs,  Gemini,  Virgo,  Sagit- 
tarius and  Pisces,  are  on  the  angles  the  mind  is  flighty 

28 


434  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

and  superficial,  wavering  and  versatile.  These  people 
are  often  very  quick  to  grasp  a  point  and  form  a 
decision,  but  just  as  ready  to  forget  and  change  their 
minds.  They  are  adepts  at  imitation  and  often  pre- 
tend to  virtues  or  abilities  entirely  foreign  to  their 
nature.  They  are  easily  swayed  by  the  winds  of 
emotion ;  one  moment  they  may  be  highly  elated  over 
some  small  matter  and  the  next  a  trifling  trouble 
bows  them  down  to  earth.  They  are  inconstant  and 
unreliable  in  all  their  dealings  with  others  because 
they  do  not  know  their  minds  two  minutes  in  suc- 
cession. They  constitute  the  agents  and  middlemen 
of  the  world,  where  they  occupy  a  subordinate  or 
serving  position.  These  delineations  are  particularly 
apt  when  many  planets  are  in  Common  Signs. 

MENTAL  EFFECT  OF  THE  RISING  SIGN 

When  there  are  no  planets  on  the  Ascendant  the 
rising  sign  has  considerable  influence  on  the  type  of 
mind. 

T  Aries  rising  gives  an  energetic,  enthusiastic  and 
ambitious  type  of  mind,  but  inclined  to  rash  and 
impulsive  acts  and  a  quick  temper. 

b  Taurus  rising  gives  a  stubborn,  headstrong  and 
selfish  nature,  envious,  covetous  and  malicious 
when  angered. 

n  Gemini  rising  gives  a  quick,  alert  and  versatile 
mind,  easily  adaptable  to  conditions  but  so  fluidic 


MENTAL  EFFECT  OF  RISING  SIGN          435 

that  it  lacks  the  ability  absolutely  essential  to 
sustained  effort  and  lasting  success. 

S->  Cancer  rising  gives  a  negative,  imaginative  and 
receptive  type  of  mind,  sometimes  of  a  rather 
morbid  nature,  reserved  and  mistrustful ;  but 
when  such  a  person  has  made  up  his  mind  to 
do  something  he  is  usually  very  tenacious  in  his 
adherence  to  his  ideas;  sympathetic,  hospitable, 
and  kind. 

SI  Leo  rising  gives  a  frank,  open,  ambitious  mind ;  a 
powerful  will  and  a  proud,  honorable  and  kind 
disposition  but  inclined  to  be  hasty,  quick-tem- 
pered, sensual  and  apt  to  go  to  extremes. 

TO?  Virgo  gives  a  critical,  scheming  and  ingenious 
mind,  able  to  evolve  ideas  galore  but  usually  lack- 
ing the  initiative  to  carry  them  out  unless  prod- 
ded by  others.  These  people  are  very  selfish,, 
self-centered  and  reserved.  They  do  not  take 
other  people  into  their  confidence  and  they  sel- 
dom become  really  familiar  with  anyone. 

=2=  Libra  rising  gives  an  easy-going  but  kindly  and 
sympathetic  type  of  mind  which  is  unable  to- 
grasp  or  cope  with  the  exigencies  of  existence. 
Therefore  these  people  drift  along  the  stream  of 
life,  taking  as  much  of  the  sweet  as  they  can  get 
and  using  every  effort  to  avoid  the  bitter.  They 
crave  approbation  but  in  return  adore  their 
friends  and  are  usually  bound  up  in  them. 


436  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

1TL  Scorpio  rising  gives  a  dual  type  of  mind.  This  is 
one  of  the  most  mystical  of  the  twelve.  Some- 
times it  is  symbolized  as  an  eagle  representing 
the  lofty,  aspiring  type  soaring  as  does  the  eagle 
into  the  ether.  At  other  times  it  is  typified  as 
a  serpent  which  crawls  in  the  dust,-  and  again  as 
a  scorpion.  There  is  also  considerable  occult 
significance  in  the  fact  that  the  serpent  has  the 
sting  in  its  head  and  the  scorpion  has  it  in  its 
tail.  B'ut  for  the  present  purpose  we  will  judge 
the  two  latter  as  one. 

The  Scorpio  type  of  mind  denoted  by  the 
eagle  is  thoughtful,  reserved  and  inclined  to 
lofty  ideals;  dignified  in  demeanor,  proud  and 
with  perfect  control  of  the  temper.  These  peo- 
ple are  very  reserved  and  generally  keep  their 
own  counsel. 

The  other  type  when  Scorpio  is  represented 
by  the  serpent  is  entirely  different;  deceitful, 
shrewd  and  secretive;  past  finding  out;  sensual 
and  unforgiving;  jealous  and  passionate,  with  a 
very  ,sharp  tongue  and  fiery  temper. 

J  Sagittarius  rising  gives  an  energetic,  aspiring, 
benevolent  mind  but  rather  lacking  in  ambition. 
These  people  are  usually  of  an  ardent,  affection- 
ate disposition  and  sometimes  very  demonstra- 
tive. 

V3  Capricorn  rising  gives  a  tactful,  diplomatic,  deep 
and  thoughtful  type  of  mind  but  selfish,  envious 


MENTAL  EFFECT  OF  RISING  SIGN          437 

and  covetous.  These  people  are  apt  to  get  into 
a  rut  and  become  very  narrow,  and  when  they 
are  crossed  they  hold  spite  and  plan  revenge. 
They  are  self-reliant  and  persistent  in  whatever 
they  undertake. 

Aquarius  rising  gives  a  good  intellect,  a  friendly, 
sympathetic  and  humane  disposition,  but  these 
people  are  very  original  and  independent;  they 
will  brook  no  interference  with  their  vagaries 
and  pursue  their  own  course  regardless  of  what 
others  say  or  think,  sometimes  even  against  their 
own  reason  but  just  to  assert  their  independence. 

Pisces  rising  gives  a  sentimental  and  romantic 
type  of  mind,  inclined  to  worry  and  restlessness, 
apt  to  turn  to  the  occult,  and  mystical  ideas. 
The  mind  is  very  sensitive  and  often  takes  on  the 
conditions  of  others  with  the  effect  of  unsettling 
and  troubling  the  person. 


CHAPTER  XX. 
YOUR  LUCK  IN  LIFE 

HEALTH,  wealth  and  happiness  are  to  most  peo- 
ple the  prime  objects  of  life,  and  whoever  has 
them  is  rightly  considered  lucky,  though,  as  we  have 
endeavored  to  show,  luck  is  very  closely  linked  to 
merit,  and  we  have  earned  what  we  have  either  in 
this  or  former  lives  and  what  we  lack  in  fortune  or 
ability  we  may  acquire  in  this  or  later  lives  by  good 
use  of  our  opportunities. 

Thus  health  and  disease,  vocational  ability,  so- 
cial and  financial  fortunes,  marriage,  etc.,  are  shown 
in  the  horoscope  as  outlined  in  the  following  pages. 

HEALTH  AND  DISEASE 

The  subject  of  health  and  disease  is  thoroughly 
elucidated  in  that  part  of  the  book  which  deals 
with  medical  astrology,  but  those  who  do  not  care  to 
go  into  the  depths  of  the  subject  will  find  the  follow- 
ing general  hints  helpful  in  determining  the  matter 
for  ordinary  purposes: 

The  main  indicators  of  health  and  disease  are 
the  Sun,  Moon  and  Ascendant,  together  with  the 
planets  in  the  First  House  or  just  above  the  Ascend- 
ant. The  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac  confer  a  vitality 
438 


YOUR  LUCK  IN  LIFE  439 

of  differing  degrees  and  when  there  are  no  planets 
near  the  rising  sign  it  is  of  much  greater  importance 
than  otherwise.  The  signs  may  be  classed  as  follows: 

Aries,  Taurus,  Leo,  Scorpio  and  Sagittarius  are 
strongly  vital  signs. 

Gemini,  Virgo,  Libra  and  Aquarius  are  moder- 
ately vital. 

Cancer,  Capricorn  and  Pisces  are  signs  of  weak 
vitality. 

Both  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  affect  health  in  all 
horoscopes,  but  the  Sun  is  the  particular  significator 
of  health  for  men  and  the  Moon  has  the  same  func- 
tion in  a  woman's  horoscope.  Thus,  if  a  boy  is  born 
at  a  New  Moon  which  is  a  total  eclipse,  he  will  have 
very  poor  chances  of  surviving.  The  same  may  be 
said  of  a  girl  born  at  the  Full  Moon  when  that  is 
eclipsed. 

If  the  Sun  is  strong  by  sign,  well  aspected  by 
Mars  or  by  the  benefics,  if  he  is  in  essential  dignity, 
exaltation  or  elevation  in  a  male  horoscope,  it  indi- 
cates the  possession  of  a  strong  vitality  and  presages 
a  life  blessed  by  good  health.  If  the  Moon  is  simi- 
larly placed  in  a  woman's  horoscope  the  same  effect 
follows. 

On  the  other  hand  if  the  luminaries  are  in  weak 
signs  in  the  Sixth  or  Twelfth  Houses  or  afflicted  by 
Saturn,  Mars,  Uranus  or  Neptune,  the  vitality  is 
weak  and  much  sickness  will  result  unless,  from  child- 
hood, care  is  taken  to  follow  the  laws  of  health  and 
hygiene.  It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  tike  lioro- 


440  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

scope  shows  only  tendencies  which  work  out  infallibly 
if  we  drift  with  the  tide  of  life.  But  on  the  other 
hand,  it  does  not  show  the  factor  of  the  human  will, 
which  being  divine  may  enter  in  and  by  proper  ef- 
forts in  the  right  direction  correct,  at  least  in  a  large 
measure,  the  limitations. 

It  is  a  good  indication  of  health  when  a  strong 
sign  rises  with  Jupiter  or  Venus  close  to  the  Ascend- 
ant and  well  aspected.  But  if  a  weak  sign  is  on  the 
Eastern  horizon,  and  the  life  forces  are  further 
sapped  by  Saturn,  Uranus  or  Neptune  in  the  rising 
sign,  a  life  of  suffering  is  foreshown. 

With  respect  to  Mars  it  has  been  found  that  his 
presence  on  the  Ascendant  strengthens  the  constitu- 
tion when  he  is  well  aspected  but  predisposes  to 
feverish  or  inflammatory  complaints  when  he  is  af- 
flicted. 

It  should  be  understood  that  the  Sun,  Venus, 
Mercury,  the  Moon  and  Jupiter  do  not  afflict  save  by 
square  or  opposition,  whereas  the  conjunction  and 
parallel  of  Saturn,  Mars,  Uranus  and  Neptune  are 
considered  inimical  as  well  as  the  square  and  oppo- 
sition. 

The  afflictions  from  Cardinal  Signs:  Aries,  Can- 
cer, Libra  and  Capricorn,  indicate  acute  ailments 
which  usually  run  their  course  and  leave  no  particu- 
lar trace. 

The  afflictions  from  Fixed  signs:  Taurus,  Leo, 
Scorpio  and  Aquarius,  indicate  organic  or  hereditary 


YOUR  LUCK  IN  LIFE  441 

tendencies  which  are  difficult  to  conquer  and  usually 
become  chronic. 

The  diseases  indicated  by  Common  Signs:  Gem- 
ini, Virgo,  Sagittarius  and  Pisces,  are  convertible. 
They  may  be  entirely  overcome  or  run  their  course 
until  they  become  chronic,  according  to  the  mental 
temperament  of  the  person  in  whose  figure  these  are 
found. 

The  places  of  the  malefics:  Saturn,  Mars, 
Uranus  and  Neptune  always  indicate  weak  points  in 
the  anatomy  and  the  place  of  Saturn  is  particularly 
sensitive,  no  matter  whether  he  is  afflicted  or  not 
it  is  always  a  danger  point.  By  knowing  the  parts 
of  the  body  which  are  ruled  by  the  different  signs 
it  is  easy  to  see  where  the  weak  links  in  the  chain  of 
human  health  are  located : 

Aries  rules  the  head  and  face. 

Taurus  rules  the  neck  and  throat. 

Gemini  rules  the  lungs,  arms  and  shoulders. 

Cancer  rules  the  breast  and  stomach. 

Leo  rules  the  heart  and  dorsal  region  of  the  back. 

Virgo  rules  the  abdominal  parts. 

Libra  rules  the  kidneys  and  loins. 

Scorpio  rules  the  genitals  and  rectum. 

Sagittarius  rules  the  hips  and  thighs. 

Capricorn  rules  the  knees. 

Aquarius  rules  the  ankles. 

Pisce^  rules  the  feet. 


442  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Thus  if  Saturn  is  placed  in  Leo  it  will  indicate 
that  the  person  is  subject  to  heart  trouble.  If  it  is 
in  Pisces  it  will  indicate  cold  feet.  The  hot  and  in- 
flammatory Mars  afflicted  in  Aries,  the  sign  which 
rules  the  head,  would  indicate  a  tendency  to  fevers, 
and  so  on  with  the  other  planets. 

There  are  three  nebular  spots  located  in  the  zo- 
diac, namely:  the  Pleiades  in  29  degrees  of  Tau- 
rus; the  Ascelli  in  6  degrees  of  Leo,  and  Antares 
in  8  degrees  of  Sagittarius.  If  the  Sun  or  Moon 
are  found  in  these  places  and  afflicted  by  a  malefic, 
be  careful  of  the  eyes,  or  if  one  of  the  malefics  are 
in  one  of  these  places  afflicting  the  Sun  and  Moon 
the  same  judgment  holds  good. 

With  these  general  indications  the  ordinary  stu- 
dent should  be  able  to  judge  a  horoscope  with  respect 
to  health  and  disease  and  should  a  more  thorough  ex- 
amination be  desired,  a  study  of  the  matter  in  the 
part  dealing  with  Medical  Astrology  will  give  the 
necessary  information. 

THE  SOCIAL  AND  FINANCIAL  FORTUNES 

The  vocation,  financial  fortune  and  social  stand- 
ing, like  all  other  matters,  should  be  judged  from 
the  whole  horoscope,  but  the  Second,  the  Sixth,  the 
Eighth  and  the  Tenth  Houses  with  their  lords  are 
the  chief  significators. 

Tine  Second  House  indicates  what  the  person 
earns  by  his  own  efforts.  When  Jupiter,  Venus,  the 


YOUR  LUCK  IN  LIFE  443 

Sun,  the  Moon  and  Mars  are  well-aspected  and  placed 
in  the  Second  House  or  lord  thereof  they  attract 
wealth  commensurate  with  the  number  and  closeness 
of  their  aspects  and  whether  they  are  dignified,  ex- 
alted or  elevated.  But  if  Saturn,  Mars,  Uranus  and 
Neptune  are  elevated  and  afflict  the  Sun  and  Moon 
it  is  a  sure  sign  of  financial  misfortune. 

Jupiter  in  the  Second  House  i,s  moderately  gen- 
erous but  Mars  makes  a  free  spender  and  conse- 
quently the  money  he  brings  goes  about  as  fast  as  it 
comes.  Saturn  in  the  Second  House,  or  ruler,  makes 
the  person  thrifty  and  saving  but  he  will  find  it  diffi- 
cult to  make  ends  meet  unless  Saturn  is  in  his  ex- 
altation sign  Libra  and  well-aspected  with  Jupiter; 
then  fortune  comes  by  legacy  or  in  the  latter  part  of 
life.  Uranus  in  the  Second  House  and  in  good  aspect 
to  Jupiter  or  the  Sun  and  Moon  is  also  a  good  indi- 
cation of  financial  fortune. 

The  Eighth  House:  The  planetary  influences 
which  bring  financial  fortune  through  the  person's 
own  efforts  when  operating  through  the  Second  House 
bring  money  through  the  marriage  partnership  or 
legacy  when  operating  through  the  Eighth  House. 
Thu;s  Jupiter  in  the  Eighth  House  indicates  money 
by  marriage  or  partnership  if  well-aspected  by  the 
Sun,  Moon,  Venus  or  the  lord  of  the  Seventh  House. 
But  if  aspected  by  Saturn  and  Uranus  it  shows  a 
legacy.  Mars  in  the  Eighth  House  well-aspected 
shows  a  husband,  wife  or  partner  with  good  earning 
capacity  but  too  free  a  spender.  The  other  indica- 


444  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

tions  enumerated  as  acting  through  the  Second  House 
may  be  similarly  applied  to  the  Eighth. 

VOCATION 

When  the  majority  of  the  planets  are  well- 
aspected  and  above  the  Earth  or  when  the  Sun  is 
in  good  aspect  to  the  Moon  and  Mars  it  is  generally 
easy  for  the  person  to  obtain  a  situation  and  when 
the  Sun  is  in  good  aspect  to  Jupiter  it  gives  promise 
of  a  lucrative  occupation.  But  when  the  majority 
of  the  planets  are  below  the  Earth,  weak  and  afflicted, 
or  when  the  Sun  is  in  bad  aspect  to  the  Moon,  Mars 
or  Jupiter,  it  is  usually  difficult  for  the  person  to  find 
employment. 

To  find  the  employment  in  which  the  person  will 
be  most  likely  to  succeed  consider  the  nature  and 
significance  of  the  Houses  and  Signs  which  hold  the 
majority  of  the  planets. 

When  the  majority  of  the  planets  are  in  the 
Fiery  Signs,  Aries,  Leo  and  Sagittarius,  it  indicates 
as  profitable  the  occupations  in  which  the  metals  and 
fire  play  a  prominent  part,  such  as  machinists,  en- 
gineers, chauffeurs,  smiths,  cutlers,  barbers,  surgeons, 
soldiers  and  hazardous  and  dangerous  vocations. 

If  the  majority  of  the  planets  are  found  in  the 
Eartliy  Signs,  Taurus,  Virgo  and  Capricorn,  it  indi- 
cates success  in  agriculture,  horticulture,  gardening, 
land,  mines,  timber,  building  materials  and  as  con- 
tractor for  buildings;  houses,  dealers  in  foodstuffs 


YOUR  LUCK  IN  LIFE  445 

both  in  the  raw  and  cooked  states,  such  as  the  grocery 
buisiiess,  in  restaurants  or  as  grain  dealers,  chem- 
istry, etc.,  also  dress  goods  and  clothing;  in  short 
everything  that  comes  out  of  the  Earth  to  nourish, 
clothe  and  shelter  the  physical  body. 

If  the  majority  of  the  planets  are  in  the  Airy 
Signs,  Gemini,  Libra  and  Aquarius,  it  indicates  suc- 
cess in  clerical,  literary,  or  artistic  pursuits;  occupa- 
tions principally  involving  brains  or  travel,  such  as 
accountants,  bookkeepers,  agents,  messengers,  ex- 
pressmen, architects,  civil  engineers,  mechanical 
draughtsmen  and  designers,  lecturers,  scientists,  elec- 
tricians, aviators,  inventors,  and  all  similar  occupa- 
tions in  which  mind  is  a  principal  factor. 

If  the  majority  of  the  planets  are  in  the  Watery 
Signs,  Cancer,  Scorpio  and  Pisces,  the  person  should 
seek  occupations  in  which  fluids  are  prominent,  .such 
as  sailors  and  fishermen,  ship  builders  and  ship  own- 
ers, marine  engineers  and  other  occupations  on  ship- 
board ;  manufacturers  and  dealers  in  liquid  refresh- 
ments, etc. 

The  ruling  planet  also  has  an  important  bearing 
on  the  life-work,  and  the  occupations  signified  by  the 
different  planets  may  be  stated  as  follows: 

G  The  Sun  as  life  ruler  indicates  a  leader — it  may 
be  of  a  state  as  king  or  president,  or  of  a  pro- 
vince or  city  as  governor  or  mayor,  or  as  head 
of  a  corporation,  whether  large  or  small.  Thus 
when  the  Sun  is  life  ruler,  especially  if  it  is  in 


446  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

the  Tenth  House,  it  indicates  a  government  posi- 
tion or  employment  in  an  executive  capacity. 

9  Venus  as  life  ruler  indicates  employment  in  an 
artistic  capacity  as  a  musician,  singer,  actor, 
theatrical  agent,  manufacturer  or  dealer  in  milli- 
nery or  fancy  goods,  laces,  embroidery  and 
women's  clothing;  candy  and  confections,  flow- 
ers or  ornaments,  etc. 

$  Mercury  as  life  ruler  indicates  success  in  litera- 
ture or  on  a  lecture  platform;  as  printers,  pub- 
lishers, or  bookkeepers;  as  school  teachers,  ex- 
press agents,  mail  carriers,  commercial  travelers, 
stenographers,  secretaries,  office  workers  and  all 
other  clerical  and  traveling  occupations. 

D  The  Moon  as  life  ruler  signifies  success  as  travel- 
ing salesmen,  railroad  employees,  ticket  agents 
and  other  positions  concerned  with  the  trans- 
portation of  the  public ;  car  builders,  hotel  keep- 
ers, dealers  in  fluidic  commodities,  nurses,  obstet- 
ricians, fishermen,  sailors  and  others  employed 
on  shipboard  and  in  the  shipping  trades. 

>>  Saturn  as  life  ruler  signifies  all  employments  con- 
nected with  the  earth  such  as  agriculture,  gar- 
dening, mines,  building  and  building  materials; 
diplomats,  judges,  politicians,  police,  jailers,  de- 
tectives, secret  service  agents  and  all  whose  work 
is  accomplished  by  stealth  and  strategy ;  night 


YOUR  LUCK  IN  LIFE  447 

workers  and  those  engaged  in  slow,  plodding,  la- 
borious work. 

Jupiter  as  life  ruler  signifies  success  in  the  profes- 
sions, as  lawyers,  judges,  clergymen,  ambassa- 
dors, cabinet  officers,  senators,  congressmen  or 
other  positions  of  public  trust;  bankers,  finan- 
cial agents,  physicians,  benevolent  or  social 
workers. 

Mars  as  life  ruler  signifies  employments  in  which 
iron  and  sharp  instruments  are  prominent,  such 
as  soldiers  and  surgeons,  smiths,  machinists,  bar- 
bers, structural  iron  workers,  founders,  molders, 
engineers  and  all  dangerous  employments. 

Uranus  as  life  ruler  signifies  employments  in 
which  air,  electricity,  thought  power  and  genius 
are  chief  factors,  such  as  inventors,  electricians, 
aviators  and  those  interested  in  supernormal 
or  super-physical  subjects  such  as  psychology, 
phrenology,  magnetic,  divine  or  mental  healing; 
cooperative  colonies,  socialism,  and  advanced 
ideas  of  life  and  living. 

Neptune  as  life  ruler  indicates  occupations  involv- 
ing the  occult,  watery  and  psychic  elements;  also 
those  in  which  fraud  and  deception  are  rampant 
because  the  genuine  article  is  so  rare.  These  in- 
clude astrologers,  mediums  and  clairvoyants. 
Neptune  also  produces  some  highly  inspirational 
musicians. 


CHAPTER  XXL 

MARRIAGE  AND  OFFSPRING 

THEEE  was  a  time  when  man  in  the  making  was 
male-female  and  able  to  beget  children  without 
the  assistance  of  another,  but  when  one  pole  of  the 
creative  force  was  directed  upward  to  build  the 
brain  and  the  larynx  mankind  ceased  to  be  bisexual 
and  thenceforth  each  male  or  female  had  to  seek  its 
complement  to  accomplish  the  begetting  of  children. 
Therefore  marriage  was  instituted  by  the  angels  as  a 
sacrament  and  the  sacred  rite  of  generation  was  per- 
formed under  their  supervision  in  great  temples  at 
certain  times  of  the  year  when  the  interplanetary  lines 
of  force  were  propitious  for  propagation.  The  rest 
of  the  time  all  lived  together  in  the  paradisiacal  bliss 
of  chaste  companionship.  Therefore  parturition  was 
also  painless  and  sickness  and  sorrow  were  unknown. 
But  when,  under  the  guidance  of  the  fallen  an- 
gels, the  Lucifer  spirits,  mankind  commenced  to  exer- 
cise the  creative  function  for  pleasure  regardless  of 
the  stellar  ray,  death  entered  and  the  woman  began 
to  bring  forth  her  children  in  sorrow  and  suffering. 
For  though  a  minister  may  legally  marry  people,  he, 
being  ignorant  of  the  stellar  script,  cannot  see  if  the 
basic  harmony  necessary  to  truly  mate  two  souls  is 
448 


MARRIAGE  AND  OFFSPRING  449 

present.  Therefore,  alas,  most  marriages  fail  to  bring 
the  happiness  and  satisfaction  of  soul  which  mark  the 
companionship  of  true  mates.  Besides  there  is  the 
pain  of  parturition  incidental  to  mismating  and  the 
increased  suffering  of  the  ego  which  is  building  its 
body  under  inharmonious  prenatal  conditions. 
Surely,  a  heavy  toll  to  pay  for  ignorance  of  the  stellar 
science!  Worse  still,  in  the  great  majority  of  cases, 
where  people  do  know  astrology  or  where  they  are  in- 
formed of  its  pronouncement  in  their  case,  they  re- 
fuse to  heed  its  warning  voice  when  it  is  contrary  to 
their  desires.  They  often  even  hate  the  astrologer 
who  has  the  temerity  to  tell  them  that  sorrow  is  in 
store  if  they  wed.  Therefore  it  is  at  best  a  thank- 
less task. 

But  this  matter  is  so  important  at  our  present 
stage  of  evolution,  it  has  such  far-reaching  conse- 
quences both  for  the  individual  and  for  society,  that 
it  is  really  criminal  to  leave  to  chance  the  choice  of  a 
mate.  Fortunately  we  are  nearing  the  Aquarian  Age 
and  there  is  no  doubt  that  people  will  then  study  the 
stellar  script,  perhaps  they  will  institute  matrimonial 
bureaus  maintained  by  the  church  or  state,  with  a 
view  to  guiding  the  growing  generation  in  the  right 
direction.  If  children  whose  nativities  are  harmon- 
ious could  visit  at  each  others'  homes  and  become 
playmates  the  attachment  would  undoubtedly  ripen 
into  love  with  the  years.  Then  marriage  would  not 
end  the  romance  as  it  unfortunately  does  in  the  ma- 
jority of  unions  consummated  at  the  present  time,  but 

29 


450  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

it  would  intensify  love  and  happiness  year  by  year. 
The  bond  of  affection  would  grow  stronger  and  aid 
the  soul  growth  of  those  under  its  magic  spell  as  no 
other  relation  can. 

Children  would  not  be  accidents  then.  They 
would  be  loved  into  life  and  they  would  scarcely  miss 
the  heaven  they  had  left  for  they  would  find  in  their 
homes  a  heaven  on  earth.  Therefore  we  pray  that 
the  time  may  soon  come  when  earch  community  will 
have  its  matrimonial  bureau  conducted  upon  the 
astrological  basis  where  parents  may  send  their 
child's  birth  data  and  receive  in  return  the  name  and 
address  of  another  child  who  will  be  harmonious  as  a 
mate.  If  the  parents  of  both  feel  satisfied  with  re- 
speet  to  family  connections,  etc.,  the  children  could 
be  made  acquainted ;  if  not,  other  names  could  be  sub- 
mitted by  the  bureau  until  one  suitable  according  to 
both  the  social  and  astrological  standards  were  found. 
The  children  could  then  become  playmates,  and  there 
is  no  doubt  that  in  time  their  affection  would  grow 
into  a  love  that  would  satisfy  the  youthful  sentiments 
of  romance.  Later  an  ideal  marriage  would  crown 
their  happiness. 

Nor  should  we  wait  for  the  church  or  state  to  take 
the  initiative.  If  parents  who  believe  in  astrology 
would  form  associations,  maintaining  a  central  bu- 
reau where  the  horoscopes  of  their  children  could  be 
kept  on  file,  grouped  and  classified  with  a  view  to 
finding  true  mates  for  them,  it  would  give  such  a 
practical  demonstration  of  the  worth  of  astrology 


MARRIAGE  AND  OFFSPRING  451 

that  in  twenty  five  years  enough  cases  could  be 
pointed  out  to  arrest  the  attention  of  conservative 
people. 

Harmony  and  Discord 

Man  is,  as  Paul  says,  spirit,  soul  and  body.  There- 
fore the  blending  of  two  beings  in  perfect  harmony- 
requires  that  they  be  in  accord  on  the  spiritual,, 
moral  and  physical  planes,  symbolized  in  the  horo- 
scope by  the  Sun  and  Moon  (Spirit  or  Ego),  Mars 
and  Venus  (soul  or  sex)  and  the  Ascendant  govern- 
ing the  physical  body.  These  significators  taken  to- 
gether with  the  sign  on  the  Seventh  House  and  the 
planet  therein  show  the  innate  agreement  or  discord 
between  people  so  far  as  the  matrimonial  relationship* 
is  concerned. 

The  physical  harmony  is  judged  by  comparison^ 
of  the  rising  sign  of  the  two  persons  involved.  Fiery 
signs  agree,  so  do  earthy,  airy  or  watery  signs.  But 
a  person  with  a  watery  sign  rising  cannot  success- 
fully mate  with  one  who  has  a  fiery  or  earthy  sign 
on  the  Ascendant.  It  is  like  mixing  fire  and  water, 
or  heaping  earth  upon  it.  Fire  will  only  combine 
with  fire  and  air.  People  having  a  watery  sign  on 
the  Ascendant  may  harmonize  with  a  person  having 
an  earthy  sign  rising,  or  vice  versa.  But  neither  the 
earthy  nor  watery  signs  will  mix  with  the  airy  trip- 
licity. 

On  the  moral  plane  the  relationship  is  governed 
by  Mars  and  Venus.  If  Venus  in  the  horoscope  of 


452  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

one  person  is  in  the  same  sign  and  degree  as  Mars  in 
the  horoscope  of  another  person,  there  will  be  love 
at  first  sight  when  they  meet,  but  the  attraction  will 
l>e  sexual  and  unless  there  are  other  powerful  signs 
of  harmony,  Mars  will  dominate  Venus,  especially  if 
Mars  is  situated  in  the  Seventh  House  or  highly  ele- 
vated above  Venus  in  the  other  person's  horoscope. 

When  the  Sun  in  one  person's  horoscope  is  on 
the  place  of  the  Moon  in  the  other  person's  chart 
liarmony  is  shown  on  the  spiritual  plane. 

The  ideal  marriage  requires  the  blending  of  the 
two  charts  in  all  these  particulars  and  the  happiness 
will  depend  upon  the  measure  of  agreement  as  indi- 
cated. There  are  unions  where  people  are  sexually 
mated  but  have  entirely  different  characteristics  in 
other  respects  and  vice  versa.  Therefore  the  two 
charts  must  be  examined  in  their  entirety  to  give  a 
reliable  judgment. 

The  following  will  explain  the  indications  for 
marriage  in  the  individual  horoscope  of  both  sexes. 

Men's  Marriages 

An  early  marriage  is  indicated  in  a  man's  horo- 
scope : 

(1)  When  he  is  born  in  the  light  of  the  Moon, 
at  the  time  she  is  progressing  from  the  new  to  the 
full,  provided  she  is  placed  in  the  Fourth,  Fifth, 
Sixth,  Tenth,  Eleventh  or  Twelfth  House. 


MARRIAGE  AND  OFFSPRING  453 

(2)  When  the  Moon  and  Venus  are  strong  and 
well  aspected  with  a  number  of  the  other  planets  in 
the  fruitful  signs,  Cancer,  Scorpio,  or  Pisces. 

(3)  When  the  Moon  and  Venus  are  in  the  Fifth 
or  Seventh  Houses  which  rule  courtship  and  mar- 
riage. 

(4)  When  a  fruitful  sign  is  rising  with  Cancer, 
Scorpio,  or  Pisces  in  the  Fifth  or  Seventh  Houses. 

(5)  When  Venus  and  Mars  are  dignified,  ele- 
vated, strong  and  well  aspected. 

(6)  When  Jupiter  or  Venus,  or  both,  are  in  the 
Seventh  House  well  aspected. 

A  late  marriage  is  shown  in  a  man's  horoscope: 

(1)  When  he  is  born  in  the  dark  of  the  Moon; 
that  is  to  say,  when  the  Moon  is  going  from  the  full 
to  the  new  and  she  is  placed  in  the  First,  Second, 
Third,  Seventh,  Eighth,  or  Ninth  Houses. 

(2)  When  the  Moon  or  Venus  are  afflicted  by 
Saturn,    Mars,    Uranus    or    Neptune,    especially    if 
either  of  these  planets  is  placed  in  the  Fifth  or  Sev- 
enth Houses. 

(3)  When  Saturn,  Mars,  Uranus  and  Neptune 
are  in  the  Fifth  or  Seventh  Houses. 

(4)  When  the  Moon  is  square  or  opposition  to 
Venus  or  Jupiter  they  bring  trouble  in  courtship  and 
consequent  delays  of  the  marriage. 


454  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

Marriage  is  denied  or  accomplished  with  great 
difficulty : 

(1)  When  Saturn  is  in  Scorpio  which  rules  the 
genitals,  or  if  the  Moon  is  there  parallel,  conjunction, 
square,  or  opposition  to  Saturn  the  planet  of  obstruc- 
tion, for  then  there  is  little  or  no  desire  for  sexual 
intercourse,  hence  such  people  generally  remain  bach- 
elors. 

(2)  When  the  Moon,   or  Venus,  the  planet  of 
love,   is  afflicted  in  the  Saturnine  sign    Capricorn, 
especially  if  the  affliction  comes  from  Saturn,  the 
planet  of  obstruction,  many  obstacles  to  marriage  pre- 
sent themselves  and  it  is  doubtful  if  they  can  be  over- 
come, hence  it  is  unlikely  that  the  person  will  marry. 

(3)  When  the  Moon  is  square  or  opposition  to 
the  Sun  it  is  difficult  for  the  person  to  make  up  his 
mind  on  any  subject,  and  if  the  Moon  is  placed  in  the 
'First,    Second,    Third,    Seventh,    Eighth    or    Ninth 
Houses,   this  will  make   it   particularly  difficult  to 
•come  to  a  decision  regarding  marriage.     If  at  the 
same  time  there  is  an  affliction  from  Saturn  he  will 
mever  make  up  his  mind,  hence  marriage  will  not  be 
consummated. 

(4)  When  the  Moon  is  in  the  last  degrees  of  a 
sign  she  is  said  to  be  void  of  course,  and  if  at  the  same 
time  she  makes  no  aspect  to  other  planets,  it  shows 
a  lack  of  attraction  to  the  opposite  sex,  which  will 
probably  prevent  the  person  entering  the  marriage 
relation. 


MARRIAGE  AND   OFFSPRING  455 

Women's  Marriages 

An  early  marriage  is  indicated  in  a  woman's 
horoscope : 

(1)  When  she  is  born  in  the  light  of  the  Moon, 
that  is  to  say,  when  the  orb  of  night  is  going  from 
the  new  to  the  full,  and  the  Sun  is  placed  in  the 
Fourth,   Fifth,   Sixth,  Tenth,   Eleventh,   or  Twelfth 
Houses. 

(2)  When  the  Sun  and  Venus  are  in  one  of  the 
fruitful  signs,  Cancer,  Scorpio,  or  Pisces,  and  well 
aspected. 

(3)  When  the  Sun,  Venus,  and  Mars  are  well 
aspected,  especially  if  in  the  Fifth  or  Seventh  Houses, 
which  govern  courtship  and  marriage. 

(4)  When  a  fruitful  sign  is  rising,  with  Cancer, 
Scorpio,  or  Pisces  in  the  Fifth  or  Seventh  Houses. 

(5)  When  the  Sun,  Mars,  and  Venus  are  digni- 
fied, elevated,  well  and  strongly  aspected. 

(6)  When  Jupiter  or  Venus  is  in  the  Seventh 
House  well  aspected. 

A  late  marriage  is  shown  in  a  woman's  horo- 
scope : 

(1)  When  she  is  born  in  the  dark  of  the  Moon, 
that  is  to  say,  when  the  Moon  is  going  from  the  full 
to  the  new,  and  the  Sun  is  in  the  First,  Second, 
Third,  Seventh,  Eighth,  or  Ninth  Houses. 


456  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

(2)  When  the  Sun  and  Venus  are  afflicted  by 
Saturn,    Mars,    Uranus    or    Neptune,    especially    if 
placed  in  the  Fifth  or  Seventh  Houses,  which  govern 
marriage  and  courtship. 

(3)  When    Saturn,    Mars,    Uranus   or   Neptune 
are  in  the  Fifth  or  Seventh  Houses. 

(4)  When  the  Moon  is  square  or  opposition  to 
Venus  or  Jupiter,  delays  and  trouble  in  courtship 
and  marriage  may  be  looked  for. 

(5)  When  the  Moon  is  parellel,  square  or  oppo- 
sition to  Uranus,  the  octave  of  Venus,  that  also  will 
bring  delays. 

Marriage  is  denied  or  accomplished  only  with 
great  difficulty: 

(1)  When  Saturn  is  in  Scorpio,  the  sign  which 
rules  the  genitals,  or  when  the  Sun  is  there  parallel, 
conjunction,    square,    or    opposition   to    Saturn,   the 
planet  of  obstruction,  there  is  little  or  no  desire  for 
sexual  intercourse,  hence  when  this  sign  is  found  in  a 
woman's  horoscope  it  is  safe  to  judge  that  she  will 
remain  a  spinster. 

(2)  When  the  Sun,  or  Venus  the  planet  of  love, 
is  afflicted  in  the  Saturnine  sign  Capricorn,  partic- 
ularly if  the  affliction  comes  from  Saturn,  the  planet 
of  obstruction,  there  will  be  many  obstacles  to  mar- 
riage and  it  is  very  doubtful  if  under  the  circum- 
stances a  marriage  will  result. 


MARRIAGE  AND  OFFSPRING  457 

(3)  When  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  afflicting  each 
other  by  square  or  opposition  it  makes  the  person  va- 
cillating on  any  subject,  and  if  the  Sun,  which  is 
significator  of  marriage  for  a  woman,  is  placed  in  the 
First,    Second,    Third,    Seventh,    Eighth,    or    Ninth 
Houses,   this   will  make   it  particularly  difficult  to 
come  to  a  decision  regarding  marriage.    Should  there 
be  at  the  same  time  an  affliction  between  the  Sun  and 
Saturn  it  will  effectually  prevent  the  person  from 
making  up  her  mind,  hence  marriage  will  not  be  con- 
summated. 

(4)  When   the   Sun   by   progression  makes  no 
aspect  to  the  other  planets  it  indicates  a  lack  of 
attraction  to  the  opposite  sex,  which  will  probably 
prevent  her  from  entering  the  marriage  relation. 

Happiness,  Sorrow  and  Bereavement 

The  masculine  Sun  is  the  particular  significator 
of  the  marriage  partner  in  a  woman's  horoscope,  and 
the  feminine  Moon  signifies  the  spouse  in  a  man's 
chart.  Hence  when  the  Sun  or  Moon  are  in  good 
aspect  to  one  another,  or  to  Venus,  the  planet  of  love, 
and  Jupiter,  the  planet  of  benevolence,  happiness  and 
joy  are  assured  in  the  married  relationship,  particu- 
larly if  these  planets  are  placed  in  the  Seventh  House. 

On  the  other  hand,  Saturn,  Mars,  Uranus  and 
Neptune,  afflicting  the  Sun  in  a  female  figure,  or  the 
Moon  in  a  man's  chart,  indicate  sorrow  and  trouble 
through  the  marriage  relation.  If  they  are  placed 


458  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

in  the  Seventh  House  the  testimony  is  all  the  more 
potent,  and  it  is  also  foreshown  that  the  marriage 
will  be  dissolved. 

In  this  respect,  Saturn  and  Mars  indicate  death 
of  the  marriage  partner;  Uranus  may  also  bring 
about  this  ending  if  afflicted  by  Saturn  or  Mars,  but 
otherwi.se  it  points  rather  to  a  clandestine  relation- 
ship which  will  probably  bring  about  the  dissolution 
of  marriage  by  desertion  or  divorce. 

Second  Marriages 

If  one  or  more  of  the  malefics,  Saturn,  Mars, 
Uranus,  and  Neptune,  are  found  in  the  Seventh 
House,  and  the  Sun  or  Moon  are  in  a  fruitful  sign, 
Cancer,  Scorpio,  or  Pisces,  or  in  the  double-bodied 
signs,  Gemini  or  Sagittarius,  it  is  likely  that  the 
person  will  marry  several  times,  and  probably  to  his 
sorrow. 

If  the  Sun  or  Moon  are  aspected  to  a  number  of 
planets  placed  in  double-bodied  signs,  Gemini,  Sag- 
ittarius, or  Pisces,  especially  if  these  signs  are  on  the 
Seventh  House,  two  or  more  marriages  are  likely  to 
occur.  When  the  ruler  of  the  Ascendant  is  placed  in 
the  Seventh  House  well  aspected  to  other  planets  and 
in  a  double-bodied  sign,  Gemini,  Sagittarius,  and 
Pisces,  it  indicates  a  plurality  of  marriages. 

Description  of  the  Husband  or  Wife 

In  a  man's  horoscope  the  planets  to  which  the 
Moon  makes  an  aspect  by  progression  after  birth, 


MARRIAGE  AND   OFFSPRING  459 

indicate  the  women  to  whom  he  will  be  attracted, 
together  with  their  character  and  disposition,  which 
is  determined  by  the  sign  that  the  planet  is  in  and 
the  aspects  which  it  makes.  For  illustration,  let  us 
suppose  that  the  Moon  in  a  certain  person's  horo- 
scope comes  first  to  a  sextile  of  the  Sun  in  Leo,  and 
that  the  Sun  is  aspected  by  a  trine  to  Jupiter,  then 
we  shall  find  the  description  of  the  wife  by  looking 
up  the  disposition  and  character  in  the  chapter  of 
the  Sun  under  the  Sun  in  Leo  and  the  Sun  trine 
Jupiter.  This  would  indicate  a  lady  of  ambitious 
disposition,  a  noble  character,  blonde  and  of  florid 
complexion.  If  on  the  other  hand,  we  find  that  the 
Moon  after  birth  makes  a  square  to  Mars  in  Scorpio, 
and  Mars  in  turn  square  to  Venus,  then  it  would 
show  a  woman  of  a  very  lewd,  slothful  and  slovenly 
nature  who  would  be  domineering,  quarrelsome,  and 
extremely  difficult  to  get  along  with.  Similarly  for 
the  other  planets. 

In  a  woman's  horoscope  the  husband  is  described 
by  the  planets  to  which  the  Sun  makes  an  aspect  by 
progression,  these  planets  to  be  taken  in  connection 
with  the  sign  where  they  are  found  and  the  planets 
with  which  they  in  turn  form  configurations,  and 
the  method  is  the  same  as  indicated  in  the  case  of 
the  Moon  in  a  man's  horoscope.  It  should  be  re- 
marked, however,  that  when  the  significator  of  the 
marriage  partner,  aspected  by  the  Sun  or  Moon,  is 
retrograde  or  weak  by  sign,  as  Saturn  in  Aries  or 
Jupiter  in  Gemini,  the  attraction  is  not  strong  enough 


460  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

to  culminate  into  a  marriage  but  will  probably  indi- 
cate only  a  passing  attraction.  Therefore  the  stu- 
dent must  use  his  judgment  in  these  respects. 

Children 

Whether  a  person  will  have  children  or  not  can- 
not be  judged  from  his  or  her  individual  horoscope 
with  any  degree  of  accuracy  for  this  matter  is  not 
dependent  on  one  only,  therefore  the  horoscope  of 
the  prospective  parents  should  be  compared  and  the 
individual  indications  blended,  then  if  both  horo- 
scopes show  a  fruitful  nature  many  children  will  be 
born,  but  if  both  are  only  moderately  fertile,  or  if 
one  is  very  fruitful  and  the  other  barren,  the  forecast 
must  be  made  accordingly. 

The  indications  shown  in  the  individual  horo- 
scope may  be  interpreted  as  follows: 

The  Moon  is  the  planet  of  fecundation  and  there- 
fore the  most  important  significator;  next  comes 
Venus,  the  planet  of  love  and  attraction ;  and  last, 
Jupiter,  the  planet  of  benevolence.  If  either  of  these 
planets  is  in  the  Fifth  House,  which  indicates  chil- 
dren, and  in  one  of  the  fruitful  or  double-bodied 
signs,  Cancer,  Scorpio,  Pisces,  Gemini,  or  Sagittarius, 
it  is  an  indication  that  the  person  has  a  fruitful  na- 
ture and  will  have  a  number  of  children  who  will  be 
of  a  good  and  pleasant  disposition.  A  similar  judg- 
ment may  be  formed  if  the  Eleventh  House  is  thus 
invested.  For  if  we  turn  the  horoscope  upside  down 
so  that  the  Seventh  House  becomes  the  First,  then  it 


MARRIAGE  AND   OFFSPRING  461 

will  show  the  marriage  partner's  figure,  and  the 
Eleventh  House  is  then  his  Fifth  House  indicating 
children,  therefore  both  the  Fifth  and  Eleventh 
Houses  should  be  considered  in  this  matter.  But  as 
already  said,  the  true  state  of  conditions  cannot  be 
forecasted  save  by  blending  the  actual  figures  of  both 
parents. 

When  the  violent,  turbulent  Mars,  or  Saturn, 
famed  in  ancient  mythology  as  a  destroyer  of  chil- 
dren, or  the  Sun  or  Uranus,  are  in  the  Fifth  or  Elev- 
enth Houses,  they  either  prevent  the  birth  of  children 
or  destroy  them  during  childhood.  This  is  particu- 
larly true  if  Aries,  Leo  or  Capricorn  are  on  the  cusps 
of  either  of  these  Houses. 

When  the  Moon  is  in  Cancer,  Scorpio,  Pisces, 
Gemini,  or  Sagittarius,  in  good  aspect  to  Jupiter  or 
Venus,  a  large  family  is  indicated. 

But  when  the  Moon  is  in  Aries,  Leo,  or  Capri- 
corn, and  afflicted  by  one  of  the  malefics  or  by  the 
Sun,  the  marriage  is  usually  barren.  Saturn  and 
Venus  in  the  Seventh  House  is  also  a  sign  of  a  mar- 
riage without  issue. 

If  there  is  a  difference  in  the  testimonies  of  the 
Fifth  and  Eleventh  Houses  the  judgment  must  be 
modified  accordingly. 


CHAPTER  XXII. 

PROGRESSION  OF  THE  HOROSCOPE 
Fate  or  Freewill 

WHEN  a  chain  is  subjected  to  strain,  imperfec- 
tions in  any  of  its  links  become  manifest,  and 
the  weakest  link  will  break  first.  Similarly,  in  the 
case  of  the  body,  there  are  certain  inherent  weak 
points  and  these  are  indicated  in  the  horoscope.  Frem 
the  moment  of  birth  we  subject  the  body  to  a  constant 
strain,  and  in  time  the  weakness  of  the  various  points 
become  manifest  as  disease.  The  movement  of  the 
planets  after  birth  measures  the  time  when  any  par- 
ticular link  is  liable  to  break.  This  motion  of  the 
planets  in  the  horoscope  is  called  "Progression." 
Study  and  practice  of  medical  Astrology  requires 
knowledge  of  how  to  progress  the  planets  in  the  horo- 
scope, and  we  shall  therefore  take  up  that  subject  in 
connection  with  the  message  of  the  stars  relative  to 
disease. 

When  the  Sun  rises  in  the  East  the  day  is  young 
and  the  labors  allotted  to  each  are  still  before 
us.  Gradually  the  Sun  progresses  across  the  arched 
vault  of  the  heavens,  and  marks  the  time  set  for  the 
performance  of  our  various  duties,  for  keeping  our 
appointments,  for  taking  nourishment,  rest  and  recre- 
462 


PROGRESSION  OF   THE   HOROSCOPE         463 

ation ;  and  when  it  has  run  its  course  through  the  day 
and  has  ceased  to  illuminate  our  sphere  of  action,  its 
absence  invites  sleep  until  the  dawn  of  a  new  day 
shall  present  opportunities  for  continuation  of  the 
activities  left  in  abeyance  from  the  previous  day.  If 
the  Sun  remained  stationary  in  any  certain  point  of 
the  sky  it  would  not  serve  as  a  time  marker  but  as  it 
is,  all  events  of  our  lives  are  fixed  by  its  progression. 

The  horoscope  is  a  chart  of  the  heavens  for  the 
time  when  the  mystic  Sun  and  Life  rises  and  awakes 
us  from  the  long  sleep  between  two  lives ;  then  we  are 
born  in  the  physical  world,  to  continue  the  labors  of 
a  previous  life,  to  keep  the  appointment  there  made 
with  friend  or  foe ;  to  reap  the  joy  or  bear  the  sorrow 
which  is  the  fruitage  of  our  former  existence  on  earth, 
and  as  the  progression  of  the  Sun  marks  the  changing 
time  of  day  and  year,  as  it  ushers  in  season  after 
season  in  orderly  sequence  and  changes  the  appear- 
ance of  the  Great  World,  the  Macrocosm,  so  progres- 
sion of  the  horoscope,  a  veritable  '  Clock  of  Destiny, ' 
registers  accurately  when  the  tendencies,  shown  by 
the  natal  horoscope  will  culminate  in  events;  it 
measures  the  periods  of  prosperity  and  adversity;  it 
warns  of  impending  temptation  and  tells  from  what 
quarter  it  will  come,  thus  aiding  us  to  escape  if  we 
will  but  listen  to  its  warning.  The  natal  horoscope 
shows  unerringly  weak  points  in  our  character  or  con- 
stitution, but  the  progressed  horoscope  indicates 
when  previous  indulgence  of  harmful  habits  is  sched- 
uled to  bring  sorrow  or  sickness;  it  tells  truthfully 


464  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

when  crises  culminate ;  thus  it  warns  us  to  be  on  the 
alert  at  critical  moments,  and  fortifies  us  in  the  dark- 
est hour  of  calamity,  with  hope  of  surcease  of  sorrow 
and  sickness  at  a  definite  time,  hence  the  importance 
of  knowing  how  to  progress  the  horoscope. 

But,  some  may  say,  if  all  is  thus  foreshown,  it 
argues  an  inexorable  destiny  decreed  by  divine  ca- 
price, what  use  is  there  then  of  striving,  or  knowing ; 
let  us  eat,  drink  and  be  merry,  for  tomorrow  we  die. 
If  we  were  born  into  this  life  on  earth  for  the  first  and 
only  time,  to  live  here  for  a  while  and  then  pass  away 
from  this  sphere  never  to  return,  fate  and  favoritism, 
independent  of  justice  would  seem  to  rule.  Such  can- 
not be  the  case,  in  a  world  where  everything  else  is 
governed  by  law,  human  existence  must  also  be  reduc- 
ible to  a  system,  and  we  hold  that  a  reasonable  solu- 
tion of  the  mystery  of  life  is  given  by  the  Twin  Laws 
of  Being:  the  Law  of  Rebirth  and  the  Law  of  Caus- 
ation. 

That  which  has  a  beginning  must  have  an  end, 
and  conversely,  that  which  is  without  ending  can 
never  have  had  a  beginning.  If  the  human  spirit  is 
immortal  and  cannot  die,  neither  can  it  be  born;  if 
it  will  live  to  all  eternity,  it  must  have  lived  from 
eternity,  there  is  no  escape  from  this  truth ;  p  re-exist- 
ence 'must  be  accepted  if  immortality  is  a  fact  in 
nature. 

In  this  world  there  is  no  law  more  plainly  observ- 
able than  the  law  of  alternating  cycles,  which  decrees 
succession  of  >•  ebb  and  flow,  day  and  night,  summer 


PROGRESSION   OF   THE   HOROSCOPE         465 

and  winter,  waking  and  sleeping.  Under  the  same  law 
man's  life  is  lived  alternately  in  the  physical  world 
where  he  sows  seeds  of  action  and  gains  experiences 
according  to  his  horoscope.  These,  the  fruits  of  ex- 
istence here,  are  later  assimilated  as  soul  powers  in 
the  spiritual  world,  birth  and  death  are  thus  nothing 
more  than  gateways  from  one  phase  of  man's  life  to 
another,  and  the  life  we  now  live  is  but  one  of  a  series. 
The  differences  of  character,  nobility  or  brutality, 
moral  strength  or  weakness,  possession  of  high  ideals 
or  low  instincts,  etc.,  are  certain  signatures  of  soul 
power  or  soul  poverty.  Finer  faculties  are  the  glo- 
rious garments  of  gentle  souls  wrought  through  many 
lives  in  the  crucible  of  concrete  existence  by  trial 
and  temptation.  They  shine  with  a  luster  which  illu- 
minates the  way  and  makes  it  easier  for  others  to 
follow.  Coarseness  of  calibre  proclaims  the  young 
in  Life's  School,  but  repeated  existences  here  will  in 
due  time  smoothe  the  rough  corners,  mellow  and 
make  them  soulful  also. 

The  horoscope  shows  this  difference  in  the  texture 
of  the  soul  and  the  aspects  indicate  how  the  soul  is 
ripened  by  the  kaleidoscopic  configurations  of  planets 
in  progression,  which  fan  the  fires  in  the  furnace  of 
affliction  to  cleanse  and  purify  the  soul  of  blemish, 
or  brighten  the  crown  of  virtue  when  victory  is  won, 
but  though  the  planets  show  the  tendencies  most  ac- 
curately there  is  one  indeterminable  factor  which  is 
not  shown,  a  veritable  astrological  "x," — the  will- 
power of  the  man,  and  upon  that  rock  astrological 


466  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

predictions  are  ever  liable  to  founder;  that,  at  times, 
is  the  Waterloo  of  even  the  most  careful  and  compe- 
tent astrologer,  yet  the  very  failure  of  wellfounded 
predictions  is  the  blessed  assurance  that  we  are  not 
fated  to  do  thus  and  so  because  our  horoscope  shows 
that  at  a  certain  time  the  stellar  rays  impel  us  in  a 
given  direction.  In  the  final  analysis  we  are  the  arbi- 
ters of  our  destiny,  and  it  is  significant,  that  while  it 
is  possible  to  predict  for  the  great  majority  of  man- 
kind with  absolute  certainty  that  the  prediction  will 
be  vindicated,  because  they  drift  along  the,  sea  of  life 
directed  by  the  current  of  circumstance,  predictions 
for  the  striving  idealist  fail  in  proportion  to  his  spir- 
itual attainment  of  will  power  which  rouses  him  to 
self  assertion  and  resistance  of  wrong. 

A  beautiful  little  poem  by  Ella  Wheeler  Wilcox 
gives  the  idea  in  a  most  pleasing  form : 

"One  ship  sails  East  and  another  sails  West, 
With  the  selfsame  winds  that  blow; 

'Tis  the  set  of  the  sail 

And  not  the  gale 
That  determines  the  way  they  go. 

"Like  the  winds  of  the  sea  are  the  ways  of  fate, 
As  we  voyage  along  through  Life; 

'Tis  the  act  of  the  soul 

That  determines  the  goal, 
And  not  the  calm  or  the  strife." 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  PROGRESSION 
AND  THE  REASON  FOR  THEM 

BESIDES  the  physical  world  in  which  we  live, 
move  and  have  our  being  at  the  present  time, 
where  sunshine  and  rain,  storm  and  snow,  heat  and 
cold  affect  our  physical  being  in  various  ways,  a  world 
of  finer  substance  permeates  the  denser  matter,  and. 
the  forces  indigenous  to  that  realm  impinge  upon 
our  souls,  as  feelings,  desires  and  emotions,  because 
the  soul  is  clothed  in  substance  from  that  world.  Mys- 
tics therefore  call  this  realm  in  nature  the  Desire? 
World.  A  still  more  subtle  substance,  an  ocean  of 
Thought,  pervades  both  the  Desire  World  and  the 
Physical  World,  and  as  the  mind  is  composed  of 
substance  from  that  region,  it  senses  the  waves  of 
thought  generated  by  other  spirits  endowed  with. 
mind. 

Here  in  the  physical  world,  Time  and  Space  are 
prime  factors  of  existence,  but  in  the  Desire  World 
distance  is  practically  eliminated  because  spirits  hav- 
ing dropped  the  mortal  coil  travel  with  the  speed  of 
lightning,  and  as  spiritual  sight  pierces  the  densest 
substance,  light  there  is  never  obscured,  so  there  is  no 
night,  neither  does  heat  and  cold  affect  the  squly 
467 


468  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

hence  there  is  no  seasonal  division  either,  to  mark 
time  as  definitely  as  in  the  physical  world.  But  nev- 
ertheless, there  is  a  certain  sequence  of  events,  and 
in  soulflights  from  place  to  place  on  the  globe,  we 
.sense  the  nature  of  intervening  country  in  spite  of 
speed,  but  in  the  World  of  Thought,  to  think  of  a 
place,  is  to  be  there  instanter,  neither  is  there  past  or 
future,  events  are  not  separated  by  time,  or  places  by 
space,  but  all  is  one  eternal  here  and  now. 

As  the  science  of  Astrology  is  founded  in  cosmic 
fact,  there  are  also  three  stages  in  progression  from 
incipient  events  in  the  World  of  Thought,  to  accom- 
plished facts  in  the  Physical  World,  and  there  are 
two  methods  of  horoscopic  progressions  pertaining  to 
the  finer  realms  besides  the  actual  movement  obser- 
vable in  the  Heavens. 

Suppose  a  pole  billions  of  miles  long  stuck  into 
the  earth  at  the  Equator,  and  at  right  angles  to  the 
poles,  then,  as  the  earth  turns  upon  its  axis,  the  end 
of  the  pole  would  describe  a  circle  in  the  heavens ; 
this  the  Astronomers  call  the  "Celestial  Equator," 
and  the  position  of  a  heavenly  body  on  this  line  is 
measured  in  degrees  and  minutes  of  "Right  Ascen- 
sion, ' '  from  the  point  where  the  sun  crosses  the  equa- 
tor at  the  vernal  equinox.  This  axial  rotation  of  the 
«arth  brings  a  new  degree  to  the  zenith,  or  Meridian 
about  every  four  minutes,  and  by  the  rules  of  one  sys- 
tem of  progression  we  may  calculate  how  many  de- 
grees of  Right  Ascension  come  to  the  Meridian  posi- 
tion from  birth  to  the  formation  of  a  certain  aspect. 


DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  PROGRESSION    469 

The  intervening  degrees  are  then  converted  to  time  at 
the  rate  of  1  degree  equals  1  year. 

The  other  system  of  progression  is  founded  upon 
the  orbital  revolution  of  the  earth,  but  in  this  system, 
the  positions  of  the  planets  are  expressed  in  degrees 
of  Longitude  and  measured  on  the  ecliptic  or  Sun 'si 
path,  from  Aries  0  degrees  to  Pisces  29.  The  measure 
of  time  is  the  same  as  in  the  system  first  mentioned : 
1  degree  equals  1  year,  but  there  is  this  important 
difference,  that  while  the  earth  takes  only  4  minutes 
to  turn  1  degree  upon  its  axis,  it  requires  24  hours 
to  move  1  degree  in  its  orbit. 

Thus,  by  one  system  of  progression  all  the  as- 
pects that  govern  events  in  a  life  of  60  years  would 
be  formed  in  60  times  4  minutes,  which  equals  4  hours 
or  one-sixth  part  of  a  day. 

By  the  other  system,  formation  of  aspects  for  the 
same  period  of  life  would  require  60  days,  or  2 
months,  or  one-sixth  part  of  a  year. 

Thus  coming  events  cast  their  shadows  before, 
but  the  shadow  varies  in  length  according  to  the  ex- 
altation of  the  sphere  of  life  whence  it  is  cast. 

From  the  sublime  height  of  the  World  of 
Thought,  wrhere  all  things  have  their  inception  in 
the  eternal,  the  progression  of  events  in  a  life  are 
silhouetted  upon  the  screen  of  Time  while  the  infant 
is  still  upon  the  threshold  of  birth,  but  the  shadow 
is  so  short :  1-360  part  of  a  day  being  equivalent  to  a 
year,  that  an  error  of  4  minutes  in  the  given  time  of 
birth  would  throw  predictions  out  a  whole  year.  Few 


470  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

people  know  their  birth  hour  to  the  second,  therefore 
this  system  of  progression  is  of  little  use  and  little 
used. 

Shadows  of  events  projected  from  the  denser 
Desire  World  are  longer  and  more  definite ;  it  does 
not  require  great  delicacy  or  precision  to  calculate 
progression  at  the  rate  of  1-360  part  of  a  year  equals 
1  year.  By  this  method  an  error  of  2  hours  in  the 
given  time  of  birth  would  only  cause  an  error  of  1 
month  in  predictions;  this  system  therefore  gives 
universal  satisfaction,  and  is  most  commonly  used. 
In  the  following  pages  we  shall  explain  a  simplified 
method  of  this  system  of  prediction,  whereby  mathe- 
matical calculation  of  events  for  a  whole  life  may 
l>e  performed  in  a  few  minutes  by  any  intelligent 
child  who  can  add  and  subtract. 

THE  ADJUSTED  CALCULATION  DATE 

When  a  child  is  born  at  7  A.  M.,  in  New  York, 
and  another  at  6  A.  M.,  in  Chicago,  a  third  at  1  P.  M., 
in  Berlin,  a  fourth  at  2  P.  M.,  in  St.  Petersburg,  and 
a  fifth  at  12  noon  in  London,  the  Observatory  clock 
at  Greenwich  would  point  to  noon,  at  the  exact  mo- 
ment when  all  these  children  were  born,  hence  though 
the  clocks  in  their  several  birthplaces  pointed  to  dif- 
ferent hours,  the  Greenwich  Mean  Time  of  their 
births  would  be  identical : — noon.  And  as  the  planets ' 
places  in  the  ephemeris  are  calculated  for  Greenwich, 
noon,  it  would  be  unnecessary  to  make  corrections; 


DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  PROGRESSION   471 

we  should  simply  place  each  planet  in  the  natal 
horoscopes  as  tabulated  in  the  ephemeris.  This 
would  be  most  convenient,  but  the  saving  of  calcu- 
lation in  a  natal  horoscope  where  the  G.  M.  T.  is 
noon,  fades  into  insignificance  before  the  facility  this 
gives  in  progressing  the  planets  for  years  subsequent 
to  birth,  as  required  to  predict  events,  for  in  natal 
horoscopes  where  the  G.  M.  T.  is  before  or  after 
noon,  the  places  of  the  planets  must  be  calculated  for 
each  year  just  the  same  as  at  birth.  We  have  evolved 
the  following  simple  method  of  saving  this  calcula- 
tion and  copying  the  progressed  planets  direct  from 
the  ephemeris  into  any  horoscope. 

Theorem  I. 

If  the  Greenwich  Mean  Time  of  birth  was  before 
noon,  it  is  evident  that  the  planets'  places  in  the 
ephemeris  are  calculated  for  a  later  time  and  also 
that,  as  they  progress  at  the  rate  of  a  day  (of  24 
hours)  for  a  year,  they  will  reach  the  Longitude 
given  in  the  ephemeris  some  day  within  a  year  after 
birth. 

Theorem  II. 

If  the  G.  M.  T.  of  birth  was  after  noon,  it  is 
plainly  to  be  seen  that  the  planets'  places  in  the 
ephemeris  for  the  year  of  birth  are  calculated  for  an 
earlier  time  than  birth,  and  that  the  position  there 
given  corresponds  to  a  certain  day  in  the  twelve- 
month before  birth. 


472  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Furthermore,  if  we  can  find  the  date  in  the 
twelve-month  before  birth,  or  after  as  the  case  may 
be,  when  the  planets  were  in  the  degree  and  minute 
of  longitude  registered  in  the  ephemeris,  we  may  use 
that  date  as  a  starting  point  of  calculation  instead  of 
the  birthday,  and  as  aspects  formed  during  the  travel 
of  the  planets  from  the  position  given  on  any  noon 
to  the  noon  next  following,  indicate  events  in  the  cor- 
responding year  of  life,  the  same  starting  date  may 
be  used  for  any  year.  Therefore,  once  that  adjusted 
calculation  date  has  been  found,  no  further  calcu- 
lation is  required  to  progress  the  planets  in  that  horo- 
scope ;  they  may  be  simply  copied  from  the  ephemeris. 
It  is  only  necessary  to  bear  in  mind  that  the  horo- 
scope thus  erected  does  not  apply  to  the  year  from 
birthday  to  birthday,  but  from  the  adjusted  calcu- 
lation date  of  one  year  to  the  same  date  of  the  next. 
There  are  two  methods  of  finding  this  date ;  the  first 
is  the  most  difficult  and  not  so  accurate,  but  it  shows 
the  philosophy  of  the  correction  better  than  the  sec- 
ond method,  and  we  therefore  give  examples  of  both. 

We  will  use  the  figure  No.  15  (Medical  Astrology 
Section),  which  is  the  horoscope  of  a  lady  who 
died  of  hemorrhages  April,  1909,  to  illustrate  how  the 
adjusted  calculation  date  is  found,  but  defer  descrip- 
tion of  the  case  and  its  crises.  The  lady  was  born 
April  25th,  1872,  Lat.  40  N.,  80  W.  Long.,  at  1:30 
P.  M.  We  first  find  the  G.  M.  T.  by  adding  to  the 
local  time  of  birth  4  minutes  for  each  degree  the 
birthplace  is  west  of  Greenwich. 


DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  PROGRESSION    473 

Local  time  of  birth,  April  25 1 :30  P.  M. 

Correction  for  80  degrees  W.  Long 5 :20 


Greenwich  Mean  Time  of  birth  Apr.  25 . .   6 :50  P.  M. 

In  compliance  with  Theorem  II,  we  subtract 
from  the  birthdate,  April  25,  a  correction  for  6  hours 
and  50  minutes  which  the  G.  M.  T.  is  after  noon. 
The  measure  of  time  used  in  this  system  is  as  follows : 

24  hours  correspond  to  12  months. 
2  hours  correspond  to     1  month. 
1  hour  corresponds  to  15  days. 
4  minutes  correspond  to  1  day. 

According  to  this  scale  we  subtract 

from April  25,  1872 

Correction  for     6  hours — 3  months 
Correction  for  50  minutes— 13  days 

— 3  months,  13  days 


Adjusted   Calculation  Date January  12th,  1872 

We  may,  however,  find  the  Adjusted  Calculation 
date  much  more  accurately  and  with  less  labor  by 
the  following  fourfold  rule : 

Rule 

(1)  Find  the  interval  from  G.  M.  T.  to  the  fol- 
lowing noon. 


474  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

(2)  To  this  interval  add  the  Sidereal  Time  for 
Greenwich  noon  on  the  birthday,   as   given  in  the 
ephemeris.     The  sum  of  these  is  the  Sidereal  Time 
of  the  Adjusted  Calculation  Date. 

(3)  When  the  G.  M.  T.  at  birth  is  A.  M.  count 
forwards  in  the  ephemeris  till  you  find  a  day  having 
the  required  S.  T.  that  is  the  Adjusted  Calculation 
Date. 

(4)  When  the  G.  M.  T.  at  birth  is  P.  M.  read 
backwards  in  the  ephemeris  till  you  find  the  day 
having  the  required  S.  T.  which  designates  it  as  the 
Adjusted  Calculation  Date. 

We  shall  use  the  same  example  as  before  to  dem- 
onstrate this  method. 

Section  1  directs  us  to  find  the  interval  between 
G.  M.  T.  and  the  following  noon.  Please  observe  this, 
the  following  noon,  for  all  depends  upon  this  being 
accurately  understood. 

From April  26,  12 :00  Noon 

Subtract  G.  M.  T April  25,     6 :50  P.  M. 


Interval  from  G.  M.  T.  to  next  Noon,  17  hrs.  10  min. 
By  Section  2  of  Rule : 

Add  S.  T.  of  birthday 

as  given  in  ephemeris 2  hrs.  15  min. 


S.  T.  of  Adjusted  Calculation  Date. .  .19  hrs.  25  min. 


DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  PROGRESSION    475 

By  Section  4  of  Rule: 

As  G.  M.  T.  is  P.  M.  we  read  backwards  in  the 
column  of  the  ephemeris  giving  S.  T.,  until  we  come 
to  Jan.  12,  1872.  On  that  day  the  S.  T.  is  19  hrs.,  26 
min.,  and  the  A.  C.  D.  is  therefore  Jan.  12th,  1872. 

Thus,  by  both  methods  we  have  arrived  at  iden- 
tical results,  but  slight  discrepancies  may  appear  in 
using  the  proportional  method  because  that  makes  no 
allowances  for  long  and  short  months,  hence  the 
method  last  demonstrated  is  more  accurate  as  well 
as  easier.  If  this  lady  had  been  born  two  hours  later, 
the  Adjusted  Calculation  Date  would  have  been  De- 
cember 12,  1871,  and  where  children  are  born  late 
in  the  year  and  early  in  the  morning,  the  Adjusted 
Calculation  Date  may  run  into  January  or  February 
of  the  next  year.  It  is  therefore  very  important  to 
state  the  Adjusted  Calculation  Date  by  year  also,  in 
this  case  January  12,  1872. 

Now,  that  we  have  arrived  at  the  point  where 
we  are  to  make  use  of  our  A.C.  D.  to  progress  the 
lady's  horoscope  and  show  how  accurately  it  marks 
the  crises,  the  first  application  of  the  date  to  the  horo- 
scope is  a  crucial  point,  and  the  student  is  earnestly 
warned  to  overlook  no  word  in  our  description  so 
that  he  may  acquire  understanding  of  the  principle. 
Once  having  grasped  the  point,  an  immense  amount 
of  labor  will  be  saved,  so  it  will  pay  to  follow  our 
instructions  to  the  letter. 

Write  in  the  margin  of  your  ephemeris  for  1872 
opposite  the  birthday  (April  25),  January  12,  1872. 


476  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Opposite  April  26  write  January  12,  1873.  Oppo- 
site April  27,  write  January  12,  1874,  and  so  on,  as 
shown  below.  Every  day  after  birth  corresponds  to 
a  certain  year  of  life  which  starts  on  the  day  written 
in  the  margin,  and  the  planets  in  line  with  any 
A,  C.  D.  indicate  the  events  for  twelve  months  from 
that  date. 

Jan.  12,  1872.  . .  .Apr.  25  Jan.  12,  1888. . .  .May  11 

Jan.  12,  1873 ....  Apr.  26  Jan.  12,  1898 ....  May  21 

Jan.  12,  1874 ....  Apr.  27  Jan.  12,  1908 ....  May  31 

Jan.  12,  1877 Apr.  30  Jan.  12,  1909 June  1 

Jan.  12,  1878 May    1  Jan.  12,  1910 June  2 

The  motion  of  the  Sun  and  planets  from  day  to 
day  is  slow,  and  as  we  count  a  day  for  a  year,  we  may 
liken  their  progression  to  the  short  hand  on  the  clock 
of  destiny :  they  indicate  the  year  when  a  certain  con- 
dition shown  in  the  natal  horoscope  has  ripened,  and 
is  ready  to  manifest  as  an  event.  The  swift  moving 
Moon  is  the  long  hand;  it  marks  the  months  when 
aspects  culminate  in  events.  Therefore  we  divide  its 
motion  during  the  year  commencing  with  any  ad- 
justed calculation  date,  by  12,  but  for  rough  figur- 
ing we  may  consider  the  Moon's  travel  in  the  pro- 
gressed horoscope  one  degree  a  month. 

Planetary  aspects  alone  do  not  operate,  however; 
an  aspect  of  the  progressed  Moon  or  a  New  Moon 
is  required  to  focus  the  hidden  forces.  Therefore 
crises  shown  by  the  planets  are  sometimes  retarded 
beyond  the  time  when  the  aspect  culminated  and  we 


DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  PROGRESSION    477 

may  think  we  have  safely  escaped,  but  the  first  aspect 
of  the  Moon  which  excites  it  will  prove  that  ' '  though 
the  mills  of  the  gods  grind  /slowly,  they  grind  exceed- 
ing fine."  The  finer  forces  lose  none  of  their  in- 
tensity by  lying  latent  in  Nature 's  lock-box  of  events. 

Uranus,  Saturn  and  Jupiter  were  in  21-22  de- 
grees of  Declination  at  birth ;  but  the  effect  remained 
latent  until  the  year  1902,  when  the  Sun  reached  the 
same  degree.  (See  ephemeris  for  1872,  May  25th, 
which  corresponds  to  Jan.  12,  1902.) 

The  progressed  Sun  was  then  in  Gemini  4  de- 
grees, 31  minutes ;  31  minutes  short  of  an  exact  oppo- 
sition to  the  Moon 's  place  at  birth :  Sagittarius  5 
degrees,  2  minutes. 

But  the  progressed  Moon  on  the  A.  C.  D.,  Jan. 
12,  1902,  was  in  Capricorn  9  degrees,  27  minutes  (see 
ephemeris  for  1872,  May  25),  and  traveling  at  the 
rate  of  one  degree  per  month  it  reached  the  place 
of  Saturn  at  birth:  Capricorn  11  degrees,  15  min- 
utes, in  March,  1902.  There  it  excited  the  parallels 
of  the  Sun,  Saturn,  Uranus  and  Jupiter,  also  the 
opposition  of  the  Sun  and  Moon,  so  that  the  lady  was 
taken  seriously  ill  with  the  disease  which  ended  her 
life  seven  years  later. 

We  shall  next  see  what  brought  about  the  lady's 
final  illness  in  the  latter  part  of  July,  1908,  and  ter- 
minated life  in  April,  1909.  We  copy  the  planets' 
places  from  the  ephemeris  for  1872,  June  1st,  into 
the  outer  ring  of  the  natal  horoscope,  for  the  planets 
on  that  day  correspond  to  the  adjusted  calculation 


478  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

date,  Jan.  12,  1909,  but  progress  the  Moon  from  the 
A.  C.  D.,  Jan.  12,  1908,  and  Jan.  12,  1909  (May  31 
and  June  1  in  the  1872  ephemeris),  to  show  the  crisis 
thus  marked. 

If  we  subtract  the  Moon's  longitude  on  a  given 
day  from  its  place  on  the  following  day,  the  differ- 
ence is  its  motion  during  the  24  hours  intervening, 
which  corresponds  to  a  year  of  life  in  progression,  and 
division  by  12  gives  us  its  rate  of  monthly  travel. 

Moon's  place  on  A.  C.D.  Jan.  12,  1909. 

(June  1  in  ephemeris  for  1872) Aries  17.34 

Moon's  place  on  A.  C.  D.  Jan.  12,  1908. 

(May  31  in  ephemeris  for  1872) Aries    4.23 

Moon's  travel  from  Jan.  1908,  to  Jan.  1909 18.11 

Moon's  monthly  travel  is  l-12th  of  the  above: 
1  degree,  6  minutes.  This  we  add  to  its  place  for  each 
month  as  shown  in  the  following  table : 


1908— 
Jan     12 

Aries 

0       / 

423 

1908— 
Oct     12 

Aries 

o     r 

14  17 

Feb    12 

.     5.29 

Nov    12 

1523 

Mar    12     .  . 

6.35 

Dec     12 

1629 

Apr.  12  

7.41 

May    12  

8.47 

1909— 

June  12 

9  53 

Jan.    12 

.  .   17.35 

July  12 

1059 

Feb.   12  

18.41 

Aug    12 

1205 

Mar.  12  

19.47 

Sept.  12.. 

..13.11 

Apr.   12.. 

..20.53 

DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  PROGRESSION    479 

By  comparing  this  table  with  the  horoscope,  we 
note  three  aspects  in  1908  and  one  in  1909,  all  from 
the  House  of  death. 

(1)  The  Moon  in  Sagittarius  at  birth  gives  the 
"Wanderlust,"  but  if  means  are  lacking  and  health 
none  too  good  (the  lady  also  had  St.  Vitus  dance  as 
a  child,  when  the  Moon  progressed  to  conjunction  of 
Neptune  and  squared  Uranus)     and    the    Moon,  at 
birth,  is  cooped  up  in  the  Fourth  House  (the  home), 
such  desires  cannot  easily  be  realized.     "When  the 
Moon   progressed    into     the     Eighth    House — which 
brings  gifts  and  legacies  also — and  cast  a  trine  to  its 
place  at  birth  in  February,   1908,  it  improved  the 
health,  brought  a  gift  from  a  brother,  and  caused  the 
lady  to  travel. 

(2)  In  July,  1908,  the  Moon  squared  Saturn  at 
birth  and  excited  his  natal  parallel  to  Uranus  and 
Jupiter.     This  brought  an  illness  as  violent  as  it  was 
sudden,  which  forced  the  lady  to  abandon  further 
travel  and  return  home.    Had  it  not  been  for  the  sex- 
tile  of  the  progressed  Sun  results  must  have  been  fatal. 

(3)  In  October,   1908,  the  Moon  progressed  to 
conjunction  of  Venus  in  the  natal  chart.     This,  for 
a  time,  alleviated  suffering  to  some  extent,  but  you 
will  note  that  from  the  time  of  the  first  violent  at- 
tack in  July,  1908,  to  the  end  of  life,  April,  '09,  the 
progressed  Moon  squared  the  degrees  between  Sat- 
urn's place  at  birth  and  his  progressed  position  for 
1909,  as  shown  in  the  outer  ring  of  the  horoscope. 
This  made  the  beneficent  action  of  Venus  less  potent. 


480  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

(4)  In  April,  1909,  the  progressed  Moon  squared 
the  natal  positions  of  Jupiter  and  Uranus,  also  the 
progressed  position  of  Saturn.  This  inimical  force 
from  the  house  of  death,  the  Eighth,  ended  life. 

PROGRESSION  OF  THE  ANGLES 

Besides  the  progression  of  planets  which  we 
trust  has  been  sufficiently  elucidated,  we  must  also 
note  a  similar  forward  movement  of  the  houses,  but 
these  must  be  calculated  by  the  same  method  as  when 
casting  a  natal  figure,  save  that  we  use  the  Sidereal 
Time  for  the.  day  which  corresponds  to  the  year  for 
which  we  wish  to  progress  the  horoscope.  In  relation 
to  the  lady's  horoscope  we  have  studied,  the  critical 
year  is  1909,  and  June  1st  in  the  ephemeris  for  1872 
corresponds.  We  bear  in  mind  that  birth  occurred 
at  1:30  P.  M.,  in  Lat.  40  N.,  Long.  80  W.,  for  these 
factors  are  used  in  placing  the  degrees  on  the  houses 
just  as  in  the  natal  chart,  the  only  change  is  using 
the  S.  T.  of  the  progressed  birth  day. 

S.  T.  at  noon  previous  to  progressed  birth-  H.  M.  S. 
day,    1909    (see   ephemeris   for    1872, 

June  1) 4  41  6 

Correction  of  10  seconds  for  each  15  deg. 

birthplace  is  West  of  Greenwich 0  0  55 

Interval  from  previous  noon  to  birth. ...  1  30  0 

Correction  of  10  sees,  per  hr.  of  interval . .  0  015 


Sidereal  Time  of  progressed  birth 6     12     16 


DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  PROGRESSION    481 

With  this  S.  T.  we  turn  to  the  Tables  of  Houses 
for  the  Latitude  of  birth,  and  may  erect  a  horoscope 
with  twelve  Houses  in  the  usual  manner,  we  may  fur- 
ther insert  the  planets'  places  on  the  A.  C.  D.  for 
.1909,  then  we  shall  have  a  complete  separate  horo- 
scope for  the  year,  which  we  may  compare  with  the 
natal  chart.  Some  Astrologers  use  that  method,  but 
we  advise  another,  which  we  think  facilitates  com- 
parison and  judgment  of  aspects  between  the  natal 
and  progressed  position  of  the  planets  in  a  degree 
unattainable  by  any  other  system;  it  is  illustrated 
in  the  various  figures  used  in  this  book. 

We  write  the  natal  chart  in  ink,  as  that  is  un- 
changed during  life,  we  also  draw  a  large  circle  out- 
side it,  to  contain  the  progressed  position  of  the  plan- 
ets. These,  and  the  houses  we  write  in  their  proper 
places,  but  lightly,  and  with  pencil,  so  that  they  may 
be  easily  erased  and  the  horoscope  erected  for  an- 
other year  without  the  necessity  of  rewriting  the  na- 
tal chart. 

But  no  matter  how  placed,  two  full  horoscopes 
with  24  houses,  18  planets,  a  couple  of  dragons'  heads, 
each  with  its  respective  'tail,'  and  two  parts  of  for- 
tunes, make  quite  a  'maze, 'and  if  the  full  galaxy  of 
aspects,  including  biquintiles,  sesquiquadrates  and 
other  highsounding  nonsensicals  are  to  be  figured  out 
the  astrologer  will  surely  so  lose  himself  in  the  math- 
ematical labyrinth  that  he  will  be  unable  to  read  a 
syllable  of  the  message  of  the  stars.  During  the  first 
year  of  his  astrological  study,  one  of  the  writers  being 

31 


482  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

originally  of  a  mathematical  turn,  had  the  habit  of 
constructing  figures,  and  tables  of  aspects,  so  fear- 
fully and  wonderfully  made  that  they  beat  the  pro- 
verbial 'Chinese  puzzle,'  they  were  veritable  'Gor- 
dian  Knots,'  and  the  destiny  of  a  human  being  was 
so  tangled  in  each,  that  neither  the  writer  who  had 
concocted  the  abomination,  nor  anyone  else  could  ever 
hope  to  disentangle  the  poor  soul  involved.  May  he 
be  forgiven;  he  has  mended  his  ways,  and  is  now 
just  as  zealous  to  eliminate  all  nonessentials  from  the 
horoscope,  but  having  been  enmeshed  in  the  maze  of 
mathematics,  his  experience  should  serve  as  a  warn- 
ing. Our  minds,  at  best,  are  but  feeble  instruments 
to  fathom  fate  and  surely  we  shall  have  the  greatest 
chance  of  success  by  applying  our  science  to  the  most 
important  factors,  and  these  are  usually  the  simplest. 

If  this  be  granted,  the  question  presents  itself: 
What  are  the  essentials  and  what  may  be  eliminated 
with  advantage  to  clear  the  progressed  horoscope  of 
u.seless,  befogging  elements? 

First,  with  regard  to  the  progressed  houses,  only 
two  vital  points  produce  results  when  aspected:  the 
Midheaven,  which  is  spiritual  in  nature,  and  the 
Ascendant,  which  is  a  significator  in  material  mat- 
ters. We  shall  treat  that  subject  later;  for  the  pres- 
ent we  confine  ourselves  to  the  argument  that  it  will 
facilitate  judgment  of  the  progressed  horoscope  if 
we  leave  the  ten  unessential  cusps  out,  and  draw  two 
dotted  lines  with  pencil  to  mark  the  progressed  Mid- 
heaven  and  Ascendant. 


DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  PROGRESSION    485 

In  the  second  place,  the  student  may  readily 
convince  himself  by  looking  through  the  columns  of 
any  ephemeris,  that  the  motion  of  Neptune,  Uranusr 
Saturn  and  Jupiter,  during  the  two  months  which 
represent  progression  for  a  life  of  60  years,  is  so  slow 
that  they  seldom  form  an  aspect  not  registered  in. 
the  natal  chart.  In  rare  cases  where  an  important 
aspect  is  formed,  the  fact  is  easily  seen,  and  the 
planet  should  then  be  entered  in  the  outer  ring'  of: 
the  progressed  horoscope,  but  in  the  great  majority 
of  cases  it  is  better  to  leave  these  planets  out,  and 
enter  only  the  progressed  positions  of  the  Sun,  Moon, 
Mars,  Venus  and  Mercury. 

In  conclusion  of  our  treatment  of  the  method  of 
Progression,  two  important  points  must  be  men- 
tioned:  The  Midheaven  at  a  given  Sidereal  Time  is 
the  same  for  all  Latitudes,  so  that  two  children  born 
at  the  same  S.  T.  would  have  the  same  sign  and  de- 
gree on  the  M.  C.,  but  if  one  were  born  in  Alaska  and 
the  other  in  Mexico,  the  Asc.  would  vary  much  and 
change  the  grouping  of  planets  in  the  houses  very 
considerably,  with  the  further  result  that  planets 
which  influence  the  First  House  affairs  in  one  horo- 
scope affect  Twelfth  House  matters  in  the  other,  etc.. 
Thus  the  lives  of  these  people  would  be  very  different.. 

The  same  argument  applies  to  the  progressed 
horoscope  of  a  person  traveling  North  or  South  from, 
his  birthplace.  His  progressed  M.  C.  remains  'un- 
changed, but  he  receives  the  forces  from  a  different 
ascending  figure,  according  to  the  Latitude  where  he 


484  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

lesides,  and  the  grouping  of  planets  relative  to  the 
progressed  Ascendant  varies  accordingly.  As  exam- 
ples we  may  state  that  both  writers  have  left  their 
birthplace ;  one  traveled  2,000  miles  West,  but  is  close 
to  the  same  Latitude  as  her  birthplace,  hence  both 
her  M.  C.  and  Asc.  are  the  same  as  if  she  had  re- 
mained in  her  native  city. 

The  other  writer  was  born  in  Latitude  56  N., 
.and  now  lives  in  Latitude  32.  Had  he  remained  in 
the  far  North,  his  progressed  Ascendant  would  in 
v(1912)  be  Virgo  6°,  exactly  conjunction  to  Mars'  place 
at  birth,  but  the  Ascendant  of  his  new  home  is  Virgo 
0  degrees,  and  in  this  latitude  he  will  not  feel  the 
effect  of  the  Mars  ray  for  a  number  of  years. 

The  other  important  point  we  had  in  mind  is 
the  necessity  of  being  definite  in  regard  to  the  year 
for  which  we  progress.  Perhaps  a  client  tells  us  that 
a  certain  event  occurred  when  he  was  26,  and  another 
in  his  50th  year.  Such  statements  are  ambiguous, 
and  give  no  safe  working  basis.  The  Astrologer  may 
go  home  and  do  an  immense  amount  of  work  to  no 
use,  because  he  thought  the  client  meant  that  one 
event  occurred  when  he,  the  client,  was  between  26 
.and  27  years  of  age,  and  a  later  consultation  reveals 
that  he  meant  the  year  between  his  25th  and  26th 
birthdays.  Pin  them  down  to  the  year,  1850,  1900, 
or  whatever  it  may  be,  but  never  accept  a  person's 
age  as  a  starting  point. 

On  the  same  principle,  never  predict  that  an 
event  will  happen  when  a  person  is  so  and  so  old, 


DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  PROGRESSION    485 

that  also  is  ambiguous  and  gives  them  no  satisfaction ; 
give  the  year  and  month ;  never  hedge ;  never  predict 
anything  of  which  you  are  in  doubt;  when  you  are 
satisfied  a  prediction  is  justified,  speak  fearlessly,  but 
tactfully;  believe  in  the  stars,  and  the  stars  will  fully 
justify  your  faith. 

SOME  IMPORTANT  POINTS 

When  judging  the  effects  of  directions  it  is  of 
the  greatest  importance  to  bear  in  mind  the  tenor 
of  the  nativity,  for  even  weak  aspects  which  are  in 
harmony  with  the  tendencies  foreshown  in  the  natal 
figure  will  be  much  more  active  than  a  strong  aspect 
which  is  contrary  to  the  radical  indications.  Sup- 
posing, for  instance,  that  there  are  strong  testimonies 
of  sickness  and  accident,  as  Mars  in  Sagittarius  in 
the  Midheaven  square  the  Sun  in  Pisces  in  the 
Twelfth  House  and  square  Saturn  in  Virgo  in  the 
Sixth  House,  then  the  progression  of  Mars  to  square 
of  the  radical  Ascendant  would  undoubtedly  precipi- 
tate an  accident  or  a  fever  of  a  serious  nature,  but  if 
the  Sun  were  trine  Mars  and  Jupiter  the  effect  of 
Mars  square  Ascendant  would  produce  little  if  any 
discomfort.  Similarly  with  all  the  other  directions, 
and  if  the  student  neglects  to  take  into  consideration 
this  all-important  point,  he  is  likely  sometime  to  make 
a  great  mistake  and  wonder  why  a  seemingly  pow- 
erful direction  produced  no  result  in  one  case,  while 
in  another  a  very  weak  aspect  had  such  a  far-reaching 


486  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

effect.  Aspects  between  two  .progressed  planets  are 
unimportant. 

Another  important  point  to  remember  is  that 
aspects  of  the  progressed  to  the  radical  planets  op- 
erate in  proportion  to  the  power  of  the  radical  planet 
in  the  nativity.  Let  us  suppose,  for  illustration,  that 
in  a  certain  figure  the  Sun  is  elevated  in  Leo  and 
aspected  to  a  number  of  the  other  planets — it  matters 
not  whether  the  aspects  are  good  or  bad  so  long  as 
they  are  close — then  even  a  weak  aspect  from  a  pro- 
gressed planet  to  the  Sun  will  have  a  marked  result. 
On  the  other  hand,  if  the  Sun  in  that  horoscope  re- 
eeived  no  aspect,  or  only  one  or  two  weak  ones,  then 
even  a; strong  aspect  of  a  progressed  planet  would 
liave  little  effect. 

It  should  also  be  noted  that  a  good  aspect  from 
a  progressed  planet  to  a  planet  that  is  much  afflicted 
in  the  nativity  would  produce  small  if  any  benefit. 
In  short,  and  to  sum  up,  progressed  aspects  operate 
only  in  the  measure  that  they  are  in  harmony  with 
the  trend  of  the  nativity  and  the  planet  wherewith 
they  are  blending. 

The  third  important  point  to  remember  when 
judging  the  effects  of  directions  is  that  an  aspect  from 
A  progressed  to  a  radical  planet  is  never  in  itself  suf- 
iicient  to  produce  results;  a  harmonious  aspect  from 
the  progressed  Moon  or  lunation  is  absolutely  essen- 
tial to  bring  the  tendency  to  fruition.  That  is  to  say, 
if  the  progressed  Sun  comes  to  square  of  radical  Sat- 
urn, a  sextile  or  trine  aspect  of  the  progressed  Moon 


DIFFERENT  METHODS  OF  PROGRESSION    487 

or  a  lunation  will  pass  unnoticed;  no  effect  will  be 
felt  until  either  the  progressed  Moon  or  a  lunation 
comes  into  conjunction,  square,  or  opposition  to  Sun 
or  Saturn,  and  vice- versa,  if  the  progressed  Sun 
comes  to  a  trine  of  the  radical  Jupiter  a  square  or 
opposition  of  the  Moon  will  not  affect  it,  it  must  wait 
for  a  sextile  or  trine.  For  this  reason  directions  are 
sometimes  delayed  in  their  action  beyond  the  time  of 
their  culmination,  and  at  other  times  they  are  some- 
what hastened  because  a  lunar  aspect  of  the  requisite 
nature  occurs  slightly  in  advance  of  the  time  when 
the  aspects  of  the  planets  is  complete. 

It  also  happens  that  in  cases  where  the  event  in- 
dicated by  an  aspect  involves  two  people  the  aspects 
of  the  planets  by  progression  may  be  complete  in  one 
person's  horoscope  and  fertilized  by  a  harmonious 
aspect  without  producing  a  result,  because  the  aspect 
in  the  other  person's  horoscope  has  not  yet  matured. 
In  this  connection  we  remember  the  horoscope  of  a 
lady  whose  Venus  was  placed  in  the  Eighth  House 
showing  a  late  marriage.  In  her  45th  year  the  pro- 
gressed Sun  reached  conjunction  Venus  but  neither 
engagement  nor  marriage  resulted ;  then  the  Sun  and 
Venus  came  into  conjunction  in  the  horoscope  of  a 
gentleman  of  her  acquaintance  bringing  an  engage- 
ment quickly  followed  by  marriage.  Thus  one  had 
waited  for  the  other,  and  unless  such  a  contingency  is 
taken  into  consideration  the  astrologer  is  most  liable 
to  meet  his  Waterloo  when  forecasting  events. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

PROGRESSED  SOLAR  DIRECTIONS 

WHEN  the  Sun  forms  a  conjunction,  sextile, 
square,  trine  or  opposition  to  one  of  the  planets 
by  progression  the  influence  begins  to  manifest  when 
the  Sun  is  l1/^  degrees  from  the  exact  aspect,  and  it  is 
felt  until  the  Sun  is  iy2  degrees  past  the  point  of 
culmination.  And  as  the  Sun  moves  about  one  de- 
gree a  day,  and  the  time  measure  of  directions  is  that 
one  day  equals  a  year,  we  may  say  that  the  influence 
of  the  solar  aspects  are  felt  for  a  period  of  three 
years.  Their  effects  are  particularly  strong  at  times 
during  this  period  when  aspects  of  the  progressed 
Moon  or  lunations  vivify  them. 

The  parallel  is  different  from  the  other  aspects. 
In  the  case  of  the  slow-moving  planets  it  lasts  for  a 
considerable  number  of  years  so  that  a  parallel  of 
the  Sun  and  Saturn  may  operate  for  ten  or  more 
years,  and  a  parallel  of  the  Sun  and  Jupiter  nearly 
as  long. 

It  may  also  be  noted  that  the  conjunction  and 

parallel  act  principally  upon  the  health,  while  the 

other  aspects  also  affect  the  business,  social  standing, 

etc.    Thus  under  the  parallel  of  the  Sun  and  Saturn 

488 


PROGRESSED   SOLAR  DIRECTIONS          489 

there  would  be  a  very  protracted  state  of  ill-health, 
while  the  parallel  of  the  Sun  and  Jupiter  would 
strengthen  the  constitution  materially. 

O  P  6  *  A  9      The  Sun  progressed  parallel,  conjunc- 
tion, sextUe  or  trine  to  radical  Venus. 

If  the  radical  Venus  was  well  aspected  this 
direction  will  bring  a  three-year  period  of  un- 
usual pleasure  and  enjoyment  into  the  life.  If 
the  person  is  not  already  married  an  attachment 
will  be  formed  and  ripen  into  marriage  of  an 
ideal  nature.  If  the  horoscope  shows  artistic 
ability,  this  will  receive  a  great  impetus  during 
the  activity  of  this  direction,  and  it  will  bring 
honor  and  social  preferment. 

O  D  6>  $    The  Sun  progressed  square  or  opposition 
to  radical  Venus. 

If  the  radical  Venus  was  afflicted,  this  direc- 
tion will  bring  a  period  of  petty  annoyances,  so- 
cial disgrace,  trouble  and  sorrow,  with  a  tend- 
ency to  be  slovenly  and  to  look  upon  the  dark 
side  of  life,  but  it  can  be  overcome  if  the  person 
will  strive  to  be  careful  of  his  morals  and  per- 
sonal appearance.  "Where  there's  a  will  there's 
a  way. ' ' 

O  P  6  *  %    The    Sun   progressed   parallel,   conjunc- 
tion or  sextile  radical  Mercury. 

If  Mercury  was  well  aspected  at  birth  this 
will  mark  a  period  of  unusual  mental  activity, 


490  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

so  that  the  person  will  be  able  to  further  his  am- 
bitions and  succeed  in  business  by  new  ventures, 
If  the  natal  figure  shows  literary  ability  this  is 
the  time  to  make  all  efforts  to  produce  something 
worth  while.  It  is  a  good  and  profitable  time  to 
travel  either  for  pleasure,  in  search  of  inspira- 
tion, or  for  the  good  of  whatever  business  he  may 
follow.  Advertising  will  be  found  a  most  effect- 
ive way  of  promoting  business  success  under  this 
direction. 

O  D  ^    The  Sun  progressed  square  to  radical  Mer- 
cury. 

The  Sun  cannot  reach  the  square  of  Mercury 
until  late  in  life,  and  comparatively  few  lives  at 
that,  therefore  its  effects  can  only  be  conjectured 
and  it  has  no  importance. 

O  P  6  #  A  D    The  Sun  progressed  parallel,  conjunc- 
tion, sextile,  or  trine  to  radical  Moon. 

If  the  Moon  was  well  aspected  at  birth  this 
direction  brings  a  period  of  success  and  popu- 
larity. It  increases  the  honor  and  esteem  which 
the  person  enjoys  in  his  environment,  it  brings 
favors  from  influential  persons,  employers,  or 
the  authorities,  and  if  marriage  has  not  already 
been  contracted,  this  direction  will  most  likely 
bring  about  a  successful  union.  It  is  also  an 
excellent  time  to  form  partnerships. 


PROGRESSED   SOLAR  DIRECTIONS          491 


O  D  <?  2>    ^e  $?m  progressed  square  or  opposition 
to  radical  Moon. 

If  the  Moon  was  afflicted  at  birth  this  marks 
a  very  evil  period,  replete  with  domestic  unhap- 
piness  if  the  person  is  married  ;  discredit  among 
the  people  with  whom  he  is  associated  in  busi- 
ness or  socially,  perhap.s  imprisonment;  loss  by 
dishonesty  of  the  partner,  financial  stricture  or 
even  bankruptcy.  He  is  also  likely  to  suffer 
severely  from  ill  health,  and  if  either  the  Sun 
or  Moon  are  in  Cancer,  Scorpio  or  Pisces  he  may 
become  a  chronic  drunkard. 

O  *  A  ^>    The  Sun  progressed  sextile  or  trine  to  rad- 
ical Saturn. 

If  Saturn  is  well  aspected  in  the  nativity 
this  direction  will  bring  a  steadying  and  consoli- 
dating influence  into  the  life  so  that  the  person 
will  be  able  to  discharge  his  duties  in  a  most 
effective,  systematic  and  tactful  manner.  He 
will  have  greater  opportunities  for  advancement 
than  before,  and  will  be  able  to  assume  the  added 
responsibilities  with  credit.  Much  benefit  may 
be  expected  from  older  people  who  will  be  drawn 
to  him  with  full  confidence.  Investments  in 
land,  mines,  houses,  and  similar  things  will  prove 
profitable  when  made  under  this  direction,  and 
in  general  it  gives  a  very  deep  insight  into  all 
problems  of  life. 


492  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

O  P  6  D  8  ^    The  Sun  progressed  parallel,  conjunc- 
tion, square  or  opposition  to  radical  Saturn. 

If  Saturn  was  afflicted  in  the  natal  chart 
these  directions  mark  a  period  of  very  evil  influ- 
ence. This  is  especially  true  of  the  parallel, 
which  lasts  about  ten  years ;  the  other  aspects  are 
only  active  during  the  usual  three  years.  Under 
these  directions  the  person  suffers  disappoint- 
ments and  delays  in  everything  he  undertakes. 
No  matter  how  carefully  he  may  plan,  something 
is  sure  to  crop  up  to  thwart  him,  and  this  is  apt 
to  breed  a  spirit  of  worry  and  pessimism  which 
makes  life  seem  a  hopeless  battle,  with  everyone 
conspiring  to  checkmate  him.  Financial  difficul- 
ties make  matters  harder,  and  he  is  liable  to  incur 
the  opposition  of  employers  or  the  authorities. 
To  crown  it  all,  the  health  suffers,  especially  un- 
der the  parallel;  his  vitality  will  be  very  low, 
and  the  recuperative  power  almost  nil.  All  will 
depend  on  whether  he  can  look  for  the  silver  lin- 
ing to  the  cloud,  and  strive  to  learn  the  intended 
lessons,  or  whether  he  simply  sinks  down  under 
the  load  and  gives  up.  Forewarned  is  fore- 
armed and  students  of  Astrology  have  at 
least  the  knowledge  that  these  trials  are  only 
passing.  They  know  when  brighter  days  will 


PROGRESSED    SOLAR   DIRECTIONS  493 

O  P  6  *  A  U   The  Sun  progressed  parallel,  conjunc- 
tion, sextile  or  trine  Jupiter. 

If  Jupiter  is  well  aspected  at  birth  these  as- 
pects are  among  the  most  fortunate  in  the  whole 
gamut  of  directions,  for  they  indicate  a  period 
of  financial  prosperity,  where  every  undertaking 
succeeds,  hence  speculation,  investments,  and 
new  ventures  in  business  will  bring  success  and 
gain,  the  person  will  rise  in  popularity  and  es^ 
teem  in  the  community  or  his  immediate  sphere 
of  associations;  he  may  gain  much  credit  in  con- 
nection with  philanthropic  or  charitable  under- 
takings, and  he  will  enjoy  much  social  success 
and  domestic  happiness.  There  is  a  tendency  to 
travel  or  changes  which  will  bring  both  pleasure 
and  profit,  and  ambitions  that  for  years  seemed 
impossible  of  realization  are  likely  to  be  grati- 
fied. Under  these  directions  lasting  friendships 
of  benefit  to  the  person  are  often  formed.  They 
also  strengthen  the  constitution  and  bring  ra- 
diant health,  but  the  exuberance  of  animal 
spirits  may  later,  under  evil  directions,  bring  dis- 
ease. If  this  is  guarded  against  the  increased 
flow  of  vital  fluid  given  by  these  directions  will 
have  a  lasting  beneficial  effect  on  the  health. 

^^   Tlie  Sun  progressed  square  or  opposition 
to  radical  Jupiter. 

If  Jupiter  is  afflicted  at  birth  these  direc- 
tions denote  a  period  of  trouble  and  trials.  Some- 


494  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

one  near  and  dear  will  pass  out  of  the  person's 
life,  either  by  estrangement  or  death;  lawsuits, 
financial  losses  and  social  disaster  are  threatened, 
with  much  opposition  from  other  people.  If  he 
invests  money  or  speculates  each  venture  will 
prove  a  failure  because  of  deception  and  misrep- 
resentation of  those  with  whom  he  deals.  If  he 
makes  a  change  of  business  or  travels  to  another 
city  he  will  meet  with  worse  conditions,  the  health 
will  suffer  and  domestic  infelicity  will  result. 

O  P  6  D  8  $    The  Sun  progressed  parallel,  conjunc- 
tion, square  or  opposition  to  radical  Mars. 

If  Mars  is  afflicted  at  birth  these  aspects 
mark  an  extended  period  of  a  very  evil  nature. 
There  is  a  state  of  rash  and  reckless  excitement 
which  is  apt  to  lead  the  person  to  do  the  most 
foolhardy  things,  hence  a  liability  to  squander 
his  money,  wreck  his  prospects  in  life,  become 
crippled  by  an  accident,  or  indulge  in  excesses 
which  bring  on  fevers,  boils,  or  inflammatory 
complaints.  He  should  be  particularly  careful 
not  to  handle  fire,  hot  water,  explosives  or  fire- 
arms, and  be  guarded  by  insurance  against  loss 
by  fire,  sickness  or  accident.  The  reputation  is 
also  likely  to  suffer  by  scandal,  therefore  he 
should  exert  all  his  energy  and  will  power  to  act 
with  all  the  discretion  possible  to  him  and  so  en- 
deavor to  rule  his  stars. 


PROGRESSED    SOLAR   DIRECTIONS  495 

O  *  A  $    The  Sun  progressed  sextile  or  trine  to  rad- 
ical Mars. 

If  Mars  is  well  aspected  at  birth  these  direc- 
tions indicate  a  period  of  adventure  when  the 
person  will  be  imbued  with  a  powerful  spirit  of 
activity,  enterprise  and  industry;  he  will  become 
acquainted  with  people  of  a  pioneering  instinct 
or  in  some  way  receive  an  impulse  that  will  start 
him  upon  a  new  venture  in  life  which  will  bring 
him  success,  friends,  and  prosperity.  He  is 
likely  to  travel  in  search  of  new  fields  and  to  be 
very  restless  in  seeking  an  outlet  for  the  energy 
which  threatens  to  burst  him,  but  he  is  also  too 
prone  to  squander  the  money  which  seems  to 
come  so  easily.  If  he  were  wise  he  would  be  a 
little  less  generous,  for  when  this  aspect  passes 
off,  it  is  likely  that  the  golden  days  are  over. 

G  P  6  D  <$>  W   Tlie  Sun  progressed  parallel,  conjunc- 
tion, square  or  opposition  to  radical  Uranus. 

If  Uranus  is  afflicted  at  birth  these  aspects 
mark  a  very  critical  period  in  the  life.  The  per- 
son becomes  very  irritable  and  short-tempered. 
He  is  liable  to  tax  the  patience  of  friends  and 
relatives  to  the  breaking  point  so  that  a  separa- 
tion or  estrangement  occurs.  He  will  be  repel- 
lant  to  others,  rash,  erratic,  liable  to  do  the  most 
strange  and  unexpected  things.  He  may  rush 
into  litigation  when  he  has  not  the  shadow  of  a 
case  or  cause,  just  for  the  mere  insane  love  of 


496  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

quarreling.  Thus  he  is  likely  to  disgrace  himself 
permanently  in  the  eyes  of  all  who  know  him,  or. 
depending  upon  what  other  aspects  are  in  force 
at  the  time,  it  may  be  someone  close  to  him  who 
causes  the  disgrace  which  then  reflects  upon  him 
on  account  of  the  friendship  or  relationship. 

O  *  A  #    The  Sun  progressed  sextile  or  trine  to  rad- 
ical Uranus. 

If  Uranus  is  well  aspected  at  birth  and  the 
person  is  of  a  sufficiently  advanced  type  to  re- 
spond to  this  influence,  these  aspects  mark  a 
period  of  great  spiritual  and  mental  accelera- 
tion; the  originating,  organizing,  and  inventive 
faculties  become  greatly  enhanced,  so  that  he  is 
able  to  formulate  ideas,  perfect  inventions,  and 
organize  enterprises  in  a  most  surprisingly  effi- 
cient manner,  with  little  or  no  effort.  There  may 
be  sudden  and  unexpected  gains  through  inven- 
tions, investment  or  speculation,  and  if  he  is  not 
already  interested  in  advanced  thought  or  occult- 
ism he  will  most  likely  be  attracted  during  this 
period  and  obtain  a  good  start  before  the  aspect 
wears  off. 

O  P  6  n  £  W   The  Sun  progressed  parallel,  conjunc- 
tion, square  or  opposition  to  radical  Neptune. 
If  Neptune  is  afflicted  at  birth  these  aspects  mark 
a  critical  time  for  those  who  can  respond  to  the 
spiritual  influence.     They  are  then  hypersensi- 


PROGRESSED    SOLAR   DIRECTIONS  497 

tive  and  likely  to  develop  an  undesirable  phase 
of  involuntary  spiritual  sight  or  apt  to  become 
entranced  or  obsessed  by  spirits  from  the  invisi- 
bel  world  who  seek  a  medium  to  gratify  their 
desires,  which  are  usually  bad.  The  person  may 
also  most  easily  become  the  victim  of  a  hypnotist 
and  get  into  trouble  through  fraud,  deception 
and  disadvantageous  changes,  or  loss  by  specu- 
lation in  large  companies  where  the  stock  is' 
watered. 

O  *  A  W    The  Sun  progressed  sextile  or  trine  to  rad- 
ical Neptune. 

If  Neptune  is  well  aspected  at  birth  these 
aspects  mark  a  period  of  spiritual  awakening, 
when  the  person  may  receive  an  initiation  which 
will  develop  his  spiritual  powers  and  open  the 
invisible  worlds  to  him,  if  he  is  sufficiently  de- 
veloped. For  others  it  may  develop  the  faculty 
of  inspirational  music,  and  yet  other  people  may 
experience  a  period  of  unexampled  love  and  bliss, 
but  the  majority  cannot  respond  to  this  influ- 
ence. 

O  P  6  *  A  M.C.  Tlie  Sun  progressed  parallel,  con- 
junction, sextile  or  trine  to  radical  Midheaven. 
These  aspects  bring  a  period  of  profit,  pre- 
ferment, honor  and  recognition,  favors  from  the 
authorities  or  employers,  added  social  prestige, 
and  a  general  advancement  of  the  worldly  affairs. 

32 


498  THE  MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

This  is  a  good  time  to  make  special  effort  for 
obtaining  an  increase  of  income  for  all  endeav- 
ors in  that  direction  will  have  a  favorable  stellar 
influence  behind  them  and  are  therefore  more 
likely  to  succeed  than  at  other  times. 

©n  <9  M.C.  The  Sun  progressed  square  or  opposition 
to  radical  Midheaven. 

These  aspects  mark  a  period  of  discredit 
when  slander  and  enmity  threaten  the  honor  and 
social  standing.  It  is  therefore  best  for  the  per- 
son to  be  very  circumspect  in  all  he  does  or  says, 
for  trouble  with  the  authorities  may  result  in 
imprisonment,  or  if  with  employers  it  may  bring 
loss  of  position.  Financial  fortunes  are  also 
threatened. 

0  P  6  *  A  Asc.     The  Sun  progressed,  parallel,  con- 
junction, sextile  or  trine  radical  Ascendant. 

These  aspects  mark  a  period  of  general  good 
fortune,  radiant  health  and  happiness.  What- 
ever the  person  undertakes  seems  to  prosper. 

OD<?  Asc.     The  Sun  progressed  square  or  opposi- 
tion to  radical  Ascendant. 

These  aspects  mark  a  period  of  ill-health, 
especially  in  a  woman's  horoscope.  There  is  also 
a  great  deal  of  trouble  and  general  so-called 
"bad  luck." 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

PROGRESSED  LUNAR  DIRECTIONS 

THE  Moon  travels  through  the  Zodiac  at  an  aver- 
age rate  of  between  twelve  and  thirteen  degrees  a 
day,  and  as  the  day  in  the  art  of  progression  is  taken 
as  a  time  measure  equivalent  to  a  year,  we  may  say 
that  the  Moon  by  progression  from  birth  to  death 
travels  at  the  rate  of  between  twelve  and  thirteen 
degrees  a  year,  or  about  one  degree  per  month.  Thus 
in  the  course  of  about  twenty-eight  years  she  circles 
the  whole  horoscope  and  forms  all  the  aspects  that 
can  be  formed  to  all  the  planets  in  the  radical  figure,, 
and  she  may  thus  travel  two  or  three  times  around 
the  horoscope  in  the  life  of  the  average  man  or 
woman.  It  is  her  passage  around  the  horoscope  that 
makes  the  life  fruitful  of  events  for  the  aspects  of 
the  planets  themselves  which  indicate  the  year, 
when  a  certain  influence  is  ready  to  be  reaped- 
as  ripe  destiny  and  produce  events  in  the  life,  do 
not  of  themselves  cause  either  good  or  ill  effects  un- 
less an  aspect  of  the  progressed  Moon  or  a  lunation 
brings  the  matter  to  a  focus  and  marks  the  month 
when  the  occurrence  will  take  place.  Therefore 
sometimes  even  strong  aspects  between  the  Sun  and 
planets,  or  between  the  planets  themselves,  are  bar- 
499 


500  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

ren  in  effect  when  not  fortified  by  a  progressed  lunar 
aspect  or  a  lunation  of  the  same  nature. 

Neither  do  the  lunar  aspects  have  an  influence 
of  their  own,  or  at  least  if  they  have,  it  is  not  very 
marked  unless  the  lunar  aspect  agrees  in  nature  with 
the  primary  direction  then  in  force. 

These  are  important  points  which  the  student 
should  always  bear  in  mind.  It  should  also  be  noted 
that  the  aspects  of  the  progressed  Moon  to  progressed 
planets  produce  little  or  no  effect  and  the  influences 
;eet  down  below  are  with  respect  to  the  radical  planets. 

D  P  6  *  A  O   The    Moon    progressed    parallel,    con- 
junction, sextile  or  trine  to  radical  Sun. 

This  aspect  marks  a  rather  prosperous 
period  in  life,  bringing  important  changes  for 
the  better.  Not  infrequently  marriage  results 
which  is  both  successful  and  happy.  An  increase 
of  business  if  the  person  is  an  employer,  or  a 
raise  in  salary  if  he  is  an  employee,  may  be 
looked  for  at  this  time,  for  superiors  and  those 
in  a  position  to  bestow  favors  are  in  a  generous 
mood  and  ready  to  give  the  person  credit  for  all 
that  is  good  in  him. 

".D  D  8  O   The  Moon  progressed  square  or  opposition 
to  radical  Sun. 

This  aspect  indicates  a  time  of  trouble  and 
loss.  There  is  a  tendency  to  difficulty  with  em- 
ployers or  customers  which  will  bring  loss  of 


PROGRESSED  LUNAR  DIRECTIONS          501 

employment  or  business;  the  mind  is  vacillating 
so  that  the  person  cannot  make  up  his  mind  what 
to  do,  and  thus  he  is  apt  to  lose  opportunities 
which  might  bring  gain  and  instead  they  bring 
loss.  He  will  experience  trouble  with  the  oppo- 
site sex,  particularly  the  marriage  partner  if  he 
is  in  the  state  of  matrimony.  The  health  will 
suffer  and  there  is  a  change  for  the  worse  in  all 
the  affairs  of  life. 

D  P  6  *  A  9    The    Moon    progressed    parallel,    con- 
junction, sextile,  or  trine  to  radical  Venus. 

If  Venus  is  strong  and  well  aspected  in  the 
natal  chart  this  period  will  be  one  of  pleasure 
and  profit  both,  for  the  person  will  make  new 
friends  and  have  opportunities  to  advance  him- 
self both  socially  and  financially.  These  aspects 
also  frequently  indicate  the  commencement  of 
courtship  or  the  culmination,  of  courtship  in 
marriage,  in  a  man's  horoscope.  It  brings  good 
health  and  a  happy,  cheerful  frame  of  mind,  so 
that  the  whole  world  seems  bathed  in  sunshine. 
This  is,  in  short,  a  period  of  general  success  and 
happiness. 

3)  D  <?  9    The  Moon  progressed  square  or  opposition 
to  radical  Venus. 

If  Venus  was  afflicted  at  birth  this  marks 
a  period  of  considerable  trouble  and  disappoint- 
ment. A  courtship  may  be  broken  off  or  a  mar- 


502  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

riage  dissolved  by  separation.  The  financial  for- 
tunes are  likely  to  suffer  and  the  health  is  apt 
to  be  poor.  Snubs  and  ostracism  may  be  ex- 
pected in  the  social  relation  and  the  person 
should  be  particularly  careful  with  the  opposite 
sex,  for  while  this  direction  is  operative  there  is 
considerable  liability  to  trouble  from  that  source. 
Knowing  what  is  doing  and  the  nature  and  dura- 
tion of  the  influence,  he  should  try  to  rule  his 
stars  by  keeping  as  cheerful  a  frame  of  mind 
as  possible,  schooling  himself  to  act  wisely  in 
the  matters  which  are  particularly  shown  as 
danger  points. 

3)  P  6  *  A  £    The    Moon    progressed    parallel,    con- 
junction, sextile  or  trine  to  radical  Mercury. 

If  Mercury  was  well  aspected  at  birth,  these 
•directions  will  bring  out  the  mental  powers  and 
it  is  therefore  a  favorable  time  to  take  up  any 
study  which  the  person  may  feel  attracted  to.  If 
any  important  changes  have  been  in  contempla- 
tion this  is  the  time  to  make  the  move,  for  under 
these  directions  success  is  sure  to  attend  in  a 
much  larger  measure  than  under  less  favorable 
influences,  and  if  he  has  any  important  matters 
to  settle  with  brothers,  sisters  or  neighbors,  he 
will  reach  a  favorable  conclusion  with  them  much 
more  quickly  than  at  any  other  time. 


PROGRESSED  LUNAR  DIRECTIONS          503 

3)  n  8  V    The  Moon  progressed  square  or  opposition 
to  radical  Mercury. 

If  Mercury  was  afflicted  at  birth  the  person 
will  need  to  exercise  a  great  deal  of  care  during 
the  operation  of  these  planetary  influences,  for 
there  will  be  a  tendency  to  rash  and  indiscreet 
speech;  thereby  the  person  may  lay  himself  lia- 
ble to  libel  or  slander.  It  is  also  likely  that  if 
any  deeds  or  legal  papers  are  signed  during  this 
time  it  will  be  to  the  person's  detriment  and  he 
will  later  regret  it.  He  should  also  be  very  care- 
ful of  his  expressions  in  correspondence  and  if 
he  is  a  literary  man  he  should  be  doubly  careful 
or  his  writings  will  be  more  than  likely  to  cause 
trouble  for  himself  or  others.  The  mind  will  be 
much  disturbed  and  he  should  neither  travel  nor 
make  changes  but  endeavor  to  keep  himself  as 
quiet  as  possible  during  this  time. 

3)  P  6  T?    The  Moon  progressed  parallel  or  conjunc- 
tion radical  Saturn. 

If  Saturn  was  afflicted  in  the  natal  chart 
this  is  a  very  critical  period.  In  a  woman's 
horoscope  it  indicates  ill-health,  worry  and  trou- 
ble. In  the  horoscope  of  a  man,  if  he  is  married, 
it  indicates  domestic  difficulties  or  ill-health  of 
the  wife.  There  is  trouble,  delay  and  disappoint- 
ment in  all  the  affairs  of  life  and  a  tendency  to 
worry  over  things  and  become  morbid  and  mel- 
ancholy. 


504  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE  STARS 

])  G  8  T?    The  Moon  progressed  square  or  opposition 
to  radical  Saturn. 

If  Saturn  is  afflicted  at  birth,  these  aspects 
mark  a  very  evil  time,  particularly  with  respect 
to  health  and  the  conditions  in  the  home.  They 
produce  a  disturbed  frame  of  mind  with  irrita- 
bility and  a  tendency  to  worry,  a  pessimistic 
outlook  on  life,  gloom  and  despondency  seems 
to  be  the  rule,  the  financial  affairs  also  suffer 
and  care  should  be  taken  to  make  no  changes  or 
investments  at  this  time.  The  only  remedy  is  to 
try  to  keep  as  philosophical  an  attitude  as  pos- 
sible, looking  for  the  silver  lining  of  the  cloud 
and  endeavoring  to  learn  the  le.ssons  that  are  to 
be  taught  during  this  period. 

D  *  A  ^    The  Moon  progressed  sextile  or  trine   to 
radical  Saturn. 

If  Saturn  was  well  aspected  in  the  natal 
chart  these  aspects  mark  a  successful  and  pros- 
perous period  when  he  will  gain  recognition  of 
a  lasting  nature  in  his  sphere  of  life.  He  will 
be  able  to  take  on  added  responsibilities  and 
acquit  himself  of  the  trust  with  credit.  If  any 
investments  in  houses,  lands  or  mines  are  con- 
templated this  will  be  a  very  favorable  period  to 
undertake  such  matters.  This  time  will  be  epoch- 
making  in  the  life  when  a  new,  solid  and  stable 
foundation  for  success  will  be  laid,  upon  which 
the  edifice  of  a  successful  life  may  be  reared. 


PROGRESSED  LUNAR  DIRECTIONS          505 

D  P  6  *  A  U  Moon  progressed  parallel,  conjunction, 
sextile  or  trine  to  radical  Jupiter. 

If  Jupiter  was  well  aspected  at  birth,  these 
aspects  mark  a  period  of  success  and  general 
good  fortune.  The  health  is  excellent,  or  if  the 
person  has  been  sick  improvement  may  be  looked 
for  .at  this  time.  The  frame  of  mind  will  be 
happy  and  he  will  enjoy  all  the  pleasures  of  life. 
It  is  a  particularly  good  time  to  travel  for  he 
will  meet  a  friendly  and  cordial  reception  every- 
where. The  financial  fortunes  will  be  benefited 
if  investments  are  made  under  these  directions, 
or  the  business  may  be  pushed  to  the  best  of  his 
ability.  This  is  an  epoch  when  things  take  a 
decided  turn  for  the  better,  and  if  the  person 
takes  proper  advantage  of  the  opportunities  then 
presented  to  him  this  time  will  be  long  felt  in 
the  life. 

D  D  8  U   The  Moon  progressed  square  or  opposition 
to  radical  Jupiter. 

If  Jupiter  was  afflicted  at  birth  the  person 
should  be  very  careful  of  his  diet  during  the 
time  when  these  aspects  last,  for  there  is  a  tend- 
ency to  excesses  which  will  cause  disease  by  mak- 
ing the  blood  impure.  He  should  also  be  very 
careful  not  to  lose  his  temper  because  if  there 
is  any  danger  of  apoplexy  shown  in  the  natal 
figure  it  is  more  likely  to  manifest  under  these 
stellar  influences  than  at  any  other  time.  Keep 


506  THE   MESSAGE  OF   THE   STARS 

as  cool  as  possible  and  avoid  eating  stimulating 
food  and  liquors.  Do  not  under  any  circum- 
stances undertake  to  speculate  while  these  direc- 
tions last  for  loss  is  certain  and  there  is  a  lia- 
bility to  be  deceived  or  defrauded  by  others. 
There  is  also  a  danger  of  domestic  troubles  and 
loss  by  lawsuits  or  similar  matters.  The  social 
prestige  is  likely  to  suffer  on  account  of  haughty, 
bombastic  and  overbearing  manners,  therefore 
the  person  should  be  careful  and  moderate  in 
everything  and  also  hold  himself  well  in  check. 

D  P  6  n  #  $      The   Moon  progressed  parallel,   con- 
junction, square  or  opposition  radical  Mars. 

If  the  radical  Mars  was  afflicted  these  as- 
pects mark  a  very  evil  period.  In  a  woman's 
horoscope  they  indicate,  for  one  thing,  bad 
health,  and  in  a  man's,  violent  quarrels  in  the 
home.  There  is  a  tendency  to  be  quarrelsome, 
foolhardy  and  reckless,  with  the  result  that  the 
person  may  sustain  bodily  injuries  or  accidents, 
also  a  tendency  to  the  over-indulgence  of  the 
lower  passional  nature  which  may  bring  trouble 
in  its  train,  therefore  he  should  be  very  careful 
in  his  dealings  with  those  of  the  opposite  sex. 
Unless  great  care  is  taken  slander  and  social  dis- 
credit are  sure  to  result.  These  directions  also 
make  the  person  very  reckless  and  extravagant 
in  financial  matters,  liable  to  form  hasty  and 
erroneous  judgment,  therefore  if  papers  are 


PROGRESSED  LUNAR  DIRECTIONS          507 

signed  at  this  time  disaster  is  very  likely  to  fol- 
low. These  directions  are  among  the  most  re- 
liable in  operation  and  the  person  rarely  escapes 
without  suffering  loss  or  injury  in  some  manner, 
therefore  the  greatest  care  should  be  taken  dur- 
ing this  period. 

D  *  A  $      The  Moon  progressed  sextile  or  trine  rad- 
ical Mars. 

If  Mars  was  well  aspected  at  birth  these  as- 
pects mark  a  period  of  considerable  activity  in 
the  life  which  will  be  to  the  benefit  of  the  person 
involved.  A  great  deal  of  vital  energy  is  accu- 
mulated and  this  dynamic  force  naturally  must 
have  an  outlet  in  some  way,  hence  this  is  a  good 
time  for  the  expansion  of  business  or  undertak- 
ing new  enterprises;  they  are  sure  to  succeed  if 
the  person  is  not  too  precipitate  in  his  efforts 
but  uses  a  grain  of  caution  in  the  expenditure 
of  this  great  energy.  These  aspects  are  particu- 
larly active  among  those  who  work  with  or  deal 
in  the  martial  elements  of  iron  and  fire,  such 
as  soldiers,  surgeons  and  engineers;  to  them  it 
brings  honor  and  promotion. 

5  P  6  D  <?  *     The   Moon  progressed   parallel,   con- 
junction, square  or  opposition  radical   Uranus. 
If  Uranus  was  afflicted  at  birth  these  aspects 
mark  a  very  critical  period,  when  the  person  is 
apt  to  make  a  sudden  and  unexpected  change 


508  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

which  will  have  a  disadvantageous  effect  upon 
the  life,  therefore  he  should  guard  carefully 
against  such  a  contingency.  There  is  also  a  lia- 
bility to  the  formation  of  a  clandestine  relation- 
ship which  will  bring  sorrow  and  trouble  to  the 
person,  hence  he  should  avoid  association  with 
the  opposite  sex  and  when  this  is  unavoidable 
he  should  be  very  circumspect  in  his  manner  and 
behavior,  for  under  these  directions  people  are 
very  likely  to  judge  him  severely  for  the  slight- 
est semblance  of  wrong-doing.  There  is  a  tend- 
ency to  irritability  and  cruelty  of  speech  which 
is  likely  to  cause  domestic  unhappiness  and  the 
loss  of  friends  that  will  later  be  regretted  very 
much,  therefore  the  person  should  endeavor  to 
curb  himself;  in  fact  it  would  be  better  to  avoid 
his  friends  as  much  as  possible  during  this  time. 

D  *  A  W     The  Moon  progressed  sextile  or  trine  to 
radical  Uranus. 

This  is  an  excellent  aspect  for  those  who  are 
sufficiently  advanced  to  respond  to  it.  If  Uranus 
was  well  aspected  at  birth,  the  original,  intuitive 
and  inventive  faculties  will  find  an  outlet  at  this 
time  which  may  be  very  advantageous  to  the 
person.  If  he  is  interested  in  the  study  of  ad- 
vanced thought  or  occultism  this  is  a  particularly 
good  time  to  pursue  such  subjects,  for  an  ex- 
pansion of  consciousness  may  most  easily  result 
under  these  directions,  friendships  are  formed 


PROGRESSED  LUNAR  DIRECTIONS  509 

with  advanced  people  who  will  be  of  benefit  to 
the  person,  and  advantageous  changes  or  re- 
movals may  be  made,  hence  it  marks  an  epoch 
in  the  life  which  is  likely  to  leave  a  permanent 
mark  for  good. 

P  6  G  <?  W  The  Moon  progressed  parallel,  con- 
junction, square  or  opposition  to  radical  Nep- 
tune. 

If  Neptune  was  afflicted  in  the  natal  chart 
these  directions  mark  a  period  of  weird  and  un- 
canny experiences,  when  the  person  is  likely  to 
come  under  the  spell  of  hypnotism  or  medium- 
ship  or  have  visions  or  begin  to  hear  voices,  but 
all  these  experiences  are  of  an  undesirable  char- 
acter and  should  therefore  be  guarded  against 
as  much  as  possible.  It  would  be  very  unwise 
under  these  directions  to  enter  the  seance  room 
of  a  spiritualistic  meeting  where  the  conditions 
favor  such  manifestations,  and  if  the  aspects 
occur  from  watery  signs — Cancer,  Scorpio,  or 
Pisces — there  is  a  strong  tendency  to  form  a 
drink  or  drug  habit  which  may  operate  to  the 
sorrow  and  trouble  of  the  person  for  all  the  rest 
of  his  life.  As  these  aspects  produce  a  mental 
and  physical  lassitude,  when  the  vital  forces  are 
low  and  the  person  negative,  such  undesirable 
influences  are  particularly  apt  to  gain  a  foot- 
hold. There  is  also  a  danger  from  plots  by 
.secret  enemies  which  tend  to  bring  the  person 


510  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

into  discredit  and  trouble.  He  may  even  suffer 
imprisonment  or  be  confined  in  a  hospital  through 
ill-health,  for  Neptune  rules  prisons,  hospitals, 
insane  asylums,  and  similar  places.  Great  care 
should  be  taken  in  all  dealings  with  others. 

D  #  A  ^     The  Moon  progressed  sextile  or  trine  to 
radical  Neptune. 

If  Neptune  was  well  aspected  at  birth  these 
directions  may  bring  a  slight  extension  of  con- 
sciousness and  if  the  solar  aspects  to  Neptune 
are  also  in  force  at  the  same  time  an  initiation 
may  be  looked  for  by  those  who  are  sufficiently 
advanced  to  respond  to  this  influence.  But  to 
the  majority  of  people  it  will  probably  mean  only 
a  pleasant  time,  a  feast  of  music  or  some  similar 
experience. 

D  P  6  Asc.  M.  C.     The  Moon  progressed  parallel  or 
conjunction  radical  Ascendant  or  Midheaven. 

This  aspect  brings  changes  in  the  life,  but 
whether  these  are  good  or  bad  depends  upon  the 
other  influences  operating  in  the  horoscope  at  the 
time. 

D  *AM.  C.     The  Moon  progressed  sextile  or  trine 
to  radical  Midheaven. 

If  other  influences  agree  this  is  a  time  of 
beneficial  changes,  preferment  and  honor,  and 
general  success  in  the  various  departments  of 
life. 


PROGRESSED  LUNAR  DIRECTIONS          511 

D  n  8  M.  C.     The  Moon  progressed  square  or  oppo- 
sition to  radical  Midheaven. 

These  aspects  indicate  loss  of  prestige,  trou- 
ble and  anxiety,  financial  loss,  especially  if  deal- 
ing with  women.  It  is  a  bad  time  to  travel  or 
make  changes. 

D  *  A  Asc.     Tine  Moon  progressed  sextfte  or  trine  to 
radical  Ascendant. 

These  aspects  bring  beneficial  changes,  finan- 
cial prosperity,  and  general  good  fortune. 

D  D  (9  Asc.     TJie  Moon  progressed  square  or  oppo- 
sition to  radical  Ascendant. 

These  aspects  mark  a  period  of  trouble.  Ill- 
health  may  be  looked  for,  and  if  any  changes  or 
removals  are  made  they  will  be  to  the  person's 
disadvantage. 


CHAPTER  XXYI. 

MUTUAL  PLANETARY  DIRECTIONS 

ASPECTS  between  two  progressed  planets  have 
little  or  no  potency,  but  when  a  planet  by  pro- 
gression comes  into  aspect  with  a  radical  planet  it  op. 
erates  for  good  or  ill,  according  to  its  nature  and  the 
power  of  the  radical  planet  in  the  horoscope. 

In  the  following  paragraphs  we  have  set  down 
these  tendencies,  and  it  matters  not  whether  Venus 
progresses  to  a  good  aspect  with  radical  Saturn,  or 
Saturn  progresses  to  a  good  aspect  with  radical  Ve- 
nus, the  effects  are  as  noted  in  the  first  paragraph, 
and  similarly  with  the  other  aspects  following. 

9  ^  *  A  Venus  and  Saturn  in  good  aspect  by  pro- 
gression indicates  a  period  of  financial  success, 
gain  in  social  prestige  and  emotional  exaltation. 
The  religious  and  devotional  nature  is  likely  to 
receive  an  awakening. 

9  T?  P  6  D  8  Venus  and  Saturn  in  evil  aspect  by 
progression  indicates  a  period  of  sorrow  and  trou- 
ble. Both  the  health  and  reputation  suffer;  de- 
lays, disappointment  and  losses  are  frequent  and 
annoying.  Others  will  seek  to  impose  upon  the 
512 


MUTUAL  PLANETARY  DIRECTIONS          513 

person;  death  or  separation  from  loved  ones, 
and  other  disagreeable  experiences  are  met.  The 
mind  is  gloomy  and  inclined  to  worry. 

*  A     Mercury  and  Saturn  in  good  aspect  by 
progression  marks  a  good  time  to  undertake  new 
responsibilities,    make    investments    in    houses, 
mines,    lands,    or    similar    property,    undertake 
study  or  research  work  of  a  deeper  nature,  and 
make  important  contracts  which  will  prove  of 
lasting  benefit  to  the  person.     It  is  a  good  time 
to  deal  with  agents  and  elderly  persons,  or  to 
undertake  journeys  for  a  serious  purpose. 

P  6  D  8  Mercury  and  Saturn  afflicted  by  pro- 
gression indicates  a  time  of  delays  and  disap- 
pointments with  a  tendency  to  look  upon  the  dark 
side  of  things.  It  is  a  bad  time  to  undertake 
new  responsibilities,  deal  with  elderly  people  or 
sign  legal  papers.  The  person  is  liable  to  slander 
and  loss  of  reputation. 

*  A     Mars  and  Saturn  in  good  aspect  by  pro- 
gression marks  a  period  when  the  person  will  be 
very   enterprising   yet   tactful   and   diplomatic, 
courageous  but  not  foolhardy,  strong  and  digni- 
fied, better  able  to  shoulder  the  responsibilities 
of  life  than  at  any  other  time.     If  he  makes 
proper  use  of  these  qualities  he  will  gain  finan- 
cially, also  in  honor  and  respect  among  his  asso- 
ciates. 


33 


514  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

$  ^  P  6  D  8  Mars  and  Saturn  in  bad  aspect  by 
progression  makes  the  person  very  foolhardy  and 
impulsive,  hence  there  is  a  liability  to  accident 
under  these  directions.  Occasionally  when  the 
horoscope  shows  violence  there  is  a  tendency  to 
crime  and  bloodshed  which  may  result  in  impris- 
onment. All  the  vices  of  the  character  seem  to 
come  to  the  fore  at  this  time,  and  loss  of  temper 
is  the  least  among  them.  The  greatest  care 
should  be  taken  to  keep  the  animal  nature  down 
and  hold  a  firm  check  upon  all  the  undesirable 
traits  in  the  character. 

The  progressed  aspects  between  Saturn,  Ju- 
piter, Uranus  and  Neptune  are  not  made  because 
of  their  slow  motion. 

$  U  P  d  *  A  Venus  and  Jupiter  in  good  aspect  by 
progression  bring  financial  benefits,  rise  in  the 
social  position  and  esteem.  They  make  the  per- 
son more  kindly,  sympathetic  and  considerate, 
hence  increase  his  popularity.  It  is  a  good  time 
to  travel  and  enjoy  life.  Investments  made  un- 
der this  influence  are  generally  successful,  and 
the  health  is  excellent,  or  if  the  person  has  been 
ill  this  marks  the  period  of  convalescence  and 
recuperation,  when  life  takes  on  a  rosier  hue. 

$  U  Q  8  Venus  and  Jupiter  afflicting  each  other 
by  progression  indicates  a  period  of  mild  domes- 
tic trouble,  small  financial  losses  and  a  tendency 
to  extravagance  and  wastefulness,  pecuniary  dif- 


MUTUAL  PLANETARY  DIRECTIONS    515- 

faculties  on  that  account,  and  possibly  lawsuits. 
There  is  also  some  loss  of  prestige  in  the  social 
circle  or  the  person's  environment. 

H  P  6  *  A  Mercury  and  Jupiter  in  good  aspect 
by  progression  indicates  a  very  successful  period 
in  the  life.  The  person  will  probably  travel  with. 
both  pleasure  and  profit  to  himself.  He  will 
have  good  health  and  be  in  the  best  of  spirits, 
so  that  life  in  general  will  take  on  a  very  rosy 
hue.  There  are  indications  of  gain  by  invest- 
ments and  in  the  general  course  of  his  business, 
and  it  is  a  good  time  to  enter  into  contracts  and 
agreements,  but  especially  for  literary  work. 

H  Q]  <9  Mercury  and  Jupiter  afflicted  by  progres- 
sion marks  a  troublesome  time,  when  the  person 
is  liable  to  become  involved  in  lawsuits  and  lose, 
thereby.  He  should  be  very  careful  not  to  sign 
papers  or  enter  into  agreements,  for  there  will 
be  trouble  and  misunderstanding,  involving 
financial  loss;  also  if  he  lends  money  to  other 
people  they  will  endeavor  to  impose  upon  him 
and  defraud  him,  and  dealings  with  agents  and 
commission  men  should  be  particularly  avoided. 

U  *  A  Mars  and  Jupiter  in  good  aspect  by  pro- 
gression marks  a  period  in  life  when  the  usual 
conservatism  of  Jupiter  is  blended  with  the  mar- 
tian  enthusiasm,  hence  the  person  will  become 
more  enthusiastic  and  enterprising  so  that  he  is 


516  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

likely  to  extend  his  business  and  be  successful  in 
gaining  an  added  income  thereby.  He  should  be 
careful,  however,  not  to  overreach  himself  at 
this  time.  These  aspects  also  work  upon  the 
devotional  nature  and  may  sometimes  express 
themeslves  as  religious  enthusiasm  when  the  per- 
son turns  over  a  new  leaf  and  becomes  a  better 
man  or  woman  than  before. 

S  U  P  6  D  #  Mars  and  Jupiter  in  evil  aspect  by 
progression  marks  a  danger  point  in  the  life  when 
the  person  is  liable  to  wreck  his  whole  career  by 
acts  which  are  definitely  criminal,  or  by  losses 
due  to  ostentatious  display  and  extravagance,  or 
lie  may  become  interested  in  some  wildcat  min- 
ing scheme  or  speculate  upon  the  stock  exchange 
in  such  a  reckless  manner  that  he  loses  all  he  has 
and  becomes  a  pauper.  The  health  is  also  likely 
to  suffer  under  this  direction;  impurities  of  the 
blood  may  cause  growths,  tumors,  boils,  and  kin- 
dred afflictions.  Altogether  it  is  a  very  evil  time 
and  the  person  should  guard  himself  very  care- 
fully against  yielding  to  any  of  these  influences. 
Mutual  aspects  between  Saturn,  Jupiter, 
TJranus  and  Neptune  are  seldom  formed  because 
of  their  slow  motion. 

9  3  *  A  Venus  and  Mars  in  good  aspect  by  pro- 
gression marks  a  period  of  pleasure  and  enjoy- 
ment when  an  attachment  of  a  lasting  nature 
may  be  formed  with  someone  through  an  en- 


MUTUAL  PLANETARY  DIRECTIONS  517 

thusiastic  courtship.     There  are  also  indications 
of  financial  gain  and  an  increase  of  popularity. 

$  P  6  D  #  Venus  and  Mars  in  evil  aspect  by 
progression  marks  a  period  of  impulse  and  reck- 
lessness when  the  person  is  likely  to  act  in  a 
most  indiscreet  manner  that  may  cause  great 
trouble  in  life.  If  married  there  will  be  some 
domestic  unhappiness.  Financial  losses  and  dis- 
credit are  also  shown,  therefore  the  person  should 
endeavor  to  hold  himself  in  check  and  avoid  any 
temptations  that  may  come  in  his  path. 

$  *  A  Mercury  and  Mars  in  good  aspect  by  pro- 
gression marks  a  time  when  the  person  is  gener- 
ally successful  in  all  affairs  of  life,  especially 
where  the  mental  qualities  are  called  into  action, 
for  this  will  make  him  keen,  shrewd  and  sharp, 
quick  to  see  a  point  and  grasp  an  advantage, 
hence  financial  gain  is  also  indicated.  This  is  a 
good  time  for  advertising  and  extending  the  per- 
son's business,  entering  contracts  and  agree- 
ments, and  dealing  with  agents  and  middlemen. 
It  is  good  for  literary  work  of  a  lighter  nature, 
and  an  excellent  time  to  travel.  The  health  is 
good  and  there  is  a  feeling  of  cheerfulness,  joy 
and  optimism. 

$  P  6  D  8  Mercury  and  Mars  in  evil  aspect  by 
progression.  This  is  a  critical  time  when  the 
person  is  liable  to  act  on  impulse,  to  speak  and 


518  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

act  impulsively  without  due  deliberation  and 
forethought,  hence  he  is  likely  to  get  into  trou- 
ble or  suffer  loss  through  the  sharp  practices  of 
other  people.  He  should  therefore  be  very  care- 
ful not  to  sign  papers  or  enter  into  agreements, 
and  there  is  danger  of  accident  and  trouble  if 
the  person  travels.  It  is  a  bad  time  for  changes 
or  extensions  of  business. 

'  £  W  *  A  Mars  and  Uranus  in  good  aspect  by  pro- 
gression indicates  a  good  period  lor  perfecting 
inventions  or  starting  new  and  original  enter- 
prises. Friendships  of  a  beneficial  nature  are 
often  made  under  these  directions,  and  not  in- 
frequently a  psychic  awakening  takes  place 
through  associations  with  people,  or  groups  of 
people,  of  a  Uranian  nature. 

'c?  J?  P  6  D  8  Mars  and  Uranus  in  evil  aspect  by 
progression  marks  a  very  dangerous  time  in  the 
person's  life.  There  is  a  liability  to  accidents 
of  an  unusual  nature,  a  breaking  up  of  condi- 
tions, estrangement  from  friends,  and  the  person 
is  liable  to  find  himself  suddenly  alone  in  the 
world.  Sometimes  there  is  a  psychic  awakening 
but  always  of  an  undesirable  nature. 

"#  ^  *  A  Mars  and  Neptune  in  good  aspect  by  pro- 
gression marks  a  time  of  good  health  and  high 
spirits  for  advanced  people,  but  the  majority 
do  not  feel  its  influence. 


MUTUAL  PLANETARY  DIRECTIONS  519 

P  6  n  <9  Mars  and  Neptune  in  evil  aspect  by 
progression  produces  a  neurotic  condition  in 
those  who  can  respond  to  its  influence.  There  is 
also  a  tendency  to  be  defrauded  or  victimized  in 
some  unaccountable  manner. 

*  A     Venus  and  Uranus  in  good  aspect  by  pro- 
gression gives  a  tendency  to  some  financial  gain 
and  it  is  likely  that  the  person  will  have  what  he 
considers  a  good  time,  involving  probably  a  ro- 
mantic love  affair,  but  it  is  likely  to  leave  a 
sting  behind.     It  insures  the  aid  of  friends  and 
increases  the  popularity  of  the  person  for  the 
time  being. 

P  6  D  8  Venus  and  Uranus  in  evil  aspect  by 
progression  is  a  fruitful  cause  of  domestic  un- 
happiness  and  divorce.  It  is  likely  to  bring 
about  a  scandal  on  account  of  immoral  conduct. 
Lawsuits  and  financial  loss  are  also  threatened, 
and  the  person  is  likely  to  act  in  a  most  erratic 
manner. 

*  A     Venus  and  Neptune  in  good  aspect  by  pro- 
gression indicates  a  period  of  success  in  social 
matters,  happiness  and  enjoyment    of    life    for 
those  who  can  respond  to  it.    The  person  is  par- 
ticularly apt  to  indulge  in  the  building  of  air 
castles  and  the  concoction  of  roseate  day-dreams 
which  are  of  no  particular  avail  but  serve  to 
make  the  period  thoroughly  enjoyable. 


520  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

$  tj?  P  6  n  <9  Venus  and  Neptune  in  evil  aspect  by 
progression  is  likely  to  bring  some  psychic  ex- 
perience of  a  disagreeable  nature  connected  with 
mediumship  or  hypnotism.  There  is  a  tendency 
to  sensuality  and  immorality,  occasionally  the 
indulgence  in  drinks  or  drugs  which  will  cause 
sorrow  and  trouble  to  come  to  the  person. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

TRANSITS 

THE  progressed  positions  of  planets  are  the  prin- 
cipal significators  of  events,  but  the  transitory  po- 
sitions of  the  planets  in  space  at  the  actual  time  of 
events  strengthen  or  weaken  effects  of  aspects  in  the 
progressed  horoscope,  according  to  whether  they  are 
akin  in  nature  or  not.  The  New  Moons  are  particu- 
larly potent.  These  co-called  Transits  are  seen  in  the 
ephemeris  for  the  actual  year  of  events. 

The  Increasing  or  Decreasing  Moon 

Among  the  points  in  Astrology  which  bother 
the  new  beginner,  is  when  the  Moon  is  increasing  in 
light  or  decreasing.  Astrological  works  frequently 
use  these  expressions  when  tabulating  the  effects  of 
various  configurations.  Biit  so  far  as  we  know,  no 
explanation  has  been  given  elsewhere,  and  we  trust 
the  following  may  make  the  subject  clear  to  students. 

Each  month  the  Moon  comes  into  conjunction 
with  the  Sun,  and  this  conjunction  of  the  luminaries 
is  called  a  lunation  or  new  Moon.  .After  the  conjunc- 
tion or  new  Moon,  she  may  be  seen  in  the  western  sky 
close  to  the  horizon  as  a  tiny  crescent,  day  by  day 
the  lighted  surface  grows  larger,  at  the  time  of  the 
521 


522  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

opposition  to  the  Sun  she  has  increased  her  light  to 
the  fullest  capacity,  and  at  that  time  we  speak  of  her 
as  a  full  Moon ;  she  then  rises  in  the  eastern  sky  at  the 
same  time  as  the  Sun  sets  in  the  west.  From  that 
time  for  another  fortnight  it  will  be  observed  that  she 
rises  later  and  later  in  the  night ;  at  the  same  time 
the  illuminated  part  of  her  disc  decreases  until  just 
bofore  the  next  conjunction  or  new  Moon,  early  risers 
may  observe  her  in  the  eastern  sky  just  before  sunrise 
as  a  tiny  crescent  upon  the  vault  of  heaven.  Thus 
the  Moon  is  increasing  in  light  from  the  time  of  its 
conjunction  or  new  Moon  to  the  opposition,  or  full 
Moon,  and  from  the  full  Moon  to  the  next  new  Moon 
it  is  decreasing  in  light.  The  times  of  the  New  Moon, 
Full  Moon  and  eclipses  are  given  each  month  in  our 
Simplified  Scientific  Ephemeris,  which  see. 

In  the  lady's  horoscope  which  we  used  to  show 
the  method  of  progression,  the  powerful  effect  of 
lunations  when  operating  with  other  influences  of  a 
similar  nature  is  also  vividly  illustrated.  In  her  horo- 
scope the  New  Moon,  April  1,  1909,  was  in  11  de- 
grees of  Aries  exactly  square  to  Saturn's  place  at 
birth,  and  Uranus  was  conjunct  the  progressed  Sat- 
urn and  square  the  progressed  Moon.  Thus  all  stel- 
lar influences  bearing  upon  this  lady  united  to  ter- 
minate life  in  the  body. 

Transits  of  Neptune,  Uranus,  Saturn  and  Jup- 
iter are  important,and  when  the  student  has  become 
familiar  with  the  mysteries  of  the  progressed  horo- 


TRANSITS  523 

scope  but  not  before,  he  may  profitably  write  the 
ephemeral  position  of  these  planets  outside  the  pro- 
gressed horoscope  and  watch  their  effect,  also  the  as- 
pects of  the  New  Moons.  But  be  sure,  at  first,  to  keep 
the  progressed  horoscope  down  to  first  principles,  for 
fancy  aspects  are  'the  stuff  dreams  are  made  of,'  the 
the  warp  and  woof  of  astrological  romances  which 
fade  away  into  moonshine  and  leave  the  astrologer 
discomfitted.  It  is  comparatively  easy  to  wield  the 
shuttle  of  imagination  with  natal,  progressed  and 
transiting  planets,  each  set  with  its  corresponding 
houses,  arid  a  multitude  of  aspects  to  choose  from,  but 
simple  judgment  based  upon  the  prime  essentials  of 
a  horoscope  is  almost  invariably  justified  by  events. 

If  the  student  has  ephemerides  for  1908  and 
1909,  he  may  see  that  in  July,  1908,  when  the  lady 
was  taken  ill  Saturn  was  in  Aries  10,  within  1  degree 
of  a  conjunction  of  the  progresed  Moon  and  also 
within  1  degree  of  a  square  to  his  place  at  birth  in 
this  chart.  Thus  he  aggravated  conditions. 

*?  6  O  D  9  U     Saturn   transiting    the   radical   Sun, 
Moon,  Venus  and  Jupiter. 

These  transits  lower  the  vitality  and  act  as 
a  damper  on  the  spirits  of  the  person,  there  is  a 
tendency  to  colds,  gloom  and  melancholy,  delays 
and  disappointments,  and  if  Saturn  should  turn 
retrograde  passing  and  repassing  these  points, 
quite  a  long  time  of  trouble  and  anxiety  results. 


524  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

T?  D  <?  O  D  9  U     Saturn  transiting  square  or  oppo- 
sition radical  Sun,  Moon,  Venus  and  Jupiter. 

These  aspects  will  produce  similar  effect  to 
the  conjunction  but  more  intense,  and  falls, 
bruises,  or  broken  bones  are  often  additional 
results. 

^  *Ao  D  $  24 Saturn  transiting  sextile  or  trine  the 
radical  Sun,  Moon,  Venus  and  Jupiter. 

These  aspects  do  not  produce  any  benefit  so 
far  as  has  been  observed. 

T?  *  A  $T     Saturn  transiting  sextile  or  trine  the  rad- 
ical Mercury. 

These  aspects  steady  the  mind  and  make  it 
more  capable  of  concentration  when  he  is  direct, 
but  when  he  is  retrograde  or  aspecting  Mercury 
by  square  or  opposition  fear,  worry,  melancholy, 
gloom  and  trouble  result,  then  it  is  also  danger- 
ous to  travel. 

^  6  $  #  tp     Saturn  transiting  radical  Mars,  Uranus 
or  Neptune. 

These  transits  always  mark  a  time  of  trou- 
ble, no  matter  what  the  aspect,  but  the  nature  of 
the  trouble  is  best  determined  by  the  house  and 
sign  where  the  afflicted  planet  is  located. 

T?  6  M.  C.    Saturn  transiting  the  radical  Midheaven. 
This   aspect   always   produces   slander,   dis- 
credit and  loss  of  prestige. 


TRANSITS  525 

T?  6-12    Saturn    transiting    the    Sixth    or    Twelfth 
Houses  and  the  Ascendant. 

These  positions  have  an  inimical  effect  on 
the  health,  according  to  the  signs  which  are  on 
the  cusps  of  these  houses. 

U  *  A  O  9  S  D      Jupiter  transiting  sextile  or  trine 
the  radical  Sun,  Venus,  Mercury  or  Moon. 

These  aspects  bring  health,  happiness  and 
financial  benefit  in  accordance  with  the  radical 
indications.  If  he  retrogrades  he  is  not  so  active 
but  the  period  of  good  is  protracted  by  his  re- 
peated direct  passage  over  the  good  aspects. 

O  9  $  D      Jupiter  transiting  square  or  oppo- 
sition radical  Sun,  Venus,  Mercury  or  Moon. 

These  aspects  are  not  very  evil  because  evil 
is  out  of  harmony  with  the  basic  nature  of  Ju- 
piter. 

6  ^  $  V  W     Jupiter  transiting  or  aspecting  rad- 
ical Saturn,  Mars,  Uranus  and  Neptune. 

These  aspects  produce  no  appreciable  re- 
sults because  the  basic  natures  of  these  planets 
are  entirely  different.  This  is  on  the  same  prin- 
ciple that  tuning  forks  of  different  pitch  do  not 
respond  to  one  another. 

6  O  9      Uranus  transiting  radical  Sun  or  Venus. 
These    transits    produce    romantic    attach- 
ments,  Bohemian  pleasures,  unconventional  ex- 
periences ;  when  he '  is  retrograde  this  may  last 


526  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

for  a  long   time,   but   when   he  is  in  evil  aspect 
immorality,  scandal  and  divorce  may  result. 

#  6  $  D  £      Uranus  transiting  radical  Mars,  Moon 
and  Mercury. 

These  aspects  of  Uranus  to  the  radical  Mars. 
Moon  and  Mercury  have  a  tendency  to  make  the 
person  rash,  reckless,  foolhardy  and  erratic, 
sometimes  to  the  point  of  insanity  if  other  test- 
imonies in  the  horoscope  concur,  the  phase  of 
the  mental  disturbance  varying  from  violence 
when  induced  by  Mars,  to  mild  idiocy  when  pro- 
duced by  the  Moon. 

¥  6  ^?  3  W     Uranus  transiting  or  in  evil  aspect  to 
radical  Saturn,  Mars  and  Neptune. 

These  transits  cause  trouble  according  to 
the  house  and  sign  where  Saturn  is  located. 
Good  aspects  produce  no  benefit  as  far  as  we 
have  observed. 

W  6  $  D      Neptune  transiting  radical  Mercury  and 
Moon. 

These  aspects  bring  a  spiritual  awakening 
accompanied  by  dreams  and  visions  of  an  eleva- 
ting nature.  These  aspects  are  also  good  for 
travel,  but  the  bad  aspects  make  the  mind  un- 
clean, polluted  and  criminal  if  the  radical  horo- 
scope allows,  so  that  the  person  may  commit  a 
crime  and  suffer  imprisonment.  Mediumship  is 
also  often  the  result  of  these  transits. 


PART  II. 

Medical  Astrology 


AFTER  AN    EXTENSIVE  PRACTICE  OF  MANY  YEARS,  THE 
FOLLOWING  TREATISE  IS  SUBMITTED  AS  EMBODYING 
THE  AUTHORS'  EXPERIENCE,  GAINED  BY  SUC- 
CESSFUL DIAGNOSIS  OF  MANY  THOUSANDS 
OF   HOROSCOPES 


[But  we  want  to  make  it  clearly  understood  that  we 
do  not  cast  horoscopes  for  money,  or  tell  fortunes.  Our 
work  is  a  strictly  humanitarian  undertaking.  To  us, 
Astrology  is  a  phase  of  religion.] 


CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

ASTRO-DIAGNOSIS   OF   DISEASE 

PARENTS  have  an  exceptional  opportunity  and 
may  lay  up  much  treasure  in  heaven  by  judicious 
care  of  growing  children  based  upon  knowledge  of 
tendencies  to  disease  revealed  by  the  horoscope.  The 
writers  rely  implicitly  upon  the  horoscope 's  testimony 
and  though  in  a  few  cases  doubts  have  been  expressed 
as  to  the  correctness  of  our  diagnosis,  because  it  var- 
ied from  that  of  practitioners  in  personal  touch  with 
the  patient,  subsequent  developments  have  invariably 
vindicated  our  judgment  and  proved  the  far-reaching 
penetration  of  Astrology  which  is  as  much  in  advance 
of  the  X-Ray  as  that  is  superior  to  a  candle,  for  even 
though  the  X-Ray  were  capable  of  illuminating  the 
entire  body  to  such  an  extent  that  we  could  see  each 
individual  cell  in  activity,  it  could  only  show  the 
conditions  of  the  body  at  a  given  moment.  But  the 
horoscope  shows  incipient  disease  from  the  cradle  to 
the  grave,  thus  it  gives  us  ample  time  to  apply  the 
ounce  of  prevention,  and  maybe  escape  an  illness,  or, 
at  least,  ameliorate  its  severity  when  disease  has  over- 
taken us.  It  indicates  to  the  day  when  crises  are  due, 
thus  forewarned  we  may  take  extra  precautionary 
measures  to  tide  over  the  critical  point.  It  indicates 
528 


ASTRO-DIAGNOSIS  OF  DISEASE  529 

when  the  inimical  influences  are  waning  and  fortifies 
us  to  bear  present  suffering  with  strength  born  of 
the  knowledge  that  recovery  at  a  specific  time  is  cer- 
tain. Thus  Astrology  offers  help  and  hope  in  a  man- 
ner obtainable  by  no  other  method ;  for  its  scope  is 
wider  than  all  other  systems,  and  it  penetrates  to  the 
very  soul  of  Being. 

An  Important  Warning 

If  letters  of  fire  that  would  burn  themselves  into 
the  consciousness  of  the  reader  were  obtainable,  we 
would  spare  no  effort  to  procure  them  for  the  pur- 
pose of  warning  students  on  one  particular  point  in 
connection  with  the  practice  of  medical  Astrology; 
it  is  this: 

Never  tell  a  patient  a  discouraging  fact. 
Never  tell  them  when  impending  crises  are  due. 
Never  predict  sickness  at  a  certain  time. 
Never,  never  predict  death. 

It  is  a  grave  mistake,  almost  a  crime,  to  tell  sick 
persons  anything  discouraging,  for  it  robs  them  of 
strength  that  should  be  husbanded  with  the  utmost 
care  to  facilitate  recovery.  It  is  also  wrong  to  sug- 
gest sickness  to  a  well  person,  for  it  focuses  the  mind 
on  a  specific  disease  at  a  certain  time,  and  such  a' 
suggestion  is  liable  to  cause  sickness.  It  is  'a  welt 
known  fact  that  many  students  in  medical  colleges 
feel  the  symptoms  of  every  disease  they  study,  and 
suffer  greatly  in  consequence  of  auto-suggestion,  but 

34 


530  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

the  idea  of  impending  disease  implanted  by  one  in 
whom  the  victim  has  f  aitb  is  much  more  dangerous ; 
therefore  it  behooves  the  medical  astrologer  to  be 
very  cautious.  If  you  cannot  say  anything  encour- 
aging, be  silent. 

This  warning  applies  with  particular  force  when 
treating  patients  having  Taurus  or  Virgo  rising  or 
the  Sun  or  Moon  in  those  signs.  These  configurations 
predispose  the  mind  to  center  on  disease,  often  in  a 
most  unwarranted  manner.  The  Taurean  fears  sick- 
ness to  an  almost  insane  degree,  and  prediction  of 
disease  is  fatal  to  this  nature.  The  Virgo  courts  dis- 
ease, in  order  to  gain  sympathy,  and  though  profes- 
sing to  long  for  recovery,  they  actually  delight  in 
nursing  disease.  They  beg  to  know  their  symptoms, 
the  crises,  and  delight  in  probing  the  matter  to  the 
depths;  they  will  plead  ability  to  stand  full  knowl- 
edge and  profess  that  it  will  help  them;  but  if  the 
practitioner  allows  himself  to  be  enticed  by  their  pro- 
testations, and  does  tell  them,  they  wilt  like  a  flower. 
They  are  the  most  difficult  people  to  help  in  any  case, 
and  extra  care  should  be  taken  not  to  aggravate  their 
chances  by  admissions  of  the  nature  indicated. 

Besides,  though  the  writers  ha^ve  practiced  medi- 
cal Astrology  for  many  years  and  with  astonishing 
success,  and  though  Astrology,  as  a  science,  is  abso- 
lutely exact  and  infallible,  it  must  not  be  forgotten 
that  there  remains  nevertheless  the  chance  of  mis- 
taken judgment  on  the  part  of  the  practitioner  and 
the  chance  that  the  person  whose  horoscope  he  is 


ASTRO-DIAGNOSIS  OF  DISEASE  53L 

judging  may  assert  his  will  to  such  an  extent  that  it 
overrules  the  indication  in  the  horoscope.  He  may 
change  his  mode  of  life  without  knowing  what  would 
have  happened  if  he  had  gone  on  as  before,  and  thus 
he  may  be  in  no  danger  at  the  time  when  the  tendency 
to  sickness  shown  by  the  horoscope  arrives ;  it  is  cruel 
to  unsettle  his  mind  in  any  case.  Naturally,  the 
young  student  would  be  most  liable  to  make  a  mis- 
take in  judgment,  but  no  one  is  immune.  We  re- 
member a  case  that  came  to  our  notice  recently. 
One  of  the  most  prominent  European  astrologers 
predicted  for  a  client  in  South  Africa  that  on  a  cer- 
tain date  he  would  have  a  severe  haemorrhage  of  the 
lungs.  The  poor  man  wrote  to  us  for  help,  but 
though  liability  to  colds  in  the  lungs  was  shown,  we 
saw  no  serious  trouble  at  the  time  predicted,  nor  has 
haemorrhage  been  experienced  in  the  year  elapsed  be- 
tween that  time  and  the  present  writing. 

Some  students  have  a  morbid  desire  to  know  the 
time  of  their  own  death,  and  probe  into  this  matter 
in  a  most  unwarranted  manner,  for  no  matter  how 
they  may  seek  to  deceive  themselves  there  are  very 
few  who  have  the  mental  and  moral  stamina  to  live 
life  in  the  same  manner,  if  they  knew  with  absolute 
certainty  that  on  a  certain  date  their  earthly  exist- 
ence would  be  terminated.  That  is  one  of  the  points 
most  wisely  hidden  until  we  are  to  see  on  both  sides 
of  the  veil,  and  we  do  wrong,  no  matter  what  our 
ground,  to  seek  to  wrest  that  knowledge  from  the 
horoscope. 


532  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Moreover,  it  has  been  well  said  that  "the  doctor 
who  prescribes  for  himself  has  a  fool  for  a  patient," 
and  this  applies  to  diagnosis  of  one's  own  horoscope 
with  tenfold  force,  for  there  we  are  all  biased;  either 
we  make  too  light  of  conditions,  or  we  take  them  too 
seriously,  particularly  if  we  investigate  the  time  and 
mode  of  death.  We  remember  a  case  where  an  intel- 
lectual woman,  principal  of  a  private  school  in  New 
York,  wrote  asking  for  admission  to  our  correspond- 
ence class,  "if  we  thought  it  worth  while,  as  she 
was  going  to  die  the  first  week  in  March. ' '  She  gave 
us  all  the  aspects  upon  which  she  based  her  judgment, 
and  as  one  of  the  writers  had  just  emerged  hale  and 
hearty  from  similar  configurations,  she  gave  the  lady 
in  question  a  good  talking  to  that  straightened  her 
out;  she  told  the  lady  she  (the  writer)  expected  to 
live  to  a  ripe  age.  Now  that  lady  is  thinking  of  a 
useful  life,  she  has  learned  to  forget  death.  Astrol- 
ogy is  too  sacred  to  be  thus  misused.  Let  the  student 
forget  about  his  own  horoscope  and  devote  his  knowl- 
edge to  help  others,  then  it  will  aid  in  accumulating 
treasure  in  heaven  as  no  other  line  of  spiritual  en- 
deavor. 

PLANETARY  POLARITIES 

When  we  study  magnetism  we  are  dealing  with 
an  invisible  force;  and  ordinarily  we  can  at  best 
state  the  way  it  manifests  in  the  physical  world,  as 
is  the  case  whenever  we  deal  .with  any  force.  The 
physical  world  is  the  world  of  effects ;  the  causes  are 


PLANETARY   POLARITIES  533 

hidden  from  our  sight,  though  they  are  nearer  than 
hands  or  feet.  Force  is  all  about  us,  invisible  and 
only  seen  by  the  effects  it  produces. 

If  we  take  a  dish  of  water,  for  illustration,  and 
allow  it  to  freeze,  we  shall  see  a  myriad  of  ice  crys- 
tals, beautiful  geometrical  figures.  These  show  the 
lines  along  which  the  water  congealed  and  these  lines 
are  lines  of  force  which  were  present  before  the  water 
congealed;  but  they  were  invisible  until  the  proper 
conditions  wrere  furnished  them  and  they  became 
manifest. 

In  the  same  way  there  are  lines  of  force  going; 
between  the  two  poles  of  a  magnet;  they  are  neither 
seen  nor  felt  until  we  bring  iron  or  iron  filings  into 
the  place  where  they  are,  when  they  will  manifest 
by  arranging  the  filings  in  an  orderly  pattern.  By 
making  the  proper  conditions  we  may  cause  any  of 
the  nature  forces  to  show  its  effects — moving  our 
street  cars,  carrying  messages  with  lightning  speed 
over  thousands  of  miles,  etc.,  etc. ;  but  the  force  itself 
is  ever  invisible.  We  know  that  magnetism  travels 
always  at  right  angles  to  the  electric  current  with, 
which  it  manifests;  we  know  the  difference  between, 
the  manifestations  of  the  electric  and  the  magnetic 
current,  so  dependent  upon  one  another,  but  we  have 
never  seen  either;  though  they  are  about  the  most 
valuable  servants  we  have  today. 

Magnetism  may  be  divided  into  'mineral'  and 
'animal'  magnetism,  though  in  reality  they  are  one, 
but  the  former  has  very  little  influence  upon  animal 


534  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

tissue,  while  the  latter  is  generally  impotent  in  work- 
ing with  minerals. 

The  mineral  magnetism  is  derived  directly  from 
•*  lodestones '  which  are  used  to  magnetise  iron  and  this 
process  gives  to  the  metal  thus  treated  the  property 
of  attracting  iron.  This  kind  of  magnet  is  very  little 
used,  however,  as  its  magnetism  becomes  depleted, 
is  too  weak  in  proportion  to  its  bulk,  and  principally 
because  the  magnetic  force  cannot  be  controlled  in- 
such  a  so-called  'permanent'  magnet. 

The  '  electro '-magnet  is  also  a  'mineral'  magnet. 
It  is  simply  a  piece  of  iron  wound  around  with  many 
turns  of  electric  wire;  the  strength  of  the  magnet 
varies  as.  the  number  of  turns  of  wire,  and  the 
strength  of  the  electric  current  that  is  passed 
through  it. 

Electricity  is  all  about  us  in  a  diffused  state,  of 
no  use  for  industrial  purposes  until  it  is  compressed 
and  forced  through  the  electric  wires  by  the  powerful 
•electro-magnets.  We  must  have  magnetism  in  the 
first  place  before  we  can  get  any  electricity.  Before 
a  new  electric  generator  is  started  the  'fields, '  which 
are  nothing  but  electro-magnets,  must  be  magnetized. 
If  that  is  not  done  they  may  turn  it  till  the  crack  of 
doom,  at  any  rate  of  speed  they  please,  and  it  will 
never  light  a  single  lamp  or  move  a  grain  of  weight ; 
all  depends  upon  the  magnetism  being  there  first. 
After  this  magnetism  is  once  started  it  will  leave  a 
little  behind  when  the  generator  is  shut  down,  and 
this  so-called  '  residual  magnetism '  will  be  the  nucleus 


PLANETARY  POLARITIES  535 

of  force  to  be  built  up  each  time  the  generator  is 
started  afresh. 

All  bodies  of  plant,  animal  and  man  are  but 
transformed  'mineral.'  They  have  all  come  from  the 
mineral  kingdom  in  the  first  place,  and  chemical 
analysis  of  the  plant,  animal  and  human  bodies 
brings  out  the  fact  beyond  cavil.  Moreover,  we  know 
that  the  plants  get  their  sustenance  from  the  mineral 
soil,  and  both  animal  and  man  are  eating  'mineral' 
when  they  consume  the  plants  as  food;  even  when 
man  eats  the  animals  he  is  nevertheless  eating  min- 
eral compounds,  and  therefore  he  gets  with  his  food 
both  the  mineral  substances  and  the  magnetic  force 
which  they  contain. 

This  j: orce  we  see  manifesting  as  '  Haemoglobin, ' 
or  the  red  coloring  matter  in  the  blood,  which  attracts 
the  life-giving  oxygen  when  it  comes  into  contact  with 
it  in  the  millions  of  minute  capillaries  of  the  lungs, 
parting  with  it  as  readily  when  it  passes  through  the 
capillaries  which  all  over  the  body  connect  the  ar- 
teries with  the  veins.  Why  is  this? 

To  understand  this,  we  must  acquaint  ourselves 
a  little  closer  with  the  way  magnetism  manifests  as 
seen  in  industrial  uses. 

There  are  always  two  fields  or  a  multiple  of 
two  fields  in  a  generator  or  motor,  every  alternate 
'field'  or  magnet  being  'north-pole'  and  every  other 
alternate  'south-pole.'  If  we  wish  to  run  two  or 
more  generators  'in  multiple'  and  force  electricity 
into  the  same  wire,  the  first  requisite  is  that  the  mag- 


536  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

netic  current  in  the  field-magnets  should  run  in  ilne 
same  direction. 

If  that  were  not  the  case,  they  would  not  run 
together  ;they  would  generate  currents  going  in  op- 
posite directions,  blowing  their  fuses.  That  would 
be  because  the  poles  in  one  generator,  which  should 
have  attracted,  repelled,  and  vice-versa.  The  remedy 
is  to  change  the  ends  of  the  wire  which  magnetises 
the  fields ;  then  the  magnetic  current  in  one  generator 
will  become  like  the  current  of  the  other,  and  both 
will  run  smoothly  together. 

Similar  conditions  prevail  in  magnetic  healing; 
a  certain  vibratory  pitch  and  magnetic  polarity  was 
infused  into  each  of  us  when  the  stellar  forces  surged 
through  our  bodies  and  gave  us  our  planetary  bap- 
tism at  the  moment  when  we  drew  our  first  complete 
breath.  This  is  modified  during  our  pilgrimage  of 
life,  but  in  the  main  its  initial  impulse  remains  un- 
disturbed and  therefore  the  horoscope  at  birth  retains 
the  most  vital  power  in  life  to  determine  our  sympa- 
thies and  antipathies  as  well  as  all  other  matters. 
Nay  more,  its  pronouncements  are  more  reliable  than 
our  conscious  likes  and  dislikes. 

Sometimes  we  may  meet  and  learn  to  like  a  per- 
son, although  we  have  a  feeling  that  he  has  an  in- 
imical influence  on  us  for  which  we  cannot  account, 
and  therefore  strive  to  put  aside,  but  a  comparison 
of  his  horoscope  with  our  own  will  reveal  the  reason 
and  if  we  are  wise  we  heed  its  warning,  or  as  surely 
as  the  circling  stars  move  in  their  orbits  around  the 


PLANETARY   POLARITIES  537 

Sun  we  will  live  to  regret  our  disregard  of  this  hand- 
writing on  the  wall. 

But  there  are  also  many  cases  when  we  do  not 
sense  the  antipathy  between  ourselves  and  a  certain 
person,  though  the  horoscope  reveals  it,  and  if  we 
see  the  signs  when  comparing  the  two  horoscopes  we 
may  feel  inclined  to  trust  our  feelings  rather  than 
the  stellar  script  of  the  horoscopes.  That  also  will 
in  time  lead  to  trouble,  for  the  planetary  polarity  is 
certain  to  manifest  in  time  unless  both  parties  are 
sufficiently  evolved  to  rule  their  stars  in  a  large  meas- 
ure. Such  people  are  few  and  far  between  at  our 
present  stage  of  evolution.  Therefore  we  shall  do 
well  if  we  use  our  knowledge  of  the  stellar  script  to 
compare  our  horoscopes  with  those  at  least  who  come 
intimately  into  our  lives.  This  may  save  both  them 
and  us  much  misery  and  heartache.  We  would  ad- 
vise this  course  particularly  with  regard  to  a  healer 
and  his  patients,  and  with  reference  to  a  prospective 
marriage  partner. 

When  anyone  is  ill,  resistance  is  at  the  lowest 
ebb,  and  on  that  account  he  is  then  least  able  to  with- 
stand outside  influences.  So  the  vibrations  of  the 
healer  have  practically  unrestrained  effect,  and  even 
though  he  may  be  ensouled  by  the  noblest  of  altru- 
istic motives,  desiring  to  pour  out  his  very  life  for 
the  benefit  of  the  patient,  if  their  stars  were  adverse 
at  birth,  his  vibratory  pitch  and  magnetism  are  bound 
to  have  an  inimical  effect  upon  the  patient.  There- 
fore it  is  of  prime  necessity  that  any  healer  should 


538  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

have  a  knowledge  of  Astrology  and  the  law  of  com- 
patibility, whether  he  belongs  to  those  who  admit- 
tedly heal  by  magnetism  and  the  laying  on  of  hands 
or  to  the  regular  schools  of  physicians,  for  they  also 
infuse  their  vibrations  into  the  patient's  aura  and 
help  or  hinder  according  to  the  agreement  of  their 
planetary  polarity  with  that  of  the  patient. 

What  has  been  said  with  regard  to  the  healer 
applies  with  tenfold  force  to  the  nurse,  for  he  or 
she  is  with  the  patient  practically  all  the  time  and 
their  contact  is  so  much  more  intimate. 

For  healer,  nurse  and  patient,  compatibility  is 
determined  by  the  rising  sign,  Saturn,  and  the  Sixth 
House.  If  their  rising  signs  agree  in  nature  so  that 
all  have  fiery  signs  rising,  or  all  have  earthy,  airy, 
or  watery  signs  rising,  they  are  harmonious,  but  if 
the  patient  has  a  watery  sign  rising,  a  nurse  or  a  doc- 
ter  with  fiery  signs  will  have  a  very  detrimental 
effect. 

It  is  also  necessary  to  see  that  Saturn  in  the 
horoscope  of  the  nurse  or  healer  is  not  placed  in  any 
of  the  degrees  of  the  zodiac  within  the  patient's  Sixth 
House. 

With  respect  to  marriage  the  planetary  polarity 
is  shown  principally  by  a  consideration  of  the  fem- 
inine Moon  and  Venus  in  a  man's  horoscope,  for  they 
describe  his  attractions  towards  the  opposite  sex,  and 
in  a  woman's  horoscope  the  masculine  Sun  and  Mars 
have  a  similar  significance.  If  these  planets  are  har- 
moniously configurated  and  the  signs  on  the  cusps 


PLANETARY   POLARITIES  539 

of  the  Seventh  Houses  of  the  prospective  partners 
agree,  harmony  will  prevail,  especially  if  the  Sun, 
Venus  or  Jupiter  of  one  person  is  placed  in  the  Sev- 
enth House  of  the  other.  But  if  the  planets  men- 
tioned afflict  one  another,  or  the  Seventh  Houses  of 
the  parties  are  out  of  harmony,  or  if  Saturn,  Mars; 
Uranus  or  Neptune  of  one  is  in  a  degree  included  in 
the  Seventh  House  of  the  other,  it  is  the  handwriting 
on  the  wall  which  indicates  that  the  planetary  polar- 
ity is  inharmonious  and  that  sorrow  is  in  store  for 
them  if  they  allow  their  evanescent  emotions  to  draw 
them  together  in  a  bond  of  unhappiness,  for  it  is 
easy  to  change  the  field  wires  on  two  electric  gen- 
erators so  that  their  polarities  will  agree,  but  it  is 
extremely  difficult  to  reverse  the  planetary  polarity 
of  one  person  to  make  it  agree  with  that  received  by 
another  at  his  planetary  baptism. 


CHAPTER  XXIX. 
THE  LAW  OF  CORRESPONDENCES 

IT  IS  said  in  the  Bible  that  God  made  man  in  His 
likeness,  and  from  hoary  antiquity  seers  and  sages 
have  noted  a  correspondence  between  the  macrocosm, 
the  great  world,  and  the  microcosm,  the  little  world, 
or  man.  This  is  again  expressed  in  the  hermetic 
axion  which  is  the  master-key  to  all  mysteries:  "As 
above,  so  below."  Therefore  we  may  note  that  the 
various  parts  of  the  human  body  are  correlated  to 
different  divisions  of  the  vaulted  arch  of  heaven  with 
the  marching  orbs  that  move  through  it.  As  the 
creative  forces  within  the  womb  act  upon  the  ovum 
and  gradually  build  the  fostus,  so  also  the  stellar 
rays  from  the  macrocosmic  body  of  mother  nature  are 
active  upon  man.  It  is  their  activity  which  we  note 
in  the  process  of  evolution  whereby  that  which  is 
now  man  has  come  up  through  the  lower  kingdoms 
to  his  present  stage  of  completion,  and  it  is  by  the 
same  rays  that  he  will  gradually  evolve  to  the  divine 
stature  where  he  will  indeed  be  like  the  Father  in 
Heaven,  consequently  we  may  note  the  correspond- 
ences between  the  signs  and  planets  and  the  different 
divisions  of  the  human  body  as  follows : 
540 


THE  LAW  OF  CORRESPONDENCES  541 

PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  THE  TWELVE  SIGNS 

Aries  rules  the  head,  the  cerebral  hemispheres, 
the  various  organs  within  the  head,  and  the  eyes, 
but  the  nose  is  under  the  rulership  of  Scorpio. 
Thus  any  affliction  in  Aries  will  react  upon 
the  head,  producing  headaches,  neuralgia,  coma 
and  trance  conditions,  diseases  of  the  brain  and 
cerebral  hemispheres. 

Taurus  rules  the  neck,  throat,  palate,  larynx  and 
tonsils,  lower  jaw,  ears,  and  occipital  region. 
The  cerebellum  is  also  under  the  rule  of  Taurus, 
so  are  the  atlas  and  cervical  vertebrae,  the  car- 
otid arteries,  jugular  veins,  and  other  minor 
blood  vessels. 

The  diseases  to  which  this  region  is  subject 
are  goitre,  diphtheria,  croup  and  apoplexy.  As 
each  sign  always  reacts  upon  the  opposite,  af- 
fliction,s  in  Taurus  may  also  produce  venereal 
diseases,  constipation,  or  irregular  menses. 

Gemini  rules  the  arms  and  hands,  shoulders, 
lungs,  and  the  thymus  gland,  also  the  upper  ribs, 
therefore  afflictions  in  Gemini  cause  pulmonary 
diseases,  pneumonia,  pleurisy,  bronchitis,  asthma 
and  inflammation  of  the  pericardium. 

Cancer  rules  the  oesophagus,  stomach,  diaphragm, 
and  lower  lobes  of  the  lungs,  the  mammae,  lac- 
teals,  upper  lobes  of  liver,  and  thoracic  duct. 


542  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE    STARS 

hence  afflictions  in  Cancer  produce  indigestion, 
gas  on  the  stomach,  cough,  hiccough,  dropsy, 
gloom,  hypochondria,  hysteria,  gall  stones,  and 
jaundice. 

SI  Leo  rules  the  heart,  the  dorsal  region  of  the  spine, 
the  spinal  cord,  and  the  aorta,  therefore  the  af- 
flictions in  Leo  cause  regurgitation,  palpitation, 
faintings,  aneurism,  spinal  meningitis,  and  curv- 
ature of  the  spine,  also  arterio-sclerosis  and  an- 
gina pectoris,  hyperaemia,  anaemia  and  hydrsemia. 

TTg  Virgo  rules  the  abdominal  region,  the  large  and 
small  intestines,  the  lower  lobes  of  the  liver,  the 
pancreas  and  spleen,  therefore  afflictions  in 
Virgo  produce  peritonitis,  tapeworm,  malnutri- 
tion, interference  with  the  absorption  of  the 
chyle,  typhoid  fever,  cholera,  and  appendicitis. 

=^=  Libra  rules  the  kidneys,  the  suprarenals,  the  lum- 
bar region  of  the  spine,  the  vasomotor  system 
and  the  skin,  hence  afflictions  in  Libra  produce 
polyuria,  or  suppression  of  the  urine,  inflamma- 
tion of  the  ureters  which  connect  the  kidneys 
with  the  bladder,  Bright 's  disease,  malnutrition, 
lumbago,  eczema  and  other  skin  diseases. 

TH,  Scorpio  rules  the  bladder,  urethra,  and  genital 
organs  in  general.  Also  the  rectum  and  the  de- 
scending colon,  the  sigmoid  flexure,  the  prostate 
gland,  and  also  the  nasal  bones,  hence  afflictions 


PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  THE  SIGNS      543 

in  Scorpio  produce  nasal  catarrh,  adenoids,  and 
polypi,  diseases  of  the  womb  and  ovaries,  various 
venereal  diseases,  stricture,  and  enlargement  of 
the  prostate  gland,  irregularities  of  the  menses, 
leucorrhoea,  rupture,  renal  stones  and  gravel. 

/  Sagittarius  rules  the  hips  and  thighs,  the  femur, 
ilium,  the  coccygeal  and  sacral  regions  of  the 
spine,  the  iliac  arteries  and  veins,  sciatic  nerves, 
hence  afflictions  to  Sagittarius  produce  locomotor 
ataxia,  sciatica,  rheumatism,  and  hip  diseases. 
Furthermore,  as  each  sign  has  an  influence  upon 
its  opposite,  afflictions  in  Sagittarius  may  also 
cause  pulmonary  troubles.  It  is  also  noteworthy 
that  broken  bones  are  caused  by  this  sign. 

Itf  Capricorn  governs  the  skin  and  the  knees,  but  it 
has  also  a  reflex  action  on  the  stomach,  which  is 
governed  by  the  opposite  sign  Cancer.  Hence 
afflictions  in  Capricorn  produce  eczema  and  other 
skin  diseases,  erysipelas,  leprosy,  and  digestive 
disturbances. 

£?  Aquarius  rules  the  ankles,  the  limbs  from  the 
knees  to  the  ankles,  and  has  also  a  reflex  action 
on  its  opposite  sign  Leo,  hence  afflictions  in 
Aquarius  produce  varicose  veins,  sprained  an- 
kles, irregularities  of  the  heart  action  and 
dropsy. 


544  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

^  Pisces  rules  the  feet  and  toes.  It  also  has  a  reflex 
effect  on  the  abdominal  region  governed  by  the 
opposite  sign,  Virgo,  hence  afflictions  in  this  sign 
indicate  trouble  and  deformities  of  the  feet,  in- 
testinal diseases  and  dropsy.  It  also  produces  a 
desire  for  drink  and  drugs  which  may  bring 
about  delirium  tremens.  Consumption  is  some- 
times found  to  be  a  secondary  result  of  cold  in 
the  feet  contracted  by  an  afflicted  Pisces. 

PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  THE  SUN 

The  Sun  rules  in  the  very  first  place  the  vital 
fluid  which  is  specialized  through  the  spleen,  trans- 
ferred to  the  solar  plexus,  and  thence  distributed  over 
the  whole  body.  This  vital  fluid  is  invisible  to  ordi- 
nary humanity,  but  to  those  gifted  with  the  spiritual 
sight  it  appears  as  a  rose-colored  fluid  which  is  like 
the  electricity  in  the  wires  of  a  telephone  or  telegraph 
system.  When  the  wires  designed  to  carry  electricity 
are  minus  the  electric  fluid  they  are  dead  and  the 
telephone  or  telegraph  instruments  do  not  respond. 
Similarly,  when  for  some  reason  the  invisible  vital 
fluid  ceases  to  flow  through  any  part  of  the  human 
organism  in  sufficient  quantity,  that  part  of  the  body 
will  not  perform  its  proper  function,  and  therefore 
disease  results,  continuing  until  the  obstruction  has 
been  removed  and  the  path  cleared  for  the  vital  fluid 
On  that  account  an  afflicted  Sun  always  causes  disease, 
particularly  in  a  male  horoscope,  and  in  a  female 


PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  THE  SUN       545 

nativity  the  Moon,  which  is  the  collector  of  solar 
forces,  takes  the  same  office  or  function.  The  heart 
and  the  pons  varolii,  or  vital  knot,  situated  in  the 
brain,  are  the  principal  parts  of  the  body  ruled  by 
the  Sun.  When  the  Sun  is  well  aspected  in  Leo  or 
Aries  radiant  health  may  be  looked  for.  But  on  the 
other  hand,  when  he  is  afflicted  he  produces  the  vari- 
ous ailments  according  to  the  sign  wherein  he  is 
placed  at  the  time.  These  disabilities  may  be  set 
down  as  follows: 

O  T  The  Sun  afflicted  in  Aries,  the  sign  which  rules 
the  head,  gives  a  tendency  to  aphasia  or  loss  of 
identity,  brain  fever,  cerebral  haemorrhage,  and 
meningitis,  cerebral  anaemia  or  congestion  of  the 
blood,  faintings  and  headaches. 

0  8  The  Sun  afflicted  in  Taurus  gives  a  tendency 
to  quinsy,  diphtheria,  and  polypus  of  the  nose. 
In  the  Pleiades  (Taurus  29°),  eye  trouble. 

O  n  The  Sun  in  Gemini  gives  a  tendency  to  pleurisy, 
bronchitis,  and  hyperemia  of  the  lungs. 

0  55  The  Sun  afflicted  in  Cancer  gives  a  tendency  to 
anemia,  dropsy,  dyspepsia,  and  gastric  fever. 

QSl  The  Sun  afflicted  in  Leo  gives  a  tendency  to 
palpitation  of  the  heart,  backache,  and  spinal 
afflictions.  In  the  Ascelli  (Leo  6°),  eye  trouble. 


35 


546  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

OTH2  The  Sun  afflicted  in  Virgo  gives  a  tendency  to 
interference  with  the  assimilation  and  peritonitis,, 
typhoid  fever,  and  dysentery. 

0=2=  The  Sun  afflicted  in  Libra  gives  a  tendency  to 
Bright 's  disease  and  eruptions  of  the  skin 
through  overheated  blood,  for  Saturn  rules  the 
skin  and  Libra  is  his  exaltation  sign. 

O  fll  The  Sun  afflicted  in  Scorpio  gives  a  tendency  to 
renal  calculus,  genito-urinary  and  menstrual  dis- 
turbances, uterine  and  ovarian  affections. 

O  J  The  Sun  afflicted  in  Sagittarius  gives  a  tend- 
ency to  sciatica,  paralysis  of  the  limb.s  and  pul- 
monary diseases.  If  the  Sun  is  in  Antares 
(Sagittarius  8°)  and  afflicted  by  one  or  more 
of  the  malefics  there  is  danger  of  disease  of  the 
eyes. 

QV3  The  Sun  afflicted  in  Capricorn  gives  a  tendency 
to  rheumatism,  skin  diseases,  and  digestive  trou- 
bles. 

O^r  The  Sun  afflicted  in  Aquarius  gives  a  tendency 
to  varicose  veins,  dropsy,  palpitation  of  the 
heart,  and  poor  circulation. 

O  X.  The  Sun  afflicted  in  Pisces  gives  a  tendency  to 
perspiration  of  the  feet,  also  intestinal  troubles,, 
typhoid  fever,  et  cetera. 


PATHOGENIC   EFFECTS  OF  VENUS          547 
PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  VENUS 

On  account  of  her  rulership  of  Taurus  and  Libra,. 
Venus  is  responsible  for  a  number  of  affections  of 
the  throat  and  kidneys,  also  maladies  due  to  gas- 
tronomical  indiscretions,  lack  of  exercise,  sedentary 
habits,  poor  circulation  of  the  venous  blood,  excess 
of  amorous  indulgence  and  dissolute  living,  hence  she 
brings  obesity,  tumors,  cysts,  poor  circulation,  vene- 
real diseases,  tonsilitis,  and  various  other  disorders. 
Her  general  effect  when  placed  in  the  twelve  signs 
may  be  classed  as  follows : 

9  T  Venus  afflicted  in  Aries  gives  a  tendency  to 
catarrh  in  the  head,  mucus,  and,  by  reflex  ac- 
tion in  Libra  congestion  of  the  kidneys. 

$  8  Venus  afflicted  in  Taurus  gives  a  tendency  to- 
mumps,  headaches  affecting  the  occipital  region, 
goitre,  tonsilitis,  and  glandular  swellings  of  the 
throat.  By  reflex  action  in  Scorpio  this  also' 
brings  venereal  diseases  or  other  troubles  p&- 
culiar  to  the  genitals. 

$  n  Venus  afflicted  in  Gemini  gives  a  tendency  to 
corrupt  blood,  pulmonary  inefficiency,  whitlows., 
warts,  and  dropsy. 

$  55  Venus  afflicted  in  Cancer  gives  a  tendency  to' 
distended  stomach,  gastric  tumor,  and  nausea. 

$  <<rt  Venus  afflicted  in  Leo  gives  a  tendency  to  spinal 
affections,  backache  and  enlarged  heart. 


548  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

$  1TE  Venus  afflicted  in  Virgo  gives  a  tendency  to 
weakened  peristaltic  action  of  the  intestines,  tu- 
mors and  tapeworm,  worms  in  children. 

$  ===  Venus  afflicted  in  Libra  gives  a  tendency  to 
uremia  and  polyuria;  by  reflex  action  in  Aries, 
headaches. 

9  TT],  Venus  afflicted  in  Scorpio  gives  a  tendency  to 
varicocele,  venereal  diseases,  uterine  prolapsis  or 
tumors,  painful  menstruation  and  other  female 
complaints,  and  by  reflex  action  in  Taurus,  throat 
affections. 

$  /  Venus  afflicted  in  Sagittarius  gives  a  tendency 
to  tumors  and  kindred  diseases  in  the  hips,  and, 
by  reflex  action  in  Gemini,  bronchial  and  pul- 
monary affections. 

3  VS  Venus  afflicted  in  Capricorn  gives  a  tendency 
to  gout  in  the  limbs,  and,  by  reflex  action  in 
Cancer,  digestive  troubles,  nausea  and  vomiting. 

5  £?  Venus  afflicted  in  Aquarius  gives  a  tendency  to 
varicose  veins,  and,  by  reflex  action  in  Leo,  heart 
trouble. 

t  £  ^  Venus  afflicted  in  Pisces  gives  a  tendency  to 
tender  feet,  bunions,  chilblains,  gout,  and,  by 
reflex  action  in  Virgo,  abdominal  tumors  and 
intestinal  disorders. 


PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  MERCURY       549 
PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  MERCURY 

Mercury  rules  Gemini  and  Virgo,  therefore  his 
afflictions  manifest  in  diseases  related  to  these  signs, 
as  bronchitis,  pulmonary  and  respiratory  troubles. 
He  also  rules  the  right  cerebral  hemisphere,  the  mo- 
tor segment  of  the  spinal  cord,  and  the  vocal  cords, 
hence  locomotor,  nervous  and  vocal  disorders  are  also 
among  his  manifestations;  so  is  deafness.  The  fol- 
lowing effects  may  be  noted  when  he  is  afflicted  in 
the  twelve  signs : 

S  T  Mercury  afflicted  in  Aries  gives  a  tendency  to 
brain  fever,  nervous  headache,  vertigo,  neural- 
gia, and,  by  reflex  action  in  Libra,  nervous  dis- 
orders of  the  kidneys,  and  lumbago. 

5  b  Mercury  afflicted  in  Taurus  gives  a  tendency  to 
stuttering,  hoarseness  and  deafness,  and  by  re- 
flex action  in  Scorpio,  nervous  affections  of  the 
genito-urinary  system. 

.  £  n  Mercury  afflicted  in  Gemini  gives  a  tendency  to 
gout  in  head,  arms,  and  shoulders,  bronchitis 
asthma,  asphyxiation,  pleurisy,  and,  by  reflex 
action  in  Sagittarius,  nervous  pains  in  the  hips. 

S  25  Mercury  afflicted  in  Cancer  gives  a  tendency  to 
nervous  indigestion,  phlegm,  flatulence,  and 
drunkenness. 

9  SI  Mercury  afflicted  in  Leo  gives  a  tendency  to  pain 
in  the  back,  fainting,  and  palpitation  of  the  heart. 


550  s          THE  MESSAGE  OF'  THE   STARS 

$  TlR  Mercury  afflicted  in  Virgo  gives  a  tendency  to 
flatulence,  wind  colic,  short  breath,  and  nervous 
debility. 

,3  ^  Mercury  afflicted  in  Libra  gives  a  tendency  to 
suppression  of  urine,  renal  paroxysms,  lumbago, 
and,  by  reflex  action  in  Aries,  vertigo,  nervous 
headaches  and  eye  trouble. 

!$  TT\,  Mercury  afflicted  in  Scorpio  gives  a  tendency  to 
pains  in  bladder  and  genitals,  menstrual  trouble, 
and,  by  reflex  action  in  Taurus,  stuttering  or 
hoarseness  and  deafness. 

•        !   .         • 

!?2  j?    Mercury  afflicted  in  Sagittarius  gives  a  tendency 
.'  to  pain  in  the  hips  and  thighs.    By  reflex  action 
in  Gemini,  cough,  asthma  and  pleurisy. 

!$  Itf  Mercury  afflicted  in  Capricorn  gives  a  tendency 
to  rheumatism,  especially  in  the  knees;  pains  in 
the  back,  skin  diseases,  melancholy;  by  reflex  ac- 
tion in  Cancer,  nervous  indigestion,  flatulence. 

i$  £?  Mercury  afflicted  in  Aquarius  gives  a  tendency 
to  shooting  or  gnawing  pains  in  the  whole  body, 
varicose  veins,  corrupt  blood  and,  by  reflex  action 
in  Leo,  palpitation,  and  neuralgia  of  the  heart. 

!3  X.  Mercury  afflicted  in  Pisces  gives  a  tendency  to 
gout  in  the  feet,  or  they  are  tender  and  subject 
to  cramp,  or,  by  reflex  action  in  Virgo,  a  gen- 
eral weakness,  lassitude,  worry,  and  sometimes 
tuberculosis,  deafness. 


PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  MERCURY       551 
PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  THE  MOON 

The  Moon  rules  the  oesophagus  and  stomach,  the 
uterus  and  ovaries,  the  lymphatics  and  the  sympa- 
thetic nervous  system,  the  synovial  fluid.  When  af- 
flicted she  produces  dropsical  and  menstrual  trou- 
bles, uterine  and  ovarian  afflictions,  dyspepsia,  eye 
trouble,  and  lunacy,  according  to  the  sign,  house 
and  nature  of  the  afflicting  planet.  She  has  particu- 
lar rule  over  the  mother  during  pregnancy. 

D  T  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Aries  gives  a  tendency  to 
insomnia,  headache,  lethargy,  and  weak  eyes. 

D  8  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Taurus  gives  a  tendency 
to  sore  throat,  and  if  in  Taurus  29°  with  the 
Pleiades  and  afflicted  by  Saturn,  Mars,  Uranus, 
or  Neptune,  eye  trouble  results;  by  reflex  action 
in  Scorpio,  menstrual  or  other  trouble  with  the 
genitals. 

D  n  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Gemini  gives  a  tendency 
to  catarrh  of  the  lungs,  asthma,  bronchitis  and 
pneumonia,  rheumatism  in  the  arms  and  shoul- 
ders. 

D  z  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Cancer  gives  a  tendency 
to  cancer  of  the  stomach,  dropsy,  obesity,  bloat- 
ing, digestive  troubles,  and  epilepsy. 

J>  SI  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Leo  gives  a  tendency  to 
backache,  disturbed  circulation,  convulsions,  and 
heart  trouble ;  if  in  Leo  6°,  eye  trouble. 


552  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

D  l\%  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Virgo  gives  a  tendency  to 
disorders  in  the  bowels,  abdominal  tumors,  dysen- 
tery, and  peritonitis. 

5  =2=  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Libra  gives  a  tendency  to 
Bright 's  diseai>e,  abcess  of  the  kidneys,  uraemia; 
by  reflex  action  in  Aries,  headache  or  insomnia. 

D  nx  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Scorpio  gives  a  tendency 
to  disturbed  menses,  bladder  troubles,  hydrocele, 
and  other  genito-urinary  disturbances;  by  reflex 
action  in  Taurus,  throat  troubles. 

D  t  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Sagittarius  gives  a  tend- 
ency to  blood  affections,  hip  disease,  and,  some- 
times, a  broken  femur;  by  reflex  action  in  Gem- 
ini, asthma. 

D  VS  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Capricorn  gives  a  tend- 
ency to  articular  rheumatism,  lack  of  synovial 
fluid,  eruptions  of  the  skin,  and,  by  reflex  action 
in  Cancer,  digestive  troubles. 

D  £?  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Aquarius  gives  a  tend- 
ency to  varicose  veins,  ulcers  of  the  leg,  dropsy, 
and,  by  reflex  action  in  Leo,  hysteria,  fainting, 
and  heart  trouble. 

D  ^  The  Moon  afflicted  in  Pisces  gives  a  tendency  to 
drink,  drug  habits,  tender  feet,  and,  by  reflex 
action  in  Virgo,  abdominal  disorders  of  various 
kinds. 


PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  SATURN         553 
PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  SATURN 

Saturn  is  the  planet  of  obstruction,  crystalliza- 
tion and  atrophy.  By  his  action  the  circulation  or 
passage  of  bodily  fluids,  such  as  the  blood,  lymph,  or 
urine,  are  impeded,  and  by  this  stagnation  waste  ma- 
terials are  retained  instead  of  being  eliminated.  Thus 
they  form  various  deposits  in  the  body,  building  the 
skeleton,  which  is  constructive,  hardening  the  ar- 
teries and  articulations,  which  is  destructive.  Saturn 
rules  the  gall  bladder,  where  he  forms  the  painful 
gallstones,  and  by  virtue  of  his  exaltation  power  in 
Libra  he  crystallizes  the  renal  stones  and  gravel 
which  cause  such  suffering  to  those  who  have  these 
concretions.  By  retention  of  the  urea  he  causes  the 
painful  rheumatism  and  gout  which  often  manifest 
in  deformity  of  the  joints  that  so  often  disfigure 
and  disable  the  sufferers  therefrom.  He  rules  the 
pneumogastric  nerve,  and  by  his  restrictive  action 
through  that  medium  he  may  at  any  moment  slow 
down  the  heart  action,  stop  digestion,  suppress  the 
urine  and  stool  under  the  emotions  of  fear  and  worry 
generated  by  him.  Thus  he  has  the  power  to  bring 
every  bodily  function  to  a  standstill. 

Saturn  also  rules  the  teeth  and  the  skin.  By  his 
action  the  teeth  decay  and  cause  malnutrition, 
the  synovial  membranes  are  hardened,  making  the 
spine  and  limbs  rigid ;  he  makes  the  skin  tough  as  the 
years  go  by.  Saturn  is  at  home  in  Capricorn,  and 
by  his  reflex  action  in  Cancer  he  interferes  with  the 


554  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

peristaltic  action  which  is  necessary  to  supply  the 
body  with  food ;  he  then  causes  antiperistalsis,  or 
vomiting.  His  general  activities  in  the  body  are  de- 
structive and  tend  to  end,  £he  life, of  the,  organism. 

Saturn  generally  hurts  by  falls,  bruises,  and 
colds.  He  predisposes  to  chronic  and  deep-seated  ail- 
ments, and  his  victims  are  difficult  to  reach  because 
he  imbues  them  with  fear,  worry,  and  pessimism,  so 
that  they  refuse  to  believe  in  the  possibility  of  a  cure 
and  cannot  be  induced  to  take  a  cheerful  look  on  life. 

The  presence  of  Saturn  in  any  part  of  the  horo- 
scope constitutes  an  affliction  in  itself,  therefore  we 
may  note  the  following  effects  in  the  twelve  signs, 
whether  he  is  aspected  by  squares,  oppositions,  trines 
or  sextiles,  but  naturally  his  effects  are  somewhat 
more  inimical  when  in  evil  aspect. 

» 

T?  T  Saturn  in  Aries  gives  a  tendency  to  headache, 
colds,  catarrh,  deafness,  and  chills,  cerebral 
anaemia,  dental  decay,  tartar,  faintings,  and,  by 
reflex  action  in  Libra,  renal  disorders. 

T?  b  Saturn  in  Taurus  gives  a  tendency  to  phlegm, 
diphtheria,  quinsy,  mumps,  croup,  decay  of  the 
lower  teeth,  choking,  and  by  reflex  action  in  Scor- 
pio, stricture,  constipation  and  similar  disorders. 

T?  n  Saturn  in  Gemini  gives  a  tendency  to  rheum- 
atic pains  in  shoulders  and  arms,  bronchitis,  pul- 
monary consumption,  asthma,  and,  by  reflex  ac- 
tion in  Sagittarius,  sciatica  and  hip  diseases. 


PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  SATURN         555 

i?  z  Saturn  in  Cancer  gives  a  tendency  to  pyorrhoea, 
dyspepsia,  gastric  ulcer  and  cancer,  nausea  and 
belching,  scurvy >  jaundice,  gallstones,  anaemia, 
and  stricture  of  the  oesophagus. 

T?  SI  Saturn  in  Leo  gives  a  tendency  to  curvature  of 
the  spine,  muscular  inefficiency  of  the  heart, 
weak  back,  arterio-sclerosis,  and  sclerosis  of  the 
spinal  cord. 

T?  TT#  Saturn  in  Virgo  gives  a  tendency  to  weakened 
peristalsis  of  the  intestines,  abated  absorption  of 
chyle,  obstruction  of  the  ileum  caecum  and  trans- 
verse colon,  appendicitis. 

T?  =£=  Saturn  in  Libra  gives  a  tendency  to  locomotor 
ataxia,  renal  stones,  gravel  and  sand,  Bright 's 
disease,  suppression  of  urine,  malnutrition,  and, 
by  reflex  action  in  Aries,  headache,  toothache, 
and  other  disorders  of  the  head. 

T?  TTL  Saturn  in  Scorpio  gives  a  tendency  to  sterility, 
suppression  of  the  menses,  stricture,  constipa- 
tion, haemorrhoids  and,  by  reflex  action  in  Tau- 
rus, nasal  catarrh,  hoarseness,  phlegm,  and  other 
throat  affections. 

T?  t  Saturn  in  Sagittarius  gives  a  tendency  to  con- 
tusions of  the  hips  and  thighs,  sciatica,  gout,  and 
hip  disease;  by  reflex  action  in  Gemini,  bron- 
chitis, tuberculosis,  and  other  Gemini  affections. 


556  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

!?  VS  Saturn  in  Capricorn  gives  a  tendency  to  articu- 
lar rheumatism,  eczema,  erysipelas,  and  other 
diseases  of  the  skin;  by  reflex  action  in  Cancer, 
jaundice,  gallstones,  and  dyspepsia. 

>  £?  Saturn  in  Aquarius  gives  a  tendency  to  weak 
ankles,  easily  sprained,  and,  by  reflex  action  in 
Leo,  curvature  of  the  spine,  sclerosis  and  other 
affections  of  the  heart,  back  and  arteries. 

T?  X.  Saturn  in  Pisces  gives  a  tendency  to  cold  feet, 
rheumatism  and  bunions,  also  tuberculosis  due 
to  cold  and  wet  feet,  and,  by  reflex  action  in 
Virgo,  dropsy. 

PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  JUPITER 

The  liver  is  the  great  center  of  the  Jupiterian 
activity ;  there  he  forms  glycogen  from  the  waste 
products  of  the  portal  blood-stream.  The  great  cen- 
tral vortex  of  the  desire  body  is  also  in  the  liver,  and 
when  an  extra  effort  is  to  be  made,  Mars  draws  upon 
the  glycogen  storehouse  of  Jupiter  for  fuel.  Saturn 
too  is  active  in  the  liver,  forming  the  gall,  urea,  and 
uric  acid. 

It  is  somewhat  difficult  for  the  average  student 
to  segregate  and  combine  the  varied  functions  of  this 
organ,  but  if  we  bear  in  mind  that  Cancer  is  the  ex- 
altation sign  of  Jupiter  and  the  opposite  sign  Cap- 
ricorn is  the  home  of  Saturn  and  the  exaltation  sign 
of  Mars,  we  shall  more  readily  understand  that  the 


PATHOGENIC   EFFECTS   OF  JUPITER        557 

great  benefic,  Jupiter,  endeavors  to  store  in  the  liver 
the  glycogen  so  necessary  to  the  bodily  activity.  This, 
Mars,  the  opposing  exaltation  ruler,  recklessly  scat- 
ters by  expenditure  of  muscular  energy,  and  he  is 
aided  and  abetted  in  his  destructive  activities  by  Sat- 
urn, who  produces  gall  and  urea  which  he  deposits 
during  the  muscular  work  as  uric  acid  in  the  various 
parts  of  the  body  where  it  manifests  as  gout  and 
rheumatism.  Saturn  also  makes  the  liver  torpid  and 
causes  constipation. 

Jupiter  rules  the  adrenals  and  arterial  circula- 
tion, hence  his  afflictions  cause  formation  of  adipose 
tissue,  fatty  degeneration  of  muscles,  tumors,  and 
morbid  growths,  enlargement  of  organs,  waste  of 
sugar  and  albumen  as  in  diabetes  and  kindred  dis- 
eases. Blood-poisoning,  hyperaemia  and  apoplexy  are 
due  to  afflictions  of  Jupiter. 

The  following  effects  may  be  noted  when  Jupiter 
is  afflicted  in  the  twelve  signs: 

U  T  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Aries  gives  a  tendency  to 
dizziness,  cerebral  congestion,  sleepiness,  throm- 
bus, fainting,  ulcerated  gums  of  upper  jaw,  and, 
by  reflex  action  in  Libra,  diabetes  and  depres- 
sion due  to  lack  of  adrenal  secretion. 

11  b  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Taurus  gives  a  tendency  to 
gourmandize,  hence  plethora  and  apoplexy,  ring- 
worm and  carbuncles  follow ;  also  ulcerated  gums 
of  mandible ;  by  reflex  action  in  Scorpio,  catarrh 
of  the  nose  and  nose-bleed. 


558  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

If  n  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Gemini  gives  a  tendency  to 
pleurisy,  blood  affections,  congestion  of  the 
lungs,  pulmonary  apoplexy;  by  reflex  action  in 
Sagittarius,  broken  bones,  gout  and  rheumatism 
in  hips  and  thighs. 

H  £o  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Cancer  gives  a  tendency  to 
gourmandize,  causing  dilation  of  the  stomach, 
dyspepsia,  liver  complaints,  jaundice,  and 
drop.sy ;  by  reflex  action  in  Capricorn,  which 
rules  the  skin,  pimples  and  similar  eruptions. 

if  Si  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Leo  gives  a  tendency  to  apo- 
plexy and  fatty  degeneration  of  the  heart,  the 
valve  action  is  weakened,  the  circulation  sluggish 
at  times  and  at  other  times  there  is  palpitation 
and  feverish  conditions;  by  reflex  action  in 
Aquarius,  swollen  ankles. 

UTf%  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Virgo  gives  a  tendency  to 
enlarged  liver,  often  ulcerated,  jaundice. 

if  ===  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Libra  gives  a  tendency  to 
melancholy  due  to  diminished  adrenal  secretion, 
renal  abcess,  diabetes,  skin  eruptions  due  to  slug- 
gish action  of  kidneys;  by  reflex  action  in  Aries* 
congestion  of  brain,  coma  and  vertigo. 

i£fl\  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Scorpio  gives  a  tendency  to 
enlarged  prostate  gland,  uterine  tumors,  urethral 
abcess,  dropsy,  hydrgemia,  excess  of  urates  and 
strangury;  by  reflex  action  in  Taurus,  apoplexy 
and  nose-bleed. 


PATHOGENIC   EFFECTS   OF  JUPITER        559 

U  J:  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Sagittarius  gives  a  tend- 
ency to  rheumatism  and  gout ;  by  reflex  action  in 
Gemini,  pulmonary  apoplexy  and  corrupt  blood 

UV3  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Capricorn  gives  a  tendency 
to  various  skin  diseases,  and,  by  reflex  action  in 
Cancer  >  digestive  ailments,  dropsy,  jaundice,  and 
fatty  degeneration  of  the  liver. 

U£?  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Aquarius  gives  a  tendency 
to  milk-leg,  swollen  ankles,  and,  by  reflex  action 
in  Leo,  apoplexy  and  palpitation. 

U  X.  Jupiter  afflicted  in  Pisces  gives  a  tendency  to 
swollen,  perspiring  feet,  and,  by  reflex  action  in 
Virgo,  enlarged  liver,  abdominal  tumors,  jaun- 
dice, and  diseased  intestines. 

PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  MARS 

The  ancient  Egyptian  sages  called  Cancer  the 
sphere  of  the  soul,  and  when  the  mystic  Sun  of  life 
goes  through  this  moist,  fruitful  lunar  sign  the  seed- 
atom  of  the  ego.'s  physical  body  is  planted.  While 
the  embryonic  body  grows  unconsciously  as  a  plant 
grows,  the  mystic  Sun  of  life  passes  through  Leo, 
Virgo,  and  Libra.  In  the  fourth  month  of  gestation 
it  passes  through  the  second  of  the  watery  signs, 
Scorpio.  Then  the  spirit  dies  to  its  heavenly  home 
and  is  immured  in  its  earthly  prisonhouse  by  Mars, 
who  chains  it  with  the  silver  cord  and  thus  brings 


560  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

about  the  quickening.  Then  the  Sun  of  life  proceeds 
through  Sagittarius,  Capricorn,  Aquarius,  and  when 
after  the  nine  months  have  been  completed  it  has 
passed  through  the  last  of  the  watery  signs,  Pisces, 
the  floodgates  of  the  womb  are  opened  and  the  ego 
launched  upon  the  sea  of  life  under  the  auspices  of 
the  martial  sign  Aries,  where  the  giver  of  life,  the 
Sun,  is  exalted. 

During  the  gestatory  period  Mars  has  given  to 
the  body  iron,  especially  in  the  form  of  haemoglobin, 
and  with  the  first  breath  oxidation  of  this  substance 
commences  to  produce  the  heat  so  necessary  to  life 
and  consciousness.  This  operation  is  continued  all 
through  life,  and  thus  to  the  Martian  ray  falls  the 
important  task  of  supplementing  the  Sun  in  the 
maintenance  of  the  vital  spark  until  the  mystic  Sun 
of  life  has  completed  its  circle  and  reached  the  sign 
where  the  quickening  took  place.  Then  Scorpio  gives 
the  body  its  death-sting,  Mars  and  his  friend  Saturn 
cut  the  silver  cord,  and  the  freed  soul  soars  as  an 
eagle  into  the  empyrean  seeking  the  celestial  spheres 
which  are  its  true  home.  Therefore  Scorpio  is  sym- 
bolized both  by  a  scorpion  and  an  eagle. 

On  account  of  his  mission  as  aide  to  the  Sun  in 
the  maintenance  of  life,  Mars  ever  aims  to  cleanse 
the  body  of  filth  and  waste  accumulation  so  that  the 
fire's  of  life  may  burn  brightly,  hence,  when  the  gour- 
mandizing  habits  of  Jupiter  and  Venus  have  clogged 
the  system,  or  the  obstructive  tendencies  of  Saturn 
have  poisoned  the  body  by  stoppage  of  elimination, 


PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF   MARS  561 

Mars  lights  the  fire  of  fever  and  inflammation  to 
burn  out  the  refuse  and  give  the  system  a  new  lease 
of  life  and  energy.  Thus  many  of  the  pathogenic 
effects  of  Mars  aim  at  a  constructive  end. 

But  Mars  not  only  aids  the  vital  process  of  the 
life-giving  Sun,  who  is  exaltation  ruler  of  Aries;  he 
is  himself  exaltation  ruler  of  Capricorn,  where  Sat- 
urn, the  planet  of  death,  holds  sway,  and  between 
those  two  thieves  the  Sun,  the  Lord  of  Life,  is  cru- 
cified, suffers  and  dies,  while  they  part  his  physical 
garment.  The  role  of  Saturn  in  this  process  has  been 
described  in  the  appropriate  chapter,  and  of  Mars 
it  may  be  said  that  by  his  recklessness  he  predisposes 
to  accidents  by  burning,  scalding,  wounds,  or  gun- 
shot. He  rules  the  genitals  through  Scorpio,  and  de- 
pletes the  vitality  and  causes  genital  disorders  by 
passional  excesses,  haemorrhage,  rupture  of  blood  ves- 
sels. Excessive  menses  and  haemorrhoids  show  his 
activities  in  the  blood ;  hernia  and  contagious  diseases 
are  also  manifestations  of  the  martian  ray.  As  Mars 
is  a  malefic,  his  presence  in  any  sign  or  house  con- 
stitutes an  affliction  in  itself,  regardless  of  his  aspects, 
but  naturally  his  pathogenic  effects  are  worse  when 
he  is  aspected  by  square  or  opposition  than  when  he 
is  fortified  by  sextile  or  trine. 

His  effects  in  the  twelve  signs  may  be  more  spe- 
cifically stated  as  follows: 

$  T   Mars  in  Aries  gives  a  tendency  to  sunstroke, 
cerebral   haemorrhages   or  congestion,   inflamma- 

36 


562  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

tion  of  the  brain,  brain  fever  and  delirium,  shoot- 
ing pains  in  the  head,  insomnia,  and  wounds  in 
the  head ;  by  reflex  action  in  Libra,  inflammation 
of  the  kidneys,  renal  haemorrhage  and  renal  cal- 
culi. 

$  8  Mars  in  Taurus  gives  a  tendency  to  mumps,  en- 
larged or  inflamed  tonsils,  suffocation,  adenoids, 
diphtheria,  polypus  and  nose-bleed,  goitre,  in- 
flammation of  the  larynx;  by  reflex  action  in 
Scorpio,  excessive  menstrual  flow,  scalding  urine, 
venereal  ulcers,  enlargement  of  the  prostate 
gland  and  strangury. 

$  n  Mars  in  Gemini  gives  a  tendency  to  haemorrhage 
of  the  lungs,  pneumonia,  bronchitis,  cough, 
wounds  or  fractures  of  hands,  arms,  and  collar- 
bone; by  reflex  action  in  Sagittarius,  fractured 
femur,  and  sciatica. 

$  £E  Mars  in  Cancer  gives  a  tendency  to  milk-fever, 
inflammation,  ulceratlon  and  haemorrhage  of  the 
stomach,  dyspepsia. 

$  Si  Mars  in  Leo  gives  a  tendency  to  muscular 
rheumatism  in  the  back,  overheating  of  the  blood, 
enlargement  of  the  heart  and  palpitation,  pain 
in  the  heart,  suffocation  and  fainting  (angina 
pectoris),  inflammation  of  the  pericardium. 

$  irg  Mars  in  Virgo  gives  a  tendency  to  typhoid,  in- 
flammation of  the  bowels,  peritonitis,  worms, 


PATHOGENIC   EFFECTS  OF  MARS  565- 

diarrhoea,  cholera,  and  ventral    hernia,    appen- 
dicitis. 

$  =0=  Mars  in  Libra  gives  a  tendency  to  inflammation 
of  the  kidneys,  excess  of  urine,  hasmorrhage  of 
the  kidneys  and  renal  stones;  by  reflex  action  in 
Aries,  brain-fever,  sunstroke,  pains  in  the  head. 

$  n\.  Mars  in  Scorpio  gives  a  tendency  to  excessive 
menses,  scalding  urine,  gravel,  pand,  and  renal 
stones,  inflammation  and  ulceration  of  the 
ovaries  and  uterus,  also  of  the  vagina  and  ure- 
thra, varicocele,  enlargement  of  the  prostate 
gland,  stricture  and  strangury,  venereal  ulcers 
and  haemorrhoids ;  by  reflex  action  in  Taurus, 
inflamed  tonsils  or  larynx  and  nose-bleed. 

$  t  Mars  in  Sagittarius  gives  a  tendency  to  fracture 
or  dislocation  of  the  femur,  sciatica,  and  ulcers 
of  the  thighs;  by  reflex  action  in  Gemini,  pneu- 
monia, bronchitis  and  cough. 

$  V3  Mars  in  Capricorn  gives  a  tendency  to  carbun- 
cles, erysipelas,  smallpox,  chickenpox,  measles, 
pimples,  itch  and  other  eruptive  or  inflammatory 
skin  diseases;  by  reflex  action  in  Cancer,  dys- 
pepsia and  ulcerated  stomach. 

$  £?  Mars  in  Aquarius  gives  a  tendency  to  varicose 
veins,  fracture  of  the  leg  and  blood-poisoning; 
by  reflex  action  in  Leo,  heartstroke,  overheated 
blood,  fainting  and  palpitation. 


564  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STABS 

£  X  Mars  in  Pisces  gives  a  tendency  to  deformities 
of  the  feet,  or  accidents  to  them,  corns,  bunions 
and  perspiring  feet;  by  reflex  action  in  Virgo, 
ventral  hernia,  inflammation  of  the  bowels  and 
diarrhoea. 

PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  URANUS 

Uranus  rules  the  ether  which  is  the  medium  by 
\vhieh  the  light  rays  are  transmitted,  hence  he  has 
considerable  influence  over  the  eyes  and  is  responsi- 
ble, when  afflicting  the  Sun  or  Moon,  for  various 
diseases  of  the  eyes,  or  even  blindness.  This  is  es- 
pecially the  case  when  the  Sun  or  Moon  is  placed  in 
the  Pleiades  (Taurus  29°),  or  the  Ascelli  (Leo  6°) 
or  Antares  (Sagittarius  8°). 

Modern  astrologers  have  not  yet  had  time  to  tab- 
ulate the  full  effects  of  Uranus  in  all  the  signs, 
and  as  for  the  pathogenic  effects  still  less  is  known, 
Lut  he  is  said  to  be  exalted  in  Scorpio  and  our  own 
experience  seems  to  indicate  that  Uranus  has  a  very 
marked  evil  influence  on  the  sex  which  is  ruled  by 
this  sign,  producing  most  deep-seated  venereal  dis- 
eases. By  reflex  action  or  affliction  to  planets  in 
Taurus  (ruled  by  Venus)  where  the  organ  of  co- 
ordinated action  is  located,  he  produces  erratic  move- 
ments, as  seen  in  St.  Vitus  dance,  contortions,  spasms, 
tetanus,  cramps,  hiccough  and  hysteria. 

As  ruler  of  the  ether  and  gases  he  is  responsible 
for  injury  and  shock  by  electricity  which  travels 


PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  URANUS         565 

through  the  ether.  Nitrogen,  a  gas,  is  the  base  of 
a  number  of  compounds  whose  characteristic  Uranian. 
instability  makes  them  highly  explosive,  and  Uranus 
is  thus  responsible  for  such  deaths  and  injuries  as 
occur  on  that  account,  especially  if  placed  in  the 
Eighth  House. 

J#  8  Uranus  in  Taurus  gives  a  tendency  to  dimin- 
ished pituitary  secretion  and  consequent  abnor- 
mal growth. 

*&  n  Uranus  in  Gemini  gives  a  tendency  to  spas- 
modic asthma,  colds,  and  a  dry,  hard  cough. 

J#  5>  Uranus  in  Cancer  gives  a  tendency  to  hiccough, 
produced  by  the  erratic  action  of  the  diaphragm, 
also  a  hard,  dry  stomach  cough  and  cramp  of 
the  stomach,  gas  and  flatulence. 

V  SI  Uranus  in  Leo  gives  a  tendency  to  palpitation, 
spasmodic  heart  action,  spinal  meningitis  and 
infantile  paralysis ;  by  reflex  action  from  Aqua- 
rius similar  effects  are  now  observable. 

Uranus  in  Virgo  gives  a  tendency  to  flatulence, 
and  abdominal  cramps. 

Uranus  in  Libra  gives  a  tendency  to  intermit- 
tent action  of  the  kidneys  and  venereal  eruptions, 
of  the  skin ;  by  reflex  action  in  Aries,  sudden  and 
violent  headaches,  shooting  pains  in  the  head,  and 
hallucinations. 


566  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

J#  n\  Uranus  •  in  Scorpio  gives  a  tendency  to  miscar- 
riages, abortions,  and  venereal  diseases,  and  in 
the  Fifth  House  he  causes  painful  and  difficult 
parturition,  generally  involving  the  use  of  in- 
struments and  often  the  infant  is  severely  or 
fatally  injured  or  stillborn. 

^  V3  Uranus  in  Capricorn  usually  works  by  reflex 
action  in  Cancer,  but  as  the  children  with  this 
configuration  are  still  young  (this  is  written  in 
1918)  the  full  effects  are  as  yet  unknown. 

PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  NEPTUNE 

Neptune,  the  octave  of  Mercury,  works  princi- 
pally upon  the  nervous  system  (ruled  by  Mercury) 
and  at  times  produces  frenzy  where  the  person  is 
beside  himself  on  account  of  religious  or  other  ex- 
citement. At  other  times  he  produces  lethargy,  coma, 
•catalepsy,  trance  or  mediumship,  where  the  bodily 
energies  are  in  abeyance  while  the  psychic  powers 
.are  in  a  state  of  hyperactivity.  He  rules  the  spinal 
canal,  which  is  filled  with  ether  during  life.  (It  is 
true  that  surgeons  tap  it  and  draw  out  a  fluid,  but 
they  may  also  draw  water  from  a  steam  boiler  be- 
cause the  steam  condenses  to  water).  This  luminous 
gas  is  called  tlie  spinal  spirit  fire  by  occultists,  and 
t>y  vibrating  the  pineal  gland,  also  ruled  by  Neptune, 
spiritual  sight  is  produced,  but  it  depends  upon  the 
rate  and  pitch  of  these  vibrations  what  the  person 
sees.  By  prayer,  concentration  and  meditation,  a 


PATHOGENIC  EFFECTS  OF  NEPTUNE       567 

state  of  religious  ecstacy  may  be  produced  where  he 
sees  the  celestial  hosts,  or  if  a  lower  rate  of  super- 
normal vibration  is  produced  by  drink  or  drugs  he 
sees  demoniac  shapes  as  related  by  sufferers  of  de- 
lirium, which  is  due  to  Neptune,  especially  in  the 
watery  sign  Pisces.  The  pathogenic  influence  of  Nep- 
tune is  most  evil  in  the  Sixth  House  (or  the  sixth 
sign,  Virgo)  indicating  disease,  or  in  the  Twelfth 
House  (or  the  twelfth  sign,  Pisces)  which  governs 
sorrow,  trouble  and  self-undoing.  If  these  two 
houses  are  occupied  by  Taurus  and  Scorpio,  the  signs 
ruling  the  throat  and  genitals,  there  is  an  abnormal 
and  perverted  passional  desire  which  gives  a  tend- 
ency to  self-abuse  and  perversion  of  a  still  worse 
nature.  The  mind,  ruled  by  Mercury,  the  lower  oc- 
tave of  Neptune,  is  morbid  in  its  brooding  upon  un- 
savory subjects,  and  parents  with  children  having 
Neptune  in  the  Sixth  or  Twelfth  Houses  will  do 
well  to  watch  them  carefully,  especially  if  Neptune 
is  in  opposition  to  Uranus  and  Saturn  in  orb:  that 
covers  a  number  of  those  who  are  now,  in  1918, 
reaching  puberty,  for  Neptune  has  been  going 
through  the  psychic  sign  Cancer  while  Uranus  was 
in  the  opposite  sign  Capricorn. 

We  have  found  that  Neptune  square  Saturn  and 
Jupiter  brought  incurable  insanity;  Neptune  con- 
junction Mars  in  Aries,  square  Uranus  and  the  Moon 
in  Cancer  caused  temporary  insanity  of  a  periodic 
nature;  Neptune  conjunction  Moon  square  Uranus 
caused  spirit  control.  We  have  also  seen  many  other 


568  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

indications,  but  the  full  effects  of  Neptune  have  not 
yet  been  systematically  observed.  We  are  working 
to  that  end,  however,  and  hope  in  future  years  to 
be  able  to  present  a  fairly  full  tabulation. 

THF  DUCTLESS  GLANDS 
Their  Role  and  Riders 

It  is  well  known  to  the  esoteric  astrologer  that 
the  human  body  has  an  immense  period  of  evolu- 
tion behind  it  and  that  this  splendid  organism  is  the 
result  of  a  slow  process  of  gradual  upbuilding  which 
is  still  continuing  and  will  make  each  generation  bet- 
ter than  the  previous  until  in  some  far  distant  future 
it  shall  have  reached  a  stage  of  completion  of  which 
we  cannot  even  dream.  It  is  also  understood  by  the 
deeper  students  that  in  addition  to  the  physical  body 
man  has  finer  vehicles  which  are  not  yet  seen  by  the 
great  majority  of  human  beings,  though  all  have 
within  them  latent  a  sixth  sense  whereby  they  will 
in  time  cognize  these  finer  sheaths  of  the  soul.  The 
occultist  speaks  of  these  finer  vehicles  as  the  vital 
body,  made  of  ether,  and  the  desire  body,  made  of 
desire  stuff,  the  material  whence  we  draw  our  feel- 
ings and  emotions,  and  with  the  addition  of  the 
sheath  of  mind  and  the  physical  body  these  complete 
what  may  be  termed  the  personality  which  is  the 
evanescent  part  distinct  from  the  immortal  spirt  that 
uses  these  vehicles  for  its  expression.  These  finer 
vehicles  interpenetrate  the  dense  physical  body  as  air 


THE  DUCTLESS  GLANDS  569 

permeates  water  and  have  particular  dominion  over 
certain  parts  thereof,  because  the  physical  body  itself 
is  a  crystallization  of  these  finer  vehicles  in  the  same 
manner  and  upon  the  same  principle  that  the  soft 
fluids  of  a  snail's  body  gradually  crystallize  into  the 
hard  and  flinty  shell  which  it  carries  upon  iljs  back. 
For  the  purpose  of  this  dissertation  we  may  say 
broadly  that  the  softer  parts  of  our  bodies  which  we 
commonly  call  flesh  may  be  divided  into  two  kinds, 
glands  and  muscles.  The  vital  body  was  statted  in 
the  Sun  Period.  Crystallization  from  this  time  on  in 
that  vehicle  has  developed  what  we  now  call  glands 
and  to  this  day  they  and  the  blood  are  the  special 
manifestations  of  the  vital  body  within  the  physical 
vehicle,  and  therefore  the  glands  as  a  whole  may  be 
said  to  be  under  the  rule  of  the  life-giving  Sun  and 
the  great  benefic,  Jupiter.  For  it  is  the  function  of 
the  vital  body  to  build  and  restore  the  tone  of  the 
muscles  when  tense  and  tired  by  the  work  imposed 
upon  them  by  the  restless  desire  body  which  was 
started  in  the  Moon  Period,  and  the  muscles  are  there- 
fore ruled  by  the  wandering  Moon,  which  is  the  pres- 
ent vantage  point  of  the  angels,  the  humanity  of  the 
Moon  Period,  and  the  impulsive  and  turbulent  Mars, 
where  the  so-called  'Fallen  Angels,'  the  Lucifer  spir- 
its, dwell.  That  is  to  say  as  a  whole,  for  the  student 
must  carefully  note  that  individual  glands  and  par- 
ticular groups  of  muscles  are  under  the  rulership  of 
other  planets  as  well.  It  is  as  rwhen  we  say  that  all 
who  live  within  the  United  States  of  America  are 


570  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

citizens  of  that  country,  but  some  are  subject  to  the 
laws  of  California,  others  to  those  of  Maine. 

We  know  the  Hermetic  axiom,  "As  above,  so 
below,"  which  gives  the  master  key  to  all  mysteries, 
and  as  there  are  upon  the  earth,  the  maerocosm,  a 
great  many  undiscovered  places,  so  also  in  the  micro- 
cosm of  the  body  do  we  find  unknown  countries  that 
are  a  closed  book  to  the  scientific  explorers.  Chief 
among  them  has  been  a  small  group  of  the  so-called 
"ductless  glands/  seven  in  number,  namely: 

The  Pituitary  Body,  ruled  by  Uranus. 
Q     The  Pineal  Gland,  ruled  by  Neptune. 
The  Thyroid  Gland,  ruled  by  Mercury. 
The  Thymus  Gland,  ruled  by  Venus. 
The  Spleen,  ruled  by  the  Sun. 
The  two  Adrenals,  ruled  by  Jupiter. 

They  have  a  great  and  particular  interest  for 
occultists,  and  they  may  be  termed  in  a  certain  sense 
'the  seven  roses'  upon  the  Cross  of  the  body,  for 
they  are  intimately  connected  with  the  occult  devel- 
opment of  humanity.  Four  of  them,  the  Thymus 
Gland,  the  Spleen  and  the  two  Adrenals,  are  con- 
nected with  the  personality.  The  Pituitary  Body  and 
the  Pineal  Gland  are  particularly  correlated  with  the 
spiritual  side  of  our  nature  and  the  Thyroid  Gland 
forms  the  link  between.  The  astrological  rule  over 
these  seven  glands  is  as  follows: 

The  Spleen  is  the  entrance  gate  of  the  solar 
forces  specialized  by  each  human  being  and  circu- 


THE   DUCTLESS  GLANDS  571 

lated  through  the  body  as  the  vital  fluid,  without 
which  no  being  can  live.  This  organ  is  therefore  gov- 
erned by  the  Sun.  The  two  Adrenals  are  under  the 
rulership  of  Jupiter,  the  great  benefic,  and  exert  a 
calming,  quieting  and  soothing  effect  when  the  emo- 
tional activities  of  the  Moon  and  Mars  or  Saturn  has 
destroyed  the  poise.  When  the  obstructive  hand  of 
Saturn  has  awakened  the  melancholy  emotions  and 
laid  its  restraint  upon  the  heart,  the  Adrenals'  secre- 
tions are  carried  by  the  blood  to  the  heart  and  acts 
as  a  powerful  stimulant  in  its  effort  to  keep  up  the 
circulation,  while  the  Jovial  optimism  struggles 
against  the  Saturnine  worries  or  against  the  impulse 
of  Mars,  which  stir  the  desire  body  into  turbulent 
emotions  of  anger,  rendering  the  muscles  tense  and 
trembling  with  rage,  dissipating  the  energy  of  the 
system ;  then  the  secretion  of  the  Adrenals  comes  to 
the  rescue,  releasing  the  glycogen  of  the  liver  in  a 
more  abundant  measure  than  usual  to  cope  with  the 
emergency  until  the  equipoise  has  been  again  at- 
tained, and  similarly  during  whatever  other  stress 
or  strain.  It  was  the  knowledge  of  this  occult  fact 
that  prompted  the  ancient  astrologers  to  place  the 
kidneys  under  the  rulership  of  Libra,  the  Balance, 
and  in  order  to  avoid  confusion  of  ideas  we  may  say 
the  kidneys  themselves  play  an  important  part  in  the 
nutrition  of  the  body,  which  is  under  the  rulership 
of  Venus,  the  Lady  of  Libra,  but  Jupiter  governs  the 
Adrenals,  with  which  we  are  now  particularly  en- 
gaged. 


572  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Both  Venus  and  her  higher  octave,  Uranus,  gov- 
ern the  functions  of  nutrition  and  growth,  but  in  dif- 
ferent ways  and  for  different  purposes.  Therefore 
Venus  rules  the  Thymus  Gland,  which  is  the  link 
between  the  parents  and  the  child  until  the  latter  has 
reached  puberty.  This  gland  is  located  immediately 
behind  the  sternum  or  breast  bone ;  it  is  largest  in 
ante-natal  life  and  through  childhood  while  growth 
is  excessive  and  rapid.  During  that  time  the  vital 
body  of  the  child  does  its  most  effective  work,  for  the 
child  is  not  then  subject  to  the  passions  and  emotions 
generated  by  the  desire  body  after  that  comes  to  birth 
at  or  about  the  fourteenth  year.  But  during  the  years 
of  growth  the  child  cannot  manufacture  the  red  blood 
corpuscles  as  does  the  adult,  for  the  unborn,  unor- 
ganized desire  body  does  not  then  act  as  an  avenue 
for  the  martian  forces  which  assimilate  the  iron  from 
the  food  and  transmute  it  into  haemoglobin.  To  com- 
pensate for  this  lack  there  is  stored  in  the  Thymus 
Gland  a  spiritual  esence  drawn  from  the  parents, 
who  are  symbolized  by  Venus,  the  ruler,  and  with 
this  essence  provided  by  the  love  of  the  parents  the 
child  is  able  to  accomplish  the  alchemistry  of  blood 
temporarily  until  its  desire  body  becomes  dynamic- 
ally active.  Then  the  Thymus  Gland  atrophies  and 
it  draws  from  its  own  desire  body  the  necessary  mar- 
tian force.  From  that  time,  under  normal  conditions, 
Uranus,  the  octave  of  Venus,  and  ruler  of  the  Pitui- 
tary Body,  takes  charge  of  the  function  of  growth 
and  assimilation  in  the  following  manner : 


THE  DUCTLESS   GLANDS  573 

It  i,s  well  known  that  all  things,  our  food  included, 
radiate  from  themselves  continuously  small  particles 
which  give  an  index  of  the  thing  whence  they  eman- 
ate, its  quality  included.  Thus  when  we  lift  the  food 
to  our  mouth  a  number  of  these  invisible  particles 
enter  the  nose  and  by  excitation  of  the  olfactory  tract 
convey  to  us  a  knowledge  of  whether  the  food  we  are 
about  to  take  is  suitable  for  this  purpose  or  not,  the 
sense  of  smell  warning  us  to  discard  such  foods  as 
have  a  noxious  odor,  etc.  But  besides  those  particles 
which  attract  or  repel  us  from  food  by  their  action 
up*on  the  alfactory  tract  through  the  sense  of  smell, 
there  are  others  which  penetrate  the  sphenoid  bone, 
impinge  upon  the  Pituitary  Body  and  start  the  Ura- 
nian  alchemistry  by  which  a  secretion  is  formed  and 
injected  into  the  blood.  It  also  furthers  assimilation 
through  the  chemical  ether,  thus  affecting  the  normal 
growth  and  well-being  of  the  body  through  life.  Some- 
times this  Uranian  influence  of  the  Pituitary  Body 
is  eccentric  and  therefore  responsible  for  strange  and 
abnormal  growths  which  produce  the  unfortunate 
freaks  of  nature  we  occasionally  meet. 

But  besides  being  responsible  for  the  spiritual 
impulses  which  generate  the  before-mentioned  phy- 
sical manifestations  of  growth,  Uranus,  working 
through  the  Pituitary  Body,  is  also  responsible  for 
the  spiritual  phases  of  growth  which  aid  awakened 
man  in  his  efforts  to  penetrate  the  veil  into  the 
Invisible  Worlds.  In  this  work  it  is,  however,  asso- 
ciated with  Neptune,  the  ruler  of  the  Pineal  Gland. 


574  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

and  it  will  therefore  be  necessary,  in  order  to  properly 
elucidate,  that  we  study  the  functions  of  the  Thyroid 
Gland,  ruled  by  Mercury,  and  of  the  Pineal  Gland 
which  is  under  the  domination  of  his  higher  octave, 
Neptune,  simultaneously. 

That  the  Thyroid  Gland  is  under  the  rule  of  Mer- 
cury, the  planet  of  reason,  is  readily  realized  when 
we  understand  the  effect  which  the  degeneration  of 
this  gland  has  upon  the  mind,  as  shown  in  the  dis- 
eases of  Cretinism  and  Myxedema.  The  secretions 
of  this  gland  are  as  necessary  to  the  proper  function 
of  mental  activity  as  ether  is  to  the  transmission  of 
electricity,  that  is  to  say,  upon  the  physical  plane  of 
existence  where  the  brain  transmutes  thought  into 
action.  Contact  with  and  expression  in  the  invisible 
worlds  depends  upon  the  functional  ability  of  the 
Pineal  Gland,  which  is  altogether  spiritual,  and  is 
therefore  ruled  by  the  octave  of  Mercury,  Neptune, 
the  planet  of  spirituality.  But  Neptune  operates  in 
conjunction  with  the  Pituitary  Body  ruled  by 
Uranus,  the  planet  of  wisdom,  as  has  already  been 
stated. 

Scientists  have  wasted  much  time  in  speculation 
upon  the  nature  and  function  of  these  two  little 
bodies,  the  Pituitary  Body  and  the  Pineal  Gland,  but 
without  avail,  and  principally  because,  as  Mephisto- 
pheles  says  so  sarcasticaly  to  the  young  man  who 
wants  to  study  science  under  Faust : 


THE  DUCTLESS  GLANDS  575 

"Who  e'er  would  know  and  treat  of  aught  alive 
Seeks  first  the  living  spirit  thence  to  drive; 
Then  are  the  lifeless  fragments  in  his  hand; 
He  lacks,  alas!  the  vital  spirit  band." 

No  one  can  really  and  truly  observe  the  physio- 
logical functions  of  any  organ  under  such  conditions 
as  exist  in  the  laboratory  on  the  operating  table,  in 
the  dissestion  or  vivisection  chamber.  To  arrive  at 
an  adequate  understanding  one  must  necessarily  see 
these  organs  exercising  their  physiological  functions 
in  the  living  body,  and  that  can  only  be  done  by  means 
of  the  spiritual  sight.  There  are  a  number  of  organs 
which  are  either  atrophying  or  developing;  the  for- 
mer show  the  path  we  have  already  traveled  during 
our  past  evolution,  the  latter  are  finger-posts,  indi- 
cating our  future  development  .But  there  is  still  an- 
other class  of  organs  which  are  neither  degenerating 
nor  evolving ;  they  are  simply  dormant  at  the  present 
time.  Physiologists  believe  that  the  Pituitary  Body 
and  the  Pineal  Gland  are  atrophying  because  they 
find  these  organs  more  developed  in  some  of  the  low- 
est classes  of  life,  such  as  worms,  but  as  a  matter  of 
fact  they  are  wrong  in  their  ideas;  these  organs  are 
only  dormant.  Some  have  also  suspected  that  the 
Pineal  Gland  is  in  some  way  connected  with  the 
mind,  because  it  contains  certain  crystals  after 
death,  and  the  quantity  was  much  less  in  those 
who  were  mentally  defective  than  in  people  of 
normal  mentality.  This  conclusion  is  right,  but 
the  Seer  knows  that  the  spinal  canal  of  the  living  is 


576  THE  MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

not  filled  with  fluid;  that  the  blood  is  not  liquid,  and 
that  these  organs  have  no  crystals  in  them  when  the 
body  is  alive;  these  assertions  are  made  with  full 
knowledge  of  the  fact  that  the  blood  and  the  spinal 
essence  are  liquid  when  drawn  out  of  the  physical 
body,  living  or  dead,  and  the  contents  of  the  Pitui- 
tary Gland  and  the  Pineal  Gland  appear  crystalline 
when  the  brain  is  dissected,  but  the  reason  is  similar 
to  that  which  causes  steam  drawn  from  a  steam  boiler 
to  condense  immediately  upon  contact  with  the  at- 
mosphere, and  molten  metal  drawn  from  a  smelter's 
furnace  to  crystallize  immediately  upon  withdrawal 
therefrom. 

All  these  substances  are  purely  spiritual  essences 
when  inside  the  body ;  they  are  then  ethereal  and  the 
substance  in  the  Pineal  Gland,  when  seen  by  the  spir- 
itual sight,  appears  as  light.  Furthermore,  when  one 
Seer  looks  upon  the  Pineal  Gland  of  another  who 
is  then  also  exercising  his  spiritual  faculties,  this  light 
is  of  a  most  intense  brilliancy  and  of  an  irridescence 
similar  to  but  transcending  in  beauty  the  most  won- 
derful play  of  the  Northern  Lights,  the  Aurora 
Borealis,  ever  witnessed  by  the  writer,  and  he  has 
seen  .them  many  times.  It  may  also  be  said  that  the 
function  of  this  organ  seems  to  have  changed  in  the 
course  of  human  evolution.  During  the  earlier  epochs 
of  our  present  stay  upon  the  earth,  when  man's  body 
was  a  large,  baggy  thing  into  which  the  spirit  had 
not  yet  entered,  but  was  there  only  as  an  overshadow- 
ing presence,  there  was  an  opening  in  the  top  and 


THE  DUCTLESS  GLANDS  577 

the  Pineal  Gland  was  within  it ;  it  was  then  an  organ 
of  orientation,  giving  a  sense  of  direction.  As  the 
human  body  condensed,  it  became  less  and  less  able 
to  endure  the  intense  heat  which  prevailed  during 
that  time  and  the  Pineal  Gland  gave  warning  when 
the  body  was  brought  too  near  one  of  the  many  cra- 
ters and  active  volcanoes  which  were  then  erupting 
the  thin  earth  crust,  thus  enabling  the  spirit  to  guide 
it  away  from  these  dangerous  places.  It  was  an 
organ  of  direction  which  operated  by  feeling,  but 
feeling  has  since  been  distributed  over  the  whole  skin 
of  the  body  and  this  is  an  indication  to  the  occultist 
that  some  day  the  senses  of  hearing  and  sight  will 
also  be  similarly  distributed  so  that  we  shall  both  see 
and  hear  with  our  whole  body  and  thus  become  still 
more  sensitive  in  those  respects  than  we  are  now. 

Since  then  the  Pineal  Gland  and  the  Pituitary. 
Body  have  become  temporarily  dormant  to  make  man 
oblivious  to  the  invisible  world  while  he  learns  the 
lessons  afforded  by  the  material  world,  but  the  Pitui- 
tary Body  has  manifested  the  Uranian  influence 
sporadically  in  abnormal  physical  growth,  producing 
freaks  and  monstrosities  of  various  kinds,  while  Nep- 
tune, working  also  abnormally  through  the  Pineal 
Gland,  has  been  responsible  for  the  abnormal  spir- 
itual growth  of  medicine  men,  witches  and  mediums 
of  spirit  controls.  When  they  are  awakened  to  nor- 
mal activities  these  two  ductless  glands  will  open  the 
door  to  the  inner  worlds  in  a  sane  and  safe  manner, 
but  in  the  meantime  the  Thyroid  Gland,  ruled  by 


578  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Mercury,  the  planet  of  reason,  holds  the  secretion 
necessary  to  give  the  brain  balance. 

In  the  future  the  ductless  glands  are  destined  to 
play  a  prominent  role,  their  development  will  accel- 
erate evolution  greatly,  for  their  effects  are  mainly 
mental  and  spiritual.  We  are  now  nearing  the  Aqua- 
rian Age,  the  Sun  is  therefore  beginning  to  transmit 
the  highly  intellectual  vibrations  of  this  sign  which 
accounts  for  the  intuitions,  premonitions  and  tele- 
pathic transmission  now  so  prevalent.  In  the  final 
analysis  these  phenomena  are  due  to  the  awakening  of 
the  pituitary  body,  ruled  by  Uranus,  the  lord  of 
Aquarius,  and  every  passing  year  will  make  them 
more  manifest. 


CHAPTER  XXX. 

THIRTY-SIX  EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES 

IN  ORDER  to  further  aid  the  student  of  the  stellar 
science  we  present  a  number  of  horoscopes  of  peo- 
ple who  have  come  to  us  for  help  in  their  trouble.  We 
therefore  know  these  cases  to  be  authentic  and  trust 
that  our  delineation  of  their  various  ailments  by 
means  of  astro-diagnosis  may  prove  a  true  guide. 

We  have  made  an  attempt  at  classification  of 
these  horoscopes,  but  as  there  are  generally  symp- 
toms of  several  diseases  in  each  horoscope  it  has  been 
impossible  to  draw  hard  and  fast  lines  in  the  group- 
ing, and  the  student  will  therefore  have  to  rely 
mainly  on  the  headlines  for  indications  of  what  the 
figure  shows. 

The  first  22  horoscopes  are  found  on  pp.  624-634, 
The  last  14  figures  are  attached  to  their  respect- 
ive readings. 

SEX  AS  A  FACTOR  IN  DISEASE 

It  is  our  earnest  conviction,  that  the  less  we 
dwell  upon  sex,  the  less  we  read  about  it  and  think 
about  it,  the  purer  we  shall  be  mentally,  and  also 
less  liable  to  danger  of  morbid  habits,  for  these 
are  often  formed  by  overstudy  of  the  sex  question, 
579 


580  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

and  persons  having  a  tendency  in  that  direction 
should  be  discouraged  in  attempts  to  discuss  the 
matter  at  all.  In  planning  this  chapter  we  had  at 
one  time  thought  it  possible  to  escape  mention  of 
the  subject,  but  more  mature  thought  based  upon 
much  study  of  health  and  disease  from  the  mystical 
standpoint  has  convinced  us  that  we  must  go  back 
to  the  allegorical  Garden  of  Eden  for  the  starting- 
point  of  pain  and  sorrow,  as  fully  explained  in  our 
literature.  The  effects  of  continued  transgression 
are  with  us  today  as  a  matter  of  actual  fact,  abuse 
of  sex  is  in  the  most  literal  sense  the  primal  source 
of  sorrow,  disease  and  degeneracy  under  which  the 
world  is  groaning,  and  in  a  work  of  this  nature  it  is 
obligatory  to  show  the  causes  so  that  the  remedy 
may  be  found  and  applied.  Therefore  we  shall 
-attempt  to  show  the  prenatal  influences  revealed 
by  the  horoscope  as  a  warning  to  parents  that  mar- 
riage is  a  sacrament,  and  not  a  license  to  sex  abuse, 
and  that  "the  sins  of  the  fathers  are  indeed  visited 
upon  the  children."  At  the  same  time,  of  course,  an 
innocent  child  is  not  born  with  the  tendency  to  a 
certain  disease,  its  former  living  has  made  it  liable 
to  a  specific  weakness,  and  for  that  reason  it  is  drawn 
by  the  Law  of  Association  to  parents  from  whom  it 
may  obtain  a  body  subject  to  that  particular  ailment, 
Thus  parents  are  only  instruments  in  fulfilling  the 
selfmade  destiny  of  the  child.  If  we  thoroughly  real- 
ize that  fact,  and  can  be  persuaded  to  live  pure  and 
wholesome  lives,  so  that  we  may  draw  to  ourselves 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        581 

souls  of  a  kindred  virtuous  nature,  how  much  better 
for  all  the  world.  To  drive  this  point  home,  the 
writers  undertake  to  paint  the  loathsome  picture  of 
degeneracy,  that  the  picture  of  purity  may  be  the 
more  attractive  by  contrast. 

In  this  connection  we  present  first  figure  No.  1, 
which  is  that  of  a  boy,  in  1912  about  16  years  of 
age.  The  Fourth  and  Tenth  Houses,  the  planets  in 
them  and  their  rulers  show  the  parents.  The  parent 
who  most  influences  the  life  is  shown  by  the  Tenth 
House  configurations,  and  the  Fourth  House  indi- 
cates the  one  least  concerned  in  the  child's  destiny. 

In  this  figure  Gemini  is  on  the  Midheaven,  and 
Mercury,  its  ruler,  is  square  the  Moon  from  cardinal 
signs.  Neptune  is  conjunction  Mars  in  the  Tenth 
Houes  and  square  the  Sun  in  the  mercurial  sign 
Virgo.  This  establishes  well  the  morbid,  neurotic  na- 
ture of  the  father,  his  instrumentality  in  depriving 
the  boy  of  the  faculty  of  speech  and  of  coordination 
of  muscular  movements ;  the  boy  cannot  walk,  but 
staggers. 

The  mother's  part  is  described  by  Sagittarius  on 
the  Fourth  House.  Jupiter,  the  ruler  is  in  Leo  in 
conjunction  with  the  Dragon's  Tail,  (the  Moon's 
Western  Node),  which  has  an  influence  similar  to 
Saturn.  It  is  also  square  to  Saturn  and  Uranus ;  the 
latter  being  in  conjunction  in  Scorpio.  This  describes 
her  as  being  a  lewd  woman ;  degenerate,  committed  to 
the  dreadful  theory  of  soulmates,  affinities,  free  love 
and  all  kindred  abuses.  These  lewrd  tendencies  she 


582  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

imparted  to  the  boy.  The  affliction  to  Leo  affects 
the  heart,  and  as  Saturn  is  the  embodiment  of  ob- 
struction, restraint  and  suppression,  we  may  know 
that  the  heart  action  is  very  weak,  (had  the  affliction 
come  from  Mars  his  dynamic  energy  would  have 
caused  palpitation).  Scorpio  has  rule  over  the  sex 
organ,  Uranus  and  Saturn  there  give  tendency  to 
self  abuse,  and  on  the  well  known  principle  that  mu- 
tilation of  that  organ  affects  the  voice,  we  have  in 
this  configuration  an  added  reason  of  the  poor  boy's 
inability  to  speak.  The  affliction  coming  from  fixed 
signs  shows  the  deep  rooted  constitutional  nature  of 
the  evil,  and  what  may  come  of  conception  during  a 
drunken  debauch. 

The  Guardian  of  the  Threshold 

Horoscope  No.  2  shows  one  of  the  most  remark- 
able psychic  conditions  we  have  ever  come  across. 
Its  portents  in  some  respects  are  plain  to  any  astrol- 
oger, but  investigation  by  one  of  the  writers  into 
this  person's  past  life  adds  sidelights  and  gives  depth 
to  the  meaning  of  configurations  not  otherwise  ob- 
tainable, also  to  the  writer,  who  made  the  spiritual  in- 
vestigation two  years  before  the  horoscope  was  cast, 
it  was  a  revelation  to  note  how  the  mystic  facts  he 
remembered  so  well,  were  inscribed  in  this  little  wheel 
of  life.  To  enable  the  student  to  properly  appreciate 
the  remarkable  case  we  relate  the  story  of  how  we 
came  into  connection  with  the  person,  what  we  at- 
tempted to  do,  and  what  actually  happened. 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        583 

In  the  fall  of  1910,  a  friend  told  us  the  sad  case 
of  a  young  boy  confined  to  his  bed,  lying  upon  his 
stomach  and  elbows,  persistently  gazing  at  a  certain 
spot  in  a  corner  of  the  room,  as  if  fascinated,  his 
whole  frame  continually  shaking  with  sobs  and 
moans.  At  request  of  the  friend  we  visited  the  un- 
fortunate boy,  and  found  that  the  object  which  drew 
his  gaze,  with  a  power  similar  to  that  whereby  the 
snake  charms  a  bird  into  its  fangs,  was  an  elemental 
of  the  most  horrible  type  we  have  ever  seen.  Stand- 
ing by  the  bedside  we  directed  a  stream  of  force  to- 
wards the  base  of  the  poor  victim's  brain,  and  thus 
drew  him  towards  us  in  an  endeavor  to  break  the 
spell,  but -the  fiend  held  the  consciousness  charmed  to 
such  a  degree  that  there  was  evident  danger  of  rup- 
ture of  body  and  soul.  We  therefore  desisted,  and, 
with  the  fearlessness  born  of  inexperience,  decided 
to  fight  the  elemental  upon  his  own  plane  of  being. 
But  the  Elder  Brother  who  is  our  Mentor  sought  us 
that  evening,  he  advised  caution,  and  investigation 
of  the  genesis  of  the  monster  before  we  took  action. 

Kesearch  of  the  memory  of  nature  developed 
the  fact  that  in  its  last  life  the  spirit  embodied  in 
the  youth  had  been  an  initiate  of  the  Order  or  Jesus, 
a  Jesuit,  and  a  zealot  of  the  most  ardent  type,  cruel 
and  unfeeling  in  the  highest  degree,  yet  perfectly  im- 
personal, with  no  other  aim  in  life  save  to  further  the 
interests  of  his  Holy  Order.  The  health,  wealth, 
reputation  or  life  of  others  he  sacrificed  without 
qualm  of  conscience,  so  that  the  order  was  benentted ; 


584  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

he  would  have  offered  himself  up  as  freely,  for  he 
was  sincere  to  the  core.  Love  was  as  foreign  to  his 
nature  as  hate,  but  sex  was  rampant,  it  tore  his  strong 
soul  to  shreds;  yet  it  never  mastered  him,  he  was  too 
proud  to  show  his  passion  even  to  one  who  could  have 
gratified  it,  and  so  he  developed  the  secret  habit.  It 
must  not  be  supposed  that  he  became  an  abject  slave 
in  that  respect;  he,  the  immortal  spirit,  fought  his 
lower  nature  by  prayer,  castigations,  fastings  and 
every  other  conceivable  means,  sometimes  he  thought 
he  had  conquered,  but  when  he  least  expected  it  the 
beast  in  him  rallied,  and  the  war  waged  as  fiercely  as 
ever.  Many  times  he  was  tempted  to  mutilate  himself, 
but  he  scorned  such  a  course  as  unworthy  a  man,  es- 
pecially when  that  man  had  taken  the  vows  of  priest- 
hood. At  last  he  succumbed  to  the  strain;  vigorous 
manhood  was  succeeded  by  a  middle  age  of  delicate 
health,  constant  pain  increased  his  mental  anguish 
and  sympathy  was  born  of  suffering,  he  was  no  longer 
indifferent  to  the  tortures  of  victims  of  the  Holy 
Office.  Being  by  nature  a  zealot  and  enthusiast  in 
whatever  direction  his  energies  were  exerted,  the  pen- 
dulum soon  swung  to  the  other  extreme,  Paul-like,  he 
fought  to  protect  whom  he  had  previously  persecuted, 
he  incurred  the  enmity  of  the  Holy  Office,  and  finally, 
broken  in  body,  but  dauntless  of  spirit  he  fell  a  vic- 
tim to  the  torture  to  which  he  had  subjected  so  many. 
By  the  sincerity  of  his  nature,  and  his  later  life, 
he  earned  the  right  of  admission  to  a  Mystery  School 
and  prepared  for  the  privilege  of  working  as  an  In- 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        585 

visible  Helper  in  future  lives.  The  Law  of  Associa- 
tion drew  him  to  birth  in  an  American  family  who 
were  former  friends,  and  from  them  he  received  a 
nervous  organization  tuned  to  the  high  pitch  re- 
quired for  his  experience. 

Saturn  opposes  the  lifegiving  Sun,  suppresses 
the  nervous  energy  of  Mercury,  and  obstructs  the 
Venus  (venous)  circulation,  by  hindering  secretion 
of  urine  and  elimination  of  poisonous  matter  through 
the  kidneys  which  are  ruled  by  Libra,  the  sign  of  Sat- 
urn's  exaltation  where  he  is  placed  in  this  natal  fig- 
ure. As  the  planets  which  he  opposes  are  placed  in 
Aries,  ruler  of  the  head,  his  disordering  influence 
manifests  through  the  brain  and  mind,  as  well  as  the 
genito-urinary  system.  The  morbid  condition  of 
these  parts  caused  by  Saturn's  repressive  influence 
on  the  kidneys  is  further  accentuated  by  Uranus  con- 
junction the  Moon  in  the  Sixth  House  which  indi- 
cates the  health,  under  the  sign  ruling  the  generative 
organs,  Scorpio.  As  the  horoscope  shows  tendencies 
resulting  from  our  actions  in  past  lives,  it  is  evident 
that  the  self  abuse  of  this  person  must  bring  him  to 
birth  under  a  stellar  ray  affecting  the  health  in  that 
particular  manner,  for  when  the  soul  has  been  over- 
come by  any  particular  besetting  sin  in  any  life, 
death  does  not  pay  all  any  more  than  removal  to 
another  city  pays  our  debts  in  our  present  abode. 
When  we  return,  temptation  will  again  confront  us 
until  we  conquer  our  weakness.  It  is  the  task  of  this 
poor  soul  to  extract  the  phoenix  of  virtue  and  chas- 


586  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

tity  from  the  burning  embers  of  passion  and  secret 
vice.  May  God  help  him  and  strengthen  his  arm  in 
the  terrible  combat.  Only  Astrology,  the  Master  Key 
of  Compassion,  can  adequately  reveal  to  us  the  strug- 
gle and  anguish  of  the  soul,  and  save  us  from  the 
crime  of  despising  one  in  conditions  of  depravity. 

The  before-mentioned  aspects  were  from  Cardinal 
and  Fixed  signs,  which  indicate  that  which  is  almost 
unalterable  destiny.  But  Neptune  on  the  Ascendant, 
in  a  Common  sign,  Gemini,  points  to  a  condition  in 
the  making.  He  is  trine  to  Saturn,  the  afflictor  of 
the  mind,  and  supported  by  the  dynamic  energy  of 
Mars. 

Neptune  indicates  the  invisible  spiritual  hier- 
archies which  work  with  and  upon  us,  and  when 
placed  in  the  Twelfth  House  it  is  evident  that  sorrow 
and  distress  may  be  expected  from  them.  This  posi- 
tion renders  the  person  liable  to  be  preyed  upon  by 
spirit  controls,  but  the  trine  to  Saturn  and  the  sextile 
to  the  Sun,  Venus  and  Mercury  protect  him  against 
influence  from  outside  sources.  Thus  he  became  a 
prey  to  the  demoniac  embodiment  of  his  former  ac- 
tions, the  terrible  creature  known  to  mystics  as 
"Guardian  of  the  Threshold,"  which  the  neophyte 
must  pass  ere  he  can  enter  conscionsly  into  the  Invis- 
ible World.  This  dreadful  shape  had  drawn  its  be- 
ing from  acts  of  cruelty  committed  by  the  man  in 
his  bygone  life ;  it  had  fed  upon  the  curses  of  his  tor- 
tured victims,  and  gorged  itself  upon  the  odor  of 
their  blood  and  perspiration,  as  is  the  wont  of  elemen- 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        587 

tals;  it  was  a  monster  in  every  sense  of  the  word. 
Death  of  its  progenitor  rendered  it  latent,  but  in  the 
new  birth  figure  time  was  marked  for  retribution  up- 
on the  clock  of  destiny.  When  the  Moon  by  progres- 
sion reached  Mars'  natal  place  in  the  Twelfth  House, 
his  dynamic  energy  galvanized  the  monster  into  new 
life,  and  the  troubles  of  the  poor  lad  had  commenced. 
The  hate,  anger  and  malice  stored  in  the  monster 
radiated  back  upon  him  pang  for  pang  and  his  nega- 
tive Gemini  nature  crumpled  under  the  onslaughts 
of  the  demon.  When  we  saw  the  thing  it  appeared 
as  a  shapeless  jellylike  mass  with  many  large  green- 
ish eyes  imbedded  at  different  parts  of  its  body. 
Every  few  seconds  a  sharp  pointed,  swordlike  pro- 
jection shot  out  from  the  most  unexpected  places  in 
its  body  and  pierced  the  poor  lad  who  lay  cringing 
upon  his  bed.  Then,  although  the  monster  had  no 
mouth,  wherewith  to  laugh,  it  seemed  convulsed  with 
fiendish  glee  at  the  fear  and  pain  it  had  given.  At 
other  times,  one  or  another  of  the  eyes  seemed  to  dart 
from  the  monster,projected  upon  what  resembled  an 
elephant's  trunk  and  it  would  halt  within  an  inch  of 
the  victim 's  eyes ;  gazing  into  them  with  a  compelling 
power  of  awesome  intensity. 

There  being  so  many  good  aspects  to  help  him, 
it  is  not  likely  that  he  will  succumb,  and  when  the 
Sun  reaches  conjunction  of  Jupiter's  place  in  the  na- 
tal figure  and  the  Moon  has  passed  the  square  to  the 
Sun's  natal  place,  a  distinct  turn  for  the  better  may 
be  looked  for.  In  the  meanwhile  the  poor  soul  must 


588  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

struggle  alone  with  its  self  made  demon.  Had  not  the 
secret  habit  sapped  vitality  in  the  former  life,  birth 
under  a  stronger  sign  would  have  given  greater  power 
of  physical  endurance  and  rendered  victory  more 
certain. 

Disease  of  the  Eyes 

This  malady  is  due  to  rays  from  certain  nebu- 
lous parts  of  the  Zodiac;  the  Pleiades  in  Taurus  29, 
the  Ascelli  in  Leo  6,  and  Antares  in  Sagittarius  8. 
When  the  Sun  or  Moon  is  in  orb  of  one  of  these  places, 
and  afflicted  by  Saturn,  Mars  or  Uranus,  or  vice 
versa,  when  Saturn,  Uranus  or  Mars  are  in  these  neb- 
ulous parts  afflicting  the  Sun  or  Moon,  trouble  is  in- 
dicated, but  if  care  is  taken  in  the  case  of  children 
having  this  tendency  to  disease  it  may  be  greatly 
modified  or  entirely  avoided.  The  light  in  school- 
rooms calls  for  attention  on  general  principles,  but 
where  a  child  has  incipient  eye  trouble  the  parent 
ought  to  request  proper  placement  of  the  child  in  a 
modified  light,  reading  by  lamplight  or  in  the  dusk 
should  not  be  permitted,  and  windowshades  in  the 
home  ought  to  be  of  a  soothing  color,  With  civiliza- 
tion and  life  in  cities  the  eyes  have  become  habituated 
to  short  focus  and  cannot  quickly  adjust  themselves 
to  variation  of  range  as  the  sailors  and  plainsmen. 
When  a  child's  horoscope  indicates  tendency  to  weak 
eyes,  residence  in  a  rural  district,  if  possible,  may  be 
of  immense  value  in  preserving  the  vision,  for  exer- 
cise of  the  eye  muscles  by  frequent  adjustment  of 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        589 

focus  from  short  to  long  range,  and  vice  versa,  will 
materially  aid  to  strengthen  the  eyes.  It  is  a  fact, 
that  much  eye  strain  is  due  to  congestion  of  the  cili- 
ary muscle,  which  adjusts  the  lens  to  range  of  objects, 
and  the  sphincter  muscle  which  contracts  the  iris. 
Each  time  that  fails  to  act  quickly  too  much  light  is 
admitted  and  the  retina  is  hurt.  Life  in  the  open 
while  the  child 's  muscles  are  still  limber  will  do  won- 
ders towards  correcting  such  defects,  and  even  grown 
persons  may  derive  vast  benefit  from  outdoor  life  pro- 
vided the  eyes  are  properly  shaded  at  first.  Careful 
osteopathic  treatment  of  the  eyes  has  also  a  most  ben- 
eficial effect  of  stimulating  circulation  and  limbering 
the  muscles. 

Subtile  Indications  of  Spiritual  Sight 

It  is  a  well  known  scientific  fact,  that  sensation 
depends  on  ability  to  feel  and  interpret  vibration  in 
air  and  ether,  according  to  the  sense  involved 
Ancient  seers  devised  the  Staff  of  Mercury  as  a  sym- 
bol of  its  effects,  and  among  other  spiritual  secrets 
embodied  in  the  undulating  forms  of  the  twin  ser- 
pents, is  also  this,  that  Mercury  is  the  originator  of 
all  vibratory  movement.  Hence  he  is  a  prime  fac- 
tor in  production  of  sensation  and  mental  processes 
arising  in  the  consciousness  as  a  result.  An  elevated, 
well  aspected  Mercury  therefore  makes  our  senses 
acute  and  the  mind  keen;  an  afflicted  Mercury  either 
dulls  the  senses,  or  makes  the  person  hypersensitive, 
in  either  case  an  abnormal  state  of  the  brain  mind  is 


590  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

produced  which  causes  suffering  according  to  house, 
sign  and  affliction ;  even  the  good  aspects  of  a  so-called 
evil  planet,  though  it  brings  out  the  virtue  of  that 
planet,  also  carries  with  it  a  touch  of  the  darker  side 
because  even  the  best  of  us  have  something  in  our 
inner  natures  which  vibrates  to  that  phase  of  the 
planet's  nature. 

But,  besides  this  roundabout  way  of  acquiring 
knowledge  through  vibrations  in  the  air  and  ether 
inaugurated  by  Mercury  and  interpreted  by  slow 
processes  in  the  brain  mind  where  spirit  and  matter 
meet,  there  is  a  direct  path  to  knowledge  symbolized 
by  the  staff  around  which  the  serpents  twine.  This 
is  the  ray  of  Neptune,  the  octave  of  Mercury,  which 
puts  us  in  touch  with  the  spiritual  worlds.  But,  ob- 
serve this,  the  staff  and  the  serpents  are  not  separate, 
the  staff  goes  through  the  winding  forms  of  the  ser- 
pents, and  thus  we  learn  that  in  our  present  condition 
spiritual  knowledge  is  dependent  on  the  brain  mind 
for  concrete  expression,  and  through  the  brain  mind 
the  latter  is  colored  according  to  the  aspects  of  Nep- 
tune. 

Experience  has  proved  that  the  afflicted  stellar 
ray  from  certain  parts  of  the  Zodiac  already  men- 
tioned, interferes  with  the  etheric  vibration  sensed  by 
the  retina  of  the  eye,  and  thus  impairs  the  physical 
sight.  If,  in  the  same  figure,  Neptune  is  focused 
through  one  of  these  places,  the  so-called  'yellow 
spot,'  which  is  blind  because  unresponsive  to  the 
etheric  mercurial  vibrations  is  sensitized  by  the  spir- 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        591 

itual  ray  of  Neptune,  and  thus  it  may  be  that  a  per- 
son physically  near  sighted,  or  even  blind,  may  view 
the  spiritual  worlds  hidden  from  people  whose  sight 
is  focused  by  mercurial  vibrations.  The  aspect  of 
Neptune  determines  the  grade  and  nature  of  the  spir- 
itual sight  evolved,  as  illustrated  in  various  horo- 
scopes herewith.  These  were  picked  to  demonstrate 
other  points,  but  it  occurred  to  us  that  the  phase  just 
mentioned  is  worthy  of  notice.  It  may  be  well,  how- 
ever, to  warn  students  against  absurd  conclusions, 
we  do  not  say  that  everyone  afflicted  with  eye  trouble 
by  Antares,  Ascelli  or  the  Pleiades  is  gifted  in 
return  with  spiritual  sight.  The  lady  in  horoscope 
No.  5  is  much  afflicted  physically,  but  Neptune  is  out 
of  orb,  and  she  derives  no  vision  from  his  ray.  Spir- 
itual vision  may  also  be  undeveloped  in  many  who 
have  the  aspect  well  defined,  but  in  those  cases  it  is 
in  process  of  unfoldment,  and  will  yield  easily  to 
proper  exercises.  Where  this  aspect  is  a  square  or 
opposition  it  is  wise,  however,  to  refrain  from  any 
attempt  to  seek  illumination,  for  in  those  aspects  lurk 
great  danger  from  spirit  controls,  elementals,  etc., 
which  is  amply  illustrated  in  horoscope  No.  2, 
where  the  opposition  of  Neptune  to  Antares  is  re- 
sponsible for  the  awful  vision  of  the  Guardian  of  the 
Threshold.  There  the  physical  sight  is  not  impaired, 
but  in  horoscope  No.  3,  defective  eyesight  is  shown 
by  affliction  from  the  Ascelli  and  like  trouble  comes 
from  Antares  in  No.  4.  In  one  the  trine  from  Nep- 
tune produces  voluntary  vision  of  the  super  physical 


592  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

realms,  and  in  the  other  his  focus  is  square,  hence  the 
spiritual  sight  obtained  is  intermittent  and  not  under 
control. 

We  have  spoken  of  Mercury  as  originator  of  all 
sense  vibrations,  auditory,  olfactory,  visual,  etc.,  and 
of  Neptune  as  its  octave ;  to  forestall  questions  we 
may  say  that  in  the  spiritual  world  separateness 
ceases,  sensations  merge,  so  that  sound  and  sight, 
voice  and  vision  are  one.  The  Neptune  ray  carries 
both,  but  undeveloped  seers  suffering  from  the  in- 
voluntary faculty,  'see'  or  'hear'  as  it  suits  the 
entities  which  obtain  admission  to  them  through  the 
ray  of  Neptune. 

Horoscope  No.  3  shows  the  inimical  influence  of 
the  nebulous  spot  in  Leo  6,  the  Ascelli,  on  the  sight. 
This  dangerous  degree  was  rising  at  birth  with  the 
Moon  in  close  conjunction,  and  the  Sun  also  in  orb. 
Saturn  in  24  degrees  of  Libra  is  just  within  orb  of  a 
square  to  the  Sun  in  Leo  0  degrees,  and  as  a  result  of 
these  various  afflictions  the  person  is  compelled  to 
use  bifocal  glasses.  There  is  a  compensating  advan- 
tage however,  Neptune  in  elevation  and  trine  to  the 
Ascelli  (with  Sun,  Moon  and  Ascendant  in  orb),  has 
endowed  him  with  spiritual  sight  over  which  he  has 
perfect  control,  as  the  student  may  readily  see  by 
examination  of  Mercury,  the  best  fortified  planet  in 
the  horoscope.  Saturn,  by  sextile,  from  the  sign  of 
his  exaltation,gives  steadiness,  persistence  and  con- 
centration ;'  Jupiter  by  trine  from  the  house  he  rules, 
expands  the  mind,  makes  it  religiously  inclined  and 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        593 

benevolent ;  Venus,  by  sextile,  adds  kindliness  and 
love  of  beauty.  Thus  it  is  evident  that  in  this  horo- 
scope the  relation  of  Mercury  and  its  octave,  Nep- 
tune, to  physical  and  spiritual  expression  of  mind, 
is  well  illustrated.  Neptune  is  most  highly  elevated 
and  Mercury  is  most  strongly  aspectel.  Neither  is 
afflicted,  therefore  he  is  not  liable  to  hallucinations, 
but  weighs  his  experiences  in  the  scale  of  logic.  Com- 
pare this  horoscope  with  that  of  the  poor  young  man 
afflicted  by  the  Guardian  of  the  Threshold  (No.  2), 
where  Neptune  is  in  the  Twelfth  House  in  conjunc- 
tion with  Mars,  and  where  Mercury  is  afflicted  by  the 
opposition  of  Saturn,  all  from  Cardinal  signs;  con- 
trast of  the  two  figures  will  bring  out  some  fine  points. 
In  horoscope  No.  5  we  see  the  Moon  in  the  Sixth 
House,  about  three  degrees  from  Antares,  and  Saturn 
is  in  the  Twelfth  House  within  4  degrees  of  an  oppo- 
sition to  Antares,  about  7  degrees  from  exact  opposi- 
tion to  the  Moon ;  thus  his  natal  influence  was  mini- 
mized. Had  the  opposition  been  close  or  exact,  blind- 
ness from  birth  would  have  been  inevitable,  but  for- 
tunately it  was  a  weak  aspect  and  the  vision  was  not 
seriously  affected  until  the  Sun  by  progression  en- 
tered the  Twelfth  House,  passed  the  opposition  to 
the  Moon,  then  opposition  to  Antares  and  arrived  at 
conjunction  with  Saturn.  These  points  of  contact 
in  the  horoscope  marked  crises  in  the  disease  of  her 
eyes.  Saturn  being  the  afflictor,  and  Mercury  also 
squaring  the  ascendant,  the  nerves  and  muscles 
crystallized  until  sight  of  one  eye  was  lost  and  the 


594  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

other  eye  is  almost  blind.  In  November,  1912,  the 
Moon  had  progressed  to  the  square  of  the  Sun's 
place  at  birth.  That  was  the  final  crisis  which  viv- 
ified the  before-mentioned  aspects.  Neptune  makes  no 
aspect  to  the  points  of  the  Zodiac  mentioned,  hence 
the  spiritual  sight  is  deeply  dormant. 

Horoscope  No.  4  is  the  most  afflicted  of  all,  the 
Dragon's  Tail,  the  Sun  and  Antares  are  in  conjunc- 
tion. That  alone  is  sufficiently  severe;  the  condition 
is  further  aggravated,  however,  by  a  close  square  of 
Neptune  and  Mars,and  then  the  mea.sure  of  affliction 
to  the  eyes  is  helped  by  a  conjunction  of  Saturn  to 
the  Pleiades  which  occurs  in  the  Twelfth  House. 
Thus  this  horoscope  shows  the  person  then  born  to 
have  very  weak  eyes,  and  as  a  matter  of  fact  she  can 
scarcely  read  even  when  holding  book  or  paper  a  few 
inches  from  the  eyes  and  using  a  magnifying  glass; 
but  the  square  of  Neptune  to  Antares  has  opened  her 
spiritual  senses  to  a  certain  extent  so  that  she  hears 
spirit  voices  and  at  times  has  visions.  These  mani- 
festations, being  uncontrolled  by  her,  are  very  un- 
satisfactory of  course,  but  prove  the  effect  of  Neptune 
aspecting  these  points  in  the  Zodiac. 

The  Dragon's  'Head'  and  'Tail'  (&— U) 

As  it  has  often  been  a  sore  puzzle  to  students 
what  are  the  'Dragon's  Head'  and  'Tail'  (called 
the  Moon's  nodes  in  the  ephemeris),  and  why  one  is 
supposed  to  be  good  and  to  further  all  that  comes 
under  its  benefic  ray,  while  the  other  is  considered 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES       595 

extremely  evil,  it  may  be  well  to  show  the  reasonable- 
ness of  the  philosophy. 

First,  let  us  say  for  the  information  of  students 
not  versed  in  astronomical  terms,  that  'nodes'  are 
points  where  a  planet,  traveling  in  its  orbit,  crosses 
the  Sun's  path;  as  for  instance,  the  earth  does  at  the 
equinoxes.  This  is  explained  from  both  the  astro- 
nomical and  mystic  sides  in  our  Simplified  Scientific 
Astrology,  and  also  the  revolution  of  the  Moon's 
Nodes. 

Speaking  from  the  convenient  geocentric  view- 
point,the  Sun  crosses  its  eastern  node  each  year  at 
the  vernal  equinox,  50  seconds  of  space  in  advance 
of  the  point  where  it  crossed  the  previous  year;  as 
the  Sun  travels  15  degrees  per  hour,  50  seconds  of 
space  are  traversed  in  about  3  seconds  of  time. 

The  Moon  rises  about  50  minutes  later  each 
night,  applying  the  same  measure,  50  minutes  of 
time  correspond  to  about  3  minutes  of  space,  and 
the  Moon's  nodes  recede  just  that  much  every  day. 

Thus  the  Sun  travels  around  the  circle  of  the 
Zodiac  in  one  year,  but  requires  27  times  as  many 
thousands  (27,000  years),  to  complete  the  precessional 
circle  of  its  nodes,  the  equinoctial  points.  The  swift 
moving  Moon  circles  the  Zodiac  in  27  days  and  its 
nodes  make  a  full  revolution  in  1000  weeks  or  19 
years.  (These  figures  are  only  approximate.) 

In  the  case  of  the  Sun  the  place  where  it  crosses 
the  earth's  equator  in  the  east  is  always  regarded  as 
the  first  point  in  Aries,  no  matter  where  in  the  con- 


596  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

stellations  it  falls  because  of  precession.  This  pro- 
cedure is  perfectly  justified  because  the  life  giving 
qualities  ascribed  to  the  Sun  in  Aries  are  observable 
as  soon  as  it  has  crossed  the  equator;  then  the  seeds 
sprout,  the  mating  season  commences  and  the  whole 
creation  seems  stirred  by  the  solar  ray  to  bring  forth. 
Therefore  astrologers  say  that  the  Sun  is  exalted  in 
Aries,  and  Aries  is  understood  to  be  the  first  30  de- 
grees from  the  equinoctial  point,  the  eastern  node  of 
the  Sun,  where  he  crosses  the  equator  at  the  vernal 
equinox. 

On  the  same  principle  the  western  node  of  the 
Sun,  the  point  where  he  leaves  the  northern  hemi- 
sphere for  the  winter  months,  is  called  the  first  point 
of  Libra,  and  Saturn,  the  planet  of  obstruction  and 
suppression  is  here  exalted ;  he  is  the  reaper  with  his 
.scythe,  he  mows  down  the  fruits  of  the  solar  ray,  he 
suppresses  life  and  joy,  the  gladsome  voices  of  our 
feathered  friends  are  hushed  in  his  presence,  and  the 
.earth  goes  down  to  its  wintry  grave  under  his  wither- 
jng  influence. 

As  the  Moon  gathers  and  reflects  the  solar  light 
upon  earth,  this  borrowed  light  is  similar  to  the  di- 
rect ray  in  certain  repects,  no  matter  where  its  east- 
ern node  (called  the  Dragon's  Head),  falls  in  the 
signs,  the  effect  upon  affairs  wherewith  it  is  con- 
nected by  conjunction  is  like  that  of  the  Sun  in  Aries, 
which  makes  nature  sing  with  joy;  it  furthers  and 
accelerates  personal  matters  in  a  most  benevolent 
manner,  it  so  to  speak,  oils  the  wheels  of  life  in  the 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        597 

particular  department  where  it  is  conjoined  with  a 
planet.  On  the  other  hand,  the  Moon's  western  node, 
(called  the  Dragon's  Tail),  corresponds  to  Libra 
where  Saturn  is  exalted  and  if  in  conjunction  with  a 
planet  it  exerts  an  influence  of  suppression  'and  ob- 
struction similar  in  effect  to  the  chill  blasts  of  winter 
ushered  in  by  the  saturnine  exaltation. 

Horoscope  No.  6  shows  its  part  in  breaking  the 
femur  (hipbone)  of  a  lady.  Its  position  in  the 
Twelfth  House  indicates  confinement,  the  square  of 
the  Sun  from  the  Midheaven  is  a  further  natal  afflic- 
tion. In  December,  1908,  the  full  Moon  was  in  exact 
conjunction,  and  Jupiter,  ruler  of  the  Sixth  House 
(which  shows  sickness),  was  in  exact  square  to  the 
Dragon's  Tail,  also  in  exact  opposition  to  her  Sun. 
Thus  indications  of  trouble  were  many.  Sagittarius, 
which  has  dominion  over  the  hips  and  thighs,  occu- 
pies the  Sixth  House,  so  the  femur  was  broken  when 
the  lady  slipped  on  an  icy  pavement  just  outside  her 
house.  No.  4  shows  the  Dragon's  Tail  in  conjunction 
with  the  Sun  near  the  fixed  star  Antares  which  has 
an  inimical  influence  on  the  sight,  and  the  poor  lady 
who  is  thus  afflicted  is  in  great  danger  of  blindness. 

The  Moan's  nodes  are  tabulated  in  our  Simpli- 
fied Scientific  Ephemeris,  the  position  being  given 
for  every  day;  its  place  at  birth  is 'found  by  simple 
proportion,  and  the  diagram  herewith  w-ill  explain 
that  these  points- are  called  the  'Dragon^s  Head'  and 
the  'Dragon's  Tail'  because  therpaths  of  Sun  and 


598 


THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        599 

planets  appear  serpentine  when  drawn  upon  a  plane 
surface. 

Disease  of  the  Ears 

The  Twelfth  House  indicates  the  confining  in- 
fluences in  life.  Mercury  there  in  conjunction  with 
the  Sun  limits  the  spirit,  and  deafness  hampers  its 
search  after  knowledge.  The  same  happens  if  Saturn, 
Mars,  Uranus  and  Neptune  afflict,  also  when  the  mer- 
curial signs,  Gemini  and  Virgo,  are  on  the  twelfth 
cusp  and  Mercury  is  afflicted,  (no  matter  where  in  the 
figure  it  is  placed).  We  append  horoscopes  of  people 
who  are  suffering  from  this  malady  ;No.  7  is  the  horo- 
scope of  a  lady  who  is  gradually  losing  her  hearing. 
Mercury,  Venus  and  the  Sun  are  in  close  conjunction 
in  Pisces,  the  twelfth  sign,  which  is  in  the  Twelfth 
House.  Blood,  lymph,  and  the  invisible  vital  fluid, 
called  'nerve  force'  by  science,  are  the  builders  of 
our  bodies;  each  planet,  except  Uranus  and  Neptune, 
has  dominion  over  one  of  their  constituent  parts. 

£  Mercury  rules  the  nerves,  particularly  the  cerebro- 
spinal  system,  and  the  invisible  rose  colored  vi- 
tal fluid  which  flows  in  the  visible  nerve  sheath. 

D  The  Moon  also  rules  the  nerves  in  a  general  way, 
but  has  special  dominion  over  the  nerve  sheaths 
of  the  body,  the  sympathetic  system  and  the 
lymph. 

U  Jupiter  governs  the  arterial  circulation. 


600  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

9    Venus  rules  the  venous  blood. 
$    Mars  rules  the  iron  in  the  blood. 
O   The  Sun  rules  the  oxygen. 

T?  Saturn  has  dominion  over  the  mineral  deposits 
carried  by  the  blood,  which  causes  the  arteries 
and  other  parts  of  the  body  to  harden. 

When  a  planet  is  in  very  close  conjunction  to  the 
Sun,  three  degrees  or  less,  it  is  said  to  be  combust; 
its  ray  is,  so  to  speak,  burned  up  in  the  terrific  heat 
of  the  Sun,  and  thus  the  afflicted  planet  is  unable  to 
properly  exercise  its  function  in  the  life  of  persons 
barn  under  that  configuration.  It  is  also  evident 
that  as  the  weakest  link  of  a  chain  is  the  first  to  give, 
so  the  disability  would  show  itself  in  a  part  of  the 
body  otherwise  afflicted. 

Horoscope  No.  7  has  both  Venus  and  Mercury 
combust  in  the  Twelfth  House;  we  may  therefore  con- 
clude that  there  is  a  lack  of  nerve  force  or  vital  fluid, 
and  that  the  venous  circulation  of  the  ear  is  ob- 
structed. Thus  congestion  is  inevitable,  and  the  hear- 
ing becomes  less  and  less  acute.  Osteopathy  is  ex- 
cellently equipped  to  deal  successfully  with  a  case 
like  this;  were  the  configuration  in  a  fixed  sign  we 
might  not  feel  optimistic,  but  flexibility  is  the  salient 
characteristic  of  the  Common  signs,  so  we  see  no 
leason  why  with  patience  and  perseverance  a  cure 
may  not  be  consummated. 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        601 

As  said,  Saturn  rules  the  earthly  mineral  matter 
carried  by  our  blood;  from  this  concretions  are 
formed  in  the  softer  tissues,  also  the  bony  structure. 
Therefore  the  skeleton  is  also  under  the  dominion  of 
Saturn. 

In  horoscope  No.  8,  the  auditory  disability  comes 
through  the  fixed  signs  Leo  and  Scorpio,  this  makes 
it  more  difficult  to  remedy,  particularly  as  Saturn  is 
the  afflictor  and  throws  his  malefic  ray  upon  Mercury 
from  an  angle.  Science  thought  at  one  time  that  the 
tympanum  was  the  only,  or  at  least  the  main  factor 
in  hearing,  but  realizes  now  that  as  much  or  more, 
depends  upon  the  bony  structure.  It  is  the  nature 
of  Saturn  to  obstruct  and  as  Scorpio  rules  the  organs 
of  excretion,  we  may  easily  see  that  this  important 
function  is  impaired,  and  that  waste  products  have 
difficulty  in  passing  kidneys  and  colon.  The  whole 
system  becomes  clogged  in  consequence,  and  as  Mer- 
cury in  the  Twelfth  House  marks  the  ears  as  weak, 
it  is  only  natural  that  the  auditory  nerve  becomes 
clogged  and  the  bony  parts  of  the  ear  grow  denser 
in  the  course  of  time. 

Sour  milk  or  buttermilk  has  a  particularly  whole- 
some influence  in  clearing  up  a  clogged  system. 
Many  people  rebel  against  the  use  of  milk  in  quantity 
because  of  an  idea  that  it  aggravate.s  constipation ; 
that  is  true  in  the  beginning,  but  after  a  short  time 
the  system  will  accommodate  itself  to  the  diet,  which 
will  be  then  found  superlatively  cleansing,  whole- 
some and  nutritious.  Greens  and  fruits  will  also  aid 


602  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

a  person  afflicted  as  horoscope  No.  8  to  eliminate  the 
waste  and  effect  a  cure  in  time. 

Disease  of  the  Vocal  Organ 

Among  the  subjects  germane  ^o  thorough  know- 
ledge of  Astrology  are  the  similar  effects  of  intrin- 
sically opposite  factors;  Saturn  is  called  evil,  and 
Jupiter  good,  but  when  Saturn  is  well  fortified  in  a 
horoscope  it  has  an  exceedingly  desirable  effect,  and 
an  afflicted  Jupiter  is  the  very  reverse  of  beneficial. 
Thus  there  is  a  good  side  to  each  so-called  ,'evil1 
planet,  and  every  'good'  planet  has  also  an  undesir- 
able phase.  The  signs  of  the  Zodiac  are  said  to  rule 
certain  parts  of  the  body,  but  each  sign  has  also  sub- 
sidiary dominion  over  the  part  ruled  by  its  opposite 
sign;  affliction  of  Gemini  may  cause  bronchitis,  or 
weaken  the  arms  and  shoulders,  but  sciatica,  a  Sag- 
ittarius disease,  may  also  result.  Taurus  rules  the 
throat,  it  has  great  sympathy  with  Scorpio,  the  sign 
that  rules  the  generative  organs,  hence  we  note  the 
change  of  voice  in  boys  at  the  time  of  puberty;  also 
woman,  when  she  forsakes  the  path  of  chastity  and 
lives  a  life  of  debauch  acquires  a  coarser  voice.  Tau- 
rus rules  the  larynx,  but  Mercury  governs  the  air 
which  stirs  the  vocal  cords  to  vibration;  thus  organic 
affliction  is  indicated  by  affliction  of  Taurus  and  Scor- 
pio, but  functional  disability  by  the  position  and  as- 
pect of  Mercury.  There  is  a  similar  relation  between 
Taurus  (ruling  the  vocal  organs)  and  Mercury  (rul- 
ing the  air  which  passes  through  the  larynx)  as  be- 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        603 

tween  instrument  and  player.  If  Taurus  (and  Scor- 
pio) are  unafflicted  the  vocal  organ  is  in  good  con- 
dition, but  an  afflicted  Mercury  may  nevertheless 
cause  a  functional  disorder  of  the  speech.  The  re- 
verse may  also  happen,  namely,  that  a  well  fortified 
Mercury  partially  overrides  the  effect  of  a  Taurus 
affliction.  This  is  well  exemplified  in  horoscope  No. 
9 ;  Saturn,  Neptune  and  the  Sun  conjoined  in  Taurus 
cause  a  throat  affection,  but  Mercury  is  in  a  sign  of 
voice,  Gemini,  (Libra  and  Aquarius  are  the  other 
signs  of  voice)  and  in  conjunction  with  Jupiter.  The 
lady  suffers  constantly  from  throat  trouble,  but  as  a 
good  musician  draws  melody  from  a  dilapidated  in- 
strument, so,  by  the  aid  of  her  well  placed  Mercury, 
this  lady  is  able  to  express  herself  better  than  many 
whose  vocal  organs  are  sound;  in  fact,  she  teaches 
elocution. 

Horoscope  No.  3  has  a  singularly  well  fortified 
Mercury,  there  is  no  affliction  to  Taurus  or  Scorpio, 
and  the  gentleman  has  a  powerful  voice  capable'  of 
filling  the  largest  halls  without  effort,  yet  not  too  loud 
for  the  smallest,  but  Mercury  in  Leo,  a  beastial  sign, 
and  Saturn  in  Libra,  a  sign  of  voice,  are  obstructive 
of  perfect  vocalization,  therefore  the  gentleman  has 
at  times  a  certain  halt  or  hesitancy  of  speech. 

It  follows  as  a  matter  of  course  that  disabilities 
of  speech  are  more  easily  remedied  than  those  that 
are  organic;  patience,  practice  of  vocal  and  breath- 
ing exercises  such  as  teachers  of  voice  culture  give, 
(these  are  entirely  different  from  the  dangerous 


604  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Hindu  breathing   exercises)    are  almost  sure  to   re- 
store normal  conditions. 

Horoscopes  Nos.  9,  10  and  11  have  Saturn  and 
Neptune  conjoined  in  Taurus ;  as  a  consequence  all 
have  throat  trouble,  and  also  disorder  of  the  genital 
organs.  Nos.  10  and  11  have  both  undergone  opera- 
tions for  removal  of  certain  parts,  and  Mercury  in 
Scorpio  centers  the  thoughts  of  No.  10  upon  sex,  caus- 
ing intense  torture,  as  it  is  impossible  to  gratify  the 
craving.  Saturn  in  a  fixed  sign  is  certainly  a  sore 
afflictor,  the  reaper  of  fruits  from  a  past  life,  and  if 
there  is  to  be  any  solace  it  must  come  through  knowl- 
edge of  the  cause,  prayer,  and  the  patience  engen- 
dered thereby. 

Disorders  of  tlie  Mind 

Before  closing  discussion  of  maladies  peculiar  to 
the  head,  mention  must  be  made  of  insanity,  though 
the  underlying  causes  can  only  be  hinted  at  in  a  work 
of  this  kind,  but  the  student  is  referred  to  The  Rosi- 
crucian  Cosmo-Conception  for  a  thorough  explana- 
tion of  the  cosmic  agencies  concerned  in  building  the 
brain,  and  a  key  to  the  astrological  correspondences. 
Here  we  only  give  the  essential  facts. 

The  brain  and  larynx  were  first  built  by  the 
angelic  host  from  the  Moon  (Luna),  who  used  part 
of  the  sex  force  for  that  purpose,  hence  the  intimate 
connection  between  these  organs.  'Lunacy'  is  often 
induced  by  misuse  of  the  sex  force,  and  'lunatics' 
frequently  have  a  flaw  in  the  speech.  When  boys 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        605 

reach  puberty  the  voice  changes,  the  speech  of  a  fast 
woman  becomes  coarse,  and  degenerate  men  acquire 
effeminate  voices.  In  Italy 'singers  anxious  to  culti- 
vate a  high  tenor  voice  have  become  eunuchs  to  achieve 
their  purpose. 

Into  the  system  thus  built  by  the  lunar  host  un- 
der Jehovah,  rebel  Angels  led  by  Lucifer,  the  Spirit 
of  Mars,  insinuated  themselves,  they  inculcated  pas- 
sion, sex  abuse  and  rebellion  against  the  rulership  of 
the  Angels  of  Jehovah.  To  offset  their  influence  our 
Elder  Brothers  from  Mercury  were  commissioned  to 
foster  reason  that  man  may  in  time  learn  to  guide 
himself.  All  the  great  Hierarchies  work  in  our  bodies 
constantly,  but  the  three  mentioned  have  particular 
dominion  over  sex  and  sense,  each  invests  one  of  the 
three  segments  of  the  spinal  cord.  The  sublimely 
spiritual  hierarchy  of  Neptune  works  in  the  spinal 
canal  and  cerebral  ventricles  to  awaken  spiritual 
senses  which,  when  evolved,  enable  the  imprisoned 
spirit  to  pierce  the  veil  of  flesh  and  contact  superphy- 
sical  realms.  The  Lucifer  Spirits  dominate  the  left 
cerebral  hemisphere  which  now  is  our  principal  organ 
of  thought.  The  Mercurians  have  dominion  over  the 
right  hemisphere,  which  will  come  into  activity  in  the 
future  and  elevate  mankind  to  a  higher,  nobler  plane 
of  life,  give  us  the  power  over  the  lower  nature  and 
make  us  Christlike.  The  lunar  Angels  hold  sway  in 
the  cerebellum  which  is  the  instrument  of  coordina- 
tion. In  this  veritable  'Tree  of  Knowledge'  the  fight 
is  fought  between  forces  which  make  for  the  emanci- 


606  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

pation  of  man  and  agencies  which  aim  to  keep  him 
dependent,  as  explained  in  Rosicrucian  Christianity 
Series,  Lecture  No.  14,  "Lucifer,  Tempter  or  Bene- 
factor ? ' ' 

Such  are  the  teachings  which  explain  the  deep 
reason  back  of  astrological  dicta,  and  any  qualified 
seer  may  easily  perceive  the  various  agencies  at  work 
in  the  human  body,  such  are  few,  however,  and  the 
student  of  Astrology  has  reason  to  thank  God  day  by 
day  for  the  blessed  science  which  is  of  greater  benefit 
than  any  measure  of  spiritual  sight.  Though  the  writ- 
ers are  firm  believers  in  the  law  of  compensation 
which  gives  to  each  exactly  what  he  has  earned,  nei- 
ther more  nor  less,  we  cannot  free  ourselves  from 
the  feeling  that  our  measure  of  spiritual  faculties 
has  been  heaped  and  shaken  down.  We  feel  very, 
very  grateful  for  the  privilege  and  added  usefulness 
in  service  which  this  gives  us.  Nevertheless,  were 
the  alternative  placed  before  us  involving  choice  be- 
tween loss  of  spiritual  faculties  and  loss  of  our  know- 
ledge of  Astrology,  we  should  not  hesitate  one  mo- 
ment, but  decide  at  once  in  favor  of  our  beloved 
science,  neither  ought  this  surprise  anyone  who  will 
give  the  matter  a  moment's  thought.  It  is  true  that 
spiritual  sight,  even  in  its  rudimentary  form  enables 
us  to  see  the  condition  of  the  human  body  to  the  mi- 
nutest detail,  and  thus  affords  a  much  easier  means  of 
diagnosis  than  Astrology,  but  though  it  penetrates  to 
the  innermost  core  of  the  bone,  mere  clairvoyance  is 
superficial  compared  to  Astrology  for  it  shows  only 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        607 

present  conditions  of  the  body.  To  find  the  causes 
which  led  up  to  that  state  and  judge  of  future  ten- 
dencies, it  is  necessary  to  consult  the  memory  of  na- 
ture. We  should  have  to  do  that  personally,  and  this 
time  would  not  permit,  as  we  are  handling  hundreds 
of  cases,  but  a  simple  astrological  figure,which  we 
may  commission  one  of  our  students  to  cast,  reveals 
as  much  at  a  glance.  There  are  delineated  the  causes 
of  mental,  moral  and  physical  disorders,  it  shows  ac- 
curately the  stages  that  have  been  passed  and  the  cri- 
ses yet  to  come.  It  also  indicates  the  direction  in 
which  a  remedy  may  be  looked  for  and  the  most  fa- 
vorable time  for  administering  the  same.  It  helps 
people  Here  and  Now,  and  the  astrologer  who  lives 
up  to  his  privilege  has  a  mission  so  high  and  so  holy 
that  the  office  of  priest,  (in  the  esoteric  sense  of  the 
term),  pales  into  insignificance.  Let  the  aspirant  to 
this  great  knowledge  remember  that  he  stands  upon 
holier  ground  than  Moses  before  the  burning  bush, 
when  he  looks  at  a  horoscope.  Through  that  circle- 
.symbol  of  infinity  an  immortal  soul  is  laid  bare,  and 
woe  to  him  who  dares  to  look  with  profane  eyes,  for 
no  matter  how  that  soul  may  have  been  smirched  in 
its  pilgrimage  through  matter,  it  is  essentially  divine 
and  as  dear  to  the  Father,  yes,  perhaps  even  more 
precious,  than  the  righteous  who  do  not  need  mercy 
and  compassion.  This  has  been  somewhat  of  a  digres- 
sion, but  we  have  no  apologies  to  offer,  for  we  preach 
Astrology  as  a  religion  and  feel  the  necessity  of  em- 
phasizing this  phase  in  season  and  out,  if  by  any 


608  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

means  we  may  inculcate  in  others  the  reverence  which 
we  ourselves  feel  for  this  divine  science. 

Returning  to  the  astrological  consideration  of  in- 
sanity, and  in  view  of  what  has  been  said  we  may  note, 
that  the  horoscope  shows  how,  in  the  spinal  canal, 
rays  of  the  various  hierarchies  blend,  and  Astrology 
tabulates  the  resultant  mental  conditions  as  follows: 

People  not  congenitally  affected,  with  cardinal 
signs  rising,  particularly  if  cardinal  or  fixed  signs 
also  invest  the  Midheaven  and  Nadir,  rarely  become 
insane.  The  active  nature  forbids  morbid  tendencies 
and  blues,  disappointment  is  quickly  thrown  off  and 
hope  springs  eternal  in  the  cardinal  breast  urging  to 
renewed  struggle  with  conditions.  It  is  said  that  the 
exception  proves  the  rule,  and  when  Capricorn  rises 
the  saturnine  rulership  gives  a  tendency  to  melan- 
choly which  under  certain  aggravating  circumstances 
may  provoke  suicide,  particularly  when  the  ruler  is 
cooped  up  in  the  Eighth  House,  as  we  see  in  horoscope 
No.  12.  Virgo,  a  common  sign,  devoid  of  stamina, 
holds  the  Sun,  Saturn,  Venus  and  the  Moon  in  this, 
the  house  of  death;  it  robs  the  person  of  joy  in  life 
and  impels  him  to  end  it  under  stress  of  sorrow. 
Knowledge  on  the  part  of  an  astrologer  friend  has  so 
far  forestalled  the  calamity,  and  it  is  hoped,  may  save 
the  poor  man  from  committing  so  grave  a  crime. 

When  a  Fixed  sign  rises  at  birth  of  a  normal 
child,  chances  of  insanity  in  later  life  are  so  exceed 
ingly  remote  as  to  be  almost  negligible,  especially  if 
a  Fixed  or  Cardinal  sign  is  also  on  the  Midheaven. 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        609 

In  our  extended  practice,  we  know  of  no  exception, 
the  rigid,  set  and  inflexible  nature  of  the  Fixed  signs 
seems  to  protect  the  mind  under  all  exigencies  of 
stress. 

It  therefore  follows,  that  the  mentally  unbal- 
anced come  principally  from  those  born  with  Com- 
mon signs  on  the  angles.  The  intrinsic  nature  of  these 
signs  is  Flexibility;  as  a  reed  in  the  wind  they  are 
swayed  hither  and  thither  under  stress  of  circum- 
stances; they  have  no  stamina  or  stability,  and  take 
reverses  much  to  heart,  while  they  last.  Sorrow 
seems  to  overwhelm  them  and  balance  is  easily  lost. 

It  is  a  distinctive  feature  of  the  Rosicrucian 
teachings  that  pupils  in  the  Western  world  must  be 
given  a  reason  for  every  dictum,  so  as  to  forestall 
criticism,  as  much  as  possible,  for  it  retards  develop- 
ment every  time  it  is  indulged.  The  Rosicrucian 
teachings  therefore  aim  to  forestall  questions  at  every 
point  by  giving  reasons  for  every  dictum,  so  that  the 
critical  mind  may  be  weaned  away  from  this  attitude. 
We  are  ardently  looking  for  the  day  and  reign  of 
Christ,  the  Friend  of  man,  we  do  not  know  when  He 
will  come,  no  man  knows,  but  Paul  said  that  when  He 
comes  we  shall  be  like  Him.  Adverse  criticism  and 
skepticism  were  not  traits  of  His  character  and  any- 
thing that  will  aid  to  eradicate  these  undesirable 
characteristics  hastens  the  glad  day  of  Universal 
Friendship. 

The  reason  has  been  given  in  Simplified  Scien- 
tific Astrology,  why  the  Ascendant  rules  the  body  as 

39 


610  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

a  whole :  it  is  the  place  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  con- 
ception. In  the  Bible  angels  are  often  mentioned  as 
heralds  of  birth  and  their  lunar  home  is  the  focus 
whence  the  spirits  enter  our  terrestrial  sphere  on  their 
return  to  physical  life.  They  fashion  the  etheric 
mould  for  our  present  instrument,  and  direct  the 
growth  of  the  foetus.  Therefore  the  Ascendant  and 
the  Moon  show  the  organic  disabilities  which  lead  to 
mental  disorder.  The  congenital  idiocy  resulting 
from  lack  of  proper  adjustment  between  the  vital 
body  and  the  physical  vehicle  has  been  thoroughly 
described  in  the  Rosicrucian  Cosmo-Conception,  to- 
gether with  causes  producing  the  same  during  pre- 
natal life.  Astrologically  this  condition  is  produced 
by  an  affliction  of  the  Ascendant,  that  is  to  say,  the 
Moon's  place  at  conception,  which  throws  the  angle 
of  the  stellar  ray  out  of  parallax  to  the  mother 's  body, 
and  the  physical  vehicle  is  built  in  such  a  manner 
that  the  head  of  the  vital  body  is  several  inches  above 
the  skull.  Thus  the  nerve  centers  are  askew,  prevent- 
ing the  ego  from  properly  controlling  its  instrument. 
This  is  one  of  the  configurations  which  produce  idiocy 
and  St.  Vitus'  dance.  Uranus  and  Neptune  are  espe- 
cially concerned  in  producing  this  latter  phenomenon. 
Saturn  is  the  cause  of  melancholy  and  depres- 
sion. Mars  and  Uranus  produce  the  muscular  and 
violent  forms  of  insanity.  Horoscopes  13  and  14  illus- 
trate these  peculiarities.  No.  13  also  shows  the  con- 
nection between  puberty  and  the  mental  state.  Gem- 
ini is  rising,  with  Taurus  and  Mars  intercepted  in  the 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        611 

Sixth  and  Twelfth  Houses,  from  whence  come  disease 
and  confinement.  The  Moon  is  in  Taurus,  which  rules 
the  larynx,  she  is  in  conjunction  with  Neptune, 
square  to  Mercury,  and  Mars  is  in  Scorpio,  which 
rules  the  generative  organs.  There  we  have  at  once 
the  tendencies  to  a  disease,  which  is  further  accent- 
uated by  the  fact  that  Neptune  in  Taurus  squares  the 
Sun  in  Leo,  and  Leo  has  rule  over  the  heart,  and  is  the 
prime  factor  in  circulation  upon  which  the  life  of  the 
body  depends;  thus  the  threatened  illness  may  be  set 
down  to  trouble  with  the  blood,  produced  by  a  ner- 
vous affection.  Puberty  occurs  at  the  time  when  the 
Moon  is  in  the  opposite  quarter  from  its  place  at 
birth.  She  entered  Scorpio,  the  opposite  of  Taurus 
which  held  her  at  birth,  at  the  time  when  the  child 
was  nearly  twelve  years  of  age.  Up  to  that  time  the 
little  girl  had  been  bright,  but  the  conjunction  with 
Mars  in  Scorpio  precipitated  the  period  and  robbed 
the  growing  child  of  vitality  sorely  needed  at  that 
time.  The  initial  periods  were  few,  but  left  her  de- 
pleted of  strength  to  withstand  the  square  to  Mercury 
and  the  opposition  of  the  Moon  to  its  radical  place. 
(The  radical  place  of  a  planet  is  its  position  at  birth.) 
This  affliction  of  Mercury,  the  ruler,  by  the  Moon  at 
birth,  was  thus  excited  and  insanity  showed  itself  in 
consequence.  As  the  affliction  comes  from  fixed  signs, 
we  may  judge  it  will  be  impossible  to  overcome,  and 
the  best  that  can  be  done  for  the  poor  soul  is  to  pray 
for  the  day  of  its  release,  that  it  may  have  a  better 
chance  in  a  future  embodiment. 


612  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STAKS 

No.  14  is  the  horoscope  of  a  young  man.  The  common 
sign,  Gemini  is  rising,  the  ruler,  Mercury,  is  in  the 
Eighth  House,  the  house  of  death,  Uranus  and  the 
Moon  are  in  opposition.  This  configuration,  which  is 
similar  to  that  of  horoscope  No.  12,  has  the  same  sig- 
nificance, it  presages  suicidal  tendencies  under  ner- 
vous strain,  and  this  augur  is  all  the  more  dangerous 
as  it  comes  from  fixed  signs.  Mars  and  Neptune  in 
Taurus  give  a  desire  for  drink  and  the  Sun  in  a 
watery  sign  accentuates  the  tendency.  Under  such 
circumstances  the  man  has  several  times  tried  to  end 
his  life  in  a  most  extraordinary  manner.  Jupiter  in 
Sagittarius,  square  to  Saturn  in  Pisces,  increases  the 
looseness  of  his  morals  and  makes  him  dishonest,  He 
will  forge  and  steal  in  order  to  satisfy  his  passion  and 
craving  for  drink  and  questionable  society.  Leo  on 
the  Second  Hou?e  with  Uranus  and  the  Moon  in  close 
conjunction,  shows  that  he  spends  what  he  gets  in 
dissolute  living. 

There  is  one  redeeming  feature  in  the  horoscope ; 
Tenus  in  the  Midheaven  sextile  to  his  ruler,  and  trine 
to  the  Moon.  He  has  energy  and  artistic  ability 
which,  it  is  hoped,  may  in  time  rouse  the  better  qual- 
ities and  make  him  a  man.  But  again  we  reiterate 
that  with  the  affliction  from  fixed  signs  the  obstacle 
is  almost  insurmountable. 

In  conclusion  the  student's  attention  is  directed 
to  the  Third  and  the  Ninth  Houses,  which  will  also 
have  an  influence  on  the  mind.  Planets  therein  act 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        613 

according  to  the  intrinsic  nature  expressed  in  the  key 
word  of  each. 

Pulmonary  Diseases 

When  we  studied  progression,  horoscope  No.  15 
was  used  as  an  illustration  to  show  the  various  crises 
which  eventually  led  up  to  the  death  of  the  native. 
But  in  order  to  keep  the  student's  mind  closely  cen- 
tered upon  the  mathematical  side,  we  refrained  from 
delineating  the  nature  of  the  disease  which  caused  her 
demise,  promising  to  elucidate  that  point  in  the 
proper  place. 

Virgo  is  rising  and  Mercury,  the  ruler,  is  trine  at 
birth,  but  unfortunately  he  is  combust,  a  term  which 
has  been  previously  explained  as  meaning  that  the 
heat  of  the  Sun  burns  up  the  ray  of  any  planet  placed 
too  close  thereto.  The  disease  was  not  congenital 
however,  although  the  Moon  was  square  to  the  Ascen- 
dant. But  Virgo  people,  we  have  seen,  are  extremely 
fond  of  being  sick.  When  once  they  have  had  a  little 
pain,  they  magnify  and  nuree  it  and  are  loath  to  let 
it  go.  The  square  of  Neptune  in  Aries  to  Uranus 
caused  St.  Vitus'  dance  at  about  the  age  of  five  years, 
when  the  Moon  passed  the  opposition  to  Uranus.  This 
was  the  beginning  of  her  illness.  She  afterwards  re- 
garded herself  as  an  invalid  and  nursed  sickness.  At 
the  time  of  puberty  the  Moon  was  in  Gemini  in  oppo- 
sition to  its  place  at  birth.  This  excited  the  above 
mentioned  square  between  the  radical  Moon  and  the 
Ascendant,  it  also  caused  the  periods  to  be  irregular 


614  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

and  troublesome.  The  blood  must  have  an  outlet  and 
the  square  of  Neptune  to  Jupiter  in  Cancer,  which 
rules  the  stomach,  caused  haemorrhages  when  the  Moon 
came  into  conjunction  with  the  Dragon's  Tail  in  Sag- 
ittarius (the  opposite  sign  to  Gemini),  and  the  radical 
square  of  the  Ascendant  and  the  Moon  were  again 
excited.  Then  also  the  lungs  became  affected  and  the 
crises  enumerated  in  the  chapter  on  Progression 
ended  the  life. 

As  we  feel  that  this  cannot  be  reiterated  too 
often,  we  repeat  our  injunction  to  students  never  to 
let  a  patient  know  that  there  is  any  danger  or  that 
there  is  a  crisis  ahead.  Particularly,  please  remem- 
ber particularly,  if  it  is  a  Virgo,  for  they  have  no 
chance  at  all  if  they  know  what  is  coming. 

Horoscope  No.  16  shows  the  natal  configuration 
of  an  actress.  Sagittarius  is  rising,  Jupiter  and  the 
Moon  are  in  close  conjunction  in  Gemini,  a  mercurial 
sign,  they  are  supported  by  a  trine  of  the  Sun;  thus 
she  had  a  most  healthy  constitution  at  birth,  so  far  as 
the  lung  power  is  concerned.  Mars  and  Mercury  are 
also  in  an  airy  sign,  giving  energy  to  respiration  and 
it  thus  seems  as  though  this  person  were  singularly 
well  fortified  against  pulmonary  trouble.  But  Sat- 
urn, Neptune  and  the  Dragon's  Tail  in  Taurus  in 
the  Sixth  House,  gives  a  tendency  to  colds  and  con- 
traction of  the  throat.  Uranus  in  Virgo  produces  con- 
vulsive movements  of  the  diaphragm  and  abdominal 
region ;  he  is  square  to  Saturn  in  Taurus,  and  thus  we 
see  how  graphically  the  stellar  script  pictures  the 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        615 

tendency  to  convulsive  coughing  and  haemorrhages 
which  nearly  brought  the  young  lady  to  an  early 
grave,  when  Mars  by  progression,  came  into  conjunc- 
tion with  the  radical  Sun  and  vivified  the  square  to 
Saturn.  \Ve  rejoice  to  say  that  the  good  aspects  first 
mentioned  enabled  the  young  lady  to  wreather  the 
storm;  but  close  attention  to  diet,  regular  living  and 
above  all  absolute  continence  are  required  to  regain 
full  physical  strength,  for  there  is  much  evidence  to 
show  that  license  played  an  important  part  in  reduc- 
ing the  life  forces  and  robbing  her  of  the  needed 
strength  at  the  critical  period. 

Diseases  of  the  Stomach 

Horoscope  No.  17  presents  a  number  of  diseases, 
but  all  have  their  root  in  an  insatiable  appetite  fos- 
tered by  the  fact  that  the  person  is  a  professional 
chef.  Venus  in  Taurus  gives  good  taste  in  food,  and 
the  sextile  to  Mercury  in  Cancer  causes  the  mind  to 
run  in  the  direction  of  preparations  wherewith  to 
tickle  the  palate.  But  the  Moon  being  ruler  of  Can- 
cer, the  rising  sign  which  has  dominion  over  the  stom- 
ach, shows  that  this  over  indulgence  of  the  appetite 
will  result  disastrously.  The  distended  stomach 
presses  upon  the  heart,  of  which  the  Sun,  our  life 
giver,  is  ruler.  This  planet  is  in  Gemini,  the  sign 
which  has  dominion  over  the  lungs,  and  square  to 
Mars  in  Pisces.  Mars  rules  the  iron  in  the  blood  and 
the  Sun  gives  us  oxygen,  thus  this  square  shows  that 
the  blood  will  lack  in  that  life  giving  element.  The 


616  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

conjunction  of  the  Sun  with  Uranus  in  Gemini  pro- 
duces spasmodic  motion  of  the  lungs  and  labored  in- 
spiration to  obtain  sufficient  oxygen  wherewith  to 
nourish  the  system,  thus  we  have  the  condition  called 
asthma.  Saturn  and  Jupiter  are  in  Virgo  which 
rules  the  abdomen,  square  to  the  Sun  and  Uranus  in 
Gemini,  showing  lack  of  circulation  and  a  tendency 
to  ulcerous  growths,  and  there  is  a  general  lack  of  nu- 
trition in  the  whole  system  because  of  the  great  en- 
ergy required  to  eliminate  waste  from  the  enormous 
quantities  of  food  which  this  person  consumes.  Sad 
to  say,  however,  persons  in  that  occupation  protest 
that  they  cannot  help  tasting,  and  that  in  spite  of  all 
ills  they  must  eat  to  excess.  It  were  wiser  of  course, 
to  seek  another  profession  and  train  the  system  to 
moderation. 

In  horoscope  No.  18  we  have  the  natal  configura- 
tions of  another  chef,  they  are  similar  to  those  de- 
lineated in  No.  17.  Cancer,  the  sign  of  the  stomach, 
is  rising,  with  Mars  and  the  Sun  close  to  the  Ascen- 
dant, thus  the  forces  of  this  individual  will  be  di- 
rected principally  toward  the  stomach,  and  the 
opposition  of  the  Moon  shows  disastrous  results  which 
eventually  resulted  from  gratifying  his  ravenous 
appetite.  The  Sun  is  life  and  motion,  Mars  is  dy- 
namic energy,  and  the  excessive  activity  centered  in 
the  stomach  to  take  care  of  digestion  causes  this 
organ  to  be  inflamed.  Nature  is  not  a  jerry  builder, 
she  builds  substantially  and  well,  or  our  bodies  could 
never  stand  the  abuse  we  give  them  as  well  as  they  do, 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        617 

but  even  the  healthiest  organism  must  give  way  in 
time  under  such  dreadful  strain.  As  indicated  by 
the  Sun  and  Mars,  an  ulcer  developed  from  the  heat, 
it  ate  through  the  stomach  and  relieved  the  poor  soul 
from  its  misused  body.  Neptune  in  Taurus,  the  sign 
of  the  palate,  was  of  course  also  a  contributing  factor. 
It  is  not  to  be  supposed  however,  that  anyone  who 
has  Cancer  rising  or  many  planets  in  Cancer,  is  nec- 
essarily going  to  die  of  the  disease  to  which  that  name 
has  been  given,  but  it  would  be  the  part  of  wisdom  to 
train  children  with  such  afflictions  to  abstain  from 
over  eating,  for  it  is  a  truism  that  more  people  die 
from  over  eating  than  from  starvation. 

Diseases  of  the  Heart 

As  the  heart  is  the  seat  of  physical  life,  its  nat- 
ural ruler  is  the  Sun  and  the  solar  sign  is  Leo.  But 
it  is  a  mistake  to  think  that  palpitation  of  the  heart  is 
necessarily  shown  by  an  affliction  to  the  sign  Leo. 
Indeed,  there  are  many  cases  where  over  indulgence 
of  the  appetite  indicated  by  the  sign  Cancer  distends 
the  stomach,  which  presses  upon  the  heart  producing 
what  the  person  then  believes  to  be  heart  trouble. 
This  was  the  case  in  horoscopes  Nos.  17  and  18,  both 
believed  their  heart  trouble  to  be  the  primal  cause 
of  the  illness  under  which  they  were  suffering,  while 
in  reality  it  was  only  one  of  the  effects. 

But  No.  3  shows  a  case  of  organic  weakness  of 
the  heart.  The  Sun  is  at  home  in  the  fixed  sign  Leo 
and  receives  a  square  from  Saturn  the  reaper;  thus 


618  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

it  is  evident  that  the  heart  was  a  weak  link  in  the  con- 
stitution and  would  cause  trouble  in  time,  unless 
care  was  taken.  Unfortunately  of  course,  parents 
knew  less  about  Astrology  a  generation  ago  than  to- 
day, when  the  science  is  coming  to  the  fore.  The  en- 
ergy of  which  this  horoscope  is  full,  was  allowed  to 
spend  itself  unrestrained  with  no  thought  given  to 
coming  disaster. 

Venus  and  Jupiter,  the  planets  ruling  the  venous 
and  arterial  circulation,  are  in  opposition.  Venus  is 
in  Gemini  the  sign  of  the  lungs,  and  when  the  Sun 
progressed  to  the  square  of  Venus'  radical  place,  and 
Uranus  transited  the  Sixth  House  illness  began, 
breathing  became  labored  as  indicated  by  the  square 
of  the  life  giver  to  the  lungs.  Uranus  in  opposition 
to  his  natal  place  in  Cancer  produced  the  convulsive 
movement  known  as  the  stomach  cough,  and  thus  for 
years  this  illness  robbed  the  man  of  vital  energy,  but 
these  afflictions  passed  and  because  of  attention  to 
right  living  the  system  has  been  left  none  the  worse 
for  the  experience.  Moreover,  the  suffering  of  the 
soul  has  resulted  in  growth  that  he  might  not  other- 
wise have  obtained. 

Horoscope  No.  19  shows  another  case  of  heart 
disease.  The  Sun  and  Neptune  are  conjunct  in  the 
Eighth  House,  in  opposition  to  Mars.  As  this  con- 
junction is  in  the  sign  Gemini  and  in  the  house  of 
death,  it  is  easy  to  see  the  portent.  The  dynamic 
energy  of  Mars  which  tears  everything  to  pieces,  ac- 
celerates motion,  causes  palpitation  etc.  The  Sun 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        619 

and  Neptune  in  Gemini  show  a  likelihood  of  a  haem- 
orrhage of  the  lungs,  resulting  from  over  activity  of 
that  vital  organ.  The  Moon  and  Saturn  in  Leo  show 
the  obstructed  passage  of  the  blood,  for  the  keynote  of 
Saturn  is  obstruction  and  retardation ;  thus  the  valves 
of  the  heart  become  leaky  and  the  backward  flow  of 
the  blood  called  regurgitation  takes  place. 

Leo  also  rules  the  spinal  cord  and  malefic  config- 
urations there  may  produce  hunchbacks  and  kindred 
disabilities. 

Horoscope  No.  20  is  the  figure  of  a  beautiful  boy, 
well  formed  and  healthy  who  became  afflicted  with 
curvature  of  the  spine.  Here  we  find  the  Moon  in 
conjunction  with  the  Dragon's  Tail  in  the  Twelfth 
House,  square  to  Saturn  and  Uranus  in  Scorpio.  At 
five  and  one  half  years  of  age  the  Moon  had  pro- 
gressed to  the  square  of  its  own  place,  this  and  the 
conjunction  with  Saturn  and  Uranus  in  Scorpio, 
brought  on  his  affliction.  After  enduring  eight  years 
of  torture  he  died,  having  been  taken  from  one  free 
dispensary  to  another  and  used  by  the  doctors  to  prac. 
tice  on.  Each  doctor  tried  a  new  cure.  He  was  in 
plaster  casts  for  years  but  to  no  purpose.  The  mother 
is  represented  by  Uranus  in  conjunction  with  Mars, 
careless  and  of  dissolute  habits,  she  was  glad  of  the 
opportunity  to  place  the  boy  anywhere  in  order  to 
shirk  the  responsibility  of  caring  for  him.  The  boy 
died  when  the  Moon  had  progressed  to  an  opposition 
of  its  own  place,  it  was  also  then  in  square  to  Uranus 
and  Saturn. 


620  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Diseases  of  the  Kidneys 

The  kidneys  are  ruled  by  Libra  and  Scorpio  both. 
That  is  to  say,  the  functional  activity  of  secretion  of 
urine  comes  from  Libra,  but  the  bladder  and  urethra 
through  which  elimination  takes  place  are  ruled  by 
Scorpio.  Renal  stones  and  gravel  would  result  from 
an  affliction  to  Libra,  for  they  are  formed  in  the  pe- 
duncle of  the  kidneys.  Diseases  of  the  ureters  are 
also  under  Libra. 

Horoscopes  Nos.  3  and  21  are  examples  of  how 
the  stars  indicate  diseases  of  the  kidneys.  In  both 
cases  Saturn  is  in  an  angle  and  square  to  the  Sun, 
he  is  in  his  sign  of  exaltation.  Libra  which  rules 
the  kidneys,  is  also  elevated.  This  latter  point  may 
not  be  apparent  to  beginners  who  look  at  No.  3  and 
find  Saturn,  as  they  would  say,  down  in  the  Fourth 
House,  but  the  nadir  of  the  birth  place  is  Midheaven 
or  Zenith  of  an  opposite  point  on  the  earth,  and  plan- 
ets in  either  of  these  points  are  found  to  have  a 
greater  power. 

In  the  two  examples  mentioned,  Saturn,  the 
planet  of  obstruction,  prevents  secretion  of  urine  but 
does  not  interfere  with  elimination  ol  that  which  has 
been  secreted.  But  in  horoscope  No.  8  where  he  is 
posited  in  the  sign  Scorpio  square  to  Mercury,  we  have 
a  case  where  the  formation  of  gravel  and  renal  stones 
is  shown  at  birth.  A  person  with  such  a  configura- 
tion ought  to  be  extremely  careful  not  to  drink  hard 
water,  for  this  may  cause  a  painful  ailment.  Only 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        621 

filtered  water  should  be  used  for  purposes  of  cooking 
and  drinking.  Sour  milk,  buttermilk  and  grape  juice 
are  great  solvents.  We  may  further  say  that  boiling 
water  will  not  soften  it,  and  the  fur  which  gathers  in 
a  tea  kettle,  where  hard  water  has  been  boiled  is  no 
evidence  to  the  contrary,  for  that  scaly  formation 
was  obtained  from  the  water  which  evaporated,  what 
remains  in  the  kettle  for  use  is  as  hard  as  ever. 

In  horoscope  No.  7  we  find  Saturn  in  Scorpio 
square  to  Mars.  Saturn  produces  the  obstruction  of 
the  blood  known  as  haemorrhoids,  and  the  dynamic 
energy  of  Mars  causes  rupture  of  the  congested 
places ;  thus  we  have  the  painful  bleeding  well  known 
to  so  many  sufferers.  As  a  secondary  result  consti- 
pation adds  to  the  malady,  because  persons  afflicted 
with  the  first  named  disease  shrink  from  the  added 
pain  of  the  stool,  and  do  not  respond  to  nature's  call. 
A  prolonged  rest  seems  to  be  the  only  physical  means 
which  is  really  effective.  Nature  however,  will  be 
very  much  aided  by  proper  osteopathic  manipula- 
tions, and  a  diet  consisting  principally  of  milk. 

Hip  Disease 

Sagittarius  rising,  or  in  the  Sixth  or  Twelfth 
Houses,  is  responsible  for  broken  bones  and  accidents. 
Under  the  chapter  on  the  Dragon's  Tail  we  saw  how 
the  person  described  in  horoscope  No.  6  fell  upon  the 
ice  and  broke  her  hip.  No.  21  has  even  stronger  in- 
dications of  accidents  and  probably  the  life  will  end 
in  an  untoward  manner.  Sagittarius  is  rising,  Sat- 


622  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

urn  is  exalted  in  the  Midheaven  exactly  square  to  the 
Sun,  and  Neptune  is  elevated  at  the  nadir  also  squar- 
ing the  Moon ;  thus  both  luminaries  are  afflicted.  As 
the  Sun  is  lord  of  the  house  of  death  these  auguries 
presage  an  untimely  end.  The  only  hope  lies  in  the 
sextile  of  Jupiter  to  the  Sun  which  gives  hair  breadth 
escapes.  This  gentleman's  life  has  been  jeopardized 
many  times  in  railroad  wrecks,  automobile  accidents 
etc.,but  although  he  has  thus  been  near  the  gate  of 
death  many  times,  the  benefic  ray  of  Jupiter  has  so 
far  preserved  his  life  and  no  bones  have  yet  been 
broken.  The  lady  described  in  horoscope  No.  22  has 
not  been  so  fortunate,  her  arms  and  limbs  have  been 
accidentally  broken  several  times,  for  Mars  and  the 
Moon  are  in  Sagittarius  in  the  Twelfth  House,  also 
in  opposition  to  Jupiter.  The  Sun  and  Mercury  are 
in  the  Eighth  House  in  opposition  to  Neptune  and 
these  planets  are  square  the  first  mentioned  positions. 
Saturn,  her  ruler,  is  square  to  Venus  so  that  she  at- 
tracts accidents  and  never  escapes  being  hurt. 

Diseases  of  tine  Limbs 

In  horoscope  No.  7  we  find  Mars  in  Aquarius 
square  to  Saturn,  and  from  this  affliction  it  is  evident 
that  there  is  an  obstruction  of  the  blood  in  the  lower 
limbs,  usually  known  as  varicose  veins.  Horoscope 
No.  17  shows  Mars  in  the  sign  Pisces  in  opposition  to 
Saturn  and  Jupiter.  It  is  the  nature  of  Saturn  to 
obstruct,  and  his  conjunction  with  Jupiter  shows  that 
the  circulation  is  poor.  Mars  in  Pisces  produces  heat, 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        623 

inflammation  and  swelling  of  the  feet,  because  of  the 
stagnated  blood.  We  have  already  seen  that  the  per- 
son there  described  is  gluttonously  inclined,  and 
therefore  it  is  no  wonder  that  stagnation  of  the  blood 
produces  such  painful  afflictions  as  indicated  by  these 
configurations.  The  remedy  of  course,  is  self-evident, 
it  is  moderation. 


624  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        625 


40 


626  THE   MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        627 


628  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES       629 


630  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES       631 


632  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        633 


634  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        635 
No.  23. — INSANITY  AND  SPIRIT  CONTROL 


In  judging  this  horoscope  we  look  first  to  the 
mentality,  as  this  is  always  the  most  important  factor 
in  the  treatment  of  a  patient.  Mercury  and  the  Moon 
are  the  two  principal  factors  in  determining  this 
point,  though,  of  course,  all  the  planets  have  their 
bearing  on  that  as  well  as  on  any  other  subject.  Here 
we  find  that  Mercury  is  combust  and  that  it  is  with 
the  Sun  in  the  Common  sign,  Pisces.  That  in  itself 
is  not  a  very  good  augur;  we  further  find  that  the 
Moon  is  in  conjunction  with  Neptune  in  Aries,  that 


636  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

it  is  square  to  both  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  and  that 
therefore  the  mind  must  be  of  a  weak  and  unstable 
nature.  Mars,  the  Moon  and  Neptune  in  Aries  would-- 
in  itself  make  an  erratic  person,  but  when  we  find, 
as  here,  that  Luna  is  square  to  Jupiter,  the  planet 
of  religion,  also  to  Saturn,  the  planet  of  obstruction 
and  negation,  it  naturally  causes  a  very  evil  condi- 
tion. The  opposition  of  Jupiter  arid  Saturn  show  that 
whatever  desire  for  religion  Jupiter  might  engender, 
would  always  be  opposed  by  the  influence  of  Saturn, 
who  would  council  "Don't,  don't,"  causing  the  per- 
son to  deride  what  he  or  she  really  wants  to  believe. 
It  is  a  common  experience  that  that  which  we  cannot 
understand,  appears  chaotic  and  erratic  to  our  minds. 
Neptune  is  the  planet  of  fear  and  chaos  to  us,  for  the 
human  race  has  not  learned  to  live  up  to  its  high 
vibrations,  and  the  Moon  together  with  Uranus  makes 
that  chaotic  mental  state  which  we  find  in  this  circle. 
To  offset  this  influence  there  is  the  trine  of  Jupiter, 
the  planet  of  religion,  to  both  the  Sun  and  Mercury; 
but  even  this  powerful  influence  will  not  be  able  to 
break  the  condition  entirely,  though  there  is  no  doubt 
this  great  redeeming  power  has  had  an  effect  in  stav- 
ing off  the  evil  day  when  the  mind  \vill  break  down 
entirely.  As  usual,  the  marching  orbs  in  their  cir- 
cling dance  come  to  a  point  where  the  string  of  each 
aspect  is  touched  which  then  produces  the  tone  of 
either  harmony  or  discord  that  impels  us  to  actions 
which  we  call  good  or  evil ;  so  also  in  this  case.  The 
time  marked  on  the  clock  of  destiny  by  the  hand  of 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        637 

God  was  April,  1913 ;  then  the  lunation  fell  into  con- 
junction with  the  Moon  in  Aries.  This  naturally 
excited  the  radical  square  to  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  also 
their  opposition,  and  thus  the  climax  was  precipi- 
tated ;  the  person  became  violently  insane. 

We  may  look  for  the  immediate  cause  that  pre- 
cipitated that  calamity  to  the  radical  position  of  Nep- 
tune and  Uranus.  These,  the  octaves  of  Mercury  and 
Venus,  in  a  square  position  will  always  bring  the 
person  in  contact  with  spirits  who  have  left  the  body, 
or  who  have  never  inhabited  a  body  such  as  we  have 
at  the  present  time. 

During  aspects  like  the  above,  they  would  have 
a  powerful  chance  to  use  this  poor  person  a.s  a  tool 
for  their  nefarious  practices,  for  naturally  those  spir- 
its which  come  under  a  square  are  not  what  we  would 
call  good  in  any  respect ;  they  have  no  benevolent 
designs  of  helping  their  victim,  no  matter  what  they 
may  profess  in  that  direction. 

The  question  then  comes:  What  can  we  do  for 
a  person  in  that  condition?  We  have  a  good  aspect 
to  the  Moon  and  Neptune,  which  is  the  sextile  of 
Venus.  Neptune  rules  music — classical  string  music 
in  particular— and  Venus  in  Aquarius  gives  the  per- 
son a  love  of  just  that  kind  of  music,  which  will 
soothe  the  mind.  This  configuration  also  gives  a  love 
of  bright  colors  and  sunshine  which  will  help  to  tone 
the  system.  She  should  not  be  allowed  books,  but 
should  have  a  complete  rest  from  all  mental  effort, 
the  brightest  conversation  possible,  and  a  vegetarian 


638  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

diet.  With  these  there  is  a  probability  that  the  evil 
configuration  may  be  overcome  and  the  person  re- 
stored to  mental  health,  though  that  will  never  be 
robust, 

No.  24. — HEART  TROUBLE,  INSUFFICIENT  OXYGENATION, 
EYE  TROUBLE,  DEATH 


Good  Aspects:  Mars  trine  the  Moon,  sextile  Sat- 
urn; Uranus  trine  Neptune;  Jupiter  sextile  Neptune 
and  Uranus. 

Bad  Aspects:  The  Moon  conjunction  Antares. 
opposition  Saturn  and  Venus;  the  Sun  conjunction 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES       639 

Dragon's  Tail,  square  Jupiter;  Mercury  square  Mars. 
The  Moon  on  the  Ascendant  in  Sagittarius 
makes  the  patient  restless  and  unstable,  but  not  shift- 
less, because  the  Moon  is  also  trine  to  Mars.  This 
gives  her  much  more  energy  than  usually  possessed 
by  Sagittarians.  Even  the  opposition  of  the  Moon 
to  Saturn  and  Venus,  which  robs  life  of  its  joys  and 
makes  her  melancholy,  is,  in  a  certain  sense,  a  help ; 
it  gives  her  a  persistence  and  resistance  that  will  not 
allow  her  to  give  in  to  disease.  Mercury  square  Mars 
shows  that  she  has  a  very  quick  temper,  and  as  Mer- 
cury is  in  Taurus,  the  sign  of  voice,  the  unfortunate 
characteristic  will  find  expression  in  an  unbridled 
tongue.  This  will  hurt  her  most  seriously  from  a 
physical  standpoint  (not  to  speak  of  the  even  more 
deplorable  spiritual  injuries) ,  for  Mars  is  in  Leo,  the 
sigh  of  the  heart,  and  that  always  predisposes  to  pal- 
pitation. He  is  sextile  to  Saturn,  but  even  good  as- 
pects to  Saturn  are  physically  inimical,  and  the  Sun, 
which  is  ruler  of  the  heart,  is  in  conjunction  with  the 
saturnine  Dragon's  Tail.  The  nerves  also  are  af- 
fected by  the  square  of  Mars  to  Mercury,  hence  the 
heart  is  far  from  normally  balanced,  and  -the  out- 
bursts of 'temper  which  this  person  is  apt  to  indulge 
in  on  the  slightest  provocation  may  cause  heart  fail- 
ure at  some  time,  by  putting  an  undue  strain  on  this 
organ  and  interfering  with  the  already  sluggish  cir- 
culation, which  is  shown  by  the  square  of  Jupiter 
to  the  Sun  and  the  Dragon's 'Tail,  also  the  conjunc- 
tion of  Venus  to  Saturn,  and  its  opposition  to  the 


640  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Moon,  Jupiter  and  Venus  being  governors  respect- 
ively of  the  arterial  and  venous  circulation. 

The  head  is  particularly  congested  because  the 
Sun  conjunction  the  saturnine  Dragon's  Tail  occurs 
in  Aries,  the  sign  of  the  head,  and  Saturn,  the  planet 
of  obstruction,  is  in  Gemini,  the  sign  of  the  lungs,  in 
conjunction  with  Venus.  This  shows  interference 
with  the  circulation  of  the  venous  blood  in  the  lungs. 
The  Moon,  which  governs  the  tidal  air,  is  in  oppo- 
sition, showing  that  an  insufficient  amount  of  air  is 
inspired  into  the  lungs  to  cleanse  the  blood  of  its 
poisonous  carbon  dioxide,  and  the  presence  of  Saturn 
shows  a  hardening  of  the  tissues,  which  is  apt  to 
develop  into  tuberculosis.  You  will  also  notice  that 
Jupiter,  the  ruler  of  the  Ascendant,  is  in  the  Eighth 
House  square  to  the  Sun  and  the  saturnine  Dragon's 
Tail  in  the  Fourth  House,  and  all  are  in  Cardinal 
signs.  This  is  a  strong  testimony  of  an  accidental 
death,  and  Mars  in  the  Eighth  House,  in  the  sign 
Leo,  which  rules  the  heart,  shows  that  hemorrhages 
may  be  the  cause  which  ends  the  physical  life. 

If  this  person  had  been  taken  hold  of  in  time 
and  taught  self-control,  this  serious  condition  could 
probably  have  been  avoided;  even  now  a  frank  state- 
ment concerning  the  great  danger  that  undue  excite- 
ment may  cause,  should  help  her  to  govern  her  tem- 
per, and  thus  lengthen  life. 

The  Moon  conjunction  Antares,  and  opposition 
to  Saturn  shows  that  the  eyes  are  in  danger  also,  and 
Saturn  in  Gemini,  which  is  a  mercurial  sign,  shows 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        641 

nervous  affection,  and  the  conjunction  of  Venus 
would  suggest  a  congestion  of  the  muscles  of  the  eyes, 
which  may  be  greatly  relieved  by  osteopathic  treat- 
ment. 

A  healer  with  Leo    rising,    and    Saturn  not  in 
Gemini,  would  be  best  able  to  handle  the  case. 

No.  25. — HEART  TROUBLE,  TUBERCULOSIS,  KIDNEYS 


We  judge  first  the  mental  calibre  of  our  patient. 
Four  Common  signs  are  on  the  angles,  and  this  at 
once  describes  the  nature  as  weak  and  vacillating. 
Mercury  square  the  Moon  further  accentuates  this 

41 


642  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

wavering  and  flightiness  of  her  mind,  and  Saturn 
conjunction  Venus  and  Jupiter  in  the  Twelfth  House 
robs  life  of  its  joy,  making  the  person  subject  to  mel- 
ancholy and  morbid  fear.  This  characteristic  is  some- 
what ameliorated  by  the  sextile  of  the  Sun  to  Uranus, 
which  fosters  altruism,  and  the  trine  of  Mercury  to 
Neptune,  which  gives  spiritual  perception,  thus  aid- 
ing to  dispel  gloom  by  directing  the  mind  from  sor- 
rows which  are  but  fleeting,  to  the  eternal  verities. 
To  sum  up,  she  is  prone  to  be  either  "down  in  the 
dumps,"  or  "up  in  the  air,"  and  it  is  necessary  to 
strive  to  cure  her  of  both  depression  and  elation, 
which  are  alike  harmful.  Equipoise  must  be  culti- 
vated to  aid  in  attaining  and  maintaining  health. 
Were  Fixed  signs  on  the  angles  this  would  be  next  to 
impossible,  but  with  Common  signs  there  she  is  more 
adaptable  and  reachable. 

Regarding  the  ailments  to  which  this  lady  is  sub 
ject,  we  note  first  Uranus  in  high  elevation,  conjunc- 
tion the  Dragon's  Tail,  whose  influence  is  saturnine, 
that  is  to  say,  obstructive  and  crystallizing,  harden 
ing.  .  Both  are  in  the  airy  sign  Gemini,  which  gov- 
erns the  lungs,  and  square  to  Saturn  in  the  Twelfth 
House,  which  denotes  confinement — in  prison,  hos- 
pitals or  upon  a  sickbed.  This  gives  us  at  once  the 
key  to  the  trouble.  Sometimes  the  tidal  air  is  almost 
stopped  by  the  Dragon's  Tail,  and  the  square  of  Sat- 
urn, Uranus  prevents  asphyxiation  by  the  convulsive 
movement  of  the  lungs  known  as  cough,  which  clears 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        643 

away  the  obstruction  and  enables  the  heart  to  again, 
circulate  the  blood. 

The  blood  is  unable  to  throw  off  its  poisonous" 
carbonic  acid  because  of  the  obstructive  power  of  the 
Dragon's  Tail  in  Gemini,  and  the  square  of  Saturn 
to  Uranus  in  the  sign  of  the  lungs.  The  arterial  and 
venous  circulation  are  also  impeded  by  the  conjunc- 
tion of  Jupiter  and  Venus  with  Saturn,  hence,  mal- 
nutrition and  carbonic  acid  poisoning  are  in  evi- 
dence. The  hardening  of  the  lungs  and  consequent 
cough,  label  the  case  as  tuberculosis. 

Elimination  of  urine  is  retarded  by  the  square 
of  Mercury  to  the  Moon,  which  is  in  the  latter  part 
of  Libra,  the  sign  of  the  kidneys.  Mercury  governs 
the  sensory  nerves,  while  Mars  rules  the  motor  nerves 
and  muscles.  He  is  in  good  aspect,  showing  that  the 
mechanical  apparatus  is  in  good  condition,  but  that 
the  trouble  is  nervous.  This  may  be  alleviated  by 
manipulations,  and  so  may  the  sluggishness  of  the 
bowels  indicated  by  Saturn  in  Virgo.  The  Mars  hour 
would  be  the  best  time,  the  Sun  hour  next.  Outside 
this  treatment  dry  rubs  with  coarse  gloves  will  stim- 
ulate the  skin  and  aid  in  eliminating  carbonic  acid 
from  the  system.  Whole  wheat  bread  toasted,  plenty 
of  fresh  milk  given  while  still  warm  (for  then  it  con- 
tains the  maximum  quantity  of  the  ether  which  is  so 
necessary  to  restore  the  vital  body),  and  as  much 
green  uncooked  food  as  the  patient  can  take  should 
be  given,  for  that  also  contains  a  maximum  of  ether. 
Onions  are  particularly  valuable  nerve-builders. 


644 


THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 


A  person  with  Taurus  rising,  whose  Saturn  is 
not  in  the  degrees  included  within  the  patient's  First 
or  Sixth  House,  Virgo  or  Pisces,  will  make  the  best 
healer  for  this  patient. 

No.  26. — TUBERCULOSIS 


Good  Aspects:  Uranus  trine  Mercury  and  Nep- 
tune; Moon  sextile  Venus;  Saturn  sextile  Mars. 

Bad  Aspects:  Moon  conjunction  Dragon's  Tail; 
Moon  square  Jupiter;  Sun  square  Mars;  Uranus 
square  Venus. 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        645 

This  is  the  horoscope  of  our  friend,  James  Casey, 
who  wrote  such  helpful  articles  in  the  'Rays.' 
He  passed  into  the  invisible  worlds  in  June,  1918, 
and  as  he  has  no  relatives  connected  with  our 
society  who  might  read  this  diagnosis  and  feel  bad 
on  that  account,  he  gave  us  permission  to  use  it  for 
the  benefit  of  his  fellows.  He  was  born  on  April  24, 
1884,  2:00  P.M.,  in  Harlem,  Iowa,  and  became  af- 
flicted with  tuberculosis  while  living  in  Denver,  Colo., 
the  Mecca  for  all  who  are  afflicted  with  this  disease. 

You  will  notice  that  Saturn,  the  planet  of  crys- 
tallization and  obstruction,  is  placed  in  Gemini,  the 
sign  which  rules  the  lungs,  and  although  Saturn  is 
the  highest  elevated  planet  in  the  horoscope,  besides 
being  unafflicted,  there  is  always  a  weak  spot  in  the 
anatomy  where  he  is  found.  The  hot,  inflammatory 
and  disruptive  Mars  is  in  Leo,  the  sign  which  governs 
the  heart;  square  to  the  Sun,  which  is  ruler  of  Leo, 
in  the  sign  Taurus,  which  governs  the  throat  and  all 
the  passages  there.  This  is  a  configuration  which 
usually  produces  fevers,  inflammation,  wounds  and 
haemorrhages.  Thus  there  was  a  tendency  in  the  sys- 
tem toward  tuberculosis,  and  you  will  furthermore 
notice  that  there  are  four  Common,  flexible  signs  on 
the  angles,  the  Sixth  House  sign,  Virgo,  being  on  the 
Ascendant  with  the  spasmodic  Uranus  afflicting 
Venus,  the  ruler  of  the  venous  circulation,  which  is 
placed  in  Gemini,  the  sign  ruling  the  lungs.  Uranus 
gives  a  tendency  to  coughs  and  spasms,  so  you  see 
that  the  condition  is  very  well  outlined  in  the  horo- 


646  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

scope,  and  the  four  Common  signs  show  that  when 
he  became  subject  to  illness  the  Virgo  nature  was 
too  weak  to  throw  it  off  and  he  simply  made  up  his 
mind  that  he  was  going  to  die  from  it,  hence  there 
was  no  help.  If  he  had  been  able  to  throw  off  the 
feeling  of  impending  death  and  struggle  against  the 
sickness  there  is  no  doubt  that  with  this  horoscope  he 
could  have  overcome. 

But  now  let  us  see  how  this  worked  out  with  the 
help  of  the  progressed  planets.  He  was  born  on  the 
-24th  of  April  in  1884  at  2:00  P.M.  The  adjusted 
calculation  date  shows  that  the  planets  in  the  ephem- 
eris  correspond  to  December  19th,  1883,  so  we  may 
say  that  this  is  practically  the  1st  of  January,  1884. 
Counting  forward  in  the  ephemeris  from  that  date, 
we  find  that  the  Sun  by  progression  in  June,  1918, 
had  reached  eight  degrees  of  Gemini,  thus  being  in 
orb  of  the  radical  Saturn  in  Gemini,  the  sign  ruling 
the  lungs.  The  previous  New  Moon  fell  on  June  8th, 
also  in  Gemini  and  between  the  radical  Venus  and 
the  progressed  Saturn.  Thus  it  increased  the  sat- 
urnine congestion  of  the  lungs  and  excited  the  square 
of  Uranus  to  Venus,  which  brought  on  a  particularly 
severe  cough  and  spasms  ending  the  life  of  the  body 
a  few  days  later. 

No.  27. — ADENOIDS  AND  CONSTIPATION 

In  this  figure  the  planets  are  grouped  in  four 
groups:  Neptune  is  in  conjunction  with  Mars,  Sat- 
urn in  conjunction  with  Uranus,  Mercury  in  conjunc- 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        647 

tion  with  the  Sun,  and  Jupiter  in  conjunction  with 
the  Moon.  The  last  two  groups  are  also  squaring 
each  other.  Venus  is  alone  and  forms  a  trine  to  Ju- 
piter. Note  also  that  the  Sun  is  parallel  to  Neptune 
and  Mercury,  and  Venus  is  parallel  to  Mars. 


This  is  a  horoscope  of  a  young  lady  born  Novem- 
ber 27th,  1896,  2 :15  P.  M.,  Tacoma,  Washington.  We 
note  first  that  there  are  Cardinal  signs  on  the  angles, 
showing  her  to  be  active  in  nature.  But  she  acts  more 
from  impulse  than  from  reason.  This  characteristic 
is  shown  by  the  fact  that  the  Moon  is  square  to  Mer- 


648  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

cury  and  the  Sun.  Naturally  as  both  the  Moon  and 
Mercury  are  significators  of  mind,  any  inharmonious 
aspects  between  them  is  detrimental.  Add  to  this  the 
further  fact  that  Mercury  is  combust  or  burned  up 
by  its  close  proximity  to  the  Sun,  and  it  is  very  evi- 
dent that  we  may  expect  to  do  very  little  with  this 
person  by  reason.  This  does  not  mean  that  she  is 
of  an  evil  mental  disposition ;  she  is  quite  the  reverse, 
as  shown  by  the  conjunction  of  the  Moon  with  the 
planet  of  benevolence,  Jupiter,  and  the  trine  between 
this  last  named  planet  and  Venus,  the  planet  of  love 
and  pleasure. 

The  trouble  for  which  this  young  lady  has  con- 
sulted us  is  adenoids,  which  cause  extreme  difficulty 
in  breathing.  The  condition  is  very  clearly  shown  in 
the  horoscope.  When  we  remember  that  afflictions  in 
one  sign  always  give  a  reflex  action  in  the  opposite, 
we  shall  readily  understand  that  Saturn,  the  planet 
of  obstruction,  in  conjunction  with  Uranus,  the  planet 
of  spasmodic  action  in  the  sign  Scorpio,  is  certain  to 
interfere  with  the  rhythmic  breath  through  the  Tau- 
rus region  comprising  the  throat  and  lower  part  of 
the  head.  Furthermore,  Scorpio  also  governs  the 
nose,  as  you  will  realize  when  you  remember  that  the 
most  prominent  feature  of  the  true  Scorpio  person 
is  an  aquiline  nose  of  generou/s  dimensions.  Thus  an 
afflicted  Saturn  located  in  Scorpio,  which  causes  an 
obstructed  rectal  region  and  constipation,  also  at  the 
same  time  gives  a  tendency  to  throat  trouble  and  ob- 
struction of  the  nasal  passages. 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        649 

In  the  case  of  this  patient  we  find  the  condition 
aggravated  by  the  square  of  the  Sun  and  Mercury 
with  the  Moon  and  Jupiter.  The  Sun  and  Mercury 
being  placed  in  Sagittarius  are  therefore  active  in  the 
opposite  sign  Gemini,  which  governs  the  lungs,  and 
as  the  Moon  governs  the  tidal  air  in  the  lungs  the 
square  of  these  planets  will  naturally  affect  the 
breathing. 

Now  for  the  remedy ;  it  seems  far-fetched  to  at- 
tempt to  rectify  an  obstruction  in  the  throat  by  work- 
ing on  the  anus.  Nevertheless,  Saturn,  the  planet  of 
obstruction,  conjoined  with  Uranus,  the  planet  of 
spasmodic  action  in  Scorpio,  shows  that  at  certain 
times  the  sphincter  muscles  of  the  anus  are  so  tightly 
closed  that  it  is  impossible  for  the  diaphragm  to 
move.  Under  ordinary  conditions  there  is  an  in- 
breathing through  the  anus  which  regulates  the  air 
pressure  in  the  bowels,  a  fact  that  is  not  generally 
known,  but  when  the  sphincter  muscles  are  congested 
by  a  configuration  of  so  severe  a  nature  as  this  one, 
this  automatic  regulation  stops  and  the  diaphragm 
is  then  unable  to  work  with  the  necessary  freedom; 
therefore  the  lungs  are  deprived  of  the  necessary 
tidal  flow  of  air.  So,  to  relieve  this  condition  an  ad- 
justable mechanical  dilator  should  be  used.  It  should 
be  noted  that  there  are  two  sphincter  muscles  to  oper- 
ate upon,  the  inside  one  being  located  just  a  little  way 
inside  the  anus. 

After  a  few  treatments  of  this  kind  the  bowels 
;should  be  kept  open  by  the  use  of  the  proper  laxative 


650  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

foods  such  as  prunes,  figs  and  not  forgetting  coarse 
whole  wheat  bread. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  this  person  has  resorted 
to  mouth  breathing,  which  has  aggravated  the  throat 
trouble,  but  by  consistent  continuance  of  the  treat- 
ment here  outlined  she  will  soon  experience  less  diffi- 
culty in  breathing  and  it  will  then  be  an  easy  matter 
to  learn  to  breathe  through  the  proper  channels,  the 
nostrils. 

A  healer  having  Leo  on  the  Ascendant  and  whose 
Saturn  is  not  in  Virgo  would  probably  be  the  best  one 
to  help  this  patient. 

No.  28.    ACCIDENTS  TO  HEAD,  POOR  OXYGENATION 

Good  Aspects:  Saturn  sextile  Jupiter,  trine 
Mars  and  Uranus. 

Bad  Aspects:  Jupiter  opposition  Mars  and  Ura- 
nus; Moon  opposition  Venus;  Sun  and  Mercury 
square  Uranus,  Mars  and  Jupiter. 

This  is  the  horoscope  of  a  man  born  on  March 
16,  1865,  at  3  P.  M.,  in  England,  and  it  affords  a  good 
example  of  how  accidents  and  also  crises  are  shown 
in  the  horoscope.  The  main  affliction  comes  from  the 
fact  that  the  Sun  and  Mercury  are  in  close  conjunc- 
tion in  the  Eighth  House,  occupied  by  Pisces.  This 
itself  is  unfortunate  for  the  reasoning  faculty.  They 
are  both  square  to  Jupiter  in  Sagittarius,  which  also 
has  a  strong  influence  upon  the  mind.  But  worst  of 
all,  they  are  square  to  Mars,  the  planet  of  dynamic 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        651 

energy,  impulse,  etc.,  and  Uranus,  the  planet  of  light- 
ning-like action,  which  precludes  forethought.  When 
action  is  dictated  by  this  intuition  generated  under 
good  aspects,  all  is  well  and  the  person  is  better  off 
than  when  he  is  forced  to  use  the  comparatively  slow 


reason.  But  when  it  is  generated  under  the  adverse 
aspects  of  the  square  and  opposition,  it  results  in  such 
rattle-brained  foolhardiness  and  absolute  lack  of 
thought  and  intelligence  that  the  person  is  generally 
mentally  incompetent.  So  we  see  at  the  very  first 
glance  that  we  have  here  before  us  a  person  who  on 


652  THE  MESSAGE  OF  THE   STARS 

account  of  weak  mentality  is  apt  to  get  into  trouble 
and  accident*.  But  the  injuries  which  he  has  received 
in  consequence  of  his  lack  of  forethought  were  all 
to  the  head  and  as  the  horoscope  does  not  show  any 
serious  affliction  to  Aries,  which  rules  the  head,  ex- 
cept that  Mars  and  Mercury,  which  rule  the  two 
hemispheres  of  the  cerebrum,  are  square,  what  then 
caused  these  accidents,  we  may  ask.  and  the  answer  is 
found  in  the  progression  of  the  Sun,  which  corre- 
sponds with  the  time  when  this  person  was  injured, 
the  Moon  also  bearing  its  part  in  bringing  about  these 
accidents.  In  1876.  when  he  was  eleven  years  of  age, 
the  Sun  and  Moon  were  both  in  conjunction  with 
Neptune  in  the  sign  Aries  and  at  that  time  he  met 
with  an  accident  which  caused  the  first  injury  to  his 
head.  In  1896  the  progressed  Sun  was  in  opposition 
to  Saturn  from  Aries;  you  will  notice  that  Saturn  is 
retrograde  so  that  although  he  is  in  the  last  degrees 
of  Libra  his  influence  is  thrown  backward  into  that 
sign  and  works  as  an  opposition  between  Libra  and 
Aries,  affecting  the  head.  The  Sun  was  also  parallel 
to  Saturn  and  this  is  one  of  the  most  inimical  influ- 
ences in  the  whele  gamut,  for  it  destroys  all  vitality 
of  the  person  who  is  under  its  sway  for  a  number  of 
years.  (One  of  the  writers  can  testify  to  this  from 
personal  experience,  having  felt  it  for  ten  or  twelve 
yean.)  At  the  same  time  the  Moon  was  in  opposition 
to  Mars  and  Uranus  and  square  to  the  Sun  and  Mer- 
cury at  birth,  thus  there  were  very  severe  afflictions 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        653 

at  that  time  and  the  poor  man  suffered  a  considerable 
injury. 

The  third  accident  came  in  1908.  at  the  age  of 
forty-three.  At  that  time  the  Sun  was  in  opposition 
to  the  Moon's  radical  place  and  the  progressed  Moon 
was  in  conjunction  with  Uranus  and  Mai?s,  square  to 
the  Sun  and  Mercury,  radix.  The  opposition  of  the 
Sun  and  Moon  occurred  from  Taurus,  which  governs 
the  lower  part  of  the  head,  where  he  was  hurt. 

In  consequence  of  these  various  accidents  the 
man  is  now  suffering  from  chronic  headaches  and  he 
is  on  the  verge  of  insanity.  Various  doctors  have 
been  called  on  for  advice  but  no  one  is  able  to  put  his 
finger  on  the  seat  of  the  trouble.  Consulting  our 
ephemeris  we  find  that  during  the  man's  lifetime  Sat- 
urn will  continue  to  retrograde  further  back  into 
Libra,  and  that  his  influence  in  Aries  is  becoming 
stronger  with  every  year.  Saturn  always  causes 
bruises  and  depression ;  we  are  therefore  satisfied  that 
there  must  be  a  depression  of  the  skull  and  an  exam- 
ination should  be  made  to  find  this  and  have  it  re- 
moved. But  the  square  of  the  Sun  and  Mercury  to 
Mars  and  Uranus  in  Gemini,  which  rules  the  lungs, 
shows  also  that  there  is  something  the  matter  with  the 
oxygenation  of  the  system,  and  Saturn  in  Libra  in- 
dicates that  there  is  a  scarcity  of  urine.  These  defects 
can  be  remedied  by  breathing  exercises  and  through 
regulating  the  diet.  When  that  is  done  there  will  be 
at  least  a  large  measure  of  relief. 


654 


THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 


A  healer  with  Aries  rising,  whose  Saturn  is  not 
in  Aquarius,  will  be  best  able  to  look  after  this 
patient. 

No.  29.— GOITRE 


As  the  hour  of  birth  of  the  person  in  this  horo- 
scope is  not  known,  we  place  Aries  in  the  First  House, 
Taurus  in  the  second,  etc. 

Mercury  and  the  Moon  are  significators  of  the 
mind,  and  we  find  them  in  opposition.  This  in  itself 
is  not  a  good  sign  of  mentality.  We  further  find  that 
Jupiter  in  the  mercurial  sign  Gemini  is  square  to 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        655 

Uranus  16-20  and  Mars  in  the  other  mercurial  sign 
Virgo ;  thus  all  the  significators  point  to  a  weak,  and 
even  an  erratic  mentality.  In  the  last  few  years  Mer- 
cury has,  moreover,  progressed  past  the  natal  places 
of  Uranus  and  Mars,  thus  accentuating  the  trouble. 

A  person  may,  however,  have  a  weak  mind  and 
yet  it  may  not  become  entirely  unbalanced,  provided 
there  are  no  other  malefic  aspects  in  the  natal  planets 
or  the  progressed  positions.  The  person  may  be  con- 
stitutionally below  the  stature  of  the  normal  mind, 
and  still  retain  unto  the  last  sufficient  hold  upon  him- 
self or  herself  so  that  it  does  not  become  an  actual 
disease  . 

When  we  look  for  the  signs  of  disability  in  a 
horoscope  like  the  present,  we  turn  to  the  aspects 
for  our  information.  Saturn,  it  appears,  is  in  con- 
junction with  the  Dragon's  Tail,  and  this  adds  to  his 
malefic  influence ;  he  is  further  in  conjunction  with 
Neptune  in  18  degrees  of  Taurus,  and  also  with  the 
fixed  star  Aldebaran  in  29  degrees  of  Taurus.  As  Sat- 
urn is  the  planet  of  obstruction  and  Taurus  rules  the 
throat  we  naturally  look  for  some  obstruction  in  that 
region,  and  we  find  that  a  concretion  has  taken  place, 
a  growth,  a  crystallization  known  as  Goitre,  a  disease 
which  also  further  bears  out  the  indications  in  the 
former  aspects  which  we  have  discussed. 

Were  it  not  for  good  aspects  which  we  have  not 
hitherto  mentioned,  namely,  the  sextile  of  Saturn 
to  Mercury  and  its  trine  to  the  Moon,  this  person 
would  certainly  have  become  an  inmate  of  an  insane 


656  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

asylum,  but  this  is  one  of  the  few  cases  where  Saturn 
really  helps,  in  a  material  sense,  for  even  his  good 
aspects  will  obstruct  when  coming  to  the  other  plan- 
ets, but  when  this  obstruction  is  applied  to  the  Moon, 
the  flightiest  planet  of  all,  and  to  Mercury,  the  one 
next  to  her  in  swiftness  and  instability,  both  of  them 
significators  of  mind,  Saturn  does  really  help  to  hold 
the  flighty  mind  in  check,  and  such  a  weak  mental 
condition  as  the  one  found  here  will  be  vastly  bene- 
fited by  that  aspect,  whereas  if  there  are  no  evil 
aspects  the  sextile  of  Mercury  and  Saturn  will 
strengthen  the  mind  in  a  wonderful  degree. 

As  Saturn  in  Taurus  always  affects  the  functions 
of  the  opposite  sign  Scorpio,  namely  elimination,  it 
is  of  great  importance  to  see  that  both  kidneys  and 
bowels  act  freely  with  a  person  like  this.  Nothing 
but  distilled  water  should  be  taken  into  the  system 
on  any  account.  As  the  muscles  of  the  neck  are  al- 
ways strained  in  hill  and  stair  climbing,  a  person 
with  this  disease  should  be  housed  on  a  level  and  on 
the  lower  floor  of  the  house.  A  vegetarian  diet  con- 
sisting of  uncooked  food  is  preferable  to  any  other, 
and  it  is  particularly  necessary  to  get  the  vegetable 
salts  which  may  tone  the  body  and  bring  the  standard 
of  general  health  as  high  as  possible;  lettuce  is  the 
best  single  vegetable  for  this  purpose. 


THIETY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        657 

No.  30.— WEAK  BACK  AND  LIMBS,  EYE  TROUBLE, 
DEAFNESS 

Good  Aspects:     The  Moon  sextile  to  Uranus  and 
Jupiter;  the  Sun  sextile  to  Mars. 

Bad  Aspects:     Saturn  opposition    to    Neptune; 
the  Sun  and  Mercury  square  to  Jupiter  and  Uranus. 


This  is  the  horoscope  of  a  young  man  born  on 
September  6,  1900,  at  6 :00  A  M.,  and  the  disability 
complained  of  is  a  weakness  in  the  back  and  limbs, 
which  prevents  him  from  moving  about  normally. 


42 


658  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

Astrologically  we  find  that  this  is  due  to  several 
causes.  In  the  first  place,  there  are  four  Common 
signs  on  the  angles,  the  Sixth  House  sign,  Virgo,  be- 
ing on  the  Ascendant  which  governs  the  condition  of 
the  body.  It  is  a  vital  point  in  that  respect.  This  in 
itself  shows  his  somewhat  indolent  nature  and  a  tend- 
ency to  give  up  very  easily.  We  also  find  Mercury, 
the  ruler  of  the  Ascendant,  in  the  Twelfth  House, 
denoting  hospitals  and  chronic  illness ;  he  is  square  to 
Jupiter  and  Uranus,  which  are  placed  in  Sagittarius, 
the  sign  which  governs  the  hips  and  the  great  sciatic 
nerve.  The  Sun,  the  giver  of  life,  is  also  square  to 
Uranus,  the  planet  of  irregularity,  which  is  conjoined 
with  Jupiter  in  Sagittarius.  And  finally,  Saturn,  the 
ruler  of  the  bony  structure  and  its  articulations,  is 
placed  in  Sagittarius  in  opposition  to  Neptune,  in 
Gemini.  All  these  configurations  naturally  tend  to 
bring  about  the  conditions  complained  of  if  nothing 
is  done  to  prevent,  and  in  this  case,  with  four  Com- 
mon, flexible  signs  on  the  angles,  with  the  life-giving 
Sun  sextile  to  Mars,  the  planet  of  dynamic  energy, 
and  with  the  Moon'  sextile  to  Jupiter,  the  planet  gov- 
erning the  arterial  blood,  it  is  quite  possible  to  obtain 
relief  by  means  of  exercises  which  will  remove  the 
sluggish  conditions. 

But  we  also  find  other  weaknesses  of  a  serious 
nature  latent  in  this  horoscope.  Uranus  is  in  con- 
junction with  the  nebulous  star  Antares  in  Sagit- 
tarius 8°,  square  to  the  Sun  and  Mercury.  This  im- 
plies a  grave  danger  to  the  sight  and  also  to  the  hear- 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        659 

ing  because  of  Mercury  being  in  the  Twelfth  House. 
These  conditions  can  certainly  be  overcome  if  the 
ounce  of  prevention  is  applied.  We  take  it  that  be- 
cause the  man  is  not  able  to  otherwise  occupy  himself 
he  is  an  inveterate  reader  and  this  will  bring  trouble 
if  persisted  in.  Massage  of  the  head  in  the  region  of 
the  eyes  and  ears,  and  exercise  of  the  limbs  and  body 
will  aid  in  restoring  this  young  man  to  health,  and  a 
healer  with  Taurus  on  the  Ascendant  whose  Saturn 
is  not  in  the  patient's  Sixth  House  will  probably  have 
the  most  persistence  in  the  performance  of  this  work. 

No.  31. — EYE  AND  EAR  TROUBLE,  POOR  CIRCULATION 

*Mercury,  the  significator  of  mind,  rises  before 
the  Sun  and  is  in  the  Twelfth  House,  conjunction 
Neptune,  its  higher  octave.  This  shows  that  the  mind 
is  naturally  inclined  toward  the  higher  and  more  spir- 
itual things  of  life,  though  Jupiter  square  Mercury 
from  the  house  of  mind  indicates  that  under  severe 
afflictions  she  may  at  times  feel  inclined  to  follow  the 
example  of  Job  and  reason  with  God  concerning  the 
hard  fate  she  has  to  bear.  The  Moon,  which  is  the 
other  significator  of  mind,  square  Venus,  shows  us 
that  considerable  sorrow  may  be  expected  in  this  life ; 
but  the  parallel  of  Venus,  the  Moon  and  Sun  to  Mars 
gives  her  the  energy  and  fortitude  to  bear  up  under 
all  afflictions;  and  though,  as  said,  she  may  feel  like 
murmuring  at  times,  there  is  no  danger  of  a  general 
despondency.  She  will  always  look  upon  life  from  a 


660  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

much  more  hopeful  angle  than  even  people  who  are 
not  at  all  afflicted  (in  comparison  with  her),  and  the 
strength  of  her  hope  is  bound  to  help  her  in  a  degree 
beyond  human  measure;  for  even  as  the  person  who 
gives  way  to  worry  and  melancholy  is  thereby  made 


more  unhappy  OT  unhealthy,  so  also  the  per.son  who 
constantly  keeps  an  optimistic  spirit  is  bound  to  gain 
thereby  correspondingly  in  health  and  happiness. 
The  Sun  on  the  Ascendant,  even  though  it  is  afflicted 
by  a  square  of  Uranus,  is  nevertheless  a  valuable  asset 
in  recuperation.  The  Sun  sextile  Saturn  will  give  her 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        661 

a  persistence,  a  tenacity  of  life,  that  will  not  let  go 
despite  all  discouragements. 

This  lady  has  been  deaf  since  she  was  five 
years  of  age  and  this  disability  is  indicated  by  the 
position  of  Mercury  in  the  Twelfth  House,  by  his 
conjunction  to  Neptune  and  his  square  to  Jupiter. 
This  latter  aspect  indicates  that  it  is  sluggish  circu- 
lation of  the  blood  which  is  responsible  for  the  dis- 
ability. These  aspects  of  Mercury  also  make  her 
dumb,  particularly  because  Mercury  is  in  Taurus, 
which  governs  the  vocal  organs.  She  has  nevertheless 
learned  to  talk,  showing  that  there  is  no  organic  dis- 
ability but  only  a  functional  weakness. 

But  these  are  not  all  of  the  poor  lady's  afflictions. 
You  will  notice  that  the  Sun  is  in  Taurus  29.  In 
other  words,  it  is  in  conjunction  with  the  Pleiades, 
a  nebular  spot  in  the  Zodiac.  It  is  also  square  to 
Uranus  and  parallel  to  Mars.  Therefore  the  eyes  are 
sorely  afflicted;  one  is  almost  blind,  the  other  not 
much  better,  so  that  there  is  danger  that  she  may  lose 
her  sight  entirely. 

On  account  of  her  afflictions  and  the  position  in 
which  she  has  been  placed,  this  lady  has  been  unable 
to  get  an  education.  Nevertheless,  by  persistence,  in- 
dicated by  Saturn  sextile  the  Sun,  she  has  accom- 
plished much.  She  writes  a  really  beautiful  letter 
which  tells  how  she  was  in  comfortable  circumstances 
up  to  1906,  when  the  earthquake  in  San  Francisco 
deprived  her  of  her  all,  and  still  she  has  not  given 
up  hope.  Her  mental  attitude,  inspired  by  her  Sun 


662  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

parallel  Mars  and  sextile  Saturn,  is  justified  in  quite 
a  large  measure.  The  trouble  comes  from  Saturn, 
the  planet  of  obstruction,  in  Aries,  the  sign  which 
governs  the  head,  and  the  squar.e  of  Jupiter,  the 
planet  which  governs  circulation,  to  Mercury  in  Tau- 
rus, the  sign  which  governs  the  throat,  There  are  also 
signs  of  malnutrition,  indicated  by  the  presence  of 
Mars  in  Cancer,  the  sign  which  governs  the  stomach, 
square  Venus,  which  governs  circulation.  If  the  sys- 
tem could  be  given  the  proper  amount  and  kind  of 
food  and  the  head  and  neck  massaged  with  special 
attention  to  manipulations  of  the  ears  and  eyes,  con- 
ditions may  be  considerably  relieved  and  further  pro- 
gress of  deterioration  stopped.  An  Aquarian  whose 
Saturn  is  not  in  Libra  would  have  a  most  beneficial 
effect  in  this  case. 

NO.  32. — H/EMORRHOIDS,  BLIND,  LATENT  SPIRITUAL 
SIGHT 

In  the  case  before  us  we  have  not  the  hour  of 
birth,  and  will  therefore  insert  the  signs  in  their  re- 
spective Houses,  commencing  with  Aries  in  the  First, 
Taurus  in  the  Second,  etc.  This  person  was  born 
November  27,  1867. 

Good  Aspects:     Sun  and  Mars  trine  Neptune. 

Bad  Aspects:  The  Sun  and  Mars  conjunction 
to  Antares ;  Saturn  square  Jupiter ;  Mars  conjunction 
the  Moon  and  Venus;  Saturn  conjunction  Mercury. 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        663 

Regarding  the  mentality  of  this  person,  we  find 
that  the  con  junction  of  Saturn  and  Mercury,  par- 
ticularly in  the  Eighth  House  sign,  Scorpio,  clouds 
the  mind  with  gloom.  The  Moon,  which  is  the  other 
significator  of  mind,  conjunction  to  Mars  in  the  Ninth 


House  sign,  Sagittarius,  would  have  the  tendency  to 
make  the  patient  rebellious  against  misfortune.  This 
tendency  is  somewhat  softened  and  toned  down  by 
the  presence  of  Venus  in  conjunction  with  these  plan- 
ets, and  we  may  therefore  conclude  that  this  person 
is  apt  to  be  very  much  depressed  in  mind  whenever 


664  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

misfortune  overtakes  him ;  that  he  rebels,  at  least  in- 
wardly, very  strongly  against  the  blows  of  fate, 
though  Venus  may  prevent  him  from  expressing  his 
disappointments. 

With  regard  to  the  ailments  to  which  this  person 
is  subject,  we  find  in  the  first  place  that  Jupiter 
square  to  Mercury  and  Saturn,  the  latter  being  in 
Scorpio,  which  rules  the  rectum,  gives  a  tendency  to 
constipation  and  haemorrhoids.  This  configuration 
also  interferes  with  the  circulation  of  the  arterial 
blood.  His  disability  is  further  enhanced  by  the 
square  of  Jupiter  to  the  Sun,  the  latter  planet  being 
ruler  of  the  organ  which  circulates  the  vital  fluid. 

But  there  is  a  great  misfortune  in  this  life,  com- 
pared with  which  the  troubles  previously  mentioned 
pale  into  insignificance.  The  Sun  and  Mars  are  in 
conjunction  with  the  fixed  star  Antares  in  eight  de- 
grees of  Sagittarius,  and  this  configuration  always 
brings  trouble  to  the  eyes,  though  it  may  not  result  in 
blindness  from  birth.  In  the  present  case  the  crisis 
came  when  the  Sun  had  progressed  to  the  opposition 
of  Uranus,  at  the  same  time  striking  the  square  to 
Neptune.  In  that  year  the  Moon  also  was  in  conjunc- 
tion to  Neptune  in  the  sign  Aries,  which  rules  the 
head.  This  kindled  the  double  fire  of  Mars  and  the 
Sun  at  birth,  with  the  result  that  inflammation  of  the 
eyes  made  the  man  blind  beyond  hope  of  recovery. 

It  may  seem  strange  that  the  writers  selected  this 
horoscope  for  analysis,  as  the  patient  is  beyond  help, 
but  it  offers  certain  points  which  it  will  be  well  for 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        665 

the  student  to  impress  upon  his  mind.  You  will  no- 
tice that  Mars  is  trine  to  Neptune,  and  that  the  Sun 
is  only  seven  degrees  from  the  exact  trine  to  the  same 
planet.  The  culmination  will  be  reached  before  even 
the  vital  body  is  brought  to  birth.  This  is  a  very 
favorable  indication  that  the  spiritual  sight  may  be 
awakened  in  this  person  and  that  it  will  compensate, 
or  more  than  compensate,  for  the  loss  of  the  physical 
faculty.  There  is,  however,  as  you  will  also  note, 
the  square  of  Neptune  and  Uranus  which  makes 
for  mediumship ;  on  that  account  it  would  be  advis- 
able for  this  person  to  be  very  closely  on  his  guard 
during  the  time  when  the  spiritual  faculty  is  being 
developed,  and  until  he  is  perfectly  safe  and  balanced 
in  the  other  world,  and  it  would  be  a  great  privilege 
for  a  healer  receiving  such  a  case  to  aid  a  person 
stricken  by  the  misfortune  of  blindness  to  cultivate 
the  latent  faculty  shown  by  the  horoscope. 

No.  33. — HEART  TROUBLE,  DROPSY 

Good  Aspects:  Jupiter  trine  Mercury;  Saturn 
trine  Mars. 

Bad  Aspects:  Saturn  square  the  Sun,  Moon  and 
Venus ;  the  Moon  opposition  to  the  Sun  and  Venus ; 
Mercury  square  Neptune;  Mars  conjunction  Uranus. 

We  consider  first  the  mind  of  this  lady,  to  obtain 
the  key  to  her  condition,  for  the  mind  is  the  most 
important  factor  in  bringing  about  disease  and  cur- 
ing it.  You  may  call  that  Christian  Science  or  what- 


666  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

ever  you  please,  the  fact  remains  and  has  been  made 
use  of  by  all  successful  healers,  either  consciously  or 
unconsciously,  no  matter  to  what  school  they  belong. 
And  there  is  more  healing  in  a  cheery  word  from  the 
physician  in  whom  the  patient  has  faith,  than  in  all 


his  medicines.  Conversely,  when  he  gives  up  hope 
and  makes  a  long  face,  the  patient  dies,  unless  he 
'gets  mad,'  or  'spunky,'  as  once  happened  to  the 
writer  when  he  was  broken  down  from  overwork. 
He  went  to  a  hospital  to  get  nursing  and  quiet,  and 
had  to  engage  a  regular  doctor  to  comply  with  the 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES       667 

rules.  He  knew  that  his  condition  would  not  change 
till  the  Moon  did,  but  lay  patiently  waiting,  though 
the  case  was  approaching  a  crisis,  for  his  mind  was 
too  lethargic  to  set  to  work;  he  expected  the  Moon  to 
do  it  all  at  the  proper  time.  But  on  the  day  of  the 
New  Moon  his  doctor  came  in  with  another,  and  both 
had  faces  a  yard  long.  They  did  not  think  he  had 
another  hour  to  live,  and  he  laughed,  but  it  made  him 
'mad,'  and  he  commenced  to  work  on  himself  with 
the  result  that  the  dropsical  swelling  which  had  al- 
most reached  the  heart,  was  gone  in  a  few  hours  and 
he  was  out  in  the  sunshine  getting  a  dose  of  new  life. 
Before  a  month  had  elapsed  he  had  not  only  left  the 
hospital  behind,  but  had  written  The  Rosicrucian 
Philosoplnj.  There  is  no  doubt  that  the  fluid  could 
not  have  been  eliminated  before  the  change  of  the 
Moon,  but  the  co-operation  of  his  mental  attitude  was 
necessary  to  help  the  lunar  forces,  and  combined  with 
proper  action  it  brought  results.  Similarly  in  every 
case,  the  right  attitude  of  the  mind  must  be  cultivated 
or  cure  is  impossible. 

This  figure  shows  an  unfortunate  person,  for  the 
mind  is  in  a  bad  state.  Saturn  is  square  to  the  Sun, 
Moon  and  Venus.  The  Moon,  which  signifies  the  in- 
stinctual mind,  is  in  opposition  to  the  Sun  and  Venus, 
robbing  life  of  all  joy,  making  her  pessimistic  and 
prone  to  look  only  on  the  dark  side.  Mercury,  the 
planet  of  reason,  is  square  to  Neptune,  the  planet  of 
spiritual  perception,  all  testimonies  which  tell  us  that 
nothing  we  may  say  is  likely  to  make  her  cheer  up. 


668  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

Such  a  poor  person  is  a  burden  to  herself  and 
her  associates  all  through  life,  so  they  shun  her 
while  she  is  able  to  take  care  of  herself,  that  is  to  say, 
while  the  body  is  in  comparative  health,  but  the  af- 
flictions which  make  her  mentally  miserable  also  have 
their  effect  on  the  body,  for  as  we  mould  the  lines 
of  our  face  to  an  exact  expression  of  our  habitual 
mode  of  thought,  so  are  also  our  other  organs  shaped 
and  built  by  this  force,  and  the  evil  effects  show  them- 
selves as  disease.  The  Sun,  Venus  and  Mercury  in 
the  Eighth  House  indicates  that  when  sickness  comes 
she  is  going  to  let  it  takes  its  course,  she  will  make 
no  effort  to  fight  for  life. 

The  nature  of  her  sickness  is  seen  to  be  heart 
trouble,  from  the  fact  that  the  Sun  is  on  the  cusp  of 
Leo,  which  governs  the  heart;  in  conjunction  with 
Venus,  which.,  governs  the  venous  circulation,  and 
opposed  by  the  Moon,  which  rules  the  liquids  of  the 
body.  The  Sun,  Venus  and  the  Moon  are  squared  by 
Saturn,  the  planet  of  obstruction,  and  thus  we  see 
that  there  was  a  natal  tendency  to  poor  heart  action 
and  faulty  elimination  of  liquids. 

In  1913  the  Sun  progressed  to  the  conjunction 
of  Uranus  and  Mars,  and  the  aspects  of  the  Sun  are 
always  effective  for  three  years,  one  and  one-half 
years  before  the  aspect  is  exact,  and  a  like  period 
after.  Therefore  it  was  still  active  in  1914,  when  the 
Moon  progressed  to  the  conjunction  of  Saturn  and 
thus  enlivened  this  square  to  the  Sun,  Moon  and 
Venus.  Neptune,  the  watery  planet,  also  reached  the 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        669 

natal  Sun  by  transit,  and  the  poor  soul  was  released 
by  the  total  obstruction  of  the  liquids ;  in  other  words, 
the  dropsical  condition  stopped  the  heart. 

The  main  effort  in  .such  cases  should  be  to  get 
the  person  to  fight.  If  she  could  have  been  made  to 
see  that  it  was  her  gloomy  outlook  on  life  that  was 
responsible  for  her  sickness  and  that  if  she  does  not 
fight  here  and  now,  she  will  have  a  harder  fate  to 
face  next  time,  it  might  have  helped.  No  person  who 
is  naturally  pessimistic  can  change  over  night,  but 
they  can  do  a  whole  lot  to  cultivate  optimism  if  given 
years,  and  we  should  strive  to  inculcate  this  attitude 
of  mind  in  all,  besides  trying  to  be  cheerful  ourselves, 
for  that  is  a  healer's  greatest  asset. 

No.  34. — SEX,  EYE  AND  THROAT  TROUBLE 

The  type  of  mind  is  denoted  particularly  here 
by  the  square  of  Saturn  to  the  Sun.  This  occurs 
from  Cardinal  signs,  Saturn  being  essentially  digni- 
fied and  therefore  very  powerful,  while  the  Sun  is  in 
Libra,  the  sign  of  its  debility  and  greatest  weakness. 
Life  and  joy  come  from  the  Sun,  while  Saturn  gives 
gloom  and  death.  Therefore  we  readily  see  that  this 
person  must  be  subject  to  gloom  and  melancholy. 
The  sextile  of  Uranus  to  Mercury,  the  significator 
of  mind,  tells  that  the  person  is  endowed  with  an 
almost  uncanny  lightning-like  intuition,  and  the 
square  of  Uranus  to  the  Moon  and  Venus  shows  that 
she  is  indiscreet  and  too  weak  for  her  own  good.  You 


670  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

will  notice  that  this  square  occurs  from  the  Fixed 
signs,  Leo  and  Scorpio,  and  it  is  therefore  a  condition 
which  would  be  very  difficult  to  overcome.  Leo  gov- 
erns the  heart,  and  Scorpio  the  generative  organs, 
and  thus  her  secret  is  told  in  the  horoscope  in  unmis- 


takable  terms.  When  such  secrets  of  the  soul  are 
revealed  by  this  sacred  science,  it  shows  us  also  the 
hidden  springs  which  are  causes  of  the  acts  we  are 
only  too  prone  to  condemn,  and  it  teaches  us  that  we 
should  pity  rather  than  censure  a  soul  impelled  by 
such  an  almost  irresistible  force  as  here  revealed. 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        671 

The  act  itself  should,  of  course,  never  be  condoned, 
but  the  tenderest  kindness  and  the  greatest  effort  to 
succor  should  be  given  to  the  one  who  is  thus  afflicted. 
The  horoscope  is,  as  you  know,  the  clock  of  des- 
tiny, and  the  position  taken  by  the  planets  at  birth 
give  certain  tendencies  for  life.  From  that  natal 
position  the  planets  move  on  to  different  positions 
with  every  year  that  passes,  as  the  hands  of  a  clock 
move  around  its  face;  thus  they  bring  to  pass  events 
foreshown  at  birth.  Now  you  will  notice  that  the  Sun 
is  in  eleven  degrees  of  Libra  in  this  horoscope,  so  at 
nineteen  years  of  age  the  Sun  entered  the  sign  Scor- 
pio. At  twenty-two  it  reached  the  conjunction  with 
the  Moon  and  Venus  and  a  couple  of  years  later  the 
square  with  Uranus  was  reached.  During  this  period 
the  unfortunate  tendency  spoken  of  developed  and 
the  seeds  of  disease  wrere  sown  which  resulted  in  a 
number  of  operations,  both  in  the  lower  regions  and 
in  the  throat,  for  you  must  remember  that  the  oppo- 
site is  always  afflicted.  The  generative  organ  can 
never  be  hurt  without  in  some  measure  its  counter- 
part, the  larynx  and  throat,  also  being  affected.  Dur- 
ing the  years  which  have  intervened  between  that 
time  and  1914  the  Sun  had  pursued  its  path  through 
Scorpio,  and  reached  the  affliction  of  Jupiter,  which 
occurs  from  the  sign  Leo  in  23  degrees.  This  square 
was  also  augmented  by  the  fact  that  the  Moon  in  its 
circle  around  the  horoscope  had  been  going  through 
Taurus,  so  that  was  an  opposition  of  the  progressed 
Sun  and  Moon,  both  of  them  squaring  the  planet 


672  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

Jupiter  at  the  same  time.  The  Sun's  square  to 
Jupiter  will  for  a  few  years  be  an  affliction  to  this 
poor  person.  Uranus  at  birth  was  also  on  the  Aseelli 
in  Leo,  the  nebulous  spot  that  is  so  dangerous  to  the 
eyes,  and  from  there  it  squares  the  Moon.  This,  also, 
is  another  danger  which  faces  this  person,  for,  as  you 
know,  eye  trouble  is  very  often  the  accompaniment 
of  indiscretion. 

Now  comes  the  question,  what  can  be  done  for 
thi^  poor  person,  and,  as  we  have  often  stated,  the 
first  effort  should  be  toward  instilling  hope  into  the 
mind.  Persons  suffering  with  melancholy  are  always 
centering  their  thoughts  upon  self,  always  seeing 
their  own  desperate  position  which  appears  to  them 
more  hopeless  than  that  of  any  other.  If  their  in- 
terest can  be  diverted  from  self  then  the  battle  is 
more  than  half  won;  that  should  be  the  first  consid- 
eration of  the  healer. 

A  simple  diet  should  be  prescribed  and  no  highly 
seasoned  dishes  permitted  a  person  of  this  nature. 
The  sextile  of  Uranus  to  the  Sun  and  Mercury  and 
the  trine  of  Neptune  to  Jupiter  shows  that  an  appeal 
along  the  higher  lines,  an  appeal  to  the  better  and 
nobler  nature  will  not  meet  with  a  rebuff  and  it  is 
possible  on  account  of  these  positions  to  elevate  this 
person's  ideas  and  ideals  so  that  she  may  become  a 
servant  of  humanity  instead  of  driftwood  upon  the 
ocean  of  life.  You  will  note  that  all  the  planets  are 
in  Cardinal  and  Fixed  signs,  that  the  Common  signs 
are  void  of  planets,  therefore  there  is  a  great  deal  of 


THIRTY-SIX    EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        673 

hope.  There  is  energy  in  this  person,  and  when  this 
energy  has  been  turned  in  the  right  direction,  when 
she  has  become  thoroughly  aroused,  then  the  great 
sinner  may  become  the  great  saint,  and  a  blessing  to 
humanity. 

No.  35. — SOLITARY  VICE,  TUBERCULOSIS 


Good  Aspects:  Neptune  trine  Uranus;  Uranus 
sextile  the  Moon. 

Bad  Aspects:  Mars  conjunction  Venus;  Sun 
conjunction  Saturn;  Uranus  square  Mercury;  Nep- 
tune opposition  the  Moon. 


674  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

This  is  the  horoscope  of  a  lady  born  May  21, 
1883,  at  5  A.M.,  Longitude  88  West,  Latitude  44 
North,  and  the  student  will  at  once  note  that  five  of 
the  nine  planets  are  placed  in  the  Twelfth  House, 
which  governs  sorrow,  trouble,  and  self-undoing. 
This  has  been  a  characteristic  feature  in  the  life.  We 
may  also  call  attention  in  passing  to  the  placement 
of  Jupiter  in  the  Second  House.  Jupiter  is  the  planet 
of  opulence  and  here  he  is  strong  in  his  exaltation 
sign  Cancer,  but  he  is  entirely  unaspected.  The  lady 
is  a  competent  worker  in  her  vocation,  stenography 
and  bookkeeping,  but  has,  nevertheless,  found  herself 
unable  to  obtain  employment  at  various  times  and 
has  been  at  those  times  on  the  verge  of  starvation. 

With  respect  to  the  mental  qualities  we  find  that 
Mercury  is  square  to  Uranus,  and  the  Moon  in  oppo- 
sition to  Neptune.  This  makes  her  skeptical,  critical, 
very  peculiar  and  spasmodic  in  her  mental  processes, 
with  an  extremely  morbid  imagination.  Uranus  is 
placed  in  the  Fifth  House,  governing  courtship  and 
the  relation  among  the  sexes  prior  to  marriage,  and 
therefore,  squared  to  Mercury,  it  indicates  an  uncon- 
ventional turn  of  the  mind,  with  a  tendency  to  pro- 
miscuous relations,  involving  public  criticism  and 
slancfer.  That  in  itself  is  an  extremely  unfortunate 
configuration  and  condition  in  a  life,  but  it  is  only 
one  of  a  number  of  afflictions  which  point  in  the  same 
direction,  for  in  the  Twelfth  House,  the  house  of 
sorrow,  trouble,  and  self-undoing,  we  find  Mars,  the 
planet  of  dynamic  energy,  conjoined  with  Venus,  the 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        675 

planet  of  love,  in  the  fiery  sign  Aries,  another  in- 
flammatory sex  condition;  and  last,  but  not  least,  we 
note  Neptune  in  Taurus,  opposition  to  the  Moon  in 
Scorpio,  which  governs  the  generative  organs.  This 
latter  is  the  worst  of  all  for  it  makes  the  mind  almost 
insane  upon  this  subject,  conjuring  up  before  the 
imagination  morbid  pictures,  and  where  the  config- 
uration occurs  from  the  Sixth  and  Twelfth  Houses 
it  is  a  certain  indication  of  inveterate  self-abuse. 
Naturally  such  practices  in  time  undermine  the  health 
and  disease  shows  itself  in  the  weakest  parts  of  the 
body  according  to  the  indications  of  the  horoscope. 
In  the  present  case  we  find  Saturn  on  the  cusp  of 
Gemini  in  conjunction  with  the  Sun.  Gemini  is  the 
sign  which  rules  the  lungs,  and  the  conjunction  as. 
we  see  is  almost  exact,  wanting  only  26  minutes.  Thus 
the  cold,  crystallizing  saturnine  forces  are  harden- 
ing the  lungs  and  producing  the  disease  we  know  as 
tuberculosis,  which  is  slowly  sapping  her  vitality  and 
carrying  her  toward  an  early  grave.  It  may  be  noted 
in  passing  that  the  lady 's  mother  succumbed  to  tuber- 
culosis at  the  very  moment  when  she  gave  birth  to 
this  child  and  Mars  by  progression  has  now  arrived 
close  to  the  place  of  Neptune  at  birth.  This  will  un- 
fortunately in  all  probability  accentuate  the  morbid 
craving  indicated  by  Neptune  opposition  to  the  Moon, 
so  that  if  left  to  herself  the  end  will  not  be  very 
far  off. 

Tuberculosis  though  serious  is  not,  however,  nec- 
essarily fatal  if  she  can  be  put  under  restraint  so 


€76  THE   MESSAGE   OF  THE   STARS 

that  it  becomes  impossible  for  her  to  gratify  her  pas- 
sion that  saps  her  vitality  by  solitary  vice.  Thus  the 
spells  of  gloom  which  are  also  resultant  from  the 
conjunction  of  Saturn  and  the  Sun  in  the  Twelfth 
House  can  be  overcome  if  she  can  be  given  a  brighter 
outlook  upon  life.  Then  the  usual  measures  employed 
against  tuberculosis  may  probably  also  save  her.  She 
has  an  intense  attraction  for  the  occult,  indicated  by 
the  exact  trine  of  Neptune  and  Uranus,  also  by  Ura- 
nus sextile  to  the  Moon.  By  playing  upon  those 
strings  and  giving  her  a  new  interest  in  life  it  may 
be  possible  to  win  her  away  from  her  present  morbid 
channels  of  thought.  At  any  rate  salvation  from  the 
evil  configurations  should  always  be  sought  through 
the  good  aspects  and  substituting  the  higher  for  the 
lower  may  help  this  poor  soul  out  of  her  condition. 
Very  little  can  be  done  physically  until  the  mental 
•condition  is  changed.  A  healer  with  either  Libra  or 
Aquarius  rising  and  whose  Saturn  is  not  in  Scorpio 
would  be  beneficial,  but  much  firmness  is  needed  here 
and  therefore  probably  the  Fixed  sign  would  be 
preferable. 

No.  36. — HORNY,  VENEREAL  GROWTHS  AND  KIDNEY 
TROUBLE 

Good  Aspects:    Mercury  sextile  Jupiter. 

Bad  Aspects:     The    Sun    conjunction    Uranus; 
Mars  conjunction    Venus;    Neptune    square  to  Sat- 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        677 

The  Moon  is  unaspected. 

This  is  the  horoscope  of  a  young  man  born  in 
Boynton,  Missouri,  October  11,  1889,  at  6:00  P.M. 
It  is  a  strange  case  which  has  puzzled  all  the  doctors 
who  have  been  consulted.  About  five  years  ago  all 


the  joints  in  arms,  limbs  and  neck  commenced  to 
grow  stiff,  so  that  by  degrees  he  became  unable  to 
move.  At  the  same  time  there  appeared,  instead  of 
the  nails,  a  strange  horny  growth  on  fingers  and  toes ; 
this  grows  to  a  certain  length  or  stage  of  development 
and  then  it  begins  to  suppurate.  This  facilitates  the 


678  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

removal  of  the  growth  and  when  that  has  been  com- 
pleted the  suppuration  ceases,  but  immediately  a  new 
growth  begins  to  form.  Lately  the  jaws  have  also 
commenced  to  grow  stiff,  so  that  now  the  young  man 
can  no  longer  eat  with  comfort. 

The  very  first  glance  at  the  horoscope  shows  us 
Uranus,  the  planet  of  spasmodic  action,  in  conjunc- 
tion with  the  Sun,  and  being  in  the  sign  Libra,  which 
rules  the  kidneys.  We  also  note  that  Uranus  is  par- 
allel with  Mars,  the  planet  of  dynamic  energy;  this 
shows  at  once  that  the  action  of  the  kidneys  is  spas- 
modic and  irregular  so  that  instead  of  the  poisons 
being  eliminated  from  the  body  by  these  organs  they 
are  retained  and  naturally  contaminate  the  whole  sys- 
tem. B.ut  we  also  find  that  this  patient  is  poisoned 
to  a  greater  extent  than  ordinarily  by  a  venereal  dis- 
ease contracted  about  seven  or  eight  years  ago ;  this 
is  shown  as  a  tendency  in  the  natal  horoscope  by  the 
conjunction  of  Mars,  the  planet  of  dynamic  energy, 
with  Venus,  the  planet  of  love,  in  the  Fifth  House, 
which  governs  courtship  and  the  relations  of  the 
sexes  before  marriage.  Saturn  is  also  there  with  his 
obstructive  hand  and  square  to  Neptune,  the  planet 
which  governs  strange  and  unusual  conditions.  He 
is  in  the  sign  Gemini,  which  rules  the  hands  and  fin- 
gers. About  seven  years  ago,  when  the  Moon  was  in 
Pisces  by  progression,  the  sign  which  governs  the 
toes,  it  was  in  opposition  to  Venus,  Mars  and  Saturn 
and  square  to  Neptune.  We  base  our  judgment  that 
the  disease  was  contracted  at  that  time  011  the  fact 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE    HOROSCOPES        679 

that  the  afflicting  planets  are  in  Common  or  flexible 
signs  and  it  could  have  been  avoided  without  much 
effort.  As  it  is,  the  most  drastic  measures  for  puri- 
fication of  the  blood  must  be  adopted;  the  patient 
should  be  brought  to  California,  treated  with  daily 
sunbaths  to  facilitate  copious  perspiration,  and  given 
nothing  but  water  and  fruit  juices  until  the  system 
has  been  cleansed. 

PLANETARY  HOURS 

Measures  for  the  alleviation  of  pain  and  disease 
cannot  always  be  deferred  to  a  propitious  time,  but 
where  that  is  possible  the  student  will  find  that  reme- 
dial treatments  given  under  the  propitious  planetary 
rays  are  much  more  efficient  and  successful  than 
when  applied  haphazard.  Therefore  the  following 
hints  may  be  found  valuable. 

Surgeons  who  have  watched  and  tabulated  these 
matters  inform  us  that  the  operations  performed 
while  the  Moon  is  increasing  in  light  (see  p.  521)  are 
generally  more  successful,  less  liable  to  cause  compli- 
cations and  more  quickly  healed  than  operations  per- 
formed when  the  Moon  is  decreasing  in  light. 

When  a  surgical  operation  seems  unavoidable 
consult  the  ephemeris  and  if  the  Moon  is  going 
through  the  sign  which  rules  that  part  of  the  body 
where  the  operation  is  to  be  performed  defer  it  for  a 
day  or  two  till  the  Moon  gets  well  into  the  next  sign. 
This  will  minimize  the  danger  of  complications,  and 


680  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

not  infrequently  the  symptoms  change  so  that  opera- 
tion is  avoided. 

Always  look  to  the  benefics  and  the  good  aspects 
in  a  horoscope  for  directions  concerning  how,  and 
when  to  treat.  Suppose  the  Sun,  the  giver  of  life,  is 
square  to  Saturn,  the  planet  of  stagnation  and  death. 
The  tendency  is  to  rob  the  person  of  vitality  and  if  he 
is  taken  ill  recuperation  will  be  very  slow.  Then,  to 
give  the  most  effective  and  energizing  treatment  ap- 
ply the  principle  of  the  day  and  hour  rulers  as  given 
in  our  Simplified  Scientific  Astrology,  choose  the 
Sun's  day  (Sunday)  and  the  hours  ruled  by  the  Sun 
on  any  day.  Treatments  on  Mars'  day  (Tuesday) 
and  the  hours  ruled  by  Mars  on  any  day,  will  also 
build  up  wonderfully.  Similarly  with  the  other  plan- 
ets, their  virtue  and  power  is  greatest  during  the  days 
ruled  by  them. 

But  the  so-called  malefics  also  have  their  virtues. 
Poultices  intended  to  draw  suppuration  from  a 
wound,  or  bring  a  boil  to  a  head  are  most  efficacious 
on  the  hot  and  inflammatory  Mars'  day  (Tuesday), 
or  in  the  hours  of  Mars  on  any  day,  but  applications 
made  to  disperse  a  swelling  are  most  successful  when 
applied  on  the  day  of  Saturn,  the  planet  of  suppres- 
sion, or  in  his  hours  on  any  day. 

Treatments  received  on  the  day  and  in  the  hours 
of  the  planets  which  are  well  aspected  in  the  patient's 
horoscope  are  always  more  powerful  and  beneficial 
than  they  would  be  if  given  in  the  hours  and  on  the 
days  ruled  by  planets  afflicted  when  he  was  born. 


THIRTY-SIX   EXAMPLE   HOROSCOPES        681 

Six  tables  of  Planetary  Hours  covering  the  twelve 
months,  usable  for  both  North  and  South  Latitude, 
will  be  found  in  Simplified  Scientific  Astrology. 

CONCLUSION 

We  have  now  given  an  exposition  of  the  methods 
we  use  in  diagnosis  of  disease.  This  we  trust  will 
enable  the  student  to  work  out  the  subject  for  himself 
or  herself  in  greater  detail.  And  as  he  or  she  uses 
it  unselfishly  to  aid  suffering  human  beings,  the  spir- 
itual qualities  will  be  developed  in  each  so  that  The 
Message  of  the  Stars  revealed  in  each  horo.scope  will 
be  as  an  open  book.  Thus  used,  this  wonderful 
science  will  aid  him  or  her  to  lay  up  treasures  in 
heaven,  as  nothing  else  in  the  world  can  do.  And  we 
pray  God  that  this  book  may  be  the  means  of  foster- 
ing soul  growth  in  all  who  aspire  to  follow  the  dual 
commandment  of  Christ: 

"Preacli  the  Gospel  and  heal  the  sick." 


IMPORTANT    NOTICE 

Despite  all  we  can  say,  many  people  write  en- 
closing money  for  horoscopes,  forcing  us  to  spend 
valuable  time  writing  letters  of  refusal  and  giving  us 
the  trouble  of  returning  their  money.  Please  do  not 
thus  annoy  us,  it  will  avail  you  nothing.  We  use 
Astrology  only  for  healing  purposes  and  if  you  are 
sick  we  will  gladly  help  you,  but  we  do  not  advise 
people  in  worldly  affairs  either  gratis  or  for  pay. 


INDEX 

CHAPTER  I. 

Evolution  as  Shown  in  the  Zodiac 3 

Early  Atlantean  Epoch   ( f£ — V5) 14 

Middle  Atlantean  Epoch   ( n—  /  ) 15 

Later  Atlantean  Epoch   (  y  — -m_ ) 16 

Aryan  Epoch    (  T  — =^= ) 25 

Piscean  Age   (  ^—  rrg) 25 

Aquarian  Age    (£?—$l) * 27 

CHAPTER  II. 

The  Measure  of  Amenability  to  Planetary  Vibra- 
tions      30 

Mystery  of  Light,  Color  and  Consciousness 52 

CHAPTER  III. 

Were  You  Born  Under  a  Lucky  Star? 55 

Amulets,  Birthstones  and  Planetary  Colors 60 

When  Is  the  Best  Time  to  Be  Born? 67 

CHAPTER  IV. 

Reading  the  Horoscope.     Introductory 70 

Mundane   Houses    72 

Signs  of  the  Zodiac 79 

Cardinal   Signs   80 

Fixed  Signs   81 

Common   Signs    83 

Comparative  Effect  of  Cardinal,  Fixed  and  Com- 
mon Signs  on  the  Angles 84 

Triplicities    86 

Sun,  Moon  and  Ascendant 87 

The  Rising  Sign 88 

682 


INDEX 


CHAPTER  V. 

Influence  of  the  Twelve  Signs. 92 

CHAPTER  VI. 

Intrinsic  Nature  of  the  Planets. . 112 

CHAPTCR  VII. 

Children,  of  the  Twelve  Signs 119 

CHAPTER  VIII. 

Sun,  the  Giver  of  Life 140 

Sun  in  the  Twelve  Houses 144 

Sun  in  the  Twelve  Signs 150 

Sun  in  Aspect  with  Other  Planets 156 

CHAPTER  IX. 

Venus,  the  Planet  of  Love 169 

Venus  in  the  Twelve  Houses 171 

Venus  in  the  Twelve  Signs 177 

Venus  in  Aspect  with  Other  Planets 185 

CHAPTER  X. 

Mercury,  the  Planet  of  Reason 192 

Mercury  in  the  Twelve  Houses 195 

Mercury  in  the  Twelve  Signs 201 

Mercury  in  Aspect  with  Other  Planets 207 

CHAPTER  XI. 

Moon,  the  Planet  of  Fecundation 217 

Moon  in  the  Twelve  Houses 220 

Moon  in  the  Twelve  Signs 225 

Moon  in  Aspect  with  Other  Planets 231 

CHAPTER  XII. 

Saturn,  the  Planet  of  Sorrow 244 

Saturn  in  the  Twelve  Houses 249 

Saturn  in  the  Twelve  Signs 255 

Saturn  in  Aspect  with  Other  Planets 261 


684  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

CHAPTER  XIII. 

Jupiter,  the  Planet  of  Benevolence 274 

Jupiter  in  the  Twelve  Houses 278 

Jupiter  in  the  Twelve  Signs 285 

Jupiter  in  Aspect  to  Other  Planets 292 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

Mars,  the  Planet  of  Action 303 

Mars  in  the  Twelve  Houses 308 

Mars  in  the  Twelve  Signs 316 

Mars  in  Aspect  with  Other  Planets 327 

CHAPTER  XV. 

Planetary  Octaves :    tjr -  $    and  J#  -  $ 341 

CHAPTER  XVI. 

Uranus,  the  Planet  of  Altruism 347 

Uranus  in  the  Twelve  Houses 349 

Uranus  in  the  Twelve  Signs 359 

Uranus  in  Aspect  with  Other  Planets 366 

CHAPTER  XVII. 

Neptune,  the  Planet  of  Divinity 380 

Neptune  in  the  Twelve  Houses 383 

Neptune  in  the  Twelve  Signs 389 

Neptune  in  Aspect  with  Other  Planets 396 

CHAPTER  XVIII. 

Doctrine  of  Delineation  in  a  Nutshell 405 

Table  of  Planetary  Keywords 407 

Elevation,  Exaltation  and  Critical  Degrees 409 

Mercury  Before  or  After  the  Sun 412 

Are  You  Helping  Your  Stars? 413 

CHAPTER  XIX. 

Mind  and  the  Ruling  Planet 419 

Influence  of  Ruling  Planets,  Well  Aspected 421 

Influence  of  Ruling  Planets,  Afflicted 427 

Mental  Effects  of  Rising  Sign 433 


INDEX  685 

CHAPTER  XX. 

Your  Luck  in  Life 438 

Health  and  Disease 438 

Social  and  Financial  Fortunes 442 

Vocation    444 

CHAPTER  XXI. 

Marriage  and  Offspring 448 

Harmony  and  Discord 451 

Men's  Marriages 452 

Women's  Marriages   455 

Happiness,  Sorrow  and  Bereavement 457 

Second  Marriages 458 

Description  of  the  Husband  or  Wife 458 

Children    460 

CHAPTER  XXII. 

Progression  of  the  Horoscope — Fate  and  Freewill  462 

CHAPTER  XXIII. 

Different  Methods  of  Progression 467 

Adjusted  Calculation  Date 470 

Progression  of  the  Angles 480 

Some  Important   Points 485 

CHAPTER  XXIV. 

Progressed   Solar  Directions 488 

CHAPTER  XXV. 

Progressed  Lunar  Directions 499 

CHAPTER  XXVI. 

Mutual  Aspects  of  the  Planets 512 

CHAPTER  XXVII. 

Transits    521 

The  Moon  Increasing  or  Decreasing 521 


686  THE   MESSAGE   OF   THE   STARS 

PART  II. 
MEDICAL  ASTROLOGY 

CHAPTER  XXVIII. 

Astro-Diagnosis  of  Disease 528 

An  Important  Warning 52  j) 

Planetary  Polarities    532 

CHAPTER  XXIX. 

Law  of  Correspondences 540 

Signs,       Pathogenic  Effects  of 541 

Sun,          Pathogenic  Effects  of 544 

Mercury,  Pathogenic  Effects  of 549 

Moon,       Pathogenic  Effects  of. 551 

Saturn,     Pathogenic  Effects  of 553 

Jupiter,    Pathogenic  Effects  of 556 

Mars,        Pathogenic  Effects  of 559 

Uranus,   Pathogenic  Effects  of 564 

Neptune,  Pathogenic  Effects  of 566 

The  Ductless  Glands 568 

CHAPTER  XXX. 

Thirty-six  Example  Horoscopes 579 

No.     1.     Conception  in  a  drunken  Debauch 579 

No.     2.     Elemental  Possession   582 

No.     3.     Heart  and  Eye  Trouble,  Spiritual  Sight  588 

No.     4.     Eye  Trouble    591-594 

No.     5.     Eye  Trouble   593 

Dragon's  Head  and  Tail  (  gj  — y  ) 594 

No.     6.     Broken  Femur 597 

No.     7.     Ear  Disease    599 

No.     8.     Ear    Disease,   Kidney   Trouble,    Consti- 
pation       601 

No.     9.  i 

No.  10.  [  Throat  and  Genitals 602,  603,   604 

No.  11.  ' 

Disorders  of  the  Mind..  ,.604 


INDEX  687 

No.  12.     Melancholy  Suicidal  Tendency 608 

No.  13.     St.  Vitus  Dance  and  Adolescence 610 

No.  14.     Suicide  and  Alcoholism 611 

No.  15.     St.  Vitus  Dance  and  Tuberculosis 613 

No.  16.     Tuberculosis    614 

No.  17.     Digestive  Disorder  and  Asthma 615 

No.  18.     Digestive  Disorder   616 

No.  19.     Heart  Trouble    618 

No.  20.     Curvature  of  the  Spine 619 

No.  21.     Kidney  Trouble,  Accidents 620 

No.  22.     Accidental   Fractures   622 

No.  23.     Insanity  and  Spirit  Control 635 

No.  24.     Heart  Failure,  Spasms 638 

No.  25.     Heart,  Lung  and  Kidney  Trouble 641 

No.  26.     Tuberculosis    644 

No.  27.     Adenoids  and  Constipation 647 

No.  28.     Accidents  to   Head 651 

No.  29.     Goitre 654 

No.  30.     Eye  and  Ear  Trouble,  Weak  Back 657 

No.  31.  Eye  and  Ear  Trouble,  Poor  Circulation  660 

No.  32.     Blindness,  Haemorrhoids    663 

No.  33.     Heart  Trouble,  Dropsy 666 

No.  34.     Diseased  Throat  and  Genitals 670 

No.  35.     Solitary  Vice,  Tuberculosis 673 

No.  36.     Horny  Venereal  Growths 677 

Planetary  Hours 679 

The  Rosicrucian   Fellowship 688 


There  was  a  time,  even  as  late  as  Greece,  when 
Religion,  Art  and  Science  were  taught  unitedly  in  the 
Mystery -temples.  But  it  was  necessary  to  the  better  de- 
velopment of  each  that  they  should  separate  for  a  time. 

Religion  held  sole  sway  in  the  so-called  'dark  ages.' 
During  that  time  it  bound  Science  and  Art  hand  and 
foot.  Then  came  the  period  of  the  Renaissance  and  Art 
came  to  the  fore  in  all  its  branches.  Religion  was  strong 
as  yet,  however,  and  Art  was  only  too  often  prostituted 
in  the  service  of  Religion.  Last  came  the  wave  of  mod- 
ern Science,  and  with  iron  hand  it  has  subjugated 
Religion. 

It  was  a  detriment  to  the  world  when  Religion 
shackled  Science.  Ignorance  and  Superstition  caused 
untold  woe,  nevertheless  man  cherished  a  lofty  spiritual 
ideal  then ;  he  hoped  for  a  higher  and  better  life.  It  is 
infinitely  more  disastrous  that  Science  is  killing  Reli- 
gion, for  now  even  Hope,  the  only  gift  of  the  gods  left 
in  Pandora's  box,  may  vanish  before  Materialism  and 
Agnosticism. 

Such  a  state  cannot  continue.  Reaction  must  set 
in.  If  it  does  not,  anarchy  will  rend  the  cosmos.  To  avert 
a  calamity  Religion,  Science  and  Art  must  reunite  in  a 
higher  expression  of  the  Good,  the  True  and  the  Beau- 
tiful than  obtained  before  the  separation. 

A  spiritual  religion,  however,  cannot  blend  with  a 
materialistic  science  any  more  than  oil  can  mix  with 
water.  Therefore  steps  were  taken  to  spiritualize 
Science  and  make  Religion  scientific. 

In  the  thirteenth  century  a  high  spiritual  teacherr 
688 


689 

having  the  symbolical  name,  Christian  Rosenkreuz — 
Christian :  Rose :  Cross — appeared  in  Europe  to  com- 
mence that  work.  He  founded  the  mysterious  Order  of 
Rosicrucians  with  the  object  of  throwing  occult  light 
upon  the  misunderstood  Christian  religion  and  to  ex- 
plain the  mystery  of  life  and  being  from  the  scientific 
standpoint  in  harmony  with  religion. 

In  the  past  centuries  the  Rosicrucians  have  worked 
in  secret,  but  now  the  time  has  come  for  giving  out  a 
definite,  logical  and  sequential  teaching  concerning  the 
origin,  evolution  and  future  development  of  the  world 
and  man,  showing  both  the  spiritual  and  scientific  as- 
pect ;  a  teaching  which  makes  no  statements  that  are  not 
supported  by  reason  and  logic.  Such  is  the  teaching 
promulgated  by  the  Rosicrucian  Fellowship.  It  satisfies 
the  mind  by  giving  clear  explanations  and  neither  begs 
nor  evades  questions.  It  holds  out  a  reasonable  solution 
to  all  mysteries — but,  and  this  is  a  very  important 
"But,"  it  does  not  regard  the  intellectual  understanding 
of  God  and  the  Universe  as  an  end  in  itself.  Far  from 
it.  The  greater  the  intellect,  the  greater  the  danger  of 
its  misuse.  Therefore  the  scientific  teaching  is  only  given 
in  order  that  man  may  believe  and  start  to  live  the  re- 
ligious life  which  alone  can  bring  true  fellowship. 


Jjeahquariera 
of  the  Rosicrucian  Fellowship 

Having  formed  the  Rosicrucian  Fellowship  for  the 
purpose  of  promulgating  the  Rosicrucian  teachings  and 
aiding  aspirants  on  the  path  of  progression,  it  became 
necessary  to  find  a  permanent  home  and  facilities  re- 
quisite for  doing  this  work.  To  this  end  a  tract  of  land 
was  purchased  in  the  little  town  of  Oceanside,  Califor- 


44 


690 

nia,  ninety  miles  south  of  Los  Angeles  and  forty  miles 
north  of  San  Diego,  the  southwesternmost  city  of  the 
United  States. 

Southern  California  offers  exceptional  opportuni- 
ties for  spiritual  growth  on  account  of  the  etheric  at- 
mosphere being  denser  than  in  any  other  part  of  the 
world,  and  Mount  Ecclesia,  as  the  Rosicrucian  Fellow- 
ship headquarters  are  called,  has  been  particularly  fa- 
vored in  this  respect. 

The  work  was  started  in  the  end  of  1911.  Since 
then  there  has  been  built : 

A  Sanctuary,  wherein  the  Rosicrucian  temple  ser- 
vices are  held. 

A  two-story  Administration  Building,  containing 
on  the  second  floor  the  offices  of  the  various  executive 
officers,  a  large  general  office,  the  publishing  and  edi- 
torial departments.  On  the  first  floor  is  a  large,  well- 
equipped  modern  printing  plant  and  bindery,  including 
a  linotype  for  setting  type,  cylinder  and  platen  presses, 
folding  machine,  power  cutter,  book  sewing  machines, 
etc. 

There  is  a  modern  fireproof  Dining  Hall  with  a 
capacity  to  accommodate  one  hundred  and  twenty  at 
one  sitting.  In  it  a  wholesome  and  nutritious  meatless 
diet  is  served  to  workers  and  visitors. 

There  is  also  a  Ladies'  Dormitory  with  a  commo- 
dious Class  Room  and  Social  Hall,  a  number  of  Cottages 
and  a  Tent  City  to  take  care  of  the  overflow  during  the 
vacation  season  when  a  specially  large  number  of  mem- 
bers visit  Mount  Ecclesia. 

The 'grounds  are  growing  more  beautiful  year  by 
year;  hundreds  of  palms  and  a  profusion  of  flowers, 
such  as  are  seen  only  in  California,  add  to  the  inspira- 
tion and  make  this  place  a  paradise  in  the  truest  sense- 
of  the  word. 


's  ^largest 


The  Rosicrucian  Fellowship  is  the  largest  and  most 
complete  Astrological  Publishing  House  in  the  world. 
We  publish  everything  needed  by  the  Astrologer  — 
Textbooks,  Ephemerides,  and  Tables  of  Houses.  We  are 
perfectly  self-contained  and  fully  equipped  for  making 
and  marketing  astrological  and  occult  books,  from  writ- 
ing the  manuscript  of  the  book  in  embryo  to  the  affixion 
of  stamps  prior  to  mailing  the  finished  product  to  the 
purchaser.  All  the  work  of  calculating  and  writing, 
linotyping,  printing,  binding,  publishing  and  shipping 
is  done  in  our  own  plant  under  one  roof. 

Our  "Simplified  Scientific"  Textbooks  are  the  best 
on  the  market,  and  the  lowest  in  price. 

THE  CORRESPONDENCE  SCHOOL 

In  addition  to  the  publications  of  the  Rosicrucian 
Fellowship  advertised  in  the  back  of  this  book,  there  are 
two  correspondence  courses  which  furnish  instruction 
to  students  who  are  desirous  of  growth  and  enlighten- 
ment by  study  of  the  Rosicrucian  Mysteries  and  the 
Science  of  Astrology.  Anyone  who  is  not  professionally 
commercializing  the  spiritual  sciences  may  apply  for 
admission  to  either  or  both. 

There  are  no  fixed  fees,  but  students  are  expected 
to  contribute  to  the  upkeep  of  the  work  for  their  own 
good  as  much  as  because  such  support  is  needed.  It  is 
good  to  remember  that  "a  closed  hand  that  does  not 
give  cannot  receive,  either." 


692 


from 


A  MONTHLY  MAGAZINE  OF  MYSTIC  LIGHT. 

Subscription  in  the  United  States  and  Canada,  $1.50 
a  year.  Single  copies,  15c.  Back  numbers,  20c  each. 
England,  6s  3d  a  year. 

General  Contents. 
The  Mystic  Light  Department  is  devoted  to  articles  on  Oc- 

cultism, Mystic  Masonry,  Esoteric  Christianity  and  sim- 

ilar Spiritual  Subjects. 
The  Question  Department  is  designed  to  give  further  light 

upon  the  various  subjects  dealt  with  in  the  different  de- 

partments, where  queries  from  students  and  other  sub- 

scribers make  this  necessary. 
The  Astral  Ray  Department  gives  Cosmic  Light  on  Life's 

Problems.     So  far  as  space  permits  horoscopes  of  sub- 

scribers' children  are  read  each  month.     These  readings 

show  the  hidden  faults  and  talents  to  help  parents  bring 

out  the  best  in  their  charges. 

Vocational  Readings  for  young  men  and  women  art 

given  to  show  them  the  sphere  in  the  world's  work  foi 

which  they  are  best  fitted. 

Students  will  find  these  readings  of  great  value  as 

practical  lessons  in  Astrology. 
Studies  in  the  Rosicrucian  Cosmo-Conception.       Our  Or- 

igin, Evolution  and  ultimate  Destiny  is  religiously,  rea- 

sonably and  scientifically  explained  'in  this  department 
Nutrition  and  Health.     Our  body  is  "A  Living  Temple,' 

we  build  it  without  "sound  or  hammer,"  by  our  food.  Ir 

this  department  articles  on  diet  teach  how  to  build  wiselj 

and  well. 
The  Rose  Cross  Healing  Circle.     Its  meetings  and  then 

results. 
Echoes    from    Mount    Ecclesia.     News    and    Notes    frorr 

Headquarters. 


tfteh  jictettitfc 

I860  TO  DATE.    PRICE,  25c.  EACH 


The  increasing  difficulty  experienced  by  Astrologers 

in  obtaining  Ephemerides  has  induced  us 

to  enter  the  field  and  produce 

A  Better  Ephemeris 

AT  HALF  THE  PRICE  NOW  CHARGED 
BY  OTHERS 

A  glance  at  this  publication  will  at  once  show 
the  Astrologer  a  number  of  advantages  in  our  ar- 
rangement. The  times  and  places  of  New  Moons, 
Full  Moons  and  Eclipses  are  plainly  marked,  dec- 
linations of  the  planets  are  given  for  every  day,  so 
i?  the  Moon's  Node.  Tables  of  Logarithms  are  given 
for  24  hours. 

The  type  is  as  large  as  used  in  this  book,  the 
print  is  clear  and  beautiful.  It  will  save  eye  strain. 


•694 

jicbnttfc 

MAX  HEINDEL 

THIRD  EDITION 
15c  Postfree 

This  book  needs  no  introduction.  Its  unparalleled  mer- 
its as  a  Complete  Text-book  of  the  art  of  casting  a  horoscope 
have  been  amply  attested  by  many  thousands  of  enthusi- 
astic students  who  have  bought  the  first  two  editions,  but 

THE  PHILOSOPHIC  ENCYCLOPEDIA 

With 
PLANETARY  HOUR    TABLES  FOR   ALL   LATITUDES 

Added  to  the 
THIRD  EDITION 

fills  a  long  felt  want  of  both  beginners  and  advanced  stu- 
dents for  information  concerning  the  underlying  reasons 
of  astrological  dicta.  It  is  a  mine  of  knowledge  arranged 
in  such  a  manner  as  to  be  instantly  accessible;  no  student 
can  afford  to  be  without  it;  112  pp.  Printed  on  a  fine  grade 
of  paper  with  a  heavy  durable  cover  in  two  colors. 


SIMPLIFIED  CALCULATION  FORMS 

Many  good  Astrologers  are  lost  to  the  world  because 
people  gifted  with  the  intuitional  ability  to  read  a  horo- 
scope are  usually  poor  mathematicians.  When  our  Simpli- 
fied Calculation  Forms  are  used,  there  is  no  mental  strain; 
the  student  has  only  to  fill  in  figures  in  blank  spaces  povid- 
ed,  and  before  he  realises  it  the  horoscope  is  cast.  15c 
each,  four  for  50c. 


695 


j^ctatttftr 


No.  2 


With  Longitudes  and  Latitudes  of  about 

FIFTEEN  HUNDRED  CITIES 
OF  THE  WORLD 

50c  Postfree 

These  Tables  of  Houses  are  printed  in  size  and  style 
uniform  with  our  Simplified  Scientific  Ephemeris,  large 
type,  clear  print  and  fine  paper. 

A  12-page  list  (double  column)  gives  the  latitudes  and 
longitudes  of  most  cities  of  fair  size  in  Europe,  Asia,  Africa, 
Australia  and  South  America,  also  American  cities  of  ten 
thousand  and  over. 

By  our  original  simplified  system  we  have  constructed 
these  Tables  so  that  with  them  a  figure  is  constructed  for 
South  latitude  by  the  same  method  and  with  the  same  ease 
as  a  figure  is  cast  for  North  latitude. 

These  Tables  cover  the  two  most  densely  populated 
belts  of  the  world,  including  the  greater  part  of  the  United 
States  and  continental  Europe,  South  America,  South 
Africa,  Australia  and  New  Zealand. 


Before  the  beginning  of  1919  we  will  have  Tables  of 
Houses  for  Latitudes  24  to  36  degrees  and  49  to  60  degrees, 
ready  for  distribution,  at  the  same  price — 50c  each. 


696 

Rosicrucian  Interpretation  of 
Christianity 

ANCIENT  TRUTHS  IN  MODERN  DRESS 
Price  lOc  Each,  Postfree 

No.  1.  "THE  RIDDLE  OF  LIFE  AND  DEATH."  Presenting  a 
solution  which  is  both  scientific  and  religious. 

No.  2.    "WHERE  ARE  THE  DEAD?" 

No.  3.  "SPIRITUAL  SIGHT  AND  THE  SPIRITUAL  WORLDS." 
Showing  that  we  have  a  latent  "sixth  sense,"  and  what 
it  opens  up  to  us  when  cultivated. 

No.  4.  "SLEEP,  DREAMS,  TRANCE,  HYPNOTISM,  MEDIUMSHIP 
AND  INSANITY." 

No.  5.  "DEATH  AND  LIFE  IN  PURGATORY."  Describing  the 
method  of  death  and  purgation,  also  how  immutable  law 
and  not  an  avenging  Deity  transmutes  the  evil  acts  of 
life  to  everlasting  good. 

No.  6.  "LIFE  AND  ACTIVITY  IN  HEAVEN."  Showing  how  the 
Human  Spirit  assimilates  the  Good  of  its  past  life  and 
creates  its  environment  for  a  future  rebirth;  also  how 
it  prepares  a  new  body. 

No.  7.  "BiRTH  A  FOURFOLD  EVENT."  Describing  the  ante- 
natal preparations  for  birth,  and  the  spiritual  changes 
which  inaugurate  the  period  of  excessive  physical  growth 
in  the  7th  year,  the  cause  of  puberty  at  14  and  maturity 
at  21.  This  knowledge  is  absolutely  essential  to  the 
right  care  of  a  child. 

N.  8.  "THE  SCIENCE  OF  NUTRITION,  HEALTH  AND  PRO- 
TRACTED YOUTH."  Showing  the  material  cause  of  early 
death  and  the  obvious  prophylactic. 

No.  9.    "THE  ASTRONOMICAL  ALLEGORIES  OF  THE  BIBLE." 


697 

No.  10.  "ASTROLOGY;  ITS  SCOPE  AND  LIMITATIONS."  Show- 
ing the  spiritual  side  of  Astrology,  how  it  enables  those 
who  study  it  to  help  themselves  and  others. 

No.  11.  "SPIRITUAL  SIGHT  AND  INSIGHT."  Its  culture,  con- 
trol and  legitimate  use,  giving  a  definite  and  safe  method 
of  attainment. 

No.  12.  "PARSIFAL."  Wagner's  famous  Mystic  Music 
Drama,  a  mine  of  inspiration  to  spiritual  effort. 

No.  13.  "THE  ANGELS  AS  FACTORS  IN  EVOLUTION."  Show- 
ing just  what  part  the  Angels,  Archangels,  Cherubim, 
Seraphim,  etc.,  play  in  the  Drama  of  Life. 

No.  14.  "LUCIFER,  TEMPTOR  OR  BENEFACTOR?"  Showing  the 
origin  and  the  mission  of  pain  and  sorrow. 

No.  15.  "THE  MYSTERY  OF  GOLGOTHA  AND  THE  CLEANSING 
BLOOD."  A  rational  explanation  which  satisfies  head  and 
heart  alike. 

No.  16.    "THE  STAR  OF  BETHLEHEM  ;  A  MYSTIC  FACT." 

No.  17.  "THE  MYSTERY  OF  THE  HOLY  GRAIL."  The  way 
to  attainment. 

No.  18.  "THE  LORD'S  PRAYER."  Showing  the  esoteric  side, 
and  how  it  applies  to  the  seven-fold  constitution  of  man. 

No.  19.    "THE  COMING  FORCE;  VRIL  OR  WHAT?" 

No.  20.  "FELLOWSHIP  AND  THE  COMING  RACE."  Showing 
why  the  Bible  contains  both  the  Jewish  and  Christian 
Religions,  and  why  both  combined  are  peculiarly  adapted 
to  the  spiritual  needs  of  the  Western  World  and  why 
Jesus  was  born  a  Jew. 

These  lectures  are  fine  for  beginners.     Read  consecu- 
tively, they  give  a  comprehensive  outline  of  our  philosophy. 

THEY  FIT  THE  POCKET 

and  allow  a  busy  man  to  utilize  time  on  cars  en  route  to  or 
from  business. 

GIVE  ONE  TO  A  FRIEND 
It  is  an  inexpensive  and  a  helpful  gift. 


698 


AN  ELEMENTARY   EXPOSITION 

200  pp.  cloth.     $1.00  postfree.  ' 

is  %  Jbok  far  lite  Jhtsu  Jfom 

who  is  seeking  a  solution  to  the  Great  Mystery  called  Life, 
but  lacks  leisure  to  wade  through  volumes  of  metaphysical 
speculations.  The  lucid  and  logical  explanations  carry  con- 
viction —  they  bear 

THE  STAMP  OF  TRUTH 

Nevertheless,  the  language  is  so  simple,  clear  and  devoid  of 
technicalities  that  a  child  can  understand  its  message.  It 
is  therefore  specially  suited  to  beginners,  but  advanced 
students  will  find 

THE  MYSTERY  OF  LIGHT, 

COLOR  AND  CONSCIOUSNESS, 
and  similar  subjects  of  vital  interest. 


or 

30c  Postfree. 

The  idea  that  India  is  the  main  repository  of  occult 
knowledge  is  held  by  many  who  have  forsaken  the  Chris- 
tian Religion  to  embrace  Hinduism.  "Christ  or  Buddha?" 
shows  most  clearly  that 

THE  WESTERN  WISDOM  TEACHINGS 

throw  a  light  upon  the  problems  of  life  which  is  much 
more  intense,  far-reaching  and  soul  satisfying  in  every  re- 
spect. A  partial  list  of  contents  will  indicate  its  scope. 

Involution,  Evolution  and  Epiger.csis. 

Trance. 

Dreamless  sleep. 

Dreams. 

The  Waking  State. 

The  Mystery  of  Blood. 

The  Mystery  of  Sex. 

The  Mystery  of  Death. 

The  Christ  of  the  East. 

The  Christ  of  the  West. 


IN  QUESTIONS  AND  ANSWERS 
Price  $1.50,  Postfree. 

A  book  of  ready  reference  upon  all  mystic  matters, 
which  ought  to  be  in  the  library  of  every  occult  student. 
It  covers  432  pages;  has  a  considerable  number  of  illum- 
inating diagrams,  is  printed  on  fine  paper  in  clear  type, 
reinforced  binding  of  cloth  with  the  beautiful  Rosicrucian 
Symbols  stamped  upon  the  cover  in  red,  black  and  gold;  the 
three  edges  are  also  gold. 

PARTIAL  LIST  OF  SUBJECTS 

Section  I. — Life  on  Earth.  Social  Conditions,  Marriage, 
Children,  Sleep  and  Dreams,  Health  and  Disease. 

Section  II. — Life  After  Death.  Cremation,  Purgatory, 
The  First  Heaven,  The  Second  Heaven,  The  Third 
Heaven,  Guardian  Angels. 

Section  III.— Rebirth.  The  Law  of  Rebirth,  The  Law  of 
Causation,  Transmigration. 

Section  IV. — The  Bible  Teachings.  The  Creation,  The  Fall, 

The  Immaculate  Conception,  Sayings  of  Christ. 

Section  V. — Spiritualistic  Phenomena.  Mediumship,  Ob- 
session, Materialisation. 

Section  VI. — Clairvoyance.  Dangers  of  Psychism,  True 
Spiritual  Unfoldment,  Initiation. 

Section  VIII. — Animals.     Their  Life  Here  and  Hereafter. 
It  is  truly  AN  OCCULT  INFORMATION  BUREAU! 


By  Max  Heindel, 

15c  Postfree. 

The  title  indicates  sufficiently  the  scope  of  the  book. 
It  is  direct  and  to  the  point  like  all  the  writings  of 
this  author. 


700 

Jxnstmtnau  Cusmcr-Cmiceptum 

Sixth  Edition 
602  Pages.    Price  $1.50 

This  remarkable  book  by  Max  Heindel  marks  an  entirely 
new  departure  in  mystic  literature. 

For  the  first  time  in  history,  the  Western  Wisdom 
Teaching  concerning  Life  and  Being  which  the  Rosicrucians 
have  guarded  for  centuries,  is  here  given  by  an  authorized 
messenger,  for  it  is  held  that  the  world  is  ready  to  receive 
this  advanced  science  of  the  soul,  the  religious  philosophy  of 
the  Aquarian  Age,  now  at  hand.  The  existing  soul-hunger 
and  the  satisfying  nature  of  the  Rosicrucian  teachings  are 
equally  well  attested  by  the  phenomenal  sale  of  this  great 
book,  and  many  thousands  of  letters  received  by  the  author 
from  grateful  students  located  all  over  the  world,  who  testify 
that  they  there  found  what  they  have  long  sought  elsewhere 
in  vain. 

We  give  herewith  some  headings  of  chapters  and  sub- 
divisions as  a  slight  indication  of  what  is  contained  in  this 
mine  of  mystc  light  and  knowledge. 

Part  I. 

The  Visible  and  Invisible  Worlds,  The  Four  Kingdoms,  Man 
and  the  Method  of  Evolution.  Spirit,  Soul  and  Body; 
Thought,  Memory  and  Soul-growth.  The  Conscious,  Subcon- 
scious and  Superconscious  Mind.  The  science  of  death,  the 
beneficence  of  purgatory,  life  in  heaven.  Re-birth  and  the 
Law  of  Consequence. 

Part  II. 

The  Scheme  of  Evolution.  The  Path  of  Evolution.  The 
Work  of  Evolution.  Genesis  and  Evolution  of  our  Solar 
System.  Chaos  the  seed  ground  of  Cosmos,  Birth  of  the 
Planets,  Planetary  Spirits.  Evolution  of  the  Earth.  The 
Moon,  the  eighth  sphere  of  retrogression.  Occult  Analysis 
of  Genesis.  The  Nebular  Theorv. 
Part  III. 

Christ  and  His  Mission.  The  "Star  of  Bethlehem,  the  Mys- 
tery of  Golgotha  and  the  cleansing  blood.  Future  Devel- 
opment and  Initiation.  Alchemy  and  Soul-growth.  The 
Method  of  Acquiring  First-hand  Knowledge.  Western  Meth- 
ods for  Western  People.  Esoteric  Training.  Christian  Ro- 
senkreuz  and  the  Order  of  Rosicrucians.  The  Rosicrucian 
Initiation. 


UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA  LIBRARY 

Los  Angeles 
This  book  is  DUE  on  the  last  date  stamped  below. 


3019)8 


REC'D  LD-URL 


Form  L9-Series  4939 


A     000024139    8 


P 


PLEA-E  DO  NOT   REMOVE 
THIS   BOOK  CARD-. 


University  Research  Library 


