EO’S 


ASTROLOGICAL  TEXT  BOOKS 


fHE  Art  of  Synthesis 

now  TO  lUDGE  A NATIVITY  PART  II.) 


W 


the  LIClUilY 

YC  Ui\G  LNIYERSITY 
PROVO,  I r\H 


C 


Digitized  by  the  Internet  Archive 
in  2017  with  funding  from 
Brigham  Young  University 


https://archive.org/details/artofsynthesisOOIeoa 


PLANETARY  TYPES 


JUPITER 


NEPTUNE:  No.  i. 


URANUS  : No.  2 

Jupiterean : Philosopher 
Positive  and  Negative  Types 


NEPTUNE:  No.  2 


Uranian : Occultist 
Neptunean : Mystic 


URANUS:  No.  i 


PLANETARY  TYPES 


VT. 


Martinl-Jupiier  ian  Tvpt 


PLANETARY  TYPES 


SUN:  No.  2 


Martial  Type : 
Energizers 

Solar  Positive 
Lunar  Negative 
Types 


MOON  : No.  2 


VENUS  TYPES 


Mrs  BESSIE  LEO 


VENUS:  No.  i 


VENUS:  No.  2 


Artistic  Types 


iv 


Positive — 


— Nemitive 


PLANETARY  TYPES 


Froin  the  ‘'^Leisure  Hour,"  by  Permission. 

JOHN  RUSKIN 

Satuniian-Mercurial  Type 


ffilVATC  LIBRARY 
OF 

VICTOR  GLANZ 


PLANETARY  TYPES 


GENERAL  BOULANGER 
Mars  arid  Vcnas  Mixed  Type 

The  nativity  shows  no  decided  temperament  ; it  seems  to  be 
tending  toward  a Negative  Uranian. 


VI 


PLANETARY  TYPES 

SATURNINE  AND  MERCURIAL  TYPES 


SATURN  : No.  i 


SATURN  : No.  2 


Saturnine  Positive 
Type  : 
Scientist 


Mercurial  Positive 
Type : 
Analysist 
CStudential) 


CIIARUBEL 


Saturnine  Negative- 
Type  : 

Persevering 


Mercurial  Negative 
Type  : 

Adaptable 

(.Studential) 


MERCURY:  No.  i 


MERCURY:  No.  2 


ALAN  LEO  (the  author) 

Horn  ^.4g  a.ni.,  jtJi  August  iS6o,  IVestinister,  London. 

SATURN  RISING,  URANUS  CULMINATING 

‘ Mr  Alan  Leo  is  so  well-known  among  all  who  are  interested  in  Astrology,  and 
he  has  done  so  much  to  raise  Astrology  from  the  position  of  a superstition  to  that 
of  a science,  that  any  book  from  his  pen  is  sure  of  a welcome  among  serious 
students.  These  books  are  the  ripe  outcome  of  his  long  experience  and  thorough 
knowledge  of  his  subject  summarised  for  the  benefit  of  his  younger  brethren.’ — 
Mrs  Annie  Besant  in  The  Theosophist,  February  19  i i. 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


PUBLISHER’S  ANNOUNCEMENT 


Re-issue  of  the  ‘Astrology  for  All  ’ Series 


In  entering  upon  a re-issue  of  the  whole  of  this  Series  in  a uniform  style  as 
regards  size,  binding,  etc.,  it  has  been  deemed  expedient  to  do  away  with  a 
possible  source  of  confusion.  A change  of  title  has  therefore  been  decided 
upon  in  two  cases,  and  the  six  books  of  this  series  now  stand  as  follows  : 


Vol.  I.  Astrology  for  All  formerly 

„ II.  Casting  the  Horoscope  „ 

„ III.  How  to  Judge  a Nativity  „ 

„ IV.  The  Art  of  Synthesis  „ 

„ V.  The  Progressed  Horoscope  „ 

„ VI.  The  Key  to  Your  Own  Nativity 


Astrology  for  All,  Part  1. 
„ „ „ Part  II. 

Hozv  to  Judge  a Nativity,  Part  I. 
„ „ „ „ „ Part  II. 

The  Progressed  Horoscope 


This  explanation  is  prefixed  to  all  copies  of 
the  New  Issue  for  the  information 
and  safeguarding  of 
purchasers 


Readers  are  requested  to  notify  the  Author  of  any  errors  they  may  discover  in 
this  or  other  V olumes  of  the  Series,  so  that  they  may  be  removed  in  future  editions.  * 


* * 


'‘^Astrology  for  All"  Series. — Vol.  IV ^ 


The  Art  of 
Synthesis 

by 

ALAN  LEO 


THIRD  EDITION,  REVISED 
(Formerly  issued  as  How  to  Judge  a Nativity.^  Part  II.') 


Price  10/6  nett 

PRIVATE  LIBRARY 
OF 

VICTOR  GLANZ 

Published  at 

“MODERN  ASTROLOGY  ” OFFICE,  IMPERIAL  BUILDINGS, LUDGATE  CIRCUS, E.C. 

1912 

The  Trade  Supplied  by 

L.  N.  FOWLER  6 CO.,  7 Imperial  Arcade,  London,  E.C. 


DIUGIIA 


Tni:T,rrRARY 
voc.\G  e \MVEasnT 
PROVO,  tTAII 


PREFACE 


The  Art  of  Synthesis  previously  known  as  Hoiv  to  judge  a Nativity, 
Part  II,  was  originall}'^  issued  in  two  parts,  and  finally  bound  in  one 
complete  volume  for  the  convenience  of  students,  when  appreciation  of 
that  work  necessitated  an  earlier  reprint  than  was  anticipated.  This 
new  edition  afforded  the  opportunity  of  making  a thorough  revision, 
which  resulted  in  a considerable  rearrangement  of  the  former  plan  and 
the  inclusion  of  a large  quantity  of  new  matter ; hence  the  book  had 
again  to  be  issued  in  two  parts,  each  being  a distinct  and  complete  work 
in  itself.  The  additional  matter  and  the  esoteric  rendering  of  some 
of  the  chapters  were  again  much  appreciated  by  students,  and  the  new 
edition  sold  more  rapidl3"  than  was  expected.  This  has  given  a further 
opportunity  for  a final  revision  and  an  improvement  in  the  book, 
necessitating  a definite  change  of  title  from  : How  to  judge  a Nativity 
Part  II,  to  The  Art  of  Synthesis. 

These  alterations  and  improvements  have  given  the  student  of  Natal 
or  Genethliacal  Astrolog3^  two  complete  books  for  the  judgment  of 
nativities,  the  one  anal3dical,  and  the  other  synthetic. 

The  two  companion  books.  How  to  judge  a Nativity,  and  The  Art  of 
Synthesis  are  unique,  inasmuch  as  the3^  are  not  in  any  sense  of  the 
word  a cop3^  of  any  other  work  on  the  subject,  but  are  the  result  of 
man3'’  years  first  hand  experience,  and  in  this  work  especiall3'',  for  the 
first  time  in  the  history  in  western  Astrology,  the  methods  adopted  in 
synthesising  the  judgment  of  nativities  is  revealed  in  a manner  easily 
understood  by  all,  whether  amateurs,  professionals,  or  advanced  students 
of  Astrology. 

The  final  expression  of  the  ideas  introduced  into  this  work  for 
practical  judgments,  will  be  found  in  the  author’s  new  book  entitled 
Esoteric  Astrology. 

ALAN  LEO. 

Imperial  Buildings,  E.C.,  1912. 

V 


1 


1 


INTRODUCTION 


By  practice  alone  the  real  art  of  judging  a nativity  comes.  Some 
students  are  gifted  in  forming  accurate  and  concise  judgments,  others 
however  labour  and  toil  for  years  without  that  understanding  so 
necessary  to  arrive  at  correct  conclusions. 

If  there  existed  any  ‘ royal  road  ’ by  which  the  whole  life  history  of 
the  native  could  be  seen  at  a glance,  there  would  be  many  more 
thousands  of  students  than  at  present ; but  then  the  joy  of  using  the 
discriminative  faculties  would  be  lacking,  and  the  pleasure  found  in 
real  study  would  thus  be  lost  so  far  as  the  appreciation  of  individual 
horoscopes  is  concerned. 

To  become  a successful  delineator  of  horoscopes,  the  art  of  blending 
or  ‘ synthesising  ’ the  whole  nativity  must  be  thoroughly  understood. 
It  is  to  aid  in  this  desirable  achievement  that  the  writing  of  this  book 
has  been  undertaken. 

It  is  the  contention  of  some  astrologers,  that  in  order  to  give  correct 
judgments  the  native’s  heredity  must  be  known,  also  the  environment 
into  which  he  or  she  was  born  ; 3'et  the  skilful  astrologer  who  has 
absorbed  the  true  teachings  regarding  astrology  will  not  be  long  in 
discovering  the  general  nature  of  the  birth  and  environment.  Thus,  it 
should  never  be  difficult  to  ascertain  whether  the  native  is  born  of 
poor,  middle-class,  or  well-to-do  parents,  and  whether  born  into  a 
mediocre  or  refined  family.  It  is  not  always  wise  to  accept  without 
reserve  statements  regarding  the  native’s  family  history,  as  they  are  apt 
to  prove  misleading  The  author  knew  the  case  of  a birth  into  a very 
poor  family,  in  which  the  native  (a  male)  had  no  education  and  no 
opportunity  to  learn  a trade  or  profession  : in  fact  he  began  work  at  the 
age  of  seven  years,  giving  his  parents  the  whole  of  his  earnings  until  he 
practically  came  of  age.  Yet  he  rose  to  a high  position  in  life  and 
became  a wealthy  man.  The  nativity  denoted  innate  refinement,  great 
determination,  and  a persistent  ambition  to  rise  in  life.  He  was  wholly 
self  taught,  and  none  could  tell  that  he  had  passed  through  such  a hard 
early  environment.  There  are  also  cases  where  men  have  been  born  into 
wealthy  and  refined  families,  and  yet  have  fallen  so  low  as  to  end  their 
days  in  the  workhouse.  What  it  is  necessary  to  know,  is  the  exact 
vibratory  power  of  the  ego  who  is  putting  himself  down  into  manifesta- 
tion through  the  particular  horoscope  that  is  being  studied. 

vii 


via 


INTRODUCTION 


It  cannot  be  wise  to  limit  the  judgment  of  an3'  nativity  to  the 
phj'^sical  body  onl}^  or  to  think  that  the  ego  manifesting  through  it  is 
here  on  this  earth  for  the  first  time,  and  we  affirm  after  devoting  fully 
twenty  j^ears’  close  study  to  astrology,  that  an3^  consideration  of  the 
science  without  the  idea  of  re-incarnation  * is  entirely  dead,  and  leads 
the  student  nowhere.  It  has  always  been  the  teaching  of  what  we  have 
been  obliged  to  term  Esoteric  Astrology,  that : 

One  in  essentials,  but  manifesting  differentl3%  we  are  all  spiritually 
the  same.  The  mass  of  cla3^  which  is  moulded  into  the  potter’s  bowl 
yields  its  form  to  the  will  of  the  workman.  Each  vessel  used  b3'  the  soul 
must  bend  to  the  will  of  the  Higher  Self,  for  the  outward  form  is  but  the 
vehicle  by  which  we  gain  experience  at  the  behest  of  our  Individual  Star. 
As  the  Sun  is  to  the  solar  system,  so  is  this  Star  to  the  Sun  of  our  being 
and  existence.  As  the  seven  planets  are  to  the  Sun  the  media  of  its 
attributes,  so  are  our  seven  principles  to  this  our  Star. 

We  are  distinctly  seven-in-one,  from  the  ph3^sical  standpoint ; but  in 
realit3%  only  three-in-one  ; the  Spirit,  or  vital  essence — the  Soul,  or 
consciousness — and  the  Body,  or  physical  vehicle  through  which  these 
may  manifest.  If  we  consider  ourselves  from  the  septenar3^  standpoint 
we  are  but  One,  using  sheaths,  or  vehicles,  to  express  ourselves — the 
One  being  formless  and  abstract. 

The  ph3''sical  body  at  what  we  call  death  disintegrates  and  passes  back 
into  the  earthy  elements,  the  remaining  sheaths  withdrawing  into  the 
matrix  upon  which  the  physical  bod3^  was  built  ; but  this  also  in  a short 
time  disappears,  leaving  the  Saturnian  vehicle  to  hold  the  others  until 
the  life-forces  have  exhausted  themselves  in  ‘kama-loka’ — (the  ‘purgator3^  ’ 
of  the  Roman  Catholics  and  the  ‘hell’  of  the  Christians).  When  this 
has  been  accomplished  and  the  grosser  desires  have  been  expended,  the 
Triad  rises  with  its  Jupiterian  vehicle  into  ‘devachan’  (the  ‘heaven’  of 
the  Christian),  once  more,  after  a period  of  rest,  to  re-clothe  itself  with 
the  concrete  elements  whereb3'  it  may  gain  fresh  experiences,  give  effect 
to  previous  causes,  and  obtain  unacquired  virtues.  For  this  Triad  must 
know  and  realise  ; and  onl3f  by  contact  with  its  opposite  in  Nature,  can  it 
test  the  development  of  its  three  attributes.  Power,  Wisdom  and  Activity. 

From  the  practical  standpoint,  the  most  satisfactory  method  of 

* For  the  explanation  of  new  terms  used  in  this  work  see  the  Glossary  in 
Appendix  at  end  of  book.  These  terms  convey  a fuller  meaning  than  ordinary 
words,  and  the  explanation  should  be  well  pondered  by  the  astrological  student. 


INTRODUCTION 


IX 


learning  the  art  of  synthesis  is  first  to  gain  some  clear  and  definite  idea 
with  regard  to  the  prevailing  temperament  shown  in  the  horoscope,  and 
then  to  bring  together  and  s3mthesise  the  various  planetary  influences  in 
accordance  with  this  temperament. 

Temperament  literally  means  the  ‘ tempering  ’ of  all  the  forces  that 
pass  through  and  out  of  the  human  body ; and  to  have  transcended  the 
human  stage  means  no  less  an  achievement  than  the  tempering  of  all  the 
elements  into  one  harmonious  whole.  Astrologers  speak  of  the  Martian, 
Jovian,  Saturnian  and  other  temperaments  in  a particular  sense,  knowing 
that  the  qualities  attributed  to  each  are  the  direct  result  of  influences 
corresponding  with  the  planets  that  govern  the  Martian,  Jovian  and 
Saturnian  elements  in  natui'e. 

Where  there  is  intelligence  and  a progressive  spirit  the  temperament 
is  very  marked.  The  Martian  temperament  at  its  present  stage  of 
development  is  shown  to  the  best  advantage  in  our  leading  military  men, 
explorers,  and  rhe  great  manufacturers,  engineers  and  handicraftsmen. 
In  contrast  to  these  we  may  place  the  Saturnian  temperament,  which 
tempers  the  same  universal  force  by  turning  it  inward  to  be  expressed  in 
a more  subtle,  refined  and  diplomatic  manner.  The  Martian  takes  risks 
and  hazards  adventures,  relying  upon  his  superabundance  of  out-rushing 
energj^  while  the  Saturnian  conserves  his  forces,  undertaking 
responsibilit3f  with  a fuller  consciousness  as  to  the  results  of  his  plans, 
meditating  long  over  a course  of  action  before  entering  upon  it,  and  then 
not  being  lightly  turned  aside. 

It  may  be  safely  stated  that  astrologers  are  quite  familiar  with  all 
the  temperaments  coming  under  the  various  planets,  save  those  which 
belong  to  the  Uranian  and  Neptunian  group.  Of  these  two  much  more 
is  known  ot  the  former  than  the  latter,  but  so  far  as  experience  goes  up 
to  the  present,  Uranus  and  Neptune  appear  to  represent  the  two  extremes 
of  a certain  temperament  which  may  be  termed, /or  of  a better  word, 

the  spiritual. 

The  Uranian  appears  to  go  to  the  extreme  on  the  side  of  indepen- 
dence and  freedom,  and  in  its  highest  form  produces  the  genius  or  the 
exceptional  talent  which  accompanies  the  man  who  hews  out  a path  for 
himself,  creating  a school  of  thinkers  who  follow  in  his  track.  The 
reverse  of  this  is  the  case,  however,  where  the  temperament  ‘ runs  to 
seed,’  as  it  were,  for  then  we  find  eccentricity,  extreme  opinions,  indiffer- 
ence to  the  views  or  feelings  of  others,  and  peculiarly  erratic  tendencies. 


INTRODUCTION 


Some  attempt  has  been  made  to  sketch  the  various  planetary  types 
with  a view  to  obtaining  a facial  presentation  that  will  illustrate  two  or 
more  temperaments  coming  under  the  same  influence. 

The  first  portrait  sketched  by  our  artist  attempts  to  describe  the 
Uranian  whose  intelligence  has  carried  him  into  the  region  of  science 
allied  to  art,  and  just  on  to  the  borderland  of  genius,  the  portrait  being 
sketched  in  such  a manner  as  to  give  no  clue  to  what  particular 
department  of  art  and  science  the  temperament  inclines. 

The  second  sketch  which  follows  depicts  the  more  practical  and 
utilitarian  side  of  the  Uranian.  The  face  seems  to  denote  intelligence 
allied  to  firmness,  independence  and  originality.  Both  faces  denote 
individuality  to  a marked  degree,  both  are  well  proportioned  with  the  will 
and  intellect  harmoniously  blended,  and  both  strike  one  as  being  faces 
of  uncommon  types — as  indeed  all  Uranian  individuals  undoubtedly  are. 

We  are  also  favoured  with  two  Neptunian  sketches.  The  first 
shows  an  inclination  to  weirdness  and  a very  highly-strung  nervous 
temperament,  with  a dreamy  cast  of  countenance,  which  is  usually 
associated  with  the  Neptunian,  and  we  can  imagine  it  to  be  the  portrait 
of  a transcendentalist,  or  a mystic  who  has  refined  his  love  nature  to  the 
point  of  transferring  it  beyond  the  claims  of  earthly  affection  alone  ; in 
any  case  it  represents  an  extreme  type.  In  the  second  there  is  an  extreme 
of  another  type  and  the  personality  is  accentuated  to  the  sacrifice  of  the 
ideal  and  the  spiritual. 

In  both  the  Uranian  and  Neptunian  types  as  illustrated,  imagination 
has  had  to  play  a prominent  part,  owing  to  the  scarcity  of  these  types  at 
our  present  stage  of  evolution. 

The  Saturnine  temperaments  give  a thoughtful  and  somewhat 
severe  cast  of  feature  as  will  be  seen  by  the  special  illustrations  given 
at  the  commencement  of  this  book  : No.  i is  the  student  type,  and  No.  2 
the  political  type.  Each  gives  the  idea  of  steadiness,  honesty  and  sobriety. 

The  Jupiterian  temperament  is  usually  of  the  philosophic  or 
religious  order.  Benevolence  is  the  marked  feature  of  this  type,  and 
that  impression  is  conveyed  in  the  illustration.  It  is  a distinct  type  and 
is  not  easily  mistaken,  and  there  is  very  little  variation  from  the  type 
shewn  in  the  sketch. 

The  Mars  types  are  more  pronounced,  self-assertion,  positivencss 
and  an  enterprising  spirit  are  the  marked  features  of  the  Martian  tem- 
perament. The  eyes  are  usually  piercing,  bright  and  full  of  alertness. 


INTRODUCTION 


XI 


The  Venus  temperament  is  of  a more  refined  and  smoother  type 
than  the  Martial,  as  seen  in  illustrations  i and  2.  The  artist  and  the 
professional  are  here  depicted,  the  cast  being  similar  in  both  faces. 

In  the  Mercurial  temperament  we  have  a more  general  t3^pe ; both  ^ 
denote  intellect  and  a keen  mind  shown  in  the  mental  expression. 

No.  I is  the  business  mental.  No.  2 the  scholar  and  the  active  thinker. 

In  the  Solar  types  we  have  the  impression  of  dignity  and  firmness,  C 
with  a good  physical  temperament  indicated.  No.  i is  of  the  ancestral 
order.  No.  2 the  up-to-date  modern  solar  man.  The  Lunar  types  are  .. 
again  distinct  and  show  the  dreamy,  imaginative,  and  receptive 
temperament.  The  Solar  gives  a positive  expression,  and  the  Lunar  a 
decidedly  negative  and  receptive  expression. 

The  following  are  the  comments  of  the  well-known  phrenologist  and 
physiognomist  ‘Viola’  on  these  types,  the  pictures  having  been 
presented  to  her  for  her  judgment : — 

Uranus — No.  1.  This  shows  the  purely  mental  temperament,  with  a 
fine  development  of  the  frontal  lobes.  It  is  the  temperament  of  the 
philosopher,  the  abstract  thinker,  and  the  genius : a man  of  lofty  ideas 
and  far-reaching  views,  who  would  always  be  in  advance  of  his  time 
and  who  steps  in  the  van-guard  of  evolution. 

Uranus — No.  2.  This  shows  the  mental,  vital  temperament,  and 
indicates  the  orator,  the  writer,  the  painter  musician.  There  is  a great 
deal  of  the  social  element  combined  with  a strong  will. 

Neptune — No.  i . Here  we  have  the  motive-mental  temperament  from 
which  we  get  the  patriot,  the  enthusiast,  the  inventor,  and  the  sculptor. 

It  alwa3's  indicates  a man  of  action. 

Neptune — No.  2.  This  shows  the  motive  type  of  temperament, 
without  sufficient  of  the  vital  to  induce  stability,  and  to  develop  the 
social  spirit.  From  this  type  comes  the  anarchist,  the  incendiary  ; the 
imagination  not  being  led  by  the  reason. 

Saturn — No.  i.  Here  we  have  shown  the  motive-mental  tempera- 
ment, and  from  this  comes  the  philosopher,  the  moralist,  the  judge  and 
the  statesman.  The  head  indicates  justice,  conscientiousness ; the 
moral  growth  is  as  large  as  the  mental. 

Saturn — No.  2.  This  shows  the  purely  mental  temperament,  pre- 
eminently the  politician,  diplomat,  and  ambassador;  always  the  man  of 
action  rather  than  the  student  or  a dreamer. 


INTRODUCTION 


xii 

Jupiter. — Here  we  have  shown  the  mental/motive  temperament,  with 
a fine  social  and  moral  brain.  It  is  the  t3’^pe  which  produces  the 
philanthropist  and  the  judge. 

Mars. — This  shows  the  vital-motive  temperament.  It  indicates  the 
soldier,  the  sailor.  There  is  a great  deal  of  force  and  the  power  to 
command. 

Ventis. — No.  i.  This  shows  the  vital  temperament  combined  with 
the  motive,  while  there  is  also  a fair  amount  of  the  mental.  There  is 
great  power  here  for  sculpturing,  for  painting,  for  music.  It  shows  the 
professional  t^^pe. 

Venus. — No.  2.  Here  we  have  shown  the  mental  temperament  with 
scarcely  enough  of  the  vital  or  motive.  There  is  talent  indicated  for  the 
diplomatic  service,  also  for  foreign  travel,  or  acting  combined  with  some 
literar^^  ability’’. 

Mercury — No.  i.  This  shows  the  vital-motive  temperament,  and 
indicates  pre-eminently  the  inventor,  the  teacher  and  the  preacher. 

Mercury — No.  2.  Here  we  have  the  purely  mental  temperament 
shown,  literary  ability  being  the  most  marked  feature.  This  person 
would  be  successful  as  a writer  of  novels,  or  any  works  of  fiction,  also 
the  drama.  The  biain  is  extremely  active  and  highly  organised. 

Solar — No.  i.  Here  we  have  the  vital  temperament  shown,  in- 
dicating one  who  would  make  a ruler,  general,  or  judge  ; one  who  must 
alwaj's  be  on  the  path  of  action.  He  would  also  make  an  excellent 
statesman  or  banker. 

Solar — No.  2.  This  type  shows  excellent  power  to  organise  and 
direct  others,  one  who  would  make  a financier,  banker  or  barrister.  It 
shows  a well-balanced  temperament. 

Moon — No.  I.  This  shows  one  who  would  make  an  engineer  or  a 
sailor,  or  even  a business  man.  He  possesses  the  vital-motive 
temperament. 

Moon — No.  2.  This  one  would  be  successful  as  a swimmer  or 
where  she  is  engaged  in  any  watery  exploits  ; as  bath  attendant,  or  as 
a bath  or  hydro  attendant ; or  barmaid. 

The  various  temperaments  are  illustrated  in  the  examples  given  at 
the  end  of  this  book ; and  the  ideas  connected  with  the  synthesis  of  the 
horoscope  are  explained  in  the  following  pages. 


TABLE  OF  CONTENTS 

PAGE 

Preface  ........  v 

Introduction  . ......  vii 

Chapter  I 

Man  and  the  Planets  ......  i 

Man  mirrors  the  universe,  3 ; Self,  Not-self,  and  the  Relation  5 

Planets  classified  in  terms  of  the  world,  consciousness  and  body  . 6 

Chapter  II 

Planets  and  Consciousness  , . . . . .11 

Three  Aspects  of  Consciousness,  Action,  i 2 ; Feeling,  1 3 ; Cogni- 
tion, 15  ; Classification  of  Planets  . , . . 15 

Chapter  III 

The  Planets  AND  the  Seven  Principles.  Personality  and  Individuality  19 

Personality,  20  ; The  Bridge,  21  ; Individuality,  22  ; The  Planets 
and  these  .......  24 

Chapter  IV 

The  Sun,  Life  Giver  ......  28 

The  Sun  and  the  Solar  Logos,  30  ; the  life  of  the  planets,  32  ; 

The  zodiac  as  a cell,  33  ; Rising,  35  ; in  the  mid-heaven  Setting, 

36  ; in  the  fourth  house  . . . . .36 

Chapter  V 

The  Moon,  Mother  ......  38 

Pre-natal  epoch,  40  ; Lunar  periods,  41  ; Occultism  and  astronomy, 

43  ; Moon  in  mythology,  45  ; Sun,  Moon,  and  Earth  as  a 
trinity,  46  ; Sun,  Moon,  and  birth,  48  ; occupations,  50  ; Feelings, 

51  ; intellect  . . . . . . .52 

xiii 


XIV 


CONTENTS 


I^ACB 

Chapter  VI 

Mercury,  the  Thinker  .....  53 

Compared  with  quicksilver,  55  ; the  psychological  standpoint,  57  ; 
Perception,  Discrimination,  Unification,  59  ; the  adept,  60  ; 
Caduceus,  60  ; Table  of  Correspondences,  62  ; when  rising,  63  ; 
types  of  mind  ...  . . . . .64 

Chapter  VII 

Venus,  the  Unifier  ......  66 

In  mythology  and  astrology,  67  ; Sun,  Mercury,  Venus  as 
Trinity,  68  ; The  Creative  Word  and  Kriyashakti,  69  ; occupation, 
appearance,  70  ; Feeling  and  intellect,  71  ; \^enus  and  Mars  . 72 

Chapter  VIII 

Mars,  the  Energiser  ......  74 

Passion,  75  ; accidents  and  fevers,  76  ; Tantalus,  77  ; Appearance, 
occupation,  77  ; Feeling,  78  ; Intellect  ...  79 

Chapter  IX 

Jupiter,  the  Uplifter  ......  80 

The  Magnetic  Aura,  80  ; Jupiter  son  of  Saturn,  81  ; Sattva,  81  ; 
Occupations,  82  ; Money,  83  ; Feelings,  83  ; Intellect,  84  ; Myth- 
ological names,  86  ; Wisdom  . . . . .87 

Chapter  X 

Saturn,  the  Subduer  ......  88 

As  Trine,  88  ; Lord  of  the  Mineral  Kingdom,  89  ; Feelings, 

90  ; Action,  91  ; as  St  Peter,  92  ; Duty  and  Renunciation  . 93 

Chapter  XI 

Uranus,  the  Awakener  . . . . . .95 

Equally  strong  in  action,  feeling,  and  thought,  95  ; Changes  but 
does  not  vacillate,  96  ; the  King,  96  ; Feeling  and  intellect,  98  ; 

Octaves,  100;  Suddenness,  101  ; The  height  of  man  . . 102 

Chapter  XII 

Neptune,  the  Mystic  . . . . . .103 

Mythology,  103  ; magic,  104;  nebulous  stage,  105  ; In  angles 
and  succeedent  houses,  105  ; cadent,  106  ; aspects  . .106 


CONTENTS 


XV 


PAGE 

Articles  on  Neptune  reprinted  from  Modern  Astrology 

I,  — Psychic,  watery,  and  unstable,  107  ; sensational,  passive, 

108  ; on  the  physical  plane,  109  ; on  the  psychic,  109  ; the, 
mental,  i lo  ; Positions  of  Neptune  in  various  horoscopes  . i i i 

II.  — In  R.  L.  Stevenson’s  horoscope,  112  ; drugs,  113  ; music, 

1 14;  dreams,  115  ; transcendentalism,  116;  house  and 
exaltation,  117  ; its  function  Regeneration  . . 118 

III. — Neptune  and  Uranus  contrasted  . . . . 119 

Chapter  XIII 

The  Nativity  and  its  Relation  to  Heredity  . . .124 

The  Pre-natal  Epoch,  124  ; the  etheric  body,  125  ; Sun,  Moon, 
and  Ascendant,  126  ; Constellations,  Signs,  Houses,  128  ; Jupiter 
and  Pisces,  129;  Correspondences,  132  ; Spirit,  Soul,  Body  . 132 

Chapter  XIV 

Character  is  Destiny  . , . . . .134 

Jupiter  and  Cell  Life,  135  ; the  Aura,  136  ; two  triads,  138  ; 
three  groups,  139  ; Saturn  and  personality  . . . 140 

Chapter  XV 

The  Rise  and  Fall  of  Planets  .....  142 

Planetary  types,  142;  Uranus,  145:  Neptune,  146;  Other 
planets,  147  ; a case  of  twins  . . . . .149 

Chapter  X\T 

Methods  OF  Synthesis  . . . . . .153 

Triplicities  and  Quadruplicities,  155  ; Sun,  Moon  and  Ascen- 
dant, 157  ; Positive  and  Negative  Temperaments,  161  ; The 
Ruling  Planet,  163  ; Majority  Sign  Positions  . . .165 

Chapter  XVII 

The  Quadruplicities,  OR  ‘ Qualities,’ Synthesised  . . .167 

The  Active  Temperament,  167  ; the  Fixed,  169  ; the 
Harmonious  . . . . . . .170 

Chapter  XVIII 

The  Triplicities  Synthesised  . . . . .176 

Fiery,  177;  Earthy,  177  ; Airy,  178  ; Watery,  179;  Qualities 
and  Triplicities  Combined  . . . . . i8i 


XVI 


CONTENTS 


EXAMPLES  OF  HOROSCOPES 


Example  Horoscope  No.  i.  John  Ruskin  . 


» No. 

2. 

Bhagavan  Das,  M.A.  . 

„ 

„ No. 

3. 

Mr  A.  P.  SiNNET 

» No. 

+. 

Dr  Rudolph  Steiner  . 

„ 

» No. 

5. 

‘ Charubel  ’ 

>» 

» No. 

6. 

Sir  Isaac  Pitman 

„ 

„ No. 

7. 

Sir  William  Allan,  M.P. 

„ 

„ No. 

8. 

A Bankrupt  . 

„ 

No. 

9. 

Bessie  Leo 

„ 

„ No. 

10. 

General  Boulanger 

„ 

No. 

11. 

Robespierre  . 

>> 

» No. 

I 2. 

Viscount  Hinton 

Appendix 

An  Astro-Theosophical  Glossary  . 


PAGE 

190 

199 

203 

207 

213 

219 

223 

228 

232 

238 

241 

2+4 

2+7 

255 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


CHAPTER  I 

Man  and  the  Planets  ; Classification 

Every  soul  is  a ‘ Divine  Fragment  ’ with  a long  past  history  behind  it. 
Before  the  beginning  of  the  solar  system,  that  great  Being  whom  men 
ordinarily  call  God — the  God  of  this  system — and  whom  theosophists 
often  refer  to  as  the  Solar  Logos,  held  within  His  life  and  consciousness, 
inseparably  united  with  him,  all  souls  that  were  to  evolve  and  progress 
under  His  guidance.  They  were  sent  forth  into  matter  by  an  act  of  His 
will,  and  although  they  remain  for  ever  in  touch  with  their  divine  source, 
they  descend  lower  and  lower  into  matter,  taking  upon  themselves 
denser  and  denser  bodies  as  they  pass  downward  from  plane  to  plane, 
until  they  reach  this  physical  world  where  the  inner  light  is  so  obscured 
in  the  darkness  of  materiality  that  their  origin  is  forgotten. 

All  beings  alike  have  this  divine  beginning,  no  matter  what  their 
present  status  may  be,  whether  good  or  evil,  savage  or  civilised,  whether 
passing  through  the  human  kingdom  or  through  some  state  below  or 
above  this — and  there  are  countless  millions  both  lower  and  higher  than 
man — and  no  matter  in  what  state  they  are  functioning,  whether  the 
sublimest  spiritual  or  the  grossest  material.  Those  that  now  rank  as 
great  Saints  or  superhuman  spiritual  intelligences  have  in  bygone  aeons 
passed  through  the  mud  of  earth,  or  at  least  through  some  lowly 
condition  akin  to  that  in  which  we  now  find  ourselves  ; and  those  who 
now  struggle  and  fail  in  the  storms  of  temptation  and  the  mists  of 
ignorance  will  in  future  ages  stand  forth  in  the  sunlight  of  the  spirit  and 
manifest  the  wisdom  they  will  have  gained  during  their  long  pilgrimage 
through  matter. 

Souls  come  forth  into  manifestation  to  gain  experience,  to  grow 
in  wisdom,  in  love,  and  in  power;  and  they  can  only  do  this  by  coming 
into  practical  touch  with  the  world  around  them,  by  experimenting  and 


A 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


then  learning  from  the  results.  Power  is  gained  by  the  exercise  of 
practical  ability,  by  going  out  into  the  world  and  living  the  life  of  action, 
by  doing  all  manner  of  works,  some  wise,  many  unwise,  and  by 
registering  within  the  soul  the  consequences  that  follow  from  each.  Love 
is  developed  by  realising  gradually  the  common  spiritual  nature  that 
animates  all  beings ; and  although  this  begins  with  the  most  crudely 
selfish  desire  for  pleasure-giving  objects,  it  is  very  slowly  refined  into 
unselfish  sympathy  and  compassion  after  passing  through  countless 
bitter  experiences  that  force  home  upon  us  the  distinction  between  acts 
that  result  in  lasting  satisfaction  and  those  which,  although  temporarily 
attractive,  are  followed  by  a preponderance  of  dissatisfaction  and  pain. 
Wisdom  is  developed  at  the  same  time  and  by  the  same  experiences  as 
those  that  call  forth  in  us  our  capacity  for  power  and  for  love  ; by 
noting  why  some  actions  are  successful  and  others  in  the  long  run  are 
the  reverse;  why  some  desirable  objects  give  satisfaction  and  pleasantness 
while  others,  apparently  equally  desirable,  prove  ultimately  to  be  pain- 
giving  ; and  by  gathering  up  within  the  soul  the  generalised  results  of 
these  experiences  gained  in  past  ages  and  possessed  by  us  to-day  as  a 
kind  of  innate  untaught  spiritual  instinct. 

Man,  at  the  present  stage  of  his  evolutionary  career,  may  be  said  to 
be  at  about  the  half-way  point  of  his  pilgrimage.  He  is  far  distant  from 
the  starting  point  from  which  he  set  out,  is  deeply  immersed  in  matter, 
has  forgotten  his  spiritual  origin,  and  is  not  yet  sufficiently  progressed 
to  realise  the  grandeur  and  dignity  that  will  be  his  when  he  has  sur- 
mounted the  limitations  of  his  present  condition  and  has  achieved  the 
final  mastery  over  matter.  The  experiences  through  which  we  have 
passed  in  remote  ages  have  been  worked  into  the  very  fabric  of  the  soul 
itself  and  are  there  contained  as  innate  faculty,  something  that  is  born 
with  the  child  and  that  often  begins  to  show  itself  in  the  earliest  years 
of  life  with  little  or  no  definite  guidance  from  parents  or  tuition  from 
teachers,  and  which,  if  not  so  born,  is  practically  not  acquired  at  all 
during  life. 

The  process  by  which  experience  is  gained  and  the  faculties  of  the 
soul  are  drawn  out  is  that  of  intercourse  with  the  environment.  Action 
and  reaction  go  on  between  man  and  the  world  in  which  he  is  function- 
ing, as  the  result  of  which  power  and  practical  ability  are  called  forth, 
discrimination  between  pleasure  and  pain-giving  objects  is  obtained, 
and  understanding  of  the  method  of  life  and  the  nature  of  the  world  is 


MAN  AND  THE  PLANETS 


3 


gained.  The  soul  in  its  material  vehicle  has  impacts  poured  upon  it 
from  outside  sources  and  by  agencies  not  itself,  some  pleasant  and 
many  unpleasant ; some  the  result  of  its  own  actions,  but  others 
experienced  through  no  promptings  of  its  own.  Existence  is  felt  to  be 
satisfactory  and  life  is  prolonged  in  proportion  as  man  is  able  to  adapt 
himself  to  the  conditions  and  necessities  of  the  world  around  him,  or  in 
proportion  as  he  is  successful  in  altering  those  conditions  by  the 
exercise  of  his  own  skill.  But  when,  on  the  contrary,  he  fails  in  the 
continuous  adjustment  of  himself  to  his  surroundings,  or  when  he  is 
too  weak  or  toa- unskilled  to  change  a disadvantageous  environment 
into  one  that  furthers  his  well-being,  existence  is  unsuccessful  and  life 
is  shortened. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  any  evolving  being,  whether  belonging  to 
the  human  or  any  other  kingdom,  the  universe  is  divided  into  two  great 
parts ; firstl3^  the  being,  soul,  man  or  creature ; and  secondly,  its 
environment,  the  rest  of  the  surrounding  universe.  Multitudes  of 
stimuli  of  various  kinds  coming  from  the  environment,  the  Not-self,  fall 
upon  the  man,  the  Self,  and  evoke  responses  within,  each  according  to 
its  kind.  Vibrations  in  the  ether  call  out  sensations  of  light  and  heat ; 
those  in  the  air,  sensations  of  sound ; and  so  on  with  the  rest  of  the 
senses;  each  is  stimulated  into  action  by  something  in  the  Not-self,  and 
each  is  the  cause  of  some  change  of  consciousness  within  the  Self. 
Experience  of  the  world  is  gained  in  this  way  ; for  sensations  are  com- 
bined into  groups,  which  are  again  associated  in  larger  groups,  and  the 
whole  is  classified,  analysed,  and  synthesised  in  the  mind  until  in  the 
process  of  time  it  forms  an  accurate  representation  within  of  the  nature 
and  condition  of  things  without,  so  that  the  man  can  act  upon  it  and 
live  out  his  life  safely  in  accordance  with  it. 

It  will  be  observed  that  this  whole  process  consists  in  the  outer 
world,  the  Not-self,  mirroring  itself  in,  or  evoking  an  accurate  corres- 
pondence of  itself  from,  the  Self,  the  man’s  consciousness.  For  everj^- 
thing  that  exists  in  the  world  of  nature  without  there  is  a correspond- 
ence established  with  something  in  the  world  of  consciousness  within. 
The  taste  of  an  apple  is  a fragment  of  inner  experience  that  corres- 
ponds to  certain  properties  possessed  by  an  object  in  the  outer  world, 
which  may  also  be  proved  to  possess  other  properties  capable  of  giving 
rise  to  other  experiences  within.  The  sound  of  a gun  really  exists 
only  in  consciousness  ; its  outer  correspondence  consists  of  certain 


4 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


vibrations  in  the  atmosphere.  The  sensation  red  is  subjective,  belongs 
only  to  the  Self ; in  the  Not-self  it  is  nothing  but  vibrations  of  a 
certain  rate  in  the  ether.  The  idea  of  a ‘ horse  ’ is  a complex  association 
of  a great  variety  of  sensations,  each  based  upon  some  concrete  ex- 
perience, and  the  whole  blended  together  in  one.  The  idea  of  ‘truth’’ 
is  still  more  complex  and  is  called  forth  by  a far  larger  series  of 
sensations,  which  have  been  classified  and  generalised  in  consciousness 
until  the  abstract  idea  has  resulted. 

The  belief  that  man,  the  microcosm  or  little  universe,  is  an  image 
of  the  macrocosm  or  great  universe,  which  is  itself,  in  Swedenborg’s 
phrase,  a Grand  Man,  is  extremely  ancient.  It  can  be  examined  and 
demonstrated  from  more  than  one  point  of  view;  and  from  the  pre- 
ceding paragraphs  it  will  be  seen  that  from  the  psychological  point 
of  view  the  whole  growth  and  evolution  of  the  soul  may  be  represented 
as  a process  by  which  man  becomes  a more  and  more  complete  image 
of  the  outer  world  of  things.  Consciousness  mirrors  the  universe ; 
the  world  is  reflected  in  the  man  ; and  although  this  process  has  small 
and  humble  beginnings,  it  is  essential  for  the  very  existence  of  intelli- 
gence, and  ever  tends  to  approach  nearer  to  perfection.  Finally  all 
experience  will  be  possessed  by  man,  and  he  will  be  a perfect  repre- 
sentation of  the  universe  in  which  he  moves. 

We  have  seen  that  impacts  from  without  call  forth  responses  from 
within,  and  that  the  idea  or  feeling  must  correspond  exactly  to  the 
outer  scheme  of  things  at  the  moment.  The  universe  may  be  sym- 
bolised by  a circle  across  which  runs  a diameter  dividing  it  into  two 
halves.  One  of  these  halves  stands  for  the  objective  universe  of  the 
Not-self,  and  the  other  for  the  subjective  universe  of  the  Self;  and 
these  two  exactly  match  each  other. 

Astrologically,  these  two  universes,  the  outer  and  the  inner,  are 
classified  in  terms  of  planets  and  signs.  The  impacts  from  without 
are  poured  upon  us  from  the  heavenly  bodies ; upon  the  growing  body 
from  conception  to  birth,  and  upon  the  self-conscious  human  being 
from  birth  to  death.  These  impacts  fall  upon  our  senses,  and  they 
proceed  from  objects  of  every  description,  animate  and  inanimate, 
conscious  and  unconscious ; and  when  properly  classified  these  are 
the  things  that  are  said  to  be  ruled  or  governed  by  the  planets,  in  the 
sense  that  iron  and  weapons  of  war  are  governed  by  Mars,  books  and 
writings  by  Mercury,  and  so  on.  The  responses  to  these  impacts 


MAN  AND  THE  PLANETS 


5 


consist  of  psycho-physiological  changes  in  body  and  in  consciousness ; 
that  is  to  say,  of  psychological  changes,  which  are  feelings,  ideas,  and 
volitions,  and  physiological  changes,  which  are  states  of  bodily  health  ; 
and  when  classified  these  are  the  types  of  character  and  person  that  are 
said  to  be  ruled  or  bestowed  by  the  planets,  in  the  sense  that  Mars  rules 
courage  and  feverish  states  of  health,  and  Mercury  rules  thought  and 
the  nerves ; and  so  on. 

All  things  may  be  classified  astrologically  in  this  way,  and  such  a 
classification  might  be  carried  out  in  considerable  detail.  From  the 
standpoint  of  any  given  human  being,  the  total  universe,  objective  and 
subjective,  with  all  possible  changes  therein,  is  included  under  three 
heads.  Firstly,  there  is  the  outer  world  of  things  innumerable,  each  of 
them  governed  by  one  or  other  of  the  planets,  astrologically  speaking  ; 
and  this  is  the  Not-self.  Secondly,  there  is  the  inner  world  of  the  Self, 
its  states  and  changes,  its  thoughts,  feelings,  and  volitions;  all  again 
grouped  under  planets.  And,  thirdly,  there  are  bodily  conditions  and 
functionings,  similarly  classified  under  planetary  rulership;  and  this  is 
intermediate  between  the  other  two,  for  body  or  vehicle  serves  the 
purpose  of  bringing  the  Self  and  the  Not-self  into  relation  with  each 
other,  and  is  the  concrete  representation  of  that  relation. 

In  these  three  regions  of  the  total  universe,  if  our  knowledge  and 
skill  were  sufficient,  we  might  seek  and  expect  to  find  three  different 
presentations  of  any  person’s  horoscope.  The  first  would  be  discovered 
in  the  outer  universe  ; and  of  course,  it  is  here  that  we  look  for  and  find 
the  actual  signs,  planets,  and  aspects  which  are  symbolised  and 
tabulated  in  the  map  of  the  nativity ; it  is  also  here  that  folklore  and 
popular  legends  incline  many  to  search  for  omens  and  auguries  of  every 
description,  which  shall  indicate  the  course  of  events  according  to  the 
various  methods  of  divination  that  have  been  followed  from  ancient  to 
modern  times.  The  second  would  be  the  inner  world  of  consciousness, 
in  the  states  and  potentialities  of  which  the  experienced  mind  might 
trace  a perfect  representation  and  correspondence  of  the  outer  planets 
and  signs,  with  all  their  consequences,  good  and  evil ; and  this  is  that 
which  has  been  rightly  termed  the  horoscope  within.  The  third  is  the 
body,  where  spirit  and  matter  meet  during  life,  where  Self  is  brought 
into  relation  with  Not-self,  and  every  part  of  which  is  ruled  by  the 
heavenly  bodies  and  is  modelled  in  accordance  with  their  positions  in 
the  zodiac  at  birth  ; for  it  is  here  that  the  study  of  physiognomy,  if 


6 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


perfected,  would  discover  not  only  the  character  of  a man  but’  his  fate 
and  fortune  also,  and  would  prove  the  body  to  be  a kind  of  living  horo- 
scope. The  same  remark  holds  good  of  the  inner  bodies  of  man ; for 
most  readers  will  be  familiar  with  the  idea  that  the  experienced  and 
highly  trained  clairvoyant  can  read  the  character  and  much  of  the  past 
and  future  of  a person  from  an  inspection  of  his  astral  and  higher 
vehicles  of  consciousness. 

At  the  moment  of  birth  these  three  horoscopes  are  in  complete 
agreement ; the  planetary  and  zodiacal  positions  are  a perfect  repre- 
sentation of  the  physical  personality  in  which  the  soul  is  intended  to 
function  during  life ; and  birth  takes  place  when  this  harmony  without 
and  within  is  complete. 


* * 

The  following  is  a short  and  condensed  table  of  the  rulership  of 
Sun,  Moon,  and  planets,  classified  according  to  the  threefold  method 
just  explained.  It  is  a brief  epitome,  made  from  the  ordinary  practical 
point  [of  view,  for  convenience  of  reference ; a fuller  and  more  philo- 
sophical account  of  each  will  be  given  in  subsequent  chapters. 

The  Sun,  in  the  outer  world,  signifies  the  King,  Emperor,  President 
or  chieftain,  as  the  head  of  the  nation  ; princes,  the  nobility,  all 
dignitaries  and  important  personages  in  cit3'^  or  county,  and  represen- 
tatives of  the  King  or  the  nation,  such  as  Viceroys ; anj^one  who  is 
exalted  in  position,  superiors  in  general,  down  to  the  employer,  and 
the  husband  as  head  of  the  household.  It  represents  these  not  as 
private  persons  but  onlj^  in  respect  of  their  relative  position  or  rank. 
It  signifies  the  places  in  which  such  persons  carrj'  on  their  character- 
istic activities,  such  as  palaces,  official  residences,  large  or  grand 
edifices,  perhaps  theatres  ; bankers,  minters,  money ; gold  and  gold- 
smiths, diamonds,  the  colour  orange.  In  some  lists  ruby,  carbuncle, 
and  other  stones  are  included  ; also  pewterers,  braziers,  coppersmiths  ; 
but  these  are  doubtful,  or  are  only  to  be  taken  as  representative  of 
ornament,  luxury,  and  display  in  general.  It  governs  sunlight  and 
all  vital  and  other  forces  that  proceed  from  the  Sun  and  flow 
through  the  solar  system,  enabling  life  and  all  activities  to  be 
carried  on. 

In  consciousness,  it  signifies  power,  the  sense  of  dignit}',  authority. 


MAN  AND  THE  PLANETS 


7 


grandeur,  pride,  ostentation,  ambition,  ardour,  generosity,  will,  and 
it  vitalises  desire  as  well  as  wisdom. 

In  body,  it  rules  the  heart  and  circulation,  arteries,  eyes,  spinal 
cord,  and  the  vital  force. 

The  Moon,  in  the  outer  world,  signifies  mothers  and  women, 
generally,  female  occupations  and  those  who  follow  them,  such  as  maid- 
servants, nurses,  midwives ; in  the  state,  the  Queen  and  women  of  title, 
also  the  common  people  ; water  and  liquids  in  general,  and  persons  who 
follow  occupations  connected  with  these,  sailors,  fishermen,  brewers, 
publicans,  ships,  harbours,  places  and  houses  near  water,  travellers, 
vehicles,  baths,  food ; colours  violet  and  silvery  white ; metal  silver, 
moonstone,  opals,  and  milk-white  stones. 

In  consciousness,  it  signifies  sensation,  instincts,  impulses  ; feelings 
belonging  to  home  and  domestic  life ; ideas  that  are  not  abstract  but 
are  applied  to  concrete  purposes  and  practical  ends ; cautiousness, 
economy,  receptivity,  imagination,  impressionability,  changeableness, 
some  kinds  of  psychic  faculty  and  mediumship. 

In  body,  it  signifies  in  a general  sense  the  substance  of  the  body  as 
distinguished  from  the  vitality  flowing  through  it ; the  stomach  and 
digestion,  bladder,  breasts,  womb,  child-bearing,  the  female  functions, 
the  nervous  system  in  part,  especially  the  cerebellum,  the  base  of  the 
brain,  and  lower  ganglia  ; the  eyes  ; the  etheric  double  of  the  body. 

Mercury,  in  the  outer  world,  signifies  schools,  colleges,  and  all 
places  where  teaching  and  learning  go  on,  scientific  and  literary 
institutions,  printing-works,  publishing  offices,  and  all  who  are  occupied 
at  these  places ; writers,  editors,  authors,  speakers,  teachers,  professors, 
men  of  science,  thinkers,  lawyers,  booksellers,  books,  post-offices, 
messengers.  It  has  some  general  significance  in  connection  with 
merchants  of  all  sorts,  in  so  far  as  they  require  to  exercise  skill 
and  intelligence ; also  in  connection  with  servants,  employees, 
skilled  workers  and  artificers.  Colour  yellow,  metal  quicksilver, 
topaz. 

In  consciousttess,  it  signifies  thought,  understanding,  reason,  in- 
telligence, intellect ; the  abstract  kinds  of  these  rather  than  the  concrete, 
knowledge  for  its  own  sake  apart  from  any  practical  application  or 
from  any  question  of  right  or  wrong ; cunning,  craft,  subtlety ; speech 


8 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


and  memory.  Its  highest  application  seems  to  be  what  is  called 
‘ pure  reason.’ 

In  body,  it  governs  the  brain  and  nervous  system,  the  tongue  and 
organs  of  speech,  hands  as  instruments  of  intelligence. 

Venus,  in  the  outer  world,  signifies  all  beautiful  objects  and  any- 
thing that  is  prized  for  its  beauty,  ornaments,  things  of  luxury  and 
pleasure,  jewels,  toys,  fine  clothes,  articles  of  adornment,  pictures, 
flowers ; dancing,  singing,  acting,  in  so  far  as  these  express  beauty  or 
pleasure  apart  from  skill  or  intelligence;  all  persons  who  follow 
occupations  dealing  with  these  ; all  places  where  these  things  belong, 
and  where  such  occupations  are  carried  on  ; sweethearts,  wives,  the 
home  and  household  as  embodying  affection  ; sapphire,  copper,  colour 
indigo. 

In  consciousness,  it  signifies  the  emotions  and  affections,  especially 
love  and  those  arising  out  of  love ; the  aesthetic  sense,  appreciation  of 
beauty,  elegance,  good  taste,  comfort  and  pleasure. 

In  body,  it  governs  throat,  kidneys,  and  to  some  extent  the  genera- 
tive system.  It  has  an  indirect  influence  upon  features,  complexion, 
hair,  etc.,  but  only  in  so  far  as  those  express  beauty. 

Mars,  in  the  outer  world,  signifies  soldiers,  surgeons,  chemists, 
butchers,  barbers,  carpenters,  blacksmiths,  gunners,  engineers, 
machinists;  iron,  steel,  cutlery,  weapons  of  war,  sharp  tools,  fires, 
slaughter  houses,  mortuaries,  brick  and  lime  kilns  ; colour  red,  ruby, 
bloodstone,  and  red  jewels  ; athletics  and  sports  in  so  far  as  they 
express  courage,  enterprise,  strength  and  dexterity. 

In  consciousness,  it  signifies  courage,  bravery,  enterprise,  positive- 
ness, self-reliance,  dignity,  desire,  passion,  impulse,  combativeness, 
anger. 

In  body,  it  governs  the  head  externally,  the  nose  and  smell,  the 
generative  system  in  part,  the  gall  bladder,  fevers,  high  temperature, 
infectious  disease,  eruptions,  burns,  scalds,  surgical  operations,  blood- 
shed, sharp  pains. 

Jupiter,  in  the  outer  world,  signifies  occupations,  persons,  and 
places  associated  with  religion  and  law,  churches,  chapels,  priests, 
ministers,  judges,  magistrates,  courts  of  justice,  universities,  students. 


MAN  AND  THE  PLANETS 


9 


public  functions  and  assemblies  of  a state  or  official  character ; it  has 
some  rule  over  charitable  and  philanthropic  movements  and  institutions, 
l.ospitals,  health  resorts,  physicians,  social  gatherings,  theatres,  clothes, 
clothiers,  grocers ; metal,  tin,  colours  blue  and  purple,  jewels  turquoise 
and  amethyst. 

In  consciousnesSf  it  signifies  a combination  of  feeling  and  thought, 
giving  benevolence,  good  nature,  sociability,  hopefulness,  love  of 
beauty,  order,  harmony,  devotion.  It  also  governs  those  things  in  the 
outer  world  that  express  these  qualities ; health  as  physical  harmony, 
law  as  social  harmony,  religion  as  spiritual  harmony  ; and  not  as  channels 
of  intellect  or  means  of  making  money. 

In  body,  it  governs  feet,  thighs,  liver,  blood,  muscles,  growth,  and 
to  seme  extent  digestion. 

Saturn,  in  the  outer  ivorld,  signifies  the  ultimate  uncombined 
atomic  condition  of  matter;  also  the  state  of  matter  called  ‘earth,’  and 
those  whose  occupations  are  concerned  with  it,  agriculturists,  builders, 
brickmakers,  miners,  potters,  gardeners,  sextons,  plumbers,  dyers, 
chimney-sweepers,  shepherds,  hostlers  ; ascetics  of  every  description, 
whether  religious  or  not,  monks,  hermits,  misers,  and  those  who  fast  or 
starve;  policemen,  scavengers,  workers  employed  by  municipalities  or 
the  state  ; and  such  places  as  mountainous,  hilly,  or  open  country, 
especially  rocky  and  uncultivated,  caves,  ruins  ; also  it  is  said  corpses, 
graves,  and  churchyards  ; metal  lead,  colour  green. 

In  consciousness,  it  signifies,  the  concrete  mind  tending  to  separa- 
tion, isolation,  and  the  emphasis  of  the  personality;  the  sense  of  ‘self’ 
is  strong;  emotion  is  held  in  check  by  thought  and  will.  The  will  is 
stronger  than  with  any  other  planet  except  Uranus,  and  perhaps  Mars 
at  times ; but  where  Mars  is  passional  and  impulsive,  Saturn  is  slow, 
cold  and  deliberate.  There  are  self-control,  patience,  steadfastness, 
reserve,  gravity,  austerity,  chastity,  prudence,  thoughtfulness,  and  much 
practical  ability. 

In  body,  it  governs  bones,  teeth,  the  spleen  ; diseases  produced  by 
cold,  rheumatism,  falls,  accidents,  melancholia.  CWowt 

Uranus,  in  the  outer  world,  governs  those  who  have  power  and 
- authority  over  others,  whether  on  a large  or  small  scale,  from  King, 
Parliament  and  Prime  Minister  downward ; the  chief,  the  ruler,  the 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


lO 

wielder  of  authority ; inventors,  discoverers,  pioneers,  antiquarians, 
electricians,  railways ; occulists,  mesmerists,  physical  researchers,  and 
new  and  uncommon  occupations.  Metal  perhaps  uranium  and  radium  ; 
colour  uncertain,  possibly  a blue  or  violet  with  an  admixture  of  orange. 

In  consciousness,  it  governs  Will,  in  the  highest  sense  of  deliberate, 
free,  and  conscious  choice  and  action ; love  of  freedom,  independence, 
the  sense  of  power  and  authority,  positiveness,  self-reliance,  dislike  of 
control,  originalit3\  It  givesrthese  qualities  equally  to  thought,  feelings 
and  action,  so  that  persons  born  under  this  planet  break  new  ground, 
suggest  new  ideas,  depart  from  established  customs,  are  often  careless 
of  conventional  morality,  and  start  new  occupations.  It  is  the  freedom 
or  newness  that  belongs  to  Uranus,  rather  than  the  actual  ideas,  dis- 
coveries, or  occupations.  Its  highest  application  seems  to  be  the 
perfected  Adept,  the  Manu. 

In  body,  its  rule  is  not  known  for  certain,  but  it  seems  to  have 
some  influence  over  the  brain  and  nervous  system  ; possibly  the  ears 
and  hearing,  and  the  teeth. 

Neptune,  in  the  outer  world,  signifies  democratic  and  popular 
movements,  mobs,  the  common  ^people  ; mystics,  dreamers,  visionaries, 
psychics,  mediums  ; perhaps  hospitals  and  charities. 

In  consciousness,  it  relates  to  feeling,  desire,  emotion,  imagination, 
aesthetics,  psychic  faculty,  and  intuition. 

In  body,  its  rulership  is  not  known,  but  its  general  influence 
resembles  that  of  the  Moon  in  some  respects,  and  may  relate  to  similar 
parts  of  the  body. 

This  short  summary  will  suggest  to’ the  reader  many  points  upon 
which  further  research  is  required,  for  it  seems  not  unlikely  that 
astrologers  of  past  centuries  have  classed  occupations,  qualities,  and 
powers  under  the  heavenly  bodies  known  to  them  when  they  really 
belonged  to  planets  since  discovered  or  still  to  be  discovered.  It  is 
quite  evident,  also,  that  there  are  many  errors  of  omission  in  all  avail- 
able lists ; for  of  the  seventy  or  more  known  chemical  elements  only 
a trivial  seven  are  mentioned,  and  yet  it  is  certain  that  all  are  capable 
of  classification  under  planets  or  signs  or  combinations  of  these ; and 
on  many  other  points  additions  to  our  knowledge  are  possible  and  to 
be  desired. 


CHAPTER  II 


Planets  and  Consciousness 

We  have  seen  in  Chapter  I that  the  universe  in  which  we  live  ma3% 
from  any  man’s  point  of  view,  be  classified  under  three  heads. 

Firstly,  there  is  the  Self,  which  is  always  within,  always  hidden 
behind  the  veil  of  matter  that  forms  the  particular  kind  of  vehicle  or 
body  in  which  consciousness  is  functioning  for  the  time  being.  This  is 
true  not  of  the  physical  world  only  but  of  higher  worlds  also  ; for  if  the 
Self  be  divested  of  the  physical  body,  it  will  be  found  to  be  clothed  in 
what  is  called  the  astral  body  or  body  of  emotions  and  desires  ; and  if 
this  be  removed  ; the  mental  body  will  remain.  The  naked  Self  is  never 
seen  in  any  world ; its  outer  garment  is  all  that  is  ever  visible. 

Secondly,  there  is  the  Not-self,  which,  from  the  point  of  view  of  any 
man,  is  the  rest  of  the  universe,  everything  animate  and  inanimate  that 
is  not  himself.  This  includes  the  bodies  of  other  men  and  of  animals, 
because,  from  the  man’s  point  of  view,  these  are  no  more  himself  than 
are  stones  or  trees,  and  they  must  therefore  be  included  in  the  class 
Not-self.  Such  a class  provides  us  with  innumerable  separate  selves, 
each  seeing  the  world  from  his  own  point  of  view  only ; and  it  is  only 
after  a very  lengthy  experience  that  they  realise  their  underljdng  unity 
with  each  other,  and  know  that  each  apparently  separate  Self  is  an  aspect 
of  the  consciousness  of  the  one  supreme  Cosmic  Self. 

Thirdly,  there  is  the  Relation  between  Self  and  Not-self ; and  this  is 
represented  concretely  by  the  bod3'  in  which  the  man  is  functioning. 

This  furnishes  us  with  three  different  regions,  each  of  great 
complexity,  and  each  capable  of  classification  under  planets  and 
signs. 

Under  Self  we  include  the  varying  types  of  character,  disposition, 
temperament,  and  states  of  consciousness  innumerable  ; all  characteristic 
of  planets  and  signs  and  their  combinations. 

Under  Not-self,  are  classified  the  host  of  things,  places,  and  phenomena 
n 


X2  THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 

of  the  various  kingdoms  of  nature,  mineral,  vegetable,  animal,  and 
human. 

Under  the  Relation  or  Body  are  included  medical,  physiological  and 
physiognomical  astrology. 

The  second  and  third  of  these  groups  have  received  an  undue  share 
of  attention  from  astrologers  in  the  past,  the  first  having  been  confined 
to  ordinary  descriptions  of  character.  It  is  only  in  recent  times  that 
the  importance  of  the  astrology  of  the  Self  with  its  varying  powers  and 
states  of  consciousness  has  been  recognised  and  attempts  been  made  to 
develop  it. 

We  now  pass  on  to  note  that  just  as  the  one  universe  manifests  the 
three  aspects  of  Self,  Not-self,  and  the  Relation,  so  the  one  .Self  shows 
three  different  aspects  to  the  world.  It  goes  out  towards  the’world  and 
effects  changes  within  it,  thereby  evolving  capacity  for  Action  or 
volition,  the  first  aspect  of  consciousness.  It  experiences  agreeable  and 
disagreeable,  pleasant  and  unpleasant,  results  of  its  various  actions,  and 
so  evolves  Feeling,  the  second  aspect.  It  observes,  analyses,  classifies, 
and  remembers  the  results  of  its  various  experiences,  and  so  evolves 
the  third  aspect,  thought  or  Cognition. 

These  are  the  three  aspects  or  departments  of  consciousness  ; 
Cognition  or  thought.  Feeling  or  desire,  and  Action  or  volition ; and  a 
glance  at  each  will  increase  our  knowledge  of  the  relation  of  the  planets 
to  man. 

Religions  teach  that  man  was  made  in  the  image  of  God ; and  the 
obvious  deduction  is  that  if  God  manifests  as  a tri-unity,  man,  made  in 
His  image,  must  exhibit  the  same  fundamental  triplicit3%  These  three 
modes  of  consciousness  are  in  the  human  Self  what  the  divine  three 
are  in  the  Creator ; and  in  each  case  the  Three  are  only  modes  of  One  ; 
their  basic  unity  must  not  be  forgotten.  All  three  are,  of  course, 
present  in  every  person,  but  it  is  quite  the  exception  to  find  them 
equally  developed.  In  most  people  one  of  the  three  is  much  more 
prominent  than  the  other  two ; and  the  result  of  this  is  to  furnish  us 
with  three  types  of  character,  three  typical  men ; the  man  of  action, 
the  man  of  feeling,  and  the  man  of  intellect. 

(a)  Action  or  volition.  This  mode  of  consciousness  shows  itself  in 
movements  of  the  body,  especially  of  hands,  feet,  and  other  parts, 
whereby  changes  are  brought  about  in  the  outer  world,  things  are  done, 
actions  are  performed.  This  is  generally  considered  under  the  head  of 


PLANETS  AND  CONSCIOUSNESS 


13 


Volition  by  western  writers,  because  the  essential  part  of  it  lies  in  the 
effort  of  the  will,  whether  strong  or  slight,  which  starts  the  action,  and 
without  which  the  action  would  not  be  conscious  and  purposive  but 
merely  reflex  like  the  movements  of  the  hands  or  head  of  a sleeping 
person. 

The  Man  of  Action  is  the  practical  man  of  affairs.  He  may  or  may 
not  be  intellectual ; he  may  or  may  not  be  possessed  of  strong  feelings. 
He  lives  his  life  in  action,  in  doing  rather  than  feeling  or  knowing.  To 
him  a thing  is  real  and  important  in  so  far  as  it  can  be  carried  out  in 
action,  can  be  put  into  practice ; and  he  is  apt  to  fancy  that  both  the 
other  types  of  men  may  be  dismissed  as  unpractical,  and  that  he 
himself  is  the  only  person  of  real  consequence.  This  class,  of  course, 
has  numberless  grades  within  it ; the  labourer,  the  skilled  worker  of 
every  description,  the  business  man,  the  soldier  or  sailor,  the  statesman, 
and  so  on ; but  they  are  all  executants,  doers. 

In  the  average  man  of  to-day,  action  is  associated  with  consciousness 
functioning  through  the  physical  body.  This  does  not  mean  that  action 
is  impossible  when  man  is  using  one  of  his  inner  bodies,  the  astral  or 
mental,  for  all  modes  of  consciousness  can  be  exercised  in  any  of  the 
bodies  by  the  fully  evolved  man  ; but  only  that  action  is  more  character- 
istic of  the  physical  world.  It  is  also  associated  with  the  earthy  element 
and  with  cardinal  signs ; and  probably  that  sign  which  combines  these 
two  characteristics,  namely  Capricorn,  embodies  deliberate  and  pur- 
posive action  better  than  any  other.  Opinions  may  perhaps  differ  on 
this  point,  and  also  on  the  further  point  as  to  which  of  the  planets 
predominates  most  in  action,  but  it  seems  likely  that  Saturn,  the  ruler 
of  that  sign,  may  claim  this  distinction,  unless  it  be  given  to  .Maxs, 
which  receives  exaltation  therein. 

(6)  Feeling  or  desire. — This  begins  in  sensation,  mere  response  to 
impacts  from  without,  affecting  consciousness  through  the  five  senses 
(Cancer) ; afterwards  differentiates  into  the  pleasant-unpleasant,  love- 
hate,  or  emotional  phase  (Pisces);  and  finally  shows  as  desire  (Scorpio). 
Sensation  is  the  undifferentiated  raw  material  of  this  mode  of  conscious- 
ness, which  under  the  influence  of  the  centrifugal  and  centripetal 
tendencies,  becomes  polarised  as  attraction  and  repulsion,  pleasure  and 
pain,  love  and  hate.  These  are  only  the  negative  and  positive  poles  of 
one  and  the  same  mode;  they  can  apparently  be  separated  but  are 


14 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


never  wholly  divorced.  They  ebb  and  flow  in  consciousness  like  the 
tides  in  the  ocean,  and  the  soul  that  is  at  one  moment  broken  and 
crushed  by  painful  feelings  will  at  another  moment  be  swept  off  its  feet 
by  a wild  uncontrollable  rush  of  pleasurable  feelings.  Where  the  one 
exists  the  coming  of  the  other  sooner  or  later  is  a certainty.  Suscepti- 
bility to  one,  means  susceptibility  to  both. 

The  Man  of  Feeling — although  it  would  be  better  to  take  woman 
as  a type,  and  to  class  man  under  Action — lives  in  the  passions  and 
emotions.  He  realises  himself  better  through  the  feelings  and  the  senses 
than  through  thinking  or  doing.  This  type  of  humanity  has  many 
grades,  from  low  to  high.  There  are  the  very  undeveloped  who  do  not 
seem  to  themselves  to  live  unless  they  are  gratifying  one  or  other  of 
the  senses  or  passions.  There  is  the  wide  sphere  of  the  affections  in 
family  and  social  life.  There  is  the  region  of  devotion,  both  humani- 
tarian and  religious.  And  there  is  that  department  of  human  nature 
in  which  the  feelings  tend  to  blend  with  the  intellect  in  the  imaginative 
life  of  poetry,  music,  and  art. 

The  higher  states  of  evolution  result  in  man  gradually  acquiring 
control  of  feeling  in  both  its  aspects.  He  masters  completely  the 
attraction  of  pleasant  states  of  consciousness  and  the  repulsion  of 
unpleasant  ones,  and  the  result  is  threefold.  He  gains  a calm  serenity 
of  mind  that  no  assaults  of  either  pleasure  or  pain,  joy  or  grief,  can 
disturb ; he  develops  universal  sympathy,  because,  having  passed 
through  all  these  states  unshaken  himself,  he  can  respond  to  and 
sympathise  with  others  who  are  still  struggling;  and  he  develops 
Will  through  the  efforts  to  control  unruly  feelings  and  desires. 

In  the  average  man  of  to-day,  feeling  of  all  kinds  is  associated  with 
consciousness  acting  through  the  astral  body.  Astrologically  it  ior- 
Jicsponds  chiefly  to  watery  signs,  as  previously  indicated  ; but  it  .also 
manifests  through  planets  in  the  fiery  triplicity,  which  expresses  an 
ardent,  impulsive,  enthusiastic  temperament  very  different  from  the 
relatively  more  passively  emotional  water.  The  airy  signs  exhibit  it 
rather  in  the  form  of  intelligent  responsive  sympathy  or  of  the  aesthetic 
faculty  and  imagination.  Among  the  Quadruplicities  or  ‘Qualities,’  the 
fixed  signs  express  it  as  desire ; and  this  is  strong  in  Scorpio,  fixed- 
water,  and  Leo,  fixed-fire. 

This  aspect  of  consciousness  is  so  deeply  rooted  in  human  nature 
and  shows  itself  in  so  many  forms  that  it  is  not  easy  to  mention  a planet 


PLANETS  AND  CONSCIOUSNESS 


IS 


that  embodies  it  solely  or  even  pre-eminently ; but  probably  Venus  for 
feeling  and  Mars  for  impulse  may  be  regarded  as  characteristic.  No 
heavenly  body  can  be  said  to  be  free  from  it ; Saturn,  perhaps,  shows 
least  of  it,  and  yet  even  this  planet  has  a reputation  for  expressing  sad 
emotions.  Uranus  can  display  it  as  an  energetic  impulsiveness  on 
occasions.  Jupiter  possesses  social  humanitarian  qualities  and  the  sense 
of  beauty.  Neptune  has  very  close  affinity  with  this  side  of  human 
nature.  The  Moon  gives  domestic  feelings,  and  the  Sun  generosity 
and  the  more  positive  feelings.  Even  Mercury,  which  at  times  seems 
wholly  intellectual,  can  bestow  a very  sympathetic  understanding. 

(c)  Cognition  or  thought.  — Reason,  understanding,  intellect, 
intelligence,  wisdom,  and  other  terms  bearing  various  shades  of 
meaning,  are  used  to  cover  this  aspect  of  consciousness.  It  begins  with 
experience  of  the  outer  world  based  upon  evidence  supplied  by  the  five 
senses,  just  as  is  the  case  with  Feeling ; but  whereas  the  latter  functions 
in  terms  of  pleasure-pain.  Cognition  compares,  analyses,  synthesises, 
classifies,  remembers,  and  establishes  relations,  generalisations,  laws 
and  principles. 

The  Man  of  Intellect  is  of  that  type  in  which  knowing  is  more  active 
than  either  feeling  or  doing.  This  class,  like  the  other  two,  also  varies 
greatly  ; proceeding  from  the  ordinary  man,  who  is  intelligent  or  fond 
of  reading  without  originating  new  thoughts,  up  to  the  author,  the  man 
of  science,  the  learned  scholar,  the  original  thinker,  and  the  great 
philosopher. 

This  is  associated  with  consciousness  acting  through  the  mental  bod}^ 
and  with  the  brain.  Astrologicallj^  it  corresponds  chiefly  to  airy  signs 
and  to  the  mutable  or  common  quadruplicity.  The  sign  Gemini,  which 
expresses  these  two  characteristics,  and  its  ruler  Mercury  have  pre- 
eminent claims  to  represent  this  aspect  of  consciousness. 

The  following  is  a short  account  of  the  planets  classified  under 
Action,  Feeling,  and  Cognition  ; fuller  particulars’are  given  in  subsequent 
Chapters  ; and  the  rulership  of  each  planet  over  Action  in  the  sense  of 
occupation  is  given  in  the  table  in  Chapter  I. 

The  Sun  mainly  vitalises  the  feelings  in  their  positive  aspects  as 
desires,  such  as  ambition,  love  of  power  and  authority,  the  sense  of 


i6 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


dignity,  pride,  ardour,  and  also  generosity.  It  can  give  a very  strong 
will  of  the  persistent  and  unbending  kind.  It  prompts  to  action 
indirectly  for  the  sake  of  gratifying  some  desire,  and  not  for  the  mere 
pleasure  of  action  ; and  these  actions  are  expressed  and  modified  by  the 
sign  and  house  in  which  it  is  placed  and  the  planet  with  which  it  is  in 
closest  strong  aspect.  It  has  little  or  no  influence  through  intellect  as 
such,  but  can  manifest  much  innate  wisdom  and  good  judgment,  and 
strength  of  character. 

The  Moon  has  some  influence  in  each  of  the  three  departments  of 
consciousness.  It  shows  much  action  of  a versatile,  changeful,  and 
adaptable  kind,  and  can  give  much  practical  ability  in  almost  any 
direction,  domestic,  professional,  business,  or  otherwise,  depending  upon 
sign,  house,  and  aspect.  Among  the  feelings,  it  expresses  the  more 
passive  emotions,  those  pertaining  to  social  and  family  life ; caution, 
economy,  modesty,  reserve  ; and  yet  it  often  gives  an  easy-going  adapt- 
able disposition  that  may  bring  many  friends  and  popularity.  It 
signifies  thought  as  applied  to  practical  ends,  such  as  that  required  for 
business,  for  practical  applied  science,  for  coming  before  the  public ; 
but  not  abstract  thought. 

Mercury  chiefly  governs  thought  for  its  own  sake,  especially  abstract 
thought,  apart  from  any  practical  application.  It  may  give  much  rest- 
lessness and  love  of  change,  but  its  actions  are  mainly  such  as  gratify 
its  enquiring  nature  and  are  associated  with  thought  activity,  skill  or 
dexterity,  whether  shown  in  writing,  teaching,  reasoning,  arguing, 
debating,  discovering,  or  any  other  intellectual  activity.  Its  influence 
upon  the  feelings  is  expressed  through  sympathy,  intuition,  and  under- 
standing the  position  of  others  ; ‘ put  yourself  in  his  place  ’ ; but  it  has 
little  influence  through  ordinary  desire  or  emotion.  It  is  greatly 
affected  by  aspects  and  by  the  ruler  of  the  sign  in  which  it  is  placed ; 
but  it  does  not  give  a strong  will,  being  prone  to  vacillation,  uncertainty 
worry,  and  sometimes  depression  of  spirits. 

Venus  governs  the  emotions,  chiefly  those  based  upon  love  and  the 
affections  ; mirth,  cheerfulness,  agreeableness,  and  love  of  pleasure 
and  amusement.  Amongst  the  intellectual  faculties  it  signifies  the  com- 
bination of  thought  and  feeling  as  the  sense  of  beauty,  poetry,  music. 


PLANETS  AND  CONSCIOUSNESS 


7 


painting,  and  ornament.  It  has  no  influence  upon  pure  reason.  The 
actions  it  signifies  are  those  intended  to  express  the  feelings  and  the 
love  of  beauty;  but  by  combination  with  other  planets  it  can  be  turned 
in  the  direction  of  business  and  professional  life,  as  in  the  occupations 
enumerated  in  Chapter  I. 

Mars  governs  desire  and  the  more  positive  emotions  such  as  Qp 
quickly  pass  into  action  ; courage,  independence,  enthusiasm,  generosity, 
ardent  affection,  ambition,  pride,  masterfulness,  anger,  combativeness. 

It  is  the  cause  of  actions  that  result  from  and  express  these  qualities 
according  to  the  list  of  occupations  given  elsewhere : it  makes  an  active, 
practical  and  energetic  worker  and  man  of  the  world.  It  signifies 
thought  turned  outward  towards  the  world,  animated  by  feeling  and 
devoted  to  practical  uses ; and  by  combination  it  can  give  quickness 
of  mind,  wit,  sarcasm,  ingenuity,  resourcefulness,  and  mental 
dexterity. 

Jupiter  governs  a combination  of  feeling  and  thought.  It  includes  Ji 
humanity,  benevolence,  compassion,  honour,  candour,  good  humour,  ' 
and  the  higher  moral  and  social  qualities;  also  dignity,  confidence, 
cheerfulness,  love  of  beauty  and  display,  ostentation,  the  dramatic 
sense,  imagination,  devotion.  In  thought,  it  gives  mental  fertility, 
tact,  common-sense,  sound  judgment,  openness  of  mind,  but  also  much 
conventionality.  It  has  nothing  to  do  with  pure  intellect,  but  by 
combination  is  adapted  to  the  purposes  of  religion,  law,  philosophj^ 
and  social  and  humanitarian  movements.  It  prompts  to  actions  that 
express  these  qualities,  and  governs  action  indirectly  through  feeling 
and  thought. 

Saturn  governs  thought  of  a solid,  concrete  kind,  very  fitted  for  ^ 
practical  work  in  the  world  in  business,  science,  law,  or  public  occupa- 
tions. It  gives  a good  memory  and  much  patience,  forethought,  and 
strength  of  will  of  the  slow-moving,  unchanging,  unyielding  kind  that 
can  both  concentrate  on  small  things  and  comprehend  large  ideas  as 
well  as  carry  out  great  schemes.  It  is  slow  to  move  but  is  very  strong, 
persistent  and  comprehensive  in  thought,  and  very  capable  and  practical 
in  action.  In  feeling,  it  is  said  to  be  cold,  reserved,  capable  of  great 
self-control  and  asceticism,  ambitious,  fond  of  power,  sometimes  very 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


i8 

selfish  and  unsympathetic,  but  with  much  sense  of  justice,  impartiality, 
and  fairness. 

Uranus  governs  the  Will  in  the  highest  degree,  and  it  can  be 
associated  equally  with  thought,  feeling,  and  action ; but  in  the  horo- 
scope it  may  lean  more  towards  one  of  these  than  another,  according 
to  its  position  by  sign,  house,  and  aspect.  It  makes  thought  active, 
original,  ingenious,  and  powerful.  In  feeling,  it  gives  impulse,  strength, 
impetuosity,  love  of  freedom,  unconventionality,  independence,  com- 
bativeness, positiveness.  It  carries  these  qualities  into  action  freelj^ 
and  fully,  often  giving  positions  of  prominence  or  notoriety,  following 
new  occupations,  doing  pioneering  work;  but  not  infrequently  acting 
suddenly  or  erratically. 

Neptune  seems  to  be  closely  associated  with  feeling,  emotion,  and 
sensation.  It  controls  thought  through  feeling,  giving  imagination, 
intuition,  love  of  beauty,  sympathj^  and  psychic  faculty.  It  is  uncertain 
and  indefinite  in  action,  being  negative  and  receptive  rather  than  positive 
and  spontaneous ; but  it  is  also  a harmonising,  balancing  and  synthesis- 
ing influence. 


CHAPTER  III 


The  Planets  and  the  Seven  Principles.  Individuality 
AND  Personality 

Man  is  in  definite  touch  with  more  worlds  than  one,  even  while  living  in 
the  physical  body.  Through  his  astral  body  he  is  put  in  touch  with  the 
astral  world,  and  through  his  mental  body  with  the  mental  world ; 
receiving  impressions  from  each  and  sending  forth  influences  upon  each 
by  his  feelings  and  thoughts. 

Again,  the  whole  of  man’s  consciousness  does  not  enter  into  his 
physical  body.  Every  man  has  spent  many  lives  upon  this  earth  in  the 
past,  and  the  experiences  then  gained  have  gradually  made  him  what  he 
is  to-day.  The  definite  memory  of  that  past,  however,  is  not  usually 
recoverable  by  the  physical  personality,  although  the  whole  of  it  is 
contained  within  the  wider  consciousness  of  the  spiritual  man  on  his  own 
plane. 

This  fact  leads  up  to  the  classification  of  man  along  the  two  lines 
of  Personality  and  Individuality. 

The  Personality,  or  the  personal  man,  is  that  which  is  born  into 
this  world  in  a physical  body.  It  brings  with  it  tendencies  to  types  of 
thought,  feeling,  and  action,  inborn  and  untaught,  being  derived  from 
its  past  career  as  a soul.  These  innate  faculties  are  expanded  and 
increased  by  its  experience  of  this  life,  and  are  taken  with  it  into  the 
next  world  after  death. 

The  Individuality,  or  the  spiritual  man,  contains  within  himself  the 
synthesis  of  the  memories,  experiences,  and  faculties  of  many  such 
personalities  in  the  past,  each  of  which  had  its  birth  in  a physical  body, 
its  life,  and  its  death.  The  whole  of  the  individuality  never  incarnates 
completely  in  a physical  body,  at  any  rate  not  in  the  case  of  ordinary 
humanity ; that  portion  of  it  which  incarnates  and  is  born  on  to  this 
plane  constitutes  the  personality  at  each  rebirth ; retaining  its  link  with 
the  spiritual  man  during  the  whole  of  the  life,  and  returning  to  be  merged 


20 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


in  the  total  individuality  and  to  awaken  to  that  more  glorious  existence 
sooner  or  later  after  passing  through  the  change  called  death. 

The  three  aspects  of  consciousness  in  the  personality,  thought,  feeling, 
and  action,  described  elsewhere,  have  their  higher  correspondences 
in  the  sublimer  consciousness  of  the  spiritual  man  or  individuality,  who 
also  presents  three  aspects  to  his  environment.  These  higher  three, 
however,  include  greater  possibilities  and  vaster  powers  than  ever  enter 
the  ken  of  the  ph3^sical  man,  and  no  detailed  description,  even  if  any 
were  available,  will  be  attempted  here.  It  will  be  sufficient  for  the 
present  purpose  to  say  that  the  spiritual  three  appear  to  be  analogous 
to  the  personal  three  but  at  much  loftier  levels. 

Between  these  two  triads  comes  the  ‘ bridge  ’ or  link  between  them, 
Antahkarana,  represented  symbolically  by  Saturn. 

From  another  point  of  view,  it  ma}'^  be  said  that  a primordial  abstract 
triad  becomes  dual  and  differentiated  under  the  influence  of  the  centri- 
fugal and  centripetal  tendencies  ; that  the  centrifugal  tendency  dominates 
the  personality,  especiall}'  during  the  first  half  of  life,  and  the  centripetal 
the  individuality ; and  that  the  bridge  between  them  represents  the 
balance  between  the  two,  inclining  now  in  the  one  direction  and  now  in 
the  other. 

These  seven  in  man,  the  two  triads  and  the  bridge,  are  represented 
in  the  solar  sj^stem  by  seven  different  types  of  evolution  ; and  the 
following  table  gives  their  association  with  the  nearest  planetary 
representatives  of  which  we  have  information  at  present. 

The  Personality 

(1)  Jupiter  represents  consciousness  stated  in  terms  of  body:  but 
body  here  may  represent  any  vehicle  whatever  in  which  consciousness 
is  functioning  on  any  plane.  So  far  as  the  physical  man  is  concerned, 
Jupiter  has  to  do  with  the  blood,  which  is  the  life  of  the  physical  body. 
It  stands  for  the  power  of  growth,  for  the  consciousness  ofithe  cells  of 
the  living  body,  and  for  organic  matter  in  general ; that  is  to  say,  for 
the  vegetable  as  opposed  to  the  mineral.  It  relates  more  closel3^  to 
the  etheric  double  than  to  the  dense  physical  bod3\ — {Vegetative 
Consciousness.) 

(2)  Mars  represents  the  thirst  for  sensation  and  the  desire  for 
pleasure.  It  is  the  seat  of  all  passional  and  emotional  impulses.  It 
is  called  into  action  from  without  by  the  presence  of  pleasure-giving 


THE  PLANETS  AND  THE  SEVEN  PRINCIPLES 


21 


objects,  which  arouse  the  memory  of  previous  pleasant  experiences  and 
prompt  to  the  repetition  of  them.  It  is  therefore  the  mainspring  of 
action,  to  secure  the  desired  object,  and  of  thought  to  plan  the  means 
of  securing  it.  In  the  earlier  stages  of  evolution  it  is  blind,  instinctive, 
and  purely  selfish  ; but  in  the  later  development  of  the  soul  it  gives 
strength  of  will  and  unselfish  devotion  controlled  by  the  higher  nature. 
It  is  related  to  the  astral  plane.  After  death  it  fades  out  in  purgatory, 
all  that  was  unselfish  in  it  having  been  absorbed  by  the  permanent 
soul. — {Animal  Consciousness.) 

(3)  The  Moon  is  dual  in  its  nature.  Its  influence  upon  body  is 
physiological,  modifying  and  varying  the  working  of  various  bodily 
processes ; and  its  influence  is  exerted  upon  the  dense  body  through 
the  etheric  double.  In  terms  of  consciousness  it  stands  for  the  lower 
brain  mind,  concrete  practical  thought,  responding  to  objects  in  the 
outer  world,  and  thinking  in  terms  of  them.  It  gives  perception  and 
observation,  concrete  not  abstract  ideas.  It  represents  the  ever- 
changing  mind  of  the  personality  with  its  fluctuating  moods,  almost 
inextricably  entangled  with  the  desire-nature,  and  like  it  called  into 
action  mainly  by  objects  in  the  outer  world.  Among  animals  it  stands 
for  what  instinctive  intelligence  they  possess.  Among  men  it  indicates 
the  trader  or  student  of  applied  science,  i.e.,  the  practical  worker  or 
practical  thinker,  rather  than  the  philosopher  or  poet.  After  death,  all 
that  is  worthy  of  survival  is  gathered  up  first  into  this  centre,  and, 
after  a longer  or  shorter  life  in  the  heaven-world,  is  handed  on  to  the 
permanent  soul.  Because  this  aspect  of  man’s  consciousness  is  so  very 
characteristic,  the  Moon  is  often  spoken  of  as  the  chief  significator  of 
the  personality,  as  contrasted  with  the  more  stable  and  less  changeful 
Sun,  which  is  then  taken  as  the  type  of  the  individuality  ; but  it  must 
be  remembered  that  this  correspondence  is  relative  only,  not  fixed  or 
absolute. — {Psycho-physiological  consciousness  of  Animal-Man^ 

The  Bridge 

(4)  Saturn  is  the  bridge  between  the  purely  human  consciousness 
above  and  the  animal-human  consciousness  below.  It  is  that  which 
emanates  from  the  individuality  at  each  rebirth,  and  which  returns  to 
it  after  each  death  coloured  and  enriched  by  the  experiences  of  personal 
life.  It  gives  the  sense  of  self,  of  ‘I,’  very  strongly,  the  limited  and 
restricted  personal  self,  wrapped  round  and  shut  in  by  the  thoughts. 


22 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


desires,  and  doings  of  personal  life.  It  may  be  said  to  become 
crystallised  by  the  habits  and  routine  of  daily  life,  and  this  condition 
must  be  broken  up,  the  cr3^stal  dissolved,  before  man  is  free  from  the 
bonds  of  fate  and  compulsory  re-birth.  When  it  emanates  from  the 
individuality  and  descends  into  incarnation,  it  brings  its  character  and 
destiny  with  it,  and  so  is  the  decreer  and  arbiter  of  fate  for  each  life. 
It  represents  that  which  is  saved  and  that  which  is  crucified  on  the 
cross  of  the  personality.  The  complete  mastery  of  the  power  of  Saturn 
leads  to  the  Christ  stage  of  perfection. — {Egoism  or  Consciousness  of 
Seljhood.) 

When  the  crystallising  influence  of  Saturn,  above  referred  to,  is 
associated  with  Jupiter,  the  dense  phj'^sical  body  is  built  round  the 
etheric  double.  When  it  is  associated  with  Mars,  the  lower  and 
coarser  part  of  the  astral  body  is  formed  and  is  vitalised  by  the 
turbulent  and  self-centred  forces  that  play  therein.  When  it  is 
associated  with  the  Moon,  the  limiting  and  devitalising  influence  upon 
the  body  as  well  as  upon  the  lower  mind  generally  makes  itself  felt. 

This  crystallising  maj^  be  compared  S3^mbolically  with  the  cross  and 
with  evil  aspects  generall3^ 

The  breaking  up  of  the  crystal  may  be  compared  with  the  triangle 
and  the  formation  of  good  aspects,  as  the  result  of  which  strength  of 
will  and  self-control  are  gained  and  additional  experience  is  extracted 
from  life. 

The  exaltation  of  Saturn  in  Libra,  the  balance,  symbolises  the  state 
of  equilibrium  between  thought  and  feeling,  and  the  synthesis  of  those 
personal  experiences  that  are  carried  up  and  merged  into  the  individu- 
ality after  death  or  during  bodily  trance. 

The  Individuality 

(5)  Venus  S3^mbolises  the  abstract  subjective  human  consciousness, 
freed  from  the  limitations  of  the  personal  self  and  perfectly  balanced. 
When  this  stage  of  evolution  has  been  reached,  action  is  performed  as 
a dut3^  the  feelings  are  transformed  into  unselfish  love,  and  the  soul  is 
then  prepared  to  unite  with  others  in  the  co-operation  of  perfect 
brotherhood  before  proceeding  to  the  still  higher  stage  of  union  with 
the  Universal  Mind.  Where  this  stage  is  not  reached,  the  influence  of 
Venus  is  only  seen  b3'^  downward  reflection  through  the  limiting  and 
distorting  veil  of  the  personality. — {Human  Consciousness.) 


THE  PLANETS  AND  THE  SEVEN  PRINCIPLES 


23 


(6)  Mercury  represents  Spiritual  Consciousness,  only  one  remove 
from  the  Universal  Consciousness,  and  is  variously  described  as  Intuition 
and  as  Pure  Reason.  It  gives  the  power  to  know  directly  without  any 
laborious  process  of  experiment,  trial  and  error ; and  also  the  power  to 
think  and  feel  with  all  and  to  transcend  the  limits  of  self  by  mirroring 
the  larger  life  of  others.  The  soul  that  has  reached  this  stage  has 
gained  such  vast  experience  that  it  can  reflect  with  perfect  wisdom  the 
feelings  and  thoughts  of  others  and  respond  sympathetically  to  their 
appeals.  At  its  best  it  is  the  Divine  Messenger,  Hermes,  doing  the 
will  of  the  Father,  perfect  in  wisdom  and  understanding.  But  the 
ordinary  man  only  knows  it  in  its  downward  reflection  through  the 
personality,  hampered  and  restricted  by  the  brain-mind  and  the  sense 
of  the  limited  self.  It  stands  for  a much  higher  stage  of  evolution  than 
man  has  yet  reached.  It  is  the  universal  solvent,  which  will  dissolve 
the  bonds  of  the  separated  self  and  ultimately  widen  out  individual 
consciousness  into  the  universal. — {Spiritual  Human  Consciousness  or 
intuition.) 

(7)  Uranus  at  its  highest  represents  the  perfected  superhuman 
consciousness  in  which  the  whole  of  the  seven  rays,  after  having  been 
separated  and  scattered  in  their  long  journey  through  matter,  are 
gathered  together  again  and  focussed  into  one  by  the  will,  and  the 
power  is  obtained  to  rise  above  all  limitations  into  Universal  Spirit. 
The  three  modes  of  consciousness  are  all  equally  present  here,  but 
desire  has  become  will,  intellect  has  become  perfect  understanding  and 
action  has  become  perfect  response  to  cosmic  rhythms — initiated  and 
controlled  from  within.  It  gives  the  supreme  Will,  perfect  peace  and 
serenity,  and  practical  omniscience  with  regard  to  all  the  lower  cosmic 
planes.  It  is  the  apex  of  evolution  when  the  God  state  is  reached 
and  immortality  is  won  for  ever.  The  Soul  is  emancipated.  Nirvana 
is  attained  and  matter  as  we  know  it  is  transcended.  The  Spirit 
knows  itself. — {Perfect  Spiritual  Consciousness.) 

As  with  the  other  two  aspects  of  the  individuality,  the  influence  of 
Uranus  is  only  known  in  its  limited  and  restricted  reflection  in  the 
personality,  where  it  is  dwarfed  into  the  freedom-loving  and  rather 
combative  personal  will. 

It  must  be  remembered  that  this  association  of  planets  with  seven 
types  of  consciousness  and  stages  in  the  evolution  of  the  soul  is  only 


24 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


relative  and  not  absolute  or  final.  Complete  information  on  these 
mysteries  is  not  available,  for  many  obvious  reasons.  Even  on  the 
physical  plane,  the  proper  places  of  Neptune  and  the  undiscovered 
Vulcan  in  such  a classification  as  this  are  not  yet  known  for  certain. 
In  the  older  lists  the  Sun  occupied  the  position  here  assigned  to  Uranus, 
and  it  is  possible  that  Neptune  should  take  the  place  given  to  the  Moon  ; 
but  this  is  not  yet  definitely  ascertained. 

The  Sun  is  not  one  of  the  seven  in  this  table  because  it  includes 
them  all.  Astronomically  it  is  the  centre  of  the  solar  system,  and 
esoterically  it  is  the  Spiritual  Centre  through  which  pour  the  light  and 
life  of  that  great  Being  called  the  Logos  of  the  system  ; for  currents  of 
energy  conveying  life  and  consciousness  pass  from  the  Sun  to  every 
planet,  where  they  are  specialised  for  the  particular  uses  of  the  planet 
before  being  returned  to  the  Sun,  just  as  blood  is  sent  from  the  heart 
and  returned  to  it  again.  In  relation  to  the  Seven  Principles,  therefore, 
the  Sun  represents  Universal  Consciousness,  beyond  humanity,  but  the 
source  and  goal  of  all. 

In  its  astrological  relationship  the  Sun  is  taken  as  representing  the 
individuality,  just  as  the  Moon  does  the  personality  ; and  this  corre- 
spondence is  developed  in  the  first  volume  of  this  series.  Astrology  for 
All.  But,  as  previously  remarked,  this  must  not  be  taken  in  too 
absolute  a sense,  for  each  heavenly  body  has  its  function  and  signifi- 
cance on  each  plane  of  man’s  being  ; and  in  the  most  general  attribution 
the  Sun  may  be  taken  to  represent  spirit  and  life,  and  the  Moon  matter 
and  form. 

Just  as  the  Sun  is  the  centre  of  the  solar  system,  so  the  individuality  is 
the  permanent  source  of  each  personality  that  radiates  out  from  it.  New 
Moon,  when  the  two  luminaries  are  conjoined,  then  represents  the 
union  of  both  lower  and  higher  aspects  of  the  soul  in  the  higher  heaven 
world.  Full  Moon,  when  the  two  luminaries  are  in  opposition,  symbolises 
the  descent  of  the  personality — signified  by  the  Moon— into  earth  life, 
where  it  shines  with  great  lustre,  all  of  which  is  borrowed  from  the 
individuality. 

When  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  compared  in  this  way.  Mercury  is 
often  taken  to  represent  the  link  of  consciousness  and  memory  between 
the  two,  the  naked  soul  considered  apart  from  spirit  above  and  matter 
below,  and  the  messenger  between  the  two.  It  is  then  related  very 
closely  to  what  has  been  previously  described  as  Saturn  in  its 


THE  PLANETS  AND  THE  SEVEN  PRINCIPLES 


25 


uncrystallised  or  dissolved  condition ; but  Mercury  gives  thought  and 
memory  without  the  strong  sense  of  self  which  goes  with  Saturn  ; in 
fact,  Mercury,  in  its  lower  application,  stands  for  the  essence  of  the 
personality  regarded  as  thought  and  memory,  and  Saturn  for  the  same 
regarded  as  a self.  In  this  position  Mercury  may  be  described  as  the 
personah  Hermes  descending  with  the  soul  into  Hades,  physical  life,  and 
afterwards  returning  to  its  source,  the  individuality  in  the  higher 
heaven-world. 

The  reason  why  Venus  is  associated  with  the  individualised  human 
consciousness  has  never  been  fully  explained,  and  a good  deal  of  mystery 
still  surrounds  the  subject ; but  the  following  points  may  be  borne  in 
mind.  There  appear  to  be  several  ways  in  which  individualisation,  or 
the  passage  of  the  soul  from  the  animal  to  the  human  kingdom,  takes 
place ; but  what  may  be  called  the  characteristic  and  normal  way  is  for 
the  change  to  occur  under  the  influence  of  the  animal’s  close  association 
with  and  affection  for  its  master.  Secondly,  after  individualisation  has 
taken  place,  the  higher  stages  of  human  evolution  cannot  be  reached 
unless  man’s  separate  self  blends  and  harmonises  with  other  selves,  and 
this  expansion  and  blending  are  influenced  by  Venus  and  the  sign  Libra, 
and  are  in  the  individuality  what  love  and  the  emotions  based  upon  love 
are  in  the  personality.  Thirdly,  after  death  the  personality  is  sooner  or 
later  gathered  up  and  merged  into  the  consciousness  of  the  individuality; 
in  fact  the  latter  is  nothing  but  a composite  blend  of  a series  of  person- 
alities that  have  lived  in  the  past,  and  each  of  which  has  taken  its  life’s 
harvest  of  experiences  back  with  it  after  death  to  swell  the  fuller  and 
richer  life  of  the  spiritual  man,  just  as  the  sign  Taurus  and  the  second 
house  gather  up  into  one  fixed  centre  and  accumulate  the  wealth 
resulting  from  personal  exertion.  Lastly,  we  are  told  that  human 
evolution  on  this  earth  has  been  greatly  hastened  by  the  presence  and 
influence  of  certain  lofty  spiritual  Beings  from  the  planet  Venus  who 
fostered  its  earlier  humanity  and  guided  its  civilisations. 

Jupiter  really  signifies  body  or  vehicle  in  general,  and  not  physical 
body  only.  It  is  often  associated  with  the  causal  body  of  the  individu- 
ality on  the  higher  mental  plane,  because  this  is  the  highest  bod^^  for  the 
average  man  at  the  present  stage  of  evolution.  Higher  still  it  signifies 
the  perfected  atmic  body  on  the  spiritual  plane  ; and  ultimately  it  belongs 
to  the  relation  between  Self  and  Not-self,  referred  to  in  Chapter  I. 

The  Sun  represents  universal  life  when  referred  to  the  living  body. 


26 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


just  as  it  represents  universal  consciousness  when  referred  to  the  soul.  In 
the  physical  body  it  stands  for  prana  or  vital  force,  which  emanates  from 
the  Sun  and  is  absorbed  by  the  etheric  double.  It  gives  life  to  the 
feelings  on  the  astral  plane  and  to  the  mind  on  the  mental  plane.  This 
is  seen  in  the  horoscope  by  the  position  of  the  Sun  ; if  it  is  in  closest 
aspect  with  Mercury,  its  influence  will  be  largely  mental ; if  with  Venus 
it  will  be  more  emotional ; and  so  on  according  to  the  planet  in  closest 
strong  aspect  with  the  Sun. 

The  solar  system  is  everywhere  permeated  and  charged  with  that 
form  of  universal  life  and  consciousness  the  central  head  and  heart  of 
which  are  both  represented  by  the  Sun.  Geocentrically,  heart  and  head 
are  separated,  because  the  universal  has  become  individualised,  and 
incarnation,  or  descent  into  matter,  has  taken  place  ; and  from  this  point 
of  view  our  earth  represents  the  separated  consciousness  of  the  head, 
and  the  Sun  the  spiritual  consciousness  of  the  heart.  In  the  horoscope, 
the  earth  and  the  head  are  represented  by  the  ascendant.  This  trinity 
of  Sun,  Moon,  and  earth,  or  ascendant,  forms  a kind  of  skeleton  of  the 
horoscope  in  relation  to  man,  and  embodies  the  three  most  important 
centres  ; they  are  referred  again  in  subsequent  chapters. 

Every  planet  revolving  round  the  Sun  is  vitalised  by  the  solar  life 
and  inspired  by  the  solar  consciousness,  which  it  gathers  up,  centralises, 
and  individualises  to  suit  its  own  planetary  type  of  evolution.  The 
physical  planet  is  only  the  body  or  vehicle  of  a mighty  Intelligence,  a 
God  or  Archangel,  who  is  supervising  the  slow  evolution  of  countless 
millions  of  souls  that  are  progressing  on  his  globe ; himself  dependent 
upon  the  still  greater  life  and  consciousness  of  the  Sun. 

Each  planet  sounds  forth  a clear  note,  one  of  the  seven  of  the  octave 
to  which  it  belongs,  and  spiritual  ears  can  hear  the  music  of  the  spheres 
that  results  from  this.  Each  also  sends  out  a definite  colour,  expressive 
of  its  own  type  of  being. 

We  have  thus  a picture  of  the  whole  solar  system  as  presenting  a 
series  of  successively  greater  differentiations  and  specialisations.  Our 
Sun  is  one  of  a group  of  seven  Suns,  each  of  which  receives  one  ray 
from  the  mightier  central  source  in  connection  with  which  it  is  evolving. 
The  ray  that  reaches  our  Sun  and  enters  the  solar  system  is  split  up 
into  seven  sub-ra3^s,  one  for  each  of  the  seven  great  Archangels,  or 
Planetary  Logoi  as  they  are  called,  who  are  concerned  in  superintending 
the  working  of  the  seven  schemes  of  evolution  of  the  s^^stem,  each  scheme 


THE  PLANETS  AND  THE  SEVEN  PRINCIPLES 


27 


including  a group  or  chain  of  seven  globes,  some  physical  but  most  super- 
physical and  therefore  invisible  to  ordinary  eyesight.  Each  of  the  seven 
sub-rays  goes  to  one  of  these  seven  chains,  and  is  again  split  up  and 
distributed  among  the  seven  globes  of  the  chain  ; so  that  our  earth 
receives  one  of  such  sub-sub-raj’^s. 

Each  planet  thus  lives  its  own  life  in  connection  with  the  still  larger 
life  to  which  it  belongs.  Our  own  globe,  like  the  others,  is  free  when 
considered  apart,  and  has  its  own  type,  character,  and  influence ; but  it 
is  also  inseparably  bound  to  those  others  that  are  sharing  its 
evolution. 

All  that  we  know  of  the  other  planets  comes  to  us  tinted  and 
modified  by  the  earth’s  zodiac.  It  is  as  though  each  one  were  simple 
and  uncomplicated  in  itself,  like  a pure  and  unmodified  ray  of  the 
spectrum,  or  like  one  single  note  in  music ; but  before  it  can  reach  our 
earth  it  is  coloured  by  the  hue  and  blended  with  the  sound  characteristic 
of  the  sign  of  the  zodiac  through  which  it  has  to  pass.  Every  influence 
that  reaches  us  on  the  physical  plane  is  modified  and  partL'^  disguised 
in  this  way;  and  we  must  learn  to  raise  our  consciousness  to  a ver^'- 
much  higher  plane  than  this  before  we  can  respond  to  the  pure 
unmodified  note  and  colour. 

When  the  ray  of  influence  from  a planet  passes  through  some  sign 
of  the  zodiac  the  rate  of  vibration  of  which  is  such  that  the  vibratory 
waves  of  the  two  clash  or  ‘ interfere  ’ (that  is,  when  the  crest  of  one 
wave  falls  in  the  hollow  of  the  other),  the  two  influences — that  of  the 
planet  and  that  of  the  sign — are  weakened  and  rendered  discordant ; as 
is  the  case  when  any  planet  is  in  its  fall  or  detriment.  But  when  the 
planetary  ray  reaches  us  through  a sign  the  wave  rate  of  which  is  in 
some  harmonious  proportion  to  its  own  vibration,  the  two  reinforce 
each  other  and  the  influence  of  the  planet  is  greatly  strengthened; 
which  is  the  case  when  a planet  is  in  its  house  or  exaltation. 

It  should  be  remembered  that  the  Sun  is  not  directly  concerned  with  O 
any  vehicle  or  state  of  consciousness,  but  represents  the  one  principle 
that  permeates  them  all  as  Life  or  Consciousness  in  general.  It  is  that 
universal  principle  in  which  everything  in  the  system  lives,  moves,  and 
has  its  being. 

Tlie  planetary  representative  of  this  state  appears  to  be  Uranus,  in 
which  the  solar  rays  are  special^"  concentrated  and  blended  to  produce 
a centre  representative  of  all  the  various  types  of  influence  in  one. 


CHAPTER  IV 


The  Sun,  Life-Giver 

At  the  centre  of  our  solar  system  is  the  Sun,  the  giver  of  life  and  light 
to  the  whole  system.  It  is  the  principal  influence  throughout  the  whole 
science  of  Astrology,  and  is,  until  a certain  stage  is  reached  in  evolution, 
the  representative  of  the  Self.  Its  symbol  is  the  Circle  with  a Point 
in  the  Centre,  symbolising  the  one  unity  underlying  all  things.  This 
Point  in  the  Circle  is  the  beginning  of  all  that  is  to  be,  the  unmanifested, 
absolute,  primordial,  permanent  Centre,  the  unspoken  Word  from  which 
all  is  to  emanate. 

From  the  Eastern  philosophy  known  as  the  Wisdom  Religion,  we 
have  been  taught  to  look  upon  the  Sun  as  the  physical  body,  or  rather 
the  outward  glory,  of  the  Central  Intelligence  in  the  Solar  System. 
The  Sun,  however,  is  only  the  reflection  of  the  Central  or  Universal 
Sun,  although  to  us  on  earth  it  represents  the  highest  we  can  hope  to 
know  or  understand  while  inhabiting  human  bodies.  Every  sun  in  the 
heavens  is  but  a reflection  of  a Divine  Glory  of  which  we  can  obtain  no 
adequate  conception,  for  no  man  can  look  upon  the  Real  Sun  and  live. 

From  the  Central  Sun,  which  itself  is  triple,  arise  Seven  Beings  or 
Holy  Ones,  who  send  forth  Their  Rays  or  forces  into  Seven  Solar 
systems;  and  our  Sun  represents  one  of  these  Rays.  In  the  New 
Testament  we  read  that  Jesus  said:  land  my  Father  are  one*;  and, 
I ascend  unto  my  Father  and  your  Father,* — showing  that  He  and 
those  who  followed  Him  belonged  to  the  same  ‘Star’  or  ‘Father’  in 
the  same  planetary  realm ; and  this  is  the  astrological  explanation  of 
the  statement:  In  my  Father’s  house  are  many  mansions.* 

Our  visible  Sun  is  therefore  the  shadow  of  the  Central  Sun,  acting 
as  a concrete  symbol  of  the  Eternal  point  from  which  it  emanates,  and 
around  which  it  moves  in  a cycle  of  thousands  of  years. 


* John  X.  30. 


’ John  XX.  17. 


® John  xiv.  2. 


THE  SUN,  LIFE-GIVER 


29 


Whether  the  Seven  Great  Spirits  or  Cosmocratores,  beyond  our 
visible  Sun,  have  a direct  reflection  in  the  seven  planets  familiar  to 
astrologers,  we  are  unable  to  say  definitely.  But  it  is  evident  that 
applying  the  maxim  ‘As  above  so  below,’  the  Sun  of  our  System 
is  a Star  having  streams  of  influence  which  seem  to  link  it 
with  each  planet  and  give  to  each  its  special  lordship  over  certain 
signs  of  the  zodiac ; for  the  Sun  has  primal  lordship  over  all  the 
signs,  and  then  each  planet  is  allotted  its  separate  rulership  under  the 
Sun. 

Exoterically,  then,  the  physical  Sun  is  the  centre  of  our  manifested 
Solar  System.  Esoterically  it  is  the  focus  of  a Ray  from  the  Central 
Sun  or  Supreme  Intelligence  presiding  over  the  whole  of  our  Universe  ; 
and  from  the  Sun  we  receive  as  much  of  the  Central  Sun’s  Rays  as 
are  manifested  through  this  focus. 

Besides  this  Central  Sun,  the  Spiritual  Centre  and  Circumference 
of  the  whole  Universe,  there  is  a Polar  Sun  connecting  the  Central  Sun 
with  the  equatorial  Sumot  our  Solar  System. 

Esoterically  we  have  the  Spiritual  Sun  and  the  Pole  Star, 
symbolised  as  the  Tree  and  the  Serpent.  The  Pole  Star  is  sym- 
bolically the  home  of  the  Gods  around  which  revolve  the  seven  stars 
of  the  Great  Bear,  named  after  the  immortal  Rishis  who  represent 
the  seven  Rays  of  the  Central  Sun.  They  stand  for  Space  and  Time 
or  Time  and  Eternity. 

Then  at  a lower  stage  we  have  the  Sun  as  Centre  of  our  Solar 
system,  and  the  Spirit  of  the  Sun  divided  into  seven  streams,  or 
spheres  of  influence  through  the  seven  planets.  For  this  reason  the 
Sun  is  always  depicted  as  drawn  by  seven  horses,  or  by  one  horse 
with  seven  heads,  meaning  the  seven  rays  which  spread  through  the 
Solar  system. 

Modern  science  is  still  in  the  dark  respecting  many  solar  phenomena, 
but  it  is  clear  that  light,  life,  heat  and  magnetism  are  very  closely 
connected  with  the  Sun.  The  astrologers  of  old  believed  in  solar 
magnetism  to  such  an  extent  that  they  attributed  all  the  life  force  in 
nature  to  this  influence,  which  they  considered  peculiar  to  our  physical 
Sun  and  quite  different  from  that  connected  with  any  other  star  or 
planet,  and  in  the  same  way  they  spoke  of  lunar  magnetism  as  being 
quite  distinct  from  that  of  the  Sun.  The  Earth  was  represented  as 
emitting  a negative  ray,  which  the  Solar  life  force  or  magnetism  im- 


3° 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


pregnated  in  a different  manner  each  month  according  to  the  changed 
relationship  of  Sun,  Moon,  and  Earth  to  the  zodiac. 

This  solar  magnetism  is,  therefore,  the  most  potent  factor  in  the 
consideration  of  what  we  may  term  planetary  influence ; for  every  ray 
of  the  Sun  is  a living  energj',  and  the  whole  is  the  life  force  or  vitality 
of  every  human  being  that  draws  breath.  The  Sun’s  position  in  relation 
to  the  Moon  and  the  Earth  at  the  moment  of  birth  decides  the  quality 
of  that  ray  and  its  strength  or  weakness. 

Astronomers  tell  us  that  there  is  a luminous  envelope  c ompletely 
surrounding  the  Sun  termed  the  Photosphere,  and  from  this  all  light 
and  heat  are  radiated.  Clairvoyants  have  gone  further,  telling  us  of 
the  colour  influence  continuously  playing  through  this  luminous  ether. 

It  is  these  rays  of  light  and  consciousness  sent  forth  from  the  Sun 
that  form  the  individualities  of  men  and  that  make  of  them  in  very 
truth  the  Sons  of  God.  For  the  Sun  represents  the  great  Sacrifice 
and  sends  forth  individualities  that  will  afterwards  be  drawn  back  in 
full  self-consciousness  to  share  that  Bliss  which  is  the  essence  of  the 
Divine  Nature. 

The  Sun,  then,  is  a representative  of  our  Solar  Logos,  whose 
sacrifice  on  a lower  plane  is  a reflection  of  that  on  higher  planes  above. 

There  is  a Trinity  of  manifestation  from  the  Solar  Logos,  just  as 
there  is  in  the  greater  universe,  and  this  we  are  taught  takes  the  form 
of  three  emanations,  or  great  outpourings  of  Consciousness  (Life), 
Light,  and  Heat  or  Magnetism. 

The  first  of  these  three  is  creative  and  energising  and  proceeds 
from  the  third  or  lowest  aspect  of  the  Solar  Logos ; it  may  be  said  to 
create  the  material  substance  of  the  Solar  System.  The  second  out- 
pouring is  integrative  and  upbuilding,  and  may  be  termed  the  ensouling 
essence  ; it  proceeds  from  the  second  aspect  of  the  Logos,  and  gives 
life  and  form  to  substance.  The  third  outpouring  is  the  gift  of  that 
divine  individual  spark  which  ensures  the  immortality  of  man;  and 
this  comes  from  the  first  and  highest  aspect  * of  the  Logos. 

Therefore,  as  taught  in  the  Secret  Doctrine’.  ‘The  Sun  we  see  is  a 
reflection  of  the  true  Sun  : this  reflection,  as  an  outward  concrete  thing, 

^ These  three  aspects  have  each  seven  vibrations  or,  as  they  are  often  termed,  seven 
great  waves  oj  evolution,  and  at  the  head  of  each  wave  there  stands  a Lord  or  Ruler 
who  directs  and  controls  the  scheme  of  evolution  to  which  it  belongs.  These,  •ate  believe, 
are  connected  with  the  planetary  chains,  of  which  there  are  seven  in  the  solar  system. 


THE  SUN,  LIFE-GIVER 


3 


is  a Kama-Rupa,*  all  the  suns  forming  the  Kama-Rupa  of  Kosmos. 
To  its  own  system  the  Sun  is  Buddhi,*  as  being  the  reflection  and 
Vehicle  of  the  True  Sun,  which  is  Atma,*  invisible  on  this  plane.  All 
the  Fohatic  forces — electricity,  etc. — are  in  this  reflection.’^ 

Again  we  are  told : ‘The  effect  of  the  Sun  on  humanity  is  connected 
with  Kama-Prana,  with  the  most  physical  Kamic  elements  in  us ; it  is 
the  vital  principle  which  helps  growth.’  * Astrologically  the  Sun  is  the 
life  factor  which  animates  everything  its  rays  fall  upon,  giving  that 
magnetic  affinity  which  binds  one  thing  to  another.  It  also  gives  the 
instinctual  consciousness,  which  is  rationalised  by  an  interblending  with 
the  planetary  rays,  ranging  from  the  lowest  to  the  highest  degree  of 
psychic  development. 

The  Sun  is  the  giver  of  the  life-principle,  or  the  breath  of  life,  and 
when  manifesting  in  the  physical  world  the  Sun  represents  the 
specialised  life  or  ‘Prana’  in  each  separated  individual.  In  all  degrees 
of  manifestation  the  Sun  is  the  giver  of  life,  spiritually,  mentally,  and 
physically,  and  it  is  therefore  of  vital  and  primary  importance  in'  all 
study  of  Astrology.  It  is  the  representative  of  the  One  Life  that  per- 
meates all  things ; and  therefore  careful  study  of  the  Sun  and  all  that  it 
denotes  in  a nativity  is  necessary  before  a sound  judgment  can  be 
given. 

From  a physical  and  mundane  standpoint  the  Sun  is  the  giver  of 
light  by  day,  and  the  Moon  by  night.  It  is  the  breath  of  life,  governing 
the  inbreathing  and  the  outbreathing. 

From  the  standpoint  of  the  feelings  the  Sun  governs  the  heart,  with 
its  sensations  and  emotions,  and  gives  life  to  these  feelings,  from  the 
fiercest  passion  up  to  the  purest  love  and  friendship. 

From  a mental  standpoint  the  Sun  is  the  heart  and  Wisdom,  the  life 
of  the  intelligence,  the  self-conscious  centre  on  the  plane  of  the  mind. 

The  importance  of  the  Sun’s  position  and  aspects  can  never  be  over- 
estimated in  judging  a nativity ; for  without  its  rays  all  would  be  dead 
and  inert. 

We  first  observe  the  influence  of  the  Sun  in  the  Sign  of  the  Zodiac 
through  which  its  rays  are  passing  at  birth.  If  instead  of  regarding  the 
Sun  as  though  it  were  outside  the  zodiac  we  were  to  think  of  it  as  the 
Centre^  with  its  rays  permeating  the  whole  Circle  at  once,  we  should 


Desire-form.  * Pure  Reason.  * Abstract  Spirit.  * S.D.  ili.  562.  * Hid.  563. 


32 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


have  a clearer  conception  of  the  manner  in  which  the  signs  are  vitalised 
by  it.  Nevertheless,  the  earth  by  its  revolution  round  the  Sun  is  so 
placed  that  at  any  given  time  one  particular  sign  appears  to  be,  as  it  were, 
specialised^  the  Sun’s  ray  at  that  time  being  focussed  through  that  sign 
on  to  the  Earth  ; and  we  thus  obtain  some  idea  of  the  reason  for  that 
particular  sign  (vitalised  by  the  Sun)  being  taken  as  the  ‘ individual 
colouring,’  as  we  have  termed  it. 

The  beginning  and  the  end  of  all  manifested  life  is  in  a special  sense 
governed  by  the  Sun,  and  according  to  its  strength  and  power  at  birth 
so  will  the  life  it  rules  be  strong  or  weak,  for  it  is  the  Power,  Wisdom, 
and  Activity  of  all  human  expression. 

All  that  is  below  Sun  is  but  a series  of  forms  that  are  more  or 
less  transitory,  the  Sun  being  the  lord  of  life,  and  the  Moon  the  ruler 
of  all  forms.  Each  planet  draws  its  life  from  the  Sun,  and  therefore  no 
planet  can  be  powerful  in  a nativity  if  entirely  free  from  an  aspect  with 
the  Sun ; whereas  each  planet  in  aspect  with  the  Sun  adds  to  the 
strength  and  power  of  the  individuality : The  Sun  vivifying  the  forms 
or  the  vehicles  which  that  planet  represents,  and  the  planet  collecting 
or  ‘ focussing  ’ the  solar  rays.  The  most  powerful  aspect  of  all  is  that 
formed  between  the  Sun  and  Moon,  when  Life  and  Form  are  conjoined. 

On  either  side  of  thef  Sun  (figuratively  speaking)  are  Mars  and 
Venus,  and  between  these  two  planets  the  Sun’s  rays  are  always  most 
active.  For  in  them  the  solar  rays  are  used  to  conquer  matter  and  the 
animal  instincts  that  are  always  permeating  matter  until  redeemed  by 
the  spirit.  Mars  is  considered  as  the  symbol  of  the  ‘counterfeit  of  the 
spirit,’  in  which  the  life  force  is  often  abused  through  ignorance  and 
inexperience.  Thus  the  solar  rays  may  be  said  to  be  pouring  through 
Mars  as  blind  forces^  in  which  the  life  is  utilised  for  muscular  or  physical 
energy.  Mars  governing  the  whole  of  the  muscular  system  in  animal- 
man.  When  this  force  is  transmuted,  it  is  attracted  towards  Venus,  and 
from  physical  passion  and  activit3’’  it  is  refined  into,  and  gradually 
manifests  as,  pure  love — its  original  condition,  though  not  then  conscious 
of  it,  animal-man  not  being  subconscious. 

This  is  represented  by  the  angles  occupied  by  the  Sun : and  also 
whether  above  or  below  the  earth.  When  in  the  east  and  below  the 
horizon  spirit  and  life  are  subject  to  matter,  and  form  casts  its  glamour 
over  the  soul  (Moon) ; but  when  above  the  earth,  life  and  spirit  are 
dominating  matter,  and  the  potency  of  the  Sun  is  more  manifest  (Venus). 


THE  SUN,  LIFE-GIVER 


33 


It  takes  the  Sun,  in  its  apparent  motion  round  the  earth,  approxi- 
mately two  hours  to  pass  through  each  of  the  twelve  houses,  and  during 
each  two  hours  its  influence  passes  from  positive  to  negative  : the  first 
15°  (=i  hour)  being  the  day  half,  ruled  by  the  Sun,  and  the  last 
15  ° the  night  or  negative  half,  governed  by  the  Moon.  The  sacred  hours 
of  the  Sun  are  sunrise,  noon,  and  sunset,  the  hours  of  meditation, 
prayer,  and  reflection,  respectively.  Each  hour  from  sunrise  to  sunset  is 
under  the  influence  of  a special  Deva,  and  over  each  event  in  every  day 
a lord  or  ruler  presides  : — over  bathing  and  meditation  is  Saturn  ; over 
affection  and  meals  is  Venus;  over  social  and  moral  duties  is  Jupiter; 
over  strength  and  business  enterprise  is  Mars ; over  speech  and  corre- 
spondence, Mercury  ; and  over  all  physical  and  mundane  things  generally 
is  the  Moon  : while  the  Sun  is  lord  over  all. 

We  may  consider  the  whole  circle  of  the  Zodiac  as  one  great  cell, 
impregnated  with  the  life-giving  rays  of  the  Sun  ; ‘manifestation’  being 
the  splitting  up  of  this  cell  into  myriads  of  smaller  ones,  each  minute 
part  or  fragment  containing  the  potent  life  of  the  Sun.  The  earth  upon 
which  we  live  draws  its  energising  and  life-giving  properties  from  this 
Zodiac,  and  in  rotating  upon  its  axis  passes  through  all  those  changes 
necessary  to  give  the  required  opportunities  for  each  human  being  to 
evolve  the  life-spark  that  is  inherent  within  him. 

From  an  earthly  standpoint,  and  a physical  or  material  conception 
of  things,  the  life  permeating  through  each  sign  of  the  Zodiac  is  the 
animal  life,  which  must  be  redeemed  by  the  triune  spiritual  essences 
coming  from  the  Sun  direct  as  Will,  Wisdom,  and  Activity.  Man  is 
made  in  the  image  of  God,  and  in  Him  eternally  lives  and  moves  and 
has  his  being,  though  plunged  into  matter  and  confined  by  ‘the  circle 
of  necessity  ’ — the  Zodiac.  For  the  time  he  is  dominated  by  the  animal 
life,  which  he  draws  from  the  form  side  of  existence ; and  only  when 
ignorance  has  been  overcome  by  experience  and  his  birthright,  his  divine 
inheritance,  is  gradually  realised,  does  he  turn  and  begin  to  ‘ reverse  his 
spheres.’ 

Thus,  and  thus  only,  does  he  rule  his  stars,  i.e.,  the  planetary  in- 
fluences, which  govern  the  form  side  of  his  existence  only.  Then  the 
Christ  or  Christos  is  born  in  him,  and  the  solar  rays  vivify  and  awaken 
the  sleeping  self  that  has  been  so  long  buried  in  matter.  Thenceforward 
his  task  is  to  ‘ put  the  Moon  under  his  feet,’  to  rise  from  the  thraldom 
of  the  lower  self  and  to  be  crowned  by  the  Sun.  The  whole  story  is  that 
c 


34 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


of  the  prodigal  son,  who  after  eating  the  husks  of  personal  illusions 
returns  to  his  father,  the  individual  or  higher  self,  asking  nothing  but  to 
be  a servant ; yet  for  him  is  prepared  the  joyous  feast.  In  the  story  of 
St  George  and  the  Dragon  again  is  repeated  the  struggle  between  the 
higher  and  the  lower  self,  the  Sun  and  the  Moon,  the  Spirit  and  the  Soul ; 
the  soul  bowing  down  to  the  animal  and  inclining  to  the  pleasures  of  the 
senses,  until  regenerated  by  the  spirit  and  drawn  from  the  selfishness 
and  limitation  of  Saturn  into  the  expansive  and  compassionate  influence 
of  Jupiter. 

Thus  on  the  Form  side  there  is  the  Moon  between  Saturn  and 
Jupiter,  just  as  on  the  Life  side  is  the  Sun  between  Mars  and  Venus. 
And  between  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  is  Mercury,  the  memory  of  human 
conseiousness  freed  from  the  bondage  to  matter  or  form. 

It  is  not  the  Sun,  nor  that  which  it  represents,  the  life  and  spirit, 
which  is  coloured  by  the  sign  through  which  the  Sun’s  rays  pass,  but 
the  special  centre  in  the  body,  or  vehicle,  which  that  sign  governs.  For 
the  root  of  the  real  self,  the  individual,  while  in  manifestation  is  in  the 
Sun  itself  of  whom  it  is  s^id  ‘in  Him  we  live  and  move  and  have  our 
being.’  It  will  now  dawn  upon  the  intuitive  student  that  the  majority 
of  humanity  are  hugging  the  spokes  of  the  great  wheel,  are  identifying 
themselves  with  the  various  vehicles  through  which  they,  the  real  selves, 
are  manifesting  ; these  are,  the  physical  body  and  the  senses,  sensations, 
feelings  and  desires,  or  the  intellect  and  the  various  mental  attributes — 
in  a word,  that  which  constitutes  the  Personality,  the  impermanent, 
changing  and  fleeting  illusory  self  governed  in  the  main  by  the 
Moon. 

The  individual  character,  as  represented  by  the  Sun,  will  find  its 
line  of  least  resistance  pourtrayed  in  the  sign  through  which  the  Sun 
was  seen  at  birth.  But  if  that  ray,  with  which  the  individual  is  thus 
identified  as  the  separated  self,  is  followed  in  thought  outside  the 
influence  of  the  Zodiac  to  the  Sun,  its  pure  white  light  will  be  found  to 
be  at  the  heart  of  all  beings,  to  contain  in  essence  all  that  which  is 
differentiated  through  the  many  and  various  combinations  found  in  our 
fellow-men — or  even  in  all-  animals,  plants  and  minerals.  For  the 
starting-point  of  all  manifested  life  commences  with  the  Sun,  and  its 
ray  through  any  particular  sign  of  the  Zodiac  at  birth  permeates  the 
whole  of  the  nativity ; its  weakest  point  being  in  the  sign  which  is 
opposite  to  that  which  its  ray  passed  through  at  birth. 


THE  SUN,  LIFE-GIVER 


35 


The  life  forces  are  renewed  each  year  when  the  Sun  returns  to  the 
same  degree  as  that  which  it  held  at  birth ; the  mental  activities 
quickened  when  the  Sun  passes  the  same  degree  as  that  held  by  the 
Moon  at  birth ; and  the  ph3'^sical  conditions  and  environment  alfected 
when  the  Sun  returns  each  year  to  the  degree  occupied  by  the  ascendant 
at  bii'th.  (The  same  is  true  in  a minor  degree  of  each  day  when  the 
earth  in  her  daily  rotation  brings  these  degrees  in  the  nativity  to  the 
angles  of  the  heavens.) 

When  rising  at  birth  it  tends  to  increase  the  size  of  the  body,  giving 
strength  to  the  muscles  and  full  proportion  to  the  stature  and  the  bones. 
The  face  and  forehead  are  large ; hair  and  complexion  light  in  colour 
(these  two  last  depend  somewhat  upon  the  sign  in  which  the  Sun  is 
placed) ; ej'es  blue  or  hazel ; sight  good  (unless  the  Sun  is  afflicted).  The 
disposition  is  honourable,  upright,  serious,  of  good  judgment,  ambitious, 
desirous  of  honour  and  public  esteem,  with  a great  sense  of  dignity. 
There  is  firmness,  power  of  character  and  strength  of  will,  steadfastness, 
and  decision  of  mind.  The  native  is  fond  of  grandeur,  pomp  and  cere- 
mony ; and  if  the  Sun  is  badly  aspected  these  characteristics,  with 
ostentation  and  too  great  a sense  of  his  own  importance,  may  have 
unnecessary  prominence  in  the  character.  The  rising  position  is  also 
very  favourable  for  health,  strength,  and  longevity.  The  Sun  governs 
the  heart  chiefly,  but  also  has  relation  to  the  back,  the  eyes,  the  arteries 
and  muscles,  and  to  the  vital  force  all  over  the  body.  It  energises  that 
bodily  centre,  plexus,  or  ‘chakram,’  signified  by  the  planet  ruling  the 
sign  in  which  it  is  placed  at  birth.  It  also  has  to  do  with  that  circulation  of 
the  vital  force  which  starts  from  the  brain  and  flows  along  the  nerves  to  all 
parts  of  the  body.  The  function  of  this  force  is  to  co-ordinate  and  unify 
the  otherwise  separate  energies  and  functions  of  the  various  parts  of  the 
body,  and  at  the  same  time  stimulate  them.  When  the  vital  force  is  with- 
drawn at  death  this  power  of  co-ordination  is  lost,  and  disintegration  follows. 

When  in  the  mid-heaven,  its  influence  is  somewhat  similar  to  that 
at  sunrise  ; but  there  is  a still  greater  sense  of  dignity  and  love  of 
exercising  authority  and  power.  The  native  is  fairly  certain  to  be  a 
person  of  note  in  his  sphere  of  life,  no  tmatter  how  restricted  that 
may  be;  and  if  the  horoscope  favours  it  he  may  gain  considerable 
prominence  and  fame.  At  his  best  he  will  have  sound  judgment, 
strong  common  sense  and  a practical  character,  with  executive  and 
orgaifising  ability. 


36 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


When  setting,  the  feelings  and  emotions  seem  to  be  largely  brought 
into  play,  and  they  may  take  various  channels  according  to  the  sign; 
domestic,  devotional,  humanitarian,  social,  conjugal,  philanthropic, 
patriotic.  There  is  a going  out  towards  others ; and  this  varies 
according  to  the  degree  of  development  of  the  nature,  high  or  low.  In 
the  lowly  evolved  soul  this  may  be  little  better  than  the  outgoing 
desire  for  selfish  pleasure  in  whatever  form  obtainable.  In  the  average 
person  this  position  is  good  for  friendship,  companionship,  partnership, 
marriage,  popularity,  social  success  and  pleasure,  and  for  almost  any 
form  of  co-operation  between  the  native  and  others,  whether  in  the 
family,  in  society,  in  public,  in  churches,  associations,  brotherhoods, 
municipal  or  public  bodies,  etc.  If  the  Sun  is  much  afflicted  there  may 
be  exactly  the  same  tendencies,  but  coupled  with  bad  luck,  trouble  and 
disappointment. 

When  in  the  fourth  house,  the  effect  may  vary  a good  deal  accord- 
ing to  sign  and  aspect.  The  first  half  of  the  life  may  be  surrounded  by 
troubles  of  various  kinds  arising  out  of  family  or  health  or  circum- 
stances. Sometimes  the  parents  may  prove  uncongenial,  or  there  may 
be  death  or  separation ; sometimes  the  health  is  far  from  robust  and  the 
career  in  life  suffers  in  consequence ; and  at  other  times  persistent  bad 
luck  may  seem  to  follow  the  native,  his  plans  are  thwarted,  his  ambitions 
are  failures,  his  hopes  come  to  naught,  and  there  may  be  an  appearance 
of  frustration  and  restriction.  In  some  cases  this  position  is  accom- 
panied by  psychic  tendencies  and  experiences.  Unless  seriously  afflicted, 
the  middle  and  latter  part  of  the  life  will  be  better  than  the  earlier ; and 
there  may  be  gain,  improvement,  success  in  any  of  the  matters  just 
mentioned ; family,  health,  position,  circumstances.  When  well  aspected, 
there  is  usually  gain  through  matters  signified  by  the  fourth  house, 
through  property,  houses,  land,  possessions,  family  circumstances  or 
estate,  etc. 

Much  of  this  general  influence  seems  to  prevail  after  the  Sun  has 
passed  the  lower  meridian  and  entered  the  third  house  ; and  if  the 
horoscope  is  otherwise  accordant  it  may  still  be  detected  even  when  the 
Sun  has  reached  the  cusp  of  the  third  house.  The  general  ‘orb  of 
influence  ’ of  the  Sun  with  regard  to  the  four  angles  is  apparently  very 
much  wider  than  is  the  case  with  the  other  heavenly  bodies,  and  in 
some  cases  seems  to  extend  to  nearly  the  whole  of  the  next  (the  cadent) 
house.  Thus  the  sunrise  influence  may  be  considered  to  begin  in  the 


THE  SUN,  LIFE-GIVER 


37 


second  house,  to  be  greatest  at  the  rising  cusp,  and  to  last  well  into  the 
twelfth  house.  Then  the  noon  influence  will  begin  in  the  eleventh 
house  and  extend  well  into  the  ninth ; while  the  sunset  characteristics 
pass  from  the  eighth  to  the  sixth. 

The  Sun  represents  superiors  and  those  in  authority.  Primarily  in 
Mundane  Astrology  it  stands  for  the  monarch,  but  in  a relative  sense 
for  anyone  who  exercises  any  degree  of  power  or  authority,  no  matter 
in  what  sphere  of  life.  The  occupations  of  the  Sun  are  usually  those 
signified  by  the  sign  in  which  it  is  placed  and  its  ruler ; but  when  in 
Aries  or  Leo  they  may  be  indicated  by  the  planet  with  which  it  is  in 
closest  and  strongest  aspect ; if  in  aspect  with  more  than  one,  that 
which  is  strongest  or  most  elevated. 

In  its  deepest  sense,  the  Sun  represents  the  Will  to  Be,  the  primal 
life  and  consciousness  at  the  heart  of  all  creation.  In  the  animal  and 
the  unevolved  man,  this  manifests  as  desire,  a rushing  outward  of  the 
mind  towards  anything  that  will  give  pleasure.  In  the  higher  type  of 
man,  these  outgoing  energies  are  controlled  by  the  intellect  and  then 
become  will.  In  both  types  alike,  they  are  the  basis  of  action. 


CHAPTER  V 
The  Moon,  Mother 

In  astrological  studies  the  ^Moon’s  influence  is  equally  as  important 
as  the  Sun’s,  for  it  is  paramount  over  all  names  and  their  embodied 
forms,  which  its  influence  either  preserves  or  destroys  according  to  the 
vibrations  it  collects  and  transmits  from  the  various  planets.  From 
the  planet  Mars  the  Moon  collects  an  influence  that  tends  to  destroy  by 
violence  or  a superabundance  of  heat,  and  from  Saturn  one  that 
operates  by  a slow  and  lingering  decay,  while  from  Jupiter  it  receives 
a preserving,  nourishing,  and  sustaining  influence. 

The  Moon  is  the  great  moulder  of  form.  She  is  the  Queen 
Mother  of  the  heavens,  the  Virgin  Mary  of  the  Roman  Catholics,  and 
has  chief  rule  over  the  earth  and  the  zodiac : while  the  Sun  is  king 
over  the  solar  system  and  the  planetary  spheres. 

The  Moon  makes  all  forms  as  plastic  as  clay,  and  suspectible  to 
every  influence  that  is  collected  and  transmitted  by  it  to  the  forms  it 
governs ; hence  the  lunar  orb  is  the  most  important  factor  in  all 
things  that  are  generated,  and  its  place  at  the  ‘prenatal  epoch’ 
decides  the  ascending  or  descending  sign  at  birth. 

The  influences  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  commingle  in  the  life  and  form 
of  which  the  ascending  sign  at  the  physical  birth  is  the  manifest 
expression.  The  Sun  plays  a very  important  part  in  all  considerations 
of  heredity,  and  the  Moon  has  an  equal  share  through  its  signification  in 
connection  with  environment.  This  interchange  is  the  under.ying 
cause  of  that  which  appears  outwardly  as  the  fact  that  all  men 
are  differently  endowed  by  Nature  as  regards  inherent  mental  and 
physical  qualities,  also  that  equality  is  not  the  law  of  the  universe  in 
which  we  are  living. 

A very  important  statement  is  made  in  the  Secret  Doctrine, 
namely  that  ‘The  Sun  is  the  Giver  of  Life  to  the  whole  Planetary 
System:  the  Moon  is  the  Giver  of  life  to  our  Globe.  She  (the  Moon) 

38 


THE  MOON,  MOTHER 


39 


is  pre-eminently  the  Deity  of  the  Christians,  through  the  Mosaic  and 
Kabalistic  Jews,  in  fact  ever  since  the  last  initiated  Father  of  the 
Church  died,  carrying  with  him  to  the  grave  the  secrets  of  the  Pagan 
'Pemples.  For  such  of  the  Fathers  as  Origen  or  Clement,  the  Moon 
was  Jehovah’s  living  symbol ; The  Giver  of  Life  and  the  Giver  of 
Death,  the  Disposer  of  being — in  our  world.  As  Luna  or  Lucina  she 
presided  over  childbirth  and  life;  as  Hecate  she  was  the  goddess 
of  death  ; and  ruled  in  the  underworld  over  magic  and  enchantments  ; in 
heaven  she  was  the  chaste  Diana,  the  Queen  of  night.’ 

The  Secret  Doctrine  teaches  that  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  are  the 
parents  of  physical  man,  and  describes  how  the  lunar  influences  gave 
him  his  shadow  body,  or  the  mould  upon  which  the  physical  particles 
were  arranged,  and  the  solar  influences  the  prana  or  life-breath.  We 
are  also  told  how  the  spirits  of  the  earth  clothed  these  shadows  or 
etheric  forms. 

For  every  human  form  there  is  a supersensuous  mould,  into  which 
the  natural  forces  enter  and  clothe  it  with  flesh  and  blood  ; therefore, 
man  has  an  etheric  as  well  as  a physical  heredity.  The  physical 
parents  do  not  give  the  forms  to  their  children,  they  are  merely  links 
in  the  great  chain  of  evolution  in  the  physical  world  ; and  by  attraction 
or  magnetism,  through  affinity  or  counterparts,  they  provide  the  soil 
in  which  the  seeds  of  physical  life  are  deposited. 

So  closely  connected  with  the  physical  body  is  this  etheric  mould 
that  it  may  be  said  to  be  part  and  parcel  of  it.  This  is  why  the  ‘ pre- 
natal epoch  ’ becomes  such  an  important  consiideration  in  Esoteric 
Astrology ; and  if  its  connection  with  the  moment  of  conception  can 
be  established  a very  important  step  will  be  taken  in  the  study  of 
practical  eugenics,  sufficient  to  reveal  the  cause  of  the  disease  and 
misery  we  find  resulting  through  unfavourable  heredity  and  environ- 
ment. It  is  this  etheric  body  into  which  the  physical  is  built  by 
the  impulse  given  by  the  male  seed,  which  receives  the  prana,  or 
breath  of  life,  from  the  Sun.  . The  relationship  between  the  Sun, 
Moon,  and  Ascendant  shews  the  condition  of  health  and  the  vitality 
with  which  the  physical  body  is  endowed,  according  to  the  nature  and 
quality  of  the  sign  occupied  by  these  primary  indicators.  It  is  this 
fact,  that  the  physical  body  is  shaped  after  the  model  created  b3'  those 
who  rule  the  destinies  of  the  world,  which  enables  us  to  trace  the 
karma,  or  fate,  of  each  individual  through  the  lunar  personality. 


40 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


The  nucleus  for  this  etheric  body  is  the  permanent  atom  conveyed 
by  the  father  into  the  womb  of  the  mother.  Without  the  presence  of 
this  permanent  atom  no  ‘ quickening  ’ can  take  place,  and  no 
conception  result. 

The  materials  forming  the  dense  physical  body  built  into  the 
etheric  mould  are  almost  entirely  supplied  by  the  mother.  In 
exoteric  Astrology  the  Moon  denotes  the  mother  and  the  Sun  the 
father ; and  it  is  practically  certain  that  the  moment  of  ‘ epoch  ’ 
decides  the  moment  of  birth  ; therefore,  nothing  more  important  than 
a consideration  of  the  forces  then  at  work  can  engage  the  mind  of  the 
earnest  astrological  student. 

In  the  first  volume  of  The  Astrologers  Magazine  published  in  the 
year  1S90,  there  began  a series  of  articles  under  the  title  of  ‘The 
Horoscope,’  in  which  a new  method  for  the  rectification  of  horoscopes 
was  very  clearly  defined  and  explained  by  the  following  rules : — 

‘i.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Moon  be  increasing  in  light  and 
above  the  earth,  or  decreasing  in  light  and  below  the  earth,  then 
the  period  (between,  birth  and  conception)  is  less  than  nine  calendar 
months. 

‘ 2.  If  the  Moon  at  birth  be  increasing  in  light  and  below  the  earth, 
or  decreasing  in  light  and  above  the  earth,  then  the  period  is  more  than 
nine  calendar  months. 

‘ From  these  we  get  a mean  of  two  postulates,  i.e.,  a period  of  nine 
months  exactly,  when  the  Moon  at  birth  is  exactly  on  the  eastern  or 
western  horizon,  and  in  conjunction  or  opposition  of  the  Sun ; neither 
above  nor  below  the  earth,  and  neither  increasing  nor  decreasing  in 
light  at  the  moment  of  birth.’ 

To  prove  the  value  of  the  Sun’s  and  Moon’s  effect  upon  the  life  of 
those  born  when  the  luminaries  are  in  affliction,  astrologers  possess  a 
valuable  aphorism  handed  down  to  us  by  Claudius  Ptolemy,  who  says : 
— ‘ If  either  of  the  two  luminaries  be  in  an  angle,  and  one  of  the 
malefics  be  either  in  conjunction  with  that  luminary,  or  else  distant  in 
longitude  from  each  luminary  in  an  exactly  equal  space,  so  as  to  form  the 
point  of  junction  of  two  equal  sides  of  a triangle,  of  which  sides  the  two 
luminaries  form  the  extremities ; while  at  the  same  time  no  benefic 
planet  may  partake  in  the  configuration,  and  while  the  rulers  of  the 
luminaries  may  also  be  posited  in  places  belonging  to  the  malefics  ; the 
child  then  born  will  not  be  susceptible  of  nurture,  but  will  immediately  perish. 


THE  MOON,  MOTHER 


4 


This  aphorism  may  be  tested  by  all  scientific  men  who  care  to 
take  the  trouble  to  ascertain  the  birth-times  of  children  dying  in 
infancy.  Many  cases  are  on  record  where  this  aphorism  has  been 
tested  and  found  true ; and  owing  to  the  very  simple  statement  of  the 
aphorism  it  should  be  cited  whenever  a test  of  the  truth  of  Astrology  is 
demanded. 

From  the  esoteric  standpoint  the  truth  of  this  aphorism  becomes 
apparent  when  it  is  known  that  the  etheric  double  of  the  physical  body 
is  governed  by  the  Moon. 

In  the  ancient  nations  of  the  past  the  worship  of  the  Moon,  and  the 
knowledge  of  her  influence  upon  the  earth,  was  a part  of  their  religion, 
as  it  is  a part  of  the  Roman  Catholic  religion  in  the  worship  of  the 
Virgin  Mary.  In  Babylon  the  Moon  was  worshipped  as  the  God  Siny 
and  by  the  Jews  as  Jehovah.  All  minor  cycles  of  time  were  known  to 
be  governed  by  the  Moon,  and  we  find  ancient  authors  referring  to  the 
periods  of  the  Moon  in  various  ways : — In  the  feminine  physiological 
phenomena  recurring  every  lunar  month  of  28  da3^s,  or  4 weeks  of  7 
days.  The  quickening  of  the  foetus  is  marked  by  a period  of  126  da3"s, 
or  18  weeks  of  7 days  each.  The  period  of  ‘viability’  is  one  of  210 
days,  or  30  weeks  of  7 days  each.  The  period  of  parturition  is  accom- 
plished in  280  days  or  40  weeks  of  seven  days  each  or  10  lunar  months 
of  28  days  or  9 calendar  months  of  31  da3^s  each. 

It  has  been  said  that  no  symbol — the  sun  included — was  more 
complex  in  its  manifold  meaning  than  the  lunar  symbol,  and  yet  over 
all  she  is  the  great  symbol  of  Illusion ; for  nothing  born  under  her 
influence  endures,  but  is  constantly  changing  and  dissolving.  ‘ As  the 
wicked  evil  Spirits  warred  against  the  Moon  in  the  days  of  yore,  so 
they  are  now  supposed  to  contend  in  vain  against  the  present  Queen  of 
Heaven,  Mary — the  Moon.  Hence  also  the  Virgin,  or  Madonna, 
standing  on  the  mythical  Satan  in  the  form  of  the  Dragon,  crushed 
and  made  powerless  under  her  feet.  This  because  the  head  and  tail  of 
the  Dragon,  which  represent  in  Eastern  astronomy  to  this  day  the 
ascending  and  descending  nodes  of  the  Moon,  were  also  symbolized  in 
ancient  Greece  by  the  two  serpents  which  Hercules  kills  on  the  day  of 
his  birth,  and  so  does  the  babe  in  his  Virgin  Mother’s  arms.’  The 
symbol  of  the  Ark  as  representing  the  Moon  is  only  another  symbol  of 
the  generative  influence  of  the  Moon,  the  virgin  mother  who  gives  forms 
for  the  life  on  earth. 


42 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


In  practical  Astrolog}^  the  Moon  governs  the  cells  in  the  brain,  and 
the  cells  of  the  body  in  which  the  instinctive  consciousness  is  retained. 
It  also  presides  over  the  stomach,  the  womb,  and  impregnation.  The 
fluids  and  the  cellular  tissues  of  the  body  are  also  under  her  rulership ; 
but  her  chief  rule  is  that  of  the  Collector,  Conve3^or,  and  Distributor  of 
other  influences  connected  with  the  Zodiac. 

The  Sun,  Moon,  and  Earth  are  inseparably  connected  in  symbology  ; 
and  the  influence  of  one  luminary  upon  the  earth  cannot  be  wholly 
understood  without  reference  to  that  of  the  other.  As  time  measurers, 
as  movers  of  the  tides  of  air  and  water,  as  eclipsed  and  eclipsing,  as 
types  of  creative  gods  and  goddesses,  as  rulers  of  birth  and  death,  as 
givers  or  withholders  of  joy  and  sorrow,  as  universal  karmic  agents 
without  whose  consent  no  event  can  come  to  fruition,  they  are  ubiquitous 
and  all-powerful.  The  Sun  represents  the  condensed  heart  of  the 
nebula  out  of  which  the  solar  s^'stem  was  originally  formed  ; and  it  is 
recognised  even  by  materialistic  science  to  be  the  source  of  all  forms  of 
life  and  activity.  It  is  therefore,  in  every  religion,  rightly  taken  as  the 
symbol  of  the  supreme  God,  the  Creator  ; and  to  its  apparent  movements 
and  characteristics,  as  seen  from  our  earth,  are  adapted  nearly  all  the 
symbolical  and  legendary  lives  of  gods  and  deified  heroes  in  the  various 
theogonies.  But  if  the  greater  luminary  represents  the  creative  power 
in  the  whole  solar  S3fstem,  the  Moon  acts  as  the  more  immediate  source 
of  life  to  our  earth  ; and  occultism  explains  that  this  extremely  important 
influence  of  the  lesser  light  is  not  exclusively  due  to  its  proximit3^  to  us, 
as  might  be  supposed,  but  rather  to  another  factor  bearing  upon  the 
origin,  composition,  and  evolution  not  only  of  this  globe  but  also  of  the 
living  organisms  it  bears. 

In  most  mythologies  and  forms  of  S3'mbolism  the  Moon  has  been 
taken  to  represent  matter,  and  life  involved  in  matter.  It  stands  for 
primordial  matter,  chaos,  or  the  ‘ great  deep  ’ so  often  spoken  of  in 
legendary  accounts  of  creation,  while  the  Sun  is  the  creative  energy 
that  moulds  it.  These  two.  Sun  and  Moon,  stand  for  the  positive  and 
negative,  force  and  matter,  life  and  form,  aspects  of  manifestation  on 
every  plane  of  existence.  In  accordance  with  this  the  Moon  has  gener- 
ally been  taken  as  feminine,  and  with  it  are  associated,  more  or  less 
directly,  nearly  every  goddess  of  the  religions,  theogonies  and  mythologies 
from  the  most  ancient  times  down  to  the  present  day.  Occasionally, 
wdien  taken  not  as  the  mere  passive  transmitter  of  solar  light  and 


THE  MOON,  MOTHER  43 

influence,  but  as  a cause  in  itself,  it  has  been  spoken  of  asViale,  or  as 
androgyne,  or  even  as  being  a triple  power  in  itself ; and  the  ‘ Man  in 
the  Moon,’  once  a good  deal  more  than  a man,  has  now  become  the 
hero  of  a nursery  tale.  To  the  e3^e  of  modern  science  these  fables  and 
myths  seem  the  credulous  stories  and  imaginings  of  humanity  in  its 
unintelligent  infancy,  and  all  are  alike  dismissed  to  the  limbo  of 
exploded  superstitions.  But  the  astrologer,  who  can  test  for  himself 
the  subtle  and  universal  influence  exercised  by  the  ‘ Queen  of  the 
Night’ every  hour  of  the  twenty-four  upon  every  man,  woman  and 
child  alive,  and  who  has  at  his  disposal  facts  as  valid  as  any  in  the 
whole  history  of  science,  can  go  a step  further  and  recognise  the 
harmony  of  his  own  experience  with  the  principles  enunciated  by  occult 
science  on  the  one  hand,  or  hoary  tradition  on  the  other. 

According  to  the  ingenious  speculations  of  modern  astronomy  the 
Moon  is  simply  a splash  thrown  off  from  the  earth  by  the  force  of  axial 
rotation  when  both  were  in  a molten  condition.  At  first  very  close  to  our 
globe,  it  has  gradually  receded,  we  are  told,  to  its  present  distance ; and, 
being  small  in  size,  has  cooled  much  more  rapidly  than  its  parent.  Oc- 
cultists, while  admitting  that  the  two  were  once  much  closer  together 
than  at  present,  deny  the  accuracy  of  this  hypothesis  of  the  origin  of  our 
satellite ; and  although  affirming  the  importance  of  much  of  the  nebular 
hypothesis,  maintain  that  it  requires  supplementing  in  a multitude  of 
details.  Scientific  speculations  of  this  sort  invariably  proceed  upon  the 
assumption  that  the  solar  system  has  reached  its  present  condition 
through  the  operation  of  the  known  laws  of  matter  and  force,  uninter- 
fered with  by  any  intelligence  more  important  than  man’s.  It  is  just 
here  that  occultism  parts  company  with  such  speculations  and  assump- 
tions by  teaching  the  existence  of  a universal  Life,  permeating  every 
atom  of  matter,  and  thus  giving  to  it  its  known  properties ; a universal 
Mind,  omniscient  within  the  solar  system,  originating  and  controlling 
every  form  of  manifestation,  spiritual  and  mateidal  alike  ; and  a vast 
host  of  agencies  of  all  grades  and  degrees,  who  carry  out  intelligently 
the  ideas  pre-existent  in  the  universal  Mind.  Without  going  into 
unnecessary  detail  it  will  be  evident,  as  soon  as  the  differences  between 
these  two  positions  are  realised,  that,  without  denying  the  validity  of  the 
scientific  attitude  as  a whole,  there  is  room  for  a multitude  of  modifica- 
tions of  the  general  hypothesis;  modifications  due  to  the  intelligent 
interference  of  the  agencies  just  referred  to,  and  to  the  existence  in 


44 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


matter  of  properties  and  potencies  not  yet  discovered  by  ordinary 
science. 

The  account  given  by  the  occultist  is  that  the  Moon  was  in  existence 
before  our  earth,  and  that  for  long  ages  it  pursued  its  course  round  the 
Sun  as  the  field  of  evolution  for  living  beings.  When  its  period  of 
activity  began  to  come  to  an  end,  a great  planetary  Intelligence,  sent 
forth  by  the  mighty  Being  represented  by  the  Sun,  gathered  together  a 
nebula,  directed  its  course,  superintended  its  condensation  into  our 
earth,  and,  with  a vast  army  of  subordinate  workers,  still  presides  over 
its  destiny.  The  air  and  water  on  the  surface  of  the  Moon  were 
volatilised  and  brought  over  to  the  new  globe,  and  with  them  a good 
deal  of  once  solid  matter  as  well.  The  living  beings  who  had  finished 
their  evolution — (so  far  as  it  was  possible  to  finish  it,  that  is) — on  the 
Moon,  were  also  handed  on  to  its  terrene  successor  when  the  time  was 
ripe,  to  continue  their  growth  in  an  environment  offering  much  more 
extended  possibilities.  Our  earth,  then,  has  gained  its  atmosphere,  its 
oceans,  and  all  its  surface  matter  by  inheritance,  so  to  speak,  from  its 
lunar  parent.  The  air  we  breathe,  the  water  we  drink,  and  the  matter 
that  forms  our  Dodies,  are  really  from  the  Moon  ; and  we  ourselves,  the 
spiritual  nomads,  are  now  continuing  here  the  evolution,  an  earlier  stage 
of  which,  amid  very  different  surroundings,  took  place  upon  that  cold 
and  mysterious  satellite  of  ours. 

Of  the  many  beings  who  thus  came  over  from  the  Moon,  only 
a very  few  had  reached  the  definitely  human  stage.  The  first  ‘men,’  if 
such  they  can  be  called,  upon  this  earth  were  from  among  the  com- 
paratively unevolved  of  the  lunar  inhabitants,  and  had  bodies  constructed 
of  ether  only.  Being  without  solid,  liquid  or  gas,  they  could  live  upon 
this  globe  when  it  was  still  at  a temperature  such  as  would  have  made 
life  as  we  know  it  to-day  an  impossibility.  Between  that  long  past 
date  and  this,  ‘ mother  earth  ’ has  provided  us  with  dense  physical  bodies 
without ; while,  as  the  result  of  manifold  incarnations,  we  have  developed 
intellect  within ; having  been  greatly  assisted,  however,  in  this  latter 
process  by  the  fostering  care  of  those  ‘Lords  of  the  Flame’  to  whom 
reference  will  be  made  in  the  chapter  on  Venus. 

It  is  evident  that  we  have  here  the  elements,  at  any  rate,  of  a much 
fuller  explanation  of  the  controlling  influence  of  the  Moon  upon  every- 
thing terrestrial  than  that  furnished  by  a mere  reference  to  the  proximity 
of  the  two  heavenly  bodies  and  their  mutual  attraction  by  gravitation. 


THE  MOON,  MOTHER 


45 


The  belief  in  the  triple  power  of  the  Moon  is  so  far  justified  that 
the  astrologer  can  detect  its  influence  over  birth,  over  the  pre- 
servation of  life,  and  over  death.  Conception,  the  feminine  functions, 
and  child-birth,  may  be  said  to  be,  astrologically,  almost  wholly  depen- 
dent upon  the  Moon  and  the  references  to  these  facts  in  the  myths  of 
various  countries,  ancient  and  modern,  are  innumerable.  Diana,  the 
Moon-goddess,  was  sometimes  called  three  formed^  and  was  held  to 
be  Selene  (Luna)  in  the  sky,  Diana  (Artemis)  on  earth,  and  Proserpine 
(Persephone)  in  the  world  of  the  dead.  She  presided  over  child-birth, 
but  was  herself  vowed  to  virginity.  The  crescent  Moon  was  connected 
with  her,  as  it  also  was  with  the  Chaldean  Astarte  and  the  Egyptian 
Isis.  The  Hindu  myth  of  the  Moon  being  the  parent  of  Mercury  will  be 
referred  to  in  the  chapter  on  Jupiter.  The  Moon  represents  water,  the 
sea,  mare  in  Latin,  and  this  becomes  the  names  Mary  and  Maia  or 
Maya.  Mary  as  the  mother  of  Jesus  ; Maia  as  the  mother  of  Buddha  ; 
Maia  as  the  mother  of  Hermes  (Mercury) ; Soma  (the  Moon)  as  the 
mother  of  Budha  (Mercury) ; all  these  are  allegorical  statements  of 
the  same  truth,  which  can  be  applied  in  more  ways  than  one. 
Intellectual  humanity  is  the  child  of  lunar  humanit3'.  Wisdom  is  the 
result  of  illusory  life  in  matter.  Initiation  follows  the  awakening  of 
psychic  faculty. 

It  is  affirmed  that  the  astrological  conditions  under  which  concep- 
tion can  and  cannot  take  place  were  well-known  to  ancient  astrologers, 
but  that  the  utilisation  of  such  knowledge  was  considered  black  magic. 
This  knowledge  appears  to  be  lost  at  the  present  day,  or  only  vaguely 
guessed  at ; and  it  is  open  to  doubt  whether  it  is  desirable  that  it  should 
be  rediscovered.  When  once  conception  has  taken  place,  the  manner 
in  which  the  Moon’s  motion  regulates  the  development  of  the  embryo, 
differentiates  the  sex,  and  limits  the  possibilities  of  birth,  is  illustrated 
in  the  theory  of  the  pre-natal  epoch.  That  theory  cannot  be  dwelt  upon 
here,  and  is  not  accepted  by  all  astrologers ; but  even  those  who  reject 
it  in  its  present  form  admit  that  lunar  regulative  action  certainly  exists 
in  some  form.  The  period  of  gestation,  in  the  higher  animals  as  well  as 
in  man,  is  measured  in  weeks,  and  a week  is  a quarter  of  the  Moon’s 
period.  It  seems  that  a double  current  of  energy  passes  between  the 
earth  and  its  satellite  ; one  flowing  in  towards  the  earth,  promoting 
fertility  and  growth  of  all  kinds,  in  animal  and  vegetable  as  well  as  in 
man ; and  another  returning  from  the  earth  to  the  Moon,  comparable 


46 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


with  negative  magnetism  and  venous  blood,  and  apparently  deprivative, 
disintegrative,  and  vampirising  in  its  action.  The  mother  provides  the 
embryo  with  the  purely  ph3'^sical  particles  necessary  for  its  upbuilding, 
but  the  psychic  or  astral  influence  that  flows  in  upon  her  originates 
outside  her,  proceeding  from  the  astral  body  of  the  incoming  soul  ; and 
this,  as  well  as  the  normal  ph3'siological  process  of  growth,  appears  to 
be  regulated  by  the  Moon.  The  influence  of  the  mother’s  mind  upon 
the  unborn  child  is  well  known  ; but  the  opposite  side  of  the  case,  the 
effect  of  the  incoming  soul  upon  the  mother,  is  less  well  recognised. 
Peculiarities  of  temper,  fancy  or  disposition  in  the  mother  at  such  a 
period  may  in  reality  proceed  from  the  child.  For  instance  a soul  that 
is  bringing  with  it  into  ph3fsical  life  an  irritable  disposition  may  be  the 
cause  of  irritability  in  the  mother.  An  inspection  of  the  two  horoscopes 
would  show  this  i and  any  very  special  disturbance  would  be.  indicated 
by -the  progressive  changes  oj  the  heavenly  bodies  in  gen^ral^  and  the 
Moon  in  particular,  between  the  horoscopes  of  conception  and  birth. 

With  the  Moon  is  connected  the  old  divisions  of  the  zodiac  into 
twenty-eight  parts,  the  so-called  ‘ Mansions  of  the  Moon.’  The  period 
of  the  Moon’s  revolution  round  the  earth  is  nearly  twent3^-eight  days 
(27.3)  which,  when  divided  into  quarters,  gives  four  of  about  seven  days 
each.  When  this  method  of  sub-division  is  applied  to  the  zodiac,  it 
gives  twent3'^-eight  equal  parts  of  12®°  each,  starting  from  To°.  To 
these  ‘ mansions  ’ a distinct  influence  was  attributed  by  some  of  the 
old  astrologers,  although  the  available  records  are  extremely  vague  and 
of  little  value  ; and  the  subject  is  almost  ignored  by  astrologers  of  to-day. 
This  is  one  of  the  many  points  of  astrological  practice  that  requires 
further  investigation.  In  recent  years  this  same  mode  of  dividing  the 
zodiac  has  been  claimed  as  underlying  that  basic  polarity  which 
differentiates  sex  in  the  embryo. 

As  stated  in  the  previous  volume  of  this  series,  the  trinity  of  Sun, 
Moon,  and  Earth  can  be  applied  in  a variety  of  ways,  both  symbolically 
and  practically  in  the  horoscope.  Probably  the  highest  of  these  applica- 
tions from  the  symbolic  standpoint  is  that  in  which  the  Sun  represents 
the  universal  Self,  Atma,  all-pervading,  omnipresent ; the  Moon,  the 
mysterious  spirit  of  wisdom,  Buddhi  ; and  the  earth,  the  individualised 
human  soul,  Manas.  These  are  then  reflected  downwards  and  reappear 
in  a much  lower  mode  as  : Sun,  the  vital  force  ; Moon,  animal  instinct ; 
Earth  (ascendant),  the  brain  mind.  Each  of  these  latter  applications 


THE  MOON,  MOTHER 


47 


will  vary  somewhat  according  as  to  whether  the  application  is  intended  to 
the  physical  body  pure  and  simple  or  to  the  three  lower  human  principles. 
Another  and  perhaps  more  interesting  correspondence  still  is  that  in 
which  the  Sun  represents  the  individuality,  the  permanent  soul,  whose 
evolution  the  long  series  of  births  and  deaths  is  intended  to  subserve. 
The  Moon  then  stands  for  the  personality,  which  is  a ray  from  the 
individuality  sent  out  from  it  for  the  purpose  of  gathering  experience  and 
playing  a definite  pre-determined  part  during  one  life  of  physical  incar- 
nation. Only  a few  scattered  observations  on  this  subject  have  been 
made  by  the  one  or  two  practical  occultists  who  are  alone  competent  to 
make  them  ; and  much  further  experiertce  is  therefore  required  ; but  so 
far  as  is  known  this  correspondence  appears  to  be  genuine  and  reliable. 
In  each  case  it  is  the  zodiacal  sign  indicated  that  seems  to  be  the  impor- 
tant factor;  that  is  to  say,  the  individuality  id  not  represented  so  much 
by  the  Sun  itself  as  by  the  sign  in  which  the  Sun  is  situated  at  the 
person’s  birth  ; and  similarly  with  the  Moon  and  Ascendant.  So  far  as 
we  know,  no  information  is  available  as  yet  concerning  the  relations 
these  three  bodies  occupy  to  each  other  in  a series  of  incarnations ; but 
seeing  that  the  soul  grows,  evolves,  />.,  changes,  there  is  evidently  no 
need  for  them  or  for  the  planets  to  occupy  the  same  position  at  the 
successive  births  of  the  same  soul. 

Although  this  correspondence  of  Sun,  Moon,  and  Ascendant  to  the 
threefold  incarnate  man  cannot  be  fully  tested  except  by  the  very  few 
persons  who  have  developed  a high  degree  of  clairvoyance,  yet  their 
outer  effects  can  be  observed  and  recorded  by  any  careful  student  of 
Astrology.  That  the  personality  in  general — including  more  especially 
under  this  term  the  feelings,  passions,  instincts,  emotions — high  and 
low,  good  and  bad — varies  according  to  the  position  of  the  Moon  at 
birth  is  simply  a matter  of  ordinary  observation.  Generally  speaking, 
tlie  zodiacal  sign  in  which  the  lunar  orb  is  posited  will  declare  the  innate 
characteristics  of  this  department  of  the  nature.  These  are  to  be  judged 
partly  according  to  the  sign  itself ; its  quality  (fixed,  mutable,  or  cardinal), 
its  elemental  nature  (fire,  air,  water,  earth),  its  planetary  ruler  ; and 
partly  according  to  the  Moon’s  aspects.  For  instance,  when  the  Moon 
is  placed  in  a Saturnian  sign,  the  personality  will  be  largely  coloured  by 
Saturn’s  influence,  and  this  may  be  either  good,  bad  or  mixed,  according 
to  circumstances  : among  the  good  influences  being  steadfastness,  self- 
control,  sobriety  of  conduct,  gravit}^  thoughtfulness,  patience,  etc.,  and 


48 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


among  the  bad  ones  despondency,  hardness,  worldliness,  selfishness, 
lack  of  humanity,  lack  of  courage,  enterprise  and  candour,  etc.  And  with 
other  planetary  signs  other  effects  will  follow,  according  to  the  known 
nature  of  the  signs.  By  careful  observation,  slight  variations  may  be 
detected  according  to  the  Moon’s  progress  through  the  signs  by  secondary 
direction  after  birth  For  instance,  when  entering  the  Martial  signs  there 
will  be  some  little  tendency  for  the  good  or  bad  characteristics  of  Mars 
to  be  manifested ; among  the  good  ones  being  courage,  enterprise,  self- 
reliance,  generosity,  activity,  practical  ability,  etc.,  and  among  the  bad, 
rashness,  ill-temper,  pride,  hastiness,  tendency  to  disputation  and  con- 
tradiction, lack  of  restraint,  etc. ; and  these  qualities  will  sometimes  play 
an  important  part  in  bringing  about  the  various  events,  lucky  and 
unlucky,  that  happen  during  these  periods.  In  fact,  the  Moon  is  con- 
tinually pouring  in  upon  the  earth  an  influence  that  constantly  varies 
according  to  its  distance  from  the  Sun  (as  measured  in  the  zodiac), 
according  to  the  sign  it  occupies,  and  according  to  the  planets  it 
aspects. 

These  facts  have  an  interesting  bearing  upon  the  doctrine  of  the 
evolution  of  the  soul,  in  its  application  to  astrological  symbology. 
Science  teaches  that  during  the  intra-uterine  life  the  human  embryo 
passes  through  states  of  development  characteristic  of  all  the  sub-human 
kingdoms,  cellular,  vegetative,  and  animal ; and  the  theory  of  evolution 
explains  that  it  is  because  man  has  actually  evolved  through  all  these 
kingdoms  in  the  past,  and  that  embryonic  development  rapidly  runs 
them  through  and  sums  them  up.  Science  and  occultism  both  agree 
upon  this  as  a broad  and  general  principle.  Let  us  therefore  examine 
its  application  to  Astrology.  If  we  avoid  exceptional  cases  and  take  an 
average  it  may  be  stated  that,  supposing  conception  (human)  to  occur 
when  the  Sun  is  just  entering  Aries,  the  child  will  be  born  when  the  Sun 
is  about  entering  Capricorn.  During  the  period  signified  by  the  first 
nine  signs  the  Sun  has  been  pouring  out  its  influence,  and  the  embryo 
has  been  slowly  built  up  in  accordance  with  it;  but  none  of  that  which 
is  signified  by  the  passage  of  the  Sun  through  Capricorn,  Aquarius,  and 
Pisces  is  represented  in  the  child.  If  we  then  apply  the  principle  just 
stated  it  is  evident  that  the  past  evolutionary  career  of  the  soul  is  sym- 
bolised in  the  solar  passage  from  Aries  to  Sagittarius  ; that  the  individual 
qualities  now  being  evolved  are  represented  by  the  Sun’s  position  at 
birth  ; and  that  the  three  remaining  signs  necessary  to  complete  the 


THE  MOON,  MOTHER 


49 


circle  represent  either  (i)  powers  lacking  in  the  soul,  which  this  incarna- 
tion is  intended  to  assist  in  developing,  or  (2)  the  karma  of  the  past 
coming  to  fruition  during  the  present,  and  symbolised  by  the  Sun’s 
progression  by  secondary  motion  after  birth,  or  (3)  some  special  work 
for  the  accomplishment  of  which  the  incarnation  was  undertaken. 
While  the  Sun  has  passed  through  three  quarters  of  the  zodiac  the  Moon 
will  have  travelled  round  the  whole  circle  about  ten  times,  but  no  luna- 
tion will  have  fallen  in  the  three  signs  untraversed  by  the  Sun,  The 
ascendant  will  have  swept  round  the  circle  about  280  times,  but  not 
once  will  the  Sun  have  risen  in  the  three  uncompleted  signs.  The 
present  condition  of  the  soul  will  be  represented  by  the  solar  position  at 
birth  ; its  past  by  the  motion  of  the  Sun  before  birth  ; and  its  future  by 
the  same  motion  continued  afterwards. 

The  Moon’s  influence  varies  so  greatly,  according  to  the  sign  in 
which  it  is  located  at  birth  and  the  planet  with  which  it  is  in  closest 
aspect,  that  it  is  not  a very  easy  task  to  give  a definite  account  of  it 
apart  from  sign  and  aspect.  It  is  usually  considered  moderately  cold 
and  moist,  and  to  be  feminine,  negative,  receptive,  plastic,  magnetic, 
fruitful,  and  changeable.  It  gives  a middle  to  full  stature,  round  face, 
fair  or  pale  complexion,  grey  e3^es,  rounded  contours,  a tendency  to 
plumpness  or  stoutness,  or  if  not  stout,  more  fleshy  than  bony.  It 
governs  the  stomach,  digestion,  absorption,  nutrition ; and  has  more  or 
less  influence  over  nearly  all  the  soft  parts  of  the  body,  glands  and  their 
secretions,  lymph,  fat,  the  breasts,  the  womb,  bladder,  the  feminine 
functions,  and  child-bearing.'  The  Sun  and  Moon  together  are  stated 
to  rule  the  eyes  and  sight ; and  when  these  afflict  each  other  or  are 
afflicted  by  malefics,  especially  by  Mars,  the  sight  is  liable  to  suffer ; 
but  there  seems  to  be  most  danger  when  the  luminaries  are  in  fixed  signs 
or  are  afflicted  from  angles.  The  Moon  is  also  found  to  influence  the 
brain  and  nerves ; but  it  probably  has  closer  relation  with  the  sym- 
pathetic system  than  with  the  cerebro-spinal,  and  in  the  latter  with 
the  cerebellum  more  than  the  cerebrum.  When  the  Moon  and 
Mercury  are  both  seriously  afflicted  by  malefics  and  receive  no  good 
aspects  from  the  benefics,  the  Sun,  or  the  cusp  of  the  ascendant, 
there  is  danger  of  mental  instability,  or  even  madness  or  idiocy.  The 
waxing  Moon  relates  more  to  the  arteries,  motor  nerves,  and  muscles ; 


' For  further  details  see  Manual  IX,  Medical  Astrology  {price  is.,  post  free). 
D 


5° 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


the  waning  Moon  to  the  veins,  sensory  nerves,  sense  organs,  and 
glands. 

The  influence  of  the  Moon  over  health  was  given  in  the  previous 
volume  of  this  series  {How  to  Judge  a Nativity,  Part  /,),  and  cannot  be 
repeated  here  in  detail.  When  seriously  afflicted  the  part  of  the  body 
governed  by  sign  or  house  is  liable  to  suffer  from  either  disease  or  injur}'. 
Its  good  aspects  are  considered  particularly  desirable  during  infancy  and 
the  early  years  of  childhood. 

The  occupations  and  pursuits  governed  are  those  connected  with 
the  water  and  liquids  generally,  and  with  travelling ; such  as  sailors, 
fishermen,  brewers,  publicans,  wine  merchants,  fishmongers,  owners  of 
vessels,  whether  of  pleasure  or  profit ; travellers,  commercial  or  other- 
wise, by  land  or  water.  It  also  stands  for  the  common  people  in  general, 
as  contrasted  with  the  Sun,  which  represents  the  upper  classes  and 
those  in  authority ; but  when  strong  and  dignified,  or  when  supported 
by  the  Sun  or  in  Leo,  it  may  signify  women  of  high  rank  or  in  some 
kind  of  authority.  It  stands  for  women  in  general,  and  for  nurses, 
midwives,  female  servants.  In  any  horoscope  of  birth  it  signifies  female 
relatives  in  general  and  the  mother  in  particular.  When  angular, 
especially  if  in  moveable  signs,  it  favours  travelling,  changes  of  residence, 
and  changes  of  all  kinds,  fortunate  or  otherwise,  according  to  aspect. 
Its  influence  upon  money  and  property  depends  upon  aspect.  It  is 
very  fortunate  when  in  good  aspect  to  planets  in  the  second  and  tenth, 
and  to  a less  degree  in  the  fourth  and  eighth.  Bad  aspects  to  these 
positions  are  apt  to  result  in  trouble  or  loss.  The  Moon’s  evil  aspects, 
generally  speaking,  are  liable  to  cause  reversal,  overthrow,  instability, 
unpopularity,  discredit  or  downfall ; this  applies  chiefly  to  oppositions 
and  squares,  but  may  take  place  in  some  degree  even  if  the  aspected 
planets  are  benefics  ; the  matters  involved  will,  of  course,  vary  according 
to  the  planet  and  house. 

The  Moon  has  also  a great  influence  over  such  matters  as  spiritualism, 
mediumship,  dreaming,  and  physical  investigations  and  experiences 
generally ; and  therefore  to  the  list  of  the  occupations  must  be  added 
those  arising  out  of  these  affairs ; mediums,  mesmeric  subjects,  crystal 
gazers,  untrained  seers  of  various  kinds,  etc.  This  applies  chiefly 
when  the  Moon  is  in  good  aspect  to  Neptune  or  Uranus : and  if 
Jupiter  assists  by  good  aspect,  and  one  of  these  bodies  is  in  the 
ninth  or  third  house,  considerable  success  may  result.  The  good 


THE  MOON,  MOTHER  51 

aspects  of  the  lunar  orb  to  Uranus  often  give  a strong  inclination  for 
Astrology. 

The  influence  of  the  Moon  over  the  feelings,  according  to  its  position 
by  sign,  has  already  been  referred  to.  Everything  outside  the  realm  of 
intellect,  from  the  lowest  animal  instinct  up  to  the  higher  emotion,  is 
very  largely  swayed  by  the  Moon.  The  older  and  more  highly  evolved 
the  soul,  the  weaker  will  be  this  influence,  and  the  more  will  it  be  under 
the  control  of  the  will ; and  vice  versa,  the  younger  the  soul  from  the 
evolutionary  point  of  view,  the  more  is  it  the  slave  of  lunar  attraction 
and  the  less  is  it  able  to  resist  passions  and  appetites  rushing  upon  it 
from  without  or  surging  up  from  within.  This  question  of  the  degree  of 
evolutionary  status  gained  by  the  soul  and  innate  at  birth  is  by  no  means 
easy  to  read  in  the  horoscope,  and  yet  very  important  issues  obviously 
hang  upon  it ; in  fact  the  whole  question  of  personal  morality  is  here 
involved.  Broadly  speaking,  young  souls  and  those  who  are  very  un- 
evenly developed  in  some  department  of  human  nature  seem  to  have 
many  bad  aspects,  especially  from  malefics,  the  planets  not  dignified, 
and  the  benefics  neither  prominent  nor  strong  ; while  the  older  and 
more  highly  evolved  souls  tend  to  reverse  these  conditions.  The 
question  is  complicated  by  the  fact  that  most  souls  evolve  very  unevenly, 
are  strong  in  one  respect  and  weak  in  another ; highly  advanced, 
perhaps,  in  intellect  but  deficient  in  morality,  or  vice  versa.  This  must 
be  largely  left  to  intuition  to  decide,  for  it  is  a subject  that  seems  to  have 
been  left  out  of  account  hitherto  by  astrologers,  and  no  adequate  rules 
are  on  record  to  enable  the  student  to  decide  it.  The  degree  of  afflic- 
tion in  the  horoscope  of  birth  is  not  always  sufficient  to  solve  the 
problem,  although  it  usually  indicates  imperfection  of  some  sort. 

The  sway  of  the  Moon  over  the  feelings  is  illustrated  by  its  import- 
ance in  questions  of  marriage  in  a male  horoscope.  The  planet  to 
which  the  luminary  first  applies  is  held  to  indicate  the  type  ofiperson  to 
which  the  native  will  be  attracted;  but  it  is  doubtful  if  this  rule  is 
adequately  stated  in  the  books.  The  planet  in  question  is  rather  the  one 
in  closest  association  with  the  Moon  by  aspect  and  by  dignity  in  the 
lunar  sign.  If  the  Moon  indicates  the  feelings,  the  planet  in  question 
will  show  which  subdivision  of  the  feelings  is  most  active  and  is  therefore 
most  likely  to  come  to  the  fore  in  the  question  of  matrimony ; but  the 
planet  most  strongly  affecting  the  Moon  in  this  way  is  not  always  that 
to  which  it  first  applies.  This  influence  over  the  feelings  can  be  traced 


52 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


quite  as  unmistakably  in  women  as  in  men,  but  is  not  held  to  have  the 
same  importance  in  marriage.  A woman  lives  more  in  the  feelings 
than  does  a man  ; and  with  her  it  is  the  solar  half  of  the  nature  that  is 
awakened  in  matrimony  as  a rule.  The  motives  for  marriage,  however, 
vary  with  both  sexes  ; and  it  is  open  to  doubt  whether  the  old  rule  of  the 
Sun  for  the  husband  and  the  Moon  for  the  wife  applies  in  all  cases  quite 
so  rigidly  as  is  sometimes  supposed.  The  planet  in  closest  association 
with  the  luminary  does  not  necessarily  indicate  the  ascendant  of  the 
marriage  partner ; in  some  cases  it  merely  points  out  the  strongest  planet 
in  the  partner’s  horoscope,  irrespective  of  the  ascendant ; in  others  it 
indicates  the  planet  ruling  the  sign  occupied  by  the  luminary  in  the 
partner’s  horoscope. 

Considered  by  itself,  the  Moon  gives  an  easy-going  nature,  sociable, 
domesticated,  changeable,  and  good-natured ; but  sign  and  aspect  make 
such  a great  difference  that  these  qualities  may  undergo  considerable 
modification. 

In  relation  to  the  intellect,  the  Moon  signifies  imagination  and 
intuition  rather  than  logical  reasoning  ; but  when  in  an}'^  strong  aspect 
to  Mercury  or  Uranus,  it  may  considerably  increase  the  intellectual 
power  of  those  planets  and  give  an  active,  resourceful,  and  fertile  mind. 
Its  imaginative  and  aesthetic  side  comes  out  when  in  aspect  to  Jupiter, 
Venus,  or  Neptune,  but  the  assistance  of  Mercury  or  Uranus,  or  both,  is 
necessar3'-  to  raise  this  to  genius. 


CHAPTER  VI 


Mercury,  The  Thinker 

Mercury  ‘the  winged  Messenger  of  the  Gods,’  is  the  expressor,  the 
mirror  of  all  the  planets.  All  who  study  Astrology  for  any  length  of 
time  sooner  or  later  become  aware  of  the  fact  that  the  planet  which 
represents  the  conscious  human  being  more  directly  than  any  other,  and 
which  most  effectually  acts  as  an  agent  or  interpreter  of  the  influence  of 
other  planets  is  Mercury. 

It  is  truly  said  that  each  planet  plays  its  part  in  forming  and  influ- 
encing the  mind,  but  it  is  the  planet  Mercury  which  governs  the  abstract 
mind,  or  the  mind  in  its  totality.  Probably  the  best  definition  of 
Mercury’s  vibration  would  be  that  it  was  lord  over  the  rational  mind  or 
mental  body,  and  in  that  respect  signified  the  memory  oi  each  individual.* 
It  is  distinctly  the  ‘ spiritually-human  ’ portion  of  the  ego,  the  Messenger 
of  the  Gods  to  man,  whose  wings  carry  him  from  earth  to  heaven.  If 
we  think  of  man  as  possessing  a soul  having  three  phases,  or  aspects, 
i.e.,  animal,  human,  and  spiritual.  Mercury  will  represent  that  phase 
which  is  neither  animal  nor  spiritual,  but  distinctively  spiritual-human. 

Apart  from  all  considerations  of  good,  bad,  or  indifferent.  Mercury 
connected  with  Saturn  causes  the  mind  to  become  crystallised,  solid, 
concrete  and  material,  thus  rendering  it  matter-of-fact  and  practical  or 
grave  and  studious.  Allied  with  Jupiter  it  becomes  more  expansive  and 
philosophical,  inclining  the  mind  to  reflection,  either  moral,  ethical  or 
religious  in  its  nature.  In  the  same  manner,  if  allied  to  Venus  the  mind 
is  artistic,  cheerful  and  refined,  while  if  connected  with  Mars  energetic, 
smart,  self-assertive  and  impulsive. 

It  would  seem  that  whatever  planet  Mercury  is  joined  to  by  aspect 
is  interpreted  in  its  true  character  by  conforming  the  mind  to  its  own 
nature  ; and  for  this  reason  it  is  said  that  Mercury  is  a ‘ convertible  ’ 

' The  individual  or  permanent  memory  is  meant,  not  the  personal,  which  is 
governed  by  the  Moon. 


54 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


planet,  being  affected  according  as  it  is  aspected  by,  or  placed  in  relation 
to,  any  other  planet.  It  is  in  Mercury  that  sex  distinctions  are  usually 
lost,  for  on  the  plane  of  pure  mind  sex  disappears. 

When  freed  from  all  contact  with  other  planets,  and  the  Ego  is  able 
to  use  its  influence  without  being  led  captive  thereby.  Mercury  represents 
The  Thinker. 

Meditation  upon  the  ‘ Caduceus,’  which  forms  the  true  symbol  of 
Mercury,  will  reveal  many  of  the  mysteries  connected  with  this  planet. 
The  two  serpents  twisted  round  the  rod  denote  the  ‘ life  ’ and  ‘ form  ’ side 
of  the  ego’s  expression,  the  rod  in  the  centre  symbolising  the  one  eternal 
changeless  Self. 

A considerable  portion  of  the  correct  judgment  of  a nativity  is 
derived  from  a study  of  Mercury,  its  position,  aspects,  and  progress,  the 
tendency  of  the  mind  being  easily  seen  from  the  sign  which  _Merc^ury 
occupies  at  birth. 

Thoughts  are  things.  As  Mercury  forms  the  mind,  by  acting  as  a 
mirror  of  all  images  to  be  reflected,  so  the  Ego  is  absorbed  by  or 
identifies  itself  with  the  form,  taking  the  image  unto  itself,  so  to  speak. 
But,  of  itself.  Mercury  is  only  the  representation  of  that  which  thinks, 
and  so  for  the  time  of  the  one  earth  life  Mercury  is  The  Thinker, 
transforming  the  essence  of  all  thought  into  memory. 

Mercury  is  therefore  God’s  instrument,  the  word  of  God  or  a ra3'  of 
the  Sun.  By  thought,  speech  and  action  it  either  builds  forms  or  breaks 
and  dissolves  them,  for  it  is  the  power  of  the  three  in  one.  In  conjunc- 
tion with  each  planet  Mercury  has  a special  mission  to  perform ; also 
when  in  any  aspect  to  any  planet. 

If  connected  in  any  manner  with  the  planet  Saturn  it  makes  all 
things  corporeal,  substantial  and  practical,  inclining  those  born  under 
this  influence  to  science  and  all  work  requiring  concentrated  thought  and 
careful  anal^^sis.  It  is  the  most  tangible  and  permanent  vibration  that 
Mercur3^  can  express,  but  it  acts  according  to  the  nature  of  the 
aspect. 

The  Conjunction  is  the  most  potent;  for  in  this  case  thought  and 
action  become  one,  whether  for  good  or  ill,  there  being  concentration 
and  much  power  of  continuity  displa3^ed, — modified,  however,  in  its 
expression  by  the  sign  through  which  it  is  manifesting. 

The  Adverse  Aspects  cause  grave  anxiety,  worry  and  a constant 
disturbance  of  the  mind,  which  is  graduall3'  consolidated  by  sorrow, 


MERCURY,  THE  THINKER 


55 

^rief,  and  continuous  limitations  of  action  which  cause  the  mind  to 
ponder  over  the  restrictions  and  obstacles  it  meets. 

The  Benefic  Aspects  refine  and  chasten  the  mind  through  harmonious 
thought  and  action,  causing  a philosophical  attitude  which  tends  to 
depth  and  sincerity,  faithfulness  and  truth.  The  Opposition  is  as 
powerful  as  the  Conjunction,  but  thought  becomes  liberated  by  dis- 
appointments, failures,  and  errors  of  judgment  caused  by  fear,  lack  of 
initiative,  and  procrastination. 

The  planet  Mercury,  as  analogous  to  quicksilver,  largely  used  as 
is  w’ell-known  for  extracting  gold  (the  Sun,  ©)  from  its  ores,  opens  up 
a wide  field  of  new  thought  in  connection  with  its  influence  in  every 
nativity.  A simple  laboratorj^  experiment  will  very  well  convey  its 
nature,  as  illustrating  at  once  its  powers  of  perception  and  reflection, 
and  also  its  function  of  memory,  both  personal  and  individual.  If  a little 
quicksilver  be  rubbed  in  a mortar  or  basin  with  a little  prepared  chalk 
it  will  soon  be  found  to  run  into  small  globules  which  will  not  again 
coalesce ; indeed,  this  process  can  be  carried  on  till  it  is  so  finely 
divided  and  so  intimately  mixed  with  the  chalk  as  to  present  a smooth 
bluey-grey  appearance,  being  apparently  one  uniform  substance  in 
a powdery  form.  It  has,  in  fact,  become  the  familar  ‘grey  powder’ 
of  the  chemist.  In  this  state  it  corresponds  to  the  separated  memories 
of  countless  earth-lives,  incarnations : the  chalk  symbolising  the 
material  conditions  of  those  lives.  If  now  a little  diluted  nitric 
acid  be  added  there  will  be  a brisk  effervescence,  and  after  the  reaction 
has  subsided  the  chalk  will  be  found  to  have  vanished,  while  the 
quicksilver  is  found  again  as  one  bright  shining  globule  at  the  bottom 
of  the  basin.  This  corresponds  to  the  synthesised  memory  of  many 
lives  which  is  one  day  attained,  and  which  constitutes  experience, 
being  represented  in  the  horoscope  by  Jupiter — Wisdom.  Suppose  the 
chalk  in  the  above  experiment  had  contained  many  particles  of  various 
metals,  gold,  tin,  silver,  copper,  etc.,  it  will  easily  be  seen  that  only 
those  tiny  globules  which  came  into  contact  with  them  could  amalgamate 
therewith  : but  since  all  of  these  particles  are  capable  of  being  absorbed 
by  mercury,  then,  on  the  solution  of  the  chalk  by  the  acid  (typifying  the 
dissolution  of  the  material  universe)  the  remaining  globule  of  mercury 
would  contain  the  whole  of  the  various  metals  (experience)  extracted. 
And  by  distilling  off  the  mercur}^  these  could  be  regained  as  a pure  alloy 
(transcendental  wisdom). 


56 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


Little  wonder,  then,  that  Nebo  or  Mercury  was  worshipped  as  the 
greatest  of  all  the  lesser  gods,  being  the  divine  Messenger  of  the  Sun, 
chief  of  all  Gods,  the  God  of  the  Solar  System  (and  also  ruler  over  all 
lesser  systems). 

When  Mercury  is  influenced  by  Mars  the  separative  principle  is 
the  stronger,  and  the  mind  has  no  adhesiveness  or  attachment ; for  the 
fire  of  Mars  burns  in  the  mind  and  makes  it  a tormenting  fire  in 
which  desire  is  ever  leading  it  captive,  a slave  to  passion  and  anger. 
For  Mars  is  ‘ the  wrath  of  God,’  the  separative  and  destroying  element, 
the  counterfeit  of  the  spirit,  which  must  - either  be  transmuted  into 
Venus  or  otherwise  can  only  be  destroyed  by  dissipation : it  is  the 
elemental  of  the  astral  plane,  the  Hell  in  which  the  mind 'is  consumed 
until  all  dross  is  burnt  out  and  the  soul  or  ‘Manas’  is  set  free  to  fly 
heavenward. 

Mercury  in  conjunction  with  Venus  shows  the  heaven-born  mind, 
which  is  the  artistic,  refined  and  pure  love  desire.  Tliis  is  the  only 
aspect  or  position  of  Mercury  * which  leaves  it  absolutely  free  to  rise 
into  the  heaven  world — the  Deva-kingdom,  the  land  of  the  Shining 
Ones. 

Mercury  is  the  Christ  between  the  two  thieves  on  the  cross,  Saturn 
and  Mars ; only  one  of  which  can  enter  into  Paradise  with  his  lord. 
Mercury  is  the  principal  planet  to  study  in  every  nativity ; for  it  is  the 
ruler  of  the  abstract  mind,  the  highest  part  of  human  existence  during 
its  pilgrimage  through  the  ‘circle  of  twelve.’  It  is  that  which  in 
conjunction  with  Saturn  incarnates  afresh  at  every  new  birth,  retaining 
the  cream  of  memory  as  a memento  of  each  earth  life ; and  therefore  no 
time  or  labour  can  be  considered  wasted  that  is  spent  in  the  study  of  all 
that  this  planet  denotes  in  each  nativity. 

In  its  highest  expression  Mercury  is  in  the  planet  of  the  adept,  the 
man  for  whom  earth  lives  are  numbered,  and  who  is  within  measureable 
distance  of  final  release  from  physical  matter.  In  the  youngest  as  well 
as  in  the  oldest  ego  it  denotes  the  powers  of  adaptability  possessed.  The 
adept  can  adapt  himself  to  all  environments  and  to  every  phase  of 
existence,  and  in  this  fact  lies  the  secret  as  to  the  growth  of  every  ego 
and  its  stage  in  evolution.  Some  can  only  adapt  themselves  to  physical 
environments,  though  these  may  be  of  all  grades,  from  coarse  to  fine. 
Others  can  extend  beyond  this  to  emotional  conditions  of  all  kinds. 
But  only  a few  at  our  present  stage  of  evolution  can  adapt  themselves 


MERCURY,  THE  THINKER 


57 


to  mental  states  of  consciousness,  enabling  them  to  understand  every 
type  of  mind  and  to  respond  to  all  the  numerous  and  various  mental 
vibrations  which  come  from  the  Manasic  Plane.  These  are  the  souls 
who  are  preparing  to  become  adepts  by  controlling  their  minds,  realising 
that  the  mind,  is  only  an  instrument  for  the  .soul’s  use ; or,  in  other 
words,  that  Mercury  is  but  the  Word  of  God,  which  is  to  be  made 
manifest  in  the  flesh — the  divine  Messenger,  the  Prometheus,  who 
stole  the  fire  from  heaven  that  it  might  become  a living  flame  on  earth. 

If  a clue  is  wanted  to  the  essential  nature  of  the  planet  Mercury, 
regarded  from  a psychological  standpoint,  it  is  apparently  supplied  by 
the  word  Knowledge.  It  is  therefore  necessary  that  there  shall  be  a clear 
understanding  of  what  this  word  means;  of  the' mode  of  operation  of 
the  mind  when  ‘ knowing  ’ anything  ; and  how  the  knowledge  aspect  of 
consciousness  is  evolved. 

It  must  be  borne  in  mind  that  this  word  is  used  here  in  a broad  and 
comprehensive  sense,  as  covering  all  operations  of  the  mind  that  are 
included  under  such  terms  as  ‘ reason,’  ‘intelligence,’  ‘understanding,’ 
‘intellect,’ ‘wisdom.’ 

The  simplest  act  of  consciousness  in  any  entity  is  the  inward  re- 
sponse to  a stimulus  from  without.  This  may  be  regarded  as  the 
fundamental  unit  of  consciousness,  and  out  of  it  all  mental  processes 
whatever  are  built  or  evolved.  In  itself  it  is  neither  intellect,  feeling, 
nor  will,  although  it  carries  all  three  as  potential  within  it.  There  is 
the  passage  of  the  shock  from  the  surface  to  the  centre  ; the  response 
at  the  centre  ; and  the  passage  outward  of  a wave  or  vibration  reversing 
the  first.  The  unit  of  consciousness  is  one,  but  these  three  elements 
are  inevitably  implied  in  it,  although  not  separated  as  such  in 
consciousness. 

When -accompanied  by  a sense  of  either  pleasure  or  pain,  no  matter 
in  how  rudimentary  a degree,  it  forms  the  germ  of  what  in  man  become 
feelings,  emotions,  passions,  etc.  The  consciousness  registers  each  of 
these  feelings,  and  their  reproduction  from  within,  in  the  absence  of  the 
exciting  stimulus  without,  constitutes  memory. 

When  the  entity  is  so  far  evolved  as  to  be  capable  of  noting  a rela- 
tion between  any  two  acts  of  consciousness,  whether  simultaneous  or 
successive,  the  foundation  is  laid  for  what  in  man  becomes  intellect, 
knowledge,  understanding,  etc.  This  consciousness  of  relation  may,  of 
course,  also  be  reproduced  from  within  as  memory. 


58 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


A creature  eats  a piece  of  food,  and  experiences  pleasure  in  doing 
so ; this  is  consciousness  as  feeling  or  sensation.  The  memory  of  this 
pleasure  causes  a craving  for  its  repetition ; which  is  desire.  After  a 
sufficient  number  of  repetitions,  the  creature  arrives  at  the  stage  of 
knowing  that  a certain  object  gives  pleasure  when  tasted.  If  we  suppose 
that  the  object  is  recognised  by  the  sense  of  sight,  this  act  of  ‘ knowing  ’ 
means  that  a relation  has  been  established  between  two  distinct  acts  of 
consciousness,  which  in  this  case  are  seeing  and  tasting ; and  that  the 
relation  is  so  definitely  fixed  that  when  the  act  of  seeing  takes  place  the 
memory  of  past  pleasures  in  tasting  is  immediately  revived.  The  know- 
ledge consists  not  in  the  sight  alone  nor  in  the  taste  alone  but  in  the 
bringing  of  the  two  into  relation  with  each  other  in  consciousness  ; in 
the  recognition  of  the  fact  that  the  thing  seen  is  followed  by  an  agree- 
able taste. 

A concrete  object  is  ‘ known  ’ when  the  evidence  furnished  to  the 
consciousness  by  the  various  senses  is  held  together  as  one  whole  in  the 
mind,  so  that  the  presentation  of  one  portion  recalls  the  rest ; as  when 
the  smell  of  an  orange  suggests  its  shape,  colour  and  taste,  to  one  who 
has  previously  seen  and  eaten  oranges. 

The  degree  of  knowledge  obviously  varies  with  the  amount  of 
previous  experience  that  has  been  stored  in  the  mind.  For  instance, 
when  an  astronomer  ‘ knows  ’ a star,  his  consciousness  reproduces  a 
highly  complex  group  of  past  experiences.  A child  may  also  ‘ know  ’ a 
star  when  he  sees  one,  but  this  knowledge  implies  the  reproduction  of  a 
very  much  smaller  group.  The  difference,  however,  is  only  one  of 
degree  and  not  of  kind. 

Abstract  knowledge  implies  that  an  enormous  number  of  units  of 
consciousness  have  been  united  into  one  whole,  consisting  first  of  small 
groups  and  then  groups  of  groups,  and  that  these  groups  are  contem- 
plated in  the  mind  apart  from  the  separate  acts  of  consciousness  out  of 
which  they  were  originally  built.  For  instance,  the  law  ‘that  the 
radius  vector  of  a planet  revolving  round  the  Sun  sweeps  over  equal 
areas  in  equal  times,’  implies  the  presence  in  the  mind  of  such  ideas  as 
velocit}^  weight,  momentum,  mass,  area,  etc.  ; each  one  of  these  in  its 
turn  is  built  of  a number  of  smaller  groups;  and  the  whole  could, 
theoretically  at  least,  be  resolved  into  a vast  number  of  separate  units 
of  consciousness. 

All  human  knowledge,  concrete  or  abstract,  is  built  up  in  this  way. 


MERCURY,  THE  THINKER  59 

and  the  action  of  the  mind  in  so  building  it  may  apparently  be  divided 
into  three  stages  : Perception,  Discrimination,  and  Unification. 

Roughly  speaking,  the  first  of  these  three  is  observation  or  Percep- 
tion. The  perceptive  faculties  are  active.  The  mind  goes  out  readily 
to  the  world  and  gains  rapid  and  accurate  impressions  of  the  appear- 
ances of  things.  The  mind  is  active  through  the  senses.  This  is 
prominent  in  natives  of  ‘ cardinal  ’ signs,  and  of  cardinal  air,  Libra  (— ) 
in  particular. 

Discrimination^  the  second  of  the  three,  takes  place  within  the  mind 
itself,  and  implies  that  perception  has  previously  been  active  and  has 
stored  the  mind  with  images  of  things.  These  are  then  compared, 
arranged,  classified,  grouped.  The  unlike  are  separated,  the  like  are 
united,  groups  of  ideas  are  formed,  underlying  laws  are  recognised,  first 
principles  are  understood.  Analysis  and  synthesis  both  go  on  side  by 
side  here,  for  the  two  are  opposite  sides  of  the  same  mental  action,  and 
neither  can  exist  without  the  other,  though  one  may  be  more  or  less 
latent  as  regards  manifestation.  Recognition  of  differences  separates 
objects  and  groups  of  objects  from  each  other ; recognition  of  similarities 
builds  up  groups  and  classes  of  groups  in  the  mind ; and  both  these 
processes  are  necessary  to  the  establishment  of  basic  laws  and  principles. 
This  is  the  work  of  ‘mutable  ’ signs  in  general  and  of  mutable  air  or 
Gemini  ( n ) in  particular.  It  may  exist  in  all  degrees,  superficial  or 
profound. 

The  third  of  the  three,  here  called  Unification.,  is  that  mysterious 
background  of  consciousness  in  which  are  blended  in  one  all  past  think- 
ings, the  memori^  of  the  soul,  to  be  brought  forth  again  as  innate  wisdom 
or  genius.  This  is  part  of  the  work  of  ‘ fixed  ’ signs,  and,  in  its  mental 
aspect,  of  fixed  air,  Aquarius  (iss). 

The  second  of  these  three  seems  to  be  more  particularly  the  region 
of  Mercury.  This  planet  can  associate  itself  with  any  influence,  whether 
mental,  emotional,  or  practical ; but  if  an  effort  is  made  to  define  its 
characteristics  when  alone  and  not  combined  with  any  other  heavenly 
body,  this  is  apparently  the  class  into  which  it  falls.  Thought,  know- 
ledge, understanding,  discrimination,  are  its  mode  of  operation.  To  use 
technical  terms,  it  belongs  to  the  Buddhic  or  pure  reason  sub-division  of 
Manas  ; or  at  least  this  is  its  highest  function  in  the  humanit}"^  of  to-da}’', 
although  it  would  seem  to  follow  of  necessity  that  an  even  higher  mode 
will  exist  when  the  purel}^  intellectual  stage  of  evolution  has  been 


6o 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


passed.  To  speculate  about  that  higher  mode  is  difficult ; but  if  we 
assume  that  the  mind  in  Its  evolution  is  first  stored  with  facts  of  the 
outer  world,  experiences,  and  afterwards  with  all-embracing  laws  founded 
on  these  facts,  in  all  departments  of  being,  a time  will  come  when  the 
outward  presentation  of  any  fact  is  immediately  answered,  fully  and 
completely,  by  the  inward  response  of  the  soul.  The  outer  appeal  and 
the  inner  reply  are  identical,  and  the  result  is  perfect  sympathy, 
absolute  harmony,  infallible  wisdom. 

When  this  high  level  of  evolution  has  been  attained,  knowledge  and 
love  have  become  one,  and  are  no  longer  separated  or  contradictory  as 
at  present.  Knowledge  or  Mercury,  and  love  or  Venus,  both  alike 
imply  duality.  There  can  be  no  knowledge  without  the  existence  of 
both  Knower  and  Known ; there  can  be  no  love  without  the  existence-of 
both  lover  and  loved.  When  the  two  become  one,  nothing  remains  that  we 
can  recognise  as  either  knowledge  or  love.  Both  these  have  their  origin 
when  unity  produces  duality-in-unity,  symbolised  by  the  conjunction 
of  Mercury  and  Venus.  In  the  language  of  mysticism,  the  Absolute 
gives  birth  to  Father-Mother,  the  two-in-one  ; knowledge,  symbolised 
by  man,  and  love,  symbolised  by  woman,  diverging  from  a common  root. 

If  a search  is  made  through  the  literature  of  mysticism,  it  will  be 
found  that  among  practically  all  schools.  Mercury,  Hermes,  Buddha, 
whatever  name  is  used,  stands  for  the  adept.  Why  is  this  ? Because 
this  is  the  planet  and  god  of  knowledge  in  the  fullest  and  highest  sense 
of  the  word.  To  take  an  illustration.  The  ordinary  man  of  to-day,  when 
not  too  sceptical,  believes  in  a life  after  death,  but  has,  for  the  most 
part,  at  any  rate,  to  take  it  on  trust ; he  cannot  prove  it.  In  what 
respect  does  the  adept  differ  from  him  ? In  this,  that  he  knows.  He  is 
as  fully  and  completely  acquainted  with  the  life  after  death  as  he  is  with 
that  of  this  world.  He  has  visited  and  explored  both,  and  holds  the 
facts  of  both  in  his  memory,  not  as  the  result  of  hearsay  or  of  book- 
learning, but  of  personal  first-hand  experience  and  knowledge.  The 
one  believes,  the  other  knows.  This  is  the  gift  of  Mercury. 

The  symbol  both  of  the  god  and  of  the  planet  is  the  Caduceus,  a 
winged  rod  round  which  two  serpents  are  twined  in  such  a way  as  to 
present  nodes  and  internodes.  This  has  a very  profound  significance, 
which  varies,  however,  according  to  the  method  of  application.  It  repre- 
sents the  spirally-moving  creative  energy  both  in  man  and  the  universe. 
Cosmically  this  takes  its  origin  when  primal  unity  is  differentiated  into 


MERCURY,  THE  THINKER 


6i 

duality,  positive  and  negative,  with  a current  of  energ3'^  flowing  between 
them;  and,  as  has  been  shown,  it  is  just  this  state  of  inter-related 
duality  that  is  signified  by  Mercury.  The  same  energy  is  said  to  be 
aroused  in  man  in  the  course  of  evolution  and  also  by  occult  training  ; 
it  is  represented  as  being  practically  all-powerful  and  therefore  ex- 
tremely dangerous  in  the  hands  of  the  unfit.  Herbert  Spencer  has 
shown  that  all  motion  is  rhythmical,  and  Sir  William  Crookes  has  proved 
that  the  evolution  of  the  chemical  elements  from  one  primordial  substance 
can  be  accounted  for  by  a spiral  movement  of  condensation  round  a 
central  axis  : exactly  that  which  is  represented  symbolically  by  the 
Caduceus.  Hindu  mystic  literature  contains  frequent  references  to  two 
curren  ts,  positive  and  negative,  of  vital  force  in  the  human  bod}',  repre- 
sented as  circulating  on  each  side  of  a central  and  neutral  third  connected 
with  the  spinal  cord,  controlling  the  vitality  of  the  whole  bod}',  and 
themselves  capable  of  control  by  the  mind. 

In  the  horoscope,  Mercury  stands  for  intelligence  in  all  shades  and 
degrees  of  development,  from  the  merest  superficiality  and  cunning  up  to 
the  sublimest  genius.  It  also  represents  the  influence  of  the  mind  upon 
the  body  in  health  and  disease ; and  its  position  and  aspects  can  often 
be  shown  to  influence  disease.  It- has  to  do  with  all  circumstances 
relating  to  the  acquisition  and  diffusion  of  knowledge,  in  small  things  as 
well  as  in  great.  Its  duality  and  relationing  are  shown  in  its  rulership 
over  those  matters  classed  under  the  third  house  and  Gemini.  Inasmuch 
as  it  represents  that  intelligence  without  which  human  co-operation  and 
civilised  life  are  impossible,  there  is  scarcely  a business,  occupation,  or  pro- 
fession, high  or  low,  in  which  it  is  not  a factor  of  more  or  less  importance. 

Probably  the  most  unique  characteristic  of  Mercury  is  its  power  of 
combining  with  the  other  planets,  and  taking  upon  itself  many  of  their 
qualities,  while  at  the  same  time  not  losing  its  own.  In  aspect  to  the 
Sun  it  will  gain  in  comprehensiveness  and  dignity  ; to  the  Moon,  fertility 
and  intuition  ; to  Venus,  social  and  emotional  qualities  ; to  Mars,  energy, 
ardour,  and  a lively  wit ; to  Jupiter,  soundness  of  judgment  and  breadth 
of  human  sympathy;  to  Saturn,  depth,  sobriety,  and  will;  to  Uranus, 
intensification  of  intellectual  power  and  activity,  with  inclination  to 
matters  characteristic  of  that  planet;  and  to  Neptune,  receptivity,  and 
adaptability  in  matters  of  feeling. 

This  power  of  combination  is  of  course  thoroughly  characteristic  of 
intellect,  which  is  represented  by  Mercury.  As  previously  shown,  its 


62 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


lowliest  and  most  primitive  form  is  the  combination  of  two  simple  acts 
of  consciousness,  the  bringing  of  them  into  relation  with  one  another 
and  comparing  them.  The  evolution  of  intellect  in  its  further  stages  con- 
sists in  acquiring  greater  power  of  combination  between  separate  mental 
acts,  greater  storage  of  mental  experiences,  and  the  ability  to  reproduce 
by  either  deliberate  or  instinctive  memory  any  combination  the  moment 
it  is  required.  To  do  this,  the  mind  has  to  be  stored  with  the  result  of 
doings  and  feelings  as  well  as  with  abstract  thinking.  It  must  have  noted 
past  acts  and  their  results,  and  must  be  able  to  adapt  the  body  instantlj^ 
to  any  combination  in  the  environment  likely  to  call  for  similar  acts.  It 
must  have  observed  feelings,  sensations,  emotions,  passions,  the  causes 
that  originated  them,  and  the  results,  favourable  or  adverse,  by  which 
they  were  followed ; and  must  have  within  itself  soundness  of  judgment 
to  separate  the  beneficial  and  desirable  from  those  which  are  the  reverse. 
In  short,  the  mind  holds  the  balance  between  feelings  and  acts,  and 
must  be  able  to  combine  with  and  respond  to  all  varieties  of  these. 

The  simplest  classification  of  the  nervous  system  is  into  sensory 
nerves,  brain,  and  motor  nerves.  The  sensory  nerves,  which  convey 
sensations  inward  to  the  mind,  correspond,  to  Cardinal,  signs  and  their 
associated  planets.  The  motor,  which  convey  acts  of  will  outward, 
resulting  in  contractions  of  muscles  and  movements  of  organs,  cprrespp.nd 
tp  the  Fixed  signs  and  associated  planets,  while  The  Mind  at  .the  centre 
holds  the  balance  between  the  two,  co-ordinates  the  two,  is  in  touch 
with  both,  corresponding  to  Mutable  signs.  This  is  the  oriental  division 
into  Gnyanendriyas,  or  centres  for  receiving  sensation ; Karmendriyas, 
or  organs  of  action  ; and  the  balancing  intelligence  at  the  centre  within. 

If  these  three  are  brought  into  relation  with  the  three  divisions  or 
stages  of  mental  action  given  a few  pages  back,  we  have  the  following 
table  of  correspondences  suggested. 


Cardinal 
Perception 
Sensory  Nerves 

Gnyanendriyas 
Rajasic  Manas 
Manas 
or 

Creative  Mind 


Mutable 

Discrimination 

Brain 

Intelligence 
Sattvic  Manas 
Buddhi 
or 

Pure  Reason 


Fixed 

Will 

Motor  Nerves 

Karmendriyas 
Tamasic  Manas 
Atm  A 
or 

Abstract  Spirit 


MERCURY,  THE  THINKER 


63 


This  power  of  combination  shown  by  the  planet  has  a parallel  in 
the  metal  associated  with  it  alchemically ; for  mercury  or  quicksilver 
unites  with  other  metals  to  form  a series  of  combinations  called 
amalgams  which  are  quite  characteristic  of  it.  An  illustration  of  this 
has  already  been  given. 

In  its  application  to  the  horoscope,  and  as  representing  intelligence. 
Mercury  varies  its  influences  according  to  the  planetary  ruler  of  the 
sign  in  which  it  is  situated  ; in  this  respect  resembling  the  two  luminaries. 
Its  nature  is  active  and  changeable.  It  governs  the  brain  and  nervous 
system,  in  common  with  the  Moon ; and  through  the  nerves  it  influ- 
ences that  part  of  the  body  signified  by  the  sign  in  which  it  is  placed, 
and  the  planetary  ruler  thereof.  It  relates  to  the  tongue  and  the  hands 
as  agents  for  the  expression  of  the  mind. 

Among  those  following  occupations  ruled  by  Mercury  ma3'^  be 
mentioned  speakers  and  writers  of  all  kinds,  such  as  lawyers,  preachers, 
public  speakers,  clerks,  accountants,  authors ; students  and  teachers  of 
all  degrees,  high  and  low ; those  engaged  in  the  diffusion  of  know- 
ledge, such  as  reporters,  editors,  telegraphists,  secretaries,  messengers, 
travellers,  booksellers. 

When  angular,  especially  if  in  the  first,  seventh  or  tenth  houses,  it 
gives  ability  for  public  speaking.  In  reality  it  has  a bearing  upon  such 
a great  variety  of  occupations  and  pursuits  that  it  can  never  be  taken 
alone  but  always  in  connection  with  the  sign  in  which  it  is  placed  and 
the  planet  with  which  it  is  in  closest  aspect.  Mercury  is  subordinate  to 
the  Sun,  just  as  the  mind  is  an  instrument  of  the  will ; and  unless 
otherwise  indicated,  it  seldom  signifies  superiors,  authorities,  heads, 
those  who  are  supreme ; but  generally  a person  who,  however  many 
he  may  have  under  him,  is  himself  controlled,  nominally  at  least,  by  a 
superior  or  a partner. 

When  rising  it  gives  a moderately  tall  and  slender  stature,  long  or 
oval  face,  full  forehead,  long  nose,  brown  or  black  hair,  thin  beard, 
hands  long  and  mobile;  but  these  may  all  vary  according  to  sign 
and  aspect.  The  mind  is  active  and  often  the  body  as  well.  The  intel- 
ligence is  well  developed  and  the  mental  ability  good,  and  there  is  the 
capacity  to  receive  an  education  to  almost  any  extent,  if  circumstances 
should  be  favourable.  When  angular  there  is  often  considerable  ability 
for  languages.  The  native  is  inventive,  ingenious,  argumentative,  of  lively 
wit,  learning  things  easily,  imaginative,  fond  of  novelty,  and  changeable. 


64 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


It  is  generally  known  that  there  are  many  types  of  mind.  Just  as 
the  sign-position  of  the  Moon  is  a clue  to  the  particular  type  of  feelings 
and  emotions  innate  in  each  personality,  so  that  of  Memii^  indicates 
the  type  of  intelligence,  intellect,  reason.  In  each  case  the  type  is 
inborn,  and  shows  out  more  or  less  clearly  throughout  the  whole  of  life 
from  the  earliest  years  to  the  latest.  Education,  training,  the  influences 
of  family  life,  of  business,  and  of  the  world,  may  each  and  all  have  much 
effect  in  refining  or  coarsening,  widening  or  narrowing,  the  mind ; for 
within  each  class  there  are  many  grades,  high  and  low  ; but  the  type 
itself  does  not  alter.  For  instance,  if  the  innate  quality  of  the  mind  is 
represented  by,  say,  a combination  of  Mercury  with  Saturn,  this  will 
give  the  general  colouring  for  the  whole  of  the  life.  No  training,  no 
effort  of  the  will,  no  amount  of  experience,  no  ‘ conversion  ’ will  change 
one  type  into  another.  All  that  these  can  do  is  to  effect  modifications, 
to  produce  sub-types,  by  bringing  the  influence,  good  or  bad,  of  other 
planets  to  bear  upon  that  which  is  indicated  by  the  radical  combination. 
Careful  observation  and  experience  will  fully  corroborate  this  statement. 

In  the  descriptions  given  of  Mercury’s  positition  and  aspects, 
in  The  Key  to  Your  Own  Nativity,  an  attempt  has  been  made 
to  summarise  these  types  briefly ; but  there  are  certain  principles 
to  be  borne  in  mind  in  applying  them  practically.  In  the  first  place, 
it  is  not  always  easy  to  separate  the  type  of  intellect  from  that  of  the 
feelings.  In  some  persons  one  of  these  may  be  very  much  stronger  than 
the  other,  the  intellect  than  the  feelings  or  vice  versa ; and  then  the 
stronger  so  overpowers  and  sweeps  aside  the  weaker  as  to  render 
difficult  the  task  of  identifying  it.  Actions  springing  from  the  one  are 
attributed  to  the  other,  and  the  basic  lines  of  character  are  misunder- 
stood. Again,  in  some  directions  the  two  maj^  blend  very  closely ; and 
in  art,  music,  poetry,  the  drama,  some  kinds  of  authorship,  oratory,  etc., 
feeling  and  intellect  are  almost  equally  essential  if  success  is  to  be  attained. 

As  previously  stated.  Mercury  can  and  does  combine  with  any  of  the 
planets ; but  for  purposes  of  classification  it  is  best  to  follow  the  type 
indicated  by  the  ruler  of  the  sign  in  which  Mercury  is  placed  at  birth, 
according  to  the  ancient  scheme  of  lords  of  signs  handed  down  by 
Ptolemy.  This  gives  what  may  be  called  the  basic  type,  but  as  a 
matter  of  course  it  is  seldom  found  alone.  The  planet  with  which 
Mercury  is  in  closest  and  strongest  aspect  at  birth  is  very  important, 
and  in  some  cases  its  influence  may  become  as  strong  as  that  of  the  lord 


MERCURY,  THE  THINKER 


65 


of  the  sign.  For  instance,  if  Mercury  is  in  conjunction  with  Venus  in 
Capricorn,  the  Saturnian  influence  of  the  sign  will  give  gravity  and 
thoughtfulness,  while  Venus  will  impart  those  social  instincts  that 
are  often  foreign  to  Saturn.  The  result  of  such  complex  blends  of 
influences  must  be  decided  by  judgment  and  experience. 

There  are  obviously  many  varieties  of  each  type,  superficial 
and  profound,  and  many  combinations  ; and  each  may  vary  somewhat 
according  to  the  degree  of  education  and  refinement  of  the  native.  The 
good  or  bad  luck  attending  each  is  a matter  for  separate  consideration 
under  the  head  of  aspects. 


E 


CHAPTER  VII 


Venus,  the  Unifier 

Venus  is  the  planet  of  refined  taste.  It  is  the  planet  governing  the 
soul,  as  apart  from  or  opposed  to  the  senses.  Mars  being  the  represen- 
tative of  the  animal  soul  in  man  and  Venus  of  the  human  soul,  Mercury 
the  ‘ winged  messenger  of  the  gods  ’ flies  between  the  two  as  ‘ Memory  ’ 
and  is  thus  the  spiritual  human  soul. 

Venus  cannot  act  directly  upon  the  physical  plane  until  the  reign  of 
Mars  is  over  and  the  passions  have  changed  their  blood-red  hue  to  the 
pure  crimson  of  purified  emotion,  which  finally  fades  into  that  delicate 
rose-pink  which  is  the  colour  of  the  highest  emotion  of  the  spiritual 
Nature. 

We  thus  see  why  Venus  is  ‘benefic’and  Mars  ‘malefic,’  the  one 
having  affinity  with  earth  only  and  the  other  with  heaven.  Yet  they 
are  but  the  two  poles,  as  it  were,  of  the  one  Great  Centre  of  Bliss ; 
Mars  working  through  form  and  finding  its  expression  only  through 
form  in  ‘existence,’  and  Venus  finding  expression  through  life  as 
‘ being.’ 

All  things  that  are  sweet  and  pleasant  come  under  the  rule  of  Venus, 
and  all  gifts  that  come  without  effort  or  labour  flow  from  the  influence 
of  this  planet ; for  it  represents,  so  to  speak,  the  cream  of  past  affections 
and  the  best  attractions,  and  brings  the  fruition  of  past  strivings.  It 
governs  all  things  that  are  lovely,  ideal  and  excellent,  and  causes  those 
charming  and  lovable  dispositions  which  please  without  any  effort  to 
do  so.  Everything  that  is  complete,  symmetrical,  harmonious,  graceful 
and  beautiful  belongs  to  the  domain  of  Venus,  as  the  fruit  of  each 
personal  effort  in  the  past  to  gain  perfection. 

The  refinement  and  delicacy  of  the  elysian  planet  is  the  outcome  of 
that  which  began  in  sensibility  and  sentiment,  being  formed  by  the 
nourishing  and  preserving  and  sustaining  power  which  has  its  genesis 
in  that  immortal  spark  or  divine  fragment  which  Venus  watches  over 


VENUS,  THE  UNIFIER 


67 


and  protects  throughout  ‘the  long  pilgrimage  of  the  soul,’— from  its 
birth  in  time,  ages  ago,  to  its  final  self-conscious  realisation  of  its  living 
unity  with  the  One  Supreme  Being.  From  start  to  finish  il__§.hows 
forth  all  the  latent  harmlessness  and  true  innocence  which  is  the  per- 
manent  possession  of  every  soul,  for  its  essence  is  harmony  and  perfect 
bliss. 

Venus  is  the  Aphrodite  of  the  Greeks  ; also  called  Lucifer  when  a 
morning  star,  and  Hesperus  when  an  evening  star ; and  represented 
under  various  names  in  various  mythologies.  Shukra  and  Ushanas  in 
Hindu  astrological  writings  ; Lakshmi,  Freya,  Astarte,  etc.  The  Greek 
myth  runs  that  when  Saturn  mutilated  his  father  Uranus,  Venus  sprang 
up  out  of  the  foam  {aphros)  of  the  sea  into  which  the  mutilated  part  had 
been  thrown.  In  India  Lakshmi  was  the  wife  of  Vishnu  and  was  born 
of  the  churning  of  the  ocean  by  the  gods.  By  the  Greeks  Venus  was 
often  stjded  Uranian;  but  other  parentages  were  sometimes  ascribed 
to  her;  thus  Homer  gives  her  Jupiter  as  a father,  and  Empedocles 
gives  Saturn.  Although  generally  referred  to  as  female,  Venus  was 
not  always  so ; thus  Ushanas,  the  guru  (instructor)  of  the  Daityas,  or 
giants,  was  a male  deity ; and  statues  of  the  bearded  Venus  have  been 
found. 

Astrologically,  the  planet  is  looked  upon  as  a benefic,  in  this  respect 
being  second  only  to  Jupiter  ; it  is  temperately  mild  and  moist.  Exoteri- 
cally  it  is  regarded  as  the  planet  of  the  love  emotion,  marriage,  friend- 
ship, pleasure,  etc.  ; but  esoterically  and  occultly  a remarkable  and 
unique  position  is  given  to  it  in  human  evolution,  a position  which  has 
by  no  means  as  yet  been  fully  explained,  or  reconciled  with  the  charac- 
teristics exoterically  attributed  to  it.  It  was  under  the  influence  of 
highly  evolved  Beings  from  the  planet  Venus  that  humanity,  long  ages 
ago,  first  developed  intellectual  self-consciousness ; that  is,  passed  from 
the  ‘superior  animal’  to  the  ‘definitely  human’  stage.  Evolution  on 
Venus  is  stated  to  be  enormously  further  advanced  than  on  this  earth  ; 
and  the  influence  of  the  Beings  who  came  here  was  of  a fostering  and 
nurturing  nature,  and  greatly  hastened  human  evolution.  To  this  day 
the  evolutionary  passage  of  the  soul  or  ‘ monad  ’ from  the  animal  to  the 
human  stage  takes  place  under  the  influence  of  unselfish  love  and  devo- 
tion. This  descent  of  the  ‘Lords  of  the  Flame,’  as  the  Beings  who 
came  from  Venus  are  called,  is  what  is  referred  to  under  the  story  of 
Ushanas  teaching  the  giants,  or  primitive  humanity'.  And  the  Greek 


68 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


m3'th  of  Venus  being  born  from  the  sea  indicates  the  evolution  of  the 
human  soul  out  of  the  astral  ‘ sea  ’ or  passional  animal  nature.  Saturn, 
the  mutilator,  stands  for  the  separative  influence  acting  on  the  mental 
plane;  Uranus,  the  mutilated,  is  perhaps  the  super-conscious  soul; 
Venus  is  the  resultant  human  soul. 

Zodiacall^^  Libra  represents  this  human  soul,  considered  apart  from 
incarnation  ; and  in  Taurus  we  seem  to  have  the  rebellious  giants,  or  the 
same  soul  in  incarnation.  It  is  symbolically  stated  that  formerly  there 
were  only  ten  signs  of  the  zodiac,  Libra  being  absent  and  Virgo-Scorpio 
being  one.  This  is  only  another  way  of  describing  the  same  evolution 
of  the  soul.  Virgo-Scorpio  stands  for  the  undifferentiated  non-humanised 
soul ; then  the  separative  influence  comes  into  play  (Saturn  is  exalted  in 
Libra)  and  Libra  is  differentiated  out  as  the  definitely  human  soul. 

The  exaltation  of  Venus  in  the  sign  Pisces  is  another  interesting 
species  of  symbolism.  ‘Water’  stands  for  the  next  interior  plane  of 
being  to  the  physical,  the  so-called  astral  or  psychic  ; and  a ‘ fish  ’ sym- 
bolises a being  belonging  to  that  plane.  Venus  in  Pisces  therefore 
signifies  the  unfolding  and  awakening  of  astral  consciousness  in  a human 
being ; ^the  first  small  step  on  the  long  path  that  leads  to  real  occult 
initiation.  Berosus  tells  us  that  ancient  humanity  was  civilised  by 
Oannes,  a man-fish,  who  during  the  day-time  gave  instruction  in  every 
kind  of  art  and  science.  ‘ He  instructed  them  in  everything  which 
could  tend  to  soften  manners  and  humanise  mankind.  From  that  time, 
so  universal  were  his  instructions,  nothing  material  has  been  added  by 
way  of  improvement.  When  the  Sun  set  it  was  the  custom  of  this 
Being  to  plunge  again  into  the  sea,  and  abide  all  night  in  the  deep ; for 
he  was  amphibious’  (Cory’s  Ancient  Fragments).  The  man-fish  sym- 
bolises an  initiate  in  incarnation,  one  of  the  many  who  have  taught 
men  in  different  ages.  The  fish  was  a symbol  much  used  by  the  early 
Christians ; and  the  bishop’s  mitre  is  to  this  day  a modified  representa- 
tion of  a fish’s  head,  although  the  symbolism  is  now  a mere  empty  form 
so  far  as  the  bishop  is  concerned. 

The  Sun,  Mercurj^  and  Venus  are  types  of  the  trinity.  The  Sun 
stands  for  the  all-creating,  sustaining,  and  universal  First  Aspect  of  the 
One  Life.  Mercury  represents  the  all-permeating,  blending,  and  under- 
standing Second  Aspect.  Venus,  the  life-giving,  energising,  and  cyclicall^'- 
moving  Third  Aspect.  At  the  creation  of  a cosmos  (whether  one  world 
or  a solar  system),  undifferentiated  matter  is  first  of  all  drawn  in  from 


VENUS,  THE  UNIFIER 


69 


outside  and  God,  acting  as  the  Third  Person  of  the  Trinit3%  starts  it  on 
its  long  path  of  differentiation  by  infusing  it  with  His  own  life  and  con- 
sciousness ; He  determines  on  each  plane  the  mode  of  vibration  of  the 
atomic  life  of  that  plane ; and  He  brings  order  out  of  disorder,  cosmos 
out  of  chaos.  This  is  typified  by  Venus,  the  benefic  life-giver,  the 
plaaot  of  cyclic  motion  (whether  expressed  outwardly  as  atomic  vibra- 
tion, or  in  consciousness  as  song,  music,  rhythm,  etc.),  and  the  producer 
of  harmony. 

In  trying  to  define  the  inner  nature  of  any  planet,  we  are  really 
endeavouring  to  grasp  the  fundamentaf  principles  underlying  the  whole 
universe.  The  mind  can  only  understand  so  much  of  external  objects  as 
it  finds  reflected  within  itself ; and  anything  not  so  reflected,  or  only 
half  reflected,  will  be  either  wholly  or  partially  misunderstood.  The 
humanity  of  to-day  is  imperfect ; its  evolution  is  not  finished  ; and 
therefore  the  cosmic  principles,  reflected  in  an  imperfect  mirror,  appear 
distorted  and  only  half-intelligible.  The  planet  Venus,  in  particular, 
has  suffered  from  this  imperfect  comprehension  ; and  its  lowest  reference 
to  sex  in  the  physical  bod}^  and  that  as  lust  rather  than  as  love,  has 
often  been  mistaken  for  its  fullest  and  most  radical  signification.  At  its 
best,  the  planet  is  as  high  above  this  as  the  heavens  are  above  the  earth  ; 
and  it  is  scarcely  going  too  far  to  say  that  the  man  of  to-day  does  not 
and  cannot  understand  it. 

As  the  producer  of  orderly  harmonious  motion,  Venus  may  sym- 
bolise that  Creative  Word  or  sound  which  brought  the  universe  into 
being.  Its  creative  power  is  seen  in  man  in  the  three  departments  of 
his  nature  ; phj'^sical  creation,  or  generation,  being  only  one  of  the  three. 
Everywhere  it  produces  order  out  of  disorder,  harmony  out  of  discord  ; 
whether  in  action,  feeling,  or  intellect.  As  the  planet  of  love,  it  .gives 
but  does  not  take.  That  which  takes  is  desire,  and  is  binding  and 
productive  of  pain  and  death.  That  which  gives  is  love,  which  is 
therefore  free  and  not  bound,  and  results  in  expansion,  increase, 

‘ moreness,’  life,  and  joy. 

The  highest  creative  power  of  Venus  is  that  called  in  occultism 
Kriyashakti.  This  is  spiritual  creation  on  the  mental  plane.  It  is 
defined  as  ‘The  mysterious  power  of  thought  which  enables  it  to 
produce  external,  perceptible,  phenomenal  results  by  its  own  inherent 
energy.’  Reference  has  already  been  made  to  the  highly  developed 
Beings  who  came  from  the  planet  Venus  to  guide  and  teach  the  infant 


70 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


humanity  of  this  earth.  This  was  before  the  evolution  of  the  sexes,  and 
therefore  before  the  establishment  of  physical  procreation.  The  bodies 
in  which  they  took  up  their  abode  they  themselves  created  by  this 
power  of  Kriyashakti,  and  they  became  the  spiritual  ancestors  of  all 
subsequent  adepts.  Even  in  the  ordinary  humanity  of  the  present  day, 
the  power  by  which  the  individuality  or  permanent  soul  radiates  forth 
its  own  duplicate  to  act  as  its  personalit3'’  during  one  incarnation,  seems 
to  be  this  very  power  of  Kriyashakti  in  a comparatively'  undeveloped 
condition.  This  is  apparently' one  of  the  reasons  why  Venus  is  given  by 
occultists  as  the  planetary  correspondence  of  the  Higher  Manas  or 
creative  mind. 

Let  us  now  turn  to  the  more  detailed  significations  of  Venus  in  the 
horoscope. 

Among  occupations  it  signifies  all  those  that  are  productive  of 
beauty,  whether  in  form,  colour,  sound,  or  outline ; all  ornamentation, 
whether  in  dress,  jewellery',  pictures,  sculpture,  or  motion.  It  therefore 
indicates  all  who  deal  in  flowers,  perfumery,  confectionery,  drapery, 
millinery',  music,  dancing,  etc. ; as  well  as  all  that  side  of  domestic  life 
that  conduces  to  beauty,  order,  and  harmony  in  the  home.  If  Mercury 
gives  speech,  it  needs  the  assistance  of  Venus  to  give  beauty  in  speech, 
i.e.,  oratory ; and  Venus  is  therefore  essential  for  poets,  musicians, 
singers,  actors,  artists,  etc.  It  rules  toys,  fancy  goods,  articles  of  the 
toilet,  and  everything  giving  pleasure,  increasing  happiness,  whether 
inwardly  in  the  feelings  or  outwardly  in  personal  appearance.  Those 
who  have  Venus  rising  or  culminating,  or  in  conjunction  with  the  ruler 
of  the  ascendant,  have  generally  some  claim  to  beauty  of  person  ; but 
the  mere  fact  of  Taurus  or  Libra  rising  is  not  in  itself  sufficient  to  pro- 
duce this  effect.  Venus  natives  are  often  short  in  stature,  especially 
women,  although  this  is  by  no  means  always  the  case ; they  are 
generally  of  good  complexion  and  skin,  dark-haired,  well-nourished, 
inclining  to  plumpness  and  rounded  contours,  but  not,  normally,  to  ex- 
cessive stoutness.  They  are  usually  popular,  agreeable,  friendly,  amiable, 
sociable,  domesticated,  fond  of  family,  children,  and  pets  ; fond  of  articles 
of  beauty,  pleasure,  and  luxury,  and  all  occupations  yielding  these. 
They  are  usually  tidy  and  orderly,  but  may  be  quite  the  reverse  if  the 
planet  is  much  afflicted.  Like  the  natives  of  Jupiter  they  often  seem  to 
succeed  quite  as  much  by  luck  as  by  merit ; for  a friendly  and  aggreeable 
manner  will  often  make  a way'  in  the  world  where  strength  or  intellect 


VENUS,  THE  UNIFIER 


71 


alone  would  fail.  The  influence  of  Venus  upon  health  is  good  normally 
as  it  is  vitalising  and  nourishing ; although  it  does  not  usually  give 
that  positiveness  of  vitality  and  tenacity  of  life  that  is  characteristic  of 
some  of  the  planets.  The  period  of  life  signified  by  it  is  youth  in  general 
and  the  marriageable  period  in  particular.  Its  influence  upon  money 
matters  is  also  good,  especially  if  in  good  aspect  to  Saturn  or  the  Moon. 
It  may  then  give  considerable  success  in  business,  money,  property, 
possessions  ; but  if  in  bad  aspect  to  the  money  rulers,  there  is  waste 
through  things  signified  by  Venus  and  by  the  afflicting  planet.  Like 
Jupiter  and  the  Sun,  Venus  may  sometimes  give  some  tendenc3'^  to 
ostentation,  fashion,  pomp,  and  show  ; and  this  not  in  worldly  matters 
onl3%  but  mentally  also,  in  exotericism  generally. 

With  the  world  of  feeling  and  emotion  Venus  has,  of  course,  very 
close  associations.  Love  and  marriage  are  pre-eminently  under  its  rule, 
but  it  also  expresses  itself  through  friendship,  domesticity,  parental  love, 
benevolence,  philanthroph3s  charity,  brotherly  love,  humanit3^  fellow- 
feeling  and  human  sympathy  in  general.  In  all  its  spheres  of  action  it 
stands  for  expansion,  fruitfulness,  renewal,  creative  energy ; whether 
ph3^sically  in  the  growth  and  multiplication  of  plant,  animal,  and  man, 
or  in  its  more  mental  modes  of  working  as  emotional  life  and  intellectual 
fertility.  As  previously  stated,  it  is  the  origin  of  the  sense  of  beauty  and 
harmony  in  poetry,  music,  painting,  the  love  of  nature,  etc.,  although 
here  feeling  and  intellect  are  blended.  And  in  every  case  the  native  of 
the  creative  Venus  takes  pleasure  in  his  art ; the  poet  in  his  intellectual 
creations,  the  orator  in  his  mode  of  expression,  the  musician  in  his 
creation  of  sound,  the  lover  in  the  object  of  his  love,  whether  it  show  as 
reverence,  benevolence,  or  love  pure  and  simple. 

In  the  intellectual  world  Venus  does  not  seem  to  act  as  logical 
reasoning  or  the  ratiocinative  facult3^  but  it  has  a very  important 
influence  upon  the  higher  mind,  nevertheless.  It  is  an  essental  factor 
in  most  i'^  not  in  all  the  higher  forms  of  genius ; and,  as  previously 
stated,  it  gives  mental  fertility,  plasticity,  receptivity  and  creative  power. 
Through  its  sign  Taurus  it  is  certainly  associated  with  mathematical 
ability,  probably  through  the  power  already  hinted  at  of  partially 
objectifying  mental  concepts,  whereby  in  such  a case  numbers  or  mathe- 
matical relationships  assume  the  form  of  definite  and  tangible  entities  to 
the  mind  gifted  with  that  particular  faculty  ; so  that  with  little  or  no 
calculating  the  result  of  arithmetical  or  algebraical  operations  appears 


72 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


to  that  mind  as  an  inevitable  consequence  of  the  factors  given — much 
as  a ‘ logical  consequence  ’ appeals  to  the  argumentative  type  of  mind. 

It  may  now  be  as  well  to  devote  a few  words  to  Mars  and  Venus  in 
their  reciprocal  relationship  as  polar  opposites. 

Mars,  as  the  planet  which  stimulates,  acting  as  the  ‘ desire 
elemental  ’ causes  impulsive  and  hasty  attachments,  which  often  lead  to 
an  imprudent  marriage,  entered  into  before  sufficient  time  has  elapsed  to 
distinguish  between  love  and  what  may  be  termed  selfish  desire.  In 
nine  cases  out  of  ten,  unions  resulting  from  a Martial  influence  are 
purely  impulsive,  produced  by  sheer  fascination  or  abandonment  to 
peculiar  ‘ swirls  ’ of  feeling  and  emotion,  corresponding  to  a dancer’s 
ecstasies. 

To  females  the  influence  of  Mars  is  inimical  so  far  as  marriage  is 
concerned,  great  care  being  necessary  to  avoid  such  hasty  and  ill- 
considered  unions  as  have  just  been  described,  when  Mars  is  the 
prominent  planet.  Sex  is  the  dominant  note  of  Mars,  from  the  first 
impulse  of  sex  desire  to  that  attraction  which  results  from  ‘magnetism,’ 
which  may  be  either  physical,  psychic  or  mental.  In  the  rank  and  file  of 
women  Mars  by  its  position  and  aspects  in  the  horoscope  will  denote 
the  uaturo-of.  the  maru  to  whom  the  native  is  drawn,  and  this  type  of 
man  will  alwaj^s  be  able  to  exercise  a certain  amount  of  influence  over 
her,  according  to  the  strength  of  Mars  in  his  own  nativity.  Females  in 
•vvhQin  the  martial  element- is- stronger  than  any  other  influence  either 
owing  to  the  majority  of  planets  being,  in  martial  s,igns,  or  by  the  pro- 
minence of  Mars  athirth,  are  drawn  towards  doctors  and  medical  men 
generall}^  if  not  attracted  to  military  or  very,  passionate  men. 

Mars  is  the  general  representative  of  the  male  sex  in  all  female 
nativities,  while  Venus  similarly  represents  the  female  sex  in  a male 
nativity.  Thus,  for  instance,  a well-aspected  Mars  in  a female  (and 
similarly  Venus  in  a male)  indicates  that  the  native  will  get  on  well 
with,  and  benefit  by,  the  opposite  sex  generally ; and  conversely  when 
either  planet  is  afflicted. 

' Mars  as  a death  ruler  in  nativities  is  the  Destroying  Angel, 
separating  the  various  vehicles — physical,  etheric  and  astral — when  the 
life  forces  depart  from  the  body  at  what  is  termed  death. 

First  the  etheric  or  lunar  body  is  separated  from,  the  physical,  and 
the  life  remains  in  the  lunar  body  for  a short  time ; then  the  life  is 
ithdrawn  from  this  lunar  body  into  the  astral  body  ; and  so  on,  until 


VENUS,  THE  UNIFIER 


73 


the  mental  body  is  reached,  when  Mars  no  longer  reigns,  giving  over 
his  rulership  to  Saturn.  Mars  is  the  symbol  of  animal  life,  and  causes 
also  the  separation  of  that  animal  life  from  the  human,  until  the  animal 
is  saved  alive : i.e.  until  the  martial  influence  is  transmuted  into  that  of 
Venus,  its  counterpart  in  heaven. 

Mars  as  a ruler  of  finance  gives  to  the  desires  of  the  lower  nature 
the  impulse  and  energy  to  acquire  wealth,  and  hence  governs  all  enter- 
prise and  activity  of  a commercial  or  business  nature,  and  it  also  gives 
a generous  and  liberal — or  rather  prodigal — nature,  the  desires  either 
taking  or  giving  according  to  the  fancy  or  impulse  of  the  hour,  and  the 
liberality  being  of  an  unreliable  character,  fitful  and  uncertain  in  its 
manifestation. 

Mars  is  ‘the  counterfeit  of  the  spirit’ ; the  ‘Wrath  of  God’;  that 
which  is  necessary  to  cause  motion  and  activity— in  a word,  ‘the 
desires  of  the  flesh  and  of  the  world.’  Mars  can  save  itself  when  in 
difficult  situations  by  its  own  inherent  quality',  that  of  sudden  conver- 
sion, quick  change  from  one  state  to  another,  impulse  on  the  one 
hand  and  attractive  influence  on  the  other,  Mars  governing  the  lower 
astral  world,  the  world  of  personal  feeling  and  emotion.  The  behaviour 
of  the  true  coquette  furnishes  an  illustration  of  this  principle,  for  it  is 
only  by  sudden  changes  of  manner  and  mood  that  she  is  able  to 
extricate  herself  from  the  difficult  position  her  love  of  conquest  leads 
her  into. 

The  only  true  and  real  salvation  of  Mars,  however,  is  by 
‘ transmutation  ’ ; w^hen  Mars  loves  it  is  redeemed  and  saved.  But  it 
must  be  the  true  Venus  love  of  pure  and  unalloyed  friendship  and 
affection,  in  which  sex  distinctions  have  disappeared  and  the  Self  within 
is  loved  for  the  Selfs  sake  only ; such  a love  as  is  spoken  of  by  the 
Teacher  who  said  ‘ Greater  love  hath  no  man  than  this,  that  he  lay 
down  his  life  for  his  friend.’  The  life  that  is  to  be  laid  down  is  the 
animal,  passional,  sex  life,  the  force  of  Mars  being  then  directed  to  other 
channels  and  used  for  aspiration  and  to  serve  the  world  through  the 
true  quality  of  Mars,  which  is  strength. 

Mars  governs  the  lower  regions  of  the  astral  world,  and  Venus  the 
higher ; the  hell,  and  the  heaven,  of  the  orthodox  religions ; and  Venus 
and  Mars  are  thus  in  a certain  sense,  complements  of  each  other. 


CHAPTER  VIII 


Mars,  the  Energiser 

Mars  was  the  god  of  the  Romans,  and  held  in  honour  next  to  Zeus ; 
he  is  also,  if  the  term  may  be  allowed,  the  god  of  the  Britons,  who 
are  declared  to  be  reincarnated  Romans.  In  ancient  Roman  days  Mars 
was  lord  over  the  New  Year,  their  first  month,  March,  being  ruled  by 
this  planet ; and  even  in  our  times  he  is  the  lord  over  the  first  month  in 
the  astrological  year,  governing  the  sign  Aries.  There  is  not  so  much 
mj'stery  connected  with  this  planet  as  with  other  more  ponderous 
planets,  as  we  have  more  opportunity  to  study  Mars  from  the  physical 
and  lower  mental  plane  than  the  others.  Just  as  the  other  planets  are 
connected  with  other  pairs  of  opposites,  Mars  on  earth,  and  Venus  in 
heaven  are  connected  with  the  passions  and  desires  of  mankind  in  a very 
marked  degree.  If  Venus  alone,  apart  from  Mars,  governed  the  actions 
of  men,  however,  there  would  be  no  enterprise  and  no  endeavour,  no 
strength  to  battle  with  the  elements,  nor  with  that  adverse  fortune  which 
falls  to  the  lot  of  all  men  sooner  or  later.  Thus  we  see  that  Mars, 
though  generally  called  ‘malefic,’  is  just  as  important  in  the  scheme 
of  evolution  as  the  more  favourable  planets. 

The  whole  of  the  purely  animal  nature  in  man  is  under  the  influence 
of  Mars  ; and  the  greater  the  animal  the  greater  the  god  eventually  ; 
but  all  this  force  and  energy  of  Mars  must  be  gradually  transmuted  into 
the  higher  vibrations  of  Venus.  This  may  be  more  easily  understood 
by  a study  of  the  handicrafts  and  the  fine  arts,  the  former  being  con- 
cerned with  metals  and  stone,  and  the  latter  with  music,  painting,  etc. 
In  every  nativity  Mars  shows  the  courage,  capacity  for  heroism,  endur- 
ance, strength  and  power : thus  Mars  can  work  for  good  as  well  as  for 
evil : and,  indeed,  it  is  only  when  its  influence  is  perverted,  when  the 
force  given  by  this  planet  is  abused, “that  it  ‘mars’  the  fortunes  and 
leads  the  native  to  destruction. 

It  would  be  impossible  to  find  in  our  da3^  a nativity  in  whichithe 


MARS,  THE  ENERGISER 


75 


planet  Mars  alone  dominated  the  life  of  the  native,  although  it  may  still 
be  the  leading  and  primary  influence  in  the  horoscope.  But  there  was 
a time  when  the  race  as  a whole  was  solely  governed  by  the  planet,  the 
earth  being  then  occupied  by  what  we  call  ‘3'oung  egos,’  young  souls, 
who  had  not  3^et  learned  to  govern  or  control  the  force  coming  from  this 
fiery  planet. 

In  Natal  Astrology  Mars  plays  a very  prominent  part,  governing  as 
it  does  the  first  and  eighth  signs  of  the  zodiac,  Aries  and  Scorpio,  life 
and  death,  generation  and  destruction.  In  savages  and  the  younger 
races  of  mankind  the  first  germ  of  feeling  arises  out  of  passion  and  gross 
desire ; and  we  may  learn  a wonderful  lesson  if  we  follow  the  history  of 
any  race  from  infancy  to  manhood,  from  blind  force  and  impulse  to 
energy  and  strength.  In  the  unregenerate  and  lower  and  less  evolved 
types  of  humanity  the  martial  influence  arouses  the  desire  to  annihilate 
or  destroy  foes  and  enemies,  which  desire  when  knowledge  is  gained 
changes  to  an  attitude  of  defensiveness  and  alertness.  Circumstances 
and  environment  call  out  all  those  active,  outrushing  impulses  which 
eventually  cause  men  to  be  acute,  keen  and  sharpwitted  ; so  that  from 
sheer  muscular  strength  and  a state  in  which  boldness,  defiance,  temerity 
and  hardihood,  or  even  foolhardiness,  is  the  main  expression  of  the  life, 
we  find  evolved  fortitude,  courage  and  strength,  enabling  the  native, 
through  practice  and  experience,  to  attain  to  ‘ skill  in  action.’ 

From  the  first  response  of  the  feelings  to  stimuli  from  without  we 
find  gradually  awakening  the  whole  range  of  passions  ; love  or  hate, 
attraction  or  repulsion,  for  the  time  dominating  the  whole  of  the  animal 
nature.  In  the  undeveloped  man  who  has  not  learned  to  control  his 
passions  the  bestial  and  brutal,  or  sensual  desires,  run  riot  until  the 
slowly  growing  Mind  begins  to  take  the  upper  hand.  Then  in  the 
mental  world  Mars  gradually  loses  its  power  over  man  ; for  there  a 
higher  and  more  subtle  force  is  waiting  to  humanise  the  man  and 
gradually  wean  him  from  the  plane  of  the  senses.  But  so  long  as  the 
senses,  governed  by  Mars,  dominate  the  mind,  then  the  mind  itself  is 
coarsened  and  made  tricky  and  designing.  The  purified  martial 
tendencies,  however,  will  make  the  mind  brave,  fearless  and  courage- 
ous ; inclining  it,  moreover,  to  practical  things,  such  as  trading  and 
general  commercial  enterprise. 

In  the  physical  world  Mars  causes  accidents,  fevers  and  violence. 
But  if  we  could  see  the  growth  of  the  Ego,  if  we  could  trace  its  history, 


76 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


we  should  find  that  impulse  and  rash  action  in  the  past  had  brought 
its  inevitable  reaction  in  accident  or  fever  ; for  every  effort  has  its  cause, 
and  there  are  no  mishaps  or  misadventures  which  could  not  be  traced  to 
a cause  set  in  motion  by  the  Ego  in  the  past.  Indeed  without  going 
back  to  past  existences  on  this  earth,  we  could  trace  many  apparent 
accidents  to  rash  and  heedless  conduct  (although  perhaps  long  forgotten 
in  the  present  life).  On  the  physical  plane  most  of  the  adverse  influence 
of  Mars  is,  as  it  were  a ‘ready-money  transaction.’  Men  who  rise  to 
positions  far  above  the  sphere  of  their  birth  use  the  influence  of  Mars  in 
what  we  call  ‘ grit  ’ — strength  of  character,  be  that  character  good  or 
bad.  In  cases  where  an  excess  of  martial  force  is  used  we  find  men 
coercing  and  compelling  others  to  do  their  bidding,  fearing  no  conflict  or 
contest  in  their  eager  fight  for  position  and  wealth.  At  the  present  day, 
the  influence  of  Mars  is  mostly  seen  in  self-assertion  and  in  a struggle  to 
maintain  self-interests.  But  in  those  who  are  developed,  the  true 
Martians,  we  find  the  power  to  direct,  to  govern,  to  superintend : they 
have  courage  and  confidence  in  their  ability  to  accomplish  and  achieve 
the  ends  sought  for. 

When  Mars  is  weak  in  any  nativity  it  gives  cowardice  or  faint- 
heartedness, which  may  lead  to  criminal  tendencies  ; a cruel  and  brutal 
nature  is  often  the  result  of  a weak  and  uncontrolled  martial  nature — 
the  man  is  a coward,  he  fears,  and  hence  he  ill-treats. 

There  is  nothing  beyond  the  mortal  and  perishable  so  far  as  the 
direct  influence  of  Mars  is  concerned  ; but  its  influence  takes  the  man  to 
the  feet  of  Venus,  so  to  speak,  where  the  force  and  passion  of  the  animal 
man  is  changed  and  transmuted  into  the  higher  and  purer  emotion  of 
love,  and  the  generative  instincts  are  changed  into  the  creative  principle 
which  eventuall^f  makes  of  man  a god.  Thus  truly  is  Mars  the  god  of 
life  and  death  : of  physical  animal  life,  which  is  yielded  up  when  the 
animal  dies  and  the  human  soul  is  born  ; then  the  passions  are  dissolved 
and  pass  away  and  the  man  loses  his  animal  life  only  to  find  life  eternal 
and  immortal.  At  each  advent  into  physical  existence  a critical  stage  is 
reached,  wherein  the  mind  and  the  senses  struggle  for  supremacy,  the 
senses  either  dragging  the  man  down  into  another  unconscious  existence, 
or  the  mind  extricating  itself  from  the  senses  and  rising  self-conscious 
into  the  heaven  world. 

It  is  the  fiery  Mars  who  binds  the  soul  in  hell  or  purgatory,  and 
holds  it  in  the  bondage  of  the  astral  plane  for  a longer  or  shorter  period 


MARS,  THE  ENERGISER 


77 


according  to  the  power  it  has  gained  over  the  mind  and  the  soul.  For 
the  same  force,  energy  and  vigour  that  the  man  was  able  to  use  through 
his  muscular  system  can  now  be  used  when  the  man  has  lost  his  physical 
body  to  keep  him  enslaved  in  the  regions  of  the  astral  plane,  wherein  the 
desire-nature  is  constantly  craving  sensation  without  possessing  the 
means  to  satisfy  its  cravings.  This  truth  is  hinted  at  in  the  story  of 
Tantalus. 

Violence  and  murder  result  from  the  elemental  forces  under  the  rule 
of  Mars  being  uncontrolled  and  allowed  to  move  blindly  and  indis- 
criminately without  the  guiding  power  of  reason  and  judgment.  Force 
must  have  some  outlet  either  in  well-guided  energy  or  else  in  mere 
impulse  and  passions  ; but  just  as  crude  pig-iron  may  be  changed  into 
fine  steel,  so  may  all  destructiveness  or  passion  be  changed  into  fortitude 
or  courage.  The  heavy  lumbering  engines  and  crude  mechanical  con- 
trivances of  the  past  are  slowly  but  surely  giving  way  to  fine  and  delicate 
mechanism,  which  not  only  does  the  work  more  effectually,  but  also 
gives  greater  joy  and  pleasure  to  all  who  have  need  of  its  power.  In 
the  same  way  our  demonstrative  enthusiasm  will  eventually  become 
‘skill  in  action,’  in  which  the  conservation  of  energy  and  the  avoidance 
of  waste,  in  every  sense  of  the  term,  will  be  the  study  of  all  who  are 
passing  out  of  the  plane  of  Mars. 

In  the  horoscope,  and  in  the  outer  world.  Mars  represents  a person 
who  is  active,  strong,  energetic,  muscular ; of  average  height,  not  usually 
tall ; hair  sometimes  red,  but  not  invariably  so  (occasionally  black),  and 
often  curly  or  wiry.  Of  average  proportions,  oftener  slender  than  stout ; 
eyes  hazel,  quick  and  observant.  Perceptive  faculties  as  a rule  more 
developed  than  the  reflective.  There  is  sometimes,  but  rot  always,  a 
scar,  mark,  or  mole  on  the  part  of  the  body  ruled  by  the  sign  or  house 
containing  the  planet. 

The  trades  or  occupations  signified  by  the  planet  are  those  of  soldier, 
sailor,  surgeon,  dentist,  coroner,  lawyer,  chemist ; while  all  workers  in 
iron,  fire,  and  metals  generally  (such  as  cutlers,  ironmongers,  gunners, 
engineers,  stokers,  smiths),  and  all  who  use  knives,  edged  tools,  or 
w'eapons,  such  as  barbers,  reapers,  butchers,  sportsmen,  carpenters,  etc., 
come  more  or  less  under  the  rule  of  the  red  god  Mars.  The  parts  of 
the  body  signified  are  head  (chiefly  forehead,  nose,  and  left  ear),  outer 
sex  organ,  lower  bowel  and  bladder,  the  gall  bladder,  and  to  some  extent 
the  muscles,  sinews,  and  arterial  system. 


78 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


The  nature  of  the  planet  is  positive,  hot,  and  dry.  When  in  good 
aspect  to  the  rulers  of  life,  it  greatly  increases  the  vitality,  energy, 
and  activity  of  the  body.  In  affliction,  it  causes  levers,  accidents, 
wounds,  burns,  bruises,  surgical  operations,  poisonings,  injuries  from 
fire  or  water,  infectious  and  germ  diseases  arising  from  filth,  impurities, 
bad  drainage,  or  high  temperature.  Mars  natives  are  usually  practical 
men  of  affairs,  men  of  the  world  and  of  action.  They  usuallj'^  abhor  con- 
finement, or  indoor  and  sedentary  occupations  ; they  love  to  be  out  and 
about;  and  dislike  restraint  of  any  kind,  fretting  exceedingly  when  ill. 

In  the  feelings  and  character.  Mars  gives  bravery,  courage,  love  of 
freedom,  an  independent  pioneering  spirit,  with  often  a good  deal  of 
executive  power  and  organising  ability.  The  natives  of  Mars  are  usually 
capable  of  making  their  own  way  in  the  world,  and  prefer  this  to  being 
under  the  control,  direction,  or  authority  of  anyone  else — even  when  this 
control  is  for  their  OAvn  welfare  and  profit.  They  are  self-willed,  high- 
spirited,  and  proud ; are  very  self-conscious ; easily  take  offence  for 
trivial  reasons,  and  see  personal  slights  where  none  are  intended.  In 
affliction  they  are  apt  to  be  irritable,  bad-tempered,  vain,  conceited,  un- 
reliable, untruthful,  deceitful,  rash,  and  imprudent.  The3^  bring  trouble 
upon  themselves  by  their  own  actions  and  then  blame  other  people,  and 
often  render  themselves  ridiculous  without  knowing  it.  When  well 
aspected,  they  can  earn  money  easily,  but  are  either  lavish  and  liberal, 
spending  too  readily,  or  else  lose  through  circumstances  beyond  their 
control.  The3"  may  gain  through  legacies  or  through  the  marriage  or 
business  partner  ; and  are  generally  practical  and  capable  in  business 
matters  if  the  planet  is  dignified  and  well  aspected.  They  are  apt  to  be 
somewhat  hasty,  demonstrative,  and  over-enthusiastic  both  in  speech 
and  action.  In  love  and  marriage  they  show  the  same  characteristics, 
both  good  and  evil,  according  to  the  aspect.  If  Mars  is  well  placed, 
they  may  be  ardent  friends  and  affectionate  lovers  and  husbands ; but 
are  somewhat  apt  to  be  exacting,  jealous,  and  masterful.  They  usually 
marry  early,  and  when  Mars  is  in  bad  aspect  to  the  marriage  signifi- 
cators,  may  suffer  seriously'  through  the  opposite  sex.  They  are  not 
naturally  religious ; when  other  influences  urge  them  in  this  direction, 
however.  Mars  gives,  on  its  good  side,  courage  and  enthusiasm  for  the 
cause  they  espouse,  ardour,  a militant  spirit,  and  the  devotion  of  the 
martyr ; on  its  evil  side,  the  planet  gives  scepticism  and  an  aggressive 
anti-religious  spirit. 


MARS,  THE  ENERGISER 


79 


In  the  world  of  the  intellect,  Mars  endows  the  mind  with  energy, 
enterprise  and  activity.  When  it  is  in  good  aspect  to  the  mental  rulers, 
the  mind  is  observant  and  apt  at  fact,  illustration,  and  detail ; the  memory 
is  alert  and  responsive  ; there  may  be  ability  for  the  practical  side  of 
art  or  science,  the  executive  or  experimental  branches.  It  has  some 
bearing  upon  drawing,  illustrating,  etching  and  sculpture  ; brass  or  wind 
instruments  in  music ; and  experimentalism,  practical  adaptation  or 
invention  in  any  science,  whether  chemistry,  physiology,  analysis, 
metallurgy,  geology,  etc. 

In  occultism,  the  planet  shows  the  same  characteristics  of  power, 
ardour,  practical  work,  experiment,  and  organising  or  executive  ability. 
They  become  practical  or  experimental  occultists,  mesmerists,  healers, 
etc.  Mars  in  good  aspect  to  Mercury,  or  well  placed  in  a mental  sign, 
gives  ready  and  fluent  speech,  making  a good  debater,  apt  at  argument 
and  retort.  It  seems  to  be  the  basis  of  wit  rather  than  humour  or  fun, 
giving  verbal  dexterity  and  smartness,  a keen  sense  of  absurdity  b3' 
contrast  or  exaggeration,  and  in  some  cases  ill-natured  sarcasm,  ironj^ 
and  caricature.  When  too  prominent  or  in  affliction,  the  planet  gives 
exaggeration  in  speech,  boastfulness  of  manner,  and  untruthfulness. 
Mars  persons  usually  have  considerable  strength  of  desire,  the  opposite 
pole  of  will ; they  can  be  very  fixed  in  their  purposes  both  for  good  and 
evil ; they  are  bitter  enemies,  and  seldom  or  never  forget  or  forgive 
a slight  or  injury. 

Philosophically  Mars  represents  that  irresistible  Desire  to  Be  which 
is  the  cause  of  creation,  underlying  all  manifestation,  and  which  urges 
on  all  evolution.  In  the  lower  man  it  appears  as  turbulent,  ill-regulated 
passions  and  desires,  anger,  lust,  cruelty,  antagonism,  warfare,  murder 
and  hate.  From  bitter  experience  these  become  gradually  reined  in, 
regulated  and  refined  as  evolution  proceeds.  They  then  reappear  as 
what  are  sometimes  almost  equally  turbulent  emotions  and  mental 
energies.  Finally  they  are  perfected  and  transmuted  into  an  imperial 
and  indomitable  Will,  which  is  used  in  the  service  of  humanity. 


CHAPTER  IX 


Jupiter,  the  Uplifter 

The  influence  streaming  from  each  planet  is,  to  us,  mysterious  in  its 
effect  upon  the  subtle  bodies  of  human  beings  ; but  there  is  a mystery 
concerning  Jupiter’s  influence  that  is  much  more  profound  than  that  of 
the  other  planets,  for  it  is  concerned  with  those  subtle  bodies  in  a 
manner  that  cannot  be  understood  without  a clear  knowledge  of  man’s 
seven  principles.  Jupiter  governs  in  every  sense  of  the  word  man’s 
possessions,  therefore  is  in  very  truth  the  planet  of  fortune. 

The  planet  Jupiter  is  especially  related  to  the  magnetic  aura,  that 
surrounds  every  living  creature,  and  rules  its  four  divisions  in  the  trip- 
licities  of  fire,  earth,  air  and  water;  corresponding  to  the  physical  or 
health  aura — earthy  signs ; the  astral,  or  psychic  aura — watery  signs  ; 
the  mental  aura — fiery  signs;  and  the  aura  of  the  higher  self — airy  signs. 
Everything  that  is  related  to  expansion,  in  the  growth  and  development 
of  living  creatures,  is  under  the  benefic  rule  of  Jupiter,  so  that  his 
dominion  is  over  upliftment,  increase,  abundance  and  fullness ; giving 
bliss,  happiness  and  pleasure  to  all  who  expand  under  his  mighty  power. 
From  the  tiniest  cell  in  the  physical  body  to  the  whole  aura — (in  some 
cases  extending  many  feet  from  the  body;  in  the  case  of  the  Lord 
Buddha  it  is  said  to  have  extended  three  miles) — Jupiter’s  influence  is 
daily  manifesting  : while  Saturn  contracts  and  densifies,  Jupiter  expands 
and  liberates  ; thus  Saturn  is  the  Lord  of  fate,  and  Jupiter  the  Giver  of 
fortune,  the  ebb  and  the  flow,  in  constant  motion  fulfilling  the  divine 
law  of  perfect  rhythm. 

Jupiter  may  be  said  to  represent  the  aspect  of  power,  of  harmoni- 
ously-balanced expansion,  growth ; _that  which  urges  on  evolution. 
Although  this  planet  has  its  highest  correspondence  in  the  more  glorious 
life  of  the  individuality,  yet,  because  the  two  answer  to  one  another,  it 
equally  represents  the  same  principle  in  the  lower  life  of  the  personality 
and  even  of  the  physical  body.  It  is  the  first  step  downwards  into 


v/ 


JUPITER,  THE  UPLIFTER  8i 

limitation  from  the  all-pervading  life  of  the  Sun ; and  it  carries  with  it 
the  ability  to  receive  that  life,  also  the  tendency  to  merge  back  again 
into  it.  It  stands  for  the  highest  matter,  life,  and  consciousness — in  the 
universe  as  a whole,  and,  by  correspondence,  on  each  plane.  In  a sense 
it  may  be  said  to  stand  for  the  ultimate  atom. 

If  we  take  Saturn  as  a binding  and  limiting  force,  whether  acting 
in  matter  as  gravitation  or  in  consciousness  as  self,  the  birth  of  Jupiter 
represents  the  operation  of  that  creative  Will-power  by  which  primordial 
chaos  was  limited  and  conditioned — focussed,  so  to  speak — into  a 
cosmos.  This  is  apparently  the  implication  when  Virgil  calls  Jupiter 
‘Omnipotent  Father  ^Ether,’  the  latter  here  being  that  living  substance 
called  Akasha,  which  underlies  and  builds  up  the  universe : Jupiter 
standing  for  the  cosmos  as  child,  and  Saturn  for  that  ordering  power 
which  ‘strikes  its  being  into  bounds,’  as  Tennyson  puts  it.  A similar 
process  is  seen  in  that  differentiation  of  the  animal  group-soul  which 
results  in  the  individualised  human  soul ; Saturn  here  being  the  growing 
mind,  separative  and  restrictive  in  its  operation,  and  Jupiter  the 
resulting  individuality  in  its  egg-shaped  sphere  of  aura,  the  ‘ auric  egg’ 
as  it  has  been  called.  Applied  in  another  way  Saturn  stands  for  that 
mental  concentration  which  results  in  the  birth  of  Jupiter,  or  the 
conscious  soul  freed  from  the  entranced  or  sleeping  body.  To  this  day 
Saturn  is  held  to  be  the  planetary  significator  of  the  father,  although 
Jupiter  does  not  appear  to  be  identified  with  the  child. 

Another  point  to  bear  in  mind  is  that  Jupiter  is  never  an  extreme, 
but  always  a mean  between  extremes,  a harmonising  and  reconciling 
power,  corresponding  to  that  guna  or  quality  in  nature  called  by  the 
Hindus  ‘sattva.’  This  is  seen  in  its  association  with  Sagittarius  and 
Pisces,  both  mutable  ‘ double  ’ signs.  It  may  seem  at  first  sight  that 
this  analogy  has  been  departed  from  in  calling  Jupiter,  as  we  have  done, 
the  first  step  downwards  into  limitation  ; but  this  is  not  really  so.  For 
beyond  the  universe,  with  its  highest  forms  of  matter,  life,  and  con- 
sciousness, is  the  Creator — the  source  of  all  three.  Jupiter  thus  becomes, 
as  it  were,  the  agent  or  vehicle  between  the  Creator  and  the  created ; a 
messenger  bringing  the  higher  influence  downwards,  and  a vehicle 
raising  the  lower  consciousness  upwards.  Its  theological  correspondence 
to  the  second  Person  of  the  various  Trinities  is  here  obvious ; and  it 
may  be  noted  that  in  one  respect  it  pairs  off  with  Mercury,  the  ruler 
of  the  two  remaining  (and  opposite)  mutable  signs.  Both  these  planets 

F 


82 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


seem  to  be  correspondences  of  the  ‘ sattvic  guna  ’ or,  harmonious 
temperament ; but  this,  in  terms  of  consciousness,  represents  a state 
much  higher  than  anything  we  can  realise  to-day ; and  all  we  can  do, 
therefore,  is  to  compare  it  with  forms  of  consciousness  which  we  can 
realise.  Mercury  then  becomes  the  representative  of  the  ‘ knowing  ’ 
half  of  this  state,  and  Jupiter  that  of  the  ‘ feeling  ’ half  of  it.  The  state 
itself  is  not  really  split  up  like  this,  for  there  the  two  become  one ; but 
in  vainly  trying  to  realise  it  we  cannot  avoid  so  splitting  it  up.  The 
nearest  approach  to  this  state  of  consciousness  is  perhaps  seen  in  the 
true  intuition — by  which,  of  course,  is  not  meant  psychic  impression,  or 
mere  fancy. 

Jupiter  is  usually  described  as  temperately  warm  ; it  is  thus  con- 
trasted, on  the  one  hand  with  Mars,  which  may  be  described  as  intem- 
perately  hot ; and  on  the  other  hand  with  Saturn,  which  is  intemperately 
cold.  Each  of  these  three  planets  has  its  good  influence  and  each  its 
•'  bad.  Saturn  may  represent  steadfastness  and  strength  of  will ; or 
sluggishness  and  extreme  selfishness.  Mars  may  stand  for  that  strength 
which  consists  not  so  much  of  steadfastness  as  of  resistless  energy  and 
activity ; or,  it  may  represent  unintelligent  restlessness  and  purposeless 
destructiveness.  Jupiter  occupies  a mean  between  these  two  extremes, 
and  has  some  points  in  which  it  may  sympathise  with  both.  Its  warmth 
easily  passes  into  heat  (electricity,  lightning,  thunder) ; its  positive  sign, 
Sagittarius,  shows  much  impulse,  and  has  distinctly  martial  sympathies  ; 
while  the  diseases  of  the  planet  are  usually' those  resulting  from  plethora, 
excess.  On  the  other  hand,  its  negative  sign,  Pisces,  has  some  clearly 
Saturnian  connotations,  both  good  and  evil ; its  inertness,  its  secrecy,  its 
concealment,  its  lukewarmness  or  even  coldness  of  temperament.  And 
yet,  in  spite  of  these  points  of  resemblance,  Jupiter  never  loses  its  own 
characteristics  ; and  what  these  are,  in  the  various  departments  of  human 
nature,  we  will  now  proceed  to  summarise. 

In  the  outer  world  of  ‘will  in  action’  Jupiter  indicates  occupations 
connected  with  the  churches  and  religious  bodies  ; law  (the  judicial  rather 
than  the  contentious  side  of  it),  travelling,  shipping  and  the  various 
modes  of  transit  such  as  steam  or  horse  traction  and  other  vehicular 
traffic  ; hospitals,  asylums,  prisons,  workhouses,  charitable  institutions, 
and  occupations  connected  therewith  ; physicians  {not  surgeons),  especi- 
ally consultants,  and  to  some  extent  exponents  of  preventive  medicine 
and  sanitation.  It  has  a bearing  upon  almost  all  the  higher  forms  of 


JUPITER,  THE  UPLIFTER 


83 


education,  professional,  collegiate  or  professorial,  though  rather  the  moral 
and  social  than  the  purely  intellectual  side  of  them.  It  must,  however, 
be  remembered  thatjiew^  if  any,  occupations  are  connected  with  one 
planet  only ; most  belong  to  a combination  of  planets  or  signs. 

The  fruitful  side  of  the  planet  is  seen  in  its  influence  upon  money 

matters  ; but  here  a a good  aspect  from  some  other  planet  to  Jupiter  is 

much  more  important  than  is  the  latter  when  taken  alone,  especially  if 
one  of  the  two  is  in  the  second,  eighth  or  tenth  house,  or  has  dignity 
therein.  It  gives  gain  quite  as  much  by  ‘ good  luck  ’ as  by  merit  or 

industry,  perhaps  more  so,  being  the  'rewarder  of  past  Karma.’  In 

good  aspect  to  Mars,  gain  by  personal  work  and  enterprise,— the  native 
being  a lavish  spender,  however ; to  Mercury,  through  educational  and 
intellectual  pursuits  and  those  of  the  planet  generally,  also  travel ; to 
the  Moon,  through  the  mother  and  family.  In  short,  when  Jupiter  is  in 
good  aspect  to  any  planet,  and  one  of  the  two  has  influence  over  money, 
through  its  house  position  or  rulership,  there  will  be  gain  through  things 
signified  by  that  planet.  In  this  respect  it  is  necessary  to  look  at  all 
parts  of  the  horoscope,  however,  and  not  to  predict  from  one'aspect  only. 
For  instance,  a luminary  in  good  aspect  to  Jupiter  will  not  bring  much 
from  the  parent  if  the  tenth  and  fourth  houses  are  afflicted.  Saturn  in 
good  aspect  to  Jupiter  is  particularly  favourable  for  money  and  possess- 
ions, and  there  is  usually  gain  through  the  father  and  by  legacy.  This 
influence  often  gives  considerable  practical  financial  ability,  especially  if 
assisted  by  the  enterprise  of  Mars,  or  the  good  luck  and  caution  of 
Venus  and  the  Moon. 

Jupiter  in  good  aspect  to  the  cusp  of  the  ascendant  or  the  luminaries 
is  extremely  good  for  the  health.  It  often  stimulates  the  growth  and 
increases  the  size  of  the  body.  It  sc  metimes  does  this  even  when  badly 
aspected  by  the  hyleg,  but  it  is  then  liable  to  result  in  an  unhealthy 
stoutness  and  to  cause  digestive,  liver,  and  other  disturbances  according 
to  the  sign  and  house  it  occupies.  In  good  aspect  to  the  hyleg,  the 
vitality  is  abundant  and  rapidly  generated  ; the  body  may  be  kept 
youthful  and  plastic  even  into  old  age  ; and  the  native  can  live  through 
diseases  that  would  kill  ordinary  persons. 

With  the  inner  world  of  the  feelings,  Jupiter  has  very  close  relations  ; 
in  fact  its  influence  may  almost  be  said  to  originate  here,  and  then  to 
pass  outwardly  into  action  on  the  one  hand  or  inwardly  into  intellect  on 
the  other.  The  person  born  under  a w^ell-aspected  and  dignified  Jupiter 


84 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


is  humane,  benevolent,  philanthropic,  sympathetic,  honourable,  sincere, 
devout,  social,  popular,  and  respected  ; and  the  planet’s  influence  is 
favourable  for  friendship  and  marriage,  for  all  family  and  social  relation- 
ships, and  for  all  religious  and  charitable  enterprises.  Its  less  desirable 
qualities  vary  a great  deal,  according  to  the  nature  of  the  afflicting  planet 
and  the  type  of  horoscope.  What  may  be  called  its  negative  side,  that 
is  when  afflicted  by  adverse  aspects,  etc.,  sometimes  causes  lack  of 
candour,  concealment  of  motives,  underhand  dealing,  subterfuge,  etc., 
also  irresolution,  sloth,  hypocrisy ; chiefly  when  afflicted  in  negative 
signs  or  by  negative  planets,  or  when  the  general  nature  of  the  horoscope 
is  negative.  Its  positive  side  gives  too  much  impulse,  an  impetuous, 
dogmatic  or  self-righteous  nature,  lacking  in  discretion,  and  acting  in 
haste,  perhaps  from  very  praiseworthy  motives,  but  often  having  cause 
to  repent  at  leisure.  When  afflicted  by  Mars,  the  religious  side  of  its 
influence  is  largely  spoilt,  and  the  native  is  either  hostile  to  ordinary 
religion  or  too  rash  and  extreme  in  support  of  it;  and  all  the  disabilities 
of  the  positive  side  of  the  planet  are  liable  to  come  out,  as  they  also  may 
when  the  Sun  afflicts. 

Jupiter  gives  considerable  appreciation  of  societ}^  life  and  its  funct- 
tions,  with  a desire  for  the  good  opinion  of  the  world  and  the  favour  of 
the  great.  The  native  is  usually  on  the  ‘correct’  side,  and  moves 
with  the  fashion  of  the  da}' ; is  orthodox  not  only  in  religious  obser- 
vances but  in  social  customs  as  well,  or  at  least  is  careful  not  to  overstep 
the  limits  of  ‘good  form.’  It  is  this  tendency  in  the  ordinary  person, 
no  doubt,  that  is  the  reason  why  Jupiter  ha.D  been  sometimes  taken  as 
the  type  of  commonplace  orthodox  exotericism.  One  of  the  Hindu 
fables  has  it  that  the  Moon  God  eloped  with  Jupiter’s  wife,  and  the 
union  of  the  two  resulted  in  the  birth  of  Mercury.  Here  Jupiter  is  taken 
as  ordinary  exoteric  religion ; the  Moon  stands  for  the  awakening 
psychic  faculty ; and  Mercury  for  that  first-hand  personal  experience 
and  knowledge,  as  distinguished  from  faith,  which  results  from  it. 

In  the  region  of  the  intellect,  Jupiter,  when  in  good  aspect  to  the 
mental  rulers,  generally  gives  much  openness  of  mind,  ‘common  sense,’ 
tact  or  persuasiveness,  and  sound  judgment.  The  mind  is  plastic,  recep- 
tive, fertile,  and  sensible.  While  Jupiter  cannot  give  intellect  pure  and 
simple,  yet  if  combined  with  Mercury  or  Uranus  it  may  vivif}'  and 
fertilise  almost  any  of  the  higher  regions  of  the  mind,  philosophic  and 
scientific,  or  oratorical,  imaginative,  poetic,  etc.,  giving  breadth  of 


JUPITER,  THE  UPLIFTER 


85 


horizon,  intuitive  grasp,  power  of  mental  combination,  mental  fruitful- 
ness and  vigour.  It  keeps  the  mind  healthy  and  gives  cheerfulness, 
hopefulness,  mental  balance  and  good  humour.  When  in  affliction  with 
Mercury,  some  of  the  drawbacks  above  mentioned  will  show  out, 
positive  or  negative  according  to  the  sign ; when  in  afQiction  with  the 
Moon,  they  are  more  likely  to  be  of  the  negative  type  unless  the  signs 
involved  are  very  positive ; but  in  any  case  of  affliction,  the  evils 
mentioned  may  quite  likely  be  due  to  no  great  moral  fault  on  the  part  of 
the  native,  being  rather  forced  upon  him  by  the  exigencies  of  circum- 
stances, fate  or  Karma  rather  than  character.  In  some  cases,  even 
when  the  native  of  Jupiter  does  wrong,  he  may  do  it  from  what  to  him 
are  honest,  sufficient,  and  conscientious  motives,  however  much  others 
may  condemn  him.  This  is  not  always  the  case,  however,  for  it  often 
accompanies  the  positive  type  of  affliction ; and  it  does  not  alter  the 
fact  that  the  extreme  of  Jupiter’s  negative  evil  may  be  deceit  and 
hj’pocrisy. 

In  aspect  with  Venus  or  the  Moon,  Jupiter  strengthens  the  imagina- 
tion ; and  in  strong  aspect  to  both  there  may  be  an  intense  appreciation 
of  the  beautiful,  with  extreme  ideality. 

The  influence  of  Jupiter  is  in  many  respects  that  of  a higher  and 
transmuted  Saturn,  the  latter  being  for  purposes  of  evolution  the 
workman  or  labourer  for  Jupiter,  the  lord  and  master.  Each  planet  is 
the  duplicate  of  another,  the  one  acting  in  the  lower  manifested  world 
for  the  ‘other  half  of  itself,’  whose  sphere  of  influence  is  more  active 
in  the  higher  or  ideal  world.  Thus  Jupiter  is  considered  a planet  that 
is  concerned  with  the  transcendental  world,  while  Saturn  is  engaged  in 
all  that  is  materialistic  and  essentially  practical  or  demonstrable.  In 
fact,  from  an  esoteric  standpoint  the  one  is  the  planet  in  which  the  life 
is  more  prominent  than  the  form ; thus  Jupiter  is  the  spirit  of  Saturn, 
while  Saturn  is  the  material  or  denser  body  of  Jupiter,  so  to  speak. 

Hence  Saturn  inclines  to  form  or  ceremony,  and  all  external 
methods  of  worship,  Jupiter  to  devotion  through  service,  benevolent 
actions,  and  pure  sympathy.  Saturn  represents  justice,  stern  and  rigid 
impartiality;  Jupiter,  mercy,  forgiveness  and  compassion. 

We  have  in  them,  as  ‘pairs  of  opposites,’  love  and  hatred,  pleasure 
and  pain,  life  and  form ; they  are,  in  fact,  counterparts  or  comple- 
ments, being  ‘subjective,’  and  ‘ objective ’ expressions  on  one  plane  of 
manifestation  of  the  same  eternal  spirit,  the  Sun  and  Centre  of  all 


86 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


things.  Saturn,  therefore,  has  sympathy'  with  the  Moon,  and  Jupiter 
with  the  Sun. 

In  all  readings  of  nativities  it  is  wise  and  profitable  to  study  these 
two  planets  at  the  same  time,  looking  upon  Jupiter  as  the  representative 
of  all  that  is  beneficient,  generous,  free  and  good ; thus  favouring  all 
advantages  and  inclining  to  service,  charit3^  philanthropy,  kindness, 
and  general  good  will.  It  is  onl^^  an  evil  influence  in  the  life  when 
afflicted  by  Mars,  or  when  not  working  harmoniouslj'^  with  its  formative 
half,  Saturn. 

When  afflicted  by  Mars,  the  liberal  and  large-hearted  tendencies  of 
Jupiter  are  turned  into  prodigalit}',  extravagance,  dissipation,  and  waste- 
fulness, but  when  free  from  these  afflictions  and  well  placed  in  any 
horoscope,  the  native  is  what  is  generally  termed  ‘ luck3^  ’ or  fortunate, 
being  happy  and  contented,  thus  courting  those  conditions  which  lead  to 
prosperit3^  and  success. 

In  all  who  absorb  more  of  Jupiter’s  vibrations  than  Saturn’s,  the 
disposition  is  mirthful  and  jo3'ous,  hopeful  and  trustful,  expectant  and 
confident ; but  when  the  disposition  is  affected  by  the  afflictions  of 
Saturn  then  the  native  becomes  hypocritical  and  deceitful,  or  pre- 
sumptuous and  boastful.  If  Saturn  is  well  aspected  by  Jupiter  the 
native  has  good  judgment,  is  a lover  of  justice,  a good  arbitrator,  and 
one  well  able  to  compare  and  review  in  a methodical  and  dispassionate 
manner. 

Jupiter  in  good  aspect  gives  discrimination,  understanding, 
and  judgment  to  all  who  come  under  his  benign  influence,  and 
when  the  whole  life  is  dominated  b3^  this  benefic  influence  the 
native  is  ever  merciful,  compassionate,  gracious,  humane,  and 
S3TOpathetic. 

Jupiter  is  the  planetary  representative  of  the  Roman  God  of  the 
same  name  ; Zeus  of  the  Greeks  ; Brihaspati  or  Brahmanhaspati  of  the 
Hindus  (called  also  Gum  by  Hindu  astrologers) ; the  Scandinavian 
Thor ; Ammon  of  Eg3^pt ; with  other  names  in  other  mythologies  and 
religions.  Astrologically  and  mysticall3'  it  has  a great  variet3'  of  inter- 
pretations ; depending  upon  whether  it  is  employed  in  the  highest 
spiritual  sense  (whether  cosmic  or  human),  in  a lower  personal  sense,  or 
physically  onl3\  By  the  ancient  astrologers  it  was  termed  the  ‘ greater 
fortune  ’ and  its  influence  was  considered  ver3^  benign  and  propitious  ; 
nevertheless,  although  modern  experience  entirely  confirms  this  view  in 


JUPITER,  THE  UPLIFTER  87 

a general  sense,  it  is  yet  certain  that  by  the  abuse  of  a so-called  bad 
aspect  the  planet  can  work  much  evil. 

To  sum  up,  Jupiter  is  a representative  of  the  ‘higher  mind’  in 
man,  not  as  pure  reason  but  as  innate  wisdom,  expansive,  unifying,  and 
harmonising.  It  holds  within  it  the  higher  powers  and  instincts  of  the 
soul  to  a far  greater  degree  than  can  be  manifested  through  the  physical 
brain  to-day.  Its  benefic  influence,  as  seen  in  the  horoscope,  is  only  a 
very  feeble  foreshadowing  of  the  more  glorious  possibilities  that  lie  in  the 
future,  but  which  cannot  be  manifested  until  man  has  fitted  himself  to 
receive  them. 


CHAPTER  X 


Saturn,  the  Subduer 

Saturn  is  the  most  important  planet  in  all  horoscopes  at  our  present 
stage  of  evolution,  marking  the  critical  stage  between  the  real  and  the 
unreal,  the  true  and  the  false,  the  subjective  and  objective,  light  and 
dark,  good  and  evil. 

In  no  sense  is  it  an  evil  planet  essentially,  but  its  restraining  and 
materialising  influence  offers  more  opportunity  for  its  interpretation 
into  direct  and  deliberate  evil  than  any  other  planet,  owing  to  the 
solidifying  and  hindering  influence  which  it  produces ; for  while  it  gives 
stability  and  firmness,  it  also  inclines  to  weakness  and  inconstancy.  In 
common  with  other  planets  it  has  a dual  aspect,  but  at  the  same  time 
its  vibrations  through  matter  tend  to  produce  greater  extremes  of  good 
and  evil  than  any  other  planet. 

Thus,  the  influence  of  Saturn  is  at  work  in  all  cases  of  degradation, 
degeneracy,  debasement  and  humiliation,  servility  and  shame  ; but  it  can 
also  be  seen  in  martyrdom,  true  humilit3'^,  reverence,  perseverance, 
endurance,  sacrifice,  surrender  and  serenity,  the  work  of  the  purifying 
angel — Saturn. 

In  every  sense  of  the  word  Saturn  is  the  planet  that  chastens,  and 
to  all  who  strive  after  purity,  virtue,  and  modesty,  the  words  ‘ Blessed 
are  the  pure  in  heart  for  they  shall  see  God  ’ will  have  a special  mean- 
ing ; for  by  leading  the  continent  life  which  Saturn  demands,  the  gates 
of  heaven  will  open  and  the  blessed  will  see  as  God  sees. 

All  the  myths  concerning  Saturn  are  deeply  interesting,  but  it  is 
unnecessary  to  quote  that  which  has  already  been  written,  therefore 
with  the  exception  of  a reference  to  the  mythological  relation  of  this 
planet  to  Chronos  or  Time  the  student  may  be  left  to  study  the  myths 
for  himself.  As  Time  Saturn  marks  a boundary,  denoting  the  finite 
and  limited,  and  symbolises  the  imprisoned  consciousness  bound  to 
form.  Saturn  is  Jehovah,  God  of  the  Jews.  He  is  also  supreme  ruler 


SATURN,  THE  SUBDUER 


89 


over  all  religious  forms  and  ceremonies,  ceremonial  magic,  etc. 
Moreover,  all  mystical  religions,  and  Jesuits,  priest,  monks,  and  rabbis, 
come  under  his  rule. 

Saturn  rarely  has  much  influence  upon  the  early  portion  of  the 
native’s  life,  governing  and  controlling  chiefly  the  latter  half  according 
to  the  strength  of  the  planet  at  the  time  of  birth. 

In  his  three  modes  of  expression  Saturn  governs  all  the  actions  of 
humanity,  and  therefore  becomes  the  chief  ruler  over  fate  and  destiny. 
He  is  the  mighty  lord  of  the  mineral  kingdom,  in  which  the  life  flowing 
from  the  source  of  all  life  and  light  is  imprisoned  and  bound  for  the 
purpose  of  its  final  separation  and  individualisation. 

The  highest  mental  attribute  of  Saturn  is  perfectiori,  produced  by  the 
power  to  achieve  through  industry  and  perseverance,  and  to  effectually 
plan  and  organise  through  deep  thought  and  careful  meditation.  Re- 
sponsibility, accuracy,  precision,  and  definiteness  are  saturnian  qualities, 
giving  power  to  consider  and  reason  on  all  things  with  caution  and 
solicitude  ; and  when  powerful  for  good  in  any  nativity  this  planet  gives 
mental  culture,  prudence  and  refinement. 

When  the  nativity  denotes  mystical  or  occult  tendencies  there  is  a 
profound  and  abstruse  mentality ; while  in  all  Saturn  inclines  toward 
the  scientific  attitude,  giving  an  intense  desire  to  find  out  the  true  state 
of  things  ; requiring  zeal,  industry,  promptitude,  and  heedfulness.  The 
higher  the  mind  is  raised  above  the  purely  concrete  and  objective,  the 
more  will  the  native  incline  towards  comparison,  discrimination,  judg- 
ment and  tact ; thus  developing  (when  Saturn  is  strong  and  unafflicted) 
the  saturnian  love  of  truth  and  honesty,  straightforwardness  and  impar- 
tiality, justice  and  sincerit3^  The  true  Saturn  man  is  alwa^^s  economical 
and  provident,  avoiding  waste  and  all  forms  of  extravagance  ; and  he  will 
always  make  some  endeavour  to  succeed,  by  persevering  and  never 
failing  in  punctuality  and  carefulness.  He  may  be  serious  and  thought- 
ful, but  is  never  giddy  or  frivolous.  Gifted  with  a mind  that  is 
watchful  and  wary,  his  chief  delight  will  consist  in  study  and  research, 
or  in  any  work  requiring  a studious,  contemplative  and  reflective  attitude 
of  mind. 

The  undeveloped  side  of  the  Saturnian  influence,  when  acting 
mentally,  is  very  undesirable,  and  inevitably  leads  the  native  to  severe 
pains  and  misfortunes  ; for  in  the  majority  of  cases  it  makes  him  very 
narrow  and  limited,  giving  rise  to  a mental  attitude  of  antipathy,  in- 


90 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


difference,  and  heedlessness,  thus  making  the  native  captious,  cantakerous, 
carping  and  negligent.  When  the  influence  is  very  strongly  towards  the 
concrete,  the  native  gives  way  to  avarice,  cupidity  dominating  the  whole 
of  the  mind,  and  if  Saturn  is  much  afflicted  the  native  wdll  resort  to 
fraud  and  trickery,  imposition  and  deception,  usurping  the  position  of 
others,  stealing  name  or  fame,  and  harbouring  dishonourable  and 
despicable  thoughts. 

The  abuse  of  Saturn’s  influence  may  be  clearly  seen  in  general 
incapacity  and  incompetence,  the  mind  being  indolent  and  dilatory ; 
while  in  those  who  fail  to  touch  any  of  the  mental  qualities,  but  lean 
solely  to  the  adverse  side  of  this  solidifying  nature,  it  causes  doubt, 
uncertainty,  hesitation  and  suspense. 

Mentally  the  vibrations  of  Saturn  are  decidedly  good  or  decidedly 
evil,  as  the  case  may  be,  their  power  in  either  direction  depending  upon 
the  crystallised  thought-forms  generated  in  the  past ; and  this  planet 
being  so  slow  in  motion,  its  influence  remaining  practically  constant 
throughout  life,  renders  it  necessary  to  take  more  than  ordinary 
care  in  studying  his  position  and  aspects  before  forming  a definite 
judgment. 

When  acting  upon  the  feelings,  Saturn  has  a very  peculiar  effect 
upon  those  who  come  under  his  retarding  forces,  for  the  province  of 
Saturn  is  to  separate  mind  from  lower  feeling,  and,  through  analysis 
of  the  feelings,  to  extract  the  virtue  latent  in  each  vice  of  the  animal 
nature.  An3^  feeling  or  emotion  affected  by  Saturn  tends  to  cause  pain 
and  sorrow,  the  chastening  and  purifying  influence  of  Saturn  tending  to 
solidify  the  emotions  and  preserve  the  feeling  for  future  reflection.  Thus 
we  may  have  from  the  afflictions  of  Saturn  stern,  uncompromising, 
inflexible  and  exacting  states  of  mind,  bringing  the  native  into  a per- 
manent attitude  of  austerity  and  arrogance.  In  undeveloped  persons 
there  wnll  be  a constant  feeling  of  antipathj^  fear,  mistrust  and  suspicion, 
tending  to  misery  and  despair,  and  finally  crystallising  into  a torpid, 
apathetic  coldness. 

The  good  effect  of  Saturn  upon  the  feelings  and  emotions  is  to 
induce  endurance,  consideration  for  the  welfare  of  others,  self-discipline, 
coolness,  self-control,  discretion,  patience,  temperance,  obedience,  sub- 
mission, respect  and  attention  to  duty.  It  gives  self  possession,  regularity, 
sobriety  and  steadfastness.  All  these  marked  traits  of  character  lead  to 
devotion  and  pure  affection,  carr3nng  the  native  safely  through  that  great 


SATURN,  THE  SUBDUER 


9 


ocean  of  feeling  in  which  so  many  whirlpools  draw  under  those  who  have 
not  learned  the  strength  of  Saturn,  namely  chastity  and  purity. 

As  regards  aetions,  Saturn  has  a benefieial  effect  upon  those  who 
have  conquered  passion  and  also  the  lethargy  that  sometimes  follows 
this  conquest.  To  those,  then,  who  have  succeeded  there  is  a steadily 
growing  tendency  to  make  actions  complete,  effective,  and  productive: 
and  those  who  are  working  under  a beneficent  Saturn  are  efficient  and 
able,  using  method  and  system,  and  displaying  perseverance  and 
steadiness.  They  usually  justify  their  actions  as  worthy  of  labour,  and 
their  position  as  the  result  of  merit,  and  they  rarely  enter  upon  any 
project  that  is  not  premeditated,  planned  and  determined  ; having  entered 
upon  any  course  they  carry  it  out  to  the  end,  and  success  though  slow  is 
sure,  bringing  honour  and  credit. 

When  weak,  this  planet  brings  failure  into  actions  and  their  frus- 
tration or  ruin,  causing  the  native  to  suffer  through  negligence,  apathy 
and  indifference.  Loss  and  misfortune  are  caused  by  injurious  and 
offensive  habits,  or  through  adverse  fate,  arising  either  from  lack  of 
merit  or  of  opportunity.  In  the  case  of  failure  the  native  is  easily 
inclined  to  leave  matters  unexplained  and  involved.  There  is  a tendency 
to  procrastinate,  and  put  off ; a common  saying  with  those  who  are 
disinclined  to  act  because  of  a weak  Saturn  being  ‘ there’s  another  day 
to-morrow  ’ or  ‘ let  them  wait,’  valuing  neither  their  own  nor  other 
people’s  time.  They  are  always  trying  to  forget  duties,  and  thus  em- 
barrass and  muddle  themselves  and  others.  When  involved  in  diffi- 
culties they  will  beg,  importune  and  implore,  but  rarely  take  steps  to 
accomplish  definitely  by  their  own  efforts  ; thus  they  induce  poverty, 
want,  and  sometimes  starvation. 

It  is  remarkable  that  Saturn  causes  effort  to  be  aroused  in  all  those 
who  would  use  his  vibration  for  the  achievement  of  whatever  goal  the 
soul  may  be  seeking.  He  increases  the  load  of  all  who  are  pilgrims  in 
any  sense  of  the  word,  and  he  is  thus  said  to  represent  a carrier  of 
burdens,  the  greatest  burden  of  all  being  responsibility  ; but  in  the  very 
task  that  Saturn  sets  for  each  of  his  children  there  is  the  surety  of  each 
virtue  he  bestows  bringing  its  own  reward. 

The  true  Saturnian  is  a faithful  friend,  a reliable  husband  and  a just 
father;  while  on  the  other  hand  a bad  Saturnian  is  a treacherous  enem3', 
an  improvident  parent,  and  an  inconstant  partner.  For  Saturn  is  the 
planet  of  fate  and  destiny,  and  represents  the  crystallised  thought-forms 


92 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


of  the  past : so  that  in  melting  as  it  were  the  leaden  pellets  of  past 
‘ karma,’  pain  and  sorrow  are  likely  to  arise  from  ignorance.  Nothing 
so  clearly  proves  the  fact  that  each  man  is  absolutely  his  own  lawgiver 
as  the  working  out  in  each  nativity,  through  Saturn,  of  the  limitations 
and  bondages  forged  in  other  lives  by  the  action  of  the  desire  nature ; 
for  Saturn  the  Reaper,  i.e.,  the  physical  body  of  environment,  gathers  in 
the  harvest  of  seed  sown  long  ago. 

Saturn ; reaper  ; husbandman  ; lower  self ; personal  ego  ; Satan  ; 
mystic ; magician ; etc.,  etc.  Many  and  various  are  the  names  and 
interpretations  of  Saturn,  that  cold  ringed  planet  shining  with  a dull  pale 
leaden  light  only  just  visible  to  the  unaided  eye.  The  secret  of  Saturn 
and  his  influence  is  a difficult  one  to  unravel ; for  he  represents  in  Natal 
Astrology  that  critical  stage  at  which  the  animal  merges  into  the  human, 
the  point  in  the  human  consciousness  where  all  the  strength  and  force 
of  the  animal  or  lower  self  is  concentrated  and  crystallised  into  the  self- 
centering atom  of  the  Personality. 

Saturn,  as  St  Peter,  keeper  of  the  keys  of  heaven  and  hell,  guards 
the  path  leading  upward  and  downward  between  the  light  and  life 
immortal  and  the  darkness  and  death  of  the  mortal  lower  self.  Esoterically 
Saturn  is  the  planet  of  The  Self  buried  in  matter  and  chained  to  the 
lower  mortal  bodies.  Hence  he  governs  that  part  of  the  Ego  in 
manifestation  which  represents  the  sum  total  of  the  Personality^ — 
the  concrete  half-animal  half-human  soul  whose  immortality  is  con- 
ditional, depending  upon  the  desires  being  polarised  heavenward  instead 
of  earthward,  and  upon  the  personal  will  being  surrendered  to  the 
divine  will,  when  the  true  humility  which  belongs  to  the  sphere  of 
Saturn  recognises  the  will  of  the  Father  as  the  supreme  and  all- 
embracing  love  which  draws  all  men  unto  Him. 

Esoterically  considered,  Saturn  is  not  an  easy  planet  to  interpret,  for 
it  is  exceedingly  difficult  to  explain  the  wide  range  of  his  dominion.  In 
the  physical  world  his  first  great  sphere  of  influence  is  exercised  over  the 
whole  of  the  mineral  kingdom,  in  which  stability  or  permanence  is  the 
leading  feature.  All  solids  of  every  kind,  and  all  dense  forms  of  matter, 
such  as  rocks,  minerals,  crystals,  etc.,  are  under  the  direct  limiting  and 
binding  influence  of  Saturn.  Thus  in  the  physical  body  Saturn  governs 
the  bony  structure  and  the  rigidity  and  firmness  of  the  human  frame,  as 
well  as  the  stability  of  trees  in  the  vegetable  world,  and  the  solidity  of 
all  animal  forms.  In  the  world  of  feeling  he  rules  over  fear  and  grief. 


SATURN,  THE  SUBDUER 


93 


sorrow  and  pain,  and  all  emotions  that  are  deep  and  prolonged  ; and  he 
reaches  his  final  solidifying  centre  in  the  mental  world,  as  the  limiting 
or  focalising  point  of  the  mind  in  the  personal  will,  and  in  those  mental 
states  which  endure  in  meditation. 

In  the  human  kingdom  Saturn  represents  all  stages  of  endurance 
and  permanence ; greed,  and  economy  ; impotence,  and  purity ; dearth 
or  stint,  and  conservation  of  energy ; and  he  embraces  all  forms  of 
humanity,  ranging  from  the  grovelling  miser  to  the  divine  ascetic,  from 
the  humblest  puritan  to  the  sannyasi  or  yogi. 

From  the  first  moment  of  individualisation  Saturn  governs  the 
whole  of  the  existence,  until  the  consciousness  passes  into  the  plane  of 
the  true  individuality  and  realises  its  immortality. 

Each  Manu  or  great  teacher  who  descends  to  guide  the  world’s 
evolution  comes  when  the  influence  of  Saturn  is  strongest ; and  each 
new  race,  whether  it  be  root- race  or  sub-race,  commences  its, fresh  cycle 
under  Saturn’s  mighty  sway. 

Saturn  delays,  retards  and  hinders  for  no  other  purpose  than  that 
perfection  shall  be  reached  by  all  things  and  all  men.  Saturn  con- 
centrates and  purifies  until  all  impurities  are  as  it  were  precipitated  to 
the  bottom  of  each  earth  life,  until  right  action  is  performed  for  right's 
sake  only. 

The  key-note  of  Saturn  for  each  individual,  nation  or  race,  is  there- 
fore Dharma,  or  Duty. 

None  can  neglect  duty  and  escape  the  hard  fate  which  Saturn 
imposes  upon  those  who  through  ignorance  or  selfishness  disobey  the 
law.  Through  obedience  to  Law  and  by  the  performance  of  Duty, 
Saturn  slowly  brings  his  children  toward  the  path  of  Renunciation.  A 
hard  task-master,  he  exacts  to  the  utmost  those  qualities  which  produce 
self-control  and  self-restraint ; and  thus  he  individualises  every  virtue, 
each  becoming  the  permanent  possession  of  those  who  come  under  his 
influence.  There  is  no  vice,  crime  or  sin  so  potent  for  evil  as  that 
which  has  the  solidifying  touch  of  Saturn  in  it,  and  on  the  other  hand 
there  is  no  virtue  or  ideal  so  permanent  and  secure  as  that 
which  Saturn  has  produced  through  his  chastening  and  purifying 
influence. 

From  a study  of  esoteric  Astrology  we  find  that  Saturn  is  the 
lord  over  duty,  and  the  path  of  action ; .and  we  know  that  the 
final  emancipation  and  freedom  from  bondage  of  all  those  who 


94 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


are  grouped  under  Saturn’s  ray  is  only  reached  by  ‘ non-attachment 
to  the  fruit  of  action.’  From  first  to  last  Saturn  binds,  and  from 
beginning  to  end  Saturn  individualises  and  purifies.  And  thus 
the  two  watchwords  for  every  Saturnian  are  Obedience  and  Homage, 
the  first  leading  to  true  humility,  and  the  latter  to  reverence  and 
respect. 


CHAPTER  XI 


Uranus,  the  Awakener 

The  planet  Uranus  was  re-discovered  by  the  astronomer  Sir  William 
Herschel  on  the  night  of  March  13th,  1781,  when  it  was  situated  in  the 
25th  degree  of  Gemini. 

As  stated  elsewhere,  the  planets  may  be  classified  in  terms  of  the 
three  departments  of  human  nature,  action  (will),  feeling  and  thought. 
Some  planets  are  stronger  in  one  of  these  departments  and  others  in 
another,  but  Uranus  is  remarkable  for  being  equally  strong  in  all  three. 
This  accounts  to  a large  extent  for  the  sudden  and  unexpected  nature  of 
the  events  it  brings  about ; for  whether  in  the  horoscope  of  birth  or  in 
directions,  and  whether  for  good  or  evil,  its  effects  are  often  unforeseen 
and  therefore  surprising  and  not  easily  guarded  against.  It  is  a planet 
of  great  power  and  energy,  and  may  be  compared  in  some  respects  to 
chemical  explosives,  which  contain  a large  volume  of  energy  locked  up 
within  them,  but  which  are  extremely  unstable  in  nature  and  liable  to 
undergo  sudden  decomposition  on  a very  slight  stimulus  being  applied 
from  outside.  In  the  case  of  Uranus,  we  have  not  only  the  great 
energy  and  the  suddenness  of  its  action,  but  also  the  fact  that  it  may 
produce  its  effects  in  any  one  or  in  all  of  the  three  directions  just 
mentioned. 

Because  it  is  equally  powerful  in  each  of  these  three  departments, 
those  persons  in  whose  horoscopes  it  is  very  strong  often  show  marked 
and  peculiar  changes  in  their  lives.  It  sometimes  seems  as  if  the 
planet’s  influence  were  exerted  for  a series  of  years  in  one  direction 
only,  largely  to  the  exclusion  of  the  other  two  ; and  that  a change,  often 
quite  sudden,  then  takes  place,  under  the  influence  of  which  the  native 
lives  a quite  different  kind  of  life  for  another  series  of  years.  In  some 
cases,  a third  series  can  also  be  detected.  With  some  people,  this 
change  will  affect  the  occupation  (as  for  instance  when  Uranus  is  in  the 
mid-heaven  at  birth)  : and  when  it  occurs,  one  pursuit  may  be  abandoned 


6 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


and  a different  one  entered  upon.  With  others,  it  may  alter  the 
affections  or  the  religious  opinions  ; and  yet  again  it  may  affect  intel- 
lectual affairs  and  studies.  The  manner  of  these  changes  will  depend 
upon  the  position  of  the  planet  b3'  sign  and  house  in  the  horoscope  of 
birth,  but  in  any  case  they  are  remarkable,  often  sufficiently  so  to 
divide  the  life  into  chapters,  so  to  speak,  each  telling  a different 
tale. 

It  must  not  be  supposed,  because  of  these  changes,  that  the  person 
in  whose  horoscope  Uranus  is  the  strongest  influence  is  changeable  in 
the  sense  of  being  vacillating,  irresolute,  easily  led  or  of  weak  will ; for 
exactly  the  contrary  is  the  case.  It  is  true  that  such  a person  may 
change  his  opinions  or  his  mode  of  life,  sometimes  within  a short  period 
only ; but  in  each  case  he  is  intensely  in  earnest.  The  planet  gives  a 
strong-willed,  positive,  enthusiastic  nature,  ver3^  set  on  its  own  ends, 
^^ifficult  to  influence,  and  disliking  control. 

If  the  whole  solar  system  be  taken  into  account,  the  Sun  stands  for 
the  king,  emperor,  president,  or  head  of  the  state.  But  the  Sun  is  not 
really  a planet ; it  is  a central  star,  giving  life  to  the  whole  system  and 
synthesising  all  influences  within  it ; being  to  the  system  exactly  what 
the  heart  is  to  the  body.  If  therefore  the  Sun  be  put  aside  and  the 
classification  of  influences  be  confined  to  the  planets,  Uranus  has  better 
claims  than  any  other  to  represent  the  king  or  ruler.  The  natives  of 
this  planet  frequently  work  their  way  to  the  front,  in  their  own  sphere 
of  life,  in  one  mode  or  another ; sometimes  through  ambition  and  pride, 
and  at  other  times  through  energy,  enthusiasm  and  determination.  They 
find  it  difficult  to  work  in  a subordinate  capacity,  and  are  so  independent 
that  they  do  not  easily  co-operate  with  other  people  at  all,  even  in  a 
friendly  way.  They  seemintended  by  nature  either  for  posts  of  authority 
and  responsibility  or  for  venturesome  positions  and  pioneering  work. 
They  are  sometimes  discoverers,  inventors,  or  explorers  : either  actually 
in  the  outer  world  around  them  or  inwardly  in  the  mental  and  moral 
worlds,  where  they  formulate  new  rules,  laws,  methods,  ideas,  codes 
and  opinions.  The3'’  seldom  keep  to  the  beaten  track,  but  Er,efer  to 
explore  the  unknown  and  to  try  new  methods. 

The  influence  of  Uranus  may  be  summed  up  under  the  three  heads 
of  action,  feeling,  and  thought. 

In  the  outer  world  of  will  and  action,  the  planet  dignifies  those  who 
are  in  authority  over  others,  whether  in  a relatively  humble  sphere  in 


URANUS,  THE  AWAKENER 


97 


life  or  in  an  exalted  position.  Its  good  aspects  bring  its  natives  to  the 
front,  even  if  onl3'^  as  a superior  servant  over  others ; and  it  ranges  from 
this  to  the  highest  positions  of  power  in  the  state.  If  in  good  aspect  to 
the  Sun,  or  when  well  placed  in  the  mid-heaven,  it  is  verj'  fortunate  for 
a monarch,  prime  minister,  statesman,  member  of  Parliament ; also  for 
those  occupying  official  positions  in  the  state,  in  the  national  services,  or 
in  municipalities.  It  is  thought  by  some  to  favour  societies,  companies, 
associations,  and  public  bodies,  and  occupations  connected  therewith. 
It  has  certainlj'  been  prominent  in  the  horoscopes  of  several  public  men, 
leaders  of  popular  opinion,  those  who  possess  what  is  called  a magnetic 
personality.  It  tends  to  bring  the  native  before  the  public,  to  broaden 
the  horizon,  not  only  of  the  mind,  but  also  of  action  and  occupation,  as 
its  interests  lie  with  the  many  rather  than  the  few.  It  influences  those 
who  follow  new  employments  or  out-of-the-way  occupations  ; inventors 
and  discoverers,  but  especially  those  who  work  along  the  most  up-to-date 
of  modern  scientific  lines,  and  those  engaged  in  employments  furnished 
by  these  inventions.  It  also  attracts  towards  such  subjects  as  mesmerism, 
hypnotism,  astrolog}’-,  spiritualism,  psychical  research,  etc. ; and  most 
people  who  follow  these  lines,  either  professionally  or  otherwise,  have 
Uranus  prominent  or  strongly  aspected  in  the  horoscopey^  It  is  doubtful 
whether,  when  considered  alone,  it  has  any  very  direct  effect  upon  the 
accumulation  of  money ; although  if  its  aspects  to  the  second,  eighth,  or 
tenth  houses  are  fortunate  its  natives  may  acquire  wealth  through 
‘ strokes  of  luck,’  fortunate  ideas,  or  through  occupations  governed  by  it 
or  by  the  planet  to  which  it  is  in  good  aspect.  It  favours  travelling  to 
some  extent,  partly  on  account  of  novelty  and  change  of  scene ; and  it 
gives  a tendency  to  bohemianism,  and  change  of  residence  and  of  occu- 
pation. It  gives  antiquarian  tastes  and  inclines  to  some  particular  hobbj', 
and  to  broad  humanitarian  views.  With  regard  to  health,  it  seems  to 
act  largely  through  the  nerves  and  mind,  and  to  be  of  more  value  in 
respect  of  vitalising  power  in  middle  and  old  age  than  in  youth  and  in- 
fancy. It  inclines  to  the  newer  and  more  unconventional  modes  of 
medical  treatment,  such  as  electricity,  hypnotism,  radiation,  etc.  When 
afflicting,  the  diseases  it  causes  are  usually  deep  seated,  complicated, 
and  often  wholly  incurable.  With  regard  to  the  will,  considered  by  it- 
self, Uranus  gives  a verj^  strong  and  positive  tendency  to  this  side  of  the 
nature,  and  a very  determined  will  while  the  impulse  lasts  ; but  it  is  a 
little  apt  to  act  erraticall3%  to  change  suddenly,  and  to  cause  apparent 

G 


98 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


contradictions  in  conduct.  Yet  there  may  be  very  intense  and  concen- 
trated activity  capable  of  accomplishing  much. 

In  the  department  of  the  feelings,  emotions,  and  passions,  Uranus 
imparts  great  impulse,  power,  or  enthusiasm,  which  may  find  its  outcome 
in  any  direction  indicated  by  the  planets  with  which  it  is  in  aspect. 
In  g^ood  aspect  to  the  Moon  it  strengthens  the  imagination;  to  Venus 
it  intensifies  the  affections,  as  well  as  giving  love  of  beauty  in  colour  and 
melody;  to  Jupiter,  it  increases  the  imjLgmative- side- -of. .religion  and 
mystical  ritualisrn  as^well  as  beaut3'^  in  form  and  harmony;  to  Mars,  it 
gives  great  ardour,  enthusiasm,  and  enterprise  in  any  work  that  may  be 
undertaken.  It  causes  romantic  attachments,  often  of  a sudden  and 
unconventional  nature.  When  afflicting,  it  causes  estrangements,  separ- 
ations, wrong  views,  incompatability  of  temperament.  It  has  sometimes 
been  regarded  as  the  cause  of  all  sorts  of  marital  irregularities  .and  as 
extremely  inimical  to  a virtuous  marriage.  But  this  is  probably  only 
the  result  of  its  characteristic  impulse,  unconventionality,  and  careless- 
ness for  established  laws  and  customs  ; for  its  influence  is  not  worse 
here  than  when  it  afflicts  the  mental  rulers.  Uranians  have  a great 
many  acquaintances  if  few  intimate  friends ; they  are  often  widely 
known  and  popular ; it  is  easy  to  make  their  acquaintance  and  to  asso- 
ciate with  them,  although  it  may  be  difficult  to  get  on  with  them  at 
times. 

With  the  intellect  this  planet  has  very  close  associations,  as  it  seems 
to  have  direct  action  upon  the  brain  and  nervous  system.  It  gives 
originality  of  thought,  independence  of  mind,  inventive  genius,  intuition, 
intellectual  and  metaphysical  ability,  appreciation  of  new  ideas  and 
advanced  forms  of  thought,  as  well  as  mental  hastiness  and  impulsive- 
ness, independence  and  self-will.  When  afQicted,  or  when  acting 
through  an  inharmonious  nature,  it  causes  eccentricity,  abruptness  of 
manner,  brusqueness,  neglect  of  or  disrespect  for  established  opinions 
and  customs,  and  unconventionality  sometimes  amounting  to  rudeness 
and  rebellion.  It  has  a close  relation  with  the  occupations  and  character- 
istics of  Mercury,  at  least  in  its  intellectual  influence : such  as  writing, 
speaking,  travelling,  etc., ; but  in  whatever  direction  its  activities  are 
carried  on,  the  native  of  Uranus  will  think  his  own  thoughts  and  go  his 
own  way,  irrespective  of  opinion,  custom,  or  precedent,  and  will  show  a 
great  love  of  mental  freedom.  In  those  who  are  really  respoi^ive^  to 
the  higher  influence  of  this  planet,  there  is  much  intuition,  response  to 


URANUS,  THE  AWAKENER 


99 


higher  thought,  and  ability  to  bring  through  into  the  waking  conscious- 
ness knowledge  gained  in  inner  spheres  of  being. 

Uranus  and  Neptune  in  many  respects  pair  off  together.*  They  are 
the  two  planets  discovered  in  modern  times,  although  names  taken  from 
ancient  mythology  have  been  given  to  them.  No  record  has  been 
handed  down  that  would  suffice  to  prove  that  ancient  astrologers  were 
acquainted  with  their  existence ; but  in  spite  of  this  occultists  report 
that  occult  investigation  shows  them  to  have  been  known  in  very  ancient 
times,  and  that  such  knowledge  had  been  gained,  not  by  the  methods  of 
the  modern  scientific  astronomer,  but  by  the  exercise  of  those  faculties 
of  seership  always  inherent  in  mankind,  though  dormant  with 
most. 

From  what  has  been  said  it  will  be  seen  that  Uranus  differs  in  one 
important  respect  from  other  planets.  Every  other  planet  has  a distinct 
bias  towards  one  of  the  three  departments  of  consciousness,  will,  intellect, 
or  feeling.  Uranus  is  the  only  one  that  is  equally  strong  in  all.  It 
manifests  a passional  energy  not  unlike  that  of  Mars,  igtellectual  power 
at  times  equal  to  that  of  Mercury,  and  a will  that  can  be  as  determined 
as  that  of  Saturn.  It  is  stated  to  be  the  planet  for  which  the  Sun  was 
used  as  a substitute  by  those  astrologers  to  whom  the  existence  of 
Uranus  was  unknown.  Its  ideal  is  that  of  the  King,  regarded  as 
gathering  up  in  his  own  person  all  the  different  lines  of  activity  in  his 
kingdom. 

Although  the  names  given  to  Neptune  and  Uranus  by  astronomers 
are,  from  the  ordinary  point  of  view,  arbitrary  and  fanciful,  it  is  remark- 
able that  astrological  experience  is,  to  some  extent,  justifying  them. 
Neptune  (Poseidon)  was  the  god  of  the  watery  element ; and  the  planet 
is  found  to  have  some  sympathy  with  water,  while  those  born  under  it 
often  display  characteristics  associated  with  that  division  of  human 
nature  which  is  held  to  correspond  to  water,  namely  the  feelings  and 
emotions. 

Uranus  or  heaven  (Coelus  in  Latin)  was  the  husband  of  Gaea,  the 
earth,  the  father  of  Saturn  and  the  grandfather  of  Jupiter.  ‘ Earth  ’ 
here  means  primal  matter,  and  ‘Uranus’  stands  for  the  creative  Will 
that  shapes  it  into  forms  and  evolves  a cosmos  from  it.  This  Will, 


* For  further  rem.irks  on  this  head  see  ‘ Uranus  and  Neptune  Contrasted,’ 
pp.  1 19  et  seq. 


lOO 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


individualised  in  man,  becomes  the  creative  power  of  the  intellect,  the 
energiser  of  the  feelings,  and  even  the  motive  force  of  the  physical  bod}' ; 
for  the  muscles  only  contract  to  move  the  body  in  response  to  the  stimulus 
of  the  w'ill. 

In  recent  times  the  theory  has  been  suggested  that  the  planets  in 
the  solar  S3'stem  ma}'  be  classified  on  a septenary  scale,  starting  from 
Mercury.  If  the  asteroids  are  reckoned  as  a unit,  Uranus  wfill  then 
become  the  octave  of  Mercur}',  and  Neptune  that  of  Venus.  While  this 
supplies  man}'  suggestions  of  interest,  it  must  not  be  accepted  without 
reservation,  and  certainly  does  not  exhaust  the  subject.  It  does  not 
seem  to  have  been  noticed  that  a slight  modification  of  this  theory  would 
agree  as  well  if  not  better  with  modern  experience.  If  we  imagine  a 
creative  wave  starting  from  the  Sun  and  travelling  outward  to  Saturn, 
the  latter  planet  w'ill  represent  the  outermost  limit  of  things,  a position 
which  it  actually  occupies  in  astrological  analogy  and  mystical  interpreta- 
tion. The  wave  may  then  be  supposed  to  return  on  itself,  not  literally 
in  space  but  metaphorically  in  the  characteristics  of  the  succeeding 
planets.  Uranus  then  becomes  an  analogue  of  Saturn,  on  the  inward  or 
return  Avave,  and  Neptune  that  of  Jupiter.  There  is  much  in  what  is 
known  of  these  two  planets  to  bear  out  such  a view  as  this.  As 
previously  remarked,  Uranus  is  by  many  astrologers  associated  with 
Saturn’s  day  sign,  Aquarius ; and  Neptune  is  believed  by  some  to  be 
the  real  ruler  of  Pisces,  the  night  sign  of  Jupiter  and  the  exaltation  of 
Venus.  In  their  influence  upon  the  weather,  this  resemblance  again 
shows,  to  some  extent;  for  Saturn  and  Uranus  are  both  classified  as 
dry  and  cold,  although  the  latter  w'ill  often  cause  winds  as  well,  thus 
showing  its  partial  resemblance  to  Mercury;  while  Jupiter  and 
Neptune  may  both  be  considered  temperate,  the  former  with  a bias 
towards  warmth  and  dryness,  and  the  latter  towards  moisture  and 
dampness. 

The  invariable  suddenness  and  unexpectedness  of  Uranus’  action  is 
quite  peculiar  to  this  planet  and  distinguishes  it  from  all  the  rest.  No 
adequate  explanation  seems  to  have  been  given  as  yet  to  this  unique 
trait,  which  has  been  likened  to  the  action  of  dynamite  and  other 
explosives.  It  has  been  shown  by  scientific  examination  that  chemical 
compounds  that  are  very  complex  in  constitution,  and  that  contain  a 
large  volume  of  energy  locked  up  w'ithin  them,  are  extremely  unstable 
in  nature  and  very  liable  to  undergo  decomposition. 


URANUS,  THE  AWAKENER 


lOI 


Herbert  Spencer  says  {First  Principles,  § loi) : 

‘ The  most  striking  and  conclusive  illustration  is  furnished  by  the  com- 
binations into  which  nitrogen  enters.  These  have  the  two  characters  of  being 
specially  unstable  and  of  containing  specially  great  quantities  of  motion.  A 
recently  ascertained  peculiarity  of  nitrogen  is  that,  instead  of  giving  out  heat 
when  it  combines  with  other  elements,  it  absorbs  heat.  That  is  to  say,  besides 
carrying  with  it  into  the  liquid  or  solid  compound  it  forms  the  motion  which 
previously  constituted  it  a gas,  it  takes  up  additional  motion  ; and  where  the 
other  element  with  which  it  unites  is  gaseous,  the  molecular  motion  of  this  also 
is  locked  up  in  the  compound.  Now  these  nitrogen  compounds  are  unusually 
prone  to  decomposition  ; .and  the  decompositions  of  many  of  them  take  phace 
with  extreme  violence.’ 

Here  we  have  a close  analogy  to  the  mode  of  action  of  Uranus. 
Like  a violent  explosive,  we  have  to  look  upon  the  planet  as  containing 
an  unusually  large  quantity  of  energy,  apparently  ready  to  exert  its 
characteristic  effects  suddenly  and  on  slight  provocation.  This  is  the 
reason  for  its  suddenness  and  therefore  also  for  the  unexpectedness  of 
the  effects  it  produces.  They  are  unexpected  because  they  occur  so 
suddenly. 

If  we  return  for  a moment  to  the  classification  of  the  effects  of  this 
planet’s  influence,  we  shall  have  a clear  picture  of  its  mode  of  operation. 
Its  cold-producing  nature,  which  allies  it  to  Saturn,  means  the  absorption 
of  energy  from  outside.  It  contains  within  itself,  apparently  in  a very 
unstable  condition,  a great  volume  of  energy,  which  operates  chiefly 
through  the  mind  and  nervous  system.  Just  as  a small  spark  falling 
upon  gunpowder  will  produce  enormous  effects  through  the  sudden 
liberation  of  the  energy  previously  locked  up  in  the  compound,  so 
what  may  seem  a trifling  cause  sets  free  the  energy  of  Uranus,  and 
effects  are  produced  suddenly  which  are  quite  out  of  proportion  to  the 
apparent  cause.  Then  more  energy  is  absorbed  from  outside,  which 
produces  more  cold,  and  after  a sufficient  interval  the  planet  will  be  again 
ready  to  act  in  its  usual  abrupt  and  explosive  fashion.  When  well 
aspected,  this  liberation  of  energy  will  of  course  act  through  harmonious 
and  fortunate  channels,  and  the  planet  will  prove  the  Regenerator ; but 
when  afflicted,  its  disruptive  effects  will  truly  entitle  it  to  the  name  of 
the  Destroyer, 

In  his  article  upon  ‘ The  Occult  Influence  of  the  Planet  Uranus  ’ 
Mr  G.  E.  Sutcliff  shows  a number  of  exceedingly  interesting  relation- 


02 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


ships — such  as  between  the  diameter  of  Uranus’  orbit  and  the  height  of 
man  for  instance. 

The  number  tt  x io‘^  is  found  to  be  of  great  significance,  as 
connecting  together  several  natural  units.  The  number  tt  (pronounced 
Pi)  is  the  ratio  of  the  circumference  of  a circle  to  its  diameter  and  its 
value  to  five  places  is  3’ 141 59....  The  above  number, 

TT  X io'*  = 3'i4i59...  X 1,000,000,000,000 

since  10'’,  or  ten  to  the  twelfth  power,  is  equal  to  a million  million. 

This  number  forms  the  ke3uiote  of  the  article  referred  to,  which  is  too 
full  of  suggestive  thought  to  admit  of  a sjmopsis  without  sacrificing  much 
of  its  value,  but  a lengthy  quotation  from  it  is  given  in  Appendix  I. 


CHAPTER  XII 


Neptune,  the  Mystic 

The  nature  of  Neptune  is  at  present  little  understood.  This  chapter 
consists  of  notes  by  several  close  students  of  Astrolog}^  who  have 
devoted  special  attention  to  this  planet.  The  statements  made  must, 
however,  be  read  as  opinions  and  not  as  definite  knowledge. 

Neptune  is  supposed  to  be  the  planet  of_Chaos»  representing  a state 
^f  things  undifferentiated,  disordered,  without  shape  or  definite  form  ; it 
Ls  thei  efore  the  planet  of  confusion,  causing  hypochondria,  hysteria,  etc. 
It  does  not  however  solely  imply  chaotic  conditions  without  any  other 
interpretation,  for,  in  common  with  all  the  other  planets,  it  has  a two- 
fold expression  ; but  it  has  least  influence  upon  the  physical  plane  of  any 
of  the  planets,  and  this  is  probably  the  reason  why  it  is  taken  to  be 
indicative  of  Chaos,  at  least  as  regards  this  plane. 

When  Ulysses,  after  his  numerous  adventures,  was  allowed  to 
return  home  by  the  command  of  Zeus,  Poseidon  (Neptune)  contended 
against  his  release.  The  majesty  of  Zeus  prevailing,  however,  Ulysses 
was  allowed  to  depart,  but  Poseidon  was  nevertheless  permitted  for  a 
certain  period  to  harass  him,  and  at  every  step  covered  him  with 
confusion. 

Poseidon  (the  Greek  name  for  the  god  Neptune)  was  given  kingship 
over  the  sea,  and  he  is  usually  pictured  lashing  the  ocean  with  his  trident. 
Over  all  things  said  by  the  ancients  to  be  governed  by  Poseidon  this  god 
exercised  a baneful  and  destructive  influence,  producing  earthquakes, 
storms,  and  disturbance.  It  is  evident,  also,  that  Neptune  had  some 
mysterious  influence  in  connection  with  the  flood  during  the  Atlantean 
period,  and  more  especially  over  the  last  portion  to  be  submerged  of 
ancient  Atlantis,  which  was  named  after  Poseidon. 

But  all  this  does  not  go  to  prove  that  perse  Neptune  is  an  evil  planet, 
or  that  it  has  no  other  meaning  than  that  of  chaos.  It  simply  means  that 
Neptune  has  little  or  no  direct  influence  over  action  upon  the  physical 

103 


104 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


plane,  its  sphere  of  influence  being  largely  confined  to  the  psychic  or 
emotional  plane. 

In  the  phenomenal  world  it  may  be  expressed  as  magic,  black  or 
white  ; but  its  power  is  manifested  rather  in  the  essence  of  things,  and  not 
in  that  of  which  it  is  the  essence.  Through  Pisces,  its  house,  it  may  be 
connected  with  the  waters  of  Lethe,  in  the  oblivion  to  all  objective 
expressions  of  consciousness  these  waters  are  said  to  produce.  According 
to  the  latest  interpretation,  this  planet  is  concerned  with  an  evolution 
that  is  not  destined  to  reach  a very  high  level  of  unfoldment  upon  the 
physical  planet  known  by  this  name.  The  connection  of  Neptune  with 
the  sign  Pisces  may  account  for  the  strange  attraction  drugs  have  for 
certain  types  of  Pisces  persons,  and  for  those  who  have  Neptune  in  the 
ascendant,  or  angular  in  a watery  sign. 

The  ‘ pairs  of  opposites  ’ appear  highly  accentuated  in  this  planet, 
and  there  has  been  more  confusion  in  the  minds  of  students  over  its 
influence  than  over  that  of  any  other.  By  some  it  has  been  considered 
an  ‘out-and-out  malefic,’  the  veritable  dust-bin  of  humanity,  the 
demoraliser  of  all  that  is  good  and  virtuous.  Undoubtedly,  there  are 
two  sides  to  its  nature  : one  that  may  at  first  sight  seem  malefic  and 
barren,  the  other  benefic  and  fruitful.  There  is  thus  a reason  for  our 
failure  to  fully  understand  the  precise  nature  of  this  most  mysterious 
planet.  On  the  phj^sical  plane,  to  the  majority  of  mankind  at  the 
present  day  it  must  represent  chaos,  confusion,  disorder  and  emptiness. 
To  the  few  it  is  the  planet  of  pure  love  and  friendship,  of  wisdom  and 
bliss.  The  true  elements  of  Neptune  are  fire  and  water,  representing 
the  higher  and  the  lower  emotions — the  purified  passions,  or  hysterical 
and  fanciful  personal  notions. 

The  influence  of  Neptune  in  any  horoscope  will  entirely  depend 
upon  the  native’s  ability  to  respond  to  its  vibrations.  The  ‘black 
magician  ’ will  use  them  to  cast  confusion  upon  his  victims,  and  will 
expend  their  force  through  himself  in  various  chaotic  schemes,  or  in 
phenomenal  magic,  having  no  definite  aim  or  purpose,  save  that  of 
gratifying  curiosity  and  perverted  wonder.  The  unconscious  ‘ medium  ’ 
will  interpret  its  influence  in  vague  and  distorted  ramblings.  Those 
who  are  not  yet  fully  self-conscious  will  bring  through  from  sleep  into 
the  brain  strange  nightmare  fancies  ; while  the  drunkard  will,  in  passing 
through  the  stages  of  his  delirium,  see  devils  and  goblins  under  its 
influence.  To  those  who  have  little  or  no  self-control  the  effect  of  this 


NEPTUNE,  THE  MYSTIC 


05 


planet  will  be  a force  playing  upon  them  that  they  cannot  understand, 
and  according  to  their  ignorance  they  will  toy  therewith  until  they 
become  the  victims  of  their  own  misuse  of  its  subtle  tendencies. 

For  in  every  horoscope  Neptune  represents  the  nebulous  stage 
which  all  must  pass  through,  even  in  the  shutting  off  of  memory  between 
day  and  night,  sleeping  and  waking,  and  from  life  to  life ; for  in  each 
and  all  of  us  there  is  some  chaos  in  our  consciousness,  and  some  part  of 
our  being  not  yet  brought  into  cosmos,  or  harmony  and  order.  In  some 
cases,  rare  at  our  present  stage  of  knowledge,  we  may  find  a nativity  in 
which  it  is  the  only  influence  to  account  for  extended  vision  and  clair- 
voyance. In  some  cases,  again,  that  have  come  under  our  observation, 
Neptune  represents  a pure  and  chaste  sex  life,  and  exalted  and  purified 
love  nature.  So  sublime  are  the  vibrations  of  this  planet  that  only  the 
few  can  raise  their  consciousness  to  its  level  of  expression ; for  its  dual 
nature,  which  seems  to  be  in  some  way  more  emphasised  than  any  other, 
causes  it  to  be  expressed  in  its  highest  only  through  the  finest  vehicles  ; 
therefore  the  mind  and  body  must  be  pure,  and  well  under  control,  be- 
fore the  higher  and  psychical  expression  can  be  made  manifest  in  the  flesh. 

When  in  an  angle  Neptune  will  affect  the  actions  of  the  native 
according  to  the  sign  it  is  in,  and  the  nature  of  the  aspects  it  receives. 
In  the  majority,  it  will  be  found  to  give  a^peculiax  fascination  and  an 
unusual  magnetic  condition.  When  this  planet  is  acting  favourably, 
the  skinAvill  be  faii'  and  the  complexion  clear,^  in  some  cases  assuming- a 
semi-transparency.  Students  of  human  nature  will  know,  on  seeing  the 
native,  how  far  the  vibrations  are  acting  for  good,  and  how  far  the 
influence  is  being,  through  ignorance,  misused.  From  a physical  stand- 
point, those  having  Neptune  in  an  angle  should  exercise  great  care  in 
regard  to  personal  cleanliness,  and  should  also  avoid  associating  with 
those  who  are  morally  not  quite  accountable  for  their  actions,  as  the 
influence  of  this  planet  is  always  more  or  less  ‘mediumistic.’ 

In  a succeedent  house,  Neptune  will  affect  the  feelings,,  their  nature 
being  in  accordance  with  the  house  and  aspects.  When  thus  acting 
through  the  feelings,  the  influence  of  Neptune  gives  subtle  and  unac- 
countable attractions  and  aversions,  peculiar  drawings  to  psychic  centrej, 
a love  of  strange  placesj-curious  perhaps  unpleasant  feelings  when  in  the 
society  of  others,  impressions  about  things  and  persons— sometimes 
correct  intuition.^- -at- other  times  * notions’  and  erratic  behaviour. 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


io6 

Many  quite  inexpressiWe-jnoods  will  be  felt ; from, vague,  semi-hysterical 
nonsense,  to  trancej  ccstasy  _and  bliss,  an^'^  ivumber^of  subjectiye.slates 
may  be  experienced. 

Jn  a cadent  Jiouse.,  ^Neptune,  affects  the  mind,  according  to  the 
particular  house  it  occupies  and  the  aspects  it  receives.  Its  influence 
then  causes  the  native  to  practisp  thought-transference,  thought-reading, 
clairvoyance,  crystal-gazing,  etc.  iLgivea  arlislie  tastes  of  an  exalted 
order,  blending  feeling  and  mind  Into  an  emotion  or  intuition  that  Js_ 
carried  awa3^  from  the  objective  tcrtliepurely  subjectiyejplanes.  of  being. 

In  aspect  to  the  luminaries,  Neptune  affects  the  native  physically  : 
^ if  to  the  Moon,  toward  subtle  feelings,  intuitions,  and  eccentric  and 
Qpndefined  actions  ; to  the  Sup,  it  gives  great  finesse  and  superior 
refinement,  with  considerable  musical  skill,  especial^’’  in  connection  with 
stringed  instruments. 

In  aspect  to  Saturn  or  Jupiter,  it  affects  the  feelings  of  the  native  ; 
\ if  to  Saturn,  toward  the  psychic,  mystical,  weird  and  ghostl3';  to 
Jupiter,  toward  the  religious  and  sympathetic  sentiments. 

In  aspect  to  Mercury  or  Uranus,  it  affects  the  mental  constitution 
^ of  the  native  ; if  to  Mercurj^  toward  magic,  with  spasmodic  fits  of 
mental  abberration,  or  forgetfulness,  sometimes  also  towards  deception 
and  fraud ; to^  Uranus,  toward  transcendentalism,  metaphysics,  jiew 
thought,  mental  healing,  and  general  reform  of  mental  expression. 

In  all  cases  this  is  modified  bj'  the  nature  of  the  aspect,  and  the 
house  from  which  it  occurs. 

The  colour  of  Neptune  from  an  occult  standpoint  only,  dark  blue, 
or  a deep  sea-blue.  When  rising  or  otherwise  manifesting  a strong 
influence  in  the  horoscope,  the  skin  is  very  fine  and  clear,  and  the  ej^es 
have  a bluish  tendency. 

None  who  claim  this  planet  as  their  ruler  can  be  too  practical  or 
too  severely  honest ; for  their  ideals,  to  be  of  any  lasting  value  either  to 
themselves  or  to  others,  must  be  lived  out  and  put  into  practice  here,  on 
this  physical  plane. 

The  further  information  given  below  about  this  planet  has  been 
selected  from  contributed  articles  because  it  would  be  difficult  better  to 
convey  the  ideas  concerning  the  m3^sterious  influence  of  this  much- 
maligned  planet  than  is  here  done.  Neptune,  as  has  been  before  said, 
is  related  to  feeling  in  much  the  same  wa3'  as  Uranus  is  to  thought,  and 


NEPTUNE.  THE  MYSTIC 


07 


each  is  concerned  with  a step  in  evolution  which,  if  it  be  missed  or 
wrongly  taken  (indicated  by  affliction  of  the  planet  in  question)  leads  to 
an  inversion,  either  of  idea  or  of  emotion  as  the  case  may  be. 

In  the  Bhagavat  Gita  there  are  two  chapters  severally  devoted  to 
two  types  of  ‘ 3’’oga  ’ or  methods  of  attaining  spiritualitj'^,  and  which  are 
there  termed  * The  Yoga  of  Discrimination  between  the  Real  and  the 
Unreal,’  and  ‘ The  Yoga  of  the  Renouncal  of  Action.’  Over  these  two 
typical  modes  of  spiritual  evolution  Uranus  and  Neptune  respectively 
may  be  considered  to  have  dominion,  and  bj'^  meditating  upon  the  true 
significance  thereof  the  earnest  student  will  most  readil3’’  arrive  at  the 
meaning  and  myster3^  of  these  two  planets,  so  intimate^’’  connected  with 
all  forms  of  occultism. 


I 

The  planet  Neptune  seems  to  be  a typical  representative  of  the 
psydiic  plane  in  Nature,  and  to  have  affinityi-wLtli  the,  watery  signs  of 
the  zodiac.  Water  stands  lor  the  woman  as  opposed  to  the  man ; for 
the  Moon-nature  as  opposed  to  the  Sun-nature ; for  that  which  is 
receptive  and  responsive  to  stimulus  from  without,  as  contrasted  with 
that  which  is  positive,  non-receptive,  and  self-motived.  The  following 
are  the  keys  to  the  nature  of  this  planet : — 

(1)  ‘Unstable  as  water’  is  a suitable  description  of  Neptune; 
unstable,  constantly  changing,  unreliable,  and  not  to  be  depended  on.  It 
overthrows  things,  and  operates  in  some  cases  even  more  unexpectedl3' 
than  Uranus  (though  rarely  so  suddenly).  Uranus  is  the  Wind,  blowing 
where  it  listeth  ; Neptune  the  Water,  less  stable  even  than  the  shifting 
sand,  engulfing  the  solid  earth  and  overthrowing  the  ambitious  works 
of  man. 

(2)  The  ‘watery’  nature,  as  manifested  in  human  character,  is 
instinctive  and  intuitive  rather  than  intellectual.  It  is  not  bound  by  the 
rules  of  the  logical  facult3%  and  its  conclusions  are  based,  in  part,  upon 
evidence  not  furnished  by  the  five  senses.  When  prominent  for  good, 
therefore,  Neptune.may  assist  the  manifestation  of  genius,  may  inspire 
the_mind  with  ideas  derived  from  inner  planes  of  nature,  and  may 
attract  towards  the  spiritual.  But  when  afflicted  in  an  evil  horoscope 
this  planet  ma3'be  the  vehicle  for  all  sorts  of  undesirable  influences  from 
the  astral  plane  of  Nature,  tempJ:atiQn&-,that  appeal  to  the  passional, 
emotionaL  and  sense-lo_ving  side  of  the  animal  man ; and  it  ma3’’  incline 


io8 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


towards  a passive  and  injurious  kind  of  mediumship.  When  well 
aspected  in  a good  horoscope,  how^ever,  this  may  take  on  a much  higher 
form,  resulting  in  normal  seer-ship. 

(3)  A third  key  to  the  planet’s  influence  lies  in  the  emotional  and 
sensational  characteristics  shown  by  those  in  whom  the  passional  nature 
predominates.  A love  of  luxury,  of  fine  sensations  and  the  things  of  the 
senses  ; an  emotional  nature  ^asily_aroused  by  slight  stimulus : .a  fond- 
ness for  novelty,  and  anything  that  causes  a new  sensation  ; a change- 
able and  versatile  nature,  with  fickle  enthusiasms — these  are 
characteristic  of  Neptune. 

(4)  Just  as  water  passively  reflects  the  images  of  things,  and  shapes 
itself  to  bodies  with  which  it  comes  in  contact,  so  the  child  of  Neptune 
is  imitative,  thinks  the  thoughts  of  others,  is  too  much  influenced  by  the 
example  of  others  and  is  almost  as  much  moved  by  the  joys  and  sorrows 
of  others  as  if  they  were  his  own.  Neptune  thus  provides  aotors  ofall 
sorts ; visionary  enthusiasts  who  create  their  own  Madonnas,  and 
reproduce  the  stigmata  on  their  persons ; detectives,  who  reflect  in 
themselves  the  thought  of  the  criminal ; thought  readers,  novelists  and 
lawyers,  who  work  by  plot  and  counter-plot ; imitative  imaginatives,  who 
resort  to  opium  and  other  drugs  to  produce  fictitious  visions  and 
artificial  exaltations  of  faculty ; also  pretenders  and  impostors,  as  well  as 
natural  actors. 

Viewed  clairvoyantly  in  the  cr3^stal,  Neptune  appears  as  a nebulous 
plasm,  bright  within,  and  of  a dull  bluish,  or  slate  colour  externally.  It 
changes  its  form  like  a protoplasmic  amoeba  in  rapid  activity,  and  seems 
capable  of  fission  or  self-duplication. 

Having  regard  to  this  general  statement  of  Neptune’s  influence,  the 
reasons  for  the  remarks  that  follow  will  be  easily  seen. 

Neptune’s  power  for  good  is  due  to  its  receptivity,  openness  to  new 
ideas  and  methods,  versatility  ofLgenius.  wilJingnesa  to  abandon  that 
which  is  old  and  useless  and-to-aeeept  4hat-wbkh  is  new  and  improved  ; 
to  its  intuitive  perception- af  truth,  its  ability  to  rise  -aboveJfie,  mergly 
TTinterial,  towards-ideafi  .firia^iiiatlve,  and  spiritual-eonditions-;  and  to 
its  ffj^mpptViy  with  tVip  fppljngs  of  ntViprg 

Its  power  for  evil  is  great,  and  is  due  to  its  unreliable,  unstable, 
changeful,  undependable  nature;  lack  of  cautious  self-control,  and 
consequent  liability  to  be  led  away  by  impulse,  by  love  of  sensation  and 
emotion ; its  vdlJin^ess  to  be  dominated  by  a stronger  mind ; its 


NEPTUNE,  THE  MYSTIC 


109 


junregulated  sympathies ; and  by  its  liability  to  undesirable  forms  of 
mediumship  or  psychism. 

Whether  the  planet  will  manifest  for  good  or  evil,  or  partly  for  both, 
depends  upon  the  aspects  it  receives,  and  also  the  general  state  of  the 
horoscope. 

Acting  on  the  physical  plane  and  in . the  bodj’’,  of  man,  it  produces 
all  kinds  of  excitements  for  which  there  is  little  real  cause,  instability  in 
the  fortunes,  a fickle  celebrity,  fame  liable  to  reversal — like  a comet  that 
attracts  ever3^one’s  attention  and  then  disappears,  perhaps  never  to 
return.  Like  the  cometar^^  mass,  there  is  likely  to  be  a good  deal  of 
show  and  little  substance,  and  undertakings  begun  during  its  period  of 
influence  have  unhappy  issues  or  fall  into  disrepute.  It  seems  to  rule 
over  the  od3dlic  circulation  in  the  magnetic  nature  of  man  ; hence  its 
obstructions  are  liable  to  produce  serious  nervous  and  cerebral  affections. 
Charles  Dickens  (born  February  7th,  1812),  who  had  the  Moon  conjoined 
with  Neptune  in  Sagittarius,  died  of  cerebral  apoplexy.  Robert  Louis 
Stevenson  (born  November  13th,  1850)  with  the  Moon  in  cohjunction 
with  Neptune  in  the  eighth  house,  died  of  the  same  disease  suddenl3% 
after  complaining  of  a strange  pain  in  the  head.  {See  Footnote,  p.  1 12) 

When  afflicting  the  mental  rulers,  Mercui'y  and  the  Moon,  it  causes 
nervous  excitability,  leading,  perchance,  to  fatal  results ; while  in,  old 
age  it  causes  a complete  exhaustion  of  the  nervous  forces,  a withering  up 
of  the  vital  processes,  a general  debilit3^  and  pining,  or  S3^nc6pe.  Similiar 
results  are  to  be  feared  when  the  planet  is  afflicted  in  the  third  or  ninth 
house  in  the  horoscope  of  birth  ; also  when  the  Sun  or  Moon  by  direction 
afflicts  Neptune,  although  these  effects  will  be  but  ephemeral  if  Neptune 
is  fortunate  at  birth.  In  common  signs,  it  chiefly  affects  the  brain  and 
nervous  system  ; in  the  fbced  signs,  the  glandular  and  secretory  processes 
of  the  body ; in  the  cardinal  signs,  the  circulatory  and  absorptive  systems. 
These  physical  effects  are  the  more  to  be  feared  when  the  Ascendant  or 
the  Moon  is  the  afflicted  point.  When  afflicting  Mercury  it  affects  the 
body  through  the  nervous  -system ; while  when  it  afflicts  the  Moon 
it  affects  the  nervous  and  mental  health  through  bodily  disorders. 

On  the  psychic  or  emotional  plane  of  life,  it  affects  the  subject  with 
extreme  excitability  and  changefulness  of  emotion  and  desire.  It  leads  to 
an  undue,  .enthusiasni  that  allows  the  feelings  to  get  the  upper  hand  of 
the  judgment.  The  impulses,  control  the  reason,  and  so  render  the 
nj.tive  liable  to  acts  of  indiscretion.  Such  persons  are  disposed  to  be 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


1 lO 

rapidly  affected  by  their  environment,  and  conform  themselves  thereto 
so  readily  that  they  are  apt  to  show  a different  front  with  every  change 
of  surroundings.  They  are  capable  of  exciting  a good  deal  of  transient 
enthusiasm  in  others,  even  though  there  may  be  no  basis  for  it  in 
themselves.  Their  enthusiasm  is  catching  and  seductive,  but  yields 
readily  to  opposition.  It  produces  strange  and  unnatural  appetites,  in 
which,  however,  the  love  of  luxury  is  the  dominating  factor,  and  thus 
makes  its  slaves  effeminate,  weak,  and  morally  debilitated.  Oscar 
Wilde  (born  October  i6th,  1854)  had  16°  Virgo  rising,  Saturn  culminating 
in  square  to  Neptune  on  the  cusp  of  the  seventh  house.  The  Archduke 
Rudolf  of  Austria  (born  August  21st,  1858,  10.15  Vienna)  had 
Mercury,  lord  of  the  ascendant,  in  the  fifth  house,  in  opposition  to 
Neptune  in  the  eleventh. 

The  general  tendency  of  Neptune  in  this  respect,  i.e.  in  its  action 
on  the  emotional  plane,  is  to  make  the  native  feel  and  act  by  imitation, 
or  from  impulses  not  his  own,  due  to  external  stimulus  or  psychic 
impression.  It  leads  to  fictitious  repre.sentation  and  to  a kind  of 
masqaerading,  though  not,  it  may  be,  with  conscious  intent  to  mislead ; 
either  circumstances  will  force  the  native  into  this  position,  or  his  mind 
will  be  dominated  and  obsessed,  as  it  were  by  an  idea.  If  other 
positions  in  the  horoscope  agree,  he  may  become  a cheap  popular 
character,  a chevalier  d'indiisirie.  General  Boulanger  (born  April  29th, 
1837,  8.15  a.m.,  at  Rennes)  had  Neptune  in  the  eighth  house,  in  oppo- 
sition to  Jupiter,  lord  of  the  mid-heaven,  and  in  square  to  the  Sun. 

On  the  mental  plane,  and  when  afflicting  the  mental  rulers,  Neptune 
conduces  to  shallowness  of  character,  simulation,  conscious  deception  or 
aptness  for  all  kinds  of  intrigues,  and  disposes  to  short-sighted  acts  of 
misrepresentation.  It  tends  to  enslave  the  intellect  with  every  new  phase 
of  opinion,  and  makes  the  mind  fickle,  deceptive,  disposed  to  imitation, 
plagiarism  and  even  forgery  ; but  for  the  production  of  the  more  culpable 
acts  there  must  be  affliction  by  one  of  the  other  malefics,  especially  Mars. 
It  causes,  when  its  influence  is  for  evil,  corrupt  practices,  bribery,  secret, 
processes,  and  duplicity. 

When  in  .good  aspect  to  the  mental  rulers,  it  produces  a love  of 
mysticism,  and  success  with  all  teleogical  subjects  such  as  spiritualism, 
theosophy,  and  religious  movements  having  an  abstract  or  mystical 
basis.  It  also  gives  a fondness  for  the  occult  arts  and  means  of  divination, 
with  abilities  for  mesmerism,  telepathy,  psychometr3-  (especially  the 


NEPTUNE,  THE  MYSTIC 


1 1 1 


latter),  and  other  methods  of  nervo-mental  divination.  It  conduces  to 
strange  theories  and  novel  ideals,  chiefly  connected  with  other-world 
conditions,  and  what  would  be  called  extravagant  notions.  It  sharpens 
the  intuition  and  makes  good  readers  of  character  and  destiny,  gives 
much  earnestness  and  enthusiasm  and  strong  incitements  to  action.  It 
gives  foresight  and  penetration,  and  mclines  strongly  to  the  deductive 
method,  of  thinking.  In  the  fiery  or  airy  signs  it  tends  to  develop 
spiritual  faculties  of  a high  order,  as  well  as  the  pyschic  gifts.  The  subjects 
of  this  benefic  influence  are  ^Je  to  follow  very  fine  and  exalted  tracts  of 
thought  to  their  proper  issues,  and  to  originate  new  and  subtle  ideas. 
They  are  subject  to  admonitions,  spiritual  and  mental  inspirations,  and 
lucid  dreams. 

In  good  aspects  taJhe  Moon  in.  a man’s  nativity,  or  to  the  Sun  in  a 
woman’s,  Neptune  produces  success  in  the  things  governed  by  the  house 
and  sign  it  occupies.  The  planet  is  far  stronger  in  the  watery  signs 
than  in  any  others,  and  is  best  in  Cancer  and  Pisces.  It  brings  success 
in  all  matters  and  occupations  connected  with  the  watery  element,  with 
shipping,  boating,  fishing,  swimming,  dealing  in  liquids,  etc. 

The  following  nativities  may  be  alluded  to  as  those  of  remarkable 
people  in  whose  careers  the  influence  of  this  planet  was  strongly 
marked. 

S.  T.  Coleridge,  poet  (October  21st,  1772,  ii  a.m.) — ^ 6 $ , in  the 
ninth  house. 

P.  B.  Shelley,  poet  (August  4th,  1792,  4.59  p.m.) — T 6 y,  d inthe 
ninth  house. 

John  Keats,  poet  (October  29th,  1795) — T d O,  ? . 

Edgar  A.  Poe,  poet  (January  19th,  1809) — T 6 h {query,  in  Asc.  ?). 

Franz  Liszt,  musician  (October  21st,  1811) — T 6 ]). 

Anton  Rubinstein,  musician  (November  i6th,  1829) — T 6 9. 

A.  C.  Swinburne,  poet  (April  5th,  1837) — T ^ 9 , 0°  ^ d. 

Jean  Gerady,  musical  prodigy  (December  6th,  1878) — T A Ifi  A 9 . 

King  George  V.  Neptune  rising. 

The  above  account  gives  in  a succinct  form  the  tendencies  of 
Neptune  as  found  operating  in  the  large  majority  of  horoscopes,  but 
there  will  be  many  who  will  desire  further  information  on  its  higher 
influence  apart  from  the  mystical  interpretation  that  has  gone  before  ; and 


I 12 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


for  them  the  following  by  a writer  who  has  himself  Moon  conjunction 
Neptune  in  the  ninth  house,  will  be  of  great  interest : — ' 

II 

Neptune  is  the  remotest  planet  of  our  solar  system  known  to  physical 
science,  although  it  is  believed  by  many  occultists  that  two  more  lie 
beyond,  and  will  be  discovered  only  when  mankind  has  advanced 
sufficiently  to  appreciate  their  special  forms  of  influence.  They  must, 
thei  efore  dominate  senses  of  which  at  present  we  can  have  no  conception, 
states  of  being  and  existence  which  have  not  as  yet  dawned  in  us. 
Indeed  Uranus  and  Neptune  themselves  cover  ground  which  even  now 
few  are  prepared  to  travel ; but  while  the  former  of  these  is  making 
itself  felt  unmistakably^  and  while  we  can  judge  its  effects  pretty-^ 
accurately,  and  already  have  done  so,  the  latter  remains  to  the  great 
majority  unspecialised,  almost  devoid  of  attributes,  a drawback  in 
rendering  judgment,  and  a bete  noire  to  the  astrologer  in  estimating  the 
effects  of  ‘ directions.’  We  need  not  traverse  the  history^  of  the 
discovery  of  Neptune,  except  to  note  that  it  was  found  at  Berlin  on  the 
night  of  September  23rd,  1846,  when  it  was  in  26°. 

Like  Uranus,  Neptune  is  supposed  to  have  no  tabernacle,  but  just 
as  the  former  is  indissolubly  linked  with  Aquarius  and  the  eleventh 
house,  so  we  shall  find  Neptune  associated  with  Pisces  and  the  twelfth. 

Its  influence  can  be  divided  under  several  heads.  First  for  its 
general  action  on  the  physical  plane.  The  action  of  Neptune  is  of  a 
restricting  tendency^  operating  to  circumscribe,  handicap,  hamper,  exile 

* At  the  moment  ofgoing  to  press  we  have  received  the  following  letter  from  this 
gentleman,  which  we  print  here  as  it  has  a bearing  on  what  has  gone  before : — 

‘ In  looking  through  the  proofs  of  this  chapter  I note  you  mention  R.  L. 
Stevenson  as  having  Moon  conjunction  Neptune  in  the  eighth  house.  According 
to  the  evidence  I have  succeeded  in  obtaining  at  various  times,  and  which  has 
also  been  substantiated  in  v.arious  quarters,  the  true  time  of  birth  was  one  hour  thirty 
minutes  p.m.  This  shows  Aquarius  rising  and  the  conjoined  bodies  in  question 
loc.ated  in  xh.t  Ascendant.  Mr  A.  J.  Pearce  wrote  me  as  far  back  as  July,  1901, 
that  an  intimate  friend  of  the  novelist  gave  him  the  same  time.  Mrs  Mary  Bell 
of  526,  Eddy  Street,  San  Francisco,  Cal.,  wrote  me  also,  the  following  being  a 
copy  of  her  letter  : “ Your  present  study  running  in  the  magazine  Modern  Astrology 
has  interested  me  very  much.  I note  you  regret  not  having  Robert  Louis 
Stevenson’s  birth  hour.  I have  it  and  as  it  makes  your  deduction  stronger,  I 
herewith  send  it  to  you  and  vouch  for  its  being  correct,  as  it  was  secured 
from  his  immediate  family  when  they  desired  a horoscope.  The  data  given 
was  Edinbro’,  November  13th.  1850,  i hr.  30  m.  p.m.’” 


NEPTUNE,  THE  MYSTIC 


13 


and  tantalise.  The  native  feels  ‘cribb’d,  cabin’d,  and  confined.’  All 
these  are  imputable  to  the  twelfth  house,  which  as  astrologers  well  know 
rules  prisons,  asylums,  exile  and  places  of  detention  and  confinement  in 
general.  As  examples  of  Neptunian  influence  in  this  light  may  be  given 
Robert  Louis  Stevenson  and  his  exile  in  Samoa.  In  his  nativity  he 
had  Moon  conjunction  Neptune.  Again  Prince  Prisdan,  who  retired 
from  a royal  sphere  to  become  a Buddhist  monk  at  Waskadua  in  Ceylon, 
was  born  with  the  Sun  in  conjunction  with  the  same  celestial  body. 
Other  instances  might  be  cited,  but  it  may  be  taken  for  granted  that  the 
sense,  and  even  the  physical  actuality,  of  being  circumscribed,  confined 
and  hampered,  will  certainly  show  in  the  life  of  the  individual  who  has 
an  unfortunate  Neptunian  influence.  It  may  not  always  be  apparent  to 
the  world  at  large,  but  it  will  exist  and  annoy  nevertheless,  although  no 
special  malefic  character  need  be  attributed.  Cases,  however,  have  come 
under  my  notice  in  which  the  evil  side  has  been  very  apparent.  In  Fate 
and  Fortune  a correspondent  gives  a horoscope,  the  native  of  which,  a 
female  by  the  way,  was  confined  in  prison  synonymously  with  a transit 
of  Neptune  over  ascendant.  Exactly  the  same  thing  transpired  in  the 
case  of  a male  whose  scheme  of  birth  is  known  to  the  writer.  Chaotic 
events  occur  under  the  transit  of  this  planet — events  of  an  involving, 
inyeiglingi  ensnaring  deceptive  nature.  This  chaotic  power  is  widely 
associated  with  Neptune.  In  the  early  chaos,  Pisces,  Neptune’s  sign, 
symbolised  the  waters  in  which  was  deposited  the  primordial  egg. 

Further,  Neptune  is  connected  with  enchantments  and  enchanters. 
It  is  the  spider’s  web  of  humanity,  the  toils  of  the  ensnarer’s  and 
decoyer’s  net.  We  may  instance  the  Roman  gladiators  called  Retiarii, 
so  named  from  the  net  {rete)  which  they  carried,  and  with  which  it  was 
their  aim  to  surround  opponents.  Besides  the  net  they  were  equipped 
with  a three-pronged  fork  {fuscina  tridens) — Neptune’s  symbol.  The 
tridens  {TpioSov?,  rplaiva)  was  specially  used  also  for  spearing  fish  {Pisces). 
'Similarly,  such  sense-enchainers  as  tobacco,  hashish,  chloroform,  opium, 
morphia,  cocaine,  Indian  hemp,  chloral,  chlorodyne,  nitrous  oxide, 
sulphonal,  paraldeh3^de,  etc.,  are  drugs  associated  with  the  outermost 
planet  of  the  solar  system.  Some  of  them  procure  a partial  release  of 
the  astral  soul  from  the  physical  vehicle,  and  the  phenomenon  is 
especially  attributed  to  Neptune.) 

The  planet  is  highly  musical  and  conduces  to  inspirational  com- 
position, dream-melodies,  melodic  hauntings,  and  so  forth.  It  thus 


TI4 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


again  betrays  its  affinity  for  the  watery,  receptive,  musical  Pisces  and  the 
twelfth  house.  The  latter  house  is  closely  in  touch  with  these  things 
probably  by  reason  of  its  representing  and  symbolising  the  expression 
of  the  emotions.  Neptune  is  concerned  chiefly  with  string-bowed 
instruments.  The  sensuous,  enchanting,  flexible,  extensive-ranged  nature 
of  this  class  of  instrument  is  pre-eminently^  fitted  for  the  expression  of 
the  emotions  musically.  It  may  be  difficult  for  the  average  reader  to 
understand  and  realise  exactly  what  it  is  sought  to  convey,  though 
the  writer  is  endeavouring  to  treat  the  subject  dispassionately,  because 
to  really  grasp  the  peculiar  capabilities  of  Neptune  necessitates  a prominence 
of  that  body  in  the  scheme  of  nativity,  and  an  actual  inner  feeling  of  its 
elusiveness. 

As  some  substantiation  of  these  statements  certain  passages  in  the 
writer’s  own  life  can  be  adduced.'  Under  the  primary  direction  of  Sun 
par.  dec.  Neptune  con.  zod.  he  commenced  the  study  of  the  ’cello.  The 
Sun  by  transit  was  in  square  to  the  radical  Neptune  at  the  same  time. 
When  Sun  trine  Neptune  con.  mund.,  and  Ascendt.  trecile  Neptune 
con.  zod.  formed,  a Gaspard  di  Salo  violin  was  purchased.  Coincidenth^ 
too,  the  Moon  was  applying  by  secondary  or  zodiacal  motion  to  a 
conjunction  with  Neptune  and  completing  a trine  to  Mars  in  the  twelfth, 
while  upon  the  exact  day  of  making  the  bargain  the  lunar  orb  transitted 
the  radical  Neptune.  These  are  very  striking  testimonies  and  sub- 
stantiations of  the  ideas  already  advanced,  but  this  planet’s  prominence 
by  transit  or  direction  has  been  repeatedly  noticed  upon  such  occasions 
when  kindred  matters  have  been  on  the  tapis.  [‘Even  as  I write,’ 
remarks  the  writer  in  a footnote,  ‘ the  postman  delivers  me  a package  of 
violin  strings  ; and  the  Moon  is  exactly  over  Neptune  in  my  radix ! ’] 

Other  evidence  may  be  adduced.  One  sidelight  in  especial  may  be 
thrown  across  our  purview.  The  scroll  indentations  in  the  waists  of 
instruments  of  the  violin  tribe  are  wave-like,  as  are  also  the  holes. 
Here  again  is  suggested  the  Pisces-Neptune  influence. 

The  violin  ’cello,  etc.,  may  be  fitly  compared  to  the  fluidic  element 
— Pisces  the  ocean  sign — by  reason  of  their  elasticity  and  adaptability. 
They  contain  likewise  in  their  names  a goodly  proportion  of  the  labial 
letters,  letters  which  I have  considered  always  to  have  connection  with  the 
twelfth  sign.  As  for  the  characteristic  letter  of  the  sound  holes  we  find 

* He  has  ])  d ^ ^ 9th  and  A d d-  ^ 12th. 


NEPTUNE,  THE  MYSTIC 


115 

it  the  initial  of  such  words  as  flux,  flow,  float,  fluid,  fleet,  etc.,  and  in 
German  fluss,  fliissig,  flussigkeit,  fluth,  fluthzeit,  flossen,  etc.,  all  having 
aqueous  connections.  Peculiarly  enough,  too,  violon  in  French  bears  a 
subsidiary  meaning  of  prison  {cachot  dhm  corps-de-garde),  and  we  know 
that  Pisces  and  the  twelfth  have  dominion  over  this  necessary  institution. 

We  are  thus  led  gradually  to  the  metaphysical  side  of  Neptune  and 
its  inspirational  capabilities.  Two  very  important  functions  fall  to  its 
share — no  less  than  the  liberating  of  the  astral  soul  from  its  physical 
Yehicle  and  the  remembrance  of  former  things.’  Those  having 
Neptune  in  the  ninth  are  subject  to  the  strangest  and  weirdest  as  well 
as  the  most  beautiful  dreams — visions  that  haunt  one  for  days  afterwards, 
which  are  like  nothing  on  earth,  and  which  make  one  dissatisfied  with 
mundane  life.  The  faculty  for  dreaming  music,  poetr^^  etc.,  is  frequentl^^ 
yery  pronounced,  although  the  productions  are  not,  as  a rule,  retained 
upon  waking,  except  in  fragmentary  form.  In  the  present  writer’s  own 
case  there  is  little  memory  save  of  a few  tag-end  couplets,  generally 
epigrammatic  and  moral ; sometimes  a ridiculous  antithesis  to  human 
conditions  and  human  thought,  but  right  and  consistent  from  the  dream 
point  of  view.  To  wake  up  with  long  pieces  of  verse  or  prose,  or  musical 
themes,  ringing  in  his  ears  is  a very  common,  indeed  almost  regular 
experience  with  him.  In  default,  musical  scores  and  printed  or  written 
pages  are  exhibited.  Moral  apothegms,  too,  short  and  pithy,  are 
imparted  in  various  ways.  Let  it  also  be  said  that  they  are — like  the 
trance  speeches,  of  which  the  spiritualist  press  is  full — often  trite, 
commonplace  and  not  profoundly  informing.  The  fault  is  in  the  race, 
not  Neptune.  We  have  not  progressed  far  enough  to  receive  the  whole 
teaching  of  this  immensely  mystical  body.  Its  chief  value  lies  in 
suggestion,  (R.  L.  Stevenson  relates  that  most  of  his  work  was 
suggested  in  dreams) ; one  must  make  the  interpretation  and  application 
oneself. 

As  mentioned  before,  Neptune  allows  the  soul  to  leave  the  body 
and  it  is  through  this  remarkable  ability  that  one  learns  the  relationship 
between  the  tangible  and  the  intangible,  double  and  changed  conditions. 
Virtually  Neptune  disposes  to  a double  physical  life,  and  its  special 
aptitude  in  the  direction  named  throws  some  light  on  the  reason.  In 
its  common  form  it  gives  heavy  slumbers,  drug-produced  stupors,  comas, 
and  deaths  under  chloroform,  nitrous  oxide,  and  so  forth.  But  exactly 
in  accordance  with  the  planet’s  power  and  prominence  in  a geniture  are 


ii6  THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 

i 

the  knowledge,  memory,  realisation,  of  the  soul’s  wanderings  in  the  night 
watches  obvious  and  surviving.  The  intelligent  principle  oozes  out, 
as  it  were,  from  the  inert  body,  and  if  the  essential  predicaments  are 
favourable,  makes  short  excursions  in  the  astral.  The  sensations  of  flying 
and  floating  are  pronounced,  and  frequently  a sense  as  though  skimming 
with  the  feet  a short  distance  above  ground  bj'^  a mere  effort  of  the  will 
exerted  by  an  amount  of  endeavour  actually  realisable,  is  experienced. 
The  return  of  the  soul  is  felt  in  a curious  manner,  especially  where  the 
sleeping  body  has  received  a shock,  such  as  a sudden  noise,  or  a rude 
awakening.  It  is  as  though  it  wrestled  with  one  to  gain  entrance. 
Under  the  Neptunian  influence  the  reversed  outlooks  of  which  I have 
spoken  are  shown  by  the  ability  to  stand  by  and  look  upon  one’s  own 
body.  If  the  objective  sight  is  rare,  at  least  there  is  a sense  of  the 
phenomenon  conveyed  in  some  occult  way. 

Again  Neptune  bestows  that  hazy,  indefinable,  but  acute  and 
vivid  impression  of  experiencing  a set  of  conditions,  a train  of  thoughts 
or  feelings  coinciding  with  a similar  series  which  must  have  eventuated 
at  some  remote  period  not  capable  of  being  connected  mentally  with 
this  life  ; glimpses  from  the  outer  world — floating  motes  from  that  inner 
transcendentalism,  and  something  akin  to  what  Tenn3^scn  describes  in 
one  of  his  earl^^  sonnets 

As  when  with  downcast  eyes  we  muse  and  brood, 

And  ebb  into  a former  life,  or  seem 
To  lapse  far  back  in  some  confused  dream 
To  states  of  mystical  similitude  ; 

If  one  but  speaks  or  hems  or  stirs  his  chair. 

Ever  the  wonder  waxeth  more  and  more. 

So  that  we  say,  ‘ All  this  has  been  before. 

All  this  hath  been,  I know  not  when  or  where.’ 

While  many  consider  Neptune’s  influence  entirely  malefic,  there 
are  some,  nevertheless,  who  regard  it  as  benefic,  somewhat  similar,  in 
fact,  to  that  of  Venus.  The  true  astrologer,  however,  knows  the  duality 
of  good  and  evil  to  be  not  in  the  stars  but  ourselves,  and  therefore  some 
power  of  modification  is  implied — the  restriction  of  evil  tendencies, 
wherever  found,  within  the  narrowest  possible  limits,  and  the  unfolding 
of  whatever  is  good  to  the  utmost  possible  extent.  Besides  this, 
permutation  is  a power;  a poison  may  be  changed  to  vitaliser,  as  in  the 
common  manioc  or  cassava  of  commerce. 


NEPTUNE,  THE  MYSTIC 


117 

There  is  one  side,  and  the  writer  believes  the  real  and  true  one,  to 
Neptune’s  character  which  he  does  not  think  has  yet  been  noticed*  He  has 
for  some  time  held  that  Uranus  and  Neptune  rule  Aquarius  and  Pisces 
respectivel}^  and  intuitively  has  never  been  able  to  get  beyond  the  idea. 

There  is,  however,  one  limiting  condition  or  modifying  factor,  which 
imposes  some  restraint  in  the  general  practice : that  is  to  say,  as  the 
two  planets  are  only  in  evidence  in  comparatively  few  persons  among 
those  now  existing, — or  rather,  as  their  true  nature  is  only  exerted  and 
can  only  function  when  the  Ego  has  grown  up  to  it,  as  it  were, — it 
follows  that  in  the  great  majority  through  ignorance  and  abuse  a 
‘ permutation  ’ occurs,  because  the  divine  and  human  nature  are  at 
enmity.  In  such  cases  it  is  to  be  expected  that  sign  and  planet  will  not 
agree,  and  that  the  real  rulership  I^,  K is  nonplussed  and  held 
in  abeyance. 

In  the  advanced  egos  found  among  the  ranks  of  astrologers, 
theosophists,  esoterics,  occultists,  and  generators  of  spiritual  or  revealers 
of  concealed  thought  in  any  direction,  the  two  far-away  denizens  of  our 
solar  system,  Uranus  and  Neptune,  will,  I feel  assured,  be  found  to 
dominate  the  respective  zodiacal  signs  Aquarius  and  Pisces. 

A side-light  is  here  thrown  upon  the  much-vexed  question  of 
‘ exaltation,’  in  that  it  would  appear  that  the  exaltation  of  a planet  is 
the  house  of  its  octave  expression.  Uranus,  it  seems  certain,  stands  in  the 
relation  of  an  octave  power  to  Mercury  (to  be  ‘an  octave  higher,’  to 
borrow  a musical  analogy),  and  the  latter  is  frequently  stated  to  have  his 
exaltation  in  Aquarius,  the  house  of  the  former.  Venus,  again,  has  her 
exaltation  in  Pisces,  and  if  Neptune  is,  as  I thoroughly  believe,  the 
‘ octave  expression  ’ of  her  ray,  then  its  house  is  well  given  as  the  twelfth 
sign  of  the  zodiac.  Of  course,  by  ‘octave  expression’  is  meant  a 
more  subtle  and  penetrating,  a more  refined  and  delicate  species  of 
emanation,  of  what  in  the  main  may  be  considered  a similar  constitutional 
quality  in  the  lower  manifestation.  The  essence,  and  perhaps  even  the 
quintessence,  is  implied,  just  as  the  musical  tone  has  its  octave  not 
radically  different  from  the  lower  generator,  but  composed  of  a greater 
number  of  vibrations,  which  in  successive  octaves  may  become  so  rapid 
and  so  numerous  that  only  the  most  acute  and  finely  developed  ear  can 
distinguish  any  sound  at  alh  as  for  instance  in  the  piercing,  needle-like  cry 
of  the  common  bat,  which  is  absolutely  inaudible  to  a great  many  people. 
It  is  just  so  in  regard  to  colour  ; a tint  may  be  lighter  or  darker  without 


ii8 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


altering  in  fundamental  character,  but  the  particles  constituting  the 
colouring  matter  may  be  so  separated  and  in  so  minute  a state  of  sub- 
division as  scarcel}^  to  be  perceptible  to  any  but  those  possessing  the  finest 
and  most  artistic  sense.  So  with  the  planets  under  consideration.  We 
are  weaned  as  it  were  from  Mercury  only,  (when  growth  has  outstripped 
the  conditions  and  quality  of  its  supply)  to  be  ‘ switched  on  ’ to  Uranus, 
and  to  rise  into  a higher  t3^pe  of  humanity,  such  as  cannot  be  even 
partially  realised  by  those  who  still  cling  to  and  have  not  overcome  the 
purely  Mercurial  instincts — and  who  therefore  naturally  suppose  the 
trend  of  life  under  Mercur^^  to  be  the  highest  that  one  can  aspire  to. 
These  forget  that  the  brain-mind  perishes. 

But  to  return  to  Neptune.  The  great  function  I perceive  in  this 
orb  is  the  conservation  of  the  Scorpio-Venus  faculties  on  the  lower 
Moon-plane,  to  the  eventual  freeing  of  the  soul  from  the  flesh.  From 
this  ability  to  conserve  the  life-force  there  results  the  creation  of  a finer 
element  which  contributes  to  impart  a high  degree  of  vibration,  radiation 
and  energ3".  Consequently,  it  may  be  imagined  that,  like  that  of  Uranus, 
tiie  malefic  influence  of  Neptune  is  terrible  in  those  who  have  not  yet 
overcome. 

. To  come  under  the  true  influx  of  this  planet’s  nature  means  spiritual 
awakening  of  the  highest  kind  ; to  be  under  the  dark  side  is  enthralment 
of  the  fleshly  senses.  It  is  the  planet  of  Regeneration  (Latin  r^=back, 
genero  — \ beget),  that  is,  the  turning  of  the  material  generative  forces  to 
purposes  of  spiritual  enlightenment.  In  other  words,  to  disenchain  the 
soul  'from  the  instincts  of  the  clay  and  the  action  of  generation  in  the 
world  of  matter,  and  hold  it  to  its  duty  to  know  the  will  of  the  divine 
Father.  We  are  to  foster  and  create  spirit  instead  of  matter,  and  to 
seek  and  know  At-one-ment,  the  act  of  being  at  one  with  the  Christ 
— the  casting  out  of  the  self,  the  leaving  without  regret  the  ‘ lower 
quaternary’  as  the  Easterns  call  it,  ‘the  personality.’ 

Until  a-  man  has  control  over  the  Sccrpio  faculties,  denominated 
among  the  ancient  mystics  Foundation — whereby  their  great  importance 
is  typified  to  those  who  would  rear  a .solid  structure — lie  ,jvill  not 
appreciate  anything  that  Neptune  has  to  bestow.  There  are  grades  of 
advance,  and  the  probationer  can  measure  his  or  her  progress ; if  an 
astrologer,  can  ‘ direct  ’ to  this  planet  and  closely  watch  for  effects ; 
and  when  promotion  has  so  far  come  and  the  nature  has  grown  better, 
wiser,  nobler,  and  less  selfish,  then  such  ‘directions’  and  positions. 


NEPTUNE,  THE  MYSTIC 


119 


instead  of  being  undesirable,  will  set  in  vibration  the  highest  spiritual 
attributes  : but  of  necessity  they  cannot  act  through  coarseness  of  spirit* 
soul  or  body. 

III. — Uranus  and  Neptune  Contrasted 

An  American  writer  contrasts  these  two  planets  thus  : 

‘ It  is  almost  impossible  to  give  an3^  idea  of  Neptune  to  a person  in 
whose  horoscope  he  is  poorly  placed. 

‘ First  of  all,  one  must  grasp  the  fact  that  the  light  that  Neptune's 
favour  gives  is  of  the  spirit,  not  of  the  mind.  As  Uranus  is  “ the  higher 
Mercury,”  so  is  Neptune  “the  higher  Venus,”  though  immeasurably 
above  the  lesser  planet,  on  a plane  where  love  is  purified  of  all  that  is 
animal  and  much  that  is  human  till  little  but  the  divine  remains.  As 
Uranus  would  bring  universal  knowledge;  so  Neptune  would  give 
universal  spirituality.  It  is  not  mental  but  soul  gifts  that  he  bestows. 

‘ Uranus  favourable  gives  marvellous  mentalitj^  to  which  the 
ordinary  mind  compares  but  as  a candle  to  a great  arc  light.  The  man 
who  comes  under  this  planet  has  the  power  to  see  the  past,  the  present, 
and  far  into  the  future,  and  to  see  them  clearly,  coldly,  and  impersonally. 

‘ Even  as  Mars  is  physical  force,  Uranus  is  mental  energy.  Per- 
verted, he  makes  the  fanatic  and  the  destroyer  ; friendly,  the  originator, 
the  prophet,  and  the  seer. 

‘Uranus  is  “the  higher  Mercury.”  He  is  the  great  illuminator, 
and  throws  light  upon  dark  places,  but  it  is  always  mental  vision  that  his 
favour  brings — clearer  sight,  not  intuition.  It  is  the  mind  and  not  the 
spirit  that  sees.  He  differs  from  Neptune  as  does  day  from  night. 
While  his  nature  is  sharp  and  clear-cut,  that  of  the  other  planet  is  §q 
illusive  as  to  be  practically  indefinable. 

‘Uranus  turns  the  light  of  scientific  and  intellectual  knowledge 
upon  men  and  things.  By  it,  he  separates  the  worthy  from  the 
unworthy,  “ the  wheat  from  the  tares,”  and  those  whom  he  has 
“ weighed  in  the  balances  and  found  wanting  ” he  casts  aside.  He  is 
intellect  without  emotion,  the dispassionate  but  ruthless. 

‘^Neptune,  on  the  contrary,  “condemneth  no  man.”  The  spiritual 
vision  is  beyond  the  intellectual  and  there  is  no  creature  so  mean  or 
despicable  but  that  Neptune  can  see  the  soul  within,  blinded  and 
ignorant  though  it  may  be ; and  since  “ to  know  all  is  to  pardon  all,” 
he  rejects  none.  Like  the  Christ,  who  “ate  with  publicans  and  sinners,” 


120 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


he  would  draw  to  himself,  to  comfort  and  to  save,  the  wretched,  the 
outcast,  and  even  the  vicious,  for  while  the  standard  of  Uranus  is  intellect 
alone,  that  of  Neptune  blends  spiritual  knowledge  and  supreme  compassion. 

‘Perverted,  Neptune  causes  strange  fancies  and  delusions,  deeds 
that  are  monstrous  beyond  ordinary  conception  ; friendly,  he  gives  on 
the  lower  plane  mediumship,  trances,  and  visions,  on  the  higher,  clair- 
voyant sight  and  that  inner  power  through  which  the  soul  possesses 
memory  of  past  births,  and  knowledge  of  other  planes  of  life  beyond 
ours  of  to-day.  To  understand  his  influence,  one  must  experience  it 
— it  cannot  be  described,  and  to  try  to  do  so  is  as  useless  as  to  paint  a 
picture  for  a blind  man.  Few  persons  at  this  present  respond  to  his 
vibrations,  and  to  that  is  due  the  lack  of  comprehension  of  this  greatest 
of  the  planets  ; for  those  of  us  who  owe  all  to  him  have  no  means  where- 
by to  express  it,  since  the  Spiritual  cannot  be  drawn  in  terms  of  the 
Material,  and  the  Infinite  reveals  Himself  but  little  through  the  Finite. 
Yet  to  those  he  favours  no  power  can  come  so  close,  for  of  him  who  is 
within  us  it  may  truly  be  written : “For  thou  art  closer  than  breathing 
and  nearer  than  hands  or  feet.”  He  it  is  who  makes  the  unseen  worlds 
as  real  to  us  as  are  the  visible,  and  through  him  comes  our  knowledge 
of  those  Powers  and  Beings  that  are  divine.’ 

Another  American  student  says  : — 

‘ Neptune  highest  spiritual  vibration— Uranus  occult ; Neptune 
mystical — Uranus  giving  mere  knowledge  of  hidden  forces,  leading  to 
adeptship ; Neptune  giving  realisation,  through  union  of  the  spiritual  ray 
within  with  the  spiritual  vibration  of  the  fourth  dimension  of  space,  or 
God  without — The  Master.  Neptune  is  universal  love,  universal  sen'se 
of  unity  with  all  life.  Theosophically  speaking,  Neptune  represents  the 
spiritual  plane;  in  Christian  phraseology,  “the  Christ,” — also  the 
“ Deva”  powers,  as  lowest  vibration. 

‘ I have  found  those  people  who  have  Neptune  harmoniously  active 
at  birth  to  be  spiritually  intuitive,  able  to  grasp  first-hand  knowledge  of 
the  eternaL  verities.  Uranus  and  Neptune  in  good  aspect  ^om  good 
signs,  a spiritual  psychic — the  Neptune  psychic,  never  the  Black 
Magician.  Only  very  old  souls  have  Neptune  active ; those  connected 
with  universal  thought  currents,  and  likely  helpers  of  humanity. 
Neptune  is  malefic  in  a harmonious  horoscope — except  bad  “karma  ” 
is  made,  and  then  he  brings  terrific  surprises. 


NEPTUNE,  THE  MYSTIC 


2 


‘ Those  born  with  Neptune  in  affliction  have  attained  spirituality  in 
past  embodiments,  but  have  lost  balance,  either  through  martyrdom 
or  extreme  ecstasy  of  devotion.  There  is  some  danger  of  insanity  : 
sometimes  it  is  Neptune  that  produces  that  genius  which  is  akin  to 
madness.  “Neptune,  most  important  of  planets  at  this  period,  is  bringing 
in  spiritual  workers  on  universal  lines.”  ’ 

The  following  short  essay  goes  into  greater  detail : — 

‘The  planets  Neptune  and  Uranus  are  complementary  to  each  other. 
Thus,  while  Neptune  is  related  to  the  spiritual,  motive  or  non-Jorm  side 
of  the  Universe,  so  is  Uranus  similarly  related  to  the  mental  or  essential- 
form  side.  They  are  thus  positive  and  negative,  and  govern  the  circle 
(or  triangle)  and  the  square  (or  cross)  respectively. 

‘This  ascription  of  a positive  or  male  character  to  Neptune,  and 
a negative  or  female  character  to  Uranus,  must,  however,  be  taken  as 
applying  to  their  “essential  ” natures.  It  is  a primary  or  real  attribute, 
not  a secondary  or  manifesting  condition. 

‘ For  it  must  be  remembered  that  the  physical  and  spiritual  are  as 
it  were  opposite  poles  of  Being,  so  that  that  which  is  masculine  on  one 
plane  is  feminine  on  the  o' her.  Just  as  plus  taken  in  a negative 
direction,  is  equivalent  to  minus  x taken  in  a positive  direction. 

‘ Uranus,  then,  in  the  objective  world  is  the  lord  of  mind — ^xnind  per 
se,  often  transcending  intellect  as  represented  by  Mercury — perceptive, 
distinguishing,  anal3'tical.  It  is  essentially  penetrating  and  separative 
and  has  the  supreme  characteristic  of  individuality  and  domination. 

‘ Neptune,  on  the  other  hand,  is  the  ruler  of  the  emotions,  the 
spiritual  emotions  or  motives.  It  is  essentiall3"  unifying,  blending, 
amalgamating  and  synthetic. 

‘ From  what  has  been  said  above  in  regard  to  positive  and  negative 
attributes  interchanging  as  we  pass  from  one  plane  to  another,  it  will  be 
easily  understood  that  the  characteristics  of  .Uranus,  while  generally 
applying  to  the  mind  in  men,  will  affect  the  feelings  in  women ; similarly, 
while  .N_eptune  will  chiefly  sway  the  feelings  of  men,  it  will  largely 
operate  on  the  minds  of  women.  This  will  be  readily  perceived  by 
analog3%  when  we  consider  that  in  regard  to  love  matters,  for  instance, 
we  are  accustomed  to  look  to  Mars  in  a female  and  to  Venus  in  a male 
geniture. 


122 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


Neptune  and  Uranus,  being  epitomes  as  it  were  of  the  other 
planets,  govern  not  one  house,  but  a combination  of  houses;  Uranus 
governing  the  cross  generally  and  the  cardinal  signs  in  particular,  while 
Neptune  governs  the  triangle  in  general  and  watery  signs  in  particular  i 
Uranus  ranking  as  a cardinal  and  Neptune  as  a fixed  planet.*  Hence 
the  operation  of  these  planets  in  physical  matters  is  usually  the  reverse  of 
what  has  been  said  as  to  their  internal  nature — viz.^  Uranus  appears  as 
positive,  masculine,  compelling,  authoritative,  and  Neptune  as  negative, 
feminine,  persuasive  and  docile.  It  is  the  reverse  of  common  for  a 
strongly  Neptunian  person  to  take  a prominent  part  in  an3^  concern  he 
may  be  interested  in  ; if  he  does,  he  sways  b3^  sympathy  or  magnetism, 
or  persuades  by  humour,  rather  than  compelling  by  force  of  reason  or 
dazzling  by  wit,  as  would  the  Uranian. 

‘ Both  of  these  planets  which  are  truly  occult,  while  concerned  on 
the  one  hand  with  the  higher  or  spiritual  side  of  things,  are  liable  to 
perversion  on  the  material  side.  When  this  is  the  case,  the  wickedness 
is  either  satanic  (as  in  the  witch,  or  the  black  magician),  or  diabolical  (as 
in  the  soul-less  being,  the  ghoul — the  “ Mr  Hyde  ” of  Stevenson’s  story). 
Uranus  may  be  described  as  neuter^  while  Neptune  is  hermaphrodite. 
The  typical  work  of  Uranus  is  translation  ; of  Neptune,  transmutation. 

‘ To  those  people  who  are  familiar  with  music — or,  indeed,  who  are 
intuitive  at  all  as  to  the  meanings  of  sound — a consideration  of,  and 
meditation  upon,  the  chords  of  the  “ diminished  seventh  ” (Uranus)  and 
the  “augumented  fifth”  (Neptune),^  whose  very  titles  are  significant,  will 
convey  more  to  their  internal  understanding  about  the  real  nature  of 
these  mysterious  planets  than  pages  on  pages  of  description.  Note  that 
these  are  the  only  chords  that  are  indeterminate  as  to  key,  that  there  are 
only  three  positions  of  the  “diminished  seventh ’’containing  different  notes, 
and  similiarly  four  of  the  “augumented  fifth,” — corresponding  with  the 
properties  of  the  cross  and  triangle  respectivel3%  when  applied  to  the 
zodiac  of  twelve  signs. 

‘Just  as  the  more  truly  spiritual  is  the  least  apparent  on  the 
physical  plane,  which  is  commonly  agnostic  as  to  that  Spirit  of  which  it 
is  the  manifestation,  so  do  these  two  outer  planets  represent  formlessness 

^ Mercury,  of  course,  being  common — it  is  noteworthy  that  these  three  are  the 
only  planets  whose  symbols  typify  the  union  of  spirit,  soul  and  body  (circle,  half 
circle  and  cross). 

2 For  instance  C,  D sharp,  F Sharp  A (I^)  ; and  C,  E,  G sharp  (^). 


NEPTUNE,  THE  MYSTIC 


123 


on  the  material  plane,  but,  the  essence  and  substance  of  all  forms  on  the 
spiritual  plane.  And  in  proportion  as  they  are  incomprehensible  on  the 
phenomenal  plane,  so  are  they  real  and  intelligible  on  the  noumenal 
plane. 

‘ They  represent  at  once  chaos  and  perfection^  the  Beginning  and  the 
Ending,  so  far  as  our  cosmic  existence  as  individuals  is  concerned ; and 
by  their  aspects  at  birth  the3^  largeU^  represent  the  state  of  attainment  of 
the  Ego.  ^To  thoroughly  grasp  their  significance,  however,  requires  (as 
has  been  before  hinted)  such  intuition  as  only  belongs  in  its  fulness  to 
the  Coming  Race  of  mankind. 

‘Uranus  in  its  highest  aspect  typifies  the  Universal  Mind,  which 
holds  all  forms  (however  contradictory)  in  its  consciousness,  harmonising 
and  reconciling  them  all.  It  is  The  Comprehender,  who,  unlimited  bj^ 
space,  commands  infinit}^  It  represents  to  us  the  ETERNAL  MAN. 

‘Neptune  s3^mbolises  the  three  orders  of  Nature,  cardinal,  fixed, 
and  common,  harmonised  into  one  unity — the  Universal  Soul.  It  is  the 
All-Lover,  who,  transcending  time,  dwells  in  eternit3^  It  represents  to 
us  the  ETERNAL  WOMAN — "'‘das  ewig  weibhche"'  of  Goethe.’ 


CHAPTER  XII 


The  Nativity  and  its  Relation  to  Heredity 

A great  deal  of  stress  has  been  placed  upon  the  Nativity  of  Jesus, 
quite  sufficient  to  convince  any  earnest  enquirer  that  it  was  an  astro- 
logical event  of  much  importance  to  the  world.  And  as  that  birth  was 
as  much  symbolical  as  historical,  if  not  more  so,  it  may  yet  be  used  as  a 
means  of  educating  many  into  the  fact  that  there  is  a law  governing 
ph3^sical  birth,  as  well  as  one  that  is  concerned  with  the  birth  of  the 
Christ  in  every  human  being. 

The  nativity  of  ever^^one  is  governed  by  a law  that  none  may  break, 
for  there  is  a time  to  be  born  and  a time  to  die.  From  the  cradle  to  the 
grave,  animal  man  is  under  stellar  rule  and  not  until  his  spheres  are 
reversed  can  he  take  the  definite  steps  that  shall  lead  him  to  freedom 
from  the  wheel  of  re-births^ 

All  mortal  births  depend  upon  the  Mooiy  who  is  the  mother  of  the 
earth.  All  life  on  the  globe  came  from  the  Moon,  the  planet  previously 
inhabited  by  the  humanity  of  this  Earth.  This  is  the  occult  teaching, 
and  in  a similar  manner  the  Moon,  or  all  that  substance  which  it 
governs  in  the  ether  of  space,  represents  the  parent  mould  upon  which 
the  physical  body  is  built,  ^t  a time  approximate  to  that  of  conception 
the  Moon’s  place  in  the  heavens  symbolises  the  type  of  body  that  is  to 
be  born,  with  its  peculiar  temperament  and  qualit;^ 

By  some  mysterious  occult  force  there  is  attracted  to  the  magnetic 
vortex  that  is  set  in  motio^*  at  that  time,  a pattern  shape  into  which 
all  the  physical  particles  that  go  to  make  up  the  physical  body  are 
buil^  This  lunar  position,  at  what  has  been  termed  the  ‘ Pre-natal 
Epoch,’  determines  the  ascending  degree  of  the  rising  sign  at  the 
moment  of  physical  birth,  ^he  pattern  mould  is  but  a psychic  emtryo, 
dying  out  of  the  invisible  world  of  ether  to  be  born  into  the  physical 
'svorld  of  visible  matter.  No  physical  body  can  be  built  without  it,  and 
none  can  die  until  it  has  been  withdrawn  from  its  outer  sheath,  the 

124 


THE  NATIVITY  AND  ITS  RELATION  TO  HEREDITY  125 

physical  Seen  with  clear  astral  vision  it  is  of  a violet  colouring, 

when  separated  from  the  other  colourings  that  it  readily  absorbs ; it  is 
that  duplicate  of  the  ph^^sical  body  which,  absorbing  the  solar  rays, 
specialises  them  into  vitality ; and  the  indrawing  of  the  solar  life  at  the 
moment  of  birth  produces  the  ‘breath  of  life,’  which  gives  the  child  its 
independent  life.  For  it  is  through  this  etheric  body,  governed  by  the 
Moon,  that  the  physical  organs  receive  their  life  and  vitality,  and  thus 
allow  the  ph3^sical  body  to  become  a fitting  instrument  with  which  to 
contact  the  outer  world. 

It  is  in  this  sense  that  the  Moon  is  the  ruler  of  forms  plastic  and 
adaptable  to  all  requirements.  It  is  this  ‘ etheric  ’ or  lunar  body  that 
contains  all  the  fatalistic  tendencies,  the  sins  of  the  past,  and  the 
possibilities  of  the  future  unfolding  of  the  personality.  Its  impression 
upon  the  physical  body  is  brought  out  b}^  the  ascendant  at  birth  ; the 
details  of  this  are  known  only  to  those  who  study  the  deeper  side  of 
Astrology  in  its  metaphysical  aspect.  It  may,  however,  be  said  that  the 
sum  total  of  each  life  is  mirrored  in  the  forthcoming  ‘ etheric  body,'  and 
thus  the  past  is  linked  to  the  future,  each  man  reaping  as  he  has  sown ; 
for  none  can  be  born  at  any  other  time  than  that  destined  for  him  by  his 
own  making  ; every  thought,  feeling,  and  action  being  photographed 
upon  the  plastic  ether  which  incessantly  and  automatically  registers 
everything  that  takes  place  within  it. 

‘When  the  time  for  reincarnation  comes,  and  the  presence  of  the 
permanent  atom  renders  possible  the  fertilisation  of  the  ovum  from 
which  the  new  body  is  to  grow,  its  keynote  sounds  out,  and  is  one  of 
the  forces  which  guide  the  ethereal  builder,  the  elemental  charged  with 
the  building  of  the  physical  body,  to  choose  the  materials  suitable  for 
his  work,  for  he  can  use  none  that  cannot  be  to  some  extent  attuned  to 
the  permanent  atom.  But  it  is  only  one  of  the  forces  ; the  karma  of  past 
lives,  mental,  emotional,  and  in  relation  to  others,  demands  materials 
capable  of  the  most  varied  expressions  ; out  of  that  karma,  the  Lords  of 
Karma  have  chosen  such  as  is  congruous,  i.e.  such  as  can  be  expressed 
through  a body  of  a particular  material  group  ; this  congruous  mass  of 
karma  determines  the  material  group,  over-riding  the  permanent  atom, 
and  out  of  that  group  are  chosen  by  the  elemental  such  materials  as  can 
vibrate  in  harmony  with  the  permanent  atom,  or  in  discords  not 
disruptive  in  their  violence.  Hence,  as  said,  the  permanent  atom  is 
only  one  of  the  forces  in  determining  the  third  “ colour  " or  “ keynote”  or 


26 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


“ temperament,”  which  characterises  each  of  us.  According  to  this 
temperament  will  be  the  time  of  the  birth  of  the  body ; it  must  be  born 
into  the  world  at  a time  when  the  physical  planetary  influences  are 
suitable  to  its  third  temperament,  and  it  thus  is  born  “under  its” 
astrological  “ Star.”  Needless  to  say,  it  is  not  the  Star  that  imposes  the 
temperament,  but  the  temperament  that  fixes  the  epoch  of  birth  under 
that  Star.  But  herein  lies  the  explanation  of  the  correspondences 
between  the  stars — Star-Angels,  that  is  to  say — and  characters,  and 
the  usefulness  for  educational  purposes  of  a skilfully  and  carefully  drawn 
horoscope,  as  a guide  to  the  personal  temperament  of  a child.’ — A Study 
in  Consciousness^  by  Annie  Besant,  p.  98. 

The  physical  body  that  is  built  upon  the  etheric  counterpart  is 
composed  of  countless  ‘ lives,’  all  contributed  by  Mother  Nature,  in 
whose  service  there  are  millions  of  nature  spirits  to  do  her  bidding  and 
build  around  the  mould  the  myriads  of  atoms  that  congregate  together 
to  make  man’s  physical  form.  Amidst  all  these  myriads  of  cells  there  is 
one  at  the  centre  that  is  permanent ; it  is  the  permanent  atom  of  the 
physical  body  that  never  dies,  but  is  resurrected  life  after  life  until  every 
other  atom  in  the  body  of  the  latest  physical  life  responds  harmoniously 
to  its  vibrations. 

Into  these  atoms  is  poured  the  ‘ Breath  of  Life  ’ by  the  Sun,  and 
the  vitality  that  permeates  them  all  is  the  animating  life  of  the  Sun, 
which  is  the  life  drawn  into  the  physical  body  as  ‘ Prana  ’ through 
the  ‘ Etheric  Double,’  thus  making  it  complete  as  a living  entity. 

Thus  the  Sun  is  the  Father,  the  Life-Giver  to  all;  the  Moon  is  the 
Mother,  giving  the  form  or  mould  out  of  which  the  physical  body,  as  the 
child,  comes  forth  built  up  from  the  ‘ Dust  ’ of  the  earth,  and  represented 
by  the  zodiac  and  the  twelve  houses  of  which  the  ascendant  is  the  head. 

From  an  astrological  standpoint  this  is  the  basis  of  the  personal 
physical  man,  represented  by  the  Sun,  Moon  and  the  Ascendant. 

0 The  SiJN  gives  the  golden  health  aura,  the  life  forces  and  the 
vitality  of  the  body.  Its  colour  is  golden  or  orange,  and  governs  the 
'breaths.’  Its  principal  seat  is  in  the  heart,  thus  governing  the  circulation, 
the  constitution,  and  that  which  gives  life  to  actions,  feelings,  and  the 
mind. 

y The  Moon  gives  the  violet  aura  of  the  mould  or  casting  for  the 
physical  body ; its  receptive  tendency  makes  it  a link  for  contacting  the 
other  worlds,  and  the  principles  that  find  expression  through  the  body  ; 


THE  NATIVITY  AND  ITS  RELATION  TO  HEREDITY  127 


and  it  thus  governs  all  the  functional  conditions.  Its  seat  is  the 
stoniach,  and  its  particular  ruling  affects  the  brain  cells,  the  most  sensitive 
and  responsive  part  of  the  body. 

The  .^scenpant  of  the  Nativity  represents  the  projection  of  the 
^pn’s  image  at  the  prenatal  epoch,  and  shows  the  limitations  imposed 
upon  the  incarnating  Ego,  as  the  result  of  the  fulness  of  the  past 
expressions  awaiting  further  realisation. 

These  three  centres  are  represented  in  each  nativity  by  the  triplicities, 
and  that  particular  triangle  having  its  apex  in  the  Ascendant,  with  its 
reflections,  or  base,  in  the  fifth  and  ninth  houses. 

The  Ascendant  symbolises  the  image,  the  model,  or  pattern  upon 
which  the  flesh  has  been  built,  and  is  the  house  of  the  present;  its 
r^PXQductive  character,  and  the  life  that  animates  it  is  shown  by  the 
fifth  house,  the  house  of  the  .past;  and  the  cell  lives,  constantly  coming 
and  going  by  the  ninth,  the  house  of  the  future.  The  cell  life  is 
under^the  domain  of  the  planet  Jupiter,  symbol  of  the  future,  and  of 
the  power  to  expand  and  divide,  an  idea  postulated  by  Weissmann  when 
treating  of  the  immortal  cell. 

‘ There  are  now  living  in  us  and  in  the  animal  world  certain  cells 
that  have  never  died,  immortal  since  life  appeared  on  earth.  Living 
beings  of  the  lower  forms  never  die.  A certain  cell  grows,  then  divides 
into  two,  but  exists  in  the  two.  So  the  cells  of,  at  any  rate,  lower  life 
are  immortal ; they  do  not  die  but  only  divide.’ 

In  this  sense  Jupiter  is  lord  of  the  physical  body,  or  at  least  of  that 
permanent  cell  that  is  the  basis  of  all  future  physical  bodies ; but  also 
much  more  than  this,  as  we  shall  see  later. 

The  Personality,  or  mortal  part  of  man,  known  as  ‘The  Lower 
Quarternary,’  therefore  consists  of  four  points  or  centres  : 

The  Moon  at  Epoch,  corresponding  to  Ascendant  at  birth 

The  ph’^sical  cells  „ „ Jupiter  allowing  expansion 

The  ‘ 'Breath  of  life  ’ „ „ Sun  gi^i^g  ‘ Prana  ’ or  Vitality 

Lord  oj  Ascendant  „ „ Mars  gi'^n^g  Astral  link,  or  Personal 

Ray  and  Colour 

Each  part  of  a nativity  has  its  counterpart,  or  symbolic  ruler. 
Mars  is  thus  nominally  the  ruler  of  every  ascendant,  being  the  natural 
ruler  of  Aries,  the  first  sign  of  the  zodiac.  It  is  the  universal  repre- 
sentative of  the  Fifth  Race  that  we  are  in  at  present,  it  therefore 
represents  the  animal  soul  in  all  who  have  not  so  purified  themselves  as 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


1 28 

to  be  entirel^^  above  it.  In  a general  sense,  in  all  nativities  the  ruler  of 
the  ascendant  and  the  planet  Mars  are  joint  rulers,  the  state  of  the 
animal  in  us  being  judged  by  these  part  rulers. 

Constellations,  Signs,  Houses 

It  is  well  known  that  in  a general  wa3^  signs  and  houses  corre- 
spond, Aries  to  the  ascendant,  Taurus  to  the  second  house,  and  so  on. 
The  zodiac  used  in  Astrology  to-day  is  that  of  our  earth  onl}^  the  twelve 
signs  being  so  many  subdivisions  of  the  vital  magnetic  forces  emanating 
from  our  globe  and  radiated  outwards  in  all  directions  just  as  prana  is 
radiated  from  a healthy  body.^ 

The  Twelve  Mundane  Houses  might  be  described  as  the  zodiac  of 
the  personality ; because  they  form  the  most  localised  and  limited  of  the 
circles  drawn  in  the  horoscope,  being  definitely  related  to  the  place  of 
birth  only,  and  to  the  physical  body  born  in  that  place. 

The  Twelve  Signs  and  their  rulers,  considered  without  relation  to 
place,  form  the  horoscope  of  the  earth,  being  universal  in  their  influence, 
and  not  more  related  to  one  part  of  the  world  than  to  another. 

The  Twelve  Constellations  form  the  zodiac  of  the  whole  solar 
system,  the  horoscope  in  which  its  fate  from  beginning  to  end  is  written. 
And  just  as  the  rotation  of  the  earth  makes  the  signs  rise  and  set,  a 
new  sign  being  on  the  ascendant  every  two  hours,  on  an  average  ; so,  as 
the  result  of  what  is  known  as  ‘ precession,’  the  far  greater  circle  of  the 
constellations  passes,  across  the  earth’s  ascendant,  the  equinoctial  point, 
the  beginning  of  the  zodiac.  In  this  way  the  great  day  of  precession, 
comprising  over  25,000  of  our  years,  comes  to  correspond  with  one  of  our 
days,  because  during  that  period  all  the  twelve  constellations  rise  and 
seance. 

" At  present  the  constellation  Pisces  is  on  the  ascendant  of  the 
earth’s  horoscope,  and  it  has  been  there  for  man3^  centuries  past,  the 
vernal  equinox  having  entered  that  constellation  soon  after  the  dawn 
of  the  Christian  era.  The  effect  it  has  had  upon  the  world  in  general 
and  upon  western  civilisation  in  particular  has  been  onl3"  too  evident. 
The  twelfth  house  and  constellation  correspond  to  the  sign  Pisces. 
This  is  the  house  of  imprisonment,  bondage,  grief,  loss  and  treachery  ; 
and  since  the  world  came  under  the  influence  of  this  constellation,  these 
evils  have  been  manifest  enough  in  histor3^  Its  record  has  been  one  of 


^ This  is  more  fully  explained  in  Casting  the  Horoscope  {Third  Edition). 


THE  NATIVITY  AND  ITS  RELATION  TO  HEREDITY  129 


darkness,  ignorance  and  bigotry ; for  the  formalism  and  external  ritual 
of  the  priest  has  taken  the  place  that  should  be  occupied  by  the  spiritual 
illumination  of  the  prophety^ 

Jupiter,  the  ruler  of  Pisces,  expresses  the  embodiment  of  con- 
sciousness, life  in  form,  spirit  clothed  in  matter.  In  our  own  small  cycle 
of  birth  and  death  it  stands  for  the  soul  on  the  threshold  of  incarnation, 
just  about  to  be  reborn.  In  a still  lower  application,  it  signifies  the 
child  in  the  womb  of  the  mother  during  the  month  immediately  preceding 
birth.  For  if  the  first  house  and  Aries  correspond  to  birth,  the  fourth 
house  and  Cancer,  with  the  Moon,  signify  conception  ;*  that  which  is 
conceived  in  Cancer  being  born  in  Aries ; and  the  intermediate  signs 
correspond  to  intermediate  stages  of  antenatal  life.  Birth  is  thus  the 
transition  from  the  darkness  and  imprisonment  of  the  twelfth  house  to 
the  freedom  and  separate  existence  of  new  life  in  the  ascendant. 

Man  cannot  express  to-da3^  one  tithe  of  the  splendour  and  magnifi- 
cence of  the  full^^-developed  soul  that  is  evolving  under  the  influence  of 
Jupiter.  Old  as  the  soul  appears  to  be  when  numbered  in  years  of  earth, 
it  has  hardly  passed  the  first  stage  in  its  long  pilgrimage ; and  that 
which  will  one  day  be  divine  wisdom  is  to-day  little  more  than 
unreasoning  ceremonialism,  an  acquiescence  in  accustomed  forms,  rules 
and  rituals  without  the  first-hand  personal  knowledge  that  alone  can 
illuminate  them.  Jupiter  may  be  described  as  belonging  to  the  dominion 
of  the  second  Life  Wave,  both  in  terms  of  body  and  in  terms  of 
consciousness.  In  terms  of  body  it  builds  up  into  one  coherent  harmon- 
ious whole  the  otherwise  scattered  units  called  the  ‘ tiny  lives,’  of 
which  our  bodies  are  formed,  unifies  and  co-ordinates  them  into  a vehicle 
that  shall  subserve  the  purposes  of  the  indwelling  soul.  In  this  way  it 
signifies,  on  the  ph^^sical  plane,  the  etheric  mould  or  model  ^ round 
which  the  dense  physical  body  is  built  and  upon  which  its  vitality  and 
growth  depend  ; but,  as  remarked  in  a previous  chapter,  when  no 
reference  is  made  to  any  plane  in  particular  it  stands  for  ‘body’  in 
general,  that  is,  for  any  form  or  vehicle  in  which  the  soul  is  functioning 
in  a fully  awake  condition. 

In  terms  of  consciousness,  Jupiter  exhibits  a similar  tendenc3^ 
Here  also  it  builds  up  otherwise  separate  units  into  a harmonious  whole  ; 
but  these  that  are  so  builded  are  here  ideas.  The  scattered  and 


^ Previously  given  by  the  Moon. 


130 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


apparently  unrelated  experiences  of  many  years  and  many  lives  are 
gathered  up  and  synthesised,  and  the  result  of  the  integration  is  wisdom, 
that  knowledge  of  the  soul  which  is  never  learned  out  of  books  or  imparted 
by  a teacher,  although  both  these  may  serve  to  call  it  forth  in  a small 
degree  if  it  already  exists  in  the  soul  from  before  birth.  Jupiter  gives 
the  sense  of  harmony  (as  distinguished  from  melody)  to  the  musician  ; 
the  eye  for  form  and  shape  to  the  artist,  sculptor  and  architect ; and  the 
love  of  beauty  in  form  to  mankind  in  general.  Under  its  jnfluence 
knowledge  becomes  wisdom,  and  intellect  intuition,  although  never  in 
the  course  of  one  life  only.  Its  weak  side  arises  from  the  fact  that, 
because  it  transcends  reason,  it  is  apt,  in  the  ordinary  imperfect  man  of 
to-day,  to  act  in  defiance  of  reason  : mistaking  its  way  in  the  darkness  of 
the  world,  it  tramples  the  intelligence  under  foot ; and  so  it  has  come  to_ 
signify  the  priest  as  the  persecutor  of  the  prophet,  the  ecclesiastic  as  the 
enemy  of  the  scientist,  the  ritualist  or  formalist  in  any  department  of 
life  as  opposed  to  the  lover  of  freedom  from  conventionality.^ 

These  characteristics  have  been  clearly  written  upon  the  pages  of 
history  while  the  earth’s  ascendant  has  been  progressing  through  the 
constellation  Pisces.  Its  many  shortcomings  have  been  due  to  human 
imperfections  and  not  to  any  essentially  malign  influence  from  the 
heavens.  A perfect  civilisation  cannot  be  built  up  of  imperfect  materials. 
The  conduct  of  a nation  can  be  but  little  better  than  the  average  conduct 
of  its  citizens  ; and  if  these,  abusing  their  sacred  and  inalienable  right  of 
freewill,  neglect  their  opportunities  and  misuse  their  privileges,  an  evil 
karma  that  nothing  can  avert  descends  upon  races  and  nations. 

These  three  circles  or  zodiacs,  to  w^hich  reference  has  been  made, 
correspond,  in  a general  way,  to  the  three  parts  of  man’s  being,  spirit, 
soul  and  body.  The  constellations  are  allied  to  the  Sun,  or  spirit, 
above  ; the  circle  of  the  mundane  houses,  to  the  body,  below ; and  the 
zodiacal  signs,  like  the  soul,  are  intermediate  between  the  two  extremes. 

The  average  unevolved  person  is  dominated  largely  by  the  mundane 
houses,  by  the  energies  that  surge  to  and  fro  in  the  matter  of  the 

^ The  building-up  influence  of  Jupiter  is  sometimes  shown  in  bringing  people 
together  into  societies,  groups,  etc.  ; and  its  love  of  etiquette  and  ceremony  has  a 
direct  bearing  upon  churches,  state  functions,  legal  ceremonies,  masonic  ritual  and, 
in  occultism,  ceremonial  magic.  Many  of  those  who  have  natural  psychic  or 
occult  gifts  are  born  under  Jupiter  or  have  the  planet  prominent  or  the  luminaries 
in  signs  of  Jupiter. 


THE  NATIVITY  AND  ITS  RELATION  TO  HEREDITY  131 


physical,  astral  and  mental  bodies,  and  by  the  lower  side  of  the  planetary 
influences  that  impinge  upon  these  bodies.  The  sense  of  ‘self’  is  very 
strong,  and  it  throws  its  illusion  over  everything.  Such  a person  thinks 
‘ I love,  I hate,  I am  happy,  I am  miserable,  I am  strong,  I am  weak, 

I desire,  I do  not  desire  ’ ; when  the  truth  is  that  planetary  forces  from 
outside  him,  by  their  impacts  upon  his  vehicles,  call  forth  an  answer 
from  within,  and  his  consciousness  automatically  lends  itself  to  the 
response,  which  he  fancies  originates  within  him.  He  has  not  sufficient 
wisdom  to  discriminate  between  ideas  and  feelings  arising  within  his 
own  consciousness  and  those  impressed  upon  him  by  vibrations  coming 
from  outside  ; and  when  he  begins  to  realise  that  neither  his  thoughts  nor 
his  feelings  are  his  own,  but  that  they  are  largely  a mere  tidal  ebb  and 
flow,  even  then  he  has  not  sufficient  strength  of  will  to  control  them.  We 
are  all  of  us  more  or  less  in  this  condition ; the  strong  personality  frequently 
failing  to  discriminate,  and  he  who  can  discriminate  failing  to  achieve^^ 
As  evolution  progresses  the  soul  becomes  more  clearly  outlined  in 
each  department  of  its  being,  clearer  in  insight,  purer  in  motive,  and 
more  capable  in  action.  That  is,  the  man  is  less  dominated  by  body, 
and  becomes  more  definitely  affiliated  to  that  sign  and  planet  to  which 
he  belongs.  His  character  is  more  his  own,  he  is  growing  more  clearly 
like  the  planetary  ruler  along  whose  ray  he  is  evolving,  and  under  whose 
protection  he  has  been  from  the  first.  He  is  no  longer  a child,  even  if 
he  has  not  yet  reached  the  full  manhood  of  the  soul,  but  the  promise  of 
the  perfect  man  can  be  seen  within  him.  At  this  stage  soul  is  growing 
stronger  and  body  weaker,  and  he  belongs  rather  to  sign  and  planet 
than  to  mundane  house. 

The  third  stage  pertains  to  the  spirit,  and  lies  far  be3^ond  the 
humanity  of  to-day,  although  all  will  one  day  reach  it.  The  soul  is  still 
planetary  in  its  characteristics,  as  it  must  always  be  during  manifesta- 
tion ; but  it  must  now  be  classed  rather  with  constellations  than  with 
signs.  Not  that  the  two,  constellation  and  sign,  are  contradictory,  for 
the  one  is  a reflection  of  the  other,  although  smaller  and  more  localised. 
The  constellations  are  common  to  the  whole  solar  system ; the  signs, 
of  our  zodiac  belong  to  our  earth  onl3^ ; and  the  mundane  houses  relate 
to  one  definite  place  on  the  earth.  Therefore,  to  descend  from  constella- 
tion to  sign,  and  from  this  to  house,  is  equivalent  to  descending  into 
successively  denser  layers  of  matter  and  more  circumscribed  regions. 

These  three  zodiacs  correspond,  as  has  been  stated,  in  a general 


132 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


wa3%  to  spirit,  soul,  and  bod3^  But  each  one  of  these  three  is  itself 
triple,  and  reflects  the  whole  within  it. 

It  is  therefore  true  that,  in  one  sense,  there  are  onl^^  three  states  or 
modes  of  consciousness  and  being  in  the  whole  solar  S3^stem.  These  we 
might  name  Sun,  Moon,  and  Earth,  tf  we  are  careful  to  employ  the  words 
in  a very  general  sense  only.  Sun  means  that  form  of  life  and  conscious- 
ness which  pervades  the  whole  system.  Moon  means  substance  in 
general,  relativel3^  uniform  in  its  source  but  actuall3^  multiform  during 
manifestation.  Earth  means  the  child  of  the  two,  a separated  manifested 
unit  composed  of  the  father  life  surrounded  by  the  mother  substance. 
Earth  therefore  in  this  sense  is  not  our  earth  onl3^butany  evolving  unit 
whether  a planet,  a man,  or  an  atom.  Each  such  unit  has  its  own  three 
aspects,  its  father  life,  spirit,  or  will ; its  mother  substance,  soul  or 
wisdom  ; and  its  own  resultant  activity  in  bod3\ 


Bearing  this  in  mind,  and  remembering  that  the  ascendant  is  a 


synthetic  expression  of  the  twelve  mundane  houses,  the  following 
correspondences  ma3"  be  suggested  to  the  reader  as  an  addition  to 


those  that  have  been  given  before. 


CONSTELLATIONS 

SUN 

SPIRIT 

MONAD 

WILL 

DESIRE 

FIXED 

SUCCEDENT 


Signs 

Moon  and  Planets 
Soul 

Individuality 

Wisdom 

Cognition 

Mutable 

Cadent 


Houses 
Earth  or  Asc. 
Body 

Personality 

Activity 

Action 

Cardinal 

Angles 


These  are  onl3^  meant  as  suggestions  to  be  taken  in  a ver3^  general 
sense.  The3^  must  not  be  applied  in  too  rigid  a manner  or  contradiction 
will  result ; for  it  is  evident  that  tables  of  correspondences  ma3"  be 
arranged  differentl3^  according  to  the  application  intended. 

It  has  been  previousl3"  stated  that  when  we  have  such  a trinity 
as  that  of  spirit,  soul,  and  bod3^  each  one  of  the  three  reflects  all 


three  within  it.  This  is  illustrated  in  the  following  table : 

( Spiritual  Will 


SPIRIT,  Will 


SOUL,  Wisdom 


BODY,  Activity 


< Spiritual  Wisdom 
Spiritual  Activity 

C Individual  Will 

< Individual  Wisdom 
Individual  Activity 

C Personal  Will,  deshe 

< Personal  Wisdom,  intellect 
( Personal  Activity,  action 


THE  NATIVITY  AND  ITS  RELATION  TO  HEREDITY  133 


Any  trinity  is  a threefold  expression  of  an  underlying  unity,  and  this, 
together  with  the  three,  being  taken  as  one  whole  makes  the  sacred 
Tetraktys.  This  is  true  of  each  trinity  in  the  above  table.  Spirit,  Soul 
and  Body  are  only  three  aspects  of  one  evolving  entity,  which  makes  each 
such  entity  a Tetraktys  in  itself.  Similarly  with  each  of  the  subordinate 
trinities  ; Spiritual  Will,  Spiritual  Wisdom,  and  Spiritual  Activity  make 
a Tetraktys  ; the  Individual  three  make  a second,  and  the  Personal  three 
a third. 

Here  then  we  have  the  Tetraktys  three  times  repeated,  as  Spiritual, 
as  Individual,  and  as  Personal.  These  three  sacred  Fours  make  a 
duodenary  which  corresponds  to  the  twelve  signs  of  the  zodiac. 

If  instead  of  synthesising  each  trinity  separately,  we  take  the 
nine  as  being  so  many  aspects  of  one  entity,  this  synthesis,  added  to  the 
nine,  will  make  the  ten,  corresponding  to  the  ten  numbers  of  the  Sun. 

Again,  if  we  take  Spirit  as  a unity  instead  of  a trinity,  this  unity 
added  to  the  six  aspects  below  it,  the  Individual  three  and  the  Personal 
three,  make  the  seven  corresponding  to  the  seven  Principles  of  man, 
seven  colours,  sounds,  planets  (seven  groups  of  planets  really),  etc. 

This  numerical  classification  could  be  continued  indefinitely,  for 
the  whole  universe  is  built  in  accordance  with  the  properties  of  numbers. 


CHAPTER  XIV 


Character  is  Destiny 

A FEW  practical  illustrations  of  how  Character  makes  Destiny  will 
now  be  useful,  and  for  that  purpose  a judgment  of  some  nativities  from 
the  exoteric  as  well  as  the  esoteric  standpoint  will  bring  out  both  methods 
of  looking  at  a human  life. 

As  pointed  out  in  previous  chapters,  every  human  being  is  a 
separated  ‘self,’  a ‘Divine  Fragment’  of  the  One  Eternal  Self, 
gradually  acquiring  fully  awakened  self-consciousness  in  time  and  space. 
So  far  as  the  unfolding  of  consciousness  is  concerned,  therefore,  some 
egos  may  be  termed  young,  while  others  are  older.  This  brings  into  the 
world,  alongside  of  the  average  or  normal  evolution,  on  the  one  hand 
the  undeveloped,  and  on  the  other  the  very  highly  evolved ; the  savage 
at  one  pole,  the  Adept  or  Master  at  the  other. 

These  we  may  illustrate  by  a small  dark  cloud  to  represent  the 
manifested  self-consciousness  of  an  undeveloped  ego  in  which  ‘ aware- 
ness ’ is  only  just  beginning  to  be  active.  A larger,  and  brighter,  cloud 
to  represent  the  normally  awakened  self-consciousness  responsive  to 
surroundings,  to  the  environment  and  general  worldly  requirements  ; 
and  large  cloud  of  bright  and  flashing  colour  to  show  that  of  the  full^^ 
awakened  and  unfolded  life  responsive  to  all  the  vibrations  that  come 
from  the  three  worlds,  mental,  astral  and  physical. 

It  is  quite  reasonable  to  suppose  that  ^n  undeveloped  ego 
will  be  altogether  subject  to  environment,  led  by  circumstances,  and 
affected  by  the  natural  elements  he  does  not  understand.  The  experiences 
of  life  alone  will  call  out  the  latent  germ  of  mind,  stimulating  in  turn 
the  perceptive  faculties  and  memory.  For  many  lives  such  an  ego  will 
be  under  the  influence  of  the  planet  Mars,  and  his  feelings  will  be  swa3^ed 
by  passions  and  appetites  responding  only  to  the  coarser  vibrations  of 
the  physical  world.  ) 


CHARACTER  IS  DESTINY 


135 


^The  normally  developed  man  of  our  own  time  will  to  a greater  or 
lesser  extent  have  subjugated  the  coarser  passions,  will  have  refined  his 
tastes,  and  will  be  more  or  less  conscious  of  his  limitations.  The  martial 
forces  will  be  transmuted  to  higher  planes,  and  he  will  have  come  more 
under  the  prevailing  influence  of  the  planet  Saturn,  having  exchanged  the 
out-rushing  impulse  and  forceful  tendencies  of  Mars,  the  astral  planet, 
for  that  of  the  restraining,  reflective  and  cautious  influence  of  the  mind- 
ruling Saturr^  ^he  highly  evolved  man  will  have  transcended  both 
Mars  and  Saturn  Vnd  will  no  longer  be  separative  and  confined  to  the 
use  of  the  physical  bod}^  but  will  exhibit  characteristics  like  those  of  the 
'houseless  wanderer’  Uranus,  and  will  respond  to  that  planet’s 
vibrations  to  such  an  extent  as  to  know  that  all  are  sons  of  the  Light, 
the  same  in  essence,  though  manifesting  differently  by  reason  of  the 
matter  through  which  the  consciousness  is  working.  His  consciousness 
will  now  be  expanded  to  the  extent  of  contacting  the  consciousness  of  Ml^ 

From  the  finest  atom  of  spirit-matter  to  the  most  solid  rock  or 
densest  metal,  there  are  innumerable  degrees  of  life  and  form,  the  life 
always  conditioned  and  circumscribed  by  the  form ; the  more  highly 
evolved  having  power  over  the  less  evolved,  owing  to  its  greater  rate 
of  vibration.  Over  the  highest  and  most  refined  state  of  spirit-matter 
the  planet  Uranus  presides.  In  this  state  matter  instantly  responds  to 
every  vibration  of  life  or  consciousness.  It  is  the  plane  of  Will,  or 
supreme  consciousness.  Each  planet  corresponds  to  one  of  the  types  of 
matter  as  well  as  to  one  of  the  modes  of  consciousness.  In  the  most 
concrete  state  of  matter,  rock  or  stone,  life  is  the  prisoner,  and  in  this 
state  it  apparently  sleeps.  Over  this  plane  or  sphere  of  influence  the 
planet  Saturn  presides,  and  the  ph3^sical  earth  is  the  plane  of  its  densest 
manifestation. 

The  life  in  the  cells  of  the  physical  body  is  governed  by  the  planet 
Jupiter.  In  the  livingm.7m  the  Sun  and  Jupiter  govern  the  physical  life, 
the  Sun  ruling  the  heart  and  vital  organs  and  Jupiter  the  blood  that 
circulates  through  them.  In  every  cell  Jupiter  gives  the  nutritive,  and 
the  Sun  the  vital  heat.  In  this  sense  the  Sun  is  on  the  life  side  and 
Jupiter  on  the  form  side,  the  physical  consciousness  resulting  from  the 
union  being  synthesised  in  the  bodily  instincts  governed  by  the  Moon. 
The  instincts  of  the  body  are  transmitted  to  the  brain  cells,  and  there 
make  up  the  brain-consciousness  of  the  whole  body,  breeding  desires  for 
sensation,  and  finally  comprising  the  Kamic  or  desire-consciousness. 


o 


r 'll  Physical  cells  of  the  body. 

O ghnng  life  to  I ^ Sensations,  feelings. 

])  Objective  mind,  brain,  thinking. 

This  represents  the  well-known  ‘lower  quaternary,’  and  forms  the  Aura 
surrounding  the  body,  beginning  with  the  lowest  ether  of  the  etheric 
double. 

This  personal  aura  is  a cloudy  sphere  enveloping  and  interpenetrating 
the  physical  body,  and  through  it  various  colours  are  constantly  flashing ; 
and  according  to  its  function  various  names  are  given  to  it,  thus : 

The  Health  Aura.  This  radiates  out  in  an  infinite  number  of  straight 
lines  in  all  directions  round  the  body.  This  only  when  in  perfect  health, 
for  when  the  health  is  imperfect  they  radiate  but  feebly  or  droop  and  are 
in  confusion. 

The  Etheric  Aura.  This  is  of  a greyish  tint  and  is  the  first  portion 
of  the  aura  to  be  seen  by  those  of  quickened  sight.  It  usually  appears 
as  a mass  of  faintly  luminous  bluish  grey  mist,  which  interpenetrates 
the  physical  body.  Jupiter  and  the  Moon  both  correspond  to  this  body 
and  further  its  evolution,  while  the  Sun  yields  the  vital  force  that 
animates  the  whole  quaternary  and  is  specially  seen  in  the  health  aura. 

The  Kamic  Aura.  This  mirrors  every  desire  and  feeling.  Its  colour 
is  usually  a red,  of  varying  shades  according  to  the  tempering  oi  the 
feelings.  When  anger  is  expressed,  deep  red  flashes  on  a dark  back- 
ground are  seen.  Animal  passion  is  denoted  by  a lurid  flaming  red. 
Thick  and  very  dark,  almost  black  red,  denotes  hatred  or  malice  ; crimson 


136  THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 

That  department  of  nature  to  which  all  desires  gravitate  is  known 
as  the  Astral  Plane.  The  matter  of  this  plane  is  of  a finer  quality  than 
the  physical ; it  responds  to  all  sensations  and  feelings  of  a personal  and 
separative  character,  for  each  desire  attracted  to  this  plane  ensouls  the 
matter  of  that  plane  and  becomes  an  ‘elemental.’  This  plane  is 
governed  by  the  planet  Mars,  through  the  influence  of  which  desires 
become  energies  and  promptings  to  action.  The  whole  of  the  muscular 
system  of  the  body  is  under  the  control  of  this  planet ; it  also,  however,  is 
dependent  upon  the  Sun  for  vital  energy,  because  the  Sun  is  the  life  of  all 
forms,  and  without  it  there  could  be  no  expression. 

The  Sun  on  the  physical  plane  is  thus  life  to  all  forms  and  represents 
the  mortal  man  symbolically  as  follows  : 


CHARACTER  IS  DESTINY 


137 


denotes  strong  affection,  and  a fine  clear  rose-pink  a pure  and  unselfish 
affection.  Mars  has  great  influence  here. 

The  Lower  Mind  Aura.  This  is  a mixture  of  the  mental  and  the  astral 
or  kamic  aura.  It  is  clear  and  bright  if  the  disposition  is  unselfish,  and 
dark  and  cloudy  when  the  desires  are  impure.  The  Moon  and  Saturn 
both  have  strength  here. 

This,  as  said,  makes  up  the  body,  or  bodies,  of  the  mortal  man.  For 
life  is  common  to  all,  and  man’s  physical  vitality  is  but  the  specialised 
life  used  by  him  while  a living  man,  and  yielded  up  to  the  great  ocean 
of  life  at  ph^^sical  death  ; and  when  it  leaves  the  etheric  form  two  parts 
of  the  physical  man  disappear ; life  and  form  on  the  lowest  plane  are 
then  dissipated.  There  then  remains  the  life  of  the  desire  nature  and 
the  lower  mind,  to  be  dissipated  on  the  astral  plane. 

The  desires,  and  that  portion  of  the  mind  that  clings  to  them,  then 
pass  into  the  plane  of  the  departed,  Kama  Loka  ; the  Hades  of  the 
Christian,  the  purgatory  of  the  Catholic ; to  be  purified.  In  other 
words,  the  pure  and  unselfish  consciousness  is  separated  from  the  gross 
and  more  material  particles,  the  soul  afterwards  passing  to  a higher 
plane  termed  Devachan  or  Heaven  ; the  empty  shell  falling  back  into 
‘ hell,’  to  form  material  for  the  bodies  of  the  less  evolved. 

So  far  as  the  manifestation  of  each  planet  is  concerned,  in  connection 
with  humanit3^,  each  has  seven  modes  of  expression,  or  governs  seven 
planes  of  matter,  and  the  corresponding  state  of  consciousness  belonging 
to  them.  Note  these  facts: 

(i)  Each  one  is  supreme  over  its  own  plane  of  matter,  but  has  also 
a sub-influence  over  the  other  six  planes.  Each  has  its  own  primary 
colour  with  sub-divisions,  making  seven  in  all. 

(ii)  The  influence  of  each  is  modified  by,  and  expressed  in  terms 
of,  the  Zodiac,  according  to  the  sign  through  which  its  rays  pass. 

(iii)  This  influence  is  again  modified  by  the  house  in  which  it  is 
placed  in  the  horoscope. 

These  three  aspects  correspond  to  the  .Spirit,  Soul,  and  Body,  or 
Will,  Wisdom  and  Activity  aspects  of  the  Self. 

Apart  from  the  Sun,  which  represents  life  on  all  planes,  although 
manifested  on  each  differently,  each  planet  may  be  said  to  symbolise  a 
plane  of  matter  with  its  corresponding  state  of  consciousness.  As  already 
stated,  Jupiter  corresponds  to  the  cells  or  sheaths  ; Mars  to  Kama,  or  the 


138 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


emotions  ; Moon  to  lower  Manas,  or  the  brain-intellect.  (The  Moon,  it 
should  be  remembered,  is  said  to  be  a substitute.) 

If  the  law  of  correspondence  is  used  symbolically  and  not  taken  too 
literally,  it  ma3^be  stated  that  these  three  conditions  of  matter  with  their 
states  of  consciousness  are  but  reflections  of  three  higher  states  and 
conditions,  with  a dividing  state  between,  acting  as  a bridge,  intermediator 
or  communicator  between  the  two,  the  higher  representing  the  immortal 
and  imperishable  and  the  lower  the  mortal  and  impermanent. 

The  correspondence  may  be  thus  stated  : 

Mortal.  Bridge.  Immortal. 

Life  or  2/  C ( Ij,I  Spirit  or 

O C?  { hi  ? O 

Prana  ])  f 5 Atma 

Here  we  have  two  triads,  each  of  which  ma^^  be  taken  as  a tetrakt^^s  ; 
the  personal  or  mortal,  and  the  individual  or  immortal.  Each  is  a unit}" 
with  three  aspects.  The  individualit}"  has  its  own  unit}",  which  is  gathered 
up  in  that  one  of  the  seven  rays  to  which  it  belongs ; but  it  manifests  as 
a trinity,  the  three  aspects  of  which  correspond  to  the  divine  three  called 
Will,  Wisdom,  and  Activity,  and  are  symbolised  by  Uranus,  Mercury, 
and  Venus.  The  personality  has  also  its  own  unity,  its  own  specialised 
sense  of  ‘I  am  I ’ ; which,  as  a unit,  may  belong  to  any  one  of  the  seven 
rays,  although  in  truth  it  is  only  a sub-division  of  the  individual  ray. 

Between  these  two  triads,  the  personal  and  the  individual,  comes 
Saturn  as  a sort  of  bridge  of  communication  ; and  the  Sun  signifies  the 
life  and  energy  that  animates  the  whole,  both  above  and  below.  Saturn 
in  this  position  reminds  us  of  Janus,  the  two-faced  Roman  god  from 
whose  name  we  have  January,  the  month  of  the  Saturnian  sign  Capricorn, 
when  the  Sun,  having  touched  the  winter  solstice,  looks  with  one  face 
back  on  the  past  and  with  the  other  forward  to  the  future.  So  Saturn 
looks  downwards  towards  the  personality  and  upwards  towards  the  indi- 
viduality ; the  downward  centrifugal  consciousness  beginning  with  the 
first  step  down  into  incarnation,  and  lasting  until  middle  age,  the  ‘down- 
ward arc  ’ ; and  the  upward  centripetal  consciousness  dominating  the 
return  journey  from  middle  age  through  death  and  the  after  death  states 
until  it  is  once  more  withdrawn  into  the  individuality. 

A similiar  expansion  of  one  into  three,  and  a withdrawal  back  again 
of  three  into  one,  is  seen  in  the  four  points  of  the  mundane  circle  mid- 


CHARACTER  IS  DESTINY 


139 


night,  sunrise,  noon  and  sunset.  The  night  half  of  the  circle  with  its 
central  station  at  midnight  stands  for  Self  as  a unit  withdrawn  from 
manifestation.  The  day  half  of  the  circle  with  the  other  three  points, 
sunrise,  noon,  and  sunset,  illustrate  the  Self  as  a trinity  during  manifes- 
tation. The  positive  current  of  mundane  influence  begins  at  midnight 
and  increases  until  noon  is  reached,  after  which  the  negative  return 
current  prevails  until  midnight,  when  the  three  aspects  of  waking 
consciousness,  after  having  been  ‘out-breathed’  during  the  da}^,  are 
indrawn,  and  ‘ pralaya  ’ reigns  in  the  sleep  of  the  bod3^ 

We  have  dealt  here  with  the  personal  and  the  individual  triads,  but 
as  has  been  stated  previousl3%  beyond  these  comes  the  divine  Self  or 
spiritual  Monad.  It  is  extreme^  probable  that  these  three,  each  one  a 
unit  as  well  as  a triad,  together  correspond  to  the  twelve  signs  in  order 
thus : 

Spiritual  (Will),  the  first  four  signs — T d n 2S 
Individual  (Wisdom),  the  second  four  signs — ^ iij  pp 
Personal  (Activity),  the  third  four  signs — ^ c-Vi  >{ 

The  three  groups  are  s3mthesised  in  the  so-called  thirteenth  sign 
which  has  been  referred  to.  in  another  chapter,  and  which  is  not  really 
a sign  at  all,  but  the  Sun  at  the  heart  of  all.  The  whole  in  this  wa3^ 
forms  a tetraktys  of  three  in  one,  which  is  reflected  in  each  of  the  parts. 

Ever3"  human  being,  as  a ‘ Divine  Fragment,’  is  an  expression  of 
the  Self  or  Monad,  the  Father  in  heaven,  in  whose  image  he  is  made ; 
and  the  three  modes  of  expressing  the  Self,  Will,  Wisdom  and  Activity, 
are  latent  in  most,  but  are  active  in  those  who  have  attained  to  full  self- 
consciousness  and  are  only  seen  as  reflections  on  lower  planes.  The 
abstract  mind,  represented  by  Venu§,__is^_,ia_the  average  man, 
reflected  in  the  brain  as  flashes  of  intuition,  gleams  of  artistic  preception, 
impulses  or  desires  towards  unselfish  action,  and  interests  for  the  common 
welfare  of  humanit3^  The  critical  state  of  consciousness  between  those 
governed  by  the  Moon  and  Venus  is  that  of  Saturn.  S.at'ifQ  is  the  planet 
that  produces  full  self-consciousness  in  each  individual,  and  thus  repre- 
sents the  fully  individualised  and  perfectl3^  separated  consciousness. 
He  is  the  giver  of  supreme  egoism . 

Personal  immortality  therefore  turns  upon  the  Saturnian  vibrations, 
since  he  onl3^  is  the  Satan  that  each  individual  must  meet,  face  and 
conquer.  Mars  is  the  Devil  who  brings  the  soul  into  the  hell  of  the 
senses,  although  SatujaiXs„kbe  . tormentor  of  the  mind  b3^  fear  and  doubt. 


140 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


All  preserved  religious  sayings  such  as  ‘ It  is  easier  for  a camel  to  pass 
through  the  eye  of  a needle  than  for  a rich  man  to  enter  into  the  kingdom 
of  heaven,’  etc.,  allude  to  the  difficulty  of  passing  Saturn  or  Satan ; and 
in  every  system  of  thought  there  is  a correct  astrological  interpretation 
which  will  be  revealed  the  moment  that  the  soul  is  free  from  the  bondage 
of  Saturn,  whose  mission  is  the  highest  of  all  the  gods  connected  with 
the  physical  world.  Saturn  is,  therefore,  the  ‘ high-water  mark  ’ of  the 
personal  and  individual  consciousness.  He  balances  the  emotions  and 
finally  purifies  them  through  sufferings  not  as  punishment  for  wrong-doing, 
but  as  the  result  of  the  clinging  to  form,  which  binds  the  consciousness 
to  matter  when  it  should  have  let  go  all  repetitions  of  that  experience  for 
those  of  a higher  and  finer  quality.  The  rings  of  Saturn  accurately 
symbolise  the  limitations  of  this  planet  in  its  various  modes  of  operation. 

On  the  physical  plane  Saturn  governs  the  old  age  of  human  beings, 
and  the  bones,  and  all  acid  desposits  hindering  the  circulation  and 
checking  exuberance  of  physical  life,  cutting  it  off  at  the  appointed  time. 

In  the  Kamic,  or  desire  consciousness,  he  represents  all  sorrowful 
and  melancholic  emotions,  all  forms  of  depression,  checking  the  wild 
rush  ofTeeling  by  reaction. 

In  the  lower  manasic  consciousness  he  brings  the  mind  to  reflection, 
concentration  and  fixity  of  purpose,  and  limits  the  mind’s  diffusiveness 
in  order  that  definite  knowledge  may  be  gained  ; hence  the  scientific  and 
philosophic  mind  is  the  result  of  his  constant  concentration. 

None  may  pass  Saturn  who  have  not  acquired  the  virtues  his 
vibrations  tend  to  produce. 

Firstl3%  physical  purity,  for  a pure  body  alone  can  reflect  pure 
thoughts. 

Secondly,  purified  emotions,  and  dispassionate  feelings. 

Thirdly,  love  of  truth,  patience,  perseverance,  chastity  and  a 
meditative  attitude  of  mind. 

Finally  he  brings  every  individual  to  true  humility,  and  the 
condition  in  which  all  that  is  material  is  finally  renounced,  so  that  the 
latent  powers  of  the  real  Self  ma^  cross  that  bridge,  made  by  Saturn, 
into  the.personalit^^  and  be  saved  by  liberation  from  the  concrete  side  of 
matter. 

Beyond  this  stage  Astrology,  so  far  as  it  concerns  individuals,  ceases, 
for  tlie  individual  is  no  longer  subject  to  the  law  of  bondage,  and  at  the 
mercy  of  circumstances  but,  having  conquered  matter  in  its  more  or  less 


CHARACTER  IS  DESTINY 


141 

solid  form,  can  leave  his  bod3"  at  Will  and  function  upon  higher  planes 
than  the  astral  or  mental,  for,  having  reversed  his  spheres,  he  works 
consciously  with  the  Ray  to  which  he  belongs,  or  definitel^^  chooses  that 
particular  Ray  along  which  he  desires  to  work  for  the  peculiar  type  of 
evolution  it  represents. 

It  must  not  be  supposed  that  the  states  of  consciousness  relating 
to  the  planes  over  which  Uranus,  Mercury  and  Venus  preside,  are 
unmanifest  in  those  who  have  not  finally  passed  Saturn  b^^  initiation 
into  the  higher  consciousness.  Will,  Wisdom  and  Perfect  Action, 
although  normally  latent  in  the  average  man,  are  occasionalty  manifested. 
But  to  be  s^-^conscious  on  those  planes  means  ‘ liberation  ’ and  the 
assurance  of  finalty  attaining  to  the  supreme  consciousness  of  a God. 
For  the  present,  however,  our  studies  are  confined  to  Astrolog}^  from 
the  individual  standpoint. 


CHAPTER  XV 


The  Rise  and  Fall  of  Planets 

We  have  seen  in  a previous  chapter  that  the  circle  of  the  twelve 
houses  is  divided  into  the  lower  or  night  half,  and  the  upper  or  day  half; 
that  the  midnight  point  or  cusp  of  the  fourth  house  stands  symbolically 
for  the  Ego  as  a unity  withdrawn  from  manifestation  ; and  that  the  other 
three  points  of  sunrise,  or  the  ascendant ; noon,  or  the  mid-heaven  ; and 
sunset,  or  the  seventh  house ; stand  for  the  three  aspects  of  the  Ego 
during  manifestation, — namely  action,  desire,  and  cognition. 

We  know  also  that  each  one  of  the  planets  exhibits  precisely  the 
same  three  aspects,  var3dng  according  to  the  degree  of  preponderance  of 
each  and  their  mode  of  combination.  It  follows  from  this  that  the 
different  planets  have  different  degrees  of  strength  when  rising,  culminat- 
ing and  setting,  and  that  there  is  no  uniformity  of  strength  or  importance 
in  this  respect.  For  instance,  if  we  consider  the  ascendant  only,  apart 
from  the  question  of  what  sign  may  be  rising,  two  planets  placed  there 
will  not  necessarily  be  equal  in  strength ; and  the  same  holds  true  of 
planets  in  the  tenth  and  seventh. 

Speaking  generall3\  the  ascendant  seems  to  correspond  to  the  mani- 
fested Self  as  activity  ; and  those  planets  that  lend  themselves  readily  to 
action  are  stronger  here  than  those  that  pertain  rather  to  some  other 
department  of  the  character.  The  mid-heaven  seems  to  exhibit  desire  or 
will  as  an  outgoing  energy  operating  as  ambition,  or  acquisitiveness,  or  the 
manipulation  and  control  of  persons  and  affairs ; and  planets  stationed 
in  the  mid-heaven  have  this  side  of  their  nature  called  out  according 
to  their  power  and  mode  of  response.  The  western  angle  belongs 
rather  to  cognition,  contemplation,  wisdom,  and  sympathy  based  upon 
understanding. 

Neptune. — Too  little  is  known  of  the  inner  nature  of  tlifs  planet  to 
justify  any  very  confident  analysis  of  its  strength  or  weakness.  On  the 
whole  it  seems  to  have  more  affinity  with  the  fourth  house,  which  links 

143 


THE  RISE  AND  FALL  OF  PLANETS 


143 


the  physical  and  astral  sides  of  life  together,  than  with  any  one  of  the 
other  three  points  in  the  circle.  When  rising,  it  gives  a sensitive, 
emotional,  mediumistic  nature,  with  the  psychic  astral  side  of  the 
personality  strong. 

Uranus  seems  to  be  at  its  weakest  in  the  fourth  house,  and  to  be 
fairly  strong  in  each  of  the  other  three  positions.  When  rising  it  gives^ 
an  active,  positive  nature  that  generally  goes  out  in  some  independent  or 
unconventional  direction.  When  culminating  it  exhibits  will,  ambition 
and  determination.  When  setting  the  understanding  is  very  active  and 
penetrating,  but  sympathy  is  easily  turned  to  antipathy,  and  a large  and 
wise  tolerance  to  a hasty  and  critical  intolerance.  A very  evenly 
balanced  nature  is  necessary  if  the  best  side  of  Uranus  is  to  be  manifested, 
no  matter  where  placed.  Its  t^^pe  is  The  King. 

Saturn,  when  rising,  gives  a strong  sense  of  self,  and  a strong 
personality  with  a well-defined  object  in  life.  It  lends  itself  readily  to 
the  life  of  action,  and  gains  its  object  through  will  power,  patience, 
persistence,  and  ability  to  overcome  difficulties  and  obstacles.  When 
culminating,  it  is  very  strong  and  gives  considerable  ambition,  will 
power  and  ability  to  control  and  mould  both  self  and  others  for  any  end. 
When  setting,  it  is  also  strong,  and,  if  fairly  free  from  affliction,  can 
give  a sense  of  impartial  justice  and  can  hold  the  balance  evenly 
between  contending  ideas,  emotions  or  persons.  Saturn  at  its  best, 
if  slow  is  sure,  if  cold  is  just.  Its  type  is  The  Statesman  or  Prime 
Minister. 

Jupiter  is  strong  in  the  ascendant.  It  gives  a full,  fertile,  resource- 
ful nature,  capable  of  action,  especially  in  activities  based  upon  social 
needs  and  affecting  groups  of  persons  rather  than  units.  Its  influence  is 
similar  in  the  mid-heaven,  where  it  gives  pride  and  a generous  ambition, 
a strong  sense  of  dignity,  and  (if  not  afflicted),  a respect  for  what  is 
proper,  correct,  orthodox,  conventional ; liking  for  form,  ceremony,  pomp, 
and  etiquette ; a sense  of  proportion  in  all  things,  out  of  which  grows  a 
love  of  beauty  and  harmony.  It  bestows  reverence,  veneration,  and 
devotion.  When  setting  it  is  not  quite  so  strong  in  some  respects,  but 
may  call  out  benevolence  and  philanthropy,  willingness  to  co-operate  or 
combine  with  others,  not  only  in  marriage,  which  is  the  technical  mean- 
ing  of  the  seventh  house,  but  in  friendship,  partnership,  associations, 
brotherhoods,  combinations,  societies  and  movements  of  various  descrip- 
tions. It  conserves  and  builds  up  both  in  body  and  mind,  and  is  more 


44 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


synthetic  and  intuitional  than  analytical  or  critical.  Its  type-  is  The 
Priest  and  Ceremonialist. 

The  Sun  is  strongest  when  rising  and  culminating.  In  whatever 
sign  or  house  it  is  placed  it  gives  life,  energ3^  and  activity  to  the  things 
signified.  When  rising  it  bestows  a strong  constitution  and  long  life, 
and  usually  goes  with  good  heredity.  The  native  is  positive,  enterpris- 
ing, active  and  independent.  It  is  very  similar  when  culminating,  but 
gives  perhaps  still  more  ambition,  sense  of  dignity,  love  of  master3",  and 
strength  of  will,  with  ability  to  manage  others  and  to  organise.  VN^ien 
setting  the  mind  is  very  active  and  positive  but  not  necessarily^  intel- 
lectual ; there  is  much  sympathy  and  devotion  to  any  person  or  cause 
that  is  favoured,  and  a full  and  generous  nature.  Its  ty^pe  is  The  Divine 
Man,  or,  at  a lower  stage.  The  King. 

Mars  resembles  the  Sun  in  being  strong  in  the  ascendant  and  mid- 
heaven. When  rising  it  gives  much  force,  energy,  impulse,  and  spon- 
taneity^  The  actions  are  quick,  but  are  rarely  persistent  or  patient. 

The  feelings  rush  out  into  hasty  speech  or  action.  The  personality 
is  strong  and  there  is  great  love  of  life.  When  culminating,  there  is 
much  strength  of  will,  ambition,  and  a masterful  nature.  When  setting 
if  free  from  affiiction,  there  is  mental  activity  and  vigour,  with  sy^mpathy 
and  devotion,  but  rather  less  of  the  ambitious  domineering  tendency\ 
Its  type  is  The  Warrior  and  Practical  Worker. 

Venus  when  rising  gives  a pleasant,  easy-going  nature,  with  inclina- 
tions for  music,  poetry,  art  or  dancing.  The  native  often  follows  one  of 
the  occupations  of  the  planet  and  is  likely  to  succeed  in  life.  In  the 
midheaven,  there  is  acquisitiveness  and  some  financial  ability,  with  much 
popular] ty\  When  setting,  it  is  strong  and  shows  its  full  nature ; it 
refines  the  mind  and  may  give  real  ability  and  warm  sympathies ; if  in 
good  aspect  to  Mercury,  the  higher  mind  is  strong.  Its  ty^pe  is  The 
Poet  or  Philosopher. 

Mercury  when  rising  shows  a very  active  mind,  capable  of  dealing 
with  a wide  range  of  subjects  ; but  in  any  position  it  is  largely^  modified 
by  the  nature  of  the  sign  in  which  it  is  placed.  If  close  to  the  cusp  of 
either  the  first  or  tenth  houses,  it  has  a bearing  upon  the  occupation  or 
profession  and  may  give  ability  for  speaking  or  writing,  as  it  may  also 
do  in  the  seventh  house.  In  the  midheaven,  intellect  is  brought  to  bear 
upon  worldly^  affairs  ; but  if  afflicted  in  this  position,  the  native  is  some-”^ 
times  a little  unpractical,  or  is  thought  to  be  so  for  various  reasons,  such 


THE  RISE  AND  FALL  OF  PLANETS 


145 


as  being  too  subtle,  too  changeable,  too  dualistic,  etc.  When  settings 
the  understanding  is  strong,  intuition  and  insight  often  very  good,  and 
the  sympathies  and  the  mind , are  closely  allied.  Its  highest  type  is 
Buddhic  consciousness,  or  pure  reason.  The  Initiate  or  Adept ; uni- 
versal understanding  and  universal  sympathy. 

The  Moon  in  any  angle  gives  some  ability  for  practical  affairs, 
especially  as  applied  to  property,  money-making,  or  financial  under- 
takings ; and  it  inclines  to  cautiousness  and  acquisitiveness.  There  is 
often  impressionability,  versatility,  changeable  moods  and  sensitiveness. 
In  the  first,  tenth,  or  seventh  there  may  be  many  friends  and  acquaint- 
ances ; in  the  fourth  house,  psychic,  tendencies.  Its  type  is  The 
Concrete  Mind  applied  to  practical  uses  in  business  or  elsewhere. 

Planets  exalted,  accidentally  dignified,  or  in  their  own  signs,  are 
powerful.  Care  should  be  taken  to  judge  accurately  the  true  meaning  of 
a planet  in  the  sign  of  its  exaltation,  especially  when  it  is  the  ruling 
planet.  If  in  its  own  sign,  dignified  by  house  or  position,  it  gives  the 
native  much  power  according  to  the  nature  of  the  ruler  and  its  position/ 
The  nativity  of  Prince  Bismarck  may  be  taken  as  an  illustration  : he 
was  born  under  the  sign  Leo,  the  Sun  (ruler)  being  in  the  sign  of  its 
exaltation,  Aries  ; this  gave  the  Prince  great  power  over  others  and 
denoted  his  rise  into  fame  and  eminence. 

When  the  ruling  planet  has  been  decided  upon,  and  thoroughly 
examined,  then  each  planet  in  turn  should  be  carefully  studied.  For 
the  remaining  planets  denote  others  than  the  native  who  will  affect  his 
life  favourabl}^  or  adversely : they  may  signify  relatives,  partners, 
friends  or  enemies,  and  each  will  influence  the  native  according  to  the 
significators.j 

With  regard  to  the  planet  Uranus,  in  quite  a general  sense  he  rules 
over  the  sign  Aquarius,  but  very  rarely  in  any  particular  sense.  Thus 
it  would  not  be  safe  to  assume  that  every  person  born  under  Aquarius 
had  Uranus  for  ruler,  yet  all  advanced  Aquarian  persons  can  more 
readily  respond  to  his  vibrations  than  others,  jlt  may  be  here  stated 
that  Aquarius  and  Pisces  are  signs  extremely  positive  and  negative : 
and  while  rapidly  exhausting  the  good  or  ‘ evil  ’ influence  of  their  normal 
rulers,  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  those  coming  under  their  influence  would 
appear  to  have  the  opportunity  of  absorbing  more  of  the  Uranian  and 
Neptunian  vibrations  respectively,  than  persons  born  under  other 

K 


146 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


signs.  It  is  also  true  that  there  are  three  sides  to  the  expression  of 
each  planet  as  ruler,  namely  the  physical,  emotional  and  mental  ; the 
one  or  the  other  being  the  most  in  evidence  according  to  the  strength 
and  position  of  the  planet. 

All  who  give  their  lives  to  the  world  in  some  unselfish  work  of  the 
positive  order  such  as  requires  skill  in  action,  which  is  usually  associated 
with  occultism  in  its  positive  sense,  come  more  or  less  under  Uranus, 
which  is  the  synthesis  of  the  planets  themselves  as  a whole. 

It  may  be  that  the  negative,  or  devotional  and  mystic  order,  may  be 
represented  by  Neptune,  and  those  who  do  such  work  as  ‘slumming’ 
or  engage  in  prayer,  missionary  work,  and  tending  to  the  bodily  needs  of 
others  in  the  sympathetic  sense  come  under  the  planet’s  influence,  which 
in  all  probability  is  a synthesising  influence  of  the  whole  twelve  signs  of 
the  zodiac.  This  is  merely  put  forward  as  an  opinion  after  much 
thought  on  the  subject,  and  having  published  in  the  earlier  part  of  this 
work  the  views  of  others  on  both  Uranus  and  Neptune,  especially  the 
latter,  it  is  well  to  make  this  statement  here  while  attempting  to  deal 
with  the  strength  of  the  various  planets. 

If  the  terms  are  clear,  Uranus  symbolises  the  occultist^  and  Neptune 
the  mystic.  Readers  who  understand  the  full  meaning  of  those  terms 
will  require  no  further  definition. 

In  this  sense,  Uranus  can  have  no  sign  of  exaltation,  and  its  corres- 
pondence with  Aquarius  can  only  be  considered  as  connected  with  the 
‘ spiral  ’ of  superhuman  evolution  which  commences  with  Aquarius 
and  having  no  relation  to  the  ordinary  circle  of  signs  which  commence 
with  Aries.  The  same  remarks  apply  to  Neptune,  with  the  exception 
that  it  may  be  possible  that  in  some  cases,  the  spiral  is  temporarily 
renounced  for  a conscious  re-circling. 

If,  as  now  seems  to  be  the  case,  Uranus  represents  the  specialised 
essence  generally  distributed  by  the  Sun,  if  in  other  words  the  Sun  is  a 
substitute  for  Uranus,  then  it  may  be  that  as  Uranus  represents  the 
concentrated  life  essence  of  the  adept  and  very  advanced  soul,  so  may 
Neptune  be  the  final  permanent  form  or  vehicle  for  which  the  Moon  has 
hitherto  been  the  substitute.  This  is  merely  given  as  a hint,  not  as  a 
demonstrated  fact ; students  of  esoteric  or  occult  astrology  may  work 
out  the  problem  for  themselves. 

Another  suggestion  that  may  be  thrown  out  is  that  in  the  personal 
man  and  the  early  stages  of  evolution,  the  influence  of  Uranus  is  closely 


THE  RISE  AND  FALL  OF  PLANETS 


147 


allied  to  that  of  the  astral  plane,  exhibiting  the  impetuous  outrushing 
energy  of  that  ill-regulated  side  of  the  nature.  At  a slightly  higher 
stage,  when  the  personality  is  more  under  control,  Uranus  stands  for  the 
will,  the  controlling  and  governing  power,  derived  from  the  individuality. 
Higher  still  it  corresponds  to  Atman,  the  fully  self-conscious  spiritual 
man. 

Similarly,  the  lowest  aspect  of  Neptune  is  the  etheric  double,  which 
plays  so  large  a part  in  mediumship  and  in  many  psychic  gifts.  At  a 
slightly  higher  stage,  it  refers  to  the  concrete  mind,  not  as  intellect  but 
as  the  passive  mirror  in  which  the  outside  world  is  reflected,  allying  it 
to  imagination  and  fancy.  There  seems  some  evidence  to  justify  the 
idea  that  it  gives  psychic  vision.  Higher  still,  it  possibly  allies  itself  to 
one  of  the  aspects  of  Buddhic  consciousness  or  pure  reason. 

From  these  digressions,  a return  must  be  made  to  the  consideration 
of  other  planets. 

Saturn  is  ruler  over  Capricorn  and  Aquarius  and  is  exalted  in 
Libra.  This  seems  to  imply  that  Saturn  has  greater  affinity  with  the 
airy  triplicity  than  the  earthy,  and  but  little  dignity  in  the  fiery  or 
watery — Aries  and  Cancer  especiall3^  these  signs  being  opposite  to  the 
exaltation  sign  Libra  and  house  sign  Capricorn. 

Saturn  in  Capricorn  gives  practical  ability  and  materialistic 
tendencies,  and  usually  much  ambition  of  the  worldl3^  and  financial  order 
(thus  having  affinity  with  Taurus  and  Virgo),  giving  love  of  respon- 
sibility, fixity  and  criticism  ; and  similarly  in  the  other  signs  of  the  earthy 
triplicity.  In  the  airy  triplicity  the  mental  faculties  are  more  to  the  fore 
and  the  ideals  are  refined,  and  less  selfish  from  the  ph3^sical  standpoint. 
In  the  earthy  signs  Saturn  would  favour  the  builder,  the  merchant,  and 
the  agriculturist : but  in  the  airy  signs  he  would  influence  the  lawyer, 
architect  and  designer,  etc. 

Saturn  is  powerful  in  the  midheaven,  and  is  not  always  evil  there ; 
for  with  a good  moral  nature  it  denotes  a laudable  ambition  and  power 
to  assume  responsibility.  As  ruler,  very  much  depends  upon  the  position 
and  strength  of  Saturn,  for  no  planet  affects  the  character  or  destiny 
more,  it  being  rare  to  find  milk  and  water  characters,  or  uneventful  lives, 
when  this  planet  is  ruler. 

J.UP1TER  rules  Pisces  and  Sagittarius  and  finds  exaltation  in  the  sign 
Cancer,  thus  giving  mom  .affinity  with  the  Watery  than  , the  Fiery 
triplicity  and  less  in  the  earthy  ar^d  airy  signs,  being  weak  in  Virgo, 


148 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


Gemini,  and  Capricorn.  Jupiter  has  great  affinity  with  all  that  is  best 
in  the  physical  world,  and  favours  pure  bodies,  being  the  lord  over  all 
cell  life,  always  seeking  to  attract  the  best  and  the  highest.  His  affinity 
with  the  Watery  signs  as  a cleanser  can  onl}^  be  understood  from  an 
esoteric  standpoint.  He  favours  all  who  live  in  the  open  air  and  those 
who  study^physical  growth  and  culture:  therefore,  his  best  influence 
c^mes  through  signs  of  expansion. 

I Mars  rules  over  Aries  and  Scorpio  and  is  exalted  in  Capricorn. 
These  are  all  signs  of  strength  on  the  physical  plane,  the  concrete  and 
hard  matter  of  Capricorn,  the  icy  solidity  of  Scorpio,  and  the  dense 
smoking  fire  of  Aries.  The  volatile  and  rapid  vibrations  of  Mars  can 
only  be  subdued  in  those  signs,  in  which  the  limitations  are  set 
for  that  planet  in  a manner  that  can  only  be  fully  understood 
esoterically. 

Venus  is  ruler  over  Taurus  and  Libra  and  is  exalted  in  Pisces  and 
therefore  has  affinity  with,  watery,  airy  and  earthy  signs,  but  none  with 
the  fiery  signs.  Venus  brings  all  things  on  earth  into  beautiful  form, 
and  favours  the  artist,  .the  sculptor  and  the  singer,  and  is  therefore 
exalted  in  the  sign  of  perfect  rhythm. 

Of  Mercury,  Sun  and  Moon  little  need  be  said,  for  Mercury  always 
maintains  a neutral  influence  in  the  signs  until  affected  by  other  planets, 
when  the  nature  of  that  sign  appears  to  be  more  or  less  absorbed.  The 
Sun  is  exalted  in  Aries  as  leader  of  the  signs  and  gives  life  to  the  brain  ; 
the  Moon  is  exalted  in  Taurus,  the  most  physical  form  sign  of  the  earthy 
triplicity. 

All  planets  acquire  some  dignity  in  the  Cardinal  signs,  where  they 
act  in  a decisive  manner  for  good  or  ill,  and  always  accentuate  the 
influence  of  the  sign  in  which  they  are  placed,  bringing  all  that  they 
signify  into  prominence. 

Persons  born  in  Northern  latitudes  gain  most  by  having  the  majority 
of  planets  between  Aries  and  Libra  ; the  reverse  of  this  is  the  case  with 
those  born  in  the  Southern  hemisphere. 

It  is  essential  to  find  out  those  who  are  represented  by  other  planets 
than  the  ruler.  A woman  born  under  Venus  with  Mars  in  the  eleventh 
will  find  friends  amongst  martial  men,  especially  if  the3^  are  born  under 
Mars,  the  quality  of  their  friendship  will  be  shown  by  the  position  and 
aspects  of  Mars,  and  the  power  of  the  person,  if  exalted  or  in  its  fall,  etc. 
If  Mars  is  in  the  twelfth  judge  them  enemies,  etc. 


THE  RISE  AND  FALL  OF  PLANETS 


149 


If  the  sign  Leo  is  on  the  cusp  of  the  eleventh,  solar  men  will 
influence  their  lives.  And  so  on  with  other  planets  and  signs. 

Always  take  the  ruling  planet  to  represent  the  native ; but  remember 
that  it  will  be  coloured  by  various  other  influences.  None  but  advanced 
souls  will  stand  out  as  clear  representatives  of  that  planet  in  its  primary 
sense,  for  all  are  affected  by  environment  just  as  they  affect  that  environ- 
ment by  their  own  influence. 

A Venus  woman,  having  Mars  ruler  of  her  seventh,  will,  if  she 
marries  a Mars  man,  and  if  she  comes  thoroughly  under  her  horoscope, 
absorb  the  qualities,  vices  and  virtues,  of  her  husband,  according  to  the 
power  of  their  respective  representative  planets. 

The  Ruling  Planet  in  each  nativity  is  of  such  importance  that  it 
cannot  be  too  carefully  studied ; according  to  its  strength  or  weakness, 
so  will  the  life  be  affected  by  the  surroundings  met  with  in  daily  life. 
All  people  are  more  or  less  affected  by  environment ; but  those  who  are 
strong,  physically,  mentally  and  morally,  react  upon  their  environment, 
and,  instead  of  being  wholly  coloured  by  fft,  add  considerably  to  it,  and 
thus  impress  others  through  that  environment. 

To  illustrate  the  value  of  the  rising  sign  and  ruling  planet  in  every 
case  the  following  account  of  twin  girls  is  here  inserted,  the  horoscopes 


being  as  follows : 

X. 

XI. 

Houses 

XII. 

I. 

II. 

III. 

‘A’ 

TI4  10.30 

12 

IR  7 

m 25.49 

t 27 

— 4 

‘B’ 

nje  17.14 

— 17 

ni  17 

^ 043 

11 3 

r.-:  10 

0 

D ^ 

? 

Planets 

d 

V 

h 

A’  1124.46  K 1.38  252.41  b 13.29  r^^28. 24  ^26.21  icci.48R  ^3.42  T28.0 
‘B’  024.47  K 1.54  252.43  b 13*30 —28.24  ^26.21  0:^1. 48R  ^3.42  T 28.0 

A Case  of  Twins,  Illustrating  the  Importance  of  the  Rising 
Sign  and  Ruling  Planet 

‘ A case  of  girl  twins,  very  well  known  to  me,  so  well  serves  to 
illustrate  the  importance  of  having  the  correct  rising  sign  of  birth,  that 
it  may  be  of  special  interest  to  students. 

‘They  were  born  in  Boston,  Mass.,  June  15th,  1873 — one  at  5.1 1 
p.m.  and  the  other  at  5.36  p.m. 

‘ They  were  seventh  month  babies,  and  when  born  so  delicate  that 
life  hung  in  the  balance  for  the  first  year,  after  which  time  a fortunate 


50 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


change  of  climate  and  environment  so  benefited  them  that  the3^  made 
slow  but  sure  gain. 

‘The  ego  born  at  5.11  (whom  for  convenience  we  will  call  “A”) 
found  its  correspondence  to  a configuration  of  the  heavens  giving  the 
26/A  degree  of  Scorpio  on  her  Ascendant. 

‘The  other  ego  (whom  we  will  call  “B”)  could  not  manifest  under 
that  sign  and  so  waited  just  long  enough  for  the  15/  degree  of  Sagittarius 
to  come  upon  the  ascendant. 

‘ Now  the  contrast  between  them  as  types — A,  described  b3^  Scorpio, 
ruling  planet  Mars  in  Libra,  and  B,  described  by  Sagittarius,  ruling 
planet  Jupiter  in  Leo — is  very  marked  and  hardly  needs  emphasis  to 
students  except  in  so  far  as  facts  are  alwa3^s  of  value  in  this  great  stud3\ 

‘ Physically  A,  cj  -in-—  is  of  medium  stature,  while  B, 
T-I/-in-^L,  is  a little  above  it.  A is  more  “stock3^”  in  build  (yet  not 
heavy)  but  differentl3^  set.  She  has  short  limbs,  while  B has  long. 
They  both  have  dark  brown  hair  and  eyes,  but  A’s  are  darker  and 
her  hair  is  inclined  to  curl.  B has  the  straight  Sagittarius  hair,  her 
face  is  longer  and  her  e3^es  distinctly  Jupiter  ones. 

‘ A as  the  first-born  has  always  been  physically  more  vital  than  B, 
3^et  as  time  goes  on  B’s  fire  sign  rising  is  telling  in  her  favour.  Both 
have  the  sensitive  organism  of  Sun  in  Gemini  polarised  with  Moon  in 
Pisces,  but  A gets  balance  through  her  fixed  sign  rising  and  B her 
special  order  of  balance  through  her  ruling  planet  Jupiter  in  the  fixed 
sign  Leo. 

‘ In  temperament  these  twins  have  of  course  many  points  in 
common  owing  to  the  positions  of  the  planets  in  the  same  signs.  Mercury 
and  Uranus  fall  in  different  houses,  as  anyone  who  might  care  to  erect 
the  charts  would  see ; also  A gets  intercepted  signs  in  second  and  eighth 
houses — this  giving  some  indication  of  the  differences  which  have  marked 
their  experiences. 

‘The  individualit3^  and  the  personalit3’^  through  which  it  functions, 
differ  so  radical^  that  only  Astrolog3^  can  tell  satisfactorily  Why  ! 

‘ Both  characters  have  the  high  ideals  of  Gemini,  both  its  restless- 
ness and  ambition  to  hold  themselves  above  the  mediocre,  both  fine 
appreciation  for  the  beautiful  and  artistic,  demanding  it  in  their  respec- 
tive environments  so  far  as  possible,  but  A,  the  Scorpio-Mars,  is  the  more 
positive  nature,  is  more  initiative  and  constructive  than  B.  A has  the 
greater  sense  of  the  “fitness  of  things,”  and  can  put  forth  in  the  outer 


THE  RISE  AND  FALL  OF  PLANETS 


151 

more  readily  than  can  B.  She  is  more  clever  with  her  hands  and  is 
very  apt  at  getting  artistic  effects  quickly  (Mars  in  Venus’  sign),  yet 
while  B,  the  Sagittarian,  has  all  the  appreciation  she  cannot  so  freely 
embody  it,  being  not  so  apt  at  the  technique.  She  has  perhaps  more 
patience  than  A,  however,  although  both  like  the  quick  results  of  the 
Gemini. 

‘They  both  love  to  work  in  the  mental  and  intellectual  spheres 
(Virgo  on  cusp  of  tenth  house)  that  is  their  home,  and  they  turn  natur- 
ally to  the  metaphysical  and  mystic  (Uranus  in  the  ninth  house.  Moon 
in  third  in  Pisces).  A,  however,  accepts  with  the  Scorpio  reservation, 
and  must  be  convinced  of  the  value  of  a practical  application,  while  B 
accepts  more  intuitionally,  more  unconditionall3%  with  the  Sagittarius 
tendency  to  faith  in  the  Unseen.  Both  have  J upiter  in  the  ninth  house. 
This  planet  being  B’s  ruling  planet,  and  the  whole  of  Sagittarius  occupy- 
ing her  first  house,  gives  her  the  full  Jupiter  nature.  Her  sister’s  is 
more  martial  and  combative,  yet  tinged  richl}^  with  the  moral  and  heart 
influence  as  well  (27  degrees  of  Sagittarius  fall  within  her  first 
house). 

‘A,  the  Scorpio-Mars-in-Libra,  is  reserved,  exclusive,  tenacious, 
very  critical,  of  excellent  judgment,  independent,  and  possessing  a 
matter-of-fact  way  of  looking  facts  square!}^  in  the  face.  She  is  self- 
protective  on  the  material  plane,  well-balanced,  keen  in  her  perceptions 
and  her  head  rules  her  heart.  Her  will  is  strong,  but  she  has  constantly 
to  overcome  the  Gemini  tendency  to  diffusion. 

‘B,  the  Sagittarius-Jupiter-in-Leo,  is  more  of  the  impressionable 
and  intuitional  order,  the  dual  signs  having  such  predominance.  She 
has  had  to  strive  for  more  independence  of  thought  and  action,  more 
stability,  and  her  heart  has  ruled  her  head  until  the  more  mature  years 
have  brought  her  better  balance.  Her  sympathies  have  been  more 
active  than  her  sister’s,  she  is  naturally  trusting,  ingenuous,  and  less  self- 
defensive and  critical,  3"et  has  plent3^  of  courage  when  the  occasion 
demands,  while  if  lacking  the  initiative  of  A she  is  not  backward  when 
she  finds  the  necessity  for  action. 

‘ Owing  to  B’s  different  quality  from  A’s  the  approach  to  others 
has  differed  correspondingly.  A’s  critical  Scorpio  nature  has  sifted  out 
her  friends  with  characteristic  discrimination.  B wins  her  way  to  the 
centre  of  the  hearts  of  her  friends.  Spiritual  attachments  to  some 
exceptional  personalities  have  been  the  experience  of  each. 


152 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


*The  paths  of  these  twins  have,  while  running  parallel  at  times, 
been  much  in  contrast. 

‘ B having  her  ruling  planet  occidental  (in  ninth  house)  has  been  the 
more  protected  and  lived  in  more  retirement  owing  not  only  to  tempera- 
ment but  the  lines  along  which  her  life  has  been  cast.  Her  work  has 
been  along  that  of  occult  studies,  she  being  proficient  in  Astrology  and 
true  to  the  nature  of  the  ninth  house  ; it  is  the  moral  side  of  the  science, 
its  use  as  an  aid  to  character  building  and  its  esoteric  symbology,  that 
claims  her  largest  interest. 

‘ A’s  life  has  had  more  of  the  social  element  and  she  has  received  the 
brunt,  as  it  were,  of  life’s  shocks,  her  character  drawing  it  to  her. 

‘ A has  travelled  to  Europe,  B has  not  3^et  been.  Neither  are  as  yet 
married.’ 

There  is  abundant  room  for  speculation  as  to  the  past  lives  of  these 
two  souls,  which  precipitated  them  simultaneously  into  embodiment  at 
seven  months  and  caused  such  contrasts  of  experience  and  character. 

Anyone  attempting  to  describe  these  sisters  without  a knowledge  of 
their  rising  signs,  would  fall  sadly  short  of  a truthful  delineation ; and 
if  any  students  happen  to  imagine  that  the  Sun’s  sign  is  of  all-sufficing 
importance,  this  one  example  should  serve  to  convince  them  of  the  value 
of  our  geocentric  system. 


CHAPTER  XVI 


Methods  of  Synthesis 

In  all  systems  of  studying  and  investigating  a man’s  character,  fate,  or 
fortune,  there  are  always  a great  many  divergent,  and  sometimes  even 
contradictory  indications  to  be  taken  into  account,  and  it  is  often  no 
easy  task  to  balance  and  co-ordinate  these  so  as  to  be  able  to  indicate 
the  prevailing  tendency  of  the  whole.  Astrology,  phrenology,  physiog- 
nomy, palmistry,  the  interpretation  of  cards,  of  numbers,  of  colours,  all 
present  this  difficult3^  which  is  a very  real  one  to  the  beginner  and 
occasionally  also  to  the  experienced  student.  Horoscopes  differ  a good 
deal  in  this  respect,  some  being  quite  easy  to  read  and  others  extremely 
difficult ; and  even  in  the  same  horoscope,  one  part  of  it,  such  as 
marriage,  may  be  quite  plain,  while  another  part,  such  as  money 
matters,  is  involved  and  difficult. 

There  is  really  no  one  sure  and  certain  method  of  overcoming  these 
troubles.  A^oqd_  knowledge  of  the  subject  and  practical  experience 
•are_lhe  only  safe  guides.  The  various  rules  given  by  ancient  and 
modern  authors  are  intended  to  point  the  way  and  to  indicate  what  is 
likely  to  be  the  outcome  of  the  many  possible  and  divergent  positions 
and  aspects  ; in  fact  each  rule  is  a short  synthesis  in  itself.  But  in  any 
extensive  or  comprehensive  study  of  the  subject,  the  different  features 
and  possibilities  increase  so  rapidly  that  the  rules  themselves  require 
synthesising  under  larger  rules ; and  probably  the  ideal  state  of  the 
science  would  be  reached  if  this  process  were  continued  until  all 
possible  contingencies  had  been  included  under  some  simple  but  definite 
system  of  syntheses.  This  tendency  has  been  more  prominent  in  books 
of  modern  writers  than  in  those  of  the  older  authors,  and  it  is  to  be 
hoped  that  the  process  will  continue  until  the  various  methods  are 
more  precise  as  well  as  comprehensive. 

In  one  sense  this  is  an  ideal  that  can  never  be  completely  attained, 
for  two  reasons.  Firstly,  the  possibilities  of  free-will  and  individual 

163 


54 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


choice  can  never  be  eliminated,  and  it  will  be  found  that  two  persons 
placed  in  exactly  the  same  situation  will  behave  differently ; and  more 
than  this,  the. same  man  will  not  behave  in  the  same  way  at  different 
periods  of  his  life,  even  in  similar  circumstances ; so  that  no  one  hard 
and  fast  interpretation  of  a planetary  position  or  direction,  applicable  to 
all  cases,  is  possible.  Secondly,  the  possible  number  of  planetary 
positions  with  regard  to  each  other,  to  signs,  and  to  houses  is  almost 
infinite ; and  although  systems  of  synthesis  may  classify  and  so 
facilitate  the  interpretation  of  these  many  possibilities,  yet  the  fact 
remains  that  every  position  and  aspect  in  the  horoscope,  whether 
simple  or  complex,  has  to  be  taken  into  account. 

The  student  collects  many  horoscopes,  no  two  quite  alike,  and  there 
are  many  factors  in  each  that  have  to  be  considered.  There  are 
different  ways  of  approaching  each  one.  Probably  in  every  case  he 
will  begin  by  enumerating  the  influences  resulting  from  the  rising  sign  ; 
but  when  it  is  desired  to  do  something  more  than  state  isolated  positions, 
when  an  attempt  is  made  to  co-ordinate  and  synthesise,  how  shall  he 
start  best  ? The  idea  underlying  this  question  is  that  in  every  horo- 
scope, no  matter  how  complex  and  apparently  contradictory,  there  is 
some  one  central  factor  round  which  all  the  rest  can  be  made  to  con- 
gregate, and  in  terms  of  which  they  can  be  interpreted  ; like  an  intricate 
telephone  system  the  headquarters  and  central  exchange  of  which  are 
located  in  some  large  city. 

This  idea  seems  to  be  sound  from  every  point  of  view.  The  occultist, 
studying  the  matter  quite  apart  from  astrology,  tells  us  that  every 
personalit3^  belongs  to  one  of  the  seven  rays  and  is  evolving  under  its 
influence  ; and  that,  for  that  personality,  ever3^thing  else  may  be  regarded 
as  subordinate  in  importance  to  that  ray  for  the  time  being.  The 
astrologer,  in  his  turn,  usually  starts  from  the  rising  sign,  finding  it  the 
best  initial  representative  of  the  owner  of  the  horoscope ; and  from  it 
he  branches  out  in  various  directions  towards  the  different  planets  and 
houses.  So  that,  in  a sense,  the  -ascendant,  .is  the  starting  point  of 
ever3^  synthesis,  and  ^11  other  influences  and  groups  of  influences  have 
to  be  brought  into  relation  with  the  rising  sign.  For  instance. 
Mars  in  Aries  bestows  some  definite  power  which  is  the  same  for 
everyone  who  possesses  it,  but  it  will  not  be  employed  in  the  same 
way  by  the  man  born  under  Leo  as  it  will  b3'  another  who  has 
Virgo  rising.  Venus  rising  is  always  a fortunate  influence,  but  it  is 


METHODS  OF  SYNTHESIS  155 

not  quite  the  same  for  the  Cancer  man  as  it  is  for  the  native  of 
Gemini. 

Every  position  modifies  every  other  to  a greater  or  less  extent,  and 
all  are  more  or  less  centralised  in  the  ascendant.  Be3'ond  the  ascendant 
other  centres  are  to  be  found,  round  which  other  influences  group 
themselves.  Some  writers  consider  the  Sun  to  be  the  most  important 
of  these,  with  the  Moon  next  in  order ; while  others  maintain  that  the 
ruling  planet  has  chief  claim  to  distinction ; and  various  methods  of 
expounding  the  horoscope  follow  from  these  different  views. 

It  is  not  safe  to  ignore  any  system.  Probabl}"  a perfect  exposition 
of  the  whole  subject  would  show  each  to  be  useful  for  a different  purpose 
and  all  to  be  capable  of  correlation.  The  notes  that  follow  are  intended  to 
assist  in  the  systematisation  of  the  man}’’  methods  of  approaching  the 
problem.  In  some  horoscopes  one  method  will  be  found  to  be  a clue  to 
the  mysteries  of  the  many  influences,  and  in  others  a different  one  will 
serve  better  as  a means  of  correlating  the  facts  and  building  them  into 
one  organic  whole.  They  are  useful  as  classes  or  heads  under  which 
may  be  gathered  together  a number  of  otherwise  unrelated  factors,  and 
they  serve  as  means  of  interpreting  different  departments  of  the 
horoscope. 

I.  The  Triplicities  and  Quadruplicities.  This  seems  to  be  the 
best  method  suggested  up  to  the  present  of  giving  a general  view  of  the 
type  of  horoscope  as  a whole  ; but  as  it  is  described  at  length  elsewhere 
not  much  need  be  said  about  it  in  this  chapter.  The  number  of  planets 
in  signs  of  fire,  earth,  air,  and  water  will  show  which  of  the  triplicities 
is  strongest ; the  number  in  movable,  fixed,  and  common  signs  will 
indicate  the  predominant  quadruplicity ; and  finally  the  juxtaposition  of 
these  two  results  will  make  still  more  definite  the  t3^pe  of  the  whole. 
In  Ruskin’s  horoscope,  the  order  is — Cardinal  4,  Mutable  3,  Fixed  2, 
Earth  3,  Air  2,  Water  2,  Fire  2.  This  combination  gives  Cardinal- 
Earth  as  that  which  is  characteristic  of  the  horoscope  when  planetary 
sign-positions  are  taken  alone  and  apart  from  the  Ascendant.  Of  these 
the  Cardinal  influence  is  much  more  important  than  that  of  the  Earth, 
because  the  former  contains  the  Moon  in  Cancer,  whereas  Earth 
contains  neither  the  ascendant  nor  its  lord  nor  a luminar3^  Cardinal- 
Earth  practically  means  the  sign  Capricorn,  and  when  this  is  united 
with  the  influence  of  the  Ascendant,  Aquarius,  Fixed-Air,  Ave  bring  out 


56 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


the  following  facts  : — (i)  Saturn  has  dignity  in  both  of  these  signs,  and 
the  map  shows  it  to  be  in  the  first  house,  so  that  it  is  a much  more 
important  planet  than  might  be  supposed  at  first  sight.  (2)  The  Fixed 
Ascendant  moderates  the  Cardinal  influence,  renders  it  more  stable  and 
less  changeful  but  not  less  practical.  (3)  The  Airy  Ascendant  in- 
tellectualises  the  Earthy  influence  ; Earth  alone  might  give  a statesman, 
a business  man,  or  a practical  worker,  but  the  added  Air  imparts 
intellectuality,  intuition,  and  originality.  (4)  The  reaction  of  the 
Cardinal  influence  upon  the  Air  tends  to  call  out  Cardinal-Air,  the 
perceptive  faculties,  which  were  very  active  in  Ruskin  the  art-critic  and 
very  characteristic  of  him,  and  this  tendency  is  strongly  supported  by 
the  conjunction  of  Mercury  and  Mars. 

Sometimes  two  of  the  triplicities  or  of  the  quadruplicities  will  be 
found  to  contain  an  equal  number  of  planets,  and  then  they  should  be 
examined  carefully  to  discover  which  is  the  more  important.  For 
instance,  in  Dr  Rudolf  Steiner’s  horoscope  the  grouping  of  the  planets 
is — Mutable  5,  Fixed  3,  Cardinal  i ; Air  3,  Water  3,  Earth  2,  Fire  i. 
This  might  be  described  indifferently  as  Mutable-Air  or  as  Mutable- 
Water.  On  examining  the  horoscope,  it  is  found  that  the  Sun  is  in 
a watery  sign  and  the  Moon  in  an  airy  one,  so  that  the  luminaries  do 
not  incline  the  balance  either  to  one  side  or  to  the  other ; but  the 
Ascendant,  Scorpio,  is  w^ater  and  this  fact  serves  to  give  Mutable-Water 
a slight  predominance. 

When  two  of  the  groups  are  nearly  equal  like  this,  and  when  examina- 
tion does  not  disclose  much  difference  between  them,  both  will  have 
effect  at  different  times  and  in  different  departments  of  the  character  and 
fortunes. 

II.  Sun,  Moon  and  Ascendant.  These  three  highly  important 
points  in  any  horoscope  may  be  compared  and  classified  according  to 
their  position  in  the  quadruplicities.  The  three  following  groups  are 
possible: — (i)  The  Sun,  Moon,  and  Ascendant  may  all  three  be  in  the 
same  quadruplicity,  i.e.  all  Cardinal,  all  Fixed,  or  all  Mutable.  (2)  Tw^o 
out  of  the  three  may  be  the  same  quadruplicity  and  the  third  in  a 
different  one.  {3)  All  three  may  be  different  quadruplicities. 

(i)  When  Sun,  Moon,  and  Ascendant  are  all  three  in  the  same 
quadruplicity,  the  effect  is  to  emphasise  strongly  the  qualities  and  char- 
acteristics belonging  to  that  quadruplicity.  These  need  not  be  repeated 


METHODS  OF  SYNTHESIS 


157 


here  because  the}^  are  given  in  Chapter  XVII  on  the  Quadruplicities 
Synthesised.  The  result  of  this  kind  of  grouping  may  be  said  to 
develop  Will,  corresponding  to  the  Sun  and  Uranus,  because  of  the 
concentration  of  the  three  powers  into  one.  When  all  three  are 
Cardinal,  this  gives  the  type  of  Will  that  accomplishes  its  end  b3^  rapid 
movement  and  impulsive  or  enthusiastic  outbursts  of  energ}",  sweeping 
aside  difficulties  more  b3’’  the  swiftness  of  its  action  than  b3’’  an3’'  other 
qualit3\  When  all  three  are  Fixed,  there  results  the  t3^pe  of  Will 
characterised  as  slow  but  sure,  capable  of  enduring  unchanged  through 
months  or  3^ears  of  effort ; and  this 'is  often  what  is  meant  when  the 
word  Will  is  used  alone,  or  when  the  expressions  Strong  Will,  Iron 
Will,  or  Indomitable  Will  are  emplo3^ed.  When  all  three  are  Mutable, 
we  have  what  may  perhaps  be  called,  for  lack  of  a better  term,  the 
Wise  Will,  exhibiting  foresight,  adaptabilit3%  intuition,  intellectualit3% 
and  the  power  of  co-ordinating  contraries.  The  first  of  these  corresponds 
to  Will  combined  with  Rajas  or  activit3%  the  second  to  Will  combined 
with  Tamas  or  stabilit3%  the  third  to  Will  combined  with  Sattva  or 
harmon3^ 

(2)  When  two  out  of  the  three  are  in  the  same  quadruplicit3^  and  the 
third  is  in  a different  one,  the  stronger  influence  prevails,  tempered  and 
modified  b3^  the  weaker.  Just  as'  the  first  group  corresponds  in  a 
general  way  to  Will,  so  this  corresponds  broadl3^  speaking  to  Wisdom 
and  the  Moon  ; and  there  are  six  possible  varieties  or  classes  of  it, 
depending  upon  which  quadruplicit3’'  contains  the  two  and  which  the 
third.  Further  investigation  will  probably  show  that  each  of  these  six 
classes  corresponds  to  a planet,  which  gains  in  importance  in  the 
horoscope  on  this  account. 

The  following  are  the  six  classes,  but  as  this  is  the  first  account 
that  has  ever  been  published  of  them  it  will  probably  be  capable  of 
development  in  the  light  of  further  experience. 

Two  Cardinal  One  Fixed.  A worker  capable  of  accomplishing  much, 
active  in  mind  or  body  or  both,  ambitious,  masterful,  willful,  and  rather 
unyielding.  The  feelings  pass  quickly  into  action,  and  action  is  im- 
pelled more  by  quick  or  warm  feeling  than  b3"  the  slower  and  colder 
thought.  Likes  and  dislikes,  attractions,  repulsions,  and  prejudices 
are  rather  marked  and  some  amount  of  criticisim  or  opposition  will  be 
encountered  in  consequence.  It  gives  suitabilit3"  for  a more  or  less 
public  position  or  career,  even  if  only  in  a small  wa3%  and  whether  for 


158 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


good  or  evil ; and  in  some  cases  these  persons  may  occupy  a prominent 
position  in  the  public  eye.  In  a favourable  horoscope  man3^  acquaint- 
ances or  friends  will  be  made,  and  some  degree  of  popularity,  power, 
dignity,  or  fame  may  be  won ; but  in  an  unfavourable  one  there  will 
be  enemies,  rivalry,  ill-will  incurred,  notoriety,  separation  from  friends 
or  relatives ; and  in  some  cases  even  danger  of  some  sort  of  downfall. 
When  in  a business  or  profession  there  is  sometimes  the  ability  to 
earn  considerable  sums  or  to  embark  on  extensive  undertakings ; but 
in  other  cases  or  even  along  with  it,  there  may  be  found  free  expendi- 
ture, voluntary  or  compulsory,  generosity,  or  extravagance. 

Two  Cardinal  One  Mutable.  Original  in  ideas,  enterprising  mentally 
and  sometimes  physically  also,  resourceful,  ingenious,  inventive, 
versatile,  adaptable,  and  very  receptive  of  the  new.  They  have  abilit3^ 
for  original  work  and  thought,  whether  in  practical  affairs,  in  applied 
science,  in  discovery  and  invention,  or  in  more  abstract  directions  in 
literature,  philosophy,  or  elsewhere.  It  may  give  skill  in  action, 
dexterity  of  hand  or  movement,  and  suitability  for  occupations  or  games 
where  skill  or  expertness  is  required.  There  is  sometimes  lack  of 
steadfastness,  persistence,  and  endurance ; a changeful  and  somewhat 
inconstant  nature ; or  much  love  of  variety,  with  passing  impulses 
rather  than  long  sustained  effort.  In  some  cases  there  is  a good  deal 
of  travelling  and  many  changes  of  residence ; and  sometimes  change  of 
occupation  or  of  views,  religious  or  otherwise. 

Two  Fixed  One  Cardinal.  Steadfast  and  persistent,  unchanging, 
and  not  easily  influenced.  Often  slow  to  begin  and  not  brilliant,  but 
persevering,  strong-willed,  and  not  easily  thwarted  by  obstacles.  The 
early  part  of  life  may  afford  very  little  evidence  of  what  these  persons 
are  capable  of  accomplishing,  and  they  show  to  better  advantage  in 
later  life.  The  feelings,  emotions,  and  passions  are  deep  and  strong, 
but  in  the  better  members  of  the  class  are  securely  under  control.  In 
some  cases  they  are  more  noted  for  will,  strength  of  character,  and 
activity  of  feeling  than  for  intellect,  but  intellectual  power  is  more 
prominent  when  the  Moon  is  Cardinal.  There  are  times  when  the^^ 
seem  slow-moving,  both  mentally  and  physically,  and  sometimes  very 
indolent,  lacking  in  adaptability,  unreceptive  of  new  ideas  or  ways, 
stolid  and  unresponsive  ; but  when  once  they  are  aroused  or  have 
assimilated  the  new  they  will  adhere  to  it  as  tenaciously  as  they 
formerly  opposed  it.  They  make  many  friends  or  acquaintances,  join 
societies,  or  belong  to  public  bodies,  and  in  some  cases  act  as  leaders, 


METHODS  OF  SYNTHESIS 


159 


heads,  presidents,  the  centres  of  some  movement,  or  are  responsible 
persons  round  whom  others  congregate,  according  to  their  sphere  of 
life.  Their  natural  instinct  is  to  save,  but  they  sometimes  go  to  the 
opposite  extreme  and  spend  freely  or  are  compelled  to  do  so  by  circum- 
stances. Similarly  the3^  are  natural  protectors  and  conservers  of  the 
established  order  of  things,  but  nevertheless  in  some  cases  become 
promoters  of  great  changes,  and  may  even  be  revolutionary,  aggressive, 
or  violent,  or  else  have  changes  forced  upon  them  by  circumstances. 
They  usually  put  their  feelings  and  opinions  to  the  test  of  action  and 
endeavour  to  be  practical. 

Two  Fixed  One  Mutable.  There  is  much  strength  of  will,  power, 
and  resolution,  but  it  is  of  a quieter  and  less  active  and  showy  kind 
than  in  the  previous  class.  They  ‘ look  before  and  after  ’ more  readily, 
and  display  more  foresight  and  method.  In  some  cases  they  try  to 
plan  out  their  schemes  and  undertakings  fully  beforehand,  both  in  small 
things  and  great,  and  may  make  plans  for  weeks,  months,  or  years 
ahead,  and  then  carry  them  out  patiently,  persistently,  and  unchanged. 
What  they  lack  in  brilliancy  of  genius  and  rapidity  of  thought  or 
action  they  make  up  in  patience,  steadfastness,  forethought,  and  cir- 
cumspection, or  else  in  strength  of  will.  The  feelings  and  affections 
are  strong  and  lasting  but  are  sometimes  slow  to  be  roused  and  not 
readily  expressed ; they  lack  spontaneity  but  have  much  staying  power. 
Sometimes  they  feel  discouraged  or  thwarted  by  circumstances,  but 
generally  recover  themselves  and  work  on  as  before ; in  other  cases 
they  miss  their  opportunities  through  hesitation,  too  much  caution,  or 
lack  of  receptivity.  Some  of  them  show  a comprehensive  and  widely 
reaching  thought  adaptable  to  great  ends  in  literature,  science,  or 
philosophy ; much  sympathy  and  strong  imagination  are  also  some- 
times found. 

Two  Mutable  One  Cardinal.  An  active  and  ingenious  mind  is  often 
found  with  this  combination,  which  may  be  adapted  either  to  a practical 
life  or  to  more  intellectual  uses.  It  gives  much  resourcefulness,  many 
plans,  and  a fertile  mind,  which  may  accomplish  much  in  favourable 
circumstances.  Sometimes  more  may  be  undertaken  than  can  be 
carried  out ; more  ideas  will  pass  through  the  mind  than  can  be  put 
into  practice ; and  there  may  be  a tendency  to  have  too  many  irons  in 
the  fire.  In  other  cases  this  becomes  restlessness,  mental  or  physical, 
and  may  be  accompanied  by  indecision  and  lack  of  patience,  of  persever- 


i6o 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


ance,  or  of  concentration.  Some  show  liabilit}"  to  despondency,  undue 
reserve,  or  secrec3",  but  this  is  not  alwa3^s  the  case.  Wit,  liveliness, 
versatilit3^,  and  even  brill ianc3^  ma3^  be  manifested,  inventiveness,  and 
originality  of  tongue  or  pen.  Some  are  quick  or  copious  in  speech  or 
writing.  There  is  a tendency  to  changefulness,  change  of  residence,  of 
views,  of  occupation,  of  methods  ; and  likelihood  of  travelling  unless  the 
tendency  exhausts  itself  in  some  other  direction. 

Tivo  Mutable  One  Fixed.  This  gives  a comprehensive  mind  com- 
bined with  strength  of  will.  The  intellect  is  sound  and  strong  and 
capable  of  development  in  more  than  one  direction,  and  a variety  of 
talents  can  be  cultivated  ; occasionall3^  a man3"-sided  genius.  Sometimes 
ability  for  practical  affairs  is  combined  with  mental  cultivation  in  some 
direction  ; or  two  occupations  or  lines  of  activit3^  may  be  followed 
either  together  or  at  different  periods  in  the  life.  In  some  of  these 
persons,  imagination  is  strong  and  capable  of  development  in  the 
direction  of  art,  music,  or  literature  ; in  others,  abstract  thought  of  the 
scientific  or  philosophical  kind  is  prominently  present ; in  many  cases 
the3^  are  better  adapted  for  the  professions  than  for  business  life. 
Sympathy  and  the  affections  are  generally  well-developed  ; but  occasion- 
ally the3^  are  considered  cold,  living  too  much  in  intellect ; or  the3^  ma3^ 
alternate  and  show  different  sides  of  their  character  at  different  times  ; 
for  the  character  ma3^  be  dualistic  or  even  contradictor3^  They  some- 
times show  hesitation,  uncertainty,  or  vacillation  ; but  in  spite  of  this, 
and  of  a tendency  to  dualism  in  character  or  in  pursuits,  they  have 
considerable  patience  and  quiet  persistence,  and  may  devote  themselves 
for  a lifetime  to  their  main  pursuit. 

(3)  When  Sun,  Moon,  and  Ascendant  are  all  three  in  different 
quadruplicities,  one  Cardinal,  one  Fixed,  and  one  Mutable,  a group 
results  in  which  there  is  the  greatest  possible  room  for  variations  and 
divergences,  although  there  is  only  one  class  of  it.  It  corresponds  in 
a general  way  to  the  principle  of  Activity  and  to  the  Ascendant. 

This  group  is  very  difficult  to  characterise.  Those  who  belong  to  it 
come  strongly  under  the  influence  of  the  rising  sign  and  the  ruling 
planet.  Many  changes  and  even  contradictions  of  character  and  fortune 
are  possible,  not  only  with  different  members  of  the  group  but  with  the 
same  person  at  different  times.  Changes  between  public  and  private 
life  ; between  popularity  and  the  reverse ; two  occupations  or  pursuits 
followed  at  different  times  or  even  at  the  same  time  ; two  different 


METHODS  OF  SYNTHESIS 


i6i 


aspects  of  character ; considerable  changes  in  habits,  views,  and  beliefs. 
They  have  man3^  points  of  contact  with  the  world  and  with  life.  When 
intellect  is  strong,  this  may  be  of  the  all  round  comprehensive  kind 
capable  of  working  in  more  than  one  direction.  When  the  feelings  are 
active,  much  S3^mpathy  and  humanity  may  be  displa3^ed  and  affection  be 
felt  for  quite  different  types  of  character.  When  the  practical  life  of  the 
world  is  lived,  there  may  be  more  than  one  occupation  followed,  or 
ability  may  be  shown  in  quite  different  directions. 

When  a horoscope  is  found  to  belong  to  this  group,  it  will  probably 
be  best  to  follow  one  of  the  other  methods  of  s3mthesis  until  further 
information  is  available. 

III.  Positive  and  Negative  Temperaments. — These  two  contrasted 
temperaments  or  general  attitudes  of  the  whole  personalit3%  may  be 
estimated  in  three  ways,  all  of  which  should  be  taken  into  consideration 
in  judging  a horoscope: — (i)  The  relative  predominance  of  the  Sun  or 
of  the  Moon ; (2)  the  relative  prominence  of  male  or  of  female  planets  ; and 
(3)  the  presence  of  the  majority  of  planets  in  odd  or  in  even  signs. 

The_Sun,  male  planets,  and  odd  signs  give  the  positive  temperament, 
of  which  man  is  the  type.  The  Moon,  female  planets,  and  even  signs 
give  the  negative  temperament,  of  which  woman  is  the  type. 

(i)  The  predominance  of  the  Sun  or  of  the  Moon  depends  upon  which 
is  the  stronger  and  the  more  prominent.  Strength  depends  mainly  upon 
zodiacal  position,  and  jiraniinence  upon  mundane  position. 

The  positions  of  zodiacal  strength  or  weakness  may  be  arranged  in 
series,  as  follows,  the  first  mentioned  being  the  strongest,  and  the  last 
one  the  weakest : — House,  exaltation,  friendly  signs,  unfriendly  signs, 
fall,  detriment.  Judged  in  this  way,  if  the  Sun  is  in  Leo,  its  house, 
Aries,  its  exaltation,  or  in  Sagittarius,  the  remaining  sign  of  the  fiery 
triplicity,  and  if  the  Moon  has  no  such  dignit3^  or  only  a weaker  one, 
the  Sun  will  be  stronger.  If,  on  the  other  hand,  the  Moon  is  in  Cancer, 
its  house,  Taurus,  its  exaltation,  or  in  Virgo  or  Pisces,  friendl3^  signs, 
while  the  Sun  has  less  strength,  the  Moon  will  be  the  stronger. 

The  positions  of  mundane  strength  depend  upon  elevation  and 
presence  in  the  angles.  That  luminary  is  the  stronger  which  is  in  an 
angle  when  the  other  one  is  not.  If  both  are  in  angles,  that  one  which 
is  nearer  the  cusp  of  the  angular  house  is  the  stronger.  If  neither  is 

angular,  that  which  is  the  more  elevated  is  generally  the  stronger.  Of 
L 


i62 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


the  four  angles,  the  first  and  tenth  houses  are  the  most  important,  and 
the  fourth  is  the  least  so ; in  fact  the  eleventh  and  ninth  houses  are  both 
stronger  than  the  fourth. 

(2)  Male  planets  diVe. — Mars,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Uranus  ; Female  planets 
are — Venus,  Neptune.  Mercur3^  is  neither,  and  its  nature  is  considered 
to  vary  according  to  the  planet  with  which  it  is  in  closest  aspect. 

If  the  male  planets  are,  on  the  whole,  stronger  by  zodiacal  position 
and  b^^  prominence  in  the  mundane  houses  than  are  the  female  planets, 
they  will  strengthen  the  positive  temperament ; but  if  the  female  planets, 
the  negative  temperament.  Their  strength  or  weakness  is  judged 
similarly  to  that  of  the  Sun  and  Moon  in  the  previous  section.  The 
task  of  judging  all  the  planets  in  this  way  ma^^  seem  complicated,  but 
only  a general  estimate  is  necessary  ; and  if  only  one  is  near  the  first, 
tenth,  or  seventh  cusp,  or  if  there  is  one  planet  decidedl3^  stronger  and 
more  prominent  than  the  rest,  that  one  ma3^  be  sufficient  to  decide  the 
point. 

(3)  Odd  signs,  when  containing  the  majority  of  the  planets  incline 
to  the  positive  temperament ; even  signs,  to  the  negative  temperament. 

It  sometimes  happens  that,  when  these  three  methods  have  been 
applied,  the  two  temperaments  seem  very  near^^  balanced,  the  one 
having  only  a slight  excess  over  the  other.  The  person  will  then 
exhibit  the  effects  of  each  in  his  character,  according  as  to  whether  the 
circumstances  of  the  moment  strengthen  the  one  or  the  other.  Occas- 
ionall3^  one  method  may  contradict  another,  as  when  the  Sun  is  rising 
but  the  majority  of  planets  are  in  even  signs  and  the  Moon  below  the 
earth.  The  positive  temperament  will  then  predominate,  but  the  recep- 
tivity and  other  qualities  of  the  negative  temperament  will  exist  strongly 
in  the  character  and  will  come  to  the  front  when  circumstances  require  it. 

The  Positive  Temperament  indicates  a person  of  strong  will  who  more 
readily  controls  circumstances  than  is  controlled  by  them.  He  is  jaot 
easily  influenced  against  his  will,  is  rather  unyielding  and  unadaptable. 
Whether  he  is  quick  or  slow,  whether  open  or  reserved,  he  resists 
circumstances,  opinions,  and  feelings  that  are  not  his  own,  does  not 
easily  assimilate  his  habits  or  views  to  those  of  others,  resents  any 
form  of  control,  regulation,  or  law  that  is  contrary  to  his  own  ideas,  and 
finds  it  difficult  to  submit  or  remain  indifferent.  These  principles  apply 
all  round,  to  thought,  feelings,  and  actions.  He  may  or  may  not  be 
original  in  thought,  but  he  acquires  his  opinions  in  his  own  w^ay  to  suit 


METHODS  OF  SYNTHESIS  163 

himself,  and  is  more  likely  to  impose  them  upon  others  than  to  abandon 
them  without  a struggle. 

The  Negative  Temperament  manifests  through  such  qualities  as 
adaptability,  plasticity,  and  receptivity.  The  persons  who  possess  it 
exhibit  characteristics  that  vary  from  openness  of  mind,  fertility  of 
thought,  readiness  to  receive  new  ideas,  studiousness,  imagination, 
intuition,  down  to  mental  indifference,  unoriginality,  inertness,  or  a 
mirror-like  reception  and  reflection  of  other  people’s  views.  In  feeling, 
they  vary  from  the  sympathetic,  affectionate,  friendl}^  responsive  to 
every  sign  of  distress  in  others,  humane,  and  philanthropic,  to  the 
indolently  emotional,  selfishly  sensational,  indifferent,  or  passively 
reflecting  their  surroundings  and  the  moods  of  others.  In  the  world  of 
action,  they  are  at  their  best  when  associated  with  others,  with  a superior 
or  partner,  or  with  some  person  of  the  positive  temperament,  so  that 
each  can  supply  the  qualities  the  other  lacks.  They  are  more  often 
servants  than  masters,  whether  in  high  or  low  stations,  but  not  neces- 
sarily in  the  sense  of  showing  servility  or  lack  of  self-respect. 

As  a type,  the  positive  temperament  corresponds  to  man  and  to 
action ; while  the  negative  temperament  corresponds  to  woman  and  to 
feeling : but  this  is  only  in  a very  broad  and  general  sense.  Both  are 
found  in  each  sex  and  in  every  position  of  life,  from  the  palace  to  the 
slum,  from  the  archbishop  to  the  gaol-bird.  They  are  attitudes  of  the 
personality  as  a whole ; but  no  man  is  absolutely  positive  or  exclusively 
negative ; it  is  only  a question  of  their  relative  preponderance,  for  both 
exist  in  every  human  being. 

IV.  The  Ruling  Planet. — A good  deal  of  difference  of  opinion  has 
been  expressed  at  various  times  by  astrologers  upon  this  question  of 
the  ruling  planet  in  a horoscope.  All  will  agree  that  the  heavenly  bodies 
differ  in  strength  and  prominence  not  only  in  different  horoscopes  but 
also  in  the  same  one.  In  some  cases  only  one  or  two  planets  may  be 
accidentally  or  essentially  dignified,  while  in  other  cases  there  may  be 
four,  five,  or  more ; but,  whether  many  or  few,  it  is  probable  that  there 
must  always  be  some  one  planet  better  fitted  than  the  rest  to  represent 
the  owner  of  the  horoscope. 

It  is  on  this  point  that  differences  exist,  the  reason  being  that  there 
are  various  ways  in  which  a heavenly  body  may  acquire  strength  and 
importance ; and  because  it  is  not  yet  possible  to  apply  quantitative 
methods  and  decide  in  what  exact  proportion  one  planet  may  be  stronger 


164 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


than  another,  it  is  not  easy  in  all  cases  to  point  with  confidence  and 
certainty  to  the  ruler  of  the  horoscope. 

A distinction  must  be  made  between  the  ruler  of  the  horoscope  and 
the  ruler  or  lord  of  the  rising  sign  ; for  although  the  two  may  sometimes 
be  the  same  it  does  not  necessarily  follow  that  this  is  always  the  case. 
The  ruler  of  the  rising  sign  is  strong  when  in  its  own  house,  or 
exaltation ; or  when  angular  in  the  first,  tenth,  or  seventh  house ; or 
when  in  the  ninth  or  eleventh  house ; or  when  elevated  over  all  the 
planets.  In  such  a case  it  will  probably  be  the  strongest  planet  in  the 
horoscope  and  may,  therefore,  be  considered  the  ruler  of  the  horoscope. 

If,  however,  the  ruler  of  the  rising  sign  is  in  its  fall  or  detriment,  such 
as  the  Moon  in  Scorpio  or  Capricorn,  and  some  other  planet  in  the  map 
is  strong,  the  latter  may  be  the  lord.  Care  should  be  taken  to  see  what 
kind  of  strength  the  other  planet  has,  and  also  what  it  rules.  Any 
planet  is  strong  when  in  its  housejDr  exaltation  ; or  when  ver^^  close  to 
the  cusp  of  an  angle ; or  wl/en  elevated  above  all  the  other  planets  ; or 
when  it  rules  the  sign  or  signs  containing  a number  of  planets,  as 
explained  in  Section  V of  this  chapter  under  Majority  Sign  Ruler's. 
But  a rising  or  culminating  planet  in  its  fall  or  detriment  is  not  likely 
to  be  strong  enough  to  be  the  ruler  of  the  horoscope  ; and  in  such  a case, 
or  when  the  ruler  of  the  rising  sign  is  also  not  strong,  or  when  two 
planets  are  both  strong,  some  careful  balancing  of  the  claims  of  one 
against  another  will  be  necessary  before  deciding  which  to  treat  as  the 
ruler  of  the  horoscope. 

In  any  case  the  ruler  of  the  rising  sign  must  not  be  overlooked  when 
delineating  a horoscope ; for  until  the  person  born  under  it  is  able  to 
respond  to  a stronger  influence,  the  ascendant  and  its  lord  are  his  true 
representatives. 

A person  seeking  the  path  of  the  higher  occultism  may  find  a Master 
represented  by  the  strongest  planet  in  the  horoscope,  and  by  responding 
to  that  influence  may  come  under  its  vibrations  to  such  an  extent  as  to 
make  it  represent  himself  as  well  as  his  Master.  For  instance,  a person 
born  under  Aries,  with  Mars  in  Taurus  but  Uranus  rising,  may  live 
under  Mars  in  early  life  and  later  on  change  to  Uranus,  the  representa- 
tive of  his  Master.  Such  a case  is  known  to  the  author.  Similar  results 
may  follow  in  other  cases  where  occultism  is  not  in  question  ; the  servant 
may  meet  with  an  emplo3^er  signified  by  the  strongest  planet,  the 
pupil  with  a teacher,  and  so  on,  and  by  assimilating  himself  to  the  older 


METHODS  OF  SYNTHESIS 


165 


or  stronger  nature  may  awaken  the  influence  within  himself ; but  it  does 
not  always  follow  that  the  strongest  planet  is  the  actual  lord  of  the 
ascendant  of  the  employer  or  teacher. 

The  relationship  between  the  ruler  of  the  rising  sign  and  the 
strongest  planet  ma^^  be  either  benefic  or  malefic.  Qualities  are  evolved 
in  men  quite  as  often  by  misfortune  or  enmity  as  by  good  luck  and 
friendship.  The  aspect,  if  any,  between  the  two  and  their  house-positions 
should,  therefore,  be  taken  into  account.  If  the  strongest  planet  is  in 
good  aspect  to  the  ruler,  good  fortune,  strength  and  increase  of  power 
will  result  from  their  association.  If  in  bad  aspect  but  the  ruler  not 
otherwise  v>^eak  some  difficulty  or  trouble  will  result  according  to  house- 
position,  but  the  native  will  gain  spiritually  or  intellectually  if  not 
materially  in  the  long  run.  If  in  bad  aspect  and  the  ruler  very  weak 
nothing  but  misfortune  or  ill-feeling  is  likely  to  result.  If  the  strongest 
planet  is  lord  of  the  seventh  house,  the  person  concerned  may  be  the 
business  or  marriage  partner. 

V.  Majority  Sign  Positions. — This  term  is  adopted  for  lack  of  a 
better  to  signify  the  influence  that  results  from  the  presence  of  several 
planets  in  the  same  sign  or  in  two  signs  that  are  ruled  by  the  same 
planets.  In  some  cases  planets  are  very  much  scattered,  and  no  sign  is 
more  important  than  another  so  far  as  the  number  of  planets  it  contains 
is  concerned  ; but  occasionally  it  happens  that,  say,  Aries  and  Scorpio, 
both  ruled  by  Mars,  contain  four,  five,  six,  or  even  more  of  the  heavenl}^ 
bodies.  This  strengthens  the  martial  influence  in  the  person’s 
character  and  fortunes  very  considerably,  quite  irrespective  of  the  actual 
position  of  the  planet  Mars. 

Similarly,  many  planets  in  Taurus  and  Libra  give  a Venusian  tinge 
to  the  horoscope;  in  Gemini  and  Virgo,  a Mercurial  colouring;  in 
Sagittarius  and  Pisces,  one  pertaining  to  Jupiter;  in  Capricorn  and 
Aquarius,  a Saturnian  effect ; and  in  Cancer  and  Leo,  an  increase  in 
importance  of  the  Moon  and  Sun. 

Influence  such  as  this  is  readil3^  overlooked  and  not  alwa^^s  easy  to 
take  into  account  when  noted. 

In  Ruskin’s  horoscope,  five  planets  were  in  Saturnian  signs,  three 
in  those  of  Jupiter,  and  only  one  elsewhere,  namely  the  Moon  in 
Cancer. 

Because  of  these  variations,  tabulation  should  alwa3^s  be  made  of 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


1 66 

planetary  position  in  the  pairs  of  signs,  and  allowance  made  for  the 
increase  of  influence  of  the  planet  ruling  the  signs  containing  a large 
majority  of  heavenly  bodies,  when  this  happens. 

When  the  planets  are  very  scattered  through  the  zodiac,  versatility 
of  gifts  and  variety  of  experiences  will  result.  When  they  are  very 
concentrated,  the  planet  ruling  the  majority-signs  will  tend  to  tinge  the 
whole  character  and  fortunes  in  every  direction,  for  good  if  it  is  well 
placed,  but  attended  by  trouble  or  weakness  of  character  if  badly  placed. 
It  takes  four  or  more  planets  to  produce  this  result  in  a marked  degree  ; 
a smaller  number,  two  or  three,  will  not  be  so  effective  unless  the  sign 
or  its  ruler  acquires  strength  from  other  sources,  such  as  position  in  the 
ascendant  or  mid-heaven.  When  four  or  more  heavenly  bodies  are 
concentrated  in  this  way,  the  planetary  ruler  concerned  acquires  an 
importance  out  of  proportion  to  its  apparent  strength,  and  the  life 
experiences  are  largely  dominated  by  it.  When  the  planet  so  marked 
out  is  neither  lord  of  the  ascendant  nor  angular,  the  character  may 
seem  to  have  two  phases,  one  signified  by  the  rising  sign  and  one  by 
the  majority-sign  ruler. 


CHAPTER  XVII 


The  Quadruplicities,  or  ‘Qualities,’  Synthesised 

A STUDY  of  the  three  quadruplicities  or  ‘ qualities,’  by  which  the 
signs  ate  classified  as  Cardinal  or  Movable,  Fixed,  and  Mutable  or 
Common,  afibrds  an  important  clue  to  unravelling  the  mysteries  of  the 
Nativity ; and  time  spent  in  considering  them  carefully  will  be  well 
repaid.  The  philosophy  of  the  subject,  in~Their  bearing  upon  the  three 
aspects  of  man’s  nature  as  the  mirror  of  the  universe  and  of  the  divine 
Trinity,  has  been  dwelt  upon  in  previous  chapters ; and  the  practical 
application  of  the  ideas  to  the  horoscope  will  now  concern  us. 

It  will  te  readily  understood  that  the  three  ‘ qualities,’  although 
always  the  sj.me  in  themselves,  may  be  employed  either  for  evil  or  for 
good,  as  may  almost  any  power  or  faculty  possessed  by  man.  It  there- 
fore follows  that  the  manner  in  which  they  impress  themselves  upon  a 
very  backward  and  unevolved  soul  will  not  be  quite  the  same  as  that  in 
which  they  are  exhibited  by  a highly  evolved  and  well-balanced  person. 
This  is  true  of  the  planets  also,  and  in  fact  holds  good  in  every 
department  of  Astrology. 

If  most  of  the  planets  are  in  any  one  of  the  three  quadruplicities, 
that  particular  ‘quality  ’ will  be  strongly  impressed  upon  the  native,  and 
will  constitute  a type  of  personality  or  Temperament.  There  are  thus 
three  characteristic  temperaments  corresponding  to  the  three  qualities  ; 
and  their  general  relationships  are  exhibited  in  the  following  table  : 


Fixed 

Mutable 

Cardinal 

Sun 

Moon 

Ascendant 

Will 

Wisdom 

Action 

Desire 

Thought 

Self-consciousness 

The  Active  Tempe?iament  is  bestowed  when  the  majority  of  planets 
are  in  cardinal  (movable)  signs.  This  is  perhaps  the  most  pronounced 
and  acute  of  the  three  groups,  and  stands  for  energy,  activity,  change, 
ardour,  enthusiasm, — self-consciousness  realised  in  a life  of  action. 

167 


i68 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


Persons  with  this  temperament  are  easily  spurred  into  activity,  either 
by  the  force  of  circumstances  or  by  their  own  inherent  nature,  and 
they  generally  come  more  or  less  prominently  before  the  world  because 
the}^  prefer  a life  of  action  to  inaction.  Generally  speaking,  their  Karma 
requires  to  be  worked  out  in  action  more  than  in  feeling  or  thought ; but 
this  activity  may  be  turned  in  almost  any  direction  according  to  the  kind 
of  horoscope.  If  operating  in  the  life  of  the  outer  world  this  type  gives 
the  ‘ practical  man  ’ or  ‘ man  of  action,’  in  any  rank  of  life  from  the 
labourer  to  the  statesman.  When,  combined  with  feelings,  desires  and 
emotions,  the  movable  quality  spurs  these  into  great  activity.  With  an 
intellectual  type  of  personality  they  give  a character  that  may  accomplish 
great  things  through  a fertile,  restless,  insatiable  mind. 

Cardinal  signs  also  give  opportunity,  and  denote  ambition,  progress 
love  of  fame  and  recognition,  much  energy,  alertness  and  quick  percep- 
tion. They  produce  a reforming  and  pioneering  spirit,  with  readiness 
of  response  to  changes  in  the  world  around  them.  The}^  arc  the  most 
pronounced  and  acute  of  the  three  groups  of  signs ; and  vithout  this 
movable  influence  the  other  two  qualities  might  remain  latent  indefinitel3^ 

The  evil  side  of  this  temperament  arises  out  of  its  proneness  to 
change  without  a sufficiently  weighty  reason,  from  its  instabiiit3q  restless- 
ness, excitability,  over-activity,  unwise  enthusiasm,  lack  of  caution  and 
concentration,  insufficient  restraint,  hastiness,  ill-regulatsd  or  destructive 
activity,  or  a reckless,  adventurous  spirit.  In  the  earl/  stages  of  soul 
evolution,  this  is  the  kind  of  influence  that  is  liable  to  manifest ; but, 
with  greater  experience,  the  energ3^  of  these  signs  is  turned  into  work 
devotedly  and  untiringly  performed.  Yajna,  or  the  Yoga  of  Action  as 
Sacrifice,  is  the  ideal  mentioned  in  the  Hindu  scriptures  that  seems  to 
belong  here. 

The  nature  of  the  separate  signs  forming  the  cardinal  group  should 
be  noticed  if  the  planets  happen  to  be  concentrated  in  one  of  them 
instead  of  being  scattered  throughout  the  group.  In  such  a case  as  this, 
also,  the  planet  ruling  the  sign  in  which  the3^  are  concentrated  is  sure  to 
impress  its  nature  strongly  upon  the  character,  nc  matter  where  it  ma3' 
be  placed. 

Aries  gives  impulse,  excitability,  activit3%  desjre  for  leadership  or  to 
be  at  the  head  of  things,  assertiveness;  also  devotion  to  persons  or 
causes,  but  there  is  also  some  liabilit3^  to  arouse  enmity  through 
disputatiousness. 


QUADRUPLICITIES,  OR  ‘QUALITIES,’  SYNTHESISED  169 


Cancer  gives  more  silent  ambition  and  quiet  per^tence,  a con- 
serving of  energies  but  much  inner  activity,  mostly  of  the  feelings,  for  the 
mind  is  largely  swayed  by  the  emotional  and  sensational  element. 
There  is  often  ability  for  business  or  for  practical  science,  and  great 
tenacity  of  purpose. 

Libra  is  more  co-operative  and  less  separative  than  Aries.  The 
activity  may  take  a more  intellectual,  imaginative,  or  artistic  direction  in 
this  sign,  with  devotion  to  an  ideal,  which  may  be  embodied  either  in  a 
person  or  a cause. 

Capricorn  is  political,  official,  or  scientific,  with  strength  of  will, 
steady  resolution,  and  ideals  that  are  generally  quite  capable  of  being 
reduced  to  practice  There  is  much  ambition,  a good  deal  of  self-will 
and  egoism,  but  also  practical  ability  and  a desire  to  work  for  the  multi- 
tude rather  than  the  few,  notwithstanding  that  there  is  a distinct  striving 
after  rank  and  high  station,  with  its  attendant  exclusiveness  and 
sometimes  a certain  amount  of  snobbery. 

Extremists  of  all  kinds  often  have  all  or  nearly  all  their  planets  in 
^ne  of  the  three  groups  of  signs  ; and  when  this  is  the  cardinal  group 
and  angles  are  occupied,  a more  or  less  public  career,  for  good  or  ill,  is 
certain.  When  the  planets  are  confined  to  one  of  the  other  two  groups 
a marked  or  very  distinct  type  of  personality  is  produced,  each  after  its 
kind.  What  is  known  as  the  strong  or  dominant  personality  is  not 
always  formed  in  this  way,  however ; for  it  may  be  due  to  one  or  more 
planets  being  exactly  on  the  cusps  of  the  first,  tenth,  or  seventh  houses  ; 
or  to  a large  number  of  planets  being  grouped  in  signs  ruled  by  one 
planet  only,  such  as  Aries  and  Scorpio,  or  Gemini  or  Virgo.  This  pro- 
duces a distinct  type,  according  to  the  planet  ruling  the  two  signs, 
especially  if  the  luminaries  and  the  ascendant  are  involved  in  the  grouping. 

The  Fixed  Temperament  arises  from  the  majority  of  planets 
being  placed  in  the  fixed  signs.  This  is,  in  principle,  the  opposite  of 
the  Active  Temperament,  and  is  characterised  by  firmness,  inertia  and 
changelessness.  In  any  nativity  it  will  incline  the  native  to  become 
more  or  less  set,  to  run  in  a groove,  and,  if  the  horoscope  does  not  show 
any  modifying  flexibility,  to  be  over-determined  and  somewhat  dogmatic. 
It  denotes  ‘grit’  and  thoroughness,  and  when  energised,  gives  the 
power  to  be  firm,  rigid,  and  unyielding  in  either  good  or  evil  according 
to  the  moral  growth. 


oc 


170 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


The  tendency  of  these  signs  is  to  hold  together,  organise,  build  up, 
accumulate,  and  make  steady  rather  than  to  scatter,  disrupt  or  change 
as  do  the  cardinal  signs ; but,  like  the  latter,  they  may  result  in  either 
good  or  bad  traits.  Thus  there  may  be  manifested  either  patience  or 
indolence,  firmness  or  obstinacy,  strength  of  will  or  stubbornness, 
conservation  or  bigotry,  concentration  or  sluggishness. 

In  the  sphere  of  action,  this  temperament  means  work  steadily 
and  perseveringly  performed.  In  the  department  of  the  intellect,  it 
gives  a profound  and  comprehensive  mind  suitable  for  dealing  with 
serious  subjects,  of  steadfast  views  and  often  a good  memor3^  With 
desires  and  feelings  it  has  very  close  affinity  both  for  good  and  evil ; for, 
according  to  moral  growth,  so  may  its  influence  vary,  from  passions 
and  emotions  of  every  description  almost,  good  or  bad,  up  to  supreme 
strength  of  will,  self-control,  and  mastery  both  of  self  and  others.  There 
may  be  either  dignity  or  pride,  and  a love  of  power  apart  from  ambition. 

Although  naturally  slow  to  move,  people  with  this  temperament 
often  rush  out  into  action  in  order  to  obtain  some  desired  end  or  object ; 
and  under  sufficient  stimulus  they  may  act  with  suddenness  or  violence, 
much  as  does  the  planet  Uranus.  But,  in  a good  horoscope,  there  will 
be  sincerity,  thoroughness,  reliability  and  conscientiousness. 

Fixed  signs  have  some  affinity  with  the  artisan  or  trading  caste, 
but  in  a higher  application,  they  may  signify  the  king  or  anyone  who 
has  authority  over  others. 

If  considered  separately,  Taurus  will  add  to  the  obstinac}^  and 
incline  to  jealous^^  and  stiff-neckedness,  sometimes  to  pride. 

Leo  gives  love  of  power,  great  persistence,  determination,  self- 
reliance,  ardent  feelings,  but  sometimes  austerity. 

Scorpio  increases  positiveness,  pride,  extravagance,  love.. ^ of 
dominating  others,  with  resentment  or  vindictiveness  in  an  unfavourable 
horoscope. 

Aquarius,  although  refining  the  temperament,  sometimes  tends  .to 
sloth  and  indolence,  and  the  mind  is  apt  to  get  too  fixed,  to  run  too  much 
in  a groove.  The  native  may  be  very  agreeable  and  companionable  (as 
may  any  of  the  fixed  signs  if  benefics  are  prominent),  but  he  has  very 
decided  opinions  of  his  own,  and  a quiet  way  of  carrying  out  his  own 
plans  undeterred  by  opposition  or  unpopularity. 


The  Harmonious  Temperament  comes  from  the  majority  of 


QUADRUPLICITIES,  OR  ‘QUALITIES,’  SYNTHESISED  171 


planets  being  in  Common  or  Mutable  signs.  On  the  surface  this  may 
not  seem  the  best  name  to  give  to  what  is  often  a monotonous  tempera- 
ment, but  it  tends  towards  harmony  and  peace  more  than  discord.  It 
has  more  affinity  with  intellect  than  with  desire  or  action,  but  it  may 
vary  a good  deal  in  its  nature  ; it  is  not  easy  to  describe  or  to  understand, 
and  the  persons  who  exhibit  it  are  not  easy  to  know.  It  is  sometimes  a 
rather  useless  temperament  for  those  who  have  to  mix  with  the  world,  if 
unassisted  by  the  cardinal  quality.  The  intellect  it  gives  may  vary 
greatly,  from  the  superficial,  changeable  and  unpractical  to  the  profound 
and  comprehensive ; but  in  most  cases  it  is  accompanied  by  a consider- 
able amount  of  finesse,  subtlety,  and  reserve.  In  some  natures  this  ma3^ 
amount  to  craft,  cunning,  deception,  stealth,  lack  of  candour  and 
duplicity  ; but  in  others  it  may  show  as  insight,  understanding,  intuition, 
ability  to  look  beneath  the  surface  of  things,  to  grasp  the  underlying 
unity  amidst  apparent  outward  diversity ; the  tactful  diplomatic  mind  on 
the  one  hand,  or  the  comprehensive  philosophic  mind  on  the  other.  It 
often  manifests,  with  this  understanding,  a very  profound  and  wide 
sympathy  and  a large  tolerance  that  seeks  to  include  all  humanit3^  the 
sinner  as  much  as  the  saint,  and  the  unfortunate  more  than  the 
prosperous.  The  idea  of  ‘ the  brotherhood  of  humanity  ’ seems  to 
belong  largely  here  and  to  be  based  more  upon  intuition  than  upon 
Kamic  emotion. 

The  tendency  of  these  signs  is  to  develop  a methodical,  sympathetic, 
sensitive,  nervous  and  highly-strung  nature,  but  there  is  apt  to  be  too 
much  duality,  a proneness  to  vacillation,  irresolution,  to  ‘ sit  on  the 
fence  ’ and  to  shirk  responsibilty.  They  have  points  both  of  re- 
semblance with  and  of  difference  from  the  other  zodiacal  signs.  They 
resemble  the  cardinal  signs  in  being  often  productive  of  change ; but 
this  is  generally  due  to  their  adaptability  and  duality  of  nature,  or  to 
indifference  and  drifting,  and  is  of  quite  a different  character  from  the 
prompt,  rapid  and  decisive  change  of  the  movable  qualit3%  They  lack 
both  the  obstinacy  and  the  strength  of  will  of  the  fixed  signs,  and  yet 
they  may  show  a monotonous  uniformity  of  action  and  a quiet  phlegmatic 
life  that  looks  very  much  like  deliberation  and  firmness. 

The  mutable  signs  require  a great  deal  of  support  from  other  in- 
fluences to  bring  out  the  best  that  is  in  them,  among  which  are  aptitude 
for  details,  mental  flexibility  and  ingenuit3^  and  an  easy  adaptability  to 
circumstances.  Because  these  persons  are  rather  lacking  in  decision  but 


172 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


are  apt  in  comprehension  the}^  usuall}^  make  better  and  more  fortunate 
servants  than  masters ; and  they  would  be  well  advised  to  be  content  to 
play  ‘ second  fiddle  ’ and  not  to  aim  at  positions  of  power  or  responsi- 
bility. The3^  make  good  agents,  intermediaries,  interpreters,  comment- 
ators, counsellors,  advisers,  arguers,  secretaries,  diplomatists  and 
tacticians,  and  many  make  impartial  judges,  critics,  editors,  arbitrators 
and  generalisers.  The3^  can  fill  an3^  position  in  which  they  carry  out  or 
express  the  will  of  another,  interpret  another’s  ideas,  or  act  as  go- 
betweens,  either  mentally  or  in  the  more  literal  sense  of  travelling ; but 
if  placed  in  positions  of  authority  are  apt  to  display  a lack  of  breadth 
and  power,  and  show  a proneness  to  be  ‘ niggling  ’ over  matters  of 
detail,  and  to  be  more  particular  regarding  trifling  distinctions  than 
fundamental  principles,  and  for  this  reason  are  far  less  desirable  persons 
for  such  posts  than  those  who  have  a good  supply  of  the  fixed  sign 
‘ ballast.’ 

The  two  ITercurial  signs  are  prone  to  continual  repetition  of  past  ex- 
periences in  consciousness,  hence  to  worrying,  anxiet3\  day-dreaming, 
and  sometimes  absent-mindedness ; but  they  tend  to  go  beneath  the 
surface  of  things,  for  good  as  well  as  for  evil.  The3'  easily  adapt  them- 
selves to  intellectual,  literar3%  scientific  and  philosophical  studies  ; and, 
if  Mercur3'  is  strong  or  angular,  may  make  omnivorous  readers  and 
prolific  authors.  Virgo  adapts  itself  to  a business  career  rather  better 
than  does  Gemini,  but  sometimes  inclines  to  carping  and  faddiness,  and 
to  become  too  critical  and  anal3^tical.  Gemini  children  often  show  much 
aptness  for  books  and  lessons,  and  later  in  life  considerable  versatility 
and  flexibilit3^  of  mind,  sometimes  garrulity  in  speech  or  writing.  Both 
Gemini  and  Virgo  have  a natural  tendency  either  to  great  reserve  or  else 
to  attach  themselves  to  a stronger  will,  to  whose  nature  they  easil3^ 
adapt  themselves ; hence  partnership,  friendship,  companionship,  devo- 
tion, socialit3%  founded,  however,  more  upon  adaptabilit3^  and  under- 
standing than  upon  emotion.  But  they  are  both  rather  difficult  to  know, 
and  one  ma3"  live  with  them  for  3"ears  without  fulB^  understanding  them. 

The  Jupiter  signs  are  rather  more  open  and  on  the  surface,  being 
fond  of  the  beautiful,  the  harmonious,  the  peaceful,  the  properly  balanced 
and  proportioned.  They  are  somewhat  inclined  to  precision  in  forms, 
customs  and  etiquette,  to  fine  clothes,  beautiful  houses  and  rooms,  neat- 
ness and  orderliness,  to  pride,  dignit3^  pomp,  show,  correctness  and 
orthodoxy.  A prominent  Mars  or  Uranus,  however,  will  easily  upset 


QUADRUPLICITIES,  OR  ‘QUALITIES/  SYNTHESISED  173 


this  tendency  in  Sagittarius,  and  will  give  rebelliousness,  rashness  and 
perversity ; while  Pisces  may  become,  under  other  influences,  indolent, 
inert,  flaccid,  talkative  and  indifferent.  Both  often  display  an  active 
imagination  ; and  a good  many  people  who  possess  clairvoyance  or  some 
psychic  gift  are  either  born  under  these  signs  or  have  important  planets 
stationed  in  them.  Priests,  judges  and  physicians  often  either  have 
Sagittarius  or  Pisces  rising,  or  else  Jupiter  angular,  or  several  planets 
in  these  signs. 

Of  these  three  qualities  the  Cardinal  is  perhaps  the  most  important, 
for  it  quickens,  energises,  and  stirs  into  life  and  activity  the  other  two. 
The  Fixed  signs,  while  denoting  stabilit}'  and  firmness,  are  apt  to  remain 
latent  and  inert ; they  require  the  stimulating  properties  of  the  movable 
signs  to  bring  out  the  powers  locked  up  within  them.  The  Mutable  or 
Common  signs,  while  producing  concordance,  rhj^thm  and  harmony, 
cause  a monotonous  recurrence  and  repetition,  which  has  a tedious  and 
iterative  effect,  and  needs  to  be  broken  up  by  the  disturbing  and 
invigorating  movable  signs. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Cardinal  signs  by  themselves  are  too  dis- 
continuous, too  unrestful,  and  need  the  steadying  influence  of  the  Fixed 
group  and  the  balance  and  impartiality  of  the  Mutable. 

The  Cardinal  signs  energise  and  vitalise ; the  Fixed  bring  back  to 
stability  and  stolidit^^;  the  Mutable  are  intermediate  in  nature,  harmonis- 
ing and  adjusting.  In  a very  general  sense,  if  the  idea  is  not  materialised 
too  much,  the  Fixed  signs  may  be  compared  to  motionless  solids  ; the 
Cardinal  to  gas  in  rapid  motion ; and  the  Mutable  to  the  liquid  state, 
intermediate  between  the  other  two.  The  three,  when  properly  balanced, 
correspond  to  the  laya  state  or  latency,  which  preceded  the  dawn  of 
creation  and  which  will  follow  its  close. 

It  is  the  combination  of  these  groups  that  denotes  the  quality  or 
kind  of  vehicle  through  which  the  native  is  manifesting  his  mind,  feel- 
ings or  actions.  Taken  separately,  the  Fixed  signs  have  to  do  with  the 
Will  power,  the  motives,  the  heart  and  the  foundation  of  the  man. 
They  govern  the  trunk  of  the  body,  and,  in  a general  sense,  favour  what 
is  known  as  the  Vital  temperament. 

The  Cardinal  signs  have  to  do  with  the  direct  forces,  the  guiding 
and  propelling  tendencies,  and  the  brain  generally.  They  govern  the 
head  and  favour  what  is  known  as  the  Mental  temperament. 

The  Mutable  or  common  signs  are  the  servers,  agents,  conveyers. 


174 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


and  have  to  do  with  carrying  out  the  orders  of  the  heart  and  brain. 
They  govern  the  nervous  system,  the  limbs  of  the  bod3%  and  favour  what 
is  known  as  the  motive  temperament. 

To  combine  these  groups  is  the  greatest  work  of  art  an  astrologer 
can  accomplish,  and  gives^at  once  the  key  to  the  line  of  least  resistance 
normally  adopted  by  the  native.  In  the  example  horoscopes  these 
combinations  will  be  explained.  In  concluding  this  chapter  it  will  be 
well  to  note  that  affinities  are  built  up  by  these  combinations. 

. A person  born  with  the  majority  of  planets  in  fixed  signs  gains  b}’’ 
coming  into  contact  with  another  having  the  majority  of  planets  in 
Cardinal  signs,  for  this  reason  : the  active  qualities  stir  into  life  and 
manifestation  the  qualities  of  the  fixed  group,  and  the  two  work  better 
together,  having  a united  force  of  great  strength.  What  the  one  gains 
in  stimulation  ^the  other  gains  in  solidification  and  steadiness.  Neither 
should  hurt  the  other,  unless  the  law  of  complements  is  totally  ignored 
or  misunderstood. 

Each,  therefore,  has  his  mission  in  life,  and  the  one  can  supply  the 
needs  of  the  other. 

If  the  Cardinal  signs  produce  in  the  one  intolerance  and  too  much 
impatience,  the  desired  effect  cannot  be  accomplished.  Similarly  if  the 
fixed  signs  produce  too  much  obstinacy  and  aloofness,  or  if  the  Mutable 
signs  become  too  irritable  and  rebellious.  Each  must  be  prepared  to 
give  and  take,  and  then  mutual  benefit  is  assured. 

In  a general  sense,  and  for  all  practical  purposes,  Uranus  may  be 
considered  the  head  or  ruler  of  the  fixed  group.  Mercury  ruler  of  the 
Mutable,  and  Mars  of  the  Cardinal ; but  only  in  a general  and  not  in  a 
~ particular  sense. 

If  any  difficulty  arises  in  deciding  as  to  which  group  should  be 
considered  as  containing  the  majorit^^  of  the  planets,  give  preference  to 
that  containing  the  Sun  or  Moon,  and  give  a ‘ casting  vote  ’ to  the 
Ascendant. 

It  sometimes  happens,  for  instance,  that  the  qualities  are  evenU^ 
balanced,  the  nine  planets  being  evenly  distributed  throughout  the  signs, 
/>.,  three  in  Cardinal,  three  in  Fixed,  and  three  in  Mutable : this  gives 
what  is  known  as  a balanced  temperament.  It  is  not  always  good, 
except  in  the  case  of  advanced  souls  who  know  how  to  use  the  three 
qualities ; it  is,  therefore,  sometimes  very  good  but  at  others  very 
inimical  to  progress,  for  balance  sometimes  means  inertia — lack  of  power 


QUADRUPLICITIES,  OR  ‘QUALITIES,’  SYNTHESISED  175 


to  tilt  the  scale  to  one  side  or  the  other.  In  the  advanced  soul  it  would 
mean  readjustment  of  all  qualities,  thus  producing  a harmonious  blending 
of  all  sides  of  the  nature. 

In  a very  young  or  undeveloped  ego  it  would  denote  stagnation, 
requiring  a very  exceptional  environment  to  act  upon  and  disturb  the 
balance  for  progressive  purposes.  In  the  advanced  ip  would  mean  a 
balancing  of  the  temperaments.  In  the  ordinary  person  the  life  would 
be  too  even  and  unprogressive,  or  rather  progress  would  be  exceedingly^ 
slow  and  the  life  very  tame.  Excess  of  one  quality^  over  another  always 
denotes  an  eventful  life.  In  the  case  of  Prince  Bismarck  the  balance  of 
the  temperament  was  justified,  but  here  as  in  most  cases  the  rising  sign 
had  the  ‘casting  vote ’and  gave  him  the  tendency^  toward  the  fixed 
quality. 


CHAPTER  XVIII 


The  Triplicities  vSynthesised 

If  the  quadruplicities  or  ‘qualities,’  as  they  are  often  termed,  form  the 
best  means  of  synthesising  the  temperament,  and  opening  the  judgment 
of  the  nativity,  the  triplicities  combined  with  the  qualities  furnish 
the  method  of  synthesis  for  the  purpose  of  summarising  the  whole 
nativity. 

Every  nativity  is,  properly  speaking,  a representation  of  seven 
distinct  notes  or  colours  and  these  seven  are  sub-divided  and  re-divided, 
again  and  again,  until  the  notes  and  colours  are  an  interblending  of 
numerous  tones,  and  shades,  of  sound  and  colour.  Of  the  first  sub- 
division, producing  forty-nine  clear  notes  and  colours,  the  qualities  and 
triplicities  constitute  the  most  important  part. 

'1  he  three  quadruplicities,  as  already  explained,  may  be  considered 
as  representing  the  energies  of  the  matter  with  which  the  ego  is  clothed, 
thus  denoting  the  temperament,  and  the  first,  or  primar}^  limitations 
through  which  the  native  has  to  express  himself — Cardinal,  Fixed  and 
Mutable.  They  are,  in  the  aggregate,  the  representatives  of  the  three 
modes  of  motion  (translatory,  rotary  and  vibratory),  or  figuratively 
speaking  the  three  sides  of  the  permanent  and  immortal  triangle,  the 
Ego. 

The  four  triplicities  form  what  has  been  termed  the  Lower  Quater- 
nar3%  and  metaphorically  speaking  are  alwa3^s  at  the  base  of  the  triangular 
‘qualities.’ 

In  themselves  the  triplicities  are  perfect  triangles,  but  are  never 
broken  up  or  separated  like  the  qualities. 

The  fiery,  watery,  earthy  and  airy  triplicities  are  always  harmonious 
in  themselves,  but  are  not  harmonious  when  opposed  to  triplicities  of  a 
diverse  character  such  as  the  fiery  and  watery,  or  the  fiery  and  earthy 
triplicities  ; water  quenching  fire,  and  earth  smothering  it.  The  triplici- 
ties affect  ever3^one,  more  or  less,  according  to  the  preponderance  of 

176 


THE  TRIPLICITIES  SYNTHESISED 


177 


planets  in  them ; and  when  blended  with  the  quadruplicities,  form  the 
final  synthesis  of  every  nativity.  But  before  the^'^  can  be  blended  their 
nature  and  tendenc3^  must  be  knov,^n.  For  all  practical  purposes,  the 
earthy  signs  represent  the  ph^^sical  bod3" ; the  watery  signs  the  astral,  or 
body  of  feeling  ; the  fier3^  the  mental  bod3^  or  body  of  mind  and  intellect ; 
the  airy  signs  the  bod3^  of  pure  reason,  the  higher  and  most  refined  part 
of  human  nature. 

The  Fiery  Triplicity  is  the  S3unbol  of  Separateness.  Air  com- 
mingles with  and  interpenetrates  all  substances  ; fire  burns  and  disinte- 
grates, allowing  the  finer  particles  to  escape  and  mingle  with  the  air  : thus 
fire  is  a separator,  and  air  a unifier.  The  airy  triplicity  symbolises  the 
higher  mind  and  the  fier3^  triplicity  the  lower.  There  are  four  airs,  the  sum 
total  of  the  airy  triplicity  making  the  fourth,  after  fixing  the  ‘ air  ’ of 
Gemini  and  Libra  in  Aquarius.  There  are  likewise  four  fires,  the  fires 
of  Aries  and  Sagittarius  being  fixed  in  Leo,  and  the  whole  transmuted 
into  the  divine  flame  over  which  the  God  Agni  presides.  On  the 
physical  plane  fire  is  the  highest  element,  it  manifests  as  light,  heat,  life 
and  death.  It  is  the  magnetism  that  is  around  all  things,  absorbing  all 
things  about  it,  and  projecting  from  itself  the  subtle  aura  in  which  are 
constantly  flashing  the  colours  of  each  planetary  ray.  In  the  fiery  signs 
are  concealed  the  greatest  energy  and  the  greatest  activities.  In  Aries,  the 
flexible  and  spasmodic  outbursts  of  fier3^  energy,  in  which  there  is  more 
smoke  and  less  flame,  but  much  evaporative  heat.  In  Leo  the  concentrated 
solar  fire  that  burns  steadily  in  the  heart  and  purifies  by  a slow  but  sure 
combustion.  In  Sagittarius  "the  flashing  flame  and  intermittent  heat 
that  bursts  forth,  and  returns,  in  constant  action  and  reaction,  the  whole 
being  transmuted  into  the  fire  of  knowledge  that  burns  up  the  dross  of 
ignorance.  Thus  the  fiery  triplicity  is  the  torch  or  flame  from  which 
the  other  triplicities  are  lighted.  The  fire  itself  cannot  be  soiled  or 
made  impure  and  the  steady  flame  of  the  Ego  burns  on  for  ever,  lighting 
each  personality  to  which  it  is  attached  life  after  life,  until  perfection  or 
supreme  consciousness  is  attained. 

The  Earthy  Triplicity  is  the  symbol  of  the  Dense  body  of  man  ; 
it  represents  the  concretions,  excretions,  and  the  residue  of  the  other 
planes.  It  is  the  plane  of  action,  conservation  of  energy,  and  concen- 
trated forces.  Earth  and  water  make  ‘ mud,’  the  physical  and  the 
astral  are  in  juxtaposition,  and  more  or  less  interwoven.  Taurus  and 

M 


178 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


Scorpio  are  counterparts,  as  also  Virgo  and  Pisces,  and  Capricorn  and 
Cancer;  they  are  polar  opposites,  complements  and  duplicates  on  the 
two  planes. 

Capricorn-Cancer,  cell  life ; Virgo-Pisces,  molecules ; Taurus- 
Scorpio,  atoms. 

Taurus  is  the  sign  of  sound,  the  physical  utterance.  The  desire  is 
in  Aries,  positive  sign,  and  the  expression  in  Taurus,  negative  sign,  and 
the  death  of  sound  is  in  Scorpio.  The  two  poles,  Taurus  and  Scorpio, 
cannot  be  operative  at  the  same  time,  hence  chastity  brings  forth  the 
true  Vach,  the  power  of  speech,  manifested  through  the  airy  sign  Gemini. 
Each  sign  is  inextricably  interwoven  the  one  with  the  other,  but  the 
earthy  signs  show  forth  the  manifested  life  of  fire  and  air,  and  of  the 
watery  triplicity  by  reaction.  Taurus  is  therefore  the  sign  of  speech,  the 
highest  expression  of  which  is  song,  or  the  correct  pronunciation  of 
Mantrams. 

Virgo  is  the  sign  of  power,  on  the  physical  plane,  to  interpret 
sensations  more  or  less  correctly.  It  governs  the  solar  plexus  in  the 
human  body,  the  most  sensitive  part  in  which  astral  impressions  are 
received  and  interpreted,  truly  or  falsely  according  to  the  development 
of  the  Ego.  It  is  thus  the  sign  of  psychic  memory.  It  is  the  great 
psychic  sign  for  physical  domonstration.  It  interprets  force  from  the 
unseen  worlds,  as  sickness,  phenomenal  magic,  labour  and  service,  and 
has  truly  a sixth  house  influence.  It  is  the  root  of  the  sympathetic 
nerv^ous  system,  and  from  it  all  psychic  phenomena  spring.  This  is  the 
mysterious  virgin  sign. 

Capricorn  is  the  sign  of  physical  expression  as  a whole,  the 
perfected man  in  which  all  the  cells  of  the  bodywork  in  unison, 
changing  and  interchanging,  with  a perfect  circulation,  replacing  old  and 
wasted  cells  for  new,  and  building  up  the  perfected  temple  for  the  coming 
of  the  heavenly  man — Aquarius.  The  sun  in  this  sign  gives  longevity 
and  the  promise  of  a ripe  old  age.  Mars  is  exalted  in  Capricorn,  the 
inner  meaning  of  which  is  skill  in  action.  The  moon  has  her  ‘ detriment ' 
in  Capricorn,  denoting  restricted  action. 

The  Airy  Triplicity  is  the  symbol  of  Unity.  It  is  the  unifying  triad, 
and  when  this  trinity  is  operating  in  unison  with  a favourable  quality,  true 
harmony  is  the  result ; but  when  the  planets  are  all  located  in  one  of 
tthe  air3'  signs  and  not  well  distributed,  there  is  danger  of  stagnation  or 


THE  TRIPLICITIES  SYNTHESISED 


179 


‘ peace  at  any  price/  and  a submission  to  that  which  should  be  striven 
against  and  overcome.  I marvelled  for  many  years  at  the  refined, 
peaceful  and  serene  behaviour  of  a lady  who  had  all  her  planets  in  one  of 
the  airy  signs,  and  it  was  not  until  I remarked  to  the  friend  with  whom 
she  lived,  how  far  advanced  she  appeared  to  be,  that  I found  reason  to 
wonder  no  longer.  ‘Yes,’  was  the  reply,  ‘ but  she  is  so  very  lazy,  and 
has  been  living  on  her  friends  all  her  life ! ’ 

Each  of  the  airy  signs  makes  for  unity,  even  the  dual  sign  Gemini, 

‘ the  twins,’  which  teaches  the  equality  of  relationship,  neighbourly 
considerations,  and  harmonising  of  differences ; in  Libra  unity  is  sought 
through  marriage,  partnerships,  and  the  people  as  a whole  ; and  in 
Aquarius  through  the  friendship  that  is  found  amongst  equals. 

The  most  indifferent  persons  under  the  air3"  triplicit^^,  fraternise  and 
express  the  social  spirit  in  which  there  is  liberty  of  feeling  and  mind 
that  allows  an  interchange,  which  is  only  really  happy  when  it  is  as  free 
as  air,  and  unhindered  by  denser  conditions. 

There  is  nothing  in  this  triplicily  that  has  any  permanent  link  with 
the  grosser  conditions  of  the  other  triplicities,  and  yet  it  permeates  them 
all,  and  abstracts  from  each  their  essence.  In  this  respect  it  is  allied  to 
the  higher  mind,  the  Buddhic  plane ; and  although  ever  making  for 
unity,  it  is  never  bound  to  anything  lower  than  itself.  There  is  only  one 
planet  exalted  in  this  triplicit}^  Saturn,  the  separator,  whose  grosser 
particles  are  dissolved  in  air  in  order  that  the  finer  experiences  of  the 
individuality  may  ascend  into  the  heaven  world  of  which  the  airy 
triplicity  is  the  physical  representative. 

In  each  of  the  airy  signs  there  is  a decidedly  dual  symbol : Gemini 
— The  Twins  ; Libra — The  Scales,  or  Balance  ; Aquarius — The 
Water  and  the  Man,  or  the  Two  Serpents,  (^-).  In  Gemini,  the  real 
and  the  unreal,  the  higher  and  lower  mind  as  twin  souls ; apparently 
two,  yet  one,  symbolised  as  the  Pillars  or  Porch  at  the  entrance  to  the 
Temple  of  Knowledge. 

In  Libra,  the  balanced  intellect,  the  equal-minded  one,  percep- 
tion and  reflection,  object  and  subject,  united  in  true  partnership.  The 
divine  marriage  of  Personal  with  Individual,  Man  with  God. 

In  Aquarius,  the  Man  complete  as  Water-bearer,  passing  from  the 
exaltation  of  Saturn  in  Libra  to  the  Uranian,  the  intuitive  mind — Manas, 
ready  for  the  spiral  ascent  to  unity  with  Buddhi.  In  its  highest  sym- 
bology it  signifies  universal  Brotherhood,  not  talked  about  but  lived. 


i8o 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


There  is  the  aity  triplicit3^  composed  of  the  ideal  signs,  each  sign 
containing  the  whole  triplicit}^  in  its  decanates,  each  having  thus  its 
link  with  the  three  qualities,  permanent,  active,  and  harmonious — or  the 
three  Gunas. 

The  Watery  Triplicity  is  the  symbol  of  the  Psychic  Man.  It  is 
the  fluidic,  impermanent  and  changeable  triad,  in  which  sensations, 
feelings  and  emotions  are  ever  coming  and  going  like  the  waves  on  the 
ocean.  It  represents  the  lower,  mortal  and  perishable  man,  and  as  such 
its  centre  is  the  fixed-water  sign  Scorpio. 

In  Cancer  instincts  are  strong,  and  sensations  are  held  and  nursed  into 
feelings  that  are  changeable  and  fluctuating,  bringing  a repetition  of 
moods  with  more  or  less  tenacity,  until  finally  fixed  in  personal  feelings, 
around  which  all  things  turn  and  thus  help  to  build  up  the  personality. 

In  Scorpio  passions  and  feelings  are  fixed  for  good  or  ill,  personal 
moods  harden  into  vices,  producing  tragedies  and  hatreds  that  are  hard 
to  dissolve,  often  resulting  in  death,  or  the  transference  of  the  personality 
to  another  world,  the  purgatorial  plane  in  which  the  dross  is  separated 
from  the  finer  emotions  that  ascend  into  the  fiery  triplicity.  Those  in 
fever  sa^^  ‘ I am  burning  in  hell  ’ ; those  in  whom  the  hatred  of 
jealous3^  burns  fiercely  exclaim  ‘ I am  in  tormenting  fever  ’ : and 
the  passionate  slave  of  lust  is  pursued  with  a vice  by  which  he  is 
eaten  up  and  literally  destroyed.  All  this  is  the  result  of  fixing  the 
sensations  and  feelings  into  the  personality  that  can  only  be  dissolved 
by  the  action  of  the  fiery  triplicity,  which  melts  the  ice-bound  stagnant 
emotions  centred  in  the  powerful  ‘ sting  ’ of  the  Scorpion.  In  this 
sign  the  fabled  Phoenix  rises  from  the  ashes  of  her  dead  self  to  a higher 
world. 

In  Pisces  the  emotions  are  active  in  deep  S3mipath3\  The  highest 
aspect  of  this  sign  is  S3^mbolised  as  the  ‘Universal  Solvent,’  the  sign  of 
compassion  and  true  hospitality  or,  when  not  expressing  the  higher  side 
of  the  emotions,  the  sign  of  transmigration  or  retardation,  the  sign 
of  ‘spooks,’  ‘elementals,’  ‘dwellers  on  the  threshold’  and  ‘lost 
souls.’ 

The  watery  triplicity  as  a whole  symbolises  the  plane  of  feeling  from 
which  the  purest  emotions  are  preserved  and,  after  passing  through  the 
fire  of  knowledge  and  experience  in  connection  with  the  reincarnating 
ego,  become  permanent  emotions  of  love  and  wisdom. 


THE  TRIPLICITIES  SYNTHESISED 


i8i 


Qualities  and  Triplicities  Combined^ 

Cardinal-Fire.  This  combination  gives  much  energy,  a very 
high-spirited  nature,  quick  perceptions,  much  independence  in  thought 
and  action,  ardent  but  changeful  feelings,  passionate  impulses,  enthu- 
siasm, good  mental  ability  of  the  objective  type,  keen  understanding, 
resourcefulness,  high  ideals  or  aspirations,  with  lack  of  practical  ability, 
though  observant,  penetrative  and  often  talented.  This  combination 
gives  flashes  of  genius,  but  the  egotistical  tendencies  prevent  its 
permanent  manifestation.  There  is  often  great  breadth  of  mind,  but 
impulse  and  the  strongly  separative  nature  of  the  combination  tend 
towards  selfishness  and  too  much  ambition  for  material  fame  and  recog- 
nition, unless  a favourable  horoscope  denotes  moral  growth  above  the 
average.  It  favours  professional  avocations  of  a speculative  and  un- 
certain character,  where  risk  is  undertaken  and  great  ‘ chances  ’ are  at 
stake.  It  is  more  favourable  for  males  than  females,  for  it  tends  to 
harden  the  nature  of  the  latter  and  make  them  too  positive  and  asser- 
tive. It  favours  ‘push  and  go,’  and  all  positions  that  are  prominent. 
It  is  good  for  military  men,  surgeons,  dentists,  and  all  whose  movements 
are  quick  and  skilful.  It  is  a combination  that  always  brings  recognition 
and  raises  the  native  to  a good  and  often  to  an  exalted  position  in  life. 
It  is  a combination  capable  of  great  possibilities. 

Cardinal-Earth.  This  combination  gives  great  desire  for  physical 
or  material  advancement  and  a practical,  active  ambition.  Those  under 
its  influence  are  tactfull}?-  reserved,  prudent,  systematic  and  judiciously 
cautious.  It  favours  business  avocations  where  organising  power  is 
required,  or  diplomatic  methods.  It  is  good  for  scientists,  chemists, 
agriculturalists,  horticulturists  and  those  who  can  combine  sagacity 
with  stability  and  who  although  active  and  alert  can  at  the  same 
time  persevere  and  unite  a progressive  spirit  with  reserve  and 
firmness. 


* These  readings,  although  intended  for  majority  of  planets  in  the  signs, 
may  also  be  employed  for  the  Sun  and  Moon,  in  which  case  the  first-mentioned 
applies  to  the  Sun.  Thus  ‘ Cardinal-Air  ’ would  be  suitable  for  a horoscope 
having  Q in  '“p  and  ])  in  n ; but  for  a horoscope  having  O in  n and  J)  in 
nP,  the  reading  should  be  ‘Mutable-Fire.’  Similarly,  of  course,  in  other  cases. 
This  method  of  making  use  of  these  combinations  is  useful  when,  for  example,  the 
heavier  planets  are  all  in  one  or  two  signs,  while  0,  ])  and  ^ are  in  three  other 
signs  of  an  altogether  different  tendency. 


i82 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


Natives  under  this  combination  are  fully  alive  to  their  own  interests, 
have  good  financial  ability  and  know  how  to  appreciate  the  material 
plane  at  its  true  value.  It  usually  produces  an  independent  nature, 
and,  although  often  egotistical,  the  native  can  also  give  as  well  as  take. 
It  sometimes  produces  a pioneering,  active  nature  in  which  the  progres- 
sive spirit  is  to  the  fore  and  is  fully  conscious  of  the  necessity  of  practical 
common  sense.  It  therefore  gives  high  ideals  of  physical  possibilities 
and  tends  towards  a truly  socialistic  spirit,  more  or  less  of  the  communal 
order,  in  which  the  ideal  of  perfection  colours  all  material  action.  The 
self-protective  and  self-preservative  instincts  are  fully  developed  and 
well  manifested  under  this  combination. 

Cardinal-Air.  This  is  a combination  that  gives  much  refinement, 
honest  and  honourable  intentions,  and  noble  aims.  It  refines  all  the 
activities,  makes  the  native  polite  in  speech,  courteous  in  action,  a lover 
of  the  beautiful  and  of  perfection.  The  intuitions  are  good,  the  mind 
is  cultured,  able  to  assume  authority  and  definitely  and  clearly  define 
intuitions.  The  native  is  assiduous,  endowed  with  favourable  acquire- 
ments, full  of  aspiration,  mental  ambition  and  pure  tastes.  He  is  rarely 
ambiguous  or  vague  but  usually  comes  to  the  point  quickl^^  being 
diligent,  capable,  and  generally  of  good  ability. 

The  mind  being  clear  and  usually  dispassionate  this  combination 
often  produces  ‘ skill  in  action,’  and  thus  favours  a professional  career ; 
it  is  good  for  lawyers,  architects,  designers  and  arbitrators.  It  also 
makes  good  orators,  and  would  be  a good  combination  for  politicans  or 
those  connected  with  companies,  associations,  societies,  clubs  and  public 
organisations.  Females  under  this  combination  would  be  a social 
success,  and  well  adapted  for  delicate  and  refined  occupations  requiring 
skill  and  discretion.  Under  a good  moral  horoscope  it  is  a most 
successful  combination. 

Cardinal-Water.  This  combination  gives  good  social  abilities,  a 
strong  personality  of  a somewhat  romantic  or  sensitive  frame  of  mind. 
It  denotes  much  feeling  and  sympath3^,  but  of  an  impermanent  or  change- 
able character  ; it  gives  the  ability  to  absorb  and  monopolise  the  attention 
of  others,  and  those  under  this  combination  are  usually"  very  expressive, 
fond  of  demonstration,  and  if  affectionate  often  sentimental,  capricious, 
fretful  and  apprehensive.  It  denotes  psychic  or  impressionable  ten- 
dencies ; the  feding  or  sensational  side  of  the  nature  is  very  easil^^ 
affected,  and  where  feeling  is  concerned  much  may  be  expected,  good 


THE  TRIPLICITIES  SYNTHESISED 


183 


or  ill.  This  combination  favours  avocations  of  a semi-professional 
character,  such  as  agents,  brokers,  commercial  travellers,  detectives, 
inspectors,  railway  men,  stewards,  attendants,  etc.  Females  under  this 
combination  do  well  in  business  for  themselves,  especially  in  laundry 
work  or  as  mantle-makers,  dressmakers,  milliners,  etc.,  or  as  matrons  in 
hospitals,  housekeepers,  stewardesses,  etc.  It  is  not  favourable  for 
fixtures  or  permanent  positions  in  life  unless  change  and  movement  are 
combined  at  the  same  time,  but  a more  or  less  prominent  position  is 
better  than  an  obscure  one,  and  more  is  gained  b3^  coming  to  the  front 
than  keeping  in  the  background.  It  often  produces  very  pronounced 
experiences. 

Fixed-Fire.  This  combination  is  good  for  practical  purposes 
where  feeling  and  determination  are  combined.  It  gives  a strong  will 
and  the  possibility  of  obtaining  knowledge  that  will  accomplish  great 
things.  It  increases  the  magnetism  of  the  native,  as  he  energises  him- 
self ; for  there  is  much  latent  heat  denoted  b^"  it,  which  produces  mag- 
netic attraction  and  conduces  to  success  in  life.  It  favours  a philosophic 
attitude  of  mind,  reserve  and  silent  ambition.  The  native  is  more  often 
moved  from  within  than  without  and  he  is  capable  of  displaying  much 
passion  and  persistent  energy.  It  denotes  much  pride,  conscientiousness 
and  fidelit}^  also  loyalty  to  a few  or  to  ideals.  It  favours  government 
employ  or  scientific  pursuits.  It  promises  success  in  life  through 
persistent  effort,  and  silent  will-power. 

Fixed-Earth.  This  combination  depends  largely  upon  the  posi- 
tions of  the  planets  in  the  nativit3^  It  usually  denotes  a very  material- 
istic mind,  a considerable  amount  of  reserve  and  often  very  obstinate  and 
persistent  tendencies.  The  nature  is  generally  over-confident  and  un- 
compromising, with  large  self-esteem,  rigid  and  inflexible,  or  too  circum- 
scribed and  limited  to  use  this  combination  to  the  best  advantage. 
Those  who  are  morally  developed  have  much  pride,  exercise  a great  deal 
of  method  and  are  less  restricted,  although  slow  and  often  over  cautious. 
It  favours  farmers,  land-owners,  miners,  labourers,  etc.  It  gives  more 
than  ordinar3"  patience  to  the  nature.  It  may  be  termed  a critical  com- 
bination in  which  the  limitations  of  fate  are  more  marked  than  in  other 
combinations. 

Fixed-Air.  This  combination  gives  a refined  trustfulness,  a firm 
will,  a noble  and  dignified  attitude.  It  favours  elegance  of  the  rigid 
aristocratic  order,  reserved  manners  and  stability.  It  promises  success 


184 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


in  all  civil  appointments,  artistic  work  of  all  kinds  that  are  of  a perma- 
nent nature,  such  as  modelling,  sculpture,  painting  in  oils,  etc.  It 
inclines  to  orthodox  methods,  respects  ancient  customs  and  limits  the 
sphere  of  usefulness  to  actual  needs  and  gives  a style  that  although 
graceful  and  beautiful  is  more  or  less  rigid  and  apt  to  be  stereotyped. 
This  combination  assists  all  conservative  methods,  ancient  customs, 
the  society  of  the  elite  and  those  who  value  caste  and  belong  to  a 
circumscribed  circle. 

Fixed-Water.  This  combination  gives  strong  and  often  silent  or 
unexpressed  emotion  ; there  is  always  the  possibility  of  extremes  of 
feeling,  tending  to  either  love  or  hate.  It  denotes  a receptive  or  psychic 
nature  and  usually  gives  impressionability.  The  desires  are  keen  but 
often  of  a mysterious  character,  in  which  distrust  or  doubt  is  largely 
mixed.  It  often  happens  that  there  is  much  that  is  latent  in  this  com- 
bination with  regard  to  the  feelings,  which  are  slow  to  be  aroused.  In 
the  undeveloped,  it  denotes  jealousy,  sentimentality  or  sensational 
tendencies,  and  a great  deal  of  moral  courage  is  often  required  to  combat 
the  many  temptations  such  a fateful  combination  brings  in  its  train.  It 
sometimes  causes  laziness  or  a slackness  that  produces  many  sorrows  in 
life.  It  favours  mercantile  pursuits,  government  officials  in  subordinate 
positions,  etc. 

Mutable-Fire.  Much  demonstration  of  affection  may  be  expected 
of  this  combination,  or  it  may  be  some  genius  or  a very  talented  mind. 
It  gives  ardent  feelings,  some  passionate  expressions,  and  at  times  a 
very  independent  and  keen  temperament,  almost  amounting  to  indiffer- 
ence where  the  mind,  but  not  the  feelings,  is  concerned.  It  favours 
religious  avocations,  manufactures,  brokers,  bill  discounters,  and  finan- 
cial agents.  It  is  not  so  favourable  for  females  as  males,  for  it  inclines 
to  sporting  enterprises  and  adventures.  In  an  unfavourable  nativity  it 
gives  irritability,  and  a liability  to  some  eccentricities.  It  does  not 
promise  fame  or  many  opportunities  to  become  prominent  in  the  world, 
although  it  often  denotes  an  eventful  career  into  which  many  strange 
experiences  may  be  crowded. 

Mutable-Earth.  This  combination  gives  a nervous  temperament, 
methodical,  slow  and  reserved  methods  of  expression.  The  life  of  the 
native  is  usuall3^  too  formal  or  monotonous.  It  favours  business  habits 
that  are  more  or  less  commonplace,  such  as  shopkeeping,  bookbinding. 


THE  TRIPLICITIES  SYNTHESISED 


185 


upholstering,  etc.  It  is  not  a fortunate  combination  as  it  usuall3^  denotes 
indifference,  or  the  lack  of  power  for  full  expression.  The  critical  and 
analytical  attitude  of  the  mind,  however,  often  stimulates  the  native  and 
helps  to  break  down  the  rigid  and  reserved  tendency  of  the  body.  Clever 
people  born  under  this  combination  often  lack  opportunity,  or  the  ability 
to  make  use  of  it  when  it  comes,  owing  to  a timorous  and  fearful  nature, 
dreading  results  and  hesitating  to  take  risks,  etc. 

Mutable-Air.  This  combination  denotes  a keen  intellectual  ability, 
a very  refined  and  complaisant  nature,  and  the  possibility  of  great 
development  either  in  scientific  or  literary  pursuits.  There  are,  however, 
difficulty,  indifference  and  the  vaguer  tendencies  to  contend  with  ; but 
if  born  into  a favourable  environment  the  native  usually  shows  much 
acumen  and  there  may  be  the  unfoldment  of  a polished  nature.  This 
combination  favours  refined  professional  vocations,  makes  skilful  ac- 
countants, secretaries,  cashiers,  teachers  and  novelists.  It  is  not  good 
for  prominence  or  public  recognition  unless  it  be  in  refined  circles,  where 
polite  and  courteous  behaviour  is  essential  ; then  some  post  of  dis- 
tinction may  be  held  without  attracting  special  attention  ; more  depends 
upon  environment  for  the  best  expression  of  this  combination  than  any 
other. 

Mutable-Water.  This  combination  gives  a susceptible  and  punc- 
tilious nature.  It  inclines  to  much  formalit}^  a capricious  and  fanciful 
disposition.  It  is  more  favourable  for  females  than  males,  and  is  often 
disastrous  to  the  latter.  It  is  favourable  for  barmaids,  invalid  attendants, 
saleswomen,  nurses,  etc.  There  are  man^^  dangers  attached  to  this 
combination,  and  unless  the  planetary  positions  are  very  favourable  it 
weakens  the  character  and  causes  moral  lapsing  or  makes  the  life  a 
very  paradoxical  or  contradictory  one.  It  tends  to  make  the  career 
unfortunate  and  obscure.  It  gives  much  apprehension  and  often 
melancholic  tendencies. 

The  * Mantle  of  Elijah  ’ does  not  go  a-begging  where  the  final 
judgment  of  horoscopes  is  concerned,  nor  does  it  fall  promiscuously  upon 
students  of  Astrology.  If,  by  any  possible  means,  it  could  be  handed 
on  to  every  reader  of  this  book — then  there  would  have  been  no  necessity 
for  its  publication ! This  may  seem  a strange  statement,  and  a slight 
digression  must  be  allowed  in  order  to  convey  something  of  the  idea 
behind  it. 

Who  has  not  enjoyed  a beautiful  'painting,  not  so  much  by 


i86 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


examining  every  detail  of  form  and  colour,  but  by  obtaining  a clear 
synthetic  view  of  the  whole  as  a picture  ? Who  has  not  listened  to  the 
rich  surging  of  sound  in  the  orchestra,  and  enjoyed  the  harmony 
produced  by  the  many  different  instruments  sounding  together  in  a 
symphony?  Yet  to  achieve  these  results  the  painter  and  the  musician 
must  have  given  many  years  of  arduous  stud}^  first  to  the  mastery  of 
detail,  and  then  to  the  subordination  of  detail  to  the  general  effect : yet 
the  power  of  conceiving  the  whole  as  a whole  must  have  been  latent 
within  him  from  the  first,  else  there  could  have  been  no  artist,  no 
composer.  Hence  we  say  the  artist,  the  poet,  the  musician,  is  born,  not 
made — though  even  the  genius  needs  training. 

The  same  is  true,  to  some  extent,  of  the  appreciator  of  art,  the  true 
critic.  The  judge  of  pictures,  first  a careful  observer  of  details,  finally 
learns  to  gauge  the  whole  at  once,  as  the  result  of  many  parts  ; or  rather, 
as  the  one  idea  expressed  through  the  arrangement  and  grouping  of  many 
parts  : the  intelligent  hearer  does  not  listen  to  observe  individual  notes, 
but  his  ear  is  attentive  to  the  complex  blend  of  tone  arising  from  instru- 
ments of  varying  compass  and  quality  ; he  hears  the  successive  changes 
of  harmony  as  an  expression  of  one  idea,  pourtrayed  through  a succession 
of  sounds. 

The  true  painter,  the  creative  artist,  catches  up  the  whole  of  Nature’s 
picture,  and  possesses  the  power  to  reproduce  it,  not  so  much  by 
separately  noting  the  several  parts,  as  by  the  ability  to  grasp  the  view 
as  a whole;  which  he  can  then  dissect  at  will.  This  is  the  secret  of  all 
true  art.  The  poet’s  rhyme  does  not  come  by  a laborious  piecing  of 
words  into  verse,  but  by  a flowing  forth  of  perfect  speech  into  song ; it  is 
a soul  quality,  not  born  of  the  personal  mind,  but  the  result  of  many  lives  of 
perception  and  of  practice,  which  blossoms  forth  in  some  one  life  genius. 

Now  these  considerations  will  throw  light  upon  the  strange  state- 
ment made  in  the  paragraph  on  the  preceding  page.  Just  as  poets, 
musicians,  and  artists  are  born,  not  made,  so  are  those  astrologers  who 
are  blessed  with  the  true  gift  of  prophecy  born  with  this  power  latent 
within  them  ; it  can  be  fostered  only,  not  created,  by  cultivation. 

The  art  of  synthesising  a nativity  consists  of  the  putting  together  of 
those  influences  (shown  by  the  various  planetary  positions  and  aspects) 
that  are  either  harmonious  or  discordant  or  complementary  so  as  to 
form  an  organic  whole,  in  order  that  a final  synthetical  reading  ma3^  be 
given. 


THE  TRIPLICITIES  SYNTHESISED 


87 


For  the  most  part  the  readings  of  horoscopes  are  purely  analytical. 
At  our  present  stage  of  evolution,  however,  this  is  less  regrettable  than 
would  at  first  sight  appear,  for  the  following  reason  ; — Only  the  lives  of 
Adepts,  Masters  and  World  Saviours  can  be  so  perfectly  harmonious  as 
to  produce  a true  synthetical  outcome,  like  the  picture,  the  symphony,  or 
the  poem ; for  in  those  who  have  arrived  at  this  perfect  expression  there 
are  blended  thousands  of  incarnations  corresponding  to  those  of  the 
ordinary  man. 

For  mankind  at  large  no  single  horoscope  can  ever  be  perfectly 
synthesised,  since  none  save  those  already  mentioned  live  perfect  lives. 
It  might  be  possible  to  obtain  a fairly  accurate  synthesis  of  the 
horoscope  of  two  true  lovers,  and  for  the  most  part  a child  born  of  these 
twain  would  approximately  represent  a synthesis  of  the  joint  expression 
in  the  horoscope. 

In  the  foregoing  pages  the  putting  together  of  various  influences 
has  been  more  or  less  successfully  achieved,  and  from  what  has  been 
written  the  Art  of  Synthesis  may  be  acquired,  or  rather  its  cultivation 
may  be  attempted,  by  all  who  have  sufficient  inborn  knowledge  of 
astrology  to  do  so. 

Every  horoscope  is — to  borrow  an  expression  from  the  studio — a 
study,’  a ‘ composition,’  in  itself ; and  a synthetical  blend  into  that 
which  shall  result  from  the  composite  whole  must  be  made  by  the  ego 
who  is  finding  expression  through  that  particular  composition. 

But  a complete  series  of  such  composite  horoscopes  is  required  to 
make  up  the  perfect  whole,  corresponding  to  the  One  Ray  belonging  to 
a particular  Hierarchy.  Just  as  a painter  will  prepare  a number  of 
sketches  which  must  all  be  perfected  and  then  incorporated  in  the  great 
painting  which  he  has  in  his  mind’s  eye ; courtiers,  princesses, 
attendants,  common  people, — all  are  necessary,  and  require  equal  stud3^ 

No  synthesising  can  go  further  than  that  attempted  in  this  book,  so 
far  as  individual  horoscopes  are  concerned.  If  any  student  is  desirous 
of  going  further  he  must  learn  the  art  of  ‘self-effacement,’  to  the  extent 
of  ‘ putting  the  Moon  under  his  feet  ’ and  resolving  all  elements  into 
the  primal  unity  of  The  Sun. 

That  which  is  a compound  cannot  be  a unity. 

‘ The  pupil  must  regain  the  child  state  that  he  has  lost.’ 

To  those  who  would  attempt  to  gain  a still  deeper  insight  into 
nativities,  this  fact  must  be  firml3^  established. in  the  mind : — The  Hitman 


88 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


Monad  is  behind  every  horoscope^  it  is  that  which  is  unmanifest,  and  there- 
fore non-existent  to  those  who  think  that  the  self  is  a composite  beings  The 
fact  is  that  the  Ego  of  each  horoscope  identifies  himself  with  parts,  and 
during  that  identification  is  represented  by  the  Sun,  Moon  or  any  planet. 
The  Monad,  the  Real  Self,  is  not  consciousness,  but  the  Ego  is  the 
manifested  part  of  it,  knowing  itself  as  ‘ I am  1/  Hence  there  may  be 
two  egos  shown  in  every  horoscope,  the  personal  and  the  individual. 
The  former  ranges  between  the  Moon  and  Saturn,  from  pliability  to 
rigidity,  and  the  latter  from  the  Sun  to  Saturn, — either  to  be  held  for 
ages  by  the  latter  or  finally  emancipated  into  Wisdom  through  the  Sun. 

To  be  able  to  pour  all  one’s  life  into  a horoscope  and  give  it  full  or 
perfect  expression,  and  then  to  withdraw  at  Will,  is  the  Yoga  of  action 
that  all  true  astrologers  seek  to  acquire. 

This  is  the  secret  of  illusion,  and  the  true  Mukti. 


EXAMPLES  OF  HOROSCOPES 


Ascendant  or  East  Point. 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES  No.  I 


Zenith  ov  South  Point 


Planet 

Lat. 

Declin. 

Rt.  Ascen. 

Mer.  Dist. 

Semi.  Arc. 

0 

0 / 

0 / 

I5SI3 

0 1 

321  12 

108  44 

0 / 

no  I 

}) 

5ni 

2sn39 

120  17 

50  21 

52  51 

$ 

OS23 

2IS34 

296  47 

46  51 

60  II 

? 

51110 

iSsio 

276  6 

26  10 

65  37 

OS55 

2IS45 

299  6 

49  10 

59  53 

n 

0S2I 

20S26 

302  27 

52  41 

62  3 

h 

IS56 

6s54 

348  54 

81  2 

98  45 

os6 

23S24 

262  49 

12  53 

57  I 

John  Ruskin.  Born  7.30  a.m.,  8th  February  1819,  London. 


Descendant  or  West  Point. 


EXAMPLES  OF  HOROSCOPES 


‘ Degrees  infinite  there  must  always  be,  but  the  weakest  among  ns  has  a 
gift  however  seemingly  trivial,  which  is  peculiar  to  him,  and  which  if 
worthily  used,  will  be  a gift  also  to  his  race  forever.'  Ruskin. 

Some  attempt  Avill  now  be  made  to  illustrate  the  Art  of  Synthesis  by 
giving  a synthetical  reading  of  a few  horoscopes  of  uncommon  person- 
alities who  are  sufficiently  well  known  to  make  their  nativities  an 
interesting  study. 

In  the  previous  edition  of  this  work  some  thirty  pages  were  devoted 
to  the  delineation  of  the  horoscope  of  John  Ruskin,  and  it  was  therein 
stated  that  the  only  facts  concerning  the  nativity  of  John  Ruskin  that 
have  been  obtained  by  the  author  are  the  following  : — 

The  birth  data  are  from  W.  G.  Collingwood's  Life  of  John  Ruskin,  a 
work  which  the  author  of  the  judgment  has  however  neither  read  nor 
seen  : birth  is  there  stated  to  have  taken  place  at  7.30  a.m.,  February  8th, 
1819,  in  London. 

The  information  was  published  in  Star  Lore  for  December,  1900, 
p.  2 1,  and  the  foregoing  delineation  was  written  from  the  horoscope  there 
given.  The  quotation  has  since  been  verified,  and  the  passage  referred 
to  is  here  reproduced  for  the  benefit  of  those  who  desire  authority  for  the 
birth-time  given  : — 

The  Life  and  Works  of  John  Ruskin,  by  W.  G.  Collingwood  : (Edition 
in  One  Volume,  published  by  Methuen  & Co.  in  1900);  chapter  II, 
p.  13.  . . . ‘Into  this  family  John  Ruskin  was  born  on  February 
8th,  1819,  at  half  past  seven  in  the  morning.  He  was  baptised  on  the 
20th,  by  the  Rev.  Mr  Boyd.’  Elsewhere  in  the  same  book  we  read 
that  the  place  of  the  birth  was  54,  Hunters  Street,  Bloomsbury,  London, 
W.C.  His  father  was  married  27/2/1818. 


192 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


The  hour  of  birth  is  not  to  be  found  in  the  larger  two-volume  edition 
published  in  1893,  and  in  his  courteous  reply  to  a letter  of  enquiry  the 
author  of  the  work  referred  to  sa3^s  (under  date  of  4/6/1908)  . . . ‘l 
took  the  information  from  existing  records,  not  from  Ruskin’s  state- 
ment. I cannot  now  remember  whether  it  was  in  a family  Bible,  but  I 
think  so.’ 

No  allusion  to  the  actual  hour  of  birth  is  given  in  the  biographical 
introduction  by  E.  T.  Cook  to  the  handsome  ‘ Library  Edition  ’ of 
Ruskin’s  Works,  published  by  Messrs  George  Allen  & Co.,  so 
that  the  above  statement  comprises  all  the  information  at  present 
available. 

From  the  Encyclopcedia  Britannica  we  learn  that  his  youth  was  spent 
in  travel.  At  five  years  of  age  he  visited  the  lake  district ; at  six  he 
went  to  Paris  and  Brussels  ; and  at  seven  went  to  Scotland.  At  fourteen 
years  of  age  he  travelled  along  the  Rhine,  then  through  the  Black  Forest 
to  Switzerland. 

He  was  a ‘ bookworm  ’ at  five  ; an  author  at  seven  ; and  at  nine  a 
poet,  so  that  from  an  early  age  his  literary  abilities  were  cultivated.  He 
was  described  when  a child  as  ‘a  savant  in  petticoats,’  and  when  a bo}^ 
as  ‘ a poet  in  breeches.’  At  seventeen  he  fell  deeply  in  love  ; his 
passion  was  not  returned,  and  after  a period  of  mute  worship  in 
which  his  feelings  sought  expression  in  a number  of  poems,  the 
intensity  of  his  emotions  reacting  on  the  body  resulted  in  a dangerous 
illness. 

He  was  married  on  April  loth,  1848,  to  a refined  and  beautiful  lady, 
but  the  marriage  was  annulled  six  years  later. 

He  was  skilled  in  drawing. 

His  father  died  in  1864,  and  his  mother  in  1871.  He  himself  died 
January  20th,  1900,  suddenly,  though  his  strength  had  been  failing  for  a 
long  time. 

This  particular  horoscope  was  purposely  chosen  owing  to  the 
somewhat  complex  nature  of  the  map  in  preference  to  a simpler  and 
less  complicated  one. 

It  is  now  unnecessary  to  give  a full  analytical  reading;  and,  to 
save  the  space  that  would  be  required  for  a long  judgment,  the 
following  chart  has  been  prepared  from  which  reference  may  be 
made  to  either  How  to  Judge  the  Navitity  or  The  Key  to  your  Own 
Nativity : — 


JOHN  RUSKIN 

Special  Chart 

For  use  in  ‘ The  Key  to  Your  Oivn  Nativity  ’ 


Description  of 

Paragraph 

Number  of 
Paragraph 

Introduction 

Rising  Sign 

I I 

Ruling  Planet  7/  . 

19 

Ruler’s  House  I 

22 

Ruler’s  Sign  K 

. II7 

Ruler’s  Aspects  ^ ^ 

. 284 

Extra  Par.  1/  etc 

. 104 

§2  Individuality 

Sun  in  Sign  tee  . 

. 152 

Sun’s  Aspects  . 

22  1 

§3  Personality 

Moon  in  Sign  Qs 

• 157 

Moon  in  House  6 

. I7I 

Moon’s  Aspects  d 

• 234 

• • 

Polarity  Q ''''  ]) 

. 609 

§4  Mental  Qualifications 

Mercury  in  Sign  ]/^ 

00 

Mercury  in  House  XII 
Mercury’s  Aspects  $ 6 

201 

. 250 

Description  of 

Paragraph 

Number  of 
Paragraph 

§5  Finance  R . 

313 

T RAVEL  9 R 

326 

Environment  ^ R 

337 

Enterprise  })  R 

345 

Sickness  ]) 

354 

Marriage  9 

380 

Legacies  9 R • 

386 

Philosophy  ^ R 

396 

Profession  . 

408 

Friends  ^ 

416 

Occultism  ^ . 

428 

Supplementary  Paragraphs 

Rising  Planet  2/ 

470 

Personal  Colouring])Qs 

477 

Rising  Planet  in 

A Ip. 

127 

§6  Summary 

Planetary  Positions  Rising  436 
Quality  Cardinal-Earth  443-4 

Explanation. — R behind  a planet 
means  ruler  of  the  particular  house 
it  governs.  The  positions  are 
given,  as  well  as  the  paragraphs  in 
order  that  reference  may  be  made 
to  Hovs>  to  judge  a Nativity,  etc. 


The  Synthesis 


There  are  three  elements  by  which  a synthesis  of  any  nativity  may 
be  made. 

a.  The  ruling  planet,  its  position,  sign  qualit^^  aspects,  and  relationship 

with  the  other  planets. 

b.  Temperament;  judged  by  rising  or  most  elevated  planets,  or  the 

principal  planet  ruling  the  nativity,  the  majority  of  planets  in  any 
sign,  or  a blend  of  the  whole  nativity. 

c.  The  predominating  quality,  or  blending  of  triplicity  and  quadruplicity. 

Synthesis  of  the  Rising  Sign  Aquarius  denotes : — Refinement ; 
humanitarian  ideals  inclining  to  the  higher  socialism  ; mental  qualifica- 
tions, giving  artistic  tendencies  in  either  literature,  art,  or  music ; 
humane  principles,  and  a sacred  idea  of  friendship.  It  favours  a quiet 
individual  resistance,  and  a sensitive  m.emory. 

N 


194 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


In  the  world  of  action  its  activities  are  slow  but  thorough,  and  ever 
inclined  to  a plodding  perseverance  which  tends  to  revolve  in  a circle, 
rather  than  to  fl}^  off  at  a tangent.  It  favours  actions  concerned  with 
principals  and  large  organisations  or  undertakings,  and  the  common 
good  rather  than  small  particulars  or  matters  of  detail. 

Syitthesis  of  the  ruling  planet  Saturn  in  Pisces  denotes ; — Emotional 
gravity,  deep  and  silent  attachments,  hospitable  and  benevolent  sympa- 
thies, an  understanding  of  the  masses  in  preference  to  interest  in  units  or 
individuals,  and  a tendency  to  despondency  and  depression.  In  the  world  of 
action  it  moves  more  through  the  feelings  and  emotions  than  through  reason; 
and  action  is  largely  prompted  by  generous  impulses  or  passing  enthusi- 
asms, often  misunderstood  and  provoking  hostile  criticism  and  opposition. 

Synthesis  of  the  planet  Saturn  in  the  Ascendant  denotes'. — Reserve, 
patience,  thoughtfulness,  steadfastness,  self-reliance,  a love  of  solitude, 
self-control,  and  truth.  In' the  world  of  action  it  is  slow-moving,  grave, 
scientific,  philosophical  and  fond  of  the  hidden  side  of  nature  and  art. 

Synthesis  of  Saturn  s relationship  to  other  planets'. — Internally,  it  is 
centralising  and  synthetic,  balancing  through  comparison,  and  it  abstracts 
the  influence  of  other  planets  through  reflective  and  reasoning  methods. 
Externally  separative  and  anal3dical,  it  gains  all  necessary  experience 
through  perception,  and  long  drawn  out  experiences,  and  profits  more 
by  isolation  and  withdrawals  than  b^^  contact  and  constant  associations. 

From  the  rising  sign  and  ruling  planet  we  therefore  synthesise  the 
character  as  undemonstrative,  but  faithful  and  constant  in  feeling. 
Intellectually^  analytical  and  grave,  thorough,  and  self-reliant,  and  of 
independent  mind.  In  action  slow,  persevering  and  moved  by  principles 
and  due  appreciation  of  responsibilit3^ 

Temperament 

The  Uranian  temperament  is  denoted  by  this  nativity^  owing  to  the 
elevation  of  Uranus,  and  by  blending  the  very  mixed  influence  of  the 
rising  planets. 

'I'he  Uranian  temperament  is  dominant  during  the  major  portion  of 
life,  but  particularly  during  the  latter  half.  All  persons  feel  the  vibra- 
tions of  Saturn  or  Uranus  to  some  extent,  but  none  come  definitely 
under  the  latter  planet  until  they  have  entirely  made  their  peace  with 
the  mighty  angel  whom  we  name  Saturn.  This  is  owing  to  the  fact 
that  the  race  in  which  we  are  now  living  has  not  y^et  developed 
sufficiently  to  allow  of  that  influence  to  be  made  manifest,  although  all 
must  more  or  less  feel  a certain  touch  of  the  Uranian  vibration,  as  its 
work  is  concerned  with  the  humanizing  of  the  race. 


JOHN  RUSKIN 


195 


We  cannot  interpret  all  the  influences  any  one  is  likely  to 

respond  to  under  this  temperament,  for  it  is  quite  certain  that  men  do 
not  express  more  than  a very  small  part  of  the  Uranian  vibration  during 
the  current  life.  To  manifest  it  fully  would  mean  that  they  were 
entirely  free  from  convention,  and  not  subject  to  circumstances  and 
environment,  but  were  able  to  remain  unmoved  no  matter  how  adverse 
the  circumstances.  For  the  true  son  of  Uranus  is  not  only  independent, 
but  free  of  all  ties  and  limitations,  having  broken  the  bonds  of  Saturn 
and  attained  to  full  and  complete  self-consciousness  on  this  physical 
plane  ; and  that  very  few  have  as  _yet  accomplished.  Uranus  represents 
the  higher  octave  of  the  senses  wherein  ph^^sical  sight  becomes  clair- 
voyance and  spiritual  insight,  and  physical  hearing  becomes  spiritual 
understanding  and  clairaudience ; and  until  we  have  manifested  these 
higher  faculties  we  shall  not  have  come  fully  into  our  birth-right.  It  is 
possible  for  the  Uranian  to  pass  from  the  wheel  of  necessity  and  to 
ascend  the  spiral  staircase  leading  from  the  limitations  and  restrictions 
imposed  by  Saturn — no  matter  how  wide  and  profound  the  consciousness 
may  be,  and  to  advance  greatly  during  the  current  life.  The  character- 
istics which  belong  to  the  Uranian  temperament  are  independence  of 
spirit  combined  with  the  true  humanitarian  principle  which  is  tolerant 
of  all;  is  original,  inventive,  and  expansive  without  being  eccentric, 
abrupt  or  irritable ; and  is  intuitive,  meditative  and  concentrated  in 
thought  without  being  selfish,  reserved  or  too  self-centred.  These  are 
large  ideals  but  are  within  the  compass  of  a perfect  Uranus  as  soon  as 
we  have  outgrown  the  limitations  of  Saturn. 

Quadruplicity  Synthesis 

There  are  a few  nativities,  and  this  is  one  of  them,  where  much 
difficulty  is  experienced  in  obtaining  a synthesis  from  the  combination 
of  the  triplicities  and  qualities,  and  for  the  most  part  these  are  nativities 
of  exceptional  persons  with  complex  natures. 

The  ruling  planet,  the  Sun,  and  the  Moon  are  the  three  main  factors, 
apart  from  the  majority  of  the  planets  in  signs,  that  have  to  be  taken 
into  account  when  finally  synthesising  the  nativit3^ 

In  the  horoscope  under  consideration  the  ruling  planet  the  Sun  and 
Moon  are  in  signs  of  the  three  separate  qualities,  i.e.  Saturn  in  the  mutable 
sign  Pisces,  Sun  in  the  fixed  sign  Aquarius,  and  the  Moon  in  the  cardinal 
sign  Cancer ; while  the  majority  of  the  planets  are  in  Cardinal  earth  signs. 

The  Mutable  Signs  are  paradoxical  and  require  to  be  interpreted  in 


196 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


terms  of  the  whole  of  the  nativity.  (Saturn  ruler  therein,  governing 
physical  brain  and  body.) 

The  Fixed  signs  denote  stability,  self-reliance,  and  love  of  power. 
(Sun  therein,  governing  will  power  and  vitality.) 

The  Cardinal  signs  denote  change,  activity,  and  ambition.  (Moon 
therein,  governing  feelings  and  emotions.) 

The  planet  Saturn  is  the  bridge  or  balance  between  two  states  or 
conditions,  and  especially  between  the  intellect  and  sensations  ; therefore, 
Saturn  in  Pisces  gives  mental  analysis  as  well  as  reflection  upon  emotion, 
and  in  an  advanced  soul  shows  a discrimination  between  the  real  and  the 
unreal,  where  the  feelings  are  concerned,  and  rarely  fails  to  bring  very 
sorrowful  experiences  out  of  which  pure  and  impersonal  emotions  are 
evolved.  It  eventually  restores  the  inward  harmony  and  brings  the 
peace  which  follows  a storm.  In  its  higher  expression  Pisces  is  the 
universal  solvent,  love ; in  its  lower,  it  is  the  sign  of  fretful  and  wasted 
emotions  in  which  worry  and  unrest  predominate. 

In  Ruskin’s  nativity  the  12th  house  supports  the  position  of  the 
ruling  planet  Saturn  in  the  12th  sign  Pisces;  and  from  this  we  should 
£xpect  to  find  the  1 2th  house  influence  made  manifest  in  his  life.  Mercury, 
Mars  and  Jupiter  occupy  the  12th  house,  the  house  which  especially 
denotes  fulfilment  oi  Karmic  responsibilities.  From  the  position  of 
these  three  planets  we  find  the  loth,  9th,  yth,  4th  and  ist  houses  involved. 

The  intuitive  student  who  studies  Esoteric  Astrology  may  use  his 
intuition  to  much  advantage  in  trying  to  decipher  its  meaning  in  clearer 
terms  than  the  writer  has  already  expressed ; remembering  that  the 
personality  of  Ruskin  was  represented  by  Saturn  in  the  second  decanate 
of  the  mutable  sign  Pisces. 

The  next  point  to  consider  in  synthesising  this  nativity  is  the  relation- 
ship of  the  Ruler  Saturn  to  all  the  other  planets.  It  casts  a semisextile  ray 
to  the  Ascendant,  which  strengthens  the  Saturnine  influence  of  the  latter. 

From  a synthetic  standpoint,  the  rays  of  Saturn  are  in  touch  with  every 
other  planet  in  this  nativity,  a very  important  factor  from  an  esoteric 
standpoint.  Its  association  with  the  Moon  in  particular,  is  very  close, 
for  both  are  in  the  same  triplicit3^  and  they  show  mutual  reception  by 
decanate.  The  houses  these  planets  represent  are  those  of  work  and 
service  6th;  honour  and  ideals  loth;  friendship  and  aspiration  nth; 
and  silence  and personal-selj  undoing  1 2th.  It  is  the  house  of  completion 
or  failure. 

The  Sun,  representing  individual  power,  wifi,  and  vitalit}^  in  the 


JOHN  RUSKIN 


197 


fixed  sign  Aquarius  denotes  a stable  mind,  with  the  power  to  concentrate. 
It  refines  the  thought  and  gives  humane  tendencies  with  the  ability  to 
draw  upon  the  universal  memory  of  nature.  It  also  shows  a mind 
capable  of  much  resistance  and  quiet  force. 

The  Moon  represents  concrete  thoughts  and  feelings,  in  which  the 
personality  is  chiefly  concerned.  Here  we  find  the  feelings  passive  and 
receptive,  affected  by  mental  activities  through  Mercury  conjunction 
Mars,  opposition  Moon.  Also  the  Moon  and  Saturn  are  closely  associ- 
ated  in  this  horoscope,  as  previously  remarked. 

From  these  three  factors  we  reduce  our  judgment  to  essentials 
regarding  the  physical,  psychic  and  moral  expression. 

From  Saturn’s  position  we  judge  a retiring  and  reserved  nature,  forced 
into  external  expression,  oftimes  against  inclinations,  but  more  from 
within  by  emotional  impulses,  through  compassion,  sympathy  or  even  pity. 

The  Sun’s  position  shows  good  moral  stamina,  natural  pride,  and 
loyalty  to  principles,  and  a well  tempered  individuality,  improving  as  life 
advances,  through  Jupiter  coming  closer  to  the  Sun  as  the  years  increase. 

The  Moon’s  position  shows  a love  of  public  work,  a desire  for 
service,  a very  receptive  brain,  and  a keenly  sensitive  emotional  nature. 

Passing  now  to  our  final  consideration  of  the  majority  of  the  planets, 
we  note  that  the  Cardinal-earth  is  moderated  by  the  strength  of  the 
Sun  in  the  ascending  airy  sign  Aquarius,  and  the  Moon  in  her  own 
watery  sign  Cancer.  These  modifications  impart  a conserved  activity 
to  the  Cardinal  signs,  and  an  absorbent  physical  expression  to  the 
earthy  signs.  The  distribution  of  the  planets  in  the  triplicities  gives 
a more  balanced  temperament  than  the  cardinal  earth  alone ; and 
because  the  Uranian  planetary  influence  predominates,  the  temperament, 
is  in  course  of  transition  from  the  balanced  to  the  Uranian.  The  Sun 
so  very  close  to  the  Ascendant  gives  what  is  phrenologically  known  as 
the  vital  temperament,  while  the  majority  of  the  planets  in  Cardinal 
signs  favours  the  mental ; and  the  combination  may  be  summed  up  in 
the  vital-mental  temperament. 

Combining  the  whole  of  the  foregoing  S3mtheses,  we  conclude  that 
Ruskin  was  born  a Saturnian,  but  with  all  the  possibilities  and  proba- 
bilities of  passing  into  a Uranian.  His  attitude  toward  the  external 
world  was  highl3^  moral  and  spiritual ; he  loved  truth  for  truth’s  sake. 
While  striving  to  be  a law  unto  himself,  he  was  ever  mindful  of  his 
kinship  with  humanit3^ ; and  although  strong^  polarised  toward  his  own 
centre,  was  still  able  to  be  all  things  unto  all  men. 


Ascendant  or  East  Point. 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES  NO.  2 


Zenith  cy  SouTH  PoTnt. 


1 

FL.4NET 

Decl. 

0 

D 

ASPECTS. 

? <r  2/ 

SUN 

21,,  g LO, 

© 

— ^ \. 

r< 

/77 

-£3L 

MOON 

13  S Wl 

D 

n 

tP 

n 

MERCURY 

%Z  5 VS, 

5 

P 

/ 

/. 

cF 

VENUS 

? 

-BZ, 

i 

^ 

p 

' d" 

MARS 

IJ.  a?. 

<7 

i 

i 

! 

1 

JUPITER 

-La/  Lg. 

i 

j 

A 

SATURN 

|£.0  49. 

b 

P 1 

p 

A 

URANUS 

p A/'  a. 

! P 

P 

n 

NEPTUNE 

! 

BHAGAVAN  DAS,  M.A. 


Descendant  or  West  Point. 


BHAGAVAN  DAS,  M.A. 

author  of  The  Science  oj  the  Emoticns,  The  Science  of  Peace,  The  Lat^s  of  Manu 
in  the  Light  of  Theosophy,  Prana^a-Vada 

Born  6.7  a.m.,  izth  January,  1869,  at  Benares 

Mr  Bhagavan  Das  was  born  with  Capricorn  rising,  a cardinal  earth 
sign,  ruled  by  Saturn.  This  sign  at  its  best  gives  power,  strength  of 
will,  self-control,  and  practical  ability.  It  fits  those  born  under  its  rule 
for  positions  of  prominence  and  public  work,  for  it  is  typically  the  sign 
of  the  statesman ; and  while  it  easily  manifests  intellect  under  the 
influence  of  a strong  Mercury,  power  and  will  under  a prominent  Sun 
and  Uranus,  and  gravity,  reserve  and  endurance  under  Saturn,  these 
qualities  are  devoted  to  practical  concrete  uses  in  the  world  and  are  not 
reserved  for  the  entertainment  and  edification  of  abstract  thought  and 
nothing  more. 

In  this  case  we  have  Sun,  Moon,  and  Mercury  rising,  giving  a strong 
personality,  and  emphasising  the  characteristics  just  referred  to  as 
inherent  in  the  sign  Capricorn;  while  Uranus,  although  in  opposition, 
is  angular  and  increases  the  strength  of  will,  independence,  and  origin- 
ality of  mind. 

Both  luminaries  rising  is  a somewhat  unusual  feature.  When  it 
occurs  it  brings  to  the  front  and  into  prominence  the  person  who 
possesses  it,  and  this  in  two  ways.  The  Sun,  especially  when  supported 
by  an  angular  Uranus,  gives  self-reliance,  he  is  fitted  for  occupying 
positions  of  responsibility  or  authority,  and  likely  to  be  of  note  in  his 
sphere  of  life  ; while  the  Moon  gives  more  adaptability,  receptivity,  and 
likelihood  of  popularity  with  the  many. 

The  rising  position  of  Mercury,  lord  of  the  ninth,  in  parallel  declina- 
tion with  Venus  and  Uranus,  gives  that  power  of  intellect  devoted  to 
profound  subjects  which  has  been  shown  in  the  volumes  published  by 
our  author ; and  the  conjunction  of  Jupiter  and  Neptune  in  the  third 
house  shows  religious  and  mystical  influences  working  in  harmony 
with  intellect  and  likely  to  be  accompanied  by  practical  psychical 
experiences. 

From  more  than  one  point  of  view  it  could  be  wished  that  there 
were  more  good  aspects  and  fewer  bad  ones  in  this  horoscope,  for  there 

199 


200 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


seem  many  obstacles  to  fight  against  here  and  many  risks  to  be  run, 
and  all  his  strength  of  will  and  power  of  endurance  will  be  needed. 
The  rising  of  the  luminaries  is  a good  indication,  taken  alone,  of  vitality 
and  longevity  ; but  here  they  are  seriously  affiicted  by  Mars,  Uranus, 
and  Neptune,  and  are  very  inadequately  supported ; so  that  periods  of 
serious  ill-health  are  threatened,  disorders  of  the  alimentary  and  nervous 
systems,  and  diseases  arising  from  rheumatism,  as  well  as  danger  of 
overwork. 

There  are  no  fewer  than  six  of  the  heavenl3^  bodies  and  the  ascendant 
in  cardinal  signs,  four  of  them  also  being  angular.  This  indicates  an 
active  and  rapidly  moving  mind  fitted  to  play  a part  on  a large  stage 
before  the  world,  and  to  attract  much  attention.  It  is  somewhat  to  be 
regretted  that  there  is  nothing  in  fixed  signs,  for  the  rapid  vibrations  of 
the  cardinal  influence  under  the  cross  aspects  will  be  too  much  for 
sound  physical  health,  and  in  addition  brings  the  danger  of  losses  of 
friends,  separation  from  co-workers,  and  alienation  of  those  who  cannot 
respond  to  such  a high  and  intense  rate  of  development.  The  ruler, 
Saturn  is  on  the  cusp  of  the  twelfth  house,  and  Uranus  is  in  the  seventh 
afflicted,  so  that  differences  of  opinion  and  method  are  likely  to  arise 
and  to  become  marked,  entailing  some  amount  of  hostile  comment, 
criticism,  and  opposition. 

So  far  as  the  quadruplicities  are  concerned,  the  positions  are  found 
to  be  cardinal  6,  mutable  3,  fixed  o ; a combination  of  activit3^  and 
thought,  original  and  individualising.  The  triplicities  show  an  equality 
of  the  practical  concrete  earth  and  the  more  intensely  energising  fire. 
The  presence  of  Sun,  Moon,  and  Ascendant  in  Capricorn,  however, 
give  earth  the  preference,  so  that  the  combination  emerges  as  cardinal- 
earth,  with  cardinal-fire  in  the  second  place. 

Tested  b3'  what  we  have  called  Majority  Sign  Positions^  the  Saturnian 
ascendant  contains  three  heavenU^  bodies,  and  no  other  combination 
shows  more  than  two ; therefore  b3^  every  method  Capricorn  appears  to 
be  the  dominating  sign  and  to  impress  its  characteristics  upon  person- 
alit3^  and  fortune. 

The  trine  of  Saturn  to  Jupiter  and  Neptune  is  the  best  part  of  the 
map  from  the  point  of  view  of  mere  luck,  and  indicates  considerable 
success  at  religious,  m3^stical,  and  literary  pursuits  carried  on  in  com- 
parative retirement.  The  strong  angular  positions,  however,  altogether 
dominate  this  and  introduce  less  peaceful  factors. 


BHAGAVAN  DAS,  M.A. 

201 

ELEMENTS 

Triplicities 

Quadruplicities 

Fire  4 

Cardinal  6 

])  rising 

Air — 

Fixed  0 

in  sign  of 

Water  i 

Mutable  3 

Detriment 

Earth  4 

{Cardinal  =■  Earth) 

Synthesis 

Main  Features. — 

'Capricorn,  second  decanate,  rising.  Saturn,  ruling 

planet,  elevated  in 

the  house  of  Jupiter  and  in 

trine  aspect  to 

that 

planet.  The  Sun,  Moon,  and  Mercury  all  rising  in  the  ascending  sign 
Uranus  setting  in  opposition  to  the  luminaries.  Six  planets  in  Cardinal 
signs.  Fire  and  earth  even. 

Personality.  — Abnormal  mental  ambition,  applied  to  universal 
service.  Philosophic  mind  in  tune  with  lower  mind.  Tactful,  3"et 
independent,  studious  and  receptive  to  new  thought,  and  ever  ready  to 
change  opinion  when  necessar3^,  3"et  firm  in  adherence  to  principles. 

Horoscope  Summary.  — Capable  of  much  influence  over  others. 
Ability  to  rise  to  great  heights,  mentalU^  morall3^  and  socially. 
Intense  nature,  liable  to  extremes  in  work  and  study,  and  in  danger 
thereby  of  overstraining  nervous  S3^stem  and  affecting  health. 

Future  Prospects. — Lasting  fame.  Many  critical  periods  affecting 
health  and  reputation ; danger  from  enemies  in  high  positions. 
Sacrifice  of  material  welfare  to  principles. 

Critical  and  dangerous  periods,  1 920-1. 


Ascendant  or  East  Poini. 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES  No.  3 


Zenith  or  South  Point. 


planet 

Decl 

0 

D 

9 

ASPECTS. 

i i V. 

>? 

Jtl 

SUN 

Eo  3 Sl. 

G 

cP 

( 

1 

1 

MOON 

P 

-W- 

-i3- 

MERCURY 

ll. 

P 

/ 

•XT 

■X' 

VENUS 

1 19  S .S8. 

9 

P 

MARS 

jl5  g 4-. 

df 

n 

■it, 

JUPITER 

IS  3 ^9. 

n 

P 

'A 

! n. 

SATURN 

~b 

P 

XL 

14- 

URANUS  1 

p g ^ 

W 

JL 

1 

NEPTUNE 

I17  g SR 

U? 

6 

L_ 

MR  A.  P.  SINNETT 


Descendant  or  West  Point. 


MR  A.  P.  SINNETT 

A 

Vice-President  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  Author  of  The  Occult 
Worlds  Esoteric  Buddhism^  The  Growth  of  the  Souh  etc. 

Born  1 1.30 p.m.,  \%th  January,  1840,  London 

Mr  a.  P.  Sinnett  was  born  under  the  Cardinal-air  sign  Libra,  with  its 
ruler  Venus  in  Sagittarius  in  the  third  house  in  conjunction  with 
Saturn,  in  parallel  and  semi-square  with  the  Sun,  in  sesqui-quadrate 
with  the  Moon,  in  square  with  Uranus,  and  in  sextile  with  Neptune. 

Libra  is  a sign  that  has  in  it  great  possibilities  both  of  union  and  of 
separation,  and  sometimes  one  of  these  extremes  will  be  shown  by  the 
person  born  under  it  and  sometimes  the  other.  Its  tendenc}^  to  inde- 
pendence and  separation  arises  from  its  actively  movable  rajasic  nature, 
because  that  which  moves  quickly  necessarily  separates  itself  from  that 
which  moves  slowly  or  not  at  all  ; and  hence  among  natives  of  the 
Cardinal  signs  we  often  find  people  who  are  isolated  in  some  sense, 
often  through  their  own  action,  by  independence  of  thought  or  feeling  or 
belief  or  career,  although  in  other  cases  it  is  more  their  misfortune  than 
their  fault  or  deliberate  choice,  and  they  deplore  the  separation,  sever- 
ance, and  breaking  of  ties  that  occur  to  them. 

The  contrary  tendency,  that  to  union,  is  illustrated  in  the  correspond- 
ence of  the  seventh  sign  to  the  seventh  house,  where  the  person  who  is 
born  under  the  ascendant  becomes  associated  on  terms  of  equality,  more 
or  less,  with  the  mass  of  the  general  public,  out  of  which  arise  friend- 
ships, acquaintances,  and  slighter  ties  of  all  kinds,  bringing  some 
amount  of  publicity,  popularit3^,  or  celebrity.  In  a more  specialised 
sense,  marriage  and  partnership  are  both  ruled  by  this  house  and  sign  ; 
different  kinds  of  union  for  mutual  benefit.  In  a higher  application,  the 
element  air  to  which  Libra  belongs,  is  said  to  correspond  at  its  best  to 
the  intuitional  or  Buddhic  consciousness  which  lies  beyond  and  above 
intellect,  in  which  the  separate  individual  becomes  aware  of  his  union 
with  his  fellows  and  with  the  greater  consciousness  beyond  himself. 

In  this  horoscope  the  quickly  moving  and  somewhat  separative 
tendency  is  accentuated  by  the  presence  of  Sun,  Moon,  and  Ascendant, 
all  three  in  Cardinal  signs.  In  other  respects,  however,  the  positions 

203 


204 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


of  the  heavenl3^  bodies  are  balanced  to  a rather  unusual  extent.  There 
are  three  each  in  the  Cardinal,  Fixed,  and  Common  Quadruplicities  ; 
there  are  two  each  in  the  triplicities  of  fire,  earth,  and  air,  with  three  in 
water ; and  there  are  four  planets  in  odd  signs  and  five  in  even  ; so 
that  the  balance  is  very  nearl37  even. 

The  ruler  of  the  Ascendant,  Venus,  is  in  the  third  house,  which  is 
also  the  onl3^  house  that  contains  as  man3^  'as  three  planets.  This 
directs  the  consciousness  strongly  towards  thought,  stud3^  and  literary 
pursuits,  which  have  won  him  many  friends  and  must  have  brought 
him  much  pleasure,  as  is  the  nature  of  the  ruling  planet.  Mercury,  the 
intellectual  planet,  is  alwa3^s  strong  and  well-placed  in  the  third  house, 
and  as  it  is  in  parallel  with  the  Moon  in  the  mid-heaven  and  in  sextile  to 
Uranus,  it  brings  success  at  writing,  publishing,  and  to  a less  extent  at 
speaking.  The  presence  of  Saturn  in  the  third  house  inclines  the  mind 
to  serious  subjects  especially  during  the  latter  half  of  life  ; while  in  the 
opposite  direction,  in  connection  with  Venus,  ma3^  be  mentioned  Mr 
A.  P.  Sinnett’s  successful  ventures  as  novelist  and  play-writer. 

The  presence  of  Jupiter  in  the  second  house  is  very  much  praised 
b3^  many  astrologers  for  its  benefic  influence  upon  money  matters  ; but 
it  is  important  that  the  planet  should  not  be  seriously  afflicted  there. 
Jupiter  is  in  trine  to  Uranus  and  is  lord  of  the  third  house,  which  is 
favourable  for  earning  money  through  literary  undertakings  and 
especially  from  those  connected  with  the  occult.  But  Jupiter’s 
square  to  Neptune,  and  its  parallel  and  square  to  Mars  are  serious 
drawbacks  entailing  loss,  high  expenditure,  and  unprosperous 
investments. 

From  the  point  of  view  of  the  h3deg  or  giver  of  life  this  horoscope 
seems  to  depart  slightly  from  the  ordinaiy.  According  to  Ptolem3^’s 
rule  the  Moon  is  hyleg,  because  it  is  above  the  earth,  while  the  Sun  is 
below,  rnd  it  receives  no  strong  good  aspect  of  any  kind,  and  two 
sesqui-quadrates  to  Venus  and  Uranus.  It  is  true  the  Voon  is  in  its 
own  sign  Cancer,  but  this  hardly  seems  sufficient  of  itself.  On  the 
other  hand  those  who  regard  the  Sun  as  alwa3^s  hyleg  find  it  here  with 
afflictions  to  the  Moon,  Venus,  Saturn,  and  Uranus,  and  no  good  aspects 
but  the  parallel  of  Venus  and  the  quintile  of  Jupiter.  Seeing  that  Mr 
A.  P.  Sinnett  has  completed  his  seventy-second  3^ear  at  the  time  of 
writing  this  w^e  doubt  whether  either  of  these  theor'es  is  adequate  to 
explain  the  result;  and  the  good  apects  to>  the  ascending  degree  seem 


MR  A.  P.  SINNETT 


205 


better  to  fit  in  with  the  facts  of  the  case,  sextile  Venus  and  Saturn, 
trine  Neptune. 

This  horoscope  helps  to  justify  the  observation  made  many  years  ago 
that  a large  number  of  prominent  theosophists  have  been  born  under 
Cardinal  signs  ; whether  that  characteristic  will  continue  through  subse- 
quent generations  time  will  show.  Comparison  will  reveal  the  fact  that 
Mme  H.  P.  Blavatsky  had  the  Moon  and  Venus  on  Mr  A.  P.  Sinnett’s 
Ascendant ; that  Col.  H.  S.  Olcott  had  Neptune  on  Mr  A.  P.  Sinnett’s 
Sun,  and  had  the  same  Ascendant  if  his  estimate  time  of  birth  is  correct ; 
and  that  Mrs  Besant  had  the  Moon  and  Jupiter  on  the  mid-heaven  of 
this  map,  and  Venus  and  Mercury  on  its  Ascendant. 


ELEMENTS 

Triplicities 

Quadruplicities 

Fire  2 

Cardinal  3 

])  elevated 

Air  2 

Fixed  3 

essentially  and 

Water  3 

Mutable  3 

accidentally  dignified 

Earth  2 

{Balanced) 

Synthesis 

Main  features : — Libra,  second  decanate,  rising.  Venus,  ruling  planet, 
in  the  second  decanate  of  Sagittarius,  in  the  third  house  of  the  Nativity, 
and  in  conjunction  with  Saturn.  Highest  planet  the  Moon,  in  opposition 
to  the  Sun  from  Cardinal  signs.  Rising  planet  Jupiter  in  the  second 
decanate  of  Scorpio  in  trine  aspect  to  Uranus. 

The  planets  at  birth  were  well  balanced  in  the  Quadruplicities. 

Personality : — Positive  ; intellectual,  philosophical,  well  balanced  ; 
much  dignity  ; good  sympathy  and  humane  tendencies. 

Horoscope  summary : — Capacity  for  public  work,  with  love  of  retire- 
ment pulling  against  ambitious  desires  for  intellectual  service. 

Good  social  opportunities  and  much  power  quietly  to  influence  others 
favourably. 

Future  Prospects  : — Long  life,  an  honourable  old  age,  and  a reputation 
that  will  live  long  after  his  death.  Sorrows  through  deaths,  and  peculiar 
estrangements  from  friends. 

Critical  periods,  autumn  1916,  followed  by  preserving  influences  until 
the  fall  of  1922. 


Ascendant  or  East  Point. 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES  NO.  4 


ZeniHi  or  South  Point. 


PLANET 

1 

Decl 

o 

D 

5 

ASPECTS 

9 e V 

»? 

¥ 

t-.  . 

SUN 

/ ? u.. 

O 

4 

n 

MOON 

D 

A 

/ 

MERCURY 

O /O  Zl. 

? 

VENUS 

9 

1 

i - - 

MARS 

SV. 

<? 

1 — 

JUPITER 

Il5  J 51. 

n 

p 

P 

Q 

SATURN 

Ill  V 9. 

b 

a 

7 

n 

URANUS 

|ai  >0  S9. 

NEPTUNE 

1-1.,.$,  ..SI- 



V 

i 

1 

1 

1 

I 

DR  RUDOLPH  STEINER 


Descendant  or  West  Point. 


DR  RUDOLPH  STEINER 


Occultist  and  M3^stic 

Dr  Rudolph  Steiner  was  born  at  Kraljevic,  in  Upper  Austria,  at 
1 1. 1 5 p.m.,  27th  Februar3^  1861. 

His  youth  was  passed  in  a mountainous  and  secluded  region,  where 
he  was  a choir  boy  in  a Catholic  church,  and  he  had  clairvo3^ant 
experiences  from  an  early  age.  From  the  age  of  sixteen  and  onward 
he  studied  the  great  philosophers,  Kant,  Fichte,  Schelling  and  Hegel, 
by  whom  he  was  much  attracted.  He  added  to  this  the  study  of  science 
at  Vienna,  mathematics,  chemistry,  mineralog3%  botany  and  zoology. 
‘These  studies,’  he  said,  ‘afford  a surer  basis  for  a construction  of 
a spiritual  S3^stem  of  the  universe  than  history  and  literature.  The 
latter,  wanting  in  exact  methods,  would  then  throw  no  side-lights  on  the 
vast  domain  of  German  science.’  Fond  of  art  and  poetr3%  he  also 
cultivated  literary  composition  and  orator3L  Later  on  he  took  the 
degree  of  Doctor  of  Philosophy,  wrote  many  scientific  articles,  acted  as 
tutor  in  several  families,  and  was  chief  editor  of  a weekly  Viennese 
paper.  He  made  the  acquaintance  of  Friedrich  Nietzsche,  the  philosopher, 
and  Ernest  Haeckel,  the  naturalist,  both  of  whom  influenced  him 
considerably. 

At  the  early  age  of  nineteen  Rudolph  Steiner  had  met  his  Master : 

‘ One  of  those  men  of  power  who  live,  unknown  to  the  world,  under 
cover  of  some  civil  state,  to  carry  out  a mission  unsuspected  b3^  an3"  but 
their  fellows  in  the  Brotherhood  of  self-sacrificing  Masters.  They  take  no 
ostensible  part  in  human  events.  To  remain  unknown  is  the  condition  of 
their  power,  but  their  action  is  only  the  more  efficacious.  For  they  inspire, 
prepare  and  direct  those  who  will  act  in  the  sight  of  all.  In  the 
present  instance  the  Master  had  no  difficulty  in  completing  the  first  and 
spontaneous  initiation  of  his  disciple.  . . . Swiftly  he  made  him  clear 
the  successive  stages  of  inner  discipline,  in  order  to  attain  conscious  and 
intelligent  clairvoyance.’ 

Dr  Steiner  joined  the  Theosophical  Society  in  1902.  ‘He  did  not, 
however,  enter  it  as  a pupil  of  the  Eastern  Tradition,  but  as  an  initiate 
of  Rosicrucian  esotericism  who  gladl3"  recognised  the  profound  depth 

207 


208 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


of  the  Hindu  Wisdom  and  offered  it  a brotherly  hand  to  make  a 
magnetic  link  between  the  two.’  He  became  General  Secretary  of  the 
German  Section  of  the  Theosophical  Society,  and  has  since  then  written 
many  books  on  Theosophical  subjects.  His  lectures  in  Germany  and 
Austria  are  crowded ; he  has  a multitude  of  pupils  and  followers,  and 
is  by  far  the  most  famous  occultist  and  mystic  in  that  part  of  the 
world. 

On  turning  to  his  horoscope  it  will  be  seen  that  Dr  Steiner  has 
Scorpio  rising,  with  Mars,  its  ruler,  in  Taurus  in  sextile  to  the  Sun  in 
Pisces  and  in  trine  to  Saturn  in  the  mid-heaven.  Mars  is  free  from 
bad  aspects,  but  the  Sun  is  in  opposition  to  Saturn  and  in  square  to 
Uranus. 

The  position  of  Mars,  setting,  indicates  a life  spent  largely  before 
the  public  gaze ; for  the  seventh  house  stands,  not  for  the  marriage 
partner  only,  although  it  has  this  signification  in  its  more  restricted 
application,  but  for  all  those  who  are  associated  in  a general  way  with 
the  native  on  terms  approaching  equality.  A similar  interpretation  is 
possible  in  the  case  of  the  mid-heaven,  but  in  that  position  some  amount 
of  power,  authority,  or  dignity  is  usually  bestowed  as  well;  whereas  the 
seventh  house  and  the  ascendant  balance  each  other  like  the  arms  of 
a pair  of  scales,  neither  being  above  the  other.  If  Mars  as  lord  of  the 
rising  sign  had  been  afflicted  here,  it  would  have  indicated  serious 
enmity,  open  opposition,  and  the  probability  of  defeat  or  disaster ; but 
good  aspects  give  the  power  of  co-operation  with  others,  support  from 
co-workers  and  from  the  public,  and  that  union  which  gives  strength 
and  success.  The  aspects  from  Mars  to  Saturn  and  the  Sun  give 
courage,  zeal,  energy,  and  executive  ability ; the  presence  of  the  fiery 
planet  in  a fixed  sign  adds  endurance  and  steadfastness ; and 
these  qualities  combine  to  give  great  will-power  and  masterful 
determination. 

The  afflictions  between  the  Sun,  Uranus,  and  Saturn  will  put  many 
obstacles  in  his  path  and  prove  that  the  way^of  the  reformer  is  never 
smooth.  They  disturb  the  harmony  of  the  ruling  planet,  and  show  that 
new  methods  and  ideas  will  not  prove  so  acceptable  to  persons  of  power 
and  position  as  they  will  to  the  generality  of  the  public.  Earnestness, 
seriousness,  and  self-control  are  prominent  features  of  the  map ; and 
when  inspired  by  will  and  energy  they  must  cause  changes,  disruptions. 


DR  RUDOLPH  STEINER 


209 


and  disagreements  with  those  who  are  wedded  to  older  or  more  orthodox 
methods. 

The  good  aspects  of  the  ruling  planet  modify  these  indications  con- 
siderably and  show  that  patience  and  enthusiasm,  aided  by  the  support 
of  many  faithful  friends  can  overcome  difficulties  which  would  otherwise 
be  very  serious. 

The  Moon’s  position  and  aspects  are  more  fortunate  than  those  of 
the  Sun,  for  there  is  a sextile  to  Jupiter  and  a trine  to  Venus.  These 
give  considerable  popularity,  the  support  of  the  public,  and  a position  of 
prominence  before  the  world,  which  combine  to  make  him  a man  of  mark. 
The  Moon  rules  the  ninth  house  and  is  approaching  the  cusp  of  the 
twelfth  in  a movable  sign,  therefore  religious  ideas  both  open  and 
occult  occupy  his  time  and  energy  ; his  activities  in  these  directions  will 
be  attended  with  much  success,  and  will  gain  a large  amount  of  public 
recognition  and  support.  A great  and  successful  work  is  in  his  hands 
and  he  will  travel  much  in  carrying  it  out. 

The  very  close  conjunction  of  the  intellectual  Mercury  with  the 
mystical  Neptune  is  one  of  the  remarkable  features  of  this  map,  and  it 
may  be  compared  with  the  similar  conjunction  of  the  Sun,  Mercur}^  and 
Neptune  in  the  horoscope  of  Mr  C.  W.  Leadbeater.  Of  the  two  planets, 
Neptune  is  here  the  stronger,  and  they  are  in  no  close  aspect  to  any 
other  planet.  When  not  overpowered  by  contrary  influence,  such  a 
combination  as  this  always  gives  mystical  tendencies  and  the  ability  to 
develop  psychic  faculties  in  harmony  with  the  intellect.  The  conjunction 
is  in  the  third  decanate  of  Pisces,  which  is  of  the  nature  of  the  rising 
sign  Scorpio,  and  it  is  near  the  mundane  trine  of  the  cusp  of  the 
ascendant ; these  positions  strengthen  the  influence  considerably  and 
throw  it  forward  into  the  personal  life. 

The  various  methods  of  synthesising  a horoscope  by  balancing  the 
planetary  positions  may  be  summed  up  briefly  in  this  case,  as  follows. 

The  Moon  is  stronger  and  better  aspected  than  the  Sun.  This  gives 
friends,  many  acquaintances,  and  success  with  the  multitude,  but  brings 
opposition  from  those  in  high  positions,  superiors,  and  the  orthodox  of 
the  day. 

The  majority  of  planets  are  placed  in  mutable  or  common  signs,  so 
far  as  the  quadruplicities  are  concerned,  five  out  of  the  nine  being  located 
there ; but  from  the  point  of  view  of  the  triplicities,  air  and  water  are 

evenly  balanced,  each  containing  three  planets.  Perhaps  the  balance 
o 


210 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


should  be  considered  as  inclining  towards  water,  because  a sign  of  that 
nature  rises ; but  when  two  elements  are  almost  equally  strong,  like  this, 
both  will  produce  effect  in  the  character  and  fortunes,  now  the  one  and 
now  the  other  being  manifest  at  different  times  in  the  life.  Mutable- 
earth  and  mutable-water,  therefore,  characterise  this  horoscope,  and 
indicate  one  in  whom  reason  and  emotion  are  both  strongly  developed. 
At  one  time  the  scientific  and  philosophical  mind  will  be  uppermost,  and 
at  another  time  the  social  faculties,  devotion,  and  imagination  ; and 
these  will  combine  to  bring  out  intuition. 

If  the  classification  is  made  not  by  the  heavenly  bodies  but  b3^  Sun, 
Moon,  and  Ascendant,  these  are  found  each  in  a different  quadruplicit}^ 
and  this  is  another  testimony  to  a manj^  sided  nature  with  interests  in 
man3"  different  directions,  who  will  have  very  varied  experiences  at 
different  times.  The  will  is  shown  to  be  strong,  steadfast,  and 
capable  of  pursuing  its  end  patiently  and  unswervingly ; the 
intellect  is  active  and  versatile ; and  the  feelings  are  ver^^  sincere 
and  sympathetic. 

The  sign  containing  the  greatest  number  of  the  heavenly  bodies  is 
Pisces,  and  this  fact  supports  what  has  been  previously  said  about  the 
influence  of  thought  combined  with  intuition,  ps^^chic  facult3^  imagination 
and  sympath3^ 

Odd  signs  contain  four  planets  ; even  signs  contain  five  planets  and 
the  Ascendant.  This  gives  similar  indications  to  those  supplied  b3^  the 
Moon’s  predominance  over  the  Sun  previousl3^  mentioned,  and  is 
evidence  that  the  feminine,  receptive,  intuitional,  and  affectional  side  of 
the  nature  is  strongl3^  developed. 


ELEMENTS 


Triplicities 
Fire  i 
Air  3 
Water  3 
Earth  2 


Quadruplicitifs 
Cardinal  i 
Fixed  3 
Mutable  5 

Mutable  {Jir,  Water) 


Synthesis 


Main  features : — Scorpio  second  decanate,  rising.  Mars  ruling 
planet,  setting  in  the  sign  Taurus.  Jupiter  culminating  in  the  sign  Leo. 
Saturn  in  the  Mid-heaven  in  trine  aspect  to  Mars  in  the  earthy 
triplicity.  The  planets  are  well  distributed  throughout  the  signs  and 
houses. 


DR  RUDOLPH  STEINER 


21  r 


Personality : — Marked  versatility,  strongly  magnetic  personality 
having  great  influence  over  others,  especially  through  speech.  The 
power  to  be  firm,  yet  yielding  when  necessary.  Enthusiastic,  and 
spiritually  minded.  Intuitive,  and  practical  where  method  is  concerned. 

Summary  of  horoscope : — Inspirational  tendencies,  consciously  or 
unconsciously  under  powerful  subjective  influences.  Much  independence 
of  thought  although  affected  interiorly  through  deep  feelings.  The 
power  to  reason  and  investigate  strongly  marked ; also  the  power  to 
express  thought  clearly. 

The  airy  triplicity  is  peculiarly  strengthened,  from  an  esoteric  point 
of  view,  by  taking  place  in  the  psychic  triangle  of  the  4th,  8th  and 
12th  houses,  by  the  Moon,  ruling  the  ninth  house,  being  on  the  cusp 
of  the  12th  in  trine  aspect  to  Venus  on  the  cusp  of  the  4th. 

The  intake  of  this  nativity  is  through  Jupiter  on  the  Meridian,  and 
the  outlet  through  Venus  in  The  Mutable-Air  and  Mutable-Water 
combinations  are  also  well  blended. 

Future  prospects', — Remarkable  power  from  1914  onward.  Cul- 
minating in  extraordinary  spiritual  unfoldment,  affecting  multitudes  of 
people  throughout  his  sphere  of  influence  the  physical  life  ends  in  glory, 
and  under  the  most  favourable  auspices  and  yet,  at  the  same  time,  under 
very  peculiar  circumstances. 


Ascendant  oy  IIIast  rniNt. 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES  No  5 


Zenith  oy  South  Point. 


planet 

Drcl. 

0 

r vr  IN 

V.2K  1 ri 

? 

1 UIIN  1 • 

ASPECTS 

? <?  2/ 

1? 

y 

•p 

SUN 

16  g 

0 

1 

i-L.. 

n ! 

L^i 

MOON 

-0  g 4-g. 

D 

1 

' ^ 

MERCURY 

9 

/ ! 

VENUS 

? 

1 

1 

.MARS 

g IS. 

<? 

IZ 

JUPITER 

. . .1  S LQ. 

T' 

0 

i n 

SATURN 

H />/  11. 

b 

p 

i 

1 

Lo 

, 

URANUS 

W 

p 

p 

p 

i 

IsL 

MEPTUNE 

n.  S_iu 

L 

P 

1 D f 

1 

‘ CHARUBEL  ’ 


Descendant  or  West  Point. 


‘CHARUBEL’ 


Author  of  Degrees  of  the  Zodiac  Symbolised 

Born  7 a.m.y  <^th  Ido’^ember,  1826.  Lat.  52.4oA^.  Long.  3.9/F. 

The  writer  made  the  acquaintance  of  this  remarkable  man,  whose 
name  in  private  life  was  Mr  John  Thomas,  in  1890,  and  joined 
a Society  founded  b3"  him,  although  never  sufficiently^  attracted  to  take 
an  active  part  in  its  work.  Each  member  of  this  Society  was  given  a 
mythical  kind  of  star  name,  a number  and  a geometrical  sy^mbol. 

‘ Charubel  ’ was  Mr  Thomas’s  own  star  name,  and  others  of  the  names 
bore  some  resemblance  to  Hebrew,  although  they  were  not  actually 
taken  from  that  language.  The  Society^  which  consisted  of  members 
scattered  about  the  world,  all  interested  in  psychic  and  occult  subjects, 
was  not  as  successful  as  its  founder  desired,  and  before  his  death  it  had 
been  dissolved,  and  Mr  Thomas  promulgated  his  views  in  periodical 
magazines  he  published  and  in  an  extensive  correspondence  he  kept  up. 

The  following  account  of  ‘ Charubel’s  ’ life  was  published  in  The 
Shrewsbury  News  by  Mr  S.  Barnett. 

‘ There  has  just  recently  passed  away  in  Manchester  one  whose  name  and 
memory  will  be  easily  and  gratefully  recognised  by  many,  especially  elderly 
residents  in  the  districts  of  Caereinion,  Caersws,  Carno,  Cefn,  Kerry,  Llandrindod 
Wells,  Llanfair,  Llanwnog,  Llansilin,  Llanymynech,  Montgomery,  Oswestry,  and 
Welshpool. 

‘John  Thomas  was  born  at  Cwmbau,  Castle  Caereinion,  Mont.,  9th  Novem- 
ber, 1826,  and  died  llth  November  1908,  aged  eighty-two  years.  In  the  year 
1851,  under  President  Edwards  (senr.),  he  studied  at  Bala  College  for  the 
Calvinistic  Methodist  ministry.  Having  a very  powerful  physique,  active  psychic 
nature,  and  strong  spirituality,  such  a combination  induced  a temperament  suited 
to  seership  and  marvellous  healing  powers.  Such  phenomena  were  so  little 
understood  among  the  stern  Calvinists  of  that  day  that  the  most  convenient  title 
available  was  “ devil.”  So  when  John  Thomas  was  yet  in  his  twenties  he  found 
himself  faced  with  the  alternatives  of  ceasing  from  these  gifts  or  ceasing  his  de- 
nominational ministry.  Preferring  the  latter,  he  went  out  upon  his  lonely  way, 
followed  a secular  calling,  and  pursued  his  congenial  studies  of  natural  law  and 
life.  The  succeeding  sixty  years  have  been  filled  with  ardent  research  into  the 
secrets  of  Mother  Nature. 

‘ “ Internals,  not  externals,”  was  his  motto,  and  of  how  well  he  succeeded 
there  is  ample  proof  in  the  hands  of  the  writer,  himself  a Salopian,  and  thirteen 
years  a Methodist  minister  in  New  Zealand,  who,  with  similar  gifts  and  pro- 
clivities, had  returned  to  England.  In  frequent  visits  to  Ryland’s  Library — a 

ais 


214 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


wonderful  repository  of  ancient  and  rare  literature — he  there  came  across  several 
works  by  John  Thomas.  So  very  charming  an  author  must  be  found  out  if 
alive,  and  in  due  course  he  was  ushered  into  the  presence  of  this  venerable 
octogenarian.  Two  souls  had  met  attracted  by  the  same  electric  chord.  Here 
was  a tall,  full-figured,  fine-featured,  fresh-complexioned,  white-bearded,  clear- 
eyed specimen  of  Nature’s  noblemen.  An  intellect  original  and  daring,  reason- 
ing faculties  able  to  grip  profound  abstract  problems,  a character  solid,  deep, 
introspective,  upright  and  honourable,  a genius  receptive  to  inspirations  from 
spiritual  sources  and  occult  power  of  a very  high  order.  Truly  he  was  a great 
man,  the  greatest  the  writer  ever  knew,  and  an  Arch-Druid,  if  ever  there 
was  one. 

‘ At  eighty-one  we  found  him  room-fast,  but  still  pursuing  his  studies,  exer- 
cising his  science,  and  maintaining  a world-wide  correspondence  and  reception  of 
far  travelled  and  instructed  visitors.  Occultists,  astrologers,  psychics,  healers,  and 
specialists,  resorted  to  him  from  far  and  wide,  sitting  at  his  feet  as  disciples  of  a 
great  master.  To  the  privileged  few  he  was  known  as  the  head  of  an  occult 
order,  and  father  of  a world-wide  brotherhood.  In  natural  magic  he  was  an 
adept,  and  possessed  accurate  and  extensive  knowledge  of  nature-spirits,  angels, 
ghosts,  etc.,  of  this  earth,  also  of  the  inhabitants,  conditions,  and  constituents, 
of  other  planets,  even  of  the  Sun  itself.  Sacred  names  and  symbols,  with  their 
secret  powers,  were  all  familiar  to  him,  and  most  wonderful  natural  phenomena 
frequently  occurred  in  his  presence. 

‘To  a wider  circle  of  readers  of  special  literature,  he  was  known  and 
honoured  as  “ Charubel.”  Bible  Lands  Jor  Bible  Readers  was  his  earliest  effort. 
This  was  followed  by  J Vision  of  the  North  Pole,  The  Geozonic  Spheres,  The  Degrees 
of  the  Zodiac  Symbolised.  His  great  and  latest  literary  effort  was  a half-guinea 
volume.  The  Psychology  of  Botany,  Plants  and  Minerals.  He  was  editor  over  a 
long  series  of  years  of  the  periodicals.  The  Seer,  The  Occultist,  and  The  Psychic 
Mirror.  All  of  the  above  are  enriched  with  a philosophy  of  Nature  in 
both  prose  and  poetry,  which  in  later  years  will  be  appreciated  at  the  real  value. 

‘ While  not  a public  man  in  the  popular  sense,  yet  he  was  well  know  n 
throughout  England,  and  especially  in  Wales.  To  him  as  “ Julius  Balsam  ” was 
linked  a large  and  influential  clientde.  His  services  to  them  took  the  form  of 
advice  on  stocks,  diseases,  disasters,  difficulties,  mysteries  of  the  past,  and  previ- 
sions of  the  future.  In  fact,  when  doctors  failed  and  outer  science  fell  short, 
John  Thomas,  with  his  interior  knowledge  and  higher  science,  proved  indeed  a 
ministering  angel.  Tumorous  growths  and  rheumatism  w^ere  his  specialities,  and 
not  a few  testify  to  a cure  without  ever  seeing  him.  From  a letter  or  article 
sent  he  sensed  their  condition,  and  healed  them.  Herbs  were  highly  valued  in 
his  practice,  but  he  relied  for  success  mainly  upon  his  power  of  transmitting 
psychic  principles.  Of  horoscopes  and  talismans  he  made  hundreds.  These 
latter  were  drawn  according  to  planetary  influences  and  written  on  parchment, 
and  w’orn  upon  the  person  for  preservation,  prevention,  and  cure,  according  to 
the  case.  So  recently  as  four  months  ago  were  they  supplied  by  him  to  clients. 
Throughout  his  long  practice  as  an  occultist  he  preserved  an  unbroken  record  of 
uniform  benignity,  and  hundreds  in  Wales  alone  will  silently  bless  his  name  and 
mourn  his  loss. 

‘To  the  last  he  was  a devout  student  of  Sacred  Scriptures,  both  Hebrew  and 
Christian,  a man  strong  in  prayer  and  full  of  the  Holy  Spirit.  To  quote  his 
own  words,  “ True  religion  is  true  magic.  It  is  union  of  man  with  God.  This 


‘CHARUBEL 


215 


union  is  the  aim  and  end  of  true  magic.”  Here  lay  the  secret  of  his  extraordinary 
ability  to  apply  inner  light  to  extract  knowledge  from  the  heavens  above  even  to 
the  centre  of  the  earth  beneath. 

‘ In  other  days  such  servants  of  humanity  have  been  variously  styled  wise 
men,  conjurors,  magicians,  etc.  Their  number  to-day  is  all  too  few,  but  the 
tide  is  turning,  and  succeeding  generations — less  material  and  external  than  this 
generation  - will  come  to  realise  the  truths  and  appraise  the  full  value  of  such 
men.  Hslf  a century  hence,  possibly,  Wales,  suddenly  awakening  to  her  ancient 
Druidic  knowledges,  will  eagerly  call  for  a print  of  ‘‘  Charubel’s  ” MSS.  and  a 
reprint  of  his  books,  and  maybe  erect  a statue  to  John  Thomas,  Druidic  Ollam, 
expounder  of  Nature’s  laws.’ 

His  clairvoyant  and  other  psychic  gifts  were  genuine  and  unmistak- 
able, and  he  was  always  willing  to  use  his  seership  in  the  interests 
of  astrological  research,  which  he  frequently  did  with  good  results. 

On  turning  to  the  horoscope,  the  Sun  is  seen  to  be  rising  in  Scorpio 
in  good  aspect  to  Mars,  the  ruler  of  the  Ascendant,  and  to  Uranus, 
Neptune,  and  the  Moon.  This  is  a sufficient  explanation  of  his  strong 
constitution  and  abundant  vitality,  for  he  lived  to  the  age  of  eighty-two  ; 
and  taken  in  connection  with  his  very  positive  temperament  and  strength 
of  will,  it  explains  his  mesmeric  ability  and  healing  powers ; for  being 
able  to  generate  vitality  easily  himself  he  could  readily  impart  it  to 
others. 

The  ruler,  Mars,  is  exalted  in  Capricorn  and  strongly  aspected,  a 
fact  which  supports  the  indications  afforded  by  the  Sun  of  the  rather 
forceful  and  unyielding  quality  of  his  mind.  Mars  in  conjunction  with 
Uranus  is  a somewhat  perilous  position  in  any  horoscope ; and  when 
one  of  the  two  is  the  ruler  of  the  ascendant  and  they  are  on  the  cusp  of 
the  third  house,  forces  are  let  loose  which  the  strongest  will  and  utmost 
self-control  will  find  it  difficult  to  rein  in  and  master.  Moreover 
Mercury,  the  mental  ruler,  is  in  parallel  declination  with  Uranus,  Mars, 
Neptune,  and  Saturn ; and  had  it  not  been  for  its  sextile  to  Jupiter  and 
the  good  aspects  to  the  Moon,  the  powers  he  used  would  have  been  too 
much  for  his  mental  balance,  for  there  are  grave  dangers  in  such  com- 
binations as  these. 

At  one  time  he  anticipated  the  appearance  of  those  whom  he 
called  the  ‘ Brothers.’  When  the  time  arrived  for  their  appearance  (he 
had  expected  them  for  some  time),  he  told  his  friends  that  a great  mani- 
festation of  the  ‘ Brothers  ’ was  to  take  place  in  his  own  room,  to  which  he 
confined  himself  for  three  days.  He  was  subsequently  found  lying 
prostrate  on  the  floor,  in  an  unconscious  condition.  Whether  they  were 


2i6 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


actually  manifested  to  him  or  not  no  one  to  this  day  could  actually  say, 
for  his  own  statements  concerning  their  appearance  were  vague  in  the 
extreme,  and  it  is  quite  probable  that  he  himself  had  no  recollection  of 
what  actually  took  place. 

On  another  occasion  he  said  that  the  form  of  a tall  man  wearing  a 
robe  marked  with  the  sign  of  the  cross  in  the  circle  appeared  fully 
materialised  and  said  to  him — ‘ Brother,  be  of  good  cheer ! He  who 
bears  the  cross  shall  wear  the  crown.’ 

The  presence  of  Mercury  in  the  ascendant  and  the  planets  on  the 
third  cusp  show  how  much  of  his  attention  was  turned  in  the  direction 
of  writing,  publishing  and  correspondence. 

In  spite  of  the  position  of  Venus  in  the  second  house,  he  did  not 
prosper  financially,  and  he  lived  during  the  latter  years  of  his  life  in 
extreme  poverty.  Venus  is  quite  devoid  of  good  aspects  here,  and  is 
semi-square  Sun,  square  Jupiter,  and  opposition  Saturn;  Jupiter,  ruler 
of  his  second  house,  being  in  square  to  Saturn.  These  are  ver}^ 
baneful  aspects  from  a monetary  point  of  view,  and  there  is  nothing 
in  the  horoscope  strong  enough  to  over-ride  them.  The  position  of 
Jupiter  on  the  cusp  of  the  eleventh  house,  however,  combined  with  that 
of  Venus,  ruler  of  the  eleventh  in  the  second,  brought  him  many  true 
and  helpful  friends,  and  it  does  not  seem  that  at  any  period  of  his  life, 
when  his  poverty  was  greatest  and  his  troubles  most  severe,  he  failed 
to  receive  response  to  any  appeal  made  by  himself  or  by  his  numerous 
friends. 

There  is  one  fact  that  should  be  placed  to  his  credit,  and  that  is  his 
energy  and  diligence  in  keeping  an  account  of  his  pS3^chic  experiences. 
When  his  means  failed  and  he  was  unable  to  emplo^^  a printer, . with 
commendable  enterprise  he  printed  his  own  periodicals  and  literature, 
setting  up  the  type  with  his  own  hands. 

He  was  twice  married,  first  on  2nd  July  1852  and  second  on 
loth  December  1898,  and  it  will  be  seen  that  the  Moon  and  Venus,  the 
significators  of  marriage  in  a man’s  horoscope,  are  both  in  double  signs. 

His  was  a very  complex  nature,  for  there  is  evidence  of  extreme 
positiveness,  strength  of  will,  and  self-confidence  on  the  one  hand,  and 
much  receptivity  on  the  other.  The  rising  sign,  Scorpio,  lends  itself  in 
both  these  directions.  The  positions  and  aspects  of  the  Sun,  Mars,  and 
Uranus  speak  of  the  positive  side  of  his  nature,  as  previousl}^  pointed 
out ; and  that  he  was  undoubtedly  very  receptive  to  the  influence  of  the 


‘CHARUBEL' 


2 I 7 

* subconscious  mind  ’ is  shown  by  the  presence  of  the  Moon  in  the 
fourth  house  in  such  a sign  as  Pisces;  while  other  indications  are 
afforded  by  the  presence  of  six  out  of  the  nine  heavenly  bodies  in  even 
signs,  and  by  the  position  of  Sun,  Moon,  and  ascendant  in  water3^  signs. 
The  sextiles  of  Neptune  and  Uranus  to  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  both 
favour  psychic  faculty  very  decidedly.  The  attraction  towards  all  things 
psychic  became  more  and  more  pronounced  as  his  life  advanced  until  it 
entirely  dominated  him. 

He  died  at  Manchester  at  11.40  p.m.,  nth  November  1908,  having 
had  two  paralytic  strokes  and  been  confined  to  his  bed  since  the  begin- 
ning of  the  year.  At  the  moment  of  death  the  Moon  was  passing  over 
the  place  of  Saturn  in  the  eighth  house  of  his  horoscope  of  birth.  By 
direction  he  had  Asc.  P.  T ; Asc.  d^Pr;?  d c^.  He 

carried  a good  deal  of  self-consciousness  over  to  the  psychic  plane,  and 
was  probably  much  more  alive  on  that  plane  than  are  the  majority  of 
people  when  they  pass  out  of  the  body. 

Synthesis 

Temperament.  Mixed  Martial-Uranian  and  Solar,  giving  ver^^  erratic 
and  eccentric  moods,  a strong  and  dominating  personalit3%  and  much 
ps3'chic  sensitivit3\ 

Environment.  Many  friends  and  a large  circle  of  acquaintances, 
but  the  planetary  positions  very  unfavourable  for  worldl3^  prospects. 
Nothing  ever  prospered  with  him  but  ps3^chic  activities  and  the  various 
developments  based  upon  them. 

Future  Prospects.  Long  life  and  good  health  ; fluctuations  of  gain 
and  loss ; periods  of  serious  privation  ; the  endeavours  of  a forceful 
character  to  win  its  way  to  the  front ; and  some  degree  of  fame  in  a 
small  wa3^  growing  out  of  his  psychic  facult3^ 

He  is  best  known  to  astrologers  through  his  work  on  Degrees  of  the 
Zodiac  Symbolised,  which  is  published  in  the  series  of  Astrological 
Manuals.  Although  unequal,  these  interpretations  of  the  s3^mbols  of 
degrees  are,  in  man3^  cases,  very  remarkable  indeed  and  have  been  put 
to  the  test  over  and  over  again,  by  many  workers.  The3^  were  quite 
original  with  him  and  were  obtained  by  the  exercise  of  his  clairvoyant 
and  psychic  facult3^ 

(The  place  of  Neptune  in  the  map  should  be  i i°5o',  not  10°  as  stated). 


Asandaut  or  East  Point. 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES  No.  6 


Zenith  or  South  Point. 


PLANET 

Decl. 

o 

I) 

5 

ASPECTS. 

>? 

SUN 

0 

f/ 

MOON 

18  S 26 

D 

JL 

_L 

MERCURY 

5 

/ 

rf' 

VENUS 

2o  g 13. 

5 

P 

A 

MARS 

IS  g .So 

d 

4 

f/ 

JUPITER 

u 

P 

P 

A 

SATURN 

~b 

p 

URANUS 

- !<=}  8 10. 

P 

P 

P 

NEPTUNE 

Zl  g 5. 

UJ 

p 

SIR  ISAAC  PITMAN 


Descendant  or  West  Point. 


SIR  ISAAC  PITMAN 


The  Inventor  of  Phonography 

Born  0.40  a.m.,  \th  January,  1813,  at  Tunbridge  in  Wiltshire 

A STUDY  of  the  biography ' of  this  celebrated  man  compared 
with  his  nativity,  is  sure  to  prove  helpful  and  useful  to  the  student  of 
Astrology.  His  rise  to  fame  and  to  a position  far  above  that  of  his  birth 
is  shown  by  Jupiter  on  the  M.C.  in  trine  aspect  to  the  ruling  planet. 

Shortly  after  the  publication  of  the  biography  just  referred  to,  an 
article  appeared  in  Modern  Astrology  and  a copy  of  the  foregoing  map 
was  placed  in  the  Author’s  hands,  without  giving  him  any  clue  to  the 
native’s  identity.  He  was  asked  to  ‘ write  a brief  delineation,  touching 
more  especially  upon  the  native’s  career,  success  and  fame,  and  the 
nature  of  [the  causes  that  led  up  to  it : the  native  was  a well-known 
man  who  died  some  years  ago  at  a ripe  old  age.’  This  delineation  is 
now  appended. 

The  horoscope  from  which  the  following  judgment  has  been  drawn 
was  sent  to  me  without  date  or  place  of  birth,  with  the  remark  that  I 
should  say  something  about  the  career,  etc.  As  to  whether  the  identity 
is  to  be  revealed  or  not  I have  no  knowledge,  but  this  I may  sa3'’,  it  is 
not  easy  to  judge  any  man’s  periods  of  success  of  fame  without  knowing 
the  time,  latitude  and  longitude  of  birth  in  order  that  the  angles  may 
be  directed  to  the  planetary  positions  at  the  nativity. 

However,  making  judgment  from  the  map  of  the  nativity  alone, 
any  student  of  Astrology  would  pronounce  a rising  fame  and  fortune 
from  Libra  ascending,  and  Venus  as  ruling  planet,  in  the  house  of 
Jupiter  and  in  trine  aspect  to  that  planet  in  the  fiery  triplicity.  A 
child  born  with  this  type  of  nativity  would  be  destined  to  rise  in  life, 
have  an  eventful  career,  and  pass  from  the  physical  world  with  a name 
that  would  long  be  honoured  and  respected. 

* Life  op  Sir  Isaac  Pitman,  by  Alfred  Baker ; Sir  Isaac  Pitman  & Sons, 
London  ; (price  ys.  6d^  net.). 


219 


220 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


The  combination  of  fixed  and  cardinal  signs  always  denotes  ambition 
allied  to  grit  and  determination,  and  the  elevation  of  Jupiter  over  all  the 
planets  points  to  a moral  character  that  can  bear  the  strain  of  a satellitium 
of  planets  in  Capricorn — a severe  test,  especially  when  the  luminaries 
and  Mercury  have  to  withstand  the  individualising  process  of 
Saturn. 

Fame  and  success  would  not  come  immediately  to  this  individual. 
He  would  have  first  to  pass  through  the  impulses  of  Mars,  and  many 
early  mistakes  would  be  made  from  vdiich  he  would  profit  in  after  years. 

The  conjunction  of  the  progressed  mid-heaven  with  Jupiter  at  the 
age  of  pubert3^  is  a good  omen,  as  the  Ego  would  then  liberate  a 
considerable  amount  of  force  that  would  have  a far-reaching  effect  in 
after  life ; for  the  native  was  destined  at  birth,  or  rather  before  it,  to 
rise  far  beyond  the  environment  into  which  he  was  born. 

His  natural  bent  would  be  toward  a professional  life,  but  in 
Governmental  positions,  literary  work  and  financing  he  could  exercise 
his  practical  abilities  to  great  advantage. 

There  is  a dualism  shown  in  the  native  that  does  not  come  from 
Venus  in  Sagittarius  only,  but  through  the  strong  contrast  between  the 
planets  in  Capricorn  and  those  in  the  other  signs.  The  third  house 
denotes  a literary  talent  far  above  the  average,  to  which  the  conjunction 
of  Venus  with  Neptune  might  easily  give  an  imagination  that  would 
produce  an  exceptional  writer  of  fiction  ; it  surel3^  gives  the  native 
inspiration,  love  of  romance  and  intuition. 

With  the  fixed  and  cardinal  signs  in  evidence  there  is  alwa^^s  a 
fine  blending  of  the  ideal  with  the  practical,  the  latter  alwa^^s  turning 
the  ideals  towards  principles  and  sentiment  into  philosophy. 

The  improvement  and  expansion  of  the  native’s  mind  would  largely 
result  from  travel,  exploration,  and  residence  in  foreign  countries,  meeting 
with  strange  persons,  etc.,  all  tending  to  draw  forth  the  talent,  wit  and 
humour  supposed  to  arise  from  the  position  ; it  also  denotes  that  musical 
ability  would  find  expression  in  dramatic  effort,  etc. 

All  persons  born  with  Mars  close  to  the  planet  Uranus  become 
marked  characters,  and  display  a talent  or  genius  for  whatever  line 
of  expression  the  Ego  chooses  that  the  soul  shall  live  through.  The 
third  house  alone  in  this  nativitj^  denotes  a grand  intellect,  diplomatic 
and  discreet  in  all  its  modes  of  expression. 

The  conjunction  of  Mercury  and  Saturn  denotes  a profound  mind. 


SIR  ISAAC  PITMAN 


221 


full  of  deep  and  thoughtful  ideas,  to  which  the  general  configuration  of 
the  third  house  adds  rather  than  detracts. 

A great  change  would  come  into  his  life  in  his  15th  year,  he  would 
then  leave  home  and  take  his  life  into  his  own  hands  to  a certain  extent : 
at  the  age  of  26  he  came  into  a legacy  and  formed  a strong  attachment ; 
in  his  42nd  year  he  was  filled  with  trouble  and  passed  through  a severe 
crisis  in  his  life  when  all  things  seemed  to  fail  him,  he  lost  a relative  at 
this  time  and  suffered  severely  through  some  unfortunate  speculations. 
After  this  unfavourable  period  his  affairs  began  to  improve  and  by  his 
57th  year  he  was  on  the  high  road  to  permanent  success. 

The  nativity  denotes  the  favour  of  Royalty,  the  possibility  of 
honours  or  titles  in  the  latter  half  of  his  life,  and  a very  successful  end 
to  his  career. 

The  close  of  his  life  was  inclined  to  be  ascetic  or  much  conserved, 
he  had  many  powerful  friends  but  was  not  in  a strict  sense  of  the  word 
a popular  man,  though  capable  of  being  very  sociable  and  decidedly 
patriotic. 

This  nativity  could  well  be  that  of  a great  financier  or  one  whose 
business  abilities  would  be  turned  into  a successful  profession.  Much 
wealth  could  be  acquired  through  speculation  and  a huge  fortune  could 
be  made  by  speculative  investments. 


Fiery  Signs  3 
Airy  „ — 


Cardinal  Signs  4 
Fixed  „ 3 

Mutable  „ 2 

( Cardinal — Earth) 


Watery  „ 2 
Earthy  „ 4 


Synthesis 


Main  features  : — Libra,  second  decanate  rising  Venus  ruling  planet 
placed  in  the  sign  Sagittarius  in  conjunction  with  Neptune,  and  in 
trine  aspect  to  Jupiter  from  the  fiery  signs. 

Mars  rising  conjunction  Uranus.  P'our  planets  in  the  sign  Capricorn. 
Cardinal-earth  Quadruplicity. 

Personality : — Introspective,  inventive,  cautious  and  inspirational. 
Quickwitted  and  practical. 

Summary  of  Horoscope: — Receptive  and  practical  mind,  great  powers 
of  expansion  from  ruler  trine  Jupiter  rare  conjunctions. 

Future  prospects : — Long  life  ; honours,  gratified  ambitions,  and 
success  through  merit.  Increasing  responsibilities,  borne  lightly 
Lasting  fame. 


AscendiVit  oy  East  Point. 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES  No.  7 


Zenith  oy  South  Point. 


FLANET 

i 

Decl.  1 

i 

0 

ASPECTS. 

? <r  y 

t. 

y 

■ i 

T 

SUN 

g 29. 

G 

1 

(Y 

/ 

! 1 

1 I 

I 

n 

i 

.MOON 

f 35. 

D 

i 

1 

c/ 

n 

JiL 

f 

MERCURY 

la  .2_5uJ 

? 

p 

r 

/ 

n 

I /iS*" 

n 

VENUS 

f 9. 

2 

A 

A 

u 

i 

I 

MARS 

Jji. 

g 11. 

c? 

1 

P 

i I 

j 

JUPITER 

^ IZ. 

u 

1 

SATURN 

-g  iS. 

h 

i 

URANUS 

lo 

8 3f: 

1 

l| 

j 

! 

NEPTUNE 

Ij 

\i.- 

L 

1 j 

1 1 

SIR  WILLIAM  ALLAN 


Descendant  or  West  Point. 


SIR  WILLIAM  ALLAN 


M.P.  for  Gateshead 

Born  29M  November  1837,  7 a.m.,  Dundee ; died  z^th  December,  1903 

The  most  interesting  nativities  to  the  student  of  astrolog}^  are 
undoubtedly  those  of  self-made  men,  and  one  of  the  best  examples 
is  that  of  the  late  Sir  William  Allan,  M.P.  for  Gateshead,  whose  death 
took  place  in  1903. 

The  following  short  account  of  the  native’s  career,  from  the  obituary 
notice  in  the  Daily  Telegraph  of  29th  December  1903,  ma^^  be  of  interest 
to  those  to  whom  the  details  are  unfamiliar. 

‘ We  have  to  announce  with  great  regret  the  death  of  Sir  William  Allan, 
the  well-known  member  for  Gateshead,  whose  disappearance  from  the  House 
of  Commons  removes  the  most  rugged  and  picturesque  figure  upon  the  Radical 
benches.  With  many  friends  on  both  sides  of  the  Speaker,  and  not  a single 
enemy  upon  either,  the  absence  of  his  genial  and  breezy  presence  will  be 
genuinely  felt  in  the  next  Session  and  will  make  a difference  in  the  aspect  of 
the  House.  The  brief  telegram  announcing  that  Sir  William  passed  away  at 
seven  o’clock  last  evening  records  the  unexpected  close  of  a remarkable  career. 
Born  at  Dundee  in  the  first  year  of  Queen  Victoria’s  reign,  on  November  29th 
1837,  he  owed  all  to  his  efforts  and  nothing  to  fortune.  ‘The  world  has  been 
my  chief  educator,’  he  used  to  say,  ‘ and  men  my  books.’  As  a working  engineer 
during  the  earlier  half  of  his  life,  he  served  in  the  Royal  Navy  and  the  mer- 
cantile marine.  When  the  American  Civil  War  broke  out  adventures  came  to 
the  adventurous.  He  signed  on  as  chief  engineer  aboard  a blockade  runner, 
but  the  vessel  was  captured  by  the  Federals,  and  he  was  allowed  some  space  for 
serious  meditation  upon  his  future  career  as  a prisoner  in  the  old  capitol  at 
Richmond. 

‘Released  on  parole,  he  settled  in  the  North  of  England  as  the  manager  of 
an  engineering  business,  and  ultimately  became  known  as  iron-master,  politician, 
and  poet.  He  founded  the  Scotia  engine  works  at  Sunderland,  amalgamated  two 
or  three  years  ago  with  Richardsons,  Westgarth  & Co.,  of  Hartlepool.  As  head 
of  this  successful  enterprise  he  always  showed  the  keenest  interest  in  the  technical 
progress  of  the  industry  with  which  he  was  connected  and  in  the  relations  of- 
capital  and  labour.  A decade  ago  he  voluntarily  introduced  the  eight  hours’  day 
at  his  works,  a fact  which  accounted  for  much  of  his  popularity  upon  the  Tyne 
and  the  Wear.  He. had  written  a couple  of  monographs  upon  ‘ Rough  Castings  ’ 
and  ‘ The  Engine-room,’  and  was  therefore  fully  prepared  to  expound  views  upon 
boilers  when  he  became  entitled  as  a legislator  to  discuss  the  naval  estimates. 
As  a Radical  who  belonged  for  a number  of  years  to  the  school  of  the  late  Mr 

223 


224 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


Joseph  Cohen,  before  that  notable  man  broke  finally  with  his  party,  William 
Allan  was  a politician  of  characteristic  humanitarian  fervour,  but  capable  of  a stiff 
independence  upon  Imperial  matters.  He  was  the  antithesis  of  a Little  Englander. 
He  heartily  approved  the  more  patriotic  and  enlightened  policy  adopted  by  the 
last  Liberal  Government  upon  naval  matters  when  Earl  Spencer  was  at  the 
admiralty,  and  at  the  same  time  Home  Rule  was  with  him  from  first  to  last  a 
genuine  sentiment.  When  a vacancy  occurred  at  Gateshead  in  1893,  the 
Radical  majority  had  been  reduced  almost  to  vanishing  point  at  the  General 
Election  a few  months  before,  but  Sir  William  Allan  worked  it  up  again  in  three 
contests.  An  ardent  supporter  of  the  South  African  War,  he  was  returned  at 
the  last  General  Election  by  946  votes,  although  the  two  Unionist  candidates 
swept  the  neighbouring  city  of  Newcastle-on-Tyne  by  enormous  majorities. 
With  his  sturdy,  powerful  figure,  his  well-known  soft  hat,  and  bearded  like  a 
viking,  the  member  for  Gateshead  was  always  one  of  the  unmistakably  distinct 
types  of  the  House.  In  debate  he  was  almost  exclusively  known  as  the  sworn 
opponent  of  water-tube  boilers,  which  he  denounced  with  an  almost  prophetic 
conviction,  but  with  an  eloquence  and  humour  which  were  pleasing  even  when 
they  were  not  persuasive.  But  the  most  lovable  side  of  the  man  was  that  of 
which  the  House  of  Commons  knew  least.  He  could  talk  politics  or  sentiment 
amid  a cloud  of  smoke  as  thick  as  ever  curled  from  the  pipe-bowls  In  Frederick 
William’s  Tobacco  Parliament.  But  most  of  all  he  liked  to  think  of  himself  as 
a poet,  and  in  this,  as  in  other  ways,  some  unmistakable  suggestion  of  the  spirit 
of  Robert  Burns  hung  about  the  man.  Among  his  volumes  were  ‘ Poems,’ 
^ Heather  Bells,’  ‘ Lays  of  Leisure,’  ‘ Gordon,’  ‘ Sunset  Songs,’  ‘ Songs  of  Love  and 
War.’  He  wrote  verses  about  as  easily  as  most  persons  read  them,  and  his  pages 
were  full  of  simple  flowing  tuneful  numbers,  and  of  a singularly  unspoiled  love 
of  nature  and  of  his  kind,  with  Scotland  always  first  and  last  in  his  affections. 
He  appeared  to  the  casual  eye  to  be  in  hale,  and  even  herculean  health,  but 
he  passed  away  of  heart  disease  at  his  Sunderland  residence  last  night.  Life  will 
seem  colder  without  him  to  all  those  in  the  North  of  England  who  had  been 
familiar,  whether  in  public  or  private,  with  his  warm-hearted,  impressionable, 
eloquent,  yet  practical,  personality.’ 

Sir  William  Allan  supplied  the  author  with  his  birth  time — which 
he  said  he  had  been  informed  was  ‘about  7 a.m.’ — a few  years  before 
his  death,  and  the  data  for  the  horoscope  have  been  calculated  in 
accordance  with  this  information. 

After  carefully  studying  the  nativity  the  student  may  very  naturally 
ask  : In  what  manner  should  a horoscope  of  this  nature  be  synthesised  ? 

The  method  would  be  as  follows : 

Jupiter  elevated  over  all  the  planets,  close  to  the  cusp  of  the  mid- 
heaven, is  discounted  to  some  extent  by  this  planet  being  in  its  detriment 
and  in  square  to  the  satellitium  of  planets  in  Sagittarius  ; it  is,  however, 
at  the  same  time  considerably  assisted  by  the  sextile  aspect  of  Saturn 
from  the  cusp  of  the  first  house,  and  the  trine  of  Venus  from  the  second 
house. 


SIR  WILLIAM  ALLAN 


225 


In  the  horoscopes  of  all  public  or  notable  men  it  is  usual  to  find 
many  planets  in  Cardinal  signs,  here  we  have  only  o;^^planet  in  a Cardinal 
sign  and  that  not  the  ruler  of  the  horoscope. 

With  no  less  than  six  planets  in  mutable  or  common  signs  the 
majority  of  students  would  at  a first  glance  judge  the  native  to  be  a 
nonentity,  or  at  least  one  who  could  never  make  a public  name  for  himself 
The  careful  student,  however,  would  note  the  fact  of  all  the  planets 
rising,  and  the  most  fortunate  planet  culminating. 

Rising  planets  are  powers,  which  a skilful  man  may  absorb  and  use 
to  considerable  advantage.  In  this  horoscope  the  third  or  Cancer 
decanate  of  Scorpio  rises,  a decanate  of  tenacity,  ambition,  fixity  of 
purpose,  and  a peculiar  sensitiveness  that  quickens  the  intuition,  giving 
power  to  sense  conditions,  not  only  for  the  immediate  present  but  also  for 
the  future.  Moreover,  Saturn  rises  in  this  decanate  close  to  the  ascendant 
bringing  a midheaven  influence  (Capricorn)  thereto : it  is,  too,  entirely 
free  from  any  afflicting  influence  in  the  nativity  ( h ^ 

All  persons  born  with  Saturn  rising  have  the  power  to  create  their 
own  success  or  failure,  and  with  an  advanced  soul  it  denotes  a peculiar 
independence,  which  often  comes  from  pride  and  self-reliance.  In  some 
cases  it  accentuates  the  self-perfecting  qualities  to  an  abnormal  extent. 

In  this  horoscope  Saturn  is  a synthesising  influence  in  itself  and  was 
an  ever-present  factor  in  the  native’s  life.  It  gave  him  continuity ; a love 
of  justice  ; faithfulness  to  a trust ; and  the  ability  to  keep  his  own  counsel, 
although  in  general  frank  and  outspoken  through  the  Sagittarian  influence. 
It  inspired  others  with  confidence  in  his  promises  and  his  abilities,  and 
stamped  him  as  a reliable  and  sincere  man  of  sound  and  honest  principles. 

His  success  in  life  would  be  mainly  due  to  his  sterling  honesty,  his 
insight  into  human  nature,  his  belief  in  himself  and  his  love  of  work,  for 
which  he  had  a great  capacity ; also  his  perseverance  and  careful 
attention  to  details,  combined  with  thoroughness  and  foresight.  This  is 
the  result  of  a blend  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  (h-Hl  and  t). 

The  Jupiterian  influence  is  equally  as  strong  as  the  Saturnine,  giving 
him  tact  and  the  faculty  to  make  a full  though  honest  use  of  social 
opportunities. 

Note  the  ruler  of  the  eleventh  house  in  the  second,  in  Capricorn,  the 
tenth-house  sign.  He  received  great  help  from  friends,  and  they  were 
of  immense  financial  advantage  to  him,  never  failing  him  in  their  aid 
and  support. 

p 


226 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


The  rugged  and  sterling  honesty  of  Saturn  rising  in  Scorpio  were 
admirably  polished  by  the  Sagittarian  affability  and  frankness  that  must 
have  won  him  many  warm  friends  and  supporters. 

He  rose  from  the  rank  of  working  engineer  to  a position  of  wealth 
and  fame,  the  whole  of  which,  it  has  been  said,  ‘ he  owed  to  his  efforts 
and  nothing  to  fortune.’  He  is  said  to  have  declared  that  ‘ the  world 
has  been  my  chief  education,  and  men  my  books.’ 

In  synthesising  this  nativity  several  factors  should  be  noted.  The 
blending  of  Saturn  and  Jupiter  is  not  difficult  to  follow,  and  its  beneficial 
influence  upon  his  character  and  disposition. 

The  luminaries  and  Mercury  strongly  tinged  with  the  Martial  in- 
fluences denote  his  mechanical  ability,  while  Mars  in  the  second  house 
shows  his  financial  success  through  it.  His  political  and  poetic  interest 
is  largely  due  to  his  wife’s  influence,  denoted  by  Venus  ruler  of  the 
seventh  in  Capricorn  in  the  second,  and  his  marriage  is  shown  to  be  a 
happy  and  profitable  one  by  the  favourable  aspects  of  Venus. 

Whatever  ambitions  he  would  have  latent  within  him  would  be 
stimulated  and  aroused  into  activity  by  his  friends  (Venus  ruler  of  the 
eleventh).  Enemies  we  should  judge  he  had  none. 

There  is  one  remarkable  feature  about  his  success  that  should  be 
noted.  His  servants  and  employees  would  very  considerably  aid  him  in 
his  enterprises  (Venus  ruler  of  the  sixth  in  the  second).  He  would 
appreciate  and  encourage  them,  and  a reciprocal  influence  of  a very 
marked  character  is  shown  by  the  aspects  of  Venus  to  Saturn,  and  to 
Jupiter, — in  fact,  a double  tendency,  testimony  to  this  helpful  reciprocity, 
is  shown  by  the  position  of  Jupiter  in  Virgo  on  the  M.C.  and  Venus  in 
Capricorn  in  the  second,  factors  that  cannot  be  under-estimated  when 
synthesising  this  horoscope.  In  illustration  of  this  it  may  be  pointed  out 
that  he  voluntarily  introduced  the  eight  hours’  day  at  his  works,  which 
act  made  him  very  popular  on  the  Tyne  and  the  Wear,  and  he  always 
showed  the  keenest  interest  in  the  technical  progress  of  the  industry 
with  which  he  was  connected,  and  in  the  relations  of  Capital  and  Labour. 

ELEMENTS 

Fire  4 Cardinal  i 

Earth  2 Fixed  2 

Air  I Mutable  6 

Water  2 


O d ^ D d c? 

Rulers  of  loth  and  ist 
Luminaries  trine  11 


SIR  WILLIAM  ALLAN 


227 


Synthesis 

Main  features : — Scorpio,  third  decanate,  rising.  Mars  ruling  planet, 
in  the  second  house,  and  the  third  decanate  of  the  sign  Sagittarius. 
Jupiter  had  culminated  at  birth,  in  sextile  aspect  to  Saturn,  and  trine 
Venus  from  the  earthy  triplicity  in  the  second  house.  With  the 
exception  of  Jupiter,  the  most  elevated  planet,  all  the  planets  were 
rising. 

Personality : — Mental  and  physical  qualities  well  balanced.  A very 
self-conscious  personality,  full  of  hope,  combined  with  much  industry 
and  perseverance. 

Stmimary  of  horoscope : — Mental-motive  temperament ; in  which  the 
blending  of  the  angular  planets  Saturn  Jupiter  and  Uranus  strengthens 
the  whole  horoscope,  denoting  honest  motives  and  good  intentions  in 
every  direction  to  which  the  mind  is  bent. 

Future  prospects : — A rising  career,  a full  life,  and  a satisfactor}^ 
ending. 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES  No.  8 


PLANBT 


SUN 

MOON 

MERCURY 

VENUS 

MARS 

JUPITER 

SATURN 

URANUS 

NEPTUNE 


1 DHCLIN. 

ASPECTS. 

FIRE 

^ EARTH 
, 3 air 

^ WATER 
/ CARDINAL 
^ FIXED 

/W,  S'/ 

iiyjr.  4 ? 

.Y  /7..KJah£.. 

y i,  /■ 

/ O tr  J 

> 

S' A 



^7:  ... 

a / A.  Jfvf 



^ couyioii 

^ EXALTED 

;■ 

■T  A. 

/±:a...i1 



THE  NATIVITY  OF  A BANKRUPT 


THE  NATIVITY  OF  A BANKRUPT 

Born  5.30  a.m.y  18M  September  1840.  Lat.  51°  N'^z'  R.J.M.C.  ^h.  \%m.  49/. 

During  the  course  \ of  his  practice  the  astrologer  will  often  come 
across  horoscopes  which  at  the  first  glance  are  very  puzzling  and 
difficult  to  decipher,  this  being  in  some  cases  due  to  a knowledge  of  the 
native’s  environment,  which  appears  to  be  very  much  more  favourable 
than  the  horoscope  indicates.  The  following  is  such  a case,  the  native, 
a man  now  deceased,  being  one  who  had  a very  firm  belief  in  Astrology, 
and  who  employed  many  astrologers  to  assist  him  in  a knowledge  of  his 
own  horoscope,  which  to  judge  by  his  social  position,  did  not  appear  to  be 
so  favourable  as  the  aspects  and  positions  would  seem  to  indicate.  He 
was  a large  manufacturer,  employing  a great  number  of  people,  and  was 
well-known  to  the  trade  that  he  supplied.  He  held  many  important 
positions,  being  at  one  time  alderman  for  the  town  in  which  he  resided ; 
he  was  also  a mason  in  high  degree,  and  was  a man  generally  looked  to 
as  an  important  personage  in  all  civic  matters  affecting  the  town  in 
which  he  lived. 

He  rose  from  a fairly  humble  position  in  life,  and  was  at  one  time 
exceedingly  wealthy,  owning  to  a great  deal  of  property  and  real  estate  ; 
but  his  one  great  drawback  was  his  extreme  liberality,  possessing  as  he 
did  an  over-generous  nature.  He  was  never  able  to  resist  the  entreaties 
of  his  friends  and  acquaintances  either  to  advance  them  money  or  to 
allow  his  name  to  be  put  down  for  charities,  with  the  result  that  he 
became  greatly  indebted  to  his  bankers  by  overdrawing  his  account  on 
various  occasions  to  the  extent  of  several  thousand  pounds.  Eventually 
he  became  bankrupt,  lost  his  position,  and  finally  compounding  with 
his  creditors  was  content  to  accept  a situation  as  manager  to  the  firm 
that  he  had  built  up  himself  and  made  so  successful. 

Now  this  horoscope  is  remarkable  for  planetary  positions  that  are 
rather  contradicted  by  aspects.  The  Sun  and  Mercury  are  rising  in  the 
ascendant,  which  gives  great  strength  and  power  to  these  planets,  but 
Mercury  ruler  of  the  M.C.,  is  in  opposition  to  the  planet  Uranus  and  in 
square  to  the  Moon  and  Saturn,  which  denotes  legal  troubles,  many 

229 


230 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


obstacles,  a great  deal  of  opposition,  alternating  credit  and  discredit,  and 
finally  the  disruption  and  entanglement  of  his  affairs.  The  Moon,  it 
will  be  seen,  is  accidentally  dignified  on  the  cusp  of  the  tenth  house,  but 
is  in  opposition  to  the  planet  Saturn  from  mutable  signs,  Saturn  being 
on  the  cusp  of  the  fourth  house,  so  that  the  natural  ruler  of  the  tenth  is 
afflicting  the  Moon  in  her  position  to  the  meridian.  The  loss  and 
extravagance  in  connection  with  his  friends  and  acquaintances  is  plainly 
marked  by  the  square  aspect  of  Mars  to  Jupiter  from  the  eleventh  house, 
the  house  of  friends,  to  the  third.  Ele  was  mixed  up  with  a great  many 
religious  affairs,  and  took  a very  important  part  in  religious  concerns  in 
connection  with  the  town  in  which  he  became  such  a prominent  person- 
age, and  it  was  owing  to  religious  associations  that  he  was  called  upon 
to  expend  more  mone}^  than  he  could  actually  afford.  Indeed,  he  was 
considered  to  be  a wealthy  man  of  considerable  means,  and  there  is  no 
doubt  that  he  had  the  faculty  for  obtaining  money,  Venus  in  her  own 
sign  Libra  occupying  the  cusp  of  the  second  house  and  being  in  sextile 
to  Mars.  Now  it  will  be  noticed  that  no  less  than  five  planets  occupy 
Mutable  signs  and  only  one  Cardinal  ; but  then,  no  less  than  five  planets 
are  angular,  the  benefics  Venus  and  Jupiter  are  rising,  and  all  these 
tended  to  bring  him  into  positions  of  trust  with  a certain  amount  of 
power  and  authority.  His  fall,  remarkable  though  it  was,  in  reality 
caused  his  death  ; it  was  not  due  to  any  dishonest  acts  on  his  part  or 
careless  want  of  attention  to  business,  although  it  is  said  he  neglected 
his  business  to  a certain  extent  by  engaging  in  civic  matters  and  in 
affairs  connected  with  the  many  charities  to  which  he  contributed. 

It  is  singular  to  note  the  position  of  Mars,  which  being  in  the 
eleventh  house  in  square  to  Jupiter  in  the  third  was  the  cause  of  his 
extravagance  and  suffering  through  the  influence  of  his  friends,  yet  at 
the  same  time  (Mars  being  in  sextile  to  Venus  ruler  of  the  second)  was 
a position  which  brought  him  gain. 

He  had  a very  strange  belief  in  his  fate,  as  he  termed  it,  and 
although  he  strove  very  hard  to  overcome  man3^  obstacles  that  he  had 
to  contend  with,  and  had  a persevering,  cheerful  and  hopeful  spirit,  yet 
he  declared  he  was  doomed  some  day  to  fail,  ignominiousl}^  through  his 
own  foolishness.  Several  times  before  the  climax  arrived  he  was  able 
to  borrow  large  sums  of  mone3^ ; but  he  graduall3^  mortgaged  estate  after 
estate,  and  eventuall3"  the  whole  of  his  business  premises,  and  then 
drew  an  overdraft  for  several  thousand  pounds,  from  his  bankers.  Finally 


A BANKRUPT 


231 


the  collapse  came,  and  he  was  a man  ruined  of  a splendid  business^ 
through  his  own  inability  to  overcome  the  severe  afflictions  in  his 
nativit3n 

The  squares  of  Mercury  and  Saturn  and  the  Moon  and  Uranus 
were  the  most  tr3n'ng  aspects  he  had  to  contend  with,  and  the  afQiction 
of  Jupiter,  ruler  of  the  fourth  house,  by  Mars,  together  with  Saturn  on 
the  cusp  of  the  fourth  forming  adverse  aspects  to  the  majority  of  the 
planets.  It  was  only  through  a knowledge  of  Astrolog3^  that  he  was 
prevented  from  committing  a rash  act,  and  his  last  visit  to  the  author 
was  one  in  which  he  expressed  himself  very  strongly  with  regard  to 
precipitating  matters  in  a way  which  would  have  disgraced  his 
good  name  ; but  fortunately  he  was  prevailed  upon  to  persevere,  and 
although  he  suffered  the  great  indignit3^  of  being  an  emplo3^ee  in  his  own 
factory  it  was  the  means  of  saving  him  from  irretrievable  disgrace 
that  would  have  overtaken  him  had  he  taken  matters  into  his  own  hand 
and  precipitated  his  fate  in  the  disastrous  manner  he  had  contemplated. 

In  synthesising  this  horoscope  the  Cardinal-Air  combination  should 
be  taken  into  account,  and  the  effect  of  the  afflictions  from  angles  care- 
fully noted.  After  his  failure,  although  appointed  manager  of  his  own 
business  by  the  bankers,  it  was  necessary  to  sell  the  business  to  another 
manufacturer,  who  placed  his  own  son  at  the  head  of  affairs  ; this  proved 
to  be  the  last  straw,  the  native  finally  succumbing  to  influences  that  at 
first  sight  appeared  to  be  beneficial.  The  influences  operating  at  the 
time  of  death  were  : — O p.  d ^ p.  (lord  of  the  fourth),  and  O p.  0 ^ P-  ; 
^ (ruler)  p.  □ Ipr.  sep.  6 hr.,  near  the  cusp  of  the  fourth  house.  It  is 
not  necessary  to  state  the  nature  of  his  death  as  it  is  so  very  plainh" 
marked,  but  students  might  note  the  fact  that  the  Sun  had  progressed 
into  the  sign  Scorpio,  conjunction  Jupiter,  square  Mars,  from  fixed  signs  ; 
and  that  Mars  by  progression  had  arrived  at  the  exact  conjunction  with 
the  radical  Sun  ; Venus  ruler  of  the  second  was  also  in  sesquiquadrate 
aspect  to  Mars. 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES  No.  9 


Zcniilt  cr  South  Point. 


The  horoscope  o/MRS  BESSIE  LEO,  born  6.47  p,m.,  ^th  Atril,  1858, 
Salisbury  England,  5 i°4'N., i^'W.  R.A.M.C.  ii3°45'. 

The  Speculum 


Right  Meridian  Semi- 

Ascension  Distance  Arc.  Mundane  Position 


0 

14 

0 

26 

80 

41 

0 

82 

18 

0 

1 

37 

under 

7 cusp 

1) 

277 

57 

15 

48 

131 

35 

28 

4 

from 

3 

$ 

25 

8 

88 

37 

104 

7 

15 

30 

n 

7 

$ 

23 

16 

90 

29 

lOI 

I 

10 

32 

)> 

7 

n 

c? 

240 

7 

53 

38 

116 

13 

23 

51 

>> 

2 

V 

46 

16 

67 

29 

III 

39 

6 

57 

)> 

8 

n 

h 

II3 

23 

0 

22 

119 

58 

0 

22 

outside 

10 

j> 

54 

37 

59 

8 

115 

42 

18 

0 

from 

8 

)) 

T 354 

13 

60 

28 

94 

39 

2 

38  outside 

6 

n 

MRS  BESSIE  LEO 


An  interesting  romance  is  attached  to  Mrs  Leo’s  acquaintance 
with  Astrology  which  students  of  Astrology  may  appreciate.  In  the 
year  1893  a free  horoscope  was  offered  to  all  subscribers  to  Modern 
Astrology  and  Mrs  Leo,  who  was  then  unmarried,  being  informed  of 
the  offer  by  a Mr  Whiting  of  Bournemouth,  and  declaring  her  unbelief 
in  Astrology,  it  was  arranged  between  them  that  he  should  use  her 
initials  and  send,  with  his  subscription  to  the  magazine,  the  particulars 
of  her  birth.  This  was  done,  and  the  following  is  a verbatim  copy  of  the 
delineation  sent  by  the  Editor : 

‘ Born  under  the  just  sign  Libra,  Venus  is  your  ruling  planet. 
Ability  for  occultism  is  shown  ; in  fact  it  is  the  feature  (T  -X-  1^1,  A h). 

‘ I judge  you  possess  clairvoyant  powers.  You  will,  if  you  seek 
it,  gain  financially  through  occultism. 

‘ There  is  a tendency  to  disaster  when  under  ill  directions  (h  M.C.). 

‘ The  disposition  seems  to  be  a good,  sympathetic  and  kind  one 
( ^ 6 ? ),  but  there  is  at  times  a tendency  to  melancholia  ( ? □ h ),  and 
this  at  periods  may  act  on  health. 

‘The  logical  and  intuitive  faculties  seem  fairly  balanced. 

‘ I judge  the  throat  will  cause  you  trouble  and  at  the  appointed  time 
a throat  disease  will  usher  in  the  terminus  vitoe  suddenly.’  ^ 

The  recipient  of  this  delineation  was  much  impressed  with  its 
accuracy,  especially  as  at  that  time  she  was  experiencing  much  trouble 
with  her  throat,  and  although  she  had  sent  for  several  horoscopes  to 
various  advertising  astrologers  all  delineations  had  hiterto  proved 
ver3^  wide  of  the  mark. 

The  subject  of  our  horoscope  has  had  a very  eventful  life  and 
has  lived  through  experiences  which  do  not  fall  to  the  lot  of  one  woman 
in  a million.  Her  devotion  to  Theosophy  and  its  teachings  is  well- 
known,  and  her  only  regret  at  the  present  time  (1912)  is  that  owing  to 
indifferent  health  she  cannot  lecture  and  do  more  outer  work  for  the 
cause  so  dear  to  her  heart.  Her  health  has  been  undergoing  a very 
severe  strain  owing  to  a train  of  adverse  aspects  which  began  at  the 
death  of  her  father  in  1908.  The  following  is  a judgment  of  this 
Nativity  by  Mr  H.  S.  Green. 

'A  comparative  judgment  of  this  Nativity  will  be  found  in  Practical  Astrology, 
page  179. 


233 


234 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


This  horoscope  shows  Libra  rising,  the  seventh  sign  of  the  zodiac, 
the  day  house  of  Venus,  the  exaltation  of  Saturn,  of  the  airy  triplicity 
and  the  movable  quadruplicity.  No  planets  are  in  the  ascendant, 
but  the  fact  that  this  sign  corresponds  to  the  seventh  house,  which  here 
contains  Sun,  Mercury,  and  Venus,  strengthens  its  influence  over 
character  and  fortunes  considerably. 

The  following  account  of  the  nature  given  by  Libra  is  abbreviated 
from  Delineations  Based  on  the  Rising  Sign,  ^ written  by  a well-known 
astrologer  more  than  twenty  years  ago,  which  frees  it  from  any  suspicion 
of  bias  on  the  present  occasion. 

‘Libra  confers  upon  its  subject  a sweet  and  gentle  nature,  very 
flexible  and  'sensitive,  and  easily  influenced  b3i^  prevailing  conditions. 
It  gives  courtes3%  honesty,  and  a sense  of  justice  which  controls  all 
the  actions  of  life,  with  kindness,  compassion,  and  deep  affection. 
The  nature  is  upright  and  frank,  at  times  very  hopeful  and  anon  ver^^ 
melancholy ; liable  to  extremes  of  temper  and  mood  and  easily  angered 
but  as  readily  pacified.  The  will  is  strong  but  does  not  always  endure. 

‘ The  native  of  this  sign  is  quick  in  learning,  has  a taste  for  the 
arts,  and  also  for  business  affairs  generally ; yet  the  appetites  are 
keen  and  the  love  of  pleasure  great,  while  the  passions  are  fervent 
and  sincere.  The  subject  is  apt  to  ride  a hobby  and  to  pursue  a fad 
to  extreme  length,  and  while  engaged  on  anything  is  very  intense,  but 
he  is  liable  to  change  his  views  at  any  moment  and  to  take  up  some 
new  pursuit.  The  father  is  a source  of  trouble  or  loss  to  the  native, 
and  frequently  has  fallen  from  a high  position : in  some  cases  the  father 
dies  when  the  native  is  quite  young  ; in  all  other  cases  there  are  disputes, 
hindrances,  and  restraints  brought  about  by  the  father. 

‘ There  are  man^^  voyages  to  and  journeys  in  distant  countries, 
and  some  dangers  therein.  The  native  will  have  much  to  do  with  the 
public,  and  in  connection  with  the  occupation  he  will  make  manj^ 
changes  of  residence  and  some  long  vo3mges.  Instabilit3"  marks  tlie 
position,  and  honours  are  likely  to  be  impermanent,  though  the  famil3^ 
sometimes  assist  the  native  in  this  particular ; while  dealing  in  land 
and  houses  will  lead  to  honour  as  well  as  profit.  There  are  secret 
enemies  among  servants  and  members  of  the  fami^^  on  the  father’s  side  ; 
moreover  famiL^  affairs  will  cause  enmit3v’ 


’ Quoted  from  Astrology  for  all. 


MRS  BESSIE  LEO 


235 


Libra  is  in  some  respects  a very  adaptable  sign,  for  the  type  of  mind 
it  gives  may  vary  considerabty  according  to  planetary  positions,  and  to 
whether  these  support  or  contradict  the  natural  characteristics  of  the  sign. 

The  element  ‘air’  manifests  in  the  ordinary  man  mainly  through 
thought,  although  it  has  a second  and  higher  interpretation  in  relation 
to  that  mode  of  consciousness  which  lies  beyond  intellect.  When 
referred  to  thought,  Libra  seems  to  correspond,  under  the  influence  of 
the  quality  of  Activity,  to  perception ; and  in  this  horoscope  the 
mental  powers  that  result  from  such  a combination  are  strongly  rein- 
forced by  the  presence  of  five  of  the  heavenly  bodies  in  movable  signs. 
This  gives  great  alertness  and  energy  to  the  perceptive  faculties ; 
things  are  seen,  heard,  and  felt  instantly,  facts  are  noted,  occurrences 
observed,  all  five  senses  are  usualb^  quick  and  active,  but  especially 
the  sense  of  sight.  This  makes  a veiy  keen  observer,  and  adapts  to  any 
occupation  or  mode  of  life  in  which  this  characteristic  can  find  a natural 
outlet ; and  Mrs  Leo’s  friends  will  at  once  recall,  in  this  connection,  her 
unusual  skill  at  physiognomy,  phrenology,  palmistr}^  and  grapholog3% 
and  especially  the  rapidity  with  which  she  makes  her  observations  and 
draws  her  conclusions  ; for  she  seems  to  have  fathomed  the  inner  nature 
of  the  person  under  consideration  before  a slower  observer,  such  as 
the  present  write*',  has  decided  whether  he  is  tall  or  short,  fair  or  dark. 

This  naturally  leads  up  to  the  faculty  of  intuition,  of  gaining 
knowledge  through  some  higher  and  more  rapidly  acting  mode  of  con- 
sciousness than  that  carried  on  by  thought  based  upon  observation. 
It  is  difficult  to  comment  upon  such  a power ; for  those  who  possess  it 
do  not  seem  to  analyse  its  processes  or  to  state  them  in  language 
easily  intelligible  to  ordinary  mortals  not  possessed  of  the  faculty. 
But  when  Libra  is  raised  to  its  higher  power,  the  combination  of  Air 
and  Activity  can  evidentty  give  a swift  intuition  ; just  as  the  same 
element,  when  working  wiih  that  quality  which  is  given  by  the  common 
quadruplicity  in  its  superior  mode,  can  manifest  what  is  called  pure  reason. 
In  this  particular  horoscope,  the  conjunction  of  Mercury  and  Venus  in 
Aries  in  the  seventh  house  acts  as  a channel  through  which  intuition 
flows.  Whatever  ma3^  have  been  Mme.  Blavatsky’s  real  reason  for  cor- 
responding these  two  planets  to  two  out  of  three  of  the  modes  of  con- 
sciousness of  the  spiritual  man,  it  seems  evident  that  their  conjunction 
stands  as  a very  real  S3mibol  of  the  potential  activity  of  Buddhi  or  intuition. 

The  influence  of  Libra  and  the  aiiy  element  generall3^  upon  the 


236 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


emotional  side  of  the  nature  is  another  problem  that  is  not  so  simple 
as  it  seems.  As  previously  stated,  in  the  ordinary  man  it  functions 
usually  as  some  mode  of  cognition,  and  yet  the  three  airy  signs  corre- 
spond to  the  houses  ruling  marriage,  brothers,  and  friends ; all  based 
upon  the  feelings  and  summed  up,  perhaps,  in  the  word  brotherhood,  in 
its  widest  sense.  In  the  spiritual  man,  understanding  and  love  are 
both  united  as  Wisdom,  which  includes  in  one  the  two  faculties  that 
are  separated  in  the  personal  man.  Here,  however,  the  case  is  simpler, 
for  the  Sun,  Mercury,  and  Venus  in  the  fiery  sign  Aries  give  to  the 
horoscope  a strong  attraction  to  the  emotional  aspect  of  consciousness. 
This  is  not  the  indolent,  plastic  emotion  of  the  watery  element,  but  an 
active,  positive,  impetuous  energy  which  floods  the  whole  nature  and 
sweeps  everything  before  it.  Those  who  have  seen  abundant  rose- 
pink  clouds  of  affection  in  Mrs  Leo’s  aura  have  not  to  search  very  far 
in  order  to  discover  the  astrological  cause  of  it.  Falling  in  the  seventh 
house,  and  with  the  seventh  sign  rising,  it  would  be  impossible  for  her 
to  live  an  isolated  life  apart  from  her  kind.  Marriage,  friendship,  and 
the  appreciation  of  the  many  fall  to  her  lot  inevitably ; and  the  same 
positions  enable  her  to  sympathise  with  many  and  diverse  types  of 
humanity,  with  whom  she  is  instantly  at  home  and  whose  joys  and 
sorrows  she  feels  as  if  they  were  'her  own.  Positions  such  as  these  in 
fiery  signs  go  with  good  nature,  generosity,  and  active  affections, 
which,  because  they  fall  in  the  seventh  angle,  bring  an  extensive  circle 
of  friends  and  acquaintances  and  a name  that  is  widely  known. 

This  combination  of  Libra  with  cardinal  sign  positions  of  the 
majority  of  the  planets  also  signifies  an  active  worker.  The  rapidl3^ 
moving  and  changing  energies  can  achieve  results  in  a short  time  that 
would  be  impossible  to  one  of  a more  fixed  temperament.  There  is 
alwa^^s  a temptation,  with  such  positions,  to  attempt  many  and  diverse 
undertakings  ; the  work  performed  will  be  great  in  amount  and  will  be 
carried  out  by  swiftness  of  action  and  concentrated  impulse  rather 
than  by  the  slow,  sure  and  unyielding  methods  of  the  fixed  signs.  All 
cardinal  sign  people  have  also  to  run  the  risk  of  sometimes  losing  or 
leaving  behind  those  of  their  friends  whose  more  unchanging  natures 
cannot  respond  to  such  rapid  movement  in  thought  or  in  action ; and 
each  step  in  advance  may  mean  the  loss  or  alienation  of  someone  whose 
opinions  and  methods  are  different  The  presence  of  Sun,  Moon,  and 
ascendant,  the  three  most  important  points  of  any  horoscope,  all  in  the 


MRS  BESSIE  LEO 


237 


movable  quadruplicity,  means  Will^  but  it  is  the  rapid  and  executive  faculty 
through  which  this  manifests,  and  not  the  steadfast  strength  of  the  in- 
domitable nature  that  moves  like  the  stars  ‘without  haste,  without  rest.’ 

Saturn  is  prominent  in  this  map  but  it  is  not  strong,  being  on  the 
tenth  cusp  in  Cancer,  its  detriment,  and  ruler  of  the  fourth  house.  Its 
square  to  the  seventh  house  threatens  periods  of  gloom  and  inharmony, 
when  adverse  conditions  overpower  the  natural  buoyancy  of  disposi- 
tion ; for  its  influence  seems  to  pertain  more  to  the  environment  than 
to  character  in  this  case,  or  at  least  to  the  latter  only  so  far  as  all  good 
or  evil  happenings  are  ultimately  traceable  to  strong  or  w^eak  points  of 
character,  victories  achieved  over  self  or  faults  not  yet  overcome.  Its  not 
altogether  harmonious  signification  in  connection  with  parents  is  obvious; 
and  also  that  a parent  would  be  an  obstacle  to  a public  career  and  to 
marriage.  On  the  other  hand,  Saturn  is  in  sextile  to  Uranus  and  Jupiter 
in  the  eighth  house,  which  apart  from  its  obvious  promise  in  connection 
with  legacies  gives  power  and  authority,  and  adds  a touch  of  reserve 
and  restraint  to  a map  that  has  not  too  much  of  this  colder  quality. 

The  square  of  Saturn  to  the  Sun  is  very  unfortunate  for  health, 
and  if  the  solar  orb  were  not  angular  and  strong  in  Aries,  its  exalta- 
tion, the  prospect  of  life  having  been  prolonged  even  to  the  present 
da3'  would  have  been  poor.  The  presence  of  Saturn  in  Cancer  afflicts 
the  stomach  and  digestion,  and  the  whole  alimentar3^  canal  indirectU^ ; 
while  Uranus  in  Taurus  and  Mars  in  the  second  house  have  weakened 
and  afflicted  the  throat  at  different  times. 

We  know  little  or  nothing  of  the  practical  occult  side  of  Astrolog3% 
but  in  view  of  the  fire,  enthusiasm,  and  generous  ardour  that  animate 
the  subject  of  these  notes,  it  is  tempting  to  make  one  or  two  specula- 
tive suggestions.  She  seems  to  possess  a full  share  of  that  rapidly 
moving  nature  which  carries  the  soul  through  many  experiences  in  a 
comparatively  brief  period,  both  here  and  in  the  heaven-world ; and 
this  seems  to  imply  a series  of  incarnations  with  relatively  short 
intervals  between  them  in  the  past,  and  may  perhaps  mark  her  out  for 
a rapid  return  ‘ to-morrow.’  Also  it  may  be  asked  whether  such  a 
soul  did  not  individualise  under  the  influence  of  one  or  other  of  the 
cardinal  signs  ; for  she  exhibits  the  characteristics  resulting  from  these 
and  from  angular  positions  in  too  marked  a degree  for  them  to  be 
attributed  to  the  passing  peculiarities  of  one  personality  only,  and  a 
more  deepU^-rooted  cause  seems  to  be  demanded. 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES  No.  lo 

Zenith  or  South  Point. 


b 

a 


K 

Ui 

H 

TJ 

o 

z 

H 


The  Tragedy  of  the  Fixed  Signs 

3 Earthy  Signs  2 Watery  Signs  o Cardinal  i Mutable 
2 Fiery  Signs  2 Airy  Signs  8 Fixed 

The  Horoscope  of  GY.OKGY.S,  Ernest  Jean  Marie  Boulanger,  bo7'n  8.15 
a.m.,  2C)th  April,  1837,  at  Rennes,  in  Brittany.  R.A.M.C.  34o°49'3o". 

Meridian 

Lat.  Decl.  Right  Ascension  Distance  Semi- Arc 


O I II  O I II  O I II 


0 

, . 

I4n26 

36 

22 

48 

55 

33 

18 

106 

40 

57 

D 

4.40s 

i6s  7 

333 

4 

52 

7 

44 

38 

71 

II 

56 

2.2In 

20n30 

51 

II 

5 

70 

21 

35 

114 

38 

15 

9 

I.  4s 

iin44 

31 

47 

8 

50 

57 

48 

103 

24 

0 

6 

2.  7n 

i8n  3 

139 

10 

37 

21 

38 

53 

68 

41 

17 

% 

o.54n 

i8n5i 

131 

44 

35 

29 

4 

55 

67 

36 

44 

h 

2.55n 

13340 

222 

33 

47 

61 

4 

17 

105 

43 

45 

0.45s 

9s22 

339 

41 

3 

I 

8 

27 

79 

23 

13 

0 

0.  7s 

l8s  8 

310 

33 

36 

30 

6 

4 

68 

35 

53 

GEORGES  ERNEST  JEAN  MARIE  BOULANGER 

General  Boulanger  was  born  at  8.15  a.m.  on  the  29th  of 
April,  1837,  at  Rennes.  There  does  not  appear  to  be  any  doubt 
concerning  his  birth-time  since  it  is  given  upon  his  certificate  of 
birth. 

The  main  interest  in  this  horoscope  is  its  tragic  indications  and 
the  remarkable  changes  of  fortune  which  Boulanger  passed  through. 
The  immense  popularity  he  achieved  in  the  years  1887  and  1888  is 
denoted  by  the  sign  Cancer  rising  with  the  sun  in  sextile  aspect  to  the 
rising  degree.  This  popularity  he  could  not  sustain,  chiefly  because  it 
came  from  the  mob,  and  lacked  the  support  of  those  who  were  needed 
to  keep  him  in  a high  position.  His  rise  and  subsequent  downfall 
may  be  attributed  to  Uranus  in  conjunction  with  the  mid-heaven,  and 
in  trine  with  the  Ascendant,  an  influence  which  raises  a man  to  the 
limit  of  his  capacities  and  depends  upon  the  maintenance  of  his  Will 
to  endure. 

At  the  critical  moment  when  Boulanger’s  fame  was  at  its  height 
those  who  held  the  reins  of  power  and  authority  deserted  him  and 
sought  by  intrigue  and  conspiracy  to  defeat  his  aims  and  ambitions. 
This  is  denoted  by  the  Sun  opposition  Saturn  from  fixed  signs  and 
succedent  houses. 

Translated  into  terms  of  Esoteric  Astrology  this  horoscope  shows 
us  that  Boulanger  was  on  the  ray  of  Power,  and  his  individual  star 
was  not  sufficiently  supported  by  the  sub-influence  of  his  ruling  or 
personal  influence  ; in  other  words  he  failed  to  ascend  the  spiral  of  his 
destiny  by  yielding  to  the  weakness  of  his  rising  sign — sensational 
feeling,  or  sentiment. 

Looked  at  from  an  esoteric  standpoint  Boulanger  was.  destined  to 
play  a certain  part  in  the  world’s  history  by  responding  to  a nation’s 
craving  for  hero-worship  evoked  by  him  through  the  courage  and 
military  enthusiasm  he  displayed  in  the  war  of  1870,  when  his  horse 

239 


240 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


was  killed  under  him,  and  he  led  the  forlorn  hope  three  times  in 
succession. 

Boulanger’s  rnilitary  ardour  is  well  marked  by  power  of  the  fixed 
cross;  Sun  in  Taurus,  square  to  Neptune  in  Aquarius  and  Jupiter 
and  Mars  in  Leo,  and  in  opposition  to  Saturn  in  Scorpio.  The 
conjunction  of  Mars  and  Jupiter,  in  square  to  Saturn,  was  a fatal 
influence  which  the  square  aspect  of  Neptune  and  Venus  finally 
made  tragic. 

His  downfall  was  hastened  by  the  Moon  square  Mercury,  and  the 
square  of  the  latter  to  Mars,  producing  the  error  of  judgment  shown  in 
his  flight  to  Belgium  in  order  to  avoid  arrest.  Had  he  been  brave 
enough  to  face  his  enemies  his  end  would  have  been  less  tragic,  for 
despair  at  the  loss  of  his  mistress  caused  the  depression  which  led  to 
his  suicide  on  the  30th  September,  1891. 

The  Sun  advancing  to  the  Parallel  of  Jupiter  gave  Boulanger  a 
fortunate  3^outh,  which  culminated  with  the  Moon  joining  this  Parallel 
at  the  age  of  20  when  he  gained  distinction  by  his  valour  in  Algeria. 
He  was  promoted  for  his  cCtion  in  the  Franco-Prussian  War  in  1870-71 
under  the  Sun  sextile  Jupiter. 

He  became  the  War  Minister  for  France  on  the  8th  January,  1886, 
under  ver}^  mixed  influences,  the  prevailing  one  being  that  of  Mars 
opposition  Uranus,  and  this  was  the  beginning  of  the  end  for  him.  As 
a soldier  and  a fighter  he  was  sure  of  success,  but  as  a statesman  and  a 
minister  he  was  no  match  for  his  political  foes.  His  enemies  were  able 
to  deprive  him  of  his  command  in  April,  1889,  under  the  fatal  opposition 
of  Mars  and  Uranus. 

His  tragic  end  took  place  while  the  Moon  b^^  secondary  direction 
was  passing  through  Aquarius,  and  it  is  curious  to  note  the  position  of 
the  progressed  horoscope  at  this  time,  for  added  to  the  separation  of 
Mars  from  the  opposition  of  Uranus  and  the  radical  midheaven.  Mars 
was  also  by  progression  in  square  to  the  progressed  Mercury,  and  the 
progressed  Sun  was  separating  from  the  sesquiquadrate  aspect  to 
Saturn  ; the  progressed  Jupiter  also  was  separating  from  the  conjunction 
of  the  radical  Mars. 

The  moral  of  this  horoscope  lies  in  the  fact  that  where  there  is 
abnormal  expansion  of  consciousness  there  should  also  be  a corre- 
sponding expansion  of  form.  In  other  words,  effort  is  not  always 
stronger  than  destiny. 


- v. 

IS 

\ 

\ 



/ j 
/ / 

^ / 

" 0 5. 

/ 

- 

3 

O ]) 

« 15.24  T 27.48 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPifcS  No.  ii.  ROBESPIERRE 

Houses  and  Planetary  Position 
X XI  XII  I Ij  jjj 

tH  V^3  )122  CC524  T20  t$23 

^ B 1^  m 

ns. 5 T4.48  ^17.3  I18.20  K2.45  K27.20  ^14.0 

Although  little  more  than  a century  has  passed  since  the  birth  and 
death  of  Robespierre,  historians  differ  in  their  statements  as  to  the 
character  of  this  remarkable  man.  But  fortunately  we  have  an  unbiassed 
and  unprejudiced  record  of  his  life  in  his  nativity,  from  which  we  may 
judge  his  character,  also  many  of  the  motives  which  prompted  him  to 
gure  in  the  history  of  France,  during  the  Reign  of  Terror. 

the^h-  Th  Aquarius  was  rising, 

Vi?  1 "sympathetic  relation  with  the 

™'ght  be  judged 

that  he  would  be  indirectly  the  cause  of  his  own  death. 

. ^p®  "Sing  iu  company  with  Uranus,  in  the 

M " in  the  first  house.  These  were  followed  by  the 

Moon  and  Venus  in  the  sign  Aries,  the  Sun  occupying  the  sign  Taurus  ; 

and  Neptune  had  just  set  in  the  sign  Leo.- the  only  planet  above  the 

earth  being  the  benefic  Jupiter,  placed  in  its  own  sign  Sagittarius  and 
on  the  cusp  of  the  tenth  house.  gittarius,  and 

It  is  to  this  latter  position,  and  to  it  alone,  that  we  may  attribute 

fel"'f  1 ““Parative  obscurity  to  one  of  historic 

hT  fir  r " ?-r  ^ Mshop  that  he  obtained 

first  rise  in  life  and  eventually  became  a judge.  Through  his 

unwillingness  to  sentence  a fellow  creature  to  death,  however,  he  was 
led  to  resign  his  post.  This  unwillingness  may  be  easily  traced  to 
M reury  in  square  to  Saturn,  which  all  through  his  life  was  the  counter- 
balancing influence  to  the  elevation  of  the  benefic  Jupiter.  The  strong 


242 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


position  of  Jupiter  in  the  meridian  and  in  its  own  sign  Sagittarius,  with 
Mercury  in  its  own  sign  in  the  third  house,  shows  how  his  successful 
pleadings  and  prize  essays  brought  him  into  the  political  field  ; for  which 
work,  however,  the  Moon  in  Aries  (a  cardinal  sign)  alone  fitted  him.  In 
spite  of  the  derision  and  criticisms  of  Mirabeau,  which  arose  from  Mercury 
square  Saturn,  the  splendid^ array  of  planets  in  the  fiery  triplicity  gave 
him  sufficient  enthusiasm  to  evoke  from  his  able  critic  this  tribute : ‘ The 
man  will  make  his  way ; he  believes  all  he  says.’  Indeed,  it  was  just 
this  enthusiasm,  which  at  times  almost  amounted  to  fanaticism,  that 
enabled  Robespierre  to  hold  his  own  against  the  unlucky  square  of 
Mercury  and  Saturn.  For  in  his  case.  Mars  undoubtedly  forged  the 
thunderbolt  for  Jove,  as  seen  by  the  trine  aspect  of  Mars  and  Jupiter 
from  the  southern  to  the  western  angle.  It  was  this  aspect  which  gave 
the  very  strong  religious  element  to  all  his  enthusiasm,  and  w'ith  Sun 
placed  in  Taurus,  rising,  in  square  aspect  to  Mars  and  Neptune,  he  was 
at  times  under  that  inspiration  which  comes  only  to  those  who  have 
fiery  elements  operating  through  fixed  signs. 

Nevertheless,  the  lord  of  the  first  being  also  lord  of  the  12th, 
caused  him  to  be  his  own  worst  enemy ; and  as  Saturn  was  his  ruling 
planet,  placed  in  the  dual  sign  Pisces,  afflicted,  he  had  a weak  fate, 
pitted  against  his  enthusiasm.  For  it  denoted  not  only  that  he  was 
always  surrounded  by  treachery,  but  also  that  his  enemies  placed  him  in 
power  in  order  that  he  might  take  the  responsibility  for  the  plans  which 
they  in  secret  formulated.  In  spite  of  the  elevation  of  Jupiter  in  trine 
aspect  to  Mars,  the  Sun,  lord  of  the  seventh,  in  square  aspect  to  the 
latter  showed  that  enmity  finally  became  sufficiently  overt  to  bring 
about  his  downfall.  And  the  ominous  conjunction  of  Mars  with  Neptune 
is  sufficient  to  show  that  in  the  midst  of  the  chaos  for  which  he  was 
made  responsible  he  himself  would  find  his  own  downfall,  and  although 
both  clever  and  resourceful,  as  shown  by  the  position  of  Mercury  in  the 
third  house,  yet  this  planet  as  lord  of  the  fourth  in  square  to  his  ruler 
Saturn,  lord  of  the  first  and  in  the  first,  clearly  denotes  his  tragic 
end. 

It  is  also  singular  that  Venus,  ruler  of  the  eighth  house,  the  house 
of  death,  was  placed  in  the  sign  Aries,  governing  the  head ; and  Robes- 
pierre 'wdiS  guillotined  on  July  28th,  1 794.  As  a testimony  to  the  truth  of 
Astrology,  the  progressed  ascendant  had  reached  the  same  degree  of 
Taurus  as  that  held  b3^  the  Sun  at  birth,  which  brought  into  full  activity, 


ROBESPIERRE 


243 


as  the  culmination  of  his  destiny,  the  Sun’s  square  aspect  to  Mars  and 
Neptune ; Jupiter  being  then  carried  into  the  eighth  house,  the  house  of 
Mars,  and  the  middle  of  the  sign  Scorpio  being  upon  the  descendant,  in 
opposition  to  the  place  of  the  Sun  and  in  square  aspect  to  both  Mars  and 
Neptune. 

Undoubtedly  Robespierre  meant  well,  but  he  was  a theorist  and  a 
dreamer,  and  it  was  not  difficult  to  make  him  a tool  in  the  hands  of 
stronger  minds  than  his  own,  since  through  them  he  saw  what  he  hoped 
to  be  the  realisations  of  his  theories.  That  he  loved  France  none  can 
deny ; that  his  intentions  were  good  and  his  aims  more  impersonal  than 
personal,  is  not  to  be  doubted.  But  he  required  a stronger  Mercur3% 
with  more  assistance  than  the  sextile  of  Venus  to  counteract  that  most 
fateful  and  mischievous  square  of  Saturn  and  Mercury  from  common 
signs.  And  although  his  nativity  is  a strong  and  lasting  testimony  to 
the  power  of  Jupiter  in  the  meridian,  showing  political  and  religious 
influence,  yet  the  singularly  evil  aspects  to  the  Sun  were  too  much  for 
even  that  strong  position.  Had  the  sign-positions  of  the  luminaries 
been  changed,  a totally  different  atmosphere  would  have  surrounded 
Robespierre  at  the  decisive  moments  of  his  most  critical  periods. 

All  students  of  Astrology  will  find  this  a remarkable  nativity  to 
study,  for  there  is  little  doubt  that  it  is  correctly  cast,  and  but  very  little 
study  will  suffice  to  show  that  it  reveals  a remarkable  picture  of  a man 
who  had  great  opportunities  but  failed  to  make  the  use  he  himself 
desired  to  make  of  them. 


'%  - 


>kOl^  r 


EXAMPLE  HOROSCOPES  NO  12 


The  Nativity  of  ‘Viscount  Hinton,’  the  Claimant  to  the 
PouLETT  Peerage 

Born:  10.55  p.m.,  i$fh  December,  1849,  Southsea 
Houses 

X XI  XII  I n III 

Uio  : asi6  ft.18  TII15  —6  ITS 

Planetary  Positions 

123-56  nS'S  l-zz-i  J5-25  n27'i4'‘  Tri8  T22-29r  K219 

In  the  year  1899  a commotion  was  caused  by  a report  in  the  press  that 
an  organ-grinder  had  laid  a claim  to  the  title  of  Lord  Poulett,  and  in 
one  of  these  papers  the  claimant’s  birth  certificate  was  printed,  in  which 
the  time  of  birth  was  given  as  10.55  P-™--  December  15th,  1849, 
Southsea.  It  was  predicted  by  the  author  in  the  pages  of  Modern 
Astrology  for  March,  1899,  that  the  claimant  would  never  succeed,  owing 
to  the  severe  afflictions  in  his  nativity,  showing  that  howsoever  he 
might  make  good  his  claim  to  the  title  he  had  no  chance  of  success  in 
his  pursuit. 

The  following  were  the  exact  words  used : W ill  he  succeed  in  his 
claim  ? There  can  be  only  one  answer  to  this  question,  judging  from 
the  above  map  of  his  nativity.  He  will  never  inherit  the  title  or  the 
property,  and  nothing  but  misfortune  can  attend  any  efforts  he  may 
make  in  that  direction.  Even  should  he  succeed  in  gaining  a legal 
decision  in  his  favour,  he  would  not  retain  it  [the  position]  for  any 
length  of  time  worth  the  labour  and  pains  expended  in  obtaining  it. 
His  nativity  shows  no  success  at  law,  and  his  only  hope  lies  in  public 
sympathy.  . . . The  case  has  been  described  as  the  greatest  romance  of 
modern  times,  but  we  might  also  add  that  the  map  indicates  one  of  the 
greatest  failures  to  achieve  anything  but  notoriety  out  of  that  romance 
which  surrounds  the  native’s  life.’ 


214 


VISCOUNT  HINTON 


245 


The  horoscope  is  in  many  respects  a remarkable  one,  owing  to 
powerful  mundane  positions,  which  were  not  however  supported  by 
favourable  aspects  or  signs  congenial  to  their  nature. 

The  sign  Virgo  rising  shows  Mercury  ruler  of  the  nativity  placed  in 
the  fourth  house,  and  most  severely  afQicted  by  the  square  of  Jupiter 
from  the  ascendant  and  the  opposition  of  the  planet  Mars  from  the 
meridian.  In  this  nativity  the  mutable  signs  are  in  evidence^  six  planets 
occupying  these  signs,  and  several  of  them  in  their  fall  or  in  signs 
where  they  have  no  power  or  dignity.  Saturn  in  the  sign  Aries  is  in 
the  opposite  sign  to  its  exaltation ; the  Moon  in  Capricorn  is  opposite 
to  its  own  sign  ; and  Jupiter  in  Virgo  is  likewise  opposite  its  own  sign. 

Here  is  a case  of  misfortune  baulking  the  native  from  the  hour  of 
his  birth,  for  there  does  not  appear  to  be  much  doubt  that  he  had  some 
justification  for  the  claim  that  was  made.  But  he  was  unable  to  gain  his 
case  owing  to  the  very  severe  opposition  that  his  ruling  planet  Mercury 
had  to  meet  from  a sign  in  which  it  had  no  dignit3%  in  the  fourth  house, 
the  nadir,  and  being  made  more  weak  by  being  in  affiiction  with  planets 
in  its  own  signs  on  the  meridian  and  ascendant.  As  quoted  in  the 
article  referred  to,  the  Moon  in  Capricorn  tends  to  bring  the  native  before 
the  public  for  good  or  evil,  for  popularity  or  notoriety,  but  it  usually  has 
some  drawback  attaching  to  it,  the  native  attaining  relative  fame  or 
notoriety,  and  moving  in  a sphere  that  brings  him  before  many  people. 
It  often  denotes  trouble  in  connection  with  the  parents,  or  that  the 
birth  may  be  illegitimate,  or  that  the  native  is  badly  brought  up  by  the 
parents. 

No  claims  to  a title  can  be  successful  when  the  rulers  of  the  M.C. 
and  Ascendant  are  out  of  dignities,  and  without  sufficient  strength  to 
support  such  positions ; therefore  it  can  easily  be  seen  that  the  native 
was  doomed  to  disappointment  in  his  claim,  and  that  failure  would 
result  from  any  attempt  to  gain  the  honour  that  he  desired.  The  nativity 
would  be  best  synthesised  by  means  of  the  Mutable-Fire  combination, 
bearing  in  mind,  of  course,  the  above  qualifying  remarks. 


APPENDIX 

THEOSOPHY  AND  MODERN  SCIENCE.  By  G.  E.  Sutcliffe' 
II.  The  Occult  Significance  of  the  Planet  Uranus 
The  Man  even  Jehovah  measure.” — Ralston  Skinner. 

‘ Man  is  often  described  in  occult  writings  as  a Microcosm,  and  in 
what  has  gone  before,^  it  has  been  shown  that  in  the  time  relation  of  the 
Microcosm  man  to  the  Microcosm  Brahma  the  ratio  is  accuratel3^ 
expressed  by  tt  x lo'^  In  other  words  a Day  of  Brahma  is  tt  x lo'^  times 
as  long  as  a human  day. 

‘ It  remains  now  to  be  seen  whether  the  same  number  also  expresses 
the  space  relation,  or,  to  put  the  matter  in  concrete  terms,  does  this  same 
number  give  the  relation  between  the  dimensions  of  a man,  and  the 
dimensions  of  the  solar  system  in  which  he  dwells.  In  order  to  ascertain 
this,  we  must  first  consider  what  are  the  correct  dimensions  of  a man. 

‘ The  Secret  Doctrine  tells  us  that  man’s  height  has  changed  with 
each  Race.  The  First  Race  was  of  enormous  size,  173  ft.,  the  Second 
Race  1 20ft.  The  first  half  of  the  Third  Race  60ft.,  and  the  second  half 
20  to  25ft.  The  Fourth  Race  was  still  smaller,  and  in  the  Fifth  Race  the 
height  became  still  further  reduced.  {Secret  Doctrine^  Vol.  II,  p.  355, 
Third  Edition.)  In  the  Fifth  Race  the  ideal  height  seems  to  be  about  6ft. 

‘ Now  which  of  these  dimensions  ought  we  to  take  ? The  figures  of 
the  Age  of  Brahma  seem  somehow  to  be  adapted  to  the  conditions  of  the 
present  Kali  Yuga,  for  the  Age  is  given  as  100  years,  which  agrees  with 
that  of  man  only  in  the  Kali  Yuga  {Isis  Unveiled^  Vol.  p.  468).  In  the 
other  Yugas  man  is  said  to  live  to  a much  greater  age.  Moreover,  the 
Kali  Yuga  is  the  period  when  humanity  is  in  the  stage  of  manhood.  It 

1 The  complete  article  from  which  this  excerpt  is  taken  is  now  to  be  had  only 
in  the  Collected  Edition  of  pamphlets  (price  12.  6d.). 

2 This  refers  to  the  pamphlet  entitled  A Day  of  Brahma,  included  in  the 
Collected  Edition  just  referred  to. 


247 


248 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


is  the  time  when  man  is  left  comparativel3^  to  his  own  resources,  and 
when  he  learns  wisdom  with  the  greatest  rapidit3^  The  Divine  Teachers 
who  guided  and  trained  him  in  the  primitive  golden  age,  stand  aside  in 
the  iron  age  in  order  to  test  man’s  power  of  self-government,  and  to 
what  extent  he  has  effectively  imbibed  the  principles  of  his  early  training. 
The  Kali  Yuga,  therefore,  though  it  is  the  iron  age  of  necessity,  is  never- 
theless the  golden  age  of  man’s  opportunity,  and  we  are  told  that  there 
is  no  other  age  in  which  such  rapid  advance  can  be  made  b3^  the 
energetic  soul.  It  is  an  age  of  despair  only  to  the  weak  and  undeveloped, 
but  to  souls  that  are  strong  and  courageous,  it  is  the  age  of  the 
greatest  hope.  The  Kali  Yuga,  therefore,  is  the  Age  of  Man  par 
excellence^  the  age  when  men  act  the  parts  reserved  in  other  ages  for  the 
Gods. 

‘ Let  us,  therefore,  choose  the  height  of  man  in  the  present  age  as 
the  standard  of  comparison  and  this  height  is  about  6 ft.,  if  we  take  the 
finer  specimens  of  humanity  ; and  surely  only  the  finer  specimens  should 
be  compared  with  Brahma.  There  is,  however,  another  reason  why  we 
should  take  6ft.  as  our  basis.  This  length  represents  12X6  = 72  inches 
and  there  is  strong  evidence  for  believing  the  British  inch  to  be  of  occult 
origin  {Secret  Doctrine,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  49) ; it  is  the  unit  of  the  Pyramid 
which  was  built  by  the  members  of  the  Great  White  Lodge  210,000  3^ears 
ago  during  the  first  ‘ Divine  Dynast3^  ’ in  Eg3^pt  {Story  of  Atlantis,  p.  38) 
and  since  the  ancients  made  their  enumerations  generally  by  using  6 and 
12  as  factors  (Secret  Doctrine,  Vol.  Ill,  p.  351)  12X6  or  72  of  these 
pyramidal  units,  is  a promising  length  to  begin  with. 

‘ Hence  taking  six  feet  as  the  ideal  height  of  a man,  and  multiplying 
it  by  TT  X or  the  ratio  of  a Day  of  Brahma  to  a human  da3%  we  obtain 

6 TT  X 10'^  feet 

This  number  of  feet  is  equal  to 

3.570.000. 000  miles, 

and  if  there  were  a planet  revolving  round  the  sun  in  an  orbit  whose 
major  axis  was  of  this  length,  its  mean  distance  from  the  sun  would  be 
just  half  of  this  or 

1.785.000. 000  miles. 

Now  the  mean  distance  of  Uranus  as  given  by  the  best  modern 
determinations  is  1,782,000,000  miles  and  this  distance  differs  from  the 
above  by  less  than  one-fifth  of  one  per  cent. 


APPENDIX 


249 


‘ This  difference  is  less  than  what  could  be  due  to  errors  of  obser- 
vation, for  modern  astronomers  cannot  measure  the  planetary  distances 
in  miles  with  this  degree  of  accuracy.  They  can  measure  the  distances 
with  even  greater  accuracy  in  what  is  called  the  astronomical  unit  (the 
Earth’s  distance  from  the  Sun)  but  the  length  of  this  unit  in  miles  can 
be  only  roughly  determined,  and  it  is  quite  possible  therefore,  that  this 
difference  between  the  figures,  may  be  due  to  inaccuracy  of  measurement, 
and  that  the  above  agreement  may  be  exact.  Hence  we  may  say  that 
the  major  axis  of  the  orbit  of  Uranus,  the  most  distant  planet  which  is 
visible  to  the  naked  eye,  is  perhaps  exactl3^  tt  x 10*^  times  the  height 
of  an  ideal  man  or  six  feet. 

‘ When  we  remember  that  H.  P.  B.  hinted  that  Uranus  was  the  outer- 
most planet  directly  concerned  with  humanity  [Secret  Doctrine^  Vol.  Ill, 
p.  563)  and  that  Ragon,  a writer  on  Occult  Masonry,  tells  us  that  Sunday 
ought  to  be  called  Uranus  Da3^  {La  Maconnerie  Occult,  p.  447),  whilst 
Mrs  Besant  said  in  her  lectures  on  the  Pedigree  of  Man  (at  p.  70),  that 
Uranus  represented  the  Sun  or  Brahma,  we  may  conclude  that  the 
number  tt  x 10^^  is  the  measure  of  the  Heavenly  Man  both  in  time  and 
space  relations,  in  terms  of  the  day  and  the  height  of  the  earthly  man. 

‘We  may  further  note  that  the  period  of  one  revolution  of  Uranus  is 
84.091  years,  or  almost  exactly  12  x 7 = 84  years,  which  may  be  said  to 
be  the  ideal  length  of  a human  incarnation,  just  as  6ft.  is  the  ideal  height 
of  a man. 

‘ It  is  known  further  that  a man  changes  the  constituents  of  his  body 
every  seven  years,  in  which  time  Uranus  passes  through  one-twelfth 
of  his  orbit,  or  one  sign  of  the  Zodiac.  In  three  years,  another  human 
cycle,  Uranus  passes  through  one  twenty-eighth  of  his  orbit,  or  one 
asterism.  A three  years  period  of  Uranus  measures  an  asterism  with 
most  minute  accuracy,  whilst  a day’s  motion  of  the  moon  does  so  only 
very  roughly.  It  is,  therefore,  quite  possible  that  esoterically  it  is  the 
real  basis  of  these  divisions  into  asterisms.  We  further  find  that  these 
astcrisms  are  subdivided  into  four  parts,  and  even  here  again  an  explana- 
tion is  forthcoming.  These  Zodiacal  divisions  are  concerned  in  Astrology 
with  the  m^^stery  of  human  birth,  and  the  period  of  inter-uterine  life  is 
about  nine  solar  months,  or  ten  sidereal  revolutions  of  the  moon. 

‘ In  this  period,  Uranus  passes  over  just  one-fourth  of  an  asterism, 
that  is,  it  passes  over  one  of  the  parts  into  which  the  ancients  divided 
it,  and  this  perhaps  gives  the  key  to  the  uses  of  such  subdivisions. 


250 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


‘ Some  students  of  Astrology  in  the  West  claim  to  have  discovered 
that  from  the  time  of  birth,  the  epoch,  or  time  of  conception,  can  be 
accurately  deduced  from  the  positions  of  the  sun  and  moon  and  the 
ascendant  sign,  but  in  order  to  do  this  it  has  been  found  necessary  to 
divide  the  Zodiac  into  twenty-eight  parts  like  the  Ancient  Zodiac.  (See 
New  Manual  of  Astrology,  by  W.  Corn  Old,  p.  163.) 

‘ It  would  seem,  therefore,  that  the  planet  Uranus  was  well  known 
to  the  esoteric  schools  in  most  ancient  times,  and  this  is  indicated  in  the 
Secret  Doctrine  (Vol.  I,  p.  126)  and  that  from  its  motions  and  their  relations 
to  human  cycles,  the  divisions  of  the  Zodiac  into  signs,  asterisms  and 
quarter  asterisms,  have  originated.  It  is  in  a sense,  therefore,  the  occult 
planet  par  excellence,  and  it  is  interesting  to  note  that  one  of  the  greatest 
leaders  of  the  Theosophical  movement,  Mrs  Annie  Besant,  was  born 
under  this  planet.  (See  Annie  Besant,  An  Autobiography,  p.  12.) 

‘ When  we  couple  with  the  above  the  fact  that  Uranus  is  the  nearest 
in  its  orbit  to  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic,  and  also  to  the  mean  plane  of  the 
solar  system,  being  less  than  one  degree  inclined  to  either  of  these  planes, 
we  see  how  suitable  it  was  to  mark  the  divisions  of  the  Zodiac.  And 
when  we  remember  also,  that  it  is  just  visible  to  the  naked  eye,  particu- 
larly in  the  clear  skies  of  India,  being  a star  of  the  sixth  magnitude,  the 
evidence  that  the  ancients  were  aware  of  its  existence,  and  used  it  for 
this  purpose,  becomes  even  stronger. 

‘We  may  further  note,  that  the  occult  number  4,320  when  applied 
to  the  revolutions  of  Uranus,  marks  out  an  important  cycle.  For  every 
4,320  revolutions  of  this  planet,  Neptune,  Uranus,  Mars,  the  Earth, 
Venus  and  the  Sun,  are  all  exactly  in  a line  stretched  across  the  solar 
system  and  twice  4,320,  or  8,640  revolutions  of  Uranus  equal 

4,406  revolutions  of  Neptune. 

385,9*^3  » Mars. 

725,925  „ „ Earth. 

1,180,008  ,,  „ Venus. 

‘This  cycle  of  about  726,000  years  seems  to  be  of  particular 
importance  in  the  evolution  of  the  Root-Races.  In  some  articles  of  mine 
on  the  Hindoo  Zodiac*  {The  Theosophist  iov  1904)  I indicated  that  in  this 
period,  the  forces  acting  on  our  solar  s^^stem  were  of  such  a nature  as 
to  cause  an  inversion  of  the  poles  such  as  what  we  are  told  occurs  at  the 


* Reprinted  in  the  Collected  Edition  of  pamphlets  previously  referred  to. 


APPENDIX 


25 


beginning  of  a Root-Race.  In  this  cycle,  the  figures  432  do  not  refer 
to  the  sidereal  revolutions  of  the  Earth,  but  to  those  of  Uranus,  the 
outer-most  planet  with  which  the  present  evolution  of  humanity  is 
directly  concerned. 

‘ This  perhaps  explains  the  reference  to  these  figures  in  the  Secret 
Doctrine  (Vol.  Ill,  p.  345),  where  we  read,  “The  combination  of  the 
three  figures  4,  3,  2,  with  cyphers,  according  to  the  cycle  and  Manvantara 
concerned,  was,  and  is,  preeminently  Hindu.  It  will  remain  a secret 
even  though  several  of  its  significant  features  are  revealed.  It  relates, 
for  instance,  to  the  Pralaya  of  the  Races  in  their  periodical  dissolution,  before 
which  events  a special  Avatara  has  always  to  descend  and  incarnate  on 
earth.”  I will  venture  to  suggest  that  the  figures  432  or  their  double 
864  are  intimately  connected  with  the  most  occult  of  all  the  cycles,  “the 
Naros.”  Speaking  of  this  cycle  Mme.  Blavatsky  says  {Secret  Doctrine, 
Vol  II,  p.  655),  “As  the  years  of  the  Naros  are,  in  India,  counted  in 
two  ways,  either  by  one  hundred  ‘ years  of  the  gods  ’ (divine  years)  or 
one  hundred ‘mortal  years,’ we  can  see  the  tremendous  difficulty  the 
non-initiated  have  in  arriving  at  a correct  comprehension  of  this  cycle, 
which  plays  such  an  important  part  in  St  John’s  Revelation.  It  is  the 
truly  apocalyptic  cycle,  because  of  its  being  of  various  lengths,  and  relating 
to  various  pre-historic  events,  and  in  none  of  the  numerous  speculations 
about  it  have  we  found  any  but  a few  approximate  truths.” 

‘ The  reader  will  be  inclined  to  ask  what  connection  can  there  be 
between  the  figures  864  and  600  which  are  the  figures  of  the  Naros. 
The  reply  is  that  when  864  is  expressed  in  the  duodecimal  notation  it 
becomes  600. 

‘It  was  Captain  Geo.  Mostyn  Field,  R.N.,  who  first  drew  my  atten- 
tion to  the  significance  of  the  duodecimal  notation  in  interpreting  occult 
figures.  He  had  done  original  work  in  connection  with  the  dimensions 
of  the  great  pyramid,  and  had  found  that  the  duodecimal  notation  was 
largely  used  by  the  builders.  They  had  not  used  this  scale  exclusively, 
as  for  some  purposes  the  decimal  notation  was  found  preferable.  Captain 
Field  pointed  out  to  me  that  432  in  the  duodecimal  scale  was  three  with 
two  ciphers,  and  I have  ever  since  found  the  idea  illuminative.  Those 
students  who  are  pursuing  investigations  on  Pythagorean  lines  will  do 
well,  I think,  to  familiarise  themselves  with  different  notations,  particu- 
larly the  duodecimal  and  the  septenary.  They  will  find  them  treated 
in  works  on  algebra,  such  as  Todhunter’s  Algebra  for  Colleges  (p.  244). 


252 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


When  occult  numbers  are  inexplicable  in  the  decimal  notation,  they 
may  be  otherwise  in  the  duodecimal  or  some  other  scale. 

‘ In  the  duodecimal  scale,  the  figure  12  plays  the  same  part  as  10  in 
the  decimal  system,  and  to  change  864  from  the  decimal  to  the  duodecimal 
we  proceed  as  follows  : 

1 2 I 864  remainders 

12  I 72  o 

6 o 

‘The  first  remainder  becomes  the  first  digit  of  the  duodecimal  scale, 
the  second  remainder  the  second  digit,  and  so  on,  until  the  number  is  no 
longer  divisible  by  12,  when  the  last  quotient  becomes  the  last  digit  to 
the  left.  Thus  864  becomes  600  and  the  total  revolutions  of  Uranus 
during  a complete  cycle  of  the  terrestrial  poles,  viz.^  8640  may  be  read 
as  6000  or  the  larger  Naros. 

‘The  years  of  the  Naros  from  this  point  of  view  are  not  the  revolu- 
tions of  the  Sun,  but  of  the  planet  for  which  the  Sun  was  exoterically 
substituted,  that  is  the  planet  Uranus.  The  number  of  ciphers  in  the 
Naros  varied  very  much.  {Secret  Doctrine^  Vol.  Ill,  p.  351.) 

‘Another  interesting  point  about  the  duodecimal  notation  is  that 
84  years  or  the  period  of  Uranus  expressed  in  this  scale,  is  70  or  the 
three  score  years  and  ten  which  the  Hebrew  Scriptures  (Psalm  xc.  10) 
give  as  the  ideal  length  of  a man’s  life,  ‘so  that,  it  is  possible  that 
esoterically  this  period  meant  one  revolution  of  Uranus.  Similarly, 
the  hundred  years  constituting  an  Age  of  Brahma  when  expressed 
duodecimally,  are  84,  thus : 

12  I 100 

8 4 

‘ Hence,  b3"  changing  an  Age  of  Brahma  from  the  decimal  to  the 
duodecimal,  we  get  the  figures  of  the  period  of  Uranus,  whilst  b}’’  the  re- 
verse process,  or  changing  70  from  the  duodecimal  to  the  decimal,  we 
likewise,  from  the  Hebrew  ideal  age  of  man,  get  the  same  significant 
figures.  In  this  way  we  see  how  very  intimately  the  period  of  Uranus 
is  interlinked  with  occult  figures,  and  how  it  ma^^  be  taken  as  the  ideal 
age  of  man. 

‘ Again,  the  Hebrew  Kabalah  divides  the  Zodiac  into  ten  signs 
instead  of  twelve,  but  this  is  known  to  be  a blind.  Now  a blind,  according 
to  Mrs  Besant  {Pedigree  of  Man,  p.  loi),  ‘ does  not  mean  that  an3^thing 


APPENDIX 


253 

untrue  is  stated,  but  it  means,  that  the  truth  is  stated  in  a way  which  needs 
explanation  to  be  understood  by  the  uninitiated.’ 

‘ How  can  we  reconcile  the  above  with  the  fact  that  the  exoteric 
Kabalah  gave  the  number  of  signs  as  10  ? 

‘A  possible  answer  is,  that  the  figures  10  should  be  read  in  the 
duodecimal  notation,  for  in  that  scale  i o corresponds  to  1 2 . . . . ’ 

Later,  after  explaining  the  relation  of  the  British  inch  to  the  digit 
and  cubit  of  the  Pyramids  the  author  says : ‘ The  above  must  not  be 
taken  as  an  unnecessary  digression  from  our  subject,  since  it  was 
necessary  to  show  that  the  inch  is  not  a mere  arbitrary  unit  but  is  of 
occult  origin — otherwise^  the  relationship  between  the  ideal  height  of  man, 
or  12X6  inches,  and  the  orbit  of  Uranus,  would  be  a meaningless  coincid- 
ence [italics  ours.]  ’ 

The  article  concludes  : — 

‘The  principal  results  of  this  and  the  preceding  article  on  the 
Day  of  Brahma  may  be  expressed  as  originally  given  by  Mrs  Besant  in 
her  recent  lectures  on  Theosophy  in  Relation  to  Human  Life  (p.  no). 

Day  and  Night  of  Brahma 
Day  of  24  hours 
Diameter  of  orbit  of  Uranus 
Height  of  Man  (6  feet) 

‘ As  suggested  by  Mrs  Besant  the  relationship  of  Uranus  to  man 
may  seem  far-fetched  when  considered  alone,  but  combined  with  the 
many  other  matters  dealt  with  in  this  article  it  will,  I think,  appear  less 
so  even  to  the  sceptical. 

‘ The  mystery  locked  up  in  these  ancient  units,  the  cubit,  the  inch, 
and  the  digit,  is  deep  indeed  ; and  man  also  is  still  a profounder  mystery 
both  within  and  without.  He  appears  to  be  both  the  riddle  of 
the  Sphinx,  and  its  solution.  “What  is  that  which  is  four  footed, 
three  footed  and  two  footed?”  asks  the  Sphinx.  “Man,”  replies 
(Edipus ; but  the  exoteric  explanation  attributed  to  CEdipus  is  a 
degradation  of  the  true  esoteric  solution.  (See  Secret  Doctrine, 
Vol.  II,  p.  543.) 

‘ The  real  solution  of  the  riddle  is  probably  unknown  to  any  who 
have  not  passed  the  gates  of  initiation.  The  figures  4,  3,  and  2 occuring 
in  it  are  a sufficient  indication  of  some  deep  occult  mystery.’ 


= TT  X lo’* 
= TT  X 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


Absoluteness. — When  predicted  of  the  Universal  Principle,  it  denotes 
an  abstract  noun,  which  is  more  correct  and  logical  than  to  appl3^  the 
adjective  ‘ absolute  ’ to  that  which  has  neither  attributes  nor  limita- 
tions, nor  can  it  have  any. 

Adam  Kadmon. — {Heb).  The  bi-sexual  Sephira  of  the  Kabalists.  Also, 
Archetypal  Man  ; Humanit3\ 

Adept. — One  who,  through  the  development  of  his  spirit,  has  attained  to 
transcendental  knowledge  and  powers. 
iEoNS. — {Gr.)  Periods  of  time  ; emanations  proceeding  from  the  divine 
essence,  and  celestial  beings  ; genii  and  angels  with  the  Gnostics. 
iETHER. — {Gi\)  With  the  ancients,  the  divine  luminiferous  substance 
which  pervades  the  whole  universe,  the  ‘garment’  of  the  Supreme 
Deity,  Zeus,  or  Jupiter.  With  the  moderns.  Ether,  for  the  mean- 
ing of  which  in  physics  and  chemistry  see  any  dictionar3L  In 
esotericism  iEther  is  the  third  principle  of  the  Kosmic  Septenar3^ ; 
the  Earth  being  the  lowest,  then  the  Astral  light.  Ether,  and  Akasa 
(phonetically  Akasha,  q.v.),  the  highest. — See  Ether. 

Agni. — (S^.)  The  God  of  Fire  in  the  Veda  ; the  oldest  and  most  revered 
of  Gods  in  India.  He  is  one  of  the  three  great  deities  : Agni,  Vayu 
and  Surya,  and  also  all  the  three,  as  he  is  the  triple  aspect  of  fire ; 
in  heaven  as  the  Sun ; in  the  atmosphere  or  air  (Vayu),  as  Light- 

^ No  authority  is  claimed  for  the  definitions  here  given,  which  are  intended 
merely  as  aids  to  students  of  the  ‘ Astrology  for  All  ’ series  of  books. 

For  fuller  and  more  technical  explanations  of  the  various  terms  the  reader  is 
referred  to  the  Index  of  H.P.  Blavatsky’s  Secret  Doctrine  Vols.  I and  II,  and  to  the 
lately  issued  Index  to  Vol.  Ill  of  the  Secret  Doctrine  where  more  complete  information 
may  be  looked  up.  Much  of  the  present  Glossary  is  quoted  from  either  Five  Tears  of 
Theosophy  or  the  Theosophical  Glossary,  but  the  definitions  have  in  many  cases  been 
compressed,  or  amplified,  as  has  seemed  advisable. 

The  abbreviations  indicate  the  source  of  the  word,  thus  Gr.  Greek,  Egyptian, 
Sk.  Sanskrit,  Esot.  Esoteric  Literature,  Occult.  Occult  Literature,  etc. ; q.v.  (pqucdvide), 
which  see. 


255 


2K6 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


ning ; on  earth  as  ordinary  Fire.  Agni  belonged  to  the  earlier 
Vedic  Trimiirti  before  Vishnu  was  given  a place  of  honour  and 
before  Brahma  and  Siva  were  invented. 

Ahankara. — Personality  ; egoism  ; self-identity ; the  fifth  principle.  It 
is  the  root  of  separateness,  and  gives  the  sense  of  ‘ I am  I.’  (Not 
to  be  confused  with  Antahkarana,  q.v^ 

Akasha. — The  subtle  supersensuous  matter  which  pervades  all  space. — 
See  the  Secret  Doctrine^  Vol.  Ill,  p.  397. 

Akashic  Records. — The  permanent  images  of  all  past  events  which 
persist  in  the  akasha,  and  which  may  be  seen  by  the  exercise  of  a 
certain  type  of  cultivated  clairvoyance ; this  is  generally  alluded  to 
as  ‘consulting  the  akashic  records.’ — See  .^ther. 

Altruism. — [Lat.)  From  other.  A quality  opposed  to  egoism. 

Actions  tending  to  do  good  to  others,  regardless  of  self. 

Anima  Mundi. — The  soul  of  the  world. 

Annamaya  Kosha. — The  gross  body;  the  first  sheath  of  the  divine 
monad  (Vedantic). 

Antahkarana. — The  internal  instrument,  the  soul,  formed  by  the  think- 
ing principle  or  egoism.  (Not  to  be  confused  with  Ahankara,  q.v) 

Archangel. — ((Pr.)  Highest  supreme  angel.  From  the  Greek  arch, 
‘chief’  or  ‘ primordial,’  and  angelos,  ‘messenger.’ 

Astral  Body. — The  body  in  which  the  soul  functions  in  the  astral 
world  after  death. 

Astral  Light. — A subtle  form  of  existence  forming  the  basis  of  our 
material  universe. 

Atma. — The  spirit ; the  divine  monad ; the  seventh  principle  of  the 
septenary  human  constitution. 

Aura. — {Gr.  and  Lat.)  A subtle  invisible  essence  or  fluid  that  emanates 
from  human  and  animal  bodies  and  even  things.  It  is  a psychic 
effiuvium,  partaking  of  both  the  mind  and  the  body,  as  it  is  the 
electro-vital,  and  at  the  same  time  an  electro-mental  aura ; called  in 
Theosophy  the  akasic  or  magnetic  aura. 

Avidya. — {Sk.)  Opposed  to  Vidya,  Knowledge.  Ignorance  which 

proceeds  from,  and  is  produced  by,  the  illusion  of  the  Senses  or 
Viparyaya. 

Brahma. — The  Hindu  Deity  v/hich  personifies  the  active  cosmic  energ^L 

Brahman. — The  highest  caste  in  India ; Brahman,  the  absolute  of  the 
Vedantins. 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


257 


Caduceus. — (Gr.)  The  Greek  poets  and  mythologists  took  the  idea  of 

the  Caduceus  of  Mercury  from  the  Egyptians.  The  Caduceus  is 
found  as  two  serpents  twisted  round  a rod,  on  Egyptian  monuments 
built  before  Osiris.  The  Greeks  altered  this.  We  find  it  again  in 
the  hands  of  Aesculapius  assuming  a different  form  to  the  wand  of 
Mercurius  or  Hermes.  It  is  a cosmic,  sidereal  or  astronomical,  as 
well  as  a spiritual  and  even  physiological  symbol,  its  significance 
changing  with  its  application.  Metaphysically,  the  Caduceus 
represents  the  fall  of  primeval  and  primordial  matter  into  gross 
terrestrial  matter,  the  one  Reality  becoming  Illusion.  (See  Secret 
Doctrine^  I,  p.  550,  First  Edition  ; p.  600,  Third  Edition.)  Astro- 
nomically, the  head  and  tail  represent  the  points  of  the  ecliptic  where 
the  planets  and  even  the  sun  and  moon  meet  in  close  embrace. 
Physiologically,  it  is  the  symbol  of  the  restoration  of  the  equilibrium 
lost  between  Life,  as  a unit,  and  the  currents  of  life  performing 
various  functions  in  the  human  body. 

Caste. — Originally  the  system  of  the  four  hereditary  classes  into  which 
the  Indian  population  was  divided ; Brahman,  Kshatriya,  Vaisya, 
and  Sudra  (or  Descendants  of  Brahma,  Warriors,  Merchants,  and 
the  lowest  or  Agriculturalists).  Besides  these  original  four,  hundreds 
have  now  grown  up  in  India. 

Causal  Body. — This  ‘body,*  which  is  no  body  either  objective  or 
subjective,  but  Btiddhi,  the  Spiritual  soul,  is  so  called  because  it  is 
the  direct  cause  of  the  condition,  leading  to  the  Ttirya  state, 

the  highest  state  of  Samadhi.  It  is  called  Karanopadhi,  ‘ the  basis 
of  the  Cause,’  by  the  Taraka  Raja  Yogis  ; and  in  the  Vedanta  system 
it  corresponds  to  both  the  Vignanamaya  and  Anandamaya  Kosha^ 
the  latter  coming  next  to  Atma,  and  therefore  being  the  vehicle  of 
the  Universal  Spirit.  Buddhi  alone  could  not  be  called  a ‘Causal 
Body,’  but  becomes  so  in  conjunction  with  Manas,  the  incarnating 
Entity  or  Ego. — See  Divine  Fragment. 

Chaldeans. — Or  Kasdim.  At  first  a tribe,  then  a caste  of  learned 
Kabbalists.  They  were  the  savants^  the  magicians  of  Babylon, 
astrologers  and  diviners. 

Chandra. — (SA)  The  moon  ; also  a deity.  The  terms  Chandra  and 
Soma  are  synonyms. 

Chandra-Vansa. — {Sk.)  The  ‘Lunar  Race,’  in  contradistinction  to 
Suryavansa,  the  ‘ Solar  Race.’ 

R 


258 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


Chaos. — (Gr.)  The  Abyss,  the  ‘ Great  Deep.’ 

Chela. — A pupil  of  an  adept  in  occultism  : a disciple. 

Chit.— The  abstract  consciousness. 

Chohan. — (Tib.)  ‘ Lord  ’ or  ‘ Master  ’ ; a chief ; thus  D/iyan-Chohan 

would  answer  to  ‘Chief  of  the  Dhyanis,’  or  celestial  Lights — which 
in  English  would  be  translated  Archangels. 

Circle. — There  are  several  ‘ Circles  ’ with  mystic  adjectives  attached  to 
them.  Thus  we  have  : (i)  the  Decussated  or  ‘ Perfect  Circle  ’ of 
Plato,  who  shows  it  decussated  in  the  form  of  the  letter  X ; (2)  the 
‘ Circle-dance  ’ of  the  Amazons,  around  a Priapic  image,  the  same  as 
the  dance  of  the  Gopis  around  the  Sun  (Krishna),  the  shepherdesses 
representing  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  ; (3)  the  ‘ Circle  of  Necessity  ’ 
of  3,000  3^ears  of  the  Egyptians  and  of  the  Occultists,  the  duration 
of  the  cycle  between  rebirths  or  reincarnations  being  from  1,000  to 
3,000  years  on  the  average.  This  will  be  treated  under  the  term 
of  ‘ Reincarnation.’ 

Clairaudience. — The  facult3%  whether  innate  or  acquired  by  occult 
training,  of  hearing  all  that  is  said  at  whatever  distance. 

Clairvoyance. — The  facult3^  of  seeing  with  the  inner  e3^e  or  spiritual 
sight.  As  now  used  it  is  a loose  and  flippant  term  embracing  under 
its  meaning  a happy  guess  due  to  natural  shrewdness  or  intuition, 
and  also  that  faculty  which  was  so  remarkabl3'  exercised  by  Jacob 
Boehme  and  Swedenborg.  Real  clairvo3"ance  means  the  faculty  of 
seeing  through  the  densest  matter  (the  latter  disappearing  at  the 
will  and  before  the  spiritual  eye  of  the  Seer),  and  irrespective  of 
time  (past,  present  and  future)  or  distance. 

Cosmic  Gods. — Inferior  gods,  those  connected  with  the  formation  of  matter. 

Cosmic  Ideation. — (Occult).  Eternal  thought,  impressed  on  substance 
or  spirit-matter,  in  the  eternit3^ ; thought  which  becomes  active  at 
the  beginning  of  every  new  life-C3xle. 

Cycle. — From  the  Greek  Kuklos.  The  ancients  divided  time  into 
endless  C3'^cles,  wheels  within  wheels,  all  such  periods  being  of 
various  durations,  and  each  marking  the  beginning  or  the  end  of 
some  event  either  cosmic,  mundane,  ph3^sical,  or  metaph3^sical. 
There  were  cycles  of  only  a few  3^ears,  and  C3Tles  of  immense 
duration,  the  great  Orphic  C3xle,  referring  to  the  ethnological  change 
of  races,  lasting  120,000  3"ears,  and  the  C3^cle  of  Cassandrus  of 
136,000,  which  brought  about  a complete  change  in  planetary  influ- 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


259 


ences  and  their  correlations  between  men  and  gods — a fact  entirel}^ 
lost  sight  of  by  modern  astrologers.  (See  A Day  of  Brahma^  by 
G.  E.  Sutcliffe  : also  Modern  Astrology  for  March,  1908,  p.  136,  and 
for  January,  1909,  p.  44,  also  February,  1909,  p.  92,) 

Daivi-Prakriti. — (S^.)  Primordial,  homogeneous  light,  called  by  some 
Indian  Occultists  ‘ The  light  of  the  Logos  ’ ; when  differentiated 
this  light  becomes  Fohat. 

Devachan. — A blissful  condition  in  the  after  life  ; heavenl}^  existence. 

‘ A speciall3^  guarded  region  of  the  Mental  Plane  ’ {Ancient  Wisdom, 
p.  137  ; 1907  Edition). 

Devas. — Gods;  beings  of  the  subjective  side  of  Nature. 

Dharma. — The  Sacred  Law ; the  Buddhist  Canon. 

Dhyan  Chohans. — Devas  or  Gods ; planetarj^  spirits. — See  Chohan  : 
see  also  The  Pedigree  of  Man,  p.  13  (Second  Edition). 

Divine  Fragment. — Represents  man’s  Atma  as  it  came  down  from  the 
Nirvanic  plane,  and  containing  the  possibilities  of  the  Logos  un- 
expressed. It  is  at  first  quite  incapable  of  expressing  them — they 
are  existing  in  germ  only.  Then  comes  a slow  expansion  of  the 
‘Fragment’  in  its  threefold  aspect.  The  third  aspect  is  the 
principle  Manas  ; the  second  is  Buddhi ; the  highest  is  Atma.  Atma 
pouring  itself  forth  appears  in  Manas  as  the  individualising  prin- 
ciple, the  ‘ I ’ making  facult^^  that  gives  rise  in  time  to  individuality' 
— time  as  the  opposite  to  eternityv  It  brings  individuality^ ; it 
builds  the  Causal  body.  It  draws  round  Atma,  on  the  upper 
Manasic  plane,  matter  to  express  itself ; and  thus  creates  as  its 
vehicle  the  Causjil  body\ 

Dynasties. — In  India  there  are  two,  the  Lunar  and  the  Solar,  or  the 
Somavansa  and  the  Suryavansa.  In  Chaldea  and  Egypt  there 
were  also  two  distinct  kinds  of  dynasties,  the  divine  and  the  human. 
In  both  countries  people  were  ruled  in  the  beginning  of  time  by 
Dynasties  of  Gods.  In  Chaldea  they  reigned  120  Sari,  or  in  all 
432,000  years ; which  amounts  to  the  same  figures  as  a Hindu 
Mahay uga,  4,320,000  years.  The  chronology  prefacing  the  Book  of 
Genesis  (English  translation)  is  given  ‘ Before  Christ,  4004.’  But 
the  figure  are  a rendering  by  solar  y^ears.  In  the  original  Hebrew, 
which  preserved  a lunar  calculation,  the  figures  are  4,320  years. 
This  ‘coincidence’  is  well  explained  in  Occultism. 

Ego. — {Lat)  ‘Self’;  the  consciousness  in  man  ‘lam  I’ — or  the 


26o 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


feeling  of  ‘ I-am  ’-ship.  Esoteric  philosophy  teaches  the  existence 
of  two  Egos  in  man,  the  mortal  or  personal ; and  the  higher,  the 
divine  and  the  impersonal;  calling  the  former  ‘Personality,’  and 
the  latter  ‘ Individuality.’ 

Egoity. — From  the  word  Ego.  Egoity  means  ‘individuality,’  never 
‘personality,’  and  is  the  opposite  of  egoism  or  selfishness,  the 
characteristic  par  excellence  of  the  latter  — See  Ego. 

Elements. — Refer  to  Tan  mate  as. 

Elementals. — Generic  name  for  all  subjective  beings  other  than  dis- 
embodied human  creatures. — See  The  Pedigree  of  Man ^ pp.  20,  ii3, 
136,  137  (Second  Edition). 

Elementaries. — A name  given  to  the  astral  shells  of  defunct  human 
beings,  which  often  take  part  in  the  spiritualistic  communications, 
materialisations,  etc.  Such  ‘ elementaries  ’ are  no  more  human 
beings  than  corpses  are. 

Esoteric — {Gri)  Hidden  Secret.  From  the  Greek  esotericos,  ‘inner, 
concealed  ’. 

Ether. — Students  are  but  too  apt  to  confuse  this  with  Akasa  and 
with  Astral  Light.  It  is  neither,  in  the  sense  in  which  Ether  is 
described  by  physical  Science.  Ether  is  a material  agent,  though 
hitherto  undetected  by  any  physical  apparatus  ; whereas  Akasa  is 
a distinctly  spiritual  agent,  identical,  in  one  sense,  with  the  Anima 
Mundh  while  the  Astral  Light  is  only  the  seventh  and  highest 
principle  of  the  terrestrial  atmosphere,  as  undetectable  as  Akasa  and 
real  Ether,  because  it  is  something  quite  on  another  plane.  The 
seventh  principle  on  the  earth’s  atmosphere,  as  said,  the  Astral 
Light,  is  only  the  second  on  the  Cosmic  scale.  The  scale  of  Cosmic 
forces.  Principles  and  Planes,  of  Emanation — on  the  metaphysical — 
and  Evolutions — on  the  physical  plane — is  the  Cosmic  Serpent  biting 
its  own  tail,  the  Serpent  reflecting  the  Higher,  and  reflected  in  its 
turn  by  the  lower  Serpent.  The  Caduceus  explains  the  m^^ster}^ 
and  the  four-fold  Dodecahedron,  on  the  model  of  which  the  universe 
is  said  by  Plato  to  have  been  built  by  the  manifested  Logos — 
s3mthesised  by  the  unmanifested  First-Born  — yields  geometricall3" 
the  key  to  Cosmogony  and  its  microcosmic  reflection — our  Earth. 

Evolution. — The  development  of  higher  orders  of  animals  from  lower. 
As  said  in  Isis  Unveiled : ‘ Modern  Science  holds  but  to  a one- 
sided physical  evolution,  prudently  avoiding  and  ignoring  the  higher 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


261 


or  spiritual  evolution,  which  would  force  contemporaries  to  confess 
the  superiority^  of  the  ancient  philosophers  and  psychologists  over 
themselves.  The  ancient  sages,  ascending  to  the  unknowable, 
made  their  starting-point  from  the  first  manifestation  of  the  unseen, 
the  unavoidable,  and,  from  a strictly  logical  reasoning,  the  absolutely 
necessary  creative  Being,  the  Demiurgos  of  the  universe.  Evolution 
began  with  them  from  pure  spirit,  which,  descending  lower  and 
lower  down,  assumed  at  last  a visible  and  comprehensible  form,  and 
became  matter.  Arrived  at  this  point,  they  speculated  in  the 
Darwinian  method,  but  on  a far  larger  and  more  comprehensive 
basis.’ 

Exoteric. — Outward,  public  ; the  opposite  of  esoteric  or  hidden. 

First  Point. — Metaphysically  the  first  point  of  manifestation,  the  germ 
of  primeval  differentiation,  or  the  point  in  the  infinite  Circle  ‘ wdiose 
centre  is  everywhere,  and  circumference  nowhere.’  The  point  is 
the  Logos. 

First  Point  of  Aries. — The  point  at  which  the  Ecliptic  intersects  the 
Equator  ; (in  relation  to  the  zodiac  of  signs).  The  First  Point  of 
Aries,  of  the  Fixed  Zodiac  of  the  Constellations,  is  said  to  be  the  star 
Revati,  the  situation  of  which  is  a matter  of  dispute.  See  G.  E. 
Sutcliffe’s  The  Hindu  Zodiac. 

Fohat. — Tibetan  for  Shakti ; cosmic  force  or  energising  power  of  the 
universe. 

Four  Animals. — The  symbolical  animals  of  the  vision  of  Ezekiel  (the 
Mercabah).  ‘ With  the  first  Christians  the  celebration  of  the 
Mysteries  of  the  Faith  was  accompanied  by  the  burning  of  seven 
lights,  with  incense,  the  Trishagion,  and  the  reading  of  the  book  of 
the  gospels,  upon  which  was  wrought,  both  on  covers  and  pages, 
the  winged  man,  lion,  bull  and  eagle’  {Qabbalah,  by  Isaac  Myer, 
L.L.B.).  To  this  day  these  animals  are  represented  along  with  the 
four  Evangelists  and  prefixing  their  respective  gospels  in  the 
editions  of  the  Greek  Church.  Each  represents  one  of  the  four 
lower  classes  of  worlds  or  planes,  into  the  similitude  of  which  each 
personality  is  cast. 

Thus  THE  Eagle  (associated  with  St  John)  represents  Cosmic 
Spirit  or  Ether,  the  all-piercing  eye  of  the  Seer;  the  Bull  of 
St  Luke,  the  waters  of  life,  the  all-generating  element  and  cosmic 
strength  ; the  Lion  of  St  Mark,  fierce  energy,  undaunted  courage 


262 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


and  cosmic  fire;  while  the  Human  Head,  or  the  Angel,  which 
stands  near  St  Matthew,  is  the  synthesis  of  all  three  combined  in 
the  higher  Intellect  of  man,  and  in  cosmic  Spirituality.  All  these 
symbols  are  Egyptian,  Chaldean  and  Indian.  The  Eagle,  Bull,  and 
Lion-headed  gods  are  plentiful,  and  all  represented  the  same  idea, 
whether  in  the  Egyptian,  Chaldean,  Indian  or  Jewish  religions, 
but  beginning  with  the  Astral  body  they  went  no  higher  than  the 
cosmic  Spirit  or  the  Higher  Manas — Atma-Buddhi,  or  Absolute 
Spirit  and  Spiritual  Soul  its  vehicle,  being  incapable  of  being 
symbolised  by  concrete  images. 

Gnana. — (Sk.)  Knowledge  as  applied  to  the  esoteric  sciences. 

Gnosis. — {Gr.)  Lit,  ‘ knowledge.’  The  technical  term  used  by  the 

schools  of  religious  philosophy,  both  before  and  during  the  first 
centuries  of  so-called  Christianity,  to  denote  the  object  of  their 
enquiry.  This  spiritual  and  Sacred  Knowledge,  the  Gupta  Vidya  of 
the  Hindus,  could  only  be  obtained  by  initiation  into  Spiritual 
Mysteries,  of  which  the  ceremonial  Mysteries  were  a type. 

Gnostics. — {Gr!)  The  philosophers  who  formulated  and  taught  the 
Gnosis  or  Knowledge. 

Golden  Age. — The  ancients  divided  the  lifecycle  into  the  Golden,  Silver, 
Bronze  and  Iron  Ages.  The  Golden  was  an  age  of  primeval  purity, 
simplicity  and  general  happiness. — See  Krita  Yuga,  also  Great 
Age,  Kali  Yuga,  etc.  Also  Yuga. 

Great  Age. — There  were  several  ‘great  ages  ’ mentioned  by  the  ancients. 
In  India  it  embraced  the  whole  Mahamanvantara,  the  ‘ age  of 
Brahma,’  each  ‘ Day  ’ of  which  represents  the  life  cycle  of  a chain — 
i.e.,  it  embraces  a period  of  seven  Rounds.  (See  Esoteric  Buddhism, 
by  A.  P.  Sinnett.)  Thus  while  a ‘Day  ’ and  a ‘ Night’  represent, 
as  Manvantara  and  Pralaya,  8,640,000,000  years,  an  ‘age’  lasts 
through  a period  of  311,040,000,000,000  years;  after  which  the 
Pralaya,  or  dissolution  of  the  universe,  becomes  universal.  With 
the  Egyptians  and  Greeks  the  ‘ great  age  ’ referred  only  to  the 
tropical  or  sidereal  year,  the  duration  of  which  is  25,868  solar  years. 
Of  the  complete  age — that  of  the  gods — they  say  nothing,  as  it  was 
a matter  to  be  discussed  and  divulged  only  in  the  Mysteries,  during 
the  initiating  ceremonies.  The  ‘ great  age  ’ of  the  Chaldees  was 
the  same  in  figures  as  that  of  the  Hindus. 

Gunas. — Qualities,  properties. — See  Trigunas. 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY  263 

Guru. — Spiritual  preceptor. 

Hermes  Trismegistus. — (Gr.)  The  ‘thrice  great  Hermes,’  the  Egyptian. 
The  m3^thical  personage  after  whom  the  Hermetic  philosophy  was 
named.  In  Eg^^pt  the  God  Thoth  or  Thot.  A generic  name  of 
many  Greek  writers  on  philosophy  and  alchemy.  Hermes  Trismegistus 
is  the  name  of  Hermes  or  Thoth  in  his  human  aspect ; as  a god  he 
is  far  more  than  this.  As  Hermes-Thoth-Aah,  he  is  Thoth,  the 
Moon,  i.e.^  his  symbol  is  the  bright  side  of  the  Moon,  supposed  to 
contain  the  essence  of  creative  Wisdom,  ‘the  elixir  of  Hermes.’  As 
such  he  is  associated  with  the  Cynocephalus,  the  dog-headed 
monkey,  for  the  same  reason  as  was  Anubis,  one  of  the  aspects  of 
Thoth.  The  same  idea  underlies  the  form  of  the  Hindu  god 
of  Wisdom,  the  elephant-headed  Ganesa,  or  Ganpat,  the  Son  of 
Parvati  and  Siva.  When  he  has  the  head  of  an  ibis,  he  is  the 
sacred  scribe  of  the  gods  ; but  even  then  he  wears  the  crown  atef 
and  the  lunar  disk.  He  is  the  most  mysterious  of  gods.  As  a 
serpent,  Hermes  Thoth  is  the  divine  creative  Wisdom.  The  Church 
Fathers  speak  at  length  of  Thoth-Hermes. 

Higher  Self. — The  Supreme  Divine  Spirit  overshadowing  man.  The 
crown  of  the  upper  spiritual  Triad  in  man — Atman. 

Homogeneity. — From  the  Greek  words  homos,  ‘ the  same,’  and  genos, 

‘ kind.’  That  which  is  of  the  same  nature  throughout,  undiffer- 
entiated, non-compound,  as  gold  is  supposed  to  be. 

Humanity. — Occultly  and  Kabbalistically,  the  whole  of  mankind  is 
symbolised,  by  Manu  in  India  ; by  Vajrasattva  or  Dorjesempa,  the 
head  of  the  Seven  Dhyani,  in  Northern  Buddhism  ; and  by  Adam 
Kadmon  in  the  Kabbala.  All  these  represent  the  totality  of  mankind 
whose  beginning  is  in  this  androgynic  protoplast,  and  whose  end  is 
in  the  Absolute,  be^^ond  all  these  s^^mbols  and  myths  of  human 
origin.  Humanity  is  a great  Brotherhood  by  virtue  of  the  sameness 
of  the  material  from  which  it  is  formed  physically  and  morally. 
Unless,  however,  it  becomes  a Brotherhood  also  intellectually  it  is 
no  better  than  a superior  genus  of  animals. — See  Man. 

Illusion. — In  Occultism  everything  finite  (like  the  universe  and  all  in 
it)  is  called  illusion  or  maya. 

Image. — Occultism  permits  no  other  image  than  that  of  the  living  image 
of  divine  man  (the  symbol  of  Humanity)  on  earth.  The  Kabbala 
teaches  that  this  divine  Image,  the  copy  of  the  sublime  and  holy 


264 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


upper  image  (the  Elohim)  has  now  changed  into  another  similitude^ 
owing  to  the  development  of  men’s  sinful  nature.  It  is  only  the 
upper  divine  Image  (the  Ego)  which  is  the  same  ; the  lower  (person- 
alit30  has  changed,  and  man,  now  fearing  the  wild  beasts,  has 
grown  to  bear  on  his  face  the  similitude  of  man^^  of  them.  {Zohar 
I.,  fol.  71a.)  In  the  earlier  period  of  Eg3^pt  there  were  no  images  ; 
but  later,  as  Lenormand  says : ‘ In  the  sanctuaries  of  Eg3^pt  they 
divided  the  properties  of  Nature  and  consequentl3^  of  divinit3^  (the 
Elohim,  or  the  Egos),  into  seven  abstract  qualities,  characterised 
each  b3^  an  emblem,  which  are  matter,  cohesion,  fluxion,  coagula- 
tion, accumulation,  station  and  division.’  These  were  all  attributes 
symbolised  in  various  images. 

Imagination. — In  Occultism  this  is  not  to  be  confused  with  fancy,  as  it 
is  one  of  the  plastic  powers  of  the  higher  Soul,  and  is  the  memory 
of  the  preceding  incarnations,  which,  however  disfigured  b3^  the 
Lower  Manas,  yet  rests  alwa3^s  on  a ground  of  truth. 

Incarnations. — The  Immaculate  Conception  is  as  pre-eminentl3^ 
Egyptian  as  it  is  Indian.  As  the  author  of  Egyptian  Belief  hdis 
it : ‘ It  is  not  the  vulgar,  coarse  and  sensual  story  as  in  Greek 
mythology,  but  refined,  moral  and  spiritual  ’ ; and  again  the 
incarnation  idea  was  found  revealed  on  the  wall  of  a Theban 
temple  by  Samuel  Sharpe,  who  thus  analyses  it : ‘ First  the  god 
Thoth  ...  as  the  messenger  of  the  gods,  like  the  Mercury 
of  the  Greeks  (or  the  Gabriel  of  the  First  Gospel),  tells  the  maiden 
queen  Mautmes,  that  she  is  to  give  birth  to  a son,  who  is  to  be 
king  Amunotaph  III.  Secondl3^  the  god  Kneph,  the  Spirit  . . . 

and  the  goddess  Hathor  (Nature)  . . . both  take  hold  of  the 

queen  by  the  hands  and  put  into  her  mouth  the  character  for  life, 
a cross,  which  is  to  be  the  life  of  the  coming  child,’  etc.  Trul3^ 
divine  incarnation,  or  the  avatar  doctrine,  constituted  the  grandest 
mysteiy  of  every  old  religious  S3^stem. 

Individuality. — One  of  the  names  given  in  Occultism  to  the  fluman 
Higher  Ego.  We  make  a distinction  between  the  immortal  and 
divine  Ego,  and  the  mortal  human  Ego  which  perishes.  The 
latter,  or  ‘ personality  ’ (personal  Ego),  survives  the  dead  bod3^ 
only  for  a time  in  Kama  Loka  ; the  Individualit3'  prevails  for  ever. 

Indra. — The  god  of  the  Firmament,  the  King  of  the  sidereal  gods.  A 
Vedic  Deit3^ 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


265 


Initiate. — From  the  Latin  Initiatiis.  The  designation  of  an3^one  who 
was  received  into  and  had  revealed  to  him  the  mysteries  and 
secrets  of  either  Masonry  or  Occultism.  In  times  of  antiquity, 
those  who  had  been  initiated  into  the  arcane  knowledge  taught  by 
the  Hierophants  of  the  Mysteries ; and  in  our  modern  days  those 
who  have  been  initiated  by  the  adepts  of  mystic  lore  into  the 
mysterious  knowledge,  which,  notwithstanding  the  lapse  of  ages, 
has  yet  a few  real  votaries  on  earth. 

Inner  Man. — An  Occult  term,  used  to  designate  the  true  and  immortal 
Entity  in  us,  not  the  outward  and  mortal  form  of  clay  that  we  call 
our  body.  The  term  applies,  strictly  speaking,  only  to  the  Higher 
Ego,  the  ‘astral  man,’  being  the  appellation  of  the  Double  and  of 
Kama  Rupa  {q.v^  or  the  surviving  eidolon. 

IsHVARA. — Personal  God,  Lord,  the  Spirit  in  man,  the  Divine  principle 
in  its  active  nature  or  condition,  one  of  the  four  states  of  Brahma. 

Isis. — In  Egyptian  Issa,  the  goddess  Virgin-Mother;  personified  nature. 
In  Egyptian  or  Koptic  Uasi,  the  female  reflection  of  Uasar  or 
Osiris.  She  is  the  ‘ woman  clothed  with  the  sun  ’ of  the  land  of 
Chemi.  Isis-Latona  is  the  Roman  Isis. 

JiVA  OR  Karana  Sharira. — The  second  principle  of  man  ; life. 

JiVATMA. — The  human  spirit;  seventh  principle  in  the  microcosm. 

Jnanashakti. — The  power  of  true  knowledge  ; one  of  the  six  forces. 

Jnanendriyas. — The  five  channels  of  knowledge. 

Jupiter. — From  the  same  root  as  the  Greek  Zeus,  the  greatest  god  of 
the  ancient  Greeks  and  Romans,  adopted  also  by  other  nations. 
His  names  are  among  others:  (i)  Jupiter  Aerios ; (2)  Jupiter- 
Ammon  of  Eg3^pt ; (3)  Jupiter  Bel-Moloch,  the  Chaldean; 

(4)  Jupiter  Mundus,  Deus  Mundus,  ‘ God  of  the  World  ’ ; 

(5)  Jupiter-Fulgur,  ‘the  Fulgurant,’  etc. 

Jyotisha. — Astrcnom3^  and  Astrolog3^ ; one  of  the  Vedangas. 

Kali  Yuga. — The  fourth,  the  black  or  the  Iron  Age,  our  present  period, 
the  duration  of  which  is  432,000  years.  The  last  of  the  ages  into 
which  the  evolutionary  period  of  man  is  divided  by  a series  of  such 
ages.  It  began  3102  3^ears  b.c.  at  the  moment  of  Krishna’s  death, 
and  the  first  C3^cle  of  5,000  3^ears  ended  between  the  3^ears  1897  and 
1898. 

Kalpa. — The  period  of  cosmic  activit3^ ; a da3'  of  Brahma  ; 4,320  million 
years. 


266 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


Kama. — Lust,  desire,  volition ; the  Hindu  cupid  ; is  pre-eminently  the 
divine  desire  of  creating  happiness  and  love ; and  it  is  only  ages 
later,  as  mankind  began  to  materialise  by  anthropomorphisation 
its  grandest  ideals  into  cut  and  dried  dogmas,  that  Kama  became 
the  power  that  gratifies  desire  on  the  animal  plane.  This  is  shown 
by  what  every  Veda  and  some  Brahmanas  say.  In  the  Atharva 
Veda,  Kama  is  represented  as  the  supreme  Deity  and  Creator.  In 
the  Taitari3^a  Brahmana,  he  is  the  child  of  Dharma,  the  God  of 
Law  and  Justice,  of  Sraddha  and  faith.  In  another  account  he 
springs  from  the  heart  of  Brahma.  Others  show  him  born  from 
water,  ie.,  from  primordial  chaos,  or  the  ‘Deep.’  Hence  one  of  his 
many  names,  Ira-ja,  ‘ the  water-born  ’ and  Aja,  ‘ unborn  ’ ; and 
Atmabhu  or  self-existent.’  Because  of  the  sign  Makara 
(Capricornus)  on  his  banner,  he  is  also  called  ‘ Makara  Ketu.’  The 
allegory  about  Siva,  the  ‘great  Yogin,’  reducing  Kama  to  ashes  b}^ 
the  fire  from  his  central  (or  third)  Eye,  for  inspiring  the  Mahadeva 
with  thoughts  of  his  wife  while  he  was  at  his  devotions — is  very 
suggestive,  as  it  is  said  that  he  thereby  reduced  Kama  to  his 
primeval  spiritual  form. 

Kama  Loka.— Abode  of  desire,  the  first  condition  through  which  a 
human  entity  passes  in  its  passage,  after  death,  to  Devachan.  It 
corresponds  to  purgatory. 

Kama  Rupa. — The  principle  of  desire  in  man  ; the  fourth  principle. 

Karana  Sharira. — The  causal  bod3^  Exoterically,  it  is  Avidya, 
ignorance,  or  that  which  is  the  cause  of  the  evolution  of  a human 
ego  and  its  reincarnation. — See  Jiva. 

Karma. — The  law  of  ethical  causation  ; the  effect  of  an  act  for 
the  attainment  of  an  object  of  personal  desire ; merit  and 
demerit. 

Kosmos. — The  Universe,  as  distinguished  from  the  world,  which  may 
mean  our  globe  or  earth. 

Krittika. — The  Pleiades.  The  seven  nurses  of  Kartikeya,  the  god  of 
War. 

Kriyashakti. — The  power  of  thought ; one  of  the  six  forces  in  Nature. 

‘ The  mysterious  power  of  thought,  by  which  it  is  capable  of 
producing  external  phenomenal  results  by  its  own  inherent 
energy.’ 

Kronos. — Saturn.  The  God  of  Boundless  Time  and  of  the  Cycles. 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY  267 

Kshatriya. — The  second  of  the  four  castes  into  which  the  Hindu  nation 
was  originally  divided.  The  warriors  or  defenders. 

Kumara. — A virgin-boy,  or  young  celibate.  The  first  Kumaras  are  the 
seven  sons  of  Brahma,  born  out  of  the  limbs  of  the  god,  in  the  so- 
called  ninth  creation.  It  is  stated  that  the  name  was  given  to  them 
owing  to  their  formal  refusal  to  ‘procreate  their  species,’  and  so 
they  ‘remained  Yogis,’  as  the  legend  says. 

Kundalinishakti. — The  power  of  life  ; one  of  the  six  forces  of  Nature. 
‘A  potent  serpentine  force,  aroused  in  the  ascetic  by  certain  Yoga 
practices,  which  can  as  easily  kill  as  it  can  create.  It  is  hiiddhi 
regarded  as  an  active  power,  as  contrasted  with  its  normally 
passive  condition.’ 

Lilith. — By  Jewish  tradition  a demon  who  was  the  first  wife  of  Adam, 
before  Eve  was  created : she  is  supposed  to  have  a fatal  influence 
on  mothers  and  newly-born  infants.  Lil  is  night,  and  Lilith  is 
also  the  owl  ; and  in  mediaeval  works  is  a synonym  of  Lamia  or 
female  demon. 

Linga  Sharira. — The  ‘body,’  i.e.^  the  aerial  symbol  of  the  bod^L  This 
term  designates  the  doppelganger  or  the  ‘ double  ’ of  man  or  animal. 
It  is  the  eidolon  of  the  Greeks,  the  vital  and  prototypal  body ; the 
reflection  of  the  men  of  flesh.  It  is  born  before^  and  dies  or  fades 
out  with  the  disappearance  of  the  last  atom  of  the  body.  It  is  now 
called  the  Etheric  Double. 

Lipikas. — The  celestial  recorders,  the  ‘ Scribes,’  those  who  record  every 
word  and  deed,  said  or  done  by  man  while  on  this  earth.  As 
Occultism  teaches,  they  are  the  agents  of  Karma — the  retributive 
Law. 

Logos. — The  manifested  deity  with  every  nation  and  people ; the  out- 
ward expression,  or  the  effect  of  the  cause  which  is  ever  concealed. 
Thus,  speech  is  the  Logos  of  thought ; hence  it  is  aptly  translated 
by  the  ‘ Verbum  ’ and  ‘ Word  ’ in  its  metaphysical  sense. 

Lohitanga. — The  planet  Mars. 

Macrocosm. — Universe. 

Magi. — Fire  worshippers  ; the  great  magicians  or  wisdom-philosophers 
of  old. 

Magic,  White. — Or  Beneficent  Magic,  so-called,  is  divine  magic,  devoid 
of  selfishness,  love  of  power,  of  ambition,  or  lucre,  and  bent  only 
on  doing  good  to  the  world  in  general,  and  one’s  neighbour  in 


268 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


particular.  The  smallest  attempt  to  use  one’s  abnormal  powers 
for  the  gratification  of  self^  makes  of  these  powers  sorcery  or  black 
magic. 

Magnetism. — A Force  in  nature  and  in  man.  When  it  is  the  former, 
it  is  an  agent  which  gives  rise  to  the  various  phenomena  of  attrac- 
tion, of  polarity,  etc.  When  the  latter,  it  becomes  ‘ animal  ’ 
magnetism  in  contradistinction  to  cosmic,  and  terrestrial 
magnetism. 

Magus. — In  the  New  Testament  it  means  a Sage,  a wise  man  of  the 
Chaldeans. 

Mahatma. — A great  soul ; an  adept  in  occultism  of  the  highest 
order. 

Maha  Chohan. — The  chief  of  a spiritual  Hierarchy,  or  of  a school 
of  Occultism ; the  head  of  the  trans-Himala3^an  m3^stics.  See 
Chohan. 

Maha  Dev^. — Lit.^  ‘Great  God,’  a title  of  Siva. 

Maha  Garu. — Lit.^  ‘ Great  Teacher.’  The  Initiator. 

Maha  Kala. — ‘ Great  Time.’  A name  of  Siva  as  the  Destro3^er,  and  of 
Vishnu  as  the  ‘ Preserver.’ 

Man. — Man  is  defined  in  Occultism  as  ‘that  being  in  the  Universe,  in 
whatever  part  of  the  Universe  he  ma3^  be,  in  whom  highest  Spirit 
and  lowest  Matter  are  joined  together  by  Intelligence,  thus 
ultimately  making  a manifested  God  . . . “Man”  is  not 
necessaril3^  of  just  the  form  that  3^ou  now  see.  He  may  have  a 
million  forms;  “man”  means  that  being  in  whom  Spirit  and 
Matter  have  joined  hands,  in  whom  they  have  become,  or  are 
becoming,  balanced,  in  whom  ultimately  Spirit  has  conquered,  or 
will  conquer.  Matter.  . . . H.  P.  B.  has  said  that  every  being 

in  this  Universe  has  passed  through  the  human  kingdom,  or  must 
pass,  if  he  has  not  already  passed  it ; if  he  has  passed  be3^ond  it, 
he  must  have  passed  through  it  ; if  he  has  not  reached  it,  he  will 
have  to  pass  through  it  in  the  future.  It  does  not  depend  on  this 
globe,  nor  on  this  race.  “ Man  ” is  the  battleground  of  Matter  and 
Spirit,  and  every  being  must,  like  Yudhishthira,  fight  his 
Kurukshetra  and  conquer,  before  he  enters  on  his  divine  kingdom. 
Such  then  is  Man.’  The  Pedigree  of  Man,  pp.  22,  23  (Second 
Edition)  [see  also  the  Secret  Doctrine,  Vol.  I,  pp.  297,  298,  Third 
Edition]. 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY  269 

Manas. — The  mind,  the  thinking  principle  ; the  fifth  principle  in  the 
septenary  division. 

Manasas. — Those  who  endowed  humanity  with  manas  or  intelligence, 
the  immortal  Egos  in  men. 

Manas,  Kama. — Lit.^  ‘the  mind  of  desire.’  With  the  Buddhists  it  is 
the  sixth  of  the  Chadayatana,  or  the  six  organs  of  knowledge, 
hence  the  highest  of  these,  synthesised  by  the  seventh,  called 
Klichta^  the  spiritual  perception  of  that  which  defiles  this  (lower) 
Manas,  or  the  ‘ Human-Animal  Soul,’  as  the  Occultists  term  it. 
Whilst  the  higher  Manas  or  the  Ego  is  directly  related  to  Vijnana 
(the  tenth  of  the  twelve  Nidanas)  which  is  the  perfect  knowledge 
of  all  forms  of  knowledge,  whether  relating  to  object  or  subject  in 
the  nidanic  concatenation  of  causes  and  effects ; the  lower,  the 
Kama  Manas,  is  but  one  of  the  Indriya  or  organs  (roots)  of  Sense. 
Very  little  can  be  said  of  the  dual  Manas  here,  as  the  doctrine  that 
treats  of  it  is  correctly  stated  only  in  esoteric  works.  Its  mention 
thus  can  only  be  very  superficial. 

Manas  TAijAsi.--Zf/.,  the  ‘radiant’  Manas;  a state  of  the  higher  Ego, 
which  only  high  metaphysicians  are  able  to  realise  and  com- 
prehend. 

Manu. — The  great  Indian  legislator. 

Manvantara. — The  outbreathing  of  the  creative  principle ; the  period 
of  cosmic  activity  between  two  pralayas. 

Maya. — Illusion,  the  cosmic  power  which  renders  phenomenal  existence 
possible. 

Mercury. — See  Hermes  ; Nebo. 

Metempsychosis. — The  progress  of  the  soul  from  one  stage  of  existence 
to  another.  Symbolised  as,  and  vulgarly  believed  to  be,  rebirths 
in  animal  bodies.  A term  generally  misunderstood  by  every  class 
of  European  and  American  society,  including  many  scientists. 
Metempsychosis  should  apply  to  animals  alone ; the  kabalistic 
axiom,  ‘ A stone  becomes  a plant,  a plant  an  animal,  an  animal  a 
man,  a man  a spirit,  and  a spirit  a god,’  receives  an  explanation  in 
Manu’s  Manava-Dharma-Shastra  and  other  Brahmanical  books. 

Microcosm. — Man. 

Monad. — The  spiritual  soul,  that  which  endures  through  all  changes  of 
objective  existence. 

Monad. — {Gri)  The  Unity,  the  one  ; but  in  Occultism  it  often  means 


270 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


the  unified  triad,  Atma-Buddhi-Manas,  or  the  duad,  Atma-Buddhi, 
that  immortal  part  of  man  which  reincarnates  in  the  lower  king- 
doms, and  gradually  progresses  through  them  to  Man  and  then  to 
the  final  goal — Nirvana. 

Mukta. — Liberated  ; released  from  conditional  existence. 

Mulaprakriti. — Undifferentiated  cosmic  matter;  the  unmanifested 
cause  and  substance  of  all  being. 

Nebo. — {Chald.)  The  same  as  the  Hindu  Budha,  son  of  Soma  the 
Moon,  and  Mercury  the  planet. 

Neophyte. — A candidate  for  initiation  into  the  m3^steries  of  adeptship. 

Nephesh. — One  of  the  three  souls,  according  to  the  Kabalah  ; the  first 
three  principles  in  the  human  septenary- 

Nidaa. — {S  k.)  The  twelve  causes  of  existence,  or  a chain  of  causa- 
tion, ‘ a concatenation  of  cause  and  effect  in  the  whole  range  of 
existence  through  twelve  links.’  This  is  the  fundamental  dogma 
of  Buddhist  thought,  ‘ the  understanding  of  which  solves  the  riddle 
of  life,  revealing  the  inanity  of  existence  and  preparing  the  mind 
for  Nirvana.’  The  twelve  links  stand  thus  in  their  enumeration  : 
(i)  Jati,  or  birth,  according  to  one  of  the  four  modes  of  entering 
the  stream  of  life  and  reincarnation — or  Chatur  Yoni  each  mode 
placing  the  being  born  in  one  of  the  six  Gati,  (2)  Jaramarmia^  or 
decrepitude  and  death  following  the  maturity  of  the  Skandhas 
{q.v).  (3)  Bhava^  the  Karmic  agent  which  leads  every  new 

sentient  being  to  be  born  in  this  or  another  mode  of  existence  in  the 
Trailokya  and  Gati.  (4)  Upadana,  the  creative  cause  of  Bhava 
which  thus  becomes  the  cause  of  Jati,  which  is  the  effect,  and  this 
creative  cause  is  the  clinging  to  life.  (5)  Trishna,  love,-  whether 
pure  or  impure.  (6)  Vedana,  or  sensation ; perception  by  the 
senses,  it  is  the  fifth  Skandha.  (7)  Sparsa,  the  sense  of  touch, 
(s)  Chadayatana,  the  organs  of  sensation.  (9)  Namarupa,  person- 
ality, i.e.^  a form  with  a name  to  it,  the  symbol  of  the  unreality  of 
material  phenomenal  appearances.  (10)  Vijnana,  the  perfect 
knowledge  of  every  perceptible  thing  and  of  all  objects  in  their 
concatenation  and  unity,  (ii)  Samskm'a,  action  on  the  plane  of 
illusion.  (12)  Avidya,  lack  of  true  perception,  or  ignorance.  The 
Nidanas  belonging  to  the  most  subtle  and  abstruse  doctrines  of  the 
Eastern  metaphysical  system,  it  is  impossible  to  go  into  the  subject 
at  any  greater  length. — See  Samskara. 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


271 


[See  also  the  article  on  the  ‘ Nidanas  ’ in  Modern  Astrology, 
Vol.  XIV,  (Old  Series),  p.  7,  also  Vol.  XII,  p.  10  : corre- 

sponds to  Pisces,  J aramarana  to  Aquarius,  and  so  on  in 
continuing  order,  Avidya  being  Aries.] 

Nirguna. — Unbound,  without  Gunas  or  attributes ; the  soul  in  its 
state  of  essential  purity  is  so  called. 

Occultism. — The  study  of  the  mysteries  of  Nature  and  the  development 
of  the  psychic  powers  latent  in  man. 

Occultist. — One  who  studies  the  various  branches  of  occult  science. 
The  term  is  used  by  the  French  Kabbalists.  Occultism  embraces 
the  whole  range  of  psychological,  physiological,  cosmical,  physical 
and  spiritual  phenomena.  From  the  word  occultus,  hidden  or 
secret.  It  therefore  applies  to  a stud^^  of  the  Kabbala,  astrology, 
alchemy,  and  all  arcane  sciences. 

Parabrahman. — The  supreme  principle  in  nature ; the  universal  spirit. 

Paramatma. — The  Supreme  Spirit. 

Personality. — In  Occultism — which  divides  man  into  seven  principles, 
considering  him  under  the  three  aspects  of  the  divine,  the  thinking 
or  the  rational,  and  the  animal  man — the  lower  quaternary  or  the 
purely  astrophysical  being ; while  by  Individuality  is  meant  the 
Higher  Triad,  considered  as  a Unity.  Thus  the  Personality 
embraces  all  the  characteristics  and  memories  of  one  physical 
life,  while  the  Individuality  is  the  imperishable  Ego  which  re- 
incarnates and  clothes  itself  in  one  personality  after  another. 

Philosopher’s  Stone. — Called  also  the  ‘ Powder  of  Projection.’  It  is 
the  Magnum  Opus  of  the  Alchemists,  an  object  to  be  attained  by 
them  at  all  costs,  a substance  possessing  the  power  of  transmuting 
the  baser  metals  into  pure  gold.  Mysticall3%  however,  the 
Philosopher’s  Stone  symbolises  the  transmutation  of  the  lower 
animal  nature  of  man  into  the  highest  and  divine. 

Plane. — From  the  Latin  planus  (level,  flat)  an  extension  of  space,  or  of 
something  in  it,  whether  physical  or  metaphysical,  e.g.,  a ‘ plane  of 
consciousness.’  As  used  in  Occultism,  the  term  denotes  the  range 
or  extent  of  some  state  of  consciousness,  or  of  the  perceptive  power 
of  a particular  set  of  senses,  or  the  action  of  a particular  force,  or 
the  state  of  matter  corresponding  to  any  of  the  above. 

Planetary  Spirits. — Primarily,  the  rulers  or  governors  of  the  planets. 
As  our  earth  has  its  hierarchj^  of  terrestrial  planetary  spirits,  from 


272 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


the  highest  to  the  lowest  plane,  so  has  every  other  heavenly  body. 
In  Occultism,  however,  the  term  ‘planetary  spirit'  is  generally 
applied  only  to  the  seven  highest  hierarchies  corresponding  to  the 
Christian  archangels.  These  have  all  passed  through  a stage  of 
evolution  corresponding  to  the  humanity  of  earth  on  other  worlds, 
in  long  past  cycles.  Our  earth,  being  as  yet  only  in  its  fourth 
round,  is  far  too  young  to  have  produced  high  planetary  spirits. 
The  highest  planetary  spirit  ruling  over  any  globe  is  in  realit3^ 
the  ‘personal  God’  of  that  planet  and  far  more  truly  its  ‘over- 
ruling providence  ’ than  the  self-contradictory  Infinite  Personal 
Deity  of  modern  churchianity. 

Point  Within  a Circle. — In  its  esoteric  meaning  the  first  unmani- 
fested logos  appearing  on  the  infinite  and  shoreless  expanse  of 
Space,  represented  by  the  circle.  It  is  the  plane  of  Infinity  and 
Absoluteness.  This  is  only  one  of  the  numberless  and  hidden 
meanings  of  this  symbol,  which  is  the  most  important  of  all  the 
geometrical  figures  used  in  metaph3^sical  emblematolog3L  As  to 
the  Masons,  they  have  made  of  the  point  ‘ an  individual  brother  ’ 
whose  duty  to  God  and  man  is  bounded  b3^  the  circle,  and  have 
added  John  the  Baptist  and  John  the  Evangelist  to  keep  compan3^ 
with  the  ‘ brother  ’ representing  them  under  two  perpendicular 
parallel  lines. 

Prakriti. — Undifferentiated  matter ; the  supreme  principle  regarded 
as  the  substance  of  the  universe. 

Prana. — Life-principle  ; the  breath  of  Life. 

Pranava. — (Sk.)  A sacred  word,  equivalent  to  Atim.  T.  Subba  Row 
relates  the  sign  Taurus  to  pranava. 

Pre-Existence. — The  term  used  to  denote  that  we  have  lived  before. 
The  same  as  reincarnation  in  the  past.  The  idea  is  derided  by 
some,  rejected  by  others,  called  absurd  and  inconsistent  by  the 
third : yet  it  is  the  oldest  and  most  universally  accepted  belief 
from  an  immemorial  antiquity.  And  if  this  belief  was  universally 
accepted  by  the  most  subtle,  philosophical  minds  of  the^  pre- 
Christian  world,  surely  it  is  not  amiss  that  some  of  our  modern 
intellectual  men  should  also  believe  in  it,  or  at  least  give  the 
doctrine  the  benefit  of  the  doubt.  Even  the  Bible  hints  at  it 
more  than  once,  St  John  the  Baptist  being  regarded  as  the  re- 
incarnation of  Elijah,  and  the  disciples  asking  whether  the  blind 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


273 


man  was  born  blind  because  of  his  sins,  which  is  equal  to  saying 
that  he  had  lived  and  sinned  before  being  born  blind.  As  Mr 
Bonwick  well  says : it  was  ‘ the  work  of  spiritual  progression 
and  soul  discipline.  The  pampered  sensualist  returned  a beggar  ; 
the  proud  oppressor,  a slave ; the  selfish  woman  of  fashion,  a seam- 
stress. A turn  of  the  wheel  gave  a chance  for  the  development  01 
neglected  or  abused  intelligence  and  feeling,  hence  the  popularity 
of  reincarnation  in  all  climes  and  times  . . . thus  the  expurgation 
of  evil  was  . . . gradually  but  certainly  accomplished.’  Verily  ‘ an 
evil  act  follows  a man,  passing  through  100,000  transmigrations’ 
(Panchatantra).  ‘ All  souls  have  a subtle  vehicle,  image  of  the  body, 
which  carries  the  passive  soul  from  one  material  dwelling  to  another,’ 
says  Kapila ; while  Basnage  explains  of  the  Jews  : ‘ By  this  second 

death  is  not  considered  hell,  but  that  which  happens  when  a soul 
has  a second  time  animated  a body.’  Herodotus  tells  his  readers 
that  the  Egyptians  ‘ are  the  earliest  who  have  spoken  of  this  doctrine 
according  to  which  the  soul  of  man  is  immortal  and  after  the 
destruction  of  the  body  enters  into  a newly-born  being.  When,  say 
they,  it  has  passed  through  all  the  animals  of  the  earth  and  sea,  and 
all  the  birds,  it  will  re-enter  the  body  of  a new-born  man.’  This  is 
pre-existence.  Deveria  showed  that  the  funeral  books  of  the 
Egyptians  say  plainly  ‘that  resurrection  was,  in  reality,  but  a 
renovation,  leading  to  a new  infancy,  and  a new  youth.’ — See 
Reincarnation. 

Principles. — The  Elements  or  original  essences,  the  basic  differentia- 
tions upon  and  of  which  all  things  are  built  up.  We  use  the  term 
to  denote  the  seven  individual  and  fundamental  aspects  of  the  One 
Universal  Reality  in  Kosmos  and  in  man.  Hence  also  the  seven 
aspects  in  their  manifestation  in  the  human  being — divine,  spiritual, 
psychic,  astral,  ph3^siological  and  simply  ph3^sical. 

Psyche. — {Gr.)  The  animal,  terrestrial  soul ; the  lower  Manas. 

Psychism. — From  the  Greek  psyche.  A term  now  used  to  denote  very 
loosely  every  kind  of  mental  phenomena,  e.g.,  mediumship,  and  the 
higher  sensitiveness,  hypnotic  receptivity,  and  inspired  prophecy, 
simple  clairvoyance  in  the  astral  light,  and  real  divine  seership  ; 
in  short,  the  word  covers  every  phase  and  manifestation  of  the 
powers  and  potencies  of  the  human  and  the  divine  souls. 

Psychology. — The  Science  of  Soul,  in  days  of  old  : a science  which 
s 


274 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


served  as  the  unavoidable  basis  for  physiology.  Whereas  in  our 
modern  days,  it  is  psychology  that  is  being  based  upon  physiology. 

PsYCHOMETRY. — Lit.^  ‘ Soul-measuring  ’ ; reading  or  seeing,  not  with  the 
physical  eyes,  but  with  the  soul,  or  tn7ter  sight. 

PuRUSHA. — Spirit. 

Rahu. — {Sk.)  A Daitya  (demon)  whose  lower  parts  were  like  a dragon’s 
tail.  He  made  himself  immortal  by  robbing  the  gods  of  some 
Afnrita— the  elixir  of  divine  life — for  which  they  were  churning  the 
ocean  of  milk.  Unable  to  deprive  him  of  his  immortality,  Vishnu 
exiled  him  from  the  earth  and  made  of  him  the  constellation  Draco, 
his  head  being  called  Rahu  and  his  tail  Ketu — astronomically,  the 
ascending  and  descending  nodes.  With  the  latter  appendage  he 
has  ever  since  waged  a destructive  war  on  the  denouncers  of  his 
robbery,  the  sun  and  the  moon,  and  (during  the  eclipses)  is  said  to 
swallow  them.  Of  course  the  fable  has  a mystic  and  occult 
meaning. 

Rajas. — The  quality  of  passionate  activity. 

Raja  Yoga. — The  true  science  of  the  development  of  psychic  powers 
and  union  with  the  Supreme  Spirit. 

Reincarnation. — The  doctrine  of  re-birth,  believed  in  by  Jesus  and  the 
Apostles  as  by  all  men  in  those  days,  but  denied  now  by  all 
the  Christians.  All  the  Egyptain  converts  to  Christianity,  Church 
Fathers  and  others  believed  in  this  doctrine,  as  shown  by  the 
writings  of  several.  In  the  still  existing  symbols,  the  human- 
headed bird,  fljdng  towards  the  mummy,  a body,  or  ‘ the  soul 
uniting  itself  with  its  Sahoii  ’ (glorified  body  of  the  Ego,  and  also 
the  Kamalokic  sA^//)  proves  this  belief.  ‘The  song  of  the  Resurrec- 
tion,’ chanted  by  Isis  to  recall  her  dead  husband  to  life,  might  be 
■ translated  ‘Song  of  Rebirth,’  as  Osiris  is  collective  Humanity. 

‘ Oh ! Osiris  [here  follows  the  name  of  the  Osirified  mummy,  or  the 
departed],  rise  again  in  holy  earth  (matter),  august  mummy  in  the 
coffin,  under  thy  corporeal  substances,’  was  the  funeral  prayer  of 
the  priest  over  the  deceased.  ‘ Resurrection  ’ with  the  Egyptians 
never  meant  the  resurrection  of  the  mutilated  mummy,  but  of  the 
sold  that  informed  it,  the  Ego  in  a new  body.  The  putting  on  of 
flesh  periodically  by  the  Soul  or  the  Ego,  was  a universal  belief, 
nor  can  anything  be  more  consonant  with  justice  and  karmic  law. 
— See  Pre-existence. 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


275 


Rishabham. — The  zodiacal  sign  Taurus,  the  sacred  syllable  Aum. 

Rounds  and  Chains. — Terms  employed  by  Theosophists  in  explanation 
of  Eastern  cosmogony.  They  are  used  to  denote  the  various 
evolutionary  cycles  in  the  Elemental  Mineral,  etc.,  Kingdoms, 
through  which  the  Monad  passes  on  any  one  globe,  the  term 
Round  being  used  only  to  denote  the  cyclic  passage  of  the  Monad 
round  the  complete  chain  of  seven  globes. 

Rupa. — (Sk.)  Body : any  form,  applied  even  to  the  forms  of  the  gods, 
which  are  subjective  to  us. 

Sabianism. — The  religion  of  the  ancient  Chaldees.  The  latter  believing 
in  one  impersonal,  universal,  deific  Principle,  never  mentioned  It, 
but  offered  worship  to  the  Solar,  Lunar,  and  planetary  Gods  and 
rulers,  regarding  the  stars  and  other  celestial  bodies  as  their  re- 
spective symbols. 

Sabians. — Astrolaters,  so  called  : those  who  worship  the  stars  or  rather 
their  ‘regents.’ — See  Sabianism. 

Sanskrit. — (S^.)  The  classical  language  of  the  Brahmans,  never  known 
nor  spoken  in  its  true  systematised  form  (given  later  approximately 
by  Panini),  except  by  the  initiated  Brahmans,  as  it  was  pre- 
eminently ‘ a m3^stery  language.’  It  has  now  degenerated  into  the 
so-called  Prakrita. 

Sattva  or  Satwa. — {Ski)  Goodness,  Harmony,  rhythm ; one  of 

the  trigunas  or  the  three  divisions  of  nature. 

Secret  Doctine. — The  general  name  given  to  the  esoteric  teachings  of 
antiquity.  [Also  the  title  of  a great  three-volume  work  by  H.  P. 
Blavatsky,  which  may  be  regarded  as  the  foundation  of  modern 
Theosophical  teachings.] 

Senses. — The  ten  organs  of  man.  In  the  exoteric  Pantheon  and  the 
allegories  of  the  East,  these  are  the  emanations  of  ten  minor  gods, 
the  terrestrial  Prajapati  or  ‘progenitors.’  They  are  called  in 
contradistinction  to  the  five  physical  and  the  seven  superphysical, 
the  ‘elementary  senses.’  In  Occultism  they  are  closely  allied  with 
varies  forces  of  nature,  and  with  our  inner  organisms. 

Sephiroth.—  {Heb.)  The  ten  emanations  of  Deity ; the  highest  is 
formed  by  the  concentration  of  the  Ain  Soph  Aur,  or  the  Limitless 
Light,  and  each  Sephira  produces  by  emanation  another  Sephira. 
The  names  of  the  ten  Sephiroth  are:  (i)  Kether — The  Crown; 
(2)  Chokmah — Wisdom  ; (3)  Binah — Understanding  ; (4)  Chesed— 


276  THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 

Mercy;  (5)  Geburah — Power;  (6)  Tiphereth — Beauty;  (7)  Netzach 
— Victory;  (8)  Hod — Splendour;  (9)  Jesod — Foundation;  and 
(10)  Malkuth — the  Kingdom.  The  conception  of  Deit3^  embodied 
in  the  Ten  Sephiroth  is  a very  sublime  one,  and  each  Sephira  is 
a picture  to  the  Kabbalist  of  a group  of  exalted  ideas,  titles  and 
attributes,  which  the  name  but  faintly  represents.  Each  Sephira  is 
called  either  active  or  passive,  though  this  attribution  ma3^  lead 
to  error ; passive  does  not  mean  a return  to  negative  existence ; 
and  the  two  words  onl3^  express  the  relation  between  individual 
Sephiroth,  and  not  any  absolute  quality. 

SiDDHi. — Abnormal  power  obtained  b3^  spiritual  development. 

Sidereal. — Anything  relating  to  the  stars,  but  also,  in  Occultism,  to 
various  influences  emanating  from  such  regions,  such  as  ‘ sidereal 
force,’  as  taught  by  Paracelsus,  and  sidereal  (luminious)  ethereal 
bod3^  etc. 

SiNGHA. — (Sk.)  The  constellation  of  Leo  ; Singh  meaning  ‘lion.’ 

Shiva. — (Sk.)  The  first  person  of  the  Hindu  Trinity  (the  Trimurti). 
He  is  a god  of  the  first  order,  and  in  his  character  of  Destro3'er 
higher  than  Vishnu,  the  Preserver,  as  he  destroys  only  to  regenerate 
on  a higher  plane.  He  is  born  as  Rudra,  the  Kumara,  and  is  the 
patron  of  all  the  Yogis,  being  called,  as  such,  Maha-Yogi,  the  great 
ascetic.  His  titles  are  significant : Trilochana,  ‘ the  three  e3^ed,’ 
Mahadeva,  ‘the  great  god,’  Sankara,  Vishnu  is  the  second  person, 
and  Brahma  the  third,  etc. 

Skandha. — Lit.,  ‘ bundles,’  or  groups  of  attributes  ; ever3^thing  finite,  in- 
applicable to  the  eternal  and  the  absolute.  There  are  five — 
esoterically,  seven — attributes  in  every  human  living  being,  which 
are  known  as  the  Pancha  Skajidhas.  These  are:  (i)  form,  riipa ; 
(2)  perception,  vidana ; (3)  consciousness,  sanjna;  (4)  action, 
sanskara;  (5)  knowledge,  vidyana.  These  unite  at  the  birth 
of  man  and  constitute  his  personality.  After  the  maturit3^ 
of  these  Skandhas,  the3^  begin  to  separate  and  weaken,  and 
this  is  followed  b3^  Ja^'amarana  or  decreptitude  and  death.  {Ref. 
Nidanas.) 

Somnambulism. — Lit.,  ‘Sleep-walking,’  or  moving,  acting,  writing, 
reading  and  performing  every  function  of  waking  consciousness  in 
one’s  sleep,  with  utter  oblivion  of  the  fact  on  awakening.  This 
is  one  of  the  great  psycho-ph3’siological  phenomena,  the  least 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


277 


understood  as  it  is  the  most  puzzling,  to  which  alone  Occultism 
holds  the  key. 

Soul. — The  vital  principle  or  the  breath  of  life,  which  every  animal  down 
to  the  infusoria,  shares  with  man.  In  the  translated  Bible  it  stands 
indifferently  for  life,  blood  and  soul.  ‘ Let  us  not  kill  his  nephesh,' 
says  the  original  text : ‘ let  us  not  kill  him,'  translate  the  Christians. 
(Refer  Spirit.) 

Space. — Akasha. 

Spirit. — The  lack  of  any  mutual  agreement  between  writers  in  the  use 
of  this  word  resulted  in  dire  confusion.  It  is  commonly  made 
synonymous  with  sotcl ; and  the  lexicographers  countenance  the 
usage.  In  Theosophical  teachings  the  term  ‘ Spirit  ’ is  applied 
solely  to  that  which  belongs  directly  to  Universal  Consciousness,  and 
which  is  its  homogeneous  and  unadulterated  emanation.  Thus,  the 
Higher  Mind  in  man  or  his  Ego  (Manas)  is,  when  linked  indissolubly 
with  Buddhi,  a spirit ; while  the  term  ‘ Soul,’  human  or  even 
animal  (the  lower  Manas  acting  in  animals  instinct),  is  applied  only 
to  Kama-Manas,  and  qualified  as  the  living  soul.  This  is  nephesh, 
in  Hebrew,  the  ‘ breath  of  life.’  Spirit  is  formless  and  immaterial, 
being,  when  individualised,  of  the  highest  spiritual  substance — 
Suddasatwa,  the  divine  essence,  of  which  the  body  of  the  manifesting 
highest  Dh3^anis  are  formed.  Therefore,  the  Theosophists  reject  the 
appellation  ‘ Spirits  ’ for  those  phantoms  which  appear  in  the 
phenomenal  manifestations  of  the  Spiritualists,  and  call  them 
‘ shells,’  and  various  other  names.  Spirit  in  short  is  no  entity  in  the 
sense  of  having  form  ; for,  as  Buddhist  philosophy  has  it,  where 
there  is  a form,  there  is  a cause  for  pain  and  suffering.  But  each 
individual  spirit — this  individuality  lasting  only  throughout  the 
manvantaric  life-circle — may  be  described  as  a centre  of  consciousness, 
a self-sentient  and  self-conscious  centre  ; a state,  not  a conditioned 
individual.  This  is  why  there  is  such  a wealth  of  words  in  Sanskrit 
to  express  the  different  States  of  Beings,  Beings  and  Entities,  each 
appellation  showing  the  philosophical  difference,  the  plane  to  which 
such  unit  belongs,  and  the  degree  of  its  spirituality  or  materiality. 
Unfortunately  these  terms  are  almost  untranslatable  into  our 
Western  tongues. 

Sthula  Sharira. — The  gross  physical  body.  Refer  Linga  Sharinr. 

Substance. — Theosophists  use  the  word  in  a dual  sense,  qualif3dng 


278 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


substance  as  perceptible  and  imperceptible  ; and  making  a distinction 
between  the  material  psychic  and  spiritual  substances  into  ideal 
(i.e,,  existing  on  higher  planes)  and  rea/  substance. 

SuKSHMA  Sharira. — The  subtile  body. 

SuRYA. — The  Sun. 

Symbolism. — The  pictorial  expression  of  an  idea  or  a thought. 
Primordial  writing  had  at  first  no  characters,  but  a symbol  generally 
stood  for  a whole  phrase  or  sentence.  A symbol  is  thus  a recorded 
parable,  and  a parable  a spoken  s3^mbol.  The  Chinese  written 
language  is  nothing  more  than  symbolical  writing,  each  of  its 
several  thousand  letters  being  a symbol. 

Taijasi — The  radiant,  flaming — ivoxntejas  ‘fire’;  used  sometimes  to 
designate  the  Manasa-riipa^  the  thought-body,  and  also  the 
stars. 

Tanha. — Thirst;  desire  for  life  ; that  which  produces  re-birth. 

Tanmatras. — The  subtle  elements,  the  abstract  counterpart  of  the  five 
elements,  earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  ether,  consisting  of  smell,  taste, 
feeling,  sight  and  sound. 

Tattvas. — The  abstract  principles  of  existence,  or  categories,  physical 
and  metaphysical.  The  subtle  elements — five  exoterically,  seven  in 
esoteric  philosophy — which  are  correlative  to  the  five  and  the 
seven  senses  on  the  physical  plane  ; the  last  two  senses  are  as  3^et 
latent  in  man,  but  will  be  developed  in  the  two  last  root  races. 

Taurus. — A most  mysterious  constellation  of  the  zodiac,  one  connected 
with  all  the  ‘ first-born  ’ solar  gods.  Taurus  is  under  the  asterisk 
A,  which  is  its  figure  in  the  Hebrew  Alphabet,  that  of  Aleph  ; and 
therefore  that  constellation  is  called  the  ‘ one,’  the  ‘ First,’  after  the 
said  letter.  Hence,  the  ‘ first-born,’  to  all  of  whom  it  was  made 
sacred.  The  Bull  is  the  S3^mbol  of  force  and  procreative  power — 
the  Logos.  Hence,  also,  the  horns  on  the  head  of  Isis,  the 
female  aspect  of  Osiris  and  Horns.  Ancient  mystics  saw  the 
ansated  cross,  in  the  horns  of  Taurus  (the  upper  portion  of  the 
Hebrew  Aleph)  pushing  away  the  Dragon,  and  Christians  connected 
the  sign  and  constellation  with  Christ.  St  Augustine  calls  it  ‘ the 
great  City  of  God,’  and  the  Egyptians  called  it  the  ‘interpreter  of 
the  divine  voice,’  the  Apis-Pacis  of  Hermothis. — See  Zodiac. 

Theosophy. — The  Wisdom.  Religion  taught  in  all  ages  b3^  the  sages 
of  the  world. 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


279 


Trigun  AS. — (S/&.)  The  three  divisions  of  the  inherent  qualities  of 
differentiated  matter,  i.e.  of  pure  quiescence  (satva),  of  activity  and 
desire  (rajas),  of  stagnation  and  decay  (tamas).  They  correspond 
with  Vishnu,  Brahma  and  Shiva. — See  also  Trinity. 

[The  three  ‘ Gunas  ’ correspond  to  the  three  quadruplicities  in 
Astrology,  namely.  Fixed  {tamas).  Mutable  {satva),  and  Cardinal 
{rajas).  Also  to  the  three  modes  of  motion,  rotary,  vibratory,  and 
translatory  ; and  to  many  other  trinities  in  thought  and  action.] 

Trinity. — Everyone  knows  the  Christian  dogma  of  the  ‘three  in  one* 
and  ‘ one  in  three  ’ ; therefore  it  is  useless  to  repeat  that  which  may 
be  found  in  every  catechism.  Athanasius,  the  Church  Father,  who 
defined  the  Trinity  as  a dogma,  had  little  necessity  of  drawing  upon 
inspiration  or  his  own  brain-power  ; he  had  but  to  turn  to  one  of 
the  innumerable  trinities  of  the  heathen  creeds,  or  to  the  Egyptian 
priests,  in  whose  country  he  had  lived  all  his  life.  He  modified 
slightly  only  one  of  the  three  ‘ persons.’  All  the  triads  of  the 
Gentiles  were  composed  of  the  Father,  Mother  and  the  Son.  By 
making  it  ‘ Father,  Son  and  Holy  Ghost,’  he  changed  the  dogma 
only  outwardly,  as  the  Holy  Ghost  had  always  been  feminine,  and 
Jesus  is  made  to  address  the  Hol}^  Ghost  as  his  ‘ Mother’  in  every 
Gnostic  Gospel. 

The  three  persons  of  the  Hindu  Trinity  are  Brahma,  Vishnu, 
and  Shiva  {q.v.).  See  Trigunas. 

Upanishads. — Brahmanical  Scriptures  appended  to  the  Vedas  containing 
the  esoteric  doctrine  of  the  Brahmans. 

Varna. — {Sk.)  Caste ; lit.,  ‘ colour.’  The  four  chief  castes  named  by 
Manu — the  Brahmin,  Kshatriya,  Vaisya  and  Sudra — are  called 
Chatur-varua. 

VijNANAMAYA  KosHA. — The  shcath  of  knowledge ; the  fourth  sheath  of 
the  divine  monad  ; the  fifth  principle  in  man  (Vedanta). 

Vishnu.— The  second  God  of  the  Hindu  Trinit3%  the  principle  of 
Preservation. 

Water. — The  first  principle  of  things,  according  to  Thales  and  other 
ancient  philosophers.  Of  course  this  is  not  water  on  the  material 
plane,  but  in  a figurative  sense  for  the  potential  fluid  contained  in 
boundless  space.  This  was  S3^ mbolised  in  ancient  Egypt  by  Kneph, 
the  ‘ unrevealed  ’ god,  who  was  represented  as  the  serpent — the  em- 
blem of  eternity — encircling  a water-wm,  with  his  head  hovering  over 


28o 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


the  waters,  which  he  incubates  with  his  breath.  ‘And  the  Spirit 
of  God  moved  upon  the  face  of  the  waters  ’ (Gen.  i.).  The  honey- 
dew,  the  food  of  the  gods  and  of  the  creative  bees  on  the  Yggdrasil, 
falls  during  the  night  upon  the  tree  of  life  from  the  ‘ divine  waters, 
the  birthplace  of  the  gods.’  Alchemists  claim  that  when  pre-Adamic 
earth  is  reduced  by  the  Alkahest  to  its  first  substance,  it  is  like 
clear  water.  The  Alkahest  is  ‘ the  one  and  the  invisible^  the  water, 
the  first  principle,  in  the  second  transformation.’ 

Will. — In  metaphysics  and  occult  philosophy.  Will  is  that  which 
governs  the  manifested  universes  in  eternit3L  Will  is  the  one  and 
sole  principle  of  abstract  eternal  Motion,  or.  its  ensouling  essence. 
‘The  Will,’  sa3^s  Van  Helmont,  ‘ is  the  first  of  all  powers  . . . The 
will  is  the  property  of  all  spiritual  beings  and  displays  itself  in 
them  the  more  actively  the  more  they  are  freed  from  matter. 
And  Paracelsus  teaches  that  ‘ determined  will  is  the  beginning  of 
all  magical  operations.  It  is  because  men  do  not  perfectly  imagine 
and  believe  the  result,  that  the  (occult)  arts  are  so  uncertain,  while 
they  might  be  perfectly  certain.’  Like  all  the  rest,  the  Will  is 
septenary  in  its  degrees  of  manifestation.  Emanating  from  the  one, 
eternal,  abstract,  and  purely  quiescent  Will  (Atma  in  Layam),  it 
becomes  Buddhi  in  its  Ala3^a  state,  descends  lower  as  (Mahat  Manas), 
and  runs  down  the  ladder  of  degrees  until  the  divine  Eros  be- 
comes, in  its  lower,  animal  manifestation,  erotic  desire.  Will  as 
an  eternal  principle  is  neither  spirit  nor  substance  but  everlasting 
ideation.  As  well  expressed  by  Schopenhaur  in  his  Parerga,  ‘ in 
sober  reality  there  is  neither  matter  nor  spirit.  The  tendency  to 
gravitation  in  a stone  is  as  inexplainable  as  thought  in  the 
human  brain  ...  If  matter  can — no  one  knows  why — fall  to  the 
ground,  then  it  can  also — no  one  knows  why — think  ...  As  soon, 
even  in  mechanics,  as  we  trespass  beyond  the  purely  mathematical, 
as  soon  as  we  reach  the  inscrutable  adhesion,  gravitation  and  so  on, 
we  are  faced  by  phenomena  which  are  to  our  senses  as  mysterious 
as  the  Will.’ 

Wisdom  Religion. — The  one  religion  which  now  underlies  all  the  now- 
existing  creeds.  That  ‘ faith  ’ which,  being  primordial,  and  revealed 
directly  to  human  kind  by  their  progenitors  and  informing  Egos 
(though  the  Church  regards  them  as  the  ‘ fallen  angels  ’),  required 
no  ‘grace,’  nor  blind  faith  to  believe,  for  it  was  knowledge.  (See 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


281 


‘ Gupta  Vidya,’  Hidden  Knowledge.)  It  is  on  this  Wisdom 
Religion  that  Theosophy  is  based. 

Worlds. — Inferior  and  Superior.  The  Occultists  and  the  Kabbalists 
agree  in  dividing  the  universe  into  superior  and  inferior  worlds,  the 
worlds  of  Idea  and  the  worlds  of  Matter.  ‘As  above  so  belov/,’ 
states  the  Hermetic  philosophy.  This  lower  world  is  formed  on  its 
prototype — the  higher  world  ; and  ‘ everything  in  the  lower  is  but 
an  image  (a  reflection)  of  the  higher’  (Zohar^  ii,  fol.  20  a). 

Yoga. — {Sk.)  (i)  One  of  the  six  Darshanas  or  schools  of  India  ; a school 
of  philosophy  founded  by  Patanjali,  though  the  real  Yoga  doctrine, 
the  one  that  is  said  to  have  helped  to  prepare  the  world  for  the 
preaching  of  Buddha,  is  attributed  with  good  reasons  to  the  more 
ancient  sage  Yajnawalk3^a,  the  writer  of  the  Shatapatha  Brahmana, 
of  Yajur  Veda,  the  Brihad  Araynaka,  and  other  famous  works. 
(2)  The  practice  of  meditation  as  a means  of  leading  to  spiritual 
liberation.  Psycho-spiritual  powers  are  obtained  thereby,  and 
induced  ecstatic  states  leads  to  the  clear  and  correct  perception  of 
the  eternal  truths,  in  both  the  visible  and  invisible  universe. 

Yoga  Vidya. — The  science  of  Yoga;  the  practical  method  of  uniting 
one’s  own  spirit  with  the  universal  spirit. 

Yogis.—  Mystics,  who  develop  themselves  according  to  the  system  of 
Patanjali’s  Yoga  Philosophy. 

Yuga. — {Sk)  A 1, 000th  part  of  a Kalpa.  An  age  of  the  world  of  which 
there  are  four,  and  the  series  of  which  proceed  in  succession 
during  the  manvantaric  cycle.  Each  Yuga  is  preceded  by  a period 
called  in  the  Puranas  Sandhya,  twilight,  or  transition  period,  and 
is  followed  by  another  period  of  like  duration  called  Sandhyansa, 

‘ portion  of  twilight.’  Each  is  equal  to  one-tenth  of  the  Yuga.  The 
group  of  four  Yugas  is  first  computed  by  the  divine  y&^xs,  or  ‘^^ears 
of  the  gods  ’ — each  such  year  being  equal  to  360  years  of  mortal  men 
Thus  we  have  in  divine  years  : 


Krita  or  Satya  Yuga 
Sandhya 
Sandhyansa  ... 


4,000 


400 

400 


4,800 


2.  Treta  Yuga 


3,000 

300 

300 


Sandhya 

Sandhyansa 


3,600 


282 


THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 


3.  Dwapara  Yuga 


2,000 


Sandhya 
Sandhyansa  ... 


200 

200 


2,400 


4.  Kali  Yuga 


1,000 


Sandhya 
Sandhyansa  ... 


100 

100 


1,200 


12,000 


This  rendered  in  years  of  mortals  equals  : 


4,800  X 360 
3,600  X 360 
2,400  X 360 
1,200  X 360 


1.728.000 

1.296.000 

864.000 

432.000 


Total  4,320,000 


The  above  is  called  a Mahayuga  or  Manvantara;  2,000  such 
Mahayugas,  or  a period  of  8, 640,000,000  years,  made  a kalpa  : the  latter 
being  only  a ‘ day  and  a night,’  or  twenty-four  hours,  of  Brahma.  Thus 
an  ‘ age  of  Brahma,’  or  one  hundred  of  his  divine  years,  must  equal 
311,040,000,000,000  of  our  mortal  years.  The  old  Mazdeans  or  Magi 
(the  modern  Parsis)  had  the  same  calculation,  though  the  Orientalists  do 
not  seem  to  perceive  it,  for  even  the  Parsi  mobeds  themselves  have 
forgotten  it.  But  their  ‘ Sovereign  time  of  the  Long  Period  ’ {Zervan 
Daregho  Hvadata)  lasts  1 2,000  years,  and  these  are  the  1 2,000  divine  years 
of  a Mahayuga  as  shown  above,  whereas  the  Zervan  Akarana  (Limitless 
Time),  mentioned  by  Zarathustra,  is  the  Kala^  out  of  space  and  time,  of 
Parabrahm.  See  Golden  Age. 

Zodiac. — (Gr.)  From  the  word  zodion^  a diminutive  of  zoon,  animal. 

This  word  is  used  in  a dual  meaning ; it  may  refer  to  the  fixed  and 
intellectual  Zodiac,  or  to  the  movable  and  natural  Zodiac.  ‘ In 
astronomy,’ says  Science,  ‘ it  is  an  imaginary  belt  in  the  heavens 
sixteen  or  eighteen  degrees  broad,  through  the  middle  of  which 
passes  the  sun’s  path  (the  ecliptic).’  It  contains  the  twelve 
constellations  which  constitute  the  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  and 
from  which  they  are  named.  As  the  nature  of  the  zodiacal  light — 
that  elongated,  luminous,  triangular  figure  which,  lying  almost  in 
the  ecliptic,  with  its  base  on  the  horizon,  and  its  apex  at  greater  and 
smaller  altitudes,  is  to  be  seen  only  during  the  morning  and  evening 
twilights — is  entirely  unknown  to  science,  the  origin  and  real 


AN  ASTRO-THEOSOPHICAL  GLOSSARY 


283 


significance  and  occult  meaning  of  the  zodiac  were,  and  are  still,  a 
mystery,  to  all  save  the  Initiates.  The  latter  preserved  their  secrets 
well.  Between  the  Chaldean  star-gazer  and  the  modern  astrologer 
there  lies  to  this  day  a wide  gulf  indeed  ; and  they  wander,  in  the 
words  of  Albumazar,  ‘twixt  the  poles,  and  heavenly  hinges,  ’mongst 
eccentricals,  centres,  concentricks,  circles  and  epicycles,’  with  vain 
pretence  to  more  than  profane  human  skill.  Yet,  some  of  the 
astrologers  from  Tycho  Brahe  and  Kepler  of  astrological  memory, 
down  to  the  modern  Zadkiels  and  Raphaels,  have  contrived  to  make 
a wonderful  science  from  such  scanty  occult  materials  as  they 
have  had  in  hand  from  Ptolemy  downwards. 

To  return  to  the  astrological  Zodiac  proper,  however,  it  is  an 
imaginary  circle  passing  round  the  earth  in  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic, 
its  first  point  being  called  Aries,  o degrees ; (this  is  measured 
from  the  point  where  the  ecliptic  and  equatorial  circles  intersect). 
It  is  divided  into  twelve  equal  parts  called  ‘ Signs  of  the  Zodiac,’ 
each  containing  thirty  degrees  of  space,  and  on  it  is  measured  the 
right  ascension  of  celestial  bodies.  The  movable  or  natural  Zodiac 
is  a succession  of  constellations  forming  a belt  of  forty-seven  degrees 
in  width,  lying  north  and  south  of  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic.  The 
procession  of  the  Equinoxes  is  caused  b^^  the  ‘ motion  ’ of  the  Sun 
through  space,  which  makes  the  constellations  appear  to  move 
forward  against  the  order  of  the  signs  at  the  rate  of  5o|-  seconds 
per  year.  A simple  calculation  will  show  that  at  this  rate  the 
constellation  Taurus  (Heb.  Aleph)  was  in  the  first  sign  of  the 
zodiac  at  the  beginning  of  the  Kali  Yuga,  and  consequently  the 
Equinoctial  point  fell  therein.  At  this  time,  also,  Leo  was  in  the 
summer  solstice,  Scorpio  in  the  autumnal  equinox,  and  Aquarius  in 
the  winter  solstice ; and  these  facts  form  the  astronomical  key  to 
half  the  religious  mysteries  of  the  world — the  Christian  scheme 
included.  The  Zodiac  was  known  in  India  and  Egypt  for  incal- 
culable ages,  and  the  knowledge  of  the  sages  (magi)  of  these 
countries,  with  regard  to  the  occult  influence  of  the  stars  and 
heavenly  bodies  on  our  earth,  was  far  greater  than  profane 
astronomy  can  ever  hope  to  reach  to.  If,  even  now,  when  most  of 
the  secrets  of  the  Asuramayas  and  the  Zoroasters  are  lost,  it  is  still 
amply  shown  that  horoscopes  and  judiciary  astrology  are  far  from 
being  based  on  fiction,  and  if  such  men  as  Kepler  and  even  Sir 


284  the  art  of  synthesis 

Isaac  Newton  believed  that  stars  and  constellations  influenced  the 
destiny  of  our  globe  and  its  humanities,  it  requires  no  great  stretch 
of  faith  to  believe  that  men  who  were  initiated  into  all  the  mysteries 
of  nature,  as  well  as  into  astronomy  and  astrology,  knew  precisely 
in  what  way  nations  and  mankind,  whole  races  as  well  as  individuals, 
would  be  affected  by  the  so-called  ‘ signs  of  the  Zodiac.’ 

Zoroaster. — The  prophet  of  the  Parsi. 

PRIVATE  LIBRARY 
OF 

VICTOR  GLANZ 


EDINBURGH  : J.  C.  THOMSON 
AT  THE  MERCAT  PRESS 


Alan  Leo’s  Astrological  Series 


STANDARD  TEXT  BOOKS 


Price  10s.  6d.,  10s.  lOd.  post  free 

HaneisoitaeSy  BoBaad 


ASTROLOGY  FOR  ALL 
CASTING  THE  HOROSCOPE  . 

HOW  TO  JUDGE  A NATIVITY 
THE  ART  OF  SYNTHESIS 
THE  PROGRESSED  HOROSCOPE 
THE  KEY  TO  YOUR  OWN  NATIVITY 
ESOTERIC  ASTROLOGY. 


. Fourth  Edition. 
Third  Edition. 
Third  Edition. 
Third  Edition. 
Ner9  Edition  Preparing. 
Just  Published. 
{In  Preparation). 


SHILLING  POCKET  MANUALS 

Price  Is.  each,  Is.  2d.  post  free 

Neatly  heund  in  doth 

WHAT  DO  WE  MEAN  BY  ASTROLOGY  ? J book  for  the  enquirer. 

PLANETARY  -INFLUENCES  . . simple  and  explanatory  manual. 

EVERYBODY’S  ASTROLOGY  ...  A book  for  beginners. 

WHAT  IS  A HOROSCOPE  AND  HOW  IS  IT  CAST  ? First  steps. 

THE  HO-ROSCOPE  IN  DETAIL  . A vade  mecum  for  every  student. 

DIRECTIONS  AND  DIRECTING  An  introduction  to  predictive  Astrology. 
THE  ‘ REASON  WHY  ’ IN  ASTROLOGY  An  explanation  of  precept  and  practice . 
MY  FRIENDS’  HOROSCOPES  . . .A  book  of  Map  Charts. 

A THOUSAND  AND  ONE  NOTABLE  NATIVITIES  Invaluable  for  study. 
HORARY  ASTROLOGY  . . Hovf  to  obtain  an  ansr^er  to  any  question. 

MEDICAL  ASTROLOGY  . Astrology  in  relation  to  physical  health. 

THE  DEGREES  OF  THE  ZODIAC  SYMBOLISED.  A useful  book. 

MUNDANE  OR  NATIONAL  ASTROLOGY  . . Just  Published. 


Sixpence  eatch^  In  Adistic  Paper  Covers 

ASTROLOGY  EXPLAINED.  By  Alan  Leo. 

THE  ASTROLOGER  AND  HIS  WORK  ; with  SOME  REMARKABLE  SHORT 
STORIES.  By  Alan  Leo. 

EXOTERIC  OR  ESOTERIC.  Being  Transaction  No  i of  the  Astro- 
logical Society. 


ORDER  THROUGH  YOUR  BOOKSELLER,  op  send  direct  to 

‘ Modern  Astrology ' Office,  Imperial  Buildings,  Ludgate  Circus,  London,  E.C. 


PRACTICAL  ASTROLOGY 

Alan  Leo’s  First  Book  on  Astrology.  Revised  and  Enlarged. 
Simply  written. 

It  contains  the  Horoscope  of  Mrs.  Annie  Besant,  and  several 
well-known  persons.  It  is  full  of  useful  and  instructive  lessons* 
Price  3S.  6d.  net,  post  free  3S.  lOd.  American  Price  $1.25.  Indian 
Price  Rps.  2.10. 

RAYS  OF  TRUTH 

By  Mrs.  Leo.  The  Religious  aspect  of  Astrology  is  given  in  a 
series  of  very  interesting  chapters  on  fate  and  destiny.  Everybody 
who  reads  this  work  is  charmed  with  the  lucid  manner  in  which 
some  of  the  deepest  problems  in  life  are  treated  in  this  valuable 
book.  Price  3S.  6d.  net,  post  free  3s.  lOd.  American  Price  $1.25. 
Indian  Price  Rps.  2.10. 

ASTROLOGICAL  ESSAYS 

By  Mrs.  Leo.  A series  of  excellent  Essays  dealing  with 
Astrology  from  a philosophical  aspect.  The  highest  praise  has  been 
given  to  this  book.  It  should  be  in  every  library.  Price  3S.  6d.  net, 
post  free  3S.  lOd.  American  Price  $1.25.  Indian  Price  Rps.  2.10. 

EPHEMERIS 

Ephemeris  for  any  year  from  1800.  Price  IS.  each  net,  post 
free  IS.  id.  American  Price  30  cents.  Indian  Price  12  ans.  each. 


MODERN  ASTROLOGY 

{Established  1890) 

EDITED  BY  ALAN  LEO,  ASTROLOGER. 

SIXPENCE  MONTHLY,  POST  FREE  Sd. 
ANNUAL  SUBSCRIPTION  7s.  6d. 

Specimen  Copy  Post  Free  for  Eightpence 

American  Price.  Monthly  16  cents.,  Yearly,  |2. 

Indian  „ ,,  8 annas,  „ Rps.  5.10. 


Order  from  your  bookseller  or  direct  from 

Modern  Astrology  Office,  Imperial  Buildings 
Ludgate  Circus,  London,  E.C. 


i'  .S’ 


. 0 

t.' 


BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSITY 


3 1 197  21047  363 


DATE  DUE 

■JAN  1 t 139j 

JAN  0 h 2011 

MAYlo  201K 


Brigham  Young  University 


