                                                THE

                     TEXT-BOOK
                                                  OF


                    ASTROLOGY
                                   (SECOND EDITION),


                                                  BY

               ALFRED JOHN PEARCE,
Author o f “ T h e W e a t h e r G u id e -B o ok , ” “ T h e S cience of t h e S t a r s ,”
       Editor o f “ U r a n ia ” (1880), “ E d to r e ” (1892-1894), an d
                       “ S t a r L o r e ” (1897-1903), etc.




                             IN FIVE BOOKS:
GENETHLIACAL ASTROLOGY, MUNDANE ASTROLOGY,
   ASTRO-METEOROLOGY, MEDICAL ASTROLOGY,
              AND ELECTIONS.

T ables      of     “ H ouses ”              for          L ondon        and        N orthampton,
   T ables of B ight A scension and D eclination, and of
A scensional D ifference                        for        L ondon        and       W ashington.



             “ To yag aAijQgj              ouSsttots       lKty % ereu. ” — P lato,
                           “ truth         is n ever r e f u t e d . ”




                  P r in t e d   an d   P u b l ish e d   fo r t h e   A u th o r   by

              MACKIE AND CO. LD., WARRINGTON, AND
         2, WINE OFFICE COURT, FLEET STREET, LONDON;
                                                 AND
         SIMPKIN, MARSHALL, HAMILTON, KENT & CO. LD.

                                                1911.
         PREFACE TO THE SECOND «EDITION.


 F araday, one of the most conspicuous examples of that
 typically philosophical mind which Great Britain has pro­
 duced, uttered, towards the close of his life, his well-known
 warning against presumptuous judgm ent as the besetting
intellectual vice of his time— a vice to which the educated
 class were almost wholly given over and from which p ro­
fessed philosophers were not exempt.
    No science has suffered so severely from presumptuous
judgm ent as Astrologia Sana. The mildest advocacy for an
impartial investigation of it is held to he evidence of a
 mental obliquity, notwithstanding the fact that for ages it
com manded the enlightened belief of the m ost learned and
the most highly gifted of mankind.
   The religious world may believe, with Professor Smyth
 and the Abbé Moigno, that astronomy began 2170 b . c., and
that the first astronomers wrere instructed supernaturally ;
but this involves the belief that a knowledge of astrology
■was also revealed to man as -Josephus averred, for
astronom y and astrology were originally one and the same
science. The late astronomer, R. A. Proctor (an opponent
o f astrology) declared that “ astrology was the nursing
m other of astronom y.”
    It is often asked: “ W h y is it the great m ajority of
learned men of the nineteenth and the present century
have denied that there is any truth in astrology ? ”       The
reply is : “ Because they had never investigated it, being too
prejudiced against it to do so.” The vexed question of the
truth of astrology cannot be solved by a priori arguments.
It must be thoroughly and im partially examined before an
opinion on its merits or demerits can be justified.         As
Bacon said :—
   “ All idols must be abjured and renounced with firm and
VI                        PREFACE.


solid resolution, and the understanding must be freed and
cleared of them, so that the access to the kingdom of man,
which is founded on the sciences, may resemble that to the
Kingdom of Heaven, where no admission is conceded except
to children.”
   It is puerile to say that as orthodox scientists do not
recognise astrology there can be nothing in it worthy o f
study.    It has been well said that if there were not suc­
cessive generations of men the world would stand still.
No great or learned man, who had attained the age of forty
years, accepted H arvey’s doctrine of the circulation of the
blood, in his day. It was the great and learned men who
despised the persecuted Galileo, who laughed at Newton,
who could perceive no wisdom in Bacon and Locke, who
repudiated Linnaeus and Hahnemann, and would have
strangled     modern     astronomy,      geology,   chemistry,
magnetism and homoeopathy.
   The author entertains the greatest respect for the learned
astronomers and philosophers of the present day. At the
same time a protest must be entered against those
astronomers and philosophers who presume to decide b y
autocratic authority so important a question as that of
the truth of the most ancient of all sciences, with the merits,
of which they are totally unacquainted. As for the attacks
of purely literary men, however brilliant they m ay be in
their own department, they are without the pale of natural
science, and are, therefore, incom petent to form an opinion
as to the truth of Astrologia Sana.
   Sir David Brewster presum ptuously assumed tlr&
absurdity of astrology, instead of investigating i t ; in fact,
in his article on the subject in the “ Edinburgh Cyclopaedia,”
there was neither a single sentence of reasoning nor a
single fact presented in evidence against i t ; for he sim ply
set up a phantom of his own for the amusement of knock­
ing it down, and thereby only betrayed his utter ignorance
of the subject and his unreasoning prejudice against it.
“ These be thy gods, 0 Israel.”
   Some materialistic opponents think to crush astrology
with the dictum that “ it is opposed to com m on sense.”
Before the science can be tried by this standard, knowledge
                           PREFACE.                         Yll

and justness are essential— for “ com mon sense ” is
usually a cloak to cover a vast amount of common pre­
judice.         W ithout entering into the logical definition of
what com mon sense is, I m ay ask such self-satisfied critics
 what is their com m on sense ? If it is opposed to scientific
 sense it is simply com m on ignorance.      “ Common sense,”
about a century since, ridiculed the idea of travelling at the
rate of fifty miles per hour by means of the locomotive
 steam engine.           The really scientific Dr. Lardner’ s
“ com m on se n se ” led him to ridicule the idea of crossing
 the Atlantic Ocean in a steam-ship, he pronounced it
 v is io n a ry ; but nevertheless he subsequently availed
 himself of a steam-ship when he emigrated to' America.
 Sir H um phrey D avy’ s “ com m on sen se” led him, in the
 course of his lecture at the Royal Institution, to compare
 the project of lighting up towns with gas conveyed by pipes
 to that of the Yorkshirem an who proposed to dissipate
 L ondon fogs by setting up windmills.          Such “ com m on-
 sense,” which draws conclusions from a priori reasoning, is
 the most fallacious and gratuitous mode of judging an
 experimental science.
     The planetary Heavens are the macrocosm and man is
 the m icrocosm .
     Astronomers boast that one of the greatest charms of
 astronom y is that it enables them to predict eclipses of the
 Sun and Moon, etc., exactly, and that their predictions are
 accepted with as little doubt as if they were the records of
 past events. On the other hand, when an astrologer fore­
 tells great earthquakes, destructive storms, floods, droughts,
 scarcity or plenty, etc., in regions through which the line
 of central eclipse (of the Sun) passes, coinciding, or nearly
 so, with the maximum of planetary action, his prediction
 ■when fulfilled is most unfairly stigmatised as a mere
  “ lucky hit.”        In both cases, the predictions of the
  astronomer and the astrologer are based upon astronomical
  phenomena and com putations : the reason why the fore­
  casts of the form er are lauded as the achievements of true
  science, and those of the astrologer are branded as
  “ pseudo-science,” or even as “ im posture,” is, in fairness,
  impossible to com prehend. It is the outburst of sheer
viii                      PREFACE.


prejudice. Many have been the failures of the predictions—
especially in relation to comets— m any have been the m is­
takes of astronom ers; yet, because they can predict the
moment of an eclipse (which the ancient astrologers could
and did accomplish, thousands of years before Newton, and,
moreover, the return of comets, also), modern astronomy is
held to be an exact science— the vopo; is received, the
\oyog is rejected !
   E ven Sir David Brewster, who ridiculed astrology, yet
enthusiastically declared : “ The planets and constellations
are truly the only objects in the Universe which all nations
have witnessed and all peoples admired. They presided
over the horoscope of our birth, and they will throw their
pale radiance over the green mounds beneath which we are
destined to lie.”
   The author trusts that all who love T ruth for its own
sake will do their best to demand a fair field and no favour
for Astrologia Sana, and aid in circulating this work.    No
study can be more interesting nor m ore fascinating, and
few can be more useful.       None other can surpass it in
leading “ from Nature up to Nature’ s G od.”
                                                 A. J. P.
                           CHAPTER                    I.



                     INTRODUCTION.

           “ It is a gen tie and affectionate thought,
             That, in immeasurable heights above us,
             At our first birth the wreath of love was woven
             With sparkling stars for flowers.” —
                        S c h il l e r ’ s Wallenstein (Coleridge’s Translation).


T he   history of Astrology is coeval with that of the earliest
civilisation. It formed the basis of all ancient religions and
mythology, and was indissolubly interwoven with the sacred
truths of the Christian religion.
   Godfrey Higgins, the talented author of the “ Anacalypsis,”
and an opponent of astrology, stated that, “ Among all the
ancient nations of the world, the opinion was universal, that the
planetary bodies were the disposers of the affairs of men.”
   Simplicius    relates     that    Calisthenes,          who    accompanied
Alexander to Babylon, sent to Aristotle from that capital a series
of astronomical observations, which he had found preserved
there, extending back to a period of 1903 years from Alexander’s
conquest of the city. Epigenes states that these observations
were recorded on tablets of baked clay. They must have
extended, according to Simplicius, as far back as 2234 b . c ., and
would therefore seem to have been commenced and continued for
many centuries by the primitive Chaldiean people. The
Chaldiean astrologers were highly honoured in Persia, at the court
and by the people, as related by Plato in one of his dialogues.
The Druids held the astrology of the ancient Chaldseans in equal
honour, for it was, in fact, their religion.
  Cicero passed the following eulogy,1 on the Chasdim :—
    “ Chaldiei cognitione astrorum sollertiaque ingeniorum
ante-cellunt.”

                           1 Cicero de Div. I., 41.
2                  THE TEXT-BOOK O f ASTROLOGY.


   Josephus states that astrology was practised by the ante­
diluvians, who had it from Adam, who received his information
thereof from G od himself. He further states that Seth having
received instruction in its principles from Adam, and foreseeing
the flood, engraved the rudiments of the science upon two
permanent pillars of stone ; and that the remains of those
pillars he (Josephus) himself had seen. He also relates that
the science was taught by Enos and Noah, who preserved it to
the days of Abraham.
  Eusebius informs us that Abraham was thoroughly versed in
the Chaldasan astrology.
  There can be no doubt that the secret religion of the
Chaldseans was that of “ Aur,” literally the light, metaphorically
the doctrine from which Abraham was called to worship the
true G od alone, and not, as they did, namely, to mix with that
the worship of the Host of Heaven. Abraham had learned the
great secret of the Aurim and Thummim— which meant the
“ Doctrines and Perfect Laws,” and which has remained to this
day a perfect mystery, inscrutable to the ablest of our
philologists, and the most learned of our divines, owing to their
ignorance of astrology.2
  Zoroaster, legislator of the Maiji, or wise men of Chaldsea,
adopted astrology. He was the originator of magia, or magic,
which, at first, was a good principle, being the worship of the
Deity.
  Aristotle says that the Chaldtean Magi were prior to the
Egyptian priests—who were contemporaneous with Moses.
   Manetho, an ancient historian, says that there was a temple
at Heliopolis, dedicated to the Sun, or Mithra, where the Magi
instructed the priests of Isis in the mysteries of their religion ;
and that there was one Moses, a priest at this temple, who after­
wards became the leader of a number of enslaved Jews, and from
this it is evident that Moses was well acquainted with the
Chaldaic philosophy.
   Godfrey Higgins says :—
    “ Though the adoption of the astronomical and astrological emblems

  3    See Zadkiel’s Almanac, 1868, pp. 62-71 ; also the Anacalypsis, by
 Godfrey Higgins, Book II. Chaps. 1 and 2.
                             INTRODUCTION.                              8

■of the Magi and the Egyptians, may he no proof of the wisdom or
sagacity of Moses, they are sufficiently clear proofs of the identity of
 his religion with the religion of the Magi, &c., before their corruption.
 What are we to make of the brazen serpent set up by Moses in the
Wilderness, and worshipped by the Israelites in the time of H ezekiah'?
What of the Cherubim under the wings of which the God of the Jews
dwelt ? These Cherubim had the faces of the beings which were in the
four cardinal points of the zodiac, when the Bull was the equinoctial
■sign, viz., the ox, the lion, the man and the eagle.:l These were clearly
astrological.
   “ The secret meaning of all these emblems, and of most parts of the
books of the Pentateuch, of Joshua and Judges (almost the whole of
which was astrological, that is, magical allegory), was what in old
times, in part at least, constituted the Jewish Cabala, and was
studiously kept from the knowledge of the vulgar.”

   Moses was brought up in the court of Rameses II.
   The Rev. John Butler, B.D., maintained :—
  “ That Moses did particularly understand astrology is apparent‘by his
predictions of the tribes as to what should betide them for the time to
come ; for it was not by revelation, nor dream, nor vision, that he spake
those things, for when it was so the Scripture was wont to say how it
was s o ; and no such thing being alleged now, it follows that he spake
merely of his natural knowledge, and besides, the phrase savours of
mere natural prophecy.”

   The ancients believed that the planets had, under their special
■care, the affairs of men. Philo was of this opinion, and even
 Maimonides declares that the planets are endued with life,
'knowledge, and understanding; that they acknowledge and
praise their Creator. “ On this opinion,” says Godfrey
Higgins,4 “ all judicial astrology, magic, was founded— a
science, I believe, almost as generally held by the ancients as
the being of a God is by the moderns.”
   Phornutus, Hipi Owavov       says, “ For the ancients took
those for gods whom they found to move in a certain and
regular manner, thinking them to be the causers of the changes
of the air and the conservation of the universe.3 These then
are gods (ffsot) which are the disposers (ifrcugs,-) and formers
of all things.”
   As to the probable origin of the ancient belief that the planets
were animated beings, Godfrey Higgins says :—

  3 See a picture of them in Parkhurst’s Heb. Lex.
  4 Anacalypsis, Book I. Chap. I.
  5 Godfrey Higgins adds, “ And this is the meaning of Genesis . . .
which is as visible as the noon-day sun in every part of the Old and New
Testament.”
4                   THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


   “ I f a person will place himself in the situation of an early observer
of the heavenly bodies, and consider how they must have appeared to
him in his state of ignorance, he will at once perceive that it was-
scarcely possible that he could avoid mistaking them for animated or
intelligent beings. To us, with our prejudices of education, it is.
difficult to form a correct idea of what his sensations must have been,
on his first discovering the five planets to be different from the other
stars, and to possess a locomotive quality, apparently to him subject to
no rule or order. But we know what happened; he supposed them
animated, and to this day they are still supposed to be so, by the
greatest part of the world.
   “ Persons are apt to regard with contempt the opinion that the
planetary bodies are animated or rational beings. But let it not be
forgotten that the really great Kepler believed our globe to be endowed
with living faculties; that it possessed instinct and volition— an
hypothesis which M. Patrin has supported with great ingenuity.
Am ong those who believed that the planets were intelligent beings,
were Philo, Origen, and Maimonides.” 6
   “ There can be no doubt that judicial astrology, or the knowledge of
future events by the study of the stars, was received and practised by
all the ancient Jews, Persians, and many of the Christians, particularly
the Gnostics and Manicheans. The persons now spoken of thought
that the planets were the signs— that is, gave information of future
events, not that they were the causes of them’ — not that the events,
were controlled by th em : for between these two there is a great
difference. Eusebius tells us, on the authority of Eupolemus, that
Abraham was an astrologer, and that he taught the science to the
priests of Heliopolis or On. This was a fact universally admitted by
the historians of the East. Origen was a believer in this science
as qualified above; and M. Beausobre observes, it is thus that he
explained what Jacob says in the prayer of Joseph: H e h a s r e a d i n
THE TABLES OF HEAVEN        ALL   THAT WILL   HAPPEN    TO   YOU,   AND TO.
YOUR CHILDREN.”

    In the Para papers3 we read that:—
   “ It is in the planetary system one finds the key that unlocks this
great pantheon of granite gods, rends the veil of the temple that
encloses the ‘ holy of holies,’ and reveals many a sublime truth of which
these solemn and silent images have so long been the misunderstood
interpreters.”

  The first verse of Genesis records that, “ In the beginning
God created the heavens and the earth.” This should be, “ In
the first place God created the planets and the earth.” The
words “ ath he shemim ” import, ath, the original matter,
he-shemimof the disposers. It is the plural of shem, the dis­
poser or placer. It has been falsely rendered “ heaven.” In the

  G Faber, Pag. Idol., Vol. I., p. 32.
  i “ It is not meant to say that, at a very early period, the planets were
not believed to be the active agents of a superior power: they probably
were.”—Note by Higgins.
  8 Page 100 ; Paris, 6, Eue Montpensier, Palais Royal.
                             INTRODUCTION.                            5

 19th Psalm we have the same word lieshemim rendered the
“ heavens,” and followed by a verb in the plural. “ Theheavens
declare the glory of ( a l ) God.” That the planets were here, also,
signified, is certain, for David says: “ There is no speech or
language where their voice is not heard.” In the 4th verse of the
same Psalm we read: “ In them hath he set a tabernacle for the
Sun.” This means among the planets. In the same verse wTe
are told : “ Their line has gone out through all the earth.”
What does this mean ? Aquila (the astrologer) renders it career,
canon, a line or thread spread out at length. It really meant,
therefore, the “ thread o f destiny,’ ’ just as the Parc®, or Destinies,
held distaffs, spinning the thread of human life.
   Godfrey Higgins says :—
   “ The word esmim in the Hebrew, and esniin in the Chaldee, do not
mean the heavens or heavenly bodies generally, but the planets only,
the disposers, as Dr. Parkhurst, after the Magi, calls them.
   “ The conduct of Christian expositors, with respect to the Hebrew
words smim and rasit, has been as unfair as possible. They have
misrepresented the meaning of them, in order to prevent the true
astrological character of the book [of Genesis] from being seen. But
that the first does mean disposers, the word heavens making nonsense,
and the words relating to the stars in the 16th verse [of the first
■chapter], showing that they cannot be meant, put it beyond a question.
M y reader may, therefore, form a pretty good judgment how much
Parkhurst can be depended upon for the meaning of the second, from
the striking fact that, though he has filled several columns with
observations relating to the opinions of different expositors, he could
not find room for the words, the opinion o f the Synagogue is, that the
word means W i s d o m , or the Jerusalem Targum says it means
W is d o m . But it was necessary to conceal from the English reader, as
already stated, the countenance it gives to judicial astrology, and the
■doctrine of Emanations.”

    In the 14th verse of the first chapter of Genesis we read th a t:
“ God said, Let there be lights in the firmament of the heaven to
 divide the day from the night, and let them be for signs, and
 for seasons, and for days and years.” The word translated
 “ lights ” should have been rendered “ instruments of light ; ”
and “ in the firmament of the heaven,” should read “ in the
•expanse of the heavens.” “ Let them be for signs,” should be
 “ let them be for signs of the future” — the word is latheth,
.and it signifies sign o f the future.«


                  See ZadkieVs Almanac, 1871, pp. 44-7-
6                   THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


    Adam Clarke, commenting on Genesis x l i x , says,
   i‘ It has been conjectured that the eleven stars that bowed down to'
Joseph might possibly refer to the signs o f the zodiac,"10 which were
very anciently known in Egypt, and are supposed to have had their
origin in Chaldtea. On this supposition, Joseph’s eleven brethren
answered to eleven of the signs, and himself to the twelfth.”

  General Yallancey, well known for his antiquarian researches,
has endeavoured, in his Collectanea Hibernica,11 to trace out the-
analogy between the twelve signs of the zodiac and the twelve sons
of Jacob, which Dr. Hales12 has altered a little and placed in a-
form in which it becomes more generally applicable:—
   “ 1. R e u b e n — ‘ Unstable (or rather pouring out) as w ater’— the
sign Aquarius, represented as a man pouring out water from an urn.
   2. S i m e o n and L e v i — ‘ The united brethren ’— the sign Gemini, or
the twins.
   8 J u d a h — ‘ The strong lion ’— the sign Leo, or the lion.
   4. A s h e r — 1His bread shall be fat ’— the sign Virgo, generally
represented holding a full ear of corn.
   5 . I s s a c h a r — ‘ A strong ass,’ or ox\ both used in husbandry— the
sign Taurus, the bull.
   6. and 7. D a n — ‘ A serpent biting the horse’ s heel’— Scorpio, or the
scorpion. On the Celestial sphere the scorpion is actually represented
as biting the heel of the horse of the archer (Sagittarius), and c7iete,
‘ his claws,’ originally occupied the space of Libra.
   8. J o s e p h — ‘ His bow remained in strength ’— the sign Sagittarius,
the archer, or bowman, usually represented, even in the Asiatic
zodiacs, with his bow bent, and the arrow drawn up to the head— the
bow in full strength.
   9 . N a p h - t a l i — B y a play on his name Taleli; the ram, the sign
A ries, according to the Rabbins.13
   10. Z e b u l o n — ‘ A haven for ships— denoted by Cancer, the crab.
   11. G a d 14— ‘ A troop or army ’— reversed D ag a fish, the sign
Pisces, the fishes.
    12. B e n j a m i n — ‘ A ravening w o li’— Capricom ns, which, on the
Egyptian sphere, was represented by a goat, led by Pan, with a ivolf’s-
 head.”
    The Reverend F. Fysh called             attention15 to Deuteronomy

   10 The number of the apostles also corresponds to that of the signs of the
zodiac.
   11 Vol. VI., part 2, page 343.
   13 Analysis, Vol. II.. p. 165.
   13 8ee Buxtoif’s Bab. Lex
   14 The name of G ad signified the planet J u p it e r . Pisces is Jupiter's-
“ night-house.” The literal translation of Genesis xxx., 12 and 13, is,
“ And bare Zilpah, servant to Leah, to Jacob, a son ; and said Leah
1 eometh Gad,' and she called the name of him Gad.” The authorised
translation has it “ a troop eometh ” ; but the word Gad is in the Vulgate
translation. Aberbanel expounds this passage without any scruple, “ This
 Gad is the star Jupiter.”
   13 Zadlciel’s Almanac for 1869, page 49.
                           INTRODUCTION.                           7

        8, “ When the Most High divided to the nations their
x x x i i .,

inheritance when he separated the sons of Adam, he set the
bounds of the people according to the number of the children of
 srael.'’ The Septuagint has, “ according to the number of the
angels of God.'' This difference is explained by a reference to
Genesis x x x v ii ., 9. The twelve signs of the zodiac are plainly
referred to. The meaning appears to be, that however numerous
the nations are, they are all under one or other of the twelve
signs.
   In Deborah’s song of triumph w^e are told that “ the stars in
their courses [i.e. exaltations] fought against Sisera.” Park-
hurst renders this passage, “ The stars from their elevations
fought against Sisera.” He then asks, “ How s o ?” and replies,
“ By having their influence on the atmosphere supernaturally
increased, so as to occasion those heavy rains which swelled the
river Kishon, so as to sweep away the army of Sisera, as
mentioned in the text.” Josephus’ account is, that a violent
hailstorm blew in the face of the enemy; this hailstorm was
caused by the electrical state of the atmosphere ; and this
electrical state of the atmosphere was caused by planetary
influence. Parkhurst says, “ But the modern philosopher will
object that the stars, including the planets, have no natural
influence or efficiency at all in causing rain. I answer, this is
certainly more than he knows. One of the principal causes of
rain is an alteration of the state of the atmosphere.”
Parkhurst then quotes Boerhave, “ Perhaps, also, the different
aspects of the planets may contribute to this effect —i.e., of
uniting the primary particles of water, which floated before
separately in the atmosphere— and so occasion rain, snow, and
hail.”
   Much has been made, by religious opponents of astrology, of
the injunction of Jeremiah, “ Be not dismayed at the signs of
heaven; for the heathen are dismayed at them ; ” and the
following passage has also been quoted against astrologers, “ Let
rio-w the astrologers, the star-gazers, the monthly prognosticators,
stand up and save thee ” (Isaiah x l v i i ., 13). But these passages
are not in the least condemnatory of astrology as a sinful
pursuit. They merely prove that the heathen were dismayed
8                 THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


at the signs of the heavens because they were ignorant of the
true God, and accordingly worshipped the planets as gods in
order to propitiate them. Although the astrologers could
foresee impending calamities by the signs in the heavens, yet
they were powerless to prevent their occurrence. Besides, these
very injunctions prove that there are signs in the heavens ! St.
Paul, in his soul-stirring appeal, delivered on Mars’ hill at
Athens, quoted the following sentence from the Phenomena (a
poem teaching astrology) of Aratus, and yet he did not take
occasion to condemn astrology:— “ Tow yap rat yevos etr/uv,”
— “ for we are also His offspring.’ ’ Late in the autumn of
1909, the excavators of the Berlin Archeological Society, engaged
on the site of Pergamos, Asia Minor, unearthed the remains of a
Temple of Demeter, which was built about 262 b . c . A marble
altar was dedicated “ To the Unknown G od” ; this is said to be
the first confirmation of the passage in St. Paul’s Areopagus
speech.
   Jesus Christ’s prophecy: “ Great earthquakes shall be in
divers places, and famines, and pestilences; and fearful sights
and great signs shall there be from Heaven ; And there shall he
signs in the Sun, and in the Moon, and in the Stars,” was
exactly fulfilled at the destruction of Jerusalem. Josephus
relates that “ a comet in the form of a sword hung over
Jerusalem for a whole year.”
   At the birth of our Saviour, his s t a r appeared, and by means
of it the Magi, or “ wise men,” were divinely guided to the place
of His birth ; and they were the first, with the exception of the
shepherds, to worship him. Even in returning, the wise men
(who were astrologers, as Bishop Porteous proved), were again
divinely guided, for “ they were warned of G o d , in a dream, not
to return to Herod.” The three presents which were offered to
the infant Saviour by the wise men, -were gold, frankincense, and
myrrh; three things consecrated by the ancients to the Sun, as
the history of the Chaldffians, Arabs, and all Eastern nations
demonstrates.
   In the Bible we are told that, “ One star differeth from
another star in glory.” The pure practice of celestial philosophy
in course of time became corrupted into the worship of the
                            INTRODUCTION.                             9

leavens, or Zabaism, and afterwards into idolatry, or the
worship of the images found to resemble certain qualities of the
planets in honour of which they were instituted. At first, men
began to attribute the effects which they perceived were
produced by the celestial bodies, to the powers of those bodies
as gods or demons of an inferior rank to the great F i r s t C a u s e ,
whose majesty was gradually lost sight of to some extent. It
has been doubted by some writers whether the ancient gods were
named from the planets. This doubt could only arise in the
minds of those persons who have only examined the writings of
 the poets of Greece and Rome. It is dispelled by a proper study
 of the mythology of the ancient inhabitants of India, Phoenicia,
.and Egypt.
    Bunsen has observed in his work on Egypt, that *• Chseremon
is said to have stated that the moat ancient Egyptian Deities are
■the Planets, the constellations of the zodiac, and others, with the
Decans and Horoscopi. Here we have an element of pure
Egyptian astrology, tinged perhaps with the zodiacal system,
■borrowed from the Greeks, and with a Stoical colouring. For
the Stoics corrupted the ancient mythology, if not as radically as
the Neo-Platonists, still with a total want of either poetical
feeling or historical sense. Porphyry describes Chasremon as ‘ a
lover of truth, a man of accuracy, and as much respected among
the Stoic Philosophers.’ ”
   The Hindu Gods Balarama, Subhadra, Jagannatha, are
( Baldrama) “ the Sun in hi? exaltation;” (Subhadra) “ the
glorious mover in the circle” — a title exactly suited to the
moon ; and (.Tagannath) “ the Living God, the shield or
protector.”        Buddha means wisdom; the word has been
generally held to signify the Sun; but the distinction between
Dhrisna, also the Sun, and Buddha, has not been well under­
stood. The secret lies in the character of the planet “ ruling ”
the ~un, or “ disposing of him ,” as astrologers term it, by
having the Sun in his, or her, house. To understand this it
must be borne in mind that each of the planets known to the
ancients had, from the earliest foundation of astrology, or the
A uh C h a sd im , one or more of the twelve zodiacal signs under its
special rule. During the 2,160 years that the vernal equinox
10                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTKOLOGrY.


was found to be in the sign Gemini (the day-house of Mercury),
the Sun was named, universally, Buddha, and was worshipped
accordingly under that appellation. Astrology teaches that
Mercury rules the brain. The Indian name of Mercury was
Buddha. After 2,160 years from the first period of Buddha, or
the Sun in Gemini, the precession of the equinoxes brought the
vernal equinox into the sign Taurus ; and then, as this is the
house of Venus, the Sun partook of her character, and became,
instead of Buddha, that female being, known in Scripture as
the “ Heifer Baal." After another period of 2,160 years the
vernal equinox fell in the sign Aries, the ram; accordingly, the
Sun then became Bal-aram, because in that sign the Sun has
his exaltation or chief power. Porphyry says,18 “ Hence a
place near to the equinoctial circle was assigned to Mithra, as
an appropriate seat; and on this account he bears the sword of
Aries, which is a martial sign. He is likewise carried in the
Bull, which is the sign of Venus; for Mithra, as well as the
Bull, is the Demiurgus and Lord of Generation." The Greeks
affixed the horns of the Bull to Bacchus, who was the Sun
in Taurus, or Baal-chus, shortened into Ba-chus, the word chus
signifying black, hence the black Baal. To the statue of
Jupiter17 they affixed a ram, because they would distinguish the
two gods. In fact the Sun in these three signs, Gemini,
Taurus, and Aries, was found everywhere. In Aries the Sun
was called Chrislma, from which, probably, the Greeks formed
their Krios, a ram, from the Chaldee, Kresa, a throne, or seat of
power ; in allusion to the power of the Sun when in Aries, his
exaltation.18 The romantic legend of Sakya Buddha, which has
been lately translated from the Chinese-Sanscrit by Mr. Samuel
Beal, contains a mass of striking evidence of the complete
interweaving of astrology with religious tradition, and earthly
sovereignty in the East. The struggle between Buddha

  18 “ Cave of the Nymphs,” Sect. ii., page 190, ed. Taylor.
  17 “ Thorwaldsen one day dining with Bunsen at Borne, and becoming
wearied of the theological conversation of his host, threw open the window,
which commanded a noble prospect of the city, over which the planet
Jupiter was shining with great splendour, and filled his glass ‘ to the
honour of the ancient gods.’ ”—Fraser’s Mac; , Nov. 1875.
  18 See Zadkiel’s Almanac 1868, pp. 62-71.
                             INTRODUCTION.                           II
(Mercury)    and Mara       (Mars)    is   in strict    harmony    with-
astrological principles, for Mars is always at enmity with
Mercury; and the victory achieved by Buddha over worldly
allurements and the “ terrible array ’ of Mara’s hosts, is-
singularly suggestive of the triumph of our Saviour over Satan.
   A celebrated Persian philosopher lived in the reign of Darius
Hystaspis, whose Persian name was Gushtasp. The “ Ancient
Universal History” relates of this personage that “ in the reign,
of Gushtasp, King of Persia, a celebrated astrologer flourished
whose name was Gjamasp, surnamed A1 Hakim or the Wise.
The most credible writers say that he was the brother of King
Gushtasp, and his confidant and chief minister. He is said to-
have predicted the coming of the M e s s i a h , and some treatises
under his name are still current in the East.” Dr. T. Hyde-
writing of this philosopher, cites a pa’ssage from a very ancient
author, who wrote an account of the very famous Persian
doctors, as follows :—-
   “ Of these the sixth was Gjamasp, an astrologer, who was counsellor
to Hystaspis. He is the author of a book entitled ‘ Judicia Gjamaspis,’
in which is contained his judgment on the planetary conjunctions..
Therein he gave notice that J e s u s should appear; that Mohammed
should be born; that the Magian religion should be abolished, etc.-
Nor did any astrologer ever come up to him.”

   In China astrology was established at the earliest periods of
its existence as an Empire, and even Emperors were chosen on
account of their astronomical skill. In the year 2513 b .c., this-
•was the case with Chueni.
  We are informed by Tillotson that a belief in astral influence
was common for some thirteen hundred years before Christ.
   In the book of Job we read, “ Canst thou bind the sweet
influences of Pleiades, or loose the bands of Orion ?”
   Hermes, the first great Egyptian astrologer, lived at a period
anterior to that of Moses. The “ Tetrabiblos or Quadripartiter
being four books of the Influence of the Stars,” written by
Claudius Ptolemy, about the year 126, appears to have been
chiefly based upon the teachings of Hermes.
  Proctor, in bis philippic111 against astrology, was constrained


        1!) Vide 11 Belgravia ” for November and December; 1876.
12                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


to admit that “ although astronomers now reject altogether the
doctrines of judicial astrology, it is impossible for the true lover
o f that science to regard astrology altogether with contempt.
Astronomy, indeed, owes much more to the notions of believers
in astrology than is commonly supposed.”
   Proctor bears testimony to the fact that Seneca, “ who
was well acquainted with the uniform character of the
planetary motions, seems to have entertained no doubt
respecting their influence.”
   Tacitus, he says, “ expresses some doubts, but seems on the
whole inclined to believe in astrology. ‘ Certainly ’ he (Tacitus)
says, ‘ the majority of mankind cannot be weaned from the
opinion that at the birth of each man his future destiny is
fixed; though some things may fall out differently from the
predictions, by the ignorance of those who profess the a rt; and
that thus the art is unjustly blamed, confirmed as it is by noted
examples in all ages.’ ”
   Cicero’s argument, “ What contagion can reach us from the
planets whose distance is almost infinite ? ’— was quoted by Mr.
Proctor, but he omitted to mention the following observation of
Cicero: “ If the office and business of prophecy cannot be
performed without the gift of prophecy, yet, notwithstanding
that the prophet may prophesy falsely, it is sufficient for the
establishment of his prophet power that he shall have once
prophesied truly. But innumerable are such examples;
therefore the existence of the powers of divination* must be
conceded..................... We see it, and hear it, and read of it,
and have inherited it from our forefathers : before the beginning
of philosophy— which is not so long ago— it was not doubted of
in common life; and since philosophy has appeared no
philosopher has thought otherwise— at least none worthy of
esteem. I have spoken of Pythagoras, Democritus, of Socrates,
and others.” If we substitute the words “ astrological science ”
for “ prophet power,” in the foregoing argument, we shall have a


  20    The first men who reasoned of the stars were the first divines. In all
nations which have emerged from barbarism the divines or priests have ever
been astrologers. Hence Claudius Ptolemy was called “ the divine
Ptolemy.”
                         INTRODUCTION.                        13-

complete answer to those modern philosophers who rail against
astrology.
  In the common cant of the day, it is said that the Copernican
system of astronomy overthrew astrology !
  Pythagoras anticipated the discoveries of Copernicus, for he-
taught the diurnal revolution of the earth, and its annual
motion round the Sun, which he supposed to be the centre of the
planetary system ; he did not regard these theories as-
antagonistic to judicial astrology, but accepted the prevailing
belief, in his day, that “ the stars do rule mankind.’’
   Anaxagoras, who anticipated many of the discoveries made by
means of the telescope, who thought that the Sun was a mass o f
fire, and that the Moon contained seas, mountains, and rivers,
was also a believer in astrology. He foreshadowed, as it were,
the molecular theory of our own age, and the infinitesimality
and micrological nature of all motion and all things.”
 Pliny and others relate that Anaxagoras foretold the fall of a.
meteoric stone, about the second year of the 78th Olympiad,
which occurred near the Egos, in Thrace. “ It happened,” says-
Pliny, “ in sight of many, in the day time, a comet blazing at
the time, and this stone was as big as a wain could carry, and
was kept for a monument.”
  Anaximander, the disciple of Thales (a renowned astrologer),
regarded the planets as unconnected with the earth. He taught
that the fixed stars were centres of other systems, perhaps more-
extensive and glorious than our own. He considered the Sun
as a body of fire, and he taught that the earth moved round
the centre of the universe. Pliny relates that he “ foretold the
earthquakes that overthrew7 Lacedaemon.” He, too, was a great
and renowned astrologer, a fact W'hich has been concealed by
Sir David Brew7ster, for fear astrology should gain credit
thereby, I presume.
  Democritus advanced the very same explanation of the
w'hiteness of the milky way that Hersehel discovered by means
of his powerful telescopes, which separate that immense nebula
into its component stars; and he maintained, though from an
erroneous theory, that the number of the planets was not
known, and that more w7ould be discovered in succeeding ages-
14                   THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


 This prediction was fulfilled after an interval of more than
:2,000 years.
   It is impossible that Pythagoras, Anaximander, Anaxagoras,
.and the many other great men of old time who believed in and
 practised astrology, could have been blind to its falsity, if it
 were a false science as its enemies assert; and it would have
 been equally impossible for those ancient philosophers to have
 foretold events by means of “ the signs in the heavens ” had
.astrology no foundation in fact. Had Anaxagoras discovered
 that astrology was a delusion he would not, most assuredly,
have shrunk from publicly proclaiming such a discovery, for he
•did not shrink from incurring the penalty of death—afterwards
 mitigated into banishment, at the instance of his friend Pericles
 — for having promulgated his theories in regard to the Moon.
The ancient philosophers before-named examined astrology, and
were, therefore, in a far better position to judge of its claims to
scientific truth, than was R. A. Proctor, who proved himself, by
the blunders21 he committed in his tirade against it, completely
ignorant of its laws-and principles.
   Eudoxus, born 368 b . c ., was distinguished for a knowledge of
.astrology, medicine, and geometry.        He was the first who
regulated the year among the Greeks.
  Hippocrates, who devoted much study to astrology and
prognostics, declared that the physician who was ignorant of
astrology was not worthy to be called a physician. It is a
remarkable fact that the study of prognostics generally has
been neglected by the medical profession since astrology fell into
disuetude ; and as the Medical Press and Circular22 once stated,

    21 One of the errors consisted of Mr. Proctor’s statement that “ Jupiter
-occupied the house of wealth” —which is the second house, at the birth of
 H.B.H. the Prince of Wales, whereas that planet was rising at the moment
 (lOh. 4Sm, a.m. of November 9th, 1841), given in the official bulletin.
 Another error consisted of Mr. Proctor's statement that the Sun was in the
 sign Cancer at the Prince’s birth, when, in fact, as every schoolboy knows,
 the Sun is in Scorpio during the first twenty-one days of November. These
-errors, although they were pointed out in Zadkiel's Almanac for 1878, are
 to be found reproduced in the reprint of Mr. Proctor’s paper on Astrology
 in his book entitled Myths and Marvels of Modern Astronomy.
    22 “ The Prognosis of Disease ” (leading article), Nov. 7, 1877. Hippo­
crates predicted the advent of plague at Athens, and it is related that when
 it broke out in Greece, he dispelled it by “ purifying the air with fires into
which were thrown sweet scented herbs and flowers, along with other
perfumes.”
                              INTRODUCTION.                                15

■“ some have gone so far as to say that the science of prognosis
has advanced little since the time of Hippocrates.”
  Nigidius Figulus, the intimate friend of Cicero, obtained the
hour of birth of Augustus Ctesar, and declared that the ruler of
the earth was born to the world ! —as Suetonius relates.
  The days of the week, and the hours of each day, were
assigned to the seven planets'23 (including the Sun and Moon).
The Egyptians also assigned the months to the planets in
regular order.24
  The Komans dedicated the months as follows :—
   December was sacred to Saturn, the Sun being in his house
(Capricomus), and Saturn being at the greatest distance from the Sun.
   January was sacred to Janus, whose double face had its origin in
the fact of the Sun in two successive signs being ruled by Saturn. It
is remarkable that he and Saturn are said to have governed together
in Italy.
   February was sacred to Neptune, by which was meant Jupiter in his
character as a sea-god, for his chariot was drawn by Hippocampi,
which were horses in their foreparts and fishes in their hinder; thus
exemplifying the two houses of Jupiter, Sagittarius the Archer, drawn
with partly the body of the horse, and Pisces the fishes. Two days in
the month, the 1st and 13th, were sacred to Jupiter.
   March was named after Mars, the first day being sacred to him.
The F q u iria were games held on the 14th day, in honour of Mars.
   A pril was sacred to Venus, to whom the 1st and 23rd days were
dedicated.
   M ay23 was so named from M aia, the Mother of Mercury, whose
birth was said to have occurred on the 15th day. The 14th was
sacred to Mercury, the Sun being in his house, Gemini.
   June was named from Juno, who was the same as Diana, or Luna,
the M oon. The first day was sacred to her. The Sun is then in her
house, Cancer.
   July was sacred to Jupiter, meaning Jupiter Ammon, being an
Egyptian term for the Sun, the greater light being then in his own
house (Leo). The L u d i Apollinares were eight days of festival held
 in his honour this month.


  23 Vide Zadkiel’s Almanac for 1876, pp. 57-62. In the Contemporary
Review, March, 1875, Mr. R. A. Proctor wrote on “ Saturn and the
Sabbath of the Jews.” to show that the Oriental belief that Saturn’s day
(Saturday) was unfortunate, dies infaustus. when it was unlucky to
undertake any work, was the origin of the Sabbath of the Jews. “ The
observance was derived from an Egyptian, and primarily from a Chaldean
source.”
  24 Godfrey Higgins says: “ Throughout all the nations of the ancient
world the planets are to be found appropriated to the days of the week ”
(Anacalypsis, Vol. I., page 6).
   25 “ The worship of the equinoctial Sun in the sign Taurus, the remains
of which are to be found in our May-day festivals, carries it back at least for
4,500 years before Christ ” (Anacalypsis, Vol. I., page 9).
16                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTBOLOG-Y.


   A ugust was sacred to Ceres, the goddess of corn, who is drawn with
 a bunch of wheat in her hand, to represent the sign Virgo, the house
 of Mercury. The 13th day was sacred to Vertumnus, the god o f
change— the astrological character of Mercury.
   September was under the protection of Vulcan) the husband of
Venus, who was herself termed Vulcanus; thus Plautus: “ Vulca/nus,
 Sol, Luna, Dies, dei quatuor, scellestiorem nullum illuxere alterum
— Venus, the Sun, Moon, and Jupiter, four deities who never shine
upon the unfortunate (a very good astrological aphorism). The Sun is
 this month in the house of Venus (Libra). It is remarkable that the
25th day was sacred to Venus and Saturn, and the 27th to Venus the-
mother. Saturn has dignities in Libra, which is the sign of his-
exaltation.
   October was under the protection of Mars, in whose honour the
Arm ilustrium festival and sacrifices took place on the 19th day, when
the Eomans assembled their army. The Sun is this month in the
house of Mars, Scorpio.
   November was under the protection of Diana, goddess of hunting;
the 14th day was set apart for the trial of horses, Lectisternia, festival
was held, also the NeptunaKa games, all of these being allusions to-
Jupiter, and the sign of the A rcher) $ ) , which is his house. On the
first day a solemn banquet, in honour of Jupiter, took place. These
observances had relation to the Sun’s passage this month through-
Sagittarius, the house of Jupiter.

   The Greeks and Eomans perverted the Chaldrean astrology
into a mere system of divination, and rendered it almost
entirely unfit for any genethliacal purpose. The Arabian
astrology is a most superstitious mass of symbolical and
allegorical trash— as Wilson averred. The mean, crafty, and
selfish policy of the Egyptians, who, in order to keep the people-
ignorant of the grand truths of astrology, converted all their
knowledge and observation into hieroglyphics, or transcribed it
in the so-called “ sacred letters ” which belonged to an alphabet
made use of by the priesthood only, the key of which once being
lost all their learning was lost with it— this selfish policy
contributed to cause astrology to be mixed up with many
absurdities, and its original meaning to be almost entirely
forgotten.
                                      17




                         CHAPTER                  II .


              I N T R O D U C T I O N.— Continued.

                                 “ Thence oblique
         Brancheth the circle where the planets roll,
         To pour their wished influence on t h e world.”— D a n t e .

A mong  modem votaries of astrology w e find on record the
honoured names of Bacon (Lord Yerulam), Roger Bacon, Baron
Napier of Merchistoun (the inventor of logarithms), Flamstead
(the first Astronomer Royal, and founder of Greenwich
Observatory), Kepler, Archbishop Usher, Melancthon, Sir Elias
Ashmole (founder of the Ashmolean Museum), Sir Christopher
Heydon, Dr. Mead, Dr. Partridge, Dr. Blagrove, Cardan,
Placidus, Burton, and the Rev. Dr. Butler.
   Kepler— of whom it has been justly recorded that, “ the
history of philosophy affords no more remarkable instance of
sincere, uncompromising love of truth ” — honestly avowed
that1: “ a most unfailing experience of the excitement of
sublunary natures by the conjunctions and aspects of the
planets, has instructed and compelled my unwilling belief.”
   Flamstead transmitted to posterity a demonstration of his
interest in astrology, in the form of a map of the heavens,
drawn by his own hand, for the moment of the laying of the
foundation-stone of Greenwich Observatory. It may be seen
among his MSS., carefully preserved, at the Royal Observatory.
No remarks were appended to the figure (which is in the form of
a square) by Flamstead, but the following phrase has been
pencilled in the inner square by some learned astronomer hostile
to astrology, viz., “ Risum teneati« amici.”
   The just renown, stability, and usefulness of the Royal
Observatory, have amply vindicated Flamstead’s judgment and
foresight.

  1 Extract from a work of Kepler’s quoted in Observations on the Life of
Kepler, published by the Society of Useful Knowledge, 1830.
                                                                        c
18                     THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


     The following is a fuc simile of Flamsteacl’s figure :—
                                      F ig . 1.




     N.B.—Approximate place of § is 29° X 45' retrograde.
                „     „     of ^ is 13° zz 23' retrograde.

   Ramesey’s “ Rules for Electing Times for all Manner of
Works,” 2 collected from writings of the ancients, contain the
following precept: “ Endeavour, therefore, at the beginning of
thy work to fortify the lord of the ascendant, and cusp of the
ascendant itself.” Again, “ have a special care that the Moon
be not with Saturn, or dragon’s tail, or Saturn in the ascendant
or fourth house [of the heavens], for this will impedite the
work and cause delays therein ; and if the affliction be by Mars,
and the ascendant be a sign of short ascension, it causeth fires
therein.”
   An in sp e ctio n of th e fig u re s h ow s th e b e n e fic p la n e t J u piter

                        2 Astrology Restored, edit. 16*53.
                               INTRODUCTION.                              19

 rising in his own sign Sagittarius, the eighteenth degree of
  which is placed on the cusp of the ascendant. On the meridian
the fortunate star Spica Virginis is posited (but not marked in by
 Flamstead). The Sun and Moon are located in the fixed sign
  Leo, separating from the trine aspect of Jupiter, which planet
 receives, also, the assistance of the trine of Venus. Mercury—
 the planet having dominion over science and art— is posited in
his own sign Virgo, elevated above the Sun and Moon, and
■“ ruling” the ninth house of the heavens (that of science).
Neither of the malefic planets (Mars and Saturn) is found in an
angle. Hence it is manifest that Flamstead followed the wise
precepts of the ancients as to “ elections,” and no amount of
 invective can “ rail the seal from off the bond.” As Solomon
said: “ To everything there is a season, and a time to every
purpose under the heavens.”
    A passage in one of Flamstead's letters» may be quoted with a
recommendation to the earnest consideration of the opponents
•of astrology:—
   “ If you would particularly advise your colleague, D r . ------ , to have
a care of discoursing of things he is not acquainted with, and has
■only false, imperfect, or prejudiced information of, you would oblige
me much.”

   In a paper on “ Coincidences and Superstitions,” which was
printed in the Cornhill Magazine (December, 1872), the following
anecdote was related in order to illustrate the prejudiced and
narrow-minded ideas of the writer thereof:—
   “ An old woman came to Flamstead, the first Astronomer-Royal, to
ask him whereabouts a certain bundle of linen might be which she had
lost. Flamstead determined to show the folly of that belief in
astrology which had led her to Greenwich Observatory (under some
misapprehension as to the duties of an Astronomer-Royal). He ‘ drew
a circle, put a square into it, and gravely pointed out a ditch, near her
cottage, in which he said it would be found.’ H e then waited until
she should come back disappointed, and in a fit frame of mind to
receive the rebuke he intended for her ; but ‘ she came back in great
delight, with the bundle in her hand, found in the very place.’ ”

   No authority is given for the statement that Flamstead
intended to rebuke the woman’s faith in astrology; and the
description given of the drawing of the figure of the heavens
stamps it as “ an invention of the enemy.” The plain truth of
the matter is that Flamstead drew the figure for the moment of
consultation, and based his judgment and advice upon the rules

  :l Letter of Flamstead to the Rev. Dr. Wallis, June 24, 1701 (page 55,
Vol. 33, Flamstead MS.).
20                    THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


of horary astrology. In all probability the planet which was-
significator of the lost bundle of linen was posited in the sign
Scorpio, which, in horary questions as to lost or stolen goods,
has always been held to indicate “ a place of unclean water,
such as a sink, ditch, or gutter.” It is very probable that
Flamstead, like Bacon, and others, believed not in horary
astrology.
   The Bev. Dr. Butler examined astrology for the purpose o f
overthrowing it, but in the course of his studies he became con­
vinced of its truth, and wrote a vindication of it. In his-
Introduction4 he says :—
  “ Myself must also needs acknowledge that some years since I also-
was one of those enemies to the noble science, who buffeted in the
dark I knew not what, until sorely tempted to take a few lines reading
in this subject, although it was with a serious purpose, to take up the
after occasion to throw dirt at i t ; yet by this means attaining to
understand who it was I spoke to, it begat in me a reverence to those
gray hairs, which, as unjustly as ignorantly, I had despised.”

   Butler’s three propositions were: “ 1. That there is an
astrology in the Heavens. 2. That this astrology, man (in the
state of corruption) may attain in some measure to understand.
3. That this understanding may be lawfully and fairly compassed
 by natural means, without any diabolical helps.”
    Bacon wrote of the state of the science in his day as
 follows :—
   “ Astrology is so full of superstition that scarce anything sound can
 be discovered in it; though we judge it should rather be purged1’ than
 absolutely rejected. B ut we receive astrology as a part o f physics,
 without attributing more to it than reason and the evidence of things-
 allow, and strip it of its superstructure and conceits. Thus we banish
 that empty notion about the horary reign of the planets, as if each
 resumed the throne thrice in twenty-four hours, so as to leave three
 hours supernumerary; and yet this fiction produced the division of the
 week, a theory so ancient, and so universally received. . . . We
 will add one thing more, which if amended, and improved, might make-
 for astrology, viz., that ive are certain the celestial bodies have other
 influences besides light and heat.....................So that, on the whole,
 we must register as needed, an astrology in conformity with these
 principles, under the name of Astrologia Sana.....................Let this


    1 “ A r i A T T P O A O n ' A , or the most Sacred and Divine Science of Astrology.
  I. Asserted, in three Propositions, showing the excellency and great
  benefit thereof, when it is rightly understood and religiously observed. II.
  Vindicated, against the calumnies of the Eev. Dr. More. By John Butler,
  B.D., A Protestant Minister of the True, Antient, Catholick, and Apostolick
  Faith of the Church of England. London, M.C.D. L X X X .”
    0 This was done by Zadkiel I as far back as 1830. when he published his
  Herald of Astrology. Partridge in his Opus Reformatum, published in 1693,
  exposed the errors of Gadbury and others.
                               INTRODUCTION.                              21

astrology be used with greater confidence in prediction, but more
■cautiously in election, and in both cases with due moderation.”

   It may not be out of place here to mention a recent instance
of planetary influence confounding the speculations of a
philosopher. In the Cornliill M agazine (July, 1877), in a paper
■on “ The Planet of W ar,” by Proctor appeared the following
words:—
   “ But if Mars were in truth the Planet of War ; if his influence,
poured from near at hand upon the nations of the earth, excited them
to war and bloodshed, we might well fear that the coming months
would bring desolation on many terrestrial fields. Moreover, twice,
■during his time of greatest splendour his rays will be closely conjoined
 with those of the malignant planet Saturn.”

   At the time the foregoing paragraph was written, Proctor
shared the belief of the Kussian commanders that the crusade
against Turkey would be but a military promenade, and would be
■ended in a few weeks. The fearful holocaust of victims to the
unsuccessful attempts to take Plevna by storm (the sacrifice of
life being greater than any known for centuries past) attested
the power of Mars and the validity of his right to be called “ the
Planet of War.” The war was foretold by the present editor of
Z adkiel’ s Almanac (for 1877).°    After the contributor to the
Cornliill M agazine had exhausted the whole of his ingenuity and
resources for arguments against the influence of Mars, it was an
•exceedingly cruel fate to have them scattered to the winds by
means of the very circumstance to which he appealed as a test
■(Mars’ nearest approach since 1798).7 Perhaps the words of
Longfellow (in his poem addressed to the planet Mars) recurred
to his mind :—
                “ 0 Star of strength, I see thee stand,
                  And smile upon my pain ! ”
Lavater said, “ The true philosopher looks first to the positive
proofs of the proposition— the superficial mind first examines
the negative objections.” Had Proctor examined first the positive
proofs of planetary influence, before writing against astrology,
he would never have brought upon himself a defeat so signal
and crushing.

   “ See pages 19. 2l. 23, 25. 27, and 42 of Zadkiel's Almanac for 1877; also
pages 11, 39 to 43 of Zadkiel's Almanac for 1878. The conjunction of Mars
and Jupiter in 0° 1' 56" of Capricorn (the sign ruling Bulgaria), which took
place on March 1st, 1877, foreshadowed the religious crusade entered upon
by Russia against Turkey and predicted in that annual.
   7 Mars was in perigee on September 7th. 1877 ; and in exact conjunction
(in     13° 45' 2T4"j with Saturn, at llh . 28m. 20s. p.m., (G. M. T.) of
^November 3rd, 1877.
 22                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


   Dean Stanley, in his sermon (1878),8 said:—
    “ It is a deplorable recoil from progress which either now or
 formerly has substituted the barbarian desire for destruction, for the
 civilised desire for reform and improvement. Yet still in all these-
 cases there remains a permanent solution when even the failures dis­
 appear and the success comes at length. The nineteenth century may
 close in darkness, but the twentieth century will dawn in light. The-
 prophets whom we stone, our sons will honour.” Alluding to the
 terrible catastrophe caused by the capsizing of the E u rydice, during a.
 sudden squall, the Dean said: “ The calamaties of this world, so it
 would seem, come not by accident, but by fix e d laws, by a combina­
 tion o f causes which, on looking back, seems irresistible.”

     Opponents of astrology would do well to ponder over these-
 words of Dean Stanley, and examine the proofs of planetary
 influence in the light of their meaning. It has been frequently
 asked by our opponents why Sir Isaac Newton rejected
 astrology ? Newton’s biographer says of him that, “ A desire
 to know whether there was anything in judicial astrology first
 put him upon studying mathematics. He discovered the
 emptiness of that study as soon as he erected a figure.” This,
 to say the least, was certainly a very sudden discovery; and if
 he really did no more than merely erect a figure of the heavens,
 we can easily understand how and why the great Newton may
 be quoted as an opponent of astrology. This science is
 altogether founded on experience-, hence if any man, however
 high may be the order of his genius, would not condescend to
 give it even a cursory examination, he could, of course, know
 nothing of it from his own experiments, and could not fairly lay
 claim to a right to deny its truth.
    The medical student, who, on inspecting a mere drawing of
 the human skeleton, should declare that he had discovered the
emptiness of the study of medicine, would be justly regarded as
no authority whatever on the subject. We may, therefore,
form the same opinion of Sir I. Newton’s alleged discovery of
the emptiness of astrology. He did not examine, therefore he
could not understand, he could not justly condemn— for “ ne
damnent qua: non intelligunt.”
    It must be noted, too, that at the time of this ipse dixit o f
Newton against astrology, he was not twenty-four years old. As
it is known that Sir Isaac did not rashly bring forward any of his
great discoveries, but allowed nearly forty years to elapse from
the time of their first conception till their publication, the fact-

  s Sermon preached in Westminster Abbey, on Good Friday, 1878,
reported in the Daily Telegraph of April 20th, 1878.
                            INTRODUCTION.                             23

of his ever having given any such opinion about the principles
of a science which he had not studied, may be reasonably
doubted.9
   Cardan, a physician of Milan, born in 1501, who was a very
learned man, and a celebrated algebraist, who gave rules for
resolving cubic equations, which still bear his name, was also
an astrologer of high repute. He was sent for to cure the
Archbishop of St. Andrews of a painful disorder which had
baffled all the physicians of France and Germany; and having
succeeded, he returned through London, where he calculated
the nativity of King Edward.
   Didacus Placidus de Titus, an Italian monk, who published
many elaborate works on Mathematics, was a renowned
astrologer. He wrote the Prirnum Mobile, and gave therein the
nativities of thirty eminent men of Europe to demonstrate the
truth and reality of astrology.
   Among the English astrologers we find almost every name of
any note in the mathematical world, from the days of the
Conquest down to those of Lord Bacon. To begin with, we
find the name of Oliver of Malmesbury, in the year 1060, who is
the oldest English writer on mathematics. We next find
Herbert of Lorraine, 1095. John of Hexham, and Simeon of
Durham, come next in order, in 1160 and 1164, respectively,
who wrote of comets ; Sigidius of St. Albans, in 1224, physician
to the King of France, and an author on astronomy. Roger
 Bacon, born in 1214, who was the friend of Fisacre and
Shirewood, both known as mathematicians, and of Robert
Grouthead, the Bishop of Lincoln. Roger Bacon was the most
extraordinary man of his day, and spent the enormous sum, in
those times, of £2,000 in experiments, instruments, and scarce
books. In his works he spared neither the ignorance nor the
want of morality of the clergy, who found, consequently, no
difficulty in persuading the vulgar that he was possessed with
the devil. In 1256 died the famous John of Halifax; his name
was really John Holywood, but he was known on the continent
as Sacrobosco. “ His work on the Sphere was for centuries
almost as general an object of study as Euclid himself.” It was
written from Ptolemy’s Almagest, translated into Latin from
Arabic by order of the Emperor Frederick II. Before Newton,
he was one of the ablest men England ever produced. Michael


  9    There is some reason to believe that there may be a work on astrology
in the possession of Oxford University, by A'ewton.
24                  THE TEXT-BOOK OP ASTKOLOGY.


 Scot, the famous wizard of Scotland, in 1290 ; Duns Scotus, in
1304; William Grizaunt, 1350 ; Clinton Langley and -John
Killingworth, 1360 ; John Estwood, 1365 ; John Chylmack,
 1390 ; and King Richard II., in 1392—who, it is asserted by
Sherbrun wrote “ something in Astronomy or Astrology, now
(1675) extant in his Majesty’s library at St. James’s. ’ The
poet, Geoffrey Chaucer, wrote a treatise on the Astrolabe, in
 1410. “ John Walter, 1410, wrote astronomical tables for the
purposes of Astrology ; and appears to have been more esteemed
than we might now suppose to have been the case ’ — says a
modern writer. The good Duke of Gloucester (1440) composed
astrological tables of directions. Robert Recorde, the physician,
a man whose memory deserves much greater fame than has been
accorded to it, on several accounts ; he was the first who wrote
on arithmetic, astronomy, and the sphere, in English, the first
to introduce algebra into England, and the first Englishman
who adopted the system of Copernicus. Dr. Dee, who professed
magic also, by way of showing that this was an exception, and
not the rule with astrologers; he died in 1572.10
   Baron Napier, to whom the world is indebted for the
invention of logarithms, and of whom, one of his con­
temporaries wrote:— “ He was a general scholar, and deeply
read in all divine and human histories,” was, also, a great
astrologer.
   “ James Bassantin, a Scotch astronomer, son of the Laird of
Bassantin, in Merse, was bom in the reign of James IV. He
was educated at the University of Glasgow, travelled through
Germany and Italy, and then fixed his abode in the University
of Paris, where he taught mathematics with great applause.
 Having acquired some fortune, he returned to Scotland in 1562,
where he died in 1568. Prom his writings he appears to have
been no contemptible astronomer, considering the times, but
like most of the mathematicians of that age, he was addicted to
judicial astrology. Sir James Melvil, in his memoirs, says that
his brother Sir Robert, when he was exerting his abilities to
reconcile the two Queens, Elizabeth and Mary, met with one
Bassantin, a man learned in the high sciences, who told him
that ‘ all his travel would be in vain, for,’ said he, ‘ they will
never meet together ; and next, there will never be anything but
dissembling and secret hatred for awhile, and at length captivity


  10   See “ The Life of Dr.        John   Dee,” by   Charlotte Fell Smith.
Constable, London, 190Ü, 10s. 6d.
                            INTRODUCTION.                      25

 and utter wreck to our Queen from England.’ He added ‘ that
 the kingdom of England at length shall fall of right to the
 ■crown of Scotland ; but it shall cost many bloody battles, and
 the Spaniards shall be helpers and take a part to themselves for
 their labour.’ Sir James Melvil is an author of credit, there­
 fore we may believe that Bassantin did utter this prediction.” 11
    Tycho Brahe not only carefully studied the comet of 1577 as
 an astronomer, but as an astrologer predicted, from its appear­
 ance, th at: “ In the North, in Finland, there should be born a
 Prince who should lay waste Germany, and vanish in 1G32.”
 Gustavus Adolphus, it is well known, was born in Finland,
■overran Germany, and died in 1632.
    Poets, from time immemorial, have sung the praises of
astrology, viz., Aratus, iEschylus, Manilius, Virgil, Horace,
Homer, Propertius, Macrobius, Chaucer, Dante, Milton, Dryden,
Campbell, Byron, Scott, Schiller, Shakespeare, etc.
    Horace asked: “ Why does one brother like to lounge in the
forum, to play in the campus, and to anoint himself in the bath
so well, that he would not put himself out of the way for all the
wealth of the richest plantations of the E a st; while the other
toils from sunrise to sunset for the purpose of increasing his
fortune ? ” Horace very correctly attributes this diversity of
character to the influence of genius, and the natal star.
   Dryden was skilled in astrology. He foretold danger of an
accident to his son Charles in his thirty-third year, who was
■drowned near Windsor, while swimming across the Thames,
having survived two severe accidents in his eighth and twenty-
third years, both of which accidents his father had also predicted
from his nativity. It is related in the “ Life of Dryden,” that
the poet told his wife that their son Charles was born in an
unlucky hour, because the Sun, Venus, and Jupiter were all
below the horizon, and the ruler of the ascendant was afflicted
■by the quartile aspect of both Mars and Saturn.




              11 Imperial Cyclopedia, Vol. I., page 391.
                                       2G




                      CHAPTER                   III.



       G E N E T II L I A C A L               ASTROLOGY.

           “ In my stars I am above thee— Some
             Are born great, some achieve greatness,
             And some have greatness thrust upon them.” — S h a k e s p e a r e .

B acon, whose advocacy of an Astrologia Sana has been already
alluded to, rejected, what he regarded “ as an idle figment,”
namely, “ the doctrine of horoscopes, and the distribution of
houses, though these are the darling inventions of astrology,
which have kept revel, as it were, in the heavens. And lastly,
for the calculation of nativities, fortunes, good or bad hours of
business, and the like fatalities, they are mere levities, that have
little in them of certainty and solidity, and may he plainly
confuted by physical reasons.” The absurd and mischievous
mixing of horary (or symbolical) astrology with genethlialogy
on the part of some of the English astrologers of the middle
ages, may have led Bacon to the conclusion above named.
When, however, genethliacal astrology is stripped (as Partridge,
and Zadkiel I. and II. stripped it) of the admixture referred to,
it can no longer he “ confuted by physical reasons; ” and, on
the contrary, by the Baconian method of induction, its truth can
be demonstrated.”
  Sir Francis Galton wisely observes2:
  “ I have no patience with the hypothesis occasionally expressed
and often implied, that babies are born pretty much alike, and that
the sole agencies in creating differences between boy and boy, and
man and man, are steady application and moral effort. It is in the
most unqualified manner that I object to pretensions of natural
equality. The experiences of the nursery, the school, the university,
and the professional careers, are a chain of proof to the contrary. I
acknowledge freely the great power of education and social influences
in developing the active powers of the mind, just as I acknowledge
the effect of use in developing the muscles of the blacksmith’s arm,

  1 Twelfth Night, Act II., Scene 4.
  2 Hereditary Genius : an Inquiry into its Laics and Consequences.           By
Sir F. Galton, F.B.S.
                         GENETHLIACAX j ASTR OLO G Y.                        27

and no further. The eager boy when he first goes to school and con­
fronts intellectual difficulties, is astonished at his progress; he glories
in his newly-developed mental grip and growing capacity for applica­
tion, and, it may be, fondly believes it to be within his reach to-
become one of the heroes who have left their mark upon the history o f
the world. The years go by, he competes in the examinations of the
school and college, over and over again with his fellows, and soon finds
his place amongst them. He knows that he can beat such and such
of his competitors ; that there are some with whom he runs on equal
terms, and others whose intellectual feats he cannot even approach.”

  Galton proceeds, further, to illustrate the fact of genius
being innate, or congenital, instead of hereditary— although he-
does not suspect the true cause :—
   “ In statesmanship, generalship, literature, science, poetry, art, just
the same enormous differences are found between man and man. I
am sure that no one who has had the privilege of mixing in the society
of the abler men of any capital, or who is acquainted with the
biographies of the heroes of history, can doubt the existence of grand
human animals; of natures pre-eminently noble, of individuals born to-
be kings of men.”

   Galton relates of the Lord Chancellors, that;—-
   “ Lord Harwicke was the son of a small attorney at Dover, in
narrow circumstances; Lord Eldon (whose brother was the great
Admiralty judge, Lord Stowell), was son of a coal-fitter; Lord Truro
was son of a sheriff's officer; and Lord St. Leonards (like Lord
Tenterden, the Chief Justice of Common Pleas), was son of a barber.
Others were sons of clergymen of scanty m eans; others have begun
life in alien professions, yet notwithstanding the false start, have easily
recovered lost ground in after life. Lord Ersldne was first in the
navy, and then in the army, before he became a barrister. Lord
Chelmsford was originally a midshipman. It is a mere accident if a
man is placed in his youth in the profession for which he has the most
special vocation.”3

   To believers in astrology it is curious and interesting to-
perceive how closely Galton has reasoned to the true cause of
the similarity of the personal features, characters, and careers of
twins,4 without ever suspecting it. Astrologers find that the-
closer the approximation of the respective moments of birth of
twin-children, the closer is the similarity of their personal

   3 This is one of the many instances of what the world loses in conse­
quence of the neglect of astrology ; for a clever astrologer can always indicate
the occupation for which a person is best fitted, on inspection of the figure
of the heavens for the moment of his birth Kepler was brought up as a
waiter in a German public-house; Ben Jonson was a mason; Lord Clive
was a clerk; Inigo Jones was a carpenter; Turner, the greatest of English
landscape painters, was a barber ; Hugh Miller was a bricklayer ; Sir
William Herschel was educated especially for a musician.
  4 The History of Twins, as a Criterion of the Relative Powers of Naturer
and Nurture, by Francis Galton, F.B.S.
28                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


appearance and character, and the closer is the correspondence of
the events of their lives. It is well-known to accoucheurs that
the intervals between the births of twins vary very greatly. In
 some cases the interval has not exceeded three or four minutes,
while in other cases it has been known to extend to hours, and
even days. Every four minutes’ interval of time brings
another degree of right-ascension on the meridian. Conse­
quently, a difference of half an hour in the times of birth would
make a great difference in the part of the sign of the zodiac
ascending, and (as one degree of arc represents one year of life,
in “ primary directions ” ) would alter the periods of occurrence
of the subsequent events. The whole sign of Aries only takes
(in the latitude of London), about fifty-two minutes in ascend­
ing. Hence, it is evident that a difference of half an hour
might give Aries ascending at the birth of one child, and Taurus
at the birth of the second. In signs of long-ascension the
difference would not be so great. In one case Saturn might be
culiminating or rising, and in the other might be cadent, which
would make a great difference in the chances of life, and pros­
pects and health of the two children. Galton says :—
   “ The steady and pitiless march of the hidden weakness of our
constitution, through illness to death, is painfully revealed by the
histories of twins. We are too apt to look upon illness and death as
capricious events, and there are some who ascribe them to the direct
effect of supernatural interference, whereas the fact of the maladies of
tw o twins being continually alike shows that illness and death
are necessary incidents in a regular sequence of constitutional
changes beginning at birth,3 upon which external circumstances
have, oil the whole, very small effect. In cases where the maladies
of the twins are continually alike the clock of life moves regularly on,
governed by internal mechanism. When the hand approaches the
hour mark,0 there is a sudden click, followed by a whirring of wheels ;
the moment that it touches it the stroke falls. Necessitarians may
derive new arguments from the life-history of twins.”

   Proctor cited the case of Jacob and Esau, as telling against
astrology, because, being twins, their fortunes “ should mani­
festly have been similar, which was certainly not the case, if
their history has been correctly handed down to us.” Taking
the account given in the Bible of their births as correct, a
considerable interval must have occurred between their respec­
tive moments of birth ; so the objection that their fortunes
were not similar cannot be fairly urged against the doctrine that

  3 Just as astrologers have ever taught.
  11 Or, as the astrologer would say, “ when the fatal train of ‘ arcs of
primary direction ’ comes up.”
                       GENETHLIACAL ASTKOLOGY.                            29

twins bom very near together, in point of time, have similar
fortunes, similar tastes, &c.— a fact which Galton's researches
have incontestably proved.7
   In the course of a letter to the Times of May 31st, 1910, Sir
Francis Galton wisely observed :—
   “ It is now generally admitted that the apparent vacancy of
space is a plenum of ether, that vibrates throughout like a
solid.”
   Sceptics in regard to astrology are mostly like Proctor, who
declared that he would not inquire whether astrology was true or
not. They hate the very name of astrology, and their object
appears to be not to discover any truth which is distasteful to
them, because of their narrow-minded views and prejudices
instilled into them by their teachers -who were in the habit of
repeating the parrot-like cry that astrology is an “ exploded ”
science, notwithstanding that when challenged they cannot say
who exploded it.
   As Sir Oliver Lodge recently said: “ They should always
mistrust negation, which commonly signified blindness and
prejudice.”
   Believers in astrology are often told that public and scientific
 opinion is against it, but, as Max Müller once wisely observed:—
 “ What is public opinion to a scholar and lover of truth ? ” 8
    The Rev. Dr. Butler says :—
  “ Some men do come into the world in a lucky hour, so as
whether they be wise or foolish, yet shall they be buoyed upon the
wings of fate, for matter of wealth, or honour, or pleasure, in all that
they take t o ; while wiser and better men, smitten by an unlucky time
of birth, shall be as unworthily disparaged, and in all purposes shall
be as unhappy. Some shall be lucky in the van of their contrivances,
and as unfortunate in the rear ; and others again contrarily. Astrology
shows us plainly the wonderful contrivance of God in Nature, that we
see it with our eyes, as it were, written in great and plain characters
on fair paper.”




   7 See the article on Twins, etc. (in answer to the criticism of the Referee
of July 30th, 1893) in F u t u r e , September, 1893.
   ” Essay on “ T h e Lesson o f Jupiter,” in the Nineteenth Century, October
1885. by Professor M a x Müller. Commented u p on b y th e a u th o r in S tar
L o r e , October, 1898.
                                          30




                        CH A P T E E                   I V.


                     THE           ALPHABET.

               “ H e a v e n ’ s g o ld e n a lp h a b e t—
                 A n d h e th a t ru n s m a y r e a d .” — Y oung .


T he   Alphabet of Astrology comprises thirty-two symbols,
representing the Sun, Moon, planets, signs of the zodiac, certain
differences of longitude called aspects, and the Moon’ s nodes.
   The first division comprises nine characters :—
        O The Sun.             2 Venus.        Tj Saturn.
         (i The Moon.         $ Mars.          § Uranus,
         g Mercury.           if Jupiter.      tgî Neptune.
  The second division comprises twelve symbols
               N orthern .                       S outhern .
               V Aries.                          ^ Libra.
                S Taurus.                          Scorpio.
               n Gemini.                        t  Saggitarius.
               2B Cancer.                          Capricorn us.
               SI Leo.                             Aquarius.
               111 Virgo.                          Pisces.
    The third division comprises eight characters :—
     d Conjunction, when two heavenly bodies have the same
longitude.
  s * Semi-sextile,when their difference of long.is 30°, or 1 sign.
 SD    Semi-quartile,                               45°, or 1^ signs.
    * Sextile,                                      60°, or 2 signs.
    □ Square,                                       90°, or 3 signs.
    A Trine,                                       120°, or4 signs.
ss □ Sesquiquadrate,                              135°, or 44 signs.
       Opposition,                                180°, or G signs.
  There are other aspects, viz., the vigintile (18°), the quin-
deeile (24°), the decile (36°), the quintile (72 % the tredecile
(108°), the biquintile (144°), and the quadrasextile (150°). All
these aspects were suggested by Kepler, and their influence is
                             THE ALPHABET.                             81

undeniable, with the exception of the vigilatile, quindecile, and the
tredeeile, which require confirmation. When two or more
heavenly bodies are in equal or parallel declination (north or
south), the effect of their combined influences is as great as
when in conjunction. When at parallel distances in proportion
to their semi-arcs from either the upper or lower meridian, they
are in mundane parallel.
   The major aspects are: the conjunction, parallel declination,
mundane, and rapt parallel, sextile, square, trine, and opposition.
   The minor aspects are : the vigintile, quindecile,semi-sextile,
decile,   semi-quartile1, quintile,    tredeeile, sesquiquadrate,
biquintile, and quadrasextile.
   The fourth division comprises two symbols —
   Si The Moon’s north node.        g The Moon’s south node.
       B enefic A spects.                   U nfavourable.
   Conjunction2, Trine,               Opposition3, Quadrature,
   Sextile, semi-sextile,             Sesquiquadrate, semi-quartile,
     biquintile, decile, quintile.      quadra-sextile.
  When the student has committed the foregoing symbols to
memory, it will be advisable for him to learn the signs which
are opposed to each other, viz. :—
        T is opposite to =n=               25   is opposite to
         S        ,,        ill            SI                    zz
        n         „          i             "K        „           X
  The following table will enable the student to determine the
zodiacal position of a heavenly body whose longitude is
reckoned from the first point of Aries :—
       Prom       T      ou 0 '      Entering iq 210° 0 '
       Entering 8 30° 0 '               „        t 2-lCU 0 '
             ÌÌ    n 60° 0 '            „          270° 0'
          >>      25    90° 0 '         „      .sr  800° O'
           5>     SI 120° 0 '           „       X 830° 0 '
           ?J     11JJ 150° 0 '         „       T 360° 0 '
                 -A _  180° 0 '




   1 The mundane semi-quartile when formed, by direction, by a planet
angular at birth, to the ascendant and mid-heaven, is powerful.
   2 The Conjunction of the Sun, Moon, or Mercury, with Mars or Saturn
is unfavourable.
   3 The opposition of the Sun or Moon with Jupiter is less evil than with
Mars or Saturn.
                                 32




                      C H A P T E R         V.




 ON   THE     RIGHT-ASCENSION,             DECLINATION,     &c.r
             OF    THE     HEAVENLY          BODIES.

          ‘ The virtue and motion o£ the saered orbs.
            As mallet by the workman’ s hand, must needs
            By blessed movers be inspired.”—D a n t e .

T hose of my readers who may happen to have forgotten the
outlines of astronomy which were taught them at school or
college, will do well to look them up again ; and those who
possess a copy of my “ Weather Guide Book ” will find (in the
first chapter) some remarks on tbe Sphere, &c.
   “ R ight -A scension ” and “ D eclination ” : If the Equator be
taken as the great circle of reference, the first point of Aries
is chosen as the origin. The abscissa of any heavenly body,
whose position is thus referred, is called its “ right-ascension”
(R.A.) ; and its ordinate is called its “ declination ” (dec.) The
R.A. varies from 0° to 360°, and is measured from the first point
of Aries in the direction of west to east. The declination varies
from 0° to 90°, and is either upper or under, i.e., north or
 south.
   “ A scensional D ifference ” : When the Sun is on the'
Equator it rises in a right sphere, and its arc above the earth is
exactly twelve hours, one half of this (diurnal semi-arc) is six
 hours. When, however, the Sun has north declination it is-
 more than six hours, from the time of sunrise, coming to the
 zenith (at noon). The difference between six hours and the=
 Sun’s diurnal semi-arc, is its “ ascensional difference.” It
 depends on the amount of declination, for in proportion as the
 Sun declines to the north, it rises in a sphere which is dedined
 towards the north— an oblique sphere ; it rises before six o’clock
 and sets as much after six o’clock, p.m., and the day exceeds the
 night in duration. When the Sun declines from the Equator
 towards the south, it rises after six o’clock, and sets before six
 o’clock p.m.— the day is then shorter in duration than the night.
    ON THE BIGHT-ASCENSION, E TC., OF THE HEAVENLY BODIES.       33

In all cases the difference between sunrise and six o’clock is
the Sun’s ascensional difference. This ascensional difference
added to the Sun’s right-ascension if it has south declination,
but subtracted therefrom if it has north declination, gives its
“ oblique ascension.”
   “ L ongitudes ” and “ L atitudes ” : If the Ecliptic betaken as
the great circle of reference, the first point of Aries is chosen as
its origin. The abscissa of any heavenly body, whose position is
thus referred, is called its “ longitude” (long.); and its ordinate
is called its “ latitude ” (lat.). The longitude varies from 0 ° to
360°, and is measured from the first point of T in the direction
of west to east. The latitude varies from 0° to 90°, and is either
upper or under, i.e., north or south.
   “ A spects ” or C onfigurations : Two heavenly bodies have
either the same longitude, or else different longitudes. If they
have different longitudes their difference of longitude is the
remainder left after subtracting the less from the greater. Since
the long, of two heavenly bodies may have any value from 0 to
360° the difference of longitude of two heavenly bodies may have
any value from 0 to 360°. But if this difference exceed 180°, we
add 360° to the smaller value, and then deduct the other from it.
Certain differences of longitude of two heavenly bodies (Sun,
Moon, or planets) have been termed “ aspects between the two
bodies.” They are in all fifteen, as stated in Chapter V. The
first two aspects occur when the difference of long, is either 0° or
180°. In the former case the two bodies are in “ conjunction,”
in the latter case they are in “ opposition.” The remaining
thirteen aspects occur when the difference of long, is of the
following magnitudes :— 18°, 24°, 30°, 36°, 45°, 60°, 72°, 90°,
108°, 120°, 135°, 144°, and 150°, or the 20th, 15th, 12th, 10th,
8th, 6th, 5th, 4th, and 3rd parts of the whole circumference, and
the difference between a semi-circumference and the 5th, 8th,
10th, and 12th parts respectively.
   “ D ir e c t ” and “ R etrograde ” M otio n : When a planet
moves forward in the zodiac in the order of the signs, its motion
is “ direct.” When a planet appears to move in the contrary
manner, its motion is “ retrograde.”
   “ S tationary ” P ositions : When a planet appears to stand
still in the heavens, it is said to be “ stationary,” and its effect
is then very powerful.
  “ E levations : ” The Sun, Moon, or planet nearest to the
zenith at the moment of birth, is “ elevated” above the rest.
34                THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


An elevated planet when in aspect to another is the more
powerful of the two.
    “ G eocentric '' and “ H eliocentric ” P ositions : The position
■of a heavenly body as seen from the Earth’s centre, is termed
•“ geocentric ; ” and that which has relation to the Sun’s centre is
termed “ heliocentric.” The geocentric positions, only, are con­
sidered in genethliacal astrology, because they have relation
 solely to the earth.
    “ B apt M otio n ” : The apparent daily motion of the heavens
 from east to west is called “ rapt motion.”
     “ M undane ” A spec ts : These consist of the conjunction,
 parallel semi-sextile, semi-quartile, sextile, quintile, square,
 trine, sesquiquadrate, biquintile, and opposition. When two
 heavenly bodies are two houses apart they are in mundane
 sextile; when three houses apart they are in quartile; when at
 •equal distances from the meridian (and having semi-ares of the
 same value) they are in mundane parallel; a planet exactly
 •culminating is in mundane square to the ascendant; a planet
 rising is in mundane trine to another planet situated on the cusp
 of the 9th or 5 th house ; the remaining aspects are determined
 in like manner, in proportion to the semi-arcs of the heavenly
  bodies.
     The mundane aspects are wholly independent of the zodiac; a
  planet on the upper meridian is in mundane square to another on
  the ascendant, and at the same .time may have a sextile in the
  zodiac with it.
     All the mundane aspects were demonstrated by Placidus, who,
  however, affirmed that they were known and referred to by
  Claudius Ptolemy, because he writes of the sextile of the Sun
  and Yenus, an aspect which Venus can never form with the Sun
  in the zodiac. There can be no doubt that they are powerful,
  but they are inferior to zodiacal aspects. Wilson was as much
  prejudiced against the mundane aspects as Placidus was in
  favour of them. Beference to figure 2 at page 38 will render
  them easily understood.
                                  35




                     CHAPTER                VI .



      ON    DIVIDING              THE        HEAVENS.

      “ Between two worlds life hovers like a star,
        ’Twixt night and morn, upon the horizon’s verge.” —B ykon.

T he ancient inhabitants of Hindostán, Chaldiea, Persia, Egypt,
Ac., divided that portion of the heavens visible at a given
moment of time into six equal parts, which they called
 “ M ansions,” or “ H ouses, ”   The opposite portion, invisible
from being below the horizon, were also divided by them into
six equal and corresponding mansions, and these twelve
divisions (corresponding in number to the signs of the zodiac)
 they termed the T welve H ouses .
    Claudius Ptolemy adopted the same method, and in addition
 suggested the construction and use of the zodiacal planisphere.
   Regiomontanus divided the heavens into twelve equal parts in
the equator, but not in the zodiac. This division was com­
mended by Morinus as the most exact extant, yet he complained
of its deficiency, and claimed to have supplied its defect by an
 invention of his own. Although the method of Regiomontanus
was called “ Modus Rationalis,” it is not correct, and is inferior
to that of Placidus. It is, therefore, unnecessary to reproduce
it here ; but those of my readers who are curious in this matter
will find a description and criticism of it given by Partridge in
 his valuable work, Defectio Geniturarum.
   The true method is that of Claudius Ptolemy, Placidus, Oxley,
and Zadkiel ; it is the semi-arc method (which js the true motion
in Nature), consisting each (house) of two temporal hours, either
-of the place or star— that is, by a proportional division of the
motions of the moveable arcs from one angle to another. A
diurnal arc is always equal to an opposition aspect, although it
may measure more or less than 180° ; a planet rising is always
on the horizon opposite to that where it sets. Of course, .there
36                 THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


can only be 180° between the two points when the planet is on
the equator ; but when in other places, its diurnal arc must
measure either more or less than 180°, and more or less than
twelve hours. But, whatever may be its arc from horizon to'
horizon, the space of the house, in which it is located, will
always be one-sixth of that arc (or what has been called its
“ double horary tim e” ), which is one-third of its semi-arc.
And as its whole arc is equal to an opposition aspect (though it
may not be exactly of the value of 180°), so is its semi-arc equal
to a square aspect (though not exactly 9 0 °); and, therefore, a
planet on the horizon is in mundane square aspect to another
 planet on either meridian.
     The term “ Chakravartis,” in Sanscrit, literally means
 “ turners of the wheel ” — and it is applied to kings who
 have great power and dominion.1 The wheel, so constantly
 introduced in the ancient Budhistic and Brahminical religions,
 was an emblem of the circles formed by the heavenly
 bodies.
     The “ Chart,” or “ Figure of the Heavens,” is simply a
 scheme, or plan, presenting an accurate picture of the heavens
 — i.e., the positions and longtitudes of the Sun, Moon, and
 planets, and, in some instances, certain of the fixed stars also—
 for the moment at which a child is bom. It shows what
 planets may be rising, southing, setting, or on the lower
  meridian, &c. In mundane astrology the figure of the heavens is
  drawn for the required time.
     It has two hemispheres— the upper being the diurnal, and the
  lower the nocturnal hemisphere—which are divided, of course,
  by the horizontal line.        It has two other grand divisions,
  effected by the line drawn from the upper to the lower meridian.
  These four divisions are the east, south, west, and north angles
  respectively ; the south angle being above the earth, and the
  north angle below it. In the northern hemisphere of the globe,
  the east angle is on the left hand side of the figure, and the west
   on the right. But in the southern hemisphere this arrangement
   is reversed, the east angle is on the right hand side of the figure
   (a point which must be borne in mind when the student has to
   erect a figure for a southern latitude). The most powerful angle
   is the south, the next in order of power is the east, then come
   the ivest and the north. The distance between the meridian


   1    “ Chakravartin” is rendered “ a universal monarch” by Mr. Beal, who
 translated the Chinese version of the “ Abhinishkramana Sutra.”
                    ON DIVIDING THÉ HEAVENS.                     37

and the horizon is always the same, measured by oblique ascen­
 sion, namely, 90°, or one-fourth of the circle.
    For the purpose of illustrating the subdivisions which have
 now to be made, let us suppose that the first degree of Aries ( the
first point of the zodiac) is ascending ; the opposite point (the
 first degree cf Libra) will be descending ; the first degree of
 Capricornus will be on the upper meridian ; and the first point
 of Cancer on the lower meridian. If the Sun be rising in the
 first point of Aries, then he is crossing the equator, and the days
and nights are equal, it is the vernal equinox. The Sun rises,
 accordingly, at six o’clock, culminates at twelve (noon), sets at
 six in the evening, and arrives at the imum call at midnight.
 At eight a.m., the Sun will have risen 30° (he is, therefore,
 in mundane sextile aspect to the mid-heaven, and in mundane
semi-sextile to the ascendant), and this being one-twelfth part of
 the circle, the Sun has passed through one house (and is on the
 cusp of what is called the twelfth house). In two hours more the
 Sun arrives at the sextile of the ascendant and semi-textile of the
 mid-heaven, and has passed through two houses (or 60°). He is
now on the cusp of the eleventh house. At noon he has passed
through a third house (he is in conjunction with the mid-heaven).
Each quadrant of the heavens is, therefore, subdivided into three
houses, making in all T w e l v e H o u s e s .
    When the Sun is not on the equator, the proportions of his
■semi-arc must be taken (in trisections) to find the time at which
his centre will pass the cusp (i.e., the beginning) of any of the
 minor houses.
    The houses which are next in rotation to the angles are called
cadent. They are the 12th, 9th, 6th, and 3rd houses. The
.ancients regarded a planet located in a cadent house as extremely
weak, in nativities, but I think this is a mistake—at least in
regard to the 12th and 9th houses (a star located in either of
these houses is above the earth). The power of any celestial
body is increased by being angular. The houses next in order
o f succession, are called succèdent. They are the 11th, 8th, 5th,
and 2nd. In nativities, the power of a planet posited in the 2nd
house has been much exaggerated by the ancient and some of
the modern astrologers. In fact, too much reliance has been
placed on the power of the houses in nativities, an error which
Zadkiel I. and Wilson pointed out, and cautioned their readers
against.
    The following figure is inserted with the view of making the
text clearer :—
38      THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.



                 F io. 2.
                 SOUTH.




EAST.                                 WEST.
                                                 BO




                              CHAPTER                         VI I .



     ON        CASTING                     A      FIGURE                   OF        THE
                                     HEAVENS.

   “ I’ll know the stars, which yet alone to gain
     Is knowledge mean, unequal to the pain ;
     For doubts resolved, it no delight affords,
     But fills soft empty heads with rattling words d
     I’ll search the depths, the most remote recess,
     And flying Nature to confession press ;
     I ’ll find what sign and constellation rule,
     And make the difference ’twixt the wise and fool.
     My verse shall sing what various aspect reigns
     When k i n g s a r e d o o m ' d t o c r o w n s , a n d slaves t o chains.” — M a n i l i u s .2

A map of the Heavens should be drawn in the circular form.
   R ule A, 1 °. — Draw a circle (with a diameter of four inches is
a convenient size) to represent the heavens ; within which draw
a smaller circular (of one inch in diameter) to represent the
earth. Then draw a straight line, horizontally, through the
outer circle to represent the horizon. Next, draw a vertical
line, at right angles from the first, to represent the meridian.
The four quadrants thus formed must next be subdivided, each
into three parts. Mark the Midheaven (above the earth) with the
letter S, or the letters M.C. (medium-cali) and the lower
meridian I.O. (Imam cadi). If the figure to be drawn is for a
northern latitude, mark the Ze/f-hand extremity of the horizontal
line E, or ascendant; and the opposite point, W. It will be
advisable to mark off the numbers of the various houses on the
edge of the outer circle, bearing in mind that the ascendant is
the first house.
   2°.— Observe either in the Nautical Almanac or Zadldel’x
Ephemeris, for the year of birth, the amount of Sidereal Time at
the mean noon preceding the time of birth given. Write this

  1 These words will apply to some of the nineteenth century (soi-disant)
“ really scientific ” men, who mistake mere learning for knowledge.
  2 “ The Five Books of Manilius ; containing a system of the Ancient
Astronomy and Astrology, together with the Philosophy of the Stoicks, ”
were translated and published by Mr. Thomas Creech, in the year 1700.
40                THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


down— correcting it for the longitude of the birthplace if far
from Greenwich by adding 9'868 per hour if the longitude is
west, and subtracting if it is east. Note how far the given time
differs, in hours, minutes, and seconds from the preceding noon
(or twelve hours in the day, by a good clock or chronometer).
Add this to the sidereal time already written down ; and add,
also, the correction for the difference between mean and sidereal
time,8 at the rate of 9'86' per hour elapsed since noon. If the
sum exceed twenty-four hours, deduct that amount. The sum
is the Right-ascension of the meridian at the given time of
birth.
    [Note.— Some of the old Ephemerides (White’ s are the best of
those prior to 1840) do not give the sidereal time at noon. In
such case, the right-ascension of the Sun must be found for the
noon preceding the birth (and if not given it can he readily
calculated from the Tables of Right-Ascension, by observing the
longtitude of the Sun at noon), and this right-ascension (in
degrees and minutes) can be converted into time by multiplying
it by 15 (as one hour answers to 15°), if a table for reducing
degrees to time4 be not at hand. The value obtained in this
manner must now he corrected for equation of time; and the
amount (always given in White’s Ephemeris daily at noon) must
be added or subtracted according to whether the clock is fast or
slow. Next, add the time elapsed since noon (and the correction
for reduction of mean to sidereal time) in the manner before
described.]
  3°.— With a “ Table of Houses ” for the nearest latitude, if
one be at hand, enter the first column and find the nearest right-
ascension to that which you have obtained, and mark the values
therein given on the cusps of the houses, the numbers of which
are found at the heads of the respective columns, entering on
the opposite houses the same degrees of the opposite signs. [If
no “ Table of Houses” can be procured calculated to within 2°
or 3° of the latitude of the birthplace, this process will have to
be effected by means of a method which will be found in the
Formulae for Computing Longitude, &c.]
  4°.— Place the Sun, Moon, and planets in the figure (after
having, by the rule of proportion, reduced their longitudes from


 3 A Table to Reduce Mean to Sidereal Time is given in Chambers’
Mathematical Tables.
 4 A table is given for this purpose in Chambers’ Mathematical Tables.
                ON CASTING A FIGURE OF THE HEAVENS.                       41

-fche noon preceding the birth, as given in the Ephemeris to the   ,s
time of birth), taking care to place them in the proper houses,
which may easily be done if it is remembered that the degrees
pass over the cusps of the houses from left to right. The Moon’s
ascending (“ dragon’s head” ), or descending (“ dragon’s tail ” )
node, need not be marked in the figure, unless the Moon happens
to be very near one of them.

15.— How to C ast a F igure of the H eavens for                a   S outhern
                                 L atitude .
   R ule 1°.— Compute the R.A. of the meridian in the usual
 manner (taking care to correct the sidereal time for the
longitude of the birthplace), by adding 9'S6a for each hour, and
proportional pares thereof for the minutes and seconds, of West
longitude, or by subtracting the same for East longitude.
   2° Draw the figure, taking care to number the houses from
right to left, making the angle on the right hand the ascendant
 and that on the left the descendant, or 7th house. Mark the
upper meridian M.C., and the lower I.C.
   3° Compute the longitudes to be inserted on the cusps of the
 various houses by the rule given in the appendix, viz., Oblique
■ascension given to find ecliptic longitude.” c
   4° Find the Greenwich mean time corresponding to the given
time at the place of birth, and compute the longitudes of the
Sun, Moon, and planets thereto.
                          C.— T he S peculum .
   The “ Speculum ” is a table containing the latitudes, declina­
tions, right-ascensions, meridian distances, and semi-arcs, of the
 Sun, moon, and planets, and should always be appended to a
 Nativity. The data referred to may be calculated from the
 Nautical Almanac for the year of birth, or from the “ Tables”
given in this work. The planets’ latitudes are given in the
Ephemeris, and can be reduced to the time of birth given by pro­
portion, in the same way as their longitudes. The student can,
•of course, make his speculum include other data than those
 mentioned above, if he desire to make it very complete.

    5     When an old Ephemeris is used, care must be taken to ascertain if it is
calculated to mean or apparent time. If to the latter, rectification will be
required, which is effected in the same way as that already described in the
Note to 2°, when dealing with the Sun’s R.A. Zadkiel's Ephemeris is com­
puted for mean time, and requires, therefore, no such rectification.
    0     “ Tables of Houses ” for many northern and a few southern latitudes
 (cities of importance) are given in m y F u t u r e (June 1893 to July 1894). A
•set of these numbers may be had of the author, price 6s. Gd.
42                THE TEXT-HOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


     D .— To D raw a M ap of the H eavens by M eans of a
                      T errestrial G lobe .
  R ole 1°.— Raise the north pole (if the latitude of the birthplace
be north) to the degree of the latitude of the place. Bring the
hour and minute of the right-ascension of the meridian to the
brass meridian. The degree of the ecliptic, culminating, will
now be seen on the meridian ; and that which is rising will be
seen on the eastern horizon.
   2 °.— Reduce the pole to the degree given in the “ Table of the
 Poles of Houses” for the eleventh house, add two hours to the
 R.A. on the zenith, and bring the sum of R.A. to the eastern
horizon ; when the longitude of the ecliptic on the eleventh
house will be found to be cut also by the horizon.
   3 °.— Alter the pole to the degree of the pole of the twelfth
house (found by the Table of Poles), add four hours to the R.A.
of the mid-heaven, and bring the amount thus gained to the
eastern horizon ; when the longitude of the ecliptic to be placed
on the cusp of the twelfth house, will be found to be cut by the
horizon.
   4 °.— Leave the pole at the last-named elevation, add eight
hours to the R.A. on the meridian, and bring the value thus-
obtained to the eastern horizon ; and the longitude of the
ecliptic to be marked on the cusp of the second house will be
found to be cut by the horizon.
   5 ° .—-Reduce the pole again to the same elevation as for the-
eleventh house, add ten hours to the R.A. on the meridian, and
bring the sum thus gained to the eastern horizon ; when the-
longitude to be marked on the cusp third house will be found to
be cut by the horizon.
   6°.— On the cusps of the houses opposite to those above-
enumerated, insert the corresponding degrees of the opposite
signs, and the map will then be ready for the insertion of the
Sun, Moon, and planets.
                  E . — T he T rue M oment of B irth .
   The true moment of birth may be taken as that when the
child first cries. It sometimes happens that the infant is born
asphyxiated or unconscious ; in such cases the moment at which
the funis is severed by the accoucheur must be taken as the true
(astrological) time of birth. When the birthplace is remote
from London the local mean time must be taken.
                                         48




                     CHAPTER                       V I I I.


     CALCULATION                          OF        NATIVITIES.

                                 How just and wise,
           And good, is the Contriver of the skies ;
           At whose command the stars in order met,
           Who times appointed when to rise and set;
           That Heaven's great secrets may be hid no more,
           And man, instructed, gratefully adore.— Manilius.

T he F ig u r e of th e H eavens is usually termed the H oroscope ,.
whereas the degree of the zodiac ascending is really the-
horoscope. The late Dr. Richard Garnett contributed to the
Classical Itevieir, July, 1899, a most valuable paper “ On Some
Misinterpretations of Greek Astrological Terms, ’ 1 in which he
wrote as follows :—
   “ Even those who may consider the correct definition of astrological
terms in a Greek dictionary a matter of slight intrinsic importance,,
will allow that it may be discussed with profit if it serves to draw
attention to the necessity of bringing the chief Greek-English lexicon
to a level with the philological requirements of the day.
   “ The misconceptions of astrological terms in Liddell and Scott’s,,
and other dictionaries proceed chiefly from the omission to note the
astrological significance of the word ipx, which in Manetho and
similar writers means neither an hoar nor a season, but the degree of
the zodiac ascending at any nativity. Manetho uses the term
perpetually, and never in any other sense. Whether his Latin
translator understood him or not is uncertain, but unquestionably he
invariably renders L « by hora, which if taken literally involves-
sheer absurdity. Where Manetho, for example, says (VI. 321):—
                       a zed ulpnv sv TSTpxersderfft zecQevpoi;,

the translator makes him say Si etiam horam in quadrupedibus
reperias. The occurrence of an hour in a quadruped must be highly
exceptional ;■ but what Manetho means, is, ‘ should the degree ascend­
ing be in a quadrupedal sign,’ such as Leo, for example. That
denotes the degree ascending here and elsewhere is patent from
innumerable passages. A great part of Manetho’s third book is
occupied with the description of the supposed effects of planets when
occupying the angles (xirrpa) of a nativity, i.e., rising, southing,
setting, or opposed to the meridian.”
  In the Medical Press and Circular, December 26th, 1877, three

  1    Vide my S t a r L o r e , September, 1899, pp. 87—40, for a fuller quotation,
by the kind permission of Dr. Garnett, from the paper.
u                   THE TEXT-BOOK OP ASTROLOGY.


 cases of puerperal convulsions were quoted from the clinical
 records of the Rotunda Hospital, Dublin. In the second case,
 the time of birth of the child was stated as 3h. 40m. p.m. of
 November 20, 1877. As this case affords a means of verifying
 the aphorism attributed to Claudius Ptolemy, relating to
■children insusceptible of nurture, the figure of the heavens may
 be taken as the first example. In order to avoid the possibility
 of dispute as to the true right ascension of the meridian, it shall
 be computed from the Nautical Almanac for 1877, wherein, at
 page 183, the sidereal time at Greenwich mean noon of
 November 20th is given, thus :—
                Sidereal Time, G.M. noon . . .       15h-   58m-   25-s-28
A d d correction for long, of Dublin 25m. 2ls.W .                    4’ 17
                          Sidereal time at Dublin    15      58     29-45
                            Add the time of birth     3      40      O'OO
    Add difference of mean and sidl. time 3h. 40m.                  36'14
                         R.A. of M.C. 294° 46' 24 "= 19      39      5-59




                                  jte .
                       CALCULATION OF NATIVITIES.                                45»

                                D e c l in a t io n s .

  O 19° 50' 12"S.           2 25° 28' 48"S.                    b 8° 25' 30"S.
  a 23° 56' 49"N.          $   4° 54' 36"S.                   ig 12° 23' 18"N.
   5 21° 33' 57"S.         71 23° 24' 40"S.                   f 11° 39' 1"N.
  Referring to the Tables of Right Ascension it will be found
that 294° 46' will give the sign Capricormis 22° 56' on the
upper meridian. “ Tables of Houses'’ for Dublin2 give Aquarius
14° on the cusp of the eleventh house, Pisces 21° on the twelfth,.
Taurus 24° 41' on the ascendant, Gemini 19° on the second, and
Cancer 6Q on the third house. The sign Aries is intercepted in-
the twelfth house, and its opposite, Libra, in the sixth.
  The longitudes of the Sun, Moon, and planets may be readily
found, by proportion, from those given of them at the noon
preceding and that following the time of birth in Zadkiel’s
Ephemeris for 1877. The time of birth being Dublin mean time
must be first reduced to the corresponding Greenwich mean time
by adding the longitude of Dublin 25m 21s to it. This makes -
4h 5m 21“ G.M.T. after noon on the 20th of November, 1877.
The Sun's longitude at noon of the 20th day was Scorpio 28°
18' 56", and on the 21st, 29° 19' 33"; his motion in the twenty-
four hours was therefore 1° 0 ' 37". Then, by the golden rule of
three:—
   As the ternary proportional logarithm of 24h (a.c.) 9-12494
   To        „          „            ,,        4h 5+“ 1-64364
   So        „          ,,           „      1° 0 ' 37"    -47268

  To         11            11                    11          10' 19"+=1-24126-
             Long, of 0         at noon                    28 18 56

           Long, of © at birth is 1+ 28 29 15
  For the Moon s longitude :—
             As prop. log. of 12h (a.c.) 8-82391
             To       „         4h 5-J-m 1-64364
             So j) motion 6° 39' 25" 1-43240

                  To       ,,              2° 1 6 '+ = l-89995

                       Long, of j) at noon                23 8 2

                                                      25 8 18
  The ancient aphorism given in the Tetrabiblos is as follows:—
  “ If either of the two luminaries [Sun and Moon] be in an
angle, and one of the malefics [Mars and Saturn] be either in

  2     “ Tables of Houses ” for Dublin and for every degree of longitude in
Great Britain, St. Petersburg, Adelaide, Brisbane, Paris, Borne, Washington,.
Cairo, Benares, e t c . , were given i n m y F u t u r e , 1892-94.
16                 THE TEXT-HOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


■conjunction with that luminary, or else distant in longitude
 from each luminary in an exactly equal space so as to form the
 point of junction of two equal sides of a triangle, of which
 two sides the two luminaries form the extremities ; while at the
 same time no benefic planet may partake in the configuration,
.and while the rulers [or disposers] of the luminaries may be also
 posited in places belonging to the malefies, the child then born
 will not be susceptible of nurture, but will immediately perish.”
    In the nativity under consideration, the Sun is in the
■descendant or western angle, the Moon is close to the ascendant
 by longitude, although already risen having 4° 59' of north
 latitude, and within three degrees of exact opposition with
 the Sun; and the evil planet Uranus is in quadrature (90°
.aspect) with both Sun and Moon. The Sun in the martial sign
 Scorpio. The malefic planets, Mars and Saturn, are elevated
 above the Moon, and neither the Sun (hyleg) nor the Moon has
 any adequate assistance from either Jupiter or Venus, the latter
 planet being in semi-quartile with the Sun.
    The child, a female, lived “ only for about twenty hours, and
 was very puny and feeble. Very great difficulty was experienced
 in establishing respiration, artificial respiration being kept up
 for nearly five hours before natural respiration was fairly
■established.” The mother, who was only nineteen years old,
 recovered from a very dangerous attack of convulsions.
    The truth of Ptolemy's aphorism is supported in this instance
 in a remarkable manner, for the afflicting planet Uranus was
 unknown to that ancient and renowned astronomer and
 geographer; and it is found to be distant in an almost exactly
■equal space of ninety degrees of the ecliptic from each luminary,
 the Sun, hyleg, being in the western angle of the heavens.
 Despite all that surgical skill could do for the child, she was
 insusceptible of nurture, and did immediately perish.
            II.— Goethe, in his Autobiography3 relates th at:—
     E xam ple
   “ On the 28th August, 1749, at mid-day, as the clock struck
twelve, I came into the world, at Frankfort-on-the-Maine. My
horoscope was propitious. The Sun stood in the sign of the
Virgin, and had culminated for the day, Jupiter and Venus
looked on him with a friendly eye, and Mercury not adversely ;
while Saturn and Mars kept themselves indifferent. The Moon,
alone, just full, exerted the power of her reflection all the more,

   3 “ The Autobiography of Goethe.’’ Truth and Poetry. From My Own
Life. Translated from the German by John Oxenford. Bohn. Vol. I. Book
I. Chap I.
                   CALCULATION OP NATIVITIES.                47

•as she had reached her planetary hour. She opposed herself
therefore to my birth, which could not be accomplished until
this hour was passed. These good aspects, which the
astrologers managed, subsequently, to reckon very auspicious for
me, may have been the causes of my preservation ; for, through
the unskilfulness of the midwife, I came into the world as dead,
and only after various efforts was I enabled to see the light.”



                             j i -e .




             « i     38N.               D 3     19S.
            .? i      9NT.              $ 14    23N.
             S 4     22S.               5 2     30N.
             % 1     37S.               S 27    47S.
             h 2      8N.               n   3    is .
             § 0     45S.               h 14    SOS.
             ¥ 0     20S.               § 15    41S.
                                        f 19    57N.
  Parker’ s Ephemeris for 1749— a copy of which may
48                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


inspected at the British Museum— gives the Sun’s longitude at
noon of the 17th of August (O.S.)4 as Virgo 5° 10'. The Table
of Right Ascension gives R.A. 157° 0' corresponding to this
longitude ; the clock was 0m 53s fast, therefore 13' 15" must be
subtracted therefrom, and as the longitude of Frankfort-on-the
Maine is, in time, 34m 45s East of Greenwich, 1 '2 5 " must also
be subtracted, thus making the R.A. of the Midheaven
156° 45' 20", which gives Virgo 4° 55' as the longitude to be
placed on the upper meridian.
   The latitude of Goethe’s birthplace is 50° 6' 43" N. The
ascendant is, accordingly Scorpio 17° 38'.
   In Goethe’ s nativity the Sun is hyleg and is, happily, free
from affliction by Saturn, Mars, Uranus, and Neptune. The
ascending position of Saturn delayed the birth and danger
of asphyxia followed. It is open to doubt whether his coming
into the world “ as dead” was owing to the unskilfulness of the
midwife, for every skilful obstetric physician meets with such
cases occasionally. Indeed, it was a very fortunate circumstance
that the birth did not take place half an-hour earlier, when
Saturn was exactly on the Eastern horizon (or ascendant), for in
such case Goethe would have been liable to suffer from some
chronic ailment, or deformity, or to serious accidents, from time
to time.

   E x a m p l e III.— In the first volume of the “ Life of the Prince
Consort,” the time of birth is given of Prince Albert, to the
nearest hour, in a letter written by the Dowager Duchess of
Coburg-Saalfeld to the Duchess of K en t:— Rosenau, August
27th, 1819. The date will of itself make you suspect that I am
sitting by Louischen’s bed. She was yesterday morning safely
and quickly delivered of a little boy. . . .          at six the little
one gave his first cry in this world.”
   White’s Ephemeris for 1819 gives the longitude of the Sun at
noon of the 25th of August as Virgo 1° 23' 51"; his right
ascension may be found by the following process :—

         Logarithm Cosine of O.E. 23° 27' 58"       9-9625058
         Tangent 28° 36/ 9" (fr o m ^ 0 ° 0' 0")    9-7366150+

         Tangent of 26° 34' 23"                    =9-6991208



              4 The Germans had adopted the New Style.
                      CALCULATION OF NATIVITIES.                         49

Then 180° 0 ' 0 " - 2 6 ° 34' 23"== 153° 25' 37" or    10h IS1"1 42«-5

Subtract   for   Equation of
                         Time           31   0    or        2     4-0

                                 152° 54 37       or   10   11   38-5
Subtract for long, of Rosenau,
                      11° 2'E.           i 49                    7-25

                                 152   52 48     or    10   11 31-25
Add time elapsed since noon      270   51 0      or    18    3 24
Add diff. mean and sidl. time          44 30     or          2 57-98

                                 424   28 18           28   17 53-23
Subtract the circle              360    0 0      or    24    0 0

The R.A. of the Mid-heaven is     64 28 18       or    4    17 53-23

   The longitudes of the Sun, Moon, and planets have now to be
computed by proportion, from White's Ephemeris for 1819, for
17h 17m 12“ of August 25th, Greenwich Solar Time, and entered
in the figure of the heavens. The declinations and right-ascen­
sions can be readily found by means of the Tables of R.A. and
déclin, given in this work, and entered in the Table or Speculum
attached to the diagram.
   For example, Uranus is in longitude 20° 30' of Sagittarius,
and in latitude 0° 8 South, what is his declination ?
    (a.) The Table of Declination headed “ Sagittarius with
South latitude,’ ' gives the déclin, corresponding to 20° without
lat. as 23° 5', and 21° gives 23° 10', difference 5'. Now say :
as 60' of long, are to 5' of déclin., so are 30' to 2' 3 0 "+ .
Opposite the long, of 20°, and in the column headed 1° of lat.,
we find 24° 5 ‘ of déclin. Now say : as 60' of lat. are to 60' of
deelin., so are 8' of lat. to 8' of déclin.+ . Then as the differ­
ences so found are both plus, they must be added together, thus
8 ' + 3 ' (rejecting the seconds) = 11', and this added to
23° 5 ' = 23° 16' as the declination of Uranus at the time of
birth.
   (b.) Let it now be required to find the right-ascension of
Uranus. Reference to the Table of R.A., “ Sagittarius with
South latitude,” shows that 20° of Sagittarius without latitude
is (adding 180° to the 79° 7' given) 259° 7', and that of 21° is
260° 12', difference 65'. Now say: 60' : 65' : : 30' : 32' 3 0 "+ .
On a line with 20° of Sagittarius, and in the column headed 1°
of lat. it is seen that the R.A. is 259° 2 ' difference 5'. Then
say : 60' : 5 : : 8 : 0 ' 40" —. As the first difference is plus and the
second minus, the latter must be subtracted from the former :
50                 THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTKOLOGY.


32' 30" —0 '4 0 " = y 1y 50" plus, or 32', which, added to 259° 7',
gives the R.A. of Uranus as 259° 39 '.




            Lat.     Déclin.     Rt. A sc.   Mer dist   Semi -Arc.

     O               10° 44' N   154° 5'     89° 37'    103° 11'
     h    1° 50' S   14   3 8    209 38      34 50      107 32
     $    4 10 S      0 36 S     170 54      73 34       90 43
     2    1 5 N      15 46 N     142 58      78 30      109 52
     3    0 9 S      23   9 N     82 46      18 18      120 59
     U    0 56 S     18 44 S     312 27      67 59      114   6
     h    2 29 S      2 35 S       0 16      64 12       86 53
     W    0   8 S    23 16 S     259 39      15 11      121   9
          1 16 N     22   9 s    266  4      21 36      119 21


  (c.) The meridian distance is found by taking the difference
between the R.A. of the nearer meridian and that of the planet.
In this case, Uranus being below the horizon, we must subtract
                     CALCULATION OF NATIVITIES.                51

the R.A. of the lower meridian (obtained by adding 180° O' 0 "
to that of the upper meridian) 244° 28' from 259° 39' and thus
find the meridian distance of Uranus to be 15° 11'.
   (d.) The Semi-arc of a celestial body is found by adding
the logarithm tangent of its declination to the log. tang, of the
Pole of the Ascendant (which is the latitude of the birthplace)
and the sum is the log sine of the ascensional difference, which
must be added to 90° if the planet is below the horizon, and in
south declination, or above the earth and in north declination ;
and subtracted if the celestial body is above the horizon and in
south declination, or below the horizon and in north declination.
When, in computing primary directions the body directed
changes its hemisphere, its opposite semi-arc can be found by
subtracting the one given in the speculum from 180°.
  Let it be required to find the Semi-Are of Uranus:—
Logarithm tangent of 50° 17 'N. lat. of Rosenau     10-0805519
    ,,          ,,     23° 151' deelin. of Uranus    9-6332727

     „     sine of 31° 9 ' 2 8 " asc diff.          =   9-7138246
   As Uranus is below the horizon and in south declination,
31° 9' + 9 0°= 1 20 ° 9 ' his (nocturnal) semi-arc.
   The declinations, right ascensions, meridian distances, and
semi-arcs of the other celestial bodies being computed and
entered in the table, the speculum is completed, and is ready as
the basis for the calculation of the arcs of primary direction.
   The reason for adopting the rectification of the stated time of
birth, six o’clock a.m. to six hours, three minutes and twenty-
four seconds a.m. will be given in the chapter on Rectifying a
Nativity.
   The aspects in the Prince Consort’s horoscope are :— Sun
sextile M oon ; Moon applying to par. dec. Yenus and semi-
quartile Uranus ; Mercury semi-sextile Venus, quartile Mars and
Uranus, sesqui-quadrate Jupiter; Venus trine Uranus, sextile
M ars; Mars separating from opposition with Uranus and
applying to opposition with Neptune, and sesqui-quadrate
Jupiter; Jupiter semi-quartile Neptune; Saturn quartile
Neptune ; and Uranus within six degrees of conjunction with
Neptune. Midheaven (M.C.) proximate trine of Jupiter.

   E x a m p l e IV.— H .R.H. the Duke of Connaught opened the
first South African Parliament on the fourth day of November,
1910, at noon, Capetown meantime, latitude 33° 56' South, and
longitude l h 13m 55s East of Greenwich.
52                 THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


     Sidereal Time at Greenwich mean noon    14h 51m 24B-19
     Correction for l h 13m 55s E.                    12-15 —




   The longitudes of the Sun, Moon, and planets have now to be
computed from Zadkid’s Epliemeris (pp. 46, 47 of Zadkiel’s
Almanac for 1910) for l l h 46“ 5s a.m. of November 4th,
Greenwich mean time, and placed in the respective signs, and
houses, in the figure.
   The Midheaven is Scorpio 15° 16', and the Ascendant is
Aquarius 20° 31'. The Sun has passed the upper meridian and
is in the ninth house, in 11° 7' 50'' of the sign Scorpio. The
Moon is in the tenth house, in Sagittarius 6° 42'. Mercury is in
the ninth house, in 6° 8' of Scorpio, very near Venus in 5° 39'
of the same sign. Mars has just separated from Jupiter (their
conjunction having taken place at 31' 34m a.m. of the same day),
and is in 28° 35' of Libra, Jupiter being in 28° 27' of the same.
                   CALCULATION OF NATIVITIES.                  53

sign, in the ninth house. So that five of the celestial bodies are
within a space of 38° 15', and near the upper meridian. This
augurs a brilliant future for United South Africa, under the
British flag. Nevertheless, Saturn in the third house, and
Uranus in the twelfth, seems to pre-signify some trouble with a
neighbouring, ambitious nation, and from secret foes, from time
to time. Jupiter, ruler of the eleventh and second houses, being
in conjunction with Mars, pre-signifies some serious squabbles
in Parliament over financial measures, and some racial
antagonism for a time. Applied science, music, art, and
literature, will be advanced greatly in South Africa. .
   Before proceeding further, the student is advised to make
himself master of the foregoing rules for easting horoscopes.
   “ Tables of H ouses” for Prague, lat. 50° 5' N., Taunton,
lat. 51° 1' N., Buckingham, 52° N., Nottingham, 52° 57' N.,
Dublin, 53° 23' N., York, 53° 57V N., Newcastle-on-Tyne,
54° 59' N., Edinburgh, 55° 57' N., Aberdeen, 57° 9 ' N., Wick,
58° 27' N., St. Petersburg, 59° 56V N., Adelaide, 34° 56' S.,
Brisbane, 27° 28' S., Paris, 48° 50' N., Borne, 41° 54' N.,
Washington, 38° 54' N., Lat. 35° 0 ' N., Cairo, 30° 2 ' N., and
Benares, 25° 19' N., were all given in F uture, June 1893 to July
1894, inclusive, enabling students to cast horoscopes readily for
any place in Great Britain, and Europe, and two important
places in the Southern Hemisphere.
   The formulas for computing the longitudes of the eleventh,
twelfth, first, second, and third houses, are given in the
appendix to this book.
                                       54




                        CHAPTER                   I X.



    THE       SIGNS           AND        CONSTELLATIONS
                       OF      THE          ZODIAC.

         “ Now constellations Muse ; and signs rehearse ;
           In order let them sparkle in thy verse ;
           Those which obliquely bound the burning zone,
           And bear the summer and the winter Sun—
           Those first: then those which roll a different way
           From west, nor Heaven’s diurnal whirl obey,
           Which nights serene disclose, and which create
           The steady rules, and fix the laws of Fate.— M a n il iu s .

T h e Z o d i a c is a band o r belt, measuring about 1 4 ° in breadth,
but, as Venus sometimes appears to have double her real or
heliocentric latitude, it is more correctly considered to be 1 8 ° in
breadth. The E c l i p t i c , or path of the Sun, passes exactly
through the centre of the zodiac, longitudinally.
   The ancients divided the zodiac into ten signs— Libra being
omitted altogether, Virgo and Scorpio being merged into one
thus: Virgo-Scorpio. Hence the similarity of their symbols,
w m-
   Claudius Ptolemy hands down to posterity the division of the
zodiac into twelve equal parts, of 80° each. He says1        “ The
beginning of the whole zodiacal circle (which in its nature as a
circle can have no other beginning or end, capable of being
determined), is, therefore, assumed to be the sign Aries, which
commences at the vernal equinox."
   Ptolemy speaks of “ the ambient ’ ’ as producing the effects
attributed to the respective signs of the zodiac, when in the
ascendant at a Nativity.
   The first sign, Aries, extends 80° in longitude from the equator
and 11° 29' in declination. The fifth sign, Virgo, has the same
value in declination from the equator, yet experience proves that
the general character of the respective influences of the stars in
these signs, is totally different.
   That the names assigned to the various divisions of the zodiac

                     1 Tetrabiblos Book I., Chap. xii.
          THE SIGNS AND CONSTELLATIONS OF THE ZODIAC.                55

are appropriate is abundantly proved by the experience of ages,
although, at first sight, they may appear to be fanciful and
arbitrary.
   Ptolemy writes of the influences of the signs of the zodiac as
follows2 :—
   “ It is the general tendency of the quadrant comprised between the
vernal equinox and the summer tropic to produce good complexions,
advantageous stature, fine constitutions, and fine e y e s; with a
temperament abounding in heat and moisture.
   “ The quadrant from the summer tropic to the autumnal equinox
tends to produce an ordinary complexion, proportionate stature, a
healthy constitution, large eyes, a stout person, with curled hair, and
a temperament abounding in heat and dryness.
   “ The quadrant from the autumnal equinox to the winter tropic
causes yellowish complexions, slender, thin, and sickly persons, with a
moderate growth of hair, fine eyes, and a temperament abundantly
 dry and cold.
   “ The other (remaining) quadrant, from the winter tropic to the
vernal equinox, gives a dark complexion, proper stature, straight hair
on the head and some on the body, a goodly figure, and a tempera­
ment abounding in cold and moisture.
   “ To speak, however, more particularly, all constellations of human
form, both those within and those without the zodiac, act in favour
of giving a handsome shape to the body, and due proportion to the
figure, while those not of human form vary its due proportions,
and incline it towards their own shape, assimilating it, in some
measure, to their own peculiarities, either by enlarging or diminishing
its size, by giving it additional strength or weakness, or by otherwise
improving or disfiguring it. Thus, for example: Leo, Virgo, and
Sagittarius enlarge the person ; and Pisces, Cancer, and Capricorn
tend to make it dim inutive; and thus, again, the upper and anterior
parts of Aries, Taurus, and Leo, increase its strength, and their
lower and posterior parts render it weaker ; while, on the other band,
Sagittarius, Scorpio, and Gemini act conversely, for their anterior
parts produce greater debility, and their posterior parts give greater
vigour. In like manner Virgo, Libra, and Sagittarius, contribute
to render the person handsome and well-proportioned, and Scorpio,
Pisces, and Taurus, incline it to be misshapen and disfigured.
   “ The other constellations also operate on similar principles; and
all these influences it is necessary to bear in mind, in order that the
peculiar properties, observed in their joint temperament, may be so
compounded as to authorise an inference therefrom, concerning the
form and temperament of the body.”

  R. A. Proctor wrote :—-
   “ The zodiacal twelve are in some respects the most important and
interesting of all the constellations. If we could determine the origin
of these figures, their exact configuration as at first devised, and the
precise influences assigned to them in the old astrological systems, we
should have obtained important evidence of the origin of astronomy
itself. It seems highly probable that the date to. which all inquiries


                           Book III., Chap. xvi.
56                    THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


into the origin of the constellations and the zodiacal signs seems to
point— viz., 2170 b . c .— was the date at which the Chaldæan astronomers
definitely adopted the new system, the luni-solar, instead of the lunar
division of the zodiac and of the time.”

   Reference to the Tetrabiblos of Claudius Ptolemy will show the
precise influences assigned to the zodiacal constellations by the
ancient Chaldæan astrologers. As before stated the Tetrabiblos
was based chiefly upon the teachings or writings of Hermes.
   The Cbaldæans and Egyptians depicted the events of the early
ages of the world, their mystic religion, in the emblematical
figures of the constellations. The Greeks and Romans replaced
several of the Chaldæan constellations by others emblematical of
their own history.
   Eratosthenes says :—
  “ That the constellation of Argo was placed in the heavens by
D iv in eW i s d o m . That the Argo was the first ship that ever was
constructed— that it was built at a period of most remote antiquity
— that it was an O r a c u l a i i V e s s e l — that it was the first ship that
ventured upon the sea, which had never been previously crossed ;
and that it was placed in the sphere as a commemorative token to
posterity.” 4

   The Greeks themselves, so far from claiming for any of their
philosophers the honour of the sphere, assigned it with general
consent to the Centaur Chiron, the incidents of whose life prove
him, through all the mist of fable to have been one of the
many personages whom tradition has substituted for Noah.’
They fully acknowledged that the Argo was the ship in which
Danaus with his colony sailed from Egypt to Greece. This was
many years before the poetic fiction of Jason and his voyage
through the Black Sea in search of the Golden Fleece. Now
the Egyptian account is that the Argo was the ship in which
Osiris with the goddess Isis sailed upon the waters of the great
deluge.“
   The people of Hindostán have a tradition in which the names
and circumstances are almost identical. The ship in their
language is Argha, and the persons who sailed in it were
Iswara and Isi ; whilst the voyage, also, was on the waters of
the deluge. The Persians have preserved the account, with
slight alteration, calling the ship Arg.

  * Eratos. Catast., XXXV.
  5 See Jacob Byrant’s Heathen Mythology ; and Faber’s Origin o f Pagan
Idolatry.
  0 Plutarch de Isid.
          THE SIGNS AND CONSTELLATIONS OF THE ZODIAC.             57

    Thus we see the same tradition preserving the knowledge of
 the one mighty event, extending through Southern Asia from
 Hindostan to Egypt, evidently emanating from one origin,
whence it has spread throughout the world, entirely independent
of, though to the fullest extent confirming the account given in
the Pentateuch by the inspired prophet of the -Tews.
    The very position of the constellation in the sphere proves
that it was not of Grecian origin. Its principal star Canopus is
only 37° from the South Pole, and the greater part of the
constellation is still nearer to it. The whole is, therefore,
invisible to Greece, which undoubtedly received the tradition
from Egypt, whence the Greeks and all their science came.
As to the sphere itself, the southern half is principally occupied
with aquatic animals, and water appears streaming upon it in all
directions. In the midst of the waves is the ship called,
variously, Argo, Argha, Arg, Ark, in Egypt, Persia, Hindostan,
or by the Jews. Near is a dove which seems flying towards it,
and at a little distance, a raven perched on the back of a
serpent. Further off, as if he had just left the ship, is the
fabulous Centaur, who with a lance pierces an animal, and
appears to bear it towards a smoking altar. The whole is an
undeniable portraiture of the mighty catastrophe— the Great
Deluge! A marvellous confirmation of the Mosaic account.
Further, that those who framed it must have lived in a southern
latitude, and at a time when men’s minds were deeply impressed
with the awful circumstances of the terrible event, is an
inference which suggests itself to the mind without effort or
research.
   The teraphim were images formed for the purposes of worship,
and for divining future events. They were made by astrologers,
under certain constellations. Among other reasons why Rachel
stole her father's images, this is thought to be one, viz., that
Laban might not, by consulting with those images, discover
what way Jacob tojk in his flight.7
   It is manifest, therefore, that the teraphim had been
constructed long after the first knowledge of the particular
properties of the various constellations existed, constituting, as
such knowledge did constitute, without doubt, the first
principles of astrology. As Laban lived about six hundred years
after the flood, it follows that the influences of the constellations


 7 See Ecclesiastical Rites, used by the Ancient Hebrews, by Thomas
Goodwyn. 1628.
58                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


of the zodiac were known within a very few generations of that
catastrophe, or about 2,200 years before Christ. At the present
day, tradition, history, experience, and common sense are alike
set at nought, and men are allowed to substitute for real
ennobling knowledge and divine truth, their own shallow,
and absurd speculations.
   Proctor observed that, “ In Egypt there are temples of vast
antiquity, having a dome, on which a zodiac— or more correctly,
a celestial hemisphere— is sculptured with constellation figures.
And we now learn, from ancient Babylonian and Assyrian
sculptures, that these Egyptian zodiacs are, in all probability,
merely copies (more or less perfect) of yet more ancient
Cbaldeean zodiacs. One of these Babylonian sculptures is
figured in Rawlinson’s Ancient Monarchies. It seems probable
that in a country where Sabseanism, or star-worship, was the
prevailing form of religion, yet more imposing proportions would
be given to such zodiacs than in Egypt.” 8 “ Indeed,” continues
Mr. Proctor, “ there have not been wanting those who find in
the ancient constellations the record of the early history of Man.
According to their views Orion is Nimrod— the ‘ Giant,’ as the
Arabic name of the constellation implies— the mighty hunter,
as the dogs and hare beside him signify. The figure now called
Hercules, but of old Eugonasin, or the kneeler, and described by
Aratus as ‘ a man doomed to labour,’ is Adam. His left foot
treads on the dragon’ s head, in token of the saying, 1It shall
bruise thy head ; ’ and Serpentarius, or the serpent bearer, is the
promised seed.”
   It is stated in the Anacalypsis that,
   “ When the French possessed Italy they examined the chair of St..
 Peter and found upon it the signs o f the zodiac. There is, also, a
published account, written by a Roman of eminence, before the time
of the French invasion, which states that the same thing was observed,
and much discussed on the chair being formerly taken down to be
cleaned. The zodiac had been forgotten, or the chair would not have
been again taken down. This is the chair of St. Peter, with its zodiacal
 chain, on which the Pope is supposed to sit to rule the Empire of his
fir s t crown, of the planets. Tt, must not be forgotten that the triple
crown is emblematical of his three kingdoms. The illustrious Spaniard
did not err far when he said, that the life of Jesus was written in the
stars.
   “ Irenasus was Bishop of Lyons. H e was one of the first fathers of
the Church who suffered martyrdom, and generally accounted one of
its most eminent and illustrious early writers. He was an Asiatic, but
 was sent as bishop to Gaul. H e founded or built a church in that
 country. This church is yet remaining in Lyons, though in the

                      8 The Student, .June, 1868.
           THE SIGNS AND CONSTELLATIONS OF THE ZODIAC.                    59»

course of almost 2,000 years, no doubt it has undergone many altera­
tions. On the floor, in front of the altar, may been seen a Mosaic
pavement of the zodiac, though a considerable part of it is worn away.
   “ Persons who do not look deeply into these matters, are easily
blinded by being told that it is the remains of an old temple. But
Irenseus had no power to get possession of Roman pagan temples. The-
pretence is totally void of foundation. The style of building, its
records, &c., all show what its priests say is true, viz., that it was built
by Irenseus. On many other churches, which never were Roman
temples, both in Britain and elsewhere, similar marks of the esoteric
religion, which I have partly unfolded, may be seen.”

  Modern authors have described the special influences exerted
by the respective signs o f the zodiac. The following may be
accepted as a fair description of them :—
   A ries ( V ) produces a spare and strong body, of stature rather above the
average; face long; eyebrows bushy; neck long; shoulders thick and
powerful; complexion sallow or swarthy; hair black or sandy; disposi­
tion irritable. The first half of the sign gives a stronger constitution,
 and a greater muscular development, than the latter half.
   T aurus ( 8 ) gives a middle stature; a thick, well set body ; a broad
forehead; full face and prominent eyes; neck and lips thick; nose and
mouth wide; complexion swarthy; dark or black hair, often curly:
disposition melancholy ; slow to anger, but, when provoked, furious.
   G emini ( n ) usually produces a tall and straight body ; complexion
dark sanguine; hair blackish ; eyes hazel, sight quick ; a smart, active
appearance; disposition fickle, understanding good.
   C ancer (25).—Moderate stature, upper part of body somewhat
large; small round face, with pale, delicate complexion; brown hair;
small gray eyes; effeminate in constitution and disposition, subject to
chest affections.
   L eo (S I ). —A large, fair stature, broad shoulders; prominent and
large eyes; hair generally light, and often yellowish; oval, ruddy
countenance ; of a high, resolute, haughty, and ambitious temper.
   V irgo ( tir). —Middle stature, rather slender, but very neat and
compact; dark sanguine complexion; dark hair; small, shrill voice
(but if Mercury ascend in this sign, the native will be a great orator),
witty, ingenious and studious, but of a fickle disposition.
   L ibra ( —).—Tall and elegantly formed, rather slender; hair brown,
smooth, and glossy, yet sometimes jet-black; face having generally
great beauty; fine dear, sanguine complexion; blue sparkling eyes;
good tempered, amiable, and high principled.
  ■Scorpio (hi).0—Strong, corpulent, robust body; of middle stature;
dark complexion; dark brown curling and bushy hair; neck thick;
mind and disposition active, yet reserved and thoughtful.

  8 Virgil makes the following allusion to the claws—X”^“^ cbelse—of
Scorpio, in the first Geòrgie:—
            “ Quo locus Erigonen inter, Chelasque sequentes
              Pauditur : ipse tibi jam brachia contrahit ardens
              Seorpius, et coeli justà plus parte reliquit.”
Ovid alludes to the same sign, as follows :—
            “ Porrigit in spatium signorum membra duorum.”
60                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


   S agittariu s (-Î).—A well-formed person; inclined to tallness;
sanguine complexion, oval face and handsome ; high forehead ;
chestnut or bright-brown hair, growing off the temples, bald early in
life; long Grecian nose; fine, clear eyes; jovial, active, and intrepid
disposition, very fond of horses and hunting.
   C apricorn (kf).—Slender make, in some cases ill-formed or crooked ;
a long, thin face, generally plain ; thin beard ; chin long and protrud­
ing ; black, lanky hair ; narrow chest ; disposition subtle, collected,
calm, witty, and yet melancholy.
   A quarius (££').—Middle stature, stout, well-set, robust, and strong;
long and fleshy face ; good, clear, delicate, and sanguine complexion ;
sandy or darkish flaxen hair ; hazel eyes ; of prepossessing appearance,
and good disposition.
   P isces ( X ).—Stature short; body fleshy, crooked, or stooping, round
shouldered ; brown hair, large, round, pale face, (but if 0 be rising, a
good complexion) ; in disposition indolent and dull, prone to drinking,
more or less.
   The foregoing descriptions rarely answer exactly. For the
ascending sign (although it has chief influence over the form of
the body), will, if a planet be within 5° of the Eastern horizon,
or in close aspect with it, have its influence considerably modified
thereby.
   Some authors instruct the student to consider, in addition to
the ascending sign, “ the sign occupied by the Moon, and that in
which the lord of the ascendant is placed.” This can only apply
to horary (symbolical) astrology, and not to nativities, except
when the Moon or the “ lord ” of the ascendant happens to be
rising, or in close aspect to the horizon, at birth.
   The late John Yarley gave the following “ elementary notions
of the twelve signs ” : —
   “ The sign Aries, amongst its various classes of human physiognomy,
gives one that much resembles that of a ram; and it signifies that
class of animals, and their attributes.
   “ Taurus gives very powerfully that of the bull, with tufted hair on
the forehead.
   “ Gemini, though a beautiful and human sign, yet occasionally gives
to persons born when it is rising a strong resemblance in the head and
neck to the characteristic forms of goats, kids, and deer ; and therefore,
being a bicorporal sign, or one of plurality, in very ancient times it was
represented by two kids; but, subsequently, the human character of
the sign has been recognised by the introduction of the Ttvins, repre­
senting the two stars Castor and Pollux.”
   [These two stars were in the sign Gemini at the time when the
constellations so far agreed with the signs whose names they bear,
that the beginning of Aries was at or near the commencement of the
constellation so-called, and the place of the Sun at the vernal equinox.]
   “ Cancer is found occasionally to give, among other characterists of
the sign, a crabbed, short-nosed class of persons, greatly resembling a
crab in features, when viewed in front ; these persons resemble crabs,
also, in the energy and tenacity with which they attack any object.
           THE SIGNS AND CONSTELLATIONS OF THE ZODIAC.                 61

   “ Leo produces the physiognomies most resembling a lion, especially
m the nose and retreating chin ; such as the profile of King George III.
exhibits; and the sign is particularly significant of such animals as the
lion.
   “ Virgo has been found to be well-suited to the signification of a
class of cool, discreet, studious women.”
   An ancient zodiac, sculptured on one of the temples of Thebes,
represents this sign as a virgin with a distaff in her hands, to denote
the industrious character of women born under Virgo. The same
figure is found in the zodiac in the great temple of Tentyra.
   “ Libra, independently of its appearing in the world's horoscope, to
mediate the zodiac horizontally, and to balance, as it were, the sign
Aries, has been found to signify straight lines and regular buildings,
and the sublime uninterrupted horizon line of the sea; it represents
also the blue colour of the sky and distances.
   “ Scorpio has been occasionally found to afford to one class of
human form when it is rising, a near approach to serpents, in the
expression of the countenance, especially in the eyes and mouth ; and
when doing or saying cruel and bitter things, they are apt to be
assimilated to the nature of snakes, scorpions, etc.
   “ Sagittarius has been observed to represent, not only such rapid
motions as belong to the flying arrow, but the eentaurion form was
suggested by the first portion of the sign, signifying the deliberation or
temperate resolves of humanity, with happy termination, in a greater
degree than the latter half, which often exhibits more of the excessive
impulses and nature of a race-horse, an animal most specifically
described by Sagittarius; and persons bom while the latter half of the
sign is rising, are subject to the constant apprehension of vicissitudes or
violent accidents.
    “ Capricornus is found to give gray-eyed human beings a most
perfect resemblance in the eyes to the full-grown goat; and in others,
 both dark and fair, the under lip somewhat resembles that of these
 animals. Capricorn from reflecting as it were, the watery sign Cancer,
 which is opposite to it in the zodiac, and from the former location of
 the famous fishy star Fornalhaut in it (which left the sign about the
 period of the great plague at Athens), caused so many persons born
 under the sign to partake in their physiognomy of the character of fish,
 that it was anciently represented by a goat with a fish’s tail.”
    [In the zodiac of Thebes, before alluded to, the goat is drawn in full,
 and without the tail of the fish, as generally seen in less ancient
 zodiacs.]
    “ Aquarius is, by many persons, erroneously termed a watery sign;
 but it is, in fact, the third sign of the aerial trigon; and as it is an
 amiable, peaceful, and uranian sign, and as the air was perceived to be
 the bearer of vapours, clouds, and even waterspouts, Aquarius was
 represented by the figure of the water-bearer, which also denoted one
 who followed a useful and domestic, rather than any destructive
 occupation.
    “ Pisces was found to signify persons who were employed in fishing,
 and in other watery concerns; and likewise shallow streams in which
 fish are readily seen. It is a sign under which many fishmongers are
 born, or in which planets are located at their birth; and some of the
 persons bom when it is rising approximate to fishes in their eyes,
 which are somewhat conspicuous and phlegmatic.
     “ It must be borne in mind that all the signs indicate various classes
  of individuals, and that by the entrance of illustrious fixed stars into
62                      THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


them their characters are reduced or exalted, as in the instance of
Scorpio, which was once termed the accursed sign, but since the
celebrated star Minerva, the north balance, and other eminent stars
have been located therein, this sign has been the ascendant of many of
the most illustrious heroes, legislators, surgeons, astronomers, painters,
engravers, etc. It was the ascendant of Edward III., and the Black
Prince, of Lord Nelson, Lord Byron, Jenny Lind, and many
distinguished officers employed by the late Duke of Wellington. The
sign is so strictly martial that no planet except Mars has any dignities
in i t ; and it was probably on this account singled out as having no
friendly signification to the harmonies of nature.
   “ There have been many other interpretations given of the names of
the signs. The most common is that which alludes to the animals
produced in the various months, as the Sun proceeds through some of
the signs. Another originates in the ideas of the Sun’s motion, and its
effects, as that at the summer solstice he begins, like a crab, to move
backwards towards southern declination ; that his fiery heat, when in
Leo, resembles a raging lion ; that the harvest time is alluded to when
he enters the sign Virgo, who is represented (latterly) holding an ear of
corn in her hand. In Libra he is said to balance the days and nights ;
and in Scorpio, to produce an unpleasant effect (by means of the
weather), as if like a scorpion, he left a string behind.
T hese,   and   the   e x p l a n a t io n s , o f   the   other   sig n s   are   in g e n io u s

EVASIONS, INVENTED BY THE ENEMIES OF JUDICIAL ASTROLOGY, OR BY
PERSONS ENTIRELY IGNORANT OF IT ; AND SERVE ONLY TO MISLEAD PER­
SONS OF ENQUIRING MIND FROM THE TRUE ZODIACAL ORIGIN OF THEIR
APPELLATIONS.”

   Ptolemy relates that the signs Aries, Gemini, Leo, Libra,
'Sagittarius, and Aquarius were denominated masculine, and the
remainder feminine, in alternative order, “ as the day is followed
by the night, and as the male is coupled with the female.”
   The signs have been divided into four triplicities, thus: fiery,
T , S I, t 1 earthy, y , ny_,     airy, n , =^, zz ; and watery,
    HI, X-
   The bicorporal signs are n , X , and the first half of f . The
fruitful signs are ss, lip, X ; the barren signs are n , Sb, and
njt.
   The signs of lony-ascension are So, SI, UK, ===, 111, t ■ The
signs of short-ascension are l^f, x ?, X , V , b , □ • The last-
named are so-called because they ascend in a shorter period of
time (owing to the diurnal motion of the earth being, when they
ascend, nearly parallel with its orbit) than the others. A trine
aspect falling in signs of short-ascension, is equal to a square in
its effects, according to Ptolemy. This, if it were true, would
only apply, per se to mundane positions, and not to differences of
longitude in the zodiac. It is not true, even in regard to
mundane positions, and could only receive (apparent) support
          THE SIGNS AND CONSTELLATIONS OF THE ZODIAC.              63

from experience when the two bodies in aspect happened also to
be in equal, or parallel, declination.
   Signs of voice are n , ng, z z , and the first half of $ , because,
it is said, when either of these signs ascends at a birth, and
Mercury is strong, the native will prove a good orator.
   The “ houses ” of the planets are readily shown by the follow­
ing table. It is exactly the same as that found in the mummy-
case of the Archon of Thebes, in ancient Bgypt, as maybe seen
at the British Museum.
                       SI    0         Î)   ®
                       m         S          n
                       —A—
                                 2          b
                       in        3          T
                       t         U          X
                       Vÿ        '?         CM



   The sign Leo is the only house (or chief essential dignity) of
the Sun, just as Cancer is the only house of the Moon. The
planets had each two houses assigned to them. Some modern
authors have assigned Aquarius to Uranus, thus either robbing
 Saturn of his “ day-house,” or forcing upon him a partner.
 However, until experience teaches us in what signs Uranus and
Neptune are most powerful, I must decline to endorse so hasty
an attempt to provide for one of the “ houseless wanderers.”
   The sign Aries is said to govern the head and face of man, and
the diseases it produces (when evil planets are located in it) are
the smallpox, measles, ringworm, apoplexy, palsy, &c.
   Taurus rules the neck and throat, and its diseases are consump­
tion (laryngeal or bronchial), scrofula, croup, quinsy, diphtheria,
bronchocele, &c.
   Gemini governs the arms and shoulders, and its diseases are
brain fevers, corrupt blood ; fractures of the head and arms, &c.
   Cancer rules the chest, breasts, and stomach. The diseases
under its influence are cancer, asthma, bronchitis, inflammation
and consumption of the lungs, cough, expectoration of blood,
gastric catarrh, and fever.
   Leo governs the heart and spine, and its diseases are spinal
affections, convulsions, acute fevers, pestilence, smallpox, measles,
jaundice, and all inflammatory complaints.
   Virgo rules the intestinal canal, the spleen, the abdomen, and
diaphragm ; its diseases are colic, melancholia, dysentery, enteric
fever, &c.
64                 THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


   Libra governs the reins and loins ; its diseases are affections
of the kidneys, diabetes, tabes dorsalis, &c.
   Scorpio rules the generative organs, inguinal regions, bladder,
&c. ; its diseases are hæmorrhoids, fistula, ruptures, scurvy, &c.
   Sagittarius governs the hips and thighs, and the os sacrum ; its
diseases are sciatica, coxalgia, gout, rheumatism, and fevers ; and
its accidents are broken bones of the lower extremities chiefly.
   Capricorn rules the knees : its accidents are sprains, disloca­
tions, and broken limbs ; its diseases are articular rheumatism,
hysteria, cutaneous eruptions, &c.
   Aquarius governs the legs and ankles ; its diseases are gout,
cramp, rheumatism, and corrupt blood ; its accidents, broken
legs.
   Pisces rules the feet and toes ; its diseases are affections of the
                                                                      »
feet, gout, lameness, ulcers, and rheumatism.
   This, of course, only applies to nativities in which one or more
of the evil planets—Mars, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune— may
be in conjunction, opposition, parallel declination, or quartile
with the Sun or Moon, or ascending degree, whichever may be
hyleg, and when, at the same time, the hyleg receives no support
from either Jupiter or Venus. In a less degree, the sesquiquadrate
and semi-quartile aspects affect the health. The mundane
parallel also is prejudicial when the evil planet happens to be
elevated above the hyleg, or close to the cusp of the eighth or
sixth house, or ruler of the sign on either of those houses.
                                     65




                          C H A P T E R          X.



                             THE          SUN.

            “ Most glorious orb! that wert a worship, ere
              The mystery of thy making was reveal'd!
              Thou earliest minister of the Almighty,
              Which gladden’d on their mountain-tops the hearts
              Of the Chaldsean shepherds, till they pour’d
              Themselves in orisons ! ” — B yeon.

 T he Sun was believed by the ancients to revolve around the earth.
 The Ptolemaic system of astronomy was founded on this belief.
 It has been rightly observed that, “ Ptolemy’ s order, false as it
was, enabled observers to give a plausible account of the motions
 of the Sun and Moon, to foretell eclipses, and to improve
 geography.” 1 Inasmuch as Ptolemy’s system of astronomy
 portrayed the actual phenomena of the heavens as they appear
to observers on the earth, it follows that his astrology is quite as
applicable to modern and improved astronomy as to his own, for
the heavenly bodies act upon the earth, its atmosphere, and
mankind, according to their apparent or geocentric positions,
without reference to their true or heliocentric places. The Sun’s
distance from the earth is now computed at 92,350,000 miles, in
mean value. Astronomers have differed, in the past, so greatly
as to the Sun’s distance, that it has been variously stated to be
from 28 to 96 millions of miles.
   The Sun has always been held to rule the first day of the week
— SuNday. “ It is a curious fact that the Hebrew’ words
expressing the seven first cardinal numbers, are all formed of
one syllable that signifies a star, and of, one or more, others that
imply the character or quality of that star. A tc h k d , or A s h s h e d ,
one, is a corruption of the words A sh , fire, and S h e d , to pour
forth; whence S h e d d a i , the name of God, the 1 All Bountiful; ’
and the words signify ‘ T h e A l l B o un tiful F ibe ; ’ which is
perfectly characteristic of the S un . It is, then, a direct reference
to the Sun, whose rule was over I aum A tched ‘ day one.’ ” 2

  1 Spectacle de la Nature.
  2 ZadkieVs Almanac for 1849, p. 59.
66                THE TEXT-BOOK OE ASTROLOGY.


    The first deity worshipped was B elus, which was the S un,
called in Scripture B aal ; hence the Buddhist terms Bal and
Bali, denoting a species of magic by which it is pretended that
diseases are cured. The Greek mythologists elaborated from
this lord or chief of the Sabaean idolatry both Jupiter and
Apollo, the former as king of heaven, the latter as the local
deity of the Sun.
    The figure of Brachma, with four faces, denotes the Sun, the
four seasons, and the four triplieities of the zodiac, viz., the
airy, fiery, earthy, and watery.
     Mr. Coleman says, “ This deity” — Surya, or the Sun—-“ is
pictured of a deep golden complexion, with his head encircled by
 golden rays of glory. He presides over A dit-W ar, or Sunday ;
 from Adit, the first, and War, day.” Many ages before
 Christianity— in the remotest times of Britain and Gaul— the
 first day of the week was set apart, more particularly, for the
 instruction of the laity, and distinguished by the name of the
 day of the Sun. A Saronide, or preacher, delivered his sermon
 from a jube, or pulpit. The discourse delivered was termed
 Sab-aith, or “ the word of the teacher, or wise man.” Henc9
 the day itself came to be termed the Sabaith-day. The
 assembly was called Sabat— a term since most absurdly applied
 by the French to signify a nocturnal assembly of witches and
 conjurors. In the word Sabbatines is still preserved the
 original unperverted sense of instructive discourses.3 The
  divines, or theologians, were styled Faidhes (hence the Latin,
  Vates), who on the day of the Sun, or of Apollo,1 preached the
  faith, or so much of the tenets of religion as they chose to com­
  municate to the people. The name, however, of the Drudical
  Sab-aith day having happily merged into that of Sabbath, was
  received by the Christians. Not only the change of the day
  (from the Jewish Sabbath, Saturn’s day, the seventh day of the
  week), but the primordial appellation of it, Sunday, still
  collaterally retained in our language, demonstrates its origin.
      When Constantine desired to hand over the people, who
   followed the Drudical religion, to the power of the Christian
   priests, he issued this decree : “ Let all judges and townspeople,
   and the occupations of all trades, rest on the venerable day of
   the Sun, &c.

   s See Etymological Vocabulary, p. 97 ; also The Way to Things by Words
 and to Words by Things. London, 17(10.
   4 Apollo—the radiance of the Sun. Apollo and Sol, in the Celtic, have
 exactly the same meaning ; an emanation from the eye of heaven.
                             THE SUN.                             67

     Eusebius gives an ancient Oracle, which he had copied from
   Porphyry, in which we are clearly told that the Magi named the
   days of the week from the planets.5
     The Sun is said to possess “ a hot and dry nature, though
  inferior, in this respect, to Mars,” and to possess, also, the
  peculiar power of destroying the nature and influence of any
  planet with w'hich he may happen to be in conjunction, and
  appropriating its qualities to himself. This is termed combustion
  (when the planet is within 8° 80' of the Sun). A planet within
  17° of the Sun is said to be “ under the Sun’s beams,’ ’ but this
  is not so great an affliction as the former position. There
 can be no doubt that a planet gradually loses its power as well as
  its light as it approaches the Sun, and slowly regains it as it
  recedes from the great luminary. The ancients held that a
  planet within 1 7 ' of the centre of the Sun was thereby fortified,
 and this position they termed “ cazimi,” but a planet so situated
 is undoubtedly in the worst state of combustion.
     When the Sun is afflicted at birth his influence becomes
 malefic, and when an evil direction of his to the ascendant or
  Moon (if either be hyleg) comes into operation, it materially
 assists in the destruction of life. When the Moon is hyleg, an
 evil direction to the Sun, even when the latter is free from
 malefic influence at birth, is somewhat dangerous to life.
     For success, or prosperity in the world to be attained, it is
 essential that the Sun, as well as the Moon, shall be free from
 affliction at birth. When both the Sun and Moon are afflicted
 the person then born has a long struggle against adverse fate.
 It is better to have the Sun and Moon free from even the good
aspects of Saturn.
    The Sun, at birth, in benefic aspect with Jupiter, pre­
signifies good fortune, and a good constitution (if the Moon and
ascendant be free from affliction).
    The Sun in good aspect with Mars, pre-signifies success in
war, surgery, chemistry, etc., and the stronger the position of
Mars, the greater will be his fame.
    The Sun in the midheaven and free from affliction, leads to
public life ; and if the Sun have the declination, or trine with
Jupiter, eminence in the Church, or the law' or in medicine.
    The Sun rising at a birth, confers courage, ambition, and
good fortune. But if afflicted by Saturn, liability to consump­
tion or paralysis, or to misfortune. Afflicted by Mars, there

                           3 Pr.   E.5, 14.
68                THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


is rashness and sternness, unless Jupiter assist the Sun by
good configuration. The Sun is said to govern the heart, spine,
arteries, the right eye of a man and the left eye of a woman.
Ilis diseases, accordingly, are : Affections of the heart and the
eye, acute fever, disordered brain, spinal complaints, etc. His
angel is called Michael.
   The Sun describes, generally, when rising at a birth, a person
of large, strong and good build, high forehead, inclined to bald­
ness, large eyes, sharp sight, yellowish or light-brown hair, and
much beard.
   If the Sun be well dignified, the disposition is noble, generous,
proud, magnanimous, humane, and affable, friendly, and
generous to an enemy ; one of few words ; and fond of luxury
and magnificence. If ill-dignified, pride, arrogance, and want
of sympathy.

                T he S un   in   the   T w e l v e S ig n s .
   0      in T describes usually one of good stature, strong, and
well-made ; a good complexion ; yellowish, flaxen, or sandy
hair ; courageous, and martially disposed ; likely to succeed in
the army or in the medical profession ; fortunate, and victorious
over his enemies.
   © in y represents a rather short, well-set person ; dark com­
plexion ; not very attractive features ; large nose ; broad face ;
strong, bold, proud, fond of opposing others, and often gaining
the victory.
   0 in n confers a well-proportioned body ; complexion
sanguine ; hair brown ; of a good, affable, and kind disposition,
rather deficient in firmness and resolution ; and not particularly
fortunate.
   0 in ® represents a moderate stature (if afflicted, deformed,
or diminutive) ; brown hair ; disposition harmless and cheerful,
somewhat indolent and addicted to pleasure.
   © in Sb gives a strong, well-made person ; of a sanguine
complexion ; light-brown or yellow hair ; full round face and
large eyes ; honest and upright in conduct, ambitious, and fond
of pleasure.
    0 in UK describes a tall person, slender, and comely; plentifu
hair of a brown colour ; mind ingenious, artistic or scientific ;
disposition cheerful and agreeable.
   © in =«= represents a straight, tall body ; a pleasing person­
ality ; prominent eyes ; light hair ; pimpled face in age ;
disposition amiable ; fond of pleasure, just, and luxurious.
                            THE SUN.                           69

   0 in n\ gives a square, fleshy body ; broad face and mouth ;
complexion freckled or sunburnt : hair brown and curling; mind
ingenious ; disposition rugged and may be overbearing ;
fortunate upon the sea and in the practice of medicine,
chemistry, engineering, &c.
   © in f represents a tall, well-proportioned body, a very
comely person ; oval face ; sanguine complexion ; light-brown
curling hair ; disposition generous, lofty, proud, aiming at noble
ends, bold, and capable of great deeds : a good sportsman.
   0 in Vÿ describes a mean stature ; a sickly complexion ; oval
face; lank brown hair ; disposition just and upright, generally
good-natured, hasty, and autocratic.
   O in zz gives a middle stature : a corpulent body ; of fair
proportions; rouud, full face: light-brown hair; clear com­
plexion ; good disposition, though tinctured with pride and
ambition ; artistic or scientific.
   0 in X describes a short, fleshy person ; round face ; good
complexion; light-brown or flaxen hair ; a harmless disposition,
may be his own enemy by reason of extravagance, and indul­
gence in feasting and pleasure.
   The Sun when afflicted in Aries, or afflicting the Moon or
ascendant, is said to cause conjunctivitis, acne, and vertigo.
When so situated in Taurus, quinsy and other diseases of the
throat. In Gemini, epidemic fever, or scurvy. In Cancer,
smallpox, measles, dyspepsia, and dropsy. In Leo, neuralgia of
the head, calculus, and acute fever. In Virgo, diarrhoea,
dysentery, dyspepsia, etc. In Libra, fever, calculus, and renal
disease. In Scorpio, diseases of the kidney, prostate, etc.    In
Sagittanj, sciatica, fistula, and acute fever. In Capricornus
articular rheumatism, and intestinal affections. In Aquarius,
disordered blood, calculus, and strangury. In Pisces, affections
of the kidneys, dropsy, etc.
                                             70




                        CHAP TEE                              XI .



                             THE                MOON.

                                  “ To the b l a n c Moon
                   Her o f f i c e they p r e s c r i b ’ d . — M i l t o n .

T he M oon , the earth’s satellite, was said by the ancients to be
“ ieminine, cold, moist, and phlegmatic.” Her influence, is,
strictly speaking, convertible as to its character, being fortunate
or unfortunate according to her position, relative to the Sun and
planets at her birth. Her position in the heavens at a nativity,
is of much importance; her proximity to the earth and the
rapidity of her motion render her a very powerful significator in
all branches of astrology. The critical years in the life of man,
the crises in disease, the period of gestation, the rise and fall of
the tides—all attest the verity of her influence.
   The second day of the week (Lume dies) is ruled by the Moon
— hence the term Monday. In Hebrew S h ejiin , tiro, or A s h -
N em , is compounded of A sh , fire (tbe stars being termed the fires
of heaven), and N e j i , dumber, meaning “ the star of slumber,”
which evidently applies to the Moon as ruler of the night, the
time for slumber. Thus S h e jiin , two, clearly indicated the rule
of the Moon over “ Day two.” The Moon was worshipped under
the name of Diana by the Ephesians, whence arose the cry,
“ Great is Diana of the Ephesians;” she was also worshipped
throughout the whole of Asia. The oracle of Themis (the
goddess of oracles being Ar-Temis, Diana, the Moon) was the
most ancient, and was consulted by Deucalion after the flood.
Among the most ancient Orphic hymns is one addressed to the
Moon under this title;—
                 ATOYSA        KAAOT’Z         KAPHOY’ 2        ¿¡¡o yxLtis
            Thou bringest from the earth the goodly fruits.

  “ Does not,” asks Parkhurst, “ this exactly agree with the
precious things put forth by the streams of light from the Moon,
Heb., I arachiji , of which Moses speaks, Deut. xxxiii., 14 ? ”
                                TBE MOON.                                 71

This proves the belief of the ancients in the power of the Moon
over vegetation, a fact beyond question.1
   The ancients considered the full moon fortunate; but when
the Moon was horned they considered it so malignant that a
child born under certain aspects at that time would soon die, or
if it lived, it would be guilty of crimes as great- as its temper
was black. This led the Hebrew wise women to write upon the
walls of their bed-chambers, “ Let not Lilith enter here ” — this
demon, Lilith being certain influences of the Moon.
   When the Moon ascends at a birth the stature of the child
usually becomes tall, complexion pale, face round, eyes gray,
brow lowering, arms short, body smooth, inclined to
corpulence, and temperament phlegmatic.             If impeded by
(i.e., in evil aspect with) the Sun, a blemish usually appears
on or near one of the eyes ; and if she be occidental, and in evil
aspect to Mars, the sight is defective. I have known cases
wherein the full Moon rising at birth, without any aspect to the
evil planets, has produced great defect in sight, although no
hereditary predisposition of this nature existed.
   If the Moon be dignified (i.e., angular, or in the signs qs or y )
at birth, the person will be more graceful, of refined and engaging
manners, good easy disposition, ingenious, and given to travelling;
rather unstable, however, and of little forecast, providing only
for the present; prone to frequently change his employment or
pursuits.
   If the Moon be unfortunate (i.e., cadent, or located in either
l^P or iq and having no assistance from the fortunes, if or 2 ) at
birth, the native is inclined to be slothful, improvident, and may
be given to dissipation. When oriental2 the Moon inclines to
corpulence ; when occidental to leanness and deformity.
   The Moon is said to govern the stomach, the intestinal canal,
the left eye of a man and the right eye of a woman. Her

   'D r, Goad says: “ In felling trees for timber the ancients have told us
that it must be a winter work in regard to the Sun. That oaks cut down in
spring-time will presently rot. They teach withal that it is of an infinite
concern to add the Moon’s observation as well as the Sun’s ; Infinitum
refert et Luvaris ratio, Pliny, xvi , 39. The elm, the pine, the nut, and all
other timber trees must follow the same rule, that if in the felling you join
both observations together, viz., the depth of winter, i.e., the winter solstice
and the last days of the Moon (interlunium) the stuff will last to perpetuity."
 [Astro-Meteorologica, 1699, p. 17.]        Montgomery Martin’s work on the
Colonies records some very interesting facts in regard to lunar influence.
The ancients knew nothing of “ dry rot,” but they, poor simpletons, believed
in astrology!
   2    This refers to the increase of light of the Moon, she is occidental when
decreasing in light (i.e., after the full).
 72                THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


diseases are: rheumatism, consumption, palsy, colic, lunacy,
scrofula, and dropsy.
   The angel of the Moon is called Gabriel.

                T he   M oon   in   the   T w elve   S ig n s .

     The Moon in Aries represents middle stature, round face,,
 light-brown or flaxen h air; temperament rash, variable, and
 passionate; not a fortunate person.
     D in & describes a well-formed body, middle stature, poor
 complexion ; brown or black hair; gentle and obliging in dis­
 position ; a fairly fortunate person.
     j in n gives a tall, well-set person, very com ely; brown
 hair; good complexion ; one who is subtle, crafty, ingenious and
 variable ; unsettled in life, usually.
    j) in ® represents middle-sized persons, well-proportioned,
and fleshy; face round and full ; complexion pale and dusky;
hair brown; of a pleasant, merry, easy disposition, free from
passion; fortunate- and highly respected; but of a roving and
 indolent nature.
    j) in St describes a person strong, robust, above the middle
height, large boned; full face; large eyes; brown h air;
sanguine complexion ; disposition ambitious ; hardly fortunate.
    ]) in njj gives a person of tall stature; dark brown or black
hair; oval face; dark, ruddy com plexion; of an ingenious
fancy, inventive, retiring, melancholy; often unstable, and
rarely fortunate.
    j) in =a= describes a tall, neatly formed person : smooth light-
brown hair; fine sanguine complexion; merry disposition ;
beloved and respected.
   j) in up gives an indifferent person, short, fleshy, muscular ;
dark brown or black curling hair ; dark complexion ; disposition
quarrelsome, in some instances malicious ; of ingenious mind.
   2) in f denotes a handsome person ; oval face ; bright brown
hair; sanguine com plexion; disposition open and generous,
passionate, ambitious and fond of sports ; usually fortunate.
   2) in Vf represents low stature, and a weakly physique; thin
face; dark brown, lank h air; weak in the knees; an unsettled
character (unless the Moon be well aspected).
   2) in zz gives a middle-sized, corpulent body; brown hair;
clear, sanguine com plexion; disposition affable, inoffensive,
kind, and irresolute ; mind ingenious ; conduct good.
    2) in X describes a short stature; face and body plum p;
complexion pale; hair bright brown ; inactive easy disposition,
                                 THE MOON.                                     78

given to the pleasures of the table, merry, and “ happy go
lucky.”

  O bservation s   on the   M oon’ s A pplication         t o , and   S eparation
                            from th e   P l a n e ts .3

    If the Moon apply to S atu rn , at birth, and increase4 in light,
it signifies widowhood to the mother, and much misfortune.
   If the Moon increase in light and apply to J u p it e r , or be
joined to him, it signifies rich, faithful, honest, and jovial
persons— unless Mars be in square or opposition to her, for this
would modify the good influence of if .
   If the Moon apply to M ars or be conjoined with him, in a
nocturnal geniture, it signifies crafty, violent, dangerous persons,
often subject to be deceived : by day, weak, feeble constitutions,
subject to diseases of the eyes and stomach, and likely to die a
violent death.
   If the Moon be carried to or conjoined with the Sun, in what­
ever part of the heavens it may fall, it signifies unhappy persons,
unfortunate or sickly.
   If the Moon be carried to Venus, or if the Moon be increasing
in light and conjoined with Venus, it signifies noble parents, but
the native may be separated from their affection, he will be
fortunate, however; but if the Moon be decreasing, she signifies
power and happiness in youth, but subject to scandal, and
dissipated if Mars behold Venus without the help of Jupiter.
   If the Moon separate from S aturn and apply to J u p it e r , it
signifies rich and happy persons.
   The full Moon separating from S aturn and applying to M a r s ,
signifies much sickness and infirmity, and the native will die in
early youth (if j) be hyleg).
   If the Moon separate from S aturn and apply to the S u n , it is
very unfortunate, and signifies many calamities,5 and a liability
to lunacy, dropsy, etc,
   The Moon separating from S aturn and applying to V e n u s ,
signifies noble, happy, rich, and wealthy persons, but licentious ;

  3 These are the (condensed) aphorisms of J. Angelus and Regiomontanus
— compiled at Venice in the fifteenth century.
  4 At the birth of King Edward VII. the Moon applied to (the square of)
Saturn, but was decreasing in light, Queen Victoria was widowed at 42 years.
  5 At the birth of the Emperor Francis Joseph of Austro-Hungary, the
Moon was separating from the conjunction of Saturn and applying to the
Sun in the 11th house) in the sign Leo, and he suffered defeat in Italy, in
1859, at Sadowa, in 1866, and lost his son by a tragic death, and his
Empress by assassination.
74                 THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


if the Moon decrease in light it denotes gain, but dissipation
also.
   The Moon separating from S aturn and applying to M ercu ry ,
and increasing, she signifies obscure persons, writers of libels,
studious of celestial sciences and the arts, good speakers, and
physicians; but if the Moon decrease in light, she impedites the
speech, or hearing, the body is sickly, cough, dropsy, and colic
result.
   If the Moon separate from J u p ite r and apply to M a r s , in a
nocturnal geniture, and be increasing, it denotes magistrates,
men in power, but not free from danger and sickness.
   The Moon separating from J upiter and applying to the S un , it
destroys the patrimony, causes the native to separate himself from
his parents, and become an exile or a captive (especially if j) be
in Y5>, zz, t , or lip).
   If the Moon increasing or at the full, separate from J u p ite r
and apply to a good aspect of V e n u s , it signifies noble, powerful
persons, but they soon lose their parents; they gain by their
wives’ dowry.
   If the Moon separate from J u pite r and apply to S atu rn , and
be increasing or at full, it causes the native to be adopted by a
stranger; it gives tutors, or persons employed in watery places,
sailors, etc.; but if the Moon be decreasing, it signifies servitude,
misfortune, captivity, frequent sickness (chronic) and misery,
and, if it be a nocturnal geniture, a violent death.
   If the Moon separate from -Jupiter and appily to M e r c u r y , she
signifies judges, collectors of money, interpreters of law, religious
aud fortunate persons.
   If the Moon separate from M ars and apply to the S u n , it
signifies very great evils, misfortunes, shortness of life,
imbecility, and violent death in a strange land.
   The Moon separating from M ars and applying to V en u s , at
full, or increasing, denotes adulterous persons; also jewellers,
painters, perfumers, dealers in metals, innkeepers, etc. (according
to the nature of the sign) : if the Moon be decreasing in light, it
signifies fortunate, happy persons, gaining wealth by female
influence, but sometimes suffering disgrace through wantonness.
   The full Moon separating from M ars and applying to M ercury
in a nocturnal geniture, signifies great persons in public
authority, but wicked and malicious : if the nativity be diurnal,
and the Moon at the full, it signifies judical condemnation and a
violent death.
   If th e Moon separate from M ars and apply to S at u r n , it denotes
                                              THE MOON.                                        75

 sluggish, dull persons, good for nothing : if the Moon be full or
 increasing, destroyers of their estates, and vicious: if the Moon
 be decreasing, it denotes privation, lunacy, epilepsy, and a
 violent death.
     If the Moon separate from M aks and apply to J u p it e r , it
 signifies powerful, rich, fortunate persons: but, if she be
 decreasing in light, it renders the native vicious, and con­
 sequently unhealthy.
     If the Moon, in a diurnal geniture, separate from the S un and
 apply to V en u s , it signifies barrenness, hinders marriage, inclines
 to vice; yet, in general, good fortune : in a nativity by night, it
 signifies many wives, living in good repute, and gaining a
fortune.
     The Moon separating from the S un and applying to M ercury in
a diurnal geniture, signifies danger to life, evil manners,
atheistical mind, e tc .: in a nocturnal geniture, it signifies public
notaries, writers, inventors, students of occult science and
mysteries, gainers of estates.
     The Moon separating from the S u n , in a diurnal geniture, and
applying to S atu rn , destroys the estate, separates one from his
parents, and brings him to want and misery, but in process of
time he may gain an estate by miserly econom y: in a nocturnal
geniture, it signifies want, destruction of estate, much sickness
and affliction.
    The Moon separating from the S un and applying to J u p it e r ,
by day, signifies a good estate, good fortune, and happiness
beyond measure: in a nocturnal geniture, the native obtains an
estate by his own industry, travels early in life, is deceived and
disappointed in youth, but in age lives in high repute.
    If th e M o o n p r o ce e d fr o m th e S un to M a r s , in a d iu rn a l
g e n itu re , it s ig n ifie s s u d d e n d ea th , a n d th e p a ren ts o fte n d ie a
v io le n t d ea th ; th e n a tiv e is lia b le to b lin d n ess o r d e fe cts in th e
s i g h t ; in a n o c tu r n a l g e n itu re , it sign ifies cru e l, v io le n t p erson s,
th e ir   e m p lo y m e n t   c o n n e c te d   w ith   fire,   ir o n , o r   m eta ls,   and
s u b je ct t o c o n tin u a l la b o u r.
   The Moon parting from V enus and applying to M er c u r y , if
she be increasing or at full, signifies stewards of noble women,
and gaming preferment by female aid ; it also denotes dyers,
jewellers, armourers, musicians, lovers of arts and sciences, but.
inclined too much to pleasure: if the Moon be decreasing, it
signifies vicious, abandoned persons, of various employments.
   The Moon separating from V enus and applying to S a t u r n ,
at the full, or increasing in a nocturnal geniture, gives a wife of
76                THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.

infamous character: in a diurnal nativity, and the Moon
decreasing, the native is licentious, and brings disgrace and ruin
on himself.
   If the Moon separate from V enus and apply to J u p it e r , it
signifies noblemen, magistrates, and courteous, amiable persons:
if the Moon decrease, it signifies gain by the good friendship of
ladies, happiness, attainment of property or of an honourable
office in the Church.
  The Moon separating from V enus and applying to Mars, in a
diurnal geniture, at full or increasing, signifies misery, imprison­
ment, or sudden death, through a love affair: in a nocturnal
geniture, it signifies cruel persons in great power, but subject
almost daily to dangers and mischances.
   If the Moon be transferred from V enus to the S u n , it separates
the native from his parents through a bitter dispute, consequent
privation, troubles, and indiscreet attachments; but after youth
be past, in process of time, he increases his substance, and easily
attains his desires.
   If in a diurnal geniture the Moon increasing separate from
M ercury and apply to S at u rn , it denotes deafness, stammering,
or some impediment in the speech; it gives employment as an
interpreter, or tailor, and a disposition to inquire into occult arts
and sciences : but if the nativity be by night, it signifies water­
men, or men employed about the water, and if malevolent stars
afflict them, it denotes imprisonment and ill-fortune.
   If the Moon be transferred from M ercury to J u p it e r , it
signifies great men, ambassadors, treasurers, stewards of noble­
men, priests, rich and happy persons.
   If the Moon be increasing or at full, and pass from M ercury
to M ars in a diurnal geniture, it signifies irreligious, perjured,
wicked persons, having a tendency towards theft, fraud, and
murder, liable to die by the hand of justice: if it be a noctural
geniture, it signifies captains, governors of cities, men in power,
but offending in divers ways, deposed, banished, or executed.
   If the Moon separate from M ercu ry and apply to the S u n , it
signifies men of dull understanding, having an impediment in
their speech, deaf, poor, wandering and inconstant, yet in pro­
cess of time these evil effects will be qualified, and after youth
be passed, they gain a livelihood by sundry employments.
   If in a nocturnal geniture the full Moon separate from
M ercu ry and apply to V e n u s , it signifies men employed in a
public capacity, gaining credit and honour in all their actions,
and increase of happiness, orators, poets, gaining chiefly by
                            THE MOON.                           77

the good offices of ladies, artists, druggists, and jewellers, but
living moderately, neither abounding nor in want, votaries of
pleasure : in a nocturnal geniture, the Moon decreasing and
applying to Venus, signifies wealthy persons, having the chief
government over towns and cities (especially if the Moon and
Venus be free from the beams of the Sun) : in a diurnal geniture
the Moon decreasing and applying to Venus, and in the tenth
house it signifies religious persons, builders of churches,
prelates; in any other part of the figure this conjunction
signifies moderate estates, occupation in arts or with metals,
perfumers, engravers, choristers, students of celestial science and
occult arts, and gaining livelihood by such pursuits.
   The Moon when afflicted in Aries, or afflicting the hyleg there­
from, is held to indicate convulsions, lethargy, weakness of
sight, or pains in the knees. In Taurus, pains in the legs and
feet, tumours, intestinal obstruction, or quinsy. In Gemini,
gout, surfeits, and obstructions. In Cancer, dyspepsia, carcinoma,
convulsions, epilepsy, or dropsy. In Leo, affections of the
heart, quinsy, scrofula, and spinal complaints. In Virgo,
cholera, diarrhoea, colic, dysentery, obstructions, and debility.
In Libra, renal affections, and pleurisy. In Scorpio, affections of
the genito-urinary organs, smallpox, dropsy, and debility of the
 heart. In Sagittary, sciatica, and intestinal affections. In
 Capricnrnus calculus, gout in the lower extremities, etc. In
 Aquarius, hysteria, and ulcers in the legs. In Pisces, cold taken
 at the feet, dropsy, and effects of intoxication.
                                      78




                     CHAPTER                  XII.


            THE          PLANET               MERCURY.

        “ Tis Jove’s world-wandering herald, Mercury.” — S h e l l e y .

M ebcuky is the chief significator, next to the Sun and Moon, in
genethlialogy.
   The cardinal number four in Hebrew, A rabo, is compounded
of A r , lifflit, i.e., the light or star, and R abo, activity, business or
employment: thus meaning “ the active star,” or “ the star of
employment,” in allusion to the doctrine that Mercury rules
over business and employment, and influences activity of mind
and body.            Arabo means a finger, and also a locust, both
influenced,          astrologically, by Mercury.   The name of the
wandering Arabs is taken from this word, all persons born
under Mercury's influence having a Bohemian tendency, and
being fond of moving from place to place. The root of the
word R ab, means to strive or contend in words, to dispute, a
well-known           characteristic of mercurial persons. The word
Arabo, four, alluded, therefore, to Mercury, who rules over “ Day
 fou r” (Mercurii dies), or Wednesday.
   The name of Buddha is formed from Budhuha or Budahu —
the name of the planet Mercury. Hermes was the Greek name
of Mercury, and the great Hermes Trismegistus, i.e., ter
maximus, thrice great by reason of his virtues and great
learning, lived about the time of Moses and is thought to be the
same. Hermes in Greek means “ the interpreter of the gods,”
and Mercury was ever represented as the messenger of the gods.
Homer, in his hymn to Mercury, says1 :—-
                           ••Hermes, nothing loth
                  Obeyed the /Egis-bearer’s will—£or he
                  Is able to persuade all easily.”
   The sixth hieroglyphic in Mr. Upham’s work on Buddhism2 re­
presents Buddha as born of a virgin, this being an allusion to the
sign Virgo, the chief dignity and “ house” of Mercury, or the

  1 Shelley’s translation.       2 History and Doctrines of Buddhism.
                       THE PLANET MEKCÜKY.                        79

sign in which he has most power. The fourth hieroglyphic in
the same work, exhibits the twin children of Buddha, an allusion
to the sign Gemini, the twins (“ the pair ” in Buddhist astronomy),
the other house of Mercury. The Hebrew B ud , which signifies
alone, single, solitary, agrees in a remarkable manner with the
character of Buddha, and also persons born under the rule of
the planet Mercury; such persons, being given to a contempla­
tive or studious life, were led to seek retirement and to dwell
alone— “ far from the busy haunts of men.”
    The late Prince Consort was born when the planet Mercury
was rising in the sign of V i r g o . H i s high talents, wisdom, and
love of retirement were in exact accord with the character of
the influence of Mercury. “ In his early youth,” says his
biographer,4 “ Prince Albert was very shy, and he had long to
struggle against that feeling. He disliked visits from strangers,
and at their approach would run to the farthest corner of the
room, and cover his face with his hands; nor was it possible to
make him speak a word. If his doing so was insisted upon he
resented to the utmost, screaming violently.”
    Mercury in Gemini, Virgo or Sagittarius and in any aspect 'with
Jupiter (more particularly the conjunction and parallel of
declination) at birth, renders the native liberal, generous,
humane, jovial, amiable, and of good mental capacity. The
quartile and opposition when formed between Mercury and
Jupiter, are said to produce “ a weak judgment, and an inclina­
 tion to view things through a false medium; ” in my opinion
 this is an error, for I have never found an instance of its verity,
 and I am satisfied that any aspect of Mercury, or the luminaries,
 to Jupiter is better than none. If Jupiter happen to have
 familiarity with Saturn, that observation would, probably, hold
 good, but in such case, it would be due to Saturn’s influence
 vitiating to some extent that of Jupiter.
    Mercury in conjunction or evil aspect with Mars, at birth, the
 native is inclined to violence and rashness, yet is he possessed of
 acuteness and discrimination; but when the evil aspects of
 Saturn also coincide, and when no assistance is rendered by
 Venus or Jupiter, he may descend to the level of a thief,
 swindler, or murderer. Mercury in conjunction or benefic aspect
 with Mars, at birth, the native proves a first-rate mechanic, or
 painter, or surgeon, brave, skilful, ingenious, possessing a fund
 of caustic humour, a penetrating wit, a talent for mathematics.

  3 See page 50.       1 Life of the Prince Consort, Vol. I.
80                THE TEXT-BOOK OP ASTROLOGY.


   Mercury in conjunction with the Sun is said to destroy the
abilities of the person then born, rendering him shallow, super­
ficial, devoid of good judgment, and, though qualified for
business, incapable of the pursuit of the higher branches of
science. This effect, however, can only take place when Mercury
is afflicted and receives no assistance from the fortunes— at least
such is my opinion. Inasmuch as Mercury is never more than
28° distant from the Sun, no aspects can be formed between
those bodies, except the mundane and zodiacal parallels. The
mundane parallel, when there is more than 17° distance between
them, of the Sun and Mercury from the mid-heaven, is said to
cause “ great and boundless ambition, and if the other parts of the
figure concur, the native may rise to considerable eminence.’ ’
   When Mercury is in conjunction, par. dec., or sextile with
Venus, the person then born is fond of poetry, music, and draw­
ing ; when the conjunction happens in the ascendant, and the
Moon separates from good aspect of Venus and applies to Mercury,
the native will prove eminent in either music, poetry, or painting.
Mars assisting this configuration, inclines the native to painting
and sculpture. Robert Burns was bom with Mercury and Venus
ascending in Aquarius.
   Mercury in good aspect or parallel declination with the Moon
produces excellent abilities, and the native proves successful in
either literature or science. A benefic aspect of Saturn to this
configuration is of great service in imparting to the native that
application and steadfastness of purpose which are indispensable
to the attainment of success and distinction. Mercury and the
Moon in conjunction, or mutual evil aspect, the native, though
possessing great abilities, is rather unsettled. Culpeper says that
to understand the character of a person born when the Moon and
Mercury are conjoined, you have only to look at a weather-vane !
    Whenever Mercury and the Moon are weak, and unconnected
with each other or the ascendant and one of them afflicted, the
person then born is very liable to mental derangement. Mercury
being a convertible planet may, when aspected by evil planets,
 operate as a malefic ; and when aspected by the fortunes, as a
benefic. Notwithstanding that this is the well-known and
observed character of Mercury, ancient authors have declared—
and some modern writers have repeated it—that “ he is in nature
cold, dry, and melancholy.” When strongly posited at birth,
i.e., when in the ascendant or third house or in either Gemini or
Virgo, and more than 17° from the Sun, Mercury produces the
most pointed wit, ingenuity, and inventive genius.
                      TH E   PL A N E T M ER CU RY .                81

   When ascending at a birth, and free from the rays of other
planets, he denotes a rather tall, straight, spare body; narrow
face, deep forehead, long, straight nose, eyes neither black nor
gray, thin lips and chin, with but little beard, brown com­
plexion ; hazel or chestnut coloured hair ; the extremeties long
and slender; the walk quick and energetic; and the manners
refined. It has been stated that, “ If orientally posited (unless
in n ) as regards the Sun, the stature will be shorter, with sandy
hair and sanguine complexion, somewhat sunburnt, the limbs
and joints large and well set, with small gray eyes ; but if
occidental, the complexion will be quite sallow, lank body,
small, slender limbs, hollow eyes, of a red cast, and of a dry
constitution.”
   Mercury strongly posited, at a birth, the person will possess a
 strong imagination and retentive memory, will be likely to
 become an excellent orator or a good logician. He will be given
 to the attainment of learning, an eneourager of the liberal arts,
of a sharp, witty, and pleasant conversation, of an unwearying
 fancy, and curious in pursuit of all natural knowledge; with an
 inclination to travel or trade into foreign countries. If bred to
 mercantile pursuits, he will be ambitious of excelling all others
 in the merchandise, and will prove successful in obtaining
 wealth.
    If Mercury be neither accidentally nor essentially dignified,
 and be not in aspect to either of the fortunes, the native will be
 wanting in resource and effort, a talebearer, and hardly capable
 of acquiring anything beyond a superficial knowledge of any
 trade or profession.
    Mercury above the horizon, at a birth, inclines to oratory;
 below, to arts, sciences, and occult studies.
    Mercury governs the brain, intellect, tongue, hands and feet.
 The diseases he produces are: mania, apoplexy, convulsions,
 impediments of speech, coryza and dry cough. His angel is
  Raphael.
                 M ercury    in   the   T w elve       S ig n s .

   $ in v gives middle stature, spare and angular; long neck,
oval face, light-brown curling hair, dusky or brown complexion ;
choleric disposition.
   $ in 8 describes a person of middle stature, full face, and
brown hair, swarthy com plexion; inert and obstinate in
disposition.
   $ in n represents a tall, slender, well-set person, swarthy
complexion, dark brown hair, hazel eyes, prominent nose, long
82                THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


hands and feet ; of great ingenuity and activity of mind, a lover
of science and art, a good orator, well-calculated for a barrister,
or author, possessing a clear and incisive intellect.
    ÿ in 23 gives low stature, bad complexion, sad brown hair,
thin face, sharp nose, and small eyes ; erratic disposition.
    $ in SI represents large stature, not corpulent but rather
lean, large prominent eyes, dark brown or black hair, swarthy
complexion, a prominent nose ; a hasty and proud disposition,
ambitious, and apt to be dogmatic.
    $ in it# describes a full stature, rather above the medium
height, well-proportioned body, indifferent complexion, oval or
thin face, dark brown or black hair, intellectual expression, and
high forehead; witty, ingenious, profound, and active in dis­
position, one who readily acquires knowledge, industrious, a
good orator, a great projector, and an able negotiator.
    $ in === gives a tall, handsome person, smooth, light-brown
hair, gray or blue eyes, sanguine complexion ; a just and good
nature and disposition, a promoter of learning, and accom­
plished.
    5 in up represents short stature, well-set, broad shoulders,
swarthy complexion, sad brown hair curling and bushy ; one
who is subtle and careful of his own interests, fond of company
and the fair sex, but intellectual and capable of acquiring
knowledge, especially of chemistry, medicine, or engineering.
    £ in f describes a person inclined to tallness, well-formed,
oval face, sanguine and clear complexion, chestnut hair growing
off the temples, prominent Grecian nose ; disposition impulsive
good-natured, aiming at noble ends, and fond of pleasure and
outdoor games and sport ; a good equestrian.
    £ in Vÿ denotes short stature, thin face, brown hair, dusky
complexion, large nose, thick lower lip, may be bow-legged or
lame ; of a peevish melancholy and nervous disposition, rather
unfortunate.
    ^ in zz confers but indifferent stature, fleshy, large face,
clear complexion, brown hair ; ingenious, witty, kind, and
humane disposition, love of research and invention.
    $ in    gives short stature, browm hair, thin face, pale com­
plexion ; disposition good-natured yet melancholy, and, in some
cases, addicted to strong drink.
                                             88




                        CHAPTEE                     XIII.


                  THE          PLANET                 VENUS.

          “ Cyntbiie figuras cemulatur Mater Amorum.” — G a l i l e o .
              “ The Mother of Love imitates the aspects of Diana.”

         “ Lo ! in the painted oriel of the West,
           Whose panes the sunken sun incarnadines,
          Like a fair lady at her easement, shines
          The evening star, the star of love and rest.” — L o n g f e l l o w .

  N ext after the Sun, says Aberbanel, the ancient Fathers
  accounted Venus to be the most propitious. It was early
  recognised that Venus was the chief cause of generation, and the
  mother of love— the universal passion. Hence, her influence
 being held to be propitious and second only to that of the Sun,
 this beautiful planet was especially worshipped throughout the
 whole East, as it is affirmed by Rabbi Kapal Ben-Samuel. The
 worship of Venus led the Turks to hold Friday (Venus’s day) in
 the same veneration that we hold Sunday. The stone (Bractan)
 which is set up at Mecca, measuring four feet long by two feet
 broad, and said by Gaffarel to be only a talisman, has engraved
 upon it the figure of Venus with a crescent.
    In Hebrew S hesh, six, is an abbreviation of A sh - i s h , “ the star
 of Beirut or Existence,” the precise character of Venus. On the
 sixth day the Creation was finished, and Job says “ the morning
 stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy.”
Venus influences music and singing. The influence of Venus
was thus recognised over the sixth day (Veneris dies) of the
week.
    The Greek name of Venus was Aphrodite, derived from <PEVil,
fero, to bear, bring forth, or produce—and not (as the poets
imagined) from A'P02, aphros, froth of the sea, etc. Venus’s
chief dignity is in the watery sign Pisces, hence a fish was
affixed to her statue. Her “ night-house ” is Taurus, hence
A s h - T aroth , “ The Star of Taurus,’ called Aera^rj, Astarte,
viz., V e n d s . A s a modern writeri has observed: “ Ignorance of

                             1 B. J. Morrison, B.N.
84                   THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


the grand astrological fact that the sign Taurus is the house of
Venus, and also the exaltation of the Moon, is at the bottom of
all the confusion of the learned world when treating on the
subject. This was one of the grand mysteries, which could not
be known or understood by any but the Chaldei, or first Free­
masons, who took care to teach it to the Royal Arch Masons,
only. This is clear from the words of Godfrey Higgins,2 who-
says ‘ The Masons, or Chaldei, or Culdees, were the judicial
 astrologers at Rome in the time of the Emperors. They could
 be of no small consequence when they were employed by Julius-
 Ctesar to correct the calendar.’ ”
     Venus is the brightest planet of the Solar system. Her orbit
 being smaller than that of the earth, she can never appear more
 than 48° distant from the Sun. When Venus has chief
 dominion over the mind and disposition, she inclines to music,
 poetry, painting, sculpture, drawing, amusement, and dancing -r
 she confers a good-humoured, witty, kind, and charitable
 disposition. Men born under the influence of Venus are general
 favourites— especially with the fair sex— but they are rather
 deficient in firmness and resolution. But if Venus be much
 afflicted, the very good nature of the man sometimes leads him.
  into awkward scrapes.
     Venus in the ascendant (near the horizon) at a man’s birth,
  strengthens his constitution, promotes his welfare, confers upon
  him a good personality, depth of affection, a tender heart, and
  a love of pleasure. In person he is, usually, handsome, well-
  formed, but not tall in stature, of fair and clear complexion,
  bright sparkling eyes of a dark hazel or black, hair bright-brown
  or chestnut, shining and plentiful, generally has dimples in
   either the cheek or chin, and sometimes in both ; voice musical.
   Women born with Venus rising, and unafflicted, display the
   most amiable, engaging, and fascinating qualities, they are very
   neat and elegant, and frequently very beautiful. If Venus be
   afflicted, there is a tendency to dissipation. A friendly ray of
   Saturn to Venus is exceedingly useful in steadying the character.
   The sextile, trine, or par. dec. of Jupiter with Venus, the former
   being in the mid-heaven, and the latter in the ascendant, not-
   only confers amiable qualities of mind3 and disposition, but good
   fortune also (unless the Sun and Moon be afflicted by Saturn).
   The conjunction of Venus and Jupiter in the ascendant, at a
   birth, is of similar import.
     1 Anacalypsis, page 768.
     3 Provided Mercury be configurated with them.
                        THE PLANET VENUS.                        85

  Venus is said to govern the reins, spine, the tubili seminiferi,
the neck, throat, and breasts. Her diseases are : those affecting
the spine, generative organs, and breasts, hysteria and diabetes ;
some authors say hernia and fistula also.    Venus is friendly to
Mars. Her angel is called Anael.

                  V enus   in the   T w e l v e S ig n s .
   2 in T represents a person of middle stature, rather slender,
good complexion, light hair, with a mark or scar in the face ;
one who is sensitive, merry and affectionate.
   2 in 8 gives a comely person, short in stature, fleshy,
sanguine complexion, and brown hair; a mild disposition, kind,
humane, and very affectionate.
   2 in n gives a stature inclined to tallness, slender, well-
formed body, rather fair, intellectual expression of features ; a
loving, just, humane disposition, and good natural abilities.
   2 in æ forms persons of short stature, inclined to corpulence,
round face, delicate or pale complexion, light hair ; an inactive,
easy-going, and pleasure-loving disposition.
    2 in     designates a tall well-made person, a clear complexion,
round face, full prominent eye, light flaxen hair ; a disposition
somewhat hasty but soon appeased, generous, large-minded,
having proper pride and dignity.
    2 in     represents a tall well-proportioned body, sad brown
or black hair, dark sanguine complexion, oval face ; in disposi­
tion thoroughly amiable, aspiring, sensitive, and active, endowed
with excellent qualities and conversational powers, often with
eloquence.
    2 in      gives a tall, elegant person, brown hair, sanguine
complexion, often freckled, dimpled cheeks ; one who is kind,
.affectionate, and generally beloved, very artistic and clever.
    2 in up represents a well-set, short, stout person, face
broad, complexion dusky, hair sad brown, curling, and plentiful ;
in disposition contentious, emotional, and affectionate, but
inert.
    2 in $ gives a well-formed person, clear sanguine com­
plexion, bright-sparkling eyes, oval face, brown hair; in
disposition amiable, “ merry even to a fault,” generous, humane,
and very sensitive ; and clever ; a general favourite, and
usually fortunate.
    Î in y gives but a mean stature, pale sickly complexion,
face thin and lean, hair dark or black ; in disposition good-
natured, but careful ; voice musical ; not very fortunate.
86                   THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


   ? in sx represents a handsome well-proportioned person,
rather stout, light brown hair, clear and sanguine complexion ;
in disposition very courteous, kind, humane, and affable; one
who is gifted, and much admired.
   5 in x gives middle stature, a fleshy body, moderately good
complexion, round dimpled face, brown or flaxen hair ; in
disposition thoroughly good-natured, mild, quiet, and inoffensive,
fond of pleasure ; generally fortunate.
                           “ Alma Venus !
        Quæ mare navagerum, quæ terras frugiferentes
        Comelebras ; per te quoniam genus omne animatum.
        Consipitur, visitque exortum lumina solis.” — L u c r e t iu s .
      “ Blest Venus ! thou the sea and fruitful earth
        Peoplest amain. To thee whatever lives.
        Its being owes, and that it sees the Sun.”

   The ancient temples of Venus crowned heights and headlands
at many places in Asia and Greece.
   The moral conception of Aphrodite Urania— the “ heavenly”
— as goddess of the higher and purer love and fruitfulness was
but slowly developed in the course of ages.4
   The ancients found by long observation that the planets Venus
and Mars were “ friendly,” and this explains why the goddess
Aphrodite was associated with Are, Mars, both in worship and
legend.




         4 See the “ Dictionary of Classical Antiquities,” p. 39.
                                              87




                        CHAPTER                            XI V.



                 THE             PLANET                       MARS .

                 “ Is it the tender star of love,
                     The star of love a n d dreams ?
                   Oh n o ! f r o m t h a t b l u e t e n t a b o v e
                      A h e r o ’s a r m o u r g le a m s .” — L o n o f e l l o w .

T he Hebrew, A s h - L e s h , means the S tap. of F l a m e , or F laming -
 Star.   S h e l e s h , the number three, means, also, a general or
commander of an army ; the third day of the week is under the
 rule of Mars, “ the god of war,” who influences all military
 men.
   The red deity, Mara, of the Buddhists, is evidently the planet
Mars. The final letter a seems to be a mere termination, for a
vast number of other names have the same terminal letter; and,
if we substitute for it the European final letter s, we have the
word M ars , which planet is red in the heavens, and has always
been represented as a fiery, evil planet. Mars was drawn with a
battle-axe or spear in one hand, and a cock or horned goat in the
other. This shows that the Buddhist planet-deity Mara was
Mars, the god of war, to whom the cock was dedicated; the
horned goat shows that it was the planet Mars, because
Capricornus (the horned goat) is the sign in which Mars is
exalted— his chief dignity. The Buddhists also assigned the
third day of the week to Mars (Angaharu).
   The mythology of the Egyptians, Greeks, and Romans was
originally a method of handing down astrological truths, from
generation to generation, before the era of letters. The hier­
oglyphics of Buddha’ s life and adventures are similar in character
to the Egyptian hieroglyphics, and may have been derived from
the latter. Buddhism is nothing more nor less than a
crystallisation of Sabeism, or planet-worship.
   Mungula is the Hindu name of Mars. “ He is painted of a
red or flame colour. His vahan (vehicle) is a ram. Those who
are bom under this planet are subject to losses and misfortunes ;
hut it is considered fortunate to engage in battle on Mungul-war,
88                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


or Tuesday, over which day he presides. Like many other
martial personages, Mungulais said to be of a fierce and arbitrary
disposition.” 1
   The scape-yoai2 which was sent into the wilderness (Leviticus,
Chap, xvi.), bears a striking analogy to the astrological allegory
that the angel of Mars dwelt in a desert place. There is a curious
instance of the connection existing between astrology and the
Buddhist mythology in Bodhisatwa’s reply to Mara’ s challenge^
Buddha. The first three lines are thus rendered2 :—
      “ Thou, although supreme in the world of Desire
        Hast no authority or power in the Spiritual world.
        Thou art only acquainted with the wretched beings in Hell.”

Mars, in astrology, is friendly with Venus, hence the allusion in
the first line quoted above.
   It has been supposed that H ercu les typifies the Sun, his
twelve labours being symbolical of the passage of the Sun through
the twelve signs of the zodiac, his extraordinary strength denoting
the potent effect of the solar rays. It is not so, however.
Hercules is the personification not of the Sun, but of the planet
M a r s . Hyginus.says, “ The third planet is Mars, which others
called Hercules.” Macrobius says, “ Maro with the ripeness of
profound learning, refers the Salii to Hercules, because the
priests consider that god the same as Mars.” The same is
affirmed in the “ Menippea ” of Varo, entitled “ The other
Hercules,” in which, after much discourse about Hercules, this
god was proved to be Mars. The star which all others call Mars,
is called Hercules by the Chaldseans.
   Ptolemy says, “ Mars ascending, gives a fair ruddiness to the
person, with large size, a healthy constitution, blue or grey eyes,
a sturdy figure, and a moderate growth of hair, with a tempera­
ment principally of heat and dryness. When occidental, he
makes the complexion simply ruddy, and the personal figure of
moderate stature, with small eyes; the body without hair, and
the hair of the head light or red, and straight; the bodily
temperament being chiefly dry.”
   Mars describes, when rising, one of a middle stature, strong
well-set body, rather muscular than corpulent, the face round,
the eyes hazel, sharp and piercing, a dark reddish complexion,
the hair sometimes red, sandy or flaxen ; not infrequently a scar

 1 Coleman’s Mythology of the Hindus.
 2 In Thibet the same rite was practised.
 3 De Sig. Cceli, 2, page 80.
                         THE PLANET MARS.                        89

 on the face especially if he be ascending near the cusp; the
 •countenance full of confidence and boldness, and the disposition
 active and intrepid.
    Experience has shown me that some men are of large stature
 who were born with the planet Mars ascending, and others of
 short stature. In every instance, irrespective of sex, with but
•one exception, has the ruddiness of Mars been imprinted either
 •on the complexion or the hair, often in both. In the case of the
 lady who is an exception to the rule, Mars was rising in
 Sagittarius, at her birth, in sextile to Jupiter, Venus being in
 (mundane) sextile to the ascendant from the third house and the
 sign Pisces.
    The Martialist is remarkable for acuteness of perception, an
 incisive intellect, but possessing some rashness as well as judg­
ment. He is possessed of great mechanical skill, high courage,
having a contempt for death, impatience of control or sub­
 mission, and but little respect for social and in some cases moral
 laws when they interfere with his liberty of action.
    A good aspect of Mars to the Sun, Moon, or Mercury, is
necessary to produce “ pluck,” resolution, and self-reliance—■
 qualities which are so greatly needed in the battle of life, when
•distinction and success are to be won. Persons devoid of
 martial influence are mean-spirited, dejected, helpless creatures.
 Evil aspects of Mars to the significators are apt to produce evil
•qualities, such as dissimulation, revenge, obstinacy, and violence.
 Mars-men make excellent soldiers, surgeons, chemists, butchers,
iron-workers, cutlers, etc.
    Mars was termed by the ancients the lesser infortune, in contra-
•distinction to Saturn, who was called the greater infortune.
 It is found that the effects of Mars’ influence by “ direction”
 come most certainly and closely to time. Mars is, in nature,
 hot and dry, and the instigator of quarrels and war. He is said
to rule the left ear, head, face, sense of smell, the imagination,
 reins, gall, reproductive organs, kidneys, etc. His diseases are the
.smallpox, acute fevers, measles, scarlatina, erysipelas, jaundice,
•diabetes, and carbuncle; accidents : burns, gunshot wounds,
 wounds in battle, surgical incisions, hannorrhages, etc. His place
in a nativity or solar revolution is held to be very unfortunate.
    When Mars is rising or oriental of the Sun, at a nativity, the
native will be above the middle stature, very hairy, and of a
clearer complexion. When occidental, the native will be short,
of a ruddier complexion, a small head, with yellow' hair, and a
■dry constitution.
90                  TH E   T E X T -B O O K    OF ASTR OLO G Y.


     The angel of Mars is called Samael.

                     M ars    in   the        T w elve   S ig n s .

   Mars in v represents middle stature, well-set body, big-boned,,
swarthy complexion, “ beetling brows,” light or red curling
h air; countenance fierce and austere; mind and disposition
valorous, intrepid, confident, enterprising, ambitious, and war­
like, one who gains preferment and distinction in martial pur­
suits.
   3 in 8 makes the native rather short, corpulent, of swarthy
complexion, a scar in the face; in disposition vicious, profligate,,
and perfidious (unless 3 be well aspected).
   3 in n describes a tall person, well-made, of sanguine com­
plexion, dark brown or black hair (red, if 3 be near Aldebaran):
mind and disposition very ingenious, but fickle ; and, through
frequent changes of residence and employment, the native is
likely to prove unfortunate.
   3 in ss was said to produce “ short stature, an ill-made, mis­
shapen body; 5 thick brown h a ir; mind and disposition con­
tentious, unamiable, not highly gifted, and the native is usually
unfortunate.” This is much overdrawn.
   3 in SI signifies large stature, a muscular and well-made
body, ruddy or sunburnt complexion, large, prominent eyes,
flaxen or sandy hair ; disposition choleric, hasty, free
magnanimous, and proud, delighting in out-door exercise and
sport.
   3 in ti}) designates a middle-sized person, dark brown or
black hair, dark ruddy complexion, a scar or blemish in the-
face ; in disposition, nervous, irritable, mutable, conceited, and
impatient of subjection ; one who is not very fortunate.
   3 in      represents a well-proportioned person, tall, and com­
manding ; oval face, sanguine complexion, countenance full of
expression and vivacity ; in disposition luxurious, fond of
personal adornment and voluptuous.
   3 in nq gives a well-set, muscular, square built figure,,
inclined to corpulence, a broad face, swarthy complexion, black
curling hair, countenance bold and resolute ; temper fiery and
revengeful; one who possesses genius, well fitted for a
commander, or surgeon, successful in his undertakings and o f

  5    The Duke of Connaught was born with Mars rising in Cancer, and he is
neither short in stature nor deformed ; but, fortunately, Mars was in sextile:
aspect with Jupiter. The poet Byron had Mars in the ascendant, in Cancer,
at the moment of his birth—at two o’clock p.m.
                        THE PLANET MASS.                        91

 invincible courage.     [Lord Nelson was born with Mars exactly'
 rising in Scorpio.] Liable to hernia.
    $ in $ gives a rather tall, well-made body, compact and
 fleshy ; complexion sanguine, hair brown and growing off the’
 temples, a fine forehead, quick eye ; in disposition jovial,
 martial, self-reliant, rash, large of soul, generous, active,
 enterprising, ambitious of renown ; one who is fond of outdoor-
 exercise and sport ; liable to gun-shot wounds, and hernia.
    $ in      represents a mean stature, rather lean ; bad com ­
 plexion, thin face, small head, black lank hair ; one who is very
 ingenious, witty, penetrating, courageous, commanding, and
 generally successful.
    S in zz gives a well-set, middle-sized body ; fair complexion,,
 sandy hair ; disposition turbulent, controversial, unruly ; and not
fortunate.
    $ in     gives but a small stature, corpulent body; indifferent
 complexion, light brown or sandy hair; in disposition artful,,
 mischievous, not very industrious, prone to excesses and
 quarrelsomeness.
    Mars, when configurated with Mercury, invariably sharpens-
 the intellect. As before observed, Lord Nelson was born with
Mars rising in Scorpio ; I have known several clever surgeons
who were born with Mars rising in Aries, Virgo, Sagittarius,.
 Scorpio, and Pisces, respectively.
    When Mars afflicts the “ hyleg,” at birth, from the sign Aries,.
the health is too likely to suffer from feverish ailments, conges­
tion of the brain, or apoplexy. Mars in Taurus causes throat-
affections, bronchitis, and calculus. In Gemini, eruptions on the
skin. In Cancer, hæmatemesis, and if in quartile or opposition,
or conjunction with Saturn, abscess of the breast. In Leo,.
hypertrophy of the heart, or kidney disease. In Virgo, intestinal
irritation, etc. In Libra, a liability to diabetes. In Scorpio,
hernia, calculus, and cystitis.       In Sagittarius, sciatica, or
fracture of the thigh, or gunshot wounds. In Capricornus, gout-
in the knees, or synovitis. In Aquarius, eczema, or gout in the=
legs. In Pisces, gout in the feet.
                                       92




                        CHAPTER                   XY.


             THE          PLANET                JUPITER.
      “ ------Jupiter, the lustrous, lordeth now,
      And the dark work, complete of preparation.
      He draws b y force into the realm of light.”—-Sc h i l l e r ' s Wallenstein.

T h e Hebrew C h em ash , or the cardinal number five, affixed to    the
fifth day of the week (Jovis dies) Thursday, is evidently formed
o f C h e m , warmth, and A s h , a star, meaning “ the star of warmth,
the exact character of Jupiter,” “ in whom,” said Claudius
Ptolemy, “ warmth is predominant.” By reversing the first
letter we have M e s h e c h , to anoint with oil, the root being
cognate with M e c h , /h i ; whence the term M esch ich , the anointed,
the “ M essiah;” because anointing with oil was part of the
ceremony of the investiture of priests as well as kings. Here we
have a reference to the influence of Jupiter over priests, religion,
and holy things ; and olive oil was generally employed, because
the olive was held to be under this planet’s influence. Again,
S hesiach , formed from C h em ash by reversing the first and last
letters, signifies Joy, and is a direct corruption of A s h -M ach ,
literally “ T h e S tar of J o y , ” which is the emphatic title of
Jove, whence we derive jovial, joy, jolly, etc. Here is ample
evidence that the word five alluded to the day of Jupiter, who
rules “ Day five.” 1
    The character of Jupiter’s influence is the same all over the
world.This planet           has been deified and worshipped under
several        names, but has ever been regarded as a mild and
benevolent deity, the character of Vishnu in Buddhism. The
chackra, or thunderbolt of Mara (Mars) is also common to
Vishnu (Jupiter), demonstrating that it was early observed that
these two planets are the chief causes of thunder, and it is a fact
that when they are configurated or conjoined there is more heat
and violent thunder than at other times. This was the opinion
o f Pliny. The Buddhist name of Jupiter was Braspaty or
Braspatia, and he was held to rule the fifth day of the week
 (Thursday).

 1   See Zadkiel’s Almanac for 1849, page 56, “ Origin of the Days of the
Week.”
                          THE PLANET JUPITER.


    The more modern Hebrew name of Jupiter was Tsecleq,.
Justice, because of the just character of persons born under his-
influence. G ad , as before remarked, was also a Hebrew name
of Jupiter, to which Aben Ezra bears testimony, for he says
that the Targum expressly retained this word as being the most i
proper for expressing this star.
    The Jupiter man is easily distinguishable by his generosity,
sincerity, and courtesy of manner. He is manly and noble, and
as far removed from the nervous manner of the Saturnine, as
from the boldness of the Martialist character.
    When Jupiter is in good aspect with the luminaries, or
ascending at a birth, he confers a sound, healthy constitution, of
great vitality, and capable of withstanding the effects of very
evil “ directions.” When posited in the tenth house, and near
the upper meridian he confers honour and dignity; on
merchants, great success in trade and speculations; and
generally raises those born in poverty to comparative wealth.
    At the birth of H.M. Queen Victoria, Jupiter was in the
 tenth house (meridian). At the birth of King Edward V II-
 Jupiter was ascending and in sextile aspect with Venus.
    When Jupiter is in the ascendant at a nativity, he produces
 an erect stature rather above middle height, a handsome rosy
 complexion, oval face, high forehead, large gray eyes, soft,,
 thick, brown hair, short neck, capacious chest, broad shoulders,..
 strong and well-proportioned limbs. The native is sober and
 manly in address, and of excellent manners. His disposition is-
 good, amiable, generous, faithful, prudent, just, honest,
 religious, and liberal, hating all mean and sordid actions.
    Jupiter is considered a masculine, hot, moist, airy, social
 planet, the author of temperance, justice, and moderation ; and
  he is termed the greater fortune. Tie is said to govern the.
  lungs, the blood, and viscera ; and his diseases are such as affect
  those organs, and plethora. The name of his angel is Zedekielr,
  or Zadkiel.
                  J u p it e r   in th e   T w e l v e S ig n s .

  J upiter in T designates a person of middle stature, of a rosy
complexion ; light brown or flaxen hair ; piercing eyes ; a high
nose; oval face, subject to pimples; disposition noble, freer
generous, with becoming pride, courteous, and polite.
   2£ in 8 gives middle stature, a well-set, compact, strong-
body ; swarthy complexion, brown rugged hair, inclined to curl
or frizzle, round face, not handsome; disposition good, manners-
D4                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


   amiable, judgment sound, and temper benevolent and hum ane;
  ■addicted to pleasure,
        2 f in n forms a well-composed, rather tall person, sanguine
   complexion, brown glossy hair, full handsome eyes ; manners
  graceful and obliging, disposition generous, but somewhat
  tickle, a great admirer of the fair sex, a lover of science and a rt;
  but if if- be near any of the violent fixed stars of Gemini the
  •disposition will be somewhat rash, and unstable.
       if in ss gives middle stature, pale complexion, fragile appear-
 .■ance, dark brown hair, oval face ; disposition busy, loquacious,
 ifond of maritime pursuits, but maybe lacking in courage unless
  , 3- aspect if or the luminaries.
       2f in St represents a strong, robust constitution; tall, well-
  made body; light-brown or yellowish curling hair, prominent
teyes, sanguine com plexion; a noble-minded, courageous,
; ambitious, and magnanimous person.
       2 f in n£ gives a full-sized person, well made, often handsome;
  brown or blackish hair ; sanguine but not fair complexion; in
■disposition ambitious, excitable, studious., industrious, and
  speculative.
       if in     confers complete symmetry in form and figure, good
 stature; oval and handsome face, rosy complexion, light brown
 hair, large eyes; disposition mild, fascinating, obliging, and
 fond of pleasure.
      if in up makes the body compact, stout, middle sized, and
 robust; fleshy face, dull complexion, dark curling bushy hair ; a
 lofty, resolute, and ambitious character ; fortunate upon the
 sea and in the practice of medicine, surgery, or chemistry.
      if in $ represents a tall, upright, well-made, handsome
 person; sanguine complexion, fine clear eyes, oval face, chestnut
 hair, thick beard ; manners courteous and highly accomplished,
 disposition generous, free, just and humane, very fond of
 horses, hunting, and all out-door sports and exercises.
      2 f in       gives but a mean stature, small head, pale com­
 plexion, lean face, little beard, dark hair; disposition rather
harmless and indolent; a person usually unfortunate.
      if in zz gives middle stature, compact, corpulent body; fair
complexion, brown hair; disposition cheerful, obliging, kind,
 humane, just, busy, and not extravagant.
      if in X signifies middle stature, a full fleshy body; dark
complexion, light brown h a ir; disposition eminently good,
studious, and kind ; talents of a high order ; one who is fortun­
 ate upon the seas.
                                     95




                      CHAP T EE                X V I.



              THE         PLANET              BATUBN,

         “ The empire of Saturnus is gone by ;
           Lord of the secret birth of things is he;
           Within the lap of earth, and in the depths
           Of the imagination dominates ;
           And his are all things that eschew the light.”
                                                — S c h i l l e r ’ s Wallenstein.


T he     ancient inhabitants of India, Phoenicia, and Egypt, seem
  to have studied very carefully the character of Saturn’s influence,
 and their esoteric doctrines comprise the very essence thereof.
  The root of the name Saturn is evidently the ancient Hebrew
 term Safer, to hide or conceal.
     S h ebo , the cardinal number seven, is composed of A sh , a star,
 and S h e b , old age; thus expressing the chief character of
 Saturn as “ the star of old age.” S hebo signifies, also, to be
 full or have plenty, in allusion to Saturn’ s rule over the produce
•of the earth; just as the Latins had saturo, to sate or saturate,
 from Saturnus. In allusion to this power of the star of agri­
 culture, recognised by all astrologers, Virgil calls a sickle
“■ Saturni deus curvus ” — the crooked tooth of Saturn, whence
  t?, the planet’s symbol. S h e b , to return, or to restore, is
 applied (I. Sam. vii., 17) to the end of the year1 and its beginn­
ing again ; so it implies the end of a week of days, and its
 beginning again. It also signifies “ hoary hairs,” which are
 under Saturn’s influence. Here is ample proof that the word
 S hebo (seven) had reference to Saturn, the ruler of “ Day
.seven,” or Saturday.
    The other name of the planet, K e o n o s , appears to have
originated from the Hebrew word Kron, a horn— an emblem of
power in the East.
    Moses decidedly set apart Saturn’s day as the sacred or
.Sabbath day, it being dies infaustus, or an unlucky day for the

  1 Claudius Ptolemy says, “ Saturn, moving in the last sphere, regulates
the final old age.”—Ashmand’s Translation, page 205.
96                    THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


beginning of any work. In Scotland no one will marry on a.
Saturday.
   The Chaldees observed that Saturn when potent at a nativity
rendered the person then born “ mystical,” and “ confederate in
secrecy.” Sater or Seater signifies the god of secrecy. The
same term in the Chaldee signifies to destroy or demolish ; and,
it being observed that infants bom 'when Saturn was in power
and elevation, almost invariably died in infancy, the fable arose
that Saturn devoured his own children. The priests, with the
aid of the poets, personified the doctrines they taught, and the
truths they learned by experience and observation, in fables and
apologues before the invention of letters.
   Lempriere says: “ Saturn always devoured his sons as soon as
born ; ” “ It was usual to offer human victims on his altars ; ”
again, “ The god is generally represented as an old man, bent
through age and infirmity. In his left hand he holds a child,
which he raises up, as if instantly to devour it.”
    The Hindu name of the planet Saturn is Sani (the Buddhist
name is Henahura). “ He is described of a dark colour, and
 clothed in black. His vahan is by some called a black vulture,
 or raven. He is old, ugly, lame, of an evil disposition, has long
 hair, nails, and teeth, and is of the sudra (husbandmen) caste.
 It is unfortunate to be bom under this planet, and the ills of life
 are ascribed to his influence, as he is supposed to be skilled in.
 all kinds of wickedness. He presides over the day of the week
 Sanis-war, or Saturday.” 2
    The influence of Saturn is the most lasting and malignant of
 all the planets. A modern author3 has aptly contrasted the
 influences of Mars and Saturn, thus: “ Mars may be compared
 to a fever, violent indeed, but short in its duration ; while;
 Saturn resembles a consumption, which, though hardly percep­
 tible in its progress, is hard to be averted by any effort of human
  skill.” If placed in the mid-heaven at a nativity, Saturn, unless-
  extremely well aspeeted, eventually causes ruin or disgrace,
  mostly. A similar effect results from the affliction by Saturn of
  both the Sun and M oon; and in this case, if either luminary be
  hyleg, the infant lives but a very short time, the closer the
  aspects the shorter its life.
     When Saturn is exactly on the upper or lower meridian,
  ascendant, or descendant, the ascendant being hyleg, and having


     2 Coleman’s Mythology of the Hindus.
     3 Zadkiel, Handbook of Astrology, Yol. I., page 17.
                        THE PLANET SATURN.                        97

no assistance from the fortunes, the infant then born seldom
lives long.
   Saturn ascending subjects the native to blows, bruises, falls,
broken bones, and other accidents ; to nervous affections, catarrh,
rheumatism and debility. Saturnine people are melancholy,
hypochondriac, penurious, secretive, and fond of solitude. They
are capable of great endurance, and are noted for their patience as
well as for their obstinacy ; they are also bashful, firm in friend­
ship, but strong in enmity, grave, austere, often ascetic, and very
stupid if Saturn afflicts Mercury.
   Saturn’s benefic aspects to Mercury and the Sun and Moon,
confer prudence, patience, subtlety, and faithfulness on the
native. He is not given to change, and will be likely to remain
in one place or one employment for the whole of his life ; and he
will prove fortunate in mining operations, agriculture, and
building.
   Saturn ascending produces a middle stature, a swarthy or pale
complexion, small black deeply-set eyes, lean face, broad forehead,
lowering brow, thick nose and lips, his head and shoulders stoop­
ing, large ears, broad shoulders, black or dark brown lank hair,
thin beard, small and lean thighs and legs. If well dignified,
(i.e. in =£r, Vy, or zz), the native will possess acute perceptive
facilities, strong imagination, and great application; in disposi­
tion and manners he will be austere, reserved, and taciturn.
   Claudius Ptolemy wrote that :—
   “ Saturn, when oriental, acts on the personal figure by produc­
ing a yellowish complexion and a good constitution ; with black
and curled hair, a broad and stout chest, eyes of ordinary quality,
and a proportionate size of body, the temperament of which is.
compounded principally of moisture and cold. Should he be
occidental, he makes the personal figure black or dark, thin and
small, with scanty hair on the head ; the body without hair, but
well shaped ; the eyes black or dark; and the bodily temperament
consisting chiefly of dryness and cold.’’4
   Saturn is said to govern the bones, spleen, teeth, joints, and
right ear, and those born under his rule are said to have bad
teeth, and to suffer greatly with toothache. He is also said to
govern the memory. His diseases are such as proceed from
taking cold, obstructions, all nervous disorders, melancholia,
epilepsy, ague, black jaundice, catarrhs, the various forms of
consumption, atrophy, fistula, leprosy, palsy, apoplexy, dropsy, etc.

                  4 Ashmand's Translation, page 149.
                                                                 H
                                              It




98                 THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


                  S atorn   in t h e   T w e lv e S ig n s .

   Saturn in Y represents middle stature; a ruddy complexion,
full face, little beard, dark hair, deep voice, large eyes ; disposition
quarrelsome, fretful, and austere.
    1? in 8 gives middle stature ; dark complexion, rough dark
hair, disposition avaricious, secretive, and envious.
    k in n gives a tall and fairly well-proportioned body ; oval
face, dark complexion, though sanguine, hair black or dark
brown ; mind ingenious but crafty; disposition perverse, selfish,
and austere.
    k in ss represents a weak, infirm, deformed body, of small
stature ; face pale, thin, and of sad expression, hair sad-brown,
eyes languid, dull and heavy ; disposition reserved and unsociable.
    k in Sh gives moderately large stature, broad strong shoulders ;
hair brown, countenance austere, eyes deeply set ; disposition
passionate and brooding, yet true to a friend.
    k in in; designates a tall, spare body ; hair black or very
dark brown, and plentiful ; face long, thin, and of grave appear­
ance, a long head ; disposition melancholy, reserved, nervous,
speculative, and avaricious.
    k in ^ gives a tall and fairly good-looking person ; hair
auburn or brown ; face oval, nose and forehead prominent, com­
plexion tolerably clear ; disposition proud, contentious, argu­
mentative, and may be extravagant.
     k in up represents a short, square, and muscular body ;
 black or dark hair, bushy ; dark complexion, plain face,
 prominent nose ; disposition petulant, subtle, inconstant, and
 envious; mind ingenious, profound, and clever; unfortunate
 on the sea.
     b in f gives good stature, well-proportioned and handsome
 person ; hair brown, beard thin, complexion sanguine, eyes
 deeply set, prominent nose ; disposition affable, obliging,
 generous, honest and upright, merciful to an enemy, and con­
 stant to a friend, profuse in promises through excess of good
 nature.
     k in       produces low stature, a thin ungainly body ; sallow
 complexion, small eyes, blackish hair ; disposition peevish,
 covetous, and discontented, due, largely, to bad health ; mind
 ingenious.
     k in zz gives large stature, corpulent strong body ; hair
 dark brown ; complexion good, teeth distorted ; disposition
 sober, manly, graceful, and courteous ; mind acute and ingenious.
                         THE PLANET SATURN.                            99

    P> in X gives low stature, corpulent body ; dark hair, pale
complexion ; disposition fickle, merry for a Saturnian, and very
careful and cautious.
    Saturn when occidental in Aries and afflicting the Sun, Moon,
or ascendant, is said to indicate a liability to deafness, tooth­
ache, and nasal catarrh. In Taurus, bronchocele and bronchial
and laryngeal affections. In Gemini, rheumatism of arms and
■shoulders, and disorders of the blood. In Cancer, pulmonary
phthisis, asthma, and cancer of the breast. In Leo, affections of
the heart, spine, and liver. In Virgo, phthisis abdominalis,
enteric fever, and disorders of the bowels. In Libra, disorders
•of the kidneys and rheumatism. In Scorpio, affections of the
genitourinary organs, haemorrhage, palsy, gout, and fistula. In
Sagittary, sciatica, gout, and hip-joint disease. In Capricorn,
•gout of the lower extremities, hemiplegia, and rheumatism. In
Aquarius, deafness, toothache, quinsy, and cramp. In Pisces,
scrofula, ulcers on the feet, dropsy, and marasmus.
    Dante, Convito, II., 14, makes the planet Saturn the symbol
of astrology. He says :—
   “ The heaven of Saturn has two properties by which it may be
compared to Astrology. The first is the slowness of its movement
through the twelve signs ; for its revolution requires twenty-nine years
and more. The second is that it is the highest of all the planets. And
these two properties are in Astrology ; for in completing its circle, that
is in learning it, a great space of time passes ; both on account of the
experience necessary to judge rightly in it. And, moreover, it is the
highest of all, for, as Aristotle says at the beginning of his treatise on
the Soul, science is of high nobility from the nobleness of its subject,
and from its certainty; and this, more than any of the above-mentioned
is noble and high, from its noble and high subject, which is the m ove­
ment of the heavens ; and high and noble from its certainty, which is
without any defect, as one that proceeds from a most perfect and
regular source. And if any one thinks that there is any defect in it,
the defect is not on the side of the Science, but as Ptolemy says, it
comes from our negligence, and to that it should be attributed.” 5




   5    Vide “ The Divine Comedy of Dante Alighieri, Translated by Henry
Wadsworth Longfellow.” London: George lioutledge and Sons, 1877,
p. 680.
                                          100




                  CHAPTE E                              X Y I I.




            T HE        PLANET                          UKATSTUS.


                  1 Full often learn the art to know
                    Of future weal, or future woe,
                    By w o r d , o r s i g n , o r s t a r . ” — S c o t t .



U ranus  was discovered on the 13th of March, 1781, b y Sir
William Herschel, and was first called the Georgium Sidns or
Herschel, names which have fallen into disuse, and was-
unknown to the ancients. His influence is found to be very-
powerful in nativities when he is in an angle or in aspect to the
Sun or Moon. The existence of Uranus having been unknown
to the ancients accounts for most of the errors of the old writers,
on nativities.
   The singular death of AEsclilyus was very probably due to the
influence of Uranus being conjoined with that of Saturn or
Mars. It had been foretold to Hlschylus that he would be in
danger of death by the fall of a house or other building about a
certain (named) period. He, in order to avoid the threatened
danger, went away from all buildings, to pass his time in the
fields until the evil influence should be passed over. AEschylus-
 was killed, while sitting in the fields, by the fall of a tortoise
 which an eagle dashed against his bald pate, probably mistaking-
 it for a stone, and desiring to break the shell thereon. The
 remarkable nature of the death induces modern astrologers to.
                       THE PLANET URANUS.                      101

 surmise that the planet Uranus was a joint cause of it. If so,
 the astrologer who foretold the death of ¿Eschylus could not pre­
 dict the nature of it so approximately as if the existence of
 Uranus and the peculiar character of his influence had been
 known.
    Godfrey Higgins relates the following circumstance:—
    “ Soon after the discovery of the last of the primary planets
 [Uranus] , an astrologer called on a friend of the author’s, who
 was well known to be a skilful calculator, and requested him to
 calculate for him the periodical motions of the newly-discovered
 planet; observing it was very probable that the want of the
 knowledge and use of its motions was the cause that, in judicial
 astrology, the predictions so often failed.” 1
    If Uranus be ascending at a nativity, he produces great
 eccentricity, and independence of thought and opinion. When
 free from the rays of evil planets, his influence is not wholly
 evil, for persons born under his influence exhibit a great love of
 truth ; they are remarkable for a love of romance, a tendency to
 Bohemianism, a love for antiquarian researches, metaphysics,
 and occult science. Uranus seems to be very inimical to con­
jugal happiness, for even his good aspects to the Sun, at birth,
 delay marriage or prevent it entirely, to wom en; and his
 conjunction, quartile, or opposition, with the Moon seems to
cause unhappiness in love and marriage, to men, pr delays their
 marriage.
    When Uranus becomes stationary near the place of the Sun or
Moon at birth, or in evil aspect to either, strange and unexpected
events ensue, and generally danger to or death of a relation.
   His good aspects at birth, or by direction, produce sudden
events of an advantageous nature, and often in a manner quite
unlooked-for. If Uranus be posited near the cusp of the second
house, at birth, and in evil aspect to the Sun or Moon, the
person then born is liable to experience sudden, strange, and
severe pecuniary losses, and he should ever avoid speculative
transactions. If posited near the cusp of the 8th house, the
property of the partner in marriage either will be almost nil, or
be diminished by some strange mischance.
   When Uranus is located in the 10th house and near the
meridian at birth, the native generally either loses one of his
parents early in life, or makes an unfortunate marriage. He or
she is subject to sudden and strange reverses of fortune (unless

                   1 Anacalypsis, Yol. I., page 208.
102               THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


    be well aspected by the fortunes), and suffers by speculation.
If posited in the 4th house, and near the lower meridan, the
father of the child then born usually dies early, and the latter
part of the life of the child is sad or unfortunate.
   King Victor Emmanuel I. of Italy was born when Uranus was
ascending in the sign Sagittarius, and in trine aspect to Venus.
The ex-Queen Isabella, of Spain, was born with Uranus ascending
in the 7th deg. of Aquarius, and in opposition to the Moon. The
late Commander Morrison, E.N., was born with Uranus exactly
rising in the last degree of Leo, and in sextile to the Sun and
Mars.
   Uranus when located in Sagittary, and affecting the Sun,
Moon, or ascendant, I have found to produce sciatica, or gout of
the lower extremities. In Taurus, a liability to diphtheria, and
to bronchitis and laryngitis. A lady who was born when
Uranus and Saturn were nearly conjoined in Taurus, in the
eighth house, and afflicting the Moon, suffered for many years
with a peculiar constant cough, the slightest movement of air
producing a most exhausting paroxysm of coughing. She
eventually died of phthisis laryngea.
   No attempt will be made in these pages to describe the
personal characteristics of the Uranus “ native” as varied by the
transit of the planet through the twelve signs of the zodiac.
Any such descriptions found m astrological books must,
necessarily, be largely if not wholly, fanciful. For, before a
mere outline of such delineation could be justified, it would be
imperative that, at fewest, a hundred exact and well-authenti­
cated times of birth stated as observed and recorded to the hour
and minute, for Uranus in each decanate of every sign. This
would involve the careful comparison of 3,600 Uranian nativities
in which the planet was alone rising at the moment of birth,
and not more than five degrees above or below the ascending
degree, measured by its (the planet's) oblique-ascension. I do
not possess any such desirable data, although my study of the
ancient science has extended over fifty years— from May, 1860,
to the time of writing (January, 1911).
   However, a few cases of notable Uranians may now be
 presented :— 1°*—The founder and original editor of X adkid's
Almanac.— Ii.J.M.— was born, according to the entry made by
 his father in the family Bible, at 9h 45m a.m. of the 15th of
June, 1795, in lat. 51° 40' N., and long. 0° 6' W. This time
the author rectified to one minute earlier, making the R.A. of
 M.O. 49° 38' 15", which gives Taurus 22° 4' on the upper
                           THE PLANET URANUS.                        103

meridian, and Virqo 1° 36' on the ascendant. The planet
Uranus had lately risen in 29° 53' of Lea, and was 3° 17' above
the eastern horizon, measured by oblique-ascension.i There
was no other planet in or near the ascendant: but, inasmuch as
Mars, in Gemini 29° 1', was very nearly in sextile with Uranus,
and Mercury, in 15° 32' of Cancer was nearly in semi-quartile
with the ascending planet, this cannot be said to be a wholly
Uranian horoscope.
   In stature Zadkiel I. was very tall, being over six feet in
height, and was well built. His head was large and well
balanced. His temperament was very energetic, sanguine, and
somewhat impulsive. He possessed a clear, active brain, of good
scientific calibre. He was free from prejudice, independent in
thought and opinion, ingenious, brave, self-reliant, original, and
not materialistic : and was predisposed towards spiritism. His
disposition was frank, courteous, light-hearted, sociable, sincere,
generous, and yet careful. He possessed in a high degree “ the
courage of his opinions,” and ever fearlessly proclaimed what
he believed to be the truth. He wrote largely on astrology for
nearly half a century, and wrote a work, in 1857, entitled
“ The Cycloid System of Astronomy.”
   When Uranus is very close indeed— within one degree— to the
ascending degree, a child then born usually meets with several
accidents in the course of his life. Zadkiel I., although he was
engaged in several actions at sea— for he was a commander in
the Royal Navy —in his early years was, I believe, never
wounded. He was once bitten in the foot by a dog, and had to
submit to a slight surgical operation in consequence, at 39 years
of age, under the influence of Ascendant quartile Mars in the
zodiac, 38° 59', by primary direction. He died in his sleep at
78 years and 8 months of age, in the early morning of February
5th, 1874, under Sun quartile Mercury, zodiac, conversely, 78°
28' by primary direction (followed by two other evil directions)
— Mercury having the parallel declination of Mars at birth.
  2 ° ___T he D uke   of   O rleans was born at l h 50m p.tn. o f the
6th of February, 1869, at Twickenham. R.A. of M.C. 843°
55' 56", Pisces 12° 34' on the upper meridian, and Cancer
14° 20' on the ascendant. Uranus was retrograde in Cancer
14° 10', within one degree of (above) the eastern horizon, no
other planet being in the ascending sign. Mars was within two
degrees of the quintile aspect with Uranus, and Jupiter was

 1 A diagram of the horoscope was given in m y F otcbe, December, 1893.
104                 THE TEXT-BOOK OP ASTROLOGY.


within three degrees (applying) of the quartile with the ascend­
ing planet. The Sun was in mundane trine with ig .
   The Duke of Orleans is not tall, and is stout in build. He
met with an accident while hunting, on the 26th of April, 1895
(arc = 26° 13'), fracturing a leg (the tibia), under the primary
direction of Ascendant parallel Uranus, in the zodiac, conversely
26° 22', and M.C. par. $ zod., con. 26° 46'. Again, he was
much shaken in a motor-carriage collision, on the 20th of June,
1899 (arc = 30° 22'), under the primary direction of 0 □       zod.
30° 33'. In the year 18902 the author foretold that this
direction would “ in his 31st year, cause the Duke some mis­
fortune.”
   3 °.— T he C rown P rince R u d o lf , of Austria-Hungary, was
bom at 1011 15m p.m. of the 21st of August, 1858, at Vienna.3
R.A. of M.C. 303° 38' 34", Aquarius 1° 24' on the Midheaven,
and Gemini 0° 74' on the ascendant. Uranus in Gemini 3° 23',
in opposition with Mars in Sagittarius 4° 29' on the cusp of the
descendant, and in mundane quartile with Saturn in Leo 5° 28',
in the fourth house. Uranus is 2° 44' below the eastern
horizon, measured by oblique ascension. The Moon (hyleg) is
3° 7' cadent from the Midheaven, in 27° 42' of Capricomus, in
parallel declination with Mars, separating from the trine with
Mercury, and applying to opposition with Saturn. The Sun is
in conjunction with Regulus, a martial star of the first magni­
tude, in the fifth house, and within two degrees of quartile to the
ascending degree. This nativity is a violent one, and the
presence of Uranus in the ascendant increases the violence of
Mars and Saturn, and indicates the mysterious and violent
nature of the tragedy which ended the life of the Prince at 304
years of age. The presence of Mars so close (really 0° 56' below
 the western horizon) to the cusp of the house of marriage, and
 the fatal primary direction of the Sun to the opposition of the
 Moon by converse motion 30° 55', preceded by Moon opposition
 Regulus 30° 29', mundo, accounts for it, astrologically speaking.
 Cardan wrote that when the infortunes are in angles it denotes a
 public death or a sudden one. It is said that a shot wound was
 found behind the ear, and that the skull was fractured ; but
 every attempt having been made to hush up the tragedy, the sad
 affair remains a mystery. The arc for death (1° = 1 year of life)
 is 30° 27'.

  2 See ZadkieVs Almanac for 1891, p. 57.
  8 The author gave the time of birth in U r a n ia (April, 1880), p. 128, on
the authority of Mr. A. G. Trent, who had examined the official record of it.
                                                   •■Boi.raury Saqua uSis
eqX ‘ tu ra ra g       ptorpoirad s i q jo o a \4 xs13I a q x a.raM q o i q A i
                       o;    sm is t a

‘ S98I-098I ui ureSis pmt ‘ g¿¿X‘ S¿¿I UT ‘ x a n ^ l d s t q x jo .raAtod e q x
jaqrasuiaa ox UOSB0J pooS Sxvuq sireoprauiy ■ u o ix 'B q 'e x e s i q jo
uSis e q x sq tCutu siqx ‘ntw.taff tit ira q A i qij.raAi.od st sitaran sy


                                                                                            •stijn
    8  95 SI              IS 8 8 95             85 51 OSI       K 58 6 8 51       M 85 0    -Sa 5i
    8  01 98              ¿ 8 18 IS              II OI SS8       S IS 15 8        SirSI I    &
   81 63 19               15 SI 59               81 85 19       N IS 01 05        S 01 0     ft
   Z Z 89 99              8   81 I               Z f 93 I5I     ist I 61 61       K 65 0     ¿t
   58 I I Z 9             5 91 I I               55 5S 18       II 91 II 55       S 68 0     ft
  NÖI ¿ I 6 IT            85 15 8 IT             IS 63 II5       S 6 6 68 85      S 98 5     2

   Oí" ¿3 16              05 9 99               IS I I 681       S 0 65 I         S 51 0     S
   85 98 06               f   91 IS             8 8 IS I I I     S 18 58 0        S 05 5     a
   85 8 09                f f 9 8               OB 18 008       S 98 I 15         S,S5 08    a
 i ¡ XZ i ZX   o9L      ,,8I,8So95            ,,11,98=061       II,,i l , I o5I              ©


   • o jy - in i 0 Q        q s ip '® H         •uosy - q j        •Ul[O0(J




                                                                                       IHk




SOI                                      •sriNVHn l a x v i d   aH x
106                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


   4 °.— T h e E a r l o f R o s e b e r y , K.G., was born at 3 o’clock
precisely, in the morning of the 7th of May, 1847, in London.
This very interesting horoscope was given in S t a r L o r e , April
1897. The R.A. of the M.C. is 269° 10' 42", the sign Sagittarius
29° 42' culminating, and Pisces 28° 3' ascending, Aries being
intercepted in the first house, or division of the heavens.
Uranus is seen in the ascendant in Aries 16° 1', near to Mercury
in 20° 42' of the same sign, the former planet being but 8° 38'
below the eastern horizon, measured by oblique-ascension, and
both Uranus and Mercury are in sextile aspect with both Venus
and Jupiter in the third house. This is a rare and very happy
combination of auspicious influences, conferring clearness,
depth, and breadth of intellect, eloquence, and good nature. A
medieval author— Morinus— averred that Mercury in mutual
sextile with both Venus and Jupiter gave “ wisdom and
eloquence, and a proper person to be an ambassador or states­
man.” The noble Earl has evinced that independence of
thought and judgment characteristic of Uranians, in his zealous
endeavours for the welfare of Great Britain, apart from party
politics. His recent writings and speeches have demonstrated
his honesty of purpose, and have verified what I wrote in 1897,
when presenting his lordship’s nativity, namely;.—“ Earl
Rosebery is deservedly popular among thoughtful and unpreju­
diced people, and is far superior in honesty of purpose and
generosity to the great majority of his opponents.” He is a.
great force in the political world, and all true Britons are proud
of him.
   5°.— V i s c o u n t W o l s e l e y , K.P., etc., was born at l l h 55m p.m.
of the 4th of June, 1833, at Golden Bridge House, Co. Dublin,
Aquarius 17° 20' on the ascendant, and Uranus in 22° 32' of the-
same sign less than five degrees below the eastern horizon. The
nativity will be found in F u t u r e , June, 1892. Uranus had the
proximate sextile aspect with both Venus and Jupiter. These
configurations, and the entry of Mercury into the sign Gemini,
within four degrees of the sextile of Mars, together conferred on
the gallant General a scientific mind, an energetic and resolute
nature, resourcefulness, high courage, and martial skill. Lord
 Wolseley entered the army in March, 1852; he was severely
wounded in the Burmese War, in his twentieth year (under the
 primary direction of Moon opposition Mars, inundo, 19° 34').
 At the siege of Sebastopol he was again so severely wounded in
 the face that he lost his right eye, and was at first thought to
 have expired. As a commander Lord Wolseley was particularly
                       TH E   P L A N E T U RA N U S.           107

 fortunate. “ It is careers like his -which lead men to believe in a
 lucky star," said a writer in the Review of Reviews on the gallant
  General’s military career.
    6 °. — The late P rin ce F rancis of T eck , the second son of
 the Duke and Duchess of Teck, and brother to Queen Mary,
 was born at 11 o’clock in the evening of the 9th of January,.
 1870, at Kensington Palace, as certified by the doctors Farre and
 Hill.
    The R.A. of the M.C. is 94° 3' 35" Cancer 3° 43' culminating
 and Libra 2° 51' ascending. Uranus is in the tenth house, in
 Cancer 20° 1', in opposition to the Sun in the fourth house, m
 Capricornus 19° 33' 49", and in quartile with the Moon (hyleg)
 in Aries 20° 27' in the seventh house. The Moon is separating
 from conjunction with Neptune in Aries 16° 50'. The hyleg has
 no support from Jupiter, and her configuration with Venus is the
 semi-quartile. As in the case of F.D.’s infant, Uranus is
 afflicting both Sun and Moon, and in this instance, is in the
 tenth house elevated above the luminaries. The early death of
 the estimable Prince Francis, after an illness of a few weeks
 took place on the 22nd of October, 1910, from blood poisoning,
 following on an operation on his throat, nine days beforehand.
 The arc for the fatal event is 40° 48', and the primary direction
 of the Moon to the zodiacal parallel of Neptune, conversely, in
 the sixth house, measures closely thereto—40° Bo'— and is
immediately followed by Ascendant opposition Venus, mundo,
conversely, 41° 21'. If the birth took place only two minutes
before eleven o’clock, this direction would be brought up exactly
to the terminus vitas, and Venus’s influence when found in the
fatal train of primary arcs is usually associated with poisoning
in some form. The lamented Prince was forward in every good
 work, and he is sadly missed.
    7°.— P rince L eo po ld , Duke of Albany, was born at l h 10m
 p.m. of the 7th of April, 1853, London. The R.A. of the M.C. is
 33° 3' 30", Taurus 5° 21' culminating, and Leo 20° 3' ascend­
ing. The author gave the horoscope in Z a d k i e l ’ s A lmanac for
1885. Uranus was in the tenth house, in Aries 7° 17', elevated
above all the other celestial bodies, and but 2° 1' from the upper
meridian, his meridian passage taking place at l h 17m p.m.
Saturn was in Aries 16° 54'. This royal duke possessed great
abilities, Mercury being in trine with Jupiter, and the Moon with
Venus in the ninth house. A train of evil directions came into
force in his thirty-first year, and his health failing, he was
advised to go to the South of France early in 1884. On the
108               TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF   A S TR O LO G Y.


■27th of March of that year the Prince was seized with giddiness
while ascending some steps, fell, and struck his head; during
the night he became rapidly worse and expired, at Cannes. The
fatal primary directions were Sun conjunction Saturn zodiac
30° 17' (last contact), Midheaven conjunction Mars, zodiac,
conversely, 30° 50', and Sun semi-quartile Mars, zodiac, 31° 5'.
Mars, Saturn, Uranus, and the Sun were all in Aries, the sign
ruling the head, and ‘whether the rupture of a blood vessel in
the head was the cause of the fall, or vice versa, a point on which
the surgeons in attendance were not agreed, the death was of a
martial (haemorrhagic) nature, and partly due to a fall, under
Saturnine influence, and in a foreign land, as the hyleg (the
Sun) and Mars were cadent in the ninth house.
    8°.— A gentleman -who was born on the 9th of April, 1848, at
511 30™ a.m. in lat. 55° 15' N., and long. 2° 11' W ., had the Sun
 rising in conjunction with Uranus in Aries, and nearly in
 parallel declination with Saturn. He lost the sight of his right
eye by an accident. He died suddenly on the 1st of November,
 1875.”
    9°.— P rin ce C h ristian V ictor was born at 5 o’clock p.m of
 the 14th of April, 1867, at Windsor Castle. Uranus is within
 two degrees (cadent) of the upper meridian (southing at 4h 52m
 p.m.) in Cancer 4° 50', and in quartile to the ascending degree
 ( Libra 4° 42'), Mars is in the tenth house, in Cancer 24° 58', in
quartile to the Sun. As neither Sun nor Moon occupied any
 hylegliaeal place the ascending degree is hyleg. The Prince
 went out to South Africa in October, 1899, with his regiment,
and, unfortunately, succumbed to enteric fever at Pretoria, in
 October, 1900. Mars and Uranus being in Cancer, the sign
 ruling Africa, and Saturn in Scorpio, which rules the Transvaal,
 the sad fatality is accounted for, astrologically speaking.
    It may be of interest to students to note that Uranus was in
 the tenth house at the birth of Mr. W. E. Gladstone (whose
 horoscope was given in S tar L o r e , June, 1898), and at that of
 Ruskin ( S tar L o r e , December, 1900).     Uranus was in the
 fourth house at the birth of Bismarck (S. L., Feb. 1898), Cecil
 Rhodes, the Prince Imperial of France, and Mr. Lloyd George.
 Uranus was in the third house at the birth of Zola (S. L., 1902).
 Uranus was in the sixth house (in Aries) at the birth of Lord
 Randolph Churchill, (S. L., June, 1899).
    It is remarkable that a transit of Uranus (in Gemini 8°) over
 the Midheaven of the horoscope of the late Dr. Richard Garnett
 coincided with a sudden impulse on his part to study astrology
                          TH E   PLANET   UKANU S.                109'

   as a key to mythology, in January, 1861. And in May, 1861,
   the author had his interest awakened in regard to astrology in
   connection with medicine and surgery, by a remarkable case of
   illness of a patient of his father’s, when Uranus was in Gemini
   10^°, in transit over the cusp of the seventh house of his (the
   author's) nativity, m trine aspect to the degree in the Midheaven
   and in opposition to the place of Mercury in his ascendant.
U-     At the birth of the Pretender, son of James II., namely at
        30m a.m. of June 10th (old style), 1688, Uranus was close to
   the Midheaven in Taurus 20°. The astrologers of that day,
   being unaware of the existence of Uranus, would pronounce his
   nativity a fortunate one. for the Sun and Venus were both enter­
   ing the tenth house, and they would he at a loss to account for
   his misfortunes. The Protorahai spoke of himself, so related
    Sir Walter Scott, in this wise: “ that for him it was no new thing:
   to be unfortunate, since his -whole life, from his cradle, had been
   a constant series of misfortunes.”
       In like manner the nativities of Buckingham and Laud afford
   instances of the power of Uranus. Gadbury gave absurd reasons
   for their violent deaths.
       If Uranus when close to the upper meridian happens to be in
   close trine aspect with the Sun, Moon, Jupiter, or Venus, there
    is every reason to anticipate success, in the long run, despite
    some occasional difficulties ; and that even a serious crisis may
    eventually end successfully.
                                   110




                  C H A P T E R           X Y I 11.



             THE        PLANET             NEPTUNE.

           “ Alt Nature is but art, unknown to thee ;
             All chance direction, which thou canst not see ;
             All discord, harmony, not understood ;
             All partial evil, universal good.”— P o p e .

  Ir having been observed for several years that the motion of
  Uranus was not always as it was calculated to be, after allow­
  ance bad been made for all known causes of disturbance, Mr.
  Adams, of Cambridge, England, and M. Le Verrier, of Paris,
  began, unknown to each other, an inquiry into the source of
  this apparent anomaly. They soon arrived at the conclusion
 that a great planet revolved outside the orbit of Uranus. The
 difficult problem was to ascertain the position of such planet
. amongst the stars, with the view of discovering it by means of
  the telescope. Several eminent astronomers declared their
  opinion that the place of the latent planet could not be
 discovered by calculation. Adams and Le Verrier, however,
 finally succeeded in solving the problem, and assigned nearly the
 same position to the planet. Adams, however, did not announce
  his conclusions publicly, and much of the credit was given to
 the French astronomer, who had declared the position of the new
  planet to the Academy of Sciences at Paris in the summer of
  1846 ; and on the 23rd of September of that year, Dr. Galle, of
  the Royal Observatory, Berlin, acting upon the urgent represen­
  tations of Le Verrier, contained in a letter received on that date,
  turned the great telescope of the Observatory to that part of the
  heavens indicated by Le Verrier, when a bright telescopic star
 appeared in the field of view at a point where no such object was
  marked in the map of that part of the heavens. It proved to be
  the predicted planet, named by the common consent of Le
  Verrier, Adams, and the chief astronomers of Europe—the
 planet Neptune. Its period of revolution is 60,118 days, or a
 little over 164f years, which is twice the period of Uranus.1

  1 The above particulars were given in Dr. Hind’s “ Introduction to
Astronomy ; ” London, Bell and Daldy.
                       TH E P L A N E T N E PT U N E .        Ill

   It is claimed that the discovery of Neptune affords “ a
remarkable confirmation of the truth of the Newtonian laws of
gravitation.”
   In the first edition (1879) of this work, the author stated
th at: “ Sufficient time has not yet elapsed to enable astrologers
to determine the precise nature of Neptune’s influence. Until
more experience shall have been gained as to its influence, it
may be accepted that its general character is fortunate, and that
persons born under its sway are healthy and good-natured.”
   C ase 1.— Not long after the above sentence was published,
my attention was directed to the case of a male child born
at 3h 50m p.m., Greenwich mean time, at Edinburgh, July
13th, 1879. R.A. of M.C. 165° 36'. The Moon was then in
Taurus 15° 53' (and, having 4° 56' of north latitude was really
■above the western horizon) and separating from conjunction with
Neptune in Taurus 11° 47'. The child died five days after birth.
The moon was hyleg, and was not afflicted by either Saturn,
Mars, or Uranus, so that there is nothing to account, astrologi-
■cally speaking, for the early death, unless Neptune is of malefic
nature. The Sun had the quartile of Saturn, but was not in
any hylegliacal situation; this might weaken the heart, but
would not per se cause so early a death. It was owing to a
malformation and internal obstruction that the child succumbed,
and the sign Taurus, which contained the Moon and Neptune, is
one connected with such congenital affliction.
    The surgeon in attendance at the birth of this infant kindly
 furnished the particulars.2
    Further investigation soon confirmed the view that Neptune’s
 influence is quite as malefic as that of Uranus— when afflicting
 the Sun, Moon, or Mercury, and receiving no assistance from
 either Venus or Jupiter.
    2.— A youth, who was “ born between 71“ 30m and 8'1p m., and
 most probably very close to the former time, of the 23rd of
 August, 1859, in lat. 52° 5' N., and 9m 20s W .,” went to Bath,
•on a visit, in 1885, and was drowned on the 29th of November
 (1885), hut how the sad event took place was never known. He
 left his brother at half-past nine o'clock, and said he would walk
 home in a few minutes. His body was found three days after­
 wards, washed on the bank of the river Avon, at Teverton. His
 watch stopped at ten forty-five. The arc for death 26° 16'.
  Taking 7h 30“ p.m. local mean time as the probable moment of

                2 Vide U r a n i a , August, 1880, p . 237.
112               TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF A S T R O L O G Y .


birth, the E.A. of the M.C. is 264° 4', Sagitanm 24° 33r
culminating, and Pisces 15° 33' ascending at the birthplace.
Neptune was alone in the ascendant, in Pisces 26° 27', retrograde,
and in quartile with the Moon in the fourth house, in Gemini
29° O', and in parallel with Mercury in Virgo 9° 27' retrograde in
the sixth house. The ascending degree is byleg ; and Neptune is.
6° 33' below the eastern horizon, measured by oblique ascension,
(thus: his semi-arc 93° 22'—-86° 48', his merid. dist. = 6° 33).
The death took place under the primary direction of Ascendant
parallel Saturn, in the zodiac 26° 25', followed by Ascendant.
 □ h zodiac 27° 55' ; Saturn being, at birth, in the sixth house,
in Leo (the sign ruling Bath) 17° 47', with Mars in 19° 30' of
the same sign, the ruler of the eighth house (Scorpio being
thereon), and with Venus in 20° 38' of the same sign [Leo). A
sign of the “ watery triplicity ” ascended at birth with Neptune
therein in quartile with the Moon in the house of the grave, and
practically in Cancer, a watery sign, and the third watery sign
(Scorpio) is found on the cusp of the house of death ; and the end
of this youth’s life was by drowning.
   3.    — The Duke of Brabant, first-born of King Leopold I. o f
Belgium, was bom at 4h 30m a.m. of the 24th of July, 1833, at
Brussels. He died on the 4th of May, 1834. The R.A. of the
M.C. is 8° 21', Aries 9° 6 ' culminating, and Leo 2° 12' ascending.
The Sun had just risen in Leo 0° 57', separating from parallel
declination and opposition with Neptune in Capricornus 28° 7 ',
less than five degrees below the western horizon. The Moon
was in the fourth house, in Scorpio 4° 22', separating from
quartile with both the Sun and Neptune. Zadkiel I. gave this
nativity in the H o r o s c o p e , .June 7th, 1834, and Neptune not.
having then been discovered, attributed the early death of the
child to the mundane semi-quartile of the Sun (hyleg) with
Mercury. The contra-parallel of the Sun with Neptune was.
very close, the Sun's declin. being 19° 58' N., and that o f
Neptune 20° 7'S.
   4.    — Nata, November 28th, 1876, 8h 45m p.m., in lat. 51° 31 'N-
and long. 0° 22' W. The Moon in the tenth house in Taurus
2° 21' in conjunction with Neptune in 3° 2 ' of the same sign,,
and separating from opposition with Mars in Libra 29° 34'.
This young lady fainted and fell, and died immediately of heart-
failure in February, 1898. She had suffered from weak digestion
and anorexia. The time of her birth was accurately observed,
and recorded.
   5. — Nata, November 14th, 1851, at 7 o’clock a.m. in lat-
                       TH E   P L A N E T N EPT U N E .       11S

   50° 51' W., and long. 0° 28' E., Virgo 6° 30' culminating,
   Scorpio 18° 16' ascending, and Pisces 6° 30' on the lower
   meridian, Neptune being in Pisces 6° 28', just within the fourth
   house, and in mundane quartile to the Sun in the ascendant, and
   in sesquiquadrate to the Moon near the cusp of the ninth house.
   This lady was seized with paralysis (partial) in 1888, and
  suffered for ten subsequent years from neuritis in her lower
  extremities, and if her feet were touched the pains were agoniz­
  ing and like electric shocks.
     6.     — Nata, January 30th, 1847, 6 p.m., in lat. 52° 20' N. and
  long. 1° 22' W. The sign Leo 24° 50' ascending. Neptune in
  the seventh house, in Aquarius 27° 10', only 2° 57' above the
  western horizon (measured by oblique descension), and in opposi­
  tion to the ascending degree (the hyleg). Saturn was also in the
  seventh house, in Pisces 0° 37', but was 7° 55' above the horizon.
  Mars was on the cusp of the fifth house in Sagittarius 22° 267
  This poor woman suffered from a large tumour which prevented
 her child from being born per vias naturales, and she died on the
 3rd of February, 1880, two days after the Cesarean operation.
     7.    — Nata, September 27th, 1862, l l h 51m a.m. Greenwich
 mean time, in lat. 50° 40' N. E.A. of M.C. 183° 13', Libra
 3° 30' on the upper meridian, and Sagittarius 6° 29' on the
 ascendant. The Sun in Libra 4° 6' 21" in opposition with
 Neptune in Aries 2° 25' on the lower meridian (cadent only
 0° 25'), and supported by Jupiter in Libra 7° 1', but afflicted by
 the zodiacal parallel of Mars. This lady met with an accident
 by falling on the ice in February, 1888, under the primary
direction of Ascendant quartile Saturn 25° 23', and has suffered,
 more or less, ever since, and has undergone a serious operation.
 Here the hyleg has both opposition and mundane parallel with
Neptune, a double affliction greater than his (the Sun’s) parallel
with Mars.
    Although Neptune is more of a malefic than a benefic planet,
it does not follow that when he is exactly rising at a birth, the
child is of a nature more malefic than benefic; but, when at the
same time the ascending degree is hyleg, Neptune does render
the health more or less delicate.
    In the chapter on Neptune, in the first edition of this work,
the author (in 1879) gave the description (furnished by the
husband) of a young lady who was born when Neptune alone
was rising in 17° 52' of the sign Pisces, and in trine aspect with the
Moon :— “ Height, 5ft. 3fin. ; eyes very large and of a blue colour ;
high forehead, oval face, light complexion; light brown hair;
114              TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y .


good figure, and, generally speaking, handsome; voice musical.”
    A young lady who was born when Neptune was in the
ascendant in Aries 28° 54', only five degrees below the horizon,
the Moon in 25° 20' of Aquarius applying to sextile aspect with
the planet, has black hair; very large eyes of a dark brown
colour, almost black, and black eyebrows ; slenderly built, and
of good figure ; and very prepossessing personality; and is in
height 5ft. 5in. Her father had black hair, her mother dark
auburn. Her father died when she was only four-and-a-half
years old under the primary direction of Ascendant conjunction
Neptune in her nativity.
    Neptune in the tenth house, near the meridian, and at the
same time in quartile with Uranus, causes difficulties and
changes in employment, business, or profession ; and, unless the
nativity is fortunate otherwise, loss of business or employment,
with years of consequent troubles. Two notable instances of
 this effect have fallen under my notice, one sufferer having been
born in June, 1869, and the other in January, 1870. In the
 former case the mother died five years after the birth of her son,
and in the latter instance, the mother, very nearly died of fever
 five years after the birth of her son, also.
    Neptune in the second house of a nativity, unless very well
 configurated, usually involves the owner thereof in financial
 losses and difficulties from time to time, and brings heavy
 expenses upon him.
    Neptune does not incline towards melancholy and despondency
 like Saturn ; neither does he incline to excitability like Mars and
 Uranus. Neptune gives an inclination to scientific studies and
 pursuits, but not so much of the mechanical kind as Mars and
 Uranus do ; and not so much ingenuity is conferred by Neptune, as
 by Mars and Uranus, when in conjunction or aspect with Mercury.
     Again, Neptune usually inclines to foreign travel, and several
 Neptunians whom I have known have travelled almost to every
 civilised country. This propensity to roam abroad seems to be
  more pronounced in persons who were born when Neptune was
 rising or in the ninth house, in either the first or twelfth sign of
  the zodiac.
     I    have not found that Neptunians and Uranians are particu­
 larly inclined to occult studies and pursuits— not more so than
  are Saturnians— although occultists and psychics seem disposed
  to believe that the two most distant planets are of such nature.
  Uranus does, usually, confer independence and originality of
  thought and action, and inclines to romanticism.
                                                   115




                              C H A P T E R                       XIX.


                    THE                FIXED                     STARS.

                                 *1And taught t h e fix’d
            Their i n f l u e n c e m a l i g n a n t w h e n t o s h o w e r . ” — M i l t o n .

 'T h e F ix e d S tars are so called because they appear to remain
■stationary, to keep the same distance from each other, and to
 have no annual revolution around the Sun. The stars have an
.apparent motion from east to west, in circles parallel to the
 equinoctial.
     When a star ascended with the Sun, or descended when the
  Sun rose, the ancient poets wrote of it as rising or setting
xosmically. When a star rose at sunset, or set with the Sun, it
 was said to rise and set acronically. When a star first became
 visible in the early morning, after having been in such close
 proximity to the Sun as to be hidden by his rays, it was said to
 rise heliacally1; and when a star first became invisible in the
•evening, on account of its proximity to the Sun, it was said to
 set heliacally.
     The time of the rising and setting of the fixed stars varies
.according to the latitudes of the places of observation ; and the
 refraction in high latitudes is very great.
     The longitudes of the fixed stars increase at the annual rate of
 50-25' '.2 Their latitudes vary but very little. The right-

    1 The ancients reckoned the commencement of the Dog Days from the
 heliacal rising of S i r i u s , and their length to be about forty days. Hesiod
 says that the hottest season of the year (Dog Days) ended about fifty days
•after the Summer Solstice. Sirius rose heliacally at Alexandria in the time
 of Hesiod about four days after the Summer Solstice. The Dog Days now
 begin on the 3rd of July, or twelve days after the Summer Solstice, and end
■on the 11th of August; hence they nowadays have no reference whatever
 to the heliacal rising of Sirius, for this star rises heliacally at London about
 the 26th of August. At the beginning of the nineteenth century our
 Almanacs made the Dog Days begin at the cosmical rising of Proeyon, viz.,
 on the 30th of July, and continue to the 7th of September; but they are
 now made to depend upon the Summer Solstice.
    2 Sir John Herschel gave the precession of the equinoxes as 50-1". From
 the declination of the zodiac which La Gentil brought from India, it appears
 that the star Aldebaran was forty minutes before the vernal equinox in 3012.
  Taking the precession of the equinoxes at 50T" we shall find that the value
 obtained will differ only 39" from that given by the Indian astronomers—a
 fact which proves that their calculation was correct and founded upon
 ■observation.
116                 TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OP A S TR O LO G Y .


ascsenions and declinations of most of the principal stars are given,
annually in the Nautical Almanac; and, by means of their
annual differences their places may be readily computed for
many years in advance. White's Ephemeris, from 1792 to 1839,
gave the places of the principal stars. The stars of the first-
magnitude have the greatest power ; those of less than the fourth
magnitude (except when in a cluster, like the Pleiades) have no>
appreciable influence.
   When a fixed star whose latitude does not exceed 8 ° 80''
happens to be in conjunction with the Sun at birth, or when the-
Sun is directed to its conjunction, certain effects are distinctly
traceable.
   When a fixed star whose latitude does not differ greatly from
that of the Moon or any planet which may happen to be in.
conjunction with it, certain effects are produced.
   When a star of the first or second magnitude happens to be
exactly culminating or ascending its influence is undeniable.
   Stars having north latitude affect us m ost; and, pur contra,.
stars having great south latitude affect the denizens of the
southern hemisphere most. The Sun, the Moon, or a planet,,
may have the parallel declination of a star with which, on:
account of its great latitude, it can never be in (zodiacal) con­
junction. In such case— provided that the star’s latitude be-
north—the effects of this parallel would probably be nearly as.
great as if the star were in the zodiac.
   The conjunction, opposition, and zodiacal and mundane
parallel should only be considered in regard to the fixed stars ~
they are said, in astrology, to cast no rays, i.e., they do not
operate on the planets or angles of the heavens by sextile,.
square, trine, etc. Aldebaran, Eegulus, Rigel, Arista, Hercules,,
the North Scale, Fomalhaut, Antares,3 or Orion’s Shoulder
 culminating, give great honour, preferment, and good fortune;.
and the same in a lesser degree when they ascend. Rigel, o r
Orion’s foot, is said to confer great and lasting honours, good
fortune, and happiness. Although situated in the sixteenth
degree of Gemini, it rises with 27° of Cancer and sets writh 14°'
of Taurus. At the Prince Consort’s birth Rigel was in the tenth
house.
   The Sun conjoined with Aldebaran, Hercules, Regulus, Antares
or any eminent star of the nature of Mars, is said to threaten a.


 s This word is probably compounded of aurs pro and « 51; Mars, signifying,.
Mars’s deputy or lieutenant, or one acting for Mars.
                            TH E   F IX E D   ST A B S.               117

-violent death, or frequent sickness. These same stars are also
 said to bring the native military preferment, or distinction in
surgery, but in the end to cause disgrace or ruin.
   Napoleon I. had the Sun with Regulus.
   The Sun with the Pleiades, Hyades, Castor, Pollux, Pnesepe,
•or the Asselli, is indicative of evil, and liability to a violent
•death.-* The South Scale5 and the Knee of Ophiucus are, when
conjoined with the Sun, indicative of trouble and disgrace. The
North Scale and Arista conjoined with the Sun give the most
■eminent and permanent good fortune. All eminent fixed stars
with the Sun in an angle give advancement and success; those
•of the nature of Mars cause violent death, or ultimate ruin, in
consequence of the native’s own conduct; those of the nature of
Saturn bring disgrace, ruin, and great calamity. The Pleiades
.and Praesepe with the Sun in an angle often produce
blindness.
   The Moon conjoined with Aldebaran or Pollux threatens a
violent death ; with the Pleiades, Praesepe, or Antares, blindness
•or injuries to the eyes (when in an angle). When the Moon
happens to be conjoined with Pleiades, and Saturn, or Mars with
Regulus, and the Moon combust, total blindness sometimes
ensues. The Moon with Antares, in opposition to Saturn with
Aldebaran, threatens a violent death, maybe strangulation. If
Mars, instead of Saturn be with Aldebaran, the death will be by
a blow or fall— particularly if they are in an angle. The Moon
with Cor Hydras, and also in conjunction, parallel declination,
square, or opposition with Mars or Saturn, death may be due to
drowning- or poison if Mars be angular. The Moon with Antares
and Saturn, danger of drowning or assassination. The Moon
with Aldebaran or Antares in the ascendant or mid-heaven,
gives honours and preferment, attended, however, with
•danger.
   In Zadkiel’s Almanac for 1886 was presented “ a chapter of
accidents,” in which I mentioned that the nativity of a child
who died, at fourteen months old, from the effects of being
accidentally scalded, showed the Moon in conjunction with Mars
in the midheaven and in parallel declination with Antares. The
birth took place at 4h 30ra p.m. of the 28th of September, 1873,
at Rishton.

  4 The Pleiades are, I think, not so evil, their influence is “ mild,” as
described in the book of Job.
  5 I have repeatedly observed that persons born when the Moon was with
the South Scale, were very unfortunate.
   118                            TH E      TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.

I.— A L i s t o f EMINENT FIXED STARS n e a r t h e ECLIPTIC, w i t h
  t h e ir   L o n g it u d e s a n d L a t it u d e s        com puted for     J a n u a r y 1 s t , 1 9 1 1 . 11
                                                                                                                     »




                              Magnitude.
                                                               High
                                                                                                           Nature.
         Name.                             Longitude. Latitude Ascen -               Declination.
                                                                sion
                                                                                                                     _.
                                                                      H.   M.   S.
                                           O     /    II                                         „
  /3 Arietis ................... 2-7 2 « 48 34 8 29n 1 49 48 20 22 28n             A !
  a Arietis, Ram’s
       following horn 2-2 6 8 25 5 9 58n 2 2 9 23 2 37n                            s i
  i] Tauri,brightest
       of the 7 stars.. 3 28 8 45 2 4 2n 3 42 12 23 49 57n 3 D \
  y Tauri, Hyades 3-9 4 n 33 41 5 49 s 4 14 44 15 24 53n 3 D
  e Tauri,          Oculus
       Tauri ................... 3-7 7 n 13 16 2 35 s 4 23 25 18 59 7n           ?
  a Tauri,             A lde-                                                         I
       BARAN ...................         1-1 8 n 32 49 5 29 s 4 30 49 16 19 57n 3     1
  /3 Tauri, Bull’s
       North Horn... 1-8 21 n 20 2 5 22Jn 5 20 40 28 32 6n 3
  y Gemi norum,
       Bright foot of
       Gemini ............ 1 - 9 75551 49 6 45 s 6 32 35 16 28 3 9 n $ 2 ;
   a Gemi norum,
       C a s t o r ................ 2        19ss 0 13 10 5 n 7 28 56 32 5 9 n 3 ? 1?
   ¡3 G em inorum ,
       Pollux.......... 1-2 215559 23 6 4 0 n 7 39 53 28 14 3 4 n                3
! y Cancri, North
       Assellus ....... 4-8 6SU7 58 3 l l N 8 38 9 21 47 2 3 n 3 O
   1 Cancri, South
       Assellus ...... 4-5 7SI 28 43 0 4 n 8 39 38 18 29 2n 3 O
   a Leonis, R e g u -
       L U S ........................... 1-3 28S135 33 0 2 8 n 10 3 38 12 24 11n 3
   a Virginis, Spica 1-2 22-=35 42 2 3s 13 20 29 10 41 45 s 2 3
   « Libra,             South
       Scale .......... 2-9 13 ir 50 16 0 2 1 n 14 45 56 15 40 18 s h 2
   ¡3 Libras, North
       Scale .......... 2-8 18iil 7 24 8 3 1 n 15 12 11 9 3 18 s 2 f 3
   f3 Scorpii, Frons
       Scorpii.......... 2-7 1 $ 56 22 1 I n 16 0 14 19 33 45 s *2 2
   a Scorpii, A nta-
       R E S ........................... 1-3 8 f 30 42 4 33 s 16 23 55 26 14 7s S 3
   r) Ophiuchi,Right
       Knee of Ophi-
       uchus .......... 2-6 16 $ 43 1 7 1 3 n 17 5 14 15 36 59 s                    2
  t Capricorni, Ca­
       pricorn’s Tail. 3 22rcf 17 16 2 35 s 21 42 6 16 32 6 s
    » The stars in the above list whose E.A. and declin. are not given in the
  Nautical Almanac, are taken from the Catalogue of 1,500 stars presented in
  Dr. Loomis’s “ Introduction to Practical Astronomy.”
    Prsesepe is'described in the old works on Astrology as “ in the Claw of the
  Crab.” Even Wilson repeated this wretched blunder. The cluster is in the
  middle of the Crab and in Leo 6°.
                                                          TH E        F IX E D      STAKS.                             119

II. — A L ist of EMINENT FIXED STARS not I ncluded in T able I.,
      w it h t h e ir       D iurnal S e m i -A r c s , computed                              for   G r e e n w ic h , J anuary
      1 st, 1 9 1 1 .




                                                                  Magnitude.                                            Nature.
                                                                               Eight                         Semi-
                    Name.                                                      Aseen         Declination.     Arc
                                                                                sion                        diurnal.

                                                                               H.    M. R.
 a C a p u t A n d r o m e d a ................ 2-1 0 3 46 28 36                       I n 132 52 U 2
 y Pegasi, Algenib ...............                                2-9 0 8 38 14 41 1 9 n 109 5 3' S
 ¡3    Ceti, S. end o f Whale ...                                 2-2 0 39 7 18 28 4 1 s 65 22 \
 ¡3 Andromedte, Mirach .......                                    2-4 1 4 44 35 9 4 n 151 28       5
 y     Andromedte, Almaoh......                                   2-2 1 58 25 41 54 2 2 n          s
 ¡3 Persei, Caput Algol .......                                   2-4 3 2 28 40 36 5 9 n          b Vr
 a Aurigre, C a p e l l a ..............                          0 2 5 10 7 45 54 4 0 n          $ 3
 ¡3    Orionis, R i g e l                .....................    0-3 5 10 16 8 8 12 s 79 31 u 3
 y Orionis, Bellatrix ...........                                 1-7 5 20 22 6 16 16k 9 7 53 V 3
 t     Orionis          ............................              2-3 5 27 28 0 21 48 s 89 33 ■U b
 e Orionis ............................                           1-7 5 31 42 1 15 25 s 88 26 u 3
 a Orionis, B e t e l g u e s k ..........                        1    5 50 22 7 23 33n 99 19 3 S
 j3 Auriga:             ...........................               2-1 5 53 1 44 56 29n            3 »
 /t Geminorum ...................                                 8-2 6 17 35 22 33 42n 121 13 $ 2
! a Cams Majoris, S i k i u s ..........                          1-4 G 41 14 16 35 32 s 68 11 U 3
 a Canis Minoris, P r o c y o n . . .                             0-5 7 84 39 5 2 7 1 8 n 96 45 s 3
 a Hydrse, Alphard...............                                 2-2 9 23 13 8 16 13s 79 33 b 2
i ¡3 Leonis, Denebola ..........                                  2-2 11 44 31 15 4 9 n 109 38 b       »
  ?l Virginis ..........................                          4 12 15 21 0 10 17s 89 47 ? 3
  c Virginis .........................                            3-7 12 51 6 3 52 5 2 n 94 51 3 »
  f Virginis, Vendemiatrix7...                                    3 12 57 44 11 26 12n 104 37 b        $
  a Bootis, A r c t u r u s ..........                            0-3 14 11 35 19 38 8 6 n 116 27 Vr 3
  « Corona), North Crown ...                                      2-3 15 30 54 27 0 3 9 n 129 30 2 S
  a Serpen tis..........................                          2 8 15 39 51 6 42 1 3 n 98 26 b      3
  o Scorpii ..........................                            2-5 15 55 2 22 22 8s 59 6 b 2
 c     Ophiuchi...........................                        3 16 9 39 3 28 1 s 85 40 b 2
 a Ophiuchi...........................                            2-1 17 30 46 12 37 1 9 n 106 13 b 2
 a Lyrie, V e g a .................................               0-1 18 33 53 38 41 5 3 k        2»
 a Aquilso, A l t a i e ......................                    0-9 19 46 24 8 87 5 0 n 100 55 b
 3 Aquarii ...........................                            3-8 21 26 51 5 57 58s 82 31      T
 a Piscis Australis, F o m a l -
          HAULT         .......................................    1-3 22 52 43 30 5 56s 43 41 2 »
 a Pegasi, Markab ...............                                  2-6 23 0 18 14 43 3 2 n 109 8 3 ?
 /3 Pegasi, Scheat ...............                                 2-3 2 2 59 26 27 36 I n 130 43

       7 Vendemiatrix is placed, in Wilson’s “ Dictionary of Astrology,” in the eighth
     degree of the sign Virgo, with 10° latitude South, whereas this bright star is
     really in the sign Libra, and has 16° 13' of latitude North. The lists of stars
     as given in the old works on astrology are all inaccurate.
120                TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR OLO G Y.


    Another instance of the influence of eminent fixed stars was
 given in the nativity of a gentleman who was horn in 1846, his
 ascendant being Leo 21° 53', Mercury in the ascendant was in
 27° 23' of the ascending sign very close to Regulus, and in
 opposition with Saturn in Aquarius 26° 11' retrograde. The
 Sun in Virgo 14° 6 ' was very near Mars in 15° 10' of the same
sign. This gentleman was nearly killed by a serious accident,
in 1879, and was shot at only a few months previously, under
the primary directions of Sun rapt parallel Mars 32° 44', and
 Sun parallel Saturn 32° 44'.
   V aria b l e stars exhibit periodical changes of brilliancy.  The
bright star Capella is believed to have increased in brightness
■during the last century. On the other hand, one of the seven
bright stars of Ursa Major has diminished in lustre.
   Professor Pickering sho-wed that no theory hitherto advanced
accounts satisfactorily for the variability of the lustre of such a
star as A l g o l , except that of an op a q u e satellite.
   The ancient astrologers declared that Algol is the most evil of
all the fixed stars, and that when it is in the line of right-
ascension of the Sun or Moon in a violent nativity it pre-signi-
fies “ a murderer who will come to an untimely e n d !” In
Robespierre’s nativity (two o’clock a.m. of May 6th, 1758, at
Arras) the Sun in Taurus 15° 24' was in the line of R.A. of
Caput Algol, and in parallel declination with Aldebaran, and
also in quadrature with Mars, which evil planet was in opposition
to the ascendant, and Regulus also was in opposition to the
ascendant. Here is an extraordinarily violent nativity, and
Robespierre, after sending many victims to the guillotine, was
himself executed, at the end of July, 1794, in the thirty-seventh
year of his age.
   I rr e g u l a r or Temporary Stars have occasionally shone forth
with a lustre far surpassing that of stars of the first magnitude,
or even that of Venus and Jupiter, remaining for a short period,
and then disappearing slowly. The most celebrated star of this
kind is that bright one in Cassiopteia, one of the circum-polar
constellations, which appeared in 1572, and was observed by
Tycho Brahe, the famous astronomer and astrologer, who
handed down to posterity a concise and valuable description of
the various changes it passed through while visible.* During
the early part of its appearance it surpassed the brightness of

  * Vide Zadkiel’s Almanac for 1879, pp. 67-71 art. “ The Star of
Bethlehem.”
                            TH E   F IX E D   ST A R S.                121

Sirius. It was seen at noon by strong-sighted persons ; and was
at first white, then yellow, and finally very red in colour. It
has been supposed to have heralded our Saviour’s birth— the
Star of Bethlehem— as its period was computed to be just about
315 years; and it was expected to re-appear in the year 1887,
but has not yet been observed.
   Another temporary star came suddenly into view in Ophiuchus
in 1604, and was observed by the great astronomer and
astrologer, John Kepler. It exceeded Jupiter in splendour. It
did not change colour, and was always white. It remained
visible until March, 1606.
   Daniel’s declaration:—
  They that be wise shall shine as the brightness of the firmament ;
  And they that turn many to righteousness, as the stars for ever and ever.

 is occasionally taken as a text by preachers, but to understand
 and explain its true meaning astrological knowledge is indispen­
sable. The proficiency of Daniel in the interpretation of visions
is directly attributable to the Almighty. In his visions we meet
with several references to astrological ideas. The constellation-
sign of the Ram is appropriately taken as typical of the
 Medo-Persian power. The mention of Gabriel, the angel of the
 Moon, the messenger, and Mikal, the angel of the Sun, the
 “ prince ” of Israel, is the outcome of the Chaldnsan doctrine of
the spirits of the spheres. The multitudinous celestial spirits
were believed to have been the spirits of just men made perfect
and received into the starry heavens, so that in Daniel viii. 10,
we find stars = saints, and “ they that be wise shall shine,”
etc., as already quoted. Manilius held the Milky Way to be the
souls of illustrious men, and Heraclitus is reported to have
believed that the soul is a spark taken from the stellar essence.
Modern popular theology has confounded the heaven of stars
into which the early Christians believed that the soul is taken,
with the New Jerusalem, which is merely an allegorical vision of
the perfected Church.
    Let the religious world ponder over the fact that the
crucifixion was accompanied by portents, and that the visit of
the MAGi^astrologers— was divinely guided by the Star of
Bethlehem, and cease to neglect and ignore astrologia sana—
divine study that it really is.
                                  122




                     C H A P T E R          XX.




   THE       IMPORT            OF       THE      NATIVITY.

          “ In the eternal volume of the sky
            The stars displayed, are characters on high,
            Where Man may read his future and his fate
            If dim the tale seem ’tis his sunken state
            Unfit by sin, that bright page to descry
            Writ by the finger of the Deity.” 1

T he Map or Figure of the Heavens being drawn for the true
moment of birth, the next proceeding is to form an opinion or
judgment upon the indications afforded by the configurations
and relative positions of the Sun, Moon, and planets.
  Ptolemy says,2 respecting the “ distribution of the doctrine of
Nativities —
   “ The questions of the periods subsequent to the birth relate first,
to the duration of life (which is distinct from the question of rearing),
then to the shape and figure of the body, to the bodily affections, and
to injuries or defects in the members. After these, further inquiry is
instituted as to the quality of the mind, and the mental affections;
then as to the fortune, in regard to rank and honours, as well as
wealth. In succession to these, the character of the employment or
profession is sought o u t ; then the questions relative to marriage and
offspring, and to consentaneous friendship, are to be considered ; then,
that concerning travel; and lastly, that concerning the kind of death
which awaits the native. The question of death, although depending,
in fact, upon the same influence as the question of the duration of life,
seems yet to find its proper situation in being placed last in the series.
   “ On each of the foregoing points of inquiry, the doctrine and
precepts to be followed shall be thoroughly and succinctly detailed;
but all idle conceits, promulgated by many persons without any
foundation capable of sustaining the test of reason, shall be utterly
avoided, in deference to the only true agency, which is derived from
primal Nature herself. It is only upon clearly effective influences-
that this treatise is established : and all matters which are open to an
authorised mode of inquiry by means of the theory of the stars, and
their positions and aspects with regard to appropriate places, shall be


  1 “ Fragment of Chaucer Modernised ; ” from Miscellaneous Poems, by
R. J. Gilman, Esq.
  2 Book III., Chap. iv.
                      TH E   IM PO RT OF TH E   N A TIV IT Y .            12»

fully discussed here; but the divination by lots and numbers,3
unregulated by any systematic causation, must remain unnoticed.”

                               T he   P aren ts.

   “ In conformity with nature,” says Ptolemy, “ the Sun and
Saturn are allotted to the person of the father; and the Moon
and Venus to that of the mother ; and the mode in which these
luminaries and planets may be found posited, with reference to-
each other as well as to other planets and stars, will intimate the
situation of affairs affecting the parents.”
   If there happens to be a planet in the mid-heaven and, if
neither the Sun nor Moon is there, it represents the m other; if
there is a planet in the fourth house, it is the significator of the-
father.
   Ptolemy says “ That the degree of the fortune and wealth of the-
parents will be indicated by the doryphory,4 or attendants of the
luminaries. If the luminaries be accompanied (either in the same
signs in which themselves are placed, or in the signs next following),
by the benefies, and by such stars or planets as are of the same-
tendency as themselves, a conspicuous and brilliant fortune is
presaged : especially should the Sun be attended by matutine stars,
and the M oon by vespertine,” etc.

  The following observations, respecting the mother of the
native are from Ptolemy ;—
  “ If Mars be succedent to the Moon or Venus, or in quartile or
opposition to them, or if Saturn be similarly aspected to the Moon
only, and both of them be void of course or retrograde, or cadent,
adverse accidents and disease will attend the mother ; should they, on
the other hand, be swift in motion and placed in angles, they portend
that her life will be short, or grievously afflicted.  Their position in
the oriental angles, or succedent houses, particularly denotes the
shortness of her life ; and in those which are occidental, her affliction.
In the same manner, should Mars be thus aspected to the Moon (and
should that luminary at the same time be oriental), the mother’s
sudden death, or some injury in her face or eyes, will be produced :
and, if the Moon be then occidental, death will be occasioned by
miscarriage, in parturition, by inflammation, or by wounds. Such are
the effects which ensue from these aspects made by Mars to the Moon ;
but, should he make them to Venus, death will then take place from
fever, some latent disease, or sudden sickness. Saturn’s aspect [quartile

  3 T his is an allusion to the ancient p ractice o f divination by lots.
Reference to Acts iv., 24 to 26. w ill show that the Apostles practised this
form of divination. Josep h ’s cup, w h ich was fou n d in B en jam in 's sack,
was the silver cup used fo r divining, ju st as the M ussulmen in India, at the
present day, practice divination.
   4            T his w ord has been heretofore rendered ‘ satellitium,’ and
“ satellites,” but as these terms do not seem sufficiently precise in their
m eaning, and are already in use to signify the m inor orbs w hich revolve
round a principal planet, I have ventured to A nglicise the Greek word
the usual signification of w hich is a body-guard.’ ” — N ote by A shm and.
124                 T H E T E X T -B O O K   OF A S TB O LO G Y .


•or opposition] to the Moon, when she is oriental, inflicts on the mother
disease and death from extreme colds, or fevers; but, should the Moon
he occidental, the danger arises from affections of the uterus, or from
consumption.

   My own experience has shown me, repeatedly, that when the
Moon is afflicted at the birth of a child, the mother has a had
time after her accouchement. This is the more likely to result
when the Moon happens to be posited in the 4th or 8th house,
and afflicted. For example :—
   C ase 1.— A male child, “ H. R.        was born February 28th, 1875,
lat, 54° 54' N., long. 1° 24' W . The Moon was in the 4th house, in
13° 9' of Sagittary, and less than 5° separated from the conjunction
with Mars. The m other was seized with metritis, and her life was
 despaired of by her medical attendants and nurse, and she only
 recovered after being as near death as it is possible for any one to be
 without actually succumbing.
    2.     — A male child (stillborn), April 30th, 1878, at 3h p.m., London.
The Moon in the 8th house, in Aries, in aspect to Mars (culminating)
and Uranus. Venus setting, in conjunction and par. dec. with Saturn,
and also in square to Mars. The mother suffered seriously from
litemorrhage, and died, of fever, May 15th, 1878.
   3.     — A male child, “ T. H. B .,” was born April 24th, 1874, in
 Sunderland. The Moon was in the 10th house, in the 19th deg. of
Leo, in opposition to Saturn, and in square to Mars (in the 8th house).
The mother died in April, 1877. The child died in August, 1874.
   4.      — A male child, “ J. Y .” born October 26th, 1874, at 6h 2om a.m.,
in Sunderland. The Moon in square and par. dec. with Saturn, and in
square to Uranus (in the 10th house). The mother died (of pneumonia)
two day afterwards; the child lived only 35 hours.
   5.      — A male child, “ A ,” born February 16th, 1878, at 4'1 45m p.m.,
London. The Moon, in the 7th house, in exact square to Mars in the
4th house. The mother died three weeks after the child’s birth. She
was a strong and perfectly healthy young lady, and had never been ill
since childhood.
   6.      — A male child, “ A. B.,” born at l l h a.m., of April 4th, 1864, in
London. The Moon conjoined with Venus, in the 9th house,
applying to the square of Uranus, and 150° from Saturn. The mother
died in a few days, of fever.
   7.      — A female child, “ D ,” bom March 10th, 1875, at l l h p.m., in
Sunderland. The Moon in the 6th house, in sesqui-quadrate to Mars,
and applying to the square of Uranus. The mother died in a fortnight,
■of fever.
   8.      —A female child, “ R .,” born November 18th, 1872, at 9h 5m p.m.,
 Sunderland. The M oon in the 12th house, in opposition to Saturn;
Venus in the 5th house, in square to Mars. The mother died in a
fortnight, of puerperal mania.
   9.      — A male child, bom February 16th, 1828, at 7h 20m a.m., R och­
dale. The Moon in square to Mars. The mother died, January 29th,
 1832.
    10.     — Miss C., born June 6th, 1843, at 4h 3ra a.m .; lat. 51° 8' N.,
long. 1° 12' W . The Moon in trine to Saturn, and applying to the
opposition and par. dec. with Uranus, and the square of Mercury. The
mother died between two and three hours after the birth.
                     THE   IM PORT   OP TH E   N A T IV IT Y .       125'
   11.    — Mrs. H., born February 17th, 1824, at 6“ 52m p.m , lat. 53° 40'
N , long. 2° 27' W . The Moon in conjunction with Mars, and in
square to Uranus and Venus (conjoined). The mother died, Decem ber
10th, 1829.
  12.    — Mr. J. R , born August 10th, 1840, at 41' 54m a.m. The Moon
in opposition to Mars. The mother died, May 25th, 1844.
   13.    — Miss S., born August 18th, 1838, London. The Moon “ under
the Sun’s beams,” and in par. dec. with Mars. Venus in par dec. with
Mars, and in (mundane) square to Saturn. The mother died, May
31st, 1843.

  Now let us proceed to investigate the doctrine that the Sunt
and Saturn represent the father:—
   C ase 14.— Dr. C. T. P., born August 11th, 1815, at 7“ a.m., London,
The Sun nearly in opposition with Saturn, and in trine with Mars ~
and Uranus close to the lower meridians. The father died in June,
 1820.
   15.    — Dr. A., born February 3rd, 1837, at 4h a.m., lat. 51° 25' N. The-
 Sun in square to Saturn, and in opposition to Mars and Jupiter. His
father died during Dr. A.’s infancy.
   16.    — The Princess Beatrice, bom April 14th, 1857, at l h 45m p.m.,
Buckingham Palace. The Sun in conjunction with Jupiter and.
Mercury, and applying to conjunction with Mars (within 14°). The
Prince Consort died on December 14th, 1861.
   17.    — The ex-Queen Isabella of Spain, born October 10th, 1830, at
2h p.m. The Sun in par. dec. with Mars and Mercury. Her father
died, September 29th, 1833.
   18.    — Le Comte de Paris, born August 24th, 1838, at 2h 45m p.m .,
Paris. The Sun in semi-quartile to Mars, and in opposition to Uranus.
His father died, July 13th, 1842.
   19.    — A male child, born March 9th, 1862, at 6h 45m a.m., Hastings..
The Sun in opposition to Saturn, and square to Uranus. His father, a
fisherman, was drowned in the evening of the same day, while endeav­
ouring to enter Portsmouth harbour during a gale. It will be observed
that the Sun was in Pisces, a “ watery ” sign.
   20.    — E. M. H , born September i7th, 1822, at 9“ 37m a.m , near
Rotherham. The Sun in sesqui-quadrate to Saturn (angular), in semi-
quartile to Mars (angular), and applying to quartile with Uranus, Her-
father died, June 28tli, 1827.
   21.    — Mr. J. It., born January 4tli, 1844, at l 11 89m p.m , Liverpool..
The Sun within 4° of the rapt parallel of Mars, and applying to con­
junction -with Saturn. His father died, October 23rd, 1847.
   22.    —.Mr. D. Le V , born September 8th, 1828, at 4“ a.m , Jersey-
The Sun in semi-quartile to Saturn, in sesqui-quadrate with Uranus,
and in conjunction with Mercury and Jupiter. His father died..
January 22nd, 1834.
   23 to 25.— Three children born, respectively, May 7th, 1868, at
5h 55m p .m .; November 9th, 1871, at 11“ 20“ p .m .; and October 3rd,
1869, at 5“ 40m p.m. In the nativity of the first-born the Sun in par.-
dec. with Saturn. In the second, the Sun in semi-quartile with Mars
and Saturn (conjoined). In the third, the Sun in with square Uranus.
Their father died, September 8th, 1873.
   26.— Mrs. F , born April 6th, 1822, at 9“ 25m p.m. The Sun in par-
dec. with Mercury and Saturn, in trine with Mars, in opposition with
the Moon, and separating from the square of Uranus. The father died
in February or March, 1829.
126                TH E    T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y .


   27.— A male child, S., bom April 23rd, 1877, at 10'1 25m p.m.,
Sunderland. The Sun in square with Mars and in trine with Jupiter.
H is father died, September 23rd, 1877.

    The foregoing nativities present a formidable array of facts in
support of the aphorism of Ptolemy in respect to the probable
 fate of the parents, as indicated by the configurations of the Sun
and Saturn in the one case, and of the Moon and Venus in the
other. It cannot, however, be affirmed that the aphorism is
always true, namely, that when the Sun and Saturn are afflicted
the father will inevitably die early, and when the Moon and
Venus are afflicted at the birth of a child, that the mother will
soon die. The threatened evil may fall in some other way.
    Medical men may take the horoscope of a child and consider
it as a figure for the decumbiture of the mother, and watch the
-effects of the configurations of the Moon, her positions in the
figure, and the aspects she forms on the critical days of the
 following four weeks.
    I    cannot coincide with Wilson’ s view that the luminaries are
significators of the parents only in a general way ; and that if
 the luminaries are in good or evil condition, the native and
•everything belonging to him will be the same. In some cases,
 the early death of the father may be a positive benefit to the
 child ; and many people who have lost both parents early in life
have prospered greatly through the kind care of relatives or
friends. There can be no doubt that the mid-heaven of a
nativity bears some relation to the parents ; and in rectifying a
 nativity we have occasionally to take an evil aspect of Saturn or
 Mars to the ascendant or mid-heaven, to account for the death
 of a parent.
                          T he    D u r a t io n   of   L if e .

  Ptolemy’s rule in regard to children who are insusceptible of
nurture, has been quoted already, in the eighth chapter. In
regard to the probable duration of life Ptolemy says :—
   “ Of all events whatsoever which take place after birth, the most
essential is the continuance of life ; and as it is, of course, useless to
consider, in cases wherein the life of a child does not extend to the
period of one year, what other events contingent on its birth might
otherwise have subsequently happened, the inquiry into the duration
of life consequently takes precedence of all other questions. The
discussion of this inquiry is by no means simple, nor easy of execution ;
it is conducted in a diversified process, by means of the governance of
the ruling places.”
   The prorogatory, or h y l e g l i a c a l places are, says Ptolemy —
  “ The sign on the angle of the ascendant, from the fifth degree above
                           TH E   IM PO RT    OF T H E    N A T IV IT Y .                    127

th e h o r iz o n , to th e tw e n ty -fifth d e gree b e lo w i t ; th e th irty d egrees in
d ex ter sextile th e re to , c o n stitu tin g th e e le v e n th h o u s e ; a lso th e th irty
d egrees in d e x te r q u artile, fo r m in g th e m id -h e a v e n a b o v e th e e a r t h ;
th ose in d e x te r trin e m a k in g th e n in th h o u s e ; an d , lastly , th ose in
o p p o s itio n , b e lo n g in g to th e a n g le o f th e w est.
    “ A m o n g these p la ce s, th e d egrees w h ic h c o n stitu te th e m id -h e a v e n
are en title d to p re fe re n ce , as b e in g o f a m o re p o te n t o r p a ra m o u n t
in flu e n c e ; th e d e g re e s in th e a sce n d a n t are n e x t in v i r t u e ; th e n the
d egrees in th e e le v e n th h o u se , s u cc e d e n t to th e m id -h e a v e n ; th en th ose
in th e a n g le o f th e w e s t ; an d, lastly, th o se in th e n in th h o u se, w h ic h
p re ce d e s th e m id -h e a v e n .”

   Ptolemy says that “ the Sun, the Moon, the Ascendant, and
the Part of Fortune are to be considered as the four principally
liable to be elected to the office of prorogator ”— or H y l e g .6
JZadkiel I. held that “ the Sun is always hyleg and has chief rule
over the life, when in any of the hylegliacal places ; but if he be
not there, and the Moon be, then she is hyleg. When neither
luminary is such, I prefer to consider the ascending degree as the
 hyleg.”
   I think it is very doubtful whether the Sun is hyleg when in
 the first half of the eleventh house. I prefer to consider the Sun
hyleg only after he has passed his semi-quartile to the M.C. in
the eleventh house. The same remark applies to the Moon.
    The nativity of Philip III., of Spain, computed by Placidus, is
mentioned by Wilson,7 and he claims that the prolonged course
 of the disease of which that monarch died, and which he says
 was due to the direction of the Moon to the declination of
 Mercury seven years before his death, shows that, “ there is a
strong probability that the luminaries, and particularly the
 Moon, are at all times aphetical; and that there is more
probability of their being so than even the horoscope.” Never­
 theless, Wilson admits that, “ the direction of the horoscope
 to the square of Saturn was apparently the more immediate
•cause of death.” Wilson also states that “ the Sun in the
 nativity had the declination of Mars, and was in zodiacal square
 to the Moon, so that the luminaries mutually afflicted each other
 by the interchange of the evil effects of the two infortunes ; ancl
.although they were both under the earth, I have no doubt that
 they were both hylegliacal.” If the luminaries were both
 hylegliacal, how is it that Philip attained the age of 42
 years and 11 months? The Moon had the declination of
  Saturn and was hastening to the opposition of Mars ; it is true


    0 Vide “ Star Lore,” November, 1897, art. “ The Hylegliacal Places.”
    7 Dictionary of Astrology, page 312.
128                TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S T R O L O G Y .


that she had the sextile of Jupiter, but this weak aspect could
not overcome either the affliction of the Sun or her own.
   The “ Part of Fortune ” is an absurdity in nativities, and it
cannot be hyleg under any circumstances. Zadkiel I. never
regarded it as hyleg.
   A modern writer propounded the absurd idea that the Sun
is always hyleg in a man’s nativity, and the Moon in a woman’s ;
the ascendant never being hyleg under any circumstances
whatever! Comment on           such an      absurdity would be
superfluous; suffice it to say that no facts in evidence of its
verity were presented for examination.
   My own experience leads me to believe that the limit of 5 °
above the ascendant, should be extended to 15° (measured by
oblique ascension), as a hylegliacal place for the Sun. It
certainly seems more in accordance with reason that the
luminaries should be more hylegliacal when they happen to be
above than when below the horizon. We know that the Moon
is the chief ruler over the physical faculties, and that in order
to enjoy the possession of a perfectly sound and healthy
“ constitution,” it is necessary that the Moon be absolutely free
from affliction at birth.
   At the birth of the late Prince Consort the Moon had the
sextile of the Sun— a configuration of which Schiller writes
thus
          “ And Sun and Moon, too, in the sextile aspect,
            The soft light with the veh’ment—so I love it.” 0

This happy aspect, combined with the approximate paralleL
declination of the Moon and Venus, tended to strengthen the
physique and vital stamina. The mundane quartile of Venus,
the zodiacal quartile of Jupiter, and the zodiacal semi-
quartile of Uranus to the Moon could produce nothing
pre judical to the health, beyond occasional attacks of
malaise arising from plethora; and, in fact, the aspects
of Venus aud Jupiter to the Moon would help to fortify
the constitution. But, on the other hand, both the Sun.
(hyleg) and the Moon had the quadra-sextile of Saturn ; and
the ascending planet, Mercury, had the quartile of Mars (in the
midheaven) and Uranus (in the northern angle), and was
applying to the opposition of Saturn (in the western angle),
receiving assistance only from Venus by semi-sextile aspect..
Hence the Prince succumbed in his 43rd year to a malady

           " Schiller's Wallenstein, Coleridge’s Translation.
                    TH E   IM PO ST   OF TH E   N A T IV IT Y .       129

(typhoid fever) plainly indicated by the affliction of Mercury in
Virgo, and by the affliction of the Sun and Moon by Saturn.
The affliction of Mercury was also indicative of the attacks of
croup from which the Prince suffered in early life.
   In the nativity of Goethe the Sun was hyleg, and, happily, free
from affliction. The narrow escape, which Goethe himself records,
from asphyxia at birth, was indicated by the evil Saturn ascending.
   The following cases will be found to illustrate the result of
the hyleg being much afflicted at birth : —
    C ase 1.— A male child, bom February 2nd, 1871, at 5h 21m p.m.,
 Sunderland. The Moon (hyleg) in the lit h house, in 10° 5' of Cancer
in opposition to Saturn (in 5° 39' of Vy), in square to Mars (in 7° 55' of
 -£r), and having the par. dec. of Saturn, Jupiter, and Uranus. The
 Sun had the trine of Jupiter. The child died on May 23rd, 1878, of
broncho-pneumonia.
    2.    — A male child, born August 26th, 1873, at 10h 30m p.m., Sunder­
land.     The ascendant was hyleg.         Uranus in conjunction with
 Mercury, on the nadir, in mundane square to the ascendant. Saturn
 and Mars in par. dec. with ascendant. This child died, December
 29th, 1874, of -whooping cough and bronchitis.
    3.    — A female child, born December loth, 1866, at 6h 40"1 p.m.,
 London. The M oon (hyleg) on the zenith in mundane square to Mars
 (rising), in sesqui-quadrate to Saturn, in square to Uranus, and in
sextile to Jupiter. The child died in January, 1871, of malignant
scarlatina (a martial disease).
    4.    — A female child, born December 19th, 1869, at 7h 35m a.m.r
 Sunderland. The Sun (hyleg)' rising in conjunction with Saturn, in
 opposition to the Moon, and having the par. dec. of Mars and Uranus,
 This child died, January 25th, 1872. Sixteen days before her death
 she -was attacked with measles, erysipelas followed, and hydrocephalus
 supervened.
    5.    — A male child, born June 9th, 1871, at 10h 35m a.m., Sunderland.
 The Sun (hyleg) in square to Mars and the Moon, and in par. dec. with
 Saturn, Uranus, Jupiter, and Venus. The Moon, setting, in opposition
to Mars. This child died of smallpox in July, 1871.
    6.    — A female child, born June 29th, 1871, at 2h 45m a.m., Sunder­
land. The Sun (hyleg) in conjunction with Jupiter, in opposition to
Saturn, in square to Mars, and in par. dec. with Saturn, Uranus,
Jupiter, and Mercury.       The Moon in semi-quartile to Saturn, in
square to Venus, and in sesqui-quadrate to the Sun. The child died of
atrophy (congenital), August 31st, 1871.
   7.     — A male child, born July 4th, 1872, at 4h 30m a.m., Sunderland.
The Sun (hyleg) in opposition to Saturn, and in par. dec. with Saturn,
Uranus, and Venus. The Moon in conjunction with Mars, in the 12th
house. Mercury rising in opposition to Saturn. This child died of
phrenitis following measles, November 28th, 1873.
   8.     — A male child, born August 7th, 1873, at 9h 5m a.m., Sunderland.
The Sun (hyleg) in close square to Mars. The Moon in the 4th house
in exact conjunction with Saturn. This child died of convulsions,
August 14th, 1873.
   9.     — A male child, born September 1st, 1872, at 10h p.m., Sunderland.
Mars and Uranus on the lower heaven in mundane square to the
ascendant (hyleg) and Saturn in par. dec. with the ascendant. The
child died of diphtheria, June 30th, 1874.
                                                                  .   K
130                 TH E   T E XT -H O O K OF A STR O LO G Y.


   10.    — A male child, born April 80th, 1875, at l h 40™ a.m., Sunderland.
The Moon (hyleg) in exact conjunction with Saturn, in the ascendant.
This child died of marasmus and bronchitis, February 15th, 1876.
   11.    — A female child, born March 29th, 1859, at 7h a.m., London.
The Moon (hyleg) in opposition and par. dec. with Saturn and in square
to Mars (rising). The child died, October 16th, 1864.
   12.    — A male child, born October 17tb, 1866, at l h 10n a.m., London.
The ascendant was hyleg— the Moon being on the cusp of the 6th
house, in conjunction with Jupiter and more than 6° separated from
the opposition of Mars. Saturn was on the nadir, in mundane square,
and also in par. dec. with the ascendant. The child died in convul­
sions, April 7th, 1867.
   13.    — A female child, born May 7th, 1860, at 4h 45™ a.m., Northamp­
ton. The Sun (hyleg) rising in mundane square to Mars (on the
zenith), in mundane square and zodiacal sextile to .Jupiter (on the
nadir and in opposition to Mars), and also in zodiacal square and in
par. dec. with Saturn (in Leo). The Moon in opposition to Uranus.
This child died of spinal disease, August 12th, 1862.
   14.    — A female child, bom February 21st, 1876, at l l h 15™ a.m.,
Sunderland. The Sun (hyleg) in conjunction with Saturn, and in par.
dec. with Mars. The Moon in the 8th house in square to Mars.
Uranus on the nadir in mundane square to the ascendant. The child
died of scarlatina, October 26th, 1876.
   15.    — A female child, bom August 13th, 1878, at 0h 7™ 16a a.m., Edin­
burgh, the Moon (hyleg) on the zenith, eclipsed, in opposition to
Uranus and Mars, and in semi-quartile to Saturn. This child died of
diarrhoea, August 25th, 1878. The doctor describes her as of average
size and healthy when born.

   The foregoing cases are beyond dispute. The exact moment
of birth was taken for the purpose of scientific inquiry, in every
instance, by a medical gentleman. All the children— with one
exception—were apparently healthy, and of average size when
born. Cases of children born prematurely, and those whose
moments of birth were not observed by a professional man,
have not been given, or the list could have been considerably
augmented. The sole aim being the elucidation of truth, all.
cases in which the data were open to any doubt, have been
rigidly excluded. We wait with confidence for a thorough
examination of this question. The result cannot be doubtful.
Opponents of the ancient science of astrology never appeal to
facts, but content themselves with empty declamation against
what they term the “ superstition” of believing in it. If we
ask one of them to produce facts in proof of his assertion that
it is a false science, he forthwith beats a retreat, and refuses to
break a lance with us. To such a carpet-knight the words of
the Marquis of Montrose are exceedingly appropriate:—•
                  “ H e only fears his fate too m uch
                      Or his deserts are small,
                    Who dares not put it to the touch
                     To gain or lose it all.”
                                           131




                         CHAPTER                      XXI.



     PH YSICAL                   CONSTITUTION                              AND
                         T E M P E R A M E $ T.

       “ T he stars o'er m a n ’ s poor trivial body ride,
         A nd raise or low er it easier than a tide.” — T h e A c h i l l e a p .


T he form and temperament of the      body are to be judged, said
the ancients, from the ascendant or planet rising at birth, and
the Moon’s position and configuration.           The particular
influences of the Sun, Moon, planets, and signs of the zodiac,
and the effects imputed to them, respectively, on the form and
temperament of the human body, have already been described.
It now remains for us to consider how far the description given
by the best authors may be relied upon. In regard to stature
the testimonies are very conflicting.
   Ptolemy says1 : —
   “ Men of tall stature have their lords of nativity in elevation, and
their ascendants in the beginnings of signs; but the lords of men of
short stature will be found in declination [or in obscure situations].
It must also be seen whether the signs be right or oblique.”

   This aphorism cannot hold good in regard to the so-called
“ lord ” of the ascending sign unless he happen to be within
5° above or below the Eastern horizon. Even in this case, I
cannot, from my own experience, vouch for its accuracy ; indeed
I regard this question of stature as one that has never been
satisfactorily solved. I have known tall men who were horn
with Cancer or Scorpio ascending; and I have known men of
very short stature who were born with Leo rising, whereas we are
told that Cancer and Scorpio produce short stature, and that Leo
produces tallness. I have never known but one very tall person
born with Venus rising. Ramesey avers that “ the Martialist
doth seldom exceed in height,” and is usually of low stature. I
have known several Mars-men who were tall—one of them was

                                 1 Aphorism, LII.
132                     THE   T E X T -B O O K OF A STR O LO G Y.


born with Mars and Jupiter rising in Scorpio. Generally speak­
ing, I have observed that the superior planets2 give tall stature '
Venus short stature ; Mercury and the Moon, according to their
configurations ; and the Sun, usually, tall stature.
   In judging of personal appearance, from the nativity, the.
difficulty lies in balancing fairly the opposing influences, and in-
comprehending the complex rules of the ancients. The ever-
varying face of the heavens renders this problem, like every
other in judicial astrology, very difficult of solution; indeed,
when the fallible nature of human judgment is also considered^
the wonder is, not that astrologers sometimes fail to correctly
describe persons whom they have never seen, merely from an.
inspection of their nativities, but, rather, that they ever succeed..
As Wilson observed :—
  “ That the position of the heavens has such an effect is abundantly
manifest, from the resemblance of children bom nearly together,
whereas the offspring of the same parents, bom at a distant period
under a different constitution of the heavens, are essentially and some­
times wholly unlike both in body and mind.” *
   The difficulty lies in comprehending the rules of the ancients
as handed down to us by Claudius Ptolemy, for he appears to-
revel in that mysticism of which the Magi were so enamoured.
   The nativities of the late Prince Consort and the late King
Edward VII. are well marked, and are forcibly illustrative of the-
fact that the ascending planet and sign impress their characters
upon the person and nature.
   Diseases and accidents are judged from the planets which may
happen to be rising or setting, and those in configuration with
the ascending degree or luminaries. Ptolemy tells us to con­
sider also the planets (if any) in the sixth house. His reason is
that the 6th house, in nativities, is “ inconjunct with the-
 ascendant.” The same remark would also apply to the eighth
house. But since the quadra-sextile aspect (five houses, or 150°
distance in longitude) has been discovered to have some
 influence, the cusps of the sixth and eighth houses can no
 longer be considered as inconjunct with the ascendant. Any
 apparent effect arising from an infortune posited on the cusp of
 the sixth would, therefore, be traceable to its mundane aspect to

   2 Saturn som etim es produces short stature, when rising at a birth, ow ing
 to spinal curvature, or som e defect in the legs ; also, when in opposition to
 the M oon, and located on the upper m eridian. A gentlem an, w ell know n to
 the author, w ho was born with Saturn rising in Cancer, is considerably
 above the m iddle height.
   3   Dictionary of Astrology, p a g e 151.
               PH YSIC A L   CON STITU TION AND TE M PE R A M E N T .        133

the ascendant; and, for the same reason, similar effects should
be traceable to an evil planet located on the cusp of the eighth
house.
  Ptolemy held that oriental planets signify accidents rather
than disease. The author’s experience has shown that oriental
planets sometimes produce diseases as well as accidents. For
example :—
  “ J. P. L.,” born February 26th, 1847, at 3h 23m a.m., lat 53° 47' N.
Mars was in the ascendant, at this man’s birth, in the sign Capricorn,
and in square to Uranus. He broke a thigh at twenty years old.
Disease of the knee-joint came on in his twenty-third year, necessitat­
ing amputation.

   In regard to blindness Ptolemy says:—
   “ Blindness of one eye will ensue, when the Moon may be in the
•ascendant or descendant, either operating her conjunction [with the
Sun] or being at the fu ll: it will also happen should she be con­
figurated with the Sun in any other proportional aspect, and be at the
same time connected with any one of the nebulous collections in the
■zodiac ; such as the cloudy spot of Cancer, the Pleiades4 of Taurus, the
arrow-head of Sagittarius, the sting of Scorpio, the parts about the
mane of Leo, or the urn of Aquarius. Moreover, both eyes will be
injured should the M oon be in an angle, and in her decrease, and Mars
or Saturn, being matutine, ascend in succession to her; or, again, if
the Sun be in an angle, and these planets pre-ascend before him, and
be configurated with both the luminaries, whether the luminaries be in
One and the same sign, or in opposition; provided, also, the said
planets, although oriental of the Sun, be occidental of the Moon.
Under these circumstances, therefore, Mars will cause blindness by a
stroke or a blow, or by the sword, or by burning; and, if he be con­
figurated with Mercury, it will be effected either hr a place of exercise
or sport, or by the assault of robbers. Saturn, howTever, under the
same circumstances, produces blindness by cataract, or cold, by a
white film, or by other similiar disorders.”

   Let us examine the truth of these remarks in the light of
facts.
   C a s e 1.— The lady whose time of birth is given at page 125

(Case 13), had the Moon in 11° 10' of Leo, with 4° 8 ' N. lat.,
very near the Asselli, under the beams of the Sun (operating her
conjunction), and in square with Saturn. Loss of sight of the
right5 eye resulted from a series of abscesses beginning in the
8th year.
   2.— Mr. B. H., horn June 2nd, 1826, at 7h p.m., Leeds. The
Moon, on the cusp of the sixth in opposition with Mars and
semi-quartile with Saturn. This gentleman lost the sight of his

   4 There is reason to doubt this effect, as far as regards the Pleiades.
   5 T h e M oon is said to govern the left eye o f a m an, and the right eye of a
w om an.
134                TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


left eye, but I do not know either the date or the cause of the'
privation.6
   3.    — Mrs. A. D., born March 17th, 1817, at 011 28m p.m., in
lat. 50° 4 4 ' N. This lady became totally blind, gradually, from
48 to 54 years of age, and remained so until her death in 1878 ;
she also suffered from cancer of the breast, the sign Cancer
rising at her birth. The Moon, operating her conjunction, in
Pisces, in semi-quartile with Mars, and in square with Uranus.
   4.    — The late King George V., of Hanover, born May 27th,.
1819, at 4h 40™ p.m., Berlin. The Moon in square with Mars ;
the Sun in semi-quartile wTith Mars, and near the mundane
square of Saturn. The Moon, moreover, was within 5° of the
semi-quartile of the Sun. Mars was in the 6th house, and in
Aries, which rules the head. The injury to the eye, in 1832,
which eventually caused blindness, occurred under the primary
directions of © s. □ p m., con. 13° 19', and © s. □ ¿f m .,
con. 13° 24'. It must not be overlooked that Mars was in
mundane parallel to Mercury, at birth, producing, as Ptolemy
avers, “ blindness by a stroke or a blow, in a place of exercise or
sport.” The injury occurred while the late king was playing
with a purse, receiving a blow on the eye from it.
   5.    — Natus, May 29th, 1812, at 2h a.m., in lat. 53° 48' N.
Saturn on the upper meridan in par dec. with the Sun. The-
Moon separating from her conjunction with the Sun, and apply­
ing to conjunction with Mars. This man was born blind ; and
his lower limbs were defective from birth, being drawn up under
him and paralysed (      in Vy).
   The next point investigated by Ptolemy is privation of the
faculty of speech. He says :—
  “ I f Saturn and Mercury, in conjunction with the Sun, be in the
before-mentioned angles, the native will have some defect in the
tongue, and stammer or speak with difficulty'; especially if Mercury be
occidental, and both he and Saturn configurated with the Moon.
Should Mars, however, be found together with them, he will for the
most part remove the defect in the tongue, after the Moon shall have
completed her approach to him.”

  A cousin of the author’ s was born (January 4th, 1834, at
10h 55m p.m., London) a deaf mute. Saturn was in the ascend­
ant in square with the Sun, in the 4th house.      Mercury was
conjoined with Mars and Venus ; and the Sun, Mars, Mercury,
and Venus were in parallel declination with each other.  Many
physicians and surgeons were consulted, but none of them could

        0 V ide Star Lore, October, 1897, p. 154 for this horoscope.
              PH YSICAL   CON STITU TION   AND TE M PE R A M E N T .   135

effect a cure.      His intellect was of a high order, and he
possessed considerable mechanical skill.
   Ptolemy next proceeds to instruct his disciples in the causes
of paralysis, etc., thus :—•
   “ Should the malefics be in angles, and the luminaries, either
together or in opposition, be brought up to th em ; or, if the malefics
be brought up to the luminaries, especially when the M oon may be in
her nodes, or in extreme latitude, or in obnoxious signs, such as Aries,
Taurus, Cancer, Scorpio, and Capricorn, the body will then be afflicted
with excrescences, distortions, lameness, or paralysis.
   “ If the malefics be in conjunction with the luminaries, the calamity
will take effect from the very moment of birth: but, should they be in
the mid-heaven, in elevation above the luminaries, or in opposition to
each other, it will then arise out of some great and dangerous accident;
such as a fall from some height or precipice, or an attack of robbers, or
of quadrupeds. And thus, if Mars hold dominion, he will produce the
misfortune by means of fire or wounds, through quarrels or by robbers;
and if Saturn, it will be caused by a fall, by shipwreck, or by con­
vulsive fits or spasms.
   “ Mercury, also, will contribute to the increase of the evil: thus, if he
be in familiarity with Saturn, he will much augment the coldness, and
promote the continuance of rheumatism, and the disturbance of the
flu ids; especially in the chest, throat, and stomach. If in familiarity
with Mars, he will tend to produce greater dryness, and will increase
ulcers, abscesses, loss of hair, erysipelas, tetters, blackness of bile,
insanity, epilepsy, and similar disorders.
   “ Under the circumstances above detailed, the disease or hurt will be
incurable, provided there shall be not one of the benefics in configura­
tion with the malefics which effect the evil, nor with the luminaries
posited in angles; and even though the benefics may be so con­
figurated, the misfortune will still be incapable of remedy, if the
malefics be well fortified, and in elevation above them.”

  Here we have some well-defined rales to guide us in our judg­
ment in respect to disease ; the question arises: Are they borne
out by experience ? Let us ascertain :—
  C ase 1.—James R. T., born August 13th, 1861, at 0h 30'n a.m.,
Monkwearmouth. Suffered from epilepsy from birth; had been under
medical treatment with no permanent benefit. Occasionally he became
maniacal. The Sun in conjunction with Mars, in Leo, and in square
with the Moon, in Scorpio.     Mercury in par. dec. with the Moon,
which luminary partakes of the nature of Mars and the Sun by reason
of her configuration with them.      Saturn vitiates both Jupiter and
Venus by his conjunction with them.
  2.    — “ F.W .” born November 24th, 1870, at 61' a.m., London. The
Sun in the ascendant, in conjunction with Mercury, and in par. dec.
with Saturn and Uranus. Mars in the mid-heaven, elevated above all
the heavenly bodies. The M oon in conjunction with Saturn, in square
with Mars, in opposition with Jupiter, haying the par. dec. with
Mercury, Saturn, Jupiter, and UranUs.     He suffered with attacks of
epilepsy every fortnight, often coming on when he was asleep,
Medical treatment proved of no avail.
  3. — “ E.M .,” born November 11th, 1857, at 5h a.m., Northampton.
136               TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TB O LO G Y.


The Moon (hyleg) in conjunction with Mars.          Saturn on the upper
meridian, in mundane square with Venus, rising. The evil Saturn was
elevated above all the heavenly bodies. This child died, May 23rd,
1861. He never had the proper use of his limbs, and he was so weak
that he was always in the recumbent posture. He suffered much with
his throat, being only able to swallow liquids ( $ in S , in the eighth
house).
   4.    — “ A. C.,” born June 6th, 1831, midnight, Northampton. Uranus
conjoined with Jupiter, rising, in opposition to Saturn, setting; Mars
in the sixth house in square with the Moon, and in par. dec. with the
Smi. The Sun on the lower meridian in mundane square with Saturn
(in Leo), Uranus and Jupiter (in Aquarius). He was paralysed from 8
years and 10 months old, when he had a severe fall and broke a thigh,
and also lost his speech and hearing for eleven years.
   5.    — “ B.,” born June 18th, 1838, at 9h 5m p.m., Northampton.
Saturn on the upper meridian, in opposition with the Moon. She had
paralysis of the lower extremities from birth.
   6.    — “ A. D. M.,” born August 7th, 1855, at 2h 40m p.m., South
Shields. The M oon in Gemini, in par. dec. with Mars and Saturn.
Mars had risen, in Cancer, just before birth, and Saturn was in
Gemini, and in the 12th house, receiving the application of the Moon.
This young man was run over by an engine, on the Hartlepool line,
and lost an arm and a leg. On the day of the accident (July 6th,
1866), the Sun was passing over the exact place of Mars at birth. The
“ direction ” operating was Asc. par. 1? zod., con. 10° 57'
   A young lady who was born when Saturn was exactly setting
in the sign Leo, in opposition to the ascending degree (hyleg)
suffered from birth until she was over nineteen years of age,
with a spinal complaint, which kept her lying down, and was
pronounced incurable by several specialists who treated the case
from time to time without success. The author encouraged the
parents of the poor sufferer to hope for a cure being effected by
the vis medicatrix natures in her twentieth or twenty-first year,
when she would have a long train of benefic primary directions
coming into operation in her favour. She recovered at twenty
years old almost suddenly, and is strong and well now.
   The cases enumerated above furnish us with ample evidence
of the truth of Ptolemy’s observations respecting the major
bodily diseases and accidents. It is open to the opponents of
astrology to bring counter evidence —if they can find any. The
important question of physical well-being as indicated, or
contra-indicated, by the relative positions of the Sun, Moon, and
planets, is deserving of the most extended observation on the
part of philosophers and the medical profession.
                                           137




                    CHAPTER                           XXII.



      THE       MIND              AND            DISPOSITION.

                “ H o w l it t l e d o w e k n o w t h a t w h i c h w e a r e !
                  H o w le s s w h a t w e m a y b e ! ” — B y r o n .


 M ercu ry has chief dominion over the mental faculties ; the
 sentient, and also the passions, are governed by the Moon and
 the ascendant. The manners and disposition are also chiefly
 influenced by the ascendant and the Moon.
    That the planet Mercury rules the rational and intellectual
 faculties has been recognised in all ages of the world, and it has
 ever been known that in order to be possessed of mens sana in
 corpora sano, both Mercury and the Moon must be strong, free
 from affliction, and connected either with each other or with the
 ascendant, and with Jupiter, Mars, or Venus.
    The mutual configuration of the Moon with Mercury is,
 undoubtedly, very desirable. The angular position especially in
 the ascendant is the best “ dignity” that Mercury can possess.
 Experience teaches us that Mercury is stronger zodiacally, when
located in either Gemini or Virgo than when in other signs,
but it by no means follows that he is weak when in Sagittary
or Pisces. At Sir Isaac Newton’s birth Mercury was in Sagittary
and in quartile with Jupiter ana Saturn conjoined in Pisces.
    When Mercury and the Moon happen to be configurated -with
several planets, the person then born will (it is averred by some
authors) be very unsettled and unstable in disposition —“ Every­
thing by turns, and nothing long.” Whether this is true or
not, it is observed that such a variety of configurations confers
versatility of talent, and a love of change of occupation.
   The parallel of declination, the conjunction, the sextile, and
the trine, are the happiest bonds of connexion between the
Moon and Mercury, for they produce, more or less, according to
the position and other configurations of these two bodies, good
abilities, ingenuity, readiness of resource, a pretty wit, and
energy. The square and opposition are better than no aspect
between the Moon and Mercury, but they sometimes cause
138                 TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


obstinacy, cynicism, and fickleness in addition to good abilities;
chiefly if Mars or Saturn be evilly configurated with one of
them. The “ dispositors,” or planets ruling the signs contain­
ing Mercury and the Moon, may be disregarded, unless they
happen to be in configuration with one or the other ; and the
oriental position of one of them is better than the occidental.
   The general influence of the signs—excepting the equinoctial
strangely omitted by Claudius Ptolemy—when ascending, or,
containing Mercury and the Moon, is thus described:—

  “ The tropical signs [Cancer and Capricomusl generally dispose the
mind to enter much into political matters, rendering it eager to engage
in public and turbulent affairs, fond of distinction, and busy in
theology,; at the same time, ingenious, acute, inquisitive, inventive,
speculative, studious of astrology and divination.
   “ Bicorporal signs |Gemini, Sagittarius, and the first half of Pisces]
render the mind variable, versatile, not easy to be understood, volatile,
and unsteady; inclined to duplicity, amorous, wily, fond of music,
careless, full of expedients, and regretful.
   “ Fixed signs [Taurus, Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius] make the mind
just, uncompromising, constant, firm of purpose, prudent, patient,
industrious, strict, chaste, mindful of injuries, steady in pursuing its
object, contentious, desirous of honour, avaricious, and pertinacious.”

   Ptolemy enjoins his disciples to consider “ the configurations
made with the Sun and the angles by stars bearing any relation
to the point in question,” in addition to “ such stars as hold any
influence over Mercury and the Moon.”
   The retrograde position of Mercury is said by some authors to
impair the native’s abilities. That this aphorism is unsound
can be proved by a reference to the Prince Consort’s nativity,
wherein Mercury will be found to be retrograde. The
proximate quartile aspect of both Mars and Uranus with Mercury
in the same nativity supports the observation of Wilson, that he
had “ never observed that the nature of an aspect,” to
Mercury, “ made much difference, whether a square or
sextile.”
   The abilities of a person born when Mercury is “ combust ” or
“ under the sunbeams,” are also said, by some authors, to be
impaired ; and, on the other hand, that the abilities of persons
born when Mercury is in “ cazimi ” (within 17' of the Sun’s
centre) are of the highest order.
   At the Plight Hon. W. E. Gladstone’s birth (December 29th,
1809), Mercury was (at noon) in 0° 45' of Ttf, and the Sun was
in 7° 27' of     ; hence Mercury was combust. The great mental
abilities of Mr. Gladstone cannot be denied, and this fact induces
                        THE   M IND AND D ISPO SITIO N .                    139'

 -very grave doubt as to the truth of the axiom that the combustion
 of Mercury impairs the abilities of the native.*
    The Earl of Beaconsfield, K.G., was born December 21st,.
 1804 ; Mercury (at noon) in 13° 2 ' of Vy, the Sun in 29° 31' of
  f , hence Mercury was under the sunbeams. Moreover, Mercury
 had the close square aspect with both Saturn and Uranus
 (nearly conjoined in Libra).+
    According to the teachings of some authors the noble Earl
 should possess very mean abilities indeed, owing to the position
 and aspects of Mercury. In justice to Ptolemy it must be stated
 that he draws no distinction between the nature of the aspects
 to Mercury, for he uses only the terms “ conciliated ” and
 “ connected,” and nowhere speaks of any difference in the-
 infiuence of the square and sextile, etc., in relation to Mercury.
    At Goethe’s birth Mercury was less than ten degrees separated,
from the Sun, and had the parallel declination of Saturn.
    At the birth of the late Sir Robert Peel, Mercury was only
five degrees distant from the Sun, and in trine aspect with
Jupiter.
    At the birth of Napoleon I., Mercury was within seventeen
degrees of the Sun, and in quartile with Uranus.
    At the birth of Lord Nelson, Mercury was less than fourteen
degrees from the Sun.
    Mercury when in conjunction, sextile or trine with Saturn, is-
said to indicate “ sound judgment, and a careful, constant wit.”
Upon this aphorism, Wilson remarks: “ I am certain the-
cunjunction with Saturn would be productive of quite a contrary
effect.” In this opinion Wilson was decidedly mistaken, as
reference to Goethe’s nativity (wherein £ had par. dec. with l? )
will prove. Any aspect of Saturn with Mercury contributes to
solidity of intellect, and gives a love for antiquarian studies,
patience, and laboriousness; and (if mixed with Jupiter),
probably a tendency to asceticism. Jupiter in aspect with
Mercury gives candour, generosity, and good abilities. Mars
configurated with Mercury gives courage, self-confidence,
mechanical dexterity, and sometimes rashness. Many eminent
surgeons were born when Mercury and the luminaries were-
configurated with Mars. Unless Jupiter or Venus be con­
figurated with Mercury, his familiarity with Mars is apt to-
produce want of tenderness, as in the case of vivisectionists.

  * The horoscope was given in “ S t a r L o r e ,” June 1898.
   f EarlBeaconsfield’s horoscope was presented in m y “ S c ie n c e o f t h e .
S t a r s.”
140               TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y .


     The Sun in conjunction or parallel with Mercury, indicates
pride, conscientiousness, and ambition.
     Venus in aspect with Mercury confers taste, elegance, love of
luxury, music, fascination of manners, and amiability; but if
 there are cross aspects of the infortunes to Venus and Mercury,
the motives of the person then born are liable to misconstruction ;
and, unless Jupiter should be configurated with them or with
the Moon, or predominant, the talents are liable to be per­
verted.
     Uranus in configuration with Mercury, inclines the native to
the study of astrology, astronomy, and applied sciences, and
 renders his mental abilities ingenious and original.
     Neptune gives as much romance to the mind and nature,
 -when configurated -with Mercury, as Uranus gives, but less
 ingenuity.
      At the birth of H .R .Il. the Duchess of Argyll, Mercury was
  retrograde, in Pisces, in close conjunction with Saturn, in
 square with Mars, and in trine with Jupiter. The Moon was in
 .sextile with Jupiter, in square with Mars, in opposition with
  Mercury, and in par. dec. with Saturn. Venus was in square
  with the ascending degree.         This amiable Princess, it is well
  -known, is highly gifted.*
      In the nativity of George III., June 4th, 1738, at 7h 46m a.m.,
   Mercury was conjoined with Saturn ; Mars (on the upper
   meridian) was in square with the ascendant and the Moon, and
  the Moon and Mercury were neither connected with each other
   nor with the ascendant. Under evil primary directions the king
  became insane, and, but for Mercury having the sextile of
  Jupiter, and the conjunction with Venus, he would have become
   insane much earlier in life. It is most important that Mercury
 .-and the Moon be connected either with each other or with the
  .ascendant, for otherwise there is always a risk, temporarily at
   least, of insanity under the combined influence of a train of evil
  •directions. Saturn inclines to melancholia, Mars to mania; and
  the combination of their evil influences induces either epilepsy or
   alternate fits of melancholy and fury.
      The observations of Ptolemy on diseases of the mind and
   body, are so confused that, although there is much truth in many
   of them, it is very difficult to sift the wheat from the chaff. It
   is just possible, however, that Ptolemy is not so much to blame
   for the confusion to be found in his writings, as handed down to

          * This horoscope was given in ZadldeVs Almanac, 1890.
                     TH E   M IND AND D ISPO SITIO N .              1«

us, for the Greeks and Romans corrupted the Egyptian
astrology.   The edition of the Elzevirs, dated in 1635, was
printed in double columns, one containing Proclus’s Greek
paraphrase, the other the Latin translation of Leo Allatius, a.
Greek by birth, celebrated for his works in both languages, who-
was appointed keeper of the Vatican Library, by Pope Alexander
VII., with whom he was in high favour.         Melancthon after
having been at the pains of correcting and republishing, in 1553
(with his own emendations), the edition of Camerarius, contain­
ing the reputed original text, still deemed it advisable, in the
following year, to edit Proclus’s paraphrase.
   A few cases have fallen under the author’s notice. They are
these:—-
   C a s e 1.— Adah P., an idiot, bom January 18th, 1858, at 0h 21m p.m.,
Northampton.         Mercury on the upper meridian in opposition with
Saturn, in square with Mars, and in par dec. with Uranus (rising), and
unconnected with the Moon. Saturn being in Cancer and opposed to.
the Sun, the child suffered from chronic dyspepsia.
   2.      — “ B .,” born June 18th, 1888, at 9h 5m p.m., Northampton. This
woman was idiotic from birth. Mercury in conjunction with Mars,,
and the M oon in opposition with Saturn (culminating).
   3.      — “ J. N. S.,” horn September 25th, 1843, at 7h a.m., London. The
M oon and Mercury nearly conjoined, in the ascendant, in square with
Saturn (in the northern angle). The Moon had the trine of Jupiter.
The Sun in square with Mars, in opposition with Uranus, and in con­
junction with Venus. This gentleman, who was well educated, and
possessed good musical talent, fell a victim to melancholia, and died,
of abscess of the brain, in a lunatic asylum, in his 31st year.
   4.      — “ K. J.,” born April 9th, 1848, at 5h 30m a.m., lat 55° N. This-
 gentleman who was highly educated, suffered with religious mania, and.
 died suddenly, in a lunatic asylum, in his 28th year. Mercury was in
 conjunction and par. dec. with Saturn and Venus, in Pisces, and in
 square with Mars. The Moon had separated but 7° from the con­
 junction with Mars, and was applying to the conjunction with Jupiter.
 The Sun had just risen in close conjunction with Uranus. At the.
 autopsy the heart and lungs were found to be perfectly healthy (J)
  d If. in $ ) ; and the doctors said that he had died from exhaustion
 through having refused all kinds of food.

  “ The diseases of the body act through the vital principle-
upon the mind,” as Dr. Sharp w ro te :* “ and, on the
other hand, the disorders of the mind act through the same
medium upon the body. These are the only instances we are-
cognisant of in which matter and spirit meet and act upon each
other ; in all other cases, so far as we know, matter acts only
upon matter, and spirit upon spirit.”

   * Essays on Medicine, being an investigation o f Homceopathy and other
 Medical Systems. Leath and lioss. T enth E dition, page 137.
142                   TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y .


     Hahnemann, the founder of homoeopathy, observed that certain
 ■symptoms manifested themselves “ at the new or full Moon,”
:and some “ when the moon is waning.” Jahr1 directs certain
  medicines to be given at the decline of the Moon, and
  others at the next full Moon. Dr. Sharp repudiated “ the
 re-introduction of astrological considerations among the reasons
 for prescribing remedies for disease,” but expressed himself as
 “ ready to adopt whatever is demonstrated, or concede whatever
 is rendered highly probable.” Dr. Sharp admitted that, “ for
 many centuries a belief had been maintained that the action of
■drugs is under the government of the Sun, Moon, and planets.”
  Also that, “ All the details of this misbelief are given with
 perfect good faith, and with entire confidence, so lately as the
 middle of the seventeenth century, in one of the most popular
 medical books of the'time— by “ popular,’ I here mean among
 medical men ; this is the Pharmaeopæia of John Schroder
 (1656).” If Dr. Sharp had carefully compared the directions
 for the administration of herbs given in Culpeper’s Herbal, with
 the symptoms produced in the healthy and cured in the
 diseased by certain drugs, used by homceopathic (and some
 allopathic) physicians, he could not have failed to be struck with
dhe manifest correlation of the homceopathic with the astrological
 law. Medicine was invented by the Egyptians in order to over­
 come the apparently fatal influence of the evil planets, when in
■certain relative positions ; and, as Ptolemy relates, “ they com­
 bined the medical art with astronomical prognostication.” Since
the spread of homœopathy, and the improvement of the medical
art generally, a knowledge of astrology and of the relation of
certain drugs to the Sun, Moon, and planets, is not so indis­
 pensable as formerly. Even at the present day, however, such
 knowledge would be of great use to the doctors, and of great
benefit to their patients ; and, in regard to the treatment of the
insane, a knowledge of astrology would be found to be of
 immense service.
    The Lancet2 once stated that :—
   “ The progressive explorations of physiological and pathological
science develop intimate bonds of union between mind and body
hitherto undiscovered, and not even supposed to exist.3 Mind and
body are inseparable,-4 at least during life ; they are mutually dependent

  1 Clinical Guide, article, “ W orm A ffections.”
   2 July 22nd, 1876.
   8 E x cep t by the Astrologers.
   4 See The Human Body and its Connection with Man, by Dr. Garth
W ilk in s o n ; also by the same author, Human Science and Divine Revelation.
                      THE   MIND AND D ISPO SITIO N .                143

for energy; the strength of the one is the power of the other; the
weakness of one is the impotence of both.”

   No better evidence of this truth can be obtained than that
afforded by a study of the genethliacal branch of astrology.
   In the Psychologie Morbide of Dr. J. Moreau (de Tours),
Médecin de l'Hospice de Bicêtre, the author thus speaks of two
"twin brothers who had been confined, on account of monomania,
at Bicêtre : —
    “ Physically the two young men are so nearly alike that the one is
■easily mistaken for the other. Morally their resemblance is no less
 complete, and is most remarkable in its details. Thus, their dominant
 ideas are absolutely the same. They both consider themselves subject
 to imaginary persecutors, the same enemies have sworn their destruc­
 tion, and employ the same means to effect it. Both have
 hallucinations of hearing. They are both of them melancholy and
 morose ; they never address a word to anybodjy and will hardly
 answer the questions that others address to them. They always keep
 apart and never communicate with one another. An extremely
 curious fact, which has been frequently noted by the superintendents
 of their section of the hospital, and by myself, is this :— From time to
time, at very regular intervals of two, three, and many months, with­
out appreciable cause, and by the purely spontaneous effect of their
illness, a very marked change takes place in the condition of the two
brothers. Both of them, at the same time, and often on the same day,
rouse themselves from their habitual stupor and prostration; they
make the same complaints, and they come of their own accord to the
physician with an urgent request to be liberated. I have seen this
 strange thing occur, even when they were some miles apart ; the one
being at Bicêtre, and the other living at Saint-Anne.”

   There    is another      curious French case of insanity
in twins, described by Dr. Baume, in the Annales Médico-
Psychologiques. ’ ’6
   Trousseau gives a remarkable case, in his important work
■Clinique Médicales, in the chapter on Asthma, of twin-brothers
“ so extraordinarily alike,” and who had “ a yet more remarkable
pathological resemblance.” He says ;—
   “ These twins were also asthmatic, and to a frightful degree. Though
born in Marseilles, they were never able to stay in that town, where
their business affairs required them to go, without having an attack.
Still more strange, it was sufficient for them to get away only as far as
Toulon in order to be cured of the attack caught at Marseilles. They
travelled continually and in all countries, and they remarked that
•certain localities were extremely hurtful to them, and that in others
they were free from all asthmatic symptoms.”

   Who will say that this is not strongly corroborative of the
truth of astrology ?

                    5 4 Série, V ol. L , 1863, page 312.
144                 TH E   T E X T -B O O K   ®F A S T R O L O G Y .


   The similarity of twins is an incontrovertible proof of the-
influence of the ambient. If Mercury be strong in both
nativities the countenance of twins born nearly together will be-
illuminated by wisdom, and vice versa. It is a mistake to think
that either religion or education can ever change the original
impress of nature. The leonine man will ever be leonine in the
expression of his countenance, and in many of the traits of his.
character; the Saturnine man will never become jovial looking ;
the Mercurialist will always be mercurial. Lord Verulam once-
observed that “ a fine person is a perpetual letter of recommen­
dation.” The Almighty has, however, in some notable instances
conferred the highest intellect upon men whose bodies and
countenances could lay no claim to symmetry— as was the case-
with Swift, Pope, Yoltaire, Goldsmith, Johnson, and ¿Esop.
Goethe tells us in his Autobiography that Lavater was to a certain
extent disappointed with his personal appearance at their first
interview.
    The remarkable horoscopes of twins born on the 9th June,.
 1890, at an interval of one hour and a half, one dying in infancy
and the other surviving that period, were given in S tar L o r e ,.
March, 1897, pp. 32, 33.
    In F u t u r e , August and September, 1893, pp. 121, 180, there?
 are some remarks on twins.
    Emerson in his “ Essay on Beauty” wrote that:—
   “ Astrology interested us, for it tied man to the system. Instead o f
an isolated beggar, the farthest star felt him and he felt the star.
However rash and however falsified by pretenders to it, the hint was-
true and divine, the soul’s avowal of its large relations, and that;
climate, century, remote natures as well as near are part of its.
biography. . . . .       a right and perfect man would he felt to the-
centre of the Copernican system.”
   Some persons born with either of the signs Aries, Taurus, Leo,.
Scorpio,1
        6 the latter half of Sagittary, and Capricorn, ascending-
(except when Mercury is in the ascendant and configurated
with the Moon and the fortunes) have something nearly akin
to the animal expression and character.       When Mercury is;
powerful in a nativity, the cultivation of the mind and the
subordination of the passions to reason will cause a gradual
transformation from the human to the divine expression. The.
divine physiognomical expression pourtrayed by the Greeks as-
appertaining to their heroes and divinities, marks “ how high
progressive life may go,” as Pope says.

      Scorpio often gives features greatly resem bling those of the eagle.
                                    145




                 CHAPTER                  XXIII.



    THE       FORTUNE  OF W E A L T H                            AND
                     RANK.

      “ E rrors, like straws, upon the surface flow ;
        H e who w ould search for pearls m ust dive below .” — D kyden.


N apoleon I. and Louis N apoleon III., by their wonderful careers,
exemplified the pre-signification of the major planets rising or
culminating at birth. They “ achieved greatness,” by the
power of their stars and the force of their intellect, and they
both fell from their exalted positions, were made prisoners, and
died in exile ! A fitting commentary is afforded by the eventful
career of those monarchs, on the meridional position of the
planet Saturn : for at their births, and at the birth of Louis
Phillippe, also, was the greater infortune culminating ! The
nativity of Napoleon the Great was computed by Worsdale, who
stated that :—•
  “ The Emperor himself gave the time of his birth to an astronomer
in Corsica, as having taken place at a quarter before ten o’clock in
the forenoon of August 15th, 1769, at Ajaccio.”

  The time of birth of Louis Napoleon was given                     in the
Moniteur of April 21st, 1808, as follows:—
  “ Paris, le 20 Avril, 180S.—Aujourd’hui, mercredi 20 Avril, â une
heure du matin, S.M. la reine de Hollande est heureusement accouchée
d’un Prince.”

   For Louis Phillippe’s time of birth the author cannot vouch,
but it was given as 9'“ 40ma.m., October 6th, 1778.
   The great Solar Eclipse of October 9th, 1847, fell close to the
place of the Sun in the navitity of Louis Phillipe (in opposition
to Uranus), and foreshadowed his downfall.
   Zadkiel I. foretold the fate of Louis Napoleon, in his Almanac
for 1853, in the following words :—
 “ But let him not dream of lasting honours, power, or prosperity.
He shall found no dynasty, he shall wear no durable crown ; but, in the
146               TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF A S T R O L O G Y .


midst of deeds of blood and slaughter, with affrighted Europe tremb­
ling beneath the weight of his daring, martial hosts, he descends
beneath the heavy hand of fate, and falls to rise no more.”

    King Francis I. of France, born September 12th, 1494, at
10h 37m p.m., in lat. 48° N., whose horoscope was given by
Placidus, had Saturn in the tenth house in Pisces 10° 22' and
in parallel of declination with the Moon, and Neptune on the
lower meridian, fought against the Emperor Charles V. of
Germany, whose horoscope was also given by Placidus, and
suffered a great overthrow, and was himself wounded and taken
prisoner by the victorious Germans. The German Emperor’ s
 nativity was the more fortunate one.
     Ptolemy directs us to judge of the fortune of wealth by the
 “ Part of Fortune” alone; “ the position of which,” he says,
 “ is, in all cases, always as far removed from the ascendant as
 the Sun is distant from the Moon.” This may have been an
 interpolation, however.
     Wilson avers that the pars fortunm “ is really nothing but a
 phantom hatched in the figurative brain of Ptolemy, which has
 no influence whatever, except influence can arise out of nothing.”
 The author is in perfect accord with Wilson in this view.
     Placidus once confessed that he had, with regard to the Part
 of Fortune, laboured a long time, and had never been able to
  find any truth in it.
     The Part of Fortune is that point of the horoscope whereon
  the rays of the Sun and Moon converge, and where the Moon
  would be if the Sun were exactly rising. Effects (if any) con­
  nected with the Part of Fortune, are really traceable to the
  Sun and Moon. It must, therefore, be rejected from a rational
  system of genethlialogy.
     If Venus and Jupiter be strong, and in good configuration
  with either the Sun or Moon in a nativity, the person then born
  will become wealthy, either through inheritance or by means of
  his own industry. The angular position is the strongest that
  the luminaries and the planets can have. The space extending
  from the cusp of the 2nd house to that of the 9th, via the
   ascendant, is the next best, and most fortunate for the
   luminaries and benefics to be placed in at birth. The most
   powerful angle is the south, the next is the east, then the west;
   and the fourth is held to be weakest of four angles.
      Saturn and Mars angular also give advancement, but it is
   almost invariably attended with risks and dangers, and with
   reverses towards the end of life.
                  TH E   FO RTUN E    OF W E A L T H   AND   RANK.              147

    The Sun and Moon afflicted and cadent in the Gth or 3rd
houses, and the planets weakly posited, threaten poverty, diffi­
 culties, and misery, difficult to overcome even by those who are
gifted with indomitable resolution, and are blessed with health
and strength.
    Planets retrograde at birth are said to cause poverty and sick­
ness, but this is very doubtful.1
   It is important that the Sun and Moon be in good aspect with
■each other—sextile or trine— and if one of them be on the
upper meridian, so much the better for the native’s fortune.
For persons who continue to reside in or near the place of their
birth, it is important that the Sun and Moon, Jupiter and Venus
be above the earth, in order to afford a prospect of lasting
prosperity. Saturn with the Moon, especially when angular, is
one of the worst positions ; and, unless the Moon be configurated
with Jupiter, or that benefic be ascending, ruin or disgrace may
■ensue. Fixed stars of a fortunate nature (Arista, North Scale,
Rigel, etc.) ascending, culminating, or with one of the
luminaries, promise riches or good fortune.
    Saturn in benefic aspect with the Sun, Moon, and Jupiter
gives riches by inheritance, gain by mines (if Saturn be in the
fourth house), lands, legacies, agriculture, or navigation.
    Jupiter gives wealth by means of the church, the law, offices
•of state, or University appointments.
   Mars gives riches by military preferment, surgery, and all
mechanical trades in which iron and sharp tools are used.
   Venus gives wealth through the friendship or kind offices of
ladies of position and influence and success in art, music, the
 drama, etc.
    Mercury confers riches by means of science, art, literature,
■eloquence, travelling, etc.
    From the position of the planets most strongly fortified in the

   1 “ H ad I faith in astrology, brother (which by the bye m y father had), I
w ould have sworn som e retrograde planet was hanging over this unfortunate
house o f mine, and turning every individual thing in it out o f its p la ce.” —
L a u r e n c e S t e r n e (Tristram Shandy).
   “ B ut there is a fatality attends the actions o f som e m e n ; order them as
they w ill, they pass through a certain m edium w h ich so twists and refracts
them from their true direction— that with all the titles to praise w hich a
rectitude o f heart can give, the doers of them are nevertheless forced to live
and die without it.” — S t e r n e .
   “ I had never m ore need that the heavenly bodies should befriend m e,
for m y earthly path is darkened and con fu sed .” — L e i c e s t e r .
                   A nd shake the yoke o f inauspicious stars,
                   F rom this world-wearied flesh.” — S h a k e s p e a r e .
 148                TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y .


 horoscope, the direction, or part of the world in which fortune is
 most likely of attainment, may sometimes be known.
   Too much stress has been laid on the position of Jupiter in
the 2nd house of a nativity. Hopes have thereby been raised
only to be disappointed, of “ wealth beyond the dreams of
avarice.”    If the Sun and Moon be evilly configurated
with Saturn, ,and have no assistance from Jupiter, the
accidental position of Jupiter in the 2nd house can be
of little avail, and the native is more likely to meet with
penury than wealth. The position of Jupiter in the 2nd house
when happily configurated with the Sun, and receiving the
bodily application of the Moon, especially in Cancer, Sagittarius,
or Pisces, the luminaries being free from affliction, will bring a
good estate, or good fortune in trade.           The career of an
individual may be advantageously altered, in some cases, by
emigration, as before stated. For example:—
   A gentleman, whose birth took place at midnight of September 29th,
1816, in Scotland, met with but little prosperity in the United
Kingdom. He removed to Australia, and there prospered to such an
extent that he became one of the wealthiest and most highly respected
citizens of Melbourne. At his birth the planets Mercury, Venus, and
Jupiter, were located in the 4th house (the northern angle). By
crossing the equator, and pitching his tent in a southern latitude (38°)
he inverted his horoscope, and thereby brought the benefics nearly to-
the upper meridian of his nativity.

  Here is another instance, and of a different kind, of benefit by
emigration :—
  A gentleman, whose birth took place when the M oon was culminating
in the sign Capricorn, in sextile to Jupiter (setting), and in trine
to the Sun. He went to India (ruled by Capricorn), rose to distinction,
and obtained a lucrative post under Government there.

   R ank.— The Sun and Moon when angular, especially if, in
 Aries, Cancer, Capricornus, or Libra and well aspected by the
benefics, or the benefics angular and well aspected by the
luminaries, confer power, distinction, and greatness on the
native.    On the other hand, the luminaries far below the
horizon, afflicted by the malefics, and no benefic angular,
poverty, obscurity, and adversity from which the native will find
it well-nigh impossible to emerge, at least in the hemisphere in
which he was born, are likely to be endured.
   Rank and authority proceeding from Saturn, may probably be-
derived from the possession of land, houses, mines, etc.
   Rank and authority proceeding from Jupiter and Venus are
pleasurable, and accompanied with honour and riches.
                   TH E   FO RTU N E   OF "WEALTH AND   RA N K .            149

    Rank and authority proceeding from Mars, are derived from
 the command of armies, the gaining of victories by sea or land,
 distinction in surgery, engineering, etc.
    Rank and authority proceeding from Mercury arise from dis­
 tinction in literature, arts, sciences, and in the direction or
 management of great companies.
    Planets when rising before the Sun, and setting after the
 Moon, are held to possess more efficacy in the promotion of rank
 and wealth.
    The configurations and positions of the Sun, Moon, Jupiter
 and Venus at the births of Her Majesty Queen Victoria, the
 Prince Consort, and King Edward VII., are eminently illustra­
 tive of the power of the heavenly bodies in nativities.
    The nativities of the late German Emperor, grandfather of
the Kaiser, and of King George III. of Great Britain show the
power of Mars when culminating at birth.
    The unfortunate nativities of the members of the Bourbon
family8 (with one exception), illustrate the power of the malefic
planets, when evilly configurated with the luminaries and power­
fully situated, to bring misfortune even upon royal families.
The exception is the nativity of Louis XVIII., in which Jupiter
was rising, and, therefore, after all his vicissitudes of fortune, he
died upon the throne.
    The mutual sextile or trine aspect of the Sun and Moon,
when they are free from affliction, will give advancement,
honour, dignity, and comparative wealth. On the other hand,
the mutual quartile or opposition aspect of the Sun and Moon
generally causes great difficulties and troubles to bar the way of
advancement. Many great men.have been born near full Moon,
but then the fortunes have assisted the Moon, or have been
angular at their births.




  2 The times of birth, and the positions of the luminaries and planets
thereat, were given in a letter to the Spectator, and printed in the edition of
that journal for February 2 2 nd, 1862 ; they were also given in the authors’
pamphlet, A Defence of Astrology, pages 24 to 26.
                                   150




                  CHAPTER                  XXIV.


                ON      THE        VOCATION.

       “ They m arked the influence, and observed the power
       O f every sign, and every fatal h o u r ;
       W hat tempers they bestowed, what fortunes gave,
       A n d who was born a king, who doom ’d a slave.” — M an ilics .

To those persons whose lot it is to labour for their daily bread,,
no question can be more important than that relating to the
nature of the vocation best suited to their talents, and most
favourable to their success. Many eminent men have been com­
pelled to change their profession or business in consequence of
the mistakes of their parents, or guardians, in having appren­
ticed them to trades or professions repugnant to their natures.
Much light can sometimes be thrown on the natural bent of an
individual, on the nature of the employment most fortunate for
him, and, also, on the part of the world most favourable to his
success, by a careful study of his nativity.  It is not, however,
always a point easily determined ; there are, in some nativities,
so many positions and configurations presented for consideration,
that the induction (by which method alone can a safe conclusion
be gained) becomes very difficult.
   If one and the same planet be in the mid-heaven, and making
its oriental appearance nearest to the Sun, it alone should be
taken as the representative of the nature of the profession or
employment. But here, again, a pretty wide field of inquiry is
opened up, for this same planet may bear rule over a variety of
trades and professions. For example, let us suppose Mercury
alone is the significator. We find that he produces writers,
superintendents of business, accountants, teachers, merchants,
and bankers ; and all who live by literature and furnishing
instruction, as well as by stipend or salary. If Mercury be badly
afflicted, the profession followed may be that of an informer, or
contributor to the low-class journals.
   If Saturn be in any way configurated with Mercury, persons
then born will most probably become managers of the affairs of
others, or employed in connection with places of worship.
                         ON T H E   VOCATION.                   151


   If Jupiter and Venus be configurated with Mercury, persons
then born will prosper as painters, artists, musicians, or
jewellers. If Jupiter alone be configurated with Mercury, the
legal or clerical profession will be well adapted to the genius of
the person then born, or the woollen or grocery trade. If Venus
be in conjunction with Mercury, a taste for music, the drama,
etc., may lead the native to devote his talents to the pursuit of
one of them as a profession ; or he may become an astronomer,
or astrologer, or both.
   If Saturn join Mercury and Venus, success is promised in the
manufacture or sale of ornaments and garments for women.
   If Jupiter be joined with Mercury and Venus, the person then
born is well adapted for the office of a magistrate, judge, or tutor.
   Should Mercury and Mars be joined together, the person then
born will, probably, do well as a sculptor, surgeon, engineer,
ironmaster or ironworker, shipbuilder, or in any trade in which
sharp tools are used. If Saturn afflict these planets, and at the
same time afflict the Sun or Moon, there is a danger of becoming
dishonest.     If Jupiter be joined with Mercury and Mars, the
person then born will distinguish himself in honourable warfare,
or in business; and he will be greatly disposed to engage in
foreign trade.
   Venus and Mars being joint arbiters of the employment,
favour success in dealing in perfumery, dyes, drugs, e tc .; and,
also, in art and the theatrical profession.
   Saturn joined with Venus and Mars will incline people to be
attendants on religious ceremonies, undertakers, grave-diggers,
etc.    If Jupiter join Mars and Venus, in signification, persons
then born may become holders of sacred offices.
   Venus alone ruling the employment, signifies dealers in per­
fumery, flowers, fruit, wines, colours, dyes, spices, and apparel
(silk, especially, if ? be in -£=).
   The signs of the zodiac appear to have some general influence
over the nature of the employment.       The signs Gemini, Libra,
and Aquarius, are held to indicate scientific pursuits, Aries,
Taurus, Leo, and Capricorn, give employment among metals, in
business, trade, housebuilding; and as smiths or mechanics.
The tropical and equinoctial (i.e., the cardinal signs) give
employment in matters of exchange, mensuration, agriculture,
or of religion.       The signs Taurus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio,
Capricornus, and Pisces, incline to employment on the water,
horticulture, shipbuilding, and agriculture.
    The Moon regulating the employment, and, separating from
152               TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF AS TK O L O G Y .


  the Sun, forming an aspect with Mercury, inclines to the
  pursuit of travelling, or astronomy, or astrology, or teaching.
     The magnitude and importance of the employment will be
  determined by the power, elevation, and aspects of the ruling
  planet or planets. If they be angular, or oriental of the Sun,
  they usually give eminence and authority; but if under the
  horizon, or occidental, they often render the employment of a
 subordinate character. If the benefics be rulers of the employ­
 ment, or in aspect with the planet ruling, and elevated, they
 give     important,    lucrative,  honourable,     agreeable, and
 conspicuous positions. If, on the other hand, the malefics be
 elevated above and in evil configuration with the ruling planet,
 the employment and position of the person then born may prove
 to be uncertain, poverty-sticken, insecure, and, probably,
 unhealthy also. In such case Saturn causes delay and
 difficulty ; and, in some cases, through several pursuits being
 blended together. Mars produces mischief by rash and reckless
 conduct. Both Saturn and Mars when evilly configurated with
the ruler of the employment indicate several enemies conspiring
against the owner of the horoscope, and seeking to oust him
 from his post; and (unless the Moon be configurated with
 Mercury) these planets may prevent proficiency as well as good
reward.
    In regard to the learned professions, we may be assured that
in order to command success in the law, Jupiter and Mercury
must be strong, and either the Sun or Moon in conjunction,
sextile, trine, or parallel, with Jupiter. To insure success in
 medicine,     Mars must be strong in the nativity, and
harmoniously configurated with either the Sun or Moon or
Mercury. To succeed in the church, Jupiter, or one of the
luminaries should be found in the ninth or tenth house of the
nativity, and in harmonious configuration with Saturn.
    In the remaining professions and trades, success may be
predicated in like manner. The parts of the world most
favourable to the native's career, may be judged according to the
instructions given in the preceding chapter.
    As a general rule the planet Mercury when in either the first,
eleventh, tenth, or ninth house, bears chief sway over
professions and trades. But, should another planet be making
its oriental appearance nearest to the Sun, or be located in the
tenth house, it must be taken to be the representative of the
employment. If one planet be making its oriental appearance
nearest the Sun, and another planet be on the upper meridian,
                        ON TH E   VOCATION.                   153

  that one must be taken which receives the application of the
  Moon. If both planets be configurated ivith the Moon, or if
  neither have any configuration with her, then that one which
  has the most fortunate aspects should be taken to represent the
 employment. If two or more planets he conjoined with
  Mercury, and have configuration with the Moon, the person then
  born will (especially if the Moon be angular) change his
 employment and residence, frequently.
     In Goethe’s nativity both Mercury and Venus are near the
  Sun and the mid-heaven. Mercury is seen placed in the ninth
 house, oriental of the Sun, having the parallel of declination of
  Saturn, the trine of Mars, and the semi-sextile of Venus; and
 separating from the opposition of Uranus. Venus is found in
■the tenth house, occidental of the Sun, having the parallel
 declination of the Moon, the opposition and par. dec. of Jupiter,
  and applying to the quartile with Mars. Venus’s position is,
 therefore, the strongest, and her configuration with Mercury
 inclined Goethe to follow the pursuit of literature, and he
 developed that dramatic and poetic genius for which he is so
justly and deservedly famed. The angular positions of the Sun,
 Venus, the Moon, and Jupiter, together, constitute this nativity
 a fortunate one, and clearly point to his high talents and
 brilliant career. The connection formed by Saturn and Uranus
with Mercury, gave a mystical trait to his mind.
    In Urania. May 1880, will be found a paper by a physician on
“ Successful Commanders,” in which it was shown in the great
majority of instances (eighteen) there was a trine aspect of the
Moon with Mars on the birthday. In a few cases the trine had
been completed on the day before the birth, and in others the
day after. In the absence of information as to the natal hour it
would be unfair to regard these cases as telling against the
theory of martial influence on the careers of generals. Next to
the trine came the mutual sextile of Mars and the Moon. In
Soult’s case there was an opposition of these two celestial
bodies, but the Sun was in Aries and in proximate sextile with
Mars at that great general's birth. In the case of Lord Napier
of Magdala, the Moon was in opposition with Mars in the
evening before his birthday, but the Sun in Sagittary was in
sextile with Mars in Libra, and, probably, the birth took place
about sunrise of December 6th, 1810. The quartile of the Moon
with Mars was only found on the birthday of Count Moltke.
Frederic the Great had the Sun, Mercury and Mars in the tenth
house, for he was born at noon.
154              TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y .


   The Emperor Frederic William of Germany had the Sun in
the martial sign Aries at his birth (two o’clock p.m.) and Mars,
in the tenth house. Moltke had the Sun in the martial sign
Scorpio, and Prince Bismarck had the Sun in Aries, and Mercury
in semi-quartile with Mars. No wonder that this triumvirate
defeated Louis Napoleon in 1870, and consolidated the various-
kingdoms of Germany into a powerful, united Empire.
   Lord Roberts had the Sun in close trine with Mars at his birth,
and Mars nearly in parallel with Jupiter. Mercury, Venus and
Jupiter were all in their respective chief dignities.1
    On the birthday of Lord Kitchener the Moon was just-
separating from the trine with Mars in Leo ; and on his fiftieth
birthday (1900) the Moon was in conjunction with Mars.
    The zodiacal sign containing the ruler of the vocation,
especially if it be on the meridian of the nativity, and if the-
ruler be dignified in it— as the Sun is in Leo, the Moon in
 Cancer, Mercury in Gemini and Virgo, Venus in Taurus and
Libra, Mars in Aries and Scorpio, Jupiter in Sagittarius and
 Pisces, and Saturn in Capricornus and Aquarius— may be of use
 in indicating the country or city in which eminence and success-
 may be achieved in the vocation.
    The gentleman, whose nativity was mentioned at page 148,
 who was born at 8h 20m p.m. of September 6th, 1840, in lat.
 52° 58' N., and long. 6° W ., Capricornus 19° 24' on the upper-
 meridian, and the Moon in 16° 14' of that sign, in trine with
 the Sun in Virgo 14° 16', and in sextile with Jupiter in Scorpio
  14° 15', went out to India (ruled by Capricornus) in October,
  1862, and succeeded well in that country. In this instance
 although the Moon is not dignified in yy, she is well supported
  by the benefic aspects of both the Sun and Jupiter.




                    1 V id e S t a r L o r e , M a rc h , 1900.
                                     155




                      CHAPTER                  XXV.



                            MARRIAGE.

             “ Oh, happy they, the happiest o f their kind,
               W h om gentler stars un ite.” — T h o m s o n .


 A g o o d knowledge of astrology, and due regard being paid to its
premonitions, might prevent many unhappy marriages, and thus
 help to reduce the ever-increasing number of appeals to the
 Court for Divorce and Matrimonial Causes. Claudius Ptolemy
laid down some very clear and concise rules on this subject. Ho-
 advised persons about to marry to have a care that the Sun and
Moon in their respective nativities are in concord. It would be
 well if persons contemplating matrimony would see to it that
 the places of the Sun and Moon in the one nativity are in sextile
or trine aspect to the places of these luminaries in the other.
Ptolemy advised that “ mutual reception ” should also be sought,
but this is of no material consequence. Astrologers generally
consider that it is of the happiest augury when the Moon in the
 bridegroom’s nativity happens to be in sextile or trine to the Sun
in the bride’s nativity. On the other hand, the square or
opposition aspect between the places of the luminaries in the two
nativities, is too often associated with matrimonial strife ; and
the worst effects will follow, if at the same time the malefic
planets afflict the luminaries in both nativities. Ptolemy says
that if Venus be with the malefies, the separation will be on
account of adultery, etc. Benetic planets partaking in the-
concord established between the places of the luminaries in both
nativities, render the married pair happy and fortunate,1 and if
Mercury also partake in the happy configurations, their mutual
affection will become notorious. If Venus in the one nativity be
on the place of Mars in the other, the cohabitation (whether
legal or illegal) will be lasting, and marked by entire love and
concord.

  1 W h ile N apoleon the Great had Josephine by his side, he was fortunate,
but when he put her away, his good fortune left h im .
 156               TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTB O LO G Y.


       For W omen, the S un is to be chiefly regarded in estimating
  their chances of marriage and happiness. If the Sun be oriental
   (i.e., between the ascendant and mid-heaven, or between the
  •descendant and lower meridian) a woman will marry in her
  you th ; or, when elderly, with a young man. If the Sun be
  between the descendant and lower meridian she will marry late
  in life ; or, when young, to an old man. If the Sun be in a
  double-bodied sign, or configurated with several oriental planets
  {in one sign) she will marry more than once. If Saturn be
  configurated with the Sun, the husband will be “ stedfast,
 advantageous, and industrious,” says Ptolemy. My experience
  has shown that when Saturn is in square or opposition with the
  Sun, the husband may prove unsteady and improvident.
  Jupiter configurated with the Sun gives a good, benevolent, and
 honourable husband.        Mars, says Ptolemy, gives a severe
 husband, “ void of affection and intractable.” Venus gives an
 amiable husband of handsome appearance, but he may be too
 fond of pleasure. Mercury gives one who is provident and
 expert in his profession or business.
      The configurations formed by Venus must not be disregarded,
 for, says Ptolemy, “ If Venus be found connected with Saturn,
 she will indicate dull and timid husbands ; if with Jupiter, the
 husbands will be good, just, and modest; if with Mars, hasty,
 and unfaithful; and if with Mercury, they will be very fond of
 children.
     For M en , the M oon must be chiefly considered, in regard to
 marriage. The Moon in her first or third quarter, at birth, the
 native will either marry when young (under thirty); or, after
having passed his prime, a young woman. “ If the Moon be
found under the Sun’s beams and configurated with Saturn, she
then entirely denies marriage,” says Ptolemy. If the Moon be
in a sign of single form, or configurated with only one planet,
the native will marry but once ; on the other hand, if she be in a
bicorporal sign (Gemini, first half of Sagittarius, or Pisces), or
in aspect with several planets (in one and the same sign), the
man will marry several times.
     If the Moon make application to the benefics, the wives will
be good and true; but if she make application to evil planets,
the wives may prove either unreliable or of a quarrelsome
•disposition.     For example: If Saturn receive the Moon’s
application the wife will prove troublesome and morose, yet
■constant and industrious ; if Jupiter receive it, the wife will be
■decorous, good, and economical ; if Mars, autocratic and
                                M A R R IA G E .                    157

 refractory; if Venus, cheerful, handsome, and agreeable; if
 Mercury, sensible, prudent, and clever; if Uranus or Neptune,
 independent, and difficult to understand.
    Should Venus be connected with Jupiter, Saturn, or Mercury,
 she will render wives provident, and attached to their husbands
 and children; but, if she be found connected with Mars, they
 will be irascible, indiscreet, if not unsteady and inconstant.
    Women, in whose nativities Venus is configurated with Jupiter
 or Mercury, are virtuous and well-conducted ; but when Venus is
 with Mars only, they are liable to be led away, unless Mercury
 or the Moon is connected with Jupiter.
    Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune3 when in the seventh house of a
 nativity, bring either unhappiness in married life, or separation
 from or early death of the partner. The unhappiness may arise
 from poverty, and not from incompatibility of temper. The Sun
 afflicted by Saturn or Uranus in the nativity of a woman, and
 the Moon afflicted by either of these planets in the nativity of a
 man, usually brings some trouble and disappointment in love or
 matrimony.
    Description of the Wife or Husband.—If a planet happens to be
located near the cusp of the seventh house, it may be taken (with
 the sign in which it is posited) to describe the partner in
marriage, approximately. If no planet happens to be SO'
situated, then that which receives the application of the Moon
must be taken in a man’s nativity ; and that which receives the
application of the Sun in a woman’s nativity. In some cases
the planet to which the Sun applies indicates the nature of the
profession or trade followed by the husband. Fortunate planets
in the seventh house, denote a happy marriage ; evil planets
therein, show either trouble or separation. Fortunate planets in
the eighth house show that the wife or husband, as the case may
be, will be ric h ; unfortunate planets therein show loss or
diminution of the estate.
   The Probable Perioij, of Marriage.— This is to be judged by
the “ directions.” The planet to which the Moon applies is.
often the promittor. Venus does not always produce marriage,
but she generally indicates a love engagement when the Sun,
Moon, M.C., or Asc. is directed to her. Jupiter often brings
marriage in the case of women, and so do the Sun and Mars by
direction. In the nativity of H .R.H. the Duchess of Argyll, the
Sun directed by converse motion to the place of Venus

         a Unless well configurated with either Jupiter or Venus.
158               TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


(O d ? m., con. 22° 45' = Dec., 1870), and to the parallel of
Venus in the zodiac ( 0 par. ? zod. 23° 1' = March, 1871),
operated to produce marriage, and the latter arc measured
exactly to the period of the happy event.
   “ Love at first sight ” is produced by the harmonius configura­
tions of the luminaries and the concurrence of the benefics, or of
Venus and Mars, in th|e two nativities. The beauty and fascina­
tion of the eyes, to which love at first sight is so frequently due,
are produced by the position of Venus in the ascendant or in
configuration with the ascending degree. Shakespeare has
pourtrayed the beauty of Juliet’s eyes, and the effect produced on
her enraptured lover Romeo. Samuel Lover in Handy Andy,
.says :—
                “ A n d as sages wise, o f old,
                  From the stars could fate unfold,
                  Thy bright eyes my fortune told,
                                        L ady, lady, m in e.”

    Venus ascending, or culminating, or in juxtaposition with
■either Sun or Moon, in the nativities of men, will render them
great favourites with the fair sex. Goethe was born when
 Venus was culminating, in parallel declination with the Moon,
.and in semi-sextile aspect with Mercury ; hence he was a great
 favourite with the ladies, and so addicted to love-making that he
.averred that the happiest moment of a man’ s life w'as when an
old love was terminating and a new love commencing !
    Jupiter materially assists to bring marriage to women,
particularly when approaching the meridian or in the seventh
 house, or receiving the application of the Sun or Moon. In
.such cases (unless Jupiter happens to be greatly afflicted, or the
 Sun afflicted by Saturn), the marriage usually proves happy and
 fortunate. The position of the Moon in the 10th house, and in
 trine aspect with Jupiter in the seventh is equally fortunate.
For example:— A lady, bom May 14th, 1845, at 5h p.m., lat.
53£° N., was married under the primary direction of M.C. A If.
 zod. The Moon was in the 10th house of her nativity, in Leo
.25° 9', and Jupiter was in the seventh house, and in Aries
 25° 56'— a.close trine aspect.
    2.    — A lady, born May 15th, 1840, at 2h 30m p.m., lat. 52-^° N.,
 was married under the direction of M.C. A If m., on
 October 18th, 1862, to a noble lord whose social position was far
 superior to that in which she was born. At her birth the Moon
 was in conjunction with Jupiter in the 2nd house.
    3.    — Another lady who was born when Vinjo 24° 55 ' occupied
  the ascendant, Neptune being close to the cusp of the seventh,
                            C A R R IA G E .                   159

the house of marriage, in Pisces 24° 15', was compelled to
•divorce her first husband, and married a second time, but none
too happily.
    4.     — A lady who was born under Leo 18° 19 , had Neptune in
the seventh house in Aquarius 24° 14' near the Moon in 24° 37'
•of the same sign, and near Venus in 27° 50' also in the sign,
 was married to a handsome and kind gentleman, who unfortun­
ately succumbed to fever less than eight years after the wedding-
•day.
     5.    — A lady who was bom when Venus in Libra 10° 32' was
■close to the upper meridian, and applying to conjunction- with
Jupiter in 16° 22' of the same sign, in the tenth house, the latter
 benefic being in quartile with the Moon in Capricornus 16° 33',
 which luminary was applying to the trine aspect with Mercury,
 ruler of the seventh house, married at twenty-six and a half
 years of age a wealthy gentleman, under the primary arc of
 ■direction of Sun conjunction Venus 26° 33', preceded by Sun
 sextile Jupiter 2(5° 8'. She was widowed at 42 years of age
 under the primary direction of Sun parallel Saturn mundo
 41° 56'. This lady was married a few years later to a noble­
 man, under Moon opposition Venus and Jupiter by primary
 •direction. In her nativity the Sun was in a sign of single form,
  in conjunction with Regulus, and applying to Mars by sextile
 aspect.
     6.     — A lady who was born under Leo 15° 24' had Neptune
 close to the cusp of the seventh house of her nativity in Aquarius
  13° 15', in proximate sextile with Saturn in Sagittarius 15° 10',
  in the fifth house, and in proximate quartile with Jupiter in
  11° 12' of Scorpio, in the fourth house; the Moon in Pisces
  14° 40', separating from trine with .Jupiter and applying to con­
  junction with Uranus ; made an early and romantic marriage
  under the primary direction of Ascendant conjunction Venus.
   She was left a widow under the direction of Midheaven quartile
  Uranus in the zodiac, attended by Midheaven opposition Venus ;
  and married a second time under Midheaven sextile Sun in the
   zodiac.
      It must be borne in mind by the student that marrying is a
   voluntary act, and not so unavoidable as are accidents and
   serious illnesses ; and, therefore, the time of marriage is difficult
   to forecast, especially when several primary directions favouring
  courtship and marriage fall near together, that is to say, within
   the space of four or five years.
                                    160




                    CHAPTER                X X Y I.



                           CHILDREN.

               “ 0 Child ! 0 new born denizen
               Of life ’s great c i t y ! on thy head
               T he glory o f the m orn is shed,
               L ike a celestial benison !
               B y what astrology o f fear or hope
               Dare I to cast thy horoscope? ” — L ongfellow.


I n estimating the probability of offspring, the 10th and 11th
houses of the nativity are to be first examined; and if there be
no planets located therein, then the opposite houses (the 4th and
5th) are to be considered.
   The Moon, Jupiter, and Yenus are held to be givers of
children ; the Sun, Mars, Saturn, and Uranus are said to deny
children, or allot but one or two, one being liable to early death
or to become a source of trouble and anxiety to the parents.
Mercury either gives or denies children, according to the planets
with which he may happen to be configurated. If the planets
promising offspring happen to be located in bicorporal (Gemini,
first half of Sagittarius or Pisces) or in Cancer, Yirgo, or Scorpio,,
they are said to give twins, which is incompatible with the very
doubtful doctrine that Gemini and Virgo are “ barren ” signs.
   If no planets be located in either of the houses before-
mentioned, those that may happen to be in benefie aspect to the
degrees on the cusps of those houses, must be considered.
   If the planets giving offspring be strongly situated the
children born will attain to good positions in the world.
   It is of the greatest importance that parents should understand
the bent of their children’s minds. This can only be known, in
many instances, from the children’s nativities. Lord Beacons-
field once observed :—
   “ W e are apt to believe that the character of a boy is easily read.
’Tis a mystery the most profound. Mark what blunders parents con­
tinually make as to the nature of their own offspring, bred too under their
eyes, and displaying every hour their characteristics. H ow often in
the nursery does the genius count as a dunce, because he is pensive ,
                                 C H ILD R E N .                           161

while a rattling urchin is invested with almost supernatural qualities,
because his animal spirits make him impudent and flippant.” 1

   “ What has Horatio done,” said the bluff sailor uncle of Lord
Nelson, “ that he, of all others, should be sent to rough it out at
sea ? But let him come, and the first time we go into action, a
cannon-ball will knock off his head, and provide for him at
once.” Here we have a notable instance of wrong judgment.
The sailor uncle was unaware of the fact that the great Nelson
was born with Mars rising in Scorpio, and that his stars
indicated a brilliant and victorious career.
   It is hardly possible to deny the usefulness of astrology in-
regard to directing as well as understanding the natural bent of
children’s minds ; and in saving several years of unavailing
efforts to excel in a pursuit for which the youth is totally unfitted
by nature.       Let us bear in mind the following words of
Ruskin:—
   “ Every human action gains in honour, in grace, in all true magni­
ficence, by its regard to things that are to come. It is the far sight,
the quiet and confident patience, that, above all other attributes,
separate man from man, and near him to his Maker, and there is no
action or art whose mystery we m ay not measure by this test. ” 2
   Ruskin was born at 7h 80m a.m. of the 8th of February, 1819,
in London. R.A. of M.C. = 249° 56', Sagittarius 11° 28' on the
upper meridian, and Aquarius 16° 28' ascending.       Jupiter had
just risen in Aquarius 0° 20', the Sun was in the ascendant in
18° 46' of the same sign, and Saturn was also in the ascendant
in Pisces 17° 5'.      His horoscope was given in S t a r L o r e ,
December 1900. His biographer says that Ruskin had “ a mood
of playing with the occult, believing like so many that ‘ there is
something in it,’ and he declared that Saturn presided at his
birth : another way of saying that an unfortunate influence
seemed to have predominated over his life.         Weak health,
especially, has to be set off against a fair share of wealth: a
certain ill-luck in little things and personal aims against the
supreme gift of genius. The violent reaction of a too sensitive
nervous system discounted his keen capacity for enjoyment; and
renown, public notice, were much more trouble to him than it
was ever worth.” 3
   Aye, the nativity of Ruskin, whose fame will never die, affords
good proof of the reality of the influence of the celestial bodies.

  1 Coningaby, V ol. I.
  2 Seven Lamps o f Architecture, page 171.
  3 “ L ife and W ork of John R uskin,” B y the R ev. W . Gershom C ollingwood.
                                                                           M
162                TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


As he wisely observed “ there is something in it," nay, more
there is a great deal in it— for it affects the greatest and meanest
of mankind; atone time— “ when the planets to disorder wander”
— it shakes the earth with terrible effects ; at another it brings
glorioup benefits.      The following saying of John Ruskin is
worthy of careful consideration by sceptics :—
     “ Astronomy— by her ancient name A s t r o l o g y , as we say
Theology, not Theonomy : the knowledge of so much of the
.stars as we can know wisely; not the attempt to define their
laws for them— not that it is unbecoming of us to find out, if we
 can, that they move in ellipses, and so on ; but it is no business
 of ours. What effects their rising and setting have on man, and
 beast, and leaf ; what their times and changes are, seen, and felt
 in this world, it is our business to know, passing our nights, if
wakefully, by that divine candlelight, and no other.” 4
      The rules found in several modern books on astrology with
 regard to judging as to the number of children likely to be borne
 to the husband, or by the wife; and the rules advanced as affording
  a reliable forecast as to the chances of life of the children,
  whether they will die in infancy or attain maturity; and the
  rules as to “ fruitful” and “ barren” signs (of the zodiac), are
  fanciful, and should be treated as unreliable by the student.
  Such rules could only be advanced by those practitioners who
  mix up horary wTith genethliacal astrology, a practice which has
  brought great confusion into the study and pursuit of the ancient
  science. One such rule is th at: “ If an evil planet or planets be
  in the fifth house of a nativity, the native w’ill have very few
  children, or if many, most of them wTill die early in life. It
  generally indicates a world of trouble caused by children. If
   the ruler of the fifth house is in the sixth, eighth, twelfth, or
   second house, especially if an evil planet, it causes unhappiness
   with children, or else most of them will die.” 6
      I have examined many hundreds of horoscopes and cannot
   find any real evidence of the truth of this rule. One lady, who
   had Mars in the fifth house, has reared six children to maturity
   and lost none, and is on the happiest terms with all of them.




   4 “ Mornings in Florence,” the straight gate, fifth morning.
   5 “ Elements of Astrology,” by L. D. Broughton, New York.
                                  163




                 CHAP TEE               XXYII



           FRIENDS             AND        ENEMIES.

                   “ Tell me, by what hidden magic
                       Our impressions first are led
                     Into liking or disliking,
                       Oft before a word is said.”

 F r ie n d sh ip and enmity depend wholly on the concord or discord
■of the Sun, Moon, and planets in the nativities of two acquaint­
 ances. The benefics in the one nativity in the place of the Sun
 or Moon in the other, favour mutual friendship and esteem ; and
 the person whose Sun or Moon is happily configurated with the
 benefic of the other, will benefit the more. On the other hand,
 the malefics in the one nativity in the place of the Sun or Moon
 in the other, some drawback is likely to result. Persons
 born under the same sign of the zodiac, or when the Moon
occupied the same degree of longitude, often become very
friendly, when they meet. Mars afflicting the luminaries causes
misunderstandings. Saturn similarly placed is apt to give
rise to some mistrust or dislike. Yenus and Mercury, says
 Ptolemy, “ produce communion by means of the arts and
sciences, and by a mutual interest in literature,” to which may
be added, a mutual interest in sports and amusements.
    The eleventh house of a nativity is believed to be symbolical of
friends, the seventh of open enemies, and the twelfth of secret
foes. This notion, so far as it relates to nativities, is very
doubtful. The fact is that persons born when the Sun or Moon
is afflicted usually meet with many enemies, and some mischief
from them ; whereas, those who are so fortunate as to be born
when the Sun and Moon are happily configurated with the
benefics, find troops of friends, and few enemies. In like
manner, persons born when an ascending planet or planets meet
with cross aspects are involved in misunderstandings, disputes,
and quarrels which may be none of their seeking. The nativity
of the Prince Consort is an instance of this, for the ascending
planet Mercury is nearly in quartile with Mars and Uranus, and
164                 T H E T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTH OLOG Y.


in opposition with Saturn. This accounts for the attacks of
jealous and envious people, and of the Press, to which he was
subjected at certain periods. The poet Keats was born when
cross aspects prevailed ; his fate was a melancholy one, for, being
of a too sensitive nature, he could not survive the merciless criti­
cism of which he was made the victim.
   Fortunate planets ascending or culminating bring numerous
friends. The signs containing the fortunes, or the angles in
which they are located, will show in what part of the world the
native will meet with the greatest number of friends who will
advance his interests.       The signs or angles containing the
infortunes will show the parts of the world wherein the native
would be likely to meet with the most inveterate opposition from
public and private enemies.
   Dr. Nobiling who wounded the Emperor of Germany, by
 shooting him in the neck, on the 2nd of June, 1878, was born on
 the 10th of April, 1848. At his birth Mars -was in the place of
 Saturn at the Emperor’s birth ; and the Moon was in opposition
 to her place at the Emperor’ s birth. On the 2nd of June,
 1878, Mars was passing over the Moon’ s place at Nobiling’s
 birth.
    Claudius Ptolemy said that “ Saturn in one nativity in the
 place of Mercury in the other denotes friendship by science, art,
 business profits, or secret mysteries." This I have proved to be
 quite true.
        “ Nescio quid, eerte est quod me tibis temperet astrum.”
 " What was the star I know not, but certainly some star it was that attuned
   me unto thee.”
                                     165




                CHAPTER                     XXVIII.



                       TRAVELLING.

          “ The Heavens give safety to your purposes !
            Lead forth, and bring you back in happiness.” — S h a k e s p e a k e .

 T he relative position of the Moon is chiefly to be considered in
 regard to travelling. When she is “ cadent” in the ninth or
 third house more especially the person then born travels much.
 The ninth house is considered as indicating long journies; and
 the third house short journies (such as are completed in a day).
 The Moon in a sign of the watery triplicity usually brings
 travelling by water ; and when so located in the ninth or twelfth
 house, a sea voyage, early in life. When, however, the Moon is
cadent at birth, and in a fixed sign (with the exception of
 Scorpio), the native does not usually travel much.
   Claudius Ptolemy considered that Mars when occidental and
declining from the meridian, and in quartile or opposition with
the Sun or Moon causes travelling in foreign countries. This is
doubtful, and the author’s own nativity contradicts it, wherein
Mars is in the ninth house in proximate mundane quartile with
the Moon and exact sextile with the Sun.
   If the benefics be configurated with the Moon, travelling is
usually prosperous, profitable, and safe. If the malefics be
evilly configurated with the Moon, they threaten troubles, losses,
misfortunes, and bad weather in travelling.
   The Moon located, at birth, in the sign Gemini, and oriental,
gives a great propensity to travel. Both Mercury and the Moon
cadent and in Aries, Cancer, or Capricornus, have the same effect;
but when both are in fixed signs and angles there is little dis­
position to travel.
   When either the Moon, Mars, or Mercury, is found, at birth, in
the ninth or third house, a journey or sea voyage is made when
the Moon or planet comes by primary direction (in mundo) to
the cusp of that house.
   Mercury ascending in Aries, Gemini, Cancer, Virgo, Libra,
166                THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLOGY.


Sagittarius, Capricornus or Pisces, gives a disposition to travel,
or trade, in foreign countries.
   The parts of the world most fortunate for travelling in, may
be judged either from the signs containing the Moon, Mercury,
Jupiter, and Yenus. The signs containing Saturn and Mars
show the countries unfavourable to any continued stay in.
   In travelling for health, consider first the position of Jupiter,
unless he is much afflicted ; and, next, that of Venus.
   It is averred that if the planet afflicting the Moon be in
Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces, danger of shipwreck will result;
and, if other testimonies concur, death by drowning. The
afflicting planet being located in the twelfth house, is said to
signify danger of being kidnapped or imprisoned.
  Mr. ,1. W., bom 6 h a.m., May 3rd, 1824, in lat. 54° 51' N., and long.
1° 28' W „ was severely shaken by the terrible collision at Abbot’s
Ripton, January 21st, 1876. At that period the following ares were
operating in his nativity; © par. $ zod. 51° 46' ; D □ 0 zod.
52° 8 '; and © par. ^ zod. 52° 11'.

  A relation of the author’s at whose nativity the Moon was in
the third house in Scorpio 9° 22', separating from quartile with
Saturn in Aquarius 8° 21', always met with bad weather at sea,
and more than once was nearly being shipwrecked.
                                        167




                       C H A P T E R              XXIX.



                 THE         KIND           OF      DEATH.
            " There is no Death—what seem3 to us transition,
              This life of mortal breath
              Is but a suburb of the Life Elysian
              Whose portal w e c a l l —Death.” — L o n g f e l l o w .

 T h e T erminus V eme is sometimes clearly foreshadowed by the
 nativity. In forecasting danger, the Christian astrologer does
 not forget that the issues of life and death are in the hands of
 our C reato r , — without Whose knowledge not even a sparrow falls
 to the ground. It is not then, in any atheistic or fatalistic
 spirit that the astrologer gives warning of times of danger to
 life. King David prayed: “ Lord, let me know mine end, and
 the number of my days : that I may be certified how long I have
 to live.” The foreknowledge that in certain cases life was
destined, astrologically speaking, to be short, may undoubtedly
save much human misery. Too often does a sudden and
unexpected death leave the widow and the fatherless in abject
poverty; whereas, could the danger of it have been foreseen,
adequate provision might have been made for them. The
invention of the medical art, as explained in a previous chapter,
was due to the desire for a means of overcoming the apparently
fatal influences of the evil planets. How often in everyday life
do we hear of medical men lamenting that the initial stage of a
chronic and fatal malady had not been foreseen or detected early
enough to admit of preventive treatment. Life might in many
instances be prolonged if the insidious attack could be foreseen;
change of residence, of occupation, and of climate could be
advised, where necessary, and other preventive measures taken.
    Hufelana said that:—
  “ A grand point in guarding against disease is that everyone should
try to discover to what malady he is constitutionally most disposed, in
order that this tendency may be destroyed, or at least that all
opportunity of its being converted into disease may be removed. In
this respect the ancients were more prudent than we are. They
employed the medical art and physicians chiefly for determining their
dietetic mode of life ; and even their astrological, chiromantic, and other
 168                  THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


researches of like kind tended, at bottom, to define the moral and
physical character of man, and to prescribe for him, accordingly, a
proper mode of living and a regimen. They undoubtedly did much
better in thus employing their physicians than if they had run to them
every week to make them prescribe for them purgatives or emetics.
But for this purpose a judicious, prudent, and acute physician is
necessary; while, on the other hand, any empiric is capable of writing
a prescription. These people, at any rate, had a surer means of
distinguishing a false from a true prophet.”1

    Claudius Ptolemy says that had the ancients been of opinion
 that all expected events are unalterable and not to be averted,
 they would never have instituted any propitiations, remedies,
 and preservatives against the influences of the ambient, whether
present or approaching, general or particular.
    Goethe was seized with smallpox very early in life— the planet
 Mars being in semi-quartile aspect (in mundo) to the ascendant
 at his birth. But inasmuch as the hyleg was not afflicted, he
 did not die of that attack, and his health was not prejudiced by
it in after life. Astrologers find that unless Mars afflict either
the ascendant or luminaries, at birth (or in the fatal train of
directions) there is little, if any, liability to take smallpox. The
doctors are wrong in assuming that every child born will, if it
live, certainly contract smallpox sooner or later if it be not
vaccinated in infancy ; and Parliament is not justified in passing
penal laws, and retaining them on the Statute book, to enforce
vaccination2 to support a medical dogma based on a delusion,
and on incomplete statistics manipulated by fanatical believers
in the practice of the rite.
   The inexorable logic of facts is against the practice of
vaccination.
   The kind of death depends chiefly on the nature of the planets
whose “ directions” operate to cause death (astrologically speak­
ing). The signs in which such planets were located at birth

   1 Hufeland’s Art o f Prolonging Life, edited by Erasmus Wilson, F.E.S. ;
translation of 1794. pages 250, 251.
   2 But for the terror caused by exaggerated statements as to the fatality
and sequelse of smallpox, and but for the fear of pitting, people would never
submit to the insertion of lymph, taken from a diseased calf, into their
system. The asserted modifying power of vaccination is, to say the least
open to grave doubt. In smallpox as in measles and scarlatina there are
several varieties, and while one person takes the disease in a mild form,
another takes it in a malignant form. Jenner, in 1798 (in his Inquiry into
the Cause and Effects of the Variolic Vaccina, pages 54, 55) recorded that,
  About seven years ago a species of smallpox spread through many of the
towns and villages of this part of Gloucestershire: it was one of so mild a
nature that a fatal instance was scarcely ever heard of. This was before
vaccination was practised.
                                    TH E   K IN D   OF D E A T H .                       169

 may be considered in forecasting the nature of the fatal illness,
 and the part of the body attacked.
    U ranus th re a te n s n e rv o u s b re a k d o w n , a n d a su d d en d ea th , o f a
 p e c u lia r n a tu re .
    Saturn indicates death by falls, crushing, or suffocation, when
 close to the ascendant or in the mid-heaven; and by chronic
 diseases arising from rheumatic fever, and its effects upon the
 heart, low or continued fever, ague, paralysis, epilepsy, or
 melancholia, when occidental. In a fixed sign and afflicting the
 hyleg cancerous disease.
   Jupiter (when much afflicted in a nativity) may become a
promittor in death, in such cases he signifies quinsy, apoplexy,
pleurisy, inflammation of the lungs, liver-disease, spasms, and
■failure of the heart.
   M ars indicates death by acute or eruptive fever, bronchitis,
pneumonia, haemoptysis, and all kinds of hœmorrhage ; and (in
women) abortion, and surgical extraction of the foetus. When
•oriental, Mars signifies burns, scalds, incised and gunshot
wounds.
    V enus (w h e n          m u c h a fflicted at b irth a n d co n c e r n e d    in   th e
train o f fa ta l d ir e ctio n s )        s ig n ifies d ea th b y p o is o n , diseases o f
th e s to m a c h o r liv e r , a n d e x cess in e a tin g o r d r in k in g .
    M er c u r y indicates death (when oriental) by accidents of the
 nature of the planet with which he is in aspect (at birth) ; when
 occidental, by brain-disease, nervous disorders, whooping cough,
etc., according to his configurations with the malefics. If with
o r afflicted by Mars and Saturn, by assaults of robbers.
    The M oon signifies death by surfeits, obstructions, etc.,
 according to her familiarity with the malefics. When in a
watery sign and evilly configurated with Saturn, death may
take place by drowning.
    The S u n , when afflicted at birth and in quartile or opposition
to the Moon or ascendant, whichever may be hyleg, causes death
by apoplexy, paralysis, or fever.
   Death occurs by violence when Mars and Saturn and evil fixed
stars afflict the hyleg, and are in mutual quartile or opposition.
Saturn, in such case, particularly when in Taurus, indicates
■death by hanging, or suffocation. Saturn in opposition to either
the Sun or Moon rising, is said to threaten death in prison.
Venus and Mercury conjoined with Saturn, the last-named
afflicting the hyleg, death is threatened from poison, or through
the treachery of a woman. Saturn in Virgo, and afflicting the
Moon (hyleg), death will be caused by drowning or suffocation.
170                  TH E T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


If found near Argo, by shipwreck. If Saturn be in a tropical or
quadrupedral sign, and the Sun be in conjunction or opposition,
or Mars be so, death will be caused by the fall of buildings; and
if Saturn be in the mid heaven and so configurated with the Sun
or Mars, death will result through falls from heights or
precipices, especially if he be in an airy sign.
   Saturn and Mars in Gemini, Virgo, Aquarius, or Sagittarius,,
and in square or opposition w'ith the Sun or Moon threaten
death by violence, in battle, or by suicide. If Mercury also be
evilly configurated with Mars, death will be caused by highway­
men or burglars. Mars near Caput Medusa is said to threaten
death by decapitation or mutilation. If Mars be in Taurus or
Scorpio afflicting the hyleg, death may result from surgical
amputation, burning, or scalding, or by the smallpox. If Mars
be in opposition to the ascendant, and in Aries, Leo, or
Sagittarius, it threatens death by fire or gunshot wounds»-
especially if near the Asselli; if in Aries, Taurus, Leo,
Sagittarius, or Capricornus, and so situated, by falls or fractures.
If Jupiter bear testimony, and be also afflicted “ death may ensue
from the wrath of princes and kings, and from judicial con­
demnation,” wrote Claudius Ptolemy.
   In the nativity of John Baptist Cardan (son of the great
Cardan), who was beheaded on the scaffold by an executioner of
justice for destroying his wife by poison, Jupiter was afflicted
and aspected by Mars, and the Moon was afflicted by the parallels
of the Sun and the infortunes,3 and the Sun and Moon were with
violent fixed stars.     Death will occur in foreign places,” wrote
Ptolemy, “ when the planets controlling the anaretic places,4 may
be in cadent houses, and especially if the Moon be in one of the
said places.”
   At the period of death a train of evil directions is usually
found to be in operation, one evil direction, however powerful,,
rarely destroys life. When the Moon is hyleg, and is directed to
the conjunction of an evil planet, if her latitude, when she
completes the aspect, differs greatly from that of the planet at.
birth, life will generally be saved, although a dangerous illness
may result. If there be a direction of Jupiter or Venus to
conjunction or trine, or parallel declination -with the hyleg in the

  s See Opus Reformatum, by Dr. Partridge, Physician to Queen Mary II.,
London. 1693.
  4 The 8 th and 4th houses’ If no planet be located in the 8 th house, if
there be one in the 4th, the latter often partakes in the signification of the
kind of death. The presence of 2/ in the 8 th does not promise a painless,
and natural death, if the hyleg is afflicted by Saturn or Mars.
                        TH E   K IN D   OF D E A T H .             171

train of otherwise ovil directions, or within two degrees thereof,,
life will be saved, provided that Jupiter or Venus be not badly
afflicted at birth. Even a sextile of one of them has sometimes,
saved life.
   The following cases are interesting and instructive:—
   C ase 1 —•“ H .L.,” a lieutenant in a native infantry regiment of
Bengal, was killed in a sortie from Lucknow, July 16th, 1857. He was
born precisely at noon of November 5th, 1826, at Gloucester. At his.
birth the 11th degree of Capricornus was rising, Mars, Uranus, and the
Moon being conjoined in that sign. The Sun was on the meridian,
and in mundane square with Saturn. Saturn, Mars, and Uranus were
in parallel declination with the ascending degree. Any student who
will take the trouble to cast this figure will find that the following
directions correspond exactly to the period of death: © par. 1? zod.
80° 35', © par. ^ zod 30° 42'. The sign Capricornus rules India, and
the death took place in that country. [N.B.— The nativity requires no
“ rectification,” and the time of birth is given just as the author
received it from the sister of the unfortunate officer. The B.A. of the
M.C. was 224° 10'.]
   2.    — “ G .W .,” born 0h 54m a.m., of June 10th, 1853, at Sunderland.
Died of confluent smallpox 'he was vaccinated in infancy), August 1st,
1871, at the sixteenth day. Uranus, Mars, and Saturn, nearly con­
joined in Taurus. The 6th degree of Aries on the ascendant hyleg).
At the time of death the following train of directions operated; Asc.
par. $ zod. 17° 58', Asc. d $ zod. 18° 32', and Asc d & nr. 19°
19'.    The arc of Asc. 6 h zod. 21° 1 7 'was near at hand.— N.B.—
The time of birth is given as found in the family Bible. Mars is the
killing planet, and the fatal illness was martial ]
   3. — “ C.D.,” born October 18th, 1838, at 6h a.m., Sunderland. At
the birth, Mars was in the 10th house, in opposition to the Moon, and
in par. dec. with both the Sun and Moon. The Sun was hyleg. This
gentleman broke a blood-vessel in January, 1866, under Asc. □ $ m.
27° 15'. He died in the spring of 1869, of consumption, under the
following train of evil directions : © □ $ zod. 30° 10', Asc. □ D m.
30° 24', and © d at par b> m., d.d. 31° 8'.
   4.    — Czar Alexander II. was born at 10'1 a.m., of the 29th of April,
1818, at Moscow, Leo 4° 42 ’ ascending. The Sun (hyleg) was in the
tenth house in Taurus 8° 2 1 in mundane semi-quartile aspect with
both Mars and Saturn (the latter planet being ruler of the eighth, the
house of death), and the mundane parallel of Saturn. The Moon was
afflicted by the sesquiquadrate of Mars, the mundane parallel of
Uranus, and was in opposition to the martial star Ilegulus. The
Asselli were very near the ascending degree, which had the sesqui­
quadrate aspect of Uranus. The primary direction of Sun rapt
parallel Mars 63° 1 2 '= July, 1881. As Zadkiel I. and the author have
observed and maintained (for years previous to 1881) all directional
parallels operate, as a rule, several weeks before they are exactly due.
Moreover, if the Sun’s semi-diameter 0° 16' be subtracted from the arc
of 63° 12', we have 62° 56 '= M arch , 1881, as the arc of first contact of
the Sun’s limb with the parallel of Mars (the direction being computed
to the Sun’s centre) and the Czar was cruelly assassinated on the 13th
 of March, 1881, by the explosion of a bomb thrown at his feet by the
assassin. Moreover, the dangerous direction of Sun parallel Saturn, in
the zodiac, conversely, 63° 23' closely followed the before-mentioned
172                  TH E TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


 rapt parallel. It was the train of five evil directions (62° 20' to 68°
 52') which led the author to foretell that: “ The Czar of Russia will be
 in some personal danger about the 6th of March, 1881,” and to say that
   He will do well to prepare for the dread summons.” 6 This warning
 was written in July, 1880, and published five months before the tragic
 death of “ Alexander the Liberator” took place.
   5.— King Humbert, of Italy, was born at 10h 30m a.m. of the 14th of
 March, 1844, at Turin, according to the official bulletin. R.A. of
 M.C. 329° 37 '. His horoscope was given in S t a r L o r e , May, 1897.
 The Sun in Pisces 23° 57' was in semi-quartile with Mars in Taurus
 7° 5', and was separating from conjunction with Jupiter in Pisces 13°
 35' and applying to Uranus in Aries 1° 46'. The M oon was in
 mundane quartile with Mars and applying to conjunction with Saturn.
 Regulus was close to the lower meridian. An attempt was made to
 assassinate King Humbert in April, 1897, when Sun parallel Saturn,
zodiac, first contact, was operating in his nativity, by primary direction.
 In the evening of the 29th July, 1900, an anarchist shot the king, who
died of his wounds ere he could be conveyed to the Palace. The
author wrote, twelve months, beforehand, that in August, 1900, the
king would be “ plagued by insidious foes and should beware of
anarchists.”     The arc for death 1° — 1 year) is 56° 22', and the
primary directions then operating were : Sun parallel Uranus, m., con.
56° 14', Mercury conjunction Mars, m. 56° 16', Mercury conjunction
Mars, zodiac, 56° 25', and Ascendant par. 0 zod , con. 56° 29'. The
nativity shows Mars close to (above) the cusp of the twelfth, the house
of secret enemies. Mercury, ruler of the ascending sign, was ruler of
the nativity, being in the tenth house, elevated above the rest of the
celestial bodies.
   6 —Dr. D., born at 9 o’clock in the evening of the 26th of November,
1860, at W arsiw. R.A. of M.C. = 20° 57', A ries 22° 39' culminating,
and Leo 10° 53' ascending. The Sun in the fifth house in Sagittarius
4° 50', in quartile with Mars in the eighth, in 3° 41' of Pisces, in par.
declin. with Moon in the tenth house, in Taurus 15° 371; and applying
to quartile with Saturn in Virgo 9° 3', and to opposition with Uranus
in Gemini 10° 17'. This learned and successful (in cure-work)
physician lost his valuable life during the revolutionary outbreak in
Russian Poland in the year 1907, by assassination! He was a
diligent student of astrologia sana, and wrote in a medical periodical
very highly of (the first edition of) the “ The Text Book of Astrology.”

   The sceptic may remind us that the great majority of diseases,
premature death, and deformity, are due to the violation of
natural laws. A pure atmosphere, a plain and nourishing diet,
plenty of out-door exercise, early hours, personal cleanliness,
abstinence from excessive indulgence in stimulants, and a cheer­
ful temperament are, undoubtedly, the best means of preserving
health and of preventing disease.6 Nevertheless, it is a fact that
the diseases to which an individual is liable, or those which he

  5 Vide Zadkiel's Almanac fo r 1881, pages 9 aud 12, and 1882, p p. 53— G3.
Punch was candid and kind enough to acknow ledge that the above forecast
was a case o f “ hitting the bull’s e y e .”
  0 It is the pro-vaccinators w ho advance the absurd and m onstrous doctrine
that a healthy child, if unvaccinated, is a danger to society.
                       TH E   K IN D   OF   DEATH.              173

inherits, are as a rule plainly indicated in the face of the heavens*
at the moment of his birth. It is the Martialist who rushes into
danger, or excesses, who brings diseases or wounds upon himself.
It is the Saturnine man who mopes and frets, and thereby
renders himself liable to liver-disease, to melancholia, and
suicidal mania. It is the Mercurial man who exhausts his
nervous energies by that restless activity so characteristic of
modern life. It is the Saturnine man who is so liable to
catarrhs that despite his daily use of the cold bath and the
exercise of the most unceasing vigilance, he “ catches cold ” from
the slightest “ draught of air,” or the slightest wetting, and is
the ready prey of the germs of phthisis. It is the Martialist
who becomes a victim to acute fevers. It is true that people
who are blessed with the greatest amount of vitality— due largely
to their having been born when Jupiter or Venus, or both were
rising, or supporting the Sun and Moon— the greatest power of
resistance, and who observe the conditions of health before-
 named, are almost proof against the attack of any kind of
 disease, and pass unharmed through the city decimated by
 yellow fever, plague, cholera, diphtheria, etc., as the case may be.
 But then it is also true that the face of the heavens as
 constituted at the birth of such persons, harmonises with the
 possession of so enviable a store of vitality and stamina. There
 are others who are born to a different fate, for they take what­
 ever disease happens to be epidemic. It is a fact well-known to
 astrologers that persons born under the sign Sagittary have
 (unless the hyleg happens to be afflicted), a great love of out-door
 exercise and sports, and enjoy good health, strength, and
 vitality.
    In the year 1588 the Duke of Guise, a few' days before he and
  his brother were murdered, had a presentiment of personal
  danger; afterwards, a more direct caution warned him of the
  existence of a plot against his life. It was, however, the
  general opinion that no such attempt would be made. On the
  22nd December, as the Duke sat down to dinner, he saw a note
  in his napkin. Opening it he read, “ Take care ; an evil turn is
  about to be played on you.” He wrote underneath it, “ They
  dare not,” and flung the paper under the table. On the same
  day the Due d’ Elboeuf told him there would be an attempt on
  his life the next morning, upon which Guise said, smiling, “ I
  see, cousin, you have been looking at your Almanac. All the
  Almanacs this year are stuffed full of such threats.”
                                174




                   CHAPTER              XXX.



            ON   PRIMARY           DIRECTIONS.

P rim ary  D irections are arithmetical computations of the
apparent motion of any point in the heavens or of any heavenly
body, from the situation which it occupied at the moment of
birth until it meets with the conjunction, parallel of declination,
or aspect of some other body or point. The value thus obtained
is termed the “ arc of direction,” and it is converted into time
by allowing every degree of arc to represent one year of life,
and every five minutes over and above the number of degrees to
represent one month.
   All directions of the midheaven are measured by an arc of
right ascension. All directions of the ascendant in mundo by
the semi-arc of the body directed, and in zodiaco by oblique
ascension.
   All the directions of the Sun, Moon, and planets are
computed by means of their semi-arcs. Those directions which
are taken in the zodiac, and for the sake of classification called
zodiacal, are really mundane.
   Primary directions are due to the revolution of the earth on
its axis, and all those to be computed for a hundred years are
formed within, comparatively, a few hours of the moment of
birth.
   The place of a heavenly body in a nativity is considered as if
it were the body itself, for the various celestial bodies are found
to impress their respective natures on the places held by them
at the moment of birth as fully as if they were always located
therein, although, by their proper motion, they may have passed
(in the heavens) away from their respective places several or
many degrees when the significator (the body directed to those
places) arrives— thus, if the Sun be directed to conjunction with
Jupiter, we mean to the radical place of Jupiter.
   The speculum, or table of the latitudes, declinations, right-
ascensions, meridian distances, and semi-arcs of the Sun, Moon,
Mercury Venus, Mars, Jupiter, Uranus, and Neptune must be
                     ON PR IM A RY   D IR E C TIO N S.              175

carefully computed, as directed in the seventh chapter, before
.any primary directions can be calculated.          In fact, the
 “ horoscope ” is not complete without the speculum, and with­
out it no proper judgment as to its import can be safely given.
   The mundane directions of the Midheaven and ascendant
should be calculated first, for they give the distance of each
celestial body from the cusps of the various houses, and thereby
facilitate the working of the mundane directions of the Sun,
 Moon and planets.
    Many practising astrologers of the present day ignore
mundane directions— no doubt because they are either too lazy
 to compute them or so imperfectly educated that they cannot
understand the method of computing them. Students who
 read only such publications on astrology as omit all instruction
in the Placidian system of directing, and substitute the old
Arabian method of “ secondary directions,” only waste their
time. The errors of such instructors is all the more glaring in
 that they fail to see and comprehend that the “ Tables of
 Houses ” — and the very ascendant of the figure of the heavens
 which they cast by the aid of such tables— are really m undane !

           M undane D irection s      of th e      M id h eaven .

   R u l e 1.— To find the Conjunction of a celestial body with the
Midheaven (M.C.), take its distance therefrom— or meridian
distance— as the arc o f direction, if such body is between the
ascendant and midheaven. This is termed a direct direction.
   2.      — If the celestial body is between the midheaven and the
descendant, its meridian distance is the arc o f direction of Mid­
heaven conjunction with such body conversely.
   3.      — For the Seville aspect (two houses), if the celestial body
is in the twelfth house, subtract two-thirds of its semi-arc from
its meridian distance to find the arc o f direction of the sextile.
   If the celestial body is in the first or second house, subtract
two-thirds of its diurnal semi-arc from its distance from the
upper meridian. This is a direct direction.
   N.B.— The diurnal semi-arc of a body so placed may be found
by subtracting its noctural semi-arc from 180 degrees.
   If the celestial body is in the seventh house, subtract two-
thirds of its semi-arc from its meridian distance. This is a
converse direction.
   4.     —To find the Semi-quartile, subtract one half of the semi­
arc of the body directed from its meridian distance. If,
however, the celestial body is less than half-way between the
ascendant and midheaven at birth, subtract the meridian
distance from two-thirds of its semi-arc, to find the arc of
direction— a converse one.
176               THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.

  If the celestial body is between the upper meridian and the
descendant, ( i.e . in the ninth or first half of the eighth house)
subtract its meridian distance from two-thirds of its semi-arc.
If it is near the cusp of the eighth or in the seventh house,
subtract two-thirds of its semi-arc from its meridian distance,,
to find the arc of its semi-quartile to the M.C., conversely.
   5.    — For the Opposition to the M.C. take the planet’s distance
from the lower meridian as the arc o f direction, if it is between
the cusp of the seventh house and the lower meridian. If the
celestial body is in the third, second, or first house, its meridian
distance (from the I.C.) is the arc o f direction of its opposition to'
the M.C., conversely.
   6.    —For the trine, if the planet is in the third or second house,
subtract its rnerid. dist. from two-thirds of its semi-arc. If in
the first house, subtract two-thirds of its semi-are from its
merid. dist. to find the arc o f direction, conversely.
   If the celestial body is in the sixth house subtract two-thirds
of its semi-arc from its merid. dist. If in the seventh
or eighth house, add one-third of its nocturnal semi-arc to the arc
for its opposition to the ascendant.

            M undane D irections    of the   A scen dant .

  R u l e II.— For the Conjunction of the Sun or         Moon or planet
with the A scendant :— When the celestial body           is in the third,
second, or first house, subtract its meridian distance (i.e. from
the lower meridian, or I.C.) from its semi-arc to find the arc o f
direction. If the celestial body is in the fourth, fifth or sixth
house, add its meridian distance to its semi-arc to find the arc o f
direction, because it has to pass the lower meridian.
    2.     —-For the opposition :— When the celestial body is in the
ninth, eighth or seventh house, subtract its meridian distance
from its semi-arc, to find the arc o f direction. If it is eastward
of the upper meridian, add its meridian distance to its semi-arc.
    If the celestial body is in the fourth, fifth or sixth house, subtract
its meridian distance from its semi-arc to find the arc o f direction
 of its opposition to the ascendant, conversely. If it is eastward
 of the lower meridian, add its merid. dist. to its semi-arc.
    3.     — For the sextile of the ascendant:—When the planet
directed is in the third house, subtract its meridian distance
from one-third of its semi-arc, to find the arc o f direction. If it
is in the second or first house, subtract one-third of its semi-arc
from its meridian distance to find the arc of direction,
conversely.
   4.      — For the trine aspect :— If the celestial body is in the sixth
or fifth house, subtract one third of its semi-arc from its
meridian distance, to find the arc of direction. If the heavenly
body is in the seventh or eighth house, add two-thirds of its
nocturnal semi-arc to the are of its opposition to the ascendant,
to find the arc of direction. If it is in the ninth or tenth
                      ON PR IM A RY D IR EC TIO N S.             177

house, add one-third of its semi-arc to its meridian distance, and
 the sum is the arc of direction. If it is in the ninth house,
subtract its meridian distance from one-third of its semi-arc. If
it is in the eighth or seventh house, subtract one-third of its
semi-arc from its meridian distance, to find the are of direction
 conversely.
    5.— The sesqui-quadrate above the horizon, in the eighth house
is the same direction as the semi-quartile already formed to the
 Midheaven. To find the arc of direction of the sesqui-quadrate
in the fifth house, if the celestial body is in the sixth house (at
birth) subtract half of its semi-arc from his meridian distance.
If in the seventh or eighth house, add half of its nocturnal semi­
 arc to the arc of its opposition to the ascendant. If the celestial
body is in the fourth house subtract its meridian distance from
half of its semi-arc, and the sum is the sesqui-quadrate, conversely.
If in the third house, add half of its semi-arc to its meridian
distance.
   R ule III.— To direct the Sun, Moon, and planets to
(mundane) parallels from the meridian.
   1° Say: As the semi-arc of the Sun, Moon, or planet, is to
the semi-arc of the celestial body directed, so is its meridian
distance to the second distance (of the body directed) from the
meridian.
   2°.— Then : Take the difference between the second distance
of the body directed so found from its meridian distance (at the
time of birth), and the remainder is the arc of direction.
   N.B.— If the body directed has to pass the meridian in order
to form the parallel, then its second distance must be added to
its first distance, and the sum is the arc of direction.
   R ule IV. -R ap t Parallels.— These are formed by the rota­
tion of the earth on its axis. They require careful consideration.
In the first place, the planet approaching the upper or lower
meridian when the parallel is completed, must be directed.
   1°. Say: “ As the sum of the semi-arcs of both bodies is to
the semi-arc of the celestial body directed, so is the difference of
their right-ascensions to the second distance of the body
directed.”
   2°. The difference of the first and second distances of the
body directed, is the arc of direction.
   [Note.— When the body directed happens to be in the opposite
hemisphere to that in which the other body is located, the
opposite place of the latter must be worked with as if it were
really there. In such case its semi-arc will, of course, be the
same ; but its right ascension will require either ISO3 added to
or subtracted from it— according to whether it is greater or less
than half the circle— to obtain the value of the B.A. of its
opposite place in the zodiac.]
   In ascertaining the difference of right-ascension between the
two celestial bodies, care must be taken to compute it in the
                                                                 N
178                THE   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


order of the signs, adding the circle when necessary. For
example : Let the Sun be in the third house with 832° 10' of
R.A., and Saturn in the fourth house with 8° 17' of R .A .; in
order to find the difference of their right-ascensions 360° must
be added to that of Saturn, and the resulting difference will be
36° 7
   If the celestial body directed is below the ascendant and has
to rise before it can complete the rapt parallel with the one in
the seventh or eighth house, the diurnal semi-arc of the former
must be taken. In like manner if a celestial body in the
seventh or eighth house at birth has to set before it can be
directed to the rapt parallel with one in the first or second house,
the nocturnal semi-arc of the former must be taken.
   [It is usually best to work with half of each quantity, and
then to double the product.]
      M undane D irections    of t h e      S u n , M oon ,    and   P lanets.
  R u l e .— 1°.Say: “ As the semi-arc of the fixed body is to
 that of the body directed so the distance of the latter from the
cusp of the house to which it is nearest, to its second distance
 from the cusp of the house in aspect to the former.”
   2°. Subtract the second distance from the primary distance,
 and the difference will be the arc of direction.
    [Note.— The body to be directed is always that one which (by
the diurnal revolution of the earth) will arrive at the aspect of
the other. When the body directed has to cross the horizon to
form the required aspect, its opposite semi-arc must be taken.]
     In enumerating these directions of the Sun, Moon, and
planets, write the symbol of the Sun or Moon first; and those
directions in which the planet’s semi-arc is employed in the first
position, term converse, and append this word, or its abbreviation
con., to such directions. For example, the Sun directed to the
mundane parallel of Saturn in the nativity of the Prince Consort
(see speculum p. 50) should be described as © par. Ij in., con.
But, on the other hand, when Saturn is directed to the mundane
parallel of the Sun, in the same nativity it should be described
as © par. 1? m., d.d.
   The Sun and Moon may be directed to aspects of their own
places by taking the proportional parts of their semi-arcs when
these aspects are formed in one and the same hemisphere.
   The Sun and Moon may be directed to their own mundane
parallels by doubling their meridian distances when East of the
M.C., or in the 4th house.
                                                    179




                          CHAPTER                              XXXI.


     EXA M PLE S OP R U L E S FOR
 W ORKING   MUNDANE     DIRECTIONS.

                  M undane D irections                     to the         A ngles.
   E xam ple 1 . — Required the arc of    M.C. g Jg, in the nativity
o f the Prince Consort.1                                            „   ,
      Right-ascension of $    .................................... 259 39
      Right-ascension of lower meridian................... 244 28

            A rc of        D ir e c t io n .......................................            15 11
  E xam ple 2.— Required the arc of Asc. g T                        ? , in the same
nativity.                                                                   0 ,
     Semi-arc of 1?     ..............................................    86 58
     Meridian distance of T? .......................................      64 12

            A rc o f D ir e c t io n ......................................................    2 2 41
[N.B.— This is bringing                     to the cusp of the 7th house.]
  E xam ple 3 . — Required the arc of M.C. A       Tj in the same
nativity.                                                0   ,
     One-third of the semi-arc (nocturnal)2of lj ...    31 2
     Distance of Tj from cusp of 7th house....... -f    22 41

            A rc of D irection ........................................                   = 53 43
  E xam p l e 4.— Required the are of M.C. ss □      I? , in the same
nativity.                                                   0 ,
     One-sixth of the semi-are (nocturnal) of T? ...        15 31
     Distance of I? from cusp of 6th h ou se....... +       53 43

            A rc of D ir e c t io n .................................... =                    69 14
  E xam ple 5.—-Required the arc of Asc. A                   2f , in the same
nativity.                                                            0 ,
     Meridian distance of 2 f ....................................  67 59
     One-third of semi-arc of if. ............................      38 2

           A rc of D irection                .................................... =           29 57

  1 See page 50.
  2 This is found by taking the semi-arc diurnal of h from 180°.
180                      TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


  E x a m p l e 6 .— R e q u i r e d t h e a r c o f M.C. d    $ , in t h e s a m e
nativity.                                                             o ,
     Right-ascension of $ ...........................................  8246
     Right-ascension of M.C.........................................   6428

         A rc o f D i r e c t i o n o r M e r i d . D i s t . o f M a r s =      18 18

  E x a m p l e 7.— Required the arc of M.C. g                     converse, in the
same nativity.                                                         0     /
     Right-ascension of lower meridian ............... 244 28
     Right-ascension of ]) ........................................ 209 38

            A r c o f D ir e c t io n   ................................... =    34 50

  D i r e c t D i r e c t i o n s t o t h e S un a n d M o o n . — When the planets
are directed to the places of the Sun and Moon, the process is
called “ direct direction." When the Sun or Moon is directed to
the planets, it is termed “ converse direction.” The latter is the
more powerful.
  E xam ple 1 . — Required the arc of 0     A 2f d.d., in the
nativity of the Prince Consort.
  In this instance if. will have to be brought up to a distance
outside the 5th house, from its cusp, proportionate (according to
their semi-arcs) to the distance of the Sun outside the 1st house
(which is in trine to the 5th). The distance of the Sun outside
the first can be found by taking his meridian distance from his
semi-arc, thus : 103° 11'— 89° 37' = 13° 34', which is Ascendt..
 d 0 con. Then :—
                                                       •24166
      As the semi-arc of © 103° 12' (prop, log.) (a.c.)                         9-75834
      To the semi-arc of 2f 114° 6 ' ........................                    ‘ 19799
      So is distance of O above ascendant 13° 34'                               1-12280

       To second distance of 2 f 15° 0 '................... =                   1-07913

   The distance of If from the cusp of the 5th house is 29° 57'
 (Asc A If). Then 29° 57' + 15° 0' = 44° 57' the arc of
 direction of © A If d.d.

   E x a m p l e 2 . — Required the arc of ©                d      £ d.d., in the
 nativity of the Prince Consort.
      Constant log.3 of © ............................................ 0-88114
      Log. of semi-arc diurnal of $ 89° 1 7 '........... -30450

       Log. of second dist. of $ 11° 4 4 '............... = 1-18564

   8 Found by adding the log. (a.c.) of the semi-arc to the log. of the merid.
 dist. of 0 .
     EXAM PLES    OF R U L E S FOR W O R K IN G MUNDANE D IR E C T IO N S.            181

   The distance of % from the ascendant (asc, 6 $ ) is 17° 9 '
Then 17° 9' +■ 11° 44' = 28° 53', the arc of direction.
   [N.B.— In this case the diurnal semi-arc of $ is taken in the
second term because £ must pass the horizon in order to arrive
at the Sun’s place. This conjunction is also the (mundane)
parallel of © and £ .]

          C o n v e r s e D ir e c t io n s   of   the    S un   and     M oon.

  E xam ple 1.— Required the are of 5 A If converse, in the
nativity of the Prince Consort.
     As the semi-arc of if 114° 6', log. a.c............. 9.80201
     To the semi-are of j), 107° 3 2'......   -22373
     So the distance of if. from cusp of               6th,    8° 5'1-34768

          To the second distance of                      7°      37'         ...= 1-37342
   The Moon has to pass the cusp of the 2nd house to form the
trine aspect with Jupiter’s place outside the cusp of the 6th.
The Moon’s distance from the cusp of the 2nd house is 36° 51'
(M.C. A J ) ) . Therefore, 36° 51' + 7° 37' = 44° 28' the arc
of direction of J) A I f conversely.
   When one arc is computed, others may be obtained from it by
merely adding or subtracting, as the case may be, the propor­
tional part of the semi-arc of the body directed, provided that
they are formed in the same hemisphere as the first. For
example, the □ of D to If may be found by subtracting one-
third of the semi-arc of d from the previous arc, thus : 44° 28'
 — 35° 51' = 8° 37' the are of j □ if con. The sesqui-
quadrate may be found by adding one-sixth of the semi-arc of D
to the arc of the a , thus : 44° 29' + 17° 56' = 62° 24' the
arc of D ss □ if. conversely.

                  P arallels         D ir e c t    and    C o n verse.

   E xam ple  1.— Required the arc of © parallel Ij direct
direction, in the nativity of the Prince Consort.
      As the semi-arc of © 103° 12', log. a.c......... 9-75834
      To the semi-arc {nocturnal) of V> 93° 7 '.......  -28625
      So the meridian distance of 0 89° 37' .......     -30288

     To the second distance of                     80° 5 2 '....... =        -34747
  The primary distance of Tj from the lower meridian is 115°
48', ergo 115° 48' - 80° 52' ^ 34° 56' the arc of 0 par.
 h m. d.d.
  In this instance     forms the parallel (below the horizon) in
the 6th house, therefore the nocturnal semi-arc of 1? is taken
in the third term ; and, of course, the parallel of the © and J?
is © g I? also.
182                   THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


  E xam ple 2 . — R e q u ire d   th e are o f 5 p a ra lle l I f   conversely in
the same nativity.
     As the semi-arc of if 114° 6 ' log. a.c..........              9.80201
     To the semi-arc of j) 107° 3 8 '.......................         '22373
     So the merid. distance of if 67° 5 9 '...........               -42287

    To second distance of p 64° 4 '................... = -44861
  Then 64° 4'— 34° 50' (primary meridian distance of ]) ) =
29° 14' the arc of direction of ]) par. 2 f conversely.
   E xample 3.— Required the                 arc of J) parallel Hi direct
direction, in the same nativity.
                                                              •22373
      As the semi-arc of j) 107° 32', log............ (a.c.)9-77627
      To the semi-arc of $ 121° 9 '........................   -17195
      So the merid. distance of p 34° 50' ...........         -71328

     To the second distance of iÿ 39° 15' ... = -66150
   To form this parallel $ has to pass the lower meridian
therefore the second distance must be added to the primary
distance of § from the nadir, thus: 15° 11' + 39° 15' =
54° 26'.
                               R apt P a r a l l e l s .
   E xam ple 1.— Required the arc o f J) Rapt Parallel $ , in the
nativity of the Prince Consort.

      Semi-arc of j)        107 32            R.A. of ? ........      142 58
      Semi-arc of 2         109 52            R.A. of § of d          29 38
                          2)217 24                                  2)113 20

                         108 42                                        56 40
      As 4 semi-arcs 108° 42' log. a.c......................         9-78098
      To 4 semi-arc of 2 54° 5 6 '...........................         -51544
      So I diff. of R.A. 56° 40' ................................     -50194

      To 4 second distance of 2 28° 8 8 ' ....... =                   -79836
                                                    2

        Second distance of        2   =     57    16 —
        Merid. distance of        2         78    30

      A r c o f D i r e c t i o n ... = 21 14
   [Note.— In this instance the opposite place of the Moon is
taken, as if she were in the 9th house, because the planet is
applying to the upper meridian.]
                                                   183




                           CHAPTER                           XXXII.



                    ZODIACAL                       DIRECTIONS.

             in the zodiac are of two kinds — “ direct ” and
 D ir e c t io n s
“ converse.” When they are made in the order of the signs
they are termed direct; and when contrary to the order of the
signs, they are termed converse. In the latter case the place of
the moderator is supposed to be carried in a retrograde manner
by the rotation of the earth on its axis. These zodiacal converse
directions were formed shortly before birth.
               To D i r e c t        the    M id -H eaven     in   the    Z o d ia c .

     R u d e .— Find the right-ascension of the place of the
                                                        aspect or
parallel declination, and, if the direction be direct, deduct
the R.A. of the M.C. from i t ; if converse, take the R.A. of the
aspect from that of the M.C.

                    To D i r e c t    the    A scen d an t   in    the   Z o d ia c .

    R u l e .— Find the oblique ascension of theplace of the aspect
or parallel declination, and, if the direction be direct, deduct the
oblique ascension of the ascendant (which is to be computed by
adding 90° to the R'.A. of the M.C.) from it. If the direction be
converse, take the oblique ascension of the aspect from that of the
ascendant.
To     D ir e c t    the    SUN, MOON o r PLANET F o r w a r d s i n                     the
                                              Z o d ia c .

   R u l e 1 ° . Find the right ascension, the meridian distance,
the declination, and the semi-arc of the place of the aspect.
   2°. S a y : As the semi-arc of the Sun is to the semi-arc of the
aspect so is the merid. dist. of the Sun to his second distance.
   3°. The sum or difference of the primary and secondary
distances of the aspect will be the arc of direction, according to
whether the aspect falls on the same side of the meridian as the
Sun is or the other side.

   To D i r e c t t h e SUN b y C o n v e r s e M o t i o n i n t h e Z o d i a c .
   R u l e .— 1 ° . Find the right-ascension, meridian distance,
declination, and semi-arc of the longitude in which the aspect
falls.
184                THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTBOLOGY.


   2° S a y: As the semi-arc of the aspect is to the semi-arc of
the Sun so is the merid. dist. of the aspect to the second
distance.
  3°. The sum or difference of the first and second distance of
the Sun will be the arc of direction.
To D irect the SUN, MOON ok PLANET to a P arallel                of
                 D eclination by D irect M otion.
   R ule .— 1°. Find the longitude corresponding (in the Tables
of Declination) to the declination of the celestial body to the
parallel of which the Sun is to be directed.
   2°. Find the right-ascension, meridian distance, and semi­
arc of the parallel, and
   8°. Say: As the semi-arc of the Sun is to that of the parallel
so is his meridian distance, to the second distance.
   4°. The sum or difference of the first and second distances
will be the arc of direction.
   To D irect the SUN to a P arallel of D eclination by
                          Converse M otion.
  R u l e .— 1 °. Find the longitude corresponding to the declina­
tion of the body to the parallel of which the Sun is to be
directed.
   2°. Find the right-ascension, meridian distance, and semi­
arc of the parallel, and
   3°. Say: As the semi-arc of the parallel is to that of the Sun
so is the meridian distance of the parallel to the second distance.
   4°. The sum or difference of the first and second distances of
the Sun will be the arc o f direction.
  To D irect the MOON or PLANET to any A spect in the
          Z odiac, by D irect M otion , w ith L atitude .
   R u l e .— 1 °. Find by reference to the Nautical Almanac,
or Zadkiel's Epliemeris for the year of birth, the latitude the
Moon or planet will have when the aspect is formed.
   2°. Find the right-ascension, declination, and semi-arc
corresponding to the longitude and latitude the Moon will have
when she reaches the aspect.
  3°. Say: As the semi-arc of the Moon or planet is to the
semi-arc of the place of the aspect, so is the merid. dist. of the
Moon or planet directed to the second distance.
  4°. The sum or difference of the first and second distances of
the aspect will give the arc of direction.
      To D irect the MOON or PLANET to a P arallel of
       D eclination by D irect D irection , with L atitude .
  R ule .— 1°. Find by reference to the Nautical Almanac, or the
Epliemeris, for the year of birth, the longitude and latitude the
celestial body has when it reaches the parallel of declination to
which it is directed.
                                  ZODIACAL DIRECTIONS.                                    185

   2°. Find the right-ascension, meridian distance, and semi­
arc of the parallel.
   8°. Say : As the semi-arc of the Moon is to the semi-arc of
the parallel, so is the merid. dist. of the Moon (or planet) to the
second distance.
  4°. The sum or difference of the first and second distances
will give the arc of direction.
     To   D ir e c t     the    MOON ( o r P l a n e t )        to   a   P arallel   of

                       D e c l in a t io n   by   C o n verse   M o t io n .

   R ule.— 1°. Find the longitude (without reference to latitude),
in the ecliptic, corresponding to the declination of the body to
the parallel of which the Moon (or planet) is to be directed.
   2°. Find the right-ascension, meridian distance, and semi-arc
of the longitude obtained.
   3°. S a y: As the semi-arc of the parallel is to that of the
Moon or planet, so is the merid. dist. of the parallel to the
second distance.
   4°. The sum or difference of the first and second distances of
the Moon (or planet) will give the arc of direction required.

    Formerly the Sun and Moon were directed under their p o l e s ,
 and this method is taught in ZadkieVs Grammar of Astrology, as
 well as the method already given of directing those bodies by
 means of their semi-arcs. The latter is the simpler method, and
 I advise the student always to follow it. The “ crepusculine ”
 and “ obscure” arcs of Plaeidus and Wilson should be dis­
 regarded. The semi-arc method is the true motion in Nature
 (see page 37).
    The pole of the Sun, or Moon, is a certain elevation it has
from the meridian towards the horizon; hence, if one of them
happens to be exactly on the meridian it has no pole, and the arc
of direction must be found by right ascension, as already shown in
the method given for directing the mid-heaven in the zodiac. If
the Sun or Moon be exactly on the horizon, it will have the polar
elevation of the horizon, which is the latitude of the birthplace,
and it must be directed by oblique ascension in the same
manner as that given for directing the ascendant in the zodiac.
Plaeidus taught that the Sun is to be directed by right-ascension
when within 2° of the meridian at birth : and when within 3°
of the ascendant (measured by oblique ascension) he advises
that the Sun be directed by oblique ascension ; and when within
3° of the western horizon, by oblique descension, and I advise
students to follow his precept.
                                                 18G




                    CHAPTER                               XXXIII.



    EXA M PLE S OF R U L E S FOR
COMPUTING   ZODIACAL    DIRECTIONS.

              Z o d ia c a l   D ir e c t io n s      of     the      M id -h e a v e n .

  E x a m p l e 1°. — Required the are of the Mid-heaven directed to
the square of Saturn, in the zodiac, in the nativity of the late'
Prince Consort (see page 50).
  The square aspect of Saturn falls in 29° 13' of n . Reference
to the “ Tables of Right Ascension” will show that the 29th
deg. of n (without latitude) gives 88° 55', and the 30th deg.
gives 90° O'. Then say: “ As 6 0 'of long, are to 65' of R.A.,
so are 13' (difference of long.) to 14' (difference of R .A .).”
Add 14; to 88° 55' and write down the sum as the R.A. of the
aspect, viz., 89° 9'. From the R.A. of the aspect subtract the
R.A. of the Mid-heaven, 64° 28 ', and the arc of direction of M.C.
 □ b is found to be 24° 41'.
  E x a m p l e 2.— Required the arc of M.C. 45° © zod., in the-
same nativity. This aspect falls in 17° 6' of ss.
     R.A. of 17° 6 ' of $ ........................................ 108° 32'
     R.A. of M.C...................................................... 64 28

                  A r c o f D i r e c t i o n ..................................=   44      4


              Z o d ia c a l D ir e c t io n s         of    the      A scendan t.

  E xam ple     2 . — Required
                           the arc of direction of Ascendant-
opposition Saturn, in the nativity of the late Prince Consort.
      E X A M P L E S OF R U L E S         FOR CO M PU TIN G ZO D IA CAL D IR E C TIO N S.                      187

  The opposition falls in 29° 18' of Virgo, the E.A. of which is
17 9 ° 17', the declin. 0 ° 1 9 'N. Th en :—
     Long. tang, of 50° 18' ............................ 100805519
     Log. tang, of 0° 1 9 '............................... + 7-7424841

       Log. sine of asc. diff. 0° 2 3 '................... =                                        7-8230360

       R.A. of 29° 13' of ntt........................................                                  17917
       Asc. difference ................................................. —                               0 23

       Oblique ascension ofopposition.......................—                                          178 54
       Obi. asc. of ascendt........................................... -                               154 28

                  A rc      of     D ir e c t io n 1         ............................ =             24 26
   E x a m p l e 3.— Required the arc of the Ascendant directed to the
parallel of Saturn, in the same nativity.
   The declination of Saturn being 2° 35' the parallel falls in
6 ° 30' of Libra, the R.A. of which point is 185° 58'. Then:—
       To the E.A. of =- 6 ° 31' ................................                                      185 58
       Add the ascensional difference of b ...............                                               3 7

       Obi. asc. of parallel........................................=                                 189 5
       Obi. asc. of ascendt.........................................—                                 154 28

                  A rc o f D i r e c t i o n ....................................                       34 37

  E x a m p l e 4 . — Required the arc o f the Ascendant directed to
the quartile of Uranus, in the same nativity.
  This aspect falls in 20° 30' of njj ; the R.A. of which point is
171° 7', the declin. 3° 46' N., and the asc. diff. 4° 83'.
Then :—                                                            o   /
     From the R.A. of 20° 30' of it* ..................           171 17
     Subtract the ascen. diff.................................. —    4 33

       Obi. asc. of the aspect....................................=                                   166 44
       Obi. asc. of ascendant ....................................—                                   154 28

                  A r c o f D i r e c t i o n ..................................................=       12 16

  E x a m p l e 5.— Required the arc of the Ascendant directed to the
sesqui-quadrate of Saturn in the zodiac, conversely, in the same
nativity.
  This aspect falls in 14° 13' of Leo, the R.A. of which is 136°
42', the declin. 16° 35', and the asc. diff. 21° 1'. Then :—

  1        This arc corresponds exactly with the arc for the father’s death - -
24° 25'.
188                       TH E T E X T -B O O K     OF A S TR O LO G Y,


      E.A. of 14° 1 3 'of Leo ....................................                      136 41
      Ase diff............................................................. —           21   0
      Obi. asc. of aspect ........................................ =                    115 41
      Obi. asc. of ascendant, ......................................                    154 28

                     A r c o f D i r e c t i o n ...............................         38 47
                   T he    S u n ’ s D ir e c t io n s    in    the     Z o d ia c .
  E xam ple  1.— Required the arc of the Sun directed to the
parallel of Saturn in the nativity of the late Prince Consort.
  The parallel falls in 6 ° 30' of Libra, the R.A. of which is
185° 58', the merid. dist. 121° 30', and the semi-arc 8 6 ° 53'.
    As Sun’s semi-arc 103° 12', prop. log. (a.c.) 9-75834
    To semi-arc of parallel 8 6 ° 53 ' ........ .......... -31624
    So Sun’s merid dist. 89° 37' .. ...................    -30288

    To second dist. of parallel 75° 29' ..........—  -37746
  Then, the merid. dist. of the parallel 121° 3 0 '— 75° 29' =
46° 1' the A r c o f D i r e c t i o n .
                  T he    M o o n ’ s D ir e c t io n s    in    the     Z o d ia c .
  E xam ple  1.— Required the arc of the Moon directed to the
quartile of Venus, in the nativity of the late Prince Consort.
   The aspect falls in 20° 12' of Scorpio, on reaching this
longitude the Moon had 3° 13' S. lat. The It.A. of 20° 12' of
Scorpio with 3° 13' S. lat. is 226° 49', the merid. dist. 17°
39', the declin. 20° 54' S.. and the semi-arc 117° 2 2 '.
     As Moon’ s semi-arc, 107° 33', prop. log. (a c) 9'77G27
     To semi-arc of aspect 117° 22' ........................ -18573
      So Moon’s merid. dist. 34° 50' ....................... -71328

      To second dist. of aspect 38° 1 ' ................... =                           -67528

 Then, the second dist. of aspect 38° 1 ' — 17° 39' (the primary
merid. dist.) — 20° 22' the A r c o f D i r e c t i o n . 2
   E x a m p l e 2.— Required the arc of the Moon directed to the
opposition of Saturn, by converse motion, in the nativity of the
late Prince Consort.
   The opposition falls in 29° 1J3' of Virgo, the R.A. of which is
179° 17', the merid. dist. 65° 11', the declin. 0° 19' N., and the
semi-arc 89° 37'.
      As semi-arc of aspect 89° 37', prop. log. (a.c.) 9'69712
      To semi-arc of Moon 107° 32' .......................   -22373
      So merid. dist. of aspect 65° 11' ................... -44114

      To second dist. of Moon 78° 13'                           ...................     -36199

  2 This arc corresponds closely to the period of the Prince Consort's
engagement.
   E X A M P L E S OF R U L E S   FO R   COM PU TIN G    ZO D IA C A L D IR E C TIO N S.   189

   Then, the second dist. of Moon 78° 13' — the Moon's merid.
dist. 34° 50' = 43° 23' the arc of direction.5
  E x a m p l e B . — Required the arc of the Moon directed to the
parallel of Mercury by converse motion in the same nativity.
  This parallel falls in 28° 30' of Virgo (without latitude), the
R.A. of which is 178° 38', the merid. dist. 65° 50', and the
semi-arc 89° 17'.
    As semi-arc of parallel 89° 17', prop. log. (a.c.) 9-69550
    To semi-arc of Moon 107° 3 2'............................ -22373
    So merid. dist. of parallel 65° 5 0 '.................... -43683

     To second dist. of Moon 79° 29' ............... = -35606
  Then, 79° 17' — 34° 50' (the Moon’s merid. dist.) = 44° 27'
the arc of direction.
               T he P l a n e t s ’ D irections         in th e     Z odiac .
  E xample    1.— Required the arc of Saturn directed to the
parallel of the Sun, without latitude, in the nativity of the late
Prince Consort.
  This parallel falls in 27° 54' 25" of Aries, and the R.A. of this
point of the ecliptic is 25° 55', and its meridian distance is 38°
33'.
     Then, as Saturn’s semi-arc, 8 6 ° 5 3 '...............   -31634
                                                       (a.£.)9'68366
     To the Sun’s semi-arc, 103° 11' ...................      -24166
     So is Saturn’s merid. dist. 64° 12' ...............      -44774

     To the second distance, 76° 15' ............... =                        -37306
                             38° 3 3 ' -

            A rc o f D irectio n = 3 8 ° 4 2 '

   E xam ple 2.— Required the arc of Saturn directed to the
parallel of the Sun, -with latitude, in the same nativity.
   When Saturn arrived at the parallel of the Sun’ s declination,
(in May, 1822) his latitude was 2 ° 15' south, and his longitude
was Taurus 4° O'. This gives the R.A. as 32° 30', and the
meridian distance 31° 58'.
      As Saturn’s semi-arc 8 6 ° 53' (a .c.)................ 9-68366
      To the Sun’s semi-arc 103° 11' ...................      -24166
      So Saturn’s merid. dist. 64° 12 ...................     -44774

     To the second distance 76° 1 5 '................... =                    -37306
                            31° 5 8 ' -

     A rc of D irection           ... = 44° 17

                         3   T h is are fa lls in th e fa ta l tra in .
190                     THE     T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTB OLO G Y.


  E xam ple    3.— Required the arc of Saturn directed to the
opposition of the Moon, in the same nativity.
   The opposition falls in 2° 29; of 8 , on reaching which
longitude Saturn had 2° 15' S. lat. R.A. was 31° 4 ': merid.
dist. 33° 2 4 '; declin. 10° 15' N., and his semi-arc, 102° 34'.
      As Saturn’s semi-arc 8 6 ° 53', prop. log. (a.c.) 9-68366
      To semi-arc of aspect 102° 34' .......................     -24427
      So Saturn’s merid. dist. 64° 2 1 '........................ -44774

      To second dist. of ditto 75° 4 7 ' ................... = -37567
     Then, the second dist. 75° 47' — 33° 24' = 42° 23' the
arc o f direction.4
   E x a m p l e 4 . — Required the arc of Mars quartile Moon in the
zodiac, without latitude, direct, in the same nativity.
   The quartile of the Moon’ s place falls in Leo 2° 30'. The
R.A. of this longitude (sine lat.) is 124° 47' ; the declination is
19° 3 7 '; the semi-arc is 115° 24' ; and the meridian distance
is 60° 19'.
      As Mars’s semi-arc 120° 59' prop, log............. -17255
                                                      (a.c.)9-82745
      To the semi-arc of the aspect 115° 24' ........... -19307
      So is Mars’s merid. dist. 18° 18' ...................  -99282

      To the second distance 17° 27' .................. = 1-01334
                             60° 19'

       A bc o f   D ib e c t io n   =    42° 52'




  4 This arc measures to within one month of the period of death, arc =
42° 18'.
                                  191




                 CHAPTER                XXXIV.


ON     EQU ATING             ARCS         OP      DIRECTION.

               “ A year for a day, and a day for a year.”

 "Various methods of equating ares of direction have been
suggested and adopted by different authors. The Ptolemaic
 measure of time is the most correct, v iz .: one degree = one
year of life, and one-twelfth part of a degree (5') = one month.
 The author adopted this measure— at the suggestion of Zadkiel I.
— in the year 1862, and his experience afforded by the calcula­
tion of several hundreds of nativities proves that it comes nearer
to the truth than any other.
    The method of Placidus was this :— “ Add the R.A. of the
Sun to the arc of direction ; the sum will be the right-ascension
of that part of the zodiac which when reached by the Sun (as
shown in the Ephemeris for the year of birth) the direction
comes into force, and the time must be equated by allowing a
year for every day the Sun takes in reaching that point, and a
month for every two hours.”
   The method of Naibod was to allow “ for every degree of arc,
one year, five days, and eight hours; and for every minute six
days, four hours.”
   Maginus recommended (on the authority of Dr. Dee, who was
a good mathematician) that the arc of direction should be
considered as right-ascension, and measured according to the
Sun’s motion, in right-ascension, at the time of birth.
   Some artists divide the arc by the Sun’s mean motion ; others
by the rate of the Sun’s motion on the day of birth.
   It is no small recommendation in favour of the Ptolemaic
measure that Zadkiel I. after having adopted the measure
recommended by Placidus (termed by Wilson as the “ most
rational” ), and followed it for many years, was compelled by the
results of his great experience to discard it in favour of the
Ptolemaic question.
192                  TH E T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


   E xam ple 1.— His late Eoyal Highness the Duke of Edinburgh
and of Saxe-Coburg-Gotha was born at Windsor Castle on the
sixth day of August, 1844, at 7h 50m a.m., Greenwich mean
time.
                                                         h. m.   s.
      Sidereal time at noon, Aug. 6 ...........          8 56 32-62
      Add time elapsed ................................ 19 50
       ,, diff. mean and sidl. time ...........             3 15-49
                                                            28   49   48t 11
      Subtract long, of Windsor Castle                ...         2   20-80
      Subtracting the circle, 24h..................         -4   47   27-81
   The sidereal time so found is equivalent to 71° 51' 57", which
is the right-ascension of the meridian at the moment of birth
stated in the official bulletin. The apparent obliquity of the
ecliptic was then 23° 2 7' 31-4". The exact longitude of the
upper meridian may be readily found as follows
     Logarithm sine of obi. ecliptic................... 9-9625337
          „    cotang, of R.A. 713 51' 5 7 "...+ 9-5152252
           „      cotang. 73° 16' 39" ................ =         9-4777589
   Subtracting 60°, for two signs of the zodiac, we have
13° 16' 39" of Gemini to enter on the midheaven, or cusp of the
tenth house. By means of the rule “ Oblique ascension given
to find the ecliptic longitude,” given in the Appendix to this
work, the ascendant is found to be Virgo 17° 13'. The oblique
ascension of the ascendant is found by adding to the R.A. of the
midheaven ninety degrees, thus 71° 51' 57" + 90° =
161° 51' 57".
   The horoscope was given at page 101 of the first volume of
F c t o r e . The longitudes of the Sun and planets were, respec­
tively:—Sun in Leo 13° 52' 23". Moon in Taurus 15° 52' 10".
Mercury in Leo 29° 19' Venus in Cancer 23° 49', retrograde.
Mars in Leo, 13° 20'. Jupiter in Aries 3° 41' retrograde.
Saturn in Aquarius 3° 1 3 retrograde. Uranus in Aries 6 ° 1',
retrograde. Neptune in Aquarius 22° 3 8 retrograde.            The
Moon was hyleg, and she was in quadrature with both the Sun
and Mars, and in mundane sextile with Venus. The Sun was
only half-a degree past conjunction with Mars. This rendered
the Royal duke liable to feverish ailments, and his first attack of
fever took place in February, 1863, are = 18° 30', under the
operation of the primary direction of Moon rapt parallel Mars
17° 50 ', and Sun rapt parallel Moon 18° 20'.
   In December, 1862, Prince Alfred was elected King of Greece,
                    ON E Q U ATIN G ARCS OF D IR E C TIO N .             19»

  but he declined the honour of becoming the monarch of that
  country, on the advice of his illustrious parents and the British
  Government. This honour was proffered under the influence in
  the nativity of the second son of Queen Victoria, of Ascendant
  parallel Jupiter, zodiac 18° 31'.
     Early in the year 1868, the young prince visited Australia,
  and on the 12th of March a dastardly Fenian attempted to kill
  him by shooting him in the back. Zadkiel I. foresaw the
  danger and foretold that “ the 12th of March (1868) is evil for a
 great personage.” This narrow escape of death at the hands of
 an assassin was incurred under the primary directions of M.C.
 parallel Mars, zodiac, conversely, 23° 39', and Moon parallel
 Saturn, mundo, con. 23° 46'. The arc for this dangerous
 experience is 23° 36'. It is noteworthy that in the nativity the
 Sun and Mars were together in the sign Leo, which from time
 immemorial has been held by astrologers to rule the back of the
 body, and the spine.1 At the 23rd Solar revolution the Sun was
 in quartile and the Moon was in conjunction with Saturn, which
 malefic planet was in opposition to the place of the Moon at
 birth.
    On the 23rd of January, 1874, the Royal Duke was married
 at St. Petersburg, to the Grand Duchess Marie, daughter of the
 Tsar Alexander I I ; the arc for the happy event = 29° 28', and
 the arc of direction of Midheaven conjunction Moon, mundo,
 conversely, is 29° 9', and that of Moon sextile Sun, zodiac, is
29° 4 7 '.2 If we subtract 0 ° 16', the Sun’s semi-diameter, from
 this arc we shall bring it up, for first contact, closely to the arc
of marriage, thus 29° 4 7 '- 0 ° 16' = 29° 31'.
    The second attack of fever was suffered in April, 1889. The
Prince was stricken with Maltese remittent fever - the evil
planet Saturn then being in transit over the places of the Sun
and Mars in his nativity ; and, moreover, Saturn was stationary
in Leo 13° 25' on the 14th day of that month. The following
primary direction was then in force: Ascendant quartile Moon
zodiac, conversely, 44° 35', the arc for the illness being 44° 41'.
    The author warned the Prince of this attack of fever, as
follows :— “ April, 1889. Our Sailor Prince will be troubled by

  1 Lord Mayo, Viceroy of India, who was assassinated by being stabbed in
the back, also had Mars in I.eo at his birth, and in opposition with the
Moon. He was born February 21st, 1822, and died on the 8th of February,
1872.
  2 This direction is computed in E.A., as it falls within one degree of the
Midheaven of the Prince’s nativity. Thus: B.A. of Gemini, 13° 52',
72° 30' —42° 43', the Moon’s E.A. = 29° 47' the arc of direction.
194                     THE     T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


Saturn’s stationary position so near the places of the Sun and
Mars at his birth ; he will do well to avoid staying in unhealthy
places where fever lurks.” 3 Certain Press-scribes, anxious to
discredit astrology, endeavoured to belittle this warning by
saying that “ England has more than one Sailor Prince,” but
this futile boomerang of theirs only recoiled on themselves, for,
in their ignorance, they forgot that only one, and that one
Prince Alfred, had both the Sun and Mars in the fourteenth
degree of the sign Leo at his birth, and that the Sun could only
be in that degree on the 6 th day of August, 1844, and not at the
birth of any other Sailor Prince of England.
   A train of evil directions brought on a malignant affection of the
larynx, at the root of the tongue, and the Royal Duke succumbed
to a sudden seizure with failure of the heart on the 30th of July,
1900, at 56 years of age all but eight days. The arc (1° = 1
year of life) measures to 55° 59'. The following directions
measure closely thereto :— Moon quartile Uranus zodiac, 55° 45 ',
Moon parallel Uranus, zodiac, conversely, 55° 49'.
   It is remarkable that the Asselli were close to the Midheaven by
primary direction : M.C. d North Assellus, in the zodiac, 55° 51'.
   The Moon, being hyleg and in Taurus, the sign ruling the
throat, and afflicted by Mars and the Sun, at birth, accounts for
the fatal illness, and Uranus being the afflicting planet, by
direction, accounts for the suddenness of the demise.4
   The late IG ng E d w ard YII, was born at 10h 48m a.m. of the
9th day of November, 1841, at Buckingham Palace, London.
At that moment of Greenwich mean time and at the birthplace,
the sidereal time was 14h l m 8-76s = 210° 17' 11" in arc of R.A.
This gives Scorpio 2° 29' 1" on the Midheaven, and S agittariu s
27° 42' 45" ascending. The geocentric latitude of the birthplace
is 51° 18' 36" N., and the longitude is 0° 36' W., of the Royal
Observatory, Greenwich. The ascending degree is computed for
this latitude, and the semi-arcs of the celestial bodies also.
   The horoscope of King Edward was east by Zadkiel I. within
three hours of the time of birth being officially stated, and was
published in the second edition of his Almanac for 1842. The
learned editor remarked that as Mars was in the first house and
 in mundane quartile with the Sun (hyleg) :—
  We    can n ot   hope     th a t   th e c h ild ’s   co n s titu tio n   w ill   be   fr e e   fro m


  3 Vide Z a d k i e l ’ s A l m a n a c for 1889, page 11.
  4 In Z a d k i e l ’ s A l m a n a c for 1 9 0 0 , p . 2 3 , will be found the following fore­
cast : “ Our Koyal Family will be involved in some grief, in the first half of
July, we regret to foresee.”
                          ON EQU ATIN G ARCS           OF D IR E C TIO N .                      195




           L a t.         D é c lin .       R t A sen .         M er. dist.         S e m i-A r c.


   o                  16 54 5 ' 'S         224e 6 4 "           14e 8 5 8 "         6 7 e>42 1 3 "
   3>    4° 11 S       3 36 38 s           177 49 15            32 27 56            85 28 52
   %     1 461-S      22 lo 39 s           239 12 45            28 55 34            59 15 44
    Î    1 42 N        5 57 46 s           198 23 24            11 53 47            82 30 22
   <?    1 33 S       24 9 38 s            286 43 17           103 83 54           124 3 53
   U     0 13 N       22 57 56 s           260 43 55            50 26 44            58 3 10
   b>    0 44 N       22 43 56 s           270 10 17           120 6 54            121 32 37
   «     0 47 S        4 26 44 s           351 41 17            38 35 54            95 34 15
   ¥     0 9 S        16 15 S              316 51               73 26              n i 21



lia b ility to fe v e rish co m p la in ts.       T h is e x ce p te d , th e h y le g (S ol) is
stron g , h a v in g th e m u n d a n e parallel o f V e n u s, a n d w e d ou b t n o t th is
s c io n o f o u r R o y a l H o u s e m a y liv e to sw a y th e sce p tre o f this rea lm .
     T h e M o o n in g o o d a sp e ct (sextile) w ith M e rcu ry g iv e s h im a sh rew d
a n d cle v e r tu rn o f m in d w ith g o o d n atu ral talents, a n d h e h as J u p iter
s o stro n g th a t h e w ill b e c o m e a m ild a n d b e n e v o le n t so v e reig n , th o u g h
firm a n d p o s itiv e in o p in io n .”
    A g a in , in ZadTcieVs Legacy (1 8 4 2 ) it w a s s ta t e d “ t h e P r i n c e o f
196                 TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


W ales    shall be called 1T h e W i s e K i n g . ’ The potent position of'
Jupiter renders him liberal, frank, brave, benevolent, and calculated for
governm ent; fond of sport and exercise ; amiable, gracious, noble and
brilliant. He will sway the sceptre of this realm in moderation and
justice— a gracious and merciful sovereign.”

 • This was a very true forecast of the talents, tact combined
with firmness, graciousness, benevolence, of his Majesty; and of
that wisdom displayed in his unceasing efforts to secure peace to
his Empire, and his wonderful faculty for saying the right
thing at the right m om ent; of his high courage and keen zest
for sport.
    King Edward VII. incurred a liability to accidents from the'
proximity of Saturn to the ascendant (only 1° 26' below the
eastern horizon, measured by oblique-ascension), but his Majesty
escaped serious injury thereby in most instances, because the
benefic planet Jupiter was but 7° 36' above the ascendant, and
 strong in his chief dignity the sign Sagittarius. Very early in life-
 he had a narrow escape of being sh ot; he rolled down the almost
 perpendicular side of a mountain, owing to a slip of his foot,,
 and escaped with a few severe bruises ; he came very near to
 being crushed by the fall of an enormous chandelier, when at
 Heidelberg, in September, 1861; he fell into deep water, when
 touring in Palestine ; he nearly fell into the flames, through a
 floor giving way, while helping the firemen to extinguish the fire
 at Marlborough House, in July, I 860 ; he fractured the patella
 of one knee by slipping on a staircase in July, 1908; he had a
 fortunate escape from assassination in Belgium, in April, 1900,
 and injured a foot, while out shooting, in November, 1905.
     When Mars arrived at the ascendant, by primary direction—
  Aset, d $ mundo 20° 30', preceded by M.C. par. if) zodiac,
  conversely 19° 58'— the King suffered the sad bereavement by
  the death of his talented and affectionate father, in December,
  1861, in which fatal month a lunar eclipse took place whereat
  Mars was exactly in transit over the place of the Sun at his
  Majesty’s birth. Under this martial direction, he went for his
  tour in the East.
      His Majesty’s marriage with the charming Princess Alexandra
  of Denmark, took place on the 10th day of March, 1863, under
  the happy influence of Moon sextile Venus, zodiac, conversely
  2 1 ° 2', and Venus parallel Moon, zodiac, conversely 21° 50', by
  primary direction.
      As the Sun arrived at the parallel declination of Saturn, by
  primary direction, his Majesty was attacked with enteric fever,
                       ON EQ U ATIN G ARCS OF D IR E C TIO N .                          197

•which so nearly proved fatal in December 1871. The arc for
the crisis of this dangerous attack is 80° 4'. That of Sun
parallel Saturn, zodiac, first contact is 29“ 42'. It is computed
in the following manner:— Saturn’ s declination 22° 43' 5 6 -3 "_
16' 10-6" (Sun’s semi-diameter) = 22° 27' 45-7", which the
Sun’s limit attains on reaching longitude f 13° 40' 36". The
R.A. is 252° 17' 38", and meridian distance 42° 0 ' 37". The
second distance of the Sun (as computed by the rule already
given) is 12° 1 8'44", which is to be subtracted from 42° 0 '2 7 ",
and the quotient is the arc of Sun parallel Saturn, first contact,
29° 4 1'43 ".
   The direction of the Sun’ s centre to the parallel of Saturn in
the zodiac measures 32° 22' 16", and its operation coincided
with his Majesty’s narrow escape, in a collision of his yacht, in
1873 (attended by M.C. 6 D mundo, conversely, 32° 28').
   At the King’ s 30th Solar revolution, the configurations of the
Moon pre-signified illness, and Zadkiel 1. directed attention to
this pre-signification in his Almanac for 1871, thus:—
    “ O n th e 9th o f N o v e m b e r, 1871, th e M o o n is a fflicte d b y a square
o f M ars a n d Saturn, w h ic h bespeaks seriou s losses a n d trou bles fo r all
p erson s b o r n th at d a y , be th e y p r in ce o r p ea sa n t.”

  The author, in an annual (1871) which he then edited, wrote
that:—
    “ A t th e S ola r e clip se o f D e c e m b e r 2 2 n d , 1870, S a tu rn is in tran sit
o v e r h is o w n p la ce at b irth o f H .R .H . th e P r in c e o f W a le s. T h is
tran sit ta k e n in to co n sid e ra tio n w ith th e fa c t th a t th e eclip se falls in
th e p la ce o f S aturn at birth , a n d in square to th e M o o n ’s p la ce,
in d ica te s tro u b le a n d ill-h ea lth — fu rth e r th a n th is w e m a y n o t sa y but
‘ th e w ise ’ w ill u n d e rsta n d .”

   This was written in July, 1870, sixteen months before the
.serious illness began (November, 1871). The effect of the Solar
eclipse of December 22nd, 1870, was retarded until the primary
direction of Sun par. Saturn came into operation, when the
■combination of these evil influences very nearly ended the
valuable life of the Prince of Wales. The eclipse lasted for four
hours and twenty-eight minutes, and its rule, therefore,
■continued for nearly four years and a half. It was total, and
 was visible as a partial eclipse in the United Kingdom.
   In the autumn of ,1876, his Majesty went to India, and in
December of that year met with an accident there, and was on
■one occasion in some danger from the charge of a tiger. As
both Mars and Saturn were in Capricomus, and in the
ascendant, the author wrote (in July, 1875, when the visit to
198                 TH E    TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TB O LO G Y.


India was announced by the Prime Minister, in the House of
 Commons): “ But for the generally fortunate character of the
 directional influences operating during the period of his Royal
Highness’ projected visit to India, one would be apprehensive
for his personal safety in that country. Care will have to be
taken to avoid accidents ” etc.5 The primary directions then
operating were Ascendt. 45° Mars, zodiac, conversely, 34° 52'
 Sun parallel Jupiter, zodiac, 35° 7', Sun quartile Moon, mundo
35° 9', and Sun sextile Venus, zodiac, 35° 53'.
   In July, 1898, his Majesty’s accident to his knee took place
under the primary direction of Ascendt. parallel Neptune,
zodiac, con. 56° 45', closely followed by Ascendt. conjunction
Uranus, mundo 56° 58'.
   Sipido’s abominable attempt to assassinate his Majesty at the
railway station at Brussels on the 4th April, 1900 (when Saturn
was in Capricornus 4° 58' the sign ruling Brussels), was,
Providentially, unsuccessful. The arc for this danger is 58° 24',
and that for the death of Prince Leopold is 58° 43'. The
primary directions then operating in the royal nativity were:—
Sun 135° Saturn, zodiac, conversely 58° 18', Ascendt.
sesqui-quadrate Mercury, mundo, 58° 38', Sun opposition
Neptune, zodiac, con. 58° 40'. His Majesty’s health was not
good at the time.
   In 1901, at the age of 59 years and two months (arc =
59° 12') on the demise of his beloved mother, Queen Victoria,
the Prince of Wales acceded to the throne, under the following
train of primary directions :—
      Midheaven quartile Moon, zod iac...........                    59°    6'
      Sun parallel Sun, zodiac, conversely ...                       59    12
      Midheaven sextile Sun, m undo................                  59    17
      Ascendant opposition Moon, zodiac .......                      59    29
      Moon trine Uranus, mundo, con..............                    59    41
      Ascendant quartile Saturn, zodiac...........                   59    47
      M.C. conjunction Saturn, zodiac ...........                    59    53
      M.C. conjunction Saturn, mundo ...........                     59    53
      Sun rapt parallel Neptune .......................              GO     1
      Sun parallel Jupiter, zodiac ...................               GO     3

   The directions of Saturn to the Midheaven, in the zodiac and
in the world, account for the accession to the throne in a time
of war and national trouble. As, however, the Sun lay, by

            5 Vide Z a d k i e l ’ s A l m a n a c for 1870, pp. 50, 51.
                  ON EQU ATIN G ARCS OF D IR EC TIO N .               199

direction, in the parallel of Jupiter, an honourable peace in
South Africa was soon concluded6 and a brilliant, although all
too short a reign of nine years and four months followed.
   The effect of the fourth direction in the preceding list, namely
the opposition of the Moon to the ascendant, in the zodiac,
59° 29' = May, 1901, was also manifest in the very narrow-
escape which his Majesty had of a dangerous accident, on the
22nd of May, 1901, by the fall of the mast of the yacht
Shamrock II., due to a sudden gust of wind. Had the snapping
of the mast happened ten seconds later, the boom would have
been right aboard, and would have fallen on the deck. At the
time of the accident the King was standing in the companion
way.7 This direction is said to presignify “ misfortunes at sea,”
as was stated in the “ Grammar of Astrology” (1840), and at
p. 285 of the first volume of “ The Text-Book of Astrology,”
first edition (1879).
   On the 14th of June, 1902, his Majesty felt indisposed, but
insisted that the troops at Aldershot should not be disappointed
of his presence, and therefore travelled thither to attend the
tattoo that evening, which unfortunately was very rainy. After
 dinner the King began to suffer much pain. On the 16th his
physicians advised his return to Windsor. On the 19th his
condition improved, and continued to the 23rd of June, when
his Majesty proceeded from Windsor to London ; but that
evening fever returned, and the swelling in the right iliac fossa
rapidly increased. The King received the information that a
purulent inflammation had occurred with his usual courage and
equanimity, and expressed the greatest distress that his people
should be disappointed, for the coronation would, necessarily,
have to he postponed. On the 24th of June Sir F. Treves
performed the operation for appendicitis. A rapid recovery
followed, after the 26th. The Coronation of the King and
Queen took place at Westminster Abbey on the 9th of August.
This critical and dangerous illness was due, astrologically speak­
ing, to the primary direction of Sun parallel Saturn, first
contact, 59° 36', followed by Ascendant 135° Sun, zodiac,
60° 32'. 'The arc for the illness and operation is 60° 36'.
   It has already been shown that the attack of typhoid fever in
December, 1871, was due to the first contact (of the Sun’s limb)
of Sun parallel Saturn in f 13° 40' 36". When the Sun again

 G Peace was signed at 1011 30m p.m. of the 31st of May, 1902, at Pretoria.
 7 Vide S t a r L o r e , June, 1901, and December, 1902.
200                     THE    T E X T -B O O K OF AS TR O LO G Y .


reached the parallel of Saturn, first contact in VS 16c 19' 24",
the King’s life was, soon after, again endangered, and this time
by appendicitis.8 At birth the Sun was in Scorpio 16° 54' 18"
in zodiacal sextile and mundane quartile with Mars, and thereby
takes the nature of the ruddy planet; and this accounts for the
dangerous purulent inflammation necessitating the surgical
operation, The Sun (hyleg) lay in the parallel of Saturn’s
declination, by direction from June, 1901, to June, 1904.
Moreover, another evil direction interposed to increase the
suffering and danger to life, namely, that of Midheaven conjunc­
tion Regulus, mundo, conversely (which is the meridian distance
of that wholly martial star at birth) 60° 18'. At the King's
60th Solar revolution the Moon was in Scorpio 2° 45', exactly
on the midheaven of the nativity; and on the 22nd of April,
1902, she was totally eclipsed in Scorpio 1° 42'. At the 60th
lunar progress (7h 16m a.m. of the 16th of September, 1846) the
Sun was within two degrees of exact conjunction with Mars in
the sign Virgo (in the eighth house of the nativity), in opposition
to the place of Uranus at birth, and in parallel declination with
both Mars and Uranus.
    The King’s grandson, now the Prince of Wales, had the Sun
in conjunction with both Mercury and Neptune at his eighth
Solar revolution, -June 23rd, 1902. Accordingly the author
wrote (in July, 1901) that : “ The 23rd of June brings a crisis ”
— and his grandfather became alarmingly ill on that day.9
    The passing of King Edward VII. took place at l l h 45™ p.m.
o f the 6th of May, 1910, to the intense grief a,nd consternation
of his loyal subjects throughout the British Empire. His
Majesty left England for Paris at 9.30 p.m. of the 6th of March,
 1910, and contracted a chill en route. The arrival at Biarritz,
on the 9th, was soon followed by a state of health which caused
anxiety to his physicians— “ the bronchitic attack, raised
temperature, accelerated pulse and respirations.” This attack
lasted ten days. The train of adverse primary directions falling
due in his Majesty’s sixty-ninth year gave rise to serious appre­
hension, and led the author to issue this solemn warning:—
  “ If   the   K in g ’s p h y s icia n s w o u ld   pay   a tten tion to   a s trolog ica l


  8 The student can readily compute this primary direction as follows :—As
Sun’s semi-arc is to the semi-arc of the parallel 57° 59’ 23" so is the Sun’ s
meridian distance to his second distance 12° 7' 5", which subtracted from
the meridian distance of the parallel, 71° 43’ 16" = 59° 36' IT' the arc of
direction.
  0 Vide Z a d ic ie l ' s A l m a n a c , 1902, p. 21.
                       ON EQUATING- ARCS OF DIR EC TION .                                     201

science, they would not advise his Majesty to travel abroad either this
spring or summer, in view of the first, fourth, and seventh of the
primary directions operating in this year 11910], and the meridional
[proximate] position of Saturn at the 68th Solar revolution.10 May
they [the favourable influences] entirely neutralise the unfavourable
ares 1”

   Alas ! the King’ s physicians permitted, if they did not advise,
his Majesty to travel abroad at the beginning of March, 1910,
and to return to this country on the 27th of April. The first
direction was Mercury parallel Sun, zodiac, conversely 08° 22'
 = March, 1910. The fourth was Moon parallel Mars, mundo,
conversely, 68° 3 8 '; the seventh was Moon quartile Uranus,
zodiac, cum lat. 68° 53'. The Sun being hyleg the first
■direction was a serious one for health ; the fourth was one
calculated to excite inflammation, threaten failure of the heart,
and to render travelling afar very risky, just as the first would.
   During his last illness, his Majesty showed as indomitable a
courage as on previous occasions. Although he had not shaken
off the depressing effects of his dangerous attack of bronchitis at
Biarritz, which was so near being fatal, he faced the risk of
returning to London and Sandringham ere the cold winds of an
English spring had subsided, making a hurried and exhausting
journey without breaking it, anxious as to the Constitutional
crisis then existing, and working to the last for the good of his
subjects.




   10 Vide Z a d k i e l ’ s A l m a n a c f o r 1910, p . 79, and f o r 1911, p p , 81-84.
                                          202




                                 C H A P T E E X X X Y.


              ON RECTI FYI NG                   A NATI VI TY.

W hen the time of birth is only known approximately, no-
observation of it having been recorded, an attempt to determine
the true moment of birth can only be made by means of the-
Placidian system. An error of four minutes will throw out the-
primary directions of the Ascendant and Midheaven a whole
year, and mundane parallels two years, more or less. An error
of eight minutes, or more, will accelerate or retard the directions
of the Sun or Moon, according to whether the error is later or
sooner than the true moment of birth, by weeks or months.
   Before railways were made, local time was kept in all towns-
remote from London, in England and Wales and Scotland.
Since the middle of the nineteenth century “ railway time ” —
that is to say, Greenwich mean time— has been kept throughout
the United Kingdom, except in Ireland, where Dublin time is-
kept.       For every degree of longitude west of Greenwich
“ railway time ” is four minutes in advance of local mean (or
clock) tim e; and for every degree east, it is four minutes later.
Before the railway era, time was kept in many country places by
means of the sun-dial. It is, therefore, important to learn
whether the stated time of birth, in a country place, is local or
railway time.              Abroad, standard time is kept, which differs
considerably from local time in places remote from the standard
in each country. ’ The following Standard Times, referred to the
Meridian of Greenwich, have been adopted for railway and other-
purposes :—
                                 h.                                          h.
   M id -E u r o p e .........            N. S. W a le s ....... . . . . 10 E a st.
   E a s t E u ro p e ..........          Q u e e n sla n d ........... .... 10 E a st.
   I n d ia ........................         T a sm an ia ........... . . . . 10 E a st.
   B u r m a ........................        N e w Z e a l a n d ...... . . . . I l i E a st.
   H o n g K o n g ..........                   A m e r ic a —
   J a p a n ........................        A tla n tic ................ . ...       4 W e s t.
                                                                              ....    5 W e s t.
   W e s t A u stra lia ....                 C en tral ................ . . . .       6 W est.
   S o u th A u stra lia ....                M o u n ta in ...........                  W est.
   V ic t o r ia ...................         P a c ific ..................... . . . . 8 \Vest.
                     ON R E C T IF Y IN G A N A TIV IT Y .       203

     Before computing the nativity the student should carefully
  ascertain whether the time of birth furnished is standard (or
  railway) time, as shown by the clock or watch by which it
 was noted. Paris time was synchronised with Greenwich time
 on the 10th of March, 1911.
     An additional source of error frequently arises from the excite­
 ment in the household wherein the birth takes place. Indeed,
 except when the first act of respiration, or first cry of the infant
 is noted by the doctor, or for astrological purposes, a guess is
 usually made some minutes after the event as to the nearest
 minute, ivhich may differ from five to ten minutes from the true
 moment.
    When the exact moment has been correctly observed and
 recorded, the student will find the arcs of primary direction,
 equated by the Ptolemaic method (1°= 1 year of life) will approxi­
 mate very closely to the periods of important events in the life
 of the owner of the horoscope to be computed, especially in the
 case of directions of the angles to' the conjunction, opposition,
trine, and quartile of Mars. As already stated, parallels, whether
 mundane or zodiacal usually begin to operate some weeks in
 advance ; and so do the mutual directions of the Sun and Moon,
 in the zodiac.
    A most misleading and unwarrantable assertion was made
 about thirty-two years ago, by the writer of an astrological
primer, that “ the exact moment of birth (always so difficult to
get at) is of no vital importance whatever.” The same writer
also asserted that astrology does not consist of the casting of
horoscopes “ and the working out of directions, but the judg­
ment of the horoscope and the effects of directions.” He also
deprecated mathematics as applied to astrological calculations,
and exalted the judgment of persons of such imperfect education
that they cannot compute horoscopes or planets' places nearer
than to degrees ! He would be a sorry specimen of an astrologer
 who cannot compute horoscopes, planets’ places, and primary
directions correctly.
    Several methods have been propounded for rectifying approxi­
mate times of birth. The only true process is by computing
arcs of primary direction for past events of importance— such as
serious accidents, dangerous illness, death of father or mother,
emigration, etc.— and comparing the arcs of such directions as
may fall due near the periods of such events and harmonise with
the nature of them. For this purpose the speculum must first
be computed. If a direction of the ascendant or midheaven,
204                   TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


satisfactory as to its nature corresponding to that of the selected
event, is found to measure within a degree, more or less, of the
arc for such event, it may be taken as the argument and a
tentative rectification made by means of it. Thus if it differs
one degree of arc late, add four minutes to the estimated time of
birth ; if one degree too early, subtract four minutes1, and its
arc will then be found to measure the same as that of the
event.
   It is usually found that directions of Mars afford the most
reliable means of rectifying an uncertain estimate of the birth-
moment ; especially in the case of an acute fever, or an accident
causing much loss of blood, or necessitating a surgical
operation, or the sudden death of a parent.
   The date of marriage, if already entered upon, will sometimes
be useful to this end, especially in the case of a real love-match,
of happy and advantageous nature; in such case a direction of
Venus may fall a little earlier than the arc of marriage, thereby
accounting for the fascination leading up to the engagement and
wedding.
   When rectification cannot be made by means of directions of
the ascendant or midheaven, those of the Sun and Moon, in the
zodiac and in the world, may enable it to be effected. In such
case the following rules, given by Oxley and Zadkiel I. (in the
first half of last century) must be followed :—
   R ule 1.— Reduce the meridian distance of Sun or Moon, whichever
is directed, into minutes of a degree, and call it the first, position ; then
add to this meridian distance one degree, reducing it also to minutes,
and call it the second position. Then, opposite the second position,
place the error of the arc of direction, multiply them together, and call
the amount A. W ork the same direction with the altered meridian
distance (taking care to correct by one degree the meridian distance of
the planet employed also); find the error of the arc of direction and
place it opposite the first position. Multiply these together, and call
the amount B.
   R ule 2.— If both errors be greater or less than the arc of the event,
find the difference between the errors, make it a divisor ; find also the
difference between A and B, and make it a dividend; the quotient will
be the true m eridian distance of the Sun or M oon at the moment of
birth, the difference between which and the amount of the meridian
 distance which was made the fir s t position, is the error of the R.A. of
the Midheaven at the estimate moment of birth.
   R ule 3.— But if one be greater and the other less than the arc of the
event, take the sum of the errors for a divisor, and the sum of A and B

   1 This relates to direct directions o f the angles. In the case of converse
directions o f the angles, if the arc o f direction is one degree greater than
that o f the event subtract one degree from the R .A . of the M .C ., and if it be
less add one degree to the R .A . of M .C.
                             ON R E C T IF Y IN G A N A TIV IT Y.                  205

for the dividend ; and the quotient will give the true meridian distance
as before stated.

  The rectification having been effected, the horoscope and the
speculum must be re-calculated to the corrected E.A. of the
Midheaven, and the directions employed in the process of rectifi­
cation must be re-calculated also ; and all directions for future
years must be computed to the rectified E.A. of M.C.
  T h e N a t iv it y   of   H.E.H. t h e L ate P rince             C onsort    (p. 50)
requires a rectification of three minutes and twenty-four seconds
later than the hour (6 o ’clock a.m.) given in his biography, to
bring up the ares of direction more closely to the following chief
events of his lamentably short life of forty-two years :—

                          E.A. of M.C. = 64° 28' 18".
              E vents .                                         D irections .
Death of the mother, Aug. 30,1831 = 12° 1 ' Ascendant □ fif zodiac 12° 16'




   Had the malefic planets, Mars, Saturn, and Uranus not been
in angles and afflicting Mercury in the ascendant, and had not
Mars been elevated above the Sun, Moon, and the benefic planets
at the moment of birth, and had the Sun (hyleg) been supported
by Jupiter and Venus, the Prince Consort would, probably, not
have succumbed to the fever which attacked him in December,..
1861, in his forty-third year.
   That a dangerous crisis was about to take place in the forty-
third year, -was foreseen by Zadkiel I., who, in a guarded manner,
expressed his anxiety for the health of the Prince, at pages 41
and 45 of his Almanac for 1861. Commenting on the nine­
teenth Solar revolution of the heir-apparent, Zadkiel said:
   1861 is evil for the father of the Prince of Wales.” Again, in
his judgment on the lunation nearest the Vernal Ingress of 1861,.
 the following remark was made: “ The stationary position of
 Saturn in the third degree of Virgo [the degree held by the Sun
 at birth] following upon this lunation [whereat Saturn was in
 the ascendant as at the vernal ingress] will be very evil for all.
206                  TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


persons born on or near the 26th of August; among the sufferers
I regret to see the worthy Prince Consort of these realms."
   Alderman Humphrey, of London, in announcing from the
magisterial bench the demise of the Prince Consort, mentioned,
as a remarkable fact, that Zadkiel [!•] had expressed in his
almanac great anxiety as to the state of His Royal Highness’s
health in the year 1861. This announcement caused a great
sensation, and, as a matter of course, the worthy alderman as
well as Zadkiel, was roundly abused in the newspapers of the
following day, with one or two honourable exceptions. The
writers of the disgraceful abuse looked rather foolish when it
soon afterwards transpired that the Prince Consort had taken
some little interest in scientific astrology.
   Well may Tennyson have written of the talented Prince a s:—
            “ Wearing the white flower of a blameless life
              Before a thousand peering littlenesses.”

  It may be mentioned that the Prince Consort, by falling
through the ice when skating, caused Queen Victoria some alarm,
under the operation, in his nativity, of a Neptune primary
direction.
              N A T IV IT Y OF H IS M A JE ST Y K IN G    GEO RG E   V.

   In the year 1868, the nativity of Prince George of Wales,
together with that of his elder brother, the late Prince Albert
Victor of Wales, was presented by the author in an annual
which he wrote (from 1868 to 1871 inclusive) in 1867. The
following judgment was appended to the diagram :—
   The regal sign Aries occupies the eastern horizon, and Mars, the
ruling planet of the ascending sign, is in Leo, also a regal sign. The
benefic Jupiter, strongly posited in his own sign Sagittarius, is within
six degrees of the upper meridian. Venus is in her chief dignity
Taurus, and in the ascendant. Saturn is in the seventh house in his
exaltation \LibrcC\. So that in this truly royal nativity we find three
planets dignified, the glorious Jupiter close to the midheaven, the Sun
and Moon nearly in mutual trine aspect, a royal sign ascending, and
Mars and Jupiter in royal signs. From these positions we may
conclude and predict that this Prince will, i f he live, become K ing of
E ngland under the title of G eorge V.
   Let us now consider the question of vitality. The Moon is hyleg,
being within five degrees of the western horizon [cadent, by oblique
descension 4° 13'], within three degrees of the quartile of Uranus,
applying to sextile with Mars, and in parallel of declination with
Neptune.* There is nothing to indicate either an early death or a
delicate constitution. The Prince will suffer occasionally from cough
or Ghest affection, but these may be easily remedied, under God’s

      The Moon also is in mundane trine with the Sun. the arc — 2° 25'.
                           ON R E CT IF YIN G A   N A TIV IT Y .                    207

    blessing, by skilful treatment; and may be also troubled with headache
    at times. If Neptune have benefic influence, as is supposed,* his exact
    parallel declination with the Moon should strengthen the physical
    constitution,
       The M oon and Mercury are both “ disposed ” of by Venus. Venus
    being dignified, according to Claudius Ptolemy, “ renders the mind and
    disposition benignant, good, copious in wit, fond of dancing, abhorring
    wickedness, delighting in the arts, affectionate, refined in taste, easily
    reconciled, tractable, and entirely amiable.”        Venus in par. dec.
    Mercury will render the Prince “ philosophical, of scientific mind and
    good genius, poetical, delighting in learning and elegance, luxurious,
    intelligent, emulous of worth, delighting in exercise, judicious, and
    high-minded.”
       It will be seen from the foregoing judgment that the Prince will, in
    mind and taste, greatly resemble his grandfather, the good and great
    Prince Albert. Indeed, England w ill be proud o f her f i f t h K ing
    G eorge , and his fam e shall descend to posterity as one o f the wisest
    and best o f monarchs.\
       Let the student watch the development of character in this Prince,
    for the nativity is especially interesting from the fact that Neptune,
    whose influence is little understood, occupies the proud position of the
    ascending planet.       The position of Jupiter pre-signifies a very
H I prosperous and peaceful reig n ; the good is somewhat marred by the
    opposition of Uranus, but this cannot seriously interfere with the
    happy influence of the glorious Jove.

      The horoscope was computed for the time stated in the official
   bulletin, namely, l h 18m a.m., and it was again given in F u t u r e ,
   March, 1892, and in Z a d k ie l ’ s A lmanac for 1911.
      However, if the time be rectified to l h 15m a.m., the arcs of
   the primary directions operating near the period of the accession
   to the throne will be brought up much more closely. As it very
   frequently happens that, astrologically speaking, the true
   moment of birth— that at which the infant’s first breath is
   drawn— is found to be from two to five minutes earlier than that
   observed, no objection can be raised to His Majesty’s true
   moment of birth being rectified three minutes earlier. The
   diagram here presented is drawn for l h 15m a.m. of the 3rd of
   June, 18G5, Marlborough House, in latitude 51° 30' 16" N., and
   longitude (in time) 37s W.
                                                                   h. m.      s.
         Sidereal time at Greenwich mean noon... 4 43 52-13
         Add time elapsed ........................................ 13 15
         Add diff. mean and sidereal time, 13h 15m                     2 10-59

                                                                   18   1    2-72
         Subtract long, of birthplace 37s W ...........                     37-00

         R.A. of M.C. is 270° 6' 26" ............... =             18   0 25-72
      * Later experience shows that the influence o f Neptune is not benefic.
      f T he capitals and italics were so printed in the original.
208                       THE    T E X T -B O O K OF AS TR O LO G Y .




 W.o'H'zé




                   Lat.         Déclin.      Bt . Asc.      Mer. dist.   Semi-Arc.

                            O     /   n      O     /   „     O   / n      O  / n
            o              22 17 59N 70 57 25               19 19 l      58 57 26
             ])   2° 274'S 2 39 54S 179 57 45               89 51 19     93 21 19
             $    3 174 S 14 10 15N 46 57 13                43 9 13      71 29 20
             5    1 30 S 13 16 59N 37 43 27                 52 22 29     72 43 56
             <?   1 26 N 20 16 34N 128 19 54                38 13 28     62 19 16
            'h    0 264 N 22 56 30 S 265 17 31               4 48 55     57 50 42
             b    2 40 N 6 51 24S 203 15 39                 66 50 47     81 18 14
            «     0 12 N 23 39 12N 88 30 3                    1 36 23    56 34 59
             ?    1 294 S 2 39 9N 9 55 1                    80 11 25     86 39 38


  The arc of accession to the throne, at 44y. and lira., is
44° 55'. The following train of primary directions will be
found to approximate closely thereto :—
                                                                            O   r
        Sun opposition Moon, mundo, conversely             ...             44   21
        Midheaven trine Sun, zodiac, direct    ...         ...             44   47
        Sun quartile Saturn, zodiac, direct... ...............             44   57
                                   ON RE C T IF Y IN G        A N A TIV IT Y .                      209
                                                                                           o   I

       A scen clt. p arallel Ju p iter, z o d ia c , d ire ct                ...    ...   45    3
       A s c e n d t. p a ra lle l J u p ite r, z o d ia c , c o n v e r s e ly    .. .   45   16
       M o o n 4 5 ° Sun , z o d ia c , c o n v e r s e ly ...               ...    ...   45   21
       J u p ite r c o n ju n c t io n S aturn, z o d ia c , c o n . ...            ...   45   27
       S u n 1 3 5 ° M ars, z o d ia c , c o n v e r s e ly ...              ...    ...   45   33

   By rectifying the time of birth from l h 18m a.m. to
l h 15m a.m., the arc of © □ I? zod. con. is brought from
45° 36' to 44° 57', as close as is necessary to the arc. for the
demise of the father and his Majesty’s accession to the throne,
May 6th, 1911. Again, the arc of M.C. A © zodiac is brought
from 44° 2' to 44° 47', and that of Ascendant parallel          ,
zodiac, direct, from 44° 18' to 45° 3', and that of the same
direction conversely, from 46° 1' to 45° 16'* These three last
named directions are powerful for good, and pre-signify a
fortunate and prosperous reign.
   It has been said that as Jupiter was retrograde and in
opposition to Uranus, near the lower meridian, at the birth of
King George V., the prospects of a long reign are not good, and
that loss of inheritance is threatened.'! Jupiter is elevated
above Uranus and all the other celestial bodies, and very near
the upper meridian, and is in Sagittarius his chief dignity.
His rétrogradation matters not. As far back as 1878, in which
year the first edition of this work was published, the author
wrote : “ Planets retrograde at birth are said to bring poverty
and sickness, but this can only apply to the infortunes ” — Mars
and Saturn. Again, in the first edition of the “ Science of the
Stars ” (1881) this was reiterated as follows : —
    R é t r o g r a d a t i o n . — A n ap p aren t m o t io n o f th e p la n e ts c o n t r a r y to
the o rd e r o f th e sig n s a n d to th eir o r b ita l m o tio n , i n n a tiv ities it w as
fo r m e rly h e ld that a retrog ra d e p la n e t ca n d o little o r n o g o o d u n less
w ell d ig n ifie d . I t is an ab su rd n o t io n an d is n o w a b a n d o n e d .”

 This royal horoscope is rendered additionally strong by the
mundane sextile of the Sun to the ascendant, the position of the


   * See Z a d k i e l ’ s A l m a n a c for 1 9 1 1 , p a g e 8 0 .
   f This statement was made on a post-card sent, anonymously, to the
author on the 5th of January, 1911, by a disloyal Socialist, who disgraced
himself by writing very disrespectfully of his gracious Majesty. Evidently
the wish was father to the thought. He laid stress on the accession taking
place coincidently with the direction of 0 □ b ■ But he forgot that Queen
Victoria acceded to the throne in 1837, under the primary direction, in her
Majesty’s nativity, of 0 J | 18° 3', attended by                     par © 18° 37'; and the
Victorian reign was a brilliant one, and continued for sixty-three years
(1837-1901). He also said that “ Neptune’s influence is better understood
now than in 1865,” but did not acknowledge that the author was the first to
discover and demonstrate that Neptune’s influence is more evil than good.
210                        TH E    TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


benefic Venus in the ascendant and in her chief dignity the sign
Taurus, the proximate mutual trine aspect of the Sun and Moon
( 0 A ] ) mundo, con. 2° 43', and in the zodiac 6° 34'). and the
proximate trine of Mars to the ascendant (2° 14'). Neptune,
although in the ascendant, is deprived of most of his power to
do evil by reason of the sextile aspect of the Sun, and Saturn’ s
evil influence is greatly mitigated by the sextile of Jupiter. In
fact, there is no valid reason for qualifying the opinion expressed
by the author forty-four years ago, namely that his Majesty’s
reign would prove to be very prosperous and peaceful.
   The rectification adopted is supported by the primary
directions measuring to the period of his Majesty’ s marriage,
 July 6th, 1893, arc = 28° 5' :—-
                                                                                °    '
      M o o n S ex tile S u n , z o d ia c , c o n v e r s e ly   ...    ...   27   42
      A sc e n d a n t sex tile V e n u s, m u n d o , co n .     ...    ...   28   8

   The Sun directed to the sextile of Venus in the zodiac,
29° 16' followed, and coincided very closely with the birth of the
Prince of Wales, June 23rd, 1894 = 29° 3'.
   The longitudes placed on the 11th, 12th, 2nd and 3rd houses
were computed by means of the formula Oblique Ascension given
to find ecliptic longitude given in the appendix. The poles of
those houses were first computed, the pole of the 11th and 3rd
houses being 23° 39' 6", and that of the 12th and 2nd houses
being 40° 45' 4”. The oblique ascension of the 11th house is
found by adding 30° to the right ascension of the meridian
thus:— 270° 6' 26" + 30° = 300° 6' 26".             In like manner,
adding 60° to the R.A. of M.C. we have 330° 6' 26" as the O.A.
of the twelfth house.
   With the foregoing examples of rectifying, when necessary,
the stated time of birth, the student should soon become expert
in the process. It is a difficult task at first, especially when the
time of birth is not known nearer than within fifteen or twenty
minutes when a sign of short ascension rises, or half an hour
 or more when a sign of long ascension may occupy the ascendant.
    That great astronomer Kepler devoted much time and labour
 to rectification. One astronomer opposed to astrology did not
 scruple to insult the memory of that genius by writing that
 Kepler “ though on behalf of the world he worked at astronomy,
 for his own daily bread he was in the employ of astrology,
 making almanacks and drawing horoscopes that he might live.” *

   * Vide “ Astronomical Myths ’’ based on Flammarion’s “ History of the
 Heavens,*’ by John F. Blake. London : Macmillan and Co., 1877.
                         ON R E C T IF Y IN G A N A TIV IT Y.               211

   Max Muller wrote of Kepler that:— “ The torch of imagination
  is as necessary to him who looks for truth, as the lamp of study;
  Kepler held both, and, more than that, he had the star of faith
 io guide him in all things from darkness to light.” “ Kepler
  believed that a man brings the celestial influences on himself by
  his own deeds, often to acceleration or retardation. In his
  opinion a marriage and its attendant circumstances depend on
  our own action. But a dangerous illness, a severe accident, and
 .any unexpected important event, may be due to planetary
 influence. Such events as these last were only made use of by
 Kepler for the purpose of rectification of a doubtful or inexact
 statement of the moment of birth. Here follows his method of
 rectification in bis own words :— *
     The horoscope of Wallenstein was computed by Kepler; the state­
  ment of the great general’s birth being “ September 14th, 1853, at
  Prague about 41‘ 30m p.m.” Wallenstein having suffered from illness
  “ setatis 22, anno 1605, in January ” — the Hungarian sickness or
  plague— the “ directionis Ascendentis ad corpus Saturni ” probably was
  the cause, for Nature takes her rnodos et leges de directionibus.
  Therefore the Ascensio obliqua Saturnis must be taken sub altitudine
  poli 51°. [N. 15.— The latitude of Prague is 50° 5' 16," as lately deter­
  mined.1 Oriente circiter 22° of Pisces est angulus orientis 15° 36'.
 ’The latitude of h meridiana est 2° 27', differentia igitur coorientaria
  8° 47', et h oritur cum 27° 47' Pisces circitur. Laboriosus igitur
 luriando hunc coorientem, angulus apud ilium est 15° 2 9 '; differentia
■coorientaria 8° 50'. Ita ij oritur cum 27° 50' of Pisces,
     Et quia Jovi latitudo meridiana est 1° 37' eodum angulo. Ergo
  differentia coorientaria 5° 50', et Jupiter oritur cum 28° 33' X . Sic
■etiam, quia oppositi Mercurio puncti latitudo cit 1° 46' angulo eodem.
 Differentia ejus coorientaria 6° 23' quare occidit Mercurius cum
.28° 58'
    Jam ascensiones obliqui sunt—
                                                            /
                 Saturni ...           ............... 350  3
                 Jovis                 ............... 359 30
                 Mercurii...           ............... 359 34
   Therefore the three directions fall within half a year, whilst the
fourth— Ascendant opposition Sun— will operate the next year. What
is very remarkable, while Saturn may have given the Hungarian sick­
ness, Mercury the plague, we find Ascendant conjunction Jupiter as a
saving direction after the rules of astrology. Now if we take the
middle, 359° 30', 269° 30' culminavit, or Sagittarius 29° 22', and
compute the course of the Sun for 21j days = 21° 7', which must
be added to the place of the Sun radix 6° 44^ '      so locus directionis
will be 21° 52' ===, ascensio recta ejus being 200° 12'. This subtracted
from 269° 20' gives the rectified time of birth 69° 8' or 4h 3 6 jm p.m.

    * Vide Dr. Struve’s (of Sulkowa) work on “ The Relations of Kepler with
'Wallenstein,” containing interesting letters of that distinguished astronomer.
 Mr. Albert Kniepf, of Hamburg, quoted from this work in his paper, printed
 in Zadkiel’s Almanac for 1903, pp. 82-84.
212               TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OP ASTR O LO G Y.


The true M C. is 69» 8' + 180° 44' = R.A. 249° 52', or 11° 25' of
Sagittarius, the true ascendant 17° of Aquarius.

   Kepler predicted serious effects from “ the transits and the five
oppositions of Saturn and Jupiter from 1632 to 1634, which
affect first the locus directionis Solis, and will operate in 1634,.
on the radical places of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mercury; whilst in
March, 1634, Mars will oppose the Sun, Venus and Mercury will
form a curious cross, for which time it will again come to my
prognostication already given ” [in the horoscope, in 1608] “ as
far as may be expected, terrible entanglements in the country,
connected with the fortunes of Wallenstein.”
   Wallenstein was murdered on the 25th of February, 1634;
the political troubles were prognosticated by Kepler exactly by
means of the above-named transits.
   Dr. Struve writes of Kepler that “ thousands of schemes”—
or horoscopes— “ which must be dated, from the handwriting,,
prior to 1608, and for which Kepler could not have been
adequately remunerated by persons who consulted him,
constitute a testimony to his great pains and labour to discover
a connexion between the events in the lives of men and the
primary directions in their nativities. It is clearly to be recog­
nised that his laborious calculations must have occupied an
immense amount of his time.”
   If there were no truth whatever in astrologia sana, and if the
pursuit of it were a delusion, as its enemies, who are utterly
ignorant of it, inanely aver, so honest a man as Kepler could
never have practised it in any -way. His genius would soon
have penetrated its falseness, and he would have published the
result of his long investigation as proving that it was unreal and
unworthy of serious study. But neither Kepler nor Tycho
Brahe ever gave such a verdict, nor did the author of the Novum
Organum condemn astrology as worthless, for they wrote of it
with respect, and, moreover, sought to improve it.
   My valued friend Mr. Arthur Mee, of Llanishen, Cardiff, an
astronomer who has investigated astrology in an impartial spirit
of enquiry, with the result that he is convinced that it is based
on truth, and is “ a great physical fact capable of rendering
unlimited assistance in the social and moral field,” states that
 “ Dr. Alfred R. Wallace candidly admits the remarkable correct­
ness of some astrological predictions which have come under his
notice, but refers the whole thing to some sort of spirit
influence.”     Dr. Wallace’s conclusion is that “ the care,
attention, labour, and study required to draw out an accurate
                       ON R E C T IF Y IN G A N A T IV IT Y .           213

 horoscope and derive from it accurate results, offer the conditions
 which enable spirits to impress on the astrological student
 the particular results he gets from the perplexities of the
 figures.”
    I have, from time to time, during half a century, protested
 that astrclogia sana is not “ occult,” and has no part nor lot with
 spiritism. When, in 1867, I wrote my judgment on the import
 of the horoscope of Prince George, second son (then only two
 years old) of the Prince of Wales, I gave the astrological reasons
 for my belief that the horoscope was indeed a royal one, and
 that the second son of H .R.II. the Prince of Wales would one
■day be K i n g o f E n g l a n d under the title of K i n g G e o r g e Y. I
 consulted no seer, neither any crystal (or other) clairvoyant, and
 showed the prediction I had 'written to no one before it "was
printed and published— forty-three years before his gracious
 Majesty succeeded to the throne. I have never sought the
impress, nor ever was conscious of the impress, of any spirit,
when writing any of my astrological predictions. Daily I
humbly pray for Divine guidance in my studies, and in my
efforts to discover truths -which may be, under the Divine
blessing, useful to mankind. This prediction under considera­
tion was read in 1867 and 1868 by quite thirty thousand
purchasers (and others) of the annual in which it was printed;
and was attested, unsolicited by me, by a scientific gentleman of
impartial mind, for he was quite unknown to me until I received
the following valuable letter from him, in July, 1910 :■—•
    “ Dear Sir,— Your readers will agree with me, I feel sure, that your
 prediction made in 1867 was a very remarkable one, to say the least;
  I have pointed it out to many persons in m y copy of your annual
 for 1868, which I read that year, when a youth of sixteen, and have
 carefully preserved. I do not dogmatise for or against astrology. As
 an examiner in English Literature I can testify to the value of a
 knowledge of astrology for one' who reads Chaucer.              What is so
 nauseating is the conceited manner in which those who are absolutely
 ignorant of both astrology and astronomy condemn the former science,
 although it won the attention and respect of many of the greatest men
 who ever lived. In your annual for 1868 you gave the maps of the
 heavens, specula, and astrological judgments respecting Prince Albert
 Victor and Prince George of Wales. The inner circle of the horoscope
 of the former Prince contained the three ostrich plumes, that of Prince
 George had a royal croiun. This was very significant. Writing of
 this nativity, you said that the younger Prince would be K i n g o f
 E n g l a n d , under the title of King George V .
    “ The universal solvent to get rid of such facts, among sceptics, is
■coincidence, a word which must be as comfortable to them as
 Mesopotamia was to the old lady People ought to form their own
 judgm ent; and ought not to be content to deny the truth of astrology
 merely because it is the fashion to do so — E d m u n d S. P a y n e .”
214                TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


    This exactly fulfilled prediction should satisfy even sceptics-
 that astrologia sana is true and that, as De Morgan, the great-
mathematician, admitted, “ If astrology be true, it is a useful
truth.” Dr. Alfred E. Wallace, for whose talents, attainments,,
 and independence of mind, I have the highest admiration and
 respect, will, I trust, admit that pure astrology is a science and
is not dependent on spirit impress.
   A sceptic has recently asserted that: “ Although when St-
Augustine relinquished astrology he was of the opinion that-
chance was the cause of some of the predictions being fulfilled,
he altered his opinion, evidently, because as atheist he could not
hold to the idea of chance occurrences.” St. Augustine said:-
“ We have good reason to believe that when astrologers give
many wonderful answers it is to be attributed to the occult-
inspiration of spirits not of the best kind, whose care it is to
insinuate into the minds of men and to confirm in those false
and noxious opinions concerning the fatal influences of the stars,
and not to their marking and inspecting of horoscopes, according-
to some kind of art which has no existence.”
   This argument can only apply to occultists, who mix up
astrology with spiritism, and who never attempt to master the
mathematical system of the ancient science. I have repeatedly
protested that astrology is not “ occult.” It should be pursued
and practised as a science. In the first edition (1881) of my
“ Science of the Stars,” I stated that Astrologia sana has nothing
whatever with spirit-rapping, palmistry, card-shuffling, or witch­
craft : it does not lead to atheism nor fatalism. As Bacon (Lord
Verulam) said : “ there is no fatal necessity in the stars, and this
the more prudent astrologers have allowed.”
   St. Augustine took a very erroneous view of pure astrology,,
and it seems that he forgot that Our Saviour alluded to the
“ powers” — or virtues— in the celestial bodies— vide Matthew
xxiv. 29, and Mark xiii. 25.
                               215




                CHAPTER              X X X Y I.



          ON    SOLAR         REVOLUTIONS.

T he “   Solar Revolution ” is a figure of the heavens drawn for
the moment of the return of the Sun to the longitude (in
degrees, minutes, and seconds), held by the great luminary at
the moment of birth. It is, of course, purely symbolical, and its
import is not so great when it differs greatly from the nature of
the primary directions falling due in the year of life then
being entered upon. It should be drawn for the birthplace ; but
if permanent residence has been taken up at a great distance
from the birthplace, then an additional figure should be also
computed to the latitude and longitude of such place, and
compared with the former one.
    Zadkiel I. thought that the chart of birth should be copied (in
black ink), and the places of the Moon and planets at the Solar
return marked in the various signs and houses (in red ink)—
because the signification of the revolutional signification depends
on the transits which coincide with the moment of the Sun’s return
to his place at birth, more or less nearly. The importance of
such transits is great by reason of their occurring at or near the
 time of the earth being in the same part of her orbit as at the
moment of birth. This teaching is sound. However, when a
planet happens to be culminating, rising, setting, or on the
lower meridian, at the moment of the Sun’s return, it is found
 to have some signification by reason of its relative position, and
all the more if configurated with the Sun, Moon, or some other
 celestial body. In all cases it is advisable to compare the
 revolutional figure with the nativity.
    Revolutional figures are much more forceful, as a rule, when
 the same sign ascends as ascended at birth, and especially if the
 degree ascending is within a few degrees of the radical ascending
 degree. Every thirty-three years the ascending degree of the
 revolution approximates very closely to that rising at birth.
 For example, at the author’s birth the sign Sagittarius 10° 29'
 ascended (November 10th, 1840, 9h 20™ a.m. London). At the
216               TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTK OLOG Y.


thirty-third Solar return f 11° 30' ascended, and at the sixty-
sixth, f 13° 41' ascended. In all, nine revolutional figures
show the sign Sagittarius rising, down to that of 1910.
   The Sun was but 8° 53' from Jupiter at birth; and at the
revolutions of 1851, 1863, 1875, 1887, 1899, and 1911, the same
benefic planet will be found to be very near the S u n ; the
sidereal revolution of Jupiter being 11.9 years.
   When the angles of the nativity are reversed at the Solar
revolution it is not a promising indication. If, however, Jupiter
or Venus be exactly rising or culminating the figure would be
a favourable one, nevertheless.
   Aspects have not any great power unless they are very close,
i.e. within five degrees in the case of the Sun and Moon
(applying), within two degrees if a major aspect between
planets, or within one degree if a minor aspect. ’ Sextiles are
weak compared with conjunctions, parallel declinations, trines,
and oppositions.
   When more than one planet happens to be close to the cusp of
the ascendant, descendant, upper or lower meridian, the
revolution is a very important one.
   The position of the Sun is of the greatest importance. The
position of the Moon is very important when she is in the tenth
house and in close aspect with the Sun or a planet. Next in
importance is the position of the planet (if any) which was close
to the ascendant or upper meridian at the moment of birth.
Mars rising at birth and again at a Solar revolution “ brings a
return of an old complaint,” so it is said. I have observed
many instances wherein the ruddy planet, thus situated, pre­
signified accidents or illness, or strife. Saturn, so situated,
indicates accidents or illness, or else misfortune.
   If at birth Saturn, Mars, or Uranus, was on the cusp of the
sixth or seventh house and the degree of the zodiac held by such
planet should ascend at the revolution, illness is pre-signified.
If one of these planets was on the cusp of the third or ninth
house of the nativity and its place ascends at a revolution,
danger in travelling is threatened, in the ensuing year. When
Jupiter, or Venus, is on the cusp of the second house of the
nativity, the thirty-third and sixty-sixth Solar revolutions bring
increase of income, or of wealth. If its place in the zodiac
ascends or occupies the upper meridian at any revolution, the
ensuing year proves a very successful one.
   The Sun in opposition or quadrature with Saturn at a
revolution pre-signifies illness or losses to the father; and if the
                       ON   SO LAR R E V O LU TIO N S .            217

 Sun be in an angle and near the cusp, or in the eighth house, the
 father will be in danger. [The author’ s forty-second Solar
 revolution (Nov. 10th, 1882, l h 10m p.m.) had the Sun in the
 eighth house, in opposition with Saturn, nearly, in Taurus
 23° 4', applying to conjunction with Mars in Scorpio 26° 45',
 and separating from opposition with Neptune in Taurus 17° 24',
 — the Sun was eclipsed at l l h 20m p.m. that day. His father
 died on the 9th May, 1883.]
    The Moon, if eclipsed near the time of the Solar return, and
 afflicted by Saturn, Mars, or Uranus, indicates danger to the
 mother (or if the Moon was in the seventh house at birth, to the
 wife or husband, as the case may be) ; and especially if the place
 of an evil planet at birth ascends or if Saturn ascends at the
 moment of the Sun’s return.
    The Moon, if afflicted at birth by quartile, opposition or
■conjunction with Saturn or Mars, and if she transits the radical
 place of either of these planets at the moment of Solar return,
 serious risk of an injury to an eye, is pre-signified.
    The Moon, in conjunction, quartile or opposition, with Saturn
 at the Solar revolution threatens rheumatism, influenza, or an
 accident. If the j occupied a fixed sign at birth and applied to
 Saturn, there is grave risk of a malignant chronic disease setting in.
    The place of the radical Moon, Mercury, or Uranus, ascending
 at the Solar return, there is a disposition to travel far, to be
 restless, or to indulge in some romantic exploit, that year.
    The place of Yenus— especially if $ was in Taurus or Libra,
 or in the ascendant or seventh house at birth— ascending at a
 Solar revolution, inclines to courtship and marriage. If the
 owner of the nativity is already married, an increase of family
 usually takes place in the course of the ensuing year of life.
 Anyone engaged in a profession or business under the rule of
Yenus may realise advancement, promotion, and increase of
income.
   Venus, or Jupiter, or both, exactly rising at a Solar revolution
a good year for health and affairs may be anticipated, whether
•either of them ascended at birth or not.

   T he F irst H o u s e .— If the celestial body ruling the ascending
sign of the nativity be found in the seventh house of the revolu­
tion, a single person is inclined towards marrying, more
■especially if a primary direction of Venus coincides. If in the
ninth house, there is a disposition to travel ; but if the
significator is with Saturn or Mars it would be best to refrain
■from voyaging abroad.
218               TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


   S econd H o u s e .— The ruler of the radical second house in
the revolutional second and assisted by Jupiter favours the
development of business and the acquirement of wealth: if
afflicted by Saturn, Mars, or Uranus, precaution is needful
against losses and being defrauded. In the fourth, some advan­
tage may be gained from property in land or houses : if afflicted
by Mars, extra precaution and insurance against fire is advisable,,
and fresh investments in lands, houses, or mines should be very
small indeed. In the eighth some advantage may accrue under a
will. In the tenth, good business will be done; if afflicted by
Saturn losses will be suffered.
   T h ir d H o u s e .— If the ruler of the radical third be in the
revolutional eighth house, and in conjunction with Saturn or
Mars, travelling will not be profitable, and danger therein will
be incurred if the ruler had the quartile or opposition of Mars
or Saturn at birth. In the ninth, profitable journeys and good
business are promised, imless the ruler receives the evil influence-
of <? , b , $ , or W • If the ruler of the radical third be Venus
or Jupiter, and in the revolutional tenth house, business will be
prosperous, and some public honour may be received.
   F ourth H o u se .— If the ruler of the radical fourth house be
a malefic planet, and in the revolutional fourth, or radical
eleventh, and afflicted, the father will be in some serious danger.
If in the revolutional twelfth, the owner of the nativity must
beware of losses by a tenant, if he lets land or houses.
   S ixt h H o u s e .— If the ruler of the radical sixth house be
Saturn or Mars, and afflicted in the revolutional third or ninth,
there is risk of illness as the result of a journey, or an accident
in travelling, especially if the ruler is “ hyleg.’ ’ In the tenth,.
disputes may arise with the landlord, or (if in employment)
wdth a master.
   S even th H o u se .— The Moon or Venus in the revolutional
seventh, and in conjunction or opposition with Mars, Saturn, or
Uranus threatens a man’s wife or fiancee with illness. If Saturn
or Mars be in the radical seventh, very near the cusp, and in the
revolutional seventh again, it threatens serious danger to the
wife ; and in women’s nativities, the same to the husbands
The ruler of the radical seventh in the revolutional sixth, and
afflicted, domestic quarrels and misunderstandings ensue.
Jupiter or Venus, ruler of the radical seventh and in the
revolutional seventh, conjugal happiness is assured; in the case
 of a single person, the year will be a favourable one for marry­
 ing. If Saturn, Mars, or Uranus be ruler of the radical seventh
 and afflicting the ruler of the radical first in the revolutional
tenth there is risk of loss of office, or business losses through an
 enemy. If the ruler of the radical seventh be in the revolutional
 twelfth and afflicted, a single person should avoid marrying during
 the ensuing year; a debtor should beware of imprisonment..
                         ON SO LAR RE VO LU TIO N S.                   219'

 Emigration should not take place if an evil planet be in the
  seventh.
     E ig h t h H ou se .— If the Sun or Moon, -whichever may be
  hyleg, be ruler of the radical ascendant, in the revolutional eighth
  house, and in conjunction, quartile, or opposition with Mars or
  Saturn, strict precaution must be taken against illness ; and the
  countries and places ruled by the sign containing the hyleg at
  birth and in the revolutional figure, must be avoided that year.
  The ruler of the radical eighth in the revolutional fourth, and
  afflicted portends accidents, damage to property, and an ill time
  for buying land and houses. In the revolutional seventh, long
  journeys should not be taken alone, especially abroad, for if the
  nativity be a violent one, the owner of it may never return home
  safe and sound. In the ninth, if the ruler (of the radical eighth)
 be Mars, Saturn, Uranus, or Neptune, and afflicted therein, no
 journey abroad should be taken, for it may too probably piove
 fatal.* The ruler of the radical eighth a benefic and in the
 revolutioual eighth, well configurated, promises benefits by a.
 legacy, or by the partner in marriage coming into property.
    N in th H ouse . —The Moon in the revolutional ninth house
 usually pre-signifies a sea voyage, more especially if at the time
 in Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio or Pisces. If the Moon be afflicted by
 Saturn or Mars, no sea voyage of long duration should be taken,
 if avoidable. The ruler of the radical ninth in the revolutional
 fourth, and afflicted, foreign journeys had best be avoided. If
 the ruler of the radical ninth be Jupiter or Venus, or if Mercury
be with          or 2 , in either the revolutional seventh or ninth,
free from affliction and well configurated, emigration may be
 made with a good prospect of success, especially if a suitable
primary direction should fall due about the same time as the
Solar revolution under consideration.
    T enth H o u se .— Saturn in the tenth house of the revolution,
or elevated above the other celestial bodies near the upper
meridian, threatens misfortunes, troubles, and anxiety of mind. If
at the same time Saturn afflicts the Sun or Moon, and Mercury,
 professional and business men are only too likely to meet with
 serious reverses, or loss of income and of popularity, especially
if an evil primary direction of Saturn be then operating in the
nativity. Mars threatens troubles from an official, a magistrate,
or a judge, or through being scandalised or libelled. Jupiter
elevates and brings some honour or promotion. Venus brings
social pleasures, advancement, and the friendship of ladies of
wealth or rank. Mercury, well aspeeted, increases professional

  * Mr. G., whose nativity had Scorpio on the eighth cusp, had 6 d HI in
the ninth of his 7oth solar revolution. He went abroad to winter, although
advised not to do so, and died in a foreign country. His health was
delicate but not in any serious state when he left England. The fatal
primary direction was ascendant conjunction Saturn.
'220               TH E T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


or business reputation and success. The Moon exactly on the
upper meridian usually causes change of residence or of employ­
ment, or else a long journey. Changes will be beneficial or
otherwise according to the nature of the celestial bodies with
which the Moon may hold a conjunction, trine, or sextile aspect,
on the one hand, or conjunction, quartile, or opposition on the
other. If the ruler of the radical tenth house be the Sun. Moon,
Venus, Jupiter, or Mercury, and located in the revolutional first,
especially if the radical ascending sign be again ascending, and
well configurated, it promises advancement, promotion, honours,
and prosperity. In the second, good business and increase of
substance. In the third or ninth, a good year for travelling on
business. In the tenth, honours, promotion, and success. In
the eleventh, new friends of position, and influential; and success
to children.
   E l e ve n th H o u se . —If Jupiter or Venus be located in the
revolutional eleventh house and in benefic aspect with the Sun,
Moou, or Mercury in the ascendant new friends of good social
status or wealth, will be made, in the ensuing year. If a
conjunction of two of the infortunes, or of the Sun or Moon
with Mars, Saturn, or Uranus, takes place in either the radical
or revolutional eleventh house, a friend will be lost by death or
some misfortune. A mutual sextile of the Sun and Moon from
the ascendant and eleventh of either the radix or revolution
would be of valuable help in bringing the influence of good
friends to the benefit of the owner of the horoscope. The ruler
of the radical eleventh afflicted in the revolutional si.vth is said
to pre-signify danger to a friend.
   T w e lf t h H ouse .— If Mars, or Mercury afflicted by Mars, be
ruler of the twelfth of the radix, and found on the cusp of the
seventh house of either the radix or revolution, there is a great
risk of incurring serious losses by the depredations of thieves
and knaves, and of personal injury at the hands of highwaymen,
in the ensuing year. If the ruler of the ascendant of the radix
be more powerful and better aspected than that of the twelfth,
there is a good prospect of overcoming such enemies. An evil
planet ruler of the radical twelfth located in the revolutional
second house pre-signifies loss of m oney; and loss of cattle to a
breeder of them. In the twelfth some loss of or injury from
cattle, or at the hands of a convict.
  The last Solar revolution of King Edward VII. was remark­
able for the proximity of the evil Saturn to the upper meridian
and its elevation above all the other celestial bodies. Here are
the elements of the revolution figure :-—
  Time of the Sun’s sixty-eighth return to the longitude held at the
moment of birth (vide page 195), 10 11 42m 3 p.m. of the 9th of
November, 1909. E.A. of M.C. = 28° 53', Taurus 1° 1' culminating,
and Leo 17° 9' ascending. Sun in the fourth house, in 111 16° 54' 18”,
                        ON SOLAR R E VO LU TIO N S.                 221

attended by Mercury in 3° 28' of the same sign. Moon in the third
house, in ^5= 12° 32' (intercepted) attended by Jupiter in 5° 49' of the
same sign. Venus in the fifth house in Vf 2U 44’. Mars close to the
cusp of the ninth house in      27° 11'. Saturn in the ninth house in
tY’ 17° 45', retrograde, receiving the application of the M oon by
opposition aspect.      Uranus on the cusp of the sixth house, in
    17° 55', in opposition, nearly, with Neptune in the twelfth house, in
 55 19° 15'.
   Saturn passed the meridian at 911 56m p.m. (forty-six minutes
only before the Sun’ s return to his place at birth), and was in
the ninth, the house ruling long journeys, in quartile aspect
with (Jranus on the cusp of the sixth, the house of sickness, and
receiving the opposition aspect of the Moon from the third, the
house ruling short journeys. The indications that a serious
risk would be incurred by his late Majesty venturing on a long
journey abroad, during the ensuing year of life, were clear and
unmistakeable. The primary directions operating in the
following March to June (1910) also being serious for health and
travelling, the author wrote the guardedly worded warning to
the King’s physicians, already quoted at p. 195. At 9h 30m p.m.
of March 6th, 1910, when King Edward started on his journey,,
the Moon was in vy 15°, exactly in the place of Mars at birth,
close to the place of Uranus at the Solar revolution, and in
quartile to the place of Saturn. At the time of his Majesty’s
demise the Moon was in t 13° 50', close to the place of Saturn
at the Solar revolution !
   At King Edward’s sixty-fourth Solar revolution, viz. l l h 20 2m
p.m. of November 9th, 1905, Leo 23° 36' ascended, and
Saturn was setting in zz 26° 17', retrograde, the Sun had the
semi-quartile aspect with Uranus, and the Moon had the quartile
with Mars. His Majesty whilst shooting in Windsor Forest, on
the 16th of the same month, put his foot into a rabbit burrow,
and, slipping, fell to the ground and sprained his ankle. In
April, 1906, during his holiday at Biarritz, the automobile in
which his Majesty was travelling had the narrowest of escapes
from collision with a runaway horse, an accident being avoided
only by the dexterity of the driver. Again, while at Corfu, on
the thirteenth of the same month the royal carriage came into
 collision with a cart driven by some drunken peasants, who were
 thrown out, and one of them was injured. Happily the King
 and Queen escaped injury. Three accidents thus happened
 within five months of the revolution under consideration.’1

  •At the author’s sixty-fiEth Solar revolution, N ovem ber lOtb, 1905,
3h 40m 22s a.m ., Libra 10° 10' ascended, the ascending degree having the
•222                 TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


   In U r a n ia , February, 1880, the author gave the horoscope of
 the Tsar Alexander II., who was born at Moscow, April 29th,
 1818, at 10h a.m., Aries 7° 16' on the M.C., and Leo 4° 42'
ascending. Mars was in the twelfth house (that ruling secret
•enemies), in semi-quartile with the Sun (mundo), and in
zodiacal sesquiquadrate with the Moon in the eighth. The Sun
 (hyleg) had the mundane parallel of Saturn ; and the ascending
 degree had the sesquiquadrate of Uranus. At the sixty-second
Solar revolution, April 28th, 1880, 9h 40m a.m., Moscow, Mars
was again in the twelfth house, in Cancer 9° 87', in sextile with
 the Sun. Neptune was in Taurus 11° 38' only three degrees
from conjunction with the Sun. The Moon was in Sagittarius
.25° 8' close to the place of Neptune at birth, and only five
 degrees past that of Uranus, and her declination (24° 81' S.)
was in contra-parallel with that of Mars (24° 43' N.) The Tsar
 was cruelly assassinated, on the 13th of March, 1881, at G2y. and
10m., arc = 62° 52’ , under the operation of the primary
direction of Sun rapt parallel Mars 63° 10'. If we take the
 Sun’ s semi-diameter 0° 16' from this arc we have 62° 54', for
first contact, exactly coinciding with the awfully tragic death of
that well-meaning monarch. The author wrote at p. 46 of
U rania that “ the year 1881 indicates personal suffering and
misfortunes— the Tsar will find it difficult indeed to weather the
storm.” The Solar eclipse of December 21st, 1880, fell in
opposition to the place of Mars at the Solar return.




sesquiquadrate of Saturn in ™ 26° 19', and the quartile oi Neptune in
 05 10° 12'. On the 13th of the same month, a fall when alighting from a
vehicle in the city of London, injured his right leg, and imminent risk of
being run over the head by a following carriage, was incurred.
                                   223




                  C H A P T E R           X X V 1I.



      ON     SECONDARY                   DIRECTIONS.

T here    is no reliable evidence of any rational system of
Astrology founded on mathematics before the first century,
although Sir Isaac Newton, in his C hron ology , admitted that
astrology was in existence nearly nine hundred years earlier than
that period. It was about the year 133 that the T et babiblo s
was compiled by Claudius Ptolemy, it is believed. Not until
1647 and 1657, when the Spanish monk, Placidus de Titus,
published his great work, the P rim u m M o b il e , were the principles
■enunciated in the T e t babiblo s clearly understood. This wrork
was translated into English by John Cooper, from the original
Latin, and published in the year 1816. And in 1822, Ashmand
published his translation of the T etbabiblo s from the Greek into
English. Prior to 1816 and 1822, the various translations of
those valuable works, and especially those by Sibly, were
•wretched and misleading, and led to numerous errors on the part
■of Lilly, Colley, Sibly, Gadbury, White, and others (when they
treated on nativities and the method of directing) who followed
the erroneous Arabian system of mixing up the system of
divination (horary questions), with the science of genethlialogy.
It is lamentable to find that this Arabian folly is still taught and
practised in certain publications of the present day.
   Placidus most probably would not have regarded secondary
directions as of the slightest importance had he not departed
from Ptolemy’s equation of arcs of primary direction and
substituted for it that of adding the arc to the right ascension of
the Sun at birth, and then determining in how many days after
 birth the Sun reached such R.A,, and allowing for each day one
year of life, and for every two hours one month.
   “ By some secondary means,” wrote Placidus, “ the aspects that are
made to the luminaries and angles on those days, jointly assist the
significators of the primary directions ; for this reason, we say, that the
days whereon these aspects happen are very powerful in those years
which answer to those days and on which they depend. From these
motions, in preference to the rest, appears the true, real, and hitherto
224                TH E   T E X T -liO O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y .


unknown foundation of the critical or cVimacterical years; for the-
Moon almost every seventh day is placed in the critical place with
respect to her place in the nativity. W e call these motions the
secondary directions, to distinguish them from the primary and
principal, and we are of opinion that Ptolemy, writing of annual places-
is to be understood of the places of those motions, and when of the
menstrual, hints at the places of the progression.”

   Yet modem practitioners of the Arabian and Chaldæan
astrology regard Secondary Directions as Primary, and pass off
the former alone as reliable, and without any arcs of primary
direction which may happen to coincide, and without which the
secondary directions are of not the slightest importance. I have
never found any secondary directions effective in my own
nativity.
   While Zadkiel I. was investigating and writing on the science,,
in the first few years of his study of it, he paid some attention
to secondary directions. Even then (in 1840) he wrote oi their
supposed effects as enduring “ only for a week or two,” 1 and that
“ they are far less powerful than primary directions, and if these
are opposed to them in nature, at the time, they have little or no
effect.” In some of his early almanacks Zadkiel I. gave some
secondary directions, attending primary, in nativities of eminent
persons ; but he ceased to do so after 1845 (except in 1868,
when he quoted two or three, which proved to be of no effect).
When he found that the Ptolemaic equation of the arcs of primary
direction came much nearer to the truth than the Placidian, he
observed that the aid of no secondary direction was needed to
ascertain when the influence of the primary one would take
effect.
   Secondary directions are nothing more than transits in the
heavens on the days after birth. Whereas primary directions
are all formed, as already shown, within a few hours of the
moment of birth.
   The attempt to galvanise into a semblance of life the dead
Arabian system of judging nativities and computing “ direc­
tions,” made by practising astrologers who cannot, or will not
take the time and trouble to compute nativities on the Ptolemaic
and Placidian system, is to present a very imperfect, unsound,
and incorrect description of the grand truths of A stkologia
S ana .
  In the nativity of his Majesty King George V., the Sun by
secondary direction, would arrive at the quartile of the place of

                   1 G ram m ar o f A strology, page 107.
                   ON SECONDARY D IR EC TIO N S.             225

Saturn, at 48 years and seven and a half months (43 days and
fifteen hours) after birth, which measures to January, 1910.
The demise of King Edward VII. took place on the 6th of May,
1910. There were no other secondary directions falling due in
the same year except Moon conjunction Mercury = November,.
1910. This “ direction ” of the Sun to the square of Saturn did
not indicate the time when the primary direction of © □ J?
zodiac, 44° 57' = May, 1910, would operate, for it measured
four months short of the bereavement.            The student on
comparing this secondary direction with the primary ones falling
due at the time of his Majesty’s accession to the throne will
perceive how high the Placidian towers over the halting and
defective Arabian system.
    Secondary directions are computed as follows;—
   R u l e .— Find the hour, by proportion, by means of Zadkiel’s
Ephemeris for the year of birth, at which the Sun, Moon, or
planet forms an aspect with the place of one of the celestial
bodies, or the degree in the Midheaven or Ascendant, and
subtract from it the day and hour of birth, and the difference is
the arc of direction. Convert the arc into time by taking the
number of the days after birth as that of years, and allowing one
month for every two hours.
   There is no need to give an example of so simple a calcula­
tion.
   In conclusion it may be said that the secondary as compared
with the primary system of directing is—
                 “ As m oonlight is to sunlight,
                   A nd as water unto w ine.”




                                                             O’
                                     226




              CHAPTER                     XXXVIII.



   ON     LUNATIONS,                     ECLIPSES,                   AND
                      PROGRESSES.

                                   “ A lack our terrene M oon
               Is now eclipsed; and it portends alone
               T he fall o f A n ton y.” — S h a k e s p e a r e .


L unations are the New and P u l l M oons which immediately
precede or coincide with the occurrence of dangerous accidents,
severe illnesses, or events of great importance to individuals or
nations.
   When a new or full moon takes place close to the longitude
held by the Sun, Venus, or Jupiter at birth, some benefit usually
coincides, or follows within the space of a fortnight or so.
When the lunation falls in the radical place of Saturn, Mars,
Uranus, or Neptune, accidents, illness, or trouble may be
experienced, especially if it coincides with the period of
operation of an adverse primary direction in the nativity.
   E clipses .— An eclipse of the Sun or Moon falling close to the
place of either luminary at birth, or in opposition thereto, or
near conjunction or opposition with a malefic planet (in the
heavens), pre-signifies troubles or ill-health, especially if such
eclipse falls in the place of the hyleg, and happens to be visible
at the birthplace or the place of residence at the time. If
falling within five to eight degrees of the place of the Sun or
Moon at birth, some trouble is threatened, but to a less extent
than when falling within two degrees. As great eclipses affect
the multitude generally, serious results may follow, although no
evil primary direction may fall due in the same year of life of
the individual whose nativity is affected by them.
   A great eclipse falling in, or within two or three degrees of,
the place of Jupiter or Venus at birth, pre-signifies some honour,
distinction, increase of income, or improvement of health, as the
case may be. It may bring marriage to pass, in the case of an
 unmarried person of full age. The kind of benefit is usually
indicated by the accidental position (in the nativity) of the
 benefic planet and its configurations.
                    ON LU N ATIO N S, E C L IP S E S ,       AND     PR O G R E S S E S .           227

   Eclipses taking place within two or three days, if of the Snn,
and within two to four hours, if of the Moon, of the time of the
Sun’s return to his longitude in the nativity, are of the greatest
importance, and the effects are of longer endurance than at
other times, as a rule.
   The annular eclipse of the Sun of the 19th of October, 1865,
took place very nearly in the degree of longitude held by the
Sun at the birth of Lord Palmerston, and that illustrious states­
man passed away ere that eclipse attained its greatest phase.
Zadkiel I. foretold the dangerous character of that eclipse as
follows :— “ This eclipse will, I expect, put an end to his (Lord
Palmerston’s) power, and endanger his life.” 1
   Lord Palmerston was born on the 20th of October, 1784, hour
not stated. Here are the places of the celestial bodies at Solar
 noon of that day, at Greenwich :—

    0           D            5           2           S                         b                    ¥
                                                                 *
O       t   o       r   O        1   o       r   O       !   O         /   O       1    O   1   o       r

27-^44 12>y27 ll= -4 0 16in57 2 0^ 34 28,ccc' 6 18>yl0 162521 14===10

    The Sun was, no doubt, hyleg, and his close trine (120°)
 aspect with the benefic Jupiter gave Lord Palmerston that
 vitality, energy, jovialness, and juvenility, for which he was so
 famous— enabling him to attain the ripe age of eighty-one years.
 It is remarkable that at his birth seven of the celestial bodies
 were in cardinal signs.
    In the chapter on Equating Arcs of Primary Direction, it has
 been already shown how the Solar eclipses of 1902 and 1910
 affected the health of his late Majesty King Edward VII.
    In S tar L ore , December, 1897,. the author mentioned that
 during the illness of her Majesty Queen Alexandra in February
 and March, 1867, the Sun was eclipsed in Pisces 15° 23', near
 the place of Jupiter (>€ 24° 19') at birth, and that immediately
 after an improvement set in, and the attack of acute rheumatism
 gradually passed off. That severe illness was due, astrologieally
 speaking, to the primary direction of Saturn parallel Moon, in
 the zodiac, direct 22° 20'.
    In the same edition of S tar L o r e , the author wrote that “ the
 Solar eclipse of the 22nd of January, 1898, falls close to the
 place of Saturn in this nativity. Happily, no evil effects need
 be apprehended, beyond suffering and danger to a near relation.”

                            1 “ Zadkiel’s Almanac ” for 1865, p. 48.
228                 TH E TE X T -B O O K   OF A S T K O L O G Y .


The Queen of Denmark, the mother of Queen Alexandra, died in-
September, 1898.
   It is related of Charles D ’Escaro, Bishop of Larigres, that he
always fainted at an eclipse of the Moon, and remained insensible
as long as it lasted. When he was very old and infirm an
eclipse took place, the venerable prelate fainted, as usual, and he
did not revive again.
   It was the inconvenient idiosyncracy of the great Lord
Verulam always to faint at the commencement of a lunar-
eclipse.
   P koghesses consist of the procession of the Moon, by allowing
an embolismic or synodical lunation, consisting of twenty-nine-
and a half days, for a year of life. The Moon at the progress is
at exactly the same distance in longitude from the Sun as at the
moment of birth.
   The Moon finishes twelve lunations and enters the thirteenth
eleven days less than one year after birth ; finishes twenty-four
lunations in twenty-two days less than two years after birth;
completes thirty-six lunations (corresponding to the age of thirty-
six years) in thirty-three days less than three years after birth,
and so on.
   In Zadkiel’s Almanac, 1903, the author directed attention to-
the fact that at the sixtieth lunar progress of King Edward VII.,
September 16th, 1846, 7h 16m a.m., G.M.T., when the Moon
was at the same distance, 47° 28', from the Sun as at the
moment of birth, the Sun was within two degrees of exact con­
junction with Mars in the sign Virgo (in the eighth house of the
royal nativity), in opposition to the place of Uranus, and in
parallel declination with both Mars and Uranus— thus
accounting for the serious illness, and the surgical operation on
that part of the body ruled by the Moon in Virgo at birth.
Moreover, on the 4th of October, 1846, at 10h 6m p.m. the Moon
formed the opposition with the Sun, and by proportion, this
measured to and took effect in the latter half of June, 1902,
when the operation was undergone. Here follow the places of
the celestial bodies at that critical lunar progress :—

    0       D      $         2         $         h  n            ¥
o       / O t   O    t o    r   o    t O    1 o     r   O   / o     /
        1 5S133 6irg2G 0iijj20 21njj 2 16 n 3 25,cca35 13 t 3 2 6 ^ 4

  The Moon is seen to be in semi-quartile aspect with M ars;
and at the time of the lunation, the Sun, Mars and Mercury are
            ON LU N ATIO N S,   E C L IP S E S , AND PR O G R E SSE S.   229

all in the sixth, the house of illness. Between the times of
•occurrence of the sixtieth and sixty-first progresses there is a
space of 714 hours. Then say: As 714h : 447” : : 365}d : 229
days. Beckoning from the 9th November, 1901, 229 days we
find that the Moon opposition Sun (full moon) of October 4th,
1846, measures to June 26th, 1902.
   At the author's fourth lunar progress, March 8th, 1841, the
Sun was exactly in the place of Uranus at birth, and in opposi­
tion to that of Mars, and in quartile to that of Saturn. My
father was seized with sciatica of so severe a character that it
became chronic, despite the skill of the eminent physician— Sir
B. Brodie— who attended him, in 1845. At my fifth lunar
progress, April 6th, 1841, the Sun was in trine aspect with
Jupiter, and in my sixth year (1846) my father recovered his
health.
                                280




                 CHAPTER              XXXIX.



                     ON     TRANSITS.

A T ran sit , astrologically speaking, is the passing of the Sun,
Moon, or a planet over the place— degree and minute of
longitude—of a celestial body, or the degree in the upper
meridian, at the moment of birth.
   Those transits which take place on or about the birthday
anniversary— and more especially if the celestial body in transit
happens to be rising, culminating, setting, or on the lower
meridian at the time of Solar return— are the most powerful.
   When transits are opposed in nature to that of the primary
directions operating at the same time, they can have but little
effect.
   Transits usually combine the influences of the body in transit
and the one whose place is affected. They sometimes hasten or
retard the operation of a primary direction about to operate.
For example, if by primary direction, the Sun is in conjunction
with Saturn, if a transit of Saturn over either the place of the
Sun or of Saturn at birth takes place a few weeks before the are
of direction is complete, such transit usually brings to a focus
the influence of such direction.
   Transits over the ascending and descending degrees of
nativities in high latitudes cannot be relied upon, except in the
case of one of the three last degrees of Virgo or one of the three
first of Libra ascending.
   The student is advised to look to the declination of the
transiting body at the time of transit, because if it differs widely
(by reason of the body having much latitude, or such as is of
opposite name to that of the transitted body) from the declina­
tion of the body over which the transit takes place such transit
is necessarily very weak.       If there is a close parallel of
declination at the time of transit, the effects are greater.
   Transits of the planets Saturn and Jupiter over the place of
the Sun or Moon near the birthday anniversary usually continue
                            ON TRANSITS.                        231

in force for a few weeks. Transits of Mars and Uranus
generally act very suddenly and punctually.
   The transit of a superior planet at a time when it is
 “ stationary,” is much more forceful than when it is quick in
motion.
   The second transit of a superior planet after rétrogradation is
 usually much more powerful in its effects than the first.
   When the Moon has much latitude at birth, transits over her
place are of little effect unless the transiting body has latitude
of the same name and nearly as great. In all cases the closer
the approximation to the exact parallel of declination, the
greater is the effect of the transit. A planet in the ascendant or
tenth house, near the cusp, at birth, is more powerful in transit
than when it is cadent, or far removed from one of the angles.
   At the moment of my birth the Moon was in Taurus 27° 8',
with latitude 4° 59' N., and declination 24° 2 3 'N. On the 6th
of October, 1879, Mars was stationary in Taurus 28° 48'. My
mother, who had been in a debilitated state of health for some
months previously, became suddenly seriously worse on the 9th,
and died on the 14th of October, 1879. Saturn was retrograde
in Aries 11° 41' on the day of bereavement, in opposition to the
degree in the midheaven of my nativity, Libra 10°.
  T he G eneral E ffects of T ransits.— The following is a brief
sketch of the general effects of transits when not opposed in
nature to the coinciding primary directions.

                      T he Moon’ s T ransits.
   The Moon passing (at the Solar revolution) over her own place
at birth, and well aspected by Venus or Jupiter or the Sun,
denotes pleasant journeys, good health, and peace of mind. If
she be evilly aspected by the infortunes, vexations, fruitless
journeys, and annoyance from vulgar people, may probably be
experienced.
   The Moon passing over the radical place of M ercury, inclines
the native to travel, gives him active and profitable employment,
and, if he be a literary character, gain and credit by his writings.
If, however, the Moon be evilly aspected, the reverse of these
benefits may occur.
   The Moon passing over the place of V enus is indicative of a
pleasurable time and gain through the good offices of ladies and
relatives. But if Venus was afflicted at birth, suffering in mind
and body may result.
   The Moon passing over the place of the Sun (at his revolution)
■232               THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


 imports troubles and quarrels with employers, or magnates
 (unless extremely well aspected). The native will be disposed to
 make changes; and he may suffer in his eyes. If both the
luminaries be well aspected by the fortunes, he may gain
preferment and comparative wealth.
   The Moon passing over the place of Maks, predicates trouble
and suffering in mind and body. The native will be involved in
quarrels and controversies; and will suffer through martial
persons and affairs. He must be very wary of thieves, fire, and
gunshot wounds. If Mars was in sextile or trine to either
luminary at birth, and the employment of the native of a martial
character, less serious evils will result. If the Moon be afflicted
at the revolution, danger to life is threatened.
   The Moon passing over the place of J upiter brings gain and
an improved state of health; also friendship of rich persons, new
friends, etc.; in many eases birth of a child.
   The Moon passing over the place of Saturn brings sickness,
sadness, or danger of an accident (according to the position of
    at birth). In some cases danger by water, or of imprison­
ment. It will be a bad year for engaging in building, mining,
or any other kind of speculations. The wife or mother may
suffer.
   The Moon passing over the place of Ukanus brings sudden
changes, and generally a family loss. In a man’s nativity it
frequently causes a serious misunderstanding with his wife or
sweetheart.

                      Mercury' s T ransits.

   Mercury in conjunction with the Sun (at the revolution) and
well aspected, especially if stationary, will produce prosperous
and active employment, journeys, and literary distinction. If
afflicted, no good can result, and the native may suffer through
knavery, or through attacks of press writers.
   Mercury passing over the place of the Moon (at the Solar
revolution) will produce journeys, and a busy year generally.
   Mercury passing over his own radical place, and stationary,
brings gain by $ men and affairs, journeys, trade, etc.
   Mercury passing over the place of V enus inclines the native to
indulge in pleasure, the society of ladies, music, the drama, etc.
He may have a child born.
   Mercury passing over the radical place of Mars, and evilly
aspected, leads to evil conduct; and produces quarrels, troubles,
and libels. If well aspected by the fortunes, less mischief will
                            ON TRANSITS.                        233

result, and the native may gain by martial pursuits. In either
■case he must beware of fraud.
   Mercury passing over the radical place of Jupiter gives
honour, active business, and some prosperity. A good year for
literary pursuits.
   Mercury passing over the radical place of S aturn will too
often produce vexation, deception, fraud and consequent loss;
unless £ be well aspected by the fortunes, in such case gain by
Saturnine pursuits, lands, buildings, or mines may result.
   Mercury passing over the radical place of U ranus will not do
any harm unless he be afflicted, when mischief will arise through
 £ or $ characters.
                       T ransits of V enus.

    Venus in conjunction with the Sun, at the revolution, will
 bring honour, pleasure, and the favour of women and rich
 persons. But if $ be evilly aspected trouble will result.
    Venus passing over the radical place of the Moon brings gain,
 and favour of ladies of quality, and a pleasurable time. If
 afflicted, however, extravagance and dissipation may result,
 especially if the ivas in lip or X at birth.
    Venus passing over the radical place of Mercury gives gain
 through men of science, literary persons, and by trade; the
 favour of young persons and ladies.
    Venus passing over the place of Mars, unless well aspected,
 inclines to dissipation, and suffering may result therefrom.
    Venus passing over the place of J upiter renders the native
jovial, and fortunate during the ensuing year of his life. If if
 was angular at birth, or with the Moon, this transit will bring
 great gain.
    Venus passing over the place of Saturn, and well aspected,
will incline the native to pleasure and bring him gain. But if
  2 be evilly aspected, evil tendencies, and loss or ill-health will
result.
    Venus passing over the place of Uranus, unless she be well
aspected, will bring troubles in love or matrimonial affairs.

                        T ransits of Mars.

   Mars in conjunction with the Sun (at the revolution) denotes
affliction, quarrels, and possibly an accident accompanied with
loss of blood. The native should act with great caution and
prudence in everything. The sextile or trine of Mars to the
Sun gives a prosperous year; to a monarch victory over enemies.
234               THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


   Mars passing over the place of the M oon, causes losses,
quarrels, ill-health to the native or to a female relative, and
sometimes leads him into bad courses. Travelling and active
employment are also promised. The good aspects of Mars to the
Moon, or to her radical place, promise activity, gain, and
travelling; to a sailor or soldier honour and promotion.
   Mars passing over the radical place of Mekcury, unless evilly
aspected, gives an active, busy, and tolerably prosperous year.
If he be afflicted, quarrels and loss are threatened.
   Mars passing over the place of V enus inclines the native to
loose conduct, and involves him in troubles and discredit, and
often ill-health, too, if $ was with or in opposition with J at
birth.
   Mars passing over the place of J upiter will produce gain, and
a change for the better, generally, unless he be evilly aspected
by Saturn or Uranus— for, in such case, quarrels with the clergy,
or magistrates, will result.
   Mars passing over the place of Saturn often causes troubles,
delay, and difficulty in gaining employment, and ill-health or
accidents. The native’s father may suffer, also.
   Mars passing over the place of Uranus brings sudden and
serious mischief, particularly if $ was in evil aspect with © , j),
M.C., or ascendant, at birth.         The native must beware o f
accidents.
                       •Jupiter’ s T ransits.

   Jupiter in conjunction or parallel declination with the Sun (at
the revolution), gives honours and gain from superiors, accord­
ing to the social position of the native. To women such a
configuration often brings marriage, advancement ' to the
husband, or birth of a son. But if Jupiter be evilly configurated
with the malefics, evil will result, such as quarrels with men in
power, and a bad state of health if the Sun be hyleg.
   Jupiter passing over the radical place of the Moon, or in
conjunction with her at the solar revolution, gives health of
body, peace of mind, increase of substance, honours, popularity,
pleasure, and birth of a child.
   Jupiter passing over the place of M ercury shows gain by £
men and affairs; augments religious feeling, and inclines to
studious habits.
   Jupiter passing over the place of V enus gives mirth, pleasure,
gain, credit, and the favour of ladies of means.
   Jupiter passing over the place of Mars gives new friends of a.
                            ON T R A N SITS .                     285-

martial character, journeys, and increase of business. If badly
aspected, losses and troubles ensue.
   Jupiter passing over his own radical place, when angular, or
in good configuration with either of the luminaries, brings
honours, new friends, office or employment, advancement of
reputation, and general prosperity.
   Jupiter passing over the place of Saturn, if well aspected,
gives gain, peace of mind, and benefits from Tj people and
affairs. If both if and h> were badly situated at birth, no great
good can result.
   Jupiter passing over the place of Uranus promises unexpected
and sudden benefits, success in scientific pursuits, and travelling.
But if $ afflicted the © or j) at birth, this transit may bring loss-
and trouble.
                         Saturn’ s T ransits.
   Saturn in conjunction or parallel declination with the Sun (at
the revolution) will bring disputes with persons in authority, loss
of reputation, pecuniary difficulties, and a bad state of health (if
© be hyleg). To a woman, this transit is of very evil import,
for loss of her father or her husband, or defamation of character,,
is threatened, especially if tj be stationary.
   Saturn passing over the radical place of the Moon, or in-
conjunction with her at the revolution, signifies danger in
travelling either by land or water; affliction of mind, body, and
estate ; and quarrels with Ip persons. A near relative (female)’
will suffer and may die.
   Saturn passing over the place of M ercury1, if the latter
planet was angular at birth, the native becomes inventive, and
prospers generally. If weak, or afflicted, this transit will very
probably involve the native in quarrels with $ and Ip people;,
and illness may also result.
   Saturn passing over the place of V enus brings trouble to the
native, and often to his wife, mother, or sister, also. He may
also become involved in some scandal.
   Saturn passing over the place o f Mars, and well aspected,.
gain by martial men and pursuits will result. If badly aspected
the native will be in danger from thieves, highwaymen, and
quarrelsome persons.
   Saturn passing over the place of Jupiter brings the native
into favour with rich and powerful persons, merchants, or

  1 At the commencement of the fatal illness of the Prince Consort Ip
passed over the place of 5 in the ascendant of the nativity.
236                THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.

clergymen, and he will be prosperous— unless 2 ( was much
afflicted at birth.
   Saturn passing over his own radical place, and well aspected,
denotes gain by houses, land, buildings, or mines. In some
■cases a legacy is promised.
   Saturn passing over the place of U ranus , and well aspected,
renders the native ingenious, studious of occult sciences, and
■eccentric. But if badly aspected a family loss is threatened, and
■other troubles, also, may result.

                         T ransits   of   U ranus .

    Uranus in conjunction or parallel declination with the Sun (at
the revolution), frequently signifies a family loss, pecuniary
difficulties, or accidents. If 0 be hyleg, ill-health of a peculiar
■character will result.
   Uranus passing over the radical place of the Moon, or in con­
junction with her at the revolution, brings sudden changes,
family losses, journeys, or sudden removals. At the same time,
it inclines the native to investigate occult matters.
   Uranus passing over the place of M ercu ry inclines the native
to pursue occult science; and if afflicted, brings troubles in
connexion with $ affairs and employment.
   Uranus passing over the place of V enus bring troubles in love
or matrimonial affairs ; a (female) relative will suffer, and may
die.
   Uranus passing over the place of Mars brings sudden and
serious mischief; in some cases, danger to life (if afflicting the
 © at the same time).
    Uranus passing over the place of J u p ite r involves the native
in dispute with religious persons ; if well aspected pecuniary
 gain will result.
    Uranus passing over the place of Saturn causes sudden
troubles, and often danger to the father or a near relative.
    Uranus passing over his own radical place, and in good aspect
to © or j , brings sudden and unexpected benefits. His evil
aspects produce troubles, family losses, and pecuniary
 difficulties.
                       T ransits     of   N eptune.

  Neptune’s chief effects seem to lie in the direction of c r is e s , as
was shown in an article in U rania (1880).
  Personally, the transit of Neptune over the opposition of the
Sun in my nativity (Scorpio 18° 5J'), in 1883 coincided with the
                           CN TRANSITS.                        237

death of my talented father, on the 9th of May in that year,
when that distant planet was in Taurus 18° 31'. An annular
eclipse of the Sun, invisible in England, took place on the 1 0 th
of November, 1882, ten hours after the Sun had returned (on that
day) to his place at my birth, the great luminary being then in
opposition to Neptune in Taurus 17° 24', and applying to the
same aspect with Saturn in Taurus 23° 4', and being attended
by Mars in Scorpio 26° 43'. My forty-third year was over­
clouded by the long illness of my father, and it was decidedly an
unfortunate one.
   Neptune in 8 or par. dec. 0 at the Solar Revolution pre­
signifies a critical time for health, if the Sun was hyleg at birth;
otherwise, a crisis in affairs, to advantage if the Sun was in an
angle or in trine with if. or with 5 or 2f. at birth. If © was
in $ , ill, °r X , a sea voyage soon follows.
   Neptune in transit over the place of the Moon at birth inclines
to travelling.; and if j) be hyleg debility of health is threatened.
   Neptune over the place of Mercury pre-signifies restlessness, a
change of residence or occupation, and financial troubles.
   Neptune over Venus indicates for young people a romantic
attachment; for others, some advantages attended with much
expense and some domestic trouble or anxiety.
   Neptune over Mars threatens (in 55, 111 , or N), danger by
water, in travelling, and serious disputes.
   Neptune over Jupiter is advantageous—unless 14 was much
afflicted by 1? or $ at birth—and promises either advancement
or increase of income.
   Neptune over Saturn threatens disasters ; if in Libra falls.
Caution will be needed in all new transactions.
   Neptune over Uranus pre-signifies accidents more or less
 serious according to the relative position and aspects of these
 two planets at birth. Scientific men and inventors will gain
 kudos under this influence.
                                 238




                     C H A P T E R         XL.



    ON     THE       EFFECTS OF P R I M A R Y
                     DIRECTIONS.

                            “ Knowledge by favour sent
                Down from the empyrean, to forewarn
                U s timely.” — M i l t o n .



A N at iv ity having been computed and rectified if necessary, and
the primary directions for a series of years having been tabulated
an attempt must be made to forecast the probable effects of
those directions. The experience of centuries has afforded us
some general rules to this end.
   Directions may be of a fortunate or an unfortunate character;
they may be powerful or feeble. The student has already learnt
that certain aspects are fortunate, that certain others are usually
unfortunate, and that conjunctions and parallels are convertible.
He has also learnt that certain planets and stars possess good
influences, that certain others possess evil influences; and that
some of their relative positions are more powerful than others.
He has now to learn that the strength or weakness of every
“ direction” depends on the position of the body directed in the
radix (horoscope), and that of the planet to which the moderator
(Sun, Moon, M.C., or Asc.) is directed. A planet which is
angular is more powerfully situated, and much more powerful in
direction, than another planet cadent. A planet culminating is
elevated above, and is therefore more powerful than the rest of
the heavenly bodies. A planet cadent is not so weak if it be in
trine with a moderator. The planet receiving the application of
the Moon (either by conjunction, parallel, sextile, trine, or
opposition) is more powerful than any other planet which is not
angularly posited. A benefic which may happen to be in close
conjunction, square, opposition, or parallel with Saturn or Mars
cannot be very effective for good by direction— unless the benefic
be angular and elevated above the malefic. In nativities those
aspects from which the more swiftly moving planets are separat­
ing are found to be much more powerful than those aspects to
              ON T H E   E F F E C T S OF PR IM A RY D IR E C TIO N S.       289

■which they are applying. The semi-square aspect in directions
is often found to be quite as powerful as the square when formed
by a planet in one of the angles. One direction operating alone
(unless the body directed be angular) cannot effect much unless
it should happen to be aided by a transit of a superior planet, or
by an eclipse. Events of the greatest importance usually occur
under a train of directions. A train of good directions may
bring (or indicate), an accession of property ; but if an evil
direction to the hyleg should fall near the same time, ill-health
may prevent the enjoyment of the benefit.

  G en eral R u l e s   fo r   J udg ing   of t h e     P robable E ffects   of

                                  D ir e c t io n s .

   A good (primary) direction indicates benefit or gain by or
through the kind of persons or things signified by the body
directed, varied according to the sign (and house, in some cases)
in which it was situated in the radix. An evil direction signifies
loss, trouble, or illness. In the case of young children, the
directions of the Midheaven, Sun, and Moon in their nativities
operate sometimes on their parents. In the case of a married
woman, directions of the Sun affect her husband, and vice versa.
   The Sun’ s directions affect the health if it be hyleg, honour,
advancement, favour of the great, the father, and, in the case of
a married woman, her husband.
   The Moon’ s directions affect the health (if ]) be hyleg), some­
times mental as well as physical; the estate, family affairs, the
mother, sister, or wife.
   The A scendant ’ s directions affect the personal health, the
estate, and employment. Ascendant conjunction Mars often
coincides with death of a parent.
   The M i d -H e a v e n ’ s directions affect the business, profession,
or employment, honour, credit, character ; and in children’s
nativities, the parents.

                         T h e S un ' s D ire c t io n s .

  The 0 d or par. dec. j . — These directions generally impair
the health; the head, eyes, and stomach often being affected.
Changes or journeys take place. If the Moon be angular and
well aspected at birth, the native may gain preferment. If he
should marry, the marriage will be fortunate or unfortunate
according to the position of the Moon at birth.
   O * or A y.— Favour and friendship of rich and powerful
 240               TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


 persons ; advancement, journeys, change of residence, or a public-
 appointment. If j be strong at birth, the native may marry a
 well endowed wife, or have a child born.
     © o or g j).— Troubles and losses, enmity of a person in
 power and authority, conjugal strife, ill-health, mental anxiety,
 and discredit are pre-signified. If either luminary be byleg, an
 eruptive fever, or ophthalmia may attend.
    The © d or par. dec. $ .— A busy period, profitable or
 unprofitable according to the strength and aspects of $ at birth.
 Travelling, writing, and speculating. The birth of a child will,
 most probably, take place. If £ be fortunate, gain, fame, and
 prosperity are promised. If unfortunate, a lawsuit may result.
 If © be hyleg, a dangerous illness is threatened, accompanied
 by cerebral symptoms of a serious nature.
    The O * or a $ .—Much business, travelling, or change of
residence, and prosperity. Mercurial persons acquire fame and
 advancement under the influence of these directions.
    The O □ g .— Fraud, forgery, false accusations, lawsuits, or
ill-health are threatened. The native should be wary in dealing
with strangers while this direction is in force.
    The © d or par. dec. ? .— A pleasurable and profitable
period, some extravagance indulged in. A child may be born to-
the native. If 2 was angular and well aspected in the nativity,
 prosperity, and favours from ladies of wealth and position.
 Ladies frequently marry under this influence.
    The 0 -X- or A ? . —A happy and prosperous tim e; indul­
gence in music, the drama, courtship, etc. ; or birth of a child.
 Single ladies receive offers of marriage, and (if their nativities
promise marriage) often marry under this influence.
    The 0 □ 5 .— This brings losses, extravagance, and in some
cases dissipation, and consequent suffering; disappointment in
love or matrimony, etc.
    The 0 d , par. dec., □ or g $ .— Danger (if © be hyleg) of
acute fever, wounds, accidents, hemorrhage, bites of dogs, burns
scalds, etc., according to the position of $ . The native should
carefully avoid quarrels and disputes, pay particular attention to
health, and beware of fire (and gunshot wounds if $ be in f ) .
    The © -ft or A ¿T.— Military preferment, distinction in
surgery, travelling, etc., according to the native’s position and
profession. A monarch may become involved in war, and gain
victories. Ladies receive offers from martial men.
   The © d >par. dec., -ft, or A U-— Health, peace of mind,
new friends, increase of estate, honours, and general prosperity.
             ON TH E   E F FE C TS   OF PR IM A R Y D IR E C TIO N S.   241

Lawyers, churchmen, and merchants gain under this influence.
Birth of a son may take place. In the nativities of single
women, this influence often brings marriage about.
  The 0 □ or g !(..— Losses, affronts, and ill-success in legal
proceedings. Unless If be afflicted in the nativity, not much
harm will be done. In some cases, pleurisy or plethora results.
Some benefit may be experienced eventually.
   The O ci par. dec-., □ , or g    ■— Affliction of mind, body,
or estate. The heart often becomes weak, and its action
deranged, under this influence. Affairs go wrong. If h be
ascending in the horoscope, there is danger of accidents or
wounds. It is an evil time for travelling, and in some cases
there is a likelihood of shipwreck. Monarchs are likely to suffer
from conspirators and assassins. Tradesmen are liable to bank­
ruptcy. The father of the native will suffer.
   The O * or A h •—Benefits by Ij people and affairs; a
good time for miners, builders, agriculturists, etc.  If the
nativity promise a legacy, it may now be obtained.
   The O d , par. dec. □ or g $ . — Losses, troubles, or ill-
health, according to the position of $ in the nativity. An
unfortunate time for change of residence, journeying, and
speculating. A lady may lose her lover or her husband, under
this influence. Neurasthenia may result.
    The © * or A $ . — Travelling, general prosperity, active
employment; gain by an invention.
    The 0 d or par. dec. A ldebaran.— Soldiers and surgeons
gain preferment and distinction ; but it is said to be not of long
continuance.
    O 6 i □ or g ^ .— A crisis in affairs. If the Sun be hyleg,
ill-health. Not a favourable time to travel.
    0 * or A f .— Benefits in business or profession ; travell­
ing.
    The © d or par. dec. A ntares,—-Military preferment, accom­
panied by danger. Fever, injury to the eyes, and violent
assaults are threatened.
    The © d or par. dec. A rista.— Advancement, -wealth (if the
nativity promise such), and happiness.
   The 0 d or par. dec. A sselli.— Acute fever, danger by fire,
disgrace, imprisonment, and calamities.
   The 0 rf or par. dec. B egulus.— Preferment, gain, ill-health
if Sun be hyleg; and the father suffers. [Lilly says he knows
most of this to be true from experience.]
242                  THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTROLOGY.


                        T he    M o o n ’ s D ir e c t io n s .

    The ¡) d or par. dec. © .— Danger of fever, or mortal illness,
if T) be hyleg and if © was afflicted at birth.          Otherwise,
mental troubles, reverses, and discredit. But if 0 be strong
and well configurated with Jupiter or Venus at birth, a change
for the better will take place.
    The     * or A © .— New friends, preferment, profitable
employment, favour of rich ladies, and popularity. This
influence often brings marriage, public employment, and
travelling. To monarchs it brings renown, honourable peace,
victories, and valuable alliances.
    The j> □ or g © .— This is always evil, producing mental
and physical suffering, converting the love of some -woman to
hatred; foreshowing trouble or illness of wife, sister, or mother ;
and tending to produce dissensions with employers, persons in
authority, etc.
    The j)    or par. dec. ^ J— This brings a journey, or voyage
 by sea, especially if either ]) or % was in the 3rd or 9th house,
 at birth. It brings an active, busy, and prosperous period, if g
be fortunate; if unfortunate, loss by fraud, theft, libels, etc. If
5 be hyleg and £ afflicted, danger of disease or accident.
    The j * or A $ .— Success in literary pursuits, business,
accounts, travelling, and litigation. A child may be born.
    The j) □ or g g .— This brings danger to life if j) be hyleg
 and $ afflicted, at birth. It always brings either lawsuits or
controversies; often loss of employment; troubles by children
and young persons, and ill-success in travelling.
    The j) 6 or par. dec. 2 — A pleasant, fortunate, and happy
 period. Marriage frequently occurs under this influence.
    The j) * or A          2 •— This influence brings happiness,
 pleasure-seeking, courtship, or matrimony, favours of ladies and
 rich persons, birth of children, or marriage of children. To
 monarchs it brings peace, new allies, etc.
    The j □ or g 2 •— This brings scandal, discredit; illness of
 wife, sister, or mother; extravagance, and often personal
 suffering. If the native should marry under this influence, he
  will not be very happy or fortunate in marriage. To women,
  this often brings serious internal complaints.

    1 I f in directing the M oon with latitude in the zodiac, to the conjunction
 o f a planet if she have latitude o f an opposite nature to that of the planet,
 at birth, so that the difference shall am ount to 5°, such direction is weak.
 In the case o f the g, if the latitudes be of the sam e nam e, the direction is
 weak, and vice versa.
             ON   THE   EFFECTS   OF   P R IM A R Y   D IR E C T IO N S .   213
     The j)         par. dec., □ , or g g .— This brings either
 ■accidents or illness, according to the position of $ . Loss by
  theft, fire, violence, or fraud is threatened. If j be hyleg there
  is danger, and, if g be in a fiery sign, it may be by fire,
  wounds, bites, or gunshot; if in a watery sign, by drowning; if
  in an airy sign, by fall from a height; if in an earthy sign, by
  fever, smallpox, dysentery, diphtheria, etc. The face and eyes
  are sometimes injured under this influence. Marriage under it
  is unfortunate. To monarehs, it brings war, and risk of, if not
 ■actual defeat.
     The j) * or A g .— A desire for active out-door exercise,
 •sports, horse-riding, martial exercises, shooting, and travelling.
  Men sometimes marry under this influence. Monarehs increase
  their army or navy, and may gain victories.
     The j) d par. dec.,     , or A I f .— Health of body and mind,
  preferment, advancement, new friends; increase of business,
 university distinction, the gaining of degrees or diplomas, etc.,
  according to the native’s profession and position. This
 influence assists in producing marriage to either sex.
     The j D or g 2 f . — This brings extravagant expenditure,
  and dissensions with employers. If the ]) be hyleg, and if.
 ■afflicted, at birth, pleurisy, etc., may attack the native. Unless
  2f be much afflicted, no material harm will be done in any way,
 and any present evil may eventually bring recompense.
     The j) d , par- dec., □ , or g       .— This influence produces
 chronic maladies, and danger to life if         be hyleg. Sciatica,
 atonic gout, rheumatic fever, gastric fever, or mental derange­
 ment may follow. In any case, either pecuniary loss, or death
•of a fair relative results. The native should act with extreme
 caution in all his affairs.
     The ]) * or A b •—Favour and friendship of old persons; a
legacy ; or success in building, mining, or farming.
     The (X rf par. dec., □ , or g ilj.— Danger of an accident or
 nervous illness if j> be hyleg. Otherwise danger to the mother,
 wife, or sister; or separation from the wife. Pecuniary loss,
 and sudden troubles.
    The 3) -x- or A Jg.— A prosperous time for business. Gain
 in an unexpected manner. A journey if either ]) or $ be
 cadent.      This influence often gives an inclination to study
 astrology and occult matters.
    (I d> □ , or g tn. —This brings a crisis, nervous depression,
.and troubles.
    3) * or A ^ .— A favourable time, some travelling.
244                THE     T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTROLOGY.


   The j) d or par. the., A l d e b a r a n . — Preferment to soldiers
and surgeons, attended with danger.
   The ]) d or par. dec., A n t a r e s .-—Preferment attended with
danger and suffering.
   The ]) d or par. dec., A r i s t a __ Pecuniary gain— in some
cases, wealth— honour, good fortune in pursuits of the nature o f
 $ , 2 , or % .
   The ]) d or par. dec., N o r t h S c a l e . — Good fortune and
preferment.
   The 3) d or par. dec., S o u t h S c a l e .— Misfortune, scandal,,
or ill-health.
   The 3) d or par. dec., B e g u l u s . — Honour and preferment,
but attended with danger if j be hyleg. The mother suffers,
and may be in serious danger.

                 D ir e c t io n s   of   the      M id -h e a v e n .

   The M.C. d or par. dec. © .— This brings honours, advance­
ment, and increase of substance. To single ladies, it often
brings marriage.
   But if © be evilly configurated with the malefics, or in con­
junction with fixed stars of a violent nature, this conjunction,
brings disputes and misfortunes, maybe of a public nature ; and.
some danger to the mother.
   The M.C. * or A '© . — This influence usually elevates the
native’s condition, and, when the nativity promises it, brings-
him renown and great advancement.           It may benefit the-
native’s parents. A public office may be gained. To women,
it brings either marriage or employment of a public-
character.
   The M.C. □ or g © .— This often brings loss of office or
employment, bad trading, disgrace; and, sometimes, bank­
ruptcy and imprisonment. One of the parents suffers. Married
women may lose their husbands under this influence.
   The M.C. d or par. dec. 3).— If 5 be strong and fortunate
at birth, honour, fame, advantageous changes, travelling, and
popularity. Men may marry under this influence. But if 3)
be weak and evilly configurated, losses, and unproductive
journeys or voyages result; and the wife, or mother, sutlers.
   The M.C.       or A ]).— Increase of substance, popularity,
honours, gifts, favours from women, active business, and
travelling are promised. To men, it denotes marriage, or birth
of children.
   The M.C. □ or g 3).— This brings unpopularity, scandal,.
              ON   THE   EFFECTS   OF   P R IM A R Y   D IR E C T IO N S .   245

   quarrels with women, suffering of wife or mother, and family
   disputes— according to the position of the 5 .
      The M.C. d or par. dec. £ .— If g be strong, gain by literary
   pursuits, by travelling, by teaching, etc. Should g be afflicted
   libel, legal difficulties, and unfortunate trading.
      The M.C. * or A $ .— Preferment, honour, and increase of
   business, according to the strength and situation of g at birth.
   Children are often first sent to school, and young men to college,
  under this influence. It often produces a change of residence.
      The M.C. □ or g g .— Troubles and losses are indicated;
  and, also, danger of lawsuits, unjust sentences, libels, and false
  accusations. Death of a child frequently happens under this
  influence.
      The M.C. 6 . par. dec., ■if or A 2 •— This brings mirth,
  gaiety, pleasure-seeking, renewal of furniture, free expenditure,
  advancement in artistic pursuits, the birth of a child, and
  general prosperity. Marriage frequently takes place under this
  influence.
      The M.C, □ or g 2 •— Indicates scandal, extravagance, and,
  in some cases, dissipation. The mother, wife, or sister suffers.
 T o kings this influence brings scandals, and wasteful expendi­
  ture.
      The M.C. d , par. dec., □ , or g g .— This evil influence
 brings quarrels, losses, fires, thefts, or fraud. To military men,
 and to surgeons, the d brings advancement, but it is attended
 with some danger. The parents suffer. Misfortunes are sure to
 result if changes and speculations be made while this martial
 influence lasts.
     The M.C. * or a i .— This signifies an active, a busy, and
 a prosperous period, especially to martialists. Military and
 naval men, surgeons, etc., gain preferment.           Generally a
 journey is taken. Monarchs increase their armies, and, if at
 war, they gain victories.
     The M.C. d> Var• dec., -X- or A If.,— Preferment, honours,
increase of wealth, benefits from persons in power, and general
happiness and prosperity. In the nativities of single women
marriage comes to pass. To merchants it brings increase of
trade; to the clergy, preferment; to lawyers, advancement and
high repute. To a Crown Prince it may bring either a regency
or elevation to the throne.
     The M.C. □ or g if..— This usually brings heavy expenses;
but nothing very evil. To monarchs its brings disputes about
laws and privileges, and trouble with the nobility and clergy.
246                T H E . T E X T -B O O K   OF A S T R O L O G Y .


    The M.C. 6 , par. dec., □ or g J?.— This indicates family-
troubles and losses, death of a parent, loss of reputation and
 credit, theft, fraud, and unpopularity. Merchants and trades­
 men lose heavily in speculative transactions. To monarehs it
brings tumults, discontent of the people, the spread of Nihilism
among their subjects, breach of treaties or defeat in battle.
   The M.C. -if or A b . —This gives pecuniary gain by farming
mining, building, legacies, favour and friendship of old persons.
   The M.C. <j , par. dec., □ or g tlj.—This is often attended by a
sudden death in the fam ily; pecuniary loss, and troubles of a.
strange nature; disappointment in love and marriage, or separation.
   The M.C. * or a $ . — Unexpected ga in ; sudden changes, or
travelling of an advantageous nature; favour and friendship of
scientists. Benefit by an invention or a discovery.
   M.C. d , □ , or g      .— Brings family troubles, unfortunate-
travelling, and losses in business.
   M.C. -if or A ■'#.—Good business, advancement.

                 D ir e c t io n s   of   the     A scendan t.

   The Ascendant d O •—If 0 be strong and fortunate, gain by
public favours from great men, advancement, employment,
increase of reputation and credit; at the same time there may
be some ill-health. To military men preferment is promised.
To monarehs increase of territory or power, and, when at war,,
brilliant victories. But if 0 be afflicted by the malefics, danger
is threatened, the head and eyes suffering. If O be in d with
 $ , danger by fire, or fire-arms; and accidents involving loss of
blood.
   The Asc. -X- or A © .— Health of body, peace of mind, favours
from persons in authority, new friends, some elevation of rank,
etc., according to the native’s social position. Women often
marry, or have a son born, under this influence.
   The Asc. □ or g © .— Diseases according to the sign
occupied by 0 . Envy and enmity of persons in power ; loss of
employment and credit; danger to the father; and, in some-
cases, danger of imprisonment.          Travelling, changes, and
speculation should be avoided while this influence lasts.
   The Asc. d or par. dec. ]).— Changes of residence, travelling
by land or sea, and preferment, if j) be fortunate. Otherwise,
adversity or accidents, or danger by water.
   The Asc. * or A D — Active employment, friendship of
great ladies, popularity, general prosperity, marriage, birth of a
daughter, etc., according to circumstances.
             ON   THE   EFFECTS   OF   P R IM A R Y   D IR E C T IO N S .   247

   The Asc. o or g 7 .— Controversies, strife, conjugal misery,
divorce, discord, jealousy, unpopularity, ill-health, intemper­
ance, etc., according to the position of ]) in the horoscope. A
bad time for travelling by land or sea.
   The Asc. d or par. dec. £ .— Change of residence, a journey,
active business, a propensity to study, invention, and writing—
the results of which will be fortunate or unfortunate, according
to the position of        at birth. If g be much afflicted, a
dangerous accident, or serious attack of illness, is threatened.
   The Asc. * or A           9 . — Prosperity, active employment,
travelling ; gain by literary work, teaching or travelling; birth
of a child or change of residence.
   The Asc. □ or g £ .— This influence gives a disinclination
for study, failure to pass examinations at college; mischief by
writings, pressmen, and over-work; diseases of the nature of g
or the planet with wThieh he may be evilly configurated; anxiety
about young persons. To children this influence often brings
whooping-cough, bronchitis, or convulsions.
   The Asc. d > par. dec., * or A $ .— This influence brings
pleasure, gain, new friends, courtship, marriage, birth of
children: purchase of articles of luxury, furniture, ornaments,
etc., according to circumstances.
   Asc. □ or g $ .— Brings trouble in love and conjugal life,
heavy expenses, and extravagance; illness of wife or mother.
   The Asc. d , par. dec., □ , or g 3 .— Accidents or diseases,
according to the position of $ . Haemorrhage frequently results.
Danger to a parent. If $ be in a fiery sign, acute fevers, or
accidents by fire ; in an earthy sign, danger of suffocation, in g ,
smallpox or diphtheria; in a sign of human form, danger of
homicide, or of being killed in a quarrel or battle ; in a "watery
sign, danger of death by drowning ; in an airy sign, danger of a
fall from a height, or acute fever.
   The Asc. * or A 3 ■— Tins inclines the native to travel,
shoot, hunt, fence, indulge in martial exercises, enter the army
or navy; study medicine, surgery, or chemistry; become an
engineer, etc., according to the nativity. Women sometimes
marry under this influence.
   The Asc. d par dec., f , or A I f.— This is fortunate for
health and affairs. Prosperity, conviviality, new friends,
advancement, favours from the great, marriage, birth of
children. If 2f be afflicted, the d or par. dec., may bring a
serious (but not fatal) illness, arising from some affection of
the lungs, the liver, or the blood.
248                        TH E   TE X T -B O O K    OF ASTR O LO G Y.


   The Asc. □ or g 2 (.■— An indifferent state of health, often
due to plethora. If 2 ( be afflicted by $ , danger of measles,
scarlatina, smallpox, pleurisy, etc. A bad time to deal -with
lawyers. Extravagant expenditure, and too much conviviality.
   The Asc. cl , par dec., □ , or g ip .—If Ip be oriental, a
dangerous accident, or a broken limb ; if occidental, a dangerous
chronic malady. In some eases this is the beginning of some
form of consumption; in others, of melancholia. To women,
dangerous internal diseases ; and disappointment and trouble in
love or matrimony, may result if Saturn afflicted the Sun at
birth.
   The Asc. * or A Ip .— Gain by elderly persons, legacies,
mining, building, purchase or sale of houses, etc.
   The Asc. d par. dec., o , or g $ . — This brings sudden
losses— either in the family or the estate ; travelling, removals,
and changes of occupation ; or else neurasthenia, or an accident.
   The Asc. 4 or A | .— Gain of an unexpected nature;
fortunate journeys, and active business; also, a desire to study
astronomy and astrology, chemistry, electricity, etc.
   Asc. rf , par. □ or g w .— Health weak or else an accident.
No long journey by sea should be made.
   Asc. * or a w .— Gains, travelling for pleasure.

  D ir e c t io n s   of   the    S un    and       M oon   to   t h e ir   ow n   A spects.

   The 0 to his own * tends to experience of preferment,
honours, fame and general prosperity.
   The © to his own parallel brings preferment, friends among
the great, and success.
   The O to his own □ , sorrow, sometimes ill-health, and
losses ; a desire to depart and be at rest.
   The ]) to her own parallel, changes and travelling.
   The j) to her own □ losses and troubles, enmity of the
vulgar, and disadvantageous changes.
   The student should bear in mind that the general nature of an
expected event must be estimated, firstly, by the nature of the
planets operating by direction; secondly, by the moderator
affected by the directional influence ; thirdly, by the strength of
the moderator and planet directed, in the nativity ; fourthly, by
the sign and mansion in which the direction falls. The student
should remember, also, that it is unsafe to judge of the probable
effects of any direction acting alone without taking into con­
sideration other directions that may fall within 1 ° or 2 ° of its
arc, and without attending to the Solar revolution, an eclipse
                     ON    THE    EFFECTS       OF   P R IM A R Y   D IR E C T IO N S .            249

 •or a lunation, which may coincide and so assist or counteract it
  to some extent. “ It is the neglect of these precautions,” wrote
 .Zadkiel I. “ that makes so many failures on the part of even
 otherwise tolerably good astrologers. And it is the labour, the
 skill, the persevering industry required to accomplish this true
 and perfect reading of the heavens which renders the doctrine
 of nativities one of the vastest and most comprehensive under­
 takings which the mind of man can grasp and understand.
 Let not the student, therefore play with this mighty matter, but
 •either resolve to abandon the research, or otherwise to approach
 these portals of the temple of truth with a resolute will to
•conquer the obstacles that beset his path, and finally to take his
 seat among the niches that contain the names of a thousand
 great and glorious lovers of truth, real philosophers, friends of
 mankind, and earnest servants of the Living God.”
    In the experience of the author, he has known, in private life,
■events to correspond very closely both in their nature and in the
 periods of their occurrence, to prediction. For example: A lady
 who was born on the 14th of December, 1840, at five minutes
 past 12 o'clock a.m., in lat. 51° 28' N. Her nativity was
 rectified, by the author, by taking Asc. rf $ zod. 15° 28' for
 her sister’s death, in May, 1856; and her marriage took place an
predicted in June, 1874, under the direction of 0 par. 2 m
-83° 27'. In this case the E A, of the M.C. was (as rectified)
83° 59'. Here is another example: A lady who was born on
the 14th of April, 1843, at l l h 35m p.m., in lat. 52° 58'N.
Her nativity was rectified, and her marriage took place in the very
month foretold, viz., July, 1874, under Asc. * 2 zod. 31° 18',
assisted by other directions.
    As Ptolemy said :—
     “ A sk ilfu l p e rso n , a cq u a in te d w ith th e n a tu re o f th e stars, is en a bled
"to av ert m a n y o f th e ir [e v il! effects, a n d to p rep are h im s e lf fo r th ose
•effects b e fo re th e y a rr iv e .”     A g a in : “ A sa g a cio u s m in d im p r o v e s th e
 o p e r a tio n o f the h e a v e n s, as a sk ilfu l fa rm e r, b y c u ltiv a tio n , im p r o v e s
 n a tu re .”

    In regard to diseases, Ptolemy says :—
    “ S h o u ld a disease b e g in w h e n th e M o o n m a y b e in a sig n o c cu p ie d
at th e b irth b y s o m e m a le fic , o r in qu artile o r o p p o sitio n to a n y su ch
sig n , s u c h disease w ill be m o s t se v ere ; a n d if th e m a le fic a lso b e h old
th e said sig n it w ill be d a n g e ro u s. O n th e o th e r h a n d th ere w ill be n o
d a n g er if th e M o o n b e in a p la c e h e ld at th e tim e o f b irth b y so m e
b e n e fic .”

    People commonly observe that one evil seldom comes alone
250                  TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y .


and this is frequently due to the combined effects of evil direc­
tions and eclipses.
   In the appendix will be found a rule for computing the arc of
duration in the cases of certain directions of the luminaries.
Eapt parallels and zodiacal parallels often continue in operation
for many months, and sometimes for several years. The rule
referred to will enable the student to gauge very nearly the-
period of time over which the direction may expend its force
from first to last contact.
   At page 200 it was stated that, in the nativity of the late-
King Edward VII., the Sun again reached the parallel of
 Saturn, first contact, in Vy 16° 19' 24". This was a clerical
error, for the Sun’s limb first reached the parallel in ly
 11° 2 ' 25", and the last contact was made in Vy 16° 1 9'2 4 ", the
 Sun’ s centre forming the parallel in Vy 13° 55' 37."
    The three arcs of direction are, respectively:—-
   0 par.    zodiac first contact              (VS 11° 2 '2 5 "), 59° 36' 11".
     ,,   ,, centre....................        IVy 13° 55' 87"), 62° 37' 30".
     „    ,, last contact ........             (Vy 16° 19' 24"), 65° 6 '2 7 ".
   Then, 65° 6 ' 27"—59° 36' 11" gives the arc of duration of this-
parallel of the Sun with Saturn as 5° 30' 16" = five years and a
half.
   The working given in the foot-note to p. 200, is quite correct,
as regards the first contact of the Sun’s limb with the parallel.
This was the most powerful of the three arcs in Capricomus, and
it depressed his Majesty’s health, and brought a narrow escape
from serious or fatal injury on board a yach t; and the first-
contact in Sagittarius, in 1871, brought enteric fever, which very
nearly proved fatal.
                                                251




                            CHAP T EE                         X L I.

       ON        THE            PRACTICAL                             USES               OF
                                ASTROLOGY.

         ‘ ' If A s t r o l o g y be t r u e , i t is a useful T ru th .” — D b M o r g a n .


T h a t the Universe is a concrete reality, and that we are in direct

relationship with every part of it is a truth. Astrologia sana is.
in principle demonstrably true, or at least based on truth, for
there can be nothing extravagant in believing that ethereal
vibrations extend from the Sun to the great planets, and from
planet to planet. All space is a network of interacting forces.
   The central fact of Astrology is the law of Nature that every
celestial body in the Solar System operates on the Earth and its-
inhabitants, and on the atmosphere. This is a direct conse­
quence of the philosophic truth of relativity.
   “ To belong to a whole is to have all other parts of the whole in
essential and potentially effective relation with oneself. And as
belonging to a subordinate whole (our Earth) we participate in the
influence of other subordinate wholes upon that. In like manner, as a.
consequence of the same universal truth of relativity, the things of
time must be essentially connected with the things of space. Thus
Astrology is, in principle, demonstrable a priori. One remark as to
the unitary double meaning (or the distinctly-one meaning) of the
word ‘principinm ’— ‘ beginning,’ and ‘ principle.’ The principle in logic
is the beginning in time ; therefore the related totality at the beginning
of anything (its 1horoscope ’ ) will contain and show the ‘ principle of
its course and development.’ The principle of genethliaeal astrology is
that Man is the microcosmic representation and correspondence of the
macrocosm. As the latter in its external aspect, is spread out at the
moment of birth, so if we have the science, can we read the [general]
character, tendencies, and ‘ accidents’ (in the literal and more compre­
hensive sense of the term) which will become manifest in the life of
the newly born. And as time is related to space, so are the larger to
the lesser circles of time. It is upon this relation that the possibility
of ‘ directing ’ depends. The day is the year writ small. The single
degree (or approximate diurnal measure of zodiacal progress) represents
the circle, or larger day, the year.” So wrote the late C. C. Massey.1
  Science accepts the view' that the Earth is an electro-magnet so
rendered by the current of electricity emanating from the Sun,

  1 V ide Letter in      L ig h t ,   January 1st, 1898, re-printed in                  S tar   L ore,
February, 1898.
252                    TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


which the Earth, in her axial revolution, is continually winding
upon herself. Other members of the Solar system cannot differ
in this respect. This being the case, when observers find that
certain terrestial and atmospheric disturbances constantly
coincide with the combined force of the planets exerted in a line
against the Earth— as at a Solar eclipse, and at mutual conjunc­
tions and oppositions of the major planets— there is nothing
either unscientific or extravagant in believing that such coinci­
dences may be related as cause and effect.
    As Mr. W . Buist Picken has said :—
    “ In constitutional disease a veritable world of forces are in
disorder, and the products of disease are all results of morbid
motions. The human organism is constituted of twenty-one
different systems of forces, arranged into three groups of seven
each, interacting ad infinitum. . . . The compositions of
molecular forces in the organism are incalculable. Instead of
representing them by the simple combinations of molecular and
atomic motion that may occur in a pool of water, there is reason
to believe that they are more justly represented by the molecular
and atomic action of all the stars in the heavens. . . . The
stability of health is in the ratio of the stability of equilibrium
of the complex normal motions of the organism under adverse
influences.” 2
    Astrology is rejected by the scientific world (without any
patient and thorough examination of it) as absurd and super­
 stitious. It is anathema to modern science! No “ scientific
authority ” accepts the suggestion that the proper way of dealing
with the problems of astrology is not to theorise about and
condemn them, but to investigate them by the aid of well-
attested facts. Such an idea seems to be quite foreign to the
habits of thought of our scientific opponents. As the late Dr.
 Bichard Garnett wrote :— “ The study of facts and the observa­
tion of Nature must always be stronger than any abstract reason­
 ing ; and the investigation of the arguments brought against
 astrology will disclose a great reluctance on the part of the
 objector to resort to the testimony of facts, and a thoroughly
 unscientific habit of mind.”
    Well might M. Ferdinand Brunetiere3 have declared not long
 ago that “ Science is bankrupt,” and “ if not totally bankrupt it
is virtually insolvent. The physical or natural sciences promised

  8 “ On Physios and M edicine,” H o m o e o p a t h ic W o r l d , July, 1897.
  8 T he learned editor o f the K e v u e d e s D e u x M o n d e s
                    ON TH E     PR ACTICAL U SES        OF A S TR O LO G Y.                             253

us to suppress mystery. Now, not only have they not done so,
but we see clearly that they have never shed a ray of light upon
it. They are powerless to adequately state the only questions
which concern us— those which relate to the origin of Man, to
the law of his conduct and to his future destiny ! The unknow­
able surrounds us ; and we cannot extract from the law's of
Physics, or from the results of Physiology, any means of knowing
anything about it. . . . Science has lost its préstige, and
Beligion has conquered a part of its owTn.” In the present year,
1911, M. R. Legendre in the course of his lecture at the National
Museum for Natural History, Paris, on “ The Physiology of
Sleep,’ ’ admitted that it is impossible to give any exact defini­
tion of sleep, which must be distinguished from narcosis,,
lethargy, and hypnotism.4
   Astrology also has reconquered part of its own. If anyone
doubts this let him ponder over the fact that at the Oxford
Congress, September 18th, 1908, M. Saloman Beinach, one of
the very first rank of savants and scholars, who presided over
the important Section 6— Beligions of the Greeks and Romans
— insisted that :—
   “ The question is rife : What is the bearing of primitive A s t r o l o g y
and star-worship on the formation of Oriental and Greek myths? We
may, for the moment, answer by a non liquet, but it is certain that the
learned work of Prof Bouché Leclerq on Greek Astrology, the publica­
tion of forgotten astrological treatises by Prof. Cumont, and his
admirable lectures at the Collège de France, where the religious
importance of A strology has been so forcibly emphasised, cannot fail to
make us once more turn our eyes to the starry heavens, after we have,
perhaps, dwelt too exclusively on the earthly and psychological
elements of cult and myth.”

   Yet Science, in this twentieth century, “ bankrupt’ ’ or at least
“ virtually insolvent ’ ’ as it is, rejects with scorn and contempt
Astrologia sana.
   It may well be asked “ What is S cien ce?” that it is so
arrogant and contemptuous. Here is the definition of G. H.
Lewes, who in his day was regarded as an authority on Science,,
presented by him in his “ Aristotle ” :—
   “ Science is the systematic co-ordination of the facts of
co-existence and succession.”
   It is the parrot-like cry that astrology is an “ exploded ”
superstition. So that astrology has been “ exploded” by “ the
systematic co-ordination of the facts . of co-existence and

  4 T h i s lecture w a s reported i n f u l l i n t h e R   e v u e   S c ie n t if iq u e , J u n e   17th,
1911.
1251               THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.


 succession ” — which, wrote E. J. Morrison, is about “ as clear as
 mud in a wine-glass.” And none can tell who “ exploded”
 astrology neither point to the work which exploded i t !
    As a distinguished physician and philosopher has written :—
 “ There is one word in particular against w'hich it is necessary
at the present day to be on our guard, if we would preserve our
 independence of character and our peace of mind— the word
 1scientific.’ To be deemed scientific is to have found salvation
 — from the prize-ring upwards. The first thing about the word
 1 scientific ’ is that it has no absolute meaning whatever: it is
■simply relative. It is rightly used to describe any method or
 action which is in accordance with the laws of the universe, so
 far as they have been at present spelled out in the department to
 which the matter described belongs. But as we are every day
 learning more and more about these laws, it follows that what is
 truly scientific to-day may, in the light of some new discovery,
 be utterly unscientific to-morrow. The next thing to be noted
 is that the word is apt to be used by each person from the stand­
 point of his own position in science; and thus the Tower of
 Babel episode comes to be enacted over again in another sphere.
 Now, if it could always be borne in mind that the word ‘ scientific ’
 is a purely question-begging term unless it is (either explicitly
 or implicitly) qualified by a statement of the precise sense in
 which it is used, and of the personal equation of him who uses
 it, the occasion of a vast amount of personal bitterness and
 misunderstanding would be got rid of.” 6
    All things tend to one conclusion—a Great First Cause Who
 in wisdom rules the Universe. Yet in 1871, the President of
 the British Association for the Advancement of Science, declared
 that great masses move through space “ without intelligence
 directed to prevent their collision.” This atheistic and absurd
 idea he borrowed from Laplace.
    That Prescience is useful was shown by Claudius Ptolemy in
 his T e t r a b i b l o s , eighteen centuries ago. He declared that
 “ prescience by astronomy is possible under certain adaptation,
 and that alone it will afford premonition, as far as symptoms in
 the Ambient enable it to do so, of all such events as happen to
 men by the influence of the Ambient. . . . Man is subject
 not only to events applicable to his own private and individual
 nature, but also to others arising from general causes. He
.suffers by pestilences, inundations, or conflagrations, produced

                    5 Vide S t a r L o r e , January, 1898.
              ON TH E   PRACTICAL U SE S   OF ASTR O LO G Y.   255

by certain extensive changes in the Ambient, and destroying
multitudes at on ce; since a greater and more powerful agency
must always absorb and overcome one that is minute and
weaker.”
    My forecast (published in October, 1908) of shocks of earth­
quake in Italy, etc., about the tenth degree of east longitude,
.about the 25th and 30th of December, 1908, led three heads of
families to ask me if I apprehended that such seismic phenomena
would be so serious as to render it unwise to spend the winter in
Italy or Sicily. I replied that they should avoid both Italy and
Sicily— the latter because Messina is related to Scorpio the sign
occupied by Mars (at the winter solstice) in semi-quartile (45°)
aspect with the Sun, the great luminary being also in
quadrature with Saturn. As they had faith in the ancient
science, they followed my advice, and took their families
elsewhere for that winter (1908’ -09), and on the occurrence of
the awful earthquakes of December 28fch, 1908, which destroyed
Messina, and shook Italy and vicinity from the eighth to the
fifteenth degrees of east longitude, my correspondents wrote
warmly thanking me for my forecast and advice.
   Dr. S. wrote (in the spring of 1908) a letter to me in which he
said : “ I am studying your treatise on Medical Astrology in
your Text Book, and find it a great help in practice. I firmly
believe that planetary action has, besides the magnetism of the
earth, all to do with the health and career of terrestrial beings as
well as with mundane affairs.”
    Some years ago, in the course of a long series of lessons in
computing arcs of primary direction, four evil ones were found
to be about to take effect in my pupil’s nativity. They were
 f    ti 5 zodiac 48° O', $ □ J zodiac 48° 4', M.C. d §
48° 14', and © par. Ip zodiac 48° 26'. It was pointed out to
my friend that this train of primary directions presignified
danger of losses, and personal danger by a fall or by an
explosion. On reflection, my friend said that he would have an
old boiler at his works examined. The examination was
ordered and promptly made, and a serious defect was discovered
and repaired. As my friend’ s office was directly over a part of
the boiler in question, and as he passed several hours in that
office daily, for five days per week, he was running considerable
risk of his life. The directions had their effect in weakening
his health, temporarily, and in a serious loss of money.
   A Scottish gentleman who was born when the Moon was in
conjunction with Mars in Cancer, in the eighth house, and
256               TH E TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTKOLOGY.


 Jupiter close to the upper meridian, had suffered seriously in
 health, and had been very unsuccessful in his profession, in-
 Scotland, up to the time when he began the study of the
 Placidian system of directing. He was advised to leave his-
native country and come south, to an English town in a
direction pointed out. He did so, under the direction, in his
nativity, of Sun parallel Jupiter, and recovered his health and
 prospered well.
    On the 24th May, 1888, at 3h 45m p.m., in the City of
 London, the author was asked by a scientific friend (who had
studied astrology under his tuition) whether he might win an
action in the Court of Appeal, if he decided to proceed against
the directors of a firm for infringing his patent rights. After
careful consideration of the primary directions then operating
(in the nativity of my pupil)— that of ]) -x- $ mundo, the Moon
occupying the tenth house at birth, being the chief one—-, and
finding the figure of the heavens drawn for the moment of
consultation also very favourable to success, I gave my opinion
that my good friend would win on the appeal. The action was-
tried by three judges, in July, 1888, who allowed the appeal,
and awarded to the plaintiff costs on the higher scale. The
plaintiff’s solicitor was very doubtful indeed of success m the
Court of Appeal, in view of having lost the first trial. It may
be mentioned that my friend had telegraphed for me to come to
his office, but I had started for the city more than half-an-hour
before his telegram was delivered at my house. I called at his
office only on intuitive perception that he wished to see m e ;
and I had neither heard nor read of the first trial, and was
unaware that he was in so anxious a state of mind— this was-
a pretty clear case of telepathy.
   With regard to surgical operations, Claudius Ptolemy
wrote “ Pierce not with iron that part of the body which
may be governed by the sign [of the zodiac] actually occupied
by the Moon ” [at the time of the operation] — to which may be
added, specially if the Moon be in conjunction, quadrature or
opposition with Mars, Saturn, Uranus, or Neptune at the time.
   This precept can be followed in major operations which admit
of a few hours’ delay, when evil planets are predominant and
afflicting the Sun and Moon.
   When a student of surgery and medicine, I well remember a
case of ovariotomy performed by a skilful surgeon at one of the
great hospitals of London, in the afternoon of the 13th of
December, 1865, when the Moon was in the sign Scorpio 2° and
             ON TH E   PKACTICAL U S E S   OF A S TR O LO G Y .   257

applying to conjunction with Saturn in 8° 87' of the same sign.
The poor woman died on the following day. Ovariotomy is a
very serious operation, and it is often performed with success ;
nevertheless, it should be delayed when the Moon is afflicted and
passing through either Virgo or Scorpio. It would be better to
run the risk of being deemed superstitious than to neglect an
astrological consideration which might give the poor sufferer a
better prospect of recovery from the shock of a serious surgical
operation.
   The dominion of the Moon in the human body as she passes
through the twelve signs of the zodiac is as follows
   In A ries (0° to 80° of longitude) head and face ; Taurus, neck
and throat; Gemini, arms and shoulders ; Cancer, breast and
stomach ; Leo, heart and spine; Virgo, abdominal organs ; Libra,
loins and kidneys; Scorpio, reproductive organs and bladder;;
Sagittarius, hips and thighs; Capricornus, knees and hams;
Aquarius, legs and ankles ; Pisces, feet and toes.
   Jerome Cardan, the celebrated physician and astrologer, was
sent for in the year 1552 by the Archbishop of St. Andrews,
whom he cured of a dangerous disease which the distinguished
physicians of his day failed to cure and pronounced incurable.
Cardan’s astrological skill enabled him to succeed in this
inveterate case wherein other physicians less skilled both in
astrology and medicine had utterly failed to effect a cure.
   In the treatise on Medical Astrology this very important
subject will be more elaborated.
                                                      258




                           APPENDIX TO BOOK I.


            TO       REDUCE                  MEAN      TO              SIDEREAL              TIME.



   Hours.                         Minutes.                  Minutes.              Seconds.
                 Add                           Add                        Add                   Add
              Min. Sec.                         Se.                       Sec.                  Sec.


    1            0     9-86        1           0-16         31           5 09      2            0-01
    2            0    19-71        2           0 33         32           5-26      6            0-02
    8            0    29-57        3           0-49         33           5-42      9            0-03
    4            0    89-43        4           0 66         34           5-59     13            0-04
    5            0    49-28        5           0 82         35           5-75     17            0-05
    6            0    5914         6           0-99         36           5-92     19            0 05
    7            1     9-00        7           1-15         37           6-08     20            0-06
    8            1    18-85        8           1-31         38           6-24     23            0-06
    9            1    28-71        9           1-48         39           6-41     24            0-07
   10            1    38-56       10           1-64         40           6 57     26            0-07
   11            1    48-42       11           1 81         41           6-74     27            0 08
   12            1    58-28       12           1-97         42           6-90     30            0-08
   13            2     8-13       13           2-14         43           7-07     81            0-08
   14            2    17-99       14           2-30         44           7-28     32            0-09
   15            2    27-85       15           2-46         45           7-39     34            0-09
   16            2    37-70       16           2 63         46           7-56     35            o-io
   17            2    47-56       17           2-79         47           7-72     38            0-10
   18            2    57-52       19           3-12         48           7-89     39            0-11
   19            3     7-27       21           3-45         49           8-05     42            0-12
   20            3    17-13       23           3-78         51           8-38     45            0-12
   21            3    26-99       25           4-11         53           8-71     48            013
   22            3    36-84       27           4-44         55           9-04     51            0-14
   23            3    46-70       29           4-76         57           9-37     55            0-15
   24            3    56-56       30           4-93         59           9-69     59            0-16


  On        th e     use   of   L ogarith m s         in   A stronomical C alcu lations .

   Logarithms were invented by Baron Napier, of Merchistoun,
for the purpose of facilitating his astronomical calculations, and
for astrological purposes. By means of logarithms multiplica­
tion is performed by addition ; division by subtraction ; propor­
tion, or the rule of three, by adding three numbers together ;
and roots are extracted by a very simple process.
                                   A P P E N D IX .                          259

   [Note.— In -working by rule of three, the ternary proportional
logarithm of the first term must be taken from 10-00000 to find
its arithmetical complement.    Where the index (in the sum)
■exceeds 10, this amount must be rejected.]
   The best Tables of Logarithms are those of Callet and Bruhns,
the sines, cosines, tangents, and co-tangents being given by
them to seconds— Chambers’ Tables only give them to deg. and
min.
   By means of the following formula: a map of the heavens may
be drawn for any part of the world.
                              F orm ula 1.
         Oblique Ascension given to find Ecliptic Longitude.
   1°.— Log. cosine Obi. Asc. from the first point of V or         (or
log. sine Obi. Asc. from 25 or >y) + log. cotang. lat. or pole of
the house1 = log. cotang, z A.
   2°.— Then, if Obi. Asc. be less than 9C° or above 270° Z A +
23° 27' (the obliquity of the ecliptic)2 = z B. If Obi. Asc. be
more than 90°, and less than 270°, the difference of Z A and
23° 27’ = Z B.
   3°.-—And log. cosine Z B (a.c.) -f log. cosine Z A + log.
■tang. Obi. Asc. from T or ^ (or log. cotang. Obi. Asc. 25 or Vy)
 = log. tang. long, from T or        (or log. cotang. long. 25 or Vy).
    [Note.— If Z B exceed 90°, take log. sine of its excess, instead
■of log. cosine, using the arith. comp, of the log., as usual, in the
first term. If z B should exceed 90°, the long, will fall the
reverse way from the point from which the Obi. Asc. is taken..]
                                 F orm ula 2.
The Oblique Ascension being exactlg 9 0 ° from T or =n=, to find the
                          degree ascending.
   Log. sine of the obliquity of the ecliptic for the given year +
log. tang. lat. of the birthplace = log. tang, of the ascending
■degree.
                                 F orm ula       3.

                 To find Ascensional Difference.
  Log. tang. lat. of the birthplace + log. tang, declin. of the
heavenly body = log. sine of the ascensional difference.
   1 A table o f the Poles o f the H ouses will be found in this volum e. The
pole of the ascendant (or first house) is always the latitude of the birth-place.
   2 T he Obliquity o f the E cliptic is given in the Nautical Almanac and
Z a dkiel’s Ephcmcris. W hen the birthplace is in a southern latitude the
■obliquity of the ecliptic must be added to Z A when the Obi. A sc. is greater
than 90° and less than 270°; and when the Obi. Asc. is less than 90 ° or
greater than 270° the difference between Z A and the obliquity of the
ecliptic m ust be taken to find Z B.
260                    THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


                                   F orm ula 4 .
The Declination and Ascensional Difference being given,to find the Pole.
  Log. cotang. dec. + log. sine asc. cliff. = log. tang, of the pole.

                                   F orm ula 5.
                    To find the Circle of Position.3
  1=.— Say : “ As the semi-arc is to 90°, so is the merid. dist. k>
the circle of position from the meridian.”
  2°.— Then, the circle of position, taken from the merid. dist.
gives the asc. diff. under the pole.

                                   F orm ula 6 .
   The S un ’ s Longitude being given, to find his Bight-Ascension.
   Log. cosine of the obliquity of the ecliptic + log. tang. long,
from T or =2= (or log. cotang long. 55 or Vy) = log. tang. R.A.
from T or i (or log. cotang R.A. from 23 or Vy).

                                    F orm ula 7 .
   The S un ' s Longitude being given, to find his Declination.
  Log. sine of obliquity of ecliptic + log. sine long, from V or
rt (or log. cosine long. S5 or Vy) = log. sine declination.

                                     F orm ula 8 .
     The S u n ' s Declination being given, to find his Longitude.
  Log. sine of his declin., — sine obliq. of ecliptic = sine of
longitude.
                                     F ormula 9 .
  The S un ’ s Right-Ascension being given, to find his Longitude.
   Log. cosine of obliquity of ecliptic + log. cotang. R.A. from
 «y or =2= (or log. tang. R.A. S3 or Vy) = log. cotang long, from
 T or 2 = (or log. tang, long, S5 or Vy).

                                    F ormula 10.
The Bight-Ascension and Declination o f a Heavenly Body, being
           given, to find its Longitude and Latitude.
10 ( Log sine R .A ., from T or -c=,or ) + log. cotang dee. — log.
    ( log. cosine R.A., from ss or Vy |    tang. / A.
    I R.A. and dec. same name,*1 / A + obliquity of ecliptic
 00    .     = / B .
      1 R.A. and dec. of different names, the difference Z A and
      (    obi. of eclip. = / B .

   3 T he circles o f position of all bodies between the m eridian and horizon
 are analogous to the circles o f latitude, being sm all circles of the sphere,
 having their planes parallel w ith the plane of the m eridian.
   4 If the R .A . be less than 180°, call it North ; if greater than 180°, call it
 South.
                                  A P PE N D IX .                         261
  Then, for the Longitude :■—
  Log. sine Z A (a.c.) + log. i log. tang. R.A., T or ^                     )
    sine Z B +                  ( o r log. cotang, R.A., ss or              j
   f log. tang. long. T or            1
 “ ( or log. cotang. long. 2S or V$ j
  For the Latitude:—
  Log. cosine z A (a.c.) + log. cosine Z B + log. sine declin.
= log. sine latitude.5
                          F ormula 11.
  The Longitude and Latitude of a Heavenly Body being given,
          to find its Bight-Ascension and Declination.
.jo ( Log. sine long, t or a ,          ) + log. tang, of obliquity of
     ( or log. cosine long. ® or Vy J       ecliptic = log. tang. Z A.
    j Long', and lat. same name............... 90° — lat. = z B. |
    1 or long, and lat. different names 90° — lat. = / B. j
8° Z B — z A = z C.
   Then, for the Declination :—
   Log. cosine Z A (a.c.) + log. cosine Z C + log. cosine
obliquity of ecliptic — log. sine of the declination.
   For the Bight-Ascension :—
Log. cosine dec. J log. cosine long, from T o r a , j + log. cosine
   (a.c.) .......+ I or log.sine long.from ffi or Vf j lat.
                    f log. cosine R. A. from T or       )
                    ( or log. sine R.A. from ss or vy)

                               F ormula 12 .
          To Find the Longitude of a Heavenlg Body from the
                              Ephemeris.
    1°.—Find the difference between its longitude at the noon
 preceding and the noon succeeding the given time.
    2 ° . — Find the diurnal proportional logarithm6 corresponding
 to the amount of that difference; find, also, the diurnal
 proportional logarithm of the time elapsed since the preceding
 noon ; add the logs, together and the sum will be the diurnal
 proportional logarithm of the motion of the heavenly body in
 longitude.
    3°.—Add the sum obtained in this manner to the longitude
.at the preceding noon (but subtract it in the case of a retrograde
 planet), and the sum will be the longitude required.

   3' If Z B should exceed 90°, the latitude will be of contrary name to the
declination.
   6 A table of diurnal proportional logarithms is given at pages 396, 397, of
•the latest edition of Chambers’ Mathematical Tattles.
262                   THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTROLOGY.


  E x a m p l e .— Let it be required to find the longitude of the-
Moon at 4h 5m p.m. (G.M.T.) of November 20th, 1877. The
moon’s motion in the 24h was (according to Zadkiel’s Ephemeris)
13° 23'.
      Diurnal prop. log. of 13° 23' ............................     25365
      Diurnal prop. log. of 4h 5m ................................   76920

    Moon’ s motion in 4h 5m = 2° 17' ................... 1.02285
  Then, the Moon’s long, at noon, 23° 2 ' of 8 + 2° 17' =-
25° 19' of 8 the Moon’s longitude required.

   To F ind th e L atitu de and L ong itude of a S tar                by the
                              C e l e s t ia l G l o b e .

   R u l e .— Place the upper end of the quadrant of altitude on the-
north or south pole of the ecliptic, according to whether the
star is on the north or south side of the ecliptic, and move the
other end until the star comes to the graduated edge of the
quadrant: the number of degrees between the ecliptic and the
star is the latitude; and the number of degrees on the ecliptic,
reckoned eastward from the first point of Aries to the-
quadrant, is the longitude.
   Or, elevate the north or south pole G6|° above the horizon,
according to whether the star is on the north or south side o f
the ecliptic ; bring the pole of the ecliptic to that part of the
brass meridian which is numbered from the equinoctial towards
the pole; then the ecliptic will coincide with the horizon ; screw
the quadrant of latitude upon the brass meridian over the pole
of the ecliptic ; keep the globe from revolving on its axis, and
move the quadrant until its graduated edge comes over the
given star ; the degree on the quadrant cut by the star is its
latitude; and the sign and degree on the ecliptic cut by the
quadrant shows its longitude.

  To F ind the A rc of D uration of a P rim ary D irection of
                             the    S un       or   M oon .

  If the Sun be in either ® , Sb, ng,         up, or f , when the
parallel is completed, his south limb will first enter the parallel
declination, or the declination of the aspect, and his north limb
will be the last to enter it. If the Sun be in Vy, zz, X , T , 8 ,
or n , when the parallel is completed, or the declination of the
aspect reached, his north limb will first enter the declination of
the parallel or aspect, and his south limb will be the last
immersed in it. To and from the degrees and minutes of
                                    APPENDIX.                                 263

 declination of the given parallel of declination (or, of the
 declination that the Sun’s centre will have at the place of the
 aspect) add or substract 0° 16f, and the sum or difference will be
 the declination of the Sun’s centre when the north or south
 limb first touches upon the parallel declination (or the declina­
 tion of the place of the aspect).
    This process of adding or subtracting 0° 16' is also applicable
 as regards the Moon, only that the Moon's declination, etc.,
 must be found in the Ephemeris or Nautical Almanac for the year
 of birth.
    Find the longitudes corresponding to the two declinations
 thus found, and work the two directions by the rule given at
 page 184. The difference (in arc) between the two values will
 be the arc of duration,8 which is to be converted into time in the
 manner described. [Oxley.]
    In the case of mundane directions 0° 16' should be added to
 and also subtracted from the R.A. of the luminary directed, and
 the sum or remainder should be worked with in such manner as
 to direct the east and west limb to the parallels and aspects; and
 by subtracting the lesser are from the greater, the arc of duration,
 or of anticipation and retardation, may be determined.




    s The are of duration will vary in length according to the sign in which
 the aspect or parallel of declination falls ; the longest will be in n . 25, f ,
 and Vy, and in some cases the same limb of the luminary that first entered
 on the declination may be the last to leave it. The longest arc, near the
.tropics, will be about 17° 20' ; the shortest, near the equinoxes, about 1° 20’ .
                                         •qjgj aqi jo asoqj su auras
aqq ara ‘sasnoq qj8 putì ‘qJ9 ‘pug aqj jo sa[od a q j "q jn aqj SB
auras aqj ara ‘sasnoq qj6 pun ‘qjg ‘p.ig aqj jo sajod aqj,— ■¡qojy

  63    IS    sx 88            t09
  X     IS    8!      58        09         6      15      63    OX   08
I XX    6X    65      18        63         15     05      58    OX   65
 LZ     8X    SX      08        83         AS     6X      8     ox   85
  81    ¿X    9       65        AS         53     8X      8X    6    LZ
  63    SX    X       85        93         3      81      AX    6    95
  8X    XX    63      95        S3         55     AX      XS    8    35
  68    8X    X       95        XS         98     91      08    8    15
; 58    5X    9       35        83         03     SX      C     8    85
  X5    XX    51      X5        53         A      SX      ex    A    55
  81    OX    15      85        XS         X5     XX      05    A    15

: XI 68       88      55         03        XX     SI      A3    9    05
  Zl 88       9X      15         61        AS     51      X8    9    61
  Zl ¿8       8       15         8X        XX     51      51    9    81
  °[ 98       61      05         AX        08     XX      6X 3       AX
  01 38       AS      61         9X        03     OX      6o 3       91
1 81 X8       83      81         SX        OX     01      A     3    SX
  ex 88       05      81         XX        95     6       SX    X    XX
 8T     58    5!      AX         ex        SX     8       X5    X    81
 05     18    3       AX         5X        3      8       X     X    51
 35     08    65      91         XX        X5     A       8X    8    IT

 58     65    93      SL         ox        8X     9       85    8    ox
 OX     85    15      SX         68        5      9       5     8    6
 8X     LZ    53      XX         88        15     3       XX    5    8
 S3     95    81      XX         AS        OX     X       15    5    A
 3      95    XS      81         98        0      X       0     5    9
 SI     35    95      81         38        85     8       XX    I    3
 35     X5    19      51         X8        XX     5       15    X    X
 98     85    85      51         88        0      5       0     X    8
 9!     55    XS      XX         58        55X            XX    0    5
 93     T5    95      XX         18        5X0            15    0    X
  /     O      /       o                   ' Ô            / o
   • 9sn oH     • a s n oH       'S a g    • a s n o jj    •asttoH   • S ag


      lr.i
      M            Mm           • iv r j     M15T              qm    *xvrj




      •sasnoH aHiL ao saaoj ani ao aaavi


                   'aso 'io h is v   ao Hooa-ixai am                          195
                                    265




                          BOOK IL


            MUNDANE                   ASTROLOGY.


                         C H A P T E R             I.



                     INTRODUCTION.

        ‘ 1They saw the stars their constant round maintain,
           Perform their course, and then return again ;
           They on their aspects saw the Fates attend,
           Their change on their variety depend,
           And thence they fixed unalterable laws,
           Settling the same effect on the same cause.— M a n il iu s .

Mundane (or State) Astrology relates to the prediction of
general events, wars, revolutions, the rise and fall of empires,
plague, pestilence, famine, etc.
   There can be no question that mundane astrology was based
upon the results of a long series of observations, as Manilius
avers, the inductive method being followed in reducing it to a
science.
   The belief of the ancients that the planets were gods who had
under their special care the affairs of mankind arose, not from
mere barbaric superstition, but from observation of calamities
accompanying, or immediately following, certain relative
positions of the planets Saturn and Mars ; and of benefits
attending upon similar relative positions of Jupiter and Venus,
and the configurations of the Sun with Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn.
  It is beyond question that the planets and stars were the gods
of the Egyptians. The seven planets were (according to the
philosopher Albricus) the first seven gods of the heathen, in the
266                   THE    T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTROLOGY.


following order: Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Apollo, Venus, Mercury,
and the Moon.
   Clemens, of Alexandria, placed the stars and heavenly bodies
in the first class of pagan deities. The summary of Egyptian
theology given by Diogenes Laertius from Manetho and
Hecatieus, is in the same spirit, which considers that matter was
the first principle, and the Sun and Moon were the first deities of
the Egyptians.1 This agrees w7ith an expression found in the
Cratylus of Plato : poi-ovs S t o u r 'r)\iov mi ae\pvpv rat atrrpa— “ the
only gods are the Sun, Moon, and Stars.” In the Timseus he
speaks of revolving gods : 'Own -t wepiuoXovm (/>ai-tpins— “ as many
as visibly revolve.”
   The Platonist Porphyry, also, treats the gods as visible:
'ovswv 'ogunras ripen- rovrovs— “ which gods you now see.”
Again: “ To the remaining gods, therefore to the world, to the
inerratie and erratic stars, who are visible gods.” Of these he
says: “ The Pythagoreans frequently employed their aid in
divination, and if they were in want of a certain thing for the
purpose of some investigation. In order, therefore, to effect this,
they make use of the gods wnthin the heavens, both the erratic
and non-erratic, of all of whom it is requisite to consider the
Sun as the leader, but to rank the Moon in the second place;
and we should conjoin with those fire [Mars] in the third place,
from its alliance with them, according to the theologist.”
   The Greek poet and philosopher Aratus in his Phenomena (as
 translated by Dr. Lamb), says :—-
         “ Let us begin from Jove. Let every mortal raise
           His grateful voice to tune Jove's endless praise.
           Jove fills the heaven—the earth—the sea—the air ;
           We feel his spirit moving here and everywhere.
           A n d w e h i s o f f s p r i n g a r e 2 He. e v e r g o o d ,
           Daily provides for man his daily food,
           Ordains ihe seasons by his signs on high,
           Studding with gems of light the azure canopy.
           What time with plough and spade to break the soil,
           That plenteous stores may bless the reaper's toil;
           What time to plant and prune the vine he shows.
           And hangs the purple cluster on its boughs.
           To Him —the First—the Last—all homage yield,
           Our Father—Wonderful—our Help—our Shield.”

  The Phenomena of Aratus was a poem teaching astrology.
  Berosus was a native of Clialdrea. He migrated to Greece and
resided for a long period in Athens. He there immortalised

  1 Wilkinson's “ Egypt," vol. iv.
  2 These are the words quoted by St. Paul, Acts 17, v. 28.
                             INTRO DU CTION .                         267

himself by writing the history of Chaldiea, and by his-
astrological predictions, in recognition of which the Athenians
erected a statue, in honour to his memory, having a golden
tongue.3 This fact will serve to show how highly the Athenians
prized astrological predictions.
   Claudius Ptolemy has handed down to us the method followed
by the ancients in formulating their predictions from the'
configurations of the planets at the vernal equino.r.
   It was an accepted belief of the ancients that the world was
created at the vernal equinox. Dante alludes to this belief4 :—
          “ Aloft the Sun ascended with those stars.
            That with him rose, when Love divine first mov’d
            Those its fair works.”

   The Jewish mundane era dates from the vernal equinox,.
8761 B.C. Hence arose the astrological observance of each
returning vernal equinox as the “ revolution of the world.” The-
Hindu god Balaram,6 is the Sun in his chief dignity Aries, the
rain. It is remarkable that the paschal sacrifice wras fixed at the-
vernal equinox (and the lunation nearest thereto), when the Sun
entered Aries (the sacrificial ram or lamb). At the crucifixion the
Sun was in Aries and near the stars called El Nath and Natik —
the wounded, the slain.
   The numbers twelve and seven— the former being the number
of the signs of the zodiac, the latter that of the planets— recur
again and again in both the Old and the New Testament.
When the tribe of Levi was appointed to the office of the priest­
hood and the service of the Tabernacle, the original number of
the tribes was made up by the sub-division of the family of
Joseph into the tribes of Ephraim and Manasseh. This full
number was likewise required for the symmetrical arrangement
of the tribes around the four sides of the Tabernacle, just as the
Zodiac was divided into four triplicities of three signs each.
The prophet Elijah, at Mount Carmel, “ took twelve stones,
according to the number of the tribes of the sons of Jacob, unto
whom the word of Jehovah came, saying, Israel shall be thy
name ; and with the stones he built an altar in the name o f
Jehovah.” The number of the Apostles of Christ was twelve, to
whom He said : “ Ye who have followed m e ......................shall
sit upon twelve thrones, judging the twelve tribes of Israel.”
In Revelations wre are informed that the heavenly Jerusalem
“ had twelve gates, and at the twelve gates angels, and

    3 Plin. 2, 103; Id. 7, 37.   4 Inferno, Canto I.   » Vide p. 9.
268                 THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


names written thereon, which are the names of the twelve tribes
of the children of Israel; on the east, three gates ; on the north,
three gates; on the south, three gates; and on the west, three
gates. The wall of the City had twelve foundations, and in
them the names of the twelve Apostles of the Lamb.” “ I
heard,” says St. John, “ the number of them -who were sealed ;
and there were sealed one hundred and forty-four thousand, of
all the tribes of the children of Israel. Of the tribe of Judah
were sealed twelve thousand; of the tribe of Reuben were sealed
twelve thousand,” and so on.6 Allusion has already been made,
in the first book of this work, to the scriptual teaching that
however numerous the nations are, they are all in relationship
with one or other of the twelve signs of the Zodiac. Ptolemy
says:—
   “ The pecularities of all nations are distinguished according to
entire parallels and entire angles, and by their situation with
regard to the S un and the Ecliptic.
   ■‘ The climate which we inhabit is situated in one of the
northern Quadrants; but other nations, which lie under more
southern parallels, that is to say, in the space between the
equinoctial line and the summer tropic, have the sun in their
zenith, and are continually scorched by it. They are con­
sequently black in complexion, and have thick and curled hair.
They are, moreover, ugly in person, of contracted stature, hot in
disposition, and fierce in manners, in consequence of the
incessant heats to which they are exposed ; and they are called
by the common name of Ethiopians.
    “ The natives of those countries which lie under the more
remote northern parallels (that is to say, under the Arctic circle
and beyond it) have their zenith far distant from the zodiac and
 the Sun’s heat. Their constitutions, therefore, abound in cold,
and are also highly imbued with moisture, which is in itself a
 most nutritive quality, and in these latitudes is not exhausted
 by heat; hence they are fair in complexion, with straight hair,
 of large bodies and full stature. They are cold in disposition,
 and wuld in manners, owing to the constant cold.
    “ The nations situated between the summer tropic and the
 Arctic circle, having the meridian Sun neither in their zenith
 nor yet far remote from it, enjoy a well temperated atmosphere.
 This favourable temperature, however,             still undergoes
 variation, and changes alternately from heat to cold ; but the
 variation is neither vast nor violent.          The people who
 enjoy this kindly atmosphere are consequently of proportionate
 stature and complexion, and of good natural disposition:

   6    Vide “ Astrology in the Apocalypse,” An Essay on Biblical Allusions to
 Chaldiean Science. By W. O. Collingwood, M.A.
                          INTRO DU CTION .                      2G9

they live not in a state of dispersion, but dwell together
in societies and are civilized in their habits. Among the nations
comprehended in this division, those verging towards the south
are more industrious and ingenious than the others, and more
adapted to the sciences ; and these qualifications are engendered
in them by the vicinity of the zodiac to their zenith, and by the
familiarity thus subsisting between them and the planets moving
in the zodiac, which familiarity gives activity and an intellectual
impulse to their minds.
    “ It has been already stated that there are four triplicities
 distinguishable in the zodiac. The first composed of Aries, Leo,
 and Sagittarius, is the north-west triplicity; and Jupiter has chief
 dominion over it on behalf of its northern proportion, but Mars
 also rules with him in reference to the west. The second,
 consisting of Taurus, Virgo, and Capricornus, is the south-east;
 and in this triplicity Venus bears chief rule, in consequence of
 the southern proportion ; but Saturn also governs with her in
 consideration of the east. The third, composed of Gemini,
 Libra, and Aquarius, is north-east; and Saturn is here the
 principal lord, in consequence of the eastern proportion ; Jupiter,
 however, governs with him in reference to the north. The
 fourth triplicity is constituted of Cancer, Scorpio, and Pisces and
 is south-west; it owns Mars as its principal ruler, in consideration
 of its western proportion ; and on behalf of the south, it is also
 governed by Venus.
     “ 'I he four triplicities being thus established, the whole
 inhabited earth is accordingly divided into four parts agreeing
 with the number of the triplicities. It is divided latitudinally
  by the line of the Mediterranean Sea, from the Straits of
  Hercules to the Issican Gulf, continued onwards through the
  mountainous ridge extending towards the east; and by this
  latitudinal division its southern and northern parts are defined.
  Its longitudinal division is made bv the line of the Arabian
  Gulf, the iEgean Sea, Pontus, and the lake Mieotis; and by
  this line are separated its eastern and western parts.
     “ Of the four quadrants of the Earth, thus agreeing in
  number with the four triplicities, one is situated in the north­
  west of the entire earth, and contains Celto-Galatia ; or, as is
  commonly called E u r o p e . Opposed to this quadrant lies that
  of the south-east, towards Eastern ^Ethiopia; it is called the
  southern part of Asia Magna. Another quadrant of the entire
  earth is in the north-east, about Scythia, and is called the
   northern part of Asia Magna. To this is opposed the quadrant
  of the south-west, which lies about Western ./Ethiopia, and is
  knowm by the general name of Libya.
      “ Under this arrangement, it follows that the north-western
  parts of the first quadrant, or that of E urope, are in familiarity
   with the north-west triplicity, composed of Aries, Leo, and
   Sagittarius ; and they are accordingly governed by the lords of
270                TH E TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


that triplicity, Jupiter and Mars. These parts, as distinguished
by their appropriation to entire nations, are Britain, Galatia,
Germany, Bastarnia, Italy, Apulia, Sicily, Gaul, Tuscany,
Celtica, and Spain. And, since the triplicity itself and the
planets connected with it in dominion are adapted to command,
the natives of these countries are consequently impatient of
restraint, lovers of freedom, warlike, industrious, imperious,
cleanly, and high-minded. Among the countries beforenamed,
Britain, Galatia, Germany, and Bastarnia have a greater
familiarity with Aries and M ars , and their inhabitants are
accordingly wilder, bolder, and more ferocious. Italy, Apulia,
Sicily, and Gaul are in familiarity with Leo and the S u n ; and
the natives of these countries are more imperious, yet kind and
benevolent, and careful of the commonwealth. Tuscany,
Celtica, and Spain, are connected with Sagittarius and J upiter ;
and their inhabitants are lovers of freedom, simplicity and
elegance.”
    Ptolemy proceeds to describe, in like manner, the remaining
■quadrants of the earth and the inhabitants thereof, as known in
his day. It is a remarkable fact that Great Britain and
■Germany are to this day affected by the transits of the superior
planets through their ruling sign Aries as declared by Ptolemy ;
that France and Italy are similarly affected by such transits
through Leo; Lower Egypt by Gemini; Persia and the Grecian
Archipelago by Taurus; Spain by Sagittarius: and Africa by
 Cancer. No alteration whatever has been found necessary by the
^astrologers of the middle ages and those of the nineteenth
century; for the constantly recurring coincidences of many
centuries have proved the truth of the aphorisms of the ancients.
No country ever prospers during the period of Saturn’s visitation
to its ruling sign; on the other hand, the transits of Jupiter are
almost invariably found to coincide with prosperity, or fortunate
■changes. Countries like America, which have been discovered
and populated since Ptolemy’s day have (by observation) been
found to have familiarity with certain signs of the zodiac.
When the independence of America was declared, and the
United States established as a separate nation from the mother-
country, the sign Gemini ascended, and, accordingly transits
through that sign are found to affect the welfare of the American
nation.7 Ptolemy says that: “ With regard to metropolitan
■cities, it is necessary to state that those points or degrees of the
Zodiac over which the Sun and Moon were in transit at the
time when the construction of any such city was first undertaken

                     7 Vide “ F u t u r e , ” Sept. 1893.
                           INTRO DU CTION .                     271

.•and commenced, are to be considered as sympathising
 •with that city in an especial manner; and that, among the
angles, the ascendant is principally in accordance with it.” It is
obviously very difficult to obtain the exact moment when a
 metropolitan city was first founded, and Ptolemy recommends in
such case, that “ the midheaven in the nativity of the reigning
 king, or other chief magistrate ” he substituted and considered
as “ that part of the Zodiac with which it chiefly sympathises.”
 This is frequently, also, very difficult if not impossible to
ascertain. Accordingly, modern astrologers note the places of
 the principal fixed stars and the major planets at the dates of
■occurrence of the chief events aft'ecting the metropolitan city the
ascendant of which it is desired to ascertain ; and when the
 moment of the laying of the foundation stone of the chief public
buildings, or of bridges, can be ascertained, the degree ascending
is carefully computed ; and when a manifest correlation is found
 the ascendant and midheaven of the city are determined.
    “ In addition to the rules which have been already given,”
 says Ptolemy, “ respecting the familiarity of the regions of the
earth with the signs and planets, it must be observed that all
fixed stars which may be posited on any line drawn from one
zodiacal pole to the other, through such parts of the zodiac as
may be connected with any particular country, are also in
familiarity therewith.”
   The ascendant of the great metropolitan city of L o n d o n was
determined, some centuries since, to be 17° 51' of the sign
 Gemini. That eminent fixed star, of the second magnitude and
•of the nature of Mars, the Bull's North Horn (B Tauri),
attained this longitude (n 17° 54') in 1665-G, when the plague
and fire of London took place. William Lilly, the celebrated
astrologer, foretold, fifteen years beforehand, those momentous
events, from the transit of that martial star over the ascendant of
London. Lilly had observed the coincidence of the outbreak of
plague in London in 1625 (the year of accession of Charles I.),
to which no less than 85,117 persons fell victims, with the
approach of the Bull s North Horn to the ascendant of the
metropolis for it had then reached 17° 20' of Gemini. It is
worthy of remark that the civil war coincided with this approach
of that martial star to the ascendant of the capital: and that in
1619, when it had arrived at 17° 40' of Gemini, the king was
beheaded.
   The longitude of the Bull's North Horn in the year 1665 may
be thus determined :—
272               TH E T E X T -B O O K   OF A STR O LO G Y.


      Longitude of B Tauri, Jan. 1st, 1879                 n20° 58' 40"
      Longitude of the ascendant of London                 n 17 54   0

                                                  2 59 40
   Then, 2° 59' 40" = 10,780 seconds of longitude, which divided
by 50"-25 (the annual motion of the fixed stars) = 214, the
number of years since the star was in n 17° 54'. From the
year 1879 take 214 and the remainder is 1665.
   Nostradamus8 also foretold the fire of London.
   This justifies the remark of Whatley on the aphorism of
Ptolemy in regard to the pre-signification of the fixed stars:—
The gradual progress of the fixed stars from one sign to another
is in an especial manner to be regarded in considering the
mutations, manners, customs, laws, government, and fortune of
a kingdom.”
   Lilly, in his Almanack for 1666, said:—-“ The eighteenth
degree of Gemini is London’s horoscope; and at the foundation,
of the City the Sun was in 25° of the same sign. This is
certainly true, that when any notable event happens to concern
that city, the planets are in those degrees, or those signs and
degrees are affected.”
   The first pile of the present London Bridge was driven at
9h 21m a.m. of March 15th, 1824; at that moment, the
ascendant was Gemini 16° 11' and Aquarius 10° 48' culminated
— the R.A. of the meridian was 318° 10' 45". When the
Fenian attempt was made to blow up with dynamite London
Bridge, on December 18th, 1884, Saturn was retrograde in
Gemini 20° 88' and in opposition to the Sun.
   When the Fenian attempt wras made to blow up with
dynamite the Houses of Parliament, Westminster Hall, and the
Tower of London, on January 24th, 1885, at 2h p.m., Saturn
was retrograde in Gemini 17° 47'.
   Borne has, from the earliest history, been held to be
influenced by the sign Leo.     The symbol (Sb) of this sign is
found on many Roman gems.9 Plutarch (“ Romulus ” ) records
that L. Tarrutius, a friend of Cicero’s, had cast the nativity of
Rome according to the rules followed in the case of a human
birth ; and one cannot help seeing the pictured horoscope of the
mistress of the world in a design of 'which many repetitions are
extant, both antique and of Renaissance date:— Jupiter is shown
enthroned between Mars and Mercury, standing upon an arch,

  8 Vide the “ Science of the Stars ’’ p. 21.
  0 Vide “ Antique Gems and Kings.” By C. W. King, M.A.
                           INTRODUCTION.                          273

under which old Oceanus half emerges from his waves, the
whole enclosed within the circle of the Zodiac. The mystical
importance of this design is apparent from the fact that it has
been kept in view by the sculptor who executed the tomb of
Junius Bassus, Prefect of Rome (dec. 359), the earliest, perhaps
the most interesting Christian monument in existence, still
remaining in situ upon the floor of the ancient basilica of St.
Peter, now the crypt of the modern edifice. In this the
principal bas-relief represents Christ seated between S.S. Peter
and Paul standing, his feet resting upon an aged man emerging
from beneath, whose robe flies in a semicircle over his head,
here probably representing Aion', or Saculum, the Genius of the
world.
   That very brilliant martial star Eegnliis or Cor Leonis, the
Lion’s Heart, entered the sign Leo (in the manner described by
Ptolemy) in the year 293 B.C., and the power of Rome then
became very fully established, more especially its religious power
or that of the Pontifex Maximus. In 571 A.D., the star entered
decanate of Jupiter (the second ten degrees of Sb), whereupon
the power of the Popes increase immensely. In 1291, the star
left the decanate of Jupiter, and in that same year, on the 18th
of May, the Holy Land was entirely lost by the capture of Acre.
 When, in 1507, the star left the term of Jupiter, the Pontifical
power in Europe was broken by the efforts of Luther to establish
 the Reformation. In the year 1868, the star passed the twenty-
eighth degree of Leo (and, therefore, according to Ptolemy, it
must be considered to have entered the sign next in order), and
 two years later the French troops were withdrawn from Rome
 and the Italian troops entered it, the Papal (temporal) power
 being thus completely overthrown10 (having been already
 considerably curtailed by the invasion of the Papal States by the
 troops of Victor Emanuel).
    The relationship of the several signs of the Zodiac with certain.
 countries and cities of the world is, as far as at present deter­
 mined, as follows :—
    A r ie s influences B r it a in , Germany, Denmark, Lesser Poland,.
 Palestine, Syria, or Judea.              Towns: Brunswick, Capua,
 Cracow, Florence, Marseilles, Naples, Padua, Saragossa,
 Utrecht, Verona, Leicester, and Birmingham.
    T aurus relates to Asia Minor, Cyprus, Georgia, the Caucasus,


  10 Vide ZadJciel's Almanac for 1861, pp. 48-49, wherein the “ speedy
overthrow of the Papal power ” was foretold from this circumstance.
274                 THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTROLOGY.


Media, Persia, Poland, Ireland, White Russia, and the
Archipelago.               T ow ns: Dublin, Leipsic, Mantua, Parma,
Palermo, and Rhodes.
   G em ini relates to the West of England, the United States of
North America, the north-east coast of Africa, Lower Egypt,
Flanders, Lombardy, Brabant, Belgium, and Sardinia. Towns:
L ondon , Versailles, Metz, Louraine, Bruges, Cordova, Nurem­
berg, Plymouth, and Melbourne.
   C ancer rules Scotland, Holland, Zealand, and Northern and
Western Africa. Tow ns: Amsterdam, Cadiz, Constantinople,
Algiers, Genoa, Berne, Lubeck, Magdeburg, Manchester (the
last decanate), Milan, New York, St. Andrews, Stockholm,
Tunis, York, Venice, and Vineentia.
   L eo relates to France, Italy, Sicily, the Alps, Bohemia,
Chaldiea, the ancient Phoenicia, or the northern parts of
Roumania. Towns : Rome, Bath, Bristol, Taunton, Damascus,
Prague, Philadelphia, Ravenna, and Portsmouth.
   V irgo influences Turkey in Europe and A sia; Babylonia,
Assyria; all the country between the Tigris and the Euphrates ;
Greece, Thessaly, Corinth, the Morea, the island of Candia,
Croatia, Switzerland, and the West Indies. Tow ns: Paris,
Lyons, Toulouse, Reading, Heidelberg, Jerusalem, and Chelten­
 ham.
   L ibr a relates to the borders of the Caspian ; part of Thibet;
 China, especially the northern provinces ; parts of India near
 China; Japan, Austria, Bactriana, Savoy, Upper Egypt, and
 ancient Libya.               Towns : Antwerp, Charlestown, Frankfort,
 Fribourg, Gaeta, Lisbon, Piacenza, Spires, and Vienna.
    S corpio rules Algiers, Barbary, Fez, Judea, Syria, Cappadocia,
 Bavaria, Norway and Jutland, Valentia, Catalonia, and the
 Transvaal. Tow ns: Dover, Liverpool, Frankfort-on-the-Oder,
 and Messina.
    S a g i t t a r i u s influences Spain, Hungary, Tuscany, lower Italy,

 (especially Tarento), that part of France between La Seine and
 La Garonne to Cape Finisterre, Arabia Felix, Dalmatia,
 Sclavonia, and Moravia.                Towns: Avignon, Cologne, Buda,
 Narbonne, Rotenburg, Toledo, Stutgardt, Nottingham, Sheffield,
 Sunderland-on-Sea, and Northampton.
    C apricornus relates to India,             Afghanistan, the modern
 Punjaub, parts of Persia about Circan and Maracan, Chorassan,
 Thrace, Macedonia, the Morea, and Illyria, Albania, Bosnia,
 Bulgaria, Styria, Romandiola in Italy, the south-west of Saxony
 Hesse, Mecklenburg, the Orkney Islands, and Mexico. Towns :
                           INTRODUCTION.                         275

 ■Oxford, Salisbury, Brandenburg, Prato in Tuscany, Canstanz,
  Tortona, Brussels, and Port Said.
    A quarius relates to Arabia the Stony, Red Russia, Prussia,
 part of Poland, Lithuania, Tartary, part of Muscovy, Circassia,
  Wallachia, Westphalia, Lower Sweden, Piedmont, Azania, and
 Abyssinia. Towns : Bremen, Hamburg, Ingoldstadt, Saltzburg,
 Trent, and Brighton.
    P isces relates to Portugal, Calabria, Normandy, Galicia in
 Spain, Upper Egypt, Nubia, and the southern parts of Asia
 Minor.     Tow ns: Alexandria, Ratisbon, Seville, Tiverton,
 Worms, Compostella, Bournemouth, and Farnham.
    The ancients observed that Saturn in Libra and Jupiter m
 Cancer, in mutual quadrature, brought great changes and
 alterations in “ the balance of Power ” in the world.
    The author has observed that those distant planets Uranus
 and Neptune also effect great changes when their mutual
 configurations are formed from tropical and equinoctial signs.
Such relative positions only take place very rarely.
    In the year 1615, Uranus was in the third degree of the
tropical sign Cancer and in quartile with Neptune in the third
•degree of Libra. In that year Captain Best, with four English
 ships, won a great victory over the Portuguese squadron off
'.Surat. In that year the foundation of the British Empire in
 India may be said to have been laid.
    In the year 1698, Uranus in the sixth degree of Cancer formed
 the quartile with Neptune in the sixth degree of Aries, a rival
•company was formed called “ the English East India Company,”
 to distinguish it from the old “ London Company.”               The
competition resulted in over-trading. In 1702, when Jupiter
 and Saturn were also in Aries, Uranus being still in Cancer, the
 two companies were united.
    In 1744, when Neptune was in Cancer, Uranus in Capricornus,
.and Saturn in Libra, England engaged in the war of the
 Austrian succession, which brought the rival companies of
 England and France into collision, the result being the capture
 of Madras in 1746. In 1760 and 1761, when ig, I? , and if.
were in Aries, the French were completely defeated at
 W^andewash and Pondicherry.
   In 1909 and 1910, Uranus in Capricornus in opposition to
Neptune in Cancer, India passed through a great crisis, as fore­
told by the author ; and N. Africa, in 1911, was in a critical state.
   The following table showing all the countries relating to each
sign of the Zodiac respectively, is given as found in Ptolemy’s
'Tetrabiblos, Book II, Chap. 8.
276                                                                  TH E       T E X T -B O O K                    OF ASTROLO G Y




                                                 pot ami a.                                                                                    •+3                       cà d


                                                                                                                               1
              ca              CO                                                  ca                                                            ca                   r= ‘13 .Si                                                  _d
                                                                                  <U                                                            CD
  !<                          d
                                                 ylonia.                                                                                                             C S C
                                                                                                                                                                                          d
                                                                                                                                                                                                          d          é %.
            H              H                                                    &                     i - i s                                 £                                        H
 o                                               syria.                                           ¡=3    id    CD   _fc
                                                                                                                                                                     -3 O e                              ^           O rd
 ÖS         rd
                                                 O rO            M
                                                                                                                               rd                                    s   a s
                           "3                    ca c i                                           K     <; °                                   d                    _a   ^   d                           J       o                |
             o              o                                                     O                                             c              o                    ^    d   £          o
            co             U1                                                   !5                                             CO'            CO
                                                                                                                                                                         Ä   O
                                                                                                                                                                                       55                                        Ph



                                                                                                                                                                                                                                 ^d


                                                                                                                                                                    luromatica                            Arabia.

                           orth- West.                                          >outh-East.
            -+-=




                                                                                                                               North-East.
                                                                                                  Phoenicia.
             ca                                                                                                                                                                          ca
             O                                                                                                                                   ca
Co                                                                                                                                               cd                                      CD

  o'                                         d       S       o       e;                           Chaldsea.
                                                                                                                                              H
                                                                                                                                                1                    Oxiana.           P                  Azania.
  <K>                                                                                                                                         rd

                                                                                                  Orchynia.                                                         Sogdiana.                            Idle Ethiop
                                                                                                                      On
              o                                                                                                                                  o
                           rA                                                CO                                                               55                                       CO
            k                                                                                                                                                       CO




                                                                                                                                              -+3                                      -D3
               Cfl            m                                               ca                                                  ca           ca                                                                .d ’
               0)             CD                                                                                                                                                          <D
  »
                                             i a =                            d                          d    ca                  d            d                      . d .«g
                                                                                                                                                                     d C cc                              ©“ 3                     cé
            £              Bf
                                             I I I                           H                    d ’ 5b IS
                                                                                                  h       Ü
                                                                                                                      c
                                                                                                                      V
                                                                                                                               H              w                     ^3 d p             Bf                2 o                     -d
 o                                                                           rd                                                               rd                                       r d ____
                                                                                                                    ’ St                                             d *2 rè
                                                                                                  5     j q 'S
                                                                                                                                d                d
5”                                                                               o                                    &         o                o                       ^CD             o
                                                                                                                                                                                                         Eh          ¿           h

            CO             CO                                                55                                     6          CO             CO                •




                                                                                                                                                                                                                 Arabia Felix.
                                                                                                   Cyrenaiea.


            North-East.    North-East.                                       South-West.                                                      North-West.                              South-East.
                                                                                                                                 ca
                                             Hyroania.                                                                           CD
                                                                                                                                                                    Tuscany.

Gemini, n
                                                                                                                               Bf

                                                                                                   Marmarica.                                                        Celtica.
                                                                                                                      5
                                             Armenia.                                                                          -+J
                                                                                                                     o-.
                                                                                                                                                                     Spain
                                             Mantiana.                                            Lower Egypt
                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                    Co         55




                                                                                                                                                                                                           Syria.

                                                                                                                               outh-West.
                                                                                                                                                                    letagonitis.

                           outh-East.                                                                                                         outh-West.
                                                                                                  Cyclades.
                                                                                -»■=
20             ta                                                                ca                                                                                                     ca




                                                                                                                    Scorpio.
                                             Parthia.                             CD                                                                                                    d
            w
                                              Media.
                                                                             Bf
                                                                                                   Cyprus,                                                          lauritania.        H
                                                                                                                                                                                       rg
                                                                                                                                                                                                         onnuagene.
                                                                             -d

               5                             Persia.                             O
                                                                                                  sia Minor.                                                         Getulia.             o              iappadocia.
os
            GO             CO                                                   55                            <                CO             CO                    r d =d             S5                        O               ^



                                  _                                                                                                                                                                                                      .
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   d
             "ta                                                                                                                              -4-3                                                          .      CJ
  8-          CD              1              £
                                                 .      • tH> cé
                                                     _ d £ ■£
                                                                                  ca
                                                                                                  ’t     * é
                                                                                                                                ca
                                                                                                                                d
                                                                                                                                               ca
                                                                                                                                               d                     |-3 03               0)               ca   . '4S
                                                                                                                                                                                                         ’ d . 2 ►••
             Si            is                                                   [2                    £> a    g                H              K                     .3   m   2
                                                     ^       S       M                                                                                                                                    cd d                       O
            rg             rd                                                rd                       CD 3    g                               rg                    "S ca ®            rg
                                             äo| |                                                                                                                   " a cn                              rd O                        fcC
               O               o
                                                                                                  o                               o              o                  |o                  "d               Eh                          o

                              55                                                CO                                             a              55                                       CO




                                                 O ^                                                                                                                 o
                                         .       5 7 = re;                                    .                                       •      p0             .                                        .
            .t» '                                £ S£                       O'
                                                                                                      Sì o'                                  c J5                    ^   S   2                            2          o'*                 •

                                                 s - S 's                                                                                                            « .S K I
                                                                                                                     •S5                                             Ü -K.
                                                                                                                                                                            CO
ÖQ                                                                                                                   CO
                                  o                                                                                                          ^   o                                 ~             o.      ¿ - s                   i
            OS            o      O                                          o         O                                                       C ü                                                         d                       o

                          0 s                 o          ^       °          <5>                       ¡6 «                                   Q>                      O ^     C"                              5
                                             O                                                    o                                                                 o                                    o
                            INTRO DU CTION .                      277

   By observing eclipses of the Sun and Moon, ancl transits of
the major planets and fixed stars, the ancient astrologers fore­
told the nature of the benefits or calamities about to happen, and
named the countries likely to be affected by them.         Modern
astrologers follow the same rules.      Mundane astrology takes
precedence of all other branches because it deals with what
Ptolemy described as “ the superior cause.” He wrote that:—
    “ It must not be imagined that all things happen to mankind
 as though every individual circumstance were ordained by divine
 decree and some indissoluble supernal cause; nor is it to be
 thought that all events are shown to proceed from one single
 inevitable fate, without being influenced by the interposition of
 any other agency. Such an opinion is entirely inadmissible;
 for it is on tine contrary most essential to observe, not only the
 heavenly motion which, perfect in its divine institution and
 order, is eternally regular and undeviating; but also the variety
 which exists in earthly affairs, subjected to and diversified by
 the institutions and courses of nature, and in connexion with
which the superior cause operates in respect to the accidents
 produced.
    “ It is further to be remarked that man is subject not only to
 events applicable to his own private and individual nature, but
 also to others arising from general causes.            He suffers for
 instance, by pestilence, inundations, or conflagrations produced
 by certain extensive changes in the Ambient and destroying
multitudes at on ce; since a greater and more powerful agency
 must of course always absorb and overcome one that is more
minute and weaker.”
    “ In exercising prognostication, strict care must be taken to
 foretell future events by that natural process only which is
admitted in the doctrine here delivered. In this manner
 experienced physicians, accustomed to the observation of
 diseases, foresee that some will be inevitably mortal, and that
others are susceptible of c u r e .................The defect of not
sufficiently considering the opposing influence has naturally
induced an opinion that all future events are entirely unalterable
and inevitable. But, since the foreknowledge of particular
circumstances, although it may not wholly claim infallibility,
seems yet so far practicable as to merit consideration, so the
precaution it affords, in particular circumstances, deserves in
like manner to be attended to ; and if it be not of universal
advantage, but useful in few instances only, it is still most
worthy of estimation, and to be considered of no moderate value.
Of this the Egyptians seem to have been well aware; their
discoveries of the great faculties of this science have exceeded
those of other nations, and they have in all cases combined the
medical art with astronomical prorpiostication. And, had they
been of opinion that all expected events are unalterable and not
278                 T H E T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


 to be averted, they never would have instituted any propitia­
 tions, remedies, and preservatives against the influence of the
 Ambient, whether present or approaching, general or particular.
 But, by means of the science called by them Medical'
 Mathematics they combined with power of prognostication the
 concurrent secondary influence arising out of the institutions and
 courses of nature, as well as the contrary influence which might
 be procured out of nature’s variety ; and by means of these they
rendered the indicated agency useful and advantageous ; since
 their astronomy pointed out to them the kind of temperament
 liable to be acted upon, as well as the events about to proceed
from the Ambient, and the peculiar influence of those events,
while their medical skill made them acquainted with everything
suitable or unsuitable to each of the effects to be produced.
And it is by this process that remedies for present and
preservatives against future disorders are to be acquired ; for,
without astronomical knowledge, medical aid would be most
frequently unvailing, since the same identical remedies are not
better calculated for all persons whatsoever than they are for all­
diseases whatsoever.” 11




  11 Ashmand remarks that “ this explains the origin of the old alliance
between medicine and astrology, so universally preserved until almost
within the last century.”
                                  279




                      C H A P T E R I I.



ON     THE      EQUINOXES                  AND        SOLSTICES.

         “ First Aries, glorious in his golden wool.” — Manilius.


T he V ern al E q u in o x — the exact moment of     the ingress of the
S un into Aries— is the commencement of the astrological year.
   From the remotest antiquity there existed a belief that the
world was created at the vernal equinox. It is a remarkable fact
that the Christian era is connected with the epoch of the vernal
equinox in Aries— the sacrificial ram or lamb.
   Astrologers regarded every successive ingress of the Sun into
Aries as the “ revolution ” of the world. A map of the Heavens
was drawn for the moment of ingress, at the seat of government.
If a fixed sign (either Taurus, Leo, Scorpio, or Aquarius) ascended,
the pre-signification of the relative positions of the planets
thereat was held to bear rule for the whole year. If a common
sign (Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, or Pisces) ascended, the figure
was held to bear rule for six months only, and another
was drawn for the autumnal equinox. If a moveable sign Aries,
 Cancer, Libra, or Capncornus) ascended, the figure was held to
retain influence for three months only, and figures were drawn
for the summer solstice, autumnal equinox, and winter solstice.
Modern experience appears to warrant a belief that the figure for
the vernal equinox always bears chief rule for the ensuing year,
that the succeeding ingresses into the other cardinal points have
also a pre-signification, but subsidiary to the first-named.
   The approved method of dividing the heavens and casting the
figure has already been described in the first book. The order
of importance of the twelve mansions or “ houses” was formerly
stated as follows: 1st, 10th, 7th, 4th, 11th, 9th, 5th, 2nd, 3rd,
8th, 6th and 12th. Experience shows the ascendant (1st) to be
the most important, then the upper meridan (10th), next the
descendant (7th), and lower meridan (4th). Next, after these
angles, come the diurnal houses, 11th, 9th, 8th, and 1 2th ; the
nocturnal 2nd, 3rd, oth, and 6th.
280                THE   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTBOLO G Y.


   In mundane astrology, the twelve houses have a somewhat
different signification to that described in genethlialogy. The
annexed diagram will demonstrate this at a glance :—

                                       S




    This traditional signification of the various houses has been
fairly borne out by experience, e.g., the success of the predictions
given in Zadkiel's Almanac extending over the last eighty years.
It is no wonder that judgment has been occasionally at fault
and that some predictions have failed when we find that each
house has several significations.        With even a thorough
knowledge of politics, and good judgment, it becomes
occasionally difficult to forecast whether the presence of
a benefic or malefic planet, as the case may be, in a certain
house presignifies gain or loss to one or more of the public
interests involved. Mars on the cusp of the lower meridian
 (4th house), at the vernal ingress of 1880,* clearly presignified
the powerful enemies of Lord Beaconsfield’s Government, and
that, in the event of a dissolution, the Government would be
beaten.     [Had the Conservative leader understood and relied
upon astrology, he might have avoided defeat by postponing the
dissolution until after the spring quarter had elapsed.]       Thus
the effects, in this instance, fell on the Government and not so

                 1 Vide Urania for March, 1880, p. 86.
                 ON T H E   EQ U IN O XES AND   SO L S T IC E S.   281

 much on the landed interest and public buildings. In like
 manner, the presence of Mars in the seventh house, at an
ingress, does not always presignify actual warfare, but it usually
■causes strained relations and danger of war with a foreign Power.
 Saturn in the twelfth house may presignify trouble in connection
 with either workhouses, prisons, criminals, or seditious persons.
 The presence of Jupiter in the ninth house may benefit either
 the clergy or the gentlemen of the long robe, or may presignify
■commercial prosperity, for it does not follow that all will equally
 benefit thereby. Hence the true reading of a figure is often
 rendered difficult to accomplish beforehand. Moreover, before
.giving judgment on the figure of the vernal ingress it is
 imperative to examine that of the new Moon nearest thereto.
 If both figures coincide in their pre-signification, judgment may
 be given with confidence; when they differ greatly, very careful
discrimination will be required to determine which to prefer.
 As a general rule, we should regard the ingress as having the
more important signification, unless the new or full Moon nearest
thereto happen to he an Eclipse. Ptolemy regarded the new Moon
 nearest the vernal equinox as having the most important pre­
signification, and Zadkiel I. followed Ptolemy’ s injunction to
 this effect in the first few annual editions of his Almanac, but
 afterwards relied more on the figures for the Solar ingresses, so
 we may take it that his experience was in favour of the latter.
 The present editor (since 1876) of Zadhiel's Almanac relies
chiefly on the Solar ingresses when no eclipse visible in England
happens to nearly coincide.
                                   282




                      CHAPTER                III.



   ON     THE       NEW        MOON         OF      THE      YEAR.

  “ Let no man, therefore, judge you in meat, or in drink, or in respect of
a holiday, or of the N ew Moos, or of the Sabbath days:       which are a
SHADOW OF THINGS TO COME.” — St . PAUL.

T he Neomenia, or New Moon of the Year, is that nearest to-
the Sun’s ingress into Aries (the vernal equinox),              It was
observed as a festival, with great solemnity, in the earliest ages
of the world and by the most ancient nations. The Israelites as
well as the Pagans celebrated it. The 5th and 6th verses of the
20th chapter of the first book of Samuel show that it was kept
with greater solemnity than the ordinary new moons, all of
which were celebrated by the Israelites.               Had it not been
found, by observation, that the new moon was really “ a shadow
of things to com e” — especially when it happened to be an
eclipse— no celebration of it would have continued to be-
observed by either the Israelites or by the Pagans.
   Ptolemy says (Ashmand’s translation) :—
    “ In the ecliptic, yvhich, as a circle, has in fact no actual or
definite beginning, the two equinoctial and the two tropical
points, marked by the equator and the tropical circles, are-
 reasonably assumed as beginnings..........................
    “ Although the foregoing arrangement has been adopted by
 men of science to denote the commencement of the several
 seasons of the year, it yet seems to be more consonant to nature,
 and more consistent with the facts, that the combined positions
 of the Sun and the new or full Moon which happens when the-
 Sun is nearest to the points above mentioned, should mark the
 four beginnings ; and more especially if such combined positions
 should produce eclipses: thus, from the new or full Moon
 taking place when the Sun is nearest to the first point o f
 Aries, the spring should be dated; from that, -when the Sun is
 nearest to the first point of Cancer, the summer ; from that
 when he is nearest to the first point of Libra, the autumn ;
 and from that when he is nearest to the first point of
 Capricornus, the winter. The Sun not only produces the
 general qualities of the seasons, but regulates the significations
                  ON TH E   NEW   MOON OF TH E    YE A R .      283

 with regard to the excitations of the winds, as wrell as other
 general occurrences more or less subjected to occasional
 variation. All these general effects are usually brought about
 by the new or full Moon which takes place at the aforesaid
 points, and by the configurations then existing between the
 luminaries and the planets; but there are certain particular
 consequences which result from the new and full Moon in every
 sign, and from the transits of the planets, which require-
 monthly investigation.”
     Although not giving the New Moon of the Year precedence
  over the vernal equinox, our experience teaches that it must not
  be overlooked. There is no doubt that germination is regulated
  by the combined influences of the Sun and Moon, and that
  unless they be taken advantage of for sowing (just before the new
  moon), good crops do not follow.1 As Solomon said, “ there is
  a time to sow and a time to reap.” The ancients recognised
  the fact that the Moon had great influence on germination, etc.,
  hence the myth of Isis. The neglect of this fact has led to the
  failure of crops, the loss of cattle, the dry rot in timber, etc.
     Haly insisted that “ we are to judge the alteration of the
  weather from the various configurations and positions of the
  planets at certain times, especially at the conjunction and
  prevention of the luminaries before the Sun’s entrance into
 Aries.” In this he followed Ptolemy’s injunctions. Haly said
 that if Saturn be in one of the angles at the new moon,
 essentially dignified, especially in the midheaven, it presignifies
 “ a various and diverse temper of air, thick and dark clouds ; in
 hot weather lessening of h ea t; in wdnter, the cold augmented.”
    If Mars be so placed, “ the heat in summer shall be
 increased; the cold in winter diminished; the spring or
 autumn shall incline to heat rather than cold.”
    If Jupiter, Venus, or the Moon be so placed, “ a temperate,
 good, and wholesome a ir ; and everything that is sowm or
 planted in the earth shall increase and fructify well.”
    Again, if Mercury be so placed, or in one of the signs of the
 airy triplicity, at any new or full moon, “ it denotes much
change of air, great and high winds and very hurtful.
    At the same time, Haly enjoined particular attention to the
planetary positions at the ingress of the Sun into the cardinal
signs. The student is advised to give precedence to the figure
for the vernal equinox.


               1 Vide Urania, April, 1880, pp. 117 —119.
                                 284




                      CHAPTER               I Y.



     NECESSARY                 CONSIDERATIONS
               BEFORE            JUDGMENT.

          “ Celestial and immortal Powers !
            0 ! aid my pen. What in me is dark
            Illumine : while I presume to treat
            Of fate and chance and change in sublunary
            Things.” — M i l t o n .

 T he Map of the H eavens for the moment of ingress of the
 Sun into the sign Aries being carefully drawn, for the seat of
 government, there are certain considerations to be entertained
before proceeding to give judgment thereon.
    In the diagram given in Chapter II, it is seen that the first
 house or ascendant bears relation to the people, their condition
and general state of health; and the tenth house (upper
meridian) to the Monarch and the Government. The planet
ascending and the Moon (unless Cancer be in the meridian) are
the signiticators of the people, the planet culminating is the
signiflcator of the Government.
   If the planet ascending be in benefic aspect with one or both
of the fortunes (Jupiter and Venus), swift in motion and more
than 17° distant from the. sun; or, if the Moon be so placed,
then judge that the people will be prosperous, healthy, and safe
in their possessions during the rule of that ingress. On the
other hand, if the planet ascending, or the Moon, be under the
Sun’s beams, and afflicted by one orrnore of the infortunes (Mars
Saturn, and Uranus), then judge that the peoxsle will be
unfortunate, sickly, and insecure in their possessions.
   Again, if there be an evil planet in the ascendant (Mars is not
so evil for England, when rising, for he is the ruling planet of
this country), judge that the season will be unhealthy, and that
some misfortune will fall on the people. But, if a fortune
ascend, free from the evil rays of the infortunes, and receive the
application of the Moon by conjunction, sextile or trine aspect,
then judge that the people will be very prosperous, successful,
.and secure.
          N EC ESSARY CON SIDERATION S   BE FO R E   JU D G M E N T.   28 B-

   If an evil planet in the eighth house afflict either the Moon or
the planet ascending, judge that there will be great mortality
during the rule of such ingress. If the afflicting planet bo
Saturn, rheumatism, consumption, catarrh, and paralysis will be
very fatal (according to the nature of the sign occupied by I?) t
if Mars, then acute fever, small-pox, and murderous outrages will
cause great mortality ; if Mercury (afflicted); mania or epilepsy
will be very prevalent; if Uranus, peculiar accidents, cholera (if
in uti), or diphtheria (if in X ) will prove fatal.
   If the Moon or planet ascending be afflicted by Mars in the-
seventh house, there will be great danger of wrar, and the people-
will be much annoyed by their enemies. If by Saturn and Mars-
conjoined in Taurus, Gemini, Leo, or Scorpio, in the lower
meridian, there will be great danger of earthquakes, and of deaths,
by accidents iD mines and fall of houses and buildings.
   The ancients said that, “ If the ascending sign he Aries and
Mars afflicted, the people of countries and towns ruled by T will
be afflicted with misfortunes, by heat or drought, and brain-
fever ; if Scorpio ascend, they will be afflicted by water (Hoods ?),.
venemous creatures, etc.
    “ If the ascending sign be Taurus, and Venus afflicted, there
will be extremity of cold and snow, the fruits destroyed, e tc.: if’
Libra, the people will suffer by storms of wind, pestilential air,
etc.
    “ If the ascending sign be Gemini, and Mercury afflicted, the
people under rt wall suffer through corrupt air, and high winds,
 also obstruction of the lungs and bronchial tubes: if Virgo, the
people under rty will suffer through great cold and dryness,
scarcity of the fruits of the earth, affections of the heart and
abdominal organs.
    “ If Cancer ascend, and the Moon be afflicted and weak, the
people under the jurisdiction of S5 shall be molested with pains
in the head and breast; and there shall be much damage by
excessive rain.
    “ If Leo ascend;' and the Sun be afflicted, people under St
 shall be subject to damage through extreme heat and drought,
warm pestilential air; and diseases of the heart and brain shall
 be very prevalent.
    “ If Sagittarius ascend, and Juptier be' afflicted, people under
  f will be afflicted with infirmities in the head and legs, and
fevers; if Pisces ascend, the places ruled by it shall suffer from
inundations, and grievous infirmities in the head and feet, gout
and dropsy.
:286                TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


     “ If CaprUornus ascend and Saturn be afflicted, the places
  subject to kf shall be visited with extreme cold and dry weather,
  and sterility, and the people with grief and diseases of the joints :
  if Aquarius, the places subject thereunto shall suffer by over
  moist air and high winds; and the people shall have many
  infirmities in their legs and heads.”
     Since the limitation of the power of the reigning Monarch
 .and the exaltation of that of the Government, in a free country,
  the determination of the significator of the monarch has become
  rather difficult. In the case of an absolute monarch, we should
  undoubtedly take the planet in the midheaven, as his
 .significator. The tenth house may be taken as signifying the
  Government in a general sense.
     The ancients took the Sun to represent the reigning monarch ;
 .Juptier, the rich and n oble; Mars, the military ; Saturn, the
  priests; Yenus, w om en; Mercury, scribes, lawyers, students,
  merchants, and artists ; and the Moon, the common people.
     The Arabian astrologers had an aphorism to the effect that
 “ if the significator of the king be under the Sun’s beams, there
 is much danger of his decease during that revolution ” ; where­
 upon Ramesey remarked that he should rather “ judge his kingly
 power to be then near its end, or likely to be much eclipsed, for
 there are many signifieators to be considered before j udging as to
 the death of the king which ought never to be pronounced on bare
 testimony; besides, were this admitted, we should consequently
-conclude by the same rule, the death of a whole senate where
 there is no king.” If the Bun alone had been taken as the
 significator of the king, it could not be under its own beams,
 hence the Arabian astrology must have taken the ruler of the
 sign in the meridian as the significator of the monarch. Be it
 remembered that we are writing of Solar inr/resses, and not of
 Solar eclipses.
    Ramesey says: “ When the sign in the tenth house is Leo and
 the Sun happens to be at the same time afflicted by the con­
 junction, square, or opposition of Mars, especially if g be ruler
 of the eighth house or therein located, or conjoined with or
 opposed by Saturn, danger of death of the reigning monarch is
 presignified.” An instance of this is to be found in the figure
 for the moment of the Sun’s ingress into Libra at Cabul, 1878.
 The sign Leo 15° culminated, and the Sun was in opposition to
 Saturn and in conjunction with Mars. Shere Ali, the Ameer of
 Afghanistan, having frittered away the weeks of grace generously
.allowed him by the British, found his country invaded, fled
           N EC ESSARY CONSIDERATIONS BE FO R E   JU D G M E N T .   287

from his capital in December, 1878, and died in February,
 1879.
    To ascertain which planet is “ lord of the year ” or chief
significator, say the ancients, “ first see if there be any planet in
an angle, if so, it is lord of the year (or the quarter, as the case
may be). If there be more than one of the planets in angles,
take that which is strongest as lord of the year. If there be
 none of the heavenly bodies in either of the angles, see if there
be one in the eleventh, ninth, fifth, or third house (in the order
named). If there be none in either of the last named houses,
take the Sun if in an angle by day, or the Moon by night, to be
■chief ruler of the year— unless (says Haly) the lord of the
ascendant be also lord of the sign containing the Sun, or the
Moon by night, if so, then the lord of the ascendant shall be lord
of the year.
    “ If the lord of the year be free from impediment, well
dignified and well aspected, the year shall be plentiful,
temperate and healthy, the people in good condition, fortunate
and successful. If the lord of the year be impedited, afflicted
and unfortunate, judge the contrary, especially if the Moon
■concur in the signification.”
    Bonatus gave more than fifty rules for ascertaining which
planet is lord of the year. Bamesey’s opinion was that either
the planet ruling the ascending sign or the one having dignities
therein, whichever may be the stronger, is lord of the year.
    In my opinion, founded on over forty years’ study of this
branch of astrology, the planet ascending or in the midheaven ; and
i f none, one in the fourth or seventh house and receiving the applica­
tion of the Moon, or the sextile, square or trine, of the Sun, is lord
of the year. If there be no planet in either the ascendant or
midheaven, take the one in the descendant or lower meridian.
If there be no planet in an angle, no planet must be taken as lord
•of the year, however essentially dignified, unless it be con­
figurated with either the Sun or Moon. A planet in the lower
meridian has chief signification as to the general character of
the weather of the ensuing quarter, unless there be a planet in
one of the other angles configurated with both the sun and
moon.
    My forecasts have been based on these last-named rules, for
many years past.
    In diurnal figures chief attention must be paid to the position
and configurations of the S u n ; in nocturnal, to those of the
Moon— so say the ancients.
288                       TH E     T E X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y .


   When Libra ascends and Yenus happens to be afflicted and.
weak, trouble will fall especially on women during the ensuing
quarter, and places ruled by Libra will have many misfortunes.
   When Mars and Saturn happen to be in conjunction or in
mutual square or opposition, especially if from angles, trouble
will fall on the places ruled by the sign or signs occupied by
them, however fortunate the figure may be in other respects. If
they be in signs of human form, much mortality and many troubles
will fall on mankind. If in conjunction in Virgo, or if one of
these planets be located in -tig and in square or opposition with the
other, great mortality from intestinal diseases, or in warfare,
will most probably follow. If at the same time one of these-
planets afflict the Sun in the tenth house (or if Leo be in the
tenth house and the Sun be afflicted by         or Tj) danger to the
chief ruler (king, queen, or president) is presignified.
   The foregoing instructions being carefully studied, it will
render them easier to comprehend and remember if we take a
Solar Ingress as an example. A better one for the purpose-
could not well be found than that of 1884, from which the
predictions published in Zadkiel's Almanac and so strikingly
fulfilled, were made.
   To find the time at which the Sun enters Aries, in 1884, this
is the process :—
Sun’s longitude, March 20th... 0 18 0*8 ...               cy 0 0 0-0-
                       19th...359 18 27-8 ... O March 19th...359 18 27-S

      Motion in 24h        ..............      59 33‘0                                    41 32-2

  Then, by proportional logarithms :—
                            As 59' 33" (a.c.)               ... 9’51901
                            To 41 32-2                     ... -63684
                            So 24h                         ... -87500

                       To 16h 44m 25-32s = 1-03151
  This is equivalent to 4h 44.4m a.m. of March 20th, 1884.
  To find the right-ascension of the meridian :—
                                                                                h. m.  s.
          Sidereal Time, March 19th .................................           23 49 44-67
                        A dd.................................................   16 44 25-12
          Difi. mean and sidl. time for ICh 44m 25s ......                          2 45'OU

                           B. A. of Meridian=249° 13' 42" or                    16   36   54-79
  .This is the right ascension of the meridian at Greenwich
Observatory, which is near enough for our purpose, there being
only 23s difference of time between the Royal Observatory and
the City of London (St. Paul’ s).
          N EC ESSARY CONSIDERATION S BE FO RE   JU D G M E N T.   289

   With a “ Table of Houses ” for Loudon the figure can now
be readily cast; the planets’ geocentric longitudes can be reduced
to the moment of ingress by the aid of Zadkiel's Ephemcris for
1884.
   The long, of the Moon is VT 2° 35', of Mercury X 20° 20', of
Venus 8 11° 9', of Mars ft, 2° 50', of Jupiter $ 24° 40' B., of
Saturn n 5° 4 ' 21", of Uranus njj 25° 56' B., and of Neptune
 8 19° 1'.
   The declinations of the heavenly bodies were :— j> 18° 30' 3 7 "
S., $ 5° 43' 2 7 " S., 2 16° 20' 1 5 " N., $ 22° 45' 50" N.,
 1+ 21° 50' 1 1 " N., I? 19° 35' 3 " N., $ 2° 20' 4 5 " N., and $
 15° 49' 5 0 " N.
   The first thing to determine is the distance of the planet Saturn
from the cusp of the fourth house (lower meridian), as it is of great
importance whether Tj is within 5° of it or not. If we compute the
 longitude of the midheaven and of Saturn to seconds, we shall
find that (n 10° 48' 50" being in the lower meridian) the
distance of h> is 5° 44' 29" in longitude. But distances from
either meridian are always reckoned by right ascension ; the B.A.
of     being 63° 25' 58" it follows that its meridian distance is
5° 47' 44". Saturn is, therefore, cadent from the lower meridian
and in the third house. Still, inasmuch as Saturn would in the
course of a few weeks transit the degree of longitude in the
lower meridian, it might be expected that it would then embarrass
the Government (by reason of its opposition to the upper
meridian) and bring trouble on London (being in Gemini).
Hence this effect was foretold at p. 13 of Zadkiel’s Almanac for
 1884, in the following words :—
   “ On the 13th inst. (May), Saturn, enters the longitude
,(n 10° 49') in the lower meridian at the vernal ingress ; this
presignifies trouble to the Government and an attempt to over­
throw it, which will go very near to succeed. What with home
and foreign questions, the Government will be in a great strait
this month. In London some turbulence or acts of violence
will be perpetrated, and Fenian machinations must be carefully
guarded against.”

  It is now a matter of history that the division in the House of
Commons on the Vote of Censure took place at l h 40m a.m. of
the 13th of May, 1884, 275 members voting for the motion and
only 303 against it, the Government being saved by a majority
of 28.    The deplorable muddle in Egypt aroused public
indignation against the Government, and nothing but a-
“ mechanical majority ” saved it from dissolution. On the 30th
290               THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


of May the Fenian explosions took place at Scotland Yard and St.
•James’ s Square, London. We venture to say that this is some­
thing like scientific precision in the way of forecasts, and that it
demonstrates the fact that the heavenly bodies are “ for signs of
the future,” or, literally, “ future events.” Let it be
remembered that we wrote these forecasts in the summer of
1883 and that they were in the hands of the public early in
October of that year. At p. 46 of Zadhiel's Almanac, it was stated
that
   “ This would be a very fortunate figure but for the proximity
of Saturn to the cusp of the fourth house, which presignifies,
says Ramesey, 1many great and high western winds; the birds
 of the air shall suffer detriment; also, men shall be afflicted
with diseases; there shall be earthquakes in the western parts.
 In the fourth house, and in Gemini there shall be many contro­
versies about rule and government; (having south latitude) a
 hot and dry air, little rain, and great mortality.’ These effects
of Saturn may be expected about the middle of May, when 1?
arrives at n 10° 49', and at the beginning of June, when the
 Sun conjoins 'with Saturn.
    “ The Sun being in trine aspect with Mars promises a fine and
 dry season ; a fortunate and victorious year for Old England,
 with the exception of the periods before-named. Mercury in the
 ascendant and in trine aspect with Jupiter, presignifies good
 trade and extension o f commerce; as, however, g is applying
 to the opposition of $ , there will be some loss to merchants
 through strange events, possibly through the disturbed state of
 the East.”
  An earthquake shock was felt in the Strand and north of
London, Colchester, the Midlands, etc, on the 22nd of April,
1884, at 9h 20™ a.m. In Essex great damage was done to
houses, etc. The weather of the spring and summer was very
dry, and, after the 10th of May, exceedingly hot, indeed the heat
and drought of 1884 will be long remembered. Controversies
about rule and government were waged with great spirit and
determination. Trade and commerce suffered through the
disturbed state of the East, in Egypt, and in China.
   As a fixed sign (Aquarius), ascended, the vernal ingress bears
chief rule for the whole year. The Sun is “ lord of the year”
being in an angle and in the sign of his exaltation (Aries). The
ruler of the ascendant (Saturn) being cadent, and the Moon in
square aspect with the Sun, presignified rhe unfortunate
condition, generally speaking, of the common people, especially
in the north where thousands of workmen and their families
were in a state of semi-starvation.
           N EC ESSARY CO N SIDE RA TION S BE FO R E   JU D G M E N T.   291

    The foregoing example will serve to prove that there is a great
•deal of truth in Mundane Astrology, and that its great useful­
 ness to mankind cannot be overrated. Indeed we may say that
 in the wide range of physical science there is no question of
 higher national importance than this. So far from a belief in
 astrology leading to fatality, it is the neglect of astrology that
tends to fatality ; for the laws of nature go on working until the
•catastrophe arrives which might have been foreseen, and its
•effects mitigated, had the warning of the heavens been attended
 to by statesmen and philosophers. Consider for a moment the
folly of the Government in 1854 in declaring war against Bussia,
 and commencing it at the time when evil influences obtained,
 in sending a fine army to the Crimea to perish in the frightful
winter of 1854-55. The planetary warnings were plain enough ;
 Zadkiel I. expressed his opinion, from the vernal ingress, 1854,
 that, “ W a r may be expected,” that “ extensive warfare and much
 shedding of blood in the dominions of the Great Turk” would result
 from the position of Mars in Virgo ; that the nativity of our good
•Queen and that of Napoleon III were both afflicted. Yet the
 Government drifted into war, and began it at the wrong time !
    To return to our aphorisms :—
    If the lord of the year be harmoniously configurated with the
 planet ruling the sign in which it is located, and free from
impediment, i.e., from affliction by the infortunes, the people
 will be “ in a good condition, quiet, secure, at peace, and
joyful.”
    If it be afflicted and have no configuration with its dispositor,
the people will be “ sad, fearful, molested with war, trouble, and
 anxiety.”
    According to the “ house ” in which the lord of the year
happens to be located will the good or evil condition of the
people be shown.
    If Saturn be lord of the year and well configurated, great
 impetus will be given to building ; the earth will be fruitful ;
 the people held in esteem by neighbouring nations ; and
 husbandmen will be successful. If Saturn be afflicted, there
 will be much cold weather ; grievous infirmities, losses, crosses,
 and sorrows ; great damage by -winds, storms, and rain (if other
 testimonies concur) ; much mortality among the aged ; and
 these evils will be most apparent in the places under the
■dominion of Vy, zz, and the sign in which T? is located.
    If Jupiter be lord of the year and happily configurated, the
rulers shall do justice, measures of reform will be enacted ;
292                TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


religious orders will prosper and do w e ll; the people will be
prosperous, happy and contented, and well affected towards
their rulers. But if Jupiter be afflicted, little benefit will accrue,
and indeed some misfortunes are likely to happen.
   If Mars be lord of the year and harmoniously aspected,
soldiers and all who bear arms will be fortunate and victorious
over their foes : the people will be prosperous (especially thoee
under Aries or Scorpio). But if Mars be afflicted, the contrary
will happen.
   If the Sun be lord of the year and free from affliction, the
monarch and nobles will be in good condition and may increase
their renown ; corn, cattle and birds will be plentiful; the people
generally prosperous and successful. If the Sun be afflicted by
the infortunes, the nobles will probably suffer diminution of
power and of privilege.
   If V enus be lady of the year and well configurated, women will
be advantaged; the people generally will thrive and be much
given to sport, recreation, and m irth; and marriages will be
numerous. If Venus be afflicted by Saturn or Uranus, women
will be unfortunate, cases of cruelty to them will be numerous,
the marriage-rate will be below the average; there will be little
of feasting and of merry-making, and the people generally will
not be fortunate.
   If Mercury be lord of the year and happily configurated,,
scientific men, artists, students, school-teachers, merchants and
tradesmen will have a successful year. If Mercury be afflicted,
judge the contrary.
    If the M o o n be lady of the year, well configurated, and free-
from affliction by the Sun or the infortunes, the people will be,
generally speaking, healthy and fortunate. But if afflicted,
judge the contrary.
   An example of the power of Mars as the significator of
violence and murder when situated in the seventh house at the
 solstice may be mentioned in the summer solstice, 1888. The-
 Sun’s ingress into the first point of Cancer took place at 0h 14m
 12s a.m., G.M.T., of June 21st. The R.A. of the M.C. is 18h 12m
48s "16 or 273° 10' 47" in arc, Capricornus 2° 55' culminating,
 and Aries 7° 29' ascending at Greenwich. The planet Mars is
 found in the seventh house, in Libra 17° O', near Uranus in =£=■
 13° 7 '. The Moon is in Scorpio 20° 8', on the cusp of the
 eighth house (that of death). The appalling murders in White­
 chapel took place during the ensuing quarter ; one woman was
 murdered on the 7th of August; another on the 3st o f
          N EC ESSARY   CO NSIDERATIONS B E FO RE   JU D G M E N T.   293

September, and two in the early morning of the 30th of the
same month ; all four women having their throats cut, and three
of them were mutilated, presumably by the same expert hand.
The excitement and horror caused by those murders were
unparalleled in London. In Zailkiel’s Almanac for 1888, page
50, will be found the following forecast:—
   “ Criminals will give a good deal of trouble, and robberies
with violence will be very numerous; in fact, murderous outrages
will be appalling.”
  Eobberies with violence were unusally numerous in that
summer quarter. The Whitehall murder and mutilation took
place in the same period.
                                   294




                        CHAPTER                V.


     ON THE PRESIGNIFICATION OF THE PLANET
        SATURN W HEN LORD OF THE YEAR.

   “ The evidence with which we see the future portrayed in the source o f
all truth, no more necessitates that future than does the image reflected in
the sight by a ship sailing down a stream, necessitate the motion of the
vessel.    D ante.


Saturn, according to Albumasar, is in nature, “ cold, dry,
melancholy, sombre, of grave asperity, and may be cold and
moist.”
   When Saturn is lord of the year and in the sign Aries, it
causes many great easterly winds, and scarcity of provisions.
If afflicted, it presignifies many thefts, highway-robberies, much
anxiety, sadness, and tribulation. If in evil aspect with Mars,,
very cold weather, epidemic diseases among sheep and cattle.
If Saturn be direct in motion and in one of the angles, much
rain or cold ; and discord between the various classes of society ;
if retrograde, the state and condition of the people will be
grievous; and if both Mars and the Moon be in evil aspect with
Saturn, there will be terribly cold weather, dissensions and
perhaps wars, and cattle will die. If Saturn have north latitude,
it presignifies a dense atmosphere and many dark clouds ; if the
latitude be south, cold weather and frost. If occidental (in regard
to the Sun), there will be earthquakes in the eastern parts.
   Saturn in Taurus, in an angle and direct in motion,,
 presignifies war or discord, chiefly in the places subject to 8
 and in the southern parts of the country for which the figure is
 cast; destruction of seeds and plants— unless the benefic
 aspects of the fortunes prevent it— a great prevalence of'
 caterpillars and worm s; destruction of houses in the southern
 parts and those ruled by 8 . If afflicted, much mortality,
 especially among the great. If afflicted by Mars and the Moon
 by asjoect, scarcity and mortality; if by conjunction, trouble and
 vexation to the rulers, and danger of war, especially if in the
 tenth house. If retrograde, destruction and violence.
    Saturn in Gemini and direct in motion in an angle,
 presignifies many great westerly winds, very sharp cold weather
        ON TH E   PR E SIG N IF IC A T IO N OF TH E PL A N E T   SA TU RN .   295

in winter ; the birds of the air will suffer detriment; men shall
be afflicted with diseases ; in summer corruption of air, thunder,
lightning and rain. If retrograde, discord is presignified ; earth­
quakes in the western parts. If in the fourth and in Gemini,
earthquakes in the western parts; if he be in aspect with the
ruler of the tenth house, there shall be many controversies and
dissensions about rule and government, and inundations by
which the fruits of the earth will be injured. If Saturn have
north latitude, there will be a foggy dark atmosphere, and
earthquakes chiefly in the western parts and places subject to
Gemini. If the latitude of I? be south, there will be a hot and
dry air, and little or no rain. If oriental, infirmities and
sickness and trouble to the nobles; if occidental, very dry air and
little rain.
    Saturn in Cancer, there shall be an increase of water, fish,
locusts (or caterpillars in our country), and worms. If Mars be
not in any aspect with Saturn, the weather will be very cold.
 If Saturn be retrograde, let the monarch beware of an attempt on
his life ; and if in aspect with Mars, there will be abundance of
rain or cold weather, and many shipwrecks, also death to fish in
the seas and rivers. If Saturn have north latitude, it presignifies
a scarcity of waters, a drought of fountains, and but little rain; if
south, trade will be unprofitable.            If oriental, dark and
unhealthy a ir; great cold in winter; damage to fruit by
northern winds ; if occidental, much rain.
    Saturn in Leo and having north latitude, presignifies much
rain and corruption of fruit, and trouble to rulers and people.
If oriental, much sickness ; if occidental, great mortality, the
more if I? be retrograde.
    S a t u r n in Virgo and in north latitude, presignifies a pleasant

and healthy air ; in south latitude, scarcity of rain and a drought
 of fountains. If oriental, women will suffer ; if occidental, acute
 and sharp fevers will follow.
    Saturn in Libra in north latitude, presignifies a hot and dry
 air, little or no rain, and a scarcity of waters ; in south latitude,
a pleasant and healthy air. If retrograde, infirmities to servants
 and the common people ; if direct, the fruits of the earth will be
 plentiful.
    Saturn in Scorpio, with north latitude it presignifies abun­
 dance of rain and increase of water in rivers and fountains ;
 with south latitude, a scarcity of provisions, especially fruits of
 the earth. If oriental, there will be many dissensions and
 quarrels among great m en; if occidental, destruction of ships
296                TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


 and loss of life to sailors. If retrograde, epidemic diseases; if
direct in motion, said some of the ancients, “ Babylon shall be safe.”
    If Saturn be in Sagittarius and in north latitude, it pre­
signifies increase of fountains and much cold in winter; if in
south latitude, less cold and rain. If oriental, noble and rich
men will be expatriated and have their estates confiscated; if
occidental, there will be many dissensions, quarrels, and war
between kings and great men. If retrograde, it will go ill with
all kinds of men and their affairs ; if direct, travellers by sea and
land shall be prosperous, safe, and successful.
   When S aturn is in Capricomus and in north latitude, the air
will be temperate and healthy, with moderate and seasonable
rains; in south latitude, there will be dark, cloudy, cold weather.
If oriental, there will be dissensions between the nobles and the
common people; if occidental, the fruits of the earth shall be
wasted and consumed by and through extremity of heat (in
summer) and creeping things, such as caterpillars and the like.
If retrograde, the common people will be angry and quarrelsome
 one with another; if direct, it presignifies the good condition of
the great, and that they shall bear themselves well towards all
 men and observe the law.
    Saturn when in Aquarius and in north latitude presignifies
much rain, frost, or cold weather according to the season ; in
south latitude, a scarcity of water in fountains and rivers. If
oriental, the common people will not thrive w ell; if occidental,
there will be many great fires. If retrograde, the evil will be
increased ; if direct, it presignifies the death of cattle breeders
 and large cattle.
    S a t u r n in Pisces and in north, latitude, presignifies many

tempestuous winds chiefly from the north, and very great cold
 in winter; in south latitude, storms and tempests at sea and
 many shipwrecks, injury to sailors and maritime people
 generally. When oriental, dissensions and discords among the
 great, also mortality amongst them ; occidental, the common
 people will exalt themselves above their superiors. If retrograde,
 there shall be many dissensions amongst religious men and
 theologians; if direct, men will be devout in their worship of
 the Almighty.
    Cardan said:— “ When Saturn is in Libra and Jupiter is in
 Cancer, great changes and alterations will happen in the world.
    “ A conjunction of Mars and Saturn in the sixth or eight
 house, especially in a humane sign (n , njj, first half of $ , or
 ¿c?), presignifies a great pestilence.”
                                   297




                        C H A P T E R VI.


     ON     THE       P R E S IG N IF IC A T IO N                 OF
                            J U P I T E R .


   We behold the things that we predict in the mirrors of eternal truth.”—-
                                                                   Dante.

J opitek— the largest planet of the Solar system, more than
•eleven times the diameter of the Earth and nearly one-tenth part
 of that of the Sun, the mass of if exceeding that of the earth
 1,428 times, its magnitude so vast that if the Earth, the Moon,
 Mercury, Venus, Mars, Saturn, Uranus and four of the largest
 planetoids could be combined they would hardly equal it—
 “ with mighty state the rival of the Sun ” — comes next in order
to Saturn in the aphorisms of the ancients as^to presignification.
■Jupiter is described as the greater fortune, as Saturn is the
greater infortune.
    When Jupiter happens to be lord of the year, in the sign
Aries, it presignifies that a new form of religion will arise in the
E ast; men shall observe religion and the law, be given to good
works ; the weather will be windy, seasonable, and favourable to
health; the fruits of the earth shall be plenteously produced. If
well aspected, it presignifies the prosperity of places subject to
 T • If afflicted, little benefit will accrue.
   Jupiter in Taurus, it presignifies fertility of the earth, a
temperate and good air, prevalence of southerly winds:
prosperity for the people and good feeling between them and the
nobles. If afflicted, little good will result.
   Jupiter in Gemini, well configurated, there will be extremely
warm air and much w ind; if in aspect with Mars, many
casualties by lightning; if in aspect with Saturn, corrupt air
and epidemic disease. If afflicted, no good will result.
   Jupiter in Cancer, the people and nobles shall be in a very
prosperous condition ; the air shall be pleasant and healthy, the
earth fruitful, the fruit good and wholesome; voyages shall be
pleasant and successful, generally. If afflicted, the good
resulting will be much less.
   Jupiter in Leo presignifies fine and warm weather, a good
harvest, and a dry season. If afflicted by Saturn or Uranus,
298               TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y .


there will be tempests, and great thunderstorms; and earth­
quakes in places under S\,. If in aspect with Mars, a drought of'
fountains and great heat in summer.
   J upiter in Virgo, men shall be sociable and delight in
agriculture ; the fruits of the earth shall be plentiful; southerly
winds will prevail. If afflicted, fruit will soon r o t ; and little
benefit to mankind will result.
   Jupiter in Libra presignifies a temperate and healthy air,
warm winds, pleasant showers for the fruits of the earth. I f
afflicted by Mars, there shall be much thunder and lightning in
summer, and casualties therefrom in the western parts.
   Jupiter in Scorpio presignifies a good clear air; the season
shall be plentiful; heat in summer, cold in wnnter ; a prevalence,
of northerly w7ind. If retrograde or afflicted, the good will be-
lessened, and perchance there will be shipwrecks, through
tempests, and some danger of war.
   Jupiter in Sagittarius presignifies a temperate air in the.
 beginning of winter, but at the end thereof great cold ; but few
 high winds. If in north latitude, little rain and pleasant air ; i f
south, gusts of wind. If oriental, the nobles and rich men shall
 be in good and joyful condition ; if occidental, their dignity and
 renown shall be increased. If retrograde, travelling will hardly
 be safe or successful; if direct in motion, travelling by sea and
 land shall be safe ; fish shall be plentiful. If afflicted by Tj or
      there wall be snow7 and frost in the spring doing great,
 damage to fruit.
    J upiter in Capricornus presignifies a plentiful year, pleasant
 air, and many great southerly wrinds ; success and profit to the
 common people. If afflicted or retrograde, no good will result;
and storms will do great damage.
  Jupiter in Aquarius presignifies a temperate, pleasant air, and
pleasant showers; a prosperous year. If afflicted, damage by
high winds, storms, rain, or snow, according to the season.
    Jupiter in Pisces, the year shall be plentiful; the people,
successful, sailors and merchants fortunate and prosperous ; the.
air temperate and pleasant, with seasonable fructifying show7ers ;
abundance of fish. If afflicted, there w7ill be much thunder and
rain, and possibly destruction of fish.
    Jupiter in the ascendant— whether or not he be lord of the year
— free from affliction, presignifies that the people will be.
prosperous, healthy, jovial, honoured and at peace. I f
afflicted, the condition of the people will not be so good as when.
 If. happens to be strong, and well configurated.
                                       299




                       CHAPTER                    YII.



    ON    THE          PR E S IG N IF IC A T IO N                          OF
                                  MARS.

          11Mars, the fierce god of war,
            Of discord dire and slaughter;
            Bellona’s aid, t h e scourge of Providence.” — C o n g r e v e .

T h e R ed P lan et — so-called from the red appearance of its-
disc, being in fact the ruddiest star in the heavens— M a r s , “ the
god of war,” “ the star of strength,” “ the star of the uncon­
quered will,” the H ercules of the Chaldfeans, has very potent
influence over the affairs of this world, when in certain
positions. Evidence of its influence when in perigee will be
found in the first volume (p. 21) of this work.
   Of its symbolism, Dante1 says :—
   “ Mars dries up and burns things, because its heat is like to
that of the fire ; and this is the reason why it appears fiery in
colour, sometimes more and sometimes less, according to the
density and rarity of the vapours which follow it, which
sometimes take fire of themselves as is declared in the first book
of Meteors. [And, therefore, Albumasar says, that the ignition
of these vapours signifies death of kings, and change of
Empires, being effects, of the dominion of Mars. And accord­
ingly Seneca says that at the death of the Emperor Augustus a
ball of fire was seen in the heavens. And in Florence, at the
beginning of its downfall, a great quantity of these vapours,
which follow Mars, were seen in the air in the form of a
cross.] ”
  There is no doubt about the combativeness of Mars-men ; and
the most destructive and dangerous lunatics are those under
Mars’s influence.
  Dante describes the Heaven of Mars as the abode of martyrs
and crusaders who died fighting for the faith, in harmony with
Plato’s idea that the soul returned to its proper planet:— “ The
Creator, when he had framed the universe, distributed to the

                              1C onvito , II., 14.
300               TH E   T E X T -B O O K OF AS TR O LO G Y .


stars an equal number of souls, appointing to each soul its
several star.”
   It has been already stated that Mars is the ruling planet and
Aries the ruling sign of Britain, hence to this day the British
are, as Claudius Ptolemy declared, “ impatient of restraint,
lovers of freedom, warlike, industrious, imperious, cleanly, and
high-minded.” It is to this that England owes her naval
•supremacy, to the native courage of her sailors and their
wandering propensities that lead them to “ plough the ocean
and to tempt the winds.” Had Manilius, the Augustan poet,
lived after the days of Nelson (who was born with $ rising in
 nq), Blake, Boscawen, Brenton, Lord Cochrane, and Drake, he
could not have better described the attributes of our naval
heroes than when writing of the ship in Aries, in his fifth book.
It is probable that Cromwell was born when Mars was rising in
Aries. When Mars is passing through either Aries, Leo,
Scorpio, or Capricornm, or in the ascendant at a Solar ingress or
eclipse (at London), the arms of England are victorious.
   The following are the aphorisms of the ancients (revised,
rewritten, and condensed) as to the presignification of Mars
when lord of the year:—
   When M ars is lord of the year and in Aries, free from the
evil rays of Saturn and Uranus, free from combustion, and
direct in motion, it presignifies that the people shall be in a
■secure condition, victorious over their enemies; the air
temperate and the earth fruitful. If in north latitude, there will
he little or no rain and a hot a ir; if in south latitude, much
thunder and lightning. If oriental, war is likely, and discord
among the nobles; if occidental, troubles and quarrels. If
afflicted by Saturn, there will be many great winds, chiefly
from the east, little or no rain; quarrels among m en ;
inflammation of the eyes, smallpox, scarlet-fever, or measles.
If retrograde, there will be much sickness.
   M ars in Taurus presignifies many great southerly winds,
much rain, thunder and lightning; the fruits of the earth
injured ; the cattle unhealthy. If in north latitude, much rain,
but less harm to the fruits of the earth ; if in south latitude,
many gusts of wind, and destruction of fruit. If oriental, there
shall be peace in the southern and western parts; if occidental,
much mortality and sickness, especially to women. If retro­
grade, many children and young people will die (probably from
smallpox or scarlatina).
   M ars in Gemini presignifies many casualties from thunder-
                ON TH E   PR ESIG N IFIC ATIO N   OF M AR S.     301

 storms, and excessive h eat; quarrels, thefts and robberies in
the northern and western parts ; the monarch and rulers shall
overcome their enemies ; inflammation of the ears and pustules-
If in north latitude, much rain ; if in south latitude, a drought
of fountains and scarcity of water. If oriental, skin diseases,
will be prevalent; if occidental, trouble to lawyers, writers,
judges and merchants. If direct, much slandering; if retrograde^
dissensions and quarrels amongst professors of religion.
   M ars in Cancer presignifies many shipwrecks; dissensions
and quarrels in the western parts; heavy taxation; fevers,,
throat-diseases, chest affections, e tc .; the air unhealthy; rain
scarce; many cattle and horses will d ie; and scarcity of the
fruits of the earth. If in north latitude, the weather will be-
cold and d ry ; in south latitude, many gusts of wind destructive
to trees. If oriental, mortality amongst cattle. If direct, the.
air will be healthier and pleasanter; if retrograde, there will be.
much crime.
   M ars in Leo presignifies war and effusion of blood, ehiefty in
places under SI ; scarcity of provisions, especially in the eastern
parts ; mortality amongst young men. If in north latitude, a
scarcity of water; if in south latitude, there will be no want of
water. If oriental, damage to cattle ; if occidental, fish will die..
If retrograde, loss and detriment to great and rich men ; if direct,.
much wind from the west.
   M ars in Virgo presignifies war and effusion of blood in the
northern parts and in places subject to u jj; plenty of
provisions; also diseases of the eyes, and much mortality
amongst women. If in north latitude, damage to fruits and
seeds ; much sickness; if south, profusion of fruit. If oriental,
mortality among the aged ; if occidental, great and tempestuous
winds. If direct in motion, prosperity of the great and rich ;
if retrograde, -war will quickly follow.
   M ars in Libra presignifies much wind, rain, and mist,
southerly winds prevalent ; mortality amongst men ; scarcity
of the fruits of the earth, of corn and w ine; danger of war,
quarrels and discord amongst men, and tribulation. If in
no.rtli latitude, much thunder and lightning; if in south
latitude, much sickness. If oriental, war, and dissension
amongst noble and rich m en ; if occidental, the rich and noble
will be safe and secure. If direct in motion, the rich will do
w e ll; if retrograde, there will be much' sickness among the
great.
   M ars in Scorpio presignifies misty or cloudy weather, much
'302                   TH E T E X T -B O O K   OF AS T R O L O G Y .


  cold in winter, excessive heat in summer, and injury to seeds
 and herbs; men will suffer in their eyes; thefts, robberies,
  quarrels and murders will be numerous. If in north latitude, a
  scarcity of water ; in south abundance of water. If oriental,
  much sickness and a prevalence of complaints under rq ; if
■occidental, little piety among men. If retrograde, many troubles;
  if direct in motion, affairs will be better.
     M ars in Sagittarius presignifies war in the eastern parts ;
  mischief to places under f ; a good deal of sickness ; little rain,
  extreme cold in winter and spring; injury to fruit-trees, plants
. and herbs ; the year generally will be marked by scarcity ; bees
  will be destroyed and honey scarce. If well aspected, such as
  bear arms shall be in good condition, fortunate, and successful.
  Albumasar said that if Mars be in one of the first fifteen degrees
  of f , and lord of the year (or in n , nig, or zz), it presignifies
  war, tumult, and mischief to kings and nobles—unless in benefic
  aspect with i f . If the latitude of $ be north, it presignifies a
  good, pleasant, and temperate a ir; if south, merchants and
  tradesmen will gain. If oriental, peace and security; if
■occidental, abundance of fruit. If direct, mortality amongst
  horses and oxen ; if retrograde men will suffer with affections of
  the head, neck, and thighs.
     M ars in Oapricornus presignifies danger of war, trouble, and
  much mortality in the eastern parts; rain in due season, plenty
  of provisions and fruit. If in north latitude, much snow in
  winter; in south, a close, hot air. If oriental, “ let the Roman
  Emperor have a care of a stab, and so much the more certain
  will this be if J) be in the 8th house or with the lord thereof, or
  with <ff in an angle, arid If prevent it not, unless the Almighty
  miraculously show His infinite mercy unto him ; ” if occidental,
  boils and carbuncles will be prevalent. If direct in motion,
  plenty ; if retrograde, want.
     M ars in Aquarius presignifies trouble; abundance of rain,
  snow and cold in winter ; a probability of dethroning of kings
  and great men, chiefly in places under zz\ a scarcity of
  provisions, especially in the western parts, unless $ be in aspect
  with 2 • If in north latitude, much snow and cold winter; if
- south, much heat, but a thick atmosphere. If oriental, the great
  will be prosperous and jov ia l; if occidental, not so well.                   If
  direct, there shall be many caterpillars, and such like creatures
  shall destroy trees; if retrograde, very hot summer, and some
■detriment to fruit.
     M ars in Pisces p re sig n ifie s m u ch s n o w a n d rain in w in te r a n d
                ON TH E   PR ESIG N IFIC ATIO N   OF M AR S.     303

spring, rain in summer and autumn ; destruction of fish, of
which men shall catch m any; danger of assassination to kings
and great men ; scarcity of the fruits of the earth ; and generally
it will be a turbulent and hard period for man and beast. If in
north latitude, the air will be good, pleasant and healthy; if south,
there will be many caterpillars, and locusts in some places. If
oriental, it presignifies the slaughter of great men ; if occidental,
many troubles will fall on servants. If direct in motion, the
people will be safe and healthy ; if retrograde, traders will profit.
    M ars in the ascendant presignifies that the people of that
•country will gain by war and overcome their enemies during that
revolution. If Mars be weak or afflicted, there will be danger of
riot, bloodshed, and even of civil war if other testimonies
•concur.
    Guido Bonatus said :— “ I have experienced that a planet is in
an angle to the space of 5° beyond the cusp; for as once I
•sought the revolution of a year, I found Mars in the 5th deg.
.beyond the cusp of the angle of the earth in Capricornm, south
latitude, which presignified the killing of the Roman Emperor ;
and acquainted him with it, for his court was at Grossietti and
I at F olirii; and it was found that Pandulfus de Farsenella and
 Theobaldus Franciscus, and divers others of the secretaries had
•conspired to slay him, and none of his own astrologers had
 observed it, because they did not believe that Mars was in an
.angle, for he was 4° 58' beyond the cusp in their opinion;
 however, after a planet shall be removed from the cusp or line
 of any angle full 5° or more, he is to be accounted cadent from
 that angle.” — Aphorism 58, translation published in 1676.
    Cardan wrote :— “ If wars be presignified, note the angle of the
 figure wherein Mars is posited, for from that part the enemies
 will come.”
                                     804




                     CHAPTER                 VI II .



   ON     TI-IE    PRESIGNIFICATION                OF     THE      SUN.

        “ Through divers passages, the world’s bright lamp
          Rises to mortals, but through that which joins
          Four circles with the threetoid cross,1 in best
          Course, and in happiest, constellation set
          He comes, and to the worldly wax best gives
          Its temper and impression.”— D a n t e .

“ T he S un that giveth light looketh upon all things, and the
work thereof is full of the glory of Jehovah.” 3
   The ancients gave precedence to Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars,
before the Sun; Yenus, Mercury, and the Moon, following the
“ greater light ” — i.e., in the order of their motion. This-
explains the meaning of the fourth verse of the nineteenth
psalm, which, after declaring that the “ rule ” of the planets
has gone forth through all the earth, says: “ In the midst o f
them a dwelling-place is established for the Sun.” The word
translated in the authorised version “ the heavens” really
means “ the planets.” It is not true of the heavens that the
Sun is in the midst of them, but as regards motion the Sun is
in the midst of the planets (as known to the ancients), having
Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, on one side, and Venus, Mercury,
and the Moon on the other.3
   Claudius Ptolemy declared that “ the power of the Sun
predominates, the others either co-operate with his power or
diminish its effect.”
   If the Sun be lord of the year in Aries (at the vernal equinox),
said the ancients, free from the malefic aspect of the infortunes,
it shall be well with the common people; the year shall be
fruitful; kings and grandees shall prosper, and shall overcome

  1 “ Where the four circles, the horizon, the zodiac, the equator, and the
equinoctial colure, join ; the last three intersecting each other so as to form
three crosses, as may be seen in the armillary sphere.” —Cary’s translation.
  3 Kcclesiasticus. xliii., 10.
  3 Vide Zadkiel’s Almanac for 1861, art. “ The 19th Psalm newly
rendered.”
               ON TH E   PR ESIG N IFIC ATIO N   OF T H E   SUN.   305

   their enemies, and do justice. If the Sun be afflicted, judge the
  contrary. Places under the rule of v will be chiefly affected.
      If the Sun be lord of the summer quarter (in Cancer), seafar­
  ing men, and the inhabitants of places ruled by qs will be
  prosperous. If afflicted, judge the contrary.
     If the S un be lord of the autumn quarter (in Libra) and free
  from affliction, people under      will prosper. If afflicted, judge
  the contrary.
     If the Sun be lord of the winter quarter (in Capricornus) and
  free from affliction), the people under vy will be prosperous and
  secure. Farmers and cattle-dealers will do well. If afflicted,
  judge the contrary.
     The Sun can never be oriental or occidental in the same sense-
 as the planets, for they are thus reckoned according to their
 position in regard to the Sun. Nor can the Sun be either
 retrograde or stationary.
     The Sun when in the ascendant presignifies (if free from
 affliction) a fortunate year and advancement for the nation ; if
 afflicted, the great will suffer in health and power.
     The Sun in the second house presignifies waste of the public
 revenue, and that the monarch or rulers will lead a retired and
 miserly life.
     The S un in the third house presignifies social pleasures and
 harmony among the people.
     The Sun in th&fourth house presignifies (if afflicted or in v )
 detriment to vegetables; degradation of some great men, or
 lessening of the power of the nobles; and a deficiency of
 rainfall.
     The Sun in the fifth house presignifies detriment to women
 and children, unless the © be extremely well configurated.
     The Sun in the sixth house presignifies a prevalence of affec­
 tions of the head and eyes ; sadness to the monarch and rulers
losses through servants; and a lessening of the privileges of the
 nobles— especially if © be afflicted.
     The Sun in the seventh house is not of good omen of good
feeling between the monarch or government and the people; and.
presignifies that the monarch will live retired.
    The Sun in the eighth house presignifies mortality among the
great, and a lessening of their privileges, especially if © be in
evil aspect with the ruler of the eighth.
    The Sun in the ninth house presignifies an increase of travell­
ing, and (if free from affliction) prosperity for churchmen^
lawyers, and scientific men.
306                 TH E T E X T -B O O K OP A S T R O L O G Y .


   The S un in the tenth house (especially when in v and
harmoniously configurated with the fortunes) presignifies the
glory, honour, renown, and prosperity of the monarch and chief
rulers, and a fortunate year.
   The S un in the eleventh house, free from affliction, presignifies
that the people shall be merry and friendly, shall achieve their
desires, and that there shall be an excellent understanding
between them and their rulers. If © be in T and happily con­
figurated with $ , soldiers, surgeons and engineers will receive
honours and do well.
   The S un in the twelfth house (unless extremely well aspected)
presignifies losses, crosses, and perchance lessening of privileges
to the great, and an ill-feeling between them and the people.




                          C H A P T E R                    IX.



ON     THE       PEE SIGNIFICATION                                      OF         VENUS.

                               “ T h a t star w h ic h view s
               N o w o b v io u s , n o w a v erse, t h e S u n .” — D a n t e .


V enus , according to Dante, plays with or caresses the Sun,
“ now behind and now in front.”           When it follows it is
Hesperus, the evening star; when it precedes it is Phosphor, the
morning star.
   Brunetto Latini1 says that Venus “ always follows the Sun,
and is beautiful and gentle, and is called the Goddess of Love.”
   Albumasar s a y s “ Venus is cold and moist, and of
phlegmatic temperament, and signifies beauty, liberality,
patience, sweetness, dignity of manners, love of dress and
ornaments of gold and silver; delectation and delight in singing,
gladness, and dancing; skill in the game of chess; love of
 pleasure, of wine, and of children; observance of faith and
justice,” etc. Venus when afflicted and weak inclines to excesses.
 Albumasar says     “ All [these qualities] are not found in one
 man, but a part in one and part in another, according to Divine

                                   1   Tresor, I, c h . 3.
                 ON TH E   PR ESIG N IFIC ATIO N   OF V E N U S .   307

  Providence; and the wise man adheres to the good and over­
  comes the others.”
     In mundane astrology Venus is the harbinger of mirth, love,
  feasting, pleasure-seeking, and prosperity.
     V enus lady of the year in Aries, happily configurated and free
  from affliction, presignifies a temperate air, showers, and a fruit­
  ful season; general prosperity, public merrymaking, and
  national good fortune. If afflicted, not much good can be
 •expected.
     V enus in Taurus presignifies general prosperity, health and
  gladness; plenty of provisions and of fruits of the earth;
  pleasant air with moderate showers ; gain and security for
  women. If afflicted or retrograde, little good will result.
    V enus in Gemini presignifies health, happiness, and pros­
 perity ; fruit pleasant and plentiful; the air temperate. If
 .afflicted, no good will result.
    V enus in Cancer presignifies plenty of rain, and a plentiful
 year. If afflicted by Mars, Saturn, or Uranus, floods are to be
 feared.
    V enus in Leo presignifies a good time generally. If afflicted,
 a good deal of sickness is to be apprehended.
    V enus in Virgo presignifies plenty, and a pleasant season. If
 afflicted, no good can be expected.
    V enus in Libra presignifies a prosperous season, especially for
 places under      ; good health for the people and much merry­
 making. If afflicted, little good will result.
    V enus in Scorpio presignifies a tempeiate air, but plenty of
 rain. If afflicted there may be floods and detriment to the fruits
 of the earth.
    Venus in Sagittarius promises peace and prosperity, especially
 for the western parts. If afflicted, evil may result.
    V enus in Oapricornus presignifies prosperity ; little rain in the
 eastern parts, earth generally fruitful. If afflicted, little benefit
 must be expected.
    V enus in Aquarius presignifies happiness, peace, and pros­
perity ; a temperate air, and sufficient rain. If afflicted, high
winds and much rain may be expected.
    V enus in Pisces presignifies a plentiful season, sufficient rain
.and a temperate air. If afflicted, thunderstorms, heavy rains,
perchance floods, may follow, mortality amongst men and
women, and affections of the eyes.
    V enus in the ascendant, whether she be lady of the year or not,
well configurated, direct in motion, and free from the rays of
808                 TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y .


the malefies, presignifies a happy, prosperous, and healthy
season for the people ; advantage and benefits for women ; and
abundance of food.




                           C H A P T E R                X.



      ON   THE        P R E S IG N IF IC A T IO N                     OF
                            M E E C U E Y.

       “ ’Tis Jove’s world-wandering herald, Mercury.”— S h e l l e y .

M ebcuby — says Albumasar, in the introduction to his seventh
treatise, ninth division, wherein he treats of the natures of the
planets and their properties,— signifies desire of knowledge-
and of seeing secret things; foreknowledge of things future;
knowledge and profundity of knowledge; in profound books;
study of wisdom ; eloquence with polish of language ; subtlety of
genius; appetite for praise and fam e; desire of perfection
cunning of hand in all arts; practice of trade; concealing
thoughts; change of habits,” etc.
   In the heaven of M ercuby , Dante places the spirit of those-
who for the love of fame achieved great deeds ; he discriminates
between the direct or immediate inspirations of the Almighty,,
and those influences that come indirectly through the stars.
   In mundane astrology M ebcury is the herald of busy times,
advancement of science, literature, art, and inventions-—-when
strong and free from affliction, for $ is convertible, being good
when with Jupiter, and evil with Mars and Saturn.
   If M ercury be in conjunction with the Sun in Aries, it pre­
signifies plenty of wine; and if with Venus also, safety and
prosperity to women ; if with the Moon, plenty of fish ; if with
Mars, inflammation of the eyes, war, and bloodshed; and if with
 Saturn, much rain and abundance of waters. Generally
speaking, $ in v and lord of the year, presignifies a temperate,
or warm air, high winds, rather dearth than plenty; if
retrograde, much rain.
   M ercu ry in Gemini and supported b y Jupiter, presignifies a.
temperate air, pleasant breezes ; plenty and prosperity. If with
                ON TH E   FEESIG N IFICATJON   OF M E R C E R Y .   309

  Venus, much rain or m ist; a merry time, advancement of art
  and sciences. If with Mars, a stormy and warm season,
  damage by lightning and incendiary fires ; an unhealthy time,
 fever prevalent; murders, outrages, and danger of war. If with
  Saturn, much snow in winter and spring. If retrograde, many
  troubles and changes.
     M ercu ry in Cancer presignifies, if afflicted by Mars, war and
 bloodshed in the north-western parts, scarcity of provisions and
 of fruits of the earth; many shipwrecks; great storms; a
 prevalence of chest affection with expectoration of blood. If
 with Mars and Venus, murders of noblemen and women. If
 supported by Jupiter, a pleasant, healthy and prosperous
 season.
     M ercu ry in Virgo presignifies sufficient rain, a temperate air,
 plenty of corn and of fruits of the earth. If afflicted, places
 under wg will suffer many evils (according to the nature of the
 ■evil planet); cholera and diarrhoea.
    M ercu ry in Libra presignifies much wind, a temperate air,
and many changes. If retrograde, much rain. If afflicted, an
 evil period, much sickness, especially low fever and abdominal
 complaints.
    M e r c u r y in Sagittarius and configurated with Saturn, pre­
 signifies much snow and frost, a turbulent, unhealthy air. If
with Mars, high winds, and lightning (or meteors). If with
Venus, much rain. If with Jupiter, fine weather, mild
air, and a healthy and prosperous quarter.
    M ercu ry in Capricornm is evil for places under this sign,
wherein war, trouble, and sorrow will prevail, unless £ be well
configurated. If afflicted, bad weather will be general.
    M ercury in Pisces presignifies much wind and rain in the
northern parts; abundance of fish end of the fruits of the
earth ; much sickness ; many shipwrecks.
    M ercury in the ascendant (whether lord of the year or not)/
presignifies a good and prosperous year for merchants, scientific
and literary men, tradesmen, travellers and youths, and
advancement of art and science. If afflicted, judge the contrary.
                                 310




                     CHAPTER               XI .



   ON     THE       P R E S IG N IF IC A T IO N                  OF
                        THE        MOON.

        “ The queen of night unclouded now appears;
          In ambient azure she her sceptre rears;
          Around her throne the beauteous planets rove,
          And on their poles through heaven’s expansion move.”

T he M oon, according to Albumasar, “ is cold, moist-, arid
phlegmatic, sometimes warm ; and gives lightness, aptitude in
all things, a multitude of infirmities,” etc. Shakespeare writes
of the earth’s satelite as “ the inconstant M oon, that nightly
changes in her circled orb.”
   Ramesey curtails the aphorisms of the ancients respecting the
presignification of the M oon when lady of the year:—
   “ The M oon doth denote all the good that can possibly be
desired by the people when she is lady of the year and strong
and well configurated; if she be weak and evil aspected, the
contrary.
   “ When you see in your figure the M oon strong, look to the
nature of the sign of the Zodiac in which she is located, and
judg6 good to such places as are subject to such sig n ; if weak,,
judge the contrary.
   “ For you must remember that the Moon in signs of human
form shows events affecting mankind ; in airy signs, the air; in
watery signs, the waters ; in earthy signs, the earth and its
fruits; in quadrupedal signs, cattle.
    “ Neither ought you to forget to make commixture according
to the planet or planets in conjunction or configuration with the
Moon at the revolution.”
  As to the position of the M oon in various houses :—
  The Moon in th &first house, whether lady of the year or not,,
presignifies -that the people will be fickle, shifting about;;
prosperous if j> be well configurated, unfortunate if afflicted.
  The M oon in the second house presignifies increase of wealth
and plenty of all things. If afflicted, the contrary.
  The Moon in the third house, fortunate, presignifies sociality
             ON TH E PRFjSIGN IFICATION OF TH E   MOON.      311

and much travelling. If afflicted, enmity among the people,
and accidents in travelling.
   The M oon in the fourth house, fortunate, shows prosperity.
If afflicted and especially if the revolution be nocturnal, public
losses, quarrels, changes, and misfortunes.
   The Moon in the fifth house, fortunate, presignifies gain to
places of amusement; increase of schools, and of the birth rate.
If afflicted, the contrary.
   The M oon in the sixth house, unless well configurated,
presignifies much sickness, loss of cattle, etc.
   The Moon in the seventh house, fortunate, presignifies an
increase in the marriage rate, and gain to women. If afflicted,
damage from public enemies, conjugal squabbles, and public
misfortunes.
   The Moon in the eighth house presignifies much mortality,
and murder, especially if j> be afflicted in T , 111 or vy.
   The M oon in the ninth house presignifies much travelling and
advancement of art and science. If afflicted, loss of life by
shipwreck or disasters on railways (according to the sign).
   The M oon fortunate in the tenth house presignifies the good
condition of the monarch and government, especially if the
revolution be nocturnal. If afflicted, the contrary.
   The M oon fortunate in the eleventh house, presignifies the
good condition of the arm y; useful measures carried through
Parliament; and a good time generally. If afflicted, the
nation’s hopes will be blighted.
   The M oon in the twelfth house and unsupported by the
fortunes, presignifies the instability and uncertainty of every­
thing, discord, damage from secret foes, and (if afflicted by $ )
danger of war.
                                  312




                    CHAPTER                  XII.



ON    THE PRESIGNIFICATION OF PLANETS                        WHEN
     IN  MUTUAL   CONFIGURATION, ONE                         BEING
     ELEVATED ABOVE THE OTHER, AT A                          SOLAR
     INGRESS OR AN ECLIPSE.

                                    “ T o the other five
               T heir planetary m otions, and aspects
               In sextile, square, and trine, and opposite
               Of noxious efficacy, and when to jo in
               In synod un benign.” — M i l t o n .


T hat P lanet which is nearest to the midheaven is the most
elevated or exalted. When two planets happen to be in mutual
configuration at a Solar Ingress, or Solar or Lunar Eclipse, and
one of the two happens to be near the midheaven, it has the
greater power. When both are equally near the midheaven, then
the one which has the greater essential dignity must be taken to
be the stronger. The following aphorisms will also be applicable
to great conjunctions happening near the midheaven.
   S aturn in conjunction, square, or opposition with J upiter, and
elevated above i f , presignifies that great and noble men shall be
slain. In aspect with and elevated above Mars, it presignifies
good. In aspect with and elevated above the Sun, trouble and
misfortune to either kings or chief rulers of places subject to the
sign in which the Sun is located.       Above V enus, the advance­
ment of art and science.       Above Mercury, the same as Venus.
Above the M oon, the people will be ill-behaved and unfortunate.
   J upiter in aspect with and elevated above Saturn, presignifies
lamentations, trouble and misfortune.          Above Mars, many
troubles.     Above the Sun, heavy expenditure, and losses.
Above V enus, benefits to women.           Above Mercury, public
servants will be advantaged. Above the M oon, the nobles and
the rich will benefit.
   Mars elevated above and configurated with Saturn, pre­
signifies but little harm. Above J upiter, strife among great
men.      Above the Sun, kings and rulers will be in danger of
             ON THE PRESIGNIFICATION OF PLANETS, ETC.          318

  assassination.    Above V enus, little merrymaking.         Above
  Mercury, quarrels, slaughter, and discord. Above the Moon,
  earthquake shocks.
    V enus elevated above and configurated with Saturn, pre-
 signifies public grief and troubles. Above Jupiter, prosperity to
 the great.     Above Mars, much pleasure-seeking.        Above the
  Sun, lavish expenditure. Above Mercury, advancement of art
 and science. Above the Moon, much pleasure-seeking.
    Mercury elevated above and configurated with Saturn, pre-
 signifies much cheating and treachery. Above J upiter, pros­
 perity to the great. Above M ars, fear of enemies. Above the
  Sun, kings and rulers will advance art and science.         Above
 Venus, great devotion to sport and science. Above the Moon,
 •extension of science, wonderful inventions.
    The Moon elevated above and configurated with Saturn, pre­
 signifies public misfortunes, and discord. Above Jupiter,
 general prosperity. Above Mars, houses and buildings will be
■destroyed by fire; earthquake shocks; and much bloodshed.
 Above the Sun, mischief and misfortune. Above V enus,
 benefits to and advancement of women. Above Mercury, good
laws, spread of education, and new inventions.
    The worst evils are said to occur under the following
 positions :—-Saturn in Libra, retrograde and in opposition with
 the Sun, and the Sun at the same time in evil configuration
with Mars retrograde. Saturn in Virgo in square aspect with
Mars in Gemini, and the Moon in Sagittarius in aspect with
both Mars and Saturn.          Such positions are said to cause
misery upon misery, the destruction of kingdoms, and revolu­
tions ; especially if the new or full moon either preceding or
following them should happen to be an eclipse. The evils will
fall chiefly on those countries subject to the signs containing the
malefics and the darkened luminary; and in the case of a
Solar eclipse, on the country or countries through which the
line of central eclipse passes.
                                       814




                       C H A P T E E              XIII.



   ON       ECLIPSES                  OF      THE          SUN        AND
                                   M 0 0 N.

 “ T he S an shall be darkened in his going forth, and the M oon
      shall not cause her light to sh in e.” — I s a i a h , x iii., 10.

  “ T he Sun shall be darkened and the M oon sh all not give her
       light, and the stars shall fall from heaven, and the powers
       o f the heavens shall be shaken.” — M a t t h e w , x viv., 2 9 .

 “ There shall be signs in the Sun and in the M oon, and in the Stars.” —
                                                         L u k e , x xi., 25.



E clipses of the Sun and M oon have from the remotest ages-
been regarded as constituting a veritable “ shadow of things tO'
come.”
   The opponents of astrology, in their ignorance of it, are very
fond of charging us with superstition in believing that great
eclipses of the Sun and Moon do really presignify coming
events. They look upon it as a relic of the superstitious dread
of barbarians who feared that “ the dragon” was about to
swallow the darkened luminary, and accordingly beat drums and
made horrible noises in order to frighten away the adversary.
We do not believe that the mere eclipse portends anything, but
that the relative planetary positions at the moment of ecliptic
conjunction or opposition of the Sun and Moon are the indices
of coming events : hence some eclipses are considered to portend
evil and others good. It is to the combined action of the Sun
and Moon (together with the planetary configurations) being-
greater than at other times, the luminaries being in a direct line,
the great effects are attribute^. Our opponents talk and write
as if we were unacquainted with the causes of eclipses, as if
none but modern astronomers were aware of their true cause and
could predict them, and as if the barbarians who were frightened
at the appearance of eclipses were the authors of the aphorisms
on which our predictions are based. Really the ignorance of our
opponents on this subject would be amusing if it were not so
lamentable in these days of widespread education! The
               ON E C LIPS E S   OF TH E   SUN AND JIOON.      815

Chaldaean astronomers foretold eclipses correctly, and formu­
lated, from long-continued observations, the rules for judging of
their probable effects. The luni solar period of the Chaldieans
must have been based upon an immense number of accurate
observations. Their period of eclipses, which they called saros,
consisted of 228 lunations, or 6,585 days 8 hours, at the end of
which the M oon returns to the same position in regard to the
S un, and her own node and perigee. The tables o f Delambre
and Mason make this period 6,585 days 7 hours 42 minutes and
31 seconds ; so that the error of the Chaldieans amounted to only
17 minutes and 29 seconds. Modern astronomers are fairly
puzzled to account for the wonderful astronomical knowledge of
the Chaldieans. It is, then, a perversion of the truth, and an
insult to the memory of such great men as Thales and
Democritus, who verified the astronomical and astrological
knowledge of the Chaldieans, and who perfectly well understood
the cause of eclipses and foretold accurately their occurrence1 to
charge them with superstitions.
   Let us refer to the words of the celebrated French astronomer
Arago (whose arguments against the possible influence of comets
are considered so conclusive), in regard to the influence of the
Moon on disi-asee :—-
   “ With regard to the theory of lunar influence on diseases it
still counts a good number of partisans. In truth I know not if
the circumstance ought to astonish us. Is it not something to
have on our side the authority of the two great physicians of
antiquity, and among the moderns that of Mead, Hoffman,,
and Sauvage ? Authorities, I admit, are of little weight in
matters of science, in the face of positive facts; but it is neces­
sary that these facts exist, that they' have been subjected.
to severe examinations, that they have been skilfully grouped,
with the view to extract the truth they conceal. Now, has this
procedure been adopted with regard to the lunar influence ?
Where do we find them refuted with such arguments as science
would acknowledge ? He who ventures to treat à priori a fact as
absurd, wants prudence. He has not reflected <jn the numerous-
errors he would have committed with regard to modern dis­
coveries. I address these short reflections to those who may
think that the subject of lunar influence is unworthy of any
notice.”
  I commend these words of Arago to opponents, for they
will exactly apply to the case of eclipses. The fact that eclipses
are followed by striking events in conformity with the

              1 V ide Urania fo r Septem ber, 1880, p. 281.
•816                 TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


 -aphorisms of the ancients, and in several instances, with
 predictions made on the basis of those aphorisms, is
 treated “ « prion as absurd” by our opponents, who
 never deign to examine this fact. It cannot be “ mere coin­
 cidence ” that Zadkiel I. foretold, from the planetary positions
 at the annular eclipse of the Sun in Taurus 5° 4', of April 25th,
 1846, “ drought, failure of the fruits of the earth, and some
 peculiar disease in potatoes,” and that Ireland and Scotland
 then suffered from these evils to such an extent that thousands
 were starved.2 That Zadkiel predicted the termination of the
 American Civil War from the position of J upiter at the partial
 eclipse of the Moon, visible at Washington, April 10th,
 1865.3 That Zadkiel I. foretold the terrible earthquake at Cumana
 of July 15th, 1853, naming the exact date and place, from the
 total eclipse of the Sun visible there on the 6th of June,
 1853.4 That Zadkiel II. foretold hostile acts in South Africa, from
the annular eclipse of the Sun of January 22nd, 1879, and the
 disastrous battle of Isandhlwana taking place on that very day.
 That ZadkielII. foretold that there would he “ great expenditure
on munitions of war about midsummer, 1882,” and that the
effects of the position of Mars at the total eclipse of the Sun of
 May 17th, 1882, would then be felt in Egypt, which was
 verified by the British expedition to Egypt. That Zadkiel
predicted yet another military expedition to Egypt in the
autumn of 1884, from the total eclipse of the Moon of October
 4th, 1884. These are facts which cannot be denied, and, in our
opinion, they deserve examination, and not contempt, at the
 hands of statesmen, astronomers, philosophers, and the educated
portion of the community.
   Plutarch relates that in the days of Nicias a man dared not
open his mind except to his best friend, and even then with the
utmost caution, about the causes of the eclipses of the Sun and
Moon which had been recently taught by Anaxagoras. For
pointing out the natural causes of phenomena Protagoras was
banished from Athens and Anaxagoras was cast into prison.
At the present day, the astrologer is ridiculed as a superstitious
enthusiast; but many who laugh in public, resort to astrology
in private. Many who claim freedom of inquiry and the right
of private judgment for themselves in other matters, will not
accord the same to the inquirer into astrology; but class the

  2 V ide Zadkiel’s Alamanac, 1846, p p. 15, 84.
  3 Alamanac, 1865, p. 44.    4 Alamanac, 1858, p. 42.
               ON E C L IP S E S   OF TH E   SUN AND MOON.      317

 patient student of this ancient science with vagrant fortune­
 tellers whom magistrates send to the treadmill when brought
before them for contravening the Vagrant Act. To boast of this
 age as the era of “ true liberty” is a mockery while such an
intolerant, exclusive, and a bigoted spirit animates so many
 Britons. For atheistical philosophers to declare that astrology
is superstition, is not so surprising as for religious persons to do
so, who should remember that the Almighty declared that the
 Sun, Moon, and planets are “ for signs of the future.”
    Let those who are sceptical refer to the great Solar eclipse of
 September 7th, 1820, which was visible in England. This
 eclipse fell in the 15th degree of the sign Virgo; Mars,
 at the moment of ecliptic conjunction being in the
 tenth house and nearly in opposition to Saturn in Aries-
 (the ruling sign of England).            Within a few months
England was on the verge of revolution, through the-
abominable proceedings against the ill-starred Queen, whose
sudden death closed the disgraceful drama. The eclipse fell in
the place of Mars at the birth of Napoleon I., and he died in
May of the following year (1821). Turkey (ruled by Virgo)
became a dungeon filled with weeping widows and w'ailing
infants of murdered Christians; Greece a slaughter-house reek­
ing with Christian and Mahommedan blood. Asiatic cholera
appeared suddenly in June and July, 1821, in the three principal
ports of the Persian Gulf, and thence spread up the Tigris
to Bagdad, to Aleppo, and the Mediterranean; through Persia
to the Caspian, and thence to Astrakan, 'which it reached in the
summer of 1823, but then ceased for a long time to make any
further progress.     The very places ruled by the sign in which
the eclipse took place, and those whereat Mars culminated at
the eclipse, were those to suffer. Moreover, the cholera ceased
after three years, the eclipse having lasted three hours, which
Ptolemy declared as equivalent to as many revolutions of the
Sun. The ancients averred that a Solar eclipse happening in
the second decanate of Virgo presignifies “ famine, yestilen.ee, and
deadly sedition.”
   I pass on to the consideration of the aphorisms of the ancients,,
relating to eclipses.
   Hermes said that: “ There shall be much inconvenience and
trouble happen in the world when both the luminaries shall be
eclipsed within one month, and chiefly in those places in which
they [the eclipses] are visible.”
318                  T H E T E X T -B O O K OF A STR O LO G Y.


   Ptolemy said5 :—
   “ After having gone through the necessary preliminary topics,
it is now proper to speak of the manner in which predictions
are to be formed and considered ; beginning with those which
relate to general events affecting either certain cities, or districts,
or entire countries.
   “ The strongest and principal cause of all these events exists
in the ecliptical conjunctions of the Sun and Moon, and in the
several transits made by the planets during those conjunctions.
   1•One part of the observations required in forming prediction
in cases of this nature relates to the locality of the event, and
points out the cities or countries liable to be influenced by
particular eclipses, or by occasional continued stations of certain
planets which at times remain for a certain period in one
situation. These planets are Saturn, Jupiter, and M ars; and
they furnish portentous indications when they are stationary.
   “ Another branch relates to time, and gives pre-information of
the period at which the event will occur, and how long it will
continue to operate.
   “ The third branch is generic ; and points out the classes or
kinds which the event will affect.
   “ The last part is specific ; and foreshows the actual quality
and character of the coming event.”
   Ptolemy then proceeds to give instruction as to the several
branches:—-
   “ In all eclipses of the Sun and Moon, and especially in such
as are fully visible, the place in the zodiac where the eclipse falls is
to be noted; and it must be seen what countries are in
familiarity with that place, according to the rules regarding the
quadrants and triplicities; and in like manner it must be
observed what cities are under the influence of the sign in which
the eclipse happens; either by means of the ascendant and the
situation of the luminaries at the time of their foundation, or
by means of the midheaven of their kings or governors;
although such time may be subsequent to the building of such
cities. Whatever countries and cities shall be thus found in
familiarity with the ecliptical place will all be comprehended
in the event; which will, however, principally attach to all those
parts which may be connected with the identical sign of the
eclipse, and in which it was visible while above the earth.
   “ The second point relates to time, and indicates the date
when the event will take place, and the period during which its
effect will continue: these are to be ascertained in the following
manner:—
   “ It must, however, be premised that as an eclipse occurring
at any particular season cannot happen in all climates at the

         8 Tetrabiblos, B ook I I ., chap. 5, A shm and’ s translation.
               ON E C L IP S E S   OF T H E   SUN AN D   MOON.   319

same temporal or solar hour, so neither will the magnitude of
the obscuration nor the time of its continuance be equal in all
parts of the world. First, therefore (as in a nativity), the angles
are to be arranged in every country connected with the eclipse
according to the hour at which it takes place and the elevation
of the pole of the country. The time during which the
obscuration may continue in each country is then to be noted in
equatorial hours. And after those particulars have been care­
fully observed, it is to be understood that the effect will endure as
many years as the obscuration lasted hours, provided the eclipse was
solar ; but if lunar, a like number of months is to be reckoned
instead of years.
    “ The commencement of the effect and the period of its general
intensity of strength are to be inferred from the situation of the
place of the eclipse with respect to the angles,” etc.
    No doubt periods of intensity may vary according to the
“ transits of such planets as co-operate in producing the effect,”
as Ptolemy stated.
    “ The third division relates to the mode of distinguishing the
genus or species of animals or things about to sustain the
expected effects. This distinction is made by means of those
 signs in which the place of the eclipse, and the places of such
 fixed stars and planets as are in dominion, according to the
.actual sign of the eclipse and that of the angle before it may be
 found. A planet or fixed star is to be considered as holding
■dominion when circumstanced as follows :—
    “ If there be found one planet having more numerous claims
 than any other to the place of the eclipse as well as that
•of the angle, being also in the immediate vicinity of those
 places and visibly applying to or receding from them, and
 having likewise more rights over other places connected
 with them by configuration ; the said planet being at the
same time lord by house, triplieity, exaltation, and terms ;
 in such a case only that single planet is entitled to dominion.
 But if the lord of the eclipse and the lord of the angle be
 not identical, then those two planets which have most connec­
 tions wdth each place are to be noted ; and of these two, the
 lord of the eclipse is to be preferred to the chief dominion
 although the other is to be considered as bearing rule conjointly.
  And if more than two should be found, having equal pretensions
 to each placs, that particular one among them which may be
  nearest to an angle, or most concerned with the places in
  question, by the nature of its condition, is to be selected for
 dominion.”
  A planet exactly rising or culminating— if there be one— at an
eclipse, if none then one setting, or in the lower meridian, as the
case may be, holds chief dominion, especially if it be
■configurated with Sun or Moon.
 320               T H E T E X T -B O O K OF ASTROLO G Y.


     “ Among the fixed stars, the chief bright one (which during
  the time of the eclipse may hold connection with the angles,
  then actually in passage) is to be admitted to dominion ; as also
  that one which at the ecliptical hour may be in an eminent
  situation, either having risen or having culminated with the
  angle following the place of the eclipse.
     “ Having considered according to the foregoing rules what
 stars co-operate in regulating the coming event, the conform­
 ation and figure of the signs in which the eclipse takes place and
 the said ruling stars may be posited are also to be observed ; and
 from the properties and characteristics of those signs, the genus
 or species to be eomprehened in the event is chiefly to be-
 inferred.
     “ For instance, should the zodiacal constellations and those of
 the ruling fixed stars out of the zodiac be of human shape the
 effect will fall upon the human race. If terrestrial or quadrupedal,
 upon animals of similar form. In addition, the terrestrial signs-
 situated in the north, about the Arctic circle, indicate sudden
 earthquakes ; and those in the south, deluges of rain.
     “ Again, should the ruling places be situated in tropical or
 equinoctial signs, in either case alike they presignify changes in-
 the state of the atmosphere at the respective season to w7hich
 each sign is appropriated. For example, with regard to the
 season of spring and the productions of the earth, if the said
 places should be in the sign of the vernal equinox, they will
 produce an effect on the buds of the vine and fig and of such
 other trees as sprout forth at that season. Should they be in
 the sign of the summer tropic, the event will affect the
 gathering and depositing of fruits ; and with respect to Egypt in
 particular, it will impede the rising of the Nile. If they should
 be in the sign of the autumnal equinox, they foreshow that it will
operate on grain and on various herbs ; if in the sign of the
winter tropic, on potherbs, esculent vegetables, and such birds
and fishes as arrive in that season.
    “ The equinoctial signs further indicate the circumstances liable
to happen in ecclesiastical concerns, and in religious matters;
the tropical signs give warning of changes in the atmosphere and
in political affairs; the fixed signs, of changes in institutions;
and the bicorporal signs show that the future event wall fall alike
on princes and their subjects.
    “ Again, the ruling places situated in the east during the time
of the eclipse, presignify that fruits and seeds, insipient institu­
tions, and youth will be affected; those in the mid-heavon above
the earth announce that the coming event will relate to
ecclesiastical affairs, to kings and princes, and to the middle-
aged : those in the west, that it will influence the laws, old age,
and persons about to die.”
  Junctinus said that—
  “ An eclipse either of the Sun or Moon in the fiery triplieity
                 ON E C L IP S E S   OF T H E   SUN AND   MOON.       321

  ( V , SI, f ) presignifies the motion of armies, the death of kings
 great men, anil cattle ; enmity between the nobles and common
 people, discord, war, murder and theft; sharp fevers and
 epidemic diseases through excess of heat; apparitions in the
 air, and scarcity of rain ; especially in those places subject to the
 sign in which the eclipse happens.
      “ In the earthly triplieity ( 8 njj, and Vy), scarcity of the fruits
 of the earth, chiefly of corn and such things as are sown
 annually.
     “ In the airy triplieity ( n ,        and rsr), scarcity, pestilence,
 and tempests.
     “ In the watery triplieity (25, up, and jt), the death of
 common people, sedition, rumours of war, and irruptions and
 overflowing of the sea-banks.
     “ In Aries, alteration in fruits ; vines and fig trees corrupted.
     “ In Libra, rottenness of seeds and herbs; schisms among
 ecclesiastics.
     “ In Cancer, corruption of fruit when gathered, causing sick­
 ness to those who partake of it.
    “ In Capricornus, olives will be devoured by locusts or cater­
pillars ; shipwrecks and submersion of ships, especially under
the dominion of Vy.
    “ In Gemini and Sagittarius, destruction of flying fowl,
especially such as men eat, whereby many even may come to
sudden death.
    “ In Virgo and Pisces, harm and destruction to vegetables and
creatures living in the waters, corruption of rivers.
    “ In Taurus, Scorpio, Leo, and Aquarius, ruin of houses and
ancient buildings, division and hatred among the clergy, and
tumults.”
                                              322




                            C H A P T E R                 X I Y.


ON      THE PRE SIGNIFICATION OF THE PLANETS,
       A C C O R D I N G T O T H E I R P O S I T I O N S AT
       ECLIPSES OF THE SUN AND MOON.
                                      “ All of us have cause
                 To wail the dimming of our shining star ;
                 But none can help our harms by wailing them.”
                                                                          Shakespeake.

T he presignification of the five planets— Satuen, J opitek,
M aes, V ends, and Meecuky— according to their relative positions
and configurations at eclipses of the Sttn and Moon, now comes
under consideration, for it is this which enables us to foretell
the good or evil nature of the events about to happen.
   Ptolemy says in reference to this point
    “ T h e d e scrip tio n o f th e p e cu lia r p ro p e rtie s a n d ch a ra cter o f the
e ffe ct a b o u t to b e p ro d u c e d , an d o f its g o o d o r evil n a tu re, o c cu p ies
t h e fo u rth an d last d iv is io n o f th is part o f th e su b ject.
    “ T h e se p rop erties m u st b e g a th ered fr o m th e p o w e r o f the stars
w h ic h c o n tro l th e r u lin g p laces, a n d fr o m th e co n te m p e ra m e n t crea ted
b y th eir r e la tiv e a d m ix tu re w ith e a c h o th e r a n d w ith th e p la ces w h ic h
t h e y c o n tro l. F o r , a lth o u g h th e Sun an d Moon are th e a ck n o w le d g e d
so u rce s o f all th e e ffica cy a n d d o m in io n o f th e stars, a n d o f their
stren g th , or w ea k n ess, an d in a ce rta in m a n n e r reg u late a n d c o m m a n d
th e m , still it is b y th e th e o r y o f th e co n te m p e ra m e n t, p ro d u c e d b y the
sta rs in d o m in io n , th a t the e ffe ct is in d ica te d .

   “ Each of the planets, when fully exercising its own separate
and distinct influence, will properly produce the peculiar effects
above ascribed to i t : but should it be combined with others,
whether by configuration, by familiarity arising from the siyn in
which it may be posited, or by its position towards the Sun, the
coming event will then happen agreeably to the admixture and
compound temperament which arise from the whole communion
actually subsisting among the influencing powers. It would,
however, be a business of infinite labour and innumerable
combinations quite beyond the limits of this treatise, to set forth
fully every contemperament and all configurations in every mode
in which they can possibly exist; and the knowledge of them
must therefore be acquired by particular discrimination in every
instance- under the guidance of the precepts of science.
   Cardan has transmitted to posterity some aphorisms relating
to eclipses, some of which are here appended :—
           ON TH E PRESIG-NIFICATION OF TH E     PLAN ETS,   ETC.     323


    “ In an eclipse, consider the strength of the ruling planet, for its
 significations will chiefly appear.
    “ If eclipses of the Sun fall upon a flourishing and promising crop
 they generally damnify it, so that it scarcely comes near what might
 have been expected.
    “ In general, some eclipses of the luminaries, at the time or even
before they happen, raise showers and rain, others great droughts,
some violent winds, others earthquakes, some scarcity of the fruits of
the earth, and others terrible fires.
   “ No eclipse whatsoever can threaten a plague or scarcity to the
whole earth, nor can the pestilence continue above four years in one
place
   “ Eclipses operate more powerfully on cities, provinces, or kingdoms
than on particular persons, or even upon kings and princes; for their
effects rather respect the multitude.
   “ When eclipses happen in earthy signs ( 3 , njj ]/y), they portend
barrenness and scarcity by reason of excessive drought; when in
w atery signs ( 2 5 , Ilf, X ), by reason of too much rain. In airy signs
( n , -rt, z z ), they presignify mighty winds, seditions, and pestilence;
and in fier y signs ( Y , Sb, $ ), terrible wars and slaughters. The
same observation applies to comets.”

    The aphorisms of Ptolemy relating to the eclipses of the Sud
 and Moon will, if borne out by observation, go far to account for
countries being at some periods blest with good seasons, peace,
and plenty, and at others afflicted with bad seasons, war, and
scarcity. Ptolemy speaks of animals and even fish suffering in
 common with mankind, and history records that:— “ In all the
 great plagues which have affected the human race, other animals
as horses, cats, dogs, and fowls, together with fish in rivers and
the ocean, and even vegetables, have borne their share in the
calamity; the pestilential virus has extended to every principle
of life.” 1
   When will the lauded science of the Royal Society, of the
Royal Astronomical Society, and of kindred associations, enable
its votaries to foretell the advent of plenty or scarcity, of good
or bad seasons, of great earthquakes, of flood or drought, of war
or peace ? Not until they examine and adopt the teachings of
Claudius Ptolemy— not until they recognise the power of the
heavenly bodies, and so follow in the footsteps of Plato, Pliny,
Herodotus, Anaxagoras, Hipocrates, Kepler, and the many other
great men who perceived that “ the heavens do rule.”
   It will be observed that Cardan, said that eclipses sometimes
produce effects “ even before they happen.” Some of our
opponents will probably say “ this is impossible, because it
makes the effect precede the cause; ” but it does not, for the


                          1 Rees's Cyclopedia.
324                T H E T E X T -B O O K   OF A STK O L O G Y.


operating causes at an eclipse are the combined' influences of the
planets holding certain relative positions at the time, as before
stated ; and this is not limited to a few hours, for the superior
planets move slowly into configurations. Lord Yerulam said
that :— All the celestial operations produce not their effects-
instantaneously and in a narrow compass, but exert them in
large portions of time and space."’
   Before concluding this chapter, it will be interesting to quote
the following aphorisms relating to the particular sign of the
zodiac in which a solar or lunar eclipse may fall, given by
Junctinus, as gathered from the writings of Proclus :—
   “ When the Sun is eclipsed in the sign Aries, it portends the
sudden and frequent motion of armies, continual expeditions, assaults-
and batteries, with many tumults, seditions amid controversies ; and an
inclination of the air to intemperate heat and drought.2

   “ In Taurus, it afflicts negotiators, agents,, and solicitors, and
business generally ; and destroys corn and affects cattle.
   “ In Gemini, in causes dissension amongst priests of all
orders ; sedition and law-breaking.
   “ In Cancer, it disturbs the air and causes various winds and
alterations of weather, and dries up rivers.
   “ In Leo, it presignifies the death of some eminent prince, and
scarcity of wheat.
   “ In Virgo, it presignifies the grievous calamity or death of
some king under Virgo, and trouble tp merchants.
   “ In Libra, it corrupts the air, causes pestilence, and scarcity
of corn, and death of a king under Libra.
   “ In Scorpio, it presignifies wars and tumults, slaughter^
hatred, captivity, and treachery.
   ‘ ‘ In Sagittarius, it presignifies grievous dissensions and deadly
feuds, and injury to horses and cattle.
   “ In Capricornus, it presignifies the transmigration of some
king, rebellion of nobles and peasants, and mischances to the
great, and scarcity of corn.
   “ In Aquarius, it causes public sorrow and sadness, and earth­
quakes.
   “ In Pisces, it dries up rivers, and presignifies calamities at sea,
and earthquakes.
   “ When the M oon is eclipsed in Aries, it presignifies fever,
destruction of woods by fire, and dryness of the air.

  2 The Sun was eclipsed in Aries 5° 15', M arch 25th, 1857; the In dian
M utiny im m ediately follow ed, as foretold by Zadkiel I.
          ON TH E   PKESIGN TFICATION    OF TH E   PLAN ETS, E T C .    325

      In Taurus, it presignifies destruction of great cattle, death of
 the queen of some country under & , and a scarcity of the fruits
 of the earth.
    “ In Gemini, it threatens incursion and rapine of armies, and
 the death of some illustrious and famous man.
    “ In Cancer, it excites wars, grievous exactions, taxations, etc.
    “ In Leo, it presignifies the death of some illustrious king or
 famous man. It excites the people and armies to new attempts
 -and actions.
    “ In Virgo, it causes diseases to kings, and sedition and discord
amongst men.3
    “ In Libra, it produces furious and tempestuous hailstorms,
and death to some famous and illustrious man.
    “ In Scorpio, it causes great thunderstorms, and sometimes
earthquakes ; it dries olives, and causes a dry air and burning
fevers ; sedition, quarrels, and troubles.
    “ In Sagittarius, it presignifies thefts and rapine, pestilence
and many evils.
    “ In Capricornus, it presignifies plots and untimely death of
some king under V3>, also sedition.
    “ In Aquarius, it presignifies the misfortune of some king
under .os'; it injures seeds.
    “ In Pisces, it presignifies sadness and anxiety to priests and
churches; the death of some great and illustrious person; and
piracy and troubles by sea.”
    To verify the truth of all these aphorisms would require great
research and a long life. Even if this were done, our opponents
would attempt to discount the value of such testimony as merely
being “ wise after the event.” What impresses them most is the
.success of predictions made upon the basis of the foregoing
.aphorisms, but even such success they endeavour to explain away
by asserting that it is but “ a lucky hit.” Some would not be
convinced even “ though one rose from the dead,” for “ a man
convinced against his will, is of the same opinion still.” The
student should disregard the sneers of such captious critics, and
follow the example of Lord Byron :—
           “ B ut now , so callous grow n, so changed since youth,
             I ’ve learned to think and sternly speak the tru th ;
             L earned to deride the critic’ s starch decree,
             And break h im on the w heel he m eant for m e ;
             To spurn the rod a scribbler bids m e kiss,
             Nor care if courts and crow ds applause or hiss.”


     There was a lunar eclipse in n ç 8° on the 26th February, 1831 ; Paris
an d Turkey were fu ll o f tum ult and insurrection, as foretold by Zadkiel.
                                      326




                      C H A P T E R                XV.




EXAMPLES OF PREDICTIONS MADE                               FROM RECENT
     ECLIPSES OF THE SUN AND MOON, SOLAR
     INGRESSES, AND TRANSITS OF THE PLANETS.

              “ E vents foretold fu lfil the prophecy ;
                W hat fortune seconds how can m an deny ?
                T h e proofs are sacred, and to doubt would be
                Not reason’s action, but im piety.” — M a n i l i u s .


 M anilius— the renowned Augustan poet— thus proclaimed his
 appreciation of the great value of astrology as a predictive
 science; and he stigmatised those who scoffed at it as stupid.
 There can be no doubt that the neglect of astrology has brought
 countless troubles and catastrophes upon nations, which might
  have been either prevented or greatly mitigated, had the warn­
 ings of the heavens been heeded by statesmen. A more striking
 instance and proof of this could not well be adduced than the
 total eclipse of the Sun at Cairo, on the 17th of May, 1882,
 when the planet Mars was exactly rising in “ his own lion.”
 The astronomers who went to Cairo, to observe the eclipse, took
no heed of the ascending position of Mars ; and, neglecting the
 astrology of Pythagoras, Ptolemy, Proclus, and Kepler, gave no
 warning to our Government of the impending catastrophe. The
 British Government drifted into w ar; gave instructions to>
Admiral Seymour to bombard the forts of Alexandria, without
first providing a landing force to protect the town from
incendiaries ; so that when the forts were silenced and Arabi
fled, the town was at the mercy of the rabble, and in a few hours
one of the greatest and most thriving cities of the' East was in
ruins. The expedition, under General Sir Garnet Wolseley, was
then sent out, and our victorious troops marched to Cairo.
   The following is the Map of the Heavens for the moment of
ecliptic conjunction of the S un and M oon at Cairo, lat. 30° 2 ' N.,
long. 31° 18' E. of Greenwich, R.A. of M.C., 19° 20' 59":—
     E X A M P LE S OF PRED ICTIO N S M ADE FROM RE C E N T E C L IP S E S .    327

                                             s




                                 D é c l i n â t tons .

     G 19    20 N                  Ï 23       4-5 n              h 14    58 N
     S 19    38 N                  S 20       42 n                   6   51 N
     5 24    22 N                  Tl 20      43 n                  15   11 N

   It will be observed that the Sun and Moon have the proximate
parallel of declination with Mars (and Jupiter) ; the ascending
degree has the parallel with Mars : the planet of war is within
five degrees of the Eastern horizon, and in 4° 43' of the sign
Leo. Mars is the planet most strongly placed in the figure.
Beference to what Ptolemy declared to be the effect of Mars
having sole dominion at a Solar eclipse, as quoted in the
previous chapter, affords a true description of the state of
Alexandria and of Upper Egypt within a few weeks of the
occurrence of this great eclipse. As the eclipse lasted three
hours and twenty-five minutes, its influence was not entirely
exhausted under three years and five months. Cholera broke
out in 1883, so that “ painful death ” quickly followed from
disease, as Ptolemy declared; moreover, “ haemorrhages ” in the
shape of dysentery were prevalent, to which many of our brave
soldiers succumbed. When the conjunction of Mars and Jupiter
in Leo 2° 56' 8" took place, on the 20th of October, 1883, i.e., in
the ascendant and place of Mars at this eclipse, a religious
insurrection in the Soudan broke out ; and the Egyptian Army
328                  TIIK   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


 of General Hicks was annihilated by the Mahdi’s hordes. Then
a British expedition was sent to defeat Osman Digna’s army, in
 February, 1884; General Gordon was sent to defend Khartoum
 and abandoned for months ; and yet another British expedition
had to be sent out in September, under Lord Wolseley, to
attempt to rescue Gordon and Stewart.
   The following predictions will be found in Zadldel's Almanac
for the years 1881, 1882, 1883, and 1884 : —
   From the conjunction of S a t u r n and J u p i t e r in 8 1° 36' 41",
April 18th, 1881 :— “ But what of the position of Mars in the
seventh house and in opposition to Uranus rising ? will be the
question of students. Would that such a position could be
blotted out! For it presignifies many wars during the rule of
this conjunction (twenty years), and, as Mars is in Pisces, the
navy of Old England will be engaged in many a battle. I trust
that the Government will not only man the fleet, but see to it
that our ships shall be equipped with the best and most power­
ful guns. Dark days are in store for Great Britain, and woe be
to those who, heedless of the warnings plainly written on the
face of the heavens, shall neglect to prepare for the mighty
struggle. The Eastern Question will write the future history of
Europe in letters of blood and flame. Happily the sign in the
midheaven at this conjunction is the ascendant of our good
Queen. The valour of Britain’s sons will again be rewarded
with victory, and if England be but true to herself, her mighty
Empire will be made secure and will also be extended. The
periods at which the evils foreshadowed by this great con­
junction may be expected, will be when eclipses shall fall either
in the place of this conjunction or in that of Mars ; also when
Mars shall transit the ascendant of this figure (njj 7° 31'j.” 1—
Almanac, for 1881, pp. 50, 51.
   From the Solar eclipse, May 17th, 1882;—
   “ The effects of the recent eclipse of the Sun will now [June, 1882]
be manifest in the countries through which the line of central eclipse
passed, viz., Northern Africa, Egypt,” etc.—Almanac, 1882, p. 15.
   “ About midsummer there will be great expenditure on munitions of
war (when Mars forms the square aspect with this eclipse).” — Ibid, p.
46.
   From the transit o f Saturn through the sign G em ini:—
   “ Unfortunately for Egypt, Saturn enters its ruling sign ( Gemini)
on the 24th of May (1883) bringing sorrow and misfortune on the land
of the Pharaohs.” — Almanac, 1883, p. 13.
   “ Old Saturn drags his slow length along -through Gemini, bringing
trouble on Egypt.” — Ibid, p. 15.
   “ Portsmouth will be the scene of busy preparation, for England will
still find it necessary to assert herself in order to safeguard her Empire.

  1 T he first Transit of Mars over this ascendant took place on the 11th and
12th o f July, 1882, the very time of the destruction o f A lexandria.
        E X A M P L E S OF PR ED ICTIO N S M ADE FROM RE C E N T E C L IP S E S .   329

 'There is every probability that our ironclads will be on active service.
 Saturn retrograding in Gemini brings serious troubles and misfortunes
 on Lower Egypt.” — Ibid, p. 25 (November).
    “ The Government will be perplexed with the state of home and
 ■foreign affairs.” — Ibid, p. 27.
    “ Saturn halts in the fourth degree Gemini, bringing troubles on
 London, Egypt, and the United States.” — Almanac, 1884, p. 4
  (February).
    “ Europe must prepare for startling events in the East. At the
 new moon of the 19th of September, Mars will be rising, hence the
■ensuing four weeks will be favourable for the arms of Old England,
:and she shall beat her enemies under her feet. The navy will gain
 prestige and renown.” — Ibid, p. 21.

   From the Solar ingress into Libra, September 22nd, 1884 :—
   “ At Cairo, Saturn is exactly on the cusp of the fourth house is
¡the ruling sign of Lower Egypt. The Moon and Mars are
¡together in the eighth house. Further misfortunes will fall on
Egypt. There is danger of revolt and of war. Let the British
be on their guard. Treachery is strongly indicated. Many
■deaths from violence and from martial acts will occur,” etc.—
Ibid, p. 50.
    When the author wrote the first of the foregoing predictions
 i(viz., in July 1880) the Liberal Government of the Rt. Hon. W.
  E. Gladstone had just come into power pledged to the mainten­
ance of peace. Who among politicians then foresaw that
 England would soon be engaged in war in the East ? Did any
 statesman foretell in 1883 another crisis in Egypt ? Not one.
 Even at the opening of the session of Parliament in February
 1884, the Government declared that there was no came for alarm
 as to the state of Egypt, and insisted that affairs were progress­
 ing w ell! In Zadkiel's Almanac for 1883, 1884 and 1885,
 repeated warnings were given of misfortune, of revolt, and of
 war in Egypt. The British people had to pay many millions
 sterling for the want of foresight of their Government and for
 their want of attention to those predictions. There is an old
 proverb to the effect that “ Forewarned is fore-armed.” Had the
 Government heeded those predictions they might have prevented
by timely action the sacrifice of Gordon’s life, of other valuable
.lives and much treasure. In face of these astrological predictions
 we are told, forsooth, that “ Astrology leads to fatality.” We
have seen that it is the neglect of astrology which leads to fatalities.
 Disaster followed disaster ! Naught but the heroism of British
.soldiers and sailors saved us from worse calamities.
                                        330




                        C H A P T E E              X Y I.



MUTUAL CONJUNCTIONS OP THE MAJOR PLANETS-

  “ Oh ! S ir,” replied the innkeeper, “ there was a red spot on thy very
cheekbone, which boded of a late brawl as sure as the conjunction of Mars-
and Saturn threatens m isfortune. ’ — K e n il w o r t h .


C laudius P tolem y urged his disciples to “ overlook none of'
the hundred and nineteen conjunctions ; for on them depends
the knowledge of worldly operations, whether of generation or
corruption.”
    Ramesey stated that “ there are seven sorts of conjunctions,
considerable:—
    “ 1.— The first and greatest of all the rest is the conjunction
of the two superior planets Saturn and Jupiter in the first term
or degree of Aries, which happens hut once in 9G0 years.
     “ 2.— The second is the conjunction of Saturn and J upiter in
the first term or degree of every triplicity, and this is accom­
plished once in 240 years ; yet once in 20 years they come in
 conjunction in one part or other of the Zodiac.
     “ 3 . — The c o n ju n c t io n o f Saturn a n d M ars in th e first term
 o r d e g re e o f Cancer, a n d is o n c e in 3 0 years.
     “ 4.— The conjunction of the three superiors, Saturn, J upiter:
 and Mars, in one term or face of any sign.
     “ 5 . — The c o n ju n c t io n o f J u piter a n d M ars , w h ic h is a m ea n
a n d th e lea st c o n ju n c t io n o f th e su p eriors, a n d th e re fo re is n o t
th e fo r e r u n n e r o f s u ch g rea t m is c h ie fs .
    “ 6.— The conjunction of the Sun with any planet at the time
of his entrance into the first point of Aries.
  “ 7.— The conjunction of the Sun and Moon, which happeneth
once in every month.”
   The discovery of the planets Uranus and Neptune necessitates
a re-arrangement of “ great conjunctions.” The influence of
Neptune is not nearly so potent as that of Uranus, therefore we
may regard the conjunction of the former with any planet as of
much less importance than any of the seven “ considerable
conjunctions ” mentioned by Ramesey.        The conjunction of
U ranus with either J upiter or Saturn is very important. We=
may consider the following as the most important conjunctions.
           M UTUAL   C O N J U N C T IO N S   OF   THE   M A JO R   PLANETS.   331

   1.   The c o n ju n c t io n o f J u p ite r a n d S atu rn .
   2.   The conjunction of M ars a n d S at u rn .
   3. The conjunction of J u p i t e r and U r a n u s .
   4. The conjunction of S aturn and U r a n u s .
   5.   The c o n ju n c t io n o f M ars a n d J u p it e r .
   6. The conjunction of M ars and U ran u s .
   7. The conjunction of either of the above named planets
with the Sun at the moment of Solar eclipse or of the Sun’s
ingress into Aries.
   The effects of a conjunction are greatly augmented when one
of the conjoined planets happens to be in -perigee. When the
conjoined planets differ greatly in latitude the importance of the
conjunction is greatly lessened. The approximate conjunction
or opposition of the Moon with the conjoined planets adds
greatly to its importance.
   It has been asserted that when conjunctions happen in either
of the “ fixed” signs ( 3 , SL. iff. and -scr) their effects are much
more lasting than in any other signs; this is, in the author’ s
opinion, very doubtful, and it is more probable that the cardinal
signs ( t , °s , ===, and >y) take precedence of all the rest.
   Ramesey asserts that the conjunction of S aturn and J u pite r
in the first point, or first six degrees of Aries, is the greatest and
most notable of a ll; and is accompanied or quickly followed by
“ commotions, wars, seditions, revolutions, alteration of laws,
plagues, the death of kings,” etc. In like manner “ the con­
junction of M ars and S aturn in the first three degrees of Cancer
is the forerunner of much evil, viz., terrible wars, slaughter,
depopulation, alteration of government,” etc.
   S aturn and U ranus were in conjunction, in the sign Taurus,
on March 16th, 1852. Taurus rules the Crimea— formerly
called Taurica Chersonesus— and shortly after this very rare
conjunction in 8 , the Crimea was invaded by the allied armies
and a terrible and protracted war ensued. Earthquakes in
Persia (ruled by Taurus) followed— notably that of May 14th,
1853, by which Shiraz was overthrown and 12,000 people
killed— as foretold by Zadkiel; and the Persian Gulf was the
scene of sanguinary naval warfare, as also predicted by Zadkiel.
   The conjunctions of J u p i t e r and U r a n u s (and likewise their
oppositions) have been almost invariably attended by epidemics1 ;
in the middle ages the visitations of plague, etc., coincided most
frequently with if., 6 , or g $ .

   1 See Urania for May, 1880, art. E pidem ics an d Planetary Influence.
332                            TH E    T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


    The  conjunctions of the two malefic planets, M a r s and
          are always attended by misfortunes— either great and
'S a t u r n ,

destructive storms, inundations, wars, or earthquakes, according
to the signs. The conjunctions of November 3rd, 1877, -June
30th, 1879, -July 6th, 1881, and July 20th, 1883, gave strong
evidence of their malefic influence. The conjunction due on
August 6th, 1885, in S5 3° 49' 29-5" did not fail to afford
additional proof.2
   The conjunctions of M a r s and J u p i t e r are often attended by
earthquakes (when happening in 8 , ill, 95, SL or Vy); at other
times by the outbreak of religious warfare, as in 1877 and 1888 ;
in summer by thunderstorms or intense heat, and in winter by
gales and lightning.
   The following are the aphorisms of Hermes as to the effects of
the most important conjunctions, as stated by Ramesey:—
   “ W hen J u p i t e r , V e n u s , M e r c u r y , and the M o o n are conjoined in
A ries, they promise benefits and success to mankind ; fertile showers ;
honour to women and Secretaries of State.
   “ W hen J u p i t e r , V e n u s , M a r s , a n d t h e M o o n a r e c o n j o i n e d i n
Taurus, t h e y p r e s i g n i f y i n j u r y t o k i n g s a n d n o b l e s ; a n d e a r t h q u a k e s .
   “ When S a t u r n , J u p i t e r , and M a r s are conjoined in Taurus, they
presignify mortality among cattle ; migration of kings ; and epidemics
among men.
    “ S a t u r n , J u p it e r , M a r s , a n d     th e   S u n : or V enu s, M e rc u r y , and
th e    M o o n , c o n jo in e d     in   Cancer, p r e s i g n i f y   d e tr im e n t   to   e v e r y th in g ,
e a r th q u a k e s a n d in u n d a tio n s .
    “ S a t u r n , J u p it e r , M a r s ,
                                        and the M o o n conjoined in Leo, kings
shall go to war and kill one another, and many evils will fall upon
men.
     S a t u r n , M a r s , and M e r c u r y conjoined i n Virgo, kings shall b e
deceived; women will suffer detriment. And if the S u n be eclipsed
in Virgo and in conjunction with M a r s , there will be civil war.
Also, when S a t u r n and V e n u s are conjoined in Virgo, it denotes an
increase of waters.
   “ M a r s and J u p i t e r    conjoined in Libra, noblemen and their
associates will suffer. When J u p i t e r , the S u n , and M o o n are conjoined
in ===, there will be mortality among women and just men ; much rain,
cloudy and malignant air.
   “ When S a t u r n , M a r s , and V e n u s are conjoined in Scorpio, it
presignifies that the king will be wounded, or bitten by some beast, or
stung by an adder or obnoxious creature ; kings shall quarrel with one
another and break leagues and promises; and when the M o o n is
joined with those planets, much rain and increase of waters.
   “ Moreover, if Scorpio be the sign ascending at the vernal ingress,
and S a t u r n be therein conjoined with M a r s , or in any participation
with $ in the ascendant, and V e n u s be then combust, and J u p i t e r
retrograde, judge evil in everything, wars and quarrels, sackings of
cities and towns, earthquakes, terrors, and bloodshed, and destructive
epidemics— for Scorpio is the most evil of all the signs. Judge, also,

                           See Zadkiel’s Almanac for 1835, pp. 50-52.
             M UTUAL    C O N J U N C T IO N S   OF   THE   M A JO R   PLANETS.   333'-

that kings will quarrel and fight with one another, and noble and great,
men die. And if both fortunes (If and 5 be conjoined in this sign,,
there will be many men come forth to draw people away from true-
religion.
   “ When S a t u r n , J u p i t e r , M e r c u r y , and the M o o n , are conjoined
in Sagittarius, it presignifies that there shall be floods; that kings;
shall exalt themselves; and that noblemen, scribes, astrologers, and
ingenious men shall be held in great esteem.
   “ When the S u n , M a r s , and M e r c u r y are conjoined in Capricornus-
it presignifies death of kings; epidemic fevers, conflagrations
apparitions in the air; high winds; a scarcity of vegetables ; and many
thefts and robberies.
   “ When M a r s , S a t u r n , and the M o o n are conjoined in Aquarius, it.
presignifies scarcity of water and rain ; injury to travellers; and many
snakes and serpents.
   “ When S a t u r n , J u p i t e r , and M a r s are conjoined in Pisces, it pre­
signifies the death of kings, noblemen, and grandees; and if the S u n
be with M a r s and S a t u r n , the king shall be slain ; there shall be little
or no rain ; any many fish will be taken in the sea.”
    Eamesey lays stress on the necessity for casting a figure of
 the heavens “ for the punctual time of partile conjunction —viz.,
 in the very same sign, degree, and minute of the zodiac.’ ’ He
 should have added, “ to the same second,” but in his day the
English astrologers appear to have been unequal (like many of
the self-styled “ professors ” of astrology at the present day) to
such a task. For unless the conjunction of Saturn and .Jupiter,
for example, be computed to seconds, the figure of the heavens
would be entirely erroneous: the            ordinary   astrological
Ephemerides giving the longitudes of the planets to degrees and
minutes only do not permit of such accuracy. There can be no
wonder that some of the predictions failed when the time o f
conjunction could not be determined within hours, or even days.
Astrologers base their predictions on the features of figures-
drawm for the moment of conjunction in longitude (i.e., in the-
ecliptic) ; whereas astronomers now-a-days compute conjunctions-
in right ascension : hence there is an apparent discrepancy
frequently found between the time of conjunction of any two of the
heavenly bodies, as stated in the Nautical Almanac and Zadkiel's-
Almanac. The last conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter, in 1881,
is given in the latter publication as occurring at 2h 4m 56s- p.ro­
of April 18th in 8 1° 36' 41"; in the Nautical Almanac, at
! h p.m. of April 22nd (in E.A.) Although the author published
the process of calculation in Urania for July, 1880, several
persons w'rote charging him with having made a mistake, as the
Nautical Almanac gave a different time. There can be no doubt
that astrologers are right in taking the ecliptic conjunction of
planets as the true one for astrological judgment, in the same-
334                THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTROLOGY.


 manner as the conjunction of the Sun and Moon (New Moon) is
 taken. The success of predictions made on this basis, and pub­
lished in Zadhiel's Almanac, give evidence of its reliability.
'Geocentric longitude of a heavenly body is its angular distance
from the first point of Aries measured upon the ecliptic, as viewed
 from the E arth; its right ascension is its distance from Aries
measured upon the Equator.
    After computing the exact moment of conjunction in
longitude, it becomes important to ascertain where the con­
joined planets will be rising at that moment, for the chief effects
are usually felt at such a place; next, where they will be
¡southing, setting, or in the lower meridian. This may be readily
 done by means of the globe. The countries ruled by the sign in
which the conjunction falls will also be affected.
    Generally speaking, conjunctions of evil planets in fiery signs
 { T , Sb, and f ) presignify “ impediment in the air ; corruption,
 and much damage thereby both to men and fruits of the earth.
 In fixed signs ( h , Sb> HI, and ¿07), whether the conjoined planets
 be benevolents or malevolents, what they portend is of continu­
 ance ; in movable signs (V , SB, =£=, and Vy), of little or no
 continuance ; in common signs ( n , ujj, $ , X ), a mean between
 these, neither of long nor short continuance.” The last-named
 distinctions are arbitrary and fanciful.
    It has already been stated that the ancients considered the
 conjunction of Saturn and Jupiter in the first term of Aries as
 the greatest of all. The next in importance is their conjunction
 in the first term of Taurus, Gemini and Cancer, because these are
 held to be the first terms of the various trigons or triplicities.
 When Saturn is in the stronger (as in        vy, and zz) the evils
 resulting will be very terrible; when Jupiter is the stronger
 planet (as in 2 5 , f , and X ) the evil will he abated. In fiery,
■earthy, and airy signs the conjunctions of Saturn and Jupiter
 were held to presignify drought, barrenness of the earth, and
•scarcity of provisions; in watery signs, detriment by super­
abundance of water.
    The conjunction of Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars in any term or
 face and configurated with the Sun, presignifies “ the destruc­
 tion of kingdoms, sects, and schisms, according to the strength
,and nature of the planet which is strongest in the sign ” in
 which the conjunction takes place. “ Note that when these
 planets are conjoined in their exaltations (gs, ===, or vy), they
 denote good, to their power; yet there shall be much war and
 many miracles; if in their falls, they denote mischief, famine,
 pestilence, etc.” — says Bamesey.
             MUTUAL    C O N J U N C T IO N S   OF   THE   M A J O Ii   PLANETS.   335

   The conjunction of Mars and Saturn in human signs (n , rtg
the first half of } , and ¿c?) presignifies “ many infirmities shall
be incident to men, according to the nature of the stronger
planet. In earthy signs, frost, snow, and cold shall molest and
prove hurtful and destructive to the fruits and seeds of the
earth. In fiery signs, the earth shall be barren through
extremity of heat and drought. In airy signs, there shall be
many high and tempestuous winds. In watery signs, abundance
of water and many inundations. In either °f, 3 , Sb, the latter
 half of f , or ty, the evil will fall on animals, chiefly those of
the nature and form of the sign. In this manner thou mayest
 enlarge upon all the important conjunctions. If Mars and
 Saturn be conjoined in an angle, they declare war3 amongst the
 great, many tribulations and discussions which shall continue
until they are otherwise conjoined.”
    The conjunction of Mars and Jupiter presignifies mischief “ by
 rain, snow, corruption of the air, war, and bloodshed.                         If
 Jupiter be the stronger, the effects will not be so bad. If they
 be conjoined in the ascendant of the vernal equinox, mischief
 and misfortune will assuredly happen to the people in general.
 The nature of the evil may be judged from the nature of the
sign and the planet which is the stronger of the two.”
   In judging which is the stronger of two conjoined planets, the
 author believes from experience that the planet which has the
 more northerly declination, especially if in perigee, should be
 considered as the stronger. In the southern hemisphere, the
 one having the more southern declination should be taken to be
 the stronger. The chief dignities may be next considered, but
 they ought not to be preferred before perigee and declination.
 At the conjunction of M a r s and S a t u r n in the year 1877, Mars
 was in perigee, and the fearful slaughter of Russians and Turks
 attested the power of the planet of war.i In that year, M a r s
 was retrograde (and therefore very near the earth) from August
 7th to October 7th.
    Sir George Wharton, a clever astronomer of the seventeenth
 century, averred his belief that a great (fourth) cause of the
 mutations of empires, kingdoms, etc., is “ the conjunction of the
 two superior planets, S a t u r n and J u p i t e r . ” He recognised that
 “ the F i r s t C a u s e i s A l m i g h t y G o d , the Creator and Governor o f

 all things. Forasmuch,” wrote Wharton, “ as God performs his

   3 As in 1879, at Cabul.     See Urania for January, 1880.
   1 See page 21.
336                  THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTROLOGY.


 greatest works in the world by angels, it is not impossible'
 or strange, if I say and aver, that every empire, kingdom,
 and republic, bath some certain angel and genius peculiarly
 appropriated thereunto as a governor ordained by God. For this
is the constant opinion of the JeAys, who believe that every
person and place hath a certain guardian angel set over i t ; nor
do a few doctors of the Catholic Church believe otherwise,
 whilst in Daniel 10, 11, there is mention made of an angel
 governor of Persia, and Greece ; and the apostle (Ephesians 3)
expressly constitutes a certain order of angels which he calls
potestates (rulers or potentates, as our English translation hath it,
principalities and powers).”
    The conjunctions of M e k c u k y and M a r s near the Equator or
tropics, especially when they are at the same time in parallel
declination, cause much public excitement; a prevalence of
robberies with violence, and of murders; and often help to cause
war. On the atmosphere, these conjunctions exercise a most
potent and disturbing influence, as Kepler records. In August,
1831, M e r c u r y , M a r s , and S a t u r n were conjoined ; tempests in
 England and the West Indies destroyed over 5,000 lives.
    The student should always hear in mind Ptolemy’s injunc­
 tions ;— “ In the conjunction of S a t u r n and J u p i t e r , pronounce
according to the nature of that one which may be higher in
elevation. Follow the same rule with other stars. Judgment is
not to be drawn from any figure until the next conjunction shall
have been considered; for principles are varied by every con­
junction ; and, therefore, to avoid error, both the last and the
next should be combined.”
                                      337




                      C H A P T E R            X Y 11.



                               COMETS.

                                 “ L ike a com et burn’d,
               T hat fires the length o f Ophiuebus huge
               In the arctic sky. and from his horrid hair
               Shakes pestilence and w a r . ” — M i l t o n .

  T h e word comet is derived from KOfxi'i, hair ; the nebulous
  matter of which the coma and tail are composed being supposed
  to resemble hair, the object being called ko/xv^ c (kometes), a
  hairy star.
     The tails of comets usually incline towards the region last
  quitted; they are sometimes curved. Many comets have
  appeared without tails, some with several separate tails; some
  (like Donati’s comet in 1859) have a tail extending over a very
 considerable part of the heavens.
     Lexell’s comet was supposed to have passed among the
 satellites of Jupiter; if so, their motions were not in the least
 affected by it. The nearest approaches to the earth ever made by
 comets, were in 1684 and 1861. In the former year, the comet
 (which passed its perihelion on June 8th) came within 216
 semi-diameters of the earth. In 1861, the earth passed through
 the tail of a great com et; the world was greatly alarmed by the
 speculations of astronomers as to the effects of this passage, but
 the event proved to be perfectly harmless. In 1856, far greater
 alarm was excited by the prediction of a learned astronomer that
 the comet of 1556 would then reappear and come into collision
 with the earth. Many persons went foolishly mad about the
 comet, which, after all, never appeared. Had an astrologer
foretold such a calamity, the newspapers would have teemed with
virtuous indignation and denouncement when the scare was
found to be groundless. The learned astronomer was flatly
contradicted by the learned astrologer Zadkiel I. (Morrison) who
told his readers that there was nothing to be alarmed at, and
that astronomers knew very little about comets. This fiasco is
not remembered against astronomers; and this marks the
difference    between     orthodox    and    heterodox     science!
                                                                 z
338              THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTROLOGY.



Astronomers claim to have discovered a singular bond of
relationship between comets and shooting-stars (this may
account for the frequent failure to predict the return of comets
and of meteoric displays). But, hitherto, they have failed to
determine either the origin, the real structure, or the causes of
the wonderful changes of shape of comets.
    Hevelius and Kepler believed that comets proceed from some
gross exhalations from the Sun.       Halley and Hamilton were of
opinion that their tails are composed of electric fluid. Newton's
erroneous ideas respecting comets were formed in ignorance of
many physical facts and laws subsequently determined.
     Sir John Herschel characterised the assertion that “ comets
 cause warm summers, epidemics, potato blights, and so forth ”
 as “ all wild talking.” History, however, abounds with
 coincidences of epidemics, wars, overthrow of kingdoms,
 pestilence, famine, and earthquakes, with the appearance of
 great comets. Hence, by an empirical law, we may venture to
 say that when a great comet, or several shall appear, certain
 great events (according to the nature of the sign of the zodiac in
 which they may appear) will immediately follow ; but this would
 by no means necessarily involve a belief that the comets were
 the cause of such events, for all these phenomena might be the
  result of a common natural cause.
     We can hardly wonder at the widespread belief in ancient and
  mediaeval times that comets are portents, considering the before-
  mentioned coincidences, and that it is stated in Holy Writ that
  changes or new appearances in the heavens were signs of
  approaching calamities. Professors of every kind of religion
  offered up prayers against the evil influences of comets and
  stars.
      The great Kepler declared that comets heralded the overthrow
  of kingdoms, and various calamities.
      In the year 1881 three comets appeared. The tropical heat
  in England in July, 1881, also in Europe and North America,
  will long be remembered. In 1882, during the total eclipse of
   the Sun at Cairo, May 17th, the astronomers observed a great
   comet in the form of a scimitar close to the Sun. The great
   comet (Id) of 1881, was first seen in R.A. 74° 45', which is the
   line of the 16th degree of the sign Gemini (which rules Egypt).
   The war in Egypt in 1882, and that in the Soudan in 1883, ’84,
   and ’85, quickly followed, notwithstanding that Mr. Gladstone’s
   Government came into power (in 1880) pledged to maintain
   peace. The tropical summer of 1884 was one of the most
                             COM ETS.                          339

 extraordinary seasons ever witnessed in these islands. The
  volcanic eruption at Java, destroying at least 65,000 lives, took
 place on August 26th and 27th, 1883.
     R. A. Proctor, in his remarks on comets as portents, called
 attention to the “ noteworthy circumstance ” that the terrible
 war of 1870 was “ begun and carried on to its termination
 without the appearance of any great com et; ” and that it
 occurred “ near the middle of one of the longest intervals
 recorded in astronomical annals as unmarked by a single
 conspicuous comet— the interval between the years 1862 and
  1874.”
    We should certainly never assert that because a great war or
 the death of a great man occurred a comet must forthwith
 appear..    However, on the night of May 29th, 1870, Dr.
 Winneeke, of Carlsruhe, discovered a comet “ resembling a
 pretty bright nebula of about 2J minutes in diameter.” He
 observed it again on the 30th, when its R.A. was 0h 50m 9-55s ,
 and its declination 28° 52' 18" north. Hence it was first seen
 in the second decanate of the sign Aries. Now, the ancients
 averred that a comet appearing in Aries presignifies a very
»extensive drought, drying up of fountains, e tc .; and such a
 drought was experienced in most parts of Europe in 1870.
 Again, the comet appeared in the north and was vertical to
 nearly the whole of Germany (ruled by Aries) ; and the terrible
 war was waged by Germany against France that same year.
 Moreover., the comet appeared very near the longitudes of the
 Sun and Mars at the birth of Louis Napoleon, and his armies
 were beaten and himself taken prisoner. We are not aware
 that the ancients attributed effects in proportion to the apparent
■dimensions of comets, but rather to the parts of the zodiac in
which they are first seen.
    The comet of 1861, which appeared at the end of June, was
 first seen in the sign Gemini. When it passed through the 77th
degree of R.A. (the line of ascendant of London) it was not
 visible, but the great conflagration in London, which lasted for
 six weeks, and had not been equalled for 200 years, commenced
 on June 22nd, 1861. In the following September the first shot
was fired in the terrible civil war in the United States (ruled by
 Gemini). The Sultan of Turkey, and the Lord High Chancellor
■of England, died within a week of the appearance of this com et;
and the lamented Prince Consort (in the midheaven of whose
.nativity the comet appeared) died on December 14th, 1861.
    The comet of 1858 (Donati’s) was followed by the Italian war
340                THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTKOLOGY.


of 1859 fas foretold by Zadkiel). That of 1853, by the Crimean
War. That of 1811, by the Napoleonic Wars.
   Proctor thought that the “ star ” seen by the wise men in
the East may have been Halley’s comet.1 “ It appeared in the
year 66, or seventy years after the Nativity, and as the period of
the comet varies, according to the perturbing influences affecting
its motion, from 69 to 80 years, it may have appeared at our
Saviour’s birth, travelling southwards.”
   Whether the .Star of Bethlehem was Halley’s comet or the
“ lost star ” of 1572-'74 which appeared in Cassiopeia, supposed
to have a period of 315 years, it is certain that it appeared in the
second deeanate of Aries. Now Aries is an eastern sign, and
rules J u d e a , hence the Magi, or “ wise men,” went to Jerusalem
the capital. This affords a complete answer to the sceptical
objection of the celebrated Deist, Thomas Paine, viz. :—■“ If the
wise men saw the star in the east (or towards the east as it may
be rendered) why did they go to the ¡vest ? why did they not go
to the east instead of from the east ? why go to Jerusalem ? ”
The true meaning of the term east is that the Magi had seen the
star or comet in the eastern part of the zodiac in regard to the
position of the Sun. If the comet became stationary in the
meridian of Bethlehem, as seems very probable, it would explain
the meaning of another verse— “ The star came and stood over
where the young child was.” No theological writer has ever
been able to answer Paine’s objection, because of the neglect of
astrology to which so many allusions are made in the Bible.
Ptolemy declared that Aries influenced Judea.
   It was Halley’s comet, wrote Proctor, which in the year 1456
created such alarm throughout Europe. At that time the Turks
had in their victorious career crossed the Hellespont and seemed
likely to overrun Europe. Millions of people believed that the
 comet portended the doom of the world. It passed its perihelion
 on June 18th, 1456, and in the following winter the Baltic was
frozen from Mecklenburg to Denmark; the Danube was frozen
for two months; and many vineyards in Germany were totally
destroyed. An earthquake occurred in Naples, followed by
violent rains and great inundations, 40,000 lives being lost.
   The next appearance of Halley’s comet was in 1531.
Religious houses were suppressed by Henry VIII. The Cabaqua
Sea rose four feet above its usual height. Spotted fever raged


  1   See ZadkieVs Almanac for 1879, p. 67, art. “ The Star of Bethlehem,’*
and Z.A. for 1911, pp. 86-89.
                                CO M ETS.                          341

 throughout Europe, and was followed by the plague. .¿Etna was
 in eruption: great inundations took place in Switzerland,
 Borne, and Antwerp; in England, from Somersetshire to
 Norfolk, the country had the appearance of a great sea. At
 Lisbon, the same year, an earthquake continued for eight days,
 overthrowing 1,500 houses and killing 80,000 people ; and
 several neighbouring towns were swallowed up.
     The next return of Halley’s comet took place in 1606, the
 year memorable for the gunpowder plot. In the following year
 it appeared of a dark livid colour (i.e. of the character of Satubn) ;
the plague raged in London, 850 dying of it per week. On June
 12th (the day of the summer solstice, before the alteration of the
calendar), there occurred a severe frost, and the following winter
 was intensely cold all over the w orld; the sea overflowed its
 banks and inundated a great part of England, so that “ hay and
corn stacks floated about like ships on the sea; pigeons were
seen upon the stacks, which were carried away by the floods.”
 The coasts of America were visited by storms of fearful violence.
    In the year 1682, Halley’s comet reappeared and passed its
 perihelion on September 4th. The heat on its approach was
 most intense throughout England and Europe ; the thermometer
 in England stood at 96° in the shade. Disease and pestilence
followed over all Europe, especially in Spain and Algiers ; at
Halle 300 per day died of plague. The City of Catana was
destroyed by an earthquake, and 60,000 of its inhabitants
perished. .¿Etna and Vesuvius were both in eruption. Earth­
quakes were felt in various parts of England. On the departure
of the comet, severe frosts ensued, a fair being held on the
Thames.
    In 1759 Halley’s comet re-appeared, and was visible in the
following year. In 1759 earthquakes were felt in Tripoli, Syria,
etc., spreading over an area of 10,000 square miles.
    Halley’s comet re-appeared in 1909. It was first seen as a
telescopic object at l h 30m a.m. of September 12th, and was
photographed by Dr. Wolf, of Heidelberg, in B.A. 94° 33' (the
line of B.A. of Cancer 4° 11') and declin. 17° 11' N. It first
became visible to the unaided eye at 3h 30m a.m. of April 25th,
1910, like a star of the second magnitude, in B.A. 858°, which
is that of the sign Pisces 27° 49', on the threshold of Aries.
Within twelve days King Edward VII. expired, to the great
grief of the British Empire. On October 3rd, 1910, a revolution
broke out in Portugal and King Manoel fled to England.
Heavy rains and great floods in Europe coincided with the
342              THE   T E X T -H O O K   OF   ASTROLOGY.


approach of the comet in January, 1910. Great heat and severe
prolonged drought in Europe and Asia followed in the wonderful
summer of 1911, as the comet receded from the Solar system.
   Three hundred and seventy-one years before the Christian era,
a comet appeared and was described by Aristotle. Diodonus
Siculus, writing of it says;— “ In the first year of the 102nd
Olympiad, Alcisthenes being Archou of Athens, several prodigies
announced the approaching humiliation of the Lacedaemonians ;
a blazing torch of extraordinary size, which was compared to a
flaming beam, was seen during several nights.’          Guillemin
remarks that this same comet was considered by the ancients not.
merely to have presaged but produced the earthquakes which
caused the towns of Helice and Bura to be submerged. Seneca,
said that as soon as it appeared it brought about the sub­
mergence of those towns.
   The comets of 134 b .c . and 118 b .c . were not regarded as.
portents of death, but as signalising, the former the birth, the
latter the accession, of Mithridates.
    A comet of an alarming nature appeared and was seen in the.
daytime with the naked eye 43 b .c ., and just after the death of
Julius Cfesar; the Romans thought that it was Cfesar’s
 metamorphosed soul armed with fire and seeking vengeance for
 his death.
    Pliny says:—■“ A fearful star is the comet, and not easily
 appeased, as appeared in the late civil troubles when Octavius
 was consul; a second time by the intestine war of Pompey and
 Gtesar ; and in our own time, when Claudius Cassar having been
 poisoned, the Empire was left to Domitian, in whose reign there
 appeared a blazing comet.”
    Lurcan records that during the war, “ the darkest nights
 were lit up by unknown stars, the heavens appeared on fire,
 flaming torches traversed in all directions the depths of space ;
 a comet, that fearful star which overthrows the powers of the
 earth, showed its horrid hair.”
     Seneca also expressed an opinion that some comets portend
 evil. He says :— “ Some comets are very cruel, and portend the
 worst misfortunes; they bring with them and leave behind them
 the seeds of blood and slaughter."
     Socrates, the. historian, says that when Gainas besieged Con­
 stantinople, “ so great was the danger which hung over the city,
  that it was presignified and portended by a huge blazing comet
  which reached from heaven to the eartb, the like whereof no.
  man had ever seen before.”
                                  COM ETS.                             343

   Cedrenus, in his “ Compendium of History,” states that a
comet appeared before the death of Johannes Tzimicas, the
Emperor of the East, which foreshadowed not alone his death,
but the great calamities which were to befall the Eoman Empire
by reason of their civil wars. In like manner, the comet of 451
is said to have announced the death of Attila, and that of 455
the death of Yalentinian. The death of Merovingius was
announced by the comet of 577 ; that of Chilperic by the comet
of 584 ; that of the Emperor Maurice by the comet of 602 ; that
of Mahomet by the comet of 632; that of Louis Debonair by
the comet of 837. Shakespeare has reflected this universal
belief that comets often indicated the approaching death of
great men, in the following lines :—
   “ When beggars die there are no comets seen ;
     T h e heavens them selves b la ze forth the death o f princes.”

   The comet of 1528 seems to have been par excellence a horrible
and portentous one. Of this, Andrew Paré writes :— This
comet was so horrible and dreadful, and engendered such terror
in the minds of men that they died, some from fear alone, others
from illness engendered by fear. It was of immense length and
blood-red colour, at its head was seen the figure of a curved
arm, holding a large sword in the hand as if preparing to strike.
At the point of this sword were three stars; and on either side a
number of axes, knives, and swords covered with blood, amongst
which were many hideous faces with bristling beards and hair.”
   Tennyson, in his drama “ H arold” alludes to the popular
dread of comets :—
            “ Aldwyth: What thinkest thou this means ?
             Gamel: War, my dear lady! ”

   Proctor evidently took a great deal of trouble to reproduce
authentic records of the appearance of comets and of dire
calamities following. In this way, he, unconsciously perhaps,
makes out a very strong case in favour of comets as portents.
He made two great mistakes : (1) in confounding the super­
stitious fears of the vulgar with the speculations of ancient
learned astrologers, whose astrology was deduced from the most
patient and careful examination of Nature ; and (2) in overlook­
ing the fact that astrologers ascribed various significations
according to the appearance of comets in the various signs of the
zodiac and the several divisions of the heavens. Even if the
premature assertion of Proctor that “ the movements of comets
3U                     THE    T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y .


 are as well understood as those of the most orderly planets ”
 were strictly true— and it is considerably discounted
 by the fact that the            great comets           of 1811 and
 1861, never drew nearer to the Sun (greatly to the
 astonishment of the Newtonian astronomers), and the
 non-re-appearance of the comet of 1556 in 1856, as foretold—it
would not controvert the fact that the appearance of comets is
followed by great convulsions, etc. Leverrier acknowledged that
the comet of 1861 “ resembled none of those already observed ”
and he added that “ this circumstance will contribute not a little
to throw confusion upou the little we know of those erratic
bodies ; moreover, the comet has not drawn nearer to the Sun :
these are all circumstances calculated to introduce great
complications into the theory of comets.” It would seem that
Proctor either never read these comments of that great French
astronomer or chose to ignore them. If the Sun attracts other
comets why did it fail to attract those of 1811 and 1861.
Which of our distinguished astronomers will answer this
question clearly and satisfactorily ?
   The conjunctions of S a t u b n and J u p i t e r — which can always
be accurately foretold— are still regarded, as we have seen, as
portents of great changes, etc. It may seem clever, to the
superficial and the frivolous, to laugh at the science of the
ancients ; but philosophers should show' more respect for it,
especially when they remember that the founders of modern
astronomy, Pythagoras, Democritus, and Kepler, believed in
Astrology. There has been nothing advanced by astrologers in
reference to the portentous appearance of comets more absurd
than the vagaries of Newton, Whiston, and others, concerning
the movements of those bodies.
   In a catalogue of pestilences which have occurred since the
 Christian era, it was showm by Dr. Forster2 that on 262
occasions appearances of comets coincided very closely therewith.
   Comet years are invariably and proverbially good wine years.
   The great comet of 1811, which appeared near the constella­
tion of Ursa Major, and continued to be visible for 510 days (the
longest appearance on record), was the forerunner of the Russian
war, and of that great convulsion which separated some of those
vast continents of ice near the North Pole, which had existed for
ages. Some idea of their age may be formed from the


   2    “ Illustrations o f the A tm ospherical Origin o f E p id em ic Diseases.”   By
T . Foster, M .B . Chelm sford, 1829.
                              COM ETS.                         315
  •observations of Kotzebue, who found icebergs covered with land,
  vegetables, and even trees ; and one of them contained the body
  of a mammoth in a state of putrefaction, due to exposure to a
  warmer climate after its separation.
      The comet which heralded the birth of Christ is the only one
  recorded as the messenger of “ glad tidings” and “ peace on
  earth.” It is a remarkable fact that whereas all ancient writers
  have represented all other comets as portents of evil or as
 scourges, not one ascribed such a character to the “ Star of
  Bethlehem.”        What a contrast to that comet which Josephus
 says appeared “ in the form of a sword,” and “ hung over
 Jerusalem for a whole year,” and thus foreshadowed the destruc­
 tion of that ancient city !
      The following are the aphorisms of the ancients in regard to
 the appearance of comets, as collated by Ramesey :—
     “ C o m e t s appearing in the sign Aries presignify evil and
 •detriment to noblemen and grandees in the Eastern parts;
 sorrow to the peoples under v ; the clash of arms and blood­
 shed ; death or dethroning of some king; also great drought,
 disease among small cattle, especially sheep.
     “ In Taurus, mischief to men under 3 ; death of some great
 m a n ; detriment to the greater sort of cattle, especially oxen;
 corruption of fruit, destruction of corn; in winter much cold and
great 'winds; also grievous earthquakes, vehement sicknesses, etc.
     “ In Gemini, quarrels, wars, and dissensions amongst m en ;
sickness and death of children and young men especially; the
 slaughter of birds ; scarcity of food ; thunderstorms, and hurri­
canes.
     “ In Cancer, abundance of locusts (in the countries subject to
their invasions; in our climate, caterpillars, and pernicious
w orm s); a scarcity of fru it; wars, discord ; death of some great
m an; and pestilence.
    “ In Leo, wild beasts shall attack mankind (in regions infested
by feral creatures) ; worms and vermin will be destructive to
corn ; the nobility and gentry will suffer detriment, and many
of them death : war amongst kings, much bloodshed in Eastern
parts; prevalence of affections of the eyes.
    “ In Virgo, banishment of servants of kings; damage to
merchants; troubles, sadness, fevers; a noise of arms, etc.
    ‘ ‘ Libra, highway robberies ; poverty ; great cold ; death of
■some eminent man, plots, treachery, and slaughter; scarcity of
rain, impetuous winds ; a drought of fountains; scarcity of the
fruits of the earth ; earthquakes, etc.
346               THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTROLOGY.


   “ In Scorpio, great wars or rebellions, changes of kingdoms;
great perils; the death of some eminent m an ; scarcity of
waters.; dangers to women: scarcity of corn and fruits of the
earth; and prevalence of diseases of the urinary and reproduc­
tive organs.
   “ In Sagittarius, decay of the nobility and of wise and learned
men ; captivity of some prince ; war, and such like.
   ‘ ■In Capricomus, increase of crime; war amongst kings and
nobles; many calamities, death of princes; contempt of
religion; highway robberies; abundance of hail, snow, and
frost, to the detriment of the seeds of the earth; also it
threateneth famine, pestilence, and the like.
   “ In Aquarius, war and bloodshed; death of some eminent,
prince or lady ; epidemics; obscuration of the air, with thunder
and lightning ; pestilence, etc.
    “ In Pisces, war amongst kindred and allies, much slaughter;
contentions about religion and ancient tradition; apparitions in
the air ; destruction of fish ; and dangers in navigation.
   “ Comets appearing in the eastern quarter of the heavens
generally bring their effects quickly to pass, the effect on the
atmosphere being drier; in the western, the effects manifest
themselves more slowly and often extend over three years, and
the effect on the atmosphere is to condense the aqueous vapours.
The quarter of the heavens in which comets appear shows the
part of the globe on which their effects will mostly fa ll; the sign
of the zodiac, the particular kingdoms or countries. The effects
are usually most manifest when the Sun arrives at the degree of
the ecliptic affected by the appearance of the comet.”
  The Tillies of October 12th, 1832, published a letter “ On
Comets,” from Mr. John Rerapath, from which the following
paragraphs are extracted :—■

   “ On this point—namely, the influence of comets to affect the
temperature— M. Arago has made some researches, the result of
which is, that comets have no effect in altering the mean annual
temperature of the earth. Granting to M. Arago the full benefit
of his inference, it by no means follows that they may not have
a powerful influence on the season, separately considered,
although they may have none on the mean temperature of the
year. For example, let us suppose that one was by any means-
rendered either uncommonly clear or uncommonly cloudy, for a .
whole year, what would be the consequence ? Would not the
summer temperature in the former case be considerably elevated,,
and the winter as much depressed, and the contrary in the latter
                                COMETS.                             347

case ; yet the mean temperature in both instances might be the
same ?
   “ History furnishes us with numberless instances of the great
atmospheric changes which have accompanied or succeeded the
apparition of large and notorious comets ; and unless we reject
altogether its often iterated testimonies, I do not see how we
can refuse our assent to influences so manifest, and yet so simple-
and perfectly philosophical.”
   Mr. Maunder writes:— “ The suggestion has been made— follow­
ing the closing lines of Paradise Lost (for Milton is responsible
for many of our interpretations of Scripture):—
                                1High in front advanced
            The brandished sword of God before them blazed,
            Pierce as a comet,’

— that a comet was indeed the “ flaming sword which turned!
every way, to keep the way of the tree of life.”3
    It may be mentioned that the appearance of Halley’s comet,
in 1759 was followed by the death of King George II. in 1760.
    Its appearance in 1066 was immediately followed by the death
of King Harold and the Norman Conquest of England. William
of Normandy is said to have remarked to his courtiers that:—
   A comet like this is only seen when a kingdom wants a king.” '
    Sceptics advanced the argument that as the appearance of
Halley’s comet in 1835 was not attended by any great catas­
trophes it was vain and superstitious to apprehend any disasters,
as likely to attend and follow its reappearance in 1910. Zadkiel.
I. declared, in his “ H erald” for 1833, his opinion that there
would be no very great evil of a physical nature attending the
return in 1835, because the years 1834, 1835, and 1836 would
be free from important conjunctions or oppositions of the major
planets. How different was the case in 1909 and 1910 (when
2 7 , >>, , and ig were in the cardinal signs Libra, Aries,
Cancer, and Capricornus) has been already recorded at pages
341, 342.
   As Evelyn wrote in 1682, “ Comets may be warnings from
G od, as they commonly are forerunners of His animadversions.”




  3    “ The Astronomy of the Bible,” by E. Walter Maunder, F.R.A.S,, second
edition, p. 107.
                                   348




                          BOOK III.

              ASTRO-METEOROLOGY.


                         C H A P T E R          I.



                     INTRODUCTION.

   “ The love of truth is of equal importance in the reception of facts and
in the formation of opinions ; and it includes, also, a readiness to
relinquish our own opinions when new facts or arguments are presented to
us which are calculated to overturn them.” —A b e r c r o m b ie .

T h e study of M e t e o r o l o g y is of the highest antiquity, being

co-eval with that of Astrology the foster-mother of Astronomy.
“ The disclosures of the cuneiform inscriptions prove that the
phenomena of the weather were observed and recorded together
with the configurations of the heavenly bodies.” 1
     In the earliest ages of the world, the shepherds, agriculturists,
and seamen watched for indications, of approaching changes of
weather, in the appearance of the sky, clouds, changes of the
direction of the wind, etc. ; also, by observing the habits of
animals, birds, insects, and the indications of sensitive plants.
     Aristotle, in his MerewpoXoyiKa, published about 300 years
b . c . , wrote of ra fjereuipa, the things above the earth— meteors,

air ; also of water and earthquakes.
     The poets Aratus, Lucretius, Virgil, and Manilius wrote
largely concerning weather and the prognostics of the ancients.
     Pliny records aphorisms relating to the forecasting of
weather, and, moreover, relates of Anaximander that “ he fore­
told the earthquakes which overthrew Lacediemon.”
     In the Oeoponica, a work compiled, by direction of one of the

   1 “ Lectures on Babylonian Literature.”    By the Bev. A. H. Sayce.
                           INTRO DU CTION .                            349'

later Greek emperors, by various authors, on agricultural pur­
suits, there are aphorisms relating to weather, seasons, etc.,,
taken from the writings of Aratus, Democritus, Didymus, and
Diophanes, based on the observation of coincidences between
the phenomena of the weather with certain relative positions of
the heavenly bodies.
    The ancient mythology related in great part to the'
atmosphere and variations of weather. Jupiter was a personifi­
cation of various atmospherical phenomena, and in turn, Jupiter
Ammon, Jupiter Tonans, Jupiter Pluvius.
    Some of the ancient Christian hymns and orations, used in
times of epidemic pestilence, were prayers that the sidereal
influences might be repressed. Thus, in the petition to Mary,
the mother of Our Lord and Saviour, beginning “ Stella cccli
extirpavit, que lactavit dominum, etc., we have the prayer,.
“ Siderci compescere.”
    Mr. Kendrick tells us th a t: “ By their science the Egyptian
astrologers could foretell years of scarcity and plenty, pestilences,,
earthquakes, inundations, and the appearance of comets, and do>
many other things surpassing the sagacity of the vulgar.” 3
    Sir John Herschel observed that: “ The discovery of natural!
truth has been remarkably slow. When the discovery is a
 single fact, many years commonly elapse before the next fact in
 connection with it is brought to light. When it is of a more
 general kind, and partakes of the nature of a law, it more
 commonly suggests other truths and valuable circumstances in
connection with it, by which means a more rapid progress is, for
 a time, made.”
    As an illustration of this, Dr. Sharp’5 refers to the attraction of
 magnetic iron, which was known to the ancients ; but this was
 all ; its polarity was not known in Europe until the year 1180,
when it was first described by G uyot; the practical application
 of this property to navigation was not made until about 1260;
the variation in the direction of the magnetic needle in different
 parts of the earth was not known until 1500, when it was dis­
 covered by Sebastian Cabot; the dip of the needle remained
undiscovered until 1576; two hundred and fifty years elapsed.
before the changed direction of the needle by a current of elec­
tricity was discovered by (Ersted in 1819, which property has
since been applied practically in the electric telegraph.

  2 “ Ancient Egypt under the Pharaohs.”      By John Kendrick, M.A.
    “ Essays on Medicine.”
■350                  THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTRO LOG Y.


    Pythagoras, Democritus, Thales, Anaximander, Anaxagoras,
 Eudoxus, Hippocrates, and Galen recognised the fact of planetary
 action on the atmosphere; Tycho Brahe, Kepler, Bacon, Baron
 Napier, Flamstead, Dr. Goad, Boerhave, and Mesmer, were
 convinced of the same fact ; yet at the close of the nineteenth
 century the observation of these great men is ignored by
 astronomers and meteorologists. It m5,y be well asked : “ What
 has meteorology gained by ignoring the experience and observa­
 tion of the ancients ? Can the nineteenth century meteorologists
-emulate the achievements of the Chaldæans and ancient
 Egyptians—can they foretell years of plenty, pestilence, earth­
 quakes, and inundations ? ” The answer is obvious. Despite
the improvement of meteorological instruments and the refine­
 ment of observation of temperature, etc., predictive meteorology
"has retrograded rather than advanced ; for the State-endowed
Météorologie Office frequently fails to foretell the general
 character of the weather only twenty-four hours in advance, and
 dare not attempt to forecast the general character of a coming
■season!
    K epler gave the key to the discovery of the laws which
 regulate the weather, for he averred that “ A Most U nfailing
 E xperience of the E xcitement of S ublunary N atures by the
■Conjunctions and A spects of the P lanets, has instructed
AND CO M PE LLE D M Y   U N W IL L IN G   B E L I E F .” 4

   It may be truly said that there is not a department in nature
which has hitherto been so successfully studied as to constitute
a science, which has not been founded upon one or more of such
general facts or laws of nature. For example, the law of
specific gravity was discovered by Archimedes ; and the law which
is the basis of mechanics was discovered by Galileo. The laws
of Kepler, as they are called from their discoverer, are three
important general facts in astronomy. “ 1°.— The orbits of the
planets are ellipses, with the Sun in one of the foci. 2°.— The
planets move over equal areas in equal times. 3°.— The squares of
the times of revolution of any two planets are to each other in the
same proportion as the cubes o f their mean distances from the Sun.”
   “ Of all the laws,” says Sir John Hersehel, “ to which the
induction from pure observation has ever conducted man, this
third law of Kepler may justly be regarded as the most remark­
able and the most pregnant with important consequences.”

    4     Extract from a work of Kepler’s, quoted in Observations o n the Life of
. Kepler, published by the Society for the Promotion of Useful Knowledge,
1830.
                           IN TRO DU CTION .                    851

    Sir Isaac Newton was indebted to Kepler for many of bis
discoveries.
    If the meteorologists of the present day will but follow the
lead of Kepler in meteorology as Newton did in astronomy, they
will constitute meteorology a predictive science. No other guide
can lead them from darkness to light. Kepler found “ from
pure observation,” that the ancients were right when they
averred that “ sublunary natures are excited by the conjunctions
and aspects of the planets.”
    The “ aspects” of the planets are certain relative positions.
 Kepler’s definition of the term is as follows:— “ Aspectus est
angulas a radiis luminosis binorum, planetarum in terra form atm,
efjicax ad stimulandum naturam sublunarem — An aspect is an
 angle formed on the earth by the luminous beams of two planets,
of strength to stir up the virtue of sublunary things. Thus,
-when the great planet Jupiter is 90° distant in (geocentric)
longitude from the Bun, it is said to be in square aspect with
 Sun, as on August 80th, 1911, marked in the Nautical Almanac
as        □ 0 , in the table of Phenomena. When two of the
heavenly bodies are in conjunction or opposition, they have nearly
the same declination, and act powerfully on the earth and its
atmosphere, because they attract in the same lin e ; they rise,
culminate, and set nearly together, when in conjunction; when
 in opposition, one rises as the other sets, one is in the upper
 when the other is in the lower meridian.
     Observation shows that certain of the celestial bodies are in
 certain relative positions when excess of heat or drought prevails,
 and that certain others are in similar relative positions when
 excess of cold or moisture prevails. Hence it is inferred :—
     1°.— That the said positions o f those celestial bodies are the
 original, though not the proximate, causes o f such atmospheric
 phenomena. 2° — That, since the periods at which such, celestial
 positions shall recur can always be accurately computed, it is
 possible to foretell the periods concurrent therewith, at which such
 atmospheric phenomena will also recur.
     Astronomers inform us that the great planets Jupiter and
  Saturn attract the earth very powerfully indeed, and that Venus
 and Mars do the same; that each planet is always attracting its
  fellows away from the average path round the Sun.
     Sir John Herschel said that: “ Meteorology included in its
  ancient and etymological sense all the appearances of the
  heavens, as well astronomical as atmospheric, but is at present
  restricted in its meaning to the description and explanation of
352               TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF A STR O LO G Y.


 those phenomena which group themselves under the heads of
 the weather, of the seasons, and of climate— phenomena which,
 scientifically regarded, are referable almost entirely to the
 agencies of those laws which govern the ever-varying affections
 of the atmosphere of our globe in its relations to heat, moisture,
 and electricity, and the movements which the changes of those
 relations, brought about by astronomical or other causes,
 impress upon its parts.” Nevertheless, we search in vain for
 any inquiry into, any recognition of “ astronomical causes” in
 Herschel’s valuable work on Meteorology, beyond a mere
allusion to planetary action on the photosphere of the Sun. It is
 this neglect of astronomical causes which bars the way to any
 real progress in predictive meteorology.
    The late Commander Morrison, E.N., who was a member of
 the original Meteorological Society of Great Britian, and the
 late Mr. W. H. White, who was the Secretary of that Society,
 averred their belief in planetary action on the weather and did
 good service in directing public attention to it. The author
published in the year 1864, “ The Weather Guide-Book,” in
which he appealed to the scientific world to investigate astro-
meteorology ; and corresponded with the late Admiral Fitz-Roy
on the subject. But my appeal was made in vain.
    Mr. Jenkins considers it “ surprising to learn that Mercury is
most powerful in its disturbing effect on our atmosphere.” If he
will refer to Dr. Goad’ s work, “ Astro-Meteorologica,” published
in 1686, he will find that this fact was known to Kepler and
Goad. Kepler wrote : “ Conjunetio £ ad © , quorum in Meteoris
magna vis est," etc. ; and again, “ in comnwvendis tempestatibus
multum valet, de Stella nova.”
    In Chap. viii. of “ The Weather Guide-Book,” the author
stated that: It is observed that when Mercury is in conjunction
with the Sun, the atmosphere is greatly disturbed, and the wind
is strong; in winter, hurricanes sometimes happen, as in
December, 1863.” And in Chap. xii. of the same work, the
author showed that to Mercury’s action the greater number of
storms were traceable.
                                    353




                        CHAPTER                I I.


                            THE        SUN.

         “ The seven strings of Apollo’s harp were the symbolical
           representation of the seven planets.”

  I t is unnecessary to explain in these pages the general
  dependence of climate on geographical situation; the high
  temperature at the equator and the extreme cold at the poles;
  the annual variations of temperature which accompany the
  changes of season and the diurnal alterations of heat and cold ;
  all being such obvious consequences of the Sun attaining a
 greater or less meridian altitude and continuing for a longer or
 shorter period above the horizon ; and already explained in the
 text-books of astronomy and meteorology.
     Our task is to search for the causes of variations in the seasons
 — of a hot or a cool summer, of a severe or a mild winter— and of
 the visitations of drought, floods, storms, etc.
     As we have already stated, from the remotest ages the causes
 of these atmospheric phenomena have been sought among the
 phenomena of the heavens.            We propose to continue this
 research, being convinced, from observation, that to abandon it
is to render the discovery of the laws which regulate the weather,
 hopeless.
    To do this, we must watch for coincidences between astronomic
and atmospheric phenomena.
    Pouillet, whose observations (in 1837-’38) at Paris were
quoted by Sir John Herschel in his work on Meteorology, found
that : “ The Solar heat alone constitutes only two-thirds of the
entire quantity of heat supplied to the earth to repair its thermal
losses by terrestrial radiation; and that without the heat
supplied by stellar radiation, the temperature of the earth would
fall to a point which would be incompatible with organic life.”
    Observation shows that when the Sun is in conjunction,
parallel declination, opposition, sextile, quartile, or trine aspect with
J upiter, the weather is warm and is usually line, often both (the
exceptions being when the Sun happens to be at the same time
                                                                    2 A
854               TH E TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


in aspect with Saturn or Uranus). This is a fact in nature, and,
being constantly repeated, there can be no superstition attaching
to a belief that the planet Jupiter (when in such relative
position) is the cause of it. The sextila aspect is the angle of
60°, and this is the angle at which water crystallizes. When
the Sun and Jupiter are 60° distant in longitude, the tempera­
ture of the air rises, but when those bodies are 65° apart no
such effect is found. In like manner, water crystallizes at 60°
 but does not crystallize at 65°. In both cases the fact is known,
but in neither can the reason (in the present state of our
 knowledge) be given. The “ rule of six ” is carried out by
 Nature in both operations.
    The hexagonal formation of snow crystals, which always
 retain the hexagonal in outline on the six,sides, is a laiv ivhich
 governs Nature alike in these “ ice-jewels” and in th e “ sextile
 aspect ” — the angle of 60° which is one-sixth of the circle
 (860°)— the effects of this angle or aspect being well-known to
 astro-meteorologists.
    In the first edition of this work (in 1889) the author declared
 that observations of Sun-spots alone will never lead to the
 discovery of the laws regulating the weather. The atmosphere
 is often liable to continuing impressions, sometimes unusual,
 and these are apparently produced by Solar configurations with
 the major planets, chiefly at or near the equinoxes and solstices.
    Mr. Maunder’s examination of the Greenwich Observatory
 records in his, the Solar Department, proves that seasons like
  that “ wonderful summer” of heat and drought in 1911, “ are
  quite independent of Sun-spots,” for they have occurred at
  maxima and minima, or intermediate periods so that the cause
  must be looked for elsewhere.”
     When will Mr. Maunder and his colleagues east aside their
  prejudices and investigate planetary action on the Sun ?
                                         855




                         C H A P T E R                III.



                             THE          MOON.

        “ Therefore the Moon, the governess of floods,
          Pale i n her anger, washes all the air."-— S h a k e s p e a r e .

“ F a i r Cynthia’s ever-changing face,’’ has been ever regarded

as more or less symbolical of weather changes. Aratus and
Virgil allude to this, in their poems.
   Pliny says : “ In Africa, the south wind is serene, the north­
east cloudy.      All the winds have their turns. To judge
rationally of their changes, the fourth day of the Moon is to be
regarded.” This probably gave rise to the vulgar Latin proverb:
“ Primus, secundus, tertius, nullus. Quartus, aliquis, quintus,
sextus, qualis, tota luna talis.” “ As is the fourth and fifth
days’ weather, so’s that lunation altogether ; ” — when the Moon
forms her first semi-quartile aspect (45°) with the Sun, after
conjunction.
   Arago endeavoured to prove that the Moon has no connection
with the state of the weather. The publication of his paper on
this subject led the Society for the Diffusion of Useful Know­
ledge to publish the results of their observations, some,fifty years
since, in the Penny Magazine, which showed th a t: “ There are
more rainy days in the second quarter of the Moon than any
other, and fewer in the fourth. Also, that the first half of the
lunar month is more rainy than the second.” These conclusions
are in harmony with those of Dr. Goad, as published in his
work “ Astro-Meteorologiea,” two centuries since. Dr. Goad
found that, in London, during the seven years 1671-77, during
the increase of the Moon (when in sextile and square aspect with
the Sun), the excess of days of rain (or snow) over those during
her decrease (when in the same aspects with the Sun) was 61
in 795 days, or 1 in 18.
   It is the disturbing action of the larger planets which renders
the problem most complex and difficult of solution ; in fact
great changes of weather are often found to occur, when the-
356                TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


Moon is in major aspect with the Sun and one or more of the larger
planets simultaneously. Hence the following aphorisms were
compiled two centuries since :—
   “ If the Moon after conjunction or opposition with the S un,
immediately apply to Saturn (especially in either of the signs
 Cancer, Scorpio or Pisces), rain shall follow.
   “ If the Moon apply to Jupiter, fine weather, with hardly any
rain (for seldom is any rain or weather produced by Jupiter
destructive or unseasonable) will follow,
   “ If the Moon apply to Mars, rain will follow, unless Mars be
in Aries, Leo, or Sagittarius, or in aspect with Jupiter. If Mars
be in aspect with Yenus or Saturn, much rain will follow.
   “ If the new Moon apply to Venus, without doubt rain will
follow (unless Yenus be in aspect with Jupiter). If Venus be in
aspect with Saturn [to which we may now add Uranus], cold,
rain, or snow (according to the season) will follow.
   “ If the new Moon apply to Mercury retrograde, rain will
follow. If Mercury be with Yenus or Saturn, much rain. I f
with Mars or Jupiter, warm or dry weather may be expected.
In any case, brisk winds will follow.” (Haly.)
   Dr. Goad wrote :— “ ’Tis confessed by the experience of
Eichstad, that the aspect [S of 0 and ]), or new-moon]
happening in the angles i.e., the oriental, occidental, or
meridional, is wont to bring rain. But the course of the Moon
is the same in those angles as elsewhere, and seeing platic
aspects are also operative, what conjunction is there that doth
not visit those angles at distance, more or less. The fault,
therefore, lies in the principles of those who discern not, or over­
look the other causes, which are of the secret committee, as I
may call it, where this aspect seems to preside.” 1
   From some observations made at Montpellier, in the year
1774, it was found that out of 760 rains, 646 began when the
Moon was very near the upper or lower meridian, or very near
rising or setting.
   Thunderstorms rarely begin when the Moon is above the
horizon.
   It is a well-known fact that changes of weather take place
more frequently about twelve o’clock in the day, when the Sun
arrives at the upper meridian, than at any other hour of the
twenty-four.
   The fact that more rain usually falls during the increase than
during the decrease of the Moon, is demonstrated in the case of the


  1 “ Astro-Meteorologica, or Aphorisms and Discourses of the Bodies
Cceiestial, founded on the Observations of Thirty Years.” By J. Goad.
London, 1086. Book I, chap. 12.
                            TH E   MOON.                        357

172 consecutive lunations during the fourteen years 1868-1881,
the excess being more than seven-and-a-half inches (during the
 increase) or as 21 to 23.
   Changes of weather take place more frequently at the first
quarter and the last sextile than at any other period of the
lunations— but the nature of the change depends on the planet
with which the Sun and Moon may be configurated at such
 periods.
   In regard to the direction o f the icind, Dr. Goad found that the
first quartile, the last trine, and the second sextile aspect formed
by the Moon with the Sun raised easterly winds more frequently
than other aspects ; and that the full moon brought more south
winds than the change.
   That variations of weather are not attributable, however,
solely to the Sun and Moon, Dr. Goad considered as proved
by his observations of the coincidences of weather-changes with
certain relative positions of the planets Mercury, Venus, Mars,
Jupiter, and Saturn ; and Kepler was of opinion that planetary
as well as luni-solar action must be taken into account. Goad
wrote:— “ We say that the depression of the Sun makes winter,
but how come winters to be warm ? often for a month or more,
when the daisy, anemone, and the strawberry. shall blow and
proclaim a favourable season ; the Moon for half the time is in
winter signs, as low and humble as the Sun.”
   Let us then pass to the examination of that planetary action
on the weather, which has been derided by so many unphilo-
sophical philosophers of the present day, who refuse to inquire
into i t !
                                     358




                        CHAPTER                  I Y.



             THE         PLANET             -JUPITER.

       *■ Through silvery w hiteness o f that temperate star.” — D ante.


T he ancients described Jupiter as a planet of “ a temperate
complexion, midway between the coldness of Saturn and the
heat of Mars.”
   Albumasar said that this planet is of “ a temperate nature.”
   Claudius Ptolemy taught that: “ Jupiter is fruitful alid airy,
and expressly connected with winds proceeding from the north.”
   In the book of Job we read that “ fair weather cometh from
the north.” In Proverbs it is recorded that “ the north wind
driveth away rain.”
   Under the action of Jupiter, in our climate, the north wind
brings fair weather and a rising barometer.
   When we find constantly recurring incidences of the
configurations of Jupiter with the Sun, Moon and Mars,
coinciding with fine weather, we are justified in looking upon
these coincidences as cause and effect. It is no reason why we
should be deterred from such a conclusion that we cannot, in the
present state of our knowledge, explain the modus operandi.
“ Till very lately,” says Max Muller, “ caloric was a term in
constant use, and it was supposed to express some real matter,
something that produced heat. That idea is now exploded, and
heat is understood to be the result of molecular and ethereal
vibrations.”
   Yes, and planetary action, that of Mars and Jupiter, chiefly is
the cause of such vibrations as produce elevation of temperature.
   The maximum generation of ozone is generally observed to
coincide with northerly winds under Jupiter’s action.
   It has been demonstrated that there is a connection between
the fluctuations of the annual death-rate and the position of
Jupiter in his orbit.1

  1 Vide the Journal o f the Statistical Society, M arch, 1869, article com ­
m unicated by M r. B . G. Jenkins, B .K.A.S.
                       TH E   PL A N E T   J U P IT E R .        359

   Under Jupiter’s action, frequently has summer heat been
experienced even in the early spring. An instance of this is
afforded in the extraordinary heat of May, 1864.           Similar
instances may be adduced in May, 1848 ; May, 1883 ; and April,
1840.
   Numerous instances could be narrated of extreme heat in
summer and autumn coinciding with Jupiter’ s “ aspects,” but
these remarkable instances of summer heat in spring time are the
most forcible. The extraordinary heat of July, 1881, when the
shade temperature at Greenwich Royal Observatory reached 97°,
coincided with the Sun in sextile with Jupiter— the “ rule of
six,” again.
   The position of Jupiter in the western angle at the vernal
equinox of 1864, was followed by a remarkably fine, warm, and
dry season. It is remarkable that while Europe was visited in
1864 with drought, Australia suffered from inundations: at the
vernal equinox at Melbourne, however, Uranus was southing and
Saturn (retrograde) was in the ascendant.
   At the autumnal equinox of 1866, Jupiter was in the lower
meridian, and a fine autumn followed. Although the total
rainfall of the year (in London) was 4 inches in excess, the rain­
fall of the last three months was much below the average.
   When Jupiter's action is unimpeded the effect is unmistakable.
Thus do we find the aphorism of Haly, written several centuries
since, strictly verified, v iz .:— “ If Jupiter be in an angle at a
solstice or an equinox, or receive the application of the Moon at
new-moon (especially that nearest the equinox, a temperate, good,
and wholesome air, and a season favourable to the increase and
fructifying of that which is sown and planted in the earth, will
follow.”
   The ancients held that the action of Jupiter was varied in his
passage through the various signs of the zodiac, so that when in
either Cancer, Aquarius, or Pisces, more rain falls under Jupiter’ s
aspects than when in other signs.
   In the “ Geoponiea,” 2 an ancient work on agricultural
pursuits, there are several chapters on prognostics of weather
and aphorisms by Aratus, Democritus, Didymus, Diophanes, and
 Zoroastres.




  2 Translated from the Greek by the Rev. T. Owen, M.A., and published
in London in the year 1805.
                                   360




                       C II A P T E R V.



              TH E      PLANET              SATURN.

             ' Then comes the father of the tempest forth,
               Wrapt in black glooms.”

 T he P l 4.net next in order of importance to Jupiter, is Saturn.
  Saturn’s action, when configurated with the Sun, is to condense
 aqueous vapour, to lower the temperature of the air, and to excite
 tempests. When the atmosphere happens to be quiescent under
 Saturn’s ascendancy, it is often dark or foggy. In contrast to
 the health-giving breezes of Jupiter, we have either bleak,
 bronchitis-producing- easterly winds, or a stagnant, mephitic
 atmosphere favouring the spread of fevers; in the spring,
 blossoms are blighted, in the summer the crops are injured.
    When Saturn crosses the equator, the atmosphere is greatly
 disturbed. A notable instance of this was the month of January,
 1863. Prom the 25th of December, 1862, to the 24th of
 January, 1863, Saturn had less than five minutes of arc in
 declination, and being so nearly stationary, his rays fell
 perpendicularly upon the earth for a month.1 The extra­
ordinarily prolonged disturbance resulting cannot be accounted
for in any other manner, for it did not begin until ten days after
the winter solstice, and the lunar positions were of far less
importance than those of January, 1864, in which month the
disturbance was most trifling in comparsion with that of
January, 1863.
   Saturn only crosses the equator once in fifteen years, were he
to cross it more frequently his influence on the atmosphere would
be more readily recognised and not so soon forgotten. Saturn
again crossed the equator on the 20th of March, 1879, and on
the 26th of the same month the Sun was in conjunction with
Saturn (having been in parallel declination on the 21st). A cold
and stormy period set in on the 20th of March, 1879, and lasted

        1 Vide “ The Weather Guide Book,” pp. 56, 57, and 99.
                          TH E P L A N E T   SATU RN .             361

    until the 27th (when the Sun formed the sextile aspect with
    Mars).
       The singular coincidence of Saturn stationary in equator (in
    January, 1863) is extremely rare and may not occur again for a
   ■century. The scientific world ridicules the idea of planets so
    distant affecting the atmosphere of the earth. Plutarch informs
   us that in the days of Nicias a man dared not open his mind,
   •except to his best and most intimate friend, and then only with
   the utmost caution, about the true causes of the eclipses of the
   Moon, which had then been recently taught by Anaxagoras, who
   was cast into prison for daring to make public avowal of his
   •discoveries. A similar spirit of prejudice is extant at the present
   day against the belief in planetary action on the atmosphere.
   To talk of the distance of the great planets being an insuperable
   barrier to such action is puerile, since the same astronomers who
  make this assertion teach that Jupiter and Saturn draw the
   earth many hundreds of miles out of her orbit!
      Saturn crossed the equator on the 20th of March, 1879, at
  the vernal equinox, nearly in conjunction with the Sun in the
  lower meridian. The effects on the weather of the ensuing
  severe season were most disastrous             The barometer and
  thermometer fell rapidly, and a cold, sun-less, rainy season
  immediately set in.
     At the summer solstice of 1875, viz., at 8h 46m 38s p.m. of
 June 21st at Greenwich, the Moon was in the ascendant in the
 sign Aquarius and applying to conjunction with Saturn ; and
 Mercury was in the descendant in the sign Cancer about to fall
 retrograde. The heavy rain that soon followed, 0-34 in. on the
 28th. 0-73 in. on the 1st of July, 0-50 in. on the 14th, 1-28 in.
 on the 15th, and 0-76 in. on the 16th, as registered at the Royal
 Observatory, the rainfall of the month of July, 1875, being 2 74
 in. greater than the average of 60 years; the floods in Wales and
in France— all this was in accordance with the aphorism of the
ancients to the effect that “ If the Moon apply to Saturn, rain
shall abundantly follow.”
     Dr. Goad wrote of the “ horrid frost” coinciding with the
Solar conjunction with Saturn in Capricornus (a sign in which
Saturn “ has dominion” ) in January, 1667; of the “ bitter
frost ” of January, 1668, when the Solar conjunction with
Saturn took place in Aquarius (in which Saturn “ has dominion”
also); and similar severe weather in January, 1669, and
February, 1670, under Solar conjunctions with Saturn (in rco').
    Again, the severe winter of 1870-’71, followed on Saturn
362                 TH E   T E X T -L O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


being in conjunction with the Sun at the winter solstice, in
Capricomus. The following Solar conjunction with Saturn, viz.,
on January 3rd, 1872, was not attended with severe weather,
but the rainfall at Greenwich Observatory, registered that month
amounted to 3'63 in., “ being l -76 in. greater than the average
fall of the preceding 57 years,” and it was a very stormy month
— the Sun being in opposition with Jupiter on the 15tb, so that
opposing influences were in operation. The Sun was again in
conjunction with Saturn on the 13th of January, 1873 ; that
month was mild, but the rainfall was “ 0-55 in. greater than the
average of the preceding 58 years.” Severe frost attended the
 O 6 b of February 5th, 1875, when no opposing influence
obtained. [The conjunctions of the Sun with Saturn take place
about eleven days later every year.]




                        CHAPTER                         VI .



                 THE          PLANET                   MARS.

            “ The good wit finds the law from a single observation,
      —the law, its limitations, and its correspondence.”— E m e r s o n .

M ars when in an angle at the equinox or solstice promotes
evaporation and raises the temperature, causing a drier state of
the weather than Jupiter, particularly when in Aries, Leo, or
Cancer, with north latitude.
   When Mars is in conjunction or opposition with the Sun,
calorific influence is usually observed to extend over a period of
from two to five days before the completion of the aspect, and a
reaction frequently tabes place immediately after.
   Cicero in his work de Nat. Deorum, says of Mars:— “ Media
 Mortis incendit Igneie ardentisque natures.” Tully 'writes, of
Mars:— “ His hot, rampant character, long and persistent
droughts whereby all verdure is parched and burnt; fevers and
pestilence,” that is to say when the influence of Mars is
predominant. Claudius Ptolemy avers that Mars when in
power:— “ Generally causes such mischief and destruction as
are concomitant with dryness. The atmosphere parched by hot,,
 pestilential, and blasting winds, accompanied by drought,
                       TH E   PL A N E T   M AE S.           368

lightnings, and fires emitted from the sky. At sea, ships
suddenly wrecked by the turbulence of the wind and strokes of
lightning. Rivers fail, and springs are dried up,”
   In our more temperate climate and insular situation, the
action of Mars is not often so. strongly marked, although tending
to dryness. Dr. Goad believed that the conjunction and opposi­
tion of Mars with the Sun disturbed the ocean currents; and he
mentions that on December 18th, 1550 (O.S.), when Mars was
in opposition with the Sun, the River Thames flowed thrice in
nine hours, as recorded by Fromond.
   The winter of 1881-2 was extraordinarily mild, fine, and dry.
Mars made a prolonged stay in the sign Cancer— viz., from
 September 21th, 1881, to May 4th, 1882— having north
latitude, his declination extended to 27° 10' 30" north on the
 11th of January, 1882; at the winter solstice, December 21st,
1881, 4h p.m., Mars was in the ascendant, and nearly in opposi­
tion with both the Sun and M oon ; and the planet was
retrograde from the 18th November, 1881, to the 2nd of
 February, 1882. On the 18th January, 1882, the barometer
 rose to 30'95 in., the highest point recorded at the Royal
Observatory, Greenwich, for thirty years. It would be interest­
ing to learn whether the stay of Mars in the South tropic from
March 19th, 1860, to October 1st, and from December 14th,
 1866, to April 13th, 1867, had a calorific effect in the Southern
 Hemisphere.
   The power of Mars in Leo was exemplified in the winter of
 1883-4. At the winter solstice, December 22nd, 1883, 3h 51-9m
a.m., Mars close to the meridian and in Sb 21° 56', stationary.
 The ensuing winter quarter -was fair and mild, and the driest of
the century, in England. This exactly corresponded with the
author’s forecast— viz. : “ The general character of the weather
 of the winter quarter will be fair, mild, and drier than usual.
 In the south of England drought may be experienced.”
                                   864




                      CHAPTER                VI I .


                THE       PLANET             VENUS.

  “ Astronomy is excellent ; but it must come up into life to have its full
value, and not remain there in globes and spaces.”—E m ebson .

 Venus exei't3 a temperate and moist influence when in one of
 the angles at the equinox or solstice, when in conjunction and
 parallel declination with the Sun, and when in the equator.
    This explains why it is so difficult to see a transit of Venus
 across the Sun’ s disc— a very rare phenomenon. The last
 transits of Venus took place December 6th, 1882, December 9th,
 1874, in 1769 and 1761. Writing in 1881, the author ventured
 to say that r— “ The rainy weather likely to coincide with the
 phenomenon of the transit of Venus on the 6th of December
 1882, will prevent it from being seen to advantage in these
islands.” From the 5th to the 7th rain and snow prevailed
 generally over Great Britain ; and the transit was observed
 “ with varying success ” in other quarters of the globe.
   Venus's arc of greatest elongation from the Sun never exceed­
ing 48°, it follows that besides the conjunction and parallel
declination the only aspect of any force which she can form with
the Sun is the angle of 45°. Venus approaches nearer to the
earth in the inferior part of her orbit in the ratio of 18 to 80.
   I have ascertained from           the published records        of
meteorological observations made at the Royal Observatory,
Greenwich, the amount of rainfall coincident with the crossing
of the equator by Venus in the years 1862 to 1881, both
inclusive, allowing three days (one before and one after in
addition to the actual day of crossing) to each occasion.
   I find that Venus was in the equator on 42 occasions, in
that space of time. We have, therefore, 126 days allotted to her
action, and the rainfall for those 126 days amounts to 9'27 in.,
which is considerably above the average. In some instances the
fall was very heavy, as on the 9th of May, 1862 (0-77 i n .) ;
October 11th, 1862 (072 in.) and the following day (0-36) ;
October 26th, 1865 (0’72 in.) ; September 25th, 1875 (07 0 in.) ;
                      TH E P L A N E T   M ERCU RY.           365

and August 25th, 1877 (054 in.). The rainfall when Venus was
in Libra and in the equator amounted to 4-71 in., and when in
Aries 8'86 in. On every occasion but two, the sky was cloudy,
the exceptions being March 3rd, 1863, and August 26th, 1869,
when the weather was fine. On 27 occasions there was a falling
barometer and on 15 a rising one. The barometer was very low
on the 1st of February, 1865, 28-718 in., the Sun being then in
45° aspect with Venus and the planet about to cross the
equator ; and again on the 17th March, 1866, 28'945 in. No
distinct effects on temperature are traceable, for it rose on 19
and fell on 16 occasions.
   Kepler recorded inundations coinciding with Venus being at
her greatest elongation :— “ 1622, February 13th, Inundatio,
pons rnptus; 2 dong. a. 0 47°. 1622, March 17th, Flavius
crevit; 2 43°. 1623, June 11th, Exandabat Danub. admodmn,
 2 3 0 °; December 26th, Auctus Danub., 2 30°. 1624,
February 18th, Auctus Jiao., 2 47°.       1625, January 15th,
Danub. crevit, 2 30° ; May 3rd, Audi armies, 2 3 8 °; May 5th,
Auctus Danub. ; August 20th, Danub. crevit, 2 43°.




                  CHAPTE E                   VI I I .



          THE        PLANET                 MEECUEY.

                 ‘‘ Go, speed the stars of Thought,
                    On to their shining goals.”

Mercury— the electric planet as it is designated by some authors
— produces rapid changes of weather, “ sometimes dryness and
at other times moisture, and each with equal vigour,” as
Ptolemy observed. The ancient astronomer also averred t h a t —
“ In consequence of the dryness of its nature, arising from its
proximity to the Sun, and the rapidity of its motion, it generates
in the atmosphere turbulent, sharp, and variable winds ’ ’ ; and
at times “ thunders, meteors, and lightnings, accompanied by
sudden chasms in the earth and earthquakes.” The last-named
are only produced when Mercury is in conjunction or opposition
with Mars, Jupiter, or Saturn, especially if at the same time in
366               TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTB OLO G Y.


or near the equator or the tropics, or in the sign Scorpio or Leo,
or with the Sun and Moon at an eclipse.
    Dr. Goad observed that “ the Sim in conjunction with
Mercury is more prone to send us a hurricane than the Sun with
“Venus, hence the ancient character of Mercury is justified.”
    The conjunction of the Sun with both Mercury and Venus,
especially if one or both of them be retrograde, as at the new
moon of July 9th, 1888 (when their longitudes were © and d 35
17° 24', K So 17° 21' retrograde, and 2 ss 16° 43'), produces
storms and floods. Happily, such a phenomenon rarely occurs,
and most people will wish that there may be no recurrence of
 similar weather in future summers.
    As Mercury is never more than 28° distant from the Sun,
only the conjunction and parallel declination can be formed
between them.
    At the vernal equinox, 1878, March 20th, oh 42-5m p.m.
 G.M.T., Mercury was setting in X 29° 32', separating from
conjunction with Saturn and applying to conjunction with the
 Sun. The weather of the spring quarter of 1878 was very rainy
and boisterous. That this wTas predicted can be proved by the
 following forecast published by the author in September,
 1877:— “ The weather of the spring quarter of 1878 will be
 remarkable for wind and rain, and many disastrous shipwrecks
 will result.” The sinking of the Eurydice, with a crew of 330,
 took place on the 26th of March, 1878, during a heavy squall ;
 and numerous disasters to shipping in that spring quarter will
 be fresh in the memory of some of my readers.
     At Greenwich Observatory no less than 124 inches of rain
 will be found to have been registered between the 20th of March
 and the 21st of June, 1878. The rainfall of April was 2'74in.
 greater than the average; that of May, 2 32 in. greater, and that
 of June, 2-66 in. greater. The first twenty days of March were
 unusually dry; and the rainfall of the month of July, 1878, was
 2-12 in. less than the average. In the Times' Register of Events
 for 1878, it is stated th a t:— “ The storms of the spring were
 most formidable ”
     An instance of the influence of Mercury when in an angle at
 the solstice or equinox may be cited. At Washington, 21st of
 December, 1887, at 9h 56-4m p.m., Mercury was in the fourth
 angle (lower meridian) and nearly in sextiie aspect with Uranus.
 The fearfully severe winter that followed and the terrible
  blizzards resulting in appalling loss of life, will long be
 remembered. The following forecast was made by the author :
                       THE PLANET    U RA N U S.                    867

— “ Mercury being in the fourth angle and in aspect with
Uranus, the American winter will be a very cold one, marked by
unusually heavy falls of snow in the Northern States, and
several great and destructive storms.”
   Kepler wrote of Mercury’s influence thus:— ‘ Conjunctio g ad
 O , quorum in Meteoris matjna vis est.” A gain:— “ In commo-
vmdis tempestatibus multum valet." As that great astronomer
kept a diary of the weather for many years, his opinion is
entitled to the greatest respect.




                     CHAPTER                 I X.



            THE       PLANET             URANUS.

    “ For when the world was framed, the mighty cause,
      These powers bestowed, and did enact these laws ”—Manilius.

Uranus although so distant is found to exert an influence on
the weather, when m certain relative positions. Disturbance
caused by Uranus usually sets in very suddenly, and frequently
takes the shape of hailstorms. Its action tends to condense
aqueous vapours and to lower the temperature of the air.
   An instance of the force of the influence exerted by Uranus,
when in an angle at a solstice, may be found in the winter
solstice of 1868, December 21st, 0h 28nl p.m., G.M.T., whereat
Uranus was in the fourth angle, and in the sign Cancer 16° 5',
retrograde. On the same night, the north of Scotland was
visited with a fearful storm, the whole of the seaward staging
and the stonework executed in the Wick new harbour during
 the year being carried away. On the 27th and the 28th of the
 same month severe gales visited all parts of the United Kingdom;
 in London houses were blown down ; at Rochdale a school-house
 was shattered. The author’s forecast, published three months
 beforehand, was to this effect:— “ Uranus in the fourth
 angle seems to threaten much damage by storms, more
 particularly in Scotland.” Storms were very frequent and
 violent in the ensuing winter quarter; and the rainfall of
888               THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


January and February, 1889, was much above the average, as-
registered at the Royal Observatory, Greenwich.
   At the winter solstice of 1860, viz. at l h 51m p.m. of
December 21st, Uranus was in the ascendant in a 9° 15'
retrograde, in square (90°) aspect with Saturn stationary in iijj
9° 32', and in opposition with Mercury in f 9° 10'; and Venus
was setting. The frost which set in on the 18th December,
1860, the day on which Saturn became stationary, and con­
tinued until the 20th January, 1801, was the severest of the
century. As the influence of Uranus was not then well under­
stood, this severe weather was not foretold by astro-
meteorologists, although the late Commander Morrison, R.N.,.
did foretell frost and snow during the last five days of December,
1860.
   Tracing still further back, we find that at the winter solstice
of 1854, December 22nd, 3h a.m., Uranus was the only planet in
an angle; a severe and prolonged winter followed.
   Uranus was in the equator on the 11th of March, 1844, and
was within 5 ' of arc of declination from the equator from the
7th to 15th of that month; and on the 22nd, was in conjunction
with the Sun. On the 19th of March, 1844, the new Moon
took place at 0h 17m a.m., G.M.T., the Moon hastening to
conjunction with Uranus.
   From the 8th to the 12th of March, 1844, the sky was over­
cast, and there w'as occasional rain ; and a “ gale, and squalls of
rain ” were registered at Greenwich on the 11th. Gusty and
showery weather prevailed on the 20th. The sky was overcast
on the 22nd and 23rd, occasional thin rain falling; and squally
weather was recorded on the 24th.
   Uranus did not again cross the equator until the 14th of
November, 1884, when very cold weather prevailed. In 1885,
on the 28th of February, and on the 29th of August, Uranus
was again in the equator, when cold weather again prevailed.
                                    369


                        C H A P T E R             X.


             THE        PLANET              NEPTUNE.
  “ Science i s the explanation of N a t u r e ....................
    Verification i s the Alpha and Omega of philosophy.” —G. H. L e w e s .

Neptune is the most distant planet of the Solar system, yet
its immense distance does not prevent it from disturbing the
weather when configurated with the Sun.
   Neptune was in the equator on the 15th of May and the 22nd
of August, 1862; again on the 15th of March, the 25th of
November and the 28th of December, 1863.
   On the 15th and 16th of May, 1862, the sky was overclouded ;
there was rain in the morning, afternoon, and night of the
15th, and occasional rain at night of the 16th. On the 22nd of
August, 1862, heavy rain in the forenoon ; a partially clouded
sky in the afternoon, and a fine evening ; on the 23rd the sky
was half-clouded. On the 15th of March, 1863, there was heavy
rain in the early morning and in the afternoon ; on the 16th an
overcast sky, and strong wind in the afternoon. On the 25th
and 26th of November, an almost completely clouded sky. On the
28th of December, an overcast sky, and snow in the afternoon;
on the 29th, an overcast sky, and slight rain in the afternoon.
   There is evidence, therefore, that Neptune in the equator
disturbed the weather, for there was rain on the first three
occasions, and snow and slight rain on the fifth, the fourth
being the only occasion on which no rain fell; on four occasions
the sky was completely overcast the whole day, and on the other
the sky was so for the first half of the day. The barometer rose
on three and fell on two occasions ; on the 15th of March, 1863,
it fell to 29-08 in., which was very near the absolute minimum
of the year. The temperature rose on the first and last, and fell
on the three other occasions. On two occasions—March 16th
and December 29th, 1863— there was a very strong wind.
   At the summer solstice of 1879, Neptune was in the fourth
angle (lower meridian), the Sun (in sextile aspect with Uranus) *
and Mercury were setting, and neither Mars nor Jupiter was in
 an angle. The cold and wet summer, so disastrous for agricul­
turists, of 1879, will be fresh in the memory of most farmers.
At the Royal Observatory, the, rainfall of July was 3'72 in.,
being 1-35 in. greater than the average of 38 years; that of
August was 5-19 in., being 2'77 in. greater than the average.
                                                                         2 B
                                   370




                        CHAP T E R            X I.



  THE    MUTUAL        CONJUNCTIONS AND                OPPOSITIONS
                       OF THE PLANETS.

           " But yet, amid this elemental war
             That scatters desolation from afar,
            Health is engendered, and mankind are hlessed.”

  Maes and Satuen when in conjunction, more particularly when
  their declinations are the same, or nearly so, at the same time,
  and when the Moon happens to be either in conjunction or
  opposition with them, cause a turbulent state of the atmosphere.
  The ancients considered that the conjunction of Mars and
  Saturn brought “ great winds and sometimes rain,” at any
  season of the year ; and when in either Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces,
  “ rain in winter, autumn, and summer, and oft-times thunder
  and lightning, also inundations.”         Cardan said that this
  conjunction “ inclines to hail and rain, si cmtera juvent,” Dr.
  Goad found that it induced “ excess of rain ; ” and “ the air to
  clear and cloud interchangeably for several days; ” also that
  “ the sudden mists put on an extraordinary hue, noted for their
  deep blue as well under the opposition as under the con­
  junction ; ” and observed the effects of the conjunction to “ help
  to qualify the air for a month at least.” Dr. Goad records “ a
  dreadful tempest, wind, rain, and hail,” on the 13th of
  November, 1664, in England, following the conjunction of Mars
  and Saturn in Sagittarius 27° on the 12th.
     The author finds that all but one of the conjunctions of
  Mars and Saturn from September 11th, 1861, to August
  16th, 1911, produced storms and great disturbance of weather ;
» moreover, every one of the storms was foretold by him many
  months beforehand ; whereas the official meteorologists failed in
  several instances to foretell those storms even a few hours in
  advance!
     When due consideration is given to the instances here
  recounted, planetary action on the atmosphere must be
  recognised; to dismiss them as mere coincidences would be
    TH E M U TU A L CONJUNCTIONS AND OPPOSITIONS OF TH E P L A N E T S .   371

   anphilosophieal and culpable. Astronomers would find it more
   useful and more instructive to watch for and study such coinci­
   dences than to confine their observations of conjunctions of
   Mars and Saturn to the delightful amusement of “ testing
  photometrically and also photographically the lustre of the
  conjoined planets.”
     In like manner, it can be shown that the mutual opposition of
  Mars and Saturn disturbs the weather, although not usually so
  greatly as the conjunction.
     Jupiter and Saturn when in mutual conjunction or opposition
  ■disturb the weather very greatly. Their conjunction happens
  but once in twenty years, and it is worthy of assiduous study.
     Kepler wrote that :— “ Saturnus cum Jove vapidum ex calentibus
  terra, latebris educit arem, qui in producendis meteoris, ingentes
 habet vires.”
     Dr. Goad placed on record instances of the conjunction of
 Jupiter and Saturn producing cold and dry weather, and
 occasionally fogs.
     Mars and Jupiter when in mutual conjunction do not always
 raise the temperature and promote evaporation, but frequently
 exert so disturbing an influence on the weather that storms of
 rain and hail attend ; in winter and spring, frosty and fine
 weather often coincides. Dr. Goad quotes an Arabian saying
 •that the conjunction of Mars and Jupiter taking place in the
 sign Aries produces great cold ; in Taurus, snow; and in Leo,
 great cold. Maginus said that when Mars and Jupiter are in
■conjunction in the same sign as the Sun occupies, “ sultry heat
 and thunder ” prevail. Dr. Goad also observed that “ a con­
 junction of Jupiter with any planet will ordinarily make a mist
 anywhere, except under the line.” And that the opposition of
 Mars and Jupiter, “ in ordinary circumstances, produces cold,
frosty mornings in winter, and not seldom in spring time, often
turbulence in winter, lightning not excepted; in summer
ofttimes thunder with violence, wind, rain and hail.”
    The conjunction of Venus with Saturn produces either cold
weather or much downfall; frequently fog, and sometimes strong
 gales.
    The conjunction of Mercury with Mars is productive, as
Cardan observed, of “ vehement winds.” Maginus and Eichstad
observed that it also sometimes brought rain or snow, hail and
thunder ; Kyriander supported their view, and held that it is the
most turbulent of all conjunctions; Begiomontanus asserted
that it brought heat and drought or wind and rain, according to
372               THE   TE XT -B O O K OF ASTROLO G Y.


the sign of the zodiac in which it took place; and, to go still
further back, Ptolemy averred that it excited “ heated and
turbulent dispositions in the atmosphere.” Dr. Goad’s observa­
tions led him to support these views, and he quoted Kepler’ s
testimony as to the violent winds raised by this conjunction.
   The conjunction of Mercury with Jupiter frequently produces
strong winds, and usually raises the temperature; sometimes it
brings thunderstorms. Columbus when in America delayed
sailing again on account of an opposition of Jupiter with the
Sun, Moon, and Mercury. The conjunction of these planets in
Aquarius 16° on the 7th of February, 18G7, was attended with
heavy squalls, rain, and lightning; at Greenwich Observatory
the greatest pressure of wind on the square foot was 4libs, on
the 8tli.
   The conjunction of Venus with Mars, which occurs at irregular
intervals, disturbs the weather, when their respective latitudes
do not greatly differ, bringing rain and mild temperature usually ;
in winter months, mist or fog, and sometimes snow ; on the
whole inclining more to warmth than cold. The following dates
of some past conjunctions of these planets will be useful for
comparison :— July 9th, 1861 ; June 3rd, 1863 ; September 27th,
1863 ; February 5th, 1864 : December 29th, 1865 ; November
 15th, 1867 ; October 6th, 1869 ; February 21st and July 29th,
 1870; June 17th, 1872 ; May 4th, 1874 ; March 29th, July 6th,
 and November 29th, 1876; October 21st, 1878 ; September 8th,
 1880 ; August 2nd and December 5tli, 1882 ; May 11th, 1888 ;
March 28th, 1885 ; February 10th, 1887 ; January 3rd, April
 20th, and October 1st, 1889.
    The pluvial influence is usually in force from the day before
 to the day after the day of their conjunction. Dr. Goad con­
 sidered it continued until Venus had separated two degrees from
 Mars— if no other major configuration of another celestial body
 of an opposite nature intervened.
    The student will recognise the force of Ptolemy’s advice to
 “ overlook none of the conjunctions; ” if space would permit,
 the effects of all of them would be stated. When three or more
 planets are near together in longitude, great disturbance of the
 atmosphere is found to result.
                                     373




                     C H A P T E R            X II.



   EARTHQUAKES              AND      VOLCANIC           ERUPTIONS.

                           “ And the old
       And crazy earth has had her shaking fits
       More frequent, and foregone her usual rest—
       The rocks falling headlong and the valleys rise.”— C o w p e b .

I n the MtrtwpoXoyim of Aristotle, published more than 300
years b . c . , we find that that ancient philosopher treated of
meteors, water, air, and earthquakes; and he observed that
earthquakes chiefly occur “ about the Hellespont, Achaia, Sicily,
and Euboea.” No treatise on meteorology can be complete if
the subject of earthquakes be altogether left out of con­
sideration.
   Great earthquakes are very irregular in their occurrence, and
they affect different localities in an apparently arbitrary and
generally unexpected manner. A period of convulsion in Syria
corresponds to a period of quiescence in Southern Italy, and
vice versa.
   The most convulsive earthquakes originate under the sea, as
for instance the earthquake which overthrew Lisbon. On the
American and Japanese coasts this has been observed.
   Steam is thought by seismologists to play an important part
in the production of earthquakes. The sudden generation of
steam in the interior of the earth probably produces electricity,
which becomes the proximate cause of shocks of earthquake.
This is the view of a scientific friend of the author who was an
eye-witness of the earthquake at Menton, in the Riviera, on the
23rd of February, 1887. In his letter to the author, he
wrote :—
   “ Great electric action was sensibly felt all the time (23rd to
27th) ; and my watch stopped twice during the shocks.
   “ My opinion is that the active agent was, primarily, steam,
the force of which generated electricity. At Nice, the sea was
observed to boil, and large fish were seen floating about dead.”
   Some earthquakes have been accompanied by remarkable
374                TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


  atmospherical phenomena, such as great hurricanes, thunder­
  storms, lightning, hail, and rain ; others, by calm weather and
 serene sky. In some instances the magnetic needle has been
 much affected, in others not so. The electrical condition of the
 air has indicated great tension in one class of earthquakes. The
 aurora borealis has frequently coincided with earthquakes.
     The shock is most destructive to buildings after its direction
 has become greatly inclined to the perpendicular, and before its
 strength has been much diminished by diffuson over a great-
 tract of country. Shocks which are nearly horizontal, if
 sufficiently powerful, are very destructive to buildings.
     Humboldt and others recognize, in addition to the vertical
 and horizontal shocks, a kind of whirling shock, to which they
 attribute the twisting of buildings and the displacement of
 portions of the surface ; but some seismologists demur to this
 mode of explaining such effects.
    It seems practically certain that earthquakes are governed by
 some cosmical influence away from the earth. Seeing that the
 tides of the ocean are affected by the Sun and Moon, there is
 nothing extravagant in the theory that the same attracting
 bodies occasion paroxysmal action, when in a line with the
 earth, and when the Moon is in perigee. But, inasmuch as
 earthquakes do not always coincide with such relative positions
 of the Sun and Moon, we should enquire whether planetary
 action plays an important part.
    L unar A ction .— Aristotle placed on record the fact that “ it
 sometimes happen that there is an earthquake about the eclipses
 of the Moon.” 1 M. Barthélémy St. Hilaire, commenting on this
 statement, says: “ ‘ Pendant les eclipses de lune,’ c'est là une
coincidence toute fortuite ; mais les deux phénomènes n'ont
aucun rapport.” The clever French author here asserts more
than he knows, for comparison of the dates of many great
earthquakes with the occurrence of eclipses of the Sun and
Moon, would lead to the conclusion that the coincidences are not
fortuitous, and tend rather to show that they are en rapport.
    Claudius Ptolemy said:—
    “ The Moon, being of all the heavenly bodies the nearest to
the earth, also dispenses much influence ; and things animate
and inanimate sympathise and vary with her. By the changes
of her illumination, rivers swell and are reduced ; the tides of
the sea are ruled by her risings and settings ; and plants and

  1 11 The Works of Aristotle,’’ translated from the Greek, by Thomas
Taylor. Vol. v. “ On the Heavens, Meteors,” &e. Book ii., p. 528.
                 E A RTH Q U AK ES   AND VOLCANIC   E R U PTIO N S .    375

 animals are expanded or collapsed, if not entirely at least
 partially, as she waxes or wanes.” 3
    Some modern scientific men who have observed that great
 earthquakes frequently take place when the Sun and Moon are
 in a line with the earth (as at an eclipse), and when the Moon is
 in perigee, are puzzled to account for some eclipses passing away
 without causing any such effect ■ and they will never solve the
 problem until they take notice of planetary positions at eclipses.
    The great earthquake of the 23rd of February, 1887, which
 caused so much destruction in the Riviera, closely followed the
 annular eclipse of the, Sun of the 22nd of that month. At this
 eclipse (invisible in Europe) the Moon was not in perigee, for she
 was in apogee on the 24th.
    The fearful earthquake of the 31st of August, 1886, which
 overthrew Charleston, quickly followed the total eclipse of the
 Sun on the 29th, the Moon being in perigee. On the 1st of
 •June, 1863, there was a total eclipse of the Moon (nearly in
perigee), and on the 3rd inst. a terrible earthquake overthrew the
 City of Manilla, and destroyed 10,000 lives.
   .P l a n e t a r y A c t i o n . — This has been recognised in all ages of

the world by men of the highest attainments in science and
philosophy. In fact planetary action as an exciting cause of
earthquakes is only doubted by those modern philosophers who
have never made any fair and complete inquiry into it, and yet
presume to deny it. It has already been mentioned that Pliny
relates of Anaximander that “ he foretold the earthquakes which
overthrew Lacediemon.” Anaximander was born in the year
610 b . c . ; he was the disciple of Thales, and taught that the
fixed stars were centres of other systems, perhaps more extensive
and more glorious than our own ; that the earth moved round
the centre of the world; and he erected at Lacediemon a
gnomon for celestial observations. He was an able and
renowned astrologer (a fact concealed by the late Sir David
Brewster in his prejudiced philippic against astrology), and he
foretold the earthquakes, as Pliny relates, by means of his
astrological skill.
   Dr. Goad presents a list of twenty earthquakes which
happened while the planet Jupiter was passing through the sign
Taurus-, and he remarks:— “ I am sure as I write that this
phenomenon, as great and stupendous as it is, depends upon
this celestial appearance— Venus or Mercury with Jupiter.”

                        2 Tetrabiblos, book i., chap. 2.
876               TH E T E X T -B O O K   OP ASTR O LO G Y .


   In Urania for February, 1880, the author foretold that the
entry of Jupiter and Saturn into the sign Taurus in 1881 would
produce great earthquakes. The earthquake at Chios (Scio), in
the Archipelago, on the 3rd of April, 1881, which destroyed
4,000 lives and injured 1,500 persons, took place just as Saturn
and Jupiter entered Taurus (in the manner described by
Ptolemy), the sign relating to the Archipelago. On the 12th of
June, 1881, thirty-four villages and 100 lives were destroyed by
an earthquake in Armenia; Venus, Jupiter, Saturn, and
Neptune were then assembled in Taurus (which sign relates also
to Armenia), within the space of eight degrees. On the 22nd of
July, 1881, when Mars was in conjuction with Jupiter in
Taurus, violent shocks of earthquake were felt in Switzerland
(the sharpest since 1854), at Lyons, and at Grenoble.
   Pliny related that the Babylonians held that earthquakes are
caused by planetary action, especially of the three superior
planets, Saturn, Jupiter, and Mars, which are the causes of
thunder. And, says Pliny, earthquakes are caused by the
congress of the aforesaid planets with the Sun, or with each
other; and this chiefly happens “ circa quadrata mundi” -—
meaning the equinoxes and tropics. Hippocrates observed a
similar action in the outbreak of epidemics. Moreover, Pliny states
that earthquakes happen frequently about the time of eclipses.
   Dr. Goad gives a list of earthquakes from 1516 to 1681
happening in coincidence with mutual conjunctions and
oppositions of Jupiter and Saturn.
   When the fearful earthquake took place at Lisbon, on the 1st
of November, 1755, the geocentric longitude of Jupiter was 187°
31', and that of Saturn 293° 8 '; Mars was in opposition with
Saturn (from tropical signs) ; Venus and the Sun were nearly in
conjunction in Scorpio; and Jupiter was in opposition to the
longitude ( t 7°) in which the Moon was eclipsed on the 27th of
March, that year.
   A terrific earthquake, on the 17th of March, 1818, engulfed
Philipoli, in Roumania, with 70,000 lives ; and the shock was
felt the same day at Bencoolen, India, the sea receding leaving-
vessels dry, throwing down walls, etc. The following were the
relative positions of the heavenly bodies :—
              March 17th, 1818, Greenwich Noon.
          ©       D       $     ?   1 <?       U      b     W
                     O      ,                O    1       O 1
Long. 26 X 20 23os37 l l X 1 27 X 28 25 n 58 10Vÿ 5 10X45 20 f 7

Déclin. 1 s.28|26n.17 9 s. 25 2 s. 17 25n.38 22 s. 53 9 s. 5 23 s. 9
               EA RTH Q U AK ES AND VOLCANIC E R U P T IO N S .            377

    Mercury was in conjunction and par. dec. with Saturn in
 Pisces ; and the Sun was nearly in conjunction with Venus in
 the same sign, and in square aspect with Mars ; while Jupiter
 was in the tropical sign Capricornus and in sextile with both
 Mercury and Saturn, and very nearly in exact par. dec. with
 Uranus.
    On the 15th of July, 1853, the fearful earthquake took place at
 Cumana, by which 4,000 lives were destroyed ; the ancient city
 disappeared in an instant ; several deep fissures were formed
 from which boiling water ascended. Tbe first shock was felt at
.a quarter past two o’clock in the afternoon, and in a few seconds
 the dreadful convulsion took place. An annular eclipse of the S un
 took place on the 6th of June, 1853, visible in South America.
 The ecliptic conjunction of the Sun and Moon took place in the
 sign Gemini 15° 56', and at 3h 47m p.m., local mean time, at
 Cumana; Mercury was in n 7° 4 2 '; the sign Scorpio 11° 23'
 ascended at that moment at Cumana ; Uranus was setting in
 Taurus 10° 37', Mars and Saturn, also in Taurus, were in the
 western angle. At the moment of the earthquake at Cumana,
 the sign Scorpio 27° ascended, and the following were the
 positions of the heavenly bodies :—
               J ulï 15th, 1883, 2h 15mp.m., Cumana.
           O       D                  2        S  V        h                w
                                                                           K° 1
                                           O/                              cc
Long. 23 ss 5 17111.25 19 SI 20 10S19 15 n 26 15 i 43 R 27 8 48            CD "


Déclin. 21 n.29 14 s.24 15 n. 7 19 n. 8 22 x. 43 22 s. 15         17 n. 57 15 n.5

   At the moment of the destruction of Cumana, Saturn was
exactly setting there, and in Taurus ; Mars had reached the
degree in which the Sun was eclipsed, and the exact declination
of the Sun, and opposition with Jupiter; and the Sun had
reached the declination of Mercury at the eclipse.
   Commander Morrison, R.N., writing on that eclipse, in the
summer of 1852, twelve months before the earthquake, quoted
the words of Ptolemy in reference to Mercury being with the Sun
and Moon, viz., that there would be “ sudden chasms in the
earth and earthquakes,” in July, 1853, about the 16th day,
along the northern coast of South America— thus naming the
part of the world affected and the time, within a few hours, of
the awful catastrophe. Again do we find undeniable evidence of
planetary action. It is a remarkable fact, that at the moment
of many great earthquakes the sign Scorpio is found in -the
ascendant.
    378                           THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF    ASTRO LOG Y.


      Another eclipse (annular) of the S un in the sign Pisces took
    place on the 23rd of February, 1808. The positions of the
    heavenly bodies thereat were as follows : —
             F e b r u a r y 23rd, 1868, 2h 20'4m p.m. (G.M.T.)

             1 o              5          S          2            3       U         J?
                                                                                               »          1
               O /          O      / O     1
   Long. |4Xl8 4X1 8 22 X 4 9 v 4 6 22,00? 0 1 6 X 3 1 °5 t 22 9 sô 4R

   Déclin. 9 s.5ö|9 s. 58 l s . 28 3 n . 2 8 1 5 s .13' 6 s. 16 19 s .15 23 n . 31

       The line of central eclipse passed across South America. The
    author writing in the summer of 1867, said:— “ The eclipse
    passes over Pernambuco, and Upper Peru; it falls in the 5th
    deg. of Pisces, within 1° of the square aspect of Saturn, hence it
    will injuriously affect those countries, which will suffer physical
    evils in the form of earthquakes, waterspouts, and floods.” The
    late Commander Morrison said that:— “ Its effects will fall
    chiefly on South America. It will dry up rivers and do much
    detriment to ships and sailors ” — as Proclus said. By a
    succession of earthquakes which lasted from the 13th to the 16th
    of August, Arica, Araquipa, Yslay, Iquique, Pasco, Juan, Caveliea,
    Ibarra, and numerous other towns of Peru and Ecuador were
    totally destroyed. The loss of life in Peru was estimated at
    2,000, and in Ecuador at 20,000. Great damage was done to
    shipping on the coast and the Chincha islands. The British
    consul at Iquique and his family perished. One of the worst
    consequences of that fearful calamity was the disappearance of
    the streams which followed their overthrow ; thousands of house­
    less creatures suffered cruelly from hunger and thirst.            At the
    eclipse, it is seen, that the Sun, Moon, Jupiter, and Mercury
    were all in Pisces, the Sun and Moon were in square (90°) aspect
    with Saturn, and Venus was in square with Uranus from Aries
    and Cancer. At the period of the earthquakes, the Sun had
    reached the opposite place to that of Mars in the zodiac, and the
    Moon wras in conjunction with Mars in Cancer 0° 4'.
       Nineteen years after there happened another annular eclipse of
     the S u n in Pisces, on the 22nd of February, 1887. The follow­
     ing were the positions of the heavenly bodies.
                F e b r u a r y 2 2 n d , 1887, 9h 40-2m p.m. (G.M.T.)

            O            ])             S           2            3           U                        «
                     O            1             O         1/ O
L ong.    °3 X 5 9   3 X 5 9 1 7 X 1 0 2 8 yx. 27 1 7 X 4 4 °5 t u 5 2 R 16 SB 3 B i l - - 5 8 R

D é clin . 10 s. 3 10 s. 34           5 s. 83    3 s. 47        5 s. 39 12 s. 10   22 n . 24       4 s.       2
                           EARTHQUAKES AND VOLCANIC E R U PTIO N S .                        879'

         Here again we find Mercury receiving the application of the
      Moon. Moreover, Mercury is in par. dec. and nearly in con­
      junction with Mars. Five of the heavenly bodies are in Pisces ;
      Jupiter is in Scorpio and in trine (120°) with the Sun and Moon.
      At about ten minutes before 6 a.m. of the following day the first
      shock was felt, and as the Sun, Moon, Mercury, Mars, and Venus
      ascended, successive shocks of earthquake destroyed one-third o f
      Porto Maurizio and over 1,000 lives, and did great damage at
      Diano Marino and Menton. The earthquake extended along the
      Riviera from east to west. The conjunction of Mercury and
      Mars took place at l l h p.m. of the 23rd of February, 1887, in
      Pisces 18° 9 ' 24" ; and several minor shocks took place during
      that night, and the two following mornings, just before sunrise.
         On the 10th November, 1882, an annular eclipse of the S un
      took place (at sunrise at Java) in the second decanate of the
      sign Scorpio. The positions of the heavenly bodies were as
      follow :—
               N o v e m b e r 10th, 1882, l l h 19’6m p.m. (G.M.T.)

              ©           I)        $         2         S        n         17         fi?    I     %
                                                    O       I          0        ,
Long. 1 8 n i3 0 1 8 n i3 0 2 9 -= 5 7 21 $ 89 27111 2          0ss36 2 3 «     2 2 2 n g l 9 1 7 8 28

Déclin. 1 7 s . 2 0 1 7 s . 3 1   9 s. 22 2 7 s. 55 1 9 s . 46 23 n . 1 16 n . 12   3 n . 4 4 !1 5 n . 1 7

          No fewer than seven of the heavenly bodies were in signs
      which are closely related to earthquakes. The Sun and Moon
      were in opposition with Neptune and within 5° of opposition
      with Saturn, and within 9° of conjuction with Mars. Mercury
      was on the threshold of the sign Scorpio and in trine with
      Jupiter in the northern tropic. At Java, the Sun, Moon and
      Mars were rising in Scorpio, and Saturn was setting in Taurus.
      On the 13th of November, 1882, began that series of earthquakes
      which continued at short intervals throughout the year 1883,
      rendering that period memorable for frequency of earthquake
      shocks and volcanic eruptions, also for the enormous loss of
      life resulting therefrom. Panama and Colon were the first
      places to suffer, one shock (in November, 1882) causing a
      rupture of the telegraph cable about thirty miles from Colon.
      On the 8th of December (when the Moon was in transit over
      the place of the eclipse) a very severe shock was felt in
      Roumania ; and about the same time fresh volcanic activity was
      noticed in the island of Santorin and in a submarine volcano
      formed near Missolonghi.    On the 1st of February, 1883 (when
      the Moon again passed over the place of the eclipse), Iquique
380               TH E TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTK O LO G Y.


and other places in South America experienced severe shocks,
which extended to Panama and Colon on the 4th and 5th, when
the cable was again broken there. In the middle of February,
when the Sun was in square (90°) aspect with Saturn,
Etna and Vesuvius were very active; on the 21st, a
-very distinct shock of earthquake was felt in South
 Australia. On the 5th March, when Mars was in square
aspect with Saturn, a fearful shock was felt in Cyprus, lasting
 nearly one minute, the severest recorded in that island for many
years. Etna became more active still. About the 12th of May
•(when the Sun arrived at the opposition of the place of the
 eclipse, and at that of Saturn), the volcano of Karang in the
island of Krakatoa, in the Straits of Sunda, after having been
 quiescent for the space of 200 years, broke into eruption, the
■violence of which was distinctly felt at Anjer and Batavia on the
 20th to 22nd, and the atmosphere was filled with smoke and
 fine ashes. On the 28th of July (eight days after the conjunc­
 tion of Mars and Saturn in Gemini 6° 42', Venus, Mars, and
Jupiter being in mutual parallel of declination, and the Sun in
 conjunction with Mercury in Leo), the great earthquake took place-
 at Casamicciola in Ischia, destroying 5,000 lives. On the 26th
■and 27th of August (when Mars reached the place of Jupiter at
 the eclipse, and was in conjunction with the Moon), the climax
 was reached in the awful eruption of Krakatoa, by which at least
 100,000 lives were lost, three towns on the coast of -Java
 completely destroyed, and an island 3,000 feet in height was
 submerged.      The volcanic products were thrown up to an
 inconceivable height, and for many miles around noon was
 rendered as dark as midnight, darkness lasting for from 86 to 40
 hours. The reverberation was heard at a distance of 2,000
 miies. A wave of -water 100 feet in height was produced by the
 vibration of the island, which destroyed everything over which it
 washed and made its mark on tidal registers in many parts of
 the world. It must not be forgotten that a total eclipse of the
 .Sun took place on the 6th of May, 1883, in Taurus 15° 59',
  Saturn being in Taurus 27° 44', and Jupiter in Cancer 0 0 22' ;
 and the Moon having been in perigee at 8h p.m. of the 5th. This
 was quickly followed by a severe earthquake in Central America,
 on the 8th, as foretold by the author. It is remarkable that at
  both these eclipses of the Sun, the one in November, 1882, and
  the other in May, 1883, Jupiter was in the 1st degree of the sign
 •Cancer, and that when the dreadful eruption of Krakatoa took place,
 Mars was in transit over the place of Jupiter at both eclipses.
                     EA RTH Q U AK ES AND VOLCANIC ER U PTIO N S.   381

      A study of the planetary positions about the time of the
   terrible earthquake at Charleston will prove interesting. On the
   29th of August, 1886, there was a total eclipse of the S un. The
   following were the positions of the heavenly bodies thereat :
           O         b   y        Î      3    U   ! h       «  I ¥
                                                   o
       o       f o/                    O   1              O   / O     /
Long. 6njj 4 6rtg 4 Î 8 S 1 5 8 1TS149 4ni45 7=^40il82s48 6-= 7 27 8 51

Déclin. 9 n. 17 9 N.ll 14 n. 5|17n.4913 s 39 2 s. 0 21n.47 Is. 49 18 n. 0

      At Charleston, the ecliptic conjunction took place at 7h 34'7m
    a.m., when the R.A. of the midheaven was 91° 19' 11", Cancer
    1° 13' culminating, and Libra 1° 7 ' 28" ascending, Jupiter and
    Uranus being just below the eastern horizon.
      The Sun and Moon are seen to be in sextile (60°) aspect with
    Mars in Scorpio ; and Jupiter but 1° 33' past conjunction with
    Uranus near the equator.
      Jupiter was in exact conjunction with Uranus in Libra
   5° 30' 30", on the 18th of August, 1886, at 7h 45m a.m., G.M.T.
   At Charleston, the local mean time of this conjunction was
   2h 34m 36s a.m., at which moment the R.A. of the midheaven
   was 5° 10' 20", Aries 4° 38' culminating, the Moon in Aries
   3° 58' having just passed the meridian, and hastening to opiposi-
   tion with Jupiter and Uranus, which planets were within 1° of the
   lower meridian. Moreover, Saturn was just rising in Cancer
   17° 36'.
      Tracing still farther back, we find that Mars was in conjunc­
   tion with Jupiter in Virgo 27° 49' 57", on the 27th of June,
   1886, at 10h 38m 38s a.m., G.M.T., very near the equator,
   Jupiter’s declination being 2° 3 ' 20" n. and that of Mars-.
   1° 14' 41" n. At Washington, the local mean time of this
   conjunction was 5h 30m 25s a.m., at which moment the con­
   joined planets were exactly in the lower meridian. This led the-
   author to foretell earthquakes in America soon after this
   conjunction, seeing that it would be so quickly followed by the
   conjunction of Jupiter and Uranus, and a total eclipse of the
   Sun, thus in the year 1884 :— “ In 1886, Jupiter and Uranus,
   will be in Libra and in square aspect with Saturn in Cancer,
   hence that year will be signalized by a series of great earth­
   quakes.” And in 1885          “ As the conjoined planets— Mars
   and Jupiter— are but 5° 52' from Uranus, and are near the
   equator-—this conjunction of the 27th of June, 1886, cannot fail
   to cause serious evils in the shape of earthquakes. At
   Washington, this conjunction takes place in the lower meridian..
382               TH E T E X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y .


Shocks of earthquake in the 77th degree of west longitude may,
therefore, be looked f o r ; great thunderstorms and waves of
intense heat will pass over the States. There will be great
excitement in America, and a religious movement of an
enthusiastic nature.”
    This forecast was exactly verified in every particular.
Charleston is situated in 79° 56' west longitude, reckoned from
Greenwich. Severe shocks of earthquake were felt between 76°
and 82° of west longitude—in Washington, Eichmond, Raleigh,
Augusta, Omaha, Mobile, Detroit, Atalanta,               Louisville,
Indianapolis, Cleveland, Pittsburg, Chicago, Memphis, and New
York. In the vicinity of Charleston, great quantities of sand
and mud were thrown up from deep fissures in the earth; 200
lives were lost, and 40,000 persons rendered homeless. There
was great excitement throughout America, and a religious revival
was witnessed in Charleston, especially among the negroes, who
thought that the Last Great Day of the world had arrived.
    It is thus seen that the planetary positions gradually led up to
the fearful catastrophe; for we have :— (1°) The conjunction of
Mars and Jupiter near the equator, on the 27th of June, 1886 ;
(2°) the conjunction of Jupiter and Uranus, near the equator,
•on the 18th of August; and (3°) the total eclipse of the Sun,
 the Moon being in perigee, on the 29th of August. On the
 25th of August, a sharp earthquake was felt at Srinagar. Then
 followed the terrible series of earthquakes in two different parts
 of the world— of one of which the Peloponnesus, and of the
 other, South Carolina, were the centres. On the night of the
 27th of August, Philitria, Gargaliano, Pyrgo, Caroni, Catacolo,
 and several other Greek towns were laid in ruins, and over 500
 people killed, twice that number injured, and thousands
 rendered homeless.         Simultaneously, Vesuvius exhibited
 renewed activity. On the 30th of August, the eastern and
 highest peak of Galita was in eruption. On the 27th of August,
 in the United States commenced a series of destructive earth­
 quakes, which were continued almost without intermission
 throughout September, and afterwards, at longer intervals, until
 the 5th of November, the greater part of Charleston being
 wrecked on the 31st of August, 1886.
    Whenever there has been a maximum of planetary influence,
 earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, and epidemics, have either
 coincided or very quickly followed. The “ spasmodic con­
 vulsions of the sickened earth ” have repeatedly been found to
  synchronize with the outbreak of epidemics; and the wise
                EA RTH Q U AK ES A N D VOLCANIC E R U PTIO N S.           883

physicians of antiquity, who were close students of physical
science, attributed such phenomena to planetary action.
   In the year 1783, the earthquakes in Calabria destroyed
40,000 lives; Saturn was then in Capricomw, Jupiter in the
same sign, Uranus in Cancer, and Neptune in Libra, the
maximum of planetary action.
   The author clearly foretold the following great earth­
quakes :— Kuchan, 1893; San Francisco, 1906 ; India, 1905 ;
Valparaiso, 1906; Italy and Messina, 1908-1909. Moreover,
these forecasts saved many readers of Zadkiel’s Almanac for
1905, 1906, 1908 and 1909, from being involved in the horrors
of those awful catastrophes.
   Captain A. T. Banon, of Iiulu-Kangra, Punjab, who was an
eye-witness of the great earthquake in India, in 1905, wrote to
the author on the 28th of April, 1905, as follows :—
   “ I suppose our earthquake, which you so successfully predicted,
exactly as to time and place, has been reported in the English news­
papers. I don’t know about the English Press, but I believe the Indian
Press has done you justice. . . .          I have come to the conclusion
that your theory, electric telluric currents, as to the cause of earthquakes
is correct; and that the scientific orthodox theory is incorrect,” etc.3

   The “ New York Herald,” European edition, April 2nd, 1907,
printed a letter from the author on Earthquakes and the
Celestial Bodies.4




  3 Vide Z adkiel’s A lm anac for 1906, p. 77, art. “ T he G reat Earthquake in
India, 1905.”
  4 Vide Zadkiel’s A lm anac for 1908, pp. 81-88.
                                       384




                            BOOK IV.

               MEDICAL                 ASTROLOGA.


                           C H A P T E E             I.



       EPIDEMICS         AND       PLANETARY              INFLUENCE.

         “ E very form o f death, and every woe,
           Shot from m alignant stars to earth below .”— C a m p b e l l .


T he   germ theory, as Beekingham says, “ is an assumption o f
causes of the existence of which we have no evidence to account
for effects they do not explain.” What is the contayium vivum,.
and what is its origin ?
   Dr. Maudesley s a y s D i s e a s e is not a specific morbid
entity, that like some evil spirit takes possession of the body,,
but a condition of degeneration from healthy life.” Mr. Wolfe
says:— “ Perhaps minute animalculas may be present, in
different stages of decay of tissue, and are assumed to be the:
cause instead of the consequence.’ ’
   What of the change of type of disease ? This is at utter
variance with the germ-theory.         It is beyond dispute that
diseases do, from time to time, undergo great changes in their
types and characters. Sydenham records this fact. He says:—
   “ Nothing in my opinion strikes the mind that contemplates
the whole domain of medicine with greater wonder than the
well-known varied and inconsistent character of those diseases
which we call epidemic. It is not so much that they reflect and
depend upon different conditions of climate in one and the same year,
as that they represent different and dissimilar constitutions of
different and dissimilar years.”
   What has become of black death ?             Has there been a
“ survival of the fittest ” among the “ specific morbid entities,”
and is that of the black death crushed out by its more vigorous.
                 E P ID E M IC S AND P L A N E T A R Y IN F L U E N C E .   385

  rivals ? To judge by results, black death having been more fatal
  than the epidemics of the present century, its specific morbid
  entity would be presumably more vigorous and more likely to
  survive; but it is gone. What destroyed its specific germ ?
     Why is scarlatina at one time malignant and at another mild?
  Why does one epidemic of small-pox prove to be most virulent­
  as in 1871, after many years of compulsory vaccination—while
  another epidemic of the same disease— as in 1791, before
 vaccination— was so mild that a fatal instance was scarcely heard
 of ? Why is the comparatively harmless disease called measles
 in some years so malignant that the mortality runs up to high
 figures ? The germ-theory cannot afford any sufficient answer
 to these questions. Astrology alone can answer them ; for in
 one year we find three or four of the superior planets in mutual
 conjunction, or opposition, and a severe epidemic coinciding;
 in another year, only two of the superior planets in conjunction,
 or opposition, and a mild form of epidemic disease coinciding.
 The periodicity of the conjunctions and oppositions of the
 superior planets corresponds to that of great epidemics. When
the influence of Mars predominates, one of the martial diseases
— scarlatina, small-pox, or measles— prevails. When Jupiter is
near his perihelion and free from affliction by Saturn, Mars, or
 Uranus, the public health is good.
    Influenza was defined by the late Dr. Edmund Parkes,
F.R.S., whose memory is held in the highest esteem, as
    “ An epidemic specific fever, with special and early implica­
 tion of the naso-laryngo-bronchial mucous membrane ; duration
definite of from four to eight days ; one attack not preservative in
future epidemics.
    “ In the seventeenth century it was first called Influenza, in
Italy, because it was attributed to the 1 influence ’ of the stars,
and this term has passed into medical use.
    “ History.— Supposed to be referred to by Hippocrates, who
yet gives no perfect description.......................... It is not until
the fourteenth century that the records became numerous and
precise :— In the 14th century, 6 epidemics are recorded; in the
15th, 7 epidemics; in the 16th, 11 ; in the 17th, 16; in the 18th,
18 ; in the 19th century (first half), 10 epidemics. There is
little doubt that the apparent increase of prevalence in the last
centuries is merely due to more accurate recording of minor
epidemics.
    “ Of these epidemics, some have been very widely spread over
a great part of the known world, as in 1311, 1557, 1580, 1590,
1729, 1762, 1775, 1780-2, 1830-2, 1847. It has prevailed in
most places of the habitable globe; in the whole of Europe ; in
386                   THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF A STR O LO G Y.


China, Tartary, Egypt, India, and other parts of A sia; in
Australia, Polynesia; in North and South America, and in the
West Indies; that is to say, in both hemispheres and in all
latitudes.” 1
    Dr. Parkes remarked :—
    “ So enigmatical are the phenomena connected with
Influenza, that caution is necessary in attempting to form some
idea of what the nature of the exciting cause may be. It must
be a specific agent of some kind. From the earliest times
authors have come to this conclusion; the similarity of the
symptoms in different epidemics show that this agent is the
same in its successive invasions. If it be connected with any
unusual meteorological or atmospheric condition, this has not
been detected, and cannot be at present even guessed at. It
 seems to me to be impossible at present to come to any conclu­
 sion as to the nature of the cause.
    “ Volcanic Eruptions.—Telluric Emanations.—Noah Webster
 and Schnurrer have collected the available evidence on this
 point, but it is entirely negative. There have been constant
 volcanic eruptions without Influenza, and epidemics of Influenza
 without great volcanic eruptions. It has been thought that
 emanations of seleniuretted hydrogen from volcanoes might
 excite Influenza, but no proof has ever been given of the exist­
 ence of this substance in the atmosphere.
    “ Electrical Conditions.—No evidence has been collected which
 shows any connexion with conditions of telluric magnetism or
 atmospheric electricity; and indeed the peculiar spread and
 frequent localization of Influenza seem inconsistent with general
  magnetic conditions.
     “ Seasons.— The disease appears at all times of the year ; nor is
  there any reason for considering it an affection of the late
  summer, autumn, and winter, as has been stated.
     “ Temperature of the A ir.—Owing to the confusion in the
  popular mind between Influenza and common catarrhs or
  catarrhal fevers, it has always been a common opinion that
  Influenza depends either on a low or a sudden variation of
  temperature. This error has taken a long time to k ill; but
  almost every writer, since the epidemic of 1580, has examined
  this point, and has decided that there is no such connexion.
  There is abundant evidence to show that the changes of weather,
  which may appear to have accompanied or preceded its outbreak
  were mere coincidences.”
   Seitz attributed great influence to the effect of vicissitudes of
 weather in causing epidemic Influenza.3

      1 See Dr. Reynolds’s “ System of Medicine,” vol. i.
      2 “ Catarrh and Influenza,” 1865.
               E P ID E M IC S   AND P L A N E T A R Y IN F L U E N C E .   387

   In order to discover the true cause of Influenza we must look
beyond the changes of weather which have so frequently preceded
or accompanied its outbreak.
   Sudden variations of temperature and unusual weather (for
the season) are, in the opinion of astro-meteorologists, due to
the rare conjunctions and oppositions of the superior planets,
more especially when such phenomena happen at or near the
period of the new moon or solar ingress into one of the cardinal
points of the ecliptic. The modus operandi is unknown—it may
probably be electrical. Dr. Pickford says :—8
   “ The prevalence of epidemic or pestilential disease has been
associated with the absency or deficiency of positive electricity in
the atmosphere ; and the mortality has been found to be in the
inverse ratio of the amount of positive electricity with which
the air is charged.
   “ In the ‘ non-eleetrie’ states of the air, or when the electricity
is ‘ weak’ or ‘ nothing,’ diseases of a low type prevail, and the
mortality increases. On the contrary, -when the electricity is
‘ positive,’ ‘ strongly positive,’ and ‘ active throughout the day,’
the number of deaths decreases.”
   Dr. Prout expressed his opinion that the derangement of the
atmosphere coincident with pestilence is due to a deranged state
of the electric fluid; and there is reason to believe, from his
experiments, “ it immediately affects that all-important function,
the change of the blood in the lungs.” Dr. Prout found an
increase of the carbonic acid expired during a thunderstorm.
   That the atmosphere is affected in some way is proved by
Influenza breaking out among horses— in the year 1872, about
16,000 horses in New York alone were attacked with Influenza
— although “ it has not yet been decided,” says Zuelzer,
“ whether the epizootics prevail simultaneously with Influenza
among men.” Virgil (Georg, lib. iii, 478) observed that the
pestilential influence is exerted on animals as well as man.
Homer and early writers on medicine record instances of the
epizootic attacking animals first and mankind afterwards. Many
cases of the kind are given in “ Electricité des Meteors’ ’ published
at Lyons, in the year 1787, by the Abbé Bertholon.
   The frequency of the coincidence of volcanic eruptions and
earthquakes with the outbreaks of epidemics, tends to support
the hypothesis of planetary action being the exciting cause of all
these phenomena ; and electricity may be the agent. Noah
Webster relates a very large number of such coincidences.

                 3 “ Hygiene.”           London : 1858, p. 55.
1388              THIS T E X T -B O O K OF ASTR OLO G Y.


   The fact that specific sources of excitement often prevail for
several months in succession and then disappear, giving place
either to other specific sources producing other diseases or to a
healthy period, points strongly to planetary action ; for the larger
planets often remain near together (before and after their con­
junction) for months, on account of their slow, motion, and
one of the conjoined planets may then form conjunction with a
third.
   Hippocrates held that all epidemics came from the atmo­
sphere ; the Indian, Arabian, and Turkish physicians held the
same opinion.
   Professor Zuelzer denied that there is any connection established
between atmospheric conditions and Influenza; Drs. Forster
and Sietz assert that there is. The fact lost sight of by these
•disputants is that the atmosphere is the medium through
which the influence is, spread, and that the atmosphere is-
variously affected according to the several natures of the planets
in mutual configuration. Dr. Parkes said : “ Surely no one can
doubt the connection of the various attacks in the great-
epidemics of Influenza with some general and pandemic
influence.” But the learned doctor did not turn his attention to-
planetary influence, or he might possibly have come to the same
conclusion as the writer, viz., that the “ general and pandemic-
 influence” is referable to certain relative positions of the
 heavenly bodies. The frequent coincidence of sudden variations
 of temperature and of abnormal seasons, with the outbreak of
 Influenza and other epidemics, lends force to this conclusion.
 When the maximum of planetary influence obtains, the
 maximum of epidemic disease attends or immediately follows.
    On the 28rd of February, 1880, there happened an eclipse of
 the Sun, visible in Tartary, Siberia, etc. At this eclipse,
  Uranus was in the meridian (in-Asia), in the sign Aquarius, and
  within 5° of the opposition of Saturn. On the 9th of March
 following, there happened an eclipse of the Moon which was
 total to the greater part of Asia and the Asiatic Isles. There
 were no fewer than six eclipses in 1880, four of the Sun.
 Zuelzer records that the Influenza first appeared in that part of
 the- world wherein these eclipses were visible. In February,
 1831, there happened an annular eclipse of the Sun in Aquarius
 24°, the luminaries being in opposition to Saturn, and the
 eclipse being visible in North America— which soon after was
 visited with the epidemic. In the spring of 1881, J upiter was
 in conjunction with Uranus in Aquarius. Zadkiel foretold, in his
                  EP ID E M IC S AND PLAN ETAR Y IN F LU E N C E .         389

  Herald of Astrology for 1831, “ tumult, sickness, and destruction”
  in the East, all of which occurred there; also, ‘ •epidemic
  disease in England in June and July,” the Influenza then
  visited England, and “ two hundred excuses were sent to the
  Queen’s ball.” In 1832, J upiter was still nearly in conjunction
  with U r a n u s ; and was in opposition to S aturn in March.
 Again, three great planets in mutual configuration, the
 maximum of planetary influence and the maximum of epidemic
 disease !
    As to the specific agent, Dr. Parkes concluded th at:—
    “ This agent must be in the air; the diffusion is too rapid to
 suppose it to be conveyed by water; besides water-poisoning is
 usually localised. It cannot be attributable to food. There
 remains only the air as a medium of communication ; and that
 this is so seems also shown by the way in which it can attack
 vessels at some distance at sea.....................It seems to me to
 be impossible at present to come to any conclusion as to the
 nature of the cause.”
    The rapid and extreme prostration of muscular strength, a
 very early symptom, together with excruciating headache, seems
 to point to electrical changes being intimately associated with
 Influenza— and these changes in the electrical condition of the
 atmosphere are due to planetary action.
    E pidem ic C ho lera in the sporadic form (Cholera Nostras,
 Europoea) is not nearly so severe as the Asiatic or Oriental.
    Lebert says th a t: Hippocrates, Celsus, and Crelius Aurelianus
 wrote of it, and Aretseus described it excellently. Diogenes the
 cynic is said to have died of it after a fit of indigestion produced
by eating cow’s feet raw, a melancholy end to the philosophical
dweller in a tub. It is only as late as the sixteenth century,
however, that we begin to find mention of this disease.
 Sydenham recorded the London epidemic im4669-l672.
   Dr. Goodene, in writing of Epidemic Cholera, states :— 4
   “ Most extended observations as to electricity, ozone, and
barometric pressure, by Mr. Glaisher are to be found in the
Appendix to the Cholera Report for 1853-54 ; and in the Report
of the Indian Sanitary Commission of 1862 ; but these have
not been found to exercise any decided influence, or to have
existed in different conditions during different epidemics.
   “ Some connection between atmospheric states and the
epidemics does exist, but it is not that of cause and effect. Mr.
Glaisher says:— 1 The three epidemics of 1832, 1848-49, and

  4    “ A S ystem o f M edicine,” edited by D r. Russell R eynolds, vol. i., pp.
671-683.
390               TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


1853-54, were attended with a particular state of the atmosphere
(in London), characterised by a prevalent mist, thin in high
places, dense in low— during the height of the epidemic; in all
cases the reading of the barometer was remarkably high and the
atmosphere thick.’
   “ Departure of Cholera Epidemics.— These often leave a place
rapidly, sometimes after sudden atmospheric changes, and after
high winds and storms. . . . Chemical analysis of the air
has thrown no light on the cause of Cholera. It is possible,
however, that prolonged microscopic examination of strained air,
as in the method of Pasteur, might be more successful. . . .
It must be confessed that we do not know what is the exciting
cause of Cholera.”
   Dr. Kelsall in his “ Remarks on Asiatic Cholera,” states his
opinion that “ the origin of Cholera is in some mysterious and
unusual telluric influence,” and whenever it occurs, he believes
1‘ there is always an unusual and temporary influence which so
modifies or changes the condition of the exhalations, that a
specific miasm is engendered by chemical union of these gases,
and Cholera prevails.” This unusual influence he believes “ to
be some perturbation of the electricity of the earth, either
atmospheric or telluric; and some such influence seems to have
been mysteriously and intimately connected with all the
different pestilences which have periodically passed over the
earth.’’ In Dr. Kelsall’s opinion :
    “ The Cholera miasm rises from the earth and floats in the
 air, sometimes assuming a visible appearance : e.cj., a mass of
 reddish vapour was seen, in 1820, on the surface of the Yellow
 Sea ; the vapours were at first light, gradually increased, became
 condensed, and rising from the surface of the water, formed an
 immense red cloud, which remained for several hours floating in
 the air. A violent wind suddenly arose, divided the cloud into
 several columns, and drove them towards the land. Those red
 vapours spread in a winding course along the hills and valleys,
 and swept over the towns and villages, and wherever they
 passed, the people were attacked with Cholera. During the
 Crimean War, H.M.S. Britannia was cruising in the Black Sea,
 in 1854; an outbreak of Cholera occurred immediately after a
 remarkable cloud was observed to hover over the ship.”
   In “ Travels and Adventures of an Officer’s Widow,” it is
related that a column of mist; enveloped a sanitary station on a
hill at Murree, in the Himalaya mountains, more than 7,000
feet above the sea-level, in 1858; and a frightful outbreak of
Cholera immediately followed, more than one-sixth of the
European soldiers stationed there being buried before the
pestilence ceased.
               E P ID E M IC S   AND   PLANETARY   IN F L U E N C E .   391

   In 1848, Cholera prevailed in Germany. It broke out in
Paris, March 11th, 1849; at first it spread slowly; during the
first eight days of June it reached a hitherto unheard of
intensity. On June 9th, a severe storm occurred, and from this
day it markedly diminished, says Lebert. In 1849, Cholera was
very fatal in Great Britain. Zadkiel I. foretold this outbreak in
these words5 :— “ The presence of U ranus in the house of death
 [at the conjunction of M ars and S aturn in v , May 25th, 1849,]
denotes, I fear, much fatality by the C h o l e r a ! which fatal
disease seems to travel like a thunder-cloud, over the coasts of
Britain/’
   Prom the great eclipse of the S u n in ^ 15° 27', in opposition
to U ranus in T 16° 20', retrograde, and in square with J u p it e r
in 2S 19° 10', of October 9th, 1847 ; at which S aturn was in the
fourth angle in X 7° 2', retrograde, and M ars was just setting ;
Zadkiel I. foretold “ fierce and violent maladies and pest il en t ial
diseases .”6 On October 24th, says Lebert, Cholera broke out in
Constantinople, which became a chief centre of radiation.
From Constantinople all Syria and a large part of the countries
about the Mediterranean Sea were attacked.
   When, in Paris, the Cholera was at its height, in the first
eight days of June, M ars was in opposition to the place of the
Solar eclipse of October 9th, 1847. The great storm of June
9th, took place under the combined influences of M ars and
•Ju p ite r in aspect with the S un , as reference to the Rphemeris
will show.
   England and Prance were again attacked with Cholera in
1853, but it was not until 1854, says Lebert, that it prevailed to
a wide extent in England, Scotland, and Ireland. In 1853 and
1854 it extended over a considerable portion of the United
States of America, and the Antilles. In 1854 and 1855 it
showed itself in Switzerland. Its spread and desolation during
the Crimean War are well remembered. From the planetary
positions at the Solar eclipse of June 6th, 1853, Zadkiel I. foretold
that “ fierce and violent maladies and pestilential diseases will
destroy vast numbers of the human race.” M ars was separating
from conjunction -with U ranus and about to form the conjunction
with S a t u r n . The eclipse took place in n 15° 56' in opposition
to J u p it e r in f 20° 6', retrograde. In fact, Zadkiel I. foretold
the Cholera year of 1854, and the healthy summer (for England)
of 1855.
  5 ZadkieVs Almanac fo r 1849, p. 38.
  6 ZadkieVs Almanac for 1848, pp. 48, 44.
392                  THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF A STR O LO G Y.


   T he P l a g u e .— The name Pest (Pestis, Pestilentia, Aoipc;), says
Liebenneister,7 was given during antiquity and the middle ages to
every epidemic disease, in which the mortality was very large.
Gradually, however, the term came to be used almost altogether
to designate a certain disease, distinguished above all others by
its epidemical appearance and by its heavy mortality.                At
present the term Pest, or Plague is understood exclusively to
mean the bubo plague.
   “ According to the testimony of Rufus of Ephesus, as given by
Oribasius, the bubo plague occurred in Egypt, Libya, and Syria,
already before the beginning of the present era. The first extensive
epidemic of the bubo plague in Europe occurred in the middle of the
sixth century, and is known under the name of the Plaque of
Justinian. Since then Plague epidemics have very often occurred on
European soil, and during the middle ages and the first years of
modern times, it was the worst of the epidemic diseases that visited
the people of Europe. Since the middle of the seventeenth century'
the Plague epidemics have begun, gradually, to be less frequent in
Europe, and the western European continent has not been visited
by the disease since the serious epidemic which occurred in Provence
in the years 1720 and 1721. . . .     It seemed for a long time as if
the Plague had entirely disappeared from the earth; during the last
decades, however, unmistakable epidemics of the disease, though of
comparatively limited extent, have appeared in isolated regions of
Africa and Asia.”
  It is universally acknowledged in modern times that the
Plague never originated autochthonously in Europe, but that it
was always introduced. The doctrine of the contagiousness of
the plague is often assailed, and the statement is often made
that it arises solely from impurities in the atmosphere or other
telluric or eosmieal influences. The question as to the manner
in which the plague is disseminated cannot yet be decided with
certainty.
   “ The season o f the year and the climate have only a very slight
influence, and yet moderate warmth in connection with dampness
seems to be quite favourable to the propagation of the plague.
   “ The second point of interest in the annihilation of the plague is the
improvement of the sanitary condition of Europe as well as that part
of the Orient which was formerly the chief source of the disease.”
  T he “ B lack D eath ” devastated almost all the known
countries of the earth, about the middle of the fourteenth
century, and was so-called because it was more fatal than all
previous or succeeding epidemics. It presented all the essential
characteristics, says Liebermeister, “ of the ordinary bubo
Plague, but in addition there was always a lung complication ;

         7 Ziem ssen s “ Cyclopaedia o f M edicine,” vol. i., p. 465.
                 E PID E M IC S AND PL A N E T A R Y   IN F LU E N C E .   393

  in numerous cases, blood was expectorated, a symptom which
  seldom occurred in the bubo Plague, properly so-called ; death
  followed more quickly, generally within three days.”
     The statement of Hecker is that the atmosphere teas really
 poisoned. The Black Death first appeared in Europe, Asia, and
  Africa, in the year 1345, arid it prevailed for seven years. The
  ancients averred that great conjunctions of planets in one of the
  signs of the “ airy triplicity” ( n , =s=, and ixz), caused or pre­
  signified “ famine, fierce and violent maladies, and pestilential
 diseases.”
     Guy de Chauliac, a surgeon of Avignon, attributed this out­
  break to the grand conjunction of the Planets S a t u r n , J u p it e r ,
 and M ars in Aquarius, on the 24th of March, 1345,— N eptune
 was also in the same sign. Here, again, is found the maximum
 of planetary influence, attended by the maximum of murderous
 pandemics. In 1346, J u p ite r overtook U ranus in Aries. In
 1352, S aturn joined U ranus in Aries. Guy de Chauliac was
 right and his narrow minded critic in the Evening Standard of
 March 4th, 1911, was wrong in sneering at “ his fatuous
 belief.” The author wrote a letter, which appeared in the same
 journal of March 6th, protesting again Mr. James McWhir’s
 condemnation of Chauliac, and reminding him of Dr. Parkes’
•conclusion already quoted in this chapter.
    At the summer solstice of the year 1665, S aturn was in the
■eighth “ house” (that of death) of the heavens, retrograde in Vy
 6°, and nearly in opposition to the S un and M ars . The M oon
 was in the sixth house (that of sickness), in            10° and in
square aspect with S atu rn , M ercu ry and Y e n u s . The Map of
 the Heavens at this ingress will be found in Lilly’ s Almanac for
 1665. Lilly foretold “ a sickly summer,” and said that: “ The
diseases likely to afflict mankind are fluxes, colic, pestilence and
plague ” — although, of course, he did' not know that there was a
conjunction of J u p it e r and U ranus to increase the mischief.
    T yp h o id F eve r (abdominal typhus) is supposed to be described
by Hippocrates in his first and third books on the Epidemics.
In the seventeenth century and in the eighteenth, there can be
no doubt that it occasionally became epidemic. Typhoid fever
is never directly transmitted from person to person ; it is there­
fore classed by Liebermeister as a “ miasmatic-contagious”
disease. Typhus (derived from TOtpo;, smoke or vapour) fever
“ is certainly a disease which can serve as a prototype of those
diseases which are transmitted from person to person.
Whoever touches, or even comes near to a case of typhus fever
394                  TH E   TE X T -B O O K OF ASTK OLOG Y.


is in danger of contagion. For this reason the greater number of
the physicians and attendants who take care of such invalids are
themselves attacked with the disease.” Liebermister proceeds :
   “ H ow then does typhoid fever originate ? H ow is the poison
elaborated, and how is it transmitted to m an? These questions are
answered with great unanimity by most persons, even those who
believe in direct contagion. They hold that the poison of typhoid fever
originates in the decomposition of organic substances. The name
pythogenic (produced by putrefaction) fever, proposed by Murchison, is
based on this generally received opinion. Yet, if we look more closely
at the facts on which this pythogenic theory rests, we can find grounds
for doubt.”
   “ It is a fact that typhoid, in contrast with many other diseases,
and especially with cholera, attacks, by preference, strong and healthy
persons, while it avoids those already suffering with chronic ailments.”

   As is the case with Influenza, Cholera, and Plague, so it is
with Enteric or Typhoid fever— the years of greatest prevalence
of the epidemic are those in which the maximum of combined
planetary influence obtains. A stagnant atmosphere favours the
spread of the specific poison. It is remarkable that typhoid
fever attacks young persons chiefly, and those between fifteen
and twenty-five years of age furnish one-half of the number of
victims— just as in the case of pulmonary phthisis. It seems to
be nearly related to intermittent and remittent fevers, and to
dysentery; and in some epidemics, typhoid fever appears to
undergo a change of type. Dr. Harley writes of three varieties,
 viz., the simple inflammatory, the contagious, and the paludal
enteric fever.
    M e a sl e s , S carlatina , and S&ia l l -P o x are classed as
 contagious diseases. They were all known to the ancients, but
 were frequently grouped together instead of being separately
 described in ancient and mediaeval times. They are all martial
 diseases ; each appears at one time in a mild epidemic form, at
 another time in a severe or even malignant form.
    Dr. Louis Thomas says :s Where measles originated, where
 and how it spread, and to what extent it has prevailed of old in
 the inhabited portions of the earth, are questions which do not
 admit of even a tolerably grounded hypothesis. Probably it is
 of exotic origin. Dr. Thomas proceeds to say :
   “ Susceptibility to the contagion of measles is almost universal,
 except where one attack has already occurred. Second attacks are
 exceedingly rare, as much so as second attacks of small-pox and
 scarlet fever. . . . Like all acute infectious diseases, and especially


       8 Ziem ssen's “ C y clo p e d ia o f M edicine,” vol. ii.   Art. Measles
                E P ID E M IC S   AND PL A N E T A R Y IN F LU EN CE .   895

small-pox, measles may appear at times with a general, almost
pandemic spread, to then disappear again more or less completely for
a longer or shorter time.
   “ True haemorrhagic measles is much rarer than the same form in
small-pox. It occurs even in little children The oldest accounts of
the malignant form are of little value, though by far the most
numerous, for the ‘ black measles ’ played formerly a great r61e.
Doubtless its ostensible frequence is somewhat explained by the
preposterous treatment of old times, but more particularly by the fact
that measles and scarlet-fever were included in one category, and
malignant forms of scarlet-fever were described as measles.”

   Scarlatina was not deemed of sufficient importance, in
ancient times, to require an exact description of it. Even in
the beginning of the seventeenth century, Sennert refers to
scarlatina as only another form of measles ; and Morton, at the
close of the same century, maintained that both are one and the
same disease, differing only in the character of the rash.
Sydenham established the specific nature of scarlatina by
observations made during the epidemics which occurred in
London from 1661 to 1675. It was soon recognised that the
character of the scarlatina epidemic was liable to great
variation; a series of years of the mild form being followed by
others of unprecedented malignancy and danger. Epidemics of
scarlatina have maintained this peculiarity down to the latest
times, especially in England and Ireland. According to Dr.
Farr’s statistics, the annual mortality from scarlatina in
England and Wales from 1848 to 1855 comprised -Jyth, and in
some years -^th of the entire death-rate. From Europe it has
extended over the rest of the world. Dr. Thomas says :—
   “ It is indisputable that the cause of scarlatina is a peculiar substance
which is transferable from the patient to the unaffected individual.
Isolation of scarlatinous patients has prevented the further spread of
the disease. An intense family predisposition is frequent; the cause
of this is as obscure as the nature of the predisposition. On the
other hand, there are families in winch the susceptibility to scarlatina
seems to be entirely absent. The predisposition to scarlatina seems
to be extraordinary in those patients who are affected so intensely that
death ensues in a short time.”

   Now this extraordinary predisposition to scarlatina is capable
of explanation astrologically. In regard to measles, it is found
that a “ direction” of the Ascendant, Sun, or Moon, to the
conjunction, square, semi-square, sesqui-square, opposition, or
par. dec. of Mars, or of Jupiter, or the Sun (if either be affected
by $ at birth), will coincide with and account for the attack.
But in regard to scarlatina, Mars alone is the cause of it. Those
who become so affected as to die in a short time, have Mars
396                  TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


afflicting the hyleg at birth,9 and therefore the anareta. Those
whose horoscopes are free from the affliction of Mars are insus­
ceptible of scarlatina. Points such as these are likely to remain
“ obscure” to the wisest physicians while they neglect to be
instructed in astrology.
   Dr. Thomas proceeds :—
    “ Cases of scarlet fever occur either in sporadic or epidemic form.
 The most complete reports concerning the influence of the seasons on
 the prevalence of scarlatina have emanated from England.           The
 greater prevalence of the disease in the autumn has been recognised
 since Sydenham’s time— the largest number of deaths out of 55,956
 cases in London, within 24 years, occurred between the middle of
 September and the middle of November, the smallest number towards
the end of March and beginning of April. Scarlatina lacks the regular
periodicity of measles.
   “ Occasionally scarlatina, like small-pox and measles, assumes a
jiandemic character, or at least spreads over large tracts of land, as
for instance in Germany' in 1818; in Denmark, England, Germany,
and Prance in 1825 and 1826; in Ireland, Russia, and Germany in
1832-85; in Germany, Denmark, and England in 1846-49; in the
United States in 1821; and over the whole of South America from
1881 to 1887. It may be said that the pathogenesis o f scarlatina is
still a mystery.”

   In 1818, at the vernal equinox, the S un was in square aspect
with Mars. At the Solar eclipse of May 5th. Mars was rising
{in ss 21°). At the Solar eclipse of October 29th, Mars was
within 6° of the luminaries.
   In 1821, there was a conjunction of Mars with both Saturn
and Jupiter in Aries.
   In 1825, at the vernal equinox, the Moon was separating from
the Sun and applying to conjunction with Mars in Aries. At the
lunar eclipse of May 31st, the Sun was in conjunction with Mars
and Saturn— the two infortunes forming their mutual conjunc­
tion on the 5th of June. In 1826, Mars was retrograde from the
29th of March to the 13th of June.
   In 1832, at the Solar eclipse of July 27th, the luminaries were
in square with Mars (8 7°), and Mars was retrograde from the
13th of October to the 25th of December. In 1834, at the
autumnal equinox, the Sun was in square aspect with Mars ; and
the red planet was retrograde from November, 1834, to February
(inclusive), 1835. In 1836, at the solar eclipse of November 9th
the luminaries were in square with Mars.
   S m a l l - p o x . — Some remarks on this martial disease will be

found at p. 168 of this work.

            See case 3, p. 129; also ease 14, p . 130 o f this work.
               EP ID E M IC S AND   PLA N E T A R Y IN F L U E N C E .   397

   The advocates for compulsory vaccination assert that the
comparative diminution of small-pox nowadays is entirely due to
vaccination! This cannot be true, for in the eighteenth century
small-pox was artificially maintained and spread by the practice
of inoculation; and, moreover, sanitation and isolation of cases
have reduced the mortality of all epidemics. Prior to the
introduction of vaccination there were mild epidemics of small­
pox, as Jenner himself records ; and, occasionally, for a series
of years there was no epidemic of it. When in the year 1871 a
virulent epidemic of small-pox broke out, it caused a high rate
of mortality in the very countries (Prussia, for example) the
people of which were most efficiently vaccinated and
re-vaccinated. When the epidemic declined, as all epidemic
diseases do after a time, its decline was attributed to
vaccination.
   Perusal of “ Vital Statistics ” (by my father, Dr. C. T.
Pearce), and of “ Registration Statistics ” (by Dr. Wallace), will
show that there is very grave reason to doubt whether vaccina­
tion has ever effected any diminution of small-pox ; at any rate
no such effect can be proved by the statistics of the Registrar-
General. The contrast afforded between unvaccinated Leicester
and vaccinated Sheffield, in 1887, is dead against the theory of
the protective power of vaccination. Dr. Creighton’s article on
Vaccination, in a former edition of the “ Encyclopsedia
Britannica,” is an unanswerable argument against the practice.
   Curschmann says :—
   “ The truth is that from an early date down to the present time,
fluctuations have occurred in the recurrence of epidemics, so that
periods of rest have alternated, with some uniformity, with years of
intense prevalence. A recurrence of the disease every 12 or 15 years
has been stated.
   “ Some epidemics are severe, others are mild. The season of the
year has some influence on the course of epidemics; they are generally
more dangerous hi summer than in winter.”

   Official advocates for vaccination publish statistics of the
comparative mortality of the vaccinated and the unvaccinated,
from small-pox, but they do not give the ayes of the victims, so
that no fair conclusion can be drawn in favour of vaccination
from their statistics. As a rule, the unvaccinated class consists
chiefly of children certified to be unfit for vaccination.
   Generally speaking, children bom when the planet Mars is
exactly rising or setting are particularly liable to the small-pox,
measles, and scarlatina; if Mars be in either .Aries, Taurus, or
398                 TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF A S TR O LO G Y.


 Virgo, the small-pox more especially. If, at the time of an
epidemic, in such a nativity there be a direction of the
Ascendant, Sun, or Moon, whichever may be hyleg, to the con­
junction, square, opposition, or parallel declination of Mars, the
owner of such nativity may not escape being attacked.
   In years of epidemic small-pox, the influence of Mars is
found supreme. The great epidemic of 1871 took place when
Mars became retrograde (in the sign Virgo) ; and at the vernal
ingress of that year Mars was in opposition to the Sun.
   When Mars has little power— that is to say when 3 is neither
in elevation nor configuration with either the Sun or Moon at
an eclipse, or at the equinox or solstice, and neither retrograde
nor in perigee—martial diseases are almost entirely absent and
are not epidemic. The low death-rate and absence of epidemics
when Jupiter is in perihelion and supreme at the equinoxes,
solstices, and eclipses, contrasted with the high death-rate and
prevalence of epidemics coinciding with the planet Mars being in
the same relative positions, is very remarkable, and forms a
very strong argument in favour of planetary influence, which is,
to say the least, deserving of impartial and thorough investiga­
tion at the hands of the Medical Profession.
   The late Professor Max Muller, M.A., wrote of the ancient
science as follows:— 10
   “ Astrology was not such mere imposition as it is generally supposed
to have been. It is counted a science by so sound and sober a scholar
as M elancthon; and even Bacon allows it a place among the sciences,
though admitting that ‘ it had better intelligence and confederacy with
the imagination of man than with his reason.’ In spite of the strong
condemnation Luther pronounced against it, astrology continued to
sway the destinies of Europe; and a hundred years after Luther, the
astrologer was the counsellor of princes and generals, while the founder
of modern astronomy died in poverty and despair. In our time the
very rudiments of astrology are lost and forgotten.
   “ According to a writer in Notes and Queries (2nd series, vol. x.,
p. 500), astrology is not so entirely extinct as we suppose. One of our
principal writers, he states, one of our leading barristers, and several
members of the various antiquarian societies, are practised astrologers
at this hour. But no one cares to let his studies be known, so great is
the prejudice that confounds an art requiring the highest education
with the jargon of the gipsy fortune-teller! ” See also a paper on
M edicine and Astrology read before the Numismatic and Antiquarian
Society of Philadelphia, June 7tli, 1866.




  10 “ Lectures on the Science of Language,” 9th edit., vol. 1, pp. 10, 11.
Longmans, 1877.
                                 399




                      C H A P T E K IL



               CRISES           IN     DISEASE.

 “ I consider as superstition the imagined knowledge and certainty which
men suppose they have of the laws of Nature.” —D r . A b n o l d .


Galen defined crises thus:— “ Est velox et repentina morbi
mutatio, qua inhrmus vel ad salutem vel ad mortem deducitur ” —
because the crisis seems to determine the issue, whether for life
or death. At the critical day, the issue may usually be correctly
discerned if the configurations of the heavenly bodies be
attended to. For this purpose, the nativity of the patient and
the hour at which he fell ill, or took to his bed, are required.
Now-a-days, these data can seldom be obtained.
    The ancients held that: “ There are two principal sorts of
crises; the one is in acute diseases, and lunar; the other in
chronic diseases, and solar." They said :—
    “ In acute diseases, the aspects or configurations of the Moon,
 viz., her quartile and opposition, are not her phases with the
 Sun, but are reckoned from the degree and minute of the zodiac
 occupied by her at the beginning of the patient’s seizure, until
 her return to the same point, which is effected in 27 days, 8
 hours, or thereabouts. Some acute diseases run from the 8th to
 the 10th, 11th, 14th, 20th, or 21st d a y ; others to the lunar
 month. The remittent, increase when the Moon forms evil
 aspects with the infortunes. Some other acute diseases are
 terminated in 3, 4, 5, 6, 7, or 8 days, such as pestilential fevers,
 pleurisy, &e.
     “ Chronic diseases follow the motion of the Sun, acquiring a
 crisis after the 40th day ; and judgment may be made when the
  Sun arrives at the square to his own place, as is evident in
 hectics, dropsies, and quaternaries. When the Sun attains the
  sextile and trine of his own place, there are only some indicative
 motions made of such effects as follow in the opposition. Never­
  theless, they are oftentimes anticipated or protracted, according
  to the nature of the planets the Sun becomes configurated with
 — if benevolent, for the better; if malevolent, for the worse.
 400               TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


    “ Crises are also distinguished as safe, doubtful, hazardous r
and not judged. The safe crisis is that which happens without
any great and pernicious accident. The doubtful crisis is that
which appears with great and pernicious accidents, and is the
most dangerous. The hazardous crisis is when, on the 4th day,
the signs of concoction appear, and therefore presage the crisis
to be judged on the 7th day. The crisis not judged is when the
crisis is absolved on the 7th day, yet was not to be judged on the
4th day by any sign of concoction. Hence the days themselves
are divided into three classes. For—■
   “ 1. Some are called C rit ic a l (nomine (jenerico).
   “ 2.   Others J u dicative , on which judgment is pronounced.
   “ 3.   Others I ntercedent (which happen between the judica­
tive and critical), whereon the disease is remitted.
   “ Seeing, therefore, that by these critical days some notable
alteration would he foreseen, tending either to the health or
death of the patient, it becomes important to define the
beginning of a disease, which, Galen confessed, is a difficult task.
The time when the patient takes to his bed (decumbiture) is not
the beginning of the disease, for a robust and strong man resists
 the onset of a disease for a longer time than one who is weak and
nervous. Nevertheless, in some diseases— as in apoplexy,
epilepsy, paralysis, haemorrhage, and pleurisy— it is easy to dis­
cover the precise beginning or seizure. The same in the case of
an accident.
   “ Hippocrates observed his indications from the hour at -which
a man sickened of a fever, but not from the day whereon he per­
ceived a heaviness of the body merely, or suffered with headache.
For by how much sharper and more violent the fever is, by so
much is it the more manifest to sense, and impossible that the
first assault or invasion thereof should be hidden from the
patient.”
   R ules.— 1 . Find the places of the Sun, Moon, and planets
at the decumbiture or first seizure. If the time was recorded, a
map of the heavens should be drawn.
   2 . In diseases which run a short course, the crisis will take
place when the Moon shall arrive at 45° distance from her
longitude at the first seizure or decumbiture, in from 3 to 4
days, according to her motion.
   3. In diseases which run a longer course the crisis will
happen when the Moon shall arrive at 90° distance from her
longitude at the decumbiture, in from 6 to 8 days. This is
called criticus primus, because it is of the utmost importance.
  4. In diseases which run a longer course than 8 days, the
great crisis will be when the Moon shall arrive at the opposite
                           C B ISE S IN D IS E A S E .              401

point of the zodiac to that held by her at the decumbiture, which
will be from the 13th to the 15th day. This is the second
crisis.
   5. In diseases which run a longer course than 15 days, the
third crisis will take place when the Moon shall arrive at the
distance of 270°, the second square to her place at the
decumbiture, which will be between the 20th and 22nd days.
   6. In diseases which run a longer course than 21 days, the
fourth and last crisis will happen when the Moon returns to her
place in the zodiac at the decumbiture. For then the disease
will either end or degenerate into a chronic or long standing
one.
   7. The indicative crises are those which take place at the 45°,
135°, 225°, and 315° distance of the Moon from her place at the
decumbiture, or the half of every quadrate.
   While on the subject of Lunar Influence, the following excerpt
from Zadkiel’s Almanac for 1844 will be found very
interesting.
   Action of the Moon’s Bays.— It has been the fashion with savants to
deny that any kind of action is traceable to the rays of the Moon.
Yet we learn that “ the calotype paper will take an impression from
simple moonlight, not concentrated by a lens. If a leaf be laid upon a
sheet of paper, an image of it may be obtained in this way in from a
quarter to half an hour.”
   As M. Becquerel has arrived at the conclusion that the rays of light
which act on the salts of silver are electrical, it follows that the rays
of the Moon are also electrical; and this supports the theory pro­
pounded for many years in this work that the Moon acts on our
atmosphere by exciting its electricity. If the Moon does this, why not
Mars and Venus, which planets reflect the Solar light to us in from
two to four minutes after those rays impinge on their respective
surfaces ?
   The photographic action of light may merely crystallise the fine
particles of the salts of silver, and so render them unfit to reflect the
light— hence the dark hue the surface of calotype, etc., papers attain.
All crystallisation is an effect of electric action ; and electric
action absolutely does fall upon the Earth by the action of the Sun and
Moon.
                                  402




                      C H A P T E R          III.



   DIAGNOSIS                AND         PROGNOSIS                OP
                           D I S E A S E .

            “ A man is not permitted without censure to follow Ms
            own thoughts in the search of truth when they lead him
            ever so little out of the common road.” — L ocke.


Can astrology afford any help to the physician in the diagnosis
of disease ?
   If we might trust the confident statements of the horary
astrologers of the middle ages, we should answer this important
question in the affirmative. Unfortunately, little reliance can
be placed on either their statements or their common sense.
They boasted that their judgment as to the nature of a disease
was infallible when the planetary testimonies were in harmony.
This confident boast was made by Lilly in his “ Introduction to
Astrology,” 1 published in the year 1647, and most unfortu­
nately allowed to stand by Zadkiel I. in his revised and
annotated edition of Lilly’s book. The horary astrologer-—Lilly,
for example —took upon himself to decide where doctors
disagreed, and to diagnose the nature of an obscure disease
 which had baffled the wisest physicians, although he never had
 any medical training, and was evidently ignorant alike of
 anatomy, physiology, and pathology. The aphorisms given by
Lilly relating to disease are too hopeless a jumble to afford much
 help to the physician. There can be little wonder that these
 vagaries of horary astrologers brought contempt upon the
 science; but, of course, it is very unjust to condemn astrology
 because one branch of it (which is not believed in by most
 scientific astrologers) as applied to questions has been so abused.
    Jerome Cardan was sent for, in 1552, by the Archbishop of
 St. Andrews, whom he cured of a dangerous disease considered
 incurable by the physicians. But this success of that renowned

  1 “ An Introduction to Astrology,” by W. Lilly, chapter xxix., p. 158.
               DIAGN O SIS AND PROGNOSIS OF D IS E A S E .         403

astrologer— celebrated equally for his genius, his learning, and
his mathematical attainments—does not justify any ignorant
fellow who chooses to set himself up as a “ professor ” of
astrology in claiming infallibility of judgment. Cardan was a
great physician, and combining medical with astrological skill
he succeeded where other physicians had failed.
   Figures drawn for the decumbiture or first seizure of the
patient may afford— when they agree with the nativity— some
aid in the diagnosis of obscure organic diseases; and they do
afford reliable foreknowledge of the critical days, as Hippocrates
and Galen observed.
   Reference to the nativity (when procurable) of the sufferer
may be of some assistance, for illness or accident usually
happens when the Moon, or the Sun, is in the place of either V
or $ at birth, or when either of these planets is in the place (or
in square or opposition thereto) of the Sun, Moon, or ascendant.
It is at all times advisable to take special precaution against
illness and accident when any such transits happen, and more
particularly when the hyleg is afflicted at the period of new or
full Moon.
   The sad death of the Princess Alice of Great Britain took
place on December 14th, 1878, from diphtheria. The benzoate
of soda was administered to her, as a prophylactic, in doses of
one drachm per diem, from November 12th, 1878. It was on
December 7th, that her actual illness began.3 A very evil train
of directions was operating in her nativity, and the Princess
became infected through kissing her children while they were
suffering with diphtheria. On the day her illness began, the
Moon was (at noon) in Taurus 19°, and in opposition to Mars in
Scorpio 19°. Mars had lately passed through the opposite point
of the zodiac to that held by the Sun (hyleg) at her birth. The
first crisis took place on the 14th of December, when the Moon
(at noon) reached Leo 19°, and on that day the Princess died.
In this case, the part affected and the nature (martial) of the
disease are indicated by the directions and transits.
   The late King Victor Emanuel, of Italy, was seized with
pleurisy at noon of the 6th of January, 1878, when the Moon
was in Aquarius 19° and not afflicted. On the previous day,
Saturn was in transit over the Moon’s place (X 15° 44') at his
birth, and it was then that the king took cold. On the 3rd of

  2    Vide the British Medical Journal, February 8th, 1879, p. 187, which
contains an official report of the case.
404                 TH E   T E X T -B O O K OF ASTR OLO G Y.


January, the new Moon fell in opposition to the place of Mars
(ss 18° 21' on the cusp of the 8th house) in his nativity. The
king died on the 9th January. In this case, no indication of
the illness could be discovered by the Moon’s position at the
time of the attack.
   Generally speaking, Ptolemy’s remarks as to the dominion of
the planets over the human body are fairly reliable.        He
says:—•
  “ Among the chief parts of the human body, Saturn rules the right
ear, the spleen, the bladder, the phlegm, and the bones. Jupiter
governs the hand, the lungs, and the arteries. Mars rules the left ear,
the kidneys, the veins, and the reproductive organs. The Sun rules
the eyes, the brain, the heart, the nerves, and all the right side. Venus
rules the nostrils, the liver, and the flesh. Mercury governs the
speech, the understanding, the bile, and the tongue. The Moon rules
the palate, the throat, the stomach, the abdomen, the uterus, and all
the left side of the body.

   When any particular configuration of the malefic planets-
causes either disease or accident, the nativity must be affected,
and it is the only reliable basis for judgment as to the issue.
Cholera and influenza have, as we have already seen, occasion­
ally attacked thousands of people in a few days; in such cases
the Moon could not be afflicted by the same evil planet at the
seizure of every person.
   In great and very fatal epidemics, it is quite possible that the
nativities of all the victims, if procurable, would not show in
every instance fatal “ directions ” corresponding to the period of
death, because they may be due to “ general causes,” viz., great
eclipses at which the malefic planets were exceedingly powerful,
as described by Claudius Ptolemy.
   The practical test of a true science is the power which it
confers of prevision, or of knowing now what will follow here­
after— wrote the late Dr. Russell Reynolds in the introduction to
his “ System of Medicine.”
   A proper study of the nativity of the patient, and of the solar
revolution and lunar progress for the year, and of the transits at
the moment of seizure, would enable the physician to discern
“ why one case of typhoid fever terminates unfavourably, while
another to all appearance running a very similar course ends in
recovery.” As long as astrology shall be neglected, so long will
physicians have to lament that “ the science of prognosis has
advanced little since the time of Hippocrates ” — who insisted on
 a good knowledge of astrology as indispensable to the wise
physician. Unfortunately the exact moment of birth is rarely
                D IAGN OSIS AND PROGNOSIS OF D ISEA SE.               405

known, and but few practitioners of astrology can cast the
horoscope and the primary directions with the mathematical
precision required for this purpose. The physician could not, of
course, be expected to do this. When the nativity cannot be
procured, the figure for the decumbiture will indicate the period
of the crisis and afford some guide as to whether it will be
favourable or probably fatal. It was in this way that the
author’s attention was first directed to the science, in the hope
of throwing some light on prognosis, in May, 1860.
   To fall ill— or to meet with an accident— when the Moon is
in conjunction, square, opposition, or parallel declination with
either Mars or Saturn, or in the place of either at birth,
forebodes serious suffering. If Mars be the afflicting planet,
fever will run high, if Saturn debility will be the greater. If
Uranus also afflict the Moon, there will be very peculiar
symptoms, and the disease will run an erratic course.           If
Mercury also afflict the Moon, delirium (especially if 5 be in
 T ) will probably supervene and be very troublesome to cure.
If the Moon be in benefie aspect with Yenus or Jupiter, recovery
may be expected (unless 5 or 2( be greatly afflicted), however
severe the illness may be, unless the nativity be very much
afflicted.
   The following aphorisms        of Cardan are worthy of
observation:—
   “ When the Moon at a decumbiture shall be under the beams of the
Sun, or with Saturn or Mars, if the patient be aged, even her con­
junction with Jupiter, Venus, or Mercury is not without peril.
   “ Saturn causes long diseases; Mercury various ones; the Moon such
as return after a time, like vertigo, epilepsy, etc., Jupiter and the Sun
cause short diseases, but Mars the acutest of all.
   “ When the M oon is in a fixed sign, physic works the less ; and if
she be in T , 8 , or l^f, it will be apt to prove nauseous to the patient.
   “ When at the beginning of a disease the Sun and Moon are both
with the infortunes, or in opposition to them, the sick will hardly
escape.
   “ Mars in the ascendant causes the disease to be swift, violent,
affecting the upper parts of the body, and disturbing the mind. If, in
addition, the Sun and Moon, and their dispositors be afflicted, death
will ensue.
   “ W ith respect to fe v e r s : when the Sun is afflicted in Leo,
mischievous fevers are threatened.
   “ Earthy signs ( h , 11J?, and Vy) are free from fevers; but watery
signs (SS, 11J, and X ) threaten putrid fevers, if Mars be in one of
them.
   “ Saturn in fiery signs ( T , SLi and t ), when the Sun is weak
causes hectic fevers; Jupiter, sanguinary, and if Mars behold him,
putrid fevers. Mars in fiery signs causes burning fevers; Yenus,
406                  THE   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y .


ephemeral; Mercury, mixed fevers; and, if the Moon be joined with
them, she causes portentous fevers. Saturn mixing signification with
Mars, causes melancholy fevers.
   “ If Mars be under the Sun’s beams, or in the sixth house, and
afflicting the signifieator of the disease, it occasions burning, pernicious
fevers, of a venomous character; if the Sun and Mars and the planet
signifying the disease be in Scorpio or Leo, the fever will be
pestilential.
   “ It will be a fatal time to suffer amputation, or' lose any member,
when the Moon is under the Sim’s beams and opposed by Mars.
   “ The signifieator of the disease in either Gemini, Pisces, or the first
half of Sagittarius, presignifies a relapse, or that it will change into
some other distemper.
   “ That siyra in which the signifieator of a disease is posited, shows
the parts of the body principally affected.
   “ Mercury unfortunate, prejudices the phantasy and inward
faculties, and threatens madness if Mars afflict him. If Mercury be in
an earthy sign, it threatens that the patient will malse away with
himself.
   “ Fiery signs in the ascendant and sixth house, at a decumbiture, or
containing the Moon, presignify acute fever, burns, or wounds, as the
case may be. Earthy signs denote diseases of long continuance, such
as ague and consumption. Airy signs presignify corrupt blood, gout,
or cutaneous affections. Watery signs denote diseases arising from
cold, also weak stomach ; Pisces particularly relates to excesses in
 eating and drinking.”

   Chronic diseases are so called because they were held by the
ancients to be under the dominion of Saturn, whose name was
Kronos.
   In surgical operations, it would be advisable to wait— when
possible—for a favourable time rather than to increase the
patients’ suffering and clanger by operating when the Moon is
within 17° of the Sun and in opposition to Mars— which Cardan
stated to be a fatal configuration. Ptolemy says : “ Pierce not
with iron that part of the body which may be governed by the
sign actually occupied by the Moon.” For example, when the
Moon is in Taurus, it is advisable not to operate on the neck or
throat, especially if the Moon be in evil aspect with Mars.
   In “ The Science of the Stars,” 3 the author mentioned the
case of Dr. Hewett, who was seized with haemoptysis at 6h a.m,
of May 16th, 1865, and died of pulmonary phthisis. September
25th following. At the moment of seizure, the Moon was in
opposition with Mars and square with Saturn.
   Another instance may be cited. At 9h p.m. (G.M.T.) of July
7th, 1861, Mrs. C. ruptured a blood-vessel in the chest, the
haemorrhage was very alarming, and for several hours the patient

             3 “ T h e Science o f the Stars,” chapter xxii., p. 145.
               DIAGN O SIS AND PBOGN OSIS OF D IS E A SE .        407

was in the greatest clanger. Within a week she was completely
 restored to health. The latitude of the place in which she
resided is 52° 10' N., and the longitude 3m 40s W. At the
moment above stated, the R.A. of the M.C., was 15h 59m 33,s by
29° in the ascendant, Mars setting in Sb 1° 54'. The Moon in
 ss 13° 1', hastening to conjunction with the Sun4 in $ 153 37',
 in the sixth house. The nature of the illness, and the extreme
danger, are well indicated in these configurations. In this case
there was no affliction at the crisis (lunar), and recovery took
place. In Dr. Hewett’s case, when the Sun arrived at the square
of his own place— i.e., in St 25° 21'— August 18th, 1865, the
Moon was in the place of Mars and in square to Saturn; and
when Saturn arrived at the square          29° 30') of the Moon’s
place, Dr. H. died. Unfortunately, in neither of these cases
could the nativity be procured.
   On the 10th of March, 1884, a lady was seized with alarming
hiemorrhage. Mars was then stationary in Sb 2° 30' in square
aspect with the place of the Sun at her birth— viz., 8 2° 59'.
On the following day, at 4h p.m., the hiemorrhage returned,
when the Sun was in the place of Saturn at her birth— viz., X
21° 6', and the Moon was in opposition thereto. Prom day to
day the hiemorrhage continued, at times passive, and at others
active, until by the 21st of March, when it came on again
violently, the patient became very greatly anemiated and very
feeble. After the new Moon of the 26th of March, when the
luminaries were very near the place of Venus at birth
(T 8° 50'), recovery became rapid, to the surprise of the doctor
in attendance, who had very faint hope of a favourable issue.
In this case the time of birth is known, approximately—viz.,
very near l h a.m. of April 23rd, 1848. The direction of ©
par. $ m.d., was then operating in the nativity.
   Cases of severe haemorrhage afford good tests of the value of
astrology as an aid to medicine, for the first seizure is usually
very sudden and alarming. In cases of fever, etc., the first
onset of the disease is seldom sharply marked.




  4     The conjunction of the luminaries happened at 2h 12m a.m. of July
8th, it being an annular eclipse of the Sun, invisible in England.
                                 408




                      C H A P T E R        I Y.



  T H E R A P E U T IC S           AND      ASTROLOGY.

  “ Science which instructs, and physic which cures us, are excellent,
certainly; hut science which misleads, and physic which destroys, are
equally execrable ; teach us how to distinguish them.”
                                                        — R ousseau.



A stronomers tell us that the science of astronomy instructs,
and that astrology misleads.
   Physicians say that the art of medicine, as taught by the
professors, instructs; and that the astrological art of Hippocrates
Galen, and Cardan misleads.
   In this manner we are taught to distinguish true from false
science.
   But when we remember that astronomers and physicians have
no real knowledge of astrology, that they “ will not inquire” —
to use Mr. R. A. Proctor’s expression— what truth there may be
in it, their opinion becomes valueless ; and when we find, as we
have already presented in these pages, evidence of truth in
astrology, we cannot but think that they themselves mislead.
   Even State astronomers and State physicians cannot be
allowed to decide by authority alone a question, of deep and
great importance, with which they are totally unacquainted. If
they will not inquire what there is of truth in astrology, they
cannot deter men of independent mind from examining, explor­
ing, and demonstrating it. Willing observers and workers are
wanted, and to facilitate their work, the author has laboured,
and here presented to his readers the results of a long period of
study and of much thought on his part.
   It is well known that State appointments, and frequently even
membership of learned societies, tend to discourage individual
effort and independent action, and likewise to warp the
judgment.
   Let us not be misunderstood. We have no desire to disparage
either the learned professors of astronomy or learned physicians.
Quite the contrary. We have the deepest respect for great
                      TH ER APEU TICS AND ASTR OLO G Y.                    409

 astronomers, learned physicians, and distinguished surgeons.
 But this cannot preclude the privilege of promulgating what we
 have reason to believe to be truth ; nor prevent due weight being
 given to the matured, reasonable, and favourable opinion of
 astrology avowed by such giants in intellect as Pythagoras and
 Kepler, by Hippocrates, Galen, and Bacon. As Sir George
 Birdwood, M.D., of the India Office, has said :— “ Pharmacy
 literally means ‘ enchantment ’ ; and Therapeutics ‘ the worship
 of the gods,’ or cure by faith in the divinities of certain plants.
 Now that we have distilled off these plants as essences, and
 precipitated them as alkaloids, and can weigh them with the
 nicest exactitude, we despise the prayer of faith, and even
 prosecute those who put their trust in it.” The Medical Press
 and Circular of June 4th, 11th and 18th, 1890, printed three
articles by the author on Medical Astrology.
    Bacon gave as a reason why medicine had not progressed in
 his day, and kept pace with the sciences, th at: “ Physicians have
 reasoned in a circle and not in a line.
    The state of therapeutics at the present day is not encouraging.
 In fact, as Dr. Sharp says, the orthodox system of medicine is
 still without any law, and is in a condition like that of naviga­
tion before the discovery of the mariner’s compass.            Many
physicians of the old school distrust authority, and, rejecting
hypotheses of all kinds, rely upon experience. Dr. Stokes once
said in the Medical Council of Great Britain :— “ There can be
no doubt that medicine requires to be placed upon a much more
scientific basis than it at present possesses. It is now simply
empiricism ; and that empiricism is only tolerable and useful
because it is wielded by thoughtful men.”
    Liebig said:— “ Truly one is tempted to adopt the opinion,
that among the sciences which have for their object a knowledge
of nature and her forces, medicine as an inductive science
occupies the lowest place.” 1
    Hippocrates advocated antipathy — the curing of disease by a
contrary agent— now expressed by contraria contrariis curantur ;
yet he observed that diseases were sometimes cured by similars.
Galen taught that diseases are to be cured by their contraries,
and this doctrine was handed down for many centuries.
Paracelsus was the first to suggest the therapeutic principle
(afterwards demonstrated by Hahnemann), to give those drugs
for the cure of disease which in health are capable of producing

       1 “ C hem ical Letters.”   B y Baron L iebig.   3rd edit., p. 77.
410                 TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLOGY.


a train of symptoms similar to those of the malady. Hippocrates
gave up in despair the difficult search for the curative action of
medicines ; -had he pursued the course followed by Hahnemann,
viz., the proving of the action of medicines on the healthy, he
would probably have come to the same conclusion— that the law
of similars is the true law of therapeutics.
   The success achieved by Hippocrates, Galen, and Paracelsus
in the treatment of disease is explained by the fact that they
administered medicines on astrological principles.
   The astrological selection of remedies was based chiefly on
antipathy and sympathy. For example: Diseases under the
dominion of the Sun were treated with Saturnine remedies;
diseases under Jupiter by M ercurial medicaments— this was by
antipathy. Diseases under Saturn were treated with M artial
drugs— this was by sympathy. Again, every planet was
believed to be capable, to a great extent, of curing its own
diseases by means of its medicaments; thus, the Sun and Moon
by their remedies cured diseases of the eyes, Saturn the spleen,
Jupiter the liver, and so on.
   This may seem very absurd to physicians who are
unacquainted with astrology, but we may ask such : Can you
explain the modus operandi of drugs ? Dr. Sharp, one of the
wisest physicians of the new school, says :—
   “ In respect to the manner of action of drugs we are in total
darkness, and we are so blind that the darkness is not felt.
Knowledge of this kind cannot be attained ; it is labour lost and
time wasted to go in search of it. True, hypotheses may be
easily conceived; so may straws be gathered from the surface of
the stream. But what are either of them worth ? There is this
difference between th em : straws may amuse children,
hypotheses are sure to mislead physicians.” 2
   Dr. Sharp observes that: “ As diseases have a local habita­
tion, so drugs have a local action : drugs to be remedies must
operate on the same organs as the disease affects.”
   This is in perfect harmony with the teachings of astrology.
For instance : The Sun and Moon rule the eyes, affliction of
the Sun and Moon at birth by the malefic planets gives rise to
diseases of the eyes, and certain drugs under the rule of the Sun
and Moon are found effectual in the cure of diseases of the eyes.
The affinity of certain drugs for certain organs of the human
 body is thus accounted for.

  2 “ Essays on M edicine.”    B y W illiam Sharp, M .D , F .R S.   E ssay xxv.
                   TH ER APEU TICS AND ASTROLO G Y.            411

    Among the remedies classed as Jovial we find stannum, and
 in homoeopathic practice it is proved to be a very valuable
 remedy for certain affections of the lungs, which organs are
 under the rule of Jupiter. Among the remedies under the rule
 of Mars we find arsenic, and this remedy is found very useful by
homoeopathists in renal dropsy, and the kidneys are under the
rule of Mars. Again, among the medicines termed Saturnine
we find aconite, and this is the sheet anchor of homoeopathists
for acute inflammations of a martial character; Saturn being
friendly with Mars, this is curing by sympathy. Many similar
instances could he cited of this verisimilitude in the selection of
remedies. Those we have given show that in the absence of a
definite and reliable law of therapeutics, the ancients did well to
rely on the astrologic method, and it is on record that they were
very successful in curing diseases. So far from being “ wholly
destitute of proofs ” the starry method is thus shown to have
been, in the hands of learned physicians, of incomparable value
in ancient and mediaeval times. By rejecting it, the dominant
school lost its guiding star, and descended to mere empiricism.
   For sunstroke, belladonna, a Saturnine plant, is a valuable
remedy. For contusions (which are Saturnine), arnica (a
Martial plant) is an invaluable remedy. When contusions result
in injury to the periosteum, ruta (a Solar remedy) is valuable ;
when to glandular parts, eonium (a Saturnine remedy) is very
useful. When fractured bones seem disinclined to unite,
Symphytum (a Saturnine remedy) is highly commended.
   No practitioner of homosopathy can read “ Culpeper's Herbal ”
without being struck with the remedies therein recommended,
for they are in many instances the same as those found most
useful by homoeopathists for the same diseases as Culpeper found
them to be— the starry method of selection indicating the same
remedies as the homoeopathic.
   Dr. Sharp, in writing of the local action of drugs presents a
table:1 in which we find, under the head of “ Brain,” the follow­
ing drugs:—Belladonna, opium, hellebore, hyoscyamus, and
cannabis. Now, all these medicines are ruled by Saturn, and
we have seen that the ancients applied Saturnine remedies to
diseases of the organs ruled by the Sun, the brain being one of
those organs, and this was termed by them curing by antipathy.
   The local action of iron— which is under Mars— is on the
blood; its kind of action is to increase the red corpuscles.

                           Op. cit., p. 687.
412                  T H E TE X T -B O O K   OF AS TR O LO G Y .


Mars-men are notoriously sanguine and full-blooded, and generally
florid in complexion. The Lancet once remarked on the singular
fact that engineers have, comparatively, an excessive amount of
iron in their blood, and attributed this to their absorption of fine
particles of iron in the exercise of their calling; the medical
writer being, of course, unaware that those who naturally take
to engineering are Mars-men, and have, therefore, from birth a
large amount of iron, and of red corpuscles, in their blood. If
the engineers, as a body, were alone distinguished for the
redundancy of iron in their blood, it might be attributable solely
to their absorption of iron in their occupation, as the Lancet
surmised; but the same observation holds good with regard to
the great majority of surgeons and soldiers, who are martialists
and distinguished alike for their energy, pluck, and endurance.
   The majority of tonic medicines are under the rule of Mars—
“ the star of strength’ ’— such as iron, arsenic, cinchona, and
lupulus. The narcotics are under the rule of Saturn.
   In regard to temperaments: According to Teste,4 arnica,
arsenic, bryonia alba, and nux vomica, act best on persons of
“ sanguine temperament, robust, and irritable” ; this is just
what an astrologer would expect, for these are Martial remedies
and, consequently, are best adapted to persons of Martial
temperament. On the other hand, aconite, belladonna, and
veratrum album act particularly well, according to Teste, on
“ nervous and melancholy persons ; this is explained by the
fact that these are Saturnine remedies, and, therefore most suit­
able to Satin-nine persons. Again, pulsatilla (anemone pratensis)
is found to be most suitable “ to persons who by the relative
predominance of the adipose tissue in their constitution, by the
whiteness of their flesh, the roundness of their forms, the mild­
ness of their disposition, and their fitful mood, exhibit all the
marked characteristics of the fair sex ’ ’ ; such are of the Venus
type, consequently, pulsatilla being ruled by Venus, its
particular suitableness to the ailments of such (Venus) persons
is accounted for in a manner of which the learned French doctor
did not dream.
   When due consideration is paid to the temperament of the
patient, the most suitable remedy for the disease is easily dis­
covered ; and the singular corroboration to be found in the fact
that the careful observations of Teste lead to the same results—

   4 “ T h e M ateria M edica, arranged system atically and practically : B y A
Teste, Graduate of the U niversity of Paris. Translated from the French
•by C. H em pel, M .D . New Y ork : R ad de ; 1854.
                   TH ER AP EU TICS AND ASTR OLO G Y.           413

although arrived at by a totally different process— as the
astrology of the ancients (the Martial remedies suiting the
Martial temperament, the Saturnine remedies the Saturnine
temperament, etc.), leads the unprejudiced, truth-seeking mind
to the inevitable conclusion that the starry method of selection
of remedies is true, being based on natural affinity and natural
law.
   Teste observed that it is almost always in the regions where
maladies originate that Providence seems to have created the
means for their removal.
   The ancients recognised the fact that every temperament has
its appropriate remedies for the diseases to which it is particu­
larly liable, and it was their astrological knowledge that led to
this discovery. Teste has confirmed this by experiment. Thus
do we find that the correlation of therapeutics and astrology is a
law of nature.
   There are still two schools of therapeutics— the old and the
new. The old or dominant school comprises physicians who
rely either on experience or on the maxim contraria contrariis-
curantur. The new or homoeopathic school consists of physicians
who follow what they believe to be the true law of therapeutics
— similia similibus curantur. The practitioners of both schools
are highly educated and legally qualified gentlemen. Hitherto,
the few eminent men of the old school who announced their
conversion to the belief in the law of similars met vith so much
abuse and ridicule from their professional brethren, that others
have been deterred from testing the value of Hahnemann’s law
— the case of Professor Henderson and that of Dr. Conquest are
examples of this. Homoeopathy has done incalculable good by
teaching people to revolt against the old-fashioned heroic
practices of bleeding and violent purging. Until the opposing
schools sink their differences, the reproach of Moliere will not
lose its point:— “ Call in the doctor, and if you do not like his
physic, I will soon find you another to condemn it.’ ’
   As Dr. John H. Clarke writes :—
   “ Hahnemann’s arrangement of his Materia Medica Pura, like
most of his practical deductions, is the truly scientific one. The
whole life and soul of Homoeopathy resides in it. The Spirit of
Homoeopathy is the Spirit of Liberty. The beauty, the grandeur,
 the glory of homoeopathy is its freedom..................... It is
Hahnemann who first showed us how to study our patients as
well as how to study our drugs..................... Homoeopathy is
 destined to spiritualise, to civilise medical practice.         The
 medical practice of the old school is in extremis; and medicine’s
414                        TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


extremity is surgery s opportunity. Surgery has reached a
degree of perfection which can hardly be bettered ; and the ready
recourse to surgery in modern times is an irrefutable evidence of
the failure of medicine..................... Yet there are some homoe­
opaths who are so much under the denomination of established
orthodoxy that they think it a slight on the profession to let the
public know that homoeopathy is more successful in curing the
sick than orthodox medicine.” 6




                                  C H A P T E R                 Y.



      MEDICINES                   AND       PLANETARY                  INFLUENCE.

   “ G oa hath created m edicines out o£ the earth ; and
     h e that is wise will not abhor them .” — E c c l e s i a s t i c u s , x x x v i i i . 4 .




I n the preceding chapter mention has been made of several
medicines under the rule of certain planets. A complete list of
the minerals and herbs ruled by each planet is now presented.
In the first place, it is deemed advisable to give a list of those
medicines in ordinary use, under their Latin names, in order
that they may be readily found :—
   The Sun governs aurum, calendula, chamomilla, chelidonium
majus, crocus, drosera rotundifolia, euphrasia, helianthus,
hypericum, ruta.
   The Moon rules argentum, colocynthis, iris versicolor,
mereurialis perennis.
   Mercury influences agaricus, dulcamara, filixmas, laurocerasus
ledum palustre, mercurius, valerian, petroselinum.
   V enus rules argentum, cuprum, digitalis, millefolium,
narcissus, pulsatilla, viola odorata, zineum.
   Mars governs aloes, arum, arnica, arsenicum, asafoetida,
bryonia, capsicum, cina, cinnabar, cinchona, ferrum, gentian,
lactuca virosa, lobelia inflata, lupulus, nux vomica, pinus,
sylvestris, sabina, sarsaparilla, squilla, sulphur, urtiea urens,
xanthoxylum.

   6 “ T he Homoeopathic W o rld ,” Oct., 1911, pp. 450-456.                          12, W arwick
L ane, L ond on, E .C .
               M ED IC IN E S   AND PLAN ETAR Y IN F LU E N C E .   415

   Jupiter rules argentum, asclepias, eupatorium, gelsemium,
stramonium, stannum, Symphytum, taraxacum, tilia.
   Saturn rules antimonium,          aconitum, agnus castus,
belladonna, cannabis sativa, eolchicum, eonium, daphne
mezereum, graphites, helleborus niger, hyoscyamus, plumbum,
rhus toxicodendron, sabadilla, veratrum, verbascum.
   The various herbs, etc. (with their English names), under the
rule of each planet are thus stated :—
    The S un rules angelica, the ash, the bay tree, burnet,
butterbur, camomile, celandine, small centaury, eye-bright
juniper-bush, lovage, marigold, pimpernel, rosemary, sundew,
rue, saffron, St. John’ s wort, St. Peter’s wort, tormentil, turn­
 sole, heart-trefoil, vine, viper’s buglas, and the walnut tree.
    The Moon governs adder’s-tongue, arrack, brankursine,
colewort, water caltrop, chickweed, clary, cleavers, coralwort,
 water cress, cucumber, duckmeat, fleur-de-luee or water flag,
fluettin, cuckoo-flower, lettuce, water-lily, white lily, loosestrife,
moonwort, mouse-ear, orsine, pellitory of Spain, rattle-grass,
saxifrage, stonecrop, pearl-trefoil, wallflower, and the willow
tree.
   Mercury rules the bitter-sweet, ealamint, wild carrot,
carraway, dill, elacampane, fern, fennel, germander, hazelnut,
horehound, houndstongue, lavender, lily of the valley,
liquorice, walrue or white maiden-hair, golden maiden-hair,
marjoram, mulberry tree, nailwort, oats, parsley, parsnip,
pellitory of the wall, sauce-alone, savory, scabius, smallage,
southernwood, honeysuckle, and valerian.
   Venus governs alkanet, alehoof or ground ivy, artichoke,
black or common alder tree, wild arrack, archangel bean,
bishop’s weed, bramble, blites, bugle, burdock, cherry tree, earth
chestnuts, chickpease, columbine, coltsfoot, cudweed, cowslip,
crab’s claw, erosswort, daisy, devil’s bit, eringo, feather-few,
figwort, dropwort, foxglove, golden-rod, gromel, gooseberry
bush, groundsel, herbrobert, true-love, kidneywort, ladies’-
mantle, marshmallow, French mercury, dog-mercury, mint,
moneywort, motherwort, mugwort, nep or catmint, orchis,
parsley piert, parsnip, peach tree, pennyroyal, pear tree,
periwinkle, plantain, plum tree, poppy, purslane, primrose,
privet, queen of the meadows, ragwort, rye, woodsage, sanicle
self-heal, sopewort, sorrel, sow-thistle, spignel, strawberry,
tansey, teasel, vervain, wheat, and yarrow.
   Mars influences all-heal, barberry, bazil, briony, benedictus,
cardines, crowfoot, dovesfoot, flax-weed, furze-bush, garlic,
416               TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


gentian, hawthorn, hedge-hyssop, hop, madder, master-wort,
nettle, onion, pepperwort, ground pine, horse radish, rhubarb,
savine, star-thistle, tobacco, and wormwood.
   •Ju p i t e r rules agrimony, Alexander, asparagus, balm, white

beet, bilberry, borage, chervil, chesnut-tree, cinque-foil,
costmary, dandelion, dock, dog’s grass, endive, fig-tree, clove-
gillifiowers, heart’s-tongue, hyssop, house-leek, liverwort, lung­
wort, maple-tree, mellilot, oak-tree, roses, sage, samphire,
scurvy-grass, and lady's thistle.
   S a t u r n rules amaranthus, barley, corn, red-beet, beech-tree-

bifoil, birdsfoot, blue-bottle, buck’s horn plantain, comfrey,
seiatica-cress, darmel, dodder, elm-tree, water-fern, fleawort,
flux weed, fumitory, gladurn, goutwort, winter green, heart’s-
ease, hawkweed, hemlock, hemp, henbane, black hellebore,
horsetail, holly, ivy, knapweed, knotgrass, medlar-tree, mosses,
mullein, nightshade, polypody of the oak, poplar-tree, quince-
tree, service-tree, shepherd’s purse, spleen-wort, tamarisk-tree,
melancholy-thistle, black thorn, thorough wax, tulsan, woad,
Solomon’s seal, Saracen’ s consound, willow tree, and the yew
tree.
   The foregoing classification may appear arbitrary, at first
sight, but it is not entirely so. It is well known that certain
plants turn towards the Moon, and increase and decrease as she
waxes and wanes. Certain flowers open as the Sun rises and
close as he sets. The plants ruled by Mars grow, mostly, in dry,
hard or stony places. Teste lays stress on the fact that plants
transplanted to soils foreign to their nature “ lose either totally
or partially the medicinal properties of which we know they are
possessed.”
   Ancient and mediæval astrologers .laid stress on the impor­
tance of gathering herbs, for medicinal purposes, in the hour
presided over by their ruling planet. More rational are Coley’s
instructions as to gathering the required herb “ when the planet
ruling it is ascending or culminating, and when the Moon is in
either sextile or trine aspect with it.” Also, “ let the herb be
taken in its prime, full of juice and green, and from such a
place as it thrives in.”
   The sensitive indications of many plants in regard to changes
of weather are well known to naturalists. The common chick-
weed flowers “ are upright, and open from 9 in the morning
until noon ; but if it rains, they remain closed, after rain they
become pendant.” The purple sandwort’s flowers expand only
when the Bun shines and close as evening comes on, or before
              M ED ICINES AND PLAN ETAR Y IN F L U E N C E .   417

an approaching shower.          The pimpernel (the poor man’s
weather-glass) closes its tiny flowers long before rain falls and
before night draws in. The goat’s beard will not open its petals
in cloudy weather. The dandelion is a true sun-dial, “ closing
at 5 in the afternoon and opening again at 7 in the morning.”
If the trefoil contract its leaves, thunder and heavy rain may be
expected. The sensitive plants (Mimosa tribe) give evidence of
this in a remarkable degree.
   Bearing in mind these facts and the various properties of
plants and minerals, it cannot fairly be termed superstitious to
believe that there is a correlation between the heavenly bodies
and medicaments.           Observation has shown that certain
countries are influenced by certain planets and certain signs of
the zodiac; and seeing that certain plants are only found in
certain places— and that if plants be transplanted to soil foreign
to their nature, they lose their curative virtues— it is reasonable
to conclude that the planet which influences such places may
influence the plants flourishing therein. Plants whose habitat
is in Martial places are influenced by Mars, and experience proves
that Martial plants act on the organs of the body ruled bv Mars.
Hence arose the classification of plants astrologically. Dr.
Sharp says :— 1
    “ It would obviously be unreasonable to ask a botanist to
arrange his plants according to their action, nutritive or
 poisonous, upon animals, which it does not come within his
province to observe. To me it appears equally unreasonable for
 the physician to adopt the method of the botanist, and arrange
his drugs according to those characters only which are open to
 the botanist to observe.
    “ It may be safely considered that there is no observed connec­
tion between either the external form of plants or the internal
structure of the organs or their functions, and their action as
 drugs. Neither the outward appearance, nor the structure of
 any part, nor its function, nor the mechanical power, nor the
 chemical composition of vegetables, throw any light upon their
 therapeutic action.”
    As the ancient physicians could not judge of the therapeutic
 action of plants by either of the methods mentioned by Dr.
 Sharp, it follows that they discovered what they knew of it by
 astrology, as Hippocrates and Galen averred they did. This
should command respect for the starry method.
   Pereira said : “ It cannot be doubted that had we a more

                 1 “ Essays on M edicine.”     E ssay xix.
418                   THE   TE X T -B O O K OF ASTR O LO G Y.


intimate acquaintance with, and precise knowledge of the action
of remedies, the therapeutic properties of medicines would no
longer appear incomprehensible and mysterious.”
   This desirable knowledge of the physiological action of drugs
can only be attained by (1) considering the planetary order of
each drug, and (2) by following Hahnemann’s method of proving
its action on the healthy. This will also serve to determine
antidotes to poisons. Dr. Ackland, in 1865, urged the General
Medical Council to prove the action of drugs on the healthy, but
his advice was rejected.
   Dr. Frazer once wrote :—-
   “ An eminent authority in pharmacology has recently
published the statement that the only method whereby the
injurious action of a poison, absorbed into the blood, can be
made to terminate is by the employment of such means as
will cause or hasten the elimination of the poison. This state­
ment, fortunately, does not accurately describe our remedial
resources. The existence of so undoubted an example of
physiological antagonism as that between atropia and
physostigma shows that the toxic influence of a morbific agent
may be directly opposed by a physiological antidote; and that
recovery may be produced by influencing the abnormal con­
ditions themselves, in such a manner as to cause their return to
a normal state.” 2
   Bacon said: “ In all our investigations of nature we must
observe what quantity or dose of the body is requisite for a
given effect; and must guard ourselves from estimating it at too
much or too little.”




  - See “ Report o f the B ritish A ssociation for the A dvancem ent of S cien ce,”
1872.
                                         419




                          CHAP TE E                   VI .



ON      THE         PRESERVATION                             OF      HEALTH.

             Sanitas, sanitas, omnia sanitas.”— B e a c o n s f i e l d .

T he noble vocation of the physician is never better exercised
than in concerting measures for the preservation of health and
prevention of disease.
   The ancient physicians and astrologers recognised this duty,
and they laid down a proper mode of living and regimen which
was, as Hufeland testifies, much better than prescribing purga­
tives and emetics.
   Down to a very recent period, the insanitary state of London
and the great towns of the United Kingdom was deplorable.
When in 1849 the Cholera visited London, great exertions were
made and still greater promises; the metropolis was to be
drained afresh, the outfall of sewage was no longer to be
beneath the windows, the river was to be embanked, e tc .; but
in 1851, none of these works had been commenced.1 What
wonder could there be that Cholera, small-pox, typhoid fever,
and other epidemics, in turn, committed great ravages when
once they broke out ? With the improvements effected in recent
years, epidemics have declined.
   Of late years works on hygiene and sanitation have been
published. Sanitary associations have done much good, but
much remains yet to be done.
   There is an important lesson requiring constant reiteration,
namely, that healthy persons should never take physic— except
for scientific experiment. A celebrated British Ambassador on
being asked why he was accompanied by his physician when
abroad, replied : “ So that I may not take physic.”
   Physicians, probably, would prescribe much smaller doses of
medicine, and in some eases none at all, were they not afraid
that their patients would desert them and run to the nearest

   1 See Mr. S im on ’s “ A nnual Report on the Sanitary State o f the City of
L on d on ,” 1851.
 420                     TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTR OLO G Y.


 druggist to purchase physic. It is to he feared that people will
 not soon learn to look upon drugs as often a cause of disease.
 Bleeding has gone out of fashion, but not so physicking. At
one time, abbeys had a bleeding house wherein the religious
inmates were periodically bled to the strains of Psalmody.
   Physicking and vaccination must one day go out of fashion
just as bleeding and inoculation have gone. With proper
sanitation and isolation, there need be no fear of epidemics
becoming devastating plagues. In Spain, inoculation of
cholera-virus is being practised as a preservative against
Cholera 1 Doctors seem to forget that there are some people so
naturally healthy and robust that they are insusceptible to
disease. If vaccination (small-pox-virus passed through the
cow) and inoculation of cholera-virus must be submitted to
every time an epidemic of smallpox or of cholera threatens,
there will soon be no absolutely healthy people left.
   Dr. John H. Clarke, in his letter printed in the Daily Mail,
May 18th, 1910, on the vaccine treatment of King Edward V II.t
wisely wrote:—
   The interesting article by your medical correspondent on the vaccine
treatment in connection with King Edward’s illness deserves a word of
comment. The writer describes the “ vaccine treatment ” (or the
“ opsonic treatment” as it is sometimes called) as the most modern
method of combating disease. He says that “ originally it was thought
that a vaccine of this sort, to give the best results, had to be injected
under the skin. W ork recently done by Dr. Latham and Dr. Spitta at
St. George’s Hospital, however, has proved that equally good results
can be obtained when the vaccine is taken by mouth on an empty
stomach.” Without wishing to deprive the doctors of St. George’s
Hospital of their claim to originality, I should like to point out that
homoeopathists have adopted this method of administering disease-
viruses any time these last hundred years. The method of treating
patients suffering from a disease by giving the modified virus of the
disease itself is essentially homoeopathic— i.e., curing like with like—
as Professor von Behring, among others, has admitted, and as the man
in the street can plainly see, if the votaries of established medicine can­
not. If the latter, when they appropriate bits of homoeopathic practice,
would only adopt the dosage prescribed by the experience of homoeopaths,
they would do their patients much more good, and run very much less
risk of doing them harm.
  Dr. Forster observed that :2
  “ History incontestably proves that not only in less virulent
epidemics, but even in the more violent plagues, when the
epidemic constitution of the air has been at its acmé, certain
persons have totally escaped its attacks; and these have been

    2     “ Illustrations o f the A tm ospherical Origin of E p id em ic Diseases,” p.
1 9 2 .
                 ON TH E   PK ESEK VATION OF H E A L T H .         421

the temperate and regular, who have that sort of secure and
tranquil health in store which is called stamina, from its being
capable of bearing up against the incursions of disease.”
   Again, health is injured by errors in diet, and by innutritious
food. Children suffer in London and many large towns
through the innutritious bread supplied by most of the bakers.
Home-made, or whole-meal bread, is the best for everybody.8
Intemperance in eating and drinking, excessive flesh diet,
neglect of out-door exercise, and uncleanliness, together, will
soon undermine the soundest constitution. As Dr. Forster
says :— “ Many are willing to be relieved when they are ill, who
will not take the trouble to preserve health.” Abernethy used
to recommend not drinking at all with meals, and he called
hunger and thirst incompatible sensations. Without going
quite so far as this, it may be asserted that most people drink
too much (whether tea, coffee, or alcoholic beverages) with and
between meals. Adults who are free from rheumatism and gout
may drink a small quantity of good draught beer (made from
malt and hops) with dinner ; the diastase promotes digestion.
Mineral waters should never be drunk, except under medical
advice. When the digestion is out of order, a wine-glass full of
natural (German) seltzer water will prove beneficial; and this is
better than taking pills. Children have, usually, too much
animal food given them : one such meal per diem is quite
sufficient for them and for adults who do not take a great deal
of exercise. “ Coffee,” said Hahnemann, “ is the substance
which, next to mercury and chagrin, contributes most towards
spoiling the teeth.” The bad quality of bakers’ bread is often
a cause of bad teeth among children. Persons born when the
planet Saturn is rising, have very indifferent teeth; and they
are liable to chagrin, and to weak health. On the other hand,
persons born when Jupiter is rising have good teeth, a cheerful
disposition and generally good health.
   When we consider how easily the “ silver cord is broken,” and
what a subtle and incomprehensible thing is L i f e , we must be im­
pressed with the importance of attention to health. Fullom said :4
   “ Philosophers have in vain endeavoured to ascertain, by
■experiments and researches of every kind, what is that
mysterious principle of life which so universally prevails, and,
after a time of uncertain duration, is infallibly and unreservedly
extinguished. So impenetrable and occult is the question that
  3 T his was written in the year 1889. T he cry for “ Standard Bread
arose in 1911. H ovis bread is the best for assim ilation and health.
  4 " Marvels of S cience,” p. 252.
422                  THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF A STE O LO G Y.


 it has hitherto been found impossible to trace out even the dis­
 tinctions and modifications of life, so as to fix the line of
demarcation that divides the animal from the vegetable world.
Divisions have, indeed, been made, but they are at once
arbitrary and unwarrantable.”
    Frequent change of air is necessary to some persons—
especially the mercurial— to maintain health. It matters not
whether we call life “ vitality,” “ vital principle,” or “ vital
force” ; “ irritability,” “ irritable matter,” or “ germinal
matter” ; we can only preserve it by attention to health. We
cannot preserve health and life by chemical imitations or con­
centrations of good food ; neither can we restore health when lost
by lowering the vis medicatrix nature with large doses of physic.
    Persons of sanguine temperament benefit by occasional fasts.
Before the institution of the Lenten fast, the ancients abstained
from animal food and ate fish largely while the Sun was in the
sign Pisces; when the Sun entered Aries, lamb was eaten and
the fast came to an end. On the sixth day— the day of Venus—
of the week, fish was eaten, and animal food was abstained from
because Venus has dignity in the sign Pisces.
    When epidemic diseases threaten, it is imperatively necessary
to avoid over fatigue of mind and body, chills, and errors in
diet. If, despite these precautions, debility be felt, Hahnemann
recommends a few drops of the tincture of cinchona in a small
quantity of wine. The moderate smoking of tobacco, if it does
not debilitate the smoker, is a good preservative against infection.
    Amulets were worn, in ancient times, as preservatives against
infection.    Although this practice was, to a certain extent,
superstitious, it was based originally on the medicinal properties
of certain metals.      Workers in copper mines have escaped
Cholera when their neighbours died of it.5 Copper is worn by
the Hindoos as a charm against Cholera. In Hungary, the
wearing of a copper plate next to the skin has been found
preservative against the same disease. Copper filings taken in
health to excess have produced symptoms very similar to
Cholera. A remarkable fact, during the epidemics of 1849 and
1853 was observed at Paris, viz., that steel springs broke and
could not be made to perfection during the violence of the
epidemic. The practice of wearing coral necklaces was due to
coral being considered a charm against whooping cough ; and
corallium rabrum is found useful in the cure thereof.

  5     See the Zoist, Ju ly, 18-53 ; art. on Cholera by Dr. Burq, translated by
D r. E lliotson.
                                                        428




                                               BOOK Y.

                                       ELECTIONS.


                                        CHAPTER                             I.



                                  INTRODUCTION.

         “ To e v e r y t h i n g t h e r e i s a s e a s o n , a n d a t i m e t o e v e r y p u r p o s e u n d e r
  t h e h e a v e n s . '’ — S o l o m o n .


Dbyden, the poet, recognised the truth of astrology and the
advisability of electing propitious moments for the commence­
ment of new and important works ; he wrote: —
              “ Fortune at some hours to all is kind;
                The lucky have whole days, which still they choose ;
                The unlucky have but hours, and those they lose,”

   To make the election of real service, the nativity must be
studied. In affairs of partnership, the nativity of each partner
must he compared; otherwise, no safe election can be made.
The figure for the revolution of the year, i.e., the Sun’s ingress
into Aries, must also be compared, if the business be of a public
company. Thus, when the same sign ascends at the vernal
equinox as at birth, with the planetary ruler of that sign well
situated, or Jupiter in the ascendant, the affair will be likely to
succeed well if commenced when the same sign shall ascend and
the ruling planet be well placed. “ Directions” and transits
will, also, need to be studied before the election be made. It is
never advisable to begin any new business when the Moon is
afflicted, however good other testimonies may be. Zadkiel’s
Almanac gives the days on which the Moon forms benefic aspects
with the Sun and planets, under the head of “ Lunar
Influences.” If the business require to be quickly brought about
424               TH E TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTE O LO G Y.


it should be commenced, if possible, when the Moon is quick in
motion, and increasing in light. The Moon should not be in a
cadent house at the commencement of any business.
    The planet ruling the business should he free from the rays of
the infortunes, and, if possible, in its chief dignity ; or in either
the midheaven or ascendant, according to circumstances. No
evil planet should be in either of the angles, nor in the “ house ”
ruling the business, unless it (Mars or Saturn) happen to be the
planet influencing the affair. It is advisable to place the Sun
and Moon, if possible, in trine with the place of the Sun in the
nativity.
    These precepts may be considered ridiculous and unnecessary
by persons who are unacquainted with astrology; but there can
be no harm in observing them. We should prefer observing
them, when possible, to running the risk of failure by beginning
 an important transaction at an unfortunate moment. Apart
 from astrology it is difficult to understand why some businesses
 fail notwithstanding that capital, energy, and industry have been
 brought into them ; or why one ship, whose keel was laid at
 one hour proves a fortunate investment, while another, whose
 keel was laid at another hour, proves a most unlucky one.
 Some transactions seem doomed to failure from their inception,
 and even the enemies of astrology speak of such as “ ill-starred ’ ’
 affairs, although unaware of the meaning of this expression.
    At page 18 of this work, Flamsfcead’s election-figure for
 the laying of the foundation stone of Greenwich Observatory
 is given ; the great success attending the Eoyal Observatory and
 its freedom from misfortune make for astrology. Possibly, had
  Flamstead not understood and believed in the science, an
  unlucky moment might have been chosen.                 Many proud
  buildings have been destroyed very soon after their completion,
  the founders of such being of course too “ really scientific” to
  give heed to astrological precepts.
     The Moon, on account of her proximity to the earth, her
  reflection of the Solar light, and the swiftness of her motion, is
  considered to be the most powerful significator in astrology.
     It is, therefore, of the utmost importance that the Moon be
  free from affliction and in close aspect with either one of the
  fortunes, or the Sun, or the planet ruling the business in hand,
  when election of an opportune moment for the commencement
  of such business is desired.
     In many cases, there is not time either to elect the best
  possible moment for commencement of a new undertaking, or
                           IN TRO DU CTION .                    425

even to wait for such a favourable moment if determined upon.
Many persons have not a sufficient knowledge of astrology to
enable them to elect a suitable moment and to accurately cast
the figure of the heavens. In such cases as these, the most that
can be done is to see that the Moon’s aspects are of the right
kind; or to consult Zadkiel. It must be borne in mind that
the parallel declination acts like the conjunction and that the
 d ,p .d .,a n d A are the most powerful aspects for good, the
sextile being much weaker; the opposition is the most powerful
evil aspect.
   As to the signs of the zodiac, the ancients said that it is best
to have the Moon in an earthy sign (& , tig, or Vy), when sowing
or planting ; or repairing buildings; in Cancer for travelling by
sea ; in Sagittarius for buying horses and cattle.
   In commencing any work or business which it is desired to
be durable, either the Moon should be in a fixed sign ( b , SI, 1TI>
or ¿cy), or a fixed sign should ascend.
   In any case, the moon should be more than 12° distant in
longitude from the Sun, or the business will be hindered.
   Uranus and Neptune, being unknown to the ancients, had no
influences assigned to them. Observation has shown that
Uranus influences pecuniary affairs to some extent, inventions,
and all extraordinary occurrences. It is not advisable to begin
any business of great importance when the Moon is in con­
junction, square, opposition, or parallel declination with
Uranus; neither to marry under such aspects. Neptune’s
influence is more evil than good, and seems to bring crises
rather than to affect the ordinary daily business of life. It is
better not to begin any affair of importance when the Sun or
Moon happens to be in conjunction, quartile, or opposition with
Neptune.
                                426




                      C H A P T E R         II.



 ELECTIONS FOR AFFAIRS                   APPERTAINING            TO
         THE FIRST SIX                   HOUSES.

   “ A time to plant, and a time to pluck up that which is planted; a
 time to kill, and a time to heal.” — S olomon .


The F irst House or Mansion of the H eavens relates to health,
and affairs generally. It is, therefore, most important to have
the ascendant free from the presence of the infortunes at the
commencement of any new work, business, or journey.
   In the sailing of ships, the ascendant and the Moon should be
free from affliction. If an evil planet be in the ascendant at the
moment of a ship leaving port, it is likely to be fortunate; if Saturn
be ascending, the ship will be very likely to run aground; if Mars be
ascending, there will be danger of fire or of shipwreck. If Uranus
and Mars be ascending, explosion may take place.
   If the ship be a trading one, Jupiter or Venus should be either in
the midheaven, ascendant, second or ninth house.

ELECTIONS APPERTAINING TO THE SECOND HOUSE.
   The Second House of the Heavens relates to the receiving,
lending, and borrowing of money ; to buying and selling; and
to removing from one place to another. The following are the
precepts of the ancients :—
   1.    — Buying tor Profit.— Fortify the Moon especially, also
Mercury, and the lord of the second house ; and, if possible, the
lord of the ascendant; let the Moon be either in conjunction or
benefic aspect with Mercury             free    from impediment.
Particularly avoid buying when the Moon and Mercury are
afflicted by Mars. If possible, let Mercury be in conjunction or
benefic aspect with either Venus or Jupiter.
   2.    — Selling to Advantage.— Let the Moon be in either Taurus,
Cancer, Virgo, or Pisces, free from affliction, and separating from
conjunction or benefic aspect with Jupiter or Venus.
EL E C TIO N S AND AFFA IR S APPE RTA IN IN G TO TH E F IR S T S IX H OU SES.   427

   iJ. - Removing fro m Place to Place.— If you desire to gain
pecuniarily by removal, and the house to which you would remove be
your own, let the Moon be in a fixed sign, and a fixed sign ascending ;
but if the house be hired, let the ascendant be a common sign and the
Moon in a common sign. If possible, have If. or 5 in the tenth or
first, or fourth angle.
   In any case, fortify the Moon and the lords of the ascendant, second
and fourth houses; and let Jupiter be in the second house, if possible.
Either Taurus or Leo should be on the cusp of the fourth house, if it
can bo so arranged ; never Scorpio.

     F L E C T IO N S R E L A T IN G TO T H E T H IR D H O U SE.

   The Third House relates to short journeys, i.e. to such as can
be completed within twenty-four hours and within one’ s native
country.
   The following is the ancient precept relating thereto :—
   Short Journeys. —Fortify the ascendant, the third house, and the
Moon. Start not on thy journey at the moment at which an evil planet
ascends or is on the cusp of the third house, and when the M oon is
afflicted. If possible, begin the journey when If or 2 ascends or
occupies the third house or ascendairt.

   Persons who are constantly travelling would, of course, find
it impossible to follow this precept always.       I recommend
the following injunction as of far greater importance :— Avoid
setting out on a journey, if possible, at or very near the time
when the Moon (near the new or full) is in transit over the place
of a malefic planet in the nativity, and at the same time
afflicted; especially if such transit happen near the birthday
anniversary.

   E L E C T IO N S R E L A T IN G TO T H E F O U R T H H O U SE.

  The F ourth House relates to building houses, etc., buying or
renting land or houses, planting trees and sowing seed.                         The
ancients hand down the following rules:
   1 — Building Houses, etc.—Endeavour at the beginning of thy work
to fortify the ascendant, the lord thereof, the Moon and her dispositor,
and the planet to which she is joined either by conjunction or aspect;
fortify also the fourth house and its lord, and the tenth house and its
lord. Be sure that the significators be not under the earth, for that
causeth slow progress, and it may never be brought to perfection.
Fortify also Mercury and its dispositor. Let not any o f the
significators behold Mars. Let the M oon be increasing in light and
motion and configurated with Jupiter, and have a special care that the
Moon be not with Saturn or her south node ( ) ; and that Saturn be
uot in the fourth house or ascendant, for this would delay the work, or
cause vexation, trouble, or early decay. If Mars afflict the
significators or be in the fourth house, or ascendant, there will be
danger of fire.
428                THE   TE X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLO G Y.


   Should the building be designed for divine worship let Jupiter be
either in the ninth house or ascendant, and in either Sagittarius* or
Pisces. If Mars be in the ascendant or ninth house, there will be
dissension, wrangling, and discord, in addition to danger by fire; if
Saturn, asceticism and strange practices are likely to ensue.
  2.     — Buying Land or Houses.— The ascendant, its lord, and the
planet from which the Moon last separated, are significators of the
buyer; the seventh house, its lord, and the planet to which the Moon
applies, are the significators of the seller. The fourth house relates to
the land or house, as the case may be.
   The buyer should be careful, at the time of signing the covenant, to
fortify the fourth house and its lord, the Moon, and her dispositor, and
the Sun if possible ; and let none of these significators be in any
aspect with Mars, for this might cause the land or house then purchased
to be soon lost and to be of no continuance to posterity.
   To make the bargain good, fortify also the ascendant, its lord, and
the planet from which the Moon last separated. If possible, let the
Moon be in either Cancer or Taurus, and in benefic aspect with the
lord of the ascendant or planet ascending. Let the fourth house have
either Taurus, Leo, or Aquarius on its cusp. Let the fortunes have
chief power in the angles, at any rate in the first and fourth. See that
the lords of these angles be not retrograde; that no retrograde planet
be in either of the angles, the ninth or eleventh houses.
   3.      — Buying Land for Agricultural Purposes.— In this case, fortify
the ascendant and its lord, the Moon and her dispositor, the Sun
Jupiter, and Saturn ; and let Saturn have the sextile or trine aspect of
Jupiter— let Saturn be in Libra and Jupiter in Sagittarius, or vice
versa, if possible— and by all means let not Mars have any familiarity
with either Saturn or Jupiter. Let the Moon be in her increase, and in
sextile or trine with Saturn; her first quarter is best.
    Let the Moon be in the tenth house in Taurus, and the ascendant
free from affliction.
    At the commencement of tilling or manuring the ground, let the
Moon be increasing in light and harmoniously configurated with one
of the fortunes and Saturn.
    4.     — Planting or Grafting Trees.— The M oon should be in either
 Taurus, Leo, Virgo, Aquarius or Pisces— Taurus is the best— and in
sextile or trine aspect with Venus. Let Saturn be direct in motion,
 and either in the ascendant, 11th, 5th, or 2nd house, dignified. If
this cannot be done, let Jupiter be in one of these houses and in benefic
 aspect with Saturn. If neither, then let the Moon be in one of them,
 or in the 10th free from impediment.
    In all plantings and sowings, see that Mars be debilitated, and in
 no configuration with the Moon.
    Let the dispositor of the Moon (wrote Alchaiat) behold her from a
 watery sign; and if the ascendant be not a fixed sign, let the Moon and
 the lord of the ascendant be oriental of the Sun and ascending, or at
 least one of th em ; for this causeth trees then planted or grafted to
 grow quickly and be fruitful; if they be ascending and not oriental,
 the trees shall soon grow but not so soon fructify.
     If the ascendant cannot be a fixed sign, let it be a common one, and
  the significators in common signs.
     If it be impossible to fulfil all these conditions, see that the Moon is
 cither in Taurus or the latter half of Sagittarius, free from affliction.
ELECTION S AND AFFA IR S APPERTAININ G TO TH E F IR S T S IX H O U SE S.       429

and in benefic aspect with Jupiter in the ascendant, 10th, 11th, 5th, or
4th house.
   5.— Sowing Seed.— The ascending sign should be movable, a.nd its
lord should be in a movable sign, and the Moon beholding it from a
movable sign ; if this cannot be done, common signs are next best
fixed signs must be avoided.
   Let the Moon be in either Cancer or Ccupricornus; if she be in Aries,
let some planet behold her from a watery sign, Cancer for choice, lest
the seed wither.
   Let the Moon be separating from the Sun,1 and increasing in light
and motion— except in the case of sowing peas.
   Let the ascendant be free from the presence or affliction of the
malefic planets.

ELECTIONS APPERTAINING• TO THE FIFT H HOUSE.
   T he F tfth H ouse relates to the giving or receiving presents
feasting, writing letters, and sending messengers.
   1.— Writing Letters or Books.— Fortify the ascendant and the
ninth, and let Mercury behold them either with a sextile or trine;
and let $ be well dignified and no wise afflicted, and not
retrograde. Let the Moon be in good aspect with Mercury, and
both the j) and ascendant free from affliction.

      ELECTIONS RELATING TO THE SIXTH HOUSE.
   The Sixth House relates to sickness, servants and cattle.
   The following rules may be interesting to medical men :—
   1.    —For Surgical Operations.—For such operations' that can be
safely deferred to a fortunate moment, let the M oon be increasing in
light and motion, and in sextile or trine aspect with Jupiter or Venus,
and let not Mars be in any aspect with the Moon. The Chaldseans held
that the Moon is more afflicted by Mars during her increase, and by
Saturn during her decrease.
   Let the Moon be in a fixed sign— but not in the sign ruling the
member or part of the body to be operated on, and let not such sign
ascend.
   Fortify the sign ruling the part of the body to be operated o n ; and
let the ruler of the ascending sign, or Venus or Jupiter be in the
ascendant or midheaven, and free from the configurations of Mars.
   Let the Moon be free from all manner of impediment.
   2.    —Buying four-fooled beasts. —See that thou-fortifiest that sign
which doth represent the beast to be bought, or that which is nearest
to its nature ; the Moon, the lord of the ascendant, and that of the 6tli
house ; and see that the Moon have the sextile or trine of the planet
ruling the sign signifying the beast, or in reception therewith.
   In buying oxen or horses, let the M oon be in either 7 aurus or the
last 15° of Sagittarius. In buying sheep, let the ]) be in V ; goats,
    or b ; dogs $ or the last 15° of $\,-

     1 See “ Urania ” for A pril, 1880, art.   “ T he Failure o f the Crops.
430                TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF AS T liO L O G Y .


   In buying race-horses, let the Moon be in Sagittarius or the last
fifteen degrees of L eo ; and fortify the ascendant, the 6th house, and
their lords; also let the Moon be free from the evil aspects of the
infortunes and in sextile or trine with Jupiter or "Venus.

   To the last precept may be added: Ascertain the day on which
the race-horse it is intended to purchase was foaled, and see that
the Sun and Moon were free from the evil aspects of Saturn and
Uranus, and were in good aspect with Mars. It will be best for
 © to be in T in A with J in SI ; or 0 or j in A with ¿f in
Irf ; the © attended by ? , or j) in aspect with ? or        or © ;
 $ in * or a with $ and x>— for courage, stoutness, and speed
are pretty certain to be possessed by horses foaled under such
configurations.    Some race-horses are notoriously unlucky,
others are soft-hearted, and many turn out worthless for racing
purposes, having neither speed nor stamina. Isonomy, one of the
 stoutest and speediest horses of the last century, was foaled on
the 28th of April, 1875, when the © was in A with $ in Vy,
in If with $ , and $ in g with If. , Bend Or, a Derby winner,
was foaled on the 13th of February, 1877, when the 0 and ])
were in if with both $ and if in f .
   Ormonde, the winner of the Derby, in 188G, was foaled at
■6h 80m p.m. of the 18th of March, 1883; Cancer 0° 32'
culminating, and Libra 0° 24' ascending. The Moon was in
trine (separating) with the Sun, the latter separating from
quartile with Jupiter and sextile with Saturn. Mercury was in
conjunction with Mars in Aries. Jupiter was in the ninth
house.
   Minoru bred by Colonel W. Hall Walker, M.P., wxon the
Derby, on the 26th of May, 1909, for the late King Edward
VII. This colt was foaled at 9h 15m p.m. of the 16th of March,
1906, Kildare. Leo 9° 52' occupied the midheaven and Libra
29° 6 ' the ascendant, Mars setting in Aries 29° 35' in sextile
with the Sun, the Moon in Sagittarius 17° 41' in trine with
Mercury in 13° 37' of Aries; the Sun applying to sextile with
Jupiter.
   Prince Palatine, winner of the St. Leger, 1911, was also bred by
Colonel W. Plall Walker. This colt was foaled on the 2nd of
April, 1908, at 011 25m a.m., Kildare. Sun in Aries 11° 53',
Moon also in the same sign 22° 53' in parallel with the Sun.
The ascending degree f 14° 2 ' had the trinal ray of the Sun
and the sextile of Mercury.
                                   431




                         CHAPTER            III.



    ELECTIONS            RELATING        TO    THE      LAST      SIX
                               HOUSES.

    1‘ A time to love, and a time to hate ; a time for war and a time for
  peace. ’ ’— Solomon.

 T he Seventh H ouse relates to marriage, partnership, war,
lawsuits, etc. The ancients hand down to posterity precepts
 concerning all these important affairs.
    In electing a propitious moment for the putting on of the
wedding ring, see that the Moon is increasing in light and
 motion, and free from affliction. Let not the Moon be in con­
junction with an infortune in the ascendant, for this would pre­
 signify strife and discord. Neither let the Moon be in con­
 junction with an infortune in the ascendant of the nativity of
 either the bride or bridegroom.
    If possible, celebrate the marriage before the Moon shall pass
 her first quarter.
    Know that it is a favourable time for marriage when the
 ascendant is assisted by the presence or benevolent configura­
 tions of the fortunes ; and unfavourable when the ascendant and
 the descendant are afflicted.
    Be sure to place the Moon, the ascendant and its lord, at the
 time of making the partnership or agreement, in Gemini, Virgo,
 Sagittarius, or Pisces. If the affair is to be a public company,
 let the Moon be in Leo in conjunction or benefit aspect with
 Jupiter, and well configurated with the Sun.
    Let the Moon be increasing in light and motion ; let the ruler
 of the 10th house, or a fortune in the 10th house, be in good
 aspect with the Moon or ruler of the ascendant ; and let the
 rulers of the ascendant and seventh house be in mutual benefic
 aspect.
    3.— Of Declaring War, Commencing Lawsuits, etc.— The
 ascendant is for the attacking party, and the 7th house for the
 adversary.
432               THIS T E X T -B O O K OF ASTR OLO G Y.


   Let, therefore, the ascendant be fortunate, and let the
ascending sign be one of those under the dominion of Mars,
Jupiter, or Haturn ; Scorpio is best, and Aries next best, for this
purpose, because they are martial signs. Let the lord of the
ascendant dispose of the lord of the 7th house, if possible, or,
otherwise, more essentially and accidentally dignified ; and let
the lord of the ascendant be in sextile or trine with Mars and
with the ascending degree or that culminating. Have a care
that the lord of the ascendant be not in the 7th, 4th, 8th, 6th,
or 3rd house, and neither retrograde, debilitated, nor afflicted.
   In lawsuits, have regard to the horoscopes, if procurable, of
the disputants; and judge that he who hath Mars most
essentially fortified in his nativity will overcome, especially if
he was born at night.
   Begin no quarrel, war, or controversy, neither invade the
enemy’s country when the Moon is in Virgo nor Capricornus ; but
when the Moon is assisted by the fortunes and by Mars, and
when Mars is in the eastern part of the heavens. If possible,
let Mars be between the 10th degree of Taurus and the 10th
degree of Leo, or between the 10th degree of Scorpio and that of
Aquarius. But if the enemy be to the ivest of thy country, begin
the invasion when Mars is in the western part of the heavens,
and between the 10th degree of Leo and that of Scorpio, or
between the 10th degree of Aquarius and that of Taurus.
   Begin no invasion when the Moon is combust, or within
twelve hours after her conjunction with the Sun. If any war be
begun in these combust hours, the beginner will be defeated, or
much evil wall befall his person and his soldiers and assist­
ants, especially if he begin the war in one of the first four
combust hours.
   It is a remarkable fact that the battle of Isandhlwana was
fought during an eclipse of the Sun, visible in Zululand— viz.,
on the 22nd of January, 1879, at l h 5m p.m. (Cape Mean Time).
Now, the native accounts of that disastrous battle stated that
the Zulus did not intend to deliver their onset until the night
of the 22nd or dawn of the 23rd, because “ the moon wras
unfavourable.” The Zulus, it is thus demonstrated, understood
astrology, and valued its precepts, and therefore would not attack
during the combust hours of the Moon. By dawn of the 23rd,
more than twelve hours would have elapsed since the time of
new Moon. Unfortunately for the British, Colonel Durnford’s
Basutos discovered and fired on a Zulu regiment; and thus
began the battle which ended so disastrously for our soldiers,
          ELEC TION S R E L A T IN G TO TH E   LA ST   S IX   H O U SE S.   438

the British force being annihilated. The map of the heavens
for this eclipse is given in “ The Science of the Stars,” chap. v.

   E L E C T IO N S R E L A T IN G TO T H E E IG H T H HOUSE.

   The E ighth House of the heavens relates to the making of
wills and to inheritance. One might think that no election
would be required for making wills, but the ancients considered
that there is a time for this purpose; that is to say, when a will
is made by a person in health, and not left to dying moments.
   1.    — Of Making Wills.— “ When thou makest thy will let not
the Moon be in a movable sign nor in the ascendant, but let her
be in a fixed sign, and a fixed sign rising, and if possible the
lord of the ascendant in a fixed sign. If the Moon be in
conjunction with Mars rising, at the time of making a will,
there is danger of it being stolen, lost, or destroyed.
   “ Let the Moon be in benefic aspect with Saturn, if thou
desirest that the will shall not be revoked.”
   2.    — Of Inheritance.—In entering upon possession of inherit­
ance, fortify the eighth house ; if possible, let one of the signs of
Jupiter or Venus be on the cusp thereof, and make the second
house and its lord strong and free from all manner of impedi­
ment, and in good aspect with the fortunes. Fortify also the
Moon, and let her behold the degree on the cusp of the eighth
house or planet therein ; and let there be reception between the
lords of the second and eighth houses. If possible, let the lord
of the ascendant be in the second house, and the lord of the
second in the eighth house.

    E L E C T IO N S R E L A T IN G TO T H E N IN T H H OUSE.

   The Ninth House of the H eavens relates to embarking on
foreign travel; to learning, science, art, etc.
   1.— Of Foreign Travel.— Fortify the 9 th house at the time of
setting forth, also the lord thereof, the Moon, and the ascendant.
Let one or both of the fortunes be in the ninth house, if possible.
Let not an infortune be in the eighth house at the moment of
departure, nor in the second at the moment of embarking on the
return journey.
   As the descendant relates to the place to which the journey is
to be made, fortify the seventh house at thy departure, and let
no evil planet be in either this or the tenth house. In returning
let no evil planet be in either the ascendant or fourth house.
   If possible, let the Moon be increasing in light and motion at
484              TH E   T E X T -B O O K OF ASTR O LO G Y.


the time of beginning thy journey, also let her be free from
impediment and receive some support from the fortunes. Let
Mercury be free from combustion and affliction, and in a good
house. Let not the Moon be in the place of Saturn, Mars, or
Uranus at birth.
   If the Moon, or Saturn, or both, be in the ascendant or
seventh house, or Saturn in the first and the Moon in the
seventh house, there will be danger or loss attending the journey
 then begun.
   2.— Of Building and Launching Ships, and Voyages by Sea.—
In building ships for tear or swift sailing, fortify the ascendant
and its lord, the Moon and her 'dispositor; place the lord of the
ascendant and Moon in either the first, eleventh, or ninth house ;
and let the sign ascending be fixed. If possible, let all the
angles be fixed, and in any case be sure to have the Moon and
lord of the ascendant swift in motion.
   Let the planet from which the Moon last separated be strong
and well disposed, also swift in motion. Place the Moon’s
dispositor in a watery sign, free from impediment or affliction.
Place one of the fortunes in either the first, tenth, or seventh
house. Let the lord of the seventh house be weak and slow in
 motion.
   In building merchant and passenger ships, in addition to follow­
ing the foregoing instructions, see that Mercury be fortified and
assisted by Venus or Jupiter, and in the tenth house. Fortify
also the second house.
    Let the Moon be in Taurus, Gemini, or the beginning of
 Cancer, Virgo, or Sagittarius, or one of the last degrees of
Capricornus. It is good to have the Moon or the ascendant in
 Pisces.
    Let the Sun be in trine aspect with Jupiter, and attended by
 Venus. Let not Mars be in any aspect with the Moon or
 ascending degree, for this is apt to cause casualties by fire. Let
 not the Moon be in Aquarius and in aspect with the Sun and
 Mars, for danger of shipwreck will ensue. Let not the Moon be
 afflicted by Mars from signs of human form, or pirates may
 probably sink the ship and kill the crew and passengers.
    In launching ships, and in setting forth on a sea voyage, see
 that the Moon be strong essentially and accidentally, assisted by
 Venus or Jupiter, and free from affliction; as likewise the
 ascendant.
          ELEC TIO N S   R E L A T IN G   TO TH E LA ST   SIX H O U SE S.   435

    E L E C T IO N S R E L A T IN G TO T H E T E N T H H O U SE.
   The Tenth H ouse relates to profession, trade, employment,
etc. Ramesey says that he believes the ancients placed occupa­
tion under the dominion of the tenth house of the heavens,
 “ because it is the highest dignity such can look for that are
bound thereunto.”
   “ Wherefore in this matter thou art to distinguish the planet
ruling the profession, trade, or mystery thou wouldst learn ; then
let the ascendant or tenth house be a sign wherein such planet
hath dominion by house ; as, for example, if thou desirest to be
a merchant, place Gemini or Virgo in the ascendant or tenth
house, or else Libra, Sagittarius or Aquarius.
   “ Fortify the lord of the ascendant, that of the tenth house,
the Moon, and Mercury.”
   The Western nations do not now-a-days consult astrologers
before appointing a Prime Minister or a President; neither do
European monarchs elect a fortunate hour for their coronation.
The ancients, however, gave rules for these proceedings, and laid
stress on the necessity for not making such appointments and
ceremonies within fifteen days of an unfortunate new Moon. In
the East the precepts of the ancients are still followed.

  E L E C T IO N S R E L A T IN G TO TH E T W E L F T H H O U SE.
   The Twelfth H ouse relates to prisoners, captives, and horses.
The ancients wrote precepts as to electing suitable moments for
freeing prisoners and captives, and buying horses. Those
relating to prisoners need not be reproduced in this work, for no
Government and no governor of a prison would pay any regard
to them, among Western nations, at the present day. In regard
to horses, rules have already been given in the seventh chapter,
as to purchasing them. Trainers of race-horses would hardly be
likely to await a favourable moment for sending a race-horse to
a race meeting at which he was engaged to run. The following
is the injunction handed down by Ramesey in this connection:—
   “ Let Sagittarius ascend, or contain the Moon, if possible, at
the time of the race-horse setting forth on his journey to the race
meeting; otherwise let the Moon or ascendant be in the first
half of Libra."
   “ Fortify the ascendant,'its lord, the Moon and her dispositor,
and the planet with which either may be joined.”
                                436




                     CHAPTER              IY.



        THE      PLANETARY              DIGNITIES.


I n Elections stress was laid by the ancients on the planetary
dignities.   These dignities are of two kinds— essential and
accidental. A planet was said to be essentially dignified when in
its own sign, exaltation, triplieity, term or face ; and was said to
be accidentally dignified when in the midheaven, ascendant, 7th,
4th, 11th, 9th, 2nd, or 5th house. A planet is accidentally
strong when swift and direct in motion, and near its greatest
distance from the Sun; a superior planet, when oriental of the
Sun ; an inferior planet, when occidental.
   A planet is essentially weak when it is in its fall or detriment.
It is accidentally weak when in the 12th, 8th, or Gth house,
retrograde or very slow in motion, within 8° 30' of the Sun; a
superior planet, when occidental of the S u n ; an inferior, when
oriental.
   Although a planet was held to be weak when within 8° 30' of
the Sun, it was said to be strong when within 17' of, or in exact
conjunction with ;he Sun— “ in cazimi ” as the ancients term it.
   The following table of the essential dignities of the planets is
taken from Ptolemy’s Tetrabiblos. Experience proves that Aries
and Scorpio are Martial signs; Sagittarius and Pisces Jovial
signs; Gemini and Virgo, Mercurial, etc.           Hence the chief
(essential) dignities of the planets are correctly stated; but it by
no means follows uhat the planets are weak in nativities, when in
the signs opposites to their chief dignities. The student may,
therefore, safely reject the “ detriment” and “ fa ll” of the
                                                                                            TH E        PL AN ET AE Y D IG N IT IE S,                                                                              487



                                                                     F al                          §3           *o                   CM           ©                    c§       Ft




                                                                                     CM                                 rv.                                  CM        DOf                               »
                                                                "S 2                       *0      Ft           -O '                 Ft                                                         ©
                                                                «  3


                                                                                 o   O     O       o            o      o             o           o           o         O        o               O        o
                                                                                     rH    H       r—1                 1—1                       1—1         rH        r“ 1     rH

                                                                     <D              0+                                              DOf                     CM
                                                                                                                       *0                         rt                            ©                   «




The Essentia Dignities o f the Planets according to Ptolemy.
                                                                                                   ©


                                                                                 o   o     O       o            o      o             o           o           o         o       O                o        O
                                                                                 °   H     i—i                  1—1    rH            r           1“ *        rH        tH      rH               rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                                   1
                                                                                                                X*     Ft            CM                      ©         «        ^0              XX-      r4
                                                                                       ©           «0
                                                                    O
                                                                    CQ
                                                                    CD           o   o     O       o            o      O             o           o           o         O        o               o        o
                                                                                 °   rH    t—I   rH                    rH            rH                      rH                 1—1             rH
                                                                                                                                                 1-1                   rH
                                                                    Ph                                                     rv.                                                                           )j y
                                                                                           XX-                  CM                   ©                                          Ft              CM
                                                                                                   Ft
                                                                                                                                                     «

                                                                                           o     o              o      o             o           o           o         o        o               o        O
                                                                                     CO    CO    CO             CO     X)            co          CO                    CO       CO              CO       CO

                                                                                                                                                                                   C\j                       Cx,
                                                                                                                X -                  «0                                *o                       *0
                                                                                                   *°                                             "°

                                                                                           ZD    o              h-     lO                                              lO       lo              1-0      ZD
                                                                                 °   N     CM    CM             (M     CM            CM          CM          CM        (M       CM              CM       CM
                                                                    CO
                                                                    CD
                                                                    S3               ^0
                                                                                                       <>       CM     Ft                                    XX-                *b                  Ft   *0

                                                                    s
                                                                     o
                                                                                     __
                                                                                           CM      rH           o      o
                                                                                                                       1—i
                                                                                                                                     00          O           1-1       Cb
                                                                                                                                                                       1—1
                                                                                                                                                                                O
                                                                                                                                                                                rH
                                                                                                                                                                                                o
                                                                                                                                                                                                CM
                                                                                                                                                                                                         a
                                                                                 0 <N      CM                   CM
                                                                                                                                     TH          -

                                                                    'o
                                                                                     XX-   Ft      CM-          »      CM            Ft Ft                   -
                                                                                                                                                                       XX       Ft              CM
                                                                                                                                                                                                         **
                                                                     co
                                                                                           1-0                  CO     CO            CO                                hH      CM               CM
                                                                                           rH                   r“ >   1—1           rH          i—!         t-H               T—1
                                                                                 ° n               - 1
                                                                    =h
                                                                                     CM-   XX-     Ft Ft               XX-                        o,         Ft        o-       XX-                       Ft
                                                                                                                                     °*                                                         **

                                                                                 O O       00                          ZD            t-                      CO        CO      CO                        CO
                                                                                                   -            50                                                                              -
                                                                                           CH                          ¿ y
                                                                                                                <b                   *>
                                                                                                                                                             *°        *                                 ° +

                                                               T riplici-                                                                                              Ft
                                                                                 i   Ft            xx           Gd     Ft            «           XX          *o                 (=±             XX       *o
                                                               tiesDay
                                                                                           o+                          ©             CM                                ©
                                                               & Night.)         a   ©
                                                                             .                                  lO                   ‘O          T---1                        ■ CO                       L'r
                                                                                           CO
                                                                                                                rH                   rH          CM                             aq                       CM
                                                                 ce o

                                                                w        a           ©                          Ft                   XX-                                                                 CM


                                                                    »                               .       1          A                 .   i                                      -
                                                                                       A   ¿H      Q                                                                   d                        fl       A         '
                                                                                                                Q                                        1
                                                                  o                        0+                                        x>          o .
                                                                                                                                                             "°
                                                                                                                                                                       Ft       rx.
                                                                                                                                                                                                         r4
                                                                 a                                                     ©     !
                                                                                                                                 i           1
                                                                    co                                                                                   1         1                        I
                                                                 S3
                                                                  bO                 8-
                                                                                           DO      a             25    eg            ^       !
                                                                                                                                                  <11
                                                                                                                                                             £     1           £        i       M        X
                                                                 m                                                                           1           1                                  i
438               THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF   ASTROLOGY.


planets. The exaltations, the rule over the triplicities, and terms
may be regarded as purely arbitrary. The “ faces ” of the
planets ought, perhaps, to come under the same category, but
there may appear to be a better foundation for these, inasmuch as
the influences of certain parts of the same sign are observed to
differ; at the same time, although the first 10° of Aries may be
reasonably ascribed to the rule of Mars, there is no reason why
the other planets should follow in the Ptolemaic order— Sun,
Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars— through the
decanates of the various signs. This is the order of the “ hours ”
of the planets through the day and night, which gave origin to
the division of the week and the nomenclature of each of the
seven days.
   Not the slightest reliance should be placed on them, even in
the case of a nativity wherein Mercury or the Moon, or the
planet ascending, may be in one of the decanates assigned to it.
It is only in such cases that these assertions would apply, for
the “ lord of the ascendant and the dispositor of the M oon”
can have nothing' whatever to do with the disposition unless
they happen to be either nearly rising or with Mercury or the
Moon at the moment of birth, whatever Ramesey may say.
   T he “ P art of F ortune ” (+) is that point of the heavens in
which the Moon would be if the Sun were exactly rising.
Claudius Ptolemy says :—
   “ The Part of Fortune is ascertained by computing the
number of degrees between the Sun and Moon ; and it is placed
at an equal number of degrees distant from the ascendant in the
order of the signs. It is in all cases, both by night and day, to
be so computed and set down that the Moon may hold with it
the same relation as that which the Sun may hold with the
ascendant; and it thus becomes, as it were, a lunar horoscope or
ascendant.”
   Prior to the teaching of Negusantius, this was understood to
mean that the Part of Fortune is to be placed as many degrees
distant from the degree ascending as the Moon is from the Sun ;
below the horizon before full Moon, and above the horizon
between full and new Moon. At new Moon the part of Fortune
would have the same longitude as the ascendant; at full Moon,
 the same as the descendant. This method is still employed in
mundane and horary astrology, and in elections, by those who
mark in the Part of Fortune; and it was taught by the late
 Zadkiel in his “ Handbook of Astrology,” vol. i. For example :
 If the Sun be in up 18° 6', the Moon in y 27° 7', and the
 ascendant f 10° 29', the Part of Fortune would be in n 19° 30'.
                   THE   PLANETARY   D IG N IT IE S .        439

   The author has already declared his opinion that the Part of
Fortune must be discarded from a rational system of genethliacal
astrology. As, however, reference is made to the position of the
Part of Fortune in figures of the heavens for elections, in the
rules of the ancients, a few remarks on the subject may be con­
sidered necessary.      However, the student may at once be
informed that the author would reject the Part of Fortune from
mundane astrology and elections; in fact altogether, for it is a
purely imaginary thing, and therefore can have neither influence
nor signification.
   The student will be surprised to learn that although the
common method of determining the place of the Part of Fortune
is still used by some astrologers in horary figures, a different
method is adopted by them in nativities, although both methods
cannot be right.
   Placidus confessed that he had never been able to find any
truth in the Part of Fortune, although he diligently studied it
and very properly assigned to it the same latitude as that of the
Moon.     As James Wilson, in his “ Dictionary of Astrology,”
observed, “ there can scarcely be stronger proof of the truth of
astrology than this, he [Placidus] could find truth in the
planetary configurations because they are founded on the
immutable laws of Nature ; but when he came to investigate the
Part of Fortune he could find no truth in it, because there was
none.”
   Unfortunately for the reputation of Placidus, who was a most
painstaking scientific man, he became charmed with the method
of Negusantius (which received also the assent of the late
Zadkiel, a greater astrologer than either), and finding one
nativity in which, according to Ptolemy, neither the Sun nor the
Moon was hyleg, but the Part of Fortune, he accepted it as
conformable to reason, although in another page of his work
(“ Primum Mobile” ) he had written that “ all these things must
be confirmed by reason and experience.” In the thirty remark­
able nativities of eminent men published by Placidus, he had
wisely omitted to mark the place of the Part of Fortune. After
writing his comments on those nativities he received the new
method of Negusantius, because it coincided with his preference
 for mundane positions and aspects to zodiacal, and because he
found one nativity which appeared to support it. Placidus thus
describes the method:
    “ When this work was finished, the very illustrious D. Adrian
Negusantius, of Fanum, a man not only very well versed in
 440               THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF A S T R O L O G Y .


 astrology according to the true doctrine of Ptolemy, but also in
 Physics and the sublime secrets of Nature, having transmitted
 to me a method to calculate the Part of Fortune perfectly agree­
 able to reason and experience, I thought proper to set it down
 here, word for word, that everyone might see a secret in this art,
 invented by so great a man, truly worthy the pen of the greatest
 astrologers; for I willingly confess that with regard to the Part
 of Fortune, I have laboured a long time and have not been able
 to find any truth in it.
   “ 1The Part of Fortune,’ says Negusantius, ‘ if we may credit
 the precepts of Ptolemy, who asserts that it has the same
position to the Moon as the Sun has to the horizon, ought to be
described and defined in the lunar parallels ; for neither, if it be
constituted in the ecliptic, according to the intentions of the
common astrologers, or in the Moon’s orbit as was the opinion
of a very eminent professor, will it be found to preserve that
order and similitude which the respective conversions of two
luminaries, both diurnal and annual, denote.’ This man sub­
scribes to the truth of everything I lately mentioned in my
Celestial Philosophy, wherein I said that the Part of Fortune
moves upon the orbit or way of the Moon’s latitude, and there­
fore not in the ecliptic.
   “ But as I have shown that the distances and rays to the
angles are, by no means, made in the zodiac, but upon the
parallel of every star, he argues that the Sun in like manner is
elongated from the east, viz., upon his parallel; also the Moon,
who has not by any other method nor way different than when
the Sun is in the horizon, by her real presence, posited the place
of the Part of Fortune; for no other fundamental principle is
seen to constitute this part in Nature, unless by such an assigna­
tion and impression of virtue, exhibited by the Moon at sunrise.
Negusantius adds: 1For when the Sun comes to the cardinal
sign of the east, then it is necessary the Moon be found in its
horizon; afterwards, in an equal space of time, the Sun
digressing, he is removed from it according to his ascension.’
Wherefore, if we study the matter with                   accuracy,
we shall find that, entirely in the same manner
as the Sun departs from the east, the Moon is like­
wise separated from the Part of Fortune, that is, both upon
their parallels, so that as many degrees as the Sun, in his
parallel circle, is elongated from the east, so many is the Moon
in her parallel distant from the Part of Fortune; whence it
follows, that the true place of the Part of Fortune does not
always remain in the zodiac, but always under the Moon's
parallel circle, that is, with the Moon’s declination the same
both in number and name, and therefore the Part of Fortune
does not receive any aspects from the stars in the zodiac, but
only in mando. We may make a calculation of its place in
various ways, but it will be shorter as well as easier if, in the
                                    THE   PLANETARY     D IG N IT IE S .                   441

 diurnal geniture, the Sun’s true distance from the east be added
 to the Moon's right ascension, and in the nocturnal, subtracted,
 for the number thence arising will he the place and right
 ascension of the Part of Fortune ; and it has always the same
 declination as the Moon, both in number and name, wherever it
 is found. Again, let the Sun’s oblique ascension, taken in the
ascendant, be subtracted always from the oblique ascension of
 the ascendant, as well in the day as in the night, and the
remaining difference be added to the Moon’s right ascension, the
 Sun will be the right ascension of the Part of Fortune, which
will have the Moon’s declination. He who has a mind to make
its directions, will accomplish it only by motions in the world,
that is to the aspects in mundo,” etc.
   In the example already given, the place of the Part of
Fortune, by the common method, is n 19° 30'. According to
the method of Negusantius, its mundane position (as in a
nativity) must be thus computed (the Moon’s latitude being
4° 59' N.) :
         Oblique ascension of the ascendant .....................           279 28 14
         Subtract Sun’ s oblique ascension .........................        248 35 28

                                                                             30 52 46
                   Add M oon’s right ascension.........................      53 33 50

                   The Part of F ortu n e’s right ascension ...            = 84 26 36

   The declination of the Part of Fortune must be, according to
Negusantius, the same as that of the Moon ; in this instance the
Moon’ s declination is 24° 23' 2" N. Its semi-arc (the birthplace
being in lat. 51° 30' 35" N.) is therefore 124° 45' 13", which is
the opposite to that of the Moon because the Part of Fortune is
above and the Moon is below the horizon.
   Wilson says that d “ The longitude and latitude of the Part
of Fortune may, if required, be found by trigonometry from its
right ascension and declination, like that of any star.” Let us
proceed to test the truth of this assertion. The rule is given in
Appendix I. of this work : The R.A. and Dec. of a Heavenly Body
being given, to find its Longitude and Latitude.
                                      o   i   tr
L og. Sine of K .A .............     84 26 36,     9-9979544
 ,, co-tang, of D ec. ...            24 23 2 n.,   0-3436324

 ,,   tang. / A .................    65 30 52-1 = 0-3415868
                           Add       23 27 43-4

                         Z B, = 88 58 35-5

  1     “ A Com plete D iction ary o f A strology.”              B y James W ilson .    L on don .
1819.    Page 312.
442                    THE    T E X T -B O O K   OF A S T R O L O G Y .


L og . Co-sine / A . (a.e.) 0*3825139L og . Sine / A. (a.c.)                 ... 0*0409271
 „          „ / B 8*2519893
                 .                        „ „      / B ......             9*9999307
 „      Sine D eo. 9*0157905              „ tang. 11. A .....             1*0119437

 „     Sine lat. 1°1'1 1 " n . = 8*2502937         „   tang. Zoii<7.84°56'22"=l*0528015


     The result is, then, that the Part of Fortune is in (geocentric)
longitude 84° 56' 22", or Gemini ( n. ) 24° 56' 22" and latitude
1° 1' 11" N. It will be observed that this longitude differs
widely from that found by the common method, viz., n 19° 30'.
But, which is of much greater importance, this latitude differs
largely from that of the Moon, viz., 4° 59' 9" N., whereas it
should be the same.
    The common method cannot be right because the places of
the Sun and Moon are taken in the zodiac while that of the
ascendant is taken in the world. The method of Negusantius
cannot be right because it assigns to the Part of Fortune always
the same declination as the Moon, whereas it cannot have the
same declination as the Moon unless the Sun be exactly rising or
 setting or in parallel declination with that of the ascending
degree— for “ the Moon is to the Part of Fortune as the Sun is
 to the horoscope,” ergo if the Sun be not in parallel declination
with the ascendant the Moon cannot be in par. dec. with the
 Part of Fortune.
    It is evident, therefore, that the whole thing is an absurdity.
 If the place of the Part of Fortune be taken by the common
 method, without reference to the Moon's latitude, as is still done
 in horary astrology, its place will differ from that found by the
 method of Negusantius, as in the case of a nativity. In horary
 astrology, in elections, and in mundane astrology, wherein the
 common method is still used, great importance is attached
  to the trine aspect of the Moon with the Part of Fortune, for
 when this connexion is found it is held to promise success in
 affairs relating to m oney; but the horary astrologers do not
  appear to have observed that when the Moon is in trine with the
  Part of Fortune, the S un is in trine with the ascending degree ;
  to this zodiacal trine o f the S un to the ascendant is to be
  attributed the good fortune wrongly ascribed to the trine of the
  Moon with the Part of Fortune.
     Lest this should be considered by some as insufficient proof,
  let us refer to the nativity of Pope Urban VIII., published by
  Placidus in the Addenda to his “ Primum Mobile.” In this
  nativity the ascendant is Si 26°, the Sun is in T 25° 42' and in
  the ninth house. This trine aspect of the Sun to the ascendant.
                      THE   PLANETARY     D IG N IT IE S .    44B

must be the presignification of the good fortune of Urban VIII.,
for the nativity is not otherwise fortunate, with the exception of
the Sun being near the mundane parallel with Jupiter.
   It is true that the late Zadkiel I. wrote,8 in the year 1840, in
favour of the Part of Fortune even in nativities; but down t o .
that year he had but a comparatively short experience, and
twenty-four years later3 he made no such declaration in favour
of it. The obvious conclusion is that his later and more
extended experience did not confirm his first impression, which
was no doubt greatly due to his respect for Ptolemy and
Placidus.
   Had the existence of Uranus and Neptune been known to
Ptolemy, Placidus, and Negusantius, it is probable that the first
named would not have invented the Part of Fortune and the
others would not have thought of it— they found that something
was wanting to account for occasional discrepancies. At the
present day, it must be rejected; its retention can only bring
discredit on astrology and its votaries, just as the extravagancies
of horary astrologers in the past brought about the decline of
astroloijia sana. No science encumbered by superstition can
flourish any more than a garden overrun by yveeds.
   Horary Astrology is a system of divination by means of the
celestial bodies, their relative positions and mutual configura­
tions ; the figure of the heavens being cast for the moment of
consultation, and the question being propounded.
   In my “ Science of the Stars ” the student who may wish to
investigate horary astrology will find a sufficient description of
it. As applied to questions it is not really worth serious
consideration, except in cases of the deepest anxiety and pertur­
bation of mind on the part of the querent, and when the horary
figure harmonises with the horoscope of the querent, and when
it also is in accord with the primary directions, falling due at
the time, in his nativity.




  2 “ Grammar of Astrology,” chap. xiv.
  3 “ Handbook of Astrology.”
                               APPENDIX IL
                        TABLES OF HOUSES.


   1             LONDON.            NORTHAMPTON.
           Lat. 51° 30' 49" North. Lat. 52° 11' 0" North.
 R. A.
  of              rg
           10th         12th
                                                 £          g
                                                                Ascendant.
                                            (d
                               Ascendant.
  the             I—1                        M   o
                                                 rH   i—1                    CNÎ   CO

Meridian
           T 8 n          a m T 8 n25     25   a n jj
h . m . s.
           O O o  O   t    o o        o  o r o o O    O


0 0 0 0 922 26 35 12 3 0 923 27              9 13 3
0 3 40 110 23 27 16 13 4 110 24 27 49 14 4
0 7 20 2 11 24 27 56 14 4 2 11 24 28 29 14 4
0 11 1 3 12 25 28 36 15 5 312 25 29          8 15 5
0 14 41 4 1325 29 16 15 6 4 13 26 29 48 16 6
0 18 21 5 14 26 29 56 16 7 515 27 0a27 17 7
0 22 2 615 27 oa36 17 8 6 1628 1             7 18 8
0 25 42 7 17 28 1 16 18 9 7 17 29 1 46 18 9
0 29 23 8 18 29 1 55 18 9 8 18 30 2 26 19 9
0 33 4 9 19 25 2 35 19 10 9 19 5 5 3 5 19 10
0 36 45 1020 1 3 15 20 11 1020 1 3 44 20 11
0 40 27 11 21 1 3 54 20 12 1121 2 4 23 21 12
0 44 8 12 22 2 4 34 21 13 12 22 3 5 3 22 13
0 47 50 1323 3 5 13 22 14 1323 4 5 42 22 14
0 51 32 1424 4 5 53 23 14 14 24 5 6 21 23 14
0 55 14 1525 5 6 32 23 15 1525 5 7 0 24 15
0 58 57 16 26 6 7 12 24 16 16 26 6 7 39 24 16
1 2 40 17 27 6 7 51 25 17 17 27 7 8 18 25 17
1 6 24 18 28 7 8 31 26 18 18 28 8 8 57 26 18
1 10 7 1929 8 9 10 26 19 1929 9 9 37 27 19
1 13 51 20 n 9 9 50 27 19 20 n 9 10 16 27 19
1 17 36 21 i 10 10 29 28 20 21 i 10 10 55 28 20
1 21 21 22 2 10 11      9 28 21 22 2 11 11 34 29 21
1 25 6 23 3 11 11 49 29 22 23 312 12 13 30 22
1 28 52 24 4 12 12 28 rtp 23 24 413 12 53 m 23
1 32 38 25 5 13 13 8 i 24 25 513 13 32 l 24
1 36 25 26 6 14 13 48 i 25 26 6,14 14 12 2 25
1 40 13 27 7 14 14 28 225 27 7 15 14 51 3 25
1 44 1 28 8 15 15 8 326 28 816 15 31 3 26
1 47 49 29 9 16 15 48 427 29 9,17 16 10 4 27
1 51 38 30 10 17 16S128 423 30 10 17 16a50 5 28
                            A P P E N D IX .                                445



                    TABLES OP HOUSES.


     2              LONDON.                     NORTHAMPTON.
              Lat. 51° 30' 49" North.          Lat. 52° 1 1 ' 0" North.
 R. A.
                                    rG A rG
                  Ascendant. r0G ■a
   of    £ rg r g
                                             Ascendant.    ?
  the         T—!            (M  CO    rH r—
                                           i            CM CO
Meridian
         8 n 25       SI         ne 8 n 2 b      SI        n

H.   M. S .   Û o o     o    r     o    o      O o   o    o   r   O o
1 51 38 0 1017         16   28      4 28     0 1 0 17 16 50 5 28
1 55 27 1 1118         17         8 5 29     1 1 1 18 17 30 5 29
1 59 18 2 1219         17      48 6    -A -  2 1 2 19 18 1 0 6       -A -


2 3 8 3 1319           18      28 7 1        3 13 2 0 18 50 7 1
2 7 0 4 14 20          19         9 8 2 4 14 2 1 19 30 8 s
2 10 52 6 15 21        19      49 9 2 5 15 2 1 2 0 1 0         8 2
2 14 44 6 16 2 2       2 0 30 9 3 6 16 2 2 2 0 50 9 3
2 18 37 7 16 2 2       2 1 1 1 1 0 4 7 17 23 2 1 31 10 4
2 22 31 8 17 23        2 1 51 1 1 5 8 18 24 2 2 1 1 1 1 5
2 26 26 9;i8 24        2 2 32 1 1 6 9 19 25 2 2 52 1 2 6
2 30 2 1 1019 25       23 13 1 2 7 10 20 26 23 32 1 2 7
2 34 17 1 1 ,2 0 25    23 55 13 8 1 1 2 1 27 24 13 13 8
2 38 14 1 2 2 1 26     24 36 14 9 1 2 2 2 27 24 54 11 9
2 42 11 13 22 27       25 17 15 10 1323 28 25 35 15 10
2 46 9 14,23 28        25 59 15 1 1 14 23 29 26 16 15 1 1
2 50 9 1524 29         26 41 16 1 1 15 24 30 26 58 16 1 1
2 54 7 16 25 29        27 2 2 17 1 2 10!25 SI 27 39 17 1 2
2 58 8 17 26 SI        28         4 18 13 17 26 1 28 2 1 18 13
3 2 8 1827 1           28 46 18 14 18 27 2 29              2 19 14
3 6 10 19:28 2         29 28 19 15 19 28 2 29 44 19 15
3 10 12 20,29 3          O n j j l l 20 16 2 0 29 3    0nÄ26 20 16
3 14 16 2 1 2 5 3        0 53 2 1 17 2 1 25 4 1            8 2 1 17
3 18 19 2 2 1 4          1 36 2 2 18 2 2 1 5 1 50 2 2 18
3 22 24 23 1 5           2 19 2 2 19 23 2 6 2 33 23 19
3 26 29 24 2 6           3        1 23 20 24 3 6 3 15 23 20
3 30 35 25 3 7           3 44 24 2 1 25 4 7 3 58 24 2 1
3 34 42 26 4 7           4 28 25 2 2 26 5 8 4 41 25 2 2
3 38 49 27 5 8           5 1 1 26 23 27 6 9 5 24 26 2 2
3 42 57 28 6 9           5 54 27 23 28 7 1 0           6 7 27 23
3 47 6 29 7 10           6 38 27 24 ¡29 740 6 50 27 24
3 51 16 30 8 1 1        7irg22 28 25 I30 811             7ne33 28 25
446                        THE   T E X T -B O O K   OF    ASTROLOGY,




                            TABLES OF HOUSES.



          3                 LONDON.                          NORTHAMPTON.
                   Lat. 51° 30' 49" North.                  Lat. 52° 11' 0" North.
       E. A.
                                                           £
         of      rg
                  H OQ Ascendant. S T'                     O
                                                               rg 1-g
                                                                   £        Ascendant.
               ©       p
        the         r—1             TO                     r—t     rH                          TO

      Meridian
               n 95 a      m      m -H -                   n ®j a              n.        îi£
                                                                    1

                   o   0    o      o      /         o o     o   o       o     O     f    O     o
      H . M . S.

       3 51 16 0 8 l i   7 22 28 25 0 811 7 33 28 25
       3 55 26 1 9 12 8     5 29 26 1 912 8 17 29 26
       3 59 37 240 12 8 49 -H - 27 2 1013 9       0    27
       4 3 48 3 11 13 9 33 1 28 3 1114 9 44 1 28
       4 8 1 4 12 14 10 18 2 29 4 12 15 10 28 2 29
       4 12 13 5 13 15 11   2 2 )T| 5 13 15 11 12 2 ni
       4 16 27 6 14 16 11 46 3 l      6 14 16 11 56 3 1
       4 20 41 7 15 17 12 31 4 2 7 15 17 12 40 4 2
       4 24 55 8 15 17 13 16 5 3 816 18 13 24 5 3
       4 29 11 9 16 18 14   0 6 4 917 19 14       9 6 4
       4 33 26 10 17 19 14 45 7 5 1017 19 14 53 7 5
       4 37 22 11 18 20 15 30 8 6 1118 20 15 38 7 6
       4 41 59 12 19 21 16 16 8 7 12 19 21 16 23 9 7
       4 46 17 13 20 21 17  1 9 8 13 20 22 17     7 9 8
       4 50 34 14 21 22 17 46 10 9 14 21 23 17 52 10 8
       4 54 52 15 22 23 18 32 11 10 15 22 24 18 37 11 9
       4 59 11 16 23 24 19 17 12 10 16 23 24 19 23 12 10
       5 3 30 17 24 25 20   3 13 11 17 24 25 20    8 13 11
       5 7 49 18 25 26 20 48 14 12 18 25 26 20 53 13 12
       5 12 9 19 26 27 21 34 14 13 19 26 27 21 38 14 13
       5 16 29 20 27 28 22 20 15 14 20 27 28 22 24 15 14
       5 20 49 21 28 28 23   6 16 15 21 28 29 23   9 16 15
       5 25 10 22 29 29 23 52 17 16 22 29 (IR 23 55 17 16
       5 29 30 23 a n 24 37 18 17 23 a 1 24 40 18 17
        5 33 51 24 1 l 25 23 19 18 24 1 1 25 26 19 18
        5 38 13 25 1 2 26 10 20 19 25 2 2 26 11 19 19
        5 42 34 26 2 3 26 56 20 20 26 3 3 26 57 20 20
        5 46 55 27 3 4 27 42 21 21 27 4 4 27 43 21 21
        5 51 17 28 4 4 28 28 22 22 28 5 5 28 29 22 22
        5 55 38 29 5 5 29 14 28 23 29 5 6 29 14 23 23
        6 0 0 30 6 6 30he 0 24 24 30 6 6 30njj 0 21 24
                               1
                           A P P E N D IX .                                                          447



                   TABLES OF HOUSES.


     4              LONDON.                     NORTHAMPTON.
              Lat. 51° 30'49" North.           Lat. 52° 1 1 '0 " North.
 R. A.
                                              10th |          12th |
   of                             rp                                   Ascendant. T3 ?
  the
            i(
            —
         2 r—  cq Ascendant. a CO                      llth
             1                                                                           ä cc
Meridian
         92 a hr             -A - 111
                      -A -
                                              95 a            UR             -A -        -A -   ni
          o o o
 H . M . S.
                     o /          o o   o o O                            o          /     o     o
  6 0 0 0 6 6 0         0        24 24 0 6 6                             0           0   24 24
  6 4 22 1 7 7 0 46              25 25 1 7 7                             0          46   25 25
  6 8 43 2 8 8 1 82              26 26 2 8 8                             1          31   25 26
  6 13 5 3 9 9 2 18              27 27 3 9 9                             2          17   26 27
  6 17 26 4 10 10 3      4       27 28 4 10 10                           3           3   27 28
  6 21 47 5 11 10 3 50           28 29 5 11 11                           3          49   28 28
  6 26 9 6 12 11 4 37            29 29 6 12 11                           4          34   29 29
  6 30 30 7 13 12 5 23           ill t   7 13 12                         5          20   ni t
  6 34 50 8 14 13 6      8         1 1 8 14 13                           6           5    1 1
  6 39 11 9 15 14 6 54             2 2 9 15 14                           6          51    2 2
  6 43 31 10 16 15 7 40            2 3 10 16 15                          7          36    2 3
  6 47 51 11 17 16 8 26            3 4 11 17 16                          8          22    3 4
  6 52 11 12 18 16 9 12            4 5 12 18 17                          9           7    4 5
  6 56 30 13 19 17 9 57            5 6 13 19 17                          9          52    5 6
  7 0 49 14 20 18 10 43            6 7 14 20 18                         10          17    6 7
  7 5 8 15 21 19 11 28             7 8 15 21 19                         11          23    6 8
  7 9 26 16 21 20 12 14            8 9 16 22 20                         12           8    7 9
  7 13 43 17 22 21 12 59           8 10 17 23 21                        12          53    8 10
  7 18 1 18 23 22 13 44            9 11 18 23 22                        13          27    9 11
  7 22 18 19 24 22 14 30         10 12 19 24 23                         14          22   10 12
  7 26 34 20 25 23 15 15         11 13 20 25 23                         15           7   11 13
  7 30 49 21 26 24 16    0       12 14 21 26 24                         15          51   11 13
  7 35 5 22 27 25 16 44          13 15 22 27 25                         16          36   12 14
  7 39 19 23 28 26 17 29         13 15 23 28 26                         17          20   13 15
  7 43 33 24 29 27 18 14         14 16 24 29 27                         18           4   14 16
  7 47 47 25 njj 28 18 58        15 17 25 n .e 28                       18          48   15 17
  7 51 59 26 1 28 19 42          16 18 26 1 28                          19          32   16 18
  7 56 12 27 2 29 20 27          17 19 27l 2 29                         20          16   16 19
■ 8 0 23 28 3 - A - 21 11        18 20 28 3 - A -                       21           0   17 20
  8 4 34 29 4 1 21 55            18 21 29 4 1                           21          43   18 21
  8 8 44 30 5 2 2 2 - 3 8        19 22 30 5 2                           22          27   19 22
448                        THE     T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTROLOGY.




                             TABLES OF HOUSES.


         5               LONDON.                           NORTHAMPTON.
                   Lat. 51° 30' 49"North.                 Lat. 52° 11'0" North.
   R. A.
                          A Xcq Ascendant.                | 10 th                   <S-0
                   10th
     of                                                              Ascendant.
                           1 i—1
                          i—                      G
                                                  C
                                                  M CO    |l l t h                G
                                                                                  C
                                                                                  MC  O
                                                                                      h
    the                                                   | 12th
  Meridian.
                   SI m- A -           —          ill 1 SI UK- A -      -A -
                                                                                  ill t
             Ûo o O
      H. M . S .          / O Q O Q o           o  r  O o
    8 8 44 0 5 2 22 38 19 22 0 5 2 22 27 19 22
    8 12 54 1 6 3 23 22 20 23 1 6 3 23 10 20 23
    8 17 3 2 7 3 24        6 21 24 2 7 3 23 53 20 24
    8 21 11 3 8 4 24 49 22 25 3 8 4 24 36 21 25
  : 8 25 19 4 8 5 25 32 23 26 4 9 5 25 19 22 26
    8 29 25 5 9 6 26 16 23 27 5 9 6 26             2 23 27
    8 33 31 6 10 7 26 59 24 28 6 10 7 20 45 24 27
    8 37 36 7 11 8 ■27 41 25 29 7 11 7 27 27 25 28
    8 41 41 8 12 8 28 24 26 29 8 12 8 28 10 25 29
    8 45 44 9 13 9 29      7 27 vy 9 13 9 28 52 26
    8 49 48 10 14 10 29 49 27 l 10 14 0 29 34 27 1
  1 8 53 50 11 15 11 011132 28 2 11 15 11 011X16 28 2
  I 8 57 52 12 16 12 1 14 29 3 12 16 11 0 58 28 3
    9 1 52 13 17 12 1 56 t 4 13 17 12 1 39 29 4
  ! 9 5 53 14 18 13 2 38 1 5 14 18 13 2 21 t 5
  ! 9 9 51 15 19 14 3 19 2 6 15 19 14 3            2 1 6
    9 13 51 16 19 15 4     1 2 7 16 19 15 3 44 1 6
    9 17 49 17 20 16 4 43 3 8 17 20 15 4 25 2 7
  , 9 21 46 18 21 16 5 24 4 9 18 21 16 5           6 3 9
    9 25 43 19 22 17 6     5 5 10 19 22 17 5 47 4 10
    9 29 39 20 23 18 6 47 5 11 2023 18 6 28 5 11
    9 33 34 21 24 19 7 28 6 12 2124 19 7           8 6 11
    9 37 29 22 25 19 8     9 7 13 22 25 19 7 49 6 12
    9 41 23 23 26 20 8 49 8 14 23 26 20 8 29 7 13
    9 45 16 24 27 21 9 30 9 1-1 21 27 21 9 10 8 14
    9 49 8 25 28 22 10 11 9 15 25 28 22 9 50 9 15
    9 58 0 26 28 23 10 51 10 16 26 28 22 10 80 9 16
    9 56 52 27 29 23 11 32 11 17 27 29 29 11 10 10 17
   10 0 42 28 - A - 24 12 12 12 18 28 - A - 24 11 50 10 18
   10 4 S3 29 1 25 12 52 12 19 29 1 24 12 30 11 19
   10 8 22 30 2 26 1311X32 13 20 30 2 25 13 10 1 2 20
                                              APPENDIX.                                                    449



                      TABLES OP HOUSES.


   6                  LONDON.                                     NORTHAMPTON.
            Lat. 51° 30' 49" North.                              Lat. 52 °1 1 0" North.
 R. A.
   of    rg
                       1 2 th
                                                  T3   >■0              tS                       T3
         o      i—1             A scen d a n t.              O          04 A s c e n d a n t .         H
  the           rH                                     CO    rH    rH   rH                       s    CO

Meridian              -A-                                         -A- -r\_
                                       I ll       t    vy    w                       111         t    vy

            o   O     o            O              o    o     O     o    O        o               o    o
H. M. S .                                     t                                            t


10 8 22 0 2 26 13 32                              13 20       0 2 25 13 10                       12 20
10 12 11 1 3 26 14 12                             14 21       1 3 26 13 40                       13 21
10 15 59 2 4 27 14 52                             15 22       2 4 27 14 29                       14 22
10 19 47 3 5 28 15 32                             16 23       3 5 28 15    9                     14 23
10 28 85 4 5 29 16 12                             16 24       4 5 28 15 48                       15 24
10 27 22 5 6 29 16 52                             17 25       5 6 29 16 28                       16 25
10 31 8 6 7 n i 17 32                             18 26       6 7 TTJ 17   7                     17 26
10 34 54 7 8 1 18 12                              19 27       7 8 1 17 47                        18 27
13 38 39 8 9 2 18 51                              20 28       8 9 1 18 26                        19 28
10 42 24 9 10 2 19 31                             20 29       9 10 2 19    5                     20 29
10 46 9 10 11 3 20 10                             21 z z     10 11 3 19 44                       21 Z Z
10 49 53 11 11 4 20 50                            22 i       11 11 4 20 23                       21 1
10 53 36 12 12 4 21 29                            23 2       12 12 4 21    3                     22 2
10 57 20 13 13 5 22   9                           24 3       13 13 5 21 42                       23 3
11 1 3 14 14 6 22 49                              24 4       14 14 6 22 21                       24 4
11 4 46 15 15 7 23 28                             25 5       15 15 6 23    0                     25 5
11 8 28 16 16 7 24    7                           26 6       16 16 7 23 39                       26 6
11 12 10 17 16 8 24 47                            27 7       17 17 8 24 18                       27 7
11 15 52 18 17 9 25 26                            28 8       18 18 9 24 57                       28 8
11 19 S3 19 18 10 26  6                           29 9       19 18 9 25 37                       28 9
11 23 15 20 19 10 26 45                           30 10      20 19 10 26 16                      29 10
11 26 56 21 20 11 27 25                           vy 11      21 20 10 26 55                      30 11
11 30 37 22 21 12 28  5                            l 12      22 21 11 27 34                      y? 12
11 34 18 23 21 13 28 44                            2 13      23 21 12 28 14                       l 13
11 37 58 24 22 13 29 24                            3 15      24 22 18 28 53                       2 11
11 41 39 25 23 14 O f 4                            4 16      25 23 14 29 33                       3 15
11 45 19 26 24 15 0 44                             5 17      26 24 14 O f 12                      4 17
11 48 59 27 25 15 1 24                             5 18      27 25 15 0 52                        5 18
11 52 40 28 26 16 2   4                            6 19      28 26 16 1 31                        6 19
11 56 0 29 26 17 2 44                              7 20      29 •26 16 2 11                       6 20
12 0 0 30 27 17 3 i 25                             8 21      30 27 17 2 | 51                      7 21




                                                                                                       2a
450                      THE           T E X T -B O O K     OF   ASTROLOGY.




                               TABLES OP HOUSES.


           7                    LONDON.                               NORTHAM PTON.
                    Lat. 5 1 ° 30' 49" N orth                       Lat. 2 2 ° 11' 0" North.
       ß . A.                                                                                          1
               rG
                += -G1                                              £ ,G
                              | 12th
          of
                                                                             12th
               •                       Ascendant. C ■y
               O r—                                                 O r^            Ascendant. G

                                                                                                       i| 1 3 r d
         the                                      CM cc             rH I—
                                                                        1                      CM
      Meridian
                       -A -
                              11              t           >y -OS'     -A -
                                                                             11           t       vy

       H . M . s.
                    o o       O           o       1       o Û       o o      o        O       \   o     0
      12 0 0 0 27 17                     3 25           8 21         0 27 17         2 51           7 21
      12 3 40 1 23 18                    4    5         9 22         1 28 18         3 31           8 22
      12 7 20 2 29 19                    4 46         10 23          2 29 19         4 11           9 23
      12 11 1 3 11 20                    5 26         11 24          3 T1 19         4 52         10 24
      12 14 41 4 1 20                    6    7       12 26          4 1 20          5 32         11 25
      12 18 21 5 1 21                    6 48         13 27          5 1 21          6 13         12 27
      12 22 2 6 2 22                     7 29         14 28          6 2 21          6 54         13 28
      12 25 42 7 3 23                    8 11         15 29          7 3 22          7 35         14 29
      12 29 23 8 4 23                    8 52         16 X           8 4 23          8 16         15 X
      12 33 4 9 5 24                     9 34         17 1           9 5 24          8 57         16 1
      12 36 45 10 5 25                  10 16         18 2          10 5 24          9 39         17 2
      12 40 27 LI 6 25                  10 58         19 4          11 6 25         10 20         18 4
      12 44 8 12 7 26                   1L 41         20 5          12 7 26         11    2       19 5
      12 47 50 13 8 27                  12 24         21 6          18 8 26         11 45         20 6
      12 51 32 14 9 28                  13    7       22 7          14 9 27         12 27         21 7
      12 55 14 15 10 28                 13 50         23 8          15 10 28        13 10         22 8
      12 58 57 16 10 29                 14 33         24 10         16 10 29        13 53         23 10
      13 2 40 17 11 t                   15 17         25,11         17 11 29        14 37         24 11
      13 6 24 18 12 1                   16    1       2612          18 12 i         15 20         25 12
      13 10 7 19 13 1                   16 46         2713          19 13 1         16    4       26 13
      13 13 51 20 14 2                  17 31         2815          20 14 2         16 49         27 14
      13 17 36 21 15 3                  18 16         29 16         21 14 2         17 34         28 16
      13 21 21 22 15 4                  19    2       Z Z 17        22 15 3         18 19         29 17
      13 25 6 23 16 4                   19 48           1 18        23 16 4         19    4       Z Z 18

      13 28 52 24 17 5                  20 34           2 20        24 17 5         19 51           2 19
      13 85 38 25 18 6                  21 21           4 21        25 18 5         20 37           3 21
      13 36 25 26 19 7                  22    9         5 22        26 19 6         21 24           4 22
      13 40 13 27 19 7                  22 57           6 23        27 19 7         22 11           5 23
      13 44 1 28 20 8                   23 45           7 25        28 20 8         22 59           6 25
      13 47 49 29 21 9                  24 34           8 26        29 21 8         23 48           8 26
      13 51 38 30 22 10                 25 f 24       10 27         30 22 9         24 i 37         9 27
                                    A P P E N D IX .                          451


                          TABLES OF HOUSES.



   8               LONDON.              NORTHAMPTON.
             Lat. 51u 3 0 ' 49" North. Lat. 52° 1 1 ' 0" North.
 R. A.       —___________________ __________________ .------
             10th
   of               rS A               T3 V
                          <n Ascendant <£
                                        M              O 1   Ascendant fl "V
                                                                          CO
  the               1—1                         CO     rH              O

Meridian
             nx 111 t           t         -00? X 111 111 t      t     ¿S' X

H, M.   S.
          O o o     o  1  o o o O o      o /    O o
18 51 38 0 2210 25 24 10 27 0 22 9 24 37 9 27
13 55 27 1 2311 26 14 l i 28 1 23 10 25 26 10 28
13 59 18 2 2411 27     5 12 r   2 24 11 26 16 12 T
14 3 8 3 24 12 27 56 14 1 3 24 12 27         7 13 1
14 7 0 4 25 13 28 48 15 2 4 25 12 27 59 14 2
14 10 52 5 26 14 29 41 16 4 5 26 13 28 51 16 4
14 14 44 6 27 15 0>y34 18 5 6 27 14 29 44 17 5
14 18 37 7 28 15 1 28 19 6 7 28 15 0>?37 18 6
14 22 31 8 29 16 2 23 20 8 8 29 16 1 32 20 8
14 26 26 9 30 17 3 19 22 9 9 29 16 2 27 21 9
14 30 21 10 ? 18 4 16 23 10 10 t 17 3 23 23 10
14 34 17 11 1 19 5 13 25 12 11 1 18 4 20 24 12
14 38 14 12 2 20 6 12 26 13 12 2 19 0 18 26 13
14 42 11 13 3 20 7 11 28 14 13 3 20 6 17 27 14
14 46 9 14 4 21 8 12 29 15 14 4 21 7 17 29 16
14 50 9 15 5 22 9 13 X 17 15 5 21 8 18 X 17
14 54 7 16 6 23 10 16 3 18 16 5 22 9 20 2 18
14 58 8 17 6 24 11 20 4 19 17 6 23 10 23 3 19
15 2 8 18 7 25 12 25 6 21 18 7 24 11 27 5 21
15 6 10 19 8 26 13 31 8 22 19 8 25 12 33 7 22
15 10 12 20 9 27 14 39 9 23 20 9 26 13 40 9 23
15 14 16 21 10 27 15 48 11 25 21 10 27 14 49 10 25
15 18 19 22 11 28 16 58 13 26 22 11 28 15 59 12 26
15 22 24 23 12 29 18 10 14 27 23 12 29 17 10 14 27
15 26 29 24 13 v y 19 24 16 29 24 13 29 18 23 15 29
15 30 35 25 14 1 20 39 17 8 25 13 v y 19 38 17 8
15 34 32 26 14 2 21 56 19 1 26 14 l 20 55 19 1
15 38 49 27 15 3 23 15 21 2 27 15 2 22 13 21 3
15 42 57 28 16 4 24 36 22 4 28 16 3 23 38 23 4
15 47 6 29 17 5 25 58 24 5 29 17 4 24 56 24 5
15 51 16 30 18 6 27Vÿ>23 26 6 30 18 5 26>y20 26 6
452                  THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.




                         TABLES OF HOUSES.



          9          LONDON.                          NORTHAMPTON.
               Lat. 51° 30‘ 49" North.               Lat. 52° 1 1 '0 " North.
       E.A.


                                                              3 1 12th j
         of    rg    A                               A
                                                     +=» rg
                  llth                                                     Ascends nt. fl V

                                        1 cc I 3rd
               o        Ascendant. Ö                 O
        the    i-H                 CO                r—1 rH                           CO CO
      Meridian
                 t Î vy     vy      X                t t                      vy      X 8

       H. M. S. o o o O     ■ O o o O O o        - Q O
      15 51 16 0 18 6 27 23 26 6 0 18 5 26 20 26 6
      15 55 26 1 19 7 28 50 28 8 1 19 6 27 47 28 8
      15 59 37 2 20 8 Oss 19 T 9 2 20 7 29 16 T 9
      16 3 48 3 21 9 1 50 1 10 3 21 8 0ss47 2 10
      16 8 1 4 22 10 3 24 3 11 4 22 9 2 21 4 11
      16 12 13 5 23 11 5    0 5 13 5 23 10 3 57 5 13
      16 16 27 6 24 12 6 38 7 14 6 24 11 5 36 7 14
      16 20 41 7 25 13 8 20 9 15 7 25 13 7 18 9 15
      16 24 55 8 26 14 10   4 11 16 8 26 14 9     2 11 16
      16 29 11 9 27 16 11 51 12 18 9 26 15 10 50 13 18
      16 33 26 10 28 17 13 41 14 19 10 27 16 12 40 15 19
      16 37 42 11 29 18 15 34 16 20 11 28 17 14 34 16 20
      16 41 59 12 Vy 19 17 29 18 21 12 29 18 16 31 18 21
      16 46 17 13 1 20 19 28 20 22 13 v y 19 18 31 20 23
      16 50 34 14 1 21 21 30 21 24 14 l 20 20 34 22 24
      16 54 52 15 2 22 23 35 23 25 15 2 22 22 41 24 25
      16 59 11 16 3 24 25 43 25 26 16 3 23 24 51 25 26
      17 3 30 17 4 25 27 54 27 27 17 4 24 27      5 27 27
      17 7 49 18 6 26 OK 8 28 28 18 5 25 29 21 29 28
      17 12 9 IS 7 27 2 25 8 n 19 6 27 1X41 8 n
      17 16 29 20 8 29 4 45 2 i 20 7 28 4         0 2 i
      17 20 49 21 9 -OC'O 7 8 3 2 21 8 29 6 30 4 2
      17 25 10 22 10 1 9 33 5 3 22 9 zz 8 59 6 3
      17 29 30 23 11 3 12   1 7 4 23 10 2 11 30 7 4
      17 33 51 24 12 4 14 31 8 5 24 12 3 14       4 9 5
      17 38 13 25 13 5 17   8 10 6 25 13 5 16 40 10 6
      17 42 34 26 14 7 19 36 11 7 26 14 6 19 18 12 8
      17 46 55 27 15 8 22 11 13 9 27 15 7 21 57 14 9
      17 51 17 28 16 10 24 47 14 10 28 16 9 24 37 15 10
      17 55 38 29 17 11 27 23 16 11 29 17 10 27 18 17 11
      18 0 0 30 18 13 30 X 0 17 12 30 18 12 30 X 0 18 12
                                   APPE N D IX.                                                 453


                      TABLES OF HOUSES.


   10               LONDON.            NORTHAMPTON.
              Lat. 51° 30' 49" North. Lat. 52° 11' 0" North.
  R.A.
   of                 rd
                            Ascendant. n3Ö rp          r3 A
                                                                       Ascendant.    2nd
              -+=     •+=
  the O
                                                        += ■+=>                            rd
                  rH Cd
              T—1 r—1 rH                Cd   CO   ©
                                                  rH
                                                       1—1 Cd
                                                       rH rH                               CO

Meridian.
              v y >y XX        T        8 n vyvy               X   X         T       8 n
 H.M .
          o o o
         S.
                   o  /          o                O                0     O       /


18 0 0 018 13 0 0 17 12 0 18 12 0 0 18 12
18 4 22 1 19 14 2 37 19 13      19 13 2 42 20 13   l

18 8 43 220 16 5 13 20 14 220 15 5 23 21 14
18 13 5 321 17 7 49 22 15 321 16 8 3 23 15
18 17 26 422 19 10 24 23 16 422 18 10 42 24 16
18 21 47 52320 12 57 25 17 523 20 13 20 25 17
18 26 9 625 22 15 29 26 18 625 21 15 56 27 18
18 30 30 7 2623 17 59 28 19 72623 18 30 28 19
18 34 50 8 27 25 20 27 29 20 827 24 21 1 n 21
18 39 11 92827 22 52 n 21 928 26 23 30        22                                      i

18 43 31 1029 28 25 15 i 22 102928 25 56 223
18 47 51 11 zz X 27 35 2 23 11        28 19 324        Z   Z
                                                               X

18 52 11 12 2 2 29 52 4 25 12 2 1 0 8 39 525
18 56 30 13 3 3 28 6 5 26 13 8 3 2 55 626
19 0 49 14 4 5 4 17 627 14 4 5            9 727                          0

19 5 8 15 5 7 6 25 828 15 5 6 7 19 828
19 9 26 16 6 9 8 30 929 16 6 8 9 26 10 29
19 13 43 17 8 10 10 32 10 23 17 710 11 29 11 SB
19 18 1 18 9 12 12 31 11 1 18 912 13 29 12 1
19 22 18 19 1014 14 26 12 2 19 1014 15 26 13 2
19 26 34 20 11 16 16 19 13 8 20 11 15 17 20 14 3
19 30 49 21 12 18 18 9 14 4 21 12 17 19 10 15 4
19 35 5 22 14 19 19 56 16 5 2214 19 20 58 16 4
19 39 19 23 15 21 21 40 17 5 2315 21 22 42 17 5
19 43 33 24 1623 23 21 18 6 24 16 23 24 24 19 6
19 47 47 25 17 25 25 0 19 7 25 17 25 26 3 20 7
19 51 59 26 1927 26 36 20 8 26 18 26 27 39 21 8
19 56 12 27 2028 28 10 21 9 2720 28 29 13 22 9
20 0 23 28 21 T 29 41 22 10 28 21 T On 44 23 10
20 4 34 2922 2 In 10 23 11 29 22 2 2 13 24 11
20 8 44 30 24 4 2 37 24 12 30 24 4 3 40 25 12
                1
454                 TH E   TE X T -B O O K   OF A STR O LO G Y.




                      TABLES OF HOUSES.



         11            LONDON.                        NORTHAMPTON.
                Lat. 51° 30' 49" North.             Lat. 52° 11' 0" North.
        R.A.
        of     A A A                     A A A                  A
               © rH co  Ascendant.            i—1 CO Ascendant. Ö V
        the    rH    rH            CO CO oi—i rH rH             CO CO
      Meridian
                  cz T      n      n 2B zz zz T          n      n SB

       H. M. s.
                0 O 0    0 !    O 0 O 0 0     o r    Q o
      20 8 44 0 24 4 2 37 24 12 0 24 4 3 40 25 12
      20 12 54 1 25 6 4      2 25 13 1 25 6 5    4 26 13
      20 17 3 2 26 7 5 25 26 14 2 26 7 6 27 27 14
      20 21 11 3 28 9 6 45 27 15 3 27 9 7 47 28 15
      20 25 18 4 29 11 8     4 28 16  4 29 11 9   6 29 16
      20 29 25 5 X 13 9 21 29 16 5 X 13 10 22 SB 17
      20 33 31 6 1 14 10 36 ss 17 6 1 15 11 37 1 17
      20 37 36 7 3 16 11 50 1 18 7 8 16 12 50 1 18
      20 41 41 8 4 18 13     2 2 19 8 4 18 14     1 2 19
      20 45 44 9 5 19 14 12 3 20 9 5 20 15 11 3 20
      20 49 48 10 7 21 15 21 8 21 10 7 21 16 20 4 21
      20 53 50 11 8 23 16 29 4 22 11 8 23 17 27 5 22
      20 57 52 12 9 24 17 35 5 23 12 9 25 18 33 6 23
      21 1 52 13 11 26 18 40 6 24 13 11 26 19 37 7 24
      21 5 53 14 12 28 19 44 7 24 14 12 28 20 40 8 25
      21 9 51 15 13 29 20 47 8 25 15 13 8 21 42 9 25
      21 13 51 16 15 8 21 48 9 26 16 14 1 22 43 9 26
      21 17 49 ¡17 16 2 22 49 10 27 17 16 3 23 43 10 27
      21 21 46 18 17 4 23 48 10 28 18 17 4 24 42 11 28
      21 25 43 |19 18 5 24 47 H 29 19 18 6 25 40 12 29
      21 29 39 20 20 7 25 44 12 30 20 20 7 26 37 13 SI
      21 33 34 21 21 8 26 41 13 SI 21 21 9 27 33 14 1
      21 37 29 22 22 10 27 37 14 1 22 2210 28 28 14 1
      21 41 23 23 24 11 28 32 15 2 23 2412 29 23 15 2
       21 45 16 24 25 13 29 26 15 3 24 2518 0 sb16 16 3
       21 49 8 25 26 14 0ssl9 16 4 25 2614 1      9 17 4
       21 53 0 2G 28 15 1 12 17 5 26 2816 2        1 18 5
       21 56 52 27 29 1G 2    4 18 6 27 29,17 2 53 18 6
       22 0 42 26 V 16 2 55 19 6 28 T 18 3 44 19 6
       22 4 33 2£ 2 19 3 46 19 7 29 2,2C 4 34 20 7
       22 8 22 3C 3 2C 4 æ 36 20 8 . 30 3i21 5 SB23 2! 8
                                  A P P E N D IX .                                           455



                    TABLES OF HOUSES.



   12          LONDON.                                NORTHAMPTON.
         Lat. 51° 30' 49" North.                     Lat. 52° 11' 0" North.
 R. A.
   of    ,£                                H3 ■g     -g   £   r-Q
                                                                    A s c e n d a n t . -ö TS
                    <N A s c e n d a n t .
  the         r-i   r—1                    <M CO          r~4 tH                        C9 CO
Meridian
         X    Y     3        25          25   a           Y   8            25       55   a
           O o O   O /    o o  = O O                                   o        /    o   c
 H . M. S.
22 8 22 0 3 20 4 36 20 8 0 3 21                                       5 23 21 8
22 12 11 1 4 21 5 26 •21 9 1 4 22                                     6 12 22 9
22 15 59 2 5 23 6 15 22 10 2 6 24                                     7    1 22 10
22 19 47 3 7 24 7      3 23 11 3 7 25                                 7 48 23 11
22 23 35 4 8 25 7 51 23 11 4 8 26                                     8 36 24 11
22 27 22 5 9 26 8 39 24 12 5 9 2 7                                    9 23 25 12
22 31 8 6 10 28 9 26 25 13 6 11 28                                   10 10 25 13
22 34 54 7 12 29 10 12 |26 14 7 12 29                                10 56 26 14
22 38 39 8 13 n 10 58 26 15 8 13 n                                   11 41 27 15
22 42 24 9 14 i 11 44 27 16 9 14 2                                   12 26 28 16
22 46 29 10 15 2 12 29 28 16 10 16 3                                 13 11 28 16
22 49 53 11 1 7 3 13 14 29 17 11 17 4                                13 56 29 17
22 53 36 12 18 4 13 59 29 18 12 18 5                                 14 40 a 18
22 57 20 13 19 5 14 43 a 19 13 19 6                                  15 23 1 19
23 1 3 14 20 6 15 27 i 20 14 20 7                                    16    7 1 20
23 4 46 15 22 7 16 10 2 20 15 22 8                                   16 50 2 20
23 8 28 16 23 8 16 53 2 21 16 23 9                                   17 33 3 21
23 12 10 17 24 9 17 36 3 22 17 24 10                                 18 15 4 22
23 15 52 18 25 10 18 19 4 23 18 25 11                                18 58 4 23
23 19 33 19 26 11 19   2 5 24 19 26 12                               19 40 5 24
23 23 15 20 28 12 19 44 5 25 20 28 13                                20 21 6 24
23 26 56 21 29 13 20 26 6 25 21 29 14                                21    3 7 25
23 30 37 22 8 14 21    8 7 26 22 S 15                                21 44 7 26
23 34 18 28 1 15 21 49 7 27 23 1 16                                  22 25 8 27
23 37 58 24 2 16 22 31 8 28 24 2 17                                  23    6 9 28
23 41 39 25 8ll7 23 12 9 29 25 3 18                                  23 47 9 29
23 45 19 26 4118 23 53 9 29 26 5 19                                  24 28 10 29
23 48 59 27 6119 24 34 10 W 27 6 20                                  25    8 11 m
23 52 40 .28 7120 25 14 11 1 28 7 21                                 25 49 11 1
23 56 20 29 821 25 55 12 2 29 8 22                                   26 29 12 2
24 0 0 30 9 22 26 25 35 12 3 30 9 23                                 27 25 9 13 3
456                           THE   T E X T -B O O K     OF     ASTROLOGY.




              TABLE                 OF         RIGHT                ASCENSION.
      (N.B.   'For Libra add 180°: when the amount exceeds 360°
                           subtract that sum.)

       Aries, with North Latitude.— Libra with South Latitude.

              Ö           n           O             O           C           O           O           O
              0           i           2             3           4           5           6           7
      D. D.       M. D.       M. D.       M.   D.       M. D.       M. D.       M. D.       M. D.       M.
       0 0         0 359 37 359 13 358 49 358 25 358 i 357 37 357 13
       i 0        55 0 0 0 8 359 49 359 20 ¡58 58 358 32 358 8
       2 ]        50 1 27 1 3 0 39 0 15 359 51 359 27 359 3
       8 2        45 2 22 1 58 1 34 1 10 0 46 0 22 359 58
       4 3        40 3 17 2 53 2 29 2 5 1 41 1 17 0 53
       5 4        35 4 12 3 48 3 24 3 0 2 36 2 12 1 48
       6 5        30 5 7 4 43 4 19 3 55 3 31 3 7 2 43
       7 6        26 6 2 5 38 5 14 4 50 4 26 4 2 3 38
       8 7        21 6 57 6 33 6 9 5 45 5 21 4 57 4 32
       9 8        16 7 52 7 28 7 4 6 40 6 16 5 52 5 28
      10 9        11 8 47 8 23 8 59 7 35 7 11 6 47 6 23
      11 10        7 9 42 9 18 8 55 8 31 8 7 7 43 7 19
      12 11        2 10 38 10 14 9 51 9 27 9 3 8 39 8 15
      13 11       57 11 33 11 9 10 46 10 22 9 58 9 34 9 10
      14 12       53 12 29 12 5 11 42 11 18 10 54 10 30 10 6
      15 13       49 13 25 13 1 12 38 12 14 11 50 11 26 11 2
      16 14       44 14 20 13 57 13 34 13 10 11 46 12 22 11 58
      17 15       40 15 16 14 53 14 30 14 6 13 42 13 18 12 54
      18 16       36 16 12 15 49 15 26 15 2 14 39 14 15 13 51
      19 17       32 17 8 16 45 16 22 15 58 15 35 15 11 14 47
      20 18       28 18 4 17 41 17 18 16 54 16 31 16 7 15 44
      21 19       24 19 0 18 37 18 14 17 51 17 28 17 4 16 41
      22 20       20 19 56 19 33 19 11 18 48 18 25 18 1 17 38
      28 21       16 20 53 20 30 20 8 19 45 19 22 18 58 18 35
      24 22       13 21 50 21 27 21 5 20 42 20 19 19 55 19 32
      25 23       10 22 47 22 24 22 2 21 39 21 16 20 52 20 29
      26 24        6 23 44 23 21 22 59 22 36 22 13 21 50 21 27
      27 25        3 24 41 24 19 23 57 23 34 23 11 22 48 22 25
      28 26        0 25 38 25 16 24 54 24 31 24 9 23 46 23 23
      29 26       57 26 35 26 13 25 51 25 29 25 7 24 44 24 21
      30 27       54 27 33 27 11 26 49 26 27 26 5 25 42 25 19


   B u l e .— Tofind the Right-Ascension of the Sun, or any point in the heavens,
or any planet without latitude, the longitude being given. 1° Seek in the
column marked 0° at the top the right-ascension corresponding to the even
degree of longitude, which transcribe and mark A. 2°. Observe the
increase of right-ascension caused by 1° of increase in longitude. Then
say :       “ As 60 minutes of increase, so are the minutes of difference in
right-ascension. 3°. Add this correction to A and the sum will be the right-
ascension.
                                           APPENDIX.                                                       457
                TABLE           OE       RIGHT                  ASCENSION.
                              (N.B.     For Scorpio add 180°.

                    Taurus with North Latitude.— Scorpio with
                               South Latitude.

                          o         O           O           O           O           O           o
                0         1         2           3           4           5           b            <
      D.   D.       M.   D. M. D.       M. D.       M. D.       M. D.       M. D.       M. D.        -M.
      0 27          54   27 33 27 i i 26 49 26 27 26 5 25 42                               25 19
      i 28          52   28 30 28 8 27 47 27 25 27 3 26 40                                 26 17
      2 29          49   29 27 29 6 28 45 28 23 28 1 27 38                                 27 16
      3 30          47   30 25 30 4 29 43 29 21 28 59 28 37                                28 15
      4 31          45   31 23 31 2 30 41 30 19 29 58 29 36                                29 14
      5 32          43   32 21 32 0 31 39 31 18 30 57 30 35                                30 13
      6 33          41   33 20 32 59 32 38 32 17 31 56 31 34                               31 12
      7 34          39   34 18 33 58 33 37 33 16 32 55 32 33                               32 12
      8 35          38   35 17 34 57 34 36 34 15 33 54 33 33                               88 12
      9 36          36   36 16 35 56 35 36 35 15 34 54 34 33                               34 12
     10 87          35   37 15 36 55 36 35 36 15 35 54 35 33                               35 12
     11 38          34   38 14 37 54 37 35 87 15 36 54 36 33                               36 13
     12 39          38   39 14 38 54 38 35 38 15 37 55 37 34                               37 14
     13 40          83   40 13 39 54 39 35 39 15 38 56 38 35                               38 15
     14 41          32   41 13 40 54 40 35 40 16 39 57 39 36                               39 10
     15 42          32   42 13 41 54 41 36 41 17 40 58 40 38                               40 18
     16 43          32   43 13 42 54 42 36 42 18 41 59 41 39                               41 19
     17 44          32   44 13 43 55 43 37 43 19 43 0 42 40                                42 21
     18 45          32   45 14 44 56 44 38 44 20 44 1 43 42                                43 23
     19 46          33   46 14 45 57 45 39 45 21 45 3 44 44                                44 25
     20 47          33   47 15 46 58 46 40 46 23 46 5 45 46                                45 28
     21 48          34   48 16 47 59 47 42 47 25 47 7 46 49                                46 31
     22 49          35   49 17 49 0 48 44 48 27 48 9 47 52                                 47 34
     23 50          36   50 18 50 2 49 46 49 29 49 12 48 55                                48 37
     24 51          37   51 20 51 4 50 48 50 32 50 15 49 58                                49 41
     25 52          39   52 22 52 6 51 51 51 85 51 18 51 2                                 50 45
     26, 53         40   53 24 53 9 52 54 52 38 52 22 52 6                                 51 49
     27 54          42   54 27 54 12 53 57 53 42 53 25 53 10                               52 54
     28; 55         44   55 29 55 15 55 0 54 45 54 30 54 14                                53 58
     29 56          46   56 32 56 18 56 3 55 49 55 34 55 18                                55 3
     30, 57         49   57 35 57 21 57 7 56 53 56 38 56 23                                56 8

  Hule.__To find the Right-Ascension of any celestial body whose longitude
and latitude are given. 1°. Look for the even degree of longitude and even
degree of latitude, at the head of the table, and in the angle of meeting will
be found the right,-ascension for those even degrees, which transcribe and
mark A. 2°. In the same column of latitude, seek the right-ascension of the
next degree of longitude and mark the increase. Then say “ As the minutes
of increase, so are the minutes of difference in the longitude given to
the first correction.”      3".   Observe the difference of right-ascension
caused by one degree of increase in the latitude     Then say ‘ 1 As 60' are to
the minutes of difference plus or minus,” so are the minutes of difference in
the latitude to the second correction, plus or minus. 4°. If the second
correction be plus, then the sum of the two corrections added to A will be
the right-ascension ; but if the second correction be minus then the differ­
ence of the two corrections applied to A, plus or minus, will give the right-
ascension required.
458                        THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.




           TABLE                     OF          RIGHT                     ASCENSION.
                          (N.B.              Foi- Sagittari/ add 180°.)

            Gemini with North Latitude. — Sagittarius with
                          South Latitude.
                  O             O            O      '     O            O            O            O            O
                  0             1            2      j     3            4            5            6            7
          D. D.       M .'D .       M . D.       M . D.       M . D.       M . D.       M. D .       M . D.       M.
           0 57 49 57 35 57 21 57 7 56 53 56 3856 23 56 8
           l 58 5T58 38 58 24 58 10:57 57 57 42 57 28 57 13
           2 59 54 59 41 59 27 59 1 4 5 9 1 58 47 58 33 58 19
           3 60 57,60 44 60 31 60 I860 5 59 52 59 38 59 25
           4 62 0 61 47 61 35 61 22 61 1 0 60 57 60 44 60 31
           5 63 3 62 51 62 39 62 2762 15 62 2 61 50 61 87
           6 64 7 63 55 63 43 63 32 63 20 63 8 62 56 62 4 4
           7 65 10 64 59 64 47 64 37 64 25 64 13 64 2'63 50
           8 66 14 66 3.65 52 65 42 65 30 65 19 65 8 64 56
           9 67 18 67 7,66 57 66 47 66 86,66 25 66 14,66 3
          10 68 22 68 1168 2 67 52 67 4267 31 67 2167 10
          11 69 26 69 16 69 7 68 57 68 48 68 38 68 28 68 18
          12 70 30 70 21 70 12 70 3 69 54 69 45 69 85 69 26
          13 71 34171 26 71 17 71 9 71 0,70 51 70 42 70 38
          14 72 3872 31 72 22 72 15 72 6|71 58 71 49 71 41
          15 73 43|73 36 73 28 73 21 73 13|73 5 72 57 72 49
          16 74 48 74 41 74 33,74 27;74 1974 12 74 4 73 57
          17 75 52 75 46 75 39 75 33 75 26 75 19 75 12 75 5
          18 76 57 76 51 76 45176 39 76 33 76 27 76 20 76 14
          19 7S 2 77 56 77 5177 45 77 40 77 34 77 28 77 22
          20 79 7 79 2 78 57 78 52,78 47 78 41 78 36 78 30
          21 80 12 80 8 80 3 79 59 79 54 79 49 79 44 79 39
          22 81 17 81 13 81 9 81 5 81 1 80 56 80 52 80 48
          23 82 23 82 18 82 15 82 11 82 8 82 4 82 0 81 57
          24 83 28 83 24 83 21 83 18 83 15 83 11 83 9 83 6
          25 84 33 84 30 84 27 84 25 84 22 84 20 84 17 84 15
          26 ¡85 38‘85 36 85 33 85 32 85 29 85 28 85 25 85 24
          27 86 44:86 42 86 40 86 39 86 37 86 36 86 34 86 33
          28 87 49187 48 87 46 87 46 87 44 87 44 87 42 87 42
          29 88 55188 54 88 58 88 53188 52 88 52 88 51 88 51
          30 90 0)90 c 90 C90 0j90 C 90 C 90 0 90 0


   R u l e . — Tofind the Eight-Ascension of the S u n , or any point in the heavens,
or any planet without latitude, the longitude being given. 1" Seek in the
column marked 0° at the top the right-ascension corresponding to the even
degree of longitude, which transcribe and mark A. 2°. Observe the
increase of right-ascension caused by 1° of increase in longitude. Then
say : “ As 60 minutes of increase, so are the minutes of difference in
right-ascension. 3°. Add this correction to A and the sum will be the right-
ascension.
                                  APPENDIX                               A5&

            T A B L E    OF      B IG H T       A SC E N SIO N .

                   (N .B .   F o r Capricorn add 18 0 °.)


             Cancer w ith North L a titu d e .—Capricorn w ith
                            South L a titu d e.
            O       O        O      C       o        O      O      O
            0       1        2      3       4        5      6      7
      D. D. M. D. M. D. M. D. M. D M. D. M. D. M. D. M.
      0 90 0 90 0 90 0 90 0 90 0 90 0 90 0 90 0
      l 91 5 91 6 91 7 91 7 91 7 91 8 91 9 91 9
      2 92 11 92 12 92 14 92 14 92 15 92 16 92 18 92 18
      3 93 16 93 18 93 20 93 21 93 23 93 24 93 26 93 27
      4 94 22 94 24 94 27 94 28 94 30 94 32 94 35 94 36
      5 95 27 94 30 95 33 95 35 95 88 95 40 95 43 95 45
      6 96 32 96 86 96 39 96 42 96 45 96 48 96 51 96 54
      7 97 37 97 42 97 45 97 49 97 52 97 56 98 0 98 3
      8 98 43 98 47 98 51 98 55 99 0 99 4 99 8 99 12
      9 99 48 99 52 99 57 100 i 100 7 100 11 100 16 100 21
     10 100 53 100 58 101 3 101 8 101 14 101 19 101 24 101 30
     11 101 58 102 4 102 9 102 15 102 21 102 26! 102 32 102 38
     12 103 8 103 9 103 15 103 21 103 27 103 33 103 40 103 46
     13 104 8 104 14 104 21 104 27 104 34 104 41 104 38 104 55
     14 105 12 105 19 105 27 105 33 105 41 105 48 105 56 106 3
     15 106 17 106 24 106 33 106 39 106 47 106 55 107 8 107 11
     16 107 21 107 29 107 38 107 45 107 53 108 2 108 h 108 19
     17 108 26 108 34 108 43 108 53 108 59 109 9 109 18 109 27
     18 109 80 109 39 109 48 109 57 110 5 110 15 110 25 110 34
     19 110 34 110 44 110 53 111 3 111 12 111 22 111 32 111 42
     20 111 38 111 49 111 58 112 8 112 18 112 29 112 35 112 50
     21 112 42 112 53 113 3 113 13 J13 24 113 35 113 46 118 56
     22 113 46 113 57 114 8 114 18 114 30 114 41 114 52 115 4
     23 114 50 115 i 115 13 115 23 115 35 115 47 115 58 116 10
     24 115 53 116 5 116 17 116 28 116 4, 116 52 117 4 117 17
     25 116 57 117 9 117 21 117 331117 46 117 58 118 10 118 23
     26 118 0 118 13 118 251118 38:118 51 119 3 119 16 119 29
     27 119 3 119 16 119 29 119 42 119 55 120 8 120 22 120 35
     28 120 6 120 19 120 83 120 46 120 59 121 18 121 27 121 41
     29 121 9 121 22 121 36 121 50 122 3 122 18 122 32 122 47
     30 122 11 122 25 122 39 122 531123 7 123 22 123 37 123 52

   Rule.— To find the Right-Ascension of any celestial hotly whose longitude
and latitude a re given. 1°. Look for the even degree of longitude and even
degree of latitude, at the head of the table and in the angle of meeting will
be found the right-ascension for those even degrees, which transcribe and
mark A. 2°. In the same column of latitude, seek the right-ascension of the
"next degree of longitude and mark the increase. Then say “ As the minutes
of increase, so are the minutes of difference in the longitude given to
the first correction.” 3°.        Observe the difference of right-ascension
caused by one degree of increase in the latitude. Then say " As 60' are to
the minutes of difference plus or minus ” so are the minutes of difference in
the latitude to the second correction, plus or minus. 4°.      If the second
correction be plus, then the sum of the two corrections added to A will be
the right-ascension ; but if the second correction be mimes then the differ­
ence of the two corrections applied to A, plus or minus, will give the right-
ascension required.
460                       THE       T E X T -B O O K OF ASTROLOGY.




                 TABLE          OF       RIGH T       ASCENSION.

                          (N .B .     F o r Aquarius add 1 80°.)


       Leo w ith North L a titu d e .—Aquarius w ith South L a titu d e.

             o        0              O       o       O       O       o    O
         :   0        1              2       3       4       5       6    7
       ]). I D* M   D. M.  D. M.  D. M. D. M. D. M.  D. M.  D. M.
        0 ¡122 l i 122 25 122 39 122 53123 7123 22123 37 123 52
        I 1123 14123 28 123 42 123 57424 11 124 26 124 42 124 57
        2 ¡124 16,124 31 124 45 125 0 125 15 125 30 125 46 126 2
        3 125 18125 33 124 48 126 3 126 18 126 34 126 50 127 6
        4 126 201126 36 126 51 127 6 127 221127 38 127 54 128 11
        5 127 21|127 38 127 54 128 9 128 25;12S 42 128 58 129 15
        6! 128 23128 40 128 56 129 12 129 28 129 45 130 2 130 19
        7 129 24129 42 129 58 130 14 130 31 130 48 131 5 131 23
        8:130 25130 43 131 0 131 16 131 33 131 51 132 8 132 26
        9 131 26131 44 132 1 132 18 132 35 132 53 133 11 133 29
      10 132 27132 45 133 2 133 20 133 371133 55 134 14 134 32
      11 133 27 133 46 134 3 134 21 134 39 134 57 135 16 135 35
      12 134 28 134 47 135 4 135 22 135 40 135 59 136 18136 37
      13 135 28 135 47 136 5 136 23 136 41 137 0 137 20 137 39
      14 136 28 136 47 137 6 137 24 137 42 138 1 138 21138 41
      15 L37 28 137 47 138 6 138 24 138 43 139 2 139 22139 42
      16 138 28 138 47 139 6 139 25139 44 140 3 140 24140 44
      17 139 27 139 47 140 6 140 25 140 45 141 4 141 25 141 45
      18 140 27 140 46 141 6 141 25 141 45 142 5 142 26 142 46
      19 141 26 141 46 142 6 142 25 142 45 143 6143 27 143 47
      20 142 25 142 45 143 5 143 25 143 45 144 6144 27 144 48
      21 143 24 143 44144 4144 24 144 45 145 6 145 27 145 48
      22 144 22 144 43145 3145 24 145 45 146 6 146 27 146 48
      23 145 21 145 42 146 2 146 23 146 44 147 5 147 27 147 48
      24 146 19 146 40 147 1147 22 147 43 148 4 148 26 148 48
      25 147 17 147 39 148 0148 21 148 42 149 3 149 25 149 47
      26 148 15 148 37 148 58 L49 19 L49 41 150 2150 24 150 46
      27 149 13 149 35 149 56 150 17 150 39 151 1 151 23 151 45
      28 150 11 150 33 150 54 151 15 151 37 151 59 152 22 152 44
      29 151 8 151 30 151 52 152 13 151 35 152 57 153 20 153 43
      30 152 6 152 27 152 49 153 11 153 33 153 55 154 18 154 41


  R u l e . — To find the Right-Ascension of the S u n , or any point in the heavens,
or any planet without latitude, the longitude being given. 1°.           Seek in the
column marked 0° at the top the right-ascension corresponding to the even
degree oi longitude, which transcribe and mark A. 2°. Observe the
increase of right-ascension caused by 1° of increase in longitude. Then
say: “ As 60 minutes of increase, so are the minutes of difference in
right-ascension. 3°. Add this correction to A and the sum will the right-
ascension.
                                                              AP PE N D IX.                                                                 461
                   TABLE                      OF              RIGH T                   ASCENSION.
           (N .B .          F o r Pisces add 1 8 0 ° : if the a m o u n t exceed s 3 6 0 °
                                         su btract that sum .)


       Virgo w ith North L a titu d e .— Pisces w ith South L a titu d e.

                   O                0                O            O                O               O                O             C
                   0                1                2            3                4               5                6             'i
      D.      D.       M.     D.        M.     D.        M.    D.     M.     D.        M.    D.        M.     D. M.          D.        M.
       0 152             5 152          27 152           49 1 5 3 1 1 1 5 3 3 ? 1 5 3 5 5 1 5 4                         18454          41
       1 153             3 153          25153            47 1 5 4       9153           31154           5c 155           16155          39
       21154             0 154          22|154           44 155         6155           29 155          51 1 5 6         14156          37
       3 ll5 4         57 155           19155            41 156         3456           26 156          49 157           12157          35
       4 :1 5 5        54156            1 6 :1 5 6       39 157         1157           24 157          47 158           10158          33
       51156           501157           1 3 (1 5 7       36 157       5 8 (1 5 8       21 1 5 8        44 159            8159          31
       6 157           471158           10 158           33 158       55 159           18 159          41 160            5 160         28
       7 158           43159             7 159           30 159       51 160           15 1 60         38 161            2 161         25
       8 159           40160             4 160           27 160       49 161           12 161          35 161           59 162         22
       9 160           3 6 :1 6 1        0 161           23 161       46 162            9 162          32 162           56 163         19
      10    161        32161            56162            19 162       42 163            6 163          29 163           53 1 64        16
      11    162        28 162           52 163           15163        38 164            2 164          25 164           49 165         13
     12 163            24 163           50 164           11164        34 164           58 165          21165            45 1 66         9
     13 164            20 164           44 165            7465        30 165           54 166          18166            42 167          6
     14 165            16 165           40 166            3166        26 166           50 167          14467            38 168          2
     15     166        11 1 6 6         35 166           59167        22 167           46 168          1 0 )1 6 8       34 168         58
     16     167          7 167          31 167           55 168       18 168           42 169           e 169           30 159         54
     17     168         2 168           27 168           51 169       14 169           38 1702 170                      26 170         50
     18     168        08 1 6 9 2 3 1 6 9 4 6 1 7 0                     9 1 7 0 3 3 1 7 0 57 1 7 1                      21 171         45
     19     169        53 170           18 170           42 171         5 1 7 1 2 9 1 7 1 53 1 7 2                      17 172         41
     20     170        49 171           13 171           37 172         l f1 7 2 2 5 1 7 2 4 9 1 7 3                    13 173         37
     21     171        4 4 172           8 172           32 172       5 6 :1 7 3       20173           44 174            8 174         32
     22     172        39 173            3 173           27 173       51474            15174           39 175            3 175         27
     23     173        34 173           58 174           22 174       46475            10475           3 4 1 .7 5 5 8 1 7 6 2 2
     24     174        30 174           58 175           17 175       41176             5 (1 7 6       29 176           53 177         17
     25     175        25 175           48 176           12 176       3 6 (1 7 7        0477           24 177           48 178         12
     26     176        20 176           43 177            7 177       31 1 7 7         56 178          19 1 7 8         43 179          7
     27 177            15 177           38 178            2 178       26 178           50 179          14 1 79          38 180          2
     28 178            10 178           33 178           5 7 1 7 9 21 1 7 9 4 5 1 8 0                   9 180           33 180         57
     29     179          5 179          28 179           52 180       16 1 8 0         40 181           4 181           28 181         52
     30     180         0 180           23 180           47 181       1 1 181          35 181          59 182           23 182         47

  R u l e .— To find the Right-Ascension o f any celestial body whose longitude
and latitude are given. 1 Q. Look for the even degree of longitude and even
degree of latitude, at the head of the table, and in the angle of meeting will
be found the right-ascension for those even degrees, which transcribe and
mark A. 2°. In the same column of latitude, seek the right-ascension of the
next degree of longitude and mark the increase. Then say “ As the minutes
of m e ease, so are the minutes of difference in the longitude given to
the first correction ” 3°. Observe the difference of right-ascension
caused by one degree of increase in the latitude. Then say “ As 60' are to
the minutes of difference plus or minus,” so are the minutes of difference in
the latitude to the second correction, plus or minus. 4°. If the second
correction be plus, then the sum of the two corrections added to A will be
the right-ascension ; but if the second correction be minus then the differ­
ence of the two corrections applied to A. plus or minus, will give the right-
ascension required.
462                             T H E T E X T -B O O K OF ASTROLOGY.




                        TAB LE           OF         RIGH T                ASCENSION

                                    (N .B . F o r Aries su b tra ct 180°.)


      Lib ra w ith North L atitu d e. —Aries w ith South L a titu d e .

           I        O           O           O                O            O           O           0           n
           1        0           1           2                3            4           5           6           7
      D.       D.       M. D.       M. D.       1 1 . i i)       M   D.       M. D.       M. D.       M. D.       M.
       ft 180 0 180 23 180 47 181 11 181 35 181 59 182                                                2 3 1 8 2 47
       1 180 55 181 1 8 181 42 182 6 1 8 2 30 182 54 183                                              18 183 42
       2 181 50 182 1 3 182 37 183 1 1 8 3 25 183 49 184                                              13 184 37
       3 182 45 183 8 183 32 183 56,184 20;184 44 185                                                  8 185 32
       4 183 40 184 3 184 27 184 5 1 1 85 1 5 1 8 5 39 186                                             3 186 27
       5 184 35 184 58 185 22 185 46¡186 1 0 1 8 6 34 186                                             58 187 22
       6 185 30 185 54 186 181186 42 187 6 187 30 187                                                 58(188 17
       7 186 26 186 49 187 13 187 37 188 1 188 25 188                                                 48,189 12
       8 187 21 187 44 188 8 188 32 188 56 189 20 189                                                 43 190 7
       9 188 1 6 1 8 8 39 189 3 189 27 189 51 190 15 190                                              38191   2
      10 189 11|189 34 189 58 190 22 190 46 191 10191                                                 33 191 57
      11 190 7 190 29 190 58 191 17 191 4 i 192 5 192                                                 28 192 52
      12 191 2 191 25 191 48 192 131192 36 193 0 193                                                  23 193 47
      13 191 57 192 20 192 43 193 8 1 9 3 31 193 55 194                                               18 194 41
      14 192 53 193 16 193 39 194 3¡194 26 194 50 195                                                 13 195 36
      15 193 4 9 1 9 4 12 194 35 194 5 8 1 95 21 195 45 198                                            8 196 31
      16 194 44 195 7 195 30 195 58 196 16 196 40 197 31197 26
      17 195 40 196 2 196 25 196 48 i97 11 197 85 197 5 8 1 9 8 21
      18 196 36 196 58 197 21 197 44 198 7 198 30 198 5 3 1 9 9 16
      19 197 32 197 54 198 17 198 40 199 2 199 2 5 1 9 9 48 200 11
      20 198 28 198 50 199 13 199 36 199 58 200 2 1 2 0 0 43 201 7
      21 199 24 199 46 200 9|200 32 200 54 201 16 201 39,202 2
      22 200 201200 42 201 5 201 2 8 2 01 50 202 12 202 341202 57
      23 201 1 7 2 01 38 202 11202 241202 46 203 8 2 0 3 30(203 52
      24 202 1 3 2 0 2 35 202 57 ¡203 20 203 42 204 4 204 26 204 48
      25 203 10|203 31 203 53 204 16 204 38 205 0 205 21(205 43
      2611204 6.204 29 204 50 205 12 205 341205 561206 17 206 39
      27 205 3 2 0 5 25 205 4 7 2 0 6 9 206 30 206 5 2 2 0 7 13 207 35
      28 206 0 2 0 6 22 206 43 207 5 207 2 6 207 4 8 2 0 8 9 208 30
      29 ¡206 57 207 19 207 40 208 1 208 22 208 4 4 2 0 9 5 209 26
      30:|207 54 208 16 208 37 20S 58 209 19 209 40 210 1 210 22


   R u l e . — To find the Right-Ascension o f the Sox, or any point in the heavens,
or any planet without latitude, the longitude being given.        1° Seek in the
column marked 0° at the top the right-ascension corresponding to the even
degree of longitude, which transcribe and mark A. 2°. Observe the
increase of right-ascension caused by 1° of increase in longitude. Then
say: "A s 60 minutes of increase, so are the minutes of difference in
right-ascension. 3°. Add this correction to A and the sum will be the
right-ascension.
                                                    A P P E N D IX .                                                       4G3

                   TABLE               OF           BIG H T            ASCENSION.

                             (N .B . F o r Taurus su b tra ct 180°.)


                   Scorpio w ith North L a titu d e .—Taurus w ith
                                 South L a titu d e .
               O             O             O             O             O             O             O              O
               0             1             2             3             4             5             6              7
     D.   D.       M.   D.       M.   D.       M.   D.       M.   D.       M.   D.       M.   D.       31.   D.       M.
      0 207 54 208 16 208 37     58 209             © CO                   19 209 4 0 2 1 0             1 210 22
      i 208 52 209 13 209 34 209 55 210                                    16 210        37 210 57 211 18
      2 209 49 210 10 210 31 210 52 211                                    13 211        34 211 54 212 14
      3 210 47 211 17 211 28 211 49 212                                    10 212        31 212 51 213 11
      4 211 45 212 5 212 25 212 46 213                                      7 213        27 213 47 214 7
      5 212 43 213 3 213 23 213 43 214                                      4 214        24 214 44 215 4
      6 213        41 214         1 214        21 214        41 215         1 215        21 215        41 216          1
      7 214        39 214        59 215        19 215        39 215        58 216        18 216        38216          57
      8 215        38 215        57 216        17 216        37 216        56 217        15 217        35 217         54
      9 216        36 216        56 217        15 217        35 217        54 218        13 218        32 218         51
     10 217        85 217        54 218        13 218        33 218        52 219        11 219        29 219         48
     11 218   34 218 53 219 12 219 31 219 5 0 2 2 0 9 220 27 220 45
     12 219   33 219 62 220 11 220 30 220 4822L 7 2 2 1 25 221 43
     18 220   33 220 51 221 10 321 2 8 2 2 1 46 222 5 222 28 222 41
     14 221   32 221 50 222 9 222 27 222 45 223 3 223 21 223 39
     15 222   32 222 50 223 8 223 26 223 44 224 2 '224 19 224 37
     16 (223 32 223 49 224 7 224 25 224 43 225 0 225 17 225 60
     17 224 32 224 49 225 6 225 24 225 42 225 59 226 15 226 33
     18 225 32 225 49 226 6 226 23 226 41 226 58 227 14 227 31
     19 226 33 226 49 227 6 227 23 227 40 227 57 228 13 228 29
     20l.|227 33 227 49 228 6 228 23 228 39 228 56 229 12 229 28
     21 228 34 228 50 229 6 229 23 229 39 229 55 230 11 230 27
     22 229 35 229 50,230 6 230 23 230 38 230 54 231 10 231 25
     23 230 36 230 51 231 6 231 23 231 38 231 53 232 9 232 24
     24 231 37 231 52 232 7 232 23 232 38 232 53 233 8 233 23
     25 232 39 232 53 233 8 233 24 233 38 233 53 234 8 234 22
     26 233 40 233 55 234 9 234 2 4 2 3 4 38 234 53 235 7 265 21
     27 234 42 234 57 235 11 235 25 235 39 235 53 236 7 236 21
     28 235 44 235 58 236 12 236 26 236 40 236 54 237 7 237 20
     29 236 47 237 0 237 14 237 27 237 41 237 54 238 7 238 20
     30 257 49 238 2 238 15 238 29 238 42 238 55 239 7 239 20

  R u l e . — To find the Right-Ascension o f any celestial body whose longitude
and latitude are given. 1°. Look for the even degree of longitude and even
degree of latitude, at the head of the table and in the angle of meeting will
be found the right-ascension for those even degrees, which transcribe and
mark A. 2°. In the same column of latitude seek the right-ascension of the
next degree of longitude and mark the increase. Then say “ As the minutes
of increase, so are the minutes of difference in the longitude given to
the first correction.”     3°.  Observe the difference of right-ascension
caused by one degree of increase in the latitude. Then say ' ‘ As 60' are to
the minutes of difference plus or minus ” so are the minutes of difference in
the latitude to the second correction, plus or minus. 4". If the second
correction be plus, then the sum of the two corrections added to A will be
the right-ascension ; but if the second correction be minus then the differ­
ence of the two corrections applied to A, plus or minus, will give the right-
ascension required.
464                          TEE     TE X T -B O O K           OF ASTROLO G Y.




                TABLE              OF          BIGHT                      ASCENSION.
                             (N.B. For Gemini subtract 180°.)

                Sagittarius with North Latitude.— Gemini with
                                South Latitude.
                O            o           o            Ö               O            o          o           o
                0            1           2            3               4            5          6           7
      D.   D.       M. 1).       M. D.       M. D .       M.    I).       M   D.       M. D       M. D.       M.
       0 237 49 238 2 238 15 238 29 238 42 238 55 239 7 239 20
       l 238 51 239 4 239 17 239 30 239 43 239 55 240 7 240 20
       2 239 54 240 6 240 19 240 31 240 44 240 56 241 8 241 20
       3 240 57 241 9 241 21 241 33 241 45 241 57 242 9 242 21
       4 242 0212 11 242 23 242 35 242 46 242 58 243 9 243 21
       5 243 3 243 14 243 25 243 37 243 48 243 59 244 10 244 21
       6 244 7 244 17 244 28 244 39 244 50 245 1 245 11 245 22
       7 245 10 245 20 245 31 245 41 245 52 246 2 246 12 246 22
       8 246 14 246 23 246 34 246 44 246 54 247 4; 247 13 247 23
       9 247 18 247 27 247 37 247 47 247 56 248 6 248 15 248 24
      10 248 22 248 30 248 40 248 49 248 58 249 7 249 16 249 25
      11 249 26249 34 249 43 249 52 250 0 250 9250 17 250 26
      12 250 30:250 38 250 46 250 55 251 3 251 11 251 19 251 27
      13 251 34 251 42 251 49 251 58 252 5 252 13 252 21 252 28
      14 252 38 252 461252 53 253 1 253 8 253 15 253 23 253 30
      15 253 43 253 50,253 57 254 4254 11 254 18254 25 254 32
      16 254 48 254 54 255 1 255 7 255 14 255 20 255 27 255 33
      17 255 52 255 58 256 5 256 i i 256 17 256 22 256 29256 35
      18 256 57 257 3 257 9 257 15 257 20 257 25 257 31 257 37
      19 258 2 258 7 258 13 258 18 258 23 258 28 258 33 258 38
      20 259 7 259 12 259 17 259 21 259 26 259 31259 35 259 40
      21 260 12 260 17 260 21 260 25 260 29 260 34 260 38260 42
      22 261 17 261 21 261 25 261 28 261 32 261 36 261 40261 44
      23 262 23 262 25 262 29 262 32 262 35 262 39 262 42 262 46
      24 263 28 263 30 263 33 263 36 263 39 263 42 263 45 263 48
      25 264 33 264 35 264 37 264 40 264 42 264 45 264 47 264 50
      26 265 38 265 40 265 41 265 44j265 45 265 48 265 49 265 52
      27 266 44 266 45 266 46 266 48266 49 266 51 266 52 266 54
      28 267 49 267 50 267 50 267 52 267 52 267 54 267 54 267 56
      29 268 55 268 55 268 55 268 56 268 56 268 57 268 57 268 58
      30 270 0 270 0 270 0 270 0:270 0 270 0 270 0 270 0


   B o l e .— To find the Right-Ascension of the S u n , o r any point in the heavens,
or any planet without latitude, the longitude being given. 1°. Seek in the
column marked 0° at the top the right-ascension corresponding to the even
degree of longitude, which transcribe and mark A. 2°. Observe the
increase of right-ascension caused by 1° of increase in longitude. Then
say : “ As 60 minutes of increase, so are the minutes of difference in
right-ascension. 3°. Add this correction to A, and the sum will be the
right-ascension.
                                                           A P P E N D IX ,                                                    4G5

                     T A B L E              OF           R IG H T               A S C E N S IO N .

                                   (N .B . F o r Cancer su b tra ct 1 8 0 °.)

                         Cajncorn w ith North L a titu d e . — Cancer w ith
                                        South L a titu d e .
                     O             O             O             O            O            O              O            O
            :        o             1             2             3            4            5              6            7
       D.       D.       M.   D.       M    D.       M    D.       M   D.       M   D.       M .l D .       M   D.       M.
         0 270            0 270         C 270         ( 270        1 270         C 270        0270          C 270         0
        11271 5 271                     5 271         5 271 4 271 4 271 3 271 3 271 2
        2 272 11 272                   10 272        10 272 8 272 8 272 6 272 6 272 4
        3 273 16 273                   15 273        14 273 12 273 11 273 9 273 8 273 6
        4 274 22 274                   20 274        19 274 16 274 15 274 12 274 11 274 8
        5 275 27 275                   25 275        23 275 20 275 18 275 15 275 13 275 10
         6 276 32 276 3 0 2 7 6 27 276 21 276 21 276 18 276 15 276 12
         7 277 37 277 35 277 3 1 2 7 7 28 277 25 277 21 277 18 277 14
         8 278 43 278 39 278 35 278 32 278 28 278 24 278 20 278 16
         9 279 4 8 2 7 9 43 279 39(279 35 279 31 279 26 279 22 279 18
       10 280 53,280 48j280 43 280 39 280 34 280 29 280 25 280 20
       H 281 58,281 53 281 47 281 42 281 37 281 32 281 27 281 22
       12 283 3 282 57 282 51 282 45 282 40'282 34 282 29 282 23
       13 284 8 !284 2 283 55 283 49 283 43.283 37 283 31 283 25
       u\ 285 1 2 2 8 5 6 284 59 284 53 284 46(284 40 284 33 284 27
       151 286 1 7 2 8 6 10(286 3 285 56 285 49|285 42 285 35 285 28
      16 287           14 287 7 286 59 286 52 286 45 286 37 286 30
                      21287
      17 288           18 288 11 288 2 287 55 287 47 287 39 287 32
                      26 288
      1 8 1289         22 289 14 289 5 288 57 288 49 288 41 288 33
                      80 289
      19! 290          26 290 17 290 8 290 0 289 51 289 43 289 34
                      34 290
      20 291           30 291 20 291 11 291 2 290 53 290 44 290 35
                      38;291
      21 292 42(292 33 292 23 292 13 292 4 291 55 292 45 291 36
      22 293 46Î293 37 293 26 293 16 293 6 292 56 292 47 292 37
      23 294 501294 40 294 29 294 19 294 8 293 58 293 48 293 38
      24 295 53 295 43 295 32 295 21 295 10 294 59 294 49 294 38
      2 5 , 296 571296 46 296 35 296 23 296 12 296 1 295 50 295 39
       26 298    297                       297           297    297              297          296       51 296 39
       27 (299   298                       298           298    298              298          297       51 297 39
       28 300 6 299                        299           299 29 299              299          298       52 298 40
       29 301  9j300                       300           300    300              300          299       53 299 40
      |30 302 113 01                       301           301    301              301          300       53 300 40

  R u l e . — To find the Bight-Ascension o f any celestial body whose longitude
and latitude are given. 1Q. Look for the even degree of longitude and even
degree of latitude, at the head of the table, and in the angle of meeting will
be found the right-ascension for those even degrees, which transcribe and
mark A. 2°. In the same column of latitude, seek the right-ascension of the
next degree of longitude and mark the increase. Then say “ As the minutes
of increase, so are the minutes of difference in the longitude given to
the first correction.”    3".    Observe the difference of right-ascension
caused by one degree of increase in the latitude. Then say “ As 60' are to
the minutes of difference phis or minus." so are the minutes of difference in
the latitude to the second. correction, plus or minus. 4°. If the second
correction be plus, then the sum of the two corrections added to A will be
the right-ascension ; but if the second correction be minus then the differ­
ence of the two corrections applied to A, plus or minus, will give the right-
ascension required.
                                                                                                                         2 H
466                         THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.




            T A B L E               OF       B IG H T               A S C E N S IO N .

                                (N .B . F o r   Leo su bstract 1 8 0 °.)

       Aquarius w ith North L a titu d e .—Leo w ith South L a titu d e .

                o           0           O           O           O           O           O            O
                0           1           2           8           4           5           6            7
      D.   D.       M. D.       M. D.       M. D.       M. D.       M. D.       M. D.       M . D.       M.
        0 302 h 301 58 301 4 5 301 31 301 18 301 5 300 5 3 300 40
        i 303 13 303 0 302 4 7 302 33 302 19 302 6801 53)301 40
        2 304 16 304 2 303 48 303 34 303 20 303 6)302 53)302 40
        8 305 18 305 3 304 50 304 35 304 21 304 7803 53)303 39
        4 306 20 306 5 305 51 305 36 305 22 305 7804 53 304 39
        5 307 21 307 7 306 52 306 36 306 22 306 7 305 52:305 38
        6 308 23 308 8 307 53 307 37 ¡307 22 307 7806 52 306 37
        7 309 24 309 9 308 54 308 37 308 22 308 7:307 51 307 36
        8 310 25 310 10 309 54 309 37 309 22 309 6308 50 308 35
        9 311 26 311 10 310 54 310 37 310 21 310 5 309 49 309 33
       10 312 27 312 11 311 54 311 37 311 21311 4810 48 310 32
       11 313 28 313 11 312 54 312 371312 20 312 3 311 47 311 31
       12 314 28 314 11 313 54 313 37313 19 313 2 312 46 312 29
       13 315 28 315 11 314 54 314 36 314 18 314 1 313 45 313 27
       14 316 28 316 11 315 53 315 35 315 17 315 0 314 43 314 25
       15 317 28 317 10 316 52 316 34316 16 315 58 315 41 315 23
       16 318 28 318 10 317 51317 33 317 15 316 57816 39)316 21
       17 319 27 319 9 318 50318 32 318 14 317 55317 37 317 19
       18 820 27 320 8 319 491319 30 319 12 318 53318 35Í318 17
       19 321 26 321 7 320 48320 29 320 10 319 51319 33319 15
       20 322 25[322 6 321 471321 27 321 8 320 49)320 31)320 12
       21 323 24 323 4 322 45 322 25322 6 321 47 321 28 321 9
       22 324 22 324 3 323 43 323 23323 4 322 45)322 25 322 6
       23 325 21 325 1 324 41 324 21324 1 323 42323 22 323 3
       24 326 19 325 59 325 39 325 19 324 59 324 39!324 19 323 59
       25 327 17 326 57 326 37 326 17 325 56 325 36 325 16 325 56
       26 328 15 327 55 327 35 327 14:826 53 326 33:326 13 325 53
       27 329 13 328 53 328 32 328 11827 50327 30327 10 326 4 9
       28 330 11 329 5C 329 29 329 8:328 47|328 27¡328 6 327 46
       29 331 8 330 47 330 2€ 330 5 329 44329 25329 3 328 42
        30 1332 € 331 44 331 23 331 2830 41)330 20329 59 329 38


    R u l e .— To find the Right-Ascension of the S u n , or any point in the heavens,
 or any planet without latitude, the longitude being given. 1°. Seek in the
 column marked 0C at the top the right-ascension corresponding to the even
 degree of longitude, which transcribe and mark A. 2°. Observe the
 increase of right-ascension caused by 1° of increase in longitude. Then
 say : “ As 60 minutes of increase, so are the minutes of difference in
 right-ascension.” 3°. Add this correction to A, and the sum will be the right-
 ascension.
                                   A P P E N D IX .                         467

             TABLE         OP    RIGHT                ASCENSION.
                      (N.B. For Virgo subtract 180°.)


        Pisces with North Latitude.— Virgo with South Latitude.

                     O       O        O           O     O     O       o
             0       1       2        3           4     5     6       7
      i D.D.  M. D.  M. D.  M. D . M . T>. M . D . M . D. M. D . M.
       0 332 6 331 44 331 23 331 2|330 41330 20 329 59 329 38
       i 333   3 332 41 332 20 331 59 331 38 331 16 330 551330 34
       2 334 0 333 38 333 17 332 55 332 34 332 12 331 51331 30
       3 334 57 334 35 334 13 333 51 333 30 333 8 332 47332 25
       4 335 54 335 32 335 10 334 48 334 26 334 4 333 43 333 21
       5 336 50 336 29 836 7 335 44 335 22 335 0 334 39834 17
       6 337 47 337 25 337 3 336 40 336 18 335 56 335 34335 12
       7 338 43 338 22 337 59 337 36 337 14 336 52 336 30836 8
       8 339 40 369 18 338 55 338 32 838 10 337 48 337 26337 3
       9 340 36 340 14 339 51 339 28 339 6 338 43 338 21 337 58
      10 341 32 341 10 340 47 340 24 340 2 339 39 339 17338 54
      11:342 28 342 6 341 43 341 20 340 58 340 85 340 12 339 49
      12 343 24 343 2 342 39 342 16 341 53 341 80 341 7 340 44
      13 344 20 343 58 343 35 343 12 342 49 342 25 342 2 341 39
      14 345 16 344 53 344 30 344 7 343 44 343 20 342 57 342 34
      15j|346 11 345 58 345 25 345 2 344 39 344 15 343 52 343 29
      16 347 7 346 44 346 21 345 57 345 34 345 10,344 47344 24
      17 348 3 847 40 347 17 346 52 346 29 346 5 345 42345 19
      18 348 58 348 35 348 12 347 47 347 24 347 0,346 37;346 13
      19 349 53 349 31 349 7 348 43 348 19347 55347 32 347 8
      20 350 49 350 26 350 3 349 38 349 14848 50¡348 27 348 3
      21 351 44 351 21 350 57 350 33 350 9 349 45 349 22 348 58
      22 352 39 352 16 351 52 351 28 351 4 350 40 350 17 349 53
      23 353 34 353 11 352 47 352 23 351 59 351 35 351 12 350 48
      24 354 30 354 6 353 42 353 18 352 54 352 30 352 7 351 43
      25 355 25 355 11354 38 354 14 353 50 353 26 353 2352 38
      26 356 20 355 57 355 83 355 9 354 45 354 21 353 57 353 33
      27 357 15 356 52 356 28 356 4 355 40 355 16 354 52 354 28
      28 358 10 357 47 357 23 356 59 356 35 356 11 355 47 355 23
      29 359 5 358 42 358 18357 54 357 30 357 6 356 42856 18
      30 360 0 359 37 359 13 358 49 358 25 358 1 357 87 857 13
  R u l e .— To find the Right-Ascension o f any celestial body whose longit ude
and latitude are given. 1°. Look for the even degree of longitude and even
degree of latitude, at the head of the table, and in the angle of meeting will
be found the right-ascension for those even degrees, which transcribe and
mark A. 2". In the same column of latitude, seek the right-ascension of the
next degree of longitude and mark the increase. Then say ‘ •As the minutes
of increase, so are the minutes of difference in the longitude given to
the first correction.”      3°.   Observe the difference of right-ascension
caused by one degree of increase in the latitude. Then say “ As 60' are to
the minutes of difference plus or minus,” so are the minutes of difference in
the latitude to the second correction, plus or minus. 4°. If the second
correction be plus, then the sum of the two corrections added to A will be
the right-ascension ; but if the second correction be minus, then the differ­
ence of the two corrections applied to A, plus or minus, will give the right-
ascension required.
4G8                        THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.




                           TA B L E       OF        D ECLIN ATION.


                                                                                                         M
          P3 I             D egrees       OF N o r t h       L a t it u d e                              g
          K |
          O !
          <2 !                                                        C            0             c      o




                                                                                                              Apparent Obliquity of the Ecliptic, January 1st, 1795, 23° 27' 50’5".
                   0                           3         i                c        c             7
                                          D.       m . D. M. D.               M. D . M. D. M.            D.
          D.     D. M . D ; M . D . M .
                                                              CM                            oo       27 30
                                                                   CO 1
cp
           0 23 27 24          27 25 27 26 27 27 27    27 29                           27        °
(M                                                                                                   27 29
           l 23 27 24          27 25 27 26 27 27 27 28 27 29                           27 30
           9 23 26 24          26 25 26 26 26 27 26 28 26 29                           2630          2 0 28
o          3 23 25 24          25 25 25 26 25 27 25 28 25 29                           25 30         25 27
CO
CM         4 23 23 24          23 25 23 26 23 27 23 28 23 29                           23 30         23 26
CM         5 23 21 24          21 25 21 26 21 27 21 28 21 29                           21 30         21 25
tH
o>        6 23 19 24           19 25 19 26 19 27 19 28 19 29                           19 30 19 24
          7 23 17 24           16 25 16 26 16 27 16 28 1 6 2 9                         16 30 16 23
          8 •■>3 13 24         13 25 13 26 13 27 13 28 13 29                           13 30 13 22
          9 23 9 24             9 25 9 26 9 27 9 28 9 29                                9 30 9 21
c3
         10 23 4 24             4 25 4 26 4 27 4 28 4 2 9                               4 30 4 20
Cu       11 23          0 24    0 25 0 26   0 27 0 28                          0 29     0 30 0 19
         12i 22        55 23   56 24 56 25 56 26 56 27                        56 28    56 29 55 18
         18 22         49 23   49 24 49 25 49 26 49 27                        49 28    49 29 49 17
         14 22         44 23   44 24 43 25 43 26 43 27                        42 28    42 29 41 16
                               37 24 36)25 36 26 36 27                        35 28    35 29 34 15
         15, 22        37 23
w                              30 24 29 25 29 26 29 27   28 28 28 29 27 14
o        16 22         30 23
         17 22         23 23   23 24 22 25 22 26 •21 27  20 28 19 29 18 13
         18 22         15 23   15 24 14 25 1 4 2 6 13 27 12 28 11 29 10 12
o                                                         4 28 3 29 2 11
         19 22          7 23    7 24 6 25 6 2 6 5 27
         20 21         58 22   58 23 57 24 5 6 2 5 55 26 54 27 53 28 52 10
&        21 21         49 22   49 23 48 24 47 25 4 6 2 6 45 27 44 28 43 9
         22 21         40 22   40 23 39 24 38 25 37 26 36 27 35 28 35 8
O        23 21         30 22   30 23 29 24 28 25 27 26 26 27 25 28 25 7
         24 91         19 22   19 23 18 24 17 25 16,26 15 27 14 28 13 6
         25 21          8 22    8 23 7 24 6 25 5 26 4 27 3 28 2 5
         26 20 58 21           56 22 55 23 54 24 53 25 52 26 51 27 50 4
         27 20 47 21           44 22 43 23 42 24 41 25 40 26 39 27 38 3
         28 •?0 35 21          33 22 31 23 30 24 29 25 28 26 26 27 25 2
         29 20 23 21           21 22 19 23 18 2 4 17 25 16 26 14 27 13 1
         30 20 1C 21            8 22 6 23 5 24 4 25 2 26 0 26 59 0




   E ole.— T o find the Declination of the S e n , or any point in the Ecliptic
(without latitude), the longitude being given.—1°. Look for the even degree
of longitude and in the column marked 0° at the top, note the decimation
corresponding thereto, and mark it A. 2°. In the same column, observe the
difference of declination caused by one degree of longitude. Then say:
“ As 60' are to the minutes of difference, so are the minutes of difference in
the longitude to the c o r r e c t i o n 3°. This correction added to, or subtracted
from A, according to whether the declination is increasing or decreasing,
will give the required declination.
                                                      APPENDIX.                                                                    469


                             TABLE                  OF           D ECLIN ATIO N .


                                                                                                                              CO
                                 D egrees            OF        N orth            L a t it u d e .                             D
         o                                                                                                                    «
         w                                                                                                                    P
         hi                                                                                                                   <
                    0            1            2            3              1
                                                                                         .             6              1
         D.    D. M. D . M.             i).       M. D .       M. D.      M. D. M . D.                     M.   D.    M.      D.

           0   20       10 21         8 22         6 23          5 24           4 25          2 26           0 26     59      10

           i   19       57 20        56 21        54 22        53 23      51 24              50 25         48126      46129

          2    19       44 20        42 21        41 22        39 23      37 24              36 25         34 26      32| 2 8

          3    19       31 20        28 21        27 22        25 23      23 24              22 25         20 26      18j 27

          4    19       17 20        14 21        13 22        11 23           9 24           8 25          626           4 26

           5   19        2 20         0 20        59 21        57 22          55 23          53 24         5 l| 2 5   49|25

           6   18       4 8 19       46 20        44 21        42 22      40 23              38 24         36 25      34124

           7   18       33 19        31 20        29 21        2 7 :2 2       25 23          23 24         21 25      19 23

           8 ¡1 8       17 19        15 20        13 21        1122             9 23          7 24           5 25         3 22

          9    18        2 18        59 19        57 20        55121          53 22          51 23         49 24      4 6 21

         10 17          46 18        43 19        41 20        38121          36 22          31 23         31 2 4     28 20

         11    17       29 18        2619         24 20        22 21          1 9 ,2 2       17 23         14 24      11      19

         12    17       13 18         919          7 20         5 21           222            0 22         57 23      54      18

         13    16       56 17        5218         50 19        47 20      4421               42 22         39 23      3 6 '1 7

         14 16          39 17        3508         33 19        30 20      27 21              25122         22 23      19      16

         15    16       21 17        1808         15 19        12 20           9 21           7 22          4 23          1   15

         16    16        3 17         017         57 18        54 19      51 20              49 21         46 22      43      14

         17    15       45 16        4217         39 18        3 6 19     33 20              30 21         27 22      24      13

         18    15       27 16        2317         20 18        17 19      14 20              11 21          8 22          5   12

         19 15           9 16         417          1 17        58 18      55 19              52 2 0        49 21      46      11

         20    14       50 15        4516         41 17        38 18      3 5 19             32 20         29 21      26      10

         21    14       31 15        26 16        22 17        19 18      16 19              13 2 0        10 21          7    y

         22    14       11 15         7 16         3 17         0 17      56 18              53 19         50 20      47       8

         23    13       52 14        47 15        43 16        4 0 17     36 18              DO   19       29 20      26       7

               13       32|14        27 15        2316         19 17      15 18              12 19          8 20          5    6
         24
         25    13       12114         7 15         316          0|16      56 17              53 18         49 19      45       5

         26112          52 13        47 14        4305         39 16      35 17              3218          2809       24      4

               12       32 13        27 14        23 15        19 16      15 17              1218           819           4   3
         27
         28    12       11 13         6 14         2 14        5 8 15     54 16              5117          4718       43      2

                                     45 13        41 14        37 15      33 16              3017          2618       22       1
         29    11       50 12
         3 0 ¡1 1       29 12        24 13        20 14        16 15          12 16           817           418           0   0



   R u l e . — To find the Declination of any heavenly body whose longitude and
latitude arc given.— 1°. Look for the even degree of longitude and under
the even degree of latitude, at the head of the Table; at the angle of
meeting will be found the declination for those even degrees, which
transcribe and call A. 2°. In the same column of latitude, seek the
declination for the next even degree of longitude, and note the difference
Then say : “ As 60' are to the minutes of difference, so are the minutes oi
difference in the longitude given to the first correction.” 3°. Observe the
difference of declination caused by one degree of increase in the latitude.
Then say: “ As 60' are to the minutes of difference, so are the minutes of
difference in the latitude given to the second c o r r e c t i o n 4°. If both
corrections be plus or minus, then the sum of the two corrections, added to
or subtracted from A, will give the required declination. But, if one be
plus and the other minus, then the difference of the two corrections added
to or subtracted from A, will give the declination required.
470                                 THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.



                                TAB LE                    OF           D ECLIN ATIO N .



         o                          D egrees              OF      N orth              L a t it u d e .                          Cfi
                                                                                                                                K


         >            O             C            o            c                             O             o            <
                      0                          2                           4                            6

         D.      D. M. D.               M. D . M . D.             M . D. M.            D.   M.       D.       M. D. M.          D.
             0   11       29 12         24 13        20 14        1615           12 16           8 17          4 18         0 30

             i   11        7112          413          0 13        56 14          5115           4716          43 17        39 29
             2   10       4641          4212         38 13        33 14          2915           2546          21 17        17 28
             3   10       2 5Í1 1       21 12        17 13        12 14           815             416          0 16        56 27
             4   10        310          59 11        55 12        51 13          4714           4315          89 16        35 26
             5 ¡ 9        4 l| l0       37 11        35 12        30 13          2614           2215          18 16        14 25

          6       9       1910          17 11        11 1 2        613            213           58 14         54 15        50   24
          7       8       57   9        58 10        4 9 11       4412           4013           35 14         31 15        26 23
          8       8       35   9        31 10        27 11        2212           1813           13 14          9 15         4 22
          9      8        12   9         8 10         4 10        5911           5412           4 9 13        44 14        39   21
        10        7       50   8        46   9       41 10        3611           3112           26 13         21 14        16   20

        11        7       27   8        22   9       17 10        12111           7 12           212          57 13        521119
        13        7        4   8         0   8       55   9       50 10          45 11          4 0 12        35 13        30   18
        13'      6    41       7        36   8       31   9       26 10          2 1 11         16 12         11 13         6 .1 7
        14       6        18   7        13   8        8   9        3     9       58 10          53 11         4 8 12       43   16
        15        5       55   6        51   7       46   8       41     9       36 10          31 11         2 6 12       21   15

         16      5        32   6        28   7       23   8       18     9       13 10           811           0 11        58114
         17      5         8   6         4   6       59   7       54     8       49     9       4 4 jl0       39 11        34   13
         18      4    45       5        41   6       36   7       31     8       26     9       2 l!l0        1 6 11       11   12
         19      4        21   5        17   6       12   7        7     8        2     8       57    9       52 10        47   11
        20       3        58   4        54   5       49   6       44     7       39     8       34    9       29 10        24| |10

        21       3        34   4        30   5       25   6       20     7       15     8       10    9        5 10         0    9
        22       3        11   4         7   5        2   5       57     6       52     7       47    8       42   9       37    8
        23       2        47   3        43   4       38   5       33     6       28     7       23    8       18   9       13    7
        24       2        23   3        19   4       14   5        9     6        4     6       59    7       54   8       49     6
        25        1       59   2        55   3       50   4       45     5       40     6       35    7       30   8       25     5
        26        1       36   2        31   8       26   4       21     5       16     6       11    7        6   8        1     4
        27        1       12   2         7   3        2   3       57     4       52     5       47    6       42   7       37     3
        28        0       48   1        43   2       38   3       33     4       28     5       23    6       18   7       13     2
        29        0       24   1        19   2       14   3        9     4        4     4       59    5       54   6       49     1
        30        0        0   0        55   1       50   2       4 51   3       40     4       351 5         30   6       25    0




   B ulb .— To find the Longitude oj the Sun, or body without latitude,
corresponding to a given declination.—1°. Seek in the column marked 0° at
the top, the declination nearest to that given, and transcribe the degree of
longitude corresponding thereto, marking it A. 2°. Observe the difference
of declination caused by one degree of longitude. Then say: “ As the
minutes of difference of declination are to 60' of longitude, so are the
minutes of difference (between the given declination and that corresponding
to the degree of longitude transcribed) to the correction " 3°. Add the
correction to A if it be plus, subtract it if it be minus, and the required
longitude will be obtained.
   [Note.— The longitude and latitude of the Moon, or a planet, correspond­
ing to a given declination, must be computed from an Ephemeris, or the
Nautical Almanac for the year of birth.]
                                                          APPENDIX.                                                                      471


                              TABLE                      OF          D ECLIN ATIO N .


         <                    D egrees                   OF     N orth              L a t it u d e                                  CO
                                                                                                                                    W
                                                                                                                                    o

        >3           O            C             O                                          O            O
                     0            1                            3 •         4               1            6            7          !
         D.    D.        M. D . M, D . M.                 D.    M. D.          M.     D. M. D . M. D . M.l D.
          0     0         o   0       55    i       50    2     45    3        40      4       35   5       30   6       25         30

          i     0        24   0       31   l        27    2     21    3        16      4       11   5        6   6         1 29

          2     0        48   0        7    l        3     1    57    2        52      3       47   4       42   5       37 28

          3      1       12   0       17   0        39     1    34    2        29      3       24   4       19   5       14 27
          4      1       36   0       41    0       15     1    10    2         5      3        0   3       55   4       50 26

          5      1       59   1        5   0        i0    0     46    1        41      2       36   3       31   4       26 25

          6     2        23   1       28   0        33    0     22    1        17      2       12   3        7   4        2 24

          7     2        47   1       52   ■0 5 7         0      2    0        53      1       48   2       43   3       34         23
          8     3        11   2       16   1        21    0     26    0        29      1       25   2       20   3       15         22
          9     3        34   2       39   1        44    0     49    0         6      1        2   1       57   2       52         21

        10      3        58   3        3   2         8    1     13    0        18      0       38   1       33   2       28         20
                              o
         11      4       21   O 26         2        311    I    36    0        41      0       14   1        9   2        41 1 9
         12 j 4          45   3       50   2        55    2      0     1        5      0       10   0       46   1       4 1 : 18
        .1 3              8   4       13   3        18    2     23    1        28              33           24   1       18         17
                 5                                                                     0            0
         14      0       32   4       37   3        42    2     46    1        51      0       56   0        0   0       55         16
         15      5       55   5        0   4         5           9    2        14      1       18   0       23   0       321 1 5
                                                          s
         16      6       18   5       23   4        27    3     31    2        36      1       40   0       45   0         9 14

         17      6       41   5       45   4        50    3     54    2        59      2        3   1        8   0       13         13
         18      7        4   6        9   5        14    4     18    3        23      2       27   1       32   0       36         12
         19      7       27   6       31   5        36    4     40    8        45      2       49   1       54   0       58         11
        20      7        50   6       54   5        58    5      2    4         6      3       10   2       15   1       19         10
        21 i 8           12   7       16   6        20    5     24    4        28      3       32   2       37   1       4i|         9
        •22 : 8          85   7       39   6        43    5     47    4        51      3       56   3        0   2        4          8
        23       8       57   8        1   7         5    6      9    5        13      4       18   3       22   2       26          7
                                                                                                                 2
        24
               19 1 9         8       23   7        27    6     31    5        85      4       49   3       45           49          6
        25       9       41   8       45   7        49    6     53    5        58 ~ 5           2   4        6   3       lO l        5

         26    10         8   9        7   8        11    7     15    6        19      5       24   4       28   3       32          4
         27    10        25   9       30   8        34    7     38    6        42      5       46   4       50   3       54          3
        '2 8 1 0         46   9       51   8        55    8      1    7         4      6        8   5       12   4       16          2
        ,2 9 1 1          7 10        13   9        17    8     21    7        24      6       28   5       32   4       36          1
        's o ' l l       29 10        33   9        37    8     41     7       45      6       49   5       53   4       57          0




  Bulk.— To And the Declination of the Sun, or any point in the Ecliptic
(without latitude) the longitude being given. 1°. Loot for the even degree of
longitude and in the column marked 0° at the top, note the declination
corresponding thereto, and mark it A. 2°. In the same column, observe the
difference of declination caused by one degree of longitude. Then say: “ As
60' are to the minutes of difference, so are the minutes of difference in the
longitude to the correction." 3°. This correction added to, or subtracted
from A, according to whether the declination is increasing or decreasing,
will give the required declination.
472                            THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.



                           T A B LE          OF         DECLIN ATIO N.


          o                                                                                         : Cßi
                               D egrees      OF N o r t h             L a t it u d e .                2
          £
          £
          o       O            O         O                                  1        3        O     c>:
                  0            L                  3            i                                    <6!
          D. D. M. D. M. D. M. D. M. D. M. J>. M. D. M. D. M. D.'
           0 i l 2 9 1 0 3 3 9 37 8 4 1 7 4 5 6 4 9 5 53 4 57 3 0
           l li       5010      54 9     58 < J 2          8  6         7 10     6   14   5 18 '29
           2 12       11 i i    15 10    18 9 22           8 26         7 29     6   32   5 36 28
           3 12       32 i i    3 6 10   39 9 43           8 47         7 50!    6   54   5 58 27
           4 12       52 i i    5 6 10   5 8 10  1         9  5         s 8      7   12   6 16 2 6
           5 13       12 12     16 11    19 10 2 2         9 26         8 29)    7   33   6 3 7 25
           6 13 3 2 12 3 6 11 39 1 0 4 2 9 4 6           8 49                    7 52     6   55 2 4
          7 13        5 2 12    5 6 11 59 11   2 10   5 9   8                    8 11     7   14 23
          8 14        11 13     14 12 17 11 2 0 1 0 23 9 2 6                     8 29     7   3 2 22.
          9 14        31 13     3 4 12 37 11 4 0 10 4 3 9 4 6                    8 49     7   5 2 21
         10 1 4       5 0 13    5 3 12 56 11 59 11    2 10 5                     9  8     8   11 2 0
         11 15   9 14 12 13              15 12        1 8 11       21 1 0   23 9 26       8   29    19
         12 15 2 7 1 4 3 0 13            3 3 12       3 6 11       39 10    41 9 44       8   47    18
         13 15 4 5 14 47 13              5012         5 3 11       5 6 10   5 8 10  1     9    4    17
         14 16   3 15    5 14              813        11 12        14)11    16 1 0 19     9   22    16
         15 16 21 15 2 3 14              26113        2 9 12       34|11    3 4 10 37     9   40    15
         16 16        3 9 15 41 14       4 4 13       4 6 12       4 9 11   51 1 0   54 9     57 14
         17 16        5 6 15 5 8 15        1 14         3 13         6 12     8 11   11 1 0   14 13
         18 17        13 16 15 15        18 14        2 0 13       22 12    2 4 11   27 1 0   3 0 12
         12 17        2 9 ¡6 3 1 15      33 14        3 5 13       37 12    3 9 11   42 10    45 11
         2 0 17       4 6 16 4 8 15      5 0 14       52 13        5 4 12   5 6 11   59 11      1 10
         21   18    2 17   4 16  6 15   8 14                       10 13    12 12    15 11    17     9
         22   18 17 17 19 16 21 15 2 3 14                          25 13    2 6 12   28 11    30     s'
         23   1 8 3 3 17 35 16 3 6 15 3 8 14                       4 0 13   4 1 12   4 3 11   45     7
         24   1 8 4 8 17 5 0 16 52 15 5 4 14                       56 13    5 7 12   59 12     0     6
         25   19    2 18   4 17  6 16   8 15                       1 0 14   11 13    15 12    14     5
         2 6 19       17 is     19 17    2016         2 2 15       24 14    25 13    27|12    29     4
         27 1 9       31 18     3 3 17   3416         3 6 15       87 1 4   3 9 13   4 0 12   42
         2 8 19       4 4 18    45 17    4 7 16       4 8 15       49 14    51 13    5 2!12   54     2
         2 9 19       57 18     5 8 17   5 9 17         1 16        2 15      4 14     5 13    7]    1
         30 20        1 0 19    11 18    12 17        1 4 16       15 15    16 1 4   17 13    18:    0


   R u l e . — To find the Declination of any heavenly body whose longitude and
latitude are given.— 1°. Look for the even degree of longitude and under the
even degree of latitude, at the head of the Table; at the angle of meeting
will be found the declination for those even degrees, which transcribe and
call A. 2°. In the same column of latitude, seek the declination for the
next even degree of longitude, and note the difference. Then say: “ As 60'
are to the minutes of difference, so are the minutes of difference in the
longitude given to the Arst correction.” 3°. Observe the difference of
declination caused by one degree of increase in the latitude. Then say:
“ As 60' are to the minutes of difference, so are the minutes of difference
in the latitude given to the second correction." 4° If both corrections be
plus or minus, then the sum of the two corrections, added to or subtracted
from A, will give the required declination. But, if one be plus and the other
minus, then the difference of the two corrections added to or subtracted from
A, will give the declination required.
                                                   APPENDIX.                                                             473


                           TA B LE                OF        D ECLIN ATIO N .

         >*                                                                                                      Ph
         pH
         <                     Degrees OF N o r t h L a t i t u d e .                                            o
         H                                                                                                       a
         M
         CD                                             o                      O                                 §

        02         0           L           l                       1                        6            1       o

        D. |D. M . D. M . D. M . D. M . D. M . D. M. D. M . D. M . D.                                                     >3
cp                     10 19    n     18       12 17    14 16          15 15       16 14        17 13    18      30
         0 ¡2 0
          i   20       23 19    24 18          25 17    26 16      2 7 15          29 14        30 13    31      29
£-
<M        2 20         35 19    36 18          37 17    38 16      3 9 15          41 14        42 13    43 28            o
O                                                                  5 2 15          53 14        54 13    55 27
                                                                                                                          cr
          3 20         47 19    48 18          4 9 17   50 16
                                                                                                 5 14        6 26
         4 20          58 19    59 19           0 18        1 17        2 16        3 15                                  P
          5 21          8 20        9 19       10 18    11 17          12 16       14 15        15 14    16 25

          6 21         19 20    20 19          21 18    22 17      23 16           2 4 15       25 14    26 24

          7 21         30 20    31 19          32 18    33 17      3 4 16          3 4 15       35 14    36 23
 03
1—H       8 21         40 20    41 19          42 18    43 17      44 16           43 15        44 14    44 22
 t>>      9 21         49 20    50 19          51 18    52 17          53 16       53 15        54 14    54 21            w
 cS                             59 20           0 19        1 18        2 17        2 16         2 15        3 20
 0      10 21          58 20
 0                                                                                                                        >3'
        11 2 2          7 21        8 20        9 19    10 18          11 17       11 16        11 15    12      19

        12 22          15 21    16 20          17 19    18 18          19 17       19 16        19 15    20      18
 O                                                      25 18      2 6 17          26 16        26 15    27      17       =H
        13 22          23 21    24 20          25 19                                                                      p
 Ph     14 22          30 21    31 20          32 19    32 18      33 17           33 16        33 15    34      16
o       15 22          37 21    37 20          37 19    37 18      3 8 17          38 16        3 8 15   39      15
K                                                                                                                14
        16 22          44 21    44 20          44 19    44 18      4 5 17      45 16            4 5 15   46
rg      17 22          49 21    49 20          49 19    49 18      5 0 17      51 16            51 15    52      13

        18 22          56 21    56 20          56 19    56 18      5 7 17          57 16        57 15    58      12
                                                            0 19        1 18        2 17         2 16     2      11
        19 23           0 22        0 21        0 20
        20 23           4 22        4 21        4 20        4 19        4 18        4 17         4 16        4   10

        21 23           9 22     9 21           9 20        9 19        9 18        9 17         9 16        9       9
3       22 23          13 22    13 21          13 20    13 19      13 18           13 17        13 16    13          8     o
O                                                                                  16 17        16 16    16          7
        23 23          17 22    16 21          16 20    16 19      16 18
0                                                                                               19 16    19          6
Cu      24 23          19 22    19 21          19 20    19 19      19 18       19 17

s       25 23          21 22    21 21          21 20
                                               24 20
                                                        21 19
                                                        24 19
                                                                   21 18

                                                                   24 18
                                                                               21 17

                                                                               2 4 ;1 7
                                                                                                21 16

                                                                                                24 16
                                                                                                         21
                                                                                                         24
                                                                                                                     5

                                                                                                                     4
        26    23       23 22    24 21
        27    23       25 22    25 21          25 20    25 19      25 18       25 17            25 16    25          3
        28    23       26 22    26 21          26 20    26 19      26 18       2 6 17           26 16    26          2

        29    23       27 22    27 21          27 20    27 19      27 18       27 17            27 16    27          1

        30    23       27 22    27 21          27 20    27 19      27 18       27 17            27 16    27          0




  Bole,— To find the Longitude o f the Sun or body without latitude, corre­
sponding to a given declination.— 1°. Seek in the column marked 0° at the
top, the declination - nearest to that given, and transcribe the degree of
longitude corresponding thereto, marking it A. 2°. Observe the difference
of declination caused by one degree of longitude. Then say: “ As the
minutes of difference of declination are to 60' of longitude, so are the
minutes of difference (between the given declination and that corresponding
to the degree of longitude transcribed) to the correction." S°. Add the
correction to A if it be plus, subtract it if it be minus, and the required
longitude will be obtained.
   [Note.— The longitude and latitude of the Moon, or a planet, correspond­
ing to a given declination, must be computed from an Ephemeris, or the
Nautical Almanac for the year of birth.J
474                         THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.



                         T A B LE              OF          D ECLIN ATIO N .

                                                                                                      |




                                                                                                      G e m in i.
         Ö                   D egrees           OF       S outh         L a t it u d e .
         a
         o
         £
         <5
         o       O           0           O           o           O           I
                 0           1           2           3           4           j




                                                                                                                    Apparent Obliquity of the Ecliptic, January 1st, 1795, 23° 27' 50S1
         D. D.   31. D .     M.     D.   M.     D.       M. D.       M. D . M. D . M . D . M .        D.
           0 2 3 2 7 1 2 2 2 7 21 2 7 20 2 7 1 9 2 7 1 8 2 7 1 7 2 7 1 1 6 2 7 3 0
           i l l 2 3 2 7 22 2 7 21 2 7 20 2 7 1 9 2 7 1 8 2 7 1 7 2 7 1 6 2 7 2 9
           2 ¡2 3 2 6 22 2 6 21 2 6 20 2 6 1 9 2 6 1 8 2 6 1 7 2 6 1 6 2 6 2 8
           3 2 3 2 5 22 2 5 21 2 5 20 2 5 1 9 2 5 1 8 2 5 1 7 2 5 1 6 2 5 2 7
           4 2 3 2 8 22 2 4 21 2 5 20 2 5 1 9 2 5 1 8 2 5 1 7 2 5 1 6 2 5 2 6
           5 2 3 21 22 21 21 21 20 21 1 9 21 1 8 2 1 1 7 21 1 6 21 2 5

           ß 2 3 1 9 22 1 9 21 1 9 20 1 9 1 9 1 9 1 8 1 9 1 7 1 9 1 6 1 9 2 4
           7 2 3 1 7 22 1 6 21 1 6 20 1 6 1 9 1 6 1 8 1 6 1 7 1 6 1 6 1 6 2 3
           8 2 3 1 3 22 1 3 21 1 3 20 1 3 1 9 1 3 1 8 1 3 1 7 1 3 4 6 1 3 22
           9 28        9 22   9 21   9 20   9 19    9 18    9 17    916      9 21
         10 2 3 4 22 4 21 4 20 4 1 9 4 1 8 4 1 7 4 4 6 4 20
c3       H i 23        0 22 0 21 0 20 C 1 9 1 1 8 2 1 7 2 1 6 2 1 9
*-3
         12 22 5 6 21 5 6 20 5 6 1 9 5 6 1 8 5 7 1 7 5 7 1 6 5 7 1 5 5 8 1 8
         1 3 2 2 4 9 21 5 0 20 5 0 1 9 5 0 1 8 5 1 1 7 5 1 1 6 5 1 1 5 5 2 1 7
         1 4 2 2 4 4 21 4 4 20 4 4 1 9 4 4 1 8 4 5 1 7 4 5 1 6 4 5 1 5 4 6 1 6
         1 5 2 2 3 7 21 3 7 20 3 7 1 9 3 7 1 8 3 8 1 7 88 1 6 3 8 1 5 3 9 1 5

 CJ      1 6 [2 2 3 0 21 3 1 20 3 2 1 9 3 2 1 8 3 3 1 7 3 3 1 6 3 3 1 5 3 4 1 4
-3       1 7 22 2 3 21 2 4 20 2 5 4 9 2 5 1 8 2 6 1 7 2 6 1 6 2 6 1 5 2 7 1 3
         1 8 2 2 1 5 21 1 6 20 1 7 1 9 1 8 1 8 1 9 1 7 1 9 1 6 1 9 1 5 20 12
         19 22         7 21   8 20 9 1 9 10 1 8 11 1 7 11 1 6 11 1 5 12 11
 0       20 2 1 5 8 20 5 9 20 0 1 9 1 1 8 2 1 7 2 1 6 2 1 5 3 10
 &       2121 4 9 : 2 0 5 0 1 9 5 1 1 8 5 2 1 7 5 3 1 6 5 3 1 5 5 4 1 4 5 4 9
         22 21 4 0 2 0 4 1 1 9 4 2 1 8 4 3 1 7 4 4 1 6 4 3 1 5 4 4 1 4 44 8
O        23 21       3020        31 19       32 18       33 17       34 16       34 15   35 14   36        7
         24 21       19 20       21 1 9 22 1 8 2 3 1 7 2 4 1 6 2 5 1 5 2 5 1 4 2 6 6
         25  21 8 2 0            10 1 9 11 1 8 12 1 7 12 1 6 1 4 1 5 1 5 1 4 1 6 5
         26  20 5 8 1 9          59 19   0 1 8 1 17 2 1 6 3 1 5 5 1 4 6 4
         2 7 20 4 7 1 9 4 8 1 8 4 9 1 7 5 0 1 6 5 2 1 5 5 3 1 4 5 4 1 3 5 5   3
         2 8 20 3 5 1 9 3 6 1 8 3 7 1 7 3 8 1 6 3 9 1 5 4 1 1 4 4 2 1 3 4 3   2
         2 9 20 2 3 1 1 9 2 4 1 8 2 5 1 7 2 6 1 6 2 7 1 5 2 9 1 4 3 0 1 3 3 1 1
         3 0 20 1 0 1 9 11 1 8 1 2 4 7 1 4 1 6 1 5 15 1 6 1 4 1 7 1 3 1 8     o



  B ule.—To find the Declination of the S un, or any point in the Ecliptic
(without latitude) the longitude being given.— 1°. Look for the even degree
of longitude and in the column marked 0° at the top, note the declination
corresponding thereto, and mark it A. 2°. In the same column, observe
the difference of decimation caused by one degree of longitude. Then say :
“ As 60' are to the minutes of difference, so are the minutes of difference in
the longitude to the correction." 3°. This correction added to. or subtracted
from A, according to whether the declination is increasing or decreasing,
will give the required declination.
                                                        A P P E N D IX .                                                         475


                              T A B LE                OF          D ECLIN ATIO N .


                                                                                                                           m
                                       D egrees         o f      S o u t h L a t it u d e .                                P
          o                                                                                                                PÌ
          a


                    0              Ì            Ì            3             l             5            6          7

          D.          M.     D. M.         D. M.        D. M.        D. M.         r>. M .       D. M.      D. M.         D.
               ! D-
           0 ¡20 10 1 9                l i 18       12 1 7       14 16         15 15         16 14    17 13          18 30

           l .1 9     57 18            58 17        59 17         116           2 :1 5       14 14        5 13        7 1 .2 9
           249          44118          45 17        47 16        4 8 15        4914          51 13    52 12          54 28
           3   19       3 1 :1 8       33 17        34 1 6       36 15         3714          39 13    40 12          42 27
           4   19       1 7 il8        19 17        20 1 6 22 1 5              2414          25 13    27 12          29 26
           5 ,1 9        2|18           4 17         e 16         8 !1 5       10|14         11 1 3   13 12          14 25

           e 18 4 8 1 7                50 16        52 15        54114         5613      5 7 jl2      59   12         0 24
           7 18       33 17            35 16        3 6 15       38L4          4013      4 1 :1 2     43 11          45   23

           8 18       1717         21 1 5 2 3 1 4 2 5 1 3 2 6 1 1 2 2 8 1 1 3 0 22
                                       19 16
           9 18      217    4 16     6 1 5 8 : 1 4 10 1 3 12Ì1 2 1 5 1 1 1 7 21
         10 1 7 4 6 1 6 4 8 1 5 5 0 1 4 5 2 1 1 3 5 4 12 5 6 1 1 5 9 11 1 20
         11 1 7 2 9 1 6 3 1 1 5 3 3 1 4 3 5 : 1 3 3 7 12 3 9 1 1 4 2 ¡ 1 0 4 5 1 9
         12 1 7 1 3 1 6 1 5 1 5 1 8 1 4 2 0 ^ 1 3 22 12 2 4 1 1 2 7 : 1 0 3 0 1 8
         13 16 56 15 5 8 1 5         1 1 4 3 1 3 6 12 8 1 1 1 1 1 0 1 4 1 7
         1 4 1 6 3 9 1 5 4 1 1 4 4 4 1 3 4 6 1 2 4 9 11 5 1 1 0 5 4       9 57 16
         1 5 1 6 21 1 5 2 3 1 4 2 6 : 1 3 2 9 1 2 3 2 11 3 4 1 0 3 7      9 4 0 15

         16 16       3 15   5 14     8 1 3 11 12 1 4 11 1 6 1 0 1 9 9 2 2 1 4
         1 7 1 5 4 5 1 4 4 7 1 3 5 0 12 5 3 11 5 6 1 0 5 S Ì 1 0      1 9 4 13
         1 8 1 5 2 7 1 4 3 0 1 3 3 3 12 3 6 11 3 9 1 0 4 1        9 44    8 4 7 12
         19 15       9 1 4 12 1 3 1 5 12 1 8 11 21 10 2 3 9 2 6           8 2 9 11
         20 1 4 5 0 1 3 5 3 12 5 6 11 5 9 11 2 10 5 9 8 8 1 1 10
         21 1 4 3 1 1 3 3 4 1 2 3 7 11 4 ( 10 4 3 9 4 6 8 4 9 7 5 2 9
         22 1 4 1 1 1 3 1 4 1 2 1 7 11 2G 10 2 3 9 2 6 8 2 9 7 3 2 8
         2 3 1 3 5 2 1 2 5 6 1 1 1 5 9 11   2 10 5 9 8 8 11 7 1 4 7
         2 4 1 3 3 2 1 2 3 6 , 1 1 3 9 10 4 2    9 46   8 49 7 52 6 55 6
         2 5 1 3 12 1 2 1 6 1 1 1 9 10 22 9 2 6         8 29 7 33 6 37 5
         2 6 ! 1 2 5 2 11 5 6 10 5 8 10     1 9 5 8 8 7 12 6 1 6 4
         2 7 12 3 2 11 3 6 10 3 9        9 43    8 47 7 50 6 54 6 58 3
         2 8 1 2 11 11 1 5 10 1 8 9 22 8 2 6            7 29 6 32         6 36 2
         2 9 1 1 5 0 10 5 4 9 5 8 9         2 8 e 7 10 6 1 4 5 1 8 i
         3 0 11 29110 3 3        9 37    8 41 7 4£ 6 4 9 5 5 3 4 57 0

  Kcle.— To find the Declination o f any heavenly body whose longitude and
latitude are given.— 1°. L o o k for the even degree o f longitude and under
the even degree o f latitude, at the head of the T a b le ; at the angle of
m eeting rvill be fou n d the declination for those even degrees, w hich
transcribe and call A . 2°. In the sam e colum n of latitude, seek the
declin ation for the next even degree o f longitude, and note the difference.
T hen s a y : “ A s 60 ' are to the m inutes o f difference, so are the m inutes of
difference in the longitude given to the first correction.” 3°. Observe the
difference of declination caused by one degree o f increase in the latitude.
T hen say : " As 6 0 1 are to the m inutes o f difference, so are the m inutes o f
difference in the latitude given to the second correction.” 4°. If both
correction s be plus or minus, then the sum of the two corrections, added to
or subtracted from A , w ill give the required declination. But, if one be plus
and the other minus, then the difference o f the two corrections added to or
subtracted from A, will give the declination required.
476                      THE    T E X T -B O O K      OF    ASTRO LOG Y.




                       T A B LE         OF         D ECLIN ATIO N .


         o               D egrees       of       S o u th L a t it u d e .                   CD
         o                                                                                   2
         P3

        l>                                   O
                0        L                   3          1                6
        D.    D. M .   D. M.   D. M .   D . M.       D. M.    D. M.    D. M.   D.   m   .   : D.
         0 l i 29 10 33 9 37 8 41 7 45 6 49 5 53 4 57 30
         i l i 8 10 13 9 17 8 21 7 24 6 28 5 32 4 36 29
         2 10 46 9 51 8 55 8 0 7 4 6 8 5 12 4 16 28
         3 10 25 9 30 8 34 7 38 6 42 5 46 4 50 3 54 27
         4 10 3 9 7 8 11 7 15 6 19 5 24 4 28 3 32 26
         5 9 41 8 45 7 49 6 53 5 57 5 2 4 6 3 10 25
         6 1 9 19 8 23 7 27 6 31 5 35 4 40 3 45 2 49! 24
         7 8 57 8 1 7 5 6 9 5 13 4 18 3 22 2 26 23
         8 8 35 7 39 6 43 5 47 4 51 3 56 3 0 2 4 22
         9 8 12 7 16 6 20 5 24 4 28 3 32 2 37 1 41 21
        10 7 50 6 54! 5 58 5 2 4 6 3 10 2 15 1 19 20
        11 7 27 0 31 5 36 4 40 3 45 2 49 1 54 0 58 19
        12 7 4 6 9 5 14 4 18 3 23 2 27 1 32 0 36 18
        13 6 41 5 45 4 50 3 54 2 59 2 3 1 8 0 13 17
        14 6 18 5 22 4 27 3 31 2 36 1 40 0 45 0 9 16
        15 5 55 5 0 4 5 3 9 2 14 1 18 0 23 0 32 15
        16 5 32 4 37 3 42 2 46 1 51 0 56 0 0 0 55 14
        17 5 8 4 13 3 18 2 23 1 28 0 33 0 23 1 19 13
        18 4 45 3 50 2 55 2 0 1 5 0 10 0 46 1 41 12
        19 4 21 3 26 2 31 1 36 0 41 0 14 1 9 2 4 11
        20 3 58 3 3 2 8 1 13 0 18 0 38 1 33 2 28 10
        21 3 34 2 39 1 44 0 49 0 6 1 2 1 57 2 52 9
        22 8 11 2 16 1 21 0 26 0 29 1 25 2 20 3 15 8
        23 2 47 1 52 0 57 0 2 0 53 1 48 2 43 3 38 7
        24 2 23 1 28 0 33 0 22 1 17 2 12 3 7 4 2 6
        25 1 59 1 5 0 10 0 46 1 41 2 36 3 31 4 26 5
        26 1 36 0 41 0 15 1 10 2 51 3 0 3 55 4 50 4
        27 1 12 0 17 0 39 1 34 2 29 3 24 4 19 5 14 3
        28 0 48 0 7 1 8 1 57 2 52 3 47 4 42 5 37 2
        29 0 24 0 31 1 27 2 21 3 16 4 11 5 6 6 1 i
        30 0 0 0 551 1 50 2 45 3 40 4 35] 5 30 6 25 0

  B u l b . — T o find the Longitude of the S u n , or body without latitude,
corresponding to a given declination.— 1°. Seek in the colum n m arked 0 ° at
the top, the declination nearest to that given, an d transcribe the degree of
longitude coresponding thereto, m arking it A . 2“ . Observe the difference
o f decim ation caused by one degree of longitude. T hen s a y : “ As the
m inutes o f difference o f declination are to 6 0 ' o f longitude, so are the
m inutes o f difference (between the given declination and that corresponding
to the degree of longitude transcribed) to the correction." 3 °. A dd the
correction to A if it be plus, subtract it if it be minus, and the required
longitude will be obtained.
    [Note.— T he longitude and latitude o f the M oon, or a planet, correspond­
ing to a given declination, m ust be com puted from an Ephemeris, or the
Nautical Almanac for the year o f birth.]
                                A P P E N D IX .                                                     477




             TABLE            OF          D ECLIN ATIO N .


               D egrees        OF        South         L a t it u d e                           CO
 <                                                                                              W
 g                                                                                              O
 pq
 M
                 O        O                       3           O            D                    P4
       0         i        2          !            1                        3           r
D.    D. M. D.       M. D . M. D .       M. D .       M. D.       M . D.       M. D.       M.   D.
   0 0 0 0 55 i 50 2 45 3 4 0 4 35 5 3 0 6 25 3 0
   1 0 24 l 19 2 14 3              9 4     4    4 59    5 55    6 49 29
! 2   0 48 l 43 2 38 3 33 4 2 8 5 23 6 18 7 13 28
   3  1 12 2 7 3 2 3 5 7 4 5 2 5 4 7 6 4 2 7 3 7 2 7
   4  1 3 6 2 3 1 3 2 6 4 21 5 1 6 6 11 7 6 8 1 2 6
   5  1 59 2 55 3 50 4 45 5 40 6 35 7 3 0 8 25 25
   6 2 23 3 19 4 14 5 9 6 4 6 59 7 54 8 4 9 24
   7  2 47 3 43 4 38 5 33 6 28 7 23 8 18 9 13 23
   8 3 11 4 7 5 2 5 5 7 6 5 2 7 4 7 8 4 2 9 3 7 22
   9  3 34      4 30   5 25    6 20 7 1 5 8 10 9 5 1 1 0 0 21
 10 3 5 8 4 5 4 5 4 9 6 4 4 7 3 9 8 3 4 9 2 9 j l 0 2 4 20
 11 4 21 5 1 7 6 12 7 7 8 2 8 5 7 9 5 2 10 4 7 1 9
 12 4 4 5 5 4 1 6 3 6 7 3 1 8 2 6 9 21 10 1 6 11 11 1 8
 13   5   8 6 4 6 5 9 7 5 4 8 4 9 9 4 4 10 3 9 11 3 4 1 7
 14   5 32      6 2 8 7 2 3 8 1 8 9 1 3 10 8 11 3 11 5 8 1 6
 15   5 55      6 5 1 7 4 6 8 4 1 9 3 0 10 3 1 11 2 6 12 21 1 5
 16   6 1 8 7 1 3 8 8 9 3 9 5 8 10 5 3 11 4 8 12 4 3 1 4
 17   6 4 1 7 3 6 8 3 1 9 2 6 10 21 11 1 6 12 11 1 3 6 1 3
 18   7   4 8       0 8 5 5 9 5 0 10 4 5 11 4 0 12 3 5 1 3 3 0 12
 19   7 27      8 22 9 1 7 10 12 11 7 12 2 12 5 7 1 3 5 2 11
 20 7 5 0 8 4 6 9 4 1 10 3 6 11 3 1 11 2 6 1 3 21 1 4 1 6 10
 21 8 12 9 8 10 4 10 5 9 11 5 4 12 4 9 1 3 4 4 1 4 3 9 9
22 8 3 5 9 3 1 10 2 7 11 22 12 1 8 1 3 1 3 1 4 9 1 5 4 8
23    8 5 7 9 5 3 10 4 9 11 4 4 12 4 0 1 3 3 5 1 4 3 1 1 5 2 6 7
24    9 1 9 1 1 0 1 5 11 11 12     6 13 2 13 58 14 54 15 5 0 6
25    9 4 1 1 0 3 9 11 3 5 12 2 9 1 3 2 6 1 4 22 1 5 1 8 1 6 1 4      5
 2 6 10   8 1 1 0 5 9 11 5 5 12 5 1 1 3 4 7 j l 4 4 3 1 5 3 9 1 6 3 5 4
2 7 10 2 5 1 1 21 1 2 1 7 1 3 12 1 4       815      4 16    0 16 56 ' 3
2 8 10 4 6 1 1 4 2 | 1 2 3 8 1 3 3 3 1 4 2 9 1 5 2 5 1 6 21 1 7 1 7   2
 2 9 11   712       413    0 13 56 14 5 1 1 5 47 16 43 17 3 9 1
3C 11 2 9 | 1 2 2 4 1 3 20 1 4 1 6 1 5 12 1 6       8 17 4 18 0 0
478                      THE TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY.




                         TABLE                 OF        D ECLIN ATIO N .

                                                                                                         CO
      o                   D egrees             OF       S outh     L a t it u d e .                      D
                                                                                                         3
                                                                                                         -si
      o
      o         O                                                                                        5*
      CQ                              i
                0                         !         3          1                                r        <
      D.   D.       M. D . M .   D.       M.   D.       M.   D. M . D .   M. D .      M.   D.       M.   D.
       0 li       12 2 4 1 3 20 1 4 1 6 1 5 12 1 6 8 1 7 4 1 8 0 3 0
                    29

        l l i 5 0 12 4 5 1 3 4 1 1 4 3 7 1 5 3 3 1 6 3 0 1 7 2 6 1 8 22 2 9
        2 12 11 1 3 6 1 4 2 1 4 5 8 1 5 5 4 1 6 5 1 1 7 4 7 1 8 4 3 2 8
        3 12 3 2 1 3 2 7 1 4 2 3 1 5 1 9 1 6 1 5 1 7 12 1 8        8 19 4 27
        4 12 5 2 1 3 4 7 1 4 4 3 1 5 3 9 1 6 3 5 1 7 3 2 1 8 2 8 1 9 2 4 2 6
        5 1 3 12 1 4    7 15    3 L6      0 1 6 56 17 53 18 49 19 45 25
        6 1 3 3 2 1 4 2 7 1 5 2 3 1 6 1 9 1 7 1 5 1 8 12 1 9 8 20 5 2 4
        7 1 3 5 2 1 4 4 7 1 5 4 3 1 6 4 0 1 7 3 6 1 8 3 3 1 9 2 9 20 2 6 2 3
        8 1 4 11 1 5 7 1 6 3 1 7 0 1 7 5 6 1 8 5 8 1 9 5 0 2 0 4 7 22
        9 1 4 3 1 1 5 2 6 1 6 22 1 7 1 9 1 8 1 6 1 9 1 3 20 10 21         7 21
      10 1 4 5 0 1 5 4 5 1 6 4 1 1 7 3 8 1 8 3 5 1 9 3 2 20 2 9 21 2 6 20
      11 1 5 9 1 6 1 1 7 1 1 7 5 8 1 1 8 5 5 1 9 5 2 2 0 4 9 21 4 6 1 9
      12 1 5 2 7 1 6 2 3 1 7 2 0 1 1 8 1 7 1 9 1 4 20 11 21 8 22 5 1 8
      1 3 1 5 4 5 1 6 4 2 1 7 3 9 1 8 3 6 1 9 3 3 2 0 3 0 21 2 7 22 2 4 1 7
      14 16     3 17    0 1 7 5 7 1 1 8 5 4 1 1 9 5 1 2 0 4 9 21 4 6 22 4 3 1 6
      1 5 1 6 21 1 7 1 8 1 8 1 5 T 9 12120          9 21    7 ;2 2 4 23   1 15
      1 6 1 6 3 9 1 7 3 5 1 8 3 3 1 9 3 0 20 2 7 21 2 5 22 22 2 3 1 9 1 4
      1 7 1 6 5 6 1 7 5 2 1 8 5 0 1 9 4 7 2 0 4 4 21 4 2 22 8 9 2 3 3 6 1 3
      18 17 13 18       9 19    7 20      5 21      2 22 0 22 5 7 2 3 5 4 12
      1 9 1 7 2 9 1 8 2 6 1 9 2 4 20 22 21 1 9 22 1 7 2 3 1 4 2 4 11 11
      20 1 7 4 6 1 8 4 3 1 9 4 1 20 3 8 21 3 6 22 3 4 2 3 3 1 2 4 2 8 10
      21 1 8 2 1 8 5 9 1 9 5 7 20 5 5 21 5 3 22 5 1 2 3 4 9 2 4 4 6 9
      22 1 8 1 7 1 9 1 5 20 1 3 21 11 22 9 2 3 7 2 4 5 2 5 3 8
      2 3 1 8 3 3 1 9 3 1 20 2 9 21 2 7 22 2 5 2 3 2 3 2 4 21 2 5 1 9         7
      2 4 1 8 4 8 1 9 4 6 2 0 4 4 21 4 2 22 4 0 2 3 3 8 2 4 3 6 2 5 3 4       6
      25 19     2 20 0 20 5 9 21 5 7 22 5 5 2 3 5 3 2 4 5 1 2 5 4 9 5
      2 6 1 9 1 7 20 1 4 21 1 3 22 11 2 3           9 24    825 626 4 4
      2 7 1 9 3 1 20 2 8 21 2 7 22 2 5 2 3 2 3 2 4 22 2 5 20 2 6 1 8          3
      2 8 1 9 4 4 20 4 2 2 1 4 1 22 3 9 2 3 3 7 2 4 3 7 2 5 3 4 2 6 3 2       2
      2 9 1 9 5 7 20 5 6 21 5 4 22 5 3 2 3 5 1 2 4 5 0 2 5 4 8 2 6 4 6        1
      3 0 20 10 21      8 22    623 5 24 4 25 226 026 59 0
                            APPENDIX.                                    479




            TABLE          OF    DECLIN ATIO N.

&
P3                                                                  «
<             D egrees     OF S o u t h   L a t it u d e            o
Eh                                                                  o
Eh

s      O                     o        O        ->                   §
O
Q      0      L        2     3        1        5           6        o
D.   D. M. D. M . D.   M. D . M. D.   M. D. M.       D. M . D. M.   D.
 0 20 10 21   8 22 6 23 5 24 4 25 2 26 0|26 59 30
 i 20 23 21 20 22 19 23 18 24 17 25 16 26 14 27 13 29
 2 20 35 21 32 22 31 23 30 24 29 25 28 26 26 27 25 28
 3 20 47 21 44 22 43 23 42 24 41 25 40 26 39 27 38 27
 4 20 58 21 56 22 55 23 54 24 53 25 52 26 51 27 50 26
 5 21 8 22 8 23 7 24 625 5 26 4 27 3 28 2 25
 6 21 19 2 2 19 23 18 24 17 25 16 26 15 27 14 28 13 24
 7 21 30 22 30 23 29 24 28 25 27 26 26 27 25 28 25 23
 8 21 40 22 40 23 39 24 38 25 37 26 36 27 35 28 35 22
 9 21 49 22 49 23 48 24 47 25 46 26 45 27 44 28 43 21
10 22 58 22 58 23 57 24 56 25 55 26 54 27 53 28 52 20
11 22 7 23 7 24 6 25 626 5 27 4 28 3 29 2 19
12 22 15 23 15 24 14 25 1426 13 27 12 28 11 29 10 18
13 22 23 23 23 24 22 25 22 26 21 27 20 28 19 29 18 17
14 22 30 23 30 24 29 25 2926 29 27 28 28 28 29 27 16
15 22 37 23 37 24 36 25 36126 36 27 35 28 35 29 34 15
16 22 44:23 44 24 43 25 43 26 43 27 42 28 42 29 41 14
17 2 2 49 23 50 24 50 25 50 26 50 27 50 28 50 29 48 13
18 22 56 23 56 24 56 25 56 26 56 27 56 28 56 29 55 12
19 23 0 24 0 25 0 26 0 27 0 28 0 29 030 0 11
20 23 4 24 4 25 4 26 4 27 4 28 4 29 430 4 10
21 23 9 24 9 25 9 26 9 27 9 28 9 29 9 30 9 9
22 23 13 24 13 25 13 26 13 27 13 28 13 29 13 30 13 8
23 23 17 24 16 25 16 26 16 27 16 28 16 29 16 30 16 7
24 23 19 24 19 25 19 26 19 27 19 28 19 29 19 30 19 6
25 23 21 24 21|25 21126 21 27 21 28 21 29 21 30 21 5
26 23 23 24 23 25 23 26 23 27 23 28 23 29 23 30 23 4
27 23 25 24 25 25 25 26 25 27 25 28 25 29 25 30 25 3
28 23 26 24 26 25 26 26 26 27 26 28 26 29 26 30 26 2
29 23 27 24 27 25 27 26 27 27 27 28 27 29 27 30 27 i
30 23 27 24 27 25 27 26 27 27 27 28 27 29 27 30 27 0
480                                          TH E TE X T -B O O K              OF ASTR OLO G Y.



Table I.                   Of Ascensional Difference for the Latitude of London,
               51° 30' 4 9 " North.                                  Obliquity of the Ecliptic, 23° 27'.



  D é clin .
                                                                                                                                /
                     o           5       10             15       20       25       30       35       40           45           50       55



    O           ©        , o         / o      ,     o        ,  0      / Q      / Q      / o      / Q      / o          / o         - Q      -
                0        0 0         6 0      13 0           19 0     25 0     31 0     38 0     44 0     50 0         57 1         3 1      9
    0

                                     22 1     28 1           34 1     41 1     47 1     53 2      0 2      6 2         12 2     18 2         25
        1       l        15 1

                2        31 2        37 2     44 2           50 2     56 3      3 3      9 3     15 3     22 3         28 3     34 3         40
        2

                                     53 3     59 4           6 4      12 4     18 4     25 4     31 4     37 4         44 4     50 4         56
        3       3        47 3

        4       5         3 5        9 5      15 5           22 5     28 5     35 5     41 5     47 5     54 6          0 6          6 6    13

                                     25 6     32 6           88 6     45 6     51 6     57 7      4 7     10 7         17 7     23 7        29
        5       6        19 6

                         36 7        42 7     49 7           55 8      1 8      8 8     14 8     21 8     27 8         34 8     40 8        47
        6       7

                                     0 9       6 9           12 9     19 9     25 9     32 9     38 9     45 9         51 9     58 10        4
        7        8       53 9



                                     17 10    24 10          30 10    37 10    42 10    50 10    57 11     3 11        10 11    16 11       23
         8      10       11 10

                                     36 11    43 11          49 11    56 12     2 12     9 12    16 12    22 12        30 12    36 12       42
         9      11       29 11

                                     55 13     2 13           9 13    15 13    22 13    29 13    36 13    4213     49 13        56 14        2
    10          12       49 12

                                     16 14    23 14          29 14    36 14    43 14    50 14    56 15     315         10 15    17 15       24
    11          14        9 14

                                     37 15    44 15          51 15    5S 16     5 16    11 16    18 16    25 16    32 16        39 16       46
    12          15       30 15

                                      0 17        7 17       14 17    21 17    28 17    35 17    42 17    49 17    56 18            3 18    10
    13          16       53 17

                                     24 18    31 18          38 18    45 18    52 18    59 19     6 19    13 19    20 19        27 19       35
    14          18       17 IS



                                              56 20           3 20    10 20    18 20    25 20    32 20    39 20    47 20        54 21        1
    15          19       42 19       49 19

                                     16 21    23 21          30 21    38 21    45 21    52 22     0 22     7 22        15 22    22 22       29
    16          21        8 21

                                     44 22    52 22          59 23     7 23    1423     22 23    29 23    37 23    45 23        52 24        0
    17          22       37 22
                                              23 24          30 24    38 24    4624     53 25     1 25     9 25        16 25    24 25       32
    18          24        7 24       15 24

                25       40 25       48 25    55 26           3 26    11 26    1926     27 26    35 26   43 26     51 26        59 27        7
    19

                                     23 27    31 27          39 27    47 27    5528      3 28    11 28    19 28    28 28        36 28       44
    20          27       15 27

    21                   52 29        0 29     9 29          17 29    25 29    34 29    42 29    50 29   59 30          7 30    16 30       24
                28



                                                             58 31     7 31    15 31    24 31    33 31    41 31        50 31    59           7
    22          30       33 30       41 30    50 30
                                                                                                                                      32
                                                                      51 33     0 33     9 33    18 33    27 33        36 33    45 33       54
    23          32       16 32       25 32    34 32          43 32

                                                                      40 34    49 34    58 35     8 35    17 35        26 35    36 35       45
    24          34        3 34       12 34    22 34          31 34

                                              14 36          23 36    33 36    42 36    52 37     2 37    11 37    21 37        31 37       41
    25          35       55 36        4 36

                                              10 38          20 38    30 38    4038     50 39     0 39    10 39        21 39    31 39       39
     26         37       50 38        0 38

                                              12 40          23 40    33 40    44 40    54 41     5 41    15 41        26 41    37 41        48
     27         39       51 40        2 40
                                                                      42 42    53 43     4 43    16 43    27 43        38 43        49 44     1
     28         41       58 42        9 42    20 42          31 42
                                                                  APPENDIX.                                                             481

Table II.               Of Ascensional Difference for the Latitude of Washington,
  D.C., 3S° 53' 3 0 " Xorth.                                        Obliquity of the Ecliptic, 23° 27 '.


  Déclin.                                                                 25



   ©             o     ' o       ' o      '        o      ' Q      ' c*      ' Q ' o                t «      ' o        ' °      '         '
                 0     0 0       4 0               0     12 0     16 0      20 0 24 0              28 0     32 0       3(5 0    40 0      44
      0                                   8
                       48 0      52 0                              5 1
      1          0                        56 1           1 1
                                                                               9 1 13 1 17 1 21 1 25 1 29 1 33
      2      ! 1       37 1      41 1     45 l           49 1     53 1         57 2       1 2      5 2      9 2        13 2     17 2      21

                 2     25 2      29 2     38 2           38 2     42 2         46 2       50 2     54 2     58 3        2 3     6 3       10
      3
                 3     14 3      18 3     22 3           26 3     30 3         34 3       38 3     42 3     47 3       51 3     55 3      59
       4
       5         4      3 4       7 4     11 4           15 4     19 4         23 4       27 4     31 4     35 4       40 4     44 4      48

                                 56 5                              8 5
       6         4     52 4
                                              01   5      4 5
                                                                               1
                                                                                     5    16 5     20 5     25 5       29 5     33 5      37

       7         5     41 5      45 5     49 5           53 5     57 6          2 6        6 6     10 6     14 6       18 6     22 6      26


             !
        8        6     81 6      35 6     3S 6           43 6     47 6         51 6       55 7      0 7      4 7        s 7     12 7      16

        9        7     20 7      25 7     29 7           33 7     37 7         41 7       45 7     50 7     54 7       58 8      2 8       6

     10          8     11 8      15 8     19 8           23 8     27 8         32 8       36 8     40 8     44 8       49 8     53 8      57

     11          9      1 9       5 9     10 9           14 9      18 9        22 9       27 9     31 9     35 9       39 9     44 9      48

      12         9     52 9      57 10            110     5 10     9 10        14 10      18 10    22 10    27 10      3110     35 10     40

      18         10    44,10     48 10    53! 10         57 11      1 11        6,11      10 11    14 11    19 11      2311     27 11     32

      14         11    36 11     40 11    4511           49 11     54 11       5812        2 12     7 12    11 12      1612     20 12     24



      15         12    39 12     83 12    3SÎ12          42 12     47 12       5112       56 13     0 13     4 13       9 13    13 13     18

      16         13    22 13     27 13    31 13          36 13     40 13       45 13      49 13 54 13       58jH        3,14     7 14     12

       17        14    17 14     21 14    26 14          30 14     35 14       39 14      44 14 49 14       5 s ll4    5815      2 15      7

       18        15    12 15     16 15    21 15          25 15     30 15       35 15      39 15    44 15    49jl5      5315     58 16      3

       19        16     7 16     12 16    17 16          2216      26 16       31 16      3£ 16    41 16    45 16      50 16    55 17      0

       20        17       17      9 17     14 17         19 17     23 17       28 17      33 17    38 17    43|l7       4817    52 17     57

       21        18        18     r 18 12 18 1718 22 18 27 18 S2jl8 36 18 41 18 4618 51 18 56
                                                            1
       22        19        19       19        11 19       16 19    21 19       2f 19      3119      36 19    4119       4619    51 19      56

       23        ¡20       20       20        11 20       17 20    25 20        27 20     82j20     3r 20    42 20      4r 20    52 '20    58
                                                                                                                                   1
        24       21      ; 121      21        18 21       18 21    24 21        29121     3421      3i 21    4 4 ¡21    56 21    55 ¡22        0

        25       ¡22     ,22      11122       1( 22       2122     2r 22        32 22     38122     48 22    48 22      5 22     59 ¡23        5

        26       23     1( 23     1,>23       l     23    26 23    3f 28        3r ;23     48 23    45523    5*   23    5£ 24       24     10

        27       24     1(3 24    2 24        2r 24       33 24    3 *24        44   24    5( 24    5 >25         25      ¡25    1225      18

        28       25     2 125     2 25        3 3 25      4lj25    4 7 25       58 25      55S26     126     1( 26      16126    2226      28
                                                                                                                          I



                                                                                                                                          2i
                                                        482




                                               INDEX.

                                               Page.                                                  Page
A c k la n d , D r., q u o t e d ............. 418          Death, The kind of ........... 167
A lb a n y , D u k e o f, T h e la te ...             107   Deborah, Song of              ...........     7
A le x a n d e r II., T h e T sa r ... 171                  Declinations, On...........            32, 468
A lp h a b e t o f A s tr o lo g y , T h e             30   Democritus quoted ...........                13
A m u le ts, O n              ...................... 422    Derby, T h e ........................... 430
A n a x a g o r a s ...............................    13   Directions, Primary, On 174, 238
A n a x im a n d e r          ......................   13   Directions, Secondary, On... 223
A r a g o q u o te d         ............ 2, 315, 346       Dryden quoted ...................            25
A ra tu s q u o te d          ............       266, 348
A r g o , T h e C on stella tion                 ...   57   Eclipses, On... 226, 314, 322, 327
A sp e cts E x p la in e d              .............  33   Edward V II , King 135, 229. 341
A s tr o -M e te o r o lo g y , O n              ... 348    Elevations of the Celestial
A u g u stin e, S t.............................      214     Bodies, On     ................... 312
                                                            Emerson qu oted ................... 144
B a c o n , q u o te d       ... 2 2 8 ,4 0 9 ,4 1 8        Equating Ares of Direction 191
B a ssan tin        ...............................   24    Equinoxes, On the        ... 279, 288
B e a co n sfie ld , E a r l o f .............       139    Evelyn quoted ................... 347
B e th le h e m , th e S tar o f 8, 121,3 4 0               Examples of Directions 179, 186
B ir d w o o d , S ir G-., q u o te d ... 409
B la c k D e a th , T h e              ............. 392    Pasts, On    ........................... 422
B lin d n e ss, O n          ......................  133    Flamstead quoted              ...........  18
B o n a tu s , G u id o , q u oted              ... 303     Formulse     ............................ 252
B o u rb p n s, T h e        ......................  149    Forster, Dr , quoted ... 420, 421
B ra b a n t, D u k e o f, T h e                ...  112    Francis I. of France ........... 146
B ra h é , T y c h o         ......................   25    Francis of Teck, Prince ... 107
B u d d h a , S a k y a ......................        10    Fullom quoted ................... 421
B u n se n q u o te d         ......................   9
B u tler, th e l le v . D r .................         20    Galton, Sir F., quoted...........             26
B u y in g fo r P r o fit             426, 428, 429         George III., King               ........... 140
C ardan , J e ro m e 23, 257, 303, 405                      George V., King, Horoscope
C ardan , J o h n B ......................... 170             of    .................................... 206
C a ttle, O n B u y in g               ............. 429    Goad, Dr., quoted 71, 355, 357,
C h ildren , O n             ......................  160                                   370, 375, 376
C h olera , O n ...................... 389, 422             Goethe, Horoscope of 47. 139, 153
C ice ro q u oted            ......................   12    Guise, Duke of ................... 173
C h ristian V ic t o r , P r in ce              ...  108
C la rk e, D r . J o h n H ., q u o te d 389,               Hahnemann, Dr. S. ... 142, 421
                                               413, 420     Halley’s Comet, On ........... 340
C o m m a n d e rs, S u ccessfu l ...                153    Haly quoted........................... 359
C o m e ts, O n ...............................      337    Health, Preservation of ... 419
C rises, O n ...............................         399    Hecker quoted ................... 393
                                                            Hercules        ................... 88, 299
D a n te q u oted             99, 267, 297, 299             H erm es................... 11. 317, 322
D a v id , K i n g ...                      167             Higgins, Godfrey ... 1. 5, 47, 58
                                              IND EX,                                                     48B

                                     Page.                                                             Page.
Hindu Gods, On the ’ ...........         9          O perations, S u rgical, O n ...                       406
Hippocrates quoted ... 14, 409                      O rleans, D u k e o f ......................           104
Homoeopathy      ........... 410, 413
Horace quoted ...................       25          P arallels, R a p t, O n                ............. 177
Horary Astrology          ........... 443           P a lm e rsto n , L o r d              ...       ...  227
Horoscopes, 18, 39, 43, 44, 47. 52,                 Parlies, D r., q u o te d 385, 386, 389
 102, 103. 104, to 113, 124, 129,                   P a rt o f F o r tu n e , O n th e 146, 4 3 8
                         133, 158, 171              P e a rce , D r . C. T .......................        397
Houses, Tables of, On... 40. 437                    P ereira q u o te d           ......................  417
Humbert, King ................... 172               P h y sica l C o n stitu tion , O n the 131
Hufeland quoted................... 167             P la eid u s de T itu s, q u o te d 23, 439
                                                   P lin y q u o te d            ...         13, 316, 342
Influenza, On          ...................   385   P ic k fo r d , D r., q u o t e d ............. 3 8 7
                                                   P l a g u e ......................................... 392
Josephus qu oted ...........                   2   P re d ictio n s fu lfilled 196, 289,291,
Journeys, Short, On ...........              427       293, 316, 326, 331, 363, 3 6 6 ,3 7 7 ,
Journeying Abroad ...........                433                                378, 382, 383, 391
                                                   P reten d er, T h e ......................             109
Ivelsall, Dr., quoted ........... 390              P r im a r y D ire ctio n s , O n                 ...  174
Kepler quoted       17, 210, 212, 350              P r in ce C on sort. H o r o s c o p e
                                                       o f ............. 50, 128, 180, 188, 205
Latitude, On     ...................          33   P r o c lu s q u o te d       ......................   324
Lawsuits, On     ...................         432   P r o c to r , R .A .        11, 21, 55, 58, 243
Lempriere quoted         ...........          96   P ro fe ssio n , O n the                ............. 435
Life, On prolonging ...........              168   P ro g n o sis, O n           ......................   402
Longitude, On ...................             33   P r o g re sse s, O n         ......................   226
                                                   P ro u t, D r., q u o te d              ............. 387
Magi, The ............................ 121         P to le m y , C lau diu s, q u o te d 55, 6 2 ,
Marriage, On       ........... 155, 431               88, 97, 128, 126. 135, 138, 249.
Mars, The planet 87,233,299, 362                                                          254, 318, 404
Massey, C. C., quoted........... 251               “ P u n c h .” q u o ta tio n f r o m ...              172
Medical Astrology, On               ... 384        P y t h a g o r a s ...............................     13
Mee, Mr. A., quoted ........... 212
Medicines, On      ................... 414         R a m e se y , q u o t e d ......................        333
Meteorology, O n ................... 348           Rank, On               ...............................   148
Mercury, The planet 78, 308, 365                   R e v o lu tio n s, S olar, O n                    ... 215
Monomania, Cases o f ........... 143               R ig h t A s ce n sio n , T a b les                  32, 4 2 6
Moon, On the 70, 231, 310, 355,                    R om e        ......................................... 272
                           374,399, 401            R o s e b e r y , E a rl o f              .............  105
Morrison, R. -L, Commander                         R u d o lf, C ro w n P r in c e .............            104
                                   102, 362        R u sk in q u oted              ......................   161
Moses quoted       ...................   95
Muller, Max, quoted ........... 398                St. P e te r ’s C h a i r ......................         58
Mundane Astrology, On ... 265                      Saturn, T h e plan et 95, 235,294, 860
Mundane Directions, On ... 175                     S ca p e -g o a t, T h e ......................          88
                                                   S ca rla tin a , E p i d e m i c ............. 394
Napier, Baron        ...................  24       S ch ille r q u o te d         ......................     1
Nativity, On rectifying a ... 204                  S cie n ce , B a n k r u p tc y o f               ... 252
Napoleon 1...................... 117, 139          S e m i-A r cs, O n           ...................... 35, 51
Napoleon, L o u is ................... 145         S h akesp eare q u o te d ............. 343
Nelson, Lord................... 91, 139            S h arp, D r., q u o te d             141, 349, 410,
Neomenia, On the             ........... 282                                                               417
Neptune, The planet 110,237,369                    S h ip s, B u ild in g a n d L a u n c h ­
Newton, Sir Isaac            ...........  22          in g o f ......................................... 434
Nostradamus          ................... 272       S ign s o f L o n g A s c e n sio n , etc.               62
484                      TH E   T E X T -B O O K   OF ASTR O LO G Y.


                                     P age.                                            P age.
Smallpox, Epidemics of ... 396                     Travelling, On ... 165, 427, 433
Solstices, On.................... 279              Twins, On ............................ 143
Speculum, The ...................          41      Typhoid Fever, On ........... 393
Stanley, Dean, quoted                 ...  22
Stars, The fixed ... 115, 118,            119      Uranus, The Planet 100, 236, 367
Sun, On the...........         65, 304, 353        Uses of Astrology   ........... 251
Surgical Operations ........... 429
Sydenham quoted               ........... 384      Vaccination, O n ................... 897
                                                   Vallancey, General, quoted...          6
Tables of Ascensional Differ­                      Varley, John, q u oted ...........    60
  ence ........................... 480,481         Venus, The Planet         83, 306, 364
Tables of Declination........... 468               Vocation, On th e................... 150
Tables of Fixed Stars........... 118               Volcanic Eruptions ........... 373
Tables of Houses................... 444
Tables of Planetary Dignities 437                  Wallace, Dr. A. R., quoted 212, 397
Tables of Poles of the Houses 264                  W allenstein............................ 211
Tables of Right Ascension... 456                   War, On Declaring ........... 431
Tennyson quoted............ 343                    Wolseley, Viscount ........... 106
Teraphim, The ...................          57
Teste, Dr., quoted            ........... 412      Zodiacal Directions, On ... 183
Therapeutics, On............ 408                   Zodiacal Signs, On the 6, 154, 268
Transits, On         ................... 280       Zoroaster    ............................
                                    485




                   SOME           BE VIE W S .

          “ THE      TEXT-BOOK            OF   ASTROLOGY.”
                                                      — G en ethm alog y.
                         F ikst E dition   (1879).

 T he Athenaiwn, June 14th, 1879:— “ The ‘ Text-Book’ is not
 at all a catchpenny tract, it is seriously written, and may be
 perused with advantage by anyone interested in astrology,
 provided he will maintain a cool judgment. The author, while
 contending for the dignity of his science, warns his readers
 against illiterate adventurers who pretend to tell fortunes by its
 means; and his work shows that its practice requires some
 degree of education and of labour, for its methods are founded
 on astronomical calculations......................... As astrology stands,
 it is a more respectable science than spiritualism, some of the
 ghosts of which are of very vulgar antecedents and performance.
 Mr. Pearce, following in the wake of Zadkiel, deals with
 conspicuous examples— kings, queens, and emperors, Prince
 Albert, the Prince of Wales, the Princess Louise ; and this we
 take to be a proper mode of dealing with a scientific subject in
 the present conditions of society......................... The astrologers
are as respectful to rank as the historians ; and Mr. Pearce’s
volume may almost be regarded as the quintessence of
accumulated Court Circulara.               In his pages the reader will
learn the real reasons why thePrincess Alice died, and he may
begin to doubt whether she can have died from diphtheria or
any mortal disease....................... The     illness of the Prince of
Wales is explained better than in the Lancet or in any other
medical journal; and, indeed, many pages are devoted to
H.R.H. and the exposition of his virtues. We have read
everything that refers to princes and princesses with great
reverence, but we own ourselves unsatisfied. What we want
from Mr. Pearce or from Zadkiel is a chronology or almanac
of the future, not the past, life of the Prince of Wales ; a scheme
showing when he will win the Derby, when he will lay a
foundation-stone, and all the important political events of his
career until the exact day of his death..........................We must
confess that as our knowledge of this science increases, so does
our doubt of its truth, and we have ceased to be altogether sure
486                TH E TE X T -B O O K OF ASTR OLO G Y.


 of the horoscope of H.R.H. Prince Albert, for though his grand­
 mother was present at his birth, she was not a woman of science ;
 very likely her watch was not wound up at the tim e; and this
  may account for the want of precision in her observations, of
 which no note was made by her on the spot. Our readers will
 observe that so delicate and exact is the science that a difference
 of four minutes in his birth may alter the whole course of a
 man’s life.”
    From the St. Leonards and Hastings Gazette, July 12th, 1872 :
 — “ This is a large and neatly-bound volume of 800 pages. It
 contains a mass of information, valuable of itself to students of
 astronomy and astrology, and interesting in all its main features
 to general readers. In the preface and introduction there is
 evinced a considerable amount of erudition. Mr. Pearce’s
 ‘ Text-Book of Astrology ’ is the work of a scientific man, and is
 evidently regarded as such by the Athenaeum.”
    From the Spiritualist, May 2nd, 1879 :— “ The predictions
accomplished by the deaths of Victor Emanuel and the Princess
 Alice, and those relating to the Dinas Colliery explosion and the
Isandhlwana disaster have obtained a wide publicity. At the
 hands of scholars, at least, astrology should be protected from
 insult by its fathomless antiquity, its universality, and by the
great names of its believers in ancient, mediaeval, and even
modern times. Of these Mr. Pearce gives an imposing list in
his interesting introduction to the volume now under review.
Even for those who desire only to obtain a general knowledge of
the subject, or at most to be able to cast and read an
astrological figure, Mr. Pearce's book may be recommended as
easily intelligible, and containing much interesting matter,
besides the processes that will be chiefly useful to the student
whose aims are more ambitious. To the latter it is invaluable.
The author is well known as the friend and pupil for many
years of the late Commander Morrison, R.N., the renowned
Zadkiel. But this work— the fruit of prolonged study and
experience— is undoubtedly a great advance upon the
1 Grammar ’ of the master, which has so long been the text­
book of students. It is enriched with many interesting notices
of nativities illustrating the different rules and doctrines of the
science. There is something like an attempt at inductive-
verification in the many cases he gives us, with the view of
justifying some of Ptolemy’s teachings from the doubts that
have been thrown upon them. Mr. Pearce respects authority
but never defers to it without evidence. Mr. Pearce’s book is a
                         SOME R E V IE W S .                  487

sufficient refutation of the notion that astrology, in these days,
is addressed to the uneducated classes. Those who wish to
know the truth abouu astrology should render to investigators
the important assistance which it is thus in their power to give
(by accurate observations of times of birth of children). In the
meanwhile, if they would see its present evidences, its
authorities and processes, as set forth by a thoroughly com­
petent, experienced, and educated adept, they cannot do better
than read the work of which a very inadequate notice has here
been attempted.— C.C.M.”
   Sir George Birdwood, M.D., L.L.D., K.C.I.E., C.S.I., in a
letter which appeared in the Journal of the Society of Arts, April
22nd, 1887, wrote:— “ Since my remarks on the application of
gems to the art of the goldsmith (p. 450) were published in the
Journal, I have purchased a most interesting book, 1The Text-
Book of Astrology,’ by Alfred J. Pearce, in which, at pp. 5 to 7,
the author distinctly states that the stones of Aaron's breast­
plate are zodiacal, giving in detail some most interesting views
on the subject, published by Gen. Vallancey in the latter part of
the last century, in the 1Collectanea Orientalia,’ and other
antiquarian periodicals.” Privately, by letter, the distinguished
author expressed a wish that he had read the “ Text-Book of
Astrology” before he made the remarks referred to above, as
this work would have been of the greatest use to him.
   From Public Opinion, April 22nd, 1882;— “ There may be
said to exist no reason why the science of astrology, if it had
always been represented by intelligent and instructive works
like the present, should not have been worthy of a far higher
meed of consideration that it appears to have received. Mr.
Pearce well condems the corruption of astrology by the
medieval astrologers, who degraded it into a mere system of
fortune-telling. The work appears to be framed, above all, in a
learned spirit, and to be free from the tendency that is so often
exhibited in similar writers to introduce considerations of a
destructive character towards other sciences. We fail to see in
this work anything that may be deemed of unscientific nature,
or that may be said to reveal a spirit alien to the 19th century.
We may, perhaps, consider that it is a curb on the ideas that
appear to have been prevalent in many of our scientific schools
that the present school of astronomy contains within itself the
possibility of all knowledge, and that the scientific men of the
day are perfectly omniscient. The perusal of such a work as
this is enough to show that knowledge is not universal.”
                    1^ s
                                                    V ¿f
                                                                 x        !   -t v -'O

                  / ci~ ^

                                               i   \■
                                                    >VS-’
u &*AT\A .                    (j f

                                                                       {/{j -


    CW\                        y, (¿ C U ^         UV       jX       ' tr'j     C U yf •

  - « - U ^ a I 1-                                                    c       1 D V

                       Aa *» /- " n V U\)
                   f O>V
  f"V
                   m         Ca a a . \
         .0
                  \H '■      |*^\VfrXx N ,
    0         '                                              o L u ^ - tl
                                                                      D
                                 t o r        / i n L'tA- f                   A ^ p f
                  x -M -                                              VnO.«
                               " 3 - p
  ■L-'']«,, .y - Q          , a-^y^A/vO   vn A \ . Y"     C/lrr*- '¿AC'VJ


                                                        M ackie and C o . L d .,
                                                   W arrington and L ondon.


   <x^A           M- b>
     /
