, - 
2” 
, aF . wt” - ar EN . "2 Gap » (ah by 
= PS i 2 oe, oY Yes En 6 c 
> = . x WOETP® 1/4 Þ PS og -*, 
: rey 


w 


i 


Aſtrologia Refraurata j 


{ LE; 
? py 5% + IT” - 
Won FY uh OS , 
31 ” a4 v #; F 
bb ” Wn : 
hs 
*4 \ pd 
+ | 


| O R, 
Aſtrologic Reſtored 
BEING AN 
INTRODVCTION. 
TO TH E 
General and Chict partot the Language 
of the $7 ZR HS 


EE In Four BOOKS. 


— _  —— 


Ing F1IKLSLE, 

Proving the Legality of ASTROLOG1E, both by Scripture , Reaſon , and the teſtimony of 
the «Ancients and learned in former Ages, wherein ts cleared to every Rational and Hupar- 
tial man the Authors Lux Veritatis in» AnſWer to Dottor Homes, to remain unſhaken not- 
rithſtanding the Doftors unowned Reply. 

: THzt Sg coN D, 

Bya plain Method teaching the Names and Charatlerg of the Planets and Signs, a4 alſo the 
Reaſons thereof and of their Dipuities, Terms, Faces, Houſes, Exaltations and Tripli- 
cities ; With the Reaſons why the Signs gre reckoned from Aries ; and in number juſt 
ewelt's YI JI more nor leſs ; With We number of the Sphears ; their Order and 
Motions : being a moſt neceſſary IntroduCtion to rhe whole eA RT , and very wſefull to 

»ow* wilters thereunto for inibling them to give Reaſons for any part thereof, &c. 
Thr THTRK D, NL 
. Fully comprehending Inſiruftions and Kules for elefting any manner of Work ; never before 
made publique in our Mother Tongue ; the Fhich bothefqr the Adminiſtration of Phyſick,, 
Letting of Blood, Husbandry and other neceſſary Works ts both uſefull ard profitable. 
HE FOURT H, 

By a moſt eafie Introduttion teacheth, by Revolutions of the Tears of the World, Eclipſes,great 
Conjunilions, Comets and Blazing-ſtars, how'to Fuage by the ordinary courſe and order of 
Narnre, of the general Accidents of Conntreys, Kingdoms, Provinces andFities, Al- 
terations.of Kingdoms and Empires, LaWs and Cuſtoms, ( auſe of Plenty, Dearth, Wars, 
Peace, Health, Sickneſs, Alteration of the Ayra and (to be ſhort ) of 4# things appertain- 
ing to the life of man in a Natural Way ; wherein is the infinite Wiſdom of GO D ſeen 
manifeſt in the Goveryment of the World by the I finence and conſtant Harmony of the 
Celeſtial Planets and Stars; the Innocency, Legality and Purity of the Art demonſtrated, 
and proved b demonſtration of the inevitable events of the Heavens, ſo long ar GOD 
upholdeth the Order and (ourſe of Nature unperverted ; and the Students thereof conſe- 

. quently proved rather Divines then ( onjurers, or Prailiſers of what i unlawful. 


'c 
By VViitiamccRamesEy, Gent. 
Student in Aſrologze, Phyſick, and the moſt Heavenly and SublAne Sciences. 
Aſtra regunt homies , ſed regitgiſtra Ders. E- 


Publiſhed by Ahoriy. . . + 
LONDO N, Printed for Robert White, 1 65 3. © 


Rs I 


» yy —— 
- X P 
, y / 
: -» 
0 
by CG 
; % 
#8 
'# 
4 » 
: x - 
. 
* 
<) X . 
Y a” 
EI | 
4 L- K DT 
q _ # p 
Wo 
| bo 
\ % 
2 - /) 
G þ | Do bs 
* 
, hs - | 
(*) 
w -: 
1 ,# 
wy ; 3 , 
x . 
G 
f 5 s 


/ 
2 


" » 
: \ | 
t 
} 
= 
4 
q 1 
A : 
: 
- 
Ci | 
' 
- 
F 
k 
? 
- 
| 
j 
? 
4 
Þ 
" 


oa "9 /» [2 FE . «4 li. 4 j ; | 


SERENISSIMO 


ILLVS TRISSIMOQVE 
PRINCIPI AC DOMINGO, 


DOMINO HONORATISSIMO 


' JACOBO STI VARTO 


DVCI DE RICHMOND 
ET LENOX: 


 COMITI DE MARCH: 


DOMINO IN 


| AVBVGNY, DARNLY, TAR- 


BOLTON,ET METHVEN: 


BARONI DE 


| LEIGHTON, BROMSWOLD ET 8. ANDREW'S,&c 


© 7 


FENDI INSIGNIS MILITI, 


DOMINO SUOCLEMENTISSIMO 
Salucem & Felicitatem Perpetuam, 
HANC SUAM 


ASTROLOGIAM 
RESTAVRATAM 


SUBMISSE CONSECRAT 


I/ilhelmns Rameſens. 


5 ul k Aa ADA _ OA Al_<n we A AE —e $" yad ww wrt —"—— COT __ © *” yore —_—Y -— me 


* a9, 
"OE 


Y \ : i 4 P. % $6 y R ks 


+ 


TO THE 
[lluſtrious and High-born PRINCE, 


I4RES SFYAkmE 


Duke of Richmond and Lenox ; Earl of March; 
Lord eAubngny,Darnly,T arbolton and Miethroen: 
Baron of Leighton, Bromſwold and St. An- 
drews, and Knight of the molt Noble 
Order of the G ART ER. 


May it pleaſe your Highneſs, 
TTNESSERSEF Nobility of Pirtth, Antiquity of Houſe, 
A 5 YO Magnanimity of Spiric, Mulaplicity of Ver- 
boy LF] FS rues, and the moſt excellenc ©ndowments 


ZZNSS that a Mortal Man can atrain unto may juſtly 
HY L225, (as their due |challenge the patronage of thele 

Et myLabours,there will be none tound to anti- 
Clpate your Highnels ; and though my misfortune is ſuch, 
that [ never had the Honour in the leaſt ro kils your Highneſs 
hand, or to appear in your preience, but remain as yer a 
Stranger to your Highnels , yet by realon the Work 1s of that 
ſublime Worth and Excellency (1 mean the Science of Aftro- 
lozy, as appeareth by the firſt Book of this Volumn, it being 
the chief of the Liberal Sciences , rogether with A/tronomy, 
Phyſicks and Natural Philoſophy. (which are all but parts of one 
intire Science) and that wherewith none 1s able to. compare) 
have I humbly preſumed to caſt it at the feet of your il[uſtri- 
ous Self, whole incomparable worth and indowments aie 
unparalleld : ſothat it your Highneſfle's Munificence doth 


-» 


favourably 


© 
*., > II 
4 4 rf 
. l - + Fx 
T & % 44 
©'s _ LAS4 
—_— F $ 
© SO TI "<<" 
»1 
» -: 


The Epiſtle Dedicatory. 


tavourably accept of this ſmall Token of my wel-wiſhes to 
true Nobility, Wd in a particular manner to your Highnels, I 
muſt neceflarily be conſtrained to acknowledge my lelf arri- 
vel to the higheſt pitch of Honour that, (for the preſent) | am 
capable to expect. The ſubject of the my unworthy Work 
(for ſo I may call it in reference to your Highneſles unparalleld 
excellency tro whom it is preſented ) is that part of Natural 
Philoſophy Cvulgarly termed ASTROLOGY) which teacheth 
by the Natural Metions,Confiourations, Aſpetts and Inclinations of the 
Celeſtial Stars and Planets to Iudge of the Natural Accidents, Muta- 
tions and Alterations of Laws, Cuſtom s, Kingdoms, States and Em- 
pires, and the general caſualties of the whole World im the Natural 
way of its Go-vernment,by the Celestial and Superiour Bodies : which 
next under G O D are the efhcient Caules of all corruption, 
generation, production and nutrition in this Elementary 
World, the knowledge whereof is ro know NATURE the 
oreat Hand-maid of the Almizhty, and the temper and quality of 
All things ; and although through the mercenary practiſes of 
ſome by letting of Nartivities, and anſwering of Horary Que- 
tions (thus abuling the Art) the validity of this Science hath 
been brought into queſtion, reproach and contempt, yet | 
ueltion nor but your Highneſles 1 innate magnanimity is ſuch, 
that it will not condelſcend to give any cenſure on what hath 
not firſt been ſummoned to the Bar or Tribunal of your 
abs; ready picrcing Judgement; {or becaule a thing is calum- 
niated and queſtioned, 15 no proof of its illegality, neither 
doth the abuſetake away the ule thereof , for were this ad- 
mitted, even the beſt of Sciences and chief of Studies, Divi- 
nity it ſelf could not be exempt from prohibition and con- 
demnation ; wherefore ſince the farft-B o o « of this Volumn 
tendeth w holly tothe Vindication thereof from the aſperſions 
of the Antagoniſts, and the abules of the ſceming Friends 
thereunto , I ſhall not further inlarge on this point ; fince it 1s 
well keown unto the Learned, that among the Ancients and 
oraver ſort of people in all Ages , this Science (being unpol- 
lured and unſophiſticared ) hath been ſtill had in moſt high 
eſteem ; nay, it is of that profundity and excellency, that it 
was firſt taught to our firſt Father Ap a» by GOD him- 
ſelf 


The Epiſtle Dedicatory. 


ſelf (as teſtifyerh Toſephs, Lib.1. Cap. 2. of lgy Antiquities of 
the Tews) who taught ic to his Poſterity ; for he further re- 
cordeth that Seth was lo excellent therein, that foreſceing the 
Flood, and the deſtru&on of the World thereby , ingraved 
this Art for the benefit of after-Ages in two Pillars, the one of 
ſtone, and the other of brick , and that be jaw himſelf that of 
one to remain in Syria in his own time ; and in the 3. chap. of his 
aforeſaid book , he further witneſleth and affrmeth , that 
man lived ſo long before the Flood to learn Arts and Sciences, 
eſpecially naming Aſtrology and Geometry ; and in his 8, chap. 
of that ſame 1. Book of the Antiquities, he doth yer further 
reſtifie, that Abraham having learned Aſtrology in Chaldea [being 
the place of his Birth] when he came into Egypt raught the 
Ezyptians the knowledge of Aſtrology and Arithmetick. Where- 
fore I humbly conceive , whatever ſome weak diſpurants 
Lnot worthy the noting] have affirmed in the diſparagement 
of this Authors Credit, thinking to make for their own en- 
vious and idle conceits ; Ilay (my-Lord) I humbly conceive 
ſince he beareth fo great an applauſe and credit among the 
* Learned and Fathers of the Church, of whom I ſhall only 
mention theteſtimony of Euſehizs, who abundantly through- 
out all his ten Books of his Eccleſiaſtical Hiſtory maketh uſe of 
this Authors words, for further confirmation of his ſcope; 
and in [ib.1. cap.6. de Hiſt. Eccleſ. (with divers other places 
which for brevitie lake I omit) he particularly uſeth theſe 
words (in the Engliſh verſion it 1s in the 7.chap.) Fereof thou 
haſt Joſephus a witneſs worthy of credit : Wherefore ſince by fo 
worthy 2 man as Euſebius was, Toſephus is thus deemed : how 
worthy of credit are they that now adays traduce him rather 
then want of their wills, or confels themſelves weak in con- 
futing what they are ignorant of ? Wherefore ( my Lord ) 
ſincethis Science 1s of {uch Antiquity, worth and excellency, 
it imboldnerh me humbly to make choice of your Highneſs 
for my Patron in this froward and confuſed generation, ſuch 
ſublime Sciences being too good, too worthy to be owned by 
any but who are truly Noble both in Vertues and Delcent, 
for let men be of what opinion they will, yer I am meerly 
perlwaded, and | have allo ſome Natural Reaſons inducing 
me 


The Epiſtle Dedicatory. 


me to this be, that meanneſs of Birth and Deſcent,though 
exalred to the moſt eminent places and worldly digniries that 
may be, cannot bur Kill retain fome imack of a mean ſpirit, 
and can never bethroughly acquaint with magnanimity, or 
be truly hecoick , though ſome glimmerings they may have 
of both : Even as a Dunghill- Cock, although he be never ſo 
well fed, trim'd and ordered for the tryal of his proweſs and 
courage, and although to the outward appearance he feem 
ſtrong, able, brisk and couragious, and begin with an un- 
daunted courage and boldneſs, yet when he is forct to feel ei- 
ther the ſharpneſs of the Conflict, or the want of breath, 
bath not that Heroickneſs of Spirit tro die rather then yield, 
but (which is worſe) doth then divulge his own deteſtable pu- 
{fllanimity and dunghilly cowardiſe by running away , which 
a true Game-Cock thar is lineally delcended of Noble blood, ' 
alchough taken from the field, and overladen with his Fea- 
thers, Comb and Gills, before he will be guilty thereof, will 
choole rather to die, not referring life before Honour, bur 
Noblenels of Spirit before life , chooſing rather that death 
ſhould be ated on him with extremity of rigour, then thart * 
he ſhould with eaſe act the leaſt unworthinels though to his 
greateſt advantage. Wherefore my (Lord) though my offence 
hath been inexpreſsibly hainous by this my boldnels, being 
alcogether a Stranger to your Highnels ; And although I want 
both words and audacity to plead for my lelt in fo foul a Fact, 
yet my comfort is, your own Munificenceand Noblenels of 
Spirit will ſeal my Pardon ; then which he is nothing more 


ambitious of, 


4:5), 44 My Loxzp, 


That is really 
Your Highneſles Wel-wiſher 


And moſt humble Servant. 


Whilſt I am 


William Rameſey. 


[udicious Reader. 


jHen I Conſidered the wickedneſs of this preſent Age 
how envious , how malicious, how flanderous and 
how evil ſome men therein are through ignorance, 
it was no {mall — ro my intentions, haye- 
| ing experimentaly'taſted of the bitterneſs of both their 
Bll Pens, Tongues, and viperous, inhumane, malitious, 

h 9 {landerous and opprobrious reproaches, for vindicating 
this Liberal Science of NATYV/RAL PHILOSOPHY vulgarly known by 
the Name of Asrrx010G1sz by reaſon it declares the motions and words 
or language of the ſtars ; from the greek word zce219yiz ex 45299 
asy& 1d eſt The Languaze or Preaching of the #ars, becauſe their yari- 
ous and conſtant influencies dictate unto us dayly new things or mu- 
rations in the Elements or Elementary bodies, 

This is the fourth time I have undertaken to undeceive my Coun- 
try men of ſuch Calumnies as are caſt upon this Heavenly and chief- 
eſt ſtudy meerly through tradition and envy.: yet have I been ſtill 
reviled and ill requited not only by the Antagoniſts thereof, bur alſo b 
ſuch as are ſeeming friends therunto and who have advanced ſo muc 
of the drofſy and more ridiculous part (or rather abuſe) which (though 
it hath advanced them and their purſes) hath brought the Art and 
its purity by their practices into contempt, and the Artiſts that ſtu- 
dy and practiſe none of their Chimera's but Natural Philoſophy only, 
to ſuffer the harſh cenſures, abuſes and abominable {landers and at- 


. c 

>» <- = . 
PY - 
"= 

(Oe Ja! 


=. 


\ 
\ 


_ fronts from the moſt inferiour and rural of men, Coblers , Hay-ma- 


kers and ſuch traſh, ro whom chough in the firſt Book of chis ſubſe- 
quent diſcourſe I am forc't to ſay ſomwhat for my own vindication, 
yet I have not ſo far torgot my ſelf as to name the Animal, leaſt 
poſterity thould think him more then he is. wheretore I ſay I being 
hitherto envied by both the Antagoniſts of the Art for vindicating 
and maintaining rhe Inocency and Legality therof; and by the Seem- 
ing friends therunco traduced for thewing myſelte fo forward therin 
and endevouring to demonſtrate the uſe from che abuſe, and for deli- 

(a) vering 


The Tenure of 
the firſt Bock. 


T; 0 the Fudicious READ ER. 


vering ſome rules and ſecrets of the Art to the world which they 
would have kept to themſelves : for ſome are ſo ambitious and ſelt- 
ended as well as conceited, that they would not have any other hand 
in the labour but their own, and pretend great forwardneſs and wil- 
ingneſs to lay plain the whole bot 7 of the Art, bur a& nothing leſs; 
ſatisfying themſelves that the particular and vain part or rather the 
abuſe ot this Art is a ſufficient inſtruction ro the whole , wherefore 
out of this conſideration and no other, have now as it were challenged 
all cheir invectiveneſs and malice by thele my Labours (which I muſt 
aſluredly look tor) the which tor the | qorn of my Countrey, the Fro- 

agation of the Arr, and tor the undeceiving of the World touching 
the falſe aſperſtons caſt on it , I have endeayoured tro Compile in this 
manner. 

In the firſt Book I have as brief as may be proved that Science, 
which we commonly term AZrology, to be one of the Liberal Sciences, 
together with A5tronomie and Natural Philoſophie, and that by the An- 
cients there was made no diſtin&tion between the one and the other as 
ſeveral Sciences, bur divers parts only of one Liberal Science, as the 
Head, Trunck and Limbs, though diſtin parts and members, conduce 
all tothe making up bur of one 1intire body ; to be Warranted by Divine 
Scripture, and the Writings and teſtimony of the Fathers;the Objeions 
againſt it removed, and the Art cleared trom all the abuſes thereof; as 
alſo my Lux Yeritats in Anſwer to Doctor Homes vindicated from all the 
cavils and ſ{ophiſtications of both himleif and his pretended ſecond. 


The ſubjeft and The Second,comprehending the Names, Numberand Characters of the 


ſcope of the ſe- 
cond Treatiſe. 


Signs and Planers Celeſtial, together with tie Reaſons why they were ſo 
named and charactered,and why there are but juſt twelve Signs, and nei- ' 
ther more nor leſs, and why the Planets areaſs;gned Rule both by Houſe, 

Exaltation, Triplicity, Term and Face therein, and the Reaſons why 
the Signs are reckoned from Aries; with the number of rhe Sphears, 
their Order and Motions, whereby is plainly delivered a moſt eafie and 


' ſhort Introduction to the whole Art of —_ and the great and 


Univerſal Book of the Creatures made maniteſtly legible to the meaneſt 
and ordinarieſt capacity ; as allo ſufficient grounds whereby toanſwer 


- all Gainſayers and Carpers thereat , and to vindicate it in every 


Of the third. 


reſpect. 

The Third Treateth of the Rules of the Ancients, touching the 
Election of a time proper for the accompliſhment of any manner of 
Work neceſlary in this iife, but more eſpecially for the Adminiſtration 
of Phylick, letting of Blood, Husbandry and the like, to the which 
it is both effectual and lawful], though in every particular in other mat- 
ters not altogether ſo certain, Except depending on the general Acci- 
dents of the World.as Reyolutions,Ecliples, Comets, Great Conjuntti- 
ons, Blazing-Stars, and the particular Nativities of men. Yet I have 
thought fir to deliver the Inſtructions of the Learned in former Ages in 
thoſe matters alſo; for that they may in ſundry things (by the weighing 
and ne the Nacures and Temperatures of the Celeſtial Signs 


and Planets ) of much uſe co the Wel-willers and Students 
in 


Tothe Fudicioaw READ ER. 


in this moſt Heavenly and Lawfull Science of As Trxotoey. 


The Fourth, is a compendious Tra& of the whole general part of Of che fourth, 


the Art, wherein is at large manifeſted the Order and Courſe of the 
Government of the World, by the Natural Operations and Harmoni- 
cal Motions and Aſpects of the Heavens, Celeſtial Signs, Stars and Pla- 
nets, in Revolutions of the Years of the World, Eclipſes, Great Con- 
junctions, Comets and Blazing Stars, whereby is portended the gene- 


ral Accidents of Countreys, Kingdoms, Provinces and Cities ; che 


Alterations of Kingdoms and Empires, Laws and Cuſtoms, cauſe of 
Scarcity, Plenty, Wars, Peace, Healch, Sickneſs, Alteration of the 
Ayr, andto be ſhort, of all rhings appertaining in a Natural way to the 
life of Man , whereby is maniteſt the infinite Wiſdom of the Great 
Creator, and the Innocency , Legality, and Purity of the Art, demon- 
ſtrated and proved by demonſtration of the inevitable Events, ſo long 
as God by his Providential Care upholdech the Order and Courſe of 
Nature 1nviolate and unchanged : Alſo the Students thereof conſe- 
quent! =_ rather Divines then Conjurers or Practitioners of whar is 
Sino Il; for thereby may a man eaſily judge of any Revolution, 
Eclipſe, &Cc. or any part of them tothe endof the World, by being 
thereby inſtructed of the Nature and Signification of every Plency in 
every Houſe and Sign of the Heavens, and Aſpects one amongſt ano- 
cher, and of their effects when Lords of the year and well or 1ll loca- 
red, &c, 


3 


In which Book if thou beeſt well inſtructed and perfe&ed, thou haſt xz, Body of 
the whole body of A#rology ; tor neither is. the Judgement of Horary Aſtrology in 


Queſtions, Ordinary Elections, Charactery-Aſtrology , Nativities, or ** hn 


any other to be eſteemed in compariſon thereof, bur as trifles, uncer- 
cainties, fallacies, illegalities, and abuſes of the purity of the Arrt. 


For truly, may I ſay the truth, ſuch like Practiſes of men, unacquaint- The geaſon why 


ed with the depth of this moſt heavenly Science by their frequent fail- my r_ 


ings have been the main and only caule of ſo many Books againſt Aj#r0- ,,,;,4 Ate-* 
lozy, which isin it felt ſo pure and undefiled, that the moſt ſcrutinous logy. 


Wit alive cannot have one Word for the Condemnation thereof , for 
amongſt the Learned , the abuſe never rakes away the uſe of a thing, 
for then there would be nothing under the Heavens Lawtall , for we ſee 
even the Pureſt and moſt Lawfull Arts,Sciences and things moſt abuſed, 
and moſt apt to be counterfeited. 

As for inſtance, is there any thing in the World more Lawfull then 
Divinity in its purity 7 and is there any thing more hard to finde, or more 
commonly abuled by falſe Teners, Schiſms, Sets and Herefies ? And 
yetit upon thele grounds, or out of theſe conſiderations, a man ſhould 
poſitively conclude no verity in Religion, or truthin Divinity, you 
would fy that man were in a moſt groſs Errour,and very Impious : Then 
I ſay, let no man that is not willing ro forfeit both his Reaſon, Diſcretion 
_s Underſtanding, be ſo weak as without an afſurance of the Na- 
cure and Quality of this moſt Lawtull Art which I here undertake 
to Vindicate and deliver tro the World conclude ought againſt ir 
eicher by Tradition or the common Voice of the World ; both 
(a2) which 


" To the Fudiciow READER. 

which being known to the Judicious to be very falſe, and tohold no- 
thing of Credit in them. 

The Authors For as it was meerly a Natural inclination within me tothe Truth,and 

JP cum"! the propagation thereof, fo faras in me lies, that firſt drew my Pen to 

trologie.. > © Paper; 01s it the ſame which makerh me now this once more appear and 

content ny Jelt ro incur all the Currith Snarls, Barkings and Bawl- 

ings of the&enyious and ingratetull, and che ſame it is alſo that imbol- 

beneth mEnor'to fear nor be danted at them ; it is no new thing with 

me:to know that Nogs will bark ar Strangers,and ſuch as are not of their 

kinde; Gentlemerg will ſhew chemſelves what they are, and love each 

other ; but what ſhall expe of Gallantry from Coblers, Hay-makers, 

Taylors and Serving-men ? | 

Ttefſt occaſ= Thefirft occaſion of my Writing in the Vindication of this Science, 

"n 0/515 w/te” yas the appearance of a railing Pamphler againſt it, without any fear or . 

T1 wit, to whom I returned a Reply in che year 1650. it is a thort Tract of 

two Sheets; what, and who the Author thereof was, you may lee in the 
latter part of my Lux Yeritatis, Printed 1651. for I hold him not worthy 
the inierting in theſe my Labours. | 

The ſecond oe The ſecond time of my Writing was occaſioned through the weak 

fton. - . ! . 
Arguments, flaſhes and {uppoſitions of Doctor Homes, who ( being a 
Scholler) ſhould (me thinks) have had more underſtanding then to con- 
demn this worthy Art under the notion of Witchcraft, Sorcery, and ſuch 
likeillegalities z or dilcretion, then to rail down one of the chief of the 

| Liberal Sciences, meerly tor the abuſes thereof. . 

The third ocea The third was, that I might maniteſt the innocency of this Science, 

Pow. and the legality, verity, excellency and validity thereot, it not abuſed, 
and therefore who lo that warily peruſe that Diicourle of mine, intituled 
Vox Stellarum, or The Voice of the ST ARS, Printed in the year 1652. 
ſhall be ſatisfied, that God doth work by Cauſes , and that he hath or- 
dained the Stars and Celeſtial Planers to be immediate Cauſes next unto 
Him of all our Natural injoyments and catualties,v:z. Fertility, Sterility, 
Wars, Peace, Health, Sickneſs, Alterations of the Ayr, Inundations, 
Earthquakes, Thunders, Lightnings, Storms, Tempeſts, Commori- 
ons, Troubles, Alteration of States, Kingdoms, Laws, Cuſtoms, and of 
all rhings in a Natural way incident to, and in this Elementary World , 
for there is nothing more certain then that the Portencies of the Stars 
(ſo faras conduceth to the government of the Natural and Elementa 
World, andthe things therein compoſed of the fame matter and tuff) 
ſhall prove trueand effe&tual unleſs God do work a Miracle, and pervert 
the Order and Government of the World, &c. 

I donot deny the omnipotent power of God, that he is able to 
alter the courſe of Nature; he that made them with and by the word of 
his mouth, can (queſtionleſs) by the ſame word not only alter cfleir mo- 
tions and pervert their effects, but alſo annihilate them again ; bur as this 
is not by me denyed, ſo cannot the Objectors againſt this Science bur 
confeſs that God is the God of Order, and worketh in order,and nor pre- 
poſteroutly; tor becauſe he can alter the courſe and influence of che Stars, 


argueth not at all that cherefore he will; for why ſhould this be any Ar- 
_ gumene 


> > 


* 
44 
U 
b-. 
_ f 


To the Fudicious READ E KR. 


oument to us, ſince we read but of three times he hath wrought in this 
manner ſince the-Creation of the World 2 vz.tirſt in Foſhuahs time when 
he made the Su» ſtand ſtill; theſecond in Hezekrahs time when he made 
the Sun go back ; and the third and laſt rtmear the paſſhon of onr Saviour 
Feſus Chrit, when he miraculouſly Echpfed the Su at the time of the 
Full Moon, which cauled Drionyſius the Areopazite thus. to burſt forth, 
Aut Deus Nature patitur, aut Mundi machina aiſſoluitur Þither the World 
is atan end, or the God of Nature ſuffereth. -% 

W heretore it is clear God workerh not, or createth new things; he 
finiſhed his Work in the firſt fix days, he therefore now upholderh all 
things by his Providence, and bringeth chem to pals by ſecondary cauſes, 
according unto his inevitable Decrees and Divine Will ; for it were great 
impiety in us, and detraction trom the Al-tuſheient Wiſdom and Power 
of the Almighty, toafirm he hath nor preordained all things to come 
to paſs from the firſt Creation even to the Subverſion , and that they are 
{ignifhed unto us in the Heavens, have recourſe to Gerſon his Trilozinm 
A#rolozie Th:olozizate; for we read that before the deſtruction of Fe- 
ruſalem there appeared a Comet in the Heavens in form of a Sword for 
many days, Hortmen alſo fighting in the Ayr, Foſephus Bel. Fud. Lib.7. 
Cap. 12. Euſebins Eccleſ. Hit. Lib.3. Cap.8. prelaging the overthrow 
thereof, which was atter accompliſhed - Titus Veſpaſian; alſo before 
che death of Claudius Ceſ.ir rhere appeared a Comet tor a long time, and 
before the Civil broils in Row?2, Ocftavins being Conſul; and again, be- 
fore the War between Great Poz;pey and Flies Ceſar, as Plinie teſtifieth, 
Lib. 2. Cap. 25. De Nat. Andift we come neerer home we ſhall finde the 
Comet 1n 1618. to be the forerunner of all our late Civil Un-civil Wars 


'in Enzland Scotland and Irclard, as well as of the Commotions and 
Delolations in Germany, &c. But this will be very clear unto us even from That Theologie 


The word of GOD, if we but with ailigence and obſervation read the Hi- = rag 
re together, 


ſtories of the Old Teſtament, of the Subverſion of Kingdoms and Na- 
tions ; but eſpecially that ot the Fews by the Babylonians, the which 
People, upon condition they wouid follow the Law of the Lord, were 
promiſed to beeſtablithed for ever ; ſhall any one from this Promile aver, 
that their Kingdom was not preordained to deſtruction in its due time, 
and the limitation thereof long before ſer down 2 but that immedutly 
becauſe they diſobeyed, rhey were deſtroyed and carried away captive 
or rather that that Age wherein they were fo captivated, ſhould in the ful- 
neſs of that time be {o inclined to wickednels, as to bring that affliction 
ſo long betore threatned upon them * So then thele two, Turorogy 
and AsrroroG yr muſt agree together, orwe ſhall never beable ro 
agree in Truth, but run our ſelves into many Errours and Abſur- 
dities. 

In that Book alſo you may ſee how far we may lafely attribute 
to the power of the Stars, and that their effets may be altered, yer 
but by one means , viz. Prayer , for if Gov give an heatt to pray as 
it ought, noqueſtion he alſo therewith grants the Petition requeſted in 
choſe Prayers. 

Laſtly, my main ſcope, and chief dritr in this my fourth o—_ 

| Wor 


6 


The Authors 
chief drift mm 
the/e his Laboys, 


To the Fudiciou READER. 
Work 1s (fince I have ſo often ſtood up for the maintenance of this 
Science) to endeavour to manifeſt unto the World the purity thereof, 
having cleanſed it from its pollutions and abules, that ſo it may appear 
what Txurz AsTroLOGY 1s, and what T maintain to be ſo, and the abuſe 
be not only diſcovered but taken away , that once more it might ſhine 
glontouſly, and be able to ſtand againſt all Gain-ſayers whatſoever : For 
notwithſtanding I had delivered.my {elf {o plainly in my former Works, 
eſpecially in my Yox Stellarum, yet did the purity of this Science remain 
under the aw by being by many deemed no other then jugling z by 
others, to extend no further then to the reſolution of Horary Queſtions 
and the Judging of Nativities and the Fates and Fortunes of men 
thereby, or at leaſt chat this was the main and chiet ſubject thereot,when 
the truth is, the practiſe of ſome men in thele ridiculous vanities, roge- 


"ther with ſome other abuſes of this Mosr Nozrts Sciftxcs vr 


The Authoys 
0p11 01 touths 
ng Nativities 
aud Horary 
© weſtions. 


* Nativities 


and Queſtions, 


AsTROLOGIE, have brought the purity thereof into queſtion by the 
unworthy, and the Science it ſelf generally into reproach with the 
illiterate. 

For I dare poſitively affirm (and fhall be ready to prove it to any Ra- 
tional man) That the Reſolution of Horary Queſtions is wholly yain 
and uncertain ; as alſo Nativities, on which they depend ( or at leaſt 
ſhould) excepting how to Judge of the particular Conſtitution and 
Temperature of the Body , and the Natural inclination of Man, as I 
ſhall ſpecifie in the 20, Chapter of the firſt Book of this Qyadripartite, 
fol. 38. | 

But it may be ſome may here demand the Reaſon then I do in m 
Lux Feritatis undertake the Reſolution of ſome Queſtions £ Bur I thaſl 
anſwer in that vulgar and ruſtical Proverb, 7t is a good Horſe that never 
Fumbles , and truly this is Language fit enough tor ſuch Horſe #uff- as 
are they. 1 am bur fleſhand blood, Ergo, (as allin my condition ) have 
failings ; I deſire not ſo much as to hide my fault when I finde it either 
of my ſelf, or by the loving adviſe of others, much leſs then do I de- 
fire tocontinue in an obſtinate way of f{implicity: I muſt contels there 
are many Faults in that Tract (yet not ſo many neither , as ſome would 
perſwade the World there is, as ſhall be in part.cleared in the firſt Book 
of this Volumn) the which I am not aſhamed to conteſs, but confeſs my 
ſelf aſhamed [rather] I publiſhed it ſo raſhly. And although I dare nor 
maintain thoſe Rules I there ſet down as infallible, yet I muſt let the 
World know, I can (and many others of good quality) juſtifie the ve- 
rity thereof at that time, and therefore very fitly brought in anſwer to 
Doctor Homes, to ſhew him, that 1t he be diſpoſed to cavil , there was 
_— enough for him, it being his part to prove, but mine to de- 
end. | 

And here now I muſt needs confeſs I have ſpent much time and pains 
in theſe * toys and trifles : And truly I amo far from being ſorry there- 
fore,that I much rejoyce thereat ; for G o» hath in mercy thereby thew- 
ed me the Foolery, Vanity and Inſufficiency thereof [which ſome cove- 
tous Wretches and mean Spirited People, contrary to their own know- 
ledge, raſhly attempr and practiſe) and fo Iam the better able to diſtin- 

| gouith 


To the Fudiciou READ ER, 


uiſh Truth from Falſhood; for I muſt confeſs that in as much as in me 
lies, I have ſet my heart co know Wiſdom, madaels and folly, and am 
able (with the Wiſe man) to pronounce the ſentence of Folly upon moſt 
things that I know, and truly the beſt of things, andall things [in com- 
_—_— of that Oneand Only thing, The care of our Souls} are but vanity 
and wexation of Spirit at the beſt: What dotha man toyl and labour for 
all his days, vexand fret himſelf, riſe early, goto bed late, weary him- 
ſelf all day, ſpend his ſpirits, when alas ! could he attain to the higheſt 
dignities, poſſeſs the greateſt Riches the World can afford,have the moſt 
abſolute command that ever Prince had, nay the whole Univerſe under 
his ſubjection, he cannot enjoy it above an hundred years, ſhould he be- 
gin to poſſeſs them the firſt hour he is produced or born into the World ; 


this is wich che moſt that I ſpeak, thelife of man zs threeſcore years and 


zen, Pſal.go.10, buta ſpan, aſhadow, Fob 8.9. Sure this is worſe then mad- 
neſs, and vanity inthe abFratt. I have a large field here to walk in, mighr 
I with civility intrude on the patience of my Reader ; wherefore I ſhall 
deſiſt, ſince Yerbum ſapienti ſat ezt. I ſpeak not this verbally, from the 
ſayings of that Holy and Incomparable Man Gzxz ar Soromon, but he 
that knoweth the heart, knows that this proceeds from an experimental 
knowledg2 of my own. 

But why ſhould I chus fear to rehearſe unto thee theſe ſo neceſſary con- 
ſiderations 2 Art not thou at leiſure to read them 2 thou wilt be imploy- 
ed worſe; it thou haſt heard them already, and ſo perhaps judge me yain 
in this my needles prolixity, T muſt needs tell thee thou haſt never heard 
them from me. and delire thee tolearn this Leſſon, That a good Leſſon can 
never be too well learned, nor a good Tale too often told : Wherefore let me 
intreat thy patience a little, betore I come to declare what TI have yer to 
ſay touching theſe my Labours; for though perhaps thou mayſt finde 
ſome of them, nay perhaps all in the Writings of other Authors, yer 
ſince I can deliver chem as my own,[ having taſted of the vanity of chem 
all experimentally, JI know no reaſon why I may not aſſume che ſame li- 
berty as others. | 


I will begin with our beginning; The Prophet Dav 1D the moſt great 974: v2rity of 
and glorious King of 1ſrae/,and the moſt renowned in his days, Pſal.5 1.5 , %! cbildbood. 


ſaith, Behold, 1 was ſhapen in iniquity; and in ſin did my mother conceive 
2e. Our very conception , initiation, before we have either ſenſe or mo- 
tion you ſee is vilde, it is vildneſs and wretchedneſs, Surely this is vanity 
anda great evil, even whileſt we were ſtill in our Mothers wombs. And 
when we were produced, to how many dangers, and troubles are we 
proſtrate ? the which as being ſenſible thereot betore we feel them or 
as a teſtimony thereof, We cry at our fg coming into the world, preſaging 
thereby, we hall have no other cauſe even in to heighth of our proſpe- 
rity, but with Heraclitus to continue the ſame tune, 1f we but confider 
our Cucko-folly : are not many by their inhumane mothers even ſtrang- 
ledin the birth to hide their whorith conchtion , their throats cur, thrown 
into houles of offices alive to be ſtifled there, buried alive, ſtrangled, 
drowned, burnt, their heads cut off, maſſacred , an hundred manner of 


ways according as the Devil worketh upon the inclination and humour of 
the 


To the Fudicious REA DER. 


the Diabolical Mother, ſoare theſe poor innocent (ſave for the Original 
ſin they have from theſe Vipers) Children murthered, murchered, mur- 
thered; and all but to hide rheir Luſt and Shame from the World as they 
think, and yet thereby they bring themſelves, and run themſelves into 
not only what they ſhunned , the open divulging of the Fact and the 
ſhame of the World,by an untimely death extirpated from the ſociety of 
men, bur alſo indanger themſelves utterly to be baniſhed the unſpeak- 
able glorious company of G ov and Angels. This is worſe then 
madneſs. 

4 ſhall ſuppoſe rhe beſt,that we are ſaved alive,and then again on 
the other {ide,we ſhall be forc't (ſuch are our innumerable Calamiries,In- 
firmities and Diſeaſes, Miſchances, Diſaſters, Tronbles, Vexations, 
Perſecutions, Impriſonments , Fears , Anguiſhes, Diſcontents , Jea- 
louſies, Difſentions,Quarrels, Anger,Strife & Debate)with Fob (Fob 3.3, 
4.,5,6,7,8,9,10,11,.12.)to curſe the day of our birth, and to wiſh the womb 
had been our grave, Fob 10.18,19. or that we had died when we firſt 
were born Fob 3.11. For dowe firſt but conſider the uncertainty of this 
life, we ſhall conclude it Much more then vanity ; When weare the moſt 
carefully looked too, are we not often overlaid, and ſmothered, ſurpri- 
zed with Apoplexies, Convulſtons, the Rickets and Defluctions of 
Rheums 2 do not Chincoughs, Lasks, Vomiting, moſt frequently anti- 
cipate us of our Lives ? | | 

But to paſs this, and to ſpeak the beſt of it, being ativo years multi- 
tude of dangers and caſualties,” ſpent in ſleeping-and eating, when we 
are ſet upon our own bottoms and ſtand on our own legs, how many 
knocks, how many falls ? and which is worſe, ho otten are we pirtifully 
whipt and beaten by our ſenſeleſs and fooliſh incon{iderate Parents, and 
Giddy-headed hal ow-brained Nurſes, and puniſhed for punithing our 
ſelves by theſe unavoidable caſualties « how otr fall we into the fire, 
water, from on high, looſe our lives by all, break our limbs, legs, arms, 
heads, faces, disfgure our ſelves for ever, loſe an eye, both , criple and 
maim our ſelves : How are we ſubje& to Meaſels, Small Pox, Scabs, 
Botches, Boils * How are we tormented with ſuch like infirmities and 
vexations 2 How gnawn and pulled with Worms both in the Maw and 
Belly? Can we help our ſelves * Are nor we forc't to ſubmit to the order- 
ing of thoſe ſet overus, our Parents, whether rational, irrational, wiſe, 
fooliſh, ſober, raſh, underſtanding, ignorant, diſcreet, {mple, &c. and 
ſo conſequently expoſed even in this our greateſt extremity, which is 
worſe then our preſent {ad condition , to all the perils and dangers of 
ruine both of health and life thar can beexpreſt ? and do we not many 
times hereby loſe our lives, or which is worſe, live in miſery all our lite 
after? Do they not teach us as ſoon as we are capable of learning.all the 
evils and miichiefs1n the World 2 Malice, Give me a blow and I will beat 


| him? Lyes, no, ſay, and 7, ſay ? when we ought rather to {ay clear contra- 


ry or nothing at all; with an hundred ſuch, which being lo ſoon put in- 
to us, are eaſily retained, and prove ſometimes our deſtruction, having 
once taken root in our hearts ; This zs alſo vanity. 


Bur paſs we theſe five troubleſom, uncomtorcable years alſo; we no 
{ooner 


To the Fudicious READ ER. 


ſooner come to the leaſt capacity or underſtanding, but we are then ſe- 
verely corrected by ſuch as are ter oyer us, if we are not ſo wiſe preſent- 
ly as themſelves, and underſtand what they either fay or teach us ; O ris 
x ares creatures, to think beating'rheir buttocks, backs and ſides, will 
put brains or more capacity then Gop hath given them into their heads ! 
what rtiſchiefs are we now at this Age prone unto ? Ineed name none 
ſince I cannot name one which we do not with eagerneſs run into ; 
and how grievqus doth-it prove unto us in the end? Learn we nor 
vice? deſpiſe we not virtue ? Are we not ſtill under the laſh and cor- 
rection of one or other? Do we not follow trifles ? Play with toys 
and negle&-our Book,: of, Trade, that which might make us men 
heratter? Have we any forecaſt? And yet will we be adviſed? Know 
we what is good for our ſelves? and yet can we condeſcend to be 
raught © run we not into all eviland extravagant courſes? and yer will 
we be taught the way of goodneſs 2 What ſhall I fay 2 when I have ſaid 
all, and have made the beſt of all, I muſt neceſſarily be conſtrained ro 
lay, All is vanity and vexation of ſpirit. 

Ler us come now to the fourteenth year of our age, and ſee if we 
grow wiſer as we grow older. Now we fall in love, fond fools ! with 
what, can wetell: know we why 7 have we reaſon ſufficient to guid us © 
have we ſufficient Judgement for theſe our fond and childith actions 2? 
Is the beautifull ? hoy ſimple are we ſo to beſor our ſelves with that which 
at the beſt is but uncertain, and with one puff of the ſtormy wind of fick- 
neſs, the Small-Pox, Feaver, or ſuch like, &c. withereth and faderh * 
How weak are we to thipwrack our Judgements on ſuch quickſands, to 
build oor houle on ſo-tottering a foundation which is impoſſible to ſtand? 
How childiſhare we ſo to bewitch our {elves to bare outfides ! Carch at 
ſhadows and neglect ſubſtances ! when Vertue, Religion, Chaſticy,Hu- 
mility, Patience, Prudence, Modeſty ought rather to be the rowling 
eyes, the love dimples,curled artificial locks,naked breſts,cherry cheeks, 
coral lips, black eye-brows, lilly white hands, lott,gentle & flender which 
we ſhould look too, and cover, and eſteem as the greateſt and chiefeſt 
beauty, though vaild under a Canveſs Curtain , this is the Jewel rather 
to be prized of -the two, though locked upin an homely Cabinet; this 
is that vertuous Woman which ſhall be a Crown to her Hushand, Prov. 12.4. 
The glory of the man, 1 Cor.11.7. and the wife that buuldeth up her houſe, 
Prov. 14-1. But the other which hath onely beauty and a bare ourlide, 
is the fooliſh that plucketh it down, as is expreſt in the tollowing words z 
For as a jewel of gold in a [wines ſnout, ſo is a fair woman without diſcre- 
tion, Prov.11.22. But alas ! now weare raſh, indiſcreet, think our own 
wits beſt , like wilde Bucks; over hedgeand ditch we go without tear 
or wit ; reſtrain our ſelves of nothing tor theſe {even years till we have 
ſown all our wilde Oats, and come home with weeping croſs; think we 
have time enough torepent; delay the time; we are young enough, and 
therefore go on in our ways : O burlet us confider the words of that blel- 
ſed man, But know O man that for all this thou ſhalt come to Fudgment, 
Ecclef, 11.9. We ſhall anſwer for every idle word, Marth. 12.32, Much 


more aſſuredly then for every vain and fooliſh idle action , eſpecially 
(d) when 


The Vanity of 
our Tokth, 


10 Tothe Fudicious RE AD E R. 


when wevoluntarily ran thereints;' and wittully / and willingly give our 
ſelves over to looſnefs/ which profirech not, bat'is 4 great toil and vanity 
it felf. Ex 4 1 bg 57 
bb do we Game, Sport, Drink, Rore-ity/and make Revel-rout, 
Rant, Cur it, and tear the ground; Vapor; Swagger, Domineer, Stare 
and Sware, follow a company to,daevil, doas our Companionsadvile us, 
or as weſee them do, never queſtioning whether there be Reaſon, Wit, 
Diſcrerion or Honeſty init; Whore, Drab, and take Tobacco, all tor 
company. and ſo deſtroy both body and'ſoul, being now forany defign< 
drink healths to our Miſtrefſes ll we leave our ſelves no-health, and 
make beaſts of our ſelves in not denying to do that which' beaſts cannot 
be conſtrained to : And truly, this beſtial vice of Drankennels may 
alſo be reprehended in thoſe of more mature years, nay, tothe ſhame of 
this our Land beir ſpoken, even the moſt grave age of men is roo much 
addicted hereunto; fo thar it 15 obſervable that hardly any Houſes thrive 
of late ſince our manifold diſtractions, bur” tipling and guſling Ale- 
houſes, the which as is very well known, are more in number by many 
then all che inhabitants of other Trades (in Lon4on) put together ; This 
alſo is vanity, and a great evil. | 
Again, let us ſee the end of ſuch doings ; what advantageth it ? doth 
it produce any good * are not theeffects hereof, Quarrels, Diſſentions, 
Fightings for Miſtreſſes; for not drinking of an Health, tor not ſaying 
» this Woman is handſom; for affirming that is not comely ; for diſpara- 
ging of a Lady, a Perſon of Honour, Quality, Renown, becaule he hath 
been admitred her preſence; tor an affront, nay for a pin, point,or pins- 


} head, muſt they into the field, off with their doublets, and too it, mar- 
ther one another,and then flie, or elfe be catcht and hanged; This is mad 
Li neſs, vanity and folly. Tt matrereth not with theſe , whether they are 


Friends, Familiars, or Enemues, it once they are ſer-ont, they muſt kill or 
be killed , die in a Ditch,and that they call Honourable, then they die in 
the bed of howour (they ay) and this for the {malleſt trifles, as Þ could te- 
ſtihe,might I relate their names, and fo again revive mens raſhneſs which 
was bur lately acted : However the ſtory of one is thus, Two Gentle- 
men in this City of Zondox,happening to meet rogether and being very 
loving Friends and intimare acquaintance, went into one of theſe devi- 
liſh Tipling-houles, called fora Pot of Ale, the which the one taſting of 
it commended to be very good ; the other was of a clean contrary opi- 
nion, and did altogether'as much diſcommend it, thinking no hurt, but 
that he might freely givealſo his Judgement thereof; but to be ſhort, the 
other again reitered 1ts excellent goodneſs, and was alſoreplyed to the 
contrary , and ſo they -fell ro words andar laſt [to end this Whimſical 


. , ta gw, "oo 
4 Pn ne” ge a LS = 4x 
_ Ws 28u710 Sion: PITS _ _ 


_ _— — —  — -__ 
. 
-—— 
i a _ 


"I 


Me Rear 


* controverſie] theyrelolved co kill one another; the day being appoint- 
; ed, and meeting, the one'was lain ; and ir was upon a good ground, was 
' $ | itnot? yet could nothing ſatisfie theſe hor ſpirits, nor ſtand with their 
| | Honours, as they ſuppoſed, but this madneſs, madneſs, madneſs. 

bd | Many ſuch like vanities and raſh actions (I ſay) might I here relate; 


| but 1 tear I ſhould in recording of them render my ſelf moſt vain , and 
{ thew my own vanity,whilft I am repreheading it in others : Doth not 
| | this 


To the Fudicius READ ER. 
this Drinking and Revelling, which they call good Company-keeping, 


not only declare it ſelf ro be clean contrary rhereunto , bur alfo ſpoil 


cheir ſociety they pretend to enjoy £ they meet together, but oftentimes 
know not how they depart ; are nor the effects thereof over and above 
what hath been ſaid, poverty, diſgrace, running in debt, cheating, lying, 
diſſembling, vain-glory, pride, luſt, prodigality 7; and when all tails, and 
Creditors call tor their w_wy, will be put oft no longer, ſet Sergeants 

to dog them, and Taylors will furniſh them no more co flant and carry ir 
out for their furgher running in debt with others unknown unto them; is 
not their Refuge ar laſt rothe High-way, turn Cutters,and from thence 
return to Tyburn, where too late they Repent , and with any would cut 
the Rope, but cannot advantage themſelves then, and there's an end of 
them ? 

Poor W retches! were not they better be old whilſt they are young, ra- 
cher then be hanged, killed, and murthered upon every Hue? tr betore 
they be old 2 be grave, ſober, ſerious, then whymlſical, fickle and fan- 
raſtical ? apply their minds to the ſtudy of vertue and the liberal Sci- 
ences, then thus to learn nothing bur vice, foolery, toppery, and vexa- 
tion of ſpirit? Knowing that their time 1s ſhort enough to learn good- 
nels, a therefore not prodigally thus to ſ{quander it away upon trifles 
and childiſh conceits : Had they not better be contented with a compe- 
rency, and live within compaſs, and addict themſelves to their Book 
then flant it, roar and ſwagget it about the ſtreets with the Drapers cloth 
on their back, the Taylors Workmanſhip, Points and Fancies, and all 
unpaid for £ the Haberdathers hat, che ſmirking Semſters half and 
whole Shirts, Bands, Cuffs and Boot-hoſe-tops, with the Shoe-makers 
Boots * Like Fſops Bird that had borrowed and tric himſelf up with 
others Feathers, was thought fome body, ſo that he preſumed to be 
King, till his Plot was diſcovered,and every Bird took his own again,and 
lefr him deſpicable z even ſo do thele Chryſalides carry themſelves high, 
advance themſelves above their Betters, think every one their inferiour 
that hath not ſuch gaudy fine quelkeſhoſes about them; and fo forget- 
ing themſelys, they run headlong into many abſurdities and Premuniries, 
being applauded of the World for this their outfide, chough vitious, 
(which had every one his own, he would be ſpeedily ſtript of, and lett as 
naked as any Nayljnot in{1de, although vertuous, it outwardly mean;Th7s 
is alſo vanity. 

Well, we are now come to Age, and we may lawfully inherit what is 


The vanity of 
man in generals 


our own, which we may quickly do G o » knows but what is this our ,,, z .x. 
Heritage 2 ſurely not worthy the naming or particularizing a bundle of yearof bu age, 
Cares, Troubles and all kinde of miſeries, tears, horrors and tribulati- =o ag 


ons, maladies and infirmities, expoſed to all dangers, and that upon 
every occaſion, io that I may ſay as one once very well ſaid , Man hath 
but one way into the World, but ( I may affirm) an hundred thouſand ways 
out. This is vanity and wexation of ſpirit; no ſooner a man hath ſowed 
his wilde Oats, but the black Ox treads immediatly on his Foot : No 
looner a man comes to be a man, chat he leaves his childiſh toys, extra- 
vagant courles, and his wilde untamed accuſtomary lite , but he is over- 


(b 2) whelmed 


Tothe Fudicious READ ER. 


whelmed with all cheſe ; If he have money, he is troubled and perplexed 
with care to hay it out tothe beſt advantage and althongh he hath im- 
ployed tas well as heart could defire, yer is heſtill in rhe' ſame conditi- 
on, thinking he —_— have improved it ſoand ſo, much better; or ſup- 
pole he be ſufficiently fatisfied it is no better to be husbanded, yet is he 
on the other fide eaten up with fear, ſadneſs, melancholy, and diſcon- 
cent, as muchas if it were utterly loſt , when indeed he had more mat- 
ter of joy ; This 1s alſsvanity. | | 

If he want money, what miſery 1s he overcharged with ! a continual 
fear poſleſſerh his Spirits, thar he ſhall ſtarve, lie in Gaol , have no friend, 
abound with diſgraces, flights, frowns and affronts, even from the 
moſt rural, although never ſo well deſerving; is he not then ready to 
rake any deſperate courſe and defign in hand © and is not this troubleſom, 
loachſom, abominable life enough to make him do thar which in his own 
natural humour he ever deteſted © 7s not this wanity .and folly then ? ſure 
zt is agreat evil. | 

Hath he a comperency { which 1s the golden mean to be deſired of all 
men] yet he is nor content,he muſt haye more, he lives not ſo high as his 
Neighbours, his Wife and Children flant it not like them, he hath not 
his Coach, Saddle-horſes tor himſelf, and a couple of men, nor the at- 
rendance, cap in hand that he ſees others have ; O miſerable man ! how 
vin art thou , that thou knoweſt not thine own happineſs * Contenta- 
tion 3s the chiefef gain - and as one moſt elegantly ſaid , It is not the 
abundance of Riches or Poſſeſs:0ns a man hath, that maketh him Rich , but the 
conmtentedneſs of this minde. For how many old, grubbing Ulurers (who 
as Anacharſis (aid , carry Gold like Afles, yet eat but Hay) uu them- 
ſelves ? feed upon porridge a whole half year rogether , make a penny 
ferve them aday, will not beſtow a farching to the making themſelves 
well when ſick, for fear of parting with their Manmon-money, although 
buta trifle ; but chooſe rather to put it co the venture , md let it wear 
away (as they uſe co lay) when oftentimes it wears them away, or at leaſt 
bears them away ; and ſoare juſtly diffipated of all, for fearing to part 
with ſome. Are not theſe men wretched, poor, even whilſt they poſſeſs 
rhe greateſt Riches © Is there any of them can afford themſelves neceſ(- 
{aries ? do they not live more like Beggars, or Peaſants [at the beſt Jhen 
rick and wealthy men 2 

And now I might here ſhew the odiouſneſs and vitiouſneſs of cove- 
reouſneſs, which of all things is moſt deteſtable, bur I fear I have al- 
ready tranſgrefled the ordinary bognds of an Epiſtle ; wherefore leaſt the 
Porch of this my Fabrick ariſe to a greater bulk then the whole build- 
ing, I ſhall paſs it by. 

And truly to goon in this I am upon(withour branching it in the leaſt) 
were an Hercaleay Labour, and toinfiſt on every particular vanity in this 
vain, vain, vain World , Beſides ſhould I be fo peremprory as to attempt 
it, my preſent condition, want of memory, and inſufficient capacity, 
would render me defe@tivein as many things as I have already or can 
heteafrer expreſs, and my vanity therein the greateſt of vanities; where- 
fore as hitherto I have bur hinted at things , being (as I have ſaid ) nor 
able 


To the Fudicions RE A DER. 


able ro do-agy other, nor indeed: willing (tt Fcould).to weary my. Rea- 
der with. fo long 2 preamble; I thal proceed directly torward; through 
che reſt of mans lite, and give you alſo an hint thereof (having began) 
and that as brief as may. be. | 

Is he ſtagle * he defares marriage; Is. he married * he deſires again to 
be ſingle ; as the ſtory goes of a fellow which. whilſt he was 2 
barchelor, was a boon- companion, and would ſpend his mony freely. 
and therfore with his Hoſts he was termed A good. fellow; bur fo ir 
happened, that at length he was married, and coming not fo frequenr- 
ly to his Hoſts as formerly, nor ſpeading his: cath fo freely wheft he 
came, was by one of them demanded the reaſon of this his unwonted 
ſtrangeneſs and great change; who replying, faid, 1 am now married; 
= then quoth the, Thoy art now an hone man ; but he fighingly made 
anſwer in thele words, Ha, but if 1 were once a good fellow again, 1 would 
never be an honet may whilit 1 live. | 

Thus you fee we are never content with our condition, neither full 
nor faſting. How are we grieved and perplexed ar the loſs of hut- 
band, Wife, Children, Goods? And how again do we fret, pine and 
conſume our Spirits, Bodies and Souls, that we cannot be rid of our 
Husbands, Wives and Children? How carelefs are we of them when 
we have them © Spend all our ſelves, Grudge them pennies, when 
we {quander away pounds npon Whores, Projects, Drink,Cards, Tables, 
Pice, and an hundred ſuch Vanities, Vanities, and ſtudy to render aur 
ſelves hereby worle then Infidels, and Deniers of the faith, according 
to the Apoſtle 1. Tim. 5. 8. But if any provide not for his owne, and 
(one for thoſe of his owne houſe, he hath denied the Faith, and is worſe 
thew an Infidel. Is not this Vanity? What is this but Vanity © Surely 
it is the Vamity of Vavities. 

Was not Marriage firſt inſtituted for procreation © Gen. 2. yet how 
many are there that would fain marry, were they bur aflured they 
might never have Child ? O wicked wretches thus co fet themſelves 
oppokite to Gods own Ordinance! They would pradtice their laſci- 
vious luſts, but deny the fruit of the womb; and truly I muſt con- 
te(s it matrereth not how little we are troubled with the breed of ſuch 
beaſts; for letme tell you, and take itfor a rule, you ſhall never find 
any of this humour, but ſuch as are moſt viide Whores, chough they 
may cover it and hide it from the World, I have obſerved it in very ma- 
ny, and have ſtill found chem no otherwiſe reputed. Are not theſe 
Vain tools? And is not this a great folly ſo to deſire what the Loxp 
hath threatened for a curſe? Hof. 9. 14. Give them O LORD :- what 
wilt thow give thew ? a miſcarryine womb and ary breits , andreftuſe what 
be hath promiſed for a bleffing ? Gen. 49. 25. 1 will bleſs thee with 
the bleſsings of the Womb , and 1o earneſtly to covert what virtuous Wo- 
men 1n old time counted a Reproach ? Gep. 30. 23. faithRacusr there, 
GOD hath taken away my reproach, when he had given her a fon. This 
is worſe they Vanity 01 Madueſs 

Doth not the riches and preterment of many men, alchough naturally 


mean. bale and unworthy,ſo elevate and tranſport them above themſelves, 
{0 


6s EI oDG.. a... 4. 6-4 *% 
© X - 


A ſhort deſcrip. 
tion of the 
world, and the 
vanity thereof. 


To the Fudicious READ ER. 


ſo as that they deſpiſe, negle& and contemn their berters, both for birth 
and endowments ? meerly becauſe they have not thoſe preterments, that 
power, that eſteem with the Vulgar, nor thoſe fine knacks about them 
which he hath ; when, ſhould we bur give to every creature its own, how 
naked ſhould we be lett* we ſhould be more mean and poor then the 
bruteſt creature, who hath hairſ at leaſt tocover his skin ; 7hzs is 4 great 
evil, and wanity it ſelf. 

And how vain are we to boaſt, and take pride in what is our ſhame 2 
we were Created naked, and had we not ſinned we ſhould have ſocon- 
tinued; we cloathed our ſelves firſt for ſhame, and now we are ſo void 
of ſhame, weare proud of our cloathing, glory in our ſhame ; but I ſay, 
let us conſider the things we are proud of , they are but excrements, at 
the beſt bur vile , and naturylly, I fay, belong to other Creatures , and 
theretore we have little or no cauſe to eſteem ſo of them, much leſs ro 
be proud of that which we are beholding to our inferiours for: For to 
the Beaver we are indebted for our Hat or covering to the head, the chief 
member; to the earth tor our ſhirt, which 1s nearer to us then our Pettt- 
coat - to the Sheep or Silk-worm, for our cloaths and ſtockins. to the 
Oyſters for our Neck-lace and Pendence ; for our Shoes , Boots, and 
drawling Galoſhes to the Goat, Ox, Cow, Ball, &c. and to the Cordi- 
vant, Buck, Stag, Kid, Lamb, Sheep tor our Gloves: and to the earth, 
rocks and mountains tor our Gold, Diamonds, Rubies, Saphires, Jaſpers, 


 Chryſalices, Heliotropians,&c. And laſtly, for our Fans and Feathers, 


which we ſo fvagger with in Hide-Park down to our backs, to the O- 
ſtridge ; and for our Pertumes, to the Civet Cat, &c. what comes from 
their Tails,we glory to have at our Noſes. How can we be more vain, 
then to ſet our minds on ſuch Trifles « be proud of ſuch traſh and trum- 
pery, vile abje&ts? This is vanity, madneſs, madneſs, madneſs; we dote, 
are ſtupid, beſotted, ſtark mad fools. 

To be ſhort (for trom this 21. year of our age, I intend to ſhew, or 
giveat leaſt an hint to the folly of moſt men from this year to their very 
laſt: tor although I might a lictle inſiſt on the crazineſs, peeviſhneſs and 
waſpiſh wiltulneſs of petrtiſh old Age, and the calamities whereunto they 
are moſt prone and incident, yer, I ſay, I ſhall rather paſs that by) Ler us 


firſt examine what the World it ſelf is, and the ſeveral degrees of men 


therein, and then he that ſhall conclude it to be other then vanity, foole- 
ry and ſimplicity, and the men therein other then fools and mad, Erit 
mihimaznus Apollo, but then I muſt tell him, he muſt nor only conclude 
ſo, but proveit to be ſo; or he ſhall (on the other ſide) be M:ihi hominum 
ſtultiſs1mus, or Sapientum Oftavns. 

Is the world [firſt ] any other then a School of Knavery, Jugling and 
hypocrifie , and (as 1t were ) a Nurſery of Vice, Villany and Profane- 
neſs, where every one is for himſelf , and his own ſelt-ends, valuing 
nothing to the accompliſhment thereof, no not the tear of G O D, nor 
his Commandments, which is according to the Royal Law of Liberty, 
To love our neighbour as our ſelf ? Is Chriſtianity, Love, Conſanguinity, 
Alliance, Charity, Friendihip or mutual Acquaintance ſufficient to re- 
claim us ? Is not this Proverb, No longer Pipe, no longer Dance, verified 

in 


To the Fudicious REA DER. 


in moſt of the People of. the World * Is not eyery man a Friend and a 
proteſſed Loyerto him that hath no need of their Friendſhips O what 
greazing #f\fat Sows inthe —- 15 there frequently to be found through- 
out the whole face of the Earth ! but which is worſe, is not this vanit 
committed by fuch as. proteſs.and make a great outward ſhew of Religi- 
on and Chrittianity « And yet roan Acquaintance, Afociate, a decayed 
Kiniman, better and more worthy both for Birth, Parts and Breedinj 
then themſelves, do they extend any thing fave a bundle of flattering 
words, and.diflembling Proteſtations of Love,affection and good will : 
and then affoon as their backsare turned, give it out, he is wicked, a 
{wearer, a beggar, he lives by this and by that ; here lies all his hope, and 
here his greateſt retuge ; never remembring, 7t is ax ill bird that defiles his 
own net ,, rejoy cCingat the decay and poverty of them, that themſelyes 
might be had un greateſt eſteem? Is not this a great evil : How many 
Ambodexters, Fanuſſes, Hypocrites, doth the wool abound with, that are 
outwardly Lambs, yet inwardly Wolts, that: play Legerdemain , and 
practiſe nought elſe, Hocrs Pocuſſes, teeming Sainrs , yer really Devils, 
that have excules for the greateſt fins, nay for pride it ſelf which hurled 
Lucifer the great Angel of light, the great Carrier of light (as his name 
imports,being interpreted) headlong to Hell and eternal deſtruction? We 
know the Apoſtle to Trmpothy, Tim. 1. 2,9, 10. exhorterh, that women 
adorn themſelves im modeit apparel , with ſhamefaztneſs and ſobriety ; not 
with broidered hazr, or gold. or pearls, or cojtly aray ; but (which becometh 
Women profeſsrag godlineſs) with good works, Whereby we clearly fee 
200d works (according to the intentot the Hor y Gaosr) ought ra- 
ther to be the attire of women (eſpecially ſuch as proſeſsthe Goſpel and 
Godlineſs) then ſuch vanities as are there expreſt, and many noiy adays 
aſſume above their rank and quaiity ; leaſt (as the ſcope of theſe words 
intimates unto us) they become a thame and reproach ro the Goſpel and 
purity thereot ; and Chriſtianity be lightly eſteemed tor their ſakes, and 
thele their vain practiles. I ſay, notwithſtanding all this, ſome who pre- 
rend much to the world of Holinels and Religion, are to hypocritical 
(nay I may wel jay deviliſh) as to maintain openly the gorgious apparel 
of women, and their vanities in ſuch practiſes, Tobe 4 grace, and an ho- 
nour to the Goſpel ; chooling rather thus highly to fin againſt GOD, and 
diſpleaſe him both in the maintenance of the a&, and [which 1s worſe] 
the vindication thereof, then in the leaſt to reprehend ic in their children, 
or diſpleafe their fantaſtical, whimſical, hypocrital wives ; but heap fin 
upon fin, that fin might be hid from the eyes of the world, tearing more 
the cen(ures of frail, deſpicable unworthy -zan, then the eternal Judge- 
ment of rhe grear, terrible omniſcient, omnipreſent and omnipotenr 
G OD that will call one day all toaccount; that will not meaſagre men 
by the outward appearance, out the inward teſtimonies of the' Spirit, 
that will reckon for every idle word ; much more for every vain action. 
and premeditated and ſtudied lyes and fallacies to cloak and cover our 
wickedneſs and deteſtable actions ; Whar profit will theſe vain, fooliſh. 
mad things be unto us, whereof we thall one day be athamed ? our lay- 
ing the faulron our Husbands, and faying he will have it 1o; or upon 
| | | @Ur 


© Og ” * _ 
- + dk} ha... ET nn ns 


ed 


: 
#1 
zh 
if ©; 
'Þ 
E & 
j 
4 
| 
. 
Wo 
' 
I: 
W 


CO tt > > ens: rey 


To the Fudiciou READ ER. 


our Wives, that ſhe will haveit ſo; will not then excuſe us , will nor 
then plead for us, will not then advantage us a ruſh, will not expiare 
our {in, nor will not protect us from the puniſhment ; This 15 alſo 
vanity. | 

How do we ſuit with every occaſion, with every company ? Do we 
not when we viſite the Religious, the Miniſters,attire our {elves modeſt- 
ly, put on our plain black gowns,hide our necks, breaſts, gorgets, with 
our icarfs, our curled locks and broidered hair with our hoods , fit de- 
murely, talk of profeſſion, and of this body, and the other body, rather 
then want diſcourſe and occaſion to cry up our ſelves? and yet do we 
ſtudy ever the more ſanctiry « Our Saviour Curisr teacheth us to 
know ſuch as are indeed his Servants by an infallible coken, Marth.7.16. 
Tea ſhall know them by their fruits , domen gather rapes of thorns , or figs 
of thiſtles? their outward pretences arenot grounds ſufficient to convince 
us of their innocency, they may be thus in ſheeps cloathing, yet inward- 
ly may be alſo ravening wolves,as you ſee.in the preceding verſe. Where- 
fore I muſt needs reprehend ſuch as poſitively conclude men either 
good or bad, according to the report of rhe world of them, or their ſeem- 
ing prerences z deviating from this Rule, this infallible Rule ; for as ic 
is raſhneſs in any to believe windy reports ; ſois it folly, and worſe then 
madneſs to be carried away or deluded with pretences, and ſeeming out- 
fides, without firſt hricully examining the truch of both; the want of 
this leſſon in wiſdom is the cauſe we run our ſelves into millions of 
Premunires , which but for brevitie ſake I might prove by a parti- 
cular recital of many; wherefore learn this, and thou ſhalt be an abſo- 
lute Politician ; for ſo ſhalt thou eaſily pluck off the mask of pre- 
ences, diſperſe the miſts of envy and reproaches , and free thy ſelf of 
many inconveniencies. 

W hat coveting is there of this Dazly applauſe of the world ? Do we 
not run here, and run there, viſit this, relieve publickly, and that to be 
teen of men, make gatherings to our own advantage ; peak to the god- 
ly tor money, cloaths, and other neceſſaries, to relieve the necefficared, 
and do it in our own Names ; be known to none we have it from any, 
but that it is our own goodnels and liberality, and yer hide our faces from 
our own fleth * Is this Charity © Is this Chriſtianity 2 Is this according 
co what we profefle ? Will we part with ſix pence to one that is in 
the moſt extremity of neceſſity when we ſee they cannor ſhew it to the 
world, or think it will not be known 2 Do we not abound with theſe 
tormalities, nay do we not rather ſwarm with them ? 

How many men follow tradition and common cuſtom, rather then 
their own Judgements, Senſe or Reaſon ? 

What greater madnets, folly and vanity can there be, then to ſee So- 
liciters, Clerks, Scriveners, be better rewarded for running of errands, 
writing of a Bill, ora Bond in a neat hand and flouriſhing Letters, and 
if may be neither true Englith nor Senſe init, then a Scholar and inge- 
nious perſon tor teaching them wit : To ſee Huntſmen: entertained, 
receive {tipends, diſcourled with, when Learning goes a Begging ? A 
tying flattering Favourite,that is a meer outfide,ger more ina year then a 


Philoſopher 


" oa FF R8BW 


To the Fudicious READ ER, 


Philoſopher all his life? A quondam Beggar, thar was glad to do any 
thing for amels of Porridge or aſcrap of Bread, fant it, and ride in his 
Coach, have the worſt of his Attendants better then the beſt of his kin- 
dred, or any of his Predeceflors? Thar was formerly a ſervant to every 
one, now Lord it over all ? Gentlemen goon foot, Beggars ride on hor- 
ſes, prancing Steeds? Philoſophers,Schollars and ingenuous ſouls crouch 
to Clowns, illiterate Curmudgins tor a meals meat, or a nights lodging 2 
Cloaths eſteemed before Wit, Learning, and underſtanding 2 meer out- 
ſides honoured, inſides {lighted, not eſteemed or valued * Men to have 
their guts in their brains, and brains in their guts ? To ſtrain at Gnats and 
ſwallow Camels ? To skip over blocks,and ſtumble at ſtraws 2 To be an- 
gry tor trifles, not moved for things of conſequences Thoſe in Autho- 
rity, Place, injoying poſſeſſions, though Idiots; be honoured, reverenced, 
applauded, eſteemed of, crouched to: when vertue, and the chiefeſt of 
endowments a mortal can poſſeſs, wanting preferment, and trath riches, 
ſhall be diſreſpe&ed and undervalued 7 Then to ſee riches make 2 man 
wiſe, ſolid, diſcreet, judicious and vertuous, though a natural Fool ; 
and poverty to render all theſe, and the man that poſſeſſerh them.,a Fool, 
a Coxcomb, an Aſs : Wiſe men degraded; Fools preferred to office © 
Orators and Judicious men to be ſilent , Fools and Idiots prate,and have 
all che talk, and reprehend others, ot what they themlelves are juſtly to 
be reprehended Men that have enough, make Vaſlals of themſelyes to 
their Inferiours to get more? Diligently to ſcrape with the one hand 
money together, and ro ſquander it away without care with the other 2 
To be penny wile. and pound fooliſh * To buy ſhadows and neglect ſub- 
ſtances © Then to ſee fo much difference between words and deeds ? 
Men rob Peter to pay Paul ? Actall kinde of villany, and pretend to be 
Saints « The Fox preach ? Vice correc fin © The Pig play on the 
Organs * Blind men judge of Colours 7 A world in the Mooz and other 
Planets ? Hell and damnation in Saturzand Mars ? the Earth turn round 
and the $yz ſtand ſtill ? A man to ſmile in your tace,and cut your throat ? 
Pretend one thing, do clean contrary ? Neither ſpeak what they think, 
nor think what they ſpeak ? To hear every one ſay he is your humble 
ſervant, yet ayms to be your inſulting Maſter ? Cuckolds to be content- 
ed, wink at their wives abuſes, and make much of thoſe that Cornuted 
them ? Women to wear the breeches, men made a Nole of Wax ? Hor- 
{es ride in Coaches, men draw them ? The Cart before the Horſe ? Men 
build Caſtles in the Ayr 2 Towers build Maſons ? Men conquer King- 
doms, and be ſubdued by their own Paſſions and Aﬀections ? Rule Em- 
pires and millions of men,and be ruled themſelves by one Woman? Do- 
mineer abroad, bea ſneaks at home ? Men poſleſſed with the Devl-flat- 
tery, turn themſelves into all ſhapes and forms ? be Religious with the 
Religious : profane with the profane : a {pend-thritt with the Prodigal, 
a Miſer with the Uſurer; fawn and wag their tongues, hats and hands, 
as a Dog doth his tayl; be furious like a Lyon : mildelike a Lamb, com- 
mend, diſpraiſe ; domineer, crouch ; vapour here, be baffled there; and 
what not, may it but advantage them {fix pence? Then ro fee men and 


women force their children to marry for Riches, Honour, this end and 
(c) | chat, 


17 


4 


ate; 


- nya, + _ q = r 
Fi Fo %s . _ 4 _ 
- >. — cc FR a j-4.FY 6 3%. ” 


- Da” 


—_— ——_— 


ag. ps hs A 
a: "Stwem—+ 
ET LET th 


| — _ 
x TI 4 5 of bay” ances th 
| s 7 
. *% 
£3. O....% _ 6 ,_ _ 
bo 2-2 4 OE DO 8 en TOA rl 
[4 L A % 
: 


18 


Tothe Fudicious RE AD ER. 


& thar, and compell them ro reje& and refuſe their loves to their utter 


ruine and deſtruction ? Love is the bond of perte&neſs, and as it co- 
vereth all ſins , Prov.10.12. ſo doth it alſo hide all faults; I dare nor 
tranſgreſs on thy Patience to ſhew thee the excellency of Love, and the 
folly of Parents in this their extream vanity , fince I have been al- 
ready, I fear, too tedious , bur deſire thee, ſince verbum ſapienti. 
to be content with this , and for that T deſire ro haſten co a con- 
cluſion, 

Then to ſee women think themſelves better, or at leaſt equal , or as 
g00d as men? Men not equal nor ſo good, much leſs better then wo- 
men - A man to be Fack Fackſonin the Country, and Mr. Fohnſoz in 
the City 7 To live ina Chriſtian Commonwealth | or ar leaſt fo in 
prerence] and dare not believea word a man ſpeaks ? Every whiffling 
Mechanick,a Politician; Gentlemen, wiſe, and learned, Simplerons? Lyes, 
Plots and inventions to cozen be believed and credited; plain dealing, 
truth and honeſty ſuſpeed, derided, and accounted weakneſs 2 The 
moſt rational, ſolid, ſober and moſt diſcreet of all Gods Creatures Man, 
become the moſt fickle, whimſical, ſimple and ridiculous ? Men to be- 
come abſolute Apes 2 one while in a narrow briar'd har, along waſte, his 
breeches to his knees; Boots and Boor-hoſe-tops , and great gingling 
Spurs, their teer as long as their legs, or at leaſt tull as long again as their 
foot naturally, as in the year 1645. and 1646. In 1648. and 1649. a 
broad brim'd hat, and no other muſt ſerve; our breeches muſt be long, 
even down to our ancles ; Boots with the tops trailing on the — 
little Spurs that muſt not gingle in the leaſt: In 1650. and 1651. we 
tumble into ſhort breeches again : In 165 2. and this prefent year 165 3. 
we think it ridiculous ro wear boots, but altogether thoos and ſtockins, 
turning down :vitha top as the French Lackies have uſed to go for theſe 
many years; one while we have toolong curling locks on both ſides of 
our head ! anon all the whole fide muſt be of a length and ſhort behinde ! 
Thus verifying the old Proverb that we Engliſh know not when a 
thing is well. 

[ have hinted bur ar theſe laſt ſeven or eight years for that theſe va- 
nities might be the better remembred by us, and to our ſhame called to 
minde ; as alſo tor that I account not the ſubject worthy of further reci- 
cal of other foregoing years; beſides, I bluſh to think men ſhould be 
{ſuch Weather-cocks, or rather Cox-combs, thus never to reſolve on a 
ſer habit : might I give my Judgement what habir is moſt becoming, 1 
ſhould commend this we now ule, ſaving that our ſhoes and fantaſtical 
ſtockins ſpeak us rather Skip-jacks, Whiftlers or Anticks, then ſober . 
and folid men : I would have Boots, it I might give my verdi&, uſed in 
their ſtead : for the lengrh of our Breeches they cannot in my opinion be 
mended, being moſt rationally made according to the length of our 
thigh, not hiding our legs as formerly, and our doublets are made of the 
exactlengrh of our waſts : I amnot fo traditionally ſpirited as to com- 
mend Trunk-breeches, making our Buttocks as big as a Barrel, nor the 
other extream, made cloſe ro our thighs like a pair of ſtockins, neither 
heir doublets with the waſte juſt under our Arm-pits (contrary to _ 
natura 


TY 3 WY OY TT_OW_ OY GA Pr oe VN 


vs. 4 


| ——_— 


— 


To the Fudiciouw READ ER, 19 


natural ſhape)and Aanting skirts reaching down to the ſeat,whence it was- 
ſaid of old, 7 will ſit on your Skirts, when an injury was threatened; for 
truly in my opinion thus to beſor our ſelves, and overſhoot our Judge- 
ments in following ſuch a monſtrous and Clownith habit, were to render 
our ſelves more ridiculous by far then we are already : great Bands and 
Cufts,and a little narrow brim'd hatalſo , unleſs I could ſee any reaſon, 
comelineſs or profitin them, I can no wiſe commend. | 
It werea vain thing in me thus to recite the ſeveral alterations and mu- 
rations in the garbs of Women, {ince every day produceth a new Toy ; 
wherefore I ſhall only name ſome of their darling-trifles, which are as 
dear unto them as their lives, and which they conſtantly obſerve and 
reſolve to keep, viz. Their embroidered, curled, powdered hair, their 
waſhings, paintings,waters and Pomatoes to their taces ; and when they 
have done all, their ſeveral forts of patches, half-moons, ſtars,coach and 
horſes, round, triangled, quadrangled, pointed, little, great, long and 
ſhort: Vainly and foolithly hereby imagining to make themſelyes hand- 
ſomer then G 0D hath created them, or is willing they ſhould +be , and 
chooſing rather to pleaſe themſelves then him; nay, + rages it beco the 
diſpleaſing of him my muſt and will doic, what care they ; their face 
is their God; they look no further ; they believe no other , they care 
for no more. Andas touching their Attire, it would tire Hercnles, nay 
Sampſon, which were far ſtronger then an hundred ſuch as am TI ro relate 
it ; and truly were I able, yer have I not patience, there are ſo many un- 
worthy ſtinkards and flirts, ſneaking Mechanicks wives to be mention- 
ed, 7 bor ſhould I attempt, would rurn my ſtomack to think of them, 
and then inſtead of Writing, Iſhould preſent thee with a foul Paper ; 
yet theſe muſt be lapt in ſilk , they are no body if they have nor a Silk- 
Mo-hair, Taffaty, Tabby Gown (nay but for ſhame they would have 
cloth ot gold or {ilver, torgetting it is a ſhame for them to attempt 
the worſt of theſe) a ſcarlet, watcher, tabby petticoat , and. that muſt 
be laced roo, gentle-woman-like; thus multiplying garment upon gar- 
ment, till the apparel exceeds the worth of the bearer by an hundred 
degrees. They muſt have thele out-{ides,though their in-fides be as bad 
as may be; though they are as dirty that they are not ro be tonched 
with a pair of tongs; though their {mocks coſt not ten groats apeece, 
nay, though they pinch their bellies, and have hardly bread to ear, 
% they muſt have clothes, and that athouſand times beyond their qua- 
| lity. Can any thing be more vain then this £ Do not our Governours 
deſerve ſeverely and ſharply to be reprehended they look not into theſe 
abuſes and vanities, when we know not a Gentlewoman from a Mecha- 
nical flirt? Foan 7s as good as my Lady; there is no more difference be- 
rween them 1n their cloaths, then is1n the dark , alls one, except ſhe 
write Lady on her back, ſhe ſhall never be known in this Age: Where- 
fore for diſtinction ſake[if for no other} it is moſt requiſite (as I humbly 
conceive) it belooked into, and an order taken,ſoas that every Fack and 
Gillet may be known to be Tradeſmen, Serving-men, &c. and not equal 
in habit with their Superiours,by many degrees,8& Gentlemen of quality; 
for now with them (becauſe they are not reprehended in this their vanity) 
(Cc 2) | all 


Tothe Fudiciou READ ER. 


all are counted fellows at foot-ball, to the ſhame and blemiſh of the glory 
of this N-tion; It would be much better certainly if the Cobler would 
not go beyond his Lazt , and every one go according to his rank. 

Again, what greater madneſs then to ſee Lords no Gentlemen, no_ 
Gentlemen Lords, no Lords Gentlemen ? Serving-men able to buy out 
their Maſters? Wile, ſober, {olid and judicious Gentlemen be led away, 
gull'd, perfiwaded to any thing by their Vaſlals, even againſt their own 
knowledge? Men to believe any reports whether good or bad , with or 
aoainſt their friends or foes, withour. the leaſt ſearch into the truth there- 
of ? Illiterates that can hardly (peak ſenſe, write or read, preach and teach 
others ; learned, reverend, orthodox Divines filenced, or at leaſt not re- 
garded ? Such as deſerve not only reprehenſ1on bur ſevere chaſtiſement, 
roreprehend and teach others ? Suchasare guilty of folly, ro laugh ar 
folly 2 Of which number I muſt now needs rank my felt, and beſo am- 
bitious as account my {elf the chief, or greateſt Fool, more deſerving 
ro be laughed at then any other ; wheretore I my ſelf may juſtly thus 
queſtion with my ſelf, | 

Art thou not more ſullen, melancholy and mad then Saturz 2. More 
jovial, merry and temperate at another time then Fupzter himſelf - More 
fierce, cholerick , peevith, waſpiſh and angry then Mars? And again, 
more gentle, wanton, and fuller of ſport then Yens? More lotty,prond, 
ambitious then the Syzz « More fickle, wavering, and unconſtant then 
the Moon : Good with the good, bad with the bad like ercury? Ever 
in extreams, too merry or too ſad « How ſilly art thou to tell others of 
their being led away by fair words, and none ſo ſoon wrought on as thy 
ſelf 2 Condemn others tor following Antick Faſhions, and none fo ſoon 
run into them 2 Plead for wildom, act nought bur folly « Cry down 
Duels and fingle Combats, yet account it better not to live then live 
with an affront ? Condemn Drinking, and ſtay a whole week in a Ta- 
vern 2 To belo mad, as to tell mad-men of their faults? To expoſe thy 
{elf to the cenlureot every tool by writing publickly, thereby loſing the 
happineſs of enjoying thy {elf tothy felt? And to think the ſmiles and 
applauſes of ſome, can countervail the trowns and reproaches of 0- 
thers * Art not thou filly ? The greateſt Fool of all 2 Worſe then 


mad * 


I muſt confeſs , ſhould Tanſwer for my ſelf, I could not in the way of 
excule plead one word in my own behalt, I muſt acknowledge my ſelf 
guilty, and can ſay nothing but this, that it is a mad world, and there- 
tore ſhould be worſe then mad , ſhould I think my (elf other then mad. 
Yet leſs ſome conceited youngſter imagine himſelf more then he is, 1 
muſt turn him to Prov. 26.12. and then let him be ſo mad, as to caſt the 
firſt ſtone at me, whence I may conclude all are mad, or at leaſt fools, 
we being ſo generally guilty hereof; bur T ſhall name the words of the 
Text, that you may the better judge of it, Sect thou a man wiſe in his 
own conceit, there 1s more hope of a fool then of him. Now I would fain 
know, it one ſhould ſtrictly examine who is not guilty hereof, whether 
he ſhould finde any that is free: In former time there were bur ſeven 
Wiſemen ; now adays there is hardly ſo many Fools, E720, all fools, all 

vain, 


To the Fudiciou READ £ R. 


vain, all mad, mad, mad for company; This tx the world,tother's the Coun- 
Iry. 
7rluws have I given you a general character of the world or an hinr 
chereot , being alrogerher unable to paint it out to the life, yet what 
hath been faid [ being g ſo obvious to the ſenle of every capacity Jis {ut- 
ficient to prove italrogerher vanity. And now I might alſo here firly 
give you the deſcription of the Courts and Palaces of Kings , Inns of 
Courts, or the practiles of Lawyers, and of Markets , but 1 fear then 
I ſhould be inexc uſably guilty of prolixity. Wherefore of each of theſe 
ſhall only give thee a touch, and haſten ro conclude. 
I ſhall begin with the laſt, becauſe 1t1s a thing ſo frequent amongſt 

us, Viz. M. whets. Anacharſis doth well define it thus, E5# forum locus in 

uo alius alinm circumvenit. The Market-place,is a place where one Cozen- 
eth and detraudeth another. I may well term it(all things being conſider- 
ed) a conyention of. Cheaters and circumventing Lyers; » 4 place where 
muſt much evil needs be committed according to ) that of the Wiſeman, 
Between the buyer and the ſeller mut needs be ſin. 

And what are our 1ans of Court but meer conventions of Politicians, to- 
menrers of ſtrite & debate? For fight Dog, fight Bear,they will never part 
you; Incendiaries ? Lovers of milchief : Takers of bribes? Reſiſters 
. and perverters of juſtice,provided they are well ted « Do they not Fu;ti- 
fie the wicked for a reward.,and take away the righteou| neſs of the rrghteous from 
him? Ifa.5.23. For doth not money do all © 1s it not it that maketh the 
Mare to go: right or wrong doth it not<arry the cauſe with theſe Cartifts ? 
How hard is it for a man to >be's Lawyer and an honeſt man both roge- 


A ſhare d:(ort - 
tion of Mays 


gete, 


Of the Inns of 
Court, or the 
Pattiſcs of 
Lawyc/s, 


ther ? How many ſuch think you, you might find in a century of years? | 


Wherefore the time is coming, and is now even at hand, wherein the 
Prophets very next words will be verified upou them, <7. Therefore as 
the fire devoureth the ſtubble, and the flame conſumeth the chaft, {o their root 
ſhall be rottenneſs, and their bloſſom ſhall zoup as duſt, becauſe they have 
caſt away th? L AW of the Lora of Hosts "and deſpiſed the word of the Holy 
one of I(rael, 1ſa.5.24. 

And now ſhould we but examine the ſtare of the Chief Courts, viz 
the Palaces of Kings, we thall yet finde therein naught but vanity and 
madnels, from the loweſt to the higeſt, from the King to the Beggar, 
all are mad : what greater vanity, then to ſee men that are to Rule thou- 
ſands, be carried away with every breath of flattery of any one Para 
ſte? Then to ſee Kings and the Grandees of the World ſo cafily perſwa- 
ded contrary to what they 1 in their own judgements know, It there be 
any blemithina King, how toon 1s it applauded, admired rather for a 
grace, a vertue rather then a vice > Alexander ſtooped in the thouldcers, 
wherefore all his Souldiers and Courtiers did ſo too. Yet here I cannot 
but ſet down the wildom and gallantry of our late King Fames of hap- 
py memory, in this particular,as I have been by ſeveral informed who 
were converſant with him. C onſidering one day the vanity of his Cour- 
tiers in applauding till all his actions , very ſeriouſly about noon look- 
ingupto the Heaven out of a W indow , demanded of thoſe that were 


about him , whether they ſaw not a Star neer ſuch a cloud ; for (he ſaid) 
he 


» Of the Pataces 
F4 ” 
of NP3s. 


The Auths;s 
exhortation to 


this mad world. 


Inſtruttions 


To the Fudicious READ ER. 


he was confident he did ; whereupon every one looking up, began to de- 
liver their opinions thus, one ſaid he ſaw it, and that ic was a little bright 
ſtar; another that it twinckled very much, &c. every one with a ſeveral 
addition, concluded poſitively as he ſaid : whereupon he burſt forth in 
theſe words, or to this ſenſe, How unfortunate a man am 1 to have ſo many 
Fools to be my Councellors ! No wiſer men then right or wrong to ſay as I ſay ! 
Again, what Revelling, Masking, Playing, Feaſting, Toying , Fool- 
ing, Whoring, Pride, CO Drunkennels, Waſtry, and what nor 
that 15 evil, or co be reprehendeqa, but is to be found in theſe places moſt 
abundantly ? There is no place free, nor thing tree, but all, azd in all 
is vanity. 

Wherefore ſince it is ſo, I can commend nothing in this tranſitory, 
momentory, vilde World, but the knowledge of G op and his Son 
J=sus Cuxisr whom he hath ſentin the fleſhinto the World co ſave 
{1nners and the world, and that we might through him obtain everlaſting 
life. We have here noabiding place, wherefore what profit will it be 
unto us ſhould we gain the whole World, and loſe our own fouls ? We 
came naked in to the World, & we ſhall carry nothing out with us;all muſt 
be left behind, our pleaſure, riches, honours, preferments,parts ,endow- 
ments, wives, husbands and children ; he that the whole earth could 
not contain, and that ſighing ſaid , 1s there no more worlds to Conquer © was 
at laſt contained in the narrow confines of a Cofhn, and could poſſeſs no 
more of what he had gained, then his juſt length and breadth, which was 
not denied tothe meaneſt he ſubdued ; you have heard what the Great 
Conquerour of the Eaſt,Sa/adiz,carried to his Grave of all he had gain'd, 
bur a poor black Shirt; wheretore let the Wop vr Gop be thy whole 
ſtudy, thy delight both day and night, that when thou cealeſt to-be 
here, thou maiſt be erernally glorified hereafter, this is the ſummunbo- 
num, the chieteſt good , yet next untoit, let me recommend the ſtudy 
of Nature betore any other thing whatloever, tor that 2t 7s the great hand- 
maid of the Almighty, by which thou mayſt daily and hourly ſee the ſecret 
operations of his hands, and be drawn neerer and-neerer to him, for ac- 
cording to the Apoſtle, by knowing Natural things, we come to know 
Spiritual the better. 

And now here it remaineth TI thould again return to ſhew thee the me- 
chod and mannerof the ſubſequent Work where I letr off, 2nd ſo haſten 
toa conclution ; bur fince I have recommended unto you that which is 
the chief means of our future felicity , I think good firſt ({ince our hap- 
pineſs here, and the hope thereof hereafter conſiſterh much on the 
O_o or badnels of our triends and affociates ) here to deliver thee 

ome Rules how to chooſe a true Friend, to know a true Friend, and to 

keep a true Friend; for commonly according to the company, ſo we 
conform our {elyes, the which it it be other then good, proves our 
utter deſtruction, according to the old Proverb , Evil- communication 
corrupts good manners. 


In chooſing then of Friends; firſt negatively, and then afhrmatively 


how to <beoſe a Ihall defire thee to obſerve theſe Rules : Negatively, that by no means 


fricad. 


you 


To the Tudicious READER. 


you familiarly affociate your (elt with a lyar, diflembler or a flatterer, nei- 
ther with a proud man, nor covertous perſon tor they will prove deceit- 
full, treacherous and (elf-ended ; beware alſo of Bragadoria's; I mean 
ſuch as boaſt and glory of their charity or courteſte to others , that they 
have done this good turn, and the other good torn for them ; for 
chough it be true they have been beneficial to ſuch, and that they have 
done all that they brag of, yet will ſuch rake it for an approved maxime} 
be never true-hearted unto thee: And fuchasare fo baſe as ro defire or 
beg that which they ſee is precious and deer in the ſtght of any one, are 
alſo to be ſhunned, with thoſe that are got able- ro keep ſecret whar is 
commitred tothem in Truſt, and Promiſe-breakers, and ſuch as meer- 
ly eſteem of thee for thy Riches ; tor theſe althoagh they carry a great ap- 
pearance or outward gloſs of Friendſhip unto thee, yer are they never 
cordial and real Friends, bur fained ourfides. Bur on the other fide ler 
ſ{uch be deer unto thee, and choſen for thy triends and familiars that are 
honeſt and prudent , and as Czcero faith, whoſe integrity, conſtancy, 
fidelity and liberality is known to all their acquaintance : Let hun har is 
zealouſly affected with and to vertuous and religious as, be thy afloct- 
ate and choice companion ; tor as Plato ſaith, triendihip was given by 
nature to Mankind to help us and further us ro vertuous inclinatt- 
ons, not to vitious, lewd and ſordid practices : wherefore Pythagoras ve- 
ry excellently ſaid, if we would ſhun vice we muſt be familiar but with 
few ; and Dicearchus would intimate the ſame unto us, when he adviſerh 
us to make the vertuous only our Friends, if we delire to keep the name 
of vertuous and honeſt men, and the reſt of the world, it polible, wel- 
willers unto us ; wheretore wiſe Bas very wilely ſaid, He was not wile 
that would make every one Þis Famiutar ; whence I may allo conclude, 
that in the multirude of triendthipis triendihip violated. Do not exceed 
then in abundance of friends and acquaintance; for it thou haſt but a 
few honeſt men and real triends to be = triends, thou maylt be aſſured 
thou doſt exceedingly abound in friends, 

And now that thou mayſt not be an enemy to thy ſelf in this thy 
choice, ler me here give thee one or two Memorandums. Firſt, that you 
let not common applaule or reproach be a rule or ground to your affect- 
on or diſ-eſteem of any one ; bur firſt ſerioutly examine the rruth, and 
then accardingly mayſt thou ule thy diſcretion and reaton : Secondly, 
let not the Nation of a man deter thee from real affection, it there be ſut- 
ficient cauſe and ground to the contrary z for it were abſurd in us to 
think all Nations evil, and our ſelves only good : As there are both 
good and bad amongſt us, ſois there alſo in the very ruraleſt of Natt- 
ons; what reaſon have we to think all the Irith blood-thirſty , all che 
Scots deceirfull, all che French fantaſtical, &c. becauſe many of them 
areſ0{ For my part, if I meet with any man of thele that is erue-hearred 
and honeſt, or of any other Nation , they thall be more deer unto me 
then a thouſand Englith Knaves ; and as I will not conclude any man of 
another Nation a Knave or Honeſt, till I have experience thereof, ſo will 


I not be fo indulgent as to make noqueſtion of thoſe of my own Nation, 
but 


Cruca's 11 
hoo ſing of 
[riends. 


Hors to kaow a 
trac friend. 


How to keep a 
true friend. 


To the Fudiciow READ ER. 


but carry a like ſuſpition'of both the one and the other, till I am rightly 
and truly informed : The Scots are vulgarly amongſt us traduced and en- 
vyed, and yet they cannot be ſo odious here, but amongſt them we are 
as contemptible; Tradition carries a great {way with tools and the vul- 
gar, but with wiſe men it is never regarded. Thirdly, let not the appa- 
rel or cloaths of any one ſtave thee off trom the familiar ſociety of friend- 
ſhip ; it isnot the Peacocks fine feathers, that can make him f1ng likea 
Nightingal : a Philoſopher may be in rags, when an Idiot is gorgeoutly 
arrayed ; look not to the outſide, but the inſide rather of a man,and thou 
ſhalt not be deceived. . 

Now to know the reality of thy friend, or whether thou haſt a true 
friend or no; {ee that in youttryal of him, hor let him nor know your 
condition, let it be in what degree or thing ſoever you prove him in; it 
would be too tedious a thing tor me to ſpeak of every thing and way 
whereby thou mayſt try hum, wherefore I ſhall here only inſtance one, by 
which according to the ſame method thou mayſt judge ot the reſt. Ad- 
mit you would borrow money, then be ture firſt you wanc not money, 
leſt if your friend fail you, you are expoled to want and ſorrow, yet be 
not known upon any condition to him you are or can be ſupplied, left 
then on the other ſ1de, he knowing your ability , readily pertorms your 
requeſt,andyou thereby kept ſtill ignorant of his aftection; tor take this for 
a ſure Rule, that that, and that only 1s real love, that without regard to re- 
quital or conſideration at all thereunto, {ets it ſelf on work , let it be in 
this or any other kinde whatſoever; wherefore if thou haſt found ſuch 
a Friend as this, thou haſt — a faithfull and real Friend indeed : 
never believe the fair prerences and promiſes of men, neither their allu- 
ring tongues and ſmooth ſpeeches, which commonly are the properties 


of diſſemblers and falſe-hearted, or hollow-hearted people for you hall 


ſeldom fee a fair tongue anda diſlembling heart go atunder; wheretore if 
any ſuch thou findeſt, chou haſt more matter of ſuſpition then credit gi- 
ven thee, Burt remember that in proving of thy Friend thou render 
not thy ſelf ſo untriendly to-him, as to require any unlawfull thing ar his 
hand ; for then aſſuredly thou muſt not only expect a denial of thy pre- 
ſent requeſt from thy triend, but the future triendſhip of thy Friend 
hereafter. 

"That thou mayſt now keep a true Friend when thou haſt found him, it 
is requiſite (as I have promiſed) to give thee ſome Rules. Wherefore 
then ler your patience be reciprocal, your opinions mutual, your love in 
all matters (eſpecially things of indifferency) free, let your love be for 
love, not recompence or gain. And for that, Nemo ſine crimine wvivit, 
there 15 none without a fault; you are to hide them, and to wink at them 
in one another, provided they proceed from frailty and imbecility of 
Nature; and when you admonitth or reprehend a friend , ler it be in a 

lace and at a time convenient ; not openly in company, but privately 
5 th i you and him, otherways you will harden him in his way, and 
work no good on him; not when he or thy ſelf is in paſſion, for this will 
cauſe thy words to be lightly eſteemed, and work no impreſſion on him : 


Andler thy ſpeech be gentle and mild, yet be plain with him,and ſpeak 
| ro 


To the Fudicious R eADE R. 


co the purpoſe, overcome him rather with mildneſs and clemency then 
anger and rigour, by which he will be conſtrained rather ro adhere unto 
chee and acknowledge himſelf obliged for this favour, then remain ob- 
ſtinate and wilfull. | 

Bur let me now returne to thew thee the method of theſe my ſub- 
ſequent Labours. In rhe penning of them I have bin very plain for 
that I delire to be underſtod ; Animis ſcribo non auribus., I write to edi- 
fie my readers underſtanding, not to pleaſe his eare with fine words, 
rather reſpecting the matter then ſyllables ; and I have endeavoured to 
compare one Author with another, and thoſe with athird , and again a 
fourth with all,almoſt on every ſubjet; and where one hath been ſhort, 
I have inlarged with another,and where all have failed ro my expectation, 
I have ſupplied of my {elt,according to Didacus Stella in Luc.1o.Tom.2. 


25 


Pigmei gigantum humeris zmpoſiti pluſquam T1 gigantes wvident. Dwarfs - 


or Pigmies ſtanding upon the thoulders of Giants, may ſee farther then 
thoſe Giants : I would have none therefore wonder to ſee me frequent- 
ly difſent trom che Ancients and relate my own conceptions in di- 
vers places ; yetin moſt I tollow my Authors, at leaſt in ſenſe, though 
not verbatim. And in ſome places I have trod the very ignorant and ir- 
rational paths of the Ancients , that fo the ingenious and wel-willer 
to this Science may have matter wherewith to exerciſe himſelf, and not 
wholly to give himſelt over to traditional precepts ; for my own part I 
abhor implicite Faith, or erroneous tradition, without ſound and {uffici- 
ent reaſon given ftorit ; and therefore you will find I have often in theſe 
my labours diſſented from my Predeceflors. By ſome perhaps I ſhall be 
diſcommended, and again by others applauded tor it; it is an hard mar- 
ter to pleaſe all parties, and therefore I have (I fay) let flip ſome places, 
on purpoſe to convince thee that former Ages had nor all the knowledge 
in the World, that ſo thou mayſt be weaned from thy confidence in the 
writings of the Ancients when neither reaſon nor experience are on 
their fide, I ſhall not need to turn you to any of thoſe places in this 
Book , I hope your ingenuity will be a ſufficient index thereunto : yer 
leaſt ſome Mom ihould convert this my filence to ignorance,and indea- 
vour to wound me with my own weapon, by impuring that as a fault in 
me, which I did wiltully neglect, I ſhall here mention one place , being 
ſo remarkable and fo palpable an abſurdity, * Z:b.4. SetF.2. Chap. 18. of 
this volumn vou will inde the fignifications of the Sux when he is Lord 
of the year in any of the twelve {1gns Aries, Taurns,Gemint,Cancer and Leo 
being expreſſed, and the reſt by varying the former Rules implyed,which 
of all ab{urdities is the greateſt, it being impoſſible tor the Su» to be in 
Taurus,Gemini, Leo,Virgo,Scorpto,Sagittary, Aquaries Or Piſces,in any yearly, 
half-y early, or quarterly ingreſs, which is ever made at his entrance into 
che firſt point of the Equinoctials Ares and Libra, or Tropicks Cancer 
and Capricorn; andrherefore I muſt needs conclude the Antients have 
herein been very weak and as worthy reprehenſion as applauſe in 
other matters. Yet I would not have thee expect any new thing; for 
I muſt conclude with Wecker in his Pref. ad Syntax. med. Nikhil diftum 
quod non difttum pris ; there 1s —_ ſaid or to be faid thar hatch 

| (qd) - nor 


*Sce Bonatus de 
Revolutiontbus, 
Cap-95. 


To the Fudiciouw READER. 


not been ſaid before; or if you will not believe him, take the teſtimony 
of the moſt wile Solomon, Eccleſ.1.9. The thing that hath been, it is that 
which ſhall be, and that which is done, is that which ſhall be done ; 
and there is no new thing under the Sun : ind it this were fo in 
his days, ſo long ſince, how can we in the lezſt expeCt novelties in 
this Age, or in thele latter days, wherein though the-world :boundeth 
in Books, ſo that D. Xing ſometime B. of Loxdon very well noted, they 
are in number without number, yer we ſhall inde the moſt of chem one 
and the ſame, expreſſed in ſeveral and divers terms and phraſes, ac- 
cording to the ſtrain and fanſie of the Penner, and for the moſt part we 
ſee him that comes laſt, to exceed his Predeceſlors. | 
It had been too intricate a thing tor me to have noted where I have 
inany place inlarged of my own , fince it is fo general throughout all 
the tour Books; yet my phraſe and ſtile will lead thee I believe unto moſt 
of it; itis wholly my own method and no tranſlation, but rather a col- 
lection, ſo that I may well ſay with Macrobius, Omne meum nihil meum ; 
mine is none of mine: yet this I can aſſure thee,that I do not remember 
any point or place where I have willingly been dark, or defired to detain 
any thing from thy underſtanding : Ir is, as I may ſay, even hewed out 
of the Rocks , and therefore I expect ſome places may be rougher 
and more unpoliſhed then I could wiſh ; it is the firſt draught, and there- 
fore I hope that may a little plead tor me ; wheretore be pleaſed (Cour- 
teous Reader) to accept of my wel-wiſhes, and out of thine own good- 
neſs and gratefull diſpoſition pardon my detects, which I cannot but fear 
are many, having not had time to correct it, or alter che ſtile or phraſe, 
which ar the beſt is but homely, and ſometimes very harſh, according to 
the preſent condition and fancy of my genius at times, not at all ſtudy- 
ing to frame or place my words, but quicquid in buccam venit ſerved turn; 
and totell you the truth, it being once brought forth, I could not en- 
dure-to think of correcting it, it being a work both ſo painſull and 
croubleſom, ſo that I had rather write another Book as big again , and 
could as ſoon accompliſh it, as correct what I have here written , beſides, 
ſhould I have gone abour ir,as oft as I ſhould have read it,ſo often ſhould 
I have altered it in one kind or other, according tothat of Ter. Adelph. 


Nunquam ita quicquam bene ſubdutta ratione ad vitam fuit, 
Quin res, etas, uſns, ſemper aliquid apportant Novi. 


The which you may Ezzl:ſh thus, 


Nanght ever was at firit coptrived ſo fit, 
But Uſe, or Age, or ſomething altered it. 


Wherefore in this regard I was the more negligent thereof , but left it 
unto thee and thy courteſie, knowirig that when I had done my utmoſt 
therein, I ſhould never be able to pleaſe all parties; if by ſome I were 
accepred, by others I ſhould be rejected; I muſt look for as well frowns, 
flights and deriftons from ſome, as applauſe or countenance from others, 
Luot homines tot ſententie,{0 many men ſo many minds; wherefore (gentle 

" - Reader) 


To the Fudicious READ ER, 


| Reader) let this conſideration plead for me, and be thou ſo favourable 


as to pals by my failings, and remember thart the belt of the Antienrs had 
their faults and defects, the which I could hererecite, might I juſtly vin- 
dicate my (elt by the condemnation of others. Beſides, I would have 
thee alſs know I have not dwelt wholly on this ſubje&, neither do I 
wholly devore my lelt to any one ſtudy or Science whatſoever, or limir 
my Spirit to lo ſtrait a priſon, or narrow confines, I was ever of aroving 
humour for matter of knowledge, and could never perſwade my ſelf 
I ſhoul4] ever know enough of any thing: and although I am not of ca- 
pacity to attain ought but the froth or ſuperticies of any ſtudy, yet have 
I endeavoured to be aliquis in omnibus , though (being brought to the 
proot) I thould.be tound Nemo zn ſinzulis ;, wherefore let this with the 
preceding prevail with thee, ſoas that my moſt abſurd faults may ſeem 
little or nothing in thy eye, fince indeed theſe my Labours were penned 
at ſpare hours, and on purpoſe to pleaſe my own fancy and humour , al- 
though Providence hath now made them publique. n 

But here it may be ſome will carp at my writing in E-2/ſh , but at ſuch 
I ſhall only laugh : for I aym to benefic the ingenious of my own Coun- 
try, and write to their edification, not to ſhew my ſelf a Scholar ora wel- 
willer to Forrainers: but I would tain ask ſuch Creatures, whether Homer 
that wrote in Greek, or Czcero in Latine, were not as worthy repre- 
henſion, as T thar write in Ezelzſþ ? fince thole were alſo their ras 
rongues ; or, what advantage or benefit ſhould the people of my Nati- 
on teceive by having an unknown language delivered them ? I write nor 
toa few, but tothem all in general: Bur it I may be plain, che thing 
that moſt troubles them 1s, their Trade will be fpoild , by reaſon their 


Juglings and Cheatings are beaten down, and the ſubſtancial part of the ' 


Art ſo plainly divulged. 

Bur to theſe men I ay, let them ſorrow and repent themſelves of 
their hypocritie, felt-endednels, pride and coveteoulnels the root of 
all evil, and learn love, humility, charity, and to purchaſe unto them- 
ſelves general ſpirits ; I know the conſciences of fome of them will 
reſtifie unto themſelves they are herein ſpoken to, and pretently ima- 
gine I ſpeak in ill will ro them, being conſcious to themlelves chey have 
given me ſufficient caule by their trequent diſparagements of me to ſome 
of my acquaintance. 

But I appeal toan higher power to be Judge of this my a&tion,I do nor 


envy or bear ill will to any of their perlons, but T cannot endure to have 


men pretend to promote an Artor any thing elſe, and yer in the mean 
time act nothing leis, nor nothing more then the ingrotsing of it wholly 
to themſelves : itis this, and this only that cauſerh me in any place to 
hintat them; wherefore ſince I know my own innocency herein, I ſhall 
be content to let them rail and revile me ar their pleaſure, 

It reſteth now I refer you to the ſubſequent Diſcourſes; but firſt T (hall 
deliver unto the World a teſtimony of my Birth, Breeding and Lite hi 
cherto, being by ſome calumniated of late,and now likely to incur more 
of their bitterneſs by theſe my labours, and let not the Reader wonder 


I witnels of my ſelf; forit is no more then many ot the Ancients and 
(d 2) Fathers 


2 Y, 


Ls RRP” 
e AUDITS 


28 


The time and 
pace of b:s 

biith, . and iv's 
parentage and 


fami'y. 


The original of 
ny Name and 


ſtock. 


*Viz. $9 eo 
that [Trade tg 
Counteaance aud 
c/£edit themſclus 
in the K/a85 
11me, af firming 
him to be thei; 
Maſler ; avid 
now ſimce by 
others, through 
envy, think ng 
thereby to 1p+ 
6:14 and 7 e- 
proach bath him 
and mc. 


there the Aus 
thor bad bis e- 
ducation, and 
haw he bath 
ſance ſpent his 
days, 


To the Fudiciow READ ER. 


Fathers of the Church have done before me; beſides I am not ſo ancient, 
but what I write may by one or other alſo be juſtified, 

I was born the thirteenth day of March, in the year of our Lord 1626. 
#ilo Anzlie, in the City of Weſtminſter, in the County of Middleſex 
Aznzlie. : . 

My Mother was by birth of England, as were all her Predeceſlors, 
my Father of Scotland and that of an antient family wiz. of Eighther- 
houſe , which hath fAouriſhed in great glory tor 1500 years till thele latter 
days, as the Records there teſtifhe. 

The Original of our Name was from the ref{idence of his and my Pro- 
genitors in che Land of Ezypt, from the pleaſantneſs of the ſoy] where 
they inhabited, or of herbs growing thereon, which therefore had che 
ſame name, Ramzsty, in Erzliſh being as much as to ſay Foy and. De- 
lizht,and this was in that County which 1s called Goſhen;trom thence rhey 
came into Germany under the conduct of the Rowan Emperogr , in which 
Wars tor thgir ſervice they obtained of him zz a field Argent , the Eagle 

ſable diſplayed,with one head for their coat of Arms; whence (the War be- 
ingended)being deſirous to travel,they took ſhip, intending for England, 
and being otrten kept back by ſtreis of weather and Divine Providence, 
they at length reſolved co take thar place for their re{tdence to Poſterity 
where they ſhould be firſt torced to Land , and not many days after, it {0 
happened they were driven into an harbour in Scot/and on that coaſt 
which is called Fife, where they being but eight in number let altve, builr 
the aforeſaid houte, and called it by that name in their Language. which 
hath ſince been thus called, according to the ſpeech of the Countrey, 
viz. [ Eiehther-houſe] It 1s turther recorded of them, that as they increa- 
ſed in number they diſperſed themſelves into ſeveral Families, of the 
which Dalhorſie 1s now reported the chiet , William Lord Rameſey being 
Earl thereot. | 

But to come neerer home, when our late Soveraign Lord King Fames 
of happy memory came to the Crown of England, he lent into France 
tor my Father, who was then there, and made him Page of the Bed- 
chamber anq Groom of the Privy-chamber, and Keeper of-all his Majeſties 
Clocks and watches; this I mention for that by *ſome he hath bin term- 
ed no better then a watch-maker; I contemn no trade or lawful voca- 
tion whartioever, but I would have men ſpeake the truth ; it's conteſt 
his ingenuity led him to underſtand any peece of work in that nature; 
we read the fame of Hepry the 4th.of France and Lewis the 13th.and many 
Princes and Emperors of Germany and others,which I could (bur for bre- 
vities fake) record, and therefore the king conferred that place upon 
him : Now how this ſhould prove him a Watch-maker and no ee, 
more then the late Earles of Pexzbrook ordinary Chamberlains becauſe 
they bore this office in the Kings houſe, do thou judge; but this by 
the way. 

As ſoon as I was of any capacity, I was put to School in St. 4/- 
bonesin Hartfordſhire, Buſby, Weſtminſter, Milend-zrc:n,and other places; and 
when I ſhould have gone to 0xford, by reaſon of our late differences I 
was prevented, and therefore being deſirous ro turther my Learning , I 

1mportuned 


Tothe Fudicious READ ER. 


importuned my Farher to ſend me to St. Andrews in Scotland, but there 
alſo I was diſappointed by the frequent approaches of the Marqueſs of 
—_ and his Army ; I therefore (rather then fail) ſerled in Edinburgh 
Colledge, where I continued till ic pleaſed God to viſit that Town with 
Peſtilence, the which at lengrh growing very hot, I returned in April 
1645. into England, and have remained in Zoxydop ever ſince, wholly ap- 
plying my lelt, as ever, tothe ſtady of Nature, and the more ſecret and 
{ublime Sciences, but practiſed nothing ſave Phyſick ; for our home- 
bred differences and diſtractions, rending me (with many others) mean 
in the fight of the more interiour Spitits of che world (for wealth and 
honour I perceive brings not nobleneſs of mind) I would not affociate 
my felt with many men and much acquaintance, bur {till lived an ob- 
ſcure, retired and reſerved lite, dedicating, myſelfe wholly (I fay) to 
my book, ſo that I dare boldly ayerr (notwithſtanding I was born and 
bred-up all my days in and about this City of London, ave only the time 
I was in Scotland) I am not tamiliarly acquainted with three people in all 
England tor ſuch is my diſpoſition, that I had rather be a ſtranger in rhe 
Land of my Nativity (in this perverſe and-rebellious Age) and to the 
Famer of men living therein , then to my ſelf and my own con- 
cience; the which ſolong as I may treely enjoy, I ſhall never repine bur 
be ever content with what condition, loſs or change {oerer, God hath far- 
ther in his Wiſdom and Providence decreed for me ; to whom for eternal 
protection I thall here commend thee and remain 


Die 7 19.7anuarii, 


I652. Thy Loving Friend, 


William Rameſcy. 


On his Ever Honoured, and moſt Ingenious Friend 
the unparalleld AurTH o x. 


W wert not thou pong in thoſe Days > 
I » which Philoſophers did wear the Bays ? 
L earning and Art in this Age are beat down ! 
L earning of old was had in great renown. 
I » Syria, Greece and Babylonia, 
A rabia, Perfia, Lacedemonia, 


'M oneſt the Caldeans alſo and Aſſyrians, 


K zrewe'd Egyptians and Sydonians, 
A nd Indians with our Neighbours of France 
M «ch honoured it, and ſtill did it advance ; 
E ach then in vertue ſtriving to exceed, 
S o wertuous werethey ; Now in our need 
E wen when it was almoſt forgotten quite, 
Y ou were brought forth tobring it unto light. 


- 


W. D. 


latromathematicus. 


On this incomparable Work, and my worthy Friend 
the Ingenious AUTHOR. 


vV Hat ſpall I of theſe learned Labours Wrue, 
Or of the Author what ſhall I indite ? 

(ome all ye Gods, aſ'iſt thu pen of mine, 

{ome all ye Siſters , come ye Muſes Nine 

Lend here your help , and let now all men know, 

If they in Myſteries deſire to grow, 

Here they the Treaſure of the Eaſt may finde, 

And Natural hidden cauſes to their minat, 

How by the vertne of the plorious Stars, 

Health, Sickneſs, Plenty, Scarcity, Peace, Wars 

Are brought to paſs mm their due time, and all 

T hings that are done in this World, great and ſmall ; 

And that God worketh not prepoſtrouſly, 

As ſome men ſtrangely have maintaind ; but by 

Order and Nature he brings all to paſz, 

Which we may clearly ſee as in a glaſs, 

Could we but read the volumes of the Skie, 

As here the Amthbor clears it to the ove 

Of every notion; whoſe elaborate pains, 

Be recompenſed with immortal gains : 

And when he ſhall be taken from thu place, 

Let bim be fixt amongſt the Stars, to grace 

Thoſe Heavenly bodies and thoſe Lamps of Light, 

For he hath made them glorious in our ſight. 


theſe his Labours. 


VV? O in his Writines Jp all men to pleaſe, 


Is not unlike the Merchant on the Seas, 
Meeting with rocks, winds, pyrates, ſhelves and ſands, 
Yet boldly ventures,ere at home he lands 
His Ship full fraught, returned ſafe and ſound, 
Diſcharg d of Wealth, wherewith ſhe did abound, 
He ſits him ſtill, and lives at quiet eaſe, 
Thinks the Land better then the boyſtrous Seas ; 
Even ſo our Friend in theſe ungratefull times 
Hath brought home learning bred in Forraien Clymes, 
Is ſure tomeet with Find-Faults for his pains, 
When be ſeeks nought but profit to their brains 
And pleaſure all men ;, Dolts do ever pine, 
When they ſee Learning live, and Yertue ſhine : 
All Azes, Sorts of men, and Learned Schools 
Have honour d this rare Science, ſave ſome Fools, 
Who neither know, nay, will not underſtand 
Unto what purpoſe God hath given command 
To the great Lights of Heawven,Planets and Stars, 
To ſhew their power on theſe Inferiours : 
I envy none, yet hee's no Friend of mine, 
Who having Pearl's will caft them unto Swine. 
The Commonwcalth of Learning cannot flouriſh, 
If ſhe inſtead of True-born, Baſtards nouriſh. 
Some ſay thoſe things are beſt which are in common, 
But ta theſe ſpeculations, there is no man 
Will ſo adjudge ; For, an illiterate head, 
But only taught to ſpell, perhaps to read 
His mother Tongue, hich Secrets to expound, 
Miſ-leading others, runs himſelf on ground. 
But as our Merchant in ſome Forraign ſoyl 
Hath got a precious Fewel by his toyl 
And induſtry, hoping thereby toraiſe 
His Fortunes, brings it home, which he doth praiſe 
Unto his Friends ; It they much maznifie, 
And ſome choice perſon doth his Fewel Buy, 
And much efteem it : So this Far-fetcht piece 
of Heavenly Science will the Golden Fleece 
Even much reſemble. Th Author honoured be, 
As Jaſon was to all Poſterity. 


Vpon the Authors Elaborate Pains in 


I. B, 


The Contents of the Firſt B o o x. % 


CHAP. I. 
Roving Aftrology to be one of the Liberal Sciences. Fol. 1. 
CHAP. II. 
That eAftrology and Aſtronomie are one and the ſame Science, and that they Were 
ever ſo received by the Ancients. 3. 
CHAP. III. 
Shewing the excellency and nobility + the Science of Aſtrology, as alſo its antiquity, 
and the admirable power and m—_ of = — 4. 


That the Stars and Heavens have influence on inferiour and elementary boazes, proved 
by Scripture or the Word of God, and acknowledged by the Philoſophers and the _— in 
ormer Apes. CHAP. V. 
Shewing that obſervation may be made of the motions of the Starr, in anſwer to the 
that hold it impoſsible for any man in bu days to obſerve the particular configurations of 
every Planet with the fixed ſtars, and with one another, as alſo that thereby we may diſ- 


cern their Influences,if we have any capacity. 7. 
CHAP. VI. 
T hat the variation of the Heavens from their places Wherein they were tn Ptolomics 
time, or at the firſt Creation, cauſeth no Errour in Aſtrological judgements. 8. 
CHAP. VII. 
Shewing the powerfull influence of the Stars and Planets, and how far We are to _— 
regard to the fixed ſtars. CHAP. VIII. 
Shewing further the infinence of = pee ou inferiour and elementary bodies. 14: 
P 
Shewing that the infinences of the Heavens and ak of the ſtars in every cli- 
mate, is the cauſe of the ſeveral y_— and Cuſtoms of the people therein. | 16. 
HAD. X. 


Containing the reſolution of the main objettions againſt this Divine Sciences 18. 
P. XI, 


Containing an Introduttion to the vindication of my Lux Veritatis from the aſper ions 
of Dr. Homes and hu ſecond, with the firſt reaſon why 1 acconuted him not Worthy of my 


notice. CHAP. XII. 23, 

Comprehending three reaſons more Why that rabble of theirs was not worthy anſwer- 

ing as to every quirk. 24, 
CHAP. XIII. 


( ontaining the Authors fourth reaſon, and a vindication of both bim and hu Lux Ve- 
ritatis from ſome of their abuſes and untruths, and their juglings and evaſions mani- 
feſted. CHAP. XIV. 26, 

Containing the Authors fifth Reaſon, and the Scriptnre proofs, alledged for —_—_ in 
hz Lux Veritatis, proved to remain unſhaken. 


_ CHAP. XV. 

Shewing that the Text in the 19, Pal. ver.3. alledgedby the Author to prove the Stars 
have influences no wiſe refelled, CHAP. XVI. 32. 

Proving their Reply to Job 38.31. ſewing the 5 tas to bave influence, to be frivilows 
and of no effett. CHAP. XVII. 33- 

Proving their Reply to Judg. 5: __ the 20. Weak, and no Wiſe available to their __ 
or phirpoſe. HAP. XVIII. | 

That the Stars are proved both k :gns and cauſes by the word of God, and the Art late 
fall, notwithſtanding all their malice. 35- 

CHAP. XIX. 
Proving Aſtrology to be Warranted ” = onncils in fight of their rabble. 37. 
XX 


Containing the power and ſnbjett 7 Afrotor , and ho far the Author vinds- 
cateth it, ibid, 


1 oy ! 


ASTROLOGY 


FULLY 


Vindicared and Defended 


FROM ALL 


The Aſperſions and Calumnies of the Antagoniſts 


thereof : As allo its Legality and Verity proved, both by the 
Teſtimony of the Scriptures, Fathers, Antients, and the con- 
ſelsion of Councels : With a clear Vindication of the 
Authors Lux YVeritatis, from the vilifying Reproaches of 
Dr. Homes and his Second ; and that the purity of the Science 
remaineth ſtil] untainted, notwithſtanding all their Reply. 


GuAiP; i 
Procvins Aſtrology to be one of the Liberal Sciences. 


þ Hen 1 firſt entred upon theſe my Labours , I thought by reaſon of 
the bulk, and for that it had been of late traduced Y the zgnorant, 
it would be very convenient to prefix ſome Diſcourſe which might 
Y cend both tothe vindication thereof, and the manifeſtation of its 
ſublime excellency and verity ; whereupon at my ſpare times, Ien- 
TW cred upon this ſubſequent Diſcourſe : upon my firſt conception 
WP hereof, 1 thought it would not have exceeded a ſhort Preface ; but 
| vi! being brought forth, I perceived both for the largeneſs of its bulk, 
and variety of diſcourſe, it deſerved rather the denomination of a Book, which I call 
A Vindication of Aſtrology. I ſhall not need to fay any more thereof, only refer thee 
toits peruſal , and here begin our matter, with the Anſwer of an Objection, the better 
to uſher in our following intentions ; which is, That Aſtrology 15 none of the Liberal O6jef. 


SCIences 


ws 


eA Vindication of Aſtrol ogy. Lib.r. 


Arſwy. Sciences, but eAſtronomy is. The vanity of which Objection ſhall be cleared here beneaths 
it being indeed one and the ſame Art, though two diſtin& parts or properties. But firſt, 
leaſt ſome may queſtion whether it be an Arr, for that, asthey ſuppoſe, Ariſtor/e in ſome 
parts of his Works ſeems to deny it ; yet upon better conſideration, there is no rational 
man but will ſoon finde that he is fo far from denying any ſuch thing, that he ſpeaketh as 

Ariſtotle mas much thereof as any Aſtrologer can. Look further, Ariſtorle Aethaphyſ. 6. and 12. and 
keth no ditfcr- 1. Polir.cap.7. and ſeveral other places, too tedious to relate here. Alſo his 2. De Calo 
_ rs” rext 17. and lib, de proprietat. element. and lib. de mando cap.g., and in the 4. de pgentra- 
ens, but tione animaliym,cap.1o.for there is none that is well acquainted with his manner of Wri- 
cogether wich Fing, but knows that he indifferently uſeth the Name of e4ſtro/oger and Aſtronomer for 
Phy/chs ac» One andthe fame ; and alſo in other places, 4ſreloger and Philo/opher, as making no dit- 
know:edgeh ference between them, which here to particularize were both tedious and ſuperfluous in 


th I] . . . , p ; 
5 == | ſocleara caſe; and in his Pby/. /1b,2.cap.2. he makes no more difference berween e4ſtro- 


- Arr, though ogy, Aſironomy and Ploicks, then the particular names of the head, hand and foot, &c. 


diſtin& pacts, do make thatthey are different things from the body , though diſtinct members, when all 
| rational men know that notwithſtanding they are ſeveral parts, yet they all conduce to 
the compoſition of one intire body. 

Wherefore in my Lrx veritatz or defence of Aſtrology chap.T. ſect.3. 1 bring Ariſtotle 
to afhrm Aſtrology ro be Scientia media, a Science betWeen the Mathematicks and Nati- 
ral Philoſephy ; wherefore thoſe that finde not theſe very words, Scicntia med:a, in the 
above ſaid 2, of Phy/.cap.2. if they finde ſomuch inferred, it is fufficient ro evince ſuch: 
carpers at Truth, to be either void of matter of diſcourſe, or envious, or both ; when it 
isclear he makes no more diſtin&tion berween the one and the other, then what you have 
but now heard. 

I forbear here, to ſet down the teſtimony of Awverrees in his Com. on the 12. of the 
Aeteph. Text 44. and onthe ſecond Book of Phy/. cap.2. but refer you to the peruſal of 
that 3. SeR. aforeſaid, where you ſhall alſo finde that in his Comment 7. of the third of 
his Metaph. he aftirmeth eſtrology to be a Mathematical Art ; and this is acknowledged 
by all che Judicious and learned ; neither do any bur Fools and Novices make it a dittin&t 
Art or Science of it ſelf, but a part of ſtrozomy, Phyſicks and Natural Philoſophy, 

A1,ology one of Which makeup one intire Liberal Science ; this is well known to the Learned ; yet for 
the Liberal Sci> the ſatisfaction of ſome weak headed MMomuſes havel thus plainly delivered my ſelf, who 
ences, carp and rail at whatthey are ignorant of. 

Further Averroes, Text 44. of the 12. of the Metaph. (amongſt many more, which 
to inſert here would make my labours of roo great a bulk) acknowledgeth Afrology to 
be an Art; but in this place, 1 ſay he hath theſe words, ta antem ars propria eff hu:c in- 
rentioni inter alias Maihematicas, quia conſiderat de ſubſtantiis eternis ſenſibilibrs; alie au- 
rem Scientie Mathematice conſiderant de accidentibus , ut ars Aruthmetica, © Geometria. 
And in his Comments onthe 2.4: Cels,Texr 58.he attributeth ſo much to the power of the 
Heavens over theſe inferior Bodies, that be confeſſeth one Star to have a greater power ther. 
another : and alſoin the 68. Text of the ſame Book, he acknowledgeth every ſtar ro hate 
hu own particular operation, &C. 

Of the legality, _ As touching the legality and great eſteem Afrolcgy was inin former Apes, I ſhall 
great eſteem here (for brevitie ſake) refer thee to the peruſal of the 4. Section of the 1. Chapter of 
and antiquity my Lex veritatzs, and for its Antiquity to the 5. Section of the ſame Chapter ; for there 
- bar wy is nothing more certain, then it hath been ever in moſt high eſteem by all the more grave 
and unſhaken ſort of Councels, States, Kingdoms and Empires; as alfo by the chieteſt and wiſelt fort of 


for ought all men ſtudied and maintained, it being the chiefeſt of all ſtudies under the Sun, and among 
the envious the Learned the moſt coveted after. 

POIs 's- For though it hath been (by the malicious adverſariesthereof) diſtinguiſhed from A- 
ay. ſtronomy, yet (I ſay) by the Learned and Judicious never ; for though they are diſtinct 
How 4ſtrolegy parts , yet are they one intire Science, and that, oze of the ſeven Liberal Sciences, as 
and 4/tonomy you have heard ; wherefore the ſimplicity and ignorance of ſome weak-braind men 
came ſeparated. 1,0, make this diſtinRion, ought not to be countenanced, ſtaining and traducing thereby 
- — and the chiefelt of Sciences that was ever ſtudied by men ; for that they, and they only were 
jeronor3 0% the firſt that made them any wiſe reputed ſeveral, ſhall beneath appear ; for tince it comes 


d the (ame R WOE ; 
belence, here ſo opportunely in my way, I will give you (for the farther clearing of this _-_ 
ri1e 


Lib.1. A Vindication of Aſtrology. 


the teſtimony of ſome former and authentick Writers , though were I not confined to 
ſomewhat a narrow bounds, 1 might infert molt or all Writers that were any ways Judi- 
cious ; bur ſince, Verb:1ms Sapient: ſat eft, and the caſe ſo clear and unqueſtioned amongſt 
-arional men, I ſhall (as brief as may be) give thee ſome, andthen proceed, that I may 
haiten (as hath been (aid) io ſay ſomewhar of one that hath put forth a patcht pretended 
Reply to my Lux Verit4:is inantwer to Doctor Nathazicl Homes. 


CHaP. 


That Aſtrology and Aſtronomy are one and the ſame Science, and that 
they were ever ſo received by the Ancients. 


works of Pro/omie,we ſhall tinde allo, that he maketh no difference berween the one ©... 
and the other;and more particuſarly(not to inlitt long hereon) Lib.1.cap.de Yuadr.& herween 4/10» 
cap.3. de Lnaar. he calleth there the Art of Aſtrology Aſtronomy, and the Predidti- togie and 4//9- 
ons Aſtronomical ; fo confounding the diſtinction of the parts with the eſſential name of 29: 
the Science. Wheretore though 4to/cmm:e hath, by ſome brain-ſick men, been brought 
to condemn Aſtrologie, we ſee thereby the folly of ſuch envious and ignorant gain-ſayers ER 
of what they are altogether unknown in : forit is very ſtrange that he ſhould be produ- a4 rk Pro 
ced to condemn what he hath taught to the world in four Books in Folio ; but ſuch is the duce P0/0ny 
ſtupidity and perverſneſs of the Antagonilts thereof, that when Aſtrotogers declare and 2gainit 4/!/9- 
ſhew manifeſtly the power and efficacy of the influence of the Stars, there they accuſe 2): 
them with impliety and illegal practices : and when they ſincerely teach not to aſcribe ſo 
muchto the Srars, as toneglect theſe inferiour cauſes, but to joyn the conſideration of 
the one with the other, here (not conſidering, nor indeed underſtanding the ſcope and 
intentions of their Writings) they pick out certain particular places of their works which What men 
they think makes for their idle conceits and cavilsto the condemnation of Aſtrology, and |.» marr Rp 
the labours of thoſe that herein have ſpent their whole lives for the benefit of theie af- for theic cg 
ter Ages ; who have by us ſmall requital of their care and pains thus to traduce them, & pains of uz ; 
when they ought rather by usto be eternized with Statues of Gold, and whole volumes fr ingrarirude 
of praiſes in perpetunm. þ mm 
Hermes Triſmegiſtu alſo in his (entiloguiam,calleth the Art no other then Aſtrology, Hermes. 
and te Students Aſtrelopers. | 
And Twill alſo in all his Works calleth the Art no other then A/rologie,never ſo much T2 
as Once — Aſtronomy , tor in Lib.2. de Divinitat. he maketh predictions a part 
of Aſtrology, and not an Art of it ſelf, when he teltifieth of Caſſander and Archelars 
that they Were excellent in other parts of Aſtrology, jet never uſed Predittions. 
And Plinie lib.7. cap.37. witneſſeth that Beyoſw, for his Divine Preditions in Afre- And Plinie. 
logy, had his Statue erected him with a golden tongue. 
The Septuagints in the 47. of 1/a.alſo make no difference of Aſtrology and Aſtronomy, The Septu19ints 
nor eAſtrologers and eAſtronomers, comprehending them both under the name Afrolo- alſo, 
gers, and the Art under the word Aſtrology. 
Galen allo, bb 3. cap.6. & 12. De diebus decret. contrariwiſe calleth the E gyptian Likewile Galex 
eAſftrologers Aſtronomers. | py 
And agaih Caſſiodorus comprehendeth the works and effe&s of the Srays under the And the ſame 
word Aſtronomy where he defines Aſtrology : ſo alſo Plato, Philo, and indeed all learned 99h Caſ5iodo» 
Writers ; which, fince to the Judicious this is ſo well known, TI ſhall not necd here longer _ lato, and 
toinfift ; only ſhall alſo add this, that Bonarns in his 11. ch. De confirm. «Aſtrol. Scientie "4 


] Have alrcady declared the teſtimony of Ariſtotle on this point, and if we peruſe the bees ack 


The apparent 


"> Bonatis con- 


maketh eſrology as did eAriſtotle (as you have already heard) a part of e Aſtronomy in ſenterh ro the 
theſe words, Aftronomia eſt Sciencia per quam nox ſolum preſentium, verum etiam pre- ſame, 
B 


2 teritorum 


4 eA Vinaication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 


See alſo hls 14 7erit0rum ac futurorum habetur cogmitio. Aſtronomie is a Science by which not onely pre- 
chap.whert un- ſent things but what is paſt and to come may be known. Here you ſee by theſe words he 
derthe word comprehendeth Aſtro/ogy under the name and word Aſtronemie. And then as I have 
| 166 tony Sep ſaid inthe following words, ſhews it is a part of the ſame Art ; definitar etiam alio modo, 
_ Soak viz. In duas partes five ſpecies ipſius breviter, contemplativam ſcilicet & attivam; que ſunt 
of the chapter Aſtrologia & Aſtronomia. It is defined alſo another way, viz divided into two 
he proverh 4- parts or kinds, to wit, contemplative and active, which are eſro/ogie and Aſtri- 
ſirelogy to be one ,, one, 4k 
of ve Liberal Thus you ſee here what difference the Antients have made betwixt the one part and 
| the other ; and he in that ſame chapter further ſheweth how they differ, where he faith, 
In quo differunt iſte due partes dicam tibi, in what theſe two parts differ I ſhall ſhew thee ; 
bond ſo forward ; wherefore then this being apparently manifeſt , I ſhall not here ſpend 
more time or trouble thee , referring thee for further ſatisfaction to his twelte chapter, 
where he ſheweth cleerly both the parts and ſpecies of Aſtronomie ; and I believe an 
artificer is beſt able to deliver a definition of his own Art, and rather to be believed then 
one altogether ignorant therein, which that man muſt needs be , that will be ſo perempto- 
rily baſe and impudent, or rather imprudent, as to deny what is thus conteſſed by all An- 
Allronomy of Tient and Authentick writers of this heavenly and moſt delectable and admired Science ; 
no great uſe or neither upon due conſideration will any man finde the knowledge of the motions, which 
validity with= js one part of the Science, to be of much uſe or validity without the true underſtand- 
out Aſtro!oYy. ing of their effets, &c. | 
And here alſo I may add one word to that fourth Section of my firſt chapter, I have 
referred thee to , thathe alſoin his next chapter, viz, the thirteenth, witneſſeth thac 
Abraham taught the Eg yptians his Art, and he Atlas who was afterwards ſo excellent 
therein that it wasthought of him, he was a God, and therefore was ſuppoſed (through 
his excellency in his knowledge therein) to ſupport thr Heavens on his ſhoulders, 


5 IT TE — ns 


CnaePe, III. 


(ontaining the Excellency and Nobility of the Science of Aſtrology, as 
alſo its Antiquity,and the admirable power and -vertue of the Hearvens. 


Aftrology firſt Ook alſo into the Preface of Gerſon his Trilogium eAſtrologie T heole- 
- + bg = gizate (who reduces in that piece Aſtrology to Divinity) and you ſhall 
byGod himſelf; finde that he acknowledgeth it an admirable and Noble Science, reveal&d ro 
Not Diaboli- Adam the firſt Patriark by Ged, and ſo to his poſterity ; Ergo, molt /awf#l, and to be 
cal or illegal, deſired above all Sciences in the World, not being either Diabolical!, Illegal, oppoſite to 
x _ _ truſt or confidence of God, but indeed rather a great means to acquaint us with his Heaven- 
to be deſired of ty and incomprehenſible divine ſelfe , when by the motions and conſtant influences of 
all other natu. the Caleſtial bodies, we know the corruption, generation and procreation of all things 
ral Sciences, A jn this Elementary world, and ſo contemplate and talk or converſe daily and hourly with 
grew mcane.4 Dim who is not to be beheld by fraile mortal eys, or fleſh, norto ſtand inthe immediate 
4 hn preſence of that dreadful omnipotent God, whoſe voice alone isa conſuming fire, &c. 
us with his Di, Ger/ons words (I ſay) are Propterea non eſt hoc negandum de Aſtrologia , quam eſſe Sci- 
vine incompre- entiam Nobilem, & admirabilem , primo Patriarche Adam, & ſequacibus revelatam, T he- 
benfible ſelf. gfopia non abnegat. Wherefore it is not to be denyed of Aſtrology, but to be a Noble 
ou. and admirable Science,revealed firſt ro «Adam and his peſterity, Divinity refuſeth or 
denyeth not ; for there is nothing more certain then that Ged hath in his ſecret wiſdom 

ſo diſpoſed of the conſtitution of the Ceeleftial bodies , that his Will by their operati- 

ons and ſeveral influences is acted and performed thereby ; ſo that to the end of the 

world it is fore-ordained and decreed by him to be ſo performed and accompliſhed by 
them,according to the opinion and excellent judgement of P.de Arjaco,who in his _ 

ance 


\ 


Lib.1. A Viidication of Aſtrology. 5 
dance of Aſtrology withDivinity,proveth the Flood, Sefts,Schiſms and other moſt notable ac- . _ _ 
cidents to be ſignified in Heaven long before; and this is confirmed alſo by Gerſon, who in 0 ett mes 
his ſecond Propoſition, acknowledged Heaven to be (as indeed it is) the Inſtrument of 1... fre. 
God, whereby he governeth this corruptible and inferiour Elementary world, And further known and fig 
faith he, Erraverunt hic aliqni, dicentes celum nihil agere, ſed tantummoao ſignum eſſe, al- Pificdby the 
legantes illud , & erunt in figna & tempora. Theyerre who think the Heavens do no- —_— 
ching, bur are onely for ſignes, alleadging that , and chey ſhall be for ſignes and ſeaſons, j, G,43, infiiu 
&c. For he further in the third Propotition, ſaith and approvethit to be a probable ment, by 

and ſubtile opinion, that God forekyoWing the chances of men , had deſcribed certain agree- which he go. 
able rokens in Heaven, concurring with the courſe of the world even to the day of judgement. aq} 
By this I ſay is my words, andthe opinion of P. ae Ariaco confirmed ; and in the fourth er a 
Propoſition, he declareth that Heaven hath received many and divers wertues of God, 1 ke Heavens 
according tothe variety of the parts of the Stars, of the Planets aud of the motions of them, have mzny and 
though not comprehended by all men ; and fo forward he teſtifierh , chat they obey the com- os vertues 


mn4ndment of God. But this by the way; let us now proceed. — _ 


mandmeng of 
God, 


OIGIE— _O©_ OOO ROO —_ — —— —— ” O >—_— —— 


CHAP. IV; 


That the Hearvens and Stars have influence on inferiour and Elemen- 
tary things, Procved by Scripture or the word of God ; And acknow- 
ledged by Philoſophers, and the learned in former ages. . 


or one of the Liberal Sciences, but not Aſtrology , and proved that they are one and 
the ſame Science, though diſtin& parts , and that they were diſtinguiſhed but of 
late times by ignorant cavillers againſt ir,) prove that the Heavens have influence toge- 
ther with the Srzars, on Elementary and ſublunary things ; being alſo by-many un- 
known in the works of God, (not to uſe a harſher terme) denyed to have any. | 
That the Heavens have a great and _ influence on ſublunary Elementary things, The Heavens 
as touching ſterility and fertility, which we ſhall here "_ tirſt with , there is none but or influence of 
who are moſt impious, will dare to deny, ſince the Word of God himſelfe ſheweth us the Ha . _ 
truth thereof : for firſt if you look into the 26 of Leviticus , ver.19. you ſhall finde x... by FID 
there, the Lord threatning his children with fterility for diſobedience, ſaith, 7 will make Of Sterilkty, 
your Heaven as Iron, and your Earth as Braſs; viz. The Heavens ſhall not duly by their 
influence diſtill thoſe comfortable ſhowers of — they ſhall be hard as Iron, and 
your earth as braſs, that it ſhall not receive any imprettion there from, &c. And ſo like- 
wiſe on the contrary, when of his infinite Goodneſs and Mercy he promiſeth plenty, he 
ſayeth, 1 will hear the Heavens , andthe Heavens ſhall hear the earth , and the earth ſhall 
hear the corx, and the wine, and tbe oile, and they ſhall heave Jezreel, Hoſ. 2. 21, 22. So that Of Fertility, 
hereby you ſee cleerly a dependency of the earth on the Heavens, and their influence ; 
7exreel the people of the Lord, when their ways ſhall pleaſe him, all be heard by the corn, 
wine , andoile, viz. all ſufficient neceſſaries, they being comprehended under theſe 
words; and theſe having their dependency as it were from the earth, as growing out of it, 
ſhall be heard or afſiſted by it , or furthered to its utmoſt ability ; bur all this will not do, 
without the Heavens bear or aſsiſt the earth With its ſweet influence;nor,then,except God the 
diſpoſer and orderer of all things, hear and give hi bleſſing to the Heavens ; fo that here- God is to be 
by we ſee Go4 moſt cleer iu the order and diſpoſal of nature, who # the firſt moving and ſeen inthe or» 
efficient cauſe, to whom all cauſes are but fubordinate; yet you ſee that next unto himſelf _ ," EY 
the Stars are ſecondary cauſes, and from him immediate cauſes of all our earthly enjoy- yy. = 
ments or affli&tions; for what cauſeth that amongſt corn, the grorind being diligently tilled Nora, 
and painfully mannured by the Husband-man , and the Corn ſowed herein being _ 
A 


| Et us now then, (having cleered this Obje&ion , viz. That Aſtronomie 11 an Art 


6 A Vindication of Aftrology. Lib.r. 
and pure, from other mixture of ſeeds; what cauſeth, I ſay, that ie notwithſtanding, 
there will ſeveral lowers both blew, red, and purple, grow amongſt it, alſo out of the 
ſame ſeed, Darnel, ſolders, and ſmutty geare ? if this be not occaſioned through and b 
the influenceof the Heavens it 15 occalioned by nothing in the whole fabrick of the world. 

3ut yet {or further confirmation hereof,the 33 of Dewr.v. 14.you ſee,doth manifeſtly make 

it apparent, where the whole influence of the Heavens , and the increaſe of all Vegeta- 

Nota. tives are attribured tothe Sun and Moon, viz. For the preciorws fruits brought forth by 
the Szr, and for the precious things put or thruſt forth by the Aſoon. 

Again we fee cleerly in many places of Scripture , the ſtars are called the Hoaſ?s cf 


Further that the . : 
fta;s haveins JHeaven, which certainly would never have been thus named , were they of no force and 


Avence. efficacy, the word hofts intimating their power and ſtrength ; ſee 2 King. chap.17.ver. 16. 
and chap.21.ver.3.5. and chap. 23 ver. 4,5, &c. So likewiſe Ged himfelfe expreſling his 
omnipotent and uwreſiitible power and force, he is called the Lord of Hoſts,Ifa. 24.v.23. 1{ 
23.9. and chap.22.v.5.12.14, 15, 25, and many ſeveral other places which are worth the 
while to -_ | 
But further to put this matter quite out of doubt, viz. That the fars have their in- 
fAuence on Elementary bodies, fee Dezt 4.19. where you ſee cleerly they are for the uſe 


0Ljca of man divided or impartcd unto all Nations under the Sun , by which if any man ſhall 
conclude and affirm is meant their light , orthat diſtintion which they cauſe between 
Anſw. day and night, and of ſeaſons; I mult needs tell him his concluſion is very weak , ſince 


we have ſo ſmall uſe of their light either inthe day or night, that it may very well be 

counted none at all; and as touching that diſtsn&iox of days and ſeaſons , the Sun and 

Acon would be ſufficient for that matrer without thoſe innumerable Hoaſts of Heaven 

Nota. the farres : therefore the uſe of the ſtars muſt in this place have a further conſtru- 
tion. 

The intluence * Mygreover that their influences have power and extend to the temperature of men, 

-* pe” appeareth Matrh.17. 14. where the lunatick is oftered unto Chriſt to be healed, whoſe 

remperarure of diftemper, as experience and common example ſheweth , followeth the courſe of the 

men, as we ſee Coon, and to the ſucceſs of mens affairs, doth yet further appeare by 7«de.5.20. where 

in Lunatick, jtis recorded that the ſtars in their courſes fought againſt Siſera, of the which more anon, 

Tothe ſucceſs 45 a1{gthat paſſage in the 38 of ob, and the 19 Pſal. as touching the Pleiades and Orion, 


|» gry and that the Heavens declare the glory of God, their voice or language of the ſtars bring 


denyed by gone through the Whole earth, &c. | 
ſome. Thus have we cleerly ſeen the influence of the ftars proved by the Word of God ; 
my NO how they were eſteemed in former ages by all P hiloſophers, E mperonrs, K imgs, and the 
knonledged by nobler Grind people you may ſee if you will have regard to the 4 Sec. chap. 1. of my 
Philoſophers, L#x Veritatts, where you may feenot onely the great elteem the Art- was in amongft all 
wiſe and learned men in former ages, but alſo the names of the chiefeſt Patriarchs, Fa- 
thers, Philoſophers, Emperonrs , and Kings that were ſtudents herein ; which notwith- 
ſtanding the pretended arguments of the envious againſt it, ſtands unſhaken, as will ap- 
peare to any that ſhall peruſe ic, comparingit with the pretended Replyers diſcourſe; 
therefore here I ſhall refer thee thereunto , being deſirous to be as ſhort as poſlibly 1 


can. 


Lib. A Vindication of Aſtrology. 7 


Cu 42M 


Shewing that obſervation may be made of the Stars motions, in anſwer to 
thoſe that hold it impoſsible for any man m his days to obſerve the par- 
ticular configurations of every Planet , with the fixed Stars , and 
with one another ; as alſo that thereby we may diſcern their influence 
if we have any capacity. 


Shall here therefore now ſhew , that obſervation will clearly evince us that the ©L36::v1tion 
Stars have admirable influence on theſe inferiour and elementary things; for teach:th us che 
though it be moſt certain that the Heavens make not their Revolution under fars intlaence. 
36000. years, yet is its variation ſo ſlow,as that it dependeth upon the motion of 
the fixed Stars; ſo that betore there can be any great difference worth ſpeaking 
of, the ſame conſtellations may be often obſerved in particular, though not in the whole ; 
for the fixed Stars according to the neereſt account of our late Writers, or the ſphear in 
which they are, move not above one degree, which 1s 60. minutes in 72. years, in which 
time there is none, but who are altogether ignorant, that cannot make ſufficient obſer- 
vation of every conſtellation worth noting tor the confirmation of their influence - for 
though they move from Ealt to W -1it once In 24. hours, ſo making this Diurne Revolu- 
tion 366. times in a year, yet lince in reſpect of the motion of this Sphear trom Weſt to 
Eait theſe 366. Revolutions cauſeth not a minutes difference ; it muit needs follow that That the tr1zs 
the very ſame fixed ſtars do riſe, culminate, ſet, and lie in the ſame Circle of polition, Pa:are of rhe 
and alſo may be in configuration of the $#»,and any of the other *P/ancrs, and that ſo 541 Iv be 
exactly in one and the ſame place or part of Heaven, that it 1s impoſtible with any inftru- ogy "mw 
ment to diſcern any variation either in the longitude, Jatitude, dechnation, right or ob- 
lique aſcention thereof; ſo that hereby it is clear the nature of any ſtar may be found 
our, and be exactly known, 
3ut now as touching the Planets ; firit, we attribute , as 1s clear to every vulgar no» T1. power of 
tion moſt power and efficacy to the Sz, next to the 200m, then to Yen, and fo to the Plincrs.. 
Mercury, and next to Jupiter and Satery, and laſtly ro Mars ; this (I mean) inrelation 
to their motion with the Sx; for by how much the light of the Planets to us is greater 
and their motion ſwifter, by ſo much are their operations neceſſarily the more apparent 
and manifeſt to us or our ſenſe : we preter Ven before Merenry, for that though he 
be ſwiſter, yet is ſhe the greater, and ſo conſequently of more efficacy : and the reaſon 
why Aars is of leaſt note, or moſt obſcure unto us, 1s, for that he is lefſe then Sarzrn 
and ?rpiter, who are preferred before him,and moverh in fo large and great an Epicycle, 
that he ſeldomelt rancounters with the Sy. 
And we know that the /ſeon (as I have ſaid in chap 4. of my Lax Veritatrs, ſect. 2.) The Gonificarl. 
iniſheth her courſe through the Zodiack every 28. days and ſome odd hours, viz. twelve ons of the in- 
times in a year ; by which we may, and do plainly perceive her contigurations , viz. {9 fAvence of the 
junitton, Sextile, Trine, Square and Oppoſition with every Star 1n the whole Heavens, both 5? 45h ha ſoon 
fixed and errant, and thereby their nature and mixture often to be known and diſcerned, _ 
and that very certainly. | their configu- 
{he Sun, Venus and Mercury allo, do every year Once finiſh their courſe, fo that alſo rations with the 
hereby every year we may, and do plainly ſee and finde out their own ſpecifical nature, 3902, with the 
and the properties of the other Stars, viz. fixed, as alſo their nuxtures, and that before _— {na 
any ſen'ble ercour can be made by the motion of the Star y Sphear. © x LN 
Again, Saturs, 7upiter and Mars, although they are (by reaſon of their ſuperiority) the configura» 
of tlower motion, yet doth it neither any ways hinder, but thart' their effects may eaſily tionsof Sarun, 
and ſoon (as alfo their mixtures amons themſelves and the fixed fars) be known ; for ptr 
though Satzin be 29. years, ſome odd moneths and days, making lvs revolution, or run- tek 
ning 


eA Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 


ning his courſe through the rwelve Signs of the Zodiack, Fupiter twelve years, Mars 
three years; yet by reaſon of their long continuance in every ſign, as alſo by their re- 
trogradations, ftations and dire&ions coming often to the conjunction of the S$rars in 
the $79» wherein they are, and to the Aſpects of others in other £:gys , we cannot bur 
often and plainly be taught to perceive the ſeveral influence of every ſtar in the whole 
Zodiack without the leaſt ſenſe of errour, eſpecially ſince the Luminaries alſo, the Sun 
and Moon in the mean time come to them, and ſo make commixture of their influence, 
early and monethly. 

The Infinence © Of all which the Sradent in Aſtrologie cannot be ignorant, ifhe but warily obſerve his 


ade - lows Authors, who have ſufficiently and largely declared them all unto him, as they by obſer- 


- by former A- p Sou : ' 
ſtrologers, — true from Age to Age ; yetif thou beelt ſo curious (as I could wiſh thou 


wert, and all other ingenious ſouls) as that thou wilt make particular obſervation there- 
Nota. of thyſelf, thou mayeit ſee that before the Starry Heaven moveth a degree, Satzrr, 
who is the very {loweſt of the P/ancts, finiſheth his courſe, and cometh to Cenjunttior, 
Sextile, Square, Trine or Oppoſition of every particular rar, of every particular mag- 
nitude, in every particular of the :welve S1gns of the Zodiack twice ; and Jupiter fx 
times, Mars 24. times ; the Suu, Venus, and Mercury 72. times, and the 1700» 864.times 
or thereabours ; but oftner and more frequently they meet with one another (I mean the 
Planets) as the great Conjunction of Satwrn and upiter happeneth once in twenty years; 
of Saturnand Mars once in two years,&c. So that particular obſervation of their effe&s 
may eaſily, and that in a mans life be both obſerved and known diſtinctly, I ſay, if any be 
thus curious. | 
Thus far chiefly, to clear the point I intend here next to inſiſt upon, viz. That the 
Stars and their influence have power over all ſublunary things; leaſt ſome ſhould (as of 
late they have) render themſelves ridiculous to poſterity, in Goring both their effects and 
power, or at leaſt, in affirming man (if they have any) is not able to- comprehend the 
depth thereof, &c. 


Cuak Tk 


That the variation of the Heavens from their places wherein they were 
in Prolomies time, or at the firſt Creation, cauſeth no erring in A- 
ſtrological Iudgements. 


be known by us, tor that Pro/omie, whom we account as a chief Doctor amongſt 
us in the delivering the myſteries and inſtructions of this Art, writ ſo long ſince, 
that the Heavens are gone ſome whole degrees trom their places,chey were in at his time, 
and therefore the ſame Rules will not now hold which he Ch 
Anſw. . Fr the anſwering of this Objection, I ſhould do well to ſay no more thenthis, that 
it 15 altogether weak, and occaſioned through ignorance, &c. and not trouble my ſelf 
The motion of further to anſwer what needs no anſwer ; but leaſt thoſe for whom 1 have undertaken 
the Heavens theſe my labours,ſhould then, for that they are not well grounded in the Art , think this 
fince Ptolomies Goliah to be more then it is; I ſhall ſay thus much, that Prolomie tyed us not by his 
”_ Gnce he Writingsto be confined to uſe his Rules for thoſe places the Signs were in at that time; 
fcſ Creatlon, Þut thus, Satwrn in Aries fignitieth fo and ſo, where ever Aries be removed ; for it is the 
Is any cauſe of nature of the Sign the Planets in, that cauſeth him to have ſuch and ſuch a ſignification, 
errour in Aſire> not the place where the Sign is, inreſpe& of the Revolution of the Starry Sphear ; for 
logers judge@ then we (making no ſuch obſervation for the direction of our Judgements) ſhould never 


+55" be able to predict any thing of certainty ; beſides if this had been neceſſary, Dooley 
Wou 


Objett. \ Nd firſt, ſince it is objected by ſome, That the true effe&ts of the ſtars cannot 


vation, and frequent practice have both been found out and approved by them to be moſt | 


Lib.1. . AVinduation of Aſtrology. 9 


would have taught us accordingly, and alſo have directed the precepts of the Artto have 
dependency on the place of the Heavens at the Creation, which were as far removed be- ' 
fore his time as they have been ſince ; ſothat ſince the firſt Creation of all things, Aries 
the firſt fign (and fo conſequently uniformly allthe reſt in that Starry Sphear) is re- 
moved and revolved in the courſe of its motion neer upon three whole ſigns , according 
to Trchs his Account, which if this were of any, or the leaſt moment (as I have ſaid) we 
ſhould never poſlibly be able (having no regard thereunto) to foretell any thing with 
certainty ; But our Rules run on another ſtrain (as hath been ſaid) viz. a Planer in 
ſuch a S1gr, fignifiech ſo and fo, let it be by its revolution where it will, &c. But this 
we finde daily certain, and the other conſequently then of no efficacy; as for 
example. : 

We ſee clearly,and thar to be teſtified by every vulgar notion,that when the Sux comes 
into the Equinoctial point of Aries, the Spring forthwith begins to ſhew it ſelf; every T,,,c...c;; 
thing by irs humidity and temperate heat, being thereby made to flouriſh, and as it were gje&ion 
to riſe again fromthe dead, which have by the tedious blaſts of the Hyemnal Ayr been cleared by cx- 
kept in obſcurity ; and this without reſpect to the place where eAries was jn Prolomies ample. 
time, or atthe firſt Creation; which neither then at that time had any other but the ſame 
efficacy now they have, though they may be intended or remitted by the conjun&ions and 
configurations of the Planets, or by the variation of their declination, as they dart their 
beams more or leſs down perpendicularly upon us, and ſo work more or leſs powerfully at 
one time then another in the ſame place. 

So likewiſe when he enters into the firſt So/ſice, or the Tropick, of (ancer (he being 
then neereſt our Zenith ) cauteth Summer ; in the ſecond EquinoCtial, Libra, Autumn ; 
in the laſt Tropick, Capricorn, Winter, &C. | 

But to put this matter quite out of doubt, letus but obſerve when the Sy comes in- 
to the Sign Taxrw, and ſtirreth up the vertue of the Pleiades and Hyades in that ſign, Manifeſted by 
and the Hed; to the North thereof , and Oro» to the South , as alſo Arfurus then tet- common expea 
ting ; and we ſhall ſee theſe Conſtellations (being naturally violent and rempeſtuous) do "**nce. 
ral Southern and moiſt winds for certain days together, watring the earth, and cauſin 
thoſe ſeeds and vegetables (not before to be diſcerned) to ſpring forth and appear ; xs, 
this hath not only been delivered unto us from Antiquity, but we every year (towards the 
lacter end of that moneth, we vulgarly call e4pr4) finde it A experience moſt true : 

Hence that old Eng/;fp Proverb, even amongſt the 4lliterate that know nothing of the 
cauſe, April ſhowers, bring May flowers. | 

Again when the Sn riſeth with the Dog-ſtar, we ſee it cauſeth many infirmities, and Farther, yer 
vehemency of heat, ſo that Hipoc. Aphor.4,5. ſaith, Medicines are hard, or obnoxious Taviteſt. 
that are adminiſtred under the Dog-far ; likewiſe we ſee Dogs at this time apt to run mad, 
the Sea to be troubled, and all Creatures whatſoever in one fort or other perplexed; and 
this is known commonly to all the vulgar, as well as the learned, and therefore needs not 
farther to be amplified : yet in ſome Summers, this time is not ſo contagious as again in Why the Dog. 
other years, which happens according to the places and configurations of the Lumina i 
ries with the other Plaxers and fixed Stars , according to their intentions and remiflions, contagious. 
neither cold nor heat proceeding from the abſence or preſence of the Sun, as ſome 
weakly conceive; for then all Summers would be alike hot, as alſo all Winters alike cald, 
ſince the Sun keeps his conſtant motion, and is never more elongated nor appropriated, 
one year then another : And this we tee alſo every year when the Sz comes near the 
18. Degree of Cancer, wherein the little or /eſſer Dog is, notwithitanding the Revolution 
of the Starry ſphear ; for otherwiſe it would be abour the time heis in the 27. Degree of 
Gemini, which is about the latter end of that moneth we commonly term May. 

Laftly, and with this I ſhall conclude as touching this point , and then proceed : A third manis 
There is no man that hath any knowledge in Aſtrologie, but can affirm, that the feſtatlon there- 
Weather will be tempeſtuous, ſtormy and turbulent, Sat#rn going out of one Signinto ®. 
another, according to Hermes, Centil. 33. and other ſayings of the Ancients, which if 
to be obſerved as they were juſt at the time Pro/omie writ, or at the firſt Creation, it will 
now be when he is in the middle,or towards the latter end of a ſign, as the ſigns are now ; 
for that Aries is now in our times very far in Tawrus, or where Taurus was in Ptolomies 


time ; but this hindreth or varieth no more the Influence of the Heavens from their 
G natural 


A Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 


natural properties and inclinations, then to affirm a Faggot or any other combuſtible 
thing will not burn, although it be putinto the fire, becauſe it is not in a Chimney,or 
any ſuch whimſical afſertion,&c. wheretfore let us now ſhew the power of their Influence, 
and fo diſcharge our former promiſe, ſince it here ſo fitly offereth it ſelf. 
The 517: c51. What hath been already faid is ſufficient to ſatisfie any man who is not diſpoſed , or 
ſes next under £iven over to obſtinacy, of the verity and certainty of Afrolopy : but for farther fatis- 
Goa the firſt faRtion, I think good yet to proceed to ſome particular effects of the Stars, that God 
| _ cauſe. may be glorified in his Works, being himſelf the firſt moving cauſe of all their wonder- 
"A te. a full operations, that we may (according to the Apoſtle) ſee him in his Works, though 
Godin his not worthy to behold him as he is in himſelf, nor indeed able, ſo longas we carry this 
works. earthy Tabernacle about us unchanged and unglorifed. 
Firſt then, becauſe we are to haiten to ſay ſomewhat to a pretended reply to my Lyx 
Feritati, leaſt this firſt Book ſwell to a bigger bulk then I would willingly have it: I ſhall 
briefly ſpeak of the Planer firſt, and then of the fixed Srars, or as they are both joyned 


rogether, and ſo haſten to a concluſion. 


—— 


CHat Vi 
Shewing the powerful influence of the Stars and Planets, and how far 


we are to have regard to the fixed Stars. 


every capacity, that by conſequence, according to the account of Zicho, the 
annual motion of the ſtars, not being above 58. ſeconds,and 58. thirds it is 

mot palpably clear, that all that while, they riſe with the ſame degree of the Zodiack. 

unto which the $#» yearly coming, at times prefixed and enter by their preſence 

the work and effeRts of the Sur, after one and the ſame manner, and ſo do not of them- 
The fixcd ſtars ſelves at all betoken plenty or ſcarcity more in one year then another ; but this variety 
no cauſe cf and change (asalſo the generation and corruption of all things) is to be referred ro thoſe 
ney > © Far that have divers motions, viz. the Planets, and this there is none that is Compos 
os $3 had . ments willſhew themſelves ſo ridiculousas to deny ; for by means of their various mo- 
bur the P/anccs tions, they being particular Agents, apply their vertue and influence diverſly on theſe in- 
© by reaſon of feriour bodies; cauſing thereby the difference of the plenty of one year over another, &c, 
their various $g that hereby the weakeſt Judgement may ſoon diſcern that the diverſity of plenty 
m1 wer ow and ſcarcity between one year and another, f Roa wr not on the riſing or oy of - the 
ty, drought, fed Stars, but on the commuxture of the Influence of the Planers with them ; wherefore 
plagues, altera- we ſee (lem. e Alex. in his Eglogues doth not only make the Stars {igns, foretelling the 
tions of the changes of the ayr, and plenty, dearth, plagues, drought, &c. and inhis Srrom. 116.6. 
mere _ neceſſaries to direct the courſe of Hodeatry and Navigation, but alſo in the ſame 
_. "5% 1g ſixth Book a little further, in his diſcourſe of the ſeven Planers, he aſcribeth the Rule and 
dry, alſothe Government of the Globe of the earth thereunto, teſtifying farther that the Chaldeans by 
ruleand ſole them. did judge of the future events of all things appertaining to this frail life ; and alſo 
[/7 waar of Accicents to come. Look more Prel. lib. 1.cap.2, de 2#uadrip. where may be ſeen the 
of the earth, 25 (eral operations of the Planets and fixed ftars in and over all Nations, Countreys 


all accidents ; | 
therein,aſcri- and People, and the reaſon of their ſeveral Cuſtoms, 'Laws, Manners , and Incli- 


bed to the in. nations. 

fluence of Thus much for the general, ſince you have already heard that their force and power 

the Plane??. may be andis known by obſervation; wherefore to deſcend to particulars. 

That the $11  T1f we have regard firſt to the Szx, we ſhall finde that the power of the Sus, andthe 

hath influ» quality of the Heavens cauſe the inhabitants of the Torrid Zone , to be black; ſuch are 

ence, they which we call vulgarly Blackmoors, or Negroes, and cauſeth them alſo to be of con- 
ſtirution Cholerick, their hair curled, of mean ſtature by reaſon of the temperature of 


their bodies, which is hot and dry ; Look Prol. 1i6,2.cap.2. de quadripar, We further me 
the 


M Oreover, having then ſeriouſly conſidered what hath been ſaid, it is clear to 


4 Y K, 


Lib.r- A Vindication of Aſtrology. 


the S# doth alſo tan even us in this our climate ; and is the cauſe alſo of Spring, Sum- 
mer, Autumn, and Winter, day and night; and the chief cauſe of the generation of all li- 
ving creatures, but more eſpecially thoſe which proceed from putretaction, &c. (every 
one knows) bringeth alſo to maturity all the fruits of the earth , and extimulateth all 
creatures tothe act of generation for the procreation of their ſeveral kinds. But to be 
ſhort, that 33. of Der. ver. 14. before mentioned, and the teſtimony of Xoſes, Gen.1. 
14. (of which anon) that the $#» and the Aſoon were conſtituted for ſigns and ſeaſons,as 
well as other ſtars, iscleer. We know allo he is of a drying and attractive Nature. That 
Chronick diſeaſes follow his courſe,as acute and ſharp the courſe of the oor , cum 
multis alizs; but here I ſhall paſs them by, lince there is no Peaſant but can acquaint us 
with ſome one effect or other of this clearly, by experience known unto him. 

And who is ſo ignorant but knoweth that the Loon hath a preat influence on the 
ebbing and flowing of the Sea 2 which every waterman on the Thames can juſtitie ; but 
if ſome urge,that in the At/aprick /eathere is no Tides, and ſothink by this their igno- 
rance, to make ought againſt :h:s moſt heavenly Art, they are miſtaken ; for as touching 
this their idle and vain conceit, I ſhall not need for the anſwering thereof, uſe many 
words, bur let them know, that by reaſon of the profundity and vaſt wideneſs of thoſe 
ſeas, I mult confeſs, little or no Tide can be diſcerned ; yet is it moſt probable, there is an 
increaſe and decreaſe of that current, as I ſhall appeal to all the learned in Navigation ; 
for by reaſon of the indiſpoſition of the ſubject, the influence (I muſt confeſs) of the 


: ; A 
Moon is not ſo much diſcerned as in other things,as all moiſt and watery bodies; that ſhe vv 


II 


The Moon, 
Objett, 
»Anſw. 
Why th:re is 
no I ides, or 


ſuch a5 can 
hard!y be di- 


(cerned in the 


'hy there is 


wholly,rules as in freſh waters, by reaſon of the rarity and ſubtilty thereof,ſhe not having no Tides in 


thar fit ſubject to work on, which is requiſite,cauſeth no Tide there ; alſo expert Naviga- 
tors can teſtifie,that in ſome places of theOcean, Tides are letted by the ſtrength of a con- 
trary Current,e&c. But there 1s no female of twenty one yeers of age,though ſome at ſix- 


freſh waters, 


and why in 
' ſome places 
there are no 


reen, nay ſooner , but can teſtifie its effects on their bodies, by cauſing their menſtrues Tides. 


once a moneth; this they tinde by experience, though perhaps all know not the cauſe or 
reafon thereof ; you have already heard her influence on lunaticks, cauſing their fits 
ſometimes to be more grievous then again at other times ; wherefore then if we further 
look to ſhell-fiſh , we ſhall ſee cleerly that they are made by her divers illuminations of 
or with tbe Sxs, both to increaſe and decreaſe. (this there is no Oyſter-wench but knows) 
the ſame effe& ſhe bath in the humours of all bodies /#b/unary. And there is none ſo 
ignorant but knoweth alſo, that thoſe who ſleep in the open fields in Moox-light-nights, 
ſhe fillerhthem with dulneſs and heavy drowlineſs, and their heads with moiſture ; more- 
over fleſh-newly ſlain , being hung forth in moon-light-nights, doth ſoon putrifie ; and 
Peaſe ſown in the increaſe of the oor, never leave blooming and bloſſoming ; and that 
ſhe is the cauſe of critical days, and alſo judicial, you have had ſhewnyou in my Lux Ve- 
ritatis; wherefore here I ſhall nor infiſt thereon , but refer you thereunto ; and to Galen 
de diebus dccretorirs; and you ſhall there finde what admirable vertue and power he aſligns 
her over all alterations of ayr and other inferiour Elementary things, as well as over 
diſeaſes, eſpecially acute, &-c.' And not only ſhell-fiſh and the humours in men and 
women do increaſe and decreaſe according to her increaſe and wane, but alſo the Brain of 
man and other living creatures. | b 

Again,there is no SoW-gelger but can juſtifie he obſerves the age and configurations of 
the 4ſoon with the Sy, for gelding of Cattle; and every husband-man or Peaſant 
knoweth that it is very uſeful for him to obſerve a time of the Moen to pur his cattle to 
ingender ; and as it is reported by Geſzer in his 30o page of beaſts , Democritm affirmeth 
that if a Horſe cover a Mare the third day before the full Moon; the Mare ſhall con- 


ceive a male foal z it thethird day after the Full, a female ; and alſo in his 207 page te- If a Horſe cos 


ſtifieth that Pliny (knowing the ſtrange ſecret operation of the Aſoon in Elephants) doth 
as it were aſcribe a kinde of Religion1n this creature; for from the Change of the X-on 
till the prime and appearance thereof, they take boughs from off the Trees , 


ver a Mare the 
third day be- 
fore the Full 
and fir Moon, a male 


look or lift them up to Heaven, andthen look upon, or towards the oor, which they Foal will be 
many times together do as it were in a ſupplication or adoration thereof, He further re- conceived, 


lateth of the ZBaboon , who by the influence of the Sw» and Moon on him in the equi- 
noctial times of the yeer, barks every hour once ; viz. twelve times a day,and as often 
_ piſſeth ; andat the Change of the oor , the male Baboon will neither look up , or 

C 2 eat 


2 


The third day . * 
a frer the Full 
Moon a female, 


tiautich (225, 


Thoſe born at 
the time of an 
Iclipſe, or 

Change of the 
Moon, live not 
long, and why. 


A remarkable 


thing of the 
Pomegranate. 


A Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 
eat, but in a forlcrn condition (through the ſence of that conjunRtion of the Luminaries) 
goes up and down; and the female purging her ſelf of abundance of blood : Bur this is 
turther handled in the fourth chapter ot the ſecond Book of this Volumn, zz. Thar 
which we call the Introduttion; wherefore here I ſhall haſten to proceed. 

Again , we ſee thatthoſe that are born ar the time of an Eclipſe of either of the 
Luminaries, or at the Change of the Morn, cannot live long ; for the Sy or Moon 
being eclipſed, he being foxs vite, and ſhe the mother(as it were) of moiſture, the native 
thoby this defe& mult be deprived (in the eclipſe of the Sw») of natural heat and nou- 
riſhment, he being deprived of his light ; and in the defect of the Afoon, of convenient 
moiſture to mitigate and to temper the heat, and ſo alſo in her Change, ec. 

Moreover , there is no Hearb nor fruit , that is either ſet or ſown in the wane of the 
Moon, but the taſte thereof is neither ſo good as naturally the fruit is, nor ſo kindely, ex- 
cept Peaſe only, (which you have already heard ) being let or ſown in the increaſe of the 
Aoon,will ftill bloom and bloſſome. 5 

So alſo that Vines may not ſpread and grow too faſt , and be too forward, they are 
pruned and cut in the Wane ; and ſuch Timber or Wood which we deſire to keep long 
un-worm-caten, we cut inthe wane, for that then the Moons light being abated, fo is the 
ſap and humidity of the Tree, which cauſeth corruption being once lopt; thus much 
concerning what we would not have grow; but as touching ſuch Vegetables as we would 
have increaſe, it is but obſerving the Heon contrariwiſe , and we ſhall ſoon accompliſh 
our deſires therein; as if we be deſired any thing ſhould grow up in heighth, we take care 
ſhe be at the time of ſetting or ſowing thereof increafing in light and motion, andin an 
aicry ſign; but contrariwile, if to take deep root and to grow downwards, we place her 
in an earthy ſign, &c. And it isreported of the Pomegranate (which is a thing wor- 
thy the noting) that it will not grow longer then ſo many youu as the A7oon was days 
old when it was firſt ſet; and this is moſt credibly reported by Lecins Bellantins in that 
Treatiſe of his in anſwer to Picns Mirandula, But Pliny and others will at large teſtifie 
of the admirable power and influence of the Planets and ftars over Vegetables; where- 
fore what hath been already ſaid is ſufficient to evince any man (who hath not wholly 
given himſelf over to obſtinacy) of the verity and certainty thereof; for fince you have 
already heard how evident and clear it is, that the Heavens have Dominion of, and ſhew 
their effects on ſenſitive things , I ſuppoſe there is none will render themſelves ſo weak 
and ignorant (after a ſerious conſideration thereof) as to deny ( contrary to the opt- 
nions and teſtimonies of all learned Philoſophers ) the Heavens and Planers to have in- 
fluence over Herbs, Corn , Plants, and all Vegetables ; for if the vegetative faculty be 
comprehended and included in the ſenſitive ; (as there is none ſo ſtupid as to deny) then 
as a Triangle is contained in a quadrangle, ſois this moſt certain ws conſequently an aſ- 
ſured truth. 

And thus much ſhall ſuffice at this time for the manifeſtation and clearing , that the 
Moon hath influence over as well men, bruit-beaſts, ſenſitives, and vegetables, plants, 
herbs, &c. as over things without life ; viz. of the ſea, cauſing (as hath been ſaid) 
its ebbing and lowing, humours in men and women, diſeaſes,critical-days, &c. I might 
here, but for tediouſneſs,deliver unto you the fivefold government of the moneth by the 
Moon, viz. of the latitude of the Moon,apparition, ſynodical, periodical and medicinal ; 
but of theſe (God willing) I may hereafter ſay ſomewhat , and that at large, Ged ſpa- 
ring me life and opportunity, cc. In the interim, I ſay, let what hath been ſaid ſuffice as 
to the proving the influence of the Sx» and ooy, and now let us hear what we are 


taught by Satwry. 
Th: influence ves. Þ EA : 
of Sazura pro» Notto inſiſt long then on the Plavers, ſince their influence is not (by the rational) 


ved. 


The cauſe of 
Climagerical 


yeers. 


in the leaſt denyed, and we are anon to handle their effeRs at large , we ſhall therefore 
be as brief as with convenience may be; in my Lux Yeritatrs, chap. 1. Set. 6. P.35. I 
have declared how that ClimaRerical yeers happen, and are cauſed by the profe&ion of 
the Planers, and firit houſe to the Square and Oppoſition of their places in Nativities, 


+ being more eſpecially occaſioned by the motion of Saturn , he having as much power in 


The power of the decree ſeveral of yeers, asthe S#n hath in moneths , or the Moon in days; he com- 
Saturn in diſ- 1Ng every ſeven yeers,to the Square or Oppoſition of his place in the Radix of any mans 


caſes. 


Nativity, Again,there is no skiſfull Phyſitian that is acquainted and verſt throughly in 
| | ---. = 


Lib.1. A Vindication of Aſtrology. 


his Art (a5 Galen and Hippocrates oy none are ,but who are skilled and acquainted with 
and in Aftro/ogy) but knows that he after the Revolution of the Sx be cometh chief 
ruler and orderer of the Diſeaſe and critical days ; and many times by his configurarj- 
ons with the ſoon hinders the (i/i5 in acute and ſharp Diſeafes ; and, obſervation as 
hath been ſaid, and the manner taught, will cleerly evince all the ignorant, that Satzrs is 
cold and Melancholy, as the Sw 1:hor and inclining to mirth ; for as he is oppoſite to 
the Su; in nature, ſo 15 he oppoſite in relation to the ſigns and manſions of the Heaven he 
rules, and therefore inclines alvw/ays to cold, aSthe + doth to heat ; whence the © in 
zz: beings the houſe of > and oppotite to & his own houſe ; the weather inclines more 
to cold. And by reaſon the l:chr, and ſo conſequently the influence of the Sw» and the . 
014 is molt manifeſt and apparentunto our ſenſe : yet Ifay, though the other ſtars 
by reaſon of their obſcurity and remote diftance from us cannot ſo eaſtly be diſcerned, a 
ſhort time ſpent in the obſervation thereof will ſoon cleer the truth of their ſeveral in- , __ 
Auences and inclinations. But to ſpeak more plainly, and home to the matter,do we not ? Nota. 
at every Conjunction, Square and Oppolition of the Luminaries with him, finde all incli- 
nation of the ayr to moiſture and cold ? and that it never fails, butat the Square , Op- 
poſition or ConjunCtion of the 5» and him (except the body of Zapiter or Mars in- 
rerpoſe or ſome of their AſpeRs;) cold ayr and wet weather is thereby produced , ac- 
cording to the ſeaſon of the yeer, notwithſtanding the natural inclination of the Sw 
ro heat anddryneſs : and this fince ſo manifeſt , and that even in the heat of Summer, 
. we may well conclude he is of a cold nature, eſpecially ſince by often experience we ſo 
tinde its effects. | LES 
Moreover there is none born that hath either the Sun, Moo, Mercury, or the Lord of I** agus 
the Aſcendant diſpoſed of by Satarn, and he located in the afcendant, or in ſquare or op- 2" Soy" EN 
poſition thereunto , or to Se/, Lyra, or Mercury ; orthe Lord of the Aſcendant (as their Nartvity 
bath been ſaid) but the native will be much addifted ro melancholy, and furly chumpiſh Sat; Signiti- 
diſpoſitions; and in configuration of AZercary (as I can juſtifie by many teſtimonies *- 
for truth) the native ſhall be of flow and ill utterance,of a dull and hard wit and capacity. 
And thus much of Sarzr»; and we are next in order to deſcend to Zpiter , and fo ha- 
{ten to proceed, ſince this point is ſo cleer ; viz. That the Planets have influence on ſub- 
lunary and elementary bodies and things : and that by our monthly and yeerly prognoſtica- The Authors 
tions made apparent to every vulgar notion and capacity ; ſo that for the further juſtifica- _ by = 
tion and confirmation thereof, I ſhall not need to deſire any better teſtimony then my ro mg Aa 
Vex Stelaram. and the writings of ſome of thoſe ſeen in this heaaty Art, publiſhed for ox s:ctarum, 
the laſt yeer, andthe two enſuing yeers, viz. till the latter end of 1654, provided they for the juſtifi» 
are guided by the rules of Art. _ of the 
For inſtance, ſince as touching my Yox Stellarum , now TI have ſo fit an opportunity, — _ 
Firſt, from page 19, to 21, and from page 105 to 107, you. may fee I poſt- = 44 = 
tively cnt we ſhould have war the yeer 1652, andyet by all judicious men it ſeem- for the proving 
ed very improbable both at the time of my penning and publiſhing that book , it being the $:a75 and 


wrote in Augnſt 1651, and Printed in Oftober following, at which time we were ina very P{ancts ro have 


ſeeming ſetled condition ; yet we can all now experimentally teſlifie, that by the timethe po org 
Summer quarter was well __ , we were at (laſhing and pelting with the Hollanders, dies. hos 
and they with us, and at ſwords drawing in the Spring quarter. 
Secondly, in the thirty third page (though I durſt not ſpeak plain Engliſh then , yet I 
hope it will be no offence now it is paſt to mention it) I declared in Latin that thoſe fig- 
nified by the ſign wherein Sarzrn was,ſhould have the better; Satrern was then in Caxcer, 
under which ſign is Holland and Scotland; and I need not ask either ourArmy in the one, 
and Fleet againit the other, of the verity thereof; and it is further to be noted, that both 
theſe were acted about one and the ſame time. | 
Thirdly, in the 134 page, I ſhewed the inclination of thoſe in Authority to Taxations; 
and what man isthere that looks into his purſe , but canaver that in that very Winter- 
quarter, the Tax wasraiſed 30000.l per menſem,above what it was before ? 
Fourthly, in the 103 page you may ſee I mentioned miſchief to men by Thunder 
and Lightning ; and how fatal this proved , even: to the aftoniſhment of us all, is well 
known to all Eg/and, eſpecially to thoſe in Leiron in (hbeſvire , in which Town onthe 20 . 
of 7une 1652 being Sunday, there was inthe Sermon time eleven ſlainin the Church by 
Thunder and Lightning, and many hurr, . _- 


14- eA Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 

To be ſhort; let the Merchants, and ſuch as make long Voyages (hinted at in the 
16. and 17. pages,and other places of my Book) teſtifie, whether they have not received 
many croſſes, loſſes and miſeries, and the people in general ; and whether many have 
not ſuſtained loſſes by thieves, and hurts or wounds the year 1652. Alſo whether there 
was not an unuſual dryneſs in the Summer, a ſcarcity of Fruits, infolency in the Com- 
mons, fraud and deceit amongſt moſt men, treachery and ſuch like evils, abundantly 

. mentioned in many places of that Treatiſe ; and many more, which at this time I forbear 
ro particularize. 

. Only for a farther teſtimony of the verity and admirable excellency of this Science, 
let me intreat thee to make particular obſervation of what I have predicted by the.Eclipſe 
of the 29. of March,1652. treated of alſo in that ſame Vox Srellarum,and Lux Veritatt, 
whoſe effects will operate till towards the latter end of the year 1654. and tell me then 
what you think thereof, when you ſhall ſee what is here mentioned come ſo punQually 
true ; asalſo, exceſs of heat in Summer, and divers maladies and infirmities, affliting 
men in general, 

Wherefore let the weakeſt capacity judge then, what reaſon or ſenſe there is in ſuch 
men as ſhall traduce ſo worthy and incomparable an Art as this, which they never broke 
fleepto underſtand , but content themſelves (being altogether ignorant) with'a bold 
facing down the unſpeakable validity, worth and excellency thereof , which of all Arts 
and Sciences is both the molt noble (and ſo deſerving the fudy of the more refined and 
heavenly Spirits) and alſo the chief and moſt deleftable of all the liberal Sciences. 

Wherefore what hath been ſaid , ſhall ſuffice at this time , for the confirmation of 
the influence of 7=pirer and the reſt, ſince I defire not to be more tedious then I 
needs muſt ; and ſince this will be cleared more fully anon when we come to treat of E- 
clipſes, Comets, Great Conjunttions and Blazing-ſtars, where we ſhall ſhew and teach their 
nature and influence over all earthly things whatſoever ; I ſhall for this conſidera- 
tion, as alſo for that we are here in this place ſtill ro treat of the influence of the Heavens, 
and then to ſpeak a word or two of that Diſcourſe late publiſhed in pretence of a Reply 
to my Lux Veritats,, leaſt this Treatiſe grow too big, crave your pardon till anon. 


Cruarye. VIII. 


Shewing the Influence of the Hearvens on Inferiour and Elementary 


Bodies. 


All 7 > F9.ZX N this place then we areto treat of the Influence of the Heavens ; you 
Ss what. Ot DS have already heard how f f pl ſcarcity th he 
cidenes what. Þ ave already heard how for matter of plenty or ſcarcity they are the im- 
ſoever, are and qd [&& mediate cauſes next under God, and that proved and warranted both by 
may be known l ea Scripture and the Learned in former Ages ; for, then that Eclipſes, Revo- 
——_— =D >&@ lutions of the World, Comets , Blazing-ſtars, and great Conjunctons 
Ecliples Wy treate of the Accidents general of all Nations, Kingdoms and Languages, 
mers , great there is nothing more true ; viz. plenty, ſcarcity , health, plague, wars, peace, alte- 
ConjunRions, ration of ayr ,and mutations in the Laws, Cuſtoms, Rights and Priviledges of Nations, 
and Blazing and to be ſhort,of things appertaining to the life of man in a Natural way, &c. 

as - ant Andif we haveregard to Prolomy, {:b.2. cap.2. & 3.de Ynadr.. we ſhall finde that he 
cute #9  dothnot onlyrefer the Nature and Cuſtom of Nations unto the general Inclination and 
Nature of the Trzp/icity they are under, but the inclinations of their. minde particular- 
ly, as well as the ſhape and form of their bodies ; as alſo their manners and kinde of life; 
as thoſe who are inhabitants of the Torrid Zone (as hath been ſaid) are black, having 
alſo black and criſped hair, of a mean ftature, and of a hot conſtitution, and of a fierce 


and cruel ſpirit, propter longam & aſſidnam ſolis moram in corumregionibiu, by —_—_ 
c 


Of thoſe thar 
live in the To7- 
. rid Zone. 


Lib.1. eA Vindication of Aſtrology. 
the long and conſtant ſtay of the Sw in that Region or Climate : & nigra ſunt corpora 
eorum quia Sol per Zenith ſnorum capitum cxrrit eoſque comburit ; they are black over 

all their body, by reaſon the Sn conſtantly rranfites their Zenith , and fo ſcorcheth 

them,that they are of that hue. 

And theſe Inhabitants of the Soxth to be of a better and quicker wit, and more Of the inkab{- 
ingenious and aprter to learning, eſpecially the ſtudy of the Stars, Proprer circuli _ of the 
ſig norum & ftellaruwm erraticarum loco Zenith eornm capitms propinguitatem becauſe their ay 
vertigal point is neer the Zoediack in which the fiens are, and under which the Plarers 
move. He alſo farther teacheth , that thoſe chat live further North are of {tronger bo- Of the Tnhabl- 
dy, but of ruder manners and conditions, becauſe their vertigal point being far removed tants of the 
fromthe £ns courſe, they more abound in cold and morfture, which for thar it yieldeth North. 
plenty of nouriſhment,js not by the heat of thoſe places at all exhauſted , or but very 
lictle : from wheace it followeth, that rhey are of complexion fair,long and ſmooth hair, 
their flature tall, and manners fierce and rude. | 

Bur it may be ſome cavillers and envious carpers at the truth, will obje& and ſay, That 06jef, 
cuſtom and good diſcipline, we (ee, doth alter this general inclination. But I anſwer, That «Anſw. 
chough oftentimes , through the force of good diſcipline and cuſtom (which is accord- 
ing to the opinion of Philotophers, ſerunaa Natwra, a ſecond Nature) i muſt conſels 
this is, or may be much altered ;' yet we ſee it hardly ſo removed, but that ſome, and 
thoſe moſt evident marks thereof, will {till remain in force; and this is evident in moſt or 
all Nations under the S#», which might, bur for brevities ſake, be at large proved and 
cleared; but we ſhall here content our ſelves with the teſtimony of Boaw, who in his 
5. Book of his Method of Hiſtories, chap. 5. (though I might ſhewyou whar Galen, Hij- 
pecrates, T acitxs, Ariſtotle and others hereon ſay) ſaith, and reporteth of the Germans, an example in 
that in Religion they might equal oc compare withthe Hebrews;in Aftrologie,to match the tie Gena ls, 
Chaldeans ; in Philoſophy, to itrive with the Grecians ; in Geometry, to equal the Egyprians; 
and in eArithmetick,, to exceed the very Phenitians themſelves : and yet there is no 
Hiſtoriographer worth a pins-head , but k1.9ws they formerly were a molt ſavage and 
rude people, without either civility or humanity (as a man may ſay) ſo that they did tar, 
in ſavage and rude behaviour, paſs our wilde 17/5 : and if we farther look to their inge- 
nuity and ſharpneſs of wit, what Nation is there under the $#», to be found able to 
match them in Handicraft and Mechanick Arts? 

Yet, I fay, notwithitanding all this, we ſhall finde, that newcher time, cuſtom, nor 
education hath been able to extinguiſh their old and ancient faſhions, which is by the ge+ 
»iu: and nature of their Country hereditary unto them ; if we bur look into their form 
and ſtature of body, their immoderate inclination to tipling and homely diet, their con- 
tinency, ſimplicity, ſeverity, exerciſes and aptneſs to War ; for notwithſtanding all their 
other excellent indowments, we ſhall till tinde in them a ſmack of theſe, which is unto 
them Natural. 

There is no man that ever dived into the cauſe of mens inclinations and diſpoſitions, 
eſpecially of the ſeveral cuſtoms and manners of Nations (which is the main ſcope of 
Philoſophers labours ; who are never contented to know ths thing is of ſuch and ſuch 
an inclination, temper and nature, but the reaſon thereof) but knows the truth of this 
point : wherefore I ſhall render my ſelf moſt weak longer hereon to infiit, ſince fot only 
the Learned, bur alſo every ordinary Reader of Hiſtories (if with diligence he hath ob- 
ſerved what he hath read) can teftiftie the ſame, 

I might alfo here ſhew you what the ſame Prolomme ſanh of the Inhabitants of the Eaſt 
and eſt, but then I fear I ſhould too much tranſgreſs my bounds ; as alſo how the whole | 
earth 1s divided into parts, and how governed by the fiery, earthy, aicry, and watry tri- 
phkcitres ; and the reaſons of the ſeveral inclinations, cuftoms, laws, manners, and tem- 
pers of .all Nattons, Kingdoms, Countreys and Provinces ; but I ſhall here, for brevities 
ſake , refer thee to the aforeſaid ſecond and third chapter of his ſecond Book of his 
Dnaadripartite. 

For there he doth not only ſhew thee under what fign of the Zodiack every Nation Of the Inhabi. 
and Countrey is : but alſo, that thoſe who are under the fiery eriplicity, viz. Europe, are 95 of wy 
(by reaſon of the triplicity they are under, being in the North-weſt part of the earth,and 7.” he tos 
by reaſon of the Planets ruling the triphcity) of magnanimous ſpirits, given to exploits 7,i;o2: 
an 


Of the inhabi. 
tanes of Aſia 
the greater,and 
the reaſon of 
their ſever2l in» 
clinations, 


A Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r, 


and feats of War (and truly no diſparagement to other Nations, this our land of Br:i- 
tany may compare with the greateſt Conquerors, if not far tranſcend them) Anglia A- 
riete & Marte aſſimulantur ideoque bellicoſi: England is under Aries and Wars, and there- 
fore are the Inhabitants and Natives thereof addicted to be expert in War or feats of 
Arms. I omit here to inſiſt on every particular Region in this part of the world, as he 
there declareth it, particularly naming every _— under each ſign of the Zodiack, bur 
refer you thereunto ; only in this place we deſire but to ſatisfie our Reader with ſome par- 
ticulars, that he may be aſſured of the verity of the ſtrong influences and manifeſt opera- 
tions of the Celeſtial Signs, Stars and Players over all Kingdoms, Nations, &c. 


Again, in the ſecond part of the World, viz. Southern, which he tominates to be 
Aſia the greater, being under the earthy triplicity , he ſheweth that (among the reſt of 
the >, 6m: and places ſubject to that triplicity) thoſe who are governed by Tanrs: (be- 
ing the houſe of Venus) are generally effeminate and delicate; given to their pleaſure, 
eſpecially to the games and ſports of Yenws ; wherefore they go itill open breaſted : like- 
wiſe thoſe under the ſign Virgo (being the houſe, exaltation and joy of Mercury) are 
exquiſite inall-kinds of good learning, and obſervers gf the motions of the Stars : and 
thoſe ruled by Capricorn (being the proper houſe of Saturn) are of form and ſhape 
commonly deformed, of condition ſordid, and of inclination fierce ; but this I con- 
ceive, by reaſon it is the exaltation of Mars. 

And if we have regard to the third part of the World, viz. Northern, or betwixt the 
North and Eaft, aſſigned to the e4ery Triplicity ; as alſo to that part under the waryy ; 
we ſhall abundantly be ſatisfied of the undeniable truth of the influence of the (z/«/tiat 
Planets and Conſtellations in the ſigns ; wherefore in this place, becauſe (as I have often 
ſaid) Idefire not to be too tedious, I ſhall refer thee to that learned Prolomie himſelf and 
now proceed. 


Ca” 


Shewing that the Influences of the Hearvens and predominancy of the ſtars 
in every Climate, is the cauſe of the ſeveral Laws and ( uſtoms of 
the People therein. 


ſtars have influence, and that as well general as particular) that Countreys and 

Kingdoms and Nations are ruled by Laws and Cuſtoms only , and not by the 
power of the influence of the triangle or triplicity they are under, which Pro/omy,in the 
aforeſaid place, abundantly ſhewerh to the contrary , and alſo confirmeth by reaſon ; 
ldok Peel. lib. 2. cap.z. whither I ſhall (at this time) refer thee; ſince natural reaſon 
will ſhew us, that through diverſity of Manners , which is cauſed through the diverſity 
of ſituations of the places. or parts of the World, divers Laws and Cuſtoms —_ 
to the Natural inclination of the Conſtellations they are under, are apparent in eac 


\ J Ain and weakthen are they who object and imagine (ſince it is clear that the 


. Nation, being far difterent from others; otherways I would fain know, why all Nations 


do nor, or cannot ſubje& themſelves to one Law or manner of Cuſtom. I could out of 
Livie, Plizie and others, ſhew thee the Authority of ſome Nations in theſe matters ; but 
for that I deſire to draw to an end, I ſhall here content my ſelf with this one teſtimony of 
Bodin (before mentioned )whoin his fifth Book de Repwb.affirmeth, that the Low-Coun- 
treys ſhook off the Government of the King of Spas, by reaſon their manners are ſo 
far different from theirs, inſomuch that hardly can there be any thing more ; for Laws, 
all Rational men know, ought to be agreeable, and be applyed to the manners of a Na- 


tion, and not the inclinations and manners to the Laws ; for what is repugnant ” 
| the 


7” 


Lib. 1. eA Vindication of Aſtrology. i7 
the Natural 'inclination of the People., cannot be of any long continuance, ' 

And here I may allo affirm, that by reaſon of the Antipathy between the figne ruling The Englih 
England, and that under which $cor{and is , the Englifs out of this conſideration, toge- Þ3vc ſhaken off 
ther with ſome others, as ec. have ſhaken off the. Government of Monarchy, being be- = MARGE: 
fore under Scotriſþ Kings for above forty yeers; the reaſon is, becauſe Aries (the proper by ir rms 
Aſcendant of Ezg/and) is hot and dry, and ({azcer (the Aſcendant of Scotland) 1s cold natal antipa- 
and moift; again eres is a fiery ſign, and of the fiery trigon ; (Cancer isa ſign watry, thy between = 
and of the watry trigon : ſo that lince there is as much difference between the natural in- (ein = mag 
clinations of thoſe two, as there is between fire and water ; ſoisit as much impoitible to col 4 _ 
unite them and make them of one inclination and minde, asto make the water and {ire :. 2fon of their 
ſo agree, as that the one being thrown into the other, they ſhall ſo unite , as not to make conrrariety in 
a noife or thundring buſtle; for they are Nations that do naturally abhor and dereit each Narvie- 
other; and this I canaver, by what I have by obſervation found in their inclinations &+c. 

Bur if any ſay, this is not the reaſon, and affirm that the £-9/i do abſolucely deteſt 
the Monarchical Government, and therefore have ſetled another kinde of rule ; 1 an- 
ſwer, that for the removing this ObjeRion, I ſhall not ſay any thing bur this, chat the O#%jef. 
ſtars Agune [ed non cogunt , they incline, but compel not, as to inforce the wiil of man, 

(this is more cleared anon; ) belzdes, all rational and knowing men can tell, that a deſpe- eLn/w. 
rate diſeaſe muſt have a defperate cure ; verbum ſapienti ſat eſt , Or erit , linceT amnot 
permitted to ſpeak all I either could or would ; but thus much ; ſhall affirm, that the na- 
tural inclination of the people of England, ( ccon_ the influences of the Heavens 
and conſtellations they are under, ) are inclined to be ſubjet to Monarchy ; from whence 
I do poſitively affirm, that before many yeers'be expired, there will be a ({ataftrophe mnn- 
d; ; we mult be content, and not repine atthe hand and will of Go4; who (according to 
his divine pleafure,) hath ordered all things , ſo as to work according to his will , even 
from the firſt creation, till the ſubverſion of all Kingdoms and Nations, and the earth 
it ſelf , nay and thoſe caleltial conſtellations who then ſhall fall from heaven, as being 
longer of no uſe. $1 ons 

W herefoae, I ſay that not onely vain and ſilly are they who obje& and talk of the cu- 
ſtome of Countries, and yet refer all things ro mans own Conſultation and opinon . Nota 
but alſo moſt weak and childiſh; as if any Diſcipline , Law or Cuſtom were ſutficient, > 
without reſpect to the natural diſpoſition of the people depending on the conſtella- 
tion of the Heaven under which they live, or that (ſince they would have it to depend 
on their own inclination) any people will conſtitute Laws contrary to their own nature; 
for we have Laws here againſt Adultery and Inceſt ; and Dzogorws and others teſtifie thar 
the Perſrans and the rulers of Africa do not onely maintain Inceſt, but alſo whole Le- x,,, j.,; re 
gions of Concubines : it had been moſt prepoſterous therefore for theſe people ordered and - 
to have created laws againſt what they are ſo naturally inclined to. The rea- conſtitured ac- 
ſon why they are ſo addited to Venery, Ptrolomie in the aforeſaid' 2, de <x*ding to the 
Luadri. cap. 3. will ſhew thee who ſaith , i» coewnda ſuperabundant , ita quod eorum con- In 
Jngia fiunt viatq; rapina; multoties etiam eorum rex cum alient ſponſis , prinſquam earum one apes ' 
ſponſs, venereos attus exercet ; & quorundam eorum ſunt uxores communes inter ipſos; ipſs herevy furthers 
quogque pilturas & ornatus concupiſcunt , & ſe more faeminino adornant propter Venerem, proved, 

They exceed and abound in venery , ſo that their marriages are by force, and their Kings 

uſe oftener to accompany,or covetmore other mens wives then their own;many have their 

wives common for one another , and for the moſt part they delighr in pitures, and go 

dreſt much afterthe faſhion of women; and all this by reaſon they are ruled and g0- 

verned by Venus. | 

This point might be further amplified by many more examples; but ſince to the judicious ' 

and rational it is ſo cleer, it were vain longer to inſiſt thereon. Thus then have you heard 

how the Heavens are rlers and diſpoſers of Kingdoms, Nations, and Conntries ; and that hy 

by their influence , they do differ from each other , both in nature and temper ; and ſo conſe= ys 

quently the inhabitants, as much vary in their natural inclinations and conditions, Laws, Cu- 

' ffoms and manners , aseach ( limate doth in its hearbs | beaſts , and Birds; wherefote 

now it reſteth , that we ſhew you the influence of the Heavens on the earth ; cauſing 

health, ſickneſſes, plagues, plenty, ſcarcity, mutations of the ayre, inhundations, wars, 

peaceand all general and particular accidents in the whole world; bur fince we ſhall 
D | have 


18 


eA Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib. t 


have occaſion to treate of this more anon, when' we come to handle the rules of the An- 
tients touching the judgements of Eclipſes , Comets , Blazing-Stars, Revolutions , and 
creat Conjunctions in the fourth book , 1 ſhall here deſiſt ; ſince by all the learnedit is 


The fars have an approved truth, that by the divers motions, aſpects, and conjun&tions of the ſtars and 


influcnce over 
all things in 


the wo 1d. 


Planets, all particular and general events are ſignified and known ; which cauſed Origen 
and all other good and learned writers, who have anywiſe had occaſion in their works to 


The Heavens fpeak of them, to compare theHeavens to a book in whichGed hath as it were writ all that 
compared roa ſhould according to his pleafure come to paſs in this world, even to the ſubvertion there- 


Book. 


Nota. 


Aſtrology lawful 
and the beſt of 


ſtudics. 


ObjeR, 


of as alſo the ations of men, though ſome have exempted that ; wherefore 0riges for 
the confirmation thereof alleadgeth the Narration of oſeph , which was in his time ex- 
tant and in great eſteem ; affirming therein , that 7acob told his ſons, the :Wetve Patri- 
arks, that he had readinthe Tables of Heaven Whatſoever ſhould for the future befall them 
and their children : and there is none I am certain fo ſtapid as todeny that the Ss is the 
cauſe of generation, life, motion, | nutrition , growing and perfe&ton of all viſible and 
ſenſible bodies. N#hil enim vifibile eſt , quod 141e non penetret excellenti lucis ſne magnitn- 
dine : ſed ad ipſam quoq; generationem ſenſibilem corporum confert, ipſeq; ad vitam mover, 
& nutrit, & apit, + perficit, prrgarg; & renovat. 

And now this doth give me herea fit opporrunity to prove unto thee by the ſacred 
word of God that the ſtars are both ſigns and cauſes: but (as hath been already ſaid) 
fince we are anon to cleer that, when we come to anſwer what the pretended Replyer 
ro my Lux veritatis, hath or can fay againſt it, we ſhall not in this place touch thereon ; 
but refer thee thereunto. 

Wherefore now all this being conſidered'which hath been ſaid , let the moſt malicious 
againſt Aſtrolopy ſtand up and ſay if the ſtudy of the fars be unlawful, or anywiſe in the 
leaſt derogating from the Word of God or Religion ; nay whether ir be not a great 
means of Take men to acknowledge a God, who if they ſaw him not in his creatures, 
perhaps would deny him ; for what hindreth but a man may as ſafely ſtudy the natural 
influences and motions of the ſtars without offence to God, as the uſe of Herbs, Drugs, 
and Minerals for Phyſick, or the cure of fuch and ſuch diſeaſes, which at the firſt was by 
the influence of the Celeſtial bodies (by which they are ruled) found out ; for if it be 
a ſin toſtudy and know nature , there is5no ſtudy lawful; andif not, Aftro/ogy muſt 
then not onely be accounted lawful and good , but the moſt beneficiall and beſt of all 
ſtudies. 

Yet doth the raſhneſs and ignorance of ſome men ſo abound , that they are not only 
(contrary to any ſenſe or reaſon)averſe thereunto, but alfo together with Sex:#s Emperi- 
car, Heminga,and others, not knowing what to ſay againſt it,or what it is indeed they ſo 
deſire to cry down, they raiſe idle and fooliſh queſtions, making Obje&ions more worthy 
the laughing at thenthe anſwering , or rehearſing ; yet by reaſon of late, ſome of the 
fame have been by the Ignorant objected to me, I ſhall inthis place touch or hint at one 
or two of them for the fatisfaQtion of the well-willers to 4fro/ogy, that they may not by 
the idle and ſhallow brains of theſe men be diſcouraged from their ftudy in this moſt dr- 
vine and heavenly Science, | 


Cmna*s 3 


Containing the reſolution of the main ObjeAions againſt this divine 
Science. 


O we but ſeriouſly conſider the vanity of theſe Objetions , it will he ſufficient 

toteſtifieunto us they have no reaſon for their high words. - E 

Firſt then they objeR, that a man and a beaſt being born at the ſame time, 

muſt according to the jadgement of Aftrologers , have one and the ſame fortune, - 
| W 


Lib.1. eA Vindication of Aſtrology. 19 
who knoweth not that of all Objections , this is the moſt weak ? ſince as the influence of _ 
the ſtars comes to us by many means, ſo they reject not other cauſes and circumſtances ; & »ſW. 
for there is none acquainted with learning , but knows that a man and a beaſt are more 
then membra dividenti.,, in that they differ the whole kinde : and fince we are taught by 
God himſelf in his holy W ord, that he created every thing in his own kinde, andindued 
man with a rational ſoul, thereby to bear rule and dominion over all creatures who are 
not reaſonable creatures : wherefore theſe objectors and cavillers do render themielves 
moſt ignorant and imptous, endeavouring thus by their envy to e4ſtrology , to take 
away Gods Ordinance inthe generation and conſervation of all creatures here beneath, 
by the ſubtile vertue of his ſecond cauſes ; viz. thoſe heavenly lights the ſtars. Yer . _ 
if one were diſpoſed to be as ridiculous in anſwering , as ſome men are in queſtioning, it OE 
mighr be averred for ought they can ſay to the contrary , that the good conſtellations at ro miſtake me 
the entrance of fomehorſes into the world, maketh them to be tended , rubbed , kept in this marrer, 
well and delicately with little or no toil, and labour, or ſtripes; and again,the malevolent '* <2*<hing be= 
conitellations do cauſe ſome again to be kept 1n perpetual {lavery hard uſage and ſtripes ; _ my 99 
bur thus to compare horſes with men, 1s but to render our ſelves worſe then Aſſes, cr the as of lac the 
bruteſt of creatures ; ſince you ſee they were from the firſt creation ; deſtined to the uſe ignoranc hath 
of man, and to be ſubordinate to his dominion , and will which is indeterminate, and fo 99n*, 2nd (o 


conſequently out of the verge of Aſtrology, as you may ſee at the latter end of this _— Jole 


Treatiſe. | to poſterity. 
Again, ſome demand whether or no Dogs, Chickens, and ſuch like , muſt needs have © ef. 
one and the fame end and life , or whether otherways -/ſtrelogy be of any validity or 4g Hy 
certainty, &c. Truly I tear I do toy in recording theſe vain Objections, and anſwering I he ObjeRion 
thereunto digreſs more from the ordinary bounds of Reaſon, then the Authors thereof ; touching the 
when ſtill what hath been ſaid in the former objection , may and is ſufficient to refel| this 13*#2u5 ends of 
alſo; beſides it remains, that theſe Objectors prove all the Chickens they ſpeak of, to ————_ 2h Ih 
be hatcht at one and the ſame moment of time, and the Dogs to be all whelped together likes td 
(which is impoſlible) or elſe they render themſelves very curriſh and ſnappiſh againſt - brought to gain 
| ftrology. But wholo deſires to be further ſatisfied, becauſe Þ hold it not either credit or (> the validity 
diſcretion to infift long hereon , let him peruſe Pexcerss his Tract of Aſtrological Pre- * Altr ology, 
dictions, and he ſhall amongſt others there find the vanity and childeſhneſs of theſe 
fooliſh cavils ſilenced, by the example of three whelps (not being worthy to be refured 
by learned reaſons) which being whelped in an Eclipſe of the lefſer Luminary , being 
grown to ſome bigneſs, fullfilled rhe effects and ſignitications of the eclipſe by their ſeve- 
ral deaths; one of them being torn in pieces with Hounds;the ſecond, firit by a fall from an 
high place broke his Thighes, and then the ſecond time his Neck; and the third was burnt. 
A third kinde of cavillers we are now to ſpeak of , who not obſerving and warily 
ſearching into the order of cauſes in Nature , nor.the government thereof, are dazled 
and puzled with the contemplation of the marvellous and admirable works of God, and 
ſo by reaſon of the divertity and difſimilitude of events and effects in divers matters 
and ſubje&ts, raſhly and molt inconſiderately deny the powers and vertues of the cau- 
ſes themſelves. . | | 
Their cavil is, that we ſee many born at one and the ſametime, and in one and the ſame gz;,x © 
latitude, and the one perhaps is a King, and the other a beggar , the third a Gentleman -” 
and the like. But this, (were 1 diſpoſed to vindicate Nativities, )T might ſay, isthe groſs eAnſiv 
miſtake and ignorance of thele Carpers at what they know nor, that cauſeth them thus ; 
to render themſelyes ridiculcus ; tor there is no Aſtro/oger but doth eſpecially regard in 
any mans Nativity, the time, place. Parents , and the feed, for the better inabling him in 
his judgement therein : for he 1s moſt ſhallow and weak , that thinketh ir not material to 
conſider whether the Native be born the child of a King , or of a poor and mean pa- The quality of 
rentage : orthat it importeth not whether all the cauſes (the preſence of whoſe help is —chepger yr 
neceſſary to the conſtitution of an effe&t) do concur: or that ſome onely be preſent, or ROI TT. 
that knoweth not that the force of the general doth prevail over the particular : and of Cuſtoms, and 
thoſe that are univerſal, that the firit cauſe doth excel the reſt, which it ſuſtainerh. I ſay other cauſes 
he that thinketh not theſe things to be moſt material , and worthy the conſideration, is _ ro be 
not onely ſhallow and weak, but moſt ignorant inthe Art , or at leaſt willfully obſtinate. —_— 
For there is nothing more certain then that e4ſtrologers which are true Arriſts indeed, do civiry. x 
| D 2 , warily 


20 eA Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 


warily conſider theſe inferioux cauſes, according as their Rules in Art do preſcribe , and 
admoniſh to have reſpe&t (as I have but now faid) to the fituation of the Climate or 
Place, Parents, Laws and Cuſtoms, &c. 

Nota. For it were a vain =_' for any man to pronounce that ſuch a conſtellation as giveth 
The inſtance heauty here in Exg/and, ſhould have the ſame effeR in Erhiopia; or that he that is the 
as h 4 may ſon of a beggar,ſhould (becauſe born at the ſame time the fa of the King was) be a 
both borer A King, or Fe like ; but he the beggars ſon ſhall as far tranſcend the degree of his Pa- 
one very mi= rents at that time the Kings Son doth come to the Crown of his Fathers, or inlarge his 
nure (if ſuch Territories (whichis the only way a King can be honoured or raiſed to dignity ) as the 
_ DOOny | Kings ſon doth his (they being both born under one and the ſame fortunate conſtella- 
- pona =_ 7 tion ;) and thus is the beggars {on extolled and raiſed, in compariſon of his degree, as 
logie, much as the Kings ſon in relationto his; he being perhaps made ſome Tradeſman, or 
one in good repute, and well to live among his Neighbours, which his Predeceſſors were 
not able to do; For you muſt know that the general fate doth over-rule the particular ; 
for it is neither agreeable to reaſon or policy that two Kings or more ſhould be in one 
Countrey, &c. T his, I ſay, were I diſpoſed to vindicate the praRtiſe of ſome men in judg- 
ing of, Nativities, I might ſpeak in their behalf, and to the ſilence of the Objectors, 
who know not how in the leaſt to reply. - 

Moreover, others I have heard alto queſtion, nay affirm poſitively, (and thoſe too 
which ſeemed to be of ſome judgement in other matters; but truly in this rendred them- 
ſelves the moſt void thereof that can be imagined) that a figure of Heaven, which A4- 
ftrologers do uſe to ſet for the goundwork of their buſineſs, is Conjuration, and illegal, 
nay Diabolical; when at the worſt it is but thus, The form and ſhape of the Heavens, 
or rather the pitture thereof, by which the Aſtrologer is made acquainted with the poſitions 
and ſeveral ſituations of the Piaxets and Stars inevery fign inthe Heavens, as we ſee in 
a Map the ſeveral ſituations of Countreys,Provinces and Cities: and if it be illegal, dia- 
bolical and a Magical trick to ſet or make ſuch a figure of the. Heavens in a piece of Pa- 

r, 1 know not what is lawfull ; but this may ſuffice forthe ſilencing of ſuch ſimplerons; 
for jet them be demanded what a figure isthey thus condemn, and you ſhall ſoon finde 
they have not a word to anſwer, nor cannot tell how to give any definition thereof, which 
is ſufficient then to ſatisfie any rational man of their ſtupidity, who thus raſhly and igno- 
"That there is rantly go about to condemn that as illegal and Diabolical, which they are ignorant of,and 
no harmin jc no more hurt, then to draw a mans figure or piQture ; for knew they whart it were, they 
un 564 > he - would never thus falſely conclude, having no ground for their words but ridiculous tradi- 
SD onifes tion: forindeed, it was a moſt rare and fine invention, and of preat uſe ; for I can 

ſhew any man thereby, the whole uſe of the Globe, and the riſing, ſetting and culmina- 
ing of every Star and Planet in the whole Heavens. So then you clearly ſee the harm- 
leſneſs of fetting a Figure of Heaven, and theenvy of the Antagoniſts; as alſo their ex- 
tream ignorance, thus to traduce ſo noble, ſo wortlfy, ſo excellent, fo delectable, ſo ſa- 
tisfying , ſo lawfull, ſo true, ſo tranſcendent, and ſo incomparable and innocent 
an Arr. 

T, but ſay they again (or others) though the Artin it ſelf be lawfull, being a contem- 
plation only and ſtudy oft Nature and its cauſes ; and though the ſetting of a Figure of 
Heaven be ſo far fromany illegal or diabolical praRtiſe, as that nothing can be more in- 
Objeft. nocent, yet is the ftudy unlawtull, by reaſon the Devil oft times brings things to paſs in 
a ſecret way, according to the prognoſtications of the 4ftrologer, on purpoſe to cauſe 
the heart to be aſſured of the inevitable truth thereof ; and ſo bringeth, by degrees, the 
Student into the labyrinth of bekeving a fatality, and ſo conſequently, to deny or di- 
ſtruſt the Providence of God. | | 
Anſwey In part, But as touching this confidence, there is none that knoweth that Goats the firſt cauſe 
Ie is confefled of ajl cauſes, (to whom all other muft, and do give obedience, and arp ſubordinate) but ' 
br _ ,q knoweth there is no fatality on any inevitable decree in the Heavens; but that He the 
the firſt ww God of all the whole Univerſe that created them all, can, and may according to his good 
chief cauſe of pleaſure alter their ſeveral decrees ; rhis there is no Chriſtian, or any who is not in- 
all cauſes can deed anabſolute Arheiſt,but will acknowledge : bur this is ſufficiently cleared by what 

aker and fru* þ th been already, and what isanonto be ſaid. 
power of the Now fay fore again, If it be fo, there is no verity or validity in Aftrologie, worthy any 


ſtars, mans 


What a figure 
of heaven is, 


. . , - p vo 

Lib. . A Vindecation of Aſtrology. - 
mans truft or belief; and therefore not fitting for any man to ſpend his pretious time on O%jef. 
ſuch trifles, [which when they are attained, are bur a bundle of uncertainties. 

To anſwer this vain Objection, I fhall not need tong to infiſt in this place, ſince all ra <£/ W. 
tional men know, that though God the omniporent Creator of thoſe glorious Creatures * hov2h God 
rbe ſtars, can at his good pleafure alcer, divert , prevent and annihitate whatſoever is 7 + 1. _ 
effe&ed by them : yer hereupon it followeth not that he doth fo; for Ged worketh or- c#.85 of the 
dinately, and not prepoſteroutly ; for as he hath made the Heavens for the ordinary ad- £ars,ic follow- 
miniftration of Nature, fo he can whenfoever it is his good pleaſure, as in the days of ©Þ ner that he 
Zoſhuah, Hextekiah, and at the death of our Saviour Fe/#s Chrsſt, alter their courſe ; but _ — dwg 
ſince thefe were miracles, and thus to do were miraculous, and that we read bur of theſe a.. hn. 
three times he thus did work fince the Creation; it is not therefore to be ordinarily or fre- tain. 
quently ſeen, neither ought ic then to be objected, ſince as long as God doth continue the 
order of Nature, it muſt needs follow that the effeRs of the Stars, by which nature is up- 
held, have very much of certainty and truth, and ſo conſequently the ſtudy thereof, and 
that more then any other ftudy whatfoever,and that for the moſt part they never fail;but if 
at any time the Arrtiſts fail, it is their ignorance ; and likewiſe theirs rhat conclude there- 
upon that the Art is faulty. 

Thus far then to clear the latter part of this grand ObjeRtion, and the dangers ſuppo- 4,4. to the 
ſed to be brought or cauſed thereby ; but as touching the ObjeRian it ſelf, viz. Thar the tull 
Devil bringeth the predittions of Aſtrologersto paſs, &c. Now itisevident that the Devil Ihe vanity of 
knoweth not things to come, and therefore is not able to bring theſe things about accord- *i -bjeAion. 
ing to his pleaſure, ergo ; to be confeſſed he cannot thus delude the A/trologer, and cauſe 
his heart ſoto erre,as to run himſelf over head and ears into the belief of a fatality, and 
fo conſequently, not cauſed thereby to deny he' providence of God, which is the main thing 
theſe punie Adverfaries drive at in this their cavil. 

For if the Devil knew things to come, he had never tempted and egged on the Jews . 
to crucifie our Saviour, when his death was the utter confuſion of his Diabolical King- ou - Devil 
dom and Government ; neither had he attempted to tempt our Saviour in the wildernels, (1 Pt 0s » 
had he known he ſhould have had ſuch a repulſe : or would he be fo butie about the elect clear. : 
im their temptations, did he aſſuredly know that they would not be ſubordinate to his will. 

Wherefore then ſince this Devil, they talk of, is ſucha ſimple fool, who indeed for know- T he Devil a 
tedge of future events they may well ſhake hands with, it isevident their cavill is alike f2® gar wo. 162 
weak, if not moſt ridiculous. For if we will admit that the Devil do know affuredly {9 3." 
things to come, what difference is there between the —_ that are not fallen and them ? make him. 

| belidesthere is no man will be ſo vain as to imagine the Devil knows any mans thoughts or 

heart, and therefore cannot tell whether his bringing a purpoſe to paſs will a whit advan- 

tage his deſire, by making the Aſtrologer believe a fatality. But this is ſo clear,that I will 

not dwell longer hereon, but now proceed, &c. 

Again, others have this fling at this moſt heavenly fliudy of the ary, and the Students - 9 bie. 
thereof ; that the Art is illegal, and the practice thereof altogether to be ſhunned , be- 
cauſe e4/trologers therein do buſie theraſelves,and pry into the ſecrets of God, &c. | 

To which there needs no more anfiver then this, that they are moſt falfly aud ſcanda- yp. 
louſly abuſed, I mean «4fro/ogers, when thus impeached, ,fince the very word of God 
doth teſtifie, that the ſecrets of the Almighty are paſt finding out : thus much for the clear- 
ing of the Students thereof, whoſe praQtſe and ſtudy is altogether legal, being only na- 
tural : for how is it poſiible chat that ſtudy ſhould be ſo illegal and diabolical (as they call 
it) that extends it ſelf tonature only,and the cauſes thereof? 

And as touching the Art it ſelf, you have it defined here beneath, whither at this Thar the Rudy 
time I ſhall refer thee ; for the ſtudy thereof is meerly natural; and if ro know that, beto of the fars or 
fearch into Gods hidden ſecrets, let the weakeſt capacity judge ; when that is only to be "+ gry d: 
accounted a ſecret, which immediatly dependeth on the ſecret will of the Almighty ; the ſ6c:ere of 
wherefore what is manifeſt and clear to us in nature then, muſt conſequently be no ſuch G4, 
thing ; for there is none, I am confident, that hath any reafon or arklerftzrding , and is 
compor mentss, that will ſay it isa diving and ſearching into the ſecrets of God, and ſo con- 
ſequemtly illegal, to foretell any mutation of the ayr , or other accident by the cauſes 
thereof, which is manifeſt by the #ars to our ſenſe ; when the word of God telleth us, 
that our Saviexr himſelf confeſſeth, the Phariſees were able to diſcern the weather by 

the 


The influences . 
of the bravens 
t:ke notaway 
Gods govern. 


mentr, 


Obje@. 
eAnſw, 


How far the 


Author hold- 


eth of caſual 


events. 


Lib.r. 


@A Vindication of Aſtrology. 
the face of the Skie : and pee you have already heard that the: Heavens are the ſecon- 


dary cauſes of all generation and corruption, and cauſe of all mutations on and in Ele- 
mentarie bodies, cauſing health, ficknels, plenty, my wars, peace, &c. If any A- 


. ftrelogical Philoſopher (which of all Philoſophers is the chiefett) do foretell any or all 


of theſe a thouſand years'to come, as plain as if they were to. happen to morrow , or 
were preſent, which they may do, if God ſo long continue the ordinary courſe of Na- 
-ture, ſhall any one render himſelf ſo ridiculous, as to imagine this man to pry and dive 
into the ſecrets of Ged, when he ſeeth plainly the events by the cauſes ? truly if there be 
any ſuch, they ſhould be by my conſent begged for— 
So that then hereby thou doſt clearly ſee that the influences of the fars do not accord- 
ins to the vain opinions of ſome mealtligda take away Gods Government, for if we 
will believe that God worketh daily new things according as we ſee them procreated, and 
brought forth by Nature, we ſhall run our ſelves into a groſs errour ; when we are tzught 
that he finiſhed his work in ſix days, Ger.1. Exod 20.11. Ergo, he worketh now no more, 
but (according to his inevitable decree by his Providence) upholdeth all things by the 
ſame power of his word by which they were firſt made, and leaveth the effecting of all 
things to the influence of the Heavens and Srars, which you have already heard, by the 
_—_ of Ged hath been proved to be next under him the ſole cauſe of all mutations and 
bleſlings here on earth, and in elementary bodies. 

W hat ſhall I ſay then, for the farther clearing of this point ? I ſhall not ſay much 
more, ſince who ſo deſires to be further ſatisfied how far caſual events may be referred 
to the influences of the ſtars , and yet the government of God and Angels no wiſe dimi- 
niſhed or denyed, let him peruſe Lucizs Befatins his anſwer to Picus Mirandula, lib.4. 
cap.2.& 3. Yet onething as touching Nativities I muſt here needs clear , which often- 
rimes the Artiſt may be deceived in, it he have not ſpecial reſpe& to the general fate of 
the place, occaſioned by the general influence of Eclipſes, Comets, Blazing-ſtars, great 
Conjunctions, and Revolutions of the Wot1d, &c. For ofttimes though the Nativity of 
any man promiſe health or long life, yet by reaſon of the affinity he hath with the place 
of his birth his health may be much impaired, and life -annaner by wars, general dif- 
caſes and the like ; but more eſpecially if the Topical ſtars of that place be in the Horo- 

ſcope or medium Cel, viz. the aſcendant or firſt La or tenth or mizd-heaven in the 
Nativity; and if ſo,this doth rather give hima fate ſtill ſubject ro general accidents.There 
are many other ways which may alter the Nativity of any perſon, but.they would be here 


roo tedious to relate, ſince I have an earneſt deſire to þe-no tediouſer then I needs muſt, 


and for that I fear before I have delivered what I am yet to ſay, 1 ſhall far exceed my 
bounds ; yet are not theſe ſo intricate, but by a skilfull and ingenious Artiſt they may be 
found out &c. 

But here,it may be, ſome will ſay, that I do attribuge too much to the influence of the 
ſtars and Celeſtial bodies ; eetooe I think good for the clearing of all what hath been 
already faid (leaſt ſome may be ftumbled thereat) to deliver my minde as touching their 
influence thus. - - 

That who ſo thinks by what in any point-or part of what hath"been already ſaid 
or to be ſaid, I do detract from the Government of God or Angels, in my tenets and 
ſcope, is altogether miſtaken ; for I do not ſo attribute all the actions of men to the 
Heavens as they conſiſt of Bodies elementary, and ſo ſubje&t them to the heavenly in- 
fluences ; but 1 acknowledge them alſo ſubject to Angels rule and government, as being 
indued with do ftanding ; and tothe Government of God, as uſing will ; eAftra sgitar 
niſi agunt, the Heavens bur incline ; and we (being induced by paſſion) incline either to 
anger, love, pleaſure or the like : but in theſe the Angels may ſo illuminate the under- 
ſtandings of our minds, that by ſome intelligible conſideration we are therefrom deliver- 
ed; and God directs the will far beyond that wherewith we are inclined to by the Heavens 
or diſpoſed to by the Angels; for by how much God and Angels exceed the Heavens, being 
of a Corporal eſſence, and they of a Spiritual, by ſo much the more doth'that where- 
unto we are carried by the illumination of Angels, and the direction of God, exceed thoſe 
inclinations,to which we are by the influence vf the Heaven: and Stars diſpoſed. Let men 
therefore apply their ſtudy to the knowledge of the chief part of the Art ; viz. thar 


which teacheth general accidents ; for all this being conſidered, the judging of the fate of 
| any 


Ss Au. A aA An «<-> 


Lib.1. » A Vindication of Aſtrology. 22 < 
any man by the time of his birth mult needs be uncertain,and therefore not maintain- | 
ed by me, being not of very much moment. | | 

Wherefore then, let not ignorance and ſtupidity carry thee beyond the bounds of rea- 
ſon and diſcretion, to condemt1 or cenſure what thou underſtandeſt not ; for it is naught Ignorance the 
but ignorance which is the cauſe of all thoſe open mouths which have of late ſo furiouſly 9nly cauſe of 
barked at this moſt heavenly, dileRable, and moſt lawfull ftudy ; for did they underſtand —_— 
it, they would be more hot againſt the gainſayers thereof, then eAſtrologers are with mot lawtul & 
them, or they with the 42; for =_ ſhall finde their diſcourſes fraught with naught keavenly Acc, 
but ignorant miſtakes, asto think the Art Witchcraft, Diabolical, Tllegal, and the like, 
barely becauſe thereby we declare things to cotne , not conſidering that we do it by no 
other means then the influence of the Heavens, which is altogether natural : when th 
might even as well fay, itis Witchcraft for any man to ſay or affirm, that ſuchan herb, A#rologyaslaw- 
drug, or compoſition is good and available to the expelling of ſuch or ſuch an infirmity, full, as the uſe 
before he applyeth the medicine, when all knowing men know ſuch imaginers to be moſt 0g any 
ridiculous, {1nce they are infallibly known to be of ſuch and ſuch a nature and temper,and & 
ſo conſequently available for ſuch and ſuch infirmities or diſeaſes; for no more then this, y,,..., be 4. 
is Aſtrelcgie unlawfull ; nay, it is more then thisto be eſteemed, and to be allowed of and fred by 1hyg. 
deſired, ſince without it, the other is of” no uſe or certainty ; for Hippocrates, Galen, A- tians then any 
vicen and Paracelſus, the main pillars on which the fabrick of Phyſick Medicinal is built, #Þr Rudy. 
found out the uſes of herbs, drugs, minerals, ſtones, and other medicines, by the influ- 
ences of the Heavens, as they were known and found by them to be under ſuch and ſuch 
a conſtellation, and ſo concluded by them to be of ſuch and ſuch a nature, and then con- 
ſequently a remedy for ſuch and ſuch a diſeaſe. Hence it was that Hippocrates ſaid, that 
that Phyſitian which is ignorant in Aſtrology, cannot perfectly be —_ his Art, be- 
ing never able without Aſtro/ogie to give Phylick ſafely, viz.when to purge by evacuation, 
vr vomit, or phlebotomue, or for what humours, or in what quantity,neither can he know Look my 14x 
or come to the true underſtanding of the chief pillar of his Art, viz. the trne cauſe of 4 "a, 1, 
the mal.idy, without it ; neither with it (if well learned therein) can he erre. And Galen OP 30 
accounteth that man rather a foo! then a Phyſitian, that is not an Aſtrologer ; and he 
farther ſaich, that Phyſick given at vnſeaſonable times, doth not only little avail or help, . 
but oftentimes prove very hurtfull , even to the indangering of the life of the Patient; 
and that theſe times are only to be known and judged by the ftars. 


CH aÞP.: Mk 


(ontaining an Introdufion to the Vindication of my Lux Veritatis, from 
the aſperſions of Doftor Homes and his ſecond , with the firſt 
Reaſon why I account neither of them worthy of my notice. 


Ven amongſt us, notwithſtanding all this, there are ſome that labour 

all they can to eclipſe the radiant ſplendor of this moſt heavenly Sct- 

ence, being blinded with ignorance and malice,as hath been ſaid ; for Ars nos 

habet inimicum preter ignoranters, Art hath no enemy but an ignorant man - 
Ignorance converteth all the defires and inclinations of a man to wretched- 7, ,,...y., 

nels, and taketh away the ſight of the minde and intelleR, that he is herein as blinde as eſtate of an igs 

A man is externally that hath loſt his eyes, of which the former is a great deal the greater norant man. 

curſe : for knowledge doth diftinguiſh us from bruit beaſts ; and by how much we ex- 

cef{ in knowledge and underſtanding, by ſo much we tranſcend the inferiour Creatures ; — 0% mh 

forit is (in my opinion)- better not to live, then to live in ignorance ; for an igno- Zo. 


rant man is not indeed worthy to live, or the earth to bear him ; the con- beags. 
| | | lideration 


24. eA Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 
* ForI am in, {ideration of which, cauſed the Antients to ſay , That every ignorant man was evil, &c. 
formed he isan Wherefore then ſince itis ſo, of neceſlity there muſt much inconveniency and miſ- 
Hay-maker, chief come thereby , both to the ignorant themſelves and others; 1 forbear here (for 
_—_ _—_— brevitie ſake) to ſhew you the prodigious and wofull .effe&ts of ignorance in ſome of 
Quack fatver, former ages as well as inthis wherein we live ; this is already clear to all judicious and in- 
and Tvb Prea, genious fouls : wherefore to our purpoſe, 1 ſay there are in this perverſe-age, niany 
cher, or at ſticklers (or ſoin pretence) againſt this Liberal and moſt divine Science, one whereof 
”_ 299 _ (for the undeceiving of my Reader, having publiſhed a pretended Reply to my Anſwer 
wn eo ke 2yms 70 DoRor Homes) I ſhall (craving pardon for my tediouſneſs) here take notice of, al- 
ar the Preaching though be be not worthy of che ſame, as you your ſelf ſhall judge , when you have per- 
of the Goſpel ; uſed what follows ; for, both his quality, and * variety of profeſlions, as alſo rural beha- 
oe drag viour and diſpoſition, in whoſe name it 1s publiſhed, ſpeaketh him not worthy the naming 
: GC 304 2a or anſwering, as I would have done had it been otherwiſe and better fathered , that the 
erue rongue in ErrOurs an abſurdities of that railing Pamphlet might have been divulged to the 
in his head. world. This may be the firſt reaſon why the Author holdsnot the pretended Reply to 


his defence of Aſtrology worthy the anſwering. 


— —_— — ————  — CLAS nn 2 > IEEE IS = Wo M—_——_ 5 you 
— — ———— — 


Cnarye. XtIl. 


Comprehending three Reaſons more why that Rabble of theirs was not wor- 
thy the anſwermg. 


more for my further inducement thereunto; firſt for that there is nothing in it bur 
what hath been long ſince anſwered by Be{axtixs, Goclenius, Maraſealertes, Piro- 
wanus, and Sir (briftopher Heyden, though in the Title page there be ſophiſtically promiſed 
an anſwer thereunto ; which the penner thereof is as muchable todo, as to remove 
St. Pauls Church. | 
Secondly, for that by the Author himſelf it was not thought worthy of his name in the 
I7 ſecond Frontiſpiece thereof, or elſe his name was not worth the inſerting, 
- mg wird rex. Thirdly, for that it was not worthy of the Authors owning, or elſe he was aſhamed of 
- it, or he had never ſent it abroad in another mans name ; for let whoſe name will be at 
the end of the Epiltle to the Reader, it is well known by Mr Darie/ the Printer in Pater- 
xofter-row, and the then Compoſers and Preſſe-men, that Door Homes was the Author 
of it, and not wa" payed for the printing, bur alſo Corrected every day at the Preſs ; 
and let him deny if he can his peeviſhneſs with the Preſſe-men , when they were angry 
he came notto Correc, and made them all that afternoon ſtand mille. For it is not like- 
ly that a Hay-maker (asitis very well known the owner thereof, or he under whoſe 
name it was publiſhed, was but two or three yeers ſince) ſhould be able to hold an 
Argument againſt one of the Liberal Sciences , although his ignorance might con- 
demn it, 
Bur truly I cannot but commend the policy of the Doctor herein, who knowing the 
\ inſufficiency of his brat to retel| the Arguments in my Anſwer to his firſt diſcourſe, be- 
ingloth to be ſeen bafled the ſecond time in Print, fora piece of mony knew how to 
make another father it ; and truly therein he alſo did a very charitable deed ; for of all 
ſneaks that ever I ſaw inmy life (that pretended to any thing) was this poor fellow he 
Sot to be the father of this Rable; for hearing he lay at the Bell in Carrerdane , I went 
purpoſely to confer with him touching ſome paſſages of that book which went under his 
name, but could not meet with him, whereupon] left a note , deſiring him to do me the 
favour if it were he that owned ſuch a book (for I was unacquainted with him) to let 
me know, (or whether it might be ſome other of his name) and he ſhould oblige me 
therein,and for an anſwer thereumto,I would be there again the next day at eleven of the 


clock, &c. | - 
O 


i þ Hus have you one reaſon whereby I am induced to flight ir, yet have I theſe five 


Lib.t. A Vindication of Aſtrology. 

To this purpoſe (1 fay) I writ a note and left it with the Chamberſainof the aforeſaid 
Inn, and deſired that he would inportune him for an anſwer ; he promiſed me he would, 
and ſo for that time T departed, camethe next day according to promiſe , inquired ſor 
the Chamberlain, detranded art arifwrer, who had no more for me then this , that he had 
defivered my note, and importuried an anfwer, but could recerve none ; then k acquaint- 
ed the Chamberlain with the buffittefs , ehat there was a Book publiſhed in the name of 
ſuch a one, and being informed it was him that ſay there , thar owned it, and therefore I 
deſired him in my note to tie receive that favour from him'to know whether he was 
the man, or ſome other of his name, and ſowifhed him to acquaint him agam with my 
being there at the rime appointed , ard wondred he would refuſe ro do ſo ſmall a 
favour as to refolve mem ſuch 4 queftion, I or no; which he again promiſed me he 
would. 

Bnt what coutteſſe conld I expet from fo mean a fpirit , which was never either ac- 
quainted with courterfie, civility, or manners, who would refufe to anſwer me,who wrote 
unto him in fo indifferent a mar? for had I known it had been him,which ar laſt I found 
it was, I ſhould have faved tharPams F put my felf to, and had never expeRed other then 
I found at his hand. For What can &4:e have of 4 beg gar but a louſe * butthinkingit might 
be ſome other of his name , was the cauſe of this my overſight ; bur to :eturn again to 
our buſineſs , k toſ& the Chamberſam (after he had promiſed me (1 fay) to acquaint 
him with my further deſire) I would call again the next day at two of the clock m the 
afternoon, and if he were the man, I ſhould be very glad to converſe with him, if his oc- 
caſions could permit ; but whenI came at the atoreſaid hour , his anſwer was, he ac- 
quainted him to the full with ajl my deſire, but could not perſwade him to (tay within to 
ſpeak with me, but bid him tel! me, he /corned to deny any thing he owned ; whereupon I 
anſwered , I did no wiſe queſtion that, if he were a man that had any ſpark of honour 
dwelling in his breſt, and this was all I could underſtand, 

The which rugged , prepoſterous and uncivil anſwer , cauſed me preſently to believe 
him to be whom I found him at the laſt; for I knew one of that name and no other , bur 
could never imagine it was he thar ſhould ſhew himſelf ro be Author of fuch a Diſcourſe, 
though for the ſimplicity thereof he might very fitly have ſerved : fo then I inquired of 
the Chamberlain what manner of a man he was, and upon his ill-favoured deſcription, 1 
immediately reſolved my ſelfe of my former an ; andthen[I was very urgent to 
know when I might meet with him; he told me about noon any day , bur he knew he was 
reſolved not to ſpeak with me, and ſo indeed I perceived by a triend of mine, as ſoon as I 
was parted from thence, whom I met, and in ſome diſcourſe, 1 acquainting him with what 
I had been about, he told me that the other day he was chid by rhisgpral Refus Roluandus, 
or Orlando Farioſo; Perſwading him that he and none other had acquainted me with 
his lodging ; and then alſo I was aſſured and confirmed , that it was him of that name 
which I knew, that was the Author (or at leaſt ſo in pretence) of that Pamphlec. 

Afeer this, being very deſirous to meet with him, that I might ſhew him ſome of his ab- 
ſurdities and abuſes towards me, whom for matter of acquaintance he was a ſtranger to, 
I went twice or thrice about noon, thinking I might meer with him , but could not ; till 
the 22 day of 7ar#4>y 1651. Iaccidentally rancountred him; it were here both ſuperflu- 
ous, and too tedious to relate what diſcourſe we had, he not being able to ſpeak one 
word without anper and choler , asif his heart were alſo on fire as well as his head , bur 
amongſt other paſTages, I fell into a very great laughter, the which he not ſeeming to take 
notice of,] 25ked him if he wondred not at this my ſuddain paſſion, who anſwered, yes; l 
told him then, 1 could not poſſibly forbear laughing to ſee ſo young a man as he was, pre- 
tend to be the Author of that Book wherein 1am termed buta boy, and he not above 
three or four yeers (at the moſt) older then my ſelf, and therefore | rold him I rather 
expeRed to ſee ſome grave fellow, whoſe Beard was at leaſt as long as his waſte, and not 
one whoſe Beard was hardly ſo long as his teeth. : 

But both he and the Antient DoRor his Maſter , and Author of that wiſe word 
(who confeſſed (to a friend of mine) nothing vexed him, but that be was an{wered by (0 
Joung aman) mult know that neither wiſdom, learning, knowledge, nor grace is to be 
meaſured by the Beard or age, and therefore but a moſt weak evalion in his Arguments, 
of the validity and verity of 4ftr:/rgy, neither is it any extraordinary witty quibble, 

fnce 


- 


25 


diabolically 


bis per, and ſo being now in his dotage, I will give hi 


 oA Findication of Aftrology. . Lib.r, 


ſince he cannot as yet confutE with all his manhood, what a bay hath affirmed ; and if he 
choughtTI would take acceptions at this , with the reſt of his ſilly jeers and affronts, rai- 
lings and abuſes , wherewith his Pamphlet is fraught, and therefore thought ir fit to 
make it proceed from one ſo neer my own age , he muſt needs think it worthy cf much 
more notice, to procure laughter onely, but no otherwiſe ; perhaps out of a tender re- 
ſpect to my health hedid ir, knowing me to bea melancholy man: for I know he is alſo 
a Doctor of Phyſick; zeſt Breditreet; nihil amplixe dico.; forthe which good receit, be- 
fore the cloſure of this Book, (1f 1 forget not)I ſhall requite him with a double Fee, for I 
abhor to be in his debt; but therein he did very ill to ſend me this medicine by ſo unworthy 
an Apothecaries boy, or man (I crave your pardon) if he intended I ſhould ever have 
taken notice of it; otherwiſe he had been repayed Jlongere now; I muſt confeſs 1 am 
not able to compare Beards with the Doctor ; for mine isnot by at leaſt two inches ſo 


| Jongasa Goats, yet it wasfull as long as his (though not ſo hoary) the Sunday after 


che Eclipſe of the Sz» in March laſt, when he beat down Aſtrology which Phreneticus 
aud ſuch like Phrenſies ; and therefore in this he ſhall the mncy for ſenex 
ve to reckon up as many Boys 
of 26 yeers of age as he pleaſes, and make himſelf more ridiculous then already if poſli- 
ble,it being no unuſual thing with him to ſpeak repugnancies to both Reaſon and Senſe, as 
wall my to any that ſhall peruſe his Book, and therefore I ſhall not need here further 
toinlarge. 


CHarP, XIII. 


Containing the fourth Reaſon, and a P indication from ſome of their a- 
buſes, and untruths. 


Aving thus entred, let us proceed to a fourth Reaſon. 

* Fourthly,for that it is a liſconrſe patcht up with nothing but evaſions, as 
not Wpuring ad idem,and ſcurrillous railing language and abuſes towards 
me; ngſt hundreds of which, I ſhall here-onely trouble thee with theſe 

three. 

Firſt, that a godly ſcholley reported unto him, I was aſſiſted in the penning of my defence 
of Aſtrology, Page 33 of his diſcourſe ; the which he heatheniſhly, ſimply, and ignorant- 
ly (1 will not ſay fooliſhly) termeth «nchriſtianlike; I would he had not been thus hypo- 
critical, but had named his godly ſcholars name (if any ſuch there were) and-not have 
left his Reader and indifferent men thus in doubt ; nor ſo diabolically wicked as thus to 
invent untruths, rather then he will not diſgrace and diſparage me , which | ſhall prove; 
and alſo that he is as] here term him,and ſo conſequently not worthy the taking notice of, 


crediting, and that firſt affirmatively and then negatively. 
That he is moſt 


Firſt affirmatively , that ſince it 1s granted that no godly man will lye , he could not 
by any one be informed of any ſuch thing, ſince I never 1n the leaſt was afliſted, or inlight- 


 Wicked,and i- ned jn any part of the Art, by any man or youu living or dead , much leſs in penning of 


venter of utt- 
truths. 


that Book, which none ever ſaw till it was finiſhed and brought to be Licenced; beſides, 1 


do here declare to all the world, I am not familiarly acquainted with any man {iving u 
on the face of theearth, that is a ſtudent in this moſt Noble Science, and therefore de 
that man whoſoever he be , that ſhall herein ſo groſly abuſe me, for I deſire any one 
(be it whom it will) that can herein diſprove me, to publiſh it to the world, and I ſhall be 
content to ſubſcribe my ſelfe no other(and then I am ſure I ſhall be bad enough) thea this 
moſt malicious and unworthy Orlando would perſwade the world of me, 


But 


Lib.1. eA Vindication of Aſtrology. 27 


But he had done well forthe prevention of this my Anſwer , to have acquainted his 
Reader (as I have ſaid) both with the name of his godly ſcholar, aiid the names of 
thoſe that i borrowed aid of; wherefore to any rational man, what hath been already 
ſaid , is ſufficient to conclude him not worthy my Anſwer to every particular of his 
Rabble, and that he is as I have affirmed him. And therefore I refer him to Kev. 21. 8. 
co receive his portion with ſuch'as are there expreſt. 

Secondly negatively, that he is neither Godly nor Religious; for ſince there is nothing Thar he is noe 
more certain, then that a godly man will not lye : ſo (by the rule of contraries) is there godly or celighs 
any thing more affirmative,chen that char man that doth lye,is nowiſe godly or religious; %: 

& that he erred in this parricular is cleer; Ergo,Not Religious nor godly himſelf, although A 
ſuch a pretender. 4»d for the aſſurance therof,/et hin but make it yet appear to the world that ; ul ou ws 
he was by any : (Whether godly or no) informed of any ſuch matter, and the names of thoſe Pg the Aus 

ſhould groe me any aſſtjtante, that there be any in the world that Will juſtfie it , and 1 do here thor promiſerh 
promiſe (though if 1 overcome, I ſhall gain thereby no credit) I will honour him ſo far , as to Sim that h-oor, 
let pofterityknoWhe was worthy of RAMESETS Anſwer. <q _— 
' And fach is hismalice, he cannot be content with this , bur upon myexpreſlion of the ,4..vick he 
Bleſſed fone of the Phicoſophers which was but'brought in by the way, he quibbles on it, holds him not 
(leaving the matter ſtill m queſtion, and his Reader unſatisfied) and that with invective, wo thy of- 
malicious, {landerous ſpeeches againſt my father , interring by his rabble in the 39 page 

thereof, that my father was not onely ruinedby his ftudy in that matter, bur alſo lay in pri- 

fon thereby, whick is moſt notorioully falſe, as all that are of his acquaintance can juttifie, 

for that he neither is in priſon or ever was upan any ſuch ſcore; thereis nothing more 

certain. It is true, much he hath expended in trying concluſions that way , bur I detie any 

man living to ſay he put him to a peny charges therein; bur ſo intolerable is his further 

abuſe herein, that ! cannot but deliver it to the world, both for the clearing of my father 

and manifeſting this Furioſo's maliciouſnels; in the ſame place he hath theſe words , per- 

itting thus in his wicked flanders ; and truly for this had he his due, his ears ſhould be 

cropt to teach him to keep his tongue within compals; after he had mentioned mo talfly 

and unworthily, he was in priſon thereby, he ſaith, chough the Later King bore with his de- 

feating him of hu expettations, and of ſcores of pounds, yet other men Will not , cannot bear 

ſuch wrongs; intimating as will ſoon appear to the judicious Reader , that he had mony 

from the King for his charges in thoſe works, but to his great dammage brought naught 

co pals, which of all miſchiefs and envies) is the greateſt ; for there is none who had any 
acquaintance with the King, but can acquaint the world, he was ever averſe to ſuch a be- 

lief, and had many times difſwaded him from ſuch expenſive courſes {this truly is a 

pretty world when ſuch fellows as he ſhall ſpeak of kings actions and expectations) and 

ſo farwas he from lending him mony, that he owed him:n arrear when he died, 5500.1. as 

is teſtified under the hands of. Sir Kobere Pye, Sir William YVnidale Sir David Cunningham, 

Cap. Falkonbridge, Auditor {oltins and others ; but certainly he that will preſume in 

print thus to affirm untruths, and thoſe ſo ſcandalous , will not ſtickro ſay any thing, 

right or wrong, ſo he may but advantage himſelf ſixpence. 

Wherefore what he ſaith in deriſion of that moſt ſublime Revelation and heavenly ſe« 
cret, which men vulgarly call he Philoſophers Stone, bur in effet the ſo»! of the world, 
and that whereby all things both Cceleſtial and Terreſtial that are creatures,ſfubſift , in- 
creaſe, and next under God himſelte , have their being ; I ſay whatever he or any ſuch 
Animal, to whom God hath not beſtowed ſo much mercy, as to believe ſuch a thing to 
be in rerum natwura, Or in poſſe, ſaith againſt it, isnot much material; for my parr, if I 
ſhould ſee ſuch kind of creatures believe and diſcourſe thereon,I ſhould (had I never be- * A good jeſt, 
fore heard thereof) have concluded it to be meer foolery, and madnefs,as theſe mad kind M7 © not 0 
of people do; * but if I ſhould ask him what he thinks of Coining , I believe he would |,... þ 
conclude that a great deal the better Trade ; but | ſhall paſs by that, for he knows well c- 
rough What 1 meay, Ile warrant you, he thinks his a more 6/efſed thing a great deal. 

Again ſecondly, in his 43 page he faith , / Was ſet on by my Brethren the eAſtralogers 3 
(being one of the ſilly weak, ones) to confute Door Howes ; and in divers places hein- 
forms and aſſures his Reader, 1 tudy and praftice the Art in a mercenary way ,and gain mony 
by reſolving queſt ions,whereby you may plainly ſee how his envy runs him into an abſurdi- 
ty,and inſtead of ſpeaking ſenſe he committeth nonſenſe, and rendreth himſelf ridiculous 

EF. 2 by - 


- lIyregenerate "©p,,,;Jexce of God: and again, in the 97. page of the Book (being the firſt SeR. o 


A Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 
by this his BY, that I being one of the fillieſt & weakeſt Students in Aſrologie was choſen 
out of all the other to contute the Dottor and vindicate the Art; Ha, ha, he ! by this, 
the DoRor and he are both very much credited that their ſtrong Arguments ſhould be 
refelled by the weakeſt Aftrologer, and that all that they can do cannot ſilence him, 
nor vindicate themſelves in the leaſt point, ſave with railing, quibling, and evading with 

uillets nothing appertaining to the buſineſs in hand ; for it high words and abuſes are of 
ſiffcient force to maintain an Argument, I will get an Oyſter-Belins-gate-wench ſhall 
 confute them both in any Argument they dare mention ; and as touching my praQiſing 
Aftrologie in a mercenary way,l ſhall appeal to all my acquaintance ; for I praRiiſe no 
fuch thing ; my practiſe publikely is Phytick, and with ir 1 privately conſult with 4ftrc- 
logie, and all ſuch Sciences as conduce to the knowledge of Nature, of which I prefer 
Aſtrology ; for without it (as you have ſufficiently heard before) there is no Phyſitian 
able to be perfe& in this Art, let them ſay what they will , and colour their ignorance 
over as they pleaſe ; I have both Hippocrates, Galen, Avicen and Paracelſus for it, which 

I am ſure were better and more expertPhyſitians then any now adays which are againſt it: 

Thirdly, whereas he faith, and that moſt impioufly and falſly, that I hold and maintain 

a neceflity and fatality in the ſtars, both that very L»x Yeritatis , which theſe ma- 
licious wretches ſo indeavor to rail down, and my Vox ſtellarnm will witneſs for me ; and 
as for my Vox ſtearum, there is hardly three leaves can be read together,wherein a clear 
manifeſtation of my denying fatality may not be had; therefore 1 ſhall not need to par- 
ticularize any part thereof, only refer thee to the peruſal at thy beft leiſure ; but as con- 
cerning my Lax Veritars, which they fo pleno ore endeavour to cry down, it betng thus 

* The Religi. Under the cenſure , I ſhall here give you its language. 

ous, and ſuch Firſt, Inthe Epiſtle to the Reader it hath theſe words, Aſtrologie, or the influence of the 

as are through- ſtars hath no fatality, except ſome contingency be mixt therewith ; for thu Were to - _ 

. rac 

"png +0" 4. chap. ) it fairhthus (and fo forward) Sapiers dominabitur aſtris, a Wiſe man may rule 

fire z. on ſuch 1 the ffars (but thisis * Selomons wile manthat is here underſtood) and e4ftra regwne be- 

muſt confels, mines, ſed regit aſtra Dems, the ſtars rule men, but God rules the ſtars ; nat meaning when 
none but the ye ſay, Afitra regunt homines, any fatal neceſſity to be attributed to rhe influence of thoſe 

-_y heavenly bedies , nor to have power over men farther then ſuch men are guided only by ſenſe 

the lefler ftars 45 brnit beaſt, and not by reaſon , and farther that they eAgwnr,non cogunt, they all or n- 

of his graces cline, bnt no wiſe compel ; but where grace or reaſon ſupports a man, there, or on ſuch a man 

and bleſſings the ftars have no power: Andin the 52. page thereof, thus, The ſtars of their own wills 

_ ——_— {x if they were living fouls) decree mor furure events , nor neceſſarily uſurp power over 

lo ode :s they 0777 minds, but only to ſignifie the inclinations of the elements, and of all things compouna- 

continue to be ea of them. 

| born only ac- All this thou mayeſt clearly fee in my Zux Veritats ; and but for tediouſneſs, I might 
cording tothe rehearſe yet ſome other rar Luo in Page 6s. line 15.pag 70.1.17.p.75-1.11. p.85.L.17. 

fl:th, and the þ | 

natural courſe Þ-97+1-28. P.94- p. 961.29. &c. But by what hathi been already ſaid, thou mayſt ſee their 
and order of palpable malice and envy, as alſo their intolerable abuſes and untruths ; for you ſee they 
the warld, A- care not what they ſay or affirm, ſo it may be but to their advantage, or what they rail 

{ia regunt 9 gut fo to the diſparagement of thoſe that pleaſe them nor. - 


mincs, 8, = Wherefore now Reader do thou judge, and tell me (all this being conſidered) whes+ 


> 


* 8 the Dr. ther by their own words (Jt « to prudent men the ſign of a bad cauſe, that needs to be de- 


| d his man 


by chelr own ferded by bad words )their cauſe be to be judged or accounted good , who have fo often 
words convin. been guilty thereof, and that moſt maliciouily, in both inventing and affirming detraQ- 
ced of the bad- inp and moſt abuſive ſpeeches and ſtories : and whether their cauſe then be not only bad, 
_ of —_ | but the baddeſt and worſt of cauſes, who in all that rabble of their pretended Reply 
Terefore other havebardly one page wherein there isnot ſome abuſe, foul language or an untruth. 
ecſtimoniesaxre Now as touching their evaſions, I ſhall briefly run over two or three of them that ſo _ 
needleſs,&c. they may be known for Sophiſters, and then proceed ; for it would be folly in me to take 
notice of more. In the firſt page of my diſcourſe I ſhew the Reader, the DoRor in all 
his Book declaresnot what Aftrologie is he ſo ſtrives to beat down; and therefore. for 
their better underſtanding of what we ſo pro and cox maintain, I there delivered a defini- 
tion thereof,whichT gathered from the 1. chap. and 1. book of Prolomies Zuadripartite, 


the which, fay they, tsnot in that place,nor any other ſer down by him, after they had as 


you 


Lib.1. eA Vindication of Aſtrology. 

ou have heard, gone on intheir inveRive railings and abuſesto-make me odious,and then 
by this their weak evaſion they indeavour to give an inlet to all their abſurdities, which in- 
deed muſt nceds conſequently follow, if this be admitted. 

But admit that definition was never recorded by him or any other eAſrotoger, yet are 
they never the neererto their purpoſe ; for, if I may (that am to vindicate the Art) have 
liberty to tell.chem whart it is that I ſtand for and maintain, ſince they have not, nor can- 
not ſhew what it is they condemn ; why then, I ſay, I define Aftrologie to be that Art, 


which by the conſtant motions, configurations, and Influences of the Stars and Planets, teach- The definition 
eth how to judge of the Natural effetts and mutations to come in elements, and in and on ele- 9 Aſtrologie. 


mentary bodies ; the which I = again, — not 5» «ph ſſimy verbs, is to be found in 
the aforeſaid place ; yet would rational men have found the ſame is effe?, which might 
and doth very well ſerveturn, which they know well enough, though they endeavour by 
chis their weak aſſertion to evade, giving any anſwer thereunto, which indeed they are 
not able to do otherwiſe ; wherefore what in all this their Galimaufry they condemn and 
argue againſt, deviating from this my definition, they neither ſpeak nor argue to what I 
have faid ; Ergo, againſt what they know not,nor are capable, in ſaying they write againſt 
Aftrology z for what is more then I have hereexpreſſed, I deny to be Aſtrology in its pu- 
rity ; but if they will not admit me to tell them what it is I hold to be lawfull or maintain, 
I muſt confeſs they may eaſily convince me ; but to this definition I and, upon which as 
T in the 100. page of that Book in anſwer to the Doctor ſay, ſo here again I dare under- 
rake the vindication of the validity and legality of thewart, againft not only what he hath 
faid, but all the Divines and men in the World put og: in one can or will ſay againſt 
it : for TI am certain he that can finde fault herewith,jg'not {ompos ments; ; and therefore 
I ſhall appeal to the learned and indifterent Judges that are judicious, whether my Argu- 
ments, that are grounded hereon, are not in tull force, and remain as yet by them ms 
ken, notwithſtanding all their ſimple querks, whimſical tricks and quillets, and ridicu- 
lous quibles like themſelves, which ſoon vaniſh, not being worthy of any wiſe mans no- 
tice, they no wiſe diſputing ad idems. 

But this is not all; Who ſo ſhall but take the pains to compare my diſcourſe with their 
pretended Reply (although they pretend to the Reader they fet down my chapters and 
ſeRions verbatim) will ſoon finde their Sophiſtical juggles, and the Reader Cantead ; 
for they not only omit here and there ſomewhat, which maketh abſolutely again them, 
but alſo in moſt ſections and chapters there is ſome very conſiderable points eſcaped their 
notice, for that they had diſparaged themſelves to have expreſſed them , knowing they 
could not give any folid or ſober Reply thereunto , I ſhall here only mention one whole 
ſection they have omitted, referring the reit to your own ſearch at your leiſure; for it were 
an intricate and too tedious 2 thing in this Book to particularize every one, and the 
reaſons why they omitted them ; ſince, I ſay. they have been herein ſo generally guilty, 
and not only ſo, but alſo in many places of what chey have fer down thou wilt finde they 
have ckearly wreited the ſenſe and meaning of my words, and made them conformable to 
their own intentions, the better to have liberty for their bald jeers, abuſes and ſophiſti- 
cations: wherefore ſhould I take notice of ſuch ſhuMers ſo as to trouble my ſelf to re- 
turn them an anfwer, according to that of the wiſe man, Prov. 26.4. I ſhould render my 
ſelf more ridiculous (if poſtible) then they are already. 

But (asT ſaid) if you have regard tothe 104. page of their ridiculous pamphler,you 
will ſoon finde {nut knowing how to give any fatisfactory Reply ) they have omitted 
my whole 6. Section of my 3. Chapter, being an anſwer to the 2. of Das. the 1,2,3,4. 
and 5. verſes, alledged by Door Hewes to condemn eAſtrologie ; pretending to their 
Reader there is nothing therein contained, bur what was left 6 me by Sir Chriſtopher Hey- 
don, and therefore not worthy the ſetting down; and this the impudent Penner indea- 
vours to prove by theſe words, As 1 dare be judged by the learned in his oWn judgement; 
andif fo, I am ſure he will be condemned both for his falſe affertion and his impudence 
thus to appeal to the Learned, in my judgement, m fo untrue a thing, which his own con- 
ſcience accuſeth him of, and muſt needs flie in his face for this, as for many other his abu- 
ſes and ontruths; for Sir Chriſtopher in no partof his Diſcourſe ſo'much as mentionetfi 
that paſſage ; for indeed, it came notat all in his way, not being alledged by Mr. Chambers 
whom he wrote againſt ; and therefore, before a friend of the pretended Replyersin the 


aforeſaid 


29 


# 


29. eA Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 


aforeſaid Inn where he lodged,the 22.day of Zay.1651.1 offered him 10.1. to ſhew me any 
one paſſage inal! that Seton in Sir Chriſtopher Heydon, or ſo much as that paſlage of 
Scripture mentioned by Mr. (hambers : wherefore what reaſon the Reader hath to cre- 
dit him in his other aſſertions and allegations through out all that Book, that dare thus 
peremptorily ſay and affirm any thing, though never ſo falſe,let him judge ; but the truth 
is, he could not (though he ſtood upon Doctor Howes his ſhoulder, who had formerly 
wrelited that text, thinking no body underſtood the Scripture but himſelf, becauſe he isa 
time-ſerving Divine) anſwer, or give any ſufficient reply co my Argumentsin that fixth 
Setion, and therefore omits it,that his Reader might not know what was therein, and ſo 
comes ſneakingly off, with telling him it was not worth the ſetting down, being left to 
me from Sir Chriſ/opher Heydon ; the which if it had been true, being a paſſage of Scrip- 
ture, and brought by the DoRor to condemn Aftrologie, and again his affirmation re- 
felled, it had not only been worth the ſetting down, but alſo anſwering (if he had been 
able ) had he had any deſire to give his Reader any fatisfaftion in the thing in 
ueſtion. 

, But alas poor fellow, he never looks to that, knowing he cannot well loſe his credit 
more then he hath already; ſo he might have money for the fathering of it, what cared 
he what was in it, good or bad, ſenſe or nonſenſe, tis all alike to him. And thus much 
ſhall ſuffice for my fourth Reaſon , why I hold not that pretended Reply worthy 
my Anſwer. | 


Es ni 


CHravpP. XIV. 


Containing the Authors fourth Reaſon , and the Scripture proofs al- 
ledged for Aſtrologie in his Lux Veritatis, proved to remain 


unſhaken. 


N Eaſon 5. Fifthly,For that it is not an anſwer to my Diſcourſe,which 
». the learned and judicious will ſoon ftind;I mean the Penners there- 
of have no ways anſwered to thoſe paſſages of mine they have ex- 
< preſtand pretend to refell. I might here ſet down many paſſages 
- of that rabbling Diſcourſe forthe manifeſtation thereof ; but leaſt 
2 TI ſhould make this Book too large, and trouble thee with the re- 
> hearſal of ſuch unworthy ſtuff, I ſhall here only clear ſome places 
DASV S S of mine, wherein I ſhew Aſtrology not impugned by Scripture, 
but rather upheld thereby and allowed by that Nivine Writ, and that thereby alſo the 
Stars are proved both ſigns and cauſes, notwithſtanding what theſe Punies have or can 
ſay ognink it ; now theſe being the conſiderableſt points, and all others depending there- 
on, we ſhall in this place touch on no other : but for your farther ſatisfaction, refer you 

to the diſcourſe it ſelf | 
In my 2. Seton and 1. Chapter, being about to undeceive my Reader, that the Di- 
vine Writ allowed not of Aſtro/ogie, and that it was not everywhere therein condemned, 
as was wiſely affirmed by Door Homes , who when all came to all could produce but 
ſix places againſt it, and thoſe but imaginary neither, as may appear by the third chapter 
of my Lux Veritats ; I uſe theſe words, being penned by that glorious King Da- 
bo wer Rars id, who was a great Prophet, and had a large meaſure of the Spirit of God, being 4 
DR ont man after Gods oWn heart : The heavens declare the glory of God, Pial 19.1. The language 
by the Divine of the ſtars # heard over all the earth, or the uttermoſt parts thereof, Pal. 19.3. As if he 
| Scripture. had ſaid (ſay I there) there # no part free from the power of their influences ; for their 
power hath a general extent over all Nations, Kingdoms , Countries , Provinces and Lan- 


guages ; I pray who can reſtrain the ſweet Influences of the Pleiades ? Job 38.31. Anddid 
not 


Lib. r. eA Vindication of Aſtrology: F 


not the ſtars in thiir courſes fight againſt Siſera> Judg.5.20. One of theſe places had been 
exough to have convinced him of great Wickedneſs, in denying the Scripture doth anywhere 
allow of Aſtrologie, &C. | 

To all which they reply thus, To that of P/4/.19.1. they ſay thoſe words ſhew only 
that the Heavens were framed rd the Word and power of God the Creater, which if no 
other meaning were in theſe words to be underitood, the Prophet might as well have ſaid, 

a Nog, Cart, or any other Creature declares the wonderfull works and glory of the Al- 
mighty ; bur the meaning thereof is, that he effefteth thereby and worketh , and herein are 
his wonderfull works the more manifeſt, and to be admired. I thought the Door and 
the other now of late pretending to be a * Miniſter of the word, had been better verſed in **gut ſome of 
the ſenſe and meaning of that Scripture ; but this by the way. 3c: his other old 
And as touching P/al.19.3. in their 22. page, where they ſhould have proved it no Trades do bec- 
ways available to my Argument or purpoſe, diſputants like , -alas, they tell their Reader, ri 
my interpretation muſt give place tothe Apoſtles, Rom.10.18. viz, preaching of the Goſpel, jc; his bn. 
not of Aſtrologie ; and for the Pleiades in Job, ſay they, they are anſwered after ; and for the mour, nor na- 
fighting of the ſtars againſt Siſera , compare ?oſh.10.11. Exod 9.23. but name the words tural inclinati- 
of none of theſe places ; for that would diſcover their wickedneſs in wreſting the Scrip- 99 49 anywile 
ture by affirming what is not ; asalſo their ignorance and weakneſs in not knowing how _—_— 
otherwiſe to anſwer the buſineſs, but by quoting the like number of Texts, and pretend- 
ing to their Reader, therein he ſhall receive clear ſatisfaCtion , never regarding whether 
they were any thing or not to the purpoſe. 

But ſince ye are ſo cunning,I will be as cunning as you ; and ſince the point is fo con- 
ſiderable, as thar the legality of the Art, and the warrant thereof from Divine Scri- 
pture dependeth thereon, 1 ſhall ſhew you (becauſe you have thus played the Sophitters 
with your Reader in this as in all other) what thoſe paſſages you quote ſpeak, and then 
let any that hath but half an _ ro diſcern berween light and darkneſs, good and bad, 
truth and falſhood, judge of the buſineſs. 

Bur firſt, let me ſhew you what they have unawares confeſſed touching that of Judges, 
thinking it will confirm that ridiculous aſſertion of theirs, That the meaning of that 7 ext 
is, the ſtorms, Tempeſts, Winde and rain fought againſt Siſera : Ha, ha, he! { never knew 
in my life (nor (1 am confident) the antienteſt and wiſelt Philoſopher that ever was any 
{tar that had the name of ſtorm, tempeſt, wind, rain or hail; the Divine Writ expreſly 
tellech us, that the ſtars in their courſes fought, &c. and yet theſe ——, what ſhall 1 
call them, render it ſtorms, tempeſts, wind, 8&c. and therein themſelves both envious and 
ridiculous, having no better a come off; if all their learning cannot diltinguiſh betwixt 
ſtars and ſtorms , they are not fo fit to hold or maintain an Argument, asto go to ſchool 
to learn to ſpell better ; for although they are ſo antient, »»»quans /era eſt, &c. for (no 
diſparagement tothem) I have known wiſer, nay and far more ſolid and diſcreet at 18. 
yu_ of age ; but perhapsthis their errour proceeded not from any defe& of Judgement, 

ut of oldAge and wanting their ſpeftacles miſtook & read forms for ſtars, as their quon- 
dam brother read greex-bay-hor{c for bay.tree ; wherefore ſince they are in their dotage, 
or at leaſt ſince theſe and ſuch like miſtakes are uſual with them , I ſhall not farther take 
notice of ſuch animals; but return to ſhew you what a rod they have given me to whip 
themſelves, which they had very well deſerved,had they been thus tardy at School, 

In the ſame 22. page of their Pamphler, they confeſs (but certainly unawares, as T ſaid That the ftars 
before) that thoſe ſlorms, tempeſts, Winds, &c. were accounted by Junius to be cauſed by the have influence, 
Influence of the ſtars and heavenly bodies ; whereby you may clearly ſee how much they {5</car from 
know what they-write againſt, when the influence of the ftars is confeſſed by them to be «andy = 
the cauſe of thoſe ſtorms, tempeſts, &c. that diſcomfited Siſeras Army (this is as much Wks 
asI deſire)and yet in their very next words they deny that that paſſage of Scripture maketh 
an) thing for Aſtrologie ; wherefore ſince you have at large already heard, and now here 
again by their own Arguments and words I have fully proved and warranted that the 
ſtars have influence on elementary things, I need not here ſpend time to ſhew you far- 
ther what might be underſtood, and is indeed to be colleRed affirmatively out of that 
rext for this our _ ; but haſten toſhew that (notwithſtanding what they have ſaid) 
the ſtars are by the ſame teſtimony, viz. the word of God , proved to be both ſigns and 
caufes;yet firſt let me ſhew you their impudence,wreſting of Scriptures,and concealedneſs, 
rouching whom the wiſeſt of men, (Solomon) Prov.26 12, teſtifyeth, _ CHAP, 


poſe. 


Their reply ts 
P/al.19.3. pro. 
ved inſufficient 
and weak 

for their pur» 


o A Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 


CHar. XV. 


Shewing that the Text in Plal. 19.v.3. alledged by the Author to prove 
the ſtars harve influence #5 n0 wiſe refelled. 


S touching the firſt , viz. Rom. 10. 18. Which they ſay s rather tobe 
taken then my interpretation , mecrly hereby to deceive their Reader, 
not being. indeed able otherwiſe to give any ſolid anſwer thereunto (as 
hath been faid.) The words are (the Apoltle having before ſpoken of 
the difference of that righteouſneſs which cometh of the Law , and 
that of Faith in the foregoing verſe, Faith cometh by hearing, and 
hearing by the Wortl of God , and then he faith) bur bave they not heard ? 
(meaning the People or Nations) yes verily ; their ſouna Went into all the earth, and their 
Words wnto the end of the World ; being about to ſhew that both /ews and Gentiles ſhall 
hear the word preached unto them ; but hereby they prove not (to any rational man) 
that becauſe theſe Texts agree and come neer to one another in a berefore they are 
one and the fame in ſenſe; for that were to render themſelyes both void of ſenſe and 
reaſon ; for we ſee clearly the Apoſtle here gone in a Prophetick way the Univerſal 
preaching of the word, or at leaſt that it ſhould ſhine inthe dark corners of the Gen- 
tiles, who were then unbelievers; but not one word or mention either in this Text, or to 
be gathered out of all the Chapter, of the ſtars or their influence : bur in that 19. P/alns 
and the third verſe we ſee clearly, here #5 no ſpeech nor language, where their voice ts not 
heard ; meaning the voice of the ſtars, viz. their influence ; having (as you have heard) 
in the preceding words ſaid, The Heawvess declare the plory of God, and the firmament 
ſrevwvetrh hus handy work , and in the ſubſequent words, 4x. verſ. 4, 5, 6. their line 
54 gone out through all the earth, and their words to the end of the World : in them hath he 
ſet a T abernacle for the Sun, which as a Bridegroom cometh out of his chamber , and rejoy- 
ceth as a ſtrong man torunarace ; his going forth is from the end of the heaven, and his 
Circuit nuto the ends of it, and there u« nothing hid fromthe heat thereof, By which you may 
plainly ſee that Davia there ſpeaketh of all the Heavens in general ; the heavens declare, 
&c. and ſtars therein, when he mentions their voice, and particularly the Zodiack , which 
he calls a Tabernacle for the S#» ; moreover, you are quite put out of doubt, that he be- 
fore ſpake of all theſe, and the influence of the ſtars by his mentioning this more parti- 
culatly, the Sun, 21 eſt Rex aſtrornm, and his heat, and ſo 050-0 Aura all under 
him being the chief of them; intimating alſo that his influence is univerſal throughout 
the whole earth fromthe Eaſt unto the Weſt, the which courſe he rejoyceth to run as 4 
ſtrong man to run arace; ſothat from hence here can nothing in the leait be gathered for 
the uniting thoſe two T exts in ſenſe being as different as the North is from the South , or 
as Heaven 1s from Earth, and altogether as impoſſible to be united, as it is to joyn the 
Eaſt with the Weſt, or the Pole Artick with the Antartick 3 for it was meerly the margi- 
nal notes in ſome of our Bibles, which led theſe two learned Teachers of the Word of 
God out of the way, and into this weak buſineſs, ſerving no whit at all to their purpoſe ; 
which they knew well enough ; and therefore it was they delivered not the words of the 
Text they quoted wading themſelves that their telling the Readerit was St. Pawls in- 
rerpretation of the Pſalm agreeing ſomewhat in words, would be ſufficient ; and truly ſo 
it is for the making them ridiculous, but for nothing elſe ; for ſure I am St. Par, never 
made either an interpretation or expoſition of the Pſalms , or the marginal Notes 
in our Bibles ; but me thinks they ſhould have taken the 4,5,and 6. verſes betore mentio- 
ned with them, and have made all concur, they depending ſo unanimouſly one upon the 
other : butthis is clear, let us now to their anſwer tothat in 7ob by me alledged , and1o 


proceed. 
CHAP. 


ates] IOS ts” 


Lib.1. A Vindication of Aſtrol 


OgY: 


CHAP. AaV'% 


Proving their Reply to Job 38. 31. ſhewing the ſtars to hare in- 


fluence, to be frivolous and of no effett. 


Ark how as touching this point, they tell their Reader iz i auſWered after, but Their Reply 
to Job, 38.31. 


M they tell him not in what manner; for if they had, they had been unwiſe; for all 
the anſwer that I could find in all their Galimautry was only this, that whar [ 
{aid was falſr, —_— to the old ſaying, in a Word thos lyeſt ; a pure way to confute an 
Argument, and very eafle ! But whoſo ſhall peruſe St. «Auguſtine upon ob, which here 
would be too rediousto diſcuſs, and ina manner (being ſoclear, and that by the teſti- 
mony of ſo good an Author) ſuperfluous ; 1 ſay no more on this matter, only deſiring 
thee alſo to peruſe but the preceding and ſubſequent words of that paſſage of St. eAmu- 
guſtine which they bring, ſeeming to make for them, and thou ſhalt ftinde therein alſo 


their jugling tricks to deceive their Reader : juſt as they brought Prolomie to condemn | 
eAſtrologie, which I hinted at in the beginning of this Book ; tor it is very ſtrange that 


©Prolomie ſhould ſpeak againſt that which he taught to the World in four Books in Folio ; 
| butif the ſenſe and _— of the Author be not regarded, it is an eaiie matter even in 
the beſt of Writings to finde out ſome ſeeming contradictions. 

But I dare poſitively affirm and maintain that St. eA#gnſtine doth in no place of all his 
works condemn, and poſitively diſ-allow of Chriſtian Iudrcial Aſtrologie in its purity,and 
not abuſed;and this may ſufficiently be manifeſted by thoſe five opinions 1 have ſet down 
in my Lux Veritats, chap.2. ſe&.3 which he recordeth i» /ibro de C'rvitate Dei, lib. 5.cap.t. 
for though the ſuperſtitious abuſes thereof be by him condemned, it argueth not there- 
fore the natural uſes are to be aboliſhed ; and r mi though before his converſion he 
followed the Herefies of the Aanichees,who maintained the | to be adored and pray- 
ed unto, and afterwards wrote againſt them , yet can it not be made apparent, that he 
utterly condemned this liberal Science,as will appear by theſe words of his in /1bro 5. cap. 6. 
de Civitate Dei; Non uſque quaque abſurde dici peſſit a4 ſolas corpornum differentias, afflatus 
quoſdam wvalere fidereos, ſicnt in ſolaribus acceſſibus, & receſſibus ; videmuts etiam ipſstes 
aunt tempora variari , & lunaribus increments & aecrementss angers & minni quedam 
genera rerum, ſicut echinos & conchas, & mirabiles eſtua oceani, non autens & animi vo- 
luntates poſitiombus ſyderum ſubdi : whereby we ſee nothing exempted trom ſubje&ion 
to the ſtars that is bodily, but only our ſpiritual part ; neicher doth he aſcribe this power 
to the ſtars in general, as that their ſpecifical vertues are not poſſible to be known by 
man ; for in Fo Book De gen. /ib.2. cap 5. he agreeth with Aſtrologers that Saturn is 
cold. 

Again ſhall we admit that St. Auguſtine, and with him all the Fathers unanimouſly 
are againit eFftro/ogie ; yet may we not hence make our ſelves ſo ridiculous as to conclude 
eAſtrologie of no validity or efficacy, they being but men,and therefore ſubject to error; 
and ſince it is nowiſe condemned by the word of God (which ſhould be the touchſtone of 
all mens writings) further then that men ſhould not give the power of the Creator to 
the creature, nor impoſe a fatal neceſlity and truſt therein; and therefore St. Auguſtine 
in the aforeſaid fifth Book, and firtt chap. of h# City of Ged, delivering five opinions (as 
Ifaid) concerning deſtiny, in his firſt ſheweth , that by deſtiny is underftood The provi- 
dence, will, and poWer of God; and therefore he warneth Aftrologers, that they continue 
their opinions, but corrett their tongues; for that through cuſtom of ſpeech the vulgar 
commonly underſtood nothing by the word fare, or deſtiny , bur the inevitable power of 
_ tw ; _ ſo becomes a means to draw them from a true truſt and confidence in God 
and his word. 


Lib. 5. cap. 4. 
and lib. 20, 
cap.6. contra 
Fauflum Mi. 


cheum, 


And truly were it not for fear of making this Treatiſe too great, I could ſhew you 


that every part of Aftrologie, nay even monethly Prognoſtications(which ſome men think 
are condemned by the word of God) being grounded upon obſervation deduced from 
F cauſes 


ST 


eA Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 

cauſes in nature, have ever been permitted and ſuffered in all well ordered and Chriftian 
Common-wealths ; and that not only the Fathers and latter Divines, but even Mr. Cal- 
vin himſelf in bs admonition, with others (that attribute as little to this Art as they may) 
do allow thereof, ſo far forth as it extends to the ſtate of the Weather,of health, ſickneſs, 
plenty, dearth, and to the direttion of the Phyſitian when to purge by Pill, when by Potion, 
when by letting of blcod ; this being as far as I maintain the Art, and make my ſtudy there- 
in proceed, as ſhall be cleared betore the cloſure of this Treatiſe ; but let us Tovs proceed. 


———————— er ere eco ——_—_—_—_— —— 
— mee ——————__—_— 


Cuna?s.: Ez 


Provms their Reply to Judges 5.20. weak , and nowiſe available to 
her intent or purpoſe. 
; purpoſ 


Nrter we now on the laſt Text, viz. That in Iedges, with which they bid us com- 
þ pare Joſ.10.11. Exod 9 23. the which ou ſhall ſee maketh altogether as little 
tor their turn as all the relt have in the other, and therefore it was they durſt not 
deliver the words, which are theſe, /-ſh.10,11. And it came to paſs as they fled from before 
Iſrael (meaning the hoſts of the 5. Kings) and were wn the going down to Bethoren, that 
the Lord caſt down great ſtones from Heaven upon thems unto Azekah ; they were more 
which died with hale-ſtones, then they which the children of Iſrael ſlew with the ſword: in all 
which, we ſee only the vengeance of God executed on thoſe people that Ioprah was or- 
dained to drive out from before the children of J/-ae/ : how doth this prove that the 
ſtars 1n their courſes fought not againſt ſera, in the fifth of —_— or that they did 
not indece fight alfo againſt theſe 5. Kings ? for by their own eonfetlion, the ſtorms, hale, 
wind, and tempeſts that diſcomfited Serus Army,were occationed by the influence of the 
{tars ; and theretore I know no reaſon to the contrary, but that they were alſo occaſioners 
of theſe hale-ſtones, ſo that they have gained little by this their firſt place to be there- 
with compared. 

As touching the ſecond, it is this, Exod.9.23. The words are, 4nd Moſes ſtretched forth 
his Red towards Heaven, and the Lord ſext thunder and hale, and the fire run along upon 
the ground, and the Lord rained hale upon the Land of Egypt ; a ſtrong argument truly, 
that the ſtars in their courſes fought not againſt Si/er« ! what would they have it to be, or 
their Reader to underſtand by theſe their weak come-offs? would they have it the hand of 
God ? I fay the ſame ; would they have it hale-ftorms? I ſay ſo to ; what would they 
have it to be? Can they ſhew me in either, or both theſe their texts, that the ſtars in 
their courſes fought not againit 5:/era ? or can they ſhew that thereby we are taught and 
ſhewn to read that place otherwiſe 2 but they mutt know this, that though in neither of 
them there is a word to be found or mention made of any itars,yet inthat of Judpes there 
is both mention of them, and expreſs teſtimony they fought againſt $i/era, The ſtars 1» 
their courſes feught againſt Silera. | 

So that you ſee cleariy my Arguments, proving Aſtrologie to be warranted by the 
word of God , do remain yetunſhaken, and that notwithſtanding all that they have or 
can ſay ; no ſolid Reply can be by them produced to the contrary; wherefore it mattereth 
not (ſhould we make no more words) what either of them both or all the men in the 
World that are either ignorantly or obſtinatly or traditionally againit it,do ſay againſt it ; 
for asI end that 2. ſect of my 2. chap. where prove the ſtars to be both ſigns and cauſes, 
I may here, you ſee, again trumphantly ſing, Er 5 Scriptara, c> ipſe Deus nob1/cum qu: 
conira nor? It the Scripture and God himſelf be with us, who can be againſt us 2? 

Wherefore you ſee now what great cauſe the Penner of that rabble had to ſay after 
theſe evaſions and juggles, T kus With a touch it appears that Mr. Rameſey is decerved 1n 
his concluſion ts the ſaid proofs, that one of them Were enough to convince any man the ſtars 
have i; fluence 3 for. nor one, nor all, nor an hunared ſuch, are in any ſhew ſufficient to cor- 


vince a prudent man of this, &c. S 
11s 


Lib.1. Al Vindication of Aſtrology. 

Thus you ſee he denies the very teſtimonny of the word of God, nay although ic were 
affirmed by an hundred places, and yet with all his wit he cannot refell the leaſt of theſe, 
ſave with his facing down with a bold forehead, which to the judicious will be but a 
a—_—_ ſtock ; for now it is moſt manifeſt, that whereas he ſaid;T was then in a dream,he 
is in ſuch a dream that he knoweth not where he is, nor how to beturn or betake himſelf 
for refuge, but by railing and ſpitting his venome Viper-like againſt me and that where- 
wich I have wounded him to the quick ; for itis moſt apparent, that (although he faith 
thas with a touch,&c. )he hath ſo ſlightly rouchgd my Arguments, that they yet ſtand un- 
ſhaken , and had he not ſaid rh with a touch, we had not known whether he had touched 
them or no. Wherefore now lets ſee how my Arguments alſo by the word of God that 
the ſtars are both ſigns and canſes,are ſtill left alſo unrefelled , and fo haſten to a con- 


cluſion. 


CHAP. XVII. 


That the flars are proved both ſens and cauſes by the word of God : 
and the Art lawful, notwithſtanding all their malice. 


the ftars are both ſigns and cauſes, Gern.1.14. Hoſ. 2,21. and De:r.33,14.the which 

becauſe it would here be too tedious to rehearſe, I refer unto thee to peruſe at thy 
own leifure ; to all which thou ſhalt tinde no other reply returned then this ac the latter 
end of the 73. page. T he Dottor denies not that the ſtars arecauſes, and this I believe is 
granted me, becauſe they knew no other reply, without rendring themſelves ridiculous 
ro the World; bur if ſo. and (asit is farther granted) that he alloweth ot Natural A- 
{trology, and ſo conſequently that the ſtars are alſo ſigns; let me ask any rational man 
what they argue againſt then , if the ſtars be confeſſed ſigns and cauſes of wind , hale, 
ſtorms, tempelts and alteration of weather 2 or how isit then unlawfull, Diabolical, or a 
doctrine of Devils, to practiſe or prognoſticate thereby of theſe accidents? as DoRor 
Homes moſt wiſely and diſcreetly termeth it : And thus haſt thou briefly been ſhewn the 
utmoſt of that di;courle tor the reteiling of mine, by which you ſee, notwithſtanding, 


WS O in my LuxFeritats, chap.2.SeR.2. From theſe Texts you will finde I prove that 


That the ſtars 
are beth ſigns 
and cauſes, 
proved and 


Cicared. 


Aſtrologie to remain in tull torce ; that the ſtars have influence, and are both ſigns and 


cauſes warranted by the Divine Word of God. Itreſteth therefore now, I only add this 
one place more in the 4. ſect. of the 1. chap. of my Nifcourſe, wherein 1 prove that the 
Art of 4ſtrologie is not prohibited by the word of God, nor the ſtudy thereof by God 
himfelf, but rather by him 2llowed,ind then ſhall conclude with a Relation of the power 
and ſ1bje& of Aſtrelogie, and how far it is by me defended or maintained, and paſs over 
' all the r<ſidue of that rabbling, railing reply as not worthy my notice. 
inth.t tourch Se. (1 fay) proving the legality of Aſtrologre, and that God doth not 
prob ©: the itudy thereof, 25s clear by that teſtimony of the Holy Ghoſt by St. Srephen 
inthe 77. of the As ver. 22. ſpeaking in the commendation of Ao/es, he giveth him over 
and above the commendation aforeſaid in that ſame 7. chap.this praiſe, That he was /earn- 
ed in all 1/;z Wiſdom of the Egyptians, and Was mighty in words and deeds, which ( | ſayin 
that place) is clear to any rational man, ** That if it had been anywiſe ſintull , Diabolt- 
© cal or odious in the ſight of God , Moſes would not have applyed his ſtudy thereunto, 
© or at leaſt it would never have been recorded in his praiſe: I might inſtance here Damel, 
&« Solomon and others ; but this is ſo clear that to inſilt longer hereon, were bur vain ; thus 
<« far 1 inſitted in that place above quoted. | 
Now as touching a Reply thercunto, they have none in the world, but a bold Afertion 
of an untruth in theſe words, pag. 38. of that Pamphlet, The Doftor hath fully anſwered 
that theſe Saints Were not judicial eſtralogers. Putin what place, the Reader is _ on 
F 2 cek 


— 


26 o I Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.1. 
to ſeek , which right Diſputants are never cuilty of ; but catch either the NoRor or this 
Kenfrs, without an evaſion or juggle, and —— -—- you may do what you will with 
them. 

£0 alſo when I prove further,that Aſtrology is a lawfulArt,being not prohibited by the 
\Vord of God, their Reply is, it 5 oely my paſſing my word for it 5 but T would fain ſee 
them paſs any ſound word or Argument againit it, and not content themſelves with theſe 
lilly and weak come-offs. 

Acain, in that 4.Se&, I come further to ſhew that, © We ſee by experience, that God 
**doth (ſo far is he from diſallowing and prohibiting the practice of Aftrology) abſo- 
*lutely allow of both the Art and Artiits, in his ſhewing ot blazing-ſtars ro them onely 
**that ſtudy Aftrology (not to the vulgar and proficient in other Arts) to forewarn his 
** peopie of the danger and puniſhment to come; and it it were not ſo , he might as well 
**ſhew ſ1pnes of his future pleaſure to the 1lhiterate by common _—_ things, asin 
* heaven, to the learned Aftrologer who can onely judge ct their effects. 

Now but warily obſerve their Reply, and thou wilt have fit matter of laughter; for in 
the 38 page, they ſay rh: my alleadging that God ſhews blazang-ſtars onely to Aſtrelopers, 
15 a gret+ Uutituth, Cornfeſſedby thouſands of the vulgar yet alive in England, Who 
ſaw the blazing-ſtar many nizhts that appeared afore the SWediſh wars 1m Germany ; fer 
what hinders but ſbepherds,/«ylers, Watch-men , and Illiterates ſhould percerve that Which i 
obvio:u to the common eys of mau-kind , and diſtinguiſh a Comet from a ſtar by hu neerneſs, 
mot! n,2ud hs feather or lowg taile? 

And truly herein they have told us a long tale to no purpoſe ; for ſhould I deny that 
ſuch things can be diſcerned that are obvious to the common ſenle of ſeeing,I ſhould in- 
decd render my felfe as ridiculous as they have in not apprehending my words , who deny 
not 1n the leaſt, but that they may plainly be ſeen of Sailers, Watchmen , Shepheards, 
illiterate Hay-makers, alſo dolts and Afles if they be not blind or aſleep , which is rc- 
thing at all ro my Argument; for 1 was to let my Reader know that God more eſpecially 
(allowing of the ſtudy and contemplation of his heavenly creatures in his ſervants) 
ſheweth tuch things as are (omers and Bl/azing-ſtars to Aſtrolnpers onely; 1 ſay becauſe 
they onely of all other men , arethe ableft ro judge of their effe&s and portences , that 
the people might be forewarned of their miſery and the lixe ; for otherwiſe he mighe 
© ſhew his wonders in common vulgar things. 

__ the Burt if we obſerve, it is wonderful toſfee how learnedly theſe zealous blades by this 

- 3 #4 nora. cir Reply prove that God (contrary to what I have alleadged) doth not in the leaſt 

nderſt2nd | | , 244 T 

Englih oc allow of Attrology, or the Students thereof, by this his ſhev/ing of Comets or Blazing« 

Senſe, ftars; and that this my Argument conduced nct to the validity of the Art or Artiſts, 

and not to come off ſo blewly to argue” on what was never affirmed ; but poor mea they 

are to be excuſed - come orce to talk ro them of Comets and Blazing-ſtars, and you put 

them quite out of their ſphear : therefore I ſhall onely propound this queſtion to them, 

and look:;oran Anſwer when they are able to underſtand Engliſh; they fay1 amſhame- 

fully out in my Latin,becauſe I interpret not the words of the Bachharer Councell verba- 

79, but deliver the ſenſe of them. I thought I had writ to men,which would have.been 

content with the ſenſe, and not to children that mutt have it word by word expounded; 

but however, this muſt needs be a Bull to affirm that therefore 1 was out in mv Latin, but 

they cannot deny they are in this place out in their Engliſh , which is a far preatefr faulr, 

* and deſerves both the ferula and flagel/um, and therefore I ſay | ſhall onely ask them 

this queſtion . becauſe they underſtand neither Engliſh, ſenſe nor honelty',* for per- 

haps thereby they may come to underſtand whatT ſaid ; viz. whether it was the Ajtrc- 

\ loger I ſpake of, or the Shepheard, Sailer, Watchmen,and Illiterates they fpeak of, that told 

_ 4 Comet in 1618. foreſrewed the Swediſh wars iy Germany , that they 
talk of ? | | 


CHAP, 


Lib.1. eA Vindication of Aſtrology. 


CHnarye. XxIBS 


' Proving Aſtrology to be warranted by Councels , in ſpight of their 
Rabble. 


Ven in that ſame 4. SeR. having thus (as you have heard) ſhewed the 
legality of Aſtrology, and validity of the ttudy thereof, not being prohibited 
by God, &c. ' conclude then, that whatever Door Homes alledgeth 
was the Law of the Romans againſt it, was of no validity ; ſince of necefli- 
ty (if warranted by the Word of God) it muſt be allowed by the C oun- 
cels,eſpecially the godher ſort of Conncels, whoſe Acts and determinations will be groun- 
ded on piety and the Word of God; and it otherwiſe, I value not what their centure is; 
for they are but men and (guided by their owa reaſons .and opinions) fraile, ſubject to 
infirmities and errours; 'umarum eft -errare. | 

To which in their 39 pag. they Reply, bat as 1 prove Aſtrology not to be condemned by 
the Word of God, juſt /o (ard n9 Wyelier) do [ prove it not 1mpugned by ( ouncels, namely 
by bare facing it downwith 4 bold forehead. 

Now | deſire no better proof that it is not condemned by Councels then this ; for if 
their wiſdomes will admit this to be proved as wiſely, and jutt as I have the other, which 
all their wit you ſec, could not in the leait and weakett point ſilence , my Argument will 
be goods and firm enough, and evident to the Reader, that they remain as yet by them 
unſhaken, and that they have no other reiuge but barely to faceit down with abold and 
impudent forehead, eſpecially being in the former ſo ſhametully bafled. 

Wherefore now it reſteth 1 ſhew you the full power and ſubject of Aſtrology , and 
how far I maintain or allow of the Art , and here defiſt, referring you for further ſariſ- 
faction to that diſcourſe of mine, which 1s able to juſtifie theſe my words, ſince for all that 
the Replyers thereunto can ſay,the Art remains ſtill v1.ſhaken,and it unanſwered; where. 
fore they had bur ſmall reaſon co title that weak piece, Judrial »ſtrology Judicialy 
condemned, when alas there is hardly a judicious ſentence to be found berween the begin- 
ning and end thereof, unleſs borrowed of ſome other Author,neither are they orit able ro 
ſhew their faces before the judicious and impartial Judges of che matrer,withour ſuffering 
condign condemnation themlelves. 


— — ————————— n———— 
— ar OR 


CHA” XA 


Contaming the power and ſubject of Aſtrology , and how far the Au- 
thor vindicateth tt. 
Ou are now to receive © The power and ſubje& of eA/?r:looy, which by 


**all what you have heard , dealeth with ſuch chings as are performed by 
* Art and Nature, with the will of man indirectly and accidentally, and 


* ons and body, and with natural and ſecondary cauſes, and general acci- logy. 
* dents and contingencies : But not with rare contingencies or ſuch as have an indiffe- 
* rent reſpe& tothe oppoſites, as depending vpon unknown and indeterminate cauſes, 
** which may happen one way or other: neicher with mans will doth Aſtrology meddle, but 
* accidentallv,ſo far as the Soul with the faculti:es thereof follows the temperature of the 
** body; neither with the Providence of (,./ or ſhew a cauſe of miracles; or with the 
* ſecrets of Goa; for they are (faith the Scripture) paſt finding out. Ergo, «Aſtrole- 
** gers, that are men that contemplate but natural caules, are fal{ly and moſt ſcandalouſly 
abuſed 


How the 4u- 
thor ſets down 
10260 eſis # x EE -* the power and 
** his inclinations temperature, and diſpoſitions ; as alſo with his affeRi- fobice of 4 [tro= 


23 | eA Vindication of Aſtrology. Lib.r. 
©* abuſed when thus impeached, neither hath the influence of the ſtars any fatality as in- 
** evitable, except ſome contingency be mixed therewith ; for this were to deny the Pro- 
vidence of God. 

Now as touching the parts of Aſtrology, I ſhall here according to Ptolomy , in the begin- 

How far the ,/;7 of his ſecond Bock of his Quadripartite, chap.1. divide into tWwo, the firſt and chief part 
- fl gar being general, as having relation to Countries, Kingdoms, Provinces, and Cities , alterati- 
fieth 4ſtrolrry, 975 of Kingdoms, LaWs, Cuſtoms, death, plenty, wars, peace, health, ſickneſs, aud mutations 
 #nthe Air, &c. Theſecond par'1cular, Vit, To mens Nativities , as ts kaoW the particular 
conſtitution, temperature and natural inclination of any man or Woman , but not other acci- 
derts, as whether a mas ſvall live long, the time when he ſhall die , and what manner of death, 
whether he ſhal! be rich, and how attain it, &c. Which are, as alſo Horary queſtions depend- 

ing thereon, not certain. 

T he fir/t # judged by the poſition of the Heavens and the Planets, and their N atures 
and ſignifications at the time of any Revolution of the yeers of the World , the appearance 
of Eclipſes, (Comets, Blazing-ſtars , or preat ( onjunttions ; The latter, at the time of the 
parties birth: and (o far and nofarther do I any wiſe allow of the Art , for, What ts called 
Aſtrology more thes this, «not eASTROLOGT, but the meer abuſe of the «Art, 
1 meaud Charattery- 1ſtrology, and other ſuperſtitions of the Arabians, and Chaldeans, 
alſo horary queſtions, and elettions, if not depending or gronnaed on the Radix of the parties 
Nativitie, or rather on that part which teacheth of the general accidents of the World, are 
neither countenanced or vindicated by me in the leaſt; for I have ſludied and krow ſufficient ly 
the experience thereof, neither do 1 Wholly relie on the ſetting of any mans Nativity, 

The Authors though it hath been approved of by ſome of the learned; fer, ſince the lars have no power 
; Opinion touch» gy (ch as are ruled either by Reaſon or Grace , (as you have heard where I ſay, Aſtra 
iug Nativicies. cunt, non cogunt , andſapiens dominabitur aftris) ro what end then is it for a man to 
buſie bu head about ſuch uncertainties, when except the native be a man meerly natural, 

20 Predittion ſhall fall out true , as to accidents and diſpoſitions > ſure it i Worſe then mad- 

neſs then, to ſpend time on thu part of the Art. 

<3 > Hong Wherefore it muſt neeas follow then that the reſolution of queſtions and eleftions thereon de= 
= Cn 08%» pending are more wncertain;yet I muſt confeſs the eAſtrologer may undertake in ſome ſenſe to 
not anſwer the demands of the Querent by his Art, without regard to the Radix or ought elſe, 
ſence he may be confidently aſſured that ſuch inquirers are nowiſe either rational or religions, 

and ſo conſequently are eaſily carried on to the temptations and deluſions of the devil, or ac- 

cording to the natural inclination and influence of the Heavens. 

Tet kaow that Elettions touching the adminiſtration of Phyſicke , Phlebotomy , uſing of 
Hw:bandry and Navigation, I do alloW of, as alſo all other eleftions if they depend on thu mat- 
ter; but What 1s more then thu doth (in my opinion) ſubjeft mans will to the pesWer of the 
ſtars, and all his voluntary attions ; Which to affirm, were moſf ridiculous. 

Needs muſt he 4nd thus far is the glory of God made cleerly manifeſt in. hu creatures; and to deny this 

be moſt impt= which :5 indeed the pure Art of Aſtrology , us to deny the moſt heavenly and chiefeſt ſtudy 

ous and igno- (ext to Divinity) under the SUN, and alſo that which of all ſtudies elſe moſt conduceth to the 

rant that rradu- praiſe and glory of the omnipotent and omniſcient creator , for which they and all things elſe 

_ WF. be firſt created ; and then conſequently muſt the treduceys thireof be moſt smpions and ig- 
; norant. 

Reader, I ſhall here for concluſion ſay no more then this, that thou firſt ſeek thy Crea- 
tor and ſerve him, before thou apply thy minde unto this ſubſequent or any other ſtudy, 
for that ſo thou ſhalt be made the more excellent and perfe& therein ; yet particularly as 
for this heavenly contemplation, let me tell thee,wert thou an Heathen before thou wert 

: ſeen therein, yet wilt thou cleerly be made thereby (when thou art acquainted therewith) 

4 vo from tg ſee thy Creator and his unſpeakable wiſdom therein * ; wherefore i all thy ſtudy give 
mes gy him the whole praiſe and glory , who hath diſpoſed and ordered all things according to 
ſome hive affir- his divine will, and inevitable decree ; and that thou mayeſt be the better inabled there- 


med) excepr | unto, thou ſhalt never want my prayers nor ſervice. 
wy belicyec a 
atality , which . . 
"RIP fludy * Die h 31. fanuarii 

to be wholly 1651. : 

denyed, and by FINIS, 
me ever was, 


AN 
INTRODVCTION 


TO THE 


Judgement of the Star S, 


WHEREIN 
The whole ARrmT of 


ASTROLOGY 


Is plainly Taught , and the Ground-work or 


Reaſons cot It the benefit of the Students 
therein delivered, the better to confirm them in every 
point thereof; as allo to ſatiche ſuch who 
(hall either enviouſly or ignorantly traduce 
or cavil againſt it. 


————— 


By VV1ittiam Ramess y, Qent. 


' Student in eAftrology Phy/ick,, and the moſt Heavenly and Szblime Sciences. 


_— }]uſl 


Job 38. 31,32,33- 
4n conſtringes delicias Pleiadum ? aut lora Orionis aifſol-oes ? 1Nt- 
duces ne remotiora figna, quodque tempore ſus ? aut Arcturum 
' cum filus ſuis duces * An cognoſcis de ſtatutis Celi * an diſponere 


potes domimunm ejus in terra * Cc. 


LONDON, 
Printed for R. FYV. 1653. 


HONORATISSIMO 
DOMINO NON MINYS VIR-. 


TVTE SVA QVAM GENERIS 
_ SPLENDORE INSIGNL, 


ILLUSTRISSIMO 


VILHELMO SEYMOVR, 


MARCHIONI ET COMITI 
D E 
HAR TFO R D: 


DOMINO IN 


 SEYMOVR.,BEAVCHAM,&<c. 
Salutem & Felicitatem Perpetuam. 


DOMINO SUO 


MVLTIS NOMINIBVS OBSERVANDO 
L- HANC SUAM 


AD ASTROLOGIAM 
INTRODVCTIONEM 


SUBMISSE DEDICAT 


IWilhelmns Rameſens: 


TO FHE 


RIGHT HONOVRABLE 
AND 


Truly Noble both for Learning and Parts, 


VVillam Seymour, 


Marqueſs and Earl of 
SER TT F O R D, 
Lo xEEY MO Y Kal 
BEAV CH AM, &CG 


Rivht Honourable, 


Hould I have the leaſt hope of meric 
IN from your Honour by this my Dedica- 
SES tion, Having never had the happinels to 
9 appear in your Honours preſence , I 
&L ſhould render my ſelf both weak and 
preſumptuous ; bur my comfort is , I 
write to a Perſon of Honour, Learning and Parts, who 
by is 


T he Epiſtle Dedicatory. 


is of that Magnanimity , that he will not deſpiſe the 
ſmalleſt gift or the meaneſs of the Giver , or the firſt for 
the unworthineſs of the laſt, Artaxerxes King of Perſia 
dildained not the water a poor man, as he ſaw him pals 
by, brought from a River in his hand and gave him, bur 
received it with a ſmiling countenance , not meaſuring 
the grace of the Gitt according to the value of the Pre- 
ſent, but according to the good Will and intent of the 
Giver, accounting it no leſs an at of Magnanimity and 
Kingly bounty to cake ſmall Preſents in good part, then 
tro give greater. And truly , though this my mite 
may ſeem ſmall, proceeding from ſo mean a hand as 
my own : Yer let me lay thus much of this Sci- 
ence, which is the chief of theſe we call Liberal, 
rogether with ASTRONOMY, PHISICKS, 
and NATYVRAL PHILOSOP HY which make 
up all but one intire Science, and of themſelves are but 
4nd ot oxy parts thereot , as witneſleth Ariftotle Lib. 2. Cap.2. 
aſoat other Phil. as alſo further in his Metaphiſ. 6. and 12. and 1. Pol. 
——_ (ap.7. and in his 2. De Celo, Texti7. and Lib. De Pro- 
Writers, as dh prietat. element. &> lib. de Mundo, cap. 9. and in his 4. De 


more appear in : "Ee . . >» 
the ffi Book Generatione Animimalium Cap.10. uſing 1n all his Writings 


oy hon indifferently the Name of ASTROLOGER and 
ASTRONOMER, and ASTROLOGER and 
PHILOSOPHER for one and the ſame, for 
the Contemplaters of Nature in and by this Sci- 
ence , are of ail Philoſophers the chieteſt; and this 
Antiquity maketh plain unto us , as teſtifeth the 
moſt Ancienteſt Hiſtoriographers, who Record that the 
Prieſts and Kings — the EGYPTIANS, the 
CHALDEANS among the BaByYLroNIANS, the 
GyYyMNOSOPHYSTS among the INDIANS, the 
M aG1claNns among the PERsIANS, the chict 
PHiL.osSoPHERS of GREECE and ITaLy, and the 
Druipes of France were all ASTROLOGERS, and 
eltcemed by theſe Nations as the wiſelt men. And _ 
ore 


The Fpiſtle Dedicatory. 
fore I ſay, as it is a part of the chiefeſt of the Liberal 
Sciences, {o hath ir been {t:|l in high efteem amongt 
the Nobler and Graver fort of People, and the more 
refined Souls in all Ages, eſpecially amongſt the 
 Chaldeans, Egyptians, Aſſyrians , Lacedemontans , Sydomans, 
Indians, Perſians, Greeks and Arabians, for amongſt the 
Egyptians, it was not Lawfull for any man to take the 
Function of Prieſt-hood on him , except he were an 
ASTROLOGER, neither could any be choſen King, 
except he were of the Colledge of the Prieſts : And 
Rodiginus reporteth , that for the prevention of Treaſon, 
the Nativities of all Infants born therein was brought to. 
the King to be judged on; and Dion recordeth the ſame 
to be practiſed by the Emperour Tyberius,and in the Pro- 
phelic of Daniel, we may lee that the Monarchs of Ba- 
bylon attempred nothing of importance without firſt as- 
king Councel of the Caldeans, And the Kings of Lace- 
demonia ſuffered none to fit in their Councels , but who 
were Aſtrolygers; And amongſt the Perſians none was 
admitted to the Crown, but who were excellently skil- 
ledin ASTROLOGY. 

Wherefore (my LORD) ſince this is an ART 
that hath ever been eſteemed amongſt the Nobler , 
Wiler , Greater , Ingeniouſer and the molt refined Spi- 
rics of the World from Age to Age, and chiefly Stu- 
died, Maintained , and Upheld by them, I humbly 
preſumed to Dedicate this Introductory Part unto 
your Honour, fince all theſe Properties are Natu- 
rally Inherent in your Noble Self , for tine Nobi- 
lity is the fitteſt Patron for ſuch Noble SCIENCES, 
neither are they fit to be offered ro any but who 
are really ſuch, it ſurpaſsing the reach of the or- 
dinary capacity of the World , fo that (my LORD) 
my hope is , that if not for the Wel-wiſhes and 
Honour the Preſenter thereof beareth ro your Lord- 
ſhip, nor the Antiquity and Excellency of the 
Thing 


The Epiſtle Dedicatory. 


Thing preſented , yet your Honour will accept 


I 


thereof out of the Munificence of your own In- 
nate Magnanimity , it being ſufficient honour for me 
to acknowledge my lelf 


My Lox, 


Your Honours 


Moſt Humble Servant, 


William Rameſey. 


To the Reader. 


m# Aving before in the Firſt Book ſufficiently proved, 

py and ſhewn the validity , excellency, certainty and 
legality of this Noble Science , and vindicated Ir 
from all its aſperſitons ; it reſteth now I thew thee 
the grounds and reaſons of the Art, v:z. the Num- 
ber of the Signs, their Names and Natures , the 
Dignities, Number and Names of the Planets, and the Reaſons 
of all theſe, and what is elſe moſt expedient and neceflary to be 
known, that thou mayſt nor be to ſeek, but be ſuthciently enabled 
toanlwer all oppolers and gainſayers thereof; in which thou haſt 
alſo a plain and eafte Introduction to the whole Art ; wheretore 
thou oughteſt ro be very well skilled and pertedt in every point 
and part contained in this Book, betore thou ventureſt ro proceed 
ro the two other {ublequent Treatiles ; for otherwiſe thou thalr 
never be able to apprehend them ; the which (contrariwile, if thou 
art perfect in this) will prove very eafte unto thee; wheretore that 
it might be fo, I have in this place prefixed it : Ler the benefit be 
thine or no, Iam ſure the Pains and Labour hath been mine; yer 
now I reſt 


Thy Loving Friend, 


I-ilham Rameley. 
A «4 


. 


- 4 © OR et os 9 gn 
hy - - 9 FS PgF+ 4 ne A” 


_ LEY _ _— a, ct hw ber a tote ner ts tet a oo rr ment a5 erent 
" len - — ho 42 5 5. Py « - —_ _ . A TINY 


wo Forms oe 


The Contents of every Chapter contained in the Second 
Book, being an Introduftion to the Indgement 


of the STARS. 


CHAP. -n, 
F the names and number of the Planets, with their ſeveral Cha- 
() radters, and ſignification and Nature of Saturn. Fol.49. 
Chap.2. Of the ſignification and Nature of Jupiter. 52 
Chap. 3- Of the ſignification and Nature of Mars. 54 
Chap.q. Of the ſignification and Nature of the Sun, | 56 
Chap.s. Of rhe ſigmfication and Natnre of Venus. 59 
Chap 6. Of the ſignification and Nature of Mercury. GE 
Chap.7. of the ſrgmfication and Nature of the Moon. 63 
Chap. 8. Of the Eſſential and accidental Dienities of the Planets according 
to Prolomie. 65 


Chap.9. Demonſtrating the uſe of the Dignities of the Planets. 67 + 
co 10. Of the houſes of the Planets, and wherefore they were ſo —_ 
ed, 

Chap.11. Of the Exaltations and Falls of the Planets, and wherefore Fo. 
were ſo conſtituted. 69 

Chap. 12. of the Triplicities of the Planets, and wherefore they were ſo 
appointed. 70 

Chap.13. Of the terms of the Planets, and wherefore ſo called and appoint- 
ed to the five Planets. 78 

Chap..14. Shewing the uſe which is to be made of the terms. 

Chap.15. Demonſtrating the uſe , nature aud reaſons of the faces of bs 


Planets. 73 
Chap.16. Of the joys of the Planets. 75 
Chap.17. Of the head and tail of the Drazon. 7 
Chap. 18. of the Antiſcions and Contrantiſcions of the Planets, Ibid. 


Chap.19. Shewing the Reaſons of the names and charadters of the Planets. 


-- 
Chap.20. of the number of the Heavens and Sphears, their places, order 


and motions. 78 
Chap.21. of the Circles of Heawen, the Zodiack and the diviſions thereof. 


Chap.22. Of the twelve Celeſtial ſigns, and their manifold diviſions. $0 

Chap.23. Shewing theuſe which i to be made of the former Chaprer. 32 

Chap.24. Demonſtrating the Reaſons of the names of the 12. Srgns , and 
why there «re juſt twelve, and neither more nor leſs. 83 

Chap. 25. Shewing the Reaſons why the Signs are reckoned from Aries, ad 
zot from any otber ſign, as alſo why they are not placed according to - 
Order of the four Elements. 

Chap.a6, Of the Nature, Siznification and quality of the ſiens, and 2 f 


Aries. 
Chap. bo 


The Contents. 


Chap.27. of the Aſpeits of the Planets and Signs, their Names,Charatters 
and Natures, and wherefore they were ſo named and charactered. 92 
Chap.28. of the Fixed ſtars in the Zodiack , wherefore they are called 
fixed, ther number, particular names, natures, magnitudes, latitades and 
longtudes, and firſt of thoſe in Aries, as they are delivered by the moſt 
learned in this Art. 93 
Chap. 29. Of the fixcd ſtars in Taurus, their nnmber, names,nature mag - 
nitnae, latitudes and lonzitudes. 95 
Chap.3o. Of the fixed ſtars in Gemini, their number, names, nature,mag- 
nitudes, latitudes and longitudes. 96 
Chap. 31. Of the fixed ſtars in Cancer, their number, names, nature,mag- 
nitudes, latitudes and lonzitudes. 97 
Chap. 32. of the fixed ſtars in Leo, their number, names, nature, magni- 
tudes, latitudes and longitudes. 98 
Chap. 33. of the fixed ſtars in Virgo, their number, names, natures, mag- 
nitudes, latitudes and longitudes, 99 
Chap. 34. Of the fixed ſtars in Libra, their number, names, natures, mag- 
nitndes, latitudes and longituacs. 100 
Chap.35. Of the fixed ſtars in Scorpio, their number, names, natures, mag- 
nitudes, latitades and longitudes. IOI 
Chap. 36. Of the fixed ſtars in Sagittatius, their number, names, natures, 
magnitudes, latitudes and long itudes. 103 
Chap. 37. Of the fixed ſtars in Capricornus ; their number, names, na- 
tures, magnitudes, latitudes and lonzitudes. 103 
Chap.38. of tho fixed ſtars in Aquarius , their number, names, natures, 
maznitudes, latitudes and longitndes. 104 
Chap. 39. Of the fixed ſtars in Piſces, their number, names, nature, mag- 
nitudes, latitudes and lenzitudes. 105 
Chap.40. Shewing the uſe of the former Tables. 106 
Chap.4r. Of the ſignifications of the 12. honſes of heaven, and wherefore 
they have ſuch ſjgntfication. ibid. 
Chap.42. Of the diviſion of the houſes into twelve equal parts. 109 
Chap.4z. Containing ſome termes of Ar! very neceſſary to be known, as alſo 
Inſtrutttons how to erett a Figure of Heaven. I1O 


Lib.2. 


A N 


INTRODVCTION 


TO THE 


|-- ludgement of the Sears. 


CnarP. I. 


Of the Names, and Number of the Planets : with their ſeveral ( ha- 
ratters, and of the ſignifications and nature of $ A TY RN. 


& E are to know firſt, There are Planets in number ſeven, viz. The Number 
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Sol, Venus, Mercury and the Moor ; of the Planes. 
and ening to the uſual cuſtom of the moſt learned , they Hm 
are thus Charactered; Saturn h , Jupiter Þ , Mars &, © 
Sol © , Venus Q , Mercury 7 , Luna or the Moon ), 
SK there are alſo other CharaQers which thou wile meet with in 
DP this Treatiſe, and others of this nature, and thoſe are >, 

AT ez Dragons head, Iy Dragons tail , @ part of fortune. Every 
of which Platfets have their ſeveral ſignifications and influences on Sublunary 

and Elementary bodies ; viz. 

Saturnis the higheft of all the Planets, whichis the reafon the Antients begin The nature of 

with him, both when they relate their names , and declare their natures and quali- Saturn. 

ties; heis maſculine and cold, he is not of a bright ſplendent colour, as are. 7- 
piter and Venus, neither is he ſo big to our vulgar tight , but asa ſtar of the third 

magnitude ; yet according to Tycho, his Orb exceeds the Orbe or Globe -of the The Globe of 
earth 22 times. Albotegnizs ſaith 79 times, and Alfraganns g1 times , (their Saturn. 
reaſons for theſe their opinions, were too tedious here to relate, I refer therefore | 
the curious therein, totheir works) he is eaſily known , he never twinkleth, (ne 
ther indeed do any of the Planets) he isof a pale wan leaden colour; flow in eanron 
motton, not finiſhigg his courſe through the twelve ſignes of the Zodiack 1m leſs PE Y, 
then 29 yeers 156 days; tor he ſeldom goes above three or four minutes in a day, on. 


but fix minutes is his (wifteft motion ; this is in relation to us by reaſon of his dt- Diſtance from 
H | tance ; the earth. 


winds ceten throne oa. 


LY 
ole AN AY om! det OS ea fe __ pa "_ 
O_ pd p- "_— 
_ 1 m_—_— . 


CE ON I TEE 
-#> _ 


_ 
vi _. 
iy + 0.4 


50 eAn Furredaliing to the Lib.2: 


ſtance ; which according to the former Tycho, is, 19550. ſemidiameters of the earth, 
A ſcmidiame® 1}horegnius and Alfraganm ſay 15800 ſemidiameters; the ſemidiameter,or half thick- 
ca the neſsof the earth, is, 860 miles. | 
YN when well Saturn well fortified, and Lord of the year inany annual revolution, ſignifies that 
tortificd, © the people ſhall that year, or during that revolution, build and erect houſes ; ſhall 

make many alterations in Fabricks, and ſhall abound tn all things: the earth ſhall be 
fruirfull, and the people ſhall be in efteem and honour with all their neighbours ; the 
husband-man ſhall exceedingly increaſe his {tore and wealth, and be ſucceſsfull in all 
his labours. | 

But if Satzrn be Lord of the year and weak, there ſhall be much cold during that 

Revolution, great and grievous infirmities, and men ſhall ſuſtain much ſorrow, loſſes 
and crofles, and gat damage by ſtorms, winde and rain (but this mult warily be con- - 
ſidered, if other figniticators of weather concur, and then mayſt thou be the more 
afſured thereof) antient and old men and women ſha!! die ; and theſe things ſhall 
chiefly happen to thoſe Places, Cities and Regions under $.::zrz 1s Domimon, and 
the Dominion of the ſign which he doth then podlz1s. 

Of Humours, he is author of Melancholv. Ard fuch men if they take to love any 
one, let then be man or woman (which happeneth bur very ſeldom) they love moſt 
conſtantly and intirely ; and if they hate (as molt commonly they do) they hate ug 
the death, and with a perpetual harted, hardly To be removed. 

Profeſsion or If he befortunate, of profeſlions and Maſtery, he denotes ſuch as are profuund 

maſtery when and occult, antiquities, things and callings belonging to labour, care and rarities, and 

mel! fortified. ich as belohg or ave any relation unto water, or neer water ; Saylers, Tankerd- 
bearers, Phummers, Ship-Carpenters, and the like ; and ſuch as belong to the earth, 
as Curriers, Broom-men, Bearers of dead corps, Holtlers, Brick-makers, Flow-men, 
Scavengers, Colliers, Ditchers, Carters, Chandlers, Gardners, Herd\-men, Dyers ot 
black cloth, Shepherds, Coach-men and Cow-herds, Brick-layers, &c. 


When weak, 


tHumours. 


Profcflion When unfortunate, he denotes generally labourers, emptyers of Jakes, Diggers of 
when weax. Cole-pits, and the like ſordid and bafe occupations. 
Nature. He is cold, dry, Melancholick, author of ſolitarinels. 


Corporatureor @Corporature or ſhape of the body, he gives a middle ftature, pale, fwarthy, or 

ſhape of body, muddy, ſmall blatk eyes, looking downward, a broad forehead, black or very dark 
hair, and it rugged or harſh, great cars, lowring eye-brows, thick lips, and Nole, 
thin beard , a lumprſh heavy countenance, large ſhoulders, ſtooping, and many times 
crooked,a ſhort lank belly, thin thighs, indecent feet, ſhuftiing againit one another. 


Ocicaral. Oriental, the ſtature is more ſhort, bur decent and well compoſed. As touching this 
and other terms of Art, have reconrſe.co the 43. chaprer. 

Occidental. Occidental, more black, and lean, lefs hair. 

Withour'lati Jf he want latitude, heis more far ; if irbe Merdional, but quick jn motion , fi: 

Meridional. and fleſhly, and ſo of the reſt of the Planets. 

North latirude, Tf the latitude be North, hairy and much Reſh; his greateſt North latitude is two 


degrees,48 minutes, _ | 


South latitude. His South latitude is two degrees, 49 minutes, and more he hath not. 


I, Scation, Tn his firit ſtation, a little fat, * 

2. $ration, Inhistecond ſtation, fat il-favoured bodies and weak ; obſerve this inall the othe: 
Ccoleſtial bodies. | 

Qual. of men. Quality of men in general , he ſignifyeth fathers, grand-fathers, old men, day- 
labourers, Beggers, Clowns, Husbandmen, Monks, Jeſuits, &c. 

Savours: -Sayours, bitter, ſowre, ſharp. 

© EEY In man he ruleth the ſpleen, 
Herbs, planzs Herbs, Hemlock, Starwort, Bears-foot, Wolf-bane, Fern , white and black He- 
and trees, Jebor,Henbane, Burdock, Dragon, Parſnip, Poppy. Pulſe, Mandrake, Vervine,Night- 


ſhade, Moſs, Angelica, Box, Tutſan, Orage, Sage, Bithwind, Spinach, Cummin, Fu- 
mitory, Shepherds-purſe, Horſe-tail, Tamarisk, Capers, Polipody, Sene, Hemp, $a- 
vin, Rue, Willow-tree, Pine-tree, Yew-tree, Cyprus-tree. 
Birds, Crow, Owl, Crane, Thruſh, Oftritch, Lapwing, Peacock, Pat,Black-bird, Cucko. 
Stones 


Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stars. 51 


Stones ſubje& to him are the Saphir, Zapz Lazxl;, or that ſtone of which Aznre Stones. 
is made, unpoliſhed black and blewiſh ſtones. | 

Minerals, he governeth Lead, the Load-ftone the droſs of all Mettals, Minerals. 

Fiſhes, the Tortois, Eel, and ſhel-tiſh, Eithes 

Beaſts, the Aſs, Cat, Hare, Moule, Mole, Dog, Wolf, Bear , Elephant, Baſilisk, Beafts. 
Crocodile, Scorpion, Serpent, Adder, Toad, Hog, all manner of creeping creatures 
breeding of putrefaCtion. | 

Places, he delighteth in deſerts, woods , obſcure vallies, dens, caves, holes, ſe- Places. 
pulchers; Church-yards, ruinous buildings, cole-pits , ſinks, muddy dirty {tinking 
places, wells, and houſes of offices. 

Weather, cloudy, dark, obſcure ayr, cold and hurtfull, thick, black and condenſe Weather 
clouds, this is but generally;his particular and immediate alteration of weather is to be : 
known from his ſeveral poſitions and aſpects with other Planets, Fortitudes and Debi- 
lities, &c. of the which more hereafter, according as I have leiſure. 

He delighterh inthe Eaſt quarter of Heaven, and cauſeth Eaſtern winds. Winds. 

In gathering of his herbs, turn thy face towards the Eaſt, in his hour when he is in Gathering of 
an Angle,and well fortified eſſentially, and no wiſe accidentally impedited , and let Herbs: 

_ Luna apply by a Sextile or Trine to him. 
*_ _ Obſervethis method in the reſt of the Planets, mutati mutand:.. 

Of the ſigns, he ruleth (apricorn by night, and Aquarins by day, and the aicry Signs Tripli- 
triplicity by = ; city. 

Old Age Age. 


His Angelis {afſiel. Angel. 

His Friends are 7wpiter, Sol, and Mercury. | Friends, 

His Enemies are Mars, Venus, and Luna. Enemles. 

He ruleth Sarzrday , beginning the firit hour after :Sx» riſing, and that night we Day of the 
commonly call T»eſday nighr. week. 

Regions, he ruleth Bavaria, Saxony , Stiria, Romandiola, Ravenna , (onflantia, Regions. 
Ingolſtad. 


His orbe is 9. degrees before and after any Aſpect; which is to ſay,his influence be- Otbe, 
gins to operate, when either he applies to any Aſpect of any Planer, or they to him, 
and is within nine degrees of the perfect aſpect, and continueth in force untill he is 
fully ſeparate nine degrees from the aſpect Parti. What a Parii/ aſpect is, you ſhall 
have anon in the 28. chapter ; but note this in all the reſt of the Flaners. 


In generation, he rulerh the firit and eighth moneths after conception, Conception. 
His greateſt yeers he ſignifies are 465. | Ws, 

His greater : 57. 

His mean ES 43. and a half. 

His leaſt 30 


The meaning hereof, is no more but this; If a Kingdom, City, Town, Family, or 
the like have its beginning when Satrs is eſſentially and accidentally well fortified. irs 
probable the Monarchy, City, Building, &c. may continue firm, and in good condi- 
tion, as at the firſt, 465. years; and ſo of the reſt, &c. h 

Inlong journeys, when he is Significator, he portends long and laborious travel, j,urneys, 
perilous dangers and impriſonments. 

Diſeaſes cauſed by Satury, are, the Falling-fckneſs, Flegmatick humours, De- Diſeaſes. 
Auctions, Melancholy, Leprouſie, Fiſtulas, Morphew, Aches and Colds in the joynts, 
Deafneſs, Tooth-ache, pains in the bones, in the bladder, all cold diſeaſes, the Gour, 

Scab, Palſie,Conſumptions, Black-jaundies, Quartan Agues, the Iliack-paſlion, Drop” 

{ie, Chin-cough, Catarrs, &c. 
He is Stationary before Retrogradation five days, and five days before diretion. Swrionary. 
He is Retrograde 440, days. Retrograde, 


H- 2 CHAP. 


The nature 


and con.pluxi- 


onet Y;. 
The globe 
of NY. 


Mean and din 
nal motion. 


Revolution. 
Dittant from 
the catth. 

J. when well 
fortificd, and 
Lord of the 
year, 


When weak, 


Humoure, 


Quality of 


men when well 


eAn Introdutton to the 


CHaP. 43; 


Of the Significations and Nature of IVPITER. 


he is maſculine and temperate,the greater fortune, bright, ſhining and clear ; the 

biggelt ſtar in magnitude (as to our fight) except Venxs ; yet according to Tycho 

he exceeds the globe of the earth in bigneſs 14.times. Alboregnins ſaith 81 times, 
Alfrapans 95 times, yet many of late hold him to be equal in bigneſs with Satary. 
- He1sſwifterin motion then Sar#r»,(as to us)his middle motion is 4,m.59,ſ.his diur- 
nal motion 15 $,10,12,0r 14.M. 

He finiſheth his courſe through the twelve ſigns of the Zodiack in 12. years. 

His diſtance from the earth 1s according to Tycho 3990 ſemidiameters ; yet eA/bc- 
ternins and Alfraganus ſay 10423 femidiameters of the earth. 

[npiter when he is Lord of the year and well dignified, the King ſhall do Juſtice, 
and it ſhall be happy for thoſe that are Noblemen, Judges, Councellors of the Law; 
and men of all ſorts of Religious Orders ſhall be in a ſucceſsfull, happy, pleaſant and 
good condition, and ſhall live pleaſantly and contentedly, in honour, and alſo great 
citeem ; andthe people alio ſhall be in a good and proſperous condition,and ſhall re- 
ceive good from their King and Superiors, and they fromthe people, and the year 
ſhall be healthy, plentifull and good, a temperate ayr, rain, fair weather, and froſt in 
due ſeaſon, &c. 

But if 7zpiter be weak, judge the contrary, according tothe ſtrength of the af- 
fiction wherewith he is aftiicted and impedited. 

Of Humours, he is author of the Sanguine or beſt complexion, moitt, temperate, 
ſound, healthful &c. | 

Quality of men ; in general this is to be underſtood, as indeed moſt of the quali- 
ties and attributions aforeſaid : he ſignifies Judges , Couuncellors, all Eccleſiaſtical 


| N the next place we are to proceed to 7apiter, who is in height next unto him ; 


ores men both Prieſts and Levites,Chancellors, Lawyers, or thoſe that follow the Law from 
the higheſt to the loweſt, all Scholars and Students in general, Clothyers,Woollen- 
Lrapers. 

LnRy of men hen he is weak, he ſignifies Mountebanks, Quack-ſalvers,Empericks, Cheaters, 

wht week Takers of Bribes, &c. 

Nature, He is author of ſobriety and temperance. 


Corporature or 


thape of budy, 


Oriental. 


Occidental. 


He giyes an upright {trait tall ſtature, brown ruddy and lovely complexion, an oyal 
viſage, plump, an forchead, ſoit hair, large gray eyes, brown hair,and it thick,and 
a ſtrong well ſet body, a ſhort neck,and uſually a kinde of a black ſpot between his 
two fore-teeth, and indeed throughout a hanſom compleat body, ſober and grave ir 
diſcourſe, and of a moſt noble diſpoſition. 

If he be Oriental, the skin1s ” 2 more clear, ſanguine, great eyes, a more fleſhy 
body, &c. | | 

If Occidental, a pure complexion, yet a more ſhort ſtature,a browner hair,ſmooth, 


not curling, &c. 


North latitude, 
South latitude. 
Qual. of men, 
Savouts. 
Colours. 

In man, 

Spice, herbs 
= drugs. y 


His greateſt North latitude,is 1.d.38.m. 

His greateſt South latirude,is 1. d. 40.m. 

He {1gnihies Religious men, Church men &c. 

Sweet, delicious pleaſant ſavours. 

He ruleth the aſh-colour, green, blew, purple, green and a mixt yellow. 

In man he ruleth the Liver. 
_ Gilly-flowers, Nutmegs, Sugar, Mace, Cloves, Straberries, Flax and Bitony,Balm, 
Fumitory, Lungwort, Walworr, Wild Marjoram,Sweet Marjoram or Organy, Pim- 


pernel, Rubarb, Alheal, Wheat, Bazil, Bugloſs, Borage, St. /ohn;-wort, Laskwort, 


Pyony, 


Lib.2. 


+ 
EZ 


: 
# 
+: 
LF 
ks 
Hh, 
Wo 
3x 
* 
"+ 
b 
x 


Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stars, 53 


Pyony,Liquoriſh , Violets, Pomgranates, Mint, Maſtix, Saffron, Dazy and Fever- 
few, and all ſuch herbs as are helpfull to obltructions of the Liver, &c. 
The Almond-tree, Hazel, Fig-tree, Olive-tree, Oak, Cherry-tree, Aſh, Gooſ- Trees: 
berry tree, Pine-tree, Coral-tree,Pear-tree, Birch-tree, 1 vy, Vine, Mulberry-tree,&c. | 
Of Birds, he ruleth the Eagle, Peacock, Pheſant, Partridge, Stock-dove, Snipe, Birds. 
Stork, Lark, Bees &c. 
The Topaz, Amitheſt, Marble, Emrald, Chryſtal, Saphir, Hyacinth, Bezoar, Free- Stones. 
ſtone &ec. 
Tin, Pewter &c. Minerals. 
The Whale, Serpent, Dolphin &c. | Fiſhes. 
The Sheep, Unicorn, Doe, Hart, Stag, Ox, Elephant,and all ſuch beaſts as are be- Beaſts. 
neficial and uſefull ro mankinde, 
Churches, neat and curious places, Gardens, Synods, Courts of Juſtice, Wardrobs, Places. 
Palaces, ſweet places, Oratories. 
He commonly cauſeth pleaſant healthfull weather, ſerenity, temperate ayr &c. Weather, 
He ruleth the North and North: eaſt winds. Winds, 
Heruleth of the Coleſtial ſigns, Sagirtary and Piſces, Sapittary by day,and Piſces *'9"5: 
by night ; the _—_ thereof 1s, that if /zpitcr be ſigniticator in the Revolution 
of any year,being by day, and in Sagztrary,he is ſo much the more fortified ; in Piſces 
in a Nocturnal Revolution &c. | 
He ruleth the fiery triplicity by night ; ſo thatif Ipirer be in the 20.4 of Aries, T"iplicity. 
or the 10. deg, ;of Leo in any ;Diurnal Revolution , he ſhall be accounted pere- 
grine, as not having any dignity there, not being in his houle, exaltation, term, tripli- 
city or face; in a Nocturnal Revolution he had not been peregrine ; for then he hath 
triplicity in theſe ſigns. 
He is exalted in the 15.d. of Cancer. Ecalaetan 
He ſuffers detriment in Gemini and Virgo; for that they are ſigns that are oppoſite Detriment. 
to his Houſes, This you muſt obſerve in all the other * laners, 
He isin his fall in the 15. d. of (apricors, for that it is oppoſite to the ſign of his **!)- 
exaltation ſo alſo note that all the Planets are in their fall in that ſign which is oppo- 
ſite to their exaltations. 


Middle age or years of moſt perfect judgement and diſcretion. Age. 
His Angel 1s Zadkie/. Angel. 
His Friends are $arrrn, Sol, Venus, Mercury and Luna. Friends, 
His Enemy Mars only. Enemies. 


Of the days of the week, he ruleth T hxr/day, and of the nights, that which we Pay of the 
call Sunday night. | week, 


Spam, Hungaria, Babylon, Cullen and Perſia. Regions, 
His Orbe is 9.d. before and after any of his Aſpects. Otbe. 

In generation, he ruleth the ſecond and ninth moneths. Generation, 
His greatelt years he gives are 28. Years, 

His greater years are 79. 

His mean years are 45. 

His leaſt years are I2. 


In journeys,when he is ſignificator, he denotes pleaſant travel, good ſucceſs, ſafety, Tourneys. 
health and mirth. 

Infirmities of the Liver, Obſtructions, Pluriſies, Apoplexies , inflamation of the Diſcaſes, 
lungs, infirmities in the left ear, palpitation of the heart, cramps, pains in the back, all 
infirmities of the reins, or proceeding from corruption of blood and putrefactions 
therein, Squinzies, windineſs, Feavers proceeding from abundance of blood ; all griefs 
in the head, pulſe, ſeed, arteries; convulſions, prickings and ſhootingsin the body,&c. 

He is Stationary five days before retrogradation, and four days before direQion. Srationary. 

He is Retrograde 120. days. Retrograde. 


CHAP, 


An Introduttion to the Lib. 2. 


CHAP, II. 


_ Of the Nature and Siznifications of M ARS. 


_ Ikewiſe after Tupiter, or next under him, is located Mars, of whom we are 
and compleQi- now to treat; he is of a fiery ſhining bloody colour, or as you ſee the fire 
on of &. burning in 1ts ſtrength : ro our ordinary ſight he is ſomewhat bigger then Sa- 


Gloveof d» txry, yet notlobig as Ipiter, but as a ſtar of the firſt magnitude (he is maſculine and 
nournal) or ſomewhat leſs, and according unto 7 ycho, he 1s 13. times leſs then the 
earth; Albotegnixs ſaith he is (in compariſon of theearth ) as ſeven is to ix; and 4/- 
Diſtant from £.,0 4x: ſaith, he is bigger then the earth by one half,and diſtant 4584 ſemidiameters 
Se of the earth ; yet Tycho faith but 1745. 


Mean and His mean motion is 31.d. 27.m. | 

Diurnal mo» His Diurnal motion 15 ſometimes 32,34,36,38, 40,42,44. M. a day. 

tion. He finiſheth his courſe through the 12.figns of the Zodiack in one year 321 days,or 
Rcvouution, thereabouts 3 


When he is Lord of the year, ſtrong and well placed, all ſuch as belons to arms, 
as ſouldiers, and the like,ſhall be fortunate and in good condition,and ſhall overcome 
their enemies; there ſhall be alſo, during that Revolution , ſufficient and plenty of 
rain,and at ſuch times (and no other) as 1sconvenient and requiſite ; and the people 
ſhall be proſperous and happy ; but if he be weak, judge the contrary, and thar the 
When ill good or evil by him portended, ſhall be chiefly incident to thoſe Places and Regions 


4 when well 
turtiheds 


placed,  Afubjeto the tign wherein he is. 

Humours, He is author of anger, haſte, choler, and ruleth theſe diſpoſitions in man ; hor, 
fiery and dry. 

Qualities of Conquerours, Uſurpers, Tyrants, Generals of Armies, and all Souldiers in gene- 

OE when well ral, Phyſitians , Apothecaries, Chiru:gions, Alchymiſts, Marſhalls, Butc hers, od 

FED ners, Watch-makers, Barbers, Armourers, and all ſuch asuſe Iron tools, Curriers, 
Tanners, Gameſters, Dyers, Carpenters, Cooks, Cutlers, Taylors, Smiths, Ba- 
kers, &Cc, 


When il When he is ill placed and not ſtrong, he denotes hangmen, thieves, baylfs, ſer- 

placed. geants, cutters by the high-way, murtherers, jaylors, and all cut-throat people, 

Nature. He is author of paſlion, extravagancy, heat and choler. 

Corporatureor Red-haired, a red face and round, a fiery ſparkling e:.2,yer tending to a ſaffroniſh 

ſhape of body. colour ; of ſtature, neither high nor low, but betwee'1 both ; 7 have ill obſerved 
that a right CMartialiſt doth ſeldom exceed in height ; or to be at the mot above 4 yard 

EN and a half high : a bold confident countenance, and it moſt commonly very harſh, 

' ſtrons and big-boned, ſeldom far. 

| Wi hen oriental. When Oriental, he is ſomewhat above the middle fize,and nairy-bodied,and a purer 

complexion then hath been already rehearſed. 


When occi- When Occidental, he is ruddy, and not ſo tall, a little head, and not fo hairy-bo- 
dental. died, yellowiſh hair, and of a drier conſtitution. 

_edinlat. 1 greateſt North latitude 1s 4.4. 31.m. 

Sou:h latitude, His South latitude 156. deg. and 47.m, 

Savouts. Sharp, bitter, and unpleaſant. 

Colcars. Red, yellow, or ſaffron colour. 


"WIR; He rules the back, veins, gall. | | 
mike all All ſuch herbs as are hot and dry, and ſuch as have ſharp-pointed leaves , and are 
ſpice. red, they uſually grow on dry places and ſuch as are barren and hard ſtory pla- 
ces; the thiſtle, Devils-milk, brambles, briers, nettles, cammock. onions, lIingwort, ra- 
diſh, arſmart, muſtard-ſeed, ginger, pepper, garlick, hemlock, red ſanders, tamerin- 
des caſtoreum, Cardars bened:tus or the bleſſed Thittle, horehound,lecks, 
All Trees that are thorny or prickly. | The 


Lib.2. 


Fudgement of the Stars. 


T5 


The Hawk , Kite, Raven, Vulture, Owl, Cormorant, Crow, Mag-pie, and all ra- Birds. 
venous birds or birds of prey, &c. 
Blood-ſtone, Load-itone,-Jaſper, Touch-ſtone, Adamant, the Amethiſt of divers Stones. 


colours. 


Iron,Stee], Arſenick, Antimony,Brimſtone and red Vermillion. 


Minerals, 


The Shark, Pike, Barbel, Fork-fiſh , all ſtinging Water-Serpents, and hurtfull Fives. 


Fiſh. 


The Maſtiff, Wolf, Tyger, Cockatrice, Panther, and all ſuch beaſts as are rave- Beaſts. 


nous and bold. 


Thunder, lightning, fiery-meteors, peſtilential ayr , and in it ſtrange appariti- Weather. 


ONS, &Cc. 


All places that are appertaining to fire and blood, as flaughter-houſes, Furnaces, Places. 


Smiths ſhops,&c. 


He ruleth, and cauſeth Weſtern winds. 
Of the Coleitial ſigns, he ruleth Aries and Scorpio. 
He hath Triplicity or Rule over the watry Triplicity or Trygon, viz. theſe ſigns, dlplicicy. 


which are (arcer, Scorpio and Piſces; he hath abſolute dominion therein both night 
and day ; yct ſome of the Antients do joyn with him the Coon, &Cc. 


He hath exaitation in {apricors in the 28. deg. 
He ſuffereth detriment in Libra and T anrm. 
He 1s in his Fallin the 28,deg. of (ancer. 


trom 22. till 45. 
Samael. 


His Enemie is the Zoox only. 
His Friends are S4twrn, 7upiter, Sol, Venus and Mercnyy. 


Of the days of the week, he ruleth Tweſday ; and of the ni 
carly call Fr:day night. 


Feruſalem, the Koman Empire, even to the Welt, &c. 
His Orbe is ſeven degrees before and after any Aſpect. 
His greatelt years are 214. + | 

His greater years are 66. 

His mean years are 40. 


His leaſt years are 
In journeys , he portends thieving , ſacking, robbing, ſlay 
hurts, v4z. to the Traveller, if Mars be hgnificator,and weak,and 1 


15. 


which more hereafter, in our Treatiſe of Eletions. 
Feavers, and thoſe burning, contagious and peſtilential ; Megrims, overflowing of Diſcaſcs; 


the Gall, Phrenzies the Plague,diftempers through the whole body, Shingles, Fiftulaes, 


Winds. 
Signs. 


Exaltation, 


Derriment. 
Fall. 


Age. 
Angel. 
Enemies, 
Friends, 


ghts,that night we vul- Pay of the 
week. 


Reglons, 
Orbe, 


Yeats. 


much danger or jJ,urneys, 
placed,&c. of the 2 


Stone in the reins, yellow Jaundies, and all ſuch diſeaſes as proceed from exceſs of 


Choler, Paſlion and An 
blood, &c. 


ger ; all diſeaſes proceeding fromthe Gall , Putrefaction of 


He is Stationary two or three days betore Retrogradation, and two days before Stationary. 


direRtion. 


He is Retrograde 80, days. 


Retrograde. 


eAn Introduttion to the Lib.2, 


CHavP, IV. 
Of the Nature and Siznifications of the SY N. 


Sun,which is ſucceſſively next to be treated on;he is under 4ars,placed in the 
midſt of all the Planets, being the chief light and preſident of them all , fit- 
the Planers, ting as a Judge or King amongſt his Nobles ; for as Satzrn, Fapiter, and Mars is pla- 
ced above his fphear,fo are Venus, Mercury and Lena beneath him ; wherefore ſome 
of the Antients have aſcribed to him chief rule,and made hun, as it were,an Emperor 
amonglt the Stars. 
Satarn is his Vice-roy, for that all Planets giveunto him their light, or do homage 
and reverence unto him, by reaſon of his flownels. 
Zupiter hath afligned him chief rule ahd dominion in the Realm, for that he is of a 
temperate, ſober, good, honeſt and religious inclination. 
Mars 15 his chiet Captain, or General of all his Forces. | | 
Venus 18 Receiver, or Maiter-Comprtroller of his houſe, by reaſon ſhe is nearer So/ 
then any other. 
Mercury hath aſſigned him chief Secretary of State, by reaſon when the King $0- 
 eth any Progreſs or Journey, he goeth; and when the King ſtayeth,ſo doth allo Ater- 
cary, tor he 15 never far from his beck. 
Luna is his Standard-bearer, being furtheſt from him ; ſhe is alſo, as I may ſay, Em- 
baſſador,Meſſenger, &c. to do his buſineſs. 
The fixed Stars of ſeveral magnitudes,are Officers and Commanders under theſe; 
I mean thoſe eſpecially of the firſt, ſecond and third magnitude ; the other are only 
ſubjects, as it were, to the above-named, or equivalent ro common people. 
Wherefore then upon the meetings of theſe Superiors, are concluded the riſe,ſub- 
verſion, confirmation, alteration, proſperity, ſcarcity, plenty , poverty, beginning 
and ſubverſion of States, Kingdoms, Empires, Common-wealths, and what not ? nay 
and the whole government of the Elements and this Elementary World,and all things 
and cauſes external and internal inthem, as in a Councel or Senate,&c, 


| Etus deſcend now unto the Sun. We are by Gods bleſling come now to the 
The order of 


The nature The Sx 1s ſo vulgarly known, that here to inſiſt on his colour, complexion or 
and complexi- [ight, were but vain; he is maſculinezDiurnal, the fountain of life, &c. 

on of ©. _  Heexceeds theearth in bigneſs according to T ycho 140 times, Prolomie ſaith 166. 
Globe of ©. Limes, and Copernicns 162. 

Diſtant from He 1s by the eſtimation of Tychs dittant fram the earth, 1150. Semidiameters of 
che earth. the earth. Prolomie ſaith, 1165. ſemidiameters ; and Copermers faith , 1142, ſemi- 


 _ diametersof the earth. 
Mean motien. Hyjs mean motion is 59. m. 8.ſec. 


Diurnal. His Diurnal motion is ſometimes 57. m. 16.1. never exceeding 59. m. 8 ſec. 

Revolution, He finiſheth his courſe through the 12. ſigns of the Zodiack in 365. days, and fix 
hours or neer upon &c. 

a wy When he is well dignified, the King and Nobles ſhall exceed and increaſe in glory 

"aro and renown; Corn, Beaſts and Birds ſhall be plentifull ; the people generally proſpe- 
rous and ſucceſsfull, and all things in a good condition, whereof the Sx fech any 


ſignification : All this is meant, if he be Lord of the year in any annual Revolution; 
but if he be weak, judge the contrary. 
Qualityofmen Emperours, Kings, Monarchs, Princes, Dukes, Marqueſles, ang indeed all Noble 
when well pl» and High-born people, and in general all Gentlemen, and thoſe that are in office or 
ced. command of ſuperiority in City, Town or Countrey ; Coyners,Maiters of the Mint, 
Goldſmiths, Spinners of Gold and Silver, and all juch neat Trades,Silver and Gold- 


wyer-drawers, and the like. 
Tyrants, 


Lib.2. Fudzement of the Stars. 57 


Tyrants, Uſurpers, Conſtables, Head-boroughs, and all ſuch as bear any petty or Whenill placed 
uſurped authority. ; or weak. 

He is Author of magnanimity, ſtate and majeſty, heat, &c. Nature. 

One of no tall tature,but abour the middle ſize, ſtrong and portly,having a ſtate- Corporature or 
I; majeſtical cate, of a taffron-coloured complexion, or Sun-burnt, faxoniſh , or ſhape of body. 
Iiohe fair hair, ſomewhat criſping or curling ; a large full hazle eye,a broad forehead, 
a verv decent, hanſom body throughout. 

The Sr is not, nor cannot be ſaid to be Oriental , or Occidental, other- Oriental, and 
wiſe then as he ,is in any Figure located near the Eaſt angle, or verging towards the Occid:na!, 

Veit ; for all other Plazers are ſaid to be Oriental , or Occidental,as 1n relation to 
the 3x, in that they riſe before him, or ſet after him. | 
The Sa hath never any Latitude ; for he ever moves forward inthe Ec- Latitude. 


cliptick. 
Sowre and ſharp favours. Savours. 
Yellow. | Coloars. 
In man, he ruleth the heart, brain and right eye ; in women, the left eye. "For 


Saffron, Pyony, Mary-gold, Balm, Ginger, Dittany, Sallendine, Vervine, which Herbs and 
being gathered under its proper conltellation, driveth away evil Spirits ; and it 1s [pice-' 
alſo uted in propheſying; Pomcitron, Ambre, Roſemary,St. Fohns-wort, Musk,Herb- 
grace, Roſa-Sohis,Cinamon, Eye-bright,Cinquefoil, Iignum Aloes, Barley,Lavender, 

Sweet Marjoram, Pepper, Frankinfenſe, Honey, Aromaticus, &c. 
The Bay-tree, the Aſh, Cedar, Ivie, the Vine, the Orange and Lem- Trees, 
mon-tree. 
The Phoenix, Swan, Cock, Hawk, Ne , Lark, the Buzzard, &c. Birds. 
e/Etites, the itone called the eye of the Iun, ecaulſe 1t 1s like the apple of the Scones. 
eye in form-, the (arbuncle, the Chryſolite, the ſtone called /rz5 , the ſtone 
Heliotropion , the Hyacinth , the ttone Pyroyphy/ms, the ftone Pantaurasr, Pan- 
therus or Pantochras , in the Scripture it 1s called Evantbum ; the Topaz, Rnbie, 
Diamond. | 
Thelearned and moit famous ornelins Agrippa, Lib.1. Chap.23.of his Occulta Phi- 
I-ſophia faith, that Albertus Magnus and William of Pars gave to theſe ſtones 
theſe vertues as followeth, h 
/Etrtes, orthe ſtone that is found in the Eagles Neſt, cureth the Falling-ſick- The yerrue «of 


neſs, and poyſons. eEtites. 
/ he eye of the Sun, is ſingular good for comforting the brain, and ſtrengthening of the x12 of 
the eye-ſight. the Sun, 
The (arbuzxcle, is of great vertue againſt Acry and vapourous poyſon. Of the Ca;- 


The (bry/clire, is of marvellous operation, in prelerving the Lungs , and xc. 
helpetch much thoſe that are Aithmatical ; and if it be bored through and fil- Of the 3/9 
led with the Mane of an Aſe, and bound to the left arm, it driveth away idle 
imaginations, melancholy tears and fookſhneſs. 

The Ur, 1tis like the Chryſtal in colour, it commonly having fix Corners ; it Of the Tz 
being part held-in the ſhadow and part inthe rays or beams of the S#y, it gather- 

- tie rays of the $zx into it ſelf, and refleteth them again in the form of a Rain- 

OW. 

The He/iotropion, is in colour green like a Jaſper, ſpeckled with red ; this cauſeth Of the 14-0. 

the bearer to be conftant, renowned, famous, and conduceth to long life ; it is ſaid 97/7 
to turn the beams of the Sux into the colour of blood, viz. when it is joyn- 
ed to the juice of the herb of the ſame name and put into water, it dazleth the 
wry ſo much that the bearer can hardly ſee it by the help of the aforeſaid 

erÞ. 

The Hyacinth, is g00d againſt poyſon and peſtiferous vapours; it keepeth the Of the 1134. 
bearer ſafe and acceptable; it conduceth alſo to riches and wit; it ſtrengthens the £#- 
heart, being held in the mouth, and wonderfully cheereth the minde. 

The *Pyrophilas as »/Eſculapias maketh mention, There 1s a certain poiſon /o very 
cold, which preſerves the heart of mai (being taken ont ) from burning, ſo that if for any 
7 


time 


Ot the Py-0- 
Plus. 


Of the P.ze 


Look my Lux 
Ver itilhs. 


Minerals, 


Fitics, 


Beaſts. 


Weather, 


Places. 


Winds. 


$igns. 

1 riplicity. 

Exaltation, 
Detrimentr. 


Fall, 
Age. 
Angel. 


Friends. 
I nemles. 


eAn Introduftion to the  Lib.2. 


trme it be put into the fire, it is turned into a ſtone; whence 1t 15 called Pyrophilns from 
the fire. 

It is marvelloutly efficacious againſt poyſon,and it makes the bearer renowned and 
dreadtull to lis enemies. | 

The Partazra 1s of that ſympathetical vertue that it draweth other ſtones to it 
as a load-itone doth iron; admirable againſt Poytons. 

I know there are many good wits in this Nation that have not the leaſt faith in theſe 
matters concerning the vertues of ſtones, and indeed of the whole ſcope of thefe my 
writings; yet they mult pardon me if I will not conclude as the vulgar and illiterate in 
fuch myltertes do; tor 1 have learned this modeſt leſſon ( which I could wiſh were alſo 
imprinted 1n their breſts) Mor ro condemn what I am ignorant of ; tor of all things (in 
my opinion) there can be none fo ridiculous as for a man to dillike, contradict, pain- 
fay or condemn what he is ignorant of: if thou haſt no behef in theſe matters; yer 
mayit thou benetir thy ſelf thereby ; it is but thy pains in trying the concluli- 
ons; if they tail, then mayſt thou on good ground condemn them; if they hir, 
thou reapeit hereby a double benefit, knowledge and experience ; wherefore by 
the way 1 thought good to hint at this, that thou mayeſt nor perſiſt in thy ill concert 
of this Heavenly Art of the Judgment of the ſtars , or Aſtrology, ſince thou may(it 
Jetit alone till thou beeſt urged by any Artiſt ro have any elteem thereof, though ne- 
ver ſo flight: but to our bulineſs in hand. 

Of Metrals or Mine-als, the $#z ruleth gold. 

The Sea-Calt, whoſe Nature is to retift 1ghtning , Shel-fiſh , the Star-fiſh for 
her parching heat,and the fiſhes called Srromb: that tollow their King, and Margars 
which have a King alſo; theſe Margart being dryed,are fixed into a ttone of a golden 
colour, as witnefleth { ornel::zs Aprippa. 

All ſuch Beats as are ſtately, furious, bold, ſtrong and invincible, as the 
Lion, Crocodile, Wolf, Ram, Boar , Bull, Horſe, and Baboon, of the which 
it is Recorded, that he barketh every hour in the day, viz. twelve times in a 
day, and that in the Equinoctial times of the year he piffeth twelve times, 
viz,cvery hour,allo as often in the night Ge/zer on Beaſts,pag. 10.W hence the Fgypri- 
ans ( as Cornelius Agrippa and others, Lib.1. cap. 23. de Occult. Philoſ, relate) 
did uſe to engrave them on their Fountains. 

Moreover the ©-+ gyptians did uſe to preſerve them amongſt their hollowed 
things ; for that by them they knew the time of the Conjunction of Sol and Lua, 
(fee Geſucr of Beaits pag.10.) for after the aforeſaid Conjun&tion, the Male Baboon 
will neither look up nor eat, but goes ſtil} dejected,as it were lamenting the raviſhment 
of the 109, with this diſdainfull paſſion ; in like manner the Female at that 
time ſendeth forth blood out of her womb of Conception ; for which caufe the 
Egyptians ſignifie by a Babson the Acorn, and her rifing by his ſtanding upright, 
holding his hands up toward heaven. 

He caufeth Weather according to the Seaſon, &c. of the which more here- 
after, | 

Princes Palaces, Courts, Houſes, all magnificent Buildings, Halls , Dining- 
rooms, Parlers, &c. | 

He loveth and delighteth in the Eaſt part of the World , and Eaſtern 
Winds. 

Of the Celeſtial ſigns, he ruleth for his houſe only Leo. 

He ruleth by day the fiery Triplicity, viz. Aries, Leo, and Sagittary- 

He is exalted in Aries the 19. degree. 

He ſuffreth Detriment in eAquaries. 

And Fallin Libra. 

The itrength of years. 

His Angel 1s Michael. 

His Friends are, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, Mercury, and Luna. 

His Enemy Satwrn only. 


"A Ft Ecy 


ws 4 KS 
oe IS 3-05 iy 
EO ER PE 


ESO 
«a4 OL Fe - - oh A ad OS ob xd 
£4 - CEA " S L5 * \ Se by FIVS 
o FN OE Aa). 2 7 . a Se” =D -- > 
TE 3 IA ORR of WY Boon Bhs Ix $250? LE 2-446 


? 


5 
Fes 
* 
HH 
+ 
b- 

wh [7 

> 


1. 
5 
13 
S::2904 
, ws 
3 
L-- " 
<, 
4 I 
»'/ 
is 
4284 
is 
PEE 
"fe 
1 
X1 
TAR 
Be 
5 


. Lib.2: Tudgement of the Stars. 59 


He ruleth S»»day of the days of the week, and of the nights that which we call Day of the 
Wedneſday night. | week, 

He ruleth the fowrth (limate, Italy, Bohemia , Sicilia , Caldea, the Roman Regions. 
Empire. | 


Is 15. degrees before and after any Aſpect. Otbe, 

In conception he ruleth the fourth moneth. | Conception 
His greateſt years are 1640. —_— 
Yet Bonatws, and ſome others ſay, but 461. 

His greater years are | 120. 

His mean years are 69. 

His leaſt years are 19. 


In journeys he giveth good ſucceſs. | Tourneys: 
He ſignifieth hot and dry Diſeaſes, palpitation of the heart, infirmities of the piſcates. 

eyes, cramps, ſoundings, giddineſs in the head, diſeaſes and infirmities of the mouth 

and brain,Catharrs, rotten Feavers, &c. 
The $#» is never Stationary. Sales: 
He moveth always dire& in the Ecliptick, and is never Retrograde. Retrograde. 


—AETY a ooo O—— _— 


CHay. V, 


Of the Nature and Signfications of VENPFS. 


Come now to Yenw, who is next under $01, ſhe is the leſſer Fortune, tranſparent, The nauure 
bright and ſhining ; ſhe is very well known by the Country people by the name and compiexi: 
of the Evening Star, when ſhe ſets after the Sx ; and ſhe 15 ſometimes by them 92 of F. 
called the morning Star when ſhe riſeth before the Sun, Feminine and NoCturral. 
And again, by ſome ſhe is called the Shepherds Star. 

She is to our ſight the biggeſt of all the Stars and Planets, except So/, and Lnna ; The” globe 
yet according to 7 ycho, ſhe 1s leſs then the earth ſix times: Prolomy, Albotegnim of F. 
ard Alfraganus ſay 36. times, &c. 
She is diſtant from the earth, according to the ſame Prolomie, Albotegnins aud eAl- 


=T : Dj 
fraganns,618.ſemidiameters of the earth, but Tycho and Copernicus ſay 1150. +0 ging 
Her mean motion 15 59. m. 8.ſec. Mean and diur. 


Her diurnal motion is ſometimes 62.m.64.m. 65.m.66.m. 70.m. 74.m. or 76.m. but nal morton. 
ſhe never exceedeth 82. m. 
She finiſheth her courſe through the twelve ſigns of the Zodiack in the ſame time Revolution. 
the $#» doth, or thereabouts. ; 
When ſheis Lady of the year inany Revolution, and eſſentially dignified, the year When well for- 
will be advantagious unto women, who ſhall generally be free from infirmities and tified. | 


miſchiefs ; they ſhall love and delight in the ſociety of their Husbands, ſhall be fruit- 


full, eaſily conceive and bring forth ; the people ſhall alſo generally thrive and be pro- 
ſperous, ſhall delight themſelves in recreations, ſports, feaſtings, mirth and jollities, 
and all pleaſure whatſoever; alſo in fine apparel ; but if ſhe be weak, judge the When ill pla- . 
contrary. _ 

Muſitians in general, Gameſters, and what Game ſvever it be, Embroyderers, Qualitle of 
Jewellers, Linnen-Drapers, Perfumers, Piture-Drawers, Ingravers, Mercers , Silk- men when well 
men , and all ſuch Occupations as ſerve to the adorning of women, &c. Women, placed, 
Waves, Mothers, Virgins, &c. 

Fidlers, Pipers, ordinary Painters, Seamſters, Glovers, Womens-Taylors, Up- wer il placed 
holſterers, &c. or weak. 

She is author of yoluptuouſneſs and pleaſure. 

Il 2 A 


. 60 


( .Orp* raiuice or 


ſh3j © ot budy. 


A' Een oriental. 


* v ? 
C)Vecraanta . 


Nec ih 'ati.ude. 


Souh latitude, 


S:Vours. 
Coloars. 
]:; man. 


Hebs and 
ſpice. 


Trees and 
perfumes. 


B:rds, 


Stones. 


Mincrals. 


Fiſlies. 
Bealts. 


Weather. 
Wind, 
Places 


Signs. 
Triplici:y, 
Exaitation. 
Detriment. 
Fall. 

H\ge. 
Angel. 
FEnemic, 
Fricnds. 
Pay of the 
wcek. 

h. cgions. 


QOtbe. 
X cars. 


Journeys, 
Diſeaſes, 


a An tntrodutton to-the Lib.2. 


A light brown hair, ſmooth, and much of it, a mean ſtature, a fair complexion, 
tending to blackneſs ; lovely black eyes, a round face, having a Love-dimple in the 
chin, a lovely mouth, cherry lips, extraordinary lovely and delightfull, a pleaſant ta- 
king countenance, an exceeding well-ſhaped body throughour, loving neatneſs,ſpruce- 
ncis, trimming and the like ; lovely in all his geſtures, ſpeaking ſoftly and ſweetly, {tu- 
dious and fold in his deportment ; in all exerciſes of the body hght and nimble. 

\\ hen ſhe 1s Oriental, ſhe gives a taller ſtature, upright and itraight, not corpu- 
lent. but decently compoſed. 
\hen Occidental,not ſotall, yer very comely and well-tavoured, 

Her greatett North latitude 1s 9. deg. 2. min. 

Her South latitude, atthe molt, 1s no more. 

Lelightiull, pleaſant, roothſom, ſweet ſavours. 

- Blew, tencins to white, or white, &c. 


The Reins, Back-bone, Seed, andthe Veſſels of Seed, the Privy-parts both of 


manand woman. 

All fuch herbs and plants as are odoriferous, pleaſant, ſweet and deleRable, and 
ſuch as invite to Venery, viz. the Satyrian, Daffidel, Cucko-Pintle , Maiden-hair, 
the Violet, Valerian, Vervin, Time, he Roſe, Lilly, &c. All ſuch Spices as are fra- 


grant and tweet, &c. 


' The Fig-tree. Pomegranate, the Cypres, ſweet Apple-tree,Pear-tree, the Mirtle- 
tree, Walnut, Almond-tree, Peach, Apricoks, the Raiſon-tree or Vine, Turpentine- 
tree, the wild Aſh-tree,&c.And of-Pertumes, Amber-greeſe, Musk, Civet,the Gum 
Ladanum, and all ſuch ſweet Pertumes, Frankinſenſe, &c. 

2 The Swan, \Water-wag-rail , Swallow, Felican Nightingal, Pigeon, Sparrow, 
Turtle-Dove, Stock-Dove, Crow, the Burgander, the Eagle ; becauſe as the Egyp- 
tians report, it will come to the Male (if called) after ſhe hath been trod thirteen 
times in a day, the Partridge, Thruſh, Black-bird, Pye, Wren, &c. 

The Beril, Chryſolite, Emrauld, Saphyr, Green Jaſper, Corneola, tites, the 
Lazul, Coral, Alabaſter, Marble. 

Copper, Braſs, and ſometimes Silver, &c. 

The Pylchard, Gilthead, the Whiting, Crab, Tithymallus, Dolphin. 

All fuch Animals as are of a ſtrong love, delicious or luxurious; the Dog, Cony, 

Sheep, Goat, Bull, Calf, Panther and Hart. 

Weather,ſhe denotes gentle ſhowres in Winter, and temperate heat in Summer. 

The South wind. p-:- 

Beds and Bed-chambers, Dining-rooms, Dancing-ſchools, Gardens, Fountains, 
Wardrobes, Banqueting-houſes, Play-houſes, and Bawdy-houſes. 

Of the Ccoleitial ſigns, ſhe ruleth, and hath for her houſes T axras and Libra. 

She ruleth the Earthy Triplicity by day, viz. Taurns, Virgo and Capricorn, 

She hath Exaltation in the 27. deg, of Piſces, 

She ſuffereth Detriment in Ares and Scorpio. 

She is1n her Fallinthe 27. deg. of Yi7ge. 

From 14. to 22. | 

eAnacl. 

Saturn only. 

Friends are Zupiter, Mars, Sol, Mercury and Lana, | 

She hath F714ay afligned to her Dominion, and that night we call Monday night. 

by ts Auſtria, Campania, Polonia,Cyprus, Vienna, Parthia, Turin, and the f1xth 

Climate. 

Her Orbe is 7. deg. before and after any AſpeR. 


Her greateit years are IFI, 
Her greater years are | 82, 
Her mean years are 45- 
Her leaſt years are I5. 


5 
In Journeys, ſhe cauſes good ſucceſs, mirth, and ſport by the way. 


Cold and moyſt Diſeaſes, ſuch as happen in the members of ——_ ws, 
adder, 


Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stars. "1 


bladder, back, belly,navel, matrix, the Running of the reins, Gonorrea , Pox, both 
French and Neapolitan, Priapiſm, Surfets, the Piſſing Diſeaſe ; weakneſs in the reins 
and members of generation, all ſtrains by over much exceſs of Luſt. 
| She is two days Stationary before Retrogradation , and two days before Di- Stationary. 
retion. | 
She is 42, days Retrograde. | | Retrograde, 


# 
I 
B; 
4.7 
% 
*# 
" 


+ 
= 
K 
[4 
z 
$4.5. 
i W- 
Z 1 


— cc e——_ —_ ——__—— —_—  - —— 


CHayrp. VI. 


Of the Nature and Siznifications of M ER CY RY. 


Frer Venus, or next under her, and above Lana,is located Mercary, of whom rg rope : 
L 


E A by Gods bleſling we are come nowto Treat ; he is of a filver-colour , but git, 5. 
Ei duskiſh ; ſeldom ſeen by us, by reaſon of his proximity to the Sz», he being «ye, 
.; never di{tant from him above 27. degrees to our fight : he is the leaſt of all the Pla- 
E nets to our ſight, except Satzru; bur according to T cho, he is leſs then the earth Globe of 5. 
L 19. times ; A/bategnins faith 19000. times, and eA!fraganns 22000. times. 
And by the opinion of Tycho, he is diſtant from the earth 1150. ſemidiameters of Diltane from 
the earth; «Albotegnins and Alfraganns ſay but 115. ſemidiameters of the earth. the earth. 
He is like an Hermophridite, participating of both ſex ; he is Maſculine when joyn- Nature of 5. 
ed by Conjunction or Aſpect to a Maſculine Planer, Feminine when with a Femi- 
nine ; good and fortunate when joyned with the Fortunes; bad and miſchievous when 
joyned to or with the Malevolents, 
His mean motion is 59.m. $.ſec. and ſometimes 40. m. never more. Motion mean, 
His Diurnal motion is never above 150.m, in a day, ſometimes 86.m. $0.m. 70.m. Pirnal. 
68.m. and 66.m, | | 
He finiſheth his courſe through the 12. ſigns of the Zodiack, much about the time Annual mo- 
that Yenes doth, yer he is the ſwitter of the two by ſomewhat. _ 
When AMercary 1s ſtrong and Lord of the year,he ſignifies, Merchants, Tradeſmen, ?. when well 
and all ſuch as give their minds to learning Arts and Sciences, ſhafl have a ſucceſsful} fied. 
' year; butif he be weak, judge the contrary. : 
Altrologers, Philoſophers, Mathematicians, Secretaries, Diviners , Merchants, Quailey _—_ 
Sculptors, Poets, Advocates, School-matters, Orators,Embafſadors, Commillioners, dignified 
Atturneys, Ingenious Artificers, &c. and all learned men in general. : 
Scriveners, Accomprants, Clerks, Sollicitors, I hieves, Carriers, Meſſengers, Foot- When ill placed 
men, Uſurers, Petty-toggers, &c. and wear, 
He is Author of Wit, Fancy, Ingenuity, and Invention. Nature. 
Not much colour in his face, nor much abounding in white nor duskiſh, but a kind Corporature. 
of a Sun-burnt-colour, long viſage,a high forehead, long noſe, thin lips ; his eyes of a 
{addiſh gray, not altogether black ; a dark brown hair,long hands and fingers, and of 
a tall, upright, ſtraighr, ſpare body. 
When he is Oriental, he is not very high, but big-boned, of a honey-coloured Oriencat. 
comp ſmall eyes, and in diſpoſition one altogether ſelf-ended , but well 
aped. 
When Occidental, of a thin ſpare body,ſwarthy viſage, hollow-eyed,of a dry con- Occidencal. 
ſtitution, &c. | 
His greateſt North latitude is 3.d. 33.m. North latitude: 
His greateſt South latitude is. 3.d. 35.m. 
Sowriſh, and ſharp ſavours. 
A mixt Galimaufry of colours, purple, &c. : | ” "OA 
The brain, tongue, and left ear: bis was. 
The 


South latitude. 
Savours. 


G2 


Herbs, and 
D: US. 


Trees, 
Birds. 


Serpents. 
Crcones. 


MI incrabs. 
Fills, 
Beaſts. 


Weather, 


Winds. 


Places. 


Signs. 


Triplicicy. 
Exaltation, 
Detciment. 
Fall. 

Age. 
Angel. 


Enemles. 
Friends. 


Dayof the week 


Regions, 


Ocbe. 


In conception. 


Yeats, 


Journeys. 
Diſeaſcs. 


Scationary, 
Retrograde. 


 eAn Introduttion to the Lib.2. 


The herb Adercary, Five-leaved graſs, Fumitory,Marjorum, Parſly, Pimpernel,and 
ſuch as are of divers colours, and mixed natures ; they have chiefly relation to the 
brain and tongue, to diſpel wind, co comfort the ſpirits,and open obſtructions; Adders- 
tongue, Lungwort, Dragonwort, Cubabs, and all ſuch herbs as are beneficiall to the 
Mules and Divination, as Vervin, Hiera, Treacle, Diambra. 

The Walnut-tree, Filbert-tree, Hazel, &c. 

Thoſe Birds that are Naturally witty, melodious and inconſtant,asthe Linet,Nigh- 
tingal, Black-bird, Thruſh, the Bird Ibis, the Bird Porphyrio, Parret, Swallow, Po- 
pinjay, Cockatoo, Crane,the Jack-Daw, Lark, the Bird Calandra. 

| Serpents and Adders. 
The Emrald, Agates, Red marble, Topaz, and ſuch as are of divers colours, Mil- 


ſtone, Marchalite. 


Quickſilver, Tin and Silver Marchaſite. 

The Trochius, the Fox-fiſh, the Muller, the Pourcontrell, the Fork-fiſh. 

Of Beaſts, the Dog, and ſuch as are of quick ſenſe, ingenious, inconſtant, ſwift, 
and ſuch as are eaſily acquainted with man,Apes, Foxes, Weeſles, the Hart and Mule, 
the Hare, Civet-cat, $quirrel, Spider; Piſmire, the Hyzna, &c. 

He muſt roopelly be obſerved,the ſign he is in, and ſeaſon of the year; but uſual- 
ly he cauſes rain, hail-ſtorms, ſometimes thunder and lightning, according to the na- 
ture of the Planets in configuration with him, of the which more hereafter. 

He delighteth in the Northern Quarter of Heaven; yet commonly he cauſeth ſuch 
winds as are ſignified by the Planer co which he applies. | 

Schools, Common-hals, Tennis-Courts, Fairs, Ordinaries, Markets, Bowling- 
Allies, Tradeſmens-ſhops ; in a gentlemans-houſe, his Hall,&c. Studies, Libraries.. . 

Of the Caleſtial ſigns , he hath for his houſes which he ruleth , Gemini; and 
Virgo. | 
He ruleth the Acry Triplicity by night, viz. Gemini, Libra, and eAquaries. 

He is exalted in Virgo the 15. degree. ; 

He ſuffreth Detrimeat in Sagittary and P3ſces. 

His Fall is in the 15, deg. of Pi/cer, 

From 7. to 14, 

Raphael. 

His Enemies are ary, Sel, and Luna. 

His Friends are 7apiter, Venus, and Satwry. 

He ruleth Wedneſday, and that night we call Saturday night, 

Flanders, Gracia, «Egypt, and Indies both Eaſt and Weſt. 

His Orbe 1s ſeven degrees before and after any Aſpect. 

He ruleth the ſixth moneth. 

His greateſt years are 450. 

His greater years are 76. 

His mean years are 48. 

His leaſt years are 20, 

in Journeys, he is according as he placed and in Aſpe@ with the other Planets. 

Vertigo's, Lethargies, Madneſs, Frenſies, Diſeaſes of the brain, Ptiſick, Stam- 
merings, DefeRs in the memory, Hoarſneſs, Dry-cough, the Hand and Feet-gour, 
all imperfeRions inthe Fancy. 

He is Stationary one day before Retrogradation, and one day before direRion. 
He is Retrograde 24. days. | 


+5 
+Y 
F F 
Lo 
VL 
7 
= 


2.0 


ONES 


Lib.2. Tudgement of the Stars, 63 


CHapP, VII. 
Of the Nature and Siznifications of the MO O N. 


next unto the earth,which is the Afoon ; ſhe is Feminine and Nocturnal; 
| | and complex[- 
her colour 15 fo vulgarly known, that it were ſuperfluous or needleſs here ,, of y, 
torelate , ſince our intentions and ſcope of our writings are to inform the ignorant | 
and illiterate of what they as yer are ignorant of ; ſhe is the biggeſt of Planets to 
our outward ſight, except the Sz» ; nay and it is hardly diſcernable externally, which 
of the two 1s the greater; but this is by reaſon of their nearneſs unto our ſight, whence 
in Genefi; ſhe 1s called one of the two great lights (which is to be underſtood as in Globe of 9; 
relation to our fight.) Bur according to T cho, is 42. times leſs then the earth. Pre- 
lomie ſaith 39. times, and Copernicz 43. times; 

And according to T ycho, ſhe is leſs then So/ 5848. times; Prolomie ſaith 6348. Compariſon 
times, and Copernic#s 7000. times. 7 | of ©. 

And dittant from the earth, according to Tycho, 60. ſemidiameters at her greateit Diſtant from 
elongation; in her leaſt elongation but 52. ſemidiameters 3 Prolomie ſaith 64. ſemi. >< carth. 
diameters; her leaſt 34. and her mean 49. Copernicus faith, her greateſt 68. her leaſt 
52. and her mean 60. | 

She is neither fortunate nor unfortunate , but as ſhe is placed and in configura- Nawre of 9; 
tion with eicher the Fortunes or Malevolents; ſhe is moſt powerfull in operation of 
all the other Planets, on Elementary bodies, by reaſon of their proximity tous, and 
her ſwiftneſs , by which ſhe transfers the light and influence of all the Superiors to 


Y Intentions are now to treat of the lowermoſt of all the Planets; and 
The nature 


_ us, by her configuration with them. 


Her mean motion 1s 13. deg. 10. min. 36. ſec. ' "ANI 

She never exceedeth 15. deg. 2. minutes in one day. 

She tiniſheth her courſe through the 1 2. ſigns of the Zodiack in 27. days, ſeven 
hours and 45. minutes or thereabouts. 

Moon Lady of the year, anditrong in any Revolution, denotesthere ſhall be no y When wel! 
want of rain 1a its due ſeaſon, both former and latter ; men ſhall be generall healthy, places. 
fortunate, ſafe and punctual in all their ations aud promiſes, eſpecially if ſhe be in 
reception with her diſpoſitor or good AſpeR therewith, &c. bur if ſhe be then weak When ill ola. 
and unfortunate, you are to judge the contrary. = ow 

One of a paliſh, whitiſh colour, round face, gray-eyes, yet having a kind of a Corporature, 
lowring or cloudiſh eye-brow, very hairy, fleſhie and plump, of a large ſtature, cor- 


Diurnal. 
Revolution. 


pulent, and well ſer. 
When Oriental, ſhe inclineth more to fatneſs. ' Oriental. 
When Occidental, nor fo well ſer. Occidental. 
Her greateſt North laticude, is, 5. deg. 17. ſec. North latitude, 
Her a South latitude, is, 5. =. 4 ſec. bor mo; South latitude. 
She fignifieth common people. Qualityof men 
Freſh watriſh taſtes, or fach as one can hardly ſay what taſte it is of. Savours. 
Silver-colour, white, a pale-green, and a pale yellow. Colours. 


She ruleth the Flegmatick humour, the brain, all watriſh and excrementitious hu- 16 -a:. 

mours ; the left eye, and the right eye of a woman, her menſtrues, &c. 

Sea tangle , Lunaria or the 1700n-herb, Hyſope, Roſemary. Agnus-caſtus, the herb Herbs. 
Chinoſta, Pompion,Melon, Muskmelon,Gourd, Cucumber, Colwort, Cabbidge, En- 
dive, Muſhrooms, Poppy, Lintſeed, Rapeſeed, and all ſuch herbs as turn towards 
the M-9n, and increaſe and decreaſe as ſhe doth. 

The Palm-tree, for that it ſends forth a twig every time the ſoon riſeth, and all © rees and 

ſuch trees and plants as participate or ſympathize with her , and are juicy and full Plants. 
of ſap Gooſe 


64. 


Birds. 


Stones. 


\A{iner2's. 


Fiſhcs. 


Beaſts, 


Places, 


Weather. 


Wind. © 
Signs. 
Triplicity. 


EF xaltation. 
Detriment. 
Fall. 

Age. 
Angel. 
Enemies, 


Friends. 


Dayof the week 


Reglons, 
Orb. 


Yeats. 


In conception. 


Journeys. 


Diſeaſes. 


$cationary, 
Retrograde. 


*An Introdutton to the Lib.2. 


Gooſe, Swan, Duck, Divedapper, Moor-hen , and all Fowl ufing the water, 
Night-owl, Night-raven, Bat, &c. 

All ftones that are white and green, the Marchaſite , the Chryſtal, the Senenite, 
and fott ftones. 

S1]ver. 

e/£lurus , whole eyes increaſe and decreaſe according to the courſe of the Moon, 
all fiſh of the like nature ; the Tortoiſe, the Echeners, Crab, Oitter, Lobſter, Cockle, 


Mulicle, and all ſhel-{iſh , alfo the Eele, &c. 


Such Bealits as uſe and delight in water, as the Otter, &c. and ſuch as ſympathize 


any wiſe with the Moon, as the Camelion, Dog,tHog, Frog, Hind, Goat, Baboon, Pan- 


ther, Cat, the Civer Cat, all monitrous Beaits, Mice, Rats, &c. Of the Baboons 
paſſions I forbear here to ſpeak , 1fince you have had it related inthe 4.chaprer, be- 
ing cauſed by the fecret influence of Sol and Luna. 
Fountains, Fields, Sea-Ports, High-ways, Rivers. Deſerts, Pools, F:ſh-Ponds, 
Bogs, Brooks, Docks, Springs, Common-ſhores, W harffs, &c. 
According to her contiguration with the other Planets, viz with,*Satury, cold, 
moylt afid clowdy weather; with 7zpicer heat and temperate ayr ; with 1-75 wind and 


clouds ; with the $#» according to the time of the year ; with Years ſhowres ; with 
Mercury wind and rain. 


She uſually cauſeth that wind ſignified by the Planet ſhe applies unto. 

Of the. Celeſtial ſ1gns ſhe hath bur one tor her houſe, v.z. Cancer. 

Her Triplicity is the earthy Triplicity ,wluch ſhe ruleth by night ,viz.7 aurns Yireo, 
and Capricory. 

Her Exaltation is in Tawrss the 2. degree 

She ſuffers detriment in ({apricory. 

Fall in Scorpio 3. degree. 

Infancy till ſeven years of Age. 

Gabriel. 

Her Enemies are Saturn, and Mars. 

Her Friends are 7«piter, Sol, Venus and Mercury, 

Of thedays of the week, ſhe ruleth JZonday and that night we commonly call 
Thurſday night. 

Denmark, Holland, Zealand, Flanders, Norinberge. 

Her Orbe 1s twelve degrees before and after any Aſpect. 

Her greateſt years are 320. 

Her greater;years are 108. 

Her mean years are 66. 

Her leaſt years are 25. 

In conception ſhe ruleth the ſeventh moneth. 

According as ſhe is ſtrong or weak, ſtrengthened or debilitated. 

Megrims, Frenzies , Apoplexies, Vertigoes, Wind-Cholick, Diſeaſes in the blad- 
der, Teſticles and left-fide, and in the liver of women, and mernvers of Generation, 
Menſtrues , Fluxes , cold Rhumes, Belchings, cold ſtomack, hurts in the left eyes of 
men, and right of women, Sciatica, Surfets, Coughs, Convulſtons, Falling-ſicknelſs, 
Apoſthumes, ſmall Pox, Meaſles, and the Kings-evil. 

She is never ſtationary. 

Nor Retrograde, but when ſhe goeth leſs then 1 3.deg. in 24.hours,ſhe is accompt- 
ed equivalent to a Planet retrograde ; but in her own proper motion ſhe ever moverh 
direct forward. 


Lib.2. 


\ 


) / 


4 


122.4 
OY mA 
Wy 


— 


CH 


P, 


Fudgement of the Stars. 


VIII. 


of the Eſſential Dignties of the Planets. 


full here relate. 


A Planet then is ſaid to be eſſentially ſtrong, or in eſſential Dignities, when he is 
in his own Hoxſe, E xaltation, Triplicity, Term, or Face. How theſe are aſligned to 
every Planet, you may ſee by this Table following, though there hath been much diſ- 
ſention therein amongſt the Ancients ; with the which if thou agree nor, I hope thou 


Have already ſhewed the Natures and Significations of the Planets; 
I am come now to ſhew their eſſential Dignities , without the which 
there can no part of this Art be underſt 
neficial ; wherefore it is neceſſary that all the Students herein , wanily 
obſerve their Fortitudes and Debillities in an 
which end they mutt be exceeding well skille 
may diligently ſtudy to do, I will (God inabling me) cordially and ſincerely to the 


, Or indeed be any wiſe be- 


rt of their works; to 
erein; which, that they 


art not hurt hereby, ſince thou haſt liberty to follow what Authors thou pleaſeſt. 


A Table of the eſſential Dignities of the Planets accord- 

4 ins to Ptolomie. 

es | gal» 0g The terms of the The Faces of Derci-, y 
Z PLaners| ations-ſh, x, Planets the Planets. Ment. |= 
7 & Dſ> 29® B[Þ 67 149 21 26h 30/3 19] 26ſe 302 ſh 
SNP 3s ſ2 85 5] 22h 26/d 30] rolp aoſh zo & | 
mie IQ gÞþ 2 7% wp iſs 25h 3086 109 2912 30] % Joy 
Sl» NugZ eos dv 13 2 20|2 27] h 30|& 10/5 20 »)30] Þ | 
ale | [oe w|» 6/13] 19/2 25] 30] h10|Y zo[& 30 E»4. 
m [6 Nſz i5ſg Þ o "71e 13/8 18h 24/4 30/0 109 20/2 30 y% [7 
=ſe DſÞ 2zjþ ©|þ 6p 17 19s 24/6 30D 15h aol 20] & fo 
im | N|___|# && 62 14]% 21/2 27]h 308 19/9 zeſ2 30] 9 | 

3 jy Dſty 3/2 ju 8 14/7 19h 25/4 307 10D 20hh 3o| & [Hf 
+ |" N34 a8'y »ſp 619 12]Þ 19h 25j& 30N 10/4 20]O 30] » iy | 
=|b D[__[_2 oe eas 20 30/2 io 32 ©] 
ls NT le 21 ol ale 263 adlh 36h 20 aol. 301-2 le. 


N the firſt Column you haye V', =, n., &c. under each other to the 
over themi'is written ſigns, intimating all theſe beneath are the 


he fgns 


end of the ſi 
CharaRers of t 

Inthe next Column to ſigns, you have written the Houſes of the Planets, under 
which you ſee & . D. over againſt it on the left hand is"; and under &. D. you 
have Q . N. and over againſt her on the left hand, +. intimating no more but this, 
that 3” is 4 his day houſe, ſignified by D. and +; is 9 her night houſe, ſignified by 
N. and ſoallalong underneath you have declared what ſign properly belongeth to 


every Planer. 


The 7/ſe of the Table. 


K 


When a Plane: 
is effentially 
dignified or 
fartified, 


66 


To know tte 
ſtrengths and 
' debilities of 
the Planets in 
any figure. 


e An Introduttion to the Lib.2. 


Inthe next column you ſee wtitten Exaltations ; under it and over againſt Y , you 
fiade + 19. andunder him, overagainſt v5, you ſee » 3. whichis, © inthe 19. de- 
grec of Y' isin the very point of his exaltation, and » inthe 3. degree of & ; and 
o of thereſt. 

In the next column you ſeeTreplicities,and under is D.N.8& under D.N.you have ©  . 
© under D.and y under N.andover againſt Y ;fo alſo over againſt 3, in the ſame co- 
lumn you fee © Y, and again overagainſt  ; which ſhews no more but that the 
© hath triplicity in the Day, ſignified by D. in theſe three fiery ſigns or Triplicity ; 
and Y in the night fignified by N. ſo you may ſee 2 and » rule the Trih 
city, 2 byday, » bynight; th aud © the acry; & the —_ only ; wherefore 
you finde both under D, and N. ſhewing that both night and day he ruleth the 
watry Irygon. 


 Inthe next column and over apgainft Y , you ſee Y 6. and inthe next cokhumn 9 
14. and next unto her over againſt Y* ftilf you finde 5 21. &c. and over their heads 


ycu have written The terms of the Planets ; the meaning whereof is, that Þ in the 
firſt 6. degrees of 7 hathterms, 9 from 6. to 14. hath terms, 7» from 14. to 21. 
hath cerms, &c. and ſo in order of therett. 

Inthe tenth column over againſt Y , you finde 4 10. © 20. and Q 30. over their 
heads, The faces of the Planets, which 15,4 in the firſt 10. degrees of V hath a face, 
© from 10. to 20. degrees, and 9 from 20. to 30. degrees : mark this all along in 
the rett. | 

In the thirteenth column, you finde 2 over againſt Y , and under her 4 over 
againſt 5 , next % over againſt It , and over all, written Derriment , in- 


timating $ inV,d int, Y in 0 are indetriment, viz. in houſes that are oppo- 


ſite to their own, whereby they are debilitated or ſuffer detriment or damage, and 
ſo you may ſee of all the reſt of the Planets. 

In the laſt column you finde over againſt Y, h ; over againſt = ,@; over againſt 
T, 2, andover all, written Fa/, ſhewing that h in, cGin&, $ inm, &c. are 
in their Falls, 2:z. in the ſigns oppoſite to their exaltations. 


But, that yon may fully examine the ſtrengths and debihties of the Planets, in the 
judging of any part of this Science, and to know how many dignities effential a Pla- 
net hath; when in Exaltation, what in houſe, how many in Triplicity, term or face; 


nay and accidental dignities, as being in AſpeRt or ConjunRion with the Fortunes, 
and located in good houſes,&c, or debilities eſſential or accidental,bave ſpecial regard 
to this following Table. 


A Table, ſhewing the Fortitudes and Debilities of the Planets. 


Eſenial Dignitier. Debilitier. 
A Planet in his own houſe, or mutual re- | In Detriment. 5 
ception by houſe ſhall have dignities. 5 | In Fall. 4 
In exaltation , or reception by exalta- | Peregrine, 5 
tion. 41 
In Triplicity. | 
In Term. .2 
In decanet or face. I 
eAcridemal Fertitudes. Accidental Debilities. 
In Mediam Czh, or aſcendant, 5 | In the 12. houſe. $ 
In the 7. 4. or 11. hoakes, 4 | Inthe 8. or 6, 2 
 Inthe2.0r5. 3 ! Retrograde. 5 
In the 9. 2 | Slow in motign. 2 
hsY> 


Liþ.2. Fudgment of the Stars. 


Inthe 3. Hh, Y andd occidental. 2 
PireR. 2 and y oriental. 2 
Swift in motion. » decreaſing in light. 2 
, 4, or & oriental. 2 | Combuſt of ©. $ 
y and v7 occidental, - 2 | Under © beams. 4 
'> occidental,or increaſing, 2 | Partil & with h or@. $s 
4 
3 
4 
3 
©. 


Free from combuſtion and © beams. F | Partil & with V. 

In Cazemi. 5 | Beſieged of h or 2. 

In Partil 4 with Þ and 9. 5 | Partil p of hord. 

In Partil with 92. Partil 7 of h ord. 

In Partil A with Y or 9. In Conjunction with Caput Algol in 2 
In Partil * with Y or Q. degrees of Tawrns. 

In & with Cor 5. in 24. deg. of Q, ; 
In & with Spica ix in 18. deg. =. 


Cuar 1% 


Shewing the ſe of theſe former dignities, Ec. 


Planet in his own houſe, and he ſignificator , he ſhews a good {tate of the in his own 
perſon or thing he ſignifieth in any ſcheam whatſoever. As if inthe Revolu- boule fignik: 
tion of the year of the World, he be ſignificator of the King, People, &c. he ſig- © 
nifies thus much, That their conditions, and ſhall be during the time of his being 
eſſentially ſtrong, in great eſteem, proſperity, health, plenty, &c. 

If a Planer be in his Exaltation, he ſhews a man of a high and majeſtical carriage Whar a Planer 
and diſpoſition, very high-minded, lofty and proud , taking more upon him then fignifieth in 
befitterh. his Exalcation. 

If a Planet be in his Triplicity, it ſhews a man meanly endued with the ;, T,11ic; 
goods of -N life, not meanly, nor very well deſcended ; yet his preſent condition —_—_ 
to be good. 

If : Planet be in his Terms, it ſhews a man rather participating of the temper and In Term, 
ſhape of the Planet, then of the wealth , power or dignity ſignified by the na- 


ture of that Planet. 
In Face, a Planet no otherwiſe fortified, then but being in face, and ſignificator of 1, pace. 


any one, ſhews him ſignified to be, as it were, at the laſt ſhifr, or as we ſay, at the 
laſt gaſp, not knowing how to beftow himſelf, nor what courſe to take; and ſo judge 
of any thing 1ignified, to be either ina good or bad condition , according to the 
ſtrength of the ſignificator, | 


|S SE : Theuſe that is to be made of all this,is no more but this; if you finde a What 2 Planer 


?»An Tntrodution to the Lib.2. 


os © TE MES © 


Of the Houſes of the Planets, and wherefore they were ſo di- 
tributed. 


in that manner attributed and afligned to the dominion of the Planets, I 
thought good here to relate, that the Students in this Noble Art may not 
want grounds and reaſons for their Rules; as alſo, that they may be able to give an an- 
ſwer to the proudeſt Antagoniſts. We will then, according to our method begin with 
Of che Lumi- the Luminaries, viz. So! and Luna, who have Cancer and Leo aſligned them by reaſon 
_ _ of their heat,which is cauſed through their nearneſs to our Zenith or Cardinal point ; 
the $*» hath allotted him Lee, for that it is moſt agreeable unto his nature : beſides, 
we ſee that the Sx being naturally hot and dry, doth ſhew its effets more forcibly 
in this ſign then in any other ; for though Aries and Sagirtary be alſo fiery ſigns, yet 
is he not ſo hot, powerfull nor efficacious therein,as in Leo. 
The ©Moon hath Carcer tor the ſame reaſon allotted to her government, it being 
moſt agreeable to her temper: tor (ancer is the firſt tign of all the reſt that are move. 
able and watry, and ſo more agreeable with her temper and quality then any of the 


D Iligently note this Chapter. The Reaſons why the ſigns are (as aboveſaid ) 


reſt. | 
Of Handhis Fatzry becauſe he is naturally cold,and an enemy to heat,and the higheſt and moſt 
kouſes. remote from the Luminaries of all the Planets, hath therefore aſligned him Capri- 


corn and Aquaries, which are the oppoſite ſigns to Cancer and Leo, wherefore they 
are cold and moyit z and by reaſon ot this their Oppoſition , Satwarz 15 reputed hurt. 
full, and the moſt obnoxious and malevolent of all the Planets, by reaſon he 
thus oppoſeth the Luminaries that are the Lamps of light, life and nutrition. 

Of Þ, And becauſe Zapiter is placed under Satmrn, he hath allotted him thoſe two ſigns 
thar go before and after Capricorn and eAquarier, viz. Sagittary and Piſces , which 
arein a Triveto the houſes of the Luminaries ; Piſces his night-houſe to Cancer the 
houſe of the NoGturnal Luminary ; and Sagirrary his day. houſe to Leo the houſe of 
the Diurnal Luminary : wherefore they are temperate , and by reaſon of this their 
Amical Aſpe& he is concluded aſliſtant, temperate and good ; fortunate and bene- 
yolent to mankinde, and the greateſt Fortune of all the Planets. 

Ot 8. Mars in order followeth epiter. whom you have heard is immediatly placed after 
him ; and therefore thoſe ſigns which go betore and after the houſes of Jupiter are 
givento him, viz. Scorpio and Aries, which arein a Square to the houſes of the Lu- 
minaries, Viz. -Aries his day-houſe to Cancer, and Scorpio his night-houſe to Leo: 
wherefore by reaſon a o__ is an Aſpect of enmity, he is accounted hurtfull and 

/ unfortunate, (yet not ſo bad as Satsr-,who beholds them (as hath been ſaid) with an 
Oppoſition) and is the leſſer infortune. 

Of 9. Venus by reaſon of her temperate conſtitution, challengeth thoſe houſes which go 
before and after the houſes of Aars, viz. Libra and Taurw, which are in a Sextile 
to the houſes of the Luminaries, which is an Aſpe& of love and amity, cauſing gene- 
ration and multiplication; and by reaſon Sextile is not ſo perfeR an Aſpect as a Trine, 
ſhe is truly accounted the leſſer Fortune. 

Of 5. And becauſe Mercary is carried below the reſt of the Stars, the two remaining 
ſigns are given him, viz. Gemins and Virgo, preceding and following the houſes of the 
Luminaries; and becauſe he is on neither ſide, and never diſtant from the Sw above 
one ſign, he inclineth naturally neither to good nor bad, but is adjudged to be partici- 
pating of the nature of the Planet to which he is joyned. 


CHAP 


Lib.2. Tudoement of the Stars, 


CHAP. XI. 


Of the Exaltations and Fall of the Planets, and wherefore they were 
ſo conflituted. 


Nrer we ſhall here (as in the p_—_ Chapter) with the Luminaries, and 
firſt with the S»r25 being the chief light, and Fons vite, the Fountain of life; 


the $#» then is ſaid to be in che point of his Exaltation when he 1s in the 19. of je exalca- 


degree of «Aries, he being then in the higheſt Northern pgynt of the Ecliprick , by tion of 9s: 
which all things are made to ſpring and flouriſh, the heat of weather and the nad 

of days being increaſed ; therefore for the ſame reaſon contrary is he ſaid to be in 
his Fall in Libra, it being the _—_— ſign in the heavensto Ares, in the which he 
declineth Southward, by the which the ſhortneſs of the days and cold is increaſed,wo 
the hinderance of the fertility of the earth. 


The $#n in Aries then being the cauſe and original of all things ; and becauſe the Of the ), 


Moon hath her light from him, ſhe being in conjunion with him in Aries, ſhews 
her ſelf firſt unto us in Tar, the firſt ſign in which ſhe hath Triplicity ; and there- 
fore for theſe cauſes ſhe is ſaid to be inexaltation in Taxrw, in which ſhe is alſo in- 
creaſed in light ; and in Scorpio ſhe is in Fall (for that its the ſign oppoſite to T ax- 
7) wherein ſhe is alſo decreaſing in light, it being the next ſign after Librathe op- 
poſite ſign to the Suns exaltation when ſhe isin her Fall, being in Conjun&ion in 
Aries, or receiving there her firſt light. 

And becauſe as you have heard before, Satzrn is moſt remote from the Sw», con- Of 7: 
trary in houſes, and author of cold, as the Sw» is of heat; therefore is he er.alted | 
in that ſign in which heat 1s diminiſhed,and cold increaſed, viz. Libra ; and in his fall 
where cold is diminiſhed and hear increaſed, viz. Aries, quite contrary to the Sms. 

Tapiter is exalted in (Cancer, and in fall in Capricory, for that Iupster delighteth in Of y. 
the Northern part of Heaven, ſtirring up Northern winds, which cauſeth fertility, 
and maketh things to grow , and his greateſt declination Northward is in {axcer, 
wherefore he is therein exalted, and by reaſon of the contrary, is he in Fall in (a- 

YICOYM. 

: Mars is naturally hot and dry, and becauſe he ſheweth his effets more powerfully oF 72. 
in Capricorn (it being a Southern ſign, where the Sw» is moſt hot, viz. about noon ) 
is he ſaid to be exalted therein, and in fall in Cancer, quite contrary to Iupiter , Mars 
being violent, /#piter temperate. 

And becauſe Venus 1s naturally moyſt, and chiefly in Piſces, by which the Spring of 7. 
is moiltned and increaſed in itrength, 1s ſhe ſaid to be exalted in P:/ces, ſhe being the 
cauſe of generation and procreation : wherefore in Autumn when all things wither, 
and fade, viz. in Virgo, 1s ſhe in fall. 

Mercury, for that he is dry and contrary unto Vers, is exalted in Virgo , and in Of 7. 
fall in P:ſces, Virgo Being both his houſe and joy. 


Cnar 


» An Introduttion to the 


CHAP, XII. 


Of the Triplicities of the Planets , and the Reaſons why they were 
ſo appointed. 


boy wg the Zogzack,, all of ove nature, making a perfe triangle ; and of theſe Tri- 


How many. plicities, amongſt the ſigns there are four, viz. the Fiery-Triplicity,the Acry- 
Howgomina- IT: the Watry-I riplicity, and the Earthy-Triplicity. The Fiery-T riplicity, 
= I conſiſteth of e ries, Leo and Sagitrary : the Atry, of Gemins, Libra and Aquaries : 
they conch? the Watry, of Cancer, Scorpio and Piſces : the Earthy, of T aurus, Virgo ard Capri- 
corn ; and theſe ſigns behold one another with a Trine ; as a Planet ina fiery ſign be- 
holds another Planet in another fiery ſign (being in equa! number of degrees) 
with a Trine; as alſo a Planet in an Aery ſign, another Planetin an Aery lign ; 
one in a Watry ſign , another in a Watry ſign ; in an Earthy ſign, a Planer 
in an Earthy ſign. And this Trine Aſpect, conſiſts of an hundred and twenty 
degrees, &c. 
© and 2 Rule The $#» and Twpiter have dominion in the Fiery-Triplicity , the Sn by day, 
the Fleryr Tri. 3nd Jwpiter by night : the Sz», for that he is hot and fiery, of the nature of 
plicity. theſe ſigns; and Tzpter,for that he is temperate; and to moderate the extremity there- 
of, therefore he ruleth this Triplicity in the night : yer ſome of the Ancients have 
added in government with them Sarxry, that by his cold natuae, he may temperate 
the exceſs of heat. This is the Eaſtern Triplicity. 
H and J the Saturn and Mercenary have dominion inthe Aery-Triplicity, which is Weſtern 
Aety. Mercury by night, and Satwrn by day z Libra is his Exaltation (ard you have heard 
for what reaſons) Aquaries is his beth and ſign wherein he moſt doth joy ; Gemini is 
CMercurys houſe z wherefore Sarwyn hath chief Dominion in this Triplicity ; yer 
ſome have joyned Jzpiter in ſignification with them , by - reaſon of his tempe- 
rancy. | 
Atars both night and day, hath aſſigned him chief Dominion of the Watry 
Triplicity ; this Triplicity is Northern : certainly the reaſon why Mrs was afligned 
chief Rule of the Water, was to cool his courage and abate his Gor ; for we ſee he 
is more powerfull to work his miſchievous pranks in Leo thenin (axcer ; for he ha- 
ving dominion and rule in Caxcer, he worketh not altogether ſo much miſchief (yet is 
. he in Fall in Cancer, but Peregrine in Leo) wherefore a Planet Peregrine is worſe 
then a Planet in Fall, if he ble ina term: yet ſome of the Ancients have joyncd 
Venus and the Moon with Mars, by reaſon Carcer is the Mens houſe, and P:{ces the 
Exaltation of Venus. 
Venus and Lana are appointed chief Governeſles of the Earthy-Triplicity, which 


& | ' Hus then firſt you muſt know, that a Triplicity is no more then three ſigns of 


& only the 
watly, 


T and ) the 


Earthy, is Feminine and Southern, cold and moyſt, cauſing South-eaſt winds, cold and moytt 
Ayr ; and therefore aſligned to theſe Feminine Planets. 


CHary. 


Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stars. 71 


CHaP, XIIL 


Of the Terms of the Planets, wherefore ſo called, and ſo aſsigned to 
every of the five Planets. | 


tain number of degrees, which in each ſign (whether it be exaltation or 
houſe) every of theſe five Planets, viz. Sarmrn, Fupiter, Mars, Venus and 
Mercury, have a priorityzwhich by long ſtudy and experience was at the laſt (by Gods 
aſſiſtance) found out by the Antients. | 

They are called Terms, Ends or Bownds, for that the Planets have their proportion Wherefore (0 
ſo allotted them, that at the end of ſo many degrees , begin the bounds, terms os © led. 
ends of another Planet : As for example, from the firſt degree of Aries to the ſixr, 
is the term, end , or bounds of 7epirey ; from the 6. to the 14. is the term of 
Venus, &C. 

Prolomie, Albumazer and Bonatua ſhew that the greater years of the Planets are To know the 
found our by their ſeveral terms, through the Zodiack, which is no more but this ; greater years of 
look what number of degrees every Planet hath affigned him in every ſign, and add Be Planets by 
them together, and they make the juſt number of their greater years, as you have * -_ 
them betore ; as for example more plainly. 


H Ere now you muſt know the Sun and Moon have no terms ; A Term is cer- W!.at a term ts 


Þ Y d o - 
Signs Terms 
V 4 6 5 bo 7 
& 2 7 6 8 y / 
I - 6 6 7 7 
S 3 7 © 7 7 
& 6 6 $ 6 r 
np 6 5 (s) 6 7 
= 6 bo) (9 5 $ 
m 3 8 6 7 6 
_ 6 8 5 6 $ 
vp 6 7 Ss 6 6 
= 6 5 5 8 6 
X 5 6 5 8 6 
Greater years 57 79 66 B82 76 


Theſe being added together; make juſt 360. degrees. 

But the reaſon why the Planets are after this manner divided into terms, is briefly 
this. The Sages and Philoſophers in former Ages followed this rule; firſt, to abſerve The reaſon 
whac Planer had moſt dignities in a ſign; whether by Exaltacion and Houſe, Triplicity why the terms 
and Houſe ; or Houſe, Baanion or Triplicity only ; and t5'that Planer that had te __ 
rwo or more Dignities, they m_—_— the firſt term, whether he were a Fortune or ,,,, © me 
Infortune ; and if an Infortune have not two dignities in a ſign, they placed them 
laſt, and gave them the laſt term of the ſign, and the firſt term to the Lord of the 
Exaltation,to the Lord of the Triplicity, or the Lord of the Houſe ; ever preferring 
him who hath two _—_ before thoſe or him that had bur one, except only in 
(ancer and Leo ; for becauſe Cancer is the oppoſite ſign to the exaltation of ar, 
viz, (apricorn, therefore is the firſt term of (Cancer aſſigned to Mars ; and becauſe 
Leo isthe oppoſite fignto the houſe and joy of Satwry, is the firſt term of Leo given 

to 


eAn Introdutftion to the Lib.2. 


to him ; to the Infortunes are given ſtill the laſt of all the ſigns, except of Leo; the 
laſt term is given to 7#pitey ; the quantity of the terms are thus divided ; when /zpirer 
and Ven have not two of the aforeſaid dignities in the ſame ſign, nor in the ſecond, 
third, nor fourth, they have ſeven degrees alotted them for their term : Sarwrn and 
CHars, becauſe they are infortunes (except in their own houſes) but five; ſome- 
times four, three, and two ; Mercwry, for that he is of a mixg nature, and naturally 
neither good nor bad, hath fix degrees alotted him, In like manner, when a Planer 
hath the aforeſaid dignities, he hath aſligned him one more, as Yexxs in the firſt term 
of Taurns hath aſſigned hereight degrees ; and Satwr» in the firſt term of Aquaries 
hath fix degrees alotted him ; and where Yew: hath eight, you ſee Saturn bath bur 
two in Taxrs, being ſo much diminiſhed , he being very weak in Tawxrss : ſo allo in 
Sapittary, you ſee Jwpiter is increaſed one, being he is there ſtrong; and CMercur 
being weak, is diminiſhed one ; J-piter hath eight, Mercury but five ; but why they 
are ſo divided throughout the figns, I finde no Author give ſufficient reaſons ; 1 mean 
for this Table, according to Prolomie, which, he faith, he found in an old rotten 
worm-eaten book, which was half conſumed with worms and age, in which, he faith, 
there was a long ſtory of the utility and reaſons of the terms : but by reaſon of the ſo 
much decay of the Book it could not be legible,ſo that he could not tranſcribe it; and 
ſo leaveth the Reader ſtill in doubt concerning this point, the clearing whereof re- 

uireth mach time and ſtudy, which ſhall not be wanting hereafter in me to beſtow 

God granting me life and health ) for che benefit both of the Art and Students 
therein. In the interim be content with what I have now delivered, 


ot aca EC eng 


CHAP. ALV, 


Shewins the uſe which is to be made of the Terms. 


F Emember that a Planet in his own Term is ſtrong, and that the more 
Ws dignities he hath there, the ttronger he is; for /pirey in the firſt 
term of Sagittary, is ſtronger and more powerfull then in the firſt 
term of Arzes ; yet they are both his terms; the reaſon is, becauſe 
Sagittary is both his Houſe and Triplicity ; e-r:es is but his Tripli- 
city only ; wherefore you ſee in Sagitrary he hath the firſt eighr 
degrees for his term, in Aries but ſix; and fo obſerve the neerer 
a Planer is in nature tothe place of his term, the ſtronger is the Planet therein; for 
Iwpiter being hot and moiſt, hath but five degrees for his term in Virgo, which is cold 
and dry ; yet in Gemini, which is hot and moiſt, he hath fix, it agreeing with his tem- 
per ; yet in Carcer, which is cold and moyſt (you will perhaps ſay) he hath ſeven, 
which agreeth not ſo near to his nature ; but the reaſon thereof is, Caxcer is his houſe 
of Exaltation, and ſo hath alotted him one for that, as you have heard before; for 
you muſt know the more dignities a Planet hath ina ſign, the Rronger he is, and hath 
the greater term alotred him. - 

In like manner, if a Planet that is cold and dry, be in a term ſo likewiſe qualified, 
242. cold and dry alſo, his cold and dryneſs is the more increaſed, and will work the 
more forcibly on the Inferiours he is ſignificator of; obſerve the ſame rule in all the 
reſt of the qualities and humors, ſtill remembring that a Planet is ſo much the more 
increaſed in ſtrength, by how much the more he is located in the places of his own 
temper and nature. 

Moreover a Planet that is hot and dry,is leſſened of his vigour in a termthat is cold 
and moyſt ; ſo likewiſe is he augmented in heat if ,he be naturally cold and moyſt,and 
in a term that is hot and dry. 

In like manner;note, that if a fortunate Planet be in a fortunateterm (1 ſay note 
7 in 


= 


Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stars. 


in general) his goodneſs is the more increaſed and augmented, having more power 
and ſtrength to operate in any thing whatſoever he is ſignificator of ; as if he have ſig- 
nitication of good, he is then fo much rhe better ; and on the contrary anevil or male- 
volent Planet 1n a malevolent fign and term is the more miſchievous. 

The Lord of a Term when he is in that Term, let ir be what fignit will, hath more 
power therein then the Lord of that fign or the Planet that hath that ſign for 
his Exaltation, it he be Peregrine anywhere, which is as much to ſay, Poſſeſſion 25 
eleven points of the Law , when there 1s but twelve. And if the Lord of any term 
be in his term , and the Lord of the ſign in another ſignin any Aſpe& with him, the 
Lord of the term ſhall have more power in the ſign where he is, then the Lord of the 
ſign, and ſhall be principal fignificator ; and if the Lord of the term be in his own 
term and ſign, his itrengch and power 1s ſo much the more increaſed. 

What ever Planet be weak in a ſign, that Planets debility is leſſened, when 

or by his being in that part of the ſign he be where he hath any term ; and if 

| he be in term and fign both of his own nature, he is very ftrong and fortu- 
nate, as aforelaid. 


— — t_—__— _ — — I I_— 0 OE FE YO > De 9 En a a One" 


CHAP. X* 


Demonſtrating the je , Nature and Reaſons of the Faces of the 
Planets. 


che Zodiack in their proper Facesis very rare, and a great myiterie , whnch 

every capacity cannot reach unto ; neither 1s it to be attained by any but 
who are great and protound ſearchers of the hidden myſteries of nature,and of great 
experience; for as water quencheth tire, and as fire dryeth up water; ſo one Planet 
oyer-ruleth another,and again is contradicted by the fame ; a term divides a face ; a 
face divides a ſign ; a tign a triplicity ; a triplicity the Zodiack, &c. 


1 Gain, the Reaſons of the Vertues of each Planet through the 12. ſigns of 


73 


Know therefore that in every fign there are three Faces, confifting df 10, de- Wherefare the 


Srees a piece : they are called faces tor that they are equivalent to Nigns, forms or 
thapes, by reaſon they ſhew the nature and inclination of the Planetsin them, as 
in their own houſes, as it were, as anon ſhall appear, being borrowed from the 
practiſe of thoſe that did uſe to foretel the Accidents, Nature, Diſpoſition and 
inclination by the face of the Planer. 

To know the proper Faces then of the Planets, you muſt begin with Xfars, and 
give him the firlt tace of Ares, viz. the firit 10. degrees, becauſe Ayes is his houſe : 
the ſecond face tothe Sun becauſe he followeth A7ars in courſe, and is located un- 
der him inthe Heavens ; the third to Venus, who ſucceſlively followeth the Swn : to 
Mercary you muſt after the ſame Rule give the firſt face of Tarr, who ſucceſſive- 
ly followeth Yenrn ; the ſecond to the 17007,being under Aercury; the third ro Sa- 
earn, being the firit of the Planets; 'and therefore in order to be reckoned after Lxnay 
which is the laſt: The firſt face of Gemini to Japiter ; the ſecond to Mars, and fo 
round about the Zodiack; for following this method, you will ſoon come to the ex- 
act knowledge of every Face, and the true Lord thereof. 

ters then hath the firit face of Aries affigned unto him; and this is the face of bold- 


Faces are cal» 
led Faces» 


The fignifica- 
tions of the 


neſs, — magnanimity, unſhamefaitneſs, reſoluteneſs and confidence. firſt face of 


The Sm 


power, renown and authority ; and in this face he 1s in his exaltation, 


Veen hath the third ſace of 4rics, which is effeminate, milde, joyfull, merry, full of the tkire. 
of ſport and play. 


L Aercury 


ath the ſecond face of 4rier,which is the face of nobleneſs, might,majeſty, Of che ſecend. 


74. An Introduthon to the Lib.z. 

Of the x. face Mercury hath the firſt face of Taxrus, which is the face of Ploughing and Tiling, 

of =. | Sowing, Building, giving of Laws, Precepts and Learning. 

Of the ſecony, The Moon hath the ſecond face of Tawrus, which is a tace of power, dignity and 

authority, depopulating Towns and Caſtles, and conſtraining the People. 

Of the third, FSarxrx hath the third face of Tarras, which isa face of miſery,ſervitude, poverty, 

| neceility and cruelty. | 

Of the 1, face Japuter hath the firſt face of Gemini, compleat in all things, and it is a face of wri- 

of 2, - ting, calling of accounts, of giving and receiving of Petitions and Writings of no 
protit or utility. 

Of the ſecond. = Mars hath the ſecond face of Gemini, which is a face of labour, trouble and 
itudy in what is painfull, and indiſhonelt actions. 

DC che third] $ol hath the third face of Gemwni, which is a face of forgettulneſs, diſdain, jear- 
ing, ſcotting and boldneſs. | 

Of the 1. face Fen hath the firſt face of Cancer, which is a face of ſtrength , underſtanding, 

of &. _ Wit and power, deſiring favour of all men. 

DE che Goon, Hercury hath the tecond tace of Cancer, which is a face of ſport, mirth, wo- 
men, riches, fertility and abundance. 

Of the third. The 07 hath the third face of Caxcer, which is a face of hunting, purſuing of 
Runaways, gaining by ftrength and arms, and oppoſing of men. 

Of the 1, face Satwrn hath the tirſt face of Leo, handſom in ſhape ; it is a face of cruelty, mil- 

of AN. chief, and violence; of induring labour and toyl 3 of boldneſs and luſt. 

Of the ſecond. 7wpater hath the ſecond face of Leo, which 1s a face of quarrels and of miſchief, 
cauſing Wars and ftrite. 

Of the third, Mars hath the third face of Leo, which is a face of love and friendſhip,and eaſily 
leaving his goods and abode for the fear of War or Commotions. 

Of the 1. face Yo! hath the firſt face of 75rgo,which is a face of Ploughing and Sowing,, Tilling ; 

of M. of gathering wealth and riches. | 

Of the ſecond, Ferns hath the ſecond face of Virgo , which is a face of gaining, and growing rich, 

| of covetcouineſs, intreating and deſiring the help of others. 

Of the third. Mercury hath the third face of Yirgo, which is a face of age, weakneſs, and de- 
crepedneſs ; of deſtroying people, and pulling up trees by the root. 

Of the 1, face The Moon hath the firſt face of Libra, which 1s a face of Juſtice, Right and Truth, 

of =, helping the weak and needy, compleat and handſom in ſhape. . 

Of the ſecond. Saturn hath the ſecond face of Litra, which is a face of quiet, profit and happy life. 

' Of the third, Jepiter hath the third face of Libra, which isa face of gluttony, lechery, revelling 
and "—_ ill courſes. | 

Of the 1, face CMarshath the firit face of Scorpio, which is a face of quarrelling, fighting, mil- 

of m1. chief, ſlaughter, robbing and ſacking. . 

Of the ſecond. Fol hath the ſecond face of Scorpio, which is a face of contentions , ſtrite, theff, 
of ſowing miſchief and debate amongſt meh, and of deceit. | 

Of the third, Venus hath the third face of Scorpio, which isa face of Wars, violence, drunken- 
neſs, of rapes and fornications. 

Of the 1, face Aercmry hath the firſt face of Sagittary, which is a face of boldneſs, freeneſs 


of T- and ſtrength. | 
Of the ſecond, The A4oox hath the ſecond face of Sagittary,which is a face of trouble in mind fear, 
miſtruſt, &c. 


Of the third, Saturn hath the third face of Sagittary, which is a face of obſtinacy and wilful- 
neſs, ſticking ro his own whimſical conceits, neither willhe by any means be beat out 
of them ; miſchievous, quarrelſom, and apt in, and delighting in odious;abhorred and 
vilde actions. | 

Of the 1, face Pupiter hath the firſt face of {apricorn,which isa face of handſom form and ſhape, 

of Vp. | lovingto ramble, to be merry and ſport. 

Of the ſecond. - AZars hath the ſecond face of Capricory, which is a face of ſeeking things that can- 
not be attained, nor brought to perfeRion. 

Of thechird, = Fol hath the third face of Capricory, which isa face of a coveteous deſire to rule 


and govern or have riches at his diſpoſal, ſuſpeRing and miſtruſting himſelf. - 
4 en 


Lib.2. Tudgement of the Stars, 75 
Venus hath the firſt face of Aqnaries, which is a face of continual trouble for mo- Of the r. face 
ney and profit, never at relt, ever in labour and toyl, yet poor and indigent. of >. 

ercury hath the ſecond face of eAquarier, which is a face of comelineſs and Of the lecond. 
beauty, of underſtanding, modeſty, mildneſs, clemency , of good behaviour, and 
of a handſom compoſed ſhape. 

Lana hath the third face of efqwaries, which is a face of contentions, repinings and Of the third, 
firife. | 
Satwrn hath the firit face of Piſces, which is a face that 1s not fad, penſive nor Of the firſt 
dejected in his undertakings, of a good nature and handſom, of many thoughts and face of +. 
Cog fitting from one place to another for the procuring himſelf a name and 
11CINCS. 

7upiter hath the ſecond face of Piſces, which is a face of haughtineſs, and a high Of the ſecond. 
diſpoſition, ſeeking after great and high things. 

Mars hath the third face of P:/ces, which is a face of concupiſcence and luſt, and Of the third. 

delight with women, yet loving reit and quietneſs. 

The Uſe of allthis is no more, but if you finde the cuſpe of the Aſcendent in the 
Nativity of any one, in any of theſe faces, you may judge the Native to be quali- 
fied as you here find ; your judgment will be the more certain, if you finde the Lord 
of the Aſcendent, the C9100, Planet beholding the aſcendent, or Planet beholding 
the Lord of the aſcendent or the oo», or both, in the ſame face or faces of the fame 
nature ; to dwell longer here were but vain, ſince this 1s ſo clear and plain. 


Eunar. LVL 


Of the Joys of the Planets, 


houſes where they are moſt ſtrong and powerfull, as, 


WES , the Planets are ſaid to be in their j2ys when they are in thoſe 


: Hh K- 
V ©. 

bY | m 

© > Toyeth in % 

JO | 5 

v | 1: 

D J 5 


The reaſon whygtheſe are their joys, is this. Satyry joyeth in Aquarier, and not in 
Capricorn, although both are his houſes, becauſe in Aquaries he hath both houſe and 
triplicity by day ; in Capricorz he hath only houſe ; ſo likewiſe Zapiter joyeth in Sa- 
gittary, andnot in Piſces, becauſe he hath in Sagirrary both houſe and triplicity, in 
Piſces but only houſe: and ſo of allthe reſt except Lyna, who although ſhe hath not 
triplicity in {axcer, yet is it a ſign of her own nature and complexion : The uſe that is 
to be made hereof, 1s only this; Sarzrn is more powerfull in «Lquaries then Capricorn, 
and 7wpiter in Sagittary then Piſces ; Mars in Scorpio then Aries ; Venus in Taurus 
then Libra; Mercury in Virgo then Gemini, &c. Of which may many good Ules be 
made inthe praQtice of this Art ; as beneath in their due places will appear. 


L 2 | Cnay. 


a An Introduttion to the © Lib.2, 


CHAaP, AVIT 


Of the Head and Tail of the Dragon. 


Ver rememher,that the head and tail of the Dragon are not ſigns nor Planets, 
neither any Coniicilations; only Nodes and Flaces of the Ecliptick which the 
Coon cutteth, they have no Aipect to any Planet ; butthey may be, and are 
aſpected by them; as touching their motion , 1t 1s according to the motion of the 
A1oon. 

Their Nature is various according as they may be placed ard aſpefted ; ſome of 
the Ancients have maintained that the head is good and fortunate; the tail bad 1d in- 
fortunate naturally, without any exception ; others are of a contrary opin!©::, and 
ſay the Head is good when well placed and fortunately afſpe&ted by the bencyolents 
and fortunate Planets; but when aftlicted and aſpected by the malevolents it is bad : 
Alſo that the Tail is good with the good Planets, viz. being joyned with them, or in 
aſpect therewith, and bad with the bad ; and fome apain will have the Head when 
Joyned with the Malevolents to be good, and with the Benevolents bad : alſo the 
Tayl when joyned,or in contiguration with the Fortunes, they tay is bad, and with the 
Infortunes good ; for my part, I have till (by that little obſervation] have madce) 
found the Headto be good, and the Tail bad and unfortunate, as 15the nature of 
Saturn and Mars naturally, but accidentally they may alſo ſonietimes be both good 
and bad, 1 mean contrary to what they are generally reputed ; thou may it follow 
which thou pleaſeſt ; experience will be thy beit rule when thou hatt done all; there- 
fore let that together with reaſon be thy guide, til! thou canit iniovrm thy ſelf in 
what is not fully comprehended by thee. 


C—Ix—x 4 4 _ 9" o—_  — LD eee es EY 


— EC—————————— ——  __ —_—  —  ________— 


CHuatk% XAVEL 


Of the Antiſcions and ( ontrantiſcions of the Planets, 


The force of Ome of the learned in this Art do hold that the Antitciors of the Planets be 
an Antiſcion. equivalent unto a Sextile or a Trine-aſpect, eſpecially if they were beneficial 
Planets ; and their Contrantiſcions to be ot the. nature 6! Quadrate or Op- 

How to know pgfition. How to know the Antiſcions 15 no more but thus; tirit, kayw the Antiſcions 
A. of the figns,which i5 no more but a ſ1gn being equally Gittant with another from (: 1: - 
' cer and Capricorn the two Tropicks ; as Gemin hath its Antiſcion in Cancer, T anrys 

in Leo, Aries in Virgo, Piſces in Libra, Aquaries 1n Scor rio, and Capricorn in Sagittary ; 
for when the S# 151n the 1. degree of Gemizi,he 1s as far from the Tropick point of 
Cancer, as when he 1s1n 29. degrees of {acer ; andinthe 5 degree of Tanrss , as 
when in the 55. degree of Zeo, &c. Having the true knowledge of the Antiſcions of 
the figns, the Antiſcions of the Planets then is ealily known ; v:2. look in what f1gn 
and degrees your Planet is whoſe Antifcion you would know , and ſubſtra& the de- 
grees and minutes he is in-from 30. degrees or a whole ſign, ard in whar degree and 
minute remains is 11s Antiſcion and then knowing in what ſign he 1s, and his Antifcion 
muſt be1.: what anſwers thereunto as aboveſaid ; as if he be in Y:-62, his Antifcion 15 
in Arcs &c. The Contrantiſcion is known thus; look in what ſign, degree and mi- 
| nute 


. 


Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stabs ; -o; 


nute your Antiſcion falls, and your contrantifcion will be in the ſame degree and mi- To know the 
nute of the oppolite 11gn to your Antiſcion: as for example, I admit your Antiſcion Conranuilci- 
of Satrry, In;iter or Mars, or any Planet be in the 16. degree, 24. minutes of Leo, _ the Da. 
then your Contrantiſcion falls inthe 16. degree, 24. minutes of Aquaries, &c. But _ 

theſe are things now (by Gods bleſiing)vulgarly known ; it is not our buſineſs there- 

tore here to dwell, only fince in ſuch a work as hi it is neceſſary to ſay ſomewhat of 


' the Planets, their digruries, ſigns, aſpects and natures, the whole Art conſiſting there- 


on, as the chief rock on which this moſt incomparable glorious Fabrick , viz. Aſtre- 
log1e15 founded and built ; and having by the bleſſed aſliſtance of my glorious Ma- 
ker waded through the beginning, that the work might befull, 1 thought to give 
tome ſmall hint of the Antiſcions, and ſo proceed ; tor our intentions in theſe our 
undertakings are not to infift on what is already made manitett (turther then to 
make the work the eaſter to the weaker fort and ſtudents therein) but what remains 
in the Art (asyet unreveaied and not made to ſpeak our language ) which we con- 
ceive the preſent times capable of receiving ; 1t being my hearty deſire to have 
knowledge increaſe upon the face of the earth, and ignorance aboliſhed, ſince the 
more know'edge a man hath, the nearer he is to the Pavine Eſſence, and further from 
the ſottith ttupidity of the VVor{d. 


2 - OO SO OCR Ss —_ * -—_ - _ - — Pe rr Innes 7s _ — —— —_— — —_—_—— 


- — 


CHAP... 


Shewing the Reaſons of the names of the ſeven Planets and their 
( haracters. | 


=) Neer we ſhall in order, according to their ſtations and places in the Heaven, 
—f with the highett firſt, viz. Yar. 

And the reaſon why he was called Sarzrn is this (though I muſt confeſs for Why Þ is cls 
ſeveral reaſons ( which would be too tedious and ſuperfluous here to relate) he was led Saturn, 
otherwiſe called)he is called 1 fay Sarzry (for becauſe thisis his vulgar name amongſt 
us ; I give you the reaſon and cauſe thereof) 2 /arxro to fill or give in abun- 
dance, quafs ſatrravit omnia, it being thought amonglt the learned that where he St- 
veth, it is in full plenty andin abundance. | 

7upiter, is ſo called a Znvando, quaſi eff Invans pater , from helping , or being Why Yy. 
beneficial ro mankinde, he being naturally temperate, inclining by his ſweet in- 
Auence the diſpoſitions of men to ſobriety, moderation and goodnels. 
Mars, quaſi Mavors , quia magna verteret , turning great things, and acting Why @. 
high exploits 
Soly quaſy ſolns Lucens, as only ſhining, being the Eye , Candle, and ſoul of Why ©- 
the World. - 
Venus, 4 veneror, (0 called, to honour,and as it were giving due reverenc to beauty, Why ?. 
ſhe being the cauſe thereof. 
Mercury, quaſs Merces, amerendo, ſignifying wages and mercature, being the Why 5. 
cauſe and Author thereof. 
Luna, quia altena luce [ncet, ſhining with a borrowed light. =» —— 
Satsry isthus Charactered þ, repreſenting a Sithe or a Croſs, for that he is au- \,1 4. py. 
thor of miſchief and old Age. Izpirer hath this Character v , repreſenting one with: ner are ſo 
a Mace or Scepter on his ſhoulder or in his hand, as deſerving a Kingdom for his rem- charaQered. 
perate good nature, and inclination. © Mars is made thus F , pointed like a Dart or 
Engine of War, for that he excites to ſuch miſchief. The Sx» isſo charactered & , 
as being a full light of himſelf, not borrowing in the leaſt from others, or 1 may 
iay 


The number 
of the Hea« 
vens. 


The order of 
the heavens. 


An Introduttion to the Lib.2. 


fay he is made round, having a prick in the middle, as being the Center of the 
whole Univerſe,as ſome have maintained he is.Yexs is thus charaRtered 9 ,refembling 
a beautifull Lady, with a lovely round viſage. Mercary is made inthis manner ty , 
for that he is the Embaſſador ang Meſſenger of the gods, with a pair of wings as 
it were on his head. The Aſoox you know either in Tos wane or prime is horned : 


wherefore ſhe is till charaCtered thus » , as belt reſen:bling her form. 


CHAT, ak 


Of the number of the Heavens and Sphears , their places, order 


and motions. 


as alſo of the Zodiack it ſelf; it is neceſſary here theretore ( having done 
with the Planets) that ſo this Art may be throughly underſtood by the lo- 
vers thereof, firlt tro ſpeak a word of the ſphears, and number of the Heavens, 
which by moſt Philoſophers, eſpecially Hermes Triſmegiſtus and Ptolomy are held 
to bein number nine, which indeed are plainly to be demonſtrated and proved by rea- 
ſon ; and this is the opinion not only of the Ancient Philoſophers, but of all Aſtro- 
nomers and Mathematicians , who will better and more at large inſtru you ; where- 
fore I refer you for ſatisfaction in what you farther doubt of « ch what I fhall here 
deliver, to their volumes ; only for the fatisfati on of my Reader, lince it comes in 
my 4 I thought good to fay ſomewhat. Wherefore thele are briefly thus diſtin- 
utſhed. 
: Firſt, know then, that about this Elementary World (as being the center) they 
all move one above another in their ſeveral ſphears, as the A7s0x firit above the earth 
inher ſphear : Atercnry above the oor : Venus above er wry, the Swz above Ve- 
"us ; Mars above the Sun ; Iuprer above Mars; Saturn above [upiter; the ſtar- 
ry heaven or eighth heaven, above $arxrn ; and in this heaven are located all the fixed 
ſtars which never move but as their ſphear moves and carryeth them,they being never 


Y OU are to know we are now about to ſpeak of the ſigns of the Zodiack, 


Being firm and the one farther or nearer to another, but are firm and fixt in their places ; for which 


fixed, 


Wherefore it 


is called the 
firſt mover, 


The motions 
of the Hea-» 
Vens. 


cauſe was this eighth heaven called the tirmament; and laſtly isthis firmament or ſtar- 
ry heaven incloſed by the firſt mover or Chry/taline heaven, which is the guide (as | 
may ſay) of the heavens (not being at all under the rule of any of the other heavens, 
but governed only by that intelligence that ruleth it, or the expreſs commandment of 
God) but carryeth them all violently about with it ſelf (of whoſe motions you ſhall 
here more anon) yet there is another higher then the ninth heaven, which doth in- 
cloſe and comprehend them all; and this by ſome is held to be the habitation of God, 
the Ele and Angels; others hold that Japiter is the place of the Ele ; and like- 
wiſe that 24+rs 15the local place of Hell for the damned , others hold Satxry to be 
Hell, &c, But we leave theſe opinions, it being no part of our Diſcourſe; and re- 
turn to ſhew you the motions of the ſphears and heavens. 

You have heard already of the quickneſs of the motion of the ſphear of Sarurn 
inthe firſt chapter of this Treatiſe, where we ſpeak of the ſignifications, nature and 
ſhape of Satzrz; as allo of the ſphear of Tupiter inthe ſecond chapter, where we 
treat of 7ypirez, and ſo of allthe reſt of the Planets , viz. Saturn ftiniſheth his mo- 
tion, or he in his ſphear in 29. years, ſome moneths and days ; /#piter in 12, years,&c. 
Their motion,notwithſtanding they are carryed violently and accidentally once a day 
about theearth by the force and power of the firſt mover, is quite contrary there- 


unto, viz. from Weſt to Eaſt; and ſo likewiſe is the motion of the ſtarry heaven from 
| Weſt 


hats Goon >. ac 


Lib.2. Tudgement of the Stars. 79 
Weſt to Eaſt alſo, whoſe Revolution is not finiſhed in leſs then 36000. years, whence The Revoluci. 
it is held concluſively by ſome, that the World muſt laſt millions of years betore the on of the eighth 
ſubverſion and diſſolution thereof, or at leaft, till ic hath made its Revolution once : _ on 
from whence P/ato was of opinion that after the Revolution of theſe years ,all things rag ——_ 
ſhould be as at the firit Creation; and as the years came about again, ſo ſhould things ; 
happen again as at firit, viz. that after ſo many years there ſhould be another deluge, 

and Noah and his company only ſaved ; and that when the ſame years came about 

again in which he himſelf lived, he ſhould again flouriſh as at that time, and be teach- 

ing his Scholars at «Athens ; and ſo in like manner that all things ſhould be renewed 

again as at firſt. But as theſe are points that would ſpend much time and labour to 

handle , and ſince the holy Writ teltifyerh unto us that the Angels in Heaven, nay Wc, 
and Chriſt himſelf as he was man) knew not when ſhould be the laſt day ; we hold —_ 
it convenient to paſs by ſuch curious matters in ſilence, and haſten to ſay ſomething of 

the Circles of Heaven, The Zodiack and the diviſions thereof, 


CCC 
—— 7 — —— —_— = ———_———__ 
- —  — W_——— _ _ — 


CHapPp. XXI. 
Of the Circles of Hearven, the Zodiack, and the diviſions thereof. 


& E come now unto the Circles of Heaven. Y ou are to know there 
are ſome greater then other, ſome leſs, ſome movable, and al- 
ſo ſome immoveable ; as concerning the greater circles, they 
are thoſe that have the ſame Center with the Heavens ; the 
lefſer Circles have their Centers out of that of the ſphear ; but 
theſe are lo plainly treated of by ancient Aſtronomers, that to 
infiſt hereon were but vain : wherefore let us to our bulineſs, 
| and fay ſomewhat of the Zodiack and its diviſions. 

Know then,that in the ſphear of the World there are two chief Circles, the one called Of the Equar 
the Equator or Equinotial, the other the Zodiach or Eclijtick ; it is called the Equator tor, and where- 
from the nature thereof, being a line of equality ; for the Sz» being under the ſame, fore ſocalled. 
cauſeth the equality of the day and night through the whole World ; it 1s called the 
Equinoctial for the ſame reaſon, it cauſing equall nights, &c. The Zodiack is called Of the Eclip- 
the Ecliptick, becauſe the Sw» and the AZoon are never Eclipſed but in it; it is alſo tick or Oblique 
called the oblique Circle, for tha it is ſituated oblique in reſpect of the Equator, &c. Circle; and 
This Equator divideth the whole ſphear into two parts, being placed directly betwixt m—_ _ 
the Poles of the World, viz. Artick and Ant-artick, which isalſo divided by the Zo- © © 
diack into two equal-parts; and thoſe points where the Zodiack cutteth the Equator 
are called Equinotial points ; and the points of the Zodiack which are the means be- 
tween theſe Equinoctals are called Tropicks or Solfteads, viz. the ſtays or ſtations 
of the Sn, &c. From theſe diviſions, are the four quarters of the year, viz. Spring, 

Summer, Autumn and Winter ; Spring beginning at the Equinoctial point, the S#z en- 

clining towards the Vertical point : Summer beginning at the Solltead after ; Autumn The havens 
at the other EquinoRtial, and Winter at the ſecond Solſtead. Now you muſt know al- divided into 
ſo that theſe ſeveral quarters are divided into three equal parts,as anſwering to begin- ive parts. 
ning, middle and end, and ſo conſequently the whole Zodiack into 12. equall parts, |! he divicion of 
which are called ſigns and houſes (the reaſons why they are ſo called you ſhall have *** ©94ict. 
anon) and every * fign isdivided into 30. degrees ; every degree into 60, minutesand _ Fry 
every minute into 60. ſeconds, and every ſecond into 60. thirds, and ſo ad infinitum. ago 74mg 
But now as touching the Reaſons, why theſe diviſions (as I ſaid before) are callednq 4o. fur- 


ſigns, and becauſe they ſeem to define and figniftie unto us the molt no- longs, or 642. 
table furlongs 


Of the Hori* 
Z.No 4 


Of the Meri- 
dian. 


Wherefore ſo 
called. 


» An Introduction to the Lib.2: 
table alterations and mutations of the Ayr, and theſe inferiour Elements. 

Now as you have heard of the two principal Circles moveable, ſo it is requiſite 
alſo you hear ſomewhat of the two immoveable Circles, the Horizon and Meridian ; 
we leave the Colrres, Tropicks, Zeunes, Vertical, Parallel, and Polary Circles, &C. to 
be taught by thoſe that have writ whole volumes thereof; tor our intentions are but 
curſorily to ſpeak ſomewhar, that our ſcope may the better be underſtood; our intenti- 
ons being to lay open that part of the Art which 1s not manitett in our tongue. 

The Horizon then is that Circle dividing the Hemiſphere ot any place under it, from 
that which is above it, to which one of the Poles is always the Vertical point, and the 
other Pole the oppotite ; according therefore to the heighth of the point of each 
place, doth the Horizon of each place differ ; for look how many places there are, 
ſo many Horizons are there ; wherefore the Horizon of thoſe places which have the 
vertical or perpendicular point under the Equinoctial,is called the right Horizon ; for 
thatit paſſeth by the Poles of the World, and equally dividecth che EquinoRtal at 
right Angles; fo likewiſe it is called a right ſphear ; tor that it ſeemeth to be right- 
ly placed in reſpe& of that Horizon, and the ſtars to make their motion directly by 
the univerſal motion of the ſphear. 

Now the Herizon of thoſe places whoſe Zenith is out of the EquinoGtal to- 
wards either of the Poles, 1s called oblique; for that that Pole which the Vertical 
point is next to, is elevated above the ſaid Horizon, and the other is fo much deprel- 
ſed ; which therefore doth divide the Equinoctial at objique angles, unequal one to 
another ; for which cauſe alſo, the ſphear is ſaid ro be oblique ; being in compari- 
ſon of the Horizon placed obliquely ; and the itars turn obliquely in their univerſal 
motion. Wheretore it is clear, that all direct Hori7ens are of one diſpoſition ; but 
amons the oblique there are as many differences as are diſtances between the Verti- 
cal point and the Equinoctial , or as the elevation of the Pole is divers above 
them. 

As touching the 2eridias,it 154 great immoveable Circle, paſſing by the Poles of 
the World, and that point of the Heavens which 1s perpendicular'in what place 
ſoever it bez and divideth both the Equinoctial and Horizon of right angles, parting 
the Eaſt part of the Heavens from the Welt ; whoſe Poles are the interſetions of 
the Horizon and Equator : and for that it divideth the Natural day and the Artifi- 
cial into two even parts, it is called the Meridian or mid-day-circle ; for when the 
$S*» cometh to this Circle above the Horizon,it is high noon, and the oppoſite poinc 
under the Horizon or earth 1s mid-night : all places then according as they are more 
Oriental or Occidental, have their proper Meridian; and they which lie alike Eaft 
or Welt. Know then, that every Meridian 1s a right Horizon to ſome places,and every 
right Horizona Meridian. | 


Cuar. AASL 


Of the twelrve Celeſtial Signs and their manifold diviſions. 


andthe Reaſons why they are ſo called: it reſteth therefore now, 1 ſhew whar 
they are called , With' their ſeveral Charafters ; and why juſt the number of 
twelve, and called by thoſe names, and why they begin at Aries, and not at Taurus, 
Gemini or Cancer , or ay other ſign , and ſo placed; as allo of their Natures "and 


| Have ſhewed you the Heavens are divided into twelve equall parts, called Signs, 


' frgnifications. But firſt, letus ſpeak of their diviſions, and the ſeveral manners there- 
O 


, and then proceed. 


Know 


Lib.2. Tudgement of the Stars. $ 


Know then that the 12. ſigns are thus named and charactered, Aries Y , Tawrm 5 , The names 
Gemint i! , Carter & , Leo 5 , Virgo MR. Libra =, Scorpio. , Sapittary © , Ca- and charadters 
pricorn vy , Aquaries 3 and Piſces x .Of theſe figns, there are ſome ofa fiery nature, 9 the figns. 
ſome of an earthy, others of an atry, and ſome of a watry. 

Fiery ſigns are Aries, Leo and Sagitrary ; Earthy ſigns are Taurus, Virgo and Ca- What fiery, 
pricorn; ACry Iigns are Geminr, Libra and Aquaries ; Watry {1gns are Cancer, Scor- earthy, acry, 
pio and Piſces. and watty. 

There are alſo ſome Maſculine, and ſome Feminine ; the Maſculine are Aries, Ge- What maſcu- 
mini, Leo, Libra, Sagittary, Aquaries ; Feminine are Tamrns, Cancer, Virgo, Scor- line, whac fe” 
pio, Capricorn and Piſces. Ever remember the fiery and atry ſigns are maſculine a__— 
thy and watry, teminine. There are alſo ſome moveable, others fixed, and ſome EquinoRial & 
common; moveable ſigns are Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn, of which two are T ropick ſigns. 
Equinoctial, two T + roman ſigns are Aries and Libra; Tropick ſigns 
Cancer and Capricorn; and theſe {igns as the maſculine ſigns, are ſo called for that 
they are hot and dry, and diurnal; the feminine for that they are cold, moiſt, and 
r:oRurnal, 

So are theſe called moveable, becauſe when the Sz enters into any of theſe ſigns, What are 
the weather and ſeaſon of the year is moved or changed. moveable. aud 

Fixed 11gns are T aurns, Leo, Scorpio and *+Aquaries ; and they are ſo called k for Why called 
that the Weather, he being therein , is more permanent (either to heat or cold ac- _ , 
cording tothe ſeaſon of the year) and fixed. Common figns being between move- and why tera:- 
able and fixed both in place and nature, are therefore ſo called ; and they are Gemini, ed tixed. 
Virgo, Sagittary and Pi/ces.Notethat there is among the moveable ſigns one fiery,one What figns are 
earthy,one acry and one watry;and ſo likewiſe have the fixed and common, for which common, and 
cauſe alſo they are divided into tour parts, as anſwering to the four ſeaſons and quar- why ſo called. 
ters of the year ; viz. Aries, Taurus, and Gemini are the Spring quarter , for that Signs anſwer- 
when the Sz is in theſe three,it is the Spring Seaſon ; when he is in Carcer, Leo and ing to the ſea- 
Virgo,it 15 the Summer Quarter ; in Libre, Scorpio and Sagittary Autumn ; in Capri- lons of the 
corn, Aquaries and Piſces Winter ; which is the reaſon why the year begins in March *** 
when the $#x enters Arzes, which is the firſt fign (fo likewiſe are all the moneths in 
order attributed to the government of the Celeſtial ſigns) It is the opinion there- 
fore amongſt the learned that the $»» was in the firit point or minute gf Aries when 
the World began, whence they judge the general accidents of the World, as the 
fates and affairs of any Kingdom or place, &c. by the Sx# his Revolution tothe firſt 
point of Aries. 

There are alſo ſome ſigns Auttral or Southern, others Boreal or Northern : Sou- What fgns are 
thern ſigns are Libra, Scorpio, Sagittary, Capricorn, Aquaries and Piſces ; theſe are Northern, and 
called Southern, for that they decline Southward from the Equinoctial : Northern ——_— + 
ſigns are Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Carcer, Leo, and Virgo : andtheſe are fo called for ©? * © _ 
that they decline from the Equinoctial Northward.- 

Bicorporeal i1gns are Gemini, Piſces and the firſt part of Sagittary being doublc- Bicorporcal 
bodied as twins, &Cc. ſizns. 

There are alſo fruitfull, barren, humane, feral and mute ſigns; fruirtul 11gns are Whar ſigns are 
{ancer , Scorpio and Piſces; barren ſigns are Gemini, Ler, and Virgo; humane or fcuirful,barcen, 
courteous ſigns are Gemin!, Virgo, Libra and 2 Aquaries ; feral {18ns are Leo, and the humane, feral 
laſt part of Sapittary; and mute ſigns or {low of ſpeech are Cancer , Scorpio and 399 Mute: 
Piſces, eſpecially if Mercyry be in any of them in Conjunction, Quadrat or Oppoſi- 
tion of Satzrn ; he cauſeth alſo an ill utterance in any ſign in the aforeſaid afpets 
of Saturn, | | | 

There are alſo in the diviſions of the ſigns, ſigns comme—_ and obeying ; ſigns what ace com: 
of long aſcention,and 11gns of ſhort aſcention : ſigns commanding are Ares, T an- manding,obey. 
rus, Gemini, ({, aucer, Leo, Virgo; ſigns obeying are Libra, Scorpio, Sapitrary, ( apri- "8, of long 
corn, //quaries and Piſces ; and figns of right or long aſcentions are-(axcer, Leo,Vir- _- _ 
go, Libra, Scorpio and Sagittary : Signs of ſhort or oblique aſcentionsare Capricorn, EO 
Aquaries, Piſces, Aries, T aurns and Gemins. 

There are alſo ſome ſigns that are whole and intire, others broken ; ſome fortu- 

M nate, 


2An Introduttion to the Lib.2. 


nate, others unfortunate ; ſome ſweet ; others bitter ; whole, are Libr, Aquaries, 
Gemini, Virgo : broken,are Leo, Piſces: fortunate, are Aries,Gemini, Les, Libra, $a- 
gittary, Aquaries: unfortunate,are Tamrus, Cancer, Virgo, Scorpio,Capricorn Piſces : 
ſweet ſigns are, Gemini, Libra, Aquaries : bitter, &1ries, Leo, Sagittary. 

There are allo weak ſigns and ſtrong ; weak ſigns are, eAries, Sagittary and (upr;- 
corn : ſtrong are, Leo, Scorpio, and Aquarier 

Note alſo that by the ſeveral places of the Heavens ſome ſigns have contrary ope- 
rations, indivers places; as Tawrms in the Eaſt quarter of Heaven, is inclining to 
heat, or luke-warm 3 in the Welt cold. Gem: in the Eaſt is hot and dry, in the Weſt 
cold and moiſt. axcer in the Eaſt is hot and dry, in the Weſt cold and moiſt. Leoin 
the Eaſt is hot and dry , inthe Welt cold and moiſt. Y7go in the Eaſt is hot and 
warm, in the Welt cold and moiſt. Sagirzrary in the Eaft cold and moiſt, in the Weſt 
hot and dry. Capricorn in the Eaſt is cold and dry, inthe Welt cold and moiſt. 4- 
queries inboth Eaſt and Welt is cold and moiſt. Piſces alſo cold and moitt both in 
Eaſt and Welt. This will be neceſſary for the judging of weather. 


k — —_— - 
CI — _— — 


CHaP. XXII. 


Shewing the uſe which 15 to be made of the former ( hapter: 


Heaven you find a maſculine ſign aſcending, and the Lord of the aſcendant in 

| a maſculine ſign, or beheld of a maſculine Planet in a maſculine ſign,” then is 

the nature and actions of the thing in queſtion, or ſignified , maſculine ; if in femi- 
nine ſigns,the contrary, being more effeminate. 

So likewiſe if the Aſcendant, his Lord and the Planets beholding them be in mo- 
vable ſigns, the thing denoted by the Aſcendant is fickle, unconitant, and wavering 
in all particulars : if the abovefaid teſtimonies be through fixed ſigns, the contrary ; 
if in common ſigns, neither perfe&ly conſtant nor fickle, yet both , ſometimes the 
one way,and ſometimes the other. 

Alſo, if the aforeſaid teſtimonies be in feral ſigns, the thing ſignified is of the na- 
ture and temper of that beaft repreſented by the ſign, as if Leo be the ſign aſcending, 
itis then bold, ſtrong, couragious, ſtately, hot and dry, &c. If Tawrns, it is ſolid, 
ſtaid and reſolved, yet of a flow muddy condition, cold and earthy. 

Likewiſe if in any figure of the Heavens the ſign aſcending be a fruitfull ſign; and 
the ſign of the fifth houſe a fruitfull ſign alſo, and the Lords of the eralan and 
fifth and the AZcon be in fruitfull ſigns, it denotes fruitfulneſs. 

So, if the ſign aſcending be a humane ſign, and the Lord of the Aſcendant and 
the oor in humane ſigns, accordingly doth it ſignifie, as hereafter will more targe- 
ly be ſhown ; ſo likewiſe of all the reſt, &c. 


[ Earn now the uſe which is to be made of all this; if in any ſcheam or figure of 


Tudgement of the Stars, 


CuaP XxX 


Demonſtrating the Reaſons of the names of the twelve ſigns ; and 
why there are just twelve, and neither moxe nor leſs. 


know why they are ſo called , and wherefore there are no more nor leſs then 
twelve, which according to A/bamazer and Bonatw, is for theſe Reaſons : 
Firſt, as all things are made of the four Elements, which are ſubje& to the ſigns, 
every ſign through the whole Circle of Heaven ruling one element or other : now 
there are four elements,every ſign-being over them; and they divided into three parts, | ——- 
as having relation to beginning, middle and end, as there is in all works, make juſt 
the number of 12. Beſides the number 12. is ſo compleat a number, as none is to com- 
pare with it; it having more particular diviſions then any other number, there being 
therein three fours, and four threes ; twg, {ixesand fix twoes : beſides they are ſo 
conſtituted from the diviſion of the Heafen (as you have heard already) divided in- | 
to twelve parts, every part being a ſ1gn 3yhe;firſt called Aries , the ſecond 7 axrus , 
f 
6 


[ Et us now deſcend to the ſeveral diviſions of the ſigns: it reſteth now you Y 


the third Gemini, &Cc. F | 
The reaſon why they are called by theſe names, are briefly thus; the firſt ſign is The reaſon 
called Aries (ſignifying a Ram,) becauſe when the Sz» is therein, he reckon to why Arics is 
his highett point ; heat m_ being increaſed, yer being mixed with the humidity of Ved by that | 
the preceding Winter, makes the temperature of the ayr hot and moyſt, which is ac- *** | 
contin to the complexion of the Razz : but there are ſome of the Ancients ſay that ? 
the ſtars in the ſigns being particularly obſerved, and as it were meaſured with a line ! 
the one from the other, they reſemble each the thing they are nominated. # / ? 
The ſecond ſign is called Tarr (fignifying a Bal) becauſe the Sun being there- Why &. m_ 4 - 
in, the heat is more fixt and fortitied, and the moiſture conſumed or expelled ; the 
temperature of the ayr tending rather to dryneſs, which reſembleth the nature of E-2J 
a Bull. / 


Thethird ſign is named Gemins (ſignifying Twins) becauſe the Su» therein cau- Why T7. - p 
ſeth a reduplication of heat ; and all Creatures couple and ingender, every thing de- | 
lighting in its mate. : 

The fourth ſign is called Cancer (lignifying a (ab) becauſe the Swe being there- Why &, / eng} 
in, goeth, as it were, backward, (after the nature of the Crab) retiring towards the | 
Equinotial from whence he came, declining contrary to that of the 7 wins. F // /0 

The fifth ſign is called Leo (ſignifying a Lion) becauſe the Sz being therein,the Why 1. if / i 
heat is increaſed in =_ ſtrength and dryneſs, after the nature of the Lion, which is ” i | 
of a ſtrong, hot and dry nature. / p 

The fifth ſign is called Virgo (lignifying a maid) becauſe the Syn therein hath his Why 0m, © 7 "= 
heat diminiſhed, and dryneſs ruleth, fo that things ceaſe to increaſe , and the earth | 
becometh barren ; being of the nature of a Y'irgiz, who is naturally tending to cold J 
rather then heat, and is of her ſelf barren. | ; don 

The ſeventh fign is called Ziby2 ( ſignifying Balarce) for that the Sun being Why <:. + : 
therein, both the length of the days and nights, as alto the temper of the ayr, are 
in balance. as it were neither inclining one way nor other; the days and nights being 
: of an equal length through the whole World ; and the temperature of the ayr be- 
tween the decayed heat of Summer, and the approaching cold of winter, is neither 
tending one way or other, but as it were in a balance. 

The eighth is called Scorpio (ſignifying a Scorpion) becauſe when the Su is there- Why 1. 

in, cold and dryneſs is predominate, which are obnoxious to nature, and by reaſon 
M 2 the 


» Why VF. 


\ % 
/ % \ 


: 


Pd 


ET Yay v. 


Ti 
SE 
70 
$ 
i 
" 


FA HCL? Why ::-. 


Why we reckon 
from "", and 
1.6t from apy 
other hgn, 


bo An Introdufion to the Lib.2. 


the natural temper of the ayr is hot and moyſt ; the ayr1s thereby corrupted , ſo 
_ dangerous diſeaſes are ingendred thereby , as peſtilential Feavers, Plagues and 
the like. 

 Theninth ſign is called Sagitrarins({ignifying an Archer or one uſing to caſt darts) 
becauſe the $zx being therein, the heatis overcome by cold, whereupon enſue Fogs 
and Frofts, and ſuch like, being (for the nature of the miſchief and hurt they do) as 
obnoxious, or equivalent to venemous Arrows or Parts. | 

The tenth ſign is named (apricornus (lignifying a Goat) becauſe the Sun being 
thetein is fartheit from the vertical point ; 1o that by reaſon of the cold mixed with 
dryneſs, and the want of heat, which ar that time is, the nature and diſpoſition of the 
ayr is melancholy, after the nature of the Goar. 

The eleventh ſign is called Agwaries (bgnifying a Waterman, or one pouring wa- 
ter) becauſe when the $# is in this dryneſs is overcome by moiſture beginning, 
yet the cold remaining, which cauſeth tigmper of the ayr hs cold and moiit, at- 
ter the nature of water. . W 

The twelfth 1ign is named Ps/ces {ſignify 
in, the ayris inclined tocold and moiſture, yet 
ture of Fiſhes who are cold and moyſt by reaſon 
they retain ſome little natural - ſo the ayr is 
ſmall quantity of heat, by r 

And thus much concerning 
we come now to ſhew the Reaſo 
der to P:{ces, and not fromT aurn 
are not placed according to the order 0 
Earth , bur firſt a fiery ſign , next 
try, &c. 


Wes) for that when the Sax is there- 
ſome ſmall heat , after the na- 
gir Element the water, yet 


yd laſtly a wa- 


XXV,. 


CHAP, 


Shewing the Reaſons why the ſigns are reckoned from Aries, and nt 
from any other ſign ; as alſo why they are not placed according to 
the order of the four Elements. | 


thing that hath been already delivered to the Students of this noble Art by the 
wel-willers thereof, ina plain manner, and our vulgar tongue, farther then to 
give me occaſlon for what is my drift, viz, to render to my loving Countrey- 
men and wel-willers of this Science, the reaſons and grounds of the Art, according 
to the moſt rational of the Antients, that they may be both confirmed in their way, 
as alſo the better able to anſwer the weak Arguments, or rather cavils of their 
puny Antagoniſts , I mean the. vain-glorious ignorant praters and ſcriblers againi* 
this Heavenly Science. I come therefore now, God enabling me, to ſhew you the 
Reaſons of the Ancients why the ſigns are ſtiltreckoned from Aries, and fo forward, 
ſince the Zodiack as well as the Heavens is round ; and what is round hath no begin- 
ning, and what hath no beginning muſt needs have no ending ; and what wanteth 
beginning and ending, muſt needs have no-middle : yet the twelve Ccelettial ſigns are 
faid to begin at Aries, which is called the firſt, and fo forward toT awras, which 1s 

the ſecond, to Piſces which is the twelfth and laſt, for theſe reaſons. 
Firſt, becauſe the Equator cutterh and divideth the Circle of the Zodiack in the 
beginning of Aries, and alſothe oppolite tign Zibra ; ſo that ſix ſigns are Fs, 

an 


] Have ſaid before, my intention in all theſe my Writings, is not to treat of any 


Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stars. 


and fix Southern ; but the reaſon why the beginning is from Aries, and not from Li- 
bra, is forthat that part which is Northern is ſtronger and of more force,efficacy and 
power, and is more noble then that which is Southern ; and Arzes is the firſt Nor- 
thern ſign, and lo arealltqthe jatrer end of Virgo; the reſt are Southern, or decli- 
ning Southward ; wheretore !ince by all in genera}, the Northern ſigns are account- 
ed ftronger, and more noble then the Southern, did the Ancients appoint Arzes the 
firſt of the ſigns, 1t being the {irlit of them. 


Secondly, the Ancients began to number the ſigns from Aries, for that when the Other reaſons 


$#n enters into Aries, a!lthings increale and multiply; the days increaſe in length, the 
Trees floulh, the earth brings torch fruit, and all things are as it were revived or 
raiſed from Igeb, being to outward appearance (asit were) by the preceding Win- 
cer barren a d; allo when S/ enters eries, it is the beginning or chief prin- 
cipium of the s, cauling every thing to receive vigour and itrength, reſembling 
youth, which 1s yne and molt pleaſant time, and beginning of lite, &c. which 
are the reaſons w ncientghave named eres the firtt of the ſigns. «Aries is 
a fiery ſign, and iey have placed Taurus which is an earthy ſign 
afrer him Gemini w then Cancer whichis a watry ſign; and then 
again beginning with 1 an earthy one, after anaery, and laſtly a wa- 
try, and lo tollowing t roughout the twelve ſigns, and not accord- 
ing to the order of the z. Hire, Ayr, Water and Earth ; but the rea- 
ſons hereof are briefly t il] haſten ro conclude this our firit Trea- 
tiſe, being meerly an Int a belore we Ccoie to peruſe the fol- 
lowing I racts. | 
Yer if you finde any be 
pains well lens; for my 
ive reaſons and grounds fi 
ed, but to ſuch as theſe, f 
happily (by ſome ignorant A 
fore ſuch and ſuch things are hel 


by, I ſhall be very glad, and eſteem my 
0 benefit young Students} that they may 
tias I ſaid before ; I write not to the learn- 
Kok theſe pains , knowing they may 
nd enemy to the Art) be queſtzoned where- 
y them, &c. 


But let us proceed; ghe Ancfents then ( as aboveſaid ) have placed firſt a Why the Gons 
fiery 1fign, then an earthy lign , after an acry, and laſtly a watry ſign for di- are nor placed 


vers good Reaſons ;gfirk then , for that the four Elements receive an alteration according ro 
the order of 

| oi PA. the four Ele. 

which corruption alteration there are generated four ſpecial qualities incident ments. 


and corruption one wth the other by the inceſſant motion of the Cweleſtial figns, of 


to elementary bodies, viz. Generation, Conſervation,Corruption and Deſtruction, 
Now for that Generation 1s the chief and more noble quality, they began with 
that ſign which is the author of Generation; viz. a fiery; Next unto which 
quality is conſervation; fixation, durability or continuance, which is cauſed by thoſe 
ſ1gns by which nature is moved to conſtancy or duration, as corruptible things re- 
ceive permanency and fixation, and they are earthy ; After which is corruption 
the more inferiour quality ; wherefore they placed inthe third place that fign which 
1s author thereof (according to that of Ariffetle, Aer vita eft vivorum Aeſtruttio 
mortuorum : Ayr isthe lite of every living thing, but the death or corruption of eve- 
ry dead thing) viz. an Acry lign. Laſtly,the moſt ignoble and rejected is deſtruction, 
which 1s cauſed by the watry ſigns, wherefore they placed in the fourth place a 
watry fign. | 

Secondly, they have placed the ſigns in this manner , for that heat and cold are 
aCtive : Drought and moiſture paihve ; and heat being ſtrong and more noble then 
cold, ſignifying or cauſing generation, as moſt deſerving » 15 placed firſt , viz. a 
fiery ſign; ſo likewiſe for that drynels is the ſtronger of the Patients, it is put 
firſt of them, and next after heat, being an earthy fign, cauſe of durability, and 
therefore placed next to generation; and becaute corruption goeth before , de- 
ſtruction is an a&ry ſign placed before the watry ; and becaule m__ is the firſt 
beginning of any living tlyhg, and therefore firſt placed, fo is deſtruction being the 
lait, placed laſt ; continmation and corruption mn the middle, &c. 
They 


86 


The quality 
and property 
of Y. 


Deſcription 


fignified by Y.. 


Diſcaſcs. 


Angel. 
Colours. 
Places. 


Regions, 


Cities, 


In man, 


The quality 


An Introduttion to the Lib.2. 


They have alſo thus appointed the order of the ſigns, and placed a fiery ſign firit , 
for that heat ruleth in fire, by which all things are quickned and vivifyed, and there- 
fore being the more noble oy (as aboveſaid) they place it firſt ; and next unto 
it an earthy ſign, by reaſon of the nearneſs of its quality with heat, it being a dry 
ſubſtance : after it they place an atry ſign, and preceding the watry , as participating 
with the humidity thereof; andlaſtly, is the watry ſign placed laſt, as the fiery is firit, 
being contrary thereunto in nature and quality; the paſſives being placed in the middle 
between the actives, which are placed in the extreams. There are ſeveral other rea- 
ſons may be produced for this order of the ſigns, but one or two may ſuffice to put to 
ſilence any caviller againſt this moſt noble Art : let us therefore now look into 


the natures and ſignifications of the ſigns, 


CHaP. XXVI. 


Of the Nature, Signification and Equality of the Signs ; and firit 
of Aries. | 


Hot and Dry, Beſtial, Luxurious, ViolenfSign ; Eaſtern, and of the fiery 
' Triplicity. fs 

A dry body, of middle ſtature, lean and ſpMe, big bones, ſtrong, thick ſhoul- 
ders, a long neck,long viſage, and a ſwarthiſffcomplexion. © 

Pimples and heat in the face, hare-lips, ring-worms, ſmall-pox, and all infirmities 
and diſeaſes incident to the face ; Head-ach, Tooth-ach, Apoplexy, Megrims, Bald- 
neſs and Falling-ſickneſs, and all diſeaſes of the head. 

CHMalchidael. 

White mixed with red. 

Sandy, dry, hilly grounds, and all places where ſmall cattell uſe to feed; the ſeil- 
ing in houſes, new ploughed lands, brick and lime kills, and unfrequented places. 

England, France, Baſtarnea , Syria, Paleſtina, the upper Burganay , Germany, 
Swetheland, the upper Sileſia, the leſſer Poland, Denmark, Fudea. 

N aples, ( apua, Ancova, Imola, Ferraria , Florenea, Verona, Lindavia, Brunſ- 
wick Cl racovia , Maſſilia, Seragoſſe, Berganum , Ceſaria, Padua, eAngouſta, 
Vrrecbt. 

The head and face. 

To divide here every Region of the World, according to the diviſion of the Hea- 
vens into four parts anſwering to the four Triplicities, would but ipend time and Pa- 
per, and hinder me from haſting to whatI rather drive at : Wherefore fince to every 
ſign you have declared the Regions and Cities ſubje& to the ſame; I paſs by the other 
in this place, and refer my Reader to the peruſal of the ſecond and third Chapters of 
the ſecond Book of Prolomies Quadripartite, to be therein inſtructed. | 


A Ries then is an EquinoGtial, Cardinal, Diurnal, Moveable, Fiery, Cholerick, 


Of Taurus, 


7. atrns, is an earthy, cold, dry, melancholy, domeſtick, feminine, fixed, noRur- 


pan Japan nal, beſtial ſign ; Southern, andof the earthy Triplicity. 


ion 


Deſcript 


A ſtrong, ſhort, well-ſet body, a full face,broad forehead, big eyes,a large mouth, 


Ggnified by &, thick lips, a ſhort big hand, black hair, andit curling or criſping. 


Al 


Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stars. 87 


All infirmities in the neck and throat, Kings-evil, Wens , ſore throats , Quinſies, Diſeaſes. 
Impoſthumes and Rhumes in the throat or neck, &c, ; 

eAſmodel, 

White mixed with Citrin. | ":- -w 

Stables, Cow or Ox-houſes, and ſuch places where their Furniture or Harneſſes are p1zces. 
laid or kept ; Paſtures, plain grounds, and ſuch places as are made level and plain,ei- 
ther on purpoſe,or by digging up Trees and Shrubs; Corr-fields, and ſuch fields as 
are far from houſes, and in houſes cellars and low ground rooms. 

Perſia, 'Media, Parthia, (pris, the Tlands of eArchipelages, the leſſer «Aſia, Regions, 
white Ruſſia , the greater Poland, Irelaud, Lorain, Helvetia, Rhetia, Franoamia, 
Switzerland. 

HMantna, Bononia, Parma, Senas, Tarentum, Burgus a Caſtle in Spain, Panc- Cities, 
rama , the head of Hiftria, Brixia, Tigurum, Lucerna, Vanceium, CHMetis, Here 
bipolis , Carolaſtadium , Liepſia, Nants, Poſua, Gueſma, Novogardi. ; 

The neck and throat, 


Angel. 


In man, 
Of Gemini. 


Gemini is an acry, hot, moyſt , ſanguine, common, double-bodied, maſculine, The quality 
diurnal, Weſtern ſign, and of the acry triplicity. and property 

It denotesa tall ſtrait body, a ſanguine complexion, but ſomewhat ſwarthy , a of T. 
dark brown hair or almoſt black, one of a wanton hazel eye, aRive in body, and of a I. 
judicious underſtanding ſpirit, but ſomewhat worldly-minded. no, 

All infirmities inthe arms or ſhoulders, alſo thoſe of the hands, frenzies, diſtem- Diſcafes, 
pers, corruption of blood, wind in the veins, &c. 

Ambreel. Angel. 
White mixed with red. Calne. 
Halls, Wainſcot-rooms, Plaiſtring and Walls of Houſes Barns or Store-houſes for places. 

Corn, Coffers and Cheſts, Hills and Mountains, upper rooms or high places ; alſo 
ſuch places where play is uſed. 
: Po Welt and Southwelt of England, Brabant , Flanders, Armenia , Lom- Reglons. 
aray, &C. 
: Lenkin Mentz, Cordubay, Bruges, Huiford, Ceſena , Norrinberg, Lovain, Bam. Cltles. 
erg, Oc. 
The arms, hands and ſhoulders, In man. 


Of Cancer. 


Cancer is a watry, moyſt, cold, feminine, flegmatick, Northern, moveable, mute, The quality 
fruitfull, Nocturnal and Solſtice ſign, of the watry triplicity. and property 

It generally denotes one of a low and ſhort ſtature, the upper parts more big then *f S: 
the lower, ſad brown hair, little eyes and thoſe gray, of a ſickly,pale,whitely com- 2*<#prion 

fond : : of ONEY ſignified by 5. 
plexion, a round viſage. 

It ſignifieth imperfeRtions all over the body, or in the breaſt and ſtomack and paps, Diſeaſes. 
weak digeſtion, Tyſicks, rotten coughs, Cancers inthe breaſts, ſalt legme, Impoſthu- 
mations in the ſtomack, and Nropical Humours. 

Muriel. | Angel. 

Green or ruſſet. Colour. 

The Sea, greatand large Rivers, places near Rivers, marſhy grounds , Ponds, Places, 


Lakes, Wells, Springs, Brooks, Ditches and Sea-banks, all watry places, Trenches, 
Ciſterns, Waſh houſes and Cellars, 


Scotland, 


88 +An Introduttion to the Lib.2. 


Regionsand Scotlavd, Hollaud,Z ealand,Conſtantinople,T ork, St. AndreWs, Venice, Algier, Jemea, 


Ciries. Amſterdam , Tun, Magdenberg , Prouſia, Millan, Wittenberg , St. Cadiz, a 
St. Lucas. | 
In man. Cancer Rules in man the breaſt and ſtomack. 


Of Leo. 


The quality Leo is a fiery, hot, dry, maſculine, diurnal, Eaſtern, cholerick, barren, command- 
and property jnp, beſtial ſign,of the fiery triplicity. | 
£4. FIR Leo denoterh one of a full and large body in the beginning of the ſign ; the latter 
ſignified by A. part giveth a more ſpare and lean body, and a black or dark hair ; the firſt part giveth 
a flaxen or yellowiſh hair, big eyes, a fierce countenance or ſprightly look, quick- 
ſighted, valiant and aQtive in body, of an oval vilage,ruddy or ſanguine complexion, 
yet ſomewhat mixt with obſcurity, | | 
Diſeaſes: All infirmities of the back, ribs and ſides, as es in the back, Convulſions, Plu- 
: riſies, &c. alſo paſſions and tremblings of the heart, violent and burning Feavers, 
Yellow-Jaundies, the Plague or Peſtilence, and ſore eyes. 


| Angel. Verchiel. 
Colours. Red or Green. 
Places. All Places where wilde beaſts frequent, as Woods, Deſerts, Fens, Forreſts, Rocky 


places, and harditony or gravelly ways, Caſtles, Forts, Parks, Kings Palaces ; all 
ſuch places where fire is, or hath been kept, as Chimneys, Stoves, Furnaces, Ovens, 


and the like. 


Regions, Ttaty, the Alps, Sicilia, Bohemia, Phenicia, Chaldea, «Emilia, part of Tarky, Sa- 
bina, T ogata, Orichemia. 

Cities, Damaſcus, Rome, Ravenna, Cremona, Con fluentia, Pragne, Linzinus, (: remiſium, 
Croton and Briſtol. 

In man, The heart, back, ſides and ribs. 


Of Virgo. 


The quality Virgo isanearthy,cold, dry, barren, foxminine, Southern, nournal, melancholy 
and property ſjpn, of the earthy triplicity. 
Deſcripelo q A ſlender body, ſomewhat above the middle ſtature, decently and handſomly com- 
Genified by ny, Poſed,a ruddy brown complexion, black or dark brown hair,an handſom & lovely per- 
| ſon, but of no great beauty ; witty, diſcreer, ingenious and judicious in worldly af- 
fairs; andif it be free from the malevolent aſpects of Saturn, and its body, as alſo 
Mercury,cthe Native will be a good Orator;but the body or aſpe&t of Saturn to Mer- 
cary, or the Aſcendant, hindreth good utterance ; it denotes alſo one ftudious, of an 
excellentunderſtanding , yet ſomewhatunſtable, a long or oval viſage , and the hair 
long, and not curling,but ſmooth, &c. | 


Diſcaſes; All infirmities of the belly , wind-cholick, worms , obſtructions in the meſe- 
raick veins, and in the bowels, infirnneſs inthe ſtones, croking of the guts. | 

Angel. Hamaliel. | | 

Colour. - Black ſpeckled with blew. 

Places. A ſtudy where Books are, Cloſets, Dayrie-houſes,Corn-fields, Malt-houſes,Store- 
houſes for Corn, Hay, Barley, Peaſe or Wheat Ricks. 

Reglons. Babylon, Meſopotamia, Aſſyria, Achaia, G reece Croatia, Corinthia, Athebna,Creet, 
me =7 of Athens, part of Gallia (omata, part of Rhenyz , and the lower 
Sefpa. 

Clrics. jernſalem, (orinth, Novaria, Rhodes, Avethium, (umas, Brunduſium, Padua, T- 


boſa, Lugdunum, Part, Baſil, (ratiſlavia, Heidelburg, Sipina, Erphoraia. 
In man, The Belly and Intrals. wat 4 of 


Fudgement of the Stars, 89 


Of Libra. 


Libra is an aery, ſanguine,hot and moiſt, equinoRtial, cardinal, moveable, maſcu- The quality 
line, weſtern, diurnal and humane ſign ; and of the acry triplicity. . and property 
One of a tall, {traight,well framed body, uſually more r ar. ON proſe, eſpeci- =. 

, . - . : eſcription 
ally in yer ; of a round, lovely and beaurifull vilage, a fine ſanguine complexion g,1jc04 py 
in youth, but in age commonly pimples or a very high colour in the face, the hair * 
yellowiſh, or ſomewhat tending to flaxen , bur it long and ſmooth,and gray eyes. 

All infirmities inthe reins,as the gravel, ſtone in the reins, back, kidneys, heats and nirafes. 
diſeaſes in the loyns, impoſtumes or ulcers in the reins, bladder, or kidneys, corrupti- 
on of blood, and weakneſs in the back. 

Zuriel. 

Black, dark crimſon, or tawny colour. __ 

Ground neer Wind-mils, Barns, and Out-houſes, Saw-pits, ſuch places as there 1s places. 
any Wood cut in,tops of Mountains and Hills, grounds wha hawking or hunting is 
uſed, ſandy and gravelly places, the upper rooms in houſes, one chamber within 
another, Garrets, Lofts, &c. 

Baſtriana, ( aſpia, Seres , Oaſir, Ethiopia , Sabandia, Alſatia, Sundgavia, Li- Regions, 
vonia, eAuſtria, Pannoma, Portugal, the Dukedom of S 4V0). 

Olyfiponus, Arefatum, Caieta , Lauda, Surſſa , Placentia, Friburgia, Argentina, Chies. 
Veldkirchium, Spira, Francofordia, Halafriſinga, Heilprima, Moſbachium, Landſhuta, 
Viennaof Auſtria. 

The reins, kidneys and bladder. In man. 


of Scorpio. 


Scorpio is a watry, cold, flegmatick, feminine, nocturnal, fixed, northern ſign, The qualley 
of the watry Trigon. | and property 
A ſtrong able corpulent body, not exceeding in height, a good broad viſage, but? " 
the complexion ſomewhat be a ſad brownhair, and it criſping or curhng, an 2*<Prion 
> COMP 0 . n ping 8> UN Gonified by N11, 
un ſhort necked, and a ſtrong ſet body every way, but commonly bowe- 
legged. 
NY infirmities in the Privities and Bladder, as the gravel, ſtone, priapiſm,ruprures, Diſeaſes. 
Fiſtulaes, the Pyles, Defects in the Matrix, and running of the reins or Go- 
norrhea. 
 Baraluel. Angel. 
Brown. | Colour. 
All ſuch places as creeping and venemous beaſts uſe, Gardens, Orchards, Vine- Places. 
yards, muddy mooriſh grounds, ſtinking Lakes,and Quagmires and ſinks in houſes, 
_— houfes, and ſuch places where rubbiſh-uſes to lie,the waſh-houſes, Kitchin or 
arger, 
HMatragonitida, Commagena, (appadecia, Indea, Ilumea, Mauritania, Getulia, Regions. 
Catalonia , Norwegia , the Weſtern Swecia, and the upper Bavaria , the king- 
dom of Fesz. 
Algera, Valentia of Spain, Trapizuntius, Vrbinum , Aquileia , Piſtoria, Came- Cities, 
rinum, Petavinm, Meſſana, Viena of the «+ Allobroges, Gedamun, Crema, Ariminum, 
Forum }ulli. 


The privy parts or members of generation. In mas. 


N of 


Tudgement of the Stars. Lib.z, 


Of Sazitarits. 


The qualiry Sagittarius is a fiery, hot, dry, maſculine, cholerick , diurnal, Eaſtern, common, 

» 3 AA Bicorporial ſign - of the fiery Trigon. 

Deſcription It repreſents one of a well compoſed ſtrong _ ſomewhat above the middle ſize, 

Ggnified by 7, 2 handſom comely countenance, ſomewhat longiſh viſage, a ruddy ſanguine com- 
plexion, a cheſnut coloured hair. 


Diſeaſes. All infirmities in the thighs and buttocks,as Ruptures and Fiſtulaes in thoſe parts : 
alſo over-heating of the blood, Peſtilential Feavers,intemperateneſs in recreations, falls 
from horſes, &Cc. 

Angel. Advwvachiel. 

Color. Yellow or green tending ſomewhat to red. 

Maces, ' A Stable of War-horſes , Ox-houſes, the higheſt places in Land, Hills, Stony 
_ and places where fire is or hath been frequently kept, the upper rooms in 

oules. | 

Regions, | eArabia Felix, Tyrrhenia, Celtica, Hyſpania, Dalmatia, Slavonia, Hungaria, Mo- 
ravia, Miſnia, Provincia, Lyguria where Genua is, Luneſana. 

Clties. Toletum, Volaterre, Mutina, Narbona, eAviinion, ( olonia, Agrippina , Stut- 
gardia, Rotemburgus, Tuberinum, Indemburgus, Buda, Aftum, Firmum. 

In man. The thighs and buttocks. 


Of Capricornus. 


The quallcy Capricorn is an earthy, cold, dry , melancholy, feminine , noturnal, movable, 

and property cardinal, ſolſticial, domeſtick, ſouthern, fourfooted ſign; of the earthy triplicity. 

» og ; One of a mean ſtature, of a dry conſtitution, and uſually one of a long thin and 

ption , , ! 

ſignified by m, _ viſage; a thin beard, black hair, a narrow breſt, long ſmall neck , narrow 
chin. 

Diſcaſes. All diſeaſes incident to the knees, either by ſtrains, fratures or otherways, the le- 
profie, itch and ſcab. 

Angel. Hanael. 

Colour. Black or ruſſet or a dark obſcure brown. 

Places. Ox or Cow-houſes, and ſuch places, asthe Implements of Cattel are putin; alſo 


where ſailsfor ſhips, or old wood is laid, ſheep-pens, grounds where ſheep and other 
Cattel feed, Fallow ground, barren and thorny grounds, dung-hills, low rooms in 


houſes, dark places neer the ground, &c. 

- Reglons. India, eAriana, Macedonia, Illyria, Thracia, Boſnia, Albania, Bulgaria, Grecia, 
Maſſovia, Lithvania, Saxony, CMorea,the Orcades , Stiria, Romandiola, the ſouth 
weſt part of Saxony, Marchia, Haſſia, T wringia. 


Citics, Zuliacum, Chevonia, Berga, HMeclinia, Gaudanum, Vilna, Oxford in England, Bran- 
denburg, Anguſta, Conſtantia, Derrhona, Faventia, Tortona,Pratums. | 
In mag, The knees. | 
Of Aquaries. 
The quality eFquariesis anatry, hot, moiſt, rational, fixed, humane,diurnal, fanguine, maſ- 


_ property culine, Weſtern ſign ; of the acry triplicity. 
of 2. : Ie 


Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stars, 91 


Itſhews one cf a tall well-ſet thick corporature, of a ſtrong nx of a long vi- Deſcription 
ſage, ſanguine complexion ; if Satzry be therein , he gives black hair ; otherwiſe lignified by =. 
commonly the party ſignified thereby, is of a fair flaxen hair, and of a paler whi- 
rer COuntenance. | 

All infirmities in the legs or ancles, as Gouts, Cramps, and all melancholy wind Diſcaſes. 
in the veins or blood. 

Cambiel. | . Angel. 

A skie-colour or blew. | | Colour. 

Hilly and uneven places, places newly dig'd, Stone-quarries, Mincs broken up, Places, 
roofs of houſes, or the upper parts thereof, vineyards, &c. 

Oxiana, Sogdiana, the Delert of Arabia Patrea, Azania, Sarmatia, Great T ar- Regions, 
tary, Walachia, red Ruſſia, Dania, the South part of Swecia, Weſtphalia, Moſſelani, 
Pedemontium, part of Bavaria, Croacia, Germany, CMuſcovia. 

Hamburgum, Breva, Monsferatus, Piſaurumin ltaly, Saluburgus, Ingolſtadins, Cites. 
Forum Sempronium, T rent. In man. 

The legs and ancles. 


Of Pilces. 


Piſces is a watry, cold, moilt, feminine, flegmatick, no&urnal, common, Bicorpo- The quality 


real, Northern, effeminate, idle, ſickly, fruitfull ſign, and of the watry Trigon, and property 
One of a ſhort ſtature, not very decent ; yet I have known thoſe that have had * = "_ 


Piſces aſcending in their Nativities of a tall ſtature, and ſomewhat handſomly ſha- gnified by X, 
| ped; butit hath been when there was a Planet in the aſcendent of that power and 
ſignification: P:/ces commonly gives a good large face, and a paliſh complexion,the 
body fleſhy, &c. 
1 diſeaſes in the feet, as Aches, Lameneſs, 'Gout, Salt-flegm , Scabs , Ttch, Diſeaſes; 
Botches and Boils, Breakings our and Ulcers, proceeding from blood putrified , alſo 
cold and moiſt diſeaſes. 
Barchiel. 
A white glittering colour. _ 
It ſignifies grounds full of water, Springs, Fiſh-ponds , Rivers, places where places. 
Hermitages have been, Water-mils, Moats acer outs Wells, Pomps, Conduits, : 
Ciſterns, and thoſe places in houſes where water is moſt frequent. 
Phazonia, Nazomonitidis, Garamats, Lydid, Pamphilia, Cilicia, Calabria, Portn- Reglons. 
gal, Normandia, Galitia, Luſitania, Egypta. 
Alexanaria, Sibilia or Hyſpals:, ("ompoſtella, Parantium, Rhotomagum, Normatia, Cirles, 
Ratifporia, Worms, 
he feet, In man, 
Thus much of the nature, qualities and ſignifications of the ſigns ; we come now 
to the AſpeRs of the Planets,and to ſay ſomewhat of them, and fo proceed. 


' 


Angel. 


Of ad. 


Its nature. 


Of a x. 


Of a Platick 
alpeR. 


Of a Partil 
alpeR- 


TI he reaſon 
why > and 


A are poof. ter, for thata Planetin A wit 


C and & ba 


Of a i). 


An Introduttion to the 


CurapP, XXVIL 


Of the AſpeFts of the Planets and Signs, their Names, Charafters 


and Natures, and wherefore they were ſo named and charattered, 


thoſe Aſpects of the Planets and ſigns which are moſt uſual and neceſlary. 

And they are thus called and charactered, Sextile x, Ywuartile (7, Trine 

A, andOppoſition Þ : We omit here to ſpeak of Keplers new Alpes, {ince theſe 

are the moſt neceſſary in the practiſe of this ſtudy. There is alſo a {ommntivn thus 

CharaQtered & , which is not properly termed an Aﬀpec, ſince a Planer is then ſaid 

to be in Conjunction with another when he is in the ſelf ſame degree and minute of 

one and the ſame ſign the other is an, and therefore cannot properly be ſaid zo be- 

hold or Aſpect him, but isin & with him : this & 15 of nature neither good nor bad, 

but according to the ſignificators and their diſpoſitions and places is both, viz. ſome- 
times good,and ſome times bad. 

A Sextile is ſo called , for that it is the ſixth part of the Zodiack, and is there- 
fore charaRered inthis manner + With ſix trokes;it conſiſteth of 60. deg, in length; 
asa Planet inthe firſt degree of Ares, beholdeth another in the firſt degree of Gemini 
with a * AſpeR.. Alfo if a Planet bein the firſt degree of Aries, he beholdeth ano- 
ther inthe fifth degree of Gemizi, witha  ; and thisis called a Planck Af pect, ad- 
mitting of the Orbs of the Planers in Aſpect ; as Sararnin the 15. degree of Aries, 
and 7wpiter inthe 23: deg. of Cem; Fwpiter is in a + of Satarn by reaſon he is not 
fully elongated 9 deg, which - 3 half orb of Satwrs and Jupiter maketh, as Saturns 
half otb being 4: deg. and a haſt, and Iypiters 4.d. anda half, added rogether make 
juſt nihie deg. and here'you ſee them but 8.deg. ſeparated from a Parrileaſpet,which 
is when they are both in one and the ſame number of degrees and minutes as above- 
ſaid. The uſe thereof is only thus ; if in any ſcheme or judgement whatſc- 
ever you finde the Significators in a Sextile Platick , you. may be  con- 
fident (if your light or Planer be .applying) your buſineſs ſigufied by thoſe Sigait:- 
cators ſhall be accompliſhed when they come to the Parr:l aſpect, eipecially if the 
more weighty Planet be retfograde or jn reception by houſe or exaltation with the 
more light;if they are ſeparating and without reception, the contrary; for by how much 
they are ſeparated from the Par: aſpgit, by fo much the more unlikely is the buſi- 
nefs ſignified by the ſignificators ſo ſeparating to cometo a concluſion; but look when 
they are fully * hems. by the mediety of their Orbs, and about that time ſhafl the 
buſineſs be tully broken of, except one of the Significators be juſt then Stationary,ard 
thenimmediatly apply again, forther'it hangeth in ſome ſuſpence, and after a while 
beginnerh afreſh, &c. But you muſt note that application by + or A is good , for 
they are Aſpects of love, _— and Friendſhip; yetthe 4 is more forcible and bet- 

another is out of houſes of the one and the ſame na- 
cure, as fire with fire, earth with earth, water with water, and ayr with ayr. A * is 
by a fiery with an acry,or earthy with watry, and theretore is not altogether ſo good 
asa A, for thattheſe agree not in every point; for fire is hot and dry, ayr hot and 
moilt, agreeing partly, viz. in heat : ſo likewiſe earth and water ; the earth is cold 
and dry, the water cold and moiſt, agreeing in coldneſs ; for which reaſon a 15 
accounted indifferent good, and fo likewiſe note that a 17] and + are naught, and of 
enmity and diſcord, quite contrary to the other, yet the # 15 the worſe,&c. 

A ®martile is (0 called, for that it is the fourth part of the Zodiack, and is 
charaRered four ſquare (2 ; it conliſteth of go deg. inlength,and four times 99 deg, is 
360. deg. you muſt know a Partil and Zlatick (1 by the ſame rute you knowa #, 

| | and 


M Any new Aſpects there are which we ſhall here omit,and here treat only of 


Lib.2. Judgement of the Stars. 9? 


2 
and fo of all thereſt, iz. A, and 2. But note that a buſineſs brought to paſs by 
the i; or & of the ſignificators, cauſeth much diſcontent and ſadnefs, ſo that the 
buſineſs had better never been done, &c. 
A Trine is the third part of the Zodiack; and 1s therefore charactered three Of a -.. 

ſquare and triangled 4 ; conlifting of 120. deg. and three times 120..deg. maketh 
juſt 360.deg. 

An Oppo(tion F , is that aſpect which divideth the Zodiack intwo equal parts, and Of an &. 
is therefore charactered with a line berween two round 0's - intimating the dire& op- 
poſition of the Orbs ot two Planets; and it conlſiſteth of 180. deg. &c. 


There is alſo an aſpect which the Ancients called Dexter and Siniſter ; a Dexter of ny. and 
aſpect is contrary to the ſuccetiion of the ſigns ; a Siniſter is according to the ſucceſ- gniſter aſpe&s. 


ſion of the ſigns ; as a Planet in Aries beholding another in Leo, is a 4 aſpect Sint- 
ſter ; a Planer in Aries beholding another in Sagittary isa 7 Dexter ; the Dexter is 
not ſo good as the Siniſter. Here 1 may alſo give you ſome other reaſons why one 
aſpect is better then another (which I had almoit forgot) which is in reſpe& of the Otker reaſcns 
Luminaries ; for as the Sz is Fons vite, the fountain of hife ; ſo is the AZ7oon of main for the good: 
power and efficacy by her forcible influence on inferiour bodies, bring-"* 

1 : a : 0 ; ne's of the 
ing the light and influence of all the other Planets to us. I ſay in reſpe&t,;... 
of them are the aſpects termed good or evil : for Satzrns houſes behold the og 
houſes of the Luminaries with an + , which is the worlt of Aſpects by reaſon he is 

the worit of Planets: In like manner a A aſpect is the molt. fortunate and belt, for 

that the hauſes of the beſt and mott temperate Planet Zepiter, beholdeth the houſes 

of the Luminaries with a Trine aſpect, even as Capricorn 1s oppoſite to (ancer, and 
eAquaries to Lee ; 10 1s Piſces in Trine to Cancer, and Sagittary to Leo: and (o is a 

Duartile the leſſer malevolent afpe, for that the houſes of the leſſer fortune, viz. 

Aar:, behold the houſes of the Luminaries with a 2w#artile, wiz. Aries is in Yauar- 

tile to Cancer,and Scorpioto Leo ; neither is this aſpect ſo bad as is an Oppoſition , for 

that Scorpio one of his houſes is in Trine to { ancer the houſe of Luxa: Likewile a 

Sextile being from the houſes of the leſſer Fortune Yenws, is of leſs force then a 

Tree, &c, and ſo much for the aſpects of the Planets and Signs. 


"R > — : Gt aA 1G ot ono ate AO TEE 


Cnary. XXVIII. 
Of the © fixed Stars in the Zodiack ; wherefore they are called 


fixed, their number, particular names, natures, magnitudes, la- 
titudes and longitudes ; and firit of thoſe in Aries, as they are 
delivered by the moſt learned in this Art. 


Come here to ſay ſomewhat of the fixed itars, ſince without the true 
knowledge thereof our works will be m__— | mean our Judge- 
GS ents; 2s alſo theſe our labours without them would be but lame and 
© imperfect. I ſhall but ipeak of ſome of the ſtars chiefly, viz. the moſt 
notable, and thoſe of the firit, ſecond, third and fourth magnitude, 
except here and there of ſome more obſcure. I ſhall refer my Reader, 
if hebe curious herein, tothe peruſal of Copernicus, Tycho, Lucas Gauricns, Stad us 
and Sconergs, and what others treat of in this Nature ; yet what T here ſet down may 
ſuffice for any judgement whattoever inthe Art of Aſtrologie, of what part thereot 
ſoever it be. The method ! follow,is briefly firſt to declare unto you the nmber,namer, 
nature, magnitude, latitude and longitnde of the moſt notable fixed ſtars in the Zodiack,, 
of the firſt, ſecond, third and fourth magnitude : as alſo thoſe (of the ſame magnt- 


tude) both on the North and South part. and theſe Will [erve for ever.and in all Regions 
p | w 
an 


nels and bad- 


eAn Introduttion to the Lib.2. 


ara places through ihe whole Globe of the Earth, except their longitudes, which Will 
vary ſomewhat in reſpett of the Equinottial ; wherefore I ſhall only give you the de- 
grees of their longitudes. 

We will begin with ries being the firſt ſign (as you have already heard) and fo 
forward ; bur before we begin, 1 think meer firit to let you know , wherefore theſe 
ſtars are called fixed ſtars, that there may be nothing in the Art which the Student 
(if occaſion ſerve) may not givea reaſon for ; for it 15 my deſire to have knowledge 
increaſe,and ignorance and envy perpetually put to ſilence: The reaſonthen why they 
are called fixea ſtars,is,for that they are indeed fixed and immovable, never ſtirring,but 
they are violently carried about with the Heavens by the firit mover (as aboveſaid) 
not having any peculiar motion of their own as the Planets have, &c. 

But let us now come to the fixed ſtars, their number, natures, names, magnitudes 
and latitudes; and firſt of Aries: in Arzes there are rwenty five notable fixed ſtars. 


Their 
The names of the Stars. Nature. 


Their 


AY 


2pmugew) 


| In Y | 


C—_— — 


1 Algenib, theend of the right wing of Pegaſns. 42 or 


2 Alderaimin, the right ſhoulder of (ephns. [Sv 
| 3 The formoſt of the 3. bright ſtars in the band of the fiſher. 'h Þ 7 


ug” Alpheraoz,, the Navel of Pegaſus, the head of Andromeda. 9g 
5 The hindermoſt in the tail of the //hþale. . | Þ 
6 The middimoſt of the 3.bright ſtars in the band of the fiſhes. h Þ v 


| 7 The middlemoſt of the 3. inthe body of the whale. h 
S The laſt of the 3. bright ſtars in the band of the bes. hP y 
___9Baten Kaiton, the belly of the Y/hbale. 


IOOf Andve-? left ſhoulder blade Sheder. 
__I1T; medathe f ſmall of the left arm, 
12's Fit 7 of the ſtars after the bowing ofthe B. of fies.| ,  __ 
13 a wry g of the ſtars after the bowing of the B. of fiber | hÞDy 
*14 -Acarnar,the bright ſtar of the River Eridanus. | 


15 The latter ofthe 3.after the bowing of the ban. of the bes. 


mmm me EE... 


| 
o |= 
| 


PSY AST pg Rey, RPE 
t 4 


[uw w ſh 


bu ! 
oF XY 


—76 The middlemoſt ſtar 


| 75The oft Fof the girdle of Andromeda. RF” 


« ;8/The knot of the band of the fi/bes,or pole of the YY bale. —— Hop 
19] Mirack, the furthermoſt ſtar of the girdle of Aydromeda. 
20|Angetenar, the turning of the River Eridauss. | 
The foremott ſtar in the right horn of the Ray, (bale. ” 
The ſouthermoſt of the 2.hindermoſ ſtars inthe breſt of the 
The foremoſt in the neck of the z/hale. 


t 


0H 0D ÞH 
Us It wm 


| 
| 


he latter ſtar inthe right horn of the Ray. 


29 
he middle of the chair of (aſſiopes. S 


51_40Þ29 


ty 
+ 


abFa ww [a wow 


I 
nn 


Lib.2. 


eAn Introduftion to the 


CHAP. XXIMX. 


Of the Fixed-ſlars in Taurus, their number, names, nature, magni- 


num- 


—— —— 


1D 


tude, latitude, and longitude. 


V 


Nto the fixed ſtars in 7 anrus we now deſcend, as they ſucceed one another 
in longitude, which are in number thirty five, as followeth, 


Their 


The Names of the Fixed Stars 


— — 


In Ss. 


0h 1T he foremoſt in the Jowl of the Whale. 
2/Schedar the breaſt of (aſsiopea. 
3'The The point of the Triangle. 


+ The Peruck of the hate. 
5 'The firſt bright ſtar after the ſpace of the Aon 
The middle of the mouth of the bale. 


CON 


9 
_ 


IO 
II 


— —— 


The left hinder foot-of the Ram. 
The foremoſt tar in the bottom of the Triangle. 
The ſtar onthe ſeat or buttock of Caſ(siopea. 


The hindermolt ſtar in the bottom of the 7 riangle. 
eAlamac, the left foot of Andromeda. 
12/The ſe ſecond great ſtar after the ſpace of the River Nl. 


13 Menkar, the end of the Jaw of the Y/hale. 
14/The left knee of Caſſtopea. 
15 The third great ſtar after the ſpace of the River N:/us. 


20 


| 16The tirſt ſtar of the tail of the Ram. 
.17 The fourth great ſtar after the ſpace of the River N/ur. 
_ 18, The foremoſt (without form) from the head of edvſa. 


© | © © | 0N &[Þ wwlt too Þ 1 


ſecond 


| 1g The middlemoſt itar of the tail of the Ram. 
| ſtar of the four in the partition. 


northermoſt ( of the Bx/7. 


| c [4807 


II 


The laſt ſtar of the tail of the Ram. 
The laſt great ſtar after the ſpace of the River Nilus. 
The right hand of Perſens, 

The head of Argo!, Gorgon or Meduſa. 


Of the Pleiades Vir- YNorthermoſt. 


gilie, Athoray, or\ Southermoft. 


Atarage 


Little ſtar. 
) Narrow end. 


6-2 _ zo The breit of the Bull. 


= 


31;The left heel or wing 
2' Alchenib, a ſtar inthe right ſide { 
33 'The ancle of the left foot Cf Perſens. 


34 Ther third ſtar of the right ſide 
| 35 The ſhank of the left leg 


on 


J 


eAn Introduttion to the 


CH AP, 


XXX. 


Lib.2. 


Of the Fixed-Stars in Gemini,their Number, Names, Nature Mag- 
nitude, Latitude and Longitude. 


D 


Eſcend we next unto the moſt notable fixed ſtars in Gemims,which are in num- 
ber thirty fix: we will here ſtill follow the ſame method, to ſet them down 
as they follow or ſucceed each other in longitude. 


O—— 


TT ST Their : [Their y 
___ The Names of the Fixed Stars Nature. [92 [latitude.} , 
cr, =Y 
ES 
= k 1he Theleft knee of Perſers. : b* Wie 3 19 506 18 
2 Of Hyades , Lam The Noſtrils  - "his M45 is 
3| pades, or Suculs N\Under the Northeye | 3 1'4 15[1 
4 Under the South eye >of the Bull. pF |. 15 502 
5 In the North eye 3 13 O93 
* 6. The eye .In the South eye | I i5 I O[4, 
7 Sixth p | IT 5ols © 
8 Seventh L | T, 3 [17 106 
o thegt Eighth of the ſhield of Orion, h Y Uio- ads 
IO Lait and Southermoſt _Þ 21 397 
© 11;The Star between the South horn and the ear of the Bull. 3 Þ la '4 ods © 
* 12\Algenze, Algebar, Rigel, or the left foot Caf: PET IO | Y i [31 3010 
13]Elgenee, Bellatrix , or the left ſhoulder et SFhew 3d | 
7 —FiFhemo moſt Southerly f ſarin the South horn of the Bull. = : Dr 4 5 ©0 ir | 
15\The formoſt of the elbow of eLuriga. i *[3818 Bogtz 
16|The hindermoſt of the elbow of Auriga, d <&v([4g818 odtg 
© 17\The ftar inthe belly of the Hare. ? | 44M2q16 | 
18|The firſt ſtar of the girdle of Or:0n. V H[2 24 10916 
19/The itarin the middle of the body of the Hare. FB 4 3417 
= 20|Hwcws the goat or the left ſhoulder of Amrige. "DE. | 1 22 B 30 17 | 
| 21/The right toot of Awrig-,the end of the nor. horn | of the , 385 Oc[17 
22; The beginning or root of the ſouth horn Bull. | nM 4 (4 M ool17 
2 The foremoſt of the bright ſtars by the form of the 1 Dog. 2 57 4olt7 
24! The -middlemott of the ſword} of ovine Y . p [3 > 30|18 
gil he Southermolt of the ſword { | 3 29 Fojls8 _ 
26'The tnd of the South horn of the Bu/. & P v1; 2  36lis 
[ob \The middlemoſt itar of the girdle of Orion. b Si [24 »+.SO[IB 
 2þ'The ſecond { brighr {tar by the form of the Dog. ? {2 '59 Jolzo 
29 Thelaſt of the girdle of Orion. %S vb 25 3oſzo | 
| 3oThel Pole-ftar 4/-#cab. A the tail of ( mreſara. NR | l P 6.4 3 166 B o0l2 1 | 
* Light knee | : 513 3 [33 M3921 | 
's The e Rke ſhoulder Fof a g F 11 j17 O0j23 | 
| 33 The rightf ſhoulder ——_—_____ d. ' Vi2 2oBod4. | 
| 34The foremoſt over the foot of Caſtor Toca -£ | 4 oo Magz5 | 
| 35 Bright one before the knee of Caſtor 4 w1chour form, BT 48,5 B goſ28 | 
- 36 The foremolt of the left foot of C/o». | 4 11 M 3oſ2d _ 


Lib.2. 


CHAP. XXXI. 


Fudgement of the Stars. 


of the fixed Stars in Cancer, their Number, Names, Nature, Mag- 
nitude, Latitude and Longitude. 


E 


therein, which are in number juſt Thirty, as followeth. 


Nrter we now on the fourth ſign of the Zodiack to treat of the fixed Stars 


Thom fs 2 Their ,= Thei: [© 
nam. | The Names of the Fixed Stars. nature. a |Latitud.,5 
——_— ; Wa 2 Fr 
In = | _[D.M.|s 
1/The hindermoſt of the left foot of {aſtor. | 5 Poſ4]1 159% 
2/The ancle of the right foot of Caſtor. ? 4 3 260 
3/The ſtar at the end of the left forefoot of the Dog. 2 [3 [41 © 202 
4, The right inſtep of Pollux or Hercules. oF 93 7 360 
5 The left knee of Caſtor. h_|3 |: B 304 
*6| Argor. ” SS 75M 00's 
__*7]Cams major, or the mouth of the great Dog, Y PGlr 139 109 
8'The left knee of Polux. 3 [2M 30'9 
g The left arm of Caſtor. p [4 [7 B 2010 
10 The right ham of Polux. 3 [oo Mao'12] 
__T1{The left buttock of Pollux. 3 [OO 3013 
| 12/The right ſhoulder blade of Caſtor. 4 [5 B 3013 
13/The left ſide of Pollux. [ 3 j3 oo14 
__14jIhe! The head of Caſtor or Ras r Algenſe. VS. 9 9g 49 I 4 
15/The right thigh of the great Dog. | 2 þ {siM 30s 
16'The right ſhoulder of ( aſtor. h 4+ 4: B 50/1 5 
| 17/The {tar between the thighs of the great Deg. Q * 3 [48M M 45/3 = 
| 18|The left ſhoulder of —— - 1B. 40/18 
19 The head of Hercules or & rolex: & 2 IS [18] 
| *20\Procyon, Canis minor, e-1/gomei/d the little : Dog, _ P Þ 31 . Mido 
| 21 The bright ſtar beſides the form of the Twin. h |4 | M 49/22 
22,The end of the tail of the great Dog. Y 13 j50 3023 
_23' The hindermoſt north leg of the Crab. v P6j3. \1 B o 24 
. 24 The molt ſoutherly ſtar of the right foot | 3 |28 3026, 
25|The ſtar in the left knee before of Helices 8 3 35 2027 
26|The buckler of the ſhip, or Iarkeb. h Yi4 '47M15[z7 
27|The moſt northerly ſtar in the right forefoot of Helice. | 8 5 329B2 28] 
28 th. — ſouth leg of the Crab. LS 487M 3 28 
29 The northermoſt y al I Bi 29 
- 3oThe ſouthermoit f Þ* forepart of the ©7 of the (7a. |& > 21's M og 


O 


CHAP, 


» An Introdutton to the 
CHAP. XXXII. 


nitude, Latitude and Lon9itude. 


I 


ber Thirty oze as followeth. 


Of the fixed Stars in Leo , thei Number, Names, Nature, Maz- 


Lib.2. 


He fixed Stars in Leo,are in order next to be treated on,and they are in num- 


(Their q Ou [Their =\Thei: 
. 'num- The Names of the Fixed Stars. pe 02 Latitud.|.Z S| 
| 1 4 Ls RT _—_. 
i'The cratch or breaſt of the Crab. 'S yfd.ſoB oz j 
2'/The Northermoſt of the two Aſſes. SE 2 40/2 | 
| 3 The firſt of the » obſcure ſtars by the form of Helice. Q Pr j23 I5'2 | 
| 4 The ſouthermoſt of the two A//es. dS C[4gjooMio} | 
5] The ſecond of the obſcure itars by Helice. Þ 2Þ©1223 45/3 
6A! ſtar without form neer the head of  Hyara. 'H 13 [23M 15'4 
7 The hindermoſt of the two in the end of the poop of the ſip. Þ Y]3 143 206 
| 8; The third of the obſcure ſtars by the form of Helice, 3 10 Þ 00/7 
' 9fThe ſouth arm of the Crab. 417 (5308 | 
10/The fourth obſcure ttar neer Helice or Urſa Major. 2) up) won B 158 
__71/The ſouthermot ſtar in the letc ſhoulder calle ed Cyroſura. #28 [2 137 509. 
1-22 2 The ſtar without form neer the Crab: EN _ iy M 40/11 
| 13|The fourth wheel! of the wagon, called poz!'). The ſhoulder of Hilice. | «) |= 149 20912 
___ 14/The mouth of the Lion. ; Ih <&|4 17 _-30j12 12 
15, The greatelt ſtar in the Maſt of the ſhip of Jaſon. 'bþ y| 2 58M2012 
16A ſtar neer the Claws of the Crab. : 'H d1|4.l5 4013 
17 The flank of He/ice being the third wheel of the wain. | | 4 . 44B 3013 
Fo.” —y a rw | 3. 9 3015 
19/5 ? Northermolt { ris he head of as _ h 1, |12 ools 
{ 20ſThe nc northermoſt in the left ſhoulder, called {ynoſwr. Wo 2 74 5917 
| | 21Therig right foreknee of the Liow. 9 P v5 loo og18 
2/The bright ſtar.neer the Hull of the ip. b V2 /63M5921 
23 \ Aphard the bricht ſtar of Hyara. £ 12 15 ger 
| 24. Northermoſt” _ 9 [2 [11 B odl21 
25| ;Southermoit Cof the 3.ſtars of the neck of the Lion. -viz '4 3022 
26.The <Middlemoſt þP y$j2 8 3a 
* 27 __ of the Lion, Kalbeleced,Regul:s, Baſiliſcns. v @þ'11 oo 10Þl 
28 eft fore-paw of the Lios. bePy'4 4 M 15/2: 
29)The ms a Hilice, or ſecond wheel of the Wagon. 2 {is jg Boolz4 
30jThe ſouthermoſt in the breaſt of the Liox. re P 7/4 !1 Mygoſ 
031/The left thigh of the great Bear,or the 1 whee heel of the wapor| 2 '3 46 Boks 


— — << — ——_  - > Dn > Ce ———_—_—_ 


Lib 


2. Fudgement of the Stars. 


CHAP, XXXIIIL. 


Of the fixed Stars in Virgo, their Number, Names, Nature Maz- 
nitude, L:t:tude and Lonoitude. 


H 


Eard you have already the Nature of the Stars in Leo, it reſteth therefore 
we in order now ſpeak alſo of the ſtars in Virgo ſucceeding, and they are in 
number Tweoaey fix, as followeth. 


Their) 20 —_——_ [Their |; =, Their - 
wh The Names of the Fixed Stars. pos oa [Latitud.|. 
ber. 5 Eo”; © OE 2.oy We Eid 
"il In Tr. = D. M. [| ig 
E I - ws —_— bright itarin the Keel of the hip Argos. ; 6 q- 69M40 Þ 
2|The left arm pit 2 : 2 Þ &5j# {OM 19P ? 
;[The left foreknee of the __ k > # 4. 10PÞ+ 
——lv ſNorthermoſt EE nag . + 1-.. ks lax a 
475 10 —_—_— the right hinder foot of Helice. | 4 - *. = 
"6A ſtar without form by the neck of Hydra. (Helice| > 9l3 [26Mool2 
-7|Alioth the 3. horſe of the wain , or the 5. ſtar of the tail of & 2 |53B 30jz 
$|The laſt ſtar on the back of the Liox. LED 2 2 13 40 
__ inthe Deck or Shrowds{ = 'n.. 2 IcaMazole 
Ke 4, tar; the Hull or Bottom <r'the 5h | vE'Y 25 bu 
I1]The ſouthermoit ſtar in the hanch . i oi b Ka 
12|The foremoſt of the three under the belly of the Lion. bo 14.17 28 


— - 


25 


— 


24/The pinion of the left ſouth wing of Virgo. (Benenas. 9 PF; gg 
The 1.horle in the wa-nthe laſt in the tail of Helice, called Benan Elkereds | | 
) 26[The foremoſt of the four in the left wing of Virgo. IvP ol; 1 io 


1 3/A ſtar covering the ſhip Argo,,or onthe ſetion of the deck), Þ 7 '2 |T7M el G 
14|The middlemolt ſtar in the tail of Helice,or the 2d. horſe, + i 3 P ; q 
15jThe left ſide of the Hanch F 2 | J5 ” f 
16] The hallow of the left thigh C of the Lin. = Ay 1513 
| 17] The joynt next under the left thigh > \4 \ooM 5713 
| #18|Deneb Eleced, the tail of the Lion. —"keo (i 11B5016 
19'Tricathe hair of Berenice. _ 20 oo | 
20 The laſt of the great itars in the bottom of the Ship. bP %'2 69M 2017 
21/Crater the bottom of the Pitcher. | FEST 23 os 
22 A ſtar toward the ſouth,from the great Bear, $: \2 449 Bay'ro 
_= The latter of the two fouthermeſt ſtars of the hair of Brrenice. © Þ borc 25 2020 


—— 
| 


IO2 


99 


eo An Introduttion to the 
CHAP. XXXIV. 


Lib. 


Of the fixed Stars in Libra, their Names, Number, Nature Mag- 


nitude, Longitude and Latitude. 


Vi 


by 


and they are in number 7 wenty five , as followe 


th. 


DJ Emember Libra follows Virgo; we have done with the Stars in 
Y rgo; Wherefore we are to come now to the Conſtellations in 
Libra , and to ſpeak in order of them as of the reſt aforegoing, 


2. 


= [Their | =| Their | 
The Names of the Fixed Stars. nature. | Latitud.|.3| 
2 CT IF 
P2225 1 ba. 4 D. M. |= 
—|Previndimiatrix the grape gatherer inthe rig.or nor.w.of 7? F- oo ET 
a\The ſecond in the [ef or ſouth wing of the Virgin. (NY . He 50 n 
3/Thar in the right ſide under the girdle of the /57gin. 'oPeolz|8 3ols 
The Bill, and that ſtar is common to Hydra 0 3 [21M3o06 
The foremoſt of the left wing of the (row. 14 or g 3 112 390'$ 
Algareb, the ſtar in the right wing | 3 114 5olg 
| 7 The left ſhoulder of Bootes. h 4 3 Fm ek 
g/The left foot of the Crow or Raven common to Hydra. |F4 or g|3 [18M 10/11 
Thelaſt of the 4. ſtars in the left wing of the YVorgey. 7 P v4 |1 B 40l12 
Ik px ſtar in the left thigh of Boores. * &s i oo 4 
The ſtar in the right hip or apron W_ g | 
II 3 40 16, 
12/The northermo ! in the foreſide of the _y_ the Firgiv. | NEL 5 [2 20] 17 
*13 Spica virgins, Ariſla, Azimcch, the ear of corn in the left hand of MW. "= P d't 2M 00/18] 
*14| Arftormw, eAlramech, 1: the conſtellation of Boorezs. p d 1131B 3018 
ns cours RR — ____—_— 
15! T he ſouthermoſt of the foreſide of the 5. 6 \00 2018; 
16'T he ſouthermoit of the latter ſide of the © ON —_— : - : 5 06 2919 
17 The latter of the two northermoſt of the q ) Q* "OE 7g: 4 þ 3021 
18 The left knee of the Virgin & ES 6 |1 302 3, 
LE 9 The foremoſt of the two joyned ſtars in the right thigh of Centaurus. V 2 2 {46M1o24 
20 The calf of the right leg FO RE h YV'3 |[28B0026 
21jThe Spear-ſtaff Jyca/urus Tn PE! 'F Þ4 153 3527, 
TaaſThe latter of the three in the loyns [ if Contam. [x 2 | 3 40Moo 27, 
23/The ſtar in the left ſhoulder of the humane ſhape P VH13 |25 4027 


24 » Jmiddlemott 
25  { ſouthermoſt 


Cftar in the hem of the veſture 


Of the | vor y 4 7 B 34'28 
Virgm, & P @4 2 


40! 


28 


CHAP. 


Eib.2. Fudgement of the Stars. 1000 
CHare. XXXV. 


Of the fixed Stars in Scorpio, their Number , Names, Natures, Magni- 
tude, Latitude and Longitude. 


Nd thus we are come to the fixed Stars in Scorpio, which are in Number Thirty five 
as followeth ſince we are now in order to ſpeak of them, and then let us proceed to 


the reſt. 


————— | Their | ZTheir © 
| ; The Names of the Fixed Stars. nature A [Latitude 71 
6: F Inm.  .. M. mn 
' "1{The Starunder the heel of the left foot of the Virgis. | 7 Org (4 ſoo 301. 
&P.o| | 
The ham of the right hinder le _ oY 2 '51 Mior 
2 g - | Þ, O 
3 'The Poſtern ofthe left leg behind Fof the Convany, | woT] 


- 4 *Apheta,Gnoſa,the bright Star of the Crown. |'Q 9 25-44 B 306 


— _—_— _ SO —  — —— 


5, Poſtern of the right leg 
6\Right ſhoulder of the humane ſha pe erh |S V|z {22 
-|The foremoſt of the twoin the belly (7 RE Centaur. | 

IV bright Star in the humane body 


—— — —— _ DO—  ——————— —_— — 


97s. brighteſt ſtar | MF : | 23,00 B 499 | 
11,The firſt Cof the folding of the neck of the Serpent 0- 3 13 129 15 13 
| I2 Star { at the beginning. ph'ucus. : E 34 8 73 
m—_—_— — god 1 eo Ld KS 
I3]The bright Star of the North þ44ance. F- 2j2 5 nw 
14, The ſmall of the right arm of the Centaur. So 7 7 or [3 25 B 15114 
The foremoit of the 3 ſouthern itars under } | I; by 
"NS + ; 3/7 3014 
16 Theater of the 2. in the middle of The South balls |  p & 4 j1 B 401 i 
17; The lett knee of the horſe ſhape of / entaurus, pl 2 |2 145 M2015 
18 Ihe temples of the head of the ſerpent Ophinchus. _ 35B 00/15 
[ 00. Cs} - Þ 

19.8 5 middlemolt } | bh, ef j3 124 a 
20t- ? Southernm. of the folding of the neck of the Serpent Ophincus. 3 [24 00,17 
21\The middlemoſt ſtar in the - 1b a 
22 The northernm. of the 2. hindermoſt before the F **** #«lare.', p, 7/4 | oo21 
23/The right Arm of Hercules or Engonaſin. = Y [3 40 10(23 
24 The laſt of the 2 bright ſtars in the Is 71414 3024) 
2x ſkater We'2 "_— w:ithout trom on the «= FNorth ballance. R P 2 þ þ = _ 
26 The right ſhoulder of Engonaſin or Hercules. ov. 5 [41 00 25} 
27;The foremolt ſtar in the palm of the left hand of Ophincus. |H 9 13 [17 0026, 
28 Of the 3 bright ſtars in the forehead _— middlemoſt. Pap 3|1M 4027] 
' the Scorpion. the ſouthernmoſt, | F 3 15 00/27; 


30 The hindermoſt ſtar in the palm of the left hand of Gpiucrs, [Hh P. 7 3 [12 B 30 27| 
7. ' —_ m_—_— GY 


3 A ſtatgn che ſouth arm or fore legge . 
32 The northernmoſt of the 3 bright onesin aifart Songs © þ 31 B 202 


33/The northernmoſt =} forehead . 8 4 1 40 28 
34 The ſouthernmoſt of the 2 <onjuiced Nars of the tody. | 4 00 30 28, 
_* 35'/The hoof olghe right forefoot of Centaurus. v 91 41M1029 


— 


» An Introduftion to the 
Poxp, LL TE 


Lib.2. 


s . . T - : . 
Of the fixed Stars in Sagittary, their Number, Names, Nature, Magni- 


tuge, Latitude and Lonvinde. 


Y intentions now are to treat of the Stars in the fign 5 agittarim, that we may ſay 


——— = 


1V L ſomewhat of the Stars therein, as we have already of the preceeding ſigns; and 
know they are in number T hirty, as followeth. 
2 | Wn Their | Their © 
5 | The Names of the Fixed Stars. 'nature | |Latitude f 
| = | ERER EZ SESP. B- 
—7A Star in the hollow of the left foot of Ophinchw. [Þ P. 2/4 fooB452 
2'The forem. of the 2 bright ſtars in the middle of the Scorpion' > p y\3 | 3 M 452 
7 = 208 15 Eb... ———— OT ES” mms 
3The left Knee of Ophinchwe. h P.g (3 [11 B5oz3 
3; | | 
E 4. Cor Scorpi, Alatrab,C.\,- Antares the heart of the Scorpion, oe P. Y [29 4 M CO 4 
5|The Eye of [nnonix:, or the Dragon. ER... | 3 75B 404 | 
ur Ago 3 mo ſtars in the middle of the Scorpion, Þ,%3 '5 M 306 
e leſt ſhoulder * . ; © |i3 148 Boog 
2a Alcet-he head ( of Hercules or Engonaſin 5G 3 37 309 
— The firſt joint next the body 7 EIT HiModio 
\2)The Southernmoſt of the 21n the 34 joint { of the Scerpion. | +, p. v 3 ''g 0011 
r1/\The flame of the eMrar. | ! 2 H[3 134 0012 
[ 71-[The right knee on ae F— B2075 
I2 A 5 17 2012 
13|{he foremoſt above the ancle of che right foor $f07 inci, hP. {482 1514 
I | as fourth Joint nere the tail of the Scorpion. 3. [ 9 3014 
 15{Theright leg "i FS. | 1352 B 1515 
16\The2 of the 4in the richt'foot( of Ophinchus, Serpent ar.- »Þ oj. 3915] 
17 R as eAlangue the head 6 or Aeſculap us, HER 3 36 CO 16! 
18|The 34 of the 4in the right foot 48,00 206 
19\Ot the 2 ſtars of the north part of the} Northernmoſt. 9 7 M 10 17] 
20] ſting of the Scorpiex without form F Southernmoit. F ?feis ——— 
21 | tail or ſting hr »: "F I3 2019 
22 The ſtar in the fifth joint - of the Scorpion. Sr 3 18 5019 
23]. _ _ C7 jointnext the ſting) P. v1; [15__ 10} 
al Ras eAben the head gf Jurcnine or the tyP.yl> 155 B 30; 
24 ED | ragen, hd P.Yj3 175 Þ 3021 
25|The ſixth joint of the tai] - (6 v.g : 16M 4022 
26/Thedim ſtar without form following the ſting of che Scorpion.[Þ © 6/113 1522 
27 i he head or ſharp point of the arrow-, I __ 3s 3026 
28 North end of the Bow ( of the Archer or Sa- 4 |2 B 5ol2 
29\The left hand that holdeth the Bow (Lirrarias v 4; 16M3 29 
|] 3olSouth part ofthe Bow : | 3 lro 5olzg 


Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stars. 107 


Crnae. XXXVII. 
Of the fixed Stars in Capricornus, their Number, Names, Nature, 
Magnituae, Latitude and Longitude. 


F:Nrer we in the next place on the fixed Stars in Capricors, which are but twenty 


b four, as followeth, 


Dy | [Their ; Z[Their by 
fa 


Their : 
wag; The Names of che Fixed Stars nature 02 La_ n | 
er / FI” 
_ - In vw. 0 D. M{|vp! 
1'The Southernm. .in the north parc of the bow | '3 tr 30l5s 
2|The Ariow or ſhaft of the Archer, 4 6 3 5O 
3|Duble clowdy ſtar of the Eye or Segiitaiiki-| 5 Febjloo B Pu | 
4\The left ſhoulder "_, F ; M 10G | 
 _ 5[The foremott of the three in the Head) © Ry 2 B 107 
C [The ſtar under the Armpit of Sagittarimw\, Hz 16 M 4515 
7\Cheleft Knee of the Fore-leg > » [2 |18 008 
*_ vega Fidicula, The ſhining Harp, the falling Vulture * * [1 [62 Bios 
9 The left Hoof before ( bh Y 2 23 Moog 
10. The middlem. ſtar of the third in the head >of Sagittariw.\5) aslt B zolg 
11|The latter in the head $ 4 [2 oolio 
12]The firſt ſtar of Antinous, by the Eagle. | #- Y%3 18 ro 
"3 Ce [n the northertimoſt crail behind the head. | x 43 4 zo'; 3] 
|  14(Of Sagit- )northernm.. '4 '6 30|14 
I 5|tarims the Ae hoof beliind - y 3 20M 1018 
16 Letethigh of che hinder leg. —— _ | 3 113 3ohsg 
© 17) The foremoſt of the two in the back of the Fagle, on 21B 20241 
* 18] Alkair. The Eagle or flying Valrere, the latter of them. '9 +}; 29 os 
19|:Mlbirto the mouth of the Sway, or bill of the Her. 'e viz ho 20 = 
20 Thenexc co the bright Rar in the back of the ſhoulder: Ba $0 - —=- 
'21 The foremoſt inthe Neck Fofthe Eagits 2 ; a _ 6 
"* Of the Goat the 4 Northernmoſt ſtar in the left horn. lo P.gi33 7 30S a 
23 > © t Southernmoſt F | 3 F ooſ28 
L205 The 1 of the bright ſtars without form before the South £5. > 5 52M 20 9 


Cnyar. 


104. 


Of the fixed Stars in Aquaries , their Number, Names, Nature, 


» An Introduftion to the 
Crnae. XX XVIII. 


Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude. 


O much of the Stars in Capricorn, come we now to thoſe in Aquaries, which are 


briefly as followeth, and in number Thirty nixe. 


Lib.2 


Ther) — | DJ Their | ZTheir (© 
ua , | The Names of the Fixed Stars 7 xa Ft pn l 5 
EI LEY” In =. F-1 [D. M.|= 
'1 T he head of 41771048. the foremoſt ſouthward from the head of the Eagle > V rY 21B. 40 Ky 
2] . Cforemoſt 6\t ag5Þs 
3 The 2 middlemoſt = 3 ſtars in the Jaw of the Goar, h P.9 G6 |1 30] 23 
4 laſt & ſouthernmoſt Z _ _ Og '6 loo 45" 
_ *5[The ſtar berw. the head & ſhaft of the arrow of Hercwles. 45 "uy [39 20 he: 
c[The right knee of the Goat. "vs 6M. 302 
- middlemoſt'} of the bright ſtars,without form, before "* "_ 
&| They next after Fthe ſouth or great fiſh called Norine. ds ns 
9 [he foremoſt of the z in the garment on the left hand of Aquarius: 3 '8 B. 306 
10/Of the ſaid three ſtars,on the back Side of the ſame hand. P-.9 3 's 30'8 
RT... — ET 
-: + ae where, Cofthe zin the mid. of the body of he goaq , 5 [4M 00 
13/The foremoſt ſtar on the back of the goat. 4 loo oo's 
ras — pay why 
- Inthe toil far of the fore ſide of the Khomboydes « bofthe Dolphis, h & :l. ahe B. _— 
JE = _- i : : — A 
16|The brighteſt of the 3.in the middle of the body of the goar |, +» JF (4M. 1 ro 
ſ 17]The pinion of the right wing of the ſway or Hen. 2 & 2 (64B 4 10 
18|The northernm. of the forefide of Rhowboyaer of the Delph| ;,; + 31133 50 
— 19|The foremoſt 7 __ | 4 6M. 5911 
20The hindermoſt of the conjoined ſtars under the belly of the Goat- - 5 : 6 bo "os 
| 21|The hindermoſt of the two on the back of the goar. 4 ſoo 5ol2 
- : The o—_ of the latter ſide of the long diamond] 3 [32B. oo[12 
23 northernm. { ſquare or Khowboydes of the Dolphin. h 6 21133 1014 
1 2- 9 hh —_— wy 4 M. 45/14 
25 "enekh Alcheat on —_— of the bale n _—_— bY 4 | 2 = o- 
26 | in the nanKk 4 30116 
2- ſhe hinderm. = the bowing of the back _ : 2 o0[17 
1 >8 foremoft in the head 120 B.30!r 
29 memyer berſe | ©—ae in the mouth EP wer 30 - 
30[The left ſhoulder of Aquarius. h E.3 $8 5018 
| 31] The foremoſt Rar after the doubling of the tail of the goar. "} 4 2M. 20/18 
; : "Mouth | 
x 33 Of the leſſer _ the hindermot in the 95 nf 72 Sf Y bf x. pa" q 
| 34\The breaſt of the Swas or Hen | |? 2.3 F6 2020 
| 3 The ſouthernmoſt tar in the left buttock of Aquarius, ? P.H6 '1M. 4023 
| 36 Emf Alpheracz,, the yawning of Pegaſus dNv J$3321B. 3026 
37 he forem.of the 2 1n the right tide ot the pitcher Ep YL, hg. 3 B. 00 27 
38/The brighter ſtar in the right ſhoulder ” 4h F$|; [11 0027 
* 39'The mouth of the ſouth fiſh,and end of the water | ?e Yy1|1 [23 M.oozs| 


<—_ — 


CHAP. 


Lib.2. 


Cua?. KXAT 


Fudgement of the Stars. 


Of tle Fixed ſtars in Piſces, their nature,number, names, magnitude, 


latitude and longitude. 


which is the laſt : the number then of the ſtars therein are twenty nine, as fol- 


FE as we have proceeded in the other ſigns, let us here conclude with Piſces 


loweth., 
[7 heir Their F Their "y 
ag | The names of the Stars. Nature.| {latitude | 3 
| In X. ":e. $6. 7... oy. 
1]The ſtar in the right buttock of Aquarius. 2 Þ h 4 [oo 5d 18 
2] Arided, Deneb Adigege, the tail of the Swan or Hey. |. Y|2 [60 Boop 48, 
___3]The Northermoit of the two in the head of Pegaſus, - dYLv 7 '3 [16 50 58 
4\The right arm SY +8 a8; © 
5]The Northermoſt ſtar in the right hand of Aquarius, b Y 3 [10 45[: 
6|The firſt ſtar of the ſtream next the Pitcher tEYF 412 of c 
HENE Neon; . en IP 5M oof © 
g [The pear cnn” in the right leg. WT BY, v'P h ; |; , 
9 The Formolt of the ſouthermoſt * as 2 » 3 |9 M 093 
__1o| © } Hindermoſt \ ſtars in the right hand = 3 [8 4 
11] CThe next Southermoſt of the Pitcher '4 [oo 10s. 7 
21 )f 4 Ita in the forepart of the bowing c 4 1 Micg 
I3 | ENorthermoſt? . of the 4 |13 2010 
I4 nec Southermoſt { in the bowing ſtream. SEL '4 14 19 
1 51/987 ME<Next after the foremoſt in? the bow-C 4 O05 3QAr1 
16 .Southermoſt next after \ ing Op CO OE F 
17]The Sothermoſt in the neck N wn [0 Þ any 10 
18|The Foremoſt of the belly of the foremoſt of the 2.Fiſ " - 8 4 B 30 S 
19] Markab. Alpharacz.. The pinion of Pegaſwns his Wing. dV veg2ii 40118 
—20|The latter in the belly | | —— ks 2066-: 
"; (The latter onthe back of the-foremoſt of the 2. Fiſhes. [y * - ' = 
22 [Foremoſt on the South } ; | | 22 
23 Foremoſt onthe North ide of the /quare without fon P 9 (4 g - = 
—; |Schear. Alparaiz. The right ſhoulder of Pegaſus. F Ping ae ee" 
_ The hindermoſt on Suh 7 fide of the Square beſides .. af wb G M : Fo 
a North { under the form of the Fi/er. fig EY : > 30124 
| 27|Ofthe YVhale the ar at the North end of the tail. | x, |3 | 3025 
, South h 
- The tail of the foremoſt of the two Fi * 
_29 OW hP $14 [6 B 2027 | 


CHAP. 


105 


eAn Introduttion to the Lib.2. 


C Have, XL. 
Shewing the uſe of all the former Tables. 


mating the number of the ſtars in the ſign Pſces, as you have ſpecified by 
the word »wmber, on the head of the column. 

In the ſecond column you have their ſeveral names, ſignified by this inſcription on 
the head thereof, T he names of the fixed ſtars in Piſces. 

Upon the head of the third column you have their Natures, intimating that under- 
neath it, and over againſt every Rar is ſet the CharaQter of the Planet of whoſe na- 
cure it participates ; as for example, over againſt the right ſhoulder of Pegaſus, we 
finde &, V,v. , intimating that the ſtar onthe right ſhoulder of Pegaſus is of the 
nature of # ,%,or 9 v. ſignifying vel, in Engliſh oy : again we ſee over againſt the 
two ſubſequent ſtars Y PQ, fignifjing they are of the nature of 7zpiter, and partly 
of Venus P. ſtanding for partly, &c. 

On the head of the fourth colamn you finde magnitude, intimating that by the Fi- 
gures underneath, and over againſt each ſtar is ſhewn the magnitude of each ſtar; as 
over againſt the right ſhoulder 4 Pegaſus,you finde 2 |.intimating it to be of the ſecond 
magnitude ſignified by 2. and ſomewhat leſs, ſignified by 1. and note that in the ſame 
column where you finde g. it ſignifieth greater in any of the Tables. 

In the fifth column you ſee their /atitade, ſhewing that by the figures underneath, 
over againſt each ſtar is declared their latitude, and that either North or South, ſigni- 
fied by M and B. M ſhewing South latitude, B North, &c. 

In the fixth and laſt column you finde the inſcription Loxgitade, and this is in like 
manner demonſtrated by the figures underneath, as,the ſpoulder of Pegaſus (as above- 
ſaid) hath 31. d. oo. m. or 31. degrees, 00. minutes Latitude,and 23.d.or 23.degrees 

itude; or in 23.degrees of Piſces : and ſo obſerve and underſtand of all the fore- 
going and ſubſequent ftars, &c. D. ſtanding for degrees, and M. for minutes. 
The total [um of theſe ſtars here expreſſed is 366. being the moſt material. 


Y OU fee in the foregoing page, in the 1. column 1, 2, 3. and ſo forward, inti- 


——_ Ie. 
| — 


CHAP”. KLE 


Of the fagnifications of the 12 Houſes of Heaven, and wherefore 
they harve ſuch ſtenification. 


Ex<IX Ndecavor to be perfe& inthis chapter,which is to demonſtrate the reaſons 
IS of ſome things which have not as yet been divulged in our vulgar tongue 
Y _ FS tothe Students of this noble Art, and thou wilt much advantage thy 
_— ſelf, it being my deſire not to let ought ſlip for which thou mayſt nor 
SRD (if need require) give ſufficient ground and reaſons, &c. 
You are ſufficiently inſtructed by other Authors of the Nature and ſignification of 
the houſes ; their ſeveral diviſions you heard already in the 25. chapter of this ſecond 
Book ; itreſteth therefore we now proceed to ſhew the reaſons why the houſes are ſo 
ordained,as the angle of the Eaſt to be the firſt houſe, and ſuccedent to it the ſecond, 
&c. and ſo of the reſt ; as alſo why the Ancients aſſigned them thoſe ſeveral {ignifi- 
cations which we commonly attribute unto them ; for ſuch hath been their curioſity 
therein, that there is no one thing appertaining to the life of man or affairs or acct- 
dents therein, which hath not ſignification from one houſe or other, &c. BY 
c 


-- 
Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stars. 107 


The firſt houſe thenis that houſe which'is the Eaſt Angle or corner of the Hea- Of the fir 
vens, or the Aſcendent ; Ir is cailzd an Angle for that it repreſents one of the Car- houſe, why it is 
dinal points, as the ſeventh may the other ; and the tenth and fourth the Tropicks, > _ _—_ 
&c. It is called the Aſcendent becauſe the Sun doth there aſcend in our Horizon ; Cock bonifica- 
Alſo in what ever Climate it be that houſe where the Sun aſcendeth or riſeth is the tions, 
Aſcendent of that place ; and it is called the firſt houſe for that it is the firſt that doth 
repreſent itſelf unto us upon the birth of any Infant, Revolution, or any work ; ſo 
that what Sign at that time is aſcending or on the point or cuſp ofthis houſe , is Sig- 
nificator ( together with the Planet that is Lord thereof, the Planet locally therein 
preſent, or in aſpect thereof, or the Lord thereof ) of the Native { as ſay the An- And fo of any 
tients ) For the Sign ſhall ſhew the complexion, form and ſhape of the body of the thing or Enters 
Native having relation to the Planets in aſpet therewith or neer in preſence ; Prize,&.c. 
And the Lord thereof ſhall declare his diſpoſition, quality and inclination , 

having alſo reſpect co thoſe Planets in conjunction or configuration with him, &c.. 
It hath ſignification of the kfe of the Native, for that it is the firit houſe , as life is 

the firſt and chief beginning of any one,and firſt eſteemed or preferred before any 

other enjoyment under the Sun ; for whatpleaſure can there be in any thing when in 

the enjoying thereof the life is taken away ? Certainly, though it be never 

ſo much tobe deſired uj;on this conſideration, it will be altogether left un- 

attempted. 

It hath ſignification of the life of the Native alſo, and the beginning of any Why the A- 
work , for that the Infant is unrevealed or known till it is borne : ſo 1s this ſcendant hath 
firſt houſe or Atcendent unſeen, and is in obſcurity ( asunto us ) rill it doth ar en of 
riſe in our Horizon, - &c. In Revolutions, Eclipſes , and great Conjun&tions ,;r -———aqar 
= the like it hath ſignification of the common People of any place where theſe ie dhates, 

appen. | or any thing or 

The Second houſe which is the ſuccedent to the Aſcendent , is ſo called for that it W*ik began. 
ſucceederh the Aſcendent , and aſcends after it, and is therefore alſo called the ſecond gf te fecong 
houſe ; it hath ſignification of the Riches and Subſtance ofthe Native or Querent , as houſe. 
alſo their ailiftance; for that next unto a mans life , is his wealth or livelihood to be 
regarded , and as wealth is an ailiſtance and aid in all matters or buſineſſes of or in 
the affairs ordinary ofmans lite, hath it alſo ſignification of aſſiſtance , &c. 

The Third houſe is ſo called for that it in order followeth the ſuccedent of the A- 
ſcendent ; it hath {ignification of Brethren, Kindred , Neighbors and Alliance , for of he thira 
that it is in * of the Aſcendent, fubterranean : it hath alſo fignification of ſhort jor- houſe. 
nyes , being the houſe _ ro the Ninth , ſignifying long journeys, the reaſon 
of which you ſhall have hereafter in its place. 

The Fourth houſe or Angle of the Earth , or Northern, is ſo called for that it in Of the fourth 

order followeth the third ; it hath ſignification of immoveable goods, for that it is an houle. 
Angle , and that of the Earth which is fixed ; alſo heritages , lands and, houſes , for 
that it is a terranean and earthy Angle; alſo it hath ſignification of hidFen treaſures 
and the like , for that it is ſubterranean and not viſible in our Horizon ; it ſignifieth 
alſo the father of the Native or Querent, for that he is the firſt cauſe of generation , as 
the earthy Chaos was the firit original of Adam, &c. 

The Fifth houſe is the ſuccedent of the Angle of the Earth, and therefore is ſo of the Gfth 
called. It hath ſignification of mirth and jollity , it being in A to the Aſcendent ; al- koule. 
ſo private pleaſure and delight , it being ſubterranean and in A with the Aſcendent, 
aud for the ſame reaſon hath ſignitication of all manner of paſtime and recreation, as 
drinking , revelling , ſporting , gaming and all kind of recreation: pleaſing the fancies 
and tempers of men. 

The Sixth houſe is the Cadent from the North Angle , andis in order the fixth of the ninth 
houſe from the Aſcendent : it beholdeth not the Aſcendent ; it hath therefore ſigni- houle. 
fication of ſickneſſes, of what kind ſoever it be; ithath alſo ſignification of Servants, 

Bond-men and women and Slaves ; and of Cattle of the ſmaller ſort for the ſame rea- 
rs as having no loving familiarity or correſpondency with the Aſcendent in friend- 

iP, &C. 


P 2 The 


108 


Of the {cventh 


houſe. 


Of the cighth 
houlc. 


Of the ninth 


houſe. 


Of the renth 
houſlc. 


Of the clcyench 


h.u.c. 


Of the twelf:h 
hcuſe. 


Nutc this well, 


Lib.2. 


* YM 
*+An Introdutton to the 


The ſeventh houſe is the angle of the Weſt, and by reaſon it in order followeth 
the fixth, is the ſeventh from the Aſcendent ; it hath ſignification of open enennes, 
tor that it isthe oppoſite houſe to the Aſcendent; and tor the fame reaton hath ſig- 
nification of thefr, orthe thing loft ; adverſaries in Law-fuits, and the like ; it hath 
in like manner fignification of women in general, of marriages. I could never finde 
the reaſon why the ancients have ordained the ſeventh or oppoſite houſe to the A- 
ſcendent;, to fignitie the wite of the Native,and women in g2neral,except for thar they 
are ſo contrary to the diſpoſition of men, the one being tor the molt part ſol:d and 
reſolved.the other fickle and unftable as their mother the oor ; as alto thar they of- 
ten prove the deitruction of men rather then aſtiſtants and comforrters,(tor which they 
are made) as Eve was the deftruction of idam, Dalilah of Samſon ; and many the 
like examples I could here relate both out of the Holy Writ, and other writings ; but 
ſince the ſubject is ſo, vile and mean it is not worthy the pains, wherefore that very 
example of So/omz0,, the wilett of Mortals,may ſuffice, who notwithſtanding he had 
ſo large a portion of the ſpirit of God, was by this Sex,drawnto Idolatry and many 
other ſins againit the living God ; inſomuch that it hath ſtaggered the learnedſt Wri- 
ters in Divinity, and put them to a on j/: toimagine (by any concluſion) whether 
he was ſaved or no : Ge letgferturn to our buſineſs, ſince I may thus conclude of 
them that they prove either the greateſt comforts or the worſt of afflictions to men. 

The eighth houſe, being the ſuccedent of the angle of the Welt, is ſo called ; it is 
a houſe which beholdeth not the Aſcendenr, and is above the earth, and 4s the ayd 
and aſliſtance of the open enemy, as the ſecond is of the Native, it being in oppoli- 
tion thereunto ; wherefore it hath ſignification of mortality., death, poyſon, de- 
ſtruction and miſchief which is to happen the Native in his lite. 

The ninth houſe is ſo called for that it followeth next after the ſuccedent of the 
angle of the Weſt, and is called Cadenr ; itis in a 7 rize of the Alcendent, and above 
the earth; wherefore it hath ignification of all goodneſs, as Rehgion, learning, re- 
velation by Dreams; as alſo of all religious men and orders, as Vivizer, Hermites, 
Monks, Froers, &c. Allo all 'manner or Students, as e-ſtrdlopers, Piyfitians, 
Lawyers, and all Students of other good learning whatſoever. 

The tenth houſe or the ſouth angle in order followeth next after, and therefore is 
the tenth houſe ; this hath ſignification of the mother of the Native, for that it is the 
oppoſite houſe ro the fourth ſignifying the father ; it Ggnifyerh alſo dignity, preter- 
ment and honour of the Native, tor thar it is the vertical point of the Heavens , or 
the highelt pitch thereof, and alto for the ſame reaſon, ſigniheth Emperours, Kings, 
Princes, Noblemen and great men, or the Grancees of theearth, and ſuch as are in 
authority mult be underitood if there be no King, &c. 

The eleventh Houſe being the ſuccedent of the angle of the ſouth is ſo called ; and 
for that it is in Sextile of the Aſcendent, and above the earth it hath fignification cf 
friendſhip and amity, hope, faith, &c, 

The gweltth houſe, being the Cadent of the angle of the South following in order 
the ſuccedent thereof, is therefore the 12. houſe; it is above the earth not beholding 
the Aſcendent, and thefefore hath fignification of private and occult enemies, im- 
priſonment, poverty, miſery, and diſgrace, Witchcraft and Sorceries ; it hath alſo 
ſignification of great cattel, as the 6. the oppoſite houſe had of ſmall. And ſo much 
concerning the reaſons of the ſigrifications of the twelve houſes or manſions of 
Heaven. | 

Yet note here, as the ſecond houſe from the Aſcendent, fignifieth the ayd, aſsiſt- 
ance and wealth or ſubſtance of the Native : the third, his kindred, brethren,neigh- 
bours, &c. the fourth, his father, lands, houſes, and the like ; the fifth, his children, 
&c. ſo you muſt know that the ſubſtance of the brother, neighbour, kinſman,and the 
like, is ſignified by the fourth, being the ſecond from the third , the fifth doth ſig- 
nifie his brethren , the fixth his father , the ſeventh his children, and ſo round the 
whole Heaven, according to the ſignification aforefaid : ſtil remembring that the 
houſe lignifying any party of whom the queſtion is, is his Afcendent; The ſecond from 


1t bis ſubſtance ; the third his kindred; as the fifth houſe in the Natives figure hath 


ſhgnification 


Lib.2. Fudgement of the Stars. 
ſignification of the wealth or ſubſtance of the father : the ſixth, his kindred and bre- 
thren, alſo the Uncle or Ant of the Querent by the fathers ſide: the ſeventh his Fa- 
ther and the Querents Grandfather or Natives; and ſo you mult underſtand of the 
reſt of the Houles, ſtill varying y our rules according to diſcretion ; for much doth 
the thorow-knowledge of the {ignification of every houſe conduce to the perfetion 
of the Scudent jnthis Art. I think good here (notwithſtanding inthe 21. chapter of 
this firſt Treatiſe you have heard already ſomewhat as touching the diviſions of the 
Heavens) to give you the diviſion thereof more plainly in this tollowing chapter. 


= — —  — 


C Hy 4 y. XLIL. 
Of the dirviſion of the Houſes into twelrue equal parts. 


Ow then you are firſt co know that the Horizop eutteth or divideth the Hea- 

IN vers into two Hemiſpheres, the upper and the lower, parting ſix of the hou- 

ſes into one Hemiſphere, and {ix into the other, v:z. the upper hath 12,18, 
10,9,8, and 7th. houſes, the lower the 6,4,5, 3- the 2d. and firſt houle. 

And as the Heavens are divided into two Hemiſpheres by the Horizon, ſo are they 
alſo cut by the Meridian into two equal parts, ſo that by theſe two Circles the Hea- 
vensare divided into four equal parts, and every of the parts by ſections and points 
of other Circles are divided into three parts, ſo thatthe whole Heavens are cut into 
12. equal parts ; which the moſt learned in this Art have called Manſtons or houles. 

The diviſion which the £/eridian makes, 1s to divide the Heavens into the Orien- 
tal and Occidental parts, ſix houſes being Oriental, fix Occidental , or fo inclining : 
Oriental are the third ſecond, firſt, tweltth, eleventh and tenth ; Occidental ninth, 
eighth, ſeventh, ſixth, fifch and fourth. 

Now you mult know that che four equal parts aboveſaid are called (by the learn- 
ed inthis Science) quadrants, becauſe each part 1s the quarter or fourth part of the 


Heaven. 
The firſt Quadrant is that part of the Heaven which lieth between the middle of 


the Heaven and the Aſcendent or Horoſcope ; and this is the Oriental, Aſcending, 
Infant, Maſculine,Sanguine and vernal Quarter, and it hath the twelfth,eleventh,and 
tenth houſes. 

The ſecond Quadrant isthoſe three houſes, or that part lying between the points of 
the tenth and ſeventh , and this is the Youthtull, Feminine, Meridional, Cholerick, 
Summer Quarter, containing the ninth,eighth and-ſeventh houſes, 

The third Quadrant is from the point of the ſeventh houſe to the mum Cwlti or 


point of the fourth, and iscalled the Occidental, Manly, Maſculine,Melancholy and 


Autumnal Quarter, including the ſixth, fifth and fourth houſes, | 

The fourth Quadrant is from the /mam (x1ito the point of the Horoſcope or A- 
ſcendent, and is the Septentrional, Feminine, Phlegmatick , old Age, and Winter 

arter. 

he Angles are the moſt powerfull houſes ; for a Planet therein hath more power 
and efficacy then another (in any other houſe) that is but equally dignified : but 
know that the houſes are in ftrength as followeth, yet Prolomie preferreth the mid- 
heaven, &c. 
I, 10,7,4, 11,9,5, 2, 3, 8, 6, 12. 

So that the meaning thereof is no more but thus; A Planet inthe 1. and another in 
the 10. equally dignified, that hath more power which is inthe Aſcendent ; and like- 
wiſethat in the 10. precedeth that in the 7, and ſo know of the reſt. And ſo much of 


the diviſions of the twelve houſes. | 
| CHAP. 


109 


 eAn Introdutton to the Lib.2: 


CHaeP. XLIII. 


Containing ſome Terms of Art very neceſſary to be known : as alſo 
Inſtru&ions how to ereft a Figure of Hearven. 


Science, and they are in number which are moſt material 23. therefore I 
would have thee diligently obſerve this Chapter. 
Direfion, Retrogradation, Stationary, Application, Separation, Prohibition Refrena- 
tion, Tranſlation, Reception, Fruſtration, Peregrination, Combuſtion, Cuzimi, under 
the Sun beams, void of Courſe, beſieging, Oriental, Occidental, Smperior, Inferior, A- 
4 thazer, Almwten and Haiz. 

Direction. A Planet is ſaid to be dire& when he moveth in his Natural motion, direly for- 
ward as Satyrn inthe firit degree of eries, goeth into the 2, 3, and ſo forward; this 
is direction. 

Retrogradation. Retrogradation, or a Planet is ſaid to be Retrograde when he goeth backward or 
contrary to the ſucceſſion of the ſigns, as Sarwrn in the firſt degree of Aries, going 
into the 30,29,and 28 degrees of P:ſces, &c. is Retrograde, or goeth backward. 

Stationary. Stationary is,when a Planer ſtands ftill, or moveth neither backward nor forward, 
as the Superiors do ſometimes fonr days together, 8&c. as you have heard before,and 
this happeneth both before direQion and retrogradation. 

Application. Application is, when two Planets (it mattereth not which) draw neer the rays or 
bodies of each other by (onjuntion or Aſpect ; and this may be done three ways ; yet 
you are to know that a more weighty Planer, or that which is ſuperiour cannot apply 
unto the lighter or inferiour, except when he is retrograde. 

The firit manner of Application is when two Planets are direct, the weightier in 
more degrees,and the lighter in fewer ; as if Satzry be in five degrees of Aries, and 
Zupiter inthree , here fupiter applies unto Saturn by Corjunttion, and this is a dire&t 
Application 

he ſecond when both are Retrograde ,as Z«pitey in three degrees of Aries,and þ in 
the firſt,here 7piter applies unto the (onjuntion of Saturn by a Retrograde motion. 

The third is when the one is Retrograde and in more degrees of a 11gn, and the 
other direct and in leſs, as if 7apiter were in four degrees of eries direct, and Satarn 
in ſeven Retrograde, here Satzrn applyeth to the (ozjunttion of Tupiter, and Fupiter 
ro him, andthis is a mutual Conjunction ; underſtand the ſame when they apply by 
Aſpect. 

Separation. + 12508 is,where two Planets have been either in Partile Conjurtion or aſpet,and 
are going from it ; asif Saturn be in 8. degrees of Aries, and Jupiter in g.here Japuter 
is ſeparated one degree from the Parte Conjunttion, yer he ſhall not be ſaid to be ro- 
rally ſeparated till he be the tull half orb of 7#piter, and his own half orb diſtant from 
him ; for every Planet both in Conjuntion and Aﬀpect is admitted his half orb and the 
half orb of the other Planet joyned unto him; as the half orb of Saturn you have 
heard is 4. degrees 30. minutes, and ſo likewiſe J«pirers, the which being added to- 
gether make 9g. whole degrees ; and therefore till 7#piter be thus many | Deron elon- 
gated or ſeparated from Satwrn, he ſhall not be ſaid to be fully ſeparated, neither ſhall 
their Gelickhrion be ineffectual for that time; underſtand the ſame of an aſpect ſtill 
admitting or allowing the half orbs of both Planets, &c. 

P: obibition. Prohibition is, when two Planets are applying to Conjurttion or Aſpett,and before 

they come to joyn themſelves another comes to Conjunttion or aſpect of the Planet 
applyed to; as if Satwrn werein 10. degrees of Aries, and Jupiter in five applying to 

e Conjundion of Saturn and CHars in tour degrees of Aries; here oe Ong 

wifter 


| \ Mongſt the Planets here are ſeveral ares. 4 to be known of all that ſtudy this 


VU $ - wah 
bÞ. vY. , - WIR 


a Y 
- 


: ” "44 | 
Lib.2. Tudgement of the Stars, IN 
ſwifter then Jupiter, comes firſt to the (oxjunition of Satarn, and prohibites Impiter, 
&c. the ſame obſerve in an AſpeR. 

Re frenation is, when a Planet is applying to another, either by Conjunttion or A- Refrenation, 
ſpe&, and before he cometh to be joyned he becomes Retrograde : as if Satwrn bein 
ſeven degrees of Aries, and fupiter in three, here J»piter applies (they being both di- 
re&) toa Partile Conjunttion of Saturn ; but before he can atrain thereunto 1»pirer 
becometh Retrograde, and ſo refrains by going backwards to come to the Conjunttion 
of Saturn, who goeth dire forward, 

Tranſlation of light and nature is, when a light Planet ſeparateth from a more 7,4, [ation 
weighty one and preſently applyeth to another more heavy ; as Saturn in 16 degrees 
of eAries and [upiter in 9. and Mars in 10. here Hars leparateth from the (on- 
zuntlion of Impiter, and tranſlateth the light and nature of Tapiter to Satwrn,to whom 
he next applies; and this is inthe like manner done by AſpeR. 

Reception is, when two Planets are in each others dignities ; for then they are ſaid Reception 
to receive one the other ; and this may be accompliſhed as many ways as there are | 
dignities of a Planet ; as Saturs in Arves,and Mars in Capricorn ; here is reception be- 
tween Saturn & Mars by houſe, Aries being the houſe of Mars,& Capricorn the houſe 
of Saturn ; 1o alſo Inpiter in (apricorn, and Aars in Caxcer is reception by exaltati- 
on, Capricorx being the exaltation of ary, and (arcer of 1xpiter : In like manner 
Satarn in Aries, and Sol in Gemini, is reception by triplicitie ; the fiery triplicity be- 
ing the Suns by day, and the atry Satwrns, &c. in like manner of term and face. 

Fruſtration is, when a lighter Planet would come to Conjunttzon with another more Fruftration, 
heavy, and before it doth accompliſh it, the more weighty Planet is joyned unto ano- 
ther; as Saturn in 20 degrees of ries, and [wpiter in 19,and Mars in 15, here Mars 
applies to the Conjunition of Ixpiter ; but before he can attain thereunto, he is fruſtra- 
red or diſappointed by zpiter, who comes firſt to the Conjunttion of Saturn. 

Peregrination is, when a Planet is ina ſign wherein he is a ſtranger, as it were, by Peregrinarion. 
being neither in his own houſe, exaltation, triplicity, term or face, and therefore then 
he is very weak, as Satursin the firſt 26 degrees of Arzes. 

Combuſtion is, when any Planet is not diſtant from the Sx eight degrees and thir- combuſtion. 

minutes either before or after his body ; as Sarwry in the firſt degree of Aries, and 

e Sun in$. and [ppiter in 16. here both Sat#rn and Iwpiter are combult of the Sw ; 
but you ſhall ſay /zpiter is moſt afflicted ; for that Planet to whom the Szx approaches 
is more damnified - on that from which he ſeparateth ; and you muſt know that a Pla- &1ger the Sun 
net ſtill remains under the Sw» beams till he 1s fully elongated 17 degrees, beams. 

Cazimi or a Planet in the heart of the Sw», is when he is not diffanc from the Sun Caximi. 
17. minutes; as if Saturn be in 3. degrees 15. minutes of Aries, and the Sx in three 
degrees and 30. minutes of Aries. 

Void of Courſe is, when a Planet is ſeparated from another, and doth not during the Yoid of comrſe. 
time of its continuance in that ſign, apply again to any other. 

Befreging is, when any Planet is placed between the bodies of the two Malevolents Beſceging. 
Saturn and Mars, as if Saturn be in 5. degrees of Aries,and Mars in 15.and Inpiter in 
10. here Jupiter is beſieged. 

Oriental is, when a Planet riſeth before the Sx». | FS IANS 

Occidental is ffothing elſe but when a Planet ſetteth after the S#»,and is ſeen above gccidenrad. 
the Horizon after him. 

Thoſe Planetsthat are placed above the Globe of the Sy, are called Superiour, $,pc,jour. 
and they arc Saturn, Iupiter, and Mars. 

Thoſe are inferiour that are placed under him, viz, Venus, Merenry and the Ifoom. 1nſeriour. 

Lthazer is, when the Toon is in one degree and minute with the Sux,and when ſhe 4:haxer. 
is 12. degrees diſtant from him, or 45. or 90. or 155. or 168. or 180. or 192, or 215. 
or 270. or 348.any of theſe are 4thazer, &c. . 

Almmten is that Planet that bears chief Rule of any ſign, or in any figure;as Saturn 4uten, 
in Libra is Almuten, or is Almuter of Libra, becauſe he hath both exaltation and tri- 
plicity therein, and Vemus hath onely houſe, ſo that Satzrz bearing chief rule, is 
of this ſign Almuten, 

Haiz ts, when a maſculine and diurnal Planet in the day time is above the earth, or x4jz. 

a feminine nocturnal Planet in the night time under the earth. Now 


Figure of 
Hcaven, 


LW2 


How to ere 2 


— . 
Pos Ins HP, 
F _ 


eAn Tntroduttion to the Cc. _ Lib.z: 

Now to ere a figure of Heaven, or Scheme at any time, hour or minute of an 
year for the judging of future events(I mean by Revolutions of the years of the World, 
Eclipſes, Comets, or great Conjunctions) you are to do no more then this, 

Have regard to the place of the Sw» at noon (according as you will finde in any 
Ephemers)tor that day wherein your figure is to be made,and fee in what degrees and 
minutes you finde him; for if he be in any degree or minute under 30. you muſt then 
look for the ſame degree he. is in, in your Table of houſes (1x. in that page wherein 
you finde Sol in Aries, "ol in Tarrns, &c. It the Sun bethen in any of thee ſigns or 
any other , you muſt {till look for your number (viz. the degree or place of the 3) 
in that page where you finde the 5» inthe ſame ſign in the Table of houſes that you 
finde himin your Ephemtris) &c. But if he bein more then 30 minutes, you muſt 
look for the next greater degree ; as if he be in 1. degree of Aries and 29. minutes, 
you are to look in your Table of houſes in the page where you! nde Sol in Arie: for 
1. degree 3 but if he were in one degree 30 minutes or 31: minutes, and ſo to the end 
vou are to look for 2 degrees in the aforeſaid page, in that Column where you finde 
over the head thereof Dom. X. ſignifying the tenth houſe. h 

Having thus found ont your number or place of the Sx» at Noon; ſee what num- 
ber you finde over againſt it inthe left hand'column, which is tituled tie from noon 
inthe ſame line, and add that number, «iz. the degrees and minutes you finde there 
to the hour and minute of the day, for the which you would erect your Scheme. 

And if they make not above 24 hours, look in your table of houſes for the number 
they make in the aforeſaid column of time frem noon ; butif they make more then 24 
hours, caſt away 24 hours,and enter with the remainder, and where your number fal- 
leth there is your figure. 

For firſt, you are to lookin the ſame line what is over againſt your number in the 
column of the tenth houſe,where you finde Dem..X. and what number you finde there 
you are to place upon the cuſp of the renth houſe in your Scheme; and then in the 
next colum where you finde Dom. X7. in the ſame line what degrees and minutes you 
finde, you are to place on the-eleventh houſe in your figure, and ſo obſerve in the 
reſt, iz. the tweltth, firſt, ſecond, and third houſes, placing as hath been ſaid the de- 
grees and minutes in every one which you finde in-the ſame line over againſt your 
number on the cuſps of every of theſe houſes in your draught .of the Heavens, and 
then fill up the other points of the Heavens thus. 

Firſt, know what houſes are oppolite. 

Secondly, what ſigns of the Zodiack. 

Then place the ſigns, degrees and minutes oppoſite to theſe places you have filled. 
upon the other vacant points. 

The houſes oppoſite are the firſt and ſeventh, the ſecond and eighth, the third and 
ninth, the fourth and tenth, the fifth and eleventh,the fixth and twelfth, and therefore 
for our more ready apprehenfion we place them thus. 

I, 2, 3, 4, 5» 6, 
| 75. 8, 9, 10, 11,12. 

Which ſhews the firſt is oppoſite to the ſeventh, and the ſeventhto the firſt , the 
ſecond to the eighth,and the eighth to the ſecond, the third tothe ninth, and the ninth 
to the third, &c. | | 

Signs oppoſite are Y to =,Trtom, Tl to, © tow, ©Q to x, and & tO X, 
which may alſo be thus ranked. 'T;, Vo Us Bo UW, . 

=, MM, ©, W, ©, XK, 
So that it is clear, V is oppoſiteto =,and = to V' ; & tom, andm tot, &c. 
Wherefore we ſhall ſuppoſe in our Scheme we have the 1. deg, of Y, and the ſecond 
min. upon the aſcendent or firſt houſe : why then becauſe the 7th. is oppoſite untothe 
firft, and = to Y , weare to place the xy” bo and 2. min. of = upon the ſeventh. 

Alſo if upon the 2. there were the 3d. deg. of 7 aurns, and the 4th. min. weare 
to place the 3.deg. and 4th.min.of m up onthe 8th. houſe, becauſe the 8th. is oppoſite 
to the ſecond, and i, to 5, and ſo of thereſt; remember till to place the oppoſite 
ſign, and the ſame degrees and minutes on the oppoſite houſe, and you cannot 
erre ; and thus much ſhall ſuffice at this time. FINIS. 


/ 


INTRODVCTION 
ELECTIONS, 


Fully comprehending 


TheRurzrs of the ANCIENTS 
I N 


Eletling a T ime for any manner of Work: 


Never before made publique in our 
Mother Tongue. 
But now ( by the Bleſsing of G oo ) for 


the benefit of all true Lovers of know- 
ledge ſent abroad, 


—— 


By VVirttiam Ramessty, Gent. 


Student in efrology, Phyſick,, and the moſt Heavenly and Swblime Sciences. 


am. 


—_— 


Ecclel. 3.1. 


To every thing there is a ſeaſom, and a time to ervery purpoſe un- 
der the Heaven. 


Pee EEE 


—— 


Sapiens Dominabitur aſtrs. 


LONDON, 
Printed for R, VV. 1653. 


HONORATISSIMO 


ATQUE 


IiLLVSTRISSIMO DOMINO, 


DOMINO 


HENRICO PERREPOINT; 


MARCHIONI DE DORCHESTER, 
COMITI DE KINGSTON 
APVD HYLFE: 


PROCOMITI NEVVAREKE 


= 


DOMINO PERREPOINT 


D E 
HOLMES PERREPOINT, 


Salutem , Facem & Felicitatem Perpetuam, 


DOMINO SUO CLEMENTISSIMO 
HANC SUAM 


IN ELECTIONIBVS 
INTRODVCTIONEM 


SUBMISSE DEDICAT 


 Withelmns Rameſeils 


m EN TOE ee C 


RIGHT HONOVRABLE 
Henry Perrepoint, 


Marqueſs of DORCHESTEXR, Farl 
of KINGSTONE upon HL LL, 


Vicount 0 EW ARA and Lord PER- 
REPOINT of Hortwes PeRReeoixnT, 


Healch and life here, and Eternal happineſs hereafter. 


Hen Your Honour ſhall conſider the reaſon 
of this my bold Dedication, I know (were 
& not Your Honour of a more Noble Spirit 

ES then to judge of things by the firſt ſight or 

> glimpſe thereof) 1 ſhould have little or no 

cauſe to hope of acceptance at Your Honours 

hands, but ſhould rather juſtly be induced to expect ( fince 
ic is my unhappineſs to be a ſtranger to Your Honour) Your 
frown rather then favour, and reprehenſion for this my bold- 
neſs: But as it was nothing bur really Your Honours Ver- 
rues, (which (according to the Philoſopher) are the onely 

Badges of Honour) and love to Learning that was the oc- 

calion of this my tranſgreſſion, I humbly preſume (through 

them) my fault will be venial, ſince the blame is Your Ho- 

Q3 nours 


bl 


» 


The EpiſUle Dedicatory. 


nours, and that my ſelf, and this my ſmall Preſent ſhall finde 
acceſs into Your Honours favour and Protection. T he ſub- 
ject of this piece is that part of Aſtrology or NaTuRar Pnir.o- 
SOPHY Which treateth of Elefons, teaching by the powerful 
Influence of the Superior and Caeleſtial bodies, how to frame 
a fir and proper time for any manner of work belonging to 
the life of Manin a Natural way, : there being ( according to 
that moſt elegant expreſſion of the chiet of Philoſophers, and 
ſageſt of Mortals SOL OMON, Ecclel. 3.1.) A ſeaſon for every 
thing, and a time for every purpoſe under the Sun. And truly it is 
a peice of that ſublime Learning, thar 1 fear ic will pals the 
bounds of not only the common and ordinaryeſt, but the in- 
different capacities of moſt men, and in ſome mealure put 
even the moſt Judicious to ſeek,unlels they are true ſons f or 
Contemplators] of Nature, and its myſteries and ſecrets ; this 
for the generality : Yet what conduceth tothe adminiſtration 
of Phyſick and Phlebotomy (which according to Hippocrates 
and Galen (as I have ſufficiently ſhewn in che 16 Chap. of the 
_ firſt Book of this Volume and the 1. Chaptcr of the 7. Sect. of 
this very third Treatiſe) can never be rightly adminiſtred 
without the help of this Art) is more eaſily ro be comprehen- 
ded, as alſo what tendeth to the nſe of Navigation and hus- 
bandry. Wherefore ſince this my fabrick of Tys Rrsrau- 
RATION OF AsTROLUGY OL the true Natural Philoſophy which 
is four ſquare is finiſhed now after my great pains and care, 
and brought to light, it imploreth Your Patronage, and eſpe- 
cially this Corner, leaſt the unworthynelſs of the Author may 
be a means of its fall ro the ground without the leaft notice 
taken thereof, or hope of recovery, unleſs Your Honours No- 
bility, Virtues and Learning be a gracious ſupport thereunto, 
the which if Your Honour be Munificently pleaſed to grant, 
it will bea perpetual rock unto it, and an inexpreſſible fame 


unto him whele highth of ambition is to be 


My Lok ob, 
Your Honouk 5s Servant, 


Whileſt he is 


Iilliam Rameſey. 


To the Reader. 


KEADER, 
%; E_AEGAS WAY $ 


”% 
1, ( 
, 


Hou art here prefented with the whole Art of Elect:- 
; ons, which may be very beneficial unto Mee in many 
things, efpecially in the adminiſtration of Phylick, u- 
& ſingot Husbandry and Navigation, for which conſide- 
2 rations I have undertaken to divulge the whole Body 
thereof ; tor herein are the rules intallible, yet in 0- 

| thers (by reaſon they are to depend on ſeveral other 
conſiderations which we ack as ground-works, viz. the Revolutions 
of the Years Of the World, Eclipſes,great ConJuntttons, and in fome mea- 
{ure NativitlesS) they are very intricate and doubful; and truly I may fay 
they ſeldom or never prove true , by reaſon few that undertake the 


practice thereof underſtand the fundamentals and grond-works , and 


how to order and difpoſe of them,or will take the pains to coniiderevery 
particular which is requiſite to be ſeriouſly pondered and weighed be- 
tore Election can be made on any particular thing. 


Noe, 


Wherefore let him that prefents this Book unto thee advite thee as The aukors 
thou tendreſt the propagation of the Art and thy own Reputation, not admonirion c 


ro dare to pntany part thereof in praiſe, unlels it be{(I ſay) fo muc 
as thou ftindeſt tend to the adminiſtration ot Phyſick, Phlebotomy, or 
uſing of Husbandry and Navigation, till thou art very well acquainted 
with Nature, and canſt prove thou knowſt the fundamentals and reatons 
of every particular point of this Science, leſt thou become ridiculous 
and odtous to the Ignorant and the rural of che World, by thy trequenr 
failings which chou canſt never avoid if thou knoweſt no more then 
what 1s here verbally delivered, or if thou cruſteſt barely to the writings 
of any man whatſoever ; for the illiterate by chis thy weaknels ( being 
no wiſe capable of the myſteries of thele knowledges) will tooner con- 
demn the Arr as imperfect or faulty, then thee or thy judgement, which 
art rather worthy reprehenſton, tor by the right knowledge of tie di- 
vine practice thereof thou mayſt attain to admirable ſpeculations anc 
rare things. | 
o 


h the Students in 
EleRions, 


To the Reader. 


For it was far from my intentions in the penning thereof to have ir 
thus abuſed, which thou mayſt ſoon do, by baſely putcing it openly in 
practiſe, as ſome have the nfoknion of Queſtions, and fo not only be- 
come an occaſion of derifion to thy ſelf with them, but alſo an ill requi- 
ter of my pains and care towards thee, and bring this part of the Arr, 
(it not all under the notion thereof ) into the contempt of the World, 
the which init ſelf is good and pure though ſublime ; for there is no- 
thing more certain, then that there is a proper time and ſeaſon for 
every thing under the Sun ; A time to be born, and atime todye; a time to 
plant, and a time to pluckup; a time to kill, and a time to heal; a time to 
break down, and a time tobuildup;, a time to weep, and time tolaugh; a time 
to mourn, and a time todance:, a time to embrace and atime to refrain+, nay 
even to the thrownig away of ſtones and gathering them again there is a time ,, 
and to be ſhort to every thing there 1s a s gr and a time to every purpoſe un- 
der the Sun, Ecclel. 3.1,2,3,4,5,&C. and thatall inferiour things are ru- 
led and ordered by the {uperiour, I have here no more to ſay then only 
refer thee taygbe firſt Epiſtle and firſt Treatiſe ; for what man is there 
chat will deny that the ſubtile ſoul and lite of the World quickneth and 
diſpoſeth of all things therein, orthart all terreſtrial things have their de- 
pendency on the motion and influence of the Stars and Planets,and their 
Configurations; occaſioning the like ſympathy as is between the Load- 
ſtone and Iron, there being nothing exempted from their power that is 
compoſed of the four Elements which they order,diſpoſe,and govern; nay 
even the hardeſt ſtones we ſee have aſympathertical quality therewith, 
and are wrought upon by their penetrative power and vertue, which ſtill 
before rain (eſpecially it it be of continuance, even when the Heavens 
bur incline to moiſture) ſweat drops of water , and become as wet as 
_ if they had been rained on, or waſht over by ſome hand; many ſuch like 
arguments I could produce for the proof hereof, bur ſince the ſubjet 
of almoſt the whole firſt Book tenderh hereunto, I ſhall ſay no more, 
bur again adviſe thee not to put ws part of this Book in practiſe till the 
grounds thereof be well apprehended by thee, that ſo thou mayeſt nor 
violate his intentions that hath lett it thee, and deſires to have no occa- 
ſion to write himſelf other then 


Thy Lorving Friend 


I illiam Rameſcy. 


.0..+ ,<..4,.4..4.,49..4,4 .4,.4..4..4..4..4,4.4 $ 4. +42 40,9.44+4 4.4 4 
*..*, dale Wo a4 o4 OE ED TINTING G << << w pHQ$; NbSSPHSH$ÞÞI$$YG HG 


The Contents of every Section and Chapter 


contained in the Third Book of this Treatiſe, being an 
In rrRoDpueriton To EtlEcCTIONS, 


——— — — —— —— ————_—— — 


SECT. I. 


(mE_ an Introduction to EleRions or neceſſary Inſtruions for the 
electing of any manner of Work by the ſecret Operations of the Heavens, by 


the nature of the Signs, Planets and Aſpects of the Moon, c. Fol. 121 
Cua?. Lk 
(containing ſome neceſſary inſtrultions to the judgement of Eletlions. 122 
Chap. 2. Of the ſigns, and their ſignifications in Elettions, and of the hinderances of 
the Moon being a farther inſtruttion to the judging of Eletlions. 126 
Chap. 3. Shewing Eletlisns by the Aſpetts of the Moon to the other fix Planets, and 
by her Manſions, | 128 
SBC T. IiL 
Containing Rules for Elefting ſuch matters as appertain to the ſignification of the 
firſt houſe of Heaven. | 132 
CHadD. I. 
Containing neceſſary rules for putting children to nurſe, to ſchool and to a trade. Idem 
Chap. 2. Of the rules of Eleitions for the cutting of hair. 133 
Chap. 3. Of cutting of nails of the hana or feet, alſo corns. 134 
Sycx. IL 
Of Rales for electing matters appertaining to the ſecond Houle. Idem 
Cuna?. L 
Of receiving and borrowing of money. Idem 
Chap. 2. Containing other rules concerning borroWing and lending. 135 
Chap. 3. Of buying to profit again by the ſale thereof. 136 
Chap. 4. Of ſelling to advantage. 137 
Chap. 5. Being a farther inſtruttion touching buying andſelling in an ordinary Way 
of the world. Idem. 
Chap, 6. Of baying of cloathing, or putting on of apparel. Idem, 
Chap. 7. Of flitting or removing from one place to another. 138 
Chap. 8. ( ontaining rules for elefting any work inthe Art of Diſtillation or Al- 
chimy. 139 
SnCT.:LV, 
Comprehending rules in EleRing ſuch matters as appertain tothe ſignificati- 
on of the third Houle, 140 


CHAP. 


The Contents. 


Cuap. l, 
Of ſhort journeys and their Eleflions. Fol. Idem 
Chap. 2. Of making friendſhip between brethren, or any two at variance. Idem 
Chap. 3. Of applying the minde or ſtady to Divine matters or contemplations, 141 


, 


— 


S323 CT Tov. | 
Containing rules of EleRions appertaining to the ſignification of the Fourth 
Houſe. 142 
Cuav?. I. 
Of building of Houſes. Idem 
Chap. 2. Of bmilding of Caſtles and Cities. 143 
Chap. 3 Of bmilding of Churches. 145 
Chap. 4. Of building or eretting of Mils. Idem 


Chap. 5. Of pulling down or deſtroying of Houſes or any Fabrick, Whatſoever. Idem 
Chap. 6. Containing rules of eleflions in buying of land, houſes or beritages. 246 
Chap. 7. Of buying of land for husbandry, and not to build upon. 147 


Chap. 8. Of bringing of Water to a houſe ether by Condgit, Pipe, Pump ; and of 
diging of wels. 148 
Chap. 9. Of tillage or manuring of the gromnd. Idem 
Chap. 10. Of renting, hireing, and letting of houſes, land or fruit, or any other 


thing tobe let or hired, 149 
Chap. 11. Of planting of trees or grafſing. 150 
Chap. 12. Of ſowmg of ſeeds :n the ground. I5I 
Chap. 13. Of ridding how/es or places from evil ſpirits, Idem 


———— _ 


3 © 4 9 i * | 

Containing ru'es for cleCting a time for any work or thing appertaining to the fifth 

Houle, 152 
| + F Wks: 

SheWing 4 fit time for the precreation of boys or girls. Idem 

Chap. 2. Of delivering adead child. I53 

Chap. 3. Of chriſtening or circumciſing of children, 154 

"Chap. 4. Of giving and receiving of gifts or preſents. 155 

Chap. 5. Containin g rules for eleiting a time for putting on of apparel, Idem 

Chap. 6. Of feaſting or eating of meat. 156 

Chap. 7. Of arinking of wine and other drinks. 157 

Chap. 8. Of writing of letters or any thing eiſe of ingennity. 158 

Chap. 9. Of making odoriferous {mels and unguents, Idem 

C hap. 10. Of [ending Embaſſadonrs or meſſengers. 159 
| SSCY.- FI 

Of Elections appertaining to the ſixth Houſe. 160 


SUIS © 
Of the true knowledge of the Crills, or critical and judicial days, very nſeful for thoſe 
that ſtudy Phyſick. | . Idem 


Chap. 2. Of applying medicines generally to all the parts of the body of man. 16: 
Chap. 3. Of admin'ſtring medicines to the diſeaſes of the head. 163 
Chap. 4. Of applying remedies tothe eyes, and preparatives ingereral, Idem 
Chap. 5. Of applying remedies to the noſe. 164 
Chap. Idem 


6, Of ixjetting clyſters, and ſtopping of rheumes or fluxes. 


The Contents. 
Chap. 7. Of the adminiffration of pargariſms,or ſneezings, and ſuch like, 165 
Chap. 8. Of giving of vomits. Idem 
Chap. 9. Of adminiſtring purges aud phyfick laxative, 166 
Chap. 10. Of bathing and eletting a time therefore. 169 


Chap. 11. Of elefting a time for uſing Chirurgery. | Idem 
Chap. 12. Of elefting a time for phlebotomy or blood-letting alſo for applying ven- 


toſrer. 170 
Chap. 13. Of the Phyſitians going to the Patient, 171. 
Chap. 14. Of hireing of ſervants. 172 
Chap. 15. Of bnying of biras and letting them fly to return again. Idem 
Chap. 16, Of buying four. foot ed beaſts. | 173 
Chap. 17. Of bringing up dogs or tameing of [mal cattel, 174 

SECT. VUL 
Containing EleRtions appertaining to the Seventh Houſe, 175 
CH a vp. 1]. 
Of the eleftions apertaining to the ſignification of the ſeventh Howſe, and touching 
marriage. Idem 
Chap. 2. Of Venereal ſports. 178 
Idem 


Chap. 3. Of p.rtnerſhip or agreements , or things between two. _ 
Chap. 4. Of going to war, or begining of adifferencies and duels, quarrels, laW- 


ſuits, controverſies and the like. 179 
Chap. 5. Of making of peace, ſuppreſſing or encountring of rebels , and ſtorming of 
caſtles and tons. I82 
Chap. 6. Of buying of arms aud preparing of inſtruments of war, and ſhips or galliex. 
184 

Chap. 7. Of ſeeking of fugitives and examining of theeves and malefattors. Idem 
Chap.. 8. To know the ſubjett and ſcope of the whiſperings or clandeſtine pratliſes of 


any two, and at playing at Cheſs (or any other ſitting game ) to win, 185 


Chap. 9, Of hunting, fowling and fiſhing. 137 
SECT. TX. 
Containing EleCions appertaining to the ſignification ofthe eight Houſe, 189 
CunAaY: L 
Of making of wils. Idem 
Chap, 2 Of the heritages of the dead, 190 
| $5 CTA 
Containing the Elections of the ninth Houſe of Heaven. Idem 
CHAP: 
Of the returning of ſuch as are abſent, and'of going of journeys and entring into any 
place. Idem 
Chap. 2. Of building of ſhips and gallies, and of Lantching them, and of voyaging by 
Sea. 194 
Chap. 3. Of learning of ſciences, and of ſinging, and m#ſick, 195 
St cr. XI. 
ſe, 196 


Containing EleRions appertaining to the ſignification of the tenth Hou - 
| H A P, 


The Contents. 


CHnavp. I. 
Of elefting Kings and Governonrs , and of their enſtauling and begining their rule 


or government, Idem 
Chap. 2. Of obtaining favour of Kings and Great men, juſtice on enemies and par- 
dons, alſo of going of progreſſes with the King or any other Grande. 197 
Chap. 3. Of learning any eArt or Occmpation. | 198 
SB CT. ALL. - 
Containing ſuch EleRtions as are under the ſignification of the Eleventh Houſe of 
Heaven. 199 
| CHnap. I, 

Of accompliſhing any thing boped for, and of gaining a good repute, and the love of 
friends. Idem 
Chap. 2. Of obtaining of promiſes and requeſt 1. 200 


CC 


SBCTION. XIII. 


Comprehending the Elections of the Twelfth Houſe. 201 
| CH ap, 1. | 
Of freeing of priſoners and Captive. Idem 


Chap. 2. Of buying and riding of horſes, &c. Idem 


LIBER 11I. 


[IVDICIHIS ASTRORVM 


ELECTIONIBVS; 


OR AN ” 
[ntroduction to Elections; 


Fully comprehending the Rurss of the 
Ancients 1n Electing a time for any 
manner of VV or «x. 


- 


4 . > 
- "FOR þ D * 
of 
N————_— Omg $0" 399 


— - _ CE —— —  — — — — ———A——— —— —_—_ ——_ —_— — - WO _— _ - ff 


SECTION: | 


=Þ E have found moſt of the Ancients to be very curious in this 
@ manner of Judicature, but ſome more excellent then others ; 
& wherefore {ſince the knowledge thereof is not only dele&able 
Sd and rare, but alſo very uſefull and profitable, both for eſchew- 
f& ing evil, and chooſing the good; as alfo for that the verity 
FH). chereof is wonderfull, if the Rules of Art be. diligently obſer- 
SW ved, and with care and difcretion practiſed ; as alſo for that I 
earneſtly deſire rhe Students in this noble Art may daily more 
and more increaſe in knowledge (as I have ſaid) I have thought good here to give 

| R you 


122 Rules for Eletting Lib.z. 
you without either fraud or deceit, the moſt Judicious and Rational Rules of the An- 
cients, concerning the ele&ting or chooſing a time for any Work incident co the af- 


fairs of mankinde, whether particularly appertaining to a mans own particular per- 
ſon, or his eſtate, friends, or enemies, &c. 


HEE Rs - 


(ontaining ſome neceſſary Inſtruftions to the judging of Elections. 


N all Authors that ever I yet met with, I finde there can be no time eleRed (in 


A __—_— this our Altrological way of electing) advantagious to any one whoſe nativity or 
Laing lonnrs time of birth is not exactly known ; tor according unto it muſt you frame your 
ding to {ome of election, together with reſpec to the revolution of the year;and Zahe!, Bonarns, 
the Ancieats, Meſſahalla and Dariot ſay that in caſe the nativity of a man cannot be artain- 


ed, reſpect mult be had to the time of the queſtion; the reaſon is/ as I conceive)for that 
The Rea/03s. (if the queltion be radical) the Querent thall have the fame ſignificator or one of 

che ſame nature in the queition as he hath in his Nativity ; and this I have ever found 
A harmony Frue in all thatever i mer with that could produce their Nativities ; wherefore it is 
and concor- Thatthe Antients conclude (as well indeed they may) that G OD the omnipotent 
dancy berween and omiſctent Creator of the Heavens and the Earth, and all things therein, hath 
OPS F” and made the earth of the four Elements, but the Heavens being the quinteſſence of them, 
Hes. hehath madeto ſurroundand inclole it, that by the ſecret working of the Anims 

Mundi, orſoul of the World. which Zahel calleth Rem ſubtilem, the which (faith 
he) /ciunt ſapientes,a ſubtile or ſpiritual quality which is known to the wiſe, which oc- 
cationeth ſuch a ſympathy as between the Iron and Load-ſtone, as thar all Inferiour 
things and ations have their dependency and government from the ſuperiour. 

But although this be the Judgement of the Antients who ſay, Look to the aſcend- 
ent of the Nativity or Queſtion and make your Election accordingly : YetI ſay (as 
mot agreeable to truth and reafon)Let the Figure of the Revolution of the years of 
the world for that year be regarded,and therefore or according thereunto Ele your 
bulines, as being the True Radix, root or ground thereof, But Note that if the aſcen- 
dent and its Lord be unfortunate in your radix, or the Revolution of the world, there 
15no Election can be made any wiſe to advantage the body or the party for whom you 
would elect an advantagious tfme ; and ſo conſider and underitand of any EleCion 
whatſoever, viz. If the chief fignificator of any buſineſle be unfortunate in the ra- 
dix, ther can be no time Elected to prevent the miſchief threatned ; for whom the 
Lord hath ordained to deſtruction or puniſhment, he cauſeth one thing or other to be 
incident unto that party ſo ordained to puniſhment, either by inclination or caſualry 
(according to his Divine wil and preordination and the harmonious concordancy of 
Altrology with Divinity &c.)that it might come to paſs; (and fo on the contrary for 
a mans happineſs, bur this comes to paſs through repentance ) for I have 
ever found men in this condition *ither to go on ſtill in their ways without reproct, 
or being reproved, will take ſo ſmall notice thereof, as that they will hardly believc 
it, or have aninclination to ſtudy amendment or prevention of the Ar carer At theſe 
particular things in Ele&ions ought to have their dependency on the generall fates. 

But as I have but now ſaid, the figure of the Revolution of the world for tha! 
year ought to be regarded and concluded the radix or ground-work of all your E- 
Divers events 1ections; for according to the nature of the ſignificator therein muſt your Election be 
happen t9 men [ramed, of you ſhall never be pertect in this Art. Hence it is that often we ſhall finde 
on the eleRtion ſome kind of men and occupations thrive and proſper ſome years more then in others; 
ot 6ne and che and again on the contrary,do all what they can,their buſineſs ſtill and endeavours go 


EY 9 backward; The reaſon is,their ſignificator 1s more fortified or debilitated in the Ra- 
TE TEELR TT dix; 


1Vote. 


wy oe ou. e-waſte eee ak —_ 
1 _- 


' tofire, a fiery ſign ; it to the water, a watry one, &c. As for example, i 


Lib.3. All manner of Works. 123 


and we ſee that ſuch ſhall in an Election by Sarwrn and Mars have a good and pro- The reaſon 
ſperous day,and upon the ſquare or oppoſition of the Moon to Satarn or Mars, al- thereof. 
hough on a miſchievous day ; becauſe theſe malevolents were chiefe rulers or ſigni- 

ficators of the bulineſs in hand, things or perſons,&c. inthe Radix.Conſider alſo the 

places of any Ecliple or Great conjunction in every year.So that when your true ſig- 

nificator is known, and his eſſential and accidental fortitudes and debilities, you can- 

not erre , the following Rules being diligently and warily obſerved, there being an 

harmony and ſuch a concordancy betwixt the Celeſtial Creatures, and our Terreftri- 

al affairs, according to that excellent ſaying of Hermes, there i nothing here beneath 

that 15 not governed and ruled by what 14 above. 

Know then that in judging of the ſtars in Ele&ions, ſpecial care muſt be had unto © g1.gt in; 
the buſineſs in hand for according unto the nature thereof mutt your buſineſs be or- fuences are 
dered, and your time choſen ; as tor earthy buſineſſes, as planting and ſowing and not effeRual 
the like , an earthy fignis to be choſen or placed in the aſcendent ; it pm bur ro ſuch 2s 

you would *<*f _ 
elect a time to plant, you mult prefer Yirgo before any other of the ſigns, becauſe ſhe coor 
is anearthy ſign, and ſuch an one too as 1s participating more of the nature of the 
fruits of the earth then any other, viz. Tawrus or Capricorn; and fo underſtand of 
any buſineſs ; be ſure you till elect a ſign proper for your buſineſs, and agreeable ro 
the nature thereof. | 

And for the ſpeedy diſpatch of any buſineſs, let a moveable ſign be choſen ; if for For the conti- 
permanency you would ele& any time, take a fixed ſign ; if you be indifferent , or 5uance or dil- 
defire your buſineſs ſhall neither be of long or ſhort continuance, preferr a com- _ or buſes 
mon ſ1gn, &Cc. ; 

But fill look tothe fundamental grounds of EleQions, viz. to fortify your cheif Cheif Signifi, 

ſignificators, and cheifly the Moor , becauſe ſhe hath a general ſignification in all cators to be 
things, in journeys » times, places and all buſineſſes whatſoever; alſo the Sx, he be- _ _ 
ing as1t were cheif Ruler or King amongſt the other Planetszburt more particularly the EM —_ 
Planer ſignifying the buſineſsin hand: as if your Eleion be concerning war or 
fireworks, you mult fortify Mars ; if to ſpeak to the King, the Su; to gain money, 
Tepiter ; if concerning — or love-matters, Venus ; becauſe theſe 1ignifications 
theſe Planets are generally of; and ſounderſtand of any buſineſs whatſoever ; fill 
have a care to fortify the Planet ſignifying your buſineſs, in general as wel! as par- 
ticular, if you can. | 

In like manner you muſt chooſe and fortify the Sign ſignifying your buſineſs in ge- The Sign a- 
neral ( for asT have ſayd, as is the nature of your buſineſs , ſuch muſt the Sign be $*<<ing gene- 
you chooſe and fortify ) as if you would goe by water as to Sea , &c. you muſt Is 
fortify a watry Sign, and more eſpecially Caxcer , for that ſhe is the houſe of the fartfred, 
Moon, if by land, asa journey, &c. an earthy Sign, &c. wiz. free from misfor- 
tune or affliction of the malevolent aſpects of the Infortunes , and place it in the A- 
ſcendent of your Election, or the Lord of the Afcendent therein, or the ſoon, or Note. 
both, if poſlible ; and this is neceſſary in all Elections , and the Antients moreover 
_ for men elected a maſculine ſign, for women a feminine ; but this is need- 

$. &C. | 

The ſign alſo and houſe ſignifying your buſineſs in your Rad;x ought to be regar- The 6gn and 
ded and well dignifyed; alſo fortify the houſe and ſign ſignifying the buſinels in houſc tignity- 
your Election; as if you would elect a time for profir , you mult fortify ( in the fi- ing your bal; 
gure of your EleRion ) the ſecond houſe in the' Radrx, its fign and the Lord there- = ef 
of, as well as the ſecond in your EleRion, &c. Inall Elections, remember to for- _ _—_ "ay 
tify the Aſcendent. its Lord and Diſpoſer of him, and the fourth , and the Lord of tl-&ions. 
the fourth and alſo his Diſpoſitor ; for by fortifying the Aſcendent, the Lord there- A general rule 
of and his Diſpoſitor, the health and ſafety of the Parties body electing is promiſed ; #9 the no- 
by fortifying the fourth., its Lord and his Diſpoſicor, a good and ſafe concluſion and > 
end of the buſineſs. But note (as aforeſayd / that if a malevolent Planet be ſignifica- 
ror in any thing in the Radix, you mult fortify it, and not think the making a for. 
tune : viz. Jupiter or Vemy ( which are but generally ſo ) ſignificators, will be be- 

R 2 neficial : 


—— 2A: 


124- 


Tuputer and 
Venus may 
ſometimes be 
malevolent 
Planets and 
not fortunes. 
Saturn and 
Mais may als 
lo ſometimes 
be fortunes & 


Rules for Eletting Lib.z. 
neficial : for it will often prove contrary : for all men are not ruled by 7apiter and 
Venns ; neither ( as I ſay ) are they always fortunes : for accidentally they may be 
infortunes : and when they are Lords of the eighth, twelfth and ſixth, they are occaſi- 
ons of ſickneſs, poverty, impriſonment, miſchief and death as effectually as Saturn or 
Mars: for every Planet mult doe the office whereunto it is ordained : and ſo by 
the ſame rule may Satzrs and ars be fortunes, and fo they are to thoſe they cheifly 
rule, and to ſuch things as are properly under their dominion either naturally or ac- 
cidentally ; wherefore the true knowledge of your ſignificator ( in Eleions ) of 


nor infoitunes, the bulineſs intended is of great value , and worthy ſerious conlideration. 


Note. 


Rules general 


Alſo in ele&ing any work, have eſpecial care to fortifie the part of fortune, the Lord 
thereof and its Dilpoſitor , fo that they be either in body or aſpect helped by the 
fortunes, and free from the configurations of the Malevolents.- Let not the Lord of 
your Aſcendent by any means be retrograde, for it will occaſion tardity and hin- 
drance in any thing, although al! the other ſignificators were eſſentially itrong and 
promiſing the effecting of the buſineſs ; it cauſeth alſo much trouble and pains in the 
buſineſs, although naturally never ſo caſy to be accompliſhed. | 

In the beginning of any work alſo ſee that rhe Dragons tay! be not with either of 


for the eleRing the Luminaries when they are in conjunction or oppoſition, or in the Aſcendent , or 


the beginning 
of any work, 


Note. 


Note. 


Note. 


houſe lignifying the butineſs in hand ; but place in thoſe places ſome fortunate Planer, 
or in the houſe of the buſineſs in Election, or in the Angles of the Figure 
at the time of Election. But have a ſpecial care in all EleQions you pur 
not. the Moon in the Aſcendent ; for ſhe is an enemy thereunto ; 1o alſo is 
the Sz ; for he therein diſſolves and undoes what is accompliſhed and done. Ard let 
not an Infortune be placed inthe Aſcendent, nor inany of the Angles, eſpecially if he 
have dominion inthe ſixth, eighth or twelfth; alſo look that ina diurnal Ele&tion you 
have a diurnil ſign aſcending;in a nocturnal,a nocturnal ſign : and if you can, that the 
Luminaries be in the ſame 11gns(I mean of the ſame nature, eſpecially that of the time. 

Avoid Elections at ſuch time as the TMeor ſeparates from the {9»junttiox or Oppo- 
ſition of the Sun, and immediately goes to the configuration of an infortune ; for it 
ſhews that if the place of the Conjunttion or Oppoſition be untortunate , the buſineſs 
then began ſhall come to no good end or concluſion ; bur if the place of the C:-»;1;:- 
ttion or Oppoſition be fortunate, it ſhews that the beginning ofthe bulineſs then in agi- 
tation ſhall be good, bur it ſhall ill ſucceed in the end. 

But if the CA7o0x ſeparate from Conjunttion or Oppoſition, and apply to a fortune, 
and the place of the Conjunttion or Oppoſition be untortunate, it ſignifieth that the 
beginning of the buſineſs ſhall be bad, and the end thereof good ; and when the 
place of the {o»jwnttion or Oppoſition 15 fortunate, and the Moon applieth immediatly 
ro a fortune, it denotes that both the beginning and the end of the work then began 
ſhall come to good or be fortunate. And ſo onthe contrary, it ſhe apply to an intor- 
tune when the places of the Conjuntion or Oppoſition are untortunate : when the place 
of the (onjuntttion or Oppoſition, or their Lord or Diſpoſer of them, be in a ſuccedenr 
houſe, it ſignifieth that the profit and good to be expected by the buſineſs ſhall be in 
the end accompliſhed, though with ſome trouble and pains ; but if they be ina Cadent 
houſe, viz. Cadent from the aſcendent of the beginning of the thing or buſineſs , or 
from the aſcendent of the Election, or Radix, it ſhall be broken off , and come to 
naught. 

IE a moſt learned Arabian in this Art, ſaith, that when the Lord of the 
Election (which is the Planet ſignifying your buſineſs) is Lord of the ſign of the Lu- 
minaries(eſpecially that of the time) inthe Revolution of the year of the World, or 
Lord of the year,or Lord of the Aſcendent at the time of the Revolution and be tor- 
runate therein, and alſo in the Election ; it fignifyeth and denoteth extraordinary 
ſucceſs and fortune in the buſineſs then began, and in all the affairs thereof. 

When the place of the Conjuntion or Oppoſition , and their Diſpoſitors be well 
dignificd and placed, the buſineſs then began or done ſhall be frm and of continu- 
ance and fortunate. Alſo accompliſhment and good ſucceſs of the buſineſs is {igni- 


fied when the Diſpoſitor or Lord of the houſe of the Conjunttion or Oppoſition betore 
the 


Lib.3. | All manner of Works. 125 


the beginning of the work or buſineſs, is ortental'in the hour of the beginning of the 

thing, and be in his own houſe beholding thoſe places with a Sextile or Trixe ; but if 

he do not behold the aforeſaid- places of the- Conjrnttion or Oppoſition, he profi- 

teth not. . 

You may alſo make your Elections for the beginning of any work from the Lord Other Rules 
of the Triplicity of the /:o9nar the time of the Conjunttion or Oppoſition ; for they - eleQing ry 
have power in the bFpinning of buſineſles ; for when they are received and fortunate > £m - 
at the time of the beginning of any work, it ſipnifierh good ;'but that which doth as 
the more confirm it,is, that the aſcendent of the Election be aſign in which he or they 
be well dignified, or have dominion inthe revolution of the year, and that the for- 
runes be in Angles, and chiefly in the aſcendent and mid-heaven, alſo in ſuccedent, 
and in the place of the thing, or buſineſs intended, or inagitation. 

In the beginning of any work (alſo) when the Luminaries behold each other with Per quick ci 
a good aſpect, it f1gnifierh ſucceſs in any buſineſs then wo a8 the buſinefs [alſo Po long 
know] in hand is foreſhewed by the 440», her being in the day-time underthe earth, ,.. 116. 
and inthe night above : and in an Election wherein a ſpeedy diſpatch of any buli- 
neſs is required, fortitie not the 17097, bur put /zpiter or Venus inthe aſcendent or in 
the mid heaven ; but have regard unto the 47-0 in things of long continuance , as 
Marriage, Building and the like ; and when ſhe is impedited, put her in an Angle or 
ſuccedent, but let her not behold the aſcendent norits Lord, nor the Lord of the 
houſe of the thing, or his Diſpoſitor, nor the Planet which hath fignitication of the 
thing either generally or parcicularly ; but if you cannot obſerve exactly all theſe look 
that you obſerve as many of them as you can, 

Some Authors hold it more neceſlary to fortifie the Lord of the Aſcendent then A thore rule in 
the Moon, others to fortifie the Lord of the houſe ſignifying the bulinels, and others cle&iog the be. 
the general ſignificators, &c. For my part, I hold it moſt neceſſary to fortifie che ſig- $i29ng of any 
nificators of the buſinels, the houſe and alſo if peſlible the Aoor , rather then the "© 
Aſcendent or its Lord, except they be proper ſignlficators. 

When the 47o0r is low in motion , 2:z. nor exceeding 12, degrees in 24. hours Cayecrs genes 
ſhe ſignifierh flowneſs and rediouſneſs in the buſineſs in hand ; bur it your buſineſs ral in Elccti- 
require haſte, and the 44992 apply to an infortune,make your infortune Lord of your 95. 
Aſcendent, and if then he be tree from misfortune it will be the betrer, but if infor- 
nate and afflicted and receive the 17997 out of the afcendent it is much better. But ſtill 
look that your chief ſignificators be free from misfortune and the Yzart:le and Or- 
poſition of the malzvolents, as alſo of the *», and of combultion, and that: they be 
not under the Sy» beams ; a Planet is under the S4» beams when he 1s not fully elon- 
gated from the body of the Sx 17. degrees; he is in combuſyon when he is within 
8. degrees 30. min. of his body, &c. as you have already heard in the 43. chapter of 
the ſecond Book of this Volumn. 

Have regard alſo unto your aſcendent,that there be no infortune therein,& that ir be 
not infortunate in the Revolution of the years of the World for that year, which you 
have bin taught is the Radix of your Work: have alſo a ſpecial care that you bring not 
your Radix backward, viz. fromthe aſcendent to the ſecond, but rather forward, viz. 
to the twelfth : and fee that the Lord of your aſcendent be not Occidental, efpecially 
if the Meor be joyned with him. 

Know alſo, that the zz in the aſcendent is not good (as hath been ſaid) except © f 
he be in Leo or Aries; the $2 in the aſcendent with Sarnryn hindreth the buſinef; in 770 0 "ai 
Election, and cauſeth an end with much labour and difficulty : Sarrz with the 3-09 $.,,, or wow wn 
inthe aſcendent fignitieth much ſadneſs, long and tedious diſeaſes, miſchief and death, the acc ndent 
evil from Kings and great men, lol of ſubſtarce and kindred, friends and companions. in Elections, 

Zapiter with the $7: 1n the aſcendent, ſignifieth ſadneſs, grief and little good, and (:x Fu pier 
change out of one place into another; with the foo he ſignifieth many waters,and '-M 
young children, concubines, marriage and honours. . | 

Mars with the $#x in the aſcendent fignifieth alſo much grief and dammage by Of 27: 
enemies, ſmall friendſhip from friends,deltru&tion and fudden death by iron or fire ; 
with the A0a,he denotes power and itrength for miſchief and deceit, 


Ct the fonif 


Venus 


ccntinuance of 


126 


Of Yenus. 


Of Mercury. 


Of the Moon. 


Rules for Elefting Lib.z. 


Venus with the Swn in the aſcendent ſignifieth much pain and travel, diſcords and 
accuſations by friends and alliance ; allo the appurtinances of women ; with the 
Moon ſhe denotes health and ſafery of the body, gain alſo and profit by wo- 
men, &c. / 

Mercury in the Aſcendent with the Sx alſo lignifieth grief and ſadneſs ; with 
the 1700n he ſignifieth many imployments and occaſions, and that often with triends 
and alliance. 

The oor in the aſcendent with the Sun ſignifieth deſtruction, miſchief, grief and 
trouble, inſtability alſo, and griefs inthe eyes, &c. but the knowledge ot theſe is 
more for curioſity then praRtice or uſe in my opinion. | 

Alfo have a care in buſineſſes of continuance, of movable ſigns ; in ſuch as require 
haſte, of fixed ; and in ſuch asare indifferent, prefer common ſ1gns, as hath been ſaid, 


- ſtill remembring that according to the buſineſs in hand and agitation a ſign muſt ac- 


Of the fignifi- 
cation of the 
moveable ſigns 
in eleRjons, 


Of the ſignifi« 
cation of the 
fixed figns in 
EleQions. 


Of the ſignl6;- 
cation of the 

n figns 
egions, 


cordingly (viz. of its nature) be choſen; and thus much ſhall ſuffice tor the firſt 
chapter being introduRory ; therefore let us now proceed. 


— ME A——  _ _——_— — -—— _ 


Clas ik 


Of the fins, and their ſionifications in Eleftions, and of the hinde- 
rances of the Moon, being a farther initrution to the judging of 


Ele&tions. 
in, be inthis Chapter ſomewhat more large in delivering the ſigniftications of 
the ſigns. and how they are to be choſen n electing any manner of work. 
Know then, that movable ligns, as are Aries, (ancer, L'bra, and Capricorn , ſig- 
nifie and denote mutation and alteration of things, and that they ſhall be of ſhort 
continuance ; wherefore in Planting, Sowing, Grafting, and in having and ſelling, 
they are to be choſen; and if any one fall ſick in theſe ſigns, viz. when they are in 
the aſcendent, or bearing rule otherways, the ſick party ſhall either ſoon die or ſoon 
recover; and whoſo flieth or taketh a journey at ſuch a time, ſhall be ſoon taken or 
return ; and the promiſe made or any other thing then began, ſhall ſoon come to an 
end, and be fpecdily performed ; news or reports are at this time uncertain, and moſt 
commonly falſe, 
Then look that you begin not any work you would have continue at ſuch a time, 
but in ſuch affairsele& the fixed ſigns which are Tamrnus, Leo, Scorpio,and Aquaries ; 
for in all things theſe make a continuance and _———_ z wherefore in building it 
is good to elec theſe ſigns, alſo marriages, or any ſuch thing as you would have con- 
tinue ; if voyages or journies be taken in them, they cannot be good, except there 
be many teſtimonies of the Fortunes ; and if any one be at ſuch time taken priſoner, 
his inlargement ſhall be protracted; and this 1 can teſtifie upon my own knowledge ; 
and who ſo ſhall incur the anger and diſpleaſure of any one, ſhall never be more in 
that parties favour. | 
The common ſigns ſuch as are Gemini, Virgo, Sagittary, and Piſces, are to be pre- 
ferred in ſuch buſineſſes as you would have of no long continuance, nor yet ſoon at 
anend ; for they are neither movable nor fixed, but common between both ; where- 
fore that houſe founded, or what ever it be that is then began, ſhall not long conti- 
nue ; wherefore in ſuch it is good to purifie gold and ſilver, or to put children to 
School or any other learning, and it advantagerh in all ſuch buſineſſes as do admit of 


a medium or indifferency, &c, 


Ike as T have promiſed, I ſhall for the better inſtrution of the Students here- 


Bur 


Lib.3. All manner of Works. 127 
But to elect any bufineſs beforementioned, or any other in the like nature, put the Bur note the 
CAfoon inthe aicendent in a convenient ſign, viz. both agreeing to your buſineſs jn 2797 doth ne> 
nature and continuance, and make het apply to a fortune with reception in a fign alſo ©" 8999 in rhe 


of the ſame natureif poſltdle ; if it be inthe day,fee that your figns be diurnal or the © 492 ian 


day-houſes of the Planets; and ſo on the contrary, if ut be in the night time; tor (© for © phewy 
much the better will your buſineſs ſucceed. 

To inſiſt longer hereon were but vain, wherefore let us proceed, &c. 0: upheid by 

In this manner of work, 2:z. Eleing a good and fitting time tor the ating or do- —_—_— 
ing of any buſineſs you mutt have a ſpecial regard to the Moor, and that the be no- * 
wile impedited or atth&ted ; for as all the ancient Rabies in this Art do telithe, there 
are ten ways whereby the 4ſ7oox may be impedited ; wherefore lince it isa thing fo 
neceſfary, I ſhall here plainly inſert them. 

Firſt then, the TAſoon may be impedited by being in combuſtion of the Suz , and The ten imp? 
even when ſhe is twelve degrees diſtant from his body, either before or after ; or more #01 ot mx 
plainly applying to or ſeparating from him; bur you mult note ſhe1s nor ſo much af- ***: 
| flicted when ſhe 1s ſeparated, as when ſhe is applying. 

In the next place the ſooz may be 1impedited when ſhe is in the degree of her fall, 
112,.1n the third degree of Scorpio. 

thirdly, ſhe may and 15 impedited when ſhe is in Oppoſition of the Sy. 

Fourthly, when joyned with infortunes or in Luartile, or Oppoſrtion of them. 

Fifthly, the 4Zooz 15 1mpedited when ſhe is within twelve degrees of the head or ;,, 11. 2; 
t41l of the Dragon, which 1s the term or place of an Eclipſe. in r</arion to 

Sixthly, when ſhe 1s in the latter degrees of a ſign wherein there is an inforrune, your buknels, 

Seventhly,when ſhe is cadent from anples or in via combuſta the burnt way,which js 19* 541414 3nd 
in the laſt 15.degrees of L:bra, and the firit 1 5. degrees of Scorpio;zand this is the wort guts 3 I'M 
Impedition the Mooncan have , eſpecially in Marriages, and in all matters belong- the 6: chp- 
ing to women, allo in felling, buying, and in travelling or going a journey. eg. 

Eightly, the Moon is impedited when ſhe is in detriment, viz. in Capricorn Or in 
Duartile, with her own houſe, or not beholding her houſe with Sexile or 7 rine. 

Ninethly, whenhe is ſlow in motion, viz. when ſhe moves in four and twenty 
hours leſs then is her mean motion (underitand the ſame in all the Planets) The mean 
motion of the Moc (according to the molt learned in this art)is 13. deg.19. min. z6. 

SCC. 

Tenthly, and laſtly, the Moon is impedited when ſhe is void of courſe,which is when 
the is in any ſign, and beholds not any Planet ill ſhe enter another y 236, 

Let therefore (in all manner of Eledions for good) the ſoon be itrong and well Underſtand 
dignified, and in good aſpect of the fortunes, and free from the Configurations of _—_ m—_—_ 
the Malevolents, and that ſhe be not in the Aſcendent, yet if ſhe be beheld by the So nonrr cg 
Fortunes,and be in the Aſcendent, it is good to buy and ful, and make the cor and and infortuncs 
the Lord of the Aſcendent (in your affairs of electing ) behold the Afcendent; for Satwz and 
when a Planet beholds not his own houſe, it is like a man that is not able ro benefit 95, 2+ in 
his houte nor remove the evil Impending ; but when a Planet behofdeth his own %# <baP'<r- 
nouſe, it is like a man that is ſtrong in his habitation, thatis able to prote&t and de- 
tend thoſe that are under his power and tuition, and to repell and keep off thoſe ene- 
mies that are without ; and note further, that when the Lord of the Aſcendent is "RP 
unfortunate, you muſt place him ſo as that he behold the Aſcendent with a 7 -ine or 20h te _ 
Sextile ; and if the Con he impedited, let her by no means be in an Anpte , but anq = 
place the Fortunes therin, or the 17097, when ſhe 1s beheld of the Fortunes out of an you cannor 4:- 
Angle : Let not Part of Fortune be cadent in the beginning of any work or queſtion f<* cime for a 
trom the Aſpe& of the 1700n, or her Conjunition ; it mattereth not for the Dif. ***®* clectivy 
poſitor of the Pur of Fortune, neither mattereth it whether Pare of Fortune be ca- 
dent from the aſcendent ; but put the Lord of the aſcendent with Part of Fortune, be- 
cauſe it is moſt profitable tor gain; bur let not the A707 be placed in the ſecond, ſixth, 
eighth or twelſth from Parr ef Fortune becauſe it cauſerh i!l ſucceſs. 

And in all bepinningsof works whatſoever, let the aſcendent and the 17-2» be in Rules mor? fo: 
fisns of right a centions as art Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, Scorpio and Sagitiry, be- = _egnoing 

caule 1 work 


Noe till tha; 
jour intoitunes 
a!c the impedi- 


tho 


in good alpe& 


diſcouiſe, 


T ke methed of 
the ſubſequent therefore now Geſcend to particulars ; wherefore t 


Rules for Eletting Lib.z. 
cauſe it deroteth good ſucceſs and ſpeedy diſpatchinthe br fineſs ; but thegfigns of 


oblique aſcention; as are Caprice, Aquarier, Piſces, Aries, Tamns and Gemini, 
cauſe a hindrance therein, and much tediouſriets ; wherefore let not the aſcendent or 


| the 41ven be in ſigns of oblique afcentiors : And if the Afoen be impedited, and your 


buſineſs is in ſuch haſte as that you muſt ele your buſineſs at ſuch a time, let not 
her have ary relation to the aſcendent either by body or aſpect, but let her be cadent 
from the aſcendent, and place a fortune in the aſcendent, or in gocd aſpect therewith, 
and fortifie the cuſp of the aſcendent,- and its Lord ard the Lord of the hour. 
Thus have you as brief as can be the general way of judging of Elections : let us 
he Methcd we ſhall take or follow 
herein , ſhall be to preceed according to the ſeveral Cemands belonging to every 
houſe of Heaven, ſince there is no one thing or buſineſs incident in the affairs and 
life of man but it is ſignified by one or other of them : wheretore we will begin with 
the buſineſſes appertaining to the firſt houſe ; and then in order we ſhall proceed to 
the ſecond and third, and fo to the reſt, &c. But firit let me give you theſe two fol- 
lowing Tables; the one of Elections according to the aſpects of the 27con to the 
other ſix Planets; and the other of the Manſions of the Ac and elections thereby , 
ſince they have been thought worthy of r.ote by the molt learr.ed of the Arcients in 
this moſt noble and beavenly Science. 


£ 
4 


Cuay. HAI 


Shewing Ele&tons by the Aſpefls of the Mun to tle aler fix Pla- 
nets, and by her Manſions. 


x 


of Art, fo asto elect a fitting time for their-work or buſineſs in hand, or can- 

not perhaps admit of ſo much time as to make an Election ; wherefore for bre- 
vitie ſake , Hnce 1 bave met with theſe followirg Tables in the books of the learned, 
notto leave theſe my labours lame, I — £ccd toinfert them, that 1 might not 
leave my Reacer to ſeek in any thing of this rature that hath come to my bard ; yet 
know that there is not much credit to be given unto them, ſince they are general 
Rules, and therefore cannot hold at all times, nor in every bodies affairs; for as hath 
been aboveſaid,7zpiter and Vixwus may accidentally be malevolents and infortunes to 
ſome men; and Satwr» ard Mars may prove Fortunes ard Aſliſtors ; wherefore then 
in thoſe mens affairs that have Sarzrryy or Mars their chief lignificator, and ftrong in 
their Nativities, the £#ar::/c or Oppeſiticn of the Aocy, I mean ſuch days as ſhe is 
thus aſpe&ed,may proverather adyantagious then prejudicial ; and to whom Jepiter 
or Venus are Rulers of the ſixth, eighth, or twelfth in their Nativities, a Sextile or 
a Trine or the Moon tO them may not a whit advantage ; however Ithought goodto 
Sive you them as they are here beneath repreſented to you by my Author. 


$ Ikely ſome people have not the capacity tounderſtard or judge of the Rules 


Lib.3: All manner of Works. 


A TABLE of Elef#ions according to the Aſpects of the eMoon 
to the other {1x Planets. 
| cf ES o BR HF. | 
'” An unfortunate] Converſe with old Confer not with Converſe with old Hire no ſervants, 
{xy, rake no jour-|men and husband old men, nor ſue men and husband. ſeck not after thy | 
1ey , ſpeak nor ro men, balld, and to Princes, take men , repair what gain, take nothing 
Princes nor old|plant trees, grafr, no Phyſick, or Is ruinous and in hand being not 
men, avoid the [bur ſeek not the journey, defer manure ground. began before, 
company of hus-|love of Women. thy deſire. 
band men. | — 
A fortunate day |Converle- with Apply thy ftudy co Begin any good Go thy journey, 
20to noble men, |Lawycrs, and Ec- Philoſophic, and work, make your and go to Pre. 
Iudges, and Pre- clefiaftical per- rake Counſel, journey co Kings laces and Ludges, | 


I" 


[laces, and ſue forſ(ons, read the | and great men, | 
bi thy right, and take Laws. [Prelaces and 


councel. | Z udges. 


An unfortunace Buy weapons of A day full of fear, Diſpoſe of all © Take no journey, 
day, take no jour-|War, or horſes, ayoid contentions, things for War, flle company, 
ney, avoid the ſhire Champions, make no» league or buy cartel , or friendſhips , and 
company of Soul- }and kindle the fare new friendſhip. caſts, love of women. 
F diers, &c. for Alchymle. | 
| : | 
| Begin nocking burf | ake in hand the A day to be Offer preſents to Sye for judge. 
that thou wouldeſi|affairs of Kings eſchewed In all Princes, and your ment from great | + 
have hidden and[and Princes , and things , deal nor |{#it will be heard men. bur ayoid 


© {lecrer. ſue for prefer- ' |with company of jof them, rich men, 
ments under great men. | 
them. | . 


A day for pleas|A day fit for amo-;Hire ſeryants or Scek the loye of Tt is good to hire 
ſures and delights, |-ous ſports, con- |workmen, make , women, and pur men or maid (er, 
Q ,put on new gat-|rract Marriage, |ſports,ſing or play, 0 new clothes if vants, to cake re- 


ments , ſeek thejieek for all kinde |and marry. ;the Moon be not creation and con- | 
love of women. [of ornaments ; it | iN £0. tract marriage, | 
is 2 proſperous 
day. 


and accompts, [make acconnts, | Embafladors,Ora which require a and Chancellors, 
2 chaffer, ſend mel | chaffer, rake char- |rors,and Carriers, good invencion, ſend meſſengers, 
| ſengers or carriers. |ges,ſend youths roſtake your journey, uſe exerciſe, and take thy journey, 
(chool,and accom- |buy and ſell, ſend children co uſe Mercbandile, 
| : pany wi:h Sages, School, follow thy ſtudy, | 


The Uſe of the TABLE. 
You ſee herein the firſt column h Þ 4 © 2 2? ; andan the five other columns 
ſeveral matters; over the firſt alſo yow ſee - , over the next #, overthe third © ; 
and upon the fourth 4, and over the head of the laſt + , which intimates no more 
then this,viz.That they are the Moons aſpetts to the aforenamed Planets; As in the 
firſt column you have theſe words , An unfortunate day, take no Journey &c- in the 
ſame line nd on the left hand yow have h placed, and over the head of theſe words 
 , ſhewingthatthe 3 in 4 with þ , isanunfortunate day to begin any buſineſs,or 
to g0a journey, &c. In the next column, and over againſt h you ſee theſe words, 
Converſe with old men and husbandmen, exc. and over the head thereof F, intima- 
ting that the 7 in « with h is good for ſuch buſinels ; and ſo underſtand of the reft 
of the columns and aſpects over againſt t ; and know allo that thoſe aſpects on the 
head ſerve for all the other Planets; and what you finde written over againſt any PJa- 
net, appertains to the ſignification of that Planer ; as for examplein the third column 
and over againſt */ , you ſee chis written, App/y thy fudy to Philoſophy, and over the 
head thereor | ; ſothat when the } isina 3} of , itisgood to apply ones ftudy 

that way; and ſo you may (following this rule)underſtand all the reſt. 
S A 


129 


1 Table of "Y Manſions of FA "my 


Rules for Elefting Lib.z. 


”O—— — —  —————— I — - -——— — 


Elections. 


— —_—_—  O— CO CO 
. —_—_ 


—o>_— — 


. [T ake thy forrney and Phyſick, Laxative. 


T ake thy journey by Water, bu Cattel cel, plant. 
{baffer, or buy and ſell, but goe not not by . Sea. 


Plant and /owe, marry not , nor journey r by water. 


or HMerchandiſe, V oJage 3  joyn Wedlock, and take Phy fich. 


Hol! hes So] nd lod bus 


10. tel. 49M Mot, 


Yar, /owe not, nor take in hand | any good. 


— -——— 


—|Plough, Sowe, Travell not either by Sea or Land. 


"| Fourney, and take Phyſich. 


Navigate. 
_ [Plant Build, Marry, but make no voyage. 


— 


oo h— 


© |\oWe, Plant, Deliver priſoners, but take no purgation. 


i" [A Q 28 pr 


[Plan Marry, but Navigate not. 
7 — Navigate Sowe,PÞlough, Marry ,and ſend meſſenger: 


ain 15 = 


Sowe, Plant Fake Phyſich,, either travel nor marry. 
 [Delveand 4 Dig, but neither marry ner travel. 
Unfortunate for any thing. LE 
_ [ag cattel, but Navigate not. 


— _— 


(1B, 28 EDM 


B51 Take Phyſ ck, | Navigate and put on new apparel. 


—_ RX —— —_—_— 


| _— |Bnild, Sowe, Plant, Navigate, re, but Wed not. WY 
 [opar, Plant, Sowe, and Vojage. 

Buy © cattel, uſe bunting, but Wea not. 
Bild, , Repair t: toa Ma lagiſtrate e for favour, but marry not. 


Take P Phyfie byfich, , Voyage, but neither Marry nor lend. 
Lead an Army, Marry, Sowe, take Phyſs =. 
Bnild, Marry, ſeek, friendſhip, take thy journey. 
It us in all things unfor tunate, ate, ſave in taking of Phys ich, 


PP  — 


" Plant, Sowe , Chaffer, Marry, but Navigate not. 


. \Uſe Merchandiſe, Marry, take Phyſfick,, but lend 4 nor, weir 
ther enterpriſe any voyage. 


--— 


Lib.3, Al! manner of Wh orks. 


The Ufe of the Table. 


In the firſt Column, you have the number of the Manſions of the Meon, 
and on the head thereof this word Manſions : In the ſecond Column you 
have the Signs Characters, and over the head thereof Sig. intimating ſigns: 
you ſee firſt ',and v5, &5, t, over againſt  , on the left-hand Column 
you ſee the Figure 1, over againſt the firſt &, the figure 2. and; the figure 3. 
againſt the ſecond ©, 4. againſt the third &, all which ſpeaks no more 
then thus, that the firſt Manſion of the Aon is in Aries; the ſecond , third, 
and fourth in Taurus, &c. In the third Column over againſt the figure 1. 
and Y , you finde 20, 6. and over the head D. M. ſignifying degrees. and 
minutes, which ſhews that the firſt Manſion of the CI4oon begins at the 2oth. 
degree and 6th. minute of Aries, and ends at the ſecond degree, and 57th. minute 
of Taurus, at which beginneth the ſecond Manſion,and ſo underitand of all the reſt ; 
As for the Qualities of every Manſion in the next Column in the fame line, 
with each Manſion, you have its quality or nature, over the head of which 
Column you have this word 2aliries : As for example, over againſt 7, you 
ſee Temperate, intimating the firſt Manſion to be ſo qualified; and over againſt 
the figure 2. being the ſecond Manſion, you have dry, and fo obſerve of all the 
reſt; this being underſtood, you may alſo ( over againſt each Manſion in the 
fifth and laſt Column) finde the ſeveral eletions which are then to be en- 
terpriſed ; as over againſt the firſt Manſion, you have theſe words in the fame 
Line, Take thy journey and Phyſick laxative: and over againſt the ſecond Man- 
\ ſion, Take thy journey by water, buy Cattel, plant, &c. And thus by the ſame 
way you finde the ſeveral Elections for every particular Manſion , as you ſee 
over the head of them written Elefions. And thus much ſhall ſuffice for the 
Explanation of this Table, and the ſcope of this Chapter : let us therefore now 
proceed ; yet if thou doſt but well underſtand and apprehend what hath been 
already ſaid , thou haſt ſufficient to lead thee through the whole Art of Ele 


ons without any more words. 


Rules for Elefting Lib.z. 
Secrion, II. 


Containing Rules for Eletting ſuch matters as appertain 
to the [ipnification of the firſt Houſe of Heaven. 


Cuna? 


Containing neceſſary Rules for putting ( hildren to Nurſe, to School, 
or to a Trade , and of Weaning of Children. 


time for putting out children to Nurſe; wherefore leaſt 1 ſhould detract from the 

Art, eſpecially writing for the edification of all ſuch ingenious ſpirits as ſhall ap- 
ply their Study to Aſtrologie, I thought good to be ſo caretull, as not to let {lip the 
leaſt matter * ſo neer as I can) that hath been delivered unto us by thoſe learned 
Rabbies,I mean,as are found in ſuch Authors as are with us extant. 


I T hath been the curioſity of the Antients to deliver inſtructions for eleRing a 


An eleQionfor Wherefore then in ſetting children to Nurſe, let the Joo when the Nurſe firſt 


ſending chil- 
dren to narſe. 


T o School. 


Toa Trade, 


begins to give the childe ſuck, be in Conjunttion of YVeaus, but if that be nor, let her 
be in a Sexrile or Trine of her,with reception out of Taxnrnxs or Libra, and if Venus 
be deſcending in her excentrix or epecicle,it isthe better ; alſo fortifie the A7o0x and 
Venws in the radix and the aſcendent and other ſignificators ; but if you cannot for- 
tifie all theſe, ſtrengthen as many as you can, but be ſure you put them in Conjunftiox, 
or at leaſt in Sextile or Trize, as 1s ſaid before. 

And to ſend Youths to School, let the Afoon be in Conjunttion of Mercury, or in 
Sextile or T rine, with reception out of Virgo or Gemini, fortifie alſo the aſcendent 
and its Lord, and the ninth houſe and its Lord, and the aſcendent and ninth in the 
radix and their Lords, or as many asyou can ; but be ſure you fortifie Mercury, the 
Moon and the Lord of the ninth in the-radix, and your time wherein you make 
your Election. 

And if you ſend any childe or youth to Apprentice, fortifie the oor, and the 
Lord of the tenth,and ſign of the tenth, alſo the ſign of the tenth and Lord of the 
tenth in the radix of the Youths Nativity ; and ſee what Planet the Trade he isto 
be bound to doth properly belong, and fortifie him both in your Radix and time ; 
as if the trade, profeſſion or occupation be a ('arrier, Potter, Plummer , Brick- 
maker, Maltſter, ( handler,Gardner,or a Workpr in Mines, &c. fortifie Saturn. 

If thou makeſt the childe a Clothier,or Wollen-draper,or a LaWyer, Divine, or of 
any Eccleſiaſtical calling, fortifie Jupiter. 

If a Phyſitian, Soularer, Apothecary, Alchimuſt, Chirurgion, Watch-maker, Cutler, 
Butcher, Smith, Baker, Barber, Dyer, (ook, Tanner or Carpenter, fortifie Mars. 

: If a Goldſmith, Minter of money, Copperſmith, Brafier or Pemterer , fortifie 
the S7. 

If a Silk-man, /Muſitian, Mercer , Linnin-araper , Limner, Painter, Lapidar, 
7eweller, Player, Embroiderer, Perfumer, Graver' Seamſter, Glover or Upholſterer, 
&c. fortifie Vexxs. | 

If an Aftrologer, Mathematician, Philoſopher, Merchant , Scrivener , Sculptor, 
Poet, Schoolmaſter, Printer , Stationer , Attorney , C lerk, Solicitor or T aylor, &-c. 
fortifie Mercury. | 

If a Sayer, Fiſherman , Fiſhmonger , Vintner , Brewer , Huntſman , Miller, 


Ialtfter, &c. fortifie the ſoo, as you have been taught in the ſecond Book. 


Bos 


_ Lib.z. All manner of Works. 133 


Bonatus, Haly and others have been ſo curious in their Elections of all works, that Of weaning «: 
they have given directionsfor _ of children, which though of no great con- taking chil- 
cernment, I thought fir notwithſtanding to deliver here their opinions; wherefore dren from 
then in weaning of children, let the oor be remote fromthe Sun, and in none of © 
the houſes of Y enus, thus Bonatas: and others ſay,if the ſoon be in her 12th. Man- 
ſion,or in Libra, when you wean the childe, ir will never more care for the breft : 
Again,ſome of the Antients hold, that if the Joo be in any of the earthy ſigns, as 
are T awrus Virgo and Capricorn,the childe will affect the eating of herbs or roots; if 
in Lee, tocat fleſh; if in Cancer, Scorpio or Piſces, fiſh; and if in any of the other 
ſigns,it will eat whatever you give it, Theſe are the opinions of ſome learned ; but 
there is no doubt if the childe be ſeparated from the breſt of the Nurſe when the 
Moon is in Scorpio or Aries, remote from the Sun, and in Square or Oppoſition of 
Venus, it will do the feat ; a little experience and tryal of theſe Rules will put the mat- 
ter out of doubt ; theſe are not things of much value or regard; bur ſince it hath 
been the curioſity of the Ancients to write thereof, I have mentioned them (as I have 
ſaid) wherefore if thy curioſity be deftrous to make tryal of theſe Rules, thou mayſt 
follow which thou thinkeft moſt agreeable to reaſon and truth, &c. 


CunavP?. Il. 
Containing the Rules of Eleftions m the cutting of Hair. 


Lways place the Afoon in common ſigns, well dignifyed, but eſpecially in 
A earthy ſigns ; this is the opinion of ſome : and others again do contradi& 

this, and fay Yirgo is not to be choſen; I conceive the reaſon was, becauſe it 
is a barren ſign : and therefore in cutting of hair, that you would not have to Thar kair may 
grow ſuddenly , place the ſoon in either Virgo, Gemini or Leo, decreaſing in no: ſoon grow. 
light and motion, and afflicted by Saturn. Bur if you deſire your hair to grow 
ſpeedily, let the aſcendent be one of the fruitful ſigns, asalſo Moor, viz. in {an- Ih = ly 
cer, Scorpis, Or Piſces ; but let the Moon be increaſing inlight and motion, and ler 5" PEEOUY: 
her be in Sextie or Trize of the Lord of the aſcendent of the parties Nativity, but 
have ſpecial regard the Moos be free from the malevolent impedition of Saturn or 
Mars , forthey will cauſe much ſcurff and dandriff at the roots of the hair. But if | "2 "ONO 
you defire it ſhould be thick , let the 2ſoon be in Oppoſition of the Sun , and the 4; 
aſcendent and the 2foop free from the aſpeRs of the malevolents, | 


Rules in cut. 
ting of the 
nails of the 
hands. 


Of the feer. 


In cutting of 


Rules for Elefting Lib.z. 


CHaP, II1T. 


Of cutting the Nails of the hands or feet, as alſo Corns. © 


houſe , but in a ſuccedent , and if not in a ſuccedent, in an Angle increa- 

ſing in light and motion; The angles of a figure are, the firſt, fourth, 
ſeventh,and tenth; The ſuccedents are the ſecond, fifth,eighth and eleventh ; the Ca- 
dents, are the third, ſixth, ninth, and the twelfth, as you have already in the pre- 
ceding Treatiſe heard ; and have a ſpecial care alſo that the ſoon be not in Geming, 
eſpecially if ſhe be beheld of Saturn or Mars, by a Square or Oppoſition , for if 
beheld of Satury , it is tobe feared they grow not again; and if they grow, they 
grow ilfavoured and thin ; and if Mars behold her by any of theſe malevolent 
AſpeRs and placed as aforeſaid, they will grow into the fleſh , which will cauſe 
much pain, and perhaps endanger the loſs of the joynt, if not the whole hand. 

Haly faith, in cutting the nails, let not the Ao0z be in Gemini or Sagiteary, nor be- 
held of their Lords, viz. Jupiter and Mercury ; but put her in Arie:,/ anus, Caxcer, 
Leo, or Libra, free from infortune or any impedition ; and let her not be in Via 
combuſta (which is in the firſt 15. degrees of Scorpio, and the laſt 15. degrees of Li- 
bra, as you have already heard) but the firſt 15 degrees of Z:1bra you may adventure 


M Ake then the C100 in cutting of the Nails of the hands be in no cadent 


on 


In cutting the nails of the feet put not the Moon in Gemini,or Piſces, or in Via com- 
buſta, or in any other impediment or affliction. 
| Andincutting of corns obſerve the ſame rules ; and that they might not ſoon grow 


Corns thar they again, let the ſoon be in Gemini, Leo, or Virgo, decreaſing in light and motion, bur 
may not grow not afflicted by the malevolents, for that may prove obnoxious and hurtfull; and if 


ſpeedily. 


To borrow or % 
receive money. (= 


you can, let the ſoon be ina cadent houſe of Heaven, 


+ BO 2, +. + Do +, 4 + da && BO $$ 2, +, +, Bo + . do e de + < Da 2 o* +, 2, +, « aa a + -*. +, t da ee DO Da bg DC) 


Szcrion []]I. 


Of Rules for Elethng matters appertaining to che 
ſecond Houſe. 


Gnas 


Of receiving and borrowing of Money. 


[ 


$8 cond in your time of borrowing or receiving, and the cuſp of the ſe- 


US, cond in your Radix, the Lord of the ſecond, and the Lord alfo of the 


F388 houſe in which he is , if you can; 7wpiter alſo ought to be fortified, for 
that he is a general ſignificator of wealth, &c. | 


Let 


Lib.3. All manner of Works. 


Letthe oo» be alſo decreaſing inlight, and in Leo,Scorpio, Saguttary, /1qnarics or 
Piſces ; and let Fapiter or Venus behold the aſcendent, or the 24907, and it you can 
both ; yer look that the A007 be not impedited of any of the Infortunes, nor 47er- 
cary, eſpecially by Conjunttion or Square ; neither let the Fortunes be cadent ; tor the 
Hoon by Mars afflicted cauſeth much ſollicitation,pains and labour, alſo much dit- 
ficulty in the procuring, and perhaps anger ; If by Satzry, it cauſeth much protracti- 
on and delays, and oftentimes after much pains and travel, cauſeth the buſineſs to 
come to no good, or fruſtrateth the borrowers expeQation. 

Take this for an approved Rule,that when the 4707 is in the firlt degree of Gemiz7, Neither bor 
Leo, or Sagittary, orthey on the cuſp of the aſcendent, 'itis not ſafe either to bor- 19 nor lenc 
row or lend, for that much inconveniency will come thereof. | 

And if you would borrow money privately that it might not be known or divul- 4 hat none 
ged, letthe Aoor(when you borrow it or receive it )be under the 54» beams , and P _— aig 
c0ingto Conjuntion of the Fortunes when ſhe is ſeparate from the $17, or ſonic of nuny. © 
other good aſped of the Fortunes no ways impedired ; this cauſeth the bulinels to be | 
kept private and cloſe : But if the Moon be joyned, or apply by any aſpect to Aars 
when ſhe ſeparates from the $» his beams, the bulineſs will be divulged abroad; and 
known by many,and thoſe too that you deſire ſhould be ignorant thereof ; look allo 
chat the 3490n be free from Via (ombuſta, or the conjunttion vf Dragons Head, and 


and Dragons T ail. 


— —_— - ——_— —— > 


CHam 1% 


Containing other Rules concerning borrowing and lending of money. 


The Aſcendent and its Lord, are the ſignificators of the Borrower or Pe- 

titioner : the ſeventh and his Lord, are ſignificators of the Lender ; Aer- 

cxry and the Moon ſignifie the Thing to be lent. When therefore you 
finde the Lord of the Aſcendent and the Lord of the ſeventh in any good Aſpe& of 
each other, orin reception, or the Lord of the ſeventh in the aſcendent,or Mercury, 
or Mercyry joyned to the Lord of the Aſcendent by body or aſpe&, or in reception It "x 
of each other, the buſineſs ſhall be accompliſhed : Bur if the Afoon be under the gps, © 
Sun beams, the Sn ſhall ſignifie the thing demanded in ſtead of the 1100s, ſhall be had. 

And Haty faith; If the A400n be in Via { omwbu(ta, or in the aſcendent at noon, or 
inthe firſt degrees of Gemin, Leo, or Sagittary, or if they be in the degree or cuſp 
of the aſcendent, it ſignifieth no good to the Lender ; but to the Borrower ; this is 
Halies opinion; you have but juft now heard it is neither good for the Borrower or 
Lender at ſuch atime ; you may follow which you pleaſe, and in your curioſity try 
them both, and follow which you finde mott true ; a little experience will ſoon clear 
the doubt : however it is no ways good to lend any thing in the hour of 
Jaturn. 

But if you deſire that the received money remain long with you, notdeſirins any That the bor-. 
ways toimploy it; let the aſcendent at the time of the receit thereof be 2 fixed tign, rowed money 
and the Lord of the aſcendent, the 700» and the Lord of the ſecond in fixed ſigns, ?? long laft, 
free from misfortune or impediment , as alſo the angles of your figure. 

But if (for ſome occaſions you have) you would ſpeedily disburſe, turn, and .. 
winde your money (which perhaps may be advantagious ) let the aſcendent be a des, _— 
movable ſign, or a common ; but a movable in ſuch a caſe is much better ; ſer alſo vantage. 
the Lord of the aſcendent, the 17o0,, and the Lord of the ſecond in your Radix, and 
at the time (if you can) of the receit of the money be a movable ſign free from 

| impediment, 


[]:: s you know the true ſignificators,you can herein do nothing. 


C 


Rules for Eletting Lib.z. 
impediment, as alſo the Angles of your Figures; and remember that in all Eletions 


you fortifie (if poſſible) your chief ſignificators ; as alſo in your Radix, as well as 


at the time of the Election. : | 
Furthermore if you deſire to keep what you get or receive , that it may be im- 


ployed by you to uu belt advantage , fortifie "Vater not and its Lord at the time 


of the receit of the money; fortifie alſo 7«piter,/aptd let not ſar: behold the Moor, 
Aſcendent, Part of ſubſtance, or part of Fortene, or their houſes, or any of their 
Lords, eſpecially of the ſoon or Aſcendent ; how to take part of ſubſtance, or any 
other part you ſhall have hereafter, asI have leiſure. 


Ct II 
— 


Cans Bt 


Of buying to profit agam by the ſale thereof. 


dities, and ſelling them again to their beſt advantage? yet there are many 
again confeſs they have often ſold their V\ ares at diſadvantage ; the reaſon 
was, eonghe them at hap-hazard, without reſpect to any peculiar or particular 
4 gi cove time (as our ignorant Phyſitians preſcribe Vomits, Purges and Phleboromie, at any 
in the genera» £IMe, procuring thereby much miſchief to their Patients(as I have by ſeveral known) 
liry of our fo that they had need again (the remedy being or proving (by the 1gnorance of the 
Phyfitians, preſcriber) worſe then the diſeaſe) to take Phyſick toexpel that Fhyſick they have 
already taken ; and this ſometimes cannot but indanger the Patients life ; for that 
nature being far ipent before, muſt needs by this raſh act of the unskilfull Phyſician 
(who is rather (as Galen and Hippocrates ſay) to be termed a Focl, then to be ho- 
Ignorance the noured with that noble term of Phyſitian) 1n preſcribing their remedies at ſuch im- 
author of mis proper times that they work contrary effects (as Purges vomet, and Vomets purge) 
——_ be more weakened and prejudiced ; nay and it doth often fall out ſo, that nature to- 
gether with the life is wholly extinguiſhed ; wherefore anon in its due place more ſhall 
be ſaid hereon, and the true & rea] times for adminiſtring of phyſick be cordially deli- 
| yered unto you; but to the buſines in hand)wherefore let them obſerve what followeth. 
Of buying ro In buying therefore any thing to make advantage or gain of the ſail thereof, for- 
profir again by tifie the 00x eſpecially, for that ſhe hath moſt power of any of the Planets in the 
the ſale thereo?. 1 dinary courſe of the lite of man ; Fortifie alſo Mercury who hath alſo much in- 
fluence in ſuch matters ; alſo the Lord of the ſecond, and (if poflible) the Lord of 
the Aſcendent : let the Hor alſo be joyned to £Hercnry by body. or a benevolent 
aſpe&, free from impediment, either accidental or eſſential, as alſo from the afiction 

of Mars as much as you can. | 
But if you cannot fortifie /Wercary, fortifie the Moon, the eleventh houſe and 
the Lord thereof ; but yet let Mercury be free from the body or Alpe& of Mars; and 
if you can by any means, ler him be in Conjmttion or good aſpet of Venws , or the 
Lord of the eleventh or both. Now be ſure you obſerve theſe rules well; for by how 
much the more you fortifie Mercury (next to the CI/-0y being to. be regarded) by 
ſo much the more may you be confident and aſſured of benefit and profit ; for Me - 
cxry, the Moon, the ſecond and the eleventh are chief ſignificators herein, and they 
{till cauſe'gain, if well dignified or diſpoſed ; but then be ſure they be free from the 
body or aſpect good or bad of 71ars 


D Oſt not thou know there are many men make a Trade of buying Commo- 


 Lib.3. All manner of Works. 
Cunar 
Of ſelling to advantage. 


high rate.Let the ſoon be in Tawurns,Cancer, Virgo or Piſces, free from mil- advancage. 
forcune and ſeparating from the Conjwuntion or aſpect of the fortunes and ap- 

plying to the aſpect , not Conja»7ion , of the infortunes ; for this is good for the Sel- 

ler, but the clean contrary for the Buyer. 


þ Ven thus muſt you do if you would Ele a time to ſell thy commodity at any of elling co 


Cunar?. Y. 


Farther concerning Buyinz and Selling in the ordinary courſe of 


the World. 


Hus inthe daily and ordinary way of trade mult you do,fortifie 9, and place ,,,,.,.. 0 
it in one of the houſes of /upitey ,and let /wpiter or ſome other of the fortunes che buyer. 
behold it with a good aſpect; for this will be advantagious to the Buyer, bur 

not to the Seller ; Alſoit the Hoon be in ſigns of ſhort or oblique aſcentions, decrea- 

ſingin light, it is good for the Buyer. 

Burt it ſhe be in ſigns of right or long aſcentions, increaſing in light, number or 
motion, and joyned with the fortunes,it ſhall be more advantagtous for the Seller and 
it ſhall ſeldom be, but at ſuch a time the Buyer ſhall loſe by the bargain. 

But note, that inall this , the 100» and Mercary be free from the body or aſpect 
of /i1ars, for that he ever hinders buying and ſelling , and cauſes diſcord and wrang- 
ling; alſo ſee they be free from the preſence of 4), for he is little worſe then it. 

Some of the Ancients have delivered theſe Rules for buying and ſelling; but others _. "REY 
have taughr that the Aſcendent and its Lord are for the Seller, the ſeventh and the ,,020 ie 
Lord thereof for the Buyer, and the 21o0x for the thing to be bought and ſold ; þuyer and (el- 
Althabarus | from whom I cannot deſcent herein] ſaith, that when the Buyer is the ler the thing ro 
_ firſt propounder or mover of the bulineſs, or doth firit ſpeak to the Seller — be bought and 
the thing he would buy, the Aſcendent and its Lord is for the Seller ; the ſeventh and ®* P'i<*- 
the Lord thereof for the Buyer : And if the Seller be the firſtmover of the buſineſs 
to the Buyer , the contrary 1s to be underſtood : The mid-heaven and its Lord is to 
ſignifie the price of the thing ; the fourth and its Lord the thing to be ſold; and alſo 
the Planet from whom the 470: latt ſeparated is given to ſignif the Seller ; the Pla- 
net to whom ſhe next applies, the Buyer ; and the ; the thing to be bought and ſold. 

Some hold that che 149», in the Aſcendent, either in buying or ſelling 1s good, yet 
ina * journey is very bad. Butnote that in ſelling it will not be amiſs for thee to place * Vore, 
the oo: in herexaltation or triplicity ſeparated from the Fortunes, and beholding 
the Infortunes, but not joyned to them by body. 


— 


— 
OO EE CO nm mo - — — 


—_— — _ 4 m—_—_—_ 


CHaP. VI. 
Y Of buying clothing, or putting on of Apparel. 


H Ear now what 15 obſervable in putting on or buying of Apparel ; fortifie the 
Aſcendent and its T.ord, and the ſoon and let the Aſcendent and the ſign 
wherein the Lord of the aſcendent is , be movable ; and if poſſible, let the 
Moon bein Aries, except the ſeventh degree ; or in Cancer, excepting the firit fix 
degrees ; or in Libya, or the firſt eighteen degrees of Firgo, or in the firit nineteen 

E | degrees 


Rules for Eletting Lib.z. 


degrees of Sagittary, or the twenty firſt degrees of Piſces; and by all means avoid 
fixed ſigns, except the firſt twenty degreesof 7 aur ; for that there (it being the 
houſe of /'ers and exalration of the oor )it ſignifyeth great joy and delight; but by 
all means let her not be in Leo or Scorpio, Leo elpecially, &c. And if poſiible, let the 
own be in Sextile or Trine of the Swun, for it will be then ſo much the better ; but 
if in thy Ele&ion thou canſt not obſerve all this, place the oo» out of Leo, 
' Scorpio and (Capricorn, and Via (ombuſta , and look that ſhe be no wiſe impedited or 
beheld of the Malevolents. | 
Fortifie alſo the cuſp of the ſecond houſe and its Lord, eſpecially in buying of Ha- 
bir, and let the A007 be increaſing in light ; however if thou cant not in every par- 
ticular remember, or be able to follow every particular of this that hath been ſaid, 
in putting on of new garments, fortifie the 4700n,and place the Sy in the tenth houſe, 
or place the Aſoon in the mid-heaven free from all misfortune ; but of putting on of 
apparel, more anon in the Elections appertaining to the fifth houſe. 


Cuan. VIE 
of flittng, or removing from one place to another. 


Q Emember this election (I mean its ſcope and nature) doth more 
d properly belong to the third houſe,it being the houſe of journeys 
& or ſhort removes; but the antient Arabians molt skilfull and lear- 
W > ned in this Art, have placed this election in this houſe , as moſt 
WS agreeing or belonging to it; but the reaſon thereof I ſuppoſe was, 
| CS becaufe ſeldom any remove their habitation but for their own 
Sain or profit in one kind or other; and for that the ſecond houſe 
7 * hath ſignification thereof(as you may ſeein the ſecond Treatiſe) 
they have placed this election in this houſe ; wheretore ſince it is and hath been ſo or- 
dered by them , I ſhall (as becomes a good diſciple) follow as neer as I can (eſpecial- 
ly in ſuch things as are indifferent) my Matters directions and documents. 

Wherefore then in electing a fit time for ſuch a matter, know that if the houſe be 
'7our own,the Aſcendent at that time muſt be a fixed ſign,and the 4790 1n a fixed ſign; 

ut if it be a hired houſe, let the Aſcendent be a common ſign,and the A707 in a com- 
mon 11gn. 

Fortifie the Aſcendent,the 1700s, the Lord of the Aſcendent, and the Lord of the 
place of the 2709,, the fecond houſe and its Lord , the fourth and its Lord, and Part 
of Fortune and its Lord, the Aſcendent and its Lord, and the Aoon and its Diſpoſitor 
to receive or have good and c1vill entertainment ; but to increaſe in ſubſtance and to 
augment what 1s gotten in a thriving way, fortifie the cuſp of the ſecond, its Lord, 
and Part of Fortune and its Lord ; and alfo it will be the better if you can then alſo 
place 7apiter in the ſecond houſe, free from impediment or affliction ; but however it 
advantageth much if Z«piter be ſo placed. | 

And for a good ſucceſs and end (as in all other undertakings) fortifie the ſign and 
cuſp of the fourth and its Lord; and it poſsible let Taxrns or Leo be on the cuſp of the 
fourth; for that denoteth the goodneſs of the place,and that the houfe or place ſhall 
be clean and ſweet, free from venemous and obnoxious beafts and vermin : but Scor- 
pio on the culp of the fourth, cauſerh multiplicity and increaſe of ſuch animals, and ſo 
much the more if it be any wiſe beheld of Sararn ; alſo be carefull that the aforenamed 
places and ſignificators be free from the Aſpects of the Malevolents, and if poſsibl- 
not only ſo, but in configuration of the Fortunes. 

However ſee that you fortifie your chiefeſt {ignificators, and your buſineſs order 
according to the intentions of the party removing or flitting his habitation, and thou 
ſhalt not erre. 


- WL fu 4a” 


CD DV N 


CHAP. 


Lib.3. All manner of Works. 129 


Cnar. VIE 


Containing Rules for Elefting any Work in the Art of Diſtillation, 
or Alchymae. 


Man ſha!), it he have regard to the writings of the Antients, find, that there 

harh ever been in tormer Ages ſome, and indeed moſt -of the more learned 
| ſort of men, who have applied their ſtudy to this heavenly myſterie : and 
truly it cannot be by ime believed, that ever there was an Ape ſince the World had its 
tirſt original that was fo ſtupid and void of underſtanding, as not to have ſome ſons of 
the Hermetick Art produced therein ; andas by the more learned and refined ſpirits 
of all Ages it hath been ever in great eſteem and practiſe ; ſo is it ſtill in this we live, 
and by very many both ſtudied and cheriſhed, it being notwithſtanding by the muck- 
worms and fottith Atinego's ot rhe World ſighted and contemned, and no more va- 
lued then a Diamond is with Hogs, both {hghting that unſpeakable and never to be 
enovoh valued and cttze. ned knowledge, and the Students or Searchers thereof, in- 
ſomuch that they 2cco!int norhing more ridiculous, then that which they vulgarly 
call Ie PRI LOSOPHERS STONE, thus giving way to folly tocondemn and not 
eſteem that great bieſsing they are in no wiſe thought worthy of ; nay not ſo much as 
worthy ihe honour to be accounted in the number of thoſe that believe there is ſuch 
a thins in Nature : but it mattereth nor what ſuch ſtupid Dolts conceive out of their 
ſhallow and conceited brains, that can admit of nothing but ignorance ; wherefore 
let it be ſtill unto thema STox#x and rock of offence ; both it, and all thoſe hea- 
venly ſouls, the Lovers thereof, ſhall by me be ever in great eſteem, and be more 
dear unco me then any worldly telicity : but I fear I tranſpreſs, let us therefore to 
our matter in hand. 

Since then, I ſay, there are many in this our Ape who apply themſelves to the ſtud 
of this molt heavenly revelation, and they ſubject to mils of their intentions, and be Why ſo many 
(as many have) fruſtrated of their expetation, let them obſerve what followeth; ay hor 
and though ſome have erred through ignorance and want of a through underſtand- ety of the 
ing of what they have ſought, and others for want of proportionating the matter ; Bleſſed Elixer, 
and again others for want of governing it in working according to Art ; 
ſome through one detect, and ſome through another, yet molt muſt needs 
fail of their defires, for want of a through intelle& and right uſe of EleR- 
ing a polition of the Heavens fit for the ſame; for as the Elements and all thereof 
compoſed are{ without diſpute Jregulated and diſpoſed by the influence and vertue of 
the Ccolettial Planets and Stars ; it muſt neceſſarily follow then, that all Metals and 
Minerals whatſoever, have their dependency and efficacy from the ſuperiour configu- 
rations of thoſe bodies : wherefore it cannot but be very efficacious in all ſuch works 
astend to Alchymie (as well as the temporal affairs otherways of men) and the great 
Her metick Work. ; 

Wherefore when thou beginneſt any work of this nature,place the Aeon in a com- 
mon ſign, free from all manner of impediment and misfortune ; alſo the Lord of the 
Aſcendent ; and let the ſign aſcending be a common ſign; fortifie alſo that Planer 
which ruleth the matter you work upon ; as, if it be Lead, fortifie Saturn ; if Tin, 
Tupiter ; if Iron, Afars ; if Gold, the Sun; if Braſs or Copper, Vents; if Quick- 
ſilver, Mercary ; it $1]ver, the 1-0n,&c. fill remember to diſpoſe of them(v:z. your 
ſignificators) according to this rule, and that in the beginning of your Work,&c, 


S-4 SECT 


Rules "'D Eletting 


$$$ > >SS$SEEÞS$ÞSS $$ÞÞÞ$SEHEHESH HH OP PEE $$$ 


S:crion IV. 


Comprehending Rules, in Eleiting ſuch matters as ap- 
pertain to the ſignification of the third Houſe. 


© ———— 


CHaPp. I. 
Of ſhort Tourneys, and their Eleftions. 


 F Any menare not acquainted with this Language ; wherefore I ſhall more 
pry declare, that by ſhort journeys we are to underſtand ſuch as can 


finiſhed within a day vor two, or leſs ; wherefore then in ſuch an EleRi- 
on, fortifie the Aſcendent and its Lord, the Moon and its diſpolitor, Parr of Fortune 
alfo, and its diſpoſitor , and the Planer to whom the 2oonis joyned or in configura- 
tion with ; the ſign of the third houſe and its Lord, the Lord of the hour, and the 
Lord of the thing, or the Planet ſignifying the thing or buſineſs for which the Party 
takes his journey (if it be related unto you) as alſo its diſpoſitor. 

Bur if all theſe thou canſt not poſſibly obſerve, neither(your occaſions being ſuch) 
can you defer them till ſuch a time ; then 1 ſay fortiftie the Moon and the Lord of the 
hour ; and if you cannot fortifie the Aſoo»,yet be ſure your Lord of the hour be no 
ways ilediced or weak , and make the Aoor fall from the Aſcendent, and if poſ- 
ſible from the Lord thereof ; But more of this inthe ninth houſe when wee come to 
treat of Elections concerning long journeys. 


CHAP. Ik 


Of making of Friendſhip between Brethren, or any two at variance. 


If thy broth ; - : 
RI he make frendſhip between brethren at variance whether the brother or kin(- 


thy berter, man be your better , equal or inferiour ; for if he be your major or better, 
Thy equal. you muſt obſerve this general Rule to have regard unto Sarzrs; if he be your equal, 
Thy inferior. 7 Afars; if thy inferiour, to Mercnry : bur firſt fortifie the Aſcendent and its Lord, 
the Aeon and its diſpoſitor, the Lord of the third, and the ſign and cuſp of the third 
it ſelf, by fitting it to your buſineſs, and let the Lord of the third be in Conjunttion, 
Sextile, or Trine of the Lord of the Aſcendent with reception out of houſes, if pol- 
ſible, or out of exaltation or triplicity and term ; for look how ſtrong and better your 
reception is, ſo much the ſooner will the parties at variance agree, and continue the 


longer in friendſhip : and if poſlible,let the Lord of the Aſcendent behold the ſign - 
cuſp 


H = have an eſpecial care in this manner of judgementin EleQing a fit time to 


Lib.. All manner of Works. 
cuſp of the third with a Sex::/e or Trine, and the Lord of the third, the Aſcendents 
cuſp, &c, Or let the Lord of the firſt be in the tenth or eleventh, and the 400x 
beholding lovingly both ſignificators or either of them. 

But note, if the reconciliation be with women, as before you had reſpe& unto Sa- 
trn,you mult regard Venus, &c. And as theſe Rules ſerve for reconciling of brethren 
and kindred, or ſuch perſons as are ſignified by the third houſe ; ſo will they very well 
ſerve for the agreement of any perſon with x 2 father, by ordering and placing the 
Lord of the fourth, as you have heard of the Lord of the third, MHyxraru mutands ; 
ſo likewiſe a ſervant, by fitly diſpoſing the Lord of the ſixth ; and a childe,by ſo order- 
ing the Lord of the fifth : a wite, by the Lord of the ſeventh ; or an open or known 
enemy ; and ſo underſtand of any perſon whatſoever, ſtill remembring to know ex- 
actly and truly your ſ1gnificators, and then you cannot fail following your Rules. 


O———= o— > ——— 


CHa?. HE 


Of applying the minde or ſludy to Dirvine matters or contemplations. 


Note. 


The fgnifcari- 


ed unto us the {ignification of every houſe as you have heard in the firſt Book, ,, erik 
where you know the Ancients have affigned the ninth houſe to fignifie pouſe. 


0 Uch hath been the induſtry of former Writers, that they have plainly deliver- 


the Religion and Divine inclination of any one whatſoever, and ſome have been ſo 
curious, that they have aſsigned it to ſignifie and denote the higheſt pitch of 


ſuch inclinations, and the men ſtudying thereof; as Popes, Cardinals, Arch-biſhops, 5; ,. third. 


Abbots, Deans, Prebend-:, Religious Hermites, &c. but the third to have ſignifica- 
tion of ordinary Prieſts, or thoſe that have not attained to that heighth of dignity, 
&c. alſo any man of what calling ſoever that is religiouſly inclined. 

Wherefore if thou wouldeſt 'know a fit time whereby thy inclination may be fur- 
thered in thy devotion, and thou the better able to continue therein ; fortifie the a- 
ſcendent and its Lord, the oor and its diſpoſitor, the Lord of the third, and third 
it ſelf, and 7piter who is a general ſignificator of Religion and good inclinations, 
alſo the Sx, and if poſsible, let the Luminaries be in the houſes of 7apiter, and ei- 
ther Sagittary or Piſces aſcending, &Cc. 

Andif thou wouldſt be an exquiſite and cunning ſearcher in Divine matters ; for- 
tifie Mercury, and make the aforeſaid fignificators behold each other with a good 
Aſpe, and each others houſes or the Planets in whoſe houſes they are located 
and this will alſo ſerve in any other buſineſs whatſoever muratis mutanar ; but if 
canit not obſerve all this, follow as much'thereof as you can poſsibly, the more 
the better. | 


XN ote. 


4 "Wm CY” 


14-2 Rules for Eletting Lib.z. 


SehhetiepetieSeeeeeieeeieSSSepebeheSeieieteets; SefeeeeHebeebebeeleteeieueteeeh 


SECTION V. 


Containing Rules of Elettions , appertaining to the 
fourth Houſe. 


CHaP. I. 
Of buildings Houſes. 


Aſcendent and cuſp.of the Aſcendent it ſelf, the 47o0n and its diſpoſiror, and 
the Planet to which ſhe is joyned by body or Aſpect ; alſo the fourth houſe 
and its Lord, the ſecond and its Lord, and the tenth and its Lord, and ſo much the 
rather if you intend the houſe to be high ; and in fuch a caſe be ſure your ſignifica- 
tors be not under the earth , for that cauſeth {low progreſs in the fabrick,. and that it 
ſhall never be brought to that heighth and ſhape it was firſt intended to be of; yet it 
the 1700x be in the fifth or.third, benevolently aſpecting any ſignificator,or a fortune 
above the earth, it hindreth not much : place alſo Part of Forture in an angle,and for- 
tifie it and its Diſpoſitor, and place Dragons Tail 1n the tweltth ; fortitie alfo AMer- 
cury andits Lord, and let not Mars behold theſe ſignificators which have been 
named,neither let him have any power when thou beginneit thy work ; bur if it fall out 
ſo that thou canſt not help it, but that he will have ſome power in thy figure , place 
Yenws tortunate in the place of Mars, or more plainly, let YVenns have great power 
and drgnity in the degree and ſign wherein Aars 1s located, and let her be in a Sex- 
tile or Trine of him :- Let Satury allo be in no configuration of Yerns, as near asyou 
can, and make the cor increafing in light and motion and joyned to 7wpiter ; for 
: this cauſeth the fabrick to be beauritull and fair, and have a ſpecial care the Moon be 
Note. not with Saturn or Dragons tail, or Saturn inthe Aſcendent or fourth , for this will 
impedite the work aud cauſe delays therein,and perhaps hinder the finiſhing thereof ; 
and if it be finiſhed, yer perhaps it will ſtand long empty ; and if inhabited, yer will 
the inhabitants finde no good therein, but much vexation , troubles, fears , infirmi- 
ties and many tribulations, and the fabrick ſhall ſoon be ſubje& to decay and fall down; 
and if the Affliction be by :Aars, and the Aſcendent be a f1gn of ſhort aſcentions, 
it cauſeth fires therein ; wherefore let (in ſuch a poſiture) the A1-0n be increaſing 
The Landlord in light and motion, and the Lord of the houſe of the 2700 in aſpet therewith, 
(1211 nor inha» and the Lord of the Aſccndent beholding the Afcendent, and theſe free from all im- 
bir the heuſe peditions ; for if they behold not their own houſe, the Landlord of the Fabrick ſhall 
bulls not live therein. 
Let Dragons tail be by no means in the Aſcendent, ſecond or fourth, but eſpecially 
inthe ſecond ; for it cauſeth profuſeneſs, but you way ſafely place Dragons head 1n 
any of thoſe places, &c. 
But if all theſe thou canſt not poſsibly at thy time place, according as thou halt 
heard 3 yet fortifie the Aſcendent and its Lord,the 17o0x alſo, the ſecond and fourth, 
and their Lords, or atleaſt the ſecond, and let the oo; be in good configuration, 0! 
C 07; unti1c4 


| ets therefore at the beginning of thy work to fortific the Lord of the 


Lib.3, Al manner of Works. 


Conjunttion with 7upiter , and if poſſible let Zwpiter bein the ſecond; fortifie alſo the 
Planet that hath exaltation in that ſign wherein the 4007 is, if you can; however 
fortifie as many as may be, if not all, and efpecially your chiefeſt ſignificators, 


CRAP. I4 
Of Building of ( aitles and Cities. 


now we know at what time it will be moſt advantagious to build Caſtles and 

Cities ; know then that in ſuch a work you mult fortifie the Aſcendent and 
its Lord ; alſo the 44o0z and the Lord of the ſign ſheisin, and Part of Fortune and 
its Lord, and place in the Aſcendent at time of your firlt beginning to build ſome 
fixed Stars of the nature of 7=piter, Sol, Venns, Mercnry or Saturn if he be well 
placed ; for that ſignifies the durability and continuance of the Caſtle or City ; or 
ſuch ſtars as are of the nature of the Aſoo or Lord of the Aſcendent. Fw note 
here, that although in building of houſes we refuſe the aſliſtance of Sartwrn , yet in 
Caſtles and Cities he tsnotto be rejected; for Haly ſaith, 1» adrficatione Civitatum, 
fac Saturnum habere firmam porticnem in medio (, «li, & in aſcendente in principio fun- 
damenti Civitatis. 'n building of Cities, let Satwry have firm power or authority in 
the mid-heaven, and in the Aſcendent at the time of the foundation of the City , or 
when the foundation 15 laid ; let the Aſcendent alſo, if you can, be one of the Loalls 
of Jupiter; butif you cannot, however let it be free from the Configurations of 
Mars ; let Mars allo be in no aſpect or bodily preſence of, or with the Afoon , or 
the Aſcendent or the Lord of the term of the Aſcendent, or Lord of the hour at the 
laying of the foundation or the firſt ſtone towards it ; let alſo the Lord of the de- 
gree of the Aſcendent be fortunate, direct and ſwift in motion, and the Lord of the 
Aſcendent in his exaltation or joy no ways afflicted or retrograde z and the Vn in a 
ſign of right Aſcentions , alſo P.rr of Fortune and its Lord in fortunate houſes. and 


Y Ou have heard already the time of eleRting the building of houſes; it reſteth 


143 


Note. 


lovingly beheld by the A/700n; for by the ſtrength of Part of Fortune, and its Diſ- The Genifice 


poſitor and the aſpect of the 47-02 thereunto, is the fertility, the goods and riches tors of the for- 


of the Inhabitants, the profit and what ever elſe there is of good in the City known *9n* 2nd good 


and judged. 


Let not 4fars by any means behold Part of Fortune, for it cauſeth ſcarcity and 
poverty ; and fortifie Satzrn as much as you can; for when he hath power in the 
mid-heaven or Aſcendent as hath been ſaid, and in good aſpect of 7wpirer,it denoteth 
the City ſhall contiuue for a long time, and that there ſhall be an innumerable mul- 
titude of Inhabitants therein, who ſhall live in peace and concord with each other, 
and that it ſhall not be depopulated. | 

But the fertility of the City is chiefly known from the poſition of 7zpiter, and the 
Sun and the fo9n, &c. but remember, that you debilitate AZavs in all foundations 
of Cities ; let him not by any means have any configuration with the Lord of the 
place of the foundation, or indeed with any fignificator ; for if he have ought to 
do in the figure at the time you begin your work, it fignifiech much miſchief and im- 
pediment to the Inhabitants, and that - ſhall be invironed and ſurrounded with 
miſchiefs. Place therefore "Mars in a cadent houſe, very weak and impedited;other- 
wiſe he will be cauſe of much miſchief, diſcord and extortion amongſt the Citizens ; 
but they ſhall on the contrary aſſuredly be free from theſe evils, if /#piter be for- 
tunately placed and elevated above /1ar-; alſo the Luminaries and Parr of Fortune, 
but eſpecially the 4-07, above all vour f1gnificators, ought to be well placed ; for 
by how much the ſtronger ſhe is and treer from impediment, will the fortune and good 


ſucceſs of the City and Inhabitants thereof be, &c. 
Further 


in any City, 


Note. 


Note. 


Rules for Elefing Lib.z. 

Further krow that in laying the foundation of Cities, it will be moſt advantagi- 
ous if the M4con be free from misfortunes, and neither in Conjunttion , Oppoſition, or 
combuſtion of the $», or in via Combuſta, void of courſe, or in meridional Lati- 
tude deſcending ; in the latter degrees of a ſign, or inthe beginning of a ſign, in her 
fall, or the Lord of the houſe in which ſhe is nor beholding it,or in the ſixth or twelfth 
houſes, or with Dragons head or Dragons rail: but let her be increaſing in light and 
motion, ard have Septentrional latitude aſcending, in her exaltation, or exaltation of 
Twpiter, and [upiter or Venus direR andin an angle with her, but chiefly in the aſcen. 
dent, or mid-heaven. 

It advantageth _ alſo, if the Aſcendent and the oor be inearthy ſigns,and 
chiefly Tarn: and Virgo; allo in Capricorn when ſhe is placed with /upiter inthe A- 
ſcendent, andthe light of the time in the mid-heaven for this ſignifies the City 
ſhall continue a long time, and the Inhabitants thereof ſhall profit therein and have 
acoodend; alſoit the Aſcendent be a common ſign, it ſignifieth there ſhall be ma- 
ny Inhabitants and multiplicity of ſtrangers and ſeveral forts of people , eſpecially if 
many Planets behold the Aſcendent and the Aooy. 

Know alſo that in building or laying the foundation of Cities , if Satwrs be joyn- 

ed with Dragozs tail, there ſhall be much miſchief and trouble to old men and fer- 
vantsin that City. If /uprter be joyned with Dragons tail, much miſchief will be inci- 
dent to the Nobles of the City or the Aldermen, &c. If Mars, there will be evil by 
fire, diſcord and debate, and perhaps the Magazine will be blown-up often, or be in 
danger thereof, or the CA411:5a will be damnified. If the 4», evil is threatned to 
the chief Ruler of the City or Mayor. If Yerws, it will tall on the Women of the 
City. If Mercenary be joyned with Dragons tail, there ſhall be much deceit and 
many lyes, and cozening deceitfull tricks uſed. If the Afoon, the common ſort of 
people ſhall be afflicted. So on the contrary judge the good ſucceſs of thoſe ſignified 
by thoſe Planets free from impediment, andin a tortified condition, at the time you 
Jaid the firſt ſtone of your foundation; if the Planets are all ſtrong, judge fortune 
and good ſuccels in general, &c. 
' To know the Moreover know, that the Aſcendent of a City hath ſignification of the life of the 
fignification of Tnhabitants : the ſecond houſe of its riches, ſtrength and power : the third, of the 
Fo bra bo Laws thereof ; the fourth, of the end of the Inhabitants cauſes, as alſo the end of 
dent ro, or in Te City, and the ſecret places therein, as hidden treaſures and the like ; the fifth, of 
any City. and the children of the Inhabitants: the ſixth, of the ſervants and infirmities and mala- 
how ro judge dies incident to the inhabitants ; the ſeventh, of the Marriages of the Citizens ; the 
— eighth, of their great houſes ; the ninth, of their manners, cuttoms and Voyages : the 
tenth, their habitations, Maſterie and occupations, alſo their honour, power and dig- 
nity ; the eleventh, their friends and afliftants ; the twelfth, their great Catrel, Plots, 
and ſecret Enemies, alſo impriſonments and poverty. 

So that from hence you may judge methodically, and particularly of every parti- 
cular quality of any City ; forin what houſes you finde the Malevolents, and ſuch 
houſes as you ſee are afflicted and impedited , you may judge the ill ſucceſs and miſ- 
fortune (according to the ſtrength of your aflifting Planets) to thoſe things ſigni- 
fied by the houſe afflicted and impedited, &c. So likewiſe of the good ſtate and con- 
dition of thoſe things ſignified by thoſe houſes you finde aflitted by the Benevolents 
and well fortified. 

When Sarzrn is in any of the wg alone,and not aſ-iſted by the Fortunes, it ſ1g- 
nifies delays and ſlowneſs in thoſe things ſignified by the angle he is in. and in the 
actions and undertakings of the Citizens in general ; if Cars be there he denotes 
many miſchiefs, dammages, robberies, and corrupt or over hot ayr. 

But if at the beginning of the building, or laying of a Cities foundation, h and Y 
behold each other with a good aſpe&, and be in angles and other good places of 
Heaven, ſtrong and well dignified, it denoteth the City ſhall be of long continuance, 
and increaſe in glory and plenty a long time. 

Obſerve mall what I have already fſaid,and it will be needleſs for me longer to in- 


fiſt on this point, Let us therefore proceed. 
CHAP. 


144 


All manner of Warks. 


CHAP. IL. 
Of Building of Churches. 


& E ſball find this EteRion (fince in this our age we build more 
A Serralias then Churches) to be in a manner needleſs, yet ſince by 
& the moſt Learned and well-minded Antients it hath been men- 
> tioned, 1 ſhall for the benefit of Poſterity, which I hope will 
(&- exceed us in Religion and goodnefs, deliver the Rules of Aﬀtro- 
dF logie in ſuch an operation, &c. 
p Atthetimethen the firſt ſtone of the Foundation is laid let 
> CRP VEE the Afcendent be fortunate, as alſoits Lord , the Xſvon and its 
Lord, the Part of Fortune and its Lord , the ninth houſe and its Lord, the Planets 
in any of theſe Places, alſo the Planet in configuration with the Aſoon, and let Zupi- 
zer be in the Aſcendent, and if poſſible in Sagizrary or Piſces, or if you cannot do 
ſo, let him be in Sext:i/e or Trine of the Aſcendent, eſpecially in Trine , and out of 
his own houſes, and good places of Heaven : but let the Lord of the Exaltation of 
the Aſcendent be well placed, the tenth and its Lord , the ninth and its Lord , the 
Moon and its Diſpoſitor; and 7»piter, if you cannot obſerve all the reſt,&c. | 


| — ———— 


CHAP. IV. 
Of Building or Erefting of Mills. 


Libra, or the latter part of Virgo, and by no means et her be in Cancer or Ca- 

pricorn, bur inthe aforeſaid ſigns, as alſo the Lord of the Aſcendent,or in Sex- 
zile and Trine thereunto; free from the Malevolent AſpeRs of the Infortunes : Qb. 
ſerve alſo this time in beginning any work belonging to Mills, &c. 


N building of Mills be ſure you place the Afoon in »Hries inthe Aſcendent ot 


5 2% Us + 


Of pulling down or deſtroying of Houſes, or any Fabrick whatſoever. 


time to pull down what hath been built (there being atime for all things under 

& 4 the Sun) having given you the time of building, it ou know alſo the 

time of pulling down whar hath been þuilt ; for there is nothing ſublunary permanent, 
or that is not ſubject both to change and deftryRion, &c. OE | | 

Haly ſaith , when you would pull down or ſpoil any building , place the 

ſignificators contrary to what you have in building, - Es, = 

 Putthe Moonin a fiery ſign, and its Lord ; _—_ Aſcendent alſo be a fiery ſign, 

| A 


[ Ike as the wiſeſt of Mortals very well once ſaid, There «4 time to build, and a 


14.6 Rules for Eletting - Lib:3. 


and the Lord thereof ina fiery ſign or an atry: but Athabarnsa learned Author 
faich, let the Aſcendent be a fign of right Aſcentions, and the Lord thereof Occi- 
dental, flow in motion, going alſo to a ſign in which he is afflicted in Fall or Detri- 
ment,let him alſo be Retrograde, and falling from an angle ; and let alſo the Ao0y be 
decreaſing in light and motion, cadent from angles, and joyned to Planets very weak 
and unfortunate, and if poſlible, let her be in Scorpio, or Capricorn, and under the 
earth, or in contiguration with a Planet under the Earth, Meridional deſcending,and 
joyned to retrograde Planets, and let her be inthe laſt Square with the Sz» : Let the 
Lord of the fourth, and ſign thereof be weak and afflicted ; as alſo all the other 
ſignificators, and the Planetsto whom they are joyned or in Aſpect with ; but chiefly 
in this work debilitate 2Zars, if you cannot all what you have heard ; for as he is 
againſt building, ſo is he alſo againſt pulling down whar is built. 

Bur if it be Þ that you care not much whether the deſtroyed place or houſe be re- 
built or no, let the A1oon be ſeparated from the Malevolents, and joyned to the For- 
tunes or in reception of them, and this will cauſe the Fabrick ſo deſtroyed to be the 


ealer rebuilt, if ever taken in hand. 


of & * "a 


Containing rules of Elefions in buying of Land , Houſes or He- 


ritages. 


| Ook in every EleCtion or Work, you have a ſpecial care you exactly know 
The _— which are your true fignificators ; wherefore in this matter the Aſcendent, its 
——_—_ Lord, and Planet from whom the Hoon laſt ſeparated, are the true ſigniti- 


cators of the Buyer. 

Of the Selle. The Lord of the ſeventh houſe, and the ſeventh houſe it ſelf, and the Planet the 
ſoon applies to, of the Selter ; Alſo the Seeds and Plants ſown or growing on the 
cround. | | 

” The fourth houſe, its Lord, and Planets therein placed, and the ſoon are ſignifi- 
cators of the houfe land or heritage to be bought and ſold. 


The price of The tenth, the Lord thereof, and Planets therein located, ſignifie the price, viz, 
the land or whether it will be cheap or dear; it ſignifyeth alſo the wood or timber on the ground. 
houſe. Having thus rightly underſtood the ground of your Work, you will be the better 


able to go through with the ſame ; wherefore then in buying or purchaſing houſes, 
land and heritages, fortifie chiefly the fourth Houſe ahd Lord thereof ; alſo the 41o0n 
and its Niſpoſitor and Part of Fortune,and its Lord and thoſe Planets therein placed, 
ſet them be no wiſe impedited,or Retrograde in Fall or Detriment,or in any Aſpect of 
the Maleyolents, eſpecially of ars,for theſe cauſe the houſe or land ſo purchaſed to 
be ſoon loſt, and of no continuance with your Poſterity. 
Thar the Land But in making your Bargain, or that your Bargain may be good and to your ad- 
_—_ - rags vantage , alſo that you may aſluredly have the Land or thing to be purchaſed, if you 
ET +n4 2; Pleaſe; fortifie the Aſcendent, its Lord, the Planer from whom the 2400» lait ſepa- 
at 2200d rate, Tared, alſo rhe Moon her ſelf, andÞher Diſpoſitor ; the fourth, irs Lord and Pla- 
or to his ad- Nets therein, and Part of Fortune and its Diſpoſitor, alſo place the Moon in Can- 
vantage. ter or Tawurns, if poſſible, and let her behold the Lord of the Aſcendent or fign a- 
ſcending with a Sexr:i/e or Trive, and bein good houſes of Heaven, and the Lord of 
the ſeventh applying to the Lord of the Aſcendent, or diſpoſed of by the Lord of 
the Aſcendent or in reception therewith ; let the fourth houſe alſo be in Taurxr, Leo, 


or Aquaries, and the Lord of the Angles Oriental and free from combuttion. 


Let 


8, 


Lib.3. All manner of Works. 147 

Let alſo the Fortunes (in purchaſing Lands or Heritages ) have chief power _ 
in the Angles , if not in all the Angles, yet in the firſt and fourth; and in the 
other two, place the Luminaries beholding the Aſcendent and fourth or one of them 
eſpecially the Aicendent, with a Sextile or Trine; and fee that the Lords of the 
Angles be not Retrograde, nor a Retrograde Planet placedin any of them; nor in 
the eleventh, or ninth, nor the Lord of the fourth of a fiery nature, nor any of that 
nature therein placed, eſpecially if they are not beheld by the Benevolent Aſpects of 
the Fortunes. 

And note that if the Lord of the fourth be of a yatry nature, or of a cold and 
moiſt temper ; let not Saturn behold him or it, ghar = not the Lord of the tenth be 
unfortunate. 

Fortunes or Planets eſſentially dignified inthe fourth, or the Lord of the fourth, Tye Land is 
and the ſign of the fourth fortunate , denote the goodneſs and pleaſantneſs of the good and plea- 
Land, Houſe or Heritage; alſo that it isa fertile and good ſoil , and the ſeeds alrea- fant. 
dy ſown or to be ſowntherein ſhall be fruittull, &c. 


Such in the ſeventh, and the ſign and the Lord thereof fo diſpoſed ; ſhew the The Plants are 


good and fruit- 


Herbs, Sets and Plants, and the culture thereon are pleaſant, good and fruitful]. Pall 
In the tenth, the Trees are tall , ſound, fruittull, and good, that there is much ; be Timber 
timber, or what is there, is excellent good and commodious. is goo and 


Know alſo that the Infortunes or weak Planets in theſe places cauſe miſchief and high or :2!!- 
impediment, according to the nature of the Planets and the places in which they are; 
therefore look that theſe Angles be free from them , and ef cially the ſeventh 
houſe ; for the Malevolents there, cauſe miſchief, malice and deceit of the Huſ- 
band-men or Tenents of the ground or houſes ; 5ararn therein placed, ſhews their 
cozening and lying ; Mars denotes them lyars, unconſtant and —_—_ 


Cnari VAIL 


Of Buying of Land, or ground for Hwubandry,and not to build on. 


profit and advantage , fortifie the Aſcendent and its Lord, the Mooy and its dil- 
ſitor, Part of Fortune alſo andits Lord, alſo Satwry, andif it be poſſible, put 

* himin Libra, orif the Land'be to be bought in the day time, plate him in Capri- 
corn or Aquaries ; butif in the night, put him in Aries, Leo or Sagitrary,or Libra ; 
lethim alſo be ina 7rine of Jupiter, or ina Sextile with him, or the fourth houſe : 
but by all means ſee that '1/ars behold them not by any Aſpect, and ler the Moon 
be in the increaſe of her light, v:z. in the firſt Sqware or Quarter , beholding Sararn 
with a Sextile or 7rine, or that Planet that beholds him 

And if the ſoon behold 7apirer, it ſignifieth that the land ſhall have labourers Many 1:bou- 
enough, that there ſhall be many fruitfull Trees and Plants, and that the land ſhall be rers inthe land; 
very fertile ; the ſame underſtand if he be in configuration with Satzxry, &c. ic ſhall be fruir. 

But if Satarn cannot be made to be beheld of 7-piter, yet let Yen behold him, __,_ c 
and fortifie the watry ſigns, for the Fortunes ſhall be ſtronger in them then in the 
aery ; let the Moon be inthe tenth in Tawrs, beholding the lord of the Aſcendent 
with a benevolent Aſpect, and let the Afoon and the ſign aſcending be free from all 
manner of misfortune. 


] N buying of Land then not to build on, but for to manure and husband for thy 


V 2 CHAP. 


Rules for Elefting Lib.z. 


Cruaye. VIII. 


Of bringing of Water to a houſe, either by Conduit, Pipe or Pump , 
and of digging of Wells. 


dent, and let it be one of the watry ſigns as alſo its Lord, and let him be 

oriental and free from all manner of Impediment, and in an Angle in his 
own dignities eſſential ; Let £atnrn alſo be oriental and free from misfortune, and in 
the eleveuth houſe, but look that the Aſoon be not in Conjunttion with them. 

Fortify alſo Iupiter , and let there be no Infortune or malevolent planet in the 
tenth houſe, for that it will cauſe rather diſcenſion then aſcenſion of the water. 

Let the C9700» alſo and its diſpoſitor be well dignified, and in the third or fifth 
houſes of Heaven in an Earthy gn ; but if ſhe will needs be above the earth, place 
her in the ninth, tenth, or eleventh ; Alkindus adviſeth to place the Xſvon, Aſcen- 
dent, or any other Angle free from all manner of misfortune or impedition ; and let 
her be in her firſt Quarter, or from her (xjzttien to the firſt Square of the Sun in- 
creaſing in light and motion : But know, that if the AZoon be in any houſe under the 
earth, you muſt fortifie her well,and place her in configuration of a benovolent Pla- 
net in the tenth, if poſsible, or however of one above the earth ; and if ſhe be above 
the earth, let her by no means behold any Planet below the earth, except with recep- 
tion by houſe or exaltation and in eſſential dignities. 

It is neceſſary alſo you have regard to Parr of Fortune and the Lord of the / o»- 
union of the Luminaries preventional or before your Elefion, and fortifie them 
both, eſſentially. | 

But if you cannot obſerve all this, yet as much as you can ; but chiefly fortifie 
the oor, the Lord of the Aſcendent and Mid-heaven, and the cuſ ps thereof, eſpe- 


cially the cuſp of the tenth. 


\ S in the going EleRions, ſo in this it is neceſſary you fortifie the Aſcen- 


CrnayPp. IX. 


Of Tillage, or Manuring of the Ground, 


tifie the Aſcendent, the Lord thereof, and the Acon, and the Pijanet who 

is the Diſpoſitor of the ſoo», ſo that they be received of the Fortunes,or 

| ſuch Planets as are fee from misfortune and well dignified, and that out of Angles, 

or ſuccedent houſes at leaſt. 

But if all this cannot exaGtly be followed, yet let the Aeon be fortunately recei- 

ved, and that out of an angle by a Fortune ; and if poſsible, place thoſe Planers you 

can moſt fortifie, in the ſecond houſe ; alſo fortifie Part of Fortune, and the Lord of 
the preventional Conjunttion of the Luminaries, and place him an angle, &c. 


M Ark the firſt hour thou beginneſt to Till, or Manure the ground ; and for- 


CHAP. 


Lib.3. All manner of Works. 


CHAP. ko 


Of Renting or Hiring, and Letting of Houſes,Land or Fruit, or any 
other thing to be Let or Hired. i 


Cam N this, the Aſcendent and its Lord are Significators of the Hirer or 
0) ; © Farmer ; the ſeventh and its Lord of the Letter or owner of the Houſe, 
2» (6 Land, or thing to be hired or Let ; the mid-heaven, of the price ; the 

\E WW) fourth houſe, of the end of the buſineſs. 
bt Fortific therefore the aſcendent,its Lord, the oor and her diſpoſitor, 
for the atcendent or its Lord being ſo conſtituted , denotes the hirer or farmer to be 
juſt , 600d and honeſt, and willingly and readily performing what he hath promiſed 
co the letter or owner ; It he be weak and aftlicted , as alſo the = of the aſcendenr, 
Judge the contrary ; after the ſame manner underitand of the fignificators of the 

Owner or Letter, 

Wherefore let both ſignificators be well fortified, and the Lord of the ſeventh ap- 
plying to the Lord of the aſcendent if you would have the Owner or Letter be 
reaſonable or deſirous to deal with the Farmer or Hirer at a reaſonable rate, 
and to cauſe hjm to have a good penyworth (as we call it) but if you would 
that it ſucced or fall out to the advantage of the Letter ot Owner , let the Lord 
of the aſcendent apply to the Lord of the ſeventh. 

Some Abe that with good reaſon) have aſsigned the aſcendent, irs Lord 
and planet from whom the ſoon is ſeparating, to ſignify or be figniticators of the 
Farmer or Hirer ; if he be the firſt mover or deſirer to traffique or deal in the Farm- 
ing the Land or houſe ; The ſeventh, the planet Lord thereof, and the planet the 
Moon next applys unto, of the Letter or Owner : But if the Owner be the firit 


moyer of the buſineſs, Judge the contrary. 
And as the fourth houſe hath fignification of the end of the thing , ſo alſo 


hath the /7o00x and the ſign wherein ſhe is. 

Know then that in Ele&ing a time for this buſineſs, it will not be amiſs to for- 
tifie Jupiter and Saturn , beholding each other with a benevolent aſpe& , for this 
cauſeth both the Renter and Letter to be faithful in keeping their promiſes and 
bargain with each other. 

However obſerve in this matter chiefly to fortifie the Aſoon and its diſpoſitor; 
the aſcendent, ſeventh and their Lords, the Lord of the tenth and fourth , as 
alſo their houſes and let the ſigniticators apply to each other as you have heard 
according to the intent and purpoſe of your EleCtion ; and remember that the 
application of the planets the Moon ſeparates from and applyes to, have the ſame 
ſignifications as you have heard the Lords of the ſeventh and aſcendent have. 


” IIARS | TIBRy os 7 any GPS 4. u a 


Rules for Elefting . Lib.z. 


CnaP. AL. 


of Planting of Trees or Graffmg. 


Fixed 6 | | 
we Rn T atirus , {quaries , Leo, Piſces or Virgo, but eſpecially inTaxrss, andin 


and chicfly Sextile or Trine of Venus ; but if it be ſo you can not place herin Tax- 

Taurus. r#* , let her be in Aqzaries for that it is next of theſe abovenamed ſigns to be 
choſen ; And if you can not-place her in Aquaries , let her bein Leo beheld of a 
benevolent planet oat of a watry lign ; let her alſo be well dignified , I mean 
free from the ill aſpe&s of the Malevolents; Let Sarwr» be allo dire&t and in 
the aſcendent, eleventh, fifth, or ſecond, in his own eſſential dignities. 

Andif you cannot place Satwry in the Aſcendent , let Z«piter be there, and in 
Sex tile or 7 rine of Saturn, however let Saturn bein what place of the figure you 

leaſe, he ought to be well aſpected by 7pirer, and let him be in a place where he 
ath eſſenrial dignities. 

But if neither of theſe be placed in the Aſcendent,let the ſoo be there, or in the 
tenth, eleventh, fifth, or third, free from all impediment ; for you muſt have a ſpeci- 
alcare that in all Plantings and Sowings, the Moon be chiefly free from misfortune, 
and not only ſo, but well dignified eſſentially, and upheld by the other Planets, viz, 

| the Fortunes and their benevolent rays. | 
Vote. In all Plantings and Sowings (as you have heard already in buildings)ſee that you 
** debilitate Mars, and hinder him from any power in your work ; let the Aeon alſo be 
in no configuration of him, neither let him be in the Aſcendent,tenth, eleventh, fitth, 
ſecond or third, or in any aſpect to either of them, or their Lords, if poſsible ; for 
he is deſtructive ; let alſo Parr of Fortune, its Diſpoſitor and the Diſpoſitor of the 
450n be free trom his miſchievous beams or aſpe&, good or bad ; and fortifie alſo 
the Lord of the Afcendent, and the Lord of its exaltation. 

Let the Diſpoſitor of the Hoon ( ſaith Alchaiat an ancient Author) behold her 
out of a watry ſign ; and if the Aſcendent be not a fixed ſign, let the 11o0u and Lord 
of the Aſcendent be Oriental of the Sx» and aſcending, or at leaſt one of them ; for 
this cauſeth ſuch Trees or Graffs. as ſhall be then ſer or graffed ro grow quickly and 
be fruitfull ; but if they be aſcending and not oriental , the Trees ſhall ſoon grow, 
but not ſo ſoon fructifie; but this in ſuch Trees as are not fruitfull, or bearing no fruit, 
as Willows, Aſh, Elms, &c. hurteth not much ; but if you place them mal and 
decreaſing in light and number, and deſcending , judge the contrary to what you 
have heard. 

Know moreover, if you cannot make your Aſcendent a fixed ſign, let it be a 
common one, and the ſignificators in common ſigns, and fortifie them, as you have 
already heard, &c. | 

But if thou canſt not diſpoſe and fit all thy ſignificators in ſo full a manner as 
you have already heard, order as many thereof as you can ; and chiefly the Moor, 
who ought to be in T aur, or in the Jaſt part of Sagrtrary , free from all misfor- 
tune or impediment z let her alſo be in Conjmn#1on, if poſſible, of Japiter, or in Sex- 
tile, or Trineof him, and let Jepiter be no wiſe impedited, and be in the aſcendent, 
tenth, eleventh, fifth or fourth, and if poſſible, alſo let Part of Fortune be free from 
the Malevalent coufigurations of the afliting Planets, and in one of the afore- 


ſaid houſes. 


L IF: in this work theſe Rules are to be obſerved. Let the Xoon be in 


Lib.2. All manner of Works. 


CHaPe. XII. 
Of Sowing of Seeds in the ground. 


is expected) thy aſcendent be a movable ſign, and the Lord” thereof in a | 

movable ſign, as alſo the A7oon,and the Lords or Diſpoſitors of the Lord 
of the aſcendent and the Moo, beholding them out of movable ſighs, or if this 
cannot be, common may be choſen ; but fixed by no means. 

Placethe oo» in an earchy or watry ſign of the movable ſigns, viz. Cancer or 
{ apricorn ; but if ſhe be in Aries,let ſome Planet behold her our of ſome watry ſign, 
eſpecially out of Cancer, leaſt the herbs or ſeed dry and wither. 

Let the Lord of the Aſcendent be free from musfortune, and in good aſpe& tothe Thar Sceds 
Aſcendent, and let the Aſcendent be alſo free from the configurations of the male- {9wn may pro- 
volents : Let the Moon alſo be free from the S#» beams, and in eſſential or accider|- ip .--— + 
tal dignities, increaſing in light and motion; for if the Afoon be decreaſing in light _ 
and number or motion and under the Sx» beams, the Seeds ſown will not come to 
good : But know, thatin Sowing of Peaſe, the 4700» mult be decreaſing in light and More 
motion, eſpecially in light, for otherwiſe they will never leave blooming, &c. 

And if the Seeds be ſeeds of Trees, or ſuch asingender or produce Trees, let 
the 4Zoon be in Tanrur, as you have already heard, &c. 


I) O thou be ſure in Sowing of ſeeds ( becauſe it is a thing in which ſpeedy gain 


Crnare. X1Il. 
of ridding Houſes or places from ervil Spirits, 


#T. 4 


Vil ſpirits and the way of commanding them or ridding houſes of them, 

is beſt known to ſuch as practiſe and make uſe thereof, it _ no part of the 

ſtudy of an Aſtrologian ; however ſince often times miſchief is done in ſuch 
ations for want of underſtanding, I thought good here to ſet down a fit time 
for ſuch buſineſſes, it being otherwiſe very dangerous. | 

There have been ſeveral inſtructions for this matter given to us by the Antients'; 
but moſt, and thoſe moſt authentick too, ſay as followeth. 

See that the AZo0y be not in the Aſcendent,and that neither the Aſcendent or the © 
Meon be in Cancer, Leo, Scorpio, or Aquaries, but in ſoine other ſigns, and let the 
M01 ſeparate from the Malevolents, and apply to the Fortunes, &c. 

And thus much concerning EleRions appertaining to the fourth houſe ; it reſteth 
now we proceed according to our promiſe next to the fifth houſe, &c. 


A © Ralles for Eletting Lib.z 


$$ $$$$$ÞÞPPPÞ GPPGPEPIGPEESSEEE Hp bbeohohotopebebe 


Szcrion VI. 


Containing Rules for Eletting a time for any Work, 
or thing appertaining to the fifth Houſe. 


Here are many curious Spirits I khow which will not be a little taken with the 

Elections appertaining to this Houſe, they being indeed all ſo neceſſary in 

the ordinary courſe of a mans life ; I ſhall notin the delivering thereof in 
the leaſt be covetous or deſirous to keep to my felf the leaſt thing that may adva 
poſterity herein ; for fince the cauſe of theſe my undertakings was for the benefit and 
inſtruction of the illiterate in theſe matters , I ſhall be free and liberal therein ac- 
cording to that ſmall Talent of knowledge God hath given me ; wherefore fince the 
Setting of childrenis the chiefeſt thing appertaining to this buuſe, I will begin with ir. 


CHAP. I. 
Shewing a fit time for getting of Boys or Girls. 
H Ave regard firſt to the ſign aſcending, the ſign of the fifth, the Lords there- 


To ingender a of, and the Mooy andits Diſpoſitor that they be in Maſculine ſigns, and ler 
ve "ay | the Moon be free from impediment, as alſo the Lords of the Afcendent and 


the fifth, and the Diſpoſitor of the Moos ; this for boys. 
| But in getting of Girls, let the aforeſaid ſignificators and places be in feminine 
Igns. | 
AB oy s cu Wd if you cannot obſerve all this, let your ſignificators be(the m:7 part of them) 
ceived. maſculine for a Boy, and ſo the contrary for a Girl ; bur if the ſignificators be equal, 
A Gil, you muſthave regard to the Lord of the bour. and the Planetto whom the Moor 
©  applies,and judge by the major part, viz. if moſt Maſculine Planets, a Male may be 
, expected ; if feminine, a female ; bur if it ſo happen that yet notwithſtanding the 
$ fipmficators axc-equal, viz. that there is the ſame equal number of maſculine Planets 
An Hermo- and 6gn$that there is feminine, the conceived Infant will be an Hermophrodite ; orif 
phrodire, the roo, the fifth and Aſcendeur, bein ſigns of double bodies, perbaps there will be 
Twins, Twins coneezved. | 
But moreover know, that in rung a time for petting of Men-children it is ne- 
ceſſary you place a fixed ſignin the Aſcendent and the reſt of the Angles, *alſo the 
Fortunes free from all impediment or affliction, let the Aſcendent alſo be a maſculine 
ſign, and a ſign of right Aſcenſions free from the malevolent Aſpets of the Infor- 
tunes; but ſee that there be in no ways an Infortune in an angle or a Feminine Planet, 
and letthe Lord of the Aſcendent be fortunate, bothinthe ſeventh, eighth, ninth and 
tenth moneths after the Conception, for that ſometimes the Birth falls out in theſe 
moneths as well as in the ninth ; Letthe Luminaries alſo be fortunate or free from im- 
pediment, and let the Moon bein Sexrile or Trine of the Sun. 
Conteption is Chiefly have reſpe& to 9 and the » thatthey be eſſentially dignified, or art leaſt 


kindred. free from misfortune ; for if 2 be afflited and weak , the place of Conception « 
Iv the 


To get boys. 


q AX R\ aha ow 


Lib.z,  e< All mannerof VVorks. 
the receptacle for the ſeed will be deficient and weak to perform its office; and if 
the Aſoon be impedited and weak, it debilitates theſeed : Some of 'the Ancients al- 
ſo' have adviſed that this ſhould be done in odde or uneven hours, as are che firſt, 
third, fifth, ſeventh, ninth and eleventh, for 'the getting of Boys, they being ac- 
counted maſculine hours ; bur for a Girl in even, as te ſecond, fourth, ſixth, 
eighth, tenth, and twelfth, they being feminine. 


Let your Aſcendent be Libra, and place the Moop therein, and Cancer on the To cauſe con- 
tenth, being a fruitful ſign ; but place the reſt of the Signiticators in maſculine ſigns, *ption, 


and this cauſegh conception, and that of a Male childe ; but it is to be underſtood 
then, that the woman be ſound in health and nature, and of capacity for ſuch mat- 
ters : Your Significators in feminine ſigns cauſe a Girl. 

All theſe Rules it may be are too tedious, or difficult to obſerve, yet at leaſt ar 
the time of copulation , ler the Aſcendent and the Moon be ttrong, and Zapiter 
upon the culp of the mid-heaven fortunate ; for this Tignifieth the woman ſhall 
conceive at the firſt bout , except ſhe be a maid before, and then the firſt goes to 
another uſe bur at the ſecond it will nor fail, provided the party be capable and 
ſufficient in ſuch anexerciſe : If your Aſcendent be a Maſculine ſign, and the 149% 
and 7«piter in maſculine figns, or the major part, it is a Boy that is conceived; if 
feminine,a Girl. | | | 

Bur if thou canſt not place 7»pitey on the cuſp of the tenth, let him be on the 
- cuſp of the eleventh, or fifth, or in ſuch a degree as that he may behold the Afcens 
dent its Lord, or the foo» with a Sexril, or Trine , or place the. Moon or Lord 
of che Aſcendent in the fifth, within five degrees of the cuſp thereof im good AſpeRt 
to the Aſcendent, for this ſignifieth the woman then made much of ſhall con- 
ceive, 


C aa vp, Il. 
Of Delivering a dead ( bilde. 


dQ Arely, yet ſometimes doth it happen, that the childe dyes in 
KF the mothers womb, which without ſpeedy help will atfo in- 
R&D danger the life of the mother: it is neceſſary therefore before 
FR > we goany further, toelect you a fit time for applying reme- 
FL dies for this accident : I might here ſer ſome remedies down, 

®\E bur I conceive it belonging no wiſe to our work in hand, it will 
YCXR) S bein a manner needleſs; and I am confident of ſmall benefic 
UF SINE co the Students in ſuch matters, for that they will never be ac- 
quaiced with any fuch thing; little expeRing to finde fuch matters in a diſcourſe 
of this nature, i 


ough TI muſt confeſs to all parts of Phyfick this Artis a preat Aﬀtol y uſe- 


help,and ought eſpecially therefore to be ſtudied by the Students of Phyfick;* other- ful for all che 
wiſe it is impoflible for them ro be throughly maſters of their Art : Therefore, pts of Phy» 


I fay, fince in the Vohumns of the learned in Phyfick, ſuch remedies are frequent! 
to be rancountred, I ſhalll here paſs it by, and ſhew you only a fit and conveni 


ICK, 
'Y * Look Chap. 
” 1.5e&4.6.0f 


ent time accordins to the influence of the ſuperiours to apply your reme- my Luz Yeri- 


d pl GC. l 
Wherefore then ſee that you apply your medicine when the Aſtendent is 'a 
teminine fign of right aſcentions, and let the coy be decreafing infight and de- 
ſcending in;your ſchems viz. ar the leaſt fix or eight degrees paſt the mid-heaven,and 
declining towards the ſeventh, and let her be in Sext«/ or Tr1e, if poſiible of the for- 
tunes, whether ſhe be received or no : or if ſhe be beheld of AZars by theſe Af] _ 
| | X | 


JI 


tat 4. 


Jo expel the 
dead childe. 


154. Rules for Elefling Lib. 3. 
; fo it be with reception it advantageth ; neither is it amiſs, if it be not with recepti- 
| on, provided the Hoon be in a feminine ſign , and the Aſcendant in a feminine 
ſign of right aſcentions, as hath been ſaid : Moreover, have a ipecial care that the 
Aſcendent, its Lord, the Xooy, and its Diſpoſitor benot in tigns of oblique aſcen- 
tions ; place alfo, it poſlible, the Lord of the Aſcendent, and the Diſpoſitor of 
the Moon declining towards the ſeventh, as you have heard of the 4400; or be. 
holding ſome Planets in that part of heaven with reception. 


—_—_—_ > Canes aroereg 


Boone tr re 


Cunak Mk 


Of Chriſtening or ( ircumciſing of Children. 


Rabiaxs and others have delivered rules for electing ſuch a time, eſpecially 
A for that oftentimes through negligence or 1gnorance the childe hath been 
almoſt ſpoil'd, in that the place ſometimes did gangreen or feſter, 8c. but 
ſince we have that Ceremony in no uſe, it being abohſhed by the death of our 
Lord] x $4 5s, it may ſeem here to be needleſs; but ſince the rules may ( if ob- 
ſerved) tend to ſome other benefit; and for that I would not willingly omit any 
thing that might be beneficial ro poſterity in theſe my weak endeavors, 1 thought 

I would however ſpare one ſide of Paper for them, 
Of Circum- See then that Yeyws be exalted above Mars, and applying to the benevolent 
cifion, Aſpect of Japiter ; alſolet the Aſcendent, its Lord and Yenws, and the ©Ioon be 
free from the Aſpect of Satwrn , for that he cauſerh putrefication and corruption 
to the generating of a Gangreen, and perhaps the indangerirg of the life of the 

childe. 

Let the Lord of the Aſcendent alſo be aſcending in latitude, and the oor and 
its Diſpoſitor in ſeptentrional ſigns and in ſuccedent houſes of heaven, and look 
that the ſoon be not in Scorpio, nor Mars in the Aﬀcendent or any other 
Angle. ; | 

| Theſe rules might ſervealſo for Chriſtening ; but ſince the Ancients were not 

The —_ ſo well acquainted with the uſe of Chriſtening as we in this latter age, they have 
—_— been herein ſomewhart deficient, and have not delivered the rules of Aftrology there- 
uſing chriſten- ON aSis requiſite ; many, nay moſt of them, wholly omitting it ; wherefore(though 
ings, were de- Aſtrology medleth not with Divine matters, nor cauſeth or procureth grace (this 
ficient in thole Ceremony being a ſign and ſeat of our admittance into the Church of Chri/t, and 
cleions. number ofthe EleR, if we live accordingly) yet they aR and incline, though not 

; compel or force) I will give you here ſome directions concerning this matter. 

Of Chriſten. Know then that your Aſcendent, and its Lord, the con alſo and its Diſpo- 
hc fitor, ought to be Cmance , and if poſſible, let the Aſcendent be a fixed ſign, and 
Zepiter herein well dignified, or in the ninth, or in good configuration with the 

Planets therein, or with the cuſps of thoſe. houſes : and let the Planets either in the 

Aſcendent or ninth be fortunes, or at the leaſt well dignifed ; but let Sarwrn and 

Mars be in no wiſe either therein placed , or in configuration with them, or their 

Lords, or the Planets therein placed ; and let the ſign of the ninth be fortunate, 

as alſoits Lord, and place Vers and the 00» ina good Aﬀpet of Jupiter; andit 

poſlible, with reception, or let them be allin ecnjentiing in the ninth or aſcendent. 


Burt if you cannot fully follow all theſe direftions. yet let the aſcendent, the ninth 
houſe, the Planets therein poſited, the Aon, its Diſpoſitor, and the Lords of the 
Aſcendent and ninth, be well dignified, and in Sextil or Trine of Jupiter or Mercury 

And thus much of Chriſtenings and Circumcifions; let us now proceed to elect- 
ing a fittime for giving of Gifts or Preſents. 


CHaP, 


Lib. 3. All manner of Works. 


Cn ar, 


of giwing and receiving of Gifts or Preſents. 


fit time for giving and receiving of Gifts or Preſents: We have here al- 

ready treated of ſome Ele&ions which might ſeem needleſs ; bur truly this 
of all we have hitherto mentiored, I may fay is moſt properly to be termed ſuper- 
fluous or needleſs , Hoſpitality and Charity being things ſo different ro the rempers 
and natures of moſt men of this age we live in : Bur ſince we write not barely to this 
age, bur alſo to Poſterity, 1 ſhall ſoon reſolve upon the butineſs ; for ſince I have 
better hopes of their goodneſs, 1 ſhall by no means omit this Election , bur deliver 
plainly the words of the moſt approved Authors hereon. . | 

Know then fi>ſt, in receiving of Gifts you are to fortifie the Aſcendent, the ſecond That the gife 
Houſe and their Lords , alſo the £07 and its diſpolitor , for this cauſeth gain to may prove ad- 
come unto thee by this Gift or Preſent; I mean it ſhall be advantageous to the re- Yantageous, 
ceiver, and he ſhall thereby much benefic hunſelt. 

Bur to make this the more certain, you mult fortifie Part of Fortane and its Lord , For confirma- 
viz. the Planet who is diſpoſer thereof, which 1s more plainly that Planet that is Lord tion hereof. 
of the ſign wherein Part of Fortune is, fortifie allo /zpiter , for that he is a general 
ſignificator of wealth and riches: this confirmeth the former rule , and maketh ir 
the more certain. 2 | 

But know that in ſending of Preſents or Gifts you are to fortifie the tifth Houſe 5 (.ngjne 

| = ys ng of 
and itsLord , as allo Jwpiter ; and ler lars both in receiving and giving be in no preſencs, 
configuration with the Aſcendent, the ſecond, their Lords, the oor , its diſpoſitor , 
Part of Fortune, its Lord, Part of Subſtance, {upiter, the fifth Houſe or theit Lords ; 
 andif poſlible let the Aſcendent and fifth Houſe be in common ſigns ; and know that 
Sagittary and Piſces are to be preferred before Gemini or Virgo , yer Virgo is before 
Gemini ; You muſt underitand this is meant of the firit fifteen degrees of Sagitrary. 

You are not onely to beware of Mars, but alſo of Saturn, that he be not either 
bodily preſent or in configuration with the Coon, the Aſcendent or its Lord, Part of 
Fortune, Part of Subſtance, or any of the aforeſaid ſignificators or places without re- 

_ - and let the Lord of the Aſcendent be elevated above the Lord of the 
ſeventh. 

But if thou canſt not obſerve all this, fortifie the TAHoon, Twpiter and Lord of the Nota bens. 
ſecond Houſe and the cuſpe thereof in receiving Preſents, Is 

. In giving, the Xeon, the fifth, its Lord , /npiter and Part of Fortune and its dif- 
poſitor. And thus much for this. 


M Y intentions are now to treat of the rules of the Ancients for electing a 


Sa 5; WM 


Containing Rules for electing a time for putting on of Apparel. 


Ven in this Chapter are we now to ſhew you the rules of the Learned in for- 

mer ages in electing a time proper thereunto, I ſhall (as in all the other) give 

you the marrow or quinteſſence of their Writings; a Volume five times as 

!arge as 15 this, is not able to contain them all verbatim ; bat in what one is deficient, 
N 2 | I 


156 


Ireatile. 


Putting on of 


Apparel. 


Note, 


Of putting on 


new Apparel, 


Of feaſting cr 
eating of ſu. 
perfluities. 


Rules for Eletting 


Lib. 3. 


I ſhall help you with another, and ſo with a third , that however thou ſhalt not be to 
ſeek in any EleRtion as well as this, ſo thou beet able ro underſtand the reaſons of the 
rules, otherwiſe thou ſhalt be ſtill ignorant hadſt thou all the V olumes that were ever 
Look Chap.6. penn'd ſince the Creation ; ſomewhat you have heard already of putting on of Ap- 
Sce. 3. of this parel , but not ſo fully as here in this place I intend ; we will begin theretore with it , 
and then in order of what remaineth, and ſo proceed. 


Herein you muſt have regard to the Aſcendent, its Lord, the 2ſoon , the Lord of 
the ſign wherein ſhe is, the fifth Houſe and Lord thereof, and let them be in moveable 


ſigns, and let the Moon if pollible be in «ries, excepting the ſeven degrees after the 
eighth , viz. from the eighth to the end of the fifteenth , and the 22 and 23 degrees 
of the ſame lign ; or let her be in Cancer , excepting the firit fix and lait three de- 
grees thereof, or in the firſt fifteen degrees of Libra , or the tirit. eighteen degrees of 
Virgo , or the firſt nineteen degrees of Sagittary , or the firit rwenry degrees of 


Piſces. 


Fixed ſigns are to be ſhunned in putting on of Apparel , wherefore ſee that none 


of the aforeſaid ſignificators be in them, except the firſt crwenty degrees of 7 aurus 
which may be made uſe of in this buſineſs, it being the Houle of thelefſer fortune and 
exalration of the ©Aſoon ; but Leo of all the fixed figns is to be retuſcd, for it cauſeth 


of t 


—_ 3 therefore inno wiſe let the 2foon: be in Leo, except ſhe be in Sexrile or Trixe 
e Sa» with reception, and then it is.not to be feared ſo much : however Prolomy, 


Centilo. 22. ſaith, Veſtem nec primum indnas , ubi Luna fwerit in Leone collecata; eſt 
autem pejws, i cadem wale affetta fuerit. Idem ait Hermes, Centilo. 82. Put not on 
new Apparel when the Coos isin Lea, anditis fo much the worſe if ſhe be there 


afflicted. 


Yet if all this thou canſt not obſerve , be ſure thou place not the Iſs in the 
Aſcendent or fifth Houſe, neither their Lords in Lev, Scorpio or Capricorn, eſpecially 
Leo, or invia combuſta , and ſee alſothey be free from ail manner of misfortune : or 
place the Zoos or the Sx in the mid-heaven tree from misfortune, and if poſlible in 
L-r28extile or Trine of Inpiter or Venws with reception , and fortifie the tecond Houſe 
and its Lord, &c, If thou warily obſerveſt what hath been ſaid , thou needeſt no 
further inſtructions herein; wherefore let us deſcend to what remains unreſolved, &c. 


* © wu *- - 5 


Of Feaſting or eating of meat. 


due times moderately, and the like , you are to underſtand we mcan or ſignifie 


0 Ince this Election is needleſs in the ordinary courſe of diet, ſuch as eating at 


ſuch eating as is in exceſs, as at Feaſts and ſuch ſuperfiuous vanities, &c. Let us 


obſerve whar follows. 


In this manner of exerciſe you muſt chiefly have reſpec to the place and motion 
of the Moon ; for if ſhe be in Taww applying to Yenw eſpecially by a good 
Aſpe& , you may ſafely eat Beef, either boyled , roaſted, ftewed, or any otherwiſe 


dreſſed. 


Alſo if ſhe be in P:/ces in good configuration of Twpiter, you may eat of Fiſh, either 


freſh or ſalc. 


And if in Libra or eAquaries received , Milk or any thing made therewith, as 
Cuſtards, Fools, and ſuch like Quelk-choſes. 
If in Vxrgo in any malevolent aſpect of Mars, itis not ſafe to eat of Hearbs , a5 
Salads, or roots and ſtalks, as Colly-flowers, Coleworts, Artichokes, Cabbage, Parl- 
nips, Turnips, Carrats, &c. neither of Fruit , as Apricocks, Peaches , or any othet 


Plumbor Fruit, as Cherries, &c 


Bur 


Lib. 3. * All manner of Works. 


But if ſhe apply to the Su» or Mars by a Trive, you may ſafely eat of varieties 
and divers ſorts of Meats, &c. Underſtand the ſame 1t ſhe apply to Veuw. 

If ſhe apply to Satern, have a care of ſtale meats, or ſuch as have been kept long 
io. ſalt. | 

If ſhe be in «Aries or Capricorn , applying to Jupiter , you may eat of variety of 
gelded Catrel, &c. 

But it is no wiſe ſafe to eat of what dyed of it ſelf , if ſhe be in a Sqware of Sarnry . 
or in Conjunttion or Oppeſition of him ; neither is it good to eat Veniſon when ſhe 1s 
in Leo, nor when ſhe applieth to Aars out of Yirge. 

But i& ſhe be in Gemini or the atry triplicity applying to Aerewry, it is not fafe 
to eat any Bird of a hot nature or conſtitution ; and if to Ars, all meats that are ca- 
Iifactive or of a hot quality are alſo to be ſhunned. 

If in Leo applying to Sarwry, itis not ſafe to eat any thing of a cold operation, &c. 
Thus much for eating, 


Cuan VEE 
Of Drinking of Wine and other Drinks. 


ſome drink after it, otherwiſe it will be but a dry one : but ſince perhaps thou 

art a good-fellow, or one that loves thy liquor better then thy meat , 1 intend 
co give thee of the beſt , and that ſuch as comes out of Bacchw his own Rampant Bu- 
cephalus ; it is Nettar and Ambroſe, ſuch as will make the wilkin roar, that will pay 
all debts when money is ſhort, that will make a Beggar an Emperour , and an 
Emperour a Fool; to be ſhort, it will make thee merry when all thy ſpirits are at 
the loweſt ; it is a remedy againſt all diſeaſes, and is good againit the 1imples ;- and 
will make a fat fellow lean the ſooneſt of any thing that is. But I need not ſay any 
more, I believe thou art convinced long ſince of the vertues thereof, if thou art a 
lover of the Beaſt Bacchw ; I think thou deſireſt now rather toraſt it then hear of 
i: ; 1 will not promiſe to make thee drunk therewith, however I will give thee as much 
as will countervail what thou haſt eaten at my Feaſt; but if thou at length goeſt 
away with an hereor] angry ; it isto be noted it is a Scholars Feaſt , not an 


] | Ven now thou haſt been at a Feaſt, and ſince ſo, itis requiſite I give thee alſo 


Epicures, Wherefor 

Take this Cup, andRfiow that if the wine be not good, it isthe fault of thoſe that 
preſſed the grapes; For had oy obſerved this rule I will here give thee , it had been 
much better ; but t6 be ſhort, the receipt is thus. 


157 


Recipe Pſces or T aurws, and put the Afoon therein in configuration of Venus, this A receipe co 
is all, but this I'le warrant thee will make the wine paſling good, and drink pleaſingly make good 


and delightfully ; but mingle not the beams of the Coon with Satar» , for that will 


ſpoyl all the ret of thy Ingrediencies , and will make thy wine crabbiſh and harſh to 
the palate , and no wiſe deleable or pleaſing to the drinker ; and not onely © , but 
very hurtful to the body; avoyd alſo the beams of Mars, for be will make it heady, 
and cauſe the drinkers to quarrel and fall out with each other, and the veſſel you pur 
it in to break or come to ſome miſchance or other ; the beams of J/zpiter or Mey- 
cry would do very well to mingle with the Aooy, as alſo the beams of the Sy», pro- 
vided they be infuſed by a Sext/e or Trine, 

In making of other drinks it is neceſſary you alſo follow the ſame receipt with the 
i:me Ingrediencies, for it will make them both pleaſant and good ; and this is worth 
your learning , when with one receipt you are taught how to make all manner of 
arinks 
Know 


©, 


158 Rules for Elefting Lib. 3. 


That one be KNOW alſo that when you would take off your cups merrily without offence to 

not cfienſive Either your friends or others , let the Aſcendent at thetime you beg:n be fortunate , 

or quarrelſom as alſo the Lord thereof, the Moor and its diſpoſitor , alſo the Lord of the fifth and 

in drink. fignof the fifth , and let them be free from the configurations of 41ar- , and inre- 
ception with the Lord of the ſeventh and eleventh, or with the Lords of thoſe Houſes 
ſignifying the parties you ſhould be merry and civil with, &c. 

Sonow ſince thou haſt had thy fill of good chear and drink, ler me defire your 
pardon that I may go alſo into my element of writing , and then perhaps anon I may 
ſend my boy to you with ſome comfortable odours or unguents. Or if thou haſt ſur- 
fetted, and mayſt thereby prove ſick, I have a remedy for thee a little furthef , which 
I may ſend all under one. | 


SG HAT, VIE 


Of writing of Letters, or any thing elſe of Ingenuity. 


letters, or any from the malevolent Aſpects of the Infortunes ; and if poſtible ler Mercury 
other thing. behold them or either of them with a Sexri/e or Trive, and ler him be well 
- dignified, no wiſe Infortunate or Retrograde , and let himbe beheld of the Moos by 

a Sextile or Trine, and if poſlible with reception. 


Of writing of Y Ou muſt in this matter let the Afcendent and its Lord be fortified and free 


1 


CHAT Hl 
Of making Odoriferons ſnels and unguents. 


þE know fince the fifth Houſe is the Houſe of pleaſure and de- 


OY w light; and fince many men are much taken and delighted in 
ſmels or un-" & ſuch things, this Election doth moſt properly belong to this 
guents. Houſe, 


& Lookthenthat in making of unguents or odoriferous ſmels , 
1\ FN chat you place the Aſcendent and the oor either in Aries, Leo 
EOS. Or Sagittary, and Venws in the Aſcendent; and if ſo, let the 
| 7 WE” Moon be inthe mid-heaven, applying by a benevolent Aſpe to 
Venus ; for this ſignifieth the confection is good , and of a good ſmell , and that he 
that makes it will much delight in it. , 
Bur if you would make ſuffumigations apart, ſee if the ſoon be received of Mars 
or the Sx» ; for if ſo, whatever is then done by the fire ſhall be good. 
Alſo when you make any ſweet ſmels or odours, and the Moon in Gemini applying 
to Mercyry, it ſignifieth that it ſhall be well and neatly performed. 


Lib, J All: manner of Works. 159 


CHAP. X. 
Of ſending Embaſſadors or Meſſengers. 


joyn her therefore by body or Aſpe& to your ſignificator , or Planet ſignifying ding Meſſens 
the party to whom you ſend ; as it to a Father , let her be in Sexr:/e or 7rine of $5 7 Em. 
the Lord of the fourth; ifroa Wife , to the Lord of the ſeventh; ro a Child, to — 
the Lord of the fifth ; to a Brother, to the Lord of the third ; to a Servant, or Fa- 
thers brother, to the Lord of the fixth, for that it is the third fromthe fourth ; to 
the Mothers brother , to the Lord of the twelfth z to the Mother or any great man 
King or Prince, to the Lord of the tenth, &c. So underſtand of any perſon ſignified 
by any Houſe; and if poſlible , make the Planet to whom the Acorn applies receive 
the _ - - leaſt o” Lord of the Aſcendent, &c. 

But further know , that in ſending to a King or great man , the Moon muſt be j ; 
configuration (with reception) of < Sun Or fs ord of thetenth; and tet the Sw and © Kin __ 
the Lord of the tenth, or that of them thar is placed in aſpect of the 44oon , be in the great men. 
Aſcendent, tenth or eleventh ; but if with conveniency thou canſt not ſo place him 
ler him be inthe third, fifth or ninth Houſe ; bur theſe are not ſo powerful or ſo good 
as the aforeſaid places. 5 
- going or ſending to Kings or great men, let not the Moon be in Gemini or Nota- 

3$[CEfs, ' 
Alſo if you ſend or goto Popes, Cardinals, Biſhops, Deans, Prebends, or * 
— to the Church , let the Moox bein Sextile - Trine of [mpiter out ba” = _ _— 
aforeſaid places; and if poſſible with reception or in reception with the Lord of the 
Aſcendent. | — | 

If your buſineſs be with Warriers, as Generals, or any Souldiers whatſoever , un- To Souldlers: 
derſtand the ſame by ar, and let him be accordingly placed, but let not the aſpet 
of the ſoon be from Angles, but ſuccedent Houſes. 

If to Husband-men or ancient men, underſtand the ſame of Satyry. To anclene 

To Women, let her apply to Venwe. | | men and huf- 

To Mercury let the Mooz be joyned or have aſpe&, if you ſend to young pgren of p_—_ Ke 
no alliance or relation to.you ; or to Scriveners , Secretaries or Scholars, &c. but To Scholers 
let Mercury be free from misfortune and impediment ; and underſtand the ſame of Secreraries , * 
the foregoing Planets , if your buſineſs be with ſuch as are ſignified by them. And Scrlyeners ot 
' thus much for the EleRions appertaining to the fifth Houſe, ; ET 


| N_ matters of thjs-nature you muſt know that the 7ſooz is chiefly to be regarded ; Rules for ſeri. 


SECT: 


. © Ai able dr 44>. cube thts fa; alpdiiss 
. F >$9 ” : Ret. , ES Sa atianey > aaa. 
- l ; by \ 
wo 
Fre 


4 T T5 IS 0 by " »: 
a 'Y X 0 
Wl Ln i * ” i obs. 27 tht \ ch 2 ag 
#.') £33 wc - 


Rules for Elefting 


Lib.z. ? 


OpppHSISHISPOEPOPEEP IS EEO PEP PS EOPHOOOGOOOSS 


 Szcrion VII. 
Of Elettions appertaining to the ſixth Houſe. 


——_— 


ee. — 


CHAP. TI. 


Of the true Knowledge of the Criſis or Critical and Judicial 
Days, very uſeful for thoſe that ftudy Pbyfack. 


The errout of Ike as we read inthe holy Writ, The Phyſician is honorable, ſo indeed he is ; 
moſt Phyſici. but being ignorant in his Art, he rendereth himſelf deſpicable and ridicu- 
ans. Jous: and the way to make him perfect is to know NAarTtuRrE, and her ſecrer 


operations, and that by the influence of the Superiors aud Rulers of all Inferiors ; 
vis. The Stars: Ttis not his looking in an Urinal of water, or feeling the pulſe of 
the party, or queſtioning with him how he feeleth himſelf, and in what places of 
his body he is moſt afflicted, that can give a through underſtanding of his malady; the 
water is Meretrsx the pulſe is Falax, the patient himſelf is Ignorans : Theſe, I fay, 
are not ſufficient grounds for him to work on ; and without a _—_ foundation, the 
fabrick is not likely to be well built, or at leaſt to ſtand long; they are indigent and 
inſufficient, and the patient perhaps ſo overcome with torment, or defire of relief, 

that he cannot well detne his own miſery. | 
The cauſe of And finceit is ſo, a Phyſician (or rather a Pretender thereunto (1 may juſtly 
: Gaale Fore call him ) for as Galen and Hippocrates ſay , T hey are rather to be termed fools 
before 2 cure then Phy/icrans ) mult be better verſed in his Art before he can do any thing ; 
beugderiaken for as he is, he can do nothing with certainty: A blinde man may catch a 
bare, bur it is very unhikely : The cauſe of a diſeaſe muſt firft be known before 
it be endeavored to be removed; and the caufe being taken away, the effe& wilf 
ſoon ceaſe : but they are ignorant of the cauſe 3 ergo, not able to perform what 

they undertake. 

And again , the nature and temper of the Patient is to be regarded; and 
this can never . be certainly and throughly diſcerned by looking in his Urine , 
nor by feeling of h1s pulſe : That which cauſeth his Conſtitution to be either 
—_— .FSanguine, Flegmatick , Cholerick or Melancholy, is to be regarded; it is not 
the racked bs any inferiour _ that cauſeth it, it is the influence of the ſuperiours ; erg», Phy- 
to be regard- ſicians ignorant therein, are not able to perform with certainty, any Cure 
ed, or known whatſoever: For what will cure a Flegmatick man of a Feaver , will not a 
alſo. Cholerick; and then the pretended Phyſician ſeeing his Medicine doth not 
work the like operation as formerly, ſuppoſes the malady to be ſomewhat elle, 
and himſelf miſtaken, and falls another way to work, and ſo kills the pa- 
_ tient with a great many Thanks and Gratuities both of Money and Gitts, 
ou m__ for (as the ignorant about him ſuppoſe) doing his endeavour to fave the 
n_ me fick, eſpecially if he can but talk of this rare cure, and that excellent 
remedy he hath formerly given, and preach himſelf up, and others ( a thou- 
ſand times more knowing then himſelf) down , and now and then uſe ſome 
Latin in bis Diſcourſe, and flouriſh it over with hard words.to the ignorant : 
W 


Lib. 3. All manner of JVorks. | 161 
I ſay, he carries it then, whether he fave or kill, and chart with a great deal of 
credit : but of all murtherers, theſe we fee ſeldomelt hang'd, yet none more de- 
ſerving it. | 

Again, the nature and quality of every medicinal thing ought eſpecially to The nature of 
be known, as Herbs, Drugs or Minerals; otherwiſe the pretending Phylician the »' edicine 
doth what he doth not underſtand ; and if we will believe Ga rs x, he telleth _—— 
us, They are onely 'to be known and judged by the ſtars: So allo Fernelius arid ry ©" 
Ficinus, ewo learned Phyſicians contels, allo Hi yrvypocRAaTtES, D AR A- beadmini. 
CEL$SUs, and CoRknxtlius AGR1?PP A, who was Phylician tothe {ired. 
Emperor Charles zhe fifth ; and not onely theſe, but all the more rational of the +. 4porly of 
' Ancient Phyſicians and Studiers of Nature (which were onely Phyſicians indeed) WE hand 
have acknowledged the ſame, whoſe names if I ſhould here record, it would be gue & known 
be too tedious both for my ſelf and thee, and in a manner ſuperfluous or needles by the ſtars. 
in ſo clear a caſe, ſince it- 15 moſt certain, that Hippocrates and Galen , the two 
pillars of the Arr of Phyſick, found out the uſe of Vegetables and their natures, as 
alſo of all their Phyſical things by the Srays, who are the Governors and Diſpo- 
ſers of them all, and cauſes of their ſeveral vertues, according to the ſeveral Con- 
ſtellations they are under. | 

Hippocrates and Galen further ſay, that a Phyſician cannot ſafely give phyſick a PhyGcian 
that is ignorant in the knowledge of the Stars and Superior bodies, not knowing ignor:nt in- 
indeed when to give purges, or vomits, or l2t blood, without much miſchief do- 490g can 
ing, nor in whatquantity ; which ignorance often times indangers the life of the lately ad- 
Patient, when as theſe that know not the influence of the heavenly bodies, give wy _—_ 

3 IC Es 

vomits at ſuch times as cauſe a purge; and purges when they become vomits, 
which in laxative diſeaſes or fluxes prove very dangerous, if not deadly or totally 
deſtructive ; and at other times when the phylick never worketh at all; yet you 
ſhall never finde the ignorant without an excuſe for their raſhnefs ; as when they a —_— 
adminiſter a purge, if it cauſe vomiting , then ſay they, the party is of a weak -—= ghar 
conſtiution, and cannot retain the Phyſick, when byſick is not piven to be re- their ignorance 
rained, itis either to work downwards or upwards immediately , and then the 
next day perhaps (as it hath been often known)gives the patient a ſtronger potion, The danger 2 
and then then the heavens otherwiſe diſpoſed (which they underſtand not) work ED s in 
ſo violently, that nature is both weakned and overcome, which ſhould have been ;« hank: of 
only helped ; and alſothe diſeaſe increaſes, which ſhould have been diminiſhed : and unskilful Phy- 
ſo on the contrary, when a vomit is given at an unfit time, cauſeth purging, then ficians. 
they conclude the patient ſtrong, when perhaps he requires angel oy and is very 
weak; for it is not nature that then worketh, it is an influence of the Superiors that 
orders the matter, which without a skilful Artiſt, you ſee is moſt obnoxtous, which 
cauſed Galen to admoniſh men not to truſt rhemſelves With that Phyſician ( or rather Galens admho- 
Pretender) Which is not skilled in eAſtrology. _ oo 

So likewiſe blood letting if the heavens be not duly obſerved, is of no efficacy ; - ++», Ao 
and ſometimes hinders phlebetomie, which the ignorant Chyrurgion colours with Cleared. 
ſaying, The party is faint-hearted, or hath much wind in his veins, or with ſome 9s in lerring 
ſuch like ridiculous whimſie. | of blood. 

This isnot all ; critical days alſo are known by eAftrologie, and no otherways, Aftrologie, 
without the due knowledge whereof, the Patient ſufferech much by the Phyſicians and ic onely 
applying contrary remedies very dangerous. F might here give you the dif- 'Þ*y<th_the 
courſe of Duret hereon , but that it belongeth not to the work in hand, be- _— 
ing eleftions; yet I ſhall here give you ſome inſtructions how to know the the _ 
true Cri{is, or Critical day, and Judicial days, though it be at this time out of coming by the 
my way, and then proceed to the clearing of what hath been ſaid ; viz. to ſhew 2** Fnowing 
you the rules of the more learned in electing a time for adminiſtring Phyſick and thereof. 
Phlebotomie. 
__, Letusthen (ſince it will not be amiſs) ſtep a little out of our way, and ſay ſome- 
what of the Critical days; when we come into our road again,we will make the more 
haſte to our journeys end. 


The cunning 


Y Learnins 


162 _ | Rules for Elefling Lid3. 


Learning and all good Arts whatſoever, 1 ever greatly deſired ſhould be 
nouriſhed and refined from their drofs, and that knowledge may ſtill increaſe upon 
the earth.; wherefore ſince the underſtanding of this matter conducerh much to 
the skil of the Phyſician, and welfare of the patient, ' as doth the want of it often- 
times through the ignoronce ofthe Phyſician, prove very dangerous to the patient, 
I ſhalldefire thee to obſervewwhat followerk, 

It is generally taken for granted (amongſt the unskilful) that the ſeventh and 
fourtecnth days are Critical, and that theſe are the firſt and ſecond Cris ; but tis 
no wiſe true as to build on, but the true (7iſi is thus known. 

How to know Look at the time of the parties firſt falling ſick, in what ſign, degree and mi- 
the true C775. nute of the Zodiack the Acer is, and when ſhe comes to the Square thereof, 
that is the firſt Cris ; when ſhe comes to the Oppoſition or oppoſite place thereof, 
it is the ſecond Crifis: The next Square is the third Criſs, and the ſame place 
where ſhe was at the firſt falling ſick, is the fourth {+;/es; and ſo go round again. 
To knowthe The judicial daysare the middle between the two Crifis, and as the Crs is the 
Jucicial days. fyddain motion of the diſeaſe, either towards health or death, whereby the Phy- 
ſician may clearly diſcern which way the diſeaſe will trend : fo are the judicial days 
ſuch rimes as the Cris may be judged of, or known whether it will be good or 
bad,; for asthe 4o0n is diſpoſed at the time of the (ſis, whether fortunate or 
in good aſpe& of the Fortunes and Aſliſting Planets, or the Malevolents and In. 
rerlilient Planets, which commonly are the Lords of the fourth and eighth, eſpe- 
cially the eighth, or in configuration with the Lord of the ſixth, ſo may you judge 
of the Criſes good or bad. | 
Cy Good, if fortunate and upheld by the Fortunes; bad, if the contrary ; as if af- 
FA Moon, in fied by the Malevolents or Lord of the ſixth, the diſeaſe increaſes; if by the 
cauſing of a Lord of the eighth, death is to be feared. | 
Criſs , is Alſo, when the Moos tranſits the cuſp of the twelfth, eighth or fixth, according 
encugh ro <a> tO its ſtrength, ir proves good or dangerous, &c. 
mand ug Jo, In like manner underſtand in a judicial day, if the 2ſoon be well dignified and 
ence ofthe alliſted, a good Criſis may beexpeRed ; if weak or afflicted, judge the contrary. 
Rars to have Now by teaſon the Moon is ſometimes ſwift, and at other times ilower of motion, 
power over neyer retaining a conſtant courſe, it muſt needs follow, ſuch as are ignorant there- 
urs ._ in, muſt needs be ignorant in knowing or finding out the true Criſ-, and whether 
fealy wa {a it will be good or bad, that is not acquainted with the ſtars. 
the crue Criſs But note, that you may the better underſtand, the reaſon thereof, it is this ; ſome- 
that is igno# tirges by her ſlowneſs of motion, ſhe comes to the Cris at the f1xth day afterthe 
rant in 4®* beginning of the diſeaſe, and again ſometime (by her ſwiftneſs) at the eighth or 
y 508 vulgar Ninth day ; wherefore they muſt needs fail, that conclude it to be always at the ſeventh 
Phyfici:as do. day; and ſo my in the other Cr:ſ6s, ſhe cometh ſooner or later very often. 

So then you ſee the error and ignorance of moſt of our pretending Phyſicians, 

and the reaſon of the {ris and nfcs thereof; it reſteth therefore now we proceed 


and haſten into our road again, &c. 


——— —— mos 


— —_—  _— nc 


Cunakiki, 


Of Applying Medicines generally to all the parts of the body of Man. 


Tke as I have already given you the error of the vaſgar Phyſicians, and the 
excellent uſes of Aftrologie inthe adminiſtation of phyſick, it reſteth there- 
fore now I begin to ſhew youthe rules of - e4ſtro/ogie herein, that thou 
mayſt be throughly convinced and ſatisfied of the verity of what hath. been ſaid: 
And firſt of adminiftring of Medicines generally to all the parts of the body, and 


then proceed. | 
| Know 


Lib. 3. All manner of Works. 163 


Know then that in giving of Phyſick, you ought to look in what part of the:bo- Of admini. 
dy the diſeaſe is, and let the Aſcendenc be that ſign which fſignifieth the diſeaſed *'i"s ny 
art free from misfortune : fortifie alſo the ſooy, and let her by no means be ,4,1,, 0%. 

; ; y fin 
uy 5 mp of the Lord of the ſixth, eighth or twelf, at the time of the parties ly. 
Grſt falling ſick, or at the time of your election, or in the radix of the patients nati- 
vity ; if fo be you cannot avoid it,but the Aſoon mutt needs be in aſpe of them, 
let it be by Sex:ile or T rine, and if poſlible, with reception; bur let not the 4ſcon be 
in { onjunttion of any of them, nor deſcending. 

Note, that the Moon muit by no means be 1n the ſign lignifying the member di» Xa. 
ſeaſed, if any inciflion be made .therein, for that is very dangerous; yet if the me- 
dicine be by emplaiſters or unguents, or any ſuch buſineſſes that do not draw blood, 
ſhe may ſafely be therein, if you cannot otherwiſe diſpoſe of her. 

If the infirmity be over all the body, let the Aſcendent be a humane ſign, of the Of giving 
which Libra is the -beſt for this uſez and ler the Lord of the Aſcendent and the Phytick, when 
(ane be alſo in humane ſigns, free from impediment, eſpecially of the aforeſaid my pe _ 
Signihcators. =_—_ 

ut if thou difireſt to give the medicine to cure or remove any infirmity, let Wh the me» 
the Aſcendent be Libra-or Scorpio, and the Icon therein joyned, orin configura- 4icine or re. | 
tion with the fortunes, and free from the Malevolents aſpeRts of the Infortunes ; but _ is ro be 
if you cannot make her avoid the Aſpects of the Malevolents, let theA fpects be by — 
Sextile or Trine, and ct her not be aſpeted by two Malevolents, or going to com- 
buſtion; but however, chiefly ſee that thou doſt fortitie the Moor, for other- 


wiſe the Phylick will torment and affli& the patient,according as ſhe is afflicted, &c. 


CHAP. III. 
Of the Adminiſtration of Remedies to the Diſeaſes of the Head. 


N eleRing a fit time for applying or taking of remedies or medicines for the When reme- 
head, either univerſally or particularly, as Rheums, diſtilling humors, and the dies for di- 
like, whether by Vomit, Gargariſms, or ſuch like, let the Aſcendent be Aries leaſes of the 

well fortified, if poſhible by the Benevolents, and freed from the AſpeRs of the — +— +a 
Infortunes ; place alſo Moos therein, or in Tawrxs, decreaſing in light, and joyn- F ; 
ed tothe Fortunes, or configuration with them, and free from any affliction or 
impediment. If thy medicine be to take away the hair, or the like, let the Aſcen- To take away 
dent and the 2oon be in feminine ſigns, and the Lord of the Aſcendent, and let hair. 
him alſo, and alſo the con, be deſcending from the mid heaven towards the 
fourth houſe, &c. | | Ke | 

And have a ſpecial care that the Sw» behold not the ſoon, or the Aſcendent by 
any Aſpe&,when they are in Aries eſpecially by Square or Oppoſition, becaule of the 
oreat heat of the Saw. 


—_—— 


Cnae, Iv. 


Of Applying remedies to the eyes, and preparatives mn general. 
k. Limiſts, pearls, films, or dimneſs of the eyes, or any other infirmities belong- When anedi; 
ing to them, ifthou wouldſt remove or know a fit time to apply thy re- <ines for the. 
medy thereunto , &c. let the 7con be increaſing in light and motion, -—— 


fortunate and in configuration with the Benevolents, 
Y 2 Let 


"164 OO Brdes for Elefling Lib.;. 


Let the Xfoon be free from all the Configurations or AſpeRs of Irs, when ſhe 
is thus increaſing in light and motion, and let Fwprrey be in the Aſcendent, or fome 
other houſe above the earth ; however let him be'in Sexri/e or Trine of the Aſcen- 
dent, 'or with a Square, if no other can be, provided he be not impedited or 
afflicted. | 

See alſo that the Aſcendent nor the 7/ſoon 'be in earthy ſigns, and if ſo be you 
cannot avoid the aſpect of Mars to the Aſoor, defer the application of thy remedy 
ill ſhe is paſt the aſpeR and ſeparating. | | 

Remember that in all ele&tions where there is any infciſtions or ſcarifications to be 

Nota, made, letnot the Moon bein the ſign ſignifying the member to be inſciſfioned, nor 
ina moveable or common fign, or in Sqware or Oppoſition of Satwyn or Mars, for 
that then ſhe cauſeth the wound to feſter'or ganger. Look whether Prolomy in his 
twenty Centilo. doth not ——_— ſame, HMembrum ferro ne percutito , cum Luna 
ſgnum tennerit, quod membro ills dominatur. 

Let this be diligently obſerved which hath been ſaid, eſpecially when the Moon 
is near her Conjunttion with the Swn, or till ſhe be fully ſeparated rwelve deprees 


When to give At leaſt. = 
Preparativess And in adminiſtring Preparatives, let the Ion be in Gemini, Libra or Aqnaries. 


—_— 


CHAP. v. 
Of Applying remedies to the Noſe. 


Of applying M Ark now; if thou would apply any remedy for the infirmities of the Noſe, 


cemadies for as unguents, ſuffumigations or ſneeſing-powders, or ſuch like, &c, let the 
infirmitles of aſcendent be Cancer, Leo, or Virgo, and the Afoon in the aſcendent in 
the noſe. configuration with a fortune, and free from all manner of affliction, or the configu- 
rations of the Malevolents, aridlethernot be in combuſtion, nor joyned to a Planer 

that is weak or retrograde, &c. 


 CNAEW 
of injefing of Cliſters, exc. and Stopping of xheums or Fluxes. 


N giving of Clyfters, remember to make thy aſcendent Aries, Libra, 
AN Scorpio or Aquaries ; however, let the Moon be in one of them, and 
WE the Lord of the aſcendent free from the configurations of the Lord 
a B28 of the ſixth, and the Moon applying to Yenws ; for this will be 
SS helpful in ſuch caſes or buſineſſes. 

In Stopping of Rheums,or Fluxes, let the Moon be in Tawny, 


Of ſopping 77... : . 
Rheuns: o: © #80 Or Capricors, | 


Fluxes. 


Of inje&ing 
Clyſters. 


CHavy. 


: 


Lib. » All manner of VVorks. 


Cuapr. VII, 


Of the adminiſtration of gargariſms, or ſneezings, and ſuch like, 


Virgo, and the Moon decreaſing in light and motion,and in Tawrus deſcend- ſtring garga. 


ing in latitude, or in Aries ; but be ſhe in what ſign ſhe will, let her be ap- deg 


powders. 


[F E to make the Aſcendent in this manner of work, either (axcer, Leo or Of admit. 


plying to the fortunes ; Let alſo the Aſcendent, its Lord, and the Moos , be in ſigns 
that chew the cud, as are Aries, 'Tawrnus and (apricern ; yet cAlſayat commendeth 
(Cancer |, Leo and Virgo , as you have heard ; ſee alſo that you let not the Zen bein 
a Square of ſupiter, eſpecially out'of Aries. 


— — 


—_— —_— 


CH a Pp, VIII. 
Of girving of Vomits. 


Aſcendent, its Lord , and the /Movz be in ſigns that chew the cud , as are Y9Mis. 
Aries, T anras and ( apricorn, of the which T awrus is the beſt, for that the 
eos is exalted therein; wherefore it will be the better if ſhe be in the firit three de. 
Srees thereof, the third _ being the point of her exaltation. | 
Let the Lord of the Aſcendent alſo be in his exaltation , or in Sexti/e or Trine of 
the degree thereof. | 
And look that the Moon be by no means in any configuration wich any Planet be- 
neath the earth ; for that cauſeth the Phyſick to work downward , eſpecially if the 
Planet ſo in aſpe& with her be firong; wherefore let her be joyned or in aſpet with 
a Planet above the earth, which is well dignified , if you can poſſibly however let 
her be ftrong. For according to Prolomy, (entilo. 21, ( um Luna copulata ſwerit 
Peltis ſupra terram conſtitutts, evomere fecit potionems. 
If the Vomit be for the help of an Infirmity in any member or part of the body , 
( ſay ſome —_— the Mov be in the ſign ſignifying the member or part of 
the body, well dignified and trong ; and let the ſign alſo if poflible be fortunate ; 
In my praRtice I have followed the former rules with much ſucceſs ; however thou 
mayfi take thy choyce and pleaſe thy ſelf; but let me give you one Caution more , 
Let not the Aſoon or the Lord of the Aſcendent be in watry ſigns , eſpecially Scorpio M44. 
and (ance, nor the Aſcendent; for they are apt to make the Phyſick laxative, and 
work downwards. And ſo much for adminifiring of Vomits; it reſteth now we 
deſcend to Purges, &c. | 


1)- thou be ſure in giving of ſuch medicines as provoke Vomits, that thy Of giving of 


* 166 


Winter rather 
fit for Purges 
then Summer. 


Vomits fitter 
for Summer 
then Purges. 


Rules for Elefling Lib. 3, 


CHAP. IX. 
Of adminiſtring Purges and Phyſick laxatiroe. 


I. The Time. 
2. TheeAge. 


| 3. And manner thereof. | 
As concerning the Time , thou art to take hee&the weather be not extream hot or 


cold ; for ſo ſaith Hippocrares , part. 4. Aphoriſm 5. Avoyd the dog-days and frofty 
weather; therefore rainy and open weather is good ; and in his 46 eFphori/mz of his 
6 part, he proveth that the Spring and Amtumn are more convenient for this purpoſe 
then Summer or Winter; yet he commendeth Winter tore then Summer ; for in 
Summer the humours boyl through extremity of heat, and ſo fainteth the ſpirits and 
annoyeth Nature much : He teacheth alſo , that in Summer we are to purge by the 
upper parts or by vomit ; in Winter by the lower, or by purge, if neceflity require 
that Phyſick muſt be given at theſe times. 

Secondly , As touching the Age, Phyſick by a prudent and wiſe Phyſician cught 
not to be adminiftred ro Infants nor decrepid old age, nor much to youth ; for to 


E Ver in adminiſtring Purges obſerve three things, viz. 


the Child it is needleſs ſince it cannot duly work its effe&t , where there is neither 


A Caution 
diligently to 
be nored, 


Aeta beye. 


_ Of admini- 
ſtring Purges, 


ſtrength nor matter to workon; ard in age it worketh in a manner the ſame ; bur 
without doubt it muſt needs debilitate Nature in both ; - in youth a little at the Spring 
and Fall may be advantageous ; burtto take it often, it hindreth the natural heat and 
concoQtion, and ſo conſequently the radical heat and moyfture being hereby abated , 
the days of the party muſt needs be ſhorrned. | 

Laſtly, Of the manner of adminiſtring Purges and other Medicines, ſome thou haſt 
had already; but of adminiſtring of Purges thou ſhalt have beneath ; wherefore here 
I ſhall onely give you this note or caution, and ſo proceed. 

That adminiſter what you will whenthe Aſooy is in the firſt fifteen degrees of L;- 
bra or Aqnaries in the Comunttion , Square or 'the Oppoſition of Saturn , Jupiter or 
Irs, or they in theſe configurations of one another , it hindreth the operation of 
the Phyfick. 

Prolomy in his 56 Centiloquinm ſaith, Com Luna eft in primo quadrangulo, hec 
eſt, ex quo a Solis comuntlione receſſit, corporum humiditates ad ſecundum uſque effiunn, 
in rtlignts autem decreſcunt. When the Moon is in her firit quarter , viz. trom her 
Conjunttion with the Sw till/the firſt 2yarti/e, the humours of mans body increaſf 
or flow from the inward parts of the body to the outward , in the reſt retire or move 
from the External parts to the Internal ; wherefore in the firſt quarterit is requiſite 
that you know it is moſt fitting to apply then External evacuations, and afterwards 
Internal ; yet 1 have ever held it ſafeſt to defer Internal potions till after its Oppoſi- 
tion with the Sx», or as we vulgarly ſay, the Full Moon. 

Some of the Ancients have approved of T axrws , Virgo , Scorpio and Piſces to be 
placed on the Aſcendent art the time of giving of Purges; others of Caxcey, Scorpio or 
Piſces; and again , ſome of the latter degrees, or more plainly the laſt fifteen 
degrees of Libra, and the firſt fifteen degrees of Scorpio; alſo that the Moon ſhould 
be 1n one of theſe places; ſo that the Learned in this moſt heavenly ſtudy have been 
of ſeveral opinions in this matter ; there is none of them but had reaſons for their 
rules, and any of them may be followed actording as the caſe may ſtand with the 
Patient , and the humour to be purged ; wherefore as Prolomy in his firſt eHpho- 
riſm of his Centiloguium ſaith, A te & aſcientia, ſo muſt thou warily conſider the 
ftate of thy Patient , and the reaſons of the Ancients in their praRice , which thou 


wilt 1oon know when thou art well verſed in the nature of the Flanets and Signs , 
| wheretore 


- 


Lib.3. e All manner of VVorks. 
wherefore I ſhall here deſire thee to be throughly perfe& in the ſecond Treatiſe of 
this Volume before thou adventureſt too far, .} then thou needeſt not fear to go 


forwards. 


In my practice I have ſtill followed theſe rules; To place the Aſcendent in one of The Authors 


the watry figns,viz. Cancer, Scorpio or Piſces fortunate, as alſo theT ord thereof, and 
the Moon in one of the aforeſaid ſigns alfo, and its diſpoſitor ; bur eſpecially I have 
delired if poſſible to place the Moor in the firſt 15 degrees of Scorpio, or the laſt 
15 degrees of Libra beholding a Planet under the earth, and free fromthe aſpects of 
Saturn, Tupiter and Mars, tor that Saturn by his coldneſs doth thicken and make 

groſs the humours, and cloſing up the pores doth hinder the effec of the Phylick;; 

/upiter his aſpeRs IT have (ſo near as I could) ſtill alſo avoyded, forthat he being hor 

and moyſt, and ſo conſequently a helper or affiſter of Nature , the Phylick working 

contrary, muſt needs be either hurtful or of no great efficacy ; Mars for that 

through his heat and dryneſs of nature he oftentimes ſharpneth the humours to the 

extraction of blood if the Phy ſick be ſtrong,or when but moderately ftrong,if the Pa- 

tient be weak. 

1 have alſo ever ſhunned thoſe times wherein the Moon doth any-wiſe behold a 
Planet above the earth, or a Planet that is retrograde , and thoſe times 1 find her in 
Aries , Taurus , Capricorn or the laſt 15 degrees of Sagittary , for that they rather 
provoke the Patient to vomiting, although the nature of the Phyſick be a purge ſo 
ordained to work downwards 3 and this oth often for want of underſtanding ra- 
ther, increaſe the diſeaſe chen diminiſh ir, when Nature is thus weakned by this Com- 
buſtion of the Phyſick and Nature , which is aſſiſted by the influence of the ſuperi- 
ours, the one working downwards, the other upwards, &c. 


And ihis-my method I colleRed from the ſayings of Hermes and Prolomy ; where- The ground 
tore tor thy betrer ſatisfaction I will here give thee their words , and firit I will begin of the Auchors 


with Hermez, for that he.is the more ancient, and was Pto/emies predeceſſor. 
Hermes then in his 74 Aphors/m of his Centiloquizm faith , Luna exiſtente in ſozntis 


method in ad- 
. minittrlng 


ruminantibus, vel comuntta Planete retrogrado , non eſt bonum purgationibus uti: hac yg; of 4. 
enjrs vomi; 1111 inferunt , vel alias leſiones. The Moon in ſuch ſigns as chew the Cud , miniſtring 
( which you have heard already ate Aries, Tamru , Capricorn, and the laſt part or Purges, 


15 degrees of Sagittary ) or in ({onjunttion or Aﬀpet with a retrograde Planer , it is 
not ſafe to adminiſter purges, for they cauſe vomiting or ſome other miſchief. 


And Prolomy in his 21 of his Centiloquium ſaith , Cum Luna fſnerir in Scorpione Ptolomy of 
ant Pulctbus , Dominy/q; Aſcenaents ſtelle ſub terram poſute copul«bitur , bonum eſt |. of 


purgation:bus uti, St vero copnlatur ſtelle ſupra terram conſtunte , potionem qui ſum- 
pſerit evomer. Whenthe Moon is in Scorpio or Piſces, alſo the Lord of the Aﬀcen- 
dent in configuration or / »»jx»5ox with a Planet underthe earth , it is good to give 
or uſe purges. Burt if either of them be in configuration with a Planer above the 


earth, the Phyſick which is given ſhall be vomited up again. 
Againas touching upiter,as I have ſaid, for that I know ſome will not condeſcend 


with me, , Prolamy 1n his 19 Centiloquium ſaith , Vis purgations hebetatur, cum Luna 
Jovi fuerit coxjunta. The ſtrength and efficacy of a putge is taken away when the 
Aon is in Conjunttion or configuration of [upiter. 


, Haly and Alkindws give direQions that the 300n be in the laſt 15 degrees of Li- Other rules th 
bra, or the firſt 15 degrees, of Scorpio, and that its diſpoſitor or the Lord of that admlaiſtring _ 
Houſe ſhe is in. be ſtrong or well dignified, oriental and in an angle, and the Plang in Purges, : 


configuration with him (if any there be) be alſo fortunate , oriental and in an angle , 
and that the Lord of the Aſcendent be alſo ſo pofited;and the ſoon and theyfree from 
the aſpe&s of the Malevolents, eſpecially the 4o0n, Lord of the Aſcendent and the 
ſign ſcending , and the Moor applying to Yenws rather then /wpitey , for that ſhe will 
further the Yhyſicks operation , and comfort the ſpirits of the Patient ; but 7upiter 
will ſo fortifie Nature, that he will hinder the operation and effect of the potion; and 
let the. Moon be received by the fortunes; and if its diſpofitor be weak , ler him 
be received of the fortunes alſo by a Sexri/e or Trixe. 


And if you would purge any particular member , or if the potion be pogny = 
ſuc 


; 168 | \ Rules for Elefting Lb: 3. 
Fr vein Tuck anuſe ,” obſerve ftill what hath been already ſaid, and place the Fortunesin that 
any i 4 ſign ſignifying the member of the body., and fortifie the fign as much as you can, 
member of andthe Lord of the fourth Houle. 
the body, Butif your potion be prepared to cool, heat, moyiten or dry, place the Afoon and 


ror Ordri"8 the Lord of the Afcendent 1n, one of the ſigns ſignifying the temper you deſire or 


your Potion _. ms # > . . L 
7 J aimat , viz. Which is of the nature of the buſineſs you intend, and fortifie it ; but 


for ail manner © 
of rempers. figns chewing the cud are to be avoyded, as you have heard , &c. 


Topurge Mc» Tf your purgation be to expel or remove Melancholy, let the ſoon be ſtrong ard 


lancholy. in a Sextile or Trine of [uputer ; but remember to ſtick faſt to what you have already 
heard in this Election and theſe ſubſequent rules; onely let theſe applications of the 
con be particularly and chiefly followed and obſerved, &c. 
Choler, As if to parge choler, let her apply by a benevolent aſpect to Venw. 
Flegm. 5 8g furge fligm, let her apply to the Sun. More that theſe muſt be by ElefTua. 
its. 


Of admini- Know thou that if the medicine be by potion for any of theſe, Scorpro is preferred 
ftring Po- before any of the 1igns, and to be placed onthe Aſcendent, or the 1400s to be therein 


Ay when ſhe ſo applys. | 
Of Eletua= If it be an EleQtuary, Carcer is to be choſen. 
ries, 5 + Tf Puls, Paſces. | 
bg Know further, if the 440» bein the Aſcendent at the time you take the Phyfick 
autions. , —Y . > , 
it cauſeth unuſual ſwellings in the body. 

Let not the Aon and the Lord of the Aſcendent be in the fourth Houſe, nor in 
the eighth, for it cauſeth deſtruion : Obſerve the ſame in Phlebotomy. 

Still remember to fortifie your ſignificators , and make them free from the con- 
figurations of the Malevolents. 

*Let not the Lord of the eighth, or interficient or killing Planet be in an angle, 
nor in configuration with any of the ſigniticators. Theſe things if thou diligently 
obſerveſt, thou ſhalt be an artificial workman , and ſhalt far exceed the chieſeſt Phy- 
ſician of thy time that is ignorant herein. 

To purge the If you would perge the ſpleen , let not Saturn be ſtrong in the Heaven; and give 
Spleen, pou m—_ in the hour of Jwpiter , and let him be well dignified and placed or 
iſpoſed. 

To purge: the the ler , let it not be in the hout of 7wpiter , or when he is ftrong , bur fortifie 
Liver. . SCatwry, and let it be in his hour. / | 
" The Heart, If the heart , let not the Sz: be ſtrong , neither apply your medicine in his hour , 
and of admi* hy jf he be in the Aſcendent , tenth or ſeventh Houſe, you may ſafely adminifter 
nifring © Cordials ; but purge not. 
1 he Lungs. When //ercwry 15 ſtrong, purge not the /angs. 
Tke Gall, When Mars, purge not che gal. 
T he members When Yenw, purge not the members, or veſſels of generation. 
day wag When the Hoo», purge not the brain. 
Of preparing 1Þ Preparing your medicines you may take any hour except the hours of Satyrs 
Mcdicines, and 11ars. 

Note alſo that if any of the Infortunes were Lord of the Aſcendent of the Pa- 


tients Nativity, you may make uſe thereof; for — it may be hurtful to another, 
it will not be to him, as you have ſufficiently heard at the beginning of this third Book. 

And thus much concerning the adminiſtration of Purges; let us therefore now 
hear the Elections touching Bathing , and ſo of uſing Chirugery and Phlebotomy , 


and then conclude this Section, 


CHAP. 


- 
x 


Lib.3. All manner of Works. 169 
CHAP, X. 
' Of Bathing, and Elefting a time therefore. 


ſame alſo for bathing ; yet if thou Batheſt for health, and the infirmity be health. 
cold or moiſt, and requireth evacuation, let the Aſoor be in fiery ſigns, and 
in good aſpet of the Swx ; but if hot, lerthe Yoon be in watry ſigns, in good con- 
tiguration of 7wpiter or Venus. | | | 
If thou doeſt Bathe for cleanlineſs, let the Moon bein Libra or Piſces, and in For cleanli. 
Sextile or Trine of. Venus. | | neſs. 

If thou doeſt Bathe or anoint thy ſelf to remove ſuperfluous hair growing on thy oF gaking ot 
body, letthe Moon be in Piſces or Scorpio, in Sextile or Trine of Jupiter, the Sw Or anointing to 
. Venus, or Quartile, but not bodily joyned in Conjuntion with any of them, nor in remove ſuper- 
configuration of Satwrn; and if thou cinſt not put herin thoſe ſigns,. place her in fv0u8 bai: 
Cancer or Piſces ; but by no means in T aurns,Gemini Virgo, Libra, Capricorn or A- 

aries: But if the Patient donot anoint himſelf, let the Joon be in what ſign ſhe 
will ; butif he be anointed,be ſure thou place not the Moon in any ſign increaſing 
hair, as Aries, Taurus, Leo, and the laſt part of Sagitrary and (apricorn. 


T Hou wilt here beneath finde the moſt fitting time for Phlebotomie ; uſe the Of Bathing Fl 


— —_— 
—. —- a 


— 


, CHay, Xl. 
Of Elefing a time for uſmg Chirurgery. 


Ave regard in eleRing a time for uſing Chirurgery, that the ſoon be in- MH 
H creaſing in light and motion, and in Sex:i/e or Trine of Jupiter , or Venus, = —_ Chi- 


and let not Aars be in any aſpe& with her ; and ſorhe Authors among the 
Caldeans hold, that the oor is more aflited by Mars when ſhe is increaſingin light 
then diminiſhing, and by Satwrs more when ſhe is diminiſhing or decreaſing then in- 
creaſing. | 

Let the Moon bein a fixed ſign, but not in theſign (or in configuration there- 
with) that hath ſignification of the member, if inciſsion be to be made : neither ler 
the Lord of the Aſcendent be therein, nor the cuſ 5of the Aſcendent, nor the ſoon 
nor Lord of. the Aſcendent Cadent. | : 

Fortifie the ſign ſignifying the member and its Lord, and place the Lord of the jy... 
Aſcendent in the aſcendent or mid-heaven, free from the configurations of Mary, 
and let the ſoon be free from all manner of impediment ; obſerve theſe, if thou canſt 
not all the foregoing Rules, a ; 


7 _ CHAP. 


190 Rules for Elefting _ Lib. 


Cray. XII. 


Of Elefting a time for Phlebotomy or Blood-letting , of applying alſo 
Ventoſies. 


«>a Emember that in Phlebotomie there are four things conſider- 
=DI&> able, viz. 
Yo 1. Thetime of the year. 
2. The Ape of the Patient. 
3. The cuſtom of the Patient, 
4. The ſtrength of the Patients body. 
Time of the Firſt che time of the year is to be regarded, ' and there- 
yeer for Ihle. (i RIS fore in very hot or cold weather Phlebotomy is not to 
boromie, = be uſed, for three Reaſons. 
Firſt, becauſe that in extream heat of cold, the body is very looſe and open, and 
the diminution of blood diſſolveth it more. $ 
Secondly,through inflammation of the Spirits and humours, Phlebotomy inflaming 
them more, | 
Thirdly, becauſe the Ayr as a Bath draweth the Humours from the Center to the 
circumference, and the effte& of Phlebotomy is to draw the humours from the cir- 
cumferenceto the Center, though it for the preſent extracteth the blood. 
The age of Secondly, the age is to be regarded; for before the age of fourteen, and after ſixty 
thoſe that are three, Phlebotomie ſhould not be adminiſtred, for that it diminiſheth that which ts 
to uſe Phlebo. the greateſt nouriſher both of the decrepid age, and the tender youth, viz.blood ; 
Gann wherefore in theſe avoid Phlebotomie,unleſs the caſe be deſperate, as in ſome HeRick 
Feaver or the like, and then draw not much blood neither, but only open a vein for 
the cooling of the body. 
Thirdly, the cuſtom of the Patient is to be regarded;for as V/us eft ſecunda natura, 
Uſe is a ſecond nature, as we ſay, Phlebotomy is not any wiſe dangerous to thoſe that 
are accuſtomed therewith, but it may,prove dangerous to the unaccuſtomed; for ſome- 
times it may breed an infirmiry ; wherefbre let fuch refrain Phleburomie, unleſs ne- 
ceſity very much require, | | 
Forrthly, the ſtrerigth of the Patietits body is ts be obſerved or conſidered ; for 
upen every flight occaſion, weak conſtirntions are not to draw bfood, bur ina ſtrong 
cotiltittition, theres not aftogerher fo mach danger, &c. 
If .neceſsity inforceth, thou needeſt not ſtand to ele&t a time (as mn Apoplexies 
ar'd bv Wong for ſuch infithnities as may adfnit of ſo much cime , thou mayft 
tofloii theſe Riiſes, and if tliou art wiſe thou wilt not negle& them, no not if thou 
wett hired thereutito, wHen thou haft made experiment thereof. 
Vhlebotomy is Let the Lord of the Aſcendent,fign of the Aſceridetit,and the 2/oon,as allo its De- 
hingred, politor be Frog and free froni the configurations of Saturn, Mars, or the Syn ; for 
| thefe hindet Phlebotomie ; for the #46 1n Conjunticn with either of them hindreth 
Phfeborotry a day before, and a U&y after che bodily of Partile Conjunttion;in Oppoſi- 
t:0n of them, hindreth 12. hours before and after; ina 7, 6.hours. The A400» alſo in 
( 9njunttion with Venus or Hercury, hindreth blood-letting ( eſpecially if they be 
combuſt) 12, hours before and after the Conjunttioy. 
Note. Remember that the Joon be not in that ſign of the Zodiack or the Lord of the 
Aicendent, {ignifying the member to be ſtruck ; neither place the 91ooz in Leo, nor 
(1f you apply Ventoſies) let her be in Taxrgr, &c. 
The 3} in &, or A of Y or g if not combuſt,cauſeth good blood-letting, as 
alſo in [7] of them, ſothe » bein a good ſign, &c. 
The Mvonalloin a good tign and free from impediment in #% or 4 of Satwrn, 
1,rs, or the Sn,cauſeth good extraction of blood. | 


Four things to WL 
be conſidered 
inPhleboromy. S 


CG o0d blced- 


[94 6 $1340 
ww 


Extract 


Lib.3. All manner of Works. 71 
Extra& blood Melancholy when the ſoon is tn L:bra or eAquarics, the reins, but- TocxtraR me- 
rocks and legs being excepted. lanchoiy blood. 
Cholerick, In any member when ſhe is in Caxcer, Scorpio, or Piſces, the breſt , ſe- Cholerick. 
crets and feet excepted. 
Fle gmatick, the Moonin Aries or Sagittary, the head and thighs excepted: Flcgmatick, 


: Fangnu:ne, from the Conjunftion of the Aoon with the Sz to the firſt Square, &* what _ 
Let YChoelerick, from the firlt Square to the Oppyſition. —__ 4 


blood p, Flegmatick, from the Oppoſition to the lait Square. -” ſed for any 
Melancholy, trom the laſt Square to the next (onjunttion, humou's 


Note alſo, that young men and women ought to Phlebotomize from the Cox- For any age. 
junttion of the M20n with the Syn to the firſt Sqware; from the firlt Sqw.rre or quar- 
ter tothe Oppoſition or Full, Middle age; from the Oppoſition or Full to the laſt 
$quare or Quarter, elder years; from the laſt Sqzzare or Quarter to the ( 0njunt!ion 
or Change, old age, if neceſlity ſo require that they muſt be let blood. 
What hath been ſaid of Phlebotomy, i alſo to be underſtood in applying Ventofies. Tyg;e 


Ee ee eee ene ms a——_—__—_—_ 


CHAP. XIITT. 
Of the Phyſutians 20ing to the Patient. 


as ſtrong as you can ; alſo place the Fortunes therein ; for the Aſcendent be- 

ing well dignified, and its Lord, and the Fortunes therein, fignific that the 
Patient ſhall be bettered by the Phylitian; the tenth , that the Patient ſhall be 
obedient and ruled by the Phyſician ; the ſeventh , . that the Phyſician ſhall be 
able to go through with his cure; the fourth, that the Phyſick ſhall work its cffe&. 

If the Infortunes be in any of theſe places , or they or theic Lords indigent and More. 
weak, judge the contrary, &Cc. 

Fortifie alſo the ninth houſe and its Lord, alſo the Xoon and it Diſpoſitor ; for if That the Phy-+ 
the ninth houſe, and its Lord be unfortunate, aMiRed or weak , though the Phyſi- fician may gain 
tian be never ſo deſerving, he ſhall be ill chought off, miſtruſted, undervalued, and —_— _ 
ſha! gain no credit by his Patient or endeavours, ; 

And if to obtain a great reward for his pains and labour, let the A700» be ſtrong 
and well dignified, and alſo 7apiter, and let him be in the ſecond houſe,or in Sextile 
or 7 rine thereof, or with the Lord thereof, the which you muſt alſo fortifie, and Parr 
of Fortune, and.its Diſpoſitor ; and if thou canſt not make him aſpeR all theſe , ler 
him behold Part of *Forrune, and as many as thou canſt contrive, &c. 

Let it be the hour of 7«pirer that thou firſt ſeett thy Patient in (if poſsible) or yp ,44 
take thy journey towards him therein ; for fo ſhalt thou gain credit and good repute, 
whether thou advantage him or no: 

And thus much ſhall ſuffice at this time for adminiſtring of Phyſick and Phlebo- 
=_ ; let us therefore now proceed to what farther we are to conſider in this 

ouſe, &c, 


; A Lways make the Aſcendent, the tenth, ſeventh and fourth; and their Lords 


 F 2_ CHAP, 


a. 


Hawks orBirds 


Cf houſhold or 


Rules for Eletting Lib.z. 


CHrar. XIV. 


Of Hiring of Servants. 


Treatiſe, wherein you finde Servants are ſignified by the ſixth houſe ; 

wherefore in this place it reſteth we ſpeak ſomewhat of them ; the Arabi- 
ans and ancient Aſtrologers in their Volumes have delivered Rules for EleQting a time 
to buy Servants; for that in their days they were uſed to be bought and ſold (being 
flaves) as horſes (or any other thing for the uſe of man) in Markets : But ſince in 
our Ape wherein we live we uſe no ſuch thing being (by the bleſsing and mercy of 
Goo) inſtructed otherways by his word,and by the bond of charity tyed to be more 
civil ; we ſhall in this place (it belonging not to us to practiſe ary ſuch matter) 
omit their Rules of Buying, and deliver you ſome Rules for hiring of Servants, &c. 
which if thou findeſt not in their Volumes, ought not therefore to be abſolutely 
ſlighted; for it followeth not that becauſe they tound out many rare things in their 
ſtudy of this moſt heavenly and admirable Science, that no body elſe is able , and 
ſoto ſtand at the ſame ſtay they lett us, &c. 

Fortifie then the aſcendent,its Lord, the 1/00», its Diſpoſitor, the Part of For- 
zune, and its Diſpoſitor , alſo the ſ1gn and Lord of the ſixth, and its Diſpoſitor, 
and let the Fortunes be above the earth ; make alſo the Lord of the ſixth apply 
to the Lord of the Aſcendent, or make the Lord of the Aſcendent diſpoſe ot the 
Lord of the ſixth; this makes thy ſervant diligent and reſpectfull to thee, and 
loving : But if there be an Infortune in the fourth, or ſixth, & ſervant will be un- 
faithtull, a fugitiye, and no wiſe conſtant. 

If thou canſt notobſerve all this, -place the Lord of the ſixth in the Aſcendent,or 
tenth, or in Sextiſe or Trine therewith ; and' if thon wouldeſt have him advanta- 

ious to thee-in thy eſtate ;- place the Lord of the ſixth in the ſecond , but ler 
bm not be eſſentially dignified .- yer free from impediment or afMiction of the Male- 
volents; or if thou canſt not place him therein, let him bein Sexri/e or Trine there- 
unto, Or in reception of the Lord of the ſecond, or diſpoſed of by him, &c. 


M*: things are ſignified by the 12. houſes you have heard in our ſecond 


CHarPe. AV. 


Of buying of Birds, and letting them flie to return again. 


the like, that the Afoon be-in Gemini, Libra , or Aquaries, or in the firſt 
15. degrees of Capriearn ; and fortifle the Aſcendent, the ſign of the ſixth 
and its Lord. 

If the Birds are Pea-cocks, Turkeys, ordinary Cocks and Hens, &c. or any 
houſhold Poultry, let the Aſcendent, the ſign of the ſixth and their Lords be for- 
tunate, and the Moon in an earthy or. fixed ſign well dignified ; this cauſeth them 
co be profitable,go0d, and to remain with you : butif the Cocks you buy are for 
fighting or of the Game, let the Moo», $4», and Mars be {trong, and if poſsible, 
in reception of each other, or of the Lord of the ſixth, &c, ” 


" Ver remember, if the Birds you intend to buy are Faulcons or Hawks and 


Lib.z. - All manner of Works. 172 

If thou intendeſt to buy Pigeons, or any ſuch Bird for thy pleaſure, let the Aſcen. Of Pigeons, 
dent, the ſixth, their Lords and the Moon, as hath been ſaid, be ftrong or under no 
impediment, and let the Aſooy be in Sextile or Trine of Venus with reception, andif 
polsible out of the fifth houſe ; and if you can, let the f1gn of the fixth be Taurus 
or Libra, but Tawrns, eſpeciaily, for that it is the houſe of YVexxs , and exaltation 
of the Moon, and alſo fixed, which will conduce much to their ſtaying 
with you. 

But if thou wouldſt know when thou hadſt beſt venture to let them firſt flie, Of lerring 
that they may not wander away or forſake the place , let not the ſoon apply them abroad co 
to Conmnttion or Aſpet with any Planet going to combuition, or to AZars,efpe- 1%"! LO: 
cially out of acry ſigns, or to Satrrn; tor all theſe denote no return, or that they 
ſhall be killed or come to ſome miſchance or other. 

\\ herefore ler the ſign aſcending, the ſign of the ſixth, and their Lords, and alſo 
the Moon, be free from all impediment and in good afrect of /wprter or Venus, 
provided they be not combult or going thereunto, and let as many of theſe as 
you can be in fixed ſigns or beholding them, eſpecialy the 47oon, the Aſcendent 
and the ſixth houle. 

And laſtly if thow wouldit buy Water-fowle, as are Swans, Geeſe and Ducks, Of Warer 
let the aforeſaid ſignificators and places bein watry figns,viz Cazcer, Scorpio and fow!. 
Piſces ; if to remain or keep from itraying , let Scorpio be preferred ; Pi/ces alſo in 
this matter hath preheminency before { ancer. 


CAC 


— Mm __—_— -—— — > — — 


Cray. XVI. 
Of buying "fourfooted beaſts 


to be bought, or that which is neereſt to its nature, and fortifie it, and the fourfoored 
von, the Lord of Aſcendent , ſign of the ſixth and their Lords, and let beaſts. 
the 11-9, it poſsible be in reception with the Lord of the {ign fignifying the 
beaſt , or the Lord of the ſixth, and free from impediment, or it not in reception, 
yet in Scxtile or 7rize. | 
If the beaſt to be bought be Bull , Ox,, Cow or Horle , or any other great Cat- Great cattel, 
tel, let,the Ion be in Tanras, or the laſt fifteen degrees of Sagittary. 
If Sheep, in Artes ; if Goats, in { apricorn, or in Tawras , if it cannot be other- Smal Cartel. 
wiſe helped; and if the Beaſt be a male, place your fignificators in maſculine ſigns, 
if a female, the contrary: 
If Dogs or Hounds for hunting, fortifie the Aſcendent, the ſixth and their Lords, Dogs or 
alſothe Mooz, and let the Aſcendent be in the laſt 15. degrees of Leo or Sagittary, 9994s. 
for this maketh them ſtrong and bold ; and for ſwiftneſs, let the Moon and your ſig- 
nificators be in acry ſigns ; underſtand the ſame in buying Race Horſes. Race Horſes, 
Let the /o0- in buying any beaſt be fortunate, in Sex:i/e or Trine of the For- 
tunes, and free from the malevolent Aſpects of the Infortunes. 
As for matter of the price, as buying to advantage and cheap, I refer thee tothe | 
3. chap. of the 3. Se. of this 3. Book , where is ſufficiently of this matter , which Vote well 
will ſerve in any thing of this nature Mntars mutandr,varying your Rules according 
to Art, and fo thou art to take notice in any other houſe where any thing is left out ; 
you muſt have reſpec to the foregoing Chapters for buſineſſes of the ſame nature, 
and fo frame your buſineſs according to diſcretion and underſtanding ; for it is not 
for me to intiſt on every particular inevery houſe, for that would ſwell this Volumn, 
toa bulk as large again as it 15, naturally I abhorring tedious Diſcourſes , eſpecially - 
| if 


C EE that in this work thou fortifieſt that ſign which dovh repreſent the beaſt oF 61w;.- 


Rales for Eletting Lib.z. 
if it may be helped; ſo alſo in Se.4. and 2. Chap. I have given thee ſufficient Rules 
for eleCing a time to make any agreement of love between brethren; the like I _ 
have handled in the fourth houſe between the Son and the Father: in the fifth be- 
tween the Native and his Son ; and inthis houſe between him and his Servants, &c. 
Bur ſincethoſe Rules are ſufficient, the ſignificators being varyed (as 1 have faid ) 
what need is there for me to inlarge my Volumn when it may be ſufficient 0- 
therways ? for itis but placing the fourth houſe and its Lord (as you have heard 
of thethird) for the Father : the fifth, for the Sun3 the ſixth, forthe ſervant ; the 
ſeventh for the wife , Leaman, or open enemy, &c. and then you are right ; and 
thus much for this, or any other buſineſs. 


CHay. XVII. 
Of bringing up Dogs, or Taming of ſmall ( attel. 


poſitor, the ſign of the ſixth and its Lord, and let the CIoon be in- 


Of raming of i ? Ver you are herein to fortifie the Aſcendent, its Lord, the Hoon and her dif- 


creaſing in light and motion, and in reception with the Lord of the ſixth 
or his Diſpoſitor, or in good Aﬀpe& with them, or either of them, or the 
Lord of the Aſcendent or its Diſpoſitor in reception or good Aſpet with them 
or either of them; and if poſſible, let the Afoon, the Lord of the Aſcendenr, 
or the Lord of the ſixth be in Sexti/e or Trine (with reception ) with 7upiter 
or Venus , or in good Aſpect, if not reception ; yet if thou canſt not obſerve all 
this, be ſure to obſerve as much thereof as thou canſt ; but eſpecially fortifie 
the oor , the Lord of the Aſcendent and the Lord of the ſixth, and if poſſible, 
let them be in ſome benevolent configuration of 7upiter or YVenns, and fo order your 
time according to diſcretion and your Rules, &c. 


Lib.3. All manner of Works. 
ShSSSSAISSISISIDD DOE Epi bp bygu pete 


Section VIIEL 


Containing Elethons appertaining to the ſeventh 
Houſe. 


f CCC 


Cap; 5 


Of Elections appertaining to the ſignification of the ſeventh houſe, 
and touching Marriage. 


as come under the hgnification of the ſeventh houſe, having done with the 

ſixth, and give you the moſt authentick Rules appertaining to the Elections 
of any work having relation thereunto : we ſhall therefore according to our former 
method proceed, and ſpeak firſt of Marriages, being the chiefeſt or principallett 
matter under its fignifications; but firſt I ſhall here ſhew you what other Elections 
are here in this houſe to be handled, &c. 

Elections under the ſignification of the ſeventh houſe, are fuch as appertairito 
Marriage, Wars, Duels, tothe making of Inſtruments for War, Partnerſhip, or 
ſuch things as are done between two, to ſeek Fugitives, to make Thieves, confeſs the 
truth, to hunt, fiſh or fowl, to buy Arms, to ftorm Caſtles and make Batteries, and 
to play at any Game, and the like ; thus much then of the Elections in' general ; let - 
us now deſcend to particulars, and firſt (as hath been ſaid) of Marriages. 

Know that in this manner of Judgment, it is moſt requiſite to know exaRly 

ur ſigniticators; otherways it is impoſsible ever to frame any ſure or ſolid 
judgement. | 

Wherefore then obſerve, that the Aſcendent, its Lord, the Sz» and the Planet 
from whom the Moon laſt ſeparated , are ſignificators of the Man; the ſeventh 
houſe , its Lord , YVenws and the Planet to bois the Moon next applies, of the 
woman. 

The tenth houſe, the Lord thereof, and the Planet or Planets therein or in con- 
figuration therewith, or with the Lord thereof, hath fignification of thoſe things 
that ſhall happen between them,v:z.whether good or ill. 

The fourth houſe, its Lord, and the Planet or Planets therein, or in configura- 
tion thereof, or with its Lord , hath ſignification of the event and end of the 
Marriage. 

Wherefore in this matter when you make any EleCtion, have ſpecial regard 
tothe Moon; for according to her fortitude or debility, thou mayeſt judge the 500d 
or bad event of any of thele. 

Mercury is not to be rejected, for he hath ſignification of the chiſdren which 
they are to have, ſo thatif at the time of Marriage or contract, he he well digni- 
fied. and in Conjenttion or Aﬀpet with the Fortunes, thou maylt affuredly ſay the 
marrjzed couple ſhall ſoon have a child. The Antients have ſaid the ſame,he being but 
n ceafiguration with the Fortunes ; but I hold it moſt true if he bein his own digni- 
ties 


Y OU ſee we are now to Treat (according to a regular courſe) of ſuchthings 


176 Rules for Elethng Lib.3. 
ties alſo at that time, and beholding them out of the fifth houſe, and the more aſſu- 
red will this be, if they be in prolitical Signs. 

Signs of irife Let the Moon be increaſing in light and morion, at the time of the Marria ce.and ſee 
and diſcord that ſhe be not ;oyned to any Intortune in the Aſcendent; tor that ſignitiet}; chat the 
berween them. parties then Married ſhall be continually in ſtrife and contention , brawling, ard diſ- 
* This is ob cord; ſo likewiſe if in either of their Nativities thig poſition be found, then that par- 
vnderiee of ty that hath this in the Radix ſhall have moſt power and bear greateſt *lway; yet note 
ſuch as live ac. if the Hoon upon ſuch a conſtellation in any ones Nativity be above the catch, that 
cording to the party that hath her ſo polited ſhall be inclined (notwithſtanding the itrite and con= 
courſe of Na- tention the party is naturally prone to) to make peace again, and compole all diffe- 
ture, not © rences. 
—_ aprinct. But what ever you do, be ſure you fortifie /Verzs, and ſee that ſhe be not Cadent, 
pal #lanet ro Retrograde, Combuſt,nor in her Fall or Detriment, nor in any malevolent configu- 
be fortified. ration with the Infortunes ; for it is impoſlible the Marriage ſhould be good where 
Venus is impotent or afflicted ; neither can it be very bad it fhe be ſtrong ard well 
aſpeted of the Fortunes; for in Marriages ſhe is the chief fignificatrix ; where- 
fore, if poſsible,make 7-pitey to be in Sexri/e or Trize with Venws , or ſhe inreception 
with him, and the Moor in the houſe of either 7piter or Venws, gr in one 0t their 
terms ; and, if poſlible, alſo in good aſpe& with them, or place the Lbrd of the ſe- 
venth in Sextile or Trine of Venws, the Moon, or Lord of the Aſcendent ; but make 
the Lord of the ſeventh apply or elſe be diſpoſed of by them either by houte, exal- 
tation, triplicity, term, or face ; but by houle or exaltation 1s beſt, &c. | 
Note. Let the Moon, Fwupiter, and Venas, if poſsible, be in Sex::i/e or Trine of each 0- 
ther, but the Trixe is beſt, and our of the watry triplicity ; but be ſure then you let 
them not be in ſuch ſigns or parts of ſigns as are to be avoided : For the Ancients 
have taught that the Aſooy, or indeed (as 1 hold) any of the ignificators, 7piter, 
or Venus, is not tobe placed in the Aſcendent at the time of Marriage in any of 
theſe ſigns following which are to be avoided or ſhunned. 
V. hat ſigns or Aries, Cancer, Libra and Aquaries, are to be avoided in Marriage; yet I conceive 
part+ thereof (with ſome of the Ancients ) Libra may be choſen for .betrothing or contracting, 
areto be avoid» though not for marrying. s 
ed or choſen. T anrus from the pn degree to the twentieth is good , from the twentieth to the 
end bad. 
The firſt fifteen degrees of Gemini are good, the laſt bad. 
The whole ſign of Leo is good , only it cauleth the one to deceive the other 
of their ſubſtance. 
Virgo ſignifieth the woman ſhall ſoon loſe her husband; wherefore it may be bene- 
ficial to her, though pernicious to him, women ſeldom loving ſo affectionately as 
men, © 6 
The firſt fifteen degrees of Scorpio are good to Marry a Maid or Virgn in, for 
that it denotes ſhe will be obedient, good and chaſte, alſo loving to her hus- 
band : but the latter fifreen degrees are altogether to be rejected in that 
it cauſeth the Woman to be of diſpoſition quite contrary 3 viz. lewd, a - 
Brawler, Perfidious , unconſtant , envious, malitious and diſobedient, &c. 

Sagittary is indifferent, as ſome of the Ancients hoJd ; 1 for my part cannot 
agree to reject it. 

The firit tendegrees of / apricorn are to be negleRed, yet the other two lait faces 
are good, and ſignifie the woman ſhall be-loving and tractable to the will and deſire 
of the man, and they are better in a Widow then a Maid , excepting they cauſe 
but few children. 

Note that the Moon in Aquaries at the time of Marriage, cauſeth the woman tg 
be of a manly ſpirit. and diſobedient to her husband. 

Piſces is good, inthat it denotes the woman to be loving and juſt ; yet it will ao 
cauſe her to be addiedto twatling and prating, which will now and then leſſen the 
mans love towards her. 

Underſtand, 


Lib. 2. All manner of Works. - 177 

Underſtand this , when the oz 1s in any of theſe ſigns, or the Cuſp of the More. 
Aſcendent, or it / ex be therein, yet their ſignifications will be moſt manifeſt , the 
Aſoon being therein. 

Yet hadtt thou /enws, the Ifoon, Aﬀcendent, the Swn, and Lord of the *This will nor 
Aicendent tortunate in the Radix, thou needeſt not much to obſerve theſe, or if hold true on 
they be but indifferently well dignified and located : ir is but making the ſignifica- _ 7 live in 
tors in the Womans * Radix(1if ic could be procured) apply by a benevolent aipect to = q nay we 
the figniticacors in thy own, or let thine diſpoſe of hers, or let hers tranſlate the light guided by rea» 
ot che benevolents to thine, or be in reception with thine by Houſe or Exaltation,and ton, &c. 
out of go0d Houſes , or but indifferent Houſes, ſo they be in reception ; and thou 
ſhalt afſuredly find the match in all reſpe&ts fortunate and agreeable to thy deſire , 
if chou delirelt to live contentedly and lovingly with her. 

Ifar the time of marriage /zpiter be in a teminine ſign , and Yenas in a maſculine, p40; 
the marriage ſhall conduce more to the good of the man then the woman : bar it 
the ſign wherein /p:ter 1s be a maſculine, and the fign wherein Yenws is be a fe- 
minine, judge the contrary. | 

See that in Marriages you let the 1ooy be increaſing in light and motion , but be 27 oze. 
ſure ſhe increaſe in light, and if polſible let it be before ſhe be palt the firtt Square of 
the 517. | 

Have regard alfo to the Radix of both parties if they can be procured ; for if The Radix of 
there be forcuncs in the mid-heaven at the time of their Nativities, or fuch Planets as *3* parties na. 
are in configuration with the fortunes, the new-married Couple ſhall have Ifſue the 457, pA 
brit year of cheir marriage. Ry 

* It in their Nativities you find in one and the ſame place fortunate Planets , they To know the 
ſhall aſſuredly be loving the one to the other : And this is a rule which will ſerve in love berween 
the Nativity of any two. two married , 

If inthe Radix thou findelt the Lord of the tenth in the ninth , there ſhall be no ies other 
Conception the firit month, as ſay ſome of the Learned ; a little obſervation will "Mt 
ſoon veritie it ; wheretfore till then I ſhall leave it in doubt , being a thing not much : 
material. 

Bur if thou wouldſt know which of the two ſhall be moſt Maſter, or bear greateſt Who (hall be 
ſway, look into both their Nativities, and fee (as ſay ſome of the Ancients) it the » Malter of the 
of ethers Radix bein the tweltch Houſe of the others Nativity, and that party which **: 
hath the » of the others in his Radix thus located, ſhall be predominant. 

That party is molt ſubordinate to the others diſpoſition, that hath the Lord of the 
Aſcendent, » or the + (in the Nativity of the man, and Aſcendents Lord, the Moon 
and Venus, in the Radix of the Woman) diſpoſed of by the ſignificators in the others 
Nativity , or applying to any aſpect-with them , except there be ſtrong reception , 
and that cauſeth a mutual amity. _ I have obſerved alſo, that that party which had 
their ſignificators in their Nativity ſtrongeſt and moſt eſſentially fortified , to have 
the molt reſpect and bear chiefeſt rule over the others inclinations and humours, &c. 

To conclude, Know that its a fit time (having conſidered what hath been already A fr time for 
faid ) to marry when the Aſcend. is aililted by the benevolent aſpects of the For- marriage. 
tunes, or they therein located ; but if it be afflicted by the Malevolents eicher by body 
or aſpe&, judge the contrary. | 

Note alſo , that whenthe d and 2 are in moveable ſigns, the joy and mirth be- The joy not 
tween thoſe then married will not be of long continuance. And thus mach for the 9 198 <on- 
electing a time for marriage ; let us therefore now proceed, IIey 


Rules for Fleftmg 


CHamn Ih 
Of Penereall ſports. 


þ Ouldſt thou be verſed in things of this nature , thoy muſt warily 
then follow thy rules thus : As, Ss pro dileftione mulicre jacere 
v4, let the Moon be in Aries, Leo, Libra or Capricory , for that 
they are of ſtrength and power; and let her be in bene- 
Y volent configuration with Mars or Venw , or both ; for apply- 
$ ing to &F ſhecauſeth multum ſperma; to 7 , gaudium quod 1n- 
yp vicem habebunt , & rationes deleftabiles fignificat. But fee that 
" the apply not to H , quia redium, frigiditatem & faſtidiam 
illins fati fignificat. But to apply to the © is good , for that it ſignifieth wagnam 
dileftionem amborum in illo negotio. See that the 3 be not in X , for that often- 
times Infirmities come thereby ; but 1 , = or « are not to be rejected , quia ſigni» 
ficant deleflationem & gaudium. 
If the 7 be in configuration of Y , the Woman will refrain, &c. 
UV! non con- Nota quoi ſs volueru muliere jacere ut non Concipiat , letthe > bem mt, Qt or 
GO. applying to 4 , and in no configuration to Y , and be ſure thou place her not in 
S , m Or X# : Someof the Ancients ſay, that / aſpexerit Luna Martem , prohibebi- 
tur gereratio, Bur know that v in the Aſcendent in = or X , deleftationem & 
gand:nm aat. But h 1n the ſeventh, in coirs , diſcordiam inter eos denotat. 
Ui concipiag, Know that 5: inprolitical figns, as alſo the Aſcendent or fifth Houſe denotes 
the contrary : Still remember to vary your rules and'order them according to dit- 
cretion, and you cannot Err. 


Luando ws. 
lues is CUM mu 
liere delefFas 
mione jaceree 


© 13 A £3.44 


Of Partnerſhip, or Agreements, or things between two. 


rcrs are chicfly and true ſignificators of what you undertake (as hath been ſufficiently ſaid) you 
ro be regard- ſhall always be able to perform any thing in this nature with certainty. 
ed. : | Wherefore in this manner of Judgement , know that between partners, the 
hgh bonita Afcendent, its Lord , the Moon and Planet from whom the 44-0 laſt ſeparated, 
_—_ are {ignificators of that party which begins the buſineſs ; the ſeventh , its Lord and 
| the Planet the oo next applys unto, of the ,other : the tenth and its Lord ſhall 
ſignifie what is or ſhall happen between them ; and the fourth, and its Lord, the end 
of the bulineſs. 
" How to jiadee Look then whether the Aſcendent or ſeventh Houſe ( I mean the cuſpe thereof) 
thereof, be moſt or more benevyolently beheld by the Lord of the tenth , or in which he is moſt 
- dignified or hath moſt fortitudes (which thou maytt know by the Table of Fortitudes 
in our ſecond Book of this Volume ) ang judge that party ſignified by the Houſe he 
is moſt in favour with, to proſper or be molt ſtable or tirmin the thing. 
Rules for diſl= Be ſure that you place the 2/--z , the Aſcendent and its Lord at the time of the 
PERmg ne Jace making the agreement or partnerſhip between tv.» , -: common ſigns , ſuch as are 
+4 "et Gemmi, Virgo, Sagittary and Piſces, as you have hca:d already in our ſecond ”_ : 
ur 


The fenifco. ] in all things you have chief reſpect to the ſignificators , and that to the right 


Lib.z. @ All manner of Yorks. 2+ Pg 


but ſome of the learned in former ages have not approved of Sagittary or.Pi/ces, ex- 

cept the Moon be received of apiter, yet Leo is to be choſen, tor that it being the 
houſeof So/, and he being gy in matters of ſociety, it hath been by the 
Ancients approved of for a good 1ign , bur other of the fixed ſigns in this matter 
they have diſallowed of ; as alſo of all moveable ſigns,except Capricors only : where- 
tore let neither the Aſcendent, its Lord, the foes, its Diſpoſitor, Part of Fortune, 
or its Lord, be in them, but place them in common ſigns, and fortifie them to thy 
utmoſt power, free from both impediment, and the Malevolent Configurations of 
the /nfortunes, but if poſlible place them in aſpect of the Fortunes. 

Moreover, let the 4foos be increaſing in light and motion ; but if thou canſt not 
obſerve all chis, yer ſee that thou fortifie as many as thou canſt, and thoſe chiefly 
ſuch as are eſpecially to be regarded, as are the Aſcerident, its Lord, the Moor, its 
Diſpoſitor, the Lord of the ſeventh, and cuſp thereof, as alſo &, its Diſpoſicor, and 
the Medium and [mam ( ls, and their Lords; and if poſlible, make them behold 
one another, or art leaſt as many thereof as thou canſt, eſpecially the Lord of the 
Aſcendent and ſeventh, or in reception of each other, or with the Lords of the 
tenth and fourth, &c. let diſcretion and judgement be your direRors, and you can- 
nvt fail of your deſire, but to obtain it, you muſt dive into the reaſons and grounds 
of the Art, as have the Sages in former times ; otherwiſe neither what they, my ſelf, 
noran hundred after me (ſhould ſo many endeavor to inſtru thee) can well dire& 
thee : but contrariwiſe, whenthou haſt ſearched the depth thereof, thou wilt ſoon be 
able to write as authentickly and truly as any that hath gone before thee, &c. 


Cmanr 1K 


Of going to War, or beginning of Differences and Duels, Quarrels, 
Law-Suits, Controverſies, and the like. 


therein, or in (oj«xttioz or Configuration with the Lord thereof, or in ce Signig.. 
aſpe&t with it, are to ſignifie him or them that begin the . quarrel or con- tators. 
troverſie, the ſeventh, Lord thereof, and Planet or Planets therein, and inaſpe&t 
therewith, or with the Lord thereof, or Conjeuttion with him , the other, or con- 
trary party. | _— 

Having thus a true knowledge of your Significators, you may eaſily frame your Rules in dif. 
buſineſs to the beſt ; as if you would have the party or parties ſignified by the Aſcen- _ the 
dent to overcome, or to have the better, it is good to place the Aſcendentin one , eee , 
of the houſes of the Superior Planets. viz. Saturn, Jupiter, or Mars; but note, yeing genie 
that in this matter, Aars is to be preferred before the reft, and of this houſe, ſome cators, or all 
of the Sages have ſaid Scorpio, becauſe it is a fixed ſign : I conceive it beinga fign tbe fignifica- 
of deceit, it may help by policy or ſlight to overmatch the contrary party , and + -pgreniggy 
therefore'to be preferred before Aries, who though it be a ſign hery, yer is it 1, PP. 
moveable and unitable; however, be ſure, if poſlible, at the time of the firſt on- airs, or any . 
ſer or beginning ofthe quarrel, you make the Aſcendents Lord diſpoſe of the Lord other concro+ 
of the ſeventh, or otherwiſe be more eſſentially fortified and dignified, and alſo verlic- 
elevated above him in the figure of heaven at thac time ; for by how much the more 
your Significator be ſtrong and well dignified, by ſo much the more ſhall he be 
able to Teal with or overcome his enemy : underſtand the ſame by the Lord of the 
ſeventh, if you would have the party or parties thereby ſignified, to have the ber- 
ter: Andnote, that either in ſingle duels , open wars between Armies, domeſtick 
Aaz2 or 


[ Earn thou this, that the Aſcendent, and its Lord, and the Planet or Planets op, ,,. the 


Rules for Elething Lib.z. 
or forraign, or Law-ſuits, or any other Controverſie , the ſame rules will ſerve, 
having a 1pecial regard tothe true Significators. 

Theſe rules might ſufficiently ſerve for any buſineſs of this nature ; bur ſince the 
Ancients have hereon been ſomewhat large, I hold it not fic for me to bury their 
ſayings inſilence ; they may very well ſerve both to confirmthy judgement, and en- 
able thee to order it according tothe moſt rational rules , which thou mayſt accord- 
ing co'diſcretion pick out thereof. 


Other rule in Let then the Lord of the Aſcendent (if that party you would have victorious, if 
diſpoſing the jt be your Significator, and ſo contrariwiſe the Lord of the ſeventh, if he be your 
-« 31 noone Sionficator ) behold the Aſcendent being his own houſe, with a Sexti/e or Tine, 
chicf Signifi and alſo Mars, if he be not Lord thereof, or be in Benevolent Configuration with 
cator. the Lord thereof, or place the Lord of the Aſcendent, in the Aſcendent,eleventh 

or tenth (but know the tenth is better then the eleventh) well dignified, both 
eſſentially and accidentally. 
Bur have a ſpecial care he be not in the abje& part of heaven, iz. the fourth, 
or in the ſeventh, becauſe then he 1s diſpoſed of by his enemy, or. as it were 1n- 
trapped or invironed by h m; neither let him be in the eighth, or m combuttion, 
or retrograde, nor cadent, or any otherwiſe debilitated ; neither in reception or 
aſpe& of any Planer thus afflicted, &c. 
Of the Lord And contrariwiſe, place the Lord of the ſeventh (if you would have thoſe ſigni. 
of rhe ſeventh. f3eq by it be worſted) inthe aſcendent or ſecond, and applying to the Lord ot che 
Aſcendent by Sext:/e or Trine, or ifnotſo, by any other aſpect, for that betoken- 

eth a delire or incl!nation to agreement. 
Whatever you do, ſee that you fortifie lars, and let him, if poſſible, be Lord 

- & placins of the party you would have viRorious (as hath been ſaid) and effentially well dig- 
_ nified and well placed in the heaven, and alſo free from all manner of Impediment, 

applying by Sexri/e or Trine to the Significator or his houſe , the Aſcendent and 
its Lord, if they be chief Significators : the contrary if the ſeventh, and the Lord 
thereof be Significators, &c. 

Of the Ggnifi You muſt further know, that the ſecond houſe hath ſignification in Duels of the 
cation of the Parties ſecond which is ſignified by the Aſcendent ; in open wars, of the A1:/iria, 
ſecond Louſe. Moneys, or all other aftittants and friends ; in Law-ſuits, the Coadjutors or Help- 

ers, or the help it ſelf: The eighth houſe alſo contrariwife of the aſliſtants or 
aid of the enemies or proſecutors, being the ſecond from the ſeventh, as you 
have had abundantly taught you in the ſecond Treatiſe of theſe our labours. - 

Fortifie therefore the ſecond houſe, and its Lord, as you have heard of the Lord 

C ; 9-of _— of the Aſcendent, and let him accordingly (to thy utmoſt abihty) be free from 
heard irs All manner of Impediment , as you have alſo heard by him ; for this ſhall make 
Lord. ſtrong your aid and aſſiſtance in all reſpe&s for the better managing your buſi- 

neſs: till remember to fortifie the Lord of the ſecond, and the ſecond it ſelf by 
eſſential dignities and aſpe&s of the Benevolents, as you have heard of the Lord of 
the Aſcendent and Aſcendent it felf, and you cannot erre; wherefore ponder 
well the reaſons hereof, ard you ſhall be foon able to perform your work with 
great facility ; otherwiſe it is impoſlible ever to inftruR thee in this matter, as I have 
often ſaid 

Of Mercury, It is alſo _ requiſite, yon have reſpe& to the Afoon, and its Diſpoſiror, 

the Mvon. and that you fortifie them alſo as much as poflibly may be , as alſo CHercury 

its Diſpofitor. and * them apply to that parties Significators you detire to be ViRorious. 

* This may 1 Jn ſingle Duels or Law-ſuits and Controverſies between man and man , you 

very well ould do well to have regard to the time of their * birth, being the moſt ſure ground 


put in. for by of thy work, if they can be procured ; for look who hath 47ars moſt eſſentially 


odl 1 
Hf +" whe fortified in the Radix , and he ſhall affuredly be Victor in the _ Contro- 
debate. . yerfie or Law-ſuit, and commonly he that is born in the night (as ſay ſome of the 


Learned) doth overcome. 
Burt I hold that Mars in Law-ſuits, is not ſo much to be regarded, as the 
Lords of their Aſcendents ; for to that which is moſt dignined , 1 give Victory, 
| without 


Lib.z. © All manner of VVorks. 184. 


without any regard to "17ars at all; onely in Duels or Wars Cars ought to be 
conlidered, | 

Yet note, if the war be betwixt two Kings, their Nativities are to be procured and The Authors 
regarded ( as fay ſome of the Ancients ) but I hold more proper to have the time of 11-4zement of 


che beginning of their Monarchies, for the judging thereon, or the beginning of their ** berween 


itock ro be procured ; and ſo conſequently if the war be between any King and ,, COM t 
State, to have the beginning of his Monarchy , and the time of the beginmng of their | 
being a State or Commonwealth , &c. and from theſe times colle& your judgemenr. 

But more of this anon when we come to treat of Rewolrerions of the World ; wherefore 

here we ſhall paſs it by and proceed, 

Part of war (as ſome of the ancient Sages have inſtructed vs) ought to be ſet, and Ot pur of 
then-you mult have a ſpecial regard to the placing thereof for advantage of that V*!, 3nd pac: 
party you deſire ſhould be victorious ; wherefore herein as thou haſt been warned © V'&ory. 
ot the ſeventh, fourth and eighth Houſes in placing the Lord of your Aſcendent , ſo 
underſtand of placing part of war. How you muſt take part of war and other parts 
caught by the Ancients, we may treat of hereafter , if it be requiſite. Allo part of 
Victory 1s to be atter the ſame manner regarded and diſpoſed , &c. | 

Know that the Aſoon in T aurw in any aſpect or coolant of Sturn or Mars, Of the M:on 
is not good, but very obnoxious to the beginner of the quarrel, war , jaw-{uit or con- '* 744144: 
troverly. | 

It ha Meoon be in Gemini or Cancer, let her be in Trine of Mars, otherwiſe ſhe is Of G-mini or 
but indifferently well placed for the beginners advantage. But if ſhe be beheld of £4. 
the Fortunes, there needs no fear. 

Begin no quarrel, war or controverſy, neither invade thy enemy, the 17oon being Of beginning 
in Virgo or Capricorn ; but when the Avon is aſſiſted and aſpected by the Fortunes , *t quarrels , 
and free fromthe impediments and aMlictions of the Malevolents, thou mayſt invade P's 
or begin any quarrel or controverſy with aſſurance of viRory and ſucceſs; for ac- ,ryeice. 
cording to the opinion of the Sages, this Configuration cauſech aſliſtance and 2 
ſtrength to the beginner, and debility and miſchief to the other. 

Many Authors have obſerved to elect the time of beginring to war » or invade 
any place, Nation or Kingdom, in the day and hour of [wprter, Venus or the Sun, and 
to make their Aſcendent tree from all impediment and affliction, andin one of the 
ſigns of right aſcentions; oblique they wholly reject in this matter ; what are oblique 
ſigns and f1gns of tight aſcentions thou haſt had already taught thee inthe 22 Chapter 
ot our ſecond Treatie in this work, or, Introanttion to the Judgement of the STARS: 
bue if thou haſt ſeriouſly weighed the foregoing rules , thou wilt find this of ſmall or 
nouſe or importance. 

Know that Part of Fortune ( if thou deſireſt ſucceſs tothe beginner {as hath been Of Par of 
ſaid) or other) ought to be placed in their Confines or Houſes appertaining to them ; Foriuae in 
as it for the beginner, let it be in the Aſcendent , tenth , ſecond or eleventh ; if for Mf1s 0 quar- 
the other, in the ſeventh, fourth, eighth or fifth : Underſtand the ſame in Law-ſuits; {;-2_ = 
the Aſcendent is ſtill for the Flaintiff , and the ſeventh for the Defendant ; but re- croverſies. 
member that ia any of theſe buſineſſes Parr of Fortune be free from unpediment , 
eſpecially of the Lords of the ſeventh, eighth, fourth or fifth ; but if poſſible, aflifted 
by the Fortunes. 

Obſerve the ſame rules in diſpoſing of the Lord of Part of Fortune; for the Of the gif. 
Sages have ſaid , that party in whoſe Confines they are well dignibed and located , poſer of Pare 
ſhall aſſuredly be victorious and have the day. of Fortuxc. 

Moveable ſigrs to be in the Aſcendent at the time of beginning any controverſy, Of moyeab!e 
are to be ſhunned , eſpecially «Aries, Libra and / ancer , and of theſe Cancer is the ligns. 
worſt , for that ſhe is a watry ſign, and the Houſe of the Moon which is the lowett 
Planer ; and the ſeventh then muſt be Capricorn , which is the Houſe of Satern , the 
higheſt and moſt ſuperiour of the Planets ; wherefore Capricorn is the rather to be 
choſen of the moveable ſigns, yet by reaſon of their inſtability and wavering inchna- 
tion, they are in my opinion to be laid afide in works of this nature. 


CHAP. 


& | Rules for Elefting Lib.z. 
CHAP. V. 


Of making of Peace, ſuppreſsing or encountring of Rebels , and ftorm- 
ing of Caſtles and Towns. 


peace or agree. rouching agreements and making of friendſhip between party and party , we 
_ have treated already, and you will find we have ſufficiently created hereof; 
wherefore here again to +> / Sond both ſuperfluous and ridiculous; tor thoſe rules, 
mutatis mutandy, will ſerve alſo for this matter ; onely remember you till are right- 
ly informed of your true ſignificators , for then you may be ſure you are right for this 
matter, &C. | 
Of ſuppreſſing In ſuppreſſing alſo of Rebels, or invading them , you are elpecially to regaud your 
or invading fjgnificators, remembring always that the Aſcendent 1s for the Rebel or Rebels. As 
Redels, rouching the ordering the matter to your content and deſire , follow the ſame rules 
you have heard delivered you in the foregoing Chapter of this eighth SeQion. 
The Sages have taught that in this manner of Judgement you have ſpecial regard 
to the place of the Lord of the Aſcendent ; for it he be in the Eaſt-part of Heaven , 
place the A4oon in the Weſt; and if he be inthe Southern part, place her in the 
Northern ; and ſo on the contrary if he be in the Wett, or North parrt. 
Remember to fortifie Mars, Mercury and the Aoon, as you have already heard, 
and you cannot do amiſs, | 
A good time Alſo when thou ſetteſt out to war, have regard to the three ſuperiour Planets, and 
to ſer out 2. ſee whether they are direct or retrograde; for if they are retrograde, ſet out at that 
pot an vyery inſtantthey become dire ; but if they bedirect , ler your time be when they 
you become retrograde ; alſo if they be oriental , when they become occidental ; if oc- 
cidental , when they become orientalz it combuſt , when they become free ; if 
free, when they become combuſt; or when they are gone out of the ſigns they 
were in when the occaſion of the war was given ; for when a Planet changeth his 
ſign, he alſo changeth his former property and ſignification ; but if Afar; be re- 
ceived inthe hour of the revolution of the year of the World by houſe or exaltati- 
on of any of the Fortunes, the war ceaſeth for that year , or at lealt for the time of 
that revolution, and peace and tranquillity followeth. 
To ftormor And if thou wouldlt elect a fit time to deſtroy Caſtles and ſtrong holds, I is re- 
demoliſh Ca- quifite you know the proper Aſcendent of the place at the firſt building thereof, and 
- wa _ 14; Eben ſeeto the places of « Planets at that time, and to the place and itrength of the 
$ "Wt? Lord of the Aſcendent, and place him in the oppoſite ſign and part of Heaven, and 
debilitate him as much as thou canſt, and if pofſible,place him diſpoſed of by the Lord 
of your Aſcendent, or afflicted by him, and let your Aſcendent be a fiery or 
acry ſign, and the /oon and Lord of the Afcendent alſo in ſigns of the ſame 
nature. | 
Or let the ſign aſcending be a ſign of right aſcention , and the Lord of the Aſcen- 
dent occidental, and the Planet that ariſeth next after the Aſcendent ſlow in motion , 
and applying to a Planet of the ſame infirmity, and entring his Fall, and cadent from 
an Angle ; bur let him not be retrograde. 

Or elſe let the oor be oriental and decreaſing in light and motion, cadent and 
applying alſo to a Planet that is alſo ſlow in motion , cadent and entring his fall , or 
the fall of the ſoon, viz. Scorpio. Alſo if the Moon be above the earth, let her 
apply to a Planet under the earth , and let not the Lord of the Aſcendent be retro- 

rade. 
, This is good if it be done in the laſt quarter of the Ao9r , and fhe in no aſpect of 
- the 


Of making of [ Ook in the fourth Section , and ſecond Chapter of this Treatiſe, where as 


=" 


Lib. 3. All manner of Works. 183 


the 5» , or her own Houſe , or the Lord of the Houſe wherein ſhe is; and by this 
thou maylt order thy matter at pleaſure , conſidering what hath been ſaid before , 
tlic which by varying thy rules thou mayft accompliſh. 
| Yet astouching invading of Enemies, and ſupprefling of them , I think good yet Other rules 
further to inlarge, thus. tor _ 
In ſetting out againſt,or invading of an Enemy,it is not ſafe whilſt the » is ſtrong , _ 2pm 
for the Afcendent and the Þ are fignificators of the Rebels: Neither is it fafe f.,,jag our a- 
for thoſe Rebels to ſtirr when ſhe is weak. Underſtand the ſame of the Lord of the gainſt them. 
Aſcendent. 
But it is very neceſſary to begin againſt Rebels or an Enemy , when Mars is in the 
Eaſt part of Heaven, and between the tenth degree of Ta#rm and the tenth of Leo , 
and from the tenth degree of Scorpio to the tenth of Aquaries: This thou muſt vb- 
{crve if the Enemy or Rebels are Eaſtward. 
Bur if they are Weitward, begin to invade them when ALars is in the Wett part of 
Heaven , from the tenth degree of Leo co the tenth degree of Scorpio , and from the 
tenth degree of «Aquaries tothe tenth degree of 7 auras. 
And truly it will be advantageous for both parties, if they are careful of not begin- 
ning their buſineſs in evil hours, viz. when the » 1s combult , or joyned to the Su» in 
one degree and minute, and for the ſpace of twelve hours after , viz. Combutlt hours , 
for theſe times are to be ſhunned in the beginning of any good work , and fo likewiſe 
at the time of any Athazer: You have heard what Acbaxzer 1s, in the ſecond 
Book, and laſt Chapter. 
Ir reſteth therefore for the better underſtanding and inſtruction of my Reader , Whar hours 
I declare unto them which are Combult hours and unfortunate , and which are again are fortunare, 
to be choſen. | and what in- 
The firſt twelve hours then after the Conjunion of the Sun and the A{oon, or __ _- 
(more plainly) after the change of the 17oon, are Combult and unfortunate hours to x 
begin any thing , the ſubſequent ſeventy two hours are good and fortunate , and the 
twelve hours following them are again unfortunate and Combuſt hours ; but the ſe- 
venty two following again after , tortunate; and ſo throughout all the month thou 
maylit judge exactly hereof , by duly obſerving the number of theſe hours night and 
day: Thisis fo plain, I ſhall not need to give you any example. 
Onely know thus much, that you are to reckon your Combuſt hours from the 
very hour and minute of the Conjurnt#ion of the Luminaries either day or night ; and 
ſo the fortunate hours from the time the Combuſt hours leave off , allowing ſtill ſe- 
_ ewo hours for their number, and you cannot fail of the exa&t pertormance 
ereof. 
If any war or quarrel be begun in theſe Combuſt hours , the beginner ſhall be de- 
ſtroyed , or there ſhall much evil and damage befall his perſon and his fouldiers and 
aſſiſtants , viz. if it be begun in the firſt four hours of any of the twelve Combuſt 
hours, the beginner ſhall be deſtroyed ; in the ſecond four hours he ſhall be wounded 
or damrutied in his body or own perſon ; And if it be begun inthe four laſt hours, 
his ſouldiers and aſliftants ſhall chiefly ſuffer. 


« y- wr a 
* - 


Rules for Eletting Lib. 3. 


CHAT TE 


Of buying of Arms , and preparing of Inſlruments of War , and Ships 


or Galltes. 


Arms defen- fenfive , ſee that the Ivo, be either in her own Houſe , exalration or triplicity 


Of buying of [ N buying of Arms , War-horſes or Inſtruments of War , either offenſive or de- 
- wan joyned to Yar in the latter end of the month , andiin the beginning to datrrn ; 


for all the Ancients conclude her infortunated in the beginning of the month when 
ſhe is joynedto CIars. and in the latter end when to Sarars. 

Of preparing In preparing of Arms, Armies, or Bands or Inftruments of War, let your Aſcen- 

Arms. dent be fixed, and if poſlible all the four Angles, and let them be ſigns of right aſcen- 


tions , and place the Zoo; and the Lord of the Afcendent in an Angle, eſpecially 
in the tenth , oriental and eſſentially ſtrong , and let the 07 be increafing in light 
and motion. 

Fortifie alſo ars as much as you can, as alſo the Lord of the Conjunition or 
prevention of the Luminaries before the beginning of your work, and ſee that the 
firit application of the .! 00x atter her Corjmnttion with the Sun , or prevention , be 
to a fortunate Planet, and let the Lord of the Aſcendent be entring 2n angle if you 
cannot place him therein , and in aſpect of the fourth Houle , and this is alſo good 
for ſetting out of Ships: but more of this in the ninth Houſe , where we ſhall treat 
of ſuch Ele&ions as conduce to the building of Ships and Gallies ; wherefore I ſhall 
in this place referr you thereunto. 


oa 


CHA FILL 


Of ſeeking of Fugitives, and examining of Thieves and Male- 


fattors. 


a Fugitive, eſcaped, is thus to be apprehended or found again; place the Moon 

when you make inquiſition in the fame degree as is the $#» , but not within 

ſeventeen minutes of his body; and let the Sun allo be weak and afflicted, and in 

the laſt fifteen degrees of Z:bra, or in the tirit fifteen degrees of Scorpio, or elſe with 

the head or tail of the Dragon , viz, within 12 degrees before it, or 7 degrees after. 

Burt if you cannot thus place them, let them be in the Aſcendent , or elſe let the 

S#n and the Moon be in Dnartile or Oppoſition or in Sextile or Trine without re- 

*ception, and weak in thoſe Houſes wherein they are; or elſe let the time wherein 

you make inquiſition be three days before an Eclipſe , or one day after; bur 

if poſſible let it be the Eclipſe of the 1702»; for by how much you weaken and debi- 

litate the 1Zoor, it is the better in this manner of judgement , for it confoundeth the 
capacity and weakneth the ability of the Fugitive. | 

But if you would aflit and torment the Fugitive when he is taken, you 

muſt place the Zo0z in her fall or detriment ; but if thou wouldit onely impri- 

ſon him , let the 00x be in AſpeRt or Conjunttion with one of the Maleyolents ; 


To apprehend \ Fugitive, Run-away, or a man broke out of Priſon, or by any other manner 


Lib.3. All manner of Wi orks. | 184 ; 


but place her not in the fourth, neither the Malevolent co whom ſhe is joyned, and 
letthe Lord of the Aſcendent be in Conjuntion or aſpect with the Lord of the ſe- 
venth, or place the Lord of the Aſcendent in the ſeventh, and the Lord of the feventh 
in the Aſcendent, and let the ſoon by no means be in Comnttion or aſpet with any 
Planet in the twelfth ; for it being the houſe of ſecret plots and deceits, ir denotes 
either that he ſhall not be taken, or if he be, that he will get away 
again. | 
; Now to cauſe any MalefaRor or Thief to ſpeak and confeſs truth, Haly faith, as To cauſe 2 
alſo Albamazar, it is good to place the Mooy, and the Planet tro whom ſhe applies in _=—_ —_ 
humane ſigns; but herein Bonatns is rather to be followed, who faith the 400» muſt 7/0. cores 
bein Libra; and if poſlible, let the Afcendent be LZ:bra, ard the Planet chart is the wh. 
Lord of the ſeventh alſo therein, in (onjunttion with the Moon ; for Libra being the 

balance or ſign of equality (as you have heard in the ſecond Book) inclineth rhe 
MalefaQor to ſpeak what is equity , truth and right : Ha/y allo faith, it is good to 

let the Aſcendent be one of the ſigns of right aſcentions ; and truly it will do very 

well, if Libra cannot be therein placed ; however, be fure you place the 41-9n, and 

the Lord of the ſeventh in Libra. | 


—— 


CHnaP. VIIL 


To know the Subject and ſcope of the Whiſperings or Clandeſtine 
Prattices of any two , and of playing at ( heſſe (or any other ſit- 
ting Game ) to win. | 


Any times it ſo happeneth that a man may have occaſion of ſuſpition of 
ſome that he ſees ſecretly laying their heads together or whiſpering;where- 
fore to ſatisfie thy ſelf of what they Treat, have regard unto the firſt arid 

ſeventh houſes and their Lords; for the Aſcendent, its Lord and the Planet fromi 
whom the Aon laſt ſeparated, are ſignificators of him that began the Diſcourſe, and 
that ſet his face towards the South ; and the ſeventh, its Lord and the Planet to 
whom the 1ſoon next applies, ſhall ſignifie the other or him thar hath his face to- 
wards the North or Eaſt ; the thing on which*they diſcourſe ſhall be ſignified by 
the tenth houſe and its Lord ; the fourth honſe, irs Lord and the Diſpoſitor of the 
ſoon, ſhall ſhew the end of their Diſcourſe or Reſult, but you muſt know the Pla- 
net ruling the ſign wherein the Aſo0s is, ſhall have more power then the Lord of the 
tourth. 

Wherefore if you finde that the Lord of the tenth apply, or is rather inclining 
to the Aſcendent, or be in reception with its Lord, ſay that the party ſignified by 
the Aſcendent ſhall obtain or prevail with the other in what they diſcourſe ; but if 
you finde the Lord of the tenth, and ſeventh in the like manner, then judge the 
contrary. 

See ally if the Lord of the Aſcefident be a fortunate and good Planer , or evil 
and unfortunate ; for if it be either 7=piter, Ven, or the Sun, and they free from 
the Malevolent aſpects of the Infortunes , ſay the party ſignified by the Aſcendeant 
ſhall ſpeak truth and be honeſt in his dealings and words ; butif he be Saturn, Mars, 
or Mercury, he ſhall difſemble, lye and deal treacherouſly; in like manner judge of 
the party ſignified by the ſeventh, according to his ſignificator &c. —-} 

Look to what Planet or part of Heaven the ſignificator of lies and treacheries caſt- 
eth his Sqzare or Oppoſition and aſpeR, and ſay to ſuch men or things ſignified by the 
Planet beheld or the place of Heaven, he ends miſchief;In like manner, judge he in- 
tends good if. his ſignificator be fortunate, eſpecially to thoſe men and things ſigniti- 
ed by the Planet and place of Heaven beheld, &c. | 

B | So 


» 


Ot Gaming, 


Rules fer Elething Lib.3. 

So likewiſe if you finde the Lord of the tenth fortunate , you, may judge 
they treat of honeſt, good and lawtull things; bur it he be untortunace, of un- 
lawfull and baſe buſineſſes; Examine the natureof the lign, and the Planet that 
is Lord thereof, and you ſhall ſoon be acquainted with the nature and quality 
thereof. 

Andif the Lord of the fourth, or the 1lanet ſignifying the accompliſhment or end 
of the buſineſs be malevolent and unfortunate , the buſineſs in agitation ſhall end 
with miſchief, treachery and deceit ; bur it he bea fortune and well dignitied, judge 
the contrary. | 

And now as touching gaming, you are to underſtand that the Aſcendent and its 
Lord are fignificatorsot the party that challengeth or beginnerth firit ; the ſeventh 
houſe and its Lord, of the other : Fortifie therefore the Aiſcendent and its 
Lord ( if that fide thou favoureſt ) and debilitate the feventh and his Lord ; 
for then ſhall the party ſignified by the Afcendent win ; and if thou placefſt 
the Lord of the eighth in the rank or applying thereunto or to its Lord, or 
the Lord of the Aſcendent , it will be the better; and it thou canit not place 
him thus, put him in the Aſcendent, bur let him bein reception with the Lord of 
the ſecond or firſt ; but let him not receive the Lord of the ſecond, eſpecially when 
they are in play. | 

fer alſo the Moon, when they begin, ſeparate from a Fortune and apply unto 
another, and let it be above the Earth; place allo the tace or breſt of him you in- 
tend ſhall win againſt the Aſoon , and let her be fortunate and ftrong,leaft ſhe prove 
more advantagious to the other. | 

He that challengeth or deſireth another to play, if thou wouldeſt have him win, 
place his face oppolite to the oor, and let her be inthe Eaſt part of Heaven; but 
if thou wouldeſt have the challenged co be gainer, place the 700 in the Welt part 
of the Heavens, and let him fic in the Eaftt part of the room with his face 
againſt her. 

If the Afcendenr be a movable ſign,.. and the Lord thereof in a movable ſign, as 
alſo the Aoon when the Game is begun,they will not continue Jong in play ; if it be 
fixed, and the Lord thereof and the A4oon in tixed ſigns, judge the contrary; if 
common, indifferent, and as toon as they have left off, others will begin. 

If the 400» apply unto a Fortune, he that begins ſhall win, bur if to an Tn- 
fortune, he ſhall loſe ; if the 1-00x apply to 4 Fortune, and then immediatly after 
to an Infortune, he ſhall win at firit, and loſe at lait : ur if ſhe apply to an Infor- 
tune, and then immediatly after to.a Fprtune, be ſhajl loſe at firft and winat laſt; 
In like manner if ſhe apply unto a malevolent, the challenger or he that beginneth 
ſhall loſe ; and ſo in the ſame manner gzadge of the other. | 

In play-ng at Cheſs let the. Moo apply to Mercery , and afterwards to 
Mars, for that in this Game there 1s variety of Play ; and if the ſoon be in 
reception alſo with them both, it will be the better ; and if the ſign be common, nci- 
ther of the Gameſters will advantage themſelves much. 

Moreover in playing at Tables, let the 47oon apply. to YVerus, or Mercury , and 


if a Fortune be in the Aſcendent, the beginner ſhall win, eſpecially if an Infortune 


be in the ſeventh ; in like manner judge on the other ſide it the Fortune be in the 
ſeventh,and the Maleyolent in the Aſcendent; alſoif the Lord of the Aſcendent be 
in the Mid-heaven,the beginner ſhall win; and if the Lord of the Afcendent , and 
the TL ord of the ſeventh be in Oppoſition, they ſhall fall out in their play. 

When the Lord of the Aſcendent is Retrograde, it ſignitieth the begin- 
ner ſhall cozen ; but if both: the Lord of the Afrendent and Lord of 
the ſeventh be equally well dignified, in the tenth there ſhall not be much 
winning on either ſide ; alſo when Mercury. and the Hoon are in the Aﬀcen- 
dent , they ſhall have many words and wrangle in their Play, and if Aars 
be in the Aſcendent, they ſhall tell many lyes, eſpecially the beginner. 

Bur if Sarwrs be inthe Aſcendent, there ſhall be no winning on either fide, 
bur after a tedious diſpute they ſhall leave off and draw Rakes; and it Jypirer be inthe 
Aſcen- 


Lib.3. All manner of Works. 


Aſcendent, they ſhall part in choler; and if Yes be therein they ſhall break off 
merrily ; andif the Joon be there,he that ought to have it go on his fide ſhall quick- 
ly win ; you have heard before of Mars and Mercnry, &c.. 

Note, that when the ſign aſcending is a common ſign at the beginning of any two 
playing , it ſignifies thag as ſoon as they have left off, others ſhall begin ; and 
thus much for this; remember what hath been ſaid, and you are well enough ; al- 
ſoletthe 700» when you go out of your houſe intending to play be in your face, and 
the Lord of the Aſcendent applying to the Fortunes, a. in the mid-heaven or in the 
eleventh houſe, and how ever, let him be above the earth, free from combuſtion, and 


the aſHiction of the Maleyolents. GY 


CHAP. IX. 
Of Huntmg, Fowling” am Fiſhing. 


}N this manner of Judgement you are to know the ſign moſt proper for 
ST the buſineſs (as in all other) is eſpecially to be choſen; for here are 
oIÞ three ſeveral elements torove in: If on the earth you hunt either 
Hare, Deer, Fox, or wilde Beaſt, in every of theſe you are to 
ISS. place your Aſcendent accordingly; as if ordinary Beats, place a 
Beaſtial or fourfooted ſign upon your Aſcendent , and place the Moon therein , 
as Aries, Taurns, Or Capricorn ; but if you Hunt feral Beaſts, ſuch as are 
Wolts, Lions, Bears, Leopards or the wilde Boar, let your Aſcendent be Leo, 
or Sagittary the laſt 15, degrees ; andlet your Aſcendent be ſtrong, as alſo its Lord, 
the 17oon, and the ſign of the ſixth and its Lord, and weaken and debilitate the ſe- 
venth houſe and its Lord as much as you can ; for the Aſcendent, its Lord and the 
Moon hath ſignification of the Hunters, and therefore it ſtrengtheneth them ; The 
ſixth and its Lord denote the Dogs, Nets, or other Inſtruments of Hunting, and the 
ſeventh hath tignification of the thing chaſed ; wherefore 1 rather adviſe thee to 
place the ſign of the ſeventh of the Nature of the thing you would take or Hunr 
rather then the Aſcendent,and debilitate it, and if poſlible, place Mars therein, for 
that denotes bloodſhed, and that you ſhall take what you ſeek ; but be ſure you for- 
tifie the Aſcendent, its Lord, the 4400», the ſign of the fixth, and the Lord there- 
of, and it will be the more certain ; but by no means let Sarwrn be in the ſeventh, 
lealt you toil and labour to no purpoſe ; for he ſignifyeth you ſhall not obtain your 
deſire, though you ſee the beaſt you aym at; or if you takeit, yet ſhall it- eſcape 
again; and iheſe Rules you are Mnraris mutands to ule in Fowling and Fiſh- 


ing, &c. 


Of hunting of 
Beaſts, either 
wide or tame. 


As if you are to hunt Firds, or (more properly) to Fowl, and the Birds are ſuch of Fowling or 
asare taken by Nets, Setting-dogs, Pinfals or any other device, let your Aſcendent taking of Birds 
be atry, and the Lord thereof in an earthy ſign well dignified , but debilitate the 9**<1and. 


ſeventh houſe ind its Lord,and fortifie alſo the ſixth and its Lord(as you have heard) 
for it addeth vigour tothe Springes, Nets, Dogs, &c. and other inſtruments appro- 


priate to your work. 


Bur if you aymat ſuch Birds as are uſually taken in the ayr, by Hawk, or Faul- foe Aim 


con, let the Aſcendent be an a&ry ſign, and the Lord thereof alſo in an aery ſign, 
yet let chem both be ſtrong , od alſo the ſixthand its Lord , and debilitate the ſe- 
venth andits Lord, as you have heard. | 

And if you hunt Water-fowl, as Duck, Mallard, or the like, let your Aſcendent 
be an atry ſign, and the Lord thereof ſtrong ina watry ; or place the Lord thereof 
nan atry, and the aſcendent ina watry or earthy ; in like manner do with the fixth 


and its T.ord. and diſpoſe of the ſeventh as you have heard. 
| Bb2 Again. 


:In the Wacer. 


188 


Of fiſhing in 
Sea, Kivetrs or 


Pools. 


Of reaching 
of Dogs to 


To teach 
Hawks and 
Faulcons, 


Rules for Elettin? Lib.z. 

Again, if your ſport be fiſhing, place the Aſcendent and its Lord in watry ſigns 
and we!l dignified ; fortifie alſo the ſixth and its Lord, and place the Aſcendent if 
you would catch ſhe!-fiſh, and are roving in the Sea, in {azcer, andlet /zpiter be in 
Piſces well dignified, and debilitate the ſeventh houſe and its Lord : For ſmaller fiſh, 


if you angle or fiſh by any other Inſtrument in Rivers or Pools, prefer P:/ces, and ſo 


according to difcretion trame your buſineſs ; for ſince you have had the tundamen- 
tal Rules of Elections delivered you at the beginning of this third Buok, you mult 
notexpec I ſhall do any more then hint at any thing we are hereafter to handle in 
this Book ; for if your own ingenuity will not lead you and enable you to go through 
with any election pertaining to the lite of man, by what thou haſt already heard,thou 
wouldeſt never apprehend the myſtery thereof,ſhould 1 inlarge as much as 1s pottible 
upon every pzriicular. 

In teaching of Dogs to Hunt, ſuch as are Hounds, Grew-hounds and {uch like, 
place the oor in Aries 1n Conjunttion of Mars; for this will make them toon learn, 
and put vigour and courage in them to flay and bite ; bur let Zptrey be alto in aſpect 
unto them , for the better preſervation of them fron: danger in|.vnting. 

In teaching of Setting-dogs, .place the co» in an carthy fign, and the Lord of 
the Aſcendent in an Atry in Cenjunttion with the 4150n, and in good aſpect of Mer- 
cary, and Venus, that he may be the more docible and gentle. 

In teaching of Hawks, Faulcons and ſuch like, let the Moon bein Aquaries ap- 
plying to Atars, and let /7ar: be in Scorpio. 

Note, that if the 7/007 be applying to a Retrograde Planet when any one begins 
either tro Hunt, Fowl, or Fiſh, it fignifieth they ſhall get nothing but weari- 
neſs, pain and trouble ; bur if it be in the Aſcendent, it denotes great agi- 
lity in Hunting or in the Sport; and if lars be in the mid-heaven, it de- 
notes the ſame to the Birds or Beaſts purſued : And if the Moon be in 
the Mid-heaven afflicted by Mary, it fignifies the Faulconer ſhall loſe his 
Hawk. 

Bur let thoſe that delight much in hawking place the Moon in Aries apply- 
ing to Mars in Capricorn, for this denotes good ſport both in the ayr and on 
the earth. 

To be ſhort, in hunting it is moſt neceſsary you place the X7oon in the mid- 
heaven and a moveable ſign in the aſcendent, and 7xpizer therein in good aſpet 
of the Moon, and Mars mn the ſeventh, and Saturn Cadent, and in no aſpeR of the 
Aſcendent, and Yexxs in the Aſcendent or mid-heaven, and the Moon applying un- 
to ber ; forthereby ſhall both man, horſe and hounds be elevated and ſtrengthened 
to undergo the buſineſs chearfully, and they ſhall obtain their deſire without much 
pains, toll, or trouble, neither ſhall they be much wearied, 


ta 
fo” 


CC LLOCO I ASTSTIAEAN 6.0. 04.0.8 CCLS.SISS + 
5 +? yrgnen tay 7 7? M6 WIT +? hes efrrtneaet gs bar J>cr do eh1ey 2, He? + 2 ee, > 2 


SECTION ., | X. 


Containing Elethons appertatming to the ſignifica- 
tron of the eighth Houſe. 


CHAP. 


Of making of Wills. 


heritages lett thereby ; as touching Wills we are in this place to treat, viz. 
what time 1s beſt for to make them. 

When thou maketſt thy VV il, let not the Aon be in a movable ſign nor 
the Aſcendent, nor its Lord if thou intendeſt it ſhall ſtand ; for this denotes its muta- 
bility, and thar after a ſhort time thou ſhalt alter it again ; wherefore let the Aſcen- 
dent be fixed, and the A700n and the Lord thereof placed in fixed ſigns ; for this de- 
notes permanency ; this is for ſuch as will be diſpoſed to ſuch aQions before they are 
vitited with fickneſs ; but when once it hath ſeized on them, it is not to ſtand upon 
electing of times, but then you are to judge of the event by the time, in this 
manner. 

It the Afoou be ſlow in motion, and increafing in light, and inno aſpect of any 
Planer, in combuſtion , under the S#» beams or Retrograde, it is good, and de- 
notes the death of the party quickly, and that his Will ſhall not be altered, eſpect- 
ally if ſhe be joyned to :Aars by body, but not by aſpet, provided Mars be 
not in the Aſcendent, nor in aſpect therewith, nor its Lord ; yet it ſhall not be kept, 
but in a ſhort time it ſhall be either loſt or ſtollen. | 

Bur if Satwrn be placed with the Joon or Lord of the Aſcendent, as you 
have heard of Mars, and in no aſpe&t of the Aſcendent , it ſignifieth the 
lick party ſhall yer live, and the Will then made ſhall continue in force all his 
life, and alſoafter his death , for it ſhall nor be altered nor revoked ; bur if he afflict 
the Aſcendent,it ſhall be altercd. | 

Alſo if Jupiter and Venus be fo poſited, the party ſick, that hath made his 
Will, ſhall again recover ; And that ſome time after he- ſhall revoke the former 
Will and make an other, &c. 


Lo the fignification of this Houſe, cometh the Wills of the dead, and the 


CHAP 


. < ” 
* ——R——_y — your” om 


Of returning 


from any jour- 


ney, 


Lib.z. 


Rules for Eletting 


CHrapP. ll. 
Of the Heritages of the Dead. 


O thou be ſure herein to place one of the houſes of either 7«piter or Venas 
ID in the eighth houſe; or elſe fortifie the cuſp of the eighth and the Lord there- 
of, and place them in Sextile or Trine of either 7apiter or Venus ; or make 
the degrees of the cuſp of the _ and the Lord thereof the terms of /«piter or 
Venus ; and make the ſecond and its Lord ftrong and free fromall manner of impedi- 
ment, and if poſlible, in good aſpect of the Fortunes : Fortifie alſo the Aſoon, and 
let her lovingly behold the eighth houſe, or its Lord, and if poſsible, fortifie alſo the 
Aſcendent and its Lordzand place the Lord of the eighth in reception with the Lord 
of the ſecond or Aſcendent ; and if you can, let him be in the ſecond, and the Lord 


of the ſecond in the eighth, &c. 


$epebepeHteeeSeSeSeehebetee$eeſieees eSeteetietieeheeleeeheetoelaeteeeeties: + 


SECTION A. 


Containing the Elefions of the ninth Houſe of Heaven. 


CHnavyp. I. 


Of the returning of ſuch as are abſent, and of going of journeys, 
and entrmg into any place. 


all ; ſome of the Ancients have placed returnings in the tenth Houſe, by rea- 
| ſon it is the next after the ninth that hath ſignification of long journeys and 
voyages, which returnings follow ; others have placed this matter in the eighth, ma- 
King the ninth houſe to follow it, becauſe a man muſt journey to. return ; but be- 
cauſe one cannot return without voyaging or travelling, contrary to both theſe, 1 
have placed it in the ninth houſe it ſelf. 

And as 1 diſſent from the Ancients.in placing this EleRion, ſo do I alſo much de- 
viate from them in the matger thereof; yet if thou wilt follow them thou mayett, 
pleaſe but thy ſelf and I am content. 

Fortihie therefore in this manner of judgement the ninth houſe at the time of 
your ſetting forth, the Lord thereof and the Aeon, as alſo the ninth and its Lord, 
and the place of the M09» in the Revolution of the year of the World or Quarter 
(if it bea year wherein ſuch are admitted) and if poſſible, let 7zpirer , or Vers O! 
both bein the ninth,or applying thereunto,or to the Lord thereof,or the Moen in _ b 

theſe 


| | Very man hath ſome Fancy or particular way to himſelfthat is not common to 


Lib.3. All manner of Works. 


theſe Schemes, and let theſe places however you do, be free from the malevolent 
contigurations of the Infortunes, and lee that there be no Infortune in the ſecond 
houſe in a return, nor in the eighth when thou ſerreſt firit out , for che ſecond ts then 
in heu of the eighth, being the eighth from the ſeventh which hath ever ſignification 
oi the place intended or travelled to ; and therefore it ſeemeth requiſice unto 
me , that you alſo fortitie the ſeventh houſe art the time of the firit journey, 
as alſo its Lord, and the place of the <I70z at that time. But thou wilt the 
better underſtand how to make an Election for returning , by knowing how to 
{et out at firſt, 

Wherefore you muſt know the Aſcendent is the {ignificator ot the City, Town or 


place. from whence any one Travels; the ſeventh of the place intended or journeyed j 


to; the tenth houſe, hath tignitication of the ways or paſſages in the journey,and che 
tourth of the ways or paſlages in the return, 

Look then how thele places are affected, and accordingly judge ; for if they are 
alliited by the preſence or aſpects of the Fortunes, good is promited ; if by the Ma- 
ſevolents, evil, according to the Nature of the thing fignified by the houle afflicted 
or ailiſted ; as if the ſeventh be fortunated, you may judge ſucceſs and happineſs ro 
the Traveller in the Country or place to which he goes ; 1f the renth, he ſhall have 
good ſuccelsin his journey,ſhall be ſafe and merry and in good health ; if the tourrh, 
judge the ſame at his return, &c. 

In beginning of any Journey, let the © Moos be increaſing in light and motion, free 
from impediment 'and affliction of the Infortunes; for an Infortune afficting rhe 
CAoon > we more hurt then when it atiicteth che Aſcendent ; and let her not be in 
the ſecond, eighth, fourth ſixth, nor twelfch, but inthe fifth, and if poſsible , be- 
held of the Fortunes; however it cauſeth good ſucceſs,and gain in the journey, health 
of body, and that he ſhall quickly return co his own content; and let Mercury be 
tree from combultion and the malevolent aſpects of the Infortunes, as alſo the Lord 
_ of the Aſcendent, and let him be placedin a good place of Heaven; place alſo a 
Fortune in the Aſcendent or ſome Angle, for ſuch an EleRion denotes fafery,agility, 
joy and gladneſs in the journey; and let not the Afs0n be inthe Aſcerdent neither 
going nor returning, for it ſignifies ſickneſs, and much grief in the journey. 

Butif thou canit not obſerve all this, let che » apply unto the Aſcendent, 
25 alſo the Lord of the Aſcendent, and let them be free from the malevolent 
aſpects of the Infortunes ; alſo proſperity and good followeth if the Ao0n be joyn- 
ed to Jupiter or Venus, or be beheld of then by a Serxr:le or Trine. 

But you mult know there can no Election be framed without reſpet to the Revo- 
{lution of the World, and the true ſigniticator of every man therein, according to 
his quality ; the which when thou haſt found, fortifie it and its Lord, the 1700» and 
the {1gn, and Lord of the Aſcendent at the —_—_ out, and the ſign ſignifying the 
thins or buſineſs occaſioning the journey, and the Lord thereof, and have a ſpecial 
care, the Aſcendent be not Cadent ; and if the journey be to the King, ler the tenth 
in the Revolution of the year of the World be the ſign of the Aſcendent in the ſet- 
tins forth; and. if it be to obtain areward at his hands, ler the eleventh in the Re- 
volution be your Aſcendent, and ſo of the reſt, according to the fignification of the 
thing deſired. | 

It is good alſo to place the oor at the beginning of any journey in the tenth 
or fifth beholding her diſpoſitor, free from impediment and the afMictions of the In- 
fortunes. and in good aſpect of the Benevolents, and they alſo eſſentially dignified, 
and the M oa increaſing in light, and Mercury free from combuſtion, and free from 
impediment ; and let not the 44oon be in the ſixth, nor twelfth , for that ſignifierh 
[impediment and delay in the journey. 

Burt if ſhe be increaſing in light and motion, it will be ſoon accompliſhed , and 
that with ſafety and quier ; but if the ), or Fatwrn, or both bein the Aſcendent or 
ſeventh, or Satwrs in the Aſcendent, and the Moor in the ſeventh , there ſhall hap- 
pen in the journey or place to which the Traveller tendeth , many grievous infirmi- 


ies, loſſes, quarrels or (laughter unto him. | 
if 


Of Ning 
"engng 
\ oyages. 

—_ > 


192 


Of making 


quick returns. 


Cf going ſe- 
_ cretly to any 
place. 


Of walking. 


Rules for Eletting Lib.2. 


If ſhe be in the 1oth. or 11th, it is good ; butif ſhe be in the third, fifth, or 
ninth, it will not be ſo well, in the ſeventh or fourth, worſe ; bur ſhe denotes nuſchief 
moſt in the Aſcendent, ſecond, ſixth, eighth or twelfth. 

And ſome of the Ancients have ſaid , that if any fer forth in the day time Aries 
aſcending,they ſhall meet with Thieves; yet if they ſerupon the Thieves they ſhall 
overcome them; alſoif at ſuch a time any go againſt a Caſtle or ftrong hold , they 
ſhall take it ; andif the Aſcendent be 7 ayrss when the Traveller ſetterh out, he ſhall 
Sain and profit by Cattel, as Cows, Oxen and Bulls and ſuch like ; if it be Gemini 
that doth then aſcend, he ſhall protit by arms or expert ſervants. 

Alſo if it be Cancer , he ſhall be ſafe in health or fortunate in all things he under- 
takes ; if Leo, he ſhall overcome, and win, and there ſhall evil happen to others for 
him ; if Firgo, he ſhall be merry, and profit by ſervants. 

Again, if it be Libra, he ſhall have a mean both of good and evil ; in Ccorpio, he 
ſhall royl and labour, but ſhall not obtain his deſire, and there ſhall happen much 
ſadneſs unto him,. but afterwards he ſhall gain a little ; If Sagirrary, he ſhall obtain 
his deſire, and ſhall profit by horſes and arms, and ſhall a&t ſomething, for which 
he ſhall receive a great reward. | 

Moreover if it be Capricorn, he ſhall betyred, and the journey ſhall be tedious, 
and his deſires ſhall not. be obtained ; if it be Aquzarres, his hopes ſhall be fruſtrate, 
and his enemies ſhall deceive him ; bur if it be Py/ces, he ſhall advantage himſelf by 
precious ſtones, ſhall obtain his deſire and ſhall have his health: 

Note that ſome of the Ancients have taken that puntum of time wherein the 
Traveller ſteps out of his houſe onward of his journey, and the degree aſcen- 
ding then to be his ſignificator , and that degree which aſcendeth when he is 
juſt out of fight of his houſe to be the fignificator, rogether with its Lord, 
of the journey. 

Some of the Ancients have in this place given us Inſtructions, if any journey be 
to Kings, Great men, -Generals of Armies, Judges , Lawyers, Women, Learned 
men, Poets, and ſuch like, of what kinde ſoever they be, by making the © 00x ap- 
ply to the ſignificator of the quality of the perſona man intends to go to,and by pla- 
cing the ſignificator in a good place of Heaven, viz. inthe Aſcendent, tenth, or ele- 
venth, or inthe houſe whereby he is ſtgnified, but by no means in the ſeventh nor 
fifth, for that ſignifies labour and trouble ; as alſo if he be in the fourth or 
Occidental ; but ſince I have already given you the exa&t ignifications of 
the Moon to the other ſix Planets in a Table in the third Chapter of the 
firſt Section of this ſame third Fook, as alſo hinted at the ſame in the ſixth 
Section and tenth Chapter , I ſhall notin this place make any repetition , but 
proceed. | 

If thou wouldeſt ſoon return from thy journey , place 7»piter in a Pwartile 
of the Sn, and Yenw in his Sextile betwixt both the Fortunes, ſeparating from one, 
and applying to the other ; or place the ſoon in the room of the Sus increaſing in 
light and motion. 

And if thou wouldeſt go ſecretly to any place, let the Moon be under the 
Sun beams, ſeparating from the Sw» , and applying to a Fortune, and free from 
all other impediment ; ſome of the Ancients have ſaid, if you would do any 
thing that you would not have revealed or come to light, begin it when the 
Aoen is in Scorpio, and under the earth ; others have concluded with the for- 
mer Rule ; yet ſome have adviſed to place the 1799» and Lord of the Afcen- 
dent both {® ws the Su» beams, buf not in combuſtion , and free from im- 
pediment, and that the Aſcendent be not beheld of the Sx, nor Lord thereot ; 
and to make it the more ſure, let the Coen be in the fourth houſe, or the ſignifi- 
cator of the thing. 

And as touching walking abroad ,, ſome of the Ancients have been large ; 
but I ſhall omit their Rules as ſuperfluous in ſuch a matter which depends on the 
Will of Man ; only I ſhall add thus much , that if the Aooy be increaſing in light 


*nd motion, and free from impedition, applying to,a Fortune, it will be the better, 
| and 


Lib. 3. All manner of Works. 192 


and the walk will ſeem more pleafant and delectable then tireſome ; for commonly 
when ſhe is weak, and in Square or Oppoſition of Saturn, the time ſeems tedious , 
and the walker will be very fad and pentive; and perhaps be ſubject ro tals and other 
caſualties, when ſhe is ſo aſpeed of Lars. 

And take this for an approved rule, that if the walker go to vifit any one, or to 
look tor any thing , if the Lord of the {eventh Houſe art the time of his ſetting out be 
inthe Aſcendent , andthe 4709s in aſpect ot any Retrograde-Planer with reception 
at the ſame time, he ſhall meet the party or thing he ſeeks or intends to vilir. 

Now as touching any Travellers entrins into any Place, Town or City, you are tO Of entins 
fortitic the ſign ot the ſecond Houle, and the Lord thereot , and place him in a good into any * 
houſe above the earth, and the 7/202 1n the third or fifth , orelle in the eleventh , p'2<c- 
apolying to a Planet receiving her, whether 1t be a fortune orno; and ler your ſign- 
ticator never be under the earth , unleſs your butinels ſo require , or 1s to be kept 
lecrer. 

Beſure the .?7042 be not inthe fourth , eighth, fixth or twelfth , but place her in 
the ſecond, if potlible, ſtrong and free trom zmpediment, and applying to the Lord of 
the ſecond, or in reception of hjm. 

And if he thar er.treth into any place would fain ſtay long there, let the Ioon 
and the Lord ofthe tecond be placed in angles; and it will not be amiſs in this buſineſs 
if he place the 100 1n reception with Stern by a good aſpect, and ler the fign of 
the Afcendent and its Lord at the firit entrance be fixed. 

But if he would ſoon return from thence , let him place the oor in the third, in T,, ,@,;n 
a moveable {ign received ; as alſo let the ſign of the Aſcendent at the firtt entrance quickly. 
be moveable, and the Lord thereof alſo in a moveable ſign , and place the Lord of 
che ſzcondin the Afcendent, and the Lord of the Afcendent inthe ſecond. 

Moreover, it his coming to the place be to require ought of the King or Grandees, To make his 
let him have recourſe tothe mid-heaven and its Lord, and make him receive his figni- Fle&ion ſuras 
ticator by a good reception; and place if poſlible the Lord of the tenth inthe Aſcen- Y'<*9 his bu- 
dent or ſecond , and in the tenth the Lord of the Aſcendent or ſecond; and fo under. 635: 
ſtand of any thing elle he requires, or for which his entrance into the place is, ſtill 
remembring to order his tigniticators aright. 

Wherefore generally in all entrings into any place, be ſure the ſecond Houſe and 
its Lord be free from impediment and affliction of the Infortunes , as alſo Com- 
buſtion and Fall , neither lechim be Cadent, for if the Lord of the ſecond be com- 
buſt , it denotes the party ſo entring ſhall there dye ſuddenly ; neither 1s it good for 
the Lord of the ſecond to be in the ſeventh , eſpecially if he be therein atflicted , be- 
cauſe it ſignifies damage both to his perſon and goods , and that he ſhall be troubled 
with many diſſentions and quarrels, and have mach trouble by and through his ac- 
quaintance; alſo if the Xooz be in the fourth Houſe,he ſhall dye there before he goes 
away , eſpecially if the Afooz be weak and afflicted of the Malevolents , or the Lord 
of the eighth, 

But the beſt EleRion in this matter 15 to let T#piter be I ord of the ſecond, located 
in the eleventh Houſe, ſtrong and free from the malevolent aſpects of the Infortunes , 
or let him be in the ſecond in configuration of the Moon , and let Pare of Fortune be 
in an angle or inthe eleventh or fifch, for it ſignifieth ſafety and health of body being 
ſo laced, as alſo increaſe of wealch ; and it will not be amiſs if you make the diſpoſt- 
tor of the ſoon apply thereunto , for it will bring things to a good end and con- 


cluſ1on. 


To ſtay 


therein, 


194- Rules for letting Lib.3. 


Cura Þ. II. 


Of building of Ships and Gallies , and of lanching them , and of 
vojagmg by Sea. | 


Ship or ſuch like Veſſel; wherefore it ſeemeth requiſite unto me I here 
ſhew a fit time for making of ſuch Commodities , and then we ſhall come to 
the time of Voyaging. Some of the Ancients have placed this Election in the 
fourth Houſe ; but becauſe Voyages are under the ſigntication of the ninth Houſe, 
and they cannot be accompliſhed without Ships, I thought it more convenient to 


place it in this Houſe. 
Inthe compoſition or building of Ships there are three ſorts conſiderable ; the 


firſt are ſuch as ſerve for War, the ſecond for Traffique or Merchandiſe, the third we 
term Gallies and ordinary Veſſels. 
Of building Wherefore in building of Ships for War or ſwift ſailing, fortifie che Aſcendent and 
of Fleet-ſhips, its Lord, the Ioonallo and its diſpoſitor , and place them inthe Aſcendent , tenth 
or Mcn of greleventh , and let the ſign aſcending be tixed ; tortfie alſo the fourth Houſe and 


T HE firſt thing we are to provide for any voyage at Sea is a Bark, Gallie, 


"—_ irs Lord, which hath ſignification of Ships naturally , and if poſlible ler all the angles 
be fixed , but be ſure you make the Hoon and the reſt of your ſignificators ſwitt in 
motion. 


Let alſo the Planet from whom the X/oox laſt ſeparated be ſtrong and well diſpoſed, 
alſo ſwift in motion, or place her diſpoſitor in a watry ſ1gn free from all impediment 
and affliction; and if you cannot place the Moon nor the Lord of the Aſcendent in 
the Aſcendent , tenth or eleventh , place one of the Fortunes there , and let him be 
free from the malevolent aſpects of the Inforrunes ; and let him be if poſſible orienta), 
and make the Lord of the ſeventh weak and flow in motion, 

Of building In building of Ships for Traffique obſerve all that you bave already heard in the 
of Merchants other , onely adde chis thereunto , that Mercyry mult chiefly be fortified and aſ- 
2 fitted of the Fortunes, and placed if poſlible in the tenth, eleventh or Aſcendent ; 
fortitie alſo the Lord of the tecond , and Parr of Fortune and its diſpotitor , and let 
not the Aſooy be flow in motion , yet it mattereth not much whether ſhe be very 
ſwift, as in the former, | | 
Of building = In building of Gallies and other Ships you need not ftand ſo much on the ſwiftneſs 
of ordinary of the Moon and your other ſignificators, onely let her not be very ſlow; yet if thou 
Ships and canſt conveniently make her and ail the other ſwift ic will be the better ; in other 
Gallles, things obſerve what hath been ſaid already. 
Other rules in In buying or making of Ships you may alfo obſerve theſe rules ; begin your 
buying or work when /#piter or Ven are {ocated in the fourth Houſe in a watry ſign , ſtrong 
ory of and free from all manner of impediment, or in a ſign of their nature, and let the Moon 
FY be in Tarrts, Gemini or the beginning of {Cancer . or Virgo or Sagittary, or the laſt 
degrees of Capricorn ; for the latter degrees of (apricors are reputed watry , and the 
firſt degrees earthy ; but it is belt co place the 1ſoox or the Aſcendent in Py/ces, 

Let the Swn alſo be in T7:ne of the Fortunes , and the Aon increaſing in light 
and motion, as alſo in latitude , and beheld alſo of the Fortunes ; but let not Mars 
be in any aſpect of the Aſcendent , nor of the 4foon, for it denotes caſualties there- 
unto by fire, and that the Ship ſhall at the laſt be burnt; alſo if the ſoon be in Aqua- 
ries . and the Sun and Iars in aſpet to her, viz. by Square or Oppoſition, or elſe 
bodily joyned thereunto, it ſignifieth the Ship ſhall endure many ſtorms and much 
damage and fear of ſhipwrack: Alſo if the » be not in =, but in a watry 
ſign in either -, | or - of the © and F , itdenotes the Ship ſhall be drowned 


and ſuffer ſhipwrack , and ſhall be ſunk with all that is in her to the bottom of the 
SEA : 


Lib.3. » All manner of VVorks. 195 


ſea: Moreover, if the . 7 be in any ſuch configuration of them, and be in a fiery 
ſign , the Ship ſhall be ſplit upon a rock, and fhall loſe moſt of her ©:o0ds , or ttick 
upon the Sands, and ſo periſh. Laſtly, if the Moon be in humane ligns, and af- 
flicted by the Su» and rs, as you have heard it ſhall meer with Pirates and Cut- 
rers at Sea, which ſhall {lay all that are in her, ranſack her , and lait of all fink 
bee? 

Now as touching lanching of Ships, and ſetting forth to Sea , to avoyd the tedious Of lanching 
rexterations and tautologies of the Ancients, you need do no more then thys : See ot Ships , and 
that the Moon be ſtrong eſſentially and accidentally , well placed in the Heavens , {ting our co 
and.in good aſpect of the Fortunes, viz. ?upiter or / en, and free from the malevo- *** 
lent afpzcts ofthe Intortunes,as alſo the Aſcendent, and its Lord, and Part of Forezene, 
and its diſpo{1tor at either of the times ; for look by how much your tignticator is 
impedited by the Malevolent , and by ſo much ſhall the Ship or the perſons therein 
be damnified; according to the fignification of the ſignificator , and the Planct af- 
flicting. 

In Navigating and Voyaging by Sea you are to follow the ſame rules as hath 5 Nariz 1- 
been delivered unto you for travelling by Land ; onely you are to elect watry tigns cing or Voy- 
in this, as in the other earthy : bur as touching the main end of your Voyage , whe- 3ging by Sea, 
ther it be for gain or any other thing, you are to order your figniticators accordingly ; | 
but be ſure you ever remember to oblerve thele five times to fortifie them to your 
beit advantage. 

The firit is the time wherein the Ship 1s firlt begun ; the ſecond is the time 
wherein it ts bought or purchaſed ; the third when ic 1s lanched ; the fourth is the 
time of the entring thereinto; and the fifth and lait is the time wherein it ſets out 
ro Sea; The which you having obſeryed, and according to art ordered , eſpecially 
your entring thereinto , and ſetting forward ( if you cannot obtain the other times ) 
is ſufficient to be ſaid hereon, &c. 


= MH AFP. THE 
Of learning of Sciences , and of Smging and Muſick. 


Ere I may ſeem to rob the tenth Houſe of this Ele&ion ; but ſince the 
tenth properly hath ſignitication of Majeſtie, and one may exerciſe Singing 
and any other Science without making it their profeſlion ; and becauſe the 
rules depend rather on this Houle then the tenth or any other, it is requiſite it ſhould 
- be here placed. 

Wherefore if you would learn any Science fee that the Aſcendent be an humane 
ſign, as alſo that the 1799» be located in an humane lign, and the Lord of the A- 
ſcendent in the tenth Houſe or entring thereinto, and the Lord of the tenth in con- 
figuration of the Aſcendent, as allo the Lord of the ninth; and let the oor be 
joyned to AMercery, or applying to him by a good afſpet, and Mercury itrong and 
well dignifed. 

Make alſo Mercury behold the Lord of the Aſcendent ina good aſpect , and let 
not the Moor be decrealing in light, nor deſcending jn latitude ; and make the Lord 
of the ninth to be in reception with the Lord of the Aſcendent. | 

In learning of Muſick thou art to have regard to the chief ſignificators thereof, 4 1 - 
viz. Venus , Mercury and the Moon: Wherefore that there might herein be "1 
found a true harmony , place Venus in ſome of her own dignities (if thou pla- 
ce{t her as ſtrong as poſlible it will he the better) and Aercary applying unto 
ber, being alſo in ſome of her dignities; as alſo the 4-0 eſpecially in Piſces , or 

Cc2 leparating 


Of Singing. 


Of eleQing 
Kings and 
| Governors. 


Rales for Elefting | Lib.z. 


ſeparating from Mercary , and applying to Venus ; and let the Aſcendent bea ſign 
agreeable to the nature of this buſineſs , and let Yen have power. therein; and ic 
will be the better if Mercary alſo have dignity therein. 

Look that neither Venus, Mercury nor the Moon be remote from an angle , unleſs 
it be the Loos, and then place her in the ninth Houſe, ſtrong and well ditpoſed, and 
let the other ſignificators be alſo ſtrong. 

Alſo if the Lord of the Aſcendent were in the ninth ſtrong and free from affli. 
ion , it were very good; and place the Moon in Capricorn to learn ſinging, and 
this cauſeth a ſhrill voyce ; but in playing on any Pipe or Inſtrument rouched with 
the mouth , place the 40s in the laſt face of Leo, Scorpio or Piſces, becauſe theſe 
are Mute ſigns; but in learning Prick-ſong or any other Song wherein words are to 
be uttered, place her in Gemins or /irgo , and fortifie the ninth Houſe and its Lord , 
and let them be free from all the Impediments of the Malevolents, as alſothe tenth 
and its Lord, if you intend to make it your profeſſion. Alſo if thou wouldſt exceed 
all others in ſinging ( as ſaith Bonar ) place Mercury direct and joyned to Venus 
retrograde, either in the Houſes, Exaltations or other Dignities of any of 
them, 


—_— I 


SECTION AT. 


Containing Elections appertaining to the fignsfication of 
the tenth Houſe. 


Camas 4 


Of elefing of Kings and Nobles , and of their enſtalling and begin- 
ning their Rule or Gorvernment. 


\\ 


\ISIY 


\ T levolents, Satwrn and Mars : but if thou canſt not avoyd their 
EDDTIHFE aſpects, let it be by Sexri/e or Trive with reception, and place 
them in angles or ſuccedent houſes, and if poſlible place the 
Sx in Leo free from impediment; and ifhe cannot bein Leo, place himin Sextile 
or Trine of that Planet that beareth dominion in the houſe wherein he is by houſe or 
exaltation; but if thou canſt not order it otherwiſe but that he muſt be beheld 
thereby by a Square, let it be with reception ; but ſhun the Oppoſition , whether it be 
with reception or no , and if poſſible let the Square aſpect be out of Maſculine ſigns, 
and let them alſo be ſuch wherein they have ſome dignity. 

See alſo if there is any Eclipſe of either Luminary that year to be celebrated , 
or any great Cozjaunttion; and let not the ſign wherein the Eclipſe or (onjun#ion is, 
be 


Lib.z. @ All manner of VVorks. 197 


be onthe Aſcendent or tenth , neither let the Lords of the Aſcendent or tenth be 
therein , nor the Lords of cither of theſe places in the tenth or the Aſcendenrt , and 
place both the Luminaries in the terms of the Fortunes beholding each other with a 
Sexrile or Trine ; and if poſſible, let the Lords of thoſe terms be in $extile or Trme 
alſo of the Luminaries, or at leaſt one of them. | 

See alſo that the Conjunttox or prevention of the Luminaries before this election 
be not unfortunated ; but if it be ſo, let your Election be deferred till fifteen days 
after the Conwnttion or prevention, if poſlible. 

At Enfſtallings or Coronations place Leo the ſign of the Aſcendent , and the Sx Of Coronaci 
Mm Taurus inthe tenth , and the oox in the Aſcendent joyned to Venus, [wpiter or 90s and En. 
AMercary, and they ſtrong eſſentially and receiving the 44007. Railings. 

And when you begin firſt to rule or govern according to the election and choyce Of beginning 
of the people, letthe angles be all fixed , eſpecially the Aſcendent and fourth , and >! Govern- 
let the Lord of the tenth be free from all manner of impediment, and place the [. ord P*** 
of the Aſcendent either in the Afcendent , tenth or eleventh , or at leaſt in the fifth , 
received of the Lord of the tenth ; and let the Lord of the tenth be received of its 
diſpclitor by Sexti/c or Trixe, and the Lord of the fourth free from imped:ment , and 
in a good aſpect of the Fortunes: And if thou canſt not do all this , let the 17097 be 
received of the Lord of the tenth , and the Lord of the fourth , tree from impedi- 
ment ; butler him not behold the Aſcendent nor its Lord , and let ſome of the For- 
tunes behold the fourth Houſe or tenth, or at leaſt one of them , if potlible. 

And thus may you judge of eleing of other inferiour Magiſtrates whatſoever , 
by diſtinguiſhing their ſeveral ſignificators, and diſpoſing of them according unto 
theſe rules, Matatis mutauds:; wherefore it were needle(s here further to en- 
large. 


CH +3 Fi 


Of obtaining favour of Kings and great men, Juſtice on Ene- 
mies , and Pardons ; alſo of going of Progreſs with the King , 


or any other Grandee. | 


ſign you place inthe Aſcendent , let /#piter be therein in a good aſpect of fayour of 
the Lord of the tenth with reception , or place the Lord of the tenth in Kings and 
the Aſcendent , or in Sextile or Trixe thereunto , or to the Lord thereof, or the &randees. 
oor; and if poſlible place the Moon in the tenth , free from all impediment , and 
{et the Lord of the Aſcendent alſo be ſtrong and no wife afflicted by the Malevolents; 
and ſet not Satwrnnor AMars be in any of the angles, eſpecially the Aſcendent, 
unleſs he be a ſignificator, and you have ordered him according to diſcretion. 
And if thou canſt not perform all theſe , ler the L ord of the thing defired be in 
the tenth, or the Lord of the tenth in the Houſe ſignifying the thing , or in good 
aſpe& thereunto, or to the Lord thereof; and if pollible ler the aſpect be with re- 
ceprion, &c. | 
Alſo when thou wouldſt obtain aid or leave of the King to proſecute thy adver- Of obtainiag 
ſary, or when thou requireſt Juſtice againſt him , place the oor free from all im- Jultice or Aſ- 
pediment , and let her be increaſing in light ; let the Aſcendent alſo be free from at- — out 
fiction, and place the Lord thereof in a good place, ſtrong, and free from the male- * *3- 
volent aſpects of the Infortunes , andif noffible let him be in his own dignities and 
dire& ; and debilitate the Lord of the ſeventh ( which hath ſignification of yu 
adverſary) and let him not be afliſted by any of the Fortunes, nor behold rhe 
Aſcendent , 


\ Bout obtaining of favour at the hand of any King or great man, whatever of 4,1, 


198 Rules for Elefting Lib.z. 


Aſcendent, nor the Aeon, nor the Sz» , and let the Lord of the tenth be inreception 
with the Lord of the Aſcendent ; and ſo if your-condition be the others , and thou 
wouldft obtain pardon, debilitate the Moen and Lord of the Afſcendent , ard fortifie 
© t cbraining the ſeventh, &c. quite contrary : And thus by varying thy rule thou mayſt a pply thy 
ot pardon. buſineſs which way thou pleaſeſt, and be furniſhed upon any occaſion, provided thou 

art well acquainted with thy true fignificator. 
Of going of In progreſling with Kings or Grandees , place 7#pirer in the Aſcendent or in the 
progreſs with ſeventh , for this ſignifieth good in the journey to thoſe that undertake it , and thar 
the _ or they ſhall be merry ; but lookthou place him not inthe fourth, neither let the Aoon 
Gantee — Nor Venws behold him out of any angle ; nor let Satwr» or Mars be in the Aﬀcen- 
dent nor any other angle , nor joyned by body or aſpect toJexxs ; neither let the 
Afoon be under the Sun-beams , nor with 45 or the Intortunes ; for this denotes the 
Nete, party goins to progreſs ſhall never return ( the Ancients alſo affirm , that whoever 
tals fick ar ſuch a time, ſhall never recover , and whoever goeth into any combate 

ſhall be lain) but dye therein. 


CHAP HE: 


Of learning any Art or Occupation. 


their reaſon was, becauſe a Trade or Occupation is the higheſt dignity 

ſuch can look for that are bound thereunto. 
Oflearning of Wherefore in this matter you are exactly to diſtinguiſh of the Planet ſignifying 
Trades or the Trade or Mytterie you would learn , the which you have been taught in the ſe- 
other Occu» cond Book of this Volume ; then let your Aſcendent or tenth Houſe be a fign 
"Pra wherein that Planet beareth dominion by Houſe ; as if you would learn Morality 
or any ſtudy , or if thou deſireſtto be a Merchant , place Geminz or Virgo in the A- 
ſcendent, or elſe Libra, the laſt fifteen degrees of Sagirrary or Aquaries , and fortitic 
the Lord of the Aſcendent, and the Cuſp of the tenth, and its lord, 7 alfoand the 
» ; yet have a more ſpecial care to fortifie 7 then any other , becauſe he is the 

Planet ſignifying the Trade or Occupation. 

Still remember to fortifie the Lord of the Trade , or that Planet which naturally 
hath ſignification thereof above any other ; for I ſhall ſay no more on this matter 
in this place, ſinceI have been large in the ſecond Section and firit Chapter of this 

Note Well. third Book, whether I ſhall here reterr thee, and now proceed , being even weary of 
reiterations : For whoſo can underitand the reaſon and ground of any one EleRi- 
on, hath ſufficient to lead him through all other whatſoever , without theſe needleſs 
repetitions, or elſe he ſhall never be able to apprehend them when we have faid all 
we can; , yet becauſe I have an earneſt deſire to make every thing plain even to the 
weakeſt capacity , I have been thus tedious ; yet whoſo ſhall compare me with the 


Ancients, will find I do not equai them in tautologies. 


M6 of the Ancients have placed this matter in this Houſe ; I conceive 


SECT. 


Lib.3. oAll manner of l/ f/ OYKS. 199 
SODSPPPPPPPE PS pee: ep e eube effec 


SEcTion XII. 


Containing ſuch Elettions as are under the ſign! cation 


of the eleventh Houſe of Heaven. 


— — — — — Wn I > OT EEE LS AE EE ISS AS So WG EIS. ma nh, —_ t_—_— 


Cu avpy, I. 


Of accompliſhing any thing hoped for , and of gaining a good re- 
pute , and the love of friends. 


Very man wiſheth and hopeth for ſome one thing or other , and few bur ſtrive 
to have a good Name, or at leaſt to be thought worthy thereof; and beeauſe 
this may be obtained, and yer the perſon no wiſe honoured in the world , | 
this Election is rather placed in this Houſe then in the tenth by me. To gain cre» 
Wherefore when either thou wouldſt accompliſh chy hope , or gain credit by any 4ir and. the 
thing thou undertakett, place Sapittary, Piſces or (ancer in the Afcendent , and for- many, hoped 
tifie /zpiter, and the '..17oon, as alſo the eleventh, and its Lord ; and if poſſible place 
Jupiter in the eleventh , or elſe in the Aſcendent , or at leaſt in Sextife or Trive of 
theſe places, or one of them; and let him be in reception with the Lord of the 
eleventh, and place the Lord of the eleventh if poſtible inthe Afcendent, and m the 
eleventh the Lord of the Aſcendent ; andif you can, let the Sa» bein the tenth , or 
the Aſcendent free from impediment, and the Afoon in a Trine or Sextile of him , or 
in $9«re with reception, provided ſhe be ſtrong and free from aftlition ; and if you, 
can poſiibly, let her ſeparate from /wpiter, the Lord of the Aſcendent, or the Lord of 
the eleventh when ſhe applyes to the S, and it will be much the better; for this de- 
notes the credit or applauſe deſired will be the more blazed and ſpread abroad , for 
the nature of the S# 1s to diſcover things, 
Order thy fignificator to thy beſt advantage ; the more thou dignitieft him 
the berter it will be ; however be ſure thou let the Luminaries be in Sex:/e or Trine 
of each other, as alſo the Lord of the Aſcendent, and the Lord of the eleventh; bur 
if it muſt be by a Square, let it be by reception , &c. Of gaining 
In obtaining the love and good will of friends , fortifie the ſoon , and the the love and, 
eleventh Houſe, and its Lord, and make them both be received of Venns by a 7 rine , ficndihip 0: 
and let Vern: be alſo well dignified; or elſe let her receive the Lord of the Aſcendent ?"?” 
and the L ord of the eleventh by the ſame aſpe& , and let the reception be by Houſe 
or Exaltation ; and if this cannot be done, let them be received by a 7rine of [upi- * ; 
ter in the ſame manner, and let the Lord of the Aſcendent be well dignified. _ 
Moreover, if thou defireit the love and friendſhip of any to gain or profit thy ſelf 
thereby , let Part of Fortune be in the Aſcendent ; and if it be for the accompliſh- 
ment of thy heritage, or for any aſliſtance therein, place Parr of Forrwne in the 
fourth 3 and ſo in any other Houſe according to the nature of the thing wherein thou 
deſireſt the aid, friendſhip or aſliſtance of thy friend” 


CHAP. 


Rules for Elethng Lib. 3. 


CHAas 154 
of obtaining of Promiſes and Requeſts. 


its Lord, asalſo Parr of Fertuxe, and its diſpotitor ; arid make the Lord of the 

Aſcendent be beheld of both the Lord of the eleventh, and the d1tpolitor of 
Part of Fortuye ; or make one of them amically behold the Lord ot the Alcendent, 
and the other the Aſcendent it feif; and let the 2-0» be ailo well dignified and re- 
ceived of the Lord of the eleventh, and the Planer fignitying the thing pronnied ; 
and let the Lord of the ſeventh be alſo applying to the Lord of the Alcendent, or 
Aſcendent it ſelf; for the ſeventh Houſe hath f1gnification of the party fought to , 
and the Aſcendent is the fignificator of him requiring promiſe or requeſting ; and 
the oor 1s ſignificatrix of the promiſe or thing quelited ; . wheretore it w:1l not be 
amiſs ifin this Ele&tion you make the Moon ſeparating from the Lord of the ſeventh, 
and applying to the Lord of the Aſcendent. 

Thou arr alſo to remember to place the Cuſpe of the eleventh Houſe in the 
dignities of the Planet ſignifying the party ſought to for promiſe 3 as if he be 
ancient and under the 1ignification of Satzrn, let his dignities be thereon 
placed ; it a Judge or ſome reverend man, let the dignities of 7*p:/rer be pre- 
ferred, and fo of the reſt; let alſo the Planet it felf apply to the Lord of the 
Aſcendent by a loving aſpe-t; as alſo the Lord of the Houſe in the EleQion 
whereby he 1s ſignified ; as if he be a Father, then let the Lord of the fourth aſpe&t 
him ; if a Mother, or ſome Nobleman, the Lord of the tenth ; and ſo in order ac- 
cording to their ſignifications. 

Alſo if thy buſineſs be touching wealth or ſubſtance, order the matter fo as that 
the ſecond Houſe or its Lord may receive ſome amicable aſpect from the ſignifica- 
tors of thoſe from whom.thou expecteſt promiſe or any other requeſt; for thou 
muſt remember ſtill to prepare in this manner the Houſe and Lord thereof ſignifying 


thy buſineſs. 


0 EE that herein thou fortifieſt the eleventh and its Lord , the Afcendent and 


Lib.z. To Elettions for all manner of Works. 


$2$$$$$74$b$$$4$$3$$$$$$4:9$$$4$$$3$32$$$$$$$4$ $446 


—— 


SECTION XNIIT. 
Comprehending the Elettions of the Twelfth Houſe. 


ere > en ens 


CHAP... 


Of Freemg of Priſoners and Captirves. 


you have accompliſhed half your buſineſs ; you muſt know then that the 

Aſcendent and its Lord hath fignification of his or their condition that 
are freed, the Tenth of the perſon freeing , or that hath power to ſet at li- 
berty, &c. 

Wherefore if there be any Infortune in the Aſcendent at the time of deliverance, 
it denotes inſlavery and impriſonment again ; place therefore a fortune in the Aſcen- 
dent, and let the Lord thereof be well dignified and free from the Malevolent AſpeRs 
of the Infortunes, 'and if poſſible let him be in Conjunttion or loving Aﬀpet of the 
Lord of the Tenth,and received by him as alſo the Lord of the Tweltth,and if you can 
let the I ord of the Tenth be in the Twelfth, or applying thereunto, or to irs Lord, 
and let him be allo received of the Lord of the Tenth. 

Make alſo the 17o0n increaſing in Light and Motion, and joined to Fortunes,and 
let the Fortune to which ſhe is joined either by Body or Aſpe& be Oriental, and 
ſwift of motion alſo; but let not the 1-0» be in the Twelfth, nor beholding a 
Planet flow in motion ; Neither let the Lord of the Twelfth be flow nor joined to 
any Planet bur ſuch as are ſwift and well dignified ; fortifie alſo the Tenth Houſe 
and its Lord, and let himnot be impedited by any means ; for then it ſignifieth im- 
| becillity in the party that is to free the other out of Priſon , fewds or ſlavery ; 
wherefore it is requiſite alſo you dignitie the 5x who is the general Significator of 
power and authority, &c. 


| Ndevour alwayes to know your true Significator in every EleQion, and 


— — DC DOOTDAES 7” 


Ewan: 


Of Buying and Riding of Horſes. 
Y Ou have him taught in the 16. Chapter and 7. Section of this Treatiſe, how 


to buy ſmaller Cattel, as alſoin ſome meaſure great ; however you need 

but vary your Significators to the Twelfth, as you are there taught of the 

Sixth, and I need ſay no more on this matter, for I love not tedious diſcourſes 
Naturally. 

Wherefore note, that in what SeRionI have omitted ſuch things as might _ 

D d een 


Note. 


202 


eAn Introduttion, &#c. Lib.3. 


been inſerted, you are to ſupply it out of another by varying in this manner your 
rules; asin the Eleventh Houſe alſo you ſee there is omitted EleQtions touching 
making of agreements between friends at variance, &c. but you have that delivered 


in the ſecond Chapter of the fourth SeRion, which may ſerve in the Eleventh or 


any other Houſe by exactly changing your Significators ; and ſo likewiſe any other 
thing you muſt ſupply in this nature, tor it were both tedious and ſuperfluous thus to 
make repetition. 

As touching riding of Horſes for any Race, or to win at ſuch a time, fit the Aſcen- 
dent, its Lord, the Ioon and its Diſpolitor, as alſo the Planet to whom they are 
joined, alſo Part of Fortune, and its Diſpolitor, and make the Lord of the Aſcen- 
dent and the Moon apply thereunto, and then place the Lord of the Hour in the 
Aſcendent at that time he ſteps out of the ſtable, 

Bur if all theſe cannot be obſerved , place the Lord of the hour (to be ſure) in 
the Aſcendent and fortifie the ſoon, and place her if you can in Sagittary, or in 
the firſt half of Zibra, and look that neither the Lord of the hour , the 1400», nor 
the Lord of the Aſcendent be in their fall, for that denotes the horſe ſhall fall in the 
race before he come to 


The End, 


i P£A 


e@ASTROLO G14 MVNDA 


ASTROLOGY 


mis P VR I 


BEING A 
Short but Compendious 


INTRODVCTION 
Tothe. Tudging of the 


REVOL VTIONS 


O F 
The W O R L D; by which, 


AS AL SQ 


ECLIPSES 


| Great CONIVNCTIONS, COMETS, 
AND 


BLAZINGSTARS 
Are Tudged (by the ordinary Courſe and Order of 


Nar uns x) the general accidents of Countries, Kingdoms, Pro- 
vinces and Cities, alterations of Kingdoms and Empires, Laws and Cu- 
ſtoms , cauſe of Plenty, Dearth, Wars, Peace, Health, Sickneſs, 
alteration of the Ayr, and (to be ſhort) of all chings ap ppercaining eo 
the life of Man in a natural way ; wherein the Infinite Wildomof G op 
is ſeen maniteſtly in the Government of the World by the Influence 
and conſtant Harmony of the Celeſtial Planets and Stars; the Innocency, 
Legality and Purity of the Arc demonſtrated, and prov ed by Demonſtra- 
tion of the Inevitable Events of the Heavens, ſolong as G 0D upholdeth 
the order and courſe of Nature unperverted; And the Students thereof 
conſequently proved rather Divines then Conjurers or Practifers of what 
is unlawful. 


- —_— — — ———  ————_—_—_ —_— 


TAE and nd oe Gent. 


'T empora Mutantur 10s & Mutamur in illis, 


— 


— OCD —_— —————— 


_ R. W 1653: 


— — 


_, F - > = a +: ©*_ "et ' is 4 , 
= as Y IS > 0 "= » hh. . -- D ” - 
m4 - 4 4. &8 % _, ” 
& 6 ' I hg , * . 
- - F C 
l 
* 
5” 
. 
. 
*F 
oy 
” 
” 
i 
Ls 
- 
b 
. 
0 
b 
' . 
E 
” 
. 
. 
» 
. 
' 
1 . 
, 
CY 
. 
. 
. 
- 
. 
- 


HONORATISSIMO 
ATQUE 


ILLVSTRISSIMO 
DOMINO NON MINVS 
VIRTVTE SVA QVAM GE: 

NERIS SPLENDORE, 


DOMINO 


MOVNTAGVE BERTY 
COMITI DE LINDSEY, 


DOMINO DE 
 WVILLOVGHBY DE ERESBY, 
E T 


TOTIVS A4NCLIE 
SVPREMO CAMERARIO, 


Salurem in Perpetuum. 
DOMINO SU®O 


MVLTIS NOMINIBVS OBSERVANDO 
HANC SUAM 


ETPOLOGCI AM 
MVNDAM 


SUBMISSE DEDICAT 


IWilbelmns Rameſens 


\ 


EO Pr” HE B07 mr th He II” 9 ge pI 1) 


\ 
\ 


_- ad | 
© Eg, 


TO THE 
Right Honorable and truly Noble 


Montague Berry, 


Eaxr of LIMDSEY, LoRD 
WILLOVGHBYof ERESBY 


AND 
Lorpd Hicyu CHAMBERLAIN 
| O F 


ENGL AMN D. 


My LokKk D, 

DRASS [d not your Honours Merits claim this 
Sa JS fourth and chief Part of my Labours 

as Your due, I durſt not have aſſumed 
that audacity as to implore Your Ho- 
nours Patronage ; for as I have humbly 
made choice of the three preceding 
moſt Noble Heroes, So (my Lord) left yer notwith- 
ſtanding my Fabrick ſhould ar length fall to the ground, 
(which it muſt inevitably do, unleſs Your Honour pals 
by the preſumption and unworthineſs of the Pen- 
ner) I humbly preſumed: ro crave Your Honours 
Patronage and ſupport thereof ( craving pardon for 
this my Simile ) being the main pillar on which I deſire 
It 


The Epiſtle Dedicatory. 
it ſhould be built and upheld) not queſtioning then, 


but Your Honours Vertues and moſt Excellent Endows- 
ments will adde ſuch a luſture to the whole, that the 
beholders will not queſtion the inſufficiency or un- 
worthyneſs of Me the Author , nor further call the 
thing it' ſelf in queſtion , but with all aſſured conh- 
dence accept thereof as moſt worthy and immacu- 
late, which in ic felf I preſume to conclude it is , 
how ever my weakneſs and inſufficiency hath expreſ- 
ſed it to the World ; the which as I queſtion nor but 
Your Honours piercing Judgement will diſcover, ſo 
I hope Your Honours Munificent goodneſs will paſs 
over and pardon. 

I muſt confeſs (my Lord) the ridiculous and baſe 
Mercenary practiſes of ſome thaz have pretended to 
the knowledge of this ſublime Science hath brought 
the whole Art into contempt, and in queſtion with 
the ignorant therein, and ſuch as are not able to 
diſtinguiſh between the uſe and the abuſe of a thing, 
or the purity of the thing ſtudyed, and the corruption of 
the Studeort; whereby the very word ASTROLOGY, 
under which this moſt heavenly Science and peece of 
NATYV RAL PHILOSOPHY is expreſt, 1s be- 
come both odious and ridiculous to moſt of the rural 
now living; but ſuch is Yout Honors Magnanimity,that 
the Traduced ſhall not without diligent examination 
and evident witneſs be condemned, nor aboliſhed 
Your Honours Preſence, not making Tradition, but 
Truth and Experience the guide and ground of Your 
Judgement. | 

I ſhall not need here ro ſpeak ought in the be- 
half of the whole Science, which I have endevoured 
in theſe my labours to purife from its drols and fe- 
culency, ſince in the preceding Epiſtles, and the firſt 
Book, 1 have hinted both ar its Verity, Excellency 
and Validity ; but only of this ſubſequent Diſcourſe, 
which now after my great care and indefatigablc 


pains being produced, I am by an happy guſt drawn 
to 


The Epiſtle Dedicatory. 


ro this Anchorage, and crave Your Honours acceptance 
and: Patronage. | 

It is an Inſtruction to the whole General Part of 
that Liberal Science which is called ASTRO NO- 
MY or ASTROLOGY, the which together with 
PHYSICKS make according to Ariftotle, 2. Phy. 
2. Cap. but one intire Science; for he throughout all 
his works indifferently uſeth the Name of AS TR0- 
LOGER and ASTRONOMER, and ASTR 0- 
LOGER and P HILOSOP HER for one and the 
ſame; and amongſt all Ancient and Learned Writers 
Aſtrolozy and Aſtronomy have been received for one and 
the ſame Science , though diſtin& parts or properties , 
as hath been hinted ar, in the firſt Book of this Volume, 
and the 2. Chapter. | 

It containeth four Sections, the three firſt treating 
of the Revolutions of the Years of the World, and the fourth 
and laſt of Eclipſes, Comets and Blazing-Stars, and the 
great Conjunftions of the Planets, by which we are taught 
how to judge of the order and courſe of Nature , and 
the Government of the World , asthe general accidents 
of the World, and the alterations thereinthe change of 
Laws, Cuſtoms, Empires and Governments, the 
alterations of the Ayr, the cauſe of Plenty, Scar- 
city, Health, Sicknels, Peace, Wars, &xc. We may allo 
hereby moſt manifeſtly ſee the infinite Wiſdom , 
Providence and Government of G op in the whole 
Vniverſe by the conſtant Harmony and Celeſtial in- 
fluences of the PLANETS andtheST ARS, whoſe 
Portencies, ſo long as G o Þ upholdeth the order and 
courſe of NATV/ RE unperverted, mult inevitably 
prove true and effectual, they being never fruſtrated 
but by Miracle. My Lord, thisis the AST ROL0-: 
GIA MY ND A, the Pure. Aſtrology, which the Pa- 
triarchs and the Antient Fathers ſtudyed and contem- 
plated : by which the Babylonians, Arabians, Syrians, Egyp- 
tians, Grecians, Perſians and Lacedemonians ruled and be- 


came famous and glorious to the whole World, and 
there- 


T he Epiſtle Dedicatory. 


therefore (My Lord) as being the chief and moſt exqui- 
ſite part of theſe my undertakings, 1 haveplaced ir laſt, 
that ſo it might not be attempted by any that are unac- 
quainted with the preceding Diſcourſes, which ſerve 
but as it were Introductions hereunto , for which 
cauſe (My Lord) itis that I humbly preſume to lay 
it at Your Honours Feet above any others, being ſo 
nerely bound to Eternile for ever Your late Honorable 
and Vertuous Conſort of happy memory, doubting 
not but by the unparalleld ſplendour of Your Ho- 
nours ſurpaſſing Endowments, it might be exalted 
to that hight of Honour as to be but accepted into 
Your Honours Preſence, which will be a perpetual 
Fame unto itand him, who in all humility Preſents 
it to Your Honour, and from thence aſſumes that Ho- 
nour as to ſubſcribe himſelf : 


My LoRD, 


Your HoxouRs moſt 


Humble Servant 


IWillam Rameſey 


To the Studious Reader. 


RE ADE R, 
=23I> N this tollowing Diſcourſe is preſenred unto thee the chieteſt 
knowledge of the whole World, and the Myſteries of Na- 

ture, ſo I call them, becauſe they ſeem no other then Myite- 

' ries, and ſtrange unto us whilſt we are Ignorant in the 
caules thereof; In this peice thou mayeſt read the time palt, 
preſent and future, the whole Government of the World trom its Cre- 
ation to its Subverſion in a Natural way, by the Revolutions of the 
Tears of the World, Eclipſes, Comets , and great Conjunttions of the Cele- 
ſtial Planets, and all accidents that ſhall happenin any Year, whether 
good or evil, whether Wars or Peace, and who ſhall overcome, whe- 
ther Sickneſs or Health, Plenty or Scarcity, what ſhall.be che condition 
of Kingsor Grandees, and thoſe that are placed in Authority in any Re- 
gion or Kingdom, as allo of the Beggar, and ſuch as are of low and 
poor degree, the ſtate of the Commons in any place, the wealth and 
roteny or want of any City, Town or Village, andof all things be- 
onging to Man, alſoot Rain, Hail, Snow, Froſt, Dew, fair Weather, 

Tempeſts, Storms, Thunder, Lightnings, Earthquakes, Apparitions in 
the Ayr,and alterations therein,and rhe caules of all thele;and to be ſhort, 
thou haſt here Faſons Golden Fleece, and the greateſt riches of Divine 
Knowledgeand Learning thar any Man (that is Philoſophically given] 
can with or deſire; hereby thou thalt not only with SOLOMON know 
all chings under the Sz, but be able ro Govern the World with Solomons 
wiſe man,and not with Phaeton. Wherefore leſt it thould be attempted by 
any ſuch giddy rath Yongſters, I prefixed theſe preceding Books , thar 
{o this may be made the more plain,and thy deſtruction thereby avoided, 
I mean the grots abſurdities chou wilt be ready to run into, as alſo thar 
thou mighteſt not be lulled afleep with telt-conceired ignorance, read it 
therefore warily, and with attention, bur firſt be chroughly informed ot 
the Nature and Quality of every Sign, Planet and Conhgurations thereof, 
which thou haſt delivered thee in the ſecond and third Books, and then 
there isno queſtion but thou wilt ſoon attain to this moſt heavenly and 
delectable Science; the which that thou mayſt be the better enabled,let me 
adviſe thee to ſeek firſt the true Knowledge of thy Creator, and chen 
afterwards ſtudy to fee him in his Nature and his Works , tor perhaps 
_ otherwiſe 


To the Reader. 


otherwiſe thou wilt be apt to attribute all to H# great Hand-maid N A- 
TURE, and ſorob him of the glory moſt due unto him : Yet upon bet- 
ter conſideration, I cannot ſee but even the moſt rural in Divine mat- 
rers muſt needs acknowledge ( if they throughly underſtand the My- 

ſeries of this Sctence)fome Superiour and Divine Power, although they 
cannot be led to the perte&t knowledge of him ; andthis we have found 
in moſt Philoſophers in former ages, eſpecially in Plato, who for his rare 
knowledgein Divine matters which he attained to by his ſtudy in Philo- 
ſophy , was termed DIVINE PLATO, the which Title he very well 
deſerved, as will appear to any that ſhall peruſe his labours: And this 
may ſerve very aki to reprehend ſuch Carpers at Humane Sciences, 
and the Students thereof that think it is impoſlible for them to be ſeen 
in ſuch matters without being Heathens , for if I may deliver my judge- 
ment, I think it will be a means rather to induce them ro acknowledge 
a Divinity, and to draw them neerer to the knowledge of the Creator, 
the which I can experimentally aver to be true, if they beany thing firſt 
grounded in Chriſtianity : Reader, I ſhall here ſay no more, but wiſh 
thou mayſt make no worſeauſe of theſe my labours then I intended in 
my publiſhing thereof, and remain 


Thy ' Lowving Friend, 


I illiam Rameſcy. 


Px 
AST ROLOGI 4 MY ND A 


OR 
Pure Altrologie: 


BEING 
eAn Introduttion to the Fudgement vf the Stars, 


Touching all general Accidents and Events in this 


Elementary V V orld, portended by the Revo- 
lutions of the Sun, Eclipſes,Comets,and Great Conjun&tions 
in a Natural way and courſe of the Govern- 
ment of the Univerſe. 


—__ — 


— — - - — - — A ——_ 


SeEcTION |. 


Containing the Ground-work of Revolutions, conſuderd- 

t;ons before Fudgement , and the true Significators 

of ſuch things as are neceſſary to be judged of in this 
manner of Work. 

W | E ſhall deſire the Studier and Well-willer to this moſt Heaven- 


ly and deleRable Art ſeriouſly to conſider and weigh the ſubſe- 
F& quent Rules, ſince this general part, andit only (as you have 


tions of the World follow this Method. 
Ee Firff, 


0 
# 


214- e Aſtrologia <M unda. Lib.4. 
The method Firſt, to demonſtrate (ſince you have heard already in the Epiſtle the extent of Re- 
che Auchorol. yolutions, and what general Accidents may be foreknown thereby in the Elements 
lows in this and Elementary World) the ground on Which Aſtrological Judgements are to be laid 
Book. SHE 6 44 : g 3 

or from Wherce to be deduced, for the preditling or kxowing any accident or mutation 
in the World, and how many Schemes or Figures of the Heavens ought to be crefled for 
the perfcrmance thereof. 
CSetondly, what 14 tobe conſidered before judgement be given thereon , neceſſary for 
the accompl:ſhment of the Work, 
Thirdly and laſtly, moſt rational and authentick, Rules deduced from natural canſer, 
hav to ;udge of all accidents whatſoever portended by Revolutions of the years of the 
World, which (notwithſtanding you have already heard them expreſſed) by reaſon 
ſome of the Antients hggge reduced them excellently to four heads, 1 ſhall thus fur- 
ther illuſtrate. 
V\ hataccidents The firſt, denoterh ſuch accidents as are viſiblein this World, and to every mans 
are portended fjphr obvious, and common to every one, as afiy Epidemical or general thing, ferri- 


by ON ay and fterility , rain, hail, ſtorms and the alteration of the ayr and weather and 
the Worlg, ſuch like. SO , 
The fecond, ſuch as are inviſible in the Elementary World, either general or par- 


ticular, as are Earthquakes, T hunders, Floods, &c. 
The third, things peculiar to one fingle Nation or People, as Wars, Peace, &*c. 
The fourth, relaterh to ſuch chings as happen in the ayr, ſuch as are ficry appari- 
tions, Lightnings, Comets or Blazing ſtars, and ſuch like, &c. 


_ vor 


CCR. L 


She wing the Ground-work on which Aſtrological Indoements for the 
judemg of Revolutions are to be bulr, and how many Schemes or 
Fizures of Fleaven ought to be erefted for this Work. 


N this matter the Ancients (in thoſe days wherein the Art remained obſcure in 

ſome points) have had divers opinions , ſome grounding their judgments in 

theſe buſineſſes on the Aſcendent of the Law,Nation, Commonwealth or King- 

dom, concetning which they have undertaken to write, and others on Eclipſe, 

and great Conjunctions, the which although conſiderable in ſome matters, and to be 

taken alſo into conſideration tn every annual Judgement; yet the true time from 

hare: wages whence Judgement is to be raiſed for the exact knowledge and predicting of future 
whence Alto: natural events in the Elements for any year, is when the xx enters the firſt point or 
I-gers :a:ſe or Minute of Aries, which as you have heard is the firſt ſign of the Zodiack, and (in 
d:rive their rhe 24. Chapter of our Second Book Of the 7ragemert »f the Ytars) that the Su» 
juogemenrs of \,.c in this very ſign, and in this very puntm atthe firſt Creation, and therefore 


futu ec 2Cci- Bf w : 

"tg *. (I fay) itisall the reaſon in the World his return thereunto every year ought to be 
vents in the the chiefett-ground on which — are tO build their judgements, touching che 
clemertary Naturalevents of all ſublunaries; eſpecially tince he is ( as you have been ſhewnin 


Wo:td. the tirſt Book) Foxs Vite the Fountain of life , and Anime mand: the ſoul of the 
W orld,by which all things,as well Vegetatives as Senſitives have their ſubſiſtence and 
vivifying nouriſhment. | 

Beſides we ſee that when the Sz» enters this EquinoRtal all things increaſe 
and flouriſh, the Trees and Earth grow green and bloſſom, and alſo fructifie by de- 


grees afterv:ards, which may alſo prove unto us the manifeſt certainey, of 
/ | - thaC 


Lib. 4. eAſtrologia eNMunda. 215 
that opinion, or rather affirmation of the Antients that the Sun was in this firit 

ſign ar the Creation of them ; and truly, if we will be regulated by reaſon, it will be 
ſufficiently proved by the very Word of God, which alchough not expreſly i» ter: 

m:14 teſtifying ſo much unto us in plain wotds , yet will the Text delivered 

in the firlt of Geneſis verſe 11. be ſufficient together with the ſequel, verſe 12. 

ſhewing the effect , be enough in all reaſon to evince the Carpers at both 

this rt and Artitts tenets , which for the moſt part are guided by paſlion, errour 

and traditionin a)l their diſcourſes they publiſh againſt chem, 

So likewiſe on the contrary, we ſee when he enters Libra which is the tign oppo- See more of 
fite to Aries and the other Equinoctial, all things decay and diminiſh in their vege- this in the firſt 
cative vigour; the earth becomes as it were barren, the leaves fall from the 2**- 
Trees, &c. _ 

Thus have you heard the time of erecting your Scheme for your Work ; now you Hew ro ere& 
are further to note thus much, that your Figure of Heaven be exactly ſet for the Re- the Scheme. 
gion or place on which you would give Judgement, having firſt punctually taken the 
Elevation of the Pole. 

And then having alfo reduced the Planets and Dragons-head to the inſtant of time How to place 
the S- enters the aforſaied point, and erected your figure according to Art and 'b* Pianers 
placed them therin, you may proceed to Judgement. _ | _ therein. 

Yet firſt take this tor a Rule; if your aſcendent at this time be a moveable Morte. 
ſign, then muſt you not content your ſelf with that Scheme alone ; but for every 
quarter of the year mult you erect another, this induring no longer then till the Sx 
enter the firſt point of Caxcer, and from thence (as of the former you do judge of 
the Spring Quarter " comprehending March, April, and Nay, under the {1gns 
Aries, T aurus, and Gemini) may you know the events of the .S ummer Vuarter  be- 
ing 7une, July and Anguſt, under Cancer, Leoand Virgo; the third figure, for the 
third Quarter, and that which is termed {urwmnal, being Seprember., Oftober and 
November, under Libra, Scorpio and Sagittary, is to be erected for the Syn his en- 
trance into Libra; and then the laſt for the Winter 2uarter when he enters Capri- 
corn, which together with Aquaries and Piſces doth rule December » january and 
February. 

If your Aſcendent at the Sxs ingreſs into the firſt point of Aries be a common If it be a com. 
ſign (you have already inthe Second Book Chap. 24. been ſhewn whi ſigns are mon fign, two 
common, alſo which are movable, and which fixed, wherefore we ſhall not here ** 2<c<flary ro 
make any repetition) then muſt you ere two "g__ that of the ingreſs into Aries ——_ 
continuingin force but the firſt half year, v:z. but till the Su» enters the firſt Pun- 

Rum of Libra, for which time you muſt erect a Scheme for the other half year, and 
for the knowing of the effeRs portended thereby. 

Bur if your fign aſcending be fixed, then will that figure ſerve for all that Revo- If ir be fixed, 
lution, or to the end of the year, viz, you _ thereby undertake to predic or ac- *bat alone is 
quaint your ſelf with all matters ſignified thereby, even till the next ingreſs, without — 
erecting any figure of the Swns ingreſs into the other points. | 

Thus much for your foundation and Platform, viz. the Schemes ; but firſt now 
before thou layeſt one ſtone, let me adviſe thee to acquaint thy ſelf well 
with theſe following neceſſary conſiderations, and then mayſt thou ſafely and with 
more judgement £0 through with thy work, 


Ee 8 CHAP. 


216 


Hh and 4 not 
always evil, 
neither 2. and 
P ever good. 


The vanity of 
the opinion 
that h and 4 


are always bad, 


and UL and p 
good- 


eAſtrologia Munda. Lib4. 


CHavp. Il. 


(ontaining ſome neceſſary conſiderations before Iudgement. 


ficators , as which Houſe and Planet denotes the King, which the 

People , which their . Aſſiſtants, and which their Enemies, &t. and 

from whence you are to inquire of the fertility and fterility of the 
Earth , Wars or Peace, or any other Accident ; otherwayes you ſhall 
never be able to come to any perfetion in this moſt Divine Science. 

Ever be ſure you weigh well the Fortitudes and Debilicies of your Sig- 
nificators, as how they are eſſentially and accidentally dignitied ( which 
you ate ſufficiently taught in the eight Chapter of the Second Treatiſe ) how 
located in the Figure of .the Heavens, and how Aſpe&ed benevolently or ma- 
levolently by the Fortunes or Infortunes , and ſo judge according to the Na- 
ture of the Planet afflifting or aſfliſting your Significator , pood or bad , as 
the ſighification and nature of the Aſpe&, Planer, Sign and Houſe wherein 
_ denotes , and the ſignification of the Planet to which he transfers his 
light. 
; Do not conclude Satwry» and Hars alwayes Malevolents and Infor» 
tunes, and Japiter and Venus ever Fortunes and Denoters of good ; for 
as it may happen, they may be ( contrary to this general and ſimple opini- 
on) Fortunes and Infortunes as = may be poſited in Houſes, and be Sig- 
nificators, as you have beenalready ſhewn 1n the firſt Chapter of the firſt Seton 
of our Intzoduttion to EleRtions. 

As for example, in the Suns ingreſs into Aries, I have Libra aſcend- 
ing, or Aquaries or Capricorn, and Satnr located therein ; I muſt not hereby, 
becauſe Satars is Naturally evil, judge the condition and ſtate of the People 
ſignified by the Aſcendent to be evil and unfortunate this year, but contrary- 
wiſe (other teſtimonies concurring ) they will be in a molt proſperous and pgal- 
lant condition. 

For you muſt know a Planet in his own, houſe is ſtrong and advantagj- 
ous , according to the old Proverb, The Devil 4 good to h:s own Children ; 
and ſo contrarywiſe 7up:rer in my Figure at the ingreſs is in detriment anc 
afflicted, and Significator or Planet from whence 1- am to inquire of ferti- 
lity, and in Square or Oppoſition of other Significators , which alſo concur 
to the ſame ſignification ; muſt I from hence becauſe 7upitex, who for the 
moſt part is good, and in his own natural inclination free from miſchief, af- 
firm or conclude the year to be fruitfull and free from any wane or pe- 
mary 2 No, but deceale he is che Sipnificator this year of this matter, and 
in detriment, retrograde , in his fall, afflicted , impotent and weak, 1 judge the 
clean contrary. 

For I am to judge according to his ſigniiication and ability at that time, 
not according to his natural ſignification; for otherwiſe we ſhould make mott ma- 
nifeſt contradictions, and confound our ſelves both in judgement and reaſon, to 
make Saturn aud Ars the only Workers of iniquity ; for we fee clearly all 
the evils in the World are not of the Nature of theſe two, whic' would ot ne- 
ceſſity follow, were this admitted ; but ſome are Jovial , fome Venerecal, and 4 
third fort Mercurial, others participating of the Nature of the $zx and again ot 


the Hoon, 


|. « that you can readily and exa&tly diſtinguiſh- of your true ſigni 


Bur 


Lib.4. eAſtrologia eNAunda. 


But to clear this point yet more fully, ( for I would not have the ingeni- 
ous thus miſled in ſo groſs an errour ) admit 7mpiter or Venus bear chief Rule 
of the eighth houſe , which you know hath ſignification of death and morta- 
lity; and I finde » ſeveral conſequences and reaſons in nature the Heavensdo 
incline to ſuch miſchief : ſhall I barely becauſe one of theſe rules that Houſe 
conclude contrary to all ſound reaſon and manifeſt reſtimonies, the year will 
be rather healthfull > Believe ir, I ſhall refuſe thus to do, for every Planet mult 
perform chat whereumo it is ordained ; Yen is now to denote death, as being Lady 
of the eighth , and therefore in ſuch years I ought thus to judge. 


Yet thus much I ſhall follow her nature, as to fay there ſhall be much mortality 


or death amonglt the People by reaſon of voluprouſneſs, or Venery and ſuch like, 
becauſe ſhe hath. naturally ſuch ſignification : In like manner if Z#pirer be Lord 
of the eighth, and mortality that year denoted, I ſhall ( notwithſtanding he 
bears rule in that part of the Heavens) thus judge as hath been ſaid, viz. dearh 
and mortality, but the nature thereof I ſhall take from his natural ſignificati- 
on , as by corruption of Blood, Feavers andthe like, I ſhall ſay isthis mortality to 
be occalioned, &c. | | 

In the next place you are to have a ſpecial care to be well inftructed in the na- 
ture of every Planet and Houſe ; wherefore be thou ſure to have the exaRt 
knowledge of the ſecond Treatiſe it being Introdutory , before thou adven- 
tureſt thus far, leaſt thou be diſcouraged from ever attaining to the perfeci- 
on of this ſtudy, which I am certain thou wilt never do, if thou beeſt not there- 
in very perfe& ; wherefore let the firit eight Chapters thereof be peruſed over and 
over, and then proceed. 

Judge not uponevery light teſtimony, but according to Reaſon and Art do thou 
order thy matter ; for the more aſſurances and teſtimonies you have on any mat- 
ter and concurrences in cauſes , the more affirmatively may you deliver your*con- 

cluſtons. 
© Fear God, ſtudy Nature, follow the Rules of Art, be knowing therein, and 
be ignorant in the vanities of the courſe of the World, and thou ſhalt come neareſt 
unto Truth, and infinitely augment thy knowledge. 

In your judgement of the Sms ingreſs, joyn alſo in conſideration with it, the ſig- 
nifications of Eclipſes, great Conjun&ions, Comets and Blazing-ftars , if there be 
any either preceding or coming after it; for be aſſured theſe things never happen bur 
before ſome notable change and alteration in the World. | | 

Remember that according to the Debility and ftrength of your Significator 
you are to judpe of the condition of any perſon , the people , or thing whatſo- 
ever thereby ſignified, and you have attained to a great help : bur now leaſt 
you ſhould be till to ſeek in the true underſtanding of the Significators ne- 
ceſſary in this manner of Judgement , I ſhall ( notwithſtanding what hath been 
delivered in the Introduction or Second -Book of theſe our labours) here beneath 


clearly demonftrare them unto thee 


217 


e Aftrologia «Munada. Lib.4. 


Cua”. H% 


Shewing which are the Significators of the King , People, 
their Enemies and Aſsiſtants , in any Revolution of the years 
of the World. | 


Argely have the Antients treated of theſe matters, yet ſome therein have 
come very ſhort, and to little or no purpoſe troubled their heads, leaving 
ſtill the Student both in doubts and errors ; wherefore according to the 
ſincerity of my firſt undertakings, I ſhall here zndeavour to undeceive my Readers 
touching theſe particulars, and impart unto them the truth and ſureſt rules for the 
judging thereot. | 
1 ſhall firſt give you ſome of their Inſtrutions, and then my own, or ſuch as I 
in my judgement hold to be moſt rational, that ſo thou mayſt be the better able to 
diſtinguiſh truth from falſhood. 
Note that thoſe We ſhall begin with the Significator of Kings (but you are to note that in any 
in Authorcty Nation where no ſuch are, the Grandees or chief Rulers of the times are to be un- 
are underſtood derſtood) the which ſay they is thus to be known or found. 
«br _ Look to the Lord of the tenth houſe in your Figure at time of the Revolution of 
mak 4 = * the Szninto the firlt point of Aries, who if he be free from Combuſtion, Retrogra- 
King. dation, Impedition, and fuch like, and within fivetegrees of the cuſp of the tenth, 
either before or after, v:z. within or without the houſe , he ſhall without doubt be 
the Kings Significator; or chief Rulers, without any farther inquiry; but if he be 
any ways impedited, as in Detriment, Fall, Combuſt, Peregrine , Retro- 
grade, or beſieged, &c. he ſhall not be ſignificator of the King or Chief 
Rulers. | 
Have recourſe then to that Planet who hath Exaltation in the Sign of 
the tenth , andif he be within five degrees of the cuſp (as you have heard) and 
inno ſort impedited or afflicted, thou ſhalt conclude him to be Significator of 
the King ; butif he be impedited or afflifted (as aboveſaid) he ſhall not be Sig- 
nificator. 
But now, you muſtregard the Sy, the Tlanet that is Almuten'of the tenth, the 
Planet placed within five degrees of the cuſp thereof (if any ſuch be) or the Lord of 
Part of Government , the which if you finde ( firſt beginning with the Sww= and 
then conſidering the reſt as they are ſet down in order ) placed and dignifyed ef- 
ſentially, or free from affliction (as yourhave heard) he ſhall be Significator of the 
King, otherwiſe not. | | | 
The Nules os ©© that then by thele their Rules {omitting many ſuch like Inſtructions for 
the Ancients brevitics ſake ) there ſhall no Revolution whatſoever, though never ſo. bad or 
in this parricu- miſchievous, in the leaſt have any relation , or extend unto the King or Chief 
ar 2zenorr© be Ryſers of any place, as if they were excuſable from misfortunes, or the Hea- 
grounced Oh. \.-ns afraid to moleſt or affli& them , which muſt needs be if theſe Docu- 
ments of the Ancients muſt be admitted authentick , who will have no Signi- 
ficator for them , but ſuch as 1s free from all impediment, from which, con- 
ſequently, we muſt conclude they ſhall never be moleſted or diſturbed by Wars, 
Commotions, Inſurrections , Loſſes or Croſſes whatſoever, which I could wiſh 
were true, but we can wofully tefiifie ro the contrary : beſides to affirmit, were 
both ridiculous and prepoſterous, 
For 


Lib. 4. eAſtrologia «NAunaa. 240 

For the Grandees of the Earth, although never ſo great and proud, yet they The grearcf: 
muſt know (with us) they are but men, and ſuch too, as are not excuſed from the Porevrare in 
harmonious configurations of the Celettial Planets and Heavens. o_ —_ * 

Bur the Ancients, although they have deſerved by their writings infinite ap- >=" uo 
plauſe from all ingenious and judicious ſouls ; as alſo high efteem , for both the Heavens 
cheir care and learning ; yet in this particular they have come ſhort (for the genera- 30d itars. 
lity of them I mean) and therefore if in this 1 difſent from them, as alſo in ſome 
other of their Rules, I delire to be excuſed, tince 1 know no Reaſon why in every 
Age and inevery [tudy there may not ſorne one or other, not only finde out ſome 
failings of ancient Auchors, but allo correct them, nay tarexceed them,chough per- 
haps 1n every particular *hey may again come ſhorrt : for we ſee even the beſt Divines 
the þeſt Plilotophers, and Phyſicians have been corrected,and in ſome things amend- 
ed, and fo alſo the Attrological Philoſopher may come ſhore of another thar ttands 
upon his ſhoulders. | 

Wherefore then know, thar the true ſ1gnificator of the King or chief Rulers , is Tke true 6: ni- 
the tenth houſe of Heaverrar the time of the Ss ingreſs into Arizs,the Lord there- ficarors of 
of, and the Planets therein poſired ; but more eſpecially, the cuſp of the tenth and irs Kings and Re- 
Lord, whether well or ill diſpoſed fhmatcereth nor : Theſe in any Revolution tothe >, 37 the 
end of the World ſhall {till be Significators of the King or Rulers particularly , and y or co 
the 3#n and Sarnrn in general, but more eſpecially the S#7. | 

In like manner, look what ever lign aſcends at the time aforeſaid, viz. the Srns in- The true Gionie 
greſs into Ares in any year, and that ſign, together with its Lord, ſhall particular- fcators of the 
ly denote the common People of that Kingdom or Nation for which your Scheam is vcople of any 
creed, and ſhall be their ſigniticators, and the Aoon generally, as the Sz is the 092% nah 
general Significator of the Rulers. the years pe vS: 

In declaring unto you the ſign fieators of the Enemies-ot both King and People World. 
in any Revolution , I might alto ſhew you the defects of ſome of the Ancients, but 
I ſhould rather chooſe (though I had not a deſire to be as brief as may be) to paſs 
them over in ſilence, they mericing ſo much at our hands otherways ; wherefore let 
us to our buſineſs, 

See that in every Revolution of the World you have regard to the op- Ofthe enemics 
pofire houſe ſignifying your Sipnificators ; as the ſeventh houſe denotes the 9f King and 
open Enemies of the Common People and King in a hotltile way; the twelfth __ OrP 
houſe their private ; and the ninth houſe the {-cret Enemies of the King or pp 
Rulers, becauſe (as you have heard in the 42. Chapter of the Second Book) it 
is the twelfth from the tenth. | 

Even fo, as the ſecond houſe lignifies the wealth and aſliſtance of the people, ; ; 

-: > Of their aſh£ 
ſo doth alſo the eleventh the Kings ayd, wealth and aſliſtance ; the cighth the jc. & © 
aſliſtance, ayd and wealth of their open enemies, &c. as you have been fully in- * D 


ftructed before in the ſame 42. chapter. 


eAſh ologia &Munda. __Lib.4. 


CHaavy. IV. 


Of the Significators of Rich and Neblemen, the Kings Standard or 
Armour-Bearer, alſo Clergy-men, and of Students , Merchants, 
Law)ers, and Wemen in general : alſo Fryers and Monks ; and 
theſe according to the ſiznifications of the Planets. 


tients, as briet as may be, that I may proceed to the ſecond Section, having at 
large ſpoken of them already in the ſecond Book. 
Wherefore know, that Rich and Noblemen are ſignified by 7=piter and the 
Lord of the ſign in which he is located inthe Sz» his ingreſs into Ares. 
Souldiers, Armour or Standarc-Bearers, Gegerals of Armies and the like , are 
underſtood by Mars. : | 

The ninth houſe and the Lord thereof, denotes Clergy-men particularly, and ge- 
nerally they are 44m by 7upiter : Allo _— and che graver ſort of men. 

. Students, Merchants, and Lawyers, and Scribes, Clerks, and all Pen-men, Piture- 
drawers, and ingenious wits ; alſo youth and young men in general, are ſignified by 
CHMercnry. 

Vengs generally denotes women and all females (ſee chap 5.Book the 2.) and the 
Meoonthe vulgar and rural ſort of People: as the Sy, you have heard, doth Empe- 
rours and Kings. 

And laftly,all ſuch as live obſcurely and devoutly to the ſervice of God,as Monks, 
Abbots, Fryers, and the like, amongit the Papiſts (as inthe 1. chap. of the ſecond 
Book) and amongſt us ſuch as light all things in the World, in compariſon of Gods 
Service and Divine Meditation, are ſignified by Satarnu. As touching Cities and 
Countries ſubje& both to the ſigns and Planets, you have alſo fully heard them de- 
clared in the Second Book,where we treat of them. | 

Now to know the itate and condition of any of theſe in a general way in any Annual 
Revolution, you have no more to do but this ; look to your ſignificator, from which 
judgement is to be required , and ſee if he be eſſentially or accidentally ſtrong or 
aſliited , and judge according to his ſtrength or debility good or bad to the parties 
ſignified ; for if well dignified and located, good may be expected: if aMlicted, and 
impedired, the contrary, &c. | 


I Shall here only give you the general Significators of theſe according to the An- 


Lib.4. eAſtrologia MAunda. 221 


SDpbp pb ebb pE$ÞÞLI4 S$ÞD SSH ES $ÞÞHDÞÞÞÞS$ÞS 


Kerio. IL 


Shewing the ſlate and condition of the King or Rulers , 
and their continuation and durability in any Revolu- 
tion; as alſo the condition of the People from the 
poſition and fortitudes of their ſygnificators. Alſo 
how to know the Lord of the year in any Revolution 
of the years of the. World, and the fignifications 
thereof in the twelve Houſes , Signs and Aſpeits 
of the Planets; alſo of the fignifications of the 
Head and T ail of the Dragon in any of the twelve 
Houſes. 


CHAP. [. 


Of the fate or condition of the King or chief Rulers and People in any 
Annual Revolution, 


Fter thou art well informed of the true ſignificator of the King and People , 
A or any ones perſon or thing , concerning which thou wouldſt judge of any 
future event, thou wilt be the better able ro accompliſh thy deſires. 
Wherefore now to-know the true ſtate and condition of the King, People or any How to judge 
other, have regard to their true ſignificators , as unto the ſign of the tenth ( if thou of the condiri- 


enquireſt concerning the King , &c.) its Lord and the Planet or Planets therein po. 7" of the King 


lited ; and ſome of the Ancients have ſaid the Sum, Part of Fortune, and its diſpoſi- — 226 
tor are alſo to be joyned in conſideration with them (thou maylt chooſe which thou 
wilt follow) and ſee how they are dignified, how aſpected, and by what Planets, their 
n2ture , place in the Heavens, and nature of the fign from whence they aſpe& your 
{tsnificator. 

If he be in Sextile or Trine of the Fortunes, and out of good Houſes , thou may lt 
e::pe& and judge from thence good ; but if beheld by the Square or Oppoſition of 
the Infortunes , miſchief is to be feared ; if the aſpects be good and from many 
benevolent Planets, judge much ſucceſs; if otherwiſe, leſs ; and ſo contrariwiſe much 
evil if your ſigniticator be ſeveral ways afflicted, &c. 

If you would know the nature of the evil or good which is threatned by the af- To know the 
ſiſtance or debilities of your ſignificator , look to the nature of the Planet affliting , = of the 
and the nature of the ſign wherein he is located, and the part of Heaven in which - . Ac Shane 


; : threa:ned, 
© placed, and according to their ſignifications judge. 
| F.F 


As 


The Conditie 
on and ſtate 
of the Com- 
mon People 
in any Revo- 
Juticn of the 
years of the 


World,or any 


Other. 


Kules touch» 
ing the Signl. 
ficator of the 
King, 


e Aſtrologia eM unaa. Lib.4. 


As for example, in your _ you have ( ſuppoſe ) the Lord of the tenth inthe 
ninth, by which you ſhall judge ſome ſecret treaſon or plot againſt his perſon during 
that Revolution, becauſe it is the ewelfth from the tench,and 11gnitieth ſecret enemies 
and plots ; Bur if beheld by the Lord thereof by a malitious Square or Oppoſition, you 
ſhall ſay he ſhall undertake ſome Journey by which he ſhall endanger his life,or in the 
which ſome ſuch Perils ſhall happen ; and if alſo at the ſame inſtant he be attlicted by 
the malevolent Aſpect of the Lord of the Eighth, which is the Fifth in the figure, no 
wiſe aſſiſted by the adjuvant beams of the Fortunes, thou mayit then aſſuredly con- 
clude himto be in great jeopardy of his life : and if other Tettimonies concur, thou 
mayſt abſolutely pronounce death ; for you mult ſtill remember that according tothe 
ſigni6cation of the Sign the aMicting Planer 15 Lord of, and the Sign and place ot hea- 
ven wherein he is, to pronounce the nature of rhe evil threatned ; for we ſhall ſup- 
poſe the Lord of the Eighth before mentioned to be in the Seventh, which is the 
Fourth in the Figure,though Seventh from rhe Tenth , by which you may aſſuredly 
ſay that the evil, viz. the danger of death rhreatned, ſhall be occaſioned by the mali- 
tious and furious actions of his enemy, the Seventh houſe having ſignification there- 
of; and ſo judge of any other poſition ; and contrariwiſe if the Aſpects and 
Planets aſpecting be Fortunes, and in good places uf Heaven , judge the con- 
trary. 

> likewiſe judge of the ftate and condition of the People having regard to the 
Aſcendent, its Lord, the 370m and Lord of the year, and it they be well pla- 
ced and dignified , alto well ajpected by the Benevolents , judge the condition of the 
common People or Subjects ro be proſperous, but if you find the _— judge 
alſo the contrary. In hke n:anner you may judge of any of the aforeſaid {1gnifica- 
tors, mutatis mutand:-. 

Asif the Sign of the Eleventh, the Lord thereof, and the Planet or Planets there- 
in poſited be eſſentially ſtrong and tree from all manner of impediment, judge the 
condition of the Souldiers and alliſta nce of the Rulers to be fortunate and ſuc- 
ce(sfull during that Revolution ; 1f otherwiſe, judge the contrary , and ſo of the 
reſt , &c. 

If the Significator of the King be under the Sx beams , there is much danger ( as 
ſay the Arabians ) of his deceaſe in that Revolution ; but I ſhould rather judge his 
Kingly power to be then neer Death or an End, or likely to be niuch eclipſed , for 
chat there are many Significators to be conſidered for the judging of Death, which 
ought never to be pronounced upon one bare teſtimony ; beſides, were this admit- 
ted, we ſhould conſequently conclude by the ſame rule , the Death of a whole Senate 
upon ſucha poſition in ſuch an Ingreſs, they being ſignified by the ſame ſignificator, 
where there is no King, which were ridiculous in any one fo to do; burl ſay that 
their power and glory ſhall be eclipſed and ſhaken, and perhaps overthrown ar that 
time when any ſuch Poſition is tound. 

If the Significator be not as yet under the Sz beams, but within twelve or thirteen 
degrees entring, then judge this Cataſtrophe to be when he comes under his beames, 
orin conjunction with the $zz bodily. 

The ſame allo is to be feared when the Sign of the Tenth is Leo, and Mars in 
Square Or Oppoſition of the Sun , or in corporal ( oxjrntlion with him , but more eſpe- 
cially if he be Lord of the Eighih, or therein located, or in reception or tranſlation of 
light with the Lord of the Eighth, or with Saturn, or any Aﬀſped , eſpecially if he be 
infortunarely placed in the time of his Nativity or Coronation. | 

So likewiſe when the Lord ofthe year is in Combuſtion in the Tenth, this danger is 
threatned him in his own Dominions ; but if he be thus aMicted in the Fourth or Sc- 
venth,the danger is to be feared and expected from ſome coming out of thoſe Regi- 
ons ſignified by the Sign wherein the Lord of the Year is aftlicted. 

Know alſo that when in any Revolution the S# is Significator of the Rulers of any 
place, and in Sqmare or Oppoſition of Jupiter, they ſhall be envyed and moleſted by 
cheir own Houſhold Servants and Subjects; if there be any ſuch Aſpect betwixt the 
Lord of the Aſcendent and-Lord of the Tenth, the Common People will alſo riſe up 
againſt their Supertors to reject them. 

# Buc 


*.. —_— OY — Ie 


k Fa 
Lib.4. eAſlrologia <A\Zunda. + 5'S 

But if there be any friendly aſpe& berwixt them, or reception , or trantietion of 
lighr, judge the contrary. 

You may know the ſeveral accidents and the nature of them by your fignificators x1, .,i mw 
coming to the place wherein the Infortunes were at the time of the ingreſs , or meet- the icvc;a! £c- 
ing with them in their ordinary motions, &c. and this of either King , People or <id*1.rt5 ro 
any other ; ſtill remembring to have regard to the Planet ajtlicted , and. who are **P#* ©» 
thereby underſtood. ne | 

It the ſigmificator of the King or any other applyes to a malevolent Planet , or 
receive the hight of one {low in motion , it threatens very much miſchuet or death ts 
the party or parties ſignified by your ſignificator. 

Alſo if thou wouldit know the cauſe of any evil or croſs to happen to the King or 4, wow 14 

chief Rulers by the {1gnitications of the Houles, thou muſt be ture thou beett well ufc of any 
verſed in them , which thou mayit learn in the 42 Chapter of our ſecond I ract in this «vil threw ned. 
Volume; as it the fignificator be atticted in the ſecond Houle, or trom Planets 
therein, judge the caule to proceed from the lignit:cation thereof, as Money, Wealth, 
Aſliftants, &c. if in the third, it is cauſed trom or by Children, kindred, Neighbors , 
ſhort Journeys, and the like ; and ſo according to the {16nitication of the other 
Houſes judge if it happen in any of them, and lo likewiſe of any other fignificator 
as well as the Kings, MMatatrs mutand's ; allo of any other thing or accident let thus 
be your rule, &c. 

Look when the afMicting Planet comes to the perfect {onjunitinn , Square Or Op: Wien it 01all 
peſstion of your ſignificator, and at that time ſay the evil threatned will come to pals , come 0 pals: 
or when the affli&ting Planet comes to the Cutp of the Houſe fignitying any perſon 
or perſons of whom thou wouldtt judge , or to the place , 25. degree and minute of 
the ſign wherein the Planet which 1s your ſigniicator is located , and fay then the 
evil ſhall happen , unleſs the fortunate aſpects of the benevolents thereunto at the 
ſame time prevent it ; and if fo, then alſo ſee what Houſe that fortunate Planer 1s 
Lord of , and where located, and of what, ſignificator, and judge thedeliverance or 
prevention to proceed from the perſon, perſons or things ſignified by the nature and 
ſignification of the Planet, ſign and Houſe he is Lord of , poſited in, and is fignitica- 
tor of, &c. but if the aforeſaid Conjurttion, Square or Oppoſition be in an angle, then 
judge the evil portended to happen when your {ignificator becomes combutlt of the 
Sun. 

Further note, that if your ſ1gnificator be afflicted by Sex:z/e, judge the evil pro- How to jadzs 
ceeds from ſuch as are pretend-dly triends to the King , People or any which your by the nature 
ſignificator denotes, or from ſuch as are not thought or ſuſpe&ed to be Enemies : % the aipeas 
if it be by a Square aſpect , judge the miſchief fignitied thereby to ariſe from ſuch as 7; - _ 
are clandeflins and ſecretly Enemies ; if by a 7 rine, from real Friends and Con- gnibed- by 
federates; and laitly, if by Oppoſition, by open and profeſſed Enemies. the i lanct at- 

Conſider alſo the Planet afflicting, and how dignitied ; as if a Planet in his own fiiting your 
Houſe aftlict the ſignificator of the King or chief Rulers , judge the evil to ariſe from hg%hcator. 
their own domeſtick friends and alliance ; if he be in his exaltation , ſay it will pro- 
ceed from ſome of the Nobles , Princes, Dukes or ſuch as are in high power and au- 
thority, or near unto the Crown ; if but in his triplicity , from ſuch as have their de- 
pendency on the atoreſaid Nobility , or are allied unto them; if in term , from ſuch 
as are interiour unto theſe, as are Marquefles , Earls , Lords and the like; if in face 
onely, then ſay they are but Knights or Gentlemen : but if the Planer aftliting be 
peregrin and in no effential dignity , it ſhall proceed from ſuch as are altogether vile 
and bale, or of no reputation or quality, having no honourable riſe or dignity ; after 
the ſame manner may you jadge ( as you have heard ) of the ſignificator of any 
other as well as the chief Rulers, by varying your rules according to art and dif- 
cretion ; but 1 believe you will never have much need of theſe curious rules of the 


Ancients. | ; What is fignt- 
If your {ignificator de retrograde inany annual Revolution, judge much trouble, ged by the re- 
impediment and anxiety to the perſons or things ſignitied thereby. trogadation of 


As it it be t1gnificator of the King or chiet Rulers, it denores much trouble and 2" i laner in 
Ff2 detriment Revolution » 


What Kings 
and Rulcrs 
may expe&t 
when their 
fgnificacor 
or | ord of 


the renth 


Houſe of 
Heaven in 
any Revolu- 
tion is im- 


pedited. 


@ A, ſtrologia e AM unda. Lib.4. 


detriment unto their perſons , and great fear of unthroning of them ; likewiſe if it be 
ſigni*cator of the People (and fo of any other) or if the Lord of the year be thus at- 
ficted , fay the condition of the People ſhall be very ſad and grievous , and much 
trouble and miſchief ſhall be to their Cities and Towns; and this ſhall more aſſured|y 
be, if your ſigniticator be then in the terms of the Infortunes , andthe unfortunate 
Planet aMicted alſo and indiſpoſed, for then ſhall the miſchief and trouble be the 
more grievous and troubleſome : So alſo if your fignificator be in the terms of a 
fortune, if he be ill-affe&ted, weak and in the Houſes of the Malevolents ; bur if he 
be free , the evil will be the leſs ; eſpecially if he be in his own Houſe or Exaltation . 
or triplicity, eſſentially well —_— 

Now as touching the 1ignifications of the impedition of the Lord of the tenth 
in any annual Revolution; and then let us proceed to the rules of the Ancients 
in judging the true ſtate and condition of the Common-People in any Region, by 
any Revolution of the year , over and above what hath been already ſaid, for the 
better illuſtration thereof, that ſo the Student may be the better able to retain 
and underſtand the rules of Art, as alſo to judge of theſe matters the more ac- 
curately. 

You have heard that the ſign of the tenth Houſe in any annual Revolution, to- 
gether with the Lord thereof, hath fignification of Kings and chief Rulers ; the 
which if it be combult in any of the Angles, it ſignifieth deſtruction to the King or 
chief Rulers during that Revolutions effects. | 

As if it be inthe Aſcendent , and the Sx be Lord thereof, you may from hence 
conclude ( if other tettimonies concurr ) that the Common People or Subjects will 
riſe up againſt their Superior or Governers, and kill him or them or depoſe them, or 
at leaſt grievouſly moleſt and aftlict them, according to the power and ftrength of 
the ſigmficators; for if Mars do then aftlit him by Conjunttion or aſpet, and be 
either Lord of the eighth or fifth , or therein located, death is the more to be feared ; 
but if Satzrn be then in aſpect or Conjnnttion with the Lord of the tenth, it is likely 
ſome Saturnian diſeaſe or evil will afi&t his perſon if he be not Lord of the afore- 
ſaid Houſes, and bear dominion either by eſſential dignity or bodily preſence in the * 
ſixth, or elfe ſome other misfortune will befal him according to the nature of Sa- 
turn and the place and ſign of Heaven wherein he is located. 

If the Combuſtion fall out ſo as to þe in the ſeventh or fourth Houſes of Heaven , 
Judge the miſchief to be according to the ſignitication of theſe Houſes, as you 
have heard of the Aſcendent : for if it be in the ſeventh you ſhall ſay ( becauſe it 
hath fignification of the Enemies of the People ) that the diſaſter ſhall be occa- 
ſioned by them; in the fourth ( being the ſeventh from the tenth ) from his own 
proper Antagoniſts , &c. if inthe tenth ir ſelf this combuſtion be , it ſhall proceed 
trom his own unrulineſs or wilfulneſs, &c. this is clear. Wherefore now alfo have 
regard to the condition and tate of the People, but firſt let us conſider the durability 


of Kings and Rulers. 


EEE: 


Lib.4. » Aſtrologia <NAunda. 225 


CH kk”. If 


Teaching how to judge of the ptrmanency or durability of Kings , 
or ſuch as are m Authority by any Revolation. 


ways the-Learned in former apes have ſet down for the judging of this 
matter ; butleſt I then deviate from both my intentions at this time , 
and natural inclination to ſhort diſcourſes, and trouble both thee and my ſelf ro no 
purpoſe, ſince it may as well be delivered in fewer words, I ſhall fatisfie my ſelf with 
thele following rules. | 
Firſt , Erect your figure of the Heavens , which for the judging of theſe matters From whence 
muſt be according to that punctum of time the King was firit Ele&ted or Crowned ; Jadgement is 
if you are to judge of a Senate , take the time of their firſt fitring or aſſembling to- *2 be :<quired 


M Uch time and paper might I here conſume in delivering unto you all the 


for the pre- 
gether, or wherein they were firſt created or made a Free State, or aſſumed power to 1; m—_ " 
a& according to what their own counſels ſhall produce. be of 


Then having exactly placed the Planets therein accordins to their then ſeveral any Kingdom 
places, and reduced them to the juſt hour and minute of the day , eſpecially the 9* Govern. 
Moon , you are to ſee what Planet is Hy/ech or Alchochoden or Giver of Life in your Þ***: 
Figure, and A/mz:en or Chief Ruler of the Aſcendent, to know the ſtate of his body 
or perton ; what of the mid-heaven, to judge of the ftate and condition of his 
Kingdom or Regal power ; and having thus done thou mayf eaſily judge of either 
of rheſe in this manner, | 

Obſerve whart ſign, degree and minute aſcends and culminates, what ſign, degree 
and minute the S#4 and  /--n poſſeſſes, and where to a very minute alſo is your A/- 
muten and Hylech ot each Houle ; then fee in every Revolution, Eclipſe or great 
Conjunction, how theſe places and ſignificators are diſpoſed , and how aſpected by 
the Malevolents, and judge the continuation or ſubverſion of their Government ac- 
cording as you ſee occation. 

If your Hylech or Giver of Life be afflicted ,, judge the evil ( according to the 

ſtrength of the affliting Planet ) to fall on the perſon or perſons of the Rulers, or 
rouching their lives: if the «L/muten of the mid-heaven, upon their Regal power ; 
and ſo contrariwiſe if they be affiſted and fortunately beheld, or come to the pla- 
ces of the Fortunes, or the Fortunes fall in any of their places in any Revolution , 
Eclipſe or great Conjunttion , judge the contrary ; ſtill remember the good or evil 
doth depend on the power of the Benevolent or Malevolent Planets; tor if much 
aMfcted , much evil is to be expeted, and fo on the contrary as you have already 
been taught. 

If any of the aforeſaid places or ſignificators fall in the place of any Eclipſe or 
creat Conjunition , judge the miſchief threatned to happen according to the ſignifi- 
cation of the Eclipſe or Planets ſo in Connttion ; warily judging according to the 
nature of the Houſes wherein they are in the Scheme of the Eclipſe or Conjunttion , 
and the ſignitication of their own nature, and the nature of the Houſes which they 
rule and are located in at the time of the Kings Coronation or Ele&ion; This 
you ſhall more fully underſtand in the delivering the rules of this Art touching the 

judgement of Eclipſes and creat Conjurtzions at the latter end of this Treatiſe. 

[ utterly for my own part Refuſe to follow the rules of the Ancients touching 
their givirs a year to every {ign betwixt the Planet aMicting and afflicted, for the 
;udging the time of the alteration of any Government and the like; for that they 
itand not wich much reaſon , or are they built on any ſtrong foundation , ſo as to 
itand unqueſtionable ; a little experience and obſeryation will ſoon manifeſt unto 
thee the truth hereof ; for touchins the juſt time when any ſuch accident ſhall 

happen, 


"_ 2 
Cad he EE ER ns Me go, cage "Og at _ 
8 Y ——__ . '« ene es _ 
: , " , A ws _ on 


eA ſtrologia eM unda. Lib.4. 
happen, I conceive ought rather (and that with a great deal of more reaſon ) to be 
ett to the good pleaſure and will of the Moſt High , who is the great orderer and 
diſpoſer of all the Cauſes in Nature , and will according to his own good time effect 
what is moſt agreeable unto his Divine will. : 

Wherefore let it ſuffice to know by the inclinations of thoſe Glorious Bodies the 
alterations and durabilities of ſublunary things, without enquiring how or when ir 
will be performed ; if thou findeſt at the beginning of any Government or State 
the Angles of Heaven fixed, the Lords thereof well diſpoſed, eſpecially of the Aſcen- 
dent and mid-heaven , and free from the malevolent preſence and Configurations of 
the Infortunes, and eſſentially dignified and aſpected by the adjuvant Planets , thou 
mayſt from hence conclude the firmneſs and permanency of the Rule or Government 
then ſetup; but if thou findeſt theſe places and figniticators contrariwiſe attiied , 
moveable and weak, judge the contrary thereunto. 

If Sarnrn be then Lord of the Aſcendent , and eſſentially well dignified and al- 
rogether free from the aftiftion of the Malevolents and Angular , ſay that the King- 
dom, State, Rule or Government then began ſhall Aouriſh and conunue unchange- 
able 465 years, being the greateſt years of $ar4rn ; and if he benot altogether ſo 
well placed , but free from all impediment and in a ſuccedent Houſe , the Govern- 
ment or Rule then ſetled ſhall continue firm and unaltered 57 years , being his 
greater years ; if he be ſignificator and eſſentially dignitied , and tree from all im- 
pediment aforeſaid , and in a Cadent Houſe , fay it ſhall continue inthe condition it 
tirſt was in, 43 years and a half, being his mean years; but if he be but chus meanly 
placed and but moderately dignified, judge the continuance thereof to be but 30 
years , which are his leaſt years ; and fo accordingly judge of ali the other Planets 
when they are ſigniticators, and well placed and dignified , as you have heard of 
Saturn , their greateſt , greater , mean and leaſt years being all recorded in our 
Intredyttion to the Judgement of the S T a R $,, where the nature and ſignifications 
of the Planets are delivered, &c. 


CHAP, 3: 


Shewing the ſtate and condition of the (ommon People in any 
Region , by any Rervolution. 


28 N the firſt Chapter of this ſecond Section I have lutfictently ſhewn the 
Z5, way and manner of judging the condition and ſtate of the People; 
SS yet for the better illuſtration thereof ( as I have ſaid ) I ſhall in this 
>> manner further enlarge my ſelf thereon. 
Eg The Aſcendent,Lord thereof,and the Planet therein poſited, but more 

eſpecially the Lord of the Aſcendent and the 20s are ſigniticators of 
the Common People of any Nation , Country or Kingdom concerning which thou 
doeſt intend to judge by the Sw» his ingreſs into the firſt point of Aries , the which it 
at that time thou findeſt well diſpoſed, fortunate , in their owndignities eſſential and 
in an angle,or ſuccedent, free from the aſpects of the Infortunes, it denotes the People 
ſhall that year be in a good condition , ſhall thrive , ſhalt be fucceſsful and pro- 
ſperous, and ſhall have one gain and ſucceſs upon the neck of another ;. eſpecially 
if the Planet or Planets in Configuration with them be Fortunes or well diſpoſed , 
or that to which the Moon doth then apply. 

If the Planet to which the Lord of the Aſcendent or the Aoon doth apply or is 
in aſpe& with be 7=piter, they ſhall be ſafe and ſecure that year , ſhall enjoy their Li- 
berties , ſhall be free from all manner of moleſtation , ſhall have Juſtice and good 


Laws executed, and ſhall be in credit and honour. 
It 


Lib.4. » Aſtrologia \Aunta. 


If it be Yen, they ſhall abound and have plenty of all things, ſhall be merry , de- 
light in and enjoy pleaſure and ſufficient recreation, ſhall be neat, curious, and pro- 
pagate Marriages: Thus you ſee we ſtill judge according to the nature of che 
Planet in configuration of our ſ1gnificator , and the ſtrength of both Planets ; ſec 


this yet further cleared and demonſtrated. 


It the Afoon at this time when ſhe is thus jn aſpe& with theſe Planets that natu- 
rally (you know) are Fortunes, be cadent, weak and no wiſe effentially dignified , yer 


fhall the condition of the People be fortunate and good , bur ſhall not to abound in 
their felicities, nor have them multiplied ſo one upon the neck.of the other , as you 
have but now heard ; andif the ©Hoomwere (o very well fortified and dignified ( as 
you even now heard ) and apply to theſe Fortunes , being alſo as aforeſaid eſſen- 
cially fortified, bur cadent , it ſhall ſignifie the gallant condition and ftare of the 
Commons, and that they ſhall have good ſucceſs upon the neck of another , but 
yet not in fo ample a manner as was before declared when they were alſo placed in 
Angles. 


Alſo it theſe Fortunes be out of all eſſential dignities and weak , yet ſhall they re- Tte 21107 3. 
ceive ſo much beneht therefrom asto be ſafe in their perſons and in health , chough Þ'ying to th 


not much abounding in other matters, &c. Yet further obſerve but the {ubſequent 
rules, and the reaſons being well pondered in thy mind, thou ſhalt be jully enabled to 


and diſcretion. 

If in any annual Revolution the Ioon being weak and peregrine applyes to the 
Infortunes , being eſſentially ſtrong and well diſpoſed , it denotes miſchiet , trouble 
and anxiety to the people, poverty, want and diſgrace , according to the nature and 
ſipnitication of the Planer fo in configuration with her ; and if the untortunate Pla- 
net be Lord of the eighth , and be therein located , or have any dominion there , 
judge the death and mortality of the People; nay even though the Infortunes were 
not ſo placed, and the Lord of the eighth beholding the _Moox or the Lord of the 
Aſcendent , it thill portends the mortality of the People ; but more particularly ac- 
cording to the nature of the Planer afflicting. 

If it be Satzr», thou ſhalt judge the People to be afflicted and perplexed with cold 
Saturnian diſeaſes, ſuch as are Conſumptions, Palſtes, Agues, and the hke, which 
ſhall be the occaſion of death : if to Mars, they ſhall be hot and dry, Feavers, 
over-heating of the blood, &c. and if then Mars ſhall happen to be in an humane ſign, 
there ſhall be much blood-ſhed and man-flaughters ; and fo much the more affured 
ſhall rhis pe_ be, if the Aſcendent come then tothe place where Afars was:in 
at the time of the beginniug of that Law, or Government, or Commonwealth , &c. 
or to the Square or Oppoſition thereof, or to his place in any great ( #njuntt10u of 
his, going before this revolution ; for in any year where thou findeſt ſuch like Con- 
fgurations, thou maylt aſſuredly judge Wars, Commotions and effuſion of blood to 
follow , eſpecially in thoſe parts ſubje& to the ſign and quarter of Heaven wherein 
ACars was. 

War may alſo be predi&ted when he is in an angle and ſtrong, alſo when he in 
any Revolution is Combuſt, or enters his Fall, or when fprrey is in combuſtion ; fee 
in what page Mars 1s, and whether Occidental, Oriental, Meridional, or Septentrio- 
na!, and judoge thoſe in the quarter wherein he is to overcome, 

If Saturn and Mars inany Revolvtion be joyned in fignification, and in an earthy 
t1gn, it denoteth Earthquakes in thoſe parts ar rs they are; if Aars be joyned 
with Aercery, there ſhall be much Merchandizing. 

Alſo if the Moon and the Infortunes be ſo diſpoſed and mixed together,fo that one 
part is ſtrong and well dignified , and the other weak and peregrine, it fignifieth the 
People ſhall change their condition during that Revolution from worle to better, and 
from better to worſe, according to their ftrength and ſignifications, 

So likewiſe if Part of Fortune be ftrong of well diſpoſed, as alſo its difpoficor , and 
free from all manner of aMfi&tion , good ſucceſs ſhall be tothe People; if afflicted , 
miſchief and loſs 3 judge the nature of the good or bad according to what you have 
been already ſhewn, Moreover, 


1 


*OrUU1CS We: 
11d ovr Of 
Y : , . | : their ffenciat 
judge of other matters and ſigniticators , your rules being varied according to art cjonicicg. 


228 eAſtrologia eM unda. Lab 4. 
Of the Goni- Moreover , if Satwrn be ftrong in any Revolution, and well placed, he ſignifieth 
Cation of he COMtent, quiet and reſt unto the People , alſo proſperity, health and increaſe of both 
Planets in Re. food and money ; but if he be weak and atticted , he denotes the contrary , as mif- 
volutions . fortunes, deſtructions, depopulations, &c. 
when either. ]f in any Revolution {xp:ter be fignificator of the People , or «Llmwten of the 
wc s * Aſcendent, and ſtrong, the People ſhall be good, vertuous, honelt, chaſt , juſt , and 

loving Juſtice , Law, and all points of equity and honeity ; but if he contrariwiſe be 
unfortunate, the People ſhall exerciſe Cruelty, Oppreſhion , Injuitice , ſhall be dif- 
obedient and break the Laws , and prove quite contrary to what you have heard : 
Alſo when in any Revolution /zpiter is placed in the ſeventh , or oppolite to the 
Aſcendent, it ſignifieth that the People ſhall have no ſucceſs or good that Revo- 
lution. | 

IF Mars be as aforeſaid »Almuten and ſtrong , &c. the People ſhall be ſafe, ſe- 
cure and free from the moleſtation of all their Enemies ; they thall overcome them 
and beat them all under their feet, and ſhall be in a ſucceſsful and moſt proſperous 
condition ; but if contrariwiſe he be then weak and impedited, retrograde, combuſt, 
&c. he denotes wars, quarrels, {|laughters, trouble, effuſion of blood , epidemical di- 
ſeaſes, feavers, hot and dry diſeaſes, many miſchiets, and the clean contrary to what 
he betore promiſed. 

So likewiſe if the Sw be as aforeſaid {ignificator and ſtrong , the People ſhall aſ- 
ſuredly be in an honourable and noble condition , and many that are thereunto fir 
ſhall be raiſed to dignity, power and authority, according to the capacity and quality 
of their perſons, and be in great eſteem and favour with their King or Rulers: but if 
he be weak and impedited , it diminiſheth the honour of the King , and abaſeth their 
condition , and the People ſhall ſuffer much damage and diſgrace from their Superi- 
ors, and be tormented by them. 

If Yer be placed and dignified as aboveſaid , the People ſhall have all the og 
ſures and good promiſed by her ſignification, as delights, banquets, riches, pleaſure, 
&c. and ſhall delight themſelves with Women, and the like ; if the be impedited , 
you' may judge the clean contrary, as ſadneſs, poverty and little or no mirth , &c. 

If you find Mercwry in your Figure placed as you have heard, the People ſhall 
gain by Merchandizing, and increaſe their riches by Traffique , ſhall love and delight 
in knowledge , good inſtructions and ingenious Arts and Sciences ; ſhall alſo cheriſh 
and propagate all good Learning , and the Studious therein , and ſhall love one an- 
other : but if he be afflicted and unfortunate , they ſhall ſuffer much loſs and vexati- 
on by contrary winds, decay of Trade and Merchandizing, and have no diſpoſition at 
all to any good —_— Education; and to be ſhort , he ſignifies the clean con- 
trary to what you have but now heard. 

In like manner if the 170» be well placed, and be Al/mwrey, and eſſentially ſtrong, 
as hath been ſaid, the year ſhall be ſeaſonable, tortunate and tertile , and the People 
during that Revolution happy , ſucceſsful and in a proſperous and fortunate con- 
dition, and ſhall be preſerved trom death, flaughters and ſickneſs: Alſo if ſhe be ill- 
affected and impedited , much damage and muſchiet ſhall happen unto. the People, 
the year ſhall beunſeaſonable, deſtructive, ſickly and untruittul or ſcarce, by diſtil- 
ling unſeaſonably rain and dew when no necd 1s thereof, and withholding of it when 
It is requiſite thied after by the earth. 

So likewiſe as thou haſt judged of the 4400» and the Planets ( in a general way, as 
being Almuten ) mayſt thou judge of the Lord of the Aſcendent, who if he be for- 
canare, and well dignified and aſpected , thou mayit judge the fortunate condition 
and ſtate of the Common People nes that Revolution; alſo their miſ-fortune , it 
afflicted , impedited , &c. Judge the nature thereof from the nature of the Houle , 
Planet afflicting, and ſign wherein it is, whether it be good or bad, as you have been 
already ſufficiently taught ; wherefore it were needleſs and ſuperfluous here to run 
over the nature of the Planets fortunate and unfortunate, afMicting or aſlifting 
your ſignificator , and the nature of the Signs and Houſes they are in for an ex- 


ample. 
Yer 


Lib.4. eAſtrologia VAunda. 


Yet leaſt thou ſhouldeſt not be ſo apt and ingenious herein as I could wiſh 
thou wert, I ſhall a little hint at the manner thereof, that ſo thou mayeſt be 


the bercer enlightened ro the through underſtanding of this kinde of Judge- 
ment. 


If the Lord of the Aſcendent or Moos be in the ſeventh afflicted and weak, 


eſpecially if malevolently aſpected by the Lord of the ſeventh , and he eſſentially 
ttrong, fay the People ſhall during that Revolution be grievouſly afflicted and mo- 
leſted by their enenues, if in the eighth by death, inthe ninth by or in long journeys, 
in the tenth by their Rulers, Supertours and Kings,in the eleventh by their friends,or 
ſo in pretence, or by the. truſtcation of their hope and cruſt, inthe twelfth, by im- 
priſonmenc, lecret enemies and the like ; in the Aſcendent they ſhall ſuffer bodily in 
their own proper perſons, according to the nature of the ſign then poſſeſſing the 
cuſp thereof { and fo accordingly vary your Judgement after the nature and fignifi- 
cation of the other houſes, it therein he be in the like manner afflicted). the more 
aſſured wil chis Judgement, be if it be a humane fign ; if beſtial,then will it happen to 
the beaſts of that place, for which your Revolutionis obſerved. 

And according to the Nature of the ſign will the evil fall on ſuch beaſts, as are 
appropriated thereunto, as if the ſign aſcending at that time be Aries or Capricorn, 
it will happen on Sheep, Hogs, Hares, Goats, &c. and all leſſer Catrel for the uſe of 
man ; it Taurus, or the lait fifteen degrees of Sagitrary, on Cowes, Oxen, 
Horſes, and the greater fort of Cartel ; if in Leo, or any of the feral ſigns, on 
the wilde ſort of Beaſts; if in Scorpio, Cancer or Piſces, on Fiſhes and ſuch 
Creatures as live on the Water ; if in any of the acry ſigns, the miſchief 
ſhall be in the ayr, viz. it ſhall be Intemperate , Peſtilential and InfeCti- 
ous. | 
Some of the Ancients alſo ſay, that if Gemini do then aſcend, the evil will fall on 
young men chiefly; if Virgo, on Virgins and young women ; if Libre, on men 
of more mature years; if in the firlt fifreen degrees of Sagittary of eAqmaries, on 
the Antienter People ; this ſhall chiefly happen to thoſe Regions, Cities and Pla- 
ces ſubject to the lign and the part of Heaven thereby lignified ( of which you are 
fully informed in the 28th, Chapter of our Introduction to the Judgement of the 
Stars) alſo to theſe places ailigned ro the dominion of the Planet , concern- 
ng which thou mayft alſo fully be informed in the ſame aforctaid Trea- 
tile. 


As, if the Aſcendent be Aries, and Mar: be then impedited, the Regions, Cities, 
Villages, and places ſubje& to Aries ſhall be damnitied, and ſhall ſuffer much detri- 
ment by the heat of the ayr and defluctions ot Rheume, head-ach and the like ; ex- 
cept the benevolent Aſpects of Venus be prevalent and gainſay it; if the Aſcendent 
be Scorpio, thoſe places ſubje& thereunto ſhall be afflicted with water, and venemous 
Creatures, the Pox, pain in the head and arms, &c 

If the Afcendent be 7 arr, and Venus then impedited and aflicted,the Regions 
and Countreys ſubje& thereunto ſhall ſuffer much detriment and loſs through extre- 
mity of Cold, Froft and Snow, and alſo dryneſs, whereby the fruits of the earth ſhall 
be deſtroyed, &c. Ifthe Aſcendent be Libra, ſuch as are thereunto allotted ſhall ſuf- 
fer affliction by winds, pettilential ayr, ſickneſſes and pains 1n the head and reins, ex- 
cept Mars work or ſignitie to the contrary. 

In like manner, if the Aſcendent be Gemini and Mercury then afflicted and weak, 
the Places under the power of Gemzn; ſhall be afflicted with corrupt ayr, and receive 
much hurt and loſs by winds, and the people ſhall be troubled with Head-aches and 
obſtructions of the Lungs and Breathing-pipes; if it be Yi-go,the evil threatned will 
be in the Regions and Cities under it; as they ſhall ſuffer through extremity of 
cold and dryneſs, and in ſome fort barrenneſs and ſcarcity , and the people ſhall 
have palpitations of the heart, and grief in their cheſts and bellies, unleſs it be pre- 
vented by 7apiter. 

Alſo if Cancer aſcend, and the 1ſoon be afflicted and weak, the People under its 


jmiſd:tion ſhall be moleſted with pains and Rheumes both in their head and breſt, 


(> s and 


229 


20 


eAſt ologia IM anda. Lib.4. 
and there (all be alſo much hurt and dammage by unuſual and exceſſive rain and 
moiſture if Sat«rn prevent it not, | 

If Leo, andthe Sz» be alſo weak, ſuch places, Cities, Nation, or Kingdoms as 
are ſubject thereunto ſhall ſuffer dammage through extremity of heat and drought, 
warm peſtilential ayr, &c. the people through intemperancy and diſeaſes incidenc 
unto the heart and brain, unleſs Satarn by his coldneſs reſtrain and alter the fury 
thereof. 

-IF it be Sagittary that aſcends, and Pn impedited, thenthe Regions and places 
under Sagit tary ſhall be afiRted with infirmities in the head and legs, and theſe ſhall 
in the firſt half of the year be incident to the perfons of men, and in the other parc 
to beaſts of the greater ſort, as are Horſes, Oxen, Cows, Bulls, &c. 1f the ſign be 
Piſces which then aſcends, the places where it Rules ſhall ſuffer inundations, and 
grievous infirmities both in the head and feer, as the Gout, Dropſie, and the like, 
if Mercury mediate or prevent it not. 

Laſtly, if Capricorn aſcend, and Satwrn be impedited, the places ſubjeR to Capr;- 
corn ſhall be perplexed with extream cold and dry weather , and ſterility, and the 
people with griets and aches in the joynts and knees : andif Aquaries aſcend, the 
places ſubject thereunto ſhall ſuffer by over-moiſt ayr and high winds,and the people 
ſhall have many infirmities in their legs and heads, if the Sun and Hoon contraditt 
it not. Inthe like manner mayſt thou judge the good condition of the People of any 
Country, and the happineſs of any place if thou findeſt the Lord of the A- 
ſcendent fortunate and free from impediment ; obſerve theſe Rules, and ponder the 
reaſons thereof , and thou ſhalt not need any farther example or illuttration for 
any other in the like Caſe. 

For after the ſame manner mayſt thou alſo judge of the ſignifications of 
the ſecond , third , fourth and fifth houſes, and ſo of them all round the 
whole Heavens, by having ( I fay) regard unto the Fortitudes or Debili- 
ties of the ſigns on every Cuſp, and their Lords, &c. Take notice alſo that 
proportionably , according to the afflition and ſtrength of every Sign and 
Planet , and the Signs wherein the Planets are afficied and afliſted, ſhall 
the good or evil threatned fall on the Perſens of thoſe ſignified or their 
Eſtates, &c. and on the Tlaces, Regions, Cities, Towns, Countreys and 
Provinces ſubject to the Signs wherein the afflicted or \ affilted Planer 
Fails. 

And thus muck Fall ſuffice for the judging of the true ſtate and con- 


dition of the Common People in any Nation or Kingdom , in any Revo- 


Iztion; yet by other teſtimonies and Significators , viz. the Lord of the year, 
and the Planer or Planets in the Aſcendent accidentally at the time of the in- 
greſs, thou wilt have their condition farther declared and inlarged in this ſub- 
ſequent Diſcourſe. 


Lib. eAſtrologia NAunda. 231 


GHA?P. - IX. 


Flow to know that Planet which s Lord of the Year in any Annual Re- 
wolution of the Years of the World. 


lowing, which I ſhall cordially deliver unto thee, and that with as much 
plainneſsas I can, and my Judgment which of them ſtands with moſt reaſon 
to be followed. | "> 

You muſt know that by the Lord of the year is known the condition of the whole What events 
Nation, People, and indeed every thing therein in a general way to happen during ** known by 
the time of that Revolution, wherefore it ought warily to be conſidered and known *** -9*4 of the 
that ſo thou mayſt do thy work compleatly. 

After thou haſt exactly calculated the true time (ro a minute) of the Sm his en- The Rules of 
trance into the firſt point of Aries, and haſt erected thy figure as the Heavens were the Ancients 
then on the cuſp of every houſe, and the punctual places of the Planets therein (be- for finding the 
ing reduced to the exact time of the day)then ſee what Planer you finde in an angle ; +> 
for if there be any ar that time ſo located, he or ſhe ſhall be Lord or Lady of the year, ng 
or ſuch as ſhall denote the condition thereof during that Revolution ; bur if you ſhall 
finde many Planets in Angles,or one Angle, and wouldſt know which of them is to be 
afligned Lord of the year ; look which of them is Lord of the hour or day, and he 
ſhall be choſen Lord of the year (having compared one with another, and judged 
by the major teſtimonies) eſpecially if he behold the Lord of the term wherein he is, 
or the Sw», if the Revolution be by day;or the Moor,if by night; and judge accord- 
ing to his ſtrength and debility good or bad as you have alreafly been ſufficiently 


LI the Ancients have found out the Lord of the year by theſe Rules fol- 


taugnr. 

TT finde none of thoſe Planets in Angles Lord of the hour or day, or both, 
then ſee which of themis moſt Fortunate or ſtrong, and make him Lord of the year; 
ſee alſo which of the other Planets are joyned in {1gnification with him, and accord- 
ing v0 their ſtrengths and debilities and nature do thou make a right commixture, 
and judge thereot. 

But if at the time of your Revolution there be no Planer found in any of the 
Angles, ſee what Planet is n the eleventh or fifth houſes, and char Planet which is 
found in either of them ſhall be Lord of the year ; if there be more then one,ſee that 
you canveſs the buſineſs, as you have heard of the Planets in Angles in every par- 
ticular. | 

And yet if thou findeſt none in the eleventh or fifth, ſee what are in the ninth 
or third, and fay the Planet in either of them is Lord of the year, and fo accord- 
ingly judge as you have heard ; bur if there be no Planets neither in theſe Houſes, 
ſee which of all the Planets (the Afoon excepted) goes firſt out of the ſign wherein 
it is, for he ſhalt be Lord of the year, eſpecially if he behold the Lord of the term 
wherein he 1s, or the Sw», if the Revolution be by day ; or the Moor, if it be by 

ight. | 

I luc if it happen that the Sw» ina Diutnal Revolution be in any of the Angles, 
or the 24-0» in a Nocturnal, he or ſhe ſhall be then Lord or Lady (as I may 
ſay) of the Year. Haly alſo ſaith, thar when in any Revolution it ſhall hap- 
pen that the Lord of the Aſcendent be atſo Lord of the houſe wherein either of 
the Luminaries are, eſpecially that of the Time, he ſhall without doubt or con- 
troverſie be Lord of the Year, and alfo ſignificator of the People. 

Theſe are the Rules of ſome of the Ancients for finding the Lord of the Yea 
in any Annual Revolation, others have _ us to have regard to the Lord 

S 2 of 


eAſtrologia &Munda. Lib.4. 
of the Aſcendent, who if he be dire, free from Combuſtion, and in the aſcen- 
dent, viz within three degrees within the houſe or four without , or without ſide 
of the cuſp, he ſhall (withougany more ado) be concluded Lord of the year, and 
you need not trouble your ſelf further to ſeek any other ; but it he be eicher Combuſt 
or Retrograde he cannot be admitted Lord of the year. 

Wherefore then you are to conſider the condition of the Planet that hath Exalta- 
tion in the Aſcendent; if it be a ſign wherein any of the Planets have Exaltation, and 
ſee whether he be free from Combuſtion and Dire, and placed in the Aſcendent, as 
you have heard : for if ſo, heſhall be Lord of the year ; but it he be Retrograde or 


Combuſt, he ſhall not have that honour. 


So that then you are to inquire whither the S#z or ſoon be not worthy of this 
Rule; for if the Revolution be by day, and the £4» have any dominion 1n the A- 
ſcendent he ſhall have it ; if by night, and the Aſooy fo dignitied,it ſhall be hers ; but 


if neither of theſe bethus, have regard to the Lord of the term of the cuſp of the 


Aſcendent, and fee whether he be free and placed as you have heard of the Lord 
of the Aſcendent and Planet therein exalted, and if foghe ſhall be Lord of the year, 
otherways not; and then laſtly, conlider the Lord of the Triplicity, of the ſign a- 
ſcending in the like manner, ard if neither of theſe yet can be admitted Lord of 
the year, then you are to look whether the Lord of the tenth houſe be free from 
Combuſtion and Direc, and placed within three degrees within, and four withour 
the cuſp of the tenth houſe, and if fo, he ſhall be afſeredly Lord of the year; , bur 
if Retrograde or Combult, not; and ſo you muſt conſider the Lord of the Exal- 
tation of the tenth houſe , if there be any, and the Sw» and oor, the Lord of the 
-avrg of the tenth, and the Lord of the Triplicity as you have heard of the Afcen- 
ent, &Cc. | 

And if till thou art to ſeek for the Lord of the year, have regard unto the ſe- 
venth houſe, after the ſame manner thou haſt to theſe; and then to the fourth, af- 
ter that to the eleventh, fifch, ninth and third ; firſt conſidering the Lord of the 
{1gn upon the cuſp of the houſe, then the Planet therein exalted, afterwards the Lu- 


 munaries, the Lord of the term then, and laſtly the Lord of the Triplicity, &c. and 


The Rules of 
the Ancients 


ſome of the Ancients alſo have had regard to the Lord of the face ; but both that, as 
alſo all the reſt, I do not much eſteem,yet mayeſt thou, if thou pleaſeſt follow them, 


for finding out Wherefore I would not totally omit them ; for by theſe Rules you ſee there is no Pla- 


the Lord ot 
the year, very 
Inconſiſtent 
with reaſon. 


What is por- 
rended by the 
Lord of the 
year when we 


or ill diſpoſed, 


Where the ef- 
feRs of the 
Lord of the 
year ſhall be 
manifeſted, 


net to be admitted Lord of the year , but ſuch as are direct and free from Impe- 
diment and Combuſtion, and ſo conſequently the year in every Revolution 
mult always be fruitfull, and the People always ſucceſsfull, never croſſed or trou- 
bled, &c. which we fee repugnant both to reaſon and experience ; and therefore the 
Ancients 1n this matter are no wiſe, I ſay, conſented to by me. 

For this is moſt certain, that if the Lord of the year be free from Impediment, 
well dignified and aſpected, the year during that Revolution ſhall be plentifull, 
temperate and healrhfull, and the People in good condition, fortunate, ſucceſsfull, 


| and ineſteem ; butif the Lord of the year beimpedited, afflicted and unfortunate, 


judge the contrary ; eſpecially if the 4700» concur in ſignification : for ſhe is ſtill 
to be conſidered, being a general ſignificatrix of as well all things ſublunary, as men 
and women. | 

What the Lord of the year ſignifies in any Revolution , whether good or bad, 
ſhalbe manifeſted chiefly in thoſe Regions and Cities ſubject co the ſign wherein he is, 
the Quarter of Heaven he is located in, and to the ſignification of the Planet who 
1s Lord of the year ; if the Lord of the year be untortunated or atflited in the 
Aſcendent, or affilted by the Fortunes and eſſentially dignified therein , the 
People ſhall be fucceſsfull or afited in their perſons according to the forti- 
tude or debility of the Significator , and the nature of the houſe: if in the ſe- 
cond, in their Subſtance ; in the third , in their ſhort Journeys, Friendſhip and 
neighbourly Converſation ; in the fourth , in their Lands, Grounds and Heri- 


tages; in the fifth , in their Children , Mirth and Jollity; and ſo judge of all 
things 


Lib ot eA 'firologia M1 unda. 2 33 
things appertaining to the life of man, whether good or evil, by running over the 
ſignification of every houſe, and confiderins the nature of the Planet afflicted or 
ailiſted cherein, &c. | 

I might here ſtill run on with the Rules of the Ancients for the finding out of the 
Lord of the year,and inlarge this Chapter to the conſiſtence of two or three ſheets, for 
(omitting the ſayings of other Authors) Bonacus alone hath no leſs then 54. ſeveral 
Rules or Conſiderations for the finding out thereof, but to rehearſe them all were bur 
ro tire thee and my ſelf both, to little or no purpole ; for were they of any moment, 
ſhould there be as many millions as units in them, I ſhould be very willing and ready 
to acquaint thee therewith, 

Wherefore take this ſhort, but ſure Rule, for the finding out of the Lord of the The true way of 
year in any Annual Revolution whatſoever ; ſee what ſign aſcends, and who is Lord finding the 
thereof, at the time of the $# his ingreſs into the firſt Puntum of Aries, and 41- £219 ®f = 
muten , and let that Planet who is Almwurten be Lord of the year, whether he be !;*; ne * 
Combuſt or Retrograde, or both, it mattereth not; yet joynin Judgement with him menc of the 
the Planet therein exalted or dignified by houſe (in the eighth Chapter of the ſecond Author. 
Treatiſe you are ſufficiently taught the eſſential dignities of the Planets, and how to 
judge of them) as for example. 

We ſhall imagine at the time of the S» his ingreſs (being Diurnal) e£ies to 
aſcend upon the cuſp of the firſt houſe in any horizon, and the firſt degree thereof ; 
the Lord of Aries I finde to be Mars, who by reaſon he is therein eſſentially digni- 
fied by houſe, hath five eſſential dignities therefore allowed him ; the term of the 
cuſp being one of the firſt ſix degrees of the ſign ts Jzpiters,the exaltation is the Suns, 
who hath therefore four dignities allowed him, the Triplicity (if by day) is alſo the 
Suns, for which he hath alſo three dignities, which makes with the other four ſeven; 
then if we examine yet farther what face the cuſp is in, it being in the firſt ten degrees 
of the ſign, we ſhall finde it to be ar his, for the which he hath one dignity aſ- 
ſigned him, which together with the aforeſaid five, makes ſix and no more ; hence 
then, 1 am to conclude the Sz to be Lord of the year being Almnren of the aſcen- 
dent, or the Planet bearing moſt dominion therein , whoſe dignities you ſee were 
ſeven; yet Mars ſhall be joyned in judgement with .him, bur till the S»» ſhall be 
chief Dominator or Significator whether of good or evil,according to their ſtrength 
or debility , as you have already ſufficiently been informed ; yet becauſe I de- 
fire that the Students in this Science ſhould be well verſt in their Rules , I ſhall 
yet further deliver ſome Inſtructions touching the condition of ſuch things fig- 
nified by the Lord of the yearin any Revolution , by the ſignification of his Na- 
ture, place in the Heavens, and his configurations with the other planets, and 
what elſe ſhall be neceſſary to the accompliſhment of this Art ; I ſhall not need 
I hopeto give you any more examples in this matter, being ſo plain in this one;where- 


fore then we ſhall to our buſineſs tm hand. 


Cuar. 


OF þ when 
Lord cf the 


2 Aſtrologia « M unda. Lib.4. 


CRaS; 7. 


Of the Significations of the ſeven Celeſtial Planets, when any of them 
#s Lord of the Year, whether Fortunated or Impedited, and of the 


AſpeFts of the other Planets with them. 
| 


the year in the preceding Chapter, I have fully declared unto you the 

general denotation of the Lord of the year, when well or i]| dignitied or 
diſpoſed in any Revolution, to which I ſhall only add theſe two or three words, and 
proceed to the ſignification of every particular Planet when Lord of the year and 
Fortunate,or afMicted, 

If the Lord of the year be beheld by his Diſpoſitor (+:z. the Planet in whoſe 
houſe or ſign he is in any Revolution) and free from Impediment ; tor if ſo, the 
Feople under that Revolution ſhall be in a good condition, quier, ſecure, at peace 
and tranquility ; alſo joyfull and pleaſant. | 

If the Lord of the year be not impedited, and not beheld by his Diſpoſitor , or 
if he be impedited and aſpeRed by him, judge their condition to be between both, 
viz what you have heard, and what follows. 

For if he be impedited, and behold him not, they ſhall be ſad, ſolitary, fearfull, 
ſhall be moleſted with War, Trouble, and Anxiety ; for thou ſhalt judge the clean 


contrary to what thou haſt heard. 
Judge this alſo according to the Nature of the houſe wherein the Lord of the 


year is; forif hebe in the Aſcendent, judge as you have but now heard; if in the 
ſecond,the good or evil {ignified ſhall happen to the ſignification of the ſecond houſe, 
as to the Peoples ſubſtance, aſliftants and friends, &c. according as you have been 
taught in the former Chapter, and other places in this Treatiſe. 

Now then to our buſineſs, if Satwr» be Lord of the year, and well dignified, the 
People ſhall that year,or during that Revolution build and erect houles , ſhall make 


D Elivering unto you the Rules of the Ancients, for knowing of the Lord of 


year and forti» many alterations in Fabricks, ſhall abound in all things, the earth ſhall be fruirfull, 


hcd. 


h Lord of the 


and the People ſhall be in efteem and honoured by all their neighbours, and the huſ- 
bandmen ſhall exceedingly increaſe their Store and Wealth, and be ſucceſsfull in all 


their labours. 
But if Sat#rn be Lord of the year and weak or afflicted, there ſhall be much cotd, 


year and weak £reat and grievous infirmities, and men ſhall ſuftain much ſorrow, loſles and croſſes, 


YN when Lord 


of the year ci- 
ther ſtrong or 


weak. 


and great dammage by ſtorms, wind and rain (but this muſt warily be conſidered, if 
other Significators of Weather concur, and then mayit thou affuredly conclude it to 


be ſo) Ancient and old men and women ſhall dic ; and theſe things ſhall chiefly hap- | 


pen to thoſe Places, Cities and Regions under Sarzrn his Domimon, and the Domi- 
nion of the ſign which he doth then poſſeſs. | 

When 7#prrer is Lord of the year and ſtrong and well dignified, the King ſhall do 
Juſtice, and it ſhall be happy for thoſe that are Noble men, Judges, Councellors of 
the Law, and men of all forts of Religious Orders ſhall be in a ſucceſsfull, happy, 
pleaſant and good condition, and ſhall live plenteouſly and contentedly, in honour, 
and alſo great eſteem ; and the People alſo ſhall be in a good and projperons condi- 
tion, and ſhall receive good from their King and Superiors, and they from the Peo- 
ple alſo, if the Lord of the Aſcendent of the Icon be in reception with the Signift- 
cator of the King orl ord of the year, or be located in the mid-heaven; but if 7#- 
p:ter be weak or atflicted, judge the contrary to all what you have heard in every par- 


"1cular which 1 omit to rehearſe for brevities ſake. 
(1 art 


—_ 
 £# $ % & T % WW or I Ys RON 


Lib.4. eAſtrologia Aunda. 235 

Mars when he is Lord of the year, ſtrong and well placed, all fuch as belong to 7 v1 ben 1 <rd 
Arms as Souldiers and the like,ſhall be fortunate and in good condition, and tha{l'of the year ci- 
overcome their enemies ; there ſhall be alſo during that Revojution ſufficient and *** ſtrung or 
plenty of rain, as ſuch times (and no other) it is convenient and requiſite, and the "***" 
People ſhall be proſperous and happy ; bur if he be Lord of the year and weak, &c. 
judge the contrary, and you muſt remember itil! in the judging the good or evil por- 
tended by him,and alſo all the relt of the Planers,it ſhall avs. w, onnck in thoſe places | 
and Regions ſubject ro his or their Dominion, which you have beer ar large ſhewn 
in the ſecond or Introductory Treatiſe. 

If in any Revolution you finde the $4» Lord of the year and well dignified , the The 5» wher: 
King and Nobles ſhall exceed and increaſe in glory and renown; Corn, Beaſts, and Lord of che 
Birds ſhall be plentifull, the people generally proſperous and ſucceſsfull, and all year either 
things in a good condition whereof the Sz hath any ſignification; if weak, judge -%g "= 
che contrary. ; ET 

When you find Ven Lady of the yeare and well and fortunatly diſpoſed, the ns when 
year will be ſuccefsfi} and dreaagiom unto women , who ſhall be free generally i ady of he 
from Infirmities and miſchances, they ſhall love and delight themſelves in che + 2g 
ſociety and company of their Husbands, ſhall be fruirfull, ealily conceive and bring ,,*,* 
forth their Children ; the People ſhall alſo generally thrive, and be proſperous, ſhall 
delight themſelves in Recreartions, ſports, feattings, mirth and jollicies, and all plea- 
ſure whatſoever they deſire, ſhall teaſt, make Marriages and delight ro go neat and 
fine in apparel ; if ſhe be weak and impedired, ſhe denotes the contrary. | 

HMercary fignifies, when he is Lord of the year and ſtrong, that Merchants, Me;cu,y when 
Tradeſ-men, and all fuch as give their minds to Learning, Arts and Sciences , thall Lord of the 
have a ſucceſsfull year, &c. andif weak, judge the contrary. | year er 

Laftly, if thou feeſt the Moo» Lady of the year in any Revolution, and that ſhe 5,5 I 
be ſtrong and well placed, ſay, there ſhall be no want of rain in its due ſeaſon, both gy of the year, 
former and latter, men ſhall be generally healthy, fortunate, juſt and punctual in all eicher ftrong or 
their actions and promiſes, eſpecially if ſhe be in reception, or good Aſpect of the weas- 

Planet who is her Diſpoſiror, &c. Burt if ſhe be then weak, judge the contrary. 

And thus much briefly, touching the general ignifications of the Planets , when 
they are Lords of the year, and either ſtrong or weak, which you have been ſhewn 
ſomewhat more briefly, yer altogether as plainly before in the preceding Chapters of 
this ſame fourth Treatiſe; yet by reaſon the Ancients ſet them down thus large, nay 
far larger, and leaſt the ſignifications of the Planets ſhould not be well apprehended 
by thee, I thought good (notwithſtanding what had been ſaid) to ſpend one quar- 
ter of a ſheet more tor thy better underſtanding ; and that the rather becauſe there- 
by the ſubſequent Diſcourſe, I hope,will be the better underſtood. 

Now we are to ſpeak of the Aſpects of the Planets to the Lord of the year, that-Of the aſpegs 
we may know how to judge of future events thereby ; the Ancients as in ſome other of any Flaner 
things, ſo in this have not been ſo plain and full as I could wiſh they had been for *2 thc Lord of 
the inſtructing of ſuch as are but young Students therein;wherefore I ſhall endeavour EE any 
to be as plain therein as ſhall be requiſite for the inſtrufting even the weakelt capa- ogra 
city, if he obſerve what is beneath expreſſed, which is not much, yet ad rem, it 1s 
more then hath been delivered by any Author that ever I met with for all their tedi- 
ouſneſs : At the beginning of the firſt Chapter of this ſecond Section , I have in tew 
words fally delivered ſuffictent Rules for the judging of any Aﬀpect of any Planet to 
any Significator, ſpeaking of the Signiticator of the King, and how to judgerthere- 
of, by which Rules, I ſay ( having regard ti]l ro your Significator ) thou mayſt 
judge of the condition of any perſon or thing to be conſidered in any Annual Re- 
volution, and the natural inclination, and accidental fignification of the Planet in 
Aſpe therewith, whether it be by Sex:i/e, Trime , Square. Oppoſition, or corporal 
& , together with the fignification of the ſigns and places of Heaven they are loca- 
ted in atthe time of the revolurion. | 

As for example (becauſe I delire thou ſhouldeſt be well and perfectly ſeen in this 
particular; for then haft thou attained ro the accompliſhment of the whole Art. 


if 


2236 


e Aſirologia «M unda. Lib.4. 


if thou canſt exactly vary thy Rules) I ſhall give you one or two by which thou 
mayit eaſily judge of all the reſt. | 

If Saturn be Lord of the year, and inconfiguration of the Sun, ſuppole by a Sex» 
tsle, upon which the Ancients ſay the King ſhall be poor, and be inforced to require 
ayd of the people, this becanſe the Sw» is a general Significator of the King ; but I 
ſee no reaſon at all it ſhould therefore follow we ſhould thus conclude, unlels the -3as 
were at the time of the Revolution Lord of the tenth ; but rather thus, if Satara be 


alſo Lord of the Aſcendent, the S»» then (if the cuſp be Aqwaries) being Lord of 


the ſeventh,js particularly arid chiefly Significator of the enemies of the people, as 
you have heard, and therefore being thus in Sexti/e with Sarwrn,unleſs by reception, 
I ſhould ſay the enemies of the people ſhall deſire peace, and a conformity with the 
People, and ſhall intreat and ſue forit, and if there be any reception berwixt tum 
and Satwrn, either by Houſe, Triplicity, Exaltation, Term or Face, ſay it will be 
agreed to by the Common People, who are ſignified by Satury, who is Lord of the 
year ard Aſcendent. If the Aſpect be by Gppoſitron, judge diſſentions , quarrels and 
diſcords among them or between them, alſo open War , if you finde other teltimo- 
nies concurring in ſignification : for you are not to derive your judgement from the 

neral ſignification of the Planer in configuration with your ſigniticator alrogetherz 


< ough ſomewhat may be hereon affirmed, or from hence concluged : bur trom the 


ſignification of the Planer as located in your Scheme, and therein ſigniticator has 
ving regard tothe places of Heaven and ſigns they are placed in ; for we lee eventhe 
molt pernitious Planets Fortunes ſometimes,as they may be Signiticators and placed ; 


. and the moſt beneficial and Fortunate Planets, Infortunes,as you have already heard ; 


for every Planet muſt perform the Natural Office whereunto in any Revolution or 
other Scheme of the Heaven it is conſtituted, as we ib ail turther inſtance ; Admit the 
Sn be inthe 12th. you ſhall then ſay the Peoples enemies (the Aipect being by Op- 
poſition as aforeſaid) ſhall Clandeſtinely and Treacherouſly by ſome underhand Plot 
or Device, ſtudy the overthrow or prejudice of the People, the twelfth houſe ſigni» 
fying ſecret Plots and miſchief; and ſo judge according to the ſignification of the 
other Houſes when therein located, be ſure you ever remember the true ſignificatt» 
on of the Planet in his own proper nature, and accidental ſignification , by his Poſt 
tion in the Heavens, aficting your ſignificator, or aſliſting him, and the nature of 
the ſign and houſe wherein he is , and you ſhall never fail (if accordingly you pro- 
nounce Judgement) of giving not only a rational but ſold concluſion on any confi» 
guration from any ſign or houſe of Heaven made by any Planet whatſoever to the 
Lord of the year: or indeed to any Flanet whatſoever Autarts mntand:.. 

And this (I fay) if thou canſt attain unto, thou haſt accompliſhed not only the 
way and manner of judging the ſignification of the Aſpects of any Planet to the 
Lord of the year, but alſoto any other Significator in the whole Scheme, and art 
Maſter of the whole Art; and this thou ſhalt never be capable of by any inftruction, 
but only by a diligent ſearch, and contemplation of the natures of every Ggn, houſe 
and Planer, and the Reaſons why they were ſo conſtituted ; wherefore 1 ſhould de- 
fire thee for thy better inſtruction pw aſsiftance, to read over and over,and ſeriouſly 
conſider every title of our ſecond Treatiſe of this Book, being an [ntroduttion 19 the 
Judgement of the *tars ; and now let us proceed to ſhew you what may be expected mn 
any Revolution ſrom the Poſition of the Planets in any of the twelve Houtes of Het» 
ven, whether they be Lords of the year or no, for the further illuſtration of what 


hath been 1aid. 


py =»: Pw, frilkh, A” te as 


Lib.4. eA ſtrologia IAdunda.. 


| 
CHAP: VE 


Containing the true Significations of the Planet Saturn as be is 
in any Annual Kervolution accidentally placed in any of the 
Twelve Houſes of Heaven, whether he be Lord of the ear 


or No, 


ſhould increaſe in Knowledge (eſpecially this, which of all other comes near- 
eſt to Divinity) that hath egged me on to this undertaking , I ſhall (according 

to my defire and firit intentions ) be herein as plain as poflibly I can , and ſhall cor- 
dially and ſincerely deal with thee as I would be dealt by , for wiltully I ſhall not in 
the leaſt detain or keep back the ſmalleſt matter cccendill co that little knowledge 
God .in his wiſdom and infinite mercy and goodneſs hath beſtowed on me, that 
might advantage thee in this moſt heavenly itudy, or be a means to propagate th 
Art. | 

If in any Revolution of the years of the world Sarzrn be in the Aſcendent ; and Of Saturn in 
diurnal , and beheld by his diſpofitor by a good _— , as alſo by the Lord of the the Aſcendear 
mid-heaven, or in reception therewith, it fignifieth the People under that Revolution x any Annu. 
ſhall be quiet during that Revolution, not making many Journies , ſhall be ina good + prog 
condition, fortunate, ſucceſsful, and ſhall be much honoured by their King and Su- ggnikes, whe. 
periours , of whom they ſhall obtain much good ; bur if he be therein afflicted , nn- ther ke beLord 
fortunate or anywiſe weak , he denotes miſchief and trouble to the People in their 9f the Year or 
proper perſons, alſo infirmities and all vexations ſignified by Sarzyn ; and this ſhall ** 
the more aſſuredly happen if he be in humane ſigns and no wiſe beheld of the Fortunes 
or adjuvant Planets. | 

Inthe ſecond, and beheld by the fortunate aſpects of the Lord of the ſecond , he $4:4-n in the 
denotes the ſucceſsful and proſperous condition of the Common People in their ſecond. 
Trades and Merchandizings , and that they ſhall thrive and grow rich , eſpecially in 
ſuch things as are —_— by the ſign wherein the Cuſpe of the ſecond is; if he be 
therein weak, impedited and unfortunate, he ſhall ſignifie the contrary , and that the 
People ſhall be poor, have loſſes and croſſes, eſpecially in ſuch things as are ſignified 
by Sargr» and the ſign wherein he is; And this underſtand touching the quality of 
the good or evil underſtood or fignified by any of the other Planets; for according 
tothe nature of the Sign and Planet therein muſt you give Judgement. ; 

Saturn in the thirk if he be well dignified ſhall generally denote mirth and Sarees bo the 
jolliry to the People, that they ſhall delight and affociate themſelves one with an- third. 
other , and all heart-burnings and differences between them ſhall be forgotten and 
laid aſide : bur if he be in the third and unfortunate , men ſhall ſuffer by ſhort Jour- 
nies, ſhall envy, hate and diſturb one another,ſhall be liars, perfidious and treacherous, 
and oftentimes ſhall have terrible and troubleſom dreams, &c. 

Alſo if he be in the fourth and ſtrong ( as aboveſaid ) men ſhall be very laborious $:4u-x in the 
and ſucceſsful in manuring and husbanding the ground, and ſhall much delight them- fourth. 
ſelves therein, and ſball thrive thereby, as alſo by heritages and houſes ; but if he be 
weak , there ſhall be no profit in ſuch things , houſes ſhall come to ruine, the earth 
ſhall not give its due increaſe ( eſpecially if other teſtimonies concurr, for how to 
jadge of plenty and ſcarcity you ſhall have anon ; yet Sarzrx his preſence in this 
houſe and unfortunate ( you mutt know ) will ſomewhat leſſen the fertility promiſed 
in any Revolution ) as will be expected by the husbandman whoſe hopes therein will 
be fruſtrated , and much of his time ſpent in vain. 


H h Again, 


| Ven as it was an earneſt deſire that all the ingenious ſpirits of our Nation 


238 A '[trologia eMunda. Lib.4. 
$2147 incke Again, Ifhe beinthe fifth and ſtrong, the People ſhall be jocund , pleaſant and 
TE merry , ſhall delight in their Children , Feaftings, and the like ; 1t he be therein 
weak, judge the contrary ; ſadneſs for joy , croſles by Children for delight inthem , 
and penury and want inſtead of Feats. 

$1447 inthe | It he be fortifiedin the 1ixth , judge health to the People if it be a humane ſign 

1Xth. whack poſſefſeth the Cuſp thereof, and good to ſervants; if it be beftial, it will 
bemoreeſpecially manifeſt inſuch Creatures asare thereby repreſented; as if Aries or 
Capricorn, Sheep, Goats and ſmall Catrel ; if Tawrws , Buls, Cows, Oxen, and the 
greater ſort of Cattel, Horſes,&c. if in watry {1gns, ſucceſs and g00d to Rivers, Foun- 
taihs and Fiſh ; if the ſign of the ſixth be Y7rgo, to the Earth and its Fruits, as Corn, 
&c. if he be impedited or weak, judge the contrary , ſickneſs and detriment unto 
them, according as you ſee the ſeveral ſignifications of the ſign on the Cuſp of the 


fixth Houſe. 
$atu-1inthe Moreover if Satsrx be in the ſeventh and ſtrong , and the ſign be humane , men 
[evcnihe ſhall delight themſelves im women, eſpecially old men, and ſhall Contra& and make 


Marriages ; if it beany other ſign , ſee of what nature and fignitication it is, and 
judge they ſhall delight themſelves in ſuch things as are according to the nature 
thereof, and profit thereby ; bur it he be weak, judge the contrary. 
Saturn in the: Andif he be inthe eighth, alckough he be itrong , yet ſhali he ſignitie danger of 
eighth, death, and ruine to thoſe things lignified by the ſign of the eighth ; as if a humane 
ſign, tomen, &c. bur if he be weak , it is the more to be feared , and if other teſti- 
monies agree, it is to be concluded, but eſpecially to men of elder years. 
S:turn inthe Alſoit he be inthe ninth, well dignified, and in a hxed ſign , men ſhall be chaſte, 
niath, lovers of Religion , the Law and all good Learning ; but if the ſign be movable , 
they ſhall make many Voyages by Sea , or long Journies , in which they ſhall con- 
tinue long ; bur if he be then weak , judge the contrary , and that many Ships ſhall 
ſuffer ſlupwrack , and men ſhall receive much damage and detriment through long 


Jourmes. 
| Saturn ln the Again, If Sat»r be in the tenth and ſtrong, the People ſhall receive much honour 
tenth, and benefit from their King and Superiours; but if he be weak and elevated above all 


the other Planets, it ſignifieth that his cold unfortunate and malicious inclination 
ſhall go generally through all the Region , Country or Kingdom ; and then the 
King ſhall remove out of one place into another , and ſhall do much miſchief and 
evilats, and too tyrannically impoſe unuſual Taxations on the People. 
Satu;n inthe Satwrn intheeleventh and ſtrong , ſhews that men ſhall obcain their deſires and 
eleventh, hopes, ſhall be ſucceſsful in their Journies and Removes, and ſhall be merry ; but if 
he be weak, judge the contrary. 
Satw/u inthe Laſtly, If he be inthe twelfth and ſtrong , men ſhall be quiet , ſhall love one an- 
tweltch, other, and retaitsno malice or ill will ; but if he be weak, men ſhall be envious, ma- 
licious and wicked one againſt the other , and there ſhall be many quarrels and diſ- 
cords inthat Region for which your Revolutions, 


Lib.4: o A, flrologia <Munda. 239 


CHAP VIE 


Of the Signification of Jupiter 4s. he # accidentally placed in any 
of the Twel-ve Houſes of Heaven in any Annual Revolution , 
whether he be Lord of the ear or 10. 


L Hus-have you heard plajnly'and fully the true ſignifications of Satzrs as he 
is located in any of the twelve Houſes in any Revolution whatſoever , whe- 
ther he be Lond of the year or no ; it refteth therefore now we deſcend to 

Zapiter , who as you have heard in owr [ntroduttion is the next under Satmry, and 
therefore we ſhall inthis place ſpeak firſt of him , and then of all the reſt in order as 
they are accordingly located in the Heavens. 

If Z«pirer then in any Annual Revolution of the years of the world be in the Fuvirer in the 
Aſcendent and ftrong,, and in good aſpe of his diſpoſitor ( as you have heard of Aſcendene or 
Satwrs in the former Chapter ) he ſignifies the People of that Climate or Region _ ule of 
ſhall be ſucceſsful and fortunate on every ſide, healthy in their bodies, ſhall have \;,,.l reve. 
much joy , honour and peace , men ſhall be deſirers and ſearchers of and in Divine lution of the 
Myſteries, and the Law and the Students thereof ſhall be in great and high eſteem , years of the 
and they ſhall build and repair Churches and Courts of Judicature, &c. andif he be _ _=_ 
weak , men ſhall be negligent and careleſs of Divine Duties and the Law; and =: ſipnifles. 
_ thou mayſt nor judge altogether the contrary to what hath been ſaid, yet ; 
maylt thou ſay the People ſhall be little the better for his preſence in their Aſcendent , 
or receive little or no good from him ; for the good he would and is naturally wil- 
ling to do you ſee he is altogerher unable to pertorm, being weak or having no power 
or ability ; in like manner judge of his conſittence in any other Houſe when he is 
in the like caſe indigent. 

If hebe inthe ſecond and ſtrong, he ſignifies abundance of proſperity and riches Fpiter in the 
to the People, eſpecially in ſuch . Junk and commodities as are lignified by rhe ſecond. 
ſigs wherein /zpiter is; allo if the Lord of the ſecond apply unto him , their riches 
will come tumbling on them they know not how; but if he apply tothe Lord of the 
ſecond, it will be by their own labour and induftry that they ſhall augment their 
riches : By this rule maylt thou ( if thou haſt well conſidered what hath been ſaid 
in the preceding Diſcourſe ) judge of every thing appertaining to thg ſignification of 
any Houſe: It Jwpiter be weak and in the ſecond, he neither nos. riches nor 
poverty in himſelt except by accident ; wherefore you are warily to conſider ( as 
hath been ſaid ) the fignification of each Planet as he is in your Scheme fignificator 
of any thing , and not ( wholly) as he is naturally; and fo judge of the good 
orevil portended by his ſignitication and aſpect , fign and quarter of Heaven he 
poſſeſſes. 

Alſo if he be in the third and ftrong, the People ſhall be pleaſant and delight to Fupiter In the 
aſſociate themſelves with their neighbours, acquainrance and kindred , ſhall delighr third, 
alſo in charitable and almf-deeds, and be proſperous and ſucceſsful in all ſhort Jour- 
nies, and give themſelves to the ſtudy of Arts and Sciences ; but if he be weak, they 
ſhall not have the like ſtrong inclinations unto theſe things. 

Again, If /xp:ter be inthe fourth and well dignified , men ſhall infinitely abound Tupiter bis the 
in wealth, and proſper by their labours on the round, eſpeciatly husbanders and ma- fourth. 
nurers thereof ; but if he be unfortunate , there ſhalt happen much ſadneſs and 
trouble unto them towards the end of the year, &c. 

Moreover if he be in the fifth, men ſhall delight in feaſting, ſporting Topiter bt the 
and all manner of recreation and paftime, ſhall be pleaſant, merry and feceive fifth, E 
much joy and content from and by their Children, women ſhall be apt to conceive 

Hh 2 with 


240 


Fupiter in 
the xth. 


| Fupiter in 
the ſeventh. 


Fupiter in 
the eighth, 


Fupiter in 
the ninth, 


Pupiter in 
the tenth, 


Fupiter in 
the eleventh. 


Fupiter in 
the twelfth. 


Mays in the 
farſt, 


Mays in the 
ſecond. 


@ A, frologia eMunda. 


Lib.4. 
with Child, and they ſhall bring them ſafely forth, perfe&t and without danger ; bur 


if he be weak it will not be ſo well, if any thing at all good. 
In the ſixth and well dignified , the good condition and ſtate of Servants is art 


miſed , alſo healch both unto them and the People in general if the ſign wherein he is 
be humane ; it beſtial , to beats of that nature the ſign is of , &c. as you have heard 
inthe preceding Chapter where we ſpake of Sar#r his being in the ſame Houſe ; if 
he be aMicted, judge not ſo much good , but (if you ſee other teſtimonies concur- 
ing ) ſay rather there will be the clean contrary, and diſeaſes, ſuch as are Impoſtumes, 
unnatural windy , ſwellings , obſtruQtions of the Liver, and the like ; be ſure you 
_ your judgeinent according to diſcretion, and the nature of the Planet and Sign 
e1S1n, &Cc. | 

Zeputer in the ſeventh fortunate , denotes many Marriages and Contracts ſhall 
be made, and Men ſhall delight themſelves with Women ; bur if he be unfortunate , 
they ſhall not agree, ſhall jarr , claſh and fall out one with another during that Re- 
volution. 

Ifhe bein the eighth, there ſhall not be any great mortality (if he be then ſtrong) 
but if he be weak, judge the contrary, or there ſhall be ſome affliction accarding to 
the nature of the ſign in which he «ON is. 

Alſo if he be fortunately placed in the ninth , men ſhall make ſafe and proſperous 
Journies and Voyages by Sea , and alſo thrive by removing from one place or houſe 
to another, and men ſhall love and delight in the Law both of God and Man, Moral 
and Divine ; but if be be weak it will not be fo good : By what hath been already 
ſaid and rightly apprehended, thou mayft eaſily judge when it will be contrary or bad 
in any degree. 

Again, If he be in the tenth and dignified, the King and Superiours ſhall be good , 
ſhall honour his or their People , and do Juſtice generally and impartially , nd they 
ſhall thrive under their Government and be ſucceſsful ; but if he be weak in digni- 
ties, he cannot be fo ſtrong as to perform this good ſo effectually, and there ſhall be 
both Law and diſcord amongſt the People , &c. | 

If he be in the eleventh , the People ſhall be moſt ſucceſsful or fortunate , alſo 
faithful, juſt and honeſt , ſhall not be deprived of their hopes nor confidence , and 
ſhall be merry ; but if he be weak it will not be ſo good. 

Laſtly , If Jwpitey be in the twelfth , the People ſhall profit and gain by their Ene- 
mies, ſhall be quiet, love and'cheriſh one another , and ſhall be free from malice and 
envy; but if he be weak, judge the contrary , as you ſhall have occaſion and 


reaſon. 


= _ 


_  CC— ——— 


VIIL 


Containing the Significations of Mars in the Twelve Houſes of Hea- 
ven in any annual Rervolution , whether he be Lord of the Year 


or 119, 
H to Mars and his ſignifications , who if he be in the firſt Houſe in any Re- 

volution and ftrong , whether he be Lord of the year or no , ſhews that the 
People of that Country ſhall gain and be advantaged by wars or ſlaughters, and 
ſhall overcome their Enemies during that Revolution ; but if he be weak, they ſhall 
diſagree and fall out one among another, and ſhall beat, draw blood and wound one 
another, for which cauſe much evil and damage ſhall happen unto them. 


If Mars be in the ſecond Houſe at the time of any Revolution, or Ingreſs of the 
Sun 


CHAP. 


Aving done with the ſignifications of Jupiter, it follows now we come 


Lib.4. » Aſtrologia <Munda. 24.1 
Su into efries, and ſtrong , he denotes many thefts, rapines and robberies , and 
cozening and cheating of one another ; thoſe alſo that are intruſted with money or 

goods ot any one, ſhall be falſe and deceitfu}, and the People generally ſhall be driven 

co want, and be perplexed with taxations and tributes. 

But it he be in the third , men ſhall not aſſociate themſelves with their neighbours 14s in the 
and kindred, but inſtead of being friends hate and envy one another, third. 

Alſoif he be in the fourth , he ſends his vigorous heat and malice to all the other z;,,, ;n 1 
Planets, ſo thart if he be in a ficry ſign, he dryes up and ſcorches the earth , and cau- fourth. 
ſeth great miſchief by fire, alſo mortalities; it the fign be humane , he cauſeth man 
ſlaughters and effuſion of blood , quarrels and war , and that chiefly in or conn 
the Jatter end of the year, and in thoſe places generally ſubject to the fin wherein 
ſhe is. 

. Andif he happen in the fifch , hard and tedious labour is threatned to thoſe with Mars in the 
Child, little or no merry meetings and feaitings ; but if any , he cauſeth diſſentions fk. 
and diſcords amongtt them. 

Again, If he be in the ſixth, in a hot and dry ſign, he cauſeth hot and dry diſeaſes ; tar: in the 
if the ſign be moyſi, the diſeaſes will be hot and moyit; if aicry , they will be feavers, > 
corruption of blood , impoſtumes, ventoſies, &c, if it be anearthy ſign , they will 
be conſumptions and melancholy diſeaſes, with ſome mixtures of choler ; and if the 
ſign be belitial, the beaſts ſubject thereunto ſhall ſuffer, &c, 

Moreover, if he be inthe ſeventh, aMicted and weak , he denotes then great difſ- 32-5 in the 
ſentions and enmities, and that men ſhall be perplexed with theft, much blood-ſhed , {<*<#th- 
contentions and wars ; and theſe ſhallchiefly be incident to the People of that Cli- 
mate for which the Radix of your Figure is made, wiz. evil accidents, wars and dif- 
cords, alſo fraud and deceit in Merchandizing, trouble and ſadneſs. 

Andifhe be in the eighth, there ſhall be fearful and terrible ſudden deaths, ac- Mays in the 
cording to the nature of the ſign in which he is. eighth. 

If he be in the ninth, travelling ſhall be dangerous, alſo much robbing and a1: in the 

lundering therein, if the Journey be by Land ; if by Sea, Shipwrack is much to be math, 


cared. 
Again, If he be in the tenth, the King and Rulers ſhall be froward and croſs with Mars in the 


their People, exerci{ing cruelty and tyrannie without any piety or fear of God , and *<ath. 


puniſhing and taxing them without any mercy or pitty. 
If in the eleventh , men ſhall not love one another , nor delight in each others Mars in (6 


ſociety, neither will they be moved with any compalilion or pitty. ' eleventh, 
And if in the twelfth, the People ſhall be much terrified and troubled by their 1.5 in the 


Enemies, from whence ſhall proceed ſlaughter and effuſion of blood, twelfth. 


CH4iP. IU 
Shewing the Significations of the Sun in the Twel-ve Houſes of Hea- 


ven in any Annual Revolution,whether he be Lord of the Vear or no. 


IQaH Ehearſing the Planets according to their order and places in the 

kr Jy Heavens after Mars follows the Suw,who if he be inthe Aſcen- The $un it 
W923 dent fortunate , eſſentially dignified, andin ax ray with the *be firſt, 
FRY *D Lord of the Aſcendent, and beheld amically by him, the year 

ſhall generally be happy and ſacceſsful for every one, as well 

the King as the Beggar ; but if he be therein infortunate, it 

ſhall be clean contrary ; and eſpecially noble and great men 

ſhall ſuffer in their perſons diſhonour , diſgrace , and be per- 


haps caft out of their dignities and places. Th 
P 


242 e Aſtrologia eM una. Lib.4. 
The $,n in The Swn inthe ſecond, the People ſhall waſte and expend their wealth , alfo their 
the ſeconds, Rulers ſhall cover atter the fingring and diſpoling thereof, inſomuch that they ſhalt 
live ſneakingly and poor. 

The Sw in The Sw» inthe third, ſhews the People ſhall delight in goodneſs, and in the Law , 

the third, Afhall love and aflociate themſelves with their neighbours, friends, kindred and afſo- 
ciates, for the which they ſhall be praiſed. | 

The $47 in If he bein the fourth, Gardens and Vegetables ſhall be ſpoyled and ſuffer de- 

the touth. triment, efpectally if he be in 11gns of that nature ; great men and high ſhall be made 
low anddegraded ; and if it be a watry ſign , the earth ſhall be dry , and the water 
dried up: p | believe the Ancients meant fiery.) 

The Sum in Again, If the Sun bein the fifth , he denotes detriment and prief to ſuch Crea- 

the fifth. tures asare with young , ſo that hardly do any eſcape without ſome manifett hurt or 
other. 

The S.2. in Alfoif he bein the ſixth , many griefs and infirmities ſhall happen, and chiefly 

the ixth..Þ {nthe eyes, and ſuch living Creatures ſhall dye as are ſignified by the {ſign wherein he 
is located; the King alſo or chief Rulers ſhall be ſad that year , much loſs alſo 
and damage ſhall be by ſervants, and fuch things as are ſignified by the ſixth Houſe ; 
alſo the ignoble and baſer ſort of People ſhall envy and raiſe themſelves up againſt 
their Superiours. 

The Sun in Moreover, if he be inthe ſeventh , he denoteth diſcords between the People and 

the leyenth. their Rulers, and berwixt the King and the Nobles, and that the King ſhall keep at a 
diſtance with the People, or keep himſelf retire from them. 

The Swn in  Inthe eighth, he denotes the death of Kings and great men, alſo the depoſing of 

the cighth. Kings, andunthroning of Nobles and Grandees , and a lefſening or diminiſhing of 
their power, eſpecially 1 he be beheld by the Lord of the eighth. ; 

The con tn Bur if he be inthe ninth , he ſhews the inclinations of the People are generally 

the ninth. to good,and that they ſhall be fortunate and ſucceſsful in lohg Journies and Voyages, 
and ſhall love and delight in both the Law of God and Man. 

The Sun in Alſo if the Su» be inthe tenth , it denotes the glory , renown and honour of the 

the tenth. King or chief Rulers, alſo the good condition of the People , and that there ſhall be 
kindneſs and love betwixt them ; for the People ſhall willingly obey ,and the Superiors 
ſhall conferr honour and priviledges on the People. 

The Sun And if he chance to be in the eleventh , the People generally ſhall have joy and 

the cleventh. Sladneſs, and ſhall be merry and ſolace themſelves with their friends , acquaintance 
and familiars, and their hopes ſhall not be fruſtrated ; the chief Rulers ſhall love the 
People alſo, and be advantageous unto them. 

The en in Laſtly, if he be in the twelfth , Rich and Noblemen, and the Grandees ſhall be 

the ewelfth, eclipſed in their hoi.our, and ignoble perſons ſhalf affront and prejudice them; and 
the People generally ſhall hate and deſpiſe their Superiours , and their Superiours 
ſhall oppreſs andgorment them. 


CHAT. - As 


Shewing the Signification of Venus in the Twelve Houſes of Hea- 
wen in any Annual Revolution , whether ſhe be Lady of the Year 


or M9. 


dignified , the people ſhall be ſtrong and healthy , and have much joy and 
gladneſs , ſhall endeavour to live neatly and in a comely ſpruce manner, m_ 
or 


5 bs os: \ Frer the Sz» follows Ven, who if ſhe bein the Aſcendent, _—— well 
fiſt. 


Lib.4. eAſtrologia \Aunda. | 242 
for matter of meat and raiment, and all other things neceſſary for the perfeRing of a 


mans pleaſure in thts life. | 
Vers inthe ſecond, cauſeth profit and gain by Women, happineſs and fertility of jaw in the 


_ the Fruits of the Earth. ſecond. 
17 ſhe be in the chird, men ſhall hate one another, and no wiſe deſire the ſociety Yenw in the 
of their friends and ne1ghbours, alfo be carelefs of Religion, Law and all goodneſs. third. 


Alfo if ſhe be in the fourth, men ſhall be jealous of their Wives, and ſhall there- ;;,,, in the 
fore ſhut themup , alſo ſadneſs and anxiety cauſed by Mothers ; but yet the latter fourth. 
end of the year ſhall be better then the beginning. 

If ſhe be inthe fifth, damage is portended through the occaſion of Children ; but Yen in the 
the latter end of the year will be better then che beginning , and the grief and ſadneſs fifth. 
converted into joy ; ſuch Creatures as are with young ſhall :go ſately and be de- 
livered ,--but the mit part will be Females ; Men ſhall be Captivated with the love of 
Women, and ſhall be merry with them , ſhall delight in ſinging, dancing, feaſtins , 
and ſeeming ſpruce and neat. 

Alfo if ſhe be in the ſixth, and the ſign humane , men ſhall profit by ſervants; in pen in the 
like manner if the ſign be beitial, they ſhall alſo gain thereby, wz. by ſuch beaſts as lixth. 
are thereby ſignified , and they ſhall be free from fickneſs and other accidents ,/ and 

women ſhall be ſick through ſurfets and weakneſs of the ftomack. 

Again, Tf ſhe be in the ſeventh, Women ſhall make and conclude Marriages , 7*% in the 
and delight themſelves with their Husbands if ſhe- be ſtrong ; but if ſhe be weak, <—_—_ 
they ſhall fall out and ſcold with their Husbands, and ſhajl be diſobedient onto 
them , and ſhall run ſcolding and prating out of- their houſes, and ſeparate.and 
divorce themſelves many of them from their husbands. | 

Moreover if inthe eighth, ſhe denotes the death of Matrons and great Women , ;-;y,, i the 
alſo generally mortality to all Women, if ſhe be then weak. cighth, 

If ſhe bein the ninth , ſhe ſhews Men of Religious Orders ſhall flit and remove ,,, . , 
from one place and houſe to another, and that Men ſhall dream true Dreams, and ,jn © 
perform long Journeys and Voyages with ſafery , and profit and gain thereby ; Men 
ſhall be Lovers of the Law both of God and Man, and eſteem of all good Learning, 
and itrive to be vertuous. 

Bur if ſhe be in the tenth , joy and gladneſs will be occaſioned by and from the 7:14 in the 
King and Superiours, the Grandees alfo ſhall love and delight themſelves with centh, 
Women , whom they ſhall adorn and deck ſumptuoutly ; they ſhall alſo take much 
pleaſure in Jelters , all merry conceits and tricks, alſo in Muſick , Songs and the like ; 
the People ſhall be ina good condition, and ſhall be beloved and honoured by their 
Superiours. | 

Alſo if ſhe be in the eleventh, the Feople ſhall be fortunate, ſucceſsful and happy, Yerws in the 
by reaſon their faith , truſt and hope ſhall not fail them ; they ſhall alſo accompany eleventh. 
themſelves with Women , and ſhall be taken in love one with another , and commit 
Fornications , and tranſgreſs the Law , yet ſhall they ſpend the year with great 
jollity and mirth. 

If in the twelfth , Tribulation is threatned , and enmity with Women ; for Men Ya in the 
ſhall hate them, and no wiſe be aſliſtant unto them, ſo that they ſhall be during the ***!fth. 
time of that Revolution moſt unfortunate. | 


24.4 eAſtrologia <Munda. _ Lib.q, 


CHAP. XI. 


Of the Significations of Mercury in the Twelrve Houſes of Hea- 
Ten in any Annual Rervolution , whether he be Lord of the Year 


Or NO. 


who if he be in the firſt , he ſhews the year ſhall be good and ſucceſsful ; 
Men ſhall be ingenious and alſo Children and Youth , ſo that they ſhall 
during that Revolution be apt to attain to any thing that ſhall be taught them, or 
that they ſhall incline their minds to underſtand. , 
Mercuryin the If hebe inthe ſecond and ſtrong, Merchants and Tradeſ-men ſhall profit and gain 
ſecond. by their Merchandizings ſhall be taithful and juſtly perform the truſt repoſed in them, 
ſhall be honoured , famous and in great eſteem of their Superiours ; bur if he be un- 
fortunare, it denotes loſs and decay of trading, infidelity and breach of truſt, and that 
men ſhall give themſelves over to gain by unlawful and indirect means, and the 
like. 
Merewyin the Alſo if he be in the third, men ſhall love and delight in the Law, and in all kind of 
third. Knowledge and Religion; and ſhall love and aſſociate themſelves one with an- 
other, and ſhall delight in ſhort Journies. | 
Again , In the fourth he cauſeth diſcords and jarrings in words betwixt man and 
man, alſo vexation and ſadneſs ; alſo many Scribes ſhall be captivated , or ſuch as 


Mercury In "MI Ercury in the twelve Houſes of Heaven comes now to be conſidered , 
fart, 


Mc;cury in the 


fourth. 
keep Books of Accounts, or Secretaries of State ; and if the ſign wherein he is be 
fixed, they ſhall continue long in Priſon ; if moveable , judge the contrary ; and if 
Mers do then malicioully aſpect him, they ſhall be grievouſly beaten and tormented , 
and perhaps Jain. | 

Mercuryinthe Allo if he be in the fifth, he denotes ſucceſs and joy by and in Children, meſſages, 

hich. | ſports, paſtimes and ingenious recreations, by which ſadneſs ſhall be rotally aboliſhed; 


alſo ſuch as are with Y oung ſhall go their time ſafely, and be at length well delivered, 
and theſe for the moſt part ſhall be ingenious Creatures ; but if he be unfortunate, 
no Conception ſhall be brought to perfeftion , and judge the contrary to what you 
have hear]. 
Merewyinche Moreover if he bein the fhxth , contentions , trouble and vexation ſhalt happen 
fixth. through the default and actions of ſervants and vile ou perſons , or ſuch as SG 
long to a mans own family, or by ſmall Cattel , viz. ſuch as are ſignified by the ſign 
wherein he is, or by fickneſs, &c. Children alſo and Young men ſhall many of them 
dye and be diſeaſed according to his affliction in this Houſe. 

If he be in the ſeventh, he denotes men will be addifted to laſciviouſneſs , and the 
company of women carnally ; .and if he be weak, they ſhall fly out and commit many 
fornications and filthy acts. | 
Mercury inthe , ID the eighth, he ſhall cauſe the death of many Young men, Women and Children, 

alſo diſcords and contentions berween men concerning Wils , Legacies and the mind 


Mercury in the 
{even:h. 


cighth, 

of the deceaſed. 
Mercury inthe Alſo if in theninth, long Journies will be performed with ſafety and pleaſure, alſo 
ninth. men ſhall mutually deſire each others ſociety , and delight in all honeſt and good 


Learning, and apply their minds to the finding out of hidden ſecrets and myſteries ; 
but if he be weak, their ſtudy will be impious and wicked ; and ſo of all the reſt, judge 
the contrary, 

Mercury in the Again , If Mercary bein the tenth , Merchants and Scribes, alſo Scholars and 
Ingenious men ſhall be honoured by their King and Superiours ; alſo all ſuch men as 


tenth, : 
are ſignified by ercary ; but it he be afflicted, judge the contrary , according 
| | 0 


Lib. 4. eAſtrologia eNAunda. 24.5 

to the nature of the Planet afMliting and the Sign and Quarter of Heaven he is in. 
Moreover if he bein the Eleventh,, men ſhall love and aflociate themſelves one $ in the x 1th. 

with another , they iball mutually give gifts, and profit one by another, 
Inthe Twelfth, the People ſhall be plotted againit by their Enemies: alſo Servants 7 iathe 1 th, 

and Children ſhall diſagree and claſh with men and women : allo loſles by great Cat- 

tell, if the Sign be Beſtial, &c. , 


mmm A en a ar re en OO” >> > 95 OS oo 


Cuar, XIE 


Of the ſignifications of the Moon in the Twelve Houſes of Hearven 
in any Annual Revolution whether She be Lady of the Year or no- 
P 


rinue to ſhew alſo the. ſignifications of the ſoon in the Twelve Houſes of 

| Heaven. Wherefore if the /7oon.in any Annual Revolution be in the firſt » inthe firlt- 
Houſe whether ſhe be Lady of the Year or no, ſhe denotes the People ſhall be 
tickle, ever wavering and going out of one Opinion into another, andone houſe 
and place to another : and men ſhall have joy and profit by women : eſpecially ſuch 
as have Mothers ſhall gain much by them. The Year ſhall be proſperous, men ſhall 
be ſucceſsfull, and in health of Body and ſtrong: this if (he be tortunate , bur if ſhe 
be impedited and weak judge the contrary. 

Alſo if ſhe be in the Second and Fortunate, men ſhall gain and profit and abound y ja the 25, 
in Riches , having plenty of all things : but rf ſhe be infortunate, they ſhall be indiz 
gent, poor and vile, &c. ſhall have many loſſes and croſſes. 

If ſhe be in the Third, men ſhall — and joy in the ſociety and company of Þ in the zd. 
their Friends, Acquairitance and Kindred ,, and all enmity and former heart-burn- 
ings ſhall be forgotten and laid aſide : they ſhall delight in all goodneſs and cha- 
ritable Almſ-deeds ; allo ſhort journies ſhal! be performed with all the ſecurity and 
profit that may be. PE, 

Inthe Fourth , and the Revolution be diurnal, ſhe denotes misfortune at the be- » tn the 4th; 
Sinning of the Year ; but towards the latter end amendment : bur if it be nocur- 
nal the People whether at the beginning or ending of the Year ſhall not have any 
ſucceſs, but contrariwiſe many tribulations,croſles, loſſes, vexations and impriſonments: 
but if ſhe be ſtrong and well dignifyed, the evill will not be altogether ſo bad. 

Inthe Fifth , men ſhall be fortunate in and through their Children in whom they Þ in the 5th. 
ſhall rejoyce and take pleaſure:there ſhall be plenty of every thing: men ſhall juncker, | 
banquet , feaſt and be merry, and the like, delight to get Children, and ma 
ſhall be conceived , and all things with young ſhall be ſafely and well delivered ; 
in a word, every thing —_— tothe ſignification of this Houſe ſhall be ſucceſs- 
full if ſhe be fortunate: but if afflicted, judge the contrary 

Alſo if ſhe be in the Sixth, men ſhall leave off their accuſtomed wickedneſſes , and ) in the «th 
apply themſelves more to goodneſs then uſually they were wont: gain by Ser- 
vants and ſmall Cattell : but if unfortunate, loſs and dammage thereby , and the 
clean contrary is to be expected. | | | 

Again,ifinthe Seventh, men ſhall be fortunate and happy in women , aud gain and 9 lathe 7th. 
profit much by them. - _. - "7 | 

And ifin the Eighth, Mortalities ſhall happen amongſt men: and if ſhe be then urn- y te 3:5. 
fortunated, it ſhall be ſo much the worſe : and ifſhe be in any of the houſes of X4ars, 
there ſhall be many and grievous ſlaughters , alſo tribulations and anxieties amongſt 
men, and that abort Legacies, and the like : and men ſhall- endeavor to proſecute - 
one anorher,'and to caſt one another out of their Poſſeſſions, &c, | 224 

I 4 Moreover 


] 4 Ven as we have already treated of the Six fore-going Planets , let us yet con- 


24.6 @ Aſtrologia «M unda. Lib.4 

D inthe 3th. Moreover ifſhe bein the Ninth, men ſhall make many journeys, and' Remove 
Out of one place into another; if the Sign be watry, they (kall make Voyages bz 
Sea; ifanearthy, long and tedious journies by land ; Men ſhall be lovers of Arts 
and Sciences; for if the Sign on the Ninth be one of the Houſes of Sarwry, they ſhall 
delight in Alchimy and Chimical preparations; if it be one of the Houſes of Jupiter 
in Divinity, Law and Juſtice ; if of Aars, in wars, feats of Arms, &c. if belonging 
to So), in all noble Sciences; if to Venus, in Mufick, ſinging and dancing ; if to Jer- 
cxry,in Aſtrology and all curious Sciences and ingenious Arts; to herſelt, in all water- 
works or things pertaining thereunto ; and if ſhe be therein afflited, then mayft 
thou judge inconveniency will come thereby, expences and trouble according to the 

ide hh nature of the Planet aMicting, &c. | 

a the 19:h.  ]fſhe bein the Tenth, the People (hall be in a good and proſperous condition, (hall 
be honored and beloved by their King and Superiors, and this (hall the more afſſured- 
ly happen if ſhe behold the Lord ofthe Tenth, or be in reception therewith , and the 
revolution Nocturnal. 

D in the 31th, Tfin the Eleventh, the year ſhall be fortunate and ſucceſsful in every thing apper- 
taining to that houſes ſignification if ſhe be ſtrong ; but if weak , judge the contrary. 

D in the 12th _ Laſt y if the Ion bein the Twelfth , (he denotes the inſtability and uncertainty of 
every thing, and the People ſubject to the Sign wherein ſhe is ſhall have many quar- 
rels, diſſentions and diſcords, if not wars ,&c, 

Note. Remember till that if your Significator or Lord of the year ,&c.be aMiced , then 
miſchiefis to be expected; if ailiſted and well dignified, the contrary; and whether 
00d or bad is portended, it ſhall ſtill happento the quarter of the Region anſwering 
to the quarter of heaven he isin; as if in the Aſcendent, it ſhall happen in the Eaſtern 
parts; inthe Seventh, in the Weltern ; inthe Tenth, in the Southern ; inthe Fourth 
in the Northern ; in the Second, in the North-eaſt and by Eaſt; in the Third, in 
the North-eaſt juſt ( if upon the Cuſp thereof; ) but if within the houſe, North-eaſt 
and by North; andſo Jucge of all the reſt of the houſes round the whole heavens : 
But the good or evill ſhall chiefly be incident to thoſe Regious and Countries ſubje& 
to your Significator and the Sign in which he is located. 

Alſo you are to remember to judge the nature of the good or bad according to the 
nature of the Planet aficting or aſſiſting, and the nature of the Sign in which he is, 
whether Aiery, Earthy,Fiery\or Watry ; for it is not for me upon every Rule to make 
repetition ; wherefore you are warily to underſtand and contider what hath been al- 


ready delivered, &c. 


"——_ mm er OO — —_— 


eo 
—— — 


CHaaÞP ATI 


Containing the ſignfications of the Head and T ail of the Dragon n 
the Twel-ve Houſes of Hearven in any Annual Kevolution of the 
Years of the World. 


{tial Planetsinthe Twelve Houſes of Heaven in any Revolution of the Years 

of the World , it reſteth we now alſo ſhew the ſignifications of the Head and 

| T ay! of the Dragon, and then proceed to the ſignifications of them in the Twelve Ce- 
N, in the rſt. leſtial Signs ; wherefore then if you tind 52 in the firſt , the People will be ſucceſsful, 
fortunate, in honor and health , eſpecially if free from the malevolent aſpects of the 

V in the firſt Tnfortunes, and fortunately beheld by the Benevolents ; But if 35 be inthe firſt , ic de- 
notes dangers, misfortunes, croſſes, loſſes, and that all manner of miſchief (hall be 1n- 

cident to the perſons of the People, alſo infirmities according to heNature and (igni- 


fication of the Sign wherein it 15s, , If 


QC Ince we have now waded through the ſignifications of the Seven Cele- 


Lib. 4. eAſtrologia *NAunda. 24.7 

If N be inthe Second , it portends fortune and good ſucceſs to the People in their 

Trades, that they ſhall grow rich and thrive in the world : butif +5 be therein, little $2 in the 26, 
or no Trading, croſſes and loffes in their ſubſtance and wealth is to be feared,and that 4F in the 24. 
caſually and unexpectedly. 

If $2 be inthe Third, ſhort Journies ſhall be profitable, fate and advantagious to H in the 3d. 

the People who ſhall alſo be good and well diſpoſed, and dream true Dreams, and 

{hall delight in all manner ot good things : Brethren and Aſſociates ſhall love and a- 

gree, allobe helptull and advantagious one to another : but it © be therein , judge F in the 3d. 
the contrary , ditcords, diſſentions and feuds among them; chiefly amongſt the men 

if the Sign wherein it 1s be maſculine, amongtt the women if teminine ; alſo dammage 

and loſs by long journies, &Cc, | 

If 52 bein the Fourth, and the Sign wherein he is be Y,t,or &,or T7, = 40r 2, Nin the 4th 
it ſignifies good ſucceſs and increaſe of things of the Earth ,as fruits and the like , and | 
all immoveable things {fignified by the Fourth houſe; burtifitbe ©, 7, w,4z,n 
ar X , judge the contrary : andif 75 be therein, Poverty and Indigency, alſo a ſcarce- V in the 4th 
neſs of fruits, and the ill ſtate of things ſignitied by that —_ 15 to be expected. 

' Alfoif the Dragons Head be in the Fitth, it ſignifies encreaſe of Joy by children,al- in the 5ch 
ſo abundance of pleaſure ,&c, but if the Dragons Ty! be therein, ſadneſs, trouble, vex- QF in the 5th 
ation and anxiety is to be expected, alſo grief and trouble by and through children : 
and if any recreation or paſtime be uſed, it is an hundred to one if there follow not 
much inconveniency thereby. 

Again if the Dragons Head be in the Sixth, it denotes encreaſe of ſmall Catrell , £2 in the 6h, 
and much gain and profit thereby : allo faithtnll Servants and ſuch as ſhall advan- 
cage their Maſters, and the Ayr ſhall be healthfull and pleaſant - bur if you find the 
Dragons Tay! therein, judge the contrary,alſo loſs by Cattell and Servants, and thar OV #2 the 6th 
they ſhall be perfidious and falſe. 

Moreover if the Dragons Head be inthe Seventh, men (hall delight in the company $2 in che 7th. 
and ſociety of women,and love ſhall be encreaſed between them ; the enemies of the _ 

People ſhall be ſtrong and in good condition ; bur if the Dragons Tay! be there, ſay Þ 12 7th, 
there ſhal be no love nor delight berween men and women,nor ſociety in any love, but 
rather quarrels,ſcoldings & brawlings,chiefly among the common ſort of people, &c. _ 

If 2 be in the Eighth , the People (hall gain and profit by the deceafe of men and $> #2 the 8th. 
women, alſo by Legacies and ſuch like, & c. but it «y be there, it ſignifies loſs by the VU in the 8th. 
death of men and women, quite contrary. 

Alſo £& inthe Ninth, long journies ſhall be.ſucceſsfull, men ſhall alſo be Lovers of $> i®the 9th. 
the Law and all good Learning ; bur if 3y be therein, long journies and voyages by V ia the zth, 
Sea (hall be tedious, dangerous and unprofitable ; alſo men ſhall be negligent and 
careleſs of the Law and Learning. 

Again, if ©, be in the Tenth, the condition of the King and Rulers ſhall be good, $} inthe 10th 
and the People ſhall ſtudy ſuch Trades as are very curious and ingenious , alſo dive 
into the Secrets of all Sciences and Studies; but ity be there, they ſhall be alſo as in- 

uiſitive, but the Arts ſhall be Diabolical and unlawfull, and the Trades-men ſhall 
deviſe ways in their Trade to cozen and cheat their Neighbors ; and the King or Ru- 
lers ſhall hv croſſes and troubles, and perhaps their Honor ecclipſed. 

Alfo if N, be in the Eleventh, the Ancients have fayd he 1ignifieth neither good NH, in the 2 1:4 
nor bad; the ſame alſo they affirm of IF. I muſt confeſs I have not had much regard V in the 116, 
tothe verity thereof by any ſufficient obſervation , nor canI as yet conceive the true 
Reaſon thereof: I hopea little time and Search thereinto will better inform both me 
and thee : in the Interim becauſe they have fo concluded , I ſhall not in the leaſt con- 
tradi them in this Point , nor derogate from them, becauſe ſomething may I know 
be ſayd for this their Tenet, hongh not ſo much as 1s fully ſatisfaory to my Ob- 
jeHons ,&c. 

Laſtly, if 1 be in the Twelfth, he denotes encreaſe of miſchief and not good ; and If N, in the 1 2h 
loſs to and by great Cattell, that few men ſhall during that Revolution 
be impriſoned; and if they be, they ſhall not ſo continue : but I (hall MWere. 


deſire thee ro remember that according to their affition or affiltance 
Ti2 thou 


QF in che 12h 


24.8 


Aote. 


 e@AflrologiaeMunaa. Lib.4. 
thou art to judge good or bad , and not always according to theſe general Rules, as 
you have been ſufficiently taught of the Planets, fo alſo touching the places where 


their effects ſhall be manifeſted, obſerve the ſame Rules you have been already taught, 
viz. thole ſubject to the ſigns in which they are, &c. 


— 
—  — 


CHaP, XIV. 


Shewins the Significations of the Planets in any of the Triplicties 
when any of them is Lord of the Year im any Annual Rervolution of 
the years of the World. 


better and further jl[nſtration of what hath been already delivered,to(though 

what hath been ſaid is ſufficient) we ſhall yet further perſiſt, and endeavour to 
make every thing ſo clear, that there ſhall not be the leaſt complaint thereof ; now 
therefore as touching the {1gnitication of every Planet when they are either Lords or 
Ladies of the year in any of the four Triplicities (what a Triplicity is, and how and 
wherefore ſo divided you have been already ſhewn inthe 12. Chapter of our J/ntro- 
duttion to the Judgement of the Stars) and then what may be expected by their being 
in any of the twelve ſigns, as alſo the Head and Tail of the Dragon, and ſo we ſhall 
proceed to the third Section, that we may the ſooner haſten to a concluſion. 

I might hereon inlarge, as have the Ancients , but it £ all be needlels ro ſay more 
then thus much, That look what Planet is Lord of the year,and the ſign he is then pla- 
ced in, and ponder exactly his Debilities and Fortitudes,and according to his ftrength 
you know and have been ſufficiently already taught, you are to judge, good or bad, 
according to his nature, the narure of the ſign heisin, and the nature of the place 
of Heaven he is placed in ; asif Sarwrn be in Aquaries or its Triplicity,this being/both 
his houſe and Triplicity by day, and fo conſequently (if the Revolution be Diurnal) 
ſtrong and well dignified, as alſo having exaltation in Libra the ſame Triplicity , you 
(hall judge what he ſignifies and denotes ſhall be advantagious and good to the Com- 
mon People and Nation, but it (hall chiefly be maniteſted and effected in the Weſtern 
parts, becauſe thisis a Weſtern f1gn. 

For, whatever your Planet Lord or Lady of the year denotes, whether by her or his 
natural Complexion, or Accidental Fortitudes, good or bad,it i} all be chiefly maniteſt 
in thoſe Regions ſubjeR ro the ſign wherein he or the is, and the Countreys alſo ſub- 
ze to that Triplicity, but more particularly in the quarter ſignified by the ſaid Tri- 
plicity ; as for example, if Satzrn bein Aries, he ſhall denote miſchief and dam- 
mage to all Noble, Rich and Great men(becauſe they are denoted and ſignified eſpc- 
cial by fiery ſigns, which alſo you have heard in the 23. Chapter of the ſecond Trea- 
tiſe of this Volume are regal)alſc tothe Common People and Nation in general (be- 
cauſe he is Lord of the year, and fo becomes ſigrificator thereof or of them) now 
1 fay miſchief ſhall be unto theſe, loſſes, and croſſes, becauſe Saturn in this lign, as 
alfo in the whole Triplicity,is weak, Ares being his Fall, and Ze- his Detriment &c. 
And this ſhall bein the Places, Cities, Regions, Countreys and Kingdoms fignified by 
Aries, and all the Triplicity (which you have alfo been ihewn in the aforeſaid Book, 
and 27. Chapter) eſpecially inthe Eaſtern parts thereof, becauſe they are Eaftern 
{igns, &c. this 1s clear. 

So that if thou haſt but regard to the Natural and Accidental] ſignifications of the 
Planer, ſign he is in, his ſtrength, and debilitiesrherein, what Triplicity the ſign is of, 
and what Regions and Quarter of Heaven it denotes,together with the Triplicity,and 
do but judge according to what thou haſt been (tewn and I need ſay no more, for 


thereby mayſt thou eaſily and exactly judge of the reit, 
y may } y Jadg CUBAP 


Ven as we have before promiſed to give you ſome Rules more at large forthe 


Lib. a. eAſtrologia und. 


CHAY. A 


Demonſtrating the Stronifacations of SAturn when he is Lord of the 
tear in any of the twelve Sions. 


| Ou have been promiſed this plain jogtrot way, and therefore I ſhall here de- 
Y' liver it you, though co the ingenious what hath been already ſaid is ſufficient, 
and this ſuperfluous. | 

Wheretore then know,that if Saturn be Lord of the year, and in 4ries, he ſtirreth of the ſiqifica- 
up many great winds, and thoſe Eaſtern, and cauſeth the death of many Matrons and tions of Saturn 
old Women, or ſuch as are Overſeers of Nunneries, ſcarcity of Proviſions, and a when Lord of 
leanneſs and barrenneſs of the earth : And if he be impedited, he cauſerh many '* 727, #4 
| Thefts and Robberies, Cutters by the High-way, anxiety, ſadneſs and tribulation pe y 
during that Revolution : Alſo if he be the only Lord or Significator of the year,and impedired. 
be Cadent from the Aſcendent,and behold it not,and be dire, he ſhews anxiety and 
crouble to Rich and Noblemen, or ſuch as are the Grandees of the earth ; and if he 
be Retrograde, their houſes, ſubſtance and coffers of wealth (hall be viſited and de- 
ſtroyed or taken away, and ſo much the rather, if he be beheld by the malevolent 
Aſpe&s of Mars ; for then he ſhall denote grievous cold weather, the death of Cat- 
cel, eſpecially Sheep, and ſuch as are ſignified by Aries, and that by ſome rot or the 
violznce and rudeneſs of Wars; and if he do not behold Mars, or Mars him, the 
Winter ſhall be extream cold, according to the nature and quality of the Climate, 
and there ſhall be a deſtruction or death of Cattel; alſo if he be not Retrograde 
there ſhall be diſſentions and quarrels amonglit men, Sackings, Robbings and Spoil- 
ings, anda great deal of miſchief ; eſpecially if he be beheld of Mars out of an 
argle ; but if he behold him from a Cadent houſe, it ſhall not be ſo bad: Alſo if 
Saturn be dire, and in an angle, he ſignifies much rain , diſcords amongſt grear 
and rich men, eſpecially if he be aſpected by Aars, for then the Common People 
thall aſſuredly diſagree, and contend with their King and Superiours; and if he be 
Retrograde, the ſtate and condition of the People ſhall be grievous; and if both 
Aars and the Moon behold him with a malevolent Aſpe together , there ſhall be 
terrible cold weather, Cattel (ha!l die, and there (hall be diſſentions and Wars. 

In any Revolution of the World, if you finde Satwrs in a fixed ſign, he denotes Saturn Lord of 
mortality, poverty, ſcarcity, and great want of the fruits of the earth (ifhe be Lord the year, and 
of the year thisis meant) eſpecially in Leo, becauſe he is therein afflicted and in de- © fixed figns. 
criment (being the ſign oppoſite to his own houſe 1quaries) not altogether ſo bad in, 
Scorpio, andin Taurus a great deal lels miſchievous then in Scorpio ; for the more he 
is impedired, the more evil ſhall he be the occaſioner of,eſpecially if he behold Mars, 
or be aſpected by him, except Z«piter da. moderate the matter by his benevolent 
beains. 

If Saturn be Lord of the year, and have Septentrional Latitude, (or more plain- Saturn when 


ly North Latitude,becauſe every one underſtands not Septentrional)he denotes thick, _ = : 


croſs and corrupt w) r, alſo dark and cloudy. _ North. lack. 
If he have Meridional or South latitude, he ſignifies much hard cold weather and When South 
froſt. lacirude. 


If he be Orieatal alſo, he ſhall be the occaſioner of trouble, ſadneſs , grief and Saturn Lord of 
{orcow to Great and Noblemen, perhaps through the coldneſs and froftineſs of the = "og | 
weather. "" 

Again if hebe Occidental, there ſhall be Earthquakes during that Revolution, g,,,,, Lord of 
eſpecially io the Eaſtern parrs {this is if he be in Aries or any ſign ſignifying that the year and 
Quarter) if he denote Earthquakes, and be Oriental, joy ſhall not be ſo great ; if Occidengal. 


he be Retrograde it will be the worſe, and ſo judge of the quality and greatneſs > 
the 


250 


Srurn in Taun- 
Iu, ot id Lord of 
th: year. 


Sature Lord of 
the year, and in 
Gummi. 


the year, & h- 
ving Sepren- 
trional latin IT 


Satura Lord of 


eAſti ologia EM unda. Lib.4. 
the cood or evil itil] ſignified by any Vlanet according to his ſtrength or impediment 
and ajtiiction. 

Thus much touching the ſignitications of Satzrx when Lord of the year, and po- 
fitedin eAries ; wheretore now as touching thus poſition in 7 aus when he is Lord 
of the year, whoif he be then in an angle and direct,he ſignifies War and Diſcords or 
Quarrels, caiefly in the Regions and Places ſubject to T arr, and in the !Southern 
parts of the Nation in which the Revolution is made, alſo deſtruction to the Seeds 
and Plants in the earth, becauſe Tarr 1s an Earthy ſign, and he no ways eſſentially 
fortified ſo asto do there any good, and being naturally evil,unlefs the good atp: &ts 
of the Fortunes do prevent and alter his influence ; he ſhall alſo cauſe Catrerpillers, 
Worms, and ſuch kinde of Creatures as ſhall deſtroy the I ruits of the. Earth ; alſo 
Tribulations, and Sorrows in the earth, Geſtruttion of Houſes , Cities and Towns, 
alſo Earthquakes,chiefly Southward ( becauſe Tarr 15a Southern ſign, &c.) and in 
thoſe places ſubject unto 7 ar. 

Moreover if Saturn be Lord of the year,and located in Taxrrw, he ſignifies Wars, 
Scarcity and Famine, or a want of iuch things as are produced out of the earth; and 
if he be impedited,' he alſo denotes mortality, and that alſorto the great Ones of the 
earth; andif Mars and the Hoon be joyned either in Connn#tion or Alpet with 
Saturn,in what ever ſignit be, or what ever then aſcends, they ſhall denote mortality 
and famine, or a ſcarcity and if they be joyned to Mars, it ſignifies trouble and 
vexation to the King and chief Rulers ; alſo Quarrels and Wars in the Southern 
parts; and if he be then Retrograde, he denotes deſtructions and violencies gene- 
rally overall the Region, Wars and Bloodſhed, eſpecially if he be in the*renth, for 
thenit ſhall be more univerſal; alſo miſchief and dammage to children and young 
men: butif he behold the Aſcendent, and be direct, the evil ſhall not be ſo great an 

eneral; and if he be Cadent from the Aſcendent, nor in Aſpect therewith, and 
- dire&, nor beheld of ar, the evilis thereby {till declared not to be ſo great : 
but if he be retrograde and impedited by Aays,he denotes deſtruction to the fruits of 
the earth and mortalities, according to the nature of the ſign he is in. 

When Saturn is Lord of the year and in Gemini, and in an angle dire , he 
ſtirreth up many great and high Weltern winds, and cauſeth very ſharp cold wea- 
therin Winter according to the nature and quality of the Climate ; the Birds of the 
ayr ſhall ſuffer Detriment of which there ſhall be a ſcarcity ; alſo men ſhall be af- 
ficted with cold and dry Diſeaſes commixed with heat and moiſture,and men ſhall be 
lyars, contentious and ihedders of blood ; there ſhall be much Froſt in Winter, and 
in Summer corruption of ayr, thunder, .ltghtning and ran ; and ifhe be Retrograde, 
diſſentionsand diſcords ſhall happen between Kings, Nobles and great men; alfo they 
ſhall during that Revolution be in great fear of death ; it ſignifieth alſy Earthquakes 
and theſe towards the Weſtern parts; and if he be remote from an Angle, he ſigni- 
fies as well Eaſtern as Weſtern winds, and abundance of Cold, and men ſhall ſuffer 
many changes ; ſo alſo judge they ſhall be if Sar, be then Retrograde ; and that 
there ſhall be many infirmities through winds, ſtorms, unnatural Dews and Rains : 
but if he be Cadent and not beholding the Afcendent and be dire, theſe things ſhall 
happen in the ſign in which $atzrn then is, and ſhall cauſe many Southern and 
Southweſt winds. | 

Alſo if Satwrn beinthe fourth houſe in Gemini, or its Triplicity, and T.ord of the 
year, or if he benot Lord of the year, yet if he be in aſpe> of the Lord of the Aſcen- 
dent, he ſignitieth that in the Weltern parts during that Revolution many men ſhall 
die through Earthquakes ; but if he bein Aſpect with the Lord of the tenth , there 
ſhall be many controverſies and diſſentions about Rule and Government, and the 
power and right of one another; alſo many inundations, and abundance of over- 
flowings of Waters, by which the fruits of the earth ſhall be damnified. 

Again, if Saturn have Septentrional Latitude, there ſhall be many grievous high 
winds, corrupt, 9gBY dark ayr and carthquakes,and theſe chiefly in the Weſtern parts 


and places ſubje&t to Gewin: 
| But 


Lib. 4. eA ſlrologia NAunda. 251 

But if he have Meridional Latitude, there will be a hot and dry ayr, If be be Merl» 
mortality , and little or no rain; if he be Oriental, he denotes infirmities and 9ioval. 
ſickneſs, alſo trouble to the Grandees of the earth, and Nobles of thoſe Re- 2ienial: 
gions under Gemii ; ſo if he be Occidental, there ſhall be a very dry ayr, and Occigental. 
lictle or no rain, &Cc. 

Again, if Saturn be in ((ancer in any Revolution and Lord of the year , Saturn Lord of 
there ſhall be an increaſe and abundance of Water, Fiſh and Locuſts (or Cater- *b* year,andin 
pillers rather in our Country) and ſuch Worms and creeping Creatures as are de- Os 
ttructive to Fruits, and are ingendred by immoderate rain with which the year ſhall 
abound, as alſo with Fiſhes ; and if Mars behold him not, there ſhall be grievous 
and terrible cold weather, and many infirmities in thoſe places under the ſign where- 
in Satern is, As alſo under the ſigns in Square and Oppoſition to him, and they ſhall 
be ſuch Diſeaſes as ſhall be of the nature of the ſign he poſſeſſes, and if he be 
Retrograde, let the King have a care of death, or ſome prime and chief Ruler du- 
ring that Revolution: and if 4ars behold him with any Malevolent aſpe&,it ſigni- 
fieth Mortalities to the aforeſaid places and many evils and miſchiefs. 

And if S«twrn behold not the Aſcendent, there ſhall be muchcold, rain and 
dew ; but if he bedirec; the evil ſhall not be ſo bad, except then the Hoon be 
in the Aſcendent, for that ſignifieth the evil ſhall fall on. the King or chief 
Rulers of the Region in which the Revolution is, if nor death ic ſelf; but 
if he be retrograde , and beheld of Mars, it fignifieth death and mortality 
in thoſe Regions aforeſaid ; and if he be Cadent and not beholding the Aſcen- 
dent, and be direct and Aars Cadent from him, it pros that men ſhall be 
ſecure and fate; and ſo much the more aſſured will this be if he be paſt the 
firit fifteen degrees of the ſign; yet ſhall there be infirmities in the Regi- 
ons and Places ſubje&t unto the ſaid ſign : but if he be retrograde and be- 
held of Mars, and neither of them in the Aſpects of the Fortunes, many tri- 
bulations and troubles ſhall be incident unto thoſe Regions, alſo abundance of 
rain and cold weather, alſo Shipwracks and Diſaſters by Sea, and much danger 
to Navigators, and ſuch as make Voyages ; alſo death ro fiſh, and the creatures 
lying in the Sea and other Waters, ; 

If that Saturn be in Cancer having Septentrional Latitude, he denotes a ſcar- Satumin Can; 
city of Waters, and a drought of fountains and rivers, and but little rain; Alſo if he cr, and having 
be Meridional , that men ſhall labour and take much pains in their Trades, but Septentrlonal 
ſhall gain liccle or nothing thereby : if he be Oriental, he denotes dark, thick and _ 
obſcure unwholſom ayr,alſo in the Winter time, grievous cold raw weather; and dam- oriencal. © 
mage to fruits by Northern winds ; if he be Occidental, atſo much rain; And if he Occidencal, 
be retrograde the evil ſhall be augmented, and the King or Rulers of the Countreys 
and Nations under the ſign wherein Satzr» 1s, ſhall undergo grievous aſper- 
ſions , reproaches and diſgraces even equivalent to death it ſelf; but if he be 
direc it will leſſen and diminiſh the evil a little, for look how much your ſignifi- 
cator is fortified, and ſo much the leſs ſhall the evil fignified be, and fo 
much the more the good, &c. And this thou wilt plainly ſee by what fol- 
lows , if thou haſt diligent reſpe& to what ſhall be expreſſed, ſo as to ponder 
throughly the reaſon of every Judgement , the which I would adviſe thee 
to do, for then ſhalt thou be aſſuredly an expert Philoſopher, and be ſoon 
able to deliver Judgement moſt rationally on any Configuration of the Hea- 
vens without recourſe to thy Books; for, that «Aſtro/oger whoſe brains re- 
mains in his Library ſhall never come to the accompliſhment of this Science : 
but he that makes his Library remain in his brains ſhall noterre ; Er ile erit mihs 
AMICHSI. 

But if Saturn be Lord of the year in any Revolution, and in Lev, having Saturn Lord of 
Septentrional ( or North) latitude, he cauſeth much rain and corruption of the year, and 
things both to the prejudice of great and ſmall, Rulers and People, alſo bringeth to '2 ©: 


nought the deigns and works of mens hands. 
If 


252 © > A, [trologia eM unda. Lib.4. 
If he be Oriental, be denotes many infirmities to the People of the Climate un- 
der that Revolution : and if he be Occidental,many Mortalitits and Peſtilencies ſhall 
happen unto the People : and ſo much the more grievous will the Evil and miſchief be 
if he be retrograde, leſs if direct. 
Saturn Lordot Alſo if Saturn be in Virgo, and be Lord of the Year and Septentrional , he ſignifies 
the year in g00d, wholſom and ſweet gales and blaits of wind , alſo convenient and featonable 
P'go. cuſts in Harveſt-time : and ifhe be Meridional], there ſhall be a drought of Foun- 
tains, and a ſcarcity of waters ; but if he be Oriental, the women that ſhall con- 
ceive during that Revolution ſhall miſcarry , by reaſon of wind or carnal copula- 
tion after conception : but if he be Occidental, he cauſeth acute and ſharp Vevers : 
and if he be Retrograde, the King and Rulers ſhall tear their Enemues : 
bur if he be Direc, they ſhall not thus fear , bur be provided tor by them. 
Saturn Lordof Again if Satzrn be in Libra and Lord of the Year Septentrional , he denotes 
the yearin ahotand dry Ayr, and little or norain during that Revolution, and a fcarcity 
Libra. of Waters: And if he be Meridional, a good wholſom ſweet Ayr and no 
noyſom Blaſts : and if he be Oriental , men ſhall have a luſttull incl:na- 
tion to women : but if he be Occidental, he denotes infamy and dilgrace 
which ſhall come of ſuch Doings : If he be Retrograde , he {ignifies In- 
" firmities to Servants and the Baſer Sort of People : And it he be di- 
re&Q, there ſhall be pretty Plenty of the Fruits of the Earth , eſpecially of 
Barly, &c. 
SatwnLordof Saturn Lord of the Year and in Scorpio Septentrional , ſignifieth abundance of 
the year in Rain and increaſe of Waters both in Rivers and Fountains : alſo that they ſhall be 
—_—_— corrupt : and ifhe be Meridional , he ſhall denote a ſcarcity of provitions appertain- 
ing to the life of man , eſpecially ſuch as are produced by the Earth : And if he be 
Oriental, there ſhall be many diſſentions, and quarre)s amonglt Great men : but 
if Occidental , he ſignifies deſtruction and trouble on the Sea, alto loſs and dammage 
to ſuch as have their Livelihood thereon : alſo if he be Retrograde, there ſhall hap- 
pen Peſtilſential Niſeaſes : but if direct, Babylon ( as ſay ſome of the Antients ) ſhall 
be ſafe. 
Saturn Lord Again if Saturn be Lord of the Year Septentrional and in Sagirtary, he denotes 
of the yearin the increaſe of Fountains, and extremity of Cold in Wigter according to the 
Sagitiary. nature of the Climate : if he be Oriental , Noble and Rich men ſha'l be pur 
out of their Countries and Habitations : and it he be Occidental, there ſhall be many 
diſſentions, quarrels and wars between Kings and Great men : alſo if he be Retro- 
grade, it ſhall go ill with all manner of men and their affairs; and quarrels ſhall be a- 
mongſt them : and if he be Dire&, Travellers both by Sea and Land (hall bein a good 
Condition and ſucceſsful] 
Satum Lord of Moreover if Satwrn be Lord of the Year, and in Capricorn and Septentrional , 
the year in the Ayr ſhall be temperate and healthy, and there ſhall be moderate and ſeaſonable 
Caprice, Rains: but ifhe be Meridional or have Meridional Latitude, in Winter there will be 
dark, cloudy, cold weather : and if he be Orienta], the ſtate of Great and Noble men 
ſhall be but ſad and troubleſome, neither ſhall they agree with the Common People : 
and if he be Occidental, the fruits of the Earth ſhall be waſted and conſumed by and 
through extremity of heat and creeping things, as Catterpillers and the like : and if he 
be Retrograde, the Common People thall be angry and tall out one with another : 
if Direct , it ſignifies the good Condition of Great and Noble men , that they ſhall 
carry themſelves well towards all men, and that they ſhall delightin and love the 
Law, and put it in execution. 
Saturn Lord of 1f Saturn be Lord ofthe Year and in Aquaries having Septentrional Latitude, he 
the yearin figmifies much Rain, Froſt and Cold ar Times convemenrt ; when Meridional, a ſcar- 
Aquaries. city of water in Fountains and Rivers : if he be Oriental, the-Common People ſhall 
obtain but few Heritages, and thrive bur little : if he be Occidental, he {ignifies many 
Combuſtions : if he be Retrograde , the Evill is increaſed; and if Direct, he de- 
notes the Death of fuch Cattell as Men ordinarily imploy about their Oc- 
- Caltons. 
Laſtly 


Lib.4. eAſtrologia <NAunda. 


Laſtly, if Satern be Septentrional, and Lord of the ”= and in Piſces, he ſigni- g,,,,1 1.0 dof 


fies many great and tempeſtuous blaſts of winds and that from the North , and 


grievous cold weather in winter; if he be Meridional, he denotes ſtorms and tem- Piſces. 


peſts by ſea and many ſhipwracks, alſo hurt and lofs to thoſe that have their living 
and dependency on the ſea or water ; and if he be Oriental, it fignifies diſſentions 
and diſcords amongſt great and noble men, and alſo flanghter amongſt them ; bur 
if he be Occidental, the ignoble and baſer ſort of people ſhall exalt themſelves 
above their Superiors ; andif he be Retrograde, there ſhall be many diſſentions, 
tribulations and diſcords amongſt Religious men and ſuch as {tudy Divine matters; 
and if he be Dire, men ſhall ſerve and worſhip God, &c. 


CHAP. XVI. © 


- 


Shewing the Signtfications of Jupiter, when he is Lord of the year 
in any of the Twelrve Signs. | 


E are now in order to deſcend to 7-pitey, being the next Planet 


J 

$4 ſhall be obſervers and lovers of the Laws, both Moral and 
RN Divine, and ſhall be given to good works : 'alſo he denotes 
FP much windy weather, and that from the Eaſt or Eaftern parts : 
. CeD© fo much cold and rainin winter, yet not ſo much as ſhall be 
hurtful, or to cauſe any inundation ; the fruits of the earth alſo ſhall be plenteouſly 
and ſeaſonably produced : And if he be then well dignified when he is Lord of 
the year and in «Aries, helignifies the proſperous and ſucceſsful condition of thoſe 
men, places, Cities and Countreys ſubject unto him and the ſign wherein he is, 
that they ſhall be merry and jovial and want nothing : the like alſo ro the common 
people in general, and that they ſhall love their Superiors ; but if he be impediced 

and weak, judge the contrary. 

Alſoif 7#piter be in humane Signs, or fiery Signs in any Revolution and Lord 
of the year, you are to know (if he be weak) that he ſignifies great and noble men 
ſhall be deeded and perplexed , moleſted and affiicted, and ſhall ſuſtain many 
loſſes, and diſgraces according to the nature of the affliftion, and theſe (hall chiefly 
be incident to the Regions and places ſubje& unto him, and the ſign in which he is 
located, as alſo the place for which the figure of the Revolution is ereQed ; but if 
he be ſtrong, judge the contrary. Alſo if he be ſtrong and well placed, or acciden- 
rally aſpeRed by any of the other fortunate Planets (which you have heard may 
ſometimes accidentally be fortunes) in earthy or watery Signs, he ſhall denote good 
to all ſuch things asare thereby ſignified, as the fruits of the earth and ſeeds if 
in earthy Signs, alſo fiſhes and ſuch things as appertain to water, if in warry 
ſigns, as Navigators and ſuch as have their living out of the Sea , they 
ſhall make good voyTpes and that ſafely and with ſecurity ; but if he be weak, 
you may judge danger by ſhipwrack , tedious and unprofitable voyages and the 
Ike : and fo contrariwiſe in earthy Signs when he is weak and afflicted, he denotes 
a ſcarcity of Grain, fruits and ſeeds, andthat the earth ſhall be afflicted with 
; A barrenneſs, 


under Satzrs in the heavens, who if he be in e4ries and Lord Zupiter 10:4 
of the year,he ſignifies an appearance of religion in the Eaſtern of the year in 
parts,or that ſome new Sec or Schiſm ſhall there ariſe; anÞmen 475 


254 eA ſtrologia eM unaa. Lib.4. 
barrenneſs, according to the nature of the Plaget cr Tlanets affiſting 
him, &c. 
Tupitcr Lord Jupiter in 7Tarw and Lord of the year well dignified, or affiſted by Adjuvant 
cf the year in Planets, ſhall denote fertillity , and the good condition of the fruits of theearth, 
+6 ct and that there ſhal] be a temperate and good ayr:men ſhall dehighr in the husbandring 
and manuring of the ground, and ſhall protit thereby; the King alſo and the 
Rulers, or Great and Noble men, ſhall do good to the people,and incourage them, 
and do them juſtice and equity : and again, the People ſhall love, honor, ard re- 
ſpe& their Superiors; there ſhall alſo be ſufficient and mocerate rain , and ſweet 
Southern winds, and all things Hgnified by 7#pirer ſhall chiefly be manifeſt inthe 
Southern parts, and thoſe places tubject ro Tuwrwm: ; but if he be weak and afflicted, 
judge the contrary , and judge the nature thereof from the hignificator aft iCting, as 
you have been otten taught before. 

Bur you are ever to remember this general rule , which I would alſo have you 
obſerve and take notice of in all the other Planets,that alchough 7#p:irer do in 7 amr ws 
ſigufie good when he is well diſpoſed, he being naturally goodin himfelf,yert doth 
he not effect it ſo powerfulſe or ſo fully as when he is in 4714: ; for he hath therein 
borh Triplicity and Term; but in 7 :#r#: only Term, ard in S«gy114ry more power 
then in es to effe& what he denotes; for therein he hath both Houſe, Tripli- 
city and Term; for by how much the ſtronger eſſentially a Planer is, by fo much 
is his power increaſed; and ſo on the contrary, when he is debilitated, &c. this, I 
fay, 1 would have thee ſtill remember in what thou hait already heard, as alſo in 
what follows, and in all the other Planets. 

Fupitct Lord If Fazuter beLord of the year in Gemini and well dignified, and in ſome Aſpects 
- wi yer In of the Malevolents, men ſhall be perplexed with extream warm winds ; and it he 
ED be in Aſpe&t with Hrs, many caſualties through thunder and lightning ſhall be 1n- 
cident uzto them ; but if he be aſpected with Sazwry, he denotes corruption of ayr; 
and it other teſtimonies :concur, peſtilential :ayr and diſeaſes rhrough corruption 
of bleod are to be feared ; butif you ſee him free from any Aſpect of the Malevo- 
lents, yet ſhall he denote no very pleaſant ayr, many ſudden guſts of winds, and 
ſtorms ot rain, which ſhall be ſomewhat deſtructive to the fruits of the earth, and 
not pleaſant unto men ; For it 15 certain, that when /piter 15 in Gemini, if he dono 
hurt, he doth as little good, or rather none at all, eſpecially if Retrograde, weak 
or afflicted. 
Jnpicr Lo:% When 7uputer 1s in Cancer, and Lord of the year, the People and Nobles ſhall be 
avert n ina moſt proſperous and good condition, ſhall live credibly in honor and eſteem, 
; the ayr ſhall be pleaſant and healthy, the earth fruitful, and the fruit wholſom and 
good : There ſhall be no danger by Sea, but men ſhall make proſperous and ſuc- 
cestul voyages ; rain ſhall fall ſeaſonably and moderately, the winds alſo ſhall be 
temperate and calm, if other teſtimonies alſo agree therewith ; bur if he be in Cancer, 
and weak, the year will not be altogether ſo happy as you have heard; yet you are 
to know, that it he be ſo aſpected and afflicted , that his ſweet influence of doing 
go0d is Jetted ; yet will he not do any mifcluef when he is in any Revolution of the 
| years of the world located in Cancer. 
ron Lord 7upiter Lord of the year in Les , denotes high winds and cold weather in win- 
ci theyear Mer, allo much rain and tempeſts, even tothe blowing uptrees by the roots; yet 
Leo, . 2 P £, ; » Y 
there ſhall be a clear and wholtom ayr towards the latter end of winter, in the ſpring 
aboundance of rain;, a 'drought of fountains, and a ſ[carceity of water 1n rivers; 
and laſtly, in Autumn thou ſhalt be fure of a plentiful and good harveſt, yet many 
people ſhall be croubled with unuſual coughs, &c. : 
Fupires Lexrd If hebeLord of year, andin Virgo, free from the Malevolent Aſpects of the In- 
of ti e year in fortunes , men ſhall be ſociable, and love one another , and delight in Husbandry 
Pgo. and manuring of the earth, the fruits ſhall be plentiful, but ſoon corrupt, alſo ſeeds 
ſhall come to good ; many Southerly winds and thoſe ſometimes obnoxious,&c.but if 
be afflicted in this Sign, he will not be of ſufficient force and-efficacy to effect the 


g00d henaturally would perform. 
Alſo 


Nora bene, 


Lib.4. D Aſlrologia Iunda. 255 


Alſo if Jzpiter be in Libra, in an annual Revolution, and Lord of the year, well Fupiter Lord 
aſpected and placed, he ſhall manifeſt his effe&s chiefly in the ayr, which ſhall ge- of the Year in 
nerally be temperate and wholſom, many warm winds, and pleaſant ſhowers for the £*- 
production of the fruits of the earth, which ſhall be good and pleaſant ; men alſo 

generally ſhall be healthy, and love one another ; if he be beheld by the Malevo- 

lent aſpect of 115, there ſhall be much thunder and lightning in Summer, and in 

the Weſtern parts ſome hurt thereby ; if by Sarwry, the ayr ſhall ſometimes be per- 

plexed with unwholfom fogs and mitts. 

Again, /#yiter in \corpio, denotesa good clear ayr if he be Lord of the year, Fupire ! 
and not afticted, and thin clouds, the year ſhall be plentiful, many ſeaſonable and *t the yea: in 
ſweer ſhowers or rain ſhall fall, hot weather may be expeRted in ſummer, but very **'?'% 
cold in winter, and thick clouds ; the ayr ſhall be healthy, and there ſhall be many 
Northern winds , alſo the Sea ſhall be free from misfortune; viz. Ship- 
wracks, Wars, and the like ; but if you finde him Retrograde, and in Sqw..re 
or Oppoſition of Saturn or Cars, judge the contrary to what hath been 
ſaid. 

Moreover, if 7-piter be in Sagittarie, he denotes a temperate ayr in the begin- Fopirer Lord 

ning of winter, but in the end thereof great cold, but tew or no high winds, alſo - "age "ger 
much ſnow and froit in the ſpring, infomuch that the fruits of the earth ali be $2g:ary, 
much damnified thereby ; for many of them ſhall be nipt in the bud, and blaſted : 
Andif his latitude be Septentrional, he ſignifies little rain, but a moſt temperate 
g00d ayr ; if Meridional, a turbulent ayr, and many great guſts of wind ; if he 
be Oriental, noble and rich men ſhall bein a good and joytul condition ; if Occi- 
dental, they ſhall be raiſed to dignity aud renown; if Retrograde, it ſhall not be 
fafe travelling or voyaging by Sea ; but if Direc, judge them to be ſafe and free 
from any danger that voyage by ſea ; judge alſo, that fiſh, and ſuch creatures as 
delightin waters ſhall in creaſe, &c. 

In Capricorn, 7upiter if he be Lord of the year, doth not promiſe much g00d Jupiter Lur ! 
weather; indeed he will be the Author of much miſchief,but according to bis puſi. of the year in 
tion, and the aſpects of other Planets unto him you are to judge ; for if he be well £47797 
aſpeted, and tree from Retrogradation and other impediments, he promiſes a 
plentiful year qwo ad Capax, yet no extraordinary abundance, but ſufficient ; alſo 
a pleaſant ayr, many great Southern winds ; ſucceſs and profit to the common 
people, &c. but if you ftinde him aftlicted by their Malevolent Aſpects, and ill 
placed, judge the contrary. 

But if /#p:ter be in e-Zquaries, and Lord of the year, alſo aſſiſted and well Zuvices Lord 
placed, judge the year to be temperate and ſeaſonable, for the molt p-rt a tempe- of che year in 
rate ayr, pleaſant ſhowers, &c. but if you finde him afflicted, judge the contrary, 
much hurt and _— by high winds,rain, and ſnow, &c. 

Laſtly, if Z4piter be Lord of the year, and in P/ces, the ayr ſhall be wholſome, 7,,;,,, 7..4 
clear and good, a plentiful year, ſeaſonable ſhowers, and ſucceſs to all thoſe that of the year in 
navigate and negotiate by ſea, abundace of fiſh &c. but if he be attlited, he ſhall Piſces. 
denote much thunder and rain, 


25.6  eAftrologia eMunaa. Lib.4s 


Cma#®e, Kal 


Shewing the S1gnifications of Mars, when he is Lord of the year in 
any of the twelve Signs, 


fore now to be treated of ; wherefore if he be Loi. of the year, andin Ares, 
he ſignifies many great and high winds, and various mutations in the ayr, in 
the Eaſtern parts eſpecially ;he ſignifies alſo little or no rain,and that men ſhall have 
pain in their eyes, and quarrels, difſentions and debates amonſt men, eſpecially in 
the Eaſtern parts, and ſuch places and Cinies ſubject to Aries, and that Kings ſhall 
diſagree amongſt themſelves and fight : but underſtand, this 1s when he is malicioutly 
aſpected of Satwrx, or any other Infortune. 
Free from af= Butif he be free from their affliction, as alſo retrogradation and combuſtion, the 
fligion, common people in that Revolution, as alſo thoſe ſubject unto Aries, ſhall be in a 
happy and good condition, ſhall proſper and overcome all their enemies; the ayr 
ſhall be temperate, and the year fruitful, and there ſhall be much plenty, chiefly if 
he be then Lord of the Aſcendent, and men ſhall generally be joytul and merry, as 
| having no other cauſe. 
Septentricnal, And ifhe have Sepentrional latitude, he notes little or no rain,and a hot ayr. 
Meridional. If he have Meridional latitude, he denotes much thunder and lightning. 
Oclental. Alſo if he be Oriental,wars and diſcords amongſt noble,great and rich men,or ſuch 
as are the Grandees of the earth. 
Occidental- But it he be Occidental, many fears and troubles ſhall fall upon men, as alſo dif- 


co:ds and contentions. 
Again, if he be retrograde,. men ſhall be perplexed with many infirmities in many 


parts of their body, bur eſpecially in their eyes. 

But if dire& and combult, or otherways impedited, men ſhall be hypocritical, 
cloathed in ſheeps cloathing, but ſhall inwardly be ravening woolves 
Mars Lord of Allo, if Har: be Lord ofthe year in any Revolution, andin Tarr, he denotes 
theyearin many great Southern winds and blaits , very hurtful and deſtructive to the fruits 
TauVMs. of the earth, by reaſon ſudden heats will follow thereupon : there ſhall alſo be many 
ſhowers of rain, and much thunder and lightning, death to greater cattel and wo- 
men, or at leaſt many tribulations and croſſes unto them ; allo the year ſhall not 
be fruitful, nor healthful, the fruits ſhall be blaſted, and rotten, and the ſeeds of the 


carth deſtroyed. 
And if he have North latitude, he ſignifies much rain, and ſomewhat the more 


N the next place you fee follows Mars who is next under Jupiter, and there- 
Ma;s Tord of 
the year in 


Arics, and af- 
fliged. 


Retrograde. | 


Dirca, 


Tfhe have X "_ , 

north latitude, £00d unto the herbs and fruits of the earth. 

Southlatitude. Bur if South latitude, he denotes many guſts of wind and blaſts(as you have heard) 
and deſtruction to the fruits of the earth. 

. If he be Oriental, there ſhall be peace in the Southern and Weſtern parts, 
Oriental. : . « : gs ; 
Occidental. And if Occidental, he denotes much death, and many infirmities, eſpecially to 
DireR. women, and that they ſhall be hated if he be direct and otherways impe- 

dited. | 
Retrograde. Bur ifhe be Retrograde, many children and young people ſhall dye, during the 


time of that Revolution. 

Mars Lord of But if Aars be Lord of the year. and in Gemini, many caſualties and damage 

= year in ſhall befal men through thunder, and lightning, and little rain, or through the want 
NEM® thereof alſo by exceſs of heat ; there ſhall alſo be debates and contentions, thefts and 

robberies in the Northern and Weſtern parts; the King or chiefRulers ſhall be exalt- 


edand overcome their enemies ; there ſhall be many griefs 'of the ears, as in- 
| flammations 


_— Mm« Aa Sa 


Lib.4. eAſlrologia SNAJunda. a7 
flammations and puſtules which ſhall be very offentive and troubleſome to ' 
Men. 

And if he have North latitude, he ſignifies much rain ; but if his latitude be South, If he have 
there ſhall be a drought of fountains, and a ſcarcety of water. north, (ouch 

If Oriental , he caufeth many infirmities, puſtules, ſcabs, and breakings out in _ 
the skin ; andif Occidental, he denotes much trouble and auxiety to Lawyers,Scribes, Occidental, 
Merchants and Judges, and that ſome of them ſhall run away by reaſon of their in- 

Juitice, extortion and cheating tricks. 

Again, it he be Direct, men ſhall be blabs of their tongues , and divuldge both n;..2. 
their own and others ſecrets, commitced to their charge ; and when he is Retrograde, Retrograde. 
religzous men, or ſuch as take ſuch kinde of functions on them, ſhalſclaſh, ditagree 
and contend upon ſome nice points. 

Again, if /Lrs in any annual Revolution of the world, be L ord of the year in Ars Lord of 
Cancer, he ſhall fignific frequent ſhipwracks, by reaſon of ſudden blaſts of wind ; *< year in 
alſo difſentions and quarrels 1n the \Wettern and Norchwelt parts, and that men ſhall zag 
ſuffer much damage under taxations; many infirmities alſo are threatned, teavers,pains 
and infirmities in the throat and breait ; the ayr thall be grievous and contagious, 
and a want of rain; allo the year ſhall be turbulent and dangerous, many cattel, 
eſpecially horſes ſhall dye, the fruits of che earth generally ſhall be wanting, and 
there ſhall be a palpable ſcarcety-thereof. 

Andif his latitude be Septentrional, there ſhall be grievous ſharp cold weather in $S-prentrion:l, 
winter, and a drought of fountains : allo it he have Meridional latitude, many nor vicridional. 
ſom guſts of wind, very dettructive to trees and fruits. 

It he be Oriental. there ſhall be a death or mortality amontſt ſuch creatures as are ,,;, . , 
kept upon Commons, and in the open fields : when Occidental, the common peo- (iden; al. 
ple ſhall be very caretul and induſtrious in their ordinary imployments and nego- 
ciations, | 

And if it be Dire&,the ayr ſhall be healthy and pleaſant ; bur if he be Retrograde, ÞicR. 
men ſhall be laſcivious, and ftudy how they may opportunely commfrt Adulteries 
and Fornications, 

Yet again, if 1{ars be Lord of the year, and in Leo, he ſignifies wars, contenti- 17 5 Lord cf 
ons, and diſcords, and a ſcarcity of provitions, and the fruits ot the earth, in the the year in 
Eattern parts eſpecially: alſo death amongſt men, and that chiefly to thoſe of younger oo , 

ears; and if he have Septencrional latitude, there ſhall be a ſcarcity of waters; 41. 4. 
but if he be Meridional, there ſhall be no want thereof ; it Oriental, damage to fuch x4 fouh. = 
beaſts as are uſeful tro mankinde, eſpecially the greater fort; Occidental, tiſh, and vriencal. 
ſuch creatures as inhabit the water ſhall be dettroyed and dye : It he be Retrograde, Retrograde. 
loſs and detriment ſhall be to the great and rich men of the earth; and it he be We 
Dire&t, many great Weſtern winds, and ſhips ſhall be fate and ſecure at oo 
yea. | 

Moreover, if Ars be in Vi-o0, and Lord of the year, he denotes war and ef- Mars Lor! of 
fuſion of blood in the Northern parts; alſo pains and griets in the eyes, plenty of *** year in 
_ proviſton and fruits of the earch, death to many women, &c. Andit he be Sepren- ,, "Dy 
trional, damage to fruits and ſeeds; alſo infirmities to mans body : it Meridional, ya 
ſucceſs to the truits, &c. if Oriental, the death of old men: it Occidental, he de- Meridional. 
notes great and tempeſtuous winds ; if Direct, he denotes the good and profperi- Oriencal.) 
ty of rich and great men ; if Retrograde, wars ſhall happen amonlt men. | --—->-nqpgh 

When Mars 1s Lord of the year, and in Libr.;, he lignifies vehement and preat ©: 
winds, infirmities and mortalities, and more eſpecially to men then women; allo Mz,, Lora of 
winds rain and clouds, alſo miſts, and thoſe chiefly Southward, and infirmities and te year in 
mortalities , a ſcarcity of the fruits of the earth, corn and wine, many ſackings and * ®=- 
robberies, quarrels, diffentions and diſcords amontt men, terrors, fears and tri- 
bulations. Septentriona! 

Andif he have Septentrional latitude, there ſhall be many thunderings and T idional 2 
lightnings ; if Meridional, many infirmities amonſt men, eſpecially on the left fide; Oricncal. 
andif he be Oriental , he ſignifies wars and diſſentions amonlt rich and noble men ; 


if 


258 | W/ ſtrologia eMunda. Lib.4. 


Occidental, if Occidental , rich noble and great men ſhall be ſafe and ſecure ; if Retro- 
kewvgrade, grade, ticknels ſhall be incident to noble, great, rich men and Judges; if Dire, it 
Dir.&. will not be fo bad with them 

PRs We} Fx Again, when Al ars is Lord of the year, and accidentally located in Scorpio, he 
the yearm  {ignifies much miſty and cloudy weather, alſo much cold in winter, and very ex- 
$c0:j10, cellive heat and intemperate ayr in Summer, for which cauſe the fruits of the earth 
ſhall be much damnified, as alſo the herbs and feeds ſhall be much hurt; men ſhall 
be moleſted with pains and griets in the eyes, thefts and robberies, quarrels and de- 
bates, as allo deceits and frauds, and a ſcarcity of fruits and proviſions: Alfo if he 
Septentrional. be Septentriong], there ſhall be a ſcarcity of water ; if Meridional, abundance of 
Meridional, water; it Oriental, many infirmities ſhall be incident ro man, eſpecially in the lower 
IR. and ſecret parts , if other teſtimonies concur ; if Occidental, ſmall Piety among 
Rerrograde, Men ; it Retrograde, he denotes many tribulations, fears and troubles ; if Direct, 
Direc, things will be ſo much the better. 

Alſo {in $4gitrary, tf he be Lord of the year,he ſignifies wars ſhall happen in 
the Eaitern parts; alſo damage and miſchiefunto the inhabitants of thoſe parts, and 
the Regions ſubject to the ſign S«ozr2ery ; death, infirmities, coughs and infirmities 
in theeyes, asalloin the loyns and back; little or no rain, and extream cold wea- 
ther in winter, as alſo the ſpring, ſo that the fruits of trees ſhall be blaſted and 
nipt 3 alſo plants, herbs and ſeeds ſhall be very much damnified, and the year gene- 
rally ſhall be ſcarce and indigent of proviſions, allo honey ſhall not be plentiful ; 
for by reaſon of the ſcarcity ot herbs, Bees ſhall many of them be deftroyed : and if 
therein he be well aſpected,-and tree from the Malevolent Aſpects of the Infortunes, 
all ſuch as bear arms, or have any relation thereunto of what degree ſocver, ſhall 
be in good condition, fortunate and ſucceſsful. 

Some of the Ancients with Albamazur ſay, that if Mars be in the laſt fifteen 
If trong. Qegrees of Sagitrary, and Lord of the year in any Revolution, or in any humane 

Sign, he denotes wars, tumults and inſurretions of the people againſt their King and 

Superiors, ſudden death, feavers both Tertian, Quartan, and Peſtilential, and many 

other infirmities, robbings, ſackings and polings, bloodſhed, tre and ſword, and 

: lightnings , and if he be Infortunately aſpected by the Malevolents, and otherways 

If weak, alſo debilitated, he ſignifies all theſe things you have now heard , but more miſ- 

chievouſly,unlets the Benevolent Aſpects of Z«p:rer prevent and contradict his fury. 

Septentrioga!. It bis latitude be Septentrional, he ſignifies the ayr ſhall be good, pleaſant and 

Mcridionzl, temperate ; if Meridional, Merchants and Tradeſ-men ſhall be on the thriving 

Ociental, and gaining hand ; if he be Oriental, he denotes peace, quietneſs and ſecurity, and 

Occidenh NoOwar ; Occidental, the ſafety of trees, and much fruit; and if Retrograde, he 

Kenrogiage, denotes coughs, and pains in the hinder part of the head and neck, alſo in the thighs , 
Dire.) if Direc, a death or mortality amongſt cattel, 

Again, if 1 irs be Lord of the year in any Revolution, and located in Capricory, 
he denotes wars, tribulation and ſlaughter to yong men , perplexities and tears to 
the Eaitern parts. alſo rain in due ſeaſon, and that moderate, plenty of all provi- 
ſions, and fruitful and plentitul year. | 
Nerth latte, And ifhe have North Jatitude,he ſignifies much ſnow in thoſe parts where it is uſual 
-eridional. and requiſite it he have Merid.onal latitude, he denotes a cloſe, hot ayr ; if Ori- 
Otlental. ental, let the Roman Emperor have a care of a ſtob, and ſo much the more aſſured 

will this be if the 1100 be in the eighth houſe or joyned by body or aſpect to the 

Lord thereof, or jovned to A ars 1n w of the Angles, or indeed any other houſe, 

eſpecially in the eighth, or be beheld by the Square or Oppoſition of theT ord of the 

- eighth ; and the more aſſuredly will this be, and thou mayelt be contident thereof, 

if there be mutual reception alſo betwixt them, or either of them, and the Lord of 

the eighth ; forif then 7#ouver prevent not by his Benevolent beams, and caſt his 

aſpe& unto <I/ars or the Moon, he will not eſcape with lite that Revolution, unleſs 

Oe God miraculouſly ſhew his infinite mercy tawards him ; if he be Occidental, botches 

'ccidental- J ; mi ng : . , 

Dire&. boyls, and ſuch like, {hall moleſt the bodies of men; it Direct, abundance of plen- 
Retrograde. Ty 1s promiſed during that Revolution ; 1t Retrograde, want, ſcarcity and penury, 

Moreover, 


Alirs Lord of 
te year hn 
S817 Ye 


2211/5 Lord cf 
the year in 
C:3fr 1007. 


Lib. 4. eAlrologia VAunda. 259 

Moreover, if Ars bein Aquaries, and Lord of the year, tribulation and trouble ,,,.. x.5.4 . 
is threarned to men during that Revolution; abundance of rain , ſnow and cold the year in 
weather in winter and ſuch times as it is uſual; a probability of degrading and un- 49waries. 
chrowntng Kings and great Hogens of the times, in thoſe places for which the Re- 
volution of the year 15; a ſcarcity 'and want of proviſions and fruits of the earth, 
eſpecially in the Weſtern parts ; Hur if he þe beheld then by Vezws, or the Lord of 
the Aſcendent, and ſhe be then alſo Septentrional , the ſpring ſhall be good 
and feaſonable; and if he be Septentrional, much ſnow and cold hard weather in Septentrional, 
winter ; if Meridional, much hot weather, but athick, obſcure, muddy ayr ; ifhe ,, . Jions) 
be :)riental, it ſhall be well with great, noble, and rich men, and they ſhall be jovial, a 
and merry; if Occidental,it will not be {6 good : but if he be Retrograde, he denotes Occideneal. 
very hot weather, and detriment to trees and their fruits by reaſon thereof ; if Retrograde. 
Dire&, there ſhall be many Catrerpillars, and ſuch like creatures, that ſhall de- Dire 
ſtroy trees, eſpecially if then the Dragons head be alſo in this Sign, or in 6 

emim!, 

Laſtly, if Mars be Lord of the year, and in Piſces, he ſignifies much ſnow and Mars Lord of 
rain ; alſo deſtruction to fiſh, and ſuch creatures as hve in the water, for men ſhall the year in 
catch many during that Revolution; the flaying and maſſacring of Kings and 
Great men, ſcarcity of proviſions, and the fruits of the earth, and generally it ſhall 
be a turbulent and hard year both for man and beaſt; and if YVexws behold the 
Aſcendent, there ſhall be much chunder and lightning, alſo much death and mor- 
rality atnongit men, and griefand pains in their eyes: and if Mars be Septen- Seprencrionat. 
crional, the ayr ſhall be good. pleaſant and healthy ; andif he be Menidional,there Meridional. 
ſhall be many Caterpillars and Locuſts in ſuch places, as ſhall be natural for them, 
and ſuch like noyſom creatures, but they ſhail not do much hurt : if he be Oriental, Oricaral. 
he ſignifies the ſlaughter of rich and great men: if Occidental, many infirmities Occidental. 
ſhall .fall on ſervancs,and the inferior ſort of people z and if he be Dired, they ſhall Dies. 
be ſafe and inhealch : alſo ſheep and ſmall cattel ſhall be in good condition : if 
Retrograde, the good condition and itate of thoſe that follow Trading is alſo pro- gerrograde, 
mifed, who ſhall gain and profit. 


EW 4 P, . XS | | 


(ontaming the Accidents ſugnified by the. Sun when be is Lord of 
the year in ay of the twelve Stens. 


gwſh exactly every ones {trength and forticudes from his debilities,and then 

FN by obſerving the reaſons of what hath been already faid in theſe three 

forgoing Chapters, in handling the Significations of theſe Superior Planets thou 

mayit ſoon know how to underſtand the Signitications of the In in every Sign, 

when ever he is Lord of the year, and judge of them without any further inſtru- 
tion. 

Yet thus much T ſhall ſay, If the Sw» be Lord of the year in «ries, free from The 51x 1 052 
the Malevoleat Aſpects of the Infortunes, it ſhall be well with the Common peo- Lord of the 
ple, the year ſhall be fruitful and fucceſful untothem, as alſo to great, noble and year in 
rich men, Kings and the Grandees of the earth, and that they ſhall be fortunate in __ 
honor, and\ſhall overcome their enemies, be gracious and loving to their people, ,,  * _ 
and ſhall do them juſtice, &c. ; 


[ Abour but to underſtand the nature of every Planet and Sign, and to diſtin- 


Bur 


260 A ſtrologia eM unaa. Lib.4. 
0. ESD But if he be in «Fries afflicted and impedited, judge the contrary ; yet know that 
Lerd of cc Whatever he ſignifies whether good or evil in Aries or its triplicity, ſhall chiefly 
year in happen in and to thoſe parts ſubjet unto the Sign and their Cities and Towns, and 
£415, weak cr more particularly to the Eaſtern parts thereof, ſo underſtand of the reſt of the 
*icted. figns when he or indecd any of the other Planets are located in them or in any 
Triplicity. | 

The cw Lorg When in any annual Revolution you finde the Sz» Lord of the year and in Tanrm, 

of the year in YOU ſhall judge the ſtate both of rich and poor, great and ſmall, noble and vile to 

Taurus, be but ſo ſo, although he be no wife aftlicted by the Malevolent beams of the In- 
fortunes; for in Taxrus he hath no manner of dignity, but is wholly peregrine and 
weak ; the fruits of the earth alſo ſhall not be very plentiful, ney if he be 
atfticted; and you muſt ſtill remember , ( as you have been fufficiently raught 
before) that according to the nature and quality of the afMiction you areto judge 
dammage or detriment to ſuch things as are ſignified by the Sz, and that they ſhall 
cluefly be incident to thoſe places ſubject unto Tawrs, and inthe Southern parts of 
thoſe places. | 

bac "= If the Sx» be Lord of the year and in Gemini, if he bewell aſpeted by the For- 

Gemini. tunes, judge ſucceſs, health and good (according to the nature and accidental Sig- 
nifications and the adjuvant Planets or Planet) to the Commons, and year in gene- 
ral, fruits ofthe earth, nobles, richand great men, and that theſe ſhall chiefly. be 
incident to the Regions and Cities ſubject unto Geminr, and the Weltern parts ; but 
ifhe be afflicted, judge alfo the afiftion accordingly by the nature and fignifice- 

tion of the afflicting Planer, &c. 

The $47 Lord If he bein Cancer or its Triplicity, judge the good or evil ſignified by him (ac- 
_ of the year in cording to the natures of the Planets aMflicting- or aſlitting him) ro happen to the 
ak Northern parts of thoſe places, Cities, Regions and Kingdoms ſignui.ed or ruled b 

the Signs wherein he is; this you have had often reiterated ; I do it not throu h 
forgettulneſs or careleſneſs, but — a willingneſs and an earneſt deſire the Rules 
may be eaſily apprehended and retained by the young <tudents,tor whole ſakes only 
I did undertake theſe my labours ; for I doubt not but thereby they will ſoon be in- 
abled to give a probable judgement upon any poſition of the hearens, without the 
help of any Book, when they have well pondred ( as 1 have oiten ſaid) the Rules of 
Art and the reaſons thereof. | 

TheSunLord Again, if the Iz be Lord of the year and in Lev, it ſhall be well with the Gran- 

of the year in dees of the earth, and people in general, the fruits of the earth ſhall be plentiful, 

Leo, &c, for you muſt know the $#x in Leo is very potent and ſtrong , by being in his 
own houſe, unleſs he be afflicted at, that time by the Malevolent Aſpects of the 
teuled and then according to their miſchievous power you are to judge the 
misfortune and detriment of ſuch things as they ſhall naturally or accidentally ſig- 
nifie, &c. 

In the fourth Chapter of the ſecond Book of this volumn, you have heard the Sz» 
hath no latitude, neither can be Oriental, Occidental, Stationary, Retrograde or 
Combuſt : and therefore, if you but remember to judge according to his ftrengeh 
eſſential and accidentalin all the other ſubſequent ſigns, as you have heard the me- 
thod before, this ſhall ſuffice to be ſaid of the ſignifications of the S,» when he is 
Lord of the year and located in any of the twelve Signs of heaven ; Wherefore let 
ns proceed to the ſignifications of Yenws when ſhe 1s Lady of the year and fo 


poſited. 


CHAP. 


— —*. - MD _. Fy 


Lib. 4. eAſtrologia IMunda. 


CHAP: XIE : 


Of the things ſignified by Venus when ſhe is Lady of the year in any 
of the 'Twelrve Signs. 


in this manner of Judgement as you have heard of the Superiors as ſay 

moſt of the Ancients: and truly in this I do agree with them (though not in 
in many other of their tenets, eſpecially in their Rules in the lait Chapter, where 
they would teach the ſignifications of the Sw in the 12. Signs in Annual Revoluti- 
ons, whenit is impoſsible for him at ſuch a time to be in any other ſign then Aries ; 
and if the Judgement be half yearly, or quarterly in Libra; Cancer, or Capricorn, he 
"muſt needs be but in no other) for oftentimes we ſhall finde the. Rules 
in the inf.riour Planets vary and prove falſe by reaſon of their ſwitt motion 
and frequent variations bur inthe ſuperiour ſeldom or never ; This I thought good 
to prefix before our Diſcourſe of the inferiour Planets that it might not ſeem 
ſtrange to the diligent Inquirer we follow not the ſame Method in theſe as in 


the former. 


ſ Ittle will it avail you to obſerve the Latitudes of the three inferiour Planets 


When Ven then is Lady of the year and in eAries in any Annual Revolution Yer Lady of 


well aſqeted and in Configuration of none of the Malevolents and neither Re- *'< year in 
ts, 


trograde nor Combult , the ayr ſhall be temperate, the Earth fruitful , menin 
general ſucceſsful, ſhall thive , be merry and delight in all pleafant recreations, it 
ſhall alſo be well with Great and noble men, and with the ſmaller fort of Cat- 
tel, men ſhall be peaceably given, and many pleaſant moderate ſhowers of rain ſhall 
fall, and generally there ſhall be plenty of proviſions, and theſe thall chiefly be in 
the Eaſtern parts, and thoſe Cities, Regions and Countreys ſubject unto 
Aries. ET 

But to ſpeak the truth, I ſee no reaſon at all why Ven ſhould occaſion ſo much 
good in Arier, it being align wherein ſhe ſuffers detriment and affliction, alchough 
no wiſe aſpected by the malevolents, and although ſhe be naturally of her ſelf fortu- 
nate and good, yet it will not follow (1 conceive) that ſhe is of the ſame power to 
cffe& good when (he is weak and impotent, as when ſhe isſtrong, for ſhe can pro- 
miſe no more then this you have heard, when ſhe is well dignified and it1 7 aw- 
rus or Libra which are her own Houſes , and wherein ſhe is eſſentially 
ttrong and dignified ; a poor weak fellow in another mans power and conſtraint 
without arms ( there is no man but knows) is not ſo able to reſcue or aſliſt his 
| friend, as one that is ftrong, at liberty, and a good Sword, or Rapier at his 
command. 

Wherefore T muſt needs diſſent from the Ancients in this point ; for 
it is not. the Nature of a Planet ſimply that muſt be the ground on which 
we muſt judge good or bad , for then 7«piter or Ven ſhall never be occa- 
fioners of miſchief in what ever houſe or ſign they are placed ; the which to 
affirm were ridiculous and very erronious, but this you have already ſufficiently 
heard cleared ; I ſhould therefore ſay when any benevolent Planet is thus 
poſited in any ſign wherein he ſuffers detriment or any other affliction, that 
the evil threatened will not be altogether ſo bad as was likely becauſe the 
benevolency of the Planet doth contradict it ; nor the good altogether ſo et- 
fecrnal, by reaſon the Planer fignifyins it, is, in detriment or otherwiſe af- 
Aicted ; and therefore in ſuch poſitions as are theſe, let not the Rules of the An- 
cients and Tradition, lead you wholly beyond the bonds of reaſon and ſenſe 
{or thereby you ſhall not avoid rendring your ſelf both irrational , weak and 
t2nfclels. 


E | Vent 


ſ 


Notes 


262 eAſtrologia EM unda. Lib.4. 


Venus Lady of Fenns in Taurus Lady of the year denotes proſperity, health and gladneſs unto all 
the year in men in general under that Revolution, and in thoſe places ſubject unto Taurns, eſpe- 
ang cially in the Southern parts, plenty of proviſion, and the fruits of the earth, plea- 

fant wholſom ayr and moderate ſhowers and blaſts of wind , ſafety to women with 
* childe, andalſo to all cattel for the uſe of man, eſpecially the greater ſort, and the 
. year generally happy; but it will not be altogether ſo good it ſhe be impedited, retro- 
Note, grade, combuſt or the like, ſtill remember, that if ſhe or any other Planet be much 
afflicted, little good, or muchevil is promiſed; if much aſſiſted, the contrary ; ac- 
| cording to the fignification and nature of your Signiticator, and the impedition and 
- affliction, or afhſtance and ſtrength thereof. 
oh hoes L-dy of Alſo if Venus be in Gemini, and Lady of the year,well aſpected of che Fortunes 
CG = andfree from Retrogradation, impedition, combuſtion and other ſuch like impedi- 
| ments and the aſpects of the Malevolents, the bodies of men ſhall be healthy, ſafe 
and ſound; the ayr temperate, good and wholſom; the fruits pleaſant, profitable 
and plentifull ; and the year generally happy, fortunate and ſuccelsfull; Burt if ſhe be 
afflicted by the malevolents, or otherwiſe impedited , the contrary mayſt thou 
judge , or ſo farre as ſhall be agreeable to reaſon, remembring your former 
Rules. 
Years Lady of Again if Ven be Lady of the year and in ('axcer in the like manner free from 
Cc, * impediment and well aſpeted or accidentally dignified , the Fruits of the Earth 
Ip ſhall be plentifull, the Sea ſafe and free from many uſual Piracies and Shipwracks, 
many comfortable, pleaſant, neceſſary ſhowres, and men ſhall generally be heaithy, 
ſucceſsfull and proſperous : But if ſhe be afflicted it will not be ſo well by ſo much 
as ſhe is afflicted, &c. 
Vents Lady of Moreover if ſhe be Lady of the year and firong or accidentally dignified and 
od pn 0. in Leo, many Diſeaſes, Wars and Diſcords ſhall be abated and taken away ; allo 
men ſhall delight themſelves in ſuch things and Recreations as are of the 
nature of Yexus ; But if ſhe be weak, impedited or afflicted, it will not be ſo 
well. | 
Venus Tady of And if ſhe be in Virgo and well dignified as aboveſaid , the year ( as ſay 
= yearin the Ancients) ſhall be fruitfull, and plenty of all things of the earth is there- 
"uy by promiſed , ſafety alſo to ſeeds and grain, and that men ſhall generally be 
healthfull. | 
I ſhould judge that the year would not be very ſcarce, becauſe the Lady 
of the year is Yezus one of the moſt fortunate Planets, nor very fruitfull, or 
plentifull, becauſe ſhe is-in her fall but ſo ſo; and indifferent both for plenty 
of fruits and health of body ; Burt if ſhe be afflicted, it will be ſo much the 
| worle. | 
Penus Lady cf Again if YVewns be Lady of the year and in Z:ibra free from retrogradation, 
the yearin combuſtion and other impedition and aſpects of the Malevolents, although nor 
L914. at all beheld or aſsiſted by the fortunes, yet ſhall the Cities, Regions and Coun- 
treys be ſafe that are under the power F, Libra and in good condition, man- 
kind alſo ſhall generally be healthfull | and likewiſe the ayr; it ſhall be alſo tem- 
perate and pleaſant, allo fruitfull and plentifull in every thing, and the people 
ſhall be generally happy, and free from all Thefts,Rapines and Robberies, and diſſen- 
| tions, troubles and diſcords; and if ſhe be aſsiſted by the benevolents it will be 
the better. 
Yenus Lacy of But if ſhe be Lady of the year, and free from all manner of impediment 
- prone and in Scorpio, ſhe ſhall cauſe a pure, good and thin pleaſant ayr , but ſome- 
6 what ſharp, and ſhall leſſen the heat of Summer and cold of Winter ; as alſo 
Diſeaſes, and increaſe Proviſions and Fruits of the Earth , and there ſhall be 
little or no omng and ſtealing ; But although theſe be the Rules of the Ancients 
you are to remember ſhe is herein in detriment , judge thou therefore according as 


thou haſt been taught in the former Rules. 


pp mr of Moreover if Venxs be Lady of the year and in Sagirtary well dignified ROT, 
| e 


Sagittory, 


Lib. 4. eAſtrologia NAunda. > 26} 
(he denotes peace and quietneſs amongſt men in the Weſtern parts, alſo health of bo- 
dy and proſperity to men in general under that Revolution, and in thoſe places ſub- 
ject to Saguttary unleſs it be hindred by Mars, the earth ſhall be frujrfull, and the 
Winter ſomewhat abated of its cold ; (th if ſhe be afflicted by 1ars or any other 
" judge the contrary, or at leaſt not ſo much good by the quantity of the evil at- 
i&ting. | 

Allo if ſhe bein Capricorn free from all manner of impedition and be Lady of the ;7:x;, Lady of 
year, there (hall during that Revolution be little or no War, Thieving, Pillaging, the year in 
Plundring or Robbing, little rain inthe Eaſtern parts, and abundance ot provition, 4Pricors. 
and the earth hall be truitfull and the year generally ſuccefsfull ; bur if ſhe be im- 
pedited, it will be nothing ſo well. 

Again if Venus be in «Aquaries in any Annual Revolution, and free from impedi- Fenus Lady of 
ment, men (hall be in a happy and proſperous conditionduring that Revolution, and *b< year in 
there ſhall be no abundance of rain nor ſnow, neither much cold in Winter,the 77%: 
year (hall be ſucceſsfull and plentifull,and people ina happy condition and proſperous 
if Mars work not the contrary. | 

Laſtly if Venus bein Piſces free from the Malevolent aſpeRs of the Infortunes, Yez»5 Lady of 
and Lady of the year , there ſhall rot be much cold weather in Winter , nor © © year in 
much ſnow nor rain but what ſhall be neceſſary and convenient, and that © 
too in due Seaſon; the Earth ſhall be fruittull , the year plentiful, and rhe 
Sea quiet and fafe from Shipwracks and Pirates : bur if ſhe be atHicted, Re- 
rg or Combult , and beholding the Aſcendent , ſhe denotes Thunders and 
Lightnings, alſo death amongſt men, and pains in theeyes, and generally, un- 
leſs Aars hinder, they ſhall abound in all things that are produced by the 
Earth, 


Cunan ak 


Of the Significations of Mercury when he is Lord of the Year in 
any of the Twelrve Signs. | 


the ſecond of the inferiour Planets, and the next under Yenws, who if he 

be Lord of the year and poſited in Ares, there ſhall be abundance of water aeeu;y Lord 

and rain, and a ſcarcity of proviſions in the Weſtern parts; he ſignifies of the year, in 
alſo great winds, much dew, and many thirſctouds, alſo death to young men and 44 
Women. | , | 

Now hecauſe he is of that quality that he participateth ſtill of the nature of that 
Planet in Configuration with him, it is requiſite we __ reſpe& thereunto ; for with 
the Fortunes he is good, with the Infortunes bad, in his own nature indifferent,and he 
is with the Maſculine Planets a Maſculine Planet and of that fignihcation ; with 
the Feminine a Feminine. ; 

Wherefore if Mercury be joyned to the Avon cither by body or aſpe, it de- 
notes plenty of Fiſh; if to the $«n, plenty of Wine, and the fafery and proſperity 
of women, and ſo much the rather if Mars and Venus be then in Conjunttion or 
Aſpe& with the Sz» ; and if Saturn bein the place of Mercury, he ſignifies very much 
rain and abundance of Waters ; but if 1ars be only then with the Sx, he denotes 
painsin the eyes and much war and blood-ſhed. 

If Mercury be Lord of the year, and located in Tawr:,he {ignifies many ſhowers aje,cu,y Lorg 
aud plenty of waters,and a deſtruction of Corn and the fruits of the earth through di- of the year in 
verſity and change of ayr, pains and infirmities in the eyes in the Eaſtern un Taurus 

L12 an 


| N the next place we areto look what are the ſignifications of AMercxry , who is 


264- 


Mcrcury Lord 
of the ycar in 
Germnt. 


Mercury Lord 
of the year in 
Cancer, 


Mercury Lord 
of the year in 
Leg. 


Mercuiy T.ord 
of the yeat in 
Virgo. 


Mercury Lord 
of the year in 
Libra. 


eAſtrologia M unda. Lib.4. 
and the death of Great and Noble men, unleſs 7»piter or YVeyn: work the contrary 
by their benovolent aſpects to him or to the Aſcendent ; but if Mars behold the 
Aſcendent, he ſignifies the death of Cows, and the greater ſort of Cattel, eſpecial- 
ly inthe Southern parts. 

Alſoif he bein Gemini, and be Lord of the year in any Revolution ofthe World, 
he denotes Wars in thoſe parts ſubje& to the ſign, much ſnow, and dammage to the 
fruits of the earth, and plenty of wine. This is one of the mad Rules of the Anci- 
ents ; I would fain know why not a plentifull year for every thing elſe as well as wine 
if be be ſtrong; for this is his own houſe ; and if he be weak, how comes he to be ſo 
ſucceſsfull to Vines and nothing elſe ? they ſay alſo he ſignifies peſtilencies and death, 
inflammations,ſwellings and eruptions ; he denotesalſo much dew and moiſt ayr : 1 
believe, it ſhould be a wholſom good ayr, and health and proſperity to the People 
in general; the Antients ſay, if 7«pter or the $#» behold the Afſcendent of the Re- 
volution, Peſtilence and Sickneſs will be leſſened, and that there will be a diminution 


of theſe evils, and men in the Eaſtern parts ſhall be ftronger and in a better and hap- 


pier condition then before ; it is clear to me all this will happen without their aſſilt- 
ance, ſo Mercury be but free from impedition and the melevolent aſpects of the In- 
fortunes when he is located in this ſign. Reader, thou maylt follow the Ancients in 
every thing they ſay if thou wilt, and bea Drone for ever; for my part I am abſo- 
Jutely reſolved to the contrary , eſpecially in theſe and ſuch bke whimfies of 
theirs. 

If Mercury be Lord of the year in Cancer, he ſignifies ſlaughter and bloodſhe( 
in the Weſtern parts (I believe it ſhould be in the Northwelt parts ; a little time and 
experience will ſoon decide the controverſie) ſcarcity of proviſions and the fruits of 
the earth, miſchief and detriment to Trees and Seeds, many infirmities through 
Rheums, Defluxions and Swellings, and thoſe chiefly in the neck, throat,and breit, 
ſuch as are Squincies, Kings-evil, ObſtruRions and ſtuffings in the pe&toral:,through 
thick, groſs, rough Flegme, unnatural Swellings or Hydropical Humours in the legs: 
If he be joyned by either body or aſpect to 4ſars and Yen both rogether , he de- 
notesthe murthering and ſlaughtering of great and Noble men, or perhaps of ſuch 
as are rampant in authority in any Nation for which your Revolution is made ; bur if 
Venus and the Moon be fo joyned tohim, judge the contrary. 

Alfo if he bein Leo, and be Lord of the year, he denotes exceilive and vehement 
hot weather in Summer ; alſo hot and warm winds; alſo if he be beyond the tenth 
houſe, viz. towards the ſeventh, he ſignifies impediment and dammage to thoſe parts, 
or to that Quarter of Heaven, v:z. Southwelt, Southwelt and by South, and South-- 
weſt and by Weſt, and a diminution of a ſcarcity of Proviſions and Fruits, but nor 
an abſolute Famine. Tf he be in any Configutarion of the Fortunes, the evil will be 
leſſened by ſo nuwch as the adjuvant Planet is in ſtrength, and the aſpeR in goodneſs; 
but if beheld by the Infortunes,by ſo much the more is the miſchief increaſed by how 
much the bee isthe aſpe& and power of the malevolent Planet; he alſo ſignifies 
the death of Lions, Wolves, and ſuch beaſts as are ravenous. 

Again, if he bein Virgo, ard Lord of the year, there ſhall be much rain and plen- 
ty of Corn (and the fruits of the earth too,T may add) and there ſhall be many In- 
frmitics of the eyes and death in the Southern parts. I ſhould truly rather conclude 
(this ſign being the houſe wherein he is both exalted, and effentially dignified by 
houſe) contrary to the precepts of my Predeceflors in this moſt heavenly Science, 
that there will be a pleaſant wholſom healthy ayr, and a diminution of infirmities 
both of the eyes and other parts of the body, comfortable and ſeaſonable ſhowers, 
and guſts of winde, and plenty of all manner of fruits and proviſions convenient for 
the life of man , unleſs the malicious beams of Sarurn or Mars prevent it. 

Mercury in Libraand Lord of the year, denotes great and high winds, and if he 
be free from impediment of the Malevolents (faith my own Natural Reaſon ) the 
ayr ſhall not be ſo troubleſom, and the year ſhall be pretty plentifull ; yer the Anci- 
ents ſay (without any exceptions) there ſhall be a diminution of Provifl 


in Libra ; and truly I am of their opinion, if he be then afflicted, otherwiſe Tm 
I 


ons if he be 


9 . AI Ms... i645 ai 


oY 


Lib.4. A ſtrologia NAunda. 265 


If Saturn be either joyncd to him in this ſign by either Conjunion or AſpeR,he ſig- - 
nifies men ſha!l be troubled with pains and intirmities in the head and belly; (I know 
no reaſon why they might not alſo have ſaid inthe neck, throat, back and reins) bur 
if the 3: do then behold $4rrn,the malice and miſchief of Saturn is taken away. 

Allo if he be Lord of the year and in S$corp:o, rhere ſhall be much ſnow and cold Mercury Lord 
wearher in thoſe parts wherein ſuch are natural or uſual ; alſo Wars and Quarrels in & **< year in 
the Northern and Weſtern parts; and if he be behe!d of ars, they will be rather ***'® 
Northern then Weſtern ; and there will be alſo much thieving, pillaging and robbing, 
both by Sea and Land ; the Sea ſhal! be very turbulent, and there will be many Ship- 
wracks and miſchiets therein, alſo peſlilencies and contagious Feavers in the Northern 
parts (why not in thoſe Regions and places ſubje to Scorpio?) and all manner of in- 
tirmities and diſeaſes of the eyes. 

Much ſnow during that Revolution ſhall fall in Winter when you finde 1ercary Mercy Lord 
Lord of the year and in Sagzrtary, eſpecially in thoſe parts of the World where ſuch 9! ie ver in 
accidents are moſt uſual, as alſo in the place under which your Revolution is, an un- *"*% 
conſtant turbulent ayr, a ſcarcity and dimunition of the fruits of the earth,and pro- 
viſions for the uſe of man ; and Wars and diffentions in the Weſtern parts, ſay the 
Ancients ; but if it ſhould prove in the Eaſtern parts, I know no reaſon why we 
ſhouid ſo much confide in every thing they write. 

Again in Capricorn, Mercury lignifies if he be Lord of the year in your annual Re- #ercry Lord 
volution, Wars, Tribulations and Sorrows to the Southern parts and places ſubject *! the year, in 
rothe ſign; this is if he be afflicted ; bur if aſliſted by the benevolent aſpects of the ©#*": 
Fortunes, and free from all other impediments, the year will be pretty truittull and 
healthy ; bur if he be afflicted by the Malevolents, judge the contrary. | 

Alſoif he be in {quaries and Lord of the year or Quarter, he 9 many Mercury Lord 
Catterpillers and Loculits in ſuch places where they are naturally , and diminution of of the year in 

rain ; alſo that men ſhall be moleſted with Pluriſtes and Puſtules or Eruptions in the 47#44c5- 
Skin, eſpecially in the thighs; and this (hall chiefly be occaſioned through corruption 
of the ayr , and ſeveral changes thereof; and it he be then in a corporal Conjunttion 
of Yen:s, there will be earthquakes inthat Revolution, eſpecially if the Sz» do then 
behold themor be joyned unto them ; andif Mars allo, or Sarurn behold them with 
a $quare or Oppoſition, thou mayſt be confident thereof, and that there will be peſti- 
lential Diſeaſes, and many Thefts and Robderies ; andif $arwrz be corporally joyn- 
edto Mercary, there (ball be anincreaſe of waters and rain. | 

Laſtly Mercury in Piſces in any annual Revolution when he is Lord of the year or Mercury Lord 
Quarter,denotes very much wind and rain in the Northern parts,alfo death; Fiſh ſhall *f *be year in 
abound, and want of proviſions and fruits of the earth; detriment alſo to the Sea and ©* 
thoſe that converſe therein, many Shipwracks, &c 

Now although Aercury at time of the Sz» his ingreſs into Aries cannot poſlibly 
bein ſome of theſe ſigns (by reaſon he is never diſtant from the 4» above 28. de- 

Srees, as you have heard inthe ſixth Chapter of the ſecond T reatiſe of this Work) 
yet|may not any one conclude theſe Rules ſuperfluous,and the Antients therein ridi- 
culous, ſince as you have heard inthe firſt Chapter of the firſt Section of this very 
Treatiſe, it often falls out that there are four Schemes to be erected , and ſometimes 
two, for the judging of annual affairs inthe World ; and therefore it was requiſite 
that his ſignifications ſhould alſo be known in any ſign of the Heavens ; for in theſe 
we ſhall otherwiſe be to ſeek, &c. 


266 


» Aſtrologia «MM unda., Lib.s. 


CHaP. X XI. 


( ontaining the Siemfications of the Moon, when ſhe is Lady of the 
Year in any of the twelve Signs. 


but (ina manner) meerly reiterations, and an inlargement of ſuch rules 
as were more briefly delivered before, that the Students in this Art might be 


\ LL that I have ſaid from the 5. Chapter of this ſecond Section hath been 


very well verſed in their rules, and perfected in the reaſons and grounds thereof. 


It reſteth therefore now we alſo handle the ſignifications ot rhe 790% inevery one 
of the twelve Celeſtial figns when ſhe is Lady ot the year ; but1 muſt confeſs I am 
almoſt tired and wearied out with this kinde of repetition ; wheretoreT ii.all only in 
{els bounds, [ yet as largely and plainly as the Ancients for matter of Inſtruction, Jde- 
liver unto you the ground of theſe rules, and ſo proceed to the ſignitications of the 
Dragons Head and T ail. 

Know then that the M1: 0» (as you have heard in the 5. Chapter of this ſecond 
Section) doth denote all the good that can poſsibly be deſired to the Commons and 
People in general when ſhe is Lady of the year and ſtrong or well dignified , if the be 
weak, the contrary according to her debility and impediment you are to judge. 

\Well then when you ſee in your figure ſhe 1s ſtrong either effentially or accident- 
ally, look to the Nature of the ſign ſhe is in, and artificially commixing their Na- 
tures and their ſtrength therein, judge thou rug to ſuch things and places as are by 
her and the ſign ſhe is in ſignified or underſtood either naturally or accidentally as 
they are placed in the Heavens, — as you have heard fufficiently before ; if 
ſhe be weak,judge the contrary after the ſame manner. 

For you mult remember that che cor in humane ſigns ſhews her events whether 
550d or bad on mankinde, according to the Sex of the f1gn ſhe isin; if in atry ſigns 
in the ayr ; in watry, inthe water ; in earthy, inthe earth; in beſtial in and upon 
beaits of the nature and quality of the fign ; as if it be Aries, on ſheep; (Capricorn, 
on Goats; Tanrus, on Bulls, Cows, Oxen and the greater fort of Cattel, and the 
like, 

Neither oughteſt thou to forget to make commixtures according to the nature of 
the Planets in configuration or Conjunttion with her at the time oft the Revolution 
for upon the true and exa&t commixtures (which you have been ſhewn in the forego- 
ing Planets, ard therefore needleſs here again to make repetition) dependeth the 
whole ſecret and key of the Art, and therefore let me here admoniſh thee once more 
(although T have often already) to be pertect in the nature and temperature of eve- 
ry Planet, every ſign, every aſpe, every houſe, every dignity, every Triplicity,eve- 
ry exaltatior, every term, every face, every detriment, every fall, every eſſential dig- 
nity and debility of every Planet in every Sign, and then thou haſt attained above 
half the Art, nay three parts and three quarters {being divided into four) and there- 
fore let the ſecond Treatiſe intituled 4» /ntroduttion to rhe Judgement of the Star:, 
be read over and over,which will perfect thee in theſe particulars, ſo mayſt thou bold. 
ly venter upon theſe two other Treatiſes, which will then be moſt eaſily comprehen- 


_ ded.and the greateſt myſteries therein quickly attained. 


And thus much ſhall ſuffice to be ſaid of the ſignitications of the ſeven Celeſtial 
Planets in the 12 ſigns when they are Lords or Ladies of the year; the ſame alſo 
ſhould ſerve for Rules to the judging the Portencies of the Dragers head and Drarons 
ra;l, but that perhaps (their natures having not been betore diſcuſſed, ſo much as 
have the Planets) they might remain obſcure, and the knowledge of the young Stu- 


' dents therein defcctive ; wherefore 1 (hall yet ſpend one quarter of a ſheet more for 


their further inſtruMion in this matter. 
CHAP. 


had ans PY POLO 0+ 


Lib.4. eAſtrologia Munds. 267 


CHua?e. XK XIE 


Shewing what us ſignified by the Head and Tayl of the Dragon, as 
they are placed in any of the Twelrve Signs in any Rervolution. 


Any are the ſignifcations of & and 4 therefore to particularize every 
pn thing,would be both tedious, andin a manner needleſs, yet 1 
old it very neceſſary you be well acquainted with their denotations in 

every ſign of the Zodiack in any Revolution,as followeth. 

If therefore in any annual Revolution of the World you finde & in eAries, it N, in V. 
ſignifies the riſe of great and noble men, and the dejetion and ſuppreſiion of vile 
and ignoble; andif Vf bein Aries, it ſhews the ill ſtate and condition of noble and Jy in Y- 
great men, and that they ſhall be injured and damnified by the common ſort of 
People. | 

If N bein Taxrus , itdenotes the ſlaughter of Kings, Noble, Great and Rich & in +, 
men in the Northern parts, and in the Weltern parts many controverſies and Diſſen- 
tions amonglſt great and noble men and the Pleabeans: if 45 bein Taxrw, it ſignifies IF in t. 
lictle Piety or Mercy in men and women , and many troubleſom and unprofitable 
journeys in the ſame parts. _ 

$) in Gemins ſhews ſickneſſes and divers infirmities to Rich and Noblemen, or £> in i. 
ſuch as are the Grandees of the earth , which ſhall happen through tempeituous 
and noyſom gales of wind, earthquakes, and unwholſom infectious Mitts; it ſignifies 
alſo Wars and Diflentions betwixt great and rich men, and men of a middle degree, 
and that the Trees ſhall be much damnitied by Catterpillers, and ſuch like Worms. 
If 45 bein Gemini, the Commons ſhall be exalted and elevated, and they ſhall ſpurn 4p in T, 
at, and deſpiſe their Superiors and Rulers, and indeavour to ger all power and autho- 
_ rity into their own hands, 

Alſo if £2 bein (ancer, it denotes honorable and bountious acts of the King and 5, in 5. 
Rulers towards their People and Subjects ; and if 4 be in Cancer, it denotes great {y in &: 
mortalities and peſtilencies, ſudden deaths, fornications and little or no juſtice, rea- 
ſon or honeſty amongſt men, the deſtruction of treaſuries, and the flitting of great « 
and noble men out ot one place into another, alſo their ſad condition and baniſh- 
ment through the works of their own hands, as writing, or ſome other thing ſigni- 
fied by the ingenious Planet Mercury. 

Again £) in Leo in any Revolution ſignifies much lightning and apparitions in 9Þ in $1. 
the ayr, much dammage trouble and vexation, and alſo infeftious ayr : Dragons tail If in A. 
in Leo, ſignifies a dark obſcure ayr, earthquakes, increaſe of waters and wet wea- 
ther and deſtruction to the fruits both of trees and the Earth. 

Alſoif £ be in Virgo, the fruits of the Earth and of trees ſhall be deſtroyed, N, in np. 
there ſhall be many Catrerpillers, and dammage and hurt ſhall purfue even tho 
fruits both of Trees, and of the Earth that are gathered into the Store-houſes-or 
Barnes, and they (hall ſuffer great detriment : and if «y bein Yirgo, ſhame, hatred, V in W. 
and diſgrace ſhall fall upon noble and great men, and there ſhall be much difſention 
and controverſie amonglt them, Religious houſes, and ſuch as ſtudy Divine matters, 
alſo ſhall greatly ſuffer dammage, trouble and loſs, many diſcords, debates and quar- 
rels amengſt men in points of Religion and Faith, Schiſms and Hereſies, &c. 

Moreover 52 in L:bra. ſhewsthat Kings and the Grandees of the earth, ſhall ex- N, ia = 
erciſe their power and authority over their People, both againſt Juſtice and their own 
Honour, taxing them with crimes, whereof they are innocent, and impoſing Taxa- 
tions, and heavy extortions and burthens on them, inſomuch that by reaſon of their 
poverty, which they (hall be reduced to, and their grievous ſad condition, they ſhall 


fink under the barthen as not being able to ſultain it ; but if V bein Libra, it de- qy in = 
notes 


LY 


CY 


268 


ia nt. 


iN 11t. 


in 7, 


in 7. 


eAſtrologia &M unda. Lib.4. 
notes the mortality of fourfooted Creatures , eſpecially thoſe of the ſmaller ſort; 
alſo in Summer, extream drought ; and in Winter, very hard cold weather ; the Fruits 
of the Earth ſhall be deſtroyed, alſo the Seeds, Plants and Trees ſhall be damnified, 
ſo that they ſhall produce little or no increaſe. 

Dragons Head n Scorpio, ſignifies joy, ſucceſs and gladneſs to men of mean de- 
vree, and ſadneſs, grief and trouble to great men, andthoſe in high degree; alſo 
diſſentions, quarrels and bloodſhed amongſt them (if other teſtimonies concur) and 
amongſt the common people, decear, treachery and fornications, for the which miſ- 
demeanors, they ſhall (many of them) fall into the hands of their Kings and Rules; 
if Dra 
in the breſt - catarrs and defluctions in the throat, but noble and great men ſhall be 
ſafe, quiet and in a peaceable condition. 

Again, if Dragess head bein any annual Revolution in Sagittary, the common 
people of Bzby/on ſhall be afficted by their King and Superiors, and ſuffer many 
vexations and injuries by them ; alſo their beaſts ſhall ſuffer much detriment, and 
thoſe that are in an hoſtile. poſture, eſpecially if ir be in the laſt fifteen degrees 
of Sagittary, it ſignifies alſo an hot and dry ayr, allo a thick and obſcure face 
of heaven; And it Dragons 7 arl be therein, it fignines the dejection_ of Noble 
and Great men and their misfortune, but the rite of Ignoble baſe fellows, and 


the fad condition of Judges, Councellors, Learned and Wiſe-men, eſpetially if 


Drapons-7 ail be in the tirit fifteen degrees. 
Alſo if Dr2g-n:- Head be in Capricern it denotes joy and gladnels to Rich, Noble 


and Great men, and their honour and preferment, but the dejection of the 
baſe and Ignoble ; but if D2gors T ail be therein , it fignifies Earthquakes and 
dammagpes eſpecially in the {outhern parts. 

And Dragons: Head in Aquarees iignifies the death of religious men and ſuch 
as ſtudy the Law, this to ſome few, but 1n one kinde or other they wilt all ſut- 
fer detriment and vexation, many Sects and Shifmes thall alſo ariſe: and if Drapons 
Tail be therin, Kings, Great-men and Land-Lords ſhail be very injurious and 
tyrannical over their ſubjects, ſervants and tennants, and ſhall afflict, tax and grinde 
theire faces beyond common humanity and honelty. 

Laſtly Dragons- Head in Piſces ſhews the honour and dignity of Great and 
Noble men, and of every man according to his degree; and if Dragons-Tail be 
in P:ſces, many Noble and rich men ſhall be ſubjugated and brought under 


* the power of the militia or men in armes, and be removed out of their ha- 


bications for their faults, and much controverſie and debates concerning Sects and 


the apperance of ſome new Hereſie or Schiſm. 
And ſo much for the ſignifications of the Head and Tail of the Drapon and 


what we have to fay in this ſecond Section ; Let us now proceed to the third 


and haſten to a concluſion. 


SETT. 


ons tail be therein, men ſhall be moleſted with many feavers and infirmities 


£4 * Wo OST 


2 At 


Lib.4. of firologia <NAunda. 269 


(containing ſome other neceſſary Inſtruftions for the 
judoing of Events portended by any Revolution of the 
Years of the World ; Alſo ſhewing how to judge of 
ſuch Years as [ygnife fertility, flerility, wars, peace, 
health or ſickneſs, alteration of and in the atr , and of 
all other things foreknown by the poſition of the Hea- 
vens at the Ingreſs of the Sun inte the firſt point of 


Aries. 


CU a, © 


Shewing the Significations of the Planets in their Exaltations ; and 
alſo m Conjun&tion,Square or Oppolition of Saturn or Mars 
at that time in any Kevotution. 


OP N this matter we ſhall have chief reſpe& to the ſuperiour Planets; 


Sa ” 
4d - 
; 


Le 
> 


who by reaſon of their magnitude and ilowneſs of motion in compari- 
A 1on of the other, do effet more forcibly and infallibly on the Elemen- 
dt ary _ of the world, and bodies of men. 
| We ſhall begin then with Satzr», being the higheſt as you have The fignifica- 
| heard, who ifhe be at the time of the Sw» his Ingreſs into the firſt point tion of Saturn 
of eArier in Libya, eſpecially the 21 degree thereot , which is the ſign and point of when in any 
his exaltation, and receive the light and nature of Yen , he ſhall ſignifie and de- —__ os 
note and be the fore-runner of ſome great and moſt notable thing to happen duxing ,F © 
chat Revolution, eſpecially in thoſe parts ſubject to Libra and Szrury, and men ſhall cation, 
fuffer much loſs and detriment in their eſtates and fortunes, and that his ſignifications 
ſhall be of long continuance ; but if Yenws be fortunate , Occidental, dire& , free 
from the atfiction of the Malevolents , or other impediment, free from combuſtion 
and the \»y-beams, Satyrz ſhall be the portender of good, proſperity and increaſe of 
the Kingdoms and Powers iu the places ſubject to his dominion and the ſign Libra ; 
bur if Ven: be weak, retrograde, unfortunate, afflicted by the Malevolents, com- 
buſt, under the Sz»-beams and impedited , judge the contrary ; but yet you may be 
confident of ſome ſtrange Cataſtrophe to happen thereupon , but the nature thereof 
will incline rather to evil then good. I 
Alfo if Zzpiter in any Revolution be in the 15 degree of Caxcer being his exal- 
M m tation 


"1 
®agy 


270 eAſtrologia eM unda. Lib. 4. 


Of Jupiter tation, fortunate and ſtrong accidentally as being well aſpected of the Fortunes and 

when in kis no wiſe afflicted by the Malevolents , and well aſpeted of the Aſn , and ſhe allo 

exalratlon- = {trong both eſſentially and accidentally there is no doubt to be made of it but that 
he ſhall be the occaſioner of ſome great alteration in C hurch-affairs and matters 
Divine and appertaining to the Law, and that for the better ; but it they be afflicted, 
_— and impedited, judge the contrary , 2:2. that the alteration ſhall be for the 
worſe. 

Again, if at the S#» his ingreſs you find Lars in the 28 degree of Capricorn , be- 

Of Mavr '"8 his exaltation , he denotes many and great Mutations , yet not altogether ſo no- 

—_— "is table and ſtrange as the two other preceding, and the nature and quality thereof 

carte. - ſhallbe according to his own proper 11gnitication , v:z. wars, fire, combuſtions, up- 

roars, ſflaughters, thefts, rapines and robberies, and ſuch like , unleſs he be beheld of 
Saturn by a Sextile or Trine , and Sature be then alſo well dignified and tree from all 
manner of impediment and affliction, or behold other Planets of whom he ts received 
and well aſpected, and thoſe Planets alſo fortunate and free from all manner of im- 
pediment ; but it otherwiſe, it ſhall be the worſe. 

Of the Shs. There is nothing to be ſaid ofthe Sz in this particular , who. (by reaſon the Re- 
volution is ſtill made by his return to the firſt point of Arics ) can never be in the 
point of his exaltation in any Revolution of the World : neither indeed have I 
found any of the Ancients regard any of the inferiour Planets in this matter; onely 
Boaxatus teſtifieth of «> A/bumazar ( a moſt learned Arabian in this Heavenly Science ) 
that in every Revolution of the World we are to have regard to the exaltation of 
Mercury, which is the 15 degree of Virgo, and fee what Planer is then therein re- 
ceiving Mercary, or Mercary him , for he ſhall be Lord or chiet Denoter or Signift- 
cator of what is portended by him according to his ſtrength or weakneſs, as you have 
heard of the Superiours; for after the ſame manner muſt you judge , &c. And 
truly I ſee no reaſon why we may not after this rule judge of Yen and the 
Moon allo. | 

Of the Conn Tn every Revolution ſee what Planet is in his exaltation, and how aſpe&ed by 

_ . Al. - either Saturn or Mars; forif it be Saturn , he ſhall cauſe much dammage and detri- 

po: mentand trouble to thoſe Regions and Places ſubject ro the Planet with whom he is 


with any Pla- ! . — 
netinexalta- in Configuration ; and if Sarxrs bein a fixed ſign, and the Planet alſo in a fixed ſign, 
tion, inany the evill ſhall continue ſo many years as there wanted degrees betwixt the pertect 


Revolution. Conjunttion or Alpet; if in common ſigns, ſo many moneths ; if movable, ſo many 
weeks or dayes: but if one be in a fixed lign, and the other in a common 
one, you are according to diſcretion ro make commixture of moneths and 
years; one in a common ſign, and the other in a movable , niake commixture 
of moneths and weeks,or weeks and days, as you fee reaſon ; but if by other teſtimo- 
nies thou tindeſt that the evil ſhall not continue after that Year wherein your Revo- 
lution was made although the Conjunttion or Alpect be in or from fixed ſigns, yet 
ſhalt thou give but moneths then for every degree they want of the perfeRt(, 04jwnicn 
or Aſpect: Note alfo, that if the Conjurttion or Aﬀpect be by common ſigns, and thou 
thereby judgeſt menerhs, and the evil ſtill continue longer then thy time prefixed , 
then. ſhalt thou convert them into Years : So likewiſe if thou didſt judge days or 
weeks thy ſignificators being in movable ſigns and the evil thll continue after thoſe 
weeks or days be expired, then art thou to ſay the continuation thereof will be ſo 
many moneths or years, &c. for as Ptolomy in his / entilo. 1. faith, A te & a ſcientia ; 
for though thou haſt the art to help thee , yet thou art not wholly to lay aſide dil- 
cretion and reaſon. 

But if any Planet by his body or aſpe& doth fruftrate the (onjunttion or Aﬀpect 
of Saturn , thenſhall not the evil happen in the places ſubject to the Planet in exal- 
tation , but to thoſe places ruled by the Planer ſo fruſtrating ; but if there be no 
fruſtration by neither the interpoſition of the body or aſpe& of any Planer , but 
that Sarwrn do come by his beams to touch the beams of the Planet ſo in exal- 
tation, the evil by him threatned ſhall aſſuredly happen in thoſe Regions and Flaces 


ſubjeR to his Dominion, &c. 
Alſo 


Lib.4. » Aftrologia unda. 


his bodily Conjuntton, he fhall denote very much evil, detriment and dammage to th 
people under his juriſdiction that is in exaltation; but if the Planet fo exalted be af- 
flicted by Square or Oppoſetion , it will be the more grievous by reaſon the nature of 
Mars is to cauſe quarrels, difſentions, wars, bloodſhed and thefts which will then be 
incident to thoſe parts; as touching the durability of the time, you are to judge 
thereof according to the nature of the ſigns your fignificators are in, as you have 
heard of Saturn, whether they be movable, fixed or common, &c. 

Conſider alſo the poſition of the Su» and oor, and ſee howin every Revolution 
they are placed, and in Canjuntion or Aſpet with any Planet; for if either of them 
be in any Configuration with any Planet in the whole Heavens, they ſhall be joyned 
in fignification therewith ; and note that if the Hoon be lately ſeparated from any 
Ylanet according to the nature thereof, and the place of Heaven he is lucated and 
hath dominion in , mayit thou judge of what hath lately happened ; bur if he be 
applying to any , . vow maylt thou know what is n——_ to happen, &c: 


cnmas o-eht_ —  _—_— — — 


CN 4k 1s 


Of the Significations of the Planets, and Dragons Head and Tail ,4s 
aljo Blazing-Stars, when they are (in any Kevolution) exalied one 
aborve another. 


Nleſs I here remove a ſeeming obſtruction or ſtumbling block , perhaps 
ſome miſtakes or errours might ariſe much to the dammage and puzzeling 


of the younger Student ; which 1: this; In the foregoing Chapter you have 
heard the ſignifications of the Planets (eſpecially the Superiour) when in any Revo- 
lution ey are in the point of their proper exaltations ; but inthis Chapter when we 
ſpeak of their being exalted one above the other , we mean as to their places in the 
Heavens at the time of the Sx his ingreſs into Aries; for he or ſhe that is neareſt to 
the Cuſpe of the mid-heaven or tenth houſe , is the Planet moſt elevated or exalted, 


and ſhall have ſignification as followeth ; yer note that it is not meant barely by the 


poſition of one above the other at that time , but when any two are in Conjuntion or 
other Configuration and elevated the one above the other at that time , then I ſay 
ſhall their ſignifications be as is here expreſſed. | 

Contrary tothe Ancients who begin in this matter with Venus , I ſhall as all along 
I have done begin with Satzr», and ſo give you their ſignifications ſtill in order as 
they are placed in the Heavens; as Sarxrs being in {onjunttion , Square or Oppoſition 
with any Planet, the Dragons Head,, and Tail , or Blazing Star , and exalted above 
chem, we ſhall begin thus : Sarmrn.exalted above 7apiter, and then above Mars, and 
afterwards above the Sn and fo forwards ; and not as the Ancients have done who 
ſet down his ſignifications as he is exatted above the Zoos firſt , then above Tuptrer , 
then WM 2rs, then Dragons Head, Dragons Tall , Blazing- Star , and laſtly Ven ; 
omitting his ſignifications when in any Configuration of Mercary or the Sun, and 
exalted above them; which defe& asin this, ſo in the ſignification of the other Pla- 
nets, T ſhall endeavour to ſupply ; for inthe ſignifications of Yenws they have omit- 
ted Jupiter and Dragons Head; and a Blazing-Star inthe ſignifications of [upiter;the 
Sn inthe ſignifications of Mars ; the Swnand Yen , of Mercenary, the Sun allo, 
of the Dr-gons Head, Iupiter and Mars, &c. 

If you find not my opinion and judgement herein ſufficiently grounded on reaſon , 
you may follow what other you can find delivered unto you , which may be more 

M m 2 pteaſing 


Alſo if any Planet in exaltation in any Annual Revolution be beheld of Cars Of Mars in 


(as you heard of Saturn) by a Square or Oppoſition, or elſe affliting any Planet by wo Qor C ev 
junthion wit 

© any Planet in 

exalration, 


271 


272 eA ſtrologia eMunaa. Lib.4. 
| m1 agreeable to thy fancy, or remain ignorant as the Ancients have left 

Satzin exalteg thee ; but to our buſineſs : 
aboveany of Cater» in any Scheam at the time of anyRevolution of the years of the World, 
the Piancts, Fcclipſe,' or creat Conunttion, or at the time of the appearance of any Comer, or 
| Oey wy Ne Blazing-Star, or atthe time of any Oppoſition of the Superiours, or any other re- 
"$22 markable or conſiderable face of the Heavens, in Conjunttion; Square, Or Oppoſition, 


r Bc FR. SLars 
Be, or any other Aſpe& of 7upiter, and ar that time elevated abovethe Body of Jwpirer, 
in the figure of the Heavens, Great and Noble men ſhall be ſlain ; if be be exalted 
Mars. above Mars, he ſignifies good, and better ſucceſs; if above the S»» when in any of 


The SM. the aforeſaid Configurations with him, Let thoſe Kings and ſuch as are in hiph or 
chief Authority in thoſe Regions ſubje& to the ſign the $#» then is in look for 
much trouble and ſorrow, as alſo Treacheries and Treaſons ; If he beexalted aboye 

nuts. Venus, men ſhall delight in Pitures, Ornaments,and neatneſs, and addict themſelyes 

to their Trades and Occupations and delight theinſelves therein; above Mercury, 
they will delight in Arts and Sciences, eſpecially fuch as are Ingenuous ; above the 

TONg. _ 1/00n, men ſhall be clowniſh and i}|-behaved ; Above Dragons Heaa, Great and 

DI Head. Noble-men ſhall have good ſucceſs joy and gladneſs ; but if above Dragons T ay/, this 

"Ys A « * felicity ſhall happen to the Commons; And ifhe be exalted above any Blazing Star, 

+> whenheisin any Configuration therewith,men ſhall generally ſuffer, poverty, penury 
and want anxiety and much miſery. 


Q1e Cit; w 


Furiter exals Tf urier be eaxlted above Sarum whenin any Configuration with him, he ſignifies 
ted 2bove $2= much lamentation, weeping, howling, grief, trouble and ſadneſs: Above 11ars 
arts there ſhall happen much griet and trouble to Men , alſo dammage and loſs if above 


.« Col 
<=t-bory the Sun: above Venus, Womens affairs and buſineſs ſhall ſucceed well and profpe- 
Mere y. rouſly : and if above Mercary the Kings Officers ſhall be increaſed, and they ſhall 
Lina. have honor, profit, gain and praiſe : above the 17s», Noble and Great men ſhall in- 
D-:gmz5 Head creaſe and abound in honor, proſperity and ſucceſs : Above the Dragons Head he de- 
D-/:005 Til. notes all good ſucceſs and fortune : ifabove the Dragons T ayl, depopulations and 
{157g $141. deſtruction of houſes and buildings; above a B/azing Star, it ſignifies that Noble men 

and ſuchas are in great eſteem ſhall be ſlain, 
Murs exalted When Mars is exalted above Saturn and in any configuration with him he doth 
+b.ve S277. not fignifie much hurt or miſchief: Above 7upiter, great men ſhall agree to 


og take arms and kill one an other : Above the Sw», Kings and Rulers will go 
Po 18. neer to be ſlain treacherouſly : Above YVenws,men ſhall not care much for pleaſures, 
M1 wn. neither will women ſoon conceive with Child : Above Mercury, quarrels, tlaugh- 


Luna, ters, and diſcords are ſignified : And above the /Zoon, Earth-quakes, and thoſe very 

D-g'ns Had. violent : Above Dragons Head he denotes good ſucceſs, and proſperity, and ho. 

nour to Great and Noble men: Above Dragons Tayl, there ſhall happen Combuſti- 

ons, troubles and inconveniencies to Men concerning Plants and Vegetables; And 

B!:$ng Star. if he beexalted above a Blazing Star, there will happen many ſlaughters amongſt 
men, and they ſhall delight to ſway and bear Arms. 

"honey The zz is of that nature and quality, that by his beams any Planet is afflicted, 


bcve any i . . OP 
he: lances, Wherefore when he is exalted ſo above any Planet, he is the lignificator of much 
4 


D/:e-H &. evilland miſchief, excepting Mercury ſtrong and fortified. 
us exaitcd Jenus being exalted above Saturz, Men ſhall be perplexed with much grief 
above $1/197% and trouble: Above 7wpiter, Great and Noble men ſhall be in a proſperous 
=, wh and happy condition, and all things ſhall ſucceed well with them : Above 4ars, 
Women ſhall willingly uſe the Art of Generation, and ſoon Conceive, and Men 
ſhall be troubled in their ſtomachs through Surfeits and eating roo much : Above 
_ the Sx», men ſhall be laviſh and expenſive : Above Mercury, men ſhall domineer 
#20; and triumph one over another : Above the 7490», men ſhall have much joy and 
p:0;91s Heed gladneſs: Above Dragons Head, joy and gladneſs to Great and Noble men, and 
all proſperity and happineſs; and they ſhall delight themſelves with young Maids 
P:rems Tay! and Virgins, andin Womens affairs; But if above Dragons T a)/, judge neither pro- 
b/az;rg Star. ſperity norgood ; and if ſhe be exalted above any Blazing Star. being in Configu- 
ration therewith, ſhe ſignifies that there ſhall be a ſcarcity of waters, and that wo- 
men ſhall not be in any great eſteem, ſhall miſcarry and come to many misfortunes 


and niſchances. Alſo 


D::2075 Tayl. 


LY18 
Alt; cury- 


Pd > NY If Fm k = aw +a 


A 


Lib. 4. eAſtrologia Ndunda. 273 

Alſo Mercury being exalted above Saturn, men ſhall go about to deceive, cheat, ,,,. ...1.., 
and betray one another : Above Zwpiter, Kings, Great men, and thoſe in power and aboye $-rurn, 
Authority ſhall increaſe in health and Honor : Above Mars, fear and terror ſhal fall 7upiter. Mars. 
upon men:above ©, Kings and Rulers ſhal be famous,and addict themſelves to know- $0', 
ledge and learning: Above 9g ,men ſhall addict themſelves to ſports,and the ſtudy of Faw. 
Necromancy, occult and ſecret Arts: Above the » , he ſignifies joy and gladneſs,and runa. 
that men ſhal do wonderful and ftrange feats: Above ©, there ſhall be many manifeſt Dragons Head, 
thefts and robberies:above Vf it ſignifies men ſhall be ſcoffers and jeerers one of ano- Dragozs Tay! 
cher: Above a Blazing Star,men ſhall ſlay and deſtroy thoſe that are Maſters of their 81az;ng Star. 
Militia, and ſuch as are in moſt eminent and chief command and belt ſouldiers. | 

The » being in any Configuration of h , and exalted above him , lignifiesevill 79% exalred 
and miſchief, and that men ſhall be ill-conditioned one towards another : Above - agg " 
rich and noble men ſhal encreaſe in health, wealch,and honor: Above # ,Houſes and — <4 
buildings ſhall be deſtroyed by fire ; alſo Earth-quakes and much blood-ſhed: Atove $9. 
©, miſchief and much evill ; and take this for a general rule, Let her be Significatrix 
of what you will, ſhe ever denotes miſchief and misfortune if ſhe be under the Sw#- 
beams: Above 9, Noble and rich Women ſhall encreaſe in honour and eſteem : Pex. 
Above v , men ſhall be wiſe, ſhall chooſe grave and- judicious Counſellors , and Mercury, 
ſhall make good Laws and wiſe Acts : Above O,, ſhe iipnifies _ to Rivers D/agons Head, 
and Fountains, Springs, and water-places : Above qy5, mortality and deſtruction to Dragons Tayl. 
beaſts : And laſtly, Core a Blazing Star,ſhe ſignifies loſs of of ſubſtance. Blazang Stay. 

Thus much of the ſignifications of the Planets, when exalted one above the other, 
and above Q, +y, and S/azing Stars, it reſteth therefore now to ſhew you the ſigni- 
fications of them, being exalted over one another, and alſo over the Planets, apd ſo 
conclude this Chapter ; according then to the ſame order we haye hitherto followed, 
we are to begin with ©, and then of the other two. | an 

Now if &, be beheld of H, and « at thar time exalted above him, ir ſtirreth 274. H.exalred 
up Wars,and men ſhall delight to bear Arms: Above Y. , Noble and rich Men ſhall mo RW. 
increaſe in honour and greatneſs, and all buſinefs ſhall ſucceed well with rhem: Above 2 
& , Souldiers and ſuch as carry Arms ſhall be proſperous,in eſteem,and fortunate; It #15. 
ſhall alſo go well with Kings,and the Grandees of the Earth when it is exalted above 
© : Andif it be above « ,, it ſignifies that Women and Virgins ſhall be joyftull and So'% 7Fengy. 
merry, and that every thing ſhall ſucceed well with them in a yore way : Above Mercy. 

' ©, men ſhall delight and addi& themſelves to laying of foundations for Palaces 
Royall,Caſtles, Cities, Towns, and Villages: Above the » , men ſhall have loſs and Le. 
detriment in their ſubſtance and goods : Above qy in this nature it cannot be exalted, p,agons Tay!. 
(becauſe(as you have heardin the 17, Chapter ofthe 2.Treatiſe of this Volume) they 

are but Nodes, and can behold no Planet, becauſe they have no rayes nor beams, bur 

may be beheld b any Planet) and therefore in this, 4 is omitted ; again if Dragons, 

Head be exalted above a Bl:zing Star, it ſignifies tempeſtuous ſtormy windes and B1zxing $:ar. 
tempeſts, and thoſe very often. 

Dragons Tayl exalted above Hh, ſignifies the death and deſtruRion of old 747: exalted 
people,and Monks, and Religious men : Above 1 , long life and joy: Above F Fragen 
ſadneſs and vexation : above © , much evill and want of charity : Above 9g , dam $9. pum. on 
mage to Women, eſpecially to young Maids and Virgins: Above 7 , evil to learned Mercury. 
and wiſe men : above the », deſtruion to rich men and loſs of ſubſtance : Above a £#. 
Blazing Star, It denotes damage in the affairs general! of women. . ' + _.. 

Now laſtly, touching Blazing Stars, and what may be predited by their being Baz.s. exalreg 
exaſted above the Planets, 2 and ?5; A Blazing Star then being in Configura- above Saturn. 
tion of + , aud exalced above him, Ggnifies many and great infirmities : Above y , /#iter. 
men ſhall kill and murther their Nobles, and Great men, and ſuch as are in efteem : 

Above +, men ſhall uſually delight to bear Arms, and there ſhall happen acer. 

many great wars and flaughters: Tf above ©, men ſhall quarrell one with another, So. 

be treacherous and given to Treaſons: Above 9 , a deminution and drying up of 7/9. 
waters: Above 7 ,damage and deſtruRion to youtig men: Above » , loſs and damage*****7- 

ro men in generall in their ſubſtance : Above 52 , Noble men ſhall be ſlain, and fuch pyagow; Head 
as are in eſteem : Above 5, there ſhali happen loſs and deſtruRtion to fruits of the Dragons Tay'. 
Earth and Trees. | Cuavp. 


o Aſtrologia eM unda. Lib.4. 


CHAP. LI. 


( ontaining Conſiderations from the Sun and Moon when the Recvo- 
lution 1s either Dinrnal or Nofturnal , alſo when the Revolution 
happens at Sun-ſetting and break of day ; from the Lord of the 
hour, Part of Fortune , the indiſpoſition of Saturn and Mars, 
from their Conjun&tion with the Dragons Head and Tail 


any Annual Rervolgtion. 


or by day, viz. Diurnal or Nocturnal ; and if it be Diurnal, have regard 
If any Revo- to the Sur, how and where he is poſited in the figure at the time of the Re- 
_ * volution, and how aſpeted of the Fortunes or Infortunes; for if he be well aſpe&ted 
2" by benevolent and adjuvant Planets it ſignifies according to the nature and ſignifi- 
cation of the Planets aſpeting him and the nature of the ſigns they are in ; if he 
be maliciouſly and unfortunately beheld by the Malevolents, judge the contrary 

dammage and evil. 

Fpr if the Sz» be ſtrong and well digniffed and aſpeRted, he ſignifies (the Revolu- 
tion being Diurnal ) the accompliſhment of ſome high and remarkable action; ſee 
alſo if the Lord of the then Aſcendent be ftrong eſſentially , and accidentally well 
aſpected ; for if fo, he ſhall ſignifie proſperity, health and happineſs during that Re. 
volution to thoſe Regions, Cities, Towns and Places ſubje& to the ſign which is then 
gpon the Cuſpe of the Aſcendent, alſo to that Kingdom or Nation for which the Re- 
volution is made, and the Kingdoms , Regions and Places ſubje> to the Lord of the 
Aſcendent ; but ifhe be weak, aflited and impedited, he ſhall ſignifie trouble, vexa- 
tion, miſery, detriment and very much unhappineſs ( according to the quantity and 

ualiry of his afMiiction) unto thoſe aforeſaid places ſubjet to the Lord of the 
ſcendent and lign thereof. 

And if the Aſcendent be Libra, and Ven who is Lady thereof be cadent fromit, 
or from an angle, impedited , retrograde or combult , aftlicted by the Malevolents or 
any other ways unfortunated, it ſignifies there ſhall happen ſadneſs , vexation, trou- 
ble, miſery, and many infirmities and deſtruction in an high meaſure to all thoſe Re- 
Sions, Towns, Cities, Kingdoms and Nations under the dominion of Ve» and L:- 
bra; what thoſe are you aretaught inthe ſecond Book ; and ſo likewiſe judge of 

_ any other Planet and Sign in the ſame nature. | 
If theRevo: But if theRevolution be NoRurnal, you are to have _ to the place and 
WE ſtrength of the Moon, as you have heard of the S«, and judge accordingly ; for if 
* the Moon beLady of the Year, or of the Aſcendent, increaſing in light and motion, 

in Cancer well dignified and aſpected of the benevolent Planets , you ſhall judge the 

Year will be ſucceſsful, the people generally healthful , fortunate and happy ; For if 

ſhe be weak, impedited, aſfited of the malevolent Planets, flow in motion, decreaſ- 

ing in light and impedited, judge the contrary, and that this good orevil ſhall chiefly 

be incident to thoſe Regions and Places ſignified by her and Cazcer , &c. but if ſhe 

. be not in Cancer, look to the Planet that is then her difpoſitor , »iz.[ he thatis I ord 


D Iigently thou art to obſerve whether the Revolution in any year be by night 


of the ſign wherein ſhe 5) and ſee whether he be eſſentially or accidentally debilita- = 
ted or atliſted, and accordingly judge as you have heard of the 4499» good or bad , th 
as he is ſtrong or weak , and that it ſhall happen to the places ſubject to the ſign Re 
aſcending, the Lord thereof,and to the ſign wherein the oor is, and its Lord, as allo 

the Region for which your Figure is erected. ha 


Seealſo if the 4/00» ( the Revolution being Nocturnal ) be either in Conjuntion the 
| or 


Lib.4., eA jtrolopia INAunda. 


or atpect with Satzrn ( or any other malevolent Planet if in your Figure you find 
him alſo accidentally ſfignificator ct miſchief and impediment) without any reception 
either of houſe, exaltation,triplicity, term or face , and the Aſoon decreaſing in light; 
tor it ſo, the miſchief and mistortune 1s ſo much the more increaſed, as is * nature 
and ligritication of the aithcting or impediting Planer ; but if the 1o0n be ſeparating 
trom the { omjurttion or atpect of any aftiicting and unfortunate Planet, and be in- 
creating 1a light and motion , the evil will be ſo much the more leſſened and dumi- 
nitſhed, &c. 

If you would know the nature of the affliction threained or portended by any Pla- 
net athlicting or impediting your ſigniticator , you need do no more then this; ſee to 
the natural iignihcation of the aftitting Planet, and alſo accidental as he is placed 


cordingly ; judge the evil ſhall proceed trom the tisnification of the houſe wherein 
the aiHicting Planet is located; the nature and quality thereof from the natural and 
accidental iignification of the Planer and ſign wherein he is. 

As for example , we ſhall ſuppoſe your f1gnificator to be the Lord of the Year or 
Aſcendent, the Planet aftlicting ro be CM,rs and he Lord of the feventh and located 
inthe ſecond; from hence you ſhall conclude that the people of the Nation for 
which the Revolution is made, fignitied by the { ord of the Yearor Aſcendent , ſhall 
be attlicted and damnitied in their ettates and riches, being atHicted in or from the 
ſecond houſe(which you know denotes the wealth and riches of the people) cherefore 
from hence ſhall the evil or miicluef threatned proceed : Now as touching the na- 
ture thereof, or manner how it thall cone to paſs , you ſhall ſay ir ſhall be by the 
iword, thetts, wars, murthers and the like , which are the natural ſignitications of 
A1azrs; or elſc by the power or treacherous plots of their Enemies , which is his ac- 
cidental ſignitication as being Lord of the ſeventh, which you have heard is the houſe 
of Enemies, &c. orit the fign of the ſecond be Libra, and Har: therein , look to his 
fignifications in Librsa, as you have been taught in the ſeventeenth Chapter of the 
iecond Section of this fame Treatiſe and ſay it ſhall be occaſioned ſo and ſo as you 
have it there expreſſed; in like manner if it be any other ſign or any other Planer, 
judge according as you ſhall tee moſt requitite and agreeing to art and nature ; if 
the atficting Planer be 1n the chird, the evii ſhajl proceed from ſhorr journies , neigh- 
bours, kindred, or brothers and ſiiters or aſſociates ; if in the fourth , from fathers , 
heritages, loſs of poſſeſtions, houtes, farms, or deſtruction of ſeed 2:1d fruits, &c. judge 
ſtill according to the nature of the houſe wherein your attifor ſhall be found, which 
you have been taught elſewhere ſufficiently. 


Having hereby now fully declared unto thee the manner how thou mayſt exactly wr - Judge 
: of any thing 


- 


and cruly judge of the Kate and condition of what is fignified by the Lord of the ;: 


fifth , ſixth , and ſo round the whole Heavens of every thing appertaining to the life 
of man in a natural way, there being nothing in the worli but what 1s ſignified 
by one houſe or other, and by which a man may judge of the quality and nature 
thereof. | 

As if the Lord of the ſecond houie be ſtrons, free from misfortune and impediment, 
judge the £00d ſucceſs of all things thereby {ignitied , and to all Nations and Places 
ſubject unto the ſign thereof and its Lord ; but if unfortunate, impedited, weak and 
aſMicred, judge miſchief, crouble, croſſes and loffes , &c. according to the ſignifica- 
tion thereof, and the aforeſaid Places and Regions under the ſign and Lord thereof ; 
and fo (1 ſay) mayſt thou eafily in this manner judge of any other thing , ſtill re- 
membring to derive your Judgement from the {ignification of the houſe, nature of 
the Planer aMicting or aſlifting , and that the good or evil will be incident to thoſe 


Regions and Places ſubject to the fign and Lord thereof, &c. RO 
It the Rey {n. 


Look alſo that if your Revolution beat the time ofthe Syx-ſetting , or within an 


In 


The nature 
of any afliAj- 
on, and from 
; K : > whence it tha! 
;n your Scheme, the naturt of the houſe and ſign he is placed in, and ſo judge ac- ariſe. 


/ mag iy : 7. bgnthed by 
Aſcendent, ſo alſo is it requiſite to acquaint thee that thou maylt (following the ſame ,;. ,, ; 
% a /mnktI 


method ) judge of what 1s a!fo ſignified by the Lord of the ſecond, third , fourth, of Heayen. 


, 4 tion Us at Sur 
hour and half thereof, you regard not the poſition and fortitudes of the Fw», bur of (4, ; , ws 
the Moon whois the Governeſs of the night, which doth then immediately ſucceed : breaking. 


275 


— 
oy 


276 eAſtrologia eM unda. Lib.4. 
In like manner if the Revolution be about the ſame time before break of day, the Sw 
is to be conſidered in the ſame manner as you have been ſhewn , and not £ Moon , 
it being ſo near day-breaking ; and over and above what hath been delivered unto 
you , you are in the conſideration of the ſtrength of either the S»» or Moor , to ſee 
if either of them are to ſuffer an Eclipſe during the time of that Revolution; and if 
ſo, to look to the place thereof, viz. in what houſe of Heaven, in what ſign and de- 
pree of the Zodiack, and the e/mwten of thoſe places, and the ſtate of thoſe Planets 
in Configuration with him, or the place of the Eclipſe , viz. whether they be ſtrong 
or weak, good or bad, and accordingly judge ; but of this more inthe next Section , 
wherein we ſhall treat of Eclipſes. 
Conlidera- Again , you muſt know that in every Revolution the Lord of the hour , or Planet 


ons Week ruling the time in which the Revolution is made , is to be regarded , as alſo Part of 


_ wy { Fortune and its diſpoſitor ; for if they be well dignified , well placed and aſpected of 


Fortune, and the fortunate and adjuvant Planets, thou mayit affuredly conclude that the good 
its Dilpoli:or. ſignified by the Lord of the Year , or ſignificator of the King , ſhall be augmented, 
if the Lhed of the Year or {ignificator of the King do denote any good ; but if they 
portend evil , and the Lord of the Year, Part of Fortune and its diſpoſitor be alſo ill 
diſpoſed, unfortunate and weak, the miſchief ſhall be alſo augmented ; bur if then the 
Lord of the hour, Part of Forrwne and its diſpoſitor be ſtrong, the miſchief ſhall be 
diminiſhed ; and ſo on the contrary if they be weak, and the Lord of the Year 
ſtrong , and alſo the ſignificator of the King , they ſhall diminiſh the good by them 
Confiderati- hignified. : ; 
ons from the Conſider alſo in every Revolution the poſition of Satzrn and Mars, and fee if 
Poſition of $4 Mar: be then ſtationary to retrogradation, and in Conjunttion with Satrrn', or S4- 
| turn applying to him whilſt he remains ſtationary , or Mars unto him when he be- 
comes retrograde ; for if {o , thou ſhalt aſſuredly judge there ſhall be much fierce- 
neſs, cuelty, barbarous and outragious actions amongſt men , and little or no auge , 
pity or mercy , but Malefactors, Thieves, Cutters, Murtherers and Robbers by the 
High-way ſhall abound, and ſervants and the rural fort of people ſhall be diſobedient 
to their Maſters and Superiours ; and it ſhall be the worſe if Sat#ry be in Libra re- 
trograde, and in Orpoſirion of the Suz, and the Sn in aſpect with Mars, and Mars 
by his retrogradation alſo applying to the Su» (for you muſt know that the ſuperiour 
Planets cannot apply to any inferiour Planet , except when they are retrograde) and 
the evil will be yet the more increaſed if Mars be then peregrine and going to the 
Conjurttion of Saturn, and the Revolution be at Swn-ſetting, or near thereunto, viz. 
a little before or after ; alſo when theſe Configurations are in any Revolution, ſome 
of the Ancients have concluded there will be many wars, quarrels, diſcords and much 
bloodſhed in the Cities and Regions of both the Eaſt and Weſt ; and truly my opt- 
nion alſo is that there will thereon aſſuredly happen many commotions,inteſtine wars 
and bloodſhed in many parts ; thoſe places chiefly I conceive will be concerned in it 
that are ſubject to both Saturn», Mars and the ſigns wherein they are then lo- 


turn and 
Miys, 


| cated. 
{harman pv gp Again, ſee whether the Dragons Head in any Annual Revolution bein & with'h , 
rags Had for then ſhalc thou conclude much miſchief and detriment to thoſe Regions and Places 
with $21z9n. ſubject tothe ſign wherein the & is, unleſs the benevolent aſpect of ſome fortunate 
Dragons Head Planet prevent it ; for if they bein in Y , they ſhall denote evil and miſchief to 
in / o:5:010110n Sheep and the ſmaller ſort of Catte], unleſs the + or 4 of & intervene, and he well 
9a = dignified pronnaly alſo much anxiety, vexation and trouble to Kings , Noblesand 
great men , if + behold them not with a good aſpect, and be alſo fortified , or elſe 


the Lord of the tenth. | 
Dy egons ficad, Andif O, bein & with Hh. in & , the evilſhall happen to Oxen,, Buls, Cows, 


$4/u17,C0% and the greater ſort of Cattel, Horſes, &c. alſo in ſome ſort to Sheep, and to young 

/rinneng 2 Men and Youths, Hearbs, Plants and Trees ; there ſhall be little rain , and a diminu- 
Ace tion of proviſions and fruits of the earth, if » and 9 prevent not. 

Dr-got's Head, Tn Gemini if they be in Conjunttien, becauſe it isa humane ſign, there ſhall much evil 


Fal12,C/M" and miſchief fall 0n mankind , eſpecially thoſe in their younger years , but thoſe in 
jr.tÞ:0n in Gc« the 
F144, | 


S442 A. a wn 


Lib +» A '[lrologia SNAuntda. 277 
the ſtrength of years, not ſo much nor onſuch as are well ſtricken in age ; there 
ſhall alſo be many great windes and obnoxious. 

In Caxcer ſuch places as are fubjet to Locuſts and Carerpillars ſhall abound & |; in & in 
therewith, and where rain is no novelty there ſhall be much more then is uſual ; ®' 
che fruits of the Earth alſo ſhall ſuffer much damage by Locuſts and ſuch kinde of 
obnoxious creatures, unleſs aſpeted by Lun or Jupiter. _ 

And ifthey be in Conjunttion in Leo, the evil ſhall fall on wilde and ſavage beaſts, 2,5, {iq q 
alſo on Kings and Great men, if the S» doth not with ſome benevolent Aſpect be- 
| hold them. | | 

Alſo if they be in Conjuntion in Virgo, dammage is threatned to women and Q,h,F# inn. 
chiefly to the younger ſort, and alſo young men will not. be wholly free; Seeds, 

Corn, and ſuch fruits as are reduced to ſeed, will be diminiſhed, or there ſhall be a 
ſcarcity thereof, by reaſon they ſhall be much damnified, for you muſt know this is 
an earthy ſign, | 

Again, if in Libra, which is anaiery and humane ſign, it ſhall happen ro men 2h, in- 
and intheair, and that chiefly to thoſe of mature years, and ſuch as are of a good 
age, and not to the younger ſort; and there will be many great and high windes, 
if Saturn or Venus contradict it not. 

Moreover if they be in Conjunttion in Scorpio, the miſchief ſhall happento ſuch 2h, inm. 
creatures as are of a poyſonous and venemous nature, eſpecially ro Scor- 

10Ns. 

Alſo if Dragons Heal and Sarurn be in ConjunTionin the firſt fifteen degrees Nx, in 7. 
of Sagittarixs (which is humane) the impediment or miſchief ſhall happen to man- 
kinde; butin the laft fifteen degrees on great Cattel, eſpecially on Horſes and ſuch 
as men ride on. 

In Capricorn on Goats and ſuch like, and the fruits of the Earth will ſuffer detri- NF, & in 
ment, but not altogether ſo much as when rhey are joined in Yirgo 3 alſo grievous 
cold and ſharp weather if Mars work not to the contrary by his Aſpet unts 
them. 

In efquaries onantientand old men, and not to thoſe in their prime and ftrenpth zh, tn 
of age and youths or young men , + _— 

And in Piſces on ſuch creatures as live in theelement of water, eſpecially ſich q 7, - ;, 
fiſhes as are uſually eaten by men, if 7-piter or Ven prevent not. p” 

And if Dragons Head be in Conjunttion with Mars in any of the twelve ſigns, Q 2 4 i; 
he ſhall ſignifie alſo much evil, but not ſo much as Satwrn doth, and it ſhall chiefly any of the 12 
be by heat and drought, unleſs Zupiter or Saturn work to the contrary. ſigns. 

Alſo in Conjunttion with Dragons T ayl, beit in what ſign it will, he ſignifies de- qo, 7, / i 
ſtrucions, depopulations, fire, ſword, ſlaughter and great blood-ſhed, famine alſo any of ,che 12 
and much miſchief. igns. 

So likewiſe if Satar» and Dragons T ayl be ih Conjunttion ih any ſign, he ſignifies V>h,c in 
famine, a ſcarcity of proviſions, great miſchiefs, cold in the extremity, grievous fears, Sy ofthe 3 
anxieties, terrors and troubles, much want and ſcarcity of the fruits of the Earth; and _ 

a ſuperfluity of evils, torments and grievances ; and theſe ſhall be incident to thoſe 
places ſubject ro the lign wherein they are joined, and underſtand the fame of A4ar+ 
when he is joined with either the Head or Tail; &c. 


N i Cyar 


278 


eAſtrologia eM unda. Lib.4. 


CHA P. I'V. 


Teaching how to judge of the ervil of any year, the nature thereof, and 
when the year #s moſt likely to be both turbulent , obnoxious, 
and unfortunate, alſo what is portended in any Revolution 
when one Planet transfers his light and nature to another. 


are to happen, or are threatned to any place, look to the Poſition of Sa- 

turn and Mars, for from them are you to require judgment touching this 
matter,for if you find them in the higher circle,v:z. inthe middle thereot towards the 
North,and they have then Septentrional latitude,and be above the earth, thou ſhalt 
judge there will grievous and horrible actions happen in that Revolution, or before 
the Sz» enter again the firſt point of Ar:es, in and to thoſe parts under che Sign and 
Triplicity wherein they are; alſo look how much they are elevated above the earth, 
(eſpecially Sarwrs) and they ſhall ſignifie ſo much the more miſchief and trouble, and 
the more certain will your judgment be ; alſo when they are in the ſuperiour part 
of the Circle, they denote a hard and ſcarſe year, both tor provitions, truits of the 
Earth, and all things elſe. 

And if one bein a Sqware of the other, it will be the worſe in every particular, 
alſo Iefetions to and in all kind of living creatures, tribulations and troubles, and 
that of continuance and durability, and ſo much the rather if Satwry be then in Virgo, 
and Mars in Gemini,and the Revolution NoRurnal, and Mars applying or tranſla- 


E Ver when you would know what grievous and heavy accidents and evils 


ting his light and nature to 5 atwry, and he receive him and either, both or one of them 


Retrograde: and Sarwrn ſhall be then moſt miſchievous, In ſo much that 7#piter ſhall 
not be of ſufficient efficacy to alter it,unleſs Satyrn or /ars be in Cancer in a Sextile 
or Trine of 7upiter, and he ſtrong and well dignified at that time, and then he ſhall 
break his malice with whom he is aſpeRed, and diminiſh it or wholly take it away, 
which you may judge from the ſtrength of your Significators, 

The affairs alfo of the King or Grandees of the Nation where your Revoluti- 
on is, and their condition ſhall be bad and ſuffer detriment,and much trouble and dif- 
ficulty there ſhall be in or about them, and they ſhall require aid and aſſiſtance from 
the common people, Religion ſhall be ſighted and impiety and wickedneſs iÞall in- 
creaſe amongtt men, and no mercy or pity ſhall be found amongſt them, and this 
ſhall continue till either Saturn or Mars tranſfite the cuſp of the tenth Houſe at 
time of the Revolution, or ſhall then begin and continue, at leaſt till 1Zars have 
made one Revolution through the twelve Signs of the Zodiack. 

But if then Satzr» be in Virgo and Mars Aſpet him out of Gemini (as hath been 
ſaid) and the 1/cex alſo tranſlate her light to Sarmrn and ſhe in Sagirtarie, there ſhall 
be miſery upon miſery, the miſchief of miſchiefs, the trouble of troubles, the tribu- 
lation of tribulations, the peſtilence of peſtilencies, and the misfortune of misfor- 
tunes, and all kind of vexations,troubles and torments, alſo it ſignifies the deſtruction 
of Kingdoms, and tranſlation of one Kingdome into the power and under the ſubje- 
tion of another. 

Moreover if the Moox when ſhe tranſlates her light and nature to Satern,either by 
Conjunttion, Square or Oppoſition, and the Lord of the Sign wherein ſhe is 
when there is a Partil (onjuntion, Square or Oppoſition betwixt them, be then 
impedited, unfortunate, weak or afflited, there ſhall be many diverſities of 
miſchiets during the time of that Revolution; and it then the 7-9» were 


eclipſed at the Preventional, or to be eclipſed at the Poſtventional full A7oo-: 
imme. 


4 


Lib. 4. » Aſtrologia «NAunaa. 


Immediately going before or comming after any ſuch Configuration,the miſchiefs and 
troubles threatned i}.all continue ſo many moneths as the Moor is or ſhall be ecclipſed 
houre;, reckoning ſrom the minute ſhe firſt begins to be ecclipſed till the Puntum 
wherein ſhe is again free. 

Bur if Part of Fortune be Impedited, and its diſpoſitor when the 40s is ſo in 
Conjun{tion or aſpet parti! of Satury, the evill thereby ſignified or threatned ſhall 
b2 increaſed; have regard alſo to the 3#» how he is placed, dignitied and aſpe&ed 
by the Malevolent Planer, or by what Aſpect he beholds him, / as you have heard of 
the Aſoon) and the Lord of the Sign in which he1is at the time of the Partil Cox- 
juntion or Aſpet, and make Parr of Fortune and its Diſpolitor participate in ſig- 
nification therewith, aud judge accordingly mutatis mutands, as yy= have heard (I 
ſay) of the on; andif the Su» was eclipſed , or to be eclipſed at the Freventi- 
onal or Poltventional Conjunttion of the Luminaries or change of the 4oos (to ſpeak 
plainly) the evill then threatned ſhall continue ſo many years as the S#x is at that 
time eclipſed houres. 

Alfo when any Planets behold one another, and be in any Reception, look in 
what place in the figure they project their rays or beams ; for thoſe places ſubje& 
ro thelign wherein they cal their rayes, ſhall ſuffer ſuch things as are by thoſe 
Planets fignified, whether good or bad, more then any other place. 

And if one Planer transfer his light, Nature and Vertue to another, you are 
diligently co weigh their natures and ſignifications, and judge accordingly as you 
have been before ſufficiently [hown; as if the Signifticator of the King transfer his 
light and Nature to Satzrn, and he alſo well diſpoſed, ſuch people and religious 
orders and things which you have heard elſewhere ſignified by Sarzry, ſhall be ber- 
tered, and receive good from the bounty or liberality of the King or Superiours ; 
If ro Jwpiter, Nobles, Judge+, and ſuch as converſe in the Law, and are ignited 
by him, ſhall receive honour, liberty, and much good from the Kings hand, &c. 
And ſo judge if any other Planet and if any other Significator transfer his light 
to any, remember the Nature of your Significator; transfering his light, and the 
Natural and Accidental fignification of the Planet to whom it is transferred, and 
judge according therennto and you are right, and will ſoon be able to judge of 
any matter muta!!s mutands, varying your rules according to Arr. 

And thus far have I in a manner reiterated rules and words for thy through 
underſtanding and inſtruction in ſuch matters as have been delivered in a more 
ſhort and compendious manner before, and indeed ſo much the rather, be- 
cauſe that though what was at the beginning of this Diſcourſe ſer down, was 
ſufficient to and for any one that is any thing entred into this Art, yet would 
it perhaps have ſeemed ſomewhat difficult to thoſe who are as yet altogether 
all therein, and therefore I hope this fault will be by the Judicious deemeg 
yenial ; Wherefore let us now proceed., 


279 


How to judge 
wether there 
ſhall: e war in 
any Years 


e Aſtrologia «ML, md. © Lib.4. 


CGH 4% - 


Shewing how to judge of health or ſickneſs mm any year. 


ſpe& to the Cuſp of the Aſcendent of the figure of the heavens at the 


4 ] T F'us then, if thou wouldft be expert in this manner of judgement, have re- 


time of your Revolution, and the Aſcendent of the figures at the time of 
the {oxjunttion or preventional Conjwnttion of the Luminaries before the Swx his in- 
greſsinto Arzes ; and then if theſe two Aſcendents and the ſoon be free from Miſ- 
fortune, and the Lord of the place of the (onjunttion allo free, and then applying to 
a Fortune, as alſo the Luminaries beholding him, eſpecially that of the time, viz the 
Sun, if it be by day, the IZoox, if by night ; then it ſignifies that thar year ſhall be 
free from infirmities general, and diſeaſes, and ſhall be healthful; but if the Lords 
of theſe two Aſcendents, and the Hloox, and Lord of the place of the (onjuntion, 
and prevention, be all or the major part of them unfortunate, it denotes general 
infirmites and diſeaſes, and no healthful year ; and that according to the power of 
the infortunate Planets, their nature nd the nature of the ſignsand places they are 
in ; what diſeaſes are appropriated to both the Planets and Signs; I have fully de- 
livered unto you in the ſecond | reatiſe of this Volumn, entituled, An Introduttion 
rothe judgement of the ST ARS. | 
Alſo it the Lords of thoſe two Aſcendents, or one of them being fo unfortunated, 
apply to the Lord of the Eighth Houſe, there ſhall be many general infirmities and 
alſo death ; bur if otherwiſe, there ſhall be many infirmities and general diſeaſes, but 
not mortality, and if death, it will not be grear. 

Moreover, if the ſtrongeſt Planet of theſe Significators apply to the Lord of the 
Eighth, there ſhall be many ſudden deaths, without any great or tedious {ickneſles ; 
alſoif to the Lord of the ſixth, there ſhall be many infirmities agd general di- 
ſeaſes, and thoſe of long continuance : And if ©1ars be the affiting Planer, 
he ſhall ſignifie hot and dry diſeaſes, eſpecially if he be in a fiery ſign, and ſwifc 
of motion : and f it be Sarury, he ſhall cauſe lingring Agues, Coughs, Conſum- 
ptions and Saturnian tedious diſeaſes, eſpecially if he bein a cold an dry ſign, and 
flow in motion, ; 


CC umas MM 
Of Wars or Peace. 


is my moſt earneſt deſire that knowledge may flow as a ſtream among all 

judicious ſouls, eſpecially thoſe of this my native Nation of England; 
and therefore I ſhall here again deſire the more quick and nimble apprehenſions 
to pardon both my largeneſs and plainneſs, fince I write to thoſe that are altogether 
to ſeekin theſe matters. 

Whereforethen know, that years of War, Difſention, Quarrels and Bloodſhed, 
are to be judged from the Conjunttion of Saturn and fxpiter, as allo from their 
Square and Oppoſition,alſo from the Aſcendent and Angles of the Revolution of the 
year ; forif theſe Superior Planets be either in Conjunttion, Square of Oppoſition of 
Each 


H TItherto we have proceeded in a plain and eafie manner of Inſtrution, for it 


Lib.4. a Al '[trologia i\Aunda. 28; 


each other,or applying to each other by any of theſe Configurations, wars are to 
be teared, and thar they ſhall then begin when they are in Parri/ {oxjunttion or 
Afﬀpect, if they are in Angles, or elſe thev ſhall begin when 7ezirer enters his ex- 
alration or one of Is houles,or any of the Angles of the Figure at time of the Revo- 
lution ; and judge that party to have Victory that is ſignified by the Planet mol} 
elevated inhis excentrick ; for if 7#pirer be moſt elevated, and be exalted above 
Satern, they fhall overcome who make inſurrection or begin the trite. 

Allo if Mars bein any of the Angles attime of the Revolution, whichſoever tr 
be, he excites and ſtirs up wars according to his ftrength and power ; for if he be 
{trong and well dignified, it will be the more certain, alſo the ſtrife and war will 
be the more invective and grievous; in like manner if he be in a S$qrare of Saturn 
or fxpiter, becauſe theſe are the Superior Planets; for rake this for an approved 
Aphoriſm, that when any of the Superiors, viz. Sarrrn, fupiter or 1Hars (who are 
thus termed becauſe they are above the Sz) arein C-njunticn, or any Malevo- 
lear Configuration one of another , there happens great and manifett Alterations 
in this =lementary world, according to their ſtrength and natural and accidental 
Significations. 

If thou wouldſt know where the war ſhall be, when in any Revolution or other ,,, ,, , _ 

face-of heaven thou leeſt it threatned. have regard unto the fien i which Zars yy 1c Wt. 
is located, allo the f1gn wherein he aſpecteth either Sarma or /zirer by Yguare Or pen, 
Oppoſition ; allo in what fign and part of heaven, Part of ur, Bloud-ſhea , or Cor- 
eention falleth , and ſay that in thoſe parts {fignified by thoſe figns, the War, Difſen- 
tion, Bloodſhed and Strife will be, and ſo accordingly judge, or by the major parr, 
How to take Part of War. as allo Parr of Peace, and all other parts requitite to be 
known, I ſhall not here mention ; the exact knowledge whereof would require a 
volumn by themſelves, which (God enabling me and granting me life and health) 
I ſhall endeavor to deliver to the world, if 1 finde the inclinations of men worthy 
of ſuch bleſlings, and therein alſo 1 ſha!l endeavor to give them ſome grounds and 
reaſons why the Antients have invented ſuch variety of parts, and why they are of 
ſuch ſignification. 

See alſo if any of the Infortunes, or all, behold the houſe of Afr, or Part of 
War , with a Sqrare or Oppoſitier, or be therein, or behold the ſign by which the 
Nation, Town or City 1s ſignified for which your Figure is fer, or the Signitica- 
cor of the King or Nobles of that Nation, Kingdom or Veople with a Square or 
Oppoſition, or be corporally joyned thereunto ; it fignifies, that if the King or thar 
People have Wars with any, they ſhall be beaten and worſted ; or atleaſt, poſſeſſed 
with much grief, ſadneſs, trouble, ſorrow and anxiety : alſo if the Planet that is 
their Significator be combuſt, it ſignifieth the ſame ; and if Retrograde , they ſhall 
fly from before their enemies, and grow weakerand weaker, ſhall be indigent and 
caſt down; judge alſo the ſame, although he were at firſt well placed , and after 
a while becomes thus afflicted. : 

Again, if inany Revolution of the year 17ars be joyned to Part of War, eſpe. Whn the was 
cially in fiery ſigns, it denotes Wars and Quarrels; and if Parr of Way be ftrong 4" "arial 
and free from atti&tion,they ſhall overcome that begin and toment the difſention and © ah 
quarrel; butif it be weak judge the contrary ; you may alſo judge of the tune 
when the War will happen, from the diſtance of Surwrn and 1ars it their Conunttion 
or Aſpe& be a forerunner thereof, or of any other Significators, by ſeeing how 
many degrees they want of the Part: Conjrnttion or Aſpect, and givinga moneth, 
day or week to every degree, according as they are in {1gns fixed, moveable or com- 
mon, as you have been taught before; or elſe you may have regard to the Planer 
denoting War, who if he be Dire&, it will happen when he becomes Retrograde; 
if he be Retrograde, ſay it will be when he becomes Direct, or when his beams 
are joyned in Configuration or ConjunRion of the Significator of the King; and 
ifhe behold the Significator of the people, he ſignifieth much thieving, pillaging 
and robbins, eſpecially if the Malevoſent Planet bein an Angle ; but if he be nor 
'n an Angle, but only in a ſuccedent or cadent, the evil will not be general, but on» 


if 


Other rules 
for re pre- 
diting war, 
and how it 

wi'! b: occah- 
oned, 


When we may 


» Aſtrologia eM unaa. Lib.4. 


ly in ſuch Towns, Cities and places under the ſign wherein he is, unleſs his 
beams be mixed in -{/pet or Conjunttiox with the beams of the Lord of the Aſcen- 
dent ; for unleſs he have rule and Dominion in the Revolution, he ſhall not then 
lignifte generally evill. 

Allo if Mars bein any of the Angles, and the Diviſion apply to any term of 
his, and the Revolution apply to the place where 11ars was, inthe laſt Conjunion 
of che Planets preceding, or to the place in which Aſars was, in any great C-x- 
junttion, 1t Nignifierh in that year fightir.g and quarrelling in thoſe places and Re- 
gions ſubject to the ſign wherein Aars was, and the application is; Diſſentions 
and quarrels alſo are threatned when Mars is in Sqnare or Oppoſition of Satyrn, 
and AHMHars received; but if Mars be not received, neither Saturn, it ſignifieth 
bur little quarrelling; alſo if in any Revolution he be under the S#» beams, 
he denotes Wars, eſpecially if in a moveable ſign, butin a common ſign he pro- 
miſeth not much ; and if Aars bein Gemini, in the Tenth Houſe, the King Fall 
be very laviſh and ſpend his treaſure ; Note alſo that if the Lord of the Fourth 
be in the Ninth Houſe of Heaven, it ſignifies the priſons and goals ſhall be ſet 
open, and many Captives and Priſoners ſhall eſcape. 

Moreover, thou art to remember, that in what ever Revolution of the World 
thou lookeſt, Wars are ſtill to be known and judged from Mars, who is the occa- 
lioner of all difſentions, quarrels, wars, blood-ſhed and commotions in the Ele- 
mentary world generally; but if-thou wouldfit know the Immediate cauſes and 
fomenters thereof, look from what Planet 1ars laſt ſeparated before the Sun his 
ingreſs into the firſt point of Ares ; for although they be Fortunes, yet ſhall they 
and ſuch as are by them fignified be the occalioners thereof; as, we ſhall admir 
Mars lait ſeparated from { 0njanttion or Aſpett of 7:piter, from whence we ſhall 
judge that Noble men, rich and great in power, authority and etteem, ſhall be the 
tomenters of the War threatned ; or Biſhops, Pope, Cardinals, Church-men and 
Religious people, they being all Sgnified by him; in like manner if it V-nus, Sa- 
turn, the Sun, the Moon or Mercury, you have no more to doe then judge in 
the like manner according to their ſeveral Significations which you are ſufficiently 
taught in the ſecond Book of this Volume. | 

Now when thou haſt found in any Revolution, that wars are threatned, have re- 


predi& peace, gard unto the Planer ſignifying it; for if he be direct and well dignified, the war 


victory, lots, 
dammage,al- 
{i{ft ance; and 
from whence 
the aſhſtance 
I5tO +. Ecx- 
pe&ed, and 
trom w at 


kinde ofmen, 


ſhall not continue or laſt long, but ſhall be broken by the King of that Region for 
which your Revolution is, for it ſignifieth a ceſſation of arms, and that there ſhall 


be peace; ſee alſo how he is aſpected. and by what Planets, and by how many, for 


many Planets beholding him, (eſpecially being then eſſentially ſtrong) it ſignifies 
the people ſhall be in good condition, ſhall be ftrong and able to detend themſelves, 
and offend their enemies, ſhall overcome them and have aſliſtance from others, ac- 
cording to the nature of the Planets fo aſpeCting him. 

Bur if he be retrograde, they ſhall be beaten, ſhall run away and be dejeted ; and 
if ſtationary to a they ſhall be ſtrong and powerful in war ; but if ſtationary 
co Retrogradation, at the beginning of the war they ſhall be ſtrong, but it ſhall 
So hard with them in the end. In like manner have regard to the Significator of 
their enemies, or thoſe that begin and firſt foment ſtrife, and judge of their conditi- 
on mutatis mutand:s, as you have of theſe ; for if their Signiticator be direR there 
is a probability of peace, and that to proceed from their deſire and willingneſs, or if 
there be war that they ſhall overcome ; but if thou wouldſt know by what means 
they ſhall thus become viRorious , if thou findeſt their Significator ſtrong eſſen- 
tially, and not beheld by any other Planer, ſay by their own itrength and policy ; 
bur if it be aſpeed and aſlifted by the benevolent rayes of other Planets, their 
Significator eſſentially not being very ftrong, ſay by the help of ſuch as are ſignified 
by thoſe Planets ſo afliſting and beholding their Signincator thall they become vi- 
Qorious; asif it be Saturn, ſay by the help of ſome King; if the Sz, by ſome Prince 
or. Noble man (for the S»» lignifieth rather petty Princes then \ turn) if Mars, 
by ſouldiers and warlike men ; If 7zpiter, by,noble, wiſe and diſcreet grave. men 

| If 


Lib.4. eA ſtrologia NA unda. 263 
If Mercury, by ſcholars, and learned, witty, politick men ; If Venus, by riches or 

by ſome noble ſpirited women ; If Luna bs Merchants, Sea men or the common 

people of any place; but if thou wouldſ particularly know the place, or from 

what Countrey, Nation, or Province, it is no more then thus, look to the Sign 

wherein your adjuvant Planets, or Planet is,and judge according to diſcretion, that 

they will be ſuch asare of the Nation or place thereby ſignified, remembring that 

anuent Aphoriſm ate & a ſcientia, for you mult not judge impoſlibilities, or what is 
contrary or repugnant to reaſon, | 

Again, If thou wouldſt know by what Nation or men the war threatned is to be By what Nati. 
begun or acted, look to which part Mars ſeems to be aſliſtane, remembring that the on or People 
aſcendent, the Lord thereof, and Planet from whom Mars laſt ſeparated are Sig. 'b* war ſhall 
nificators of the Kingdom, People or Nation wherein your Revolation is; the eoeges, 
ſeventh Houſe, the Lord thereof and the Planet Mars next applies unto, are Signi- 
ficators of their enemies: and that he is more aſliſtant to that party with whoſe 
Signihcator he is applying or in Configuration, or that which he doth more lovingly 
behold ; for on whoſe ſide ſoever you finde Mars, ſay that that party ſhall be che 
beginners or fomenters of the war if he be dire, and that they ſhall be valiant 
and ſtout, and turn their backs upon no enemy whatſoever ; but if he be retro- 
grade it ſhall be occaſioned by divers men who aim at the honour and applauſe of 
ſuch actions as they are never able to perform, or are worthy of the name, yet at- 
tributing that unto themſelves which was acted and accompliſhed by others, ſhall 
boaſt of great and high matters, but ſhall perform little or nothing, and lay the 
burthen of the war on other mens ſhoulders, and ſhall themſelves only thieve, 
pillage and plunder, and cut by the high ways; and if Aars be ſtationary (as 
aboveſaid) the war ſhall be the more greivous and hot, and the men more ſtrong and 
couragious. 

Have regard alſo unto Satwry, who ſtirs up moſt deadly fewds and heart-burn- 
ings above any of the other Planets, when he is Significator of diſfſentions and 
troubles, and that to thoſe to whoſe ſide he takes: alſo grievous troubles and 
miſeries unto thoſe Cities and Towns ſubject unto the ſign wherein he is , according 
to the ſignification of the houſe of Heaven he is in, as if in the ſecond, they ſhall 
be damnihed in their eftates, ſubſtance and riches; in the third, in their ſmall jour- 
neys, brethren and kindred, and ſo {as you have been taught above) you may run 
over the ſignification of every houſe of Heaven; if he be retrograde, he ſhall lignifie 
the ſame miſchiefs which you have heard of Aars, but they ſhall be more grievous 
and intolerable. 

Know alſo that if the Planet denoting war be in good aſpe& and reception of What may be 
the Lord of the Year, he ſhall denote good during that Revolution, »:z. peace and expeed when 
rio war ; If with the Lord of the half Year or quarter, no miſchief by war ſhall the Lord of 
happen that half year or quarter ; In like manner, if he be thus in Configuration ©'* yearghalf 
with the Lord of the moneth and day, ſuch miſchief ſhall not happen thereiri oooh or day 
and if this reception by either body or aſpeR,be in the firſt ſeven degrees of any ſign, arein good a(- 
the good ſhall be chiefly at the beginning of theyear and during the firſt quarter ; pe&,and re- 
If it be between the ſeventh and fifteenth degree, during the firſt half year, =—_ ofthe 
If berwixt the fifteenth and one and twentieth,in the third quarter ; If between that ve 0a F 
and the end, in the laſt quarter and later end of the year : In like manner judge of 
the moneths, days and hours, | | | 

The Antients amongſt other curioſities in this nature have given theſe rules Whether the 
for the knowing whether the Generall or chief Commander of the enemies party be Enemies Ge- 
young orold ; have regard to the Significator of the aflicting Planer and Signifi- _—_— young 
cator of the enemy, and ſee if they be Oriental , for then it denoterh him young, "2: 
eſpecially if then the 4-0» be alſo Oriental; but if they be all Occidental, he 1s 
old; butifone ſhall be Oriental and the other Occidental, he is neither young nor 
very old but of a middle age. | | 

] ſhall here now conclude this Chapter with this note, that all quarrels and 


blood- 


284. eAſtrologia eM unda. Lib.4. 
blood-ſheds that happen in the World are generally occaſioned by Mars, becauſe 


hen he enters any angle, eſpecially the fourth, he ſignifies there ſhall be many 
vemcadey by ery an on floug ters and effuſion ot blood, and that men ſhall 


elight to kill one another. 


CHAP. VII. 
Of Fertility and Sterility. 


SARAH Eaſon and Experience teacheth us, that commonly after war 
ID comes a ſcarcity; and after peace, plenty; and therefore 
Yo theſe being their ſucceſſors ( as I may ſay) or events, I 
have thought good in this Chapter to ſpeak thereof. 
Wherefore in this matter have regard to the Aſcendents 
07/2) of the Conjuntion and prevention of the Luminaries to the 
'Þ 9:4 S Revolution and their places; and if the place of the Conjur- 
COP IDIDEDS &102 or prevention apply to the place of Jupiter, and 7upi- 
ter have dominion in that place, or if he afliſit the Lord of the Aſcendent, and the 
' Lord of the fourth houſe at that time free from misfortune, and the application of 
the Aſcendent of that law or the change of Triplicities, applying to the place of 
Zepiter or Venus by Conjunttion or AſpeR, there ſhall be plenty atthat year of ſuch 
things as the earth doth produce; eſpecially if the Lord of the ſecond houle alliſt 
or apply unto the Lord of the Aſcendent by a good and friendly Aſpect ; and this 
ſhall be the more aſſuredly confirmed; if Part of Fortune have power and dignity 
there in that place, becauſe thoſe ſignifie plenty upon plenty, 
Of ſcarcity or But if thou wouldſt know when the year is likely to be ſcarce and unfruitful, ſee 
dearth. if Saturn be ruler or diſpoſer of the place of the Conjunttion or Oppoſition by Eſſen- 
tial dignity or Aſpe&,or whether he be Lord of the Aſcendent or Almuten thereof, 
or afflict it by any malevolent AſpeR, orbe in any Angle, and the Lord of the 
fourth affliſted of the Infortunes, eſpecially of Satwrn; tor if ſo, ſcarcity is threat- 
ned and may afſuredly be expeRed, eſpecially if he be in Oppoſition of Mercury, or 
in any ofthe Angles of the figures at the time of the {onjuntion or prevention ; or 
bein Square or Oppoſition of the Lord of the ſecond, Lord of the Aſcendent, Part of 
Fortune, or its Diſpoſitor ; ſcarciry may alſo be expeted when Serwrn affliterh 
the Won, or the Moon apply unto him by either Conjunttion or Aﬀpect, having 
laſt ſeparated from the Conjunttion or Oppoſition of the Sun; In like manner , 
judge penury and want, if either of the Malevolents affi the year thus, eſpecially 
if they be-in Square or Oppoſition of Mercury , but you mult note that the evil 
threatned by Sat»ry is worſe then that promiſed by Mars, as the good promiſed 
by 7epiter 1s much better then that ſignified by Yenw ; and judge the quality of 
the good or evil promiſed or tareatned by any of theſe, from their proper nature 
and the nature of the ſign wherein they are; as if Saturs bein an aicry or watery 
ſign, he denotes floods, inundations and many ſtorms; tempeſts and deſtruction by 
high windes ; if ina fiery ſign, drought, &c. Alſo note, that if Mars in that Revo- 
lution inwhich the Lord of thatNation, Kingdom, Law, or Common-wealth is 
exalted, be then in any of his own Houſes, he ſhall ſignifie much rain; and if he 
be in any of the Houſes of Sazwry, little or no rainis to be expected, and in other 
Houſes a meanis promiſed, 


How ro judge by. -| 
of plenty in 
any year, 


Cuavrp. 


A wh. MM en —_ La 


Lib.q.  * eAſtrologia dunda. 


CHAP. VITE 


Teaching how to know the price of any thing in any Year. 


o. 


moſt expedient to be known, I ſhall here ſer down, and as neer as I can omir 
that which may be ſuperfluous 

In this manner of judgement, you areto have regard to the ingreſs of the Su» 
into Aries, from whence you are to require Judgement, as alſo of the Poſition of the 
Heavens at every ( 0junttion and Oppo/ition of the Luminaries every moneth, and 
from the Conjunttion preceding every Ingreſs, as well quarterly and half-yearly as 
yearly, for all things happening in this World in a natural way, are occaſioned by 
the Stars, and may be known by the Poſition of the Heavens, Stars and Planets at 
the time of the Conjunttion and Oppeſiricn of the Luminaries if rightly under- 
ſtood, ſo that by the Conjunfior, the Generation and beginning of things are 
judged , by the Oppoſitzon, the deſtruftion and decay thereof; for the Afoon being 
neereſt ot all the Planets to the Globe of the Earth, and the ſwitteft, doth immedi- 
ately convey untoit and men thereon the vertue and fſignification of all the other 
Planets, and therefore we ſee by reaſon of this her great power and influence, all 
things,as well Vegetatives and Minerals as Animals, increaſe and decreaſe in vigour 
ſtrength and growth in ſome ſenſe according to her motion, and that the corruption 
and generation of all things are appropriate unto her and the S»», and therefore 
by their C' »j#4tt:on and Oppoſition theſe things may perfe&ly be known unto us if 
we be but ſearchers and contemplators of Nature and its Caues. 

Now if thou wouldſt know what ſhall happen generally touching the price of 
any thing in any year, have regard unto the Poſition of the Heavens at the ns 
Ingreſs into +4r:cs if there be but one tigure to be erected, but if two look to 
their Poſitions at his Ingreſs into Arres and Livra, if tour, or tor every quarter , 
at his Ingrels into »4ries, Cancer, Libra,and Capricorn ; and if you would more parti- 
cularly make monethly obſervations thereon, have regard unto the / onjuntt.on of 
the Luminaries every moneth, and remember that the Aſcendent thereof, or the 
ſign aſcending at that inſtant for which you deſire to erect the figure of the Heavens, 
its Lord and the Planet or Planets therein located are fignificators of the condi- 
tion and ſtate of Man and the Ayr, and you may join allo in ſigni-cation with 
them the Diſpolitor of the Lord of the Aſcendent, if the Planets or Planet therein 
located be peregrine and affited, judge miſchief and detriment in theſe according 


75 . eh . 
to- his nature , ſignification and ſtrength ; and ſo judge the contrary if he be then 


ftrong andeffentially dignified, 

If there be any Planet in an Angle who bath dignity and powerin the Aſcen- 
dent, eſpecially Exaltation, be ſhall be the Significator of the price of things, or 
any Planet in an Angle Eſſentially dignified and ftrong; and it the Lord of the 
Aſcendent be remote from this Houſe and the Planet in an Angle Peregrine, yer 
he (hall be Significator as long as he is inthat Angle; But when the Lord of the 
Aſcendent is in any of the Angles, or in theeleventh or fifch Houſes, he ſhall more 
manifeſtly itew his ſignifications then any other, eſpecially if he be Oriental and 
goings from under the #-beams: ever take this for a general and true rule,that what 
ever Planet you finde fortunate in any ſign, he ſhall ſignifie and denote the dearneſs 
of ſuch things as are under the ſignification of that Planet , and the tign wherein 
he is; ſo alſo on the contrary, it he be weak and impedited, judge they will be of 
little or no eſteem or value, and may be purchaſed at a ſmall rate; wheretore it 1s 
very neceſſary you be throughly verſed in the Nature of eyery Planet and Sign which 


you are ſufficiently taught mn the ſecond Book; and this rule without any more 
O © | words 


\ Tabarim amongſt other of the Antients hath been herein mot large ; what is 


285 


286 


e Aſtrologia eMunda. Lib. 4. 
words may ſuffice for ſufficient inſtruction in theſe matters, yet may we apply it 
thus 
Look if the Lord of your Aſcendent be received or diſpoſed of by any Planet and 
the receiving or diſpoſing Planet be ſtrong in an Angle, it ſignifieth that Corn and 
ſuch things as are molt neceſſary for the uſe of man ſhall be at a high race all that 
moneth; And the Diſpoſitor ofthe Lord of the Aſcendent in Oppeſicion of the Lu- 
minaries or that of the time promiſeth the ſame ; as alſoif the Lord of the Aſcen- 
dent be received or diſpoſed of, and he together with the receiving and diſpoſing 
Planet be aſcending ; But if the Lord of the Aſcendent and the Planet in an Angle 
apply to any Planet Cadent, flow in motion, or afflicted, the price (hall fall ; ſo 
likewiſe if the Lord of the Aſcendent, its Receptor or Diſpoſitor be Cadent, weak 
and aftited it ſignifieth the ſame, according to their affliction ; if much weakned 
and afflicted, they will be very cheap, if a litcle affi&ted their price will fall but nor 
altogether ſo much &c. And if the Lord of the Aſcendent, its Niſpoſitor and Re- 
ceptor do then alſo apply to any Planets weak, cadent and aftlicted, this will be the 
more certain. 

See alſo what Planet you finde in the Aſcendent, for he ſhall have Ggnification with 
the Lord of the Poms} hy and ſhall according to his ſtrength or weakneſs denote 
the cheapneſs or dearneſs of proviſions ; But if the Lord ofthe Afcendent be not re- 
ceived by any Planer, he ſhall not have Ngnification with him, but the Plat:er therein 


roo ſhall be Significator onely : If your Significator, or Lord of the Aſcendenr, 


if he have participation with him) and the Luminaries be in the Aſcendent,or in an 
other Angle at the time of their monthly Conjmnttion, the price of Corn & other —_ 
faries for the life of man ſhal<continue and remain as it wasin the preceding moneth; 
butif your Significator and the Luminaries be received and ſtrong, and be in the 
eleventh, or fifth , the price (ball be raiſed, and that according to their fortitudes ; 
for if they be eſſentially very ſtrong it will be much raiſed, and fo on the contrary : 
Alſo if the Planet in the Aſcendent apply unto the Lord of the Aſcendent, the price 
ſhall be raiſed that day you finde your ſignificators in Partil Conjufion or AſpeR; but 
if the Lord of the Aﬀcndent and the Luminaries be weak and afflicted in the third, 
or ninth,or twelfth,or eighth Houſes,it Ggnifieth their price ſhall be abated and fal'n; 
But the Angles ſignifie the fixation and durability of what is; If any aMlited 
Planet alſo apply to the Lord- of the Aſcendent, judge the abatement of the 
price, and that eſpecially if the Lord ofthe Aſcendent apply to any Planer weak or 
afflicted. 

Moreover if the Lord of the Aſcendent be weak and afflicted, and its Diſpoſitor 
ſtrong, yet ſhal not he by his ſtrength ſignifie any thing; for the Lord of the Aſcendent 
ſhall il be Significator of the price of things unleſs he were in a Cadent Houſe,and 
ſome Planet be then in an Angle (as hath been ſaid) for thenthar Planet ſhall be Sig- 
nificator : Laſtly, if the Aſcendent be any of the houſes of the Luminaries, have re- 
gard untothem,and according to their fortitudes or debilities and places in the figure 
and Configuration with the Aſcendent, judge. 

Some of the Antients have taught that weare to regard the Planet in the tenth 
Houſe, if any be there at the time of the Sw» this ingreſs into Aries, or the Planer 
applying tothe Lord of the tenth, and make him ——_— of the price of things ; 
As if the Planet located in the tenth or beholding the Lord thereof be ftrong and 
dire, ſuch things ſignified by the fign wherein your Significator is ſhall be deer 
and of an high price; but if your Significator be weak and.rettograde, judge the 
contrary, 

Devvckieg with others ſay to know the price of things, look what Planets you find at 
the Sx his ingreſs into Aries Oriental andjudge ſuch things ſignified by um,and the 
ſign wherein he is ſhall be deer ; and that thoſe that are under the fignification of 
thoſe that are Occidental and the ſigns wherein they are, ſhall be cheap; In like 
manner have regard to every Planet, and fee which of them is _ and free from 
all impediment, and judpe ſuch things as are ſignified by him and the f1gn wherein he 
is, ſhall be deer, and on the contrary they ſhall be cheap whoſe Significators are 

weak 


Lib.4.  eAſtrologia nnd. 

weak, compbuſt, cadent, under the S#:-beams and Retrograde, &c. and fo alſo 
according to their mean betwixt thoſe two extreams judge of the butineſs when they 
are not alrogether ſo ſtrong, nor altogether ſo weak; and truly this is very ra- 


tional and for the generality may paſs current, yet mayelt thou follow which moſt 
pleaſeth thy fancy, but I would recommend this unto thee. 


e—:brabamius {ndens ſaith, If Satmrz 1n any Revolution or other time be not in 


any of the angles, ſuch chings as are edible and moſt beneticial and uſeful for 
man ſhall be cheap ; bur ifhe be therein, judge the contrary, eſpecially if he be ſtrong 
and have dignity therein, for then he ſhall denote grievous ipenury and want, 
thiags ſhall be ſo deer. a7 

AMeſſchalah ſaith, have reſpe& unto the Lord of the Aſcendent and the CIoon, 
and if the ſtrongeſt of them apply to any Planer inthe Afcendent or Mid-heaven, 
judge the price of proviſions neceſſary for the uſe of man to be high; andif it ap- 
ply to any Planet in the ſeventh houſe the price ſhall be indifferent; bur if to a 
Planet in che fourth, received or the Lord of the Aſcendent, its Diſpoſitor, or the 
Alcon received by him, it ſhall be high ; but if they or either of them apply to a 
Planet in a cadent houſe not receiving him, proviſion ſhall be ſo bad it will hardly 
be 1old ; bur ff they do receive him, they ſhall be deer. 

Hal; faith, have regard to the Lord of the Year who if he be going to Retro- 
gradation or be Defcending in his circle, or be in the lower part of his Epicycle, 
he ſignitiech things ſhall be cheap and of a low price that are of the nature of the 
{gn wherein- he 1s; fo likewiſe if the 910, be either inthe Revolution of the year, 
quarter Or moneth decreating in light and motion, or applying toa Retrograde or 
weak Plauct, ſhe ſignifieth the ſame. 

3ut as touching the cheapneſs and dearneſs of any thing, have regard to the In- 
greſs of the \«2 into Arier, or any other quarter (if it be fo that ſo many figures 
are to be made) and therein diligently conſider the ſtate and condition of the Planer 
and Sign ſignifying that concerning which you would require judgement, and accor- 
ding to his ttrength and debility judge ; for it ſtrong, the things will be deer and ofan 
high price or value; and if weak, judge the contrary. 


Some of the Antients have alſo taught that for monethly obſervations in this 


matter we have regard to the Conjunttion of the Luminaries, and Haly faith that 
we oughtin every year to have regard whither Sat#rn or 7upitey enter the ſign ofthe 
Kingdom, Nation or Countrey tor which you erect your Figure, and from their 
then places, ſtrengths and debilities we are to judge ; for that it the Planets are un- 
fortunate in theſe places, it ſignifies things ſhall be cheap ; but if they be. there for- 
tunated and ſtrong, judge the contrary. 7 | 

Moreover you are to take notice that every Planet in his Exaltation or ele- 
vated in his Epicycle whether he have dignity in the Aſcendent or no, ſigni- 
fieth things ſhall be deer that are of the nature of that Planet and the Sign 
wherein he is; and therefore I ſay again it 15 moſt requiſite you be throughly 
acquainted with the ſignifications of the Planets and Signs taught you in the 
ſecond Book. 


287 


288 


How to judge 
of the alrera- 


e Aſtrologia eMſunda. Lib.4. 


CHAP. IX, 


( ontaining ſome Inſtruftions touching the alteration of the Ayr and 
change of weather in any Near. 


lible in chis matter, I mean for theſe Regions and parts of the Earth wherein 
we live being Iflands; but doubtleſs the Antients did ſufficiently treat 
hereof; neither is the validity and certainty of their rules which they have left ro 
poſterity to be queſtioned ; for ſuch is the reaſon they carry with them, that queſti- 
onleſs they were moſt authentick 'and ſeldom or never admitted of corre&ion in 
thoſe parts of the Continent wherein they lived ; and perhaps in theſe parts alſo 
with a little amendment they may be made infallible, wherefore I ſhall here do 
my utmoſt endevour to deliver them unto thee, and perhaps hereafter according as I 
ſhall have life, liberty and leiſure afforded me, I may give you them more ſhort , 
compendious and efficacious : For I muſt confeſs the preſent Philoſophers of this our 
age are more to ſeek in their judgements of weather then in any one thing whatſoever 
and do ofteneſt therein deviate from truth. 
Inthe judging then of theſe matters have regard unto the figure of the Smx his 
ingreſs into eAries, for the general judgement thereof for the whole year, if no more 


M Uch pains and &ligent obſervation is required for the delivering rules infa]- 


tion of the *J" Figures are to be erected ; butiftwo, or four, (as you have heard in the 1, Chap- 


and change of 


the weather, 


Of the chicf 
and genera) 
fignicator of 
the weather, 


ter of this Treatiſe) you are to have reſpect unto them, to know the ſtate of the 
weather __ and half-yearly , but you are allo to remember you join in 
judgement with them the figures at the time of the Preventional (onjwnttion and O 
poſition of the Luminaries ; and if you would judge of the alteration of the ayr for 
every moneth, you may have regard to the figure of Heaven at the time of every 
{onjunition of the Luminanes ; as alſo to every Square and Oppoſition if you would 
predi& of every week. 

When you would judge of any of theſe times, have regard unto the degree 
aſcending of the figure, whither it be for the year, half year or quarter, and the 
places of the Conjunttion and Oppoſition preceding, and ſee in what manſion of the 
oor thele places fall, viz. whether ina dry, moiſt, cold or temperate manfion 
(the which you are taught inthe 1. Se&. and 3. Chapter of the third Book of this 
Volume being our /ztrodtion ro Elettions) and whither the Lord of the Manſion 
have any Aﬀfpe& to the {o»junttivn, Oppoſition, Aſcendent of the Revolution, or 
Lords thereof; and of what nature, temper and quality he is, and the manſion he is in, 
and accordingly judge of the ftate of the weather, he being the general and chief 
Significator, eſpecially if he be A/mwren of the Afcendent, for he ſhall ( as faith 
Prolomy ) be Significator though he doth not behold their (onjwn'/ion or Oppoſi- 
tion , but if any other doth, you muſt join him in judgement with him. : 

Have regard alſo to the fixed ſtars of the firſt, ſecond, third and fourth Magni- 
rudes, riſing, culminating and ſetting; and ſee how they are aſpected by the $1g- 
nificator, and ſee whither any of them be in Conjunttion with him ; conſider their 
nature and manſion they are in; alſo have regard to the nature and quality of the 
Lord of the place of any great Conmwnttion, or Eclipſe of any of the Luminaries; 
and to what Planets or fixed Stars they apply, as alſo the Moon atter her Conjur- 
ion and Oppoſition with the Sun, and as you finde it requiſite, having regard to the 
major teſtimonies, judge of the nature, quality and temper of the weather. 

If your Significator be free from impediment, ſtrong, no wiſe beheld by any of 
the Planets, nor he in Conjnnt#ion nor applying by Aſpect to any of them, nor to 


any notable fixed ſtar, you ſhall judge the quality and nature of the weather from 
; his 


1 n 
ak ax ac | _ | > & —_ 


Lib.4. » Aſtrologia <NAunaa. 
| his bare ſignification ; but if any Planer be in Configuration with him, or he with 
any Planet or fixed ſtar, you are to judge according to the nature of your Signitt- 
cator, and the nature ofthe Planet or fixed ſtar in { 9jurttion or other Configura wn 
with him by making a rational and judicious commixture,and this ſhall happen at that 
time, and on thoſe dayes wherein you finde them in {onjuzttion or AﬀpeRt. 

As if Satwrn be chief Signiticator of weather in an Angle no wiſe impedited nor 
applying to any other Planer, nor any to him, he ſhews temperate ſhowers and ſea- 


ſons, dark clowds over-ſpreading the sky,eſpecially if he bein a temperate Mantion ; 


but if it be a cold Manſion, the weather will incline to cold; if a moiſt, to 
moiſture : Butif he be impedited or ill aſpected he ſhall ſignifie ſtorms, rempelits, 
hail, rain, winde, thunder, and dark clowds, eſpecially if he be then malevolently 
aſpected of Venus or Mercury out of an Angle and in a moitt Manſion; of 7xpiter, 
windes, rain and thick clowds; of Mars, yellow clowds, lightning, thunder and 
rain in places and time convenient ; ofthe Sz», red clowds, winde and fgreat rain, 
alſo in Summer thunder and lightning ; according tothe nature of the Signs, Man- 
lions, and Places of the Heavens their Cozjunitwon or Aﬀpetts are ; But you muſt 
know the Sun or Moon are never alligned chiet Dominionin any Figure concern- 
ing weather, becauſe they are gencral Significators of times and featons; as the 
Szu of the Year, and its parts, v4z. Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, by his 
Ingreſs into the EquinoRtials and | ropicks; the 14997 of the moneths and weeks by 
her Conjunttion, Square and Gopoſition to the Sun, ec, 

Your chief Significator being Oriental, will work his cffe&s chiefly towards the 
latter end of the Year; if Occifental, towards the beginning. 

Moreover you are to haveregard that you may be the better enabled to your 
work, to the nature of of the ſign aſcending at any Lunation, time , or quarter of 
the year, the Planet Lord thereof, and the nature of thoſe Planets located in the 
Aſcendent, orin any Configuration thereof, and in what Manſions all theſe are, 
as alſo the Planetsin Conjwnttior or Aﬀpect of the Hoon ; fee allo from what houle 
ſhe is beheld, or in what houſe corporally joined to any, and according to the major 
teſtimonies judge, if wet, wet ; if dry, dry ; &c. and if the teſtimonies be equal, judge 
an indifferency. | ; 

Conſider alſo the Anple the oor 1s next toenter into ; forif moſt Planets are 
therein located, or caſt their Aſpects to the Cuſpe thereof, or are therein accom- 
panyed with the moſt notable fixed Stars, it 1s a ſure teſtimony ofrain; and that ge- 
neral throughout the whole Region; eſpecially if the Lord of the Afcendent be in 
that Angle and chief Signifcator 3 allo if the ſign aſcending belong to the Dominion 
of Sarrrn, Venus or the Moon, or if they be in the Aſcendent, or behold it with any 
Aſpe&,it prenotesalſo rain and a moiſt ayr and weather; Alſoif a Retrograde Planet 
(eſpecially if it be one of the Superiours ) be with the Opener of gates, alſo when 
Ven 151n any Configuration ofthe Sz», eſpecially Square,Oppoſition or Conjunttion, 
in ſeaſons convenient. 

See alſo you have an eſpecial regard to Mercenary ; for as ſoon as ke changeth his 
habitude either in the Zedzack , or in his Orb though never ſo little , the ayr and wea- 
ther is altered; abſerve alſo to what Planet he is joined either by Body or Aſpe& in the 
opening of gates ; for if it be Saryr», he cauſeth fierce blaſts, darkneſs of the ayr 
and rain; IF Venws , clowds and ſhowes.in times and places convenient, and ſo of 
the relt. | 

It is alſo an approved rule, that when Sarrrn goeth out of oneſign of the Ze- 
adiack into another, the ayr and weather doth immediately alter , let it be at whar 
time of the \yedr it will, and ſometimes cauſeth.thunder and lightning, and .very 
rempeftuous ſtormy weather : Alſo when the. Hoon after any ( onjuvttior, Square 
or Oppoſition of the Sun applyeth.to the.chief .Sjgnificator, or to the degree aſcen- 
ding at the time .of the ſame |{{9njnnion, Square or Oppoſition, the weather will 
be diſpoſed according to the nature,of the Significator inthe, Figure, 


Operung of gates is when a Planer applyeth.to another who ruleth the ſign op- what opening 


poſite to his houſe, or when another Planet ſepareterh from any and applyes of Garcs i: 


immedi- 


Nota bene, 


A ſtrologia M unaa. Lib.4. 
immediately to another that hath Dominion by houſe in the ſigns oppoſite tro 
thoſe ruled by the Planet from whom ke laſt ſeparated; as for example, If the 
Sz arply by any Aipec&t or Conjuxttion of Saturn, it 15an openirg of Gates (or 
windowes as it 15 termed by .1o/es in the 7.0f Ger. 11.) becauſe Aquaries 
which is a houſe or Sign under the Dominion of Satars , is oppoſite to Leo, 
which is the houſe of the 3#n; ſo likewiſe if any other Planet ſhould ſeparate 
from the S«» and immediately apply next to Sarzrn, or ſeparate from ater and 


apply to the Sz», it isalſo an Opener of Gates ; becauſe that Planet transferreth the. 


light and nature of the Planet with whom it was laſt joined either by Body or Aſpet 
ro the Planer it next applies unto, ard to cauleth an alteration of the ayr, as rain ever 
followeth upon Opening ot Gates. 

Now you may ſoon know the Opening of Gates inallthe other Planets, by ha- 
ving regard to the houſes and ſigns appropriated to each Planer, as you have been 
taught in the 8 Chapter of our /xirodut tom 10 the Juagerent of the ST ARS, 
But it you pleaſe you may have regard to this following direction. 


V Of theſe three Op-F v7 
poſite unto them, or \ 
they to theſe, or we 7 


Is an opening of 
Gates, for that their 
Houſes are oppoſite 
the one to the other, 


Any of theſe four 


applying to a PY 


X +» [J.4.0T F. Flaner,tranſlating the 


© 3 - hghr of each ro the© h 1 wiz. 

other, 

v” tw 1 'V rules 2 and X ; - 
2 ne L and ik; &, Y andm; 
pp g,=and 5; ©, Q ; 

Fo >, >3 is = and w; 

according as you may ſee 

ON ,*h them placed. 

SS VP 


© that the Planet from whom any Planet feparteth, openeth the Gates of the 
other to whom he applyes ; as if from Z#piter to Mercury, or they be in each others 
Aſpect, they raiſe fierce North windes; If Mars and Venus, according to the ſea- 
ſon and place and ſigns they are in they ſhall denote rain, haul, ſnow and thunder ; If 
the Su and Saturn, dark ayr, many clouds and much wet, &c. 


CaaW XK 


Shewing how to judge of the weather by the Aſpefts of the Moon 
t6 the other Planets, and by the ſeveral Aſpefts of the Planets 
amongſt themſelves. 


the alteration of the ayr; for in ſome places and Regions rain is more natural 

and uſual then in others,and again [which is wonderful] rain'is never ſeen in 
Egype which is watred with the overflowing of the River Xi/«- onely ; and there- 
fore let your judgements be framed according to diſcretion, conſidering the nature 
and quality of the Climate concerning which thou art to judge, 


| Ver remember you be wary in pronouncing judgement touching weather and 


The 


Lib.4.. » Aſtrologia Aunaa. 291 

The Moon in Conjuntion, Square or Oppoſition of Saturn in moilt ſigns ſignifies How to judge 
cloudy weather, cold, and moiſt ayr that day, and ſo according to the nature of thg of the alterari- 
ſign judge ; and if ſhe ſeparate from Satzr» and apply to the Su» by any Aſpect P® o the ayr 
or Conjunttion, the weather will be tempeſftuous , and very hard and uncomfor- ym ng" wh 
table. | ; volent aſpeQs 
If ſhe be in Conwnttion, Square or Oppoſition of {apiter either in «Aries or Scorpio, of the Moon to 
ſhe denotes fair weather and white clowds;with Mars in watry ſigns promiſeth rain ; *>< 9cher fix 
in fiery,divers coloured clowds throughout the whole heaven; In Summer often thun- ops 
der. Wh the Sn 1n moiſt ſigrs denotes rain,eſpecially if ſhe immediately after apply 
to Satzrn ; Inaiery ſigns and applying to Jpiter afterwards denotes a temperate ayr 
and moderate weather ; In fiery and applying to Mars, hot and dry weather and 
much lightning ; If the Moon be in like manner in Conyunttion, Square or Oppeſi- 
tion of Venws , rain is threatned, eſpecially if they be in moiſt ſigns ; with Mercury 
if ſhe be ſo beheld, or he ſo aſpected by her, ſignifieth rain alſo and winde, and that 
the more if ſhe then goto any Aſpect of 7pirer,or from Venus to Mars, becaule theſe 
are Openers of Gates as you have heard. 

Thus much of the Malevolent Aſpects of the ſoon with the other ſix Planets ; How 'o know 
now it reſteth, we ſee alſo what may be predicted touching the alteration of the ayr #h< tare of the 
when the Planets are mutually af; need the one by the other. mo by the 

' : L qa : murual Af(- 

Saturn then in Conjunttion of Fupiter, in fiery ſigns ſignifies a great drought ; In ,.ac of the 
wfhtry, floods, continual rain, alſo inundations and overflowings of water ; Inaiery Planers. 
__ plenty of wind ; In earthy, Earth-quakes and the fall of Houſes and eradication 
of trees; judge alſo the ſame when they are in a malitious Square or Oppoſe- 
$101, Cf Co 

Saturn in (onjuinftion, Square or Oppoſition of Mars in watry ſigns, denotes rain Of gaturn.. 
in Winter, Autumn and Summer, as alſo in Summer oftentimes thunder and light- 
ning, eſpecially if in fiery ſigns; but in Autumn and Winter windy dry weather, as 
allo in the Spring ; Andin aiery ſigns both Spring, Summer, Autumn and Winter, 
promiſeth great windes and ſometimes rain. 

Saturn 1n Conjurtlion, Square or Oppoſition of the Sxy, in the Spring denotes cold 
. Fain or haul, in Summer much rain, thunder and lightning according to the nature 
of the ſign ; In Autumn tempeſtuous ſtormy weather ; and in winter, grievous cold, 
and ſnowy flabby weather. 

Saturnin Conjunition, Square or Oppoſition of Venus, promiſeth in the Spring rain 
and cold, in Summer ſuddencold, in Autumn much rain, and in Winter rain and 
ſmow, eſpeciall if in theſe times the 1ign be watry; but it otherwiſe, judge according to 
diſcretion and the nature thereof. 

Saturnin Conjurttion, Square or Oppoſition of Mercury , Nignifieth windes and 
rain in the Spring, eſpecially in watry and aiery ſigns, asalſo in Summer winde and 
ſhowres ; bur if they be in fiery ſigns, thunder, lightning and rain; In Autumn 
winde and cold, according to he nature of the ſign, and in Winter cold and 
ſnow, 

Zapiter in like manner in Conjunttson, Square or Oppoſition of Mars, ſhews the of p,1;1e,. 
Spring to be windy and tempeſtuous; a thundering andlightning Summer ; rain and 
ſtorms in Autumn; and in Winter cold ſnows and ſharp windes according to the na- 

_ ture of the ſipn. 

Zupiter in Conjunttion, Square Or Oppoſition ofthe Sun in the Spring ſignifierth high 
windes, in Summer thunder and lightning; and in Autumn vehement windes, and 
very dry, cold, froſty weather in Winter ; for the moſt part they ſignifie thus in every 
lign; | 
Jupiter 1n (onjunttion, Square Or Oppoſition of Venus, ſhews a temperate ayr accor- 
ding to the nature of the ſeaſon all the year long; yet if they be in watery ſigns 
they will incline ſomewhat to miſling ſhowers. 

7upiter 1n Conjun#tion, Square Or Oppoſition of Mercury, denotes great and vehe- 
ment windes in every quarter they are ſo aſpeRed if in aiery ſigns ; In watry, rain ; 


In fiery, thunder and lightning, but of no great continuance. 
| AMar r 


Of the Sur, 


Of Yeu. 


Saturn. 


Jupiter | 


A ſtrolopia eM unda. Lib. 4. 


SS ind, nor of ©, in fiery ſigns promiſeth drought in Summer , in 
the Spring a dry ayr, alſo in Autumn and in Winter froſt ; in watry 1igns, ſkewers 
in the Spring ; Summer, thunder and rain ; and in Autumn, ſhewers; in Winter rain 
and cold, | 

Fin, 7 or & of Q , inthe Spring caufeth ſudden great and violent rains ; 
Tempeſts in Autumn, and in Summer : bur if in fiery ſigns or in each others houſe 
great thunders and l:ghtnings. | 

Ain, Cor + with 7, in fieryſigns, cauſeth heat and drought in Summer ; 
rainin watry ſigns, and ſometimes <hunder and lightnings ; in Autumn and Winter 
tudden great windes, alſo cold in Winter. | 

Jin of 2, in the Spring cauſeth rain, in Summer thunder , tempeſis and 
rain; in Autumn, ſhewers and winde ; and in Winter , much moiſture in {5 or # of 
@ , he can never be. 

» in & of 7, denotes windes and moiſture, eſpecially in watry and aiery ſigns, 
bur in fiery a ſerene ayr in Summer, and froſt in Winter ; in 3 or + he can never be 
neither of . , by reaſon of his proximity, as you have heard in the 2 Book, Chap. 6, 

? in & of +, Rain in the Spring, Summer, and Autumn, as alſo ſnow 
in Winter and ſudden high windes, alſo in Summer they raiſe ſtorms and tempeit: ; 
judge alſo the ſame in every one being in * or A as you have heard of theſe Alpects, 
but you muſt know they are not altogether ſo bad, | 


CHa* Lk. 


Demonſtrating the alteration of the Ayr by the Combuſtion, Orientality 
and Occidentality of the Planets in ervery of the 12 Signs. 


fair weather; Occidental, great and vehement winde-. 
In vs Combuſt, caufeth thick clouds ; Oriental, T hunder ; Occidental a 
curbulent ayr. 
In 1 Combuſt and Occidental, drought; Oriental, fair windy weather. 
In = Combuſt and Occidental,dark ayr, fogs, miſts and troubleſome weather ; 


Oriental, ſomewhat calmer. 
In & Combuſt, Oriental or Occidental, cauſeth rain and miſling at the beſt,and 


ſometimes thunder. 
In Mm Combuſt maketh an infeRious ayr ; and turbulent if Occidental ; but Ori- 


ental, it will not be ſo bad. 

In = Combutt cauſeth a defect in the ſight of men and women; Oriental, winds; 
Occidental, whirlewindes and a turbulent ayr. 

In m Combuſt, cold ayr; Occidental, froſts; Oriental, cold North windes. 

In + Combuſt and Occidental, a cold rainy ayr ;- Oriental, cold and froſt. 

In w Combuſt, denotes a dark obſcure ayr with South windes ; Occidental,cold; 
Oriental, North windes. 

In zz Combuſt, cold ayr ; Occidental, tempeſts; Oriental, rain. 

In % Combuſt, clouds ; Occidental, rain ; Oriental, a more temperate ayr. 

Y in Y Combult is a token of rain; being Occidental he cauſeth clouds; and Ori- 
tal, fair weather. 

In s Combuſt, indifferent weather; Occidental, pleaſant ſhewers ; Oriental, 
cloſe calm weather. 

In 13 Combulſt, Occidental or Oriental, fair temperate weather. 

In S Combuſt , Occidental or Oriental, brings a calm and pleaſant ayr. 


CG eAturn in Y Combuſt, denotesa dark, obſcure, cloudy, miſty ayr ; Oriental!, 


In 


Lib.4. eAſtrologia <NAunda. 
In Leo Combuſt, Occidental or Oriental, pleaſant windes. 
In Virgo Combultit, Occidental or Oriental, cauſeth weather fit for the produRion 
of ſeed and the fruits of the Earth. 
In Libra Combult, Occidental or Oriental, indifferent weather. 
In Scorpio Combult, rain ; Occidental, bitter weather ; Oriental,more temperate. 
In Sagutary Combuſt, much rain ; Occidental, worſe weather ; Oriental, better. 
In Capricorn Combuit, moiſt ayr ; Occidental, it is worſe ; Oriental, better. 
In Aquaries Combuſt and Occidental, rain ; Oriental, fair. 
In Piſces Combuſt, Occidental and Oriental,calm windes. 


293 


Mars in Aries Combulit and Occidental, bad weather ; Oriental, the con- a4, 


crary, 
Ia Taurus Combuſt, a quiet ayr ; Occidental, ſtormy ; Oriental, windy. 
In Gemins Combuſt and Occidental, heat ; Oriental, ſomewhat more temperate, 
In Cancer Combuſt and Occidental, great heat ; Oriental, not ſo violent. 
In Leo Combuſt, and Occidental, drought ; Oriental, not altogether ſo dry. 
In Yirgo Combutt, Occidental and Oriental ſignifieth the ſame as you have heard 
of Saturn.” 
In Libra Combuſt, cauſeth moiſture ; Occidental, high windes; Orienta!, more 
temperate. | 
P Scorpio Combuſt, moiſture; Occidental, ſtorms ; Oriental, gales of 
winde. 
In Sagittary Combuſt, drought ; Occidental, the ſame z but Oriental, it will not 
be ſo very dry. | 
In Capricorn Combuſt, clowdy ; Occidental, ſome heat ; Oriental, more tem- 
rate. 
# In Aqzaries Combuſt, drought ; Occidental and Oriental, plenty of windes. 
In Pi{ces Combult and Occidental, drought ; Oriental, thunder and lightning. 


The Sz» now ſhould follow in order, but he { as you have heard betore) can The Sam 


never be either Combuſt, Oriental or Occidental, the Planers being thus termed 
in reſpe& of him : beſides you have been alſo ſhewn that neither the 53» nor 
Moos areto be admitted chief Rulers in any Scheme, becauſe they are general figni- 
ficators of times and ſeaſons; therefore let us now have regard unto the ſignitica- 
tions of Venxs, when ſhe is either Combuſt, Occidental or Oriental in any of the 
ſigns of the Zoaiack, 


Venus in Aries Combuſt and Occidental, cauſeth moiſture and great windes ; Ori- Yenxe. 


ental, thunders and rains. 
In Ta#r«s Combuſt, thunders ; Occidental, fair ; Oriental, pleaſant weather. 
In Gemini Combuſt and Occidental, winde ; Oriental, a calmer ayr. 
In Cancer Combuſt, Occidental or Oriental, a quiet calm time. 
In Leo Combuſt, Occidental or Oriental, drought. 
in Virgo Combult and 'ccidental, drought ; Oriental, the contrary, 
In L:bra Combuſt, moiſt ayr ; Occidentall, rain ; Oriental, fair. 
tn Scorpio Combuſt, Occidental or Oriental, rain. - 
In S:gittary Combult, rain ; Occidental, winde and cold; Oriental, not ſo bad, 
In Capricorn Combult, cold ayr ; Occidental and Oriental, rain. 
In Aqazaries Combuſt, clowdy ; Occidental, hot ; Oriental, rain, 
In Piſces Combuſlt ; cold ; Occidental and Oriental, diſpoſed to ſnow. 


Mcrcury in Aries Combuit, promiſeth tempeſts; Occidental and Oriental, fair xe-cu-y, 


windy weather. 

In Tarr: thunder,and ſtorms being Combuſt ; Occidental and Oriental,a clowdy 
dark muddy ayr. | 

In Gemini Combuſt and Occidental, winde; Oriental, temperate ayr and ſmall 
Fuſts of winde. 

In Cancer Combuſt and Occidental , tempeftuous ſtormy weather ; Ortental, 
calmer. 

In Leo combuſt, Occidental and Oriental, winde, ; 
Pp a 


294. eAſtrologia M iunda. Lib.4 


In Frgo Combuſt,drought and often tempeſls ; ſo alfo when Occidental; Lut when 
Oriental,the contrary. 

In L:bra Combult, Occidental or Oriental, windes, 

In Scorprs Combuit and Occidental, raging weather, chiefly Oriental, 

In $agirary Combulit and Occidental, rain; Oriental, clear ayr. 

In Capricorn Combuſt, Occidental and Oriental, rain. 

In Aquaries Combuilt, ſnow; Occidental, more cold ; Oriental, rain. 

In Piſces Combuit, Occidental cr Oriental, moitt ayr. 


-——— Ia — 


PC CO CLC—_ 


CHaP. XIT. 


Contam further I ſtruftions touch ng the alteraticn ef the Hr, from 
the application of the Moon to the other Planets, hacving ſepa- 
rated from the ConjunCtion or Oppoſition of the Sun. 


ficiently furniſhed with ability to judge of the weather for every moneth ; 

| In the ninth Chapter of this Book,you have heard that the Planet the Joo 

- next applyes unto after her Conjurttion and Oppoſition with the x 1s eſpecially to 

be regarded for the exact judging of the ſtate of the weather ; wherefore1 thoughr 

good for thy better Inſtructionto inſert this Chapter, which reacheth Jargely how 

to judge by her applicationunto any other Planet (alter her aforeſaid Confhpurati- 
ons with the $»» } of the mutation or alteration of the ayr. 

Becauſe S122 1s the higeſt of all the Planets (as you have heard ) and there- 
fore we have ſtill began with him in all the progreſs of this our labour,, we ſhall 
here alſo follow the ſame method, ard ſhew what is to be expeRed when ſhe ſe- 
parates from the ( oxjur.t!10% or Gpprſitien of the Sun ard applyes next tinto Sarzrn , 
and then to 7wpiter,and ſon order of the reſt. 

Having erected your figure then for the Corjur ey, (if that be your time) or 
for the Oppeſicion of the Luminaries if you are to conſider that, have regard to the 
place of the Conjurticn or Oppoſition, the nature of the ſigns and Marſions they 
are in, and the Square Aſpects of the Malevolents unto thele places, and accordingly 
judge ; judge the time when the effect will be manifeſted trom the nuniber of degrees 
they want of the Parti] Aſpect, and the nature of the figns, fixed, common, or 
moveable, and ſo according to reaſon judge dayes or H:oures; but if your Signi- 
ficators or the co» be ſwift of motion, it will be the ſooner; if flow, the con- 

. trary, &c. | | : 

The 2Mcop If the oor after her bodily Conjunfiton or Oppoſite Aﬀpectt with the Sun do 
any \». immediately next apply unto $4147 in moiſt ſigns and manſions, let it be by what 
jundtien oc Aſpect it will, rain ſhall follow in ſome meaſure, n:ore abundantly it ſhe apply by 
Oppoſiticn of Conjnnttion, Square or Oppoſitien; not ſo much it by Sexrile; and if by Tr:»e,yet there 
he Sun,and will be miſlings, and dark clowdy obſcure ayr, &c. Remember according tothe 
epplying to nature of the ſigns, aſpets and manſions to pronounce judgement : But if Satwry 
OT be then in a fiery ſign and a dry Manſion,and the Aſcon allo fo polited;there ſhall ra- 
ther be a turbulent, dark, obſcure ayr then rain. 

On the contrary, if ſhe then apply next nnto 7-pitry although ſhe ard he both 
be in moiſt ſignes and manſions yet ſhall they denote onely ſweet ſhowers and mo- 
derate dews and the like, but in other ſignes and manſions hardly any rain at all; 


how ever it will be but very moderate, ſeaſonable and pleaſant if there be any, 
which 


| Ndeavour thou but to underſtand this Chapter well, and thou ſhalt be ſuf- 


To Fu iter, 


Lib. 4. » Aſjtrologia <NAunda. 


which ſometimes ( as other 'cauſes may concur) perhaps may be ; But if either 
Venus or Mercury, or both do then caſt their beams unto either the Moon or /u- 
piter or both, there will happen rain in ſome meaſure ; judge the quality from the 
nature of the manſions and nature of the ſigns they are in; as if moiſt, then it 
will be the more wet ; if dry, the leſs ; if in ſigns atery, windes and ſhowers by fits ; 


but ſeldome is any rain or weather produced or occafioned by 7#;:irer that is 
deftructive or unſeaſonable , but it is ſtill moderate, temperate and wholſome. - 


295 


Again if the Coon apply next unto Mars after her Conmnttion or Oppoſition To Mays. 


with the Sun, and Satwrn be then alſo in any Aſpe&t with her or Mars, or 
with the Sx», rain is threatned, and that immoderate if they are in moiſt ſigns and 
manfions, and if in temperate, and yet the Aoox be ina moilt ſign and manſion, it 
ſhall denote rain though not ſo much ; but if ſhe be in a moiſt fign and manſion and 
they in a dry, there ſhall be but very little wet ; but if Venus do then . Aſpet Mars 
alſo,you ſhall judge the contrary,that there ſhall be much rain,and if it be in ſummer, 
thunder and lightning with all. 


Alſoif at the time of the Conjaunttion or Oppoſition of the Luminaries you finde To the 5». 


them in Aſpe& with none of the Planets nor any with them, judge it will be tair 
weather and little or no rain; butif Sat#rn or Mar, eſpecially Sarzrn behold et- 
ther of them, or any other Planet in a moiſt ſign and manſion, eſpecially from an An- 
gle and the Sx then Peregrine, much rain ſhall follow, and ſo on the contrary 


judge. 


or either of them be beheld of either Saturn or Mars; but it will be infallibly true 
if then they be beheld of both Saturn and Mars, eſpecially if Saturn behold the 
toon, and Mars Venw, becanſe theſe are Openers of Gates as you have heard ; bur 
you muſt note the rain will nor be ſo great, if but one of them behold the 1oon and 
Yenus or either of them : Bur if Z«piter behold them in like manner, judge there 
will be no rain, but contrariwiſe fair weather,or at leaſt ſuch moderate,gentle ſhowers 
as ſhall be very ſeaſonable and acceptable; aud if Yenw be free from impediment, 
when ſhe is thus aſpeted of the *Aſoop, and fortunate, and not in moiſt ſigns nor 
manſions, there ſhall not be any rain on their then Configuration,whether it be Com- 
;zzattion or Aſpec, but clowds and dews. 


Andif ſhe immediately apply to Mercary and they be in moiſt ſigns and manſi- Ty ateycuy. 


ons, there ſhal} be continual rain and that dayly , efpecially if Saturn and Mrs doe 
then behold them ; alſo if Venus have then any dignity in.the place of the Conjur- 
tion or Aſpect of the Moon and Mercury, there ſhall be unuſual wet weather; ſo 
likewiſe if (when the Sw» and the Moon are in (onjunttion) Mercury be alſo in the 
fame _ with them ina moiſt ſignand and manſion and apply to Venus ; And if 
you finde theſe Configurations in- other manſions and ſigns, you ſhall alſo judge 
wet weather is threatned , but not ſo abundantly: And if Mercury and the 
Moon be alone in Conjunition or Aﬀpet, dews and gentle ſhowers are moſt com- 
monly produced ; but if J«piter behold them when they are in Conjunttion, or Mer- 
cury at any time, he ſhall cauſe much rain and windes according to the nature ofthe 
ſigns and manſions; and thus much ſhall ſuffice to be ſaid of the oo» her ap- 
plication to the other Planets, having been immediately before in Conjunttion or Op- 
poſition of the S#n ; I know the Antients have been more large, but I queſtion whither 
all cheir rules wil{ be agreeable to the nature of the Climate wherein we live ; where- 
fore if what hath been already delivered unto thee, and what is beneath on this par- 


ticular further ſaid, be not infallible rules forthe judgeing of weather as I ſaid before, 


being very intricate, eſpecially in Iſlands, I ſhall deſire thee lovingly to accept of my 
weak indeavoursand well wiſhes to the propagation of this Divine Science, and 
alſo to ſtudy (by a diligent obſervation and trial of theſe rules and others thou ſhalt 
in thy practiſe find out) to perfe& ſome rules which may exactly and infallibly point 
out unto us the true ſtate of the weather in any quarter of the year, or day in any 


QUAITEr, 
P p 2 CHAP, 


To Ven if in aiery or watry ſigns and moiſt manſions, without doubt rai will To Fenus; 
thereon follow, (but it will not be ſo much, if the ſigns be aiery) eſpecially ifthey ' 


q —— © 
n_ 


. — in ”. Tee NS ":; > hors pero are 
OREP Yon wr RON os on => pee 
JOYI9- woe wy aw ow 9. © <2 _ Rs * _ » _ F 


Rs... 
5 Is 
P L* 
——__— 


TY 8 . Fn ave 
%. at#« Mgr + © 
MK+..oe pr wp ed 
> WES. 4 - __ 


De 


. 4 % MN . FLY 
* uf Oe Ws 
_ ” "Y x _ 


296 


» Aſtrologia «Munaa. Lib. 4. 


CHAP. XIII. 


Teaching by other 'Rules how to judge of the alteration of the Ayr, and 
to know when Kain is to be expefted. 


you require judgement, and place the Planets rherein being (reduced to the 

A. - time of the day) and ſee what Planets arethen in Conunttion or Aﬀpet with 
the Sw» and oor, eſpecially if the figure be made at any Lunation, for it it be 7«- 
piter or Venus and they corporally joined to the Su» and Moon, or Zupreer in a Sex- 
tile or Trine of them, and they be then free fromthe Conjunttion and Aſpect of all 
the Malevolents, neither apply unto them after their ſeparation from 7-p:ter, it is 
an aſſured teſtimony of fair weather ; but if 7«prrer behold them by a 5quare or 
Oppoſition; and they free alſo from the Malevolent Configurations of the Infortunes 
(as hath been ſaid) he ſhall denote gentle pleaſant ſhewers. Bur if any of the Ma- 
levolent Planets, eſpecially Saturz be in Afpect with them, or Conjuxttioy, although 
by Sextile or Trine, or they apply unto him after their C ozx»#:0n, eſpecially if by 
Square or Oppoſition, rain ſhall inevitably follow, for it is the natural property of 
the Malevolents to difturb and thicken the Ayr with offenſive groſs vapours, 2s it 1s 
the diſpoſition of the fortunes ro diſperſe them and clear the ayrthezeof, reliſting 


the quality ofthe Malevolents. | 
Now you muſt know, that —_— Venns be one of the fortunes, yet doth ſhe 


by reaſon of her moiſt nature diſpoſe the ayr and weather to moiſture, eſpec;ally 
if ſhe be in any Configuration with the $# in moiſt ſigns and manlions, or have 
any commixture or participation with the malevolents, but yet ſhe ſeldome ſends 
noiſome or unſeaſonable wet weather, unleſs, when ſhe participates with the infor- 
tunes ſhe be then alſo very weak and afflifted, for then ſhe is not able to leſſen their 
malicious influence, | 

If the Sn bein the South part of heaven and Yenws under his beams, and the 
Moon bethen in Conjunttion with either of them, eſpecially with ex, or apply- 
ing unto her by any Aſpet , you ſhall aſſuredly judge when that Configura- 
tion is, viz. that very day and hour there ſhall berain and ſhewers, and it then 
Mercury alſo bein the ſame part of Heaven applying to the Toon by Conjunttron 
or Aſpe&, itſhall prenote rain, eſpecially if the Aſoon be in Scorpio : ſo alſo if 
Mars and Venus be in Conjunttion, {eſpecially allo in Scorpio; and when the yun is 
in e-Lquaries and the Aoon applying by Oppoſotion unto him, and Yenrs be alſo 
placed as aforeſaid, you ſhall judge rain at that yery hour, ſo alſo when A7ars ap- 
plyes at that time to either the Sw»: or Venus, and the Moon in Square or Oppoſirion 
of the S»», and when Venus applyes unto the Sw» ,and Mercury then allo in Con- 
zu»ttion with her or ſhe with him, rain is to he expeRed at that very inſtant ; again, 
if the Sun be in Libra, and Yer in Sagittar:ws inthe ſame number of degrees , 
and the Mecon applying, eſpecially to Venus , that very day and hour you may 
predi& rain; alſo when the $7 is either in Aries or Aquaries and the en in 
Oppoſition unto him many ſhewers follow in that day from the hour of their 
Oppoſition ; judge the ſame if the Moon be in > agitary, yet Leois a cauſe of more 
ſhewers a great deal; alſo if the aforeſaid Configurations be out of the houſes of 
Mars and Veras, judge the ſame, viz, wet-weather, alſo chunder, lightning, rain jn 
Sreat drops, and ſometimes. hail: Again, if the Sz» be in Aries or Pi/ces, and 
the Moon in Libr: or Virgo, or Sagittary, there ſhall be ſhewers in that hour 
wherein they come to a Partil Gppofition or Sqwere; In like manner if Venus and 
Mercury in any of the aforeſaid places behold the $7 out of Leo, and the Aces 


apply 


> Ou muſt ſtill remember to ere&t your Figure for the exa& time for which 


Lib. 4.  » Aſtrologia <Nunda. 


apply alſo then unto him, eſpecially if ſhe bein Leo, it ſignifies many flaſhes of 


lightning and thunder, yet little or no rain, eſpecially if they are in Partil Cox- 
junttion or Aſpet; alſo if the Yun bein Aries, Leo, Libra, Scorpio or Aquaries, 
and the Moo in a right diameter joined unto him by Conjunttion or Aſpet, or to 
Venus by Oppoſition trom either Ares or Libra, it denotes after rain many flaſhes 
of lightning and thunder : Lattly, if the 5» or the Aſoon be in Piſces no wiſe up- 
| held or aſpected of the fortunes, and Mars do then behold them with a \quare 
or Oppoſition, it (hews there will follow much rain, thunder and flaſhes of light- 
ning. 

But you are hereto note that there are ſome places of the Zodsack called Places 
of rain, and again others which are not altogether ſo effe&tual; thoſe which moſt 
conduce and incline to rain, are (acer, Leo, Capricorn and Aquaries, for if the 
Moon be in any of them and corporally joined to Venus, or by any Aſpect doth 
participate of her nature, and their beams touch each other within one degree 
cither before or after the Partil Conjunttion, or Aſpett, eſpecially if the Aſpe& be 
a Square or Oppoſition, there ſhall follow many ſhewers, but you are to take no- 
tice that the firſt 15 degrees of Capricors is leſs effetual, or conduceth leaſt to 
rain of any of the other, and the ſat fifteen degrees inclines rather to cold, ſothar 
you are warily to judge according to diſcretion ; thoſe places that are leſs effe- 
ctual are the laſt term of Aries, and the (igns Gemini, Virgo and Libra. 

And here for the manifeſtation of the ſecret and admirable power and influence 
of the Heavens, Stars and Planets, I may juſtly reprehend ſuch as deny their influ- 
ences on Sublunaries by theſe ordinary and common ſigns of rain; As, 

The unuſual crowing of the Cock, v:z. at times unaccuftomed, denotes rain : Alſo 


297 


Ordinary 
ſts ns of the 


inordinate ſwelling of the Seas, Kivers, and other waters, in calm and moderate wea- ,,...1.. ., 

ther : The ſtraightneſs of doores and windows: The noyſe and trumpeting ſound of weather, or 

Peacocks : The crying of Fowles about waters : The crying and whining of Swiye ; tokens of rain, 
r 


The abſence of Sea and Water-fow! from the Sea, and frequenting the Land : And 
Land-fowle frequenting the water : The chirping of Sparrows 'in a morning, viz. 
about Sun-riſing or a little after : The ſudden motion of Beaſts out of one place in- 
to another, and their making then a noyſe : The frequent licking of their feet and 
hoofs ; and this is very remarkable in the (ar, who ſtill before rain and tempe- 
ſtuous weather, will run up and down the houſe, turning over and over, and playing 
with her tail, and aſcend up by hangings, beds,or ſuch like tothe root of the room; and 
this ſhe will do very often together, although each time ſhe endangereth her ſelt by 
deſcending : Even as though (and as I indeed conceive it) ſhe were by the influence 
of the Heavens conſtrained to ſuch mad freakiſh actions : You may alſo obſerve 
that theſe creatures make a great ſtir at ſuch times in licking their feet, and rubbing 
their feet about their viſape and head, whence the vulgar uſually ſay at ſuch times, 
The Cat waſheth her face, &c. The greedy feeding of Beaſts allo denotes rain : and 
their ſauffing up the ayr with their head held up againft the wind : The reſorting of 
Poultry to their rooſt being covered with duſt : Theegreſlion of Worms out of the 
Earth: The tumbling and rubbing &:" Dogs in the duſt : The buſie heaving of 
Moules : The quick pratling of the Crow : The high flight of Birds: The cloſe 
flying of the Swa//ow to the water, and the flapping of her wings therein : The 
buſie working of the Spider in her web: Alſo the buſineſs of the Ar with her 
Egges : The ſound of Bels when they are heard further then uſually ; The inordi- 
vate ſweating of Srones in dry weather : The hankering of Bees about home in fair 
weather: The exceſlive pain of Corxs and old ſores and wounds in men and women 
which are either very great, or not well cured : The buſineſs of F-wls in pruning 
themſelves, eſpecially if it be in winter. And here I would have the Reader to 
take notice, that unleſs they be ſeen to ſqueeſethe ſmall Puſtule ( as it were) that 
prone on their rump, and then anoint their feathers by {lightly ftroaking their 

ils thereon, it is no certain ſign of rain, for in their time of moultring they will 
prune and peck their feathers all day long; but in-this Puſtule (as I may call it for 


the reſemblance it hath therewith) there is a certain unctious matter or ms” ſub- 
| ANnce 


+ 208 © Aſtrologia M unaa. Lib.4; 


ſtance wherewith they ſmooth their feathers and anoint them, be better ro keep 
out the wet, and this thou mayeſt eaſily perceive to be true by taking a feather and 
pulling it afunder with your m_ gently, and you will ſoon ſee how the beards on 
the edges thereof will ſtick rogether. | ; 

I might here inſtance many more ſuch like ordinary ſigns of the mutacions of 
the Ayr ; but ſince I deſire not to be tedious, and to the judicious and ſearchers of 
Nature, many ſuch like teſtimonies will be frequently offered to their contide- 
rations, I ſhall here deſiſt, deriding ſuch as ſhall deny by their ignorance the ad- 
mirable and powerful vettues of the Heavens, Stars and Celeſtial Planets, being 
convinced even by theſe bruit creatures, Fowls, creeping things, and the very itones ; 
wherefore ſuch muſt needs be concluded worſe, or at beſt no better then Stocks, Dolts 


or Aſles, 


CnaPe KEY. 


| Shewing Haly bus ſudgement on Weather and the alteration of 

the Afr. | 
How to judge E are to judge and know the alteration and Mutation of the 
of the altera. E Ayr and Weather from the various Configurations and Poſiti- 


ons of the Planets at certain times,eſpecially at the Con unttiox 
and prevention of the Luminaries before the Sx his entrance 
MW into Aries,whoſe'Aſcendents are chiefly to be regarded,and the 
MW places of the Conjunition and Oppoſition, allo the places of the 
P Luminaries in the figure at the Ingreſs of the S»z into Aries , 
_—d and the places of the Planets in theſe aforeſaid Scheams, 

So that if Satzrn be in any of the Angles from the Aſcendent or in any of the 
Angles from the Lord of the Aſcendent, ſtrong and eſſentially dignified, eſpecially 
in the mid Heaven, he ſignifies a various and divers temper of Ayr, thick and dark 
clowds; and in hot weather he leſſeneth the heat, nts winter or cold weather 
the cold is by him augmented and increaſed ; but if he be not.in an Angle, the 
rimes ſhall be more ſtable and natural; alſoif Satzr» be in any of the Angles from 
the Lord of the Aſcendent, he ſhall not work ſo forcibly his effeRs as when he is in 
any Angle from the Aſcendent it ſelf. 

And if Mars be located as you have heard of Satary, eſpecially in the mid- 
Heavens, the heat in Summer ſhall be increaſed and augmented, and the cold in 
Winter diminiſhed and abated, and the Spring and Autumn alſo ſhall incline rather 
to heat then cold. — 

If Fwpiter, Venus or the Moon be fo placed, they cauſe a temperate, good and 
wholeſome ayr , and cauſe every thing to grow, increaſe and frufifie well and 
kindely that is ſown or planted in the Earth. | 

Again, If Mercury be found as aforeſaid, viz. in the mid-Heaven in the figure 
of the Preventional Conjunction or Oppoſition, 1n an aierylign and any of the In- 
fortunes in any of his Angles, it denotes much change of « great and high 
winds and very hurtful ; in like manner judge the contrary if > wy nd any of the For- 
tunes inany of his Angles, or he in any Angle from them, for this ſigntfies the ſame 
as if they were in Conjwnction. | 

Wherefore if any Planet be in an Angle or ſuccedent Houſe from the Aſcendent of 
the Preventional Conjwunction, make him your Significator, & then ſee what commix- 
ture he hath with Sarzrn and Har: or either of them ; forif he be in a Square of 
Har; or Oppoſition,or (onjunttion,and Mar: be ina fiery ſign, heat in Summer ſhall 
be 


tion of the ayr 
at any time of i 
the year. WEL 


Lib.z. eA ſlrologia <NAunda. 299 


be augmented,and in \Winter cold abated ; alſo if the commixture with him be by a 
> extile.or Trine and ar; bein any fiery ſign, he denotes the ſame but not ſo effe- 
ctually. 

Alfo if its commixture be with Yararn by Conjunttion, Square or Oppoſition, and 
Satra be in cold, watry or earthy figns, the cold in Winter ſhall be increaſed and 
the heat in Summer diminiſhed ; alſo if it be by Sextile or 7 rize, and Saturn be in 
any of che atoreſaid Signs , he ſhall alſo ſignifie the ſame, but not ſo powerfully ; 
and if *4:zrn be in aiery Signs which are hot and moiſt, and the commixture with 
the S1gmificator be by « onjwntt:on, Square or Oppoſition , it ignifieth the ayr 
ſhall be temperate and good, and 4f it be by Searz/e or Trizeit ſhall be the 
better. | 

Alfo if 47ars have commixture with the Significator, and he be in Earthy Signs 
which are cold and dry, or in watery which are cold and moiſt, and it be by { o- 
'unttion, Square or Oppoſition,the ayr will be good and temperate, but if it be by Sex- 
rile or Trixe, it will be much the betrer, and will more effectually produce the fruits 
and ſeeds of the Earth. 

See alſo in the aforeſaid figure of the Conjaxion you have chief regard tothe Part 
of Aw or Weather,ard make it participate in judgment with your Significator; And if 
viou finde Saturn or Mars afrer the fame manner placed , and in Aſpect therewith , 
judge according as you have heard of the Significator. You are to take this part from tq,y © talc 
the place and degree wherein Mercury is, (ifhe be not in his own Houſe,) to the part of ayr «; 
degree of the Lord of the Houſe wherein he is, to which you mutt yet adde the de- weather, ac 
gre aſcending, and ſo proje& it fromthe Aſcendent, and there ſhall be your part ©2i"3*9 
where the number ends; But if 1/ercury bein his own Houſe, take only the Sign, 7 
Zegree and Minute wherein he is, and by adding the Aſcendent and projecting it 
: 7u ſhall tinde it where your number ends : But if God ſpare me life and opportu- 
nity, I ſhall for thy benefit and the good of poſtericy take ſome pains to deliver thee 
the manner and way of taking any Part either by night or day belonging to any 
of the Planets,or the Signification of any of che 12 Houſes, ina treatiſe by it ſelf, as 
alſo the uſes of them, &c. 

To be ſhort, if you would judge of the alteration of the ayr for any quarter of 
the Year, ere&t your figures for the S#», his ingreſs into Aries, Carcer, Libra, 
and Capricorn and according to the ſame method judge ; if for any or every moneth, 
ſee when he enters the firſt Punctum of every Sign; it for any day, have re- 
gard to Pars dierum or Part of dayes whicly is taken from the place of the Sux to j;,, ch . 
the place of Satwura, (or more plainly ſubſtra& the place of Satwrn from the place pays 4c, 1, 
of the Sw) and adde the place of the 1ſoon , and fee where your number of or pai: of 
Signs, Negrees and Minutes ends, and there ſhall be your Pars dreram, and this £395: 
muſt he taken at the punctuall appearance of the Su» his ariſing above our 
Horizon. 

\Wherefore if 1ercary, behold this part or be corporally joined thereunto, in 
that dav there ſhall be much winde, eſpecially if the 4ſ09» be then alſo with 
him, and Venxs have alſo any Aſpect thereunto ; for then the more aſſured will 
this judgement be. | 

There is alfo another way to judge of the Diurnal mutation of the ayr, which is 
to obſerve exactly the time of the 1oon her entring inro the firſt point of any ſign ; 
and having erected the figure of the Heavens far that moment ſee what Planet A- 
ſpeteth or 1s located within five degrees of the Cuſpe thereof, and make him Sig- 
mficator of the ſtate of the weather during the time the <A7o0» 1s 1n that ſign, and 
according to his ſtrength and Configurations with the other Planets judge as you 
have heard according to diſcretion. 

Thus have you been taught the alteration of the Ayr for any time of the Year, To to judge 
Moneth, Day, &c. It reſteth now you alſo know how to judge of Thunder, Light- ery oF 
ning and Winds ; And this we are to require from the S*» his ingreſs into the gy? :. = 
twenty degree and one minute of Scorpio, for the which time having creed the 
figure of the Heavens, and placed all the Planets therein being exactly reduced to 

the 


l 


2 


- R <2 


FIR 4" -—<m_ 


mh... 


3 q / % _ wo 
+: VE B 
—— OC 8 
I IS CERES recs 


298 o Aſtrologia eM unda. Lib.4; 


ſtance wherewith they ſmooth their feathers and anoint them , be better ro keen 
out the wet, and this thou mayeſt eaſily perceive to be true by taking a feather and 
pulling it afunder wich your fingers gently, and you will ſoon ſee how the beards on 
the edges thereof will ſtick rogerher. h , 

I might here inftance many more ſuch like ordinary ſigns of the mutacions of 
the Ayr ; but ſince I deſire not to be tedious, and to the judicious and ſearchers of 
Nature, many ſuch like teſtimonies will be frequently offered to their conſide- 
rations, I ſhall here deſiſt, deriding ſuch as ſhall deny by their ignorance the ad- 
mirable and powerful vertues of the Heavens, Stars and Celeſtial Planets, being 
convinced even by theſe bruit creatures, Fowls, creeping things, and the very ſtones ; 
wherefore ſuch muſt needs be concluded worſe, or at beſt no betcer then Stocks, Dolts 
or Aſles. 


CnaT KEV. 


Shewing Haly hs judgement on Weather and the alteration of 
the Afr. 


E are to judge and know the alteration and Muratic, 
Ayr and Weather from the various Configurations a 
ons of the Planets at certain times,eſpecially at the C 
and prevention of the Luminaries before the Sx hi. 
into Arie:whoſe'Aſcendents are chiefly to be regarde! 

$ places of the Conjunttion and Oppoſition, alſo the place 

Luminaries in the figure at the Ingreſs of the S#» into 

| and the places of the Planets in theſe aforeſaid Scheams. 
So that if Satzryn be in any of the Angles from the Aſcendent or in any of the 
Angles from the Lord of the Aſcendent, ſtrong and eſſentially dignified, eſpecially 

-1n the mid Heaven, he ſignifies a various and divers __— of Ayr, thick and dark 
clowds; and in hot weather he lefſeneth the heat, and in winter or cold weather 
the cold is by him augmented and increaſed ; but if he be not in an Angle, the 
times ſhall be more ſtable and natural; alſo if Satzr» be in any of the Angles from 
the Lord of the Aſcendent, he ſhall not work ſo forcibly his effeRs as when he is in 
any Angle from the Aſcendent it ſelf. 

And if Mars be located as you have heard of Satnrn, eſpecially in the mid- 
Heavens, the heat in Summer ſhall be increaſed and augmented, and the cold in 
Winter diminiſhed and abated, and the Spring and Autumn alſo ſhall incline rather 
to heat then cold. - 

If Zapiter, Venus or the Icon be fo placed, they cauſe a temperate, good and 
wholeſome ayr , and cauſe every thing to grow, increaſe and fructifie well and 
kindely that is ſown or planted in the Earth. 

Again, If Aercwry be found as aforeſaid, viz. in the mid-Heaven in the figure 
of the Preventional Conjunction or Oppoſition, in an aierylign and any of the In- 
fortunes in any of his Angles, it denotes much change of Ayr, great and high 
winds and very hurtful ; in like manner judge the contrary if you nd any of the For- | 
tunes in any of his Angles, or he in any Angle from them, for this ſignifies the ſame 
as if they were in Conjunction. | 

Wherefore if any Planet be in an Angle or ſuccedent Houſe from the Aſcendent of 
the Preventional Conjxrction, make him your Significator, & then ſee what commix- 
ture he hath with Sarzrn and Hears or either of them ; forif he be in a Square of 
Hars or Oppoſition,or ('onjunttion,and Mars be ina fiery ſign, heat in Summer ſhall 
| be 


How to judge 
of the altera. 6 
tion of the ayr 
at any time of 
the year, VZ 


hm. ws ws tant 


Lib.4. _ eAſtrologia VAdunda. 299 


be augmented, and in \Winter cold abated ; alſo if the commixture with him be by a 
> excile.or Trime and 47s; bein any fiery lign, he denotes the fame but not lo effe- 
ctually. 

Alſo if its commixture be with Sararn by Conjunttion, Square or Oppoſition, and 
Satura be in cold, watry or earthy figns, the cold in Winter ſhall be increaſed and 
the heat in Surnmer diminiſhed, alſo if it be by Sextile or 7 rize, and Saturn be in 
any of the aforeſaid Signs , he ſhall alſo ſignifie the ſame, but not ſo powerfully ; 
and it *4:zrn be in aiery Signs which are hot and moiſt, and the commixture with 
the Sigmticator be by « onjuntt:on , Square or Oppoſition , it Iignifieth the ayr 
ſhall be remperate and goud, and if it be by Seari/e or Tr:izeit ſhall be the 
better. | 

Alto if urs have commixture with the Significator, and he be in Earthy Signs 
which are cold and dry, or in watery which are cold and moitt, and it be by { ox- 
'nnttion, Square Or Oppoſition,the ayr will be good and temperate, but if it be by Sex- 
rile or 7rixc, it will be much the betrer, and will more effetually produce the fruits 
and ſeeds of the Earth. | 

See alſo in the aforeſaid figure of the Conjaxion you have chief regard to the Pare 
of Aw or Weather,and make it participate in judgment with your Significator; And if 
vou finde Saturn: or Mars afrer the fame manner placed , and in Aſpect therewith , 
judge according as you have heard of the Signiticator. You are to take this part from t3,y 5 tal 
ts place and degree wherein Mercary is,  (ifhe be not in his own Houſe,) to the part of ayr «; 

- of the Lord of the Houſe wherein he is, to which you mutt yet adde the de- weather, ac 

ending, and fo projet it fromthe Aſcendent, and there ſhall be your part -—— a 

e number ends; But if 1Zercury bein his own Houſe, take only the Sign, oo 

d Minute wherein he is, and by adding the Aſcendent and projecting it 

finde it where your number ends : But if God ſpare me life and opportu- 

| for thy benefit and the good of poſterity take ſome pains to deliver thee 

r and way of taking any Part either by night or day belonging to any 

nets,or the Signification of any of the 12 Houſes, ina treatiſe by ir ſelf, as 

uſes of them, &c. 

5 be ſhort, if you would judge of the alteration of the ayr for any quarter of 

e Year, erect your figures for the S#», his ingreſs into Aries, Carcir, Libra, 

and Capricorn and according to the ſame method judge ; if for any or every moneth, 

ſee when he enters the firlt Punctum of everv Sign; it for any day, have re- 

gard to Pars dierum or Part of dayes which is taken from the place of the Sw to ;3,, ., 4. a 
the place of Satarn, (or more plainly ſubſtra&k the place of Satzrn from the place pa,s 4c, 
of the $#z) and adde the place of the 4400», and fee where your number of or pair of 
Signs, Negrees and Minutes ends, and there ſhall be your P-rs dreram, and this ©3Y5- 
muſt he taken at the punctuall appearance of the Sz his ariſing above our 
Horizon. 

Wherefore if 1ercaury behold this part or be corporally joined thereunto, in 
that dav there ſhall be much winde, eſpecially if the ſo.» be then alſo with 
him, and Yenzs have alſo any Aſpect thereunto ; for then the more aſſured will 
this judgement be. 

There is alfo another way to judge of the Diurnal mutation of the ayr, which is 
to obſerve exactly the time of the 7100» her entring inro the firit point of any ſign ; 
and havingerected the figure of the Heavens far that moment ſee what Planet A- 
ſpecteth or is located within five degrees of the Cuſpe thereof, and make him Sig- 
mficator of the ſtate of the weather during the time the ©A7o0» 15 1n that ſign, and 
according to his ſtrength and Configurations with the other Planets judge as you 
have heard according to diſcretion. 

Thus have you been taught the alteration of the Ayr for any time of the Year, ow *O judge 
Moneth, Day, &c. It reſteth now you alſo know how to judge of Thunder, Light- hemp H 
ning and Winds ; And this we are to require from the S»» his ingreſs into the y?, :. 
twenty degree and one minute of Scorpio, for the which time having ereted the 
ficure of the Heavens, and placed all the Planets therein being exactly reduced to 

the 


2 


4; 
| 


as 


Ry 
» —_— 
£4 


X "Wm noe tou” RT - 


a <'Y 


ZOO 


When rain is 
tG be ex- 


pecd, 


- nifieth detriment in the ay 


eAſlrologia eM unda. Lib.4. 
the time of the day or night, have _ to 7apiter, Venus and Mevenry, and if you 
finde them all Occidental or Retrograde , judge there ſhall be much rain and wet 
weather that year. 

Look then if Aars be in any of the Angles,eſpecially inthe tenth Houſe in an aiery 
ſign, andin any Configuration of Mercury, he ſignifies thtinder, Aaſhes of light- 
ning, and tempeſtuous ttorms of rain that year, yet ſometimes without rain, they ſigni- 
fie alſo an unwholſome ayr ; but if Mars be in the fourth Houſe in anearthy ſign,and 
the Fortunes ſtrong and in Configuration with Mercury , it lignifies Earth-quakes, 
fiery apparitions inthe ayr and ftrange ſights; alſo damage to the Mines of the 
Earth ; but if £3/ar- be in the fourth in a fiery ſign, it denotes an obnoxious hurt- 
ful ayr to the Earth, and feeds thereof, and the corn and fruirs ſhall be ſcorched and 
burntup; alſo if he bein a watry ſign in the fourth , he denotes a diminution and 
ſcarcity of waters and detriment to Fiſhes and ſuch as Navigate; but if the For- 
runes be in Configuration with him, damage and miſchief by Thunder ſhall be leſ- 
ſened . but if they do no wiſe behold him, that year there will be miſchief by Thander 
and Lightning. 

Moreover if Satary be there, in the ſtead of Mary, and in the tenth Houſe in an 
aiery ſign, and in any Aſpect of Mercary, and no wiſe aſſiſted by the Fortunes, it ſig- 
r, and much hurtful rain, and that for ſome continuance ; 
but if he be in the fourth Houſe, as hath been faid in an earthy ſign, and in any 
Configuration with 2ercury, and no wiſe beheld by the Fortunes, there ſhall happen 
Farth-quakes, and there ſhall be much black water upon the Earth and the like ; Hu 
if he be in a watry ſign in the fourth poſited as aforeſaid, and not at all helped by 
the Fortunes, there ſhall be a ſcarcity of waters, and all things abiding there! , 
whither living creatures or other things, ſhall ſuffer detriment ; alſo if he be ior 
earthy ſign placed in the ſame manner , he ſignifies damage to the Earth, and 
the things thereon and growing out of it : But if AMercary do not behold him by 
any Configuration, neither be joined bodily ro him, the aforeſaid Significations 
ſhall not be ſo grievous, but more tolerable ; and if he be beheld of the Fortunes, 
the miſchief will be yer leſs and leſs ; andif by a Sexrile or 7rive, and they ſtrong 
eſſentially, it will be totally taken away. | 

Note that every Planet hath its own peculiar property ; for the ſuperiour are as 
Spirits, the inferiour as bodies, of which all thecorrupton and generation in the 
World hath participation, by their Configurations aud Commixtions one with 
another according to the preordination and will of God. 

Moreover the radix from which you are to judge of the alteration of the ayr, is 
the Aſcendent of the Conjunttion or prevention of the Luminaries before the In- 
greſs of the Sx» into every ſign ; and have regard to the Lord alſo of the Aſcendent 
and the I ord of the place of the Conjunttiou or Prevention; for if theſe places and 
their Lords be in moiſt ſigns and manſions, it ſignifieth wet weather ſhall follow 3 alſo 
if the Sigrificator in chief be Occidental, Retrograde or ſlow in motion, it ſignifies 
rain, and ſo alſo if he be Combuſt, unleſs 27ars hinder it ; for he being Combuſt 
hindereth and prohibiteth rain ; Alſo note that if the chief Significator be deſcen- 
ding in Latitude or in his Epicycle, Ire ſignifieth rain, and fo on the contrary if he 
be aſcending; Moreover note, that when rain is occaſioned by the Signification 
of the Inforcunes, it is ſtill hurtful; if it be Sarzrn, he ite eruptions and 
over-''owings of water ; if Mars. he cauſeth for the moſt part extraordinary 
hear. 
Now if thou wouldſt know when it is moſt probable and likely to rain, accor- 
ding to Haly have regard unto the chief Significator of rain; for if he be in an 
Angle from the Aſcendent, or entring therein , judge rain at thattime ; as al- 
ſo to the Ingreſs of the S#n into the twentieth degree and one minute of Scorpio, 
and fee what Planets ſignifying rain that year are received of him , and eſpeci- 
ally of the  14o0n, and which he isin Conjunttion, Square or Oppoſition with ; tor up- 
on thoſe days wherein theſe Configurations happen, rain is to be expected ; but if 


theſe Aſpects be without reception,the rain will not be of long continuance nor very 
much, More- 


Lib.4. » Aſtrologia <XAunda. 301. 


Moreover if the Significator be in an Angle as hath been ſaid, and in Conjuntion 
with the Moon, it ſignifies Rain, Thunder, Lightning, Earth-quakes, and ſuch | 
like; bur if you would know what rain is to be expected for all the year, have re- Of the ſtare of 
gard unto Venus, Mercury and the A1con, and if you finde them all in {onjwnttion in the weather 
P:;ſces atthe time of the Revolution of the year, it ſignifieth rain, moiſture and f***he whole 
many clouds that year ; but if they be ſo joined in Aries or T awriw , the year ſhall?***: 
be dry,and ſhall want rain. 

Aſſo if YVexws apply to /ercnry in any of bis Houſes, *it ſignifieth much rain , 
and that of continuance that year ; ſo likewiſe if the 4-02 be in Oppoſition to ei- 
ther the Swn, Saturn or Venws, it fignifieth much rain and dark clouds that year ; 
alſo when Mercury and Vern are in one and the ſame term, there ſhall be great 

rain; andif itbe ina moiſt ſign, and the 170» ina Sextile or Trine of them, there 
will be tempeſtuous ſtorms and rain, until one of them go out of the aforeſaid term : 
alſo at thetime ofthe Sn his Ingreſs into 1ries, if Saturn be in Square or Oppe- 
fition of him or of the IMoor, or Fupiter and Mercury, or Venus and Mars fo 
poſiced , much rain is tobe expected in that year, eſpecially if the Aſpe&t be by 
Oppoſition, and they be in Reception by Houſe ; for this is Opening of Gates or 
Windows , as you have heard: Alſo if YVenxs be before the Swn, it ſignifieth 
there will be many clouds that year , dews and moiſture of ayr, _ but little 
ain. 
And if Venus be retrograde whileft the Sw» is in eAries or T aurns, there ſhall 
be much rain that year, eſpecially in the Spring; bur if ſhe beRetrograde in Ca- 
pricorn, Aquaries of Piſces, there ſhall not be ſo much rain in the Spring, but very 
much in the Winter. . 

Moreover when Mercury is ſtationary, in what ever ſign it be, he denotes a moiſt 
ayr, rain and clouds according to the ſeaſon ; alſo many ſtorms and tempeſtuous 
ſhowers follow when Openers of Gates and the Significators of rain are placed 
in moiſt and watry ſigns; alſo if Yenzs be fo poſited judge the' ſame; alſo if 
Mercury be in a fiery dry ſign, and the ſoon and Venus in watry and moiſt 
ſigns, there ſhall be temperate and moderate rain; and if Saturn behold them 
and he being in a cold ſign, there will be rain and ſnow and much cold with an ob- 
ſcure and dark ayr. 

And thus much ſhall ſuffice to be ſaid rouching the judgement of the weather 
and alteration of the ayr by the Poſitions and Configurations of the Planets and 
Stars the ſecondary cauſes of all ſublunary accidents ; if theſe rules in every par- 
ticular hold not, endeavour thou the more to finde out the truth , and let my 
failings be rather an incouragement to thee to ſearch further into the ſecrets of 
Nature ; wherefore I ſhall ſay no more on this point in this Nature, but con- 
clude our laft Chapter touching the alteration of the ayr with ſome particular 
obſervations from the aforeſaid cauſes, wh ch are common and may be obſerved 


even by the moſt illiterate and rural Peſant that &. 


Q q CHAP. 


How to judge 
of weather by 
' the riſing and 
ſetring of the 
YT 


eA flrologta eMunda. © Lib.4. 


Eus*. XY. 


Shewins how to judge of Weather from common Obſercvation of the 
riſing and ſetting of the Sun, colour of the Moon , appearance 
of the Rain-bow , Comets, Clowds , Brightneſs of the fixed 
Stars, alſo by the prime day, and from the time of the day 
wherein 1Bunder happeneth. 


world ; although it be not alcogether ſo Afﬀrological as the preceding Chap- 
rers are, yet by reaſon it containeth Obſervations deduced from the Stars 
and other Superiour things, it cannot be abſolutely rejeRted as not agrecing with 
our diſcourſe and ſubje ; beſides lince it may very well be an help both tor the 
plainneſs and certainty thereof,to ſuch as perhaps are not of ſufficient capacity to at- 
rain to the perfetion of what we have ſet down before; 1 have adventured to give 
them to underftand thus much. | 
That when the Sz riſeth clear and bright in our Horizoy, it denotes a pleaſant 
day ; but fowl weather, if then he be overcaſt with a thin cloud ; if he ſet being free 
from clouds, a fair night followeth; alſo being then divers coloured , his beams 
15, Hoon red, denotes windes the next day from that part or quarter of heaven ; 
his beams ſpotted, green, black or pale, promiſeth rain that night ; if at his ſettin 
there be one or more circles about him, you are to obſerve whether they are red, 
and here and there broken ; for then he denotes vehement windes that night: if 
obſcured thick and black circles, it ſignifies cold windes and ſnow in Winter ; many 
circles denote winde of what colour foever they are, but the more if they be red ; 
if but one circle be about him and, and that clear and of no continuance, fair wea- 
ther is to beexpected ; underftand the ſame of the 41700 which you have heard of 
the Sx» ; when there is circles about her ; blacknefs in the S&n and ſoon denotes 
rain; redneſs, winde; The elemer.t red inthe morning , ſhews winde and rain to 


] T doth no wiſe ſeem unto me unneceſſary.to deliver this Chapter unto the 


" enſue thatday; the ſame in the Evening declares the contrarF; for the day follow- 


By the col-ur 
of the Mocn. 


By the Rain- 
bow. *© 


By Comets. 


ing is for the moit part then fair ; and in this manner of Prognoſtication we finde the 
Phariſees very expert, as appears in the 16. of Matthew, 

. Alſo if the oor in the third day after the change, and the third day before the 
full,- or jn themidſt of the quarter be found of a red colour, cauſeth windes; pale 
and inclining to blackneſs and muddy obſcurity, brings rain; but being bright 
and clear the end dire& upright and free from circles promiſeth fair weather. 

L ook alſo to the the time when a Rain-bow appears, and by it judge of weather 
thus; if it appear in fair weather, judge fowl will follow; if in fowl, fair will 
follow, this is the opinion of ſome, and it ſtands with very much reaſon to be 
true, if we look to the firſt Ordination thereof in the gof Gen. again if it ap- 
pear in the morning rain and moiſture is thereby portended ; it in the evening, 
fair weather. 

From Comets if we require judgment touching theſe matters,we are to know that 
they never appear bur they bring as well great and terrible alteration in the ayr 
as on the earth ; but of this we ſhall have more occaſion to treat anon in the 
next Section; wherefore here only note that they cauſe = weather and ayr, 
great and high windes, eſpecially if they appear obſcure and cloudy. And their 
power and efficacy judge by their greatneſs, ſmalneſs, length and ſhortneſs ; 
they cauſe alſo ſickneſs by corruption of ayr if they appear in Aiery or Earthy 


figns. 
o When 


Lib.4. eAſtrologia <NAunda. 303 
When you ſee thick clouds and reſembling flocks gathered together in many py clouds. 
places, they denote rain; and ſo do dark, obſcure thick clouds over the North part 
of Heaven declining ro the Weſt; if they appear like hils and ſomewhat above the 
Earth, it ſhews weather over-paſſed; black clouds, promiſe rain ; white clouds ap- 
pearins in \Wuiter two or three days together inthe Eaſt part of Heaven,ſhews cold 
and ſnow. 
When the Stars ſeem to fall which we vulgarly term ſhooting of the Stars , it By Stars. 
prenotes winde in that part ; bur if they ſhoot in many places, or perhaps all over 
the Heavens, Inordinate windes, thunder, lightnings, and very tem ehpous wea- 
ther; and when they ſeem to run along out of one place into necks ,it denotes 
winde ; and that the weathcr ſhall alrer from the temper wherein it is, if but few 
appear, and thoſe obſcure and cloudy ; alſo if they at any time ſeem greater and 
brighter then uſua!, it denotes winde and rain in theſe parts where you ſee ſuch Stars 
appear ; and in Winter they preſage froſts,ſnow and cold weather ; but herein unleſs 
chou art well acquainted with their Natural magnitudes thou mayeſt be deceived 
and canſt never be perfeR, 
Again, you may judge of the weather by the prime day thus ; if it be Monday , By the Prime 
judge moiſt weather; | ueſday, windy and cold ; Wedneſday, very cold ; Thurſday, day. 
fair and clear; Friday, mixt weather ; Saturday, moiſt ; and Sunday, dry. 
Thunder in the Morning alſo denotes winde about Noon ; in the Evening, rain By Thunder, 
and tempeſt ; Thunder alſo in the Winter ſhews terrible accidents and alterations the 
Summer following ; whence the old Proverb, «4 Winters Thunder 11 a Summers wou- 
der ; alſo when in any Summer you finde no Thunder, the Winter following will be 
very unhealchful and obnoxious to all creatures. 
And thus much of the alteration of the ayr and change of weather; Come we 
now to (hew ſome natural reaſons for ſuch thingsas are commonly incident amongſt 
us, and yet their cauſe by many unknown, and ſo haſten to conclude this Seftion, 


CHAP. ACK 


Demonſlrating the Natural cauſe of many Suns , of the Rain-bow, 
Ram, Hall, Eroſt, Snow, Dew, Winde, Earth-quakes, Comets, 
Thunders, Lightnings and the cauſe of the Sun and the Moons 


Eclipſe. | 


way and ſhew my Reader, who hath not waded far into the Ocean of Na- 

- ture, what Hail, Snow, Dew, Winde and the Rain-bow is, and how it comes 

to paſs we have many Suns ſometimes viſible, and Moons ; alſo what Thunder and 

Lightning is, and how we come to haue ſuch ſtrange and new Stars as are Comets 

and the like, and how the S#» and the 1oon become ſometimes eclipſed or 

darkned, that ſo he may not be to ſeek in theſe ordinary and ſmall matters, 
which I believe may ſtumble ſome,more then greater and higher things. 

We ſhall then in order handle each of theſe as they are ſet down in the contents, The reaſon of 
and firſt then we are to take this for an approved rule, that there never appeareth many Suns 
any Parelii or mock-Suns nor mock-WYoons above or beneath the Sw» or Moon, and Moon. 
but on each ſide, and that neither, bur at the Sw»-riſing or ſetting ; and they are 
thus occaſioned, when a thick cloud is gathered together toward the fide of the 
Sun or the Moon in which the broken beams of the Sun or Moon being gathered, 
the very form or faſhion of the Sun os 17999, is repreſented unto us therein 


Q q 2 As 


| [ Eaving now our Aſtrological Diſcourſe, I ſhall here a little ſtep out of the 


304 


The c2uſc cf 


What rain is. 


(now. 


Whar froſt 
and dew. 


What winde. 


and the occah- 


on of Earth- 


quakes, 


What a Co- 


mer, 


What thunder 


» Aſtrologia eMunda. 


Lib. 4. 
As touching the Rain-bow, it is no more then the reflection of the Sux-beams in a 
che Rain bow. cloud that turns tothe contrary vapour. 

Rain is a cold vapour drawn up or exhaled by the attractive faculty of the Sun to, 
the nether part of the middle Region of the Ayr , where being thickened through 


cold it falleth againto the Earth. 
What hail and Hail and Snow are the ſame, only are drawn up higher ; Snow into the middle 


Region,and Hail into the upper,and there condenſed and congealed into the body of 
a cloud, and being diſpoſed by the Configurations of fit Significators deſcendeth. 

In like manner hoar froſt and dew is alſo the ſame vapour., and of the ſame na- 
ture asis rain and the reſt, only not drawn ſo high by the Sz» as to keepup, but when 
he with draws himſelf from our Hemſphere falleth down again, and is by the coldneſs 
of the Earth congealed or reſolved into water which we call dewin Summer, bur'in 
Winter by the ſharpneſs of the ayr it is congealed into froſt, and by reaſon of the 
hoaryneſs of it, is called Hoare froſt. 

Winde alſo 1s but a dry exhalation drawn up from the Earth by the heat of the 
Sun alſo, and diſperſed here and there ; and this is the reaſon of Earth-quakes ; 
for through the gathering together of abundance of theſe vapours in the Concaves 


of the Earth, and from thence violently breaking our, and the Earth cloſing again, 


is the Earth cauſed to ſhake or as it were tremble ; and this is the fore-runner of 
wars for the moſt part in thoſe parts of the Earth. 

Moreover a Comet is a flame cauſed of a dry, hot, ſlimy exhalation, drawn up 
by the $#» to the uppermoſt part of the ayr, the which being diſperſed and broken 
cauſeth high windes ; but more ofthis in the laſt Section, | 

Again, Thunder isa quenching of treina cloud, or an exhalation hot and dry 


and lightning, 1; xt with moiſture, carryed up to the middle Region, and there thickened and 


Signs of 


Earth-quakes 


ro CCMmee. 


The cauſe of 
the $47 his 
Eclipſe, 


wraped into a cloud, where meeting with moiſture being of a contrary quality, it 
breaketh out the ſides of the cloud, and by this its eruption cauſerh a thundering 
noyſe in the ayr ; and this flying out of the fire the vulgar call Lightning ; the which 
eAriſtotle ſaith comes after Thunder ; but I am of opinion they come both together, 
though the ſenſe of ſeeing is more ſuddenly apprehenſive of the light then the hear- 
ing is of the ſound ; becauſe what is conveyed to the Eye is by a dire& line, but 
ro the Ear by anoblique; for at a diſtance we may diſcern a blow before we 
hear it, yet being hard by we ſhall hear it as ſoon as it is given or can be 
ſeen, &c. 

Lightning as ſay ſome Authours, is of marvailous efficacy, and they have made 
mention of three ſorts, Dry, Moiſt, and Clear ; the Dry doth*not burn but cleaveth 
trees through and alſo houſes and the like; the Moiſt doth not burn neither, 
but alkereth colour; the Clear both burneth and deſtroyeth, and is indeed 
the moſt dangerous of all ; for it breaketh the bones, and ſword, and bruiſeth not 
theskin nor breaketh the ſcabbard; and melteth moneyin the purſe, and yet melteth 
not wax, &c 

We are now to give the reaſon of the Eclipſing of both the Luminaries ; but firſt 
T think it very requiſite to ſer down ſome tokens of Earth-quakes to come, which 
are briefly fix; the firſt is when the $S«» is obſcured and darkened without the 
preſence of clonds or the body of the Aoon ; the ſecond token that an Earth-quake 
1sat hand, is when the S»» 1s as it were bloudy and coloured in ſuch a ſtrange 
manner ; the third is when a fiery Pillar, or cloud like a pillar of fire, appears in 
the Heavens; the fourth is when the ayr is very quiet both at Land and Sea for a 
longs continuance and winde abſent; the fifth when waters are ſalt and troubled, 
and of another taſte then uſually and naturally rhey are 3 the ſixth and laſt is 
when ſtrange unaccuſtomed and unuſual noiſes of exclamations of men , howl- 
ng, lamentations, and clatterings of armour are heard, and ſuch ſights ſeen in 
the Ayr. 

And now as touching the Eclipſe of either of the Luminaries, you are to 
know it is only a privation of their light ; that of rhe Sm is occaſioned at the 
conjunion of the Luminaries ( or more plainly at the change of the <Iſoon) 


by 


Lib.4. » Aſtrologia «NAunda. 305 

by the interpolition of the body of the 4-0» betwixt the Sun and the Earth 

averting or turning his beams from us, and ſo the Sun becomes obſcured or darkened 

for that time. 

That ofthe 1/0» by the Diametrical interpoſition of the body of the Earth be- The cauſe of 
eween the $2 and the door, thereby depriving her of the borrowed light ſhe re- the Ifvons 

ceiveth of the Sy, and this is ever upon the Oppoſition of the Luminaries, or vul- =©!ipſe. 

garly at the Full ,1foon ; and truly this deſeR of the Luminaries would happen every Why there are 

change and full, did not the ſoon ſometime deviate from the Ecliptick line five de- nor's Eclipſes 

oy Northward, as afſo ſometimes again as far South-ward,and therefore cannot ſo every moneth, 
iretly meet with the Conjunf7ion and Oppoſition of the Sun who ever moveth in the 

Ecliptick, line or juſt under it 


CHAP. VIiL 


Of the Signification of the moſt notable fixed Stars both fortunate and 
unfortunate in any of the twelve Houſes in Revolutions of the 
Years of the World. 


Names, Nature, Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude of the moſt notable 

fixed Stars ; what are leſs and more obſcure, are not fo needful and re- 
quiſite to be recorded, fince they are of the ſame nature as are the reſt in their con- 
ſtellation ; wherefore what are there expreſſed may ſufficiently ſerve as touching thy 
judgment in the Stars, : 

I ſhall not therefore here at all rehearſe either the names or natures of any 
Star there expreſſed ; onely I ſhall defire thee to be very experi in the ſeveral 
Natures thereof, and .ſo according to their ſeveral Poſitions, ConjunRtions and 
Configurations with the Planets judge either good or bad according to the nature of 
thoſe Stars, Planets and Houſes of Heaven they are 1n. 

As if malevolent, miſchievous and unfortunate Stars, viz. ſuch asare of the The (gnifica- 
nature of Saturn or Mars,or both, be upon the Cuſpe of the Aſcendent, or within tion ot the Ma. 
five degrees thereof or with the Lord of the Aſcendent in ConjunFion Partil, or !<volent fixed 
within five degrees thereof, judge miſchief and damage to the people of that Na- _- _ 
tion for which your Revolution is ſet in one kinde or other ; compare and weigh-' 
exactly the nature of your Significators, wiz. the Stars affliting your Aſcendent 
or its Lord, and you will ſoon diſcover the nature of the evill threatned ; and this 

our own Genius muft teach you ; for all the writings in the World without it will 
be of little or no effe&; it ſignifies alſo diſeaſes in the head, eſpecially if the ſign 
aſcending be eAries. 
If they bein the ſecond Houſe afflitingthe Cuſpe thereof or the Lord thereof [n the ſecond 
or both (as aboveſaid of the Aſcendent ) judge the evill to fall in and to mens« 
eſtates aud riches, eſpecially to the common people who ſhall many of them be 
expoſed to poverty and want, and in ſome meaſure even the Nobles alſo and beli 
of them ſhall have loſſes and croſſes in ſuch matters ; it fignifies alſo that there 
ſhall many maladies and infirmities in the Ears, Throat and Neck, affli mer, 
ſuch as are Impoſtumes, Catarrs and Rheumes, &c. eſpecially if the ſign of the ſe 
cond be T aur. 

If inthe third, the evill ſhall happen to thoſe that go ſhort journies, and they !n a+ :hir 
ſhall be unprofitable ; ſtrife, contentions and diſcords amongſt brethren, neighbors 


and kindred without cauſe or any occaſion given; many grievous infirmities an 
thoſe 


| Ook into the ſecond Book of this Volume and there you ſhall have the 


206 A ſtrolog1a eM und. Lib.4. 
thoſe cheifly in the Arms, Hands, and Shoulders or Shoulder-blades, eſpecially if the 
{rgn of the third be Gemin:. 

Inthe fourth, In thefourth, (as you have heard of the Aſcendent) or in Conjunition with the 
Lord thereof, evill and miſchief is threatned to the Earth and its Fruits ; it ſig- 
nifies alſo wars and contentions amongſt men , and one City and Place with another ; 
alſo diſſentions and quarrels between Fathers and Children , and the end of mens 
actions ſhalt be evill; alſo if any ſhall purchaſe Land, Houſes,or Heritages, they ſhall 
not finde that profit and good therein which they expected ; and there ſhall be 
many Infirmities and diſeaſes in the Breaſts and Lungs and parts adjacent, eſpecially 
if the ſign be (ancer. | 

In the Gfth, Alſo inthe fifth, if they or any of them be found aMicting the Cuſp thereof, or 
its Lord, much evill ſhall happen to Children, Parents ſhall not be 1o affectionate 
and careful asthey ought, Women conceaved ſhall miſcarry, ſuch as are not con- 
ceaved ſhall continue unfruitful, friends alſo and loving acquaintance ſhall diſagree 
and claſh, and Men ſhall ſuffer detriment in and by ſuch things as they moſt de- 
light in, and many infirmities will be incident to man alſo , eſpecially in the Back, 
Reins and Parts or Veſſels of Generation, and in the Stomach,cheifly it the 6gn of 


the fifth be Leo. 
Again, if in che ſixth, &c. miſchief ſhall happen to ſmall Cattel, ſervants of both 


In the fixth. 
ſex; it ſignifieth alſo there ſhall be no gain or profit in Merchandizing and Trading 
in ſmall Cattel, and many infirmities in the Belly and Intrals, ifthe ſign of the fixth 
be Virgo eſpecially. | 

In the ſeventh, 1n the ſeventh or any of them in Conjunfion with the T.ord thereof (as you have 


heard, &c.) denotes wars, diſſentions amongſt great ones, alſo quarrels and diſſen- 
tions amongſt Aſſociates and Lovers, and between Man and Wite, won, and their 
Subjeas and Aſſociates, and they with their King or Superiours, mens hearts ſhall 
be hardned , neither (hall there be any mercy or pity amongſt them , nor faith 
nortruth ; and promiſes,tyes and proteſtations ſhall be violated and lightly eſteemed, 

and men ſhall not care tor the uſe of their Trade . Profeſſion or Calling, bur 

ſhall be given to looſeneſs; and it ſignifieth alſo there ſhall be many Inftirmities 
in the Bladder , ' Ureters and Reins, efpecially if the fign of the ſeventh be 

L:bra. 

in theeighih,  Inthe eighth, it denotes the evill condition and trouble of Theeves and Robbers, 

alſo that men ſhall quarrel and diſagree that have inherited the Goods and Lega- 
cies of the late deccaſed ; and to be ſhort. impediment, loſs and damage in, to and 
by all things appertaining to the ſignification of the eight Houſe, which you have 
been abundantly ſhewn in the -41. Chapter of the ſecond Book; it ſignifies alſo 
many Infirnuties in the Secrets, if the ſign be Scerpio eſpecially, alſo Tlagues, More 
calities, and Malevolent infectious and poyſonous Diſeaſes. 

In the ninth. Allo if in the ninth, judge miſchief to happen to the Religious ſort of men, and 
ſuch as bear Office in the Church and Eccleſialtick affairs; Sects, Schiſms, and new 
Tenets fhall be allayed, perhaps extirpated and totally beaten down and quaſhr, 

. &c. Much damage it alſo fignifies to ſuch as travel and go long journeys, and no 
ſucceſs or profit therein : It ſignifies alſo that men ſhall be corrupt, Heatheniſh, 
and of ill converſations; there ſhall be little or no war, and men ſhall be perplexed 
with many accidents and Infirmities in the Thighs, eſpectally if the ſign of the ninth 
be Sagittary. 

Again, if any of the Malevolent fixed Stars be in thetenth afliting the Cuſpe | 
thereof, or the Lord thereof, it denotes much damage and detriment, ſorrow and 
rrouble to thoſe in Authority, alſo difſention quarrel and diſcord amongſt them, and 
they ſhall be ſo put to it for mony, that they will de induced to tax the people, net- 
ther indeed will they contribute to their neceſſities as formerly, nor have ſo vene- 
rable an eſteem of them, but ſhall ſlight, deride, and ſcoffe at them and ſer up 
themſelves if poſſible in their room, Nobles will be deje&ed, and Ruſticks erected 
and elevated, and there ſhall be many infirmities in the Knees, eſpecially if the 
ſign be Capricors, | : 

Alfo 


In the tenth. 


. | . | y 
Lib.4. eA ſirologia SVAunda. 307 
Alfo if in the eleventh, ftrife, diſſention aud diſcord ſhall happen among friends In the ele- 
and acquaintance, and one ſhall abuſe and ſlander the other, and ſtudy to injure venth. 
and prejudice each other ; hopes ſhall be fruſtrated, and the Treaſure of the 
King or chief Rulers ſhall be exhauſted, and thoſe in whom they moſt contide 
ſhall deceive them, and leave them helpleſs at their greateſt extreamity, and men 
ſhall be perplexed with many Infirmities inthe Legs, eſpecially if the ſign be in 
Agquaries. 
Laſtly, if in the twelfth. It denotes many theeves, and much theeving and rob- In the twelfth. 
bing by the High-way, alſo deceit and falſehood of ſervants towards their Ma- 
ſters, and much detriment by them, a diminution of indigent and poore people, 
the Commons ſhall be kept under by their Superiours, damage ſhall be to great 
Cattel,and there ſhall be many infirmities incident to man in the feer, eſpecially if the 
ſign be Psſces. 
In like manner judge the contrary if you finde the benevolent Stars ſo poſited ; 
they are benevolents that you find are of the nature of Z«piter or YVenws, or both, or 
of the nature of 7apiter. and Satwry, Jupier and Mars, or Venus and Saturn, Venus 
and Mars, and of the nature of 7Zwpiter and Mercury, Venus and Mercery, and of the 
nature of Mercwry only, efpecially if aſſiſted by the benevolent AſpeRts of the For- 
runes. 
And thus much ſhall ſuffice for InftruRion in the judging of the Annual Revolu- 
tions of the world ; let us now deſcend to Eclipſes, and fo haſten to a concluſion of 


theſe our labours. 


— _—_p_—_____——___—— 


SECT, 


®A, ſtrologia eM ks Lib.4. 


S4$455<$$$þ$S$$<$5$$ÞPP$EIHIES$$SP$IGEHHHGEHH $$ 1 $45 


— 


SECTION IV. 


T eaching how to judge of the Natural Mutations and 
eAccrdents of this Elementary World by the appear- 
ance of Eclipſes , ( omets , great ( onjttutlions and 
Blazing Stars. 


anEclipſe of either of the Luminaries is, and the cauſe of that defe& in each of 


] N the Sixteenth Chapter of this very Fourth Book 1 have already declared what 


them ; wherefore it would be both needleſs and mp here again to touch 


thereon, I ſhall therefore give you now the whole Method whereby co judge of any 
Mutation or Accident in this World portended by Eclipſes, and that in brief accor- 
ding to the Rules of our Predeceſſor Pro/omzy, whom I prefer for his ſhortneſs and 
plainneſs before any or all other Writings that I have mett with; it is true, Leevitius 
hath been very large on this ſubject, and others ; but ſince what Prolomy hath deli- 
yered us, is ſufficient for inſtruction to any that are to ſeek in theſe matters, I ſhall 
paſs them by as more myſterious and intricate , and yet tending no more to edifi- 
cation. 

In the firſt Section and firſt Chapter ofthis Fourth Book you have been taught 
that in your judgement of Revolutions you are to conſider the place of the Eclipſes 
of either Luminaries or both, it any ſuch happen, and joyn them in judgement ; for 
if there be any Eclipte or Ecliples, you are to ſec if there be any agreement betwixr 
them and the Lord of the Year and Aſcendent of the Revolutions ; for there is no- 
thing more certainthen that there tolloweth many inconveniencies and alterations 
in the World after any of the great Lights are Eclipſed ; for by them all things have 
their ſubſiſtence and nutriment ina natural way; and therefore it muſt needs follow 
ſublunary things mult tuffer detriment in one kinde or other when either of them are 
deprived of their lights and influences, eſpecially if both in one Moneth ; whence Her- 

No:e. mes faith , There ſhall much inconvemiency and trouble happen in the World when 
both the Luminaries ſhall be Eclipled in one Moneth, and chiefly in thoſe places in 
which their Effects ſhall be manitetted. 

Wherefore in any Year if either or both the Luminaries are Eclipſed,,or in an 


quarterly Revolution , ſee if the Lord of the Sign wherein the Eclipſe is to fall, be 


{trong or weak, or in / 02juntio, or any Configuration with the Lord of the Aſcen- 
Whar rime the dent at the time of the middle of the Eclipſe ( which you are to know is the time 
_ ke | ., wherein you are to ere& your Scheme or _— of the Heavens for the judging of 
be ere&ed for he Effects of any Eclipſe ) or with the Lord of the Year or Quarter , or whether 
the judging of the Fortunes behold theſe or the Infortunes : for if the Fortunes, you areto judge 
Eclipſes, good; ifthe Infortunes, the contrary. The nature and quality thereof judge from 
the nature of the Significators, as you have heard before : likewiſe whether much e- 
vill or good is to be expected by conſidering the ftrength of your Significators and 
their Receptions and nature of their Aſpects. 
Wha things or. And judge this evill or good to thoſe lignified by the Planet in Configuration with 
-_ a ppl theſe Lords or the Fortunes or Infortunes, whether men or things: asif the Aſcen- 
ceill in day dent or its Lord be beheld by the Fortunes, then you may ſafely ſay .the People of 
Eclipſe. that Nation or Kingdom wherein the Revoluton 1s , ſhall be ſafe , of good health 
and proſperous, &c, and fo judge of allthe reſt ofthe Houſes according to their 
ſeveral 


Lib. 4. eA ſtrologia NAunda. 
ſeveral ſignifications , as you have been taught before : and ſo on the contrary evill, 
if by the Infortunes : And this ſhall be the more encreaſed if the Lord of the Aſcen- 
dent or Lord of the Year be the Lord of the Sign wherein the Eclipſe is to happen. 
In like manner pronounce evill and dammage to the perſons and things ſignified by 
any other Houle of whom you find the Lord of the Sign of the Eclipſe Ruler, &c. 
Judge the time when it ſhall be molt grievous unto them, to be whenthe $#x; comes 
ro the ſame Houle inthe Eclipſe ( I mean the very degree and minute of the Cup ) 
whereby they are {igaitied , or ro the degree and minute of the Zodiack their chief 
Sgnificator was then in: as if it be the Common People , when the $#» comes to the 
degree and minute of the Aſcendent at the time of the middle of the Eclipſe : if it be 
the Rulers or King, it will be moſt grievous when the S#x comes to the degree and 
miuute of the Tenth Houſe at that time; and ſo of the reſt. 

Detriment and mitchief alſo is to be expected to all things ſignihed by the Houſe 
wherein any Eclipſe is: asifin the Tenth, to Kings, Grandees and chief {ulers : 
ifinthe Ninth , co Church-men : in the Eighth , the death of Old men, &c. and 
it ſhall be chiefly incident unto men, if any Eclipſe be in Humane Signs: itin Ajery , 
to Birds: if in Earthy , to the Fruits of the Earth and Seeds : ( yet ſunitinw al- 
ſureth us,that if an Eclipſe be in Libra, it ſignifies the rottenneſs of Herbs, and that 
there ſhall be Sects and Schiſms amongſt Church-men ) in watery , to the Fiſhand 
Creatures living in the Watery Element : in Beſtial Signs, to Beaits , according to 
the nature of the Sign: as if Aries, to Sheep : if {apricorn, to Goats: if Tauras, 
to Bulls, Cows and Oxen : if Sagitrary, the laſt 15 degrees, to Horſes, &c. and if 
feral ſigns, to wild Beaſts. 

See alſo in what Triplicity the Luminaries are Eclipſed ; for Junfinw ſaith, An The Portence 
Eclipſe either of the $4» or A700» in the Fiery Triplicity , denotes the motion of ofn t c'ipſe 
Armies, the death and deſtruction of Cattell, Kings and Great men; impriſon- "7" RO 
ments, enmity between the Vulgar and Nobler ſort of People, diſſemblings, fewd **"?: 
and diſcords,wars, and grievous [laughter and deſtruction of men, murthers, thefts , 
depopulations, abortions to women, ſharp Feavers and Epidemical diſeaſes through 
exceſs of heat, apparitions inthe Air, ſcarcity of Rain , eſpecially in thoſe Regions 
and places ſubject to the ſign wherein the Eclipſe is, admirable and ftrange mutations, 

In the Earthy Triplicity when any of the Luminaries are Eclipſed , it occalions 
ſcarcity of the Fruits of the Earth , and chiefly of Corn,and ſuch things as are uſually 
ſown every Year. 

In the Aiery, ſhews Famine, fierce and violent Maladies and Peſtilential Diſeaſes, 
tempeſtuous ttormy winds, and thoſe very pernicious. 

In the Watry Triplicity it promiſeth the death of the Vulgar and ignobler ſort of 
hes 4, ſeditions and rumors of wars, and eruptions and overflowings of the Sea- 

anks. | 

Moreover he further teſtifieth, that if an Eclipſe happen in eArzes, it cauſeth altera- In the Cargi- 
tionin Fruits: Vines and Fip-trees ſhall be corrupted. nal poincs, 

If in Libra, in Seeds and Herbs; and Schiſms amongſt Eccleſiaſtical men ( as you 
have already heard. ) | 

In Cancer, a rottenneſs or corruption of the fruit when it is gathered, cauſing lick- 
neſs to thoſe that eat them, perhaps ſurfeits. 

In Capricorn, it denotes Olives to be devoured by Locuſts or Caterpillers and ſuch 
like Worms, many ſhipwracks and ſubmerſions of ſhips,change in mens diſpoſitions 
and manners, eſpecially in thoſe _—_— and Places ſubjet unto Capricorn. 

In Gemini and Segittary an Eclipſe threatens deltruction to flying Fowls, eſpecially In common 
ſuch as men eat, whereby many men come to ſudden death. 1gns. 

In YVirge and Piſces harm and deſtruction to Vegetables and Creatures living in the 
Waters, cheifly in Fountains, corruption of Rivers, 

In T aurns, Scorpio, Leoand Aquaries, ruine of houſes and ancient buildings , divi- In f6x<d, 
ſions and hatred amongſt the Clergy, and they ſhall excite Tumults. 

Let us now come to Pro/omyes Method in judging of Eclipſes , which he begins in 
Chap. 4. of his 2. Book of his 2nadripartite after this manner, 


R r CHAP, 


yo] e Aſtrologia eMunda. Lib.4.. 


CHAP. I. 


Contaming Prolomies method in judging Eclipſes, and how to know 
the Kegions to which the Effe&ts belong. 


rutions of feverall Nations of the World, and the occaſion thereof from 
the nature of the Signs and Planets, he comes in the 4 Chapter to a more 
facil way of appropriating them unto the ſeveral ſigns of the Zogiack, the better to 
predi& the moſt eminent accidents and caſualties in all Nations, Kingdoms, and Re- 
S10Ns, &C. 
F: ur things to Wherefore herein there will be four things moſt worthy our conſideration. 
be conficered The firſt, The Places or Regions, (onntreys, Kingdoms or Cities where the effetts 
in judging of of any Eclipſe Will be manifeſt. | | 
Ecliples, The ſecoud, T he time when the Effetts ſhall begin and how long continue. 
The third, The kinds of the events. 
The fourth, The quality of the events Whither good or evill. 
I. Touching the firſt you have no more to do bur thus; ſee what place of the Zodiack 
your Eclipſe fals in, whither it be of the Su» or oo, and what Cities, Countries, 
Kingdoms or Regions are ſubje& to the ſign wherein the Eclipſe is, and ſuch Cities 
that had the ſign wherein the defect is,in the Horoſcope or firit Houſe at the time of 
its firſt ſtruRture, or the place then of the Sun or /1oon, and the places ſubjeR to the 
ſigns in Oppoſition and Square thereunto, you may ſay ſhall aſſuredly taſte of its et- 
fects, as alſoſuch Regions wherein the Eclipſe ſhall be viſible ; Kingdoms, Cities and 
Places ſubject to every ſign of the Zoarack you have in the ſecond Book, 


\ Frer he had in the preceding Chapters declared the conditions and conſti- 


CHAP. Th 


Shewing the time when the Effetts of any Ecliple ſhall begin and how 


long continue. 


operate not till ſach a time after their appearance ; but they have bur 
ſmall reaſon to move them to this their admiration ; for the effects of an 
Eclipſe opperate from the firlt appearance thereof, though not ſo apparently ; as 
'a child from its very firſt Conception is in Beeing, yet cannot properly be termed 
ought other then ſoine living creature till it be produced to light, 
And therefore I conceive the Antients without any reſpect at all to the former, 
have till given Rules for judging of the latter, or the time when their Effects will be 
in force or begin to be apparent. 
c—_ F- Wherefore Prlomy teacherh us, that if an Eclipſe fall in the Eaſt = of the 
_ = is Horizon, (or more plainly inthe Aſcendent or Eaſt Angle) the Events thereof ſhall 
Effes, and firſt manifeit themſelves from the fourth Moneth after,but it will more ſtrongly ope- 
when more rate in the firlt third part of its whole duration. 
forcibly. Jf inthe mid-Heaven, the Effe&s thereof will firſt begin to appear after the ſecond 
four Moneths (or more plainly about eight Moneths after the defect of the Lumi- 
nary)but more apparent will it be in the ſecond or middlemoſt third part of the whole 


time it Continues, Bur 


M Any men I know wonder why Aſtrologers have taught that Eclipſes 


Lib. 4. eAſtrologia <NAunaa. Tt 
But if it be in the Welt-part 6f the Horizon, ( viz. in the Seventh Houſe of _ 
Heaven, or the Welt Angle) in the third or laſt fourth Moneth ſhall the Effe&s 
be manifeſted, but more forcibly in the third and Jatt part of the whole time of its 
continuance. | 
But the particular Remiflions and Intentions we muſt judge from the Conjuncti- 
ons and Preventions which in the mean time ſhall happen in that place, or in any 
other places of the figure that hath relation thereunto, from the places of the mo- 
tion of the Planets by which future events are fore-known, v:z. ſuch as are Oriental, 
Occidental, Stationary or aſcending in the cloſe of the Evening, vz. veſpertine and 
are occaſion of any future events by their Aſpe&s or any other manner ; whenthey 
are Oriental you mult know their effe&tsare augmented, and when they are Stati- 
onary ; bur Occidental and under the S»x-beams, or veſpertine and Retrograde, de- 
miniſhed and lefſened ; underitand this as to the time, not Nature. | 
As touching the time of their continuance, viz. how long the Effeits of any Eclipſe How leng the 
ſhall laſt or be in force, - it is inthis manner to be known, for as much as an Eclipſe Efte&s of any 
is not ſeen in all Regions and Places inthe ſame houre or inſtant of time , neither Natiple hall 
for the beginning, continuation or end thereof ; you ought therefore in every Re- © 
gion to take according to proportion the Ecl:prical houre, the Elevation of the Pole 
and the Angles of the figure according thereunto. | 
And then you are to fee how many equal houres (viz. Natural Equinoctal houres 
conſiſting of 60 Minutes a peece) the Eclipſe continues in every Region , for 
when you have this, you are to know that the Events of a Solar Eclipſe ſhall con- 
tinue fo many years as he is Eclipſed houres, reckoning from the firit moment of 
his Obſcuration to the very laſt ; of a Lu»ar, ſo many moneths; wherefore the 
beginning of them you ſhall know from the place where the Eclipſe fals,and the An- 
les of the figure at that time. | 


CHAS, TEE 


Of the kindes of the Events of any Eclipſe. : | he 


(aw, IN the third place you know the kindes of the Events of any Eclipſe 3, 
| a2, 1-7 P are to be conſidered, which is known from the qualities and ſigns 


belonging to the ſigns in which either of the Luminaries are eclipſed, 
and from the places or ſigns in which the Planets and moſt norable 


SPE 
Ne A fixed Stars are, the which with the ſign of the Ecliple (or the Sign 
' wherein the Ecliple is )and the fign of the Angle preceding the Eclipſe 


is to be conſidered. 
To know the Planet that ſhall bear chief «rule of theſe two piaces, it isno more How to know 
then thus ; ſee which of the Planets bath moſt power and itrength in the place ofthe Lord of 
the Eclipſe and Angle preceding the Eclipſe, by Houſe, Exaltation, Triplicity, face *** *<liple, 
or term, and give it to him; burif one Planet be not both Lord of the ſign wherein 
the Eclipſe is, and the Angle preceding the Eclipſe, but there be cwo Planets bear- 
ing rule in theſe places, then are youto prefer that Planer which is Lord of the place 
of the Eclipſe to the rule or Dominion before the other, yet ſhalt thou joyn him 
in judgement therewith ; but if there be feveral Planets that have Dominion in theſe 
places. you (hall prefer that which is neareit an Angle and moſt ſtrong in the degree 2 
of the Ectipſe,and make him Lord of the Eclipſe, «SY 
And'youarealſo to obſerve thoſe fixed Stars which are of moſt note, and placed £:x:4 $:ars cr: | 
nere the place of the Eclipſe and the Cuſpe of the Angle preceding che Eclipfe,as alſo be confdered 
the Cuſps of the Aſcendent and mid-Heaven at the time of the Eclipſe, | 
| R r:2 Having 


212 » A ſtrologia eMunda. - Lib.4. 


The forms Having thus ſeriouſly conſidered the fixed Stars as you ought.the forms and figures 
and figures of of the ſigns are to be conſidered in-which an Eclipſe fals, and in which the predomi- 
the ogns. nant Planets are ; for the quality of the Events cannot be well known but by the na- 
ture thereof. | | 
For humane ſigns or ſuch as are of that form have ſignification unto mankinde ; 
and if they be ferall ſigns, or ſuch as bear the form of wild Beaſts, or four. 
footed Creatures, it ſhall be to ſuch Beaſts and Creatures whichare found in ſhape” 
and Nature agreeable thereunto ; whether the ſign ſignifie Snakes, Beafts of 

: field, domeſtick, rame Creatures,&c. 

we. Northern ſigns, ſignifie ſudden Earth-quakes,which have the figure of Beaſts of 
the field when an Eclipſe is therein ; in Southern, alteration of the ayr, in ſuch Signs 
and Conſtellations as have wings,ſuch as are Yirge, Sagittary, the Hey, the Vwltxre , 
&c. it denotes detriment to birds and flying fowl, chiefly ſach as are uſtally eaten by 
man ; If in Carcer, Piſces, or the Dolphin, to Creatures living in the water ; if in the 
Conſtellation of the Ship, to Ships and ſuch as Navigate ; in Aquaries, to Rivers and 
the like, &c. 

The portence Alſo if an Eclipſe of either L uminary be in any of the Tropical or Equinottial 

wy wm ſigns,it denotes change of oye in every of theſe times ; if in the vernal Equinox, dam- 

EquineGtal mage to Trees when they begin to bud agd ſhout forth, as the Vine, Fig-tree and 

6gns. othersthen ſpringing ; ifin the Summer So/ftice, the events will be on fruits when 
they are gathered, butin E Us it ſignifies the over-flowing of Xi/ws ; If inthe Au» 
tumnall Equinox, they will be manifeſt on Hearbs and the Seeds of the Earth when 
they are ſown, and detriment in harveſt ; in the Winter So/ftice,on Pot-Hearbs, Birds 
of the ſeaſon and Fiſh. | 

Alſo if an Eclipſe be in Zquizosal ſigns , it ſhews its EffeQs in Religious 
things and Church affairs; in the Tropicks, in the ayr, laws and manners of 
men z In fixed ſigns , in foundations and edifices; in common figns, in mankinde 
and Kings. _ No 

In the quarters From, a Eclipſes nere the Eaſt, ſignifie their Effes will be apparent in fruits 

of Heaven. youth and foundations; in the mid-Heaven, in the Church, State, great ones and 
ſuch as are of middle age ; but if in the Weſt, in the Laws and Cuſtoms of the 
People,the alteration thereof, and in thoſe d& elder years ; it hath ſignification alſo of 
Murthers. 

To know the The quantity or the greatneſs of their Effects are known fromthe greatneſs of the 

A —_— Eclipſe, and from thoſe Stars which in the place ofthe Eclipſe are cauſcsof the future 

. events. 

RFTEnIO For when an Eclipſe of the Sw is veſpertine, the evill portended thereby is 
leſſened; but when Maturtine, increaſed; fo likewiſe on the contrary, an Eclipſe 
of the Moon Veſpertine increaſeth the evill, Matutine impareth it the one half, 

The reaſon thereof is, becauſe the Sm» is the proper Governour of the Day, and 
the Moon Governeſs of the Night, Ger. 1.16. and therefore when they are thus 
afflicted intheir own ſeaſon,the EffeRts muſt needs be much more effeRnal then when 


on the contrary. 


CHAP. IV. 
Of the quality of the Ervents of any Eclipſe, whether Good or Eyill. 
How to know | 
the and der the verge of this Chapter will the qualijry of the events; whether good 
quali of th or evill fall and the nature of them ke which is known from the na- 
vents of any AL. ture of the Planets,having moſt forritudes inthe place of the Eclipſe and 


Kclipſe,whe. |; « Communication and commixtion of one with another, and the places in which 
evil, they are inthe Figure of Heaven, For 


# 


Lib.4. » Aſtrologia <NAunda. 

For the S«» and Meow bear rule over the other Planets, and are maincauſes of 
future accidents, as alſo the =” and efficacy of the other Stars are by them aug- 
mented or diminiſhed; but the commixtures of thoſe Stars who are of moft power, 
ſhew the quality of the events. 

But let usdeclare the works and properties of each Planet and their natures ; bur 
that our relation thereof may be the more. effeual, you are to take notice that 
when I nominate or declare the nature generally of the five Planets, you are ta 
underftand their temper, power and force, whether that Planet doth of himſelf in 
his own nature predominate or no, or whether any other Star which is not errant, 
or other place of the Zodiack of the ſame nature and temper or influence of thar 
Star ; wherefore if poſſible we are to know the nature and quality of every fixed 
Star worthy the noting for the making a right commixtion when they are joined in 
Configuration with the Errant Stars or Planets, becauſe this is as conſiderable as 
their ae: one with another, according to their familiarity þefore men- 
tioned, 


33 


So that if Satwrs be only chief Lord or Ruler, he ſhall be generally the occa- Orcas 


ſion of deſtration and miſchief cauſed by cold ; and particularly when his in- yen ke is 
fluence relateth unto men , he cauſeth long and tedious Infirmities , Tifticks and chlef Ruler, 
obnoxious Diſeaſes, occaſioned from Humors, Flegm and Defluxions, o_ and his fignls 


Feavers, Baniſhment, Want, Tribulation, Anxiety, Fears, ſadneſs and Death ; 
theſe chiefly to thoſe that are ſtricken in years. 

But when it relateth to Beaſts and Creatures belonging to the uſe of Man, he 
bringeth deſtruction and cauſeth a ſcarcity of them, and ſickneſs and rottenneſs to 
thoſe that remain ; death alſo and infirmity in the ſame nature to rhoſe men that 
uſe or eat them. 

In the ayr he ſhall cauſe froſt and ſnow, and ſuch as ſhall produce bitter cold 
weather, cloudy and obſcure, alſo pernicious, peſtiferous and tempeſtuous, Snow 
and inconvenient wind and moiſture, producing by corruption pernicious and offen» 
ſive creatures to mankinde. | 

But in the Sea and Rivers, tempeſts and ſhipwracks, alſo difficult and dangerous 
Navigating, a deſtruionand ſcarcity of fiſhes; increaſe and decreaſe of waters in 
the Sea by fits,the over-flowing of Rivers,and eruptions of the Sea-banks and miſchief 
by water. | 

" the Earth, a diminution and deſtruction of fruits, and chiefly to ſuch as are 
«more particularly for the uſe of Man ; they ſhall ſuffer by Worms very much detrj- 
ment and Caterpillars, Locuſts, and ſuch like, or by inundations , — of 
Water, or too much abundance of Rain, cold Froſt or the like, ſo that thereby there 
ſhall be ſuch a ſcarcity and deerneſs of ſuch things, that many men ſhall dye for want 


of bread. 


fica 
- and "ral, 


If Jupiter be chief Ruler,he cauſeth generally an increaſe and plenty of all things, Of Fapite: 


and particularly to man, he elevateth their condition to honour, renown and plenty, when 


chief Ruler, 
s, and all," bant- 


giveth health, tranquillity, peace and an increaſe of riches and good 


he is 


_— appertaining to the life of man in a natural way ; Increaſerhthe benefits and g.1 ;, cnc. 
g 


s received from Princes, or ſuch as are in Authority, and cauſeth alſo even ral, 


theſe Grandees to be more 1lluſtrious, inlargeth their Territories and Dominions, 
and abundantly - —w—_ their Grandure ; generally 7piter denotes ſucceſs and 
happineſs in every thin 
o Beaſts belonging chiefly to the uſe of Man, he ſignifieth an increaſe, but 

ſuch as are deftruRive and not profitable, he deſtroyeth. 

The ayr alſo he tempereth and maketh wholſome, and ſendeth convenient mot- 
ſture in ſeaſons requiſite for the ProduRion of the fruits of the Earth, the which he 
 multiplyeth and increaſeth by his ſweet influence. 
The Sea alſo for Navigation ſhall be ſafe, the floods of Rivers temperate, &c. 


If Mars bechief Lord of any Eclipſe, he generally threatneth miſchief to all ſorts Ofthe fgnig. 


ic. cations of 


and kinds of men which ſhall happen through extremity of — - and particu 
larly he cauſeth much war, inteſtine hatreds, fewds, quarrels a 


diſcards amongſt Afzrs, if be be 
men Ruler, 


tions in ge» 


314. | . eAſtrologia eMunaa. Lib.4. 
men, eſpecially of that kinde of life, viz ſouldiers ; he excites menalſo to many robbe- 
nes, ſpoilings, ſackings, tyranny and rebellion ; he alſo cauſeth the wrath of Kings 
and Great men, and troubles ir general, ſudden death, fickneſſes and thoſe chiefly 
tertian Agues or Feayers, and thoſe principally, or more particularly to thoſe of 
younger years or in their ſtrength of youth , much choler and anger amongſt 
men of ſmall repute ; they ſhall commit unlawful things and violate the Law ; many 
Combultions, {laughters, rapines,thefts, and robberies. 
| In the ayr he cauſeth extremity of heat and very warm windes, alſo ligthning and 
ttlerain, | 

In the Sea deſtruction to ſhips, and ſubmerſions ſuddenly by mixt winds, I1ightning 
and ſuch like, 

In Rivers a ſcarcity of waters, a drought of Fountains and detriment by drinking 
of waters, which for the moſt part will be corrupted. | 

Andin things appertaining to the life of Man, viz. Beaſts and Vegetables, he ſhall 
caule a ſcarcity, ai:d deſtruction of the fruits of the Earth, by reaſon they ſhall be 
ſcorched with extremity of heat or eaten with Locufts and Caterpillers, or deſtroyed 
by winds, or nipt in the bud. | 
Of Venus and Burt if Fexs be chief Significatrix, ſhe denotes the ſame as doth Jupiter gene- 
ker ſignificat* rally but together with it ſome Venereal ſports ; and particularly to men ſhe cauſeth 
ons generah honour, fame, joy, fortunate ſucceſs in every thing, happy marriages, abundance of 
children and felicity in all things belonging to Matrimony, and an increaſe of riches, 
and an unufual familiarity and correſpondency between Princes and their Subjects 
and Familiars. | | 

Inthe ayr, winds, but temperate, bringing abundance of ſhowers , yet they very 
ſeaſonable and convenient for the fructifying of the Earth, a ſeaſonable time accor- 
ding to the nature of the ſeaſon. 

Inthe Sea ſuch Ships as Navigate ſhall be ſafe and proſperous. 

In Rivers abundance of waters by reaſon of many ſhowers. CET 

Beaſts, Vegetables and ſuch things as are for the uſe of man, ſhall be plentiful. 


Ot Merenry If Mercury be chick Ruler, he ſignifieth ſuch events generally as are of the na«+ 
—_ —_ tuze of the Planer he is in Conjunttion with and in Contiguration ; for you have been 
his che faught in our ſecond Book of this Volume, that he participaterh in Nature with the 
Ruler Planet in Con'uz&:0z or Configuration with him ; but properly in his own nature he 


furthers the natural ſignificatioa of the other. 
Particularly in men he excites expedition, induſtry,cunning and ingenuity in every 
thing, 
be the Sea he cauſerh unfortunate Navigation when he is joined in judgement 
' with the Infortunes as being in Configuration or (onjunftion with them z- but if with 
the Fortunes, judge the contrary ; with the Malevolents alſo he denotes many diſeaſes 
and infirmities, Quotidian Feavers, Impoſthumes , C onſumptions and Coughs , 
Phchiſis and dry diſeaſes ; as touching matters of State, Laws, Cuſtoms and Privi- 
ledges, he orders all according to the Planers and Stars in Configuration with him ; 
wherefore we ſee he being dry of conſtitution being ſo nere the $#», and of a ſwitt 
motion, and becauſe he is ofteri Retrograde, he ſtirs up frequent turbulent and per- 
nicious winds, alſo thunder and lightning, openings of the Earth and Earth-quakes, 
and perhaps much damage thereby to Vegetables and Creatures for the uſe of Man 
(1 conceive P:c/omy might very well have left out perhaps ) alſo in the houres of 
his ſetting he cauſeth a d&1minution of Waters and'Rivers ; in the houres of his riſing 
an augmentation ; andthus much of the innate ſignifications of the Planets, 
Now when according to the variety of the Aſpects and Signs they are mingled 
by being mutually beheld of each othet and their Poſition in reſpect of the 3», 
they thereby vary their effe&s or ations according to the variety of fignifications 
we judgements ariſing from their ſeveral Conjunttions and Configurations, 
Wherefore ſince it is impoflibleto relate exa&ty unto thee all their Configurations 
and their commixtures, or art leaſt for that it would be ſo intricate a thing, we ſhall 


refer it to the ſtudy and conſideration of the Student ; for as I have faid _— 
unle 


Lib. 4. » Aſtrologia <Vunda. 215 
unleſs thy Genius leadeth thee to the exact knowledge thereof, the reading of all the 
Books in the World will no wiſe avail thee. ; 

But we ought diligently to obſerve the nature of thoſe Stars by which the e- 
vents are _— and their affinity with thoſe Regions where the effects are 
to be manifeſted thus. 

If they be fortunes and haverelation to the evil places where the events ſhall 
happen, and no wiſe contradicted by other Stars, they more effectually perform 
what events were afore. promiſed; but if they have no relation to thoſe places, 
or if they be gainſayed by malevolent Stars, their good influence is by ſo much 
leſſened, and ſo thou maycit judge on the contrary. And thus much of Eclipſes 
according to Piolomy. 

Some lines towards the latter end of the eighth chapter of his aforeſaid ſe- 
cond Booke 1 have willingly omitted, for that I do not in every word agree 
with him, and therfore herein I ſhall defire co be excuſed, as alſo if I have in 
any other places varied ſomewhat from him; I know no reaſon why any man 
that ſtandech on his ſhoulders may not ſee farther then he ; truly I muſt really 
confeſs he hath merited much honour from his ſucceſſors, wheretfore I ſhall eſteem 
him as for his ſhortneſs, ſo tor his accurate and ſufficient largeneſs and method before 
any or all other Aſtro/ogical Philoſophers whatſoever; and therefore (as I have al- 
ready ſaid) with him I ſhall conclude as touching this matter, adding only this Chap- 
ter which I have collected our of of Jaxt7inws, that we may haſten to a concluſion 


of this Treatiſe. 


3» Þ % I 


Of the Sun and Moon Eclipſed in any Decanate or Face of the twel-vg 
Celeſtial Signs. 


mu ; wherefore now tor concluſion of this point ; I thought good to give 
thee this Chapter out of him alſo, che which he gathered from the writings 
of Proclus. | 

When there happens any Eclipſe either of the ſa» or Moon in Taurus, Virgo, 
or Capricern, it denotes a ſcarcity of the fruits of the Earth and Corn; in Gems, 
Libra or. Aquaries, a Faminand outragious diſeaſes, Pettilencies and Mortahties ; 
in Cancer, Scorpio or Piſces, the death and flaughter of obſcure, common Plebean 
kinde of people, continual quarrels and editions, and great damage to Navigators 
and ſuch asconverſe in the Sea, or Sea-affairs ; in Aries, Leo or Sap:ttary, I need. 
ſay no more then this, has it is ſufficiently declared inthe handling the ſeveral De- 
canates of theſe Signs ; wherefore it will not be amiſs if we alſo gothrough every 
ſign of the whole Z:4:ack, beginning at Aries, that ſo thou mayelt not be to ſeek 
upon any Eclipſe of the Luminaries, and firit then of the Sw. 

When the %#» is Eclipſed in any of the firſt ten degrees of «Aries ( which you 7 x0. 
have heard is the firſt Decanate or Face thereof) it portendsthe ſudden and fre- 
quent motion of Armies, continual expeditions, aſſaults and batteries with many 
rumults, ſeditions and controverſies, and an inclination of the ayr to jntempe- 
rate heat and drought. 

In the following Decanat or Face, ( viz. from the tenth to the twentieth de- + 25 
gree of Aries) it denotes the Impriſonment, trouble and ſadneſs of ſome King,and 
danger of death unto him, a corruption of trees that are fruicful or of ſuch fruits as 


are produced of Trees, as alſo of the Earth, 
In 


ID Lvers rules have I before delivered unto thee which I colle&edout of funtti- 


Y, 


O 


eAſtrologia M unda. Lib.4. 

In the laſt Decanate or Face, (viz. from the twentieth to the thirtieth, or laſt 
degree of eAvies) he bringeth grief and ſadneſs to mortals, and the death of greacr 
women, and a ſcarcity or diminution of Cattel (zz. thoſe of the leſſer ſort, becauſe 
its fignitied by eric.) 

An Eclipſe of the $«» happening in the firſt Face of Taurw, afflicteth Negotia- 
tors, Agents and Solicitors, dettroyeth buſineſſes, and the Corn upon the Earth. 

In the ſecond Decanate or Face of Tawrw, incommodities to ſuch as bear chil- 
dren, and alſoto Travellers. 

In the third, Peſtilence and Famine, from whence we may colle& the deſtruction 
of greater Catrel, v-z.Buls; Oxen and Cows. 

An Eclipſe in the firſt Face of Gemini (of the Sun) cauſeth diſſention amongtt 
Prieſts, of what Order ſoever they are , inveterate hatred and editions, and a con- 
tempt of both the Law of God and Manis to be feared. | 

In the ſecond, thefts and robberies, piracies and flaughters. _. 

In the third, the death of ſome King, and various miſcheifs to ſuch Common- 
wealths as are under Gemn:, and the fruſtration of ſuch Cities affairs and Negoti- 
ations, : 

Again, an Eclipſe of the Sx in the firſt Face of (ancer, troubleth the ayr , and 
cauſeth var.ous winds and alterations of weather. 

In the ſecond, dryeth up Rivers and Fountains, and cauſeth petulent and greiyous 
mortalities. 

In the third, through Armenia and Africa, and the reſt of the Regions and Places 
ſubje& to Cazcer, Hidropical diſeaſes, ſeditions, and the diſeaſe of France, N apler, 
Spain, England, and indeed of allthe World; yet commonly called the French and 
N eopolitan ai/eaſe, or more plainly the French Pox. | 

Alſo an Eclipſe of the Sas in the firſt Decanate of Leo denotes the death of ſome 
eminent Prince, and the ſcarcity of Bread-corn. 

In the ſecond, troubles and anxieties to Kings, Princes and Great men or Magi- 
ſtrates. 

In the third, caprivities, ſlaughters, rapines and profanation of holy and ſacred 
Houſes (I conceive he hereby meant Churches, Monaſteries, and ſuch like. ) 

Moreover an Eclipſe of the Sm in Virgo, argues the grievous calamity and death 
of ſome certain King in the confines of Firgs. 

In the ſecond, Famine,Peſtilence and deadly Seditions. 

In the third, to Pictures, Poets and Merchants, and ſuch as live by their Ingenuity 
and wit tlaughters, deſtruction, baniſhment, and the like. 

Ifan Eclipte of the $#x bein the firſt Face of Libra; it corrupteth the Ayr,cauſeth 
the Peſtilence ; and a ſcarcity and dearneſs of Corn 

Inthe ſecond, portendeth the death of ſome Great King ; under the Dominion of 
Libra,Seditions and Famine. 

In the third, diſcords amongſt Great ones, and detriment in their eſtates, 

Alſo if an Eclipſe bein the Fri Face of Scorpio, it moveth and ſtirreth up Wars 
and tumults, flaughter,hatred, caprivities, plots and treacheries. 

In theſecond, miſchief to ſome King whoſe minde is averſe to war. 

In the third, the riſe of ſome tyrant, the ſtothfulneſs and idleneſs of the former 
King bareful to every one. 

In the firſt Face or Decanate of Sagirtary, if an Eclipſe of the Sun be, it ſhews 
grievous difſentions and deadly fewds amongſt men. 

In the ſecond, the death of Camels and ſuch Cattel as chew the cud (eſpecially 
the greater ſort) and ſuch like. 

In the third, prejudice to Horſes and Armies. 

Again, an Ecliple of the Senn the firſt Decanate of Capricorn , it denotes un- 
happineſs and chances to Great men, the tranſmigration of ſome King, and the 
Rebellion of the Nobles and ruſticks. 

In the ſecond, hired ſouldiers are excited and animated againſt their Commanders 
and Superiours, and fruſtrateth all their devices, | 
In 


Lib.4. A ſirologia NAunaa. 2 
In the third, it induceth the cumultuary motion of the King, and cauſeth Famine, 30 
Moreover an Eclipſe of the Sx in the firit Face of e<Aquaries, cauſeth publique 

ſorrow and ſadneſs. 

In the ſecond, publique thefts, rapines and roberies, Earth.quakes and Famine. 2 

In the third, the death and (laughter of ſheep and beaſts of the field. = 30. 

Laſtly, an Eclipſe ofthe $» in the firſt Face of Piſces, drieth up Rivers, and un- 
fortunateth the Sea and the affairs thereof. 

In the ſecond, the death of famous and excellent men, deſtruct ion of Fiſh,Earth= 34 29. 
quakes, &c. | | 

In thethird, fedicion, cruelty, furiouſneſs and inhumanity of ſouldiers, > -30. 

An Eclipſe of the 1{von now inevery Decanate is to be conſidered, tince we have The M>0n 
done with the Su, wherefore when the 4400n is Eclipſed in the firit Decanate of eclipſed inthe 
eAries , ſhe denotes Feavers, deſtruction of Woods by fire, anda ficcity and dry- f*® Face of 


neſs of the ayr. __ 
In the ſecond, Peſtilence. | | Y.26. 
In the third, Abortive births, incommodities and ſuch like dangers ro women. T” 30. p 


An Eclipſe of the oor in the firſt decanate of 7Tawr#., denotes deſtruction and x 10. 
death to great Cattel. 

In the ſecond, the death of the Queen of ſome Region under Tarr; anda © 20, 
ſcarcity of ſeeds and barrenneſs of the Earth. 

In the third, ſhe ſhews cruelty on Serpents andfuch like. 

Alſo an Eclipſe of the oc 1n the firk Face of Gemixi, threatneth incurſions 
and rapins of enemies. g | 

In the ſecond, the frequent motion of Armies, and the ſolicitations of private it 20, 
and publique things. : 

In the third, the death of ſome illuſtrious and famous man. H 30. 

Again, an Eclipſe of the oor in the firit Face of Cazcer , excites and ſtirs up & 10. 
Wars. 

In the ſecond, grievous exattions, intolerable Tributes, Taxations and ſuch like © 29, 
burthens, F 

Tn the third, death to the Female ſex, and ſudden deſtruction and mileries. = 

Alſo an Eclipſe ofthe Moos in the firit Face of Leo, denotes the death of either © x09, 
ſome Illuſtrious King or famous Man, 

Inthe ſecond, the journey of the King and mutation of things, & 20. 

In the third, ſhe excites the People and Armies to new actions and attempts. Q 30. 

An Eclipſe of the /ooz in the firit Face of Virgs, cauſeth diſeaſes and Infirmities ny 10, 
to the King, and various ſeditions and diſcords amongſt men. 


=Wo« 
© 


. gy i 
s + > : 

2. AED ni S 
2. > 

2" - "2 o 
es —__ wi ome Rane n= 


"KC =: 
A Y% 
en. EB 


2” Ut 1 
v 
5 


42 nn” az. 
ONT He nn 
> * " = 
» — ». Py 
PT OT Co ESE 


Inthe ſecond, cauſeth miſchief to Councellors, Scribes, or ſuch like men. N 20, £ 
In the third, brings deadly diſeaſes. Ne 30. j 
A Lunary Eclipſe in the firit Face of Z:bra, provoketh furious and tempeſtuous = 19 p 
hail torms. ? 
In the ſecond, miſchief and trouble to every one. = 20. Y 
In the third, death to ſome famous and illuſtrious men. == 30, 7 F 


If an Eclipſe of the ſoon be in the firlt Face of Scorpio, it cauſeth horrible Thun- n1 10. 
der and Lightning , and ſometimes Earth-quakes. 

In the ſecond,dryeth Olives ; and cauſeth a dry ayr, and Burning Feavers. m 20. 

In the third, the ſame is threatned, and death ; many ſeditions, quarrels, and y z0. 
troubles over and above. 

Alſo an Eclipſe of the ſoon inthe firſt Face of Sagittary, lendeth thefts and ra= , 10, " 
pines. | 

In the ſecond, deſtruction to Horſes and Mules, | 7 20. 

Inthe third: the Peſtilence and many evils. ? 30. 

Again, the Moon eclipſed inthe firſt face of Capricors, ſhews ſuggeſtions amonglt yy 70. 
men, and untimely death ; or miſchief to ſome illuſtrious and Noble man. | 

In the ſecond, frequent incurſions and aſſaults of ſouldiers, thefts, roberies and wp 20. 
Captivities. | 


OS 1 In 


2'S aA ſtrologia eo M unada.- Lib... 


W 30. : Inthe third, the death of ſome King under the Dominion of {'apricor», alſo ſe- 
1110N. 
-2 10. Moreover the Moon eclipſed in the firſt face of Aquaries, denotes the misfortune 


of ſome King under Agquarzes. 
20, In theſecond, univerſally hurteth the ſeed of the Earth. 
30. In thethird, a change in all things. - | 
10. Laitly, the 4-07 eclipſed. inthe firſt face of P:ſces, bringeth ſadneſs and anxiety 
tro thoſe we call Prieſts, and Religious Houſes, 
20. In the ſecond, the death of ſome great and Illuſtrious Perſon. 
30. In the third. thefts, rapines, robberies by Land, and piracies and troubles by Sea. 
And thus much ſhall ſuffice to be faid of Eclipſes at this time; hereafter God 
ſparing me hife and leiſure from my other ſtudies, perhaps I may make ſome addi- 
tion thereunto if 1 finde the preſent age worthy thereof ; Let us now proceed. 


+a 


av i/ 
\ 
Ar * 


Cuar 5 


Of Comets and Blazing-Stars, what they are, the many ſorts thereof 
their Portences, and how long they appear at any time. 


is, in the 16. Chpater of the 3. Section of this Book, it being no other then a dry 
exhalation, viſcuous and ſlimy, exhaled by the S«» and power of the Stars 
by degrees into the upper Region of the Ayr ; for by how much the dryer or 
moiſter are the vapours whereof they are compounded, the higher or lower are they 
placed and drawn up. 8 
The name This word Comer we borrow from the Greeks, who call it Ky4i7"s, C omeves quaſs 
thercot. comate ſtella, an hairy Star, as the word ſignifies in Engliſh, whence the Latines 
call it { rinita, becauſe many times they appear like hair made of fire, or fire in 
the manner and form of a mans head, or anhorles main, and wein Eng/and do 
vulgarly call them Comers or Blazing-3tars, of which there are divers forts, as 
mentioneth 7 {iny, Lib. 2.cap. 25. de Nat. and others, 

Divers ſorts of The firſt by the Gre: ks called 7»ſ«rins, 4 barba, reſembling a beard, becauſe it 
np 2.0 hath a circle about it of that form or ſhape, IT meanabout the nether part thereof. 
1.zing Rats. i 1% Þ er . . Sf 

The ſecond they call £45-7:z 9 7s «44/71, id eſt, a jaculo, becauſe it isſhapen in 
form of a dart or ſpear. 
The third *-2iz+, which 1s the. ſame as is the former, ſave only they are ſhorter 
andſharper-pointed at the top then the other,and pale like a ſword and without raies. 
The fourth -i-z>, diſcus, id eſt , a diſh or platter; this Comet is ſo called 
for that iris round reſembling a diſh, yet now and then it putteth forth one of the 
brims thereof. 
The fifth 7»&, Pithews, and this is in form like a Tun, invironed ina ſmoaky 
l;ghr. 
The fixth «*$27i25, Ceratiary thus called for that it reſembleth an horn , and 
ſuch an one Pliny reſtifietrh appeared when the whole manhood of Greece fought 


the battel of "alamr. RET 
The ſeventh zu 745 lampas 4 Meum, [plendeo, to ſhine like a lamp, and there- 


fore hath it this name. | 
The eighth izmvs, Hippexs ; this emitteth ſtreamslike unto an Horſe main, and 
therefore it is thus called ; this is ſwiftin motion and often turneth round, as faith 

Pliny. | | ; 
A ninth he recordeth to be white and bright like ſilver hair, and of that (yr 
| or 


What a Comet ( Lſewhere you may remember you have been ſhewn what a Comet is, viz. 


Lib. 4. eAſtrologia SNJunda. 319 


dor thata man is hardly able to behold it, and others become ſhaggy and com- 
paſſed as it were with hair or frindge round abour, 

They arein a manner all ſeen under the Great Rear, or that conſtellation which Where or in 
we vulgarly call Charlimains Wain, or Charles his Wain, yet ſome have been dif- what part of 
cerned to appear in that white part of the Heaven called commonly the 241lky +7 wong uſual- 
way from the fictions of the Poet; they denote many boiſterous winds and exce(- _—_— 
ſive heat; ſeldome are any ſeen in the Weſt part of Heaven, but about the South 
or Antartick Pole ſome have been ſeen, as Plizy in the ſame aforeſaid Chapter te- 

{tifieth, ro whom | here refer thee where thou ſhalt finde what Prodigies they 
were the fore-runners of in the time of Clayd.us Caſar, Pompey, and Oftavins the 
Conſul. 

{hath been obſerved and noted by the diligent care,induſtry and pains of the An- Their cont. 
tients, that they never appear a ſhorter time then a ſeven-night,nor longer then 8© Pvance in the 
dayes; ſome have ſaid 40; others 75, from Plutarch, who noted ſo much from the fins. 
Comet which appeared betore the 'Pe/oponſiax wars in Greece; but their continu- 
ance is according to their magnitude ; for if they be hut ſmall,they will be ſoon burnt 
out, unleſs they be dajly fed with new exhalations: I ſhall not here trouble m 
ſelf to recite what Seneca, Ariſtotle, and others write in Hiſtories concerning ch 
horrid accidents which have followed in many places on the appearance of Comets, 
ſince all the learned in the works of Nature do unanimoully conclude they are the 
fore-runners of much tribulation, alteration, anxiety, and trouble, which I ſhall by 
and by more amply deliver unto thee. | 

You areto take notice that ſome Comets do move, as the Planets; and again, Some Comers 
others, {tir not but are fixed as are the other Stars. move, others 

To judge of the accidents portended by Comets, the place of their appearance in a" mo 
the Heavens is to be obſerved, and what Stars are in Configuration therewith ; al- =_ judge 
ſo in what ſimilitude they appear, and where they appear and ſhine. of their Pors 

If they appear like ſwords, wars are threatned, and deftruction of mankinde ; like tences. 
Flutes or Hout-boys, it portends miſchief ro Muſicians ; if in the middle of a lign, to 
whore-maſters, and women gameſters; in form ofa triangle ar quadrangle, viz. a 
Trine or Square Aſpect to any of the fixed Stars, to wits and learned men; if a 
Comet appearin either of the Nodes, or thoſe places which we commonly call the 
Head and Tail ofthe Dragon, it proves infectious and peſtiferous; | 

We come now to ſhew the events of Comets, or {uch things as they are the fore- Tke birtk of 
runners of; yet I cannot but firſt let my Reader know the ſtrange foreknowledge our Saviour 
Sybilla 7 iburtina had in this Science, who from the apparition ot that great and fa- for-known by 
mous Comets which was ſeen in (ſar eAwguſtas his time (in whoſe dayes and _— 
reign was our Saviour Cbrif born) told the Emperour that it pointed out a child time. 
born of a Virgin, which ſhould be greater then he; and therefore ſhe exhorted him 
ro worſhip and adore him, &c. | 

Hittories, antient Writers, and common experience in former ages teſtifieth unto x, porteq. 
as that theſe ſigns jn the Heaven, or appearance of Comets, are the aſſured fore- cjes of Co- 
runners of the ſterility of the Earth, Peſtilence , Famin, War, alterations of mers 2nd Blz- 
Kingdoms, States and Empires, Laws and Cuſtoms, Winds, Earth-quakes , *ing:Stars, 
Iuundations, extream heat and drought, greiveous diſeaſes and infirmites, and ſuch 


like horrid evils. 


- 


» Tigw 
653 4. 


320 


aA, ſtrologia eMunda. Lib.4. 


CuaP. VIiLk 


Shewing the Phyſical reaſons of the horrid and terrible portences of Co- 
mets and Blazms-Stars. 


. Hart they are the cauſe of izordinare heat, is apparent by their ardent burn- 
| ing in the ayr, and their matter of which they are made. 

Of ſterility , by reaſon the farneſs of the Earth is ( rogether with the 
exhaled matter whereot they are compoſed ) drawn out, and the Earth left dry , 
and lean, and fo the moiſture and convenient humidity, whereby it fructified all 
things growing therein, 1s dried up by exceflive heat, and conſequently rendred 
barren, whence there muſt needs follow famine or ſterility in thote Regions and 
places where they are ſeen , or from whence their matter or ſubſtance was drawn. 

Of Peſtilence and Diſeaſes, in that the ayr is by them infected through hor, thick 
cloudy exhalations, the which being drawn in at the mouth of living creatures, in- 
feterh and killeth them ; alſo by exceſlive and inordinate heat the radical humi- 
dity and moiſture of living creatures whereby they ſubſift, is dryed up, whereby 
they become no other then dead carkaſſes : wherefore it is neceſſary in ſuch times 
to uſe cooling and moiſtning preparatives which are of that nature asto reſtore and 
conſerve radicall moiſture. | 

Of War and alter:tions in Kingaoms, States, LaWs and Cuſtoms, in that when a 
Comet or Blazing-Star appears, there are many exhalations in the Ayr , and 
thoſe of nature hot and dry, the which do ſo dry up the humors in men, and in- 
creaſe choler, that they are eaſily excited to quarrels, after which follow blows , 
wars and blood-ſhed ; and fo conſequently alterations in States, Governments , 
Laws, Cuſtoms, and Empires. | | 

Of Winds, for that they are of the ſame matter whereof Comets are, as you 
have heard in the 16 Chapter and 2 Se&ion of this fourth Book, and when any 
Comet or Blazing-Star appears, many ſuch dry vapours are exhaled ; beſides, when 
they vaniſh, they become windy rapours. 

Of Earth-quakes, for the ſame aforeſaid reaſon; for they are the occaſion of 
winds,and winds of Earth-quakes, as inthe ſame aforeſaid 16 Chapter you have been 
taught. | . 

of Inundations, for the ſame reaſon alſo ; for Comets cauſe winds, winds cauſe the 
Sea to roar and rage, whence follows inundations, 

Thus have I delivered you the reaſons of their portences the which 1 would 
not have thee nor any to fear, though never ſo horrid and terrible , but ra- 
ther take courage thereby to- call earneſtly to God for mercy , that he mighr 
evert his judgments whereof he doth ſo fairly warn us by theſe bis meſlen- 
gers. | 


Chap. 


Lib... —« Afirologia ſunda. 


CHAP VIEL 


Shewing ſome other names of Comets or Blazing-Stars, and their 
Portences. 


Ere it will not be amiſs, if I ſet down ſomething which-I had almoſt for- Why Comets 
got, viz. that Comets and Blazing-Stars ſeldom are ſeen}, for that it is are ſeen bur 
not an eafie matter for the $#» and Planets, (neither is it ſoon done) Pang 

to draw up ſo much dry vapour as is requiſite for the compoſition of ſuch an appa- jj. 
rition; and therefore is it alſo chat there doth but one appear at a time, th ugh 
Ariſtotle affirmeth there hath been many ſeen together, and this I muſt confeſs is as 

likely ro be true as many other of his ſtories and tales. 

They are ſeldom or never ſeen in Winter by reaſon of the abundance of cold Ar what time 
and moiſt weather that then aboundeth, ſo that there can be no ſuch dry va- ofthe year 
pour exhaled by the Sz» or Stars, nor in that quantity as 1s requilite to the _ _— 
compoſition of ſuch apparitions; neither in »#»mer , by reaſon of the ex- aually appeee. 
ceſs 07 heat, or the heat of the S#» which conſumes and diſperſech the matter 
whereof they are made, ſo that it cannot aſcend unto that part of the Region of 
the Ayr wherein they are uſually placed ; neither in the Spring time, by reaſon 
of the abundance of moiſture that then reigns, and the want of ſufficient 
heat to elevate ſo much matrer ; but in Aurumy, eſpecially when Saturn and 
AMars are in Con anttion, becauſe then the heat that exhales the matter, is more 
ſtrong. 

Farther note, that ſome Comets are white, ſome again red, which ariſeth from Comers white 
the divers natureand qualit of the matter whereof they are; for pure thin exha- 3*d red; and 
lations produce a white, clear and bright Comet ; when it is more groſs and im- A 
pure, red, and theſe appear like burning coals; but when the marcer whereof they +9 
are is very groſs, they appear asred as Scarlet or blood ; wherefore the Antients 
have afligned them unto the ſeveral Planets according to their complexions; for 
ſuch as are Saturnian, are pale, wan and of a leaden colour like unto Saturs ; 

Jovial, bright ; Martial, red ; Solar, golden or yellow ; Venereal, obſcure ; Mercurial, 
blew, &c. | 

Such as are like the hairs of a mans head (as you have heard) are more con- The re:ſon of 
denſed and thick in the middle, bur about the edges more rare ; thoſe reſembling their tape and 
beards, have their extreams more rare and diſperſed ; and thoſe that are much exten- frm. 
ded in length, are more rare and ſubril. 

The Antients have delivered moreover theſe nine following ſeveral Comets or The diſtin 
Blazing-Stars, and thetr virtues or Portences which I could no wife omit. being ſo figniftications 
neceſſary to Inſtruction. ofevery Co- 

The firſt then is calf Vers, for that it reſembleth a ſpir, or dart, and appeareth in co hg 
the day time very terrible to the beholders : It denotes a ſcarcity of fruit both of * 
the Earth and trees; mutations in Church and State, grievous ſlaughters and the 
death of Kings, Nobles and ſuch as are of their adherence 

The ſecond, Tenacelam, of the colour of Iars, and hath rates under it like 
the flames of burning coals : it ſignifieth there ſhall not be ſuch plenty as formerly, 
yet not famine; wars alſoare thereby ſtirred up to the great prejudice of the god- 
lier ſort of people who ſhall be very forward therein. 

The third, Pert:c, which ſometimes emitts o5ſcure raies, and again at other times 
bright ; this denotes a drought both of the Earth and Waters, and a ſcarcity of 
Proviſions ; the which it corporally joined to any Planet ſignifyeth events according 
to the nature of that Planet (the nature of every Planet you have been _— -— 
ore) 


Note. 


A ſlrologia M unda. Lib.4. 
fore) asf it be joined to Satzrn, there ſhall be mortalities,troubles to old men, and 
thoſe ofthe religious Orders: to 7wpirer it extends its effeRts to Kings and Gran- 
dees whether good or bad according to their fortitudes; tro Mars, many wars, 
tumults, {laughters and effufion of bloud ; to the Sw» it will not appear by rea- 
ſon of the Ss ſplendour, yet it portends the death of Kings and many tribula- 
tions, plagues, and ſicknefles ; -to Yen, it ſignifies drought, and a diminution of 
great waters; to Mercury, it denotes the death of young men, wits and ingenuous 
ſouls; to the Moe, it fignifies death and grievous mortality to men, elpecially 
common people. | 

The fourth CMiles, conſecrated to Venus , and hath an hairy tail or main, 
emitting © ovon-like beams or rayes; it ſignifieth miſchief ro Kings, Nobles and 
Great men, and that men ſhall riſe that will endeavour to alter the Laws and 
antient Cuſtoms, and ſet up new ; but the greateſt evil portended thereby will 
be incident to thoſe places towards which it extends its tail or rayes; it denotes 
allo wars. | 

The fifth / erw/ews , of a blew or azure colour, appropriated to Mercury, it de- 
notes the death of Kings and Grandees, Nobles ſuch as are chief Rulers, and 
chiefly towards the part towards which it extends its rayes ; alſo wars. 

The ſixth Aurora five Martina , afligned to Mars, it hath a tale, and is of 
a fiery complexion ; when it appeareth towards the Eaft, bending its head down- 
wards, it ſignifies war,combuſtions, fire and fword, peſtilence and famine in e Arabia 
and Egypr, drought and a ſcarcity of waters, and this ſhall extend alſo to the 
Weſtern Regions | 

The ſeventh Arpextum live Argenteus , and this is the brighteſt and cleareſt of 
all Comets ; it hath pure bright beams; when it appears, 7=piter being then 
in Cancer or Piſces, it promiſeth abundance of corn and fruit in thoſe parts where 
it appeared ; bur if Z«picer be then in Scorpio, it will not be altogether ſo good. 

The eighth Roſs, this is a great round Comet, and is of the form and imi- 
lirude of of a man, it cauſeth che death of Kings, Great, Noble and Rich men, 
and the alteration of things. 

Therinth and laſt Xrger, appropriated to Satxry, being incolour like unto him ; 
it denotes mortality both natural and alſo by the ſword, beheadings and the 
like. 

If a Comet appear in the Aſcendent of any Town, Kingdom, City, Family, or 
in the Aſcendent of the Revolution of the World, it ſignifieth deſtruction of the 
things ſignified by the Aſcendent and the fign thereof; and if it appear in the 
ſign of the mid-Heaven at the time of any of theſe, it bringeth danger to ſuch as 


. are promoted to honour. : 4H | 
The fignifica= Comets appearing in earthy ſigns, denote ſterility through drought; in watry, 


tion of Co. 
mers in Ear- 
thy figns, Wa- 
try.aiery and 
kery, 


through abundance of rain and floods, and cauſeth alſo Pettilence; in aiery, they 
promiſe Winds, Seditions and Peſtilence, yet not alwayes Plagues ; infiery, Wars, 


ſlaughters and commorions, 


= 


Lib.4., » Aſtrologia <unda. 


Cana z- 3 


Of the ſagnification of Comets and Blazing-Stars appropriated to the 
ſeven Planets. 


Eceive theſe Rules following, as from the Chaldeans, Ar :bi- 
ans, and ſuch as were very: expert in theſe matters in former 
Ages, 
Wherefore know, that if any Comet of the nature and [he Portences 
complexion of Saturn appear in the Aſcendent of the Revo- * {vc Co- 
| ' . ; : mers as belong 
S lution of the World, it denotes many evils, Famine, Peſtilence, ,, $,:,r,. 
> Baniſhment, Want, Anxiety, terrour and trouble, Chronick 
RS diſeaſes, and Melancholy diſtempers, Catarrs, Quartane 
Agues, Falling Sickneſs, Leproſies, Palſlies, Cancers, and thoſe diſeaſes 
which are of continuance, lingring Conſumptions, and the hike ; dettruction to 
Beaſts appertaining to the uſe of man ; exceſlive cold weather in winter; (but you More 
are ſtill to remember the Nature ofthe Climate ; for this inordinate cold in «/£:/19p14 
will cauſe but a temperate Ayr, &c. and therefore this 15 to be underitood of 
cheſe Northern parts, ) clouds, froſt and ſnow, ſtrong and high winds, tempetts , 
ſhipwracks, deſtruction of Fiſh, as alſo of Fruit by Caterpillers, Locuſts, and ſuch 
like Vermine ; great Inundations and ſtorms, to the anoyance of Cattel, and all 
things, Men and Kingdoms ur.der the Dominion of Sarzrn ſhall ſuffer detriment, 
and be indanger of deſtruction. | 
Such as are of a ſilver colour, bright and of great ſplendor, and of the nature Comers of hg 
of Jupiter, cauſe a plentiful year when they appear in the Aſcendent {as you have nature of Fu- 
heard) whollome blaſts of Ayr with many ſeaſonable ſhowers, eſpecially if it be Art and 
a watry ſign; it denotes alſo ſuch infirmities as are of the nature of Jnpiter ,,, OY 
(which you have heard in the ſecond Book of this Volume ) and many alterations 
and changes in ſuch Kingdoms, Regions and Places ſubject unto him , the which { 
have there alſo ar large ſet down. | 
Thoſe Comets which you have heard we have underſtood by the names of Comets of the 
J'erw and Pertica are of the nature of Mars, wherefore they denote horrible 72ture of 
winds, ſtorms, and tempeſts, a drought of Fountains, and a deftru&ion of Fruit by SY. 
corruption, and all the diſeaſes portended by Mars ; &c. frequent Thundering and .;,,,. * 
Lightnings to the deſtruction of many Ships at Sea, wrath, quarrels, heart-burnings, 
flaughters And blood-ſhed amongſt men ; tumults, ſeditiogg and wars, alterati- 
ons of Kingdoms, Laws, Government and. Cuſtoms, and ſuch like evils appro- 
priated to the nature of <A/ars , and they ſhall chiefly be incident to ſuch men 
as are under his Dominion, Towns, Cities, Kingdoms and Places, as alfo to thoſe 
parts towards which the Comet extendeth its tay] as you have heard, | 
Comets and Blazing-Stars of the nature and complexion of the Sz; , denote The hgnifica. 
the death of Kings, Great men and Nobles in thoſe parts they appear, and in ning of the 
that Kingdomor Nation under the Aſcendent of that ſign wherein they appear ,**" a 
and for which the Revolution is made ( when they are ſeen in the Afcendent 
thereof; ) alſo alterations in Government to the better ; continall and dayly tu- 
mults. alſo war, drought , and ſuch infirmities as are ſolar, and thoſe chiefly to 
ſolar men, and to ſuch places as are under his Dominion. | 
Such as are appropriated unto Venus, ſhew their Effects on I ruits and in \Wa- Comets of the 
cers, and cauſe change and mutations in the World, alterations of the Laws , 2ature of Y- 
Cuſtoms and Priviledges of Men ; damage and detriment to Women, Nuns, and ===> 
. . ; oF J&-" S. 
Matrons, chiefly in their Stomach, Secrets and Reins, &c. All infirnuties Ae: ; 
y 


LL, WY 


32.4. eAſtrologia eM unda. Lib.4. 
by Yen: are threatned, to thoſe eſpecially that are under her rule , and alſo to 
| thoſe places ſubje& unto her. 
What is gn» Mercurial Comets occaſion the death of ſome Great man (till remember 
php curmnes þ this is where they have Dominion) grievous calamities, War, Peſtilence and Fa- 
" m3 mine, Deſtruction, Tribulation, Anxiety, trouble and ſadneſs to Mercurialiſts, and 
Ingenuous and wiſe men, and tuch as are ruled by Mercary, and grievous trouble 
and ſorrow to ſuch places as are ſubjet unto him, and the ſign wherein the 
Comet appears, and places to which it extends it ſelf , and where it is viſible ic 
ſends Mercuriall diſeaſes, 
Whatby Lu- Lunar Comets chiefly manifeſt their ſignifications on women and common 
2h people ; as atſoto all ſuch as are under her rule, whether Towns, Cities, Kingdoms 
or Nations ; they particularly denote troubles, alteration of the Laws, Cuſtoms 
and Rites, Sterility and Wars, all infirmities ſignitied by the Aon, and thoſe chiefly 
to ſuch as are by her governed, &c. | 
Note alſo, that if a Comet extends its ſelf towards Satyrn, (viz. its raies or tail) 
it portendsthe deſtru2oz of the fruits of the Earth, and a ſcarcity or Famine ; to- 
wards 7apiter, wrath and deſtruction to Kings, and the Grandees of the Earth ; 
towards /ars, grievous and terrible ſickneſſes, wars, flaughters and blood-ſhed, 
and the alteration of Kingdoms ; towards the Sn, the death and deſtrutions of 
Kings and Government ; towards YVenw, the death of Great and Noble women, 
and damage to ſuch things as appertain unto them ; towards Mercury, much con- 
ſumprion of wealth, with ſhame and infamy ; towards the Moon, troubles and 
ſhame to the People in general. | 


Ca: 


Shewing the S1gfications of Comets, when they appear in any of the 
twelve Signs of FHearpen. 


cation of Co- Comets or Blazing-Stars appear in .4r:es, it ligniftes evill and detriment 
mets when to Noble men, and the Grandees of the Earth in the Eaſtern parts, 
wrnbagg en and abundance of ſadneſs to the commoner ſort, (and truly I conceive all Nati- 
| ons, Kingdoms and People, Cities, Towns, Villages and Families under the fign 
Aries will ſuffer the fgme) alſo a noife of the claſhing of Arms, blood-ſhed , 
and the death of ſome eminent Prince, or ſlaughter ot ſome great Lady, (you 
mutt remember to confine your judgment herein to the places wherein the Bla- 
Zing-Star or Comet hath power, ſo alſo in the ſubſequent rules in the like caſe) 
with fear and trouble of ſlaughter amongit men; alſo great drought, common 
diſeaſes in the Head, Eyes and Brain, a rot amonglt ſmall Cattel, eſpecially 
Sheep, and a dejection of Great and Noble men, or an un-throning of ſome 

King, and a riſe or promotion of vile and ignoble mean people. 

It its apparition be in the Eaſtern part of Heaven, it will operate ſooner, and 
there ſhall be enmity amonglit men ; bur if in the Weſtern,more (low, and much evill 
and detriment from Kings or Superiours, and many ſhowers, inundations and fre- 
quent ſnows in Winter. 

In Taurus. Tf any Blazing-Star or Comet appear in Taw, it ſignifieth miſchief to men, 
and diminution of their goods, alto injuries and wrongs put upon them ; it uſes 
alſo to fignifie (as ſay the Antients) the death of ſome Great man, Captivities, 


injuries, and a toleration of evils; detriment to the greater ſort of Cattel, eſpecially 
| Buls, 


Of the Ggnifi. \ Lbumaſer and Junftinus with many others ſay, that if any of the aforeſaid 


Lib.4.. eAſtrologia IVAunda. 225 


'Buls, Cows and Oxen, great winds, a corruption of Fruit, and deſtruction of Corn, 
and in Winter much cold, alſo grievous Earth-quakes, vehement ſickneſſes, and 
dry ſcurtie diſeaſes, proceeding of putrefication,as ſcabs,&c. - 

If ic appear toward the Eaſt, it will ſooner operate , and the King ſhall fear his 
Enemies, and men ſhall be moleſted with boils and ſwellings about the Groins , 
and theſe ſhall continue for ſome years ; alſo ſickneſſes in the Summer-quarter ; 
and if it appear inthe Weſtern partzit will work more flowly,and ſignifies much rain. 

In Gemini, if any Comet appear, it ſignifies men ſhall be laſcivious and inceſtuous; In Gerriri. 
looſe livers and neglecters of goodneſs ; alſo it denotes quarrels, wars, and diſſenti- 
ons amongſt men, 1ickneſſes and the death of children, and yong -men eſpecially ; 
alſo Aborrtive births, the ſlaughter of Birds, Famine, Thunder and Lightning, with 
very high winds to the eradication and ſubverſion of trees and houſes. 

And if it appear towards the Eaſt part of Heaven, the Effects thereof will ſoon 
be ſeen,and many Grandees of the World ſhall be abaſed,and brought down from 
their High Places and Honours ; and if it appear in the Weſt, not ſo ſoon, and 
it ſignifies much captivity, and abundance of rain and inundations. 

Alſo if a Comet appear in Carcer, itſignifies abundance of Locuſts (in the parts In Cance-. 
where they are naturally produced, in our Climate it produces Caterpillars, and 
ſuch like pernitious worms ) which ſhall eat up and deſtroy the Fruits of the Earth, 
alſo ſmall worms in © orn and Trees, a ſcarcity of Fruit and plenty of Worms; it . 
denotes alſo wars, diſcords and much evill, the death of ſome Great Perſon, ſub- 
merſions, Rapes and Robberies, Famine and Peſtilence. 

And if it appear in the Eaſtern part of Heaven, its EffeRs will be quickly mani- 
feſt, and there ſhall be ſcarcity of Proviſions for the uſe of man towards the latter 
end of the year ; if in the Weſtern, not ſo ſoon; it denotes the kindneſs of Kings 
and Great men tothe Commons. | 

Again, if any appearin Leo, men ſhall be damnified by wild Beaſts, I yons and Ia Ie. 
Woolts, ( this is to be underſtood in thoſe Regions where ſuch feral creatures 
are) Worms and Vermin ſhall be deſtructive to the Corn, and men ſhall be dam- 
nified in their eſtatesz the Gentry and Nobility ſhalf ſuffer detriment, and man 
of them death, and War amongſt Kings towards the end of the year, and n— 
effuſion of bloud inthe Eaſtern parts | note the Parentheſisin Aries] and pains in 
the Eyes. 

And if it appear inthe Eaſtern gart, the EffeRs are ſoon manifeſted, and it ſig- 
nifies great Winds, + 199 gu a ſcarcity of Waters ; inthe Weſtern, not ſo ſoon, 
and it ſignifies many ſickneſles, and that Wolves and mad Dogs will rage. 

And if in Virgo, it denotes the extirpation of Domeſticks belonging to ſome In Virgo, 
King or Prince, or their removall out of one place into another,or out of one King- 
dom into another, or their baniſhment, or their being carried away captive, and 
their goods and offices ſhall be taken away without any hope of reſtauration, nei- 
ther ſhall they ever recover them; it denotes alſo damage to Merchants and mu- 
tual injuries and injuſtice amongſt men; alſo vexations and captivities, and much la- 
bour, pain, trouble,tribulations and ſadneſs, Feavers, Abortions in women, a noiſe of 
Arms, &c. 

If it appear Eaſtward, the ſooner are its Effets manifeſt, and portends war; if 
Weſtward, the later, and denotes quarrels and a rankeneſs of Corn. 

In Libra it denotes theft and robberies, alſo cutters on the High-way, and men In Libra 
ſhall fear poverty and want, and ſhall ſuffer through cold ; it denotes alſo the 
death of ſome eminent mian, ſlaughters, and ſecret plots and treacheries, a ſcarcity 
of Rain, impetuous Winds, a drought of Fountains and other waters, a want of 
the Fruits of the Earth, and Proviſions for the uſe of man, Earth: quakes, &c. 

And if it be Eaſtern, theſe Efﬀects will the ſooner appear, and the Kings of Ba- 
bylon (and ſuch as areunder the ſign Libra) ſhall be unfortunate ; and Horſes and 
Mules ſhall be dear, and Wars amongſt the Romars ; butif Weſtern, the contrary, 
and ſervants ſhall contemn and reje& their Maſters, and the fruits of the Earth ſhall 
not be altogether ſo ſcarce. EY In 


I__ 


| 
nl " " "- - & OS rot + 8. ” - _4 
5 ded) gt —_ yo » 8 ” 2 F 
. - : Wh , a” OS I -Y =>, 
þ fr Þ ——_ 4 KB FM p Pp 4 - _ » E 
- Ate as. WX- Lata RE i IEEE <<; Ox ts 
i= : : 
... 3 = 


FIERY" s a 


ea 6 
wn 


<-> +. Bf 
<tthe > >. 
" - 


32.6 


In $ corfto, 


In Sag'ttary. 


In Caprico/n. 


In 4q«a7ies, 


In Piſces. 


When Comets 


» Aſtrologia eMunda. Lib.4. 

In Scorpio any Comet {ignifieth abundance of war and rebellion to Kings, 
changes and alterations, detriment and damage to ſouldiers, labour and travel to 
all kinds of men, contentions amongſt Great men, great perils and dangers, the death 
of ſome emigent man, and a ſcarcity of waters at ſome certain times , miſchief to 
ſuch as are with'child, a ſcarcity of Corn and the fruits of the Earth, and pains 
in the Teſticles and Bladder. 

And ifit be ſeen in the Eaſt or Eaſtward,theſe do ſoon appear, and it denotes a 
ſcarcity of rain,and that Wolyes and Dogs will ravin; but if it be Weltward, not ſo 
ſoon, and there ſhall be Locuſts and ſuch like creatures. 

Allo a Comet in Sagirrary denotes a decay of Nobility, and a ſuppreſſion of 
Great and Noble men, wiſe, prudent and learned, and much evill and tribulation 
will fall upon them, and eſpecially to Scribes or Lawyers, moreover captivity of 
Princes, war and ſuch like. | 

zur if it be ſeen towards the Eaſt, ſooner will theſe be effeted, and it ſignifieth 
the death of Kings,fightings robberies and a ſcarcity of Provitions for the life of man; 
ifrowards the Welt, . later, and it denotes many fantaſtical dreams, and that women 
ſhall have many Abortions. : 

Again, in Capricorn any Comet ſignifies fornications amongſt men, war amongſt 
King and Nobles, many calamities and misfortunes, quarrels, poiſoning of Kings , 
the death of Princes. cutting by the High-way , contempt of Religion, men and 
things ; and italfo ſhews perſecution of or to Religion, hail, ſnow, and a ſharp 
winter to the great anoyance of the ſeeds of the Earth; alſo it threatnech Famine, 
Peſtilence, and the like. 

If it be firſt ſeen in the Eaſtern part of Heaven , its Effects will ſuddenly ap- 
= and it denotes that Kings ſhall be damnified by their enemies, and they ſhall 

e the occaſion of their death and alterations in Government, ſnow alſo and abun- 
dance of rain, to the deſtruction of Vines and other the fruits of the Earth ; but 
if inthe Weſtern, not ſo ſoon, and it denotes a Year of abundance of graſs and 
water. 

Moreover if in »Aquariez, it denotes many wars and flaughters, and the death of 
ſome honorable and eminent Prince or Lady in the Eaſtern parts, ſay ſome of the 
Antients; (bur I ſhould have judged it inthe Weltern parts, Aquaries being a 
Weltern ſign, &c. ) war for a long time, Epidemical diſeaſes, an obſcuration of the. 
Ayr, with thundring and lightning, Pettilence alſo, and the death of both 1lluftrious 
men, and alſo the common ſort ot people. 

If it appear in the Eaſtern parts, their Portences will ſooner operate, and it de- 
notes abundance of graſs ; if inthe Weſtern, later, and it ſignifies various rumors , 
and chiefly of war, and that many men ſhall be impriſoned and captivated. 

Laſtly, a Comet in P#/ces ſignifies war amongſt kindred and ſuch as are allied one 
tro another, and there ſhall be much ſlaughter, contentions alſo touching matters 
of Faith, and priviledgesand cuſtoms in Religion and antient Traditions ; there 
ſhall be alſo many apparitions in the Ayr, fiſhes ſhall many of them ſuffer 
deſtruction, and it ſhall be dangerous Navigating; Kings ſhall War one againſt 
another the father againſt the ſon, and the ſon againſt the father, and brother againſt 
brother,&c. 

And if it appear inthe Eaſt part of Heaven, the ſooner will theſe be manifeſted,and 
it ſignifies enmities between Kings,Nobles,and Plebeans,tumults, bickerings,&c. if in 
the Weſt part, the later, and there ſhall be many anxieties and deaths amongſt men in 
the Weltern parts (I ſhould judge it in the North-weſt parts,) and this (hall continue 
three years, and and there ſhall be many birds, fithes, and inundations and over- 
fowings of Rivers. 

You have heard that they chiefly ſhew their Effects to thoſe parts to which 


chiefly ma- they emitt their beams or rayes, to the which I may adde the Regions where 


nifcſt their 
EfteRs. 


they are ſeen, and the Kingdoms, Countreys, Provinces-and Cities ſubject to the 
ſign wherein they appear ; but the time when it ſhall be chiefly moſt _— is 
- when 


E:b.4. eAſtrologia aMunda. 327 
when the Sun comes to the place of their firſt appearance,or to that Planet of whoſe 
nature and complexion it 15,&c. 


And thus much of Comets and Blazing-Stars; come we now to great Con-- 
junctions, and ſo conclude theſe our labours. 


Cn AF, XL 


Of great ( onjunttions their Number, and how to Judge of their Effefts : 
M Oſt of the Antients have been ſhort in their judgments on this ſubje&, yet 


ſome more copious then others, but none ſo effeRual as I could wiſh-for 
thy inttrucion, ſince by the Conjwunttion of the Planets all the accidents 
and mutations of this Elementary World are known, eſpecially by the Commuttion 
of the Superiours; how ever ſuch as they are I ſhall here deliver unto thee with my 
beſt aſſiſtance ; time and opportunity may happily produce more hereaftex; in the In- 
terim underſtand thus much , 
Thatthere are ſeven ſorts of {\onjunttions conſiderable. | 
The firſt and greateſt of all the reſt, is the Conjun#ion of the two ſuperiour Pla- 
nets Saturn and 7upiter in the firſt term or degree of eArres, which happens but 
once in nine hundred and threeſcore yearr. 
The ſecond is the {onjanttion of Saturn and Jupiter in the firſt term or degree of 
every triplicity, and this is accompliſhed once in two hundred and forty years, yet 
once in twenty years, they come in Conjuntion in one part or other of the Zodiack. 
The third is the ({Conjunttion of Saturn and Hars in the firſt term or degree of 
Cancer, and this is once in thirty years. 
The fourth is the Conjunttion of the three ſuperiours, Saturn, Tupiter and Mart 
in one term or face of any ſign. | 
The fifth is the onjurttion of Jupiter ard Mars, vihich is a mean and the leait 
Corinugttion of the ſuperiours, and therefore is not the tore-runner of ſuch great 
n fortefs as the other, as you ſhall by and by underſtand. 
mee ſixth is the Conjurnttion of the £4x with any of the reſt of the Planets at the - 
time of his entrance into the firſt point of eres. 
The ſeventh and laſt is the Conjunttion of the Sun and Noon , which happeneth 
once every moneth. | | 
Of which we are nowin order to treat ; but firſt you muſt know that the time for —_ 
the erecting of your figure is when the Planets are in Partil Conjunttion, wiz. in mnt 
the very ſame ligne, degree and minute of the Zodiack. You may ſee what a : 
Partil Aſpe& is in the 27 Chapter of the ſecond Book of this Volume. 
Having then erected the Figure of the Heavens at your punctual time,and placed 
the Planets therein being reduced to the time of the day, have regard unto the for- 
ritudes and debilities of the Planets, eſpecially thoſe in (onjmunttion, for if they be 
ſtrong and fortunate, they preſage good ; if weak and impedited,the contrary, 
And this good or evill ſhall be according to the nature of the Planets in Con 
jnttion, and the nature of the ſign in which they are ; as if the Sign be aiery and 
the Planets evill, impediment in the Ayr, corruption and much damage thereby 
both to men and the fruits of the Earth is denoted ; and ſo judge of the ret of 
the ſigns ; in like manner judge the contrary if the Planets in Conjunttion be 107 
runes and well dignitied. 
Again, if the Malevolents be in CoyjunTton in feminine Signs, they denote Pe- 
ſtilence and evill infirmities to women ; and the Female ſex of things m general chiefly, 
in like manner to the Maſculine ſex if the Sign be Maſculine ; and health, proſperity 
and good ſucceſs, if they are benevolent Planets, 
| 42 More- 


32.0 


In Sag'ttay. 


In Capricorn. 


In 4qza71es, 


In P:/ces. 


When Comets 


» Aſtrologia eMunda. Lib.4. 

In Scorpio any Comet fignifieth abundance of war and rebellion to Kings, 
changes and alterations, detriment and damage to ſouldiers, labour and travel to 
all kinds of men, contentions amongſt Great men, great perils and dangers, the death 
of ſome emigent man, and a ſcarcity of waters at ſome certain times , miſchief to 
ſuch as are with'child, a ſcarcity of Corn and the fruits of the Earth, and pains 


in the Teſticles and Bladder. 


And if it be ſeen in the Eat or Eaſtward,theſe do ſoon appear, and it denotes a 
ſcarcity of rain,and that Wolyes and Dogs will ravin ; bur if it be Weſtward, not ſo 
ſoon, and there ſhall be Locuits and ſuch like creatures. 

Alſo a Comet in Sagitrary denotes a decay of Nobility, and a ſuppreſlion of 
Great and Noble men, wiſe, prudent and learned, and much evill and tribulation 
will fall upon them, and eſpecially to Scribes or Lawyers, moreover captivity of 
Princes, war and ſuch like. | 

Zur if it be ſeen towards the Eaſt, ſooner will theſe be effefted, and it ſignifieth 
the death of Kings,fightings robberies and a ſcarcity of Provitions for the life of man; 
ifrowards the Welt, later, and it denotes many fantaſtical dreams, and that women 


ſhall have many Abortions. 


Again, in Capricorn any Comet ſignifies fornications amongſt men, war amongſt 
King and Nobles, many calamities and misfortunes, quarrels, poiſoning of Kings , 
the death of Princes. cutting by the High-way , contempr of Religion, men and 
things ; and italfo ſhews perſecution of or to Religion, hail, inow, and a ſharp 
winter to the great anoyance of the ſeeds of the Earth; alſo it threatneth Famine, 
Peſtilence, and the like. 

If it be firſt ſeen in the Eaſtern part of Heaven , its Effets will ſuddenly ap- 
_ and it denotes that Kings ſhall be damnified by their enemies, and they ſhall 

e the occaſion of their death and alterations in Government, ſnow alſo and abun- 


. dance of rain, to the deſtruction of Vines and other the fruits of the Earth ; bur 


if inthe Weſtern, not ſo ſoon, and it denotes a Year of abundance of graſs and 
water. 

Moreover if in »Aquariez, it denotes many wars and flaughters, and the death of 
ſome honorable and eminent Prince or Lady in the Eaſtern parts, ſay ſome of the 
Antients ; (but I ſhould have judged it in the Weltern parts, Aquaries being a 
Weltern ſign, &c. ) war for a long time, Epidemical diſeaſes, an obſcuration of the 
Ayr, with thundring and lightning, Peſtilence alſo, and the death of both 1lluſtrious 
men, and alſo the common ſort ot people. 

If it appear in the Eaſtern parts, their Portences will ſooner operate, and it de- 
notes abundance of graſs ; if inthe Weſtern, later, and it ſignifies various rumors , 
and chiefly of war, and that many men ſhall be impriſoned and captivated. 

Laſtly, a Comet in P3/ces ſignifies war amongſt kindred and ich as are allied one 


to another, and there ſhall be much ſlaughter, contentions alſo touching matters 


of Faith, and priviledgesand cuſtoms in Religion and antient Traditions ; there 
ſhall be alſo many apparitions in the Ayr, fiſhes ſhall many of them ſuffer 
deſtruction, and it ſhall be dangerous Navigating; Kings ſhall War one againſt 
another the father againſt the ſon, and the ſon againſt the father, and brother againſt 
brother,&c. 

And if it appear inthe Eaſt part of Heaven, the ſooner will theſe be manifeſted,and 
it ſignifies enmities between Kings,Nobles,and Plebeans,tumults, bickerings,&c. if in 
the Weſt part, the later, and there ſhall be many anxieties and deaths amongſt men in 
the Weltern parts (I ſhould judge it in the North-weſt parts,) and this ſhall continue 
three years, and and there ſhall be many birds, fiihes, and inundations and over- 
flowings of Rivers. 

You have heard that they chiefly ſhew their EffeRts to thoſe parts to which 


chiefly ma- £hey emitt their beams or rayes, to the which I may adde the Regions where 


nifeſt their 
EffeRs. 


they are ſeen, and the —_— Countreys, Provinces-and Cities ſubje&t to the 


ſign wherein they appear ; but the time when it ſhall be chiefly moſt manifeſt is 
E when 


Lib.4. eAſtrologia <Nunda. "BP 
when the Su» comes to the place of their firſt appearance,or to that Planet of whoſe | 
nature and complexion it 15,&c. 


And thus much of Comets and Blazing-Stars; come we now to great Con- 
junctions, and ſo conclude theſe our labours. 


CHnuaPr. Xl, | | 


Of great ( onjunttions their Number, and how to judge of their Effefts. 
M Oſt of the Antients have been ſhort in their judgments on this ſubje&, yet. 


ſome more copious then others, but none ſo effeRual as I could wiſh-for 
thy inſtruction, ſince by the Conjuntion of the Planets all the accidents 
and mutations of this Elementary World are known, eſpecially by the Commuttion 
of the Superiours ; how ever ſuch as they are I ſhall here deliver unto thee with my 
beſt aſſiſtance ; time and opportunity may happily produce more hereaftex; in the In- 7 
terim underſtand thus much, | | 
Thatthere are ſeven ſorts of {"onjunttions conſiderable, | | 
The firſt and greateſt of all the reſt, is the Conjun#:o of the two ſuperiour Pla- 
nets Saturn and 7upiter in the firſt term or degree of eAries, which happens but 
once in nine hundred and threeſcore yearr. | 
The ſecond is the {*onjanttion of Saturn and Jupiter in the firſt term or degree of 
every triplicity, and this is accompliſhed once in two hundred and forty years, yet 
once in twenty years, they come in Conjunt#tion in one part or other of the Zodiack. 
The third is the (onjuxttion of Saturn and Wars in the firit term or degree of 
Cancer, and this is once in thirty years. 
The fourth is the Conjunttion of the three ſuperiours, Saturn, 7upiter and Mars 
in one term or face of any ſign. : 
The fitth is the (onjunttion of Jupiter and Mars, which is a mean and the leaſt 
Coviuyttion of the ſuperiours, and therefore is not the fore-runner of ſuch great 
n #efs asthe other, as you ſhall by and by underitand. 
ae ſixth is the Conjmnttion of the £4 with any of the reſt of the Planets at the 
time of his entrance into the firſt point of eArres. Es 
The ſeventh and laſt is the Conjunttion of the Sun and Moow , which happeneth 
once every moneth. : | 
Of which we are nowin order to treat ; but firſt you muſt know that the time for En 
the erecting of your figure is when the Planets are in Partil Conjunttion, viz. in han? 
the very ſame ſigne, degree and minute of the Zodiack. You may ſee what a 
Partil Aſpect is in the 27 Chapter of the ſecond Book of this Volume. 
Having then erected the Figure of the Heavens at your punctual time,and placed 
the Planets therein being reduced to the time of the day, have regard unto the for- 
ritudes and debilities of the Planets, eſpecially thoſe in {om junttion, for if they be 
ſtrong and fortunate, they $4 good ; if weak and impedited,the contrary. 
And this good or evill ſhall be according to the nature of the Planets in Con 
jnttion, and the nature of the ſign in which they are ; as if the Sign be aiery and 
the Planets evill, impediment in the Ayr, corruption and much damage thereby 
both to men and the fruits of the Earth is denoted ; and ſo judge of the reſt of 
the ſigns ; in like manner judpe the contrary if the Planets in Coniunttion be 1 0: 
tunes and well dignitied. 
Again, if the Malevolents be in Conjunton in feminine Signs, they denote Pe- 
ſilence and evill infirmities to women ; and the Female ſex of things m general chiefly, 
in like manner to the Maſculine ſex if the Sign be Maſculine ; and health, proſperity 
and good ſucceſs, if they are benevolent Planets, 
S. C4 More- 


© Rs A © ner ee” a WY og” . 


2 22.8 » Aſtrologia eMunda. Lib.4. 
Moreover in fixed ſigns, what they portend ( whether they are Beneyo- 


lents or Malevolents) is of continuance ; in moveable, of little or no continuance : 
in common figns, a mean berween theſe, viz. they are neither of long or ſhort 


continuance. 


en 
——  — 


"TI 


CHaP. XI1L. 


Of the Conjunctions of the Supertours. 


this World | for the which they were ordained ] but ſome more forcibly 
then others, as being fore-runners of greater and ſtranger accidents and 
mutations. | 
Of the Con For, the great Conjuntion of Saturn and Jnpiter in the firſt point of Aries, or 
on if the firſt term thercof, is the greateſt and moſt notable (onjunt#ion of all the other, 
ebony i for that they are the higheſt, and ſo conſequently (as to us) the ſloweſt of the 
Planets, and therefore have more power to a& what they denote thenany of the 
other h: :, and for that eres is the firſt of the ſigns of the Zodiack, and the 
firit fign of the Triplicities, alſo the firit of the fiery Trygon. 

And therefore it is that when theſe two highelt Planets are in Conjuntion in the fiery 
| Trygon, (eſpecially inthe firſt term or degree of Aries the Aſcendent of the world, 
| and the place wherein the chief Luminary (tz. the Su») was at the Creation) many 
commotions, wars, ſeditions, troubles, ſubverſion of Monarchies, Kingdoms, States, 
alteration of Laws, Cuſtoms, Priviledges and Rights, Plagues, Famine, Deſolation, 
Anxiety and trouble, Treafons, Treacheries,and the death of Kings,Nobles, Princes, 
| Emperours and Powers, tollow. 
| Of the Coz- © SO likewiſe when they are in Conjunttion in the firlt term of any Trygon, whe- 
| juafton of $4 ther it be fiery, earthy, aiery or watry, but not fo forcible 1s their then EF |, 
E /u/nand 7u- nor fo terrible as the former, yet (though in a leſs degree) the fore-runnersan - 

non, | * caſioners of grievous mutations and accidents, according to the nature of that 

We Planer which hath moſt power of the twoin the Sign wherein they are joined ; for 
if Saturn be ſtronger then 7«picer, it will be very terrible ; bur if Fepiter be {tronger 
then him, ſomewhat will be abated ; in fiery, earthy and atery Signs they cauſe 
drought and a ſcarcity of Proviſions and barrenneſs of the ground, Peſtilence and 
Famine ; in watry, detriment by the too much abundance thereof. 

Alſo when theſe two firſt { 0njxnfons are inany ofthe Angles , eſpecially the 
tenth, it denotes the ariſe of ſome new King or Prophet from the quarter ſignified 
by the ſign wherein they are joined, and if the Sign and Lord thereof be fortunate, 
it denotes their continuance,eſtabliſhment and glory ; bur if it be weak or afficted, 
and its Lord, they ſhall be {lain and put down ; for the whole world is governed by 
theſe Trygonr, as Prolomy teacheth in his ſecond Book, and the whole Macrrcoſm 
compounded of the four Elements which anſwereth to the four Triplicities,and there- 
fore it is that the Conjun#tion of the Superiours in them are occaſioners of ſuch great 
mutations, 

Of the Cor= Tn like manner the C2njunttion of Saturn and tAars in the firlt degree or term of 

ern fo Cancer, is the forerunner of much evill. (yet are the two former preterred before it) 
WW -- in Caacers 21%. ternible wars, flaughters, depopulations and alterations of Government, and 

deſtruction of Kingdoms, fire and ſword, famine and peſtilence, &c. and if it be Ori- 
ental,its Effects will ſoon operate; if Occidentall, not fo foon, the Conjunttion of > a- 
turn and Mars in any other ſign and place is not ſo terrible. 


And truly this is a terrible Cojunion if rightly conſidered, and diftateth unto us 
ugon 


F Very Planet in ſome meaſure or other contributeth to the Government of 
i 


Lib.4. » Aſtrologia <NAunda. 329 
upon the firſt conſideration, no leſs then horrible troubles and alterations in the | 
World; Jf we butconfider ic, it isa Conjunition of the Malevolents , two enemies f 
muſt needs be ftronger then one, and here they are both together, and in a ſign 

wherein jzpiter our belt friend is exalted, and the Aoon the mother of moiſture 

pitcheth her Tent, ſothat by their (onjunttion therein both the afliſtance of the 

one and the nature of the other is much damnified and affiiRed; again, Sarwrn is there- 

in in detriment , it bing the ſign oppoſite to bis Houſe Capricorn, and Mars 15 

therein in his fall, Capricorn being the Houſe of his exaltation, and therefore it is 

(theſe things being conſidered) that they are ſo miſchievous, when joined in this 

fign,the which of all their Comwntions is the worlt, &c. 

Alſo the Com mntion of Saturn, Jupiter and Mars in any term or face, and beheld —_ _ F. 
by the 5»x, they being rhe three ſuperiour Planets and moſt effeRual for ftrength and?, 7 A — 
beight,figniticth the deſtruction of Kingdoms,Sects and Schiſms,and great things ac- and Mar. 
cording to their ttrength and the nature of that Planet which is ſtrongelt in the fign, 

&c. Note that when theſe Planets are joined in their exalcacions, they denote good, 
to their power ; yet there ſhall be much war, and many Miracles ; if they be joined 
intheir fals, they denote miſchief, Famine and Peſtilence, &c. 


CHap. XIIT. 
Of the mean and leſſer Conjunctions, and their Effects. 


mean their Communtion in any other ſign or place of the Heavens fave that 

in Cancer) a mean (oxjunttion, that of Fupiter and Marr, a leſſer, and 
that of the S-» with any Planet in his ingreſs into Aries, and his Ceninnftion with 
the 1100» every moneth, leaſt of all. | 
| Their reaſons will ſoon appear, if we but warily conſider why they term the 
foregoing Conjunttions greateit or greater, for Saturn and Mars mult needs do 
more miſchief then 7«pirer and Mars, Saturn being of a Malevolent nature, and 
higheſt of all the Planets, and ſo conſequently floweſt, ( as to us, yet his mo- 
tion doth equal if notexceed the Afoons, only the largenets of his ſphear cauſeth 
that it is not ſo apparently obvious to our ſenſe ) and «pier of a Benevolent 
and ſweet Influence, and lower, &c. and therefore as touching the reſt, your own 
ſenſe will give you (having conſidered what hath been ſaid ) that the Inferiour 
are not of ſuch power and efficacy as are the Superiour. Ko 

The Conjunttion of Saturn and Mars (1 mean this mean Conjuntion) denotes war Of the cor- 
and blood-ſhed; but if you would know in what degree this will be executed —_— 66 
you are to ſee what Planet is Almuten of the figure, and whether he be fortunate ,;;,.** 
or no, for if he be ſtrong, eſſentially and free from impediment and affliction, and 
be of a Benevolent nature, judge the evil will be leſſened in one kinde or other, 
and if this Almuten have any good Aſpect to the place of the {onjunttion, ſee to 
the nature of your Almuten and the quarter of Heaven he is in, and the nature 
of the ſign he doth poſſeſs, and judge that by ſuch things, occaſions, or men tig- 
nified thereby, ſhall the war threatned be mitigated, and perhaps diſſolved, eſpe- 
cially if there be any reception between him and the ſtrongelt of thoſe Planets 
m [onjuntRien, &c., underſtand this in all the reſt murary mutandis ; likewiſe if Note. 
your Almuten be evil, weak and unfortunate, judge the contrary, and that ra- 
ther by fuch as are by him ſignified the war will be fomented or increaſed. 
Note alſo, that if they are joined in hamane figns, many jnfirmities ſhall be 
incident to men, and thoſe according to the nature of rhe ftrongeſt of the two in 
Tts Conmuttion; 


0 Ome of the Antients have termed the Conjunttion of Saturn and Mars (1 


320 A lrologia eM unaa. Lib.4. 


Conmnttion ; in earthy ſigns, froſt, ſnow and cold ſhall moleſt and prove offenſive 
and deſtructive to the fruits and feeds of the Earth; in fiery the Earth ſhall be 
barren through extremity of heat and drought ; in atery there ſhall be many hich 
and tempeſtuous winds; in watry, abundance of waters and many inundations; fo l1kc- 
wiſe if it happen in beaſtial ſigns, the evil chiefly will be incident to Beaſts, and tl:v!« 
eſpecially that are of the nature and form of the ſign, &c. (as you have often heard 
: betore in delivering rules for the judging of the Revolutions of the Years of the 
Nete. World) in this manner alſo mayeſt thou enlarge upon all the preceding and fub- 
ſequent Coxjunttions ; if they be joined in an Angle, they declare war amongſt 
great ones, and many tribulations and difſentions, which ſhall continue cill chey are 
othetwiſe joined, &c. 
Of the & of The chiefeſt of the leſſer Conjuntions 1s the Conjunttion of Jupiter and Mars,ard 
a" 6. this denotes many accidents and evils by rain, ſnow, corruption of the avr, war 
nd blood-ſhed; if Jwpiter be ftrongeſt in the Conjunition it will not be ſo bad; if 
. /ars, do not expect berter ; and it they be joined in the Aſcendent ot the 1 &vo- 
lation of the Year, miſchief and misfortune will happen aſſuredly unto the people tn 
general ; the nature of the evil judge from the nature of the fign they are in,and the 
Planet moſt fortified, &c. | 
In the ſame manner judge of the reſt of the preceding and ſubſequent Cominy--,- 
cns, if they be in the Aſcendent of the Revolution, and ſoalſo according to the (ir- 
nification and nature of every Houſe wherein you finde them in the Figure or R: ,0- 
lution, as you have heard in other caſes ſufficiently before ; underſtand clus and thou 
haſt attained a great ſecret. 
The f ofthe The Coniunttion of the Sn with any other Planet when he in his annual Re- 
D = theo- yolution enters the firſt point of eAries, you are to judge according to the nature 
Ofthe & of of the Planer whether good or bad, of which,as alſo his Con;unfion with the 4700% 
the © and ».” Every Moneth, I need ſay no more m this place ſince what hath been delivered 
| where we treat of the Revolutions of the World, of weather and alteration of the 
Ayr, and of Eclipſes before in this ſame fourth Book may ſuffice ; wheretore let us 
now draw to a concluſion of this work. 


CruaPe. XLvV. 


Of the Conjunction of the Planets in the twelve Signs according t9 
Hermes. 


and this one Chapter more, and thou wilt ſoon be able to give a rationall 

and ſufficient judgement upon any Cimnttion whatſoever. 
Ofthe dof When 7uoriter, Venus, Mercury and the Moon are joined in Aries , they pro- 
27,7 and) miſe good ſucceſs tro Mankinde, and much gain and profit every where, fertil ſhewers, 
n\- _ and honourtowomen and Secretaries of State ; alſo ifthe Moo and 7upiter alone be 

joined in Aries, they denote juſtice and honeſty amongſt men. 

& pandd in When Yenw and Mars are joined in T awrr, it ſignifies women ſhall brawl and 
Wa quarrel with their husbands, and there ſhall be many Epidemical diſeaſes _—_ 
men and Beaſts, deſtruction and tlaughter, ftrong and Malevolent winds , and de- 
and triment to treesand fruits; alſo if ?#piter, and Vers and Mars and the © on be 
joyned in Taxrus , there ſhall be much lying and diſſembling amongſt men, as alſo 
rreacheries, deſtruction of Kings and Nobles, vile and ignoble men ſhall rebel and 


raiſe war again their Prince ; alſo it denotes Earth-quakes : And if —_ and 
upiter 


| Ndeavour thou bat to underſtand what hath been ſaid touching Conjwuntions 


SN Yd 
D int 


Lib.4. eAjlrologia <NAunaa. 231 
Zupiter and Mars be joined in 7 aurus,they ſignifie the death and mortality of beaſts, 4 h y and 2 
and that Kings ſhall go out of their own Kingdoms into others ; and there ſhall hap- in >. 
pen many infirmities to men through choler, and grievous mortalities both to Man 

and Beaft, 

Alſo when the Ss and Venus and Mercury are joined in Gemini , Scribes and & © 2 and 
Secretaries ſhall ſuffer detriment, and ſuch as keep Books of Accompts, Stewards and * in It. 
Secretaries of Stare, Truſtees, &c. ſouldiers ſhall be obedient to their Commanders, 
and many thefts and robberies by the High-way ſhall be committed, to that paſſengers 
arethreatned miſchief, 

So likewiſe Saturn and Fupiter and Mars and the Sun, and Venrs and Iſer- hy 7 
cury, and the Aloon in / onpuenttion in Cancer iignifieth detriment inevery thing,and _ © 
fear ſhall fall on men, and the King ſhall perplex men, and one man another, there : Y ,_y the 
ſhall alſo be Earth-quakes and detriment both at Sea and Land. crank 

And when Saturn and ZFupiter, and Mars and the <Iooz are joined in Leo, & h, Y and 
Kings ſhall war and kill one another, and there ſhall happen many great terrors and 4 &) in $1. 
evils to men. 

When $4'#rn and Mars and Mercery are joined in Virgo, it fignifieth damage 5 þ & and 5 
and detriment to women, and Kings ſhall be deceived ; allo if the 5: be eclipſed in in. 
V:-gzand Mars joined unto him, there ſhall be {laughter between the Nobles and o Foipted, 
Plebeans, and great diſſentions; Alſo when Satzrn and Lens are joined in this lign, 7 x Tap 4 
it denotes an increaſe of waters. | ; 

When Cars and Juprter are joined in Libra, it ſignifies the evill ſtate of No- & & and 
ble men and their Aſſociates; Alſo when [wpicer and the 5#» and the Moon are In =. 
therein joined, there ſhall happen mortalities to women and jukt men, and there ſhall XL ©and) 
be much rain, clouds and malignant ayr. - Sg 
 Again,when Sararnand Mars and YVenw are joined in Scorpio,it {ignifieth the King & Þ & and ? 

ſhall be wounded, or bitten by ſome Beaſt, or ſtung by ſome Adder, or obnoxious ' "t- 
creature ; and that Kings ſhall go out of their own Lands into others ; one King ſhall 
diſagree and claſh with another, and they ſhall break the league and promiſe which 
they have made toeach other; A!ſo when the oo is alſo joined with them, it fig- 
nifies much rain and increaſe of waters. | 

Moreover if Scorpio be the Aſcendent of the Revolution of the World, and 
Saturn be there,. and Aars alſo joined unto him, or have any participation with 
him in the Aſcendent, and Venrs be then Combuſlt, and /#pirecr retrograde, judge 
evill in every thing, wars and quarrels, ſackings and ſpoilings of Cities and Towns, 
Earth-quakes, terrours and blood-ſhed, mortalities and many deſtructive intirmities, 
becauſe Scorpio is the moſt unfortunate of all the ſigns ; judge allo that Kings ſhall 
diſagree and fight one with another, and Noble and Great men ſhall die, and there 
ſhall happen many anxieties, tribulations and trouble in the world: alſo if both & y and in 
the Fortunes be joined in this ſign there ſhall many ſeducers be diſcovered, and ſuch m, 
as ſtudy to with-draw men from the true Worſhip of God. 

Alſo when Satwrn and /upiter and Mercury and the Moon are joined in Sapit- / þ, y; t5 and 
tary, it ſignifieth there ſhall be many waters upon the face of the Earth, and thar ) in 7, 
Kings ſhall exalt themſelves; alſo Noblemen, Scribes, Aftrologers and Ingenuous 
men thall be in great eſteem. | 

Again, when the Sxn and Mars and Mercury are joined in Capricorn, it figni- & O @ and 7 
fieth deftruction to Kings,cauſeth hot and dry diſeaſes, many Combuſtions and fiery #2 
apparitions in the ayr ; many windes and a ſcarcity of all ſorts of Vegetables; and 
that there ſhall be many thefts and robberies. 

Moreover when Mars and Saturn and the Moon are joined in e-Lquaries, it figni- 4 & h and y 
fieth a ſcarcity of water and rain ; damage to travellers; and that there ſhall be many in xx. 

Snakes 'and Serpents. LE. 

Laſtly, when Saturn and /apiter and Mars are joined in Piſces, it ſignifieth the F h v4 and 
death, and great damage of Kings, Noblemen and Grandees; alſo if the 5 and & in x. 
Mars and Saturn be there joined, the King (hall be lain, there ſhall be little or 4 © J and H 


no rain, and many Fiſhes ſhall be taken in the Sea ; Note, that when Dragons Fn in X. 
an 


» 
» ad 
The Coniun. 


Ffion cf Dra- 
gons Head 


and Sa14;R in 


any gn. 


Noe. 


Sunday. 


Monday. 


» Aſtrologia eMunda. | Lib.s. 


and Stern are joined in any Sign, it ſignifieth evill and damage according to the na- 
rure of the Sign; as if they be deg. in any fiery Sign, drought and damage to 
Beaſts; ifin Aries, to Sheep and ſmall Catrel ; if in Leo, to Lyons or feral Beaſts 
and creatures of prey; if in Sagiztary, to Horſes, eſpecially in the laſt 15 degrees 
chereof; it in Earthy,viz.T aurgs, to Buls, Cows and Oxen ; in Capricorn, to Goats, 
and ſuch like, and damage to the Earth and fruits, but eſpecially if in Virgo; if in 
watry, damage in and by water, ſhipwracks, and the death of Fiſh and creatures li- 
ving inthe water ; ifin Aiery, there ſhall be many tempeſtuous, pernicious winds 
and ſtorms, corruption of the Ayr, the death of many Kings and many infir- 
mities, &Cc. . 

And thus have I / by the bleſling of God) delivered unto thee the Natural rules 
and reaſons of fertility, ſterility, health, ſickneſs, wars, peace alterations and accidents 
of this life, and how to judge of them by the Revolutions of the Tears of the World, 
Eclipſes or che two great lights and lamps of Heaven the Sun and Moon, Comets 
and Bliz4ing-*tars, the fore-runners of great mutations, which we have found in all 
Ages God hath uſed to ſnd for the reclaiming of his people from their evill wayes, 
before his wrath be poured on them; and laitly, by the great, mean and lefler Cor- 
junttions of the (wleſtial Planets, who next under the Great Creator , Governour 


and Cauſer of all cauſes, are the Governours of the World, and cauſes of all things 


therein, in a general and natural way. 

Wherefore to him alone that ordereth and dlſpoſeth all things according to his Di- 
vine will, and that Created the Heavens, Earth, ('&leſtial Planets and Stars, and 
that calleth them all by their names, and that maketh them differ from each other in glory, 
and that giveth of his free Will and pleaſure the knowledge of Divine and Natural 
things to the ſons of men, be aſcribed all poſſible Praiſe, Glory,-Power, Dominion, 
and [ hanksgiving both nov and for evermore, Amen. 

With this Chaprer I thought to have concluded, but ſince we have treated al- 
ready of the Natural cauſes of the general accidents of the World, and that ſome 
of the Antients have judged of all theſe things by the Falling of New-Tears-Day , 
and for that I have for ſome few years found them experimentally true, I ſhall 
adde this own Chapter more, for my Readers recreation and ſport when he is ſo 
diſpoſed ; yer if he diligently obſerve the Effects, he will finde them for the moſt 
part come yery near truth, rhough many times on the otherſide they may deviate 


therefrom. 


LUST, AT 


Shewing how to judge of the General Accidents of the World by the 
Falling of New-Years Day. 


for if it fall on Sunday, a pleaſant Winterenſueth,and a natural and kindly 
Summer and ſufficient fruit ; the Harveſt will be indifferent for weather . 
yet ſome wind and rainit will produce, a temperate Spring and it ſeaſonable ; ir de- 
notes alſo many Marriages, plenty of Wine and Honey, the death of young Men 
and Cartel, robberies in moſt places, news of Prelates and Kings, and cruel wars to- 
wards the end of the Year, or at leſt much difſention and diſcord amongh men. 

If it fall ona Monday, the Winter will be ſomewhat uncomfortable ; the Sum- 
mer temperate ; No great plenty of fruit, many fanſies and fables diſperſed abroad, 
many Apues, the death of Kings, Nobles and Great men, in moſt places marriages, 
and a downfal ofthe Gentry. | 

If 


Y Ou are herein to obferve on what day of the week NeW-Tears-Day falleth ; 


Lib.4. *© = Aftrologia \Aunda. 333 

If on Txe/day there followeth a ſtormy Winter , and a wet Summer, a various Tueſay. 
harveft, and moiſt Spring, Corn and fruit indifferent, yet Garden Herbs ſhall not 
flouriſh, great ſickneſs amongſt men, women and young children, and a mortality of 
_ many men (hall die of the Bloody-Flux, and every thing ſave corn ſhall 

e dear. 

On woden/day, a warm Winter in the beginning, but towards the end ſnow and Wodenſgay. 
froſt, a cloudy Summer, plenty of fruit, alſo of corn, wine, hay, honey and other | 
things,damage and hard labour to women with child, death ro many children, plenty 
of ſheep, news of Kings and great wars and blood-ſhed towards the midit, 

On Thur/4:y both Winter and Summer windy,a rainy Harveſt and a moiſt Spring, T hurſday, 
many Innundations towards the latter end of the Y ear,much fruit,and plenty of the 
fruits of the Earth and honey, buc fleſh ſhall be dear, a death of Cattel , in ge- 
reral, great trouble, wars and commotions, and women {hall be looſe and iicen- 
tious. 

On Fryday,a ſtormy Winter,and no pleaſant Summer,a moderate Spring,fave only Friday, 
it will be windy, and an indifferent Harveſt,and ſmall ſtore of fruit, wine and honey, 
corn dear, many blear Eyes, Y outh (ball dye many of them, Earth quakes in many 
places, much Thunder and Lightning , alſo Tempeſt , andthe ſudden death of 

Cattel. 
Laſtly on Saturday, a mean Winter, a very hot Summer, a late harveſt, and a dry Szurday. 
windy Spring, Garden Herbs ſhall be cheap , much burning, plenty of honey, flax 
and hemp, the death of antient people in moſt places, many Feavers, but chiefly 
Tertians, great rumours of wars, and ſudden murthers in many places for or upon 
' little or no occaſion, &c. 
Thus much from the falling of New-Years-doy, the which alchough the Tlliterate 
and Vulgar may make uſe of, for the frequent verity thereof, yet would 1 not have 
them depend thereon, for I cannot (I muſt contels) finde any ſure ground why 
the Antients ſhould thus conglude ; wherefore here 1 defift with this Concluſion, 


To (0d alone be the Praiſe. 


LAAALAGAAASAAGANAAARARALARASAAAAASAASAAAAAAAEAL, 


The Poſt-Scripr. 


T o the Ludicious and Impartial Reader. 


Pox the cloſure of theſe my Labours , and when ſo much of the Epiſtles 
L was printed, that I con{d not conveniently bring in this which 1 am here 
> to deliver unto thee, appears an woettive, flaſhy, weak, ridiculous, in- 
SA Ba confiderate, cholerick,, raving and rayling Pamphlet , againſt one 
U/PESESS which it ſeems he u diſpleaſed with for not concluding with hins on the 
Annotations Which ke publiſhed on Jer. 10. 2. The which as indeed ridiculous, ſo ſhould 
i bave ſwmilingly paſſed it over in ſilence, and not rendered my ſelf thus worthy of langhter 
in recording hu folly, but that he Was ſo abſurd and childiſh as to bring me upon the 
Stage Whom he knoWweth not, and who u altogether a ſtranger unto him ſave for what 
the Mendax Rufus Rolandus, or | h#2 Brother] Orlando furioſo hath maliciouſly 
and contrary to his own knowledge delivered unto him. 

U pon the firſt fight thereof I perceived it tobe a ſcurrulous Pamphlet, no more Worthy 
the heeding then Politicus, Phreneticus, or Walkers d:ſ[embling aud lying Occurences 
as it Was compoſed of ſuch like paper and variety of letter (being (1 beleive ) by the 
Printer publiſhed gratis, and therefore by him not thought worthy of better paper, let- 
ter or werk,, being ſuch mean ſtuſfe) ſo doth it contain the like phrenſies, invettrves and 
' whimſical inventions and evaſions ; I ſhall not ſpend time or paper to mentsox any part 
thereof ſave only Where he #1 pleaſed now and then ( thinking he bath ſufficient oround 
from the malicious aſper ſions of the unWorthy before mentioned, for his 1mprndent and 
impudent taunts and language ) tovent hu waſhipneſs andfroward crafineſs againſt me ; 
his reaſon I know not, unleſs it Were for arſWering a * turn-coat of hu own Livery, who 
had vainly aud ignorantly attempted to beat doWn that Which he ts altogether ignorant 
of ; or for that noxe could ever yet give me a Reply, though it hath been attempted with 
all the vigour and ripour that might be, but to no parpoſe, as appears by the firſ® Book 
of thu Volume. | 

In his 92 page he boldly tels his Reader, Sir Chriſtopher Heydons large diſcourſe, 
and Wil. Rameſeys reply to Dr. Homes it ſufficiently confuted. But he doth not im the 
leaſt tell ws how. nor make it plain; it # enough for thu old man to fit at home, and hear 
people talk or reid the tule of Bucks, but ſearch no further either for want of time or 
judgement ; for if that patcht up pretended Reply to my Book, were ever peruſed by 
him , be cannot be ignorant that there 1s not any one Argument of Sir Chriſtopher 
Heydons /o much as mentioned, much leſs diſcuſſed or confuted; and as touching mine 
Which thu old Tom (if 1 might anſwer him in hu own language, and ſhew him 
his plain flilmg of me without being guilty of the ſame abſurdity with him; or if I 
might vindicate my ſelf from huz aſperſions by caſting the ſame dirt in hu face that 
he hath boldly done in mine) learnedly tearmeth a Reply , as hu learned Confutor did 
before him ; but ſober men know it 1 prepoſterous to call that a Reply mhich is 
an Arſvver ; but it Will quickly appear (as 1 have ſaid) to the Judicious , by the firff 
Book of thu Volumne ; that the main and chief arguments therein remain as yet both 
by him and ethers unſhaken, nay by Myr. Gataker himſelf they are unrefelled, though 
much carpedat as 1 plain by hs [ubſequent words, where he affirmeth the alligation of 
bath Sir Chriſtopher and my ſelf, that Aſtrology Was revealed by God to Adam. 
Seth, Enoch and there poſterity to be frivolous and groundleſs, as alſo at the lower end 
of h3 4 pages and at the beginning of his 168 page,hs doth not only hint at the ſame, but 
paſſeth 


The Poſt-Script. 


paſſeth it over With aperemptory atteſtation of | the contrary, Without either argument, 
proof , rime or reaſon againſt it ; me thinks he ſhould not ſo frequently have taken 
me up, unleſs he could have proved by ſufficient grounds my Allegations to be frivolous, 
as he 1s pleaſed to term them, aud not thus frivalouſls to paſs them over With a bare 
ſaying itis falle, without any contrary demonſtration, and ſo deceive hoth himſelf and 
Reader ; for I ſhall appeal to his own conſcience, whether he have ever peruſed by Book, 
or that pretended Reply and mine together ; or if ſo, whether he 1 not convinced, not 
only that half my diſcourſe 15 wholly omitted by the rurall Revlyer ; but al(o that there ts no 
ſolid and ſubſtantiall reply to any particular thereof, (laying aſiae his ridiculons Whins- 
ſeys and weak quibbles aud evaſions WhereWwith that Pamphlet ſo copiouſly abounds ) and 
this my appeal 4 not only to CMr. Gataker, but all Ingenuons ſouls who impartially 
will judge of the matter, and warily obſerve how my Words are by him ſet down con- 
trary to my intent and purpoſe in many places, the better to make for his turn and idle 
conceits, by comparing mine With his. 

Thu I thought good to acquaint the World With, that they be not led away With error 
and tradition, having at this time ſo opportunely the opportunity of the Preſs, and 
not only ſoa, but todemonſtrate alſo to the World,that notwithſtanding what Dr. Homes, 
the above named Rufus, or this My. Gataker, can or have ſaid # altogether inſuffici- 
ent torefel the Arguments contained in that Diſcourſe of mine; it 1 not his ſaying 
Adam, Seth, Enoch, Abraham, Solomon, an4 the Patriarchs were not Afﬀtrological 
Philoſophers, (Which of a Philoſophers are the chief) that will prove them not to be 


ſo; but ſince I have Joſephus his teſtimony * that they were [0,and Euſebius h# t eſti - *Foſeph. Ant 
mony, that he wasa man worthy of credit, Eccleſ.Hift. lib.1. cap. 7.Certamly IT ſbould 744. lb. 1, 
forefeit my faith credit reaſon and underſt nding, if 1 ſhould belerve his teſtimony before © ** 


the teſt1mony of Joſephus, Who was by ſo learned and holy a Father of the Church as Euſe- 
bius deemed ſo Worthy and an Authentick, Witneſs ; or if I ſhould beleive that he hath any 
ground for hu other weak evaſions whereWith his Book is fraught, that dares thus (con- 
trary to his own conſcience and knowledge) aſperſe ſo worthy a man as Joſephus by que- 
ſftioning hu credit, to whom the World us ſo abundantly engaged for h1s anthentick and 
unparalled Works. the Which neither Mr. Gataker, Wiſaker, Rufus, or a thouſand ſuch 
animals are worthy to carry after him; But by this one thing 1 it plain to every Intelli- 
gent Reader, that hs tongue is no ſlander (as we ſay) and therefore the rather to be 
excuſed, if in any place of his rabling patcht peece, he be fonnd puilty of reproaching hs 
betters. that dares thus ( when he knows not other Wiſe how to an{mer ad rem) not only 
lightly eſteem the teflimonies of the Antient Hiſtoriographers, but alſo of the Fathers, 
which but for brevities (ake, 1 conld ſhew him hoW in innumerable places of their Works 
they acknowledge themſelves beholding to this learned Joſephus ; but eſpecially Euſebius 
in almoſt every Chapter throughout his whole ten Books of his Eccleilaſtical Hiſtory, and 
in ſeveral places therein plainly expreſſes in the aforenamed words, that He was a man 
worthy of Credit : the Which he cannot he ignorant of (certainly) being a profeſſed 
Divine, Faage thou then Reader, Whether is more worthy of credit, Joſephus, that ( as 
I have ſufficiently ſhewed) teftifierh Adam, Seth, Enoch, «nd the reſt of the Patriarchs 
were Aſtrologers and moſt exquiſite therein,and Euſebius that was a learned Father of 
the / harch that teſtifiech Joſephus to be a man moſt worthy of credit, or learned 
Rufus Rolandus, and wiſe Mr. Gataker, who ſay they are not , and revile thoſe who 
bave maintained the contrary, but not able otherwiſe to give any reply thereunto ; but if 
one ſay, here is two to two, and ſo imagine we ſtand upon equal terms, I muſt neeas tell 
him he will finde as mach difference, as is between men and aſſes; yet to put the matter 
out of donbt, I ſhall give you one more , which is Gerſon , one ſufficient to connter- 
vail athouſand ſuch Rolands or Gatakers that are oppoſite thereunto, Who in his Pre- 
face to his.Trilogium Altrologiz Theologizatz, teſtifieth alſs that Aſtrology was 
firſt revealed by God himſelf ro Adam. Nay farther Joſephus doth nor only teſt ifs- 
eth that this Science was ſtudied by theſe Patriarchs, and that alſo God fir? revealed 
it wnto onr firſt Father Adam, but that Seth was ſo well skilled therein, that he fore- 
knew thereby that the World ſhould be deſtroyed by the flood, and therefore ingraved it 


(with other Arts and Sciences) on two Pillars, the one of ſtone and the other of brik, _ 
that 


* 7oſeph. Ant. 
Jud, lib. 1. 
cap.8, 


tf Fol. 6, 3. 
* Poge «< 8. 
[| Pag, 168, 


* Cap.13 fol. 
28, F 


* Rufus R0* 
landu:, 


The Poſt-Scripr. 


that he ſaw that of ſtone to remain in Syria in his dayes ; Moreover he farther teſtifieth 
* chat Abraham being exquiſite therein, and having learned it in Chaldea, the place of 
hu birth, when he Went into Egypt was the firſt that taught them Aſtrology and Arith- 
metick, the which teſtimonies ( eſpecially carrying ſuch ſtrength of provability with 
them) I cannot beleeve ever Were or ever Will be queſtiened by the judicious and the 
more rational ſort of men. 

And as touching Mr,Gataker his raſh and inconſiderate aſper ſion in reckoning me with 
the Impoſtors and Jugling knaves which abuſe thu Noble Science, by their illegall pra- 
Aiſes,(the which | have in the firſt Epiſtle,and * firſt Book, ſufficiently declared againſt ) 
in terming me || a bird of the ſame feather ; 1 might juſtly tell him he is no better thin a 
Thom-as Wiſaker, rhws ra/hly ro conclude What he t« ignorant off ,but that I fear I ſhould 
be guilty of the like abſurd language With him, and be too plain With the old man, whom 
I muſt confeſs hath by this hu raſh and inconſiderate affirmation, moſt extreamly over-ſhot 
him{elf ; and were he not a Divine, 1 ſhould ſay he were doting or mad, thus highly to dare 
to affront one who he 1s altogether a ſtranger to; and this let me tell you Mr, Ga- 
taker, and excuſe your ſelf when and as well as you can, T bat it u neither the part of 4 
Scholar, a Rational man, a Divine, a Presbyterian, or a Chriſtian, to aſſume liberty to 
aſperſe, vilifie and wrong fully accuſe your brother upon the bare hearſay of another, eſpe» 
cially one of ſo mean credit as u the pret ended Author of the Reply to my Book in anſWer 
to Doftor Homes, ( for 1 ſcorn to name him ) who hath beeu of ſuch variety of 
Profeſſions, and ts well known to be a time-ſerving fellow, Ergo not Worthy the noting ; 
for deny it if you can that it was not that pretended Reply that lead you thus to aſſume 
the boldneſs as to term me ſo confidently a bird ofthe ſame feather wich Impoſtors ; for 
as I have before declared inthe * firft Book, 1 never prattiſed or ſtndyed it otherwiſe then 
for the [atsfattion of my minde, and for my own pleaſure, and therefore good My. Ga- 
taker,tuke notice, that [ ſcorn to be guilty of any ſuch mercenary pratti/es ; as much as 
you ſcorn to be termed or acconnted ſchiſmatical or Jeſuitical 3 and that I am as free and 
innocent from thoſe abuſes of the Art, as yon are guilty of abuſing me by this Wrong 


| accuſation, being blinaed With errour, and deluded by the aſperſions and lying abuſes of 
that unworthy * fellow , and ſo in danger to ſhipWwrack your diſcretion and judgement 


oy the rock, of Tradition , which if guided by Reaſon would have been ſafe , which 
I would have all men ſtudy to obtain, and then I queſtion not but that they will ſoon 
finde, that I abhor longer to live then { ſhould degenerate from my ſelf. | 

therfore with this argument I ſhall conclude ; Who ſo imputeth folly or maaneſs to any 
man for his tenets, Which he cannot refute that doth gainſay them, doth thereby abundant- 
ty prove himſelf to be a malignant cavilling fool, and his arguings frivolous : But Thom- 
as Gataker imputes folly to William Rameſey for the allegation aforeſad with bis bro- 
ther Rufus, yer can not refute What they gainſay, Ergo ——— 


Die H. 11% Juni, 


_—_ William Rameſey. 


The Contents of every Section and Chapter contained in this 
fourth Treatiſe,intituled AsTROLOGIA MuUND 4. 


—_— — + 


Ee Es Es I er tat at I tt = 


SS CTION NH 
(= the ground work of Revolutions of the Years of the World, conli- 
JAerations before judgement, and the true ſignificators of ſuch things as are ne- 
ceſlary to be judged of in this manner of work. Fol 213 
Cna 
SheWing the ground-work on which Aſtrological Fudgements for the judging of Revs- 
[utions are to be built, and how many Scheams or Figures of Heaven ought to be eretied 


for thus work. | 214 
Chap. 2. Containing ſome neceſſary conſiderations before judgement. 216 
Chap. 3. Shewing which are the ſignificators of the King, People, their enemnes 

and aſſiſtants in any Revolution of the Teats of the World. 218 


Chap. 4. Shewtng according to the ſignification of the Planets, the Significators in 
general, of rich and Noble men, the Kings Standara-bearer, Armor-bearer, or General 
of the Armies, ( lergy men, Students, Merchants, Lawyers Women, Fryers and Monks, 
7 220 


—_—_—_ = 4 CNS 


S © T- KY 
Shewing the ſtate and condition of the King or Rulers, and their continuation,and 
their durability in any Revolution, alſo the condition of the people from the Poſi- 
tions and Fortitudes of their Significators ; Alſo how to know the Lord of the Year, 
and what is portended thereby in any Revolution, whether in Aſpect of the Planets, 
located in the Houſes or Signs ; alſo of the ſignifications of the Head and Tay! of 
the Dragoy,in the 12 Houſes of Heaven in any Revolution in the 12 ſigns alſo,Fol. 


22TI 
| CA A Þ. 1, 
Of the State and condition of the King or chief Rmlers, and People in any Annual 
Revolution. Idem. 
Chap. 2. Teaching how to juage of the permanency or durability of Kings or ſuch as 
are in authority by any Revolution. 225 
Chap. 3. Shewing the ſtate and condition of the common people in any Region, by any 
Annual Revolution. 226 
Chap. 4 How to know that Planet which 15 Lord of the Year mm any eAnnual revolu- 
tion of the Tears of the World. | 231 


Chap. 5. Of the ſignifications of the ſeven Celeſtial Planets,Wvhen any of them i5 Lord 
of the Year, whether fortunatedor impedited, and of the Aſpetts of the Planets with 
them, 234 

Chap. 6. Containing the true Significations of the Planet Saturn, as he is in _ 
Annual Revelntion accidentally placed in any of the twelve Houſes of Heaven, whether 
he be Lord of the Tear or no. 237 

Chap. 7. Of the ſignifications of Jupiter 4s he # accidentally placed in any of the 


twelve Houſes of Heaven in any Annual Revolution, whether he be Lord of the Tear or 


0, 239 
Chap. g. ( 9ntaining the ſignifications of Mars in the twelve Houſes of Heaven, in 
any «Annual Revolution, Whether he be Lord of the Year or no. 240 
Chap. '9. SheWing the ſignifications of the Sun in the tWelve "Howſes of Heaven in 
any Annnal Revolution , whether he be Lord of the Tear or no. 24T 
Chap. 10. Shewing the Signification of Venus in the twelue Houſes of Heaven in 
any Annnal Revolution,whether ſhe Lady of the Tear or no, 242 
Chap. 11. Of the ſignifications of Mercury in the twelve Houſes of Heaven in any 
Amnual Revolution, whether he be Lord of the Tear or no, 244 


Us: Chap. 


' The Contents 


Chap. 12. Of the figyfications of the Moon in the twelve Houſes of Heaven in any 
Annual Revolution, whether ſhe be Lady of the Tear or no, 245 
Chap. 13. Containing the ignifications of the head andtayl of the Dragon, in the 
twelve Houſes of Heaven in any Annnal Revolution of the years of the World. 246 
Chap. '4. Shewing the ſignifications of the Planets in any of the Triplicities when 
any of them is Lord of the Te 'r in any Annnal Xevolmtion of the Tears of the World. 248 
Chap 15. Demonſtrating the ſignifications of Saturn When be t Lord of the Tear in 


any of the tWelve ſigns, 249 
Chap. 16. Shewing the ſignifications of Jupiter when be is Lord of the Tear in any of 

the twelve ſigns, s 253 
Chap. 17. Shewing the ſignifications of Mars when he i Lord of the Year in any of 

the twelve figns. 256 


Chap. 18. Containing the accidents ſignified by the Sun When he is Lord of the Year 
41 any of the tWelve ſigns. | 259 
Chap. 19. Of the things ſignified by Venus when ſhe is Lady of the Year in any of the 


tWelve ſigns, 261 
Chap. 25. Of the ſignifications of Mercury when he is Lord of the Year in any of the 
twelve ſigns, 263 
Chap. 21. ( ontaining the ſignifications of the Moon When ſue ts Lady of the Tear in 
any of the twelve ſigns. 266 
Chap. 22. SheWwing what u ſign fied by the Head and Tayl of the Dragon, as they 
are placed in any of the twelve ſigns in any Revolution. -— op 


—_—  —————— — _ of oy —  — —_ —— 


- — 


S 3 C2114 
Containing ſome other neceſſary Inſtructions for the judging of Events portended 
by any Revolution of the Years of the World, alſo ſhewing how to judge of ſuch 
Years as ſignifie fertility, ſteriliry, wars, peace, health or ſickneſs, alterations of, 
and in the Ayr, and of all other things foreknown by the Poſition of the Heavens 


at the Ingrels of the Sz» into the firſt point of Ares. 269 


CHAP. 1, 
Shewing the ſignifications of the Plantts in their exaltations, and alſo in Conjun- 
ion, Square or Oppoſition of Saturn or Mars at that time in an) Revolution. Idem. 
Chap. 2 Of the ſignifications of the Planets and Dragons Head and Tail, as alſo 
Blazing-Stars, When they are (in any Revolution) exalted one above the other. 271 
Cha Pp. 3. Cont arin'ng conſiderations from the Sun and the Moon, when the Revolution 
# either Diurnal or Nofturnal, alſo when the Revolution happens at Sun- ſetting or break, 
of Day, and frem :he Lord of che Hour, Part of Fortune, the [ndi/poſition of Saturn 
aud Mars, and from the Conjunction with Dragons Head and Tayl in an) of the 
twelve ſigns, % any e Annual X tvolution, 274 
Chap. 4. Teaching how to inage of the evill of any year, the nature thereof , and 
when the.year is moſt likely to be turbulent, obnoxions and unfortunate ; allo what :4 
portended by any Nevolution when one Planet transfers hu light and nature to another.278 


Chap. 5. SkeWing how to juage of health or ſickneſs 1n any year» 250 
Chap. 6. How of Wars or peace. | Idem. 
Chap. 7. Of fertilty and ſterility. | 284 
Chap. 8. Teaching how to knoW the price of any thing in any year. 285 
Chap. 9. Containing ſome Inſtruttions touching the alteration of the «Ar and change 
of weather in any year. 288 


Chap. 10. Shewing how to judge of the weather by the Aſpetts of the Moon to the 
other Planets, and by the ſeveral Aſpeits of the Planets among#t themſelves. 290 
Chap. 11. Demo»ſftrating the alteration of the Ayr by the Combuſtion, Ortentality 
and Occidentality of the Planets in every of the twelve figns of Heaven. 292 
Chap, 12, Containing further inſtruttions touching the alteration of the Ayr from = 

| «ppli- 


of the Fourth Book. 


application of the Moon to the other Planets, having ſeparated from the Con janction 
or Oppoſition of the Sun, 
Chap. 13. Teaching by other rmles how tojuage of the alteration of the apr, P= to 


how when rain u to be expetted. 29 
Chap. 14. Shewing Haly h1 judgement on weather, and the alteration of the Ayr, 
298 


Chap. 15, S hewing how to judge of Weather from common Obſervation of the riſing 
and [etting of the *un, colony of the Moon, appearance of the Rain-bow, Comets, 
Clouds, brightneſs of the fixed Stars, alſo by the prime day, and from the time of the 
aay wherein thunder happeneth, 302 

Chap. 16. Demonſtrating the natural cauſes of many Suns, of the Razy-bow, Rain, 
Hail, Froſt Snow, Dew, Winde, Earth-quakes, Comets,T hunaers, Lightnings, and the 
cauſe of rhe Sun and Moons Eclipſe. 393 

Chap. 17 Of the ſignification of the moſt notable fixed Stars both fortunate and un- 
fortunate in any of the twelve Houſes in Revolutions of the Tears of the World, $05 


Omer ———_—— 


— —— _—_ Ot — — 


_— — > —_— 


S 3.T 7. ET 
Teachin "| how to judge of the natural mutations and accidents of this Elemen« 
tary World, by the appearance of Eclipſes, Comets, great Conjwnttions and Blazing- 
ſtars. : 308 
C na vp. I. 
Containing Ptolomies method in judging Eclpſes, and how to know the Regions to 
which the Effects belong. 3906 
Chap. 2. Shewing the time when the E ffelts of any Eclipſe ſhall begin, and how long 
continue. Idem 
Chap. 2. O/ che kindes of Events of any Eclipſe. 31T 
Chap. 4. Of the quality of the Events of any Eclipſe Whether good or evil. 312 
Chap. 5- Of che Sun and Moon eclipſed in any Decanate or Face of the twelve Coe- 
leſtial ſigns. 315 
Chap. 5. Of Comets and Blazing-Stars, what they are, the many ſorts thereof, = 
Porterces.und how long they appear at any tine. 
Chap. 7. Shewing the Phyſical reaſons of the horrid and terrible portencies of C, 0= 
mets and Blazing Stars. 320 
Chap. 8. Shewing ſome other xames of Comets or Blazing-S tars,and their Portencies, 
321 
Chap. 9. Of the ſignification of Comets and Blazing-Stars appropriated to the ſeven 
_ Planets - 2nd 
Chap. 10. Shewing the ſignifications of Comets When they appear in any of the twelve 
frons of Heaves. 


324 
Chap. 11. Of great ConjunRtions, their Number, and hoW to judge of their E frets, 


327 

Chap. 12. Of the Conjunions of the [uperionrs, 328 
Chap 13. Of the mean and leſſer Conjundtions and their effefts. 329 
Chap. 14. Of che Conjunction of the Planets in the twelve ji = according to Hermes, 
30 

Chap 15. Shewing how to indge of the general accidents of the World by the falling 

of New- Years Day. 353 


FINIS, 


An INDE X, pointing to the chief matters contained in this Yo- 
lame. This mark * before any figure, points you to the folio 


inthe firt EPISTLE to the READER. 


A 
Braham an Aſtrologer, Epi/t.Ded. 1 
Poſtſcript, fo/:o 4. The firſt that 
taught the Egyptians the knowledge 
of the Stars. Ibid. 
Abuſe of any thing, taketh not away the 
uſe thereof among the Learned. * 3 
Abuſes caſt upon the Author by the pen- 
ners of the pretended Reply to his /.»x 
Veritatu, and he vindicated from them 
all, from folio 26 to 29. their juglings 
and evaſions diſcovered. 29 
Acmte diſeaſes how ruled. I1 
Adam an Altrologer, notwithſtanding 
Mr. Gatakers evaſions in his Annota- 
tions on Fer. 10. ver. 2. put forth by 
the Synod. Epiſt.De41 Poſtſcript: and 
for the clearing of that Text , to that 
aforeſaid Lux /eritatu,Chap, z.Sect.5 
Ayr: alteration, how to judge thereof, 
from 288 to 303 by general ſignifica- 
tors 288, 289 by opening of Gates 
290 by the aſpects of the Moon to the 
other Planets 291 by the Planets mu- 
tual aſpeRs 291,292 Orientallity,Oc- 
cidentallity, and combuſtion in the 12 
ſigns 292, 293 by the application of 
the Moon to the other Planets, having 
ſeparated fromthe conjunction of the 
Sun 294, 295 Aphoriſms 296 Ordi- 
nary ſigns and tokens 297 by Haly his 
judgement, from 298 to 302 by the 
riſing and ſetting of the Sun , the co- 
lour of the Moon, the Rainbow , and 
by the appearance of Comets 202 by 
Clouds, Stars, Prime day,&c. 303 
e/Etrites, a ſtone ſo called, its vertue. 57 
Affliftions portended by revolutions, the 
nature thereof, and from whence it 
ſhall ariſe. 275 
Age decrepit prohibited phyſick. 166 
Age of thoſe that are not to uſe Phebo- 
romie 170 What time of the Moon it 
availeth. 171 
A time for making of Apreemests, 178 
Arime for any work in the art of Alchi- 


my. I79 
A time for All things under the Sun. 145 
Almuten what. II 


Alterations in the world occafioned by 


Ecclipſes of either Luminary, and why, 
308 by Comets 319 and why. 320 
A time for Anointing to remove ſuperflu- 


ous hair. 169 
Antiſcience of the Planets, their force, 
how to know them 76 
eAphoriſms conducing to the judging of 


Elections, from 122 to 128 ſhewing 
how to judge of the condition of 
Kings, People, or any other ; what ac- 
cidents are to happen them, and at 
what time in any year, from221 co 
224 more particularly of the People, 


from 226 to 230 
Apiſhneſs in men reprehended. *18 
Exceſs of Apparel in the vulgar condemn- 

ed. * 19 
A time for putting on of Apparrel. 
137. 156 
Appearance of many Suns and Moons, the 
reaſon thereof, 303 
Application what. 119 
A time for Applying Medicines to all the 
parts of the body. 163 


Agquaries, its nature and quality go Cor- 
porature, Diſeaſes, Angel, Colours, 
Places, Regions, Cities, and part in 
man under its rule 91 why ruled by 
Saturn 68 the number, names,nacure, 
magnitude, latitude and longitude of 
its moſt notable fixed ſtars. 294 

Aries, its nature and quality, Corpora- 

ture, Diſeaſes, Angel, Colours, Places, 
Regions, Cities,and part in man under 
its rule 86 why governed by Mars 68 ' 
why the exaltation of the Sun,and fall 
of Saturn 69 the number, names, na- 
cure, magnitude, latitude and longi- 
tude of its moſt notable fixed ftars 94. 

Armour-bearers, their {ignificators gene- 


ral in annual judgements. 220 
A time for buying «rms. 184 
eAſcendant, why 10 called. 107 
Aſia. its inhabitants, the reaſon of their 

ſeveral inclinations. 16 


eAſpetts, names,naturs, characters, why 
ſonamed and charaGtered, partile and 
platick, 92 dexter and ſiniſter. 93 
eAſþelts of the Planets to the Lord of the 
year. 235 
Aſuiſtaxee 


. OP ea 
w__ « 6. 4 


eAſſitance from whence to be expected, 
and from what kind of men 282 to 
obtain it of great men. 197 
Aſtrologie, the definition of the word 
* x 1ts ſcope or defigition * 3 agreeth 
with Divinity * 5. 4, &c. one of the 
Liberal Sciences, together with Aſtro- 
nomy and Phyſicks 2 how they be- 
came ſeparated, or ſo accounted 1614. 
how brought into contempt * 1, *3 
the beſt of ftudies and lawful 4, 18, 23 
revealed firſt to Adam by God, nor 
diabolical (as ſome weakly have en- 
deavoured toperſwade the world) but 
a great means | rather ] to acquaint 
us with a Diety 4, 38 medleth not 
with the ſecrets of God:21 moſt uſeful 
for Phyſicians 23, -8 its definition 29 
Legality 38 Excellency 4 warranted 
by Councels 37 not impugned by Di- 
vine Scripture from 30 to 36 uſeful 
for all the parts of Phyſick. 153 
Athazer what. T1! 
Atlas fained to bethe ſupporter of the 
Heavens and why, 4 
The Amtber divided by the Author * 20 
hisexhortation to this mad world * 22 
how far he holdeth of caſua} Events 
22 his practice or way of living 28 
denictha farality in the Stars Influen- 
cies ibid. yer proveth they have admi- 
rable Influence in all ſublunaries 4 
and that thev are cauſe of fertility and 
ſterility 5 how far he vindicaterh it 
37, 38 alloweth not of the reſolution 
of Queſtions, whereby many now-a- 
days enrich themſelves, and cheat the 
world, and bring a ſcanda) on the pu- 
rity of Aftrologie ; but condemneth 
it, with the ſetting of Nativities, as 
toys, trifles, vanities, cheats and abu- 
ſes ofthe purity of the Science of the 
Stars * 3, *36, 38 the cauſe of his 
putting pen to paper in any of his 
works * 4, * 6 what books he hath hi- 
therto wrote 4 his manner of writing 
intheſe his Labours * 25, &c. the oc- 
caſion thereof and his end therein * 6 
his birth , breeding and life hither- 
to,declared. * 28, *29 
Author of the pretended Reply to my 
Lux veritats diſcovered, and that it 
is not his under whoſe name the Epiſtle 
thereof paſſeth. 24 
HZ 
*13 


Barrene/s a curſe, 


An Alphabetical Index of the principal Heads. 


Atime for Bathing. 
Beaſt: atime to purchaſe. 


16y 
173 
Beauty real defined, as vulgarly received, 

rejected. *Þ 
Atime for Begettizg Boys and Girls. 152 
Benevolents not alwayes /upiter and Ve- 


11. 124 
Beſieging what. III 
Birds a time to buy. 174 
Bl:ckhmores why black. 14 
Blood-letting when convenient. 170 


Book the firtt, ſecond, third of this Vo- 


lumn, their ſcope * 2 the fourth. * 3 
Books pabliſhed by the Author. * 4 
A time for Borrowing of money. 135 
A time to purge the Brair. 168 


A Bridle tor Y outh. *g 
Of buying and felling 137 to profit 
thereby. 136 


C 
Caxcer, its nature and quality, corpora- 
ture, diſeaſes, Anpel, colours, places 
87 Regions Cities, partin man un- 
der its Rule 88 why ruled by the 
Moon 68 why the exaltation of 7ap:- 
ter and fall of Mays 69 the number, 
names, nature, magnitude, latitude, 
and longitude of its moſt notable fix- 

ed Stars. 7 
Capricorn, its nature and quality, Cor- 
porature, Diſeaſes, Angel , Colours, 
Places Regions , Cities and Part 

in man under its rule go why ruled by 
Saturn 68 why the fall of 7wpiter,and 
exaltation of Mars 69 the Number, 
Names, Nature,Magnitude, Latitude, 
and Longitude of its moſt notable fix- 

ed Stars. 103 
(artives a time fof freeing of them. 201 
( arbunkle its nature. T7 
Caſtles atime to build them. 143 
({aſualties of Cities how to judge of 
them, 144 
Catrel ſmall and great a time to buy 
them 173 to tame them. 174 

( antions in adminiftring Phyſick laxa- 
tive. 166, 168 

( azimi what. II 
C harafters uſed in Aſtrological books, 
explained. 49,77. $1,91 
CharaFery Aſſrologie queſtioned. * 2 
Childhood the vanity thereof * 7, * 8 
Child dead to bring forth, I53 
(hilaren born at the time of an Eclipſe, 
or at the Partile Conjunction of the 
Luminaries, 


Luminaries, live not long, and why. 


I2 
A time to purge Choler. 168 
A time to draw cholerick blood. I71 
Of Chriſtening. 154 
{hronick diſeaſes how ruled. 11 
Chryſolue 1ts vertue, 57 
{ hurches a time to build. 145 
Chyrurgery a time to uſe, 169 


Circles of Heaven, their number, order 
and motion. | 79 
Of Circamciſion. 154 
A time to bathe for cleanlineſs. 109 
Clergy men their {ignificators general in 
Annual judgments 220 more particu- 


larly. 141 
Cauſe of Climaterical years. 12 
Cloatbing a time to buy. 137 


(1zters, a time for adminiſtring them. 
164 

Why ir is Colder in Fanwary when the 
days increaſe in length, then in Decem- 
ber when they are at the ſhorteſt. 13 
Combuſtion what. III 


Comet , why ſo called, the many ſorts 


thereof 318 the definition thereof 
304 318 the appearance thereof an 
evident token ot Altrologies Legality, 
and that ic is allowed of by God 36 
in what part of the Heaven they ap- 
pear ; Continuance , Portencies , how 
to judge thereof, the birth of our Sa- 
viour foretold thereby 319 Ph: fical 
reaſons of their portencies 320 why 
ſeldom ſeen, and bur in'one part of 
heaven, at what time of the year , 
the reaſons of their various ſhapes and 
colours, diſtin&t fignifications 321 Sa- 
turnian, Jovial, Martial, Solar and 
Venerial, their portencies 323 Mercu- 
rial, Lunar 324 ſignifications and por- 
tencies in any of the 12 Signs , from 
324to 327 when chiefly they mani- 
felt their effects. 326 
Conception when hindred 152 when far- 
thered. I53 
Ut malier Concipiat ; ut won Concipiat. 
17S 

Great Conjwnt.onrtheir Number ; Con- 
{iderations before judgement-327 of 
the ſuperiours and their effects 328 
Leſſer , & their portencies 329 Hermes 
of Conjun&tions, from 330 to 333 
Con unttion its nature. 92 


How to order the matter for ' Conqueſt in - 
any war, 


179 


An Alphabetical Index of the principal Heads. 


Confiderations to be had in Phlebotomie. 
170 
( 0nftellations hindering and farthering 
Phlebotomie. [bid. 
To know the the Contents of any writing 
unſeen. 185 
Contr anti/cians of the Planets how to 
know ther ; their force. 
( 9r»5,a time for the cutting of them. 13+ 
Corondtions, atime for them. 197 
Covetouſneſs moſt dereftable. * 12 
Whar ſign the Sun was in at the firit 
Creation. 214 
Critical-days whence cauſed 11 the true 
knowledge of them 162 may often be 
hindered by Saturn. I3 
Cuſ/tome reproved * 16a ſecond nature 
170 cannot wholly alter the Natural 
Contftitution of any Place or Pegple. 
I 
The C:xſtoms and Laws of all Nations 


different, and why. 16 
D. 
Dead childe to deliver. 153 


Debility of any Planet in any Sign to 

know, 66 
Decrepit age prohibired Phyſick. 166 
Degrees, how many ina ſign of Heaven. - 


DeleQatione cam muliere jacere, 178 
Devil ignorant of the iſſue of future ac- 


cidents. 21 
Dexter afþett, what its nature, 93 
Direttion what. T1O 


A time for any work in the Art of Di- 
ſtillation. | 139 
Dog-days why not a like contagious eve- 
ry year. : g 
A time for buying of Dogs173 of bring. 
ing them up. 174 
Dragons Head and Tay! what they are ; 
their nature 76 ſignitications in the 
twelve Houſes in the Revolutions of 
the years of the world 247 in the 


twelve ſigns of Heaven, 267, 268 
A ume for Dwelling. 179 
E 


A time for husbanding the Earth. 148 
Earthquakes how occaſioned, ligns 
thereof. 304 
Earth Semidiamiter, 5x 
Cauſe of the Ebbing and flowing of the 
ſea, It 
Eclipſe of the Sun the cauſe thereof 304 
0 


of the Moon ; why they happen not 
twice every Moneth 305 how to 
judge of the mutations and accidents 
in this Elementary world thereby , 
from 308 to 318 that alterations do 
follow in the world upon the Eclipſe 
of either Luminary , and wherefore 
308 an Introduction from 308 to 310 
what 1s to be conſidered 3 ro when 
their effeRts manifeſt themſelves, 161d. 
how long continue 311 to know the 
Lord of any Eclipſe, 165d. the kinds 
of the Events 312 quality, whether 
So0d or evil from 313 to 315 of 
_ the Sun in any decanate of the 12 
Signs 316 of the Moon. 317 
Eclptick (Circle what it is, why fo called 


Edncation not of force ſufficient to alter 
the natural conſtitution of a People 
or Nation. 15 

Egypt how watred. 290 

A time for Eleing Kings and Gover- 
nours. 196 

Elettions ordinary, lighted. "3 

. Elettions by the Aſpects ofthe Moon to 

the other Planets. 129 


Eletuaries a time to adminiſter, 168 
Artime for ſending Embaſſaders. 159 
Enemies a time to ſuppreſs. 182 


Enoch an Aitrologer, vid. Poſtſcript. 
A time for Enſtaulings. 197 
Equator or the EquinoGtial circle what it 
is, why ſo called. 79 
To know when a Planet 15 Eſſentially 
dignified. 65 
To know the event of any war. 181 
Events portended by the Lord of the 
year 231,c5c. where they ſhall be ma- 
nifeſted 232 of Comets 31g of E- 
clipſes from 308 to zZi8 
To know the E»:/ threatned in any year 
co any place 278 the cauſe of any evil 
to happen. 22 
Europians why of magnaminous ſpirits 
and given to wars and exploits. 16 
To Expel a dead child. I53 
Eye of the Sun, a Stone ſo called its ver- 
rue. 57 
A time for adminiſtring remedies to the 
Eyes. 163 
F, 
Faces of the Planets their uſe, why ſo 


called 73 their fignifications, 74 
A time for Feaſting. 156 
To know ifany Land be ferts/e. 147 


An Alphabetical Index of the principal Heads, 


Fertility and ſterility on what they de- 
pend. 10 
How to judge of the fertility of any year. 


284 

Figure of Heaven what it is 20 how to 
frame it. 112 
Firmament why ſo called. 78 
Firſt Book its SubjeR. "2 
Firſt-mover why ſo called, 78 
A time to fi/h. 187 


Fixed Stars no cauſe of plenty or ſcarcity 
10 Tables demonitrating the Names, 
Nature, Number, Magnitude, Lati- 
tude and Longitude of the chiefeſt of 
them, in every of the 12 ſigns, from 
94 to 106 why called fixed 94 their 
ſignifications in any of the 12 houſes 
of Heaven in Revolutions of the years 
of the World, from 305 to 308 

Flegm a time to purge it. 168 

Flegmatick-blood a time to extract it. 171 


A time for flittizg or removing 138 
Flaxes,a time to ſtop them. Ic4 
Fourth Book ts ſubject. ”» 
Fortunate Planets. I27 
A time to fow!. 187 


Fre/i,-waters why not ſo ſubject to ebb 
and flow, II 
Friendſhip berween Brethren a time to 
make 140 between any two 141 a 
time to obtain it of any. 199 
Friends. how to chooſe them * 22 prove 


them and keep them. * 24 
Froſt what it is, 304. 
Fruſtration what. II 


Fryers their ſigniticators generat in An- 

nual judgements. 220 
Fugitrves a time to ſeek, 184 
Furlongs, how many in a ſign of Heaven. 


79 

Futnre accidents to knajy. 223 
G. 

Galen his admonition to the Vulgar. 161 

Gall a time to purge. 168 

186 


How to win at any game. 
A time for adminiſtring © argariſms. 165 
Opening of Gates what it 15 299 a cauſe 
of the change of weather. 290 
Gemini, its nature and quality, Corpo- 
rature , Diſeaſes, Angel , Colours, 
Places, Regions, Cities, and part in 
man under its Rule 87 why ruled by 
Mercury 68 the Number , Names, 
Nature,Magnitude, Latitude & Longi- 
rude of its moſt notable fixed Stars. 96 
General 


An Alphabetical Index of the principal Heads. 
General accidents how to judge of them A time for buying of Land for Fusban- 


by the falling of Newyears day. 333 


General Rules will not hold in particular 

affairs. 128 
Gentlemen their vanity in general. #*20 
A time for getting of Girls. 152 


A time for giving of Gifes. 155 
God worketh by cauſes * 4 is the God of 
order 6i4. clearly to be ſeen in the or- 
der of Nature * 5, 10 ſeldom or ne- 
- ver perverteth its order, - 
A time for the beginning of Govern- 


ments. 197 

A time for Graffig, I50 

A time for buying of great (atwel., 173 

Groundwork of EleCtions, 22 
H. 

Hail what it is, how condenſed. 304 


Hair a time for cutting of it 1 33 a time 
for applying medicines to remove 
what is ſuperfluous 163 when to 


bathe for the ſame purpoſe. 169 
Haiz, what. 111 
An Harmozy between the Ccolcſtial and 

Terreſtrial bodies. 122 
A time for adminiſtring remedies to the 

Head. 163 
A time to bathe for Health. 169 
How to judge ofthe Health of any year. 

280 
A time to purge the Heayr. 168 


Heavens power and vertue admirable 5 
Gods book in which all things from 
the beginning to the ſubverſion of the 
world 1s written 18 order,number and 
motions 78 diviſion into 1 : Signs. 79 


Heliotropion ts vertue. 57 
A time for buying of Heritages, 146 
Hermophroaites when begotten. I52 
A tifne for Hiring any thing 149 ſer- 
vants. I72 

A time for obtaining the thing Hoped for. 
199 
Horizon what 1t 5, it's diverſity. 5O 
A time for buying Hor/er. 201 


Houſes of Heaven what, the reaſons of 
their ſignifications 107, 108 diviſion 
into 12 parts 109 how to judge of any 
thing ſignified by them. *' 275 

Houſes a ime for buying of them 146 
for building 142 letting or hiring 149 


for ridding of evil ſpirits. I51 
A time for buying of Honnas, 173 
A time to Hun. 257 


ary. 147 
Hyacinth its vertue. 57 
H\ypocrites reproved. *25 

1, 
Jacob an Aﬀtrologer. 18 
Impeditions of the Moon. + 127 
Infants prohibited Phylick. 166 . 
Inferiour what, _ III 
Inferiours ruled by Superiours 123 


Influence of the Stars may be found our, 
notwiſtanding the ſlowneſs of the ſtar- 
ry ſphear in leſs then thirty years time 
7 ,&c, may certainly be eelikes 
withſtanding the Revolution of the 
ſtarry ſphear ſince Pro/omies time, or 
ſince the firſt Creation 8, &c. takes 
not away Gods government 22 may 
be altered by him * 4 yet it is fel» 
dom or never ſeen. 2 

A time for acting any thing of Ingenuity. 


: 158 

Inns of Court deicribed. *21 
A ſhort Zonrney what it is 140 a time for 
Sons. ibia. 


A time of [onrneying and returning, and 
to judge of the fuccels therein. 391 
Ir:, a ſtone ſo called, its vertue. 57 
Iſſue a bleſling * 13 ſuch as deſire none, 
reprehended. ibid. 
7udicial days whience cauſed 11 the true 
knowledge of them. 162 
Jupiter , his Nature and Complexion, 
Magnitude,mean and diurnal Motion, 
Revolution, Diſtance from the Earth, 
Humours, Quality of men ſignified by 
him , Corporature , greatelt North- 
Latitude, South , Colours, Savours, 
Spice, Hearbs and Drugs ruled by him, 
and part of Man 52 Trees, Birds, mi- 
neral, Stones, Fiſhes, Beaſts , Places, 


Weather, Winds , Signs, Triplicity,. 


Diſeaſes, Regions, Day of the week 
ruled by him ; his Exaltation, Fall, 
Detriment, Age, Angel, Friends, E- 
nemies, Orb, Years, Moneth after 
Conception 53 his Joy 75 why fo 
called and characered 77 is not al- 
ways a fortune 124, 216 ſignificati- 
ons when Lord of the year 234. in any 
of the 12 houſes of Heaven in any res 
volution of the years of the world 239 
ec, in any ofthe 12 Signs from 25 3 
to 256 when Lord of an Eclipſe. 313 
A time to obtain 7aſtice of Rulers, 197 
X x Kings 


Ef 


pert; 


—_ 


K. 

Kings ſignificators in Annual Judge- 
ments, not exempt from the power 
of the Stars 219 Condition in any 
year 221, 222 How to judge of their 
permanency 225 A time to obtain 
their favour 197 and their Pardon, 

198 
L. 

A time for Lanching of Ships, 195 

A time for buying of Laxd 146 for Let- 
ting 149 if it be fertile. 147 

A time to prevail in LaW-ſwits, 181 

Lawyers their ſignificator general 220 


reprehended. *21 
A time to Learn Sciences 195 Arts or 
Occupations, I98 
A time for Lending of money. I35 


Leo, its Nature, Quality , Corpora- 
ture, Diſeaſes, Angel, Colours, Pla- 
ces, Regions, Citics, and Part of 
man under its Rule 88 why ruled by 
the Sun 68 the Number, Names,Na- 
ture, Magnitude, Latitude, and Lon- 
gitude of its moſt notable fixed 


Stars. 98 

A time for compoſing of Letters. 158 
Lightning what it is. 304 
168 


Liver a time to purge it. 
Lord of the Tear how to know him accor- 
ding to the Antients 231 according 
to the Author 233 of the Aſpects of 
the Planets to him. 235 
Lo/s how to judge of it. 282 
To know the LovFSetween two marri- 
ed,or any other 177 
Loweconnreymen why they ſhoke off the 
Spaziards Government. 16 
Lewaneſs deſcribed , its portencies * 10 
its remedy, *x2 
A time to purge the Lungs. 168 
Lybra, its Nature , Quality, Corpora- 
ture, Diſeaſes, Angel, Colours, Pla- 
ces, Regions, Cities, and Part of man 
under its Rule 89 why ruled by Ve- 
nus 88 why the fall of the Sun ard ex- 
altation of Saturn 69 the Number, 
Nature, Magnitude, Latitude and 
Longitude of its moſt notable fixed 


Stars. I 00 


SA 
Malefaftor « time to make him confeſs 
Truth, 185 


Aalevolents are not always Saturn and 
Mars, 


124 


An Alphabetical Index of the principal Heads. 


Man his vanity in general * 11,* 12,* 13 
ſubjet tro Gods Governinent, and 
Angels rule, as well as to the power 
of the ſtars, and how 22 wherein he 
differeth from a brute Creature. 23 

Manſions of the Moon; their ſeveral 
qualities and Elections. 130 

A time for Maruring the Earth. 148 

A time for Marriage according to the 
Antients 176 according to the Au- 
thor 177 the end thereof *13 forced, 
cenſured. *19 

AMarket s deſcribed, * 21 

Mars, his Nature, Complexion, Mag* 
nitude , Diftance from the Earth, 
mean and diurnal Motion, Revolutt- 
on, Humours, Quality of men, Cor- 
porature, North Latitude, South, 
what Savours, Colours, Part in man, 
Hearbs, Trees and Spice ruled by him 
54 what Winds, Weather, Signs, Di- 
ſeaſes or Triplicity , Places, Birds, 
Stones, Fiſh, Beaſts, Mineral Day of 
the week, Enemies, Friends, Angel, 
Age,Exaltation, Fall Detriment, Orb, 
Regions, Places, Years 55 Joy 75 
why ſo called and charaQtered 77 
may ſometimes be a benovolent and 
adjuvant Planet 124, 216 fignificati- 
ons when Lord of the Year235 in 
any of the twelve Houſes 241 in any 
of the twelve figns from 256 to 259 
when Lord of an Eclipſe. 314 

The vertue of CAMedrinal things how 
found our. IGT 

A time for applying Medicines to all 
parts of the body. | 163 

A time to purge ' A/elanchely, 168 

A timc to extract Melancholy blood. 

| 171 

A time to purge any ember of the bo- 
dy. 168 

A time to purge the Members of Gene- 
ration. | 11d, 

Merchants their 11gnificators general. 


220 


Mercury , his Nature , Complexion, 


Magnitude, Diſtance from the Earth, 
mean and diurnal Motion, Revoluti- 
on , Quality of Men, Corforature, 
greateſt North Latitude, South, $Sa- 
vours, Colours, and Part of man ru- 
led by him61 Hearbs, Drugs, Trees, 
Birds, Serpents, Stones, Minerals, 
Fiſhes, Beaſts, Weather , Winds, 
Signs , Triplicity , Places , Day _ 

c 


An Alphabetical Index of the principal Heads. | 
the week , Regions, Moneth after No New thing under the Sun, * 25, * 26 


Conception, Years , Diſeaſes , &c. 


under his Dominion; Exaltation,Fall, 
Detriment, Age, Angel, Friends, 
Enemies 62 Joy 75 why ſo called and 
charactered 77 ſignifications when 
Lord of the Year 235 in any of the 
twelve Houſes 244 in any of the 
twelve ſigns, from 263 to 265 when 


Lord of an Eclipſe. 314 
Meridian what it is, wherefore ſo called. 
$O 

A time for ſending of Meſſengers. 159 
Method of the fourth Book. 214 


Alile: how many in a ſign of Heaven, 


79 
A time for building of 17:/s, 145 
Alinntes in a degree how many. 79 


Alonarchial Governmext calt off by the 


Engliſh, and why. 17 
Monks their ſignificators general. 220 
A time for receiving 1oxey. 135 


Aſoons Influence proved 11, 12 mock- 
moons the cauſe of them 303 her Na- 
ture, Complexion, Magnitude, mean 
and diurnal Motion , Revolution, 
Diſtance from the Earth, Humours, 
Quality of men, Corporature,North- 
Latitude, South, Colours , Savours, 
Hearbs, Trees and Plants 63 Birds, 
Stones, Mineral, Fiſhes , Beaſts, Pla- 
ces, Weather, Winds, Sign, Tripli- 
city , Exaltation , Fall, Detriment, 
Ape, Angel, Enemies, Friends, Day 
of the week, Regions, Orb, Years, 
Moneth after conception , Journies, 
Diſeaſes, &c. ruled by her 64 Joy 75 
why ſo called and charactered 77, 78 
ſignifications when Lady of the Year 
235 in any. of the twelve Houſes of 
Heaven 245 in any of the twelve 


ſigns. | 266 
A time to Learn 17/ich, 195 
IN. 

Nails of the hands or feet a time to cut 
them. 134 


No XN tion but hath good and bad in it. 
Nativities Legality queſtioned and con- 
demned as vain * 3,*6 how far main- 
tained by the Author. 38 
The ſtudy of Nature an help to the 
Knowledge of God *22,38 fts courſe 
may be altered and how * 5 how of- 
ten ſince the Creation, ibid, 


Noblemes their ſignificator general. 220 
A time for applying Remedies to the 

Noſe. | 164 - 
A time for ſending Children to Nar/e. - 


«© VS 
Northern Inhabitants why ſtrong body- 
ed, rude and fair Complexioned. 15 


0. 
Objections againit Aſtrology anſwered, 

from 18 to 23 
Occidental what. ILL 
A time for making odoriferons [mels. 15,8 
Oppoſite eAſpett, or an Oppoſition why 


ſo called and charactered 93 where. 
fore malevolent, 92,93 
Oriental what, 111 


F. 
Palaces of Kings defined, with their va- 


nity. ® 20 
Pantaura its vertue. . 58 
A time for obtaining pardon of Kings. 

198 


Parents Careleſneſs reprehended * 13 
their folly in bringing up Children.* 8 
Partile , Conjundtion, Sextile, Square, 
Trine and Oppoſition whar. 92 
Of Partnerſhip. 178 
The Patient his danger by being inthe 
hands of an unskiltul Phyſitian. 161 
Patriarchs Aſtrologers, vid. Poſtſcript. 
A time of peace. 182 
How to judge of peacein any year. 282 
A wonderfull thing of Peaſe, I1,12 
People, their fignificators in Annual 
Judgements 215 their State and Con- 
dition 222 and from 226 to 230 
Peregrination what, III 
How to know the permanency of Kings, 
_ States, Governments, or any in Au- 
= thority. 225 
Phileſophers-ſtone what 27 ſtudied by the 
moſt refined ſpirits in all ages, and 
why ſo many miſs of obtaining it. 139 
A time for adminiſtring Phyfickto all the 
parts of the body. 163 
Phyfich denyed to Children and decre- 
pit age. | 166 
Phyſitians ought to be well verſed in 
Aftrologie 153 the errour of moſt of 
them 136, 160 the Ignorant therein, 
accounted by the rational rather fools 
then Phyſitians 23, 160, 280 what is 
requiſite to perfect them in their Art, 
Xx 2 being 


being ignorant in Aſtrology, can ne- 
ver ſafely adminiſter Phyſick, nor ac- 
counted by the judicious fit to be trult- 
ed with the lives of men 161 a time 
for going to his Patient. 171 
Phlebotomy, what Conſtellations hinder 
it, what *farther ; Conſiderations, 
when beſt to refrain , when to uſe it 
170 what time of the Moon is to be 
obſerved in all Ages and Humours of 
men. 171 

A time for adminiſtring Pls. 168 
Piſces its Nature , Quality , Corpora- 
ture, Diſeaſes, Angel, Colours, Pla- 
ces, Regions, Cities, and Part of man 
under its rule 91 why ruled by Zupiter 
68 why theexaltation of Venus and 
fall of CMercury 6g the Number, 
Names, Nature, Magnitude , Lati- 
tude and Longitude of its moſt no- 
table faxed ſtars. 150 
Planets Influence proved 10, 13 Num- 
ber, Names, Characters. 49 
What time is beſt to plaze or ſow. 12 
A time for planting of Trees. I50 
Platick Conjunction , Sextile , Square, 
Trive and Oppoſition what. 92 
Plenty and ſcarcity depend on the moti- 
ons and configurations ofthe Planets. 

10 

How to judge of Plenty in any _ 
| 204 
A remarkable thing of the Pomegranate. 
12 


When Preparatives ought to be adminis. 


{tred 164 
A time for Treparws Medicines. 168 
A rime to give Pre/euts. 1535 


To know the Price of any thing to 
be bought or ſold. 146 
To know the Price of any thing in any 


Year, from 285 to 288 
Pride, its Cauſe removed. *14. 
A :ime for freeing of Pri/oners. 201 
A time for going of Progreſs. 198 
Prohibitron what. 110 
A time for obtaining Prom/es. 207 
When to prune and cut Vines. 12 


Prolomies method in judging of Eclipſes, 
from 310 to 315 
A time for pulling down what hath been 
built. 145 

A time for taking of Parges. - 166 
A time for putting on of Apparrel. 137, 
1506 

* "=o 


Pjrophilm.its vertue. 


4n Alphabetical Index of the principal Heads. 


L 
A cime for Ywuarrels. 179 
Luartile Ape, its nature, why fo cal- 
led and charaQtered , why unfortu- 
nate. 92 
Lneſtions if radical agree with the Na- 
tivity; yet both rejected as not ſuffici- 
ent ground-works for Elections 322 
the reſolution thereof as practiſed 
among us by Impoſtors, condemned. 
*3,*6, 38 


R. 
Race-horſes a time for buying them. 173 
Rain what it is, how procreated. 304 
never ſeen in Eg ypr. 290 
Rainbow the cauſe thereof 304 how to 
judge of the weather thereby 302 
Four Keaſons why the pretended Reply 
to my Lux Veritatrs 15 not taken notice 
of by me 24 another reaſon 26 an- 


Other. 30 
A time to receive gifts. 155 
Reception what. III 


Regrenation what. A 
Regions under Saturn 51 ſubject to 7«- 
piter 53 Ruled by Har: 55 by the 
San 59 by Venxs 60 by Mercury 62 
by the Moon 64 by Aries 86 by Tax- 
rs and Gemini 87 by Cancer, Leo 
and Virgo 88 by Libra and Scorpio 
8g by Saguttary and (apricorn 90 
by 1queriums and Piſces. 9I 
A time for applying Remedies to all the 
parts of the body. 163 
A time tor removing. 138 
A time for renting of Houſes, Land, 


Fruit, or onght elle. 149 

A time for obtaining Reqyeſt s. 200 
| 'etrogr adation what, TIO 
That Birds may rerwrn that are let fly. 
173 

A time for ſtopping of Rheumes. 164 


Revolution of the Starry-{phere, of Sa- 
turn, Sol, Venus, Mercury and the 
Hoon 7 of Jupiter and Mars. '8 

R evolutions of the Years of the world; 
their portencies,the Radix or ground- 
work from which they are to be judg- 
ed 214how many Scheams ought to be 
ſet for the judging thereof 215 Con- 
ſiderations before judgement 216,217 
Conſid.rations from the Su» and. 
1oo0n when the Revolution is either 


diurnal or noRurnal 274 at Suns ſet, 
or 


or at break ofday ; Conſiderations 
from the Lord of the hour, part of 
fortune, its Diſpoſitor, the Poſition 
of Saturn and Mars, the Crrjnnttion 
of Dragons head with Satmrn in Avies, 
in Tawrns, in Gemmi 276 in Cancer, 
in Leo,in Virgo, in Libra, in Scorpio, 
in Sapittary, in Capricors, itt Aqaari- 
9, in Piſces, of of Dragons tail 1n any 
of theſe Signs ; And of Hars in Con- 
junition with Dragons head of Dragons 
tail in any of the twelve ſigns 277 
from the fixed Stars in the twelve 


Houſes, from 305 to 308 

Rich-men, their Significators general in 

Annual judgements. 290 

Riches wherein they conſiſt. *12 

A time for r:ding of Horſes, 202 
d 


Sazittary, its Nature and Quality, Cor- 
porature, Diſeaſes, Angel, Colours, 
Places, Regions, Cities, and Part of 
man under its rule go why ruled by 
Zapiter 68 rhe Number, Names, Na- 
ture, Magnitude. Latitude and Longi- 
tude of its moſt notable fixed Stars. 

I O2 

Satzry, his Influence proved 12, &c. 
removal out of one Sign into another, 
cauſe of change of Air 9 Colour, 
Nature , Magnitude , diurnal Mo- 
tion , Diſtance from the Earth 49 
Humours , Profetlion , Coporas. 
ture, Quality of men ruled by him, 
Savours, what part irt man, Hearbs, 
Trees, Plants and Birds 58 Stones, Mi- 
nerals Fiſhes,Beaſts, Places, Weather, 
Winds, Signs, Tripltcity, Angel, Ape, 
Friend , Enemies , Regions, Orb 59 
is ſometimes a benovolent and adju- 
vant Planet 124, 216 his Significatio 
ons when Lord of the Year 234 in 
any of the twelve Houſes of Heaven 
237, 239 inany of the twelve Signs, 
from 249 to 253 when Lord of an 
Eclipſe. 313 

Scarcity of any year how to judpe of it. 

284 

A time tor ſetting of Children to Schoo!. 

132 

Scorpio, its Nature and Quality, Corpo- 
rature, Diſeaſes, Angel , Colours, 
Pfaces, Repions, Citres, and Part of 
man nnder its rute 89 why raled by 
eAMars 68 why the fall of the Moor 

69 uhe Number, Names,Narure,Mag- 


An Alphabetital Index of the principal Heads. 
nitude Latitude ard Lofigitude of its 


moſt notable fixed Stats. - O11 
Second Books its fubjeR, | ® > 
Secoyds how many in a mitmte. 79 
Artime for ſowing of Seeds 151 
Self-endedaneſs reprehended * 14 
A time for ſelling to gain thereby. 137 
Of /ellirg and buying, ibia. 
Separation what. I10 
A time for hiring Servants. 172 


/ 
Seth an Aftrologer, Epiſt. Dedic. 1. 29. 
PoRtſcripr, 
Setxtile Ajpett its nature, why ſo called 
and characered , benevolent. 92 
A time for building of Ships. L 9.4 
When the Sick. 1s not likely to fecover. 
I 95 
How to judge of Sickneſs in any year. 
280 
S;onifications of Saturn and 'uriter when 
Lords of the Year in any Annual Re- 
volution 234 when rulers of an E- 
clipſe 313 of HMars,,the Stun, Venus, 
Mercury and the 11ooz, when Lords 
or Ladies of the Year 235 CMars, 
Vents and Mercnry when rulers of an 
Eclipſe 314 in any of the twelve 
Houſes or Signs, from 237 to 268 
in their exaſtations or mutual aſpects 
269, 270 exalted one above another, 
from 271 to 273 of Dragons head and 
rail 2.47 of the Planets in any Tripli- 
city. . 248 
Significators of the King , People and 
their Enemies in any Annual Revolu- 
tion 219 of all ſorts of People. 220 
Signs what they are, why called Signs, 
how many degrees in a Sign, how 
many Minutes in a degree, how many 
Seconds'in a Minute , how many 
Miles or Furlongs a Sign confiſteth of 
79 their Names and Characters, Di- 
viſions 81 why ſo called and cha- 
facered $3, &c. why reckoned from 
eAries, and not placed in the Hea- 
vens according to the order of the 
four Elements. 85 


A time to learn to Sig. 196 . 


Siniſter Aſpeft what it is, its nature. 93 
A time for buying of /mall { artel 173 


of taming of them. 174 
A time for making ſweet Smel/:. 150 
A time for adminiſtring Syeezings. 165 
Snow what it is. 304 


Sout hernTInhabitants,why quickwitted.15 
A time for ridding houſes of )pirits. 1 51 
a 


A time to purge the Splees. 168 
Spring-time the cauſe thereof. 9,11 
Square Aſpe, its Nature, why ſo cal- 
led and charaQtered, why malevolent. 
92 

Standard-bearers their ſignificators. 220 
Stars portencies what * 4 cauſe of ſteri- 
lity and fertility, proved by the Word 
ofGo ÞD 5 moſt effetual and never 
perverted but by miracle * 4 both 
Signs and Cauſes warranted by the 
word of G © Þ 35 influence proved3z, 
6, 1O, 11,14,15.16,17,18 maintained 
by ſacred writ in ſpite of its Antago- 


nifts 23,31, and 33 
The Annual motion of che Starry-ſphere. 
7,10 


Stationary what. 110 
Sterility and fertility on what they de- 
pend 10 how to judge thereof in any 
Year. 284 

A time for gtorming Caſtles and Towns. 
182 

To know the grrexgth of any Planet in 
any Sign. 66 

A time for Studying divine matters, or 
ought elle. I41 
Summer the cauſe thereof 9, 11 why 
not alike hot every Year 9 what Phy- 
ſick is therein moſt ſafe to be taken. 

I 66 

San hisInfluence proved10,18 his nature, 
complexion, magnitude, diſtance from 
the Earth mean and diurnal Motion, 
Revolution, Quality of men, 56 Cor- 
porature, Savours, Colours, Part in 
man, Hearbs, Spice, Trees , Birds, 
Stones 57 Minerals, Fiſhes , Beaſts, 
Weather, Places, Winds, Sign, Tri- 
plicity, Exaltation, Fall , Detriment, 
Age, Angel, Friends, Enemies, 58 
Day of the week, Regions , Orb, 
Moneth after conception , Years , 
Diſeaſes 59 Significations when Lord 
of the Year 235 inany ofthe twelve 
Houſes 241 his Preſence or Abſence 
not alone the cauſe of heat or cold 9g 
Mock-Suns the reaſon thereof 303 
under the Sunbeams whats Il 
Sruperiour what. ibid. 


* 

Tables of the Number, Names, Nature, 
Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude 
of the moſt notable fixed Stars in eve- 

-ry Sign, from g4 to 105 of the Ef. 


An Alphabetical Index of the principal Heads. 


ſential dignities of the Planets accord- 
ing to Prol/omy , or | rather] an un- 
known Author 95 of their tortitude 
and debilities 66, &c. of the AſpeRs 
of the Moon to the other Planecs and 
EleRtions thereby 129 of the manſi- 
ons of the Moon. 130 

A time for Taming ſmall Cattel, 174 
T arrus, its Nature, Quality, Corpora- 
ture,86 Di Mae Cotours Pla- 
ces, Regions, Cities, and Part of man 
under its rule 87 why ruled by /enus 
68 why the Exaltation of the Hoon 
69 the Number, Names, Nature, 
Magnitude , Latitude and Longitude 

- of its moſt notable fixed Stars. gg 
Term what it is, wherefore ſo called,and 


why ſo attributed to the Planets 71 
their uſe. 72 
Terms of eArt explained, 110, &c. 


A time for apprehending Thieves 184 to 


make them confeſs truth. 185 
Third book its ſubjeR. "3 
Thirds how many in a ſecond, 79 
T hunader what it 18, 304 
A time for Tiling the ground. 148 


Artime to cut 7zmbey to keep long. 12 
What Time is beſt to uſe Phylick 166 
Phlebotomie. 170 
A Time for all things under the Sun, 145 
A convenient time to ſet Children to a 
Trade. 132 
Tradition in ſome kind cenſured. * 3, *6 
Tranſlation what. HI 
Tranſlation of light among the Planets, 
and what is thereby portended in Re- 
volutions. 279 
A time for planting of Trees. 150 
Trine aſþett, its Nature, why ſo called 
and charactered 93 why good and 
benevolent. | 92,93 
Triplicity what it is, how many, how no- 
minated, by what Planet ruled, and 
wherefore. 7 
T des not ſo apparent in the Atlantick 
Sea as in others, and why in ſome 


places they are hindred. II 
I. 

Venereal ſports a time for them, 178 

A time for applying Yentofier. 170 


Venuw, her Nature, Complexion, Ma 
nitude, Diſtance from the Earth, 
mean and diurnal Motion , Revolu- 
tion, Quality of men 58 Coporature, 
North Latitude, Seuth,Savours,' Co- 

; lours, 


a bo A 
. x " - Le 
» *. -2 % 
ks + as 
+ - \ -1 
by * . # C ” 
; # 
We 


lours, Part of man, Beaſts, Hearbs, 
Spice, Trees, Perfumes, Birds, Stones, 
Mineral, Fiſhes, Weather , Winds, 
Places, Signs, Iriplicity, Day of the 
week, Regions, Years, Diſeaſes ru- 
led by her, her Age, Angel, Exalta- 
tion , Fall , Detriment, Enemy , 
Friends 60 her joy 75 why .ſo cal- 
led and charaQtered 77 is ; Ave hen 
a malevolent and interticient Planet. 
124, 216 Significations when Lady of 
the Year 235 in the twelve Houſes 
243 inthe twelve Signs from 261 to 
263 when Lady of an Eclipſe. 314 
How to orderthe matter for Yiftery.179 
How to judge of /i#ory in any year.282 
Whea to prune and cut //;»ev. 12 
Virgo, its NEpre, Quality, Corpora- 
ture, Dileaſes, Angel, Colours, Pla- 
ces, ans aged. Cities, and Part of 
man under its rule 88 why ruled by 
Ale cury 68 why his exaltation and 
fall of Vexzus 69 the Number, Names, 


Magnitude, Latitude and Longitude | 
of its moſt notable fixed Stars. og 


Vertue of Hearbs, Stones, Minerals, 
Drugs, and other Medicinal things 


how found out. 2%0 
Unfortunate Planets. 127 
A time for making of Vnpnents, 158 
A time for Voyage. Ig95 
Void of Conrſe what, IT 

W. 


A time tor War 179 to judge of the 
event 181 how to jndge of it in 
any vear ; where and when it ſhall 


An Alphabetical Index of the principal Heads, 


happen 28z who ſhall be the begin- 


ner thereof. 283 
A time to bring Water to an Houle by 
pipe or otherwates. 145 


A time for Weaning of Children. 133 
Weather how to judge of it, trom 258 


ro - ., £803 
A time for digging of Wells, | or: 
How to know the Whiſperings of any 
wo. | | | 185 


Will of any one ifto be altered or ftand in 
force, and how to judge of the ſtate 


thereof, | | 159 
How ta #1” at any game. 186 
Wind what itis. | \ 304 


winter the cauſe thereof 9, 11 why not 
all alike cold 9 what phylick is there- 
in beſt to be taken. - 166 
Women their 1ignificators general 220 
their Darling toys deſcribed. * 19 
Ford of God the chiefelt Good. - *22 
1/orld how governed by G OD fince he 
finiſhed his ſix days work *5,4 ru- 
led by Planets 328 the vanity there- 
of in general ?7 its deſcription and 
vanity more particularly from * 14 
to* 19 turned tophie turvy, * 27 
writing of Letters a cime therefore, 158 


' 7. 
Year whether likely to be turbulent or 
obnoxious 278 plentiful or ſcarce. 
; 284 
Greater Years of thePlanets how known. 


; f* 
Yewih andiits vanity and folly deſcribed. 
*9,*10 


From my Study at my Ruthers Houſe is Holborn, within two doors of the 


wounded Heart, near the Kings,Gate, this 17 of January 1652, 


' Reader, | | 
S in all Volumes you foall finde the Printers _— ſoin thu ; by reaſon it 1s a Work 
 wherewith the) are unacquainted, mayeſt thou abundantly finde their failings which 
1 would intreat thee candidly to paſs by,and amend With thy pen, before thou adventureſt 
' foreadthe ſame ; eſpecially for that ſome are ſo groſs and abſurd, they may otherwiſe 
lead thee into an errour,, unleſs thou art Well acquainted With this manner of learning. 
T have put the fault all along according as it ſhould be amended in a different letter that 
thou mayeſt thereby the more readily apprehend where the defetZ lyeth ; if there be any 


p, - , '7 
gs 5 


oe 


- + 6k WF mth $6 Abi þ _ . - , 
| ON ray PRE I+ 4 - _ : $4 
OI OE TO OO TS Wh or Oe 4 ”  "— mm 
ws x L] * r OY 07” "7 
3 I « ts, Ms” 
<7 


other, as alſo literal faults or defefts by me committed in the ſubjeft it ſelf, if thow halt 
ſhrew thy ſelf ſo charitable a lovingly to correit; and acquaint me therewith, I ſhall be for 


ever engaged to acknowledge my [el by 
74 PI. Thy aſſured Frieng, aud * 


Humble Servant 


William Rameſey. 


_ Where in ſome Copies there are theſe faults let ſhp. 


| In the firſt Book. 
2Olio 3, line 13. read Chaps 1. f. 4. 1. 24. r.4his art. 1. 26. r, the Heavens. f. 14, 1. 25. r. [ately pub. 
liſhed, and |, 50.r.of alt things. f, 2 2.1.23. r. Lucius Bellantiies, f. 26.1. 45. r. or creditinggt. 27.1. 52+ 
r. this 2 more, &c. f.28, 1.1 3.r.his art. f, 30. in the contents of the 14 Chap. t. ffibreaſon. f. 31. 1. 57- 
7. and Conceitedaeſs. f, 3 3.1. 16: after ſuperfiaous,,r, ſhall be ſatisfied, and in the ſame |. after matrer 
T. therefore. t.35-1. 3. r. facing it. f. 38,1. 7.7. Dearth. and 1. 18,r.I mean. alſo 1.23. r. for fince. | 
+ In the (econd Book. 

Folio 50.in the margin.r. Saturn when well fortified, ibid. 1.39. r. Meridienal.and 1.40.r. fleſhy.F, 51. 
1.34.r.Chap.27. f.54.1. 19.r. in two years.f. 62.1. 43.r, he is placed.f.63.1,15.r.ber nearneſs. f.65, in 
the table over againft -.and after Y.r þ« 24. and over againſt1! and after P.r. H.25. and 430-and af- 
ter Y 25.0ver againſt N.r,2þ 30.& over againſt = after P 11, r.Þ 16.8 ovtr againit m,after 4.6.t.P 
1 3.f.69. in the contenrs of the 11 Chap.r.alls, & |. 25.wherein ſhe is in her ſw, f. 71, in the table over 
againſt 17 and under 2; ,r.for 6; 7.and in the ſame ],under 4.r.tor 6.5. and over againſt 5) and under 
J.for 6.r. 5.and in the ſame line under £.for 5.t 6.and 1.41. r. him lat, & 1.42.r.allo him. 76.1.49.t. 
25.degrees and |.5z.dele and,t.79.1.56.r-:s becapſe f 85.1,21.r.{ccond treatiſe. f.36. in the con- 
rents of the 26 pigs ay Np 5.t.lighter Planer, and | 4 r.the wor? &c.f, x06. |, 5ocr. 21. 


Chapf.10g. 1. 7. r. ſecond Treatiſe, | 
| oY Inthe Mg Book. 


Folio 122 |, 24 r.Ommiſcient Creator,and 1. 37.r. of the party f. 125.1 15 for foreſhewed.r, furthered. 
f.127.1.16.r.ſeparating.f. 128,1.11.r.affairs for demnands.f.135.l. 19. dele and. f. 137, 1. 43.r. ſhe next. 
f.141.1,24. r.ſccond book.f.r48.1.50. r. in an angle.f.16f.1.1 2.dele be, and |. 32 dele then. f. 162. 1.20. 
r-z:ter ficient.1.36 r.by ker ſwiftneſs.and 1.37. r. by her ſlowneſ5.f, 163.1. 19 r.malcvolent alpefs.f. 173, 
1.14.r.a/pe& of.f.179,1.44.r.and of his houſes.f 183.1.24.r.unto bim,f.185 1,5 3.dcle axd before aſpect. 


f.201.1,51.r, you have been caught. 
In the fourth Book. 


Folio 214.1.46, r 25 Chap,f.215 1.33 r Chap.22.and |. 5o.r. Chap.26.f,224.1 27.r.or ſixth.t.229. 
1.3 2.r.to thoſe places. 241.1: 12.r-he is. f, 250-1.4.r.bis poſition. f. 251. 1.3 1.r. living in the Sea. f.255.1. 
33-1. Zupucr prevent. f.259. in the laſt note dele Lord.f. 261,1.13. dele inf, 265.1. 1.dele cither,f. 282.1. 
28.r.if it beVenous.f. 284.1. 26.dele ar.f. 286.1. 1.r.amplifie it thus. f.294.1. 5.for this book.r.,this Seftions 
£.295.1,39.dele aud.f.298,1. 1. rhe berter,and 1. 10, r. theſe brute; and 1,1 1.rr. oy at beſt.f. 300,|.11.r. 
ſeeds therefore.f. 308, 17.,r.in the ſixteenth Chap, and third Section-fe3 20,1.33.r.16.Chap. and 3.Steh. 


z 


RI 


Aſtrologia Reſtanrata ; 


Aſtrologic Reſtored: 
INTRODVCTION 


TO "L5 


General and Chict Pa x $þc Language 
7 of the k) 7 7 T 


_ — ————— —— 


In Four BO ORSs = et 

we Tus EE EST; <A 

Proving the Legality of ASTROLOGIE, both by Scripture , Reaſon , and the teſtimony of 
the eAmtients and learned in former Ages, wherein 1 cleared to every Rational and Impar- 
tial. man the Authors Lux Veritatis in AnſWer to Dottor Homes, to remain nnſhaken not- 
withſtanding the Deftors nnowned Reply. | | 

| Tus SE CcoON Þ, 

By a plain Method teaching the Names and Charatters of the Planets and Signs, as alſo the 
Reaſons thereof : and of their Diguities, Terms, Faces, Houſes, Exaltations and Tripli- 
cities ; With the Reaſons why the Signs are reckoned from Aries; and in number juſt 
twelve ; and neither more nor leſs ; With the number of the Sphears ; their Order and 
Motions ; being a moſt neceſſary Introdution to rhe wholeeA RT , and very wſefull to 
all wel-willers thereunto for inabling them to give Reaſons for any part thereof, cc, 

Ins Iu1ikD 
Fully comprehending Inflruftions and Rules for elefting any manner of Work ; never before 
"made publique in our Mother Tongue ; the which both for the Adminiſtration of Phyſick , 
Letting of Blood, Huabanary and other neceſſary Works u both uſefull ard profitable. 
Tar FourrT n, 

By a moſt eaſie Introdnttion teacheth, by Revolutions of the Tears of the World, Eclipſes,great 
Conjuntlions, Comets and Blazing-ſtars, how to Juage by the ordinary courſe and order of 
N ature, of the general Accidents of Conntreyt, Kingdoms, Provinces and (ities , Al- 
terations of Kingdoms and Empires, LaWws and Cuſtoms, (anſe of Plenty, Dearth, Wavrs, 
Peace, Health, Sickneſs, Alteration of the Ayr, and (to be ſhort ) of ail things appertain- 
ing to the life of man in a Natural Way ; wherein is the infinite Wiſdom of GO D ſeen 
manifeſtly in the Government of the World by the Influence and conſtant Harmony of the 
Celeſtial Planets and Stars, the Innocency, Legality and Purity of the Art demonſtrated, 
and proved by demonſtration of the inevitable events of the Heavens, ſo long as GOD 
wpholdeth the Order and (ourſe of Nature unperverted ; and the Students thereof conſe- 


quently proved rather Divines then (onjurers, or Prattiſers of what & unlawful. 


By VV1itiam Ramegssy, Gent. 


Student in 4ſtrologie, Phyſick, and the moſt Heavenly and Sublime Sciences. 
| Aſtra requnt homines , ſed reoit aſtra Dens. 


—  — 


Publiſhed by Authority. 
LO NDON, Printed for Robert White, 1 65 3. 


% 


ag NC CN 


ul. 


ww ct 


g— PRI 


2i4. A ſtrologia eMunda. Lib-4. 
men, eſpecially of that kinde of life, viz. ſouldiers ; he excites men alſo to many robbe- 
ries, ſpoilings, ſackings, tyranny and rebellion ; he alſo cauſeth the wrath of Kings 

and 'Great men, and troubles in general, ſudden death, ſickneſſes and thoſe chiefly 
tertian Agues or Feavers, and thoſe principally, or more particularly ro thoſe of 
younger years or in their ſtrength of youth , much choler and anger amongſt 
men of ſmall repute ; they ſhall commit unlawful things and violate the Law ; many 
Combuſtion, flaughters, rapines,thefts, and robberies. | 

. - the ayr he caufeth extremity of heat and very warm windes, alſo ligthning and 
ikt]e rain, 

In the Sea deſtruction to ſhips, and ſubmerſions ſuddenly by mixt winds, lightning 
and ſuch like, | | 

In Rivers a ſcarcity of waters, a drought of Fountains and detriment by drinking 

of waters, which for the moſt part will be corrupted. 

And inthings appertaining to the life of Man, viz. Beafts and Vegetables, he ſhall 
cauſe a ſcarcity, and deſtruction of the fruits of the Earth, by reaſon they ſhall be 
ſcorched with extremity of heat or eaten with Locuſts and Caterpillers, or deſtroyed 
by winds, or nipt in the bud. FA 
Of Pens 2nd But if Venus be chief Significatrix, ſhe denotes the fame as doth Jupiter gene- 
ker fignificati* rally but together with it ſore Venereal ſports ; and particularly to men ſhe cauſeth 
ori gederal. honour, fame, joy, fortunate ſucceſs in every thing, happy marriages, abundance of 

children and felicity in all things belonging to Matrimony, and an increale of riches, 
and an unuſual familiarity and correſpondency between Princes and their Subjects 
and Familiars, | 
Inthe ayr, winds, but temperate, bringing abundance of ſhowers , yet they very 
ſeaſonable and convenient for the fruRifying of the Earth, a ſeaſonable time accor- 
ding to the nature of the ſeaſon. 
In the Sea ſuch Ships as Navigate ſhall be ſafe and proſperous, 
In Rivers abundance of waters by reaſon of many ſhowers. 
| Beaſts, Vegetables and ſuch things -as are for the uſe of man, ſhall be plentiful. 
Of Mercy If Mercary bechief Ruler, he ſignifieth ſuch events generally as are of the na- 
_ - _ ture of the Planer he is in Conjan#io» with and in Configuration ; for you have been 
he is chize Faught in our ſecond Book of this Volume, thar he participaterh in Nature with the 
Ruler. Planet in Coniznttion or Configuration with him ; but properly in his own nature he 
furthers the nacural ſignification of the other. | 
- Particularly in men he excites expedition, induſtry,cunning and ingenuity in every | 
thing. | 
Is the Sea he cauſeth unfortunate Navigation when he is joined in judgement 
with the Infortunes as being in ings + pr or {*onjunttion with them ; but if with 
the Fortunes, judge the contrary ; with the Malevolents alſo he denotes many diſeaſes 

and infirmities, Quotidian Feavers, Impoſthymes, Conſumptions and Coughs , 
. Phrhifis and dry diſeaſes ; as touching matters of State, Laws, Cuſtoms and Privi- 
ledges, he ordersall according to the Planets andStars in Configuration with him ; 
wheretore we ſee he being dry of conſtitution being ſo nere the Sz», and of a ſwift . 
motion, and becauſe he is often Retrograde, he ftirs up frequent turbulent and per- 
nicious winds, alſo thunder and lightning, openings of the Earth and Earth-quakes, 
and perhaps much damage thereby to Vegetables and Creatures for the uſe of Man 
(I conceive Prolomy might very well have left out perhaps )) alſo-in the houres of 
his ſetting he cauſeth a &1minution of Waters and Rivers ;' in the houres of his riſing 
an augmentation; andthus much of the innate fſignifications of the Planets. 

. Now whenaccording to the yariety of the Aſpects and Signs they are mingled 
by being mutually beheld of each chi and their Poſition in reſpe& of the 3x , 
they thereby vary their effe&ts or aRions according fo the variety of fignifications 
and judgements ariſing fromtheir ſeveral Conjunttions and Configurations, 

Wherefore fince it is impoſſibleto relate exaRtly unto thee all their Configurations 

. and their commixtures, or at feaft for that it would be ſo intricate a thing, we ſhall 
refer it to the ſtudy and conſideration of the Student ; for as I have ſaid before, 
nnoleſs 


Lib.4. aA flrologia aNAunada. 


unleſs thy Genius leadeth thee to the exact knowledge thereof, the reading of all the 
Books in the World will no wiſe avail thee. 

But we ought diligently to obſerve the nature of thoſe Stars by which the e- 
vents are ſignified, and their affinity with thoſe Regions where the effecs are 
to be maniteited thus. 

If they be fortunes and have relation to the evil places where the events ſhall 
happen, and no wiſe contradicted by other Stars, they more effectually perform 
what events were afore '(promiſed; but if they have no relation to thoſe places, 
or if they be gainſayed by malevolent Stars, their good influence is by ſo much 
leſſened, and ſothou mayeſt judge on the contrary. And thus much of Eclipſes 
according to Ptolomy. 

Some lines towards the latter end of the eighth chapter of his aforeſaid ſe- 
cond Booke I have willingly omitted, for that I do not in every word agree 
with him, and therfore herein I ſhall deſire to be excuſed, as alſo if I have in 
any other places varied ſomewhat from him ; I know -no reaſon why any man 
that ftanderh on his ſhoulders may not ſee farther then he ; truly I muſt really 
confeſs he hath merited much honour from his ſucceſſors, wherefore I ſhall eſteem 
him as for his ſhortneſs, ſo for his accurate and ſufficient largeneſs and method before 
any or all other Aſtrological Philoſophers whatſoever ; and therefore (as I have al- 
ready ſaid) with hy I ſhall conclude as touching this matter, adding only this Chap- 
ter which I have colleted out of of J#xtfiinw, that we may haſten to a concluſion 


of this Treatiſe. 


Ca Y,; 


Of the Sun and Moon Eclipſed in any Decanate or Face of the twelve 
Celeſtial Signs. 


»u , wherefore now for concluſion of this point ; I thought good to give 
thee this Chapter out of him alſo, the which he gathered from the writings 


D Ivers rules have T before delivered 1nto thee which I colletedout of JaunT7i- 


_ of Proclus. 
When there happens any Eclipſe either of the S#» or gon in Tawru, Virgo, 


or Capricorn, it denotes a {carcity of the fruits of the Earth and Corn; in Gemini, 
: Libra or Aquaries, a Faminand outragious diſeaſes, Peftilencies and Mortalities ; 
in Cancer, Scorpio or Piſces, the death and ſlaughter of obſcure, common Plebean 
kinde of people, continual quarrelsand feditions, and great damage to Navigators 
and ſuch asconverſe in the Sea, or Sea-affairs ; in Aries, Leo or Sapittary, I need 
ſay no more then this, thas it is ſufficiently declared inthe handling the ſeveral De- 
canates of theſe Signs ; wherefore it wM not be amiſs if we alſo gothrough every 
ſign of the whole Zodiack, beginning at Aries, that ſo thou mayeſt not be to ſeek 
upon any Eclipſe of the Luminaries, and firit then of the Swy. 

When the S#n is Eclipſed in any of the firit ten degrees of «Lies ( which you 
have heardisthe firſt Decanate or Face thereof) it portendsthe ſudden and fre- 
quent motion of Armies, continual expeditions, aſſaults and batteries with many 
rumults, ſeditions and controverſies, and an inclination of the ayr to intempe- 
rate heat and drought. 

In the following Decanat or Face, ( viz. from the tenth to the twentieth de- 
gree of Aries) it denotes the Impriſonment, trouble and ſadneſs of fome King,and 
danger of death unto him, a corruption of trees that are fruitful or of ſuch fruits as 


are produced of Trees, as alſo of the Earth. 
In 


35 


LA 
; ad - 2 


Gy 


& 


S % 


I Os 


eAſtrologia eM unaa. Lib... 


In the laſt Decanate or Face, (viz. from the twentieth to the thirtieth, or laſt 
degree of eAvies) he bringeth grief and ſadneſs ro mortals, andthe death of great 
women, anda ſcarcity or diminution of Cattel (:z. thoſe of the leſſer ſort, becauſe 
itis ſignified by eries.) | | 

An Eclipſe of the Sw» happening in the firſt Face of Taurw, afflicterh Negotia- 
tors, Agents and Solicitors, deftroyerh buſineſſes, and the Corn upon the Earth. 

In the ſecond Decanate or Face of Taxrw, incommodities to ſuch as bear chil- 
dren, and alſo ro Travellers. 

In the third, Peftilence and Famine, from whence we may colle&t the deſtruction 
of greater Cattel, viz.Buls, Oxen and Cows. 

An Eclipſe inthe firſt Face of Gemini (of the Sw») cauſeth difſention amongſt 
Prieſts, of what Order ſoever they are , inveterate hatred and ſeditions, and a con- 
rempt of both the Law of God and Manis to be feared. 

In the ſecond, thefts and robberies, piracies and ſlaughters. 

In the third, the death of ſome King, and various miſcheifs to ſuch Common- 
wealths as are under Gemini, and the fruſtration of ſuch Cities affairs and Negoti- 


: ations, 


Again, an Eclipſe of the Sw in the firſt Face of (arcer, troubleth the ayr , and 
cauſerh var.ous winds and alterations of weather. 

In the ſecond, dryeth up Rivers and Fountains, and cauſeth petulent and greivous 
mortalities. ; | 

In the third, through Armenia and Africa, and the reſt of the Regions and Places 
ſubje& to Carcer, Hidropical diſeaſes, ſeditions, and the diſeaſe of Fraxce, Naples, 
Spain, England, and indeed of all the World ; yet commonly called the Frexch and 
N eopolitan diſeaſe, or more plainly the French Pox. 

Alſo an Eclipſe of the Swz in the firſt Decanate of Leo denotes the death of ſome 
eminent Prince, and the ſcarcity of Bread-corn. 

In the ſecond, troubles and anxieties to Kings, Princes and Great men or Magi- 
ſtrates. 

In the third, captivities, ſlaughters, rapines and profanation of holy and ſacred 
Houſes (I conceive he hereby meant Churches, Monaſteries, and ſuch like.) 

Moreover an Eclipſe of the Sw» in Virgo, argues the grievous calamity and death 
of ſome certain King in the confines of Firge. 

In the ſecond, Famine, Peſtilence and deadly Seditions. 

In the third, to Pictures, Poets and Merchants, and ſuch as live by their Ingenuity 
and wit flaughters, deftruQtion, baniſhment, and the like. . 

Ifan Ecliple of the $» bein the firſt Face of Libra; it corrupteth the Ayr,cauſeth 
the Peſtilence; and a ſcarcity and dearneſs of Corn | 

Inthe ſecond, portendeth the death of ſome Great King ; under the Dominion of 
Libra,Seditions and Famine. 

In the third, diſcords amongſt Great anes, and detriment in their eſtates. 

Alfo if an Eclipſe bein the firſt Face of Scorpio, it moveth and ſtirreth up Wars 
and tumults, ſlaughter, hatred, captivities, plots and treacheries. 

In theſecond, miſchief to ſome King whoſe minde is averſe to war. 

In the third, the riſe of ſome tyrantr® the ſlothfulneſs and idleneſs of the former 
King hateful to every one. | 


in the firſt Face or Decanate of Sagirtary,-if an Eclipſe of the Sus be, it ſhews 


Srievons diſſentions and deadly fewds amongſt men. 

In the ſecond, the death of Camels and fuch Catrel as chew the cud (eſpecially 
the greater ſort) and ſuch like. 

In the third, prejudice to Horſes and Armies. 

Again, an Eclipſe of the Sz» in the firſt Necanate of Capricorn, it denotes un- 
happineſs and chances to Great men, the tranſmigration of ſome King, and the 
Rebellion of the Nobles and ruſticks. | 

In the ſecond, hired ſouldiers are excited and animated againſt their Commanders 
and Superiours, and fruſtrateth all their devices. 

In 


TT ee A INE IERIFAG 


d 


tr 


Mm 


05:95 4255 wt ado ea ed bf > TN 


Lib.4. eAſerologia VAunda. 217 
In the third, it induceth the tumultuary motion of the King, and cauſeth Famine, yy 39, 
Moreover an Eclipſe of the Sn in the firſt Face of equaries, cauſerh publique #*: 10, 


forrow and ſadneſs, 


In the ſecond, publique thefts, rapines and roberies, Earth.quakes and Famine. = 20. 

In the third, the death and ſlaughter of ſheep and beaſts of the field, = 30. 

Laſtly, an Eclipſe ofthe S» in the firft Face of Piſces, drieth up Rivers, and un- » 10, 
fortunateth the Sea and the affairs thereof. | 

In the ſecond, the death of famous and excellent men, deſtruct ion of Fiſh,Earth= 3% 25 
quakes, &c. es 

In thethird, ſedition, cruelty, furiouſneſs and inhumanity of ſouldiers, X 20 


An Eclipſe of the A400» now inevery Decanate is to be conſidered, tince we have The Rh 
done with the Sur, wherefore when the 4Loon is Eclipſed in the firſt Decanate of eclipled in the - 
eAries, ſhe denotes Feavers, deſtruRtion of Woods by fire, anda ficcity and dry- f*® Face of 


neſs of the ayr, | | — 
In the ſecond, Peſtilence. Lo ; Y 20. 
In the third, Abortive births, incommodities and ſuch like dangers to women, Y 36, 


An Eclipſe of the 2ſooz in the firſt decanate of Tawras, denotes deſtruction and » 10. 
death to great Catrel. 

In the ſecond, the death of the Queen of ſome Region under Tanrw; anda & 20. 
ſcarcity of ſeeds and barrenneſs of the Earth. 

In the third, ſhe ſhews cruelty on Serpents and ſuch like. 

Alſo an Eclipſe of the 7ooy in the firſt Face of Gemini, threatneth. incurſions 
and rapins of enemies. 


& 30. 
IL 
In the ſecond, the frequent motion of Armies, and the ſolicitations of private - 20, 
I 
> 


IO. 


and publique things. 
In the third, the death of ſome illuſtrious and famous man. 
Again, an Eclipſe of the eos in the firſt Face of Cancer , excites and ſtirs up 
Wars. 
8 In the ſecond, grievous exaRions, intolerable Tributes, Taxations and ſuch like < 20, 
urthens. | | | 
In the third, death to the Female ſex, and ſudden deſtruction and miſeries. 
Alſo an Eclipſe ofthe Afoox in the firſt Face of Leo, denotes the death of either 
ſome 11luſtrious King or famous Man, 
Inthe ſecond, the journey of the King and mutation of things, 
In the third, ſhe excites the People and Armies to new ations and attempts. 
An Eclipſe of the 2o0x in the firſt Face of Yirgo, cauſeth diſeaſes and Infirmities 
| to the King, and yarious ſeditions and diſcords amongſt men. 
Inthe ſecond, cauſeth miſchief ro Councellors, Scribes, or ſuch like men. 
In the third; brings deadly diſeaſes. - 
A Lunary Eclipſe in the firit Face of Libr«, provoketh furious and tempeſtuous 


hail ftorms. : 


30. 
LO. - 


3O. 
IO. 


© Q 


-P YI RB©O09 
9 


In the ſecond, miſchief and trouble to every one, * 20. 
In the third, death to ſome famous and illuſtrious men, = 30, 
If an Eclipſe of the ſoon be in the firſt Face of Scorpio, it cauſeth horrible Thun- m, 10. 
der and Lightning , and ſometimes Earth-quakes, 
In the ſecond, dryeth Olives ; and cauſeth a dry ayr, and Burning Feavers, m 20. 
In the third, the ſame js threatned, and death ; many ſeditions, quarrels, and 30 
troubles over and above. : | 
| Alſo an Eclipſe of the Moor inthe firſt Face of Sagittary, ſendeth thefts and ra- , 10 
pines, , 
In the ſecond, deftruRion to Horſes and Mules, P 20, 
Inthe third, the Peſtilence and many evils. 7 3O. 


Again, the /ſoon eclipſed inthe firſt face of Capricore, [ſhews ſuggeſtions amongſt 1 105. 
men, and untimely death ; or miſchief to ſome illuſtrious and Noble man. 
In the ſecond, frequent incurſions and aſſaults of ſouldiers, thefts, roberies and vy 20. 


(Ca ptivities. 


Sf In 


218 * Aſtrologia eMunda. Lib.4.. 
w-30. Inthe third, the death'of ſome King under the Dominion of {apricors, alſo ſe- 
itION. 
= 10. Moreover the 4/o0x eclipſed in the firſt face of Aquaries, denotes the misfortune 
of ſome King under Aquaries. : 
22 20, In theſecond, univerſally hurteth the ſeed of - the Earth, 
= 30. Inthethird, achange in all things. 
X 10. Laſtly, the Avon eclipſed inthe firſt face of Piſces, bringeth ſadneſs and anxiety 
to thoſe we call Prieſts, and Religious Houſes, 
X 20. In the ſecond, the death of ſome great and Illuſtrious Perſon. 
X 30. In the third. thefts, rapines, robberies by Land, and piracies and troubles by Sea. 
| And thus 'much fhall ſuffice to be ſaid of Eclipſes at this time; hereafter God 
ſparing me life and leifure from my other ſtudies, perhaps I may make ſome addi- 
tion thereunto if 1 finde the preſent age worthy thereof; Ler us now. proceed. 


gen EI Ir Dre en ne ne 


Cuaz. V1 


Of Comets and Blazing-Stars, what they are, the many ſorts thereof, 
their Portences, and how long they appear at any time. 


is. in the 16, Chpater of the 3. Section of this Book, it being no other then a dry 
exhalation, viſcuous and flimy, exhaled by the Su» and power of the Stars 
by degrees into the upper Region of the Ayr.; for by how much the dryer or 
moiſter are the vapours whereof they are compounded, the higher or lower are they 

placed and drawn up. 
The name 'This word Comer we borrow from the Greeks, who call it Kaine, Comeres quaſs 
thereof, comate (tells, an hairy Star, as the word ſignifies in Engliſh, whence the Latines 
call it (rinira, becauſe many times they appear like hair made of fire, or fire in 
the manner and form'of a mans head, or an horſes main, and wein Eng/and do 
vulgarly call them Comers or Blazing-Stars, of which there are divers ſorts, as 

mentioneth Pliny, Lib. 2.cap. 25.de Nat. and others. 
Divers ſorts of The firſt by the Grecks called 7»ſoriz5, 4 barba, reſembling a beard, becauſe ir 
wo 52.5 hath acircle about it of that form or ſhape, ] meanabour the nether part thereof 
S "215. Theſecond they call 4c017iz &2 75 4xor7iz, 5d eff, a jacwlo, becauſe it is ſhapen in 
form of a dart or ſpear. | 
The third X»2iz-, which is the ſame as 1s the former, ſave only they are ſhorter 
andſharper-pointed at the top then the other,and pale like a ſword and without raies, 
The fourth 4io*&-, diſcus, id eſt , a diſh or platter, this Comet is ſo called 
for that itis round reſembling a diſh, yet now and then it putteth forth one of the 
brims thereof. 

The fifth 99G, Pithers, and thisis in form like a Tun, invironed ina ſmoaky 
light. | 
be ſixth «*ga7ies, Ceratias, thus called for that it reſembleth an horn, and 
ſach an one Pliny teſtifieth appeared when the whole manhood of Greece fought 

the battel of falamr. 

The ſeventh au ms Jampas 4 apr, ſplendeo, toſhine like a lamp, and there- 
fore hath it this name, 

The eighth inmvs, Hippews ; this emitteth ftreams like unto an Horſe main, and 
therefore it is thus called ; this is ſwiftin motion and often turneth round, as faith 
Pliny. | 
F4 ninth he recordeth to be white and bright like ſilyer hair, and of that —_— 

or 


- What a Comer : | Lſewhere you may remember you have been ſhewn what a Comet is, viz. 


Lib.4-. eA/trologia NAunda, 219 
dor thata man is hardly able to behold it, and others become ſhaggy and com- 
paſſed as it were with hair or frindge round about. 

They arein a manner all ſeen under the Great Bear, or that conſtellation which Where or in 
we vulgarly call Charlimains Wain, or Charles hy Wain, yet ſome have been difſ- what part of 
cerned to appear in that white part of the Heaven called — the Milky +475 uſual- 
way from the fictions of the Poet; they denote many boiſterous winds and exceſ- cries 
ſive heat; ſeldome are any ſeen in the Weſt part of Heaven, but about the South 
or Antartick Pole ſome have been ſeen, as P/izy in the ſame aforeſaid Chapter te- 
ſtifieth, to whom 1 here refer thee where thou ſhalt finde what Prodigies they 
were the fore-runners of in the time of Cland.us Ceſar, Pompey, and Oftavins the 
Conſul. 

7 bath been obſerved and noted by the diligent care,induftry and pains of the An- Their cont{- 
tients, that they never appear a ſhorter time then a ſeven-night,nor longer then 80 2vance in the 
dayes; ſome have ſaid 40; others 75, from Plutarch, who noted ſo much from the fs: 
Comet which appeared betore the 'Pe/opon/ian wars in Greece ; but their continu- 
ance is according to their magnitude ; for if they be but ſmall,they will be ſoon burnr 
out, unleſs they be daily fed with new exhalations: I ſhall not here trouble m 
ſelf to recite what Seneca, Arstatle, and others write in Hiſtories concerning fuck 
horrid accidents which have followed in many places on the appearance of Comets; 

{ince all the learned in the works of Nature do unanimoully conclude they are the 
fore-runners of mnch tribulation, alteration, anxiety, and trouble, which I ſhall by 
and by more amply deliverunto thee. | 

You are to take notice that ſome Comets do move, as the Planets; and again, Some Comets 

others, ſtir not but are fixed as are the other Stars. ' move, others 
To judge of the accidents portended by Comets, the place of their appearance in —F _ 


the Heavens is to be obſerved, and what Stars are in Configuration therewith ; al- y4,,+, judge | 


ſo in what ſimilicude they appear, and where they appear and ſhine. of their Por» 
If they appear like ſwords, wars are threatned, and deftrution of mankinde ; like tences. 
Flutes or Hout- boys, it portends miſchief to Muſitians ; if in the middle of a ſign, to 
whore-maſters, and women gameſters ; in form ofa triangle or quadrangle, viz. a 
Trine or Square Aſpect to any of the fixed Stars, to wirs and learned men; if a 
Comet appear in either of the Nodes, or thoſe places which we commonly call che 
Head and Tail ofthe Dragon, it proves infetious and peſtiferous, 
We come now toſhew the events of Comets, or ſuch things as they are the fore- The birth of 
runners of; yet. I cannot but firlt let my Reader know the ſtrange foreknowledge our Saviour 
Sybille 7 iburtina had in this Science, who from the apparition of that great and fa- fore-known by 


the Comet in 


mous Comets which was ſeen in ("ear eLuguſtas his time (in whoſe dayes and p 

. | | A. pred * Auguſius his 
reign was our Saviour Cbrift born) told the Emperour that it pointed out a child time. 
born of a Virgin, which ſhould be greater then he; and therefore ſhe exhorted him 
to worſhip and adore him, &c. _ | | 

Hiſtories, antient Writers, and common experience in former ages teſtifieth unto The Portene 
usthat theſe ſigns in the Heaven, or appearance of Comets, are the aſſured fore- cies of Co- 
runners of the ſterility of the Earth , Peftilence , Famin, War, alterations of mets and Bii- 
Kingdoms, States and Empires, Laws and Cuſtoms, Winds, Earth-quakes , *ing:Stars. 
Tuundations, extream heat and drought, greiveous diſeaſes and infirmities, and ſug 


like horrid evils. 


Sf 2 CHAP, 


— ——— = _— CO. IPER _ I 


m—— 


DIGEST GBS WAY Ss Ins Ie > PV" 2s ORE ERR POL 02-4 <Y _ —— _—_— 
E - - 


20 


1 e Aſtrologia eMunaa. Lib.4. 


CGaHaP. VIL 


Shewing the Phyſacal reaſons of the horrid and terrible portences of C6- 
mets and Blazimg-Stars. | 


ins in the ayr, and their matter of which they are made. 
Of ſterility , by reaſon the fatneſs of the Earth is ( together with the 
exhaled matter whereof they are compoſed ) drawn out, and the Earth left dry , 
and lean, and fo the moiſture and convenient humidity, whereby it fructified all 
things growing therein, 1s dried up by exceſlive heat, and conſequently rendred 
barren, whence there muſt needs follow famine or ſterility in thoſe Regions and 
places where they are ſeen, or from whence their matter or ſubſtance was drawn. 

Of Peſtilence and Diſeaſes, in that the ayr is by them infefted through hot, thick 
cloudy exhalations, the which being drawn in at the mouth of living creatures, in- 
fe&eth and killeth them ; alſo by exceſlive and inordinate heat the radical humi- 
dity and moiſture of living creatures whereby they fubſiſt, is dryed up, whereby 
they become no other then dead carkaſſes : wherefore it is neceflary in ſuch times 
to uſe cooling and moiſtning preparatives which are of that nature asto reſtore. and 
conſerve radicall moiſture. 

Of War and alterations in Kingdoms, States, LaWs ayd Cuſtoms, in that when a 
Comet or Blazing-Star appears, there are many exhalations in the Ayr , and 
thoſe of nature hot and dry, the which do ſo dry up the humors in men, and in- 
creaſe choler, that they are eaſily excited to quarrels, after which follow blows , 
wars and blood-ſhed ; and ſo conſequently alterations in States, Governments, 
Laws, Cuſtoms, and Empires. 

Of Winds, for that they are of the ſame matter whereof Comets are, as you 
have heard in the 16 Chapter and 2 Section of this fourth Book ; and when any 
Comet or Blazing-Star appears, many ſuch dry vapours are exhaled ; beſides, when 
they vaniſh, they become windy vapours. 

Of Earth-quakes, for the ſame aforeſaid reaſon; for they are the occaſion of 
winds,and winds of Earth-quakes, as in the ſame aforeſaid 16 Chapter you have been 
taught. 

by Inundations, for the ſame reaſon alſo ; for Comets cauſe winds, winds cauſe the 
Sea toroar and rage, whence follows inundations, 

Thus have I delivered you the reaſons of their portences the which I would 
not have thee nor any to fear, though never fo hn and terrible , but ra- 
ther take courage thereby to call earneſtly to God for mercy , that he might 
evert his judgments whereof he doth ſo fairly warn us by theſe his meſlen- 
gers. | 


T Hat they are the cauſe of inordinate heat, is apparent by their ardent burn- 


CHap. 


Lib.4. » Aſtrologia <\unda. 321 


CHaPp. VIIT. 


Shewins ſome other names of Comets or Blazing-Stars, and their 
Portences. 


got, viz. that Comets and Blazing-Stars ſeldom are ſeen, for that it is are ſeen bur 
not an eaſie matter for the $»» and Planets, (neither is it ſoon done) rand 
to draw up ſo much dry vapour as is requiſite for the compoſition of ſuch anappa- ;jm. 
rition; and therefore is it alſo that there doth but one appear at a time, though 
Ariſtotle affirmerh there hath been many ſeen together, and this I mult confeſs is as 

likely to be true as many other of his ſtories and tales. 

They are ſeldom or never feen in Winter by reaſon of the abundance of cold Ar what time 
and moiſt weather that then aboundeth, fo x * there can be no ſuch dry va- ofthe year 
pour exhaled by the Sw» or Stars, nor in that quantity as is requiſite to "ms _ 
compoſition of ſuch apparitions; neither in *#mwmer . by reaſon of the ex- races 
ceſs of heat , or the heat of the Sz» which conſumes and diſperſerh the matter 
whereof they are made, fo that it cannot aſcend unto that part of the Region of 
the Ayr wherein they are uſually placed ; neither in the Spring time, by reaſon 
of the abundance of moiſture that then reigns, and the want of ſufficient 
heat to elevate ſo much matter ; but in Autzmn, eſpecially when Satwrn and 
Mars are in Conjantion, becauſe then the heat that exhales the matter, is more 
ſtrong. 

Farther note, that ſome Comets are white, ſome again red, which ariſeth from Comers white 
the divers nature and qualit. of the matter whereof they are; for pure thin exha- 39d red; and 
lations produce a white, clear and bright Comet ; whenit is more groſs and im- = _ 
pure, red, and theſe appear like burning coals; but when the matter whereof they _ 
are is very groſs ,-they appear asred as Scarlet or blood ; wherefore the Antients 
have affigned them unto the ſeveral Planets according to their complexions; for 
ſuch as are Saturnian, are pale, wan and of a leaden colour like unto Satwr ; 
For ; Marcia], red ; Solar, golden or yellow ; Venereal, obſcure ; Mercurial, 

lew, &c. 

Such as are like the hairs of a mans head (as you have heard) are more con- The reaſon of 
denſed and thick in the middle, but about the edges more rare ; thoſe reſembling their ſhape and 
beards, have their extreams more rare and diſperſed ; and thoſe that are much exten- form. 
ded in length, are more rare and fubril. | 

The Antients have delivered moreover theſe nine following ſeveral Comets or The diftin& 
Blazing-Stars, and their virtues or Portences which I could no wiſe omit being ſo fignifications 


H Ere it will not be amiſs, if I ſet down ſomething which I had almoſt for- Why Comers | 


neceſſary to Inſtruction. of every Co- 
The firſt then is called Yer, for that it reſembleth a ſpit, or dart, and appeareth in 2% Pia 
p Zing Star, 


the day time very terrible to the beholders : It denotes a ſcarcity of fruit both of 
the Earth and trees; mutations in Church and State, grievous flaughters and the 
death of Kings, Nobles and fuch as are of their adherence. 

The ſecond, Texaculam, of the colour of Mars, and hath rates under it like 
the flames of burning coals : it ſignifieth there ſhall not be ſuch plenty as formerly, 
yet not famine; wars alſo are thereby ſtirred up to the great prejudice of the god- 
lier ſort of people who ſhall be very forward therein. 

The third, Perrics, which ſometimes emitts 05ſcure raies, and again at other times 
bright ; this denotes a drought both of the Earth and Waters, and a ſcarcity of 
Proviſions ; the which it corporally joined to any Planet ſignifyeth events according 


to the nature of that Planer (the nature of every Planet you have been taught be- 
fore) 


| A ſtrologia eM unda. Lib.4. 
| ' fore) asifithe joined to Satzrn, there ſhall be mortalities,troubles to old men, and 
thoſe ofthe religious Orders: to Japitey it extends its effects to Kings and Gran- 
dees whether good or bad according to their fortitudes; to CMar:, many wars, 
tumulrs, ſlaughters and effuſion of bloud ; to the Su» it will not appear by rea- 
ſon of the $zxs ſplendour, yet it portends the death of Kings and many tribula- 
tions, plagues, and ſickneſſes; to Yen, it ſignifies drought, and a diminution of 
great waters; to Mercary, it denotes the death of young men, wits and ingenuons 
ſouls; to the Moor, it ſignifies death and grievous mortality to men, eſpecially 
common people. | 
The fourth Miles, conſecrated to Venus , and hath an hairy tail or main, 
emining Moor-like beams or rayes; it ſignifieth miſchief ro Kings, Nobles and 
Great men, and that men ſhal! riſe that will endeavour to alter -the Laws and 
antient Cuſtoms, and fer up new ; but the greateſt evil portended_ thereby will 
be incident to thoſe places towards which it extends its tail or rayes; it denotes 
alſo wars. "I "I 

The fifth / erx/ews , of a blew or azure colour, appropriated to Mercury, it. de- 
notes the death of Kings and Grandees, Nobles ſuch as are chief Rulers, and 
chiefly towards the part towards which it extends its rayes ; alſo wars, 

The fixth Awrora five Marntina , afligned to Mars, it hath a tale, and is of 
a fiery complexion ; when it appeareth towards the Eaſt, bending its head down- 
wards, it ſignifies war,combuſtions, fire and ſword, peſtilence and famine in eLrabia 
and Egypt, drought and a ſcarcity of waters, and this ſhall extend alſo to the 
Weſtern Regions. 

The ſeventh Arpentum five Argenters , and this is the brighteſt and cleareſt of 
all Comets; it hath pure bright beams; when it appears , 7-piter being then 
in Cancer or Piſces, it promiſeth abundance of corn and fruit in thoſe parts where 
it appeared ; bur if 7*piter be then in Scorpio, it will not be altogether ſo good. 

The eighth Roſe, this is a great round Comet , and 1s of the form and fimi- 
lirude of of a man, it cauſeth che death of Kings, Great, Noble and Rich men, 
and the alteration of things. ; 

The ninth and laſt Nger, appropriated to Saturn, being in colour like unto him ; 
it denotes mortality both natural and alſo by the ſword, beheadings and the 
hke. 

Note. If a Comet appear in the Aſcendent of any Town, Kingdom, City, Family, or 
mn the Aſcendent of the Revolution of the World, it ſignifieth deſtruction of the 
things ſignified by the Aſcendent and the ſign thereof; and if it appear in the 
ſign of the mid-Heaven at the time of any of theſe, it bringeth danger to ſuch as 
are promoted to honour. 

The 6gnificv Comets appearing in earthy figns, denote Rterility through drought ; in watry, 
tion of C0- through abundance of rain and floods, and cauſeth alſo Peltilence; in aiery, they 
ood wid promiſe Winds, Seditions and Peſtilence, yet not alwayes Plagues ; infiery, Wars, 


thy hens, wa- 
MR ebryand fAaughters and commotions. 


ery, 


CuaP, 


Lib:4, o Aſtrologia aNAunada. : 323 


TCxad IT 


Of the ſignification of Comets and Blazing-Stars appropriated to the 
ſerven Planets. | 


KS Eceive theſe Rules following, as from the Chaldears, Ar1bi- 

SS ans, and ſuch as were very expert in theſe matters in former 
Apes, | 
Wherefore know, that if any Comet of the nature and The Portences 
complexion of Satzrn appear in the Aſcendent of the Reyo- **v<h — 
> lution of the World, it denotes many evils, Famine, Peſtilence, - 5 -ntny ng 

JF Baniſhment, Want, Anxiety, terrour and trouble, Chronick 

- SEISUS diſeaſes, and Melancholy diſtempers, Catarrs, Quartane 
> Falling Sickneſs, Leproſies, Palſies, Cancers, and thoſe diſeaſes 
which are'of continuance, lingring Conſumptions, and the like ; deſtruction to 
Beafts appertaining to the uſe of man ; exceſlive cold weather in winter ; (but you Note. 
are ſtill to remember che Nature ofthe Climate ; for this inordinate cold in e Ethiopia 
will cauſe but a temperate Ayr, &c. and therefore this is to be underſtood of 
theſe Northern parts, clouds, froſt and ſnow, ſtrong and high winds, tempeſts , 
ſhipwracks, deſtruction of Fiſh, as alſo of Fruit by Caterpillers, Locuſts, and ſuch - 
like Vermine ; great Inundations and ſtorms, to the anoyance of Cattel, and all 
things, Men and Kingdoms urder the Dominion of Satzrn ſhall ſuffer detriment, 
and be indanger of druRtion, 

Such as are of a ſilver colour, bright and of great ſplendor, and of the nature Comets of the 
of Jupiter, cauſe a plentiful year when they appear in the Aſcendent (as you have nature of Fu 
heard) wholſome blaſts of Ayr with many ſeaſonable ſhowers, eſpecially if it be Pier and 
a watry ſign ; it denotes alſo ſuch infirmities as are of the nature of Zapiter 2", ied 
(which you have heard in the ſecond Book of this Volume ) and many alterations ; 
and changes in ſuch _— Regions and Places ſubje& unto him , the which I 
have there alſo at large ſer down. 

Thoſe Comets which you have heard we have underſtood by the names of Comets of the 
Very and Pertica are of the nature of Mars, wherefore they denote. horrible 22ture of 
winds, ſtorms, and tempeſts, a drought of Fountains, and a deſtruction of Fruit by os, and 
corruption, and all the diſeaſes portended by Mars ; &c. frequent Thundering and; =—ch a 
Lightnings to the deſtruction of many Ships at Sea, wrath, quarrels, heart-burnings, 
ſlaughters and blood-ſhed amongſt men ; tumults, ſeditions and wars, alterati- 
ons of Kingdoms, Laws, Government and Cuſtoms , and ſuch like evils appro- 
priated to the nature of /ars , and they ſhall chiefly be incident to ſuch men 
as are under his Dominion, Towns, Cities, Kingdoms and Places, as alſo to thoſe 
parts towards which the Comet extendeth.itstayl as you have heard. >. 

Comets and ag 7 of the nature and complexion of the Su», denote The fignifica. 
the death of Kings, Great men and Nobles in thoſe parts they appear, and in *i91s of the 
that Kingdom or Nation under the Aſcendent of that ſign wherein they appear "neg Co- 
and for which the Revolution is made ( when they are ſeen in the Aſcendent —_ 
thereof; ) alſo alterations in Government to the better ; continall and: dayly tu- 
mults. alſo war, drought , and ſuch infirsiities as are ſolar, and thoſe chiefly tg 
ſolar men, and to ſuch places as are under his Dominion. 

Such as are appropriated unto'YVenws, ſhew their Effets on Fruits and in Wa- Comets of the 
ters, and cauſe change and mutations in the World, alterations of the Laws , ®**ure of Y- 
Cuftoms and Priviledges of Men ; damage and detriment ro Women, Nuns, and "nd their 
Matrons, chiefly in their Stomach, Secrets and Reins, &c. All infirmities ſignified 2 

| by 


324. eAſirologia eM unaa. Lib:4. 
by Yen are. threatned, to thoſe eſpecially that are under her rule , and alſo to 
| thoſe places ſubje& unto her. ; | 
What is Ggni- Mercurial Comets occaſion the death of ſome Great man (ſtill remember 
: _— by Mercu- this is where they have Dominion) grievous calamities, War, Peltiſence and Fa- 
244 bes mine; DeftruRion, Tribulation, Anxiety, trouble and ſadneſs to Mercurialiſts, and 
Ingenuous and wiſe men, and ſuch as are ruled by Merczry, and grievous trouble 
ang ſorrow to' ſuch places as are ſubje& unto him , and the ſign wherein the 
Comet appears, and places to which it extends it ſelf , and where it is viſible ic 
ſends Mercuriall diſcafss, | | 
Wharby Lu- Tunar Comets chiefly manifeſt their ſignifications on women and common 
_ people ; as alſoto all ſuch as are under her rule, whether Towns, Cities, Kingdoms 
or Nations ; they particularly denote troubles, alteration of the Lavgg, Cuſtoms 
and Rites, Sterility and Wars, all infirmities ſignitied by the 400, and thoſe chiefly 
to ſuch as are by her governed, &c. | 
Note alſo, thatif a Comet extends its ſelf towards Saturn, (viz. its raies or tail) 
it portendsthe deſtrn5on of the fruits of the Earth, and a ſcarcity or Famine; to- 
wards 7apiter, wrath and deſtruction to Kings, and the Grandees of the Earth ; 
towards Mars, grievous and terrible ſickneſles, wars, ſlaughters and blood-ſhed, 
and the alteration of Kingdoms ; towards the Sx», the death and deſtruRtons of 
Kings and Government ; towards Venus, the death of Great and Noble women, 
and damage to fuch things as appertain unto them ; towards Mercury, much con- 
ſumption of wealth, with ſhame and infamy ; towards the ſoon , troubles and 
ſhame to' the People in general. 


+ F% a © 


$ hewing the Significations of Comets, when they appear in ay of the 
twelve Signs of Hearven. 


Of the ligaik- Lbumaſer and Janftinu with many others ſay, that if any of the aforeſaid 
cation of Co- Comets or Blazing-Stars appear in Artes, it ſignifies evill and detriment 
mets when to Noble men, and the Grandees of the Earth in the Eaſtern parts, 


—_—_— and abundance of ſadneſs tothe commoner ſort, (and truly I conceive all Nati- 
ons, _ and People, Cities, Towns, Villages, and Families under the ſign 
Aris will ſuffer the ſame) alſo a noiſe of the claſhing of Arms, blood-ſhed , 
and the death of ſome eminent Prince, or laughter of ſome great Lady, (you 
muſt remember to confine your judgment herein to the places wherein the Bla- 
_—_— or Comet hath power, ſo alſo in the ſubſequent rules in the like caſe) 
with fear and-trouble of ſlaughter amongſt men; alſo great drought, common 
diſeaſes in the Head, Eyes and Brain, a rot amongſt ſmall Cattel, eſpecially 
Sheep, and a dejection of Great and Noble men, or an ur-throning of ſome 
King, and a riſe or promotion of vile and ignoble mean people, 

If its © omar be in the Eaſtern part of Heaven, it will operate ſooner, and 
' there ſhall be enmity amongſt men ; but if in the Weſtern,more ſlow, and much evill 
and detriment from Kings or Superiours, and many ſhowers, inundations and fre- 

quent ſnows in Winter, 
| In Taurus. Tf any Blazing-Star or Comet appearin Ta, it ſignifieth miſchief to men, 
. and diminution of their goods, alſo injuries and wrongs put upon them ; it uſes - 
alſo to ignifie (as ſay the Antients) the death of ſome Great man, Captivities, 
injuries, and a tolſeration of evils ; detriment to the greater ſort of Cattel, eſpecially 
| "SN. 


Lib.4. A ſtrologia Vdunda. 


Buls, Cows and Oxen, great winds, a corruption of Fruit, and deſtruction of Corn, 
and in Winter much cold, alſo grievous Earth-quakes, vehement ſickneſles, and 
dry ſcurfie diſeaſes, proceeding of putrefication,as ſcabs,&c. | 

If it appear toward the Eaft, it will ſooner operate , and the King ſhall fear his 
Enemies, and men ſhall be moleſted with boils and ſwellings. abour the Groins , 
and theſe ſhall continue for ſome years; alſo ſickneſſes in the Summer-quarter ; 
and if it appear inthe Weſtern part,it will work more flowly;and ſignifies much rain, 


7 


In Gemini, if any Comet appear, it ſignifies men ſhall be laſcivious and inceſtuous, In Gemini 


looſe livers and neglecters of goodneſs ; alſo it denotes quarrels, wars, and difſenti- 
ons amongſt men, {ickneſles and the death of children, and yong men eſpecially ; 
alſo Abortive births, the ſlaughter of Birds, Famine, Thunder and Lightning, with 
very high winds to the eradication and ſubverſion of trees and houſes. 

And if it appear towards the Eaſt part of Heaven, the Effe&s thereof will ſoon 
be ſeen,and many Grandees of the World ſhall be abaſed,and brought down from 
their High Places and Honours ; and if it appear in the Weſt, not fo ſoon, and 
ic ſignifies much captivity, and abundance of rain and inundations. 


Alſo if a Comet appear in Carcer, itſignifies abundance of Locuſts (in the parts In cance: 


where they are naturally produced, in our Climate it produces Caterpillars, and 
ſuch like pernitious worms ) which ſhall eat up and deftroy the Fruits of the Earth, 
alſo ſmall worms in < orn and Trees, a ſcarcity of Fruit and plenty of Worms; it 
denotes: alſo wars, diſcords and much evill, the death of ſome Great Perſon, ſub- 
merſions, Rapes and Robberies, Famine and Peſtilence. 


And if it appear in the Eaſtern part of Heaven, its Effects will be quickly mani-* | 


feſt, and there ſhall be ſcarcity of Proviſions for the uſe of man towards the latter 
end of the year ; if in the Weſtern, not ſo ſoon; it denotes the kindnefs of Kings 
and Great men to the Commons. 


Again, if any appear in Leo, men ſhall be damnified by wild Beaſts; L yons and Ia Zez. 


Woolfs, ( this is to be underſtood in thoſe Regions where ſuch feral creatures 
are) Worms and Vermin ſhall be deſtructive to the Corn, and men ſhall be dam- 
nified in their eſtates; the Gentry and Nobility ſhall ſuffer detriment, and man 
of themdeath, and War amongſt Kings towards the end of the year , and muc 
effuſion of bloud inthe Eaſten parts [ note the Parenthefis in Aries] and pains in 
the Eyes. | 

And if it appear inthe Eaſtern oart, the Effects are ſoon manifeſted, and it ſig- 
nifies great Winds, + 15 gn a ſcarcity of Waters ; inthe Weſtern, not ſo ſoon, 
and it ſignifies many ſickneſles, and that Wolves and mad Dogs will rage. 


And if in Virgo, it denotes the extirpation of Domeſticks belonging to ſome In 7jzgo, 


King or Prince, or their removall out of one place into another,or out of one King- 
dom into another, or their baniſhment, or their being carried away captive, and 
their goods and offices ſhall be taken away without any hope of reſtauration, nei- 
ther ſhall they ever recover them; it denotes alſo damage to Merchants and mu- 
cual injuries and injuſtice amongſt men; alſo vexations and captivities, and much la- 
bour, pain, trouble;tribulations and ſadneſs, Feavers, Abortions in women, a noiſe of 
Arms, &Cc. | | 

* If it appear Eaſtward, the ſooner are its Effets manifeſt, and portends war; if 
Weltward,the later, and denotes quarrels and a rankeneſfs of Corn. 


In Librait denotes theft and robberies, alſo cutters on the High-way, and men In Z;bra- - 


ſhall fear poverty and want, and ſhall ſuffer through cold ; it denotes alſo the 
death of ſome eminent man, ſlaughters, and ſecret plots and treacheries, a ſcarcity 
of Rain, impetuous Winds, a drought of Fountains and other waters, a want of 
the Fruits of the Earth, and Proviſions for the uſe of man, Earth. quakes, &c. 

And if it be Eaſtern, theſe EffeRs will the ſooner appear, and the Kings of Ba- 
bylon (and ſuch as areunder the ſign Libra) ſhall be unfortunate ; and Horſes and 


Mules ſhall be dear, and Wars amongſt the Romans; bur if Weſtern, the contrary, 


and ſervants ſhall contemn and reje& their Maſters, and the fruits of the Earth ſhall 
not be altogether ſo ſcarce, T rt In 


) 


326 @ Aſtrologia eM unda. Lib.4: 

In Scorpio any Comet fignifieth abundance of war and rebellion to Kings, 
changes and alterations, detriment and damage to ſouldiers, labour and travel to 
all kinds of men, contentions amongſt Great men, great perils and dangers, the death 
of ſome eminent man, and a ſcarcity of waters at ſome certain times , miſchief to 
ſuch as are with child, a ſcarcity of Corn and the fruits of the Earth, and pains 
in the Teſticles and Bladder. 

And if it be ſeen inthe Eaſt or Eaſtward,theſe do ſoon appear , and it denotes a 
ſcarcity of rain,and that Wolyes and Dogs will ravin ; bur if it be Weſtward, not ſo 
ſoon, and there ſhall be Locuſts and ſuch like creatures. > 

Alſo a Comet in Sagiztary denotes a decay of Nobility, and a ſuppreſlion of 
Great and Noble men, wiſe, prudent and learned, and much evill and tribulation 
will fall upon them, and eſpecially to Scribes or Lawyers, moreover. captivity of 
Princes, war and ſuch like. | 
. But if it be ſeen towards the Eaſt, ſooner will theſe be effected, and it ſignifieth 

| the death of Kings,fightings robberies and a ſcarcity of Proviſions for the life of man; 
iftowards the Weſt, later, and it denotes many fantaſtical dreams, and that women 

ſhall have many Abortions. | 
In Caprico;n. Again, in Capricora any Comet ſignifies fornications amongſt men, 'war amongſt 
* King and Nobles, many calamities and misfortunes, quarrels, poiſoning of Kings , 
the death of Princes. cutting by the High-way , contempt of Religion, men and 
things ; and italſo ſhews perſecution of orto Religion, hail, ſnow, and a ſharp 
winter to the 6 7 anoyance of the ſeeds of the Earth ; alſo it threatneth Famine, 

Peſtilence, and the like. 

__ If it be firſt ſeen in the Eaſtern part of Heaven , its Effects will ſuddenly ap- 
pear, and it denotes that Kings ſhall be damnified by their enemies, and they ſhall 
be the occaſion of their death and alterations in Government, ſnow alſo and abun- 
dance of rain, to the deſtruction of Vines and other the fruits of the Earth ; but 
if in the Weſtern, not ſo ſoon, and it denotes a Year of abundance of graſs and 
water. 

Moreover if in » £qzarie-, it denotes many wars and flaughters, and the death of 
ſome honorable and eminent Prince or Lady in the Eaſtern parts, ſay ſome of the 
Antients ; (but 1 ſhould have judged it in the Weljern parts, Aquarie: being a 
Wettern ſign, &c. ) war for a long time, Epidemical diſeaſes, an obſcuration of the 
Ayr, with thundring aod lightning, Pettilence alſo, and the death of both 11luſtrious 
men, and alfa the common fort of people. 

If it appear in the Eaſtern parts, their Portences will ſooner operate, and it de- 
notes abundance of graſs ; if in the Weſtern, later, and it ſignifies various rumors , 
and chiefly of war; and that a men ſhall be impriſoned and captivated. 

In Piſces. Laſtly, a Comer in Pi/ces fignifies war amongſt kindred and fach as are allied one 
to another, and there ſhall be much ſlaughter; contentions alſo touching matters 
of Faith, and privitedgesand cuſtoms in Religion and antient Traditions; there 
ſhall be alſo many apparitions in the Ayr, fiſhes ſhall many of them ſuffer 
deſtruction, and it ſhall be dangerous Navigating; Kings ſhall War one againſt 
another, the father againſt the ſon, and the ſon againſt the father, and brother againft 
brother, 8c. 

And if it appear inthe Eaſt part of Heaven,the ſooner will theſe be manifeſted,and 
it ſignifies enmities between Kings, Nobles,and Plebeans,tumults, bickerings,&c. if in 
the Weſt part, the later, and there ſhall be many anxieties and deaths amongſt men in 
the Weſtern parts (I ſhould judge it in the North-weſt parts,) and this (hall continue 
three years, and and there ſhall be many birds, fiſhes, and inundations and over- 
flowings of Rivers. | | 

When Comets Y 08 bave heard that they chiefly ſhew their Effects to thoſe parts to which 

chiefly ma- they emitt their beams or rayes, to the which I may adde the Regions where 

nifeſt their they are ſeen, and the Kingdoms, Countreys, Provinces and Cities ſubje& to the 

EffeQs. ſign whereinthey appear ; but the time when it ſhall be chiefly moſt manifeſt is 

when 


In $ corpro, 


In Sagittary. 


In Aquaries, 


E1b.4. eAſtrologia NAunda. 327 
when the Sun comes to the place of their firſt appearance,or tothat Planet of whoſe 
nature and complexion it is,&c. 


And thus much of Comets and Blazing-Stars; come we now to great Con-- | 
junRions, and ſo conclude theſe our labours. 


GCmnaPr Xt 


Of great ( onjunttions their Number, and how to judge of their Effe&ts. 


Oft of the Antiemes have been ſhort in their judgments on this ſubje&, yer 
M ſome more copious then others, but none ſo effeual as I could wiſh for 
thy inſtruction, fince by the Conjuntion of the Planets all the accidents 
and mutations of this Elementary World are known, eſpecially by the Commuttion 
of the Superiours; how ever ſuch as = are I ſhall here deliver unto thee with my 
beſt afliſtance ; time and opportunity may happily produce more hereaftes; in the In- - 
terim underſtand thus much , 

Thatthere are ſeven forts of ('onjunftions conſiderable, | 

The firſt and greateſt of all thereſt, is the Conjan#ion of the two ſuperiour Pla- 
nets Satzrn and 7wpiter in the firſt term or degree of eHries, which happens but 
once in nine hundred and threeſcore yearr. 

The ſecond is the (onjanttion of Saturn and:Japiter in the firſt term or degree of 
every triplicity, and this is accompliſhed once in two hundred and forty years, yet 
once in twenty years, they come in Coyjun#iov in one part or other of the Zoadiack. 

The third is the (onjurttion of Saturn and-Hars in the firſt term or degree of 
. Caxcer, and this.is once in thirty years. 
| The fourth is the Comjunition of the three ſuperiours, Saturn, Jupiter and Mats 
in one term or face of any ſign. 

The fifth is the (onjuntion of Jupiter and Mars, which is a mean and the leaſt 
Conjunttion of the ſuperiours, and therefore is not the fore-runner of ſuch great 
miſchiefs as the other, as you ſhall by and by underſtand. 

The ſixth is the Conjunttion of the £xx with any of the reſt of the Planets at the 
time of his entrance into the firſt point of erie-. | 

The ſeventh and laſt is the Conjunttion of the Sun and Moon , which happeneth 
once every moneth. 

Of which we are nowin order to treat ; but firſt you muſt know that the time for +0085 neg 
the erecting of your figure is when the Planets are in Partil Comjuntion, viz. in +> 1onrgan 
the very ſame ſigne, degree and minute of the Zodiack. You may ſee what a 
Partil Aſpe& is in the 27 Chapter of the ſecond Book of this Volume. 

Having then erected the Figure of the Heavens at your punctual time,and placed 
the Planets therein being reduced to the time of the day, have regard unto the for- 
titudes and debilities of the Planets, eſpecially thoſe in (o»ju»tion, for if they be 
ſtrong and fortunate, they preſage good ; if weak and impedited,the contrary, 

And this good or evilt ſhall be according to the nature of the Planets in Cor- 
jun{ion, and the nature of the ſign in which they are ; as if the Sign be ajery and 
the Planets evill, impediment in the Ayr, corruption and much damage thereby 
both to men-and the fruits of the Earth is denoted ; and ſo judge of the reſt of 
the ſigns ; in like manner judge the contrary if the Planets in Conjuntion be For- 

' tunes and well dignified. 

Again, if the Malevolents be in Conjun#ion in feminine Signs, they denote Pe- 
ſtilence and evill infirmities to women ; and the Female ſex of things in general chiefly, 
in like manner .to the Maſculine ſex if the Sign be Maſculine ; and health, proſperity 
and good ſucceſs, if they are benevolent "3 

| £3 More- 


328 eAſtrologia eMunda. Lib.4.. 


Moreqver in fixed figs what they portend ( whether they are Benevo- 
lents or Malevolents) is of continuance ; in moveable, of little or no continuance: 
in, common.ſigns, a-mean between theſe , viz. they are neither of long or ſhort 


continuance. 


CHaP. XIL. 
Of the Conjun&tions of the Supertours. 


this World | for the which they were ordained ] but ſome more forcibly 


; } Very Planet in ſome meaſure or other contributeth to the Government of 
then others, as being fore-runners of greater and ſtranger accidents and 


mutations. | | 
Of the Con= _ For, the great Conjunttion of Stern and 7wpiter in the firſt point of Aries, or 


+05 wp the firſt term thereof, is the greateſt and moſt notable (onjunion of all the other, 
piter in Aries, for that they are the higheſt, and ſo:conſequently (as to us) the ſloweſt of the 
Planets, and therefore have more power to a& what they denote then any of the 
other have, and for that e-2r:es isthe firſt of. the ſigns of the Zodiack , and the 
firſt ſign of the Triplicities, alſo the firſt of the fiery Trygon. . 
And therefore it is that when theſeryo higheſt Planets are in Conjuxttion in the fi 

Trygon, (eſpecially inthe firſt term or degree of Aries the Aſcendent of the world 
and the place wherein the chief Luminary (viz. the Sw») wasat the Creation) many 
commotions, wars, ſeditions, troubles, ſubverſion of Monarchies, Kingdoms, States, 
alteration of Laws, Cuſtoms, Priviledges and Rights, Plagues, Famine, Deſolation, 
Anxiety and trouble, Treaſons, Treacheries,and the death of Kings,Nobles, Princes, 

Emperours and Powers,follow. 
Of the con. © So likewiſe when they are jn Comunttion in the firſt term of any Trygon, whe- 
junthion of $4+ ther it be fiery, earthy, aiery or watry, but not ſo forcible is their then Effects , 
turn and 74> nor ſo terrible as the former, yet {though in a leſs degree) the fore-runners and oc- 
prerina'y  caſioners of grievous murations, and accidents , according to the nature of that 
Ya" Planet which hath moſt power of the twoin the Sign wherein they are joined ; for 
if Saturn be ſtronger then 7=pster, it will be very terrible ; but if Zepiter be ſtronger 
then him, ſomewhat will be abated z in fiery, earthy and ajery Signs they cauſe 


drought and a ſcarcity of Proviſions and barrenneſs of the ground, Peſtilence and 


Famine; in watry, detriment by.the roo much abundance thereof. 

Alſo whentheſe two firſt {onjunf:ons are inany of the Angles , eſpecially the 
renth, it denotes the ariſe of ſome new King or Prophet from'the quarter ſignified 
by the ſign wherein they are joined, and if the Sign and Lord thereof be fortunate, 
it denotes their continuance,eſtabliſhment and glory ; but if it be weak or afflicted, 
and its Lord, they ſhall be ſlainand put down; for the whole world is governed by 
theſe T7ygons, as Prolomy teacheth in his ſecond Book, and the whole Macrocoſm 
compounded of the four Elements which anſwereth to the four Triplicities,and there- 
fore it is that the Conjunion of the Superiours in them are occaſioners of ſuch great 
mutations, 

| Of the Co-- Tn like manner the Conjunttion of Saturn and Hears in the firſt degree or term of 
2 Cancer, is the forerunger of much evill, (yet are the two former preferred before it) 
in Cancer, ©1%. terrible wars, ſlaughters, depopulations and alterations of Government, and 
deſtruction of Kingdoms, fire and ſword, famine and peſtilence, &c. and if it be Ori- 
ental,its Effe&s will ſoon operate; if Occidentall, not ſo ſoon, the Conjuntion of 5 a- 

tern and Mars 1n any other ſign and place is not ſo terrible. 


And truly this is a terrible Conjanf5on if rightly conſidered, and diftateth unto us 
upon 


aL OS teat rably Sgt otaett >. rol _ 


AE I HA 


SEES ARE es ade od > el; 


RI I ILE 3 - nd 0 TO I TOE? 


Lib ob» ? Aftr ologia aNAunda. | 329 
upon the firſt conſideration, no lefs then horrible troubles and alterations in the 
World; If we but conſider it, it 15a Conjanition of the Malevolents , two enemies 
muſt needs be ſtronger then one, and here they are both rogether, and in a ſign 
wherein Jupiter our belt friend is exalted, and the Moon the mother of moiſture 
pitcheth her Tent, ſothat by their (onjuvfion therein both the ailiftance of the 
one and the nature of the other ts much damnified and afflicted; again, Satary is there- 
in in detriment, it being the ſign oppoſite to bis Houfe Capricorn, and Mars is 
therein in his fall, Capricorn being the Houſe of his exaltation, and therefore it is 
(theſe things being conſidered) that they are ſo mifchievous, when joined in this 
ſign,the which of all their ConjunTions is the worlt, &c. ' 

Alſo the Conjunttion of Saturn, Zupiter and Mars in any term or face, and beheld "a =- _— | 
by the Sun, they _ the three ſuperiour Planets and moſt effeRual for ſtrength and/,,”* Tupi ay 
height, ſignifieth the deſtruction of Kingdoms,SeRts and Schiſms,and great things ac- and Mars. 
cording to their ftrength and the nature of that Planet which is ſtrongelt in the ſign, 

&c. Note that when theſe Planetsare joined in their exaltations, they denote good, 
to their power; yet there ſhall be much war, and many Miracles ; if they be joined 
in their fals, they denote miſchief, Famine and Peſtilence, &c. 


— JM — —_ —_ — 


Crap. XII. 
Of the mean and leſſer Conjunctions, and their Efetts. 


mean their Conjunttion in any other ſign or place of the Heavens ſave that 
in Cancer) a mean (onjunftion, that of Jupiter and Mars, a leſſer, and 
that of the Su» with any Planet in his ingreſs into Aries, and his Cenjunition with 
the 11oon every moneth, leaſt of all. *Þ 
T heir reaſons will ſoon appear, if we but warily confider why they-term the 
foregoing Conjunttions greateit or greater , for Sarurn and Mars muſt needs do 
more miſchief then ?«piter and Mars, Saturn being of a Malevolent nature, and 
higheſt of all the Planets, and ſo conſequently ſloweſt, ( as to us, yet his mo- 
tion doth equal if. not exceed the /ſoors, only the Jargeneſs of his ſphear cauſerh 
that it is not ſo apparently obvious to our ſenſe ) and Zupicer of a Benevolent 
and ſweet Influence, and lower, &c. and therefore as touching the reſt, your own 
ſewſe will give you (having conſidered what hath been faid ) that the Inferiour 
are not of ſuch power and efficacy as are the Superiour. 
The Conjunttion of Saturn and Mars (1 mean this mean C oe) denotes war Of the cor- 
and blood.ſhed; but if you would know in what degree this will be executed + -=% hace 
you are to ſee what Planet is Almuten of the figure, and whether he be fortunate ,,,,.* 
. or no, for if he be ſtrong, eſſentially and free from impediment and aMi&tion, and 
be of a Benevolent nature, judge the evil will be leſſened in one kinde or other, 
and if this Almuten have any good Aſpec to the place of the {onjuntion, fee to 
the nature of your Almuten and the quarter of Heaven he is in, and the nature 
of the ſign he doth poſſeſs, and judge that by ſuch things, occaſions, or men lig- - 
nified thereby, ſhall the war threatned be mitigated, and perhaps diſſolved, eſpe- 
cially if there be any reception between him and the ftrongett of thoſe Planets 
in ( onjurttion, &c. underitand this in all the reſt mutatis mutandis ; likewiſe if Note, 
your Almuten be evil, weak and unfortunate, judge the contrary, and that r4- 
ther by ſuch as are by him ſignified the war will be fomented or increaſed. 
Note alſo, that if they are joined in humane figns, many infirmities ſhall be 
incident to-men, and thoſe according to the nature of the ftrongelt of the rwo in 
/ S-Sy Conmnttion; 


0 Ome of the Antients have termed the Conjunittion of Saturn and Mars (I 


330  eAſtrologia eMunaa. Lib. 4. 
Conjuntion ; in earthy ſigns, froſt, ſnow and cold ſhall moleſt and prove offenſive 
and deſtructive to the fruits and ſeeds of the Earth; in fiery the Earth ſhall be 
barren through extremity of heat and drought ; in aiery there ſhall be many high 
and tempeſtuous winds; in watry,abundance of waters and many inundations; fo like- 
wiſe if it happen in beaſtial ſigns, the evil chiefly will be incident to Beaſts, and thoſe 
eſpecially that are of the nature and form of the ſign, &c. (as you have often heard 
before in delivering rules for the judging of the Revolutions of the Years of the 

Note. World) in this manner alſo mayeſt thou enlarge upon all the preceding and ſub- 
ſequent Corjunitions ; if they be joined in an Angle, they declare war amongſt 
great ones, and many tribulations and diffentions, which ſhall continue till they are 

* otherwiſe joined, &c. 
Of the f of The chiefeſt of the leſſer Conjuntions is the Conjunttion of Jupiter and Mar:,and 
% and G. this denotes many accidents and evils by rain, ſnow, corruption of the ayr, war 
and blood-ſhed ; if 7wpiter be ſtrongeſt inthe Conjuntion it will not be ſo bad; if 
Mars, do not expe better ; and it they be joined in the Aſcendent of the Revo- 
hution of the Year, miſchief and misfortune will happen aſſuredly unto the people in 
general ; the nature of the evil judge from the nature of the ſign they are in,and the 
Planet moſt fortified, &c. 

In the ſame manner judge of the reſt of the preceding and ſubſequent Conjun®:- 
ens, if they be in the Aſcendent of the Revolution, ang ſoalſo according to the ſig- 
nification and nature of every Houſe wherein you finde them in the Figure or Revo- 
lution, as you have heard in other caſes ſufficiently before ; underitand this and thou 
haſt attained a great ſecret. | 

The f ofthe The Conjunttion of the Sw» with any other Planet when hein his annual Re- 
© with the 0. ygjution enters the firſt point of eAries, you are to judge according to the nature 
= baron] of the Planet whether good or bad, of which,as alſo his Coniun#io with the X00: 
the © and y.” Every Moneth, I need ſay no more mn this place ſince what hath been delivered 
' Where wetreat of the Revolutions of the World, of weather and alteration of the 

Ayr, and of Eclipſes before in this ſame fourth Book may ſuffice ; wherefore ler us 


now draw to a concluſion of this work. 


CHAP.ALV. 


Of the ConjunRion of the Planets in the twelve Signs according to 
Hermes. 


Ndeavour thou but to underſtand what hath been faid touching Conjunitions 
HE and this one Chapter more, and thou wilt ſoon be able to give a rationall 
and ſufficient judgement upon any Cimjenition whatſoever. 
Ofthe Sof When 7upiter, Venus, Mercary and the Moon are joined in Aries, they pro- 
29,9 andÞ miſe good ſucceſs tro Mankinde, and much gain and profit every where, fertil ſhewers, 
Y and honour to women and Secretaries of State ; alſo ifthe Moon and 7piter alone be 
' Joined in Ares, they denote juſtice and honeſty amongſt men. 
of pandg in When Yenus and Mars are joined in T awrrw, it ſignifies women ſhall brawl and 
FF quarrel with their husbands, and there ſhall be many Epidemical diſeaſes amongſt 
men and Beaſts, deſtruction and flaughter, ſtrong and Malevolent winds, and de- 
I ÞJ & andtriment to treesand fruits; alſo if Z»piter, and Venus and Mars and the Ioon be 
DinC. joyned in Taxrs , there ſhall be much lying and difſembling amongſt men, as alſo 
rreacheries, deſtrufion of Kings and Nobles, vile and ignoble men ſhall rebel and 
_ raiſe war againſt their Prince ; alſo it denotes Earth-quakes : And if — and 
wpiter 


Lib.4.  eA ftirologia <unaa, 231 
7upiterand Mars be joined in T aurus,they ſignifie the death and mortality of beaſts, FH; y, ang 5 
and that Kings ſhall go out of their own Kingdoms into others; and there ſhall hap- in v. | 
pen many infirmities to men through choler, and grievous mortalities both ro Man 

and Beaft. | | 

Alſo when the Sun and Venwm and Mercvry are joined in Gemini , Scribes and & © T and 
Secretaries ſhall ſuffer detriment, and ſuch as keep Books of Accompts, Stewards and * '* V+ 
Secretaries of State, Truſtees, &c. ſouldiers ſhall be obedient to their Commanders, 
and many thefts and robberies by the High-way ſhall be committed,ſo that paſſengers 
are threatned miſchief. | 

So likewiſe Saturn and Faupiter and Mars and the Sun, and Venus and Her- Shy 4 
cury, and the AIoor in { onjunttion in Cancer fignifieth detriment inevery thing,and 
fear ſhall fall on men, and the King ſhall perplex men, and one man another , there 7 
ſhall alſo be Earth-quakes and detriment both at Sea and Land. 

And when Saturn and Fupiter, and Mars and the Ion are joined in Leo, & KY and 
Kings ſhall war and kill one another, and there ſhall happen many great terrors and © &) in $1. 
evils to men. | 

When Saturn and Mars and Mercury are joined in Virgo, it iignifieth damage & H@ and 5 
and detriment to women, and Kings ſhall be deceived ; alſo if the 4» be eclipſed in in. | 
”_ and Mars joined unto him, there ſhall be ſlaughter between the Nobles and © Eclipſed, 


© and the 
in S, 


Plebeans, and great diſſentions ; Alſo when Satzrn and Vexrs are joined in this lign; —_ = : 


it denotes an increaſe of waters. 

When HMarsand Zupiter are joined in Libra, it ſignifies the <evill tate of No- & & and 
ble men and their Aſſociates; Alſo when [zpirer and the Sun and the Aoon are =. 
therein joined, there ſhall happen mortalities to women and jut men, and there ſhall 7 * 2 2nd D 
be much rain, clouds and malignant ayr. | AY 

AI Saturnand Mars and Venw are joined in Scorpio,it ſignifieth the King & H & and 2 
ſhall be wounded, or bitten by ſome Beaſt, or ſtung by ſome Adder, 'or obnoxious ** "- 
creature; and that Kings ſhall go out of their own Lands into others ; one King ſhall 
diſagree and claſh with another, and they ſhall break the league and promiſe which 
they have made toeach other; Alſo when the 40x is alſo joined with them, it fig- 
nifies much rain and increaſe of waters. | | ry 

Moreover if Scorpio be the Aſcendent of the Revolution of the World, and 
Saturn be there, and Mars alſo joined unto him, or have any participation with 
him in the Aſcendent, and Vena: be then Combulit, and /upiter retrograde, judge 
evill in every thing, wars and quarrels, ſackings and ſpoilings of Cities and Towns, 
Earth-quakes, terrours and blood-ſhed, mortalities and many deſtructive infirmities, 
becauſe Scorpio is the moſt unfortunate of all the ſigns ; judge alſo that Kings ſhall 
diſagree and fight one with another, and Noble and Great men (hall die, and there 
ſhall happen many anxieties, tribtlations and trouble in the world: alſo if both & y; and 9 in 
the Fortunes be joined in this ſign there ſhall many ſeducers be diſcovered, and ſuch m. 
as ſtudy to with-draw men from the true Worſhip of God. 

Alſo when Saturn and /wpiter and Mercury and the Moon are joined in Sapit- Hh. © and 
tary, it ſignifieth there ſhall be many waters upon the face of the Earth, and that Þ in 7. 
Kings ſhall exalt themſelves; alſo Noblemen, Scribes, Aſtrologers and Ingenuous 
men ſhall be in great eſteem. ys 

Again, when the Sz» and Mars and Mercury are joined in Capricers, it ſigni- &f © & and $ 
 fieth deſtruRion to Kings,cauſeth hot and dry diſeaſes, many Combuſtions and fiery i2 Wy. 
apparitions in the ayr ; many windes and a ſcarcity of all ſorts of Vegetables; and 
_ that there ſhall be many thefts and robberies. + EÞ 

Moreover when Marsand Satwrn and the Moon are joined in eLgquaries, it figni- & 4 h and y 
fieth a ſcarcity of water and rain ; damage to travellers; and that there ſhall be many in =. 
Snakes and Serpents. | | 

Laſtly, when Saturn and [zpiter and Mars are joined in Piſces, it ſignifieth the F HY and 
death, and great damage of Kings, Noblemen and Grandees; alſo if the Sw» and & in X. 
Mars and Satrrn be there joined, the King (hall be ſlain, there ſhall be little or &f © & and H 


no rain, and many Fiſhes ſhall be taken in the Sea ; Note, that when Dragons oy in X. 
an 


” 
332 
The Conun. 


(ion of Dra- 
gons' Head 


and Saturn in 


any bgn. 


Sunday. 


Fonda, 


e Aſtrologia eMunaa. Lib.4.. 
and S4twrn are joined in any Sign, it ſignifieth evill and damage according to the na- 
ture of the Sign; © as if they be joined in any fiery Sign, drought and damage to - 
Beaſts; ifin Aries, to Sheep and ſmall Cartel; if in Leo, to Lyons or feral Beaſts 
and creatures of prey; if in Sagittary, to Horſes, eſpecially in the laſt 15 degrees 
thereof; if in Earthy,viz.T awrys, to Buls, Cows and Oxen ; in Capricors, to Goats, 
and ſuch like, and damage to the Earth and fruits, but eſpecially if in Virge; if in 
watry, damage in and by water, ſhipwracks, and the death of Fiſhand creatures li- 
ving in the water ; if in Aiery, there ſhall be many tempeſtuous, pernicious winds 
and ftorms, corruption of the Ayr, the death of many Kings and many infir. 
mities, &c. | 

And thus have I [by the bleſling of God) delivered unto thee the Natural rules 
and reaſons of fertility ſterility, health, ſickneſs, wars,peace alterations and accidents 
of this life, and how to judge of them by the Revolutions of the Tears of the World, © 
Eclipſes of the two great” lights and lamps of Heaven the S»» and Moon, Comets 
and Blazing- Stars, the fore-runners of great mutations, which we have found in all 
Ages God hath uſed to ſend for the reclaiming of his people from their evill wayes, 
before his wrath be poured on them; and laitly, by the great, mean and leſſer Coz- 


. junttions of the (wleſtial Planets, who next under the Great Creator , Governour 


and Cauſer of all cauſes, are the Governours of the World, and cauſes of all things 
therein, ina general and natural way. 

therefore to him alone that ordereth and dlſpoſeth all things according to hu Di- 
vine will, and that Created the Heavens, Earth, ( wleſtial Planets and Stars, and 
that calleth them all by their names, and that maketh them differ from exch other in glory, 
and that giveth of his free Will and pleaſure the knowledge of Divine and I atural 
things to the ſons of men , be aſcribed all poſſible Praiſe, Glory, Power, Dominion, 
and T hanksgiving both now and for evermore, Amen. 25-0 | 

With this Chaprer I thought to have concluded, but fince we have treated al- 
ready of the Natural cauſes of the or accidents of the World, and that ſome 
of the Antients have judged of all theſe things by the Falling of New-Tears-Day , 
and for that I have for ſome few years found them experimentally true, I ſhall 
adde this own Chapter more, for my Readers recreation and ſport when he is fo 
diſpoſed ; yet if he diligently obſerve the EffeRts , he will finde them for the moſt 
part come yery near truth, though many times on the otherſide they may deviate 


therefrom. 


- 


CHAP. XV. 


Shewing how to indee of the General Accidents of the World by the 


Falling of New-Years Day. 
Y for if it fall on S#»day, a pleaſant Winter enſueth,and a natural and kindly 
Summer and ſufficient fruit ; the Harveſt will be indifferent for weathec , 
yet ſome wind and rainit will produce, a temperate Spring and it ſeaſonable ; it de- 
notes alſo many Marriages, plenty of Wine and Honey, the death of young Men 
and Cartel, robberies in moſt places, news of Prelates and Kings, and cruel wars to- 
wards the end of the Year, or at leſt much difſention and diſcord amongh men. 
If it fall ona Monday, the Winter will be ſomewhat uncomfortable ; the Sum- 
mer temperate ; No great plenty of fruit, many fanſies and fables diſperſed abroad, 
mdfy Agues, the death of Kings, Nobles and Great men, in moſt places marriages, 
and 2 downfal ofthe Gentry. 
If 


Ou are herein to obſerve on what day of the week New-Tears-Day falleth ; 


Lib.4. » Aſtrologia Apnda. 333 
If on. Twe/day there followeth a ſtormy Winter , and a wet Summer, a various Tueſgap. 
harveſt, and moiſt Spring, Corn and fruit indifferent, yet Garden Herbs ſhall nor 
flouriſh, great ſickneſs amongſt men, women and young children, and a mortality of 
| _ many men (hall die of the Bloody-Flux, and every thing ſave corn ſhall 
dear. | | 
On wodenſday, a warm Winter in the beginning, but towards the end ſnow and Woden(diy; 
froſt, a cloudy Summer, plenty of fruit, alſo of corn, wine, hay, honey and other 
things,damage and hard labour to women with child, death to many children, plenty 
of ſheep, news of Kings and great wars and blood-ſhed towards the midſt, 
On Thurſday both Winter and Summer windy,a rainy Harveſt and a moiſt Spring, Thurſday, 
many Innundations towards the latter end of the Year,much fruit,and plenty of the 
fruits of the Earth and honey, but fleſh ſhall be dear, a death of Cartel, in ge- 
neral, great trouble, wars and commotions, and women ſhall be looſe and licen- 
tious, | | 
On Fr54az,a ſtormy Winter,and no pleaſant Summer,a moderate Spring, ſave only Friday, 
it will be windy, and an indifferent Harveſt,and ſmall ſtore of fruit, wine and honey, 
corn dear, many blear Eyes, Youth ſhall dye many of them, Earth-quakes in many 
places, much Thunder and Lightning , alſo Tempeſt , andthe ſudden death of 
Catrel. | 
Laſtly on Saturday, a mean Winter, a very hot Summer, a late harveſt, and a dry Saturday. 
windy Spring, Garden Herbs ſhall be cheap , much burning, plenty -of honey, flax 
and hemp, the death of antient people in moſt places, many Feavers, bur chiefly 
Tertians, great rumours of wars, and ſudden murthers in many - places for or upon 
little or no occaſion, &c. 
"Thus much from the falling of New-Tears-d4ay, the which although the Illiterate 
and Vulgar may make uſe of, for the frequent verity thereof, yet would I not have 
them depend thereon, for I cannot (I muſt confeſs) finde any ſure ground why 
the Antients ſhould thus conclude ; wherefore here 1 deſiſt with this Concluſion. 


To God alone be the Praiſe. 


