••• 


LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF 
CALIFORNIA 
SAN  DIEGO 


3   1822  01096  6240 


f   ^ 


IHt  UNIVERSITY  LIBRARY 

UNIVERSITY  OF  CALIFORNIA.  SAN  DIEGfc 

LA  JOLLA,  CALIFORNIA 


THE 

GUIDE  TO  ASTROLOGY 

CONTAINING 

A    COMPLETE    SYSTEM 

OF  ' 

GENETHLIACAL    ASTKOLOGY 

In  One  Volume. 


RAPHAEL 

The  Astrologer  of  the  Nineteenth  Century, 
Author  of  the  "  Prophetic  Messenger,"  &c.,  &c 


W.   FOULSHAM    &    CO., 

4    PILGRIM    STREET,    LUDGATE     HILL,    E.G. 
1905. 


Price  Two  Shillings  and  Sixpence. 


PREFACE. 


volume  originally  appeared  in  two  volumes, 
as  "  The  Guide  to  Astrology,  Vols.  I.  and  II.," 
and  were  sold  separately.  They  have  now  been 
rewritten,  revised,  and  made  into  one  volume,  com- 
plete in  itself,  so  far  as  the  Astrological  part  of  a 
Nativity  is  concerned.  Information,  not  previously 
published  by  myself,  on  "Birthday  Figures"  and 
"Transits"  is  given,  which  the  reader  will  find  useful 
and  reliable  to  a  very  large  extent. 

The  most  unsatisfactory  part  of  Astrology  is  that 
dealing  with  "Directions,"  or  the  "Calculation  of 
Future  Events."  At  present  there  is  no  system 
known  that  will  give  reliable  results,  but  the  method 
taught  in  this  volume  will  be  found  to  be  more 
accurate  than  any  other  known  system,  yet  even  here 
there  appears  to  be  something  lacking,  some  "missing 
link"  which  would  explain  why  some  directions  fall 
out  exactly  and  like  a  thunderclap,  and  others  pass 
without  any  appreciable  event.  Why  this  is,  no  one 
can  tell.  Perhaps  it  is  a  wise  provision  of  Providence 
that  it  is  so,  on  account  of  the  fear  and  dread  of  mis- 
fortune which  seem  inherent  in  the  human  heart.  To 
know  that  certain  death  or  misfortune  awaited  one 
at  a  certain  time,  would  drive  to  madness  or  suicide 
a  very  large  majority  of  the  inhabitants  of  this  earth; 
and  in  this  way  "True  Astrology"  would  be  a  terrible 
scourge,  compared  with  which,  the  bloodiest  wars,  or 
the  greatest  natural  catastrophes  would  be  as  nought. 

All  through  the  book  I  have  done  my  best  to  make 
everything  as  simple  and  plain  as  possible,  so  that 
the  youngest  student,  or  most  illiterate  person  can 
readily  understand. 


London,  Xmas,  1905. 


CONTENTS. 


I'uye 
IVcfacc         ........         3 

The  Symbols  Explained  .....  5 

The  Nature  of  the  Aspects  .  .  .  .  .6 

The  Nature  and  Quality  of  the  Signs  of  the  Xoiln-      .  .  6 

The  Measurement  of  the  Planetary  Aspects          .  .  .7 

The  Orbs  of  the  Planet*  .  .  .  .  9 

The  Mundane  Houses  of  the  Heavens        .  .  .  .10 

Persons  Produeed  by  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac1 .  .  .  13 

The  Form  of  Body  Given  by  the  Planets  in  the  Signs      .  .15 

The  Essential  and"  Accidental  Dignities  ...  26 

The  Use  of  An  Ephemeris .  .  .  .  .  .28 

How  to  Erect  a  Map  of  the  Heavens  ....  30 

How  to  Place  the  Planets  in  the  Map        .  .  .  .34 

The  Nature  of  Uranus  and  its  Aspect*  .  .  40 

„  „       Saturn         ,,  „  .  .  .  .       4« 

„  ,,       Jupiter        „  ,,  .  51 

,,  ,.       Mnrs  ,,  .  .  .  .66 

..       Sun  ....  ...  f>8 

„       Venus          ........       01 

,.       Mercury      ,.  ..  ...  64 

Moon          „  .  .  .  «« 

The  Planet  N'cptuno      .  .  .    •  .  .  07 

The  Term  Elevation  ......       6!) 

Advice   ........  70 

How  to  Judge  a  Nativity  •  •  •  •  •  .72 

Whether  a  Child  will  Live  or  Die         ....  73 

The  Health .74 

The  Mental  Qualities     ......  77 

The  Money  Prospect*          ...  .  .       7!) 

The  Employment  ......  82 

Of  Marriage  .......       84 

Of  Children S7 

Traveling   .  .  .  .  .       90 

On  the  Selection  of  a  House     .  .  92 

Friends  and  Enemies  .  .  .  .  .  .       !I5 

The  Kind  of  Death        .  .  97 

Directions;  or,  Calculating  Future  Events  .  .  .99 

An  Example  of  Working  the  Directions          .  102 

The  Effects  of  the  Directions  of  the  (^  and  .  .  .106 

The  Directions  of  the  Planets  .  .  .  .114 

Solar  Returns  or  Birthday  Figures  .  .  .  .117 

Transits  and  Eclipses    .  .  .  .  .  .  121 

A  Short  Astrological  Dictionary    .....     127 


THE  GUIDE  TO  ASTROLOGY. 


PART   FIRST. 


CHAPTER  I. 

THE  SYMBOLS   EXPLAINED. 

LEARN,  practice,  and  understand  the  following : — That  the 
planets  are  nine  in  number,  and  are  thus  named  and  sym- 
bolised :   v?  Neptune ;   y  Herschel ;   F?  Saturn  ;  T/  Jupiter ; 
C<"  Mars  ;  0  The  Sun  ;  9  Venus  ;  $  Mercury  ;  ])  the  Moon. 
The  Zodiacal  signs  are  as  follow : — 

Northern   T  Aries  Southern  £:  Libra 

y  Taurus  TT\  Scorpio 

n  Gemini  f  Sagittarius 

25  Cancer  Vf  Capricorn 

&  Leo  zz  Aquarius 

TO?  Virgo  X  Pisces 

Each  sign  contains  30°,  which,  multiplied  by  the  twelve 
signs,  gives  360°,  being  the  total  number  of  degrees  contained 
in  the  Zodiac.  The  reason  the  ancients  divided  the  Zodiac 
into  360°  appears  thus :  that  the  solar  year  measures  365 
days,  and  the  lunar  year  355,  the  mean  of  which  is  360,  the 
number  of  the  degrees  in  the  Zodiac. 


B  TOT  QUID*   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

TThe  Planetary  Aspects. 
V  Semisextile  A  Trine 

/_  Semisquare  Q  Sesquiquadrato" 

•%•  Sextile  i'Biquintile 

Q  Quintile  \y  Quincunx 

f]  Square  ^"Opposition 

P  Parallel  of  Declination 
There  is  also  the  position,  <$  Conjunction. 

Of  the  Nature  of  the  Aspects. 

The  following  conjunctions  of  the  planets  are  good  in  power 
and  effect:— TZ  rf  *.  fcU  b-  0»  9»  $.  or  the  D  ;  9  <j  $, 
or  the  D  :  9  tf  D-  The  remaining  cf  s  are  all  evil  more  or 
less,  and  which  will  be  fully  explained  «.  chapters  on 

"  The  Effects  of  the  Aspects." 

The  v.  Semisextile  is  always  good. 

The  /_  Semisquare  is  always  evil.  .  J  5 

The  5J<:  Sextile  is  always  good.       o 

The  Q  Quintile  is  slightly  good.   ' 

The  n  Square  is  always  evil. 

The  A  Trine  is  always  good. 

The  Q  Sesquiquadrate  is  always  eviL  \  ^  * 

The  ±  Biquintile,  the  same  jn  effect  as  the  Quintile.  i  ,„ 

The  v  Quincunx  is  evil.    \  ~ 

The  §  Opposition  is  always  eviL  (  %  0 

The  P  Parallel,  this  ie  like  the  <^  in  nature. 

The  relative  power  or  potency  of  the  aspects  is  approxi- 
mately as  follows  : — The  most  powerful  is  the  ft,  next  to  this 
the  tf,  then  the  A,  Q  *,  Q,  P,  Z,  V,  Q,  ±,  and  ^. 

Of  the  Nature  and  Quality  of  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

The  signs  are  classified  and  divided  as  follow : — 
Masculine  Signs — Y%  n,  £t,  ^  ft  *~. 
Feminine  Signs — 8,  gs,  TIT,  n\,  Vf,  K. 
Fiery   Signs—  T,   SI.    •?  ;    earthy—  b,  nt.  VP;'airy—  n, 
£:,  ~  ;  watery — 25,*n\,  K- 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  7 

Signs  of  Short  Ascension— Vy,  2Z,  X,  T,*y,  II. 

'Signs  of  Long  Ascension — 25,  £^,  1%,  £i,  H|,  $. 

Moveable  and  Cardinal  Signs — IT,  2B,  fi,  T^p. 

.Ftzerf  Signs— 8,  Si,  TT\,  2£. 

Common  Signs — n,  Tip,  /,  X. 

Fruitful  Signs — 05,  TT1,  X- 

Barren  Signs — n,  $\,,  and  fl}?. 

Double-bodied  Signs — n,  K>  and  the  first  half  of  £. 

Equinoctial  Signs — y%  and  £i. 

Tropical  Signs — 25,  and  Vf. 

Aspects  formed  in  the  cardinal  signs  are  the  strongest ; 
next  to  these,  in  the  fixed  signs ;  and  lastly,  and  least  in  power, 
are  those  formed  in  the  common  signs. 

NOTE. — The  young  student  should  study  well  the  foregoing 
divisions,  as  a  perfect  knowledge  thereof  is  necessary  in  judging 
a  nativity. 


fCHAPTER   II. 

CONCERNING   THE  MEASUREMENT  OP  THE   PLANETARY 
ASPECTS. 

THE  whole  Zodiac  contains  360  degrees,  or  twelve  signs  of 
30  degrees  each.  The  signs  run  in  order  thus,  and  remain 
so  always  : — 

T  8    n  25  Si  tip  ^  TT\ *  j  v?  s:S>€ 

Now  from  T  0°  to  8  0°  is  30° ;  from  T  0°  to  n  0°  is  60°, 
or  from  T  15°  to  IT  15°  is  60° ;  from  8  0°  to  Tip  0°  is  120°; 
or  from  V?  0°  to  8  0°  is  120°,  being  four  signs  apart,  and  so 
on  with  the  other  signs  in  like  way. 

The  first  aspect  (this,  properly  speaking,  is  a  "  position  ") 
we  take  will  be  the  tf  conjunction,  which  is  when  two  01 
more  planets  are  in  the  same  sign  (the  nearer  they  are  to  each 
other,  the  more  powerful  becomes  the  aspect — note  this  with 
all  the  other  aspects)  say,  for  instance,  T/,  Jupiter,  is  in  8  6°, 
and  the  0  in  T  28°,  now  fromlT  28°  to"  8  6°  is"8°,  and  thus 


8  TH«   GUIDE   TO    ASTROLOGY. 

the  0  would  be  approaching  the  tf  of  I/.  Observe  that 
a  tf  is  more  powerful  separating,  than  applying ;  for  instance 
if  If.  be  in  8  6°.  and  the  Q  in  8  14°.  the  <J  of  0  and  I/  will 
have  more  power  and  effect  on  the  native  than  if  the  0  were 
in  TT  28°  and  applying  to  I/.  The  planets  apply  thus  : — 
The  J)  applies  to  all  the  planets,  being  the  swiftest  in  motion  ; 
$  applies  to  9,  -D,  rf,  If.,  b,  tf,  and  ••?.  9  to  ©,  tf,  If.. 
I?,  H  and  <?.  ©  to  d",  T/,  f?»  M>  and  *?.  o"  to  1£,  b.  # 
and  t?.  T/  to  b,  y  and  <?.  T?  to  U  and  <y.  1,1  to  ~. 
^  to  no  planet  it  being  the  slowest  in  its  motion.  Exception  : 
a  planet  retrograde,  i.e.,  moving  backward  in  the  sign?,  as 
from  8  to  ")T»  can  apply  to  another,  as  1 1  retrograde  can 
apply  and  meet  the  tf,  or  aspect  of  any  other  planet,  even 
the  ]). 

"  To  apply  "  means  "  to  approach." 

The  second  aspect  is  the  v  (semisextile),  or  1  sign,  or 
30°  distant.  Thus :— o"  in  8  5°,  and  V>  in  n  5°  will  be 
30°,  or  1  sign  apart. 

The  third  aspect  is  the  £  (semisquare),  or  45°,  or  \\  signs 
apart.  Thus  :— 9  in  8  15°,  and  TJ.  in  <?£  0°,  will  be  45°,  or 
1 J  signs  apart ;  for,  from  8  15°  to  the  end  of  8  will  be  15°, 
and  n  contains  30°,  then  15°  +  30  =  45°,  as  25  0°  is  at 
the  end  of  n .  Observe  this  example  teith  all  the  other  asperts. 

The  fourth  aspect  is  the  s|c  (sextile),  or  2  signs,  or  60°  apart. 
Thus  :— rf  in  ^  4°  :  and  T/  in  / ,  4°— will  be  2  signs  or  60° 
apart. 

The  fifth  aspect  is  the  Q  (quintile),  which  is  72°  apart,  or 
one-fifth  part  of  the  whole  Zodiac.  Thus: — tf  in  ^,  18°, 
and  0  in  8,  0° — will  be  72°,  and  forming  the  aspect  of 

©Qcf. 

The  sixth  is  the  n»  or  3  signs,  or  90°  apart. 

The  seventh  is  the  £  or  4  signs,  or  120°  apart. 

The  eighth  is  the  Q  or  4$  signs,  or  135°  apart. 

The  ninth  is  the  ±  or  144°  apart. 

The  tenth  is  the  <y  or  150°  apart. 

The  eleventh  is  the  $  or  6  signs,  or  180°  apart. 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  9 

The  twelfth  is  the  P,  or  an  equal  distance  in  declination, 
either  north  or  south  from  the  equator. 

The  planets  cannot  be  more  than  180°  apart,  and  they  are 
then  in  opposition,  after  which  the  distance  between  them 
decreases. 

NOTE. — The  fiery  signs  are  in  trine  aspect  to  each  other. 
Thus  f  is  in  A  to  ^  and  f,  and  SI  's  in  A  to  T  and  /, 
and  ' £  is  in  A  to  "f  and  $],.  The  same  is  the  case  with  the 
earthy,  airy,  and  watery  signs.  The  common,  cardinal,  or 
moveable  and  fixed  signs  are  in  £]  and  §  to  each  other, 
thus — 8  is'in  Q'to  $\,,  and  in  <P  to  fl\,  and  so  on  with  the 
others. 


CHAPTER    IIL 

THE   ORBS   OP  THE   PLANETS. 

THESE  are  the  number  of  degrees  apart  in  which  one  planet 
acts  on  another,  and  this  requires  very  careful  handling  and 
consideration,  for  the  orbs  are  less  when  the  planets  are 
applying  to  an  aspect  than  when  separating. 

The  orbs  of  IJ,  T?,  T/,  cf",  9»  and  $,  when  applying,  are 
about  6°,  and  when  separating  from  an  aspect,  they  may  be 
reckoned  as  8°.  They  must  be  reckoned  thus : — Suppose 
$  is  applying  to  a  <$  of  y  or  V>,  then  when  £  gets  within 
6°  of  either  of  these  planets,  the  aspect  will  begin  to  have 
effect,  and  will  last  until  $  is  8°  past  it.  It  is  the  same  with 
the  other  planets.  The  0  and  J)  have  larger  orbs.  You 
may  reckon  the  0  when  applying  as  12°,  and  when  separating 
as  17°  ;  and  the  J» ,  8°  when  applying,  and  12°  when  separating 
from  an  aspect.  These  orbs  apply  only  to  the  following 
aspects,  viz.,  the  <$•>  >k>  Di  £•  a°d  cf  •  The  minor  aspects, 
viz.,  the  V,  Q,  and  ±,  I  consider  only  when  the  planets 
are  within  2°  applying,  and  3°  separating.  The  /. 
and  g  are  to  be  reckoned  3°  when  applying,  and  4°  when 


TO  'TRT-'OOTDK  TO  ASTROLOGY. 

separating,  that  IB,  with  the  flanets  ;  the  ^)  and  1>  may  be 
allowed  an  extra  1°.  This  is  a  most  difficult  subject,  and 
fie  above  is  as  near  as  T  can  pivo  it  .  judped  by  experience- 
With  respect  to  the  P,  T  do  not  allow  more  than  2°  either 
way.  thus:  supposed  Q's  Dec.  18°  N.,  and  T/'s  Dec.  10°  8., 
T  should  consider  it  as  0  P  ")L  The  mnndane  houses  (1st, 
2nd.  3rd,  &c.)  have  orbs.  The  way  in  which  T  consider  these, 
is  this — find  the  number  of  decrees  between  the  two  cusps, 
and  divide  by  3,  and  reckon  one-third  as  the  orb  of  the  house — 
thus — in  the  map,  pape  37.  the  number  of  degrees  between 
the  cusps  of  the  10th  and  llth  houses  is  39°,  which  divided 
by  3  eives  13°,  so  that  T  should  not  consider  any  planet  in 
the  10th  house  which  was  not  more  than  13°  past  the  cusp 
of  the  1 1  th.  If  we  take  the  ascendant  we  shall  find  the  number 
of  desrrees  contained  in  this  house  to  be  approximately^  1°, 
a  third  of  which  is  7e,  consequently  a  planet  would  not  be 
clear  of  the  2nd  house  unless  it  were  more  than  7°  above 
:ts  cusp.* 


CHAPTER    IV. 

CONCERNING    THE    MUNDANE    HOUSES    OF    THE    HEAVENS, 
AND    THETR    POWER    AND   SIGNIFICATION. 

ancient  philosophers  divided  the  canopv  of  heaven 
into  twelve  equal  parts,  which  they  called  "  houses."  or 
"  mansions."  of  the  heavens. 

The  position  of  the  "  houses  "  are  shown  in  the  following 
diacrram.  page  12. 

The  First  House. — This  rules  the  personal  apix>arance  of 
the  native,  and  influences  the  mind  to  a  certain  extent, 
especially  if  anv  planet  be  therein.  It  is  also  called  the 
"  ascendant."  If  an  evil  planet  be  therein,  ther*>  will  be  a 
scar  or  mole  on  the  head  or  face,  as  this  house  rules  these 
parts  "of  *the*body.^ 


THE   GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  11 

The  Second  House. — This  rules  the  native's  weafth  and 
worldly  goods  chiefly,  also  his  liberty.  Tt  also  rules  the  neck 
and  throat. 

The. -Third  House. — This  denotes  the  brothers  and  sisters  of 
the  native  ;  short  iournevs,  chieflv  by  rail  or  road,  letters, 
writings,  neighbours,  and  anv  planet  therein  has  some  in- 
fluence on  the  mind.  The  parts  of  the  body  it  rules  are,  the 
hands,  arms,  and  shoulders. 

The  Fourth  House. — This  signifies  the  father  of  the  native, 
inheritance  or  property,  also  the  condition  and  position  of 
the  native  at  the  close  of  life.  Tt  is  a  very  important  house, 
and  should  be  closely  studied.  Tt  rules  the  stomach  and  the 
breast. 

The  "Fifth  House. — This  denotes  the  offspring  of  the  native, 
also  his  success  in  betting,  speculation  and  hazardous  games — 
the  pleasures  he  enjoys  and  the  wealth  of  his  father.  Tt  rules 
the  heart  and  back. 

The.  Sixth  JJousf. — This  concerns  the  native's  sickness,  and 
the  diseases  to  which  he  is  most  liable,  also  his  servants  and 
inferiors,  and  signifies  uncles  and  aunts.  It  rules  the  intestines 
or  belly. 

The  Seventh  House. — This  denotes  Icve  and  matrimonv. 
wife  or  husband,  public  enemies,  law  suits  and  contentions, 
partnership,  and  all  dealings  with  persons  (not  relatives)"in 
general.  It  rules  the  reins  and  loins. 

The  Einhth  House. — This  is  the  house  of  death,  also  of  wills 
and  legacies,  and  the  estate  or  dowry  of  the  wife,  or  husband. 
Tt  "iiles  the  priw  parts. 

The  Ninth  House. — This  house  rules  lonq  journevs,  or  sen 
vovages,  religion,  dreams,  and  visions,  also  the  brethren  of 
the  husband  or  wife.  Tt  governs  the  hips  and  thighs. 

The  Tenth  House. — This  denotes  the  native's  mother,  also 
his  honour,  trade  and  profession.  Tt  rules  the  knees  and  hams. 

The  Eleventh* House. — This  ru1es~the~native's~"friends,"hopes 
and  wishes,  also  "the  wealth  "of  tb.e  mother.  Tt'governs'the 
legs 'and  lankles. "'  •  •  P*5  ~ 

THE  OITIDB   TO   ASTROLOGY. 


The,  Twelfth  House, — This  denotes  the  secret  and  private 
enemies  of  the  native,  imprisonment,  assaults  on  the  person 
by  robbers  or  highwaymen.  It  rules  the  feet  and  toes. 

NOTE. — The  strongest  houses  are  the  1st  and  10th,  next 
the  llth,  7th,  and  4th,  then  the  2nd,  3rd,  9th,  and  12th, 
and  lastly,  the  5th,  6th,  and  8th.  The  1st,  3rd,  and  9th,  may 
be  called  the  "  intellectual  houses,"  as  planets  therein  always 
influence  the  mind.  The  1st,  4th,  7th,  and  10th,  are  called 
angles,  and  represent  the  four  cardinal  points  of  the  compass  ; 
thus,  the  1st  is  East,  7th,  West,  4th  is  North,  and  10th,  South. 
The  2nd,  5th,  8th,  and  llth,  are  termed  succeedent  houses, 
as  they  succeed  the  angles  ;  the  3rd,  Cth,  9th,  and  12th,  are 
called  eadc.nl  houses,  that  is,  falling  from  the  angles. 


XI 


IX 


XII 


A 


vi  ii 


\ 


\ 


No.  1. 


THE   GUIDE   TO  ASTBOLOGY.  13 

CHAPTER    V. 

DESCRIPTION    OF    PERSONS    PRODUCED    BY    THE    SIGNS    OF 
THE   ZODIAC  ASCENDING   AT   BIRTH. 

TT  ARIES. — Middle  stature ;  rather  lean ;  long  face  and 
neck ;  strong  limbs  ;  hazel  eyes  ;  coarse  hair  ;  dark,  swarthy, 
or  ruddy  complexion  ;  sandy  whiskers ;  quick  sight.  Dis- 
position :  Angry,  violent,  and  quarrelsome ;  ambitious, 
aspiring ;  quick,  intrepid,  and  determined. 

8  TAURUS. — Short,  thick-set  person  ;  full  face  and  eyes  ; 
short,  thick  neck ;  large  nose  and  mouth  ;  swarthy,  ill-com- 
plexioned ;  broad,  strong  shoulders ;  dark  hair  and  eyes, 
the  hair  sometimes  curling.  In  a  female's  nativity,  it  produces 
a  more  comely  person ;  plump,  fleshy,  dark,  curling  hair,  and 
black  eyes.  Disposition :  Conceited,  bigoted,  angry  and 
violent ;  ill-natured  and  unfeeling,  gluttonous,  great  eaters, 
and  lovers  of  their  own  ease  and  comfort ;  fond  of  drink  ; 
a  bad  husband  or  wife. 

U  GEMINI. — Tall,  straight  body  ;  long  arms  and  hands  ; 
dark,  sanguine  complexion  ;  dark  brown  hair ;  hazel  eyes  ; 
quick  sight ;  active  look ;  walk,  smart  and  quick.  Dis- 
position :  Scientific,  judicious,  fond  of  reading,  ambitious  of 
fame,  moderate  and  temperate  in  eating  and  drinking,  gener- 
ally respected,  and  good  members  of  society. 

25  CANCER. — Moderate  stature  ;  face,  round  ;  pale,  whitish 
complexion ;  small  features  ;  sad-brown  hair ;  constitution 
not  strong ;  eyes  grey,  or  very  light  blue.  Disposition : 
Timid,  inactive,  dull,  void  of  energy ;  careless,  harmless, 
inoffensive,  and  feeling. 

£1  LEO. — A  large,  full  stature  ;  big  bones  ;  full,  broad 
shoulders,  well  set ;  grey  eyes,  quick  sight ;  light  hair  and 
eyebrows  ;  head,  large  and  round  ;  complexion,  sanguine  or 
ruddy.  Disposition :  Bold,  firm,  and  generous ;  ambitious 
and  aspiring ;  free  and  courteous ;  quick  in  anger,  but  soon 
over ;  fond  of  sports  and  recreations  and  bodily  exercise  ; 
active,  intrepid,  and  very  determined. 


14  THE   QUICK   TO   ASXBOLOOT. 

•x  VIBOO. — A  slender  bouy,  somewhat  above  the  middle 
height ;  a  ruddy,  dark  complexion ;  face  round  ;  dark  hair 
aud  eyes ;  well  formed  but  not,  handsome.  Dis'poaition : 
ingenious ;  foiid  of  learning  and  curiosities ;  ambitious ; 
Huick  and  active  ;  given  to  the  study  of  languages  ;  of  a  good 
utterance,  and  graceful  elocution. 

ii  LIBRA. — A  tall,  straight  body ;  rather  slender,  hair 
brown  aud  smooth,  sometimes  jet  black ;  face,  round  ;  features 
well  made  ;  line,  clear  complexion  ;  dark  eye« ;  if  a  female, 
good  looking.  Deposition :  Ambitious,  talkative ;  fond  of 
the  other  sex ;  aud  the  temper  tolerably  even. 

n\  iJcuiu-io. — Middle  stature ;  thick  well-set  body,  strong 
and  robust ;  face,  large  and  broad ;  dark,  palish  complexion ; 
hair,  dark  brown,  curling  and  plentiful ;  short,  thick  neck ; 
ill  made  feet ;  sometimes  bow-legged.  Disposition  :  .Reserved, 
ambitious,  and  violent ;  furious  and  bloodthirsty  when  pro- 
voked ;  deceitful  and  conceited  ;  active,  intrepid,  and  daunt- 
less ;  void  of  feeling,  and  brutish. 

f  SAQITXAKIUS. — Well-formed,  handsome  person,  rather 
tall ;  high  forehead  ;  long  nose  ;  clear,  hazel  eyes ;  ruddy 
complexion,  free  and  open  countenance  ;  hair,  chestnut  or 
light  brown ;  face  rather  long.  Disposition  :  Bold,  active, 
and  generous ;  free  and  good-hearted  ;  fond  of  sports  and 
recreations  ;  ambitious  of  honour  and  doing  good  ;  laudable 
in  actions,  and  generally  to  be  depended  upon. 

Vf  CAWUCOBN. — A  short  slender  person,  not  well  formed  ; 
long,  thin  face  ;  thin  beard  ;  chin,  long ;  black,  or  dark  coarse 
hair ;  narrow  chest ;  long,  small  neck  ;  weak  knees,  and  of 
a  bad  gait  generally.  Disposition  :  Sharp,  subtle,  and  capri- 
cious ;  covetous,  envious,  jealous,  crafty,  selfish,  and  unstable. 

rx  AQUARIUS. — Middle  stature  ;  stout,  well  set  and  strong  ; 
long  visage  ;  sanguine  complexion  ;  fair  flaxen  hair ;  dark 
eyes,  aud  generally  very  handsome,  especially  if  a  female. 
Disposition  :  Stable,  good,  kind-hearted  ;  scientific  ;  fond  of 
learning  aud  recreation  ;  gentle,  and  temper  even. 

X  Piscss.— Short,  thick  stature ;  fleshy,  pale  face ;  eyes 


4    j?HB   GUIDE   TO£ASTKOLOGY.  (6 

sleepy  and  dull ;  hair,  light  brown ;  arms  and  legs  short ; 
ill-made  large  feet ;  constitution  sickly  and  weak.  Disposition : 
Dull,  indolent,  and  lazy  :  caring  for  nothing^;  loving  their  own 
ease,  and  slothful. 

NOTE. — The  foregoing  descriptions  are  only  to  be  taken  when 
there  are  no  planets  in  or  near  the  ascendant. 


CHAPTER    VI. 

THE  FORM  OF  BODY  GIVEN  BY  THE  PIANISTS  IN  THE 
TWELVE  SIGNS.,, 

Aries, 

y  in  Aries. — Bather  tall  stature  -,  lean,  and  well  made  ; 
light  hair ;  blue  or  grey  eyes ;  ruddy  complexion ;  strong 
constitution ;  ambitious,  and  quick  in  anger. 

(7  in  f- — Middle  stature  ;  ruddy  complexion  ;  large  bones  ; 
thin  and  spare  ;  dark  hair,  and  small  eyes  ;  inclined  to  quar- 
relling and  contentious. 

11  in  Y\ — Middle  stature  ;  rather  lean ;  ruddy  complexion  ; 
oval  visage  ;  flaxen  hair,  quick  eye,  high  nose  ;  the  disposition 
obliging  and  courteous. 

(f  in  y. — Middle  stature  ;  well  set ;  big  bones ;  swarthy 
complexion ;  the  hair  light  and  curling  ;  grey  eyes ;  sharp 
sight,  and  austere  countenance  ;  very  quick  in  anger ;  fond 
of  combat,  in  which  he  is  usually  successful. 

O  in  T  • — Rather  short  stature  ;  well  made  ;  complexion 
good  ;  very  light  hair  ;  generous  to  excess,  even  to  an  enemy  ; 
valorous,  and  to  be  trusted. 

^  in  ")T, — Middle  stature  ;  rather  slender  ;  good  complexion  ; 
fair  hair,  and  blue  eyes ;  of  a  quick,  restless,  changeable  dis- 
position ;  fond  of  the  opposite  sex,  and  liable  to  acts  of  indis- 
c  retion. 

§  in  Y\ — Rather  tall,  spare,  and  slim ;  long  neck  ;  oval 
face ;  light  brown  curling  hair ;  swarthy  complexion ;  of  a 


16  'I  I  IK   i.l  I  I.I.   TO  ASTROLOGY. 

restless,  amoitious  uiupouition ;  addicted  to  falsehood  and 
theft ;  a  most  pregnant  wit  and  fancy,  good  orator  and 
dramatist.  I  am  of  opinion  that  our  great  poet  Shakes[>carc 
was  born  with  Mercury  rising  in  Aries. 

})  in  T- — Indifferent  stature  ;  round  face  ;  light  brown 
hair ;  well  made  ;  grey  eyes,  and  a  good  complexion.  In 
disposition  changeable  and  uncertain  ;  fond  of  travelling,  and 
restless. 

Taurus, 

Ifl  hi  Taurus. — Short,  thick-set  person  ;  dark  hair  and  eyes, 
rather  fleshy ;  pale  or  swarthy  complexion ;  short  neck ; 
deep-set  eyes  ;  passionate,  boasting,  and  revengeful ;  a  person 
to  be  avoided,  conceited  and  luxurious. 

V)  in  y . — Dark  complexion  ;  rough  skin  ;  middle  stature  ; 
dark  hair  ;  feet  and  hands  ill  made  ;  a  dull,  sottish  person  ; 
very  revengeful,  and  of  a  secret  and  murderous  disposition. 

11.  in  y . — Well  set,  middle  stature,  and  compact ;  dark 
complexion  ;  brown  eyes  ;  dark  hair  ;  short  thick  neck  ;  dis- 
position, good,  generous,  and  firm. 

(f  in  y . — Middle  stature  ;  inclining  to  shortness  and  corpu- 
lency ;  grey  eyes  ;  round  face  ;  ruddy  complexion  ;  dark  hah* ; 
wide  mouth ;  vicious,  gluttonous,  and  violent ;  conceited ; 
void  of  feeling ;  and  very  ill-natured. 

0  in  y . — Short,  well-set  person  ;  light  brown  hair  ;  grey 
eyes  ;  great  nose  ;  large  mouth  ;  opinionative  ;  conceited, 
proud,  improvident,  and  bold. 

9  in  y. — A  comely  person;  moderately  fleshy ;  good- 
looking  ;  fair  ;  sanguine  complexion  ;  light  brown  hair  ;  temper 
good  ;  captivating ;  fond  of  females,  by  whom  he  is  highly 
respected. 

§  in  y . — Middle  stature  ;  full  face  ;  brown  hair  ;  swarthy 
complexion ;  grey  or  hazel  eyes.  In  disposition,  talkative ; 
loving  his  own  ease  ;  improvident ;  indulging  hi  drink  to  excess. 

])  in  y. — Well-made  body;  rather  short,  corpulent,  and 
strong ;  pale  complexion  ;  brown  hair,  and  grey  eyes ;  of  a 


THE  GUIDE  TO  ASTROLOGY.  17 

mim  and  obliging  disposition,  and  generally  respected  ;  fond 
of  the  opposite  sex. 

Gemini. 

y  in  Gemini. — Produces  a  tall,  thin  stature  ;  light  brown 
hair,  and  grey  eyes ;  well  made ;  quick  step ;  active  and 
nimble  ;  fond  of  science  ;  of  a  good  disposition  ;  eccentric  in 
behaviour ;  generous  and  inventive. 

\~)  in  ].] . — Rather  tall  in  stature  ;  oval  visage  ;  dark  brown 
hair  ;  dull,  swarthy  complexion  ;  ingenious  ;  fond  of  the  goods 
of  this  world. 

T/  in  n . — Well-composed  body ;  tall ;  sanguine  complexion ; 
open  and  frank ;  fond  of  science  and  society. 

0"  in  IT . — Rather  tall  stature  ;  brown  hair ;  grey  eyes  ; 
ruddy  or  sanguine  complexion ;  strong  body  ;  big  bones  and 
long  arms  ;  rash,  free,  and  generous  ;  ambitious  and  aspiring. 

O  in  n . — Well-made  body  ;  sanguine  complexion  ;  light 
brown  hair ;  large  grey  eyes  ;  good  disposition,  courteous  and 
affable  to  all :  fond  of  science,  and  a  philanthropist. 

$  in  El . — Middle  stature  ;  thin  and  handsome  ;  clear, 
sanguine  complexion  ;  light  brown  hair ;  and  generally  blue 
eyes;  disposition:  mild  and  good;  free  and  kind  to  all  ; 
generally  beloved  and  respected. 

$  in  II. — Tall,  slender,  well-composed  person  ;  dark  brown 
hair  ;  hazel  eyes  ;  high  nose  ;  long  arms,  hands,  and  fingers  ; 
very  quick  and  active  ;  possessing  a  rare  mind  for  science ; 
a  good  orator ;  delighting  in  art,  science,  and  literature  ;  of 
a  moderately  good  disposition. 

j)  in  n . — Well-composed  person  ;  rather  tall ;  brown  hair  ; 
good  complexion  ;  rather  pate  ;  agreeable  and  talkative  ;  very 
ingenious ;  somewhat  subtle  and  crafty,  especially  if  V)  alone 
aspects  the  moon. 

Cancer. 

y  in  Cancer. — Produces  a  short,  thick-set,  corpulent  body  ; 
pale  complexion  ;  dark  brown  hair  ;  and  grey  eyes  ;  conceited  ; 

.o 


18  TUB   QUIDS   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

bigoted  ;  fond  of  drink  ;  violent,  eccentric,  and  ungovernable. 

]-)  in  2b. — Middle  stature  ;  lean  and  thin  ;  dark  hair  ;  weak, 
sickly  constitution ;  deceitful  and  cunning  in  behaviour ; 
given  to  drink  ;  and  generally  a  wretched,  miserable  being. 

If.  in  25. — Middle  stature  ;  pale  complexion  ;  oval  face  ; 
dark  brown  hair,  and  brown  eyes  ;  obliging  and  courteous  ; 
rather  conceited  ;  constitution  sickly  and  unhealthy. 

CJ*  in  s. — Personates  bodies  sometimes  deformed,  or  void 
of  due  proportions  ;  the  complexion  pale  and  vitiated  ;  brown 
hair ;  grey  eyes ;  of  a  sottish,  heavy  disposition  ;  given  to 
thieving  and  drink  ;  revengeful  and  ill-natured. 

O  in  25. — Short  stature  ;  sickly,  pale  complexion  ;  freckled  ; 
brown  hair,  and  grey  eyes  ;  fond  of  females  ;  a  lover  of  ease 
and  pleasure,  but  free  and  generous  to  excess,  and  given  to 
acts  of  intoxication. 

9  in  <5>. — Short  stature  ;  rather  fleshy  ;  round  face  ;  pale 
complexion  ;  light  hair,  and  blue  eyes  ;  a  comely,  good-looking 
person  ;  gentle  and  mild,  free  and  improvident ;  careless  and 
indolent ;  fond  of  women  and  drink. 

$  in  25. — Short  stature  ;  pale  complexion  ;  black  hair  ; 
thin  face  ;  sharp  nose,  and  small  grey  eyes.  In  disposition, 
changeable  and  uncertain  ;  fickle,  and  not  unfrcqucntly  light- 
fingered. 

])  in  25. — Middle  stature  ;  well-made,  and  fleshy  ;  fair 
complexion ;  round  face ;  rather  pale ;  brown  hair ;  of  a 
sociable,  pleasing,  courteous  disposition  ;  kind  to  all ;  harmless, 
and  respected. 

Leo, 

tl  in  Leo. — Makes  a  full-sized  stature ;  broad,  strong 
shoulders  ;  light  brown  hair,  and  sandy  whiskers  ;  firm  walk. 
In  disposition,  generous  and  free  ;  eccentric  ;  fond  of  military 
actions  ;  rather  proud,  and  self-conceited. 

J?  in  £\,. — Large  stature ;  shoulders  broad  and  strong ; 
the  hair  brown  ;  large  bones,  and  body  lean ;  the  aspect  surly 


THE   GUIDE   TO    ASTROLOGY.  19 

I 

and  austere.  In  disposition,  passionate  and  revengeful, 
boasting  and  conceited. 

11  in  $\,. — A  strong  well-proportioned  person ;  tall ;  the 
hair  light  brown ;  sanguine  complexion ;  the  eyes  full  and 
commanding.  In  disposition,  free,  generous,  noble,  and 
courageous. 

O*  in  $\,. — A  tall  stature ;  large  limbs,  endued  with  strength 
and  agility  ;  ruddy  complexion  ;  light  hair ;  large  grey  eyes  ; 
firm  and  intrepid  walk.  Disposition :  passionate,  noble,  and 
generous  ;  proud,  austere,  and  fond  of  field  sports. 

0  in  $\,. — A  strong,  well-proportioned  body ;  fair,  sanguine 
complexion  ;  light  brown  or  sandy  hair ;  full  face  and  large 
eyes ;  an  honest,  faithful  person  ;  ambitious  and  aspiring ; 
rather  proud,  and  careful  of  affronts. 

9  in  Q. — Rather  tall  in  stature  ;  well  made;  round  face; 
full  eyes ;  clear  complexion ;  hair  light  brown  or  flaxen ; 
rather  passionate,  but  generous  and  free  ;  kind  to  all ;  although 
somewhat  proud  and  stubborn. 

9  in  SL, — Large  stature  ;  rather  lean ;  large  eyes  and 
swarthy  complexion  ;  round  face  ;  light  brown  hair ;  broad 
and  high  nose.  In  disposition,  hasty,  choleric,  proud  and 
ambitious. 

j)  in  Q^. — Tall  stature ;  well-made ;  large  bones  ;  sanguine 
complexion  ;  brown  hair ;  large  full  eyes ;  aspiring  and  lofty 
in  disposition  ;  ambitious  and  persevering 

Virgo. 

y  in  Virgo. — A  short  stature  ;  dark  hair  and  eyes ;  lean 
body ;  small  limbs  ;  of  an  eccentric  turn  of  mind ;  fond  of 
curiosities  and  novelties  ;  studious  ;  scientific  ;  but  mean  and 
close  in  his  worldly  affairs. 

V}  in  Rf. — Tall,  spare  body ;  dark  brown  or  black  hair ; 
swarthy  complexion ;  austere,  melancholy  countenance ; 
retentive  of  anger ;  curious  in  ideas ;  fond  of  science  and 
learning. 

o  2 


20  THE  'GUIDE  TO  "ASTROLOGY 

Ij.  in  nj. — Full  stature  ;  hair  black  or  dark  brown  ;  ruddy 
complexion,  but  not  clear.  In  disposition,  choleric,  ambitious, 
boastful  and  improvident. 

0"  in  nj. — Middle  stature,  well  proportioned  :  dark  brown 
hair ;  ruddy  complexion  ;  grey  eyes  and  round  face.  Dis- 
position :  very  angry  and  choleric  ;  hasty  and  revengeful ; 
conceited  and  very  irritable. 

0  in  nj. — Tall,  well-proportioned  stature,  rather  slender  • 
a  good  complexion  ;  brown  hair  and  grey  eyes  ;  ingenious 
and  cheerful ;  scientific  and  free. 

^  in  n£. — Tall,  well-made  body;  brown  hair;  oval  face; 
sanguine,  or  ruddy  complexion  ;  quick  in  speech  ;  active  and 
inspiring  ;  fond  of  music  and  singing  ;  and  generally  respected. 

9  in  rrf. — Tall,  slender  person  ;  dark  brown  or  black  hair  ; 
long  face  ;  small  dark  eyes  ;  quick,  active  and  nimble ;  very 
much  addicted  to  science,  literature,  and  the  acquisition  of 
languages  ;  a  good  orator ;  subtle  and  careful  of  their  own 
interest. 

})  in  nf. — Middle  stature  ;  pale  complexion  ;  dark  brown 
or  black  hair ;  pensive  ;  fond  of  distinction ;  loquacious  ;  and 
often  covetous  and  imposing. 

Libra. 

I0I  in  Libra. — Produces  a  full  stature  ;  strong,  well-made 
body  ;  round  face  ;  light  hair,  and  sanguine  complexion  ;  of 
a  scientific,  ambitious  tuni  of  mind  ;  soon  angered  ;  and 
eccentric  in  behaviour. 

b  in  — • — Tall  person  ;  rather  handsome  ;  brown  or  auburn 
hair  ;  oval  face  ;  prominent  nose  and  forehead  ;  proud,  careful 
and  fond  of  argument 

"V  in  £i. — Well-made  person,  rather  tall  and  slender ;  full 
eyes  ;  light  brown  hair  ;  clear  complexion  ;  of  an  open,  free 
and  generous  disposition ;  willing  and  anxious  to  oblige 
everybody. 

(f  in  £i. — Well-made  person  ;  tall ;  light  brown  hair ;  oval 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  21 

visage  ;  sanguine  or  ruddy  complexion  ;  quick  in  anger,  but 
of  a  pleasing  countenance  ;  ambitious  and  fond  of  recreation. 

0  in  £>. — Middle  stature  ;  oval  face  ;  ruddy,  cheerful  com- 
plexion ;  light  hair  and  full  eyes  ;  extravagant,  bold,  free  and 
generous  to  excess  ;  proud,  and  possessing  a  good  opinion  of 
himself. 

9  in  £.. — Tall,  graceful  person  ;  sanguine  complexion  ; 
light  brovvn  hair,  and  blue  eyes  ;  very  good  looking ;  of  an 
obliging,  courteous  disposition ;  generally  beloved  and 
respected. 

9  in  £i. — Well-composed  body,  rather  full  than  otherwise  ; 
light  brown  hair  and  grey  eyes;  ruddy  or  sanguine  complexion  ; 
an  ingenious,  thrifty  person,  of  pleasing  manners  ;  a  good 
orator ;  and  a  lover  of  all  arts  and  sciences. 

J)  in  £i. — Well-made  person  ;  light  brown  hair ;  ruddy 
complexion,  and  tolerably  good  looking.  In  disposition, 
agreeable  and  courteous,  loving  mirth  and  society ;  much 
beloved  and  respected. 

Scorpio. 

H  in  Scorpio. — Short  and  thick-set  body  ;  broad  shoulders 
and  ill-made  hands ;  dark,  swarthy  complexion ;  dark  or 
black  hair  and  eyes  ;  a  malicious,  deceitful,  cunning  person  ; 
given  to  drink  and  pleasure  ;  and  generally  a  most  despicable 
person. 

V)  in  ffl . — Short  stature  ;  thick,  well-set,  and  strong  body  ; 
broad  shoulders  ;  small  dark  eyes  ;  a  malicious,  mischievous 
person  ;  given  to  thieving,  and  very  often  in  trouble. 

"U.  in  TTJ . — Middle  stature  ;  compact  body  ;  dark  hair  ; 
fleshy  face,  and  dull  complexion.  In  disposition,  arrogant 
and  lofty,  ambitious,  active  and  industrious. 

cf  in  n\. — Well  set,  middle  stature  ;  broad  face  ;  complexion 
dark  and  swarthy ;  hair  black  and  curling ;  passionate,  rash, 
and  revengeful ;  ambitious  and  aspiring ;  excelling  in  any 
pursuit. 

0  in  n\. — Square  body ;  full  face ;  wide  mouth  ;  dark, 


22  THE   GUIDE   TO    ASTROI/XJY. 

sunburnt  complexion,  brown  hair ;  reasonably  fleshy.  In 
disposition,  ingenious,  austere,  ambitious  ;  a  good  chemist  or 
doctor. 

9  in  fl\. — Represents  a  well-set  body,  rather  corpulent  ; 
broad  face  ;  brown  hair  ;  blue  or  grey  eyes  ;  fond  of  drink 
and  evil  company  ;  and  an  enemy  principally  to  themselves. 

<^  in  n\. — Short  stature  ;  well  set  ;  broad  shoulders  ;  swarthy 
complexion  ;  sad  brown  hair  :  given  to  lying,  drinking,  thieving 
and  possessing  many  unlaudable  qualities  ;  a  good  and  subtle 
chemist. 

J>  in  H\. — Ill-composed  person  ;  short,  thick  and  fleshy  ; 
obscure  complexion  ;  brown  or  black  hair.  Disposition  : 
sottish,  and  given  to  many  evil  actions,  particularly  with  the 
opposite  sex. 

Sagittarius. 

U  in  Sagittarius. — Describes  a  person  of  tall  stature  ;  light 
hair  and  eyes  ;  lofty  forehead  ;  good  complexion.  In  dis- 
position generous  and  free,  fond  of  all  sports,  and  enthusiastic. 

\-)  in  J . — Large  body  ;  brown  hair  ;  rather  handsome  ; 
lean ;  ruddy  complexion ;  reserved,  yet  obliging,  and  not 
easily  offended. 

~\l  in  f . — Tall,  upright  body;  chestnut  hair  ;  ruddy  com- 
plexion ;  oval  face  ;  and  the  eyes  brown  ;  comely  and  engaging. 
In  disposition,  courteous,  just  and  noble  ;  despising  mean  and 
sordid  actions,  fond  of  exercise  and  recreation. 

CJ"  in  J . — Rather  tall ;  well-proportioned  body  ;  ruddy  or 
sanguine  complexion  ;  brown  hair ;  visage  open  ;  quick  eye  ; 
of  a  choleric  and  hasty  disposition,  yet  generous  and  free  ; 
generally  successful  in  cattle  and  horse-dealing. 

0  in  f. — Tall,  well-made  person;  oval  visage;  sanguine 
complexion  ;  light  brown  hair  ;~of  a  high,  aspiring,  lofty 
disposition  ;  aiming  at  great  and  noble  things,  generous  and 
free. 

9    in    / . — Well-proportioned    body  ;    clear    complexion  ; 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  23 

brown  hair  ;  and  noble  visage  ;  of  a  free,  generous  disposition  ; 
good-natured  and  obliging ;  fond  of  pleasure  and  recreation. 

^  in  ^ . — Tall  stature  ;  well-shaped,  but  not  corpulent ; 
large  bones,  brown  hair,  ruddy  complexion  and  large  nose ; 
passionate,  but  soon  appeased  ;  rash  in  his  actions. 

J)  in  / . — Handsome,  well-proportioned  body  ;  oval  face  ; 
bright  brown  hair  ;  ruddy  or  sanguine  complexion  ;  grey  eyes. 
In  disposition,  good  and  generous,  passionate  but  forgiving ; 
ambitious  and  aspiring. 

Capricorn. 

y  in  Capricorn  denotes  one  of  middle  stature  ;  well-made, 
short  neck,  high  forehead,  dark  hair  and  heavy  eyes  ;  proud, 
austere,  and  conceited ;  and  possessing  but  few  laudable 
propensities. 

f>  in  Vf  gives  a  thin  person,  of  low  stature  ;  rough  skin, 
dark  complexion,  small  eyes,  and  long  visage  ;  melancholy, 
peevish,  mistrustful,  and  avaricious  ;  serious  and  austere. 

"I/,  in  Vf. — Mean  stature ;  pale,  sickly  complexion  and  lean 
face  ;  small  head  ;  dark  hair ;  weakly  and  infirm ;  peevish 
and  desponding ;  and  generally  in  trouble. 

O"  in  Vf. — Short  stature ;  lean ;  ruddy  complexion ;  small 
head  and  thin  face ;  black  lank  hair ;  ingenious  and  cour- 
ageous ;  possessing  prudence  and  great  determination. 

0  in  Vf. — Mean  stature ;  pale  complexion ;  brown  hair ; 
oval  face  ;  spare  thin  body.  In  disposition,  just  and  good- 
humoured,  gaining  respect  thereby. 

9  in  Vf. — Short  stature  ;  complexion  pale  and  sickly  ;  thin, 
lean  face  ;  brown  or  dark  hair  and  blue  eyes.  In  disposition, 
courteous  and  obliging  ;  fond  of  the  opposite  sex  to  their  own 
detriment. 

ty  in  Vf. — Mean  stature  ;  thin  face  ;  brown  hair ;  dusky 
complexion ;  generally  bow-legged ;  sometimes  crippled  if 
^  be  afflicted  by  V),  tf  or  y.  In  disposition,  peevish  and 
fickle  ;  yet  acute,  sharp  and  penetrating. 

])  in  Vf. — Low  stature,  and  ill-complexion ;  the  body  and 
face  thin  and  spare,  dark  brown  lank  hair ;  weak^knees ; 


24  THK    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY. 

possessing  no  activity  :  disposed  to  mean  actions  and  de- 
bauchery. 

Aquarius. 

1:1  in  Aquarius  produces  a  middle  stature  ;  brown  hair  and 
eyes  :  well-made  and  handsome  broad  face  ;  very  ingenious  ; 
fond  of  science  and  novelties ;  eccentric  ;  and  of  a  good 
disposition. 

V)  in  zz. — Middle  stature  ;  large  head  and  face  ;  hair  dark 
brown  ;  large  grey  eyes  ;  sober  and  prudent  ;  fond  of  science  : 
industrious  and  persevering. 

"J/  in  ™. — Middle  stature  ;  compact  ;  rather  corpulent  ; 
the  complexion  clear  ;  hair  dark  brown  ;  of  a  cheerful  and 
obliging  disposition  ;  injurious  to  none  ;  just  and  merciful  ; 
and  fond  of  recreation. 

o"  in  :£. — Middle  stature  ;  well  made  ;  rather  corpulent  ; 
the  hair  sandy  or  red  ;  clear,  ruddy  complexion ;  Disposition  : 
turbulent  and  unruly  ;  fond  of  controversy  and  determined."* 

0  in  ~.  -Middle  stature  ;  corpulent  body ;  decently  com- 
posed ;  round  face  ;  light  brown  hair  ;  clear  complexion  ;  in 
disposition  good  and  just ;  obliging,  but  rather  proud. 

9  in  ?z. — Handsome,  well-proportioned  person  ;  somewhat 
corpulent ;  of  a  clear,  sanguine  complexion  :  the  hair  brown  ; 
but  sometimes  flaxen  :  of  an  open,  generous  disposition  ;  free 
and  kind,  and  generally  beloved. 

9  in  'zz. — Indifferent  stature  ;  a  good,  clear  complexion  ; 
brown,  but  sometimes  black  hair ;  full  face  ;  ingenious  ;  fond 
of  arts  and  sciences  ;  given  to  study,  researches  and  invention?  ; 
of  a  pregnant  wit,  and  admirable  understanding. 

D  in  ZZ. — Middle  stature  ;  well  formed  ;  rather  corpulent ; 
brown  hair  ;  clear,  sanguine  complexion  ;  ingenious,  courteous 
and  inoffensive  ;~active~and  inventive. 

Pisces. 

J^I  in  Pisces. — Low,  mean  stature  ;  sickly,  pale  complexion  : 
dark  hair  and  "eyes  ;  ill-made  hands  and  feet ;  bad  walk  ;  in 
disposition,  sottish  and  dull ;  dejected  and  despised. 


rTHE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  25 

f>  in  }{. — Short  stature ;  pale  countenance ;  hair  nearly 
black  ;  head  large  and  eyes  full ;  contentious  and  malicious  ; 
fraudulent  and  deceitful  in  their  dealings  ;  sottish  and  thievish. 

"U  in  V. — Middle  stature  ;  fleshy  body  :  obscure  complexion  ; 
light  brown  hair;  studious,  generous,  and  good-hearted; 
fortunate  in  travelling  ;  generally  respected,  and  fortunate. 

<-j"  in  >? . — Mean  stature  ;  short  and  fleshy  ;  hair  light  brown ; 
complexion  bad  ;  large  eyes.  In  disposition,  given  to  vicious 
actions  ;  sottish,  and  prone  to  lewdness  ;  idle  ;  delighting  in 
broils  and  wicked  actions. 

"""  0  in  }•£. — Rather  short  stature  ;  round  face  ;  pale,  sickly 
complexion  ;  light  brown  hair,  and  grey  eyes  ;  rather  corpulent; 
a  general  lover  of  the  female  sex  ;  addicted  to  drink  and 
gambling  ;  extravagant  and  prodigal. 

""""  9  in  >£. — Middle  stature  ;  inclining  to  shortness  ;  plump 
and  fleshy  ;  good  complexion  ;  hair  light  brown,  and  blue 
eyes ;  the  face  round.  In  disposition  affable  and  good- 
natured  ;  just  in  their  dealings,  and  respected.  •* 

$  in  X . — Low  stature  ;  brown  hair ;  thin  face  ;  sickly 
complexion  ;  generally  very  hairy  upon  the  body.  Tn  dis- 
position, repining,  fretful,  drinking  and  disconsolate. 

T)  in  >{  gives  a  person  rather  obese  ;  pale~complexion": 
Jight  brown  hair  ;  rather  corpulent ;  round  face  ;  sottish  and 
fond  of  their  own  ea.se  and  pleasure  ;  lover*  of  the  opposite 
sex. 

Neptune. 

The  description  of  persons  produced  by  ^  is  unascertained, 
as  the  planet  was  only  discovered  in  1846,  and  as  its  motion 
is  very  slow,  it  has  only  travelled  about  one-fourth  of  the 
Zodiac. 

The  descriptions  so  far  are  approximately  as  follow : — 

^  in  Aries. — Rather  tall,  well-formed,  with  ruddv  com- 
plexion ;  eyes  usually  brown,  and  long  neck." 

W   in    8 . — Medium  stature  ;  thick  set ;  pale  complexion 
eyes  blue. 


26  THE   OtrTDB   TO    ASTROLOOY. 

y  in  II. — Tall,  well-made  stature;  rather  dark. 

t$r  in  X- — Tall,  thin,  pale  in  complexion,  and  a  long  neck. 

The  disposition  produced  by  <£  is  unsettled,  restless, 
doubtful,  inquiring,  ambitious,  and  much  inclined  to  spirit- 
ualism and  occultism. 

NOTE. — The  foregoing  descriptions  will  answer  when  there  t» 
no  other  planet  in  the  ascendant,  or  in  power/ill  aspect  thereto."* 


CHAPTER    VII 

THE  ESSENTIAL  AND  ACCIDENTAL  DIGNITIES   OF  THE  PLANETS. 

The  Essential  Dignities. 

THE  signs  are  distributed  among  the  planets  in  the  following 
order,  and  are  called  the  planets'  Houses  or  Mansions.] 

V  and  fl\  are  the  houses  of  tf. 

8      „     £:  „  „  ?. 

n    „    nj       „        „        $. 

J    „    X         „         „        "U- 
25  is  the  house  of  the1          J). 

Si  .,  „  0. 

Vf  „  „  b. 

~  „  „  y. 

They  are  called  "  mansions  "  or  "  houses,"  because,  when 
the  planets  are  in  their  respective  signs,  they  are  then  very 
powerful,  and  become  Lords  of  the  horoscope,  according  to 
the  sign  that  is  on  the  ascendant,  or  rising  at  the  birth.  For 
instance,  should  Y~  be  rising,  then  Mars  is  lord  of  the  figure, 
or  the  ruling  planet  of  the  native  ;  the  same  if  H\  rises.  If 
J  be  rising,  then  TZ  is  lord,  and  so  on  of  the  others. 

The  reason  for  this  classification  appears  to  be  this : — 
The  natures  of  the  signs  y  and  0\  agree  with  the  nature  of 
(f  more  than  with  any  other  planet ;  for  instance,  IT  is  a 
bold,  intrepid,  warlike,  headstrong,  impetuous  sign,  agreeing 
with  the  nature  of  Q"  when  unafflicted  ;  IT\  on  the  other  hand 


THE    GUIDE    TO   ASTKOLOGY. 

is  a  malicious,  crafty,  stubborn,  cruel  and  bloodthirsty  sign, 
very  similar  to  the  nature  of  Mars,  when  badly  placed  in  a 
nativity,  or  afflicted.  The  sign  8  is  similar  in  nature  to  9 
when  afflicted,  and  £:  when  she  is  strong  and  unafflicted. 
25  is  the  "  house  "  of  the  ])  ;  this  sign  is  moveable,  moist 
and  unstable,  and  persons  born  with  it  rising,  especially 
females,  lack  firmness ;  the  })  is  constantly  changing  her 
position,  for  she  moves  twelve  times  faster  than  the  Sun, 
whose  house  is  the  regal,  firm,  steadfast,  noble  sign,  Q . 

There  are  also  some  signs  in  which  certain  planets  are 
found  to  be  very  powerful,  though  not  to  the  same  extent  or 
degree  as  when  in  their  own  "  houses."  These  are  called  the 
"  exaltations  of  the  planets,"  and  they  run  thus  : — ~)T  is  the 
exaltation  of  the  Sun  ;  8  of  the  Moon  ;  °B  of  Jupiter ;  TTJ>  of 
Mercury ;  ^  of  Saturn  ;  Il\  of  Herschel ;  Vf  of  Mars ;  and  X 
of  Venus.  The  signs  opposite  to  these  are  those  in  which 
they  receive  their  "  fall,"  being  then  weak  in  power,  and  the 
signs  opposite  to  their  respective  "  houses  "  are  called  the 
"  detriments  "  of  the  planets.  They  are  then  especially  weak 
and  unfortunate.  For  instance,  8  and  £i  are  the  detriments 
of  0*,  being  in  opposition  to  "f  and  \][,  which  are  the  "  houses  " 
of  Q*. 

The  following  table  will  show  this  at  a  glance  : — 


Sign. 

Planet's 
House. 

Exaltation 
approximate  j          FalL 
degrees. 

Detriment. 

r 

0" 

O  19-                b 

V 

5  3°             y 

c/ 

II 

V 

D 

1/15°               a* 

b 

& 

O 

y 

TTJ> 

9   15°                9 
b  21°              O 

j 

n\ 

cf 

y         ]> 

/WV 

Cf"  .28°               i/ 

I 

O 

X 

"U 

9  27°               V 

28  THE    OXTIPE   TO    ASTROLOGY. 

There  are  other  signs,  also,  in  which  the  planets  are  powerful 
but  only  to  a  small  extent,  and  these  are  the  signs  which  agree 
with  the  planet  in  natvrf.  For  instance,  *}  joys  in  n,  TTf, 
-tt-  and  tr,  being  signs  of  n  scientific  nature,  and  most  allied 
to  its  own  nature  ;  9  m  fruitful,  moist  signs,  as  25  and  X ; 
©  and  rf  in  hot,  fiery  signs,  as  y\  $  or  f  ;  11  in  fruitful, 
temperate  signs,  and  especially  in  25  and  W,  and  also  in  £± 
and  ?z.  \~)  delights  in  ^  and  ^r,  and  y  in  J±  and  P\.  The 
J)  is  the  same  as  9- 

I  advise  the  student  not  to  notice  any  other  dignities  of 
the  planets  that  he  may  have  heard  or  read  of,  such  as 
"  Triplicity,"  "  Term,"  and  "  Face  "  ;  for  I  have  not  dis- 
covered that  these  have  any  signification,  especially  in 
Genethliacal  Astrology,  so  I  omit  them.  No  signs  or  dignities 
have  as  yet  been  assigned  to  &. 

The  Accidental  Dignities. 

These  consist  of  a  planet  being  well  placed  in  the  figure 
of  the  Heavens,  with  respect  to  being  in  the  angles  or  other 
houses.  The  most  powerful  accidental  dignities  are  the  1st 
and  10th  houses,  next  the  7th,  then  the  llth  and  4th,  and 
the  only  fvil  house  appears  to  be  the  6th.  for  any  planet 
therein  very  seldom  benefits  the  native,  it  is  more  often  the 
other" way.  Some  planets  "  joy  ""more  in  one"  Itouse'than 
another,  for  instance,  the  0,  )),"!/,  and  <~"  in  the  10th,  but 
f>  and  ^  prefer  the  1st;  the  3rd  is  also  favourable  for  the 
latter  planet ;  9  delights'in  the.  7th,  and  F I  in  tl>e  9th. 


CHAPTER    VTH.     ' 

HIE    USE    OF   AN    EPHEMBRIS.      ' 

ATT  Ephemeris  is  an  account  of  the  Geocentric  places  of 
the  planets,  and  contains  their  Longitudes.  Latitudes,  and 
Declinations.  It  is  absolutely  necessary  in  all  Astrological 


THE   GUIDE   TO  ASTROLOGY.  "  29 

computations,  and  cannot  be  dispensed  with.  They  are 
issued  for  every  year  from  1800.  The  student  should  obtain 
one  for  the  year  in  which  he  wishes  to  erect  the  map ;  if  born 
in  1840,  he  should  obtain  an  Ephemeris  for  that  year ;  the 
same  with  any  other  year.  The  price  is  Is.  per  year 

At  the  top  of  my  Ephemeris,  you  will  find  the  Latitude 
and  Declination  of  ^,  y,  V),  11,  cf,  9»  and  $>  and  also  the 
Moon's  Node,  and  the  "  Mutual  Aspects."  With  the  Latitudes 
of  the  planets,  and  the  Moon's  Node,  you  need  not  concern 
yourself,  for  you  will  not  require  them  for  any  calculations 
taught  in  this  book.  The  "  Mutual  "  aspects  are  thus  called, 
because  they  are  formed  between  the  planets,  and  in  contra- 
distinction to  the  "  Lunar  "  ones,  or  those  formed  exclusively 
by  the  j),  which  you  will  find  at  the  right-hand  side  of  the 
lower  part  of  the  page.  The  Declinations  you  will  require  in 
calculations. 

In  the  bottom  segment  of  the  page  there  is  a  column  marked 
"  Sidereal  Time,"  this  you  may  use  in  setting  a  Map  of  the 
heavens  for  any  time  by  adding  or  subtracting  the  "  time  from 
Noon,"  as  taught  elsewhere. 

The  second  large  column  is  the  Q's  Longitude,  also  to  be 
used  to  ascertain  the  position  of  the  0  in  the  map,  for  this 
column  shows  the  sign,  degrees  and  minutes  the  0  occupies 
each  day ;  the  next  column  is  the  ©'s  Declin.,  then  the  ])  's 
Longitude,  noon  and  midnight,  also  her  Latitude  and 
Declination  for  the  same ;  her  Latitude  will  not  be  wanted, 
and  if  you  work  by  Logarithms  as  taught,  it  will  be  best  to 
use  the  columns  for  noon  only,  and  leave  those  for  midnight 
alone. 

On  the  right-hand  page  the  Longitudes  of  the  planets  will 
be  found,  which  show  the  sign,  degree,  and  minute  each  planet 
occupies  for  every  day  of  the  month.  These,  of  course,  you 
will  require,  in  order  that  you  may  know  in  what  part  of  your 
map  to  place  the  planets. 


30  THK  (.run:  TO  ASTROLOGY 


CHAPTER    IX 

HOW    TO    EKECT   A   MAP   OF    THK    HKAVJt.VS 

You  must  first  ascertain  what  time  it  is  you  are  usinjr. 
Whether  Greenwich  time  or  local  time.  If  local,  you  must 
take  the  time  just  as  it  is,  and  work  with  it  without  any 
alteration  or  additions  of  any  kind,  but  if  Greenwich  time, 
you  must  ascertain  the  difference  in  time  between  the  place 
for  which  you  set  the  map,  and  Greenwich,  because  everything 
in  the  Ephemeris  is  calculated  for  Greenwich.  The  difference 
in  time  East  or  West  of  Greenwich  is  4  minutes  for  every 
degree  of  Longitude.  Suppose,  for  instance,  you  want  to  sot 
a  map  for  Newport,  Mon.  This  is  3°  West  Longitude,  or  1'2 
minutes  later  than  Greenwich.  Therefore  if  Greenwich  time 
is  used  at  Newport,  you  must  subtract  12m.  from  the  time  to 
make  it  local  time,  for  when  it  is  noon  at  Greenwich,  it  will 
be  about  llh.  48m.  at  Newport.  Again,  suppose  the  map 
is  for  Galway,  in  Ireland,  which  is  9°  West  Long,  or  36m. 
later  than  Greenwich,  you  must  subtract  36m.  from  the 
Greenwich  time,  to  make  it  local  time,  but  if  the  time  used 
is  local  time,  of  course  you  will  make  no  alteration.  Great 
Yarmouth  and  Lowestoft  are  about  1°  30'  earlier  than  Green- 
wich, consequently  you  must  add  6m.  to  Greenwich  time  to 
make  it  local  time,  that  is,  provided  the  time  used  is  Green- 
wich time.  There  is  also  a  little  correction  to  make  for  the 
increase  in  the  Sidereal  time.  It  is  at  the  rate  of  10  sees,  per 
hour,  or  two  minutes  for  12  hours.  It  is  very  trifling  and  the 
young  student  need  not  bother  with  it  at  first. 

Having  ascertained  the  local  time  for  which  to  set  the  map, 
you  must  first  look  in  my  Ephemeris  for  the  "  Sidereal  Time  " 


THE  GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  31 

on  the  day,  month,  and  year  required ;  then,  if  the  birth  be 
before  noon,  deduct  from  the  Sidereal  time  the  difference 
between  the  time  of  birth  and  noon  of  the  same  day ;  but, 
if  the  birth  happened  after  noon,  then  add  the  difference 
between  noon  and  the  time  required  to  the  Sidereal  time  at 
noon.  If  the  Sidereal  time  be  small,  so  that  the  deduction 
cannot  be  made,  add  twenty-four  hours  to  it,  then  make  the 
deduction,  and  work  with  the  difference ;  also,  if  in  adding 
the  time  to  the  Sidereal  time,  the  total  exceeds  24  hours, 
deduct  24  hours,  and  work  with  the  remainder.  For  instance, 
say  the  time  required  for  the  map  was  December  1st,  190G, 
10.20  p.m.  Look  in  the  Ephemeris  for  1906,  and  in  the 
column  marked  "  Sidereal  Time,"  and  on  the  1st  day  of 
December,  you  will  find  it  to  be  16h.  37m.  44s.  Now,  as  the 
time  is  after  noon,  you  add  to  this  Sidereal  time  the  10.20  p.m., 
which  makes  it  26h.  57m.  44s.,  and,  as  the  total  exceeds  24h. 
you  must  deduct  that  amount,  and  it  will  leave  2h.  57m.  44s., 
which  is  the  Sidereal  time,  or  Right  Ascension  of  the  Meridian 
at  10.20  p.m.  on  the  1st  of  December,  1906.  If  the  time 
required  had  been  10.20  a.m.  instead  of  p.m.,  you  would  have 
had  to  deduct  from  the  Sidereal  time  Ih.  40m.,  as  Ih.  40m.  is 
the  difference  in  time  between  10.20  a.m.  and  noon.  Thus, 
Sidereal  time  is  16h.  37m.  44s.,  deduct  Ih.  40m.,  and  it  leaves 
14h.  57m.  44s.,  which  is  the  Right  Ascension  of  the  Meridian 
at  10.20  a.m.  on  the  1st  December,  1906. 

At  the  end  of  my  Ephemeris  for  nearly  every  year  since 
1884  you  will  find  "  Tables  of  Houses  "  for  London,  Liverpool, 
and  New  York ;  use  those  tables  which  are  nearest  the 
Latitude  in  which  you  were  born.  Now,  we  found  that  the 
Sidereal  time  or  Right  Ascension  of  the  Meridian  at  10.20  p.m., 
on  December  1st,  1906,  was  2h.  57m.  44s.,  therefore  you  must 
turn  to  the  Tables  of  Houses,  and  in  the  column  marked 
''  Sidereal  Time,"  find  this  amount  or  the  nearest  thereto ; 
if  you  take  the  Tables  for  London,  you  will  find  the  nearest 
is  2h.  58m.  7s.  In  the  next  small  column  to  this,  to  the  right, 
we  find  17°  and  at  the  top  10  y ,  the  10  means  the  10th  house, 


32  THK   OtTIDB  TO   ASTROLOGY. 

and  b  shows  that  that  sign  is  then  passing  over  the  cusp  or 
beginning  of  that  house,  and  the  17°  is  the  degree  which  is 
actually  on  the  cusp  at  10.20  p.m.,  consequently  we  place  b 
17  on  the  cusp  of  the  10th  house.  In  the  next  small 
column  we  find  2G°  and  at  the  top  11  II  ;  the  11  signifies  the 
llth  house,  and  II  shows  that  that  sign  is  then  passing  the 
cusp  of  the  llth  house,  therefore,  we  place  II  26°  on  the  cusp 
of  that  house.  In  the  next  column  we  find  ft,  and  on  the 
top  12  <5c,  which  means  the  12th  house,  and  that  2c  has  been 
on  the  cusp,  but  if  you  look  slowly  down  the  column  you  will 
find  25  passes  over,  and  Q  begins  before  the  time  we  want, 
hence  you  must  place  ft  0°  on  the  cusp  of  the  12th  house. 
In  the  next  column  you  will  find  28°  4'  and  at  the  top  "  Ascen. 
ft,"  the  "  Ascen."  means  ascendant  or  the  1st  house,  so  you 
place  them  on  the  cusp  of  the  1st  house,  thus:  28°  ft  4'.  In 
the  next  column  you  will  find  18°  and  at  the  top  2  n£  ; 
the  2  signifies  the  2nd  house,  and  that  H£  is  the  sign  on  its 
cusp.  You,  therefore,  place  rijf  18°  on  the  cusp  of  the  2nd 
house.  In  the  next  column  we  iind  13  and  at  the  top  3  nj  ; 
the  3  denotes  the  3rd  house,  but  by  looking  down  the  column 
you  will  find  that  J1J>  runs  out,  and  ii  begins,  hence  you  place 
£:  13°  on  the  cusp  of  the  3rd  house.  You  have  now  got  the 
signs  and  degrees  on  the  cusps  of  six  houses,  and  on  the  other 
cusps  you  must  place  the  same  degrees,  but  opposite  signs, 
thus  : — On  the  cusp  of  the  4th  we  put  M\  17°,  for  P\  is  opposite 
to  8 ,  and  the  4th  house  is  opposite  the  10th ;  on  the  6th  we 
put  I  26°,  for  /  is  opposite  to  II  ;  on  the  6th  we  put  ~  0°, 
for  :£  is  opposite  to  ft  ;  on  the  7th  we  put  28°  ZZ  4'  for  the 
same  reason  ;  on  the  8th,  K  18°  and  on  the  9th  f  13°,  because 
X  and  V  are  opposite  to  H£  and  £±.  You  have  now  the  signs 
and  degrees  on  all  the  cusps  of  the  houses,  but  if  you  run  over 
the  signs  hi  rotation,  beginning  with  V,  8,  &c.,  you  will 
find  no  S,  this  sign  is  what  we  call  "  intercepted,"  that  is, 
between  the  cusps  of  two  houses,  and  as  s  follows  n ,  it  must 
be  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  llth  house;  if  you  proceed 
with  the  counting,  you  will  find  no  Vf,  now  Vf  is  opposite  to 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

2c,  hence  it  must  be  placed  in  the  middle  of  the  5th  house. 
See  the  following  diagram : — 


IX 


XII 


VIII 


VII 


n 


IV 


VI 


III 


No.  2. 

It  often  happens  that  two  signs,  and  sometimes  even  four, 
are  "  intercepted,"  so  that  the  student  should  always  look 
them  over,  to  make  sure  they  are  all  there.  This  "  intercep- 
tion "  is  caused  by  the  Latitude  of  the  Country.  At  the 
Equator  all  the  signs  rise  in  regular  rotation,  but  as  one 
proceeds  N.  or  S.  an  inequality  in  their  rising  occurs. 

NOTE. — Tables  of  Houses  are  the  same  from  year  to  year. 
They  do  not  change. 


?4  THE  GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

CHAPTER    X. 

HOW   TO   PLACE   THE   PLANETS    IN    THE   MAP. 

NOTE. — To  get  the  exact  places  of  the  planets  it  will  l>c 
necessary  to  correct  your  local  time  to  Greenwich  time,  by 
adding  or  subtracting  the  difference.  For  instance,  suppose 
your  map  is  for  lOh.  20m.  p.m.,  local  time  at  Newport,  Mon., 
the  difference  in  time  being  3°  or  l'2m.  from  Greenwich  time, 
you  must  add  this  to  the  lOh.  20m.,  making  it  lOh.  32m. 
Greenwich  time,  and  for  this  time  you  must  calculate  the 
planets'  places.  There  will  be  very  little  alteration  in  any 
of  the  places  except  the  moon,  which  moves  very  swift,  her 
average  motion  being  about  13°  per  day,  or  32'  per  hour, 
or  four  times  faster  than  any  other  planet.  In  the  case  of 
Newport  it  would  make  a  difference  of  about  0',  ,With  the 
sun  and  other  planets  it  is  much  less,  and  for  all  practical 
purposes  the  places  can  be  calculated  as  if  for  Greenwich. 
Our  knowledge  of  astrology  is  not  so  exact  that  a  difference 
of  a  minute  or  two  in  the  Longitude  of  a  planet  will  make 
any  alteration  in  the  judgment. 

In  my  Ephemeris  the  Longitudes  of  all  the  planets  are 
given  daily  for  mean  noon,  and  to  get  at  the  exact  place  of 
a  planet  for  any  hour  is  a  very  simple  matter.  You  must 
first  observe  the  difference  in  Longitude  on  the  noon  of  the 
day  of  birth,  to  the  noon  of  the  day  nearest  thereto.  For 
instance:  if  the  time  be  A.M.,  the  difference  between  the  pre- 
vious noon  and  the  noon  of  the  day  for  which  the  figure  is 
set  must  be  taken  ;  but  if  the  time  be  P.M.,  use  the  difference 
between  the  present  noon  and  the  noon  of  the  day  after. 
For  example  :  Our  diagram  is  set  for  December  1st,  1900, 
10.20  p.m.,  and  referring  to  the  Ephemeris  for  that  mouth 
(page  24),  we  find  in  the  column  marked  "Q  Long."'  that 
on  the  1st  day  it  was  8°  /  23'  51",  and  on  the  2nd  day 
9°  24'  41",  now,  the  difference  is  1°  0'  50*,  which  we  may 
call  1°  1',  for  50*  is  nearly  1'.  This  1°  1'  is  the  motion  of 


THE   GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  35 

the  ©  m  '24  hours  or  from  noon  of  the  1st  to  noon  of  the  2nd. 
(The  daily  motion  of  most  of  the  planets  is  given  on  pages 
26-27  and  28  of  the  Ephemeris). 

At  the  end  of  my  Ephemeris  you  will  find  a  "  Table  of 
Proportional  Logarithms,"  and  a  rule  and  example  at  the 
bottom.  In  the  present  case  we  proceed  thus  : — 

Proportional  Logarithm  of  Q's  daily  motion,  1°  1',  =  1.3730 
lOh.  20m.  .3660 


Total     1.7390 

We  find  the  nearest  number  to  this  in  the  table,  to  be  1.7434, 
and  at  the  top  of  that  column  0,  and  to  the  left  of  the  figures 
26',  which  shows  that  the  Q  moves  0°  26'  in  lOh.  20m.,  and, 
as  the  time  is  P.M.,  we  add  it  to  his  Longitude  at  noon  on  the 
1st  December,  which  will  make  it  8°  f  49'  51",  or  say  8°  }  50' 
(where  seconds  are  under  30,  reject  them — if  over  30,  call 
them  1').  We  therefore  place  the  0  in  the  4th  house  in  the 
map. 

With  the   J)   we  proceed  exactly  the  same,  thus  : — 
-Longitude  of  ])  on  2nd  26°  II     3'    27" 

1st     =     14          13      28 


Motion  of  ])  in  24  hours  =  11°  49'  59"  or  11°  50' 

Proportional  Logarithm  of  11°  50'        =  .3071 

lOh.  20m.   =  .3660 


.6731 

The  nearest  we  can  find  is  .67:20,  and  at  the  top  of  column 
5,  and  at  the  side  6',  which  shows  that  the  moon  moves  5°  6' 
in  lOh.  20m.,  and  we  add  this  to  the  J)  's  Longitude  at  noon, 
thus : — 

Longitude  of    D  14°  II     13' 

Motion  of  J)  in  lOh.  20m.        5  6 


19°    II  19' 

Therefore  we  place  the  })  in  II  in  the  10th  house. 

D  2 


30  TICK   (;UII)K   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

Wo  liiul  the  Longitude  of  V  on  page  25  of  Ephemeris  to 
bo  12°  <£  0',  on  the  1st,  and  12°  5'  on  the  2nd  ;  hence  he  moves 
but  1'  in  the  24  hours.  So  we  place  him  in  2o  12°  6'  in  the 
llth  house,  and  put  1^  after  it,  to  show  that  it  is  Retrograde, 
or  "  going  back  "  in  Longitude.  The  next  planet  is  y ,  he 
moves  4'  in  the  24  hours,  so  wo  add  2'  to  his  longitude,  and 
put  him  in  the  5th  house,  in  Vf  6°  55'.  The  next  is  V),  and 
he  moves  2'  in  the  24  hours,  so  we  add  1'  to  his  Longitude, 
and  place  him  in  the  7th  house,  in  K  8°  38'.  The  next  is 
T/,  and  he  moves  7'  retrograde,  so  we  subtract  3'  from  his 
Longitude,  and  place  him  in  the  llth  house,  in  <£>  9°  19'  ]]t 
near  ^.  o"  comes  next,  and,  subtracting  his  Longitude  on 
the  1st  from  that  of  the  2nd,  we  find  he  moves  37'  in  the  24 
hours. 

Proportional  Logarithm  of  37'  1.5902 

lOh.  20m.    =       .3000 


1.9502 

The  nearest  Logarithm  is  1.9542,  which  is  equivalent  to  16', 
so  we  add  10'  to  Q"  Longitude,  which  makes  it  J±  20°  24', 
and  place  him  in  the  3rd  house.  The  next  planet  is  $  which 
is  seen  to  be  retrograding,  and  her  motion  between  the  1st 
and  2nd  is  30'  therefore : — 

Proportional  Logarithm  of  30'  1.6021 

„       lOh.  20m.    =         .3060 

1.9081 

The  nearest  to  this  is  1.9542  or  10',  we  therefore  subtract 

16'  from  the  Longitude  of  9»  which  makes  it  ^  6°  3',  and 

we  place  her  in  the  4th  house,  near  the  0.     The  last  planet 

is  9,  who  is  also  retrograde,  and  moves  1°  17'  in  the  24  hours. 

Proportional  Logarithm  of  1°  17'  1.2719 

lOh.  20m.        =       .3660 


1.6379 
The  nearest  is   1.6398,   or  0°  33'.     Subtract  this  from  the 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

Longitude  of  $,  which  makes  it  f  4°  51',  and  we  place  him 
beside  9»  m  the  4th  house :  see  the  following  diagram : — 


12°  5'  R 


V 

HP. 


<& 


Vf 


6°  55' 


We  have  now  found  the  Longitudes  of  all  the  planets. 
The  next  point  is  to  find  their  Declinations.  The  Declination 
of  t£*  for  the  1st  day  is  seen  to  be  22°  N  0',  and  on  the  3rd  the 
same,  so  we  do  not  alter  it.  y  moves  only  1'  in  the  2  days, 
so  we  leave  his  Declination  at  23°  S  35'.  }->  moves  2',  and 
we  also  leave  his  Declination  at  10°  S  10'.  Same  as  regards 
11,  who  moves  but  1';  Declination — 22°  N  58'. 

Observe  that  the  Declinations  of  Q",  9  an(l  $»  are  given 
for  noon  each  day.  (j"  moves  14',  and  for  lOh.  20m.  the 
motion  will  be  6',  making  the  Declination  of  Q"  6°  S  53'. 
9  moves  22',  and,  by  using  the  Table  of  Proportional  Loga- 


38  THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

rill i ins  as  already  shown,  we  find  that  she  moves  9'  in  the 
lOh.  20m.,  so  wo  subtract  9'  from  her  Declination  (as  it  is 
decreasing),  making  it  22°  S  17'.     9   moves  31',  or  13'  in 
lOh.  20m.  ;  so  we  subtract  13'  from  his  Declination  (as  it  is 
also  decreasing),  which  leaves  it  at  19°  S  33'.     On  page  24, 
you    will   find    0    Declin.    which    means    Q's    Declination. 
Between  the  1st  and  2nd  he  moves  9',  or  4'  in  the  lOh.  20m., 
so  we  add  4'  to  his  Declination,  making  it  21'  S  47'. 
The  J)'s  Declination  moves  1°  36'  in  the  24  hours — 
Proportional  Logarithm  of  1°  30  1.1701 

lOh   20m.  .3(500 


1.5421 

The  nearest  is  1.5456  or  41'  which  added  to  her  Declination 
at  noon,  makes  it  19°  N  21'. 

You  need  not  concern  yourself  with  the  Latitudes  of  the 
planets,  or  the  Moon's  Node,  as  they  are  not  necessary  for 
our  present  purpose. 

Having  got  thus  far,  we  will  now  proceed  to  find  out  the 
aspects  of  the  planets  to  each  other.  The  first  planet  wo 
take  is  the  Moon.  She  is  placed  in  19°  FI  19'.  We  find  '#  in 
55  12°  6',  or  22°  47'  from  J) ,  which  is  no  aspect.  Next  comes 
y  in  ]/?  6°  55'.  He  is  17°  36'  from  J)'s  £,  and  consequently 
in  no  aspect  to  her.  The  next  planet  in  order  is  !;>.  We 
find  him  in  X  8°  38'.  From  K  8°  to  n  19'  is  101°,  which 
is  no  aspect,  so  we  pass  it  over.  The  next  is  T/  in  23  9°  19', 
or  20°  from  j) ,  this  is  no  aspect.  The  next  planet  is  tf  in 
=5t  20°  24'.  Now  from  D  19°  to  :£  19°  is  4  signs  or  120° 
or  a  £  aspect,  as  tf  is  within  1°  of  it ;  hence  wo  find  J)  A  d"» 
and  place  it  beneath  the  map  accordingly.  The  Q  is  next 
in  J.  8°  60'.  This  is  £>  to  the  J)  or  0  signs  apart,  so  we  put 
it  down  })  £  0.  9  an(l  9  aro  both  out  of  orbs  of  the  ])'«<?. 
Now,  having  finished  the  }),  we  take  $,  who  is  scon  to  lx? 
quite  near  0  and  9»  and  therefore  in  <j  with  them,  BO  we 
put  it  down  0  tf  $,  ^  rf  ?•  He  is  44°  27'  from  tf,  which 
is  a  sign  and  a  half,  45°  or  /_.  $  and  If.  are  4  signs  and  25° 


THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  39 

32'  apart,  or  145°  32',  which  shows  they  are  iu  ±,  or  144°, 
a  very  weak  aspect,  b  comes  next,  and  we  find  him  in  close 
Q  to  $,  or  3  signs  apart.  $  an(l  U  arc  m  V,  being  32°  4' 
apart,  ty  is  in  ±  with  ^ ,  as  we  found  he  was  with  T/.  You 
will  now  proceed  in  the  same  manner  with  the  other  planets, 
taking  each  in  rotation,  when  you  will  find  the  following 


J>  8  ©•  D  A  rf.  $  rf  9-  S  Z  d".  $  ±  "V-  9  D 
b-  $  v  y.  9  ±  •#.  9  Z.  cf-  9  ±  "V-  9  D  b- 
9  v  y.  9  ± '#•  0  rf  9.  0  cf  9-  0Zd".  0D 

b  *  W-    b  A  W.    ^  §  V. 

We  now  look  at  the  Declinations  to  sec  if  any  of  the  planets 
are  in  Parallel.  We  find  ©  in  nearly  the  same  Declination 
as  9  and  ~',  so  we  write  down  Q  P  9.  O  P  ¥•  Then  D 
P  9  is  almost  exact.  Again  T/'s  Declination  differs  less  than 
1°  from  that  of  y  and  <?,  so  we  say  If.  P  y.  If.  P  <#.  We 
have  now  completed  the  map  entirely,  and  the  next  point 
is  to  judge  it. 


PART    SECOND. 


CHAPTER    I. 

OF  THE   POSITIONS   OF  TUB   PLANETS   AND  THE  SIGNIFICATIONS 
OF  THE   PLANETARY   ASPECTS   IN    A   NATIVITY. 

y    Herschel   or   Uranus. 

y  IN  the  ascendant,  in  fiery  signs,  makes  the  native  rash, 
headstrong,  impetuous,  and  ambitious  ;  fond  of  curiosities  ; 
restless  ;  inclined  to  the  study  of  astrology  ;  aiming  at  great 
and  noble  things,  possessing  original  talents ;  fond  of  dispute 
and  argument.  In  the  earthy  signs,  the  native  is  stubborn, 
headstrong,  and  malicious,  with  large  animal  propensities  ; 
treacherous,  gluttonous,  and  conceited.  In  the  airy  signs — 
subtle,  learned,  penetrating,  and  original  in  ideas  ;  fond  of  all 
sciences,  especially  such  as  relate  to  occult  matters  ;  truthful, 
opinionative,  and  rather  proud.  In  the  watery  signs — given 
to  drink,  and  to  low  company  and  cunning  practices ;  lewd, 
shallow-minded,  stubborn,  and  malicious  ;  void  of  fine  feelings, 
blunt  and  ill-mannered  ;  subtle  and  crafty  for  his  own  ends. 
Generally,  the  nature  of  Herschel  may  be  said  to  be,  when  in 
the  ascendant  at  birth,  wayward,  stubborn,  conceited,  possess- 
ing some  original  talent,  talkative,  proud,  malicious,  and 
jealous.  The  native  is  abrupt  in  manners,  changeable  in 
mind  and  temper,  difficult  to  please,  impulsive,  precipitate, 
and  very  independent.  The  mind  appears  to  be  made  up  of 
contrarieties,  and  he  acts  more  from  impulse  than  from  reason, 
and  is  always  ready  to  quarrel  with  his  best  friend  ;  such  per- 
sons are  often  estranged  from  their  kindred,  and  lead  a 
roaming,  unsettled  life, 


THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  41 

y  in  the  2nd. — Sudden  gains  and  sudden  losses ;  much 
difficulty  and  perplexity  in  money  matters ;  often  subject  to 
heavy  losses,  and  those  generally  unexpected. 

II  in  the  3rd. — Fond  of  science  and  astrology ;  given  to 
occult  studies,  to  the  purchase  of  curious  books ;  it  denotes 
many  changes  of  residence  and  unsettledness  of  purpose. 
Fond  of  travelling  ;  independent  in  manners  ;  trouble  through 
letters  and  writings  and  from  brethren  and  neighbours. 

y  in  the  4th. — Estranged  from  parents ;  trouble  with  any 
money  or  property  the  native  may  expect ;  bothers  and 
perplexities  and  often  poverty  in  old  age,  which  will  depend 
on  the  strength  or  weakness  of  the  planet.  If  strong,  the  old 
age  will  be  much  more  favourable  and  pleasant  than  if  weak. 

y  in  the  5th. — Denies  offspring,  or  they  are  short-lived,  or 
die  in  some  extraordinary  manner ;  much  trouble  from 
children  ;  loss  in  betting  and  speculation  ;  too  much  given  to 
pleasure,  or  gaming.  A  very  unfortunate  position  for  females, 
threatening  disgrace  at  an  early  age,  especially  if  05  or  X  be 
rising. 

y  in  the  6th. — Troubles  from  servants,  labourers,  and 
inferiors,  who  are  not  to  be  trusted ;  the  native  should  also 
be  careful  of  diphtheria  if  y  be  in  8  in  the  6th.  It  often 
produces  strange  sickness  which  baffles  the  skill  of  medical 
men. 

H  in  the  1th. — Very  evil ;  threatens  a  most  unhappy  mar- 
riage, and  often  separation  ;  the  wife  or  husband  will  be  cruel, 
violent,  or  adulterous ;  it  is  nearly,  if  not  quite,  the  worst 
position  possible  for  marital  or  conjugal  happiness  ;  very  bad 
for  law  and  disputes,  also  partnerships,  all  of  which  the  native 
should  studiously  and  strenuously  avoid,  particularly  if  y 
should  be  afflicted  by  aspect  or  position  ;  it  also  shows  opposi- 
tion to  the  native's  success  by  powerful  adversaries.  It  is 
a  bad  position  for  business,  threatening  loss.  The  native 
gets  the  bad  end  of  every  bargain. 

H  in  the  8th. — Wife  or  husband  poor  and  squanders  money  ; 
difficulty  with  any  legacy,  and  probably  loss  of  the  same  ; 


4'2  THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROI/X1V. 

much  annoyance  and  excitement  about  the  goods  of  the  dead. 
If  much  afflicted  it  threatens  suicide. 

1:1  in  the  Qth. — Fond  of  occult  sciences  and  astrology, 
literature  and  arts  and  sciences  generally  ;  given  to  travelling, 
and  curious  in  religious  beliefs  ;  independent,  firm,  headstrong, 
wayward,  and  stubborn  ;  often  suffers  seriously  from  relatives 
by  marriage. 

1 1  in  the  10th. — Credit  and  discredit  alternately  ;  disputes 
with  superiors ;  often  changing  employment  or  profession, 
and  travelling  about ;  scandal,  estranged  from  relatives ; 
independent  and  bigoted. 

y  in  the  1  Ith. — Friends  ready  to  help  and  to  want  help  ; 
acquaintances  not  creditable  to  the  native,  and  the  fewer  he 
encourages  the  better  for  him,  as  ho  is  liable  to  eventual  loss 
and  trouble  through  them. 

y  in  the  12th. — Many  secret  and  private  enemies ;  jealous, 
crafty,  subtle  fellows,  delighting  in  the  native's  downfall. 
Their  description  can  be  seen  by  referring  to  the  sign  1,1 
occupies.  If  afflicted  by  c?  in  this  house,  let  the  native  beware 
of  robbers  and  burglars,  and  personal  hurt  thereby. 

NOTE. — Special  regard  must  be  paid  to  the  strength  or  weakness 
of  this  planet.  A  strong  and  'powerful  planet  helps  the  native, 
but  when  weak  cither  by  sign  or  aspect,  much  trouble  will  occtir. 
For  instance,  Icl  in  ^  or  ^  trill  produce  very  different  effects 
to  y  in  8  or  25  or  even  n|\ 

THE   CONJUNCTIONS    AND   ASPECTS   OF  HERSCHEL. 

1 1  in  tf,  or  fad  aspect  with  |j. — These  are  not  important, 
except  in  the  1st,  2nd,  7th,  or  10th  houses.  In  the  1st  they 
make  the  mind  crafty,  subtle,  malicious,  murderous,  and 
revengeful.  In  the  2nd,  loss  of  wealth  and  perpetual  poverty. 
In  the  3rd,  great  fondness  for  astrology  and  occult  studies, 
and  damage  from  brethren.  In  the  4th,  poverty  and  distress 
at  the  end  of  life,  unless  they  be  in  />,  Yf,  or  ^.  when  the 
end  may  be  expected  to  be  miserly  and  wretched.  In  the 
oth,  death  of  children.  In  the  Gth,  heavy  and  prolonged 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  43 

affliction,  dishonest  servants.  In  the  7th,  lawsuits,  losses, 
bankruptcy,  and  a  most  unfortunate  marriage.  In  the  8th, 
no  gain  or  benefit  by  the  marriage  partner.  In  the  9th, 
fondness  for  the  occult  sciences  and  a  powerful  mind.  Xo 
religious  convictions.  Damage  from  relatives  by  marriage. 
In  the  10th,  great  discredit,  disgrace  and  probably  ruin  and 
imprisonment.  In  the  llth,  ruin  through  friends.  In  the 
12th,  robbery  and  a  host  of  secret  foes,  full  of  envy  and 
jealousy. 

l.i  in  good  aspect  to  Pp. — Not  important  in  any  way.  I  have 
observed  that  the  aspects  of  H  and  Jp,  especially  the  Q  and 
§ ,  conduce  to  clairvoyance  and  lucidity  of  vision. 

I-I  in  tf  or  good  aspect  with  T/. — Benefit  by  legacy,  especially 
if  H  or  T/  be  in  the  2nd  or  8th  house  and  strong ;  and  success 
in  business,  and  fond  of  religious  occupations,  and  offices  of 
distinction. 

y  in  evil  aspect  to  T/. — Loss  by  litigation ;  difficulty  with 
property  or  inheritance,  or  any  property  the  wife  or  husband 
may  possess  ;  it  is  not  good  for  business  or  success,  threatening 
sudden  and  heavy  losses.  Clergymen  frequently  turn 
Ritualists  and  incur  the  displeasure  of  their  superiors.  Specu- 
lation should  be  strictly  avoided. 

y  in  d  or  evil  aspect  with  g". — Very  malicious,  blood- 
thirsty, and  daring  ;  given  to  thieving  and  robbing,  and  liable 
to  imprisonment.  This  must  only  be  considered  when  either 
or  both  are  in  the  ascendant,  3rd,  9th,  10th,  or  12th  houses. 
It  is  very  bad  for  marriage  if  it  happens  in  the  7th  house, 
separation  will  ensue  and  perhaps  injury  or  murder.  It  is 
also  bad  for  lawsuits  and  partnerships,  and  also  unfortunate 
for  the  military  profession. 

H  in  good  aspect  to  cf. — Bold  and  self-confident ;  headstrong, 
and  violent ;  generous,  brave  ;  makes  a  good  soldier  or  surgeon, 
gaining  reputation  thereby.  Consider  this  chiefly  if  tf  or  H 
le  strong  cither  by  house  or  sign. 

H  in  tf  or  P  with  the  Q. — This  happening  in  the  ascendant 
makes  the  native  brave,  bold,  sincere,  and  respected.  In 


44  THE  OUIDE   TO  A8TBOLOGY. 

the  2nd  house,  or  midheaven,  gives  him  great  success  at  certain 
periods,  followed  by  the  most  crushing  misfortune  ;  a  life  full 
of  strange  vicissitudes.  In  a  female  natus  it  is  very  evil, 
and  such  persons  not  unfreqncntly  cohabit  with  men  unmarried, 
or  leave  their  husbands  and  elope.  The  Q  in  any  aspect  to 
y  in  a  feminine  natus  is  evil,  and  especially  so  are  the  Q 
and  §. 

I !  in  evil  aspect  with  the  ©. — Many  bothers,  discredit  and 
loss  through  powerful  enemies,  public  companies,  or  railways. 
His  affairs  go  wrong  nearly  all  through  life  ;  and  losses  and 
disappointments  threaten  him.  If  H  or  0  be  in  the  1st, 
2nd,  or  10th,  so  much  the  worse.  With  a  female  it  is  similar 
to  the  cf. 

M  in  good  aspect  to  the  0. — Benefit  from  strangers  and 
elderly  persons  ;  success  in  any  employment,  more  especially 
public  or  governmental.  Many  of  the  government  officials 
have  the  0  befriended  by  y  at  birth.  With  females  it 
excites  to  strong  attachments,  and,  frequently,  to  a  very  early 
marriage,  or  an  immoral  love  intrigue,  particularly  if  the 
})  is  afflicted  by  Jj  or  0". 

Ij  in  tf  or  P  with  9- — This  happening  in  the  1st,  3rd,  or 
9th,  the  native  is  generally  a  good  musician  or  actor,  excelling 
in  the  fine  arts,  but  very  fond  of  women  and  pleasure.  When 
it  happens  out  of  the  ascendant,  the  native  will  be  harassed 
in  courtship,  and  form  an  illicit  acquaintance  after  marriage. 
In  the  7th  house,  the  wife  may  do  the  same.  In  the  M.  C.  it 
shows  success  by  and  through  powerful  females. 

H  in  eril  aspect  with  9  • — Trouble  in  "  love  "  affairs,  prone 
to  jealousy,  disliked  by  females  generally  ;  the  native  wastes 
his  substance  over  worthless  women.  This  especially  will  be 
the  case  if  either  9  °r  H  be  in  the  1st,  2nd,  5th,  7th,  or  10th 
house. 

II  in  good  aspect  to  9- — Success  with  the  opposite  sex, 
by  whom  he  is  much  beloved  ;  skilful  in  music  and  singing, 
and  very  refined  if  F I  or  9  be  dignified  by  position  or  sign. 

II  I'M  cf  or  P  with   *}. — This  happening  in  the  ascendant 


THE    GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  45 

makes  the  native  a  great  scholar,  excelling  in  art  and  literature, 
gaining  fame  and  reputation  thereby  ;  in  the  3rd  or  9th,  fond 
of  astrology  and  the  occult  studies ;  eccentric  in  behaviour, 
original  in  taste  and  ideas,  yet  at  some  period  in  life  severely 
criticised  by  the  public.  If  this  happens  in  X»  the  native 
will  be  all  talk  and  conceit,  and  fond  of  drink.  The  quality 
of  the  sign  occupied  must  be  considered.  Not  much  good 
can  be  expected  if  they  occupy  <£>  or  K>  as  the  native  will  be 
given  to  drink. 

y  in  evil  aspect  with  $. — This  produces  a  nasty,  bitter, 
sarcastic  turn  of  mind,  very  fond  of  finding  fault  with  others. 
Ill  success  in  publishing  literature,  however  good  it  may  be, 
and  severely  criticised  by  the  press  and  public.  It  is  a  bad 
aspect  for  public  favour. 

y  in  good  aspect  to  $ . — Success  in  literature  ;  a  pregnant, 
studious  mhid  ;  original  in  ideas ;  fond  of  curiosities  and 
things  out  of  the  common  track.  This  especially  will  be  the 
case  if  H  or  ^  be  in  the  1st,  3rd,  or  9th  house,  and  occupy 
a  scientific  sign,  such  as  n,  Tif,  £>:,  or  'ZX. 

y  in  d  or  evil  aspect  with  J) . — This  has  chief  rule  over  the 
native  in  his  married  life,  and  with  respect  to  his  wife,  acting 
the  same  with  him  as  the  Q  and  y  do  in  a  female  natus. 
He  is  not  unfrequently  led  astray  after  marriage,  and  unless 
careful,  separation  follows.  He  is  given  to  travelling,  and 
frequent  changes  of  residence.  In  the  case  of  a  female,  it 
frequently  shows  the  husband  to  be  unfaithful  and  fond  of 
the  society  of  married  women. 

y  in  good  aspect  to  J) . — This  leads  to  illicit  connections 
after  marriage,  but  not  often  to  separation.  If  the  J)  or  y 
be  in  power,  i.e.,  in  1st,  or  10th  or  even  3rd  or  9th,  he  will 
travel  much,  and  never  remain  long  in  one  place. 

NOTE. — The  young  student  cannot  pay  too  much  attention  to 
the  position  of  every  planet,  whether  it  is  strong  or  weak.  A 
strong  planet  rarely  afflicts  the  native,  but  benefits  him,  whether 
the  planet  be  a  malefic  or  benefic.  On  the  contrary  a  malefic 
planet,  weak,  afflicted  or  afflicting  other  planets  by  bad  aspect, 


40  THE   ODIDE   TO    ASTROLOGY. 

will  be  a  constant  source  of  trouble  to  him,  the  exact  nature  of 
which  may  be  learned  from  the  house  the  afflicting  planet  occupies. 
Again,  a  benefic  planet  weak,  or  afflicted  by  bad  aspect,  cannot 
produce  much  good,  for  it  sfiows  tluit  the  native's  friends  or 
lliosc  who  would  help  him,  are  not  in  a  position  to  do  so  ;  even 
their  advice  will  turn  out  unfavourable.  Never  rely  on  a  weak 
or  afflicted  planet  for  any  benefit  in  any  way,  because  it  cannot 
produce  it.  These  remarks  apply  to  all  the  planets,  and  in 
every  case. 


CHAPTER   II. 
Saturn. 

THIS  planet  in  the  ascendant  at  birth  makes  the  native  timid, 
cautious,  mistrustful,  and  fearful ;  reserved,  thoughtful, 
malicious,  and  revengeful ;  covetous  and  envious.  In  the 
fiery  signs  his  nature  is  improved  ;  he  is  more  free,  straight, 
and  honest  in  his  actions,  but  rash  and  iinjietuous,  fond  of 
argument  and  quarrelling.  In  the  earthy  signs,  especially 
b ,  the  native  is  sottish,  dull,  heavy,  and  malicious ;  in  nf 
very  inquisitive,  suspicious  and  fretful ;  in  Vf,  argumentative, 
crafty,  selfish,  hard-working,  and  miserly.  In  the  airy 
signs,  thoughtful,  studious,  contemplative,  close  over  money 
matters  and  his  own  affairs,  sincere  and  devout  in  religion, 
so  far  as  it  concerns  "  self."  II  and  zz  arc  better  signs  than 
£:,  for  in  the  latter  he  is  simply  a  nuisance  to  every  one  on 
account  of  his  opinionative,  selfish,  miserly,  and  proud  ways. 
In  5c  or  X  especially,  he  is  dull,  sottish,  and  dejected,  depraved 
and  obscene  ;  sometimes  an  enthusiast  in  religion  ;  in  11\  very 
crafty  and  malicious  and  not  to  be  trusted.  Generally  the 
native  of  Saturn  is  shy,  and  has  aversion  to  society ;  con- 
templative, stubborn  and  morose ;  deceitful,  crafty,  and 
subtle  for  his  own  ends  ;  miserly,  fond  of  his  habitation  ; 
constant,  curious  in  religious  beliefs,  fanciful  and  bigoted, 
frequently  an  impediment  in  the  speech  (except  I?  be  in  the 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  47 

airy  signs),  careful  of  his  affairs  and  family,  austere  and 
averse  to  changes.  Much,  however,  will  depend  on  how 
this  planet  is  aspectcd,  which  will  be  explained  presently. 

\-)  in  the  2nd. — Much  trouble  and  worry  in  money  matters  ; 
loss  of  money  ;  ill  success  in  trade  or  business ;  the  native 
lias  usually  to  work  very  hard  for  his  money,  even  when  !;>  is 
essentially  fortified  ;  when  out  of  dignities,  distress  and  poverty 
usually  dog  the  native's  footsteps,  more  or  less,  through  life. 
The  sign  occupied,  and  the  aspects  he  receives,  must  not  be 
lost  sight  of. 

\-)  in  the  '3rd. — Danger  and  loss  in  travelling ;  journeys 
unpleasant ;  quarrels  with  or  losses  through,  neighbours  or 
brethren  ;  contemplative  ;  fond  of  astrology  and  uncommon 
subjects  and  occult  sciences  ;  serious  and  thoughtful,  stead- 
fast and  persevering. 

J?  in  the  4th. — Illness  or  early  death  of  the  father ;  and 
a  miserable  and  poverty-stricken  end  to  the  existence ;  if  J? 
be  strong,  as  in  Or,  Vy,  or  y%  judge  the  contrary,  and  that  the 
native  will  acquire  land  or  property  and  have  a  peaceful  end 
to  his  existence ;  he  will  be  a  dear  lover  of  gold,  even  to  the 
grave. 

V)  in  the  5th. — In  JI,  fl£,  =ST,  or  Vf  denies  offspring  ;  in  other 
signs,  destroys  them,  or  causes  them  to  be  a  continual  source 
of  trouble  and  unhappiness  to  their  parents,  drunkards, 
reaching  an  untimely  grave  ;  bad  success  in  gaming  or  specu- 
lation, and  sports  of  any  kind,  and  injury  thereby. 

IT  in  the  G'/£. — This  is  an  unfortunate  position,  as  unless  1^ 
be  well  aspcdcd,  it  causes  sad  and  heavy  sicknesses.  In  the 
fixed  signs,  danger  of  heart  disease,  gravel  or  stone,  diphtheria 
and  throat  affections,  bronchitis ;  in  the  common  signs, 
consumption,  asthma,  cancer,  bad  legs,  bowel  and  kidney 
conplaimts  ;  in  the  cardinal  signs,  pains  in  the  chest  and  weak 
stomach,  rheumatism,  and  in  =a-,  great  derangement  of  the 
liver  ;  bad  servants  and  losses  through  them  are  also  denoted. 

Ij  in  the  1th. — Cold,  reserved,  melancholy,  morose,  wife  or 
husband,  and  if  in  a  common  sign,  death  of  the  partner, 


48  THE  GUIDE  TO   ASTROLOGY. 

ami  n  second  or  even  third  marriage  ;  if  !;>  be  essentially 
strong,  money  or  property  in  marriage,  and  marriage  with 
a  widow  or  a  widower,  as  the  case  may  be.  It  is  an  unfortu- 
nate position  for  chastity.  It  is  seldom  the  marriage  turns 
out  happy.  It  also  shows  many  deceitful,  open  enemies. 
This  position  is  also  very  bad  for  partnerships,  lawsuits, 
and  in  dealing  with  others. 

}-)  in  the  8th. — No  portion  with  the  marriage  partner  except 
]•)  be  strong ;  trouble  and  annoyance  with  any  legacy  or  pro- 
perty the  native  may  expect. 

]~>  in  the  Sth. — Firm  and  steadfast  in  religion  ;  headstrong, 
thoughtful,  reserved,  and  contemplative  ;  studious  ;  fond  of 
astrology,  occultism,  and  things  out  of  the  common  track, 
magic.  &c.,  danger  in  travelling  by  water  ;  loss  through  rela- 
tions by  marriage.  The  native  should  avoid  foreign  lauds 
unless  fj  be  very  strong  by  position  or  aspect. 

]-?  in  the  10th. — Success  in  life,  with  an  ultimate  fall  to 
disgrace  and  trouble  ;  frequent  discredit  in  business  ;  trouble 
to  the  mother  and  loss  of  substance. 

fp  in  the  llth. — False,  deceitful  friends,  and  heavy  losses 
through  them,  probably  ruin  ;  the  native  who  has  this  position 
should  never  lend  money,  stand  security,  or  become  surety 
for  any  one  ;  this  position  also  threatens  trouble  to,  or  from, 
offspring. 

b  in  the  l'2th. — Private  and  deceitful  enemies,  who  try  to 
secretly  injure  the  native,  and  often  succeed  ;  liability  to 
false  accusations  or  even  imprisonment ;  danger  of  secret 
poison. 

NOTE. — Special  attention  must  be  paid  to  the  strength  or 
otherwise  of  this  planet.  When  strong,  its  good  effects  will  be 
augmented,  but  if  weak,  the  evil  effects  will  be  much  increased. 

THE   CONJUNCTIONS   AND   ASPECTS    OF  SATURN. 

b  in  d'  ft  or  good  aspect  with  I/. — Wealth  or  property  by^ 
egacy,  or  by  marriage  if  T/  be  lord  of  the  7th  house ;  in  the 


THE   GUlflE   TO   ASTROLOGY*  49 

2nd,  shows  gain  and  success  in  business ;  in  the  9th,  an 
excellent  divine  ;  in  the  10th,  credit  and  esteem  and  high 
honour.  These  aspects  generally  lead  to  the  acquisition  of 
wealth,  as  they  render  the  native  careful;  he  will  also  hold 
important  offices. 

f?  afflicted  by  T/. — Loss  of  money  or  property  by  law,  or 
through  trustees  ;  the  native  often  enters  speculation,  and 
loses  heavy  sums  of  money ;  squanders  his  estate  ;  and  if 
\-)  or  y.  be  lord  of  7th,  the  native  is  generally  anxious 
to  marry  a  moneyed  partner,  but  rarely  succeeds  ;  enthusiastic 
in  religion  ;  often  unfortunate  in  business.  It  threatens  loss 
of  offspring ;  the  native  rarely  becomes  rich. 

IT?  in  tf  or  evil  aspect  to  0". — A  nasty,  bitter  temper  ; 
malicious  and  murderous,  liable  to  imprisonment;  dishonest 
and  crafty  ;  consider  this  principally  when  in  the  1st,  3rd, 
9th,  or  10th.  The  native  is  liable  to  hurts  and  injuries,  or 
broken  bones  ;  falls,  especially  if  either  planet  be  oriental. 
The  signs  these  planets  occupy  will  show  the  part,  or  organ 
of  the  body  likely  to  suffer. 

(7  in  good  aspect  to  tf. — Courage  and  boldness  ;  makes  an 
excellent  soldier  or  butcher,  with  strong  nerves  and  plenty 
of  confidence  ;  steady  and  persevering.  Consider  this  princi- 
pally when  in  the  aforesaid  houses. 

\-)  in  ($  or  evil  aspect  ivith  the  Q. — This  has  great  effect  on 
the  health,  especially  if  0  or  I?  be  occidental ;  in  the  common 
signs,  the  native  is  liable  to  colds  and  consumption,  and  will 
have  a  weak  chest  and  lungs  ;  in  25  or  Vf  danger  of  asthma  ; 
in  the  fixed  signs,  falls  and  accidents,  danger  of  drowning  or 
suffocation,  and  diseases  of  the  heart  and  urinary  organs  ; 
in  the  cardinal  signs,  discredit  and  losses  in  business,  but 
generally  it  has  more  effect  on  the  health.  With  females,  it 
either  denies  marriage  or  delays  it  very  much,  according  to 
the  nature  of  the  sign  in  which  the  aspect  occurs  ;  in  <£:,  HI, 
or  K,  it  denotes  marriage  to  a  lazy,  sottish  person,  and  misery 
and  poverty  therefrom  ;  it  also  shows  the  death  of  the  husband, 
and  a  second  or  even  third  marriage,  and  generally  to  elderly 

E 


50  THE  GUIDE   TO  ASTRO  LOU  V. 

jxTsons  or  widowers.  These  marriages  are  rarely  happy  ones, 
the  husband  being  very  exacting,  domineering,  cruel,  and 
selfish,  taking  delight  in  ill-using  others. 

\}  in,  yood  at  peel  with  the  ©. — Steady,  ]x«rsevcring,  and 
generally  sober  ;  guin  and  success  in  life  and  by  great  and 
powerful  persons,  and  the  holding  of  lucrative  or  governmental 
offices.  With  females  it  leads  to  marriage  late  in  life,  or  with 
elderly  persons,  and  if  {7  be  in  ^r,  Vy,  or  ££,  the  husband  will 
possess  money,  but  be  very  mean  over  it,  and  the  marriage 
does  not  prove  a  happy  one. 

fj  -in  (j  or  bad  u>spcrt  to  9- — Disappointment  in  courtship 
or  marriage ;  much  trouble  and  grief  through  females,  a 
depraved  taste  ;  addicted  to  secret  and  unnatural  practices  ; 
often  filthy  in  talk  and  behaviour  ;  deceitful  and  cunning  ; 
hypocritical,  especially  in  religion.  This  applies  more  to 
males  than  females.  It  often  leads  to  drink  or  intemperance. 

r?  in  yood  aspect  to  y. — Success  in  courtship;  steady; 
attached  to  wife  and  family ;  acute  in  feelings,  soon  moved 
to  pity  and  tears  ;  persevering  and  careful.  It  is  very  good 
in  a  feminine  nativity,  as  it  shows  care,  prudence,  chastity, 
and  sincerity. 

F?  in  tf  or  aljlictiiiy  ty . — Deep  in  thought;  bad  temper; 
bitter,  malicious,  and  spiteful ;  frequently  some  impediment 
in  the  speech  ;  often  dishonest,  deceitful  and  crafty,  not  to 
be  trusted  ;  addicted  to  drink  ;  in  the  3rd  or  «Jth,  it  gives 
great  inclination  for  science  and  occult  learning,  but  attended 
with  but  little  success ;  enthusiastic  and  hypocritical  in 
religion  ;  a  false  friend  and  malicious  enemy. 

1}  in  yood  a-yjwct  to  ty. — Steadiness  in  character  and 
behaviour ;  very  careful  of  their  own  afYairs  and  health  ; 
fond  of  science,  and  generally  possessing  a  good  judgment ; 
jHM-scvering,  thoughtful,  and  contemplative.  -Much,  however, 
de)»ends  on  the  houses  and  signs  occupied  ;  the  iiin/  signs 
being  especially  good,  and  the  watery  signs  but  very  little  so. 
Again  if  in  the  1st,  3rd,  or  9th,  the  effects  are  very  market!, 
but  in  the  other  houses  much  less  so. 


THE    GUIDK    TO    ASTKOLOGY.  51 

]->  in  tf  or  afflicting  the  D . — Loss  of  substance  and  much 
trouble  in  money  matters  all  through  life  ;  the  native  squanders 
his  money  and  is  improvident,  fretful,  and  suspicious  ;  care- 
less and  allows  himself  to  be  robbed  chiefly  by  false  friends  ; 
he  fails  in  business  and  has  a  hard  struggle  through  life  ;  he 
generally  gets  a  useless  wife,  one  without  thought,  and  if 
the  planets  are  in  common  signs,  he  will  marry  more  than  once. 
When  the  planets  are  occidental  it  leads  to  temporary  de- 
rangements of  the  health;  falls  and  accidents  if  oriental. 
I  consider  the  affliction  of  the  })  by  V),  as  the  most  unfortunate 
influence  that  can  be  for  success,  prosperity  or  happiness  in 
life,  With  females  it  is  very  evil,  generally  resulting  in  dis- 
grace, fondness  for  drink,  and  depravity  ;  it  also  destroys  the 
health,  especially  if  at  the  same  time  $  be  afflicted. 

}-.  in  (jood  aspect  to  tkc  j) . — Very  patient  and  persevering, 
leading  to  success  and  the  acquisition  of  wealth ;  in  a  female 
natus,  good  health,  industrious  and  prudent.  , 

NOTE. — The  remarks  at  the  end  of  ^1  on  page  45  will  also 
apply  here  and  must  not  be  overlooked 


CHAPTER     III. 
Jupiter 

I/  in  the  ascendant  in  the  fiery  signs  makes  the  native 
generous,  bold,  good-natured,  successful  in  business,  a  sincere 
friend  and  a  generous  enemy  ;  rather  proud  ;  delighting  in 
exercise  and  recreation  ;  firm,  faithful,  and  constant.  In  the 
airtln/  signs,  more  secret  and  selfish,  proud,  conceited,  shallow- 
minded,  ostentatious,  bigoted.  In  the  airy  signs,  just, 
generous,  even  in  temper,  faithful,  ready  to  lend  and  help  any 
one,  especially  if  in  ^=  or  ^.  In  the  watery  signs,  fond  of 
sport,  drink,  and  merry-making  ;  careless  in  money  matters, 
but  generally  fortunate.  55  and  X  are  better  than  H\,  the 
latter  .sign  inclines  to  "  self."  The  general  character  of  T/  is 

E  2 


M  THE   i.i  11. 1.   TO  ASTROLOGY. 

to  make  men  free,  brave,  and  generous  ;  faithful  and  prudent ; 
just,  honest  and  religious  ;  aiming  at  distinction  and  honour  ; 
liberal  subscribers  to  public  charities ;  hating  mean  and 
sordid  actions. 

[  in  the  '2nd. — Wealth  and  a  bountiful  share  of  prosperity 
during  life  if  he  be  essentially  dignified  ;  the  most  successful 
men  living  have  T/  in  the  2nd  or  10th.  The  success  or  other- 
wise will  dc]H>nd  upon  the  strength  and  aspects  which  the 
planet  receives. 

11  in  the  3rd. — Short,  pleasant  journeys  ;  help  from  neigh- 
bours and  brethren.  The  mind  honourably  inclined. 

11  in  the  4th. — Success  in  life,  and  happiness  in  old  age,  if 
If.  be  strong  and  moderately  well  fortified  ;  it  also  shows  the 
father  to  be  in  a  good  position.  If  If.  be  weak  and  out  of 
dignities,  the  native  will  die  poor. 

If.  in  the  5th. — Dutiful  and  obedient  children,  who  will  be 
a  help  and  comfort  to  the  native,  and  who  will  do  well  in  the 
world  and  become  great  men.  If  1J.  be  strong,  gain  by 
betting,  racing  and  speculation. 

11  in  the  Gth. — Good  health  generally,  unless  11  be  much 
afflicted  by  aspect  or  position  ;  in  II  or  Ifl>  it  deranges  the 
chest  -and  bowels  ;  it  also  denotes  good,  faithful  servants 

T/  in  the  1th. — Success  and  happiness  in  marriage  ;  good 
for  lawsuits  and  partnerships,  and  in  dealing  with  others. 
If  I/  be  in  HI?  expect  but  little,  for  he  seems  to  be  sadly  de- 
bilitated in  this  sign,  and  powerless  to  effect  any  good. 

11  in  the  Hth. — Money  by  marriage,  and  also  by  will  or 
legacy,  especially  if  1£  be  strong  and  in  favourable  aspect 
to  Saturn. 

11  in  the  9th. — A  religious  turn  of  mind,  sincere  and  moral ; 
prudent  and  much  respected ;  benefit  from  relatives  by 
marriage,  and  success  in  long  journeys  or  foreign  lands. 

1J.  in  the  \0tlt. — This  ensures  success  in  life,  and  much 
honour  and  esteem  among  men.  T/  in  this  house  or  in  the 
2nd,  are  the  best  "  positions  "  that  can  be  for  success  and 
prosperity,  such  persons  generally  hold  prominent  official 


THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  53 

appointments.  The  success  can  best  be  judged  by  the 
strength  and  aspects  which  11  receives. 

1J.  in  the  llth. — Good,  faithful  friends,  ready  to  help  the 
ative,  and  he  profits  much  through  their  instrumentality 
and  advice  particularly  if  11  be  strong.  It  is  also  favourable 
for  offspring  and  family  matters. 

11  in  the  12th. — Few  private  enemies,  and  those  not  likely 
to  do  the  native  any  harm.  If  anything  this  position  tends 
to  success  in  life. 


THE   CONJUNCTIONS   AND   ASPECTS   OF  JUPITER. 

If.  in  tf  or  evil  aspect  with  Q". — This  leads  to  prodigality  ; 
generous  to  excess ;  headstrong ;  foolish  with  money ;  in- 
discreet, often  in  trouble  ;  these  aspects  often  cause  the  native 
to  lose  heavy  sums  of  money,  either  by  betting,  speculation, 
or  false  friends.  He  may  also  suffer  damage  by  fire  or  thieves. 
It  tends  to  destroy  the  issue  of  the  native. 

11  in  good  aspect  with  tf. — Brave,  free,  and  generous  ; 
always  ready  to  help  another.  Note  the  aspects  of  Q*  to  T/ 
are  never  good  for  the  acquisition  of  wealth  ;  the  evil  aspects 
shows  losses  beyond  the  native's  control,  and  the  good  ones, 
that  he  will  squander  it  away  himself. 

11  in  cf ,  P  or  good  aspect  to  the  0. — Success,  and  the  acquisi- 
tion of  money  and  fame  ;  powerful  friends,  and  assistance 
from  them,  good  health,  and  usually  long  life.  The  tf  of 
O  and  11  predisposes  somewhat  to  apoplexy,  and  this  disease 
not  unfrequently  terminates  the  native's  existence.  In  a 
female's  nativity,  these  aspects  show  a.n  honourable  and 
happy  marriage,  more  especially  if  If.  be  strong,  essentially 
and  the  Q  free  from  the  aspects  of  the  malefics. 

11  afflicted  by  the  Q. — Loss  of  fortune,  and  much  ill  luck 
during  life  ;  let  the  native  beware  of  lending  money  or  be- 
coming surety.  He  not  unfrequently  becomes  involved  in 
law,  which  goes  against  him,  and  results  in  heavy  loss  of 
money,  or  any  property  he  may  have  ;  squanders  his  wealth 


54  THE    GUIDE    TO    AKTROI/XiY. 

and  becomes  poor  at  tin*  close  of  life.  With  a  female,  it 
denotes  that  she  will  get  a  good  but  unfortunate  husband. 

"}J.  in  ej  or  good  aspect  with  9- — This  is  not  of  much  im- 
portance ;  rather  favourable  for  success ;  the  native  will  be 
fond  of  dress  and  ornament  and  s|)cnd  much  of  his  money 
thereon  ;  with  females  it  inclines  to  prudence  and  chastity. 
It  inclines  the  dis|>osition  to  be  kind  and  generous. 

11  afflicting  9- — He  squanders  his  money  over  dress, 
ornament,  and  females,  and  often  lives  beyond  his  means  ; 
is  high  and  proud  in  his  ways.  The  same  refers  to  a  feminine 
nativity.  Such  persons  always  desire  the  best  of  everything, 
whether  they  can  afford  it  or  not. 

I/  in  tf  or  good  aspect  to  $ . — (Jood  and  sound  judgment ; 
success  in  literature,  by  which  he  makes  money  ;  he  is  free, 
generous,  yet  steadfast  and  sober  in  his  ways  ;  it  also  inclines 
to  general  success  in  life,  and  helps  the  native  out  of  trouble. 

"}f.' afflicting  t} . — Not  good  in  judgment,  but  sees  things  in 
the  wrong  light ;  inclined  to  wrangling  and  to  be  irreligious  ; 
of  no  steadfast  ways  ;  persons  so  born  should  be  extremely 
careful  of  their  conduct,  as  it  often  leads  them  to  law,  and 
sometimes  to  something  worse,  for  which  they  get  punished. 

1J.  in  cj  or  good  aspect  to  the  ]) . — This  is  very  good,  being 
one  of  the  best  aspects  that  can  occur  for  success  and  prosperity 
in  life,  and  the  acquisition  of  wealth  ;  it  also  denotes  success 
in  marriage,  and  a  good  wife  ;  in  a  female  nativity,  good  health, 
prosperity,  and  prudent  conduct. 

T/  afflicting  the  }). — The  native  squanders  his  wealth,  and 
brings  himself  to  ruin  or  poverty  ;  is  very  unfortunate,  and 
should  never  s|>eculate,  or  engage  in  risky  adventures  ;  these 
aspects  not  unfrequently  derange  the  liver  and  stomach. 

NOTE. — The  remarks  at  the  end  of  y  on  payc  45  also  apply 
lure.  Everything  depends  on  the  strength  or  weakness  of  a 
planet,  and  how  it  is  aspcctcd. 


THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  55 

CHAPTER    IV. 
Mars. 

THIS  planet  in  the  ascendant  in  fiery  signs  makes  the  native 
hold,  determined,  persevering,  headstrong,  generous,  angry, 
and  haughty  ;  in  the  earthy  signs,  covetous,,  selfish,  malicious, 
careful,  fond  of  women,  quarrelsome,  and  sometimes  fond  of 
drink  ;  in  the  airy  signs,  fond  of  travelling,  changes,  persever- 
ing, but  not  fortunate  ;  in  the  watery  signs,  a  good  sailor,  but 
much  given  to  drink  and  women,  especially  in  1S  or  X  ;  in 
HI  he  makes  an  excellent  chemist  or  doctor  Generally  the 
nature  of  cf"  is  daring,  ungovernable,  independent,  rash, 
strong,  stubborn,  aspiring,  and  ambitious  ;  the  native  iisually 
has  a  mole  or  scar  on  the  face. 

(f  in  the  2nd. — Lavish  and  careless  in  expenses,  improvi- 
dent ;  yet  determined  in  the  acquisition  of  wealth,  but  liable 
to  sudden  and  heavy  losses  ;  the  native  rushes  into  specula- 
tions and  enterprises  without  thought  or  reason  ;  he  is  very 
generous. 

CJ"  in  the  3rd.- — Danger  in  travelling  by  rail ;  dispxites  and 
losses  through  neighbours  and  brethren  ;  stubborn  and  head- 
trong  in  disposition  ;  fond  of  travel  or  changes. 

0"  in  the  4th. — Heavy  troubles  in  old  age,  unless  (f  be  strong, 
essentially  ;  poverty  and  distress  ;  it  also  threatens  the  father. 
This  is  a  bad  position  in  any  nativity. 

cf  in  the  5th. — Unruly  and  troublesome  offspring,  som  of 
whom  die  early  and  suddenly  ;  fondness  for  pleasure,  women 
and  drink  ;  loss  by  gambling,  betting,  or  speculation  ;  in  a 
female's  natus  it  threatens  disgrace. 

CJ*  in  the  6th. — In  fixed  signs,  sore  throat,  stone  and  gravel, 
heart  disease  and  quinscy  ;  in  the  common  signs,  danger  of 
consumption,  weak  chest  and  lungs  ;  in  the  cardinal  signs, 
danger  of  burns,  scalds,  diseases  of  the  kidneys,  rheumatics, 
fevers,  etc.  It  also  denotes  bad  servants,  who  will  rob  and 
abuse  the  native. 


56  THE   GUIDE   TO    ASTROIAXJY. 

g"  in  the  1th. — An  unfortunate  marriage,  and  probably 
separation  ;  constant  quarrels  ;  many  persistent  enemies  in 
business  ;  loss  by  law  ;  ill-success  in  partnerships  ;  the  native 
is  very  prone  to  enter  into  quarrels  ami  disputes,  injuring 
himself  thereby  ;  with  a  female  the  effects  are  similar,  and 
it  also  threatens  her  chastity. 

O*  I'M  tin'  8///. — Xo  money  by  marriage  ;  extravagance  on 
the  part  of  husband  or  wife. 

CJ"  I'M  the  Oth. — Headstrong,  stubborn,  and  jealous  ;  given 
to  falsehood  ;  of  no  religious  principle  ;  danger  in  travelling 
long  distances,  especially  if  o"  be  in  a  watery  sign.  Ix>sses 
by  relatives  through  marriage. 

0"  in  the  10th. — Bold  and  conceited,  bigoted  ;  quick  in 
judgment  and  very  passionate  ;  if  Q"  be  near  the  cwp  of  10th, 
liable  to  slander  and  discredit  (especially  if  a  female),  whether 
deserved  or  no. 

0"  in  the  \\th. — Evil  and  malicious  "  friends  "  injuring  the 
native,  and  by  whom  he  loses  much  money  ;  is  imposed  upon 
by  them  and  misled  by  their  advice. 

0*  in  the  12th. — Secret  enemies,  danger  of  imprisonment, 
of  injury  by  large  beasts,  by  burglars  or  robbers,  especially  if 
0"  be  afflicted  by  f^  or  II. 

THE   CONJUNCTIONS   AND   ASPECTS   OF  MARS. 

0"  d>  or  afflicting  the  Q. — The  native  is  bold,  intrepid,  rash 
and  firm,  headstrong,  determined,  quick  in  anger  ;  rushing 
headlong  into  any  speculation,  fearless  of  danger  ;  generous 
and  free  ;  in  the  uiitcry  signs,  it  inclines  to  drink.  It  gives 
a  liability  to  feverish  complaints,  and  a  sudden  or  violent 
death  ;  the  native  is  usually  strong  and  healthy.  The  student 
will  remember  that  the  tf  and  P  are  not  so  unfortunate  as 
the  evil  aspects.  With  females  it  acts  unfavourably,  denoting 
an  unhappy  marriage  ;  the  husband  will  possess  a  very  violent 
temper,  and  a  fondness  for  drink  ;  very  austere,  exacting  and 
difficult  to  please  ;  should  \->  or  ]{  aspect  the  0  also,  the  hus- 
band is  likely  to  die  suddenly,  or  get  killed  by  accident. 


THE   GUIDE   TO    ASTROLOGY.  57 

CJ"  in  good  aspect  to  the  Q. — The  native  is  generous,  free, 
and  bold  ;  of  great  bodily  strength,  a  good  constitution  and 
usually  long  life  ;  he  is  much  respected  by  superiors  and  meets 
rapid  advancement ;  especially  in  the  army  or  in  government 
service.  This  is  especially  the  case  if  Q*  be  strong  in  the 
nativity.  With  a  female  it  denotes  marriage  to  a  noble 
and  high-minded  person,  and  probably  one  who  is  in  govern- 
ment employ. 

0"  tf,  or  afflicting  9- — Much  given  to  the  society  and 
pleasure  of  females  ;  lewd  and  wanton  in  desires  ;  void  of 
self-respect ;  generous  and  careless  over  money ;  given  to 
drink  and  pleasure  seeking  to  the  injury  of  his  health  ;  regard- 
less of  money  or  expenses.  With  females  it  inclines  to  low 
company,  and  many  regrettable  actions. 

O*  in  good  aspect  to  9- — Very  fond  of  the  opposite  sex,  and 
much  respected  by  them  ;  fond  of  company  and  society  of  all 
kinds  ;  free  and  careless.  With  females  it  acts  similar  to  the 
bad  aspects. 

in  tf  or  afflicting  $ . — Quick,  active  wit ;  fond  of  wrang- 
ling and  disputing ;  addicted  to  falsehood  and  pilfering, 
forgery  and  other  ruinous  habits ;  sarcastic ;  possessing  a  good 
judgment,  aspiring  to  be  foremost  whether  in  good  or  evil ; 
generally  very  clever  at  any  handicraft ;  a  good  workman, 
but  often  fond  of  drink. 

O*  in  good  aspect  to  ty . — Good  arithmetician,  very  accurate  ; 
of  good  mental  qualities,  quick  and  piercing  intellect,  easily 
angered  ;  very  clever  at  engineering  or  chemistry,  and  in  any 
occupation  requiring  dexterity  of  hand  and  sharpness  of  wit ; 
the  native  is  active,  hating  laziness,  and  continually  scheming 
or  making  something. 

0*  in  d  or  afflicting  tke  J) . — Of  a  turbulent,  headstrong 
mind  ;  indiscreet  and  rash,  plunging  headlong  into  good  or 
evil ;  fond  of  the  opposite  sex,  by  whom  he  suffers  in  health 
and  pocket ;  persevering,  of  a  quick  wit,  given  to  falsehood  ; 
brave  and  generous.  To  a  male  it  denotes  an  unhappy 
marriage,  much  quarrelling,  and  generally  to  a  drunken, 


f>8  TIIK    tiVIDE    TO    ASTKOI.OCY. 

worthless  woman.  With  a  feme.)*.'  it  threatens  injury  to  the 
health,  sickness  and  vexation,  ami  often  leads  them  into 
disgrace. 

(f  in  ijixxt  nxfHCl  to  tlir  J). — Courageous,  brave,  daring  and 
resolute  ;  successful  in  dealing  with  others  ;  it  trnd-i  to  success 
in  wealth  ;  very  linn  ;  hut  sometimes  indulging  in  fits  of 
sensuality  and  drink.  With  a  female  it  shows  good  health 
and  a  strong  constitution,  much  activity  of  body  and  mind, 
a  real  worker. 

NOTE. — See  the  remnrl-s  at  the  end  of  H  on  jmgc  15  and 
ap]>fi/  them  here. 


CHAPTER    V. 
The   Sun. 

OF  all  the  planets  the  0  is  the  most  powerful,  and  without 
his  presence  this  world  would  speedily  become  a  corpse,  a 
vast  blank,  void  of  life.  When  in  the  ascendant  at  birth,  it 
makes  the  native  firm,  generous,  lofty,  proud,  and  magnani- 
mous, scorning  mean  and  sordid  actions,  imperious,  confident, 
just  and  honest.  In  the  fieri/  signs  very  ambitious,  quick  in 
anger,  and  aspiring  to  rule  over  all  with  whom  he  comes  in 
contact ;  grave,  and  of  few  words,  and  shaking  to  the  purpose; 
in  the  cartJn/  signs,  the  native  is  proud  and  haughty  to  excess, 
opinionative,  and  headstrong  ;  in  the  airy  signs,  just,  noble, 
aspiring,  and  much  given  to  science  and  arts  ;  in  the  u-atiry 
signs,  rather  lewd  and  fond  of  the  opposite  sex,  even  to  his 
own  prejudice  ;  in  IT\  lie  makes  an  excellent  chemist  or  doctor, 
gaining  fame  and  credit  thereby.  The  position  of  the  0  in 
the  ascendant  is  fortunate  for  the  prosperity  of  the  native. 

0  in  the  '2nd. — Very  generous  and  free  with  money,  spending 
it  fast  and  lavishly  ;  is  careless  over  expenses,  and  squanders 
his  estate.  A  A  or  5JC  of  11  makes  a  great  alteration,  and 
leads  to  wealth  and  fortune,  particularly  if  T/  be  strong. 


THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  59 

O  in  the  3rd. — Fond  of  science  and  the  line  arts  ;  firm  and 
steadfast  in  opinion,  and  removing  the  residence  but  seldom. 
In  the  water >i  signs,  many  short  journeys  by  water,  and  in 
the  moueablc  signs,  much  travelling  by  railway. 

O  '"  '/"'  -Mlt- — A  good  position,  especially  if  the  Q  be 
strong,  or  well  aspected,  denoting  success  and  fortune  at  the 
close  of  life.  It  also  benefits  the  father. 

0  ///  tin-  ~>t/i. — Denies  offspring,  except  the  Q  be  in  the 
watery  signs,  they  are  then  likely  to  be  weak  and  sickly,  and 
will  probably  die,  unless  the  J) ,  T/l  or  9  be  there  also,  or 
aspect  the  0.  The  native  delights  in  pleasure,  and  female 
company,  and  spends  his  money  freely. 

0  in  the  6th. — Xot  a  good  position  for  health,  and  if  afflicted 
shows  many  long  sicknesses,  and  if  0  be  in  the  fixed  signs, 
quinsy,  diphtheria,  bronchitis,  asthma,  gravel  or  stone,  heart 
disease,  weak  back  and  loins  ;  in  the  common  signs,  danger  of 
consumption  (especially  if  in  TlJ>  or  K)»  and  obstructions  in 
the  breathing  organs.  In  the  moveable  signs,  liver  complaints, 
nervousness,  weak  chest  and  stomach,  giddiness,  and  rheu- 
matism ;  probably  also  some  permanent  hurt  or  injury. 

0  in  the  1th. — The  husband  or  wife  will  be  proud,  austere, 
yet  sincere  and  honourable  ;  lofty  and  high  in  manners,  yet 
generous  and  well  disposed ;  also  good  for  business  and 
partnership,  but  much  will  depend  on  how  the  0  is  aspected, 
and  in  what  sign  he  is  placed. 

Q  in  the  Sth. — Extravagance  on  the  part  of  husband  or 
wife  and  if  afflicted  by  a  tf ,  C,  or  §  of  cj* ,  danger  of  a  violent 
or  sudden  death. 

0  in  the  9</i. — Honourable,  firm  and  steadfast;  just  and 
faithful  in  his  dealings  with  others ;  makes  an  excellent 
divine  ;  if  in  a  walcry  sign,  it  shows  long  sea  voyages,  and 
often  success  in  foreign  lands. 

0  in  the  10th. — Honour  and  preferment;  success  in  life, 
and  the  acquisition  of  riches ;  fortunate,  much  esteemed,  and 
frequently  elected  to  a  post  of  honour. 

0  in  the  1  It//. — Firm  and  faithful  friends,  and  if  0  be  strong, 


fiO  THE   OU1DE   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

they  arc  willing  and  able  to  help  the  native,  and  will  do  so ; 
but  if  weak  and  afflicted  they  will  be  a  burden  instead  of 
a  help. 

in  the  l"2th. — Rather  unimportant,  but  as  the  ©  is  above 
'the  earth  it  denotes  success  in  life  ;  if  the  0  be  much  afflicted 
in  this  house,  it  shows  imprisonment. 

THE   CONJUNCTIONS   AND   ASPECTS   OF  THE  SUN. 

O  in  ($  or  any  aspect  tvith  9- — Fond  of  company  and 
pleasure,  and  female  society  ;  success  in  dealing  with  clothing, 
jewellery  or  apparel ;  fond  of  music,  singing,  dancing,  and  all 
elegant  arts  and  sciences.  If  in  25  or  H\  given  to  drink  and 
low  company,  and  may  become  sottish.  If  the  aspect  happens 
in  the  2nd,  5th,  or  7th,  he  will  spend  much  money  on  females 
and  pleasure,  wasting  his  time  and  fortune  ;  in  the  10th,  it 
leads  to  rapid  promotion,  and  in  the  4th,  success  in  business. 
As  9  is  never  more  than  48°  from  the  ©,  she  can  only  form 
the  tf,  P,  V  and  /_  with  that  luminary. 

O  in  d  or  P  with  $ . — This  makes  an  ambitious  and  good 
business  man  ;  learning  with,facility  and  ease  ;  studious,  and 
comprehensive  ;  quick  at  figures ;  consider  the  foregoing 
chiefly  when  in  the  1st,  3rd,  9th,  or  10th.  If  the  Q  »nd  $  ko 
in  K»  the  native  will  possess  but  little  wit,  and  be  very  con- 
ceited, talkative,  fond  of  travelling ;  void  of  any  sound 
learning,  dabbling  in  almost  every  branch  of  science,  and 
mastering  none  ;  vain  and  foolish.  If  in  n\ ,  the  native  will 
be  a  great  doctor  or  chemist.  It  has  often  been  said  that 
the  ©  and  9  in  d  impairs  the  native's  faculties.  I  am  not 
of  this  opinion  so  far  as  business  or  literary  ability  is  concerned, 
but  for  dear,  sound,  intuitive  perception,  and  deep  contempla- 
tion, $  is  best  away  from  the  beams  of  the  0.  As  $  is  never 
more  than  28°  from  the  ©,  it  can  only  -form  the  <$  and  P  with 
tlial  orb. 

0  <^,  or  in  good  aspect  to  the  J). — Success  in  life;  rapid 
promotion ;  prosperity,  and  help  from  powerful  persons ; 
honour  and  esteem.  Persons  born  with  the  0  and  J)  in  good 


THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  61 

aspect  seldom  have  any  difficulty  in  obtaining  employment. 
These  aspects  also  strengthen  the  constitution  both  of  male 
and  female,  and  with  the  former  denotes  marriage  to  a  high- 
minded  noble-dispositioned  person. 

Q  in  evil  aspect  with  the  J) . — Difficulty  in  money  matters ; 
trouble  in  getting  into  employment  or  other  office  ;  loss  by 
speculation  and  females,  whom  the  native  should  avoid.  It 
also  weakens  the  health  or  constitution  and  produces  long 
and  serious  sicknesses ;  gives  great  liability  to  colds  and 
influenza. 

NOTE. — The  position  of  the  sun  and  moon  in  a  nalus  shoiild 
be  well  studied.  TJiey  are  the  two  most  poivcrful  planets  and 
on  them  depends  mainly  the  health  and  success  of  the  native. 
8ee  the  remarks  at  the  end  of  y . 


CHAPTER    VI. 
Venus. 

7  in  the  ascendant  makes  a  person  much  beloved  by  the 
opposite  sex,  fortunate  and  gaining  thereby  ;  fond  of  pleasure  ; 
good  disposition ;  generous,  merry  and  kind,  and  usually 
a  good  singer  or  musician  ;  8 ,  fl ,  =sv>  2£,  and  X>  are  the  best 
signs,  ")T,  Iff,  n\,  and  Yp  the  worst,  especially  11\,  for  it  makes 
the  native  lewd,  low,  and  indecent,  fond  of  drink  and  loose 
women,  especially  if  Q"  should  be  in  aspect.  <$  in  aspect  to 
$  makes  a  good  painter  or  artist,  actor  and  singer,  the  voice 
is  sweet,  musical  and  even  ;  they  excel  on  the  stage,  or  in  any 
occupation  or  profession  that  brings  them  in  contact  with 
the  multitude  ;  the  constitution  is  not  usually  strong,  and 
the  habits  of  living  seldom  conduce  to  health  and  long  life  ; 
their  temper  is  even,  and  their  ways  winning. 

9  in  the  2nd. — Promises  success  in  life,  and  lucrative 
pursuits,  if  strong  ;  yet  the  native  spends  much  on  ornament, 
dress,  jewellery,  and  females,  and  in  pleasure-seeking,  and 


62  THE   i.i  I  hi;   TO  ASTROLOGY. 

extravagance ;  hence,  unless  9  be  we"  fortified,  or  other 
testimonies  concur,  he  will  never  be  very  rich. 

9  in  the  '3rd. — Help  from  kindred  and  near  relatives  or 
neighbours  ;  success  in  railway  travelling  :  the  mind  jovial 
and  merry,  much  given  to  poetry  and  novel  reading. 

9  in  the  4th. — Shows  the  latter  part  of  the  native's  life  to 
be  prosperous  and  happy,  es|>cciaUy  if  9  °c  unafflicted  ; 
also  gain  by  inheritance. 

9  in  the  ~>th. — Much  given  to  pleasure  and  female  company, 
whereby  the  native  injures  his  health  ;  he  will  be  fond  of 
theatres  and  places  of  amusement  ;  it  denotes  a  numerous 
family,  many  girls,  dutiful,  good  and  loving,  who  will  be  a 
comfort  to  the  native  ;  if  9  be  very  strong,  it  may  give  gain 
by  speculation  and  hazardous  games. 

9  in  the  (i</(. — Health  tolerably  good  ;  but  this  position 
has  but  little  effect  except  on  the  menials  of  the  native,  who 
will  be  dutiful  and  obliging. 

9  in  the  1th. — This  denotes  happiness  in  the  marriage  state 
and  great  love  for  offspring  ;  the  native  usually  marries  early 
unless  9  be  in  IT\  or  Vf,  when  he  is  likely  to  form  improper 
connections.  This  position  signifies  success  in  business,  in 
partnerships  or  in  dealing  with  others.  It  also  shows  that 
the  native  gains  by  his  adversaries. 

9  in  the  8th. — If  atrony,  gain  by  marriage  and  by  the  wills 
and  legacies  of  the  dead  ;  if  weak,  the  position  denotes  but 
little. 

9  in  the  Mh. — Shows  travelling  ;  pleasant  journeys  ;  a 
sincere,  religious  turn  of  mind;  merry  and  jovial ;  fond  of 
reading  and  poetry  ;  benefit  from  relatives  through  marriage, 
and,  if  9  be  not  far  from  the  31.  C..  the  native  will  marry  well 
in  life,  or  to  a  person  above  his  or  her  own  sphere  in  life. 

9  in  the  \0th. — Success  in  life  :  honour,  fortune,  promotion, 
and  esteem,  especially  amongst  fc.uiales  ;  the  mind  is  pleasant 
and  agreeable,  disliking  quarrelling  and  bothers  of  every  sort ; 
the  native  marries  above  his  own  station,  if  9  be  strong  and 
well  fortified. 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  03 

in  the  llth. — Many  friends  ready  and  willing  to  help  the 
native,  and  by  him  they  are  much  valued. 

9  in  the  12th. — Of  little  importance  ;  it  tends  to  success  in 
life,  but  shows  many  secret  enemies  :  the  native  must  be  care- 
ful of  deceit  and  treachery,  if  nothing  worse,  should  fj  afflict 
o 

NOTE. — The  very  best  dispositions  are  those  produced  by  9- 
When  this  planet  is  strong  in  the  1st,  3rd,  or  Wi,  the  native  is 
not  only  kind  to  his  fellow  creatures,  but  also  to  animals  and 
every  living  thing ;  abhorring  cruelly  in  every  shape  and  form; 
very  sympathetic,  and  unostentatious  in  his  actions  and  ivays. 

THE    CONJUNCTIONS    AND    ASPECTS    OF    VENUS. 

9  in  d  <•»'  «ny  aspect  to  $ . — The  mind  is  merry  and  cheerful, 
fond  of  music,  singing,  poetry,  and  all  elegant  arts  and  sciences; 
if  in  the  ascendant,  the  native  will  bo  a  good  poet ;  if  in  the 
3rd,  9th,  or  10th,  fond  of  reading  and  a  greal  inclination  for 
literature  and  poetry.  The  native  is  likewise  very  fond  of 
young  persons,  and  men  often  marry  very  young  women. 
These  planets  are  never  more  than  76°  apart,  consequently  they 
can  only  form  the  d,  P>  l/>  /.,  ^,  and  Q  with  each  other; 
notice  the  d>  P»  o,nd  5|c  principally. 

9  d,  or  in  good  aspect  to  the  J) . — This  gives  tidiness  and 
neatness  in  appearance,  to  which  the  native  pays  great  atten- 
tion ;  well-conducted ;  likewise  benefit  from  females  and 
respected  by  them;  it  denotes  a  comfortable  marriage,  and 
if  9  k°  h'ec  from  affliction,  a  gootl  wife,  ll  (cuds  to  success 
and  frugality.  It  makes  women  very  neat  and  clean  in  their 
ways  ;  discreet  and  prudent  in  their  actions,  depending  much 
upon  the  signs  the  planets  occupy. 

9  afflicting  the  ]). — Slovenly  and  untidy  in  appearance; 
cureless  in  expenses  ;  too  often  fond  of  drink  ;  disliked  by 
females  of  position.  In  a  feminine  nativity,  it  injures  the 
health,  and  weakens  the  system  by  excessive  periodic  com- 
plaints. "  Sluts  "  invariably  have  9  afflicted  by  the  J)  in 
their  nativity. 


04  THE    (il  IDE    TO    ASTROLOGY. 

CHAPTER    VII. 

Mercury. 

9  in  the  ascendant  makes  a  person  of  quick  and  subtle 
wit.  In  the  fiery  signs,  sharp,  impetuous,  quick  in  anger* 
delighting  in  dramatic  performances,  fluent  in  speech,  skilful 
in  mathematics,  and  endowed  with  an  excellent  fancy  ;  in 
these  things  V  and  Q  appear  better  than  f ,  in  which  sign 
he  is  rash  and  imprudent,  with  a  ilow  of  speech  of  no  great 
depth.  In  8  or  Vf,  the  native  is  subtle,  crafty,  and  rather 
malicious  ;  headstrong,  opinionative,  and  gluttonous,  loving 
his  own  ease.  In  II,  HJ1,  r^,  or  ^,  of  an  excellent  wit  and 
fancy ;  a  good  orator ;  a  great  scholar ;  easily  mastering 
anything  scientific  ;  acute,  sharp,  and  penetrating.  In  TT\  he 
makes  an  excellent  chemist  or  doctor  ;  jxmetrating  and  fond 
of  experiment ;  quick  in  judgment  but  deep  and  crafty,  and 
to  be  treated  with  caution.  In  25  or  X,  the  native  possesses 
a  fleet,  shallow  mind  ;  dissembling  and  changeable  ;  a  silly, 
rattling  tongue,  with  a  very  high  opinion  of  himself  and  his 
own  abilities ;  sottish  and  fanciful ;  no  dependence  to  be 
placed  upon  him  ;  in  these,  53  is  better  than  K- 

9  in  the  2nd. — Not  of  much  importance,  except  $  be  well 
aspected  or  fortified,  when  it  promotes  success  and  the  acquisi- 
tion of  wealth. 

$  JH.  ike  '3rd. — Tx-ads  to  study  and  science,  astrology,  and 
occultism  ;  fond  of  all  kinds  of  curiosities,  especially  if  $  be 
in  an  airy  sign,  or  Hf  or  n*\  ;  it  also  denotes  travelling  ;  but 
when  in  25  or  X>  the  mind  is  apt  to  be  tickle  and  unsteady, 
unless  \-)  throws  an  as|>cct  to  Mercury. 

9  in  the  4th. — Inclines  to  study,  but  is  not  important, 
except  §  be  well  dignified  (in  n  or  ITJ ),  when  it  denotes  success 
late  in  life. 

9  in  the  5th. — In  barren  signs,  denies  children,  or  destroys 
them,  and  if  in  <2£,  IT\,  or  X.  they  may  be  deformed  or  insane, 
especially  if  17  or  o"  afflicts  $•  This  position  also  inclines 
to  gambling,  betting,  and  drink. 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  05 

$  in  the.  6th. — Shows  deceitful  and  troublesome  servants, 
and,  if  afflicted,  they  will  rob  the  native.  If  $  be  lord  of  the 
ascendant,  and  in  this  house  in  X  or  f ,  he  gives  consumption, 
weak  lungs  and  chest,  and  frequent  attacks  of  sickness ;  if 
afflicted  by  the  malefics,  so  much  the  worse. 

5  in  the  1th. — Much  competition  and  annoyances  in 
business  ;  quarrels  in  the  conjugal  state,  and  a  marriage  partner 
with  a  very  long  and  sharp  tongue  ;  whether  such  a  partner 
will  talk  wit  or  nonsense  can  be  seen  by  the  sign  $  occupies. 

$  in  the  8th. — Of  little  importance.  It  shows  nothing  in 
particular. 

5  in  the  Qth. — Sharp,  clever  wit,  fond  of  science  and  learn- 
ing,  curiosities,  and  religious  studies  ;  the  native  is  likely  to  * 
travel  if  9  occupies  a  moveable  sign. 

$  in  the  IQth. — Success  in  literature  and  trade,  or  as  a 
merchant ;  of  a  quick,  pregnant  wit ;  possessing  some  original 
talent,  and  if  in  the  airy  signs  a  good  orator. 

in  the  llth. — Shows  friends  among  scientific  men;  if 
be  strong,  assistance  from  them  ;  if  weak,  they  are  an 
injury,  instead  of  a  help,  to  the  native. 

^  in  the  12th. — In  8,  fl\,  or  Vf,  many  crafty  enemies, 
seeking  to  injure  the  native  secretly ;  in  the  other  signs  it 
tends  to  success  in  life,  and  fluency  in  speech. 

THE   CONJUNCTIONS   AND  ASPECTS   OF  MERCURY. 

$  in  tf  or  good  aspect  ivith  the  J) . — Very  quick  in  wit, 
splendid  abilities,  sharp  and  penetrating,  especially  if  occurring 
in  the  airy  signs ;  much  wit  and  sagacity ;  the  1st,  3rd,  9th,  and 
10th  are  the  best  houses  for  this  aspect.  The  native  usually 
acquires  foreign  languages  with  ease  and  facility,  and,  if  the 
sign  rising  be  IT,  Hf,  ===-,  f,  or  TZ,  the  native  speaks  with 
admirable  elocution. 

Q  afflicted  by  the,  J) . — Much  given  to  backbiting,  lying  and 
slandering ;  possessing  a  sharp,  turbulent  wit,  and  good 
abilities  ;  if  T?  or  fj1  afflicts  J)  or  £  at  the  same  time,  the 
native  will  be  dishonest,  and  turn  his  abilities  to  bad  account. 

F 


00  THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

CHAPTER   VIII. 

The   Moon. 

THE  T>  in  the  ascendant  makes  the  native  fond  of  rambling 
and  moving  about,  esj>ecially  if  in  a  common  or  moveable  sign  ; 
unstable  in  mind  ;  fond  of  females,  and  by  them  much 
respected  ;  of  a  quiet  nature,  delighting  in  friendship  and 
society  ;  philanthropic,  and  usually  fortunate  in  dealing  with 
the  multitude  and  the  lower  class  of  people  ;  rather  timid 
in  nature  ;  inclined  to  be  generous,  and  in  the  fiery  signs, 
ambitious  and  aspiring.  In  "f,  the  native  is  giddy  and 
changeable,  constantly  on  the  stir,  especially  if  in  aspect 
to  y  ;  in  Yf  or  l\[  fond  of  drink,  low  company,  and  sottish, 
lewd  and  filthy  in  talk  and  behaviour;  in  FT,  flf,  =^,  or  %:, 
fond  of  science,  delighting  in  astrology,  and  a  good  linguist  ; 
in  55  and  X  very  kind  and  good-natured,  and  much  respected  ; 
in  8,  firm  and  steadfast,  industrious  and  persevering.  Som- 
nambulists generally  have  the  rising  at  birth.  Usually 
the  nature  of  the  J)  is  kind,  well  intentioned,  quiet ;  with 
a  great  dislike  to  wrangling  and  quarrelling. 

])  in  the  2nd. — Essentially  strong,  is  good,  and  shows 
success  in  life  and  the  acquisition  of  riches.  If  in  IT\  or  Vf, 
the  native  will  experience  much  trouble  in  money  matters, 
and  loss  of  fortune. 

D  in  the  3rd. — Many  short  journeys ;  fond  of  science  and 
occult  studies  ;  and  if  J)  be  strong,  help  from  brethren  and 
neighbours. 

J)  in  the  4th. — The  native  frequently  removes  his  residence  ; 
success  in  lauds  and  agriculture  ;  if  the  ])  be  strong,  essentially, 
in  this  house,  it  is  an  excellent  indication  of  success,  and 
ultimate  independence. 

D  in  the  5th. — Rather  too  fond  of  gambling,  pleasure,  and 
women  ;  many  children,  especially  if  ])  be  in  a  watery  or 
double-bodied  sign ;  probably  twins  if  in  X-  The  native 
will  have  great  love  and  affection  for  his  children  and  young 
persons  generally. 


THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  07 

J>  in  the  Qth. — Not  good  for  health  (especially  if  a  female) ; 
in  the  common  signs  clanger  of  consumption  or  lung  disease ; 
in  the  fixed  signs,  gravel,  stone,  or  bronchitis  ;  in  the  cardinal 
signs,  derangement  of  the  stomach  and  nerves.  You  must 
only  judge  these  when  the  J)  is  badly  placed  or  afflicted,  for 
in  nat^^,re,  she  is  benefic,  and  seldom  works  harm  unless  aspected 
unfavourably. 

])  in  the  1th. — Success  in  marriage  and  connubial  comfort ; 
also  in  law  or  partnerships  ;  this  position  inclines  to  journey- 
ing or  removals.  The  J)  well  placed  in  this  house  (in  b , 
25,  j^,  .£,  yx,  or  K)>  and  in  good  aspect  to  fp,  denotes  a  very 
industrious,  careful  husband  or  wife. 

D   in  the  8th. — Rather  unimportant,  but  if  strong,  money 
/     by  marriage  ;  if  much  afflicted  by   fp  and  0",  danger  of  a 

violent  death. 

*~~~>/.  D  in  the  9th. — Travelling  ;  long  journeys  ;  fond  of  science,   ""KX 
out  rather  bigoted  in  religion  ;  curious  and  eccentric  ;  if  ])      1\ 
be  strong,  assistance  from  relatives  by  marriage. 

J)  in  the  IGlh. — Success  in  life,  and  prosperity  ;  favours 
from  powerful  females,  especially  if  ])  be  strong ;  the  native 
is  generally  successful  in  dealing  in  public  commodities ;  ho 
is  much  respected  and  esteemed. 

T)  in  the  llth. — If  })  be  strong,  many  good  friends;  but  if 
iccak,  friends  will  be  an  injury  to  the  native. 

])  in  the  l'2th. — If  in  ITj.  or  Vf  it  denotes  deceit  and  craft, 

/  chiefly  from  badly  disposed  females,   who  will  injure  and 

damage  the  native.     In  other  signs,  it  tends  to  success  in 

life  according  as  the  ])  may  be  stVong  by  aspect,  or  unafflicted. 


CHAPTER    IX 

THE   PLANET  NEPTUNE.       '#. 

THIS  part  would  not  be  complete  without  some  reference  to 
the  probable  influence  of  this  distant  planet.  It  seems  to  be 
the  general  opinion  that  this  is  of  a  malefic  nature,  but  pro- 

F  2 


08  THE    OUIDK    TO    ASTROLOGY 

ducing  "  worry  "  rather  than  an  actual  evil  event.  Of  course 
it  must  not  be  forgotten  that  much  will  depend  ujxm  the 
position  and  the  aspects  of  <£  to  other  planets,  whether  good 
or  evil.  Evil  aspects  never  result  in  good,  but  there  is  no 
reason  why  f  angular,  and  well  aspecU-d.  should  not  benefit 
the  native  in  a  similar  way  to  any  other  planet.  f?  is  not 
always  evil,  neither  is  T/  always  good.  Everything  depends 
upon  the  position  and  aspects.  Now  as  regards  y* ,  some  think 
it  is  most  powerful  in  <3>  and  X,  and  that  these  signs  may  be 
designated  its  "  house."  Of  course  the  opposite  signs,  Vf 
and  nj1,  would  be  its  detriment.  There  is  also  a  generally 
agreed  opinion  that  the  chief  influences  of  V  on  the  mind  is 
to  incline  it  to  spiritualism  and  metaphysics,  that  is,  sup]>osing 
the  planet  to  be  rising,  or  in  the  3rd  or  Dth  house.  Such  a 
position  also  tends  to  instability  of  character,  xmreliablc, 
intuitional,  impulsive,  fond  of  change,  lack  of  self-control, 
excitability,  and  love  for  sensation  such  as  is  produced  by  an 
excitement  of  the  animal  passions.  In  cardinal  and  common 
signs  the  mutability  of  the  mind  would  be  increased  ;  in 
fixed  signs,  retarded,  at  the  same  time  the  animal  instincts, 
as  well  as  fondness  for  foods  and  drinks,  would  be  increased. 
The  planet  seems  to  have  much  connection  with  the  nervous 
system  in  man,  hence  the  "  dread  "  of  impending  misfortune 
which  often  does  not  materialize.  If  the  planet  be  in  the 
2nd,  a  fear  or  dread  of  poverty  or  financial  ruin  will  often 
depress  the  native  If  in  the  3rd,  many  removals,  love  of 
the  weird  and  mysterious.  In  the  4th,  much  uneasiness  of 
mind,  and  minor  troubles  late  in  life.  In  the  5th,  large 
sensual  propensities,  fondness  for  pleasure,  dissolute  and 
sordid.  In  the  6th,  constant  worry  about  servants  or  work- 
people, or  health  ;  dread  of  sickness.  In  the  7th,  an  unfortu- 
nate marriage,  marital  infelicity,  probably  separation.  In  the 
9th,  inclination  for  occult  studies.  Curious  in  beliefs.  In 
the  10th,  much  doubt  and  perplexity  in  business,  constantly  on 
the  worry.  In  the  llth,  annoyances  from  friends,  and  anxiety 
caused  by  them.  In  the  12th,  fear  and  dread  of  enemies. 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  69 

Note,  if  the  planet  be  well  aspected,  particularly  by  J , 
"tti  0  or  ])»  the  above  remarks  will  be  much  moderated,  but 
if  badly  aspected  by  any  of  the  planets,  the  influence  will  be 
much  more  adverse  and  unfortunate.  The  unfortunate 
aspects  of  "J/  denote  loss  of  money  and  great  worry.  The 
good  aspects,  benefits  and  financial  success.  If  afflicted  by 
0"  or  9  inclination  for  lying,  deceiving,  and  other  undesirable 
practices.  The  good  aspects  denote  a  sharp  mind,  inquisitive 
and  inventive.  If  afflicted  by  V  much  given  to  lust  and 
pleasure  and  the  gratification  of  the  lower  senses.  It  is  con- 
sidered unfortunate  for  females,  particularly  if  %  be  in  the 
f)th  or  7th  houses.  The  good  aspects  of  9  incline  to  spirit- 
uality and  mediumship.  The  J)  afflicted  by  ^  denotes  many 
changes,  journeys  and  removals  ;  the  native  does  not  stay 
long  in  one  place,  unsettled  in  mind  and  purpose,  untruthful, 
and  an  unhappy  wedlock,  if  a  male,  if  a  female,  in  danger  of 
disgrace.  The  good  aspects  inclines  to  intuition  and  clever- 
ness, and  to  the  study  of  occultism  and  spiritualism.  It  also 
helps  to  steady  the  mind,  particularly  if  in  fixed  signs. 

The  planet  moves  very  slowly,  occupying  about  160  years 
in  making  one  Zodiacal  Revolution,  hence  it  will  be  many 
years  before  anything  reliable  as  to  the  kind  of  person  pro- 
duced by  '#  in  the  various  signs  can  be  ascertained.  At 
present  much  of  it  is  conjecture,  and  the  young  student  should 
not  rely  too  much  even  on  the  remarks  in  this  chapter.  The 
only  actual  experience  I  have  had  of  its  influence  is,  that  it 
produces  no  end  of  worry  and  nervous  excitement,  notwith- 
standing that  it  is  in  X  and  in  exact  ,A  to  my  D  in  S5  at  birth 
and  otherwise  unafflicted,  except  by  being  in  the  12th  house. 


CHAPTER    X. 
;* 

THE    TEEM,    ELEVATION. 

BY  this  term  I  mean  that  planet  which  is  nearest  to  the 
meridian.     For  instance,  a  planet  on  the  cusp  of  the  llth 


70  THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROI/KJV. 

house,  and  another  on  the  cusp  of  the  12th,  that  planet  on 
the  cusp  of  the  llth,  would  bo  "elevated"  above  that  on 
the  cusp  of  the  12th,  and  if  another  planet  were  on  the  cusp 
of  the  10th  it  would  be  elevated  above  the  others  ;  also  one 
on  the  cusp  of  the  3rd  or  5th  would  be  elevated  above  any 
planet  in  the  4th  house. 

This  position  of  Elevation  is  very  important,  for  if  you 
lind  the  evil  or  malefic  planets  elevated  and  in  cardinal  or 
succeedant  houses,  it  shows  a  much  harder  struggle  for 
success  than  if  the  benefics  were  in  Elevation  ;  and  if  the 
general  testimonies  in  the  map  arc  unfavourable,  and  the 
malefics  again  in  Elevation,  it  would  be  a  hard  and  con- 
tinuous struggle  against  poverty  all  through  life  ;  whereas, 
if  the  benelics  were  in  Elevation,  they  would  materially  lessen 
the  evil  of  a  bad  nativity. 

Again,  if  the  malelics  afflict  the  Q  or  J) ,  and  be  in  Elevation 
above  them,  the  evil  is  much  greater  than  if  the  Q  or  })  were 
in  Elevation  above  the  malefics. 

Too  much  attention  cannot  be  paid  to  this ;  should  o" 
afflict  V  and  be  in  Elevation,  the  evil  is  greater  than  if  the 
same  configuration  occurred  with  9  in  Elevation. 

The  same  must  be  observed  with  sickness  and  health.  If 
\-)  be  in  Elevation  and  afflict  the  0,  the  effects  are  much 
more  severe  than  if  the  Q  were  in  Elevation  above  K  The 
same  must  be  observed  with  the  ])  and  females  ;  I  have 
known  many  females  with  the  J)  on  the  meridian,  but  much 
afflicted  by  the  malefics,  to  enjoy  pretty  good  health,  and  to 
have  but  little  to  complain  of  as  regards  sickness. 


CHAPTER    XI. 

ADVICE. 

BEFORE  proceeding  further,  it  is  very  necessary  to  impress 
upon  the  reader's  attention  the  importance  of  mastering 
thoroughly  the  foregoing  particulars  ;  in  fact,  they  should 


THE   GUIDE  TO  ASTROLOGY.  71 

be  learned  by  heart,  so  that  the  symbols  and  other  informa- 
tion may  come  readily  to  the  mind ;  to  attempt  to  judge  a 
nativity  before  this  is  accomplished  is  like  running  before 
one  can  walk,  and  is  sure  to  end  in  grief  and  disappointment. 
The  reader  cannot  do  better  than  experiment  with  his  or  her 
own  nativity  ;  for  in  the  lives  of  every  one  there  are  certain 
actions,  events,  tJioughts,  and  inclinations  known  only  to  one's 
own  self  ;  these  may  all  be  found  depicted  in  the  Map  for  the 
time  of  birth,  but  unless  knoum  by  the  student  to  exist  in 
the  individuality  of  the  native,  might  lead  to  a  wrong  judg- 
ment. 

Therefore  let  the  student  take  time  over  the  rudimentary 
part  of  the  science,  mastering  all  its  details,  exercising  himself 
in  the  computation  of  the  aspects,  until  he  feels  confidence 
in  his  own  ability.  When  he  has  proceeded  thus  far,  he  may 
commence  with  Part  III.,  and  then  on  to  Part  IV.  The 
latter  is  the  most  difficult  of  all  the  parts,  and  one  that  tests 
the  skill  and  ability  to  the  utmost,  even  of  the  best  and 
surest  practitioners.  It  will  be  best,  however,  to  experiment 
with  the  past,  comparing  the  directions  with  the  events,  for, 
in  this  way,  a  key  to  the  future  may  be  found. 


PART   THREE. 
CHAPTER    I 

HOW   TO   JUDGE   A   NATIVITY. 

DRAW  your  figure  for  the  given  time  of  birth  ;  if  the  last  or 
first  two  or  three  degrees  of  a  sign  arise,  then  inquire  imme- 
diately as  to  the  time  of  birth,  for  five  minutes  will  sometimes 
throw  the  personal  appearance  and  mental  qualities  quite 
the  opposite  way ;  for  instance,  the  last  degree  of  n  will 
produce  a  widely  different  person  from  the  first  degree  of  5c. 
When  one  comes  to  a  nicety  like  this,  it  is  best  to  write  the 
description  of  person  each  sign  produces,  and  send  to  the 
person  wanting  the  nativity,  at  the  same  time  inquiring  which 
of  the  two  descriptions  comes  the  nearest,  and  from  this  answer 
to  judge  the  sign  ascending.  When  several  degrees,  or  the 
middle  of  a  sign  arise,  five  minutes'  error  in  the  time  of  birth 
is  of  little  consequence,  but  try  at  all  times  to  get  the  ascendant 
as  near  correct  as  possible  ;  then  determine  the  lord  of  the 
ascendant, — for  instance,  if  y  or  TT)  arise,  then  Q*  IS  'ort'  5 
if  b  or  £±,  then  ^>,  and  so  on  of  the  remainder,  and,  in  fact, 
the  lords  of  all  the  houses  should  be  well  remembered  ;  after 
this,  compute  the  aspects  between  the  planets,  the  declina- 
tions and  conjunctions,  and  remember  well  in  what  houses 
the  planets  are  placed,  and  also  whether  essentially  dignified 
or  not. 


THE   GtriDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  73 


CHAPTER    II. 

WHETHER   A   CHILD  WILL  LIVE   OR  DIE. 

THIS  is  one  of  the  most  difficult  points  in  Astrology,  as  so 
much  depends  on  the  nativities  of  the  parents,  and  the  amount 
of  vitality  the  infant  possesses.  First,  have  regard  to  the 
positions  of  the  planets  in  the  parents'  nativities,  for  if  these 
denote  loss  of  offspring,  then  the  child  will  die,  but  if  not, 
then  judge  it  will  live,  unless  the  natus  be  very  unfortunate  ; 
if  the  testimonies  in  the  nativities  of  the  parents  be  doubtful, 
undecided,  or  denote  the  loss  of  some,  but  not  all,  the  offspring, 
then  have  recourse  to  the  following : — 

Consider  the  ascendant,  its  lord,  the  J ,  and  lord  of  the 
8th,  for  if  a  malefic  be  near  the  ascendant,  and  afflicted  by 
the  lord  of  the  8th,  and  the  ])  be  at  the  same  time  afflicted 
by  the  0,  ^  or  tf,  the  child  soon  dies.  The  lord  of  the 
ascendant  in  the  6th  afflicted,  shows  a  weakly  child,  and  if 
this  affliction  be  by  the  lord  of  the  8th,  the  child  will  ulti- 
mately die,  but  should  a  benefic  be  in  good  aspect,  it  will  be 
reared,  but  with  great  difficulty.  Claudius  Ptolemy,  one 
of  the  old  writers  on  Astrology,  says :  "  If  one  of  the  lights 
be  angular,  and  either  joined  to  a  malefic,  or  if  the  latter 
be  at  an  equilateral  triangle  with  them,  and  no  benefic  aspect- 
ing  them  at  the  time,  and  the  rulers  of  the  lights  be  in  malefic 
places  (6th  or  8th  chiefly)  the  child  then  born  will  not  be  reared, 
but  will  shortly  die."  I  have  found  this  often  correct. 
Children  are  generally  killed  by  position  before  the  age  of 
three  ;  after  then  by  direction.  Children  born  under  25,  Vy 
and  X  possess  less  vitality  in  their  infant  years  than  those 
born  under  the  other  signs,  and  evil  positions  or  directions 
are  more  liable  to  kill ;  8  rising  gives  danger  of  fits  during 
dentition  (especially  if  the  natus  be  an  evil  one),  and  death 
may  ensue ;  £t,  ±±  and  $  give  good  stamina  and  strong 


74  THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROIOOY 

constitutions ;  next  to  these  are  Y~,  n,  nf,  Tl\  and  C.%  so  that 
]>ersonH  born  with  the  strong  signs  rising  will  thrive  and  live 
through  sicknesses  that  would  kill  others  born  under  25,  Vy 
or  X-  It  is  the  difference  in  the  quality  or  nature  of  the 
signs  that  causes  an  apparent  contradiction  in  the  science, 
for  one  child  will  live  and  be  healthy  with  a  very  evil  nativity, 
and  another  will  die  with  half  the  amount  of  radical  evil, 
and  this  depends  almost,  if  not  entirely,  on  the  sign  ascending. 
More  persons  are  born  under  ^,  TJT,  — ,  H\  and  J  than  under 
the  other  signs,  these  signs  occupying  about  fourteen  hours 
out  of  the  twenty-four  in  ascending,  and  these  being  strong 
and  healthy  signs,  account  for  the  increase  of  population. 

The  duration  of  the  life  of  an  infant  which  will  not  live  to 
maturity,  is  also  very  difficult  to  arrive  at.  It  generally 
dies  when  the  ])  by  transit  meets  an  evil  planet,  and  especially 
if  in  the  4th  (the  house  of  the  grave),  6th  or  8th  house.  The 
exact  time  of  death  depends  upon  the  exact  amount  of  vitality 
the  child  possesses,  and  as  this  is  difficult  to  arrive  at,  it  is 
best  not  to  be  too  sure,  but  to  watch  events  and  refer  them 
to  the  course  of  the  J),  for  in  the  case  of  infants,  whether 
male  or  female,  the  ])  is  all-powerful,  but,  wherever  possible, 
examine  well  the  nativities  of  the  parents. 


CHAPTER    III. 

THE   HEALTH. 

THE  first  points  to  attend  to  in  a  nativity  aro^the  life  and 
health.  If  the  map  be  for  a  male,  then  regard  the  Q ;  if 
a  female,  then  look  to  the  })  ;  also  see  if  cither  Q  or  ])  be 
in  the  ascendant,  or  Gth,  for  such  positions  have  much  in- 
fluence on  the  health.  If  you  find  the  Q  afflicted  by  V} 
the  health  is  not  good,  more  especially  if  the  Q  be  occidental  ; 
for  then  it  denotes  long  and  tedious  illnesses.  0"  in  any 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  15 

aspect  to  the  0  produces  strength  and  a  strong  constitution, 
but  if  in  tf,  n  or  c?  there  is  liability  to  accidents,  short 
but  sharp  attacks  of  sickness,  and  sudden  death.  I/  afflicting 
the  O  predisposes  to  apoplexy,  pleurisy,  corrupt  blood,  and 
liver  complaints,  and  the  0  or  ])  in  bad  aspect  to  each  other 
weakens  the  constitution  in  both  male  and  female,  and  seldom 
leads  to  long  life.  If  tf  and  ^  both  afflict  the  0,  the  health 
is  not  so  bad  as  if  3"  were  not  there,  for  0"  strengthens  the 
system,  but  the  end  of  such  a  person  is  liable  to  be  very  sudden, 
either  by  accident  or  disease,  according  as  the  planets  may 
be  oriental  or  occidental.  Oriental  positions  signify  accidents 
and  short  attacks  of  sickness,  but  occidental  positions  denote 
long,  lingering,  chronic  diseases.  The  0  or  V)  in  the  Gtli 
and  in  tf,  Q  or  ^  is  a  bad  testimony,  and  denotes  heavy 
affliction  ;  in  fact,  it  is  one  of  the  worst  positions  that  can 
occur  for  health.  On  the  other  hand,  the  0  in  good  aspect 
to  If.  cr  cf",  or  to  the  )),  helps  the  health  much,  and  denotes 
a  strong  constitution,  more  especially  if  0  be  rising,  or  in 
any  house  except  the  6th  or  8th.  The  planet  y  does  not 
seem  to  exercise  any  great  influence  over  the  health,  but  he 
causes  accidents  and  suicides,  and,  when  in  the  6th,  denotes 
an  incurable  disease. 

For  a  female,  take  the  J)  and  judge  exactly  as  indicated 
for  a  male,  but  note  that  the  ])  in  bad  aspect  to  9  deranges 
the  constitution  of  a  female,  making  it  weak  and  debilitated, 
and  if  ^  or  cf  be  there  also,  her  nealth  will  be  a  continual 
source  of  trouble  to  her.  Remember  this — that  (f  destroys 
the  influence  of  the  ])  more  than  f>,  but  T?  injures  the  0 
more  than  0",  because  the  natures  of  the  ])  and  tf,  and  0 
and  V)  are  totally  dissimilar,  but  the  J)  and  V)  and  the  © 
and  cf  have  natures  more  in  common  one  with  the  other. 

With  respect  to  accidents,  the  0  afflicted  by  the  malefics 
and  oriental  denotes  accidents  that  are  likely  to  terminate 
fatally,  V)  afflicting  the  ])  and  oriental,  denotes  falls  and 
bruises,  and  if  cf  be  there,  severe  cuts,  and  if  the  0  at  the 
time  be  afflicted,  they  are  likely  to  terminate  fatally. 


"•'•  THE   CUIDE   TO  ASTROUKIY. 

The  nature  of  the  diseases  to  which  the  native  is  liable 
may  be  learned  from  the  sign  occupying  the  cusp  of  the 
Oth  house,  and  the  sign  in  which  the  majority  of  the  planets, 
especially  the  malefics,  are  situated.  For  instance,  the  fixed 
signs  show  diseases  of  the  heart,  throat  or  urinary  organs, 
stone  or  gravel,  bronchitis,  &c.  ;  the  cotnmon  signs,  consump- 
tion, spitting  of  blood,  bowel  complaints,  sciatica,  drojwy 
and  poorness  of  the  Wood  ;  the  Cardinal  signs,  indigestion, 
weak  stomach,  mental  derangement,  vertigo,  fevers,  liver  or 
kidney  complaints. 

To  particularise  the  diseases,  IT  denotes  mental  derange- 
ment, fevers,  giddiness,  and  such  ailments  as  concern  the 
head  principally.  b  rules  the  throat,  hence  diphtheria, 
bronchitis,  king's  evil.  II  rules  the  arms,  hands  and  shoulders, 
and  produces  hurts,  accidents,  or  rheumatism  in  those  limbs. 
25  governs  the  stomach,  denoting  indigestion,  and  frequently 
that  terrible  disease,  cancer  ;  Q  rules  the  heart  and  back, 
and  affliction  of  planets  in  this  sign  denotes  heart  disease,  or 
injury  to  the  back  ;  fTf  rules  the  bowels,  and  such  diseases  as 
they  may  bo  subjected  to ;  s±  rules  the  veins,  liver,  and  loins, 
also  kidneys  ;  V)  or  o"  in  this  sign  is  sure  to  upset  the  liver  or 
kidneys  ;  11^  rules  the  bladder  and  private  members,  hcnco 
stone,  gravel,  &c. ;  £  rules  the  hips  and  thighs,  and  causes 
more  broken  bones  than  any  other  sign  ;  also  sciatica  and  hip 
disease  ;  Vf  governs  the  knees  ;  £S  the  legs,  and  X  the  feet ; 
0"  in  X  denotes  corns  and  bunions  in  plenty.  To  this  I  may 
add  that  Y™,  23,  £i  and  Vf  are  signs  in  Q  or  £  to  each  other  ; 
hence  planets  in  Vf  often  affect  the  organs  ruled  by  f,  25 
and  £i,  those  in  g  especially  ;  b »  &»  H\  and  KS  are  also 
in  n  or  £,  y  and  III  denoting  the  throat  and  privates  chiefly, 
and  zz  and  Q  the  heart  and  back  :  n ,  nfl?,  J.  and  X  are  in 
similar  aspect  and  should  be  j  udged  as  above. 

Referring  to  the  map  on  page  37  we  find  a  strong  sign, 
£[  rising,  and  the  Q  close  to  the  planet  Venus.  These 
would  be  favourable  testimonies  for  health  and  strength  if  it 
were  not  for  the  exact  Q  of  K>  to  the  Q,  the  former  being  in 


THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  / i 

elevation  above  the  0,  and  occidental ;  the  aspect  also  occurs 
from  angles  rendering  it  very  powerful.  We  should  therefore 
judge  that  the  native  would  experience,  as  a  rule,  good  health, 
yet  have  occasionally,  severe  and  protracted  attacks  of 
sickness,  and,  as  the  lord  of  the  Gth  and  the  majority  of  the 
planets  are  in  common  signs,  such  sickness  would  affect  the 
chest  and  lungs  principally,  and  arise  from  colds,  or  the 
wearing  of  damp  or  wet  boots,  for  the  afflicting  planet  is 
h  and  he  is  in  X>  which  rules  the  feet.  The  Q  is  also  in 
Z.  to  cf,  but  this  aspect  is  nearly  past  and  as  the  J)  is  in  A 
to  tf,  but  very  little  mischief  will  result  from  that  aspect, 
and,  so  far  as  health  is  concerned,  it  may  be  ignored. 


CHAPTER    IV. 

THE   MENTAL   QUALITIES. 

NOTICE  the  signs  ascending  and  the  ©,    ]),  and   §   chiefly, 
although  all  the  planets  have  some  influence  on  the  mind. 

The  sign  n ,  ^5?,  —  or  ES  rising,  makes  the  native  fond  of 
science,  reading  and  study,  quick  and  ingenious,  with  an  easy 
and  pleasant  flow  of  speech  ;  "f,  £?  or  J ,  ambitious,  fond 
of  honour,  fiery  in  temper  and  much  given  to  sports  and 
exercises,  aspiring  to  rule  ;  Q  and  £  are  better  than  f  ; 
the  latter  makes  the  native  unsettled,  rambling  and  often 
witless.  95  or  ]/?  makes  the  mind  ambitious,  very  fond  of 
politics  and  engaging  in  public  business,  25  especially;  Vf  is 
more  selfish  and  crafty  ;  T1\  makes  good  chemists  and  doctors, 
secret  and  crafty,  and  seldom  to  be  trusted  ;  b  or  X  signifies 
persons  loving  their  own  ease,  fond  of  drink  and  pleasure, 
slothful,  and  8  is  very  furious  and  revengeful  when  provoked. 
In  a  former  part  of  this  book  you  will  find  the  significations 
of  the  planetary  aspects,  but  it  will  be  necessary  to  add  more 
here.  The  worst  sign  in  which  $  can  be  placed  is  X  ;  he 
therein  makes  the  native  shallow  in  intellect,  loquacious, 


78  THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

changeable,  conceited  and  often  fond  of  drink  ;  the  next  is 
25,  9  therein  inclines  to  politics,  drink,  with  no  depth  of 
thought  or  mature  reasoning;  in  I  rash,  foolish  and  impetuous, 
proud  and  conceited,  fond  of  scents  and  perfumerj' ;  in  "Y". 
very  inquisitive,  of  a  fertile  imagination,  quick  in  speech, 
rash,  furious,  never  at  a  loss  for  a  word  ;  in  8 ,  H\  or  Vf, 
selfish,  close,  covetous,  envious,  malicious,  deceitful,  a  person 
best  avoided,  yet  possessing  good  talents,  especially  if  in 
ll\  or  Vf ;  in  $ ,  straightforward  and  steadfast  in  opinion 
and  purpose;  in  n,  tiff,  —  or  ~>  very  ingenious,  possessing 
excellent  mental  qualities,  original  in  ideas  and  a  good  orator 
or  writer 

NOTE. — These  descriptions  are  principally  to  be  considered 
when  ^  is  rising,  or  in  the  3rd  or  9<A  house. 

0"  in  aspect  to  9  makes  the  mind  exceedingly  sharp, 
whether  in  good  or  evil ;  such  persons  are  generally  very 
active,  fiery  in  temper,  great  liars,  irreligious,  or  else  hypocrites 
and  often  "  light-fingered."  h  in  aspect  to  9  inclines  to 
steadiness  and  firmness,  but  if  by  evil  aspect  it  denotes  deceit, 
treachery,  duplicity  and  thieving ;  in  good  aspect,  thoughtful 
and  reserved,  steady  and  sober  in  character ;  $S  and  T/,  the 
native  is  honest,  and  possesses  a  good  judgment ;  fcl  makes 
the  mind  wayward,  restless,  stubborn,  fond  of  curiosities, 
original,  but  revengeful ;  to  be  successful  in  literature,  it  is 
necessary  that  ^  and  1 1  be  in  tf,  ^c  or  £,  aspect.  If  in  n 
or  £  it  leads  to  much  criticism  and  public  disapproval. 
9  with  tj  renders  the  mind  cheerful,  pleasant,  fond  of 
pleasure  and  society ;  the  J)  with  $ ,  very  clever,  of  an 
excellent  wit  and  understanding,  but  the  Q  and  £  inclines 
to  lying  and  deceit,  fault-finding  and  duplicity. 

The  disposition  is  denoted  by  the  Q  ant^  J>  principally, 
and  when  these  are  aspected  by  tf  it  is  free  and  generous 
to  excess,  aspiring,  courageous,  but  angry ;  T/  makes  it 
moderately  generous ;  such  persons  are  very  solicitous  of 
fame,  and  seldom  extend  a  helping  hand,  unless  it  is  likely 
to  be  well  known  ;  F>  and  y  incline  the  disposition  to  be  selfish 


THE   GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  79 

and  close.  Again,  9  an<^  d*  strong,  makes  it  generous  and 
lavish  ;  $  and  b  close  and  mean  ;  Ijl  is  uncertain,  sometimes 
generous  and  sometimes  the  reverse.  The  0  or  J)  rising 
makes  a  good  disposition,  kind  and  generous,  but  if  H  be  in 
aspect,  then  the  native  is  careful  of  his  own  goods. 

The  map  on  page  37  shows  t}  and  9  m  d  which  would 
incline  the  mind  to  poetry  and  music,  also  pleasure  and  the 
company  of  young  people.  Mercury  is  nearly  in  exact  /  to 
O* ,  the  latter  planet  being  in  the  3rd  house.  This  denotes 
that  the  mind  will  be  very  sharp,  bitter  and  sarcastic,  and 
very  headstrong  and  independent,  difficult  to  persuade  or 
manage,  and,  as  }?  is  in  Q  to  $ ,  the  temper  will  be  very  bad. 
We  should  therefore  judge  the  native  to  be  quick  and  clever, 
persevering  and  headstrong,  and  very  quick  in  anger,  especially 
as  Q,  which  is  an  "  angry  "  sign,  is  rising.  Except  for  the 
proximity  of  9  to  $ ,  the  mental  qualities  would  be  of  a  bad 
stamp,  and  would  lead  the  native  into  dishonest  practises, 
chiefly  for  the  sake  of  sport  or  pleasure,  for  the  sign  f  is 
pre-eminently  a  "  sporting  "  sign.  The  disposition  is  such 
that  "  friends  "  can  have  everything,  but  others,  nothing. 


CHAPTER    V. 

THE   MONEY   PROSPECTS. 

THE  surest  sign  of  success  is  T/.  in  the  2nd  house,  and  the 
stronger  If.  is,  essentially,  the  better  ;  also  if  he  be  well  aspected 
by  the  0,  J),  or  Tp.  &  m  bad  aspect  to  I/  in  any  part  of 
the  map  is  evil,  for  it  causes  heavy  and  sudden  losses,  fre- 
quently of  an  overwhelming  nature  ;  even  the  good  aspects  of 
<3"  to  T/  are  not  good,  for  they  lead  to  unbounded  generosity, 
carelessness  over  money,  causing  the  native  to  spend  it 
lavishly. 

When  most  or  all  of  the  planets  are  above  the  earth,  that 
is,  in  the  7th,  8th,  9th,  10th,  llth  or  12th  houses,  it  is  a 
favourable  sign  of  prosperity,  especially  if  they  are  oriental  ; 


80  THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

11  in  the  M.C.  is  a  good  testimony ;  also  the  Q  or  J)  or  \j,  in 
sjc  or  A  to  11  ;  or  the  0  or  J)  in  tf  with  T/,  is  also  an  excellent 
testimony.  The  Q  and  ])  in  jfc  or  A  is  favourable,  especially 
for  such  as  are  in  employment,  the  D  or  c?  being  the  reverse. 
The  4th  house  is  ;u  very  important  factor  in  this  question, 
for  if  benefic  planets  (Q,  J),  T/»  or  V)  occupy  this  house, 
it  is  a  sign  of  success  at  the  latter  part  of  life,  and  the  stronger 
these  planets  are,  either  essentially,  or  by  aspects,  the  greater 
the  success ;  but  if  they  be  weak  or  knocked  about  by  cross 
aspects,  judge  the  opposite  ;  the  malefics  therein  peregrine  or 
afflicted,  show  a  sad  end,  probably  in  want  or  misery,  and 
even  if  1},  tf,  or  y  be  strong  essentially,  it  yet  denotes  an 
unhappy  end,  not  so  much  from  want  of  money,  as  by  a 
miserable  miserness  (especially  if  denoted  by  fy),  or  by 
outside  troubles  caused  by  friends,  health,  or  relatives.  In 
this  matter  your  reason  must  be  exercised,  for  Fj  in  ^  or  Vj5 
in  the  4th  in  A  to  T/  would  signify  a. very  different  end  to 
the  native's  existence  than  if  !;>  had  been  afflicted  by  the  Q 
or  (P  of  11,  or  any  other  planet. 

T/  or  I;,  lord  of  the  7th,  and  in  ^c  or  A,  denotes  money 
by  marriage ;  I/  in  good  aspect  to  f  1  shows  gain  by  legacies, 
or  in  an  unexpected  manner.  Many  planets  together  in  one 
sign  denote  great  successes  and  great  reverses,  in  proportion 
as  they  may  be  aspected  or  placed  essentially  ;  for  if  afflicted 
by  aspect  or  position,  the  reverses  will  outweigh  the  successes 
and  vice  versii.  Again,  IT  in  the  2nd  house  denotes  a  hard 
struggle  all  through  life,  every  penny  the  native  possesses  he 
will  have  to  work  doubly  hard  for.  If  ]-)  afflicts  the  ]) ,  it  is 
another  bad  testimony,  and  keeps  or  makes  the  native  poor  ; 
of  course,  a  A  or  ^f  of  If.  or  Q  to  the  j),  or  even  I},  alters 
the  case,  and  would  improve  the  native's  prospects  immensely. 

The  lights  afflicted  by  I/  denotes  prodigality ;  9  afflicting 
")/,  the  native  is  expensive  in  his  household  and  fond  of  dress 
and  finery  ;  the  0  or  (f  in  the  "2nd,  he  is  free  and  liberal  to 
excess,  and  if  0"  afflicts  the  0  by  Q  or  £  he  will  lose  money 
by  law  or  quarrelling  and  get  robbed  by  sharpers. 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  81 

The  Zodiacal  sign  rising,  has  some  influence  over  the  success 
of  the  native  ;  V,  n,  ££,  ±±,  f  and  s^  may  be  termed  fortunate 
signs ;  the  other  signs  are  not  so  fortunate ;  there  are,  of  course, 
many  exceptions,  and  I  do  not  advise  much  reliance  to  be 
placed  on  this  point,  although  an  unfortunate  nativity  with 
an  unfortunate  sign  rising,  is  singularly  evil. 

The  popularity  or  fame  of  the  native  depends  principally 
on  the  angles  ;  if  Cardinal  signs  occupy  these,  he  will  become 
famous,  either  in  good  or  evil,  fj  in  M.C.  gives  power  and 
authority,  but  casts  down  again ;  T/.  there,  denotes  fame  all 
through  life,  the  same  with  the  0  or  }) .  tf  in  the  10th 
brings  scandal,  especially  to  females.  The  Q  or  g  of  one 
or  both  of  the  luminaries  to  a  planet  from  Cardinal  signs, 
produces  fame.  Common  signs  and  planets  therein  denote 
obscure  persons ;  persons  born  with  planets  rising  usually 
become  famous  in  their  respective  spheres  or  trades,  especially 
if  in  Cardinal  signs,  for  these  denote  authority,  whereas  the 
common  signs  show  obscurity,  or  a  limited  amount  of  fame ; 
such  persons  seldom  possess  much  sway  or  power  of  mind 
over  others.  The  0  in  good  aspect  to  y  gives  fame  and  the 
friendship  and  help  of  old  moneyed  men,  and  is  an  excellent 
aspect  in  the  nativity  of  any  one  who  has  to  do  with  public 
men  or  public  affairs.  It  is  sure  to  lead  to  fame  and  distinc- 
tion although,  perhaps,  late  in  life. 

In  our  map,  page  37  we  find  no  planet  in  the  2nd,  and 
its  ruler,  $  •  m  his  detriment  in  <^  with  9  and  the  Q  but  in 
Q  to  Tj.  <3"  is  also  ruler  of  the  4th  and  in  his  detriment, 
and  cadent.  These  are  unfavourable -testimonies.  On  the 
other  side  we  have  I/  strong  in  the  llth  in  A  to  Vj,  but  in 
&  to  1 1 .  The  D  is  in  A  to  Q*.  Now  I/  is-  the  most  powerful 
planet  in  the  map  and  being  in  the  llth  denotes  much  help 
from  friends,  and  the  A  to  V)  shows  money  by  legacy,  but 
the  §  of  y  denotes  some  difficulty  with  it,  but  the  native 
will  get  it  as  11  is  elevated  above  y.  Except  for  the  strong 
position  of  I/  the  native  would  have  had  a  hard  struggle  all 
through  life,  As  it  is,  he  will  not  save  money,  but  his  pluck 

a 


82  THE  GUIDE   TO   ASTBOLOGY. 

and  perseverance  (  J  A  0".  d"  m  3rd)  will  keep  his  head  above 
water.  I  judge  the  money  will  he  by  legacy,  for  tf  which 
denotes  his  first  wife  as  well  as  \->,  is  weak,  and  one  scarcely 
likely  to  possess  wealth.  Apart  from  TJ.  L  V),  and  ])  A  tf, 
and  the  powerful  position  of  "J/,  there  are  no  positions  or 
aspects  to  favour  success. 


CHAPTER   VI. 

THE  EMPIX)YMENT. 

CONSIDER  the  midheavon,  the  ascendant,  that  planet  which 
is  nearest  the  Sun,  or  oriental  to  that  luminary,  and  the 
positions  of  the  majority  of  the  planets.  The  Signs  may  be 
divided  thus  : — f,  b,  Q_,  and  Vf  produce  employment  among 
metals,  housebuilding,  smiths,  and  machinery;  n,  r£r  and 
£»  are  scientific  signs,  and  produce  clerks,  writers  and  literary 
or  scientific  pursuits;  25,  TT\,  and  X  produce  inn-keepers, 
publicans,  brewers,  sailors,  wine  merchants  and  fishmongers ; 
the  sign  D\,  moreover,  produces  many  chemists  and  doctors 
of  noted  ability,  njj  and  f ,  messengers,  dealers,  booksellers, 
printers,  engravers  and  artificers.  Moreover,  8,  nj  ftnd  Vf 
have  connection  with  agriculture;  TT,  &  and  /  with  fire, 
iron,  the  army  and  dangerous  pursuits ;  n ,  ^=  and  rs:  scientific 
pursuits,  shopkeepers  and  clothiers. 

If  the  native  have  many  planets  in  the  watery  signs,  it 
signifies  that  he  would  succeed  well  as  a  publican,  brewer, 
fishmonger,  especially  if  such  signs  be  occupied  by  the  benefic 
planets.  If  they  possess  the  scientific  signs,  he  will  excel 
as  a  clerk  or  writer,  dealing  in  clothes,  as  an  auctioneer,  &c.  ; 
if  in  the  earthy  signs,  housebuilding,  agriculture,  bricklaying, 
or  those  employments  which  deal  chiefly  with  earth  ;  if  in  the 
fiery  signs,  as  smith,  mechanic,  cattle-dealer,  horsebreaker,  and 
various  kinds  of  employment,  in  the  army,  &c. 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTUOLOCIY.  83 

The  most  powerful  planet  in  the  map  also  has  some  influence 
on  the  employment.  In  this,  $  denotes  writers,  authors, 
accountants,  teachers,  stationers,  booksellers,  and  those  who 
live  by  stipend  or  salary ;  9  signifies  employment  among 
wines,  dress,  ornaments,  perfumery,  flowers,  and  those 
engaged  on  the  stage  ;  0"  produces  soldiers,  and  such  as  work 
by  fire  or  iron,  cooks,  butchers,  shipwrights,  carpenters,  &c.  ; 
T/  shows  lawyers,  councillors,  divines,  clothiers,  tailors, 
revenue  officers,  judges  and  public  characters ;  T?  denotes 
printers,  agriculturists,  sextons,  and  sometimes  divines, 
especially  if  in  >fc  or  A  to  T/;  y  shows  astrologers,  antiquarians, 
curiosity  dealers,  and  all  who  follow  a  strange  and  uncommon 
employment.  If  $,  Q"  and  T;>  are  the  chief  ruling  planets, 
and  in  d  or  bad  aspect,  the  native  takes  to  thieving  and 
forging,  swindling  and  unlawful  pursuits.  If  9  j°in  9  a°d 
O",  they  are  sculptors,  painters,  artists  and  engravers.  The 
O  favourably  aspected  by  T?  or  y,  gives  employment  in  the 
State  or  Civil  Service,  and  denotes  managers,  and  persons 
having  authority  and  power.  The  testimonies  respecting 
employment  should  be  well  weighed,  as  the  different  kinds  of 
employments  are  various  and  very  numerous ;  therefore,  let 
not  the  young  student  judge  this  point  hastily. 

The  importance  or  magnitude  of  the  employment  will  be 
seen  from  the  position  of  the  ruling  planets,  for,  should  they 
be  oriental  or  above  the  earth,  then  it  will  be  lucrative  and 
eminent ;  the  same  if  many  planets  occupy  Cardinal  signs, 
or  Cardinal  signs  occupy  the  angles ;  but  should  the  ruling 
planet,  or  most  of  the  planets  be  occidental  and  under  the 
Earth,  then  it  will  be  obscure,  and  such  persons  usually  have 
to  work  for  others  all  their  lives.  Persons  so  born  seem  to 
lack  ambition,  and  are  consequently  quite  content  to  remain 
in  obscurity  and  be  the  faithful  servants  of  others.  When 
the  Q  and  ])  are  in  sjc  or  A  to  each  other,  the  native  seldom 
has  any  difficulty  in  obtaining  employment,  but  the  Q  or 
§  of  the  lights  has  an  opposite  effect ;  also  persons  born  with 
the  })  much  afflicted  by  Fp,  should  be  careful  in  commencing 


84  TIIK   (iUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

business  on  their  own  account ;  they  will  be  much  happier 
and  far  more  prosperous  in  employment.  Again,  the  Q  in 
s)c  or  A  to  0"  is  very  favourable  for  employment,  denoting 
rapid  advancement,  but  when  (f  afflicts  the  Q  by  Q  or  £  it 
is  seldom  the  native  and  his  master  agree. 

Referring  to  our  map  pago  37  we  find  9  l*dy  of  the  Mid- 
heaven  in  (j  with  the  0  and  ^  an('  oriental  of  the  0,  con- 
sequently that  planet  would  denote  the  employment.  Placed 
as  she  is,  I  should  judge  his  profession  to  l>e  in  connection 
with  wearing  apparel,  flowers  or  millinery,  probably  the 
former  as  T/  is  strong  and  denotes  tailors,  clothiers,  &e.  We 
may  therefore  consider  his  employment  as  such,  and  that  it 
is  the  best  he  can  follow.  The  /,  of  ])  and  0"  would  make 
him  a  shrewd  man  of  business  and  one  that  can  drive  a 
hard  bargain. 


CHAPTER    VII. 

OF  MARRIAGE. 

FOR  males  regard  the  J)  and  9»  an(l  f°r  females  the  0  ami 
9  ;  if  these  are  strong  and  free  from  the  affliction  or  aspect 
of  V),  they  marry  early,  especially  if  they  be  oriental,  i.e., 
between  the  1st  and  10th  houses,  or  in  the  opposite  quarter 
of  the  map,  but  should  I?  afflict  the  J)  or  0.  it  delays 
marriage,  and  should  the  latter  planets  be  weak  and  h 
strong,  and  barren  signs  occupy  the  1st  and  f>th  houses,  the 
native  will  not  marry.  Should  I?  afflict  the  J)  by  tf,  Q  or 
(f,  the  death  of  the  wife  is  signified,  and  if  in  n ,  f  or  X , 
a  plurality  of  wives  is  denoted,  especially  if  at  the  same  time 
the  J)  applies  by  tf  or  aspect  to  more  than  one  planet.  For 
a  female,  judge  the  0  instead  of  the  J).  9  afflicted  by  J;> 
shows  trouble  in  courtship  and  probably  disappointment, 
and  if  afflicted  by  IJ,  jealousy  and  mistrust;  the  J)  afflicting 
9  also  denotes  trouble  in  courtship.  The  fruitful  signs 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  85 

occupying  the  1st,  5th,  or  7th  hastens  marriage  ;  the  barren 
signs  retard  it,  The  ])  strong  in  the  5th  or  7th,  in  aspect  to 
many  planets,  causes  an  early  marriage. 

Conjugal  happiness  depends  upon  the  J),  9>  ©>  y»  and 
the  7th  house  chiefly,  for  should  y,  F?  or  (j*  occupy  this 
house,  but  little  happiness,  prosperity  or  comfort  will  be 
experienced,  unless  they  are  most  excellently  aspected  by 
the  benefics,  and  even  then,  many  minor  troubles  will  occur  ; 
but  should  these  planets  be  unaspected  or  afflicted  in  any 
way,  then  marriage  will  prove  the  most  unfortunate  event 
in  the  native's  whole  career.  Again,  if  the  0  with  a  female 
be  afflicted  by  y ,  it  will  lead  her  astray,  and  she  will  probably 
leave  her  husband  and  live  with  another  man  ;  if  the  0  be 
afflicted  by  Q%  the  man  will  be  a  harsh,  cruel  husband  ;  if 
by  fp  he  will  be  worthless  and  miserly,  lazy,  and  in  both  cases 
a  most  unhappy  union  will  be  the  result.  Even  should  the 
0  be  in  5J<  or  A  to  y  there  is  danger  of  the  female  being 
led  astray,  especially  if  25  or  X  occupy  the  ascendant,  but  in 
this  case  it  is  not  likely  to  lead  to  separation.  With  men 
regard  the  D  ;  if  she  be  in  tf»  Q  or  §  to  y,  men  will  cohabit 
with  married  women,  and  even  the  ^f.  or  A  incline  this  way. 
When  y  afflicts  or  aspects  9»  men  cohabit  with  single  females, 
and  women  with  single  young  men  ;  should  tf  or  Tj  aspect 
any  of  the  aforesaid  planets  at  the  same  time,  the  misconduct 
will  be  publicly  known,  but  if  I/  be  in  aspect,  it  will  not  be 
known  to  any  extent ;  V)  in  •%.  or  A  will  cause  it  to  be  carried 
on  with  great  secrecy,  y  or  T?  in  the  1st,  6th  or  7th, 
or  (f  in  the  5th  or  7th  it  is  seldom  the  native,  whether  male 
or  female,  leads  a  chaste  life. 

9  in  good  aspect  to  V)  shows  sincerity  and  attachment 
in  marriage,  and  if  T/  or  9  ^c  m  the  7th,  domestic  felicity 
and  comfort ;  the  0  and  J>  therein  is  good,  but  much  depends 
on  how  they  are  aspected,  and  to  what  planets  they  apply. 
The  0  with  a  female  and  the  ])  with  a  male  applying  to  the 
<J ,  ^  or  A  of  11  denotes  a  happy  marriage  sooner  or  later 
in  life  ;  but  if  to  Fj,  then  it  will  not  be  so  happy,  for  the  wife 


80  THE   GUIDE   TO    ASTROLO<JY. 

or  Ini.-liaii'l  will  be  old,  bad-tempered,  ami  miserly,  exacting, 
and  with  but  little  attachment  or  feeling. 

The  wife  is  described  by  that  planet  to  which  the  J)  first 
applies  (except  there  be  a  planet  near  the  cusp  of  the  7th, 
when  take  it),  or  if  she  apply  to  no  planet,  then  take  the 
sign  on  the  cusp  of  the  7th  and  judge  from  this  ;  if  she  apply 
to  9»  th°  w'f°  W'H  ')C  handsome,  loving  and  accomplished  ; 
if  to  9»  clever,  sensible,  active,  but  a  great  talker;  if  to  0"» 
bold,  refractory,  hot-temjwred  ;  if  to  I/,  just,  cheerful,  kind, 
with  a  good  disposition  ;  if  to  \->,  grave,  serious,  attentive  to 
her  duties  and  miserly  ;  if  to  the  0,  generous,  noble,  straight- 
forward, firm  and  determined  ;  if  to  Icl,  she  will  possess  many 
peculiarities,  be  very  headstrong,  rash  and  independent,  and 
difficult  to  manage. 

NOTE. — If  the  application  be  by  bad  aspect,  the  effects 
will  be  so  much  the  worse.  ;  also  sec  how  each  planet  is  aspected, 
and  in  what  sign  it  is  placed,  for  the  ])  A  9  'n  —  denotes 
a  very  different  wife  to  one  signified  by  9  in  Vy  or  V  or  flf ; 
the  same  with  the  other  planets.  For  females,  take  the  0 
instead  of  the  )),  and  observe  also,  that  the  0  applying  to 
T/  in  nj  denotes  a  very  different  husband  to  the  one  signified 
by  T/  in  ^,  or  any  other  sign,  unless  it  be  Vf  ;  the  same  with 
the  other  planets.  The  7th  or  8th  house  occupied  by  H, 
strong,  or  by  V)  in  good  aspect  to  I/,  promises  gain  by 
marriage  ;  the  same  if  I/,  or  V)  rules  the  7th  and  be  in  favour- 
able asj>ect.  The  0  afflicted  by  Q",  V)  or  1,1,  destroys  the 
husband,  or  causes  him  great  and  heavy  misfortunes  ;  the 
J)  similarly  afflicted,  destroys  the  wife,  especially  if  the  J) 
be  in  II ,  /  or  X  • 

As  the  map  on  page  37  is  for  a  male,  we  must  take  the 
J)  and  9  as  the  chief  significators  of  marriage,  but  in  this 
ease  there  are  other  testimonies  to  be  considered.  V}  is 
placed  in  the  middle  of  the  7th  house  in  X  '•  the  ))  applies 
to  cf"  by  a  A  aspect,  o"  is  in  =£:  weak  and  cadent,  and  9» 
the  co-significator  with  the  ])  is  near  the  0  and  9  *"d  in  f. 
Fortunately  the  D  is  elevated  and  free  from  affliction.  The 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  87 

wife  is  signified  as  a  mixture  of  Q"  in  £»:  and  Pj  in  X  with  a 
dash  of  9»  9  an(l tne  0'  iQ  ^ier  mmd.  To  accurately  describe 
her  under  these  conditions  is  difficult.  In  stature  she  would 
be  short  with  clear  cut  features,  pale  in  complexion,  and 
fleshy  face.  In  disposition  headstrong,  determined  and 
sullen  in  temper  (tf  and  Jp),  yet  fond  of  music,  pleasure  and 
of  sight  seeing,  as  denoted  by  9»  9  an(l  0-  Her  position 
in  life  would  be  only  fair,  as  none  of  the  significators  are  strong. 
Marriage  felicity  or  happiness  is  not  shown,  for  tf  and  T?  the 
chief  significators  are  out  of  place  and  afflict  each  other. 
Marriage  would  take  place  early  in  life,  as  the  ])  and  9  are 
in  oriental  quarters.  As  the  ]) ,  9  ancl  b  are  m  bi-corporcal 
signs,  we  may  judge  he  will  lose  his  first  wife  and  marry  again, 
the  2nd  being  signified  by  y,  probably  a  widow  with  some 
money,  for  y  is  strong.  In  this  marriage  much  unhappiness 
will  follow,  probably  separation,  for  the  application  to  II 
will  be  by  £ . 

If  the  nativity  had  been  for  a  female,  we  should  take  b 
for  the  husband  ;  the  ©'s  application  is  by  Q  aspect,  and  b 
is  in  a  weak  and  watery  sign,  denoting  a  drunken,  worthless 
fellow,  and  much  sorrow  and  misery. 


CHAPTER    VIII. 

OF   CHILDREN. 

CONSIDER  the  5th  and  llth  houses  ;  the  1 1th  is  to  be  considered 
because  it  is  the  5th  house  from  the  7th,  or  the  5th  house  of 
the  husband  or  wife.  If  you  find  fruitful  or  feminine  signs 
on  the  cusps  of  these  houses,  they  denote  children  or  offspring  ; 
the  ]) ,  9  an<3  "U-  arc  givers  of  children,  the  £),  <f,  I?  and  y 
deny  them,  allot  but  few,  or  destroy  them  according  to  tho 
nature  of  the  sign  they  occupy  in  the  5th  or  llth  houses. 
§  depends  on  the  sign  he  occupies.  The  signs  arc  approxi- 
mately as  follows  : — T  is  against  offspring,  or  gives  but  one 


88  THE  GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOtlY. 

or  two;  b»  three  or  four;  II,  two  or  three;  Sc,  five  or  six  ; 
££  denies  offspring;  TCf,  two  or  three  ;  £i,  three  or  four;  IT,, 
four  or  five  ;  / ,  three  or  four  ;  Yf>,  two  or  three  ;  52  denies 
offspring  ;  X,  seven  or  eight.  The  foregoing  are  when  no 
planets  possess  cither  the  5th  or  llth  house.  The  Q,  $,  and 
the  inulcfic  planets  diminish  the  number;  the  ]) ,  V  or  "5/ 
augments  it.  The  D  in  the  5th,  in  bi-eorporeal  signs,  ]>ro- 
mises  many  children,  often  twins  ;  the  same  if  she  be  in  <£> 
in  the  5th.  A  friend  of  mine,  with  J)  in  nj  in  5th,  in  good 
aspect  to  many  planets  has  sixteen  children,  all  living. 

The  number  of  children  will  be  increased  or  diminished 
in  proportion  as  the  planets  in  the  5th  house  are  well  aspected, 
and  vice  versa.  The  D ,  9  or  T/,  in  5th,  shows  ol>cdient  and 
dutiful  children,  that  will  be  a  comfort  to  their  parents  ; 
but  if  the  evil  planets  be  therein,  then  the  children  will  be 
a  great  trouble,  sickly  or  unruly.  Again,  the  prolific  planets 
in  the  5th  or  llth,  and  afflicted  by  the  infortunes,  denote 
death  to  some  of  the  offspring ;  but  if  in  favourable  asj>ect 
to  many  planets,  they  augment  the  number.  The  5th  house 
shows  the  first  child  ;  the  7th,  the  second  (being  the  3rd  from 
the  5th);  the  9th,  the  third;  the  llth,  the  fourth;  the  1st, 
the  fifth  ;  the  3rd,  the  sixth  ;  and  the  5th  again,  the  seventh 
child. 

If  there  are  signs  of  the  death  of  some  of  the  offspring, 
and  evil  planets  possess  the  9th  house,  by  position  or  "  lord," 
say  the  third  child  will  die  ;  if  the  maleiics  be  in  the  7th,  the 
second  child  will  die  ;  if  in  the  llth,  or  rulers  of  that  house, 
the  fourth  child,  and  so  on.  This  system  of  judging  I  have 
found  tolerably  accurate. 

Many  planets  in  feminine  signs  show  more  girls  than  boys  ; 
in  masculine  signs,  the  reverse.  Again,  if  the  sign  occupying 
the  cusp  of  the  5th  be  masculine,  and  its  ruler  be  a  masculine 
planet,  and  be  placed  in  a  masculine  sign,  most  of  the  children 
will  be  boys;  but  if  the  signs,  &c.,  bo  feminine,  then  the 
majority  will  be  girls.  Again,  if  the  husband's  significators 
be  stronger  than  the  wife's  significators  in  the  figure,  it  is  an 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  89 

additional  testimony  of  more  boys  than  girls,  and  vice  versa. 
Once  more,  if  the  5th  house  denotes  children,  and  the  llth 
house  denies  them,  some  will  die  in  infancy  ;  the  same  if  the 
llth  house  promises  offspring,  and  the  5th  denies  them. 
This  was  remarkably  exemplified  in  a  nativity  I  once  had 
before  me,  in  which  the  D  was  in  8  in  the  5th,  in  favourable 
aspect  to  all  the  planets,  except  V)  and  cJ",  but  tf  ruled  the 
llth,  and  he  was  afflicted  by  y,  T/,  Q,  9  ant^  £  :  *^e  con' 
sequence  was  that  the  native  lost  three  out  of  his  nine  children. 
If  the  lord  of  the  5th  be  in  the  5th,  and  well  aspected,  it  shows 
the  offspring  to  become  fortunate  and  famous  ;  the  same  if 
the  lord  of  the  5th  be  dignified  and  oriental,  or  if  T/.  be  in  the 
5th,  strong  and  unafflicted  ;  bvit  should  the  planets  denoting 
children  be  occidental,  and  out  of  their  dignities,  and  afflicted 
by  aspect,  then  will  the  offspring  be  obscure  and  unfortunate. 
C*  in  <p  to  T/  destroys  some  of  the  offspring ;  so  also  docs 
h  when  afflicting  "}/.  The  late  Queen  Victoria  had  T/  £  b 
at  birth,  and  she  lost  three  of  her  children. 

If  we  refer  to  the  map  on  page  37  we  find  J  on  the  cusp 
of  the  5th  and  T/  its  ruler  in  the  llth  in  the  fruitful  sign  25. 
In  the  5th  we  find  F;l  in  the  sign  Vp  in  £  to  I/,  the  latter 
planet,  however,  is  in  A  to  V)  in  a  fruitful  sign  in  the  7th  house. 
We  should,  therefore,  judge  a  small  family  of  three  or  four, 
as  the  testimonies  are  not  strong  enough  for  a  larger  one. 
The  g  of  I/  and  10I  will  cause  trouble  through  offspring. 
The  3rd  child  ruled  by  the  9th  house  and  ^  is  likely  to  be 
the  "  black  sheep  "  in  the  fold,  and  the  4th  signified  by  I/  in 
the  1 1th,  will  be  the  most  fortunate.  Parental  love  or  parental 
affection  is  ruled  by  the  7th  house,  in  this  case  it  will  not  be 
very  strong  for  V>  weak,  in  this  house,  denotes  that  the  father 
will  think  his  children  much  trouble  and  expense,  and  he 
certainly  will  not  spoil  them  by  over-indulgence. 


90  THE  GUIDE  TO   ASTROLOGY. 

CHAFFER    IX. 

TRAVELUNO 

NOTICE  chiefly  the  .'!nl  and  9th  houses ;  also  in  what  signs 
the  planets  arc  situated,  especially  the  ])  and  c*,  for  if  these 
planets  arc  in  the  3rd  or  9th  in  inoveable  or  common  signs, 
then  the  native  will  travel  much  and  go  long  voyages.  The 
3rd  house  has  connection  chiefly  with  railway  or  short  journeys, 
and  the  9th  house  signifies  long  voyages  to  distant  lands  or 
emigration.  The  ])  in  j>owerful  aspect  to  II,  and  either  in 
the  1st,  3rd  or  9th,  denotes  many  journeys.  The  J)  or  cf" 
cadent,  especially  in  the  3rd,  9th  or  12th,  is  a  sure  sign  of 
travelling  and  if  in  25  or  X,  long  and  extensive  voyages  are 
denoted.  If  the  benefits  govern  the  planets  ruling  the  3rd 
and  9th  and  the  j) ,  and  be  in  favourable  aspect  thereto, 
then  will  the  journeys  be  prosperous  and  lucrative;  the  same 
if  T/  or  9  occupy  the  3rd  or  9th  house,  and  is  not  afflicted  ; 
but  should  \),  o*  or  11  be  there,  it  denotes  much  danger, 
trouble  and  annoyance  ;  and  if  these  planets  be  in  a  watery 
sign  in  the  9th  and  afflicted,  the  native  will  be  shipwrecked  ; 
but  should  they  be  in  the  3rd,  he  will  be  liable  to  an  accident 
in  going  a  short  journey,  by  rail,  road  or  water. 

The  planets  in  fixed  signs  show  but  little  travelling  (except 
in  n\,  when  they  signify  a  voyage) ;  also  when  fixed  signs 
occupy  the  1st,  3rd  or  9th,  there  will  be  but  little  travelling. 
V)  powerful  in  a  nativity  makes  the  native  fond  of  his  home  ; 
the  Q  the  same  ;  whereas  1J,  Q",  $  or  the  ])  denotes  many 
changes,  and  the  native  seldom  remains  long  in  one  place. 
11  or  9  powerful,  he  will  journey  for  business  or  pleasure. 

With  respect  to  going  abroad,  consider  well  the  positions 
of  the  favourable  and  unfavourable  planets,  for  when  the 
majority  of  the  good  planets  are  in  Southern  signs,  they 
show  that  the  native  will  have  good  success  in  the  Southern 
latitudes.  For  instance,  many  planets  in  111,  or  even  J.  , 
would  show  success  in  Australia,  or  adjacent  places,  and  if 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  91 

in  £2  or  K>  then  New  Zealand  would  be  a  good  country. 
Vf-  seems  to  favour  South  Africa  or  Cape  Colony  chiefly. 

If  the  9th  house  is  favourably  occupied  by  these  signs  and 
the  benevolent  planets,  then  the  native  would  do  well  abroad- 
The  same  if  they  were  in  the  1st,  10th,  12th  or  even  the  6th 
house.  You  must  use  your  own  judgment  a  little  here,  for 
it  is  impossible  for  me  to  explain  every  position  possible  for 
the  planets  to  occupy  ;  but  have  chief  regard  to  the  ©,  for 
9  and  9  must  of  necessity  be  near  him,  on  account  of  their 
longitudes  not  exceeding  48°  with  9>  ancl  about  28*  witli 
9  from  the  (£. 

Next  look  to  T/.  Never  expect  much  from  him  if  he  be 
in  n£  or  afflicted  by  tf.  The  same  holds  good  of  the  other 
planets,  and  always  avoid  the  localities  signified  by  those 
planets  that  are  much  afflicted,  or  else  you  will  be  in  con- 
tinual hot  water  with  either  health  or  fortune. 

The  Northern  signs  show  places  near  home,  or  in  North 
latitudes — for  instance,  "f  would  show  the  East  of  England, 
or  a  locality  to  the  east  from  your  place  of  birth.  8  and 
n  are  more  N.E.,  and  SB  denotes  the  North  of  England  or 
Scotland.  £?,  1%  or  ==r  the  N.W.  and  W.  parts,  and  T$ 
Lancashire  especially. 

Persons  born  in  England  under  1%  or  £•,  and  many  planets 
in  (I  or  s  in  the  9th  or  10th  house,  would  do  well  across  the 
Atlantic,  and  in  the  North-East  States  of  the  Union  ;  but  if 
the  planets  were  in  TT£  or  ^r,  then  they  should  go  to  the  Western 
States,  California,  etc. 

NOTE. — Never  go  abroad  if  your  3rd  or  4th  house  is  strong 
and  well  occupied,  or  you  will  sorely  repent  it. 

There  is  much  more  in  the  selection  of  a  house  and  proper 
locality  than  many  imagine,  and  it  is  a  point  on  which  authors 
have  been  very  silent. 

The  foregoing  is  what  I  have  observed  and  found  very 
correct  from  experience  and  observation,  but  there  may  be 
many  points  to  discover  yet ;  hence  I  advise  much  care  and 
scrutiny  into  the  nativity  on  this  head ;  in  fact,  you  cannot 


92  THE  GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOUY. 

give  it  too  much  attention,  for  I  believe  that  a  right  direction 
ami  locality  in  more  than  half  the  road  to  fortune  and  good 
health. 

Referring  to  the  map  on  page  37  we  find  moveable  signs 
on  the  cusps  of  the  3rd  and  9th  and  tf  cadcnt  in  A  to  the  D  • 
These  are  testimonies  of  considerable  travelling  chiefly  by 
rail  and  in  connection  with  business  as  well  as  pleasure. 
The  D  A  o"  is  also  a  testimony  of  changes  and  activity. 
As  V)  afflicts  both  (f  and  y,  and  is  in  elevation  above  them, 
there  is  danger  of  hurt  or  accident,  and  the  jtosition  of  Q" 
shows  that  the  journeys  will  not  be  beneficial  or  agreeable. 
9  ruler  of  the  3rd  in  tf  with  0  and  £  shows  the  pleasurable 
side  of  the  travelling,  and  tf  in  the  3rd  in  A  to  the  ]) ,  the 
business  part.  There  is  no  striking  benefit,  or  otherwise, 
shown  in  travelling  or  changes  of  residence. 


CHAPTER    X. 

ON    THE   SELECTION   OF  A   HOUSE. 

I  HAVE  found,  from  my  own  cxi>erience  and  that  of  others, 
that  much  depends  on  the  selection  of  a  suitable  house  and 
locality. 

We  often  see,  in  everyday  life,  that  a  person  goes  on  com- 
fortably and  steadily,  then  makes  a  move,  and  is  often  ruined, 
or  else  is  ill  and  dies,  have  bereavement,  &c.  ;  in  fact,  the 
move  seems  evil  in  every  way,  and  to  upset  him  terribly. 

It  is  true,  also,  that  others  move,  and  everything  prospers 
with  them,  and  fortune  attends  them  in -every  way.  There 
arc,  no  doubt,  some  directions  operating  at  the  time  either 
for  good  or  evil,  but  if  one  gets  into  a  bad  locality,  then  the 
good  directions  are  much  weakened,  and  the  bad  ones  are 
made  stronger. 

Note,  therefore,  the  following  : — 

First  consider  the  angles  of  the  nativity.  If  cardinal  signs 
occupy  these,  the  house  should  be  a  corner  one;  if  fixed  signs, 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  93 

then  the  house  should  stand  in  the  middle  of  a  road  or  street, 
and  not  at  a  corner,  or  where  roads  or  streets  meet ;  if  common 
signs  are  on  the  angles  of  the  nativity,  then  the  house  should 
be  nearly  the  last  one  in  a  street  or  road,  but  not  absolutely 
the  last  one — not  if  it  be  a  corner  one. 

Again,  f  or  25  denotes  the  first  house  in  a  street  or  road 
that  stands  at  a  corner  ;  -fi  or  Vf  the  last  house  that  stands, 
also,  at  a  corner. 

For  instance,  suppose  there  are  30  houses  in  a  street,  then 
V  or  25  would  show  No.  1,  and  4±  or  Vf  No.  30,  both  of  which 
shoiild  be  corner  houses  ;  the  other  signs — that  is,  the  fixed 
and  common — denote  the  houses  between  these  numbers. 
I  should  consider  the  fixed  signs  to  signify  from  2  to  15,  and 
the  common  signs  from  16  to  29.  This  is  as  near  as  I  can 
tell,  although  probably  a  person  under  8  or  Q  should  be  higher 
up  the  road  than  one  under  tl\  or  ur,  I  consider  }£  to  signify 
the  last  house  but  one  in  a  street. 

The  angles  to  be  considered  are  the  1st  and  4th.  If  you 
find  fixed  or  common  signs  on  one,  and  cardinal  on  the  other, 
it  does  not  matter  where  your  house  is,  yet  even  here  it  is  best 
to  give  preference  to  the  northern  or  southern  signs,  the 
former  showing  the  beginning  of  a  road,  and  the  latter  the 
end  of  it. 

Next  have  regard  to  the  direction  to  which  the  signs  point. 

T  is  East;  25,  North;  £.  is  West;  Vf,  South. 

Now,  if  T  and  25  occupy  the  1st  and  4th  houses,  yoxir 
house  should  have  a  North-East  aspect,  that  is,  one  side  of 
the  house  should  face  the  North,  and  the  other  the  East  ; 
but  if  £>:  or  E  occupy  these  cusps,  then  it  should  face  the 
South  and  West.  The  other  signs  you  will  consider  in  the 
same  way,  thus :  from  T  to  25  the  signs  are  N.E.,  from  25 
to  it  is  N.W.,  from  £:  to  Vf  is  S.W.,  and  from  yp  to  X  is  S.E. 

Cardinal  signs  show  prominent  positions,  as  on  a  hill ; 
common  signs  denote  the  lower  part  of  a  town. 

If  you  live  in  the  country,  then  the  cardinal  signs  show 
where  roads  cross  each  other,  and  this  is  where  your  house 


94  THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROIXKiY. 

should  be  ;  in  short,  if  you  arc  born  under  cardinal  signs,  let 
your  hoiiBo  stand  as  prominently  as  possible ;  but  if  under 
common  signs,  do  not  live  in  a  prominent  house.  Fixed 
signs  are  between  these  two. 

The  next  point  to  look  at  is  where  you  should  be.  If  you 
find  unfortunate  planets  in  the  4th  house,  and  they  be  weak 
or  out  of  dignities,  do  not  stop  in  your  native  place  or  town, 
for  the  4th  house  shows  the  place  in  which  you  were  born, 
but  if  this  house  lie  strong  either  with  the  malefics  in  their 
own  dignities,  or  else  with  the  lights  or  good  planets,  and  they 
not  much  afflicted,  then  stay  there. 

If  the  3rd  house  be  very  strong  with  favourable  planets, 
you  should  go  a  little  distance  from  your  native  town,  and 
in  the  direction  signified  by  the  sign  on  the  3rd — as  if  <S,  go 
a  little  to  the  North  ;  if  Vf,  go  a  little  to  the  South,  and  so  on 
with  the  rest  of  the  signs,  but  do  not  go  far,  for  the  3rd  house 
shows  but  short  distances,  and  I  consider  50  miles  ought  to 
be  the  outside. 

If  you  find  the  9th  house  well  occupied,  go  a  long  way  from 
your  native  place,  or  as  far  as  you  like,  and  in  the  direction 
indicated  by  the  sign  on  that  house. 

By  going  these  distances,  and  in  the  direction  signified, 
you  bring  yourself  under  the  influences  of  the  good  planets, 
and  so  will  have  better  fortune  and  success. 

flood  planets  in  the  1st  or  10th  you  may  go  where  you 
like,  provided  it  be  in  the  proper  direction  denoted  by  the 
planets. 

For  instance,  it  would  be  madness  to  go  South  with  favour- 
able planets  rising  in  eg,  or  to  go  West  if  they  were  in  T  and 
on  the  ascendant. 

If  the  favourable  planets  arc  in  the  other  houses,  the 
distance  you  go  matters  but  little,  so  long  as  you  keep  in 
the  right  direction  as  indicated  by  the  signs. 

Referring  to  the  map,  page  37,  as  to  the  selection  of  a 
house.  It  would  not  be  well  for  him  to  reside  in  his  native 
place,  for  Q*  ruler  of  4th  house  is  weak  and  afflicted  by  h, 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  95 

$ ,  9  >  and  ©•  He  should,  therefore,  remove  from  his  birth- 
place. The  strongest  and  least  afflicted  planets  are  the  }) 
and  11,  and  these  are  in  signs  denoting  the  N.  He  should, 
therefore,  live  in  a  Northerly  direction  from  his  place  of  birth, 
and  his  house  or  business  office  should  be  in  the  middle  of 
a  street  or  road  as  denoted  by  fixed  signs  being  on  the  angles 
of  the  figure.  The  distance  from  his  birthplace  is  not  material, 
as  neither  the  3rd  nor  9th,  or  their  rulers,  are  strong,  con- 
sequently distance  is  of  no  consequence.  He  should  avoid 
foreign  parts,  for  the  lord  of  the  9th  house  is  afflicted  by 
position  and  aspect. 


CHAPTER    XI. 

FKIENDS   AND   ENEMIES. 

FOE  these  have  regard  to  the  llth  house  for  friends,  the 
7th  for  open  enemies,  and  the  12th  for  secret  enemies.  The 
G>  "U-  or  5  in  the  llth,  strong  and  well  aspected,  denotes 
many  strong  and  substantial  friends.  If  the  J)  or  ^  be 
there,  well  fortified,  the  same ;  but  if  afflicted  by  aspect  or 
position,  the  native  will  lose  by  his  friends ;  and  if  J?,  cC  or 
IJ  be  there,  then  will  friends  injure  the  native,  and  do  him 
much  damage. 

The  J)  afflicted  by  Tp  in  any  sign  or  house  is  a  token  of 
false  and  bad  friends,  and  losses  thereby.  Evil  planets  in 
the  7th,  and  especially  cf,  point  to  many  open  adversaries, 
litigation  and  losses ;  good  planets  the  contrary,  unless  they 
be  in  <£>  to  a  planet  in  the  ascendant.  For  instance,  a  person 
born  with  cf"  rising,  and  the  Q  in  g  from  the  7th,  denote 
much  trouble  from  great  and  powerful  men  (signified  by  the 
0),  who  will  thwart  the  endeavours  of  the  native,  causing 
him  injury  and  loss. 

The   J)   and   $   depend  wholly  on  how  they  are  aspected. 


00  THE   GUIDE   TO    ASTBOUXlY. 

If  afflicted  by  the  other  planets,  they  produce  enemies  ;  but 
if  well  placed  and  aspect ed,  the  contrary. 

b>  d"  or  H  i°  the  12th  points  to  many  secret  enemies, 
spiteful  and  malicious,  secretly  injuring  the  native  both 
directly  and  indirectly ;  the  J)  therein  afflicted,  female 
enemies.  The  Q,  I/  or  9  shows  but  few,  if  any,  secret 
foes  ;  9  afflicted  denotes  many  ;  thus  far  with  regard  to  the 
positions  in  the  Horoscope. 

Friendship  and  enmity  are  also  produced  by  the  different 
positions  in  any  two  persons'  nativities  and  the  sign  occupying 
the  cusp  of  the  ascendant ;  for  instance,  persons  born  under 
certain  triplicities  agree,  irrespective  of  the  places  of  the 
planets,  such  as  one  born  under  f  will  agree  and  feel  friendly 
with  persons  under  ,Q,  or  f;  those  under  8  with  persons 
born  under  HJ  or  Vf,  and  so  on  with  the  other  triplicities;  but 
when  the  signs  occupying  the  ascendants  of  two  persons  are 
in  Q  or  <f ,  or  inconjunct,  then  little  harmony  is  manifested. 
In  this  the  g  is  worse  than  the  C,  or  inconjunct  signs ;  thus 
a  person  born  under  Y  will  never  agree  long  with  one  born 
under  £:,  or  s,  or  Vf.  Again,  you  must  consider  the  places 
of  the  luminaries  and  other  planets,  for  if  the  Q  or  J)  in  one 
nativity  be  in  rf  or  friendly  aspect  with  the  lights  in  the  other 
nativity,  then  will  friendship  follow  ;  but  should  they  be  in 
Q  or  £>,  quarrelling  and  enmity  will  occur.  The  lights 
(Q  and  J))  in  parallel  in  the  two  nativities  are  a  good  testi- 
mony of  friendship.  Again,  the  other  planets  must  be  well 
considered,  for  if  the  0  in  one  nativity  be  on  the  place  of 
\)  in  the  other  nativity,  he  who  has  fj  will  bencBt  from  or 
through  him  who  has  the  Q  on  the  place  of  V)  ;  neither  is  it 
necessary  that  the  Solar  man  should  suffer  damage  from  the 
Saturnine  person.  Damage  is  only  shown  when  the  nativity 
is  very  bad,  and  consequently  the  minds  of  the  afflicting 
party  will  then  be  bent  on  mischief,  c?  and  9  roust  be 
considered  principally  for  friendship,  and  enmity  between 
male  and  female,  for  if  tf  in  a  female  nativity  be  on  the  place 
of  9  m  a  male,  there  will  spring  up  strong  feeling  of  regard 


THE   GUIDE  TO   ASTROLOGY.  97 

and  friendship  immediately  they  meet,  but  if  o"  in  the  one 
nativity  be  in  Q  or  §  to  $  m  the  other,  hatred  and  dislike 
will  soon  be  manifested. 

In  the  map  on  page  37  the  llth  house  is  ruled  by  §  and 
the  ]),  the  sign  <£>  being  "intercepted"  with  T/  therein. 
The  ])  is  also  unafflicted  and  near  the  cusp  of  the  llth.  These 
are  testimonies  that  the  native  will  not  lack  friends,  but  will 
benefit  by  them  very  much.  He  should,  however,  be  careful 
of  young  people,  or  those  with  a  literary  turn  of  mind  as 
shown  by  £  in  f,  for  this  planet  is  weak  and  afflicted  by 
cf  and  V),  and,  consequently  can  render  no  material  help 
to  the  native. 


CHAPTER    XII. 

THE   KIND   OF  DEATH. 

THIS  is  denoted  chiefly  by  that  planet  which  afflicts  the 
0  or  J) ,  and  the  sign  and  house  in  which  it  is  placed ;  also 
by  the  6th  house,  Avhich  is  the  house  of  sickness. 

y    causes   death   in   some   extraordinary   or   uncommon 
manner,  what  are  generally  called  in  the  newspapers;  "strange 
deaths,"  and  these  are  frequently  sudden  and  unexpected 
he  also  inclines  to  suicide,  and  death  by  railway,  or  in  travelling 
that  is,  if  the  map  shows  a  violent  end. 

P?  denotes  death  by  colds  and  consumptions,  agues,  dis- 
orders of  the  spleen,  dropsy,  atrophy  or  wasting,  syncope, 
and,  generally,  all  chronic  diseases. 

11  shows  death  by  apoplexy,  inflammation  of  the  lungs, 
and  liver  diseases,  and  enlargement  of  the  heart,  &c. 

(j"  denotes  fevers,  stone  in  the  kidneys  or  bladder,  strangury , 
spitting  of  blood,  bursting  blood  vessels,  fatty  degeneration 
of  the  heart ;  also  burns,  scalds,  wounds,  miscarriage, 
haemorrhage,  abortion,  erysipelas,  smallpox,  and  such  deaths 
as  generally  occur  after  a  short  or  sudden  illness. 

H 


98  THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY. 

The  «I<;;M  in  which  the  planets  are  located  should  be  noted, 
and  also  the  nature  of  the  signs  on  the  (Hh  and  8th  houses. 
The  fixed  signs  dispose  to  death  by  suffocation,  heart  disease, 
bronchitis,  stone  or  gravel,  spinal  complaints,  also  diphtheria. 
The  movcablc  signs  denote  death  by  colds,  rheumatism,  gout, 
cancer,  all  diseases  of  the  kidneys  and  liver,  brain  fever, 
vertigo,  fits  and  disorders  of  the  stomach.  The  common  signs 
show  death  by  consumption,  asthma,  spasms,  dropsy,  diabetes, 
scurvy,  and  bowel  complaints. 

A  violent  or  sudden  death  is  denoted  when  the  Q  or  J)  is 
afflicted  by  the  Q  or  <£  of  cf",  c?  at  tnc  «ame  time  being 
elevated  above  the  lights.  Again,  tf  in  tf  with  the  lights 
in  the  1st,  Gth,  8th,  or  10th,  ]>oints  to  a  violent  or  sudden 
death,  more  especially  if  ^  or  I.I  add  their  evil  testimony  to 
CJ".  V)  in  the  10th  in  §  to  the  Q  produces  death  by  the  fall 
of  buildings.  The  signs  occupied  by  the  Luminaries  and  0* 
or  \-)  must  l>c  considered  ;  Cardinal  signs  signify  a  notorious 
death,  as  by  murder,  gunshot,  lightning,  scalds,  railway  or 
lire ;  the  fij-vd  signs — strangling,  hanging,  suffocation  <ir 
drowning ;  the  common  signs — suicide,  shipwreck,  prison, 
hydrophobia,  &c.,  and  II  always  denotes  that  the  deatli  will 
be  extraordinary  or  uncommon,  and  create  great  public 
interest  or  concern. 

In  our  map  page  37  we  find  the  Q  much  afflicted  by  h , 
the  latter  planet  being  in  elevation,  consequently  we  should 
judge  f?  in  X  to  be  the  "  killing  "  planet.  Placed  in  that 
sign  he  denotes  colds,  consumption,  lung  difficulties  and 
dropsy. 


!PART    FOUK. 


CHAPTER   I. 

'CONCERNING  DIRECTIONS,  OR  THE  METHOD  OF  CALCULATING 
FUTURE   EVENTS. 

BEFORE  practising  this  part  of  astrology,  you  should  make 
yourself  thoroughly  conversant  with  all  that  has  been  taught 
previously,  especially  such  as  relate  to  the  planets  and  signs, 
and  the  calculations  of  the  aspects  particularly,  otherwise  you 
will  iind  yourself  in  a  hopeless  stale  of  confusion,  and  uuablo 
to  decide  anything. 

In  the  lirst  place  the  directions  are  calculated  from  the 
places  of  the  planets  after  birth,  reckoning  each  day  after 
birth,  as  one  year  of  life,  the  10th  day  after  birth  as  the  10th 
year  of  life,  the  50th  day,  as  the  50th  year  and  so  on,  calcu- 
lating the  places  of  the  planets  every  day  to  the  actual  hour 
of  birth.  For  instance,  if  the  hour  of  birth  were  4  A.M.,  and 
you  desired  the  directions  for  the  50th  year  of  life,  you  would 
take  the  places  of  the  planets  for  the  50th  day  after  birth, 
and  calculate  them  to  4  A.M.  of  that  day,  and  the  aspects 
formed  on  that  day  would  denote  the  events  for  that  year. 
In  fact,  this  part  of  the  system  is  like  the  erection  of  so  many 
horoscopes,  and  I  advise  the  student  to  erect  a  map  for 
every  day  after  birth,  as  the  motion  of  the  ])  is  very  swift, 
and  her  position  is  constantly  changing. 

The  motion  of  the  ])  per  day,  you  will  divide  by  twelve, 
which  will  give  her  motion  per  month,  as  there  are  twelve 
months  in  a  year ;  if  you  divide  this  again  by  four  it  will 

a  2 


100  TUB  O  IT  IDE  TO 

give  her  motion  per  week,  for  there  are  four  weeks  in  a  month  ; 
this  division  is  very  necessary,  because  the  T)  does  not  move 
regularly,  but  changes  from  1*2°  to  nearly  10°  per  day. 

You  will  lind  the   ])   to  be  the  principal  actor  in  the  direc- 
tions owing  to  her  swift  motion.     The  signs  and  degrees  on 
the  cusps  of  the  houses  in  the  nativity  you  will  continue  the 
same,   and   insert   the   planets  according   to   the  signs  and 
degrees  in  which  they  may  be  found,  the  same  as  you  would 
if  it  were  a  simple  nativity.     When  you  have  proceeded  thus 
far,  calculate  all  the  aspects  that  are  actually  formed  by  the 
])  and  planets  on  tliat  day,  and  note  them  down,  for  they  are 
the  directions  for  that  year  of  life.     The  next  point  are  the 
transits.     These  must  be  considered  for  the  actual  year  in 
which  the  directions  fall  out ;  for  instance,  if  you  compute 
the  directions  for  the  20th  day  after  birth,  which  is  equal  to 
the  '20th  year  of  life,  you  must  look  to  the  transits  for  tho 
actual  year  of  life  ;  as,  if  a  person  were  born  in  1862,  seo  tho 
transits  for  1882.     Now  observe.     When  the  places  of  the 
evil  directions  are  excited  or  aspected  by  evil  transits,  the 
results  are  very  powerful  and  evil ;  good  directions  and  good 
transits  produce  very  beneficial  results ;  evil  directions  and 
good  transits,  and  good  directions  and  bad  transits,  have  little 
or  no  effect,  as  they  nullify  each  other. 

Suppose  for  instance,  you  find  j)  Q  I?,  and  at  tho  time 
I/  is  in  s|<  to  ])  and  AZ  to  V?,  or  quincunx  (150°)  to  fp  by 
transit,  such  a  direction  would  not  operate,  for  T/  would 
correct  the  evil,  but  if  \r)  or  }£  were  in  tf  with  ])  or  V),  then 
it  would  operate  with  great  force. 

The  exciting  planets  are  y,  V),  T/,  and  cf,  the  latter 
especially  when  !{, ;  the  Q  also  when  passing  over  the  place 
of  direction,  but  I  do  not  observe  his  aspects.  Sonic  students 
have  written  to  say  that  ^  has  a  powerful  exciting  influence, 
and  I  would  advise  the  reader  to  observe  him  ;  his  motion 
is  very  slow :  hence  it  is  quite  probable  he  may  effect  some- 
thing. When  the  exciting  planets  arc  li,  the  effect  is  more 
powerful  us  their  motion  is  slower.  Particular  attention 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  101 

should  be  paid  to  the  P  of  y,  Y>,  11,  Q",  and  the  Q,  for  the 
motions  of  these  are  very  slow ;  hence  they  exert  great  in- 
fluence, whether  by  direction  or  excitement.  For  distinction, 
I  call  those  directions  which  are  made  by  the  planets  among 
themselves,  primary  ;  and  those  made  by  the  moon  I  call 
secondary  or  lunar  ;  and  the  transits  I  call  excitement. 

The  student  will  remember  that  y,  \},  and  tf  are  evil 
planets,  and  ^  a  benevolent  one  ;  hence  the  transits  of  the 
former  over  the  place  of  direction  are  evil  in  effect ;  the  same 
with  their  parallels,  but  the  cfs  and  Ps  of  T/  are  favourable. 
The  aspects  are  to  be  reckoned  according  to  their  natures, 
thus  : — v»  >K>  Q  and  A  being  good,  the  Z »  D>  Q  and  £  lad. 
You  must  bear  in  mind  that  good  aspects  of  the  unfortunate 
planets  to  the  places  of  directions  which  are  evil,  are  not  so 
powerful  as  the  good  influences  of  If.,  and  that  their  evil 
aspects  by  transits  to  the  place  of  direction  are  worse  than 
the  bad  rays  of  T/. 

You  must  also  recollect  the  power  of  the  aspects,  whether 
Directional,  or  by  Transit;  for  instance,  a  V,  Q,  ±,  &c.,  will 
have  very  little  effect  because  they  arc  "weak"  aspects  and 
their  influence  is  always  weak  accordingly.  Page  6,  on  the 
"Nature"  of  the  aspects  will  give  the  student  an  approxi- 
mate idea  of  the  relative  strength  of  the  different  aspects,  and 
this  strength  or  weakness  must  never  be  lost  sight  of  in 
forming  a  judgment. 

The  /__  or  Q  of  the  Sun  by  direction  appears  to  be  exceed- 
ingly powerful,  very  little  inferior  to  the  Q  or  £>,  why  this 
is  so,  I  cannot  explain,  but  experience  has  convinced  me  that 
it  is  so ;  neither  have  I  ever  known  a  /.  or  Q  of  the  Q  to 
any  of  the  superior  planets  ('#,  y,  (7,  T/.  and  J)  to  pass 
without  a  marked  event  occurring,  particularly  y,  (7  or  T/. 
This  part  of  Astrology  requires  a  lot  of  thought,  and  the 
different  significations  should  be  well  balanced  in  the  mind. 

THK    Ciri 


TO    ASTKOLOttY. 


CHAPTER   II. 

AX    EXAMPLE   OF   THE    WOKKINO   OF  THE   DIRECTIONS. 

Foil   the   convenience   of   students   we   will   reproduce   hero 
a  copy  of  the  map  on  page  37. 


23    <?   12°  5'  R 

y  9°  19'  a  . 


vy 

Supposing  we  want  the  directions  for  the  20th  3'ear  of  life, 
we  take  20  days  after  birth,  or  December  20th,  1906,  and 
calculate  the  planet's  places  to  lOh.  20m.  p.m.  on  that  clay 
as  in  the  following  map. 


THE    (iUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY. 

DECLINATIONS  :  — 


<jf  22° 
#23° 
b  9° 
11  23° 


N.  2' 
S.  31' 
S.  46' 
N.  8' 
S.  10' 


0  23' 

$  16C 

19C 


S.  20' 
S.  57' 
S.  35' 
S.  24' 


The  daily  motion  of  the  J>  is  13°  25'  which  divided  by  12 
is  1°  7'  or  her  motion  per  month.  Divide  this  again  by  4 
which  will  be  17',  and  it  shows  her  motion  per  week. 

If  you  refer  to  the  "  Aspectarian  "  in  my  Ephemeris  for 
190f>,  it  will  show  you  what  aspects  are  formed  between 
10U.  20m.  p.m.,  on  December  20th  and  lOh.  20m.  p.m.  on 


104  THE  GUIDE   TO   ASTBOLOGY. 

the  21st.  In  addition  to  these,  there  will  be  the  aspecls  of 
the  progressed  planets  to  certain  places  in  the  map  at  birth. 
There  is  only  one  Primary  aspect  9  V  "V-  This  is  very 
weak  and  need  not  be  noticed.  In  the  Lunar  aspects  them 
are  several. 

SECONDARY. 

December,  1906     >  A  T/  February,   1907      )>  d  b 

>  *  y  April,  „         >    P  b  R 

January,     1907      >   P  0*  „  „         >  A  ^ 

»  d"  b  R     Mfty  »      >  p  b 

„  „         >   D  Q  R       September,   „         ji   Q  o" 

February,     „         j>  A  "V  R      October,       „         >   Q   »  R 

We  must  now  look  to  the  transits  for  192C  and  1927  or 
20  years  after  birth,  and  see  whether  any  of  these  direc- 
tions will  be  excited  to  action.  The  first  direction 
5>  A  "11  in  December  is  not  excited  beyond  a  faint  ^  of  Q" 
n  8,  which  will  effect  but  little. 

The  next,  })  •%.  H  also  in  December,  will  Ixs  similarly 
excited  but  only  to  a  small  or  non-effectual  extent.  In 
January,  1907,  the  J)  P  cf"  in  Declination  about  11°  S.  This, 
too,  is  not  excited. 

In  the  same  month  the  J)  comes  to  a  d  of  b  m  ^1C  Radix 
or  Nativity  in  X  8°  38'.  tf  will  be  in  ^  in  b ,  but  as  the  direc- 
tion is  bad  and  the  excitement  good,  no  material  evil  will 
result. 

The  next  will  be  the  J)  Q  0  in  the  Radix,  also  in  January. 
There  is  no  excitement  except  that  of  Q",  which  is  benefic, 
so  the  direction  will  pass  without  any  appreciable  effect. 

In  February  ))  A  ~U-  >"  X  9°  19'  followed  almost  directly 
by  J  d  b»  b  by  transit  will  be  in  /  6°  on  the  1st  of  the 
month,  hence  within  4°  of  a  Q  to  the  place  of  the  ]),  and 
although  I/  is  in  X  4°  at  the  same  time,  yet  the  influence 
of  b  W'U  destroy  that  of  11  and  nullify  the  good  of  ])  A  T/. 
We  may,  therefore,  judge  that  February  will,  on  the  whole 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTKOLOGY.  105 

be  an  unfortunate  month,  the  chief  influence  being  J>  tf  Tp, 
moderately  excited  by  Fp  in  J  in  Q. 

The  next  direction  is  that  of  ])  P  Tp  in  April,  but  it  is 
not  excited  to  action. 

In  the  same  month  j)  A  ^  from  K  12°,  but  that  also  is 
not  excited  to  action. 

In  May   ])  P  fp  but  it  is  not  excited. 

In  September  D  Q  tf  from  K  17°  and  tt[  2°.  There  is 
no  excitement. 

In  October  D  Q  D  from  X  19°  19'  and  n  19°  19',  but 
here,  again,  there  is  no  excitement  worth  noticing.  Therefore 
the  year  so  far  as  directions  are  concerned  will  be  very  quiet, 
and  the  native's  affairs  will  proceed  as  usual,  except  in  Febru- 
ary when  there  is  an  unfavourable  influence  of  fp,  occurring 
in  the  4th  and  7th  houses. 

The  latter  is  the  house  of  business  or  sweethearts,  hence 
some  trouble  will  occur  in  connection  with  love  or  business 
affairs,  probably  a  disappointment,  as  fp  afflicts  9  at  birth. 


CHAPTER  III. 

THE   EFFECTS   OF  DIRECTIONS. 

You  will  first  observe  and  carefully  note  the  lords  of  the 
different  houses,  as,  for  instance,  the  lords  of  the  2nd,  3rd, 
6th,  and  other  houses,  and  particularly  the  houses  in  which 
the  directions  fall,  and  from  which  the  excitement  arises. 
For  instance,  say  !>  D  b  fr°m  2nd  and  6th,  and  excited 
from  10th ;  such  a  direction  would  fall  principally  upon 
business  and  money,  as  ruled  by  2nd  and  10th  ;  but  if  the 
excitement  occurred  from  the  8th,  there  would  be  great 
probability  of  sickness,  and  perhaps  death,  for  the  majority 
of  influence  would  arise  from  the  6th  and  8th. 


100  THE   GUIUK    To    ASTKOUHiY. 

Have  special  regard,  however,  to  the  i)lacc  of  the  afflicting 
planet,  for  J)  Q  V)  and  V)  in  2nd  is  loss  of  money  or  bank- 
ruptcy ;  but  if  V)  wore  in  6th,  it  would  more  likely  touch 
the  health.  You  will  also  observe  that  directions  formed  in 
angles,  and  cardinal  signs,  and  excited,  are  very  jxmcrful 
with  resjx;ct  to  fame,  credit,  and  other  things  of  a  sudden 
and  stuj>endous  nature,  cVen  to  a  violent  or  sudden  death  ; 
and  those  in  succeedcnt  or  eadent  houses  arc  more  tardy  and 
slower  in  effect,  yet  are  none  the  less  powerful  when  excited 
to  action.  These  are  the  chief  points  to  be  observed. 

The  Q  tf  {_  n  Q  $  or  P  \\. — Very  unfortunate,  and 
signifies  unlooked-for  calamities,  attended  with  great  anxiety 
of  mind,  law,  &c.,  but  I  have  not  observed  that  it  affect 
the  health  to  any  remarkable  degree,  although  it  may  assist 
the  evil  operations  of  other  planets.  It  signifies  great  and 
sudden  losses  by  bad  debts  and  speculations,  accusations, 
and  danger  of  imprisonment. 

With  females  it  is  extremely  unfortunate,  and  many  get 
into  trouble  under  this  direction,  leave  their  husbands,  or 
elope.  Some  I  have  known  to  marry  suddenly,  but  separation, 
or  death  of  the  husband  has  followed  within  twelve  months. 
I  have  also  observed  that  it  produces  voyages,  journeys,  and 
the  entire  break-up  of  many  homes.  Have  regard  to  the 
houses  in  which  it  falls,  as  the  1st,  5th,  and  7th  for  females, 
the  3rd  and  9th  for  voyages,  changes,  or  journeys,  and  so  on 
of  the  others. 

The  0  v.  sfc  Q  A  $• — Beneficial  friends,  publicity,  fame 
and  honour,  journeys  and  pleasant  voyages,  prosperity  and 
gain.  This  is  a  famous  direction  for  an  M.P.,  and  he  is  sure 
to  come  out  prominently  under  its  influence  ;  civic  honours, 
&c.,  are  bestowed.  With  females  this  direction  is  not  good. 
It  sometimes  causes  a  hasty  marriage,  and,  unless  the  natus 
is  favourable,  a  regrettable  one.  With  some,  it  alienates 
them  from  their  husbands  and  homes.  The  bad  directions 
of  0  and  I.I  have  similar  influence  if  they  fall  in  certain 
houses. 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  107 

The  Od"ZDQcPorP  b- — This  is  very  evil,  and  brings 
trouble  in  health,  mind,  and  estate,  and  frequently  death. 
If  the  aspect  falls  in  the  4th,  or  T?  or  0  be  lord  of  the  4th, 
it  signifies  death  to  the  father  ;  if  in  the  2nd  house,  loss  of 
wealth  ;  and  unless  the  nativity  is  strong,  the  native's  affairs 
will  be  entirely  "  shipwrecked."  The  same  if  it  occurs  in 
the  10th,  as  may  be  witnessed  by  the  fate  of  Napoleon.  In 
the  1st,  brain  fever  and  mental  affliction  are  shown,  also 
rheumatic  and  chronic  ailments,  falls,  and  such  accidents  as 
are  likely  to  result  in  sudden  death,  as  the  fall  of  buildings, 
and,  if  in  watery  signs,  shipwreck  or  drowning ;  the  2nd 
house,  loss  of  substance  and  general  misfortune ;  in  the  3rd, 
accidents  in  travelling,  and  loss  through  brethren;  in  the  6th, 
much  sickness,  and  perhaps  death  ;  the  same  in  the  8th  ;  in 
the  llth,  bad  friends  by  whom  the  native  will  be  robbed; 
and  in  the  12th,  danger  of  imprisonment. 

Have  also  regard  to  the  houses  of  which  the  0  and  V)  are 
lords.  In  a  female  nativity,  loss  of  husband,  death  of  parents, 
sorrow  and  bereavement. 

By  way  of  illustration  and  which,  no  doubt,  all  my  readers 
have  observed,  I  will  mention  that  sometimes  a  person  dies 
in  the  midst  of  prosperity  ;  another  has  good  health  and  losos 
his  fortune  ;  another  loses  perhaps  fortune  and  health  at  the 
same  time ;  and  another  suffers  great  bereavement,  but 
receives  a  fortune.  Such  things  can  only  be  learned  from 
the  radix,  and  the  houses  in  which  the  directions  fall,  and  the 
lords  of  certain  houses.  All  deaths  are  not  evil  alike,  and  all 
are  not  signified  by  bad  directions.  For  instance,  If.  strong 
in  the  6th  denotes  gain  through  uncles  and  aunts  ;  so,  when 
a  good  direction  is  formed  to  T/,  the  native  will  have  benefit 
from  them,  or  they  may  die  and  leave  him  a  legacy.  Hence, 
instead  of  the  death  being  an  injury,  it  will  be  a  benefit  to 
the  native.  These  are  points  which  you  must  always  bear 
in  mind  if  you  mean  to  be  accurate. 

The  0  V  ^f-  Q  A  Pp- — These  arc  very  powerful,  especially 
if  0  or  T?  be  powerful  at  birth,  or  lord  of  a  prominent  house, 


108  THE  GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOG*. 

as  the  1st,  10th,  2nd,  &c.  They  then  show  public  fame, 
pain,  and  honour,  new  friends,  gifts,  &c.  With  females, 
they  sometimes  give  marriage. 

The  0  /_  n  C  §  1£. — Very  bad,  even  worse  for  money 
matters  than  the  evil  directions  of  I? .  Law  is  threatened, 
affronts,  and  indignities.  All  speculations  should  be  avoided. 
It  deranges  the  health,  and  denotes  danger  of  apoplexy, 
pleurisy,  bursting  of  blood-vessels,  and  a  disordered  state 
of  the  system.  In  the  7th,  it  is  very  bad  for  law  ;  in  the  10th 
and  2nd,  for  money  and  business ;  in  the  12th,  danger  of 
imprisonment ;  in  the  1st,  Gth,  or  8th,  bad  health,  in  addition 
to  money  losses.  A  gentleman  of  my  acquaintance,  with 
"11  in  M.C.,  made  a  fortune,  and  has  just  lost  it  all,  under  the 
direction  of  0  §  T/  locally,  and  powerfully  excited. 

The  O  rf  V  3|c  Q  A  P  T/. — These  are  generally  very  good, 
bequeathing  wealth,  honour,  prosperity,  and  good  friends  ; 
the  native  manages  his  affairs  with  skill  and  tact.  The  P  is 
especially  good,  and  lasts  several  years,  with  more  or  less 
power,  according  to  the  excitement  there  may  be. 

I  have  found  from  experiences  that  these  directions  produce 
more  female  marriages  than  any  other  direction,  and  scarcely 
one  passes  except  the  female  marries,  or  has  an  offer  of  mar- 
riage— that  is,  if  the  direction  occurs  at  a  marriageable  age, 
and  the  nativity  shows  marriage. 

0  tf  £  Q  Q  g  orP0". — Sharp  diseases,  fevers,  accidents, 
and  hurts,  cuts,  blows,  burns,  bites  of  dogs,  fluxes,  diarrhoea, 
cholera,  smallpox,  law,  quarrelling,  disputes,  &c. 

The  signs  occupied  by  c"  and  0  have  a  great  deal  to  do  with 
the  event.  Fiery  signs — disposing  to  cuts,  blows,  gun  acci- 
dents, lightning,  fevers,  &c.  ;  watery  signs — fluxes,  drowning, 
and  scalds ;  airy  signs — broken  bones ;  and  earthy  signs — falls, 
beheading,  hanging,  and  fluxes.  In  a  female  nativity,  danger 
of  death  in  child-birth,  or  sudden  loss  of  husband 

The  effects  of  these  directions  are  very  sudden,  falling  like 
a  thunderclap  upon  the  native,  and  against  which  care  and 
c-anlion  can  effect  but  little.  A  transit  of  the  Q  or  0", 


THE   GUIDE  TO   ASTROLOGY.  109 

or  a  P  of  these  planets,  usually  brings  these  directions  into 
force.  I  have  observed  when  the  0  and  cT  arc  'n  fixed 
signs,  either  at  birth  or  by  direction,  the  native  is  in  danger 
of  heart  disease,  or  sudden  death  therefrom,  bursting  of  its 
blood-vessels ;  and  in  II  or  / ,  inflammation  of  the  lungs. 
These  directions  are  much  more  potent  if  the  Q  or  ])  be 
afflicted  at  birth  by  Tp  or  cf".  These  directions  also  incline 
to  fighting,  anger,  quarrels,  and  violence,  robbery,  loss  by 
fire  if  in  fiery  signs  ;  and  in  watery  signs,  drunkenness.  Ob- 
serve the  houses  in  which  they  fall,  as  well  as  the  signs,  and 
regulate  your  judgment  accordingly. 

O  V  >K  Q  A  cf. — Gain  by  Q*  men,  honour,  preferment, 
activity,  and  a  change  of  place ;  health  and  strength.  Yet 
the  mind  is  irritable,  and  quick  in  anger.  To  kings  and 
rulers,  gain  of  territory,  increase  of  armies,  honour  and  fame. 
The  >)c  or  A  produces  marriage  with  some  females,  but  such 
a  union  is  marked  with  discord,  and  frequently  separation. 

OtfV>fcQAP9  • — A  happy  and  pleasant  time. 

The  native  is  given  to  amusement  and  pleasure,  and  has 
great  leanings  towards  the  female  sex.  The  $  or  P  generally 
produces  marriage  with  a  male,  but  I  have  not  known  a 
female  to  marry  imdcr  such  directions.  It  conduces  to 
health,  preferment,  promotion,  society,  and  squandering 
money,  drink,  &c.  The  tf  and  P  are  the  principal  directions, 
and  the  •%.  next. 

O  Z.  or  Q  ?• — This  is  unfavourable,  and  denotes  wasting 
of  money  over  females,  and  extravagance,  grief  through 
offspring,  inclination  for  drink  and  evil  company.  The  Q 
cannot  occur  until  after  the  30th  year. 

O  cf  V  >fc  or  P  $. — Great  inclination  for  books  and 
learning,  and  literature  generally,  study,  much  business, 
mental  activity,  sometimes  journeys  (if  Q  or  £  be  in  the 
3rd  or  9th),  fame  and  credit  through  inventions  (if  the  nativity 
shows  it),  promotion.  The  <^  and  P  are  to  be  mostly  observed, 
and  the  chief  effect  of  these  appear  to  incline  the  native  to 
writing,  study,  literature  and  publication. 


110  THE  OUTOE  TO   ASTROLOGY. 

Only  one  female  luivo  1  known  to  marry  under  this  direction 
(cH,  and  then  0  und  $  were  in  fl£  '»  the  7th. 

Q  ^  or  O  $S. — The  latter  ean  only  hap)>en  when  tho 
native  is  over  (R)  years  of  age.  The  /  is  not  important, 
unless  very  jiowerfully  excited,  \vhen  it  produces  trouble 
over  letters,  writings  and  agreements. 

0  &  ]). — With  n  male  it  denotes  gain,  suecess,  fame, 
and  j>rosperity.  and  frequently  marriage  if  in  a  convenient 
house,  as  the  7th  or  10th  ;  new  friends,  introductions,  and 
preferments.  It  is  unfortunate  with  a.  female  as  regards 
health,  denoting  danger  of  fever,  inflammation,  bad  health  ; 
and,  in  the  8th,  danger  of  death  ;  in  the  2nd,  bad  trade  anil 
loss  of  money  ;  in  the  7th,  a  bad  marriage,  or  trouble  through 
the  husband. 

0  V  sf:  Q  A  <>r  I'  D- — These  are  very  good.  Favour  and 
friendship,  credit,  esteem,  or  popularity,  prosperous  business. 
The  1'  frequently  causes  marriage  with  both  sexes,  preferment 
and  honour;  in  short,  the  affairs,  of  the  native  succeed  most 
favourably,  attended  with  promotion  and  favour  from  great 
and  powerful  persons,  or  superiors. 

©  Z.  D  Q  or  cP  D- — A  very  cv'l  time,  full  of  vexation, 
losses,  and  troubles.  The  native  is  thwarted  in  his  purposes, 
and  suffers  damage  from  powerful  and  superior  JXTHOIIS. 
With  many  it  signifies  death  of  parents,  loss  of  wife,  or  bereave- 
ment. With  a  female  it  is  unfortunate,  and,  unless  the  radix 
be  strong,  danger  of  illness,  or  even  death. 

From  watery  signs,  the  native  takes  to  drinking,  and  bad 
and  low  company  ;  and  if  in  the  liith  house,  danger  of  im- 
prisonment, loss  of  trade,  and  general  misfortune. 

D  d  Z  D  Q  <?  P  H.— These  are  all  unfavourable,  inas- 
much as  they  produce,  changes,  removals,  journeys,  troubles 
from  females,  loss  of  credit,  anxiety,  worry,  and  great  desire 
for  change,  restlessness  of  mind,  and  in  some  cases  bereave- 
ment. Happening  in  the  7th,  they  produce  discord  in 
marriage  ;  in  the  oth,  illicit  connections,  &c.  With  females 
they  are  not  so  evil  as  with  males,  and  produce  generally  an 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY,  111 

unpleasant  journey,  or  a  sudden  and  disadvantageous  removal, 
or  change  of  occupation  or  employment.  The  mind  during 
the  operations  of  these  directions  is  generally  bitter,  sarcastic, 
obstinate,  and  wayward  ;  hence  libels,  slander,  and  difficulties 
through  letters,  especially  if  the  nativity  harmonises  in  any 
way  with  these  particulars.  / 

j)  V  >fc  Q  A  y. — These  are  good,  and  the  native  usually 
takes  a  pleasant  journey,  or  makes  an  advantageous  removal ; 
they  also  incline  the  mind  to  female  society. 

I  consider  y  the  principal  planet  in  causing  changes, 
removals  and  journeys.  Of  course,  he  is  more  powerful  in 
this  when  situated  in  the  1st,  3rd,  or  9th  house. 

D  cf  Z.  D  Q  cf.P^1?. — Very  bad  directions,  denoting  loss 
in  business  and  money;  and,  if  (7  or  ])  be  in  the  2nd,  danger 
of  bankruptcy,  disappointment,  grief,  sorrow,  and  bereave- 
ment. He  may  lose  a  good  wife,  mother,  or  promising  child, 
and  such  things  will  happen  as  will  cause  great  sorrow  and 
despondency.  If  the  hyleg  is  weak  or  afflicted,  sickness  is 
denoted,  and  the  mental  qualities  are  disturbed  by  fear  and 
anxiety. 

With  females  it  is  very  unfortunate,  denoting  sickness, 
and  in  many  cases  death,  loss  of  goods,  friends,  and  parents. 
Also  slander,  reproaches,  and  disappointment.  Many  females 
get  "  disgraced  "  under  these  influences,  particularly  if  the 
j)  was  afflicted  by  (7  at  birth. 

D  V  ^  A  *7 . — Gain  in  business,  popularity,  credit  and 
esteem,  new  friends.  The  mind  is  serious,  austere,  and 
contemplative,  caring  but  little  for  society,  sober  in  manners, 
and  attentive  to  duties. 

D  d  V  >fc  Q  A  P  T/. — These  are  very  good,  especially 
for  money  and  wealth,  denoting  promotion,  great  increase 
of  business,  riches,  fame,  and  honour  ;  inclines  io  marriage 
with  males  ;  with  females  good  health,  enjoyment,  and  gain. 

])  Z.  D  Q  c?  "V- — Loss  of  wealth  ;  bad  period  for  specu- 
lation, dealing  with  lawyers,  landlords,  magistrates,  &c. 
The  native  spends  and  squanders  his  wealth,  and  frequently 


112  TIIE  GUIDE  TO   ASTROLOGY. 

loses  money  by  lending  it  to  others.  With  females  it  denotes 
loss,  corrupted  blood,  and  frequent  headaches. 

5  cf  Z.  D  Q  <?  1*  O*- — Unfortunate.  The  native  is  rashly 
inclined,  quarrels  much,  and  rushes  into  disputes  and  litiga- 
tion. He  is  liable  to  accidents  and  acute  diseases,  Midi  as 
fevers,  smallpox,  and  other  martial  inflammatory  distempers, 
and  may  suffer  from  a  touch  of  gravel  or  the  stone  ;  is  liable 
to  wounds,  bites,  kicks  and  broken  bones. 

If  the  nativity  shows  it,  he  may  commit  a  theft  or  forgery, 
and  get  into  trouble  ;  he  suffers  from  bad  company  and 
depraved  females,  takes  to  drinking  and  low  company,  spends 
his  money,  and  is  altogether  careless  and  indifferent. 

He  may  meet  accident  in  travelling,  and  if  <f  has 
much  authority  in  the  1st  or  2nd  house,  he  may  lose  by 
fire,  theft  or  robbery ;  the  same  if  tf  be  strong  in  the  7th. 
I  have  known  a  few  males  to  marry  in  a  hurry  tinder 
such  directions,  but  great  misery  and  sj>cedy  separation  have 
followed. 

With  females  it  signifies  bad  success,  loss  of  employment, 
danger  of  fevers  and  bad  health,  and  accident,  looseness  in 
the  morals,  in  which  the  direction  is  very  important  and 
mischievous.  Single  females  should  be  well  cautioned  when 
coming  under  these  directions,  and  married  ones  may  expect 
quarrels  with  the  husband,  or  indisposition,  as  the  places  of 
the  planets  may  indicate. 

J)  V  >K  Q  A  cf  • — These  bring  activity,  journeys,  exercise, 
increase  of  business.  The  native  is  courageous,  generous, 
and  seeks  society  and  females,  enjoys  health  and  preferment, 
new  enterprises  and  success  in  general.  With  females  it  is 
not  so  fortunate,  inclining  them  to  the  society  of  the  opposite 
sex,  amours  and  trouble. 

T)  d  ©• — With  males  it  signifies  gain,  activity,  and  increase 
of  business,  and  frequently  marriage  ;  the  mind  is  generous, 
free  and  open.  With  females  it  is  not  so  good,  but  presages 
ill-health,  fevers,  inflammations  and  sometimes  death,  if  in 
the  6th  or  8th  house.  So  far  as  business  is  concerned,  it  is 


THfi   GUIDE   T^O   ASTROLOGY.  11 

favourable.     In  an  angle  it  affects  the  eyes,   especially   if 
$  be  there. 

D  .V  %•  Q  A  P  Q. — These  denote  great  and  powerfu 
friends,  introductions,  and  the  P  is  strong  for  marriage, 
promotion  and  preferment,  success  in  trade,  speculation,  and 
a  fortunate  time  generally.  The  same  with  a  female — good 
health  and  friends. 

D  Z.  D  Q  cf  ©• — An  unfortunate  time  for  all  purposes, 
and  denotes  mental  or  bodily  suffering,  acute  diseases,  loss 
of  trade,  falling  away  of  business,  loss  of  friends,  death  of 
wife  or  relatives,  and  an  unfortunate  time  generally.  With 
females,  ill-health,  loss  of  situation  and  bereavement. 

These  directions  are  very  powerful  to  evil  when  excited 
to  action,  more  especially  if  they  fall  in  important  signs  or 
houses. 

D  d  V  >)<  Q  A  P  9- — A  pleasant,  happy  period.  It 
conduces  to  marriage  with  both  sexes.  The  native  gives 
way  to  pleasure  and  the  society  of  females.  To  the  married 
it  signifies  the  birth  of  a  child  and  domestic  felicity  ;  to 
females,  favourable  health,  peace  of  mind,  and  good  fortune 
the  tf  and  P  are  to  be  principally  observed  with  respect  to 
marriage. 

D  Z.  D  Q  c?  9- — This  brings  trouble  through  females, 
domestic  unpleasantness,  scandal,  illicit  connections,  waste 
and  extravagance,  disappointment  in  love,  quarrels  with 
females,  and  frequently  loss  of  a  child.  To  females,  ill-health, 
grief  through  opposite  sex,  disappointment  and  sorrow. 

D    tf   V   ^f.  Q   A   P    £. — This  inclines  much  for  study 
travelling,  mental  activity,  and  increase  of  business,  literary 
undertakings,  lawsuits  and  general  prosperity. 
c->       D    £-    Q    Q    c?    9- — These   are  unfavourable,   denoting 
\  '       slander,  bad  lawsuits,  quarrels  with  literary  characters,  ill 
/   success    in    publishing,     disputes,     unfavourable    journeys 
The  native  should  be  very  careful  of  letter  writing  and  making 
contracts  at  this  time. 

3   in  tf,  P,  or  good  aspect  to  her  own  place. — Changes 

I 


114  TI1R   (11'IUK   TO    ASTRO  f/XJY. 

gain  by  females,  new  friend*,  journeys,  and  increase  of  trade 
or  business ;  the  native  desires  female  society,  &c. 

}'i  afflicting  her  own  place. — Losses,  grief  through  females, 
disappointment,  unpopularity  ;  and  with  females  it  inclines  to 
bad  health. 

Always  bear  in  mind  the  house  and  sign  the  direction  falls 
in,  also  the  house  and  sign  from  which  the  excitement  comes, 
and  also  of  what  houses  the  exciting  and  directing  planets 
are  lords. 


CHAPTER    IV. 

THE    DIRECTIONS   OF  THE   PLANETS. 

THE  directions  of  II  and  V)  are  very  rare,  and  not  important 
when  they  occur,  and,  unless  they  fall  in  the  1st,  3rd,  9th,  or 
10th,  have  not  appreciable  effects.  When  either  or  both  of 
the  planets  may  be  found  in  either  the  1  st,  3rd  or  9th,  it  denotes 
a  great  inclination  for  the  secrets  of  nature,  occult  studies  and 
eccentric  companions  ;  in  the  10th,  the  evil  configurations 
denote  trouble  in  business,  ill-fame,  and  probably  disgrace. 
The  good  directions  are  of  little  or  no  account,  as  neither 
II  or  ^  arc  favourable  when  in  the  10th.  As  before  noted, 
these  directions  are  rare,  and  somewhat  unimportant. 

H  in  d,  P,  >Jc  or  A  I/. — If  excited,  it  brings  about  gifts 
of  money,  gain  by  legacy,  and  conduces  to  wealth. 

H  afflicting  T/  is  bad  ;  danger  of  lawsuits,  and  loss  through 
lawyers  and  superiors. 

y  and  (f  in  direction  operate  but  little,  unless  in  the  1st 
or  7th  ;  in  the  1st,  increase  of  anger,  and  in  the  7th  (if  married) 
divorce  and  much  trouble  with  the  partner,  whether  in 
marriajze  or  business.  * 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  115 

y  afflicting  9- — This  inclines  the  native  much  for  female 
company  and  pleasure,  and  if  y  afflicts  9  a^  birth,  it  causes 
the  native  to  go  astray  and  form  illicit  connections  ;  he  is 
liable  to  scandal  and  ill-fame,  and  trouble  through  the  opposite 
sex. 

y  in  good  direction  of  9- — This  induces  to  company  and 
society,  and  inclines  to  illicit  actions,  but  he  escapes  detection  ; 
such  directions  frequently  cause  an  amour  in  a  feminine 
nativity. 

£1  afflicting  £ . — The  mind  becomes  sarcastic  and  bitter, 
and  he  may  suffer  through  the  "  Press,"  may  commit  forgery, 
or  get  into  trouble  through  letter-writing.  The  mind  very 
unsettled. 

J^  in  good  direction  of  $. — Inclines  to  occult  study,  and 
study  in  general.  The  mind  is  active,  witty  and  original, 
and  manages  the  affairs  with  skill  and  prudence  ;  inclination 
for  travelling.  Many  persons  have  commenced  to  study 
Astrology  when  the  J)  or  0  has  been  in  direction  with  ^, 
but  such  will  be  shown  in  the  nativity,  viz.,  by  the  position 
and  aspects  of  y. 

I?  in  c^,  P  or  good  aspect  of  }/. — This  is  good,  and  if  I/ 
be  strong,  will  give  a  "  windfall "  to  the  native  in  the  shape 
of  a  legacy,  gift  or  inheritance  ;  in  lawsuits  the  native  gains, 
and  receives  honour  and  preferment.  The  P  and  aspects 
are  better  than  the  tf. 

Ip  afflicting  I/. — Losses  through  law,  friends,  involved  in 
troubles  and  difficulties,  disgrace,  unpopularity,  bank  failures, 
and  such  things  as  destroy  the  native's  income,  capital,  and 
peace  of  mind. 

f?  and  (5'  in  good  direction,  not  much,  unless  either  or  both 
are  prominent,  when  it  gives  a  stimulus  to  the  native's  energy, 
steadiness  ;  he  may  do  a  courageous  act,  &c. 

I?  afflicting  g"  or  vice  versa. — If  I?  or  tf  be  in  the  ascen- 
dant, 7th  or  10th,  this  is  evil,  and  he  may  commit  a  crime  ; 
his  mind  is  angry  and  violent,  and  it  leads  to  fighting,  wrang- 
ling, and  bad  and  depraved  habits. 

i  2 


116  THE  crime  TO  ASTROLOOV- 

NOTE. — These,  directions  effect  little  or  nothing,  unless  \-)  or 
0"  be  very  strong  by  jxtsition,  or  accidental  dignity  in  the  nativity. 

I?  afflicting  V- — This  causes  grief,  bereavement,  disap- 
pointment, the  loss  of  relatives  or  wife  ;  sorrow  ;  he  is  liable 
to  be  jilted  by  the  opposite  »ex  ;  death  of  offspring  and  keen 
sorrow  ;  inclines  to  drinking,  bad  habits,  and  the  company  of 
low  women. 

I?  in  good  direction  of  9- — 1'nc  mind  steady,  reserved, 
cautious,  inclining  to  chastity  and  good  behaviour. 

lp  afflicting  $. — Had,  the  temper  is  short,  and  if  tin: 
nativity  shows  it,  danger  of  forgery,  thieving,  by  which  the 
native  gets  into  trouble  ;  he  quarrels  and  mixes  with  low 
company. 

I?  in  good  direction  of  £!• — ^°*  °f  importance,  except 
that  it  imparts  steadiness  to  the  mind,  and  the  native  manages 
his  affairs  with  discretion  and  prudence  ;  inclines  him  to  study, 
to  be  serious  and  reserved. 

11  afflicted  by  0"  is  not  good,  but  not  important ;  denotes 
that  he  may  lose  by  speculation,  failures,  and  losses  in  sundry 
ways  ;  and,  if  "J/  be  afflicted  at  birth,  will  squander  his  money, 
drink,  bet  and  make  off  with  a  great  deal.  If  the  nativity 
denotes  it.  it  may  cause  lawsuits,  or  the  native  may  get  himself 
into  trouble. 

1}.  in  good  direction  to  Q*. — Not  important,  but  inclines  to 
good,  to  energy,  increase  of  estate,  promotion,  according  as 
0"  or  If.  may  be  placed  in  the  nativity. 

If.  in  evil  direction  with  9-~l*rm£8  a  squandering  of 
money  over  dress  and  females,  losses  in  speculation,  but  this 
is  not  important. 

11  in  good  direction  with  9- — Inclines  to  success  and 
female  society  :  he  conducts  himself  with  propriety,  but  these 
directions  are  of  little  moment. 

11  in  tf  or  good  direction  of  9- — Favourable,  denoting 
promotion,  gain,  activity,  fame,  popularity,  credit;  the  mind 
is  steady. 

If.  afflicting  $. — Had.  denoting  trouble,  and  in  some  oases 


THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  117 

imprisonment    through    forgery,    libel,    perjury ;    danger    of 
mental  derangement  if  §  be  not  strong. 

d"  afflicting  9- — Inclines  to  the  company  of  lewd  women, 
and  to  female  society  generally,  by  which  he  suffers  in  health, 
liable  to  scandal,  domestic  quarrelling,  drinking,  debauchery, 
and  fighting.  Should  tf  be  in  the  5th,  7th,  or  10th  house  at 
birth,  this  direction  is  bad  in  the  case  of  a  female. 

(f  in  good  direction  of  9- — He  is  merry,  jovial,  free,  de- 
lighting in  female  company,  drink,  and  spends  his  money. 
No  direction  of  tf  to  9  is  good  from  a  moral  point  of  view, 
either  with  male  or  female. 

0"  afflicting  $. — Unfavourable  for  the  mind,  giving  rise 
to  quarrelling,  thieving,  forgery,  drinking,  and  frequently 
entailing  punishment ;  he  is  given  to  libelling,  and  suffers 
from  his  own  actions  ;  he  engages  in  law  and  disputes,  mixes 
with  low  and  bad  company,  and  may  commit  violence. 

0"  in  good  direction  with  ^ . — Not  very  important,  except 
that  it  denotes  activity,  energy  and  increase  of  business, 
promotion  ;  the  mind  is  quick  and  apt  during  the  time  of 
direction. 

9  and  $. — The  directions  of  these  planets  are  very  un- 
important. The  tf  and  P  when  much  excited  incline  to 
company,  poetry,  and  the  fine  arts,  new  friends  and  female 
acquaintances. 


CHAPTER  V. 

SOLAR  RETURNS   OR   BIRTHDAY   FIGURES. 

I  HAD  not  much  confidence  in  these  until  forced  to  it  by  the 
logic  of  facts.  And,  after  the  publication  yearly  of  "  Birthday 
Information  "  in  my  Almanac,  and  the  great  number  of  letters 
I  received  as  to  the  correctness  of  it,  as  well  as  by  personal 
observation  in  my  own  family  circle,  and  those  of  friends, 


118  TIIK    «jril)K    TO    ASTKOIXHJY. 

I  am  convinced  that  there  is  much  in  them,  and  that  they 
ought  not  to  be  neglected. 

The  usual  way  to  set  these  maps  is,  to  find  the  time  when 
the  O  reaches  the  same  degree,  minute  and  second  of  the 
Zodiac  which  he  occupied  at  the  time  of  birth,  and  then  to 
calculate  the  cusps  and  planet's  places  for  that  time,  and 
judge  the  map  as  an  ordinary  nativity,  noting  particularly 
the  different  aspects  that  are  formed,  or  very  near,  and  in 
what  houses  the  planets  are  placed.  For  instance,  malefic 
planets  in  the  1st  would  signify  worry  and  mental  excitement, 
or  ill-health.  In  the  2nd,  loss  of  money  and  business  trouble. 
In  the  3rd,  accident  by  travelling,  or  trouble  or  losses  through 
brethren.  In  the  4th,  illness  of  parent,  change  of  residence, 
&c.  In  the  oth,  bother  in  love  or  family  affairs,  loss  of 
money  by  speculation,  fondness  for  pleasure  and  loss  or 
trouble  thereby.  In  the  Gth,  sickness,  difficulty  with  servants, 
and  such  things  as  may  be  ruled  by  that  house.  In  the  7th, 
loss  of  business,  bother  in  marriage — with  a  single  female, 
danger  of  disgrace,  &c.  .  In  the  8th,  death  of  friends  and 
relatives.  In  the  9th,  trouble  from  relatives  by  marriage. 
In  the  10th,  loss  of  credit,  disgrace,  &c.  In  the  llth,  bad 
friends  and  loss  thereby.  In  the  12th,  enemies,  secret  and 
malicious.  If  benefic  planets  occupy  these  houses,  and  they 
must,  some  of  them,  judge  the  contrary.  But  bear  in  mind 
both  here  and  in  judging  the  effects  of  Directions,  that  nothing 
can  happen  contrary  to  what  i.«  signified  in  the  nativity. 
Every  event  in  life  is  shoicn  in  tlie  nativity.  The  Directions, 
Solar  Returns  and  Transits  simply  bring  to  pass  what  is 
there  shown.  The y  can  produce  nothing  contrary  to  the  nativity. 
If  the  nativity  shows  honour  and  success,  do  not  judge  dis- 
grace and  ruin,  let  the  Directions,  Solar  Returns,  &c.,  bo 
what  they  ma}'. 

I  will  now  give  an  illustration  of  a  Solar  return  or  Birthday 
Map,  taking  the  King's  time  of  birth  as  an  example. 

The  following  map  is  the  King's  nativity.  He  was  born 
Xovembcr  '.Mil,  1841,  lOh.  48m.  A.M.,  London. 


THE    GUIDE    TO    A.STKOI.O(!Y. 

DECLINATIONS. 


16°  S.  44' 

4°  s.  27' 

22°  S.  44' 
22°  S.  58' 
24°  S.  10' 


Q  16°  S.  54' 

9  5°  S.  58' 

S  22°  S.  16' 

D  3°  S.  37' 


We  observe  that  the  Longitude  of  the  0  is  TTJ.  16°  54'  18". 
Suppose  we  require  the  Solar  Return  for  November,  190(5. 
On  the  King's  birthday,  November  9th,  1906,  we  find  the 
Q's  Long,  is  f  16°  10'  52",  consequently  the  Solar  Return 
occurs  between  the  9th  and  10th.  The  Daily  motion  of  the 
O  on'tbe  9th  is  1°  0'  19*. 

ASTKOLOOY. 


Longitude  of  the  0  at  birth     10°    54'     18* 
„  „  on  9th      16°     10'    52" 


Difference  43      20 

You  will  therefore  say  : 

As  1°  0'  19*  is  to  43'  26*  so  is  24  hours ;  and  the  answer  will 
be  17h,  17m.,  or  5h.  17m.  A.M.  on  the  10th,  for  which  time 
we  set  the  map  as  follows — 


DECLINATIONS. 

¥  21°  N.  58'  0  16°  S.  53' 

y  23°   S.  38'  9  27°  S.  33' 

1?    10°  S.  20'  £  24°  S.  38' 

•tf  22°  N.  48'  )    14°  N.  18' 
<f    1°  S.  37' 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  121 

You  will  judge  the  map  as  an  ordinary  nativity,  such  as 
0"  on  cusp  of  12th  F)  jy,  secret  enemies  and  much  danger 
therefrom.  Tp  on  cusp  of  5th,  trouble  through  children,  or 
sickness  in  family,  or  such  things  as  are  ruled  by  the  5th  house. 
The  0  is  separating  from  the  A  of  ^ »  "U-  and  **•* ,  and  is 
practically  unafflicted,  which  is  favourable  for  health. 

As  before  mentioned  these  maps  are  often  very  important, 
particularly  if  they  agree  with  the  Directions  in  nature  and 
signification.  If  they  do  not  agree  little  or  nothing  will  result. 
Again,  if  the  Directions  be  unfavourable,  on  account  of  the 
influence  of  tf,  and  in  the  revolution  you  find  c?  also  un- 
favourably placed  or  aspected,  then  serious  events  will  follow. 
The  same  with  I?,  I01,  %'  or  the  other  planets;  but  if  the 
afflicting  planet  be  I/  in  the  Directions,  and  P?  in  the  Solar 
Returns  the  effects  will  not  be  so  mischievous  as  if  the  affliction 
was  wholly  by  either  T/  or  Tp ,  as  the  natures  of  J?  and  %  are 
not  alike. 

This  you  must  observe  with  the  other  planets. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

TRANSITS   AND   ECLIPSES. 

DEALING  with  Eclipses  first.  These  are  simply  Conjunctions 
or  Oppositions  of  the  sun  and  moon.  They  must  be  very 
close,  otherwise  there  could  be  no  occultation,  but  eclipses 
are  not  visible,  as  such,  all  over  the  world  at  one  time,  and 
where  not  visible,  they  will  be  simple  conjunctions  in  the  case 
of  the  sun,  and  oppositions  in  the  case  of  the  moon.  So  far 
as  my  personal  experience  and  observation  are  concerned, 
I  do  not  think  them  of  very  great  importance.  For  instance, 
the  great  Eclipse  of  the  Sun  on  December  22nd,  1870,  occurred 
on  the  very  degree  of  my  midheaven  and  in  tf  with  fy ,  but 
nothing  important  followed.  I  was  neither  ill  nor  disgraced. 
These  conjunctions  and  oppositions  are  more  important  if 
they  happen  on  one's  birthday,  and,  of  course,  would  figure 


122  THE  uriDE  TO  ASTKOI.<M;Y. 

then  in  the  Rcvolutional  Figure,  or  Solar  Return  for  that 
year.  Sometimes  eclipses  will  coincide  with  an  important 
event,  but  so  far  as  my  experience  is  concerned  I  have  observed 
nothing  reliable,  nnd  it  is  reliability,  as  far  as  possible,  that 
we  require. 

Dealing  now  with  Transits.  Let  it  be  clearly  understood 
that  the  transits  of  the  planets  over  the  places  of  the  Lumin- 
aries or  Planets  at  birth  will  effect  nothing,  unless  at  the  samo 
time  there  is  some  direction  which  the  transit  will  force  into 
action  as  explained  by  Placidus  in  the  (>8th  paragraph  of 
his  "  Primum  Mobile."  Take,  for  instance,  cf".  Ho  transits 
every  planet's  place,  the  midheavcn  and  ascendant,  once,  if 
not  more,  every  two  years,  and  it  is  absurd  to  think  events, 
repeat  themselves  thus  frequently.  It  is  the  same  with  I/, 
>7  and  the  other  planets.  Here,  again,  my  experience  has 
not  borne  out  the  many  statements  made  as  to  the  influence 
of  planets  when  passing  certain  places  in  the  nativity,  whether 
those  places  are  those  of  the  sun,  moon,  or  any  other  planet. 
If,  however,  directions  fall  out  at  the  same  time  and  arc  of 
the  same  nature  as  the  transit,  events  will  follow,  but  not 
otherwise. 

Now  there  are  other  Transits  which  I  have  found  very 
powerful,  and  which  probably  gave  rise  to  the,  what  I  con- 
sider, mistaken  ideas,  as  to  the  influence  of  the  simple  passage 
of  a  planet  over  the  place  of  any  other  planet.  These  transits 
are  those  of  the  planets  through  the  various  mundane  houses 
of  the  nativity,  such  as  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd  house,  &c.  But 
here,  again,  you  must  bring  a  little  common  sense  to  bear  upon 
the  subject,  and  must  study  the  nativity.  For  a  person  in 
whose  nativity  Mars  was  all  powerful,  and  unafflicted,  would 
be  scarcely  likely  to  suffer  to  any  serious  extent  from  the 
passage  of  Mars  through  any  of  the  houses.  Take  Jupiter. 
Suppose  you  find  him  weak  in  the  nativity,  particularly  in 
nj,  cadent,  or  afflicted  by  aspect.  What  benefit  could  one 
expect  from  his  transits  through  the  houses,  or  over  any 
important  cusp  in  a  nativity  ?  But  put  Jupiter  in  a  good 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  123 

sign,  Cancer  or  Pisces,  for  instance,  and  let  him  occupy  a 
prominent  place  in  the  nativity,  what  a  different  effect  his 
transits  through  the  various  houses  will  have  !  It  is  the 
same  with  Saturn,  Uranus,  and  Neptune.  I  say  "  Neptune," 
but  I  am  not  sure  about  him,  for  although  strong  and  well 
aspected  in  my  nativity,  he  has  been  a  tormentor  in  every 
house  through  which  he  has,  up  to  the  present,  passed. 
Students  must  observe  him,  and  make  a  note  of  their  obser- 
vations. 

Experience  has  taught  me  this — that  an  afflicting  planet 
at  birth,  is  an  afflicting  planet  all  through  life,  whether  by 
Direction  or  Transit,  and,  on  the  contrary,  a  planet,  strong 
and  unafflictcd  at  birth,  whether  benefic  or  malefic,  will 
benefit  the  native  by  his  Directions  and  Transits.  But  you 
must  understand  an  afflicting  planet  at  birth  if  a  malefic,  is 
much  more  injurious  than  if  it  were  a  benefic,  and  if  the  strong 
planet  at  birth  be  a  benefic,  his  Directions  and  Transits  will 
conduce  to  much  more  benefit  than  if  it  were  a  malefic  simi- 
larly placed.  Malefic  planets  are  not  always  malefic,  but 
when  malefic,  they  are  much  more  so  than  benefics  similarly 
placed.  And  contrariwise  with  the  Benefics.  It  appears  that 
the  magnetic  influences  of  the  planets  are  inhaled  at  birth, 
and  it  is  only  reasonable  to  suppose  that  that  planet  whoso 
influence  was  paramount  at  birth  should  exercise  the  most 
powerful  influence  over  the  native.  That  is  the  positive 
side  of  the  question.  The  negative  side  is  the  contrary.  An 
afflicting  planet  at  birth,  will  be  a  source  of  trouble,  more  or 
less,  to  the  native  all  through  life,  particularly  if  a  malefic. 

To  return  to  our  subject,  Transits  ;  the  operation  of  these 
is  similar  to  that  of  the  same  planet  in  the  nativity,  and  in 
the  same  house. 

For  instance,  the  passage  of  Neptune  through  the  1st 
house  will  produce  worry  and  trouble  mentally,  a  dread  and 
doubt  about  something  going  to  happen,  or  expecting  some- 
thing lo  happen.  If  Uranus,  then  his  weakness  at  birth  comes 
into  play.  If  for  drink,  ho  will  drink  to  excess.  If  sensuality, 


1'24  THE   (H'lDE   To   ASTROIXMJV. 

lio  will  lose  all  sense  of  propriety,  and  go  practically  "  wild  " 
for  a  time  regardless  of  consequences.  If  the  nativity  is 
violent,  he  may,  in  one  of  his  fits  of  eccentricity,  put  an  end 
to  his  existence.  If  Saturn,  the  native  will  be  despondent ; 
if  weak  in  constitution,  he  will  suffer  in  health  ;  if  weak  in 
intellect,  he  may  lose  his  reason.  Jupiter  will  produce 
benefits,  personal  and  monetary,  according  to  his  strength  in 
the  nativity  as  mentioned  already.  Mars  moves  very  fast, 
so  the  effects  of  his  transits  arc  not  great,  unless  other  influences 
combine  to  make  them  so,  such  as  the  passage  of  another 
obnoxious  planet,  or  an  evil  direction  at  the  time.  The  sun 
and  other  planets  move  very  fast  and  no  material  event  may 
be  exj>ected  from  their  passage  through  any  house,  yet  the 
sun,  from  his  immense  power,  should  not  be  altogether 
neglected.  Many  persons  have  noticed  certain  times  of  the 
year  in  which  they  are  more  lucky  or  unlucky  than  at  others. 
These  fluxes  of  fortune  are  produced  by  the  passage  of  the 
sun  through  certain  houses  in  their  nativity. 

The  passage  of  Xeptune  through  the  2nd  house  will  cause 
trouble  in  business  and  money  affairs,  and  depression  of  spirits 
in  consequence.  If  Uranus,  the  native  must  avoid  speculation, 
lending  money,  or  standing  security ;  also,  new  business 
enterprises  should  be  avoided.  If  the  transit  is  by  Saturn, 
it  will  show  loss  of  money  and  business,  which  will  lx>  ship- 
wrecked. If  Jupiter,  increase  of  business,  success  by  specu- 
lation, and  general  good  fortune. 

The  passage  of  Neptune  through  the  3rd  house  denotes 
mental  worry  over  brethren  or  neighbours,  journeys  or 
changes,  an  unsettled,  restless  feeling.  Uranus  or  Saturn 
will  show  disaster  in  travelling,  loss  of  money  through  brethren, 
or  worry  about  their  affairs.  If  Jupiter,  gain  and  success 
through  neighbours,  brethren  and  such  matters  as  are  ruled 
by  the  3rd  house. 

The  passage  of  Neptune  through  the  4th  house  is  important 
as  it  is  an  angle  and  will  affect  the  native's  business  and 
family  affairs ;  probably  the  death  of  a  parent,  or  a  long 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  125 

spell  of  adversity.  Similar  effects  may  be  expected  from 
the  passage  of  Saturn  and  Uranus,  although  the  latter  planet 
would  signify  estrangement  from  kindred,  family  quarrels  or 
disputes. 

The  passage  of  Neptune  through  the  5th  house — trouble 
and  anxiety  from  children,  or  the  native  may  take  to  intem- 
perate habits,  drink  and  sensuality,  spending  his  money  on 
pleasure  and  neglecting  his  business.  If  a  female,  she  should 
exercise  great  cave,  or  serious  trouble  may  follow.  Similar 
events  will  follow  the  passage  of  Saturn  and  Uranus.  The 
latter  planet  in  this  case  being  more  evil  than  Neptune  or 
Saturn,  and  is  sure  to  bring  about  trouble  in  "  love  "  affairs, 
or  misbehaviour.  The  transit  of  Jupiter  will  benefit  the 
native  by  successful  speculation.  The  children  will  prove 
a  source  of  gratification  and  pleasure  to  the  native  for  the 
time  being. 

The  passage  of  Neptune,  Uranus,  or  Saturn  through  the 
Oth  is  liable  to  derange  the  native's  health,  or  give  much 
trouble  through  workmen  or  servants,  or  from  his  fellow- 
workmen.  He  should  beware  of  deceit  or  robbery.  The 
transit  of  Jupiter  will  benefit  his  health  and  fortune,  and 
denotes  dutiful  servants  that  will  be  a  source  of  profit  to  the 
native  for  a  time. 

The  passage  of  Neptune,  Uranus,  or  Saturn  through  the 
7th  is  important,  as  that  house  is  an  angle  and  has  much 
effect  on  the  business  and  conjugal  happiness  of  the  native. 
It  would  signify  losses  in  business,  and  unless  the  nativity 
be  good,  bankruptcjr.  Law  and  quarrelling.  Domestic 
infelicity,  separation  or  quarrelling  according  to  the  positions 
at  birth.  In  this  case  Uranus  will  be  worse  than  Saturn, 
the  latter  planet  affecting  the  business  chiefly.  The  native 
should  be  careful  of  new  business  enterprises  and  avoid 
risks  and  partnerships.  If  the  transiting  planet  be  Jupiter, 
gain  and  success  in  business,  marriage,  domestic  felicity,  and 
events  opposite  to  those  enumerated  for  the  obnoxious  planets. 
The  passage  of  the  evil  planets  through  the  8th  denotes 


\'2l\  THK   UriOE   TO    ASTRO LOCJV. 

the  death  of  friends  or  relatives  ;  or  the  wife  or  husband  may 
run  wild  and  spend  money  stupidly  and  senselessly.  Jupiter 
shows  benefit  through  Deaths,  if  such  is  denoted  in  the  nativity 
not  otherwise. 

The  passage  of  Xeptune,  Uranus  or  Saturn  through  the  9th 
denotes  mischief  or  losses  from  relatives  by  marriage,  or  trouble 
and  anxiety  concerning  them.  Also  disputes  and  arguments 
about  religion.  The  native  should  not  undertake  any  voyage 
to  foreign  lands  under  such  transits.  Jupiter  acts  the  con- 
trary, and  will  benefit  the  native  by  relatives  through 
marriage,  or  by  voyages  to  foreign  parts. 

The  passage  of  Xeptune  through  the  10th  shows  loss  of 
credit  and  anxiety  in  business.  If  Uranus,  the  native  will 
act  strangely,  and  may  lose  both  honour  and  fortune  by 
discreditable  acts  of  his  own.  If  a  female,  she  may  be  dis- 
graced. Saturn  shows  loss  of  business,  and  money,  and  much 
discredit.  This  house  is  an  angle  and  an  imjxjrtant  one, 
and  transits  usually  have  a  prominent  effect. 

The  passage  of  Neptune  through  the  llth  shows  anxiety 
through  friends ;  if  Uranus,  quarrels  with  friends  and  the 
native  will  suffer  losses  or  be  robbed  by  them  ;  the  effects  of 
Saturn  will  be  similar  to  Uranus.  The  planet  Jupiter  seems 
to  "  joy  "  in  this  house,  and  would  signify  good  friend*,  who 
will  help  the  native  and  whose  advice  will  prove  highly 
beneficial. 

The  passage  of  Neptune,  Uranus  or  Saturn  through  the 
12th  house,  denotes  envy,  hatred  and  malice.  Let  the  native 
beware  of  deceit  and  treachery,  and  not  trust  any  one  out  of 
his  sight.  If  the  transit  be  by  Jupiter,  it  will  show  success  in 
business  generally. 

Now  bear  in  mind  that  these  transits  can  produce  nothing 
contrary  to  the  nativity,  so  do  not  judge  marital  disaster,  if 
the  nativity  denotes  domestic  felicity.  In  a  case  like  this, 
the  effects  of  the  obnoxious  transit  would  affect  the  business, 
or  something  else  denoted  by  the  7th  house.  You  must  bear 
in  mini  I  that  in  every  nativity  there  are  weak  "  spots,"  and 


THE   GUIDE   TO   ASTROLOGY.  127 

that  evil  transits  as  well  as  directions  will  mainly  attack  these 
spots.  Such  weakness  may  have  connection  with  the  health, 
business,  money,  morality,  relatives,  or  domestic  relations  of 
the  native,  which,  can  be  easily  learned  from  the  nativity, 
but  as  before  stated,  do  not  neglect  to  consider  the  position 
and  strength  of  the  transiting  planet  at  birth. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

A  SHORT  ASTROLOGICAL  DICTIONARY. 
Affliction. — A  planet  may  be  afflicted  either  by  being  in 
its  detriment,  fall,  being  Cadent  in  the  map,  or  by  being 
assailed  by  malefic  aspects.     It  is  doubtful  if  "  Combustion  " 
is  really  an  affliction. 

Airy  Signs. —  n,  •£*,  2£.  A  more  appropriate  name  would 
be  "  mental  signs,"  as  they  are  signs  giving  a  strong  and 
powerful  mind  when  rising  at  birth. 

Angles. — 1st,  4th,  7th,  and  10th  houses.  Planets  in  these 
houses  have  a  powerful  effect  on  the  native  all  through  life. 

Angular. — Any  planet  in  an  angle  is  said  to  be  Angular, 
and  is  very  powerful. 

Application— Applying. — The  motion  of  any  planet  towards 
the  body  or  aspect  of  another.  The  order  in  which  the  planets 
apply  can  be  seen  in  Part  I.,  chapter  II. 

Aspects. — V,  semisextile  or  30°  apart ;  ^/,  semisquare,  or 
45°  apart ;  ^:,  sextile,  or  60°  ;  Q  quintile,  or  72°  ;  Q  square  or 
quartile,  90°;  A  trine,  120°;  Q,  sesquiquadrate,  135°; 
±,  biquintilc,  144°  ;  ^7,  quincunx,  150°  ;  £ ,  opposition,  180°  ; 
P,  or  Parallel  of  Declination  ;  tf>  conjunction,  when  two  or 
more  planets  are  in  the  same  degree  of  Longitude  in  the  same 
sign. 

Barren  Signs. —  II ,  ^,  '1?. — These  signs  are  considered 
chiefly  when  occupying  the  5th  or  llth  cusp  in  deter- 
mining the  offspring  of  the  native. 

Benefics. — "}/  and  9-  The  former  planet  gives  the  greatest 
success,  and  the  latter  the  best  disposition. 


12ft  THE  CCIDE  TO  ASTROLOGY. 

liicorporcal  Signs. —  IF,  /,  X-  The  moon  in  one  of  these 
signs  and  afflicted,  denotes  plurality  of  wives. 

Cadent.— Planets  in  the  3rd,  Oth,  9th,  and  12th  houses.  It 
is  a  sign  of  weakness  or  debility,  yet  any  planet  in  the  3rd 
or  Oth  house,  has  a  powerful  influence  on  the  mind.  The  Oth 
is  the  worst  house  for  any  planet  to  be  in. 

Cardinal  Signo. — <Y\  25,  =^,  and  Vf.  These  are  jxwcrful 
signs,  and  many  planets  in  them  denote  a  jK-rson  "not  in 
the  roll  of  common  men."  Cardinal  signs  on  the  angles  of  a 
nativity  denote  fame  and  notoriety. 

Combuat. — Under  the  Q's  beams  or  within  8.1°  of  that 
Luminary.  It  is  said  to  be  an  affliction,  but  I  doubt  it. 
The  O  d  "U-  's  certainly  not  an  affliction. 

Common  Signs. —  n,  fIJJ,  /,  and  X- — These  signs  on  the 
angles  of  a  nativity,  or  many  planets  in  them,  make  a  person 
with  very  acute  feelings.  II  and  rfl>  are  scientific  signs, 
denoting  an  excellent  and  powerful  mind. 

Cusp. — The  beginning  of  any  of  the  twelve  houses.  Any 
planet  on  the  cusp  of  a  house  is  powerful  in  any  matter  ruled 
by  that  house. 

Declination. — The  distance  of  a  planet  X.  or  S.  of  the 
Equator.  See  Ephemeris. 

Detriment. — A  planet  in  a  sign  opposite  to  its  house.  Thus 
0"  in  ^=  would  be  in  his  detriment,  as  ^  is  opposite  to  If, 
which  is  the  house  of  Mars. 

Direct. — When  a  planet  moves  forward  in  the  Zodiac  as 
from  «Y>  to  8,  &c. 

Directions. — That  part  of  Uenethliacal  Astrology  which 
relates  to  future  events.  It  is  the  most  difficult,  the  least 
understood,  and  the  least  satisfactory  part  of  Astrology. 
There  are  two  systems  chiefly  in  vogue,  the  Placidiau  and 
the  Arabian.  The  latter  is  the  one  taught  in  this  volume  ; 
it  is  much  the  simplest,  and  the  results  obtained  are  more 
satisfactory  than  by  the  Placidian  method.  The  latter  is 
simply  time  and  patience  wasted,  and  it  is  rapidly  going  out 
of  use  and  favour.  If  I  may  digress  a  little,  I  would  like  to 


THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  129 

point  out  to  the  reader,  that  the  unsatisfactory  condition  of 
the  Directional  part  of  Astrology  is  a  wise  intervention  of 
Providence,  because  if  every  one  knew  for  a  certainty  what 
was  going  to  happen,  at  least  50  per  cent,  of  the  people  on 
this  earth  would  either  become  lunatics  or  commit  suicide. 
True  Astrology  will  never  be  discovered  until  the  earth  is 
peopled  by  a  race  to  whom  death  and  misfortune  present  no 
terror. 

Dispose. — When  one  planet  is  found  in  the  dignities  of 
another,  the  latter  is  said  to  "  dispose  "  of  him.  Thus  tf 
in  =5=  is  disposed  of  by  9>  as  —  is  the  house  of  9- 

Double-bodied  Signs. — See  Bicorporeal  Signs. 

Earthy  Signs. —  8 ,  *%,  and  Vf. 

Elevation. — The  planet  nearest  the  meridian  is  said  to  be 
elevated  above  the  others.  This  is  an  important  position. 
See  page  69. 

Ephemeris. — A  book  giving  particulars  of  the  planets' 
places ;  and  absolutely  necessary  in  all  Astrological  calcu- 
lations. 

Equinoctial  Signs. —  T  and  =^. 

Exaltation. — A  powerful  dignity.  The  Q  is  exalted  in  T  ; 
j)  in  y  ;  $  in  TJ\  ;  b  in^=;l/inS,;cf'inVy;  9  in  H ; 
and  $  in  TTf.  Many  planets  in  their  exaltations  denote  that 
the  native  will  rise  far  above  his  sphere  of  birth. 

Fall. — When  a  planet  is  in  a  sign  opposite  to  its  exaltation, 
thus — Q  in  £^  is  said  to  be  in  his  fall,  as  ==r  is  opposite  to  T- 

Figure. — The  map  of  the  heavens  for  any  moment ;  also 
called  the  "  scheme  "  or  "  chart." 

Feminine  Signs. —  y,  <£>,  1%,  TH,  Vf  and  X-  These  are 
termed  by  some  writers  "  obeying  "  signs.  The  distinction 
is  not  important. 

Fiery  Signs. — T,  $,  and  $  .  These  are  signs  of  ambition, 
push  and  energy.  Q  and  f  are  the  best. 

Fixed  Signs. —  y ,  Si,  D\  and  %%.  Planets  in  these  signs 
show  tenacity  of  purpose,  and  very  often  tenacity  of  "  temper  " 
too  ;  the  reverse  of  "  forgiving." 

K 


130  THE   OUIDK   TO    ASTROLOGY. 

Fruitful  Signs.— <S>,  !l\  and  X.  If  on  the  cusp  of  the  5th 
IUIIIM-  they  usually  show  a  large  family. 

Oenethliacal. — That  which  applies  to  the  geniture,  nativity, 
or  birth. 

Houses. — These  are  of  two  kinds.  The  houses  of  the  planets 
are— D,Oo;O,^;y,-;  ^Y?;!/,  ?  and  K;r»%  <f,and  n\; 
9,  8 ,  and  £±  ;  ^  »  d  and  IQ/.  A  planet  in  its  house  is  always 
powerful,  and  unless  heavily  afflicted  by  bad  aspects,  will 
benefit  the  native,  either  in  body,  mind,  or  estate.  The 
other  "  Houses  "  are  the  Mundane,  or  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd,  Ac., 
in  the  map 

Hyleg. — The  ])  or  Q  may  be  considered  the  hyleg  in  every 
nativity.  Some  writers  consider  the  ascendant  hyleg  when 
the  1  and  Q  are  under  the  earth,  or  not  in,  what  they  term 
hylegical  places,  which  is  nonsense.  The  ])  and  0  are  the 
fountains  of  all  life  on  this  earth. 

Infortunes. — Iti,  fp  and  (V1.  ••£,  Neptune  might  also  be 
included. 

Intercepted. — A  sign  lying  between  the  cusps  of  two  houses 
in  the  map.  It  is  caused  by  the  Latitude  of  the  country 
No  sign  is  "  intercepted  "  at  or  near  the  equator. 

Light* — Luminaries,  the  ])  and  0.  The  way  in  which  these 
are  aspected  or  placed  at  birth,  will  show  the  native's  health, 
and  largely,  his  success  or  otherwise  in  life. 

Lord. — That  planet  which  governs  the  sign  occupying  any 
cusp  in  the  nativity.  If  T  is  rising,  0"  will  be  "  lord  of 
the  map.  If  b  is  on  the  cusp  of  the  2nd,  9  w'^  be  "  lord  ' 
or  "  lady  "  if  you  like,  of  that  house,  because  b  is  the  house  of 
9.  If  /  be  rising,  11  will  be  "  lord"  of  the  map,  or  ruler  of 
the  1st  house,  because  f  is  the  house  of  I/,  and  ao  on  of  the 
others.  See  Part  I.,  chapter  VII. 

31  alefics. — See  Infortunes. 

Masculine  and  Feminine  Planets. — ¥,  y,  >?,  T£,  cf«  ©  *°d 
$,  are  masculine.  J)  and  9  are  feminine.  The  distinction 
is  not  important. 

Nativity. — The  birth-map  of  anyone. 


THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY.  131 

Northern  Signs. — T,  8,  n,  25,  ft,  NT-  Benefic  planets  in 
these  signs  denote  that  the  native's  success  lay  in  a  Northerly 
direction  from  his  place  of  birth.  T,  8  and  n  may  be 
considered  from  E.  to  N.,  and  25,  $.  and  flf,  from  N.  to  W. 

Occidental. — Western.  Any  planet  between  the  10th  a^d 
4th,  via  the  7th.  Many  planets,  particularly  (7  and  Q",  in 
this  part  of  the  map,  denote  heavy  and  long  attacks  of  sick- 
ness. Planets  "  occidental  "  do  not  impart  the  same  amount 
of  activity  or  ambition  to  the  native,  as  when  "  Oriental." 

Orbs. — There  are  orbs  of  the  planets  and  orbs  of  the  houses. 
See  Part  I.,  chapter  III. 

Oriental. — Eastern,  or  rising.  Any  planet  between  the  4th 
and  10th,  via  the  1st.  Planets  oriental  denote  success.  The 
native  is  usually  more  ambitious,  aspiring  and  masterful, 
than  when  they  are  occidental. 

Parallel. — Equal  distance  in  Declination  North  or  South 
from  the  Equator.  The  Declinations  of  the  planets  are 
given  in  the  Ephemeris. 

Peregrine. — Void  of  essential  dignity.  The  0  in  8,  n, 
25,  &c.,  or  in  any  sign  except  <Y>,  Q ,  =£=  and  '%,,  will  be  peregrine. 
It  is  neither  a  benefit  nor  affliction. 

Radical  or  Radix. — That  which  belongs  to  the  nativity  or 
figure  of  birth. 

Retrograde. — A  planet  moving  backwards  in  the  degrees  of 
the  Zodiac.  The  J)  and  0  are  never  Retrograde.  ^,  y, 
>2  and  "J/  are  Retrograde  every  year  for  some  months.  Q* 
and  9  about  once  in  two  years,  and  ^  three  times  every  year. 
"  Retrograde  "  may  be  termed  an  affliction,  for  no  planet  is 
so  strong  beneficially,  when  retrograde,  as  when  direct,  or 
moving  swiftly. 

Separation,  Separating. — When  two  or  more  planets  having 
been  in  <$  or  aspect  to  each  other,  begin  to  move  away  there- 
from. An  aspect  "  separating  "  is  more  powerful  than  "  ap- 
plying." For  instance,  the  D  Q  I?  applying,  would  be 
scarcely  operative  unless  within  8°  of  the  aspect,  but  if 
separating  10°  might  be  allowed. 

K  2 


132  THE    GUIDE    TO    ASTROLOGY. 

Significator. — That  planet  ruling  the  house  of  the  native  or 
anything  in  connection  with  him.  For  instance  the  lord  of 
the  1st  would  bo  the  significator  of  the  person  himself ;  the 
lord  of  the  2nd  would  signify  his  wealth  ;  the  lord  of  the  10th 
wguld  be  the  significator  of  his  honour  and  credit,  esteem,  &c., 
and  so  on  of  the  others.  For  the  "  lords  "  of  the  houses  see 
Part  I.,  chapter  VII. 

Signs  of  Long  Ascension. — Zo,  £(,,  Tfl?,  ^ ,  TT\  and  /. 

Signs  of  Short  Ascension. — yf,  ££,  Xt  T,  b  and  n. 

The  inequalities  in  the  rising  are  caused  by  the  Latitude 
of  the  country.  There  is  no  inequality  at  or  near  the  Equator. 
Signs  of  Long  Ascension  in  N.  Latitude,  are  signs  of  Short 
Ascension  in  S.  Latitude,  and  vice  versa. 

Southern  Signs. — £±,  Ti\,  J ,  yf,  %zt  X-  Persons  born  with 
many  planets  in  these  signs  generally  succeed  best  in  Southern 
Latitudes,  or  in  places  to  the  South  of  their  birthplace. 

Succeedent  Houses — The  2nd,  5th,  8th,  and  llth  houses. 

Trigons  or  Triplicities. — These  are  four,  vi/. :  the  fiery, 
Tf  Q_  and  /  ;  the  earthy,  8 ,  1  ar>d  VT ;  the  airy,  n ,  ^  and 
ZZ  ;  the  watery,  <£>,  Tl^  and  X-  The  signs  comprising  a  tri- 
plicity  are  in  £  aspect  to  each  other — thus,  T  is  in  A  to  £\, 
and  J  and  Q  is  in  A  to  T  and  f .  They  comprise  signs  of 
a  similar  nature. 

Tropical  Signs. — <5>  and  Vf.  5c  is  the  Northern  tropic, 
and  W  the  Southern. 

Watery  Signs. — See  Fruit  fid  signs. 

Void  of  course. — When  a  planet  forms  no  aspect  before  it 
leaves  the  sign  it  is  then  in. 

Ready  April   1st,  19O6. 

The  Geocentric  Longitudes  and  Declinations  of 
Neptune,  Herschel,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  and  Mars  for  the 
1st  of  each  month,  from  1900  to  2001. 

Post   free   1  -.  or  25   Cents. 

FI.ETCHBU   AND   SON,    LTD.,    PRINTERS,   KOKWICH. 


University  of  California 

SOUTHERN  REGIONAL  LIBRARY  FACILITY 

405  Hilgard  Avenue,  Los  Angeles,  CA  90024-1388 

Return  this  material  to  the  library 

from  which  it  was  borrowed. 


A     000807258     9