_ ASTUDENTS TEXT- BOOK 
OF ASTROLOGY 
By VIVIAN E.ROBSON. BSc. 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK 
OF ASTROLOGY 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK 


OF 


ASTROLOGY 


BY 


VIVIAN E. ROBSON, B. Sc. 


EDITOR OF “MODERN ASTROLOGY” 


LONDON 
CECIL PALMER 
OAKLEY HOUSE BLOOMSBURY STREET W.C. 1. 


ow Oye 


FIRST 
EDITION 
1922 
COP Y- 
RIGHT 


PREFACE 


For many years there has been a demand 
for an up-to-date, concise, and comprehensive 
text book of Astrology that is complete in 
itself and does away with the necessity of pur- 
chasing one or more additional volumes, and 
it is primarily to meet this need that the present 
work has been undertaken. 

The method of arrangement that has finally 
been adopted is in some respects new, inasmuch 
as it has been my endeavour to make each 
chapter complete in itself and so dispense with 
the usual annoying necessity of turning back 
to the introductory chapters in order to find 
the influence of the planets and signs on the 
particular matter under consideration. Each 
chapter is, therefore, arranged so as to include 
the general rules applicable to that section, the 
specific effects of planets and signs, and a number 
of special rules or aphorisms. By including the 
latter I am aware that I lay myself open to 
the charge of treating the subject in too cut- 
and-dried a manner, but I have endeavoured 
to correct any such view of astrology itself 
in the chapter on general principles of judgment, 
and moreover, many of the rules are of such 
value that it seemed a pity to omit them, es- 
pecially as accuracy and definition of judgment 
are the qualities most needed in present day 
astrological practice. 


Vv 


A good deal of hitherto unpublished material 
will be found scattered throughout the book, 
and as much detail in every case as could be 
conveniently compressed in a manner consistent 
with clearness. Had space been no object I 
should have endeavoured to have illustrated 
each important statement by an example nativity, 
but this would have expanded the work to 
an unmanageable size, and was found to be 
impracticable. 

In conclusion I take this opportunity of ex- 
pressing my thanks to many friends and pupils 
for their helpful interest and suggestions, and 
in particular to Mr. Clifford Bax, without whose 
kindly offices the work would never have been 
produced ; to my colleague, Miss J. Harrap, who 
read and criticised most of the manuscript ; 
and to my wife who undertook the laborious 
task of typing the whole work. 


VIVIAN E. ROBSON. 
48, Flanders Mansions, 
Bedford Park, London, W. 4. 
6th June, 1922. 


VI 


CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 


CHAPTER 


I 
II 
Ill 


CONTENTS 


SECTION TI. 

GENERAL PRINCIPLES AND THE CASTING OF A 
HOROSCOPE 

Page 

The Fundamental Principles of Astrology 3 

The Alphabet of Astrology .... ..... 14 

Casting*the Fioroscope crass ns semen ee 35 
SECTION II. 

JUDGMENT OF A HOROSCOPE 
General Principles of Judgment ...... 53 


CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 


CHAPTER 


CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 


CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 
CHAPTER 


Infant Mortality and Length of Life.. 63 


Personal Appearance and Physical 


Pecnliaritics jis nave sa sro ¢ aap brelerora 68 
Character andeMind. ..25.6saes«en.citec 85 
Health and: Accidents: avis. ss0cwacs 95 
IN ATICE Ais covas ls ghee Soi o! 6a ah erie sg ote ane es 109 
Occupation and Position ;...,.......- 116 
Parents, Relatives and Home........ 127 
Friends and Enemies, and the Comparison 

DPPELQUOSCOPES a te sinis oie, = [siviare's)ecrme 6 ois 133 
OVE rand Marriage cogs. sc ccls cas ese 143 
CTSIAT EG gieterets are rersreleigials Gieig ais bl e:0 ole siee6 155 
BL EAM OL aE iaytogtaesar aoiee sk este inis 6 e978 «eres 162 
DeGatiitsantan rats st dees Weis dala a% als v, wisis 4-0 168 
Esoteric Astrology ......0s0cccsctses 174 
An Example Nativity ........0.0.s- 182 


VII 


SECTION III. 
DIRECTIONS AND RECTIFICATION 


Page 
CHAPTER I Secondary Directions... ....... 0006 aL LSO 
CuarTeR II Interpretation of Directions.......... 200 
CuarteErR III Primary Directions..............+4-- 208 
CHAPTER IV Minor Methods of Directing.......... 220 
CHAPTER V < Rectification si). .1.c sce ssl twalee ee eemete 225 

APPENDIX 

A. The Present Use of Standard Time ............ 233 
BS eS UII OL ULL LEO Per aicieca sl aaa a ahetaie Catete toieuphelersiekeicreierena 238 
C. Adoption of the New Style Calendar....... Ps oc) 
Dee Sensitive ye Ons: aiieps esi ne exc esetetcnwinera'e ot tel ates 240 
£. Correction of Mean to Sideteal Time ............ 243 


VIII 


SECTION I 


GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF ASTROLOGY AND THE 
CASTING OF A HOROSCOPE 


CHAPTER I 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES OF 
ASTROLOGY 


I. DeFIniTIon. The science of Astrology is 
concerned with the effects of planetary positions 
upon the earth and its inhabitants. The exact 
nature of such a connection is a matter of specu- 
lation, though its reality may be proved ex- 
perimentally, and we are not in a position to 
say, with any degree of certainty, whether the 
planets actually influence Mundane affairs or 
whether they are merely signals and pointers 
that denote certain causes without necessarily 
originating them. It should be remembered, 
therefore, that when we speak of the influence 
of a planet we are using a convenient phrase 
to denote the obvious connection of planet and 
effect without concerning ourselves as to its 
theoretical justification. 

2. FACTORS EMPLOYED. Astronomy is the foun- 
dation of astrology, and a horoscope is simply 
an accurate diagram representing the positions 
of the heavenly bodies in relation to the earth 
at any given moment. The actual factors em- 
ployed are the Sun, Moon, and planets, the 
Signs of the Zodiac, and the position or orien- 
tation of the earth. In certain cases these are 
supplemented by fixed stars, eclipses, comets, 
and other celestial phenomena, but such: aids 


3 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


are secondary, and except in the case of eclipses 
are rarely used. 

3. Tue Sorar System. For all practical pur- 
poses the factors employed in astrology are 
limited to the Solar System. The central, and 
by far the largest body of the system, is the 
Sun, round which revolve the planets and their 
satellites, the nearest to the Sun being Mercury, 
the next Venus, then the Earth with its satellite 
the Moon, and then Mars, the Asteroids, Jupiter, 
Saturn, Uranus and lastly Neptune, which is 
the most distant. Each of these bodies has its 
own characteristic nature and produces or 
signalises definite effects, and all are of con- 
siderable astrological importance, with the ex- 
ception of the Asteroids, whose influence has 
not yet been properly investigated, and which 
are rarely included in a horoscope 7 

From time to time misconceptions have 
arisen here owing to the terminology adopted 
by astrologers, and some explanation is necessary. 
The astrologer knows quite well that the Sun 
is to all intents and purposes stationary, and 
that the earth moves round it, and also that the 
Moon is merely a satellite, but he often finds 
it convenient to refer to the Sun and Moon as 
planets, and to speak of the Sun’s movement 
when he really means its apparent change of 
position due to the Earth’s movement. It 
should, therefore, be understood that such re- 
marks are used merely for convenience and refer 
to apparent phenomena. For practical astrologi- 
cal purposes the earth is taken as the main 
body and all the positions used are those that 
appear to be held by the planets as seen from 
the Earth, or in other words they are geocentric 


4 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES 


(seen from the centre of the Earth) and not 
heliocentric (seen from the centre of the Sun) 
such as are used in Astronomical works. This 
has been used as an argument against astrology, 
but a little thought will show that it is really 
of no weight. We are concerned with the effects 
of the planets on ourselves and on the earth, 
and therefore, while using the true positions in 
space of the planets we measure the angles 
between them and note the positions they 
eney relative to ourselves rather than to the 
un. 

4. ORBITAL REvoLvTION. All the planets per- 
form two movements simultaneously, viz : revo- 
lution round the Sun and rotation upon their 
own axes, but except in the case of the Earth 
we are concerned only with their revolution. 
The path, or orbit, of every planet is an ellipse 
nearly approaching a circle, of which the Sun 
occupies one of the fixed points or foct. No 
two bodies perform a complete revolution in 
the same time, and while it takes the earth 
one year to return to the same point in space, 
Neptune requires almost 165 years. Therefore 
it is only after millions of years that the planets 
all return to any given position with respect 
to each other, and except in the case of people 
born at the same time and place no two horos- 
copes can ever be exactly alike. Owing to these 
differences in speed there is a continual ka- 
leidoscopic change taking place in the heavens 
as seen from the earth, one planet overtaking 
and passing another, and then apparently slowing 
down, stopping and beginning to move back- 
wards for a time. This apparent backward motion 
is known as retrogradation and is merely an 


5 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


illusion caused by the combined motions of the 
planet and the earth and their position relative 
to the Sun. The most familiar example of a 
similar illusion is furnished by two railway 
trains moving side by side. From the point of 
view of a man seated in the slower train he is 
stationary while the overtaking train is moving 
forwards. If, however, his train gradually in- 
creases in speed, the other will appear to him 
to be slowing down, to stop, and finally to move 
backwards as his train gradually draws ahead. 
The illustration is not quite parallel but will 
no doubt serve to indicate the principle involved. 
It is sufficient here to emphasise the fact that 
no planet ever really moves backwards, and that 
retrogradation is only apparent. Any given 
planet, however, moves more quickly at certain 
points of its orbit than at others, the Earth’s 
speed varying from about 59 minutes of space 
to 61 minutes a day, and this fact becomes of 
importance when dealing with the question 
of time. 

5. Tue Zopiac. The path of the Earth round 
the Sun is called the ecliptic, and it is observed 
that all the planets’ orbits lie nearly in the same 
plane, and are included in a belt of about 9 
degrees on either side of the ecliptic. This belt 
is termed the Zodiac and is divided equally 
into 12 sections of 30 degrees each, which are 
called signs and are given distinctive names. 
The Zodiac is a circle and therefore has no real 
beginning, but an arbitrary point is taken as 
its commencement and is termed the first point 
of Aries or 0° Aries, and is used as the standard 
for all measurements. This point is that at 
which the Sun passes from south to north decli- 


6 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES 


nation and is one of the two points where a 
line from the centre of the earth to the Sun 
cuts the Earth’s equator, which happens on 
about March 21st and September 21st each 
year, the former being the date when the Sun 
is in 0° Aries. This circle of the Zodiac is used 
in Astrology to define the positions of the 
planets and they are measured in signs, degrees, 
minutes and seconds from 0° Aries and in degrees, 
minutes and seconds above (north) or below 
(south) the ecliptic line. The distance from 
Aries is termed celestial longitude, and that 
above or below the ecliptic, celestial latitude. 
At the same time another system of measurement 
is used which has reference to the Earth’s equator 
or to its projection in space. The same point 
of intersection between the equator and ecliptic, 
o° Aries, is used as the starting point, but the 
measurement is taken along the equator and 
north or south of it instead of along the ecliptic, 
the longitudinal distance being measured in 
degrees from 0° to 360° orin hours from 0 to 24 
and termed Right Ascension, and the distance 
north or south, declination. All these standards 
are used in Astrology, the most usual, however, 
being longitude and declination. 

One other point needs mention and that is 
the exact nature of the Zodiac. There are 
really two zodiacs, namely, the zodiac of con- 
stellations and the zodiac of signs, the former 
consisting of 12 actual unequal constellations 
along the line of the ecliptic, bearing the same 
names as the signs, and the latter being an 
imaginary circle or belt equally divided into 
12 parts. It is the latter, or zodiac of signs, 
that is used in astrology, and the constellation 


4 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


zodiac may be disregarded. Originally the two 
coincided, but owing to a phenomenon known 
as the Precession of the Equinoxes the point 
o° Aries is gradually passing backwards through 
the constellations at the rate of about 50 seconds 
per annum, and now falls on or about 10° Pisces 
of the constellations. 

6. Rotation. The earth performs one com- 
plete rotation upon its own axis from west to 
east in 24 hours, and the effect of this move- 
ment is to make Sun, Moon, planets, and stars 
appear to rise in the east, pass across the sky, 
and set in the west. In other words each sign 
and degree of the zodiac rises, culminates, and 
sets once in 24 hours, and it is on account of 
this that the time of birth is of such great im- 
portance in astrology, as it enables us to fix 
the exact position of the earth in relation to 
the other bodies and points in space. One 
complete rotation of the earth is called a day, 
but it is necessary to distinguish between three 
kinds of day, viz :— Sidereal, Solar or Apparent, 
and Mean. 

(a) Sidereal Day. Suppose a star is exactly 
overhead at a given time. The Sidereal Day 
is the time taken by the earth to rotate through 
one complete circle so that the star again occupies 
’ the same position, or in other words it is the 
time elapsing between two successive passages 
of a given star over a fixed point. The Sidereal 
Day is about 4 minutes shorter than the day 
registered by the clock. 

(b) Solar or Apparent Day. Instead of a star 
the Sun is used as the standard and the Solar 
Day is the time elapsing between two successive 
passages of the Sun over a fixed point, and is 


8 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES 


about 4 minutes longer than the Sidereal Day. 
The reason for this is that the earth moves about 
one degree during the day so that at the end of 
one complete rotation the Sun appears to have 
advanced one degree, and the earth has to 
rotate through this extra distance, which takes 
it about 4 minutes, in order to bring the Sun 
back to the same place. The Solar Day is not 
in general use as it is variable in length. The 
earth moves at a variable speed, according to 
its place in its orbit, and therefore the Sun 
appears to move either more or less than one 
degree a day, which will, therefore, be more 
or less than 4 minutes in excess of the fixed 
and unvariable Sidereal Day. 

(c) Mean Day. As the Solar Day varies in 
this manner the average length of all the days 
in a year is used in practice and is called the 
Mean Day. All our civil time is Mean Time, 
which may or may not coincide with Solar 
Time, there being at times a discrepancy of 
as much as 16 minutes. All astronomical and 
astrological tables are computed for Mean Time, 
and all births are registered in Mean Time also, 
except in the very rare cases where a Sun-dial 
is used. Then the apparent Time given by the 
Sun-dial must be converted into Mean Time 
by adding or subtracting the difference (called 
the Equation of Time) which is given for every 
day of the year in Whitaker’s Almanac, but 
this is of extremely rare occurrence and cases 
will probably never be encountered by the 
student. 

The two standards of time used in astrology 
are the Mean and Sidereal, and as the Mean 
Day is 3™ 56°.56 longer than the Sidereal, Mean 


9 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


Time may be at once converted into Sidereal 
Time by the addition of 3™ 56°.56 per diem or 
g°.86 per hour. There is a column in the Ephe- 
meris headed ‘‘Sidereal Time’’ which gives the 
Sidereal Time at noon on the day in question. 
A clock registering Sidereal Time is in every 
Observatory and is set at 04 o™o* when o° Aries 
is immediately overhead or ‘‘on the mid-heaven’’. 
One degree passes across the mid-heaven in 
about 4 minutes and, therefore, the Sidereal 
Time at noon on any day shows what degree 
is on the mid-heaven at that moment, and by 
adding the time elapsed between noon and 
birth we obtain the Sidereal Time at birth and 
know from that the degree on the mid-heaven 
at that particular moment. To avoid cal- 
culation the Sidereal Time corresponding to 
any mid-heaven degree is tabulated in the 
“Tables of Houses” which also show the degree 
rising and those upon other important points. 
Thus we know exactly where a vertical line 
drawn from the earth is “‘pointing’’ in space 
and being given the longitudes of the planets 
we can insert them in a diagram in their proper 
positions relative to the earth. 

7. Time. The subject of time standards is of 
the greatest astrological importance. The Ephe- 
meris is computed to Greenwich Mean Time 
(abbreviated G.M.T.) and it is essential to 
know in what standard of time a birth is regis- 
tered in order to be able to find the corres- 
ponding G.M.T. and also the Local Mean Time 
(abbreviated L.M.T.). 

(a) Local Mean Time. Local noon is the 
moment measured in Mean Time at which the 
Sun is on the mid-heaven of any particular 


Io 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES 


place. In the following remarks Mean Time 
must be always understood as we are no longer 
concerned with Solar Time. 

When it is noon at Greenwich the Sun is 
overhead, but at New York it will not long 
have risen, and noon there will not occur for 
approximately another 5 hours, the Local Time 
at New York being about 7 a.m. or more exactly 
7.4 a.m. Therefore noon at Greenwich is equi- 
valent to 7.4 a.m. at New York. 

We have already seen that in casting a horos- 
cope the planets must be arranged according 
to the way the earth is pointing, and it follows 
that when we are finding the degree on the 
mid-heaven we must use Local Time or our 
positions will be wrong. On the other hand, 
however, the Sun occupies the same degree and 
minute of longitude at Greenwich noon as it 
does at 7.4 a.m. at New York, and as the 
planetary positions in the Ephemeris are all 
computed for G.M.T. we must find the G.M.T. 
corresponding to our Local Time when cal- 
culating their exact longitudes. 

The Local Mean Time of any place depends 
entirely upon its longitude east or west of Green- 
wich. The earth rotates at the rate of one 
degree in every 4 minutes and therefore the 
Local Time of a place 1° West of Greenwich 
will be 4 minutes earlier than the G.M.T. To 
find the difference in time between Greenwich and 
any given place convert the longitude of the 
place into time at the rate of 1 hour for each 15°, 
4 minutes for each degree, and 4 seconds for 
each minute. The easiest method is to call the 
degrees of space minutes of time, and the minutes 
of space seconds of time, and multiply by 4. 


II 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


Thus New York is 74° o’ West of Greenwich. 
Call this 74™ o* and multiply by 4. The result 
is 296" o& or 4556" o% If the place is West 
of Greenwich subtract the result from G.M.T. 
to obtain L.M.T., and if east add it. 

(b) Standard Time. It is not convenient in 
practice for every place to use its own Local 
Time and definite standards have been adopted 
to cover large areas. Thus the whole belt of 
country lying between 67°W30’ and 82°W30’ 
uses a standard time that is 5 hours slow of 
Greenwich. This is nearly correct for New York 
but not for many other places in the area as 
it is a purely artificial time. In dealing with 
such cases as these where a birth is registered 
in Standard Time it is only necessary to add 
or subtract the Standard to obtain the correct 
G.M.T., and from that we can at once arrive 
at the true Local Time by applying the longitude 
in time to the G.M.T. Thus suppose a birth 
took place at Pittsburg, Long. 80°Wo’ at 2.15 p.m. 
Standard Time. The standard in use is 5 hours 
slow of Greenwich and the G.M.T. will, therefore, 
be 25 15™ plus 55 = 75 15™ p.m. The longitude 
in time of Pittsburg is 5" 20™ o® which must be 
subtracted from the G.M.T. to obtain L.M.T. 
Thus 75 15" minus 55 207 =1555™ p.m. The 
result is, therefore, that birth took place at 1.55 
p.m. L.M.T. corresponding to 7.15 p.m. G.M.T. 
A Table is included in the Appendix showing 
the standards at present in use and where possible 
the dates upon which they were adopted. 

(c) Summer Time. Summer Time is a variety 
of Standard Time in which one hour is added 
to the G.M.T. or to the Standard Time of the 
place during certain months of the year, so that 


12 


THE FUNDAMENTAL PRINCIPLES 


all birth times then registered must have one 
hour subtracted from them to convert them 
into the time normally used at the place. There 
is much confusion in the dates that have been 
adopted by various countries, and in many 
cases, partly owing to the War, our knowledge 
is not exact, but a Table is given in the Appendix 
showing so far as possible the dates during 
which Summer Time has been used since its 
adoption in 1916. 

(d) The Calendar. The Calendar now in uni- 
versal use is the Gregorian, or New Style, which 
has replaced the Julian or Old Style. It is 
important when calculating horoscopes for an- 
cient times or for modern Russian dates to know 
in what style the date is recorded, and a Table 
is therefore included in the Appendix showing 
the dates on which the various countries adopted 
New Style, and also the number of days diffe- 
rence between Old Style and New Stylein various 
centuries. The question is entirely one of chrono- 
logy and a detailed explanation of the differences 
in style is therefore unnecessary. 


13 


CHAPTER II 


Tue ALPHABET OF ASTROLOGY. 


i. THe Pranets. There are 9 heavenly bodies 
that are employed in astrology. their names and 
symbols being as follows: 


Sun O Jupiter 2) 
Moon sp Saturn bh 
Mercury $ Uranus H 
Venus @ Neptune If 
Mars 3 


Each of these bodies is a centre of force and 
exerts its own particular kind of influence af- 
fecting us according to its position in the horos- 
cope and the sign and house through which the 
influence is transmitted. The general nature of 
each planet is as follows:— 

Sun. Hot, dry, positive, electric, masculine, 
vitalising, strong, sanguine and inflammatory. 
It is never retrograde. 

Moon. Cold, moist, phlegmatic, negative, 
magnetic, feminine, fruitful, changeable, wande- 
ring and sympathetic. Its nature is convertible 
as it partakes largely of the nature of the planet 
most strongly aspecting it. The Moon is a collector 
and absorber of influence, and carries the in- 
fluence of one body to another. It is never 
retrograde, but was considered so by the ancients 
when its motion was less than the mean value 
of 13° 11’ a day. 


14 


THE ALPHABET 


Mercury. Cold, nervous, changeable, active, 
excitable, and busy. Its influence is convertible, 
and it takes on that of the planet in strongest 
aspect with it, becoming masculine or feminine and 
benefic or maleficaccording to the aspecting planet. 


Venus. Warm, temperate, moist, fruitful, nega- 
tive, magnetic, graceful, joyful and pleasure- 
giving. She was called the Lesser Fortune by 
the ancients, and her influence is favourable, 
tending to peace, harmony, justice and love. 


Mars. Hot, dry, barren, inflammatory, posi- 
tive, electric, energetic, warlike and quarrelsome. 
It was called the Lesser Infortune and is usually 
unfavourable, tending to accidents, wars, quarrels 
fires and passions. 


Jupiter. Warm, moist, fruitful, positive and 
electric. It was called the Greater Fortune and 
its influence is benevolent, charitable, jovial 
and expansive. 


Saturn. Cold, dry, barren, melancholy, negative 
and magnetic. It is the Greater Infortune and 
its influence is separative, secretive, apprehensive, 
suspicious, selfish, cold and chaste. 


Uranus. Cold, dry, barren, positive and elec- 
tric. It is eccentric, explosive, spasmodic, 
original, erratic, separative and tends to accen- 
tuate the will and individuality. 


Neptune. Warm, moist, fruitful, negative and 
magnetic. Its influence is chaotic, dreamy, 
fanciful, psychic, spiritual, deceptive and tends 
to sacrifice or self-suppresion. 

These influences are general and are exerted 
in every department of life, being modified by 
signs and houses, and their application in par- 


15 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


ticular cases will be explained later. The use 
of the terms “benefic’’ and ‘‘malefic’’ is a 
convenience. The nature of a planet is neither 
good nor bad, and the question of fortunate 
or unfortunate influences depends upon the 
planet’s position and aspects in the horoscope. 
It is important to remember that a malefic will 
produce good if well aspected, and a benefic 
will prove unfortunate if badly aspected. There 
is, however, probably more sympathy between 
conditions of life here and the nature of the 
benefic planets, for while a badly aspected 
malefic will produce serious evils, a benefic in 
a similar condition will not be so strongly and 
violently evil. 


Each planet moves through the zodiac in 
the order of the signs, passing from Aries to 
Taurus, and so on to Pisces, from which it 
again passes into Aries, and its position is 
denoted by the degree it occupies in any par- 
ticular sign. At various times all the planets, 
with the exception of the Sun and Moon, appear 
to move backwards through the zodiac, i.e. 
from Aries to Pisces to Aquarius, and so on, 
after which they become stationary and again 
move forwards. A planet thus moving back- 
wards is called Retrograde (symbol R), and when 
moving forward Direct (symbol D). The point 
at which it is stationary passing from direct 
to retrograde is called its First Station and that 
at which it again becomes direct is called its 
Second Station. A retrograde planet is weaker 
than one that is direct and usually promises 
more evil or good than it performs. Retrogra- 
dation weakens both good and evil planets 


16 


THE ALPHABET 


alike, and does not make a malefic more evil, 
as is sometimes stated. A planet that is station- 
ary is always of very great importance and its 
influence in a map is thereby greatly accentuated. 
When within 8° 30’ of the Sun a planet is said 
to be “combust’’, and this was considered a 
weak and unfortunate position by the ancients, 
though less harmful to Mercury than to the 
other bodies. 

2. THE SIGNS OF THE Zopriac. The circle of 
the zodiac is divided into 12 equal parts of 
30° in extent, each of which is called a “‘Sign’’. 
The signs are divided into two groups termed 
Northern and Southern, and as they form a 
circle the first six are always opposite the last 
six. The names and symbols should be learnt 
in order, and it is necessary to know at a glance 
the sign opposite any given one. The Latin 
and English names of the signs, together with 
their symbols are as follows :— 


Northern. Southern. 
Aries. The Ram, ‘VY oppositeto 7. Libra, The Balance, woe 
Taurus, The Bull, W oe » 8, Scorpio, The Scorpion, ML 
Gemini, The Twins, I A » 9. Sagittarius, The Archer, 
Cancer, The Crab, 96 ne » 10. Capricorn, The Goat, 
Leo, The Lion, 9) < » 11, Aquarius, The Waterman. 
Virgo, The Virgin, 1) ro » 12, Pisces, The Fishes, KH 


There are many divisions and classifications 
of the signs which will be dealt with where 
necessary, but the following classifications are 
important and should be memorised. It is not 
necessary to enter into a description of the 
influences of signs and divisions at present, as they 
will be fully treated in the chapters on Judgment. 


17 


Astrology B 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 
(a) Triplictties. 


Fiery Signs YSEy et 
Earthy Signs sp ae 
Airy Signs nua = 
Watery Signs oso m 


(0) Quadruplictties. 


Cardinal or Moveable Signs VY @ 2 #7 
Fixed Signs v Qm om 
Mutable, Common, or Flexed 

Signs rm # 


(c) Positive and Negative Signs. The signs are 
alternately positive and negative, the odd signs 
vv mg 2 x being positive and masculine, 
and the even signs ¥ 95 m m % X negative 
and feminine. 

(a) Decanates. Each sign of 30° is sub-divided 
into three parts of 10° each, called Decanates. 
The first decanate of a sign is under the sub- 
tulership of the sign itself, the second is sub- 
ruled by the following sign of the same tripli- 
city, and the third is ruled by the remaining 
sign of that triplicity. Thus 0° to 10°Y is 
sub-ruled by ‘Y’, 10° to 20° Y’ is sub-ruled by Q), 
which is the sign following ‘Vv in the fiery 
triplicity, and 20° to 30° Y is sub-ruled by J. 
Similarly 0° to 10° my is under mp, 10° to 20° mp 
is under %, and 20° to 30° mp is under YW. 

3. RELATION OF SIGNS AND PLANETS. Definite 
relationships exist between the planets and 
signs of the zodiac. A given planet does not 
act with equal power through all signs, as in 
some cases the two influences are sympathetic 
and in others antagonistic, so that the influence 
of the planet is more favourable and less disturbed 
in some signs than in others. There are four 


18 


THE ALPHABET 


chief kinds of relationship that are of particular 
importance, namely, House, Detriment, Exal- 
tation and Fall. 


(a) House. Each planet is said to be the 
ruler of two signs, with the exception of the 
Sun and Moon, which rule one each, such signs 
being the zodiacal houses of the planet. In 
each case one sign is odd or positive and the 
other even or negative, the former being termed 
the day house, and the latter the might house. 
In present day astrological practice this dis- 
tinction is usually ignored, but the ancients 
set some store by it and considered the day 
house to have chief power in a day horoscope, 
and the night house in a night horoscope. A 
planet in its own house is in its most powerful 
position and tends to operate more strongly and 
favourably than when otherwise placed Afflic- 
tions to such a body are not so serious, while 
good aspects act more powerfully. 


(6) Detriment. A planet is in its detriment 
when in one of the signs opposite to those it 
rules. This is its worst position and its influence 
is then rendered weaker for good and more 
powerful for evil. 


(c) Exaltation. Each planet is said to be 
exalted when it is in a certain sign of the zodiac, 
and it is then rendered more powerful for good 
though not to quite so great an extent as when 
in one of its houses. Unlike house and detriment 
a planet has only one sign of exaltation, and 
the ancients held it to be exalted only when 
in a particular degree of that sign. This point, 
however, is now ignored, and a planet is con- 


19 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


sidered to be exalted when in any part of the 
sign. For the sake of completeness the Table 
below indicates the exact degree of exaltation 
which was assigned to each body. 

(d) Fall. The fall of a planet is the sign (and 
degree) opposite to its exaltation. This is a 
weak position that renders the planet less power- 
ful for good and more powerful for evil. It 
is held to be less serious than the detriment, 
but too much importance should not be attached 
to this comparison, as in many cases a planet 
in its fall seems to act more unfavourably than 
when in detriment. This is particularly the 
case with ¢ which is usually more evil in 95 
than in WY or 2. 

These four positions are termed essential 
dignities and debilities, in contradistinction to 
the accidental dignities and debilities which will 
be noted later, the house and exaltation being 
the chief dignities, and the detriment and fall 
the chief debilities. 

The planets ™ and Jf have been discovered 
so recently that some doubt exists as to their 
houses and exaltations. is usually assigned 
to Hi as its house, but m has also been suggested, 
while in the case of Jf, % is almost always 
said to be its house, its exaltation being ~# or % 
In these cases the house rulership of = will © 
be shared by h and m, and of ¥ by 2| and IK, 
and in reading a horoscope this should be borne 
in mind. At our present stage of knowledge 
it is not safe to assume, for example, that a 
entirely replaces 2| as ruler of 3, and bot 
bodies should be considered. : 

The following Table shows at a glance the 
above relationship of signs and planets :— 


20 


THE ALPHABET 


Si ey woe Serge paplienon Fall of 

ss 3 © 19° |b an 
3° | Se 

mH fe} 21 Ba Sots 

5 ») i) a t§. 28" 

$v 6) h or Hf — —_ 

m" 8 2, or Ye age Cee Rey oo 

=o. 2 3 Bo2inut aig: 

m 3 , H? D acd 

Poel. 2 & =. = 

6 h ») Oo -26-.4 2) 18s 

= hort Ss, eae — 

[orm]  § Q 27° | ¥ 15° 


4. Aspects. The aspects are certain distances 
between the planets measured in degrees of the 
zodiac. It is found that when planets are a 
certain number of degrees apart they affect one 
another either favourably or unfavourably, ac- 
cording to the distance separating them. Thus 
a distance of 90° is always exceedingly adverse 
and planets so situated are inharmonious and 
spoil each other’s effect. 

As already mentioned the zodiac is divided 
into 12 signs (12°) each of 30 degrees (30°) in 
extent. Each degree is divided into 60 minutes 
(60’) and each minute into 60 seconds (60). Thus 
from ‘Y’ 0° to ¥ 0° is one sign or 30° ; from ‘VY 12° 
to 95 12° is 3° or 90°; from ¥ 25° 42’ 36” to 
mp 14° 39’ 20” is 108° 56’ 44” and so on. The 
distances between planets are measured in this 
manner, and it is customary always to use the 
shortest distance as all the aspects are contained 
in the semicircle of 180°. Thus 0° to % 0° 


2I 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


is either 240° or 120° according to whether we 
count from ¥ or from %, and we therefore use 
120° as that is less than 180°. 

Only certain distances are of influence and it 
is to these that the name aspects is given. Each 
aspect possesses its own influence which is 
exerted irrespective of the planets concerned. 
Thus the square or 90° is evil in all cases, even 
between benefic planets, while the trine or 120° 
is favourable even between malefics. In other 
words good aspects always produce good results 
even from bad planets, while bad aspects pro- 
duce evil even from good planets. 

The following Table shows the names, symbols 
and nature of the aspects, together with the num- 
ber of degrees constituting them, and also their 
,orbs”’ which will be explained later. 


Number | Number 
a yeni A f sat of signs |of Degrees} Nature | Orb 
P apart Apart 
Parallel ||or P — — Variable id 
Conjunction ros re) ° Variable ge 
Semi-sextile . I 30 Weakly good} 2° 
Semi-square Z 1/4 45 Weakly bad| 4° 
Sextile x 2 60 Good 7 
Square CJ 3 go Bad ge 
Trine A 4 120 Very good | 8° 
Sesquiquadrate u 44/4 135. | Weakly bad | 4° 
Quincunx A 5 150 Weakly bad | 2° 
Opposition Ss 6 180 | Very bad go 


(a) Effect. The Parallel is strictly a position 


and not an aspect. It occurs when two planets 
occupy the same degree of declination no matter 


22 


THE ALPHABET 


whether both planets are in north declination, 
both in south, or one in north and the other in 
south. Like the conjunction this aspect is variable, 
that is to say it is favourable between good 
planets and unfavourable between evil ones. 
Thus 2 ¢ or P 2| is always favourable, while 
6 o& or P f is always unfavourable, and simi- 
larly the o or P between 9 and f is also un- 
favourable as h spoils the influence of 9. 

The ¢ and P are both of very great strength 
and together with the take precedence over 
all the other aspects. The action of the P is si- 
milar to the ¢ if the bodies are in no other aspect 
but if on the other hand they are already in 
some aspect the P strengthens it, so that a P 
between two bodies already in [] acts in terms 
of the (] and renders it stronger than it other- 
wise would be. 

Planets in ¢ tend to act alternately and it 
should be remembered that they do not altogether 
blend although they are both acting through 
the same part of the zodiac. There is usually 
a more or less rapid change from one body to 
another. Thus 2? ¢ ¢ generally causes the native 
to change quickly from anger to smiles and 
vice versa, though it also gives energy to the 
feelings and some softness to the passions. In 
a o& both bodies are always active and it is a 
mistake to imagine that one is cancelled out. 
The relative strength, however, is not equal 
and depends largely upon the sign occupied, 
for 2¢ ¢ in & is much more favourable to 9, 
which rules «, than to 34, while the reverse 
would be the case with Qo gd in Y. 

A of is usually rather difficult to interpret 
especially when three or more bodies are con 


23 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


cerned and it tends to limit the native owing 
to the presence of several planets in one sign, 
for the various energies and experiences of the 
planets are all exerted or received through one 
channel. 

Another position linking up two planets is 
that known as mutual reception, which occurs 
when each body is in a sign ruled by the other, 
as for example 2} in Y and g in ~. This is 
also said to cause the two planets concerned 
to act as if in conjunction. 

The opposition is usually classed as the worst 
aspect of all, but this is often not so as it fre- 
quently acts as a complementary aspect and 
loses much of its evil nature. Furthermore with 
an it is often possible to incline the balance 
to one side or the other, whereas in the case of 
the square this is not possible and the latter 
may usually be taken as the worse affliction. 
In the matter of character the [] is always 
more evil than the £ and exercises a more 
distorting influence as it causes a twist in the 
nature, whilst the £ gives more ‘“‘cussedness” 
and sets the native in opposition to others. 

With regard to the other aspects in the list, 
the % is sometimes said to be of more purely 
material benefit than the A, but this is doubtful. 

There are two ancient rules connected with 
the aspects that have fallen into disuse which 
may be stated as follows:— 

1. Three planets in trine to one another from 
the corners of an equilateral triangle are said 
to be in grand trine and to exert a very evil 
influence. 

2. In signs of long ascension (95 to jf) a & is 
equivalent to a [1], and a [J to a A, while in 


24 


THE ALPHABET 


signs of short ascension (% to 11) a LJis equivalent 
to a %, and a A toa [. 

Both these rules are extremely doubtful but 
as they have not been investigated it seems de- 
sirable to mention their existence. 

The list of aspects given above is not complete 
and numerous others have from time to time 
been suggested. They are, however, all very 
weak and may safely be ignored. The chief ones 
are the Vigintile 18°, Quindecile 24°, Decile 36°, 
Quintile 72°, Tredecile 108°, and Biquintile 
144°. The foregoing aspects were first suggested 
by Kepler, but since then others have been put 
forward and a great number were introduced 
by the late George Wilde, which, however, were 
never properly proved and have not been accepted 

(0) Orbs. Planets are in aspect with one ano- 
ther when within a few degrees of the exact 
distance constituting the aspect. The number 
of degrees that can be allowed in this way is 
known as the orb of the aspect, and the appro- 
ximate values are shown in the Table on p. 22. 
Thus the orb of a square is about 8°, and this 
means that two planets are in [] when distant 
from each other from 82° to 98°. The influence 
of the [J first appears when the bodies are 82° 
apart, gradually reaches a maximum at 90°, 
and then decreases until the effect disappears 
at about 98°. These orbs are all approximate 
and must not be taken as hard and fast dividing 
lines. For example, the orb of the conjunction is 
given in the Table as 8°, and this may be followed 
in general cases, but when the aspect is formed 
between the Sun or Moon and another planet 
10° may be allowed, and between the Sun and 
Moon themselves it may be extended to 12°. 


25 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


This is a larger variation than is allowable in 
the cases of the other aspects, and with these 
it will be advisable to keep to the values shown 
in the Table. The orbs of the aspects are, however, 
subject to modification by the planets concerned, 
and may sometimes be extended when several 
planets enter into the configuration. Thus, 
suppose ¢ to bein Y 10°, and Qin ‘VY’ 20°. As they 
stand they are beyond the orb for a ¢, but if 
at the same time another body, say 2|, were 
in §) 15°, it would be in A to both and would 
act as a medium in bringing them into g. 

Exact aspects were at one time called fariile, 
and aspects within orbs platic, but these terms 
are rarely used nowadays. Another distinction 
that is sometimes met with is in the direction 
from which an aspect is cast, a dexter aspect being 
one thrown forward in the zodiac, and a sinister 
aspect one thrown backwards. The latter is said 
to be stronger for good or evil than the former. 

When a quickly moving planet is going to- 
wards an aspect with a more slowly moving one 
by overtaking it it is said to be applying to 
the aspect, and to be separating from it after 
completion. The ) is the most quickly moving 
body and applies to all the rest. The order of 
speed of the others being $2 ¢ © 2] h # and 
ult so that g applies only to 2| h m and I, 
whilst ff cannot apply to any. A separating 
aspect is said to be stronger than an applying 
one since its effects have already manifested 
and are in being, whilst those of an applying 
aspect have not yet fully materialised. 

(c) Measurement of aspects. 

1. Never use an aspectarian but always work 
out the aspects independently. In a short time 


26 


THE ALPHABET 


one can see them without calculation if this is 
done, but the use of an aspectarian or similar 
mechanical device destroys this power. 

2. Start with the © and note the number of de- 
grees between it and the ). Then take © to 8, © to 
2, © to g, and so on in order. Next take ) to %, 
) to &, etc., then § to Q, 8 to g, and so on until 
all have been examined. A definite order should 
always be followed and the most convenient 
is ©) 89 21 bh m UL. Write down the symbol 
of each aspect as it is noted in tabular form as 
in the diagram at the foot of the map on p. 

3. Note that planets in or near the same degree 
of signs are always in aspect. 

4. To any given planet’s longitude add 15° 
(or subtract 15° if preferred) and note planets 
in the same degrees of different signs. Such may 
be in Z or & but the result must be checked 
as they may be at distances of 75°, 105°, or 165°, 
which are not aspects. 

5. Signs of the same triplicity are in trine, 
and signs of the same quadruplicity are in 
square or opposition. 

5. MunpanE Houses. The usual forms of 
horoscope diagrams are as follows:— 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


The square from was in use in most of the 
older books but the circular map has almost 
entirely replaced it and beyond understanding 
the square map the student should not concern 
himself with it as the circular diagram is much 
easier to follow. 

The map is drawn from the point of view of 
an observer facing towards the south. The small 
central circle represents the earth. The South 
point or Midheaven (often called Medium Coeli, 
and abbreviated M.C.) is immediately overhead 
and is the point reached by the Sun at noon. 
The North point (called Imum Coeli and abbre- 
viated I.C.) is underfoot, while the East point 
or Ascendant, where the planets rise, is on the 
left hand, and the West point or Descendant, 
where they set, is on the right. By the rotation 
of the earth in a direction opposite to the hands 
of a watch the planets all appear to rise on the 
eastern horizon and set on the western, the hori- 
zontal line in the map representing the horizon, 
and the vertical line the meridian. One such 
rotation takes place in 24 hours, and is quite 
distinct from the contrary movement of the 
planets in their passage through the signs. 

The circle of the heavens is divided into 
twelve segments by great circles, and these are 
known as the Mundane Houses. For the sake 
of simplicity they may be thought of as bounded 
by spokes projecting from the earth. The outer 
circle represents the zodiac, and as the earth, 
with its spokes, rotates, the points of the zodiac, 
cut by each spoke, are continually changing, 
about one degree passing across the M. C. spoke 
every 4 minutes. Each of these houses rules 
certain departments of life and is known by a 


28 


THE ALPHABET 


number as shown inthe diagram. The rst, roth, 
7th, and 4th houses are termed angular or angles, 
and are of the greatest strength and importance. 

The 2nd, rith, 8th and 5th are termed 
succeedent and come next in importance. ; 

The 3rd, 12th, gth and 6th are termed cadent, 
and are the weakest. 

In a purely general way planets in angles 
have most influence on the external world, 
those in succeedent houses on the emotions, and 
those in cadent on the mind, but this is not 
exclusively so as all houses affect all states of 
existence, though to a different extent. 

The beginning point of each house is called 
the cusp, and is indicated in the diagram. The 
cusp is the strongest point of the house and 
planets on cusps are stronger and more impor- 
tant than when they are well within the house. 
Each house also has its orb. and a planet exerts 
an influence on a house when outside it but 
within 5° of its cusp. Frequently such a position 
as this blends the influence of both houses, and 
the planet has some effect upon each. 

The various matters ruled by each house 
are given in the following list and should be 
thoroughly memorised. 

First House. The “native” or subject of the 
horoscope, his personal appearance, body, outlook 
on life, etc. It rules the head and corresponds 
to the sign Aries. 

Second House. Money and possessions. Rules 
the throat and corresponds to Taurus. 

Third House. Short journeys, letters, writings, 
papers, brothers and sisters, contemporary rela- 
tives, neighbours, and the lower mind. Rules the 
arms and shoulders and corresponds to Gemini. 


29 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


Fourth House. The home, early life and also 
the end of life, the grave, houses and land, 
mines, places under the earth, the inner aspira- 
tions, and basis of character, and one of the 
parents. Opinions differ as to which parent is 
represented by this house, the western astrologers 
assigning it to the father, and the eastern astrolo- 
gers to the mother. It has also been suggested 
that the fourth house represents that parent 
of opposite sex to the native or alternatively 
the parent who has least influence over the 
native. Rules the breast and stomach, and 
corresponds to Cancer. 

Fifth House. Pleasures, love affairs outside 
marriage, places of amusement, such as _ theatres, 
etc., holidays, speculation, children and schools. 
Rules the heart and back, and corresponds 
to Leo. 

Sixth House. Health and sickness, servants, 
employees, aunts and uncles on the side of the 
parent represented by the fourth house, food 
and clothing, small animals, and the subcons- 
cious mind. Rules the intestines and corresponds 
to Virgo. 

Seventh House. Marriage, the wife or husband, 
partners, contracts and open enemies. Rules the 
reins and kidneys, and corresponds to Libra. 

Eighth House. Death, loss, decay, wills, legacies, 
and money of marriage or business partner. 
Rules the generative and excretory systems, and 
corresponds to Scorpio. 

Ninth House. Long journeys and voyages, pu- 
blications, the Church and clergy, religion, the 
higher mind, dreams, the law and legal affairs. 
Rules the hips and thighs, and corresponds to 
Sagittarius. 


30 


THE ALPHABET 


_ Tenth House. Employers, superiors, business, 
profession or occupation, the outer aspirations, 
and honour and credit. To this house is assigned 
one of the parents, the opposite one to that ruled 
by the fourth house. Rules the knees, and corres- 
ponds to Capricorn. 

Eleventh House. Friends, associates, compani- 
ons, hopes and wishes, and income from business. 
Rules the legs and ankles and corresponds to 
Aquarius. 

Twelfth House. Self-undoing, confinement, pri- 
sons, hospitals, asylums, exile, secret enemies, 
sleep, aunts and uncles on the side of the parent 
ruled by the roth house, and large animals. Rules 
the feet and corresponds to Pisces. 

It will be noted that each house corresponds 
to a sign, as the first house to Aries, and so on. 
This correspondence is important and always 
holds good no matter what sign may actually 
occupy the cusp. 

Houses below the horizon are more obscure 
than those above, as will be seen by comparing 
the rulerships of opposite houses. Thus the third 
house rules short journeys and the ninth long 
ones; the fourth the home and inner life, the 
tenth business and the outer life, and so on. 

In every respect the houses are similar to the 
signs and share the positive and negative, and 
other qualities, associated with the signs to which 
they correspond. Their influence, however, is 
more personal than that of the signs on account 
of the fact that all the planets pass through all 
the houses once a day, whereas they may stay 
in one sign for years. The effect of any planet 
in a house is entirely different from its effect in 
any other house, and it is therefore essential to 


31 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


know the time of birth and also the place, in 
order to ascertain the house position of the 
planets. 

6. THE RELATION OF HovusEs AND PLANETS. 
The planets are more favourable in certain houses 
than in others, just as in the case of the signs, 
and these positions are termed accidental dignities 
and debilities. Since each house always corres- 
ponds to a particular sign a planet is favourable 
in the houses corresponding to its signs of house 
or exaltation and unfavourable in those corres- 
ponding to its detriment and fall. Thus fh is 
favourable in the roth house, which corresponds 
to % and also in the seventh which corresponds 
to 2, its exaltation. Apart from this the planets 
are said to “‘joy”’ in certain houses, and the older 
astrologers gave the following list :— © in roth, 
).in 3rd, % in rst, 9 in 5th, gin 6th, 2| in 11th 
and h in 12th. These, however, are not impor- 
tant and are usually ignored at the present time. 

7, SENSITIVE Points. (See Appendix.) 

This section may be omitted by the beginner. 

In addition to the factors already mentioned 
there are certain sensitive points in a horoscope. 

(a) The Moon’s Nodes. These are the points 
at which the Moon’s orbit cuts the ecliptic. The 
position of the North node or Dragon’s Head 
(symbol (2) is given in the ephemeris, and the 
South node or Dragon’s Tail ebro is always 
exactly opposite or 180° from it. These points 
are said to have an influence, according to house 
and sign position, and to affect a planet by 
conjunction though not by aspect. The Head is 
of a benefic nature and is said to be exalted 
in 1 3°, while the Tail is malefic and is exalted 
in 73°. Any influence possessed by these points 


32 


THE ALPHABET 


is probably due to the fact that they mark the 
approximate position of eclipses that fell during 
ante-natal existence. 

(b) The Part of Fortune or Fortuna. This is 
found by adding the longitude of the ) to the 
longitude of the Ascendant, and from the sum 
subtracting the longitude of the ©. 

Example. Given Asc. If 5° 49’, © @ 13° 21’, 
) @ 8° 27’. Required the longitude of Fortuna. 

Expressing these quantities in signs we have 
the ascendant in 2° 5° 40’, ie. it has passed 
through two complete signs, viz :V and \, 
and is in 5° 49’ of the next. 


Then, Asc. Ps? 40 
sD 8-8 27 
Tomr4-16 
go 2® 3 13 21 


ae OSS 


Thus, Fortuna is in m 0°55’. 

Twelve signs may be added, if required, to 
allow of subtraction or deducted if the sum ex- 
ceeds that amount. 

The use of this point will be shown later. 

8. Summary. We have now completed a sur- 
vey of the elements which build up a horoscope. 
We have planets, signs, houses, and aspects, 
each exerting its own influence, and the task 
before the astrologer is to combine their effects 
into a coherent whole in accordance with certain 

iding rules. 

It is difficult to assign any order of importance 
to the factors employed, as all are equally 
necessary, but some help may be found in the 


33 


Astrology C 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


following idea. A planet is universal and shines 
through a particular sign for a longer or shorter 
period. Therefore all people born in that period 
will have that planet in the same sign, and in 
some cases this will mark a generation. The ray 
from these again passes through a particular 
house which adds its own colouring and gives 
a more personal effect, since the house positions 
change so rapidly. Therefore we may conclude. 
that in general house positions are more personal 
and of greater significance in small matters and 
environment than planets and signs, while signs 
are of greater effect on character. This rule is 
largely true but must not be followed too closely 
as every point is of importance and all the factors 
work together. 


34 


CHAPTER III 


CASTING THE HOROSCOPE. 


The data necessary in order to be able to cast 
a horoscope are the time, date, and place of 
birth. The actual time of day is a very important 
consideration as that alone can determine the 
degrees of the zodiac upon the cusps of the 
houses and consequently the house positions of 
the planets. In a general delineation of a horos- 
cope an error of a quarter of an hour or so is 
usually allowable, but in certain systems of direc- 
ting, or estimating the times of future happenings, 
an error of 4 minutes will throw events out a 
whole year. It is possible to “rectify” a birth 
time, but this is a tedious process and is frequently 
uncertain unless the time is known approximately. 
When stating the time of birth it is convenient 
to write midnight as 0.0 a.m. of the following 
day and noon as 0.0 p.m. This will save the 
confusion that frequently arises, especially in 
births taking place near midnight. It may always 
be taken for granted that a birth time is recorded 
in the standard in use at the birthplace unless 
otherwise stated. 

The date of birth is needed in order to find the 
positions of the planets at the time, and the 
latitude and longitude of the place are necessary 
to fix the local and Greenwich times of birth 


35 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


and to determine the cusps of the houses which 
vary according to latitude. 

These are the only essential data, but before 
the horoscope can be cast it is absolutely neces- 
sary to obtain an Ephemeris for the year of birth 
and Tables of Houses for the latitude of the place. 

An Ephemeris is a small paper-covered publi- 
cation containing the Sidereal Time and the longi- 
tudes, latitudes, and declinations of the planets. 
for Greenwich noon on every day of the year. 
Raphael's Ephemeris is that most commonly used 
and may be obtained for any year from 1800, 
the price being 1/- per year. Tables of Houses 
contain the signs and degrees upon the cusps 
of the houses for given Sidereal Times. They 
are calculated for various latitudes and do not 
change from year to year as do the Ephemerides. 
Raphael publishes a shilling book of 18 Tables 
serving for all places from 50° to 59°, and also 
a five shilling set covering all latitudes from 
a° to 60°. 4) 

The casting of a horoscope falls naturally into 
two divisions, namely, (1) finding the cusps of 
the houses, which must be done for Local Time, 
and (2) finding the planets places, which must 
be done for Greenwich Time. A map form 
should be obtained or the diagram should be 
drawn as in fig. 1, and the following rules, which 
cover all possible cases, should be applied in 
the order given :— 


1) These publications and other astrological requisites may 
be obtained from Mr. J. M. Watkins, 21, Cecil Court, Charing 
Cross Road, W. C. 


36 


CASTING THE HOROSCOPE 


A. — TO CALCULATE THE GUSPS OF THE 
HOUSES 


I. For NORTH LATITUDES. 


I. Consider whether the given time of birth 
be Standard Time, Local Mean Time, Summer 
Time or Greenwich Time. 

2. Convert the given time into Local Mean 
Time as follows:— 

(a) If given in Local Mean Time retain it 
unchanged. 

(0) If given in Standard Time find the standard 
in use at the birth place from the Table in the 
Appendix. If the place is west of Greenwich add 
the standard to the given time, and if east of 
Greenwich subtract it. The result is the Green- 
wich Mean Time (G.M.T.) of birth. 

(c) If given in Summer Time subtract one hour 
to obtain G.M.T. or Standard Time in the case 
of a foreign birth. 

(d) If given in Greenwich Mean Time or 
converted into that by rules 2 (0) or 2 (c). 

(I) Convert the longitude of the birthplace into 
time. For this purpose 15° of longitude = I 
hour of time, 1° = 4 minutes, and 1’ = 4 seconds. 
The easiest method is to call the degrees of longi- 
tude minutes of time, and the minutes of longitude 
seconds of time, and multiply them by 4. 

(II) If the birthplace is west of Greenwich 
subtract the longitude in time from the G.M.T. 
of birth and if east of Greenwich add it. The 
result is the Local Mean Time of birth. 

3. Extract from the Ephemeris the Sidereal 
Time at Greenwich for the noon previous to birth. 

4. Find the longitude of the birthplace in time 
as explained in rule 2 (d) (I). For every hour 


37 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


allow 9.86 seconds (or approximately Io seconds) 
and proportionately for the minutes and seconds. 
A Table for this correction will be found on p. 243. 

5. If the birthplace is west of Greenwich add 
this correction to the Sidereal Time found in 
rule 3, and if east of Greenwich subtract it. The 
result is the Sidereal Time at the birthplace for 
the noon previous to birth. (This rule and the 
last may be omitted in English births.) 

6. Find the number of hours, minutes, and 
seconds that elapsed between the noon previous 
to birth and the actual Local Mean Time of 
birth. Thus 2.30 p.m. is 25 30™, and 2.30 a.m. 
is4L4e 30", 

7. Add to the time elapsed a correction at the 
rate of 9.86 seconds per hour (see Table on p. 243.) 

8. Add the total result obtained in rule 7 to 
the Sidereal Time obtained in rule 5. The result 
is the Sidereal Time at birth. If the Sidereal 
Time so obtained exceeds 24 hours, subtract 24 
hours and use the remainder. 

g. Turn to the Tables of Houses for the latitude 
of the birthplace. If approximate results only 
are required find the nearest Sidereal Time in the 
Tables to that obtained in rule 8 and write on 
the map the signs and degrees on the cusps of 
the roth, 11th, 12th, rst, 2nd, and 3rd houses 
corresponding to that time. 

ro. If accurate results are required it is usual 
to calculate the cusps of the roth and Ist houses 
to minutes as follows:— Extract from the Tables 
the nearest Sidereal Times greater and less than 
that obtained in rule 8. Subtract the lesser 
from the greater and reduce the difference to 
seconds. Call this a. Subtract the lesser Sidereal 
Time in the Tables from that found by rule 8, 


38 


CASTING THE HOROSCOPE 


and reduce this difference also to seconds. Call 
this 6. Then for the roth house ax 60 = the 


number of minutes to be added to the degree 
on the tenth cusp corresponding to the lesser 
Sidereal Time in the Tables. (The degree on the 
roth in the Tables is exact, and o’ is implied, as 
for example I0 ¥ means 10° 0’ ¥). 

For the ascendant, subtract the degrees and 
minutes on the cusp corresponding to the lesser 
Sidereal Time in the Tables from those correspon- 
ding to the greater and reduce the difference to 


minutes. Call this c. Then aa = the num- 


ber of minutes to be added to the degree and 
minute on the cusp of the ascendant correspon- 
ding to the lesser Sidereal Time in the Tables. 
In the case of the other cusps take the degrees 
corresponding to the nearest Sidereal Time in 
the Tables . 

11. Write these signs and degrees on the cusps 
indicated by the numbers at the heads of the 
columns and complete the circle by writing in 
the same degrees of the opposite signs on the 
opposite cusps and inserting intercepted signs, 
if any. 

II. For soutH LATITUDES, 

A. Follow rules x to 8 of the previous section. 

B. To the Sidereal Time so found add 12 hours 
(subtracting 24 hours from the sum if it exceeds 
that amount). 

C. Use the Table of Houses for the same lati- 
tude North as the birthplace is South. Thus for 
40° S, use the Table for 40° N. 

D. Take the Sidereal Time found in B and 
follow rules g or 10 of the previous section, but 


39 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


write on the map the opposite signs to those 
given in the Tables, retaining the same degrees. 
Thus if the Tables give 24 IZ on a cusp write 
down 24 i. 

E. Complete the map as in rule 11 above. 


B. — TO CALGULATE THE PLANETS’ 
PLAGES. 


1. Convert the given time of birth into Green- 
wich Mean Time as follows.— 

(a) If given in Greenwich Mean Time retain it. 

(0) If given in Summer Time subtract one hour 
to obtain Greenwich Mean Time or Standard 
Time if foreign. 

(c) If given in Standard Time, add the standard 
to the given time if the place is west of Green- 
wich, and subtract it if east. The result is the © 
Greenwich Mean Time. 

2. Extract from the Ephemeris the longitudes 
of the planets on the noon previous to birth and 
on the noon after. Subtract the lesser longitude 
from the greater in each case, thus obtaining the 
distance each moves in 24 hours. 

3. Find the time elapsing between birth and 
the nearest noon. 

4. Find the Diurnal Proportional Logarithm 
of this time from the Table on the last page of 
the Ephemeris. 

5. Add to this the Prop. Log. of the planet’s 
daily motion as found in rule 2. 

6. Find from the Table the number of degrees 
and minutes to which the sum corresponds. 

7. If in rule 3 the nearest noon was before 
birth (i.e. a p.m. birth) add the degrees and 


40 


CASTING THE HOROSCOPE 


minutes obtained in rule 6 to the longitude of 
the planet on the previous noon. 

If the nearest noon was after birth (i.e. an a.m. 
birth) subtract them from the longitude on the 
noon after birth. The result is the longitude of the 
planet at birth. 

Note:— If a planet is Retrograde reverse rule 
7 and subtract for p.m., or add for a.m. 

8. Insert the planets in their proper places 
in the map. 

g. Repeat rules 2 to 7 using the Declinations 
instead of the longitudes. If the Declination is 
decreasing it must be treated similarly to a 
Retrograde planet. 

to. The latitudes are obtained in a similar 
way but are not needed for general work. 

The above rules have been given in as concise 
a form as possible in order that reference to them 
by the more advanced student may not be ham- 
pered by a mass of explanation. For the benefit 
of the beginner they will now be exemplified, 
and as'an example we will choose a birth in 
England, as that will be of most service to the 
student. Having once mastered the principles 
involved he will have no difficulty in erecting a 
horoscope for any time and place by means of 
the above rules. 

Example. Birth, 3rd April, 1922, 7.30 a.m. 
Summer Time, Bristol, Lat. 51° N. 27', Long. 
2°W 306’. 

Birth is in Summer Time and this is converted 
into G.M.T. according to rule 2 (c) by subtracting 
1 hour, giving the true G.M.T. of birth as 6.30 
a.m. 
By rule 2 (d) (I) the longitude of the birthplace, 
2° W 36’, is converted into time as follows:— 


4I 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


29 of = 2 X 4 minutes = 8m os 
0° 0° 36° = 36 x 4 seconds = 1448 = 2 24 
Therefore 2° 36” Tom 248 


Bristol is west of Greenwich and therefore by 
rule 2 (d) (ii) the longitude in time must be 
subtracted from the G.M.T. to obtain the Local 
Mean Time, thus:— 

Greenwich Mean Time = 65 307 0° a.m. 
Subtract Long. in time IO 24 
Local Mean Time = 6° 20 (200-2 me: 


Turning to the Ephemeris for 1922 and opening 
it at April we find a column on the lefthand side 
headed ‘“‘Sidereal Time’’ and in which the Sidereal 
Time is given for noon each day. Take out the 
Sidereal Time for the noon fvevious to birth, 
which in this case is the 2nd April. It will be 
found to be o® 4o™ 11S. (Rule 3). 

As the birth is in England rules 4 and 5 may 
be omitted as the resulting correction is too 
trifling to be of any account. 

By rule 6. The local time elapsed from the 
previous noon is 185 19™ 368. 

By rule 7. The correction for this is found 
from the Table on p. 243 as follows:— 

Correction for 185 = 2™ 578.42 


* ee che are 

x pee 0 .I0 

3 ouod 
Call this 3™ 1° and add it to the time elapsed. 
Time elapsed ae 18h rg" 368 
Plus correction SMS 
18.22 237 

By rule 8. AddtoS.T. at previous 

noon O 40 II 
S.T. at moment of birth = 19 2 48 


42 


CASTING THE HOROSCOPE 


The Tables of Houses for the nearest latitude 
are those for London, Lat. 51° N 32’. Turn to 
these and look down the columns headed ‘“‘Side- 
real Time” to find the nearest tabulated time 
to 19 2™ 48°. To the right of the column con- 
taining Sidereal Time are six columns each of 
which is headed bya number. This number refers 
to a house and the six columns give the degrees on 
the cusps of the roth, 11th, r2th, rst, 2nd and 
3rd houses. Immediately below the house number 
is the sign that occupies the cusp and the rest 
of the column shows the degree corresponding 
to the given Sidereal Time. 

The Sidereal Time in our example, 194 2™ 485 
falls between 19" 0™50° and 19" 5™85 in the Tables, 
and is nearer to the former. If an approximate 
result only is required we may copy down the 
signs and degrees on the cusps exactly as given 
in the Tables opposite to 19 o™ 58s, thus:— 

¢ 
Io II 12 Ascen. 2 3 


pete 4S CUA 24 U6 a 26 


It will be noted that in some cases the sign 
at the top of a column gives place to another 
in the column itself, and when this occurs it is 
the latter that must always be used, so that it 
is necessary to run the eye up the column to 
see if any such change has taken place. In the 
example this has happened in columns II, 12, 
Ascen, and 2, the signs at the top of the other 
two columns being unchanged. 

To obtain greater accuracy follow rule Io, 
thus:— 


43 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 
Greater S.T. in Tables 195 5" 585 


Lesser ater 1) EU ESOESO 

Difference 5 8 = 30088 =a 
Given S.T. Ig 2 48 
Subtract lesser S.T. I9 0 50 


x68 =116 =f 


nearest minute. 


This must be added to the degree corresponding 
to the lesser Sidereal Time and the result becomes 
poles 

For the Ascendant we have:— 

Cusp corresponding to greater S.T. 6° 30’ 
= iy >, lesser!” 5, eed 


2 6=126'=¢; 
DX Cc 8 xX 126 14868 
Then ——_— patch, = oo 
3 a 308 308 
minute. 


48’ tothenearest 


Therefore the exact Ascendant becomes 4° Y 24’ 
plus 0° 48’ = 5° ¥ 12’. 

We now have the following values correspond- 
ing to our Sidereal Time of birth:— 


Io II 12 Ascen. 2 3 
14 23° Sa OS SWI2 156s 31 26 


These signs and degrees should be written 
down on the cusps of the houses in the blank 
map as shown in fig. 2. 


44 


CASTING THE HOROSCOPE 


Fig. 2. 


The cusps of the remaining houses bear the 
same degree of the opposite signs in each case, 
so that the cusp of the fifth house will be §) 4, 
of the sixth mp 5, and so on.’ When these have 
been written in, the map must be looked over to 
see that no signs are omitted. It will be found in 
the present case that the signs 1 and 4 occur 
on two houses in each case, and that ‘V’ and 2 
do not appear at all. When this happens the 
omitted signs must be placed in the circle 
between the cusps in the position they occupy 
according to the order of the signs, and if this is 
done in the example the map will appear as 
in fig. 3 


45 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


Such omitted signs are called “intercepted” and 
the phenomenon is due to the obliquity of the 
ecliptic and the latitude of the place. In the 
example map the second house contains only 
20° of the zodiac, viz., from 1 6° to 1 26°, while 
the 12th contains just over 60°, viz., 25° of X, 
all of Y’, and just over 6° of y. The zodiac may 
be thought of as an elastic band that appears 
to be stretched in some places and compressed 
in others, though of course it is really a regular 
circle viewed obliquely. The degrees shown in 
the map are the points where the house cusps 
cut the zodiac, and the other degrees that are not 
marked fall within the houses, the signs and 


46 


| CASTING THE HOROSCOPE 


degrees always retaining their correct order and 
always passing round the map in an anticlockwise 
direction. 

Having now completed the cusps it only re- 
mains to find the planets’ positions. For this 
we use the Greenwich Mean Time of birth, which 
we found to be 6.30 a.m. of the 3rd April. For 
the longitudes we need the columns in the 
Ephemeris headed “Long.” with the planet’s 
symbol above. The longitudes there given for 
noon on 2nd and 3rd April, which are the noons 
immediately preceding and following birth, are 
as follows:— 


O ) : g 3 
2 Apr.} Il VV? 57 51 | 8 115 57 | 21 9C 44 | 24°’ 52 | 18 237 
2 R EL 
14. 2. 10 37 30.5 Ti MC 24 130) 18 
ky 7 ky 
O ) 8 g 3 
; Apr. | 12 5659 | 21 16 54123 22 | 26 Og ets sas 7 
2 b HI ut 
T4 9:8 3 34 Ei e 27 4it3 71 


A retrograde planet is denoted by the symbol 
R and it remains retrograde until the symbol D 
(direct) occurs. The © and )) are given to seconds 
and their positions may be found by proportion 
or by logarithms to the nearest minute. 

The nearest noon is that of 3rd April, and the 
time elapsed from birth to that noon, as required 
in rule 3, is 58 30™ (i.e. 12" less 64 30" = 5® 30™). 


47 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


The prop. log. of this time, as given in the Table 
on the last page of the Ephemeris is .6398. 

Beginning with the ©, we find that its motion 
from noon on the 2nd to noon on the 3rd was 
0° 59’ 8”. To find how much it moved in 5® 30™ 
add the prop. log. of 0°59’ to the prop. log. 
of 5° 30™. 


Prop. Log. of 55307 =  .6398 
#3 ay O° 5" = 1.3875 
2.0273 


This is the prop. log. of 0° 14’ to the nearest 
minute, and by rule 7 it must be subtracted from 
the Sun’s longitude at noon on the 3rd. 

Long. © noon 3 Apr. (to nearest 


minute) = 12° ¥Y 57’ 
less 0) 14 
Sun’s long. at birth a= Lol, Ay 


The )) moves 13° 0’ 57” or 13° I’ between the 
two noons. 


Then Prop. Log. of 55 307 = .6308 
= os w3. he eee 
Moon’s motion == .9055 = 2°59’ 
Long. ) at noon3rd= 21° 117’ 
less 2 59 
Long. ) at birth = 18 18 


If the Moon’s longitude is required to seconds 
it is advisable to take a proportion between the 
times of noon and mid-night instead of from 
noon to noon as its motion is irregular. 

The above process must be repeated with all 
the planets, remembering that in the case of 
retrograde planets the result must be added 
instead of subtracted. This is the case with 2k; 
h, and 4k. 


48 


CASTING THE HOROSCOPE 


The positions thus obtained are as follows:— 


O ) § 2 3 
12 VY 43 |18 1 18/23 X o| 25V 49 [18 2 52 
ah R EE 
14-2 10K |3-235 BR] 11 X 26] 139. 18K 
Having thus obtained the planets’ longitudes it 


is necessary to repeat the process to find their 
declination, which are as follows:— 


o) ) 8 g 3 
ooo 117 N 5715 S_0o-];9 N 15] 22 $35 
21 i) EL 


pee) Im O 1 7S 58 | 16 .N 57 


The student should check these results. 

For ordinary purposes the latitudes of the 
planets are not required, but if needed they may 
be calculated in the same way. If desired the 
nodes and Fortuna may also be computed. 

It now remains only to place the planets in 
the map in their correct positions and to calculate 
the aspects. In inserting the planets it is ad- 
visable to write each body close to the cusp 
bearing the same sign and parallel with it, and 
also to arrange them in numerical order, according 
to their degrees, care being taken to place them 
on the proper side of the cusp. Planets in inter- 
cepted signs should be written parallel to the 
rim of the map. 

The casting of the horoscope is now complete 
and the finished map, together with the aspects, 
is shown in fig. 4. n 


49 


Astrology D 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


Planet 


a [tat Deal] 0) 
Sun 5N2/O| |X/P] JAIPP| Pv] A 
Moon 17N 57] ) OU} P| Al | O}X<P 
Mercury 5So01/8 Cy} P 

Venus gNi5} 2 A ‘b 
Mars 22538) 3 aA mn] AN 
Jupiter 487 {21 RV; 
Saturn INo|b 

Uranus 75 58) Ht 

Neptune I6N 

Ascdt. nt x 

N.C. MC. 


50 


SECTION II 


THE JUDGMENT OF A HOROSCOPE 


_ 


him 
as | 


aes 


4 


A: Pe f = ree 
Bois 
, ek 


CHAPTER I 
GENERAL PRINCIPLES OF JUDGMENT. 


The art of judging a horoscope is usually 
divided into two branches, analysis and synthesis. 
The former process consists in splitting up the 
map into its component parts and thereby ascer- 
taining the exact influence of each position and 
aspect, whilst the latter is concerned with the 
building up of all these isolated pieces of infor- 
mation into one coordinated whole. 

Astrology, like everything else, requires the 
exercise of a great deal of common sense, and 
it is necessary to realise at the outset that the 
horoscope is a person and not a set of disconnected 
planetary influences. Always remember that 
there is something that links up these scattered 
and contradictory fragments into a connected 
and coherent whole, and blends contradictions 
in such a way as to form a definite character or 
individual. The art of judging a map lies in 
the ability to make it live. Anyone can copy the 
effects of aspects or positions from a book, but 
this is not judgment and the result is a very 
wooden and artificial reading that is devoid of 
individuality, and describes a puppet rather than 
a human being. The astrologer must, so far as 
possible, identify himself with the horoscope, and 
having at hand a full analysis of the map and 
a knowledge of the strength and weakness of 


53 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


its parts, he must put himself in the native’s 
place and decide how he himself would act 
and feel if under the same influences. Remember 
that contradictions do not cancel out but always 
exist side by side. In every horoscope there are 
innumerable conflicting tendencies, not one of 
which should be ignored. They are all in the 
character, though some are strong and others 
weak, and the whole aim of a good synthesis 
is to estimate correctly the relative strength and 
prominence of contradictions so as to present a 
living picture of the native. Do not get carried 
away by one position or over-emphasise hastily. 
This is a very common fault among astrologers 
and is partly due to the rather dogmatic rules 
that have to be laid down. It is impossible in 
any one book to do more than give the in- 
fluence exerted by a single position, and no 
account can be taken of modifying factors. In 
most cases, therefore, such statements of in- 
fluence should be received cautiously and not 
be emphasised unless the rest of the map is in 
agreement. To a certain extent the same re- 
marks apply to aphorisms, a great number of 
which will be found in the following pages. These 
are extremely useful in judging details as they 
are positions that have been found to occur in 
a number of maps, all of which show the same 
peculiarity. Some caution is needed in dealing 
with them, however, and they must not be taken 
as hard and fast rules that admit of no exceptions, 
for the general nature of the map may be entirely 
contradictory, in which case the aphorism would 
be much modified or even contradicted. 

The most difficult element of judgment lies 
in estimating the degree of mental, moral, or 


34 


GENERAL PRINCIPLES 


spiritual development of the native whose map 
is being studied. No rules can be given for this, 
for it is either beyond the horoscope or we have 
not yet discovered the key, and intuition is the 
only guide unless we know the native’s status in 
life. Every planet and sign acts on all planes 
of existence and must be interpreted accordingly. 
Every planet is the centre of a radiating force 
which is absorbed by all the beings in the universe 
in proportion to their capacity and in accor- 
dance with their development, or in other words 
the planetary force flows through them along 
the line of least resistance. Therefore if once the 
development of the person is known we can 
interpret all influences in terms of that develop- 
ment, and if. it is unknown the best we can do 
is to interpret in terms of the present day average 
development. 

The following general hints on judgment will 
be found of- great service and importance :— 

I. When judging any particular matter con- 
sider to which house it belongs, such as wealth 
to the 2nd, sickness to the 6th, and so on, and 
note if there be any planets in that house and 
the sign in which they are situated. Blend the 
influence of the planet with that of the house 
and sign, remembering that each sign corresponds 
to one of the houses, as for example §), being 
the fifth sign corresponds to the 5th house and 
has the same meanings. Thus ¢ in the 2nd would 
mean a tendency to extravagance since ¢ is out- 
going and expansive in its nature. If it were in 
the sign §) expenditure would be lavish, with a 
tendency to display, since this is the nature of 
the sign, and would be concerned with amuse- 
ments, pleasures or speculation for the same reason. 


55 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


Note the aspects to the planet. A malefic well 
aspected will produce beneficial results, whilst 
a benefic will be weak or adverse if ill-aspected. 
The planets throwing good aspects promise bene- 
fit through the matters ruled by them and by 
the houses and signs containing them and the 
houses which they rule, and the afflicting planets 
denote the sources and nature of loss or evil. 
The houses ruled by an aspecting planet afford a 
useful key to interpretation. Thus if 2] is in §Q 
in the 2nd house, ~ on the 6th, and 3¢ on the 
oth, a great deal of money (2| in 2nd) will be 
obtained through speculation, etc. (fifth sign 2), 
through Jupiterian people and occupations, and 
also through matters such as health or travel, 
ruled by the 6th and oth houses, since these are 
the houses ruled by 2|. If h were to cast a 
favourable aspect from the 12th there would be 
gain through investment and Saturnian affairs 
and secretly, or in some other manner denoted 
by the 12th, and also through marriage and 
legacy, as Saturn’s signs % and * occupy the 
cusps of the 7th and 8th houses which rule these 
matters respectively. 

2. If the house is unoccupied note the aspects 
to the degree on its cusp and also the position 
and aspects of the ruler of the sign on its cusp 
in exactly the same way and treat it as you 
would a planet im the house. 

In a case such as this the house containing 
that ruler is of considerable importance, thus, if 
§’ were on the cusp of the 2nd, that house un- 
occupied, and the © in the 7th, financial affairs 
would be greatly bound up with 7th house matters 
such as marriage and partnership. In general the 
house and sign position of the ruler of any house 


56 


GENERAL PRINCIPLES 


is important in the affairs of that house, and a 
rising planet near the Ascendant always brings 
into prominence the affairs of the houses it rules. 
Therefore, when judging the influences of a planet 
in a house always note which houses it rules as 
these will be strongly implicated. 

3. The dispositor of a planet is also of importance. 
The dispositor of any planet is that body which 
rules the sign containing it. Thus the dispositor 
of h in © is 2 which rules the sign «. 

4. The nature of the sign on the cusp influences 
the affairs of the house. Thus the cardinal and 
watery sign 95 on the cusp of the oth is an indica- 
tion of voyages which will be upheld or con- 
tradicted by other factors in the map. 

5. Houses containing intercepted signs are al- 
ways important as the house contains part of 
three signs and therefore its affairs are complica- 
ted. In general the sign on the cusp indicates 
the earlier experiences in matters ruled by the 
house, and the other signs the later. This idea 
may also be used in connection with transitory 
matters related to the house. Thus if the latter 
degrees of a cardinal sign are on a cusp and the 
house also contains part of the following fixed 
sign it usually happens that any event denoted 
by that house starts off under the cardinal 
influence and later on is affected by the fixed 
sign, so that there will be an energetic and im- 
pulsive beginning followed by a slower period of 
greater tenacity and purpose. 

6. Planets are not equal in strength in any 
one map. A planet in elevation or in an angle, 
or in a favourable sign or house, or very strongly 
aspected, is stronger for good than another not 
so placed. Of the houses the angles come first 


57 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


in importance, then the succeedents, and then 
the cadents, and in the case of the signs the order 
of importance is first cardinal, then fixed, and 
then mutable. A planet in its own sign or exal- 
tation is stronger and more powerful for good 
than when in other signs, whilst a planet in fall 
or detriment is stronger for evil. A retrograde 
planet usually denotes hindrances in matters 
signified by it and much of its good or evil does 
not materialise. This position does not, however, 
make it more malefic as has sometimes been 
erroneously stated. A stationary planet is always 
very important as its influence is thereby intensi- 
fied. 

7. The planet ruling the rising sign, i.e. the 
sign on the cusp of the 1st house, is called the 
Lord or Ruler of the Ascendant, and is always 
of great importance. In a general way it typifies 
the native himself, and is frequently said to be 
the ruler of the horoscope, but it need not neces- 
sarily be so if there is another body that is 
exceedingly strong by sign, position, and aspect. 
Always try to determine which planet is strongest 
in the map as that body will have great influence 
over everything. Such a planet should be in an 
angle and strong by sign and aspect. Strength 
is increased by elevation, and the most elevated 
planet in the map is always important, as also 
is a rising planet, and one with a large number 
of aspects. In the mere matter of strength the 
nature of the aspects involved is not of conse- 
quence, and the strongest planet will often be 
more evil than good. 

8. In general cardinal signs and angles tend to 
act more markedly on the physical plane and 
in events, fixed signs and succeedent houses on 


58 


GENERAL PRINCIPLES 


the emotional plane, and mutable signs and 
cadent houses on the mind, but these distinctions 
are merely general as all the signs and houses 
act on all planes. 

g. Note that characteristics shown by planets 
in angles or cardinal signs will always be marked, 
whereas those denoted by planets in obscure 
positions will operate more internally and will 
not be so noticeable outside. Planets in the 
4th, 6th, 8th, or 12th usually denote inner or 
concealed characteristics. Thus the lord of the 
5th afflicted in the 12th will give secrecy and 
concealment in love affairs, and in many cases 
such matters will play a part never appreciated 
by others. 

ro. Remember that the planets act through 
the signs and that these in turn act through the 
houses, so that sign influence has a deeper 
significance than house influence, and denotes a 
more lasting effect or tendency. Thus a planet 
in a favourable sign and an unfavourable house 
is some indication of a well developed character 
struggling in a bad environment. 

rr. In judging a map for any particular depart- 
ment of life remember that every planet, sign 
and aspect has some bearing on the matter. Thus, 
marriage is primarily denoted by the luminaries 
(i.e. the Sun and the Moon), the 7th house, 9, 
and 4, but every position can be interpreted in 
the light of marriage just as it can in that of 
finance or health. All you have to do is to read 
the symbols in the map in a different language, 
for they are universal and apply to the whole of 
the life in all its branches. 

12. The aspects to any planet indicate the 
assistance or hindrance that it receives. Every 


59 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


planet is a significator of something in the life 
indicated by the houses containing or ruled by 
it and the planets aspecting it show the people 
and things that help or hinder the affairs of 
which it is significator. An unaspected planet 
denotes that the matters ruled by it will be 
isolated and uninfluenced by others. If the ruler 
of the Ascendant is unaspected the native will 
always be left to his own resources and receive 
little, or no, assistance from others. ; 

13. There is usually a link between the two 
houses ruled by one planet, and it is found that 
the native of any sign responds greatly to the 
house occupied by the other sign ruled by the 
lord of the Ascendant. Thus, natives of m are 
greatly occupied with work and professional mat- 
ters, since 1, the other sign ruled by 8, is on 
the roth house. 

14. When judging of any matter always look 
for several indications. No important charac- 
teristic is ever indicated by one position alone, 
and the more important the matter the greater 
number of testimonies will there be found. 

15. Obtain a general idea of the native’s charac- 
ter before making a detailed judgment in order 
to be able to see matters in the right proportion. 
In a strongly Saturnian map an aspect from 
Mars will not have the same effect as in a martial 
map. If there are strong indications of caution 
an influence tending to hastiness or impetuosity 
will be much modified, and similarly there will 
be only moderate caution if the general nature 
of the map is impulsive. 

16. Contradictory tendencies exist side by side 
and operate alternately. Thus, ) [1] h and ) 
A 2, denote meanness and generosity respec- 


60 


GENERAL PRINCIPLES 


tively. If h is elevated and stronger than 2I, 
the prevailing tendency will be towards care- 
fulness, but the trine to 2] will operate at times 
in generosity, and in all probability the native 
will be generous at heart but unable to avoid 
saving or possibly will not possess the money 
necessary to practice generosity. The position 
of 2| and the houses ruled by it would show the 
directions in which money was spent. In all 
cases such as this interpret in terms of the general 
character. Had 2| been the stronger, then gene- 
rosity would have been the prevailing tendency, 
with periods of carefulness or impecuniosity. In 
all cases the strength of the planet will show the 
dominating influence. 

17. A useful method of obtaining a complete 
analysis of a horoscope, and one that may be 
recommended to the beginner, is as follows :— 
Take a number of sheets of paper and head them 
Character and Mind, Money, Health, etc., allow- 
ing a separate sheet of paper to each department 
of life. On every sheet note each planet, sign 
position, house position, and aspect that has any 
bearing on the matter and write against each 
its influence. Having completed the sheets go 
over them one by one and balance up the con- 
flicting statement by considering the relative 
strength and weakness of the planets, signs, 
houses, and aspects concerned, and the number 
of separate testimonies pointing one way. Then 
write out the judgment giving prominence to the 
strong characteristics, indicating the less conspi- 
cuous tendencies underlying the character, and 
omitting the weak antagonistic influences that 
are at variance with the rest of the map. Practice 
in this method gives thoroughness and impresses 


61 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


the nature of the influences on the student’s 
mind making it increasingly easy for him to 
write a complete delineation without reference 
to any book and developing his power of inde- 
pendent judgment. On no account should any 
statement taken from this or any other book be 
written down as it stands in a final judgment 
without a careful balancing of indications. 

18. Always use common sense and try to 
think out what will be the natural effect of a 
position. Do not make the mistake of thinking 
a rule or aphorism infallible, but use it merely 
as a useful guide or pointer to be accepted or 
rejected according to whether it is upheld or 
dismissed by other indications. There is no hard 
and fast rule in the whole of astrology except 
in its mathematics. 


62 


CHAPTER II 


INFANT MORTALITY AND LENGTH OF 
LIFE. 


The first and most important consideration 
when dealing with the horoscope of an infant is 
that of its chances of survival, for it is obviously 
futile to delineate a map when the native has 
little, or no, chance of life. 

The vital spots in any horoscope are the ©, ) 
and the degree rising on the cusp of the Asc., 
which should be treated as a planet and consi- 
deration given to the aspects it receives. One of 
these points is chosen according to certain rules, 
as that which has chief influence over life, and 
acts as significator of the length of life, this body 
or point being known as the Hyleg, or Giver of 
Life. The function of the Hyleg is to indicate the 
approximate length of life by means of its 


strength or weakness, and severe afflictions to 


the Hyleg must occur for death to ensue. The 
tules by which it is chosen are as follows:— 

I. The “‘hylegiacal places’ are from 25° below 
the Asc., to 5° above (measured by oblique as- 
cension), the upper half of the 11th house, all 
the roth and gth houses, and from 25° above the 
cusp of the 7th house to 5° below. 

The 8th and 12th houses, and all below the 
earth, except those portions of the rst and 7th 


63 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


already indicated, can never be _ hylegiacal. 

2. If the Sun occupies a hylegiacal place it 
must always be chosen as Hyleg. 

3. If the Moon occupies a hylegiacal place 
when the Sun does not, it then becomes Hyleg. 

4. If neither the Sun nor the Moon is in a 
hylegiacal place the Ascendant must be chosen. 

These are the generally accepted rules, but it 
must be admitted that the question of Hyleg is 
still a somewhat open one. It has been suggested 
that the Hyleg may change as the horoscope 
progresses and another body passes into a hylegia- 
cal place, but much research still remains to be 
done upon this matter. 

The length of life is estimated by the proportion 
of good and bad aspects received by the Hyleg. 
If this body is free from affliction, and supported 
by favourable aspects, a long life may be predicted 
while if it receives only bad aspects the life will 
be short. In practice it is advisable to study all 
three vital points and not to predict a very early 
death unless all these points are badly afflicted 
and there is little or no assistance from the 
benefics. 

Aspects to the Hyleg and the other vital points 
from 9 and 2| are the most desirable, but may 
be weakened if these bodies are weak by sign 
or position and if they also happen to rule the 
6th, 8th or 12th houses. Any aspects from the © 
and ¢ give vitality, but the unfavourable ones 
dispose to fevers and accidents. Good aspects 
from fh and # prolong the life in old age but 
have little effect in youth, especially in the case 
of m, which appears to have little effect upon 
the life as its afflictions rarely kill by themselves. 
Aspects from I{{ also seem to have little vitalising 


64 


INFANT MORTALITY 


effect, and those from % are variable being 
favourable or the reverse according to whether 
the strongest aspect to § is favourable or other- 
wise, as in all cases $ is negative and takes on 
itself the nature of the nearest aspecting planet 
considered together with the aspect. 

The vitalising effect of the signs when rising 
or containing the © or ), is as follows:— 

I. VY, $Y, =, and # are very strong and give 
great power of resisting disease. They will 
prolong life even in a severely afflicted map, and 
in ordinary cases give a considerable length of life. 

2. 8, I, t,m, and = are moderately strong 
and in ordinary cases promise a fair length of 
life. ¥ and m are critical in infancy but increase 
in strength later in life. is often rather frail 
and is the weakest of this group. I and mp are 
wiry rather than strong. 

3. Os, %, and X& are the weakest of all and if 
at all afflicted give much difficulty in rearing. 
%, however, often gives a long life if the native 
survives infancy as it becomes increasingly strong 
as old age is reached. 

In judging the length of life either of an infant 
or adult consider the signs and houses occupied 
by the ©, ), and ruler of the Ascendant, and also 
the rising sign and aspects to the cusp of the Ist 
house. If the majority of these are in vital signs, 
strong by house, and well aspected, a long life 
may be predicted, but if weak and greatly afflict- 
ed, especially by the rulers of the 4th, 6th, 8th 
and 12th houses, and little or no help is obtained 
from the benefics, or they are weak by sign, life 
will not be sustained. The point which is Hyleg 
needs special consideration. It is said that the 
Kabalists erect a map for the seventh hour after 


65 


Astrology E 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


birth in order to judge whether the child will 
live. The following are particular rules:— 

1. If the © or ) be in an angle, and one of the 
malefics be in conjunction with it, or else distant 
from both © and ) so as to form the apex of 
two equal sides of a triangle of which the © and 
) form the other apices, and at the same time 
no benefic planet assists and the dispositors of 
the © and ) are also weak or afflicted by the 
malefics, the child then born will immediately die. 

2. If the ©, ), and Asc., are all afflicted by 
the malefics, especially from angles, and no 
assistance is given by 9 or 2| the child will die 
in infancy. Note that angular afflictions are 
always the most serious, and that favourable 
aspects from the benefics will be rendered of 
little efficacy if these bodies are very weak. 

3. If the © and )) are in opposition, and at 
the same time are both in square to two malefics 
also in opposition, the child will be stillborn or 
will die at once. If, however, in such a case the 
© and ) are separating, and 2] and 2 precede 
them, the child will live for a short time. 

4. Afflictions from an elevated planet are worse 
than from one not so placed, and are much 
more difficult to overcome. 

5. In general ¢ afflicts the })) more than it 
does the © as they are of different natures, and 
similarly h afflicts the © more than it does the 
) for the same reason. 

6. ?§ in conjunction with a malefic in the 4th, 
or the luminaries besieged by (i.e. in between). 
malefics often kills at birth or just after. 

7. The conjunction of 2| or 9 to the Hyleg 
preserves life, but if the © is Hyleg the effect is 
less, assome of the benefic influence is destroyed, 


66 


INFANT MORTALITY 


and if 2| or 9 rule the 4th, 6th, 8th or 12th, 
their influence is greatly lessened. 

8. Other positions unfavourable for length of 
life are:— (a) Malefics in the Asc. ; (b) ruler of 
Asc., combust, cadent, retrograde or in the 8th; 
(c) © or) in 6th, 8th, or 12th, or afflicted from 
these houses or by their rulers ; (d) © ¢ or & j, 
especially if it is at the same time an eclipse. 

g. Afflictions to the ), whether it be Hyleg 
or not, are of primary importance in the case of 
an infant, and the last and next aspects of the ) 
should be considered. If in a severely afflicted 
map it separates from a benefic and applies 
to a malefic the evil is strengthened, but if from 
a malefic to a benefic there is more hope of 
improvement. 


67 


CHAPTER III 


“PERSONAL APPEARANCE AND PHYSICAL 
PECULIARITIES. 


Personal appearance is one of the most difficult 
matters to judge from a horoscope as it is modified 
by many factors. 

The following are the most important general 
rules:— 

I. The personal appearance is denoted pri- 
marily by the rising sign or Ascendant and is 
modified by the sign containing the ruler of the 
Ascendant. The rising decanate should also be 
observed as that often exercises a slight modifying 
effect. 

2. Rising planets modify the typical appearan- 
ce of the sign, and a planet on or very near to 
the Ascendant is always of great importance. 

3. Planets exactly aspecting the Ascendant are 
important and introduce modifications in accor- 
dance with their own natures and sign positions. 

4. A sign containing 3 or more planets usually 
influences the appearance. 

In judging of appearance in practice look 
first to the rising sign and rising planet (if any), 
then to the ruler of the Ascendant, and lastly 
to planets aspecting the Ascendant. The typical 
appearance given by each sign when alone is as 
follows:— 

Aries. Body. Medium height or over; lean; 


68 


PERSONAL APPEARANCE 


spare; wiry; long neck; strong, thick shoulders; 
fingers often short and thick. Head round, short, 
held erectly. Face long, with high cheek bones 
and broad temples, tapering to a narrow chin; 
often with mark or scar ; upper lip often long ; 
sometimes lips project and underlip is thick and 
hanging. Hairy red, sandy, brown, or sometimes 
very dark, and either wiry and straight or crisp 
and curly ; recedes on temples ; frequently parted 
in the middle; often stands up like horns on 
each side of the forehead. LEyes grey or greyish 
brown, occasionally blue, with alert sharp and 
piercing look ; sometimes large and prominent. 
Eyebrows dark and bushy. Nose thin and aquiline 
or long and close to the face with a slight rise 
in the middle. Teeth white and strong, wide 
apart and usually large and prominent, often pro- 
jecting. Complexion usually pale but sometimes 
ruddy. Peculiarities. Often like a ram or sheep 
in appearance ; tend to butt sideways with the 
head when excited ; habit of craning the neck ; 
strong voice, and sharp and direct speech, often 
using slang ; hasty handwriting ; energetic walk ; 
rush at things. 

Taurus. Body. Medium height or under; 
thickset and squarely built ; short and strong 
neck ; strong shoulders, often stooping: strong 
broad and plump hands and feet ; women fre- 
quently handsome. Head round or square, broad, 
and well set into shoulders. Face square ; full 
forehead; full lips, often well shaped; wide mouth; 
heavy jaw and chin. Some types have thinner 
lips and a flat space between nose and upper lip. 
Features sometimes flattened. Haiy dark and 
usually curling or wavy ; often very plentiful ; 
does not readily turn grey. Eyes brown or dark, 


69 


A STUDENTS’ T EXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


large, round, sometimes prominent, and often 
slow moving and mild. Eyelids heavy and often 
partly lowered, giving sleepy look. Eyelashes 
long, dark and curling. Nose well shaped, often 
making straight line with the brow; nostrils 
usually thick. Complexion creamy white but 
sometimes coarse or swarthy ; thick skin. Pecu- 
liarities. Often like a bull in appearance ; hairy 
body and hands; very fond of good living and 
coarsen in age; deep musical voice and often 
sing ; sometimes wear muttonchop whiskers ; 
walk with small steps holding body still and set. 

Gemini. Body. Tall, upright, thin and slender; 
long arms and legs ; narrow chest ; often sloping 
shoulders; usually long, slender and artistic 
fingers, but sometimes hands and feet are short 
and fleshy; neck long and thin; women often 
short. Head long and narrow. Face long ; wide 
and intellectual forehead ; long chin ; wide thin 
lips ; small ears. Hair usually straight, soft and 
brown, sometimes black. Eyes hazel, usually 
bright, fine and expressive ; quick sight ; cruel 
glint in eyes when angry. Nose either long and 
straight, or resembles a bird’s beak, being thin, 
aquiline, and cut straight across at the end. Com- 
flexion clear and pale, skin rather yellowish. 
Peculiarities: often like a bird or monkey ; often 
perky and hopping about like a sparrow ; voice 
high pitched, and speech quick, sometimes 
cackling ; walk quick and energetic, long strides, 
swinging arms, and head projecting ; often fanci- 
ful in clothes ; restless, hands and feet never still; 
women fond of changing furniture. 

Cancer. A very variable sign, much modified 
by the sign containing the Moon. Body. Two 
types, one tall and slim, and the other short, 


7O 


| 
| 


PERSONAL APPEARANCE 


squat and fleshy. Latter is more typical. Body 
is usually rounded and often has a top-heavy ap- 
pearance and a watery or puffy look ; wide and 
full chest and bust ; slender arms ; short, fleshy 
and small hands and feet. Head round with low 
broad forehead. Face long and narrow or round ; 
often double chin and pendulous cheeks ; large 
mouth. Hair brown, light, golden brown or 
colourless ; men usually dark. Eyes grey, light 
blue or colourless, usually large and watery ; 
eyelids often baggy, eyebrows sometimes meet 
over nose. Nose short, small and round ,tip 
prominent or bending over with a caught-up look 
at the nostrils. Teeth poor and often distorted or 
overcrowded. Complexion pale or muddled. Pe- 
culiarities: pleasant voice, talkative but also 
reserved ; laborious, rolling or swaying walk, 
often giving the impression at a distance that 
the toes are turned inwards and that one foot 
is placed slightly in front of the other ; often sit 
with feet turned inwards towards each other, or 
legs twisted round the chair rails; sometimes 


‘tend to move sideways like a crab; often wear 


moustache with points turned upwards ; hand- 
writing irregular with hooked letters ; lower type, 
such as washer-women often stand with arms 
folded and a hand on each elbow. 

Leo. Body. Medium height or tall ; fine figure; 
squarish body ; strong broad shoulders ; dignified 
appearance; large bones and muscles; long, 
strong and straight back; hands large and 
brown, finger nails with large moons Head large, 
round and domed, held erectly. Face round or 
oval ; high forehead ; strong chin ; curved cheek 
bones ; large mouth, often with down drooping 
corners; lips held well together. Hav light, 


71 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOG Y 


yellow, tawny, flaxen, or light brown, usually 
wavy. Some types have very plentiful hair like 
a mane, and others incline to baldness on the 
top. Eyes often yellowish or sherry coloured, 
sometimes blue or grey; sometimes full and 
staring ; but often partly covered, though always 
intent looking and not sleepy; occasionally a 
habit of looking sideways ; eyelids and eyebrows 
set close together. Certain types have weak sight 
or a slight cast in one eye and wear pince-nez, 
usually of the rimless make . Nose small and 
straight like that of a lion or cat, rather spread at 
the nostrils. Teeth large, strong and yellowish 
white. Complexion florid or ruddy. Peculiarities : 
often like a lion; very erect and dignified walk 
but buoyant step; good dancers; sometimes 
purr when pleased; large appetite; fond of 
brown clothes and boots; strong and powerful voice. 

Virco. Body. Medium height, slender, usually 
spare, and neat, compact and refined in appea- 
rance ; shoulders often wide. Head well developed 
but not large. Face round ; high forehead ; often 
serene and pure expression with delicate and 
finely formed features, but sometimes with sharp 
and pointed features; lips usually thin but 
sometimes full, and occasionally the lower lip 
slightly projects. Hair dark to light brown, 
generally swept back and falling over the ears ; 
inclined to baldness on top. Eyes dark, hazel, 
or grey, large, sharp and bright ; sometimes set 
too closely together in lower types, giving a 
foxy and cunning look. Nose straight, with 
very thin and mobile nostrils. Complexion pale 
or dark, skin usually more olive than white. 
Peculiarities: oftenlike a fox ; active walk ; often 
lame ; quiet voice, but sometimes shrill when 


72 


PERSONAL APPEARANCE 


excited ; dress neatly and quietly ; handwriting 
very neat, careful and small. 

Lisra. Body. Tall, slender and slight in build 

“but tending to become stout in later life ; often 
very beautiful ; hands and feet small but broad 
and plump ; fingers short with good nails. Head 
small, round and shapely, usually held on one 
side. Face oval or round, lips well curved and 
delicately marked ; chin well shaped, small and 
round ; expression often plaintive or dissatisfied. 
Hay usually brown but sometimes flaxen or 
black, smooth, fine, and often parted in the 
middle. Eyes blue or deep brown, often sharp 
and penetrating. Nose well formed, long and 
straight, making a straight line with the brow, 
but in some types upturned; sometimes the 
nose appears to be abruptly cut off at the end, 
and the nostrils are wide. Teeth good, small, 
and even. Complexion often very good with 
fair, delicate and fine skin, but sometimes in- 
different and inclined to be ruddy and pimply. 
Peculiarities: very graceful movements; soft 
voice, but often with an undertone of petulancy 
and dissatisfaction ; walk with a springing up- 
and-down movement ; handwriting large, rounded 
and artistic. 

Scorpio. Body. Medium height or under; 
thickset ; powerful ; strongly made ; square type 
of body with tendency to stoutness, but taller 
types have gracefully curving back at the waist ; 
full muscular throat; strong bony hand with 
square tipped fingers. Head squarish. Face 
broad, often square,; large mouth ; square jaw ; 
prominent brows with sharp facial angles ; often 
Jewish type of face. Hairy dark, wavy or curly, 
often coarse, crinkled, thick on the temples, and 


73 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


low on the forehead ; sometimes shows several 
tones of colour. Eyes dark, with a very intense 
gaze; often beady; eyebrows have a ruffled 
look. Nose often aquiline, but sometimes flat- 
tened and broad at the base. Teeth well shaped 
and strong. Complexion usually dark, swarthy, or 
dusky ; skin often dirty looking and lacking colour 
in the cheeks. Peculiarities. Often like a scor- 
pion, serpent or eagle; good fighters; speech 
very intense and dramatic, making secrets or 
mysteries of trivialities ; voice sometimes shrill 
and penetrating ; tragic manner ; sometimes wear 
side-whiskers ; women often strikingly handsome; 
sinuous movements ; walk with the head erect 
and still, but twisting the body from side to 
side ; handwriting often spiky. 

SaciTtarius. Body. Tall, slim and well made ; 
strong, aristocratic, athletic looking and active ; 
sometimes stooping ; long hands and feet, and 
legs often disproportionately long; very long 
neck ; broad shoulders. Head broad. Face some- 
times oval, but usually long, narrow, and of 
even width; broad rounded forehead; strong 
chin, often dimpled. Hair brown, nut brown, or 
chestnut, often with a twist in it; growing off 
the forehead and thinning at the temples. Eyes 
grey, blue, or brown, often rather prominent ; 
bright, clear, honest looking, and expressive, 
often twinkling ; eyebrows well marked ; eyelids 
often appear to be stretched wide open in the 
middle; eyes often slant downwards slightly 
towards the cheekbone. Nose long, thin, and 
usually straight, lying fairly close to the face, 
but sometimes aquiline. Teeth long, strong, and 
often projecting. Complexion fresh, ruddy or sun- 
burnt and healthy looking. Peculiarities: often 


74 


: 


PERSONAL APPEARANCE 


like a horse; very restless; great talkers, but 
often tend to stammer or have a slight impedi- 
ment in speech; fond of walking; and take long 
strides, head thrown back and arms swinging ; 
particular over dress, but often careless in hand- 
ling clothes; fond of checks, women affect 
tailor-made costumes. 

Capricorn. Body. Medium height or under ; 
spare and bony ; thin and wiry ; often ill-formed ; 
weak chest ; sloping shoulders ; long thin scraggy 
neck ; weak limbs, and often weak at the knees ; 
bony hands. Head often small. Face thin and 
hard set, often with melancholy expression ; pro- 
minent, clearly defined, but often irregular fea- 
tures ; thin, firm lips ; prominent, narrow, pointed 
and bony chin, sometimes lantern-jawed ; brow- 
bones prominent ; ears sometimes project and 
are deficient in the lobes. Hair dark or black, 


thin, lank, and usually scanty. Eyes dark, usually 


deeply set. Nose long, often bent inwards at 
the tip ; prominent ; often strongly aquiline pro- 
ducing nutcracker appearance inage. Teeth often 
bad. Complexion dark or swarthy, often with 
coarse skin. Peculiarities. Often like a goat, 
camel, or elephant ; awkward, jerky, but ener- 
getic walk, sometimes holding head down, and 
often appearing as if they would fall to pieces ; 
angular movements ; often deformed ; frequently 
hurting their knees ; usually grave and serious, 
and often look worried ; strong voice, but in- 
clined to be harsh and rasping, and sometimes 
cracks unexpectedly ; thin beard, if any ; angular 
and cramped type of handwriting; dry and 
businesslike form of expression. 

Aquarius. Body. Medium height or over, rare- 
ly short; full rounded figure, often squarely 


75 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


built and tending to stoutness. Head often droops 
slightly. Face oval, or long and fleshy ; straight 
features but sometimes rugged; often good 
looking ; well developed chin ; large mouth show- 
ing all the teeth when laughing; sometimes 
ethereal appearance ; often with enquiring ex- 
pression. Hair pale brown, flaxen, silky, and 
slightly curling ; sometimes falls in heavy clump 
over one side of the brow. Fyes blue or hazel, 
deep set and wide apart, with rather far-away 
expression ; sometimes hypnotic. Nose straight, 
but often very slightly aquiline. Teeth often 
poor. Complexion beautiful and clear, refined 
delicate skin. Peculiarities. Fascinating ; very 
pleasant, soft and refined voice ; seldom laugh ; 
excellent speakers ; very quiet and retiring ; often 
brisk walk. 

Pisces. Body. Medium height or under ; bulky 
and fleshy ; weak bones; narrow chest ; often 
large, thick and rounded shoulders, and curved 
spine ; short legs; small and plump hands and 
feet, latter often ill-made. Head large and wide, 
ill-made, and often drooping forward. Face 
round and fleshy ; large mouth ; full lips ; tenden- 
cy to double chin ; low and wide forehead ; very 
changing expression. Haiy dark, soft, fine and 
plentiful. Eyes blue, sometimes dark ; full, wate- 
ry, often weak looking, and sometimes filmy. 
Nose short and wide. Teeth small and shell-like, 
or uneven and overcrowded ; easily decay. Com- 
plexion sometimes beautiful, pale, and delicate, 
but often chalky and flabby ; clear skin ; colour 
easily comes and goes in cheeks. Peculiarities. 
Often rather fish-like ; flabby handshake ; stoop- 
ing, rolling, lurching, and clumsy walk, head 
held down ; often with moustache of the walrus 


76 


PERSONAL APPEARANCE 


type or drooping at the corners ; uncontrollable 
laughter. 

The planets when rising and near the Ascen- 
dant modify the above types very considerably. 
In general the effect of a rising planet upon 
appearance is to give some of the characteristics 
of the signs it rules. Thus the © rising imparts 
some of the characteristics of ¢) and in certain 
cases the native may easily be mistaken for this 


_ sign. Similarly the )) rising tends to give a 9g 


appearance. In the case of the planets, however, 
the matter is rather more complicated as the 
appearance is usually more like one of the planet’s 
signs than the other. Thus, 2 rising sometimes 
resembles Y% and at other times +, and it is 
not easy to say which sign will be the one im- 
pressed upon the native. The general modifying 
effect of each of the planets when rising, or 
strongly aspecting the Ascendant, is as follows :— 

The Sun. Adds dignity and gives a fresh com- 
plexion, full stature, large head, round face, 
light or yellowish hair, growing thin, and blue 
or grey eyes. 

The Moon. Renders the body short and often 
squat, tending to plumpness, and gives a broad 
chest, face and forehead, fleshy hands and feet, 
brown hair, grey, soft and limpid eyes, one often 
slightly larger than the other, and a pale com- 
plexion. 

Mercury. Adds tallness and length to the body 
and limbs, and gives thin nose and lips, dark 
hair and eyes, olive complexion, and a quick, 
talkative and active manner. 

Venus. Adds plumpness, and gives a short body 
with short fleshy hands, small feet, round cheeks, 
red lips, well shaped mouth, smiling face, often 


fed 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


dimpled, light brown and smooth hair, blue or 
brown eyes, clear complexion, and a musical | 
voice. 

Mars. Gives medium height and a strong and 
muscular body with large bones and broad 
shoulders. The face is round, with sloping fore- 
head, prominent brows, aquiline nose, and often 
a mark or scar on the face. The hair is often 
red or light, crisp and curly, but sometimes 
black. The eyes are hazel, sharp and piercing 
and the complexion fresh or ruddy. 

Jupiter. Adds bulk and robustness to the body, 
tending to stoutness in later life. The bearing is 
dignified, and the face oval, with high forehead, 
arched brows, full beard, brown or chestnut hair, 
blue or brown eyes, and a fresh or sanguine 
complexion. 

Saturn. Gives leanness, with a thin sometimes 
melancholy face, large ears, long nose, heavy 
brows, dark or black hair, dark, small and deep- 
set eyes, bad teeth, pale or sallow complexion, 
and a downward look when walking. 

Uranus. Adds height and spareness, giving a 
wiry, muscular, and rugged appearance. The 
features are strongly marked, and the face is 
often good looking, with dark hair and eyes, and 
a pale complexion. 

Neptune. Gives medium height and thinness, 
sometimes inclined to softness and plumpness. 
The face is long and thin, nervous looking as if 
strained or startled, often prematurely wrinkled, 
and with light, soft and silky hair, blue eyes, 
usually very sleepy or dreamy looking, a clear 
complexion, and a light coloured skin. 

By means of the above descriptions we are 
able to obtain a good general idea of the native’s 


78 


> 
j 


PERSONAL APPEARANCE 


personal appearance, but for a more detailed 
judgment of his peculiarities and defects the 
following special rules will be found necessary :— 

(a) Stature. Tallness and shortness are very 
difficult to judge accurately, and the typical 
stature given by the signs is frequently modified. 
The chief factors in determining this question 
are the rising sign, its ruler, the ), and the planet 
in strongest aspect with the ) or ruler. In general 
the natives of 1,9), 7, and x are tall, and those 
of , 95, %, and }% are short, the other signs 
disposing to an average height, but it is not 
safe to rely too much upon this alone. Some 
special rules are as follows :— 

I. Planets aspecting a significator usually give 
taller bodies when rising than when setting. 

2. The )) gives a shorter body when decreasing 
in light (i.e. passing from the £ of the © to 
the 9) than when increasing (i.e. passing from ¢ 
L0../). 

3. An earthy sign rising and the ©, ), and 
ruler of the Ascendant in earthy signs gives a 
very short body. The same is the case if the 
majority of planets are in earthy signs and as- 
pecting the )) and Ascendant. 

4. If the ) is in the Ascendant in # and 2] 
is in 95, especially in the 6th house, the native 
will be very short or a dwarf. 

.5. © or @ rising, with § andQ@ocorPh 
causes a dwarfed body. 

6. The ) and ruler of the Ascendant without 
latitude and in the ends of signs causes shortness. 

7. The Ascendant in the beginning ofa sign and 
its ruler in elevation dispose to tallness. 

8. 8 or 9 in house or exaltation and aspecting 
the Ascendant give tallness, and the contrary 


79 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


when in fall or detriment. h, 2| or ¢ in fall or 
detriment, and at the same time retrograde, 
tend to shortness. 

(b) Corporature. This is judged chiefly from the 
rising sign, its ruler, rising planets, and the ). 

I. The watery signs rising or strongly occupied 
usually give stoutness, and excessive stoutness 
is usually caused by the prominence of these 
signs and the planets ), 2|, and Jf. 

2. According to Ptolemy the ruler of the As- 
cendant without latitude gives thinness, and with 
latitude stoutness, South latitude increasing the 
activity and North latitude decreasing it. 

3. © o& ) makes the native ill-coloured and 
lean. * 

(c) Hatr. The rising sign and the planets as- 
pecting it show the colour of the hair. 

I. g exactly rising or in strong close aspect to 
the Ascendant gives red hair, while h similarly 
placed gives black. 

2. The mutable signs and especially m and 4 
affect the hair most strongly, and # or & rising, 
with 2| in houses 1, 2, 3, 7, 8 or 9 often produce 
premature baldness. The same may happen if 
h rules the Ascendant and is similarly placed. 

3. d elevated above and afflicting 9, especially 
from I, ~, or % causes the hair to fall out. 
The same frequently happens when ¢ afflicts ¥. 

(d) Eyes. The colour of the eyes is shown by 
the rising sign and planets as previously indicated 
in the general descriptions. To these it may be 
added that 2 ¢ or £ 2| frequently gives deep 
blue or violet eyes. 

The © rules the right eye of a man and the 
left eye of a woman, while the ) rules the left 
eye of a man and the right eye of a woman. As 


80 


PERSONAL APPEARANCE 


a rule these bodies will be found afflicted in 
cases of defective eyesight. 

The following are special rules :— 

1. Defective sight or sore eyes are caused by 
afflictions to the © or ) in or from Y and =. 
The same is caused by © & ) in these signs. 

2. The © in x badly afflicted by h often 
causes total blindness. 

3. Certain fixed stars, nebulae, and clusters, 
are most usually involved in cases of blindness 
or defective eyesight, the most important being 
situated as follows:—- Pleiades in Y 28° 51’, 
Praesaepe in §) 6° 9’, the Asselli in ¢) 6° 24’ and 
§. 7° 34’, and Antares in ~ 8°37’. The longi- 
tudes of these bodies increase at the rate of 
50’’.25 per annum, the above positions being for 
Ist January, 1918. 

If the © or ) are in any of these places and 
either afflicting each other alone or afflicted by 
the malefics, or if the malefics afflict them from 
these places, blindness or defective sight results, 
one or both eyes being affected, according to 
whether one or both luminaries are afflicted. 
Affliction from h gives danger from cold or 
cataract, from ¢ by fire, battle or accident, and 
from # by explosions or electricity. The favour- 
able aSpects from the benefics show the amount 
of help and relief that may be obtained. One 
of the worst positions is when the ) is in the 
7th house, the malefics in the Ist, and the © 
also in an angle. 

4. The ) ing with the© near Cingula Orionis (in 
about m 24) causes blindness at least in one eye. 

5. The © or ) afflicted in the Milky Way 
(from about 21 1 to 5 9 and from about 16 4 
to 7 %) often causes blindness. 


81 


Astrology ‘F 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


6. © & ) free from affliction and not in ang- 
les causes a squint. 

7. The following positions have some effect in 
causing blindness or defective sight. (1) Od d 
in the 8th and ) £ h from, m, 2, form; 
(11) )o¢ hingsorz% in [J or £ to J; (wz) /) 
in 4th (J) bh gd and © in 8th;; (iv) ) in M. G., © 
in Asc., and h in oth. 

(ec) Ears. Defective hearing is usually caused 
by afflictions to %. The following positions 
denote a tendency to deafness :— 

1. 8 afflicted by h, and especially when § 
rules the 6th. 

2. % ruling 12th or 6th, and afflicted in one 
of these houses or d ©. 

3. 3 & © afflicted by a malefic ruling 6th. 

4. 3 in X% afflicted by the malefics. 

(f) Speech. Defective speech is usually denoted 
by afflictions to %, and generally involves the 
mute signs 95, m, and X. 

I. % in one of the mute signs and afflicted by 
a malefic causes an impediment in the speech, 
especially when § rules, or is in, the 6th. 

2. 8 ¢ © and fh in an angle hinder speech, 
and the same effect is caused by % in the first 
six degrees of m, & ), and also by § o¢ ro) in 
the 6th, 8th, or 12th. 

3. b rising in a mute sign or in Y, &, QQ, or 
%, often causes an impediment. 

4. $ afflicting % causes quick speech. 

5. I, m, 2, # or m on the Asc. and % 
unafflicted gives free and graceful speech. 

(g) Teeth. 

I. 9 in the Asc. in 95, m, or 3, causes loss 
of teeth. 

2. h ¢ © in a watery sign, especially if in 


82 


PERSONAL APPEARANCE 


the Asc. or 6th, causes much suffering from 
toothache. 

3. h in Asc. or 7th, except in % and x, 
denotes trouble with teeth, and in earthy signs, 
except %, gives weak, distorted, and easily 
decaying teeth. If in an airy sign there may be 
much toothache but the teeth are seldom lost ; 
and if in a fiery sign the teeth rot without much 
pain. 

(h) Deformity. Deformity is caused by severe 
afflictions, especially in earthy signs and in 
angles, or in the 6th and 12th houses. The lumi- 
naries are frequently cadent and in no aspect 
to the Asc. whilst malefics occupy the angles. 
The signs VY, &W, 95, $2, m, ®, and # are most 
frequently concerned in such cases either as rising 
signs or containing the afflicting or afflicted pla- 
nets. Afflictions from ¢ cause deformity through 
fire or wounds ; those from f through falls ; and 
those from # from explosions. When acting 
from birth, however, # usually causes some 
inversion of the parts affected. Afflictions in 
mutable signs affect the legs and arms ; in fixed 
signs the body ; and in cardinal signs the head. 

I. %, =m, or X rising and containing the © 
or )) and afflicted often produce lameness. 

2. ) near QQ or @ afflicted by malefics from 
angles makes a hunchback or deformed person. 

3. ) o fh and Q or @& in rath and 2| ¢ © in 
4th makes a hunchback. 

4. h afflicting Asc. or ), and the lord of the 
Asc. afflicting the dispositor of the ) usually 
denotes deformity or mutilation. 

5. The ) in the Asc. with % and h, afflicted 
by ¢g often causes hermaphroditism or sexual 
imperfections. 


83 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


6. Other positions causing deformity are (i) 
malefics in angles, especially in the M. C. or Asc. 
and afflicting the rising degree; (ii) © and ) 
in 6th, 8th or 12th, and their dispositors afflicted 
by malefics ; (iii) malefics in angles ruling 6th, 
8th, and 12th, and afflicting the ) or lord of the 
Asc. 

7. According to Ptolemy the new or full Moon 
nearest before birth should be examined, together 
with the dispositors of the luminaries. If at 
birth the ), %, and the dispositors of the birth 
luminaries, or most of these bodies, are in no 
aspect to the luminaries or their dispositors at 
the lunation, the birth will be monstrous, and 
if the luminaries at birth are in the bestial signs 
Vv, ¥v, Qi, @, and %, it will not be human. The 
nature and disposition of the creature may be 
judged by the nature of the aspecting planets. 


84 


CHAPTER IV 
CHARACTER AND MIND. 


CHARACTER. The most important significators 
of character are the ©, ), the rising sign, and 
its ruler, but all the planets have some effect, 
expecially if they aspect the significators. The 
rising sign describes the native’s outlook on the 
world and the side of his character that is most 
in evidence, the )) describes his personal attri- 
butes, and the ©, the deeper and inner side 
of his character. If the © is stronger than the 
) the inner character will be stronger than the 
personality and vice-versa. If the Asc. is strong 
and the © is weak the native will not have the 
inner strength to carry through what he begins, 
but if the Asc. is weak and the © strong he will 
make resolutions and plans that he will not be 
able to carry out. 

The signs containing the majority of the planets 
indicate the general type of character. Cardinal 
signs denote activity, energy, ardour, ambition, 
love of fame, restlessness. Fixed signs denote 
firmness, stubbornness, will power, plodding, 
organising, patience, conservatism. Mutable 
signs denote intellect, vacillation, indecision, 
nervousness, worry, duality, adaptability,cunning. 
Fiery signs give energy activity, intellect, ar- 
dour, inspiration; earthy signs are practical, 
concrete, suspicious, plodding, worldly; airy signs 


85 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


mental, idealistic, nervous, intellectual; and 
watery signs emotional, imaginative, changeable, 
and psychic ; there is sometimes a tendency to 
drink or debauchery, especially if 2 or % be 
afflicted here. - 

The general type so indicated will be modified 
by the sign positions and aspects of the signi- 
ficators, good aspects giving the more favourable 
characteristics of the aspecting planets, and bad 
aspects the more unfavourable. 

Mind. The chief significators of mind are the 
y, 3, and planets in, or the ruler of, the 3rd house. 
In addition planets in the mutable signs and 
cadent houses also influence the mind. §% rules 
the pure intellect ; the ), the brain and concrete 
mind ; the 3rd house, the lower mind ; the goth, 
the higher mind, philosophy, and dreams, the 6th, 
the sub-conscious mind; and the 12th, the hid- 
den, inner, and unconscious mind, and occultism. 

The signs and aspects of the significators denote 
the mental characteristics. If % and the ) are 
unconnected, not aspecting the Asc., and afflicted 
by the malefics, especially if mutable signs are 
involved, there is great danger of mental 
instability or madness, h indicating melancholia, 
2. and ¢ religious mania, ¢ alone madness, 
and so on. The more aspects there are to $ the 
better, even ifmany are bad ones, as an unaspect- 
ed & tends to lack of balance. About the worst 
affliction to % is from m, as this causes twisted, 
inverted, erratic, and eccentric ideas, and in- 
sanity, or at least liability to nervous break- 
down. Other positions indicative of a tendency 
to insanity are § afflicted by g in a day map, or © 
by h in a night map; fh afflicting the Asc. 
by night, or $ by day, especially if in a watery 


86 


CHARACTER AND MIND 


sign; ))o¢ © in a sign ruled by h, or) £ O in 
one ruled by 3. Good aspects from 2| or 9 will 
avert the greatest danger and judgment must 
be formed by comparing the strength of the 
afflicting planets with that of the planets casting 
good aspects. 

The general type of character given by each 
of the signs when rising or containing the planets 
is as follows:— 

AriEs. Frank, outspoken, impulsive, brave, 
reckless, generous but selfish, extravagant, 
quarrelsome, destructive, ambitious, pioneering, 
jealous, independent, aggressive, clever, ingenious, 
shrewd, changeable, exaggerating, fond of politics, 
often bigoted, monopolise conversation, fight for 
rights, do not like to hear their faults. J, imagina- 
tive, poetical, scheming. #H, abrupt, inventive. 
h, industrious, touchy, deceptive. 2|, enthu- 
siastic, hopeful, judicious. ¢, positive, idealistic, 
argumentative, irritable. ©, self confident, 
commanding, rash, independent. Q, idealistic, 
ardent, demonstrative. %, quick, fluent, im- 
pulsive, exaggerative, clever, quarrelsome, greedy 
y, enthusiastic, irritable, penetrative, disobedient, 
unconventional. 

Taurus, Dogmatic, obstinate, strong willed, 
self-possessed, slow to anger and forgiveness, 
resentful, selfish, strong passions, violent if 
roused, patient, plodding, careful and exact, 
fond of ease and good living, proud, sensuous, 
magnetic, very reserved, loyal, domineering, 
strong sense of humour, strong opinions, good 
memory, fond of science or agriculture. JL, artistic, 
musical. #, determined, considerate, occult. 
bh, economical, diplomatic, fond of solitude, 
sullen. 2{, peaceful, dignified, just, compassio- 


87 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


nate. , fearless, acquisitive, reserved, proud. 
©. over confident, autocratic, warm hearted, 
meditative. 9, strong and deep feelings, volup- 
tuous, kind. %, practical, stubborn, cheerful, 
strong likes and dislikes. ), quiet, persistent, 
hopeful, conservative. 

GemMInI. Flexible, irritable, worrying, self- 
contained, nervous, vacillating, see both sides 
to every question, versatile, changeable, clever, 
inventive, original, fond of knowledge for its own 
sake, always want to know why, subtle, brilliant 
wit, fond of puns, puzzles, and conjuring tricks, 
sceptical, schemers, capable of pure abstract 
thought, mathematical, coldly scientific and 
dispassionate, may be dishonest. J{{, humorous, 
poetic, HI, curious, inventive, occult. h, scien- 
tific, subtle, observers, self deceived. 2], fond 
of detail, refined, literary. , acute, cunning, 
clever, severe. ©, ambitious, studious, refined, 
thoughtful. 9, considerate, sympathetic. §, 
shrewd, scientific, clever, unbiased. ), secretive 
ingenious, subtle, fond of intrigue. 

CANCER. Quiet, reserved, quick temper, im- 
patient, autocratic, very imaginative, fond of 
sensation, fond of dramatising their own actions, 
sentimental, very emotional, capricious, sensitive, 
irritable, adaptable, very sympathetic with suf- 
fering, jealous, usually narrow minded, resent 
criticism, often very depressed and gloomy, 
tenacious and never let go unless frightened 
unexpectedly. J, wayward, emotionally chan- 
geable. HH, eccentric, restless, fanciful. h, 
peevish, discontended, remorseful. 2], kind, 
popular, enterprising. ¢, ambitious, industrious, 
unruly, domesticated, peevish. ©, conscien- 
tious, easy going, fond of pleasure. 9, economical, 


88 


CHARACTER AND MIND 


fickle. %, discreet, tactful, changeable. ), fond 
of ease and comfort, homely, emotional, chan- 
geable, sensitive, easily influenced. 

Leo. Open, frank, ambitious, confident, scorns 
meanness, somewhat reserved and never tells 
all, lordly, generous, quick tempered, optimistic, 
fixed and dogmatic opinions, fond of poetry and 
drama, brave when necessary but often relies on 
display. Fond of show, fond of sunshine, fond 
of glittering things, brass, etc., and rich colours, 
always right, fond of giving advice. J{{, romantic. 
Hi, independent, fond of freedom. h, ambitious, 
determined, cautious. 2], proud, loyal, magna- 
nimous. 4, commanding, argumentative, gene- 
rous, fearless, impulsive. ©, just, honourable, 
generous, ambitious. 9, romantic, ardent, extra- 
vagant, fond of display and popularity. 4%, 
bombastic, large views, dogmatic, positive. jp, 
dignified, enthusiastic, ambitious, artistic, fond 
of luxury and show. 

Virco. Cool, practical, discriminating, very 
critical, often destructively so, impassive, faddy 
over little things, very inquisitive, modest, re- 
tiring, faithful, intellectual, strong opinions, fond 
of art, literature, science and mathematics, fond 
of collecting, good memory and reasoning power, 
not very original, slow to anger and forgiveness, 
quiet, persuasive, very good at detail work, 
fond of gardening, reading, cookery, needlework, 
etc., often servile to rich or distinguished people, 
fond of telling people their faults, worry over 
little things but brave in emergency, insist on 
respect, often rather old maidish. a sensitive, 
retiring, mysterious. H, economical, antiquated, 
eccentric. h, cautious, bashful, melancholy, 
studious, captious. 2|, prudent, covetous, dicta- 


89 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


torial, deceitful fond, of service. 4, shrewd, 
affable, irritable, deceitful. ©, ingenious, in- 
dustrious, modest, small self confidence. ?, chaste, 
or given to intrigue. %, intellectual, ingenious, 
critical, scientific, mysterious, sceptical. )), quiet, 
analytical, psychic. 

Lipra. Gentle, sensitive, inventive, artistic, 
imaginative, idealistic, honest, lazy, too easy 
going, fickle, very persuasive, indecisive, easily 
led by flattery, greatly influenced by surround- 
ings, strong sense of justice, cheerful and me- 
lancholy by turns, very fond of pleasure and 
company, worry over trifles, horror of physical 
injuries or suffering, usually selfish and rather 
shallow. Uf, poetical, visionary. Ht, romantic. 
bh, improvident, opinionated, scientific. 21, 
compassionate, considerate, courteous, great love 
of justice. 4, refined, captivating, courteous, 
idealistic. ©, affectionate, sociable, imaginative, 
artistic. 9, helpful to others, simple affections, 
equable. §, dispassionate, refined, broad mind. 
y, accomplished, kind, popular. 

Scorpio. Very strong character, great will 
power, quarrelsome, destructive, sarcastic, tre- 
mendous pride and self satisfaction, often claim 
to be much more advanced than others, per- 
sistent, follow one line until finished and then 
readily change, dramatic, sensational, impressive, 
fiery temper, brusque, ambitious, great magne- 
tism, fertile imagination, very fond of secrets, 
mysteries, and occult matters, penetrating mind, 
fixed opinions, fond of occult or chemical research. 
YC, mysterious, proud. #, artful, secretive, 
superstitious. h, avaricious, jealous, contemp- 
tuous, passionate, violent. 2|, haughty, over- 
bearing, pride of birth. 3, quick, acute, designing, 


go 


CHARACTER AND MIND 


passionate, tricky. ©, firm, unbending, proud, 
passionate, contentious. 9, jealous, seductive, 
character reader. §%, keen, critical, curious, 
suspicious, fond of secrets.  )), firm, abrupt, 
revengeful, selfish, conservative. 

SAGITTARIUS. Frank, honest, open, impetuous, 
good natured, intuitive, sporting, strong sense 
of justice, irritable, generous, optimistic, inde- 
pendent, clever, versatile, quick, fond of pre- 
diction, fond of religious and philosophical sub- 
jects, fond of outdoor exercise, sport, and horses, 
apt to make shrewd shots and guesses, fond of 
giving advice. J, inspirational, utopian ideas. 
i, rebellious, turbulent, over generous. h, 
honest, trustworthy, sensitive. 2|, refined, kind, 
courteous, humane, fond of gambling and specu- 
lation. dg, impulsive, rash, rebellious, talkative, 
generous. ©, generous, proud, sincere, restless, 
love of show and luxury. Q, light hearted, suscep- 
tible, fond of pleasure, 4%, inspirational, passio- 
nate, talkative, rebellious, rash. )), energetic, 
restless, kind, sincere, fond of change and sport. 
_ Capricorn. Ambitious, quiet, calculating, prac- 
tical, scientific, melancholy, malicious, sometimes 
fond of service, diplomatic, suspicious, love of 
power, reticent, unrelenting, cautious, prudent, 
persistent, selfish, lustful, economical,often mean. 

, crafty, subtle, designing, selfish. HI, acqui- 
sitive, restless, romantic. h, apprehensive, 
suspicious, discontented, treacherous. 2|, auto- 
cratic, severe, orthodox. 4, brave, enterprising, 
tactful, industrious. ©, subtle, reserved, serious, 
conservative, conventional, self controlled. 9, 
fickle, irresolute, restricted and ambitious affec- 
tions. %, tactful, suspicious, patient, critical, 
discontented, scientific, irritable. ), fond of 


ol 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


show or fame, selfish, covetous, very economical, 
cold, calculating. 

Aguarius. Artistic, idealistic, humane, strong 
will, frank, open, cheerful, genial, timid, scien- 
tific, interested in life rather than form, fixed 
and strong opinions, good judges of human nature, 
influence over animals, often break promises, 
ask advice and do not follow it. J, humani- 
tarian, broad minded, H, eccentric, impressio- 
nable, scientific. h, observant, thoughtful, slow 
in speech and action. 2|, humane, cheerful, 
broad and tolerant mind, more philosophical than 
religious. , nervous, clever, hospitable. ©, 
obedient, cheerful, idealistic, democratic, prudent. 
Q, faithful, obliging, chaste, romantic, effeminate, 
timid. %, eloquent, observant, humane, refined, 
intuitive. ), tolerant, inoffensive, sociable, po- 
litical and scientific, fantastic imagination. 

Pisces. Kind, romantic, vacillating, very ima- 
ginative, psychic, rather muddled, fond of good 
living, generous, emotional, very talkative, fond 
of animals, fond of sensationalism. J£, sympathe- 
tic, peculiar ideas, wm, fanciful, despondent 
h, indecisive, lack of hope and courage, sensitive. 
21, hospitable, philantropic. ¢, satirical, humane, 
receptive, passionate, timid and bold alternately. 
©, hospitable, restless, changeable, lack of ini- 
tiative, arrogant. 9, hospitable, sympathetic, 
impressionable, philanthropic, obstinate. Y, su- 
perficial, imitative, too receptive, muddled, 
little depth. ), dreamy, inconstant, quiet, 
easy going, restless, retiring, easily discouraged, 
lacks common sense or humour, intemperate. 

Thegeneralinfluenceoftheplanetsisas follows:— 

Sun. Dignified, proud, confident, honourable, 
arrogant, egotistical. 


g2 


CHARACTER AND MIND 


Moon. Ambitious, changeable, receptive, ima- 
ginative, romantic, sentimental, fond of novelty. 
Rising in Y and afflicting §, liar. Afflicted by 9, 
untidy, and slovenly. 

Mercury. Active, energetic, clever, quick, 
alert, nimble, cunning, talkative. Takes on . 
nature of planet in nearest aspect. Aspecting ), 
good at languages. Afflicted by g, quick mind 
but contentious and sarcastic. If in 3¢ angular 
and afflicted by g or ©, fanatic. In good aspect 
with 21, good judgment. If afflicted by 2, 
hyprocrisy and deceit. If o h, depth of mind. 
If £ )) in angles, stupid. If retrograde or com- 
bust in Y or % in 6th, 8th or 12th, not aspecting 
) or lord of Asc., simple and rude mind. 

Venus. Artistic, affectionate, sociable, quiet, 
tender, refined, fond of pleasure, scents and 
ornaments. Afflicted by 3, ardent and extra- 
vagant passions. Afflicted by h, sorrowful. 

Mars. Courageous, confident, assertive, active, 
energetic, consequential, aggressive, destructive, 
proud, passionate, extravagant. Afflicted by 
h or H, ungovernable temper. If rising in mp, 
insufferable conceit. 

Jupiter. Dignified, proud, jovial, philan- 
thropic, kind, sympathetic, generous. If afflicted, 
hypocrisy, and pride of the nature of the planet 
afflicted. Afflicted by g boasting and religious 
enthusiasm ; by h, grasping and unsympathetic. 
If in 2 with mp rising, pretentious mind. 

SaturN. Economical, cautious, diplomatic, 
suspicious, reserved, cold, selfish, just, ascetic, 
harsh, severe, industrious, thoughtful, melancholy, 
apprehensive, steadfast. In 3rd, melancholia, 
morbidity, insanity. If % ) in earthy signs, 
very melancholy. Afflicted by 2, hypocrisy ; 


93 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


by 4, violent ; by 9, depraved ; by %, dishonest ; 
by ¢ and 4, enthusiast or fanatic; by the lu- 
minaries, discontended. 

Uranus. Original, inventive, erratic, eccentric, 
genius, brusque, assertive, independent, roman- 
tic, fond of occultism, electricity, aviation, or 
antiquarianism. 

NeEptTuNE. Psychic, fantastic, aesthetic, very 
musical, fond of stringed instruments, dreamy, 
voluptuous, mystical, mediumistic, neurotic, self 
indulgent, peculiar and chaotic ideas. 


94 


CHAPTER V 
HEALTH AND ACCIDENTS 


The most important factors in the judgment 
of health are the Sun, Moon, and Ascendant, 
and the planets in, or the ruler of, the 6th house, 
but any strong bad aspect renders those parts 
of the body sensitive that are ruled by the signs 
in which the aspect falls. The © and ) are 
general significators of the life, the © ruling the 
radical constitution, and the ) the functional 
disorders and sympathetic system, and any 
afflictions to these or to the Ascendant, which 
rules the body, tend to disturb the health. The 
seriousness of such a disturbance must be judged 
by the strength or otherwise of the sign and house 
positions of the bodies concerned, the strength 
of the afflicting aspect, and the amount of help 
received from @ and 2{. In general afflictions 
to the © are worse than those to the )) as they 
denote defects in the radical constitution and 
give less promise of relief, but afflictions to the 
) are always serious in the case of women just 
as are those of the © to men. 

The relative power possessed by each of the 
signs of withstanding disease has already been 
given and should always be taken into con- 
sideration. 

Each sign of the zodiac rules various parts of 
the body and when rising, or on the cusp of the 


95 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


6th, or containing afflicted or afflicting planets, 
causes those parts of the body to become sen- 
sitive and easily subject to disorder. The fol- 
lowing list indicates the parts of the body ruled 
by each sign, the types of disease associated 
with them, and remarks on certain less obvious 
effects of planets afflicted therein :— 

Artes. Rules head, face, brain. <Azlments. 
Head, stomach and kidney troubles, disorders of 
eyes and brain, fevers, neuralgia. Remarks. Pla- 
nets here frequently cause peculiar internal 
diseases. ¢ inflammatory and mental complaints, 
pains in eyes and bowels. )) insomnia, especially 
if o We 

Fee Rules Cerebellum, neck, throat, la- 
rynx, lips, ears. Azlments. Throat and heart 
troubles, diphtheria, quinsy, diabetes, piles, fistu- 
las, apoplexy, disorders arising from over-feeding. 
Remarks. Nervous over health. Planets here 
often cause illness through foreign travel. h danger 
of contagious diseases and from over-feeding. 
6 or f rising in this sign gives fits in dentition. 

Gemini. Rules shoulders, arms, hands, lungs, 
breath, blood. Azlments. Mind and nerve disor- 
ders, mental overstrain, worry, consumption, 
bronchitis, asthma, blood troubles. Remarks. 
Mind affects health. Planets here frequently give 
illness arising through the profession. I spas- 
modic asthma. 

CanceR. Rules breast, chest, stomach, digesti- 
ve organs, ribs, elbows. Ailments. Gastric trou- 
bles, dropsy, scrofula, rheumatism, cancer, dip- 
somania, hypochondriasis. Remarks. h here, 
pyorrhoea, also danger from impure magnetism. 
¢ gastric troubles and weak sight, but sometimes 
power of resisting disease. 


96 


HEALTH AND ACCIDENTS 


Leo. Rules spine, back, heart, wrists, forearm. 
Ailments. Heart troubles, palpitation, syncope, 
spinal meningitis, lumbago, violent sickness. 
Remarks. h here, danger of overwork and from 
infection. $ peculiar ailments, pains in eyes and 
stomach, inflammatory and tumorous complaints. 
This sign rising and © afflicted in the 5th is a 
sure indication of heart trouble. 

Virco. Rules abdomen, umbilicus, bowels, in- 
testines, lower spine, fingers. Ailments. Bowel 
disorders, colic, dysentery, diarrhoea, constipa- 
tion, dyspepsia, debility, worry. Remarks. Worry 
over health. h here, sickness in early life, 
headaches, and mental diseases. .¢ danger from 
bad food, but sometimes power to resist disease 
through hygiene. )) danger to eyes. 

Lisra. Rules kidneys, lumbar region, skin. 
Ailments. Skin and kidney disorders, diabetes, 
Bright’s disease, nephritis, lumbago, eczema, 
blood disorders. Remarks. h here, locomotor 
ataxia, and danger of contagious diseases. 

Scorpio. Rules urinary and generative organs, 
anus, bladder, appendix, pelvis. Azlments. Piles, 
ruptures, fistulas, venereal diseases, heart, throat 
and blood disorders, infectious diseases, and ail- 
ments arising from excess. Remarks. h here, 
liable to epidemic complaints. 2! gout, blood- 
poisoning, hereditary diseases. ? venereal diseases, 
heart trouble at end of life. 

SacitTarius. Rules hips, thighs, nerves, ar- 
teries. Ailments. Rheumatism, sciatica, gout, 
blood trouble, ailments affecting lungs and nerves. 
Remarks. fh here, danger of nervous breakdown 
at end of life. ¢ danger from operations or medi- 
cal errors. 

Capricorn. Rules knees, hands, bones, joints, 


97 


Astrology G 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


teeth. Ailments. Rheumatism, skin diseases, ec- 
zema, leprosy, impetigo, urticaria, colds and 
chills, ailments affecting the knees. Remarks. h 
here, chronic illnesses, g acute diseases. © heart 
disease. )) biliousness, melancholia, hypochon- 
driasis, chest and throat troubles. 

Aguarius. Rules legs, ankles, blood, circula- 
tion. Ailments. Nerve and blood disorders, anez- 
mia, cramp, sprained and broken legs and ankles. 
Remarks. Planets here may give avoidance of 
illness by the study of hygiene food reform or 
temperance. @ or )) varicose veins. ¢ acute 
diseases, weakness or pains in legs. 

Pisces. Rules feet, toes, lymphatic system. 
Atlmenis. Bowel disorders, gout, colds, dropsy, 
tumours, infectious diseases, ailments arising from 
excess. Remarks. 3 here, consumptive tenden- 
cies. 9 tender feet, sickness after marriage. © 
dropsy and diabetes. 

The positions given in the above remarks are 
intended to be merely supplementary, for as a 
general rule an afflicting planet disturbs those 
parts of the body ruled by the sign concerned 
and causes illnesses of its own nature affecting 
those parts. 

It is found that afflictions in any sign affect 
those signs in opposition or in square to it. This 
is known as polarity and is very important in 
practice. Thus, kidney diseases (2) will aifect 
the eyes (‘Y’) ; internal troubles (m) will affect 
the blood (%) and the heart (Q)), and so on. In 
general the quadruplicities and triplicities have 
each a group influence as follows :— Cardinal. 
Head, stomach, kidneys, skin. Fixed. Blood, 
throat, heart, urino-genital organs. Mutable. 
Nerves, lungs, bowels, digestion. Five. Head, 


98 


HEALTH AND ACCIDENTS 


heart, hips. Earth. Throat, bowels, digestion, 
knees, skin. Air. Lungs, kidneys, blood, nerves. 
Water. Stomach, urino-genital organs, feet. Thus 
an affliction in any sign is liable to cause a sym- 
pathetic disturbance of the organs ruled by the 
other signs of the same triplicity or quadruplicity, 
but the maximum effect is exerted by the afflict- 
ed sign itself. 

The parts of the body and diseases ruled by 
the planets are as follows :— 

Sun. Rules heart, back, vitality, blood, brain, 
right eye of a man, and left eye of a woman. 
Ailments. Tf afflicting Asc., or )), or itself afflicted, 
debility, fevers, sunstroke. 

Moon. Rules breast, stomach, saliva, fluidic 
and lymphatic systems, left eye of a man and 
right eye of a woman. Ailments. If afflicting 
Asc., or ©, or itself afflicted, functional disorders, 
chills, colds, dropsy. If in 6th, fanciful over food 
or too fond of liquids ; sometimes gives meningitis 

Mercury. Rules brain, mind, lungs, tongue, 
speech, hands, arms, nerves, hair. Azlments. 
Nerve disorders, headaches, neuralgia, insomnia, 
giddiness, nervous breakdown, lung diseases. If 
in 6th causes faddiness over food or interest in 
hygiene. 

Venus. Rules throat, chin, eustachian tubes, 
complexion, cheeks, umbilicus, reins, ovaries, 
veins, internal generative organs. Ailments. Kid- 
ney troubles, venereal diseases, and ailments 
affecting the throat, heartburn, tonsilitis, cysts, 
and ailments arising from indiscretion in diet. If 
in 6th often gives careful nursing. 

Mars. Rules nose, forehead, bile, gall, muscles 
and sinews, external generative system. Aul- 
ments. Fevers, infectious and inflammatory 


99 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


diseases, sharp and sudden diseases, operations, 
shingles, fistulas, ailments affecting the nose, 
ruptured bloodvessels. If in 6th some tendency 
to illness through over-eating, also sudden 
diseases. If in 12th extreme and sudden weakness. 

Jupiter. Rules blood, semen, liver, arteries, 
pleura, absorptive system, right ear. Azlments. 
Blood disorders, accumulations of fluid, liver 
disorders, pleurisy, boils, abscesses, quinsy, 
apoplexy, and ailments arising from surfeit and 
indiscretions in diet. 

SaturN. Rules bones, joints, teeth, spleen, 
secretive system, left ear. Ailments Colds, chills, 
dull aches, rheumatism, chronic and lingering 
diseases. If in 6th gives danger through fasting 
or ascetic habits, and of chronic diseases. If in 
12th, hable to gout. 

Uranus. Rules nerves, membranes of the brain 
and spinalcord. Azlments. Obscure and incurable 
diseases, cramp, ruptures, sudden and spasmodic 
ailments, nervous breakdowns, paralysis. 

Neptune. Rules brain, and telepathic organs. 
Ailments. Obscure and incurable diseases, ob- 
session and psychic ailments, vague and irrational 
fears, and the various “‘phobias”’, worry, ailments 
arising through drug taking, excessive smoking 
or tea and coffee drinking. 

The exact nature of an illness is shown by the 
combined influence of the planet and sign. Thus 
h is weakening and obstructive and x rules the 
blood, so that h in % tends to anaemia or bad 
circulation. Similarly 2| in x causes blood 
impurities arising through excess, and so on. 
These effects take place when the planet afflicts 
the luminaries in or from these signs, or is 
afflicted in the 6th. 


100 


HEALTH AND ACCIDENTS 


In judging of health :— 

1. Note the rising sign, its afflictions, and the 
ruler. The sign will give the ailments to which 
the native is subject considered in connection 
with the afflicting planet, and also the organs 
most likely to be affected. 

2. Observe the © and ) and note the signs 
containing them and the afflicting planets and 
their signs. If they are free from affliction, well 
placed and aspected, the health will be good. 
In general afflictions to the © indicate lasting 
and hereditary diseases, and those to the ) the 
ailments arising from time to time and more 
easily cured. 

3. Note the sign on the 6th, and to a lesser 
extent those on the 4th and 8th as these indicate 
sensitive parts of the body. Planets in these houses, 
and especially in the 6th and 12th will disturb 
the health if afflicted and affect the parts ruled 
by the signs containing them. 

4. Note any strong afflicted or afflicting 
positions anywhere, as these will also mark sen- 
sitive points. 

5. Observe the help given by good aspects 
from 2 and 2|. These afford relief but cannot 
assist very much if weak by sign, house, or aspect. 
If very strong they will save the life and often 
ward off illness also. Good aspects from these 
planets indicate not only the prospects of recovery 
but also the sources of help. Any good aspect 
to an afflicted significator affords relief through 
its house and sign position ; thus if lord of the 
12th or in the 12th there will be benefit from 
hospital treatment, if in 6th from nursing, if 
in 3rd from relatives and neighbours, and so on. 

6. The relative preponderance of sickness and 


Ior 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


health must be judged by the relative strength 
of the afflictions and good aspects to the signifi- 
cators of health. 2 or 2| in the 6th exert a 
protective influence on the health but if afflicted 
cause troubles according to their natures. In 
general the health is good if the luminaries are 
strong and well aspected ; lord of 6th fortunate ; 
luminaries well aspected by planets in 6th ; and 
lords of 1st and 6th in good aspect (not ¢). 

7. The house position of the ruler of the 6th 
often shows the source of illness but the houses 
ruled by the afflicting planets must also be con- 
sidered. In general the effect of the ruler of 
the 6th in the houses is as follows :— Ist. Much 
ill-health, often caused through the native’s own 
fault. The same effect follows if the lord of 
Asc., is in 6th. 2nd. Loss of money or expendi- 
ture on health. 3rd. Illnesses on journeys. 4th. 
Hereditary illnesses. 5th. Illness through pleasu- 
res. 6th. Through work. 7th. Through marriage 
or women. 8th. Bad health and often near 
death. gth. Illness abroad or on voyages. Ioth. 
Through business or by promotion. 11th. 
Through disappointments. 12th. Much confine- 
ment. 

8. The houses correspond to the signs, and a 
malefic in say the 2nd may affect the health 
not only through the sign containing it but also 
through \y, the sign normally corresponding to 
the 2nd house. To determine whether house or 
sign will be affected note the condition of the 
house corresponding to the sign and of the sign 
corresponding to the house. Thus } in in 
2nd may affect lungs (11) or throat (2nd house 
corresponding to ). To determine which will 
suffer note whether there are afflictions to the 


102 


HEALTH AND ACCIDENTS © 


3rd house (corresponding to 1m), or to ¥ (corres- 
ponding to 2nd house). If yy is afflicted judge 
that the throat will suffer, but if the 3rd house 
is worse look to the lungs. If judgment cannot 
be formed in this way note also the condition of 
the planetary rulers. 

g. The house positions of the luminaries and 
ruler are important and if these bodies are in 
the 4th, 6th, 8th, or 12th they denote poor 
health throughout life. The same effect frequent- 
ly follows if they are in conjunction with the 
rulers of these houses. Afflictions from these 
rulers or planets in these houses are worse than 
from other bodies or positions. 

ro. The house and sign position of the afflict- 
ing planet shows not only the general part of 
the body affected but also the particular spot. 
The beginning of a sign rules the upper parts of 
the organs subject to it, the intermediate degrees 
rule the middle, and the end of the sign rules the 
lower parts. Furthermore the odd signs and 
houses rule the left side in a man and the right in 
a woman, while the even signs and houses rule 
the right side of a man and the left of a woman. 

The following are the chief aphorisms relating 
to health :— 


A. .GENERAL. 


i. The Asc. and all planets in signs of one 
triplicity cause continual trouble from ailments 
pertaining to that triplicity. 

2. Lord of Asc. or of sign intercepted in Ist, 
afflicted by malefics in 6th or 12th denotes general 
ill-health. 

3. © or ) afflicted in 6th or 7th denotes much 
illness, and the health is weakened if © afflicts ) 


103 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


4. ©o ) makes the native infirm and tends 
to weak mental balance or peculiar diseases. 

5. Lord of Asc. applying to a bad aspect of 
lord of 6th indicates that the native is negligent 
of his health. 

6. Malefics rising cause accidents or acute and 
painful illnesses; if setting long and tedious 
diseases. 

7. Benefics oriental or angular and aspecting )) 
indicate that diseases will be curable. If 2I it 
will be by medicine, and if 9 they will cure 
themselves. If the benefics be cadent or occi- 
dental the disease will be wholly incurable. 

8. If the benefics are in no aspect to the © 
and )), and the malefics are in angles the diseases 
will be incurable, and even if the benefics assist, 
a cure will not be effected if the malefics are 
strong and elevated above them. 

g. Malefics rising before the © or after the ) 
cause diseases and their effects are increased 
if S is with them. 

ro. When f is instrumental in causing disease 
it frequently indicates a tendency to complain, 
and if & is also afflicting the native may talk 
much about his illness or even parade it for 
profit or beg from door to door. 

II. § in any aspect with © gives great vita- 
lity, but if afflicting, danger of accidents and 
fevers. 

12. g elevated above h makes the native 
sickly and a weakling, but if h is elevated above 
6 he is strong. 

13. ) Llor £ h or with %§ is ist or 2nd shows 
the whole life to be infirm. 

14. The ) afflicted in Y, ¥, or I disposes 
to cancer and facial eruptions ; in 95, Q), or mm 


104 


HEALTH AND ACCIDENTS 


ringworm, tetters, and shingles; in 2, m, or 
%, scurvy and a variety of leprosy ; and in %, 
m, or }, boils, pimples, and scabbed lips. 

15. Malefics angular in 95, %, or 3, and rising 
after the )) or before the © cause scurvy and 
scrofula. 

16. § afflicted by h or g, or in square to the 
) from Ist or 7th causes ailments affecting the 
head, and if both malefics are concerned it often 
causes apoplexy. 

17. ) P h or gd causes diseases affecting the 
head, which will be very severe if § is at thesame 
time afflicted by h or ¢. 


B. SPECIAL. 


I. ConsumPTION. (a) Many afflictions from 
mutable signs dispose to consumption. If h is 
the afflicting planet the disease will be slow, 
but if g, rapid. 

(6) h elevated near M.C. and [J or © tends 
to consumption, especially if in mutable signs. 

(Cc) h o QQ especially in an angle and in 
square to the )) in a cadent house. 

(Z) © and § afflicted in 3 in 6th with mp 
rising tends to consumption. 

2. CaANcER. The astrological indications are 
not yet certain. As a rule the ) is badly afflicted 
and there are afflictions from 2|. h or I, and 
the signs VY, &, 95, 2, and %. h in & often 
indicates the death of a parent, usually the father, 
from cancer. 

3. Epitepsy. (a) 3 and ) not aspecting each 
other, or when in }{ and % or in 6th, 8th, or 12th, 
and neither aspecting Asc. 

(6) h by night and ¢ by day strong in an 
angle and afflicting both § and ). 


105 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


(c) h by day and ¢ by night disposing of $ and). 

(d) J{ in a watery sign on Asc. and afflicting, 
causes epilepsy or water on the brain. Other 
positions causing epilepsy are )) in Asc. 9% 
and bh; h¢ & in angles; ) do © anddg in 
4th in square or opposition to h; © and Q in 
Asc. £ h; luminaries afflicted by 9 and g. 
Malefics angular rising after )) or before © and 
in m or # also cause epilepsy, but if in the very 
end of the sign they are said to produce gout, 
cramp, and rheumatism. In nearly all cases 
of epilepsy the Asc. is heavily afflicted. 

4. Gout. (a) Both luminaries afflicted in 
watery signs. 

(0) Luminaries in conjunction with or oppo- 
sition to malefics in VY, W, 95, mM, %, %, or &, 
the luminaries or malefics having house or exal- 
tation in Ist or 6th. 

(c) In nocturnal maps g, 2 and ) angular in 
opposition to h in W, $2, @ or X. 

(dq) hinX, dg or © or jp. 

(ec) h in my, @ or X in 6th or rath, [J or 
$d, ©, or j. 

5. FEMALE AILMENTS. (a) )) in conjunction 
with or in good aspect to 2 causes regular cata- 
menia, but if afflicting each other they will 
be profuse and weakening especially if at the 
same time ¢ afflicts 9. 

(0) h afflicting Q causes catamenia to be 
irregular, painful, or suppressed. 

(c) hand Qin X, afflicted by ) in » indicates 
danger of the catamenia never occurring, and 
consequent barrenness. 

6. CONVULSIONS are caused by afflictions 
from fixed signs, § being at the same time afflicted 
by 39 or Ht. 


106 


HEALTH AND ACCIDENTS 


7. STONE. In a diurnal map h and ¢ in 7th 
or 8th, or 3 in 6th in . or m, afflicting ), or 
) in 2 or m afflicted by ph. 

8. Tumours AND ABSCESSES are caused by 
the planets or luminaries afflicted in 95 or X 
If the afflicting planet be in np or 3 it often 
produces an abscess on or near the liver. 


ACCIDENTS. 


Accidents are caused by serious afflictions 
from J, h, or H, especially when these planets 
are rising or afflicting a rising planet. The signs 
most conducive to accidents are the ‘‘violent”’ 
signs ‘Y’, =, m, @ and x, and to these may be 
added mu also. It is found that the latter half 
of » is frequently productive of accidents when 
containing the malefics or afflicted luminaries. 
The cardinal signs and angles are of chief im- 
portance and the position of the © or )) afflicted 
in houses 4, 5, 6, 10, II, I2, is also conducive 
to accidents. 

I. Afflictions from ¢ cause accidents through 
fire, burns, cuts, scalds (especially if 3 be ina 
watery sign), wounds and bullets (when ¢ is 
in one of the “human” signs 0, 7, or =), and 
bites (especially when ¢ is in m or %). g in the 
I2th in 1, $2, or 2 gives danger from horses 
or large animals. The nature of the sign, whether 
watery, fiery, etc., or human or animal, together 
with the house, will show the source of danger 
and the nature of the accident. 

2. Afflictions from h cause falls, (especially 
in airy signs), blows, bruises, sprains, disloca- 
tions, and accidents from falling bodies. If in 
% there are falls from horses, and in x from steps 
or downstairs. When } is elevated in the roth 


107 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


and afflicting the luminaries there will be violent 
falls especially if h rules the 1st or 8th. Goh 
gives liability to accidents under directions 
even when these planets do not afflict the lumi- 
naries, and if the conjunction takes place in 
’ in the 4th there is danger from the fall of 
ruined buildings. 

3. Afflictions from m cause sudden and unex- 
pected accidents from machinery, electricity, 
lightning, and explosions. 

The part of the body affected is in all 
cases shown by the sign containing the malefic 
or the afflicted luminary. In general there is 
frequently a mark, scar, or mole on the part of 
the body ruled by the signs containing malefics, 
and often on the face if the malefic be rising. 

The severity of the accidents must be judged 
from the strength of the afflicting planets and the 
amount of help received. Good aspects from 2] 
and 2 when themselves strong will avert serious 
danger and give “‘miraculous escapes”’. 


108 


CHAPTER VI 
FINANCE. 


The 2nd house rules money and property ; the 
5th speculation ; the 8th loss but also legacies, 
inheritance, and the money of the wife, partner, 
and general public, and the 11th, income 
from business. Planets in these houses or their 
lords will indicate gain or loss through these 
matters. 

I. Note the planets in the 2nd, its ruler, and 
their signs, and also planets aspecting them with 
their house and sign positions. Favourable aspects 
will bring gain by means of the matters, people, 
and occupations ruled by the aspecting planet 
and its sign and house, and bad aspects will 
similarly indicate the sources of loss. Any 
planet in the 2nd will bring gain if well aspected 
but if it is a malefic and weak by sign the gain 
may not prove durable. The same method of 
judgment is to be applied to planets in, or the 
rulers of the 5th, for speculation, the 8th, for 
legacies, and so on. 

2. Particular attention should be paid to 
the ©, ), 2|, and Q, as they are natural signifi- 
cators of money. The © is more important in 
a woman’s map, and the ) in a man’s. If these 
bodies are afflicted the fortunes are poor, but 
favourable aspects denote gain. A good aspect 
between © and )) is very beneficial and if these 


109 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


bodies afflict one another the fortunes are uncer- 
tain or fluctuating. 

3. Examine the position and aspects of the 
Part of Fortune in a similar way. 

4. Judge wealth or poverty by the greater 
number of indications and the relative strength 
of the planets. Cardinal signs and angles give 
increased fortune or misfortune, while mutable 
signs and cadent houses tend to obscurity and 
little success. 

The following are the influences of the signs 
and planets on finance, and certain specific 
effects of some of the planets in the signs. It 
should be remembered that the position of a 
planet in a sign merely indicates connection 
with the matters mentioned and the question 
of loss or gain depends upon the nature of the 
aspects it receives. 

ARIES. Gain by own endeavours and shrewd- 
ness. h here, acquisitive, gain or loss through 
deaths of uncles or aunts, competence at end of 
life if well aspected by 2|. 2|, voyages, shipping 
or foreign investments. 4, private sources, 
loss through marriage. @ gain through deaths 
of inferiors, secret affairs, and mother’s relatives. 

Taurus. Economical, fond of investment, 
cautious and careful, gain by marriage. h, indu- 
stry and investment; fortunes improve later. 2|, 
investment and speculation, money from women. 
3, acquisitive and persevering. 9, profession. 
), inheritance from parents, money from com- 
panies or wholesale trading. 1, from partnership 

Gemini. Fluctuating, double sources of gain, 
do not save until latter half of life. h, questio- 
nable means. 3, by wits. 9, by relatives, specu- 
lation. friends’ advice, and secret methods. | 


IIo 


FINANCE 


Cancer. Acquisitive and careful. Gain through 
water or voyages. h, occultism. 2], property, 
intellect. dg, servants, agencies, travel, public 
affairs. 2, meeting public needs. )), property and 
shipping. 

Leo. Speculation or public work. Often gives 
wealth. h, domestic or foreign affairs. 21, 
marriage, mining. g, government or public work, 
music, success at end of life. 9, inheritance, ©, 
rarely in want. 

Virco. Foreign affairs, shipping, health, 
service. h, religious people and things. 2, 
investment, literature, secondhand dealing. 
Richer than parents. 4, speculation, investment. 
9, speculation, help of partner. H, state or 
public work. ©, wealth in middle age. 

Lisra. Business and association with others. 
h, labour and employment. 2], institutions, 
partner or wife, inferiors, commerce, science, 
or employment of agents. 6, loss through 
inferiors. 9, loss through marriage. 

Scorpio. Gain by others’ death or losses and 
by marriage. h, public companies, popular 
enterprises, life policies. 2|, arbitration, mining, 
unsound speculation. ¢ marriage. 9, union or 
secret alliances. 

SaciTTarRius. Legacies and speculation. h, 
investment. 2], marriage, sick relatives, specu- 
lation, gor 9, marriage, speculation. )), inferiors. 

Capricorn. Foreign affairs or abroad, invest- 
ment. Acquisitive. h, speculation and invest- 
ment. 2|, commerce, relatives’ deaths. 4, travel. 
2, diplomatic alliances. Jf, catering on large 
scale. 

Aguarius. Corporations and associations. h, 
quiet effort. 2|, associations, inheritance. 4d, 


III 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


parents or relatives. 9, inheritance or public 
affairs. 

Pisces. Gain from friends. h, disregards 
money. 2], associations and companies, mining. 
Kf, charity. 

Cardinal signs give good earning powers but 
free expenditure and bring success from enter- 
prise and public recognition. Fixed signs tend 
to hoard up money but give sudden losses. They 
favour government work. Mutable signs bring 
gain through service and in the employment 
of others. 

The influence of planets on money is as 
follows:— 

Sun. Money from father, superiors, business. 
Gives much money but also free expenditure. 

Moon. Money from the mother, females, 
public service, if elevated and strong from fac- 
tories. Causes thrift but fortunes are changeful. 
Afflicted by 2|, improvident, indiscreet, and too 
generous ; by h, financial failure and if ¢ h 
in an angle causes poverty. Ruling 2nd, in 
reception with ruler, and placed in Asc. well 
aspected gives great wealth. 

Mercury. Gain by commerce, writing, agen- 
cies, travel, skilled work; danger of loss by 
theft. Aspected by 9, refined occupations ; 
3, industry and skill; 2|, judgment; , diplo- 
macy ; Hi, inventiveness or speculation. 

Venus. Friends, pleasures, women. Free ex- 
penditure on pleasure or finery. Aspected by h 
investment or banking; ) public; 2, friends 
and foreign affairs; Hf, acquaintances, peculiar 
methods. Afflicted by $, waste and extravagan- 
ce ; h, fear of poverty, unavoidable loss; #, sudden 
losses. Afflicted in 2nd, loss by females or wife. 


IIz 


FINANCE 


Mars, Strength and energy, legacy, marriage. 
Earns easily but spends freely. Afflicted by 
2| extravagance ; h, poverty, If in 2nd afflict- 
ing )) loss by war, fire, or theft. 

JUPITER. Religious affairs, shipping.. Gives 
wealth. In good aspect to h or Ht (especially 
from 8th or 4th or these planets rule those 
houses) legacies and inheritance. Afflicted by 
bh or m loss by law or trustees, often poverty. 
In 8th gain by marriage. If strong in 2nd. 
in good aspect to ) or lord of Asc. in an angle 
gives ample fortune. 

SATURN. Thrifty. Labour, investment. In 
good aspect to 2 or 21, investment and com- 
panies. In 7th bad for trade. 

Uranus. Out of the way sources, sudden wind- 
falls, government, fluctuating fortunes, danger 
of smashes. In 7th harassed by creditors, loss 
after marriage. 

Neptune. Institutions, hospitals. Danger of 
fraud or bubble schemes. Sometimes gain by 
fraud or blackmail. 

The position of the lord of the 2nd is of im- 
portance and its influence in each house is as 
follows :— ist. By energies, or else well off. 2nd. 
Riches, especially when well aspected by lord 
of Asc. 3rd. Loss from relatives, gain by jour- 
neys. 4th. Inheritance. 5th. Speculation, child- 
ren. 6th. Loss by servants, health, animals. 7th 
Loss by marriage, partners, theft and wars. If 
afflicted in ‘VY, m, %, or x, loss by enemies and 
robbed by wife, unless lord of Asc. is in good 
aspect with lord of 7th. 8th. Legacies, marriage. 
oth. Voyages, shipping, or abroad. roth. Profes- 
sion, eminent people. 11th. Friends, societies, 
companies. 12th. Gain from enemies, servants, 


II3 
Astrology H 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


and animals, loss by theft and imprisonment. 
As before the aspects received will indicate 
whether gain or loss is to be expected. 

The following are the aphorisms dealing with 
finance :— 

General. 1. Many planets in 2nd bring money 
in various ways according to the nature of the 
planets but indicate poverty if afflicted. 

2. Lord of 8th in 2nd and well aspected brings 
gain by legacy and marriage, but if afflicted 
causes poverty or ruin. 

3. Benefics promising money and not afflicted 
by malefics denote lawful gain, but malefics 
promising, and afflicted, retrograde, combust 
or in a bad sign, denote unlawful gain. A benefic 
in the house or exaltation of a malefic, or a 
malefic in the house or exaltation of a benefic, 
denotes both lawful and unlawful gain. Retro- 
gradation and combustion increase the likelihood 
of unlawful gain in both cases. 

4. If the significators of wealth are in houses 
I2, II or 10, money will be obtained in youth ; 
if in 9, 8, or 7, between the ages of 25 and 35 or 
40; if in 6, 5, or 4, between 40 and 50; and 
if in 3, 2 or I late in life. If the significators 
rise before the © money will come earlier but 
if they rise after the ©, nearer old age. Retro- 
gradation delays the time but swiftness of 
motion hastens it. 

Gain. 1. 2| strong in Asc. and )) well aspected 
in 2nd gives wealth. 

2. ® strong, and its dispositor in 8th in good 
aspect to lord of Asc., brings legacies. 

3. (2 with ), 21, or 2 in 2nd denotes durable 
fortune. The same is denoted if 2| or 9 are in 
good aspect to the cusp of the 2nd. 


114 


FINANCE 


4. h disposing of @ and in good aspect to 2} 
indicates inheritances. If the aspect is in angles 
or 2| is in 1, #, or X, and in the 7th in good 
aspect to the )) the native is often an adopted 
child and inherits the wealth of its adopted 
parents. 

5. ) in ¥ in 2nd separating from [Jj or £ 2 
and applying to A, © denotes considerable riches. 

6. Q and 2| in 7th with QQ, or Q with 4, 
brings riches through the wife. 

Loss. 1. ?§ in 2nd causes want, poverty, and 
loss by theft. 

2. Lord of znd combust, @ unfortunate, and 
2nd afflicted causes confiscation of estate and 
bankruptcy. 

3. Lord of 2nd ¢, [, or £ h or 4, and both 
retrograde, cadent, and weak by sign indicates 
perpetual poverty. 

4. The 8th or its lord afflicted may cause loss 
of estate by the wife’s death. 

5. ) in 8th and lord of Asc. in 2nd or 12th, 
retrograde, denotes loss by gambling or specu- 
lation. | 

6. g and fh in 4th, or cardinal signs on angles 
and containing g and h gives poverty and 
misfortune throughout life unless very well as- 
pected by 21. 

in 6th, retrograde, and lord of 2nd in 
an unfavourable sign or afflicted denotes poverty. 

8. The majority of planets retrograde or below 
the horizon indicates failing fortune. 


115 


CHAPTER VII 
OCCUPATION AND POSITION. 


The roth house rules occupation, employers, 
fame, honour, and power; and the 6th, ser- 
vice, inferiors, employees, occupations followed 
through necessity rather than choice, and ones 
which give little honour or renown. The fol- 
lowing are to be noted in judging the nature of 
the occupation :— 


1. The signs and planets in, or rulers of, the 
roth and 6th. 


2. The Sun’s house and sign position and as- 
pects, and the planet nearest the Sun, especially 
if rising before it. 

3. The ruler’s position and the planet in 
strongest aspect to it. 


4. The planet in strongest aspect to the Moon. 
5. The dominant planets in the map. 


The particular nature of the occupation is 
very difficult to judge as the field of choice is 
so large, and many people follow more than one 
pursuit, especially if the mutable signs are 
strongly tenanted and the significators receive 
many aspects. Asa rule the exact work is deno- 
ted by several positions rather than by one only 
and follows the general type of map, but the most 
important factors in addition to the roth and 6th 


116 


OCCUPATION AND POSITION 


houses are the strongest planet in the map and 
the ©, ), %, Asc. and its ruler. 3) 

The stronger the positions and aspects of any 
planet the more connection will it have with the 
profession, and the nature of the aspect does 
not greatly influence the matter except that 
good aspects denote the better and more refined 
occupations of the planets, while the bad aspects 
denote the more laborious and obscure. The 
success in any work, however, depends upon the 
aspects and dignities of the planets concerned, 
and any occupation denoted by a badly placed 
or aspected planet will never prove successful. 
The cause of the lack of success is shown by the 
position of the afflicting planet and its nature, 
thus h may cause laziness or neglect ; g, pride, 
obstinacy, carelessness or debt; 9, trouble 
through pleasures or women; and so on. In 
choosing a profession look to the most favourably 
placed planets. 

The nature of the chief significator and the 
sign containing it should be combined when 
judging the nature of the occupation. Thus h 
denotes work in connection with dark objects, 
lead, etc., and m has to do with writings and 
books, so that h in I might denote a compositor 


1) According to Ptolemy the chief significators of the occu- 
pation are the planet rising just before the ©), and the pla- 
net in the M.C. If the former is in the M. C. or aspecting 
it or receiving the application of the j it must be chosen. 
If it is not in the M.C. and another is, the stronger must 
be chosen, while if there is no planet rising near the () 
nor in the M.C., the ruler of the M.C. must be chosen if 
it is yp, 3, 9, or go. These rules are somewhat doubtful, 
however, and those given above should be followed. 


117 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


provided the rest of the map were in agreement. 
Note also that the houses correspond to the signs 
and rule the same matters, so that a planet in, 
say, the 6th house has a similar effect to one 
in m9. 

The matters ruled by the signs, and the effect 
of certain sign positions of the planets, are as 
follows :— 

Artes. Pioneer, soldier, short story writer, 
cattle dealer, groom, coachbuilder, veterinary 
surgeon. h here, ambition, difficulties in early 
life. 21, government work, military success. 3, 
work in connection with home. ), work in- 
volving secrecy, or plebeian. 

Taurus. Dealer in real estate, house agent, 
broker, dealer in woollen goods, singer, gardener, 
soap boiler. 2] religious, philanthropic or philo- 
sophical worker. 4, both gain and pleasure from 
work. ), succeeds to father’s business, work 
remunerative but secret or plebeian. 

Gemini. Writer, journalist, editor, teacher, 
schoolmaster, ‘surveyor, astronomer, astrologer, 
aviator, musician, conductor, or composer, clerk, 
Often double occupation. } common and public 
work, science, typing, shorthand, book-keeping, 
cashier. 2|, obscure, unprofitable, or unpopular 
work. g, better servant than master, gain by 
wits, cross examiner, detective. ©, ballooning, 
mountaineering, unprofitable scientific work. 

CANCER. Occupations in which liquid enters, 
sailor, publican, wine and spirit merchant, 
barmaid, caterer, washerwoman, occupations 
connected with the public. 2|, exalted position. 
6, medicine and surgery. ©, admiral, ship’s 
carpenter. 

Leo. Actor, artist, jockey, schoolmaster, mana- 


118 


OCCUPATION AND POSITION 


ger, coachman, butler. h, secret or government 
work, obstacles from superiors, 2|, government 
or church dignities, secret service, diplomacy, 
crime detection. g, works to end of life, govern- 
ment work, music, high army position. 9, help 
from women of position. §, author, if ¢ © 
jeweller. 

Virco. Secretary, accountant, stationer, prin- 
ter, schoolmaster, astrologer, chemist, confec- 
tioner, clothes dealer. If rising and § strong 
good physician but poor salary or bad debts. 
Bad for legal work. h, difficulties in early life, 
literary critic, proof reader, journalist, chemist. 
21, love of service, magistrate, tutor, guardian, 
secondhand dealer. 3, work abroad, ©, success 
in police force. 

Lisra. Valuer, assayer, bank clerk, designer, 
money changer, pawnbroker, linen draper. h, 
career affected by marriage, favours from supe- 
riors, trouble every 7 or 9g years. 6, refined 
occupations, trouble from competitors, warlike. 
$, subordinate position in law. )), work in partner- 
ship with someone older or younger, work affected 
by marriage, success in law. 

Scorpio. Naval man, soldier, chemist, oil and 
colour merchant, photographer, surgeon, brazier, 
founder, brewer, maltster. If rising denies success 
in the Roman Catholic church. 21, government 
or chemical work, entrusted with secrets, 6, 
peculiar or secret government work, sea voyages 
connected with work. 

Sacitrarius. Explorer, lawyer, clergyman, 
physician, dealer in cattle or horses. Inclines 
to double occupation. h, public service and 
welfare worker, independent worker. 2|, gain 
in common work but loss where social interests 


11g 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


are involved. , inactive in early life, occult 
work, unprofitable or risky occupation. jp, 
help from women. 

CAPRICORN. Political agent, diplomat, govern- 
ment official, dealer in wool or lead, farmer, 
farrier, chandler, victualler. UL, distributive 
work on large scale. 2, joy in duty, despot, 
delights in ruling inferiors. )) drawback or 
difficulty in work. 

AQuaRIUS. Electrician, aviator, scientist, com- 
pany promoter, painter, poet, ship’s carpenter. 
21, work in public institutions, gain in work 
dealing with liquids or air. d¢ good director, 
humanitarian interests. ©, politician, architect, 
painter, sculptor. 

Pisces. Imaginative writer, fishmonger, war- 
der or attendant in prison or hospital, brewer. 
Tends to double occupations. h, trouble with 
superiors. 2|, public companies or philanthropy. 
dS, mental occupation or one requiring uniform. 
2, hospital work. )), poet, sailor. 

The nature of the signs containing the majority 
of planets is also important and the following 
are the group influences of the triplicities and 
quadruplicities:— Five. Work in fire or metals. 
Soldier, surgeon, mechanic. Earth, Manual labour- 
agriculture, mining, farmer, corn dealer. Air. 
Intellectual work, literature, artist, lawyer, ma- 
thematician, draughtsman, designer. Water. 
Work with fluids, textiles, fabrics, painter, sailor, 
chemist, brewer, wine and spirit merchant, 
washer-woman, emotional actor. 

Cardinal. Pioneering work, diplomat, manager, 
director, retailer. Fixed. Plodding work, govern- 
ment or old established concerns, naval man, 
producer, manufacturer. Mutable. Better servant 


120 


OCCUPATION AND POSITION 


than master, agent, traveller, writer, clerk, 
speaker, importer. Work in public institutions, 
sometimes needing uniform. 

The influence of the planets upon the occupa- 
tion together with certain of their positions and 
aspects are as follows:— 

Sun. King, nobleman, courtier, manager, go- 
vernment worker, goldsmith, jeweller, gilder. In 
roth, occupation of power and trust, honour and 
success in middle age, help from superiors. 
Afflicting ), changes, trouble with superiors and 
in finding work. 

Moon. Sailor, traveller, fisherman, barmaid, 
servant, nurse, advertiser, caterer, washer-woman, 
midwife, work to do with water or the public. 
In roth, fluctuations and changes, and if afflicted 
by 3g, scandal ; if in good aspect to 2| or 9 and 
they in good aspect to the lord of Asc. or signi- 
ficator of profession gives great success. In 
vy, $l or =, fanatics, false religionists, enthu- 
siastic preachers. In, or} disfavour of superiors. 
Afflicted by # sudden changes. With J, butcher. 

MeERcuRY. Writer, editor, accountant, teacher, 
schoolmaster, interpreter, secretary, clerk, post- 
man, carrier, bookseller. In Asc. afflicted by 3 
or h and in no good aspect to 2] or 9, thief, or 
forger. In 4th afflicted, shoemaker. With I, 
musician. With h, geologist, mining engineer, 
bookbinder, printer, dyer, antiquarian. Afflicted 
by h, potter, turner, thief. With 2], painter, 
barrister, parish clerk; if in o, ambassador, 
merchant. With 4, sculptor, carver, quarryman, 
wrestler, strong man, footballer, etc., chef, 
steward, dairyman, scavenger, lavatory attendant. 
% above the earth inclines to oratory, but below, 
to science or art. 


I21I 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


Venus. Painter, poet, artist, maker of toilet 
accessories, dealer in scents, and flowers, em- 
broiderer, confectioner, milliner, dealer in women’s 
goods or luxury trades. In 9th, poet, especially 
if in o& or aspect to h, %, and ). With 21, 
haberdasher. With g, dyer, perfumer, barber, 
metal worker. With $R, singer, music master. 
With )), seamstress, engraver, upholsterer, glover. 
Afflicted by h and both weak, harlot. 

Mars. Soldier, surgeon, dentist, chemist, iron 
and steel worker, barber, cook, agitator. In 
2nd, unfortunate with merchandise. In roth, 
energy but no success except in martial work, 
slander. With h, miner, plasterer, bath or 
exhibition attendant ; if in bad aspect, sweep, 
bailiff, labourer. With 2], soldier, tobacconist, 
mechanic, tax collector, innkeeper. With ©, in 
nocturnal map, soldier. Separating from ©, 
shipwright, stonemason, carpenter, labourer. 

JUPITER. Judge, councillor, clergyman, lawyer, 
doctor, banker, trustee, clothier, grocer. If in 
nm, with ) in %, poet. With 2 and g, prison 
keeper, in charge of women. 

SaTurRN. Dealer in land and property, miner, 
coal merchant, plumber, architect, undertaker, 
jailer, grave digger, beggar, monk, antiquarian, 
labourer, worker in dark or heavy materials. 
In 7th loss through public affairs. In roth, 
rises high by industry but falls. With 9 or ¢ 
curate, undertaker, work connected with religious 
ceremonies. Afflicting § and 4, thief, and swind- 
ler, especially if )) also afflicts $; if h is in 7th 
may be hung, ifin 12th transported or imprisoned; 
if 3 also afflicts ), robber and assassin. 

Uranus. Government official, aviator, tra- 
veller, engineer, inventor, electrician, antiquarian, 


122 


OCCUPATION AND POSITION 


astrologer, hypnotist, engaged in uncommon 
work. In 7th, loss through public affairs. In roth, 
chequered career. 

Neptune. Sailor, medium, dealer in cotton, 
tobacco, drugs, tea, coffee. Occupations connec- 
ted with psychic or spiritual matters or in which 
water enters. In roth, scandal and treachery, 
sometimes adopts assumed name. 

The position of the ruler of the roth is impor- 
tant and its influence in each house is as follows: — 
In ist, authority over public. 2nd, wealth. 3rd, 
journeys in connection with work. 4th, land, 
property, mines, success at end of life. 5th, 
help through or work in connection with children. 
6th, poverty or service. 7th, help through 
marriage. 8th, by deaths. ogth, church, law, 
voyages, shipping, abroad. oth, honour and 
success, favours from superiors. 11th friends 
or companies. 12th loss, treachery, imprisonment. 


RANK AND POSITION. 


The rank and position depend upon the strength 
of the planets in the map, their house and sign 
positions, the condition of the roth house, and 
the number of planets attending the luminaries. 

Planets above the earth or in the eastern 
half of the map (i.e. in houses I0, II, 12, I, 2 
and 3) give ambition, and denote that the native 
will rise to a good position ; while if below the 
earth they tend to obscurity, and if in the western 
half of the map (i.e. in houses 4, 5, 6, 7, 8 and 9) 
they give a more altruistic nature, a greater 
dependence upon others, and a more fated life. 
It is frequently stated that if the majority of 
planets are below the earth there is no likelihood 


123 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


of fame, but this is entirely erroneous unless 
they are also weak in other ways. 

If the majority of planets are in cardinal 
signs or angles the native works his way into 
prominence usually early in life ; if in fixed signs 
and succeedent houses progress is slower but 
more stable ; and if in mutable signs or cadent 
houses the life is obscure, or passed in the service 
of others, and the native is frequently unstable 
or too versatile. Dignified planets increase the 
reputation or fame, but debilitated or retrograde 
ones cause obscurity and hindrances. Strong 
aspects, especially in cardinal signs and angles 
cause fame or notoriety but if the aspects are 
unfavourable there is at the same time much 
criticism and an unfavourable ending. 

21, 9, or the ©, if well aspected, in the Ioth 
raise the native above his birth position, and 
h and # have the same effect but in their case 
there is usually a corresponding fall or crash 
afterwards. The continuance of honour and 
rank depend upon the strength and positions— 
of the planets promising them. The house 
positions of these planets moreover, indicate the 
approximate age at which fame or notoriety may 
be expected, as already explained in connection 
with the significators of wealth, and the rank 
or position will be obtained through the people 
and things ruled by the planets promising them. 
Planets in the roth indicate the position attained 
in middle life, and those in the 4th that at the 
end of life. The condition at these periods may 
be judged by the nature and aspects of the planets 
concerned or of the rulers of these houses. The 
©, 21, or Q in the 4th promise success at the 
end of life, but § causes trouble and quarrels, 


124 


‘OCCUPATION AND POSITION 


h. loneliness and isolation, and J{ confinement 
in some institution. | 

Furthermore the 4th denotes the result of 
business activities and if afflicted indicates 
changes and unsatisfactory endings to all occu- 
pations. 

A satellitium or group of planets in any house 
or sign tends to bestow fame or notoriety the 
nature of which will depend upon the dispositor 
of the planets or the house in which the satel- 
litium occurs. If h, it will come from elderly 
people or Saturnian things or occupation; if 
2|, from professional people, etc., if g, through 
war or murder; if 9, through women; and if 
%, through intellect, writing or speaking. 

The following are the aphorisms relating to 
rank or position :— 

I. Y, $l, or @ rising, and lord of Asc. in roth 
causes the native to aim at things above his 
present station. 

2. Fortunate planets in gth make famous 
clergy or lawyers. The same is caused by benefics 
in trine to the lord of the oth. 

3. 9 and & in roth, in the houses of either 3 
or § give eminence in arts and sciences. 

4. Sruling Asc. and posited in roth gives dignity 
and power accompanied by injury and cruelty. 

5. © and 2| in roth give great honour and 
position, but they are lost if h or ¢ are in [J 
or £. In general h or ¢ afflicting the roth 
or its lord cause the native to be unexpectedly 
cast down. 

6. 2 in 11th, 8 in r2th © in Asc. 2| in 2nd, 
h in 6th, and ) in 9th cause so many and great 
accidents that the life may be justly esteemed 
prodigious. 


I25 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


7. pintothin%, fhord in o in 4th make 
the native incapable of honour. 

8. ) in m, in roth fd in 8 causes an un- 
fortunate life. 

9. Lord of Asc. between 15°-2- and 15° m causes 
trouble in business. 

1o. Lord of roth or © afflicted by ) or h 
causes misfortune. 

II. h on cusp of 4th, and lord of toth ¢ J in 
a fiery sign causes a catastrophe. 

12. The following positions are all indicative 
of honour and preferment:— (4) © in o with 
Qin Q), or with 2| in 4, or with diny. (0) ©, 
2|, and ¢ in trine to each other in fiery signs. 
(c) ©, ), and lord of roth all in trine. (d) © in 
95 in trine to 2| inX and )inm. (e) ) in 28° Q), 
2, in roth Ag, and Og Q. ()) o 2Ains 
in 10th. (g) Lord of Asc. rising in its own sign. 
(h) ) exactly rising in Y, or © exactly rising 
in §2, and unafflicted. (#) © in o° Y on M.C. 
(j) © & ) in oth. (k) ) in good aspect to lords 
of M.C. and Asc. 


126 


CHAPTER VIII 
PARENTS, RELATIVES AND HOME. 


Parents. The roth and 4th houses rule the 
parents, but it is not quite certain by which 
house a particular parent is ruled (see p. 30) 
The general significators are the © and fh for 
the father, and the )) and @ for the mother 
(according to some authors the © and @ by day, 
and the ) and fh by night), and it is usually 
advisable to base conclusions on the conditions 
of these planets. If well aspected or accom- 
panied (within 30°) by benefics a long and fortu- 
nate life is indicated, but afflictions to these 
significators or to planets in, or the rulers of, 
the roth and 4th denote trouble or death. If the 
significators are afflicted, debilitated, and not 
assisted by 2! or 2 the parents will be unfor- 
tunate, obscure, or humble. If h afflicts the © 
and both are weak and cadent, or g is elevated 
above and rising before them the father is full 
of infirmities, and if the aspect falls in other 
houses and especially in angles he may die. 3 
elevated above the © causes sudden death or 
injuries in the face and eyes, but if above h, 
bodily pains. The significators of the parents 
afflicting each other and afflicted by malefics 
often denotes trouble between the parents them- 
selves or their separation. If 2 is in conjunction 
with fh and either rules the 7th in a child’s map, 


127 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


there is some likelihood of its being illegitirnate, 
especially if Ue is also afflicting. Illegitimate 
children are said often to have the Asc. in aspect 
with the ) and not the significator of the father, 
further indications being the absence of aspect 
between the lords of the 4th and second and the 
); 2 joined with g or 8; and ) ¢ @ as a slight 
indication. The fortunes and length of life of 
the parents must be carefully estimated by 
balancing the indications. 

Brothers and Sisters. The 3rd house rules 
brothers, sisters, and contemporary relatives in 
general, and the brother or sister next younger 
than the native in particular. That one next 
older than the native is ruled by the 11th, the 
next above that by the gth, and so on, while 
the next but one below the native is ruled by 
the 5th, the next below again by the 4th, and 
so on. Planets in these houses or their rulers 
indicate the circumstances of the particular 
brother or sister. According to Ptolemy the M.C., 
t1th, ), and 2 must be considered for general 
indications of brethren, and their sex, conditions, 
and fortune judged by the planets aspecting the 
significators and the amount of affliction received. 
If the © is surrounded by strong malefics there 
will be few brethren, and if it is afflicted by h 
from the Asc. it is said to cause the death of the 
eldest brother from a lingering disease, but if 
the affliction is from ¢ all the brethren will die. 
If h and ¢ are in the Ist or 7th houses few 
brethren are likely. 

Other Relatives. The houses ruling other waa 
tives may be estimated by their relationship to 
the roth and 4th. Thus the 6th and 12th houses 
rule uncles and aunts, as they are the third from 


128 


PARENTS, RELATIVES AND HOME 


the 4th and roth respectively, one being on the 
father’s side and one being on the mother’s. 
Similarly the 7th house rules grandparents, the 
gth grandchildren, and so on. In the case of 
the planets 3, 9, and g rule contemporary male 
and female relatives, 2| rules uncles and aunts, 
and HI grandparents. 

Home. The 4th house rules the domestic life 
and the residence. Afflictions to planets here 
or the ruler show unhappiness and changes, 
while good aspects indicate the reverse. In 
choosing a residence it is necessary to consider 
the rising sign and that on the cusp of the 4th. 
The house should face towards that point of 
the compass ruled by the sign on the 4th (see 
Chap. xii). Cardinal signs on the angles denote 
corner houses and prominent or elevated posi- 
tions or on a cross road ; fixed signs denote houses 
in the middle of streets and low lying positions ; 
and mutable signs houses near the end of streets 
and flat and inconspicuous positions. The num- 
bet of the house should harmonise with the planet 
in or ruling the 4th, the planetary numbers 
being as follows:— ©, I and 4; ), 7 and 2; 
%,5and9;92,6and3;4,9and5; 21, 3 and 6; 
h, 8 and 4; m 13; and If 16. Where two 
numbers are given the first is positive and the 
second negative. Any number of several digits 
must be reduced to unit value by adding the 
digits together, thus 127 = 1+2-+7=10=I, 
i.e. positive ©. 

The effect of the signs and planets upon 
domestic matters is as follows :— 

ARIES. h, early troubles, death of uncles and 
aunts. ¢, trouble through parents. 9, feelings 
affected by father and his affairs. ), mother 


129 
Astrology I 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


plays an important and often unfortunate part 
in life. 

Taurus. h, loss of brethren, peculiar domestic 
experiences, death of father if in 8th or 12th. 
2|, sorrow through relatives. ©, fortunate for 
father. 9, strong domestic ties. ), friendly with 
relatives, more sisters than brothers, often sup- 
ports mother. 

GEMINI. 2|, eldest or foremost in family. 4, 
domestic sorrows. ©, cleverest or foremost in 
family, several brothers and sisters, help from 
relatives. 9, many relatives through marriage. 
y, frequent changes of residence, numerous breth- 
ren, often has step (or adopted) mother or rela- 
tives, resembles mother physically or mentally. 

Cancer. Attached to home and mother. ut 
close association with mother. HI, estrangement 
at home. h, domestic trouble, sometimes early 
loss of parents. §, domestic struggles and trouble, 
danger to mother. ©, attached to home and 
mother. 9, fond of home. ), fond of home, 
often lives near water. 

Lro. H, loss or trouble through father. 21, 
domestic success. ©, fortunate for father. Q, 
mysterious domestic arrangements at end of life. 
y, unfavourable for father. 

Virco. g, many poor relations. ©, unfortu- 
nate for father. 9, anxiety over relatives. )), 
unfavourable for mother. 

LisrRA. h, serious domestic troubles late in 
life. 2|, fortunate domestic conditions at end 
of life. g, many deaths at home. ©, strong 
affection for brethren. ), fortunate for mother. 

Scorpio. Often indicates a death in the family 
shortly before or after the native’s birth. h, 
inferior, poor, and jealous relatives. ©, death of 


130 


PARENTS, RELATIVES AND HOME 


or separation from the father. )), unfavourable 
for mother and her relatives. 

SaciTtTarius. If rising, early death of or sepa- 
ration from the father. h, trouble through 
father. 9, fond of service at home. ), frequent 
changes of residence, may have step or adopted 
parent. 

CAPRICORN. UL, trouble through family or 
father. I, early family discord, loss of or 
separation from father. 3, early death of breth- 
ren, survives relatives but does not gain from 
them. 9, little or no domestic happiness. ), 
death of or separation from parent, may be 
illegitimate or badly brought up. 

Aquarius. g, early death of brethren. ©, 
unfavourable for father. )), unfavourable for 
mother. 

Pisces. h, trouble through or danger to 
father. 2|, help from relatives. J, danger to 
female relatives, harm from family. ©, un- 
favourable for father, native foremost in family. 
9, honour amongst relatives. )), numerous breth- 
ren, native’s birth may bring trouble to the 
mother. 

Sun. In 4th good heredity. 

Moon. In 4th, many changes of residence, es- 
pecially late in life ; often indicates adoption or 
early separation from home. If afflicted, es- 
pecially in 4th or 8th, mother makes a bad reco- 
very from childbirth. 

Mercury. In 4th many changes of residence, 
worry over domestic matters. 

Venus. In 4th, fortunate and happy home 
life. In 3rd, help from relatives. 

Mars. In 4th, domestic quarrels, especially late 
in life, trouble with parents, danger of fires at 


131 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


home. If angular or succeedent and afflicting ) 
or 9, accidents and disease to mother. If afflic- 
ting oriental )), danger of injuries to or sudden 
death of mother, if )) is occidental she may die 
of miscarriage, childbirth, inflammation, or 
wounds. If afflicting 9, death of mother from 
fever or sudden illness. 

Jupiter. In 4th, happy homelife. 

Saturn. In 4th, unsatisfactory environment, 
if afflicted poverty. In 3rd, sorrow through rela- 
tives, few brethren. Afflicting oriental )), death 
of mother from disease, cold and fevers, if )) is 
occidental, womb affections or consumption. If 
slow, retrograde and cadent and afflicting ), 
accidents and disease to mother, but if both be 
swift and angular she will have a short and 
afflicted life. 

Uranus. In 4th, domestic trouble, estrange- 
ment or death of parent, peculiar disharmony. 
In 3rd, peculiar relatives. 

Neptune. In 4th, peculiar domestic condi- 
tions, residence in unfavourable psychic con- 
ditions, domestic secrets. In roth, danger to 
parents. In 3rd, peculiar relatives. 


132 


CHAPTER IX 
FRIENDS AND ENEMIES. 


Friends and acquaintances are ruled primarily 
by the 11th house, but the 7th is concerned with 
open friends, partners, and associates, and the 3rd 
with secret friends. Enemies, if open ones, are 
alsoruled by the 7th, but if secret by the 12th. 

I. For the general testimonies of friendship 
or enmity and the type of people concerned 
note the condition of the above houses and their 
rulers. Planets in the 11th denote the type of 
friends ; in the 4th home associates ; in the 7th 
business associates, acquaintances, and open 
enemies ; in the 12th secret enemies, and so on. 
The planet and sign in the house, or its ruler, 
will represent the appearance, character, and 
occupation of the friend or enemy. 

2. Any well aspected planet denotes a friend 
or friends among people represented by that 
planet and its sign and house position. Similarly 
an afflicted planet denotes enemies, and this 
is particularly true of planets afflicting the ruler 
of the Asc. and the luminaries. A native with 
a badly afflicted g will not be on good terms 
with natives of V or m even if these signs are 
not occupied in his map. Should they contain 
benefics, however, the experiences will be mixed 
and there would be a tendency for friends to 
fall away or become enemies since $ would dispose 


133 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


of the benefics and therefore to some extent 
rule the end of the matter. 

3. Much detail may be learnt about friends 
or enemies by calling the sign and house con- 
taining the significator that person’s first house, 
the next to it his second, and so on. Afflictions 
and good aspects to the significator should then 
be judged according to their house positions in 
relation to it. If the significator is in, say, the 
2nd house and is afflicted by h in the 7th (which 
is the 6th from the significator) he will probably 
be an invalid, and so on. ‘The actual house 
containing the significator denotes the conditions 
under which the person will be met, or the nature 
of the link between him and the native. 

4. The strength of the significators of enemies 
in relation to that of the ruler of the Asc. in- 
dicates whether enemies will be successful in 
harming the native or not. The stronger and 
more elevated the ruler the less the native has 
to fear. 

5. A Satellitium in any sign or house brings 
many acquaintances among people represented 
by the sign or house, but usually few friends. 

The following are the influences of the signs 
when rising or signifying friends or enemies, 
together with certain effects due to the planets 
when posited therein.— 

AriEs. Never sees faults in friends. Intellec- 
tual friends. h, 2| or Q, friends among relatives. 
2|, acquaintances through travel, gain from 
enemies. %, quarrelsome or assertive friends. 
), romance or adventures with friends. 

Taurus. Loyal but dominating friends, bitter 
and unrelenting enemies. Planets here denote 
friends in the domestic circle. , liable to 


134 


FRIENDS AND ENEMIES 


treachery, trouble from women, a few faithful 
friends. 2\, spiritually minded friends, often 
ungrateful. dg, famous or notorious friends, 
powerful opponents. §%, friends among women, 
dogmatic and faithful. 

GrMINI. May take advantage of friends. If 
rising gives enemies. Friends often clever, may 
be deceitful. , deceitful friends, treachery 
at home, jealous enemies. 2|, noble friends, 
religious enemies. , influenced by pleasure 
lovers. 9, clerical or legal friends. ), dual 
friendships. 

Cancer. Jealous and fickle, imperious, very 
devoted. If rising difficulty in making friends, 
especially when )) is weak and afflicted by 2. 
Planets here give friends among inferiors. h, 
sickness of friends, enemies affect honour. 2\, 
powerful but inconstant friends. 4, wounds 
from secret enemies. )), friends in the home, 
strange experiences. 

Leo. Warm hearted, generous, loyal, never 
see faults in friends. h, secret enmity from 
inferiors, treachery of servants, a few faithful 
friends among equals or superiors, friends become 
enemies. 2|, enemies become friends. 4, trouble 
through inferiors, powerful enemies. §&, noble 
friends. ), poetical and artistic friends. 

Virco. Discriminating in friendship, difficult 
to know, seek to know rich or distinguished 
people. Planets here often give sorrow through 
death of friends. h or 2I, occult or mystical 
friends; %, learned. ), peculiar friendships, 
attached to inferiors. 

Lipra. Popular, very just, fond of society, seek 
admiration. Artistic, scientific or philosophical 
friends, sometimes made abroad. h, sorrow 


135 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


through death of secret friend, strange expe- 
riences, open female enmity at 21, 35, and 42. 
9, sorrow through death of friends, danger from 
women but help from society ladies. ), vindictive 
female enemies. 

Scorpio. Magnetic, dominating, champion op- 
pressed, strong likes and dislikes, reverence 
for well known people. Treacherous friends. 
bh, elderly, ambitious, or secret friends, honour 
through them. 2], intrigues with superiors, 
treacherous friends, powerful and jealous enemies. 
©, mystical or doubtful friends who attack 
reputation, secret enemies among servants or 
near relations. ), secret attachments and tra- 
gedies. dg, dangerous enemies, but often over- 
comes them. 

SAGITTARIUS. Friendly and genial, very attrac- 
tive. If rising gives enemies. h, public friends, 
mental opponents. 6, refined intuitive friends, 
danger of secret and often undeserved scandal. 
©, in nocturnal map, danger from secret enemies. 
, powerful friends, strange enemies, enmity 
through women. 4%, friends showy and clever 
but shallow and ungrateful. ), loyal friends. 

CAPRICORN. Good friends, bitter enemies. h, 
treacherous friends or sorrow through them, 
influenced by inferiors. 2|, treacherous friends, 
involved in sorrows of friends which have caused 
their confinement. 4, difficulties through friends, 
dangerous secret enemies who affect honour. 
2, strange or doubtful friends, treachery. 4, 
crafty friends. )), deceived. 

Aguarius. Courteous, very attractive and 
magnetic, faithful. Faithful friends, often old, 
learned, or scientific. If rising gives enemies. 
h, faithful friends easily made, suffers passively 


136 


FRIENDS AND ENEMIES 


from others. <¢, social friends, meets violent 
people. Q friends made easily, often inferiors ; 
indirect gain through enemies. ©, enemies 
among nobles. 

Pisces. Attractive, changeable, crave sym- 
pathy. h, unfavourable ties, loss through 
friends, many enemies, danger from secret ones. 
21, generous to enemies ; enemies in high posi- 
tion who will not be harmful. 9, friends among 
weak or afflicted people, gain from friends, 
enemies through marriage or rivals. §%, many 
chance acquaintances, talkative and inquisitive 
friends. ), mediumistic friends. 

The general influences of the planets over 
friendship and enmity are as follows :— 

Sun. Friends among superiors. Some osten- 
tation. In 7th, powerful enemies. 

Moon. Large number of acquaintances, often 
among women, inferiors, or the public. Afflicted 
by h, false friends. In % or X, trouble from 
powerful or noble people, especially if afflicted 
by 2! or h, but if in good aspect to these denotes 
pretended friendship from such people. 

Mercury. Mental friends, young people, often 
deceitful. In 7th commercial rivals, slanderous. 

Venus. Friends among women and gain from 
them. Aspecting ), love of pleasure and po- 
pularity. 

Mars. Few real friends unless well aspected. 
Dominated by friends, and lose through their 
advice. If in a watery or airy sign friends 
become enemies. In 7th violent enemies. Af- 
flicted by I{{, trouble through peculiar people, 
dipsomaniacs, or by plots; by m, tragic friend- 
ships, legal troubles; by h, violence, deceit, 
injury ; by 2|, lawsuits and loss ; by ¥, scandal. 


137 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


Jupiter. Fortunate friendships. Aspecting 
If, mystical friends ; h, lasting attachments. 

SaTurN. A few elderly faithful friends, but 
ruin if afflicted. In 7th persistent enemies, 
deceitful opponents. 

Uranus. Peculiar sudden friendships and 
estrangements. Afflicting h, powerful enemies. 
In 7th public rivals. 

NeptuNE. Peculiar and unfavourable friend- 
ships, highly romantic or unique. In 7th, 
plotting and scheming enemies. 

The following are the aphorisms dealing with 
friendship and enmity:— 

Friends. 1. Ruler of Asc. in 12th causes solitary 
life. 

2. Ruler of Asc. in 11th or aspecting its lord 
gives many friends. 

3. Planets in 11th in good aspect to Asc., its 
ruler, ae or Bey give faithful friends. 

4252 dignified in 11th gives constant 
eminent frien s, but if debilitated, poor or un- 
fortunate friends. 

5. ©, ), ¥ and @ in r1th denote many faith- 
ful friends, but if afflicted few false and treache- 
rous ones. 

6. Lord of 11th separating from lord of Asc. 
denotes few friends and disagreements with 
them. 

7. Cardinal signs on 11th or its lord in a 
cardinal sign denote ambitious friends who may 
prove treacherous ; fixed signs, faithful friends; 
and mutable signs fickle and inconstant friends. 

8. Lord of Asc. in any sign in good aspect 
to lord of 11th in fixed sign gives faithful friends. 
The same occurs when ) is in good aspect to 
lord of 11th; if ) or lord of 11th is ina mutable 


138 


FRIENDS AND ENEMIES 


sign friends do not often fail the native, if in 
cardinal sign they promise more than they 
perform, but if badly aspected friends are few. 

g. Lord of roth separating by retrogradation 
from lord of Asc. or r1th, friends, if any, will be 
poor, and rich people will dislike the native. 

10. If the same sign occupies the cusps of the 
r1th and 12th there will be a tendency for friends 
to become enemies, and vice-versa. (This rule 
is a general one and applies to all cases. When 
such occurs the two houses blend and the matters 
ruled by them alternate or are associated.) 

Enemies. 1. Lord of Asc. in 12th, or planets 
afflicted there, gives many secret enemies. 

2. Lord of 2nd a malefic and in 12th afflicting 
lord of Asc. the native will be his own enemy, 
and will also be cheated in business. 

3. Significators of enemies afflicting the lu- 
minaries denote treacherous and secret enemies. 
If the significators be strong in an angle the 
enemies will be powerful ; if in a succeedent house 
not so powerful ; and if cadent poor people. 

4. Lord of 12th and 7th in conjunction in 7th 
the wife or husband will be the chief enemy. 

5. Lord of 12th combust, cadent, weak by 
sign, or afflicted by h, g, or ?§, the enemies 
will be few and unfortunate. 

6. Lord of Asc. in no aspect to lord of rath 
denotes few enemies. 

7. The following positions indicate that the 
native is able to overcome his enemies: (a) Lu- 
minaries or lord of Asc. in reception with ¢ in 
his houses or exaltation; (6) Lord of 12th in roth 
weak, or lord of roth in 12th; (c) g and 9 in 7th 
or 4th; (d) lord of Asc. aspecting lord of 1ath 
and disposing of it. (e) lord of r2th afflicted by 


139 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


malefics, especially in 6th, and 2] or 9 in 12th. 


COMPARISON OF HOROSCOPES. 


The likelihood of friendship or enmity between 
particular individuals is best judged by compar- 
ing their horoscopes and noting the aspects 
formed between planets in the one and those 
in the other. 

Draw two columns side by side on a sheet of 
paper and head them with the names of the 
natives. Take the © in one map and observe 
if it forms any conjunctions, parallels or aspects 
to the planets and angles in the other map. 
Write down the Sun’s symbol in the column of 
the native whose © it is, and the aspect and 
aspected planet in the other column. Having 
completed the aspects formed by the © do the 
same with the ), then §, then 9, and so on, 
finishing up with the Asc. and M.C. This gives 
in a convenient form all the aspects between the 
maps, and the amount of attraction and repulsion 
is to be judged by the nature and strength of 
these aspects and of the planets involved. 

The strongest sign of affinity is when the lu- 
minaries in the two maps are in conjunction or 
good aspect, as this indicates radical harmony. 
In cases of marriage the best possible link is 
when the © in the woman’s horoscope is in 
conjunction with or in good aspect to the ) 
in the man’s. If a malefic in one map falls on or 
afflicts one of the luminaries in the other there 
will be enmity, and the native whose luminary 
is so afflicted will be the one to suffer most. A 
benefic falling on a luminary is correspondingly 
favourable, and the owner of the luminary will 
be the one to receive most benefit. The relation- 


I40 


FRIENDS AND ENEMIES 


ship existing between the respective Ascendants 
is also important and a favourable aspect disposes 
to friendship. The greater the number of links 
that exist the stronger will be the tie for good 
or evil. 

In maps of opposite sexes the opposition 
aspect is frequently more complementary than 
evil, though something depends upon the planets 
concerned. @ in opposition to ¢ creates a strong 
sex attraction and is not necessarily unfavourable, 
but g in one map afflicting fh in the other by 
any aspect is extremely evil, and while often 
leading to warm attraction at first. if the sexes 
are opposite, gradually cools the ardour and 
culminates in coldness, hatred, or even violence. 
The same applies to ¢ afflicting H except that 
the effects are more sudden. 

The general effect of aspects from planets 
in one map to those in another is as follows:— 
Ue causes attraction through mysticism, music, 
psychism, or peculiar immorality, and gives an 
intense and subtle fascination; HI, romantic 
friendships, and those arising through occultism, 
antiquarianism, etc., if afflicting 9 it may cause 
seduction ; h aspecting 2| causes a link through 
inheritance, business, or agriculture; h and 4, 
quarrels, fraud, murder; h and Q, kindred, cool 
steady affection that will not last if aspect is 
unfavourable ; h and 8, partnership ; 2| and 3, 
politics, 2| and 9, women or clerical and legal 
matters ; 2| and % literature and science ; J and 9, 
sex, danger of seduction; ¢ and & fraud, rivalry 
in trade; 2 and %, correspondence, may be 
schoolfellows. 

To a much less extent the mundane positions 
in the respective horoscopes are important. 


I4I 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


Thus if the © is on the Asc. in one map, and the 
) on the Asc. in the other there will be an attract- 
ion even if no aspect occurs between them, as 
they hold equivalent mundane positions. The 
houses in a map in which the other person’s 
planets fall also produce some effect, and the 
benefics of one falling in the 11th of the other 
will produce friendship, in the roth, help in 
business, and so on. 

So far we have treated of the radical maps, 
but the same remarks apply to progressed po- 
sitions. Thus, 2 in one map progressing to a 
luminary in the other sets up a strong temporary 
attraction that will persist if the radical maps 
harmonise, but die if they are not in accord. 
The progressed )) brings acquaintances in this 
way and causes temporary association. The 
course of a friendship can easily be foretold by 
observing the aspects formed by the progressed 
planets across the maps, and it should be noted 
that parallels are of great importance. In cases 
of marriage it is often easier to determine the 
actual date of the event in this way than by 
directions in one horoscope alone, as it is usually 
marked by strong aspects between the maps. 


142 


CHAPTER X 
LOVE AND MARRIAGE. 


The 7th house rules marriage (or union whether 
legal or otherwise), and the wife or husband ; 
and the 5th love affairs apart from marriage. 
Planets in, or the rulers of, these houses denote 
the success or otherwise of love and marriage 
and describe the appearance and characteristics 
of the marriage partner or people to whom the 
native becomes attached. In addition to these 
the significators of love and marriage in a male 
horoscope are the )) and 9, and in a female one 
the ©, &, and ¢. 

Love affairs apart from marriage are to be 
judged chiefly from the 5th and 11th houses, 
their rulers, and aspects to the above signifi- 
cators. The rising sign and the sign and house 
position of the planets concerned will indicate 
the native’s attitude towards love affairs, their 
success, and the type of people to whom he is 
attracted. 

Marriage or the likelihood of union must be 
judged by the sign positions of the significators. 
(a) Male. In male horoscopes marriage is indi- 
cated if )) and @ are strong, especially in the 
“fruitful” signs 95, m, or X; if d aspects 9; 
if 9 and the ) are not afflicted by h; and if 
fruitful signs are on the Ist or 7th or the lords of 
these houses are in good aspect. The indications 


143 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


preventing or delaying marriage are )) and 9 
weak, afflicting each other, and afflicted by a 
strong h, especially when they are in the “‘bar- 
ren” signs ‘V, I, 1, m, or 3; )¢o Oms 
or =: and afflicted by h; and ) in m afflicted 
by h. (b) Female. This is judged similarly from 
the positions of ©, J, and 9. If these are strong, 
in fruitful signs, not afflicted by h or H, and 
the © is in aspect to g, marriage may be expect- 
ed. The indications denying or delaying it are 
& weak and in no aspect to ©; and O, 3g, or 9 
afflicted by h, H, and sometimes Jf, and weak 
or in barren signs. 

Time of Marriage. (a) Male. The general 
strength and positions of the significators must 
be carefully considered and the probable time of 
marriage estimated by balancing the indications. 
An early marriage is indicated if the )) is unafflic- 
ted in a fruitful sign ; }) or several planets between 
Ist and roth or 7th and 4th; ), increasing in 
light; or ) and 2 unaspected by h. These 
indications may sometimes also denote marriage 
to a very young partner. Delay is shown (or 
alternatively marriage to an older or elderly 
partner) when ) or 9 are afflicted by h; © and ) 
afflict each other ; significators in barren signs ; 
) between roth and 7th or rst and 4th, or de- 
creasing in light. (b) Female. Consider the sign 
positions and aspects of the © and g. If strong, 
unafflicted, and in fruitful signs, and also if 
the © is strong and between Ist and roth or 
7th and 4th an early marriage may be expected ; 
but if in barren signs, or afflicted by h or H, 
or if ¢ does not aspect ©, or if © is between 
roth and 7th or Ist and 4th, marriage is delayed, 
or in some cases the partner is elderly. 


144 


LOVE AND MARRIAGE 


Several marriages are denoted by the ) (or ©) 
in fruitful signs, or in 1 or ~ aspecting many 
planets; OU, 7, or X on 7th or containing 
several planets ; or lord of Asc. in 7th aspecting 
lord of 7th ing, 4, or %. In such cases there 
is often a malefic in the 7th or one afflicting the 
marriage significator denoting the death of the 
first partner. 

The partner is described by the planets to 
which the )) (or ©) next applies by strong aspect 
after birth, together with planets in the 7th or 
its lord; but any planet in strong aspect to 
the © or ) has some significance in the matter. 
It is generally considered that application should 
be as shown in the ephemeris and not as in 
directions, namely both bodies should be con- 
sidered as moving instead of one being fixed. 
The successive applications of the luminary con- 
cerned denote the various attachments formed, 
marriage occurring with that person whose signi- 
ficator is strongest. Application to retrograde 
planets usually denotes broken attachments, but 
sometimes separation from, or the death of, the 
partner, especially if the planet rules the 7th. 
The appearance and character of the partner are 
denoted by the sign containing the significator 
and the aspects to that planet, and the circum- 
stances or place of meeting by the house con- 
taining it. By calling the significator’s house 
that person’s first house and renumbering the 
houses accordingly a great amount of detail may 
be obtained. The happiness or otherwise of 
marriage must be judged from the nature of the 
significator and its aspects, and also in all cases 
by a comparison of the horoscopes of husband 
and wife. 


T45 


Astrology J 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


The fortunes after marriage are best determined 
by erecting a horoscope for the moment of 
marriage and treating it as a radical map, the 
first house representing the husband and_ the 
7th the wife. Directions formed in this horoscope 
(calculated exactly as in the case of a nativity 
by the rules given later) affect the married life 
and denote happenings that influence the union, 
while directions between this map and those 
of the husband and wife are also indicative of 
the course of domestic events. 

The following are the effects of the signs and 
of planets contained therein :— 

Aries. Intense love nature; too impulsive ; 
often unhappy marriage. h, jealous or older 
partner, poverty through marriage. 2!, ambi- 
tious partner. ¢, financial loss, difficulty in 
consummating union. Q, idealistic, changeable, 
demonstrative, secret or mental attachments, 
early marriage but may not marry, often unhappy 
if a woman. ©, gain through husband if a 
woman. ), mysterious affairs, wounds from 
women. 

Taurus. Extreme love nature ; lustful ; often 
Marries money ; often two marriages, the first 
early and hasty, and the second happy. h, love 
troubles, death of partner or financial trouble. 
2,, chaste and mystical partner, happy marriage. 
6, early love affairs, tragic or unfortunate 
marriage, ruled by partner, harm to or from 
women. Q, strong feelings, voluptuous, physical 
attractions. §, trouble through women. j), in- 
trigues, 

Gemini. Fickle; nonmoral; sex complications 
and dual love affairs ; fairly late marriage. h, 
marriage to foreigner or abroad. 2|, marries 


146 


LOVE AND MARRIAGE 


relative. 3g, several love affairs often at once, 
partner religious ora relative. 9, dual love affairs 
or marriage, peculiar intrigues necessitated by 
home life. )), peculiar marital relations. 

Cancer. Very sentimental ; rather fickle, but 
exact faithfulness from others ; rarely happy in 
marriage. h, grief through love, partner rises 
by industry. 2!, social success by marriage. 
6 scandal by marriage, discontented partner. 9, 
fickle, secret love affairs, marriage abroad or to 
a foreigner, or union while travelling, danger 
of separation or divorce. ©, unfavourable for 
marriage if a woman. 

Leo. Intense love nature ; very rarely happy 
marriage ; often marry for children. h, dis- 
regards pleasure, marries friend, sometimes two 
marriages. 2], marries influential or rich friend. 
6, secret alliances, ardent affections returned by 
partner. ©, often unhappy marriage. 9, ardent, 
jealous, marries friend, sometimes believes in 
free love. 

Virco. Inclined to be sentimental and roman- 
tic ; critical ; very self-controlled ; undemonstra- 
tive; dutiful; usually chaste. h, romantic 
courtship, trouble from or disinclined to marriage, 
happier if partner is older, sometimes two 
marriages. 2|, secret love affairs, peculiar mar- 
riage, sometimes to inferior. 3g, peculiar ties, 
secret love affairs with inferiors, led astray, 
unhappy ; may marry soldier if a woman. 9, 
intrigues with inferiors, illicit love, tragedy, 
secret and obscure marriage ; if afflicted by h, 
immorality. ), secret sorrows in marriage. 

Lipra. Fond of pleasure; always desire ad- 
miration and attention ; often selfish and shallow; 
often unhappy marriage. h, separation, es- 


147 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


pecially if 2 is afflicted. 2|, happy marriage. 
3, responsibility by marriage. ©, danger of 
separation. 9, pure, fiery passions, love affairs 
with relatives, responsibility and financial sa- 
crifice through marriage. ), secret love affairs. 

Scorpio. Intense sex nature ; seek admiration ; 
critical and nagging; jealous; often marry money ; 
secret love affairs; often two marriages. h, 
passionate, secret and sad love affairs. 2, 
injury in love, jealousy, gain by marriage but 
often unhappy. 4, struggles, gain by marriage, 
unhappy partner ; if in 6th, 8th or 12th violence 
to or from women unless the benefics prevent. 
Q, jealous, marries widow or widower, risky love 
affairs, may be frail or betrayed if a woman. 
©, danger of separation. 

SaciTTarius. Impulsive ; affectionate ; often 
unhappy but usually conceal it; often two 
marriages. h, danger of separation. 21, two 
love affairs or marriages, one to a relative. ¢ 
mental improvement and gain by marriage. 9, 
mental improvement, marries relative, more than 
one marriage and early widowhood. ), happy 
matriage. 

Capricorn. Deep love nature ; undemonstra- 
tive ; often lustful. h, entanglement with in- 
feriors, opposed to marriage or unhappy. 21, 
parents concerned in marriage, unsatisfactory. 
6, early entanglement with inferior, social gain 
and changes by marriage. 9, ambitious, in- 
trigues with inferiors, disappointments, marriage 
of convenience, cold partner, adultery. ), in- 
constant and unfortunate marriage. ©, bad 
for marriage and husband’s health if a woman. 

Aquarius. Very idealistic; easily led; usually 
faithful but may be the reverse. h, faithful, 


148 


LOVE AND MARRIAGE 


romantic and lasting tie, good marriage. 2}, 
love marriage, partner older than native. 2, 
good and faithful marriage. 9, chaste, often 
long courtship and late love marriage. 

Pisces. Affectionate ; fickle; inclined to be 
wanton. h, unfavourable ties, beginning roman- 
tically and ending tragically, ailing partner, 
unhappy marriage, trouble through servants 
after marriage. 2|, marries inferior, often two 
marriages, danger of scandal. 4, passionate, un- 
happy, two attachments, disappointing love 
affairs, delay in marriage, separation. ©, rich 
but unhappy marriage. 9, discriminating in 
love affairs, early marriage ; if o& ) afflicted by 
h, fickle, separation or divorce. ), adultery. 

The following are the influences of the planets:- 

Sun. Proud and honourable or vain and 
domineering partner ; marries in middle life. In 
good aspect to ), happy. If afflicting ), un- 
happiness. 

Moon. Fickle love affairs; intrigues; early 
marriage ; partner fond of change and travel. 
If afflicted unfortunate in choice. In 4th wife 
dies first. In 7th marries between 24 and 28; 
if afflicted tragedy. In 12th indiscreet in love 
affairs. Afflicted by #, cruelty to or from women; 
by h, slovenly wife; by 9, untidy wife. If 
& 2| or 9, bereavement. If separating from ¢ 
and applying to 9 in western half of the map, 
several wives. If o¢ @ and h in 12th, death 
of wife and difficulty in obtaining one. 

Mercury. Clever and quick witted or busy- 
body and malicious partner ; wrangling if afflic- 
ted ; anxiety over love affairs ; marriage through 
correspondence or journeys; partner younger 
or a cousin. If afflicted, especially in 5th, 


149 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


scandal. In 7th afflicted by § or m denotes 
partner with nerve disorders or unsound mind. 
If with 2 in 4th afflicted by ¢ denotes evil 
conduct. 

Venus. Attractive, pleasant and affable or 
bold, arrogant, and wasteful partner; happy 
love affairs. Afflicted by HL, very romantic 
attachments or sudden separations; by h, sor- 
row in. love; by 4, impulsive and extravagant 
love affairs. If in Asc. with h in signs ruled by 
either planet, dishonourable or aged wife. In 
2nd, marries for money. In 4th, afflicting ) 
in %, inconstant wife. In 6th, marries servant. 
In 7th unafflicted, good house wife ; and if in 
good aspect to h, 2|, or %, provident, attached 
to home, late marriage, fond of harlots. li¢ 
© in 7th, wife is a stranger. Ruling gth and 
placed in 1st or roth, foreign wife. In 12th 
secret or obscure love affairs, early marriage 
but separation later, especially if afflicted by h 
or H1; particularly bad if 9 is in Y, 95, m, or 
~%- If oriental, dignified, and aspecting Jupiter, 
wife will rule. If o h and afflicted by g, much 
jealousy and strife. If afflicted in $2, woman- 
hater. 

Mars. Cordial, honest, and forceful or com- 
bative, vicious and violent partner. Quarrels or 
violence if afflicted. Afflicted by H, foolish. 
infatuation; by 2], unrestrained feelings. In 
5th delays marriage if a woman. In 7th or 8th 
afflicted by 2|, ruin through extravagant wife. 
If in 95, m or X afflicting ) (or ©), the wife 
(or husband) may drink. 

JUPITER. Successful love affairs; honest, 
faithful, religious partner, often older than native. 
Ifin 5th or 7th in a woman’s map often 


150 


LOVE AND MARRIAGE 


denotes attachment to a widower. If afflicted 
in 3 on cusp of 7th or just below and receiving 
the application of the ©, denotes an adulterous 
husband in a woman’s map. 

SATuRN. Elderly, discreet, prudent, perseve- 
ring and industrious or lazy and envious partner; 
delay and disappointment ; steady and enduring 
love. In 7th in good aspect to )) (or ©), marries 
widow (or widower) who will have a family 
if g aspects h, and will be wealthy if h is 
dignified and in good aspect to 2|. In 12th 
afflicting luminaries, sorrow through death of 
loved ones. Afflicting g or Qin 5th, danger of 
unnatural affections. With or afflicting 9 in his 
own dignities, vicious and sordid partner. 

Uranus. Romantic attachments; hasty en- 
gagement and marriage; danger of separation, 
particularly if afflicted in 7th. Afflicted by 3 
violence. Afflicting 9, intrigues with girls; 
sometimes homo-sexual or other positive sex 
perversions, especially if in or from Y or Z%, 
§ being also afflicted. Afflicting ), intrigues 
with married women ; afflictions from g or §% 
cause scandal, but 2| or h keep the matter 
secret. Afflicting © ina woman’s map, elopement 
or seduction, especially if g also afflicts ) or 
©; often denies marriage entirely. 

Neptune. Peculiar union, platonic or reverse ; 
seduction; crippled, drug taking, or musical 
partner. If afflicting ) or 9, especially if in or 
from negative signs, causes negative sex perver- 
sions. In 7th gives intense desire for marriage 
but may prevent it or make it unsatisfactory. 

The following are the aphorisms dealing with 
love and marriage:— 

Love Affairs. 1. Significators of marriage or 


151 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


© in cardinal signs, especially if 9 or )) are in o 
or % cause inconstancy in love and marriage. 

2. 2 badly placed and afflicted by g causes 
much trouble in love especially if a woman. 

3. ) in a nocturnal map separating from ¢ and 
applying toh denotes many\troubles from women 

4. 9 in Asc. afflicted by g or h or both gives 
sensuality, dissipation, scandal and _ ill-fame, 
especially if the malefics occupy the roth. 

5. 8, =, or m rising, and ¢ afflicting, causes 
the native to do harm to women. 

6. g or 9 in an angle in 95 or % and afflicting 
the )) gives vicious inclinations. 

7. fh elevated above and in square to 2 makes 
the native shameless and a woman hater, but 
if 2 be elevated above f he is a great friend to 
women. 

8 ) inm 0 fh in Q, or £ bh in rarely 
gives either wife or children. If h be in = the 
native will be a woman hater. 

g. 8, &, or ® ascending with ¢ therein in a 
woman’s map leads to immodesty. 

10. 6 ¢ © ina woman’s map causes intrigues 
with inferiors, but if 9 be well aspected, with 
equals or superiors. 

11. Malefics aspecting each other and afflict- 
ing Q and 2! caused secret indecency in men, 
but if gj and @ alone they will be licentious. 

I2. ¢ separating from 2 and h, and in good 
aspect to 2| causes men to be decorous in sex 
matters, but if J aspects h alone they will be 
dull and careless. 

13. ) & h or afflicted by it causes men to 
be of solitary habits and to lead single lives. A 


combust planet or the © in y greatly afflicted 
has the same effect on women. 


152 


LOVE AND MARRIAGE 


14. Lord of 5th afflicted in 12th causes secret 
love affairs or self-abuse. 

15. 2 with h and aspecting lord of Asc. 
causes the native to be attracted to old, ugly 
or dirty women, or to be sexually perverted. 

Marriage. 1. hf S from ist and 7th, or h 
alone near 7th, or 2 in ¢)2 or m unaspected by 
6, or d in ¥, my, or % in 7th whether aspecting ? 
or not, give great difficulty in obtaining a partner, 
and finally a hasty marriage, though the native is 
often lascivious. 

2. h lord of 7th often delays marriage to 
middle life. Barren signs on cusps of 1st and 5th 
delay marriage and deny children. If, however, 
2 or 2| be in Asc. in good aspect to ), an early 
marriage is likely. 

Type of Partner. 1. 2, in good aspect to ) 
and in reception denotes a wealthy and well 
born wife, especially if 2! be in 7th or 8th. 

2. Lord of 7th in 8th if a benefic denotes a 
rich marriage partner or one born to ample 
inheritance. 

3. 2 afflicted in 6th denotes a poor wife unless 
) be well aspected by 2], or 2| be unafflicted in 
7th. 

4. Lord of 7th in 12th afflicted by h denotes 
an immodest partner. 

5. d6£ 2 from 6th and 12th denotes an in- 
constant and vicious partner especially if one of 
these planets is the ruler of 7th. 

6. Part of Marriage afflicted by malefics or ?§ 
denotes a partner of evil life or diseased. (The 
Part of Marriage for both sexes is found by adding 
the longitude of the Asc. to the longitude of 
the 7th cusp and from the sum subtracting the 
longitude of 9). 


153 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


7. 9o¢ Bin 4th, or ino or my, and h in roth 
denotes a low wife, and if also aspecting g she 
will be evil. If in 9 or %, a harlot. 

8. ) decreasing in light and o g in cardinal 
signs indicates that the wife loves another man. 

g. ) in man’s map or © in woman’s afflicted 
by ¢ denotes a headstrong and wilful partner. 

ro. ¢ ruling Asc. in woman’s map with @ 
in it, or 9 ruling Asc. with ¢ in it or ¢ ruling 
Asc. and in M.C. causes her to be unfaithful 
in marriage. 

Ir. ¢ in mutual reception with 9, h and ¢ 
indicates marriage between persons of same age ; 
if in Ist or roth with an older relative. 

Agreement. 1. § and §& afflicting lord of 7th 
and elevated above it causes the native to kill 
his wife, partner or enemy, especially if either 
has power in the Asc. 

2. 2| in 7th no matter how strong, afflicted 
by malefics denotes strife in marriage. 

3. In a man’s map @ afflicting )}) denotes 
trouble in marriage. If 2 be in 12th ¢o ¢ he 
will be cruel to his wife. 

4. If in a man’s map the Part of Marriage falls - 
in the obedient signs - to , and in a woman’s 
in the commanding signs VY to mp, the woman 
will rule the man. 

5. In a woman’s map lord of 7th in Asc. indi- 
cates that she will domineer over her husband. 

Death of Partner. 1. Q rising after ©, weak 
and afflicted, indicates a short lived wife. 

_ 2, ))in a man’s map or © in a woman’s apply- 
ing first to 2| and then to m denotes death of 
marriage partner, especially if HI or h occupy 7th. 


154 


CHAPTER XI 
CHILDREN. 


The 5th house rules the children of the native 
and the 11th those of the marriage partner 
since it is the fifth house from the 7th. Accord- 
din to Ptolemy if these houses are unoccupied 
and unaspected the roth and 4th are to be con- 
sidered, but this rule is usually ignored. The 
) and planets in these houses or their rulers and 
the signs concerned indicate whether the native 
is prolific or the reverse, the sex of the children, 
and their disposition and fate. 

The nature of the signs is as follows:— 95, m 
and #, are very fruitful signs and give a large 
family; m and are often fruitful also and 
disposed to the birth of twins ; y, ny, 2, and =, 
are only moderately fruitful and give few children; 
Vv, §¥, and % are barren or give only a very 
small family. The nature of the signs on the 
Ascendant and 5th or containing planets there, 
and those occupied by the ruler of the 5th and 
the )) indicate whether a large or small family is 
likely. Afflictions to these planets from the 
malefics limit the family and denote death of 
children in infancy, especially if the malefics 
occupy the 5th or 11th or rule those houses. If 
the malefics occupy fruitful signs in the 5th or 
rith children will be born but will die early, 
but if well aspected by 2| or 2 the children will 


155 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


be reared after much difficulty. The strength 
of the afflictions and the nature of the signs 
will determine whether children are denied 
or whether they will merely be very sickly. It 
is necessary also to balance the testimonies of 
of the 5th and 11th houses, as if they contradict 
some of the children will die in infancy. 

The sex of the children is to be judged by the 
signs and planets signifying them. The even 
signs and houses are female, and the odd signs 
and houses male, while ), 9, and are female 
and ©, 6, 2|, h and H are male, $ being indif- 
ferent and taking the nature of that planet in 
strongest aspect to it. The predominance of 
male or female indications will determine the 
sex. According to some writers the 5th house 
in a male horoscope rules the first child, the 7th 
rules the second, the gth the third and so on, while 
in a female map the first child is ruled by the 
4th, the second by the 6th, the third by the 8th, 
and so on. The condition of the house concerned 
will denote the sex, disposition and fate of the 
child it represents. In all cases it is necessary 
to examine the horoscopes of both husband and 
wife and balance the indications so obtained as 
one map may contradict the other. 

Twins. If the planets denoting children in a 
fruitful map are placed in the double signs m, 
%, and 3 or are in a fruitful sign and strongly 
aspected from double signs there is likelihood 
of twin or multiple births. The same may also 
occur if the map is very strongly fruitful and all 
the significators are in fruitful signs. According 
to Ptolemy sex is chiefly to be judged from the 
signs containing the Asc., the luminaries and 
their dispositors. When the majority of these 


156 


CHILDREN 


are in double signs twins will be born, and when 
all are so placed and most of the other planets 
similarly situated the birth will be triple, or 
even more in extreme cases and when the signi- 
ficators are in angles especially in the M.C. h, 
2|, and g in masculine and double signs and 
aspecting the Asc., luminaries, or their dispositors 
in fruitful signs are said to cause the birth of three 
males ; 9, ), and ¥ so placed and in feminine 
sign, three females; fh, 2| and 9, two males and 
one female; and 9, )) and g, two females and one 
male. In most cases, however, the children are 
born with some defect or deformity. 

The influence of planets in the various signs 
is as follows ;— 

Arigs. 2| gain through children. © slightly 
favourable for birth of sons. 

TAURUS. h, anxiety through children. 21, 
position obtained through care of children. 4, 
strange experiences through them. 6, children 
gain through parents. 

GEMINI. h, no children or few and sickly in 
infancy, sorrow through them. ©, favours 


_birth of twins, children gain through parents. 


Q, likelihood of twins in female map. 

CANCER. h, sorrow through children. gd, 
unfortunate children. ©, children sickly or 
do not prosper if afflicted. 2 or), large family. 

Leo. Passionately fond of children. ©, fa- 
vours birth of son but danger of trouble to him 
if afflicted. 

Virco. Not fond of children but very dutiful 
to them. 2|, fine children. : 

Lisra. 2|, good children. g, many and in- 
telligent. 

Scorpio. 2|, notoriety through children, pre- 


157 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


mature loss of first child. ©, death of son. 
Q, death of or trouble through children. ), many 
children but death or sorrow through one ; 
danger of sterility, miscarriage, or death in 
childbirth, especially if afflicted and in a diurnal 
map. 

SFO agi bes bh, fortunate children. ©, pre- 
mature loss of children. 9, affectionate children 
who gain social success. )), many children. 

CAPRICORN. h, suffer through selfish children. 
2|, troubles in birth or rearing of children. 4g, 
sickly children. ©, illhealth or death of son. 
©, danger of sterility in female map. 

AQUARIUS. ©, favours birth of sons but 
causes trouble with one. @, premature loss of 
children. 

PiscEs. h, separation from children or sickly 
ones. <4, denies children or gives early death 
of one. ©, death of eldest child or unfortunate 
children. 9, healthy and fine children. 

The influence of the planets is as follows:— 

Sun. In 5th denies children or gives trouble 
at their birth. If well aspected gain through 
them . 

Moon. In 5th famous or notorious children, 
life bound up with children ; if afflicted from 8th 
or 12th death of children. With 9 in fruitful 
signs in 5th, many healthy children. In vy, Qu 
or % afflicted by © or malefics, barrenness. 

Mercury. In 5th fatalistic affair with, or 
worry over children. In Asc. £ h in 7th causes 
children to live with native only a short time. 
If occidental and well aspected by benefics gives 
many children, but if oriental and afflicted by 
malefics causes barrenness. 

Venus. In 5th artistic or musical children. 


158 


CHILDREN 


In Asc. and 2| in 7th gives fortunate children. 
In Ist or 7th afflicted by } causes barrenness 
in both sexes, miscarriage, or death of children 
at birth. 

Mars. In 5th, denies children or causes trouble 
at their birth, often kills one of them, gives bold 
and refractory children. If £ 2| or @ destroys 
the children. 

Jupiter. In 5th, good and dutiful children. 
Ruling 5th and {pf kills most of the children. 

SATURN. In 5th, stubborn children and trouble 
through them. Afflicted by g or 9, lack of 
sympathy. If £ 2! or 9, destroys some of the 
children or denies issue. 

Uranus. In 5th, eccentric children, separation 
from children, and anxiety and scandal. Mis- 
carriage. 

NEPTUNE. In 5th, great desire for children 
but often sterile. Peculiar or afflicted, or adopted 
or illegitimate children. 

The influence of the house positions of the 
tuler of the 5th is as follows:— In Ist, many 
good children. 2nd, dutiful ones. 3rd, children 
gain from friends. 4th, children obtain inheri- 
tances, but if afflicted will suffer and some will 
die in prison. 5th, prosperous and honoured 
children. 6th, children will have few serious 
illnesses and will assist their father, or he will 
gain through them. 7th, children side with 
marriage partner against native and cause in- 
jury. 8th, children obtain money through deaths; 
if afflicted few children or they die before the 
native, especially if the lords of 5th and 8th 
afflict each other. 9th, religious and pleasure 
loving children. oth, sickly but may be emi- 
nent. 11th, trouble to children through enemies 


159 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


and quarrels. 12th, few, troublesome, or hateful 
children. 

The following are the aphorisms dealing with 
children:— 

Fruitfulness. 1. })) and 8 in 5th and their dispo- 
sitors unafflicted give many children. 

2. 21, 2, or ) in 5th in fruitful signs give many 
children. If }) is in good aspect to 2l or Q the 
number is increased. 7 

3. 21, 9, or QQ in 5th indicates happiness and 
fortune through children who will gain honour 
and dignity. 

4. 2| A ) in human or watery signs, or ) 
and 2 with 2| in an angle denote many children 
who become prosperous. 

Barrenness. I. h in5thand© [J 2} denies issue. 

2. ©, h, or o ruling Ist, 5th, and 11th, with- 
out good aspects from benefics, or if posited 
in 5th, deny issue. 

3. © with h and % in 5th or 11th aspecting ) 
denies issue or causes children to die soon after 
birth. 

4. The greatest testimony of barrenness is 
when lords of 5th and rst are combust or retro- 
grade especially if malefics, and: )) is weak and 
afflicted also. 

Sickness or Death. 1. h o @ and afflicting 
) in 5th denotes little comfort from children, and 
much sickness amongst them. 

2. ) in 5th gives children, but ill-conditioned 
ones if h, g, or 7§ are there. 

3. Lord of 5th afflicted by malefics or by 
lord of 12th (eighth from fifth) indicates that the 
the children live but a short time. 

4. ©, kh, and ¥ in conjunction in M.C. afflict- 
ing )) causes death of children. 


160 


CHILDREN 


5. h and ¢ in 5th or r1th or in opposition 
from those houses causes death of children, 
and if © rules, or is exalted in, 5th and is afflict- 
ed by h or g no children are left alive, 


161 
Astrology K 


CHAPTER XII 


TRAVEL. 


The 3rd house rules short journeys such as 
can be completed in a day, and the goth long 
journeys and voyages. Planets in, or the rulers 
of, these houses denote the probability and suc- 
cess of journeys and the countries to visit or 
avoid. In addition, attention should be paid to 
the ©, ), %, and g which are general signifi- 
cators of travel. 

If the significators or majority of planets are in 
cardinal or mutable signs, or angular or cadent 
houses, many journeys will be made, but if in 
fixed signs or succeedent houses the native will 
tend to remain in one place, especially if h is 
strong. Watery signs, or Jf or 2| strong, indi- 
cate voyages especially if the 9th house is pro- 
minent. The house positions of the significa- 
tors denote the cause or reason of travel and their 
aspects indicate gain or loss. Afflictions to the 
significators of travel denote the nature of any 
dangers encountered. Afflictions from fiery signs 
indicate accidents, burns, fevers, etc. ; earthy 
signs, famine, falls, foundering, grounding ; airy 
signs, falls and tempests; and watery signs, 
floods, wrecks, drowning, or being left in desolate 
places. Cardinal signs indicate privation or 
sickness ; fixed signs, falls or tempests ; and mu- 


162 


TRAVEL 


table signs, attacks from pirates or savages or if 
%, from wild beasts. 

If the 3rd and 4th houses, or their rulers, 
are stronger and more favourable than the gth 
and roth it is inadvisable to reside abroad and 
the native should remain in his birthplace, but 
if the 4th is unfavourable it is better to remove. 
In the selection of a place choose those countries 
tuled by the signs containing the benefics if 
they are favourable, but if not then choose those 
of the best aspected planets especially if in good 
aspect to the luminaries.. The countries and 
points of the compass ruled by the signs are 
given below. In the case of short journeys the 
direction in which to travel is often better in- 
dicated by the house, and the points of the com- 
pass ruled by the houses are as follows :— 1. E. 
2. ENE. 3. NNE. 4. N. 5. NNW. 6. WNW. 
7 W. 8. WSW. 9. SSW. ro. S. 11. SSE. 12. ESE. 
The nearer the house is to the 4th the nearer is 
the place to be chosen, the 3rd and 5th showing 
places quite near and the roth the antipodes. 

Some authors recommend altering the radical 
(and progressed) map to the longitude of the 
place of residence when abroad. This is done by 
taking the G.M.T. of birth as fixed and erecting 
the map for the corresponding L.M.T. of the place 
of residence. The new house positions of the 
planets indicate the prospect of success in that 
place. A further key to the chances of success 
in any place lies in a comparison between the 
native’s map and one for the place. The town 
map should be erected for the foundation of 
the town or for the date on which a charter was 
given, the time being rectified by events or taken 
roughly for noon. 


163 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


The points of the compass and countries 
ruled by the signs, and the effects of planets 
in signs are as follows :— 

Aries. E. England, Germany (parts), Den- 
mark, Palestine, Syria, Burgundy, Lesser Poland. 
bh, few and dangerous journeys. 2|, gain by 
voyages. ©, fond of travel and exploration, 
voyages on missions with or for influential 
people. @, pleasure from travel. %, danger of 
exile. 

Taurus. S by E. Ireland, Persia, Poland, 
Grecian Archipelago, Asia Minor, Caucasus, 
Cyprus, White Russia, Georgia. 2|, voyages 
affect health. ©, fond of travel. 9, sickness 
in travel. 

Gemini. W by S. Belgium, Flanders, Wales, 
West of England, Lombardy, Brabant, Sardinia, 
Armenia, Tripoli, Lower Egypt, N. E. Africa, 
United States of America. 4, unfortunate jour- 
neys. ©, fond of short journeys. 9, travel for 
pleasure. &, fond of travel. )), many short jour- 
neys. 

Cancer. N. Scotland, Holland, Germany 
(parts), Prussia, Mauritius, N and W. Africa, 
Paraguay, China (parts), Zealand. h, troubles 
in travel and residence. 2|, safe voyages. 4, 
journeys on business. ©, much travel but danger 
by water. §, much travel by water. ), un- 
profitable voyages. 

Leo. E by N. France, Italy, Alps, N. Rou- 
mania, Apulia, Bohemia, Sicily, Chaldea to Bas- 
sorah, ancient Phoenicia near Tyre and Sidon, 
Australia (parts). ¢, danger of exile. 

Virco. S by W. Turkey, Switzerland, Assyria, 
Mesopotamia, Croatia, Silesia, Crete, Babylonia, 
Morea, Thessaly, Greece (parts), Kurdestan, W. 


164 


TRAVEL 


Indies, Lavadia, Virginia, Brazil. 2|, foreign 
travel on business. <4, business abroad. Q, 
foreign travel on business or to safeguard repu- 
tation. ), many short journeys often for peculiar 
reasons. 

Lispra. W. Austria, Japan, N and Indo-China, 
Tibet, Caspian, Savoy, Upper Egypt, Livonia, 
Argentina, Burma 2], lasting friendships abroad. 
©, short journeys by land, fond of travel and 
of the country )), journeys to avoid legal pro- 
ceedings. 

Scorpio. N by E. Algeria, Barbary, Judea, 
Cappadocia, Morocco, N. Syria, Catalonia, Bava- 
ria, Jutland, Norway, Transvaal, Queensland. 
h, unpleasant voyages, residence abroad. 2I, 
long voyages and strange adventures. 4g, un- 
fortunate journeys. © or )), danger in travel. 
9, romance on voyages. %, danger of exile. 

SAGITTARIUS. Eby S. Spain, parts of France 
near C. Finisterre, Provence, Tuscany, Madagas- 
car, Hungary, Istria, Moravia, Sclavonia, Dal- 
matia, Arabia, Australia (parts). g, fond of 
travel. ©, travels and voyages. 9, marriage 
union while travelling. )), travel, changes and 
voyages. 

Capricorn. S. India, Punjaub, Afghanistan, 
parts of Persia near Korassan, Circan, and 
Maraccan, Greece, Thrace, Macedonia, Morea, 
Illyria, Balkan States, Hesse, S. W. Saxony, 
Styria, Romandiola, Mecklenburg, Lithuania, 
Mexico, Orkneys. 9, gain or allowances from 
abroad. 

Aguarius. W by N. Arabia, Abyssinia, Cir- 
cassia, Tartary, Lithuania, Westphalia, Wal- 
lachia, Piedmont, Prussia (parts), Poland (parts), 
Red Russia, Sweden. 3, danger on voyages. 


165 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


Pisces. N by W. Portugal, Galicia, Calabria, 
Normandy, Nubia, Sahara. 9, travel for business. 
y, travel by water. 

The influence of the planets is as follows :— 

Sun. If in gth influential position abroad. 

Moon. In oth fond of travel. Aspecting # 
and either in angles or 3rd and oth, sudden 
changes and removals. Rising or in M. GC. in © 
or ~, fond of travel and long voyages. In UH, 
#, or 3, frequent and usually sudden changes, 
if in 3€, advantageous. In 5th in good aspect 
to 2| or 4, either ruling gth, pleasure in travel. 

Mercury. Many short journeys often on 
business, mental benefit through travel. If ¢ ), 
in reception, or both in ist, 3rd or oth, many 
long journeys. If afflicting significators, danger 
of piracy, imprisonment or poison. 

Venus. In goth, travel for pleasure, fond of 
yachting and boating. If afflicted unpleasant 
journeys. 

Mars. Impulsive and dangerous journeys. If 
aspecting luminaries often gives changes. If 
descending, especially in gth and afflicting lumi- 
naries causes tramping or itinerating. 

Jupiter. Travel and residence abroad, finan- 
cial success. Afflicted by $ danger of accidents 
or shipwreck. 

SATURN. Unfavourable for travel and often 
gives love of home. 

Uranus. Sudden and unexpected journeys. 

NEPTUNE. Long voyages, and journeys by 
water. 

The following are the aphorisms dealing with 
travel :— 

I. g, 9, and ) just setting in a watery sign 
cause voyages or long residence near water. 


166 


TRAVEL 


2. © or ) setting in 7th denote journeys 
for gaining employment or evading enemies. 

3. Lord of Asc. in goth, or lord of goth in Asc. 
indicates fondness for travel. 

4. Significators of travel with lord of roth or 
h elevated, native will be sent on a mission by an 
influential person, but if significators are in 
Asc. or in good aspect to it he will travel by his 
own wish. 

5. 2| ruling Asc. and posited in oth and afflic- 
ted by malefics causes forced journeys on account 
of religion or law. 

6. 2, ruling 7th, in oth afflicted by malefics 
denotes travel on account of love affairs. 

7. @ cadent is some indication of numerous 
journeys. 


167 


CHAPTER XIII 


DEATH. 


The 8th house rules death, and the 4th the 
end of life. It is usually said that the 4th de- 
notes only the old age conditions, but this is 
incorrect as it also indicates the state at the end 
of life, at whatever age that may be, and some- 
times affords clearer indications of death than 
does the 8th. Planets in the 4th, or its ruler, 
considered in connection with their sign and 
aspects will show the circumstances under which 
the end of life is passed. 

In the case of death note the hyleg, the planets 
afflicting the luminaries, and those in the 8th 
and 4th or the rulers of these houses. If the 
significators are free from serious affliction judge 
that natural death will occur and do not antici- 
pate a violent one unless the afflictions are severe 
and unmistakable. Good aspects from 2] or 9 
interposing among afflictions will often change 
the death from tragedy to natural suddenness. 
The character of a natural death may be judged 
from the planets in the 8th and 4th and the afflic- 
tions to the significators, together with the signs 
concerned, Death will be due to the illnesses 
ruled by these factors as given in chap. V. 

Violent Deaths. These occur when there are 
severe afflictions from the malefics to both © 


168 


DEATH 


and )), and usually to the Asc. also, especially 
from Y, &, §, m, #, or %; when no help is 
given by the benefics; when the malefics are 
elevated or angular ; and when there are afflic- 
tions to the 4th and 8th, or their rulers. Afflic- 
tions are increased when coming from cardinal 
signs, angles. or the 8th house. 

The time of death can be known only from 
directions, and even then precise determination 
is difficult and should never be attempted as 
even asmall benefic aspect will frequently preserve 
life. Death is denoted by a long train of evil 
directions of which the first shows the time of 
death and the others its nature. 

% and rarely, if ever, kill alone and only 
influence the type of death. The influence of the 
signs and planets is as follows :— 

AriEes. Indirectly causes own death. h, 
suicidal tendencies if § also afflicted. 21, honour 
at end of life, heroic death. ), danger of drowning 

Taurus. Sometimes death by surgical opera- 
tions. 3, death by beheading or cutting throat. 

GEMINI. h, strange death, liable to violence 
through jealousy, end hastened by relatives. 
6, unfavourable end amongst hostile relatives. 

CaANncER. h, difficulties at end of life, death 
abroad or by drowning. 2|, notable end, peace- 
ful death abroad with honour. 

Lro. f, danger of death from overwork or 
heart disease. 2|, honourable death. <, death 
in office or labour to end of life, danger of 
violent death abroad or in exile. 9, possibility 
of death to save honour. 

Virco. h, drowning or suffocation if afflict- 
ing. ). ¢, quiet and affected by relatives. 

Lispra. h, trouble at end of life, danger of 


169 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


tragic and notorious death. 2!, peaceful end 
amongst family. 

Scorpio. #, liable to sudden end. h, liable 
to sudden death, solitary and mysterious end, 
death through secret enemies, animals, or drown- 
ing. 21, liable to tragic death through society 
or politics. 6, indirectly causes own death, 
sudden or violent end often through secret ene- 
mies, murder, especially if ) is afflicted by h. 
©, danger of early or sudden end. 9, danger of 
death by poison, suicide through love affairs, 
or death at the hand of a woman. 4, danger of 
death from poison, bites, or enemies. ), danger 
of early death by violence, drowning, epidemics, 
or childbirth. 

SAGITTARIUS. h, death amid good surround- 
ings and with religious thoughts. g, danger of 
murder especially if afflicting ) from angles, 
9, peaceful end. 

CAPRICORN. h, danger of death through chro- 
nic and tragic mental ailments. 4, death by 
drowning. 

Aquarius. h, end of life better than beginning. 
21, sudden end. ¢g, death in strange land or 
among strangers. 9, tragedy or shock at end oflife. 

Pisces. h, retired or secluded and _ tragic 
end, sometimes suicide, grief, or drowning. 
21, quiet and religious end. <4, death through 
pleasure or abroad. ©, danger of violent death 
from secret enemies. 

Sun. In 8th, death through hereditary weakness, 
heart trouble, or heroic end ; honour after death. 
If afflicted sudden or violent death in middle life. 

Moon. In 8th, public death, death in presence 
of strangers or in hospital, drowning. 

Mercury. In 8th, liable to death through 


170 


DEATH 


brain or nerve disorders, melancholia, etc. 
Fully conscious at death. 

Venus. In 8th, peaceful death; if afflicted 
death through pleasure, poison, wasting diseases, 
diabetes, kidney or venereal diseases. 

Mars. In 8th, sudden or violent death, suicide, 
accident, fever, or operation. In I, m, x, or 
first half of @, death by human hands or in 
war ; if 9 is also involved, through women ; and 
if & also, through burglars or robbers. In W 
or m afflicting hyleg, death by operation, 
burning, or smallpox. If setting in opposition 
to the luminaries, death by fire. 

Jupiter. In 8th, peaceful end. If afflicted 
death through heart, liver, blood, tumours, 
cancer, or consumption. 

SatTuRN. In 8th, slow lingering death, suffo- 
cation, falls, consumption; if in watery sign, 
drowning ; if well aspected, death in old age; 
if in fixed sign, suffocation, strangling or hanging. 
If afflicted by 2] death by judicial sentence. 
If.in ¥Y,,..6,.9%, @, or %, death by bites of 
animals. If in opposition to luminaries rising, 
death in prison. If in M.C. and afflicting © 
and g, falls from heights especially if in an airy 
sign. If conjunction 9 and & and afflicting hyleg, 
death by poison or female treachery. 

Uranus. In 8th, sudden or uncommon death, 
suicide, epilepsy, paralysis or death from electro- 
cution, explosions, or machinery. 

Neptune. In 8th, strange and mysterious 
death, disappearance, death in trance, through 
drugs, in hospital or asylum ; danger of being 
buried alive. 

The following are the more important aphorisms 
dealing with death ; 


171 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


1. A planet exactly on the 7th cusp in its 
own sign will partly indicate the nature of the 
death. 

2. Malefics afflicting from angles denote a 
public death. 

3. h in 12th and @ in 8th indicate early 
death or suicide. 

4. One malefic in r2th, another in 6th, and 
lord of Asc. in 8th, afflicted by either, indicates 
death by plots of secret enemies. 

5. & afflicted in 6th is some indication of 
desth in prison. 

6. Significators in earthy signs indicate death 
in prison or by starvation or poison. 

47. Lord of 8th weak and afflicted by h 
or ¢ in watery signs denotes death by poison 
or venomous stings. 

Animals. The following positions indicate death 
from the kick or bite of an animal. 

I. h in Asc. ) in 7th, []¢ in 4th in one of 
the “‘bestial’” signs ‘Y’, Y. QQ), @, or Z%. 

2. ) with h and g in M.C. in a bestial sign. 

3. 6, ruling 8th, with ) in bestial sign. 

4. ) in an angle and 2| weak in a bestial 
sign, especially QQ. 

Muttlation. The following positions indicate 
mutilation: — 

I. © with Caput Algol (in WY 25 or its line of 
R. A. in Y 15) in no aspect to benefics, no benefic 
in 8th, and the © by day or the ) by night 
afflicted by 4, the native will be beheaded ; if 
the luminary culminate he will be wounded, 
maimed, or torn to pieces alive ; and if g be in 
I or X his hands or feet will be cut off. 

2. g with Caput Algol and afflicting © in Qv 
or m indicates beheading. 


172 


DEATH 


Drowning is indicated by the following 
positions:— 

1. Significators afflicted in watery signs. 

2. h in So in 4th rising after © and afflicting 
©; 3; or jp. 

3. Lord of 4th in 7th in a watery sign and a 
watery sign on 4th cusp. 

Burning is indicated by the following posi- 
tions:— 

I. Significators afflicted in fiery signs. 

2. d afflicting luminaries from m indicates 
accidental burning; from Y or §Q) sentenced 
to be shot ; from 7, sentenced to be burnt. 

3. )o fo in fiery sign in 8th. 

4. ) ruling 7th, and ¢ and © in affliction 
from 7th and roth in fiery signs. 

5. © in conjunction with lord of Asc. in 
§U, no benefic in 8th, and ¢ neither ruling nor 
exalted in Asc. 

Hanging or Falls are indicated as follows:— 

I. Significators afflicted in airy signs. 

2. h ruling 8th, and 2| with g in 7th not 
aspecting 4th cusp. 

3. h or 3d with 7 in 7th. 

4. 6 with Pleiades (¥ 29), h with Regulus 
(QU 29) or Antares (2% 9), and © with Caput 
Algol, indicate hanging or beheading. 


173 


CHAPTER XIV 


ESOTERIC ASTROLOGY. 


Esoteric Astrology or Astrotheosophy is that 
branch of astrology which deals with the natal 
horoscope from a theosophical point of view 
and seeks to discover the operations of evolution 
and the unfoldment of the Ego behind the map. 
According to its teachings the horoscope is the 
result of a series of past lives in which the 
present environtment and character have been 
built up, and by a study of the map thetrend > 
of former lives may be discovered, and the line 
of development most fitted for the native may 
be picked out. The general argument is that an 
affliction in a horoscope indicates some dishar- — 
mony, abuse, or lack of development in matters 
represented by the planets concerned, and that 
one of the aims of the present life is to correct — 
this failing and to fight against it in order that 
the proper quality may be evolved and the dis- 
harmony be removed. Thus a badly afflicted 
Mars indicates misapplied energy, cruelty, or 
passion, in a past life, and it is therefore ne- 
cessary to combat the passionate tendencies 
indicated in the present map as a result of the 
past life, and to utilise the stronger and better 
qualities in the horoscope in order to rise above 
it. This may be done by the help of favourable 


174 


ESOTERIC ASTROLOGY 


aspects. If in the example Mars has a favourable 
aspect to one of the other planets the qualities 
ruled by that planet should be developed as 
they may be applied to check the martial 
disharmony through the channel of the good 
aspect. Failing a good aspect the sign ruled 
by a planet, if favourably occupied, may be 
used for the same purpose. 

The law of cause and effect, or Karma, by 
which thought in a past life becomes character 
in the next, desire becomes opportunity, and 
action decides environment, gives us a clue to 
the type of life of which the present is the out- 
come. Symbolically the planets are the qualities, 
the signs character, and the houses environment, 
so that in general a planet in a favourable sign 
but unfavourable house indicates a fairly well 
developed character functioning in an unfavour- 
able environment, as would be the case if a 
man had performed a bad action from which 
good results had proceeded, and the same would 
hold true of the converse position. It is neces- 
sary, however, to distinguish between bad cha- 
racter and bad Karma. The most highly develo- 
ped people have frequently the most strongly 
afflicted horoscopes, the bad aspects working 
out in physical trials and struggles and producing 
a series of disaster in order that the Ego may 
be freed from past unfavourable links. Only 
intuition can decide whether the native is of high 
or low development, and our present knowledge 
is insufficient to read this from the map. 

The greater part of an esoteric judgment must 
be based upon symbolism, and it is found that the 
planetary symbols employed are all made up 
of three separate characters, namely, the circle, 


175 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


symbolising spirit, the cross matter, and the 
semi-circle or crescent soul, or the emotional 
and desire nature. The aspects and signs are 
arranged according to the symbols of the triangle 
and cross or square, of which the triangle re- 
presents the three aspects of the Deity and spirit, 
and the cross or square matter. All aspects 
formed by dividing the circle into three parts, 
or equal divisions of these, such as the trine, 
sextile, and semisextile, are favourable, while 
those formed on the cross, such as the square 
and semi-square are infavourable. Similarly signs 
of the same triplicity are harmonious as they form 
a triangle, whilst those of the same quadruplicity 
are inharmonious being formed on a cross. 

The signs and houses correspond to the three 
divine attributes of Will, Wisfom, and Activity, 
and also rule the planes and human priciples. 

Cardinal signs and angular houses correspond to 
Activity and the physical world. 

Fixed signs and succeedent houses correspond to 
Will and the desire world. 

Mutable signs and cadent houses correspond to 
Wisdom and the mental world. 

Cardinal and fiery signs are in affinity as are 
fixed and earthy, and mutable and airy and 
watery. The triangles of the fiery and airy 
signs represent the inner nature or Individuality, 
and those of the watery and earthy the outer 
nature or Personality, planets in these triangles 
indicating the development and nature of each. 
Furthermore:— 

Airy signs correspond to the Higher Mental 
plane and Causal body. 

Fiery signs correspond to the Lower Mental 
plane and Mental body. 


176 


ESOTERIC ASTROLOGY 


Watery signs correspond to the Astral plane 
and Astral body. 

Earthy signs correspond to the Physical plane 
and Physical body, and the condition of these 
signs indicates the condition of the correspon- 
ding principle in the native. 

The following are some esoteric notes on the 
signs and planets :— 

Aries. The symbol denotes the uprushing: 
fountain of life become individualised and enter- 
ing this plane to gain development. It is the 
sign of the separate self and rules the personal 
vitality. 

Taurus. The symbol represents a coiled ser- 

pent. It is the hidden impulse to action, blind 
desire, inertia, and the creative instinct, and 
forms the centre to which the physical activities 
of Capricorn converge through the “agency 
of Virgo. 
' Gemini. The sign of mental relationship. It 
acts as a channel along which the mental 
activities of Libra converge into Aquarius, or 
through which the will of Aquarius re-acts upon 
Libra. 

Cancer. The symbol represents the life spring- 
ing from the cell. It is the activity of the senses 
and the outgoing emotions, which come from 
or go to the fixed centre Scorpio. 

Leo. The symbol is a partly uncoiled serpent. 
It is the heart of the Individuality and the fixed 
centre of the fiery triangle. 

Virco. The sign of service and discrimination, 
and the medium through which the physical 
energies and activities are transmitted. 

Lisra, The balance or turning point between 
the first or outgoing half of the Zodiac, and the 


177 


Astrology L 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


last or absorbing half. It is the point at which 
a new departure is made when the previous 
experiences are balanced up and the Ego defi- 
nitely turns inwards. 

ScorPio. The symbol is a moving serpent 
denoting the waking of the fixed centres which 
began in Taurus and culminates in Aquarius. 
It is the sign of generation and re-generation 
in which the creative forces may be turned 
outwards or inwards. 

SAGITTARIUS. The symbol is an arrow shot into 
the unknown. It is the sign of initiation and 
rebirth, and the beginning of a new and higher life. 

Capricorn. The symbol is usually said to be 
a goat ascending a mountain typifying the 
evolution of the personality through work and 
service, but the real ancient symbol as depicted 
on the old star maps is a creature half goat and 
half fish denoting the physical energies and service 
evolving through sensation and desire, and the 
transmutation of the latter into the former. 

Aquarius. The symbol is a white serpent 
gliding over water and its dark reflection, or a 
man pouring water out of a vessel. It denotes 
the free gift of the spirit and the ceasing of 
rebirth, when the spirituai forces flow through 
the native for the good of humanity and are 
not absorbed for himself. There is a light and 
a dark side to the sign, and the spiritual forces 
are frequently distorted through the “water” 
of the astral plane. 

Pisces. The sign of universal solution and of 
self-undoing. It is the passage from this plane 
to another and to freedom from bondage, or 
the universal love and sympathy into which 
all things are to be resolved. 


178 


ESOTERIC ASTROLOGY 


It will be seen from the above that the triplici- 
ties form groups that react from one to the other. 
The cardinal sign of any triplicity denotes its 
activities, the mutable sign the channel along 
which they pass, and the fixed sign their centre. 
In the lower stages the fixed centre attracts for 
itself, but in the higher stages it acts as a part 
of the Divine Will which moves outwards through 
the other signs. The positions of the planets in 
these signs indicate the type of activity of each 
sign of the triplicity, and the help or hindrance 
to the moving forces. 

The esoteric nature of the planets is as follows 

Sun. The symbol is the point within the circle 
denoting the manifesting spirit. It represents 
the spark of Deity in all, and rules the Indi- 
viduality or permanent part of man. 

Moon. The symbol is the semi-circle, or the 
soul of man and the desire or emotional nature. 
It represents the Personality, and its rapid 
motion indicates the many and _ fluctuating 
changes that take place in the outer nature. 

Mercury. The symbol is the semi-circle over 
circle over cross, or the predominance of soul and 
spirit over matter and the blending of all three. 
The central position of the spirit denotes the 
alternation of emotion and matter through which 
the spirit is reached and to which it forms a 
point of balance. It rules the Buddhic or In- 
tuitional consciousness, and the Second Ray. 

Venus. The symbol is the circle over the 
cross indicating the predominance of spirit over 
matter. It is said to rule the Higher Mind and 
the Third Ray but this has been disputed. 

Mars. The symbol is the cross over the circle 
denoting the predominance of matter over spirit. 


179 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY ~ 


It rules the astral plane and the desire nature. 
- Jupiter. The symbol is the semi-circle over 
the cross denoting the predominance of emotion 
over matter. It rules the human bodies and the 
physical body in particular. 

SaTuRN. The symbol is the cross over the 
semi-circle denoting the predominance of matter 
over emotion. It is the planet of limitation and 
fate or Karma, and marks the dividing or limiting 
line between the Personality and Individuality 
which has to be passed or overcome before true 
progress can be made. 

Uranus. The symbol represents the life emer- 
ging from the spirit, passing through matter, 
and converging into onepointedness. It is the 
planet of individualisation, and represents the 
will or spirit that is ever pressing forward through 
changing matter. 3 

NEPTUNE. The symbol represents the life emer- 
ging from the spirit, passing through matter, 
and diverging into unity with the Divine along 
the three lines of Will, Wisdom and Activity. 
It is the Christ planet denoting the suppression 
of self and universal love and charity, and is 
probably the real ruler of the Second Ray. 

The practical application of these esoteric 
principles is largely a matter of intuition and 
cannot be laid down in a series of hard and fast 
rules. The general nature of the map will indi- 
cate the part of the character that is functioning 
to the greatest extent, afflictions will denote the 
sources of disharmony and the hindrances to 
development, and good aspects the powers that 
may be utilised for development. The nature of 
the afflictions roughly indicate their cause in 
past lives. Thus the position of Saturn in a sign 


180 


ESOTERIC ASTROLOGY 


or house indicates a check on the activities ruled 
by them, and therefore denotes something damped 
out probably because of past excesses. Thus 
Saturn in Leo might well represent past abuse 
of power, and the same might also be shown 
by a map in which the majority of planets were 
in powerful and ruling signs with a weak and 
serving ascendant. It is said also that rising 
planets and those in the succeedent houses, es- 
pecially the 5th and 2nd, denote past Karma, 
while the gth indicates the line upon which the 
future is being built. 

In general the following are the afflictions in 
a map that are said to result from various abuses 
in past lives of the nature of those indicated :— 
IK afflicting g. Deceit, unnatural practices, 

black magic. 

Anarchy, suicide, murder, des- 

truction. 
. Hypocrisy, religious injustice, 
imposition. 

Cruelty, violence, hatred, self- 

ishness. 

Dishonesty, treachery, cowar- 

dice. 

Waste, conceit, extravagance. 

Lying, slander, malice. 

Sensuality, abuse of emotion 

and affection. 

In all cases the path of development lies in 
checking the existing tendencies to these vices 
and developing the opposite virtue by the aid 
of the strong and favourable positions in the 
map. 


fH rp 


181 


CHAPTER XV 
AN EXAMPLE NATIVITY. 


As an example of the foregoing rules and 
methods of procedure the following nativity may 
be considered. It is not proposed to give a 
detailed delineation as the student should work 
this out for himself, and therefore only the facts 
and a few explanatory notes are set down. 


AN EXAMPLE NATIVITY 


ASPECTS 

Planets 

Decl. Oy) Fd Anak 
Sun ) PQA) ja 
Moon 20S 29] ) rh ae 4 Mies Fan 
Mercury 2354413 of iO 
Venus 22S9 |Q A LIA 
Mars 26N37|3 I O|X 
Jupiter 15N5r}2| Ald 
Saturn IIN4 |h a 
Uranus 5N15|H A 
Neptune 14Naz | 
Ascdt. ASC. 
M.G. M.C. 


Length of Life. The Asc. is hyleg and is badly 
afflicted by the squares of h, J, and 2| from 
the roth, but is A 2 from the 5th. A strong 
sign is rising but © and )) are weak and badly 
afflicted, though A fh ruler of 6th. The afflic- 
tions from ¢ give vitality but do not promise 
length of life. The testimonies are more unfavour 
able than favourable and a comparatively short 
life is all that could be expected. Native died 
at 37 years of age. 

Appearance. The personal appearance is fairly 
well described by §). The native was tall with 
a large frame and big bones, walked erectly, 
had sherry coloured and rather catty eyes, but 
was very dark owing to the strong Saturnian 
influence (h [J Asc., © o J) in %). He was 
thin and unhealthy looking, largely owing to 
© o& j) in %. Sight and hearing were good, 
but the native stammered at times through ner- 
vousness (8 [] w, || © in %,Uhin). Teeth 


were good and there was no apparent deformity. 


183 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


Character and Mind. The §) characteristics 
were marked and the influence of % was also 
pronounced. The strong fixed and earthy signs 
gave a dogmatic nature, materialism, ambition, 
great conscientiousness and plodding power in 
work, and a good deal of despondency. There 
was much love of statistics, and also of philo- 
sophy and poetry (8 ¢ 9 in #), and the mind 
was very idealistic, always evolving utopian 
schemes (8 [1 w), strongly pacific (8 o& Q), 
and yet at the same time Bolshevistic (afflic- 
tions from Hw and J). The native always 
wanted to do good but only succeeded in offen- 
ding everybody (© ¢0 )in%, H# CD 8 Q, and the 
cramping influence of h and the earthy signs). 
The mental balance was not good and there 
were serious nervous breakdowns and some in- 
sanity () o © in %, ) and ¥ in no aspect, 
% in ~ afflicted by H on cusp of 3rd, § afflicted 
by h in night map. etc.). 

Health. The health was fairly good owing to 
the strong sign rising but ) on cusp of 6th ¢ © 
gave weakness and digestive trouble (95), © 
afflicted in 5th with ) rising and fixed positions 
heart trouble, and the afflictions from ¢ on the 
12th cusp together with the afflicted $3, insomnia. 
Much of the ill-health came from overwork 
(h ruling 6th in roth) and domestic worries 
(afflictions from ¢, part ruler of 4th.) 

Finance. All the native’s money came by 
his own endeavours and by hard work (strong } 
and fixed signs). He was careful over money 
matters (h and 3%), but at the same time im- 
pulsively generous to women and friends (% ruling 
2nd and 11th ¢ 2 1 &, QQ rising, 2} inwO ©). 

Occupation and Position. The native held a 


184 


AN EXAMPLE NATIVITY 


position under a large body (h and %). He was 
at one time engaged in work connected with 
the land (¥ 3%) in Ireland (¥), but met with 
much opposition. Later he was engaged on 
work connected with land and sea (J{f). His 
final position was a good one (© ) in a cardinal 
sign, three planets in roth including } and 2\), 
but the responsibility hastened his death owing 
to overwork and apprehension lest he should 
be unable to carry on (% afflictions, h in \). 

Parents and Relatives. The father was an 
invalid and confined to his bed for many years. 
(h and JL in roth, © afflicted in %). The 
cause of his death was heart trouble (¥ operating 
through ¢) by transverse polarity). The mother 
died of cancer (¢ ruling 4th afflicting }) from 95). 
There was one brother and one sister. Domestic 
affairs were extremely unhappy (¢ ruling 4th 
in 12th in 9 afflicting luminaries). 

Friends. The native had few friends but a large 
number of acquaintances mostly among young 
people, clerks, or writers (Y ruling m on 11th). 

Love and marriage. The views on love affairs 
and marriage were peculiar (9 ¢ Yin 5th (1) &), 
and the passions were strong. Marriage was 
unhappy (QQ rising, ) £ dg, etc.) and there was 
temporary separation (2? [] m). The wife was 
described by ¢ in 95 and hin. There were 
two children, the first being a girl who died in 
infancy, and the second a boy, born with ) rising. 

Death. A violent death is clearly shown. The 
native committed suicide by drowning after 
having unsuccessfully attempted to poison him- 
self (watery signs on 4th and 8th, $ in o& in 
12th £ © ) and elevated, 2| ruling 8th, o If 
afflicting ©, etc.). 


185 


‘ 

AS lice 

Rep kt 
bys a 
are 


SECTION Iil 


DIRECTIONS AND RECTIFICATION 


CHAPTER I 
SECONDARY DIRECTIONS. 


Directions or the calculating of future events 
are divided into two main headings, Primary 
and Secondary. The processes are based on the 
fact that after birth the planets and houses 
“‘progress’’, or pass on to form different positions 
and aspects amongst themselves and to their 
birth positions, and therefore denote changing 
influences that enter into the life after birth. The 
secondary system, which is that commonly in 
use and which may conveniently be treated 
first, is concerned with the passage of the planets 
in their orbits on successive days after birth. 
It is found that one day after birth ts equivalent 
to one year of life, and that if we wish to know the 
influences in force during say the 20th year of 
life we must examine the planetary posstions on 
the 20th day after birth, so that all the directions 
acting in a life of 90 years are actually formed 
in the heavens within three months after birth. 

The horoscope of birth is thus not only signifi- 
cant of the whole of life but also relates in a more 
particular manner to the period from age 0 years 
to age I year, or from the actual birthday to 
its first anniversary. The most simple method 
of obtaining the “‘progressed horoscope’ is to 
count as many days after birth as the native is 
years old and erect a map for the same time 


189 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


as at birth but on the day thus found. Suppose a 
person were born at 6.49 p.m. on 3rd April, 1864, 
and wished for a progressed horoscope for 1879. 
The age on the birthday in 1879 would be 15 
years, and therefore the map must be cast for 
6.49 p.m. on the 15th day from birth. The day 
after birth is called 1, and the 15th would there- 
fore be 18th April, 1864, so that a map for 6.49 
p.m. on 18th April, 1864, would show the course 
of events taking place between 3rd April, 1879 
and 2nd April, 1880, or to put the matter rather 
more accurately aspects formed during the 24 
hours from 18th April to r9th April would operate 
between 3rd April, 1879 and 2nd April, 1880. 

The movement of most of the planets is so 
slight that few aspects are formed in any given 
day, but in the case of the Moon a large number 
may be formed and it is necessary to sub-divide 
the period in order to obtain the exact months 
of their operation. Therefore, since the whole 
day is equivalent to one year, it is necessary to 
divide the daily motion of the Moon by 12 in 
order to find its progressed motion per month. 

There are three main methods of obtaining the 
progressed horoscope, each of which gives the 
same result but begins the progressed year at a 
different point. Method A should be thorougly 
grasped as it gives a clear idea of the principles 
involved, but in practice method B is the most 
speedy and convenient. 

a. BirtHpAy Metuop. This is the most simple 
to understand and is the one already outlined 
above. It gives the progressed positions as on . 
the birthday, so that the year counts from one 
birthday to the next. The following are the 
rules for erecting the map :— 


190 


SECONDARY DIRECTIONS 


1. Add one day for each year to the date of 
birth in order to obtain the progressed date for 
which the positions must be calculated. 

2. Compute the cusps for the actual birth time 
but use the Sidereal Time of the progressed date. 
The local Mean Time of birth should be used as 
in erecting an ordinary horoscope. 

3. Compute the planets positions for the time 
of birth on the progressed date using Greenwich 
Mean Time. The whole process consists in 
imagining the native to be born again at the 
same time of day on the progressed date, and the 
map is cast in the ordinary way. The result 
is the progressed positions of the planets as on 
the birthday anniversary. 

4. Calculate the Moon’s position for the same 
time on the next day and so find the number of 
degrees and minutes it moves in the 24 hours 
(or one year). 

5. Divide this quantity by 12 to obtain its 
monthly progress (which will be more or less 
than 1°.) 

6. Add this quantity successively to the posi- 
tion originally found and the result will be the 
Moon’s progressed longitude on the birth date 
in each month. 

7. Follow rules 4 to 6 using the Moon’s declina- 
tion instead of its longitude. 

Example. Native born 2 May, 1922, 6 a.m., 
G.M.T., London. 

Required progressed map for age 10 to 11 (May, 
1932 to May, 1933). 

Io years after birth is equivalent to 10 days 
and therefore the progressed map showing the 
progressed positions as at 2 May, 1932, should 
be cast for 6 a.m. on 12 May, 1922. Then :— 


IgI 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 
Sid. Time at noon 1m May, 1922 3 r3 99 
I 


Add local time elapsed O36 
Add correction yaa yj 


Sid. Time at6a.m.12May,1922 21 16 54 


With this Sidereal Time turn to the proper 
“Tables of Houses and write down the cusps. Next 
find the planetary positions for this time and 
insert them in the map. 

The Moon’s position for the required time will 
be found to be 3°24 44’, which is therefore its 
progressed place as on the birthday anniversary 
of 2 May, 1932. To find its place on 2 May, 1933 
calculate its position at 6 a.m. on 13 May, 1922. 
The result will be found to be 17° ~ 27’. There- 
fore it follows that the Moon moves from 3° 4 
44’ to 17°27’ in the year from 2 May, 1932 . 
to 2 May, 1933. The annual progressed motion 
is therefore obtained by subtracting the former 
from the latter and is found to be 14° 43’. To 
obtain its monthly motion divide this by 12, the 
result being 1° 13’;4. We may now erect a 
table of the Moon’s monthly position as follows:— 
Moon’s prog. place on 2 May, 1932 3° <@ 44’ 

Add monthly motion I 1375 


Moon’s place on 2 June, 1932 4 7 5715 
Add monthly motion I I3q'5 


Moon’s place on 2 July, 1932 6 Ir+ 
and so on 
Write these in a column and then repeat the 
whole process to find the monthly value of the 
Moon’s declination. 


Ig2 


SECONDARY DIRECTIONS 


The process of calculating directions will be 
explained after the other methods of computing 
the positions have been described. 

b. Noon Date Metuop. This is the method 
most commonly employed in practice as it does 
away with the necessity of calculating the planets 
places. 

It is clear that if one day after birth is equivalent 
to one year the following proportion holds good:— 


24 hours = 12 months 
2 hours = 1 month 
I hour = 15 days 
4 mins. = I day 


In the above example we found that 6 a.m. 
on 12th May was equivalent to 2 May, 1932, 
and 6 a.m. on 13th May to 2 May, 1933. There- 
fore noon on 12th May must correspond to some 
date in between 2 May, 1932 and 2 May, 1933, 
and if we find this date we can simply copy the 
noon positions from the Ephemeris on the r2th 
May as they will be the correct progressed posi- 
tions for this intermediate date which is known 
as the ““Noon Date’’. 

The following is the easiest method of finding 
the Noon Date :— 

I. Find the time elapsing from birth to the 
nearest noon. The Greenwich Mean Time of 
birth is to be used for this purpose. 

2. Convert the hours and minutes thus found 
into months and days by means of the propor- 
tions given above. 

3. (a) If the birth is a.m. add the months and 
days so found to the date of birth. 

(0) If the birth is p.m. subtract them. 


193 


Astrology M 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


The result is the noon date for any year. 4) 

Thus in our previous example 6 a.m. is 6 
hours before noon. 6 hours are equivalent to 
3 months and as the birth is a.m. 3 months 
must be added to the birth date to give the noon 
date which will, therefore, be 2nd. August. Then 
the noon positions each day after birth in the 
Ephemeris will be equivalent to their progressed 
positions as at 2nd August of each year, the noon 
positions on the day of birth itself (2 May, 1922) 
being equivalent to 2 August, 1922. 

The rules for erecting the map are as follows:— 

I. Calculate the cusps for the time of birth 
on the progressed date as in method A2®.) 


1) The above method treats all the months as consisting 
of 30 days, and a more accurate method is as follows :— 

1. For an a.m. birth. Subtract the Sidereal Time at birth 
from the Sidereal Time at noon on the day of birth and to 
the result add the Sidereal Time at noon on the day of 
birth. The Noon Date will be the day whose noon Sidereal 
Time is the same as that found in the above result. 

2. For a p.m. bivth. Subtract the Sidereal Time at noon 
on the day of birth from the Sidereal Time at birth. Sub- 
tract the result from the Sidereal Time at noon on the 
day of birth. The result is the Sidereal Time at noon on 
the Noon Date as before. 

If the birthplace is not London it will be necessary to 
find Sidereal Time at Greenwich for the moment of birth. 
This may be done by supposing the native to be born at 
London and using the Greenwich Time of birth instead of 
the Local Time in finding the Sidereal Time at birth. 

*) The slight discrepancy between the cuspal and planetary 
dates is immaterial as a whole year alters the M.C. by 
only 1°, but if absolute accuracy is desired proceed as follows:— 

1. Find the Sidereal Time at the time of birth on the 
progressed date as before. 

2. Find the time elapsing in hours and minutes between 
the Greenwich time of birth and the nearest noon. 

3. Find the correction for this from the Table on p. 243 
of the Appendix. 

4. If the birth is a.m. add the correction to the Sidereal 
Time found in 1, and if p.m. subtract it. The result is 
the Sidereal Time corresponding to the Noon Date. 


194 


SECONDARY DIRECTIONS 


2. Insert the noon positions of the planets 
in the map, making a note as to the date to 
which they measure. 

3. Find the Moon’s motion in longitude and 
declination from that noon to the next and divide 
by 12 to obtain its monthly position as before. 

Example. As before. The noon date is 2 August 
so that the planets at noon on 12 May, 1922 
are their progressed positions as at 2 August, 
1932. Calculate the cusps as before and make 
a note “cusps as at 2 May, 1932’’. (unless the cusps 
are also adjusted to the noon date, in which 
case the Sidereal Time will be 215 17™ 53° instead 
of 215 16" 54° as already determined). 

Insert in this map the positions of the planets 
at noon on 12 May, 1922. The Moon’s longitude 
on this date is 7° #13’, and on the next noon 
it is 20 #52. Therefore it moves 13° 39’ in 
the year, or 1° 8’: a month. Then:— 

Moon’s position as at 2 Aug. 1932 7° @ 13’ 
Ie 


Add monthly motion 84 
Moon’s position as at 2 Sept., 1932 8° 21} 
and so on 


It will be noticed that the positions in this 

Table and those in the last show a discrepancy 
of 2 or 3 minutes. These are due to the method 
of obtaining the noon date and may be eliminated 
by employing the Sidereal Time method, 
' C. First oF JANUARY METHOD. It is some- 
times convenient to calculate the planetary 
positions for the Ist January of each year and 
for the 1st of each succeeding month instead 
of for intermediate dates. The method of doing 
this is as follows:— 

1. Subtract the month and day of birth from 


195 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


the 1st January next following so as to obtain 
the native’s age on the Ist January in months 
and days. 

2. Convert the months and days thus obtained 
into hours and minutes at the rate of I month 
= 2 hours, and = I day 4 minutes. 

3. Find the time elapsing from birth to the 
nearest noon and add it to the above result 
if the birth was p.m. or subtract it ifa.m. The 
result will be the time counted from noon on the 
birthday that measures to the Ist January of 
the following year. 

The above method can be modified so as to 
find the time for which calculation must be made 
to obtain the progressed positions on the first 
of any month. All that is necessary is to find 
the age on the 1st of the required month next 
following as in rule I above, and then to proceed 
exactly as there shown. 

Example. As before. Required the directions 
for 1922. 

Year Month Day 


tst Jan.: 1923 == 1923 I (e) 
and May 1922 = 1922 5 2 
Age a) 7 29 
Subtract time of birth from nearest noon 6 0 
Time from noon on day of birth 9 56 
= 9.56 p.m. 


Therefore the planets positions for 9.56 p.m. 
on the day of birth measure to Ist Jan. 1923, 
and by adding the required number of days 


196 


SECONDARY DIRECTIONS 


we find that their positions at 9.56 p.m. on 11th 
May, 1922 measure to Ist. Jan. 1932. 

The cusps are computed in the usual way and 
the planets positions for 9.56 p.m. are inserted 
in the map.') 

The Moon’s monthly motion is obtained in 
the usual way Thus the Moon’s place at 9.56 
_ p.m. on 11 May, 1922 is 29° m 1’, and on 12 May, 
1922, 12° ~ 52’. Its annual motion is therefore 
13° 51’, and its monthly progress 1° 9/3. Then:— 
Moon’s position as at I Jan., 1932 29° mt’ 

Add monthly motion I Qt 


Moon’s position as at I Febr. 1932 o # Io} 
and so on. 

Having now described all the methods of 
calculating the progressed map we may proceed 
to the further task of finding the directions in 
force. The following rules will make this clear:— 

I. Take the progressed position of the Sun 
and notice whether it forms any aspects to any 
of the planets in the birth horoscope (which is 
usually called the “‘radical’’ map, as it is the 
radix or root from which changes proceed). Pa- 
rallels are also to be included. If any aspects 
are formed during the year under consideration 
note the approximate month in which they be- 
come exact. The Sun moves about 1° or 60’ per 
annum by progression, and its monthly movement 
will therefore be about 5’. 

2. Next note whether the progressed Sun 
forms any aspects or parallels to the progressed 

1) If desired the cusps can also be corrected to 1st Jan., 
by adding to the Sidereal Time at the time of birth on the 


progressed date the correction for the age expressed in hours 
and minutes on the 1st Jan., following as in method B. 


197 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


planets with the exception of the progressed 
Moon. Note these and their months of operation 
also. 

These two classes form the Solar Directions. 

3. Take the progressed § and note any aspects 
and parallels it may form to radical positions 
and then to progressed positions. Note the 
months in which such aspects are formed by 
estimating the monthly movement of 8. 

4. Do the same with 9, g, 21, h, m, and IK 
respectively. When looking for aspects to 
progressed planets omit the progressed Moon 
in all cases. 

These form the Mutual Directions. 

5. Tabulate the Moon’s monthly progressed 
positions and then write down against the months 
in which they are formed any aspects or parallels 
made by the progressed Moon to the radical 
and progressed places of the Sun and planets. 
These form the Lunar Aspects. 

6. If the birth time is reliable the aspects 
formed by the progressed M.C. and Asc., may be 
tabulated also, but if there is any doubt as to 
the accuracy of the time they should be omitted. 
The directions are now complete. 

When writing down directions it is customary 
always to write the moving body first, and to 
mark the radical and progressed positions by the 
letters “‘r’’ and “‘p” respectively. Thus, O p¥)r 
means that the Sun has progressed to form the 
sextile of the Moon’s place at birth, whereas in 
the case of ) pX ©r it is the Moon that moves 
to the sextile of the Sun’s radical position. An 
aspect formed between 2 progressed bodies may 
be written either in the form © p & ) por simply 
©). When a letter is omitted after the 


198 


SECONDARY DIRECTIONS 


planet’s symbol it is to be understood that the 
body is a progressed one and that it is ‘‘p” that 
is omitted. These distinctions are important 
and should always be observed. 

The final step in the process is to obtain an 
Ephemeris for the actual year for which the 
directions are required, or if this is unobtainable 
a set of Transit Tables should be obtained. A 
shilling publication by Raphael entitled ‘The 
Geocentric Longitudes of the Major Planets 
from 1900 to 2001” will serve the purpose 
admirably. 

A transit is the passage of a planet in the 
heavens on any day over a radical or progressed 
position. The theory is that a radical planet 
retains its birth position and influence throughout 
life and that its progressed position is also a 
sensitive point. Both these points may be 
stimulated at any time by the passage of a 
planet over them and it is this that constitutes 
a transit. It is customary to ignore the transits 
of 9, %, and the )) when dealing with major 
influences, as the transits of these bodies are 
of minor importance and are chiefly of use in 
marking favourable and unfavourable days. A 
strong transit will hasten or retard the operation 
of a direction as will be explained later and 
a note should be made of the dates of all the 
major transits over both the radical and pro- 
gressed positions of all the planets. The directions 
are now ready to be interpreted. 


199 


CHAPTER IL 


INTERPRETATION OF DIRECTIONS. 


The progressed horoscope cannot be read in 
quite the same way as a radical map. The birth 
horoscope is fixed and rules the whole of the 
life as it represents the character, environment, 
and type of life into which the native is born 
or with which he is furnished. By the gradual 
progression of the planets away from their birth 
positions, however, a certain amount of freedom 
arises and the native is able to expand or to 
change along the lines indicated by the progres- 
sion. The progressed horoscope changes only 
very slightly from year to year and therefore 
if read as a birth map it would hold good for many 
years. But all changes in the progressed horos- 
cope must be interpreted in terms of the birth 
map, as that is the radical or root map of the 
life and therefore has the major significance 
and power, so that the most important point 
is not so much where the planets are in the 
progress as in what relations they stand to their 
birth positions. 

The following are the rules for judging a pro- 
gressed horoscope and for estimating the happen- 
rings at any time in the life:— 

1. The Solar and Mutual directions are the 
most important as they are the slowest in for- 


200 


INTERPRETATION OF DIREGTIONS 


mation and may be in force for many years. 
Tabulate the aspects made by the progressed 
Sun and keep them together, and do the same 
with the other directions, keeping each set of 
aspects to a particular planet in a class by itself. 
Suppose the Sun is in trine to Jupiter at 19 
years of age, and next forms a square to Saturn 
at 27. The mid-point between these aspects 
occurs at 23, and the influence of the trine to 
Jupiter will extend to that age when it will be 
gradually replaced by the influence of the square 
to Saturn which will reach a maximum at 27 
and then gradually decline in power until it is 
superseded by the next aspect formed by the 
Sun. At any time in the life of an aspect it may 
be stimulated by lunar directions and transits, 
and so a direction such as © A 2! will operate 
in various ways and at different times during 
several years, the nature of the effect being 
modified by the kind of stimulation it receives. 
When two successive aspects of an opposite 
nature are formed, as in the above example, 
the mid-point is critical and secondary effects, 
such as lunar aspects, will operate freely, but 
when the major aspects are similar in nature the 
mid-point is a very strong one. During the time 
in which a major aspect is in force, secondary 
aspects will act strongly if of the same nature 
as the major one but will be repressed if of an 
opposite nature. Thus under © A 2| a lunar 
aspect such as ) [J h would not be strongly 
felt, but if the same aspect fell under © [] h 
it would mark the climax of the major influence 
and would operate with great power. A major 
aspect need not operate exactly to date as it 
is usually dependent upon minor causes and 


201 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


operates many times, or overshadows and 
characterises a long period of time. 

2. As already stated each class of direction 
should be kept separate from the others. The 
successive aspects of the progressed Sun form 
an ordered series, and the same is true of the 
successive aspects of the other planets with 
the exception of the Moon. These separate 
series interpenetrate but do not cancel each other, 
so that a bad aspect in the Saturn series may co- 
incide with a good one in the Jupiter series, the 
total, effect probably being sorrow through a 
death but a the same time benefit by a legacy. 
The worst and most dangerous periods of the 
life are indicated by a train or series of bad 
aspects. 

3. In interpreting a direction consider the 
planets involved and the signs and _ houses 
occupied and ruled by them. For this purpose 
the direction of a progressed planet toa radical 
one is to be interpreted in terms of the radical 
map and consideration given to the radical 
houses involved ; but a direction falling between 
two progressed planets must be referred to the 
progressed map. 

4. The strength of a direction depends upon 
the strength and nature of the radical planet. 
If Jupiter in the horoscope of birth is badly 
afflicted a good direction to it in after life does 
not produce as good results as when it is free from 
affliction, and similarly a bad direction to a 
malefic well aspected at birth is not so serious 
as if it had been afflicted. Remember that the 
radical map symbolises the whole life and that 
directions must conform to it. Therefore unless 
the horoscope shows a violent death do not 


202 


INTERPRETATION OF DIRECTIONS 


judge it from a severe and violent direction, 
and if the radical map shows a life of poverty 
no good direction will produce riches. 

5. The function of the lunar aspects is to 
indicate the monthly course of events through 
the aspects formed by the Moon and its stimu- 
lation of major influences. The sign and house 
of the radical map through which the Moon is 
passing will always be prominent in directions, 
and the exact effect will be denoted by these, 
combined with the house and sign occupied by 
the aspected planet, together with the houses 
ruled by it either in the radix or progress accord- 
ing to whether it is a radical or progressed planet. 
Thus suppose the Moon is passing through the 
radical second house in the sign Leo and meets 
the opposition of the radical Mars, which rules 
the 5th and roth houses in the horoscope of 
birth. If the major influences are not antago- 
nistic there will be heavy expense () & 3) 
connected with business and speculation (roth 
and 5th houses) and probably over children 
(5th) or a death (8th). These indications may 
be narrowed down by a study of the transits 
in force. It should be noted that when the Moon 
passes from an aspect of a radical body in one 
month to an aspect of that same body’s progressed 
position a month or two later, a period is formed 
that is under the continuous influence of that 
planet. 

INFLUENCE OF PLANETS IN DIRECTION. The 
general influence of the planets in direction is as 
follows :— 

The Sun. Directions involving the Sun affect 
the father, husband, male relatives, profession, 
fame, health, life, and constitution. Bad di- 


203 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


rections will cause trouble in these affairs of the 
nature indicated by the aspecting planet and the 
houses and signs concerned, while good aspects 
will produce good results. 

The Moon. The mother, wife, female relatives, 
health, functional changes, residence, and jour- 
neys. Aspects between the Sun and Moon are 
always critical, especially to women, as they 
denote changes in the constitution. 

Mercury. Commerce, business, journeys, writ- 
ings, papers, documents, mental affairs, nerves, 
criticism, aunts, and young men. 

Venus. Pleasures, love affairs, money, orna- 
ments, sisters, and young women. Afflictions to 
Venus frequently produce bereavement. 

Mars. Accidents, fevers, wounds, (especially 
if in human or airy signs), loss of blood, passio- 
nate impulses, slander, and brothers. 

Jupiter. Prosperity, religion, legal and pro- 
fessional matters, legacies, and uncles. Good 
aspects bring great prosperity and give optimism, 
and joviality, but afflictions tend to blood 
disorders through intemperance or excess. 

Saturn. Diseases, falls, hurts, deaths, colds, 
rheumatism and slow lingering ailments, teeth 
trouble, contact with aged people or old asso- 
ciations, death of elderly people, investments 
and business. Good aspects cause steadiness, 
contemplation, and sometimes bring legacies ; 
bad ones cause melancholy and suspicion. 

Uranus. Association with large firms, the 
Government, corporations, and very aged people, 
such as grandparents. Electrical, occult, or 
antiquarian matters excite interest. Unexpected 
changes occur and there may be some very ro- 
mantic episodes. If afflicted there are sudden and 


204 


INTERPRETATION OF DIRECTIONS 


unexpected crashes. The influence of Uranus 
is always sudden and peculiar. Under affliction 
it frequently brings most promising looking 
opportunities which if taken lead to sudden 
disaster. 

Neptune. Psychic and spiritual interests or 
experiences. A sea trip or journey to the seaside. 
Interest in music or speculation, association 
with hospitals and places of confinement, pecu- 
liar and irrational fears or desires. If well as- 
pected it brings idyllic or highly spiritual ex- 
periences, but if afflicted leads to drug taking, 
excessive smoking, or peculiar excesses, and 
gives great danger of fraud and trickery. 

Midheaven. Aspects to the midheaven are 
similar in nature to those to the Sun and affect 
profession, honour, business, and the parents. 

Ascendant. Aspects to the Ascendant are 
similar to those to the Moon, affecting the health 
and causing changes and journeys. 

Any of the above matters may be stimulated 
by direction, the effect being favourable or the 
reverse, according to the nature of the aspect, 
the conjunction being good or evil according 
to the bodies concerned. The particular in- 
fluence can only be judged by a consideration 
of the signs and houses involved, and it is there- 
fore of little use to give details of the effect 
of each planet upon the others. In Mutual 
Directions the matters pertaining to each planet 
are affected, but in lunar aspects the chief effect 
comes from the planet aspected by the Moon 
and the houses and signs containing it and ruled 
by it, as the Moon in this case acts in a negative 
manner and excites the influence of the other body, 
It should be remembered that directions not 


205 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


only produce events but also bring into the life 
people of the types ruled by the bodies forming 
the aspects, and who answer in personal appea- 
rance or character to the planets, signs and aspects 
that are being stimulated. The conjunction and 
parallel in particular always introduce the na- 
tive to new people or surroundings. 

Transits. A transit over a point affected by 
direction will precipitate the effect, but to be 
strongly operative the transit must be of the 
same nature as the direction, and if it is of an 
opposite nature its power will be held in check. 
Transits are subsidiary to directions except 
in the case of a transiting planet that is statio- 
nary upon a radical or progressed body, as this 
has the power of a direction. A strong conjunc- 
tion or opposition of two transiting bodies on a 
sensitive part of the map is always important. 
The power of transits should not be over-exagge- 
rated and their effect should always be inter- 
preted in the light of the directions in force, 
but they are of extreme use in marking the exact 
date when a given direction is most likely to 
operate. 

New Moons. Particular notice should be taken 
of New Moons, especially when no lunar aspects 
are in force. The house and sign of the radical 
map in which a New Moon falls will always be 
affected, and the nature of the effects may be 
judged by the aspects made by the New Moon 
to the radical planets and also by the aspects 
in the New Moon map considered by itself and 
in relation to the radical map. The relation to 
the progressed map is also of some importance 
but its influence is not so marked as a rule unless 
there are few aspects to radical planets and a 


206 


INTERPRETATION OF DIREGTIONS 


great number to progressed ones. The effects 
of a New Moon are in force for one month, but 
are modified by the quarters and full Moon 
which have a secondary influence. 

Ecuipses. An eclipse falling on any planet 
in the map is of great importance and is usually 
adverse, as it cuts off the things signified by 
that body in the radical map. Unlike an or- 
dinary new or full Moon an eclipse lasts much 
longer than a month and its influence is often 
not felt for along time. The effects of an eclipse 
of the Sun are said to last for as many years 
as the eclipse is hours in duration, and those 
of the Moon for as many months as the lunar 
eclipse is hours in duration. During these periods 
the eclipse effects will be felt whenever stimulat- 
ed by directions or transits, and the most marked 
effect will always occur when a planet is in 
transit over the eclipse point, the nature of the 
effect being shown by the nature of the transiting 
body, Mars causing cuts and burns, Saturn 
falls and deaths, and so on. The affairs of the 
house in which the eclipse falls in the radical 
map will also be disturbed. Although usually 
adverse an eclipse may sometimes produce ulti- 
mate good, and in the case of an eclipse falling 
on Jupiter, and to a lesser extent when on Venus, 
the immediate result is unpleasant but the final 
result is advantageous. Eclipses are of extreme 
importance and should always be most carefully 
studied. The most dangerous are those that fall 
upon the Sun, Moon or Ascendant, as they 
usually disturb the health and frequently denote 
death when the directions are sufficiently severe. 


207 


CHAPTER II 
PRIMARY DIRECTIONS. 


Primary directions are formed by the rotation 
of the earth alone, and ignore the progression of 
the planets in their orbits. By the earth’s 
rotation a planet is carried up to an angle or to 
the place or aspect of another planet which is 
supposed to remain fixed and the time at which 
an event so symbolised will happen is represented 
by the “‘arc of direction” or the number of degrees 
of right or oblique ascension through which the 
moving body has to pass. 

Primary directions are either mundane or 
zodiacal. The former are computed with re- 
ference to the mundane positions of the planets 
in the houses, and the latter are concerned with 
the zodiacal degrees occupied by the planets 
irrespective of their house positions. In the 
mundane system a direction is termed direct if 
the motion of the moving body is clockwise, and 
converse if it is anti-clockwise, while in the zodiacal 
system a direct direction is formed by motion in 
the order of the signs (i.e. anti-clockwise) and a 
converse one by motion against the order of 
the signs (i.e. clockwise). As before it is usual 
to write the moving body first and to state after 
the aspect whether it is mundane or zodiacal and 
direct or converse. 

It is not possible within the limits of a general 


208 


PRIMARY DIRECTIONS 


text book to treat the subject of primary direct- 
ions so fully as could be desired, but their 
great importance renders their inclusion neces- 
sary to any complete outline of astrological 
practice, and it will therefore be possible only 
to give the full rules, lengthy examples being 
necessarily omitted. 

The object of primary directing is to obtain 
the arc of direction which is finally converted 
into time by a simple proportion. It should, 
however, be understood at the outset that the 
system requires that the time of birth be known 
to great accuracy, for an error of 4 minutes in 
the birth time throws a direction one year wrong 
in its date of operation, and therefore unless the 
birth time is exactly known, or can be found by 
rectification, it is useless to compute primary 
directions. 

The Sun, Moon, Ascendant, Midheaven, and 
Fortuna are the bodies to which direction is 
made and are termed Significators, the other 
planets being called Promittors. It is usual to 
direct promittors to significators and vice-versa, 
but it is not generally held to be legitimate to 
direct the promittors among themselves, or in 
other words directions corresponding to the 
Mutual Directions of the Secondary system are 
not usually computed as it is considered that 
all events are indicated by directions between 
promittors and significators. 

In order to facilitate calculation it is neces- 
sary first of all to prepare a “Speculum” or table 
showing the Right Ascension, Meridian Distance, 
Semi-arc, and Cuspal Distance of each of the 
planets. It is necessary also that the latitudes 
of the planets should be known and these may 


209 
Astrology N 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


be obtained direct from the Ephemeris. The follo- 
wing arethe elements included in the speculum :— 

Right Ascension. (R. A.) is the distance of the 
planet or point from ‘Vv o° measured along the 
equator. Meridian Distance (M. D.) is the dis- 
tance of the planet in degrees of R. A. from the 
M.C. or I.C. and is called upper and lower 
M. D. respectively. The Semt-arc (S. A.) is half 
the time the planet remains above or below the 
horizon expressed in degrees and minutes of 
space, the former being called the diurnal S. A. 
and the latter the nocturnal S. A. One third of 
its S. A. is the extent of a house for the planet 
concerned. The Horizontal Distance (H. D.) is 
the distance of the planet from the eastern or 
western horizon, and the Cuspal Distance (C. D.) 
is the distance of the planet from the cusp of 
a house measured in accordance with its S. A. 

For the purposes of calculation it is customary 
to use Ternary Proportional Logarithms, a table 
of which will be found on pp. 398—413 of 
Chambers’ Mathematical Tables. This table 
should be altered so that the words “1 degree 
or hour’ and ‘‘2 degrees or hours’ at the head 
of the tables read 60° and 120° respectively ; the 
minutes heading each column should be changed 
to degrees, and the seconds on the left should 
be changed to minutes. 

The following formulae are necessary :— 

1. To convert the longitude of the Sun or of a 
zodiacal degree into R. A. 

Log. Cos. obliquity of ecliptic (23° 27’) + log. 
tan. long. from Y or (or log. cotan long. 
from 95 or %) = log. tan. R.A. from Y or & 
(or log. cotan R. A. from 93 or %).. If in y, 
‘, or I the answer is the required R.A. ; if 


2I0 


PRIMARY DIRECTIONS 


in 95, §), mp add 90°; if in 2, m, 3 add 180°; 
and if in %, x, X add 270°. 

2. To convert the long. of the Moon and planets 
into R. A. 

Log. cos. declination (arithm. comp.) + log. 
cos. latitude of planet + log. cos. long. from ‘VY’ 
or 2 (or log. sine long. from 95 or %) = log. cos. 
Rk. A. from ‘Y or 2 (or log. sine R. A. from 95 or Z). 

3. Given long., to find the declination of the 
Sun or of a zodiacal degree. 

Log. sine obliquity of ecliptic (23° 27’) + log. 
sine long. from ‘Y or = (or log. cos. long. from 
95 or %) = log. sine declination. 

4. Given declination, to find the long. of the 
Sun or of a zodiacal degree. 

Log. sine declination — log. sine obliquity of 
ecliptic = log. sine long. from Y or «© (or log. 
cos. long. from 95 or 7). 

5. To find Meridian Distance subtract the R.A. 
of the planet from the R. A. of the M. C. or I. C. 
whichever may be nearer, if it is west of the 
M.C. or east of the I.C. If it is east of the 
M. C. or west of the I. C. subtract the R. A. of 
the nearer Meridian from the R. A. of the planet. 

6. To find Ascensional Difference. (A. D.) Log. 
tan. declination + log. tan. latitude of birth- 
place = log. sine A. D. 

7. To find Oblique. Ascension. (O. A.) With 
north declination, R. A: — A. D. = O. A. With 
south declination, R. A. + A. D. = O.A. (For 
places in south latitudes reverse these rules). 

8. To find Semi-arc. 

For diurnal S. A. with N. declination, 90 + A.D. 


a? a2 33 39 2? 00° ” a) 
4 Hoeturnal <iirk aah N. yy 90 —,, 5, 
o> 9) oF 6F9 9? a a? go + »”? ”? 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


(Reverse the rules for southern latitudes). 


g. To find Horizontal Distance. 


M. D. of the planet from its S. A. 


to. To find Cuspal Distance. 


Subtract the 


In the following 


rules use lower M.D. and nocturnal S. A. for 
a planet in houses 1 to 6 inclusive, and upper 
M. D. and diurnal S. A. for one in houses 7 to 12 
inclusive. 


If in houses 1 


” 


” 


Lat: 


ns Oy 


or 7 S.A.—M.D. 


ph | 409 M.D. 
>a se) M.D. 


plots eA. — MD 
» I M.D.—4S.A. ,, 
» » ¥S-A—M.D. ,, 
» 12 M.D.—#S.A. 
61s. OED 


et 
OL MDs SAF 
» 8S A—MD. 
a, MDI Si As 
, 9 $SA—M.D. 


is the distance below 1 or above 


above 2 ,, 
below 2 ,, 
above 3 ,, 
below 3 ,, 
Be Of fee 
W.of 4 ,, 
below 5 ,, 
3 » above 5 ,, 
below 6 ,, 
above 6 ,, 
below 7 ,, 


below 
above 
below. 
above 
W. of 
G8 
above 
below 
above 
below 
above 


The preliminary step is to compute the specu- 
lum and for practical work it will be found 
convenient to include the following columns. I 


2 Dec. 


3 R.A. 4. M.D. and its ternary 


prop. log. 5. H. D. and its log. 6 both S. A.’s 


and their logs. 
8 both C. D.’s and their logs. 


7 one third of both S. A.’s. 
g Constant log. 


The constant log. is found by adding the arithmet- 
ical complement of the ternary prop. log. of 
the S. A. to the ternary prop. log of the nearest 
C.D. The S. A. used should be diurnal if the 
planet is above the horizon and nocturnal if it 
is below. The arithmetical complement of a log. 
is of frequent use and is found by subtracting 
the log. from 10.00000. The quickest way to 
do this is to write down the numbers necessary to 
make each figure of the log. add up to 9 working 


212 


* 


PRIMARY DIRECTIONS 


from left to right, and making the last right 
hand figure up to 10. Thus the arithm. comp. 
of 0.32568 would be 9.67432. 

When it is desired to calculate the mundane 
directions of Fortuna that point must be com- 
puted in a special way, and it is not possible to 
use its position in the zodiac as usually deter- 
mined. According to the method of Negusantius 
the mundane position of @ is to be found as 
follows :— Add the R. A. of the ) to the O. A. 
of the Asc., and from the sum subtract the O. A. 
of the ©, adding or subtracting 360° if the 
subtraction requires this or the sum exceeds 
that amount. The result is the R. A. of Q. Its 
declination is the same as that of the ) and its 
S. A. is also the same as that of the ) if they 
are both on the same side of the horizon, but if 
one be above and the other below it is found 
by subtracting the S. A. of the ) from 180°. 

A. MuNDANE DIRECTIONS TO ANGLES. A 
planet on the cusp of the Asc. is in mundane 
square to the M.C., one on the cusp of the 
I2th is in mundane sextile to the M.C. and 
semi-sextile to the Asc. and so on. 

(a) Direct Directions. The C. D. of a planet 
measured from the cusp to which it will next 
come if moving in a clockwise direction gives the 
first arc of direction. Thus a planet 9° 30’ 
above the 8th cusp will be % M. OG. and X Asc. 
after moving 9° 30’, and this is therefore the arc 
of direction. To this keep adding one third of 
the planet’s S.A. to bring it to the cusp of 
successive houses, noting the arc of direction 
in each case. The Z and @ are formed in the 
middle of houses and one sixth the S. A. must be 
added to obtain these. While the planet is above 


213 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


the horizon the diurnal S. A. must be used and 
while below the nocturnal S.A. If it passes 
across the horizon the S. A. must be changed. 

(b) Converse Directions. The method of proce- 
dure is identical with the exception that the first 
arc of direction is the distance of the planet 
from the cusp to which it would next come if 
moving in an anti-clockwise manner. Succes- 
sive thirds of the appropriate S.A. are then 
added as before. 

B. MUNDANE DIRECTIONS BETWEEN SUN, MOON 
AND PLANETS. One body is considered to be 
fixed and the other to be brought up or down 
to its conjunction or aspect by the rotation of 
the earth. Rule:—As the S.A. of the fixed body 1s to 
its C.D. so is the S.A. of the moving body to its 
second distance from that cusp from which the 
aspect 1s formed. The correct S.A. belonging to 
each body should be used. If the moving body 
crosses the cusp to form the aspect the sum 
of its first and second C.D.’s is the are of di- 
rection, but if it remains on the same side of the 
cusp the difference of the distances is the arc 
of direction. Further directions are found by 
adding one third of the S.A. of the moving 
body (or one sixth for Z and {) to the first arc 
of direction. If the moving body crosses the 
horizon the above proportion must be calculated 
again using the opposite S.A. of the moving 
body. Suppose 2] is 3° above the cusp of the 
2nd and the © is 4° above the cusp of the 6th. 
The © will form the trine of 2| when it is about 
3° below the cusp of the 6th measured in pro- 
portion of its S.A. Then the first arc of direction 
will be the Sun’s distance above the 6th plus 
its second distance below as it has to cross the 


214 


6 PRIMARY DIRECTIONS 


cusp. Adding one third of its nocturnal S.A. 
brings it to (] 21, another third gives 2, 
another sixth gives Z 2|, another sixth gives 
N 2,, and another third brings it to ¢ 2|. The 
converse series begins with a proportion to find 
the Sun’s second distance below the 7th. Then 
a further proportion is necessary using the diur- 
nal S.A. to find its distance below the 8th. In 
a case like this it is more convenient to use the 
C.D. of 2| below the rst and then to find the 
proportional distance of the © above the 7th 
which can then be added direct to the Sun’s 
H.D. to obtain the arc of direction. In working 
out proportion sums like the above find the arithm. 
comp. of the log. of the first term and add to it 
the logs. of the second and third terms. The 
sum is the log. of the answer. 

CG. MUNDANE PARALLELS. These are formed 
when two bodies are at equal distances from 
the Meridian measured in proportion to their 
$.A.’s Both bodies may be on the same side of 
the Meridian or on opposite sides. Rule:— As 
the S.A. of the fixed body is to its M.D. so is the 
S.A. of the moving body to its second distance 
from the Meridian on which the parallel is formed. 
The arc of direction is the difference between the 
first and second distances if the body remains 
on the same side of the Meridian, and the sum 
of these distances if it crosses. 

D. Rart PARALLELS. In this case both bodies 
are considered to move until they occupy pro- 
portional distances from either the Meridian or 
horizon. One of the bodies will be approaching 
the Meridian or horizon and the other receding 
from it, and it is the applying body that is 
directed. The S.A.’s employed are those proper 


215 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


to the bodies when*®the direction is complete 
and the M.D.’s or H.D.’s should both be measured 
from the same Meridian or horizon. Rule:— As 
half the sum ofjthe S.A.’s of the two bodies is 
to half the sum of the M.D.’S (or H.D.’s) sois 
the S.A. of the body applying to its distance 
from that Meridian (or horizon) when the aspect 
is complete. 

E. ZODIACAL DIRECTIONS TO THE M.C. Zodiacal 
directions are concerned only with the zodiacal 
degrees occupied by the planets or in which 
their aspects fall. In directions to theM.C. calculate 
the R.A. of the degree and minute in which the 
conjunction or aspect falls and find the difference 
between it and the R.A. of the M.C. Suppose 
the M.C. is m1 5, and the © g5 7. When the M.C. 
comes to 1 7 it will form the direction M.C. 
NM. ©, zod. dir. To compute this find the R.A. 
of m 7 and subtract the R.A. M.C. The answer 
will be the arc of direction. The next aspect for- 
med will be M.C. ¢ ©, to calculate which the 
R.A. M.C. must be subtracted from the R.A. 
of 95 7. In zodiacal directions every aspect needs 
a separate calculation and as the directions are 
concerned only with the longitude of a body the 
quantities given in the speculum must not be used. 

Zodtacal Parallels to the M.0. These are formed 
when the M.C. arrives at a degree having the 
same declination as one of the planets in the 
horoscope. Find the longs. of the zodiacal de- 
grees to which the given planet’s declination 
corresponds by means of formula 4. Then find 
the R.A. of this degree and take the difference 
between this and the R.A. M.C. as the arc of 
direction. 


F. ZODIACAL DIRECTIONS TO THE ASCENDANT. 


216 


€ 


PRIMARY DIRECTIONS 


The Asc. is directed by oblique ascension. The 
O.A. of the Asc. is found by adding go° to the 
R.A. of the M.C. To direct the Asc. find the 
R.A., Dec., A.D. and finally the O.A. of the 
degree and minute in which the aspects falls. 
The difference between this and the O.A. of the 
Asc. is the arc of direction. 

Zodtacal parallels to the Asc. Convert the 
dec. of the body whose parallel is required into 
long. Find the O.A. of this long. and take the 
difference between it and the O.A. of the Asc. 
as the arc of direction. 

G. ZODIACAL DIRECTIONS BETWEEN SUN, 
MOON, AND PLANETS. These are formed by one 
body passing up or down to a zodiacal degree 
to form the aspect or conjunction of another 
body. Either the moving body or the fixed 
point will occupy the foremost position in a 
clockwise direction and whichever is the further 
advanced in this way is called the preceding body 
or point, the other being the succeeding one. The 
preceding body or point is always further back 
in the zodiac than the succeeding one, but further 
advanced if both are thought of as moving in 
a clockwise direction. The rule for both direct 
and converse directions is:— As the S.A. of the 
preceding body or point is to its M.D. so is 
the S.A. of the succeeding body or point to its 
second distance from the Meridian. If the suc- 
ceeding body crosses the Meridian the sum of its 
first and second distances is the arc of direction, 
but if it remains on the same side the difference 
of the distances is the required arc. Use that 
S.A. and M.D. which belong to the preceding 
body or point and if they are diurnal then all 
must be diurnal. 


217 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


In all cases one of the two factors is a body 
and the other a point, or in other words a body 
is always directed to a longitude which may 
be the actual longitude occupied by a planet 
or one in exact aspect to it. In computing the 
direction the S.A. and M.D. of the pom must 
be calculated but those of the body may be taken 
from the speculum. . 

Zodiacal Parallels are to be treated in a similar 
manner, the longitude corresponding to the 
planet’s declination being computed and used 
as the point to which direction is made. 

This completes all the classes of directions 
that can be formed. It is a tedious process to 
compute all the arcs for a life time but it is worth 
the trouble and it will be found easier to compute 
a long series than to select only those due to 
operate in any one year. 

Having a list of all the arcs of direction arrange 
them in numerical order and at the side write 
the date to which each arc corresponds. For 
this purpose it is necessary to convert the arc 
of direction into time, and the most usual and 
generally satisfactory method is that of Ptolemy 
namely 1° is equivalent to one year of life and 
5’ to one month. Thus an arc of direction of 
35° 25’ will operate at the age of 35 years 5 months. 

Certain other measures of time have also been 
suggested of which the following are the most 
important:— 

Naibod’s Method. The Sun’s mean daily motion 
(59’ 8”) represents one year of life. In other 
words each degree of R.A. measures I year 5 
days 8 hours, and each minute 6 days 4 hours. 

Simmonite’s Method. The Sun’s actual daily 
motion after birth represents one year of life. 


218 


PRIMARY DIRECTIONS 


In other words the increase in the Sun’s R.A. 
from noon on the day of birth to noon on the 
next day is the measure for the first year ; that 
from noon on the first day after birth to noon 
on the second is the measure for the second year, 
and so on. A variety of this method is to employ 
the Sun’s actual daily motion in R.A. on the day 
of birth as a constant measure for the whole 
of life. 

Placidus’ Method. Add the arc of direction 
to the Sun’s R.A. The direction will operate when 
the Sun in its daily motion after birth attains 
this R.A., the time being measured at the rate 
of 1 day to a year, and 2 hours to a month. 

Each of these methods has its advocates, but 
the simple Ptolemaic measure of 1° = I year is 
that in greatest favour and the student would 
do well to follow it. 

The interpretation of primary directions is 
similar to that of secondaries with the exception 
that lunar aspects are of much longer duration 
and importance. Note the planets, signs, and 
aspects involved and interpret accordingly having 
regard to the houses occupied and ruled and re- 
membering also that the house into which the 
moving has body passed is likewise of influence. 


219 


CHAPTER IV 
MINOR METHODS OF DIRECTING 


Apart from the two main systems already 
described there are a number of minor methods 
of directing, all of which give more or less good 
results. The multiplicity of systems that have 
been advocated tends rather to embarrass the 
student, especially if he begins to apply them 
all, but it is at least as well for him to know of 
their existence and something of the principles 
upon which they rest in order that he may form 
his own opinion as to their merits. 

In general the Primary system is the most 
reliable, but the complicated and tedious nature 
of its practice and the necessity for absolutely re- 
liable birth data render it unsuitable in the 
majority of cases. Next to that in general 
utility and reliability comes the Secondary system, 
and the greater number of astrologers use no 
other. Some, however, also employ converse 
secondary directions and the Solar Revolution, 
but beyond that the other methods herein ex- 
plained are practically never used. With this 
brief apology we may now turn to a rapid survey 
of the most important minor systems that have 
been put forward. 

I. CONVERSE SECONDARY DrreEctions. These 
are frequently termed ‘‘pre-natal’’ directions since 
they are all formed in the heavens before birth. 


220 


MINOR METHODS OF DIRECTING 


The process of calculation is exactly the same 
as that used in the ordinary secondary system 
except that the number of days corresponding 
to the native’s age in years is counted backwards 
from birth, 30 days before birth representing the 
events of the 30th year of life. The horoscope 
and the Solar and Mutual aspects are calculated 
as usual and the Moon’s daily motion is divided 
by 12 to obtain its monthly position, the only 
difference being that everything is passing back- 
wards and the Moon moves about 1° backwards 
each month instead of forwards. This is pro- 
bably the most important of the minor methods 
and forms a useful adjunct to the ordinary 
Secondary system. 

2. SOLAR REvoLuTion. This is a map erected 
each year for the moment the Sun returns to 
the exact degree, minute, and second that it 
occupied at birth. Unlike the Secondary system 
the map must be erected for the actual year 
for which a forecast is required. The horoscope 
so obtained is judged partly as a separate map 
but chiefly with reference to the radical horos- 
cope. Thus the ruler of the radical Asc. in the 
revolutional 6th is an indication of ill-health, 
and so on. The position of planets in the revo- 
lution in aspect to, or on the places of planets 
at birth is important, and these act almost like 
directions. The times of happenings denoted in 
the revolution are indicated by transits over the 
revolutional positions during the year. 

3. PRECESSIONAL SOLAR Revo.utTion. It has 
been suggested that as the whole zodiac is moving 
backwards owing to the precession of the equinox- 
es, the ordinary Solar Revolution does not 
represent the return of the Sun to its real birth 


221 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


position. The amount of precession is 50”.25 
per annum, and before erecting the precessional 
revolution this amount should be added to the 
radical longitude of the Sun for each year of 
life, the Solar Revolution being calculated in 
_ the ordinary way but using this revised longitude 
as that which must be occupied by the revolutio- 
nal Sun. 

4. PROGRESSIVE SOLAR REvo.tutTion. This is 
equivalent to counting a year, and a day for each 
year of life. Add to the date of birth as many 
days as the native is years of age. Use the 
position of the Sun on that date but erect the 
rest of the map in the usual way for the current 
year for which the revolution is required. 

5. SynopicaL Lunations. A Synodical Luna- 
tion is the return of the progressed Moon to the 
same distance from the progressed Sun as the 
radical Moon was from the radical Sun. Each 
Synodical Lunation, which occurs once every 
294 days or thereabouts, measures to one year 
of life, and a map should be erected for the 
moment when the relationship of the luminaries 
to each other is exactly the same as at birth. The 
first return of the luminaries to their birth rela- 
tionship will take place in the month after 
birth, and will measure from age I to age 2, 
and so on. Synodical lunations are subsidiary 
to directions and are to be interpreted in the 
same way as a Solar Revolution. 

6. CURRENT SYNODICAL LuNaTions. These 
are maps erected for any given month in the 
current year when the luminaries are in the 
same relationship as at birth. Their rule is 
limited to the space of one month. 

7. Lunar Revo.vution. This is exactly ana- 


222 


MINOR METHODS OF DIRECTING 


logous to the Solar Revolution and is a map 
erected for each month of the current year and 
for the moment when the Moon returns to its 
exact longitude at birth. It rules for one month. 

8. Diurnat Horoscope. This is a map erected 
for the time of birth on each day in the current 
year and rules for one day only. Its chief uses 
are for finding the exact date of operation of 
an aspect, and for determining good and bad 
days, those days being bad on which the malefics 
or their radical places pass across the angles 
of the diurnal horoscope. 

g. Periopic Directions. These are directions 
formed by the planets in their motion through 
the signs in accordance with their Kabalistic 
periods of revolution. These periods are said 
to be as follows :— © Ig years, )) 4 years, 3 Io 
years, 2 8 years, J 15 years, 2| 12 years, and 
h 30 years, and to these might, perhaps, be 
added m 84 years and J{ 165 years. In this 
system of directing each planet is said to pass 
through the 12 signs once in its period, so that J, 
for example, will take 15 years to come back 
to its birth position, and will, therefore, move 
at the rate of 24° a year and 2°a month. A table 
should be formed showing the place of each 
planet each year, and directions will be formed 
by the aspects made by the progressed planets 
to radical bodies and among themselves in their 
passage through the various houses of the birth 
map. 

IO. PROFECTIONAL Directions. These are of 
three kinds, Annual, Monthly, and Diurnal, and 
are, perhaps, more Kabalistic than purely astro- 
logical. In annual profections the Ascendant 
advances one complete sign in one year, and the 


233 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


other signs are arranged in their normal order 
round the cusps of the other houses. Thus if 
the birth Ascendant is m, that for the next 
year of life will be 95, and so on, the birth As- 
cendant returning every 12th year. The planets 
remain fixed in their birth positions and judgment 
is drawn from their passage over or aspects to 
the angles, the exact time of such aspects being 
easily determined by proportion. A _ similar 
process is also to be applied to the M.C., ©, ), 
and @, each of which advances one sign per year. 

Monthly profections are formed in a similar 
manner one sign being added for each month, 
and in the case of Diurnal Profections one sign 
is added for every 2 days 8 hours. 

Ir. ALFRIDARIES. An Alfridary is an arrange- 
ment by which the life is divided into periods 
ruled by the planets in a definite order. A 
number of alfridaries have been put forward, the 
most famous being that of Ptolemy, in which 
the )) rules from birth to 4 years of age, § from 
4 to 14, 9 to 22, © to 41, ¢ to 56, 2| to 68, and 
finally h to 98. It has been said that ordinary 
directions to a planet act more powerfully in the 
period of life ruled by it. 


224 


CHAPTER V 
RECTIFICATION 


It has been shown that if a birth time is 
accurately known it is possible to arrive at a 
knowledge of the times and natures of events 
that happen during the course of the life time, 
and from this it follows that a converse process — 
is possible, namely to determine the time of 
birth when the dates of a number of happenings 
are known. This process is termed “‘rectification”’ 
and it may be employed either to find a quite 
unknown birthtime, or to correct one that is 
defined as lying between certain limits. In the 
latter case absolute accuracy of result is easily 
obtainable, but when the birthtime is not known 
to within 24 hours the process is usually exceeding- 
ly difficult and requires the most expert manipu- 
lation. 

The first step in any system of rectification 
is to determine the rising sign, as once that is 
obtained it is comparatively easy to find the 
exact degree required. In some cases this may 
be done from a photograph, and the detailed 
descriptions given in the chapters on appearance 
and character will be found of great assistance. 
It is often impossible, however, to be certain 
of a result obtained in this way, and in such 
cases the first step is rectification by Secondary 
directions, the rules for which are as follows :-— 


225 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


1. Given the date of an important event, 
count as many days after birth as the native 
was years old at the time the event happened. 

2. Take the position of the progressed Moon 
on the day so found and see whether during the 
24 hours it formed any strong and appropriate 
aspect to a radical or progressed planet. 

3. If an appropriate aspect is seen to have 
taken place on the progressed day find by means 
of proportion the time of day in hours and mi- 
nutes at which it became exact, and write it 
down in years, months, days, hours, and minutes 

4. Find the native’s age at the date of the 
event in years, months and days and convert it 
into days, hours and minutes by calling the years 
days and taking 2 hours as equivalent to rt month, 
and 4 minutes to 1 day. Write the result below 
that found in 3. 

5. Subtract the result of 4 from that of 3 and 
the answer will be the date and approximate 
time of birth. 

Thus suppose a person was born on 24 July, 
1872, and an important event took place on 
g September, 1894. The age on this date would 
be 22 years, I month, 16 days, which is equivalent 
to 22 days, 3 hours, 4 minutes. The progressed 
date would be 22 days later than 24th July 
which measures to 15 August, 1872. Let us 
suppose that an appropriate aspect was formed 
by the Moon to a radical or progressed planet 
at 4.30 p.m. on that date. 
Yrs. Mths. Days Hrs. Mins. 
Then :— Aspect formed 187208. S25 eae 

Subtract age yy a 


Birth 1872. 74 BANE oe 


226 


RECTIFICATION 


Birth is therefore indicated as having taken place 
at about 1.26 p.m. on 24th July. 

The result thus obtained should be checked 
by applying the same method to other important 
dates in the life. The final result should be correct 
within about 2 hours, but greater accuracy cannot 
be obtained in this way owing to the slowness of 
the Moon’s progressed motion. The method serves, 
however, to narrow down the field of enquiry 
and to give a choice of 2 or 3 ascending signs. 

The next step in the process is to erect a 
series of maps, (say one for every 15° on the 
M. C.) between the limits determined upon. Take 
the list of events and turn the age at each event 
into degrees and minutes at the rate of I year = 
1°, and 1 month = 5’, and then convert the arcs 
so obtained into time at the rate of 15° = 1 hour, 
I° = 4 mins., I’ = 4secs. Find from the correct 
Tables of Houses the Sidereal Time when one 
of the given degrees is on the M. C., or in other 
words the Sidereal Time for which one of the 
trial maps is erected. Add the arc in time to 
this Sidereal Time and look up the M.C. and 
Asc. corresponding to the sum in the Tables of 
Houses. Do this with each of the maps in turn, 
.and notice what planets are brought to the 
conjunction or aspect of the progressed angles. 
If any aspects appropriate to events are formed 
in any of the maps or would be formed in some 
map intermediate between two of the trial ones, 
look up the Sidereal Time which gives the exact 
aspecting degree on the M.C. or Asc. when the 
proper arc is added and adjust the map according- 
ly. Check this map by other aspects to angles 
inasimilar manner. The aspects so far examined 
are direct, and to obtain the converse ones 


227 
Astrology O 


A STUDENTS’ TEXT-BOOK OF ASTROLOGY 


subtract the arc in time from the given Sidereal 
Time and look up the. corresponding M. C. and 
Asc. Ifthe tentative map is correct there should 
be converse directions also in force. 

Being satisfied of the approximate accuracy 
of the horoscope so obtained, work it out in full 
detail, calculate the speculum, and then compute 
accurate Primary directions to angles. If dis- 
crepancies exist between the arcs obtained and 
the true arc of the event adjust the former to 
the latter and calculate the exact R. A. M. C. so 
obtained Slight differences of a few minutes 
will probably still exist, and the final R. A. M. C. 
should be taken from the most accurate arc or 
from the direction likely to operate most exactly 
to time. Aspects to 3, g, and H are usually 
well defined and act promptly, whilst those to h 
are usually too slow and long drawn out to be 
of use in estimating the time with great exactness. 

The only directions that are of much use in 
rectification are Primary directions to angles and 
Rapt Parallels, since these depend entirely upon 
the accuracy of the map, and a mistake of 
4 minutes in the time of birth makes an error 
of I year in the time of their operation. Rapt 
Parallels are of great assistance in arriving at 
the correct Asc., but directions to angles are 
handier to use and should be computed first, 
the former being used to check the final results. 

Primary directions among the Sun, Moon, and 
planets are not of great use as they are not 
affected to the same extent by errors in the birth 
time, but there is a method of employing them 
that is of service when only the approximate 
time has been ascertained, as for example. by 
the use of Secondary lunar aspects. This method 


228 


RECTIFICATION 


as given by Oxley and Zadkiel, is as follows :— 

I. Reduce the Meridian distance of the © or ), 
whichever is directed, into minutes and call it 
the first position. Add to this Meridian distance 
one degree, reducing it also to minutes and call 
it the second position. Then opposite the second 
position place the error of the original arc of 
direction expressed in minutes, multiply them 
together and call the amount A. Work the same 
direction with the altered Meridian distance 
(taking care to adjust the M.D. of the planet 
employed also), find the error in this arc of direct- 
ion and place it opposite the first position. 
Multiply these together and call the amount B. 

2. If both errors be greater or less than the arc 
for the event, find the difference between the 
errors and call this C. Find also the difference 
between A and Band call this D. Then D divided 
by C will give the true Meridian distance of the 
© or ) at the moment of birth, and the R. A. 
of the M.C. should be adjusted accordingly. 

3. If one error be greater and the other less 
than the arc for the event call the sum of the 
errors C, and the sum of A and B call D. Then 
D divided by C will give the true Meridian dis- 
tance as before. 

Having obtained the corrected time by this 
method proceed as before to adjust the map by 
means of directions to angles and Rapt Parallels. 

The final steps in obtaining the exact degree 
and minute rising at birth may also be performed 
by means of a process known as the Pre-natal 
Epoch, but this method cannot be treated here 
as it is far too vast a subject, and an imperfect 
outline would be worse than useless. 


229 


APPENDIX 


SA 


revawia atl 
He 


2 
ae 


APPENDIX 


A. THE PRESENT USE OF STANDARD TIME. 


Fast (++) or Date 
PLACE Slow (—) of of 
Greenwich Adoption 
hms 
MID DI” 5 et IO OD eee ane ec +300 Recent 
BERGA ocomalland 2)... .).000.5 0008s +.300 Recent 
PDAS ILASE, ios wists. sileye s « 0) cre swwieiae + 2300 Recent 
UVGyi eg CS oe S21) a ne, See +200 {1 March 1903 
Wnion.of South, Natal oi.02.6 20%. +200 I Sept. 1895 
Orange River Colony, Transvaal, +200 rt Oct. 1903 
Rhodesia, Cape Colony ....s.0. 600 +200 1903 
French Equatorial, Belgian Congo, 
Cameroons, Nigeria, Portuguese 
West Africa, South West Africa .. + 100 Recent 
Gold Coast, Ivory Coast, Gambia, 
PU AMOMMOY. 7S dooce cr cwie » «We Sidiahelae G.M.T Recent 
Liberia, Senegal, Sierra Leone .... —1Io0oo 
PMMA es TORY CHS Bice eltehS oloke Si eyG.ie: sip) aloo G.M.T tL Marchtg1t 
AMERICA, United States of 
Maine to S. Carolina (674° — 824°)]| — 500 |18 Nov. 1883 
Dakota and Michigan to Texas and 
Florida (824° — 974°) .....--.-» — 600 |18 Nov. 1883 
Montana to Arizona and New Mexico 
fae eed LDR) oe aa rermenclcle aiew's. 30% — 700 |18 Nov. 1883 
Pacific Coast States and Nevada 
(Gress —WCOASt) sf. c.c cis oe ols — 8oo0 |18 Nov. 1883 
BN MAKE MDE ele vintesithasioe- 9 0'B esa ie) vie e Fioye & —goo0 |18 Nov. 1883 
IARGENTING REPUBLIC (a's acne cvs eees — 400 1 May 1920 
IMGISTRAL ARCHIPELAGO™ 4.5 50:6 005 ceeds —I0 00 — 
PEER AUP AS VVOSE Gli cijsues aw tie ane ga eles 6 + 800 I Feb. 1895 
STOCEE ED BRS ot i en -a oe + 9300 |1 Feb. 1895 
Victoria, New S. Wales ........6 +1000 1 Feb. : 1895 
PE CMSLATICNE OM si ah Jae lee Seis eee 2 91 svete s +1000 I June 1895 
ATUSPREAATTUNGARY? i divs Few ce os eke af 010} 1 Oct.9 2851 
VNGAS RARER 8 oer ay fol dial Sie 0 (aks sye a's ally fcove — 200 Recent 
eA Me MeSH LGN Rte dive horas roles sie ele os — 500 Recent 


APPENDIX 


Fast (+) or Date 
PLACE Slow (—) of of 
Greenwich Adoption 
hms 

BELGIUM! (5c cose ce emilee te mire G.M.T. May 1892 

BISMARCK ARCHIPELAGO .............. +1000 | Recent (1911 

or after) 

BORNEO sac Suis ore mter Set oid crake rant ames + 800 Oct. 1904 

USOSNE AS rags a se AOE ort cs einai +100 Recent 

IBRAZIIy WeSt. osrehee wate. DARL See —500 
Central sg, irae. etecehe Team oue ccs — 400 
[ESO Ses, seers Ree ae Oe Rae tian, Sa a 300 

UGA RTA GLEE O Ri Ls eA ORR erie ee +200 Recent 

CAMIBORNTACE wretara dood ou shete wn ee eer wk — 800 

CANADA British Columbia ....,..... — 800 |18 Nov. 1883 
Mountain Zones, Alberta, Assiniboia, 

Athabasca mies a ona ricer et es — 700 |18 Nov. 1883 
Central Zones, Keewatin, Manitoba, 

Ontario (W of 823°) 1.0.2 fy.cu. — 600 |18 Nov. 1883 
Quebec (W), New Brunswick (W), 

Ontario (BE of 822°) "ss sume aes — 500 |18 Nov. 1883 
New Brunswick (E), Quebec (E), 

Nova Scotia, Prince Edward Is... | — 400 |18 Nov. 1883 

CAPR VEE ORIG... odcc.. 8 ve beads —= 210.6 Recent 

DANGSIME 10.0 Vat Pe. cs odes inv coconut +900 Recent 
Westeroner sy cnr k= ta Syn, eee tame +1000 After rorr 
OED S OES SAE ues, a eke ee ET 00 Recent 

Si aT), ee See a eae ame een Eee a S00 Recent 

CHAGG6-ARCHIPELAGO .. 05. c.sccccccc. + 5.0.0 Recent 

CHILE, Except Valparaiso, L.T. of Santiago} — 4 42 46 
Welpatatso To. T crc os te eee — 446 34 —— 
(Chile is now said to have adopted the 

Standard of — 4h) 

Cuina East Coast, Macao ............ +800 Jan. 1903 
FIMO RY BORG ths ios caheae + 8a0 Oct. 1904 
PorboA stisict pe ho Seal | Poa + 800 
French. Indo-China .............. 35% 010 Recent 

CoLomBia L. T. of ROG Otd ai ale cae eee — 456 54 

Costa Rica L. T. of San "VOSS cc pisey waren — 5 36 27. 

Guba L.-T. of Havana ........c..5... — 529 26 

GXPRUS AGT Sy oe bn oes =e Ome Recent 

CZECHOSLOVAKIA. 64.00 sees eccdenceecs =y 5 1020: Recent 

DENGEERE SAW oe citi el eae +100 |1Jan. 1894 


APPENDIX 


Fast (+) or Date 
PLACE Slow (—) of of 
Greenwich Adoption 
hms 
PicwADOR L.-1.50f Quito ....56..e.00. — 5147 
ei AUTEM A te ro cdck lone sielove e acake oie a ave dee +200 |{1Oct. 1900 
Mera EYONE Brae satel Biatb.0 9 oo, Gyro d 'eie'e Wace G.M.T Legalised 
1880 
FALKLAND Is. L.T. of Port Stanley ..] — 351 26 
[SUSIE 5) 2 ES ee G.M.T. Recent 
FEDERATED MALAY STATES .......4.. +700 Recent 
eA OLS 5 o/c 8 Here cole! sisivis a] «ors 0 9.9, 010s —200 Recent 
SP oc. Fs elects i alles, be vis a azeiels Bhes +1200 Recent 
PURO ADIN Bet, HS, cie choca oi Sha errsiin a) ene: 6 au +200 |1May tIg2t 
MAREN EO RMERE a ote cc's, she b>, vcdevetewiaie ees e + 800 I Jan. 1896 
PRI ARNCNE MEIN (Sue oye s) cate) shee oe wis 's e's ons egiui'e G.M.T. Ir Mar. Igit 
EMCEE See es ec ai cmew acca sot +.100 tr Apr. 1893 
RGUERONTDAR. 5G. > cesie ib-e does eed ve aiew sine G.M.T — 
GREECE (L. T. Athens, + 1 34 53 adopted 
14/9/ 1895 & in use until recently)} + 200 Recent 
RRA AM rs gy eo. oils bie Gis) 8. din Sia, sieve —400 Recent 
EST ATI E OUD .c, 2 'slsie\eis's, (023.3 oe wesc 0 & —400 Recent 
ATMA MIT OLICH ieee cies ojeiee vce aie oo be —400 |1 July tIoit 
HOLLAND Railway & Telegraph ...... GML: 1 May 1891 
Pere PATIISECLOANL 6... po oc eo cle ele ye + O19 32 
AM SAS Me deals dnc eis wiae's 0» 26 6 6 one —600 
LCOS 5° Sef 9 aaa SN are a ae a ae —100 Recent 
Inpia Except Calcutta and Portuguese 
Eres Seats Oe vals cieiesiee « aisle os + 5300 |1 Jan. 1906 
(CANS) ae 0 Oe ae ee ee 3. 5532 
EBreUeuesewi nid: ... liaise «oe. +500 _—_—— 
MEAN ERNE pees i alatwcals''oss)isi « sfove le erele «sls 10 + 6 300 
Mi AONTDRSeRYcae chcwiavele Gi 6c cigpis eineraieisiaie ss G.M.T 1 Oct. 1916 
From 1880 to 1916 L. T. of Dublin 
0.25.21 
i AMameMMRR IRS coin ie icte te eterdis 'elop6 Sa! e ewig 0 le were + 1 1 Nov. 1893 
I PARUAMOACNA Mee tayal<\(> sere 03: save wousre' ed SR 0's. ot —500 Recent 
AGIOS ni. Wes aero Soe tions. li e.a'e Sie +900 |1 Jan. 1888 
WAAR? Of Batavia <. 22 he's oes +7714 — 
ANC eer NMS alae Tote PW olto/o: lots a (plies é) a's few 019 B6 + 900 |1 Dec. -1904 
PES IONMOT ci ochs atin Git eve eieie Sie Wet elena eS « + 800 Oct. 1904 
PE ARES OLS 1 ni aisle vies aegis eee s 5 ax — 400 Recent 
BBV let a siemaetarle a ce cs Zep. aisle es si6 +100 — 


APPENDIX 


Fast (+) or Date 
PLACE Slow (—) of of 
Greenwich Adoption 


hms 

OW ARCHIPEEAGOMiicormivis ai stern scehecr ie —I0 00 Recent 
ILUXEMBOURG so vce orem cede Sos vier ecepousaaienase + 100 — 
MADAGASCARAI% cies aneleveclererminre deters tins +300 Recent 
DMA ORAS Deter ot Nic feos opeh teed Sueea aire face! o's pollo, asa —1o00 Recent 
NEAT AG Dn cuy scetstats: cretsce a! shalere tasers ease eh + 100 — 
MariANneE Is. Except Guam ........ +1000 After 1911 

SrA TAD sy oh cay ee ratinne fete Srna sce plldtregs olen eleee's + 9 300 — 
MOROCCO Wiel cieks: alos ee siat'e rele s Seana anarsts eee G.M.T. Recent 
EAR OUDISAS 0 ata ieceysna isles ete a 0 Sytnilep b mueiel are 9 —I000 Recent 
BERR SEATS LSI igen Jed dios a tai cis eteralece: aleve) = a> €oe +II 00 Recent 
DEAR TINO UE wets ai, eteiche erate att. sie a Sitepeswranece —400 Recent 
NEAURETEUS or eli, oS asthe, oye oie is Clete erer als +400 Récent 
Mexico, bx Tarot Mexica City: occ se <a — 6 36 27 — 
EOIN-AGO) nag valaieinl Savet edetel diebe’e \elaveles ceric ele tye G.M.T. aa 
INE Win GCALBDONTA onc. arcvoarcis are Harem eerste +1100 Recent 
NEWFOUNDLAND L.T. of St. Johns ..] — 330 44 — 
INDIE Wi GEN BAe « (tlt ha ay ravansiic: aa Sheimtahe inane s +1000 After I91t 
INE Wie ZEALAND nid te acta tere ae Mipnscoreis +11 300 — 
Nicaracua L.T. of Managua ........ — 545 10 —_——— 
INO RWVASE SOR, siorg va nesieaeh Sitka’ cnamatarerasieysialarews +100 j1 Jan. 1895 
PAN AMAUIEG. 1 sO COlOM skiers sinew tele — 519 39 — 

CANALS ZOMG ep Sno aq tis eure shea cul rehale —500 After I9g1t 
Persia L. T. of Teheran (Telegraph pur- 

WOSES) ices Sco klabtcs vale W Rabe atepeivinner ere + 325 40 
eR ME ame ain eo aaae ANU Gotha Aisa ea wi — 500 Recent 
PESCADORES: KSrinet 24 thine eee ee + 800 I Jan. 1896 
EEIULT BRINE SES sav aan ahi eat ce piecwn + 800 iz May 1899 
PORTO ORICON Sab ag fag cls oe FRAO — 4.00 — 
PORTUGAT, Wn. c te Motte tial ah tekche eileen G.M.T After r9rt 
IPRINGES LTS. aie re Cal ret enn MRE he G.M.T. Recent 
REUNION: TS. yin’ ota uabie ae ee reas +400 Recent 
FROW MANGA GES Sic: che mteaiieln ie sbape.se tees eabesauene +200 Recent 
Russia L. T. Petrograd for Telegraph & 

Raul ays | eee Cob bey acesrelaue: + 2119 a 

L. T. of place for general purposes 
SB TW OTAN Sune Asc mete oe cr hee tpaRoeodnaane: — 400 Recent 
Sits) PERRI oy Mae MELAS Ota a aoneatis ==, 44040 Recent 
SUE BOMASE TS.) horeeRy ldots uate tes eee G.M.T. Recent 
ST (VINCENT, Bi cuisine eae aoe ee — 400 Recent 


APPENDIX 


Fast (+) or Date 
PLACE Slow (—) of of 
Greenwich Adoption 
hms 
SaLvapbor L.T. of San Salvador ....] — 5 56 32 
PPAMNOI ARTO MA cpr y sents oh ED OE wh lite woah +1200 After 1911 
BANDWICH AS. F Fl ees baat eats oa ee —I0 300 Recent 
OCH) TISANUDY farses cle) sian ale sana ey siake Prd vel ot Maite telah « G.M.T. Legalised 
1880 
“DLT cat het A +=" 10,0 | POckS w8o0r 
OLR ASE 0 So SN ys Rae Ons eee Ie are +400 June 1906 
UMN 3 pce epee Ree a ar a a +700 
BREN GEOR sue gto nity coast s/s ms o/b. sg ES ae GH 8 +700 Recent 
CNR MMES oi iene GaSe leis sede dale op -ok —I0 00 Recent 
SIDE oS ¢0 yt eS SC G.M.T. I Jan. tr901 
DPRAENS SEITLEMENTS .cce omnes tsps +700 Recent 
DUMATRA IL. T. of Padang ....as..>.. + 641 21 
MVE i Aha ateldteecs ore Ku hs ajaystan cies s + 100 — 
Ea RPRERC ANIA! cssp:c s/t iss Bie ns bs omnis wn +100 I June 18094 
PERE MN TENS Bets) Sie mtroce ele wla'e sys pe d0'5 se ehs-o > +1000 
BUMOR AE OTCURUCSS 26.6 .cs mens ennse +800 Recent 
POAT O cans sie ivicie's wicks se sine dees saa sie —400 Recent 
BEAN UID NEY Marc tera Saree GW cia. ese Oia dase eae 8 —400 Recent 
MRENIDADT IS: KiTazil)... P27, eae. was were —200 Recent 
NG Er al Sf ecete ceil avarice gle uie's Raeee +100 ? IQrl 
PR SCEOViNGrE Ca ce cha ec weaved Mae eke ve es +200 
EID RLGT SAG Oh Ee ace erg eI rt ae ae ar Aa — 400 |1May 1920 
PVA EG eleidie = eG ielisia- calc ctcvet.s' 9.0 a1 — 4300 Recent 
YEE SRM creo .6).o ores ala e's vies sst ee aie ae G.M.T Legalised 
1880 
SON MEE. cet ee Shine eee ee vee" — 900 |20 Aug. 1900 


NOTE 


Early in 1919 the British Admiralty introduced a series 
of zone or standard times that are now generally adopted. 
In the above list the word ’’Recent”’ implies that the standard 
there given has been in use only since about 1918 or 1919, 
while the words ’’After tg11”’ indicate that in that year 
standard time had been proposed, but had not yet been 
adopted. Prior to the adoption of standard time it was 
customary for each country to use the local mean time 
of its capital. 


237 


APPENDIX 
B. SUMMER TIME 


ENGLAND British Summer Time (abbreviated B.S.T.) 
I916 21 May, 2am. G.M.T. to 1 Oct. 3a.m. LBs t 


£0¥7)— 8 Api? 2... en to-E7 Sept... heise 
TOES; 24 March .~..500 «ae oe oso: Septic er a. a e 
LOIQ N{O_yMarchS gcacck ose to29 Sept. isos pees 
¥920. 528 [March aii. oss ons £695 OGt sonia ie weens eee 
F921 53 ADIN ee coe neces to .2-Oct.. "S. ose eee ees : 


%922--26 Marchi: .. <0 sca +) 10 6 6 Ota cae eee 


The Summer Time Bill recently passed lays down the 
following rule for 1923 and subsequent years :— 

“The period of Summer Time shall be taken to be the 
period beginning at two o’clock, Greenwich mean time, in 
the morning of the day next following the thivd Saturdav 
in April, or, if that day is Easter Day, the day next fol- 
lowing the second Saturday in April, and ending at two 
o'clock, Greenwich mean time, in the morning of the day 
next following the third Saturday in September.” 

The Bill will not be permanent but will be renewable 
annually. 


FRANCE 
1916 14 June 22° 59™ to 30 Sept. 23" 59™ 
1917-1 April (0.0.2). to 7 Oct. (0.0:2) 
I920 14 Feb. iI1 p.m. to 23 Oct. 
I92r 14 Feb. II p.m. 
After 1921, to be in force from 15 March to 25 Oct. each 
year. 
GERMANY & AUSTRIA-HUNGARY 
1916 1 May to 30 Sept. 
1917. 16 April, 2:a.m. to -27-Sept 3 acm: 


F9rse a5 Aprilivsawses to. 26° Sept..27 255 

Has not been introduced since. 
Norway 1916, 21° May 2'a.m..to +x Oct..3 a.m. 
SWEDEN 1916 15 May I a.m. to 30 Sept. 


HOLLAND Introduced 1 May 1916 


DENMARK As I5 May 1916 
PoRTUGAL Fr 17 June 1916 11 p.m. 
GREECE = 16 June 1916 

ITALY 1916 3—4 June to ? 

1917 15 March to 1 Oct. 0.0. 

RUSSIA 1917 14 July to ? 

TANGIER 1918 6 May 0.0. to 7 Oct. 0.0. 
BELGIUM 1920 14—I5 March to ? 


238 


APPENDIX 


AUSTRALIA Mainland (including N.S. Wales, Victoria, 
Queensland, S. & W.) Sb. 
1917. 1 Jan. 2 a.m. to 25 March 2 a.m. 
Act then repealed. 


TASMANIA In force. 
t916_ tr Oct. 2a.m. to 1917, 25 March 2 a.m. 
EQr7  2u'Octir. 3.4, “to'rgrs) “3 March: >. 2)’. 
1918-27: Oct. ...= to zror9, 2 March: .<24.. 


Act then repealed. 
U.S.A. Adopted Summer Time but discontinued its use 
; at the end of IgIg. 
CanaDA Decided against Summer Time on 27 May 1919, 
but certain towns and railways used it. 


C. THE CALENDAR 
DATES OF ADOPTION OF NEW STYLE 


A.D. 1582 Denmark 
,, Oct. 15 | Italy (parts of), Portugal, Rome, Spain 
», Dec. 20 | France, Lorraine , 
» Dec. 25 | Artois, Brabant, Flanders, Hainault, 
Holland, Malines z 


1583—1584 Switzerland (parts of) 

1584 Germany (Roman Catholics) 
1586 Poland 

1587 Hungary 


1682 Mar. 1 | Strasburg 

1699 Nov. 15 | Germany (Protestants) 

1700 Dec. 12 | Friesland, Groningen, Guelderland, 
Overyssel, Utrecht, Ziitphen 

1701 Jan. 12 | Basel, Berne, Schaffhausen, Switzer- 
land (Protestants) Zurich 

1749 OF 1751 Tuscany 

1752 Sept. 14| England, all English Colonies, America 

1753 Mar. 1 | Sweden 


1872 Japan 

Igi2 China 

I9I5 Bulgaria 

I9I7 Soviet Russia 

1919 Yugo-Slavia and Roumania 


239 


APPENDIX 


The difference between the Styles is as follows :— 


15th Century 9 days 2zoth Century 13 days 
16th 5 TOs? ey 2 2Ist b a i eee 
17th oe ck eke 22nd bn TA es 
18th a Ein 353 23rd nS 15 Sy 
19th és E2ice;, 24th = 16 fe 
Add the difference in days to Old Style to obtain New Style 
Subiract ,, % »» »» rom New Style ,, ,, Old Style 


D. SENSITIVE POINTS 


A great deal of interest is now being taken in the so- 
called ‘‘sensitive points’, and the student may appreciate 
a list of them together with the method of computing each. 
There are two main series but the principles of calculation 
are similar and the method of calculating one of them (Fortuna) 
has been described in detail (See p. —) 


SERIES I. THE ARABIC POINTS 
Part of Fortune, Fortuna or Landmark (@) corresponding to 


Caduceus or Point of Commerce 33 - 
Heart oy es », Love Se E> 
. Sword cir os San a ASSLOID 3 3 
Pomegranate x aS », Increase = f2: 
Hourglass 7 ts » Fatality a 5 
. Lightning Flash ,, 3 », Catastrophe v; sa 
. Grille or Trident ,, as ow» | weteachery: a8 3 


The position of any of the above points is found by adding 
the longitude of the planet to which it corresponds to the 
longitude of the Ascendant, and from the sum subtracting 
the longitude of the Sun. 

It marks the point that would be occupied by the planet 
if the Sun were exactly rising, and it would probably be more 
correct to use the longitudes for sunrise. 

It has been said that when a planet is retrograde its 
distance from the Sun should be subiyacted from the As- 
cendant instead of being added. 

These points respond to aspects and their sign and house 


) 
g 
? 
P 


3 
2 
HI 
ut 


positions are of influence. They carry the nature of their 


corresponding planets and if those are weak the points are 
also weak. 


240 


Aum WN 


© oN 


Io. 
tT; 
I2. 
iy 
14. 
15. 
16. 
ie 
18. 
19. 
20, 


25, 
22, 
23 


24, 


25. 


26. 


27, 


. Part of the Fathey Asc. + CO poe b 
. Part of Fortune in Husbandry Asc. + b> 


APPENDIX 


SERIES II. THE ARABIC PARTS 


. Part of Life Asc. + y — New or full moon nearest 


before birth 


. Part of Understanding Asc. + 3 — g 

. Payt of Spirit Asc. + Oo ») 

. Part of Fortune Asc. + y — 

. Part of Goods Asc. + cusp of 2nd — lord of 2nd 
. Part of Brethren By day:— Asc. + 21 Ty 


By night :— Asc. + f — fa 
Part of the Love of Brethren Asc. + base 


wio O 


Part of Inhevitances and Possessions Asc. + 

Part of Male Children Asc. + 21 _ y 

Part of Female Childven Asc. + Q — y 

Part of Plays Asc. + fe) — o 

Pari of Sickness Asc. + gust 

Part of Slavery and Bondage Asc. + )) — Dispositor of )) 

Pari of Servants Asc. + o= 

Part of Marriage Asc. + cusp of 7th — Q 

Payt of Discord and Controversy Asc. + 21 Saale 

Part of Death Asc. + cusp of 8th — 

Payt of the Perilous and Most Dangerous Year Asc. + 
lord of 8th — 

Payt of Faith Asc. + 38 — ) 

Part of Journeys by Watey Asc. + 15° 95 — h 

Part of Travels by Land Asc. -++ cusp of 9th — lord 
of oth 

Part of the Mother Asc. + }) — Q (Not given by 
ancients) 

Part of Honour (a) Asc. + 19°? — ©, or according 
to some 


coal 


(b) Asc. + 3° W — y 
Part of Sudden Advancement Asc, + ioe) = (if bh 
is combust substitute ) 
Part of Magistevy and Possessions Asc. + ») =f 


241 


APPENDIX 


28. Part of Merchandise Asc. + ia — Part of Spirit 
29. Part of Friends Asc. + y — 
30. Part of Honourable and Illustrious Acquaintance 
By day :— *Ase..-.C) of 
By night :— Asc. + 45) arbi) 
31. Part of Imprisonment, Sorrow, and Captivity Asc. + 
@ — Part of Spirit 
32 Part of Private Enemies Asc. + cusp of 12th — lord 
of 12th. 


These points are to be judged according to their sign 
and house positions, and aspects, and their effects in direc- 
tions should be noted. : 

Other series of sensitive points may be obtained by taking 
the middle distances between any two bodies, and also the 
reflection of one body over another, i.e. the distance of 
one body from another projected on the other side of the latter. 


242 


E. CORRECTION TO BE ADDED TO MEAN TIME TO OBTAIN SIDEREAL TIME. 


| Mins. | Cor. 


Hours. | Correction. | Mins. | Cor. 


Se hse BIO Se ane 16 Ue kib le ue ea fe pete) 8s) oe a awe 


HSBABRHRSS FILS VSS BIRZSSSSBSESSS 


w SSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSSS 


AMP OO NDAD ANAS RLELARANKARKRNRAB 


aSRS QR Ser the SSAA geVSqgsresahQee 


IMINO INOOOOOOR EEE DWDODDDDDAIMAAIAAD 


AHBABRGRSSSILI RSS SIRSSRSBSEBAS 


PFGE a Ss. PE Fy ae a I ee TOR I Wes GE pale ans ahh Raat rtd hig eae ey oat 4 


9009 OOO St we tt tt IOI NN 69 0 099 079 019 09) Ht ST tt ST St 


MAM MOM DHONI MMO PAISIVAGHRRS 


nBEBIR=ASREBIRISBRGINLSSRHLAVSSE 


PAVRBLBSOLASSB- CRESS FRRSS°LAR LB 


BOSCO OOO 6 tt INI AI AI AIA 09 09 69 69.09 09 St SH SH St tt SI 


MAMPI OAS 1 SOK PORANRVA LETRA 


243 


sex Grenier be 
Wr ener ne 


meter graye rea 
cman rarer ene~ wrt 
Gee temorer erent 

© 


rere tier aire 
Ss tS 


eh ad 
oes 


Sav Ba SoegT eer Sittont 
dipren ree a ha nts 


apgirsh Sima ar eter 
eyes 


scab art wheal 


Md dH Td ADE 


Lexteachibtearrare we 
sara soeenbenese: 
pd ee teen te tet a ee 


ohn 
neLee mea ce 
wei of 

Rime at ee he rene be eel 


habia tere he hina be we rape ee ee baie 
DPR ATS RECN TEN 


eee Rie ee Rei) 
OGL D ERED PDI EEG IR ERI TAN IS? 


