THE FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 
‘ IN ASTROLOGY 



-The fixed stars and 

C ON STELLA TI ONS 

IN' 

AS TROLOGY 

Presented to the Library of 
The Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, by 
Late Shri Hiialal Amritlal Shah, Bom 

- by - 

VIVIAN E.-ROBSON, B.Sc. 

AUTHOR OF 

A STUDENT'S TEXTBOOK OF ASTRotoGY 



CECIL PALMER 
FORTY-NINE 
CHANDOS 
STREET 
W.C. 

2 


PREFACE 

Of late years the subject of fixed stars and constel- 
lations has aroused the interest and curiosity of the 
astrological student who has been debarred from 
examining their effects owing to the lack of available 
information. Most modem textbooks of astrology 
are silent upon the subject except perhaps for some 
tantalizing remarks upon the influence of the stars 
in cases of blindness, and for further details it lias 
been necessary to consult a great number of old 
books that arc difficult to obtain and in many coses 
prohibitive in price. For this reason there has been 
for several years an increasing demand for a book 
devoted solely to the astrological significance of 
stars and constellations, and the present work has 
been undertaken to meet this demand and to fill 
the most serious gap in astrological literature. 

My object in compiling the mass of information 
here gathered ‘together has been neither a critical 
nor an originative one. It has appeared to me to be 
desirable to place before the student as complete and 
systematized an account as possible of all that has 
ever been written about the stars from an astrological 
point of view, unburdened by alteration or criticism, 
in order that the work may stand as a foundation 
upon which future research may be built. For 
5 



6 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


this reason I have obtruded few, if any, personal 
opinions or criticisms. 

Originality is not claimed, but it is believed that 
the book will be found to contain practically every- 
thing that has been published on the subject since 
the Middle Ages, and to be as complete as it was 
possible to make it. No pains have been spared to 
attain this end, and a free use has been made of all 
sources of information. A detailed bibliography is 
unnecessary, especially as it would cover some two 
hundred books, but it is only fair to acknowledge 
my indebtedness to The Science and Key of Life , 
Vol. IV, by Alvidas, which contains much informa- 
tion on the effects of certain stars, and to'R. H. 
Allen's Star Nantes and their Meanings, which I have 
followed throughout as the best available authority 
on the orthography and derivation of the names 
of stars. The references throughout the text to 
Ptolemy, Wilson, Simmonite. Pearce and Bullinger 
refer, unless otherwise stated, to the Tetrabiblos, 
Dictionary of Astrology, Arcana of Astral Philosophy, 
Textbook of Astrology, and Witness of the Stars,, 
respectively. No plates or illustrations of con- 
stellations have been given for the reason that they 
would have added to the cost of the book without 
conferring any corresponding benefit. The student 
who wishes to follow up the subject in a serious 
manner will, of course, require some kind of star 
map, or, what is much better, a celestial globe, but 
for the ordinary purposes of astrology not even a 
map is necessary. 

If the present work has the effect of stimulating 



. PREFACE 


the astrological study of the stars and encouraging 
research it will have achieved the'puipose for which 
it was intended. 


VJVIAN ROBSON. 


48 Flanders Mansions, 

Bedford Park, London, W.4 
5th July, 1923. 



CONTENTS 

CHAPTER PAGE 

I. The Fixed Stars in Astronomy - - n 

II. The Influence of the Constellations - 22 

III. The Lunar Mansions - - - 68 

IV. The Fixed Stars in Natal Astrology - 92 

V. The Influence of Fixed Stars, Nebul/E 

and Clusters ... - 106 

VI. The Fixed Stars in Mundane Astrology 2zo 

VII. Stars and Constellations in Medieval 

Magic - ..... 229 

VIII. The Fixed Stars in Astro-Meteorology 240 

Appendix. Mathematical Formulae - - 248 

Index - 257 


9 



CHAPTER I 

THE FIXED STARS IN ASTRONOMY 

In the early days of astronomy the celestial bodies or 
stars were divided into two groups, the one consisting 
of the fixed stars and the other of the " erratic " or 
wandering stars which we now term planets. The 
fixed stars were thought to be immovable, and, al- 
though it was known that their positions with respect 
to the equinox were changing owing to precession, 
it was not until comparatively recently that the so- 
called “ fixed ” stars were found to possess indepen- 
dent motion and to be moving through space in 
immense and unknown orbits. It may, therefore, be 
remarked at the outset that to speak of " fixed " 
stars is really erroneous, but it will be convenient to 
retain the term here as there is an unfortunate tend- 
ency among certain astrologers to use the word 
" stars ” in a would-be poetical manner for the 
planets. 

Each fixed star that we see in the night sky is a 
Sim very similar to our own Sun in structure and 
general composition, and differing only in size and 
temperature. It shines by its own light and is 
probably surrounded by its own system of planets, 
though owing to the enormous distance no telescope 
constructed on present ‘lines can ever hope to dis- 
ii 



12 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

cover even the largest of such planets ; in fact were 
our Sun removed to the distance of the nearest of the 
fixed stars it would appear to us as a sixth magnitude 
star, and Jupiter, big as it is, would be totally be- 
yond the powers of our telescopes. It follows from 
this that a great many of the visible stars and all the 
brilliant ones are immeasurably larger than our own 
Sun, which is a comparatively small member of the 
Universe. 

Distances. The distance of a star when expres- 
sed in miles is such an enormous quantity that the 
mind is unable to grasp it, and in order to reduce 
the figures to manageable dimensions such distances 
are usually expressed in light years, the unit of 
which is the distance travelled in one year by light 
moving at the rate of about 186.330 miles per second, 
namely, approximately six billion miles (6,000,000, 
000,000). The distances o! only a few of the nearer 
stars are known, that nearest to us being Bungula 
(a Centaur i) at a distance of 4'3 light years, and one 
of the furthest Polaris at a distance of 44 light years. 

The basic principle underlying the determination 
of the distance of a fixed star is simple and easily 
described. Suppose we measure the altitude of a 
star, or the angle between it and the horizon, on a 
certain night in the year, and again on a night six 
months later, when the earth is at the opposite 
point of its orbit. We know the diameter of the 
earth's orbit and we have determined the altitude 
of the star from each end of this diameter, so that 
we know one side and the two adjacent angles of 
a triangle from which the length of the other sides 



THE FIXED STARS IN ASTRONOMY 13 


may easily be calculated. The difference in the 
angles so obtained is called the parallax of the star, 
and it is found to be only in the cases of the few 
near stars that any parallax can be measured, there 
being usually no appreciable difference in the star’s 
position when viewed from opposite points in the 
earth's orbit. 

Motion. It has already been stated that the 
stars are by no means fixed, and there are in fact 
three distinct kinds of motion.viz. : — (a) Precession, 
(6) Proper Motion, and (c) Radial Motion, or motion 
to or from the earth. 

(o) Precession. The precession of the equinoxes 
is a phenomenon that causes all the stars to appear 
to advance in longitude in a body at the rate of 
about 50' per annum, due to the retrograde motion 
of the Vernal Equinox, or first point of Aries, through 
the constellations. The cause of this phenomenon 
is not absolutely certain. It is usually said to be 
due to a slight annual change in the inclination of 
the earth's axis, but it has been suggested that the 
effect comes from the motion of the Sun in space 
along its own orbit, by which, of course, all the 
planets would be carried along independently of their 
own paths just as the Moon is carried round the Sun 
by the earth. This precessional change does not 
affect the relative positions of the stars among them- 
selves. 

{&) Proper Motion. In the year 1718, Halley 
jdiscovered that Arcturus and Sirius had moved 
(southwards since the time of Ptolemy, and it is now 
recognised that all stars possess a proper motion 



14 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

of their own that causes them gradually to change 
their positions relative to each other. In all cases 
this proper motion appears very small owing to the 
great distances of the stars, though their actual 
velocity is no doubt exceedingly high. ' As seen from 
the earth, the average proper motion of a first mag- 
nitude star is about 0**25 per annum, while that of a 
sixth 'magnitude star is about o'* 04 but the actual 
rates vary in individual cases, the maximum proper 
motion known being that of an eighth magnitude 
star (G. C. Z., V, No. 243) invisible to the naked 
eye which is as much as 8*7 per annum. 

In common with the other stars our Sun is moving 
through space, and if, as we are sometimes told, 
this is the real cause of precession, it is probable that 
’’its orbit is one necessitating about 26,000 years for 
• a complete circuit. The direction in which the Sun, 
and of course the whole Solar System, is moving 
at present is known, and the point which it is ap- 
proaching, or the Apex ol the Sun's Way as it is 
called, lies on the border of the constellation Her- 
icules in R, A. 277 0 5' and Dec. 35 0 N, which corres- 
ponds to rt ii° and Lat. 58° N. 

This universal motion of the stars has led to the 
suggestion that there may be a Central Sun round 
which the whole universe moves, and it has been 
suggested that Alcyone in the Pleiades is probably 
this body, but the suggestion does not find favour 
among present-day astronomers. 

(c) Radial Motion. This is really only another 
form of proper motion that has recently been in- 
vestigated. It is found that in the case of an 



THE FIXED STARS IN ASTRONOMY 15 


proaching or receding body the lines in the spectro- 
scope move, and this has been used as a means of 
measuring its velocity. The greatest velocity yet 
found is that of i* Cassiopeia*, which is approaching 
the earth at the rate of 61 miles per second, while 
other high velocities are ( Herculis, 44 miles ap- 
proaching ; Aldebaran, 36*1 miles receding ; and 
7 Leonis, 24* 1 miles approaching. 

Binary and Multiple Stars. Many stars that 
appear single when viewed with the naked eye are 
found under telescopic examination to be composed 
of two or more stars lying very close together. 
The simplest case of this is furnished by the so- 
called double stars, in which the two stars are not 
related in any way but appear dose together because . 
of the angle at which we view them. Frequently 
one is countless millions of miles further away from 
the earth than the other, but as they both happen 
to be nearly in line they appear to us to be close to- 
gether. In the same way we may have triple and 
quadruple stars acddentally grouped together. In 
the case of binary stars, however, the two bodies are 
actually related and revolve round each other, 
while even more complex relationships may be 
found in which three stars fonning a ternary system 
are all linked in the same way. 

Clusters. When a very great number of stars 
appear together we have what is called a duster, a 
well-known example being furnished by the Pleiades. 
The Milky Way also forms an enormous cluster ex- 
tending right across the heavens. It is now thought 
that the universe is disc-shaped, and that the Milky 



16 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELtATI 

II this is the 


Way represents the edge staR probably 


case we ourselves and all our ytsi ^ t0 p e a t 
lie within it. for its thickness is 
least ro.ooo to 20,000 iight years. ^ gazing 

more. In looking at the M^y WaV^ M infinite 
along the disc from inside, and, there: • (Q u iefi 
number of stars appear to be crow ^tive 
while looking at right angles the ^ 

scarcity of the stars is due to the fact tn ^ 

looking outwards from within the disc and tn 
that we see form the top and bottom beyond 
lies infinite empty space, unless as may well chan » 
other disc universes lie at distances so unmen 


that their combined light fails to reach us. 

Nebule. Many clusters were known to the 
ancients, but as a rule they called them nebulous 
stars or nebuke, as the components could not be 
separated ■with the inadequate means at their dis- 
posal. Nowadays, however.^ a great many real 
nebula? are known. These consist of incandescent 
gaseous matter extending over many millions of 
miles of space and gradually condensing fo form a 
star or solar system. They are in many stages of 
devdopment. and their relative age can frequently 
be determmed by their colour and spectroscopic 
composrbon. For astrological purposes nebula: and 
222? ‘“"'j ahray5 been 6™uped together, for at 
F^\ 6 do not know w hat, if any, distinction 
h &rim” ade as ,‘° tte Mtur = of <b* influences. 
J*2. TO * HD . Macmtod =- Although it is not 

fSTS,i?T SIU “ bIe ^ tte naiEd “>= fixed 

stars exhibit a great variety of colour, and this. 



THE FIXED STARS IN ASTRONOMY 17 


as will be seen later, was one of the early means of 
establishing the influence of a given star, though 
it could be applied only to the larger ones. For 
purposes of comparison the apparent sizes of the 
stars are denoted by numbers representing magni- 
tude. The ist magnitude stars comprise the bright- 
est in the heavens, such as Sirius, Arcturus, and 
Aldebaran, and the remaining stars are classified in 
accordance with their apparent size and brightness 
down to the 14th and 15th magnitudes. Anything 
below the 6th magnitude is almost if not quite in- 
visible to the naked eye and forms what is called a 
telescopic star. It is estimated that of the visible 
stars in the sky north of 35 0 S. declination there are 
14 of the ist magnitude ; 48 of the 2nd ; 152 of 
the 3rd; 313 of the 4th; 854 of the 5th; and 
2,010 of the 6th. 

It is found, however, that certain stars appear to 
change in brightness and to vary periodically between 
certain magnitudes. Thus Algol varies between the 
magnitudes 2 3 and 3*5 during a total period of 
2 d. 20 h. 48 m. 54'4 s., whilst the classic example 
Mira (o Celt) varies between the 9th and 2nd mag- 
nitudes over a period of about 11 months. In the 
case of Algol the variability is caused by a dark 
companion star that produces a periodical eclipse as 
the two bodies revolve round one another, but the 
reason for the variability of stars in general is very 
imperfectly understood. 

In addition to these periodic variables there are 
certain stars that show a gradual change of magni- 
tude and others that blaze out temporarily and then 



18 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

diminish in' light rapidly or disappear altogether. 
As an example of the former we have Zubeneschamali 
(ft Litres), which in the time of Eratosthenes was 
brighter than Antares {<* Scorpii) and is now one 
magnitude fainter. The latter group covers the 
temporary stars or Nova that suddenly appear from 
time to time. One of the most recent of these was 
Nova Cygni that was discovered by Mr. W. F. 
Denning, of Bristol, at 9.30 p.m., G.M.T., on 20th 
August, 1920, in R.A. 299 0 , Dec. 53 N., corres- 
ponding to Long, K i° 22', Lat. 70° N. 50', which 
was thought to have been connected with serious 
rioting and incendiarism at Belfast. The cause of 
the sudden increase in brilliancy of these bodies is 
not known with any degree of certainty, but it seems 
probable that in some cases it is due to the collision 
of two stars. 

Classification. Several different methods have 
been used throughout the ages to classify and iden-’ 
tily the stars, but almost all are based upon the 
fundamental grouping into constellations. In the 
days of Ptolemy only 48 constellations were recog- 
nized, the remainder having been added since 1600, 
but the origin of these ancient star groups is quite 
unknown. Forty-five of them were mentioned by 
Aratos in 270 B.C., but they were in existence hun- 
dreds of years before his time, and may have been 
formed by the Chaldeans or an earlier race of people. 
It seems certain, however, that the constellation 
figures were 'chosen for astrological reasons, since 
the arrangement of the stars in any group bears no 
resemblance to its traditional form. Originally only 



THE FIXED STARS IN ASTRONOMY ig 

those stars falling on the constellation figure were 
recognised as belonging to the group, those outside 
being called “ unformed " or *' scattered/' but at a 
later date the boundaries were extended and now 
every star in the heavens is a member of some con- 
stellation. Unfortunately the boundary lines are 
not by any means well defined, and may not be 
absolutely correct from an astrological point of view, 
for they have been settled only comparatively 
recently, Argelander's boundaries being accepted 
for the northern constellations, and Gould's for the 
southern. The original divisions were probably 
more regular, especially in the case of the zodiacal 
constellations, which are now of very unequal 
extent. 

(a) By name. The earliest method of identifying 
stars was by name. All the large stars and many 
small ones bore distinctive names, most of which 
have come down to us. The Arabs gave nearly 
all the names in use in western astronomy, but they 
were probably outrivalled in their lists of star names 
by the Chinese, who seem to have had a very com- 
prehensive system of stellar nomenclature. Identi- 
fication by name has now been almost entirely 
superseded by other and better methods. At best 
it is a cumbersome system, which gives no proper 
due to the approximate place where the star may 
be found, and moreover is hopelessly inadequate to 
deal with the countless small stars now revealed by 
the telescope. For astrological purposes, however 
where only a comparatively few stars need to be 
considered, it is a much handier method than any 



20 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

other, and I have, therefore, retained the old names, 
and indeed added a few new ones where necessary, 
for it is much easier to talk of Sun conjunction 
Capulus, for example, than Sun conjunction 33 1$ 
vi Persei. 

(6) By place in constellation . Ptolemy made a 
certain advance in stellar identification by intro- 
ducing the system of naming a star according to its 
position in the constellation figure, as, for example, 
" the Right Knee of BoQtes " for Arcturus, but the 
system is a very cumbersome and inexact one, and of 
course fails completely in the case of stars lying 
outside the boundaries of the constellation figures. 
It was, however, in^ frequent use among the 17th 
century astrologers, and unfortunately has survived 
among those of the present day who pay attention 
to the fixed stars. 

(c) By constellation and letter. In 1603 Bayer 
introduced a method in which each star was known 
by the name of the constellation containing it and 
further distinguished by a letter of the Greek 
alphabet. In assigning the letters it was usual to 
start with the brightest star, calling that a, and 
so on through the alphabet in order of brightness 
Thus Rcgulus, being the brightest star in Leo, 
became known as u Leonis, the genitive case being 
used for the constellation, and this system with 
slight modification is the one in use at the present 
day. It was, of course, necessary to introduce 
numbers as well as letters when the Greek alphabet 
became exhausted, and this was done by Flamsteed. 

(4) By catalogue number. At the present time 



THE FIXED STARS IN ASTRONOMY 21 


it is usual to retain the last method for well-known 
stars but to identify the telescopic ones since dis- 
covered by their number in some reliable catalogue. 
Thus we ha ve< Groombridge 1646, Lalande 21285, 
and so on, these various catalogues containing the 
places of nearly a million stars, and giving the mean 
positions irrespective of precession, nutation, aber- 
ration, and proper motion. Thus almost every star 
can now be identified when once its Right Ascension 
and Declination are known, the use of longitude and 
latitude having long since been given up. 

For the convenience of those who wish to investi- 
gate the influence of any star not dealt with in the 
following pages, the method of- converting its Right 
Ascension and Decimation into longitude and latitude 
is fully explained in the Appendix. 

As Greek letters are extensively used throughout 
the text I append herewith the characters and names 
of the letters in the Greek alphabet : 


a Alpha 
/ 3 Beta 
y Gamma 
S Delta 
t Epsilon 
f Zcta 
V Eta 
e Theta 
* Iota 
k Kappa 
X Lambda 
H Mu 


v Nu 

i » 

o Omicron 
«^7T Pi 

p Rho 
a- Sigma 
r Tau 
v Upsilon 
Phi 

X Chi 
Psi 

w Omega. 



CHAPTER II 


THE INFLUENCE OF THE CONSTELLATIONS 

The constellations known to the ancients were but 
48 in number, their names being as follows : 

Zodiacal Constellations. 

Aries Leo Sagittarius 

Taurus Virgo Capricomus 

Gemini Libra Aquarius 

Cancer Scorpio Pisces 

Northern Constellations. 

Andromeda Cygnus Pegasus 

Aquila Delphinus Perseus 

Auriga Draco Sagitta 

Bootes Equuleus Serpens 

Cassiopeia Hercules Triangulum 

Cepheus Lyra Ursa Major 

Corona Borealis Ophiucbus Ursa Minor. 

Southern Constellations. 

Ara Cetus Hydra 

Argo Corona Australis Lepus 

Canis Major Corvus Lupus 

Canis Minor Crater . Orion 

Centaurus Eridanus Piscis Australis. 

22 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 23 


To these many more have been added in com- 
paratively recent times until their number is now 
well over 100. The original constellation figures are 
all_traditional and have been a source of annoyance 
to modem astronomers, who have naturally failed to 
trace among the stars the slightest resemblance to 
the objects they are supposed to represent. To 
those actively engaged in a study of stellar and con- 
stellation influences, however, it will soon become 
apparent that these seemingly fanciful shapes arc in 
reality a fair representation of the collective influences 
of the stars contained in them, and that the constel- 
lation of the Dog, for example, actually influences 
-dogs, ridiculous as it may appear. This, of couise, 
may be explained by assuming that the ancients 
based the figures and divisions upon their knowledge 
of the influence of each, but the same certainly can- 
not be said of the modem constellations and it is an 
amazing fact, though easily proved, that they also 
closely represent the nature of the influences. 

The rationale of this is inexplicable and we can 
only suppose that the originators were in some way 
led to choose the most appropriate figure. That 
this has happened in the case of the planet Neptune 
is a fact well known to every astrologer, and it is 
none the less true that it is also apparent in the case 
of the constellations. 

To those of an occult turn of mind the foregoing 
explanation will be adequate, but to the scientific 
investigator it will, of course, have no weight. 
U be will examine, the. tads, la ms. w.bia.*«?i WA-wntt 
however, he will see tint they arc indeed facts, even 



24 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


if they appear at first sight to be unreasonable and 
absurd. 

With this brief apology we may turn to a more 
practical consideration of the matter. The chief 
difficulty confronting the student is that each con- 
stellation occupies a fairly large part of the heavens 
and overbps others when referred to the zodiac. 
Moreover the actual boundary line between any two 
constellations is not defined with any degree of 
certainty. It is probable that the chief effect of 
each is located in one or more particular places 
wliich arc at present unknown. It seems, however, 
that the major points of influence lie in the vicinity 
of the important stars and also near the boundary of 
the constellation, which thus appears to play the 
same part as the cusp of a house. It must be re- 
membered that a star may have its own effect apart 
from that of the constellation, which is the group 
influence of many stars, and therefore the two must 
be separated when endeavouring to fix the most 
sensitive points. It is also extremely likely that 
there may be sub-influences in each constellation, 
perhaps varying with the part of the figure on which 
a given group of stars may lie, and this is a matter 
that will certainly require attention in the future. 
In practice it will be found that the effect of the 
constellation is most marked when the Sun, Moon, 
or Ascendant is posited there. The conjunction, 
opposition and parallel have effect but the influence 
of aspects cannot be traced. 

It will be noticed that Ptolemy expresses the 
nature of the constellations in terms of the planets. 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 25 


a method that will be found fully explained in Chap. 
IV. The other descriptions are modem and to be 
found chiefly among French authors. It will be 
observed that the characteristics of many of the 
groups resemble those of the sign in which they fall. 
Some years ago Sepharial suggested that the signs 
themselves might not be the real originators of all 
the influences ascribed to them, some of which might 
more properly be attributed to constellations. 
Thus in the case of Cancer the pushing nature of its 
natives may really be due to Monoceros, their love 
of dogs to Canis Major, and their love of the sea to 
Argo. This should be borne in mind for by careful 
research we may eventually be able to assign more 
exact influences to both signs and stars. In this 
connection it will be obvious that the separate in- 
fluence of each degree of the zodiac may also be a 
stellar phenomenon. 

A word is necessary, perhaps, as to the zodiacal 
constellations. These are actual irregular star 
groups lying along the ecliptic, or earth's path round 
the Sun, and should not be confused with the signs 
of the zodiac which are regular divisions of the 
ecliptic bearing the same names. In the descriptions 
given below comparatively little has been said as to 
the nature of these constellations because each has 
the same influence as the sign of the same name, and 
the latter are fully described in all textbooks of 
astrology. 

J.n order to Larilitateits use and avoid the .usee ssStp 
of consulting a globe or map the approximate extent 
of each constellation, both in longitude and declina- 



26 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


tion, as nearly as can be estimated, is indicated 
against its name. In the descriptions that follow, 
the legendary history of the constellations has been 
given wherever possible so that students of symbo- 
logy and occultism may exercise their powers of 
interpretation. In all cases, however, the Biblical 
parallels have been omitted, partly because they are 
often obvious but chiefly because they are later im- 
portations and not so worthy of study. 

i. Andromeda. The Chained Woman. <pi2— 
8 20N—55N. 

Legend. Andromeda was the daughter of Ce- 
pheus. King of /Ethiopia, and Cassiopeia. In con- 
sequence of Cassiopeia’s boast that the beauty of 
Andromeda surpassed that of the Nereids, Neptune 
sent a sea-monster (cetds) to lay waste to the country, 
and promised deliverance only on condition that 
Andromeda were offered as a sacrifice to it. She was 
accordingly chained to a rock, but was discovered 
and released by Perseus, who, riding through the air 
on Pegasus, slew the monster by turning it to stone 
with the Medusa's Head and claimed Andromeda as 
his bride. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy the influence of 
this constellation is similar to that of Venus, though 
the legend would lead one to suppose some connec- 
tion with Virgo, It is said to bestow purity of 
thought, virtue, honour and dignity upon its natives, 
but to cause battle with chimerical fears and a tend- 
ency to become easily discouraged. By the Kabal- 
ists it is associated with the Hebrew letter P <5 and the 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 27 

17th Tarot Trump "The Stars.” - If Mars af- 
flicts the luminaries from Andromeda, and especially 
if in an angle, it causes death by hanging, decapita- 
tion, crucifixion or impalement. 

2. Antinous. ft 13 — ksio. 8N — 13S. 

History. Antinoiis was a youth of extraordinary 
beauty, bom in Bithynia, and was the favourite of 
the Emperor Hadrian. He is said to nave drowned 
himself in the Nile in the belief that the Emperor’s 
life would thereby be prolonged, and the constellation 
was formed in his honour by Hadrian in 132 A.D. 
Antinoiis has also been associated with Ganymedes 
who was seized by an eagle and tarried off to be cup- 
bearer to Jupiter, but this legend belongs more 
probably to Aquarius. 

Influence. No astrological influence was suggested 
for this constellation by the ancients, but it seems to 
have been associated with the ideas of passion, love 
and friendship, for certain of its components stars 
were named Alkhalimain or A 1 Halilain, the Two 
Friends, by the Arabs, and the Kabalists associated 
it with the Hebrew letter Vau and the 6th Tarot 
Trump " The Lovers.” It has also been said to give 
a love of swimming, and to be connected with certain 
sex irregularities, the latter probably being greatest 
in ' that part of the constellation lying in Capri- 
corn. 

Note. Antinoiis lies just south of Altair in Aquila 
and is now taken as part of that constellation. He 
is sometimes represented as canying a bow and 
arrow as he is borne aloft in the Eagle's talons. 



28 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


3. Antua. Pnf.umatica. The Air Pump. T^o — 
— o. 30S--43S. 

History. This constellation was added by La 
Caillc, 1752 A.D., under the name JIachina 
Pneumatica. 

Influence. It is said to bestow prosperity, har- 
mony and spiritual force. 

4. Apus, The Bird of Paradise. fo — f 25. 

75S— 80S. 

History. This constellation was added by Bayer, 
1604 A.D., under the name Apis Indica. 

Influence. It is said to confer a kind, benevolent, 
sympathetic and ambitious nature. This part of the 
sky has apparently always been associated until birds, 
for it was known to the Chinese under the names 
" The Curious Sparrow " and " The Little Wonder 
Bird." The connection of Gemini-Sagittarius with 
flight may possibly be due to this constellation. 

5. Aquarius. The Waterman. sszg — X26. 5N — 
30S. 

Legend. Aquarius is said to represent Ganymedes. 
son of CallirhoS, the most beautiful of mortals, who 
was carried to heaven by an eagle to act as cup- 
bearer to Jupiter. According to other accounts, 
however, it is Deucalion, son of Prometheus, who was 
translated to heaven in memory of the mighty deluge 
from which only he and Pyrrha were saved. 

Influence. Ptolemy-makes the following observa- 
tions : "The stars in the shoulders of Aquarius operate 
like Saturn and Mercury those in the left hand and 


INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 29 


in the face do the same : those in the thighs have an 
influence more consonant with that of Mercury, and 
in a less degree with that of Saturn : those in the 
stream of water have power similar to that of Saturn, 
and moderately to that of Jupiter." By the 
Kabalists Aquarius is associated with the Hebrew 
letter Nun and the 14th Tarot Trump " Temperance,” 
over which virtue the constellation appears to have 
some rule. The beauty of Ganymcdes and his 
flight through the air also link it to the ideas of 
personal charm and aviation with which it is certain- 
ly connected. 

6. Aquila. The Eagle. H12— ^15, 22N— 

13S. 

Legend. Originally called Vultur Volans or the 
Flying Grype, Aquila represents the Eagle, thought 
to be Jupiter himself, that earned Ganymedes to 
heaven (see Aquarius). 

Influence . According to Ptolemy the influence of 
Aquila is similar to that of Mars and Jupiter. It is 
said to give great imagination, strong passions, in- 
domitable will, a dominating character, influence 
over others, clairvoyance, a keen penetrating mind 
and ability for chemical research. It has always 
been associated with the sign Scorpio, and by the 
Kabalists with the Hebrew letter Vau and the 6th 
Tarot Trump ” The Lovers.” 

7. Asa. The Altar, f 10 — vl o. 47S — 65S. 

Legend. During the war between the Gods and 
Titans, the Gods leagued themselves together and 



30 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


swore to withstand their enemies, confirming their 
oath upon an altar built for them by the Cyclops. 
After their victory' the altar was taken up to heaven 
to commemorate the good resulting from unity, 
According to another account Ara was the altar on 
which the Centaur offered his sacrifices. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy its influence is 
similar to that of Venus and also Mercury in some 
degree. It is said to give aptness in science, egoism, 
devotion and a love of ecclesiastical matters 

8 Argo Navis. The Ship Argo. £510—^20. 

15S-65S. 

Legend. This constellation represents the ship in 
which Jason brought the Golden Fleece from Colchis, 
said to be the first ship ever built. 

_ Influence. According to Ptolemy the bright stars 
are like Saturn and Jupiter. Argo is said to give 
prosperity in trade and voyages, and strength of 
mind and spirit, but it has been observed to accom- 
pany cases of drowning, a notable instance being 
furnished by the horoscope of Shelley, where Argo 
occupied the 8th house and contained the Sun, 
Venus and Uranus. Drowning is particularly to be 
feared when Saturn afflicts the Moon in or from 
Argo. It is probably on account of this constellation 
that Virgo, especially the first decanate, is frequently 
found to be connected with drowning. 

Argo was sub-divided by La Caille into Carina, 
The Keel ; Malus, The Mast , Puppis, The Poop ; 
and Vela, the Sails : but the separate influence, if 
any, of these divisions is not known. , 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 31 


9. Aries. The Ram. ^18 — B 20. oN — 27 N. 

Legend. Aries represents the ram with the golden 
fleece, a gift from Mercury, upon which Phrixus and 
his sister Helle escaped through the air from their 
step-mother Ino. On arriving in Colchis, Phrixus 
sacrificed the ram to Jupiter and its fleece was hung 
in the Grove of Mars, whence it was subsequently 
carried away by Jason [see Argo). According to 
another account it was the ram that guided Bacchus 
to a spring of water in the Libyan desert. 

Influence. Ptolemy's observations are as 
follows : *' The stars in the head of Aries possess 
an influence similar in its effects to that of Mars and 
Saturn : those in the mouth act similarly to Mercury, 
and in some degree to Saturn ; those in the hinder 
foot, to Mars ; those in the tail, to Venus.” By 
the Kabalists Aries is associated with the Hebrew 
letter and the 5th Tarot Trump " The Pope.” 

30. Auriga. The Charioteer. Uio - 2S3. 30N — 
GoN. 

Legend. Auriga represents Erichthonius, son of 
Vulcan and King of Athens, who was the first to 
devise a chariot, drawn by four horses, which he 
used in order to conceal his greatly deformed feet. 
The goat and kids depicted in the constellation 
figure commemorate the goat upon whose milk 
Jupiter was reared, together with her offspring. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy the bright stars 
are like Mars and Mercury. The constellation is 
said to give self-confidence, interest in social and 
educational problems, and happiness, but danger of 



32 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


great vicissitudes. The native is fond of country 
life and may be a teacher or have the upbringing of 
young people. By the Kabalists Auriga is associ- 
ated with the Hebrew letter Saraech and the 15th 
Tarot Trump " The Devil." 

11. Bootes. The Herdsman. 1^27—711,7. 10N — 
55 N. 

Legend. Bootes is said to be Areas, whose mother 
Callisto was transformed into a bear (see Ursa 
Major) by Juno. While hunting. Areas came upon 
his mother unawares in her form of a bear and pur- 
sued her into the temple of Jupiter, where he would 
have killed her and afterwards been killed himself 
by the priests. In order to prevent this, Jupiter, 
who had taken pity on them, took them both into 
heaven, where Bootes is still seen pursuing the Bear. 
According to another account Bootes is Icarius, who 
was killed by some shepherds he had made drunk 
with a flagon of wine given him by Bacchus. In 
-consideration of the grief of his daughter Erigone 
and their hound Msra, Jupiter placed her father 
in heaven as Bootes, together with herself as Virgo 
and the hound as Canis Minor. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy the influence 
of the constellation is like that of Mercury and 
Saturn, though the star Arcturus is like Mars and 
Jupiter. It is said to give prosperity from work, 
strong desires, a tendency to excess, and fondness 
for rural pursuits, together with some liking for 
occultism. The Kabalists associate it with the 
Hebrew letter Teth and the 9th Tarot Trump " The 
Hermit." 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 33 

12. Cxum. The Graving Tool. 812 — II * 5 * 

35S— 50S. 

History. Formed by La Caille, 1752, from stars 
between Columba and Eridanus. It is sometimes 
called Caila Sculpt oris, the Sculptor's Tools, and 
Scalp tori um. 

Influence. It has been said to give artistic tiste 
and inclination, religious feeling, and fondness for 
astronomy, architecture and engraving. 

13. Camelopardalis. The Giraffe. 132—2215. 
53N— 90N. 

History. This constellation was formed by Baxt- 
schius in 1614 to represent the camel that brought 
Rebecca to Isaac. 

Influence. It is said to confer patience, endurance, . 
and great wisdom, and to cause its natives to become 
teachers or instructors of some kind. 

14 Cancer. The Crab. 2522 — ft 17. sN — 40N. 

Legend. This constellation represents the crab 
that bit the heel of Hercules during his fight with 
the Lemean Hydra, and was placed amongst 
the stars in gratitude by Juno, the enemy of 
Hercules. 

Influence. Ptolemy’s observations axe as fol- 
lows : " The two stars in the eyes of Cancer are of 
the same influence as Mercury, and are also moder- 
ately like Mars. Those in the claws are like Saturn 
and Mercury." By the Kabalists Cancer is associ- 
ated with the Hebrew letter Tzaddi and the 18 th 
Tarot Trump “ The Moon." 

C 



34 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


15. Canes Vekatici. The Hunting Dogs. — 
30N— 50N. 

History. Formed by Hevelius in 1690. Tlicy are 
represen t«l by two greyhounds. the northern one 
named Astcrion, and the southern Chara, held in 
leash by BoStes and assisting in his pursuit of the 
Bear. 

Influence. This constellation gives a love of 
hunting and a penetrating mind, making those bom 
under it faithful, keen, clever and fond of specula- 
tion- 


16. Canis Major. The Greater Dog.- £ 30 — fto- 
15S— 4°S - 

Legend . This constellation is said to represent the 
dog set by Jupiter to guard Europa whom he had 
stolen and conveyed to Crete. According to other 
accounts, however, it was cither L relaps, the hound 
of Actreon ; that of Diana's nymph Procris ; that 
given by Aurora to Cephalus ; or finally one of the 
dogs of Orion. 

Influence. Ptolemy states that the stars of this 
constellation, with the exception of Sirius, are like 
Venus. It is said to give good qualities, chanty 
and a faithful heart, but violent and dangerous 
passions. There is some danger from, or fear of, 
darkness and the night, and liability to dog bites, 
though the latter characteristic is probably to be 
associated more particularly with Sirius. Canis 
Major is connected by the Kabalists with the He- 
brew letter Tzaddi and the iSth Tarot Trump " The 
Moon.” 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 35 

17. Canis Minor. The Lesser Dog. 2518— 2328. 
iN — 10N. 

Legend. Canis Minor represents Micra, the hound 
of Icarius, who drowned himself on account of his 
grief at the death of his master {see Bootes). 
According to another account it was Helen's dog 
who was lost in the Euripus. 

Influence. Ptolemy gives no information as to the 
influence of the constellation itself, but merely dcs- 
scribes that of its chief star, Procyon. By other 
authors, however, it is said to cause frivolity and 
either love of dogs or danger of dog-bites. It is 
noteworthy that the ideas of water and drowning 
seem to be universally associated with this con- 
stellation, for in addition to the Greek ideas embodied 
in the legends its Euphratcan name was the Water- 
Dog, and its Chinese equivalent Nan Ho, the South- 
ern River, certain of the stars being called Shwuy 
Wei, a Place of Water. Together with Canis Major 
this constellation is associated by the Kabalists with 
the Hebrew letter Tzaddi and the 28th Tarot Trump 
" The Moon.” 

28. Capricornus. The Goat. >525 — ^22 10S — 
35S. 

Legend. During their war with the giants, the 
Gods were driven into Egypt and pursued by Typhon. 
In order to escape, each was forced to change his 
shape, and Pan, leaping into the Nile, turned the 
wppy; ’part. tL -a 'gvjS. -ani Vnt Vower part 

into a fish, a shape considered by Jupiter worthy of 
commemoration in the heavens. 



36 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


Influence. ^Ptolemy’s observations are as follows : 
** The stars in the horns of Capricorn have efficacy 
similar to that of Venus, and partly to that of Mars. 
The stars in the mouth are like Saturn, and partly 
like Venus : those in the feet and in the belly .act 
in the same manner as Mars and Mercury : those in 
the tail are like Saturn and Jupiter." By the 
Kabalists this constellation is associated with the 
Hebrew letter Yod and the ioth Tarot Trump "The 
Wheel of Fortune.” 

19. Cassiopeia. The Seated- Woman. — 

IIo 50N—70N. 

Legend. Cassiopeia, the the wife of Ceplieus and 
mother of Andromeda, was taken into heaven in 
consideration of the deeds of Perseus ( see Andro- 
meda). She is said to have boasted that not only 
Andromeda but she herself was fairer than the 
Nereids, and for that reason she was bound to her 
chair and condemned to circle the pole head down- 
wards as a lesson in humility. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy this constella- 
tion is of the nature of Saturn and Venus. It is said 
to give haughtiness, boastfulness and exaggerated 
pride, but at the same time the power of commanding 
respect It is associated by the Kabalists with the 
Hebrew letter Beth and the 2nd Tarot Trump " The 
High Priestess." 

20. Centaurus. The ^Centaur. ^2 — ^28. 

28S— 68S. 

Legend. This constellation probably represents 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 37 

Pholos, son of Silenus and Melia, who was accident- 
ally wounded in the foot by one of Hercules' poi- 
soned arrows. According to some accounts it is 
Chiron, but he is more correctly associated with 
Sagittarius. 

Influence, According to Ptolemy the stars in the 
human part of the figure are of the nature of Venus 
and Mercury, and the*bright stars in the horse's part 
of Venus and Jupiter. It is said to give hard- 
heartedness, inclination to vengeance, love of arms, 
strong passions and an energetic nature. It may 
also be connected with poison. 

21. Cepiieus. k 17— so.' 55N— 85N. 

Legend. Cepheus, King of ^Ethiopia, was taken 
into heaven with his wife Cassiopeia and daughter 
Andromeda in commemoration of the deeds of 
Perseus ( see Andromeda). 

Influence. According to Ptolemy, Cepheus is like 
Saturn and Jupiter. It gives authority and a sober 
mind, sometimes making its natives judges or arbi- 
trators, but exposes to cruel and severe trials. If 
Mars afflicts the luminaries from Cepheus, especially 
if in an angle, it causes death by hanging, decapita- 
tion, crucifixion or impalement. By the Kaba lists 
this constellation is associated with the Hebrew 
letter Shin and the 22nd Tarot Trump “ The Fool." 

22. Cerberus. $ 20—^5. 16N — 38N. 

History and Legend. This constellation, which is 
not now recognised, was probably added by Hevelius 
in 1690. It represents the three-headed monster 



33 FIXED STARS AXD CONSTELLATIONS 


that guarded the gates of Hades and was brought 
to the upper world by Hercules. The figure depicts 
it as held by Hercules, in which constellation it is 
now merged. According to some accounts it is the 
serpent slain by Hero that infested the country 
around Tainarum. 

Influence. Cerberus is said to cause faithfulness, 
devotion, industry and watchfulness, and to restrain 
from evil, but to give danger of poison. 

23. Cirrus. The Whale or Sea Monster. X 1 7 — 

8 13 - 10N — 30S. 

Legend. Cctns represents the sea monster sent 
by Neptune to devour Andromeda ( see Andromeda). 

Influence. According to Ptolemy this constella- 
tion is like Saturn. It is said to cause laziness and 
idleness, but to confer an emotional and charitable 
nature, with ability to command. 

24. ClIAMXLEON. TTLI2— ?3. 75S— 80S. 

History. Added by Bayer in 1604. 

Influence. Chamaeleon is said to give a practical 
and sound mind with a love of knowledge, a sym- 
pathetic and adaptable nature, and fondness for 
travel and the drama. 

25. Circinus. The Compasses. 17129—^10 
553 — 65S. 

History. Formed by La Caille in 1752. 

Influence. It is said to give a revengeful, violent, 
grasping and tenacious nature. 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 39 


26 Columba NOiE.' Noah’s Dove. 115 — 55 17. 
27S— 43S. 

History. First recognised by Royer in 1679, 
but in existence some years before. It represents 
the dove sent by Noah from the Ark. 

Influence. Columba gives a gentle, kind, timid, 
innocent and self-sacrificing nature, together with 
strength of spirit. 

27. Coma Berenices. Berenice’s Hair. TJ17— 
^12. 25N— 31N. 

History and Legend Added by Eratosthenes in 
a.d. 300. Berenice, the wife of Ptolemy Euergetes, 
offered up her hair to Venus on condition that her 
husband returned safe from the wars. The hair was 
placed in the temple but was stolen, and to appease 
the king's wrath it was said that Venus had taken 
it into heaven to form a constellation. 

Influence. It is said to give a suave and well-bred 
manner, with great personal charm, but to lead to 
an idle and dissipated life. There is some love of, 
or ability for the stage. Lilly states that the 
beginning of this constellation causes blindness or 
defective eyesight, and it is probable that the part 
lying in Virgo has some influence over baldness. 

28. Corona Australis. The Southern Crown. 
rti2 36S— 45S. / 

Legend. This is said by some authors to repre- 
sent a cast-o2 garland once worn by Sagittarius, 
while others consider that it represents the wheel 
upon which Ixion was tormented because of his 



40 .FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

insult to Juno. This constellation has also been 
called Uraniscus, because of its resemblance to the 
palate or roof of the mouth. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy the bright stars 
are like Saturn and Jupiter. It is said to bring 
unforeseen troubles, but to give a position of author 
ity. 

29. Corona Borealis. The Northern Crown. 

27N — 33N. 

Legend. Corona Borealis represents the garland 
. given by Venus to Ariadne on the occasion of her 
marriage to Bacchus after she had been forsaken 
by Theseus. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is like Venus 
and Mercury. It is said to give artistic ability, love 
of flowers, lassitude and disillusionment, but to 
bring its natives to a position of command. By the 
Kabalists it is associated with the Hebrew letter 
Daleth and the 4th Tarot Trump "The Emperor." 

30. Corvus. The Crow. ^5 — ^=15. 7S — 25S. 

Legend. Apollo gave a feast to Jupiter and 

requiring water sent the crow with a cup (Crater) 
to fetch some On his way the crow noticed a fig 
tree, and, resting there until the figs became ripe, 
feasted himself upon them until, remembering his 
errand and fearing the anger of Apollo, he picked 
up a snake (Hydra) and on his return gave as an 
excuse that it had prevented him from filli n g the 
cup. Apollo ordained in punishment that the crow 
should never drink so long as figs were not ripe, and 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 41 


placed the crow, cup and snake in the heavens as a 
memorial. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy, Corvus is like 
Mars and Saturn It is said to give craftiness,, 
greediness, ingenuity, patience, revcngcfulness, pas- 
sion, selfishness, lying, aggressiveness, and material 
instincts, and sometimes causes its natives to become 
agitators. 

31. Crater. The Cup. TJJ13 — ^3. 5S — 23S. 

Legend. This constellation represents the cup 
given by Apollo to the crow (see Corvus). 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is like Venus 
and in some degree like Mercury. It gives a kind, 
-generous, cheerful, receptive, passionate and hospi- 
table nature, with good mental abilities, but subject 
to apprehension and indecision. There is a disor- 
dered life full of sudden and unexpected events, and 
great danger of unhappiness, but usually some 
eminence. 

32. Crux. The Cross. — 71^12. 56S — 65S. 

History. Usually atributed to Royer, 1679, but 
much older. 

Influence. Crux is said to give perseverance, but 
many burdens, trials and responsibilities, together 
with much suffering and many hardships. 

Note .— In connection with the rulership of coun- 
tries it may be noted that Brazil was named the Land 
ol tivs. Kobj Grass, by *&£ fevrerti G&Wi m isfr 
May, 1500, and that the constellation Crux has been 
represented on the postage stamps of that country. 



42 ‘ FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS' 


33. Custos Messidii. The Harvest-Keeper. 8 20 — 
mo. 70N — 77N. 

History. Formed by La Lande in 1773 under the 
title Le Messier, but not now recognised. It lies 
near Cassiopeia and Cephe’us. 

Influence. It is said to give a simple, kind, re- 
tiring, pleasant and honest nature with interest in 
rural pursuits. 

34 - Cygnus. The Swan. >5 z$—K 28. 28N— 
55N. 

Legend. In order to visit Leda, the wife of Tyn- 
dareus, King of Sparta, with whom he was in love, 
Jupiter turned himself into a swan and being pursued 
by Venus in the shape of an eagle flew to Leda as if 
for protection. 

/ nflutnce. Cygnus gives a contemplative, dreamy, 
cultured and adaptable nature. The affections are 
ill-regulated and unsteady, and the talents develop 
late. There is some love of water and swimming 
and the arts. By the Kabalists it is associated with 
the Hebrew letter Resh and the zoth Tarot Trump 
** Judgment.” 

35- Delphinus. The Dolphin. 1=8— =19. 3N — 
19N. 

Legend. When Amphitrite, who was sought as a 
wife by Neptune, hid herself, the God sent messengers 
to find her. The dolphin was the first to succeed 
and persuaded her to consent to the marriage, for 
which service Neptune placed him in the heavens. 
According to other accounts it is one of the pirates 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS '43 

who were changed into dolphins by Bacchus on his 
voyage to Ariadne. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy, Delphinus is 
like Saturn and Mars. It gives a simple appearance, 
cheerfulness, dissembling and duplicity, love of 
hunting and sport in general but little happiness. 
There is fondness foi pleasure, ecclesiastical matters 
and travel, but danger of suffering from ingratitude, 

3 6. Dorado. The Goldfish, ^o — Ho. 48S — 
67S. 

History. Added by Bayer in 1604. 

Influence. It gives penetration and a keen wit, 
fondness for appearances, artistic ability, but danger 
of obstacles and hindrances. 

37. Draco. The Dragon. Circles round pole. 
63N— 81N. 

Legend . Draco represents the dragon that guarded 
the golden apples in the garden of the Hesperides. 
According to other accounts, however, it is either the 
dragon thrown by the giants at Minerva in their war 
with the Gods, or the serpent Python slain by Apollo 
after the deluge. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy the bright stars 
are like Saturn and Mars. Draco gives an artistic 
and emotional but sombre nature, a penetrating and 
analytical mind, much travel and many friends but 
danger of robbery and of accidental poisoning. 
It was said by the Ancients that when a comet was 
here* ijnisno. was. scattered, oxer the. 'iwJ/i. 

Kabalists it is associated with the Hebrew letter Mem 
and the 13th Tarot Trump ** Death." 



44 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


38 . Equuleus. The Foal. 5=10—^28. 'oN— 
12N. 

Legend, According to various accounts Equuleus 
represents CeJeris, the brother of Pegasus ; or Cyl- 
larus, the horse of Pollux. 

Influence. It gives friendship and sagacity but 
frivolity and love of pleasure. 

39< Equttlecs Pictoris. The Painter’s Easel. 
Do— ^5. 45S-65S. 

History. Formed by La Caille in 1752 and usually 
known by the name Pictor. 

Influence. It gives imagination, artistic ability, 
frankness and a reliable nature. 

40. E rid anus. The River. X 15 — no. oS — 

55S. 

Legend. Eridanus represents the river Padus or 
Po into which Pliaton fell when slain by Jupiter for 
avwg set the w orld on fire by misguiding the chariot 
of his father Phcebus. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy all the stars 
with the exception of Achernar are like Saturn, 
ridanus gives a love of knowledge and science, much 
vel and many changes, a position of authority, 
ut danger of accidents, especially at sea, and of 
drowning. 

4I - Feus - Tt = Cat. aaS— 1515. 15S— 2jS • 
obsolete 0 ’' Fonned by La ™ lSo 5’ but no ’ v 
Influence. Felis is said to give a quiet, cautious. 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 45 

watchful, careful, stealthy, cruel, revengeful and 
destructive nature, with fondness for out-of-the-way 
subjects and attached to home. The love of cats 
displayed by Virgo natives is probably due to this 
constellation. 

42, Porn AX Chemica. The Chemical Furnace. 
Spio— 8*3- 26S — 40S. 

History. Formed by La Caille, 1752. 

Influence. Fomax is said to give an ardent, en- 
thusiastic, persuasive, practical and pioneering 
nature with fondness for engineering, chemical or 
metal work. 

43. Frederici Honores. The Honours of Frederick, 
cpg — cp 2 o. 4TN — 52N. 

History. An obsolete constellation formed by 
Bode in 1787, in honour of Frederick II of Prussia, 
from stars between Cepheus, Andromeda, Cassiopeia 
and Cygnus. 

Influence. The constellation figure contains a 
nimbus to represent dignity, a laurel for fame, an 
olive branch for peace, and a sword and pen for war 
and literature. It is possible that some influence 
over these qualities may be inherent in the con- 
stellation. 

44. Gemini, The Twins. 251 — 2323. 13N — 35N. 

Legend. The constellation represents Castor and 
Pollux, the twin sons of Leda and Jupiter. It has 
a'lso ‘been suggested that it may represent Apollo 
and Hercules. 



46 FJXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

Influence. Ptolemy makes the following observa- 
tions : The stars in the feet of Gemini have an 
influence similar to that of Mercury, and moderately 
to that of Venus. The bright stars in the thighs are 
like Saturn." It is said to cause trouble and disgrace, 
sickness, loss of fortune, affliction and danger to the 
faiees. By the Kabalists it is associated with the 
Hebrew letter Qoph and the igth Tarot Trump 
The Sun." 

45. Globus Aerostaticus. The Balloon, cxg— 
~£i6. 26S— 39S. 

History. Formed by La Lande in 1798, but now 
obsolete. 

Influence. It is said to give a dreamy, poetical, 
talkative, boastful, fickle and changeable nature. 
The sign Aquarius containing this constellation has 
always been associated with aeronautics probably 
on this account. 

46. Grus. The Crane. ^7 — mo. 37S — 56S. 
History. Added by Bayer, 1604. 

Influence. Grus gives a retiring, active, proud, 
watchful, kind, idealistic and devoted nature, with 
a liking for astronomy. 

47- Hercules. The Kneeling Man. =0=28— V$2. 
5N— 53N. 

Legend. This constellation was put in heaven 
as a reminder of the labours of Hercules. According 
to another account, however, during the war between 
the Gods and Titans the former all ran to one side 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 47 


oi the heavens, which would have fallen had not 
Atlas and Hercules supported it, and the latter was 
placed in the sky in commemoration of this service. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is like 
Mercury. It is said to give strength of character, 
tenacity and fixity of purpose, an ardent nature 
and dangerous passions. By the Kabolists it is 
associated with the Hebrew letter Dalcth and the 
4th Tarot Trump " The Emperor.” 

48. Horolocium Oscillatoiuyjm. The Pendulum 
Clock. X 5— 8 14 - 44S— 67S. 

History. Added by La Caille, 1752. It has also 
been named Horoscope. 

Influence. It is said to give a steady, patient and 
industrious nature, a well-stored mind and a fond- 
ness for history. 

49. Hydra. The Water-Snake. ft 5 — V\.z 3 - 

10N— 36S. 

Legend. This constellation represents the snake 
picked up and taken to Apollo by the crow (see 
Corvus). 

Influence. According to Ptolemy the bright stars 
are like Saturn and Venus. It is said to give an 
emotional and passionate nature, threatened by 
great troubles, and to cause some interest in shipping. 

50. Hydros. The Snake. n5— X7. 62S— 86S. 
History. Added by Bayer, 1604. 

Influence. It is said to give a cunning, practical 
and treacherous nature, with great danger of 
poisoning. 



48 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

51. Indus. The Indian. H 12— =12. 45S — 77S. 
History. Formed by Bayer, 1604. 

Influence. It is said to give a quick penetrating 
mind, deep insight, and interest in orientalism, 
mysticism and sport. 

52. Lacerta. The Lizard. H 18 — T 5 - 35N — 5°N. 
History. ' Formed by Hevelius, 1690. The Sceptre 

and Hand of Justice, introduced by Royer in i 679 > 
occupied the same place, but was superseded by 
Lacerta. 

Influence. It gives a keen, practical intellect, a 
careful, patient and scientific nature, and a great 
love of power and justice. 

53. Leo. The Lion, ft, 12 — 1^22. oN — 34N. 
Legend. This constellation represents the Nemean 

Lion, originally from the Moon, that was slain by 
Hercules. 

Influence. Ptolemy makes the following obser- 
vations : *' Of the stars in Leo, two in the head are 
like Saturn and partly like Mars. The three in the 
neck are like Saturn, and in some degree like 
Mercury. . . . Those in the loins . . . Saturn 
and Venus : those in the thighs resemble Venus, 
and, in some degree. Mercury.” It is said that the 
stars in the .neck, back and wing all bring trouble, 
disgrace and sickness affecting the part of the body 
ruled by the sign, especially if they happen to be in 
conjunction with the .Moon, By the Kabalists, 
Leo is associated with the Hebrew letter Kaph and 
the nth Tarot Trump *' Strength." 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 49 


54. Leo Minor. The Lesser Lion, ft 10— ^ 7 - 
27N— 45N. 

History. Formed by Hevelius, 1690. 

Influence. It gives a generous, noble, peaceable, 
but fearless nature, with the ability to undertake 
prominent and responsible positions. 

55. Lepus. The Hare. 115 — 2 S 3 - 14 s — 25S. 

Legend. A young man of the Isle of Leros greatly 
desired a hare and brought some over, for none 
were to be found on the island. The other in- 
habitants also wished to keep hares, but eventually 
the animals multiplied to such an extent that there 
was not enough food for them and they devoured the 
com in the fields, whereupon the inhabitants joined 
together and destroyed them all. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy, Lepus is like 
Saturn and Mercury. It gives a quick wit, timidity, 
circumspection, fecundity and defiance. 

56. Libra. The Balance or Scales. 7Ij,7 — \ 2 ,&. 
7S — 24S. 

History and Legend. Libra was not considered a 
separate constellation by the ancients and was called 
Chela, or the Claws of Scorpio, which sign was made 
to consist of 6o°. The present constellation figure 
is said to represent the balance wherein Astra»a 
weighed the deeds of men and presented them to 
Jupiter. 

Infi.ue#c& Ptolemy makes tie folio tving ohsarea- 
tions : " Those stars at the points of the claws of 
Scorpio operate like Jupiter and Mercury: those 



50 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS - 


in the middle of the daws, like Saturn, and m some 
degree like Mars.” By the Kabalists, Libra is 
associated with the Hebrew letter Heth and the Sth 
Tarot Trump " Justice. 

57. Lotos. The Wolf. HIS— 17 - 34S— 57 s - 

Legend. The wolf is said to be placed in the 
heavens as a reminder of the religious nature of 
Chiron the Centaur, who is depicted as spearing it 
in order to offer it as a sacrifice. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy the bright stars 
are like Saturn and partly like Mars. Lupus is sai 
to give an acquisitive, grasping, aggressive, pruden 
and treacherous nature, with a keen desire for know- 
ledge, and strong ill-regulated passions. 


58. Lynx. The Lynx. 350— ftp. 36N— 6fN. 

History. Added by Hevelius. 1690. and sometimes 
called Tigris, the Tiger. . , 

Influence. It is said to give stealthiness ana 
cunning, many changes iD life, and an adventurous 


59 Lyra: The Lyre. >110—1129- 28N— 47 N - 

Legend. Mercury found the body of a tortoise 
cast up by the Nile, and discovered that by striking 
the sinews after the flesh was consumed a musical 
note was obtained. He made a lyre of similar shape, 
having three strings, and gave it to Orpheus, riie son 
of Calliope, who by its music enchanted the beasts* 
birds and rocks. After Orpheus was slain by the 
Thracian women, Jupiter placed the lyre in heaven 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 51 


at the request of Apollo and the Muses. This 
constellation was often called Vultur Cadens, or the 
Falling Grype by the ancients. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy Lyra is like 
Venus and Mercury. It is said to give an harmoni- 
ous, poetical and developed nature, fond of music 
and apt in science and art, but inclined to theft. 
By the Kabalists it is associated with the Hebrew 
letter Daleth and the 4th Tarot Trump " The Em- 
peror." 

60. Machina Electrica. The Electrical Machine. 

X 25— T * 4 - 28S— 42S. 

History. An obsolete constellation formed by 
Bode in 1800. 

Influence. It is said to give a scientific spirit, a 
mind in advance of its time and peculiar or idealistic 
view’s. 

61. MiCROSCOPIUM. The Microscope, oso — ss6. 
30S— 47S. 

History. Formed by La Caille, 1752. 

Influence. It gives a careful, methodical, fas- 
tidious, meticulous and scientific nature. 

62. Monoceros. The Unicom. so — 

I3N — 23S. 

History. Added by Bartschius, 1624. 

Influence. It is said to give a pioneering, per- 
sistent, enterprising, ambitious and pushing nature 
with a love of travel and change. 



52 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATION'S 

63. Mo.vs JLen'alus. Mount Mzcnalus. —iz — 

^=28. 10N — 18N. 

History. Formed by Hevelius, 1690. 

Influence. It gives pride and dignity with great 
abilities, but some destructiveness. The life is 
beset by difficulties. 

64. Mons MeKSLS. The Table Mountain, t IO— 
"15. 72S — 86S. 

History. Formed by La Caille, 1752. and now 
generally known by the name Mensa. 

Influence. It gives an ambitious, aspiring and 
proud nature. There will be many difficulties in 
the life, but they will eventually be overcome and 
the latter years will be peaceful. 

65. Musca Australis. The Southern Fty- 

TLio— TH25. 66S— 74S. 

History. Formed by Bayer, 1604. 

Influence. It gives a capricious, fickle, pleasure- 
loving, changeable, but industrious nature. 

66. Musca Borealis. The Northern Fly. 8 12 — 

8 20. 25N— 33N. 

History. Added by Bartschius, 1624. 

Influence. It gives a practical, pleasure-loving, 
changeable and industrious nature, together with 
sarcasm and spitefulness. There is a good deal of 
vitality and favourable financial prospects. 

67. Noctoa. The Night Owl. 6—^20 
17 s — 3 oS 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 53 


History . An obsolete constellation that super- 
seded Solitarius, the Solitaire, or Turdus Solitarius, 
the Solitary Thrush, formed by Le Monnier in 1776. 
It occupies the end of the tail of Hydra. 

Influence. It is said to give wisdom, discrimina- 
tion, penetration, patience, and depth of thought and 
study. 

68. Norma et Regula. The Level and Square. 
t 2 — 1 15. 36S — 60S. 

History. Added by La Caille, 1753. Sometimes 
called Quadra Euclidis, Euclid's Square, but now 
generally known as Norma. 

Influence. It is said to give honesty, truthfulness, 
justice and an upright life, with interest in Free- 
masonry, geometry, surveying, mathematics and 
architecture. 

69. Nubecula Major. The Greater Cloud. 114 — 
230. 65S— 75S. 

History. Probably added by Bayer, 1604. 
Influence. It gives a poetical, artistic and imagi- 
native nature but much hard work and powers of 
persistence. 

70. Nubecula Minor. The Lesser Cloud. ^15 — 
8 4- 7 2 S— 77 s. 

History. Probably added by Bayer, 1604. 
Influence. Similar to that of Nubecula Major but 
gives isolation and loneliness. 

71. Octans Hadleianus. Hadley's Octant. 
’ f 10— sso. 75S— 90S. 


54 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

History. Formed by La Caille in 1752 in recogni- 
tion of the octant invented in 1730 by John Hadley. 
It is now usually abbreviated to Octans. 

Influence. It is said to give a scientific mind 
marred by ill-regulated passions, psychic distur- 
bances and discord. 


72. Officina TYPOGRArniCA. The Printing Office. 
2320 — RIO. 9S — 22 S. 

History . Formed by Bode in 1800, but now ob- 
solete. , • -^i 

Influence. It is said to give a keen and ongmai 
mind, and honour through literature and art. 


73. Opihuciius or Serpentarius. The Serpent 
Bearer. 1^27 — 1 27. J ®N — 24S. 

Legend. This constellation is said to represent the 
infant Hercules who strangled two serpents sent y 
Juno to kill him as he lay asleep in his cradle {see 
Serpens). . _ 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is like Sat 
and moderately like Venus. It is said to give a 
passionate, blindly good-hearted, wasteful and eas y 
seduced nature, together with little happiness, un- 
seen dangers, enmity, strife and slander. 
said that it occasioned much .mortality y 
poisoning. This constellation has also been cauea 
Aisculapius, and held to rule medicines. By tne 
Kabalists it is associated with the Hebrew letter m 
and the 16th Tarot Trump “ The Lightning-Strucic 
Tower." 



56 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

76. Pegasos. The Flying Horse —27 — ^P 10 - 
3N— 36N 

Legend. Pegasus was bom from the blood of 
Medusa after Perseus had cut off her head, and was 
afterwards tamed and ridden by BeUerophon. 
Being weary of earthly affairs BeUerophon attempted 
to fly to heaven but feU off, and Pegasus continued 
his course, entered heaven and took his place among 
the stars. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy the bright stars 
are like Mars and Mercury. The constellation gives 
ambition, vanity, intuition, enthusiasm, caprice and 
bad judgment. 

77. Perseus. The Champion. 8 12— 338 - 3 °^— ■ 
62N. 

Legend. Perseus, the son of Jupiter and Danae, was 
furnished with the sword, cap and wings of Mercury 
and the shield of Minerva. He killed the Medusa by 
cutting oS her head and afterwards rescued and 
married Andromeda. On his return home he in- 
advertently killed his grandfather Acrisius and pined 
away through grief, whereupon Jupiter took pity on 
him and placed him among the stars. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy, Perseus is like 
Jupiter and Saturn. It is said to give an intelligent, 
strong, bold and adventurous nature but a tendency 
to lying. By the Kabalists it is associated with the 
Hebrew letter Lamed and the 12th Tarot Trump 
“ The Hanged Man." 

78. Phoenix. ThePhomix. =ki8 — 4 2S — 60S. 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS ‘ 57 

History. Added by Bayer in 1604. 

Influence. It is said to give a pioneering dis- 
position, ambition and power, together with a long 
life and lasting lame. 

79. Pisces. The Fishes. X15 — ^26. oN — 32N. 

Legend. Venus and her son Cupid while sitting on 
the bank of the Euphrates suddenly saw Typhon, the 
enemy of the Gods, approaching them. They leapt 
into the river and were saved fiom drowning by two 
fishes; who were afterwards placed in the heavens by 
Venus in gratitude for their help. 

Influence. Ptolemy makes the following obser- 
vations : " Those stars in Pisces which are in 

the head of the southern fish have the same influence 
as Mercury, and, in some degree, as Satum : those 
in the body are like Jupiter and Mercury : those 
in the tail and in the southern line are like Satum, 
and, moderately, like Mercury. In the northern 
fish, those on its body and backbone resemble 
Jupiter, and also Venus in some degree : those in 
the northern line are like Satum and Jupiter.” 
By the Kabalists Pisces is associated with the 
Hebrew letter Pe and the 17th Tarot Trump '* The 
Stars.” 

80. Piscis Australis. The Southern Fish. 
— 15— X 5. 28S— 36S. 

Legend . This constellation is said to commemor- 
ate the transformation of Venus into the shape of 
a fish on one occasion when bathing. 

Injhunce. Ptolemy gives no separate influence 



, 58 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

, and only describes Fomalhaut, but according to 
Bayer the constellation is of the nature of Saturn. 
It is said to have an influence similar to that of 
Pisces, but, in addition, to augment the fortunes. 

81. Piscis Volans. The Flying Fish. 15 ! 20 — 
t o, 63S — 74S. 

History. Added by Bayer, 1604. It is known 
as Volans. 

Influence. It is said to give -a quick mind, 
activity, emotion, imagination and poetical or 
artistic ability. 

82. Psalterium Georgianum. George's Harp. 
8 14—827. o S — 15S. 

History. Formed by the Abbd Hell in 1781 in 
honour of George II of England, but now obsolete. 
It lies between the forefeet of Taurus and Eridanus. 
In the horoscope of George II the Sun and Venus 
were conjoined in Scorpio in opposition to this 
constellation. 

Influence. It is said to give an harmonious and 
artistic nature together with joviality and kind- 
ness. 

83. Pyxis Nautica. The Mariner’s Compass. 

SI 19—^3- 25S— 36S. 

History. Formed by La Caille in 1752 from stars 
in the mast of Argo. 

Influence. It is said to give a wise, ambitious and 
steady nature, good judgment and interest in 
nautical and geographical matters. 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 59 


84. Quadrans Muraus. The Mural Quadrant. 

\o 47N — 57N. 

History. Fonned by La Lande in 1795 but now 
obsolete. 

Influence. It is said to give a scientific mind, 
rectitude, justice, idealism and penetration. 

85. Reticulum Rhomboidalis. The Rhom- 
boidal Net. X8 — C P22. 57S — 70S, 

History. Formed by Habiecht o! Stiassburg. 
Influence. It gives a restricted life, self-absorp- 
tion, tenacity, selfishness and emotion. 

86. Robur Carolinum. Charles’s Oak. ^25 — 
ss:i2. 46S — 54S. 

• History. Formed by Halley, 1679, in commemora- 
tion of the oak in which Charles II Jay hidden on 
3rd September, 1651. 

Influence. It is said to give a frank, honourable, 
generous, hospitable and steady nature. 

87. Sagitta. The Arrow. >4 17 — ^9. 15N — 22N. 
Legend. Sagitta represents the arrow with which 

Hercules slew the eagle that fed upon the liver of 
Prometheus. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy this constella- 
tion is like Saturn and moderately like Venus, 
but Bayer states that it is of the nature of Mars and 
Venus. It is said to give a keen mind with ability 
for abstract thought and teaching or writing, irrita- 
bility, jealousy and danger of hostility and bodily 
harm. 



6 o FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

-88. Sagittarius. The Archer. $ 28— ^=r. 

20S — 50S. 

Legend. This constellation represents the wise 
and just Centaur Chiron who was killed by acciden- 
tally dropping one of the poisoned arrows of Hercules 
upon his foot. 

Influence. The following are Ptolemy's remarks : 

"The stars at the point of the arrow in Sagit- 
tarius have influence similar to that of Mars and the 
Moon : those on the bow, and at the grasp of the 
hand, act like Jupiter and Mars . . . those in the 
waist and in the back resemble Jupiter, and also 
Mercury moderately : those in the feet, Jupiter and 
Saturn." ... By the Kabalists Sagittarius is 
associated with the Hebrew letter Vau and the 6th 
Tarot Trump " The Lovers." 

89. Sceptrum Brandenburgicum. The Branden- 
burg Sceptre, no — H4- 7S — 31S. 

History. Added by Gottfried Kirch, 1688. 

Influence. It is said to give honour, wealth, 
eminence and power. 

90. Scorpio. The Scorpion. PI23 — $ 26 7S — 
46S. 

* Legend, This constellation represents the 
\ scorpion that killed Orion ( see Orion). 

Influence. Ptolemy makes the following obser- 
vations : " The bright stars in the front of the 
body of Scorpio have an effect similar to that 
produced by the influence of Mars, and partly to 
that produced by Saturn : the three in the body 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 61 


itself ... arc similar to Mars and moderately to 
Jupiter: those in the joints of the tail are like 
Saturn and partly like Venus : those in the sting, 
like Mercury and Mars." By the Kabalists Scorpio 
is associated with the Hebrew letter Oin and the 
16th Tarot Trump " The Lightning'S truck Tower." 

91. Sculptor. The Sculptor's Workshop. 
X4 — Kz8. 30S— 44S. 

History. Formed by La Caille in 1752, its full 
title being Apparatus Sculptoris. 

Influence. It is said to give ambition, creative 
imagination and artistic abilities. 

92. Scutum Sobiescianum. Sobieski's Shield. 
VU— Ft 11 5S— 17S. 

History. Formed by Hevelius in 1690 in honour 
of John Sobieski III King of Poland. 

Influence. It is said to give eminence, honour, 
power, and bravery together with an adventurous 
career. 


93. Serpens. The Serpent. 1^13—^15. 26N — 
17s. 

Legend. When Glaucus, son of Minos, King of 
Crete, was drowned in a barrel of red honey, ^Escula- 
pius was sent for to restore him to life and was shut 
in a secret chamber with the body. While he stood 
wondering what to do a serpent entered, which he 
slew. Thereupon another serpent came in bearing 
a herb which it placed on the head oithe dead serpent, 
thereby restoring it to life, and Aisculapius, using the 



62 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


same herb, succeeded in restoring Glaucus. The 
serpent was placed in heaven arid for this reason 
cer tai n writers have identified ,Ophiuchus with 
Aisculapiu?. 'According to other accounts the 
serpent is one of those that would have slain Hercules 
in his cradle (see Ophiuchos). 

Influence. According to Ptolemy, Serpens is like 
Saturn and Mars. It is said to give wisdom, craft, 
deceit, malice, a feeble will and danger of poison. 

94. Sextans Uranus. The Sextant of Urania. 
SI 22 — 15 10. 7N — SS. 

History. Formed by Hevelius in 1690. He stated 
that he placed the sextant between Leo and Hydra 
because both constellations were of a fiery nature and 
formed a commemoration of the destruction of lus 
instruments when his house in Dantzic was burnt in 
September, 1679. 

Influence. It is said to give a keen, intellectual, 
orderly and exact mind with interest in mathematics, 
astronomy and similar subjects. 

95. Tarandus. The Reindeer. 8 23 — SZOj 

74N— 90N. 

History. Formed by Le Monnier in 1776. 

Influence. It is said to give a quiet, gentle and re- 
tiring nature, and an obscure life. 

96. Taurus. The Bull. 8*7 — U z 3 - 34 N 

2S. 

Legend. Jupiter, assuming the form of a bulb 
• mingled with the herd when Europa, with whom he 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 63 


was infatuated, andhermaidens disported themselves 

on the sea-shore. Encouraged by the tameness of the 
bull Europa mounted it, whereupon the God rushed 
into the sea and bore her away to Crete. According 
to other accounts Taurus represents Io whom Jupiter 
turned into a cow in order to deceive Juno. 

Influence. Ptolemy makes the following observa- 
. tions:" Those stars in Taurus which are in the abscis- 
sion of the sign resemble In their temperament the 
influence of Venus, and in some degree tliat of Sa- 
turn . . . the stars in the head (except Aldebaran) 
resemble Saturn, and, partly. Mercury ; and those at 
the top of the horns are like Mars.” By the Kaba- 
lists Taurus is associated with the Hebrew letter 
Aleph and the 1st Tarot Trump " The Juggler." 
In all the ancient Zodiacs, Taurus is the beginning 
sign and marked the Vernal Equinox from about 
4,000 to 1,700 B.C. 

97. Taurus Poniatovii. Poniatowski’s Bull. 
t 24—1117. 11N — 5S. 

History, Formed by the Abbd Poczobut of Wilna 
in honour of Stanislaus Poniatowski, King of Poland. 

Influence. It is Said to give obstinacy and change- 
ability, emotion, honour and renown. 

98. Telescopium. The Telescope. £24 — ^15. 
36S — 59S. 

History. Formed by La Caille, 1752. 

Influence. It is said to give a keen mind, prophet- 
ic abilities, and interest in philosophical, occult or 
historical subjects. 



64 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

99. Telescopium Herscheui. Herschel's Tele- 
scope. £25— 25 16. 35N— 47N. . 

History. Formed by the Abb4 Hell in 1781, 13 
honour of Sir William Herschel. 

Influence. It is said to give scientific abilities, a 
keen intellect and spiritual powers. 

100. Triangulum. The Triangle. 8 4 — 8 *3- - 

30N— 37N. 

Legend. Triangulum is said to have been piacea 
in the heavens by Jupiter at the request of Ceres "ho 
asked that the shape of her island Sicily might be 
represented amongst the stars. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy itis like Mercury. 

It is said to give a just, companionable, truthful, 
righteous and benevolent nature, with interest m 
architecture and Freemasonry. 

ior. Triangulum Minor. The Lesser Triangle- 
8 6— 8 12- 28N— 33N. 

History . Formed by Hevelius, 1690. 

Influence. Similar to that of Triangulum. 

102. Triangulum Austraie. The Southern Tri- 
angle. $ 5 — f 22. 61S— 71S. 

History. Attributed to Pieter Theodor of tn 
x6th century. 

Influence. Similar to that of Triangulum. 

103. Tucana. The Toucan. —6 — — 2 7- 60S- 
72 S. 

History. Added by Bayer in 1604. 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 65 


Influence. It is said to give pride but gentleness, 
unselfishness, activity and kindness. 

104. Ursa Major. The Greater Bear, ssio — 

tyty. 33N— 73 N. 

Legend. Callisto, daughter of Lycaon, king of 
Arcadia, of whom Jupiter was enamoured, became a 
follower o! Diana on account of her love of hunting. 
Jupiter sought Callisto by assuming the form of 
Diana, and Juno who discovered the intrigue turned 
Callisto into a bear. Angry that the bear was 
placed in heaven, Juno requested her brother Nep- 
tune never to let those stars set within his kingdom, 
and for this reason they are always above the horizon 
in Europe. To account for the length of the bear’s 
tail, it is said that Jupiter, fearing her teeth, lifted 
her by the tail, which became stretched because of her 
weight and the distance from earth to heaven. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy, Ursa Major is 
like Mars. It is said to give a quiet, prudent, sus- 
picious, mistrustful, self-controlled, patient nature, 
but an uneasy spirit and great anger and revengeful- 
ness when roused. By the Kabalists it is associated 
with the Hebrew letter Zain and the 7th Tarot Trump 
“The Chariot." 

105. Ursa Minor. The Lesser Bear. 25 0 — 1^7. 

69N— 90N. 

Legend. According to some accounts this con- 
stellation represents Areas, son of Callisto and 
Jupiter (see Bo6tes and Ursa Major). Other 
writers state that it is meant to represent Cynosura, 



66 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

one of the Nymphs of Crete who reared the infant 
Jupiter ; the other, Helice, being Ursa Major. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy the bright stars 
are like Saturn and in some degree like Venus, it 
is said to give indifference and improvidence o 
spirit, and to lead to many troubles. By the Kaba- 
lists it is associated with the Hebrew letter Tau an 
the 2ist Tarot Trump “ The Universe." 

106. Via Lactea. The Milky Way. Crosses eclip- 
tic at nai— 25 i. ?i2—?20, 1 29— fi 6 - 

Legend. Via Lactea is said to be caused by an 
overflow of the milk upon which the infant Mercury 
was nourished. According to other accounts, how- 
ever, Saturn, wishing to devour his children, was 
given a stone by his wife Ops and would have choked 
had she not poured milk down his throat, some 0 
which overflowed and formed the Milky Way. 

Influence. It is said to give a sympathetic, hu- 
mane, artistic, kind and emotional nature. If 
.Sun or Moon is afflicted here blindness is said fre- 
quently to ensue. 

107. Virgo. The Virgin. ^20 — 1|_6. 16N * 5 $- 
Legend. This constellation is said to represen 

Erigone, daughter of Icarius, who hanged herse ^ 
through grief at the death of her father {see BoSrtSj- 
According to other accounts it is Astrma, d aught 
of one of the Titans, who sided with the Gods a- 
gainst her own father. 

Influence. Ptolemy makes the following observa- 
w tions : "The stars in the head of Virgo, and that at the 



INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS 67 


top of the southern wing, operate like Mercury and 
somewhat like Mars : the other bright stars in the 
same wing, and those about the girdle, resemble 
Mercury in their influence, and also Venus, moder- 
ately . . . those at the points of the feet and at the 
bottom of the garments aie like Mercury, and also 
Mars, moderately." By the Kabalists it is asso- 
ciated with the Hebrew letter Gimel and the 3rd 
Tarot Trump ** The Empress." 

108. Vulpecula ET Anser. The Fox and the 
Goose, 24 — X4. 20N— 30N. 

History. Formed by Hevelius in 1690, and now 
usually abbreviated to Vulpecula. 

Influence. It gives a cunning, voracious and 
fierce nature, together with a keen mind. 



CHAPTER III 


THE LUNAJ? MANSIONS 

In considering the classification of stars into groups, 
and the influences attaching to these divisions, it is 
necessary to include the lunar mansions, which are 
probably much older than either the constellations 
or the ordinary solar zodiac now in use. These. 
mansions form a lunar zodiac of 28, or sometimes 
27 divisions, each one of which roughly marks the 
distance travelled by the Moon in one day, and, al- 
though they undoubtedly underlay all the ancient 
systems of astrology, and three separate series have 
come down to us from Arabia, India and China res- 
7 pectively, all of which appear to be variants of some 
* 'single lost system, our knowledge of their several 
f influences is exceedingly meagre. More details are 
available of the Arabian system perhaps than of.the 
others, and in this the influence of each mansion will 
be found to correspond more or less closely with the 
Ptolemaic nature of the stars included in it. 

The method of employing the lunar mansions in 
practical astrology is not at all properly understood, 
and it is even doubtful how they should be measured. 

As given here they are in their original form and refer 
to groups of stars. Thus they are exactly analogous 
to the zodiac of constellations and may be used in the 
68 



70 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


T E * 11 , 0 ° O' 12 ° 51 ' 25 ° 43' 

8 ft. m 8° 34' 21 0 26' 

XI W t K 4 0 1/ 17 0 9' 

In the following lists will be found the three main 
systems, namely the Arabic manzils, the Hindu 
nakshatras, and the Chinese sieit (Houses), with the 
longitude of the determinant star for 1st January, 
1920, and as much information as possible as to the 
nature of each so as to form a basis for future study 
and research. 

THE ARABIC MANSIONS 

X. Al Thurayya. 17 Tauri. 8 28° 52'. 

The Many Little Ones. Profitable to sailors, 
huntsmen and alchemists. With Moon here in the 
case of an election, plant and sow but do not many 
or travel by water. 

2. Al Dabaran. a Tauri. U8° 40'. 

The Follower. Causes the destruction and 'hind- 
rances of buildings, fountains, wells, gold mines, the 
flight of creeping things, and begets discord. With 
Moon here, pursue business, travel, marry and take 
medicine. 

3. Al Hak’ah A. with <*> Ononis H22 0 35' 

A White Spot. Helps the return from a journey, 
the instruction of scholars, building, and gives health 
and goodwill. With Moon here, begin war hut do 
not sow or undertake any good. 



THE LUNAR MANSIONS 


7i 


4. Al Han’ah. 7 Geminorum. 537° 59'. 

A Brand or Mark. Favourable for hunting, be- 
sieging towns, and the revenge of princes, destroys 
harvests and fruits, and hinders the operation of the 
physician. With Moon here, plough, sow, but do not 
travel. 

5. Al Dhira. a with p Geminorum. sig 0 8'. 
The Forearm. Favourable for gain and friendship 

and for lovers, and destroys magistracies. With 
Moon here, travel and take medicine. 

6. Al Nathrah. 44 M Cancri. ft 6° 7'. 

The Gap or Crib. Causes love, friendship and 
society of fellow travellers, drives away mice, af- 
flicts captives and causes their imprisonment. 
With Moon here, navigate. 

7. Al Tart. \ Leotxis. ft x6° 46'. 

The Glance (of the Lion's Eye). Hinders harvest 
and travellers and causes discord. With Moon here, 
plant, build, marry, but do not travel. 

8. Al jABHAn. a with 7, {, and y Lion is. ft 28° 
43 '. 

The Forehead. Strengthens buildings, promotes 
love, benevolence, and help against enemies. With 
Moon here, sow, plant, release prisoners but take no 
purgatives. 

9. Al Zubrau. S with 0 Leonis , t%j o° za'. 

The Mane. Good for voyages, gain by mcrchan- 



72 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

disc, redemption of captives. With Moon here, 
plant, marry but do not navigate. 

10. Al Sarfah. p Lewis, 20° 30'. 

The Changer (of the weather). Gives prosperity 
to harvest and plantations, hinders seamen, good for 
the bettering of servants, captives and companions. 
With Moon here, travel, navigate, sow, plough, 
many and send messengers. 

11. Al Awva. p with »?, y, fi, and t Virginis. 
15! 26° 2'. 

The Barker. Gives benevolence, gain, voyages, 
harvests and freedom of captives. With Moon here, 
sow, plant, take medicine but do not travel or marry. 

12. Al Simak. a Virginis. ^22° 43'. 

The Unarmed. Causes marital love, cures the 
sick, helps sailors but hinders journeys by land. 
With Moon here, dig but do not marry or travel. 

13. Al Ghafr. 1 with k Virginis. 71 ^ 2 ° 40'. 

The Covering. Favourable for extracting trea- 
sures, digging pits, helps divorce, discord, the des- 
truction of houses and enemies, and hinders travellers. 
With Moon here, unfortunate for anything. 

14. Al Jubana. a with p Libra. 7rj_i3° 58'. 

The Claws. Hinders journeys and marriage, 

harvest and merchandise, favourable for redemption 
of captives. With Moon here, buy cattle but do not 
navigate. 



THE LUNAR MANSIONS 


73 


15. Iklil AL Jabjjaii. (3 with 5 and *■ Scorpii. 
1 2° 4'. 

The Crown of the Forehead. Improves misfor- 
tune, makes love durable, strengthens buildings and 
helps seamen. With Moon here, build, sow, plant, 
navigate but do not many. 

16. Al Kalb. « Scorpii. p 8° 39'. 

The Heart. Causes discord, sedition, conspiracy 
against princes and rulers, and revenge from enemies, 
but frees captives and helps building. With Moon 
here, plant, sow, travel and go to war. 

1 7. Al Siiaulah. A with v Scorpit. p 23 d 28'. 
The Sting. Helps in besieging cities, taking towns, 

driving men from their places, destruction of seamen 
and captives. With Moon here, buy cattle, hunt but 
do not marry. 

18. Al Na’am. { with <r, r, and </> Sagittarii. 
ft 12 0 31'. 

The Ostriches. Helps the taming of wild beasts, 
strengthening of prisons, destroys the wealth of 
societies and compels a man to come to a certain 
place. With Moon here, build, ask favours but do 
not marry. 

19. Al Baldah. 7 r Sagittarii. ii 15 0 8'. 

The City or District. Favourable for harvest, 
gain, buildings, and travellers, but causes divorce. 
With Moon here, take medicine, navigate and put on 
new clothes. 



74 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS . 


20. Al Sa’d al Dhabih. a with p Capricorni. 
ZZ 2° 42'. 

The Lucky One of the Slaughterers. Helps the 
escape of servants and captives and the curing of 
diseases. With Moon here, take medicine, travel, 
but do not lend money or marry. 

21. Al Sa'd al Bula. p with v A quanta zzu° 
S3'- 

The Good Fortune of the Swallower. Causes 
divorces, liberty of captives and heals the sick. 
With Moon here, many, sow, take medicine and lead 
an army. 

22. Al Sa'd al Su'ud. p with £ Aquarti . 
SS22° 1 7'. 

The Luckiest of the Lucky. Gives marital happi- 
ness, victory of soldiers but prevents the execution 
of government. With Moon here, build, marry, 
make friends and travel. 

23. ' Al Sa’d al Aubiyah. 7 with a, y, and 
7T Aquarii. X 5° 36'. 

The Lucky Star of Hidden Things or Hiding 
Places. Favourable for besieging and revenge,' 
destroys enemies, causes divorce, helps prisons and 
buildings, hastens messengers, hinders childbirth 
and hinders the action of the body. With Moon 
here, unfortunate for everything except taking 
medicine. 

24. Al Fakch al MuKcnr. /? with a Pegasi. 

X 28° 15'. 



THE LUNAR MANSIONS 


75 


The Fore-spout {of the Water-bucket). Causes 
union, health of captives, and destroys buildings 
and prisons. With Moon here, plant, sow, bargain, 
marry but do not navigate. 

25. At. Farge al Thant. y with 5 Pegasx and 
a Andromeda. 8° 2'. 

The Second, or Lower, Spout (of the Water- 
bucket). Increases harvests, revenues, gain, heals 
infirmities, hinders building, upholds prisons, 
causes danger to seamen and destruction of enemies. 
With Moon here, marry, take medicine, pursue 
business but do not travel or lend money. 

26. AlBatnalHut. p Andromeda. 29 0 17'. 
The Belly of the Fish. Increases harvest 

and merchandise, helps travellers through danger, 
strengthens prisons and causes marital happiness 
and loss of treasure. With Moon here, travel 
and take purgatives. 

27. Al Sharatain. P with y Arielis. 8 z° 51'. 
The Two Signs. Causes discords and journeys. 

With Moon here, buy cattle, plant and take voyages. 
I This mansion is now considered to begin the 
l series. 

28. Al Butain. 8 with * Arielis. 8 27 0 52'. 
The Belly. Helps the finding of treasures and 

retaining of captives. With Moon here, buy and 
sell but avoid the sea. 

Further details concerning the influence of the 



76 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

Arabic mansions will be found in the chapters on 
Magic and Astro-meteorology. 

THE HINDU MANSIONS 

1. Krittika. v Tauri. 8 28 0 52'. 

The General of the Celestial Armies. Symbol, a 
Flame or Razor. Regent, Agni. god of fire. Ruled 
by the Sun. A soft and sharp mansion or asterism 
belonging to the Brahmin caste and producing 
mixed effects. Those bom on the lunar day will 
delight in white flowers, perform sacrifice, and 
will be magicians, metaphysicians, diggers, barbers, 
potters, priests or astronomers. With the Moon 
here at birth the native will be a glutton, adulterous, 
handsome and famous. Rules forests and the head. 

2. Rohini. a Tauri. H 8° 40'. 

A Red Deer. Symbol, a Temple or Wagon. 
Regent, Prajapati, the creator. Ruled by the Moon. 

A stable astensm belonging to the Shudia caste and 
favourable for coronations, expiatory ceremonies, 
planting of trees, sowing of seeds, building of towns, 
and matters of a permanent nature when contain- 
ing the Moon. Those bom on the lunar day will 
be devout, rich, merchants, rulers, drivers, possessed 
of wealth and cattle. With Moon here at birth 
native will be truthful, polite, steady, handsome, 
cleanly and uncovetous. Rules vinegar pots and 
the forehead. 

3. Mricasiras. a Orionis . H 22 0 35'. 

The Head of the Stag. Regent, Soma, the Moon. 



THE LUNAR MANSIONS 


77 


Ruled by Mars. A soft asterism belonging to the 
serving caste and favourable for friendship, married 
love, purchase and making of clothes and ornaments, 
music, and auspicious deeds when containing the 
Moon. Those bom on the lunar day will deal in 
perfumes, flowers, ornaments, and animals, will be 
lascivious and good writers or painters. With Moon 
here at birth native will be timid, capricious, skilful, 
talkative, rich, fond of pleasure. Rules cots and 
the brows. 

4. Ardra. a Orionis. n 27° 38'. 

Moist, so called because of its stormy influence. 
Symbol, a Gem. Regent, Rudra, the storm god. 
Ruled by the Dragon's Head. A sharp asterism 
belonging to the butcher caste and favourable 
for punishment, torture, imprisonment, exorcism, 
mesmerism and separation or union when contain- 
ing the Moon. Those bom on the lunar day will 
deal in pod-grains, black magic, sorcery, exorcism, 
and will delight in murder, torture, lying, theft, 
cheating and adultery. With Moon here at birth 
native will be insincere, proud, ungrateful, cruel, 
sinful, deceitful and wicked. Rules temples and 
the eyes. 

5. Punarvahsu. £ Geminorum. 25 22° 7'. 

The Two Good Again. Regent, Aditi, the sky 
goddess. Ruled by Jupiter. An asterism belong- 
ing to the Vaisya caste and favourable for shaving. 
Those born on the lunar day will be truthful, generous, 
cleanly, respectable, handsome, famous and wealthy. 



78 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


fond of service, friendly with painters and sculptors, 
honourable merchants. With Moon here at birth 
native will be devout, quiet, happy, good-tempered, 
of wrong views, sickly, thirsty and pleased with 
trifles. Rules granaries and the nose. 

6. Pushya. 8 Cancri. SI 7° 36'. 

A Flower. Symbol, a Crescent on the Head of an 
Arrow. Regent, Brihaspati. the teacher of the god s. 
Ruled by Saturn. A light asterism belonging to the 
Ksbattriya caste and favourable for sales, art , 
sculpture, learning, marital love, wearing of- orna- 
ments, medicine and purchase of carriages when 
containing the moon. Those bom on the lunar day 
will deal in barley, cereals, crops, will be ministers 
or rulers and will live by water. With Moon here 
at birth, native will be popular, self-controlled, 
learned, wealthy, and charitable. Rules houses 
and the face or upper lip. 

7. Aslesha. , Hydra . SI 11 ° 14'. 

The Embracer, Symbol, a Wheel. Regent?, 
Sarpas, the Serpents. Ruled by Mercury. A 
sharp asterism belonging to the lowest caste and 
favourable for punishment, torture, imprisonment, 
exorcism, mesmerism and separation or union when 
containing the Moon. Those bom on the lunar day 
will deal in perfumes, roots, fruits, reptiles and 
poison, will be skilled in medicine and dishonest. 
With Moon here at birth native wall be dishonest, 
ungrateful, a clever swindler and a promiscuous 
eater. Rules dust heaps and the ears or lower lip. 



THE LUNAR MANSIONS 


79 


8. Magha. a Leonis. ft 28° 43'. 

The Mighty. Symbol, a House. Regents, the 
Pitris, Fathers. Ruled by the Dragon’s Tail. A 
severe asterism belonging to the Shudra caste and 
favourable for acts of disgrace, destruction, deceit, 
imprisonment, beating, burning and poison when 
containing the Moon. Those bom on the lunar day 
will be wealthy, fond of hills, merchants, valiant, 
and women haters. With Moon here at birth native 
will be wealthy, religious, contented, well served, 
and iond oi life. Rules grain boxes and the lips 
and upper mouth. 

9. Purva Phalguni. 8 Leonis. io° 12'. 

The Former Bad One. Symbol, a Bed or Couch. 

Regents, the Adityas, Aryaman and Bagha. Ruled 
by Venus. A severe asterism belonging to the 
Brahmin caste and favourable for acts of disgrace, 
destruction, deceit, imprisonment, beating, burning 
and poison when containing the Moon, Those bom 
on the lunar day will be fond of women, dancing, 
art and trade, will remain youthful and deal in 
natural produce. With Moon here at birth native 
will be generous, handsome, submissive, of wandering 
habits and good speech. Rules uninhabited houses 
and the right arm. 

10. Uttara Phalguni. p Leonis. 1$ 20° 30'. 

The Latter Bad One. Symbol, a Bed or Couch. 
Regents, the Adityas, Aryaman and Bagha. Ruled 
by the Sun. A stable asterism belonging to the 
Kshattriya caste and favourable for coronations, 



80 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


expiatory ceremonies, planting of trees, sowing of 
seeds, building of towns, and matters of a permanent 
nature when containing the Moon. Those “bom on 
the lunar day will be mild, cleanly, wealthy, virtuous, 
generous, learned, modest and heretical and will have 
influential friends. With Moon here at birth native 
will be popular, learned, free from cares and will have 
an enjoyable life. Rules lakes and the left arm. 

11. Hasta. S Corvi. =c= i2° 20'. 

The Hand. Regent, Savitar, the Sun. Ruled 
by the Moon. A light arferism belonging to the 
Vaisya caste and favourable for sales, art, sculpture, 
learning, marital love, wearing of ornaments, medi- 
cine, and purchase of carriages when containing the 
Moon. Those bom on the lunar day will be 
thieves, dealers in large animals, painters, merchants, 
handsome and religious. With Moon here at birth 
native will be active, resourceful, shameless, merci- 
less, and a thief and drunkard. Rules tanks and 
the fingers. 

12. ClTRA. a Virginis. ^ 22° 43', 

Bright. Symbol, a Lamp or Pearl. Regent, 
Tvashtar, the artificer. Ruled by Mars. A soft 
asterism belonging to the serving caste and favour- 
able for friendship, married love, purchase and mak- 
ing clothes and ornaments, music and auspicious 
deeds when containing the Moon. Those bom on 
the lunar day will be mathematicians, surgeons, 
oculists, weavers, writers, singers, manufacturers 
of perfumes and dealers .in jewels and cloth. With 



THE LUNAR MANSIONS 


81 


Moon here at birth native will be fond of clothes 
and flowers of many colours and will have beautiful 
eyes and limbs. Rules water banks and the neck. 

13. SvATZ. a Bootis. ^ 23 0 7' 

The Good Goer, or Sword. Also called Nishtya, 
Outcast. Symbol, a Coral Bead, Gem, or Pearl. 
Regent, Vayu, the god of the wind. Ruled by the 
Dragon's Head. A mutable asterism belonging to 
the butcher caste and favourable for commencing 
work of an impermanent or moving character. 
Those bom on the lunar day will be weak, abste- 
mious, skilful, fond of animals and changeable in 
friendship. With Moon here at birth native will be 
quiet, polite, self-controlled, skilful, kind-hearted 
and charitable. Rules rice fields and the breast. 

14. Visakha. a Libra. 7^ 13 0 58'. 

Branched. Symbol, a Decorated Gateway. Re- 
gent, Indragni. Ruled by Jupiter. A soft and sharp 
asterism belonging to the lowest caste and producing 
mixed effects. Those bom on the lunar day will be 
religious, dealers in produce, and fond of red flowers. 
With Moon here at birth native will be jealous, mean 
miserly, good-looking, clever in speech, and quarrel 
some. Rules cotton fields and the nipples. 

15. Anuradha. S S cor pit. f i° 27'. 

Propitious or Successful. Symbol, a Row or 

Ridge. Regent, Mitra, one of the Adityas^ Ruled, 
by Saturn. A soft asterism belonging to the Shudra 
caste and favourable for friendship, married love, 

F 



82 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

purchase and making of clothes and ornaments, 
music and auspicious deeds when containing the 
Moon. Those born on the lunar day will be val- 
iant, influential and keep vehicles. With Moon 
here at birth native will be wealthy, of wandering 
habits, unable to bear hunger and resident abroad. 
Rules fields overgrown - with flowers, and the 
stomach. 

16. Jyestha. a Scorpii. p 8° 39'. 

Oldest. Symbol, a Pendent Ear Jewel. Regent, 
Indra, the sky goddess. Ruled by Mercury. A 
sharp asterism belonging to the serving caste and 
favourable for punishment, torture, imprisonment, 
exorcism, mesmerism and separation or union when 
containing the Moon. Those bom on the lunar day 
will be valiant, wealthy, famous, well bom, some- 
what dishonest, fond of travelling and in a high 
position. With Moon here at birth native will be 
cheerful; irascible, charitable, but will have few 
friends. Rules deserts and the right side of the 
body. 

17. Hula, a Scorpii . f 23 0 2S'. 

The Root. Symbol, a lion's Tail. Regent, 
Nirrity, Calamity. Also called Vicritati, the Two 
Releasers, as the stars in this mansion were thought 
to bring relief from lingering diseases. Rmed by 
the Dragon's Tail. A sharp asterism belonging to 
the butcher caste and favourable for punishment, 
torture, imprisonment, exorcism, mesmerism and 
separation or union when containing the Moon. 



THE LUNAR MANSIONS 


83 


Those bom on the lunar day will be druggists, dea- 
lers in flowers and fruit, rich and fond of gardening. 
With Moon here at biith native will be conceited, 
wealthy, luxurious, kind-hearted, happy and resolute. 
Rules stables and the left side of the body. 0 f 

18. PURVA Ashadha. 

The Former Unconquered. Symbol, an Ele- 
phant's Tusk, or, together with the next asterism, a 
Bed. Regents, Apas, Waters, and Visve Devas, the 
Combined Gods. Ruled by Venus. A severe aster- 
ism belonging to the Brahmin caste and favourable 
for acts of disgrace, destruction, deceit, imprison- 
ment, beating, burning and poison when containing 
the Moon. TTiose bom on the lunar day will be 
truthful, cleanly, wealthy, fond of fruit and flowers 
and sea voyages. With Moon here at birth native 
will lie conceited, proud, constant in friendship and 
will have an agreeable life. Rules thatched houses . 
and the back. * • , " \ 

1 2 .-*' 


19. Uttara Ashadha. *^grtfaror~'>r' 3 0 ‘ 28 *: 

The Latter Unconquered. Symbol and Regent 
the same as for the last asterism. Ruled by the Sun. 
A stable asterism belonging to the Kshattriya caste 
and favourable for coronations, expiatory ceremo- 
nies, planting of trees, sowing of seeds, building of 
towns, and matters of a permanent nature when 
containing the Moon. Those bom on the lunar day 
will be honourable, handsome, happy, religious, fond 
of large animals and will be soldiers or wrestleis. 
With Moon here at birth native will “be obedieht, 


84 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

polite, popular, grateful and have many friends. 
Rules wash-houses and the hips. 

20. ABRXJXT. a Lyres. >1 14 0 21'. 

Victorious. Symbol, a Triangle or Three-Comer ed 

Nut. Under its influence the Gods vanquished the 
A sums. It Is an asterism belonging to the Vaisya 
caste and is used only in horary astrology. 

21. Sravana. a AquiUs. rez o° 39'. 

The Ear. Symbol, a Trident. Regent, Vishnu. 
Ruled by the Moon. A mutable asterism belonging 
to the lowest caste and favourable for commencing 
work of an impermanent or moving character. 
Those bom on the lunar day will be cunning, active, 
bold, truthful, virtuous, religious and skilful. With 
Moon here at birth native will be rich, learned, 
famous, and have a good wife. Rules parade 
grounds and private parts. 

22. Skavtsrtha. p Dclphini. zz 15® 14'.. ■ 

Most Favourable. Symbol, a Drum or Tabor. 

Regents, the Vasus, Bright or Good Ones. Ruled by 
Mars. A mutable asterism belonging to the serving 
caste and favourable for commencing work of an 
impermanent or moving character. Those bom on 
the lunar day will be shameless, rich, generous, 
women haters and will have few friends. With 
Moon here at birth native will be wealthy, liberal, 
fond of music, valiant, niggardly. Rules mills and 
the excretory system. 



THE LUNAR MANSIONS 


85 


23. Catadhishaj. A A quant, x io° 27'. 

The Hundred Physician. Regent, Varuna, god- 
dess of the waters. Ruled by the Dragon’s Head. 
A mutable asterism belonging to the butcher caste 
and favourable for commencing work of an imper- 
manent or moving character. Those bom on the 
lunar day will be fishermen, washermen, or dealers 
in wine, fish and birds. With Moon here at birth 
native will be eloquent, harsh in speech, truthful, 
adventurous, thoughtless, independent, gambler, 
fond of bad women, murderer of enemies. Rules 
streets and the right thigh. 

24. PURVA BUADRA-PADA. a Pfgast. X 22°22'. 
The Former Beautiful, Auspicious, or Happy Feet. 

Symbol, a Couch. Regents, Aja-Ekapat, tire One- 
footed Goat and Ahi Budhya, the Bottom Snake. 
Ruled by Jupiter. A severe astcrism belonging to 
the Bralunin caste and favourable for acts of dis- 
grace, destruction, deceit, imprisonment, boating, 
burning and poison when containing the Moon. 
Those bom on the lunar day will be wicked, mean, 
deceitful, shepherds, thieves, torturers, and ir- 
religious. With Moon here at birth native will be 
sorrowful, wealthy, clever, submissive to women, 
miserly and of distinct speech. Rules the south- 
east of houses and the left thigh. 

25 . Uttara Buadra-Pada. y Ptgasi. op 8° 2 '. 
The Latter Beautiful Feet. Symbol and Regents 

as in the last asterism. Ruled by Saturn. A 
stable asterism belonging to the Kshattriya 



86 FIXED STARS AND, CONSTELLATIONS 


caste and favourable for coronations, expiatory 
ceremonies, planting of trees, sowing of seeds, 
building of towns, and matters of a permanent 
nature when containing the Moon. Those 
bom on the lunar day will be generous, devout, 
rich, and in influential positions. With Moon here 
at birth native will be happy, eloquent, charitable, 
and possess children and grandchildren. .Rules 
swamps and the knees. 

26. Revati. { Phcium. cp 18 0 53'. 

Rich. Symbol, a Drum or Tabor. Regent, 
Pusha, the Nourisher. Ruled by Mercury. The 
determinant star of this asterism marked the be- 
ginning of the celestial sphere in about 572 AJ>., 
when it was 10' west of the vernal equinox. A soft 
asterism belonging to the Shudra caste and favour- 
able for friendship, married love, purchase and mak- 
ing of clothes and ornaments, music and auspicious 
deeds when containing the Moon. Those bom on 
the lunar day will be dealers in flowers, perfumes, 
or ornaments and may be boatmen. With Moon 
here at birth the native will be popular, a warrior, 
wealthy, of strict principle, uncovetous and will have 
a well-developed body. Rules flower gardens and 
the ankles. 

27. Asvrar. pAriette. 8 2 0 51'. 

The Horsemen. Symbol, a Horse’s Head. Re- 
gents, the Asvini Devas. Ruled by the Dragon's 
Tail, This mansion superseded Krittika as leader 
at about 400 B.C. It is a light asterism belonging 



THE LUNAR MANSIONS 


87 


to the Vaisya caste and favourable for sales, art, 
sculpture, learning, marital love, wearing of orna- 
ment, medicine and purchase of carriages when 
containing the Moon. Those bom on the lunar day 
will be physicians, military commanders and dealers 
in horses. With Moon here at birth native will bd 
polite, fond of ornaments, handsome, popular and 
intelligent. Rules towns and the upper part of the 
feet. 

28. Biiarani. 35 ArieUs. 8 *5° 49'* 

Bearer. Regent, Yama, God of Death. Ruled by 
Venus. A severe asterism belonging to the lowest 
caste and favourable for acts of disgrace, destruction, 
deceit, imprisonment, beating, burning and poison 
when containing the Moon. Those bom on the 
lunar day will be wicked, weak-minded, fond of 
killing and torture, and dealers in precious stones. 
With Moon here at birth native will be faithful, 
persevering, healthy, successful and free from cares. 
Rules streets and the soles of the feet. 

Only 27 mansions or Nakshatras are commonly 
employed in Hindu astrology, Abhijit being in- 
cluded only in certain systems of horary astrology. 
When referred to the circle of the ecliptic they are 
made to consist of 13° 20' each, beginning with 
Asvini at o oc p . In the above descriptions the term 
" lun ^r day ” refers to the day of the Full Moon that 
falls in the mansion. 



88 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


THE CHINESE MANSIONS 

1. Mao. i} Tauri. 8 28 0 52'. 

The Constellation. Ruled by the Sun. 

2. Pi. a or « Tauri. U 8° 40'. 

A Hand-net or Rabbit-net. Ruled by the Moon. 

3. Tsee. A and <*> Orionts. H 22 0 35'. 

The Beak or Pouting Lips. Ruled by Mars. 

4. Shen. '8 Orionis. n 21 0 ,16'. 

Three Side by Side. Ruled' by Mercury. 

5. Tsing. a and pGcminorttm. 23 19 0 8'. 

A Well or Pit. Ruled by Jupiter. 

6. Kwei. with 44 M and 17 Cancri. SI 6° 7'. 
Spectre. Ruled by Venus. 

7. Lieu. s Hydra. SI 9 0 6'. "] 

A Willow Branch. Ruled by Saturn. This 

asterism governed the planets and was worshipped 
at the summer solstice as an . emblem of immortality. 

8. Sing. « Hydra. SI 26 0 10' 

A Star. Ruled by the Sun. 

9. Chang. v Hydra. ^ 5 0 47'. 

A Drawn Bow, Ruled by the Moon. 



THE LUNAR MANSIONS 


89 


10. YEN. o Crater is. 22° 36'. 

Wings or Flanks. Ruled by Mars. 

11. TCHIN. y with /?, 8, and * Corvi. =c= 9 0 41'. 

The Cross-piece of a Chariot. Ruled by Mercury. 

12. Kio. <* with (Virginis. 22 0 43'. 

The Horn or Spike. Ruled by Jupiter. 

13. Kang. * with » and v Virginia, til 3° 22 ‘- 
A Man’s Neck. Ruled by Venus. 

14. Ti. o with (3 Libra, til 13 0 58'. * 

Bottom. Ruled by Saturn. 

15. Fang, it with /?, 8, and p ScorpU. f i° 49'. 
A Room or House. Ruled by the Sun. This 

asterism was connected with the rearing of silk- 
worms. 

16. Sin. <r with a and r ScorpU. f 6° 41'. 

The Heart. Ruled by the Moon. 

17. Wei. ft with <, {, rj, 0, 1, k, v, and A ScorpU. 
f x$° z\ 

The Tail. Ruled by Mars. 

18. Ki. y with 8 and t Sagiltarii and (3 Tele- 
scopium. ft o° 9'. 

A Sieve. Ruled by Mercury. 

Tew . 4. with X and p Sagiilarii. 9*1*. 

\ A Ladle or Measure. Ruled by Jupiter. 



90 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


20. FJieu. p with a, v, ©, ir, and p Capricomi. 
^ 2° 56'. 

The Ox. Ruled by Venus. This asterism was 
connected with the rearing of silkworms. 

21 Mo. ewith p and v Aquarii. zz 1 0° 37'. 

A Woman. Ruled by Saturn. 

22. Heu. p Aquarii. zz 22 0 17'. 

Void. Ruled by the Sun. 

23. GUI. a Aquarii with < and 6 Pegasi. 
X 2® 14'. 

Steep or Danger. Ruled by the Moon 

24. Shih. a with p Pegasi. X 22° 22'. 

A House. Ruled by Mars. 

25. Peih. y with S Pegasi and a Andromeda. 
cp S ° 2'. 

A Wall or Partition. Ruled by Mercury. 

26. Goei. p Andromeda. T 29 0 17'- 

The Man Striding or the Striding Legs. Ruled 
by Jupiter. 

27. Leu. p with a and 7 Arielis. fcJ 2° 5 I# * 

The Train of a Garment. Ruled by Venus. 

28. OKI. 35 with 41, 33 and 39 Arielis. 8 I 5 ° 49 '* 
Belly. Ruled by Saturn. 



THE LUNAR MANSIONS 




At the earliest period the Chinese mansions or 
sieu began with No. 12, Kio, at the September 
equinox. They were grouped into four sets of 
seven sieu, each set forming one of the huge con- 
stellation figures into which the heavens were 
divided, the arrangement being as follows : 

Nos. 12 to 18 formed the constellation of the 

Azure Dragon. 

>. 19 .. 25 „ „ Black Warrior. 

„ 26 „ 4 „ „ White Tiger. 

.. 5 •• zx „ „ Red Bird. 

No__infqrmation as to the influence of these 
constellations is available. 



CHAPTER IV 


THE FIXED STARS IN NATAL ASTROLOGY 

The influence of the fixed stars differs from that of 
the planets in being much more dramatic, sudden, 
an d v iolent. As a rule planetary effects are gradual 
and operate comparatively slowly, one might almost 
say softly, whereas the stars appear to exercise 
most of their influence in sudden, hard, vehement 
bursts, producing tremendous effects for short 
periods, and, after raising the natives to a great 
height, dropping them suddenly and bringing a 
series of dramatic and unexpected disasters. In 
other words the fixed stars may elevate from 
poverty to the extreme height of fortune or vice 
versa, whereas the planets do not do so. It may 
be taken as a fairly well-established rule that the 
stars do not operate alone, except perhaps in those 
cases where they are situated on angles, and that 
their chief effect is transmitted by the planets. 
They seem to form an underlying basis upon which 
the horoscope is built, and if a planet falls upon a 
star its effect is greatly magnified, giving it a pro- 
minence in the life that is quite unwarranted by 
its mere position and aspects in the map. Cases 
are known to all astrologers in which a certain planet 
in a horoscope seems to be emphasized for no 



FIXED STARS IN NATAL ASTROLOGY 93 


apparent reason, so that it acts drastically through- 
out the life, and in a case such as this there is usually 
a fixed stai in operation in the background through 
the planet concerned. 

The extent and magnitude of the effects brought 
about by the stars depend upon several factors, 
namely, (a) apparent size, (f>) celestial position, (c) 
nature of planet through which they operate, and 
(1 i) general nature of the horoscope. 

(а) Apparent size. The magnitude of a star 
bears a definite relationship to its intensity A 1st 
magnitude star is of great power, a 2nd magnitude 
star is appreciably weaker, and so on down the scale, 
the effect of the stars below the 4th magnitude being 
very small except in the case of clusters. 

(б) Celestial position. The nearer a star may be 
to the ediptic the greater is its power, and in the 
northern hemisphere a star with north defclination 
is more powerful than one with south, the reverse 
holding good in the southern hemisphere. It has 
frequently been said that stars with great latitude 
cannot affect us, but it is very doubtful if this 
assumption is correct, and experience, particularly 
in the case of comets, seems to indicate that bodies 
in all parts of the celestial sphere are capable of 
exerting an influence upon the earth and its in- 
habitants. 

(c) Nature of planet through which they operate. 
As already pointed out the fixed stars give strength 
and energy to the planets and modify their effects, 
but at the same time the nature of the planet exer- 
dses a strong controlling influence upon the result 



94 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


The greatest effect Is obtained when the star and 
planet are both of_the same nature, and in such 
cases the influence of the planet is raised to a vehe- 
ment pitch, though at the same time the malefic 
effect of the star is diminished. Thus if the planet 
Mars fall upon a star of its own nature its power is 
increased ; if upon a star of the nature of Jupiter 
or Venus it is reduced and modified ; while if upon 
one of the nature of Saturn it is greatly changed. 
In other words if a planet falls upon a star of similar' 
nature to its own it acquires intensity, while if upon 
.one of contrary nature it becomes quiescent or 
'distorted and may give a kind of sodden or dull 
effect to the character. 

(d) The general nature of the horoscope. This is ' 
an important consideration and should not be 
forgotten. The result of the effect of a star upon a 
planet depends largely upon the strength or weakness 
of that planet in the horoscope. Thus in a map 
showing great ability and high position the success 
attained by the aid of a star will be of a more lasting 
nature than in one where this is not indicated. 
Furthermore, in all cases the fixed stars do not 
contradict the planetary indications. A man will 
not become a murderer, thief or forger merely 
through the effect of a star alone, and for this to 
take place the general nature of the map must be 
suitable and in harmony with such indications. 
The chief function of the stars is to emphasize 
qualities rather than to bestow them, and the exact 
nature and effect must be sought through the 
ordinary rules of astrology. Similarly in directions 



FIXED STARS IN NATAL ASTROLOGY gj 

the action of the stars is much more potent if a 
planetary direction of a like nature is in force at 
the same time. 

The fixed stars operate by position and are said to 
" cast no raj’s,” or in other words their aspects are 
said to be ineffective and their influence to be 
exerted only by conjunction and parallel. As in 
in the case of the planets. they are most powerful? 
when in angles and weak when cadent, their effect! 
being very marked when rising, culminating, set- 
ting or on the nadir even when alone. In such 
cases all 1st magnitude stars give honour and 
preferment, which will be lost or retained with 
trouble and danger if the star be of the nature of 
Mars, while if it be like Saturn there will be final 
disgrace and ruin. The particular angle occupied 
exerts its own modifying effect, the ioth house 
influencing the profession, the 7th the wife, the 4th 
the home, and the 1st the native himself. 

The most powerful effect of a star is exercised 
when it is in conjunction or parallel with a planet, 
and a great deal of information on this will be found 
in the next chapter. It is usual to take the con- 
junction in exactly the same way as a planetary 
conjunction in a horoscope, that is, by the degree 
of ecliptic longitude affected by the star, and the 
parallel by its declination, and these positions are 
the only orthodox ones to use. It will be found, 
however, that the opposition is almost as powerful 
as the conjunctiom'and 'that the square has an 
undeniable influence which it will be unwise to 
neglect. In the case of the trines and sextiles very 



96 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


little effect, if any, is to be discovered, but in all 
probability this is due to the fact that, with the 
exception of the square and opposition, the aspects 
to the body of a star with latitude do not fall in the 
zodiacal degrees one would expect, as may be seen 
by the example given in the Appendix under Formula 
8. It is a simple matter, however, to calculate the 
'correct places in which such aspects fall and if this 
is done in a few cases it will soon be possible to arrive 
'at a definite conclusion as to their power. The same 
difficulty is met with in the rising and setting of 
stars and a further reference to the Appendix will 
show that when the ecliptic longitude of a star is 
rising or setting the actual body of the star itself 
may be a long way above or below the horizon. 
This is particularly important when examining 
the angular effect of a star which may operate 
either through its ecliptic longitude or its bodily^ 
position, and also in computing primary directions, 
for in many cases the direction Ascendant conjunc- 
tion star in mundo is impossible as it neither rises 
nor sets in the latitude at which the birth took place. 
Full details will be found in the Appendix enabling 
the student to determine for any latitude the zodiacal 
degrees with which a given star rises and sets, but 
there will be no necessity to calculate these unless 
he wishes to examine mundane angular influences 
and mundane primary directions. 

One other point arises in connection with the 
action of stars and that is the “ line of Right Ascen- 
sion.” It has been suggested that a star may 
operate through the degree to which its R-A. corres- 



FIXED STARS IN NATAL ASTROLOGY 97 

ponds. Thus Algol in 8 25 0 3' has R.A. 45 0 44', 
which when converted directly into longitude 
without latitude corresponds to 8 * 8 ° 12'. Those, 
who wish to experiment with this idea will find the 
method of converting R.A. into longitude without 
latitude in Formula 9 of the Appendix. 

It will be noticed that all the influences described 
in the following chapter are expressed in terms of 
the radical horoscope and no allowance has been 
made for directions. This is done for the simple 
reason that the directional influences are exactly 
the samp, the only difference being that they do not 
persist throughout the life. Therefore in studying 
the effects of directions the same delineations may 
be used if it is borne in mind that they are of a 
transitory nature and not lasting. Either primary 
or secondary directions may be used and both are 
calculated in the usual way. 

It now remains only to consider the actual natures 
of the fixed stars and the manner of representing 
them. The generally accepted method of expressing 
the kind of influence exerted by any star is in terms 
of the planets of our Solar System. Thus a certain 
star may be “ of the nature of Mars ” for example, 
and this implies that it possesses characteristics 
similar to those exhibited in a horoscope by that 
planet. Fiequently, however, two or more planets 
are mentioned, and in this case that one whose 
name is mentioned first is considered to represent 
the chief influence of the star. The second one 
denotes a kind of modifying influence, so that a star 
of the nature of Mars and Jupiter for example ha? 



93 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS • 


an influence similar to* that of Mars but modified 
by Jupiter. Thus the purely martial qualities are 
given an expansiveness by Jupiter, there is more 
optimism and good luck than would otherwise be 
the case, and so on, The eflect is something like 
that of a promittor passing to the conjunction of a 
significator in directional astrology, the former 
being represented in our- example by Jupiter and 
the latter by Mars. It will follow from this, of 
course, that the effect of a star of the nature of 
Jupiter and Mars would be somewhat different for 
the emphasis would in this case be upon Jupiter, 
and Mars would add fire and energy to the Jupiterian 
characteristics. 

This method of classifying and describing the exact 
natures of the stars enables us to gain a good idea 
of each, and if it is combined with the sign and 
decanate occupied by the star, together with the 
planet and house through which the star is acting in 
any given map, we may refine our judgment of its 
specific effect considerably, and also estimate the 
way in which any other little-known star is acting, 
for its nature may be known bom the general 
character of the constellation to which it belongs. 

| How these natures were first discovered or fixed 
Ave do not know, for Ptolemy, to whom we are 
indebted for them, gives no rules for their deter- 
mination. That he followed some sort of rule seems 
certain for otherwise it is difficult to see how the 
fine shades of influence could be appreciated. 
According to Agrippa the natures of the fixed stars 
are known from the similarity of their colours 



FI XED STARS IN NATAL ASTROLOGY 99 


to those of the planets/ which he describes as 
follows: - 

Satum, blue, leaden .and shining ; Jupiter, citron 
near to paleness and clear ; Mars, red and fiery ; 
Sun, yellow, and when rising red, afterwards glitter- 
ing ; Venus, white and shining, white in morning, 
reddish in evening ; Mercury, glittering ; Moon, 
fair : and to these might perhaps be added Uranus, 
bright and greenish ; and Neptune, also greenish 
but not so bright. This method, however, does not 
commend itself as a very scientific one, and it is 
extremely doubtful if it is that used by Ptolemy. 

The ge neral effect of the stars of any given nature 
in terms’ of natal astrology is as follows : 

Uranus. Interest in occultism, electricity, 
aviation, antiquities ; abrupt. If rising, eccentricity 
gained by learning. If culminating, learned, 
eminent in arts and sciences, mechanical and in- 
ventive ability. 

Saturn. Disgrace, ruin, calamity. It rising, 
grave, thoughtful, melancholy, liable to disgrace, 
much care and anxiety, connected with building, 
mines and minerals. If on 7th cusp and Moon 
afflicted by Satum ruler of 7th, a slovenly wife. 
If culminating, trouble through old people, disgrace, 
trade losses, deceitful associates, rise followed by 
fall. With the luminaries, lean and infirm, many 
miseries. If afflicting Mercury, deafness. 

Jupiter.- If rising, sober, grave, patient, legacies, 
ecclesiastical preferment. If culminating, honour, 
glory, preferment, success in trade and in the 
Church. 



100 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


Mars. Violent death,* ultimate ruin by folly or 
pride. If rising, wealth, power, courage, generosity, 
ingenuity, rise to authority, martial success, subject 
to cuts, wounds, accidents, sores and injuries to the 
face, pains in the head and fevers. If culminating, 
martial eminence, success in trade and in occupations 
of a Mars nature. If afflicting Mercury, deaf- 
ness. 

Venus. If rising, good fortune, happiness, gifts, 
fortunate for love and marriage, gain by legacies and 
inheritance. If culminating, "honour and success, 
dealings with and help through women, success in 
occupations of a Venus nature. 

Mercury. If rising, honour, intellect, great 
learning. If culminating, business activity, gain 
through books and intellectual matters. 

Saturn-Jupiter. Dignified, pious, conservative, 
acquisitive, retentive. Honour and preferment if 
culminating. 

Saturn-Mars. Bold, cruel, heartless, adulterous, 
criminal, liar, loss of estates, poverty, few friends. 
If of ist magnitude, rises by usury or unfair means. 
If culminating, bad name, rise by trade followed 
by disgrace and ruin. 

Saturn-Venus. Slovenly, very immoral, shame- 
less, revolting, mean, sorrows in love. .If rising' 
good-tempered, healthy, gain by industry and mar- 
riage. If culminating, improved health, fame ''by 
help of superiors. 

Saturn-Mercury. Profound liar, thief, black- 
guard, scandal and slander. JL. «*»(£ 

J upiTer-Saturn. Legacies, inheritance, fame, es- 



FIXED STARS IN NATAL ASTROLOGY ioi 


petially if rising, but foolish and unfortunate in love 
affairs. If culminating, honour and preferment. 

Jupiter-Mars. High ambition, pride, love of 
power, grandeur of view, If rising, military honours. 
If culminating, high ecclesiastical honour, martial 
preferment, prosperity in business. 

Juphtr-Venus. Contented, happy disposition, 
honourable, philosophical mind, legal or ecclesi- 
astical preferment, help through women. If rising 
or culminating, honour and riches. 

JuriTER-MERCURV. Religious mind, thoughtful, 
philosophical, writer on religious or similar subjects. 

Mars-Saturn. Malicious, thieving, merciless, 
fiendish, repulsive, liar, accidents, violent death. 
If culminating, military preferment but final dts- 
gracc. 

Mars-J uriTER. Great pride, grandly liberal, com- 
manding, cosmopolitan views. If rising or cul- 
minating, military honour and preferment. 

Mars-Sun. Heroic, courageous, defiant, intrepid 
leader, warlike, danger to the eyes, violent death 
If rising, preferment to metal workers, soldiers, sur- 
geons, and other Mars people. If culminating, 
preferment in business and in all martial affairs. 

Mars-Venus. Strong passions, artistic feeling, 
gain through women and friends, honour and prefer- 
ment in martial affairs, especially if rising or cul- 
minating. 

Mars-Mercury. High enterprise, combative, 
destructive. If rising, rash, very obstinate, ruined 
by headstrong and precipitate conduct. If cul- 
essiasici'tg'. ahasge&hbiv Ausifts& 



102 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


Mars-Moon. Adventurous, perfidious, insolent, 

wanton, brutal, danger to eyes. If rising, sore eyes, 
weak sight, trouble and loss through women. If 
culminating, disgrace and imprisonment. 

^ Sun-Mars. Fearless, intolerant, warlike skill, 
•over-confident, fierce, cruel, vindictive, energetic 
organizer, danger to the eyes, accidents, violent 
death. 

Venus- Saturn. Cunning, bad morals, mercenary, 
repulsive habits, perverted tastes, unfortunate love 
affairs, seduction. 

Venus-Jupiter. Refined, good, high morals, 
vivacious, sincere, pure, healthy, artistic, fortunate 
in love and marriage, help through relatives. 

_ Vewjs-Maws. Shameless, vain, self-indulgent, 
abandoned, violent passions, danger of seduction, 
riotous living but often self-respecting and decent. 

Venus-Mercury. Idealistic, psychic, handsome, 
neat, lovable, refined, genteel, intelligent. 

Mercury-Saturn. Subtle, studious, keen and 
profound mind, often shameless liar, interested in 
occult or serious subjects. 

r~ Mercury-Jupiter. Optimistic, cheerful, philo- 

I sophical, broad mind, religious views, success through 
* 1 influential friends or the Church and law. 

' — Mercury-Mars. Exaggerative, argumentative, 
unreliable, unscrupulous, given to invective, mecha- 
nical ability, very quick mind, great talker. 

Mercury-Venus. Courteous, affable, orderly, 
elegant, sweet-tempered, lovable, refined, artistic, 
honour and riches, If rising, love of poetry, 
painting and teaching, quick mind. If cu ^' 



FIXED STARS IN NATAL ASTROLOGY 103 

initiating, success in literary and legal profes- 
sions. 

Moon-Mars. Changeable, passionate, wanton, lia- 
ble to accidents especially when travelling, bad eyes, 
injuries to face. 

Neduue and Clusters. Blindness, disease, ac- 
cidents, fevers, quarrels, rape, murder, banishment 
and decapitation. 

No difficulty should be experienced in using the 
fixed stars in natal astrology, but for the benefit of 
the beginner the following rules may be laid down : 

1. Note on the map or make a list of the fixed 
stars that fall in conjunction and parallel with, 01 in 
opposition to, the planets, together with their magni- 
tudes and natures. The following orbs may be 
allowed for conjunction and opposition : For a 1st 
magnitude star, 7 0 3°*; for a 2nd magnitude, 5 0 30'; 
for a 3rd magnitude, 3 0 40' ; and for a 4th magni- 
tude, i° 30' 

2. Look up the constellation containing the star, 
its nature as tabulated above, and the combined 
influence of star and planet as given in the next 
chapter. 

3. Modify these characteristics by the sign, 
decanate and house occupied, together with the 
aspects to the planet and the houses it rules just as 
would be done in the case of an ordinary planetary 
conjunction. 

4. The magnitude of the star and its angular, 
succeedent or cadent position will give some idea of 
the strength likely to be exhibited. 

As an example we may take the horoscope of the 



104 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


ex-Kaiser, who was bom at Berlin on 27 January, 
1859, a * 3 p**n- The chief positions arc as follows : 
Ascendant conjunction Pollux, M.C. and Neptune 
conjunction Markab, Mars conjunction Scheat, 
Uranus conjunction, and Moon opposition, Pleiades, 
and Mercury conjunction Wega. 

The most striking position is Markab, a 2nd 
magnitude Mars-Mercury star in Pegasus on the 
M.C. and in conjunction with Neptune and Mars. 
This star brings disgrace and ruin, and with Neptune 
gives a romantic, emotional and unbalanced mind, 
while the constellation Pegasus gives vanity, am- 
bition and bad judgment — a disastrous attempt to 
find " a place in the Sun *' if one may apply the 
legend literally. The nature of the star is combative, 
destructive and aggressive, and its particular mode 
of operation is greatly influenced by Mars con- 
junction Neptune afflicted by Sun and Saturn, which 
indicates martial megalomania and downfall. We 
should, therefore, expect these characteiistics to 
be tremendously emphasized and matters connected 
with them to end in a crash of a far greater magnitude 
than Mars conjunction Neptune would indicate alone. 

Furthermore, Pollux, a martial star, is rising, in- 
dicating imprisonment and honour of short duration, 
while the Moon is heavily afflicted by Uranus from 
the Pleiades giving deformity (the ex-Kaiser has a 
paralysed ann) and heavy losses at the end of life, 
together in such a case as this with revolutions and 
popular outbreaks caused by Uranus falling on a 
star of the nature of the Moon and Mars. 

At the outbreak of the war in 19x4, the Kaiser's' 



FIXED STARS IN NATAL ASTROLOGY 105 


Sun was separating from Difda, and Mars from Hamal 
and the Ascendant was in conjunction with Regulus. 
The last position is a very significant one indicating 
military honour and success but ultimate failure. 
Difda also denotes self-destruction by brute-force, 
while Hamal is a violent and destructive star of the 
nature of Mars and Saturn, which with Mars gives 
final disgrace and ruin. 

Another interesting study is that of the Emperor 
Franz Josef of Austria, whose life was a succession 
of disasters, many of which were due to the position 
of the Sun, Moon and Saturn in conjunction with 
Alphard in the neck of the Hydra, but examples 
could be multiplied indefinitely and the student will 
soon discover for himself that the use of the fixed 
stars and constellations is indeed a valuable help to 
the understanding of a horoscope. 



CHAPTER V 


THE INFLUENCE- OF FIXED STARS, NEBUUE AND 
CLUSTERS 

In the following Table Avill be found the names and 
positions of all the stars, nebula and dusters that 
have been mentioned in astrological literature, 
arranged in order of longitude and corrected up_to 
ist January, 1920. 

A rough and ready means of determining their 
positions for any other year is to add 50} ' per annum 
to their longitudes if the year is after 1920, and to 
subtract that amount for each year before 1920. 
Thus if the positions are required for, say, 18S7, 
which is 33 years before 1920, all that must be done 
is to multiply 50J' by 33 and subtract the result, 
namely, 1658' or 27' 38' from the longitude given in 
the Table ; whilst if the positions were required for 
1953, or 33 years later, the same amount would have 
to be added. The latitudes do not vary to any 
appreciable extent from year to year. 

This will be found suffident for all ordinary pur- 
poses, but if greater accuracy is required it may be 
obtained by employing Right Ascension and Dec- 
lination. Two columns will be found giving the 
Annual Variation in R.A. and Dec. for eadi star. 
This quantity must be multiplied by the number of 
years between the required date and 1920, and then 
added to or subtracted from the R.A. and Dec. given 
106 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULA 107 


in the Tables. The correct position can then be 
calculated by the use of Formula 5 in the Appendix. 
In the case of R.A. the annual variation is always to 
be added if the year for which the positions are re- 
quired is later than 1920, and subtracted if earlier. 
In the cast oi Dec., however, if the annuel variation 
is positive it means that the star is travelling north- 
wards and therefore for years later than 1920 it must 
be added for stars with North Dec. and subtracted 
for those with South Dec., and vice ver«a if earlier 
than 1920. Conversely if the annual variation is 
negative the star is travelling southwards and the 
correction must be subtracted for stars with North 
Dec., and added for those with South Dec. if after 
1920, and vice versa if before. The positions of 
many of the stars, however, are given yearly m the 
Nautical Almanac, Whitaker's Almanac, and other 
similar publications, and a reference to these will give 
the R.A, and Dec. without the trouble of correction. 

In any case never use the Tables of star positions 
given in the old astrological works, and for that 
matter in most modem ones, for they are very in- 
correct. For example, Vindemiatrix, which is in 
the first decanate of Libra, is given by Wilson, 
Simmonite, and Alvidas as in the beginning of Virgo, 
and a multitude of similar, though perhaps not so 
glaring errors might easily be mentioned. In the 
1 present case every care has been taken to compute 
I the positions accurately and they have all been 
. {carefully checked, so that the possibility of error is 
.‘very remote. 



10 S FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


POSITIONS of the CHIEF STARS, NEBULA 


Cat. Name Mag I Nature Long. 


1 Difda 

2 Algenib 

3 Alpheratz 

4 Baten Kaitos 

5 A1 Pherg 
r 6 Vertex 

.7 Mirach 

8 Sharatan 

9 Hainal 

10 Almach 

11 Menkar 

12 Capulus 

13 Algol 

14 Alcyone 

16 Prima Hyadum 
16 Aldebaran 
Rigel 

18 Bella trix 


P Ceti 
7 Pegasi 
a Andromeda: 

I C Ceti 

V Pisciura 

31 M Andromeda: 
p Andromed* 
p Arietis 
s fa Arietis 
7 Andromeda 
“ Ceti 

33 vi Persei 
P Persei 

V Tauri 
7 Tauri 
a Tauri 
P Orionis 
7 Orionis 




ssj 





INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 109 


and CLUSTERS for tst JAN., 1920. 


No. 

Lat. | 

RA. | 

Var. 

Decl. 

Ann. 

Van 


» 

, 

. 

, 




0 

» 

» 

- 

1 

S 20 

46 

9 

53 

37-0 

+45-1 

S 

18 

24 

52-4 

+19-8 

0 

N 12 

36 

2 

16 

42-6 

46-3 

N 

14 

44 

19-6 

20-0 

3 

N 23 

41 

1 

3 

43-8 

46-5 

N 

28 

38 

35-6 

19-9 

4 

S 20 

20 

26 

52 

39-7 

44.4 

S 

10 

43 

47-4 

17-8 

G 

N 5 

22 

21 

47 

59-2 

48-1 

N 

14 

56 

1-6 

18-6 

G 

N 33 

21 

9 34 

22 *5 

48-4 

N 

40 

49 

65-0 

19-7 

7 

N 25 

56 

16 

18 

42-4 

50-2 

1 N 35 

11 

4S-4 j 

19-1 

8 

N 8 

29 

27 

33 

14-8 

49-6 

N 

20 

25 

3-1 

17-7 

0 

N 0 

58 

_ 30 

39 

63-1 

60 -7 

N 

23 5- 

5-3 

17-1 

10 

N 27 

48 

29 

44 

42-9 

55-0 

N 

41 

66 

47-2 

17-3' 

11 

S 12 

35 

44 

31 

25-6 

46-9 

N 

3 

46 

35-9 

14-2 

12 

N 40 

22 

33 

20 

45-0 

Cl -8 

N 

56 

46 

54-0 

16-8 

13 

N 22 

25 

45 

44 

21-1 

58-6 

N 

40 

38 

64-4 

14-0 

14 

N 4 

2 

55 

40 " 

! 52-9 

53-4 

N 

23 

51 1 31-5 . 

11-3 

15 

IS 5 44 

63 

48 

34-5 

61*1 

N 

15 

26 

7-6 

8-8 

1G 

S 5 

28 

67 

49 

65-2 

51-6 i 

N 

16 

20 

58-3 

7-4 

17 

S 31 

8 

77 

40 

23-1 

43-2 

S 

8 

17 

35-2 

4-3 

18 

S 16 

50 

80 

12 

35-6 

48-3 

N 

6 

16 

41-5 

3-4 

19 

N 22 

55 

77 

41 

38-7 

66-4 

.N 

45 

55 

5-1 

3-8 

20 

S 57 

23 

81 

11 

16-2 

32-5 1 

S 

34 

6 

68-1 

2-0 

21 

S 23 

37 

81 

5S 

46-8 

45-9 

S 

0 

21 

26-5 

[ 2-8 

22 

N 6 

23 

80 

18 

301 

5G-8 

N 

28 

32 

28-1 

3-2 

23 

S 28 

42 

82 

53 

0-0 

47-7 

S 

5 

26 

27-0 

2-7 

24 

S 24 

32 

83 

2 

18-0 

45-6 

S 

1 

15 

7-3 

2-4 

25 

S 2 

12 

83 

12 

66-6 

53-8 

N 

21 

6 

41-7 

2*3 

26 

N C6 

6 

22 

55 

18-1 

450-6 . 

N 

88 

52 

38-9 

+18-4 



27 Betelgcuze 
.28 Mcnkalinan 

-29 Tejat 

30 DiraJj 

31 Alhena 
'32 Sirius 

33 Canopus 

34 Wasat 

35 Propus 
■3G Castor 
-37 Pollux. 

-38 Procyon 

39 Prjestepe *- 

40 North Asellus 
4! South Asellus 

42 Acubens 

43 Algenubi 

44 Alphard 
,45 Adhafera 

46 A1 Jabhah 

47 Regulus 

48 Zosma 

49 Denebola 

50 Copula 

51 Labrum 

52 Zavijava .. 

53 Markeb 
64 Zaniah 

55 Vindemiatrix 


. a Orionis 
ft Auriga: 

V Geminorum 
I 1 Geminorum 
y Geminorum 
a Canis Majoris 
a Argus 
*3 Geminorum 
* Geminorum 
a Geminorum 
P Geminorum* 
a Canis Alinoris 
44jtf Cancri 
y*“Cancrp- 
8 Cancri 
a Cancri 
< Leonis 
a Hydra 
C Leonis 
»/ Leonis 
a Leonis 
8 Leonis 
p Leonis 

51 M Canum Ven. 
8 Crateris 
p Virginis 

* Argus 

7 Virginis 

* “Virginis 


s a 
i s 
' s s 

V .? 

5 S 

V 3 
h V 

h 

»■? 

- S 

- 3 
S 1 
3 j>. ji e 7 
<© 
so 
b a 
h S 
h-9 
h ? 

I) 9 

3 v 

h ? V 1° 12 


INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E hi 


No. 

Lat. 

R.A. ‘ | 

Var.’ 

Dccl. 

Var.’ 



0 

» 

0 

# 

• 

. 


o 

' 

- 

' . 

27 

S 

16 

2 

'-87.. 

.42. 

36-3 

+48-7 

N 

7 

23 

35*9 

4 0*8 

' 28 

N ' 

21 

30 

88 

24 

54-0 

66*0 

U M 

50. 

26-7 

4 0*5 

1 20 

S 

0 

64 

92 

30 

43-9 

64*3 

N 

22 

31 

62*4 

- 0*9 

30 

s 

0‘ 

50 

94 

31 

49-2 

54*4 

N 

22 

33 

21 *2 

1*7 

31 

s 

G 

45 

9S 

1G 

21-9 

52*0 

N 

1G 

28 

7*3 

2-9 

1 32 

s 

39 

35 

100 

24 

22-0 

39*6 

S 

1G 

3G 

19-9 

4*8 

' 33 

s 

7G 

50 

—03 

32 

.37 *3 

18-3 

s 

52 

39 

C-5* 

1*9 

31 

s 

0 

11 

108 

50 

12-4 

53*6 

N 

22 

7 

61*1 

6*6 

35 

N 

5 

45 

110 

11 

24*4 

65*9 

N 

27 

57 

29*8 

7*0 

1 '30 

N 

10 

5 

112 

22 

2G-8 

57*4 

N 

32 

3 

55-9 

7*7 

37 

N‘ 

\ c 

40 

115 

6 

21*0 

65*2 

N 

28 

13 

14*9 

8*6 

33 

s 

10 

- 0 

113 

46 

43-G 

471 

N 

5 

25 

51*8 

9*1 

39 

N 

1 

33 

128 

54 

16*0 

51-6 

N 

20 

15 

8*0 

12*2\ 

40 

N 

3 

11 

129 

40 

1*0 

52*3 

N 

21 

45 

43*3 

12*5- 

41 

N 

„0- 

- 4 

130 

o 

7*3 

61*1 

N 

18 

26 

57*1 

13*1 

1 42 

S 

5 

5 

133 

31 

42-0 

49*2 

N 

12 

10 

6*6 

13*8 

43 

N 

9 

43 

i45 

19 

42*4 

51*1 

N 

24 

8 

35*7 

16-5 

1 44 

S 

22 

23 

140 

54 

511 

44-2 

S 

8 

18 

40*2 

15*5 

1 45 

N 

11 

62 

153 

3 

39-9 

50*1 

N 

23 

48 

69*5 

17*9 

1 40 

N 

4 

52 

150 

44 

36-3 

49*0 

N 

17 

9 

11*9 

17*5 

! 47 

N. 


~28 

161 

1 

42-3 

48*0 

N 

12 

21 

31*3 

17*5 

! 48 

N 

14 

20 

167 

27 

60 8 

47 -8 

N 

20 

67 

44-0 

19*7 

! 49 

N 

12 

16 

176 

14 

42-4 

45-9 

N 

15 

1 

9*6 

20*1 

| 50 

N 

60 

55 

201 

35 

37*5 

36-7 

N 

47 

36 

18*0 

18*6 

l 61 

.S 

17 

34 

168 

50 

6*5 

34*5 

S 

14 

20 

43*6 

19*5 

| 62 

N 

0 

42 

176 

37 

55*3 

46*9 

N 

2 

12 

56 0 i 

20-3 

! 63 

S 

63 

43 

139 

64 

31*3 

27*9 

S 

54 

40 

G*8 

16*3 

, 64 

N 

1 

22 

183 

57 

11*1 

46*0 

S 

0 

13 

20*4 

20*0 

1 55 

• N 

16 

13 

194 

32 

55*2 

444*8 

N 

U 

23 

19-8 

-19*4 


I 













INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAS 113 


No. 

Lat. 

R.A. 

Ann. 

Var. 

Decl. 

.Var.' 



0 


• 

» 

- 



0 

» 

# 


5G 

N 

0 

48 

189 

24 

6-1 

4-45*0 

S 

1 

0 

39*2 

-19*8 

57 

S 

12 

11 

ISO 

25 

60,*2_ 

4G*5 

S 

16 

4 

12*7 

20*1 

5S 

N 

49 

33 

217 

12 

61 *G 

36-3 

N 

38 

39 

27*3 

15*8 

59 

S 

GS 

55 

ICO 

29 

11-8 

67*3 

S 

59 

15 

40*6 

18*7 

CO 

s 

2 

3 

_2Q0 

14 

38-4 

47*4 

S 

10, 

_44 

39*0 

18*8 

Cl 

N 

30 

47 

213 

0 

10*6 

41*1 

.N 

19 

35 

64*0 

18*8 

02 

N 

48 

59 

228 

4 

9-7 

36-3 

N 

33 

36 

45*1 

13*6 

03 

N 

0 

28 

213 

3G 

39-0 

47*8 

S 

13 

0 

19*G 

16-6 

04 

S 

52 

62 

185 

32 

7-6 

49*8 

s 

62 

39 

22*5 

20*0 

G5 

N 

44 

20 

232 

49 

30-3 

38*1 

N 

26 

68 

59-2 

12*2 

GG 

N 

O' 

20 

221 

36 

44-2 

49-6 

S 

15 

42 

36-6 

15-1 

G7 

N 

8 

30 

228 

10 

29-6 

48*4 

s 

9 

5 

19-2 

13*4 

08 

N 

25 

25 

235 

4 

63-5 

44*2 

N 

6 

40 

35*1 

11*4 

G9 

S 

44 

9 

209 

32 

27-7 

631 

S 

69 

59 

15-3 

17-5 

70 

S 

42 

34 

218 

32 

18-1 

GO-9 

s 

60 

30 

21-8 

15-0 

71 

N 

17 

15 

242 

32 

16-2 

47-1 

s 

3 

29 

21-9 

9-4 

72 

S 

1 

58 

238 

53 

69-7 

63-1 

s 

22 

23 

42-7 

10*4 

73 

N 

1 

1 

240 

11 

43-8 

62-2 

s 

19 

35 

16*4 

10*0 

’ 74 

N 

11 

24 

248 

11 

16-6 

49-5 

s 

10 

24 

22*2 

7*4 

, 75 

S 

4 

34 

246 

7 

29-1 

65*0 

s 

20 

16 

20*4 

8*1 

1 7G 

N 

75 

17 

262 

9 

21-9 

20-2 

N 

62 

21 

36*2 

2*7 

( 77 

N 

7 

12 

25G 

26 

49-3 

51-6 

s 

15 

37 

37*4 

4*0 

1 78 

N 

35 

51 

2G2 

48 

18-0 

41-7 

N 

12 

37 

1*9 

2-7 

< 79 

S 

14 

0 

261 

19 

48-6 

61-0 

S 

37 

14 

0*0 

3*1 

* 80 

s 

8 

60 

2G3 

44 

42-0 

58-3 

s 

32 

9 

46-0 

2*3 

<-81 

s 

11 

22 

2G7 

7 

12-0 

59-8 

s 

34 

47 

22*0 

1*1 

< 82 

N 

13 

41 

268 

39 

19-6 

49-5 

s 

9 

45 

63*7 

0*6 

< 83 

N 

0 

1 

269 

30 

— 

54-5 

s 

23 

26 




( 84 

1 

N 

2 

21 

272 

14 

40-8 

+53*6 

s 

21 

4 

51*7 

0 

+ 



1X4 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS* 


No. 

Name 

Cat. Name 

Mag 

Natti 

3^85 

Facies 

22 11 Sagittarii 

C 

0* 

V 80 

Pclagus 

<r Sagittarii 

2 

V $ 

87 

Ascclla 

{ Sagittarii 

3 

V S 

83 

Manubrium 

o Sagittarii 

4} 

OS 

‘'-'89 

Wega 

a J.ync 

1 

* $ 5f 

DO 

Deneb 

C Aquifce 

3 

S v 

>91 

Tcrebcllura 

“ Sagittarii 

G 

9 h 

02 

Albirco 

P Cygni 

3 

9 S 

03 

Altair 

a Aquike 

1 

S * 

04. 

Giedi 

'a Capricomi 

4 

9 t 

05 

Dabili 

fl Capricomi 

3 

h 9 

-00 

Oculus 

r Capricomi 

5 

h 9 

07 

Bos 

- P Capricomi 

5 

h 9 

x 03 

Armus 

ij Capricomi 

5 

S $ 

09' 

Dorsum 

6 Capricomi 

0 

h V 

*-100 

Castra 

* Capricomi 

5 

h V 

101 

Kashira 

y Capricomi 

4 

h V 

102 

Sadalsuud 

P Aquarii 

3 

b 5 

103 

Deneb Algedi 

5 Capricomi 

3 

h v 

104 

Sadalmclik 

a Aquarii 

3 

h V 

105 

Foraalhaut 

a Piscis Aust. 

1 

9 S 

100 

Deneb Adige 

a Cygni 

1 

9 $* 

-107 

Skat 

3 Aquarii 

3 

h v 

108 

Achernar 

a Eridani 

1 

V 

10Q 

llarkab 

a Pegasi 

2 

$ tf 

110 

Scheat , 

P Pegasi 

o 

t $ 


:!.* 


7 12 

11 10 

12 31 

13 32 

14 12 

15 41 
24 43 

zzO 0 

0 39 

2 42 

2 SO 

3 35 

4 3 

11 37 

12 43 

19 5 

20 40 

22 17 
22 25 

X 2 
2 44 
4 14 
7 45 
14 19 


28 15 


INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUUE 115 




R.A. 



m 

■ 


n 

n 

0 

* 

r 


m 

D 

n 

■a 

■ 

S5 


0 

43 

277 

52 

37-5 

-f54-7 

E 

23 

58 


+2-4 

SG 

s 

3 

2G 

2S2 

34 

34-S 

55-8 

s 

20 

23 

60-G 

4-3 

67 

s 

7 

10 

2S4 

22 

50-2 

57-3 

s 

29 

59 

44-3 

5-0 

ss 

N 

0 

52 

2S4 

ns 

21-5 

53 -G 

s 

21 

51 

45*0 

' 5-2 

89 

N 

Cl 

44 

278 _ 

-33 

2G-7 

30-4 

N 

38 

42 

30-3 

3-3 

90 

N 

30 

22 

285 

25 

69-5 

41-4 

N 

13 

44 

3G-G 

5-2 

91 

S 

5 

25 

297 

43 

4G-6 

54-7 

s 

2G 

31 

13-3 

9-2 

02 

N 

•IS 

69 

291 

52 

25-2 

3G-3 

N 

27 

47 

2G-8 

7-5 

03 

N 

20 

18 

290 

43 

12-0 

43-0 

N 

8 

39 

21-9 

9-4 

04 

N 

G 

5S 

303 

21 

1G-4 

49-9 

S 

12 

4G 

34-4 

11-0 

05 

N 

4 

30 

304 

7 

4G-2 

50-5 

s 

15 

0 

5-9 

11-3 

9G 

N 

0 

64 

305 

41 

15-1 

61-4 

s 

18 

28 

34-9 

11-5 

07 

N 

1 

12 

30G 

4 

29-4 

51-3 

s 

18 

4 

44 -G 

11-8 

OS 

S 

2 

59 

314 

57 

55-3 

61-1 

s 

20 

10 

27-9 

14-1 

99 

S 

0 

3G 

315 

22 

GO 

50-4 

s 

17 

34 

8-1 

14-0 

100 

s 

4 

53 

323 

9 

10 G 

50-4 

s 

19 

49 

3G-3 

16-9 

101 

s 

2 

33 

323 

54 

54-9 

49-9 

s 

17 

1 

27-5 

1G-2 

102 

N 

S 

37 

321 

60 

13-8 

47-4 

s 

5 

65 

25-7 

IB-8 

,103 

s 

2 

35 

325 

39 

24 -G 

49 -G 

S 

10 

29 

27 -G 

1G-3 

101 

N 

10 

39 

330 

25 

8-i 

46-2 

s 

0 

.42 

32-7 

17-4 

105 

S 

21 

8 

343 

18 

29-5 

49-8 

s 

30 

0 

47-6 

19-0 

106 

N 

69 

55 

309 

40 

33-7 

30-6 

N 

44 

69 

37-7 

12-8 

107 

S 

8 

11 

342 

3G 

6-6 

47-8 

s 

16 

14 

47-8 

19-1 

10 s 

s 

59 

22 

23 

41 

3-G 

33-6 

s 

57 

33 

34-6 

18-3 

109 

N 

19 

24 

345 

11 

36-9 

44-8 

N 

14 

40 ' 

28 -2 

19-3 


N 

31 

8 

344 

5S 

24-3 

+43-G 

N 

27 

38 

54-7 

+19-5 




Ii6 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


In the following pages will be found a description 
of the influcnce of each star in as much detail as 
could be obtained. The stars are arranged alpha- 
betically to facilitate reference, and the longitude is 
also added in each case to enable the position in the 
Table to be found without trouble. 

x. Achernar. a Eridani. X 14* 10'. 

Notes. A white star situated at the mouth of the 
River. From A 1 Aliir al Nahr, the End of the River. 

Influence. In his notes on the stars in Eridanus 
Ptolemy says " the last bright one is of the same in- 
fluence as Jupiter." It is symbolized as the Cherub 
and Sword and gives success in public office, bene- 
ficence, and religion. 

2. Acrux. a Cruets, rj. io° 46'. 

Notes. The brightest star in the Southern Cross. 
It is triple. 

Influence. Acrux is of the nature of Jupiter. It 
gives religious beneficence, ceremonial, justice, magic 
and mystery, and is frequently prominent in the 
horoscopes of astrologers and occultists. 

3. Acubens. a Cancri. SI I2°3i'. 

Notes. A double star with white and red compo- 
nents situated on the southern claw of the Crab. 
From Al Zubanah, the Claws. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Mercury. 

It has been called " The sheltering or hiding place, 
and gives activity, malevolence and poison, making 
its natives liars and criminals. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 117 


4. _Aculeos. 6M S cor pit. f 24 0 39'. 

Notes. The so-called Nebula in the sting of 
Scorpio mentioned by Ptolemy. It is actually a 
cluster and lies with Acumen a little above the sting. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mars and the Moon. 
It affects the eyesight and causes blindness of one or 
both eyes if in conjunction with an afflicted luminary, 
or in conjunction with a malefic that afflicts the 
luminaries. The opposition appears to be equally 
effective. 

5. Acumen. 7M Scorpii. f 27° 35'- 

Notes. A companion cluster to Aculeus and of the 
same nature and influence. 

6. Adhafera. ( Leonis . SI 26° 27'. 

.Notes. A double star in the Lion's mane. It has 
been called A 1 Serpha, the Funeral Pyre. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Mercury. 
It is connected with suicide, poison, corrosive acids, 
liquid explosives, liquid fire, lying, stealing and 
crime. 

If rising gives great military preferment and 
riches. 

7. Agena. p Centauri. 71^ 22 0 43'. 

Notes. On the right foreleg of the Centaur. 
Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 

nature of Venus and Jupiter, but Alvidas suggests an 
influence similar to that of Mars conjunction Mer- 
cury. It gives position, friendship, refinement, 
morality, health and honour. 



XI 8 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


With Sun. Mental activity, rashness, success, 
many friendships. 

With Moon. Sarcasm and bitter speech, strong 
passions. 

With Mercury. Great mental ability, sarcasm, 
material gain, speaking, writing and championing 
the masses. 

With Venus. Poetical, strong passions, rash 
friendships with women. 

With Mars. Legal authority, honour as speaker 
or writer, gTcat mental and physical powers. 

With Jupiter. Intellectual success, legal and 
Church authority, professional honour. 

With Saturn. Thoughtful, shrewd, association 
with medical men, healing powers, abrupt manner, 
occultism, domestic disharmony through jealousy. 

With Uranus. Sarcasm, public work but eventual 
disfavour of superiors, caustic speaker and writer, 
violent, coarse, unrefined, strong passions, domestic 
disharmony, loss of expected wealth, peculiar 
death. 

With Neptune. Sharp, rash, headstrong, original, 
organizer, poor executive ability, loss through law 
and speculation, obstacles to success, many false 
friends and enemies, liable to accidents, death by 
colds or fevers. 

8. Albireo. (3 Cygni. ts; o° 9'. 

Notes. A topaz yellow and sapphire blue binaiy 
or double star situated on the head of the Swan. 
Symbolized as “ The Song of the Dying Swan." 

Influence. Of the nature of Venus and Mercury. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 119 


It gives a handsome appearance, neatness, a lovable 
disposition and beneficence in despair. 

9. Alcyone. n Tauri. B 2S 0 52'. 

Legend. Alcyone represents the Pleiad, daughter 
of Atlas and Plcione, who became the mother of 
Hyricus by Neptune. 

Notes. A greenish yellow star and brightest of the 
Pleiades, situated on the shoulder of the Bull. From 
early times it has been thought to be the central 
Sun round which the universe revolves, and was A1 
Wasat, the Central One, of the Arabs, and Tcmennu, 
the Foundation Stone, of the Babylonians, but this 
idea has now been abandoned by astronomers. 
Alcyone marked the beginning of the 4th ecliptic 
constellation of the Babylonians, and as Amba. the 
Mother, formed the junction star between the Hindu 
nakshatras Krittika and Roliini. It is frequently 
called the Hen. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mars and the Moon. 
It causes love, eminence, blindness from fevers, 
small-pox, and accidents to the face. For further 
particulars sec Pleiades. 

10. Aldebaran. a Tauri. Q 8° 40'. 

Notes. A pale rose star marking the Bull’s South 
or Left Eye. Its name is from A1 Dabaran, the 
Follower. It formed one of the four Royal Stars 
or Watchers of the Heavens among the Persians in 
about 3000 B.C., when, as the Watcher of the East, 
it marked the Vernal Equinox, the other stars being 
Regurus, Antares, and Fomalhaut. Aldebaran is a 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAS 121 


With Sun or Moon, culminating or rising, great 
honour through violence with difficulties and cas- 
ualties. 

With Mercury. Aflects the health and domestic 
affairs, prominence through mercurial matters, 
material gain, and many learned friends. 

IPiM Venus. • Honour through literature, music or 
art ; creative abilities ; favourable for health and 
marriage. 

With Mars. Great military' preferment but 'at- 
tended by much danger ; liable to accidents, fevers 
and a violent death. If at the same time the Moon 
is with Antarcs, especially in an angle, death will 
come through a stab, blow or fall. 

With Jupiter. Great ecclesiastical honour and 
high military preferment. 

With Saturn. Great afflictions, strange mind, 
gTeat wickedness, sarcasm, eloquence, good memory, 
studious and retiring nature, legal abilities, domestic 
and material success, losses through mercurial 
friends. If at the same time the Moon is with 
Antares there will be a violent death, probably by 
hanging. 

With Uranus. Scientific, a nature lover, critical, 
just, domestic and political success, public honours, 
fond of occultism but may meet with disfavour' 
through it, lingering death. 

TPiVA Neptune. Connected with science, art, 
occultism and mediumship, good intellect, loss 
through fire, electricity or speculation, but gain 
through metals, machinery or scientific instruments, 
especially i! Mars is strong ; many journeys, ob- 



1 22 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


stacles to domestic happiness, unfavourable for 
children, danger of accidents and sudden death. 

With Fortuna or its depositor, poverty. 

With a malefic in the 4th, 7th, nth or 12th house 
and the Moon at the same time with Antarcs, death 
by a sudden sword thrust, stab or fall. 

11. Algenib. y Pegasi. ^ 8° 2'. 

Notes. A white star situated at the tip of the wing 
of Pegasus. From A 1 Janah, the Wing, or AI Janb, 
the Side, According to Bullinger it means " Who 
carries." 

Influence. Of the nature of Mars and Mercury 
It gives notoriety, dishonour, violence, misfortune, 
and denotes the naked and poor professional beggar. 

With Sun. Mental disturbances, fevers and ill-' 
health, some danger of accidents. 

With Moon. Dishonour, loss by scandal, exiled or 
forced to flee, ill-health, trouble through writings. 

With Mercury. Quick temper, mental distur- 
bances, success in legal and other disputes. 

IVtth Venus. Generous, proud, quick temper, bad 
morals, drink or evil habits, favourable for financial 
affairs. 

With Mars. Quick mind and body, lying or theft, 
danger of accidents. 

With Jupiter. Hypocrisy, financial success, real 
or pretended religious enthusiasm. 

With Saturn. Many enemies, success, secret help 
from powerful friends and influential relatives, bad 
morals. 

With Uranus. Active and eccentric mind, re- 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 123 

former or agitator, great influence over the minds of 
others necessitating journeys, peculiar ideas in ad- 
vance of the times, mystic and fond of mysteries 
though frank and open, domestic troubles especially 
in a woman's map. 

With Neptune. Conceited, stubborn, deceptive, 
cowardly, vacillating, untruthful, envious, super- 
stitious, strong passions, sex troubles, evil surround- 
ings, many enemies, mechanical ability, criminal 
tendencies, may be forger, sudden and violent death. 

12. Algenubi. « Leonis. & 19 0 35'. 

Notes. A yellow star in the Lion’s mouth. 
Influence .n Of the nature of Saturn and Mars, and 

has been called “ He who rends.” It gives a bold, 
bombastic, cruel, heartless, brutish and destructive 
nature, but artistic appreciation and power of ex- 
pression. 

13. Algol, p Persei. 8 25 0 3'. 

Legend. Algol represents the head of the Gorgon 
Medusa who was slain by Perseus. Medusa, who was 
the only mortal one of the three Gorgon sisters, was 
originally a beautiful maiden, but her hair was 
changed into hissing serpents by Minerva in conse- 
quence of her having become by Neptune the mother 
of Chrysaor and Pegasus m one of Minerva’s temples. 
This gave her so fearful an appearance that everyone 
who looked at her was changed into stone. 

Notes. A white binary and variable star marking 
the Medusa's Head held in the hand of Perseus. 
Its diameter is 1,060,000 miles, and its density only a 



124 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


little above that of cork. Algol is from Ra’s aJ Ghul, 
the Demon’s Head, other names in frequent use be- 
ing Caput Algol and Caput Medusa;. It was known 
as Lilith by the Hebrews, after the nocturnal vampire 
said to be Adam’s first wife : and Tseih She, Piled- 
up Corpses, by the Chinese. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Jupiter. 
It causes misfortune, violence, decapitation, hanging, 
electrocution and mob violence, and gives a dogged 
and violent nature that causes death to the native or 
others. Jt is the most evil star in the heavens. 

If culminating. Murder, sudden death, beheading, 
prone to murder and mischief. If at the same time 
in conjunction with Sun, Moon or Jupiter, -gives 
victory over others in war. 

With Sun. Violent death or extreme sickness. 
If also in no aspect to a benefic, or there is no benefic 
in the 8th house, and the depositor of the Sun in a 
day nativity or of the Moon in the night one is in 
square or opposition to Mars, the native will be 
beheaded ; if the luminary culminate he will- be 
maimed, mangled, wounded or tom to pieces alive ; 
and if Mars is at the same time in Gemini or Pisces 
his hands or feet will be cut off. 

With Moon. Violent death or extreme sickness. 

With Mars, or if Mars be elevated above the 
luminaries when Algol is angular, the native win 
be a murderer who will come to an untimely end. 
The same is caused by Algol angular or with the 
hyleg. 

With Mars or Saturn, and the Moon, at the same 
time with Sadalmelik, hanging or decapitation by 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 125 


royal command ; if the Moon is with Denebola, 
death by judicial sentence ; and, if the Moon is with 
Alphard, death by water or poison. 

With the Hyleg and angular, decapitation or a 
murderer who meets with a violent death. 

With Fortuna or its depositor, poverty 

14. Algorab. S Corvi. ^ 12 0 20'. 

Notes. A double star, pale yellow and purple, 
situated on the right wing of the Crow. From A1 
Ghirab, the Crow. 

Influence. Of the nature ot Mars and Saturn. 
It gives destructiveness, malevolence, fiendishness, 
repulsiveness and lying, and is connected with 
scavenging. 

15. Al Hecka. { Tauri. JJ 23 0 40'. 

Notes. The Bull’s South or Following Horn, 
sometimes called 41 The Driver." 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Mars, but Alvidas suggests that of Mercury 
and Saturn conjoined. It gives violence, male- 
volence and danger of accidents. 

With Sun. Suspicious, reserved, studious, 
unfavourable for health and especially for the lungs, 
aptitude for military enterprise and stratagems but 
danger of deceit and ambushes. 

With Moon. Quarrels, evil habits and company, 
depravity. 

With Mercury. Hasty temper, selfishness, ‘greed, 
dissipation, legal and business troubles^ poor healthy 
domestic troubles and separation from wife or 



126 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


children, low companions, loss of wealth and 
poverty. 

With Venus. Unfortunate, low companions, bad 
environment. 

With Mars. Evil companions, bad habits, sex 
troubles, and afflictions of a Mars-Venus type.-. 

With Jupiter. Hypocrisy, dissipation, business 
losses and disgrace. 

With Saturn. Uncontrolled passions, drink, 
debauchery, perverted genius, clever writer of 
undesirable literature, luxurious surroundings but 
little wealth, isolated or confined at end of life, 
domestic unhappiness, accidents if Mars is also 
afflicting. 

With Uranus. Legal difficulties, trouble through 
occultism, danger of imprisonment but help from 
friends, unfavourable for love and marriage, paren- 
tal disharmony, little wealth, death from an acci- 
dent. 

With Neptune. Accidents, secret enemies, great 
psychic powers, wife may be sickly or die soon after 
marriage, favourable for gain but many losses in 
latter part of life, sudden troubles of a Mars nature. 

16. Alhena. . y Geminorum. £5 7 0 59'. 

Notes. A brilliant white star in the left foot of 
the Southern Twin, often called Bright Foot of 
Gemini. From AlHan’ah, a Brand or Mark burnt in. 
According to Bullinger it means "hurt, wounded 
or afflicted," and it has been called " the wound 
in the tendon Achilles.'" 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the nature 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULiE 127 


, of Mercury and Venus, but Alvidas gives Moon and 
Venus. It bestows eminence in art but gives 
liability to accidents affecting the feet . 

With Sun. Pride, love of ease, luxury and 
pleasure. There may be martial honours but 
danger of losing them. 

With Moon. Good health, honour, riches, 
pleasure and society, domestic benefits. 

With Mercury. Popularity, benefits from opposite 
sex, musical and artistic ability but little fame, 
domestic harmony, business adversely affected by 
pleasure and society. 

With Venus. Material concerns, love of dress, 
pleasure and flattery, artistic and musical ability. 

With Mars. Superficial nature, fond of pleasure, 
ease, luxury, ornament and display. 

\ With Jupiter . Social advancement and success, 
' v philosophical mind, love of ostentation. 

With Saturn. Caution, reserve, studiousness, 
prominence in science or art, some domestic discord, 
sickness to the children, unexpected losses but 
possibility of wealth, ill-health at the end of life. 

With Urantis. Timid, suspicious, selfish, econo- 
mical over small things and extravagant in large 
ones, emotional, vacillating, unpractical and much 
influenced by habits, easily hypnotized, occult 
interests and secret psychic ability; afflicted with 
Cancerian ailments; two or more mam ages, one 
very early and extremely unhappy especially it 
female ; unfavourable for home and children. If 
a woman, good-looking and many friends but 
enemies among women. 



-12 8 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


With Neptune. Easily influenced, suffers through 
indiscreet actions, mediumistic, very sympathetic, 
often domestic disharmony, unfavourable for gain, 
death brought about by own acts. ' * 

17. Al Jabbab. ij Leonis. SI 26° 4f. 

Notes. From AI JehTia, the Forehead. It 15 
situated on the Lion's mane. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Mercury. 
It gives loss and many dangers, a violent and in- 
temperate nature, and to a military officer danger of 
mutiny and minder by his soldiers. These charac- 
teristics are most marked when the star is rising. 

xS. Alsiacb. y Andromeda, y 13 0 7'. 

Notes. A binary (or ternary) star, orange, 
emerald and blue, situated on the left foot of Andro- 
meda. From Al Anak al Ard, a small Arabian 
animal like a badger. 

Influence. Of the nature of Venus. It give* 
honour, eminence and artistic ability. 

19. Alnilam. < Ononis , U 22° 22'. 

Notes. A bright white star occupying the central 
position in Orion's Belt. From AI Nitham, the 
String of Pearls. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Jupiter and Saturn ; and to Alvidas of 
Mercury and Saturn. It gives fleeting public 
honours. 

With Sun. Rash, headstrong, surly. If also 
culminating, military preferment or’^'^un. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULA 129 

With Moon. Many sudden and unexpected losses 
and reverses, much help from friends, ill-health of 
family. 

With Mercury. Hasty, quick temper, quarrels 
with associates, domestic disharmony through own 
actions, troubles through writings and opposite sex. 

With Venus. Trouble through love affairs, scan- 
dal, enemies among women. 

With Mars. Quarrels, loss by lawsuits, domestic 
disharmony, bad health, violent death. 

With Jupiter. Legal or Church preferment but 
danger of disgrace, loss by speculation, trouble 
through relatives and foreign affairs. 

With Saturn. Courageous, domestic disharmony, 
leaves home early, successful but many unexpected 
losses, favourable for health. 

With Uranus. Scientific ability, critical, enthu- 
siastic, too many interests, may practise medicine 
or invent new surgical appliances but reaps no gain 
from them, many troubles and annoyances, dis- 
harmony with brothers and sisters who may cheat 
native out of inheritance, loss through law and in 
business, several marriages, enmity between native 
and partner’s relatives, unfavourable for children, 
sudden death in middle age while travelling, leaving 
affairs involved in litigation. 

With Neptune. Honest, outspoken, hasty in 
speech, rash and impulsive, offends others through 
irreligious speech, business and mercantile pursuits 
or engaged in science, may be head of learned in- 
stitution or connected with large companies, fond of 
speculation, sports and the water, quick and level- 



130 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

hooded in emergencies, many friends but 
some, dinger of accidenls. domestic harmonj, 
before old age. (See Cixcoia Orioxis.) 

20. Ali-iiard. a Hydra-. SI = 6 ” io . 

Holes. An orange star in the nechof “ 

From A1 Fard al Shnja, the SohtalJ^ m ft - 
pent. Often calledthe Hydra sHeart « to»J 
Influence. Ftolemy states that it a l of I & is 

of Saturn and Venus, but according ‘°f Tgi'* 
similar to the Sun and Jupiter ™ 'knowledge 

rrisdom, musical and artistic appremt .^ rf ^ 

of human nature, stron f,. p ^“^ ^,3 a sudden 
control, immorality, revoltmg < *“*““„* 
death by drowning, poison or “ pb> d loss in con- 
1/ rising, much trouble ;“ d] ^,„. addicted t» 
ncction with estates and building, 
women and intemperance. suffering 

Il'.'tt Sun. Power and position 

through own acts and fromenem.es, loss V- 

and honour, overcome by ene ™f ' gipey, faflur' 
HVrt Moon. Lust, u relative, 

in projects but financial help often^ 
ill-fortune to wife or “ otb !L' h ^ at i on . If affi= lrf 
ruin, danger of dead ■ b V “^S^ing or poi»“ 
by Mars or Saturn, de: ath } a roa ]efic a a 
especially if Mars be angu] i • ^ ater or poison, 
conjunction with Algol, deathy writing* un- 

IT . ih Mercury. Trouble JStfLugh a pass®: 
favourable for "amage, suffering ° f 

ate attachment that entuely chang 

the life. ' . , attachments that are 

With Venus. Passionate attacnm 



IKFUJESCE OF STARS AND NEBUUE xj 1 

opposed by relatives, handsome and admired by 
opposite sex, favourable for gain, sorrow through 
love affairs if female. 

With Mars, Trouble and scandal through love 
affairs. Attachment to a married person. Bad for 
childbirth, if ft woman liable to miscarriage and 
death, together with death of child, danger of serious 
accidents ; if afflicting luminaries, danger of death 
by drowning or poison. 

With Jupiter. Strong passions, favourable for 
gain, attachment to widow or widower, liable to 
disgrace, legal trouble and judicial sentence. 

With Saturn. Strong passions but cool, cautious 
and slow to anger, secret and sorrowful love affairs 
of short duration, unfavourable for gain, domestic 
disharmony, danger of death by poison. 

With Uranus. Disgrace especially through love 
affairs, evil habits, unbalanced mind, tendency to 
great crime, bad for gain and marriage, downfall 
through love disappointment ; if a woman, early 
ruin and depraved life. 

With Neptune. Strong passions, shallow affections, 
seducer, led astray early in life, bad for gain and 
marriage, separation from or loss of parents, acci- 
dents, public death through secret enemies. If cul- 
minating, death of mother at native’s birth. 

21. Alvhecca. a Corona: Borealis. TT 
Notes. A brilliant white star in the 1 
ribbon. From A1 Na’ir al Fakkah, the 
of the Dish. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it b 
ture of Venus and Mercury, but Alvidas 



130 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


beaded in emergencies, many friends but Joss through 
some, danger of accidents, domestic harmony, dies 
before old age. ( See Cingula Orionis.) 

20. Alphard. a Hydra. ft 26° lo'. 

Notes. An orange star in the neck of the Hydra. 
From AJ Fard al Shuja, the Solitary One in the Ser- 
pent. Often called the Hydra’s Heart or Cor Hydra. 

Influence. Ptolemy states that it is of the nature 
of Saturn and Venus, but according to Alvidas it is 
similar to the Sun and Jupiter in sextile. It gives 
wisdom, musical and artistic appreciation, knowledge 
of human nature, strong passions, lack of self- 
control, immorality, revolting deeds and a sudden 
death by drowning, poison or asphyxiation. 

If rising, much trouble, anxiety and loss in con- 
nection with estates and budding ; addicted to 
women and intemperance. 

With Sun. Power and authority but suffering 
through own acts and from enemies, loss of position 
and honour, overcome by enemies. 

With Moon. Lust, wantonness, profligacy, failure 
in projects but financial help often from a relative, 
ill-fortune to wife or mother, eventual disgrace and 
ruin, danger of death by asphyxiation. If afflicted 
by Mars or Saturn, death by drowning or poison 
especially if Mars be angular. If a malefic is in 
conjunction with Algol, death by water or poison. 

TPilft Mercury. Trouble through writings, un- 
favourable for marriage, suffering through a passion- 
ate attachment that entirely changes the course of 
the life. 

WUh Venus. Passionate attachments that are 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULA! 133 


unfavourable for money matters but gain through 
marriage, domestic disharmony and peculiar fea- 
tures in connection with marriage, not very favour- 
able for children, gain through martial occupations, 
may invent something of value in surgery or chem- 
istry, writes on occult subjects, many changes, 
much travel by water in early life, many enemies, 
liable to heart ailments, sudden or violent 
death. 

22. Alpiieratz. a Andromeda:. 13° xx'. 

Notes. A double star, white and purplish, in the 
hair of Andromeda. From A1 Surrat al Faras, The 
Home's Navel, as it was formerly located in Pegasus. 
According to Bullinger, though with less likelihood, 
it is from Al Phiratz, the Broken Down. Fre- 
quently called Caput Andromeda; or Andromeda's 
Head. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the na- 
ture of Jupiter and Venus, and to these Alvidas adds 
Mars also. It gives independence, freedom, love, 
riches, honour and a keen intellect. 

With Sun. Honour, preferment and favours from 
others 

With Moon. Energetic, persevering, honour, 
wealth, many good friends and business success. 

With M ercury. Active mind, benefits from judges, 
lawyers or churchmen, pioneer work bringing pro- 
minence, accused of selfish motives, writes on science, 
religion or philosophy. 

With Ventts. Neat and tidy appearance, quiet 
life, good health, fond of pleasure and society, 
fortunate in speculation. 



132 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

to be like Mars and Mercury. It gives honour, dignity 
and poetical and artistic ability. 

With Sun. Active and brilliant mind, self-seeking, 
subject to scandal that does not affect the position. 

With Moon. Public honour and dignity, suffers ' 
through law, partners and neighbours, trouble 
through underhanded dealings of enemies but 
eventual triumph over them, bad for love affairs, 
some faithful friends, greatly esteemed by Venus and 
Mercury people. 

With Mercury. Mind more active than body, 
somewhat indolent, benefits from friends, extrava- 
gant but saving in small things, loss by enemies. 

With Venus. Favourable for love affairs, benefits * 
from friends, artistic and musical tastes. 

With Mars. Active mind, better writer than 
speaker, unfavourable for gain. 

With Jupiter. Honour and dignity, artistic 
ability, benefit through ecclesiastical matters, fa- 
vourable for material gain. 

With Saturn. Studious, popular, economical bat 
poor, benefits from elderly friends, strong but well- 
controlled passions, poor health, love disappoint- 
ment but marries above own station, few children 
but harmonious ties with them. 

With Uranus. Selfish, mental affliction and vio- 
lence at end of life, psychic power, suffering through 
occultism, deceptive, many false friends, small in- 
heritance obtained with difficulty, losses by law, 
enemies and mercurial affairs, sorrow through 
children or an adopted child, domestic trouble 
through own acts, danger of a violent death. 

With Neptune. Aggressive, abrupt, disagreeable. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 133 


unfavourable for money matters but gain through 
marriage, domestic disharmony and peculiar fea- 
tures in connection with marriage, not very favour- 
able for children, gain through martial occupations, 
may invent something of value in surgery or chem- 
istry, writes on occult subjects, many changes, 
much travel by water in early life, many enemies, 
liable to heart ailments, sudden or violent 
death. 

22. Alphcratz. a Andromeda. <p rj°n'. 

Notes. A double star, white and purplish, in the 
hair of Andromeda. From A1 Surrat al Faras, The 
Horse's Navel, as it was formerly located in Pegasus. 
According to Bullinger, though with less likelihood, 
it is from Al Phiratz, the Broken Down. Fre- 
quently called Caput Andromeda; or Andromeda's 
Head. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the na- 
ture of Jupiter and Venus, and to these Al vidas adds 
Mars also. It gives independence, freedom, love, 
riches, honour and a keen intellect. 

With Sun. Honour, preferment and favours from 
others. 

With Moon. Energetic, persevering, honour, 
wealth, many good friends and busmess success. 

With Mercury. Active mind, benefits from judges, 
lawyers or churchmen, pioneer work bringing pro- 
minence, accused of selfish motives, writes on science, 
religion or philosophy. 

With Venus. Neat and tidy appearance, quiet 
life, good health, fond of pleasure and society, 
fortunate in speculation. 



134 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

With Mars. Sharp mind, energetic, business 
success through own endeavours. 

With Jupiter. Philosophical or religious mind, 
benefits from professional men, ecclesiastical honour 
and dignity, favourable for gain. 

With Saturn. Open and affable but miserly, 
seeks popularity, pretends to be religious for business 
ends, favours from clergy and lawyers, likelihood 
of wealth, domestic harmony, liable to diseases - 
in the head and tumours that finally cause 
death. 

With Uranus. Just, honourable, good speaker, 
domestic harmony if male, but not so fortunate for 
female, benefit from practical application of ideas, 
interest in occultism, considerable psychic power if 
female, favourable for gain. 

With Neptune. Sincere, earnest, humane, good 
speaker and writer, engaged in charitable work, 
religious reform or animal protection, knowledge of 
human nature, money sought and obtained chiefly 
for charitable purposes, many friends, domestic 
harmony, not very favourable for children. 

With a malefic and the Moon at the same time with 
Sirius, death by a fiery cutting weapon or from 
beasts ; if the Moon be with Wega; violent death. 

23. An Pherg. t] Piscium. SP 25 0 42'. 

Notes. A double star in the cord near the tail of 
the Northern Fish. Associated with the Greek 
Head of Typhon. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Jupiter. 

It gives preparedness, steadiness, determination and 
final success. 



136 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


hypocrisy, trouble through legal and church matters, 
and with relatives, bad for gain, disappointment 
over inheritance. 

With Saturn. Sorrow and disappointment, 
mental disturbance necessitating asylum or hospital 
treatment and probably death there, separation 
from family or parents, danger of accident involving 
inability to work or lifelong affliction. 

With Uranus. Cautious, spiritual, sensitive, 
sympathetic though sometimes abrupt, just, idealistic, 
interested in occultism but sceptical in religion, 
reverence for early memories, disappointments 
throughout life, good mind, considerable gain, 
faithful literary friends of a Gemini type, some 
domestic affliction, natural death at a very advanced 
age. 

With Neptune. Over-sensitive, distasteful 
environment, high ideals, mystic, drifts without 
personal effort, secret enemies and trouble through 
occultism, domestic disharmony, sudden and 
unexpected death. 

25. Antares. a Scorpii. f 8° 39'. 

Notes. A binary star, fiery ml and emerald 
green, situated on the body of the Scorpion. From 
Anti Ares, similar to, or the Rival of Mars. It was 
one of the four Royal stars of Persia in 3000 H.C., 
when as the Watcher of the \\Y*t it marked the 
Autumnal Equinox. Sometimes called Shiloh and 
Cor Scorpio, the Scorpion's Heart. * 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Mars and Jupiter. AlvxJas give* Jupiter 
textile Venus, but this w unlikely c~ "nf the 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULJE 137 


decidedly martial and malefic nature of the star. 
It causes malevolence, destructiveness, liberality, 
broad-mindedness, evil presages and danger of 
fatality, and makes its natives rash, ravenous, 
headstrong and destructive to themselves by their 
own obstinacy. 

If rising, Riches and honour, violence, sickness, 
benefits seldom last. 

If culminating . Honour, preferment and good 
fortune. 

With Sun . Pretended religion, insincere, honour 
and riches ending in disgrace and ruin, military 
preferment, danger of treachery, violence committed 
or suffered, fevers and sickness, injuries to the right 
eye, violent death. If rising or culmmating, great 
honour through violence attended by difficulties and 
casualties. If with Mars also, pestilential disease. 

With Moon. Popular, broad-minded, interested 
in philosophy, science and metaphysics, liable to 
change religious opinions, influential friends, favour- 
able for business and domestic matters, active in 
local affairs, great power, honour and wealth but 
benefits may not prove lasting, danger of violence, 
sickness, drowning or assassination. If in 1st or 
10th houses, honour and preferment but many 
dangers and calamities. Liable to blindness or eye 
injuries especially if at the same time Mars or Saturn 
be with Rcgulus. If Saturn be with Aldcbaran. 
danger of a violent death probably by hanging; 
but if Mars be with Aldcbaran death by a stab, blow 
or fall especially *f in angles. If a malefic be with 
Aldcbaran in the 4th. ” th or t 12th , Rouses, 
death by a sudden sword-thrust, stab or fall. 



138 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


With "Mercury. Suspicious, wrongfully accuses 
friends, unpopular, uses ecclesiastical influence in 
business, money obtained slowly and with much 
difficulty, danger of sickness to the native and his 
family, and death of a relative at home or away. 

With Venus. Insincere, dishonest, energetic and 
able but selfish, unfavourable for gain and health. 

With Mars. Detrimental habits powerfully 
affecting the life, quarrels with friends and relatives, 
fairly favourable for gain.- If at the same time 
the Moon is with Aldebaran, danger of death by 
sword or hanging. 

With Jupiter . . Great religious zeal real or pre 
tended, ecclesiastical preferment, tendency to 
hypocrisy, benefits through relatives. 

With Saturn. Materialistic, dishonest through 
circumstances created by environment, religious 
hypocrisy, many disappointments, loss through 
quarrels and legal affairs, trouble through enemies, 
many failures, hampered by relatives, unfavourable 
for domestic matters, much sickness to and sorrow 
from children. If at the same time the Moon is with 
Aldebaran, danger of death by sword or hanging. 

With Uranus. Abnormal and extreme ideas, 
hypocritical, lies and exaggerates, extremely socialise 
tic.'incites to riot, lawlessness and anarcliism and in 
danger of imprisonment on this account, occasional 
poverty, disharmony with relatives, more than 
one marriage, unfavourable for children, violent 
death. 

With Neptune. Shrewd, cunning, unbalanced and 
mentally unsound, secretive but apparently candid, 
dishonest, tendency to theft, economical, untrutliful. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 139 

strange religions ideas, evil environment, gain through 
hard work, sudden and unexpected death brought 
about by treachery or through enemies who will 
escape retribution. 

With Fortum, or its depositor, poverty. 

26. Arcturus. a Boohs. 23 0 7'. 

Notes. A golden-yellow star situated on the left 
knee of Bootes. From Arktouros, the Bear Guard. 
Also called Arctophilax, the Bear Watcher ; and 
Alchameth, Azimech, and other variants of A 1 Simak, 
the Lofty One. According to Bullinger Arcturus 
means He Cometh, and was called Smat, One who 
rules, and Ban, the Coming One, by the Egyptians. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the nature 
of Mars and Jupiter, but Alvidas substitutes Venus 
and Mercury conjoined. It gives riches, honours, 
high renown, self-determination and prosperity by 
navigation and voyages. 

If rising. Good fortune, with many cares and 
anxieties through own folly. 

If culminating. High office under Government, 
great profit and reputation. If at the same time 
with Sun, Moon or Jupiter, ample fortune and great 
honour. 

With Sun. Success through slow and patient 
plodding, friends among dergy, favourable for gain 
and for dealing with the public and lawyers. 

Wjth Moon. New friends, business success, good 
judgment, domestic hanuony. If with Mars also, 
danger of death by suffocation. 

Wtth Mercury. Sober, industrious, popular, in- 
clined to be religious, somewhat extravagant but 



140 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

well-off, help through friends, holds position of trust 
in large company or corporation, or receives promo- 
tion under direction, favourable for health and 
domestic affairs. 

With Venus. Popular, gifts and favours from 
friends, some false friends of own sex. 

With Mats. Popular, many friends, considerable 
gain but does not save owing to extravagance. If in 
1st, 7th, gth, 10th or nth houses and the Moon is at 
the same time with Pollux, danger of death by 
suffocation. 

With Jupiter. Benefits from legal and Church 
matters, influential position, danger of hypocrisy, 
gain through foreign affairs or shipping. 

With Saturn. Honest, selfish, inclined to be 
mean, shrewd in business, materialistic, favourable 
for gain and speculation and for domestic matters, 
but early difficulty in married life, favour- 
able for children but disagreement with one of 
them. 

With Uranus. Favourable for work entailing 
quick buying and selling and for dealing with the 
public, associated with antiques or ancient matters 
and given to forming collections, associated with art. 
science or literature, official position in some club or 
society, favourable for gain, benefits from friends, 
favourable for marriage and children and benefit 
through both, natural death abroad. 

With Neptune. Ingenious, business instincts, 
changeable, and loss through this means, mediuin- 
istic and rather negative, associated Hath societies 
as an official, loss and misfortune in middle age which 
hastens death, favourable for friendship, partnership. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 141 


marriage and success, greatly dependent upon advice 
of marriage partner. 

27. Armus. tf Capricorni. ss: n° 37'. 

Notes. Situated in the heart of the Goat. 
Influence. Of the nature of Mars and Mercury. 

It gives disagreeablcness, contcmptiblcness, instab- 
ility, shamelessness, nagging and a troublesome and 
contentious nature. 

28. Ascella. { Sagittarii. 11 12 0 31'. 

Notes. A binary star situated in the armpit of 
Sagittarius. 

Influence. Of the nature of Jupiter and Mer- 
cury. It gives good fortune and happiness. 

With Sun. Good fortune and lasting happiness. 
With Moon. New and influential friends, valu- 
able gifts, love of respectable women. 

29. Aselli. 7 and S Cancri. SI 6° 25' and 
7 ° 36'. 

Legend. The Aselli represent the asses ridden by 
Bacchus and Vulcan in the war between the Gods 
and Titans. The braying of these animals so fright- 
ened the latter that they fled, and the Gods in grati- 
tude translated both the asses and their manger 
(Pr^S^pe) into heaven. 

Notes. Two straw-coloured stars known as the 
North Asellus (7) and the South Asellus (8) from 
the Latin asellus, a little ass, situated in the body 
of the Crab. 

Influence, kecotffmg to rtdiemy hotn tne Aseni 
are of the nature of Mars and the Sim, but Alvidas 



142 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

states that the North Asellus is like the Sun and Mars 
in sextile, and the South Asellus like the Sun and 
Mars in semisquare. Together they give care and 
responsibility, with a charitable and fostering 
nature, but danger of violent death, serious accidents 
and bums. The joint influence of the two Aselli 
is as follows : 

If rising. Burning fevers, bad eyes, blindness of 
left eye, injuries by beasts, quarrels, slander from low 
women or vulgar persons, martial preferment. 

If culminating. Disgrace and ruin, often violent 
death 

With Sun. Blows, stabs, serious accidents, shoot- 
ting, shipwreck, beheading, hanging, murderer or 
murdered, violent fevers, danger of fire, disgrace and 
imprisonment. 

With Moon. Inflammatory fever, pains in the 
head, blindness. 

The separate influences are as follows . 

(a) North Asellus. 

Identified with Balaam’s ass. It gives patience, 
beneficence and courage, and makes its natives 
heroic and defiant leaders. 

With Sun. Favourable for dealing with the public 
and influential people, business success. 

With Moon. Favourable for material success, 
honour through public positions, help from friends, 
favourable for gain, danger of accidents to the head, 
fevers, inflammatory ailments, and heart weak- 
ness. 

With Mercury. Power and authority after many 
difficulties, little gain, numerous expenses, losses by 
writings, mortgages and bonds. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 143 


With Venus. Proud, opinionated, help from an 
influential friend, favourable for gain. 

With Mars. Courageous, generous, noble, just, 
power and authority. 

With Jupiter. Great gain and influential position, 
favours front churchmen and gain through legal and 
ecclesiastical matters, benefits from foreign affairs. 

TPiVA Saturn. Somewhat self-centred and self- 
seeking, loss through enemies, high public office, but 
eventual retirement with public censure. Favour- 
able for gain, unrelenting nature, domestic dishar- 
mony caused by antipathy between one of the 
children and the native or partner. 

With Uranus. Energetic, reformer, blunt in 
speech and often bitter, fixed ideas, honest, careless 
or broad in religion, many friends among the public, 
some of whom abuse confidence, enemies among the 
higher classes, governmental position, involved in 
disputes with corporations owing to socialistic in- 
terests, favourable for gain and domestic matters, 
likelihood of unexpected death abroad. 

With Neptune. Proud, haughty, great self-esteem, 
occult interests, prominent and influential position 
in a company concerned with stocks and shares or 
speculation, connected with schools or places of 
amusement, early difficulties with parents, favourable 
for gain but danger of loss by fire or theft, favourable 
for marriage but sometimes one of convenience. 
With Mars also, accidents and danger of fatal in- 
juries. 

(b) South Asellus. 

Called the Mare Ass, A Resting Place, and the 
Ending or Stop. 



144 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

With Sun. Unfavourable for dealing with the 
public and influential people, trouble in business. 

With Moon. Ill-health, defective sight, hearing 
or speech ; bad for business affaire, loss of friends and 
trouble through enemies. 

With Mercury. Mental affliction, much worry and 
disappointment, loss by fire of valuable papers, bad 
for success in spite of help from friends, difficulties 
brought about by children. 

With Venus. Trouble through friends, unfavour- 
able for love and marriage, enmity of women, too 
fond of pleasure and society. 

With Mars. Energy, courage, misapplied powers, 
little success, public disfavour. 

With Jupiter. Legal and ecclesiastical troubles, 
hypocrisy, dishonesty, false friends, danger of im- 
prisonment. 

With Saturn. Untrustworthy, dishonourable, low 
morality, bad habits formed early in life. 

With Uranus. Seeks applause, suffers from own 
mistakes, seldom sees own faults, official positions 
of short duration, downfall brought about by 
enemies, self-seeking, loss or ruin through specula- 
tion, bad for gain and domestic matters, danger of 
accident causing lingering death. 

With Neptune. Ambitious but indolent ; if male. . 
handsome, pleasant and affable and a lady’s man ; 
if female, rather masculine in appearance and charac- 
ter; many love affairs causing general suffering, 
losses through speculation, unmerited favours from 
friends, advantageous marriage but domestic dis- 
harmony, fevers and violent diseases, sometimes 
causing death in infancy. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 145 


30. Baten Kaitos. ( Ceti. ^20° 50'. 

Notes. A topaz-yellow star in the body of the 
Whale. From A 1 Batn al Kaitos, the Whale's 
Belly. 

Influence. Of the nature of Satum. It gives 
compulsory transportation, change or emigration, 
misfortune by force or accident, shipwreck but also 
rescue, falls and blows. 

31. Bellatrix. y Ononis. U 19 0 50'. 

Notes. A slightly variable pale-yellow star on the 
left shoulder of Orion. The name means the Female 
Warrior, but according to BulUnger it signifies 
Quickly Coming or Swiftly Destroying. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is like Mars 
and Mercury ; and, to Alvidas, Mercury and Mars in 
good aspect. It gives great civil or military honour 
but danger of sudden dishonour, renown, wealth, 
eminent friends and liability to accidents causing 
blindness and ruin. If prominent in a woman’s 
map it makes her loquacious and shrewish, and 
gives a high-pitched, hard and sharp voice. 

1J culminating. Quarrels, hatred, fraud committed 
or suffered, forgery, swindling, coming and perjury. 

With Sun. Vacillating, changeable, indecisive in 
business, mechanical ability, riches and honour but 
final ruin, blindness by accident, disease, extreme 
sickness, fevers or violent death. 

With Moon. Luxury, lust, vain ambition,’ waste, 
ruin, blindness by accidents, great power, honour and 
wealth, honour in martial matters, as soldier, sur- 
geon, metal worker ; may attain distinction through 
courage. . K 



146 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


With Mercury. Honour and preferment in mili- 
tary matters, favourable for friendship and social 
affairs. 

With Venus. Much suffering through love affairs 
owing to unrestrained feelings. 

With Mars. Strength, energy, success as soldier, 
surgeon or metal worker, liable to accidents. 

With Jupiter. Philosophical and religious mind, 
hypocrisy, maybe fanatic.legal prominence, andgreat 
honour but danger of slander. 

With Saturn. Secluded and studious life, re- 
served, thoughtful, unfavourable for gain owing to 
lack of interest, poverty at end of life, often single 
but if married the partner may die young, no 
children. 

With Uranus. Mental disturbance, much activity, 
occult or unpractical interests, repeatedly suffers 
through the same mistakes, disharmony with re- 
latives and neighbours, successful in the occupation 
of making peculiar machinery but little financial 
gain ; unfavourable for domestic matters, many 
minor accidents. 

With Neptune. Keen intellect, extremist, little 
forethought or balance, many quarrels, ability for 
mercantile pursuits, associated with companies 
connected with patents or electrical instruments, 
bad for marriage or partnership, many unexpected 
events, fairly good for gain, many narrow escapes 
but eventual violent death. 

32. Betelgeuze. a Ononis. H 27 0 38'. 

Notes. An irregularly variable orange star situated 
on the right shoulder of Orion. From Ibt al Jauzah, 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAS 147 

the Armpit of the Central One or Giant, but mean- 
ing according to Buliinger the Coming of the 
Branch. 

Influence . According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Mars and Mercury ; and, to Alvidas, of 
Mercury, Saturn and Jupiter in good aspect. It gives 
martial honour, preferment and wealth. 

1 f culminating. Great military fortune, command, 
invention, ingenuity and helps in the perfection of 
arts and sciences. If at the same time with Sun, 
Moon or Jupiter, ample fortune and great honour. 

With Sun. Interest in and ability for occult 
and mystical subjects; acute diseases, feyers, honour 
and preferment ending in final ruin. 

With Moon. Active mind, strong will, turbulent, 
rebellious under restraint, military success but 
suffering through quarrels with superiors, likelihood 
of great power, honour and wealth. 

With Mercury. Serious, studious, scientific and 
literary ; unfavourable for gain, fame through 
writings or engravings m metal, favourable for 
health but liable to accidents. 

With Venus. Somewhat retiring and reserved, 
great ability as a maker of fine ornaments, favourable 
for gain, some sorrow connected with the family or 
marriage. 

With Mars. Cautious, reserved, good leader and 
organizer, honour and preferment in martial matters. 

With Jupiter. Serious and studious mind, shrewd 
and profitable business dealings, great honour in the 
Church or law. 

With Saturn. Shrewd, cunning, craftily dishonest, 
treacherous to friends, eventful life with many ups 



148 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

and downs, eventual wealth but little comfort, 
unfavourable for domestic matters. ' 

With Uranus. Quick, active and evil mind,"" 
clever criminal, notorious as forger or counterfeiter 
but rarely caught, quiet pleasant manner, generous 
and not bad at heart, possesses hypnotic and thought- 
reading powers. 

With Neptune. Ingenious, mechanical ability, 
may invent mechanical device, spiritualistic interests, 
some physical ailment or affliction or mental de- 
rangement, not good for gain but greatest success 
in partnership, favourable for marriage and children 
but disharmony with brothers and sisters, liable 
to some serious or fatal accident in middle age. 

33. Bos. p Capricorni. iss. 4 0 3'. 

Notes. A small star situated in the Goat’s face. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Venus. 

It gives a clever and piercing intellect if in conjunc- 
tion with Mercury. 

34. Bungula. a Ceniauri. 28° 28'. 

Notes. A binary star, white and yellowish, on 
the left forefoot of the Centaur. According to 
Bullinger it bore the ancient name Tollman, mean- 
ing the Heretofore and Hereafter. It is the nearest 
to our system of all the stars and lies at a distance of 
about 275,000 times that of the earth from the Sun. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Venus and Jupiter; and, to Alvidas, of 
Mars with the Moon and Uranus in Scorpio. It 
gives beneficence, friends, refinement and a position 
of honour. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 149 


With Sun. Envious, self-centred, slow but fairly 
successful progress, many enemies, loss of inheritance. 

HV//1 Moon. Popular, many friends, diplomatic, 
secret bad habits, excessive drinking, involved in 
disputes but emerges successfully. 

With Mercury. Changeable, vacillating, fault- 
finding, difficult to please, good intellect, business 
success, trouble in domestic affairs through enemies, 
family sickness, disappointed ambitions. 

With Venus. Popular, artistic and musical 
abilities, benefits from friends, danger from love 
affairs. 

With Mars. Physical endurance, considerable 
mental power, speaker or writer, little prominence. 

With Jupiter. Great ecclesiastical or legal honour 
and preferment, ritualistic tendencies, success in 
foreign countries, favourable for gain. 

With Saturn. Studious, well read, materialistic, 
self-seeking, favourable for gain, accumulation of 
money and property and legacies, though not without 
quarrels, favourable for marriage though some 
domestic disturbance, eldest child may be afflicted 
in early life. 

With Uranus. Selfish, self-seeking, jealous of 
others’ success, dishonest, determined but indecisive 
in some things, loss through law, enemies and 
mercurial affairs, little prominence at home and 
greater reputation abroad, loss of friends, death 
through virulent disease. 

With Neptune. Occult interests, psychic or 
mediumistic, deceitful, dishonest, many journeys and 
voyages often to the cast of birthplace, rarely long 
in one place, occupation of a watery nature or 



350 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


connected with places of amusement and small 
speculations, favourable for gain and domestic 
' matters, heavy business losses at end of life, death 
caused by Scorpio ailment. 

J 35. CANOPUS.^a Argus. S3 13° 51'. 

Notes. A (jvhit^ star in one of the oars of the 
ship Argo. Named in honour of Canopus, the chief 
pilot of the fleet of Menclaus, who was killed in 
Egypt by the bite of a serpent on his return from 
the destruction of Troy. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of. the 
nature of Saturn and Jupiter ; and, to Alvidas, of the 
Moon and Mars. It gives piety, conservatism, a 
wide and comprehensive knowledge, voyages and 
educational work, and chances evil to cood^_ 

If culminating. Great glory, fame and wealth, 
dignity and authority by the help of an old clergy- 
man or influential person. 

With Sun. Domestic affliction, trouble with 
father or parents, financial loss, danger of accidents, 
bums and fevers, unfavourable end to life. 

With Moon. Success in martial matters as a 
soldier, surgeon, metal worker, etc. 

With Mercury. Rash, headstrong, stubborn, 
kind-hearted, speaker or writer on unpopular sub- 
jects incurring criticism; trouble and loss through 
domestic matters, partners and law. 

With Venus. Emotional, sensitive, stubborn, 
strong passions, scandal through, an intrigue by 
which reputation will suffer, public disgrace, bad for 
gain. 

With Mars. Cruel, bad-tempered, envious, jealous. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 151 


With Jupiter . Great pride, religion used for 
business ends, voyages, honour and preferment but 
reversal through public dissatisfaction. 

With Saturn. Discontented, occult interests, un- 
favourable for reputation and domestic matters, 
little prominence but may do good. 

With Uranus. Materialistic, dishonourable, many 
difficulties, easily influenced, estranged from rela- 
tives and friends, trouble through enemies and op- 
posite sex, domestic disharmony, violent and possibly 
public death. 

With Neptune. Aggressive, materialistic, strong 
mind and body, loss through quarrels, speculation 
and friends, ideas or inventions often stolen, peculiar 
events throughout life, unexpected losses and gains, 
disharmony with father in earlier life, liable to 
accidents, sudden death. 

36. Capella. a Auriga;, n 20° 44'. 

Notes. A white star situated on the body of the 
Goat in the arms of Auriga. The name means 
Little She-Goat. Sometimes called Amalthea in 
honour of the nurse who reared Jupiter upon the 
milk of the goat. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Mars and Mercury ; and, to Alvidas, of 
Mercury and the Moon. It gives honour, wealth, 
eminence, renown, a public position of trust and 
eminent friends, and makes its natives careful, 
timorous, inquisitive, very fond of knowledge and 
particularly of novelties. 

1 J culminating. Military, naval or ecclesiastical 
connections and preferment, waste, dissipation, envy. 



152 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


and trouble. If at the same time with Sun, Moon or 
Jupiter, ample fortune and great honour. 

With Sun. Vacillating, changeable, too loqua- 
cious, quick speech, misunderstood and criticised, 
martial honour and wealth. ' 

With Moon . Inquisitive, loquacious, indiscreet 
speech, sarcastic, quarrelsome, many journeys and 
voyages, domestic disharmony, danger to sight, 
liable to accidents. 

With Mercury. Disagreeable experiences, legal 
action over writings and success after much difficulty. 

With Venus. Literary and poetical ability, un- 
favourable for gain. 

With Mars. Intellectual, learned, talents wasted 
on low subjects. 

With Jupiter. Legal or ecclesiastical connections, 
slander and criticism, too enthusiastic or zealous, 
many voyages, trouble with relatives. 

With Saturn. Shrewd, tidy, fond of luxury, many 
detrimental habits, makes much money but does not 
keep it, trouble from opposite sex and domestic 
disharmony, bad health at end of life and afflicted 
in arms, legs or eyes necessitating restricted move- 
ment 

With Uranus. Eccentric, mentally unbalanced or 
insane, clever inventor especially in connection with 
electricity, dependent upon others, little gain, pe- 
culiar religious views, unfavourable for domestic 
affairs; children, if any, weak in intellect. 

With Neptune. Prominent psychological writer, 
high ambitions and moderate success, courageous, 
rash, studious, connected with inventions to do with 
methods of transit, many journeys, peculiar hygienic 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAS 153 

ideas, disharmony with brothers, unfavourable for 
children, accidents in early life, health collapses in 
middle age necessitating confinement but mental 
faculties remain active. 

- 37. Caphir. y Virginis. ^ g° 2'. 

Notes. A binary and slightly variable white star 
on the left arm of Virgo. Called An Atonement 
Offering and the Submissive One. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the na- 
ture of Mercury and Venus ; to Simmonite, of Mer- 
cury alone ; and, to Alvidas, o! Venus and Mars. It 
gives a courteous, refined and lovable character with 
prophetic instincts. 

With Sun. Involved in an intrigue, some diffi- 
culty of short duration leaving native in unpleasant 
position. 

With Moon. Popular, business worries, domestic 
disharmony and divorce, poor health. 

With Mercury. Legal troubles, criticism, many 
worries, business difficulties which will be overcome, 
ill-health, loses respect of associates. 

With Venus Unfavourable for gain, much scan- 
dal from passionate love affair. 

With Mars. Loss through lawsuits and by fire 
or storm, trouble with opposite sex, marriage partner 
and public. 

With Jupiter. Trouble through legal affairs or 
with the Church, disputes over inheritance, domestic 
disharmony through intrigue and consequent 
scandal. 

With Saturn. Intelligent, studious, home 
troubles in early life, evil environment, liable to 



154 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


imprisonment or execution for another's crime 
especially if in I2tii house, suffers through con- 
spiracj’ of friends or relatives, domestic disharmony, 
sickly children, home broken up, death in prison. 

With Uranus. Well-educated, good intellect, 
easily influenced, led astray into extremely unplea- 
sant environment by false friends, strong passions, 
often remains single, frequent accidents to the head, 
sudden and unexpected death through accident. 

With Neptune. Shrewd and cunning for evil, 
changes in early life, many disappointments affect- 
ing the mental balance, abnormal religious en- 
thusiasm, unpractical and useless pursuits, bad 
for gain, marriage and children. 

3S. Capulus. 33 y vi Persei. tf 23 0 5'. 

Notes. A double cluster situated in the sword 
hand of Perseus. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mars and Mercury. 

It causes blindness or defective eyesight. 

39. Castor, a Geminorum. 23 19 0 8'. 

Notes. A binary star, bright white and pale 
white, situated on the head of the Northern Twin. 

It represents Castor, the mortal one of the twins, 
famous for his skill in taming and managing horses 
Sometimes called Apollo, and symbolically named 
A Ruler yet to Come. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Mercury; to Wilson, Simmonite and 
Pearce, of Mars, Venus and Saturn ; and, to Alvidas, 
of the Moon, Mars and Uranus. It gives distinction, 
a keen intellect, success in law and .publishing. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAS 155 


many travels, fondness for horses, sudden fame 
and honour but often followed by loss of fortune , 
and disgrace, sickness, trouble and great affliction. 
Its natives are said to be mischievous and prone 
to violence. 

If rising. Blindness, bad eyes, injuries to the 
face, disgrace, stabs, wounds, imprisonment. 

With Sun. Prominence in occult matters, 
government work dealing with foreign affairs, 
serious accidents, blows, stabs, shooting, shipwreck, 
injuries to the face, blindness, disease, violent fevers, 
evil disposition, rape or murder committed or 
suffered, imprisonment, banishment, decapitation. 

With Moon. Timid, sensitive, lacks confidence, 
occult interest and psychic ability, blindness, in- 
juries to face, disgrace, stabs, wounds, imprisonment. 

With Mercury. Remarkable psychic powers 
entailing criticism and ridicule but eventual pro- 
minence, unfavourable for gam. 

With Venus. Strange and peculiar life, many 

extreme ups and downs, unfavourable for marriage. 

With Mars. Evil disposition, much travel, aim- 
less life, many ups and downs. 

With Jupiter. Philosophical and occult interests, 
loss through law, speculation or travel, danger of 
judicial sentence. 

With Saturn. Timid, distrustful, eccentric, 
original mind but difficulty in expression, better 
writer than speaker, considerable intellectual powers, 
fond of detail, prejudiced against popular opinions, 
unfavourable for marriage, peculiar domestic con- 
ditions, early sickness of children, gain at end of life 
through hard work. 



156 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

With Uranus. Conscientious, sensitive, impres- 
sionable, great psychic power entailing much public 
criticism, desirous of pleasing all, favourable for 
marriage and gain, few, if any, children but har- 
monious relations with them, loss in early life of 
the parent of opposite sex to native. 

With Neptune. Emotional, romantic, fond of 
pleasure and amusement, connected with or notoriety 
through watery matters, occult interests, theatrical 
work and acting, especially in parts where no speak- 
ing is required, many removals and journeys, some 
domestic disharmony or separation, marries too 
young especially if female, good for gain but loss 
through friends and speculation, trouble through 
one or more of the children, death through some 
Cancer ailment. 

40. Castra. c Caprtcorni. -sz. icfl 5'. 

Notes. A small star in the Goat's Belly. 

Influence. Of the nature of Satum and Jupiter. 

It gives malevolence, destructiveness and an un- 
controllable temper. 

41. Cingula Orionis. S and * Oriotiis. n 21° 16' 
and 22 0 22'. (See Mintaka and Alnilam.) 

Notes. Orion's Belt, of which the chief stars are 
Mintaka and Alnilam. 

Influence. The separate influences will be found 
under the above-named stars. The joint influence 
is to give strength, energy, industry, organizing 
abilities, notonety, good fortune, lasting happiness, 
a sharp mind and a good.memory. 

If rising. Legacies, love or dissipation, gravity 
and austerity. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 157 

With Sun. Notoriety, good fortune, lasting 
happiness. 

With Moon. Blindness of at least one eye, new 
and influential friends, valuable gilts, love of res- 
pectable women. If a malefic be with Markab, 
drowning. If the moon is with Saturn also, drown- 
ing and assassination. 

With a malefic and the Moon at the same time 
with Markab, death at human hands. 

42. Copula. 51 M Cannm Venalicorum. 23 0 58'. 

Notes. The Spiral or Whirlpool Nebula men- 
tioned by Ptolemy as the nebula under the tail of 
the Great Bear. 

Influence. It is of the nature of the Moon and 
Venus, and causes blindness, defective eyesight, 
/ strong passions, hindrances and disappointments. 

43. Dabih. (3 Capricorni. 2° 56'. 

Notes. A double (but telescopically multiple) 
star, orange yellow and sky blue situated in the 
left eye of the Goat. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Saturn and Venus ; and, to Alvidas, of 
Uranus and Saturn conjoined in square to Mercury. 

With Sun. Reserved, suspicious and mistrustful, 
loss through friends, responsible public position of 
trust and authority. 

With Moon. Successful in business but retires 
under a cloud, favourable for wealth, influential 
position but scarcely realizes ambitions, trouble 
through opposite sex, deserved criticism and censure. 
With Mercury. Reserved,, suspicious, envious, 



- 158 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


self-centred, prominent position in public affairs or 
companies, favourable for gain, bad for domestic 
affairs, peculiar home conditions. 

With Vtnus. Secret Jove affairs, sorrow and 
disappointment, easily led astray, enmity of women. 

With Mars. Great ambition, energy, high posi- 
tion but danger of reversal, domestic disharmony. 

With Jupiter. Hypocrisy, dishonesty, high legal 
or ecclesiastical preferment but ultimate disgrace. 

With Saturn. Melancholy, studious, recluse, rest- 
less and nervous, writer, accumulates wealth in 
miserly fashion, often lives alone but if married 
danger of separation and divorce, wrapt up in some 
great sorrow, long life. 

With Uranus. Strange and peculiar e.vperiences, 
many ups and downs, much suffering, loses friends 
through deception, disappointed ambitions. Josses • 
of a Mercurial nature, unfavourable for domestic 
affairs, terror of death, dies after a lingering illness. 

With Neptune. Active mind, shrewd and selfish 
in business, pessimistic, critical, many enemies, 
occupied with secret undertakings, serious accidents 
in middle age, disappointing love affairs, unfavour- 
able for early marriage but favourable for one in 
middle age, prominence in public affairs, sudden 
death 

44. Deneb. { Aquiles. >1 i8° 41'. 

Notes. A green star in the Eagle’s tail. From 
A1 Dhanab, the Tail. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mars and Jupiter. 

It gives ability to command, liberality, success in 
war and beneficence. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULA 159 


45. Deneb Adige. a Cygni. H 4 0 14'* 

Notes. A brilliant white star in the tail of the 
Swan. From A1 Dhanab al Dajajah, the Hen's Tail. 

Influence. It is of the nature of Venus and Mer- 
cury, and gives an ingenious nature and a clever in- 
tellect that is quick at learning. 

With Sun and Mars above the earth, and the Moon 
at the same time with Procyon, death by the bite of a 
mad dog. 

46. Deneb Algedi, s Capricomi. ^ 22 0 25'. 

Notes. A small star in the Goat's tail. From Al 
Dhanab al Jady, the Tail of the Goat. Symbolically 
called the Judicial Point of the Goat. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Saturn and Jupiter ; and, to Alvidas, of 
Uranus and Mercury in Aquarius in opposition to 
Saturn in Leo. It is said to cause beneficence and 
destructiveness, sorrow and happiness, and life and 
death. 

7/ culminating. Great glory, lame, wealth, dig- 
nity and authority by the help of an old cleTgyman 
or influential person. 

With Sun. Loss through false friends, high posi- 
tion but final disgrace and ruin, loss of money or 
property, sickness, worry through children. 

IFiVA Moon. Great difficulties in everything, suc- 
cess after patient plodding but final loss of position. 

II’i/A Mercury. Melancholy, quiet, solitary, un- 
kempt ot Tagged, student of nature, . science or 
philosophy, engaged in trapping animals or reptiles, 
snakes or poisonous beetles which do not harm the 
native. 



i6o FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


With Venus. Some secret desire that is never 
gratified, domestic or family difficulties. 

With Mars. Danger from enemies, accidents, 
honour and preferment but many quarrels and final 
disgrace, violent death. 

With Jupiter. Disappointment in secret wishes, 
false friends, loss through the law. Church and rela- 
tives. 

With Saturn. Great power over animals and 
poisonous reptiles, indifferent to study, knowledge 
of many secrets of nature, feared, unpleasant ap- 
pearance and life, bad for gain and marriage, death 
of or separation from parents in youth, secluded end 
of life. 

/ With Uranus. Many sorrows, engaged in reform, 
unbalanced mind, may seek someone's life as a 
mission, unfavourable for gain and marriage, strange 
and peculiar or violent death. 

With Neptune. Easily influenced, psychic ability, 
superstitious, reserved, economical, some gain through 
speculation, many enemies, bad early environment 
leaving lasting impression, morose and melancholy 
at end of life, accidents, death in a fit or by assassi- 
nation. 

47. Denebola. /? Leonis. Tgj 20° 30'. 

Notes. A blue star in the Lion’s tail. From Al 
Dhanab al Asad, the Tail of the Lion, or, according 
to Bullinger, the Judge, or Lord who Cometh. Fre- 
quently abbreviated to Deneb and so given in most 
astrological works, but this title properly belongs^ 
to another star already described. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 161 


nature of Saturn and Venus ; to Wilson and Pearce, 
of Saturn, Venus and Mercury ; to Simmonite, of 
Uranus ; and, to Alvidas, of Mercury, Uranus and 
Mars. It gives swift judgment, despair, regrets, 
public disgrace, misfortune from the elements of 
nature, and happiness turned to anger, and makes 
its natives noble, daring, self-controlled, generous 
and busy with other people's affairs. 

If rising. Riches, preferment and good fortune 
attended by many dangers and anxieties through 
own folly, benefits seldom last, trouble and sickness. 

Wilh Sun. Honour and preferment with danger, 
public disgrace and final ruin, disease, fevers and 
acute ailments, death by suicide. 

With Moon. Honour and preferment among the 
vulgar, but final disgrace and ruin, violent disease 
of vital organ, blindness and injuries to the eyes, 
accidents, losses through servants, domestic quarrels, 
temporary separation from marriage partner. Tf 
at die same time Satum or Mars is with Algol, 
death by sentence. 

With Mercury. Many losses through agents or 
servants and through writings, bad for gain, loss of 
one of the family through malignant or contagious 
disease. 

With Venus. Strong passions, led astray early 
in life, ruined through love affairs. 

With Mars. Bitter, vindictive, cruel, unpopular, 
loss of position and public disgrace. 

With Jupiter. Pride, hypocrisy, disappointed 
life, troubles abroad or through relatives, secret 
enemies, danger of imprisonment or death by sen- 
tence. I. 



162 fixed stars and constellations 


With Saturn. Critical, always complaining, many 
enemies, loss through servants and thieves, un- 
fortunate life, domestic sorrow, wife afflicted or 
children mentally unsound or deformed. 

With Uranus. Subject to fits, idiotic, insane, 
and sometimes violent, sharp and cunning, may com- 
mit murder during insanity, confined in asylum, 
death often by suicide. 

With Neptune. Disagreeable, ingenious, clever, 
sarcastic, bitter in speech, domestic quarrels, 
accidents and sickness in early life, death in middle 
age by an accident or lingering illness. 

48. Difda. p Ceti. <p i° 28'. 

Notes. A yellow star on the Whale's tail. From 
A 1 Difdi al Thani, the Second Frog. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Saturn ; and, to Alvidas, of Mars, Saturn 
and Mercury. It causes self-destruction by brute 
Iotcc. sickness, disgrace, misfortune and com- 
pulsory change. 

With Sun. Mental disturbance, some Joss keenly 
felt, accidents such as bums, scalds and cuts. 

With Moon. Pioneer, reckless, headstrong, violent 
temper, many quarrels, bad for gain and business. 

With Mercury. Active mind, writer or speaker 
upon subjects of public welfare, seeks to enact laws of 
benefit to the community, favourable for social affairs. 

With Venus. Reserved, passionate, many secret 
love affairs. 

With Mars. Passionate, violent, subject to acci- 
dents and injuries to the head, fevers, disgrace and 
ruin through own acts. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 163 

With Jupiter . High legal or ecclesiastical position, 
but danger of reversal, treachery from secret 
enemies, loss through speculation. 

ll’M Saturn. Impure mind, worry, secret wrong- 
doing, inharmonious environment. 

With Uranus . Quick mind, but slow expression, 
many losses especially in Mercurial matters, restless, 
much travel, rarely remains long in one place, 
'much energy, but accomplishes little, mind tem- 
porarily unbalanced, bad for love affairs and mar- 
riage, ailments affecting the kidneys or veins in the 
small of the back, peculiar death, probably alone 
in a forest or desert. 

With Neptune. Disagreeable, fixed opinions, 
mechanical and inventive ability, but little gain, 
peculiar religious ideas, very zealous, domestic 
disagreements, sorrow caused through some secret, 
trouble through children, disagreement with or 
separation from parent, harm through anonymous 
letters, loss through mercurial affairs and fire, 
death often by fire. 

49. Diram. ^ Geminorum . 25 4 0 11'. 

Notes. A double star, crocus yellow and blue, in 
the left foot of the Northern Twin. From A1 Dirah, 
the Seed or Branch. Symbolically called the 
Abused or Beaten One. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mercury and Venus. 
It gives force, energy, power and protection. 

50. Dorsum. & Capricomi. sx 12° 43'. 

Notes. A small star situated on the back of the 
Goat. 



xf>4 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


Influence. It is of the nature of Saturn and Jupiter 
and is of unfortunate influence. 

With Sun or Mars. Danger of bites from venom- 
ous creatures. 

51. El N.vrn. (i Tauri. n 21 0 27'. 

Notes. A double star, pure brilliant white and 
pale grey, situated on the tip of the northern horn 
of the Bull, and commonly known as the Bull's 
North Hom. From A 1 Natih, the Butting One, 
or according to Bullinger the Wounded or Slain. 
Symbolically called the Shepherd. The name El 
Nath is often erroneously used for Hamal in Aries. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mars and Mercury. 
It gives fortune, eminence and neutrality for good 
or evil. 

With Sun. Ecclesiastical preferment, honour 
through science, religion or philosophy. 

With Moon. Quarrels with questionable associ- 
ates, business success, environment detrimental 
owing to wife, partner or relative. 

With Mercury. Favour of superiors, but enmity 
of colleagues, rises to high position or changes 
vocation, favourable for gain, but many small 
losses, domestic expenses, often obliged to support 
an invalid. 

With Venus. Favourable for gain, enemies who 
are powerless to injure. 

With Mars. Good lawyer, speaker, and debater, 
quick-witted. 

With Jupiter. Success in legal or ecclesiastical 
affairs, favourable for gain and inheritance. 

With Saturn. _ Cautious, thoughtful, bad-tem- 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULA 165' 


pered, accumulates money, favourable for domestic 
affairs, gain through relatives, may receive start in 
life through a legacy r 

With XJranus. Great mental energy and force of 
character, weak body, original and practical ideas, 
occult interests, but material aims, late success, 
favourable for domestic affairs, death in middle age. 

With Neptune. Active in mind and. body, vacil- 
lating, some physical defect, occult interests, may 
make discoveries in medicine, domestic disharmony 
owing to peculiar matrimonial ideas, may become 
famous, death in middle age. 

52. Ensis. 42 M Ononis. JJ 21 0 55'. 

Notes. The Great Nebula m the sword-sheath 
of Orion. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mars and the Moon. 
It causes blindness, defective sight, injuries to the 
eyes, sickness and a violent death. 

53. Facies. 22 M Sagittaiii. >1 7 0 12'. 

Notes. The nebula in the Archer’s Face. 
Influence. It is of the nature of the Sun and 

Mars, and causes blindness, defective sight, sickness, 
accidents and a violent death. 

54. Fomalhaut. a Piscts Australis, x 2° 44'. 
Notes. A reddish star in the mouth of the 

Southern Fish. From Fum al Hut, the Fish's 
Month. \\ -was one oi the iovvr Royal Stars of 
Persia in 3000 B. r ., when as the Watcher of the 
South it marked the winter solstice. 

- Influence. According to Ptolemy, it is of the 



l66 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


natuie of Venus and Mercury ; and, to Alvidas, of 
Jupiter in square to Saturn from Pisces and Sagit- 
tarius. It is said to be very fortunate and powerful 
and yet to cause malevolence of sublime scope and 
character, and change from a material to a spiritual 
form of expression. Cardan stated that together 
with the stars rising with 12 U it gives an immortal 
name. 

If rising or culminating. Great and lasting 
honours. 

With Sun. Dissipated, easily influenced by low 
companions, gain through inheritance, but un- 
productive of good, may suffer for some crime 
committed, danger of bites from venomous aeatures. 

With Moon. Secret business causing much trouble 
and enmity, but eventual gain after many diffi- 
culties. The separation is more benefic than the 
application. 

With Mercury. Many losses and disappointments, 
unlucky in business, better servant than master, 
writes or receives secret letters, worry through 
slander, imprisonment or damaged reputation, 
domestic difficulties, sickness of a Saturnian nature. 

With Venus. Secret and passionate love affairs, 
some restriction in the life, disappointments, easily 
led astray. 

With Mars. Malevolent, passionate, revengeful, 
many secret enemies, liable to disgrace and ruin, 
danger of bites from venomous creatures. 

With Jufiter. Sympathetic, charitable, honour 
in the Church, Freemasonry or secret societies, many 
voyages. 

With Saturn. Accidents, ailments affecting the 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUUE 167 

lung*!, throat and feet, loss through enemies, friends. 
Mercurial affairs, bands and companies, wrongfully 
accused, affairs involved at end of life, sudden death 
and family cheated out of their rights. 1 

With Uranus. Unstable, wasted talents, evil 
environment, unpractical ideas, loses friends, ad- 
dicted to drugs or intoxicants, utopian schemes, 
afflicted marriage partner, brings misfortune to 
associates, fatally injured by electricity, explosion 
or accident. 

With Neptune. Sharp, shrewd, self-seeking, analy- 
tical, detective ability, many secret enemies, con- 
nected with secret affairs or government work, 
occult interests, somewhat dishonest, influential 
friends, associated with 9th and 12th house affairs, 
gain through speculation, death of marriage partner, 
many narrow escapes, violent death through secret 
enemies. 

55, Foramen. 7 Argus. === 21 0 3'. 

Notes. An irregularly variable reddish star situ- 
ated in the stem of the Ship, and surrounded by the 
Keyhole nebula. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Jupiter. 
It causes peril, dignity, piety, usefulness and acquisi- 
tiveness, and gives danger to the eyes. 

With Sun. Danger of shipwreck. 

56. UlEDi. a Capricorni. ssz 2° 42'. 

Notes. A multiple star, yellow, ash and lilac, 
situated on the south horn of the Goat. From AI 
Jady, the Goat. Symbolically called the Slain Kid. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 



1 68 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


nature of Venus and Mars ; to Simmonite, of Venus 
and Mercury ; and, to Alvidas, of Uranus in sextile 
to Venus. It gives beneficence, sacrifice and offering. 

With Sun. Peculiar events, unexpected losses and 
gains, sometimes great good fortune. 

With Moott. Peculiar and unexpected events, 
eccentric, public criticism, new and influential 
friends, valuable gifts, love of respectable women 
but difficulties and sometimes platonic marriage. 

With Mercury. Romantic, psychic, vacillating, 
bad for gain, many love affairs some of which cause 
notoriety, may elope with married person. 

With Venus. Many strange and • unexpected 
events, peculiar and romantic marriage, may be 
separated for years from partner through secret 
government or political reasons of which even native 
may be ignorant. 

With Mars. Abrupt, aggressive, much criticism, 
public position. 

With Jupiter. Government position, preferment > 
in law or Church, marriage abroad, favourable for 
gain and inheritance. 

With Saturn. Genius but kept down by cir- 
cumstances, peculiar and occult early environment, 
birth amidst strange conditions while mother is 
travelling, many narrow escapes, associated with the . 
stage, rarely mames, unfavourable for gain. 

With Uranus. Peculiar environment, bad morals, 
strong passions, genial, affectionate, vacillating, 
small self-confidence, too trusting, peculiar ideas on 
marriage and religion, ambitious but too weak to 
rise, bad for domestic affairs and children, if any, 
though there may be illegitimate ones, violent death. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL.E 169 


With Neptune. Psychic in childhood, never un- 
derstood by others, cruelty from a parent, many 
disappointments, peculiar conditions in domestic 
life, little success, greatly influenced by others, 
minor accidents, death in early life or middle age. 

57. Graffjas. p Scorpii. f 2 0 4'. 

Notes. A triple star, pale white and lilac, si- 
tuated on the head of the Scorpion, and frequently 
called Frons Scorpii. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the na- 
ture of Mars and Saturn ; and. to Alvidas, o! Jupiter 
in square to Saturn and the Moon. It causes ex- 
treme malevolence, mercilessness, fiendishness, re- 
pulsivcness, malice, theft, crime, pestilence, and con- 
tagious diseases. 

If rising. Riches and preferment attended by 
danger, violence, trouble, sickness, benefits seldom 
last. 

With Sun. Materialistic, too active a mind, 
ecclesiastical difficulties, bad health. Otherwise 
similar to the effect if rising. 

With Moon. Great power, honour, wealth, gilts, 
difficulty in obtaining legacy, materialistic, inter- 
ested in unpopular ideas, criticized, success after 
many difficulties. Otherwise similar to the effect if 
rising. 

With Mercury. Dull mind, difficulty in expression 
or defect in speech, gifts, difficulty in obtaining 
legacy but final success. 

With Venus. Dishonest, self-seeking, energetic, 
able, favourable for gain. 

With Mars. Athletic, suffers from over-exertion 



170 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


goes to extremes, active mind, favourable for money 
matters but extravagant and has many debts. 

With Jupiter . Hypocritical, real or pretended 
religious zeal, legacies attended by legal diffi- 
culties. 

With Saturn. Cautious, cunning, self-seeking, 
deceitful, dishonourable, progressive ideas, religious 
but hypocritical, proud of home, loss by fire or water, 
gain through marriage and partnership, few children, 
long life. 

With Uranus. Scientific, religious or philosophical 
work, difficulties with marriage partner’s relatives, 
favourable for marriage and children, domestic 
difficulties finally overcome, trouble with parents in 
early life, favourable for gain and speculation, loss 
through Mercurial matters, liable to accidents by 
fire and electricity, sudden death. 

With Neptune. Connected with science, inven- 
tions, ‘ companies, or Journalism, breeds horses or 
cattle, good mind, late but favourable marriage but 
peculiar domestic conditions, accidents in middle age, 
death after lingering illness. 

58. Hamal. o Arietis . g 6° 32'. 

Notes. A yellow star situated in the forehead of 
the Ram and commonly known as the ram's FoI-_ 
lowing Horn. From A 1 Hamal, the Sheep. Sym- 
bolically called the Death Wound and often in- 
correctly named El Nath. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the na- 
ture of Mars and Saturn ; and, to A 1 Vidas, of Venus 
and Saturn. It causes violence, brutishness, cruelty 
and premeditated crime. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 171 


With Stitt. -Dissipation, evil associates, loss and 
disgrace. 

With Moon. Patient, slow success through hard 
work, trouble through love affairs but favourable for 
marriage, marriage partner gains by business or 
speculation. 

With Mercury. Dull mind, many friends, great 
determination, tactful, greatly influenced by mar- 
riage partner. 

With Venus. Handsome, quiet, envious, jealous, 
domestic trouble, ill-health to native or family. 

Wiffr Mars. Violence, criminal tendencies, in- 
fluential position but final disgrace and ruin. 

With Jupiter. Dissipated, hypocritical, legal or 
ecclesiastical preferment, loss by speculation. 

With Saturn. Cautious, thoughtful, critical, sar- 
castic, materialistic, intcicstcd m geology or agri- 
culture, some domestic happiness, favourable for gain . 

' With Uranus. Pleasant, sympathetic, easily 
influenced, sensitive, strong passions, weak nature, 
mediumistic, dnnk or detrimental habits, many 
friends, love troubles, death under distressing cir- 
cumstances. 

With Neptune. Strong character, firm, occult 
interests, mental disturbance at end of life, con- 
nected with societies, success in business connected 
with clothing or ornaments, success in dealing with 
opposite sex, domestic harmony, accumulates u calth, 
sudden death. 

59. Has*. { Ophiuchi. ? 8 s 7'. 

Notes. A small star situated near the left knee of 
Ophiuckus. 



172 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Venus. 
It brings trouble and disgrace. 

With Sun. Sickness, disgrace and ruin. 

' With Moon. Disgrace, ruin, and ailments affect- 
ing those parts ruled by Sagittarius. , 

60. IsiDIS. 2 Scorpii. ? l° 27'. 

Notes. Situated near the right claw of the Scor- 
pion. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the na- 
ture of Mars and Saturn ; and, to AJ vidas, of Jupiter 
in square to the Moon. It causes sudden^ assaults, 
malevolence, immorality and shamelessness. 

With Sun. Immoral, dissipated, low associates, 
many sorrows. 

With Moon. Reserved, suspicious, bad for busb 
ness success, disgrace, loss by horses and cattle. 

With Mercury. Hypocritical, evil mind, low 
associates, imprisonment, malignant disease but 
chances of recovery, criminal, secrets in connection 
with life or parentage, domestic disharmony. 

With Venus. Quiet, reserved, jealous, selfish, 
favourable for gain. 

With Mars. Immoral, criminal, violent, evil en- 
vironment, sudden or violent death. 

With Jupiter. Deceitful, dishonest, dissipated, 
low companions, danger of imprisonment. » 

With Saturn. Vacillating, strong passions, evil 
habits, low associates, may be disowned by family, 
several unhappy marriages, early death of favourite 
child, death from consumption. 

With Uranus. Shrewd, cunning, excellent lin- 
guist, bad morals, trouble through opposite sex, bad 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 173 

for marriage, many enemies, strange adventures 
abroad — sometimes as spy, bad for gain, obscure 
death. 

With Neptune, Active mind, weak character, 
easily led, ruined through opposite sex, organizing 
ability, high position but subsequent disgrace, ac- 
cidents from fire, water and electricity, death by 
accident or by human hands. 

61. Khambalia. A Virginis. ^ 5 0 45'. 

Notes. A small star situated on the left foot of 
Virgo . From the Coptic meaning Crooked-clawed. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mercury and Mars. 
It causes swift violence, unreliability, changeability, 
and an argumentative nature. 

62. Labkum. 8 Crateris. ^ 25 0 35'. 

Notes. Situated in the Cup, and symbolically 
called the Holy Grail. 

Influence. Of the nature of Venus and Mercury. 
It gives ideality, psychic power, intelligence, honour 
and riches in disgrace and purifies to salvation. 

If rising. Ecclesiastical preferment, or very good 
fortune. 

63. LESATH. v Scorpii. f 22° 54'. 

Notes. A small star situated on the sting of the 
Scorpion. From A 1 Las'ah, the Sting. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mercury and Mars. 
It gives danger, desperation, immorality and malevo- 
lence, and is connected with acid poisons. 

64. Manubrium. 0 Sagillarii. ^ 13 0 52'. 

Notes. Part of the cluster in the Archer’s Face. 



174 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


Influence. Of the nature of the Sun and liars. It 
causes blindness, explosions, fire, flaring heat, 
heroism, courage, and defiance. 

65. Markab. a Pegasi. X 22 0 22'. 

Notes. A white star situated on the wing of 
Pegasus. From Markab, a Saddle, Ship or Vehicle, 
or, according to Ballinger, Returning from Afar. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the na- 
ture of Mars and Mercury ; to Simmonite, of Mars 
and Venus ; and, to Alvidas, of Jupiter in square to 
Mercury with Saturn from Pisces and Gemini. 
It gives honour, riches, fortune, danger from 
fevers, cuts, blows, stabs and fire and a violent 
death. 

If culminating. Disgrace, ruin and often a vio- 
lent death. 

With Sun. Energetic, unlucky, impermanent 
martial honours, disappointed ambitions, accidents, 
sickness. 

With Moon. Injuries from enemies, bad for gain 
and domestic matters, fairly good health but many 
accidents. If Mars be with Moon, death by wild 
beasts or soldiers. If a malefic be with Cingula 
Orionis, death by human hands. 

With Mercury. Good mind, rash and headstrong, 
quick in speech, diplomatic, capable writer, criticized, 
friends become enemies, bad for gain. 

Wifi Venus. Evil associates, «lrink and other 
excesses, bad for gain. 

With Mars. Quarrelsome, violent, many diffi- 
culties and losses through Mercurial affairs. 

With Jupiter. Trouble and loss through legal 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 175 


matters, danger of judicial sentence or banishment 
and exile. 

With Saturn. Bom in poverty, prison or asylum, 
may be abandoned, hard life, imprisoned for crime, 
.few friends, unfavourable for domestic matters, 
death under similar conditions to birth. 

With Uranus. Evil habits, mental disturbances, 
dever, wanderer, unavailing efforts, peculiar life, 
trouble with parent of opposite sex, bad for gain and 
domestic matters, many accidents, violent death. 

With Neptune. Unbalanced or abnormal mind, 
many disappointments, emotional, romantic, dis- 
tasteful environment, secret enemies, domestic 
disharmony, many accidents, violent death in early 
life. 

With a malefic and the Moon at the same time with 
Cingula Orionis, death by drowning. 

66. Makkeb. '* Argus. HJJ 27 0 48'. 

Notes. A small star in the Buckler of the Ship. 
Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Jupiter, 
It gives piety, a wide knowledge, educational work 
and voyages. 

If rising. Profitable journeys in company with 
Jupiterian and Saturnian people wherein native is 
grave and discreet but suffers much injury which 
ultimately turns to good. 

67. Menkazinan. 0 Auriga, n 28 0 48'. 

V.ois.%.. A. bright, ydlrog <aiuatssL rngrA. 

shoulder of Auriga. From A 1 Mankib dhi’I Inan, 
the Shoulder of the Rein-holder. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mars and Mercury. 



176 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

'It causes ruin, disgrace, and frequently violent 
death. 

68. Menkar. a Celt, y 13 0 12'. 

Notes. A bright orange star situated in the jaw 
of the Whale. From A 1 Minhar, the Nose. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the nature 
of Saturn ; to Simmonite, of Mars ; and, to Alvidas, 
of Venus and the Moon. It causes disease, disgrace, 
ruin, injury from beasts, sickness, and loss of fortune. 

If rising. Legacies and inheritances attended 
by much evil. 

If culminating. Disgrace, ruin, danger from 
cattle and large beasts. 

With Sun. Great 'trouble, sickness, throat ail- 
ments, legacies and inheritances attended by much 
evil, loss of money, failure of crops. 

With Moon. Mental anxiety, hatred of the 
vulgar, ill-will of women, danger from thieves, 
sickness to native and family, loss of marriage 
partner or near relative, quarrels, legal losses, 
legacies and inheritances attended by much evil. 

With Mercury. Difficulties through writings, 
difficulty in payment of mortgages, bad for gain, 
ill-health to marriage partner or relative, destruction 
of crops. ' 

With Venus. Strong and uncontrolled passions, 
jealousy, domestic disharmony and temporary 
separation, ill-health of marriage partner. 

With Mars. Evil associates, immoral, violent, 
murderous, violent death. 

With Jupiter. Deceitful, dishonest, wandering 
life, imprisonment, banishment, or judicial sentence. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAS 377 


With Sal urn. Self-seeking, selfish, causes un- 
happiness to others, much sickness, bad for gain. 

With Uranus. Active mind, artistic, scientific 
and mystical interest and ability, troubles through 
opposite sex, loss through fire and false friends, 
good fortune and misfortune alternately, severe 
injuries from animals. 

I Vith Neptune. Peculiar early life, loss of or separa- 
tion from parents abroad, may lose identity and be 
brought up by foreigners in dishonour, learns of 
parentage too late in life to obtain advantage, brave, 
organizing ability, high position, wasted talents, 
many journeys, violent death frequently by assas- 
sination. 

69. Min taka, s Oriom’s. n 21 0 16'. 

Notes. A slightly variable double star, brilliant 
white and pale violet situated in Orion's belt. From 
A1 Mintakih, the Belt, or Dividing. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Satum and Mercury ; and, to Alvidas, 
of Mercury, Satum and Jupiter. It gives good 
fortune. 

With Sun. Discreet, cautious, somewhat change- 
able. 

With Moon. Active, sharp, alert in business, 
public position, many enemies, more successful in 
business. 

Wffc Mercury. Studious, fond of seclusion, 
deliberate and fixed mind, little sympathy or dis- 
agreements with relatives, bad for gain. 

With Venus. Public position, enmity of women, 
love disappointments, u 



178 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


With Mars. Energetic, quick mind, good speaker 
and debater, quarrelsome, strong passions. 

With Jupiter. High position in law or Church, 
studious and philosophical mind, gain through 
inheritance. 

With Saturn. Far-seeing, studious, good fudge 
of human nature, psychic, domestic disharmony, 
sickncss>to family. 

With Uranus. Selfish, studious, eccentric, diffi- 
cult to get on with, losses through lawsuits and 
business, successful in middle age but poverty at end 
of life, favourable for domestic matters, death from 
consumption. 

With Neptune. Thoughtful, studious, keeps 
discoveries to himself, sarcastic writer, generous but 
not wealthy, rarely marries, death unattended in 
old age. 

{See Cingula Orionis). 

70. Mirach. fi Andromeda e. qP 29 0 17'. 

Notes. A yellow star situated in the girdle of 
Andromeda. From Mirak, the Loins. Often 
called Zona Andromed*, or Andromeda's Girdle. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of th® 
nature of Venus ; and, to Alvidas, of Mars and the 
Moon. It gives personal beauty, a brilliant mind, 
a love of home, great devotion, beneficence, for- 
giveness love, overcoming by kindness, renown, 
and good fortune in marriage. 

With Sun. Trouble through opposite sex, 
disappointments in expectations but otherwise 
favourable. 

With Moon. Trouble with opposite sex owing 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 179 


to indiscretions, bad for domestic affairs, honour 
through martial matters. 

With Mercury . Vacillating, unstable, peculiar 
events, many travels and changes, little success. 

With Venus. Voluptuous, bad morals, scandal, 
drink or drug-taking late in life. 

With Mars. Ill-mannered, boisterous, evil 
associations, may be tramp. 

With Jupiter. Help from women but danger of 
scandal, much travel, legal or ecclesiastical diffi- 
culties. 

With Saturn. Strong passions, debauchery, 
mechanical genius, misdirected talents. 

With Uranus. Unbalanced mind, may commit 
crime m insanity, occult interests, continual dis- 
appointments, bad for domestic affairs, peculiar or 
violent death. 

With Neptune. Persevering, ambitious, strong 
passions, eccentric, dishonest, domestic disharmony 
and separation, may disinherit children or family, 
trouble through companies and inventions, success- 
ful business, many enemies and few friends, painful 
and lingering death. 

71. Nashira. y Caprkorni. 20° 40'. 

Notes. Situated in the tail of the Goat. From 
A 1 Sa’d al Nashvrah, the Fortunate One or Bringer 
of Good Tidings ; or, according to Bullinger, the 
Record of the Cutting Off. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Saturn and Jupiter ; and, to Simmonite, 
« of Saturn. It causes overcoming by evil, which is 
turned to success, and gives danger from beasts. 



i8o FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


72. Oculus. v Capricorni. ts: 3 0 36'. 

Notes. A small star in the right eye of the 
Goat. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Venus. 
It gives a clever and piercing intellect when in 
conjunction with Mercury. 

73. Pelagus. <r Saglllarii. ir° 16'. 

Notes. A small star situated on the vane of the 
arrow at the Archer’s hand. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Jupiter and Mercury ; and, to Alvidas, of 
Saturn and Mercury. It gives truthfulness, optim- 
ism and a religious mind. 

With Sun. Influential public position, favourable 
for domestic and family matters. 

With Moon. Successful writer on science, philo- 
sophy, education or agriculture, unorthodox in 
religion, defeats enemies, many friends, illness of a 
Saturnian nature. 

With Mercury. High government position, popu- 
lar criticism, wealth, anxiety on account of illness 
to wife or mother. 

With Venus. Heart rules head, favours from 
opposite sex, many friends. 

With Mars. Reserved, diplomatic, strong mind, 
courageous, energetic, straightforward, false friends, 
favourable for gain. 

With Jupiter. Diplomatic, philosophical mind, 
writer, ecclesiastical or legal preferment. 

With Saturn. Thoughtful, reserved, self-centred, 
success delayed until after 50, ambition thwarted 
by enemies, danger of disgrace, wealth at end of life. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUUE 181 


trouble to parents, favourable marriage late in life, 
usually at least one child. 

JTO Uranus. Proud, industrious, aggressive, 
high government or business position, early disgrace, 
especially if female, favourable for marriage in x 
middle age, sudden gains and losses, many friends, 
natural death. 

With Neptune. Practical, occult interests, 
wealthy, associated with large concerns, some 
domestic disagreements, defeats enemies, natural 
death in old age. 

74. Phact. a Coltimba. n 21 0 3'. 

Notes. Situated at the base of the right wing of 
the Dove. Said to be from Had’ar, Ground, or 
Fached, the Thigh. 

Influence. Of the nature of Venus and Mercury. 
It gives beneficence, hopefulness and good fortune. 

75. Pleiades. In the neighbourhood of 8 28° 52'. 

(See Alcyone.) 

Legend. The Pleiades or Atlantides were the 
seven daughters of Atlas and Pleione, six of whom 
are described as visible, and one as invisible or 
" lost." They were the virgin companions of Diana, 
and were translated into heaven in order to escape 
the importunities of Orion, or according to another 
account because of their grief at the fate of their 
father, Atlas, who was condemned to support the 
weight of the heavens on his head and hands. 

The names of the sisters, and the catalogue 
numbers of the stars representing them are as 
follows Alcyone fo), Maia (20), Electra (17), 



182 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


Mcropc (23), Taygetc (19), Cclzeno {16), and Steropc 
(21 and 22), and to these have been added the parents. 
Atlas (27) and Plcione (28). 

The missing or lost Pleiad has been said to be 
Mcropc, who alone married a mortal, Sisyphus, and 
hid her face in shame at being the only one not 
married to a god, but other accounts substitute 
either Electra, who withdrew her light in sorrow at 
the destruction of Ilium, which was founded by her 
son Dardanos ; or Cclreno, which Theon the Younger . 
said was struck by lightning. 

Notes. The Pleiades form a duster, with Alcyone 
as the principal star, situated on the shoulder of 
the Bull. For all practical purposes the longitude 
of Alcyone may be used for the whole group, as all 
are contained within about one degree of longi- _ 
tude. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy they are of the 
nature of the Moon and Mars ; and, to Alvidas, of 
Mars, Moon and Sun in opposition. They are said 
to make their natives wanton, ambitious, turbulent, 
op t i mi stic and peaceful ; to give many journeys 
and voyages, success in agriculture and through 
active intelligence; and to cause blindness, disgrace 
and a violent death. Their influence is distinctly 
evil and there is no astrological warrant for the 
oft-quoted passage in Job (xxxviii. 31), "Canst 
thou bind the sweet influences of Pleiades . . - ? 
which is probably a mistranslation. 

If rising. Blindness, ophthalmia, injuries to the 
eyes and face, disgrace, wounds, stabs, exile, im- 
prisonment, sickness, violent fevers, quarrels, violent 
lust, militar y preferment. If at the same time the 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULiE 183 


Sun is in opposition either to the Ascendant or -to 
Mars, violent death. 

jf culminating.' Disgrace, ruin, violent death. If 
with the luminaries it makes its natives military cap- 
tains, commanders, colonels of horse and emperors. 

With Sun. Throat ailments, chronic catarrh, 
blindness, bad eyes, injuries to the face, sickness, 
disgrace, evil disposition, murderer or murdered, 
imprisonment, death by pestilence, blows, stabs, 
shooting, beheading or shipwreck. If in 7th house, 
blindness, especially if Saturn or Mars be with 
Regulus. If with Mars and Venus the native will be 
a potent king obeyed by many people but subject to 
many infirmities. 

With Moon. Injuries to the face, sickness, mis- 
fortune, wounds, stabs, disgrace, imprisonment, 
blindness, defective sight especially if in the Ascend- 
ant or one of the other angles, may be cross-eyed, 
colour-blind or the eyes may be affected by some 
growth. If in the 7th house, total blindness es- 
pecially if Saturn or Mars be with Regulus and the 
Moon be combust. 

With Mercury. Many disappointments, loss of 
possessions, much loss from legal affairs, business 
failure, trouble through children. 

With Venus. Immoral, strong passions, disgrace 
through women, sickness, loss of fortune. 

With Mars. Many accidents to the head, loss and 
suffering through fires. If at the same time Saturn 
is with Regulus, violent death in a tumult. 

With Jupiter. Deceit, hypocrisy, legal and ec- 
clesiastical troubles, loss through relatives, banish- 
ment or imprisonment. 



x84 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

With Saturn. Cautious, much sickness, tumor- 
ous ailments, chronic sickness to family, many Josses. 

With Uranus. Active mind, deformity from birth 
or through accident in childhood, many accidents 
and troubles, many unexpected losses often through 
fire or enemies, marriage partner proves false es- 
pecially if female, troubles through women, occult 
interests, unfavourable for children, if any, and lack 
of harmony with them, heavy losses at end of life, 
violent death. 

With Neptune. Bold, military preferment, hon- 
our, wealth, help from friends, many serious acci- 
dents, many travels, somewhat dishonourable oc- 
cupation involving secrecy, ill-health to marriage 
partner and peculiar conditions respecting parentage, 
bad for children, may lose everything at end of life, 
violent death, often abroad while following occupa- 
tion. 

76. Polaris, a Ursa Minoris. n 27° 27'. 

Notes. A double star, topaz yellow and pale 
white, situated in the tail of the Lesser Bear, and 
marking the celestial pole. Also called A1 Rukka- 
bah, the Riders ; Cynosura, the Dog's Tail ; and 
Stella Polaris, the Pole Star. Owing to the pre- 
cession of the equinoxes the_j>ole jnoves. inatirde 
among the stars taking about 26,000 years to com- 
_ plete'omT revolution. At present Polaris is i“„I 4' 
distant Jrom the pole and will continue to approach 
It until the.yearl2095 when it wfll reach its nearest 
distance of 26 ' 3 Q*_an d then reced e. The chief 
stars that wUFmark the'posffion of the pole are 
successively as follows : — ' , and a 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND XEBUL/& 185 


Cephci; • and l Cygn*: - Lyre; » and T 
Hrrculis; <?, «. and e Draconis; p Urs.T Minoris; 

. Draconi' 1 and then « Urvar Minoris, our.I’ohris, 
again. Alxwt the year 12, zoo D.C., . Lyra: (Wega) 
marked the pole; , DraconU about 4.500 U.C. : and 
a DraconU about 2,700 U.C. ; while 7 Cephci will 
occupy this position in about 4.500 A. I). ; o Cephei 
in 7.500 A.D. ; a Cygni in 11,300 A.D. ; and Wega 
, in about 13.500 A.D. 

1 * Influence. Of tlic nature of Saturn and Venus. 
It causes much sickness, trouble, loss of fortune, dis- 
grace and great affliction, and may give legacies and 
inheritances attended by much evil. The Arabs 
were of the opinion that the contemplation of 
Polaris cured ophthalmia. 

li’i/Ji Sun. Many troubles and evils. 

U’i/Ji Moon. Hatred of the vulgar, ill-will of 
women and danger from thieves. 

77. POUS. fx Sagillarii. 1^ 2° 6’. 

Notes. A triple star in the upper part of the bow 
of Sagittarius. From the Coptic Polts, a Foal. 

Influence. Of the nature of Jupiter and Mars. 
It gives success, high ambition, martial desires, 
horsemanship, keen perception and domination. 

78. Potxux. p Cetninorum. 23 22 0 7'. 

N otes. An orange star situated on the head of the 
Southern Twin. It represents Pollux, son of Jupiter 
and Loda, and the immortal one of the twins, famous 
for his skill in boxing. Sometimes called Hercules, 
and symbolically named A Heartless Judge. 
Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the na- 



. i86 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


ture of Mars ; and, to A 1 vidas, of the Moon, Mars and 
Uranus. It gives a subtle, crafty, spirited, brave, 
audacious, cruel and rash nature, a love of boxing, 
dignified malevolence, and is connected with poisons. 

1J rising. Bad eyes, blindness, injuries to the 
face, sickness, wounds, imprisonment, ephemeral 
honour and preferment. 

If culminating. Honour and preferment but 
danger of disgrace and ruin. 

With Sun . Occult and philosophical interests, 
blows, stabs, serious accidents, shooting, shipwreck, 
murderer or murdered, extreme sickness and di- 
seases, fevers, ailments affecting the stomach, evil 
disposition, riches and honour but final ruin, blind- 
ness, injuries to the head and face, quarrels, rape 
committed or suffered, banishment, imprisonment 
for embezzling, violent death, decapitation. 

With Moon. Hatred of the vulgar, ill-will of 
women, danger from thieves, violent death, power, 
pride, sickness, calamity, wounds, imprisonment, 
injuries to face, defective sight or blindness especi- 
ally if Mars or the Sun be in square from Aries. 

If Mars or the Sim be in square from Libra, danger 
of accidents and legal or matrimonial troubles ; 
but, if in opposition from Capricorn, danger to the 
mother’s honour and reputation. If Mars be in 
conjunction, death by suffocation, drowning of 
assassination. If Mars be with Arcturus in the ist, 
7th, 9th, 10th or nth houses, death by suffocation. 

With Mercury. Unbalanced mind, unpopular and 
peculiar occupation, trouble with father through 
relatives or enemies, domestic disharmony, anxiety, 
loss through land, property and mines. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 187 


With Venus. Strong and irregulatcd passions, 
danger of seduction if female, loss through women, 
danger of poison. 

IVifh Mars. Violent, murderer or murdered, high 
position but final ruin, violent death by suffocation, 
drowning or assassination especially if the Moon be 
there also. 

Il'itt Jupiter. Legal losses, high position but 
danger of disgrace, trouble through relatives, banish- 
ment or imprisonment. 

With Saturn. Bad temper, bitter, sarcastic, loss 
of arm or leg, loss of parents or trouble through step- 
parents, much help from a friend, lack of education, 
sudden death while following occupation through 
horses or large animals. 

With Uranus. Occult interests, psychic ability, 
selfish, proud, vain of personal appearance, success 
in connection with the Government, companies or 
electrical matters, harmonious marriage in middle 
age, favourable for children, end of life not so favour- 
able as middle. 

With Neptune. Changeable, many travels, excel- 
lent linguist, many influential friends, good for 
partnership, peculiar conditions in marriage and 
partner often a foreigner, occupation connected with 
exploration or zoological and botanical work abroad, 
minor accidents, isolated death through fever or 
virulent disease. 

79. Presspe. 44 Af Cancri. SI 6° 7'. 

Legend. Prasaipe represents the manger of the 
asses ridden by Bacchus and Vulcan (see Aselli). 
Notes. A coarse extended cluster situated on the 



x88 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


head of the Crab. Popularly termed the Beehive, 
Manger or Crib, and known by the Chinese tinder 
the name Tseih She Ke, Exhalation of Piled-up 
Corpses. With the Aselli it was the *' cloudy spot 
, of Cancer " mentioned by Ptolemy as causing blind- 
ness. 

Influence. It is of the nature of Mars and the 
Moon, and causes disease, disgrace, adventure, 
insolence, wantonness, brutality, blindness, industry, 
order and fecundity ; and makes its natives fortun- 
ate though liable to loss through others, and the 
founders of large businesses. 

If rising. Blindness especially of the left eye, 
ophthalmia, injuries to the face, sickness, violent 
fevers, wounds in face and arms, stabs, violent lust, 
imprisonment, exile. If at the same time the Sun 
opposes Mars or the Ascendant, violent death. 

If culminating. Disgrace, ruin and violent death. 

With Sun. Evil disposition, murderer or 
murdered, blows, stabs, serious accidents, shooting, 
shipwreck, execution, banishment, imprisonment, 
sharp diseases, fevers, luemorrhage, lawsuits, danger 
of death from fire, iron or stones, injuries to the face, 
wounds, bad eyes, and if in an angle blindness. 

With Moon. Wounds, stabs, imprisonment, in- 
juries to the face, sickness, blindness or eye injuries 
especially if Saturn or Mars be with Regulus. 

8o. Prtoa Hyadum. y Tauri. n 4° 41'. 

{The'chief star of the Hyades). 

Legend. The Hyades were the seven daughters 
of Atlas and Aithra, half-sisters of the Pleiades, 
with whom they were entrusted by Jupiter with the 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUUE 189 

care of the infant Bacchus. They were placed 
among the stars as a reward for their sisterly love 
which was evinced by their sorrow at the death 
of their brother Hyas, who was lulled by a wild 
beast in Libya. 

Notes. The Hyades consist of six stars (a, <?*, <?*> 
y t S, and «, Tauri) situated on the forehead of the 
Bull and marking the northern eye. * 

Influence. According to Ptolemy they are of the 
nature of Satum and Mercury ; and, to Alvidas, of 
Mercury and Mars. Simmonite likens them to Mars 
but this is probably a misinterpretation of Ptolemy’s 
meaning. They give tears, sudden events, violence, 
fierceness, poisoning, blindness, wounds or injuries 
to the head by instruments, weapons or fevers, and 
contradictions of fortune. 

If rising. Blindness, bad eyes, injuries to the 
face, wounds, stabs, imprisonment. 

If culminating. Disgrace, ruin, violent death. 

If risitig or culminating with luminaries, make 
their natives military captains, commanders, colonels 
of horse and emperors. 

With Sun. Evil disposition, disturbed mind, 
failure in study, muddled thinking, misfortune, 
murderer or murdered, death by blows, stabs, shoot- 
ing, beheading or shipwreck. 

With Moon. Tactful, fair ability, difficulties 
connected with writings, may forge the name -oi 
employer or friend but finally escape punishment 
and retain position, liable to sickness and disgrace, 
danger of blindness or eye injuries. 

With Mercury. Quick mind, resentful, hasty tem- 
per, broods over small troubles, favourable for gain. 



igo FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

With Venus. Many accomplishments, artistic, 
ability to write or paint, strong passions which 
influence work. 

With Mars. Abrupt, brave, aggressive, courag- 
eous, lacks concentration. 

With Jupiter. Ambitious, dishonest, legal diffi- 
culties, quarrels with relatives, judicial sentence. 

With Saturn. Caution, forethought, omnivorous 
reader, scientific, success but little prominence, 
worry and annoyance from relatives. 

With Uranus. Scientific, literary, artistic and mys- 
tical interests, unconsciously psychic, greatly influ- 
enced by environment, favourable for marriage after 35 
and forgain and children, ill-health, seldom long Ufe- 

With Neptune. Keen intellect, learned, land- 
hearted, sympathetic, scientific and philosophical 
interests, some inventive genius often connected 
with ctheric waves, which will bring fame but not 
wealth, broad and unorthodox religious views, 
benefits from companies, favourable for domestic 
matters, not good for children, brothers or sisters, 
knowledge gained psychically, sudden death while 
engaged in important work. 

8r. Princeps. £ Bodtis. nj, a® a'. 

Notes. ^ A pale yellow star situated in the spear- 
shaft of Bofltes. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mercury and Saturn. 

( It gives a keen, studious and profound mind, with 
j the ability for research. 

If rising. Good fortune, but troubles, discontent 
and fear occasioned by own temerity rather than 
circumstances. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAS 191 

82. Procyon. a Cam's Minor/s. 25 24 0 41*. 

Notes. A binary yellowish white and yellow 
Star situated on the body of the Lesser Dog. From 
Prokuon, before the Dog, in allusion to its rising 
before Sirius. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Mercury and Mars ; to Simmonite, of 
Venus and Mazs, which is probably a misprint ; 
and, to Alvidas, of the Moon, Jupiter and Uranus. 
It gives activity, violence, sudden and violent 
malevolence, sudden preferment by exertion, ele- , 
vation ending in disaster, danger of dog bites and 
hydrophobia, and makes its natives petulant, saucy, ‘ 
giddy, weak-natured, timid, unfortunate, proud, 
easily angered, careless and violent. Two cases are 1 
on record of death or injury by dog bite in which ' 
Procyon and Sirius are involved. 

1. Male, bom 14th September, 1829, 54° N. 
Died from the bite of a dog. Sirius was in 
square to the Moon and also to Mercury in the 
8th house, while Procyon was in square to 
Venus in the 8th. The ascendant fell midway 
between the opposition of both stars. 

2. Male, bom 6th July, 1885, 6.15 p.ra., 
54 0 N. 3’, 2 0 W. 46*. Bitten in the leg by a dog 
on 9th December, 1901, and was not expected 
to live. Sirius was in conjunction with the Sun 
near the cusp of the 8tb house, and Procyon 
was in conjunction with Mercury within that 
house. 

If rising. Artful, crafty, dissembling, wealth by 
violence and rapine, lust, dissipation, waste and 



192 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

ruin, military preferment, quarrels, loss in trade or 
by servants. 

With Sun. Great help from friends, gifts and 
legacies if not afflicted, military preferment after 
great struggles and expense. If rising or culminat- 
ing, kingly preferment. 

With Moon. Occult interests, restless, never 
remains long in one place, quarrels with friends, 
partners and employers. If at the same time the 
Sun and Mars be with Deneb Adige or Wcga, above 
the earth, death from the bite of a mad dog. 

With Mercury. Occult interest, minor position of 
management under Government, trouble and scandal 
through opposite sex, favourable for health and gain. 

With Venus. Many benefits from influential 
friends, associated with the Church, favourable for 
gain. 

With Mars. Cruelty, violence, scandal and slan- 
der, disgrace and ruin, danger of dog bites. 

With Jupiter. Many journeys, trouble through 
relatives and the Church or law, help from friends. 

With Saturn. Good judgment, high position of 
trust often in connection with land, may be adopted 
by aged couple from whom a good inheritance is 
obtained, benefits from elderly friends, good health, 
domestic harmony, marriage to one of higher 
station. 

With Uranus. Broad-minded, liberal, minister or 
speaker on religious and philosophical subjects, not 
limited to any definite creed, many friends among the 
people, favourable for domestic matters. 

With Neptune. Sensitive and mediumistic, notor- 
ious through and luck in speculation, political 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 193 


interests, wealthy friends, favourable for domestic 
matters, death from tumorous growth after unsuc- 
cessful operation leaving financial affairs involved. 

83. Propus. * Gcminorwn. S 3 1 17 0 50'. 

NoCes. A small star situated between the shoulders 
of the Twins. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mercury and Venus. 
It gives strength, eminence and success. 

v/84. Rasalhague. a ophiuchi. t 21° 20'. 

Notes. A sapphire star situated on the head of 
Ophiuchus. From Ras al Hawwa, the Head of the 
Serpent Charmer. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the nature 
of Saturn and Venus ; and, to Alvidas, of Jupiter 
and Mercury in sextile to Mars. It gives misfortune 
through women, perverted tastes and mental 
depravity. 

With Sun. Reserved, thoughtful, studious, sus- 
picious, solitary, reputation for athletics, little 
wealth, careless of public opinion. 

With Moon. Public prominence in religious 
matters, favourable for gain. 

With Mercury. Unpopular attitude and criticism 
through religion, philosophy or science ; difficulties 
in marriage and quarrels fostered by others, trouble 
through opposite sex, not very good for gain. 

With Ven us. Quick mind, well educated, cautious, 
secretive, suspicious, unfavourable for gain. 

HTfft Mars. Trouble through writings, public 
censure in connection with religion, science ot 
philosophy, bad for gain. jj 



194 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


With Jupiter. Diplomatic, religious or legal pre- 
ferment, but some criticism, favourable for gain. 

With Saturn. Selfish, unpopular, determined, fixed 
opinions, successful, somewhat dishonest, domestic 
disharmony through jealousy, marriage partner 
may be invalid, losses of a Mercurial nature. 

With Uranus. Strong passions, strong nature 
but changeable, ambitious, occult interests, seeks 
popularity, easily swayed though outwardly aggres- 
sive, reverence for ancestry, benefits through 
elderly and influential people and public affairs, 
unfavourable for marriage and children, if any. 
trouble through opposite sex, sudden death. 

With Neptune. Hypocritical, self-seeking, able 
speaker or writer, but panders to the public, occult, 
religious or scientific work, but largely misleading, 
minor Government position, domestic disharmony, 
ill-health to marriage partner, disappointment over 
legacy, peculiar death sometimes through fall but 
animal and human agency may be suspected. 

85. Rastaban. P Draconis. f Xo° 50'. 

Notes. A binary yellow star situated in the head 
of the Dragon, and anciently called " The Nebulous 
Star in the Dragon's Eye.” From A1 Ras al Thuban, 
the Dragon's Head. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Mars* 

It gives loss of property, violence, criminal inclina- 
tions and accidents. 

With Moon. Blindness, wounds, quarrels, bruises, 
stabs, blows and kicks from horses. 

86. Reg ulus. aLeonis. SI 28 0 43'. 

Notes. A triple star, flushed white and. ultra- 



.INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NE^UL/E 195 

marine, situated on the body of the Lion. From 
Regulus, a Little King, and often called Cor Leonis, 
the Lion's Heart, and symbolically the Crushing 
Foot. It was one of the four Royal Stars of the 
Persians in 3,000 B.C., when, as Watcher of the North, 
it marked the summer solstice. 

Influence . According to Ptolemy it is of the nature 
of Mars and Jupiter, but most later authors liken 
it to Mars only, while Alvidas states that it is similar 
to the Sun in good aspect to Uranus. It gives 
violence, destructiveness, military honour of short 
duration, with ultimate failure, imprisonment, vio- 
lent death, success, high and lofty ideals and strength 
of spirit, and makes its natives magnanimous, 
grandly liberal, generous, ambitious, fond of power, 
desirous of command, high-spirited and independent. 

If rising. Great honour and wealth, but violence 
and trouble, sickness, fevers, acute diseases, benefits 
seldom last, favour ot the great, victory over 
enemies and scandal. The 145th Consideration of 
Guido Bonatus is as follows • — “ That thou see in 
Diurnal Nativities whether Cor Leonis be in the 
Ascendant, that is to say, in the Oriental Line or 
above it one degree or below it three degrees ; or 
whether it be in the tenth in like degrees, without 
the Conjunction or Aspect of any of the Fortunes ; 
for this alone signifies that the Native shall be a 
person of great note and power, too much exalted, 
and attain to high preferment and honours, although 
descended from the meanest parents. And, if any 
ot the. Fortmes behold that place also, his glory 
shall be the more increased ; but, if the Nativity be 
nocturnal, his fortune will be somewhat meaner, 



ig6 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

but not much ; but if the Infortunes cast their 
aspects there it will still be more mean ; but if the 
Fortunes behold it also they will augment the good 
promised a fourth part, and mitigate the evil as 
much ; yet still, whatever of all this happens, it 
signifies that the Native shall die an unhappy death ; 
or at least that all his honours, greatness and 
power shall at last suffer an eclipse and set in a 
cloud.” 

If culminating. Honour, preferment, good for- 
tune, high office under Government, militaiy success. 
If with Sun, Moon or Jupiter, great honour and 
ample fortune. 

With Sun. Power, authority, great influence 
over friends, honour and riches, but violence, 
trouble and ultimate disgrace and ruin, sickness, 
fevers, benefits seldom last. 

With Moon. Occult interests, powerful friends, 
danger from enemies and false friends, gain by 
speculation, public prominence, great power, honour, 
wealth, benefits seldom last, violence, trouble and 
sickness. Makes women high-spirited and in- 
dependent. If at the same time the Sim is with the 
Dragon’s Head in Gemini, or Jupiter is in the loth 
house in trine to Mars and the Sun is with the 
Dragon's Head, great preferment even from the 
lowest sphere to high rank. 

With Mercury. Honourable, just, popular, gener- 
osity abused by opponents, fame, gain through high 
position. 

With Venus. Many disappointments, unexpected 
happenings, violent attachments, trouble through 
love affairs. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E ig7 


With Mars. Honour, fame, strong character, 
public prominence, high, military command. 

With Jupiter. Fame, high preferment, especially 
of a military nature, success in the Church. 

Wifli Saturn. Just, friends among clergy, success 
in Church or law, scholarly, wealth, gain through 
speculation, companies and friends, high position, 
proud of home and family, good health, heart trouble 
at end of life. If angular and especially if rising or 
culminating, public honour -and credit. If Mars 
be with the Pleiades, violent death in a tumult. 

With Uranus. Energetic, ambitious, successful, 
may be unjust or dishonourable, self-aggrandisement, 
high official position, panders to aristocracy, associ- 
ated with religion for business purposes, gain through 
speculation and companies, favourable for marriage, 
sorrow through death of daughter and disappoint- 
ment through a son, friends become enemies at end 
, of life, may retire and live in seclusion, violent 
death through accident or assassination. 

With Neptune. Prominent leader, law-giver, 
diplomatic, strong character, control over others, 
influential friends, few if any enemies, domestic 
harmony, natural death in old age. 

With a malefic and the Moon with Antares, 
Prsesaepe or the Pleiades, blindness or injuries to the 
eyes. 

87. Rigel. p Orionis. U 1 5° 43'* 

Notes. A double bluish white star situated on the 
left foot of Orion. From Rijl, the Foot. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy and Lilly it is 
of the nature of Jupiter and Saturn, but later authors 



1 98 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

consider it favourable and similarjto Jupiter and 
Mars. Alvidas likens it to Mercury, Mars and Jupi- 
Itcr. It gives benevolence, honour, riches, happiness, 
/glory, renown and inventive or mechanical ability. 

If rising. Good fortune, preferment, riches, 
great and lasting honours. 

If culminating. Great military or ecclesiastical 
preferment, anger, vexation, magnanimity, much 
gain acquired by labour and mental anxiety, .lasting 
honours. 

With Sun. Bold, courageous, insolent, unruly 
temper, hasty actions, bloodshed, many enemies, 
great good fortune, military success. 

With Moon. Much worry and disappointment, 
injuries to life and fortune, sickness, bad for gain, 
ill-health or death to wife or mother. 

With Mercury. Scientific, prominent position in 
connection with Mercurial matters or in science. 

With Venus. Honours or favours in middle life, 
good and influential marriage especially if female. 

With Mars. Unruly, ingenious, occupied with 
mechanical matters, great military preferment. 

With Jupiter. Great legal or ecclesiastical prefer- 
ment, many journeys, benefits from foreign affairs, 
favourable for marriage. 

With Saturn. Benefits from elderly people, clergy - 
and lawyers, just, discriminative, good for legacy 
and inheritance, domestic harmony, good health, 
long life. 

With Uranus. Scientific, romant'c, interested in 
antiquities, fame through historical or geological 
discoveries, probably in an ^unexplored country, 
friendships formed in a peculiar way abroad, many 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE igg 


adventures and narrow escapes,, early love dis- 
appointment, favourable for marriage after 30, 
death through- some trivial accident abroad. 

With Neptune . Kind, energetic, scholarly and 
active mind, position under Government or at the 
head of some learned institution, cautious, reserved, 
resourceful, prompt, diplomatic, occult interests, 
success, public prominence, domestic harmony, 
natural death. 

. 88. Sabik. »/ Ophittchi. t 16 0 51'. 

Notes. A pale yellow star situated on the left knee 
of Ophiuchus. From Sabik, Preceding One. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the nature 
of Satum and Venus ; and, to A 1 vidas, of Jupiter and 
Venus. It causes wastefulness, lost energy, per- 
. verted morals, -and success in evil deeds. 

With Sun. Sincere, honourable, scientific, reli- 
gious and philosophical interests, unorthodox or 
heretical, moral courage, bad for gain. 

With Moon. Secret enmity and jealousy, trouble 
through relatives, successful but not wealthy, suc- 
cess m breeding stock. 

With Mercury. Injury from open enemies, little 
help from friends, failure in business, fairly good for 
gam but legal losses, scandal through relatives of 
marriage partner. 

With Venus. Musical and artistic ability, not 
very favourable for gain. 

With Mars. Unorthodox or heretical religious 
views that may cause trouble, domestic disharmony, 
trouble through love affairs, bad for gain. 

With Jupiter. Material success, preferment in 



200 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

Church or law but criticized, gain through large 
animals, trouble through relatives. 

With Saturn. . Industrious, persevering, economi- 
cal, strong passions, trouble through some active 
indiscretion affecting whole life, trouble and disap- 
pointment in love affairs, secret help from female 
friends which may cause scandal, success especially 
in latter part of life in affairs of an earthy or Sagitta- 
rian nature, but little prominence. 

With Uranus. Sincere, sober, retiring, melan- 
choly, thoughtful, calm and patient in trouble, 
clergyman or associated with the Church, some 
physical disability, separated from friends and rela- 
tives, some great sorrow in the life, occupied in 
doing good but disappointed in results, rarely 
marries. 

With Neptune. Highly sensitive, psychic, strong 
will, prominent writer or speaker, success, many 
friends, favours from opposite sex, gifts and legacies 
used for scientific purposes, domestic harmony, 
sudden death in middle age from colds or consump- 
tion. 

89. Sadalmelik. a Aquarii. X 2 0 14'. 

Notes. A pale yellow star situated on the right 
shoulder of Aquarius. From A1 Sa'd al Malik, the 
Lucky One of the King. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Saturn and Mercury ; to Simmonite, of 
Saturn and Jupiter ; and to Alvidas of Jupiter and 
Uranus in sextile to the Sun from Pisces and 
Taurus. It causes persecution, lawsuits, extreme 
and sudden destruction and the death penalty. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL-E 201 

With Sun. Occult interests, prominence in oc- 
cultism, gain through companies. - 

With Moon. Prominence in occult matters, suc- 
cess in large companies, favourable for gain. If at 
the same time a malefic be with Algol, death by royal 
command either by hanging or by decapitation. 

With Mercury. Occult interests and research, 
criticized, favourable for friendship, success in large 
companies, loss through servants. 

With Venus. Favourable for occult investigation, 
gain through friends. 

With Mars. Fame through discoveries in science 
or inventions, benefits do not last. 

With Jupiter. Ecclesiastical success, occult 
interests, criticized, trouble through enemies, loss 
through lawsuits. 

With Saturn. Original, inventive, psychic, careful, 
cautious, practical, good judgment, difficulty in 
putting ideas or inventions into practice, gam through 
companies, speculation and matters of an earthy- 
nature, chronic illness to wife or children, favourable 
for gain, long lite. 

With Uranus. High ideals, philosophical, 
scientific, good mind, psychic, inventive, successful, 
gain through business or under Government, in- 
fluential and learned friends, does much good in 
purifying creeds and philosophies, sudden but 
natural death. 

With Neptune. Psychic, prominence in occult 
matters, kind, sympathetic, generous, friends 
among clergy and lawyers, favourable for gain 
through companies, banks or stocks, domestic 
harmony but sickness to wife or children entailing 



202 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

the breaking up of home, minor accidents, long 
life. 

90. Sadalsood. p Aguarii. ssx 22 0 17'. 

Noles. A pale yellow star situated on the left 
shoulder of Aquarius. From A1 Sa'd al Suud, the 
Luckiest of the Lucky, so called on account of its 
heliacal rising marking the period of gentle and 
continuous rain. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Saturn and Mercury; to Simmonite, of 
Uranus ; and, to Alvidas, of Uranus in sextile to 
the Sun. It is said to cause trouble and disgrace. 

With Sun. Occult interests, psychic, wealth 
through opposite sex involving litigation, domestic 
harmony. 

With Moon. Reputation through occult matters, 
respect of friends, favourable for gain, peculiar 
domestic conditions. 

With Mercury. Social success, favours from 
opposite sex but some transitory difficulties, re- 
tirement owing to abuse of position, sudden loss 
through speculation, domestic sorrow and trouble. 

With Venus. Strange events, romantic and pe- 
culiar marriage entailing separation for Government 
or political reasons. 

With Mars. Difficulties through occult matters, 
bad for gain. 

With Jupiter. Litigation, material and social 
success, difficulties in marriage, may marry abroad 
or a foreigner. 

With Saturn. Sharp, cunning, dishonest, immoral, 
cold, unsympathetic, hard-hearted, disgraces an 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 203 


honourable father, hypnotic influence over opposite 
sex, many intrigues wrecking homes, death through 
female’s revenge. 

With Uranus. Occult interest, very unfavour- 
able lor women, sensitive, emotional, vacillating, 
weak mind, easily influenced, led astray in early 
life, indiscreet actions, trouble through opposite sex, 
bad for gain, bad for marriage before middle age, 
accidental death. 

With Neptune. Mcdiumistic, good-looking, 
youthful appearance, success in occupations con- 
ncctcd with amusements or ornament, domestic 
harmony, many moves and changes, peculiar 
matrimonial conditions, sudden death. 

91. Scale, North, ft Librce. n 18 0 15’. 

Notes. A pale emerald star situated in the 
northern scale of the Balance. Its proper name is 
Zubeneschamali, from A 1 Zuban al Shamaliyyah, 
the Northern Claw, a reference to the ancient 
celestial sphere in which Libra was omitted and 
Scorpio occupied 6o°. It is symbolically called the 
Full Price. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Jupiter and Mercury, but later writers 
have considered it similar to Jupiter and Mars, and 
Alvidas likens it to Mars in sextile to Jupiter. It 
gives good fortune, high ambition, beneficence, 
honour, riches, and permanent happiness. 

If ttsfttg or cidwitwjtfttg. Houa'is, 
good fortune. 

With Sun. Great good fortune, high position, 
transitory difficulties eventually proving beneficial. 



204 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

With Moon. Active mind, organizing ability, 
benefits through new and influential friends, 
valuable gifts, uses friends' names to obtain money 
but matter is amicably settled, high position, love of 
respectable women. 

With Mercury. Active, alert, favours from 
influential people, good position, much expenditure, 
benefits through writings. 

With Venus. Social success, help from women, 
favourable for love affairs and marriage. 

With Mars. High ambitions, success through 
energy, influential position, forceful writer and 
speaker. 

^ — With Jupiter. Philosophical mind, ecclesiastical 
or legal preferment, able writer or speaker, in- 
fluential friends. 

With Saturn. Cautious, reserved, studious, 
economical, analytical, good chemist or detective, 
good judge of human nature, early losses never fully 
recovered, favourable for gain and domestic matters, 
sickness to children in infancy. 

With Uranus. Economical, great self-control, 

psychic, material instincts, many difficulties, good 
for gain but much expenditure, loss through law 
and enemies, help from influential friends, occasional 
peculiar domestic disharmony, sudden death often 
from heart trouble. 

With Neptune. Occult writer or speaker, medical 
or chemical discoveries, practical, kind, sympathetic, 
alive to self interests, gain through marriage and 
business, disharmony with parents, grandparents, or 
relatives, legacy obtained through litigation, suffers 
from accidents, death resulting from previous injury. 


INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULA 205 

92. Scale, South, a Librae. 13 0 58'. 

Notes. A double star, pale yellow and light grey, 
situated in the southern scale of the Balance. Its 
proper name is Zubenelgenubi, from A 1 Zuban al 
Janubiyyah, the Southern Claw. Symbolically 
called the Insufficient Price. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy and the old 
writers it is of the nature of Saturn and Mars, but 
later authors substitute Saturn and Venus or Saturn 
and Mercury, and Alvidas likens it to Mars, Venus 
and Saturn. It causes malevolence, obstruction, 
an unforgiving character, violence, disease, lying, 
crime, disgrace, and danger of poison. 

- With Sun. Sickness, loss in business and through 
fire or speculation, disgrace, ruin, disfavour of 
superiors, suffers through wrongful accusations, 
sickness to family. 

With Moon. Trouble through opposite sex, 
wrongful accusations, disgrace, ruin, mental anxiety, 
loss of relatives, many disappointments, much sick- 
ness, disease in those parts of the body ruled by the 
sign. 

With Mercury. Crafty, revengeful, treacherous, 
quick mind, bad health, bad for gain, disgrace, 
poverty at end of life. 

lVt/ft Venus. Bad for marriage, sudden and secret 
death, may be poisoned owing to Jealousy of one of 
own sex. 

With Mars. Bitter quarrels, entailing bloodshed 
or death. 

With Jupiter. Hypocrisy, deceit, dishonesty, pre- 
tended religious zeal for business purposes, danger of 
imprisonment. 



206 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

With Saturn . Dishonourable, often escapes jus- 
tice but finally suffers, jealous, quick-tempered, 
domestic disharmony, bad for marriage, gain and 
legacies ; miserable death. 

•With Uranus. Sharp, cunning, dangerous, ab- 
normal mind, thought reader, . always injuring . 
others, may commit undiscovered' crime, violent 
passions but great control, secret revenge, latter 
part of life in asylum or prison, violent death. 

With Neptune. Morose, melancholy, isolated, 
shrewd, cunning, evil use of occult powers and of 
poisons or drugs, cynical, dangerous, broods over 
some secret, peculiar death, often suicide 

With Fortunes. Loss by thieves, soldiers, servants, 
gambling, speculation, fire and lawsuits. 

93. Screat. p Pegasi. X 28° 15'. 

Notes. An irregularly variable deep-yellow star 
situated on the left leg of Pegasus. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it i$ of 
nature of Mars and Mercury ; to Simraonite, of 
Saturn ; to other authors, of Saturn and Mercury ; 
and, to Alvidas, of Neptune in square to Saturn or 
Mars. It causes extreme misfortune, murder, sui- 
cide, and drowning. 

With Sun. Bad for success, danger through water 
and engines, liable to accidents or drowning. 

With Moon. Worry, loss and gain of friends 
through criticism, danger of accidents and by water, 
bad for gain. 

With Mercury. Many accidents and narrow es- 
capes especially by water, many enemies, trouble 
through writings, bad for health and domestic affairs. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 207 

With Venus. Evil environment, suffering through 
own acts, danger of imprisonment or restraint. 

With Mars. Many accidents, bad for gain, sick- 
ness to native and relatives. 

With Jupiter. Many voyages, losses through law, 
friends and relatives, danger of imprisonment. 

With Saturn. Danger of death in infancy, bad 
for gain and pleasure, domestic trouble, colds and 
consumption, death by drowning or accident. 

With Uranus. Deceitful, vacillating, little con- 
centration, psychic, unreliable, bad for gain, in- 
volved in difficulties due to own acts, many accidents, 
death through drowning or by water especially if in 
1st, 6th, 8th or 10th houses. 

Neptune. Prominent in inventive, occult or 
psychic matters, persecuted, peculiar domestic con- 
ditions, many accidents, danger of drowning. 

With a malefic and Moon with Sirius, death by 
fiery cutting weapons or from beasts. If the Moon 
be with Wega, violent death. 

94. Seginus. y Bodlis. =2: 16 0 32'. 

Notes. A small star situated on the left shoulder 
of Bo 5 tcs. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mercury and Saturn. 
It gives a subtle mind, shamelessness and loss through 
friends and companies. 

With Moan. Preferment by indirect means fol- 
lowed by disgrace and ruin. 

95. SnARATAN. p Arietis. g 2 0 51'. 

Notes. A pearly white star si tuated on the horn of 
the Ram. and commonly called the Ram's North 
Hom. From A 1 Sharatain, the Two Signs. 



2oS FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


Influence. Of the nature of Mars and Saturn. It 
causes bodily injuries, unscrupulous defeat, des- 
truction by fire, war or earthquake. 

96. Sinistra. * Ophiuchi. $ 28° 38'. 

Notes. A small star situated in the left hand of 
Ophiuchus. __ 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Venus. 
It gives an immoral, mean and slovenly nature. 

With Moon. Lustful, wanton, infamous, scanda- 
lous, addicted to sorcery and poisoning. 

97. Sirius, a Canis Majoris. 12 0 59'. 

Notes. A binary star, brilliant white and yellow, 

situated in the mouth of the Greater Dog. From 
Seirios, Sparkling or Scorching, or according to some 
authors from the Egyptian god Osiris. Among 
these people it was also Thoth and Sothis, and formed 
the basis of the Sothic period of chronology. The 
Chinese knew it as Tseen Lang, the Heavenly Wolf, 
and said that when unusually bright it portended 
attacks from thieves. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Jupiter and Mars ; and, to Alvidas, of the 
Moon, Jupiter and Mars. It gives honour, renown, 
wealth, ardour, faithfulness, devotion, passion and 
resentment, and makes its natives custodians, 
curators and guardians. It also gives danger of 
dog bites, and two examples of this effect will be 
found under Procyon. 

If culminating. High office under Government 
giving great profit and reputation. 

With Sun. Success in business, occupation con- 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUUE 209 


uected with metals or other martial affairs, domestic 
harmony. II rising or culminating, kingly prefer- 
ment. 

With Moon. Success in . business, influential 
friends of opposite sex, favourable for the father, 
good health, beneficial changes in home or business. 
If a malefic be with Scheat, death by fiery cutting 
weapons or from beasts. If Saturn be with the Moon, 
death by wild beasts or soldiers. 

With Mercury. Great business success, help 
through influential people, worries unnecessarily, 
associated with the Church, physical defect through 
accident. 

With Venus. Ease, comfort and luxury, ex- 
travagant, gain by inheritance. 

' With Mars. Courageous, generous, military pre- 
ferment, work in connection with metals. 

With Jupiter. Business success, journies, help 
from relatives, ecclesiastical preferment. 

With Saturn. Steady, reserved, diplomatic, just, 
persevering, high position 'through friends, favour- 
able for home, gifts and legacies, domestic har- 
mony. 

With LTrrtmis. Gain and prominence in Uranian 
matters, help from influential friends, gain through 
haimonious marriage, especially if male; sudden 
death. 

With Neptune. Intuitional, occult interests, re- 
ligious, good organizing ability, success in mercantile 
pursuits, banks or corporations, many influential 
friends, favourable for gain and domestic matters, 
' natural death. 


210 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

9S. Skat, 8 Aguarii. H 7 0 45'. 

Notes. A small star situated on the right leg of 
Aquarius. From A 1 Shi’at, a Wish, or A 1 Sak, the 
Shin Bone. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Saturn and Jupiter; to Simmonite, of 
Uranus ; and, to AJridas, of Uranus and Venus in 
sextile to Mercury. It gives good fortune and 
lasting happiness. 

With Sun. Sensitive, emotional, psychic; criti- 
cism and persecution through raediumship, but help 
from friends. 

With Moon. New and influential friends, associ- 
ated with companies, public position, but little 
prominence, valuable gifts, love of respectable 
women. 

With Mercury. Peculiar events, occult interests, 
psychic, many friends. 

With Venus. -Psychic, occult interests, friends 
among opposite sex, favourable for gain. 

With Mars. Energetic, advancement through 
exertions, mechanical discoveries or ability. 

With Jupiter. Philosophical, occult or religious 
mind, social success, prominent in Freemasonry’. 

With Saturn. Trouble through opposite sex, 
many travels and peculiar adventures, sudden ups 
and downs, early marriage but may desert wife or 
be deserted or marriage may be bigamous, separated 
from children, no help from friends, bad for gain 
and for health in latter part of life, may die in 
workhouse, hospital or asylum. 

With Uranus. Vacillating, weak character, men- 
tally far in advance of his time, writer on theories 


INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 211 

0! life, suffering from violent attachment or marriage 
in early life, eccentric, greatly criticized, sudden 
death. 

With Neptune . Abnormal mind, changeable, 
easily discouraged, idealistic, psychic, many alli- 
ances, separated from marriage partner and children, 
accidents, may become insane, death through a fall 
or by water in middle life. 

gg. Spica. a Virgin**. ^ 22 0 43'. 

Notes. A brilliant flushed white binary star in 
the Wheat Ear of Virgo. Frequently called Arista. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Venus and Mars; and, to Alvidas, of Venus, 
Jupiter and Mercury. It gives success, renown, 
riches, a sweet disposition, love of art and science, 
unscrupulousness, unfruitfulness and injustice to 
innocence. 

If rising or culminating. Unbounded good for- 
tune, riches, happiness, ecclesiastical preferment, 
unexpected honour or advancement beyond native’s 
hopes or capacity. 

With Sim. Great and lasting preferment, eminent 
dignity, immense wealth, great happiness to native’s 
parents and children, help from friends among 
clergy, favourable for public and legal affairs. 
If culminating. Church and State preferment. If 
with Venus and Mars also the native is a potent king 
obeyed by many people, but subject to many 
infirmities. 

With Moon. Gain through inventions, success, 
wealth and honour from Mercury, Venus or Jupiter 
people. 



2i2 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


With Mercury. Neat, tidy, clever, ingenious, 
favour of clergy and people in authority, gain 
through investment, responsible position. 

With Venus. Benefits from friends, social success, 
false friends of own sex. 

With Mars. Popular, social success, may have 
good judgment and quick decision or be violent in 
dispute, rigid, and nearly or quite a fool. 

With Jupiter. Popular, social success, wealth, 
ecclesiastical honour and preferment. 

With Saturn. Apt to be suspicious, sharp or 
rugged, but does much good, occult interests, good 
speaker, popular, many friends, gain through 
legacies but extravagant, good health, favourable 
for domestic matters. 

With Uranus. Medium is tic, popular, business 
connected with ornaments, gain through marriage, 
fortunate, sudden natural death. 

With Neptune. Well-bom, comfortable surround- - 
ings, always sufficiently well off, associated with 
companies, gain through legacies, favourable for 
domestic matters, somewhat fast and extravagant* 
does not live to old age. 

With Fortuna. Great wealth, voluptuous pro-, 
pen si ties. 

ioo. SricuLUM. 8 M, 20 M. 21 M Sagittarii. 
t 29° 32'. 

Notes. Two clusters and a nebula (20 M) situated 
on the arrow-head of Sagittarius. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mars and the Stood, 
and specifically mentioned by Ptolemy as productive 
of blindness. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUL/E 213 


101. Tejat. Gemitiorum. ss 2° 19'. 

Notes. A binary and variable star situated on 
the left foot of the northern Twin. 

Influence. Of the nature oi Mercury and Venus. 
It causes violence, pride, over-confidencc and shame- 
lessness. 

102. Teredcllum. u Sagittarii. 24 0 43'. '' 

Notes. The chief star of " the four-sided figure 

in the tail ” of Sagittarius mentioned by Ptolemy. 

Influence. Of the nature of Venus and Saturn. 
It gives a fortune but with regret and disgrace, 
cunning, a mercenary nature and rcpulsiveness. 

103. Unukauim. a Serpeniis. \ 20° 56'. 

Notes. A pale yellow star situated on the neck 

of the Serpent. From Unk al Hayyah, the Neck of 
the Snake. Sometimes called Cor Serpentis. the 
Serpent's Heart. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Saturn and Mars ; to Simmonite, of 
Saturn and Venus; to Pearce, of Saturn, Venus and 
Mars; and, to Alvidas, of Mars and Saturn in 
opposition to Venus. It gives immorality, acci- 
dents, violence and danger of poison. 

With Sun. Many quarrels and disappointments, 
unfortunate lile, seriously affected by death of 
family or friends. 

With Moon. Clever, evil environment, hatred of 
authority, involved in intrigues and plots, banished, 
imprisoned or hanged for crime probably by poison- 
ing. / 

With Mercury. Dishonourable, accused of forgery 



214 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

or theft of papers, ill-health, narrow escapes, danger 
of bites from poisonous animals. 

With Venus. Enmity, jealousy of own sex, bad 
for domestic matters, favourable for gain, secret 
death probably by poison. 

With Mars. Violence, quarrels, lying, crime, 
violent death probably by poison. 

With Jupiter. Hypocrisy, deceit, banishment, 
imprisonment or exile. 

With Saturn. Secret insanity, drug taker, secret 
crime and poisoning often for no reason, shrewd, 
cunning, intelligent, studious, often physician or 
nurse, usually unmarried, may commit suicide or be 
confined in an asylum or prison. 

With Uranus. Spasmodic insanity, wealthy and 
luxurious environment, often fails to obtain inherit- 
ance, bad for marriage, may commit crime, sudden 
death often by suicide. 

With Neptune. Shrewd, ingenious, courageous, 
persistent, intuitive, evil environment, often criminal, 
trouble through opposite sex, bad for gain and 
marriage, violent death. 

104. Vertex. 31 hi Andromeda. T 26 0 43'. 

Notes. The Great Nebula situated to the north 

of Andromeda's head. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mars and the Moon. 

It causes blindness, injuries to the eyes, sickness 
and a violent death. 

105. * Vindemiatrix. ,Virginis. = 8° 50' 

Legend. Vindemiatrix, or as it was originally 

Called, Vindemiator, the Gatherer of Grapes, repre- 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBUUE 215 


sents Ampelos, the son of a satyr and a nymph, 
to whom Bacchus, in token of his fondness, gave a 
vine planted at the foot of an elm. While gathering 
grapes Ampelos fell and broke his neck, whereupon 
Bacchus placed him among the stars as a memorial 
of his former affection. 

Notes. A bright yellow star situated on the right 
wing of Virgo. Its name is said to have been given 
because it rises in the morning just before the time 
of vintage. Wilson, Simmonitc and A 1 vidas all 
erroneously place this star in the sign Virgo instead 
of in Libra. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Satum and Mercury ; to Simmonite, of 
Saturn and Venus, which is probably a misprint; 
to Wilson and Pearce, of Satum, Venus and Mercury, 
and, to A 1 vidas, of Mercury and Satum in evil aspect. 
It gives falsity, disgrace, stealing, wanton folly and 
often causes its natives to become widows. 

With Sun. Worry, depression, unpopular, failure 
in business, harassed by creditors. 

With Moon. Worry, many disappointments, loss 
through law or writings and theft, bad health, 
failure in business. 

W ith Mercury. Impulsive, too hasty, loss through 
writings and business. 

With Venus. Trouble through love affairs, loss 
of friends, danger of scandal. 

With Mars. Rash, headstrong, indiscreet,, ener- 
getic, trouble through law, business and friends. 

With Jupiter. Trouble through law or Church, 
much criticism, many journeys. 

W ith Saturn. Cautious, thoughtful, reseiyed, 



2x6 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


materialistic, hypocritical in religion, loss through 
speculation, success in business, secret difficulty 
with marriage partner. 

With Uranus. Deformity or disease of spine or 
bach about which native is sensitive and seeks 
seclusion especially if female, danger of heart 
trouble, bad for marriage, death through an accident. 

With Neptune. Active, critical, mind hovers ' 
between spiritual and material things, loss through 
speculation and Mercurial matters, mechanical and 
inventive ability, temporary domestic separations, 
death of or separation from a child, death through 
an accident or Saturnian disease. 

106. Wasat. s Geminorum . S3 17 0 24'. 

Notes. A double star, pale white and purple, 

situated on the right arm of the northern Twin. 
From A1 Wasat, the Middle. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn. It gives 
violence, malevolence, destructiveness as a _ first 
principle, and is connected with chemicals, poisons 
and gas. 

107. Wega. a Lyrce. ft 14 0 12'. 

Notes. A pale sapphire star situated in the lower 
part of the Lyre. From A1 Waki, the Falling. ar*d 
known in the Middle Ages as Vultur Cadens, the Fall- 
ing Grype or Vulture. Often incorrectly spelt Vega. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the 
nature of Venus and Mercury ; and, to Alvidas, of 
Saturn in trine to Jupiter from the earthy signs 
especially Capricorn and Taurus. It gives bene- 
ficence, ideality, hopefulness, refinement and 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAE 217 

changeability, and makes jts natives grave, sober, 
outwardly pretentious and usually lascivious. 

With Sun . Critical, abrupt, reserved, unpopular, 
fleeting honours, influential position, insincere 
friends. If with Mars also, above the earth, and the 
Moon be with Procyon, death from the bite of a mad 
dog. 

With Moon. Public disgrace, probably through 
forgery, loss through writings, some ill-health, suc- 
cess in business, gain through an annuity or pension. 
If a malefic be with Scheat, violent death- 
With Mercury Suspicious, reserved, bitter, 
thwarted ambitions, double dealing, secret enemies in 
influential positions, trouble with the mother, loss in 
business. 

With Venus. Hard-hearted, cold, miserly ; ill- 
health, ugliness or deformity. 

With Mars. Scientific interests, unpopular opin- 
ions, moral courage, favourable for gam. 

With Jupiter. Loss through legal affairs, favour- 
able for gam, danger of imprisonment. 

With Saturn. Strong passions, opinionated, ori- 
ginal, many Mercurial difficulties, reputation suf- 
fers through wrongful accusations, trouble with 
superiors, domestic difficulties, few, if any, children, 
latter half of life more favourable, sudden death. 

With Uranus. Critical, abrupt, reserved, strong 
passions, materialistic, many disappointments, do- 
mestic sorrow, much gam and loss, many open and 
secret enemies, accidental or violent death. 

With Neptune. Timifi, Son ii oS music, ' occult 
interests, practical and scientific mind, associated 
with occult societies, material success, home may be 



218 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


broken up, liable to accidents, natural death in old 
age especially when Mars is in favourable aspect. 

108. Yed Prior. S Ophitichi. f 1° Ii'. 

Notes. A deep yellow star situated on the left 
hand of Ophiuchus. From Yad, the Hand. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Venus. 
It causes immorality, shamelessness and revolution. 

109. Zaniah. v Vtrginis. m 3° 43'. 

Notes. A variable star situated on the southern 
wing of Virgo. From A 1 Zawiah, the Angle or Corner 
which formed part of the Kennel of the Barking 
Dogs located here by the Arabs. 

Influence. According to Ptolemy it is of the na- 
ture of Mercury and Venus ; and, to Alvidas, of 
Venus and Mercury in sextile. It gives refinement, 
honour, congeniality, order and a lovable nature. 

With Sun. Educational and studious interests, 
popular, social success, much pleasure, favourable 
for marriage. 

With Moon. Worry, loss through legal and Venu- 
sian affairs, trouble through writings, led astray by 
sympathies. 

With Mercury. Musical or artistic ability, gain 
through writing short stories, popular, social 
success, many friends especially among opposite sex. 

With Venus. Quick in learning, musical and 
artistic ability, fond of society, many friends, favour- 
able for gain. 

With Mars. Active, energetic, loss through law- 
suits, trouble through opposite sex. 

With Jupiter. Religious and philosophical mind, 
social success, many friends. 



INFLUENCE OF STARS AND NEBULAS 219 

With Saturn. Sober, industrious, many influential 
elderly friends, gain through old people, grand- 
parents, and marriage. 

With Uranus. Studious, psychic, retiring, some- 
what unpractical, uneventful life, many friends, 
social success, favourable for marriage if male but 
less so if female, gain through marriage and business, 
natural death. 

IJ’i'IA Neptune. Kind. sympathetic, somewhat 
impatient, good at detail work, peculiar love affairs, 
gain through marriage and partnership, help from 
influential friends, uneventful life, danger of death at 
about 10 years of age or natural death in middle life. 

no. Za vt java. P Virginia. 26° 2'. 

Notes. A pale yellow star situated below the head 
of Virgo. From A1 Zawiah, the Angle or Comer 
(see Za.vzar), but according to Buliingcr the name 
means the Gloriously Beautiful. Symbolically 
called Correct Weighing. This star was used for 
confirming the Einstein theory during the solar 
eclipse of 21st September, 1922. which fell close to it. 

Influence. Of the nature of Mercury and Mars. 
It gives beneficence, force of character, strength, 
combative movements and destructiveness. 

in. Zosma. S Leonis. io° 12'. 

Notes. A triple star, pale yellow, blue and violet 
situated on the Lion’s back. From Zosma, a Girdle. 

Influence. Of the nature of Saturn and Ven us. It 
causes benefit by disgrace, selfishness, egotism, 
immorality, meanness, melancholy, unhappiness of 
mind and fear of poison, and gives an unresonable, 
shameless and egotistical nature. 



CHAPTER VI 


THE FIXED STARS IN MUNDANE ASTROLOGY 

Very little is known as to the effect of the fixed stars 
in mundane astrology although there is no doubt 
that their influence is of supreme importance in this 
branch of the subject. In matters concerning the 
fate of nations and cities the movement of the 
planets is too rapid to cause radical changes They 
do indeed effect the more ephemeral happenings, but 
for slow, world-wide changes and epoch-making 
events it is necessary to take note of influences that 
are correspondingly great, and we are driven to a 
consideration of the movement of stars as being the 
only influence known to us that is capable of pro- 
ducing effects of the necessary 1 magnitude. Un- ' 
fortunately circumstances are against any detailed 
examination of this nature owing to the immense 
periods of time involved, and therefore our know- 
ledge is of the smallest, but nevertheless one or two 
facts are on record and with an increased interest in 
astrology others will no doubt rapidly come to light. 
The growth of religions appears to be in some way 
connected with the passage of the vernal equinox 
through the zodiac of constellations. Thus its entry 
into the constellation Taurus is associated with the 
worship of Baal and the golden calf, and its passage 
220 



STARS IN MUNDANE ASTROLOGY 221 


into Aries with the worship of the ram. Christ- 
tianity arose when the vernal equinox was nearing 
Pisces and it is significant that the symbol of a fish 
was that adopted by the followers of the new reli- 
gion. A greater amount of detail may be obtained 
from a study of the dccanatc through which the 
vernal equinox is passing. The approximate period 
during which it remains in one sign is 2160 years, 
and it therefore requires about 720 years to pass 
through a single dccanate, which it doc$ in a retro- 
grade direction. Unfortunately the exact position 
of the vernal equinox in the constellations is not 
known with any accuracy, but there seems to be no 
doubt that the first point of Aries in the zodiac of 
signs coincided with that in the constellation zodiac 
in about 500 A.D. 

In addition to the influence of the moving equinox 
itself similar effects are brought about by the same 
phenomenon of precession on the longitudes of the 
stars, which increase at the rate of a little over 50' 
per annum. Pearce pointed out that the Roman 
Empire and the Papal power were greatly affected by 
the passage of Regulus through the sign Leo by which 
Rome is ruled. This star entered Leo in 293 B.C., 
and the power of Rome became fully established. 
In 571 A.D. it entered the Sagittarius decanate 
corresponding with the great increase in Papal 
power ; in 1291 it left that decanate and in the same 
year the Holy Land was entirely lost. When 
Regulus left the term of Jupiter in 1507 the efforts of 
Luther were disturbing the power of the Popes, and 
when, in 1868, its influence began to be transferred to 
Virgo on account of its having passed the 29th degree 



222 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

of Leo, the French troops left Rome and the tem- 
poral power of the Pope was overthrown. 

Another method of prognostication by the use of 
the fixed stars consists in noting the effect of their 
passage over the Ascendant and luminaries in the 
horoscopes for the building or foundation of towns, 
cities and institutions. Thus it is traditional know- 
ledge that n 17 ° 54 ' occupies the Ascendant of the 
horoscope of the City of London, and it has been 
pointed out that the plague and fire of London coin- 
cided with the passage of the Bull’s north horn (El 
Nath) over this degree. In The Horoscope for May, 
1834, Commander Morrison (Zadkicl I) made some 
interesting observations on the effect of the fixed 
stare on Liverpool, which are well worth quoting. 
He wrote as follows : 

" In the same manner we have been able to 
decide that the exact ascendant of Liverpool 
is 18 degrees 12 minutes of Scorpio. And we 
find that the North Scale, a very benevolent 
fixed star, first came within the orbs of influence 
(5 degrees) of Liverpool's ascendant in the 
year 1558, when the cottons of Manchester were 
first bartered for wine with the Liverpool mer- 
chants. Two years previously King Philip 
and Queen Mary granted a charter to the town ; 
in 1570 the first Common Council was held ; in 
1596 a vessel arrived with a cargo valued at 
£1,000 ; in 1626 King Charles I granted a charter 
to the town, which was made a body corporate 
and politic, etc., and the trade and importance 
of the place began to increase. Again, if 18 
degrees 12 min. of Scorpio be the ascendant, 8 



STARS IN MUNDANE ASTROLOGY 223 


degrees 55 minutes of Virgo must be the mid- 
heaven, which has rule over the Magistracy, 
Corporation etc. ; and a star in the Lion's back, 
of the nature of Saturn and Venus, bringing 
discredit and dishonour, has been approaching 
that degree, and is now, in this year 1834, in 8 
degrees 55 minutes of yirgo: accordingly, the 
Corporation, &c., have suffered discredit by 
the House of Commons having passed a Bill to 
disfranchise the freemen. 

" In 1863, the South Scale, a star of an evil 
nature, comes within the orbs of the ascendant 
of Liverpool. It will bring serious losses and 
injuries to the town and its trade lor about a few 
years before ; but it is not a very powerful star. 
In 1916, the North Scale Teaches 18 deg. 12 min. 
of Scorpio, and will produce wonderful improve- 
ments in Liverpool. Some freak of nature 
brings great improvement to the entrance of the 
port, and, altogether, Liverpool will flourish 
greatly about the eariy part of the 20th century. 

“ In the year 1721, the star Rigel came to 
within orbs of London's ascendant, and that 
nefarious scheme the South Sea Bubble almost 
ruined its citizens. In 2077 that star will 
cross the degree of London's ascendant ; about 
which period we believe that some ill-advised 
laws, and many misfortunes, will bring ruin and 
disgrace on the trade of London . The commerce 
of that port will dwindle away, and London 
become very unfortunate. Again, about 389 
years hence, the very violent and evilmartial star 
Aldeharan enters within orbs of London’s as- 



224 FIXED stars and constellations 


cendant, and then very many evils, including 
fire, tear and bloodshed, will overthrow the im- 
portance of London entirely. II irill fall from 
Us metropolitan rank, and become far below the 
town of Liverpool in consequence. Just 63 
years afterwards, the very powerful regal star 
The Lion’s Heart enters within orbs of the 
mid-heaven of Liverpool ; which will then be- 
come (about the year 2291) THE ROYAL AND 
METROPOLITAN CITY OF ENGLAND, AND 
THE SEAT OF GOVERNMENT." 

Methods such as these are of great interest but are 
very limited in their application, for our knowledge 
of the ruling degrees of towns is far from complete. 

, We need a method of more general utility. In the 
Middle Ages the Kabalists were in the habit of pre- 
dicting the fate of nations and cities by observing 
the fixed stars vertically overhead and attempting to <■ 
form them into words in accordance with a variant 
of Hebrew called the Celestial Alphabet, the words 
so formed indicating the fate of the place. This, of 
course, is pure kabahsm, if not psychism, but it is 
probable that the underlying idea of the passage of a 
zenith point from one constellation to another may - 
influence a locality. The position of a city upon the 
terrestrial globe may bear a definite relationship to 
a position on the celestial globe. It has been sug- 
gested that the meridian of Greenwich corresponds to 
TT g°, having progressed to that point from T 5 o 
during the time elapsed since the beginning of the 
Kali Yuga in 3102 B.C., and that other places 
correspond in a similar manner to degrees as far re- 



STARS IN MUNDANE ASTROLOGY 225 


moved from H 9° as the place is distant in longitude' 
from Greenwich, Taurus lying to the west and Cancer 
to the east. If there is any truth in this theory a 
point near the knee of Perseus and below the hoofs 
of Camelopardalis with longitude H 9 ° and declina- 
tion 51 0 N 32' would be vertical to London. A study 
of such points in relation to the history of nations 
might throw some light upon events. 

In addition to these general methods, however, 
the fixed stars may be utilized in the ordinary 
mundane horoscopes for ingresses, new moons, 
conjunctions and eclipses. Eclipses in particular 
are important and very frequently affect matters 
ruled by the constellations in the longitude in which 
they fall, at the same time stimulating the influence 
of any star in conjunction with them, and it may 
be remembered that the great war eclipse of 21st 
August, 1914, fell almost exactly upon Regulus. 
The ‘easiest method of interpreting such positions 
is to consider the nature of the star and also to 
expand its known influence in natal astrology to 
cover national events. Thus a star causing sickness 
in a nativity may produce an epidemic, and one 
conducing to murder may evoke a series of such 
crimes, just as Regulus in the case mentioned pro- 
duced a national warlike feehng instead of an 
individual one. It has also been said that fixed 
stars falling on the angles and indeed on any cusp 
in such maps stimulate the influence of the house 
• concerned in accordance with their natures, and 
probably the constellations situated on the angles 
or in the houses are also worthy of consideration. 



226 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


Before leaving the subject of mundane astrology 
it is necessary to add a few words on Novae or 
Temporary Stars. These are generally included by 
the old authors under the same heading as comets, 
and the same significations are applied to both. 
Their effect appears to be exerted through the con- 
stellation in which they appear, and also through 
the zodiacal sign and degree to which their position 
corresponds. They are said to cause inordinate 
heat, pestilences, sterility of the earth, wars and 
changes in kingdoms, winds, earthquakes and floods, 
and are assigned to the planets according to their 
colours. Those of the nature of Saturn cause 
mortality and beheading ; of Jupiter, abundance of 
com and fruit ; of Mars, war, fire, pestilence, 
drought and famine ; of the Sun, plague, sickness, 
and death of kings ; of Venus, drought and trouble 
to kings and women ; of Mercury, death of kings, 
nobles, literary people and youths, together with 
wars ; and, of the Moon, great mortality among the 
common people. 

The influence of such stars (and comets also) in 
the various zodiacal signs is as follows : 

In Aries. Evil to nobles, war, death of some 
king or of a great lady, drought, diseases affecting \ 
the head, ailments among sheep, dethronement of 
a king and rise of common people. If in the eastern 
part of the heavens when discovered it will operate 
sooner and cause wide-spread enmity ; but if in the 
western it will be slower causing trouble to kings, 
and rain, floods and snow in winter. 

In Taurus. Harm to cattle, great winds, destruc- 
tion of fruit and com, death of some great man, 



STARS IN MUNDANE ASTROLOGY 227 


and in winter cold, earthquake and pestilences. 
If in the east danger of war and sickness, if in the 
west much rain. 

In Gemini, Wars, incest, immorality, death of 
young people, abortive births, famine, storms and 
death of birds. If in the east, trouble to kings, 
and, if in the west, rain and floods. 

In Cancer. Destruction of crops and fruit by 
caterpillars and worms, war, death of some great 
person, rape, robbery, famine and pestilence. If 
in the east, scarcity of food towards the latter end 
of the year. If in the west, benefits to the public 
from their rulers. 

In Leo. Destruction by wild beasts and vermin, 
trouble to the nobility, war towards the end of the 
year, especially in the east, and ailments affecting 
the eyes. If in the east, storms and drought ; if 
in the west, sickness and danger of madness to dogs. 

In Virgo. Downfall of kings, trouble to merchants, 
fevers, abortive births. If in the east, war ; if in 
the west, poor crops. 

In Libra. Robberies, poverty, death of great 
people, plots and treachery, high winds, drought, 
earthquakes, scarcity of food. If in the east, 
trouble to countnes under Libra and deames§ of 
horses and mules ; if in the west, the contrary, 
but trouble with servants. 

In Scorpio. War, rebellion, death of some great 
man, drought, scarcity of crops, danger m childbirth. 
If in the east, drought and trouble through beasts ; 
if in the west, locusts. 

In Sagittarius. Trouble to nobility and lawyers, 
danger of war. 'If in the east, death of kings’ 



228 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


robbery and scarcity of food. If in the west, 
abortive births. 

In Capricorn. War,immoraKty, poisoning, death 
of kings, religious persecution, hail, snow, cold winter, 
famine and pestilence. If in the east, overthrow of 
governments, snow, much rain, damage to crops; 
if in the west, abundance of grass and water. 

In Aquarius. War, death of ah eminent eastern 
man or woman, epidemics, pestilence, storms. 
If in the east, abundance of grass ; if in the west, 
rumours of war. 

In Pisces. War amongst kindred, religious dis- 
putes, civil war, destruction of fishes and danger at 
sea. If in the east, universal enmity ; if in the west, 
anxieties and deaths amongst men in the western 
or north-western countries, continuing for three 
yearn ; floods and death of birds and fishes. 

In general the effects begin to appear at a much 
earlier date if the star is first seen in the east than 
they do when it appears in the west. Those places 
in which they are visible and those ruled by the 
sign in which they appear will feel the chief effect, 
which is most manifest when the Sun or a planet 
transits the place of their first appearance or the 
Sun comes to the conjunction of the planet whose 
nature they resemble. 

It is, I think, clear from the foregoing remarks 
that we have as yet touched only the fringe of the 
nature of stellar influence in mundane astrology, 
and until more is learnt our mundane predictions 
will remain in much the same incomplete and in- 
adequate state as they are at present. 



CHAPTER VII 


STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS IN MEDLEVAL MAGIC 

The magical ceremonies of all ages have been built 
upon an astrological foundation, and a knowledge 
of astrology was essential to the invocator and maker 
of talismans who had to perform his ceremonies 
under appropriate planetary configurations in order 
to obtain the desired results. Most of the magical 
ceremonies that have survived in any detail are 
mediaeval, and Hebrew in origin, having descended 
to us through the works of Cornelius Agrippa and 
others. These processes are largely tahsmanic in 
nature and consist in the construction of talismans 
under the influence of the seven planets known to 
the ancients. The fixed stars, lunar mansions, 
and constellations, however, were not ignored by 
the mediaeval magician, and, though their use was 
not by any means common, some account of the 
talismans and amulets consecrated to them has 
come down to us, and it is with these that I am at 
present concerned. 

For the benefit of any would-be dabbler in magic 
who should chance to read the following remarks 
I may add that I have never attempted to put 
any of the rules into practice, and include them here 
only for the sake of completeness and not through 
any assurance of their efficacy. 

In constructing a talisman it was usual to engrave 



230 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


the symbols and images upon some of the metal or 
stone ruled by the planet or star, and at the same 
time to add a text from the Hebrew scriptures that 
Was appropriate to the result desired. Should 
neither metal nor stone be available however, 
virgin parchment might be substituted. This pro- 
cess had to be done under the proper astrological 
conditions, and in the case of a planetary talisman 
it was essential for the planet concerned to be strong 
by sign, angular or elevated, and well aspected, 
especially by the Moon. Then the finished talisman 
was suffumigated and worn round the neck in a 
silk covering. In the case of the fixed stars the 
process was the same. The stars, or rather those 
used in magical ceremonies, were given magical 
seals, all of which will be found reproduced on p. 233* 
and- these seals were engraved on the image cut out 
of stone. The talisman was engraved at a time 
when the star or constellation was rising or otherwise 
strong by house position, and when it' was well- 
aspected or contained a well-aspected Moon. It 
was then worn round the neck if of a personal nature, 
or secretly conveyed into a house if it was designed 
to affect the inmate. In the case of the Lunar 
Mansions, it was customary to draw the image 
upon parchment or the metal specified, adding the 
name of the ruling spirit and offering up suitable 
prayers and invocations. 

We may now turn to a consideration of the magical 
effect, images, seals, and ruleiship over stones and 
plants of the fixed stars anti constellations. In 
the case of the latter the images used were those 
of the constellation figures. 



STARS IN MEDIEVAL MAGIC 231 


MAGICAL INFLUENCE OF CONSTELLATIONS. 

z. Andromeda. Gives love between husband 
and wife and reconciles adulterers. 

2. Aquila. Gives new honours and preserves the 

old. 

3. ” Ara. Gives chastity. 

4. Argo Navis. Gives security on the waters. 

5. Canis Major. Cures dropsy, resists plague, 

and preserves from beasts. 

6. Cassiopeia. Restores weak bodies and 

strengthens members. 

7. Centaurus. Gives health and long life. 

8. Cetus. Makes one amiable, prudent, happy 

by sea and land, and helps to recover lost 
goods. 

9. Cygnus. Frees from palsy and the quartan 

ague. 

10. Draco. Gives craft, ingenuity, and valour. 

11. Hercules. Gives victory in war. 

12. Hydra. Gives wisdom and riches, and resists 

poisons. 

13. Lepus. Guards against deceit and madness. 

14. Lyra. Preserves phrenetical and mad people. 

15. Ophiuchus. Drives away poisons and cures 

venomous bites. 

16. Orion. Gives victory. 



232 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


ly. Pegasus. Prevails against diseases of horses 
and preserves horsemen in battle. 

18. Perseus. Frees from envy and witchcraft 

and preserves from lightning and tempests. 

19. Ursa Major and Ursa Minor. Give craft* 

ingenuity and valour. 

MAGICAL INFLUENCES OF FIXED STARS. 

1. Am EB ARAN. 

Rules. Carbuncle, ruby, milky thistle, and 
" matry-silva." 

Image. The likeness of God, or of a flying man. - ' 
It is said to give riches and honour. 

2 . Alcol. 

Rules. Diamond, black hellebore, mugwort. 
Image. A human head cut off at the neck. It 
gives success to j>etitions, makes the wearer bold and 
magnanimous, preserves the body, protects against 
witchcraft, and turns evil and spells back upon those 
who work them. 

3. Algo rah. 

Rules. Stones of the colour of black onyx, burr, 
quadra ginus, henbane, comfrey, and the tongue of 
a frog. 

linage. A raven, snake or negro dressed in black. 

It makes the wearer angry, bold, courageous and a 
backbiter, gives bad dreams, the power of summon- 
ing or driving away evil spirits and protection from 
winds and the malice of men and devils. 

4. Alphecca. 

Rules. Topaz, rosemary, trefoil and ivy. 



STARS IN MEDIAEVAL MAGIC 233 


X 

ALDEBARAK 

>1—® ‘ 

Algol 

SS CM 

J J 03 

Algorab 

X\ 

Alphecca 

Orf^^T- 0 

l - 

1 r 

Antares 

b X 0 

Arcturus 

X 

Capella 

SI 

Denes Algedi 

•WU 

Pleiades 

Polaris 

y 

PROCYON 

MH 

Regulus 

Sirius 

K— 

Spica 

' X 

Wega 


THE MAGICAL SEALS OF THE FIXED STARS. 



234 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


- Image. A hen or crowned man. It gives 
chastity and the love and goodwill of men. 

5. Antares. 

Rules. Sardonyx, amethyst, long aristotochy 
and saffron, * - 

Image. A man armed with a coat of mail, or a 
scorpion. It gives understanding and memory, 
help against evil spirits, and the power of driving 
them away and binding them. 

6. Akcturus. 

Rules. Jasper and plantain. 

Image. A horse, wolf, or man dancing. It 
cures fevers, retains the blood and acts' as an astring- 
ent. 

7. Capeixa. 

Rules. ' Sapphire, horebound, mint, mugwort and 
mandrake. 

Image. A man playing musical instruments. 
It makes the wearer -honoured and exalted before 
nobility and cures the toothache. 

8. Deneb Algedi. 

Rules. Chalcedony, marjoram, mugwort, nip and 
mandrake root. 

Image. A hart, goat, or angry man. It gives 
prosperity and increased wrath. 

9. Pleiades. 

Rules. Crystal and the stone Diodocus, the herb 
Diacedon, frankincense, fennel and quicksilver. 

Image. A little virgin or a lamp. It strengthens 
the eyesight, assembles spirits, raises winds and 
reveals secret and hidden things. 


STARS IN MEDIAEVAL MAGIC 235 

10. Polaris. 

Rules, Lodestone, succory, mugwort, periwinkle 
flowerSxond the tootli of a wolf. 

Image. A pensive man, a bull, or a calf. It 
protects against spells- and renders the wearer 
secure in travel. 

11. pROCYON. 

Rules. The stone Achates/ flowers of marigold, 
pennyroyal. 

Image. A cock, or three little maids. It gives 
the favour of gods, spirits and men, power against 
witchcraft, and preserves the health. 

12. Regulus. 

Rules. Granite, sallcndine, mugwort and mastic. 
Image. A lion, cat, or an honourable person 
seated in a chair. It makes the wearer temperate, 
gives favour and appeases wrath. 

13. Sirius. 

Rules. Beryl, savine, mugwort, dragonwort and 
the tongue of a snake. 

Image. A hound or a little virgin. It gives 
honour, the goodwill and favour of men and the 
airy spirits, and the power to pacify nobles and 
others. 

14. Spica. 

Rules. Emerald, sage, trefoil, periwinkle i mug- 
wort and mandrake. 

Image. A bird, or a man laden with merchandise. 
It gives riches, overcomes contentions, and removes 
scarcity and mischief. 

15. Wega. 

Rides. Chrysolite, succory, and fumitary. 



236 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


Image. A vulture, hen or traveller. It makes 
the wearer magnanimous and proud, and gives 
power over beasts and devils. 


MAGICAL INFLUENCE OF ARABIC LUNAR 
MANSIONS. 

The following numerical order of the mansions 
corresponds to that given in Chapter III, the 1st 
mansion being taken to be A 1 Thurayya. 

1. For general good fortune and happiness. In 
a square table on a silver ring the image of a woman, 
well clothed, sitting on a chair, her right hand being 
lifted to her head. Sealed and perfumed with musk, 
camphor and calamus aromaticus. Ruling spirit, 
Anixiel. ' 

2. For revenge, separation, enmity and ill-mil. 
The image of a soldier sitting on a horse, and holding 
a serpent in his right hand. Scaled in red wax and 
perfumed with red myrrh and storax. Ruling 
spirit, Azariel. 

3. For royal and official favour and good enter- 
tainment. The head of a man, sealed in silver and 
perfumed with red Sanders. Ruling spirit, Gabriel. 

4. To procure love between two people. Two 
images embracing one another and sealed in white 
wax, and perfumed with lignum aloes and amber. 
Ruling spirit, Dirachiel. 

5. To obtain every good thing. A man well 
clothed holding up his hands in prayer, sealed in 
silver and perfumed with good odours. Ruling 
spirit, Scheliel. 



STARS IN MEDIEVAL MAGIC 237 


6. For victory in war. An eagle with the face 
of a man, scaled in tin and perfumed with brimstone. 
Ruling spirit, Amnedid. 

7. To cause infirmities. A mutilated man cover- 
ing his eyes with his hands, scaled in lead and 
perfumed with pine resin. Ruling spirit, Barbiel. 

■ 8. To facilitate child-bearing and to cure illness. 
A seal of gold bearing the head of a lion and perfumed 
with amber. Ruling spirit, Ardefitl. 

9. For fear, reverence and worship. A gold seal 
bearing the image of a man riding on a lion, his left 
hand holding its ear, and his right a bracelet of gold. 
Perfumed with good odours and saffron. Ruling 
spirit, Neciel. 

10. For the separation of lovers. A seal of black 
lead bearing the image of a dragon fighting with a 
man and perfumed with lion’s hair and asafeetida. 
Ruling spirit, Ahdizuel. 

11. For the agreement of married people. The 
images of a man in red wax and a woman in white 
embracing one another and perfumed with lignum 
aloes and amber. Ruling spirit, Jazeriel 

12 For separation and divorce. A seal of red 
copper bearing the image of a dog biting its tail 
and perfumed with the hair of a black dog and a 
black cat. Ruling spirit, Ergediel. 

13. For friendship and goodwill. A man sitting 
and writing letters, perfumed with frankincense and 
nutmegs. Ruling spirit, AiUel. 

14. For gaining merchandise. A silver seal bear- 
ing the image of a man sitting on a chair holding a 
balance in his hand and perfumed with pleasant 
spices. Ruling spirit, Azeruel. 



238 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


J 5 - Against thieves and robbers. An -iron seal 
earing the image of an ape and perfumed with the 
hair of a ape. Ruling spirit, Adriel. 

1 • Against fevers and venomous creatures. A 
copper seal^ bearing the image of a snake with its 
tail above its head and perfumed with hartshorn. 
Ruling spirit, Egibiel. 

For facilitating birth. A copper seal bearing 
the image of a woman holding her hands before her 
lace and perfumed with liquid storax. Ruling 
spirit, Amutiel. 


18. For hunting. A seal of tin bearing the image 
of a centaur and perfumed with the head of a wolf. 
Ruling spirit, Kyriel. 

19. For the destruction of someone. The image 

hltd.?*” ) nth ® doub l e countenance before and 
behind, and perfumed with brimstone and jet. 
Tits wns to be put in a box of brass together with 
brimstone, jet and the hair of the victim. Ruling 
spirit, Bithmtl. 5 

zo. For the security of runaways. An iron seal 
1 6 of a man with wings on his feet 

h » v ° n hlS head - and Perfumed with argent 
vive. Ruling spirit. Gelid. 

7 8I : F ° r destruction and wasting. An iron seal 
hearing the image of a cat with a dog’s head. This 
was perfumed with hair taken from a dog’s head 
and buned in the place where harm was intended. 
Ruling spirit. Requid. 

22. For multiplying herds of cattle. The image 
01 a woman and infant W'as branded with iron on 
tne horn of a ram, bull, goat or of the kind of cattle 



STARS IN MEDI/EVAL MAGIC 239 


neck of the leader of the flock or burnt into his 
horn. Ruling spirit, Abrinael. 

23. For the preservation of trees and harvest. The 
image of a man planting, sealed in the wood of a fig 
tree, perfumed with its flowers, and hung on the 
tree. Ruling spirit, Aziel. 

24. For love and favour. The image of a woman 
washing and combing her hair, sealed in white wax 
and mastic and perfumed with good odours. Ruling 
spirit, Tagriel. 

25. To destroy fountains, pits, medicinal water: 
and baths. An image in red earth of a winged mar 
holding in his hand an empty and perforated vessel 
The image, mixed with asafcetida and liquid storax 
was burnt and buried in the pond or fountair 
which it was desired to destroy. Ruling spirit 
Aiheniel. 

26. For catching fish. A copper seal bearing the 
image of a fish and perfumed with the skin of a sea- 
fish. This was thrown into the water where a catch 
was desired. Ruling spirit, Amnixiel. 

27. For the destruction of someone. In an iron 
ring sealed in black wax the image of a black man 
in a garment of hair and wearing a girdle, casting a 
small lance with his right hand. Perfumed with 
liquid storax. Ruling spirit, Geniel. 

28. For reconciliation with royalty. The image 
of a crowned king, sealed in white wax and mastic, 
and perfumed with lignum aloes. Ruling spirit, 
Enediel, 



CHAPTER VIII 


THE FIXED STARS IN ASTRO-METEOROLOGY 

No account of the astrological influences ascribed 
to the fixed stars would be complete without some 
mention of their effect upon the weather. In the 
17th century astro-meteorology occupied a prominent 
position and received a great deal of attention, but 
at the present time it has apparently ceased to in- 
terest any but the almanac maker, and its modern 
followers mostly practise the slipshod and almost 
useless method of noting the daily aspects in the 
ephemeris and predicting from those alone. 

In the old days it was customary to base the major 
■weather predictions upon the positions of the planets 
in the horoscopes for the entry of the Sun info the 
four cardinal signs Aries, Cancer, Libra and Capricorn, 
together with those for great conjunctions and 
eclipses. These general indications were then am- 
plified by a. study oi New AIooos, FuU Moons, 
Quarter Lunations and in some cases daily horo- 
scopes. 

It is no part of my present plan to describe the 
methods and rules at length, but merely to draw 
attention to the fact that in the following account 
of stellar influences the positions are understood 
to be those occurring at significant epochs, such as 



STARS IN ASTRO-METEOROLOGY 241 


Ingrcsscs and Lunations, and not merely daily 
transits. 

The general type of effect appears to follow the 
nature of the star. Thus the Sun being with Satur 
nian stars is said to indicate cold, rain or snow ; 
with Jupitcrian stars, a serene and temperate air ; 
with Martial stars, thunder-storms ; with Venusian 
stars, rain, moisture and mist; and, with Mercurial 
stars, wind. Much importance was attached to the 
rising and setting of stars, especially in their re- 
lationship to the Sun, and it is a well-known fact 
that the ancient Egyptians began their New Year 
at the time when Sirius rose with the Sun at the 
Summer Solstice and marked the beginning of the 
inundations. All the ways in which a star could 
rise or set with the Sun were carefully classified in 
very early times and given distinctive names, but 
only two need concern us here, namely, Mainline 
and Vespertine, the former of which is applied to a 
star that rises and sets before the Sun, and the latter 
to one that rises and sets after it. 

In addition to the individual star influences, the 
lunar mansion in which a lunation, ingress or con- 
junction fell was held to affect the weather in ac- 
cordance with its nature. The meteorological na- 
ture of each of the Arabic mansions has been handed 
down to us, and, beginning with A1 Thurayya, is as 
follows : r. Moist and cold ; more cold. 2, Dry. 
3, Temperate. 4, Moist. 5, Cloudy and tempest- 
uous. 6, Dry. 7, Moist. 8, Temperate and cold 
9, Moist. 10, Temperate. 11, Temperate. 12, Moist. 
13, Cold and moist. 14, Moist. 15, Dry. 16, Moist, 



2 4 z FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


17, Temperate. 18, Temperate. 19, Moist. 20, 
Temperate. 21, Temperate. 22, Dry. 23, Dry. 
24, Moist. 25, Temperate. 26, Temperate. 27, Dry. 
28, Moist. 

\Ve may now turn to the separate star influences, 
which, together with those of a few constellations, are 
as follows : 

Achernak. 

With Sun. Serene and temperate 
With Jupiter. Serene. 

Adhafera. 

With Mercury. Moist and windy. 

With Jupiter. Winds. 

Aldebaran. 

With Sun. Turbid, windy and wet. If risi 
with Sun, wind, rain, thunder and lightning. 

With Mars rising or setting. Turbulent, windy 
and often sultry weather. 

Algol. 

With Sun rising. Snow. 

With Saturn. Cold and moist. 

Alpkard. 

With Sun rising. Cloudy season. 

Alphecca. 

With Mars rising or setting. Turbulent, windy 
and often sultry weather, 

With Jupiter and afflicted by Mars. Wind and^ 
hail, thunder in summer, warmer in winter especially' 
if Jupiter be stationary. 

With Saium. Moist and cloudy, sometimes snow 
and rain. 



STARS IN ASTRO-METEOROLOGY 243 


Altair. 

If rising in evening. Tempests. 

With Sun rising. Snow. If matutine setting, 
great heat and south wind. 

Wilh Mercury. Snow or rain. 

With Mars. Rain, snow, great cold. If rising or 
setting, turbulent, windy and often sultry weather. 

With Jupiter and afflicted by Mars. Wind and 
hail, thunder in summer, wanner in winter especially 
if Jupiter be stationary. 

Antares. 

With Mars rising or setting. Turbulent, windy 
and often sultry weather. 

Akcturus. 

If there be showers at the matutine rising of 
Delphinus there will be none at the rising of Arcturus. 
If setting. South wind. 

With Sun. Vespertine rising, tempests; matutine 
setting, good weather and showers. 

With Mars. Strong winds, rain, thunder and 
lightning. If rising or setting, turbulent, windy 
and often sultry weather. 

With Jupiter and afflicted by Mars. Wind and 
hail, thunder in summer, warmer in winter especially 
if Jupiter be stationary. 

With Saturn. Wind and rain. 

Rising or setting with Sun, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter 
or Saturn, winds. 

Aselli. 

If the North Asellus be hid when the air is serene 
and clear it betokens great winds from the south ; ' 



244 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


but the South Asellus being hid betokens north- 
easterly winds. 

With Sun rising. Thunder and lightning, show- 
ers, cloudy season. 

With Venus. Moist sear 
Auriga. 

If rising. Rain. 

Castor. 

Rising or selling with Sun, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter 
or Satuxn, winds. 

Corona Borealis. 

If setting. Tempests. 

With Sun rising. Cloudy season. 

Delphinus. 

If at the matutine setting of Delphinus there be 
showers, there will be none at the rising of Arcturus. 

If setting. Wind and snow. 

With Sun rising. Winds. 

With Mars rising or setting. Turbulent, windy * 
and often sultry weather. 

With Jupiter and afflicted by Mars. Wind and 
hail, thunder in summer, warmer in winter especially 
if Jupiter be stationary. 

With Saturn. Moist and cloudy, sometimes snow 
and rain. 

Deneb Algedi. 

With Sun rising. Snow. 

With Mercury. Cold winds, snow, showers. 

With Mars rising. Moist. 

With Saturn. Moist and cloudy, sometimes snow 
and rain. 



STARS IN ASTRO-METEOROLOGY 245 


Denebola. 

With Sun rising. Cloudy season. 

With Mercury . Sudden change to wind and wet 
Graitias. 

With Sun rising. Cloudy season. 

With Mars. Cold, rain, snow. 

Hamal. 

If rising. Rain and snow. 

Hyades. 

If rising. Rain. 

If setting. Trouble by sea and land especially 
ii afflicted by Mars and Mercury. II matutine set- 
ting, rain and south wind. 

With Mercury. Winds, showers, thunder and 
lightning. 

With Venus. Moist season. 

With Mars. Great heat, clouds and moisture. 
If rising or setting, turbulent, windy and often 
. sultry weather. 

With Saturn. Wind, clouds, rain, thunder. 
Orion. 

If rising. West wind, turbid air. 

With Sun. Turbid, windy and wet. If rising, 
cloudy season, wind, rain, thunder and lightning. • 
With Mercury. Winds, showers, thunder and 
lightning. 

With Mars. Great heat. If rising or setting, 
turbulent, windy and often sultry weather. 

With Saturn. Wind and showers. 

Pleiades. 

If the Pleiades rise fine they set rainy, and if they 
rise wet they set fine (Swahili proverb.) 



246 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

If rising. West wind. 

Vespertine setting. South wind terminating in 
the west. 

With Sun. Wind and rain. If rising, east wind. 
II setting, north-north-east wind. 

With Mercury. Wind and rain. 

With Venus. Moist season. 

With Mars . Cloudy season. 

With Saturn. Troubled air, clouds, rain, snow. 

PHESiEPE. 

If Praessepe does not appear when the air is 
serene and clear it betokens foul, cold and winterly 
weather. 

With Sun rising. Thunder, lightning, showers, 
cloudy season. 

With Saturn. Wind, clouds, rain, thunder. 
Procyon. 

With Mercury. Winds, showers, thunder and 
lightning. 

With Mars. Great heat. If rising or setting, 
turbulent, windy and often sultry weather. 

Regulus. 

Matuiine rising. North-north-east wind- 
If setting. North 'wind and sometimes rain. 

With Sun. Thunder and lightning. If setting, 
west wind. 

With Mercury. Winds, showers, thunder and 
lightning. 

With Mars. Great heat. If rising or setting, 
turbulent, windy and often sultry weather. 

With Jupiter rising. Fair weather in winter, 
mitigates cold, increases heat in summer. 



STARS IN ASTRO-METEOROLOGY 247 

With Saturn. Thunder, rain, changeable weather. 
Sirius. 

If rising in evening, tempests. Matutine rising, 
produces heat, troubles the seas and changes all 
things. 

Vespertine setting. South and north-north-east 
winds. 

With Sun. Fair and warm, thunder and lightning. 
With Mercury or Saturn. Wind, rain, thunder 
and lightning. 

With Mars. Great heat. If rising or setting, 
turbulent, windy and often sultiy weather. 

Spica. 

With Mercury. Sudden change to wind and wet. 
With Mars rising or setting. Turbulent, windy 
and often sultry weather. 

With Saturn. Showers and thunder. 
Triangulum. 

Rising or setting with Sun, Mercury, Mars, Jupiter 
or Saturn, winds. 

VlNDEMIATRIX. 

If setting. North-north-east wind. 

Wega. 

With Sun setting. Cold and moist. 

With Mercury. Sudden change to wind and wet. 
With Mars rising or setting. Turbulent, windy 
and often sultry weather. 

With Saturn. Moist and cloudy, sometimes snow 
and rain. 



APPENDIX 


MATHEMATICAL FORMULAE 

X. TO FIND THE OBLIQUITY OF THE ECLIPTIC. 

Obliquity s= 23 0 27' 8.26' — 46.837' T — 
0.0085' T 2 4- 0.0017' T 3 where T is the time from 
1900 reckoned in centuries, being negative if earlier 
and positive if later. 

Example. Required the obliquity for 19Z3. 

Here T is positive and less than unity, being ,-50 
or .23, T 2 will therefore be .0529, and T 3 , .012167. 

Then— 46.837' x ( 4 - .23) *= —10.77251 

— 0.0085 x (+ .0529) = — 0.00045 

4 - 0.0017 X ( + .012167) — 4 - 0.00002 


— 10.77294 


Then 23 0 27' 8.26' — 10.77' = 23° 26' 57.49'. 

2. To find the Value of Precession 
Precession = 50.248' 4 - 0.000222' / 
where t is the time from 1900 reckoned in years, 
being negative if earlier and positive if later. 

Example. Required the precession for 1st Jan., 
1923. 

Here t is positive and equal to 23.0. 

Then 0.000222' x ( 4 * 23.0) — 4- 0.005 
Therefore 50.248' 4- 0.005 = 50.253'. 

248 t 



MATHEMATICAL FORMULAS 249 

3. To convert Time into Degrees. • 

Multiply the hours, minutes and seconds of time 

by 15. The result is the equivalent in degrees, 
minutes and seconds of space. 

Another method is to reduce the hours, minutes 
and seconds into minutes and seconds, to call the 
minutes degrees of space and the seconds minutes of 
time and to divide by 4. 

Example. The Right Ascension of Pollux in 
time is 7 h. 40 m. 25.4 s. Required its Right 
Ascension in degrees. 

7 h. 40 m. 25.4 s. reduced to seconds = 27625.4s. 
27625.4 X 15 = 4I438 i'.o = 115 0 6' 21.0'. 

By the alternative method 7 h. 40 m. 25.4 s. = 
460 m. 25.4 s. 

Then 460° 25.4' = 460° 25' 24.0' and this divided by 
4 gives 115 0 6' 21.0'. 

4. To convert Degrees into Time. 

Divide the degrees, minutes and seconds of space 
by 15. The result is the equivalent in hours, min- 
utes and seconds of time. 

Another method is to call the degrees of space 
minutes of time, and the minutes of space seconds of 
time, and multiply by 4. The seconds of space 
should, however, -first be converted into decimals of a 
minute. 

Example. The RA.M.C. when Sirius rises at 
London is 32 0 26'. Required the equivalent 
Sidereal Time. 

32 0 26' divided by 15 gives 2 h. 9 m. 44 s. 

By the alternative method : 



250 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


32° 26' call 
multiply by 

• 129 44 

*=» 2 h. 9 m. 44s. 

5. Given Right Ascension and Declination to 
find Longitude and Latit ud e. 

Pari x. 

Log. sine R.A. from cp or == (or log. cosine R.A. 
from 25 or V 5 ), 

+ Log. .cotangent Declination. 

— Log. tangent angle A. 

Part 2. ~ ~ 

If R.A. is less than 180° call it N, and if more than 
180 0 call it S. 

(1) R.A. and Dec. same name (i.e. both S or both N) 

A + obliquity of ecliptic (23 0 2y r ) = B. 

(2) R.A. and Dec. different names (i.e. one N and 

the other S), the difference between A and 
the obliquity of ecliptic (23 0 27') = B.’ 

If B exceeds 90 use the sine of its excess in Part 3 and 
the cosine in Part 4. The Latitude will then be of 
contrary name to the Declination. 

Part 3. For Latitude. 

Log. cosine A {arith. comp.) 

+ Log. cosine B 
+ log. sine Declination 
«=s Log. sine Latitude. 

Part 4. For Longitude. (See Note.) 

Log. sine A {arith. comp.) 

+ Log. sine B. 


m. s. 
32 26 
4 



MATHEMATICAL FORMUUE 


251 


-f Log. tangent R.A. from T or — (or log- 
cotangent R.A. from 25 or H ). 

- « Log. tangent Longitude from T Qr — (o r 
log. cotangent Longitude from 25 or VI). 

NOTE. 

1. In all 'cases where R.A. and Dec. are of the 
same name, and in those cases in which R.A. and 
Dec. are of different names but A is greater than the 
obliquity, the Longitude is obtained directly from 
Part 4. 

2. In those cases where the R.A. and Dec. are of 
different names hut A is less than the obliquity, the 
numerical result in degrees and minutes obtained in 
Part 4 must be applied as follows instead of as there 
shown : 

(а) If R.A. was measured from cp o 0 or ^ o° sub- 

tract result from SPo° or ^ o° respectively. 

( б ) If . was measured from 25 0° or ft o° sub- 

tract result from 90° and add the remainder 
to ^ o" or T 0° respectively. 

{The arithmetical complement of a log. is the number 
obtained by subtracting the log. from io.qqooo 
The quickest way to do this is to write down the 
numbers necessary to make each figure of the log, 
add up to 9 working from left to right, and making 
the last right-hand figure up to 10. Thus the arith. 
comp, of g.73492 is 0.26508). 

6. To find the Sidereal Time or Culmination 
of a Star. 

The Right Ascension of the star expressed in time 
is the Sidereal Time of its culmination. 



25“ FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 

7 . To find the Sidereal Time of the True 
Rising and Setting of a Star. 

A star can neither rise nor set if its declination ex- 
ceeds the co-latitude of the place. The co-latitude 
of any place is found by subtracting its latitude from 
90° Thus the latitude of London being 51° 32' 
its co-latitude wilfbe 90° — 51® 32' = 38° 28', and no 
star whose declination N or S is greater than this can 
either set (if in N dec.) or rise (if in S dec.). 

The following method gives true rising and setting, 
and the apparent or visible rising and setting will 
differ slightly owing to refraction and also to the 
fact that we are here concerned with the mean 
places of the stars irrespective of aberration, etc., 
but. the difference is so trifling as to be negligible. 

(1) Log. tangent Declination of star 
+ Log. tangent Latitude of place 

= Log. sine Ascensional Difference. 

(2) If Dec. of star is N, 90° + Asc. Diff. = H. 

If Dec. of star is S, 90° — Asc. Diff. — H. 

(Reverse the rule for places in S latitudes.) 

(3) For rising. 

R.A. of star — H = K.A.M.C. of rising. 

For setting. 

R.A. of star + H — R.A.M.C. of setting. 
(360° may be added to allow of subtraction 
or deducted if the sum exceeds that 
amount.) 

Convert the R.A. 3 I.C. thus obtained into Sidereal 
.Time by Formula 4. The resulting Sidereal Time 
may be looked up in a Table of Houses for the place 
to find what sign and degree occupy the Ascendant. 


MATHEMATICAL FORMULA- 


=53 


Example. Required the Sidereal Times ef true 
riiir.g and setting cj Sirius at Ijondon. 
Latitude of London *•* 51* 32'. R.A. Sirius » 
100* 24'. Dec. Sirius *» :6* S 36'. 

(x) Lop.'ten. xG* 3G* « 9 47 - 13 8 r } 

+ Log. Mu. 51 0 32* =» jo.09991 


« Log v sine 22* 2' r» 9.57429 


(2) II *» 90* 0' - 22* 2' « 67° 5S*. 

(3) R.A.M.C. of rising too* 24' — 67* 5S' 

32’ sG\ 

Sidereal Timcof rising is therefore 2h. 9m. 44 s. 
R.A.M.C. of setting ~ ioo° 24' + 67" 5S' 
iGS* 22'. 

Sidereal Time of setting is therefore 
xi h. 13 m. 2S s. 

Looking up these Sidereal Times in the Tables 
of Houses for London we find that Sirius rises with 
19 0 ft and sets with 25 0 y’T' A further reference 
to the Tables will show that when its ecliptic longi- 
tude, 13° £3, is rising the actual body of Sirius is 
in the 3rd House and docs not come to the Ascendant 
for over three hours. 

8, To CALCULATE THE ASPECTS TO THE BODY Or 
A Star. 

Owing to latitude aspects to the actual body of a 
star fall in quite different places from those to its 
ecliptic longitude, except in the eases of the square 
and opposition. These places may be found as 
follows : 



254 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS' 

(1) For opposition and square. These points are 

i 8 o° and go° from the star’s ecliptic 
longitude as usual. 

(2) For sextilc and trine. 

Log. cosine latitude of star [arith. comp.) 

-f Log. cosine 6o° (9.69897). 

. *= Log. cosine distance to be added to star’s 

longitude to obtain sinister sextile, and 
subtracted to obtain dexter sextile. 

The "points opposite to those so obtained 
are the trines. 

(3) For semisquare and sesquiquadrale. 

Log. cosine latitude of star [arith. comp.) 
+ Log. cosine 45 0 (9.84949) 

= Log. cosine distance to be added to star's 
longitude to obtain sinister semisquare, and 
subtracted to obtain dexter semisquare. 

The points opposite to those so obtained 
are the sesquiquadrates. 

(4) For any other aspect add the arith. comp, of the 

Jog. cosine of the star’s latitude to the log. 
cosine of the number of degrees in the 
aspect, adding the result to, and subtracting 
it from, the star’s longitude to obtain the 
places of the aspect. If the aspect is 
greater than 90° subtract it from jSo° and 
use the remainder. The result will then 
be the opposition point to the place of the - 
aspect. 

Example. Required the aspects to the body oj 
Sirius. 

Latitude of Sirius «= 39 0 S 35’. Longitude = 
ss 12 0 59'. 


MATHEMATICAL FORMULAE 


255 


(1) The opposition falls in H 12 0 59' and the 

squares in 12 0 59' and ^ 12° 59'. 

(2) For sextiles and trines : 

Log. cosine 39 0 35' ( arith . comp.) = 0.11312 
+ Log. cosine 6o° =9.69897 

Log. cosine 49 0 33' = g.81209 

Longitude of Sirius 25 12 0 59' 

+ 49° 33' 

Sinister sextile = ■njj 2 0 32' 

Longitude of Sirius - 22 12 0 59' 

49° 33' 

Dexter sextile = y 23 0 26' 

The trines will therefore fall in K 2° 32' 
and ul 23 0 26'. 

(3) For semisquares and sesquiquadrates : , 

Log. cosine 39 0 35' (arith. comp.) = 0.11312 
4- Log. cosine 45 0 = 9.84949 

Log. cosine 23 0 26' = 9.96261 

" Applying this distance to the longitude of Sirius 
as before we obtain n 19 0 33' and ft, 6° 25' as the 
places of the semisquares, and the opposition 
points 1 19° 33' aj id ss: 6° 25' as those of the sesqui- 
quadrates. 



-256 FIXED STARS AND CONSTELLATIONS 


9. To convert Right Ascension into Longitude 
without Latitude. 

Log. cosine obliquity of ecliptic (23° 27') 

*f Log. cotangent R.A. from or =2= (or log. 

tangent R.A. from £5 or n). 

= Log. cotangent long, from ^ or^ (or log. 
tangent long, from 25 or >•$). 

R.A. of o° <P = o°; of o° 25 «= 90°; 
of o° = 1S0 0 ; and of o° »1 = zjo 0 ' 
Example. Required the longitude corresponding 
to the R.A. oj Algol. 

R.A. of Algol «= 45 0 44'. 

Log. cos. 23 0 27’ 5= 9.96256 
Log. col. 45 0 44' =» 9.98888 


Log. cot. 48° 12' = 9.951 44 


Therefore the longitude equivalent is S 18 0 21' 



INT5EX v 

|a r*3rr f «HI ffrtlW'if K'Jel HrufJi'iil lit Jei», IW 
inter lil tern tnanfrj I' d imfl f/ 

Vt.mi r</nr«.n ly meant e] elu-A m 5/jr cf Cemtlevaticm mir le 
/.v> lei up /r?n «r e«» of i(j im;inil, Ki/ifj/; r» «inr(. 


Acherrar 
Aero* * 

AtttY-rft* 
Aculeu* 
Acerrtn 
A<!!u!na - 
.V.Kulapltjs 
Althenus — 


r»C« 

m 4. 116. 241 


». l»7. 


CIA* 


• 34 


II*. 117 
114. M3 


,1Sroi fifimi 

Agenx 

Albifeo • ii 

Akharr.rtb. see Ar.tunn 
Ak>one - • 14, 10S, 110 

AlJtbarao io5, no jij. 23*. 

. *JJ- *** 

Algenib • • * 103. 12a 

AlgenuM • • • tio. 123 

Algol io3. |2J. 232. 233 242. 

variability of. 17 
Algorab 112.123.232.233 
Al Halilain * - - - 27 

Al Hecka - • io3. 123 

Allirna - • 

Al Jabhah - 

AlWhalimain 
Atmach 
v Alnilam 

Alphabet. Greek 
AlpharJ - no. 130. 242 

Atphecca 122.131. 232, 233.342 
Alpberat* • - • 10s. 133 

Al Phere - - - 10S. 134 

Al Kukkabah, ate Polartt 
AlSetpha .... uj 
1 * 4 . 03 . *43 


■ IIO. 223 

- 203. Ill 

- 10S. 128 


Altair - - 

Altar. The. tee A fa 
Al Want 
Amatthea 
Amba - - • • t 

Andromeda 16, 231 Girdle, 
see JtlimeA , Head, see 
Alpheralf. Wt Foot, 
sec Almtuk ; Nebula, 
see Vertex. Alpha, 73. 


**9 


po.*rey4//4rrj}2 ; Beta, 

7 4- «X», see .tfirar*; 
Gamma. see Almark; 

31 M, see I’ertet 
Antares 112. 13b. 233. 234.243 
AntinoOs • - - * '*7 

Aotlu I'neumatlca - • 28 

Ape* «f the Sun's Way - 14 
Apis Indies • • . as 

Apollo see Caitor 
Apparatus Sculptoris • Cl 

Apus 28 

Aquarius, 28 I-eft Shoul- 
der. aee SaJalluuJ ; 
Idsht Shoulder, tee 
SaiaJmthb Alpha, 74, 

«X* . see Saialm'h* ; 
Beta, 74. 00. see SaJal- 
tuud . Gamma. 74; 
Della see S3a| . fcp- 
slton.90, Zeta, r.ta, 74 , 
Lambda. 83 ; Mu, Nu. 

74. 90 : XI. 1*1. 74 
Aquila. 29. 2ji . Alpha. 84. 
see All nr . Zct4. aee 
Dent 6 

Ara - . • - 29. 23* 

Arabic Mansions - 70. 236, 241 
Archer. The. see SafiltJnus 
Bow, see PoUt , l ace, 
see / o.Tfj and Manu • 
tnum , Tail see Tere- 
te Hunt 

AretophiUuc see Arcturut 
Arcturus 13. 112. 139. 233, 

„ . *34.243 

Argo Navis, 23, so, 231. 
Alpha, see Cunopm ; 

Eta. sec Foramen ; 
Kappa, aee Marheb. 
Aries 31. Alpha, 90, see 
Hamal ■ Beta, 75. 86, 

90, see SAar.ilan ; Gam* 
ma. 75. 9°; Delta, 


257 



258 ‘ INDEX 


Epsilon, 75 ; (33). 9° : 

(35). 87,90: (39). (41). 

90 

Arista, see Spied 

Armus - - - JI4, 141 

Arrow, The, see Sagitta. 

Ascella ... 114, 14 1 
Aselli .... 141, 243 
Asellu3, North - *• no, 142 

Asellns, South - . - ixo, 143 

Atlas, see Pleiades 
Auriga, 31, 244. Right 

Shoulder, see Menkoh- „ 
nan. Alpha, see 
Ca pella : Beta, see 

Menkaltnan- 
Azimech, see A returns 
Azure Dragon - * - 91 


Balaam's Ass — — — 142 

Balance, The, see Libra 
Balloon, The, see Globus 
&rostahcus 

Baten Kaitos - - io3, 145 

Ban — - - - 139 

Bear, The Greater, see Ursa 
Major The Lesser, see 
Ursa Minor. 

Beehive Cluster, see Prcrscrpe 
Bellatrix - - - -108,145 

Berenice’s Hair, see Coma 
Berenices 

Betelgeuze, - - ■no, 146 

Bird of Jove, see A Hair 
Bud of Paradise, see A pus 
Black Warn or - gi 

Bodtes, 32. Left Knee, see 
Areturus: Left Shoulder 
see Segtnus ; Spear- 
shaft, see Pnnceps ; 
Alpha, 81, see A returns ; 
Gamma, see 5^isui ; 
Delta, see Prmctps. 

Bos - ri4, 148 

Brandenburg Sceptre, see 
Sceplrum Brandtn- 

BuU^^he " see Taurus. 
North Eye. See Prtma 
Ilyadum ; North Horn, 
see El Hoik ; South or 
Following flora, see 


PAGE 

Al Hecka ; South or 
Left Eye, see Ald/baratt 
Bungula - - 12, ri2. 148 


Cals Sculptoris - * 33 

Caslum - 33 

Camelopardalis - p 33 

Camelus, see Camelopardalis 
Cancer, 25, 33, Cloudy 
spot of, x8S. Alpha, 

6ee Acubens ; Ga mm a, 
see A stilus, North; 
Delta, 78, see A stilus. 
South; Eta, Phi, 83; 

44 M, 71, 83, see Praesarps 
Canes Veuatici 34. srM. 
see Copula 

^Canis Major 25, 34. 231. 
Alpha, see Sinus 
Canis Minor, 35, Alpha, 
see Procyon 

Canopus ... no, 150 
Cape fla - - roS, 151, 233, *34 

Caphu - - - 11*. *53 

Capncoruus, 35. Alpha, 74. 

90, see Giedi ; Beta, 

74, 90, see DaUh ; Gam- 
ma, see Naskira : Delta, 
see Derub Algedi ; 
Epsilon, see Casts a ; 

Eta, see Armus ; 
Theta, see Dorsum ; 

Nu, Omicron. 90 ; P* 

90, see Oculus ; Kho, 

90, see Bos 

Capnins - 10S, 154 

Caput Algol, see Algol 
Caput Andromed®, see Alpherats 
Capnt Medusa, see Algol 
Carina - ... 30 

Cassiopeia, 36, 231. Mu, 13 
Castor - - 110,154,244 

Castro ... X14. 15* 

Cat, The, see Pehs 
CeLeno, see Pleiades 
Celestial Alphabet - - 242 

Centaarus, 36, 231. Alpha, 

12, see Bungula ; Beta, 
see Agena. 

Central Sun - - - - 14 

Cepheus, 37. Alpha, Gam- 
ma. Zeta, Nu, P>, 184 



P AGE 

Cerberus - - - . 37 

Cetus, 38, 331. Alpha, see 
Menkar ; Beta, see 
Dt/Ja ; Zet3. sco 
Dalen Kailas ; Omic- 
ron. ty 

Chained Woman, The, see 
A ndromeda. ' 

ChamrrJcon - - - 38 

Charioteer, The, see Auriga 
Charles's Oak, see Robur 
Carolinum 

Chela; • - - - 49 

Chemical Furnace, see For- 
nax Ckemica 

Cherub and Sword * - n6 

Chinese Mansions - - 88 

Cingula Orionis • • 136 

Circinus .... 38 
Cities, Meridian degrees o! 224 
Cloud, The Greater and 
Lesser, see Nubecula 
Major and Minor 
Clusters - - - 15, 103 

Colour - 9 s 

Columba Noas. 39. Alpha, 
see Phacl 

Coma Berenices - 39 

Comets ----- 226 
Compasses, The, see Circtmcs 
Constellations, 18, 20, 22 , 
ancient, 32 ; boundar- 
ies, *9 ; influence, 22, 

231 ; zodiacal, 25 

Copula - - r no, J57 

Cor Hydra, see Alphard 
Cor Leonis, see Regulus 
Corolla, seejCorona Australis 
Corona Australis - - 39 

Corona Borealis, 40, 244. 

Alpha, see Aiphecca 
Cor Scorpio, see Antares 
Cor Serpentis, see Vnukalkat 
Cams, 40. Beta, Gamma, 

89 ; Delta, 80, 89, see 
Algor ab ; Epsilon, 89 
Crab, The, see Cancer. 
Breast, see Pmscepe ; 

Claw, see Acubens. 

Crane, The, see Grus. 

Crater, 41. Alpha, 89; 

Delta, see Labrum. 


^ . 2 59 

PA GB 

Crib, see Prasape , 

Cross, The, see Crux. 

Crow. The, see Corvus. 

Wing, see Algorab. 
Crown, The Northern and 
Southern, see Corona 
Borealts and 'Australis. 
Crux. 4 1 . Alpha, see A crux 
Culmination d! stars , - - 35) 

Cup, The, see Crater 
Custos Messium - 42 

Cygnus, 42, 231, Alpha, 

185, see Deneb Adige ; 

* Beta, seeAlbirgo ; Delta 
185 ; Nova, t8 
Cynosura, see Polaris. 

Dabih - 114, 137 

Degrees, conversion into 
time - 249 

Delphwus, 42, 244. Beta, 84 
Deneb - - -114,158 

Deneb Adige- - -114,159 

Deneb Algedi 114, t59, 233. 

_ t , 234.244 

Denebola - no. r6o, 245 
Difda - - - 108, 162 

Dirah .... no, 163 
Directions - - - 9 7 

Dog, The Greater, see Cams 
Major 

The Lesser, see Corn's 
Minor 

The Little, see Procyon 
Dog Star, see Struts 
Dolphin, The, see Delphmus 
Dorado - 43 

Dorsum - - - 114, 163 

Draco, 43, 231. Alpha, 185 ; 

Beta, see Rastaban ; 

Theta, Iota, Kappa, 185 
Dragon, The, see Draco 
Nebulous star in Eye, 
see Rastaban 

Dnver, The - 123 

Eagle. The. see Aouita 
Neck, see <4 Hair ; Tail, 
see Deneb 

Eclipses, effect of 225 

Electra, see Pleiades 
Electrical Machine, see 
Mac Aina Elecinca 



26 o 


. - PACE 

El Melik, see Sadalme'ik 
Ei Nath - io 3 , 164, 222 
End of the River, The, 
see Achemar 

Ending', The ... 

Engonasi s, see Hercules 
Basis - 10S, 165 

Equuleus - - ' - * 44 

Equuleus Hctoris - - 44 

Endanus, 44, Alpha, see 

Achemar 

Erratic Stars « « - n 


Fades ... 1x4, x6j 
Falling Grype or Vulture 51,216 
Felis ..... 44 
Fish, The Southern, see 
Piicis Australis 
Fishes, The. see Pisces 
Flavius, see Endanus 
Fly, The Northern and 
Southern, see Musca ■ 
Borealis and Australis 
Flying Fish, The, see Ptsws 
Volans 

Flying Grype or Vulture - 29 
Flying Horse, The see Pegasus 
Foal, The, see Equuleus 
Fomathaut - 114, 165 

Foramen ... 212, 167 
Fornax Chemica - 45 

Fox and Goose, see Vul- 
pecvla el A user 

Fredenei Honores - - 45 

Frons Scoipii, see Graffias 


Gemini, 45. Bright Foot, 
see Alhcna , Forward 
Foot, see Dirah. Alpha, 

71, see Castor ; Beta, 

71. 77, 88, see Pollux ; 
Gamma, 7r, 88, see 
Alhena ; Delta, see 
XT as at ; Eta, see Trial ; 
Iota, see Propus ; Mn, 
see Dir ah 

George's Harp, see Psal- 
- terium Georgia mint 
Giant, The, see Orion 
Giedj .... IT4, 167 
GiraSe, The, see Camtlopar- 


Ciobns Alrostatfeu! - - 46 

Goat, The, see Capri comas. 
Back, see Dorsum ; 
Belly, see Castra ; Face, - 
see Bm: Heart, see 
jf Annus ; Horn, see Gieii. 

■ Left Eye, see Dabih; 
Right Eye, see Oculus : 


Tail, see Deneb Algedi 
. and Nashtra 
Goldfish, The, see Dorado 
G raffias - -112,169,243 

Graving Tool. The. see Calum 
Gras .... - 46 


Hamal - 1 08, 170, 243 

Han - IXJ. 171 

Hare, The. see Lepus 
Harvest- Keeper, The, see 
Gustos Messium 

Hen, The - - - - **9 

Hercules, 14, 46, «*■ fSee 
also Pollux). Zeta,r 5; 
lota. Tan, 185 
Herdsman, Ihe, see Bodies 
Hindu Mansions - - 7 6 

Holy Grad - - - - *73 

Horologium Osaliatonam - 47 
Horoscope, The - "47 

Horoscopes : SheVey, 30 ; 
Ex-Kaiser. 104 1 Em- 
peror of Austria, ioj; 
Dog-bites, igt 
Horse, The. see Pegasus. 

Navel, see Alpherati 
Hunter, The, see Orion. 

Hunting Dogs. The, see 
Canes Venohci- 
Hyades, 245, see Prtma 
Hyadum 

Hydra, 47, 23r. Heart, see 
A ip hard. Alpha, 83 , 
see Alphard ; Delta, 

88 , Epsilon. 78 ; 

Upsiinn, 88 

Hydras - - - - 47 


Indian, The, see Indus 
Indus - - - - - 40 

Isidis .... rr2, 172 


Kennel of the Barking Dogs 318 



INDEX ‘ z6i 


Keyhole Nebula - - 167 

Khambalia - - 112. 173 

Kneeling Man, The, see 
Hercules 

Labrum - - - Uo, 173 

Lacerta • - - - 48 

Le Messier ■ • » • 41 

Leo, 48. Alpha. 71, 79, see 

liegulus : Beta, 72, 79 - 
see Denebola ; Gamma, 

13. 71 ; Delta, 71, 79. 
see Zosma ; Epsilon, 
sceA/genubi ; Zeta, 71, 

See Aahaftra ; Eta. 71, 
see A I Jabhah ; Theta, 
Lambda, 71 

Leo Minor - 49 

Lepus • - - - 49. 231 

Lesath ... 1*2. 173 

Level and Square, see 

Norma et Itegula 
Libra, 49. Alpha, 72, 8 1. 

89, see Scale, South ; 

Beta. 72, 89, see Scale 
North. 

Light Years - - - 12 

Lilith - - - - 124 

Line of Right Ascension - 96 
Lion, The. see Leo. Back, 
see Zosma ; Heart, see 
Regvlus ; Mane, see 
Adha/era and Al 
Jabhah , Mouth, see 
Algenubt ; Tail, see 
Oenebola 

Lion, The Lesser, see Leo 
Minor 

Liverpool, eSect of stars on, 

222, 224 

lizard. The, see Lacerta 
London, effect of stars on 

222, 223 

Longitude, correction of » 106 
Lost Pleiad - - - 182 

Lunar Mansions 68, 236, 241 
Lupus ' 50 

Lynx • 50 

Lyra, 50, 231. Alpha, 84, 

185, see Wega 

Machiaa Electnca - • 51 


Macbiaa Pneumatica - - 28 

Maia, sec Pleiades 
Mains - - * . - 30 

Manger, see Prasupe 
Manubrium - . 114, 173 

Manzils - * • . >70 

Mare Ass - 143 

Mariner's Compass, sec Pyxis 
Na utica 

Markab - 114, X74 

Markeb - no, 173 

Matutine - -■‘241 

Medusa’s Head, see Algol 
Menkalman • . xio, X75 

Menkar - - . - jo8, x66 

Mensa - 52 

Metope, see Pleiades 
Microscopium - 51 

Milky Way, 15 See Via 
Lactea 

Mintaka - - - 108, 177 
Mira ..... j- 
Mirach - 108, 178 

Monoceros - - - 23, 51 

Mons Mxnalus - . - 52 

Jfons Meass - - - 32 

Mundane Astrology, 220 et seq. 
Mnsca Australis and Borealis 52 


Nakshatras - . 70 

Nan Ho 35 

Nashira - - - 114, 179 

Natures of Stars - - - 97 

Nebula, t 6, 103. Andro- 
meda, see Vertex ; 
Archer's Face, see 
Fanes ; Arroiy-head 
of Sagittarius, see 
Spiculum ; Onon, see 
Ensis , Ship’s Stern, 
see Foramen , Shag 0/ 
Scorpio, see Aculeus 
and Acumen , Tail of 
Great Bear, see Copula 
Night Owl, The, see Noclua 
Noah’s Dove, see Co,untba 
Noce 

Noctua . c 3 

Norma et Regula . - 53 

Nova, 18, 226 Cygni, 

Nubecula Major and Minor st 
Nobes, see Nubecula 



z 62 - IKPEX 


Obliquity oi Ecliptic - 248 
' Octans Hadlelanus - - 53 

Oculus - 114, 180 

Officina T> pographica . 54 
Ophmchus, 54. 231. Head, 
see Iiasalhague } .Left 
Knee, see Han and 
Safcift, Alpha, see 
Iiasalhague ; Delta, see 
Yed Prior ; Zeta, see 
Han} Eta, see Sabik ; 

* * Nu. see Sinistra 

Orbs of Influence - - 103 , 

Qtioa, <,S> » MS* Belt, 

see Cingula Orionis ;■ 

Left Foot, see Rtgel : 

’ Left Shoulder, see 
Bellatrix ; Nebula, see 
Ensis ; Right Shoul- 
der, see Bele/geute. 
Alpha, 77, see Betel- 
geuee ; Beta, see 
Rtgel ; Gamma, see 
Bellatrix ; Delta, see 
Mtnlaka; Epsilon, see 
Atmtam; Theta, 70, 

88 ; Lambda, 70, 76, 

83 ; 42 M, see Ensis. 


FACE 

Pictor - - * - 44 

Pisces, 57, 7eta, 86 : Eta, 
sec Al Pherg _ v * 

Piscis Australis, 57. Alpha, 
see Fomalfiaut 

Pisris Volans ... 58 

Pleiades, 14 , 15, i8t. 233, 

234. *45 

Pleione, see Pleiades 
Polaris, 12, :o8, 184, 233, 235 
Pole Stars - - - *84 

Polis .... 112, *85 
Pollux - - - no. (85 

Presscoe - ixo,. 187,. 34.6 

Precession - xj, 13, 106, 248 

Pnma Hyadum - - 108, 188 

Prill ceps - - - 112, 19° 

Printing Office, see Officina 
Typographic 

Procyon no, 191, 233, 235, 240 
Proper Motion ... S3 
Propus - - *110, 193 

Psalterium Georgianum * 58 
Pnppis .... 30 
Pyxis Nautica - - - 58 


Quadra Euclidis - * 53 

Quadrans Mural is - - j9 


Painter's Easel, see Equvleus 
■Pi ctoris 

Parallax - 13 

Pa vo • 55 

Peacock, The, see Pavo 
Pegasus, 56, 231. Wing, 
see Algcnib and 
RIarkab Alpha, 74, 

85. 90, see Marhab ; 
Beta, 74, 90, see Reheat ; 
Gamma, 74 85, 90, see 
Algentb ; Delta, 74, 90; 
Epsilon, Theta, go 
Pelagus - - - X14, 180 

Pendulum Clock, see 
Horologium Osctllatormm 
Perseus, 56. 232. Sword 
Hand, see Capulus. 

Beta, see Algol} 

33 Ijl v l» see Cnpulus 
Phact - 10S, 181 

Phoruli - 56 


Radial Motion - - 13, 14 

Ram, The, see ./fries. Fol- 
lowing Horn, See 
Hama! \ North Horn, 
see Shot at on 

Rasalhague - - Ul, 193 

Rastaban - XI2, 194 

Red Bird - - - - 91 

Kegulns, no, 294, 221, 224. 

225, 233, 233, 246 
Reindeer, The, see Tartrndus 
Reticulum Rhomboidalis 59 
Rhomboidai Net - - 59 

Rigel - - XOS, 197, 223 

Right Ascension, conver- 
sion into longitnde 250, 256 
River, The, see EndanuS 
Robur Carohrium - - 59 

Rome, influenced byRegulns 221 
Royal Stars 119, 135, »6j, 19J 

Sabik - ^ - XT2, 199 

Sadalmehlc -tsg.zoo 



INDEX 263 


Sadalsuud - • 114, 202 

Sagitta * - - - 59 

Sagittarius, 60. Gamma, 

89: Delta, 83, 89; 
Epsilon, 89 ; Zeta, 73, 

83, see A sc el! a] 
Lambda, 89; Mu, 89, 
see Polls', Omicron, 
see Manubrium ; Pi, 

73 ; Sigma, 73. see 
Pelagus; Tan, 73 ; PM 
73, 8g ; Omega, see 
Terebellum ; 8 M, 20M, 
aiM, see Spiculum ; 
22M, see Fanes 
Scale, North 112,203,222 

Scale, South xiz, 205, 222 

Scales, The, see Libra 
Scalptorium - 33 

Sceptre and Hand of Justice 48 
Sceptnim Brandenburgicum 60 
Scheat - -114,206 

Scorpio, 60. Alpha, 73, 82, 

89, see Antares ; Beta, 

73, 89, see Graffias ; 
Delta, 73, 81, 89. see 
Isidis : Epsilon, Zeta, 

Eta, Theta, Iota, Kap- 
pa, 89 ; Lambda, 73, 

8z, 89 : Mu, 89 ; Pi, 

73, 89 ; Rho, Sigma, 

Tau, 89 ; Ups>lon, 73, 

89, see Lesath , 6M, see 
Acultus ; 7M, see 

Acumen. 

Scorpion, The, see Scorpio. 
Claws, 49 ; Head, see 
Graffias ; Heart, see 
Antares , Sting, see 
Lesath 

Sculptor - 61 

Scutum Sobiescianum - 61 
Seated Woman, The, see 
Cassiopeia 

Seginus - - - 112, 207 

Serpens, 61. Alpha, see 
Unukalhai. Heart or 
Neck, see Unukalhai 
Serpentanus - * - 54 

Serpent-Bearer, The, see 
Ophiuchus. 

Sextans Urania; - - - 62 


PAGE 

Sharatan ... 108, 207 
Shiloh, see A tttares 
Ship, The, see Argo Navis. 
Buckler, see Markeb \ 
Stem, see Foramen. 
Shwuy IVei - - - - 35 

Sieu - .... 70 

Sinistra - -112,208 

Sinus v 13, no, 20S, 233 
„ 235, 247 

Skat .... 1 14,^10 
Smat .... - 139 

. Snake, The, see Hydrus 
Sobieski's Shield - - 61 

Sohtanus - 53 

Solitary Thrush, The, see 
Noctua 

So this, see Sinus ' 

Southern Cross, see Crux 
and A crux 

Southern Fish, see Piseis 
Australis 

Mouth, see Fomalhaut 
Sparrow, The Cunous - 28 
Spica 1x2, 211, 233, 235, 247 
Spiculum - H2, 212 

Spiral Nebula - - - 157 

Stars, nature 11, 94: dis- 
tances, 12 ; motion, 

13 ; double, binary, 
etc , 15 , colour 16, 98 ; 
magnitudes, 16. 93 ; 

vanable, 17 , classifi. 
cation, 18 ; unformed 
or scattered, rg ; 
names, ig , catalogue 
names, etc., 20 ; in- 
fluence, 92 , position 
eflect, 93, 95, angular 
95 : aspects, 95, 253; 
orbs oi influence, 103 ; 
rising and setting. 

96, 252 ; directional 
effect, g7 , rules for 
use, 103, magical in- 
fluence, 232 ; seals, 

233 1 weather effect, 

241 

Sterope, see Pleiades 
Swan. The, see Cvgnus, 
Head, szs Albirco, Tail, 
see Deneb Adige. 



264 - 


INDEX 


.. Table Hours lain, The, see 
Mont Mensai Z 
Talismans, construction of 229 
Tarandus - - . - - 62 

Tarot Trumps, 27. 29, 3**37, 

40. 42, 43, 46-48. 5 o, 

_ 5*. 54-57. 60. 6 *. 6 3. 65-67 

Taurus, 62 . Alpha, 70,-76.,. 

88, -ice Atdcbaran ; 
Beta, see TJ Hath ; 
Gamma, see JPnma 
/{yadurn , Epsilon, 88, 
Zeta, see At Hecka ; 

* _ Eta. 70. j6, 88, see Al- 
cyone See also Pleiades 
Taurus Pooiatowi - • 

Taygete, see Pleiades 
Teiat" - no, 213 

Teiescopium, 63 Beta, 89 
Telescopium Herscheln - 64 
Temennu - - • - - 119 


- 114. «3 

Thoth, see Sirttis 

Tigris 50 

Time, conversion into degrees 

249 

Toucan, The, see Tueana 
Triangulum - - 64, 247 

Triangulum Australe - 64 

Triangulum itinor - - 64 

Tseen Lang, see Si him 
T seih She 

Tseih She Ke - - 

Toeana • 

Turdus Sohtanus 
Twins, The, see Gemini 


- *24 


- 53 


Unicom, The, see ATonoctros 
Universe, shape of - - >5 

Unukalhai - - -112,213 

Ursa Major - - 65, 232 

Ursa Minor, 6 3 , 232 Alpha, 
see Polans , Beta, 185 


: BVga 


Vega, 

Vela 3* 

Vernal Equinox and religions 220 
Vertex - - -108.214 

Vespertine - - - ,, * *4* 
Via .Lac tea. 66. See Milky 


Vindemiatrir, - no, 2 $ 4 , 247 

Virgin, The, see Virgo Left 
Foot, see Khombaho ; 

' Bight Wing, see Vtnde- 
tniatrix ; South Wing, 
see Zatuah ; Spike, see 
Spica. 

Virgo. 66 Alpha, 72, 80, 

89 see 5ptta ; Beta, 72, 
seeZavijava ; Gamma, 

72, see Caphir ; Delta. 


72 , Epsilon, 72, see 
Vt ndemialnx ; Zeta, 


,.Eta 72, s tnZanxah’. 
Iota, Kappa, 72, 89; 

» Lambda, see Kham- 
• balm ; Upsilon, 89 
Volan*, see Piscis Volant 
Vulpecnlaet Anser - *' 67 

Vultur Cadens - - 31, 2*6 

Vultur Volans ... 29 


Wasat ... no, 216 
Watcher of the East, 119 ; 
North, 195 , South, 165 
West. 136 

Water Dog - - * 35 

Waterman, The see Aquarius 
Water Snake, The, see Hydra 
Wega, 114, 185, 207, 233 

235. 247 

Whale, The see Cel. is 
Belly ‘eeBaten Kaitos , 

Jaw. seeMenkar . Tail, 
see Dtfda 

Wheat-car of Virgo, see Spica 
Whirlpool Nebula - 157 

White Tiger - - - 91 

W'oli, The see Lupus 
Wonder Bird, The Little 28 


Yed Pnor 


!, 218 


Zona Andromeda!, see 

Zubenelgenubi, see l 
South 

Zobeneschamali *8, < 



