HAROLD  B.  LPF  .: AKY 

BRIGH AM  YO IJ  N  a  V  BRSITY 

PROVO,     UIaH 


HAROLD  B.  LEE         .-ARY 

BRIGHAM  YLHjN:;   V  .jrvHRSITY 

PROVO,     UIaH 


f\ 


v^^ 


PRACTICAL 

ASTROLOGY 

A  Simple  Method  of  Casting-  Horoscopes 

The  Language  of  the  Stars 


EASILY    COMPREHENDED 


BY 

Comte  C.  de  Saint=Germain 

Author  of  "The  Study  of  Palmistry"  (for  Professional  Purposes), 
"Practical  Hypnotism,"  "Practical  Palmistry,"  etc. 


Unfolding   the    wonderful  wisdom  of    the  Chaldean,    Egyptian, 
Greek  and  Arabian  astrologers,  without  any  of  the  compli- 
cated, discouraging  operations  required  by  other  methods 


With  a  History  of  Astronomy  and  Numerous  Illustrations 
and  Portraits,  especially  designed  tor  this  work 


CHICAGO 
LAIRD  &  LEE,  Publishers 


ENTERED  ACCORDING  TO  ACT  OF  CONGRESS, 
IN  THE  YEAR  1901, 

By  WILLIAM  H.  LEE, 

IN  THE  OFFICE  OF  THE  LIBRARIAN  OF  CONGRESS, 
AT  WASHINGTON,  D.  C. 


ALZ    RIGHTS    RESERVED 


THE  LIBRARY 

BRIGHAM  YOUNG  UNIVERSFTY 

PROVO,  UTAH 


Table  of  Contents 


Preface 
Chapter  I. 
II 


What  is  Astrology  ? 

The  Planets  and  the  Zodiac, 

III.  The  Signs  of  the  Zodiac, 

The  Four  Typical  Temperaments, 

IV.  The  Planets,    .  . 

The  Synbols  of  Planets,  etc., 

V.  •   The  Twelve  Solar  Houses, 

VI.  The  Thirty-six  Decans,    . 

VII.  The  Zodiacal  Calendar,  . 

VIII.  The  Aspects,   .... 

IX.  The  Cyclic  Tables  of  the  Years, 

X.  Yearly   Horoscopes, 

XI.  Meanings   of   the  Planets   in   the 

Houses,        .... 

XII.  Casting  a  Horoscope, 

Table  of  the  Major  Arcanes,    . 
Table  of  Starting  Points, 
Fatidic  Circles, 
The  Major  Arcanes, 
The  Minor  Arcanes, 

XIII.  A  Short  History  of  Astronomy, 


Solar 


PAGE 


1G8 


List  of  Illustrations 


PAGE 

The  Sculptured  Zodiac  of  Denderah,            .          ,          Frontispiece 

Tycho  Brahe's  Mural  Quadrant,         ..... 

The  Signs  of  the  Zodiac,     ....... 

The  Constellations  of  the  Northern  Sky,     .... 

The  Constellations  ol  the  Southern  Sky,      .... 

The  Four  Trinocracies,        ....... 

The  Twelve  Constellations  of  the  Zodiac,    from  page  23  to 

60  ' 

The  Planetary  Globes,          ....... 

The  Thrones  of  the  Planets,        ...... 

The  Solar  Houses,       ........ 

94 -^ 

The  Aspects,       ......... 

The  Planets  Seen  Through  a  Telescope,       .... 

Figure  of  Victor  Hugo's  Horoscope,    ..... 

Figure  of    Horoscope,          ....... 

The  Major  Arcanes,    ....         from  page  186  to 

The  Minor  Arcanes,    .          .          ,          .         .    "       '*    230  to 

Ptolemy,     .......... 

Diagram,  showing  apparent  equal  size  of  sun  and  mooHj 

Copernic,   ......... 

Tycho  Brahe,       ......... 

Galileo    Galilei,           ........ 

John  Kepler,       ......... 

Isaac  Newton,     ......... 

William  llerschel,       .         ,         .         .         ,                   .         . 

PREFACE 

This  volume  Is  intended  to  fill  a  want  not 
yet  covered  by  works  published  on  the  sub- 
ject. The  methods  usually  employed  in- 
volve calculations  with  the  longitudes  and 
latitudes  of  the  moon,  the  declinations  of  the 
planets,  etc.,  or  they  are  based  on  strange 
theories,  often  discouraging  to  the  reader. 

In  this  book  the  material  with  which  the 
astrologer  works,  is  made  familiar  to  the 
student  in  the  most  systematic  and  easy 
manner,  while  the  art  of  casting  horoscopes 
is  reduced  to  a  set  of  operations  as  simple 
as  that  of  consulting  a  dictionary.  This  is 
accomplished  by  numerous  diagrams  and 
tables,  and  by  a  full  interpretation  of  the 
"Arcanes,"  those  wonderful  old  symbols. 

"  There  are  more  things  in  heaven  and  earthy 
Than  are  dreamt  of  in  your  philosophy  I' 
says  Hamlet.  Astrology,  to-day  denounced 
by  scientists,  may  be  in  universal  favor  to- 
morrow. It  certainly  is  an  instructive  and 
interesting  study,  from  which  even  the 
skeptic  may  derive  an  amusing  diversion. 

That  the  book  may  prove  a  welcome  help 
to  all,  whether  they  believe  in  the  strange 
and  fascinating  language  of  the  stars,  or 
not,  is  the  sincere  wish  of 

The  Publishers. 


TYCHO  BRAKE 

In  his  beautiful  Observatory  Uraniborg,  built  by  hiin  on  the  island  of 
Hven,  Denmark,  i58o.  In  the  foreground  is  seen  the  famous  Mural 
Quadrant. 


PRACTICAL  ASTROLOGY 

CHAPTER    I 

WHAT  IS  ASTROLOGY? 

Among  all  the  sciences  and  arts  which 
claim,  justly  or  not,  to  reveal  man  or 
woman's  nature  and  to  open  the  mysterious 
book  of  the  future,  there  is  none  more  justi- 
fied in  its  pretensions  than  the  oldest  of  all 
the  sciences,  the  science  of  astrology. 

Its  antiquity  and  the  high  standing  of  the 
men  who  have  believed  implicitly  in  its 
revelations,  force  even  the  most  skeptical  to 
grant  it  a  certain  amount  of  the  respect 
which  they  begrudge  to  Palmistry,  Car- 
tomancy (the  reading  of  the  future  in  cards), 
or  Phrenology.  Although  it  might  seem  to 
the  unbeliever  as  if  the  great  progress  of 
modern  Astronomy  had  removed  from  their 
proud  position  the  astronomers  of  ancient 
Assyria,  Egypt  and  Greece,  it  so  happens 
that  the  more  recent  discoveries  among  the 
ruined  tombs  of  the  early  Egyptian  kings — 

built  some  4,800  years  before  Christ — have 

10  ASTROLOGY 

furnished  us  with  the  most  positive  proofs 
that  the  great  astrologers  of  those  days 
were  almost  as  deeply  conversant  with  the 
principles  of  our  solar  system  as  the  astron- 
omers of  the  present  century,  allowance 
being  made,  of  course,  for  the  fact  that  they 
had  no  telescopes  to  assist  them  in  their 
researches  in  the  firmament. 

Now,  the  Chaldean,  Egyptian  and  Greek 
ASTRONOMERS  were,  also,  astrologers,  that 
is  to  say,  while  understanding,  in  the  main, 
the  positions  of  the  stars  and  planets  as 
correctly  as  we  do  since  the  rediscoveries  of 
Kepler,  Copernicus  and  Newton — they  also 
believed  that  these  heavenly  bodies  exert 
over  every  human  being  a  powerful  influ- 
ence for  good  or  evil,  from  the  day  of  birth 
to  the  hour  of  death,  an  influence,  which,  of 
course,  personal  conduct  will  strengthen  or 
decrease. 

In  our  time  of  skepticism  and  agnosticism 
it  is  not  strange  that  the  claims  of  astrology 
are  laughed  at,  but  it  is  certainly  a  study 
that  has  lost  none  of  the  powerful  fascina-^' 
tion  which  it  has  exerted  over  the  greatest 
men  throughout  the  7,000  or  8,000  years  of 
which  we  know  anything,  and  the  vast  num- 
ber of  well-authenticated  fulfillments  of 
prophecies  by  astrologers  will  surely  go  far 


WHAT    IS   ASTROLOGY  11 

to  prove  that  Astrology  Is  entitled  to  the 
name  of  a  science. 

From  among  the  thousands  of  cases  of 
successful  predictions  by  astrologers  we 
mention  here  two  which  are  as  remarkable 
as  they  are  true. 

The  first  Instance  we  cite  from  Bacon's 
Essay  of  Prophecies: — "When  I  was  In 
France,  I  heard  from  one  Dr.  Pena,  that  the 
queen-mother,  who  was  given  to  curious 
arts,  caused  the  king,  her  husband's,  na- 
tivity to  be  calculated,  under  a  false  name; 
and  the  astrologer  gave  a  judgment,  that 
he  should  be  killed  in  a  duel;  at  which  the 
queen  laughed,  thinking  her  husband  to  be 
above  challenges  and  duels;  but  he  was  slain 
upon  a  course  at  tilt,  the  splinters  of  the 
lance  of  Montgomery  piercing  his  neck." 

The  second  is  a  most  singular  prophecy  by 
one  of  the  most  brilliant  astronomers  of  the 
sixteenth  century,  Tycho  Brahe,  whose  pic- 
ture ornaments  this  volume  (see  page  278). 
In  1577  there  was  a  comet  visible,  from  the 
observation  of  which  Brahe  deduced  a  clear 
proof  that  the  sky  was  not  a  solid  vault,  and 
from  the  appearance  and  course  of  which 
he  predicted,  that  in  the  North,  in  Finland, 
there  should  be  born  a  prince  who  should 
lay  waste   Germany   and    vanish    In    1632. 


12  ASTROLOGY 

Gustavus  Adolphus,  king  of  Sweden,  was 
born  in  Finland,  overran  Germany  and 
when  he  was  killed,  in  1632,  in  the  battle  of 
Luetzen,  his  dead  body  was  never  found. 

Whoever  has  read  Milton's  Paradise  Lost, 
will  remember  his  innumerable  references  to 
\   planetary  influences;  Wallenstein,  the  great 
^  captain  and  adversary  of   Gustavus   Adol- 
phus, undertook  no  important  work  without 
first  consulting  Seni,  his  astrologer,  and  it  is 
^well  known  that  Napoleon  I.  firmly  believed 
in  his  star. 


CHAPTER    11 

THE  PLANETS  AND  THE  ZODIAC 

The  heavenly  bodies  that  are  of  influence 
over  the  destinies  of  human  beings,  and 
consequently  over  all  human  affairs,  ^^ill  be 
given  in  this  volume,  together  with  tneir  re- 
lations  to  each  other  and  their  various  com- 
binations,„  wKich,  as  astronomy  teaches  us, 
have  re-occurred  in  regular  intervals  from 
time  immem:^rial.  vVe  shall  find  the  influ- 
ence of  each  star,  of  each  constellation,  and 
of  each  combination,  based  on  the  experi- 
ence of  thousands  of  years;  we  shall  find 
elaborate  tables,  worked  out  with  infinite 
patience  by  the  old  astrologers,  and  exceed- 
ingly helpful  to  the  student.  The  directions 
for  using  them  are  simple  and  plain  and  can 
be  understood  and  followed  by  a  child,  as 
are,  also,  those  for  the  use  of  the  "arcanes," 
a  marvelous  inheritance  from  the  ancient 
wizards  in  the  shape  of  seventy-eight  mys- 
terious "tarots,"  which  were  probably  orig- 
inally devised  by  the  old  masters  as  aids  in 
teaching  their  art,  and  which  are  an  inter- 
esting study  by  themselves. 

U  ASTROLOGY 

Astronomy  teaches  us  that  there  are  two 
classes  of  heavenly  bodies:  "Fixed  Stars" 
and  "Planets."  The  first  are  as  many  Suns 
at  enormous  distances  from  the  Earth;  our 
own  particular  Sun  being,  not  the  largest, 
but  the  nearest.  The  other  class  of  stars 
are  called  "Planets"  on  account  of  their 
roaming  habits,  which  are  not,  however,  in 
any  way  erratic,  since  they  follow  regular 
routes  over  stated  tracks,  called  their 
"Orbits."  The  Earth  is  a  planet  and  takes 
365  days  and  a  fraction  to  cover  its  orbit 
around  the  Sun,  its  central  ruler.  The 
other  large  planets  known  to  us  are,  in  the 
order  of  their  nearness  to  the  Sun,  our  com- 
mon center: 

1.  Mercury.     3.  The  Moon.    5.  Jupiter. 

2.  Venus.         4.  Mars.  6.  Saturn. 
(The   Moon,  which   revolves   around  the 

Earth  and  with  the  Earth  around  the  Sun, 
and  on  account  of  its  nearness,  has  a  strong 
influence.) 

If  we  now  add  that  a  large  number  of 
Fixed  Stars,  visible  with  the  naked  eye, 
have  been  grouped,  from  time  immemorial, 
into  Twelve  Combinations  called  the  "Con- 
stellations of  the  Zodiac,"  we  shall  have  an 
exact  idea  of  the  various  celestial  elements 
that  furnish  the  necessary  data  for  complete 


PLANETS    AND   ZODIAC  15 

and  accurate  Astrological  readings,  or 
"Horoscopes," — this  being  one  of  the  first 
terms  you  must  become  familiar  with. 

So  far  we  have  not  used  any  words  or 
statements  that  are  not  used  In  every  primer 
on  Astronomy  and  the  definition  of  the 
Zodiac  which  follows.  Is  also  accepted  by 
modern  science,  although  dating  back  to  the 
very  dawn  of  human  history. 

The  "Zodiac"  is  the  imaginary  route 
'^  vv^hich  the  Sun  travels  around  the  Earth 
during  a  period  of  one  year.  We  write 
"imaginary"  because  It  Is  recognized  nowa- 
days that  It  Is  the  Earth  that  Is  traveling 
around  the  Sun,  and  not  the  Sun  around  the 
Earth.  But  this  manner  of  expressing  the 
idea,  being  In  constant  use,  had  better  be 
adhered  to  for  the  present. 
i  Now,  as  the  Sun  travels  around  the  Earth, 

-*fC  it  se^ps  to  be  entering  every  thirty  days 
among  a  new  set  of  stars,  or  "Constella- 
tion" which,  ever  since  man  began  to  take 
delight  In  contemplating  the  skies,  have 
been  known  to  be  the  successive  monthly 
dwellings  of  the  Sun,  called  the  "Signs  of 
<  the  Zodiac." 

Before  proceeding  further  it  is  therefore 
proper  for  us  to  give  you  the  accepted 
names  of  the  "Signs  of  the  Zodiac,"  and  the 


X6 


ASTROLOGY 


exact  periods  during  which  these  Constel- 
lations exert  their  influence  over  the  Earth 
and  the  Inhabitants  of  it. 

South 


iBST 


West 


Worth 


The  astrological  year  begins  with  the 
spring  equinox,  on  March  21st;  thus: 

The  first  Sign  of  the  Zodiac — aries  (the 
Ram) — reigns  from  March  21st  to  April 
19th. 

The  second  sign — taurus  (the  Bull) — 
reigns  from  April  20th  to  May  iQth. 


PLANETS   AND   ZODIAC  1? 

The  third  sign — gemini  (the  Twins) — 
reigns  from  May  20th  to  June  i8th.    " 

The  fourth  sign — cancer  (the  Crab)— 
reigns  from  June  19th  to  July  23d. 

The  fifth  sign — leo  (the  Lion) — reigns 
from  July  24th  to  August  22d. 

The  sixth  sign — virgo  (the  Virgin) — 
reigns  from  August  23d  to  September  21st. 

The  seventh  sign — libra  (the  Balance) — 
reigns  from  September  22d  to  October  21st. 

The  eighth  sign — scorpio  (the  Scorpion) — 
reigns  from  October  22d  to  November  20th. 

The  ninth  sign — Sagittarius  (the  Archer) 
— reigns  from  November  21st  to  December 
20th. 

The  tenth  sign — Capricorn  (the  Sea-Goat) 
■ — reigns  from  December  21st  to  January 
TQth. 

The  eleventh  sign — Aquarius  (the  Water- 
Bearer) — reigns  from  January  20th  to  Feb- 
ruary 1 8th. 

The  twelfth  sign — pisces  (the  Fishes) — 
reigns  from  February  19th  to  March  20th, 

The  divisions  of  these  twelve  periods  are 
called  "Degrees"  and  not  "Days."  As  the 
student  has  doubtless  already  noticed,  there 
are  30  degrees  (days)  in  each  sign,  except 
in  "Cancer,"  where  there  are  35  degrees 
(days)  to  complete  the  regular  cycle  of  365 


18  ASTROLOGY 

days  composing  the  solar  year;  these  five 
extra  "degrees"  or  days  are  called  ''Epago- 
menes." 

We  cannot,  in  this  short  work,  give  the 
reasons  for  these  various  arrangements,  all 
very  logical  when  fully  understood;  it  would 
take  too  much  time  and  space  and  only  con- 
fuse the  student  who,  at  present,  is  solely 
looking  for  simple  rules  that  he  may  apply 
himself,  successfully.  This  second  chapter, 
with  the  illustration  that  accompanies  it, 
has  indicated  to  him  the  first  Astrological 
elements  with  which  he  must  make  himself 
absolutely  familiar  if  he  wants  to  proceed 
smoothly  in  his  study  of  this  strange  and 
most  curious  science. 

The  symbol,  or  written  mark,  by  which 
each  sign  of  the  Zodiac  is  invariably  indi- 
cated in  astrological  illustrations  and  horo- 
scopes, is  given  in  our  illustration  next  to 
the  name  of  the  sign  it  corresponds  to  and 
again,  in  the  next  chapter,  at  the  head  of 
each  of  the  twelve  divisions  devoted  to  the 
Signs  of  the  Zodiac  and  the  Types  that 
proceed  from  them. 


PLANETS  AND  ZODIAC 

rHE  PRINCIPAL  CONSTELLATIONS  OF 
THE  NORTHERN  SKY. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE  PRINCIPAL  CONSTELLATIONS  OF 
THE  SOUTHERN  SKY 


CHAPTER   III 

THE  SIGNS  OF  THE  ZODIAC 

As  explained  to  you  In  the  preceding 
chapter,  the  "Zodiac"  is  the  zone  of  the 
heavens  whereon  are  to  be  found  the  vari- 
ous omens  or  predictions  which  are  to  con- 
stitute a  primary  "Horoscope." 

The  great  importance  ascribed  to  the 
Zodiac  by  all  the  astronomers  of  the  most 
ancient  times,  Is  proved  by  the  elaborate 
and  artistic  representations  of  it,  which  are 
still  to  be  found  In  Eastern  countries,  such 
as  China,  India  and  Egypt.  Our  frontis- 
piece pictures  one  of  the  most  famous  of 
these,  hewn  in  stone. 

The  twelve  equal  divisions  of  the  Zodiac 
are  called  "Signs";  each  of  them  is  itself 
divided  into  thirty  "Degrees"  or  days,  and 
every  one  was  born  in  one  of  these  degrees. 
The  first  thing  to  know,  therefore,  is  the 
ancient  meaning  of  each  of  the  signs  and 
the  type  peculiar  to  the  human  beings  born 
under  it.  I  shall  give  in  this  chapter  a  sum- 
mary of  the  leading  features  belonging  to 
the  Signs.  Before  doing  so,  however,  I  will 
state  that  the  Signs  have  been  classed  into 

ASTROLOGY 


four  groups,  or  "Trinocracies,"  according  to 
their  dominant  characteristics. 

Aries,  Leo,  Sagittarius,  are  "Fiery  Signs.*' 
Taurus,  Virgo,  Capricornus,  are  "Earthy 
igns. 

Gemini,  Libra,  Aquarius,  are  "Airy  Signs." 
Pisces,    Cancer,    Scorpio,    are     "Watery 
igns. 


The    Illustration    on    this  page    Indicates 


SIGNS   OF   THE  ZODIAC 


^3 


this  division  by  means  of  triangles.  Later 
I  shall  have  occasion  to  more  fully  explain 
the  importance  of  this  classification.  I 
begin  now  the  enumeration  of  the  peculi- 
arities and  omens  special  to  each  of  the 
signs.  It  is  the  basis  of  all  further  study 
and  must,  therefore,  be  given  most  serious 
attention. 


I  ARIES.     (The- Ram.)  ^ 

The  Constella- 
tion "Aries" — the 
first  Sign  of  the 
Zodiac — exerts  its 
i  n  f^  u  e  n  c  e  from 
March  21  to  April 
19,  the  period  co- 
inciding with  the 
first  month  of  the  Roman  Year.  It  en- 
dows .  those  born  during  this  period  with 
sir^gle.  unaffected  Qianners^^with  an  obedi- 
ent disposition  and  yetwith  a  capacity  for 
com.manding  (a  duality  of  qualities  fre- 
quently met  with);  with  plenty  of  enterpris- 
ing audacity;  with  a  lofty,  charitable  soul; 
with  a  generous  heart,  that  will  meet  with 
few  grateful  returns;  with  a  firm  will,  a 
superior  mind,  quick,  brilliant,  courageous. 


24  ASTROLOGY 

but  not  lacking  In  prudence;  with  religious 
tendencies;  often  with  artistic  talents,  with 
plenty  of  clever  ingenuity;  a  natural  gift  for 
business;  a  rather  combative  spirit,  tem- 
pered, however,  by  eclecticism  (the  power 
of  learning  from  others).  The  will,  although 
steadfast,  may  vary  in  its  object,  in  its  plans. 

He  will  have  a  taste  for  outdoor  sports, 
especially  hunting. 

He  will  aspire  to  the  highest  honors,  and 
will  not  be  daunted  by  the  difficulties  in  his 
way.  Should  he  choose  a  military  career, 
he  would  make  a  success  of  it  and  gain  rapid 
promotion. 

This  sign  endows  one  with  aptitudes  more 
varied  than  profound;  it  renders  eloquent. 
The  love  affairs  of  one  born  under  this  sign 
will  be  sudden,  full  of  fancies  and  of  short 
duration. 

The  subjects  of  Aries  will  get  easily  into 
passions  of  rage,  but  the  fire  will  burn  itself 
quickly  out  and  leave  behind  no  rancor  or 
grudge.  They  will  forget,  in  an  Instant,  the 
injury  done  to  them. 

The  opinions  of  the  subject,  be  they  of  a 
religious  or  political  character,  will  be  very 
strong  and  ardent  for  a  time,  but  that  time 
will  be  short. 

He  will  pass  through  many  changes  In  his 


SIGNS   OF   THE    ZODIAC  25 

financial  status;  he  will  own  much  real 
estate,  especially  country  property  that  will 
come  to  him  through  marriage.  He  will 
have  to  stand  many  difficulties  and  law-suits 
in  reference  to  these  estates;  women's  prefer- 
ences and  an  inheritance  will  bring  him 
most  of  what  he  will  ever  own;  but  he  will 
be  lucky  in  his  business  partnerships. 

He  will  probably  be  an  only  child,  or 
become  such  by  the  death  of  brothers  and 
sisters. 

In  childhood,  there  will  be  troubles  or 
disasters  in  the  family  of  the  subject  that 
may  upset  his  career. 

If  the  birth  takes  place  between  midnight 
and  noon,  the  subject  will  lose  his  father 
early  in  life. 

Much  traveling  will  be  rendered  necessary 
by  family  matters  or  to  escape  enmities. 
The  subject  will  make  balloon  ascensions,  or 
at  least  climb  mountains. 

At  the  ages  of  7,  19,  30,  44,  the  subject's 
family  will  meet  with  trouble  or  he  himself 
will  run  dangers  due  to  his  own  relatives. 

By  his  own  fault,  the  subject  will  shorten 
the  duration  of  his  life;  he  will  have  to 
struggle  against  many  unforeseen  and 
dreadful  incidents  that  will  place  him  in 
great  peril. 


26  ASTROLOGY 

Aries  announces  many  conjugal  disagree- 
ments and  often  broken  partnerships. 

There  will  be  very  few  children,  if  any. 

The  subject  will  rise,  after  many  obstacles, 
to  high  positions  of  trust  and  honor,  but  will 
not  keep  them,  as  he  will  be  the  victim  of 
the  bitterest  envy. 

The  subject  will  marry  too  young;  there 
will  be  danger  of  inconstancy  in  the  mar- 
riage relations. 

The  professions  that  will  probably  be 
chosen,  by  the  persons  born  under  this  sign, 
are  the  army,  the  bar  and  mining  engineer- 
ing. 

Should  the  birth  take  place  between  the 
hours  of  noon  and  midnight,  the  friends  of 
the  subject  will  greatly  exert  themselves 
pushing  him  to  the  front,  and  he  will  reach 
high  positions;  if  he  is  in  the  Church,  a 
bishopric  may  come  to  him. 

He  will  have  many  and  devoted  friends 
with  a  dangerous  traitor  among  them, 
Many,  also,  will  be  his  enemies,  all  envious 
of  his  success,  but  these  enmities  will  not 
Jast  long. 

The  physical  temperament  of  the  subject 
will  be  nervous-sanguine,  if  he  is  born  in  a 
southern  climate,  and  bilious-sanguine  if  he 
is  born  in  a  northern  latitude.  (See  page  75.) 


^ 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC 

2.  TAURUS.     (The  Bull.)    ^ 

The  Constellation  "Taurus" — the  second 
sign  of  the  Zodiac — exerts  Its  Influence  from 
April  20  to  May  19. 

It  endows  the  persons  born  during  this 
period  with  a  stubboxa  diapQsItlo^^    It  makes 
the m'  rebel lious — 
to  advice,  exag- 
gerately    g^rou-d, 
difficult    of    ap- 
proach, and  fond 
of  opposItIon_  to^ 
the    p  o  i  n_t    of 
startTng  j^  con- 
tro versy,  __  o  r„„ a 
fight  forthejole. 
"purpose  of  com- 
ing   out  yictorl- 
ous.      Slow    to 
get  excited  and 
slow     to    calm 
down,    the    sub- 
jects  of  Taurus 
will   harbor   a 

grudge  for  a  long  time  and  will  be  hard  to 
reconcile. 

Of  course,  all  these  Idiosyncrasies  may  be 
modified,  even  overcome  by  surroundings, 
education,  etc.     We  are  only  enumerating 


26  ASTROLOGY 

here  inborn  tendencies  or  instincts  that  can 
always  be  fought  against  and  triumphed  over. 
-This  sign  gives  the  subject  a  mind 
straightforward,  just,  inquisitive  and  shrewd; 
it  makes  him  hard  to  fathom  and  endows 
him  with  the  essential  qualities  of  a  diplomat. 

The  impressions,  when  received,  are 
violent  but  changeable;  the  passions  fiery, 
but  not  persistent. 

'^  The  subjects  whom  this  sign  influences 
are  generally  very  much  attached  to  their 
sentiments  and  their  opinions;  they  are 
taciturn  and  tenacious;  their  will  is  steady, 
persevering  and  determined  to .  reach  its 
end  at  almost  any  cost. 

They  are  fit  to  command,  to  govern; 
there  is  a  great  probability  that  their  brain 
power  will  prove  of  so  superior  a  kind  that 
they  will  be  carried  up  to  celebrity  almost 
unwittingly. 

Sometimes  the  sign  of  Tarus  gives  the 
subject  a  taste  for  agriculture;  it  is  certainly 
conducive  to  a  liking  for  choice  food,  while 
it  renders  the  subject  patient  in  all  his 
undertakings  and  fond  of  a  well-earned 
repose  of  mind  and  body. 

The  subjects  of  Taurus  are  essentially 
conservative  in  their  ideas,  their  actions, 
and  even  their  ambition  toward  high  offices. 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  29 

In  love  matters,  they  are  (with  many  ex- 
ceptions) of  a  fickle,  yet  jealous,  disposition. 

This  sign  always  brings  about  severe 
struggles,  also  illnesses  caused  either  by 
excess  of  work  or  by  a  too  great  indulgence 
in  good  living. 

There  will  be  a  gathering  of  an  important 
amount  of  personal  property;  but  it  will  be 
in  some  danger  of  being  frittered  away, 
either  by  lawsuits,  or  by  loss  of  employment, 
or  through  intrigues  out  of  wedlock. 

However,  unexpected  gifts  of  valuable 
property  are  among  the  possibilities;  they 
will  be  inspired  by  some  devoted  affection; 
certainly,  the  financial  affairs  of  the  subject 
will  be  improved  by  people  who  love  him; 
thus,  an  inheritance  from  a  dear  friend  is 
indicated  as  probable. 

If  the  subject's  birth  is  "nocturnal,"  i.  e., 
has  taken  place  between  the  hours  of  mid- 
night and  noon,  the  sign  of  Taurus  foretells 
that  his  father  will  be  a  man  of  some  impor- 
tance, either  by  his  rank,  by  his  fortune,  or 
by  his  talents  in  art,  literature,  etc. 

Brothers  and  sisters  will  be  the  causes  of 
much  serious  trouble;  the  subject  will  have 
to  take  a  very  long  journey  on  account  of 
one  of  these  blood  relations. 

Many  travels  are  to  be  expected;   if  the 


80  ASTROLOGY 

subject  Is  born  between  midnight  and  noon, 
one  of  these  journeys  will  prove  very  dan- 
gerous, perhaps  fatal. 

This  sign  must  induce  the  subject  to  take 
great  care  of  his  children,  especially  hi^ 
first-born;  if  it  is  a  boy,  he  runs  great  dan- 
gers in  his  boyhood.  Otherwise,  the  chil- 
dren will  give  great  satisfaction  and  distin- 
guish themselves,  in  a  scientific  career,  at 
the  bar,  or  in  industrial  pursuits.  Still,  the 
subject  will  have  periods  of  sad  disappoint- 
ment with  them. 

The  greater  part  of  the  subject's  life  will 
be  peaceful  and  eventless;  his  main  troubles 
will  arise  from  difficulties  the  subject's  in- 
born stubborness  will  cause  him  to  create 
himself,  or,  at  any  rate,  to  magnify  greatly. 

This  sign  announces  the  following  diseases 
as  being  in  store  for  the  subject:  splenetic 
and  plethoric  troubles  at  ii,  23,  35  years 
of  age.  Besides,  as  the  weak  organs  of 
the  subject  will  be  the  kidneys  and  the 
liver,  he  must  watch  for  the  incipient 
symptoms  of  the  stone  and  diseases  of  the 
spine.  Let  him  beware  of  wounds  from 
sharp  instruments  or  from  quadrupeds. 

There  is  a  sorrow  or  a  death  predicted,  in 
relation  with  the  subject's  marriage. 

While  his  position  will  be  very  modest  in 


SIGNS   OF   THE    ZODIAC  31 

his  youth,  he  may  reach  great  fortune  and 
celebrity  due  to  his  talents  in  the  line  of  the 
fine  arts,  or  his  discoveries  in  the  realm  of 
physics. 

There  will  be  many  friends  to  brighten 
the  life  of  the  Taurus  subject,  but  none  of 
them  of  the  steadfast  kind,  and  most  of 
them  undesirable.  Both  the  so-called 
friends  and  the  subject's  relatives  will  cause 
him  many  disappointments.  The  enmities 
he  will  encounter  will  be,  fortunately,  of  the 
open  kind,  not  of  the  hidden  and  treacher- 
ous variety. 

The  constellation  Taurus  always  promises 
a  long  life,  provided  excesses  of  all  kinds  be 
avoided.  The  many  perils  through  which 
the  subject  will  pass,  he  may  escape  the 
worst  consequences  of,  since  they  will  be,  so 
to  speak,  in  full  sight  and  known  in  advance. 

The  physical  temperament  of  the  Taurus 
subject  will  be  bilious-sanguine  in  a  south- 
ern latitude  and  lymphatic-nervous  in  a 
Qorthern  clime. 

ASTROLOGY 


3.  GEMINI.     (The  Twins.)   n 

The  Constellation  "Gemini" — the  third  of 
the  Zodiac — exerts  its  influence  from  May 
20  to  June  18. 

'  It  endows  the  subject  born  during  this 
period  with  probity,  a  pleasing,  accommodat- 
ing disposition, a  temper  quickly  irritated 

but  just  as  quickly  calmed  down,  showing 

Fu  t  little  vio- 
lence in  its  out- 
bursts  and  a 
great  prompti- 
tude in  mani- 
festing repeftt- 
ance.-  The  sign 
of  Gemini  often_ 
promises  some 
kind  of  celebrity. 
It  gives  the  sub- 
ject natural,  in- 
ventive genius,  and,  with  it,  a  love  of  science 
for  its  own  sake ;  it  urges  him  to  follow  scien- 
tific researches,  especially  in  the  line  of  math- 
ematics, and  often  makes  him  an  orator  or 
an  author.  It  endows  him,  also,  with  some 
talents  for  commerce,  with  a  saving  disposi- 
tion and  moderation  in  the  use  of  all  things. 
It  renders  him  scrupulously  honest,  fair- 
minded,  and  noble-hearted;    he  will  possess 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  33 

a  subtle,  quick-seeing  mind,  an  easy-flowing 
mode  of  speech;  but  the  latter  quality  will 
manifest  itself  only  when  the  subject  is 
talking  about  some  favorite  topic  of  his; 
otherwise,  he  is  rather  reserved,  even  to 
taciturnity  and  often  suffers  strange  per- 
plexities and  hesitations  when  the  moment 
to  act  has  arrived. 

The  expression  of  his  will  is  firm,  some- 
times too  affirmative,  but  without  tyrannical 
tendencies,  and  without  roughness. 

Besides  the  scientific  talents  mentioned 
above,  Gemini  also  gives  a  taste  for  fine 
arts,  for  music,  especially  the  study  of  har- 
mony, counterpoint,  etc.  In  the  scientific 
line,  chemistry  will  be  a  prime  favorite. 

The  wealth  acquired  by  the  practice  of  the 
talents  above  mentioned  will  lead  the  sub- 
ject to  many  ups  and  downs,  which,  at  times, 
will  leave  him  almost  in  want,  ^vhen,  at 
other  moments,  his  fortune  ^vill  be  quite 
large. 

It  will  be  the  same  as  \o  the  positions 
occupied  by  him;  they  will  lack  stability, 
now  ver)^  brilliant,  now  again,  of  the  hum- 
blest. These  fluctuations  will  all  be  due  to 
the  subject's  own  acts. 

This  sign  always  foretells  family  secrets 
and  family  disagreements.     Great  trials  will 


34  ASTROLOGY 

have  to  be  gone  through  on  account  of,  or 
caused  by  the  subject's  father. 

Numerous  will  be  the  subject's  children; 
some  enmity  will  unfortunately  be  devel- 
oped among  them,  and  against  their  father 
or  mother,  or  both. 

The  diseases  that  will  be  most  threatening 
are  bladder  troubles,  epidemic  fevers, 
malaria;  great  perils  will  be  incurred 
through  quadrupeds,  also  from  venomous 
bites  and  from  enemies  bent  on  serious  mis- 
chief. The  subject's  family,  his  employes, 
or  servants,  will  show  themselves  painfully 
and  actively  unfriendly  toward  him. 

Great  sorrows,  troubles  and  disappoint- 
ments will  be  caused  by  love  affairs.  There 
will  be  several  marriages  or  long  attach- 
ments in  the  subject's  life. 

He  will  have  friends  of  all  sorts  and  con- 
ditions, several  of  whom  will  turn  his  bitter 
enemies. 

Toward  middle  life,  he  will  meet  with 
persistent  obstacles  to  his  success  and  legiti- 
mate promotion;  they  will  be  brought  about 
by  enmities  to  be  found  in  the  church  or  in 
the  law  profession.  He  will  be  to  blame  for 
the  fact  that  these  persons  will  be  his  ene- 
mies. 

The  position  occupied  by  the  subject  and 


SIGNS  OF  THE   ZODIAC  35 

constituting  his  life  work  will  often  be  of  a 
dual  nature;  he  will  constantly  attempt  to 
run  two  things  at  once;  hence,  many  com- 
plications in  his  social  relations..  A  disas- 
trous betrayal  is  to  be  feared. 

This  sign  foretells  the  existence  of  per- 
sistent, often  armed  enemies;  the  subject 
may  even  be  waylaid.  He  will  have  cause 
to  suspect  his  immediate  associates,  his 
relatives  by  marriage;  he  will  suffer  cruelly 
from  tireless  calumnies,  from  low  intrigues 
relating  to  secrets  in  his  family  or  that  of 
his  wife. 

Gemini  always  announces  events  of  a 
violent  nature;  but  Providence  may  save  the 
subject  from  their  worst  consequences. 

The  subject  will  have  a  sanguine-bilious 
constitution  in  a  southern  latitude,  and  a 
bilious-nervous  temperament  in  a  northern 
one. 

4  CANCER.     (The  Crab.)     25 

The  Constellation  "Cancer" — the  fourth 
of  the  Zodiac — exerts  its  influence  from  June 
19  to  July  23  (including  the  ''5  Epagomenes," 
or  supplementary  degrees).  It  always  gives 
to  the  subject  a  most  agitated,  restless  ex- 
istence, but  a  life  of  power  and  incessant 
activity. 

Cancer  endows  the  subjects  it  inflnpnrpc; 


36  ASTROLOGY 

with  a  taciturn  disposition,  with  a  seai::alung 
mind  and  good  morals,  pure  even  to  aus- 
terity.  1  heir  imagmation,  or  a  rich,  creative 
character,  will  be  In  love  with  the  fantastic; 


added  to  It  will  be  a  great  aptitude  for 
assimilation,  so  that  the  subject  will  be  ever 
ready  to  act  in  real  life  the  part  of  the 
particular  hero  for  whom  his  imagination, 
his  dreams,  or  his  readings  will  have  given 
him  a  temporary  fancy. 

The  mood  will  be  changeable,  capricious, 
fickle  to  a  degree,  and  the  intercourse  with 
others  will  suffer  on  that  account,  although 
the  subject  himself  \nll  not  greatly  care. 

An  unquenchable  thirst  for  sympathy  will 
make  him  attach  himself  to  a  new  fancy  as 
fast  as  the  preceding  one  will  lose  Its  attrac- 
tion. 

This  sign  renders  one  discreet,  Independ- 
^Ojx  open-minded^nd  versatile. 


SIGNS    OF   THE   ZODIAC  37 

The  Moon,  who  has  Its  throne  In  this 
constellation,  gives  the  subject  sometimes 
the  appearance  of  a  most  phlegmatic  indi- 
vidual, and  again  It  shows  him  up  as  a  most 
unreasonably  irritable  fellow;  both  states 
of  the  mind  are  due  to  excessive  impres- 
sionability and  sensitiveness. 

Those  born  under  Cancer  are  quick  In 
body  and  mind,  clever  In  business  matters 
and  fit  to  command;  they  are  ambitious  to 
obtain  wealth,  honors  and  all  the  good 
things  of  life,  and  Cancer  helps  them  to  suc- 
ceed, while  it  gives  them  decided  religious 
tendencies.  Women  born  under  this  sign 
are  both  hard  workers  and  Imperious. 
Eclecticism  and  general  versatility  are 
among  the  gifts  of  Cancer. 

The  complex  Influences  that  proceed 
from  this  sign,  and  which  are  more  helpful 
to  those  who  are  born  between  midnight 
and  noon,  may  render  the  subject  either 
brave  or  cowardly  according  to  circum- 
stances and  surroundings.  The  same  indi- 
vidual may  show  himself  one  day  suspicious 
or  simply  prudent  to  excess;  and,  the  next 
morning,  influenced  by  the  phases  of  the 
moon,  he  may  prove  extravagantly  thought- 
less, absent-minded  and  fanciful. 

These  qualities  are  the  causes  of  the  sud- 


38  ASTROLOGY 

den  but  weak  and  short-lived  fits  of  anger  of 
the  subject;  In  reality,  it  is  only  assumed 
anger  which  will  vanish  like  smoke. 

Wealth  will  be  often  very  hard  to  col- 
lect, and  the  inherited  patrimony  may  be 
recklessly  squandered,  either  by  relatives  or 
by  children  of  the  subject. 

Losses  at  the  gaming  table,  or  in  specula- 
tion, or  through  thieves  are  to  be  expected; 
but,  in  the  latter  part  of  life,  the  chances  to 
become  rich  are  excellent. 
^_  During  his  youth,  the  subject  will  meet 
with  obstacles  to  his  chosen  vocation  and 
have  troubles  from  near  relations;  he  is 
threatened  with  an  early  loss  of  brothers 
or  with  quarrelling  with  them.  He  may 
have  a  second  (or  adopted)  family,  outside 
of  his  own.  His  children  will  cause  him 
much  anxiety;  It  will  be  hard  for  him  to 
settle  them  In  life,  with  the  exception  of  the 
eldest  one,  however,  who  will  reach  a  high 
position. 

The  subject's  kindred  will  push  him  ener- 
getically in  the  career  he  will  finally  select. 

Many  will  be  the  vicissitudes  and  worries 
of  the  subject;  some  of  them  of  a  mysterious 
nature;  but  at  the  hour  of  most  desperate 
crisis,  unexpected  assistance  will  come  up 
providentially. 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  39 

^  Thi^  sign  gives  one  a  repulsion  against 
marriage  and  renders  it,  if  entered  into, 
quite  unsatisfactory;  the  subject  may  inherit 
property  from  a  first  wife,  but  a  law  suit 
will  be  connected  with  it. 

Travels  will  be  long  and  profitable.  One 
of  them  will  make  the  subject  comparatively 
famous  and  he  will  emerge  "all  right"  out 
of  the  perils  and  struggles  he  may  encounter 
in  these  journeys. 

Some  changes  of  residence  will  prove  in- 
jurious to  the  health  and  to  the  pocket,  on 
account  of  undesirable  acquaintances  or  hid- 
den enemies;  even  ambushes  are  to  be 
feared,  especially  at  he  age  of  14,  26  or  7,8. 
—^Toward  the  35th  year  the  subject's  posi- 
tion will  be  changed  from  good  to  bad  or 
vice-versa.  After  that  age  it  will  be  much 
more  steady. 

The  subject  will  have  many  friends  and 
protectors,  especially  among  persons  of  the 
other  sex;  one  of  these  patrons  will  run  a 
great  danger  of  total  ruin,  which  will  have 
a  disastrous  effect  upon  the  subject. 

At  the  age  of  20,  32  and  44  there  will  be 
great  peril  resulting  from  secret  intrigues  of 
declared  enemies  or  traitors  among  the  sub- 
ject's trusted  friends. 

Cancer  generally  gives  the  people  born 

ASTROLOGY 


under  it  excellent  health.  Should  they  be 
ill,  the  parts  of  the  body  to  be  affected 
will  be  the  lungs  and  in  general  the  breath- 
ing organs. 

Wounds  inflicted  by  the  hands  of  man  are 
foretold. 

This  sign  gives  the  subject  a  lymphatic- 
bilious  temperament  in  a  southern  climate 
and  a  lymphatic-nervous  disposition  in 
a  northern  latitude. 


5.     LEO.     (The  Lion.)  St 

Thf-  rongff^]1at-ion  "Leo" — the  fifth  of  the 
Zodiac — exerts  its  influence  from  July  24  to 
August  22. 

Ptolemy,  of  Pelusa,  surnamed  the  King  of 

Astrologers,  said 
that  the  subjects 
born  under  this 
beneficent  influ- 
ence will  reach 
positions  of  honor 
and  trust. 

Leo  jgi  ves  to 
those  born  under' 
its  influence  a  loftyjmndi  a  spirit  of  fair  play, 
an  unbending  dignity  and  a  warm  and  geruer- 
ojjs  heart.  Th£_j;yilL-power  of  the  subjee^will 
be  firm,  enterprising  and  persevering;  it  will 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  41 

aim  straight  at  the  object  desired,  but  secure 
it  only  by  honest  and  above-board  methods. 

The  mind  will  be  steadfast,  virile,  proud, 
simple  and  liberal,  with  great  brilliancy  that 
may  render  it  sometimes  egotistic  and  pre- 
sumptuous but  never  lacking  in  gratitude  for 
an  act  of  helpful  kindness.  The  impulses 
and  instincts  will  be  always  held  within  con- 
trol. The  temper  will  be  kindly,  though 
firm,  courageous  and  magnanimous. 

In  the  difficult  moments  of  life,  anger  may 
be  quickly  aroused  but  it  will  harm  no  one 
and  cool  down  almost  at  once. 
T-  Good  will  invariably  be  returned  for  evil; 
this  will  be  the  only  kind  of  revenge  prac- 
ticed by  the  subject. 

This  sign  induces  one  to  love  steadfastly; 
the  affections  will  be  constant,  although  for- 
getfulness  may  occur,  in  case  of  prolonged 
absence. 

The  special  aptitudes  of  the  subject  will 
be  of  a  soldierly  character;  he  will  be  quite 
successful  in  all  open-air  sports,  patient  in 
all  kinds  of  labor  and  admirably  adapted  to 
command.  This  sign  does  not  endow  the 
subject  with  many  varied  abilities,  but 
those  granted  him  will  be  of  the  best, 
often  approaching  perfection. 

Leo     gives    a    taste    for    pleasures    and 


42  ASTROLOGY 

luxury.  Those  born  under  this  sign  have 
nothing  but  disdain  for  the  honors  they  are 
destined  to  reap  almost  without  efforts. 

The  subject's  inclinations  will  be  strong, 
and  yet  well-reasoned  out.  His  opinions 
will  be  fixed,  passionate,  sometimes  exag- 
gerated, and  when  he  decides  on  a  certain 
course  of  action  he  will  follow  it  to  the  end, 
at  all  risks. 

Those  born  under  this  sign  will  acquire, 
by  their  own  merit,  a  good  deal  of  property, 
besides  what  will  come  to  them  through 
relatives  or  influential  friends.  But  their 
losses  will  be  heavy  and  sudden,  due  to 
either  gambling,  or  speculation,  or  impru- 
dent loans;  they  may  suffer  from  cruel 
spoliation,  family  property  being  taken  from 
them  quite  unjustly.  The  death  of  a  near 
relative  will  greatly  compromise  their 
pecuniary  interests  and  their  position;  they 
will  be  shabbily  treated  in  money  matters 
by  brothers  and  sisters,  or  other  close  rela- 
tions. Even  their  parents  may  ruin  their 
hopes  of  brilliant  promotion. 

During  a  short  journey  rendered  neces- 
sary by  the  subject's  position,  he  will  have 
to  fear  some  personal  danger;  the  upper 
part  of  the  body,  the  head  and  the  shoulders 
especially,  may  be  severely  hurt. 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  43 

Violent  quarrels  with  relatives  will  be 
caused  by  a  division  of  property  or  by  family 
secrets,  or  by  prolonged  absence  of  the  sub- 
ject. 

The  father  of  the  subject  will  be  in  peril 
of  his  life  on  a  journey. 

There  will  be  many  children  coming  to 
the  subject  who  will  have  the  sorrow  of  los- 
ing the  eldest  one. 

If  the  subject  is  a  woman  she  will  prob- 
ably be  the  mother  of  twins,  or  she  may 
have  children  of  two  successive  husbands; 
when  these  children  will  be  grown  up,  they 
will  give  her  trouble. 

Long  and  complicated  diseases  are 
threatening;  the  woman  born  under  Leo 
will  have  great  troubles  in,  and  resulting 
from,  child-birth.  Servants  and  employes 
of  the  subject  will  be  the  cause  of  constant 
worries. 

Leo  always  announces  family  disagree- 
ments. 

Several  unforeseen  legacies,  or  even  in- 
heritances, will  render  easier  the  circum- 
stances of  the  subject  and  especially  of  his 
children  who  often  will  be  the  beneficiaries; 
there  is  a  probability,  however,  that  relatives 
may  succeed  in  diverting  these  wind-falls 
away  from  the  subject  and  his  family. 


44  ASTROLOGY 

The  subject  will  mLkc  but  few  sea  voy- 
ages; the  first  one  will  be  detrimental  to  his 
interests  and  a  source  of  losses. 

His  position  will  demand  frequent  voyages 
on  land;  one  of  these  will  prove  highly  ad- 
vantageous and  bring  about  a  sudden  change 
for  the  better. 

The  offices  coming  to  the  subject  will  be 
offices  of  great  honor  but  small  emolu- 
ments; he  may  grievously  compromise  his 
chances  in  that  direction,  or  even  forfeit 
these  valued  prizes,  in  an  instant,  by  some 
most  unfortunate  and  thoughtless  moves. 

He  will  enjoy  some  reputation,  even 
marked  celebrity,  through  his  own  merit 
and  without  the  help  of  any  outside  protec- 
tion. It  may  be  in  the  sciences,  or  the  fine 
arts  that  he  will  find  his  true  sphere  and 
make  a  shining  success.  As  said  above,  the 
ruin  of  these  promising  prospects  will  be 
due  either  to  an  unfortunate  voyage  or  to  a 
rash  act  on  the  part  of  the  subject. 

His  friends  will  be  many,  but  of  little 
assistance,  even  if  their  fortune  and  position 
be  such  as  to  give  them  the  means  to  be  of 
great  use;  on  the  contrary,  they  will  prob- 
ably cause  the  subject  some  heavy  financial 
losses. 

His   few  enemies  will  be  declared  ones. 


SIGNS   OF   THE    ZODIAC  45 

low  and  cowardly  Intrigues  against  him 
win  prove  so  Invariably  unsuccessful,  that 
he  will  soon  be  free  from  such  attacks. 

Leo  gives  those  born  under  It  a  nervous- 
sanguine  temperament,  a  remarkably  fine 
health  and  a  long  life. 

;-^^  However,  the  subject  may  be  attacked  by 
inflammatory  rheumatism,  located  especially 
In  the  knees.  Pneumonia,  and  in  general, 
troubles  of  the  respiratory  organs,  and 
troubles  of  the  spleen  and  the  bladder  are 
also  among  the  possibilities;  wounds.  If 
any,  will  affect  the  feet  and  hands. 

According  to  the  old  astrologers,  Leo, 
containing  the  throne  of  the  Sun,  is  always 
the  prognostic  of  a  fine  fortune  and  a  lofty 
position. 

6     VIRGO.     (The  Virgin.)     rrji 

The  Constellation  of  "Virgo" — the  sixth 
of  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac — exerts  its  Influ- 
ence from  August  23  to  September  21. 

Those  born  within  this  period  will  r;each 
honors  through  their  personal  merit. 

This  sign  bestows  on  them  a  cool  reason, 
a  spirit  of  equity,  a  merciful  disposition  and 
a  taste  for  everything  that  Is  honest  and 
rstraIghtforwar3. 

The  moral  nature  of  the  subject  will  be 

ASTROLOGY 


tnild,   modest,  amiable,    confiding,   and  yet 
not  easily  fathomed. 

His   will-power,    although    comparatively 

firm  may  be  influ- 
enced through  sen- 
timental motives. 

He  will  be  intelli- 
gent, ingenious,  but 
above  all,  moved  by 
his  feelings  to  which 
he  will  remain  pas- 
sionately attached. 
He  will  be 
slow  to  anger 
and  slow  to 
quiet  down, 
although  h  i  s 
wrath  will 
never  harm 
any  one.  He 
will  be  moved 
to  repentance  quickly  and  deepl}^  Virgo 
gives  people  born  under  it  a  taste  for 
cloister  life,  a  love  of  divine  thoughts;  or, 
in  a  lower  plane,  an  inclination  toward 
the  liberal  arts  and  the  gift  of  persuasive 
eloquence. 

To  the  taste  for  art  the  subject  will  add  a 
liking  for  agriculture  or  horticulture  and  a 


SIGNS   OF   THE  ZODIAC  47 

mild  mania  for  collecting  things.  He  will 
show  a  real  aptitude  for  the  higher  sciences 
and  deeper  studies.  All  his  tastes  will  be 
under  his  control  and  his  opinions  easily 
changed. 

Those  born  under  Virgo  run  serious 
physical  dangers  from  their  earliest  baby- 
hood and  all  through  childhood. 

It  is  almost  an  invariable  fact  that  they 
will  have  the  greatest  difficulty  to  acquire 
even  moderate  means,  and  this  small  com- 
petence will  be  constantly  threatened,  dur- 
ing the  first  part  of  their  lives.  Later,  they 
will  be  luckier  financially  and  recover  some 
family  property. 

Although  this  sign  foretells  wealth,  due  to 
the  hard  work  and  intelligence  of  the  sub- 
ject applied  in  the  field  of  science  and  art, 
or  through  successful  inventions,  or  thanks 
to  some  high  office  connected  with  the 
Church,  still,  by  the  fault  of  the  subject 
himself,  there  is  a  strong  probability  of  his 
losing  suddenly  that  (either  money  or  posi- 
tion) which  he  will  have  acquired  through 
such  long  and  laborious  efforts. 

Travels  may  be  the  cause  of  some  large 
addition  to  the  subject's  fortune. 

Relatives,  near  or  distant,  will  prove 
rather  harmful  than  otherwise. 


48  ASTROLOGY 

The  subject  may  have  many  brothers  and 
sisters,  but  there  will  be  no  harmony  between 
them,  and  he  will  lose  several  of  them  at  an 
early  age,  probably  in  a  violent  manner. 

There  will  be  sad  and  grave  family  secrets, 
either  on  account  of  irregular  unions,  or 
through  divorces  or  separations. 

There  is  here  a  prognostic  of  sudden 
losses  of  children,  either  through  a  fall  from 
a  high  place,  or  through  drowning,  or 
through  quadrupeds. 

Virgo  always  announces  some  violent 
happenings,  great  obstacles  in  love  matters, 
serious  law  suits,  dissensions  between  friends 
or  relatives,  between  husband  and  wife, 
even  divorces.  Let  us  say  here  that  "unions 
and  marriages"  are  expressed  by  the  same 
indications  in  astrology,  and  must  be  under- 
stood aright  by  the  parties  interested. 

The  struggle  for  life  will  be  particularly 
hard  for  those  born  under  this  sign.  But, 
after  painful  efforts,  and  many  disappoint- 
ments, the  subjects  of  Virgo  generally 
triumph.  "Better  late  than  never,"  ought 
to  be  their  motto. 

They  will  have  decided  religious  tend- 
encies. 

The  Virgo  subject  will  have  a  chance  to 
marry  twice.     But  his  second  union  will  be 


SIGNS   OF   THE    ZODIAC  49 

the  cause  of  a  ^reat  upheaval  in  his  exist- 
ence; it  may  be  for  his  good,  and  again  it 
may  prove  disastrous. 

.  Few  inheritances  will  come  the  way  of 
the  subject;  those  that  will  be  within  his 
reach  will  be  acquired  only  after  long  and 
disagreeable  law  proceedings. 

The  subject  may  have  to  undertake, 
generally  against  his  will,  long  travels, 
either  to  try  his  fortune  in  a  foreign  coun- 
try or  to  fill  a  mission  of  importance  with,  or 
in  obedience  to,  the  orders  of  some  great  man. 
But  travel  he  will,  surely  and  frequently. 

It  will  be  a  hard  pull  for  him  to  succeed, 
since  he  will  have  only  his  own  self  to  de- 
pend upon;  but  he  will  succeed  and  reach  a 
high  position  in  the  world.  He  may  even 
acquire  riches  through  his  intelligence  and 
activity;  but  if  he  does  get  wealthy,  it  will 
be  on  account  of  the  dangerous  profession 
or  occupation  he  will  have  selected.  It  may 
be  the  result  of  perilous  experimenting  in 
the  realm  of  physics,  for  which  he  will  be 
particularly  well  adapted. 

His  friends  will  be  very  few,  very  uncer- 
tain and  of  little  use  to  him;  a  few  pleasant 
acquaintances,  met  in  his  travels,  will  be 
among  the  least  undesirable  of  his  associ- 
ates; but  he  will  soon  lose  track  of  them. 


50  ASTROLOGY 

The  subject  will  have  secret  enemies  in 
the  world  of  art,  or  in  the  financial  marts, 
or  among  business  leaders;  they  will  cause 
him  numerous,  heavy  losses,  especially 
through  bad  investments. 

In  southern  climates,  Virgo  gives  those 
born  under  it  a  lymphatic-bilious  tempera- 
ment; in  northern  climates,  their  consitution 
will  be  lymphatic-nervous.  The  weaker 
spots  will  be  the  stomach,  the  liver  and  the 
legs. 

7.     LIBRA.     (The  Balance.)     =^ 

This  Constellation,  "Libra" — the  seventh 
of  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac — also  called  "the 

Scales" — exerts  its 
i  n  fl  u  e  n  c  e  from 
September  22  to 
October  21. 

It  endows  those 
V  b  o  r  n   under   its 
influence  with 
^     great  gentleness, 
straight  forward- 
ness  and    puxe 
moral  principles; 
]t  renders  the  soul  merciful  and  the  heart 
affectionate  and  constant. 
The  disposition  is  frank,  op-^n,  confiding, 


SIGNS  OF   THE   ZODIAC  51 

slightly  melancholy;  anger  is  easily  aroused 
and  rapidly  qi  lie  ted  ..down  agalrT 

'This  sign  causes  indecision  in  opinions 
and  in  actions;  it  bestows  upon  one  inven- 
tive genius,  a  special  aptitude  for  mechan- 
ical arts  and  sciences  and  for  navigation; 
but  all  these  gifts,  will  not  profit  the  subject. 

The  will-power,  although  plentiful,  knows 
not  how  to  bring  about  final  results. 

The  subjects  of  Libra  are  prone  to  study, 
handy  with  tools  as  well  as  quick  at  figures, 
but  care  little  for  the  fine  arts,  except  music, 
being  devoted,  heart  and  soul,  to  business. 
Otherwise,  in  the  choice  of  their  pleasures, 
they  show  refinement. 

Their  passions  are  deep  and  honest. 

They  are  changeable  in  their  opinions, 
although  strongly  attached — for  a  time — to 
the  idea  or  theory  that  rules  over  them 
temporarily. 

Toward  the  middle  of  his  life,  the  subject 
born  under  Libra  will  make  a  fortune,  thanks 
to  some  industry  connected  with  navigation, 
or  at  least  with  water  as  motive-power.  He 
will  have  to  defend  his  wealth  in  court;  a 
great  law  suit  which  he  will  ultimately  win, 
will  create  bitter  enmities,  perhaps  even  a 
serious  disagreement  between  him  and  his 
spouse  or  partner. 


52  ASTROLOGY 

He  will  have  many  brothers,  and  sisters, 
some  of  them  by  a  second  wife  of  the  father 
or  by  a  second  husband  of  the  mother; 
these  blood  relations  will  be  constantly  at 
odds  between  themselves  and  with  the  sub- 
ject. 

He  may  have  some  trouble  with  his  par- 
ents, especially  with  his  father,  who  will  lack 
the  paternal  fiber.  If  the  subject  is  born 
between  noon  and  midnight  there  is  a  risk 
of  his  losing  his  father  early  in  life. 

Few  children  will  come  to  him,  and  one 
of  them  will  be  the  cause  of  great  anxieties. 

Family  relations  will  be  frequently  dis- 
turbed; there  is  a  prognostic  of  a  second 
family,  perhaps  an  adopted  one;  or  the  sub- 
ject himself  may  be  the  object  of  adoption. 

Diseases  characterized  by  a  flow  of  some 
kind  are  to  be  expected;  the  weak  organs  of 
those  born  under  Libra  are  the  bowels-and 
the  bladder.  The  hands  and  feet  are 
threatened  with  wounds. 

The  sign  which  presides  over  marriage, 
in  the  arrangement  of  the  Zodiacal  Con- 
stellations, is  "Aries"  in  House  VII.  It  is 
fickle,  violent  in  temper,  and  barren;  it  is 
directly  opposed  to  Libra,  but  unsatisfactory 
as  this  opposition  is,  the  subject  will  gain 
riches    through    marriage.      Through    the 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  63 

death  of  the  spouse  he  will  make  a  large 
inheritance  totally  unexpected. 

Those  born  under  this  sign  had  better  be- 
ware of  sea  voyages;  they  will  prove  dan- 
gerous and  never  profitable. 

Toward  middle  age,  there  is  a  threat  of 
loss  of  position,  and  a  warning  that  the 
mother  of  the  subject  may  be  the  cause, 
direct  or  indirect,  of  this  disastrous  happen- 
ing. 

The  subject  has  in  prospect  the  probabil- 
ities of  reaching  some  high  and  honored 
position;  his  relatives  will  assist  him  in  his 
ambitions;  he  will  possess  protectors  and 
friends  among  the  great  people  of  this 
world;  they  will  show  themselves  steadfast, 
assist  him  to  a  brilliant  marriage,  lend  him 
their  moral  and  material  support  in  matters 
of  business;  and  yet,  it  will  come  to  pass, 
that,  willingly,  or  not,  the  subject  will  do 
grievous  harm  to  one  of  these  powerful 
friends. 

He  will  meet  with  serious  enmity  on  the 
part  of  certain  clergymen  on  account  of 
family  matters;  other  enemies  will  come  up 
among  lawyers  and  men  of  learning. 

An  ancient  tradition  says  that  the  persons 
born  under  this  sign  will  be  the  cause  of 
tneir  own   troubles   and   perhaps  of    their 

ASTROLOGY 


death.  In  southern  latitudes  the  subjects  of 
Libra  are  naturally  sanguine-bilious;  in 
northern  climates  they  are  nervous-bilious. 

8.     SCORPIO.     (The  Scorpion. )    n\, 

This  Constellation,  "Scorpio" — the-eighth 
of  the  Zodiac — exerts  its  influence  from 
October  22  to  November  20. 

It  endows  the  subject^  J)orn  during  this 
period    with  ""aTjiiiind    at    the — same- -time 

shrewd,  persuasive,  fickle, 
capricious,  dreamy,  poet-^ 
ical  and  often  religiously 
inclined. 
' — ff  eTias  a  firm  hold  upon 
himself  and  his  will-power 
is  steadfast  and  persever- 
ing. 

The  temper  is  fiery, 
b  e  TTi  cose  and  easily 
aroused,  somewhat  rough 
and  even  viqlenjt,  but 
never  unkindly  so;  there 
IS  a  lovp  of  danger  for  its  own  sake.  This 
sign  renders  those  born  under  it  phlegmatic, 
taciturn  and  close  mouthed;  they  are  often 
tinged  with  misanthropy. 

Slow  to  move  to  anger,  they  are  also  sjpw 
to   forgive;    they   keej^_a  deep    feeling  of 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  55 

r£S£iiLiii£ntj__and  as  their  wrath  cools  down 
it  becomes  almost  more  dangerous,  for  in 
their  revengeful  spirit,  they  are  relentless 
and  act  quickly  and  recklessly. 

If  the  phlegmatic  tendency  is  the  pre- 
dominant symptom,  they  oppose  their  ad- 
versary by  the  mere  force  of  inertia. 

If  they  are  not  toned  down  by  education 
and  proper  surroundings,  the  subjects  of 
Scorpio  are  quarrelsome  and  fond  of  seek- 
ing trouble  with  or  without  cause. 

This  constellation  renders  those  born 
under  it  skillful  and  patient  in  all  kinds  of 
work;  it  gives  them  a  love  for  architecture, 
for  simple  country  pleasures,  and  withal,  a 
thirst  for  honors. 

In  their  opinions  they  are  stubborn, 
rarely  amenable  to  reason  and  disagreeably 
aggressive. 

This  sign  gives  little  prosperity  in  the 
first  part  of  life,  but  promises  plenty  of  it  in 
mature  years.  Unexpected  gains  will  accrue 
at  that  time  of  life;  they  may  come  from 
matters  connected  with  religious  worship  or 
be  the  result  of  long  journeys;  an  inherit- 
ance is  also  among  the  most  serious  prob- 
abilities. Scorpio  always  brings  fortune  in 
its  train. 

The  subject  will  have  few  brothers  if  any; 


|{6  ASTROLOGY 

one  of  them  is  threatened  with  a  fatal  acci- 
dent either  through  a  fall  or  through 
drowning. 

If  the  subject  is  born  between  midnight 
and  noon  his  father  will  suffer  complete 
ruin  in  his  position  and  fortune. 

Scorpio  always  gives  to  his  subjects  a 
numerous  progeny. 

Malignant  fevers  contracted  across  the 
sea  will  threaten  the  subject's  life;  he  will 
also  suffer  from  constant  headaches  and 
cruel  fits  of  neuralgia;  through  excesses  of 
some  kind — work  or  dissipation — a  severe 
illness  will  come,  but  recovery  is  possible. 

The  subip'^t  w^ill  surely  marry,  in  fact,  he 
will  marry  twice  as  an  early  widowhood  is 
foretold;  one  of  these  unions  will  be  unfor- 
tunate. Either  of  the  spouses  will  be  in 
slight  danger  of  being  crippled  by  a  large 
quadruped,  by  secret  enemies  or  by  acci- 
dent. 

Deep  heart-sorrows  will  come  to  the  sub- 
ject by  the  early  loss  (before  the  age  of 
thirty),  of  a  dearly  loved  one,  either  wife  or 
husband  or  sweetheart,  or  friend  of  either 
sex. 

Long  journeys  will  be  undertaken  over 
land  and  sea;  they  will  not  be  particularly 
fortunate. 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  57 

As  success  will  come  to  him  comparatively 
late  in  life,  he  will  have  passed  middle  life 
before  h.^  tastes  a  secure  peace,  bitterly 
fought  for  through  a  laborious  youth. 

Many  will  be  his  friends,  and  the  kindly 
favors  of  the  great  will  not  be  wanting;  but 
one  friend  or  protector  will  be  the  cause  of 
great  trouble  in  \he  march  of  success,  or  in 
a  love  affair. 

Enmities  will  also  be  numerous  and  they 
will  stick  to  the  subject  the  best  part  of  his 
life.  These  will  be  found  even  among  his 
daily  associates,  both  social  end  in  business. 

If  the  subject  visits  a  foisigu  country,  he 
will  be  in  great  danger  of  Leing  waylaid; 
but  he  will  escape  scot  free,  as  all  those 
born  under  Scorpio  are  singularly  well  pro- 
tected against  accidents  or  attacks, 

In  warm  climates  the  subjects  :A  Scorpio 
are  lymphatic-bilious,  in  cold  latit\ides  they 
are  nervous-bilious. 

9.  SAGITTARIUS.     (The  Archer.)    / 

This  Constellation,  "Sagittariijs"  —  the 
ninth  sign  of  the  Zodiac — exerts  its  influ- 
ence from  November  21  to  December  20. 

lL_eiKljcws  th^^^^^^  this  period 

with  an  ingenuous,  strictly  honest  nature, 
with  a  generous  heart,  that  does  kindly_a£ls 

ASTROLOGY 


^'  .with 


without  a  thought  of  reward  or  even  grati- 
tude. 

The  ancient  Magi  claimed  that  the  sub- 
jects of  Sagittarius  would  prove  exception- 
ally good,  or  radically  bad. 

Tlie  mind_xif_jhe_subiecLis-3^ 
tie,  easy-going,  peaceable;  _guick  to  anger 

and  quicker  to  qui- 
ej  down,  very  -lib- 
e r al  andjippartial 
,in_lnsjO£inions^  and 
a  gift  for 
rapid  assimilation. 
But  it  worries  a 
great  deal  about 
trifles  and  shows 
anxiety  out  of  pro- 
portion with  the  trouble  in  prospect.  The 
temper  does  not  grow  heated,  except  when 
unjustly  attacked,  or  if  placed  in  the  pres- 
ence of  dangerous  people. 

The  subject  of  Sagittarius  has  an  ex- 
tremely sensitive  and  nervous  disposition, 
and,  on  that  account,  shows,  at  times,  an 
irritability  only  skin-deep,  however,  and  of 
short  duration.  Otherwise  he  is  habitually 
cheerful,  often  like  a  child. 

Sagittarius  gives  simplicity,  and  uncon- 
ventionality,  and  an  intense  love  of  inde- 


SIGNS   OF  THE  ZODIAC  69 

pendence.  Its  subjects  are  always  on  their 
guard  over  themselves  and  over  others, 
although  frequently  deceived,  just  the  same; 
they  love  harmony  and  prefer  giving  way 
rather  than  fight  and  win.  Their  extreme 
timidity  prevents  them  often  from  asserting 
their  rights,  but  at  times  they  suddenly  con- 
quer it  and  show  that  they  are  no  cowards. 
They  are  not  easily  understood  as  they  keep 
much  to  themselves.  They  are  skillful 
with  their  hands  and  are  gifted  with  elo- 
quence; the  fine  arts  and  certain  branches 
of  science  attract  them;  they  love  solitude, 
and  study  by  themselves  behind  locked 
doors. 

Their  passions  are  fully  under  control,  and 
yet  they  are  ardent  and  numerous;  their 
opinions  are  always  moderate,  rather  of  an 
eclectic  nature  and  frequently  changed. 

The  subjects  of  Sagittarius  will  be  in  poor 
circumstances  in  infancy  and  childhood,  on 
account  of  losses  their  parents  will  have 
suffered  from. 

Their  personal  merits  will  assist  them  in 
building  a  fortune  to  which  a  few  legacies 
will  be  added  later. 

This  sign  announces  that  the  subjects 
will  have  few  brothers  and  sisters,  and  that 
they  will  not  be  on  good  terms  with  them; 


60  ASTROLOGY 

one  of  them  will  die  an  early  death  or 
barely  escape. 

On  account  of  certain  family  secrets,  a 
serious  disagreement  will  Intervene  be- 
tween the  subject  and  his  parents,  or  par- 
ents-in-law, or  step-parents.  He  will  have 
but  few  children  and  the  eldest  one  will  be 
a  cause  of  serious  worry;  in  fact,  he  will  not 
get  along  with  his  children  and  they  will 
live  away  from  hirri. 

This  sign  foretells  two  marriages,  one  of 
which  will  be  of  great  detriment  to  the  sub- 
ject's position. 

The  aptitudes  as  well  as  the  occupations 
will  be  of  two  different  kinds,  interfering 
greatly  with  each  other,  and  thus  hindering 
success.  The  subject  will  have  reached 
middle  age  before  obtaining  the  position 
and  fortune  due  to  him  on  account  of  his 
talents. 

He  will  suffer  from  frequent  minor  phys- 
ical ailments,  such  as  sore-throat,  sick 
headaches,  etc.  Until  his  thirtieth  year  he 
will  meet  with  frequent  falls  from  high 
places. 

Many  long  journeys,  but  none  by  water, 
will  be  made  necessary  by  his  position  and 
his  business.  During  one  of  these  trips,  he 
will  hear  of  the  death  of  a  near  relative. 


SIGNS   OF  THE   ZODIAC 

Socially  he  will  meet  with  success  and 
make  many  friends,  one  of  whom  will 
prove  treacherous  and  almost  bring  about 
the  loss  of  the  subject's  position.  He  will 
have  protectors  of  high  degree,  among 
them  a  person  of  lofty  standing,  who  will 
be  extremely  useful  to  him  at  a  critical 
moment. 

His  enemies  will  show  themselves  bitter 
and  persistent;  they  will  not  hesitate  to 
slander  him  cruelly,  and  try  their  best  to 
ruin  his  prosperity  in  business  and  in  love 

This  constellation  gives  to  its  subjects  a 
purely  nervous  temperament  in  Southern 
climates,  and  a  nervous-bilious  disposition 
in  Northern  latitudes.  It  promises  them  a 
long  life. 

lo.  CAPRICORN.  (The  Sea-Goat.)  1^ 

This  Constella- 
tion, "Capricorn" 
— the  tenth  sign  of 
the  Zodiac — exerts 
its  influence  from 
December  21  to 
January  19. 
J^he  p  e  r  s  o  n  s_ 
born  under  i ts  influen£e„ will~^-b^  self-nm^e 
nien,_tlie  builders  of  th^JiLQwn  fortime^nd 
they  will  know  how  to  remain  prosperous. 


62  ASTROLOGY 

Capricorn  alscL^endpws  its  subje^^tf^  ^^'^^  a 
strong  taste  for  destroying  thlngs^an  active 
disposj^tion.  a  vigorous  body,  especially  if 
born  between  midnight  and  noon,  for,  if 
born  between  noon  and  midnight  they  may 
have  a  few  physical  defects  and  suffer  from 
accidents.  They  will  show  themselves 
aggressive,  warlike,  enthusiastic,  vehement, 
and  yet,  inclined  to  melancholy  and  saving 
habits. 

Their  mind  will  be  shrewd,  fair  and  clever 
in  business  matters,  and  decidedly  versatile. 

Their  will-power,  although  strong,  may 
vary  in  its  object,  but  will  finally  succeed  in 
reaching  the  desired  goal. 

Capricorn  renders  its  subjects  rather 
brusque  in  their  manners,  with  such  decided 
ways  that  they  will  often  seem  rude.  They 
will  be  slow  to  anger  and  slow  to  forgive, 
although  they  do  not  harbor  mean,  revenge- 
ful feelings. 

They  are  very  prudent  and  circumspect, 
never  making  a  move  without  lengthy  de- 
liberation. 

Capricorn  endows  those  born  under  it 
with  quickness  and  agility  and  with  a  sound 
eyesight. 

They  will  not  prove  constant  in  love  mat- 
ters, although   this  fickleness  may  be  fre- 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  63 

quently  caused  by  the  influence  of  others, 
not  by  an  inborn  unfaithful  disposition. 

Money  will  come  to  the  subject  through 
his  own  talents  and  efforts,  seldom  through 
gifts  or  inheritance. 

Brothers  and  sisters  will  be  numerous,  but 
harmful  rather  than  helpful. 

The  Capricorn  subject  will  undertake 
many  short  journeys,  several  of  them  in 
consequence  of  his  enemies'  intrigues. 

His  father  will  make  him  suffer  through 
his  violence;  his  family  will  be  a  source  of 
more  trouble  than  satisfaction;  they  will 
interfere  with  his  matrimonial  projects. 

In  his  youth,  he  will  have  to  face  great 
physical  dangers,  either  wounds  in  war  or 
severe  illnesses. 

This  constellation  is  not  prolific;  it  is 
better  so,  since  the  children  of  the  subject, 
if  he  has  any,  will  ruin  his  position  or  his 
conduct  will  ruin  the  children's  lives. 

Great  struggles  are  foretold;  difficult  and 
mysterious  intrigues  developing  during 
journeys  or  on  account  of  them;  clerical 
gentlemen  will  be  mixed  in  the  matter. 
Until  the  subject  has  passed  his  42d  year 
he  will  have  to  undergo  many  vicissitudes 
and  be  ill-treated  by  relatives. 

The    Capricorn    subjects    suffer    greatly 


64  ASTROLOGY 

from  gout,  rheumatism  In  the  joints,  espe- 
cially in  the  arms  and  hands;  they  are 
troubled  also  with  certain  stomach  disorders. 
They  may  expect  bruises  due  to  falls;  they 
will  develop  a  tendency  to  hypochondria. 

The  marriage  question  is  In  their  case 
both  serious  and  complex.  The  Cancer 
constellation,  whose  part  it  Is  to  preside 
over  alliances  between  sexes,  is  particularly 
fickle  and  changeable;  It  Is  in  direct  oppo- 
sition to  Capricorn,  which  It,  therefore, 
greatly  influences,  and  so  the  subjects  of 
the  latter  will  meet  with  serious  troubles  in 
their  marital  relations,  and  will  probably 
marry  more  than  once. 

Capricorn  interferes  sadly  with  long  jour- 
neys, and  renders  them  quite  dangerous, 
either  through  accidents,  or  through  severe 
illnesses  or  wounds. 

There  will  be  more  than  one  Judas 
Iscnriot  among  the  friends  of  the  subject; 
his  position  will  run  great  risks  through 
their  dark  intrigues.  A  powerful  protection 
will  help  the  subject  upward,  especially  If  he 
has  chosen  the  army  or  navy  as  his  career. 

He  will  meet  two  kinds  of  enemies; 
some  in  high  places,  others  low  down  in 
social  rank;  his  brothers  and  sisters  (at 
least    one    of    them)    will     not    prove    his 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC 

friends.  Finally,  he  will  triumph  over  all 
this  active  or  latent  ill-will,  or  it  will  subside 
of  itself. 

The  Capricorn  constellation  gives  its  sub- 
jects a  lymphatic-nervous  physical  tempera- 
ment in  Southern  climes,  and  a  lymphatic- 
bilious  disposition  in  Northern  latitudes. 

II.  AQUARIUS.     (The  Water-Bearer.)  CJ? 

This  Constellation,  "Aquarius''  — the 
eleventh  sign  of  the  Zodiac — exerts  its  in 
fluence  from  January  20  to  February  18. 

It  endows  the  persons  born  under  it  with 
a  special  aptitude 
for  the  fine  arts 
and  secures  popu- 
lar recognition  for 
their  remarkable 
works.  Besides,  it 
gives  them  a  long 
life  and  lofty  posi- 
tion, and  makes  of 
them  orators  and 
authors. 

However,  they 
will  have  none  but 
them  s  e  1 V  e  s  to 
blame  if  they  are 
^persecuted  or  even 
exiled. 


66  ASTROI.OGY 

They  will  have  graceful,  gentle,  simple, 
and  straightforward  natures.  Although 
violent  when  driven  to  wrath,  they  quiet 
down  quickly  and  bear  no  grudge. 

The  will-power  will  be  firm,  but  lacking 
in  logic  and  be  apt  to  rush  to  its  goal  un^ 
mindful  of  obstacles  over  which  it  will  ride 
rough  shod.  The  Aquarius  subjects  will  be 
fond  of  solitude,  laborious  and  diligent, 
patient  and  persevering.  They  are  well 
endowed  for  serious  studies,  and  for  ruling 
over  other  people;  they  are  always  dream- 
ing of  riches  and  honors. 

Passionate  in  all  their  undertakings,  their 
opinions  are  ardent,  steadfast  and  strongly 
convincing. 

The  property  the  subject  will  acquire  will 
not  be  permanently  in  his  possession,  but  be 
taken  from  him  repeatedly  through  the 
intrigues  of  evil-minded  people,  some  of 
them  his  pretended  friends,  who  will,  at 
times,  resort  to  violence  to  deprive  him  of 
his  own.  Through  members  of  his  family 
he  will  come  to  much  money,  but  other 
blood  relations  will  damage  his  position  and 
reputation. 

The  Aquarius  subjects  will  be  great 
travelers,  sometimes  against  their  will;  but 
these  journeys  will  generally  turn  out  badly 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  67 

and  interfere  disastrously  with  the  financial 
prospects  and  the  social  position  of  the  sub- 
jects; their  health  also  will  suffer  on  that 
account. 

They  will  have  few  brothers  and  sisters,  if 
any;  they  will  receive  from  them  little  else 
but  unpleasant,  even  cruel,  treatment. 

On  a  short  trip,  the  subject  will  run  some 
serious  bodily  risk,  probably  on  the  water  of 
through  fire-arms  or  quadrupeds. 

His  father  will  die  of  sudden  death,  or 
meet  with  unexpected  financial  reverses. 
Scientific  researches  may  be  the  cause  of 
either  disaster. 

Aquarius  subjects  are  often  blessed  with 
twins.  Death  in  child-birth  is  among  the 
probabilities;  the  infants  that  will  come  to 
them  will  be  delicate  in  health  and  hard  to 
raise. 

Among  diseases  that  will  afflict  them  are 
troubles  of  the  stomach  and  the  lungs, 
violent  sick  headaches  and  brain  neuralgia. 

The  Constellation  Leo,  in  whose  resort  all 
unions  between  sexes  are  placed,  foretells 
for  the  Aquarius  subjects  a  marriage  with 
an  artist,  actor  or  professional  musician. 

The  career  of  the  subject  will  be  full  of 
ups  and  downs,  the  latter  often  of  the  most 
disheartening  kind;  but  he  will  always  come 


68  ASTROLOGY 

out  a  victor,  either  through  his  unfaltering 
efforts,  or  through  the  opportune  assistance 
of  his  friends. 

For  his  friends  will  be  many  and  really 
devoted.  People  in  high  position  will  con- 
tribute to  the  subject's  final  triumph  over 
•  his  difficulties. 

But  his  enemies  also  will  be  many  and 
relentless,  using  both  hidden  and  open, 
violent  means  to  undo  him;  he  will  conquer 
them  through  a  series  of  almost  providential 
circumstances. 

Still  the  risks  ahead  of  him  are  many, 
mostly  due  to  his  own  rashness  and  his  ruin- 
ous love  of  change.  His  friends  will  often 
quarrel  with  him  on  that  account.  But 
Aquarius  will  bestow  upon  him  public 
esteem,  and  the  kindly  advice  of  the  wise 
will  help  him  to  reach  a  pre-eminent  posi- 
tion among  his  fellow-citizens. 

Those  born  under  this  constellation  have 
a  bilious-sanguine  temperament  in  Southern 
climes,  and  a  nervous-sanguine  physical  dis- 
position in  Northern  latitudes. 

12.  PISCES.   (The  Fishes.)  X 

This  Constellation,  "Pisces" — the  twelfth 
sign  of  the  Zodiac — exerts  its  influence 
from  February  19  to  March  20. 


SIGNS   OF   THE    ZODIAC  69 

Those  born  under  this  sign  will  be  the 
artisans  of  their  own  celebrity  and  will  at- 
tain it  in  the  realm  of  the  fine  arts,  sciences 
or  literature.  Popularity  will  come  to  them 
unbidden,  as  a  reward  of  unwearying  efforts 
in  developing  their  natural  talents. 

Pisces  endows  its  subjects  with  a  certain 
degree  of  restlessness,  with  a  constant  dis- 


position to  find  fault  with  the  results  of 
their  own  labor,  thus  inciting  them  to 
further  efforts;  they  are  somewhat  pessi- 
mistic and  inclined  to  alter  their  views  to 
reach  the  goal  more  rapidly.  They  have  a 
kind  of  duplex  moral  nature  difficult  to 
fathom,  but  withal  strictly  honest,  fair  in  all 
its  dealings,  poetical,  dreamy  and  mystical. 
The  morals  of  the  subject  will  be  pure, 
owing   to   his   high    principles,   for   he   will 


70  ASTROLOGY 

otherwise  be  very  fond  of  pleasure.  He 
will  be  of  a  proud  disposition  and  that  will 
keep  him  away  from  anything  degrading. 

His  will  is  strong  while  it  lasts;  but  it  will 
change  its  object  frequently;  he  will  be 
mildly  despotic,  without  a  real  tyrannical 
trait. 

His  prudence  will  be  remarkable;  he  will 
be  slow  to  confide  in  any  one,  or  to  make 
real  friends,  while  always  cheerful  in  his 
relations  toward  his  fellow  beings. 

He  will  be  witty  and  somewhat  sarcastic 
in  his  remarks,  but  never  biting  or  un- 
pleasant. There  will  never  be  any  sting  in 
what  he  says. 

Slow  to  move  to  anger,  he  will  quiet  down 
just  as  slowly,  but  will  keep  no  rancor  in  his 
heart.  He  will  be  quick,  vigilant,  indus- 
trious. 

This  constellation  gives  those  born  under 
it  gifts  of  eloquence  in  speech  and  writing, 
and  causes  them  to  love  a  generous  diet, 
especially  when  sitting  with  friends  around 
a  well-laden  board.  It  will  make  them 
sociable  to  a  marked  degree. 

Their  opinions  will  be  ardent,  but  rather 
eclectic  than  one-sided. 

By  his  work,  by  his  personal  merit,  the 
subject   of   Pisces   will   be    able   to   acquire 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  71 

wealth;  but  he  will  be  kept  poor  by  impru- 
dent alliances  or  reckless  speculations. 

Generally,  this  sign  foretells  two  or  more 
professions,  pursued  simultaneously  or  suc- 
cessively, as  the  subject  will  prove  remark- 
ably versatile. 

He  will  have  more  sisters  than  brothers, 
and  will  lose  one  of  them  early  in  life.  His 
parents  had  to  suffer  from  serious  mishap 
or  losses  during  his  childhood. 

This  twelfth  constellation  generally  prom- 
ises its  subjects  many  travels  and  plenty  of 
money,  although  the  ownership  of  the  fam- 
ily estate  may  be  contested  in  law  by  step- 
father or  step-mother,  on  account  of  a 
second  marriage  of  the  subject's  surviving 
parent. 

He  will  leave  the  family  home  at  an  early 
age,  while  his  people  will  not  be  great 
travelers. 

This  constellation  announces  two  mar- 
riages for  the  subject,  one  with  a  widow  or 
widower;  there  will  be  some  misfortune  con- 
nected with  either  the  first  or  the  second 
spouse;  the  other  marriage  will  be  a  very 
happy  one. 

Severe  accidents  will  happen  in  his  family. 
He  will  undertake  many  journeys;  their 
object  will  be  the  acquiring  of  fortune,  or 


72  ASTROLOGY 

reputation,  or  both.  He  will  change  his 
residence  and  maybe  his  position,  very  fre- 
quently. 

Pisces  promises  those  born  under  it,  high 
public  or  social  positions  and  the  favor  of 
people  of  lofty  standing — probably  a  liberal 
profession  as  one's  life's  work  and  some- 
times two  distinct  careers. 

The  illnesses  peculiar  to  this  sign  are 
fevers  and  troubles  of  the  heart  or  eyes;  the 
accidents  that  may  occur  will  be  of  trifling 
nature.  Unpleasant  dreams  will  annoy  the 
subject. 

Besides  a  few  solid  friendships,  the  subject 
will  have  very  treacherous  friends,  one  in 
particular  whose  odious  conduct  toward  him 
will  almost  wreck  his  life. 

Many  will  be  the  envious  ones  whose 
occult  or  open  intrigues  will  have  to  be 
constantly  guarded  against.  They  will  fail 
in  their  evil  designs,  unless  the  subject's  con- 
duct be  such  as  to  give  them  a  serious  hold 
upon  his  destiny. 

In  Southern  climes,  the  subjects  of  Pisces 
are  by  nature  lymphatic-bilious;  in  North- 
ern latitudes,  they  are  lymphatic-nervous. 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  73 

CONCLUSION    OF   THE    INTERPRETATION    OF   THE 
SIGNS    OF   THE    ZODIAC. 

We  are  compelled  to  admit  that  a  hasty 
perusing  of  characteristics  thus  assigned  by 
tradition  to  the  subjects  of  the  various 
Zodiacal  signs,  may  reveal  a  number  of  dis- 
couraging contradictions,  at  least  on  the 
surface,  until  the  student  has  fairly  grasped 
the  onward,  esoteric  significance  of  these 
long  enumerations  of  qualities,  defects, 
probable  accidents,  etc. 

This  unfavorable  impression  disappears, 
however,  as  soon  as  one  takes  the  trouble 
to  classify  these  various  "symptomatic 
prophesies,"  according  to  the  Trinary 
Kabbalistic  divisions y  or  '' Triitocracies','  the 
importance  of  which  cannot  be  too  strongly 
insisted  upon. 

As  I  rnentioned  repeatedly  in  my  large 
book  on  Palmistry*  all  visible  manifestations 
of  the  occult  may,  or  rather,  must,  bear 
three  distinct  separate  meanings,  to  be  used, 
the  one  or  the  other,  or  again  the  third, 
according  to  the  elements  in  the  human 
being  which  we  wish  to  understand  and 
fathom. 

*  The  Study  of  Palmistry  for  Professional  Purposes 
and  for  Advanced  Pupils.  Large  8vo  vol.  of  480  pp.,  and 
1,251  illustrations.     Laird  &  Lee,  Chicago. 


74  ASTROLOGY 

We  have: 

First:  The  World  of  the  Soul — Inspt>-€t' 
Hon. 

Second:  The  World  of  the  Mind — Intellect. 

Third:  The  World  of  Matter — Action. 

To  the  first  zvorld  belong  religious  and 
psychological  aspirations,  the  knowledge  of 
good  and  evil,  Conscience. 

To  x\\Q  second  world  h^Xong:  Imagination 
at  its  best,  or  its  worst;  what  is  erroneously 
called  Genius;  the  gift  of  reasoning,  of 
higher  eloquence,  of  poetry,  of  art,  of  music, 
the  inventive  faculty,  the  direct  influence 
over  one's  fellow  beings. 

Finally,  to  the  third  world:  Our  passions, 
our  instincts,  our  love  for  doing  and  undo- 
ing, the  creative  or  destructive  impulses. 

Now  that  we  have  laid  down,  in  a  few 
brief  words,  the  tripartite  rule  that  must 
govern  our  investigations,  of  ourselves  or 
other  human  beings,  be  it  by  Astrology, 
Chiromancy,  Graphology,  or  Phrenology, 
let  the  student  read  over  the  special  charac- 
teristics (given  above)  that  have  been,  from 
prehistoric  times  to  our  days,  attributed  to 
those  born  under  this  or  that  sign  of  the 
Zodiac,  and  he  will  have  no  difficulty  to  find 
his  way  through  what  appeared  at  first  a 
rather  inextricable  labyrinth. 


SIGNS   OF   THE   ZODIAC  75 

Should  he  desire,  however,  to  plunge  a 
little  further  into  the  mysteries  of  the  three 
worlds,  inasmuch  as  this  classification  enters 
into  the  scheme  of  this  work,  he  may  read 
the  following  pages,  that  will,  doubtless, 
lighten  the  wide  stretches  of  kabbalistic 
horizon  still  left  dark  in  this  our  popular 
exposition  of  the  particularities  of  the 
Zodiac  subjects. 

THE  FOUR  TYPICAL  TEMPERAMENTS 

Bilious:  Dark  complexion,  strong  mus- 
cles, great  vitality,  strong  passions,  tenacity 
of  purpose. 

Sanguine:  Brilliant  complexion,  active 
mind  and  body,  energy,  fickleness  of  pur- 
pose. 

Nervous:  Delicate  features,  rapid  circula- 
tion of  blood,  irritability  of  vital  functions 
and  temper,  shrewdness. 

Lymphatic:  Flabby  muscles,  dull  com- 
plexion, sluggish  of  circulation,  emotion  and 
mind. 

As  the  V  Jre  type  is  rarely  found,  a  tem- 
perament is  best  described  by  modifying 
one  of  the  above  terms  by  another.  George 
Washington  might  be  called  sanguine- 
bilious;  Victor  Hugo,  nervous-sanguine. 


An  ancient  instrument  denvonstrating  the  distance  of  the  planets 
from  the  earth  and  the  plane  of  their  paths.  The  smaller  cut 
represents  the  earth,  its  zones,  equator,  etc. 


CHAPTER    IV 

THE   PLANETS 

In  the  first  two  chapters  we  have  com- 
pleted what  is  called  "the  Orientation  of  a 
Horoscope,"  meaning  by  this  the  position 
of  the  Sun  on  the  Ecliptic  on  the  day  of 
birth  of  any  one  whose  life  we  propose 
studying.  Of  course,  without  this  exact 
date,  nothing  can  be  done  toward  the  cast- 
ing of  a  Horoscope,  but,  on  the  other  hand, 
astrological  readings,  to  be  reliable  and 
truly  personal,  depend  on  other  facts  and 
calculations  which  will  be  gradually  unfolded 
to  the  reader.  Horoscopes  based  solely  on 
Zodiacal  indications  have  a  real,  intrinsic 
value  and  one  of  the  most  popular  books  in 
America  claims  that  they  include  everything 
worth  knowing  in  this  order  of  ideas. 

But  the  details  of  one's  life,  i.  e.,  informa- 
tion about  Health,  Fortune  and  Love,  are 
not  convincingly  and  accurately  revealed  by 
the  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  studied  singly  and 
by  themselves. 

Although  I  have  neither  the  space  nor  the 

inclination,  in  these  short  and  practical  les- 

J  77 


78  ASTROLOGY 

sons,  to  attempt  a  defence,  or  simply  an  ex- 
planation, of  the  mysteries  of  ancient 
Astrology,  I  must  state  the  following  as  an 
article  of  faith  in  astrological  researches. 

In  this  great  Universe,  all  the  realms,  all 
the  Worlds,  are  included  in  a  huge  soli- 
darity, just  as  in  our  little  bit  of  a  world  the 
various  elements,  whether  endowed  with  life 
or  not,  all  depend  on  each  other  and  are  the 
component  parts  of  a  great  whole.  If  this 
be  so — and  this  primordial  law  is  being 
made  clearer  and  more  certain  every  day  b)> 
the  discoveries  of  modern  science — the 
larger  celestial  orbs  or  luminaries  exert  a 
most  decided  influence  over  us — the  Earth 
— just  as  we,  ourselves,  do  exert  an  influence 
over  them. 

In  my  first  chapter  I  named  "seven" 
celestial  bodies,  which  have  been  recognized 
from  all  antiquity  as  the  bestowers  of  power- 
ful fluidic  influence  over  our  planet.  In  the 
order  of  their  nearness  to  us  they  are: 

Between  us  and  the  Sun:  Venus  and  Mer- 
cury. 

Farther  from  the  Sun  than  the  Earth: 
Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn. 

To  these  five  planets  let  us  add:  The  Sun 
itself,  and  the  Moon,  which,  as  we  all  know, 
is  a  satellite  of  the  Earth. 


THE    PLANETS  79 

Now,  to  each  of  these  five  Planets  have 
L<;en  assigned  by  tradition  a  Throne  by  day 
and  a  Residence  by  night,  in  one  of  the 
signs  of  the  Zodiac.  The  illustration  used 
in  this  chapter  places  the  symbols  of  these 
planets  where  they  belong,  that  is: 
Saturn  by  day — in  Aquarius;    by  night — in 

Capricorn. 
Jupiter  by  day — in  Sagittarius;   by  night — 

in  Pisces. 
Mars    by    day  —  in    Aries;     by    night  —  in 

Scorpio. 
Venus    by    day — in     Libra;     by    night — In 

Taurus. 
Mercury  by  day — in  Gemini;   by  night — in 

Virgo. 

The  Sun  Is,  day  and  night,  In  Leo,  while 
the  Moon  is,  night  and  day.  In  Cancer. 

Remember,  these  are  the  specially 
elected  Dwellings  of  the  seven  Planets,  and 
their  meanings  are  to  be  understood  In  con- 
nection with  the  readings  we  have  given  of 
the  signs  of  the  Zodiac.  This  adds  that 
much  more  precision  to  the  Information  we 
have  already  gathered  from  the  signs  them- 
selves and  "by  themselves." 
^  But  before  giving  these  meanings,  and 
describing  the  human  types  that  bear,  as  it 
were,  the  visible  imprint  of  the  particular 

ASTROLOGY 


Planets  exerting  upon  them  a  predominat- 
ing influence,  let  me  state  at  once  that  the 
main  study  of  the  would-be  astrologer,  pro- 
fessional  or   amateur,  is   to   learn   how   to 


locate  exactly  the  position  of  each  of  these 
Planets,  on  the  day,  and,  if  possible,  the 
hour,  of  birth  of  the  person  whose  horoscope 
is  being  cast.  This  has  always  been  con- 
sidered as  the  most  difficult  part  of  the  cast- 


THE   PLANETS  81 

ing  process  and  arduous  mathematical 
operations  have  been  claimed  j:o  be  Indis- 
pensable to  reach  this  result  with  any  degree 
of  accuracy. 

If  you  have  perused  other  works  on  As- 
trology, you  are  aware  that  they  require  cal- 
culations about  the  moon's  position,  the  plan- 
ets' declinations,  etc.  To  avoid  this  difficulty 
I  have  spent  years  in  hard  work,  until  now 
I  shall  be  able,  in  my  concluding  lesson,  to 
give  the  student  a  much  simpler  and  most 
accurate  system,  for  putting  together  the 
different  elerxients  of  a  Horoscope,  all  of 
which  we  shall  have,  by  that  time,  thor- 
oughly mastered  together.  But  this  Is 
antlclpatlnp-  and  getting  away  from  the  sub- 
ject of  this  lesson,  the  Planets. 

Of  the  seven  celestial  orbs,  Saturn,  Mars 
and,  often,  the  Moon,  are  considered  as  de- 
cidedly unfavorable  or  "Inimical."  The 
Sun,  Venus  and  Jupiter,  on  the  other  hand, 
are  constai.  Jy  favorable  or  "  friendly." 
Mercury  is  sometimes  good,  sometimes  bad. 
Of  course,  their  positions,  on  the  day  of  the 
subject's  birth,  not  only  influence  the  said 
subject's  whole  life,  but  also  react  upon  each 
other  and,  in  that  way,  modify  greatly  the 
meanings  of  each  separate  orb,  and  the 
type  it  represents  on  Earth. 


82  ASTROLOGY 

1.  SATURN 

Any  one  born  under  this  Planet  will  be, 
In  physical  appearance,  unprepossessing  and 
even  somewhat  repulsive.  The  complexion 
is  dull;  the  hair  Is  straight,  dark  and  dull 
and  Is  lost  early.  Their  teeth,  also,  are 
poor.  They  walk  with  a  stoop  and  with 
eyes  downcast;  they  are  awkward  and  fall 
frequently;  they  are  often  deaf  and  suffer 
from  rheumatism.  They  are  skeptics  born, 
even  scoffers,  and  have  no  liking  for  the 
society  of  their  fellow  beings.  Among  them 
are  found  poisoners,  anarchists  and  all  sorts 
of  public  and  private  enemies.  They  are 
fond  of  the  wicked  sides  of  the  occult  sci- 
ences, of  chemistry,  agriculture  and  mining; 
they  are  misers  at  heart,  and  smile  but 
rarely.  Saturn  has  a  disastrous  influence 
upon  the  nervous  system  and  drives  one  to 
insanity.  The  Saturnians,  as  they  are 
called,  are  born  gamblers  and  unlucky  ones 
at  that. 

2.  JUPITER 

This  Planet — next  In  size  and  nearness  to 
the  Sun — endows  those  born  under  its  influ- 
ence— Juplterlans — with  a  handsome,  most 
pleasing  physique,  and  a  most  cheerful, 
jovial  disposition.     They  are  general  favor- 


THE    PLANETS  83 

ites,  in  fact,  too  much  so,  for  their  own 
good,  as  they  have  a  tendency  to  live  too 
high  and  too  fast.  They  have  a  clear,  some- 
what florid  complexion  and  a  disposition  to 
stoutness.  Their  hair  is  plentiful  and  curly, 
they  lose  it  early  in  life.  Their  teeth  are 
good,  sometimes  a  little  large  in  front;  they 
often  have  dimples.  They  are  great  lovers 
of  comforts;  their  ambition  is  generally  suc- 
cessful, doubtless  on  account  of  their  popu- 
larity due  to  the  pleasant  magnetism  that 
emanates  from  them.  In  religion,  they  love 
everything  that  appeals  to  their  senses;  they 
are  most  of  the  time  in  love  but  are  more 
sensual  than  truly  affectionate.  At  bottom, 
and  unless  otherwise  influenced,  they  are 
weak  and  lack  the  power  to  resist  tempta- 
tion. In  its  best  type,  the  Jupiterian  (or 
"Jovial")  is  magnanimous,  noble-hearted 
and  a  born  leader  of  men — or  women, 

3.     MARS 

Between  Jupiter  and  the  Earth,  Astron- 
omy places  the  Planet  Mars,  with  which  it 
is  claimed  we  are  about  to  communicate  by 
means  of ,  electric  waves.  Whether  such 
result  be  obtainable  or  not,  it  is  certain  that 
the  majority  of  human  beings  born  under 
the   influence   of    Mars — the   Martians    (or 


84  ASTROLOGY 

"Martials") — are  heavily  built  but  physically 
strong.  They  are  not  gifted  with  much  In- 
tellectuality and  care  but  little  for  any  form 
of  learning,  except  as  it  refers  to  out-door 
sports,  travels  In  dangerous  countries  and 
military  affairs.  They  are  brave  to  a  de- 
gree, only  too  ready  to  risk  their  lives  for 
little  or  no  purpose;  they  are  easily  angered, 
and,  for  the  time  being,  forget  everything 
in  the  excess  of  their  violence.  The  worst 
Martian  type  will  commit  murder  before  he 
knows  it.  At  their  best,  those  born  under 
Mars  will  show  themselves  straightforward 
and  incapable  of  any  kind  of  fraud.  Their 
word  is  their  bond  and  they  are  ready  for 
hard  work.  They  are  patient,  faithful  and 
true,  but  not  "brainy."  A  male  Martian  is 
generally  a  great  favorite  with  the  ladles 
and  is  apt  to  be  rather  quick  and  unscrupu- 
lous in  his  courtship  methods.  He  is  not  a 
sentimental  lover.  A  bad  Martian  is  a  loud, 
fatiguing  talker  and  a  braggard. 

Now  we  have  studied  the  Astrological 
meanings  of  the  three  Planets  placed,  in  the 
Solar  system,  farther  from  the  Sun  than  we 
— the  Earth — are.  Between  us  and  the  Sun 
we  find,  first: 


THE   PLANETS  85 

4.     VENUS 

This  is  one  of  the  most  favorable  or 
"friendly"  Planets.  The  persons  born  under 
its  influence  have  many  physical,  mental  and 
moral  traits  in  common  with  those  born 
under  Jupiter.  But  the  Venusians — it  is  the 
name  they  are  known  by  in  Astrological 
lore — possess  a  more  effeminate  style  of 
beauty  and  their  general  temperament  is 
also  cast  somewhat  in  the  same  molds; 
thus,  their  complexion  is  ultra-clear  and 
their  skin  very  thin  and  transparent.  Their 
height  is  below  the  average;  the  face  full, 
the  forehead  smooth  but  often  too  narrow 
for  perfect  beauty;  the  hair  is  dark  with  a 
brilliant  shine,  the  eyebrows  and  lashes  are 
gracefully  pencilled.  The  nose  is  fleshy  and 
the  nostrils  dilate  whenever  a  pleasure  is  in 
prospect;  the  eyes  are  smiling  and  bathed 
in  a  tender  languor;  frequently  one  eye  is 
larger  than  the  other.  The  mouth  is  small, 
with  full  lips  of  a  bright  red;  it  displays 
white  and  perfect  teeth  and  coral-red  gums, 
The  body  is  plump  but  beautifully  shaped, 
with  no  bone  prominent;  the  hips  are 
rather  too  marked.  Hands  and  feet  are 
small  and  well  formed.  Venusians  are 
found  of  dress,  of  jewelry,  of  flowers,  of  per- 
fumes, of    music — especially   simple,  melo- 


86  ASTROLOGY 

dious  music.  They  are  often  quite  expert 
in  some  of  the  fine  arts,  which  they  cultivate 
more  for  the  pleasure  they  find  in  them  and 
to  charm  their  friends  than  for  the  satisfac- 
tion of  theirvanity  or  for  profit.  The  Venu- 
sians  are  remarkable  for  their  constant  good 
humor  and  their  aversion  to  all  strife  and 
quarreling,  even  of  the  mildest  character. 
They  generally  have  large  families.  If  this 
planet  be  under  unfavorable  aspects  from 
Saturn,  or  Mars,  its  best  benefits  turn  into 
terrible  defects,  especially  if  Jupiter  is  also 
in  bad  aspects.  Then  the  effeminacy 
grows  to  such  an  extent  as  to  destroy  every 
noble  trait  in  the  subject's  nature;  the  in- 
herent sensuality  of  the  Venusian  allowing 
itself  unrestricted  scope  becomes  the  cause 
of  gravest  excesses  and  ruins  the  subject's 
prospects.  Sometimes,  if  the  Venusian  be 
a  man  and  Mars  should  react  on  Venus, 
brutality  in  love  matters  will  be  the  domi- 
nant feature  of  the  wretched  victim  of  this 
sad  combination.  As  a  matter  of  fact,  in 
the  good  as  well  as  in  the  bad  Venusian,  the 
senses  are  all  powerful;  they  may  act  in  a 
more  refined  way  in  the  first  case  than  in 
the  second,  but  in  either  case,  they  have 
still  to  be  watched  over  closely  or  may  turn 
out  to  be  rather  unreliable  rulers. 


THE    PLANETS  8^ 

5.     MERCURY 

As  I  Stated  above,  Mercury  is  an  unclassi- 
fied Planet,  a  sort  of  "free  lance,"  in  the 
Astrological  world.  It  is  at  times  "friendly," 
at  others  decidedly  "inimical."  It  all  de- 
pends upon  the  aspect  of  the  other  planets 
toward  it.  Those  born  under  Mercury — the 
Mercurians  as  they  are  called — are  small  in 
stature,  but  rem.arkable  for  their  agility  and 
bodily  skill.  Mentally,  they  are  endowed 
with  a  versatility  which  renders  them  apt  to 
undertake  almost  any  study,  trade,  or  pro- 
fession, and  make  a  success  of  it.  They  re- 
main young-looking  very  late  in  life  and 
their  complexion,  rather  of  a  creamy  white, 
is  often  tinted  by  blushes.  The  hair  is 
chestnut-colored  and  curls  at  the  end;  the 
forehead  is  high,  the  eyebrows  meet,  the 
eyes  themselves  are  deep-set  and  penetrat- 
ing, a  little  too  restless,  perhaps;  the  nose  is 
straight,  the  upper  lip  protrudes  slightly; 
the  chin  is  long  and  pointed. 

The  Mercurians  are  active  to  a  degree, 
fond  of  money-making  and  clever  in  busi- 
ness. Their  voice  is  not  strong  and  yet 
they  are  often  eloquent,  but  of  an  eloquence 
that  does  not  dazzle;  it  is  of  a  convincing, 
not  of  a  showy,  style.  They  are  born 
logicians  and,  on  that  account,  are  excellent 


S8  ASTROLOGY 

mathematicians;  they  have  wit,  are  quick 
at  repartee  and  excel  in  turning  a  threaten- 
ing failure  into  success.  They  are  met  most 
frequently  among  the  professions,  the  medi- 
cal particularly;  they  are  successful  in  society 
and  a  Mercurian  of  the  fair  sex  has  always 
a  crowd  of  fascinated  admirers  in  her  train 
when  much  handsomer  women  remain  un- 
courted.  In  fact,  adventurers  of  both  sexes 
are,  eight  times  out  of  ten,  Mercurians,  for 
they  need  a  great  deal  of  personal  magnetism 
to  victimize  their  dupes.  Affected  l^y  Saturn, 
the  Mercurian  will  become  extremely  dan- 
gerous, for  he  grows  secretive,  which  Mer- 
cury is  not  by  nature.  Then  all  these 
talents  for  mischief  may  lead  him  to  crime, 
such  as  forgery,  perjury,  even  poison- 
ing. .  ^ 

The  defect  against  which  all  those  born 
under  Mercury  ought  to  guard  themselves 
with  a  tireless  vigilance  is  a  temptation  to 
lie  and  an  irresistible  inclination  to  annex 
too  freely  other  people's  property  by 
schemes  that  are  called  "clever  business 
devices"  by  the  unscrupulous.  Then  again, 
they  talk  too  much  for  the  sake  of  boasting 
of  their  various  feats  of  cleverness,  and  this 
weakness  leads  them  into  all  manner  of 
trouble. 


THE    PLANETS  89 

6.    THE  SUN 

The  Solarians — or  those  born  under  the 
influence  of  the  Sun — are  of  an  average 
size,  handsome  and  well  built;  their  com- 
plexion has  a  sort  of  golden  tint;  their  hair 
is  often  a  beautiful  blond  color,  wavy  and 
abundant;  their  forehead  is  well  developed 
but  too  high;  it  denotes  at  once  the  uncom- 
monly brainy  type  of  the  subject.  The  eyes 
are  large,  of  a  graceful  shape,  full  of  fire 
and  yet  gentle  in  expression;  they  are  some- 
what prominent  and  the  eyesight  is  easily 
affected.  The  face  is  well  rounded,  the 
mouth  is  arched  and  the  teeth  regular  but 
somewhat  yellowish  in  tint;  the  chin  is 
round  and  firm.  The  body  is  admirably 
shaped,  the  bearing  is  proud  and  stately, 
but  in  the  good  Solarian  there  is  no  trace  of 
silly  vanity.  They  are,  intellectually,  a  very 
superior  race  and  no  other  star  endows  its 
subjects  with  such  a  taste  for  all  the  arts. 
They  are  dreamers  of  beautiful  dreams  and 
although  not  what  one  calls  "practical,"  they 
are  singularly  successful.  Often  it  seems  as 
if  everything  they  touched  turned  into  gold. 
They  are  essentially  lucky  and  their  gam- 
bling or  speculating  ventures  seldom  fail  to 
ultimately  enrich  them,  especially  if  they 
obey  their  own   inspirations.     Their  great 


90  ASTROLOGY 

defects  are:  a  great  deal  of  unconscious 
selfishness,  and,  as  a  natural  result,  a  lack 
of  constancy  in  their  affections.  Thus 
these  most  amiable  and  charming  indi- 
viduals render  the  people  devoted  to  them 
very  unhappy  and  discouraged. 

The  Solarians  are  often  called  to  the 
highest  positions  in  the  world  they  belong 
to,  as  their  flowery  eloquence  and  charming 
personality  dazzle  their  listeners.  They  are 
not  shrewd  in  business  matters  and,  being 
accessible  to  flattery,  are  frequently  the  vic- 
tims of  sharpers  and  adventurers.  In  brief, 
they  are  the  spoiled  children  of  Nature  and 
if  they  realize  their  weak  points  in  good 
time,  they  have  a  magnificent  existence 
before  them. 

7.  THE   MOON 

You  have  doubtless  noticed  by  this  time 
that  words  in  every-day  use,  such  as  "jovial," 
"saturnian,"  "mercurial,"  "sunny,"  applied 
to  the  dispositions  of  the  human  temper  cor- 
respond with  remarkable  exactitude  to  the 
names  given  by  Astrology  to  the  various 
planetary  types.  The  rule  holds  good  with 
the  Moon  subjects,  whom  we  call  "Lunari- 
ans" (not  "lunatics"). 

These  Lunarians  are  above  the  average 


THE   PLANETS  91 

height,  with  blond  hair,  rather  prominent, 
light-colored  eyes  and  a  round  head  with 
somewhat  bulging  brow.  They  are  stout, 
but  this  is  often  due  to  an  ultra-lymphatic 
temperament.  They  have  a  tendency  to 
dropsy  and  kidney  diseases.  The  hair  falls 
easily  and  so  do  the  teeth;  there  is  a  sort  of 
vague  expression  in  the  eyes,  which  are 
often  watery.  To  the  Lunarian  type  belong 
the  nervous,  hysterical  temperaments,  easily 
hypnotized  and  genuinely  clairvoyant. 
Their  intuition  Is  all  the  more  remarkable, 
since  they  are  very  poor  reasoners  and  are 
swayed  to  and  fro  by  an  ever-working  imag- 
ination. Their  nature  is  seldom  well-bal- 
anced and,  unless  properly  trained  or 
protected  by  "friendly"  Planets  In  favorable 
aspects,  the  Lunarians  may  end  in  insane 
asylums  as  "lunatics." 

However,  a  fair  amount  of  Moon  influ- 
ence may  be  beneficial,  especially  to  those 
whose  profession  calls  for  a  constant  supply 
of  imagination,  such  as  poets,  novelists, 
composers,  and  even  painters  and  sculptors. 
As  a  rule  it  is  among  women  that  one  finds 
the  greatest  number  of  Lunarians;  their 
special  physical  troubles  are  also  very 
powerfully  influenced  by  the  Moon.  Intui- 
tion, this  precious  gift  of  the  weaker  sex,  is 

ASTROLOGY 


due  to  the  same  planet;  finally,  the  Lunari- 
ans are  decidedly  hypochondriac,  that  is, 
constantly  imagining  themselves  the  prey 
of  some  disease  or  other. 

This  closes  m.y  present  review  of  the 
Planets'  characteristics.  Remember,  this  is 
only  the  ground-work  of  what  is  coming 
later;  but,  like  every  other  kind  of  ground- 
work, it  is  an  essential  part  of  the  structure 
and  has  to  be  studied  in  all  its  details,  if  any 
satisfactory  results  are  to  be  secured. 


SYMBOLS  OF  THE  PLANETS  AND 
ZODIACAL  SIGNS 


Saturn 

b 

Aries 

T 

Libra         -^ 

Jupiter 
Mars 

V 

s 

Taurus 
Gemini 

IT 

Scorpio  HX 
Sagittarius  / 

Sun 
Venus 
Mercury 
Moon 

© 

c 

Cancer 

Leo 

Virgo 

1^ 

Capricorn  VJ 
Aquarius  z:z 
Pisces         K 

.      CHAPTER  V 

THE   TWELVE   SOLAR    HOUSES 

We  have  studied,  sufficiently  for  all  prac- 
tical purposes,  the  first  two  elements  of  a 
Horoscope,  namely,  "the  12  signs  of  the 
Zodiac"  and  "the  6  Planets."  Now  we 
reach  the  third  element,  which,  intelligently 
combined  with  the  two  others,  will  give  us 
the  most  extraordinary  inside  view  into  the 
lives  of  the  subjects  under  inspection. 

This  new  and  distinct  element  in  our 
study  consists  in  another  method  of  dividing 
the  Zodiac,  discovered  or  prescribed  by  the 
ancient  Magi,  and  their  successors,  the 
Egyptian  Priests.  Here  again,  the  Zodiac 
is  divided  into  twelve  equal  parts,  called  this 
time  "Solar  Houses,"  and  designated  by  the 
numerals  L  to  XIL  in  Roman  figures. 

The  student  will  remember  that,  when  we 

began  our  examination  of  the  Signs  of  the 

Zodiac,  we  placed  the  first  Sign,  "Aries,"  in 

what  is  called  the  "Orient"  ( =  East)  of  the 

Zodiacal  circle.      This  same  space  (to  the 

left  hand  of  the  reader  when  examining  a 

ASTROLOGY 


diagram  of  the  Zodiac)  is  permanently  occu 
pied  by  House  I.     Proceeding  downward  to 
what  is  called  the  "Bottom"  of  the  Horos- 


cope, we  place  House  II.  in  the  compartment 
reserved  for  "Taurus." 


THE   SOLAR    HOUSES  95 

Continuing    in    the    same    direction    we 
place: 


House 

III. 

in 

Gemini. 

House 

IV. 

in 

"Cancer." 

House 

V. 

in 

"Leo." 

House 

VI.] 

in 

"Virgo." 

House 

VII. 

in 

"Libra." 

House 

VIII.  ] 

m 

"Scorpio." 

House 

IX. 

in 

"Sagittarius." 

House 

X.  ] 

n 

Capricorn. 

House 

XI.  i 

n 

Aquarius. 

House 

XII.] 

in 

"Pisces." 

The  illustration  in  this  Chapter  locates 
the  12  Houses  in  accordance  with  the  above 
enumeration.  Now,  this  is  the  position  of 
the  Houses  in  every  Horoscope;  ^/ley  never 
change. 

On  the  other  hand,  the  Signs  of  the 
Zodiac,  although  keeping  in  their  immutable 
order,  are  "oriented"  (placed)  in  such  a 
manner  that  the  sign  containing  the  date  of 
the  subject's  birth  always  occupies  the 
s-pace  which  is  devoted  to  Aries  when  the 
Zodiac  is,  as  above,  examined  by  itself  and 
without  having  any  particular  individual  in 
view.  In  other  words,  the  sign  representing 
the  date  of .  birth  is  invariably  placed  in 
House  I. 

As  an  example,  let  us  suppose  that   the 


96  ASTROLOGY 

subject  was  born  on  September  23,  i.  e.,  in 
the  second  degree  of  Libra.  After  drawing 
a  circle  and  dividing  it  into  twelve  equal 
parts,  we  shall  place  the  sign  of  Libra 
where,  in  our  illustration,  Aries  is  marked. 
Then,  working  our  way  downward,  we  will 
place: 

Scorpio  where  Taurus  was. 

Sagittarius  where  Gemini  was. 

Capricorn  where  Cancer  was. 

Aquarius  where  Leo  was. 

Pisces  where  Virgo  was. 

Aries  where  Libra  was. 

Taurus  where  Scorpio  was. 

Gemini  where  Sagittarius  was. 

Cancer  where  Capricorn  was. 

Leo  where  Aquarius  was. 

Virgo  where  Pisces  was. 
In  such  a  Horoscope  the  signs  are  located 
in  the  following  Houses: 

Libra  in  House  L;  Scorpio  in  House  IL; 
Sagittarius  in  House  IIL;  Capricorn  in 
House  IV.;  Aquarius  in  House  V.;  Pisces 
in  House  VI.;  Aries  in  House  VII.;  Taurus 
in  House  VIII.;  Gemini  in  House  IX.; 
Cancer  in  House  X.;  Leo  in  House  XL; 
Virgo  in  House  XII. 

As  each  of  the  Houses  embraces  one  or 
more   of   the   leading   features   of   man   or 


THE  SOLAR  HOUSES  97 

woman's  physical,  mental,  and  moral  char- 
acteristics, as  well  as  all  the  important 
events  of  his  or  her  life,  the  clear  under- 
standing of  the  meanings  of  the  Solar 
Houses — not  only  by  themselves  but  in  con- 
nection with  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  which 
the  fatality  of  birth  has  caused  to  be  located 
in  each  of  the  Houses — brings  us  a  wide 
step  nearer  to  a  complete  comprehension  of 
the  Astrological  mysteries. 

Let  me  give  you  first  the  grouping  of  the 
twelve  Houses  in  four  divisions  of  high 
philosophical  importance  and  at  the  same 
time  of  real  practical  utility  for  every  stu- 
dent. And  in  this  connection,  allow  me  to 
remind  you  of  the  divisions  of  the  Signs  of 
the  Zodiac  into  the  four  Trinocracies:  Fire, 
Earthy  Air  and  Water, 

Here  we  have  also  four  groups: 

First  Group:  House  L,  V.,  IX. — These 
represent  the  life  of  the  subject: — House  L, 
his  own  life  and  type.  House  V.,  his  life  in 
his  children.  House  IX.,  his  life  in  the 
upper  world,  in  God;  his  religion. 

Second  Grotip:  Houses  X.,  VL,  II. — These 
represent  the  activity,  honors  and  money-, 
making  possibilities  of  the  subject. — House 
X.,  refers  to  what  is  not  financial,  in  one's 
prosperity,  such  as  promotions,  honors,  etc., 


98  ASTROLOGY 

House  VI.,  to  the  possessions  of  the  subject 
that  are  of  an  animated  nature,  such  as 
slaves,  cattle,  etc.  House  II.,  treats  of  the 
other  kinds  of  wealth. 

Third  Group:  Houses  VII.,  III.,  XI. — 
They  represent  love  In  its  various  manifes- 
tations.— House  VII.,  refers  to  marriage, 
and  in  general  to  love  between  the  sexes. 
House  III.,  to  blood  relations.  House  XL, 
to  friends. 

Fourth  Group:  Houses  IV,,  XII.,  VIII. — 
They  represent  old  age,  illness  and  death. — 
House  IV.,  refers  to  the  various  traits  that 
come  by  heredity.  House  XII.,  to  all  the 
troubles  that  may  affect  us:  disease,  im- 
prisonment, exile,  etc.  House  VIII.,  reveals 
the  time  and  manner  of  death. 

Almost  as  a  matter  of  course,  its  next 
neighbor,  House  IX.,  Is  devoted  to  such 
revelations  as  refer  to  the  Supreme  Being 
and  a  future  life. 

In  these  elementary  lessons  I  try  to  avoid, 
as  much  as  possible,  the  introduction  of  too 
many  technical  words,  and  yet  I  must  speak 
here  of  two  other  divisions  of  the  Houses, 
which  are  referred  to  frequently  in  more 
extended  Astrological  works.  The  first  is 
as  follows: 


THE  SOLAR  HOUSES  99 

Houses  I.,  IV.,  VII.  and  X.  are  called 
"Cardinal"  or  "Angular." 

Houses  II.,  v.,  VIII.  and  XI.  are  called 
"Succedent." 

Houses  III.  VI.,  IX.  and  XII  are  called 
"Cadent." 

The  second  division  is  as  follows: 

Good  or  "Favorable":  Houses  I.,  II.,  V., 
VII.,  X. 

Indifferent  or  "Middling":  Houses  III., 
IV.,  IX.,  XI. 

Bad  or  "Unfavorable":  Houses  VI.,  VIII., 
XII. 

I  wish  I  had  the  space  and  time  to 
demonstrate  to  you  that  the  apparent  dis- 
order in  the  arrangement  of  the  Houses  is, 
in  reality,  a  most  admirable  and  logical 
grouping  of  all  the  elements  that  compose  a 
human  existence.  I  will  only  add  this — 
which  applies  to  everything  I  have  taught 
you  so  far:  no  single  department  of  Astro- 
logical study — either  the  characteristics  of 
the  Signs  of  Zodiac,  or  the  nature  and  posi- 
tion of  the  Planets,  or  the  location  and 
meanings  of  the  Solar  Houses,  taken  sep- 
arately and  apart  from  the  other  elements  of 
study,  could  suffice  to  cast  a  reliable  Horo- 
scope, although  in  many  respects  it  may 
furnish    surprisingly  accurate   data.      It   is 


100  ASTROLOGY  - 

only  the  combined  examination  of  all  these 
three  great  components  that  brings  forth  a 
true  and  worthy  Horoscope.  We  are 
studying  now  each  of  these  elements  sep- 
arately, but  in  a  short  time  I  shall  be  able 
to  initiate  you  a  little  further,  and  to  place 
in  your  hands  the  key  of  one  of  the  most 
curious  and  trustworthy  of  the  occult  sci- 
ences. 

As  stated  above,  we  find  in  each  House 
accurate  information  referring  to  some 
special  characteristics  or  events  concerning 
the  person  under  examination. 

HOUSE  I. 

Thus,  House  I.,  called  also  "the  Horo- 
scope" or  "the  House  of  Nativity,"  is  espe- 
cially rich  in  details  concerning  the  subject's 
type,  his  physical,  mental  and  moral  propen- 
sities, and  his  past,  present  and  future 
health.  Here,  also,  we  find  everything 
concerning  the  duration  of  life  and  possible 
accidents,  especially  those  that  might  affect 
the  head. 

HOUSE  n. 

House  II.  furnishes  information  about 
pecuniary  transactions,  their  success  or 
failure,  the  probabilities  of  becoming  rich  at 


THE   SOLAR   HOUSES  101 

some  time  or  other,  whether  it  be  advisable 
to  take  risks  in  money  matters  or,  on  the 
contrary,  to  be  satisfied  with  a  moderate 
competence  acquired  without  resorting  to 
any  speculative  ventures.  It  also  tells  gam- 
blers when,  and  when  not,  to  tempt  fickle 
fortune. 

A  close  study  of  all  the  various  fea- 
tures of  astrology  proves  a  fairly  sure 
guide  in  all  enterprises  that  possess  an  ele- 
ment of  danger.  But  a  long  experience  is 
necessary  before  such  revelations  are  to  be 
trusted  at  all.  Beware  of  so-called  astrolo- 
gers who  offer  their  services  to  speculators 
on  the  Board  of  Trade  or  the  Stock  Ex- 
change; as  a  rule,  they  are  absolute  frauds, 
as  they  do  not  give  themselves  the  trouble 
to  go  deep  enough  in  the  arcana  of  our  sci- 
ence to  obtain  reliable  answers  to  their 
clients'  queries.  In  most  cases  they  are  not 
astrologers  at  all,  but  simply  swindlers. 

HOUSE  III. 

House  III.  will  tell  you  everything  of 
interest  concerning  your  brothers,  sisters, 
and  other  collateral  relatives.  It  reveals 
also  when  travels  and  minor  changes  in  the 
subject's  existence  are  t6  take  place,  also 
the  influence  of  passing  acquaintances. 


102  ASTROLOGY 

HOUSE  IV. 

House  IV.  refers  to  parents  and  ancestors 
in  the  direct  line;  to  inheritances,  legacies, 
family  secrets,  mysteries  of  all  kinds  in 
which  the  subject,  his  parents  and  his  direct 
descendants  are  interested.  A  loss  of  posi- 
tion due  to  some  family  stain  or  disaster  is 
also  occasionally  found  marked  in  this 
House. 

HOUSE  V. 

House  V.  is  known  as  the  "House  of  Good 
Fortune,"  and  in  it  most  of  the  joys  of  life 
are  discovered.  Our  love  affairs,  either 
ending  in  marriage  or  otherwise;  our  chil- 
dren; success  in  our  career,  the  satisfactions 
of  our  pride;  the  presents  we  receive,  and 
the  rewards  that  come  to  us — deserved  or 
not — all  these  and  many  others  of  similar 
nature  are  predicted  to  us  by  astrological 
readings  based  on  the  occupants  of 
House  V 

HOUSE  vi. 

House  VI.  used  to  be  dubbed,  by  the 
ancient  astrologers,  the  "Hospital  of  the 
Zodiac,"  and  it  truly  deserves  this  appella- 
tion, since  it  is  there  that  we  are  notified  of 
everything  concerning  our  illnesses,  our 
most    serious     disappointments,    the    cruel 


THE    SOLAR   HOUSES  103 

blows  that  Fate  has  in  reserve  for  us,  and 
our  repeated  failure  to  triumph  over  "what 
has  been  written."  In  the  same  House  we 
must  look  for  all  that  concerns  our  inferiors, 
our  servants,  our  dependents. 

HOUSE  VII. 

House  VII.  is  the  revealer  of  such  things 
as  relate  to  marriage  and  every  kind  of 
partnership.  Strange  to  say,  it  is  here  also 
that  we  are  apprized  of  our  open  enemies' 
attacks,  of  fights,  and — should  we  be  rulers 
of  our  fellow-beings — of  the  wars  we  shall 
have  to  wage  or  which  will  be  waged  against 
us.  The  fact  that  this  House  is  directly 
opposite  to  House  I.,  the  House  of  the  sub- 
ject's birth — renders  it  dangerous  and  in- 
imical to  the  very  existence  of  the  person 
under  examination.  Separations,  divorces, 
grave  disagreements  in  matters  of  affection 
and  interest  are  also  found  predicted  herein. 

HOUSE  VIII. 

House  VIII.  divides  with  Houses  VI.  and 
XII.  the  worst  prognostics  that  are  fur- 
nished by  astrological  examinations.  It 
tells  of  sorrows,  of  the  loss  of  beloved  ones, 
of  serious  wounds,  of  fatal  accidents,  of 
diseases,  and  of  death.  The  only  consola- 
tion  we  can  sometimes   extract   from   this 


104  ASTROLOGY 

House  is  the  announcement  of  unexpected 
inheritances,  of  gifts  of  importance  coming 
to  us  unexpected,  but  welcome. 

HOUSE  IX. 

House  IX.  reminds  us  of  the  resources 
and  holy  balm  to  be  found  in  religion,  of 
the  possible  development  of  our  higher 
brain-power,  of  our  abilities  for  philosoph- 
ical studies,  of  our  love  for  delving  into 
the  mysterious  realms  of  the  occult.  When- 
ever this  House  is  well  endowed  with  Signs 
and  Stars  in  their  favorable  aspects,  you 
may  feel  certain  that  the  subject  is  a  person 
of  very  unusual  accomplishments. 

HOUSE  X. 

House  X.  is  the  revealing  center  of  all  the 
honors  and  dignities  that  may  gild  the  life- 
horizon  of  the  person  under  examination. 
Remember  that  it  does  not  promise  the 
realization  of  foolish  ambitions,  entirely  out 
of  porportion  to  the  subject's  position  in  life. 
But,  within  the  sphere  where  Fate  has 
placed  his  lot,  he  will  be  looked  up  to  as  a 
leader,  and  if  he  is  never  to  be  "the  second 
in  Rome,"  he  is  fairly  sure  to  be  ''first  in  his 
village."  In  one's  calling  or  profession, 
prominence  is  in  the  gift  of  this  House;  it  is 


THE    SOLAR    HOUSES  105 

believed  by  many  astrologers  that  House 
X.  gives  more  vain  glory  than  moneyed  suc- 
cess. As  a  side  issue,  we  often  consult 
House  X.  for  information  on  the  subject's 
mother,  while  in  House  IV.  the  father's  fate 
is  found  predicted  or  related. 

HOUSE  XI. 

House  XI.  is  the  revealer  of  the  benefac- 
tors and  the  true  friends  it  may  be  our  lot  to 
meet  during  life.  They  are,  as  we  all  know 
to  our  sorrow,  few  and  far  between,  and  so 
are  the  disinterested  protectors  also  an- 
nounced in  this  House.  Finally,  by  the  fact 
of  its  being  exactly  opposite  House  V.  we 
obtain  here  supplementary  information  con- 
cerning our  children,  the  alliances  (matri- 
monial or  other)  we  may  contract,  and  we 
are  also  told  sometimes  of  the  chances  of 
seeing  our  most  cherished  hopes  realized. 

HOUSE  xn. 

House  XII.  is  undoubtedly  the  worst  of 
the  12  Zoadical  habitations,  especially  for 
those  who  do  not  consider  death  as  being 
the  greatest  evil  man  is  heir  to.  It  refers  to 
the  troubles  and  heart  burnings  coming  to 
us  from  the  treachery  of  friends;  to  cease- 
less  persecutions   rendering  our   life  more 


106  ASTROLOGY 

than  a  purgatory;  to  calumny  pursuing  us 
relentlessly,  to  imprisonment,  exile,  wretched 
poverty,  unutterable  discouragement  and 
despair. 

And  this  ends  my  rapid  examination  of 
the  12  Houses,  the  close  study  of  which  I 
take  the  liberty  of  particularly  recommend- 
ing to  my  readers- 


CHAPTER    VI 
THE  THIRTY-SIX   DECANS 

Now  that  we  have  obtained  a  pretty  fair 
and  accurate  idea  of  the  three  main  ele- 
ments of  Astrological  lore,  to-wit:  The 
Signs  of  the  Zodiac,  the  Planets  and  the 
Solar  Houses,  I  want  to  enter  into  some 
further  revelations  which  you  will  not  find 
in  any  other  works  of  the  kind  published  on 
this  side  of  the  water  cr  in  England.  I 
refer  to  the  meanings  given  to  the  divisions 
of  the  12  Signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

You  must  be  told  first,  that  the  Egyptian 
priests — who  became  the  depositories  and 
perfectors  of  the  ancient  science  of  predict- 
ing man's  fate  from  the  stars — had  placed 
each  Zoadical  period  of  30  days  under  the 
guardianship  of  one  of  the  supernatural 
beings  we  call  "genii."  They  further 
divided  each  sign  into  periods  of  10  days, 
assuming  some  particular  spirit  as  the 
power  dominating  over  each  of  these  spaces 
of  10  days.  Finally,  each  day  had  its  demi- 
god in  charge  and  its  separate  interpreta- 
tion. 

108  ASTROLOGY 

I  do  not  intend  to  give  you  here  th(; 
names  of  these  strange  and  powerful  beings 
nor  do  I  propose  to  explain  the  meanings 
and  prognostics  attached  to  every  one  of 
the  365  days  of  the  year.  But,  to  come  a 
little  closer  to  the  understanding  of  the 
nature  of  the  subject  under  examination,  I 
will  insert  in  this  volume  of  brief  lessons, 
the  positive  and  most  reliable  statements 
that  concern  each  one  of  these  periods  of 
ten  days  called  in  Astrological  parlance 
"Decans"  from  the  Greek  word  "deka," 
meaning  "ten."  Instead  of  following  the 
usual  order  of  the  Signs  and  beginning  the 
year  in  March,  I  will  start  from  January  ist. 

JANUARY 

Decan  i.  From  January  i  to  10  (Capri- 
corn, 12  to  21). — Intelligence  devoted  to  use- 
less pursuit.  Constant  scheming  of 
unpractical  affairs.     Warlike  disposition. 

Decan  II.  January  11  to  20  (Capricorn,  22 
to  Aquarius  i). — ^Suspicious,  skeptical  mind; 
impotence,  timidity. 

Decan  III.  January  21  to  30  (Aquarius,  2 
to  11). — Anxiety  due  to  hard  struggle  for 
life.  Disappointed  ambition.  Delay  in  the 
realization  in  one's  hopes.  Illness  in  in- 
fancy due  to  neglect  of  the  nurse. 


THE    DECANS  109 

FEBRUARY 

Decan  I.  January  31  to  February  9 
(Aquarius,  12  to  21). — Well  endowed  brain- 
power. Gentleness  of  temper,  private  vir- 
tues. 

Decan  II.  February  10  to  19  (Aquarius 
22  to  Pisces  i).— Extremely  delicate  child- 
hood until  7  years  old.  Persistent  diffi- 
culties through  life.     Bitter  disappointments. 

Decan  III.  February  20  to  28  (Pisces  2  to 
10). — Great  ambitions,  love  of  glory;  bold- 
ness in  everything  the  subject  undertakes. 

MARCH 

Decan  I.  March  i  to  10  (Pisces,  11  to  20)= 
—Indolence,  love  of  pleasure,  sluggish  mind. 

Decan  II.  March  11  to  20  (Pisces,  21  to 
30). — Restless  disposition,  confused  schem- 
ing, fickle  tendencies,  yearnings  for  impos- 
sible things. 

Decan  III.  March  21  to  30  (Aries,  i  to 
10). — Firm,  haughty  disposition.  Contempt 
for  all  obstacles  and  perils. 

APRIL 

Decan  I.  March  31  to  April  9  (Aries,  11 
to  20).  Noble  nature,  generosity,  aptitude 
for  commanding,  diplomatic  talent. 


110  ASTROLOGY 

Decan  II.  April  lo  to  19  (Aries,  21  to  30). 
Quick  and  versatile  mind.     Love  of  pleasure. 

Decan  III.  April  20  to  29  (Taurus  i  to  10). 
— High  intellectual  faculties,  inclination 
toward  the  exact  sciences  and  political 
economy.  The  subject  will  meet  with 
serious  reverses,  some  of  these  of  a  violent 
character. 

MAY 

Decan  I.  April  30  to  May  9  (Taurus,  11  to 
20). — Generosity  of  mind  and  heart,  lofty 
inclinations,  distinctions  due  to  merit;  elo- 
quence. 

Decan  II.  May  10  to  19  (Taurus,  21  to  30). 
— Obstacles  to  enterprises;  obligation  to 
submit  to  the  authority  of  others  in  spite  of 
a  naturally  independent  temper;  troubles 
against  which  the  subject  must  fight  with  all 
possible  energy. 

Decan  III.  May  20  to  29  (Gemini,  i  to 
19). — Restless  disposition  which  will  destroy 
the  subject's  chances  in  life.  Threat  of 
violent  death. 

JUNE 

Decan  I.  May  30  to  June  8  (Gemini,  11  to 
20). — Careless,  thoughtless  disposition; 
superficiality,  poor  understanding  of  own 
best  interest.     Useless,  often  senseless,  talk. 


THE    DECANS  111 

Decan  II.  June  9  to  18  (Gemini,  21  to  30). 
— Inclination  toward  the  purely  theoretical 
branches  of  knowledge  that  bring  neither 
profit  nor  glory.  Troubles  through  life. 
Serious  disaster  early  in  life. 

Decan  III.  June  19  to  July  3. — This  period 
includes  the  five  Epagomenes  or  Supple- 
mentary Days,  thus  completing  the  full  365 
days  of  our  regular  year.  (Cancer,  i  to  10). 
— Bright,  quick  mind,  sociable  instincts. 

JULY 

Decan  I.  July  4  to  13  (Cancer,  11  to  20). — 
Abrupt  manners.  Love  of  the  arts  and 
sciences.     Great  luck  in  money-making. 

Decan  II.  July  14  to  23  (Cancer,  21  to  30). 
— Hard,  inflexible  temperament,  calling 
upon  force  to  carry  out  its  wishes.  Sea- 
voyages  predicted. 

Decan  III.  July  24  to  August  2  (Leo,  i  to 
19). — Violent  disposition,  fiery  passions, 
often  celebrity  acquired  in  such  arts  as 
sculpture,  architecture,  engineering,  etc.,  or 
as  a  playwright. 

AUGUST 

Decan  I.  August  3  to  12  (Leo,  11  to  20). — 
Phlegmatic  temperament;  force  of  inertia, 
exaggerated  self-confidence.  Talent  for  the 
plastic  arts.     Conceit. 


112  ASTROLOGY 

Decan  II.  August  13  to  22  (Leo,  21  to  30). 
— Great  persistency  of  purpose,  egotism, 
adventurous  disposition,  highly  successful 
ambition  through  luck  and  thanks  to  a  com- 
bative spirit.     Several  marriages. 

Decan  III.  August  23  to  September  i 
(Virgo,  I  to  10). — Longevity;  timidity;  apti- 
tude for  the  analytical  sciences  and  the 
mechanical  arts. 

SEPTEMBER 

Decan  I.  September  2  to  11  (Virgo,  11  to 
20). — Orderly  and  saving  disposition,  some- 
times to  the  point  of  penuriousness.  Patient 
perseverance  in  all  undertakings. 

Decan  II.  September  12  to  21  (Virgo,  21 
to  30). — A  passion  for  gambling  or  other 
forms  of  speculative  ventures.  Incapacity 
for  useful  productiveness,  destructive  tend- 
encies. Grave  fatalities  on  account  of  an 
unfortunate  marriage  or  through  relatives. 
Often  an  inventive  genius. 

Decan  III.  September  22  to  October  i 
(Libra,  i  to  10). — Love  of  justice  and  of 
truth;  feeling  of  what  is  right;  impulse  to 
defend  the  weak  against  all  oppression. 

OCTOBER 

Decan  I.  October  2  to  11  (Libra,  11  to  20). 
— Ambitious    and     restless     mind.       Great 


THE    DECANS  113 

cleverness  in  the  handling  of  men;  audacity; 
success  in  all  bold  enterprises. 

Decan  II.  October  12  to  21  (Libra,  21  to 
30). — Intense  love  of  all  kinds  of  pleasures, 
of  luxury  and  of  the  society  of  the  other 
sex. 

Decan  III.  October  22  to  31  (Scorpio,  i  to 
10). — Disappointment,  treachery  often  met 
with,  perilous  travels,  chimerical  enter- 
prises. 

NOVEMBER 

Decan  I.  November  i  to  10  (Scorpio,  11 
to  20). — Enmity  from  influential  people  that 
will  threaten  to  ruin  even  the  best  pros- 
pects. 

Decan  II.  November  11  to  20  (Scorpio,  21 
to  30). — Ardent  passions,  unbending  disposi- 
tion, energy  that  knows  no  defeat. 

Decan  III.  November  21  to  30  (Sagittarius, 

I  to  10). — Haughty  disposition,  extreme  love 
of  independence.  Brilliant  military  career; 
disastrous  married  life. 

DECEMBER 

Decan  I.  December  i  to  10  (Sagittarius, 

II  to  20). — Deeply  religious  turn  of  mind. 
Great  struggles  all  through  life,  terrible  fits 
of  anger.      Gloomy  temper.      Scientifically 


114  ASTROLOGY 

inclined.  Many  unforeseen  perils.  Frank- 
ness mixed  with  a  great  mobility  of  impres- 
sions. 

Decan  II.  December  ii  to  20  (Sagittarius, 
21  to  30).  —  Obstinacy,  violent  temper, 
shrewdness,  often  dishonest,  versatility, 
fighting  instincts. 

Decan  III.  December  21  to  31  (Capricorn, 
I  to  11). — Disastrous  journeys,  alternatives 
of  very  good  and  very  bad  fortune,  great 
love  sorrows. 

Completing  the  above  statements  con- 
cerning the  Decans  the  reader  must  know, 
that,  just  as  each  Sign  of  the  Zodiac  is  the 
seat  of  the  Thrones  (diurnal  or  nocturnal) 
of  one  of  the  seven  Planets,  just  so  one  of 
these  Planets  is  in  charge  of  each  of  the 
Decans,  except  when  the  astrological  calcu- 
lations place  it  somewhere  else.  I  will  give 
herein  the  list  of  these  "Influences  of  the 
Decans." 

ARIES 

Decan  I.  Mars.     Decan  II.  The  Sun.     De- 
can III.  Venus. 

TAURUS 

Decan  I.    Mercury.     Decan  II.    The  Moon. 
Decan  III.  Saturn. 


THE   DECANS  115 

GEMINI 

Decan  I.   Jupiter.     Decan  II.    Mars.     De- 
can  III.  The  Sun. 

cancer 

Decan  I.  Venus.     Decan  II.  Mercury.     De- 
can III.  The  Moon. 

LEO 

Decan  I.  Saturn.      Decan  II.  Jupiter.     De- 
can III.  Mars. 

VIRGO 

Decan  I.  The  Sun.     Decan  II.  Venus.     De- 
can III.  Mercury. 

LIBRA 

Decan  I.    The  Moon.      Decan  II.    Saturn. 
Decan  III.  Jupiter. 

SCORPIO 

Decan  I.  Mars.      Decan  II.  The  Sun.     De- 
can III.  Venus. 

SAGITTARIUS 

Decan  I.  Mercury.     Decan  11.   The  Moon. 
Decan  III.  Saturn. 

CAPRICORN 

Decan  I.   Jupiter.     Decan  II.    Mars.     De- 
can III.  The  Sun. 

AQUARIUS 

Decan  I.  Venus  .     Decan  II.  Mercury.     De- 
can III.  The  Moon. 

PISCES 

Decan  I.  Saturn.     Decan  II.  Jupiter.      De- 
can III.  Mars. 


116  ASTROLOGY 

Now  let  me  tell  you  how  the  knowledge 
of  the  influence  of  the  planets  on  the  Decans 
may  be  used  by  you  to  advantage. 

After  you  have  located  a  birthday  where 
it  belongs,  in  one  of  the  degrees  of  one  of 
the  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  you  must  read  care- 
fully the  various  characteristics  I  gave  you 
in  Chapter  III.  as  referring  to  those  born 
under  this,  or  that,  particular  sign.  Then, 
turning  to  Chapter  IV.  you  will  read  what  I 
have  taught  you  concerning  the  various 
planetary  types.  If  the  subject  you  are 
studying — either  yourself  or  anyone  else, 
even  a  total  stranger — is  born,  say  on 
August  3d,  i.  e.,  in  the  9th  degree  of  Leo, 
which  belongs,  of  course,  to  the  first  Decan 
of  the  said  Sign,  you  will  find,  by  referring 
to  the  above  table,  that  your  subject  was 
directly  influenced  at  birth  by  the  planet 
Saturn.  Thus  the  reading  of  what  I  have 
told  you  about  Leo  and  Saturn  will  already 
give  you  a  much  deeper  insight  into  this 
particular  person's  real  nature  and  into  his, 
or  her,  past  or  future,  than  could  be 
obtained  simply  by  Zodiacal  data.  But  this 
is  anticipating  a  little,  as  I  reserve  for  our 
future  lessons  the  systematic  working  out 
of  all  the  mass  of  classified  information 
herein  contained. 


CHAPTER    VIII 

THE  ASPECTS 

The  special  object  of  this  chapter  is  the 
explanation  of  what  is  meant  by  "Astro- 
logical Aspects,"  and  the  practical  use  to 
which  the  knowledge  of  these  Aspects  can 
be  put  for  the  proper  casting  of  a  Horo- 
scope. 

Will  you  kindly  look  back  to  my  illustra- 
tion, page  80,  entitled  "The  Planets  on  their 
Thrones"?  We  will  suppose  for  a  moment, 
that  in  somebody's  Horoscope  these  lumi- 
naries are  all  occupying  both  their  Thrones 
at  the  same  moment.  Now  you  will  admit 
that,  around  the  Zodiacal  circle,  these 
planets  seem  to  be  gazing  at  each  other,  so 
to  speak,  at  different  angles.  Thus,  if  we 
take  Saturn  in  Capricorn  as  the  starting 
point  (as  I  do  in  my  illustration,  page  124) 
Saturn  is  said  to  be 
in  Semi-Sextile  Aspect  (tV)  toward  Jupiter 

in  Sagittarius. 
in    Sextile    Aspect    {})     toward   Mars   in 

Scorpio. 
in   Square   Aspect  (J^)   toward    Venus    in 

Libra. 

ASTROLOGY 


in  Trine  Aspect  {}i)  toward    Mercury  in 

Virgo, 
in  Sesquiquadrate  Aspect  (A)  toward  the 

Sun  in  Leo. 
in  Opposition  Aspect  (yi)  toward  the  Moon 

in  Cancer. 


A*  Trine 
Ui'Sesquiquadrgti 
or^' Opposition 


c/=  Conjunction 


In  the  accompanying  illustration,  I  give 
the  symbols  or  marks  by  which  these  six 
different   aspects   are   indicated    for   short* 


THE   ASPECTS  125 

The  seventh  aspect  Is  called  conjunction 
and  takes  place  whenever  two  or  more 
planets  are  found  in  the  same  Zodiacal  sign. 
Now  keep  in  mind  the  two  following  state- 
ments: 

First.  By  "Aspects"  is  always  meant  the 
positions  of  the  planets  respecting  each 
other,  as  these  vary  constantly.  The  posi- 
tions of  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  in  respect 
to  each  other  is  immutable  and  cannot  be 
referred  to  by  the  term  "aspect." 

Second.  By  my  system,  which  is  nothing 
more  or  less  than  the  exact  restoration  of 
the  oldest  conception  of  the  Influence  of  the 
heavenly  bodies  upon  the  types  and  desti- 
nies of  mankind,  It  constantly  happens  that 
the  same  planet  appears  several  times  in 
the  same  Horoscope  of  birth.  Thus  an 
almost  infinite  number  of  combinations  of 
Aspects  is  formed;  but  numerous  as 'they 
are,  they  are  easily  grouped  together,  so 
that  even  a  very  indifferent  student  may 
grasp  their  leading  meanings. 

I  gave  you  the  names  and  positions  of  the 
seven  Aspects,  but  I  do  not  advise  you  to 
use,  nor  do  I  use  myself,  more  than  five  of 
these  "points  of  view."  These  are:  Con- 
junction,     Sextile,     Square,    Trine,    and 


126  ASTROLOGY 

Opposition.      The    Rule    in    reference    to 
Aspects  is  simply  and  invariably  this: 

1.  Planets  separated  by  one  full  Sign,  or 
60  degrees,  are  in  Sextile  Aspect. 

2.  Planets  separated  by  two  full  Signs,  or 
90  degrees,  are  in  Square  Aspect. 

3.  Planets  separated  by  three  full  Signs,  or 
120  degrees,  are  in  Trine  Aspect. 

4.  Planets  separated  hy /our  iuW  Signs,  or 
180  Degrees,  are  in  Opposition  Aspect. 

The  Semi-sextile  and  Sesquiquadrate 
Aspects  are  of  so  little  consequence,  com- 
paratively speaking,  that  we  may  omit  them 
entirely  from  our  consideration. 

Now  that  the  Aspects  have  been  well 
defined  let  me  give  you  some  general  points 
concerning  their  Astrological  value. 

"Conjunction"  is  considered  favorable  only 
if  the  Planets  thus  brought  together  are 
''beneficent  planets." 

"Sextile"  is  always  a  favorable  Aspect. 

"Square"  is  an  unfavorable  Aspect,  except 
between  two  beneficent  planets. 

"Trine"  is  always  a  favorable  Aspect. 

The  "Opposition"  of  two  planets  is  always 
considered  as  most  unfavorable. 


CHAPTER  IX 

THE  CYCLIC  TABLES  OF  THE  YEARS 

An  Astrological  Cycle  consists  of  36 
years.  Each  such  cycle  is  ascribed  to  one 
of  the  planets,  in  regular  rotation.  ,This 
planet  presides  over  the  i,  8,  15,  22,  29  and 
36  years  of  its  cycle,  while  the  other  6  plan- 
ets preside  over  the  remaining  30  years  in 
sequence. 

The  cycles  follow  each  other  in  the  in- 
verted order  of  the  week  days:  The  Sun 
(Sunday),  Saturn  (Saturday),  Venus  (Friday), 
Jupiter  (Thursday),  Mercury  (Wednesday), 
Mars  (Tuesday),  The  Moon  (Monday). 

The  order  in  which  the  planets  succeed 
each  other  within  each  cycle,  is  as  follows: 
Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Sun,  Venus,  Mercury, 
Moon,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  etc. 

CYCLE  OF  VENUS  (1801  —  1836) 

Venus,    1801,  1808,  1815,  1822,  1829,  1836. 

Mercury,   1802,  1809,  1816,  1823,  1830. 

The  Moon,  1803,  1810,  1817,  1824,  1831. 

Saturn,    1804,  1811,  1818,  1825,  1832. 

Jupiter,    1805,  1812,  1819,  1826,  1833. 

Mars,     1806,  1813,  1820,  1827,  1834. 

The  Sun,   1807,  1814,  1821,  1828,  1835. 

128  ASTROLOGY 

CYCLE  OF  JUPITER  (1837—1872; 

Jupiter,  1837,  1844,  1851,  1858,  1865,  1872. 

Mars,  1838,  1845,  1S52,  1859,  1866. 

The  Sun,  1839,  1846,  1853,  iS^»  iS6y. 

Venus,  1840,  1847,  1S54,  1 86 1,  1868. 

Mercury,  1841,  1848,  1855,  1S62,  1869. 

The  Moon,  1842,  1849,  1856,  1863,  1870. 

Saturn,  1843,  1S50,  1857,  1864,  1871. 

CYCLE  OF  MERCURY  (1873— 1908) 

Mercury,  1873,  1880,  1887,  1894,  1901,  1908. 

The  Moon,  1874,  1881,  1888,  1895,  1902. 

Saturn,  1875,  1882,  1889,  1896,  1903. 

Jupiter,  1876,  1883,  1890,  1897,  1904. 

Mars,  1877,  1884,  1891,  1898,  1905. 

The  Sun,  1878,  1885,  1892,  1899,  1906. 

Venus,  1879,  1886,  1893,  1900,  1907. 

CYCLE  OF  MARS  (1909— 1944) 

Mars,  1909,  1916,  1923,  1930,  1937,  1944. 

The  Sun,      1910,  1917,  1924,  1931,  1938. 
etc.  etc. 

In  the  cycles  presented  above,  the  planets 
preside  over  the  years  set  opposite  their 
names.  The  student  can  easily  construct 
the  cycles  preceding  or  following  those 
given. 


CHAPTER  X 

YEARLY  HOROSCOPES 

As  the  Zodiac  makes  a  complete  revolu- 
tion in  12  years,  the  sign  under  which  a  per- 
son was  born,  will  be: 

In  House  I.  during  the  years  i,  13,  25,  -^ly 
49,  61,  ']'^,  85,97,  109,  etc.,  of  the  person's  life. 
In  House  XII.  during  the  years  2,  14,  26,  38, 

50,  62,  74,  86,  98. 
In  House  XI.  during  the  years  3,  15,  27,  39, 

51,63,  75,  86,  99. 
In  House  X.  during  the  years  4,  16.  28,  40, 

52,  64,  76,  88,  100. 
In  House  IX.  during  the  years  5,  17,  29,  4!; 

53»  65,  11,  89. 
In  House  VIII.  during  the  years  6,  18,  30,  42, 

54,  66,  1%,  90. 
In  House  VII.  during  the  years  7,  19,  31,  43, 

55»  67,  79,  91. 
In  House  VI.  during  the  years  8,  20,  32,  44, 

56,  68,  80,  92. 
In  House  V.  during  the  years  9,  21,  '}^2)^  45, 

57,69,81,93. 
In  House  IV.  during  the  years  10,  22,  34,  464 

58.  70,  82,  94. 


130  ASTROLOGY 

In  House  III.  during  the  years  ii,  23,  35,  47 

59,  71  >  83,  95. 

In  House  II.  during  the  years  12,  24,  2)^,  48, 

60,  72,  84,  96. 

This  change  is  due  to  the  fact  that  the 
Zodiac  moves  around  by  30°,  one  whole  sign, 
every  year.  If  Leo,  for  instance,  was  in 
House  I.  at  the  birth  of  a  person,  it  will  be 
there  again  in  his  37th  year.  In  his  45th 
year  Aries  will  be  in  House  I.  This  is  fig- 
ured as  follows: 

45  —  I  =  44.     44  -i-  12  =  3,  remainder,  8. 
Add  5,  the  number  of  Leo.     8  -f-  5  =  13. 
13  —  12  «=  I,  the  number  of  Arie*. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  returns  to 
House  I. — Here  you  simply  interpret  the 
sign  according  to  its  general  meaning  as 
given  in  chapters  3  and  4.  In  our  next  les- 
son we  shall  study  the  meanings  of  the 
other  Signs  of  the  Zodiac  passing  through 
House  I. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  passes  through 
House  XII. — Obstacles  to  all  enterprises, 
animosities  difficult  to  overcome,  illnesses, 
bad  year  for  traveling  or  for  beginning 
business  or  starting  a  law  suit.  Betrayal  by 
friends. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  passes  through 


HOROSCOPES  131 

House  XI. — Anxieties,  threatened  loss  of 
reputation;  the  death  of  a  friend  or  relative 
interferes  with  one's  prospects,  but  powerful 
protections  will  save  the  day.  Probabilities 
of  travel. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  passes  through 
House  X. — A  favorable  year  for  any  busi- 
ness having  money-making  as  its  object.  A 
good  time  to  take  a  sea  voyage  or  to  attack 
and  conquer  one's  enemies.  Fame  will 
come  to  the  subject.  Also  a  chance  to 
marry  well.  These  excellent  omens  will  be 
darkened  by  a  family  mourning. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  passes  through 
House  IX. — Another  excellent  year  for  all 
matters  of  affection  and  friendship.  Also 
for  the  success  of  enterprises  and  the  effec- 
tive assistance  of  people  in  high  position. 
Threatened  loss  of  most  of  these  good 
things  through  some  scandalous  revelation 
coming  to  ears  it  should  not  reach. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  passes  through 
House  VIII. — Illnesses  and  even  danger  of 
death.  Betrayal  by  friends  and  disastrous 
love  affairs.  Those  you  liked  best  will  turn 
out  to  be  your  worst  enemies;  to  a  great 
extent  it  will  be  your  own  fault. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  passes  through 
House  VII. — Danger  of   robbery  and  fire. 


132  ASTROLOGY 

Favorable  year  for  entering  upon  married 
life.  Unpleasant  relations  with  one's  supe- 
riors or  employers.  Great  changes  in  the 
subject's  position. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  passes  through 
House  VI.  —  Dangerous  illness.  Great 
struggles.  Annoying  and  lasting  enmities. 
More  than  modest  financial  circumstances. 
The  subject  ought  to  be  on  his  guard 
against  everybody  and  everything.  Wounds 
of  a  serious  character. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  passes  through 
House  V. — Danger  from  perfidious  enemies, 
but  happy  chances  through  the  protection 
of  people  in  high  position.  Probable  mar- 
riage. Providential  assistance  in  the  nick 
of  time.  The  occupation  of  the  subject 
will  be  the  cause  of  successful  travels. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  passes  through 
House  IV. — Inheritance,  or  large  present 
made  to  the  subject.  Danger  of  a  serious 
fall  or  of  drowning  while  on  a  business  trip. 
A  lucky  year  for  the  enterprises  the  subject 
will  undertake  alone,  but  he  must  not 
count  on  any  assistance  or  any  useful  in- 
fluence exerted  in  his  favor.  Family  jour- 
ney?. Unfortunate  complications  in  love 
affairs. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  passes  through 


HOROSCOPES  V5'd 

House  III. — A  year  of  traveling  or  at  least 
of  moving..  Threatened  secret  enmities  and 
slow  diseases.  Loss  of  confidence  on  the 
part  of  the  subject's  employers.  Finan- 
cial failure.  Friends  will  forsake  him. 
He  will  be  the  victim  of  constant  persecu- 
tions on  the  part  of  envious  people  bent  on 
ruining  his  career. 

When  the  Sign  of  Nativity  passes  through 
House  II. — A  splendid  year  for  the  financial 
prospects  of  the  subject,  except  that  he  will 
be  particularly  exposed  to  being  robbed  or 
swindled.  Those  he  has  a  right  to  believe 
his  best  friends  will  turn  out  his  enemies. 
Danger  through  four-footed  animals.  Posi- 
tion due  to  influential  protectors.  Chance 
offered  the  subject  to  undertake  a  long 
and  profitable  journey.  Physical  dangers 
threaten  the  subject  and  his  or  he  r  spouse. 


Venus 
Neptune 


Mercury  Mars 

Jupiter  (with  four  moons) 

Saturn  Uranus 


THE  PLANETS  AS  SEEN  THROUGH  A  TELESCOPE 
/  — 


CHAPTER  XI 

MEANINGS  OF  THE   PLANETS   IN    THE 
SOLAR  HOUSES 

The  student  understands  clearly  that  the 
position  of  the  Houses  never  varies;  House 
I.  always  occupying  the  space  devoted  to  the 
Zodiacal  Sign  Aries  in  our  original  design 
of  the  Zodiacal  Circle  on  page  i6,  while  the 
Zodiacal  Sign  of  Nativity  must  be  placed  in 
this  House  I.  in  each  particular  case.  For  a 
thorough  understanding  of  this  all-impor- 
tant principle  I  refer  you  once  more  to 
Chapter  V.  which  clearly  explains  the  vari- 
ous points  at  issue.  Now  I  propose  to  go 
one  step  further  in  my  brief  course  of  prac- 
tical tuition  and  give  you  a  concise  synopsis 
of  the  "Meanings  of  each  Planet  when  found 
in  each  House." 

I.    SATURN 

In  House  I. — Delicate  constitution,  poor 
health,  slow  intelligence,  gloomy  disposi- 
tion, dislike  for  social  intercourse.  In 
House  II. — Very  commonplace  life-work, 
up-hill  efforts  to  doubtful  success.  In 
House    III. — Quarrels    with     relatives     on 

136  ASTROLOGY 

account  of  money  matters  especially  about 
inheritances.  In  House  IV. — Vicious  tend- 
encies, miserliness,  meanness  in  all  affairs 
of  life.  In  House  V. — Childlessness,  or  loss 
of  children  in  babyhood.  In  House  VI. — 
Chronic  diseases  and  needy  circumstances. 
In  House  VII. —  Unfortunate  for  partnerships 
and  marriag"e.  In  House  VIII. — A  low,  danger- 
ous nature  ;  will  end  his  or  her  life  in  prison  or 
even  on  the  gallows.  In  House  IX. — The  genius 
of  the  inventor,  the  discoverer,  the  explorer ;  a 
powerful  mind  but  seldom  for  the  good  of  others 
or  his  own.  In  House  X.  —  High  position  or 
honors,  obtained  through  unworthy,  sometimes 
shameful,  means.  In  House  XI. —  A  tendency 
to  practice  usury  and  even  worse  traffics ;  a 
despicable  character  generally.  In  House  XII. 
Hatred  of  one's  fellow-beings  which  is  returned 
in  kind ;    a  wretched  ending  to  a  contemptible 

life. 

2.  JUPITER 

In  House  I. — Splendid  health,  sanguine 
nature,  fine  presence,  power  over  others, 
success.  In  House  II. — Taste  for  arts  and 
sciences.  Success  in  almost  any  career;  the 
subject  is  often  chosen  for  important  public 
ofifices  or  to  manage  large  enterprises,  as  he 
inspires  confidence.  In  House  III. — A 
leader  in  the  family  circle,  generally  sue- 


PLANETS  IN  HOUSES  137 

ceeds  in  pushing  his  own  people  to  excel- 
lent positions.  In  House  IV. — Fortune 
made  in  mining  or  in  large  agricultural 
enterprises.  Especially  endowed  as  an 
engineer.  In  House  V. — Happiness  in  love 
matters  and  marriage  relations;  perhaps  too 
much  fickleness  in  affections.  Blessed  in 
children.  In  House  VI.  —  Very  large 
wealth;  superb  estates,  picture  galleries, 
horses,  yachts,  etc.  In  House  VII. — Rich 
marriage,  but,  whenever  the  aspects  of  the 
other  planets  are  not  favorable,  unhappiness 
in  a  union  contracted  more  through  ambi- 
tion than  for  love.  In  House  VIII. — The 
fine  omens  of  the  planets  will  be  darkened 
by  law  suits,  calumnies,  loss  of  protectorSf 
etc.  In  House  IX. — Fortune  made  by 
means  of  extended  traveling  at  home  and 
abroad.  In  House  X. — High  official  posi- 
tions. In  House  XI. — Many  friends  and 
many  people  under  the  subject's  orders; 
success  greatly  due  to  influential  relations. 
In  House  XII. — Most  serious  reverses  from 
which  the  subject  will  emerge  triumphant, 
ending  his  life  prosperous  and  universally 
honored. 

3.  MARS 

In    House    I.  —  Aggressive,   quarrelsome 
disposition;    all  through  life  frequently  the 


138  ASTROLOGY 

victim  of  accident,  wounds,  falls,  etc.  In 
House  II. — The  calling  of  the  subject  will 
be  of  a  dangerous  nature;  often  he  will  be 
in  the  army  or  navy.  In  House  III. — Bitter 
family  quarrels.  In  House  IV. — Severe 
illnesses  due  to  the  subject's  imprudence  or 
excesses.  In  House  V. — Extreme  sensuality, 
resulting  but  too  often  in  physical,  financial 
and  social  ruin.  In  House  VI. — Heavy 
losses  of  money  caused  by  men  or  the  ele- 
ments, especially  fire  and  water.  In  House 
VII. — Unfortunate  marriages,  separations, 
divorces,  or,  when  the  union  is  happy,  early 
bereavement.  In  House  VIII. — Violent 
accidents,  serious  wounds,  even  death.  In 
House  IX. — Great  taste  for  dangerous  ex- 
peditions, that  may,  and  probably  will,  end 
fatally.  In  House  X. — The  social  position 
of  the  subject  will  be  ruined  without  warn- 
ing. In  House  XI. — Frequent  fights  and 
association  with  objectionable  people.  In 
House  XII. — Mars  is  here  at  its  worst  as  it 
may  tempt  the  subject  to  commit  murder, 
or  suicide. 

4.  THE  SUN 

In  House  I. — Noble  instincts  and  healthy 
ambition.  Excellent  constitution  and  long 
life.  In  House  II. — Honors  and  high  situa- 
tions coming  to  the  subject  on  account  of 


PLANETS  IN  HOUSES  139 

his  brain-work  and  his  accomplishments.  In 
House  III. — An  only  son,  or  in  every  way 
superior  to,  and  more  successful  than,  hij 
brothers.  Prosperity  and  distinction  in  a 
foreign  country.  In  House  IV. — Conceit 
replaces  pride;  a  love  for  show  at  any  cost 
ruins  the  prospects  of  the  subject.  In  House 
V. — Pure,  noble  and  disinterested  love;  a 
scrupulously  honest  conscience;  a  progeny 
to  be  proud  of.  In  House  VI. — Large 
wealth,  life  spent  in  a  sumptuous  palace. 
In  House  VII. — A  brilliant  marriage  will 
raise  the  position  of  the  subject  far  above 
expectations.  In  House  VIII. — High  honors 
on  the  battlefield,  or  on  account  of  deeds  Df 
heroism.  If  the  other  planets  are  unfavor- 
able, death  in  a  fire  or  by  sunstroke.  In 
House  IX. — Brilliant  intelligence,  great 
social  and  financial  success,  wide  fame.  In 
House  X. — Honors  bestowed  on  the  sub- 
ject, governmental  position,  high  promotion 
in  the  church.  In  House  XI. — A  leading 
position  in  society  and  great  wealth  coming. 
In  House  XII. — Ambitions  far  beyond  pos- 
sibilities of  realization;  reverses  followed 
by  recoveries,  happy  and  comfortable  old 
age. 


140  ASTROLOGY 

5.  VENUS 

In  House  I. — Beauty,  grace  and  the  gift 
of  pleasing,  but  no  faculty  to  judge  people 
right,  and,  on  that  account,  frequent  decep- 
tions. In  House  II. — Riches  coming  through 
the  other  sex;  talents  for  such  trades  as  are 
devoted  to  the  beautifying  of  the  body  or 
to  the  light  recreation  of  the  mind.  In 
House  III. — Promise  of  perfect  harmony 
with  one's  family.  In  House  IV. — The  lov- 
ing instinct  of  the  subject  will  prove  a  cause 
of  ruin  on  account  of  excesses  or  lack  of 
constancy.  In  House  V. — Tenderness, 
platonic  love,  disinterested  devotion,  beauty 
of  body  and  soul,  bliss  in  mutual  love.  In 
House  VI. — Inheritance  or  large  gift  from  a 
person  of  the  other  sex,  close  to  you  by  the 
ties  of  love  or  blood.  In  House  VII. — Most 
happy  marriage.  In  House  VIII. — Exas- 
perated jealousy  leading  to  crime,  com- 
mitted either  by,  or  against,  the  subject.  In 
House  IX. — Ambition  excited  by  love,  the 
loved  one  rr\et  on  a  travel  or  belonging  to 
another  nationality.  In  House  X. — Social 
prominence  due  to  the  efforts  and  influence 
of  a  loved  one.  In  House  XI. — Innumer- 
able flirtations,  but  generally  helpful  in 
cne's  career.     In  House  XII. — Contemptible 


PLANETS   IN  HOUSES  141 

love    affairs,    position    ruined    through    un- 
worthy intrigues. 

6.  MERCURY 

In  House  I. — Great  versatility  but  very 
superficial  talents;  ability  in  handling 
people;  the  other  planets  will  decide 
whether  this  cleverness  will  prove  a  bless- 
ing or  a  curse.  In  House  II. — Versatility  is 
here  still  more  marked  and  so  are  its  draw- 
backs. In  House  III. — The  subject  will  be 
in  partnership  with  brother  or  sister.  In 
House  IV. — Serious  illnesses,  low.  occupa- 
tions, wretched  understanding  of  life.  In 
House  V. — A  disposition  to  be  unscrupulous 
in  all  dealings.  In  House  VI. — The  subject 
will  be  a  broker  of  some  kind,  a  speculator 
with  other  people's  money,  generally  lucky 
but  seldom  honest.  In  House  VII. — Two 
successive  marriages  or  sometimes  two 
simultaneous  households.  In  House  VIII. 
— A  quarrelsome  disposition;  going  to  law 
on  the  slightest  pretext  and  seldom  faithful 
to  his  word.  In  House  IX. — Love  for 
traveling  and  the  society  of  foreigners; 
constant  changes  in  plans.  In  House  X. — 
Great,  but  unwarranted,  ambitions,  rewarded 
only  by  minor  positions.  In  House  XL- 
Many   useful    acquaintances    but    few    real 


142  ASTROLOGY 

friends.  In  House  XII. — Many  disasters 
due  to  the  lack  of  wisdom  and  the  intriguing 
ways  of  the  subject.  Threats  of  prison, 
exile  and  total  ruin. 

7,  THE  MOON 

In  House  I. — Queer  tastes,  disposition  to 
constant  changes.  In  House  II. — A  num- 
ber of  successive  occupations,  lack  of  sta- 
bility in  pursuits.  In  House  III. — Twin 
brothers  or  sisters,  early  death  of  mother, 
many  travels  in  one's  own  country.  In 
House  IV. — Accidents  on  the  water,  danger 
of  drowning,  possible  insanity,  sudden 
changes  of  position.  In  House  V. — Fickle- 
ness in  love  matters  and  lack  of  moral  prin- 
ciples; often  childishness.  In  House  VI. — 
One  lives  under  the  persistent  illusion  of 
being  rich,  frequently  in  the  train  of  some 
wealthy  protector.  In  House  VII. — Un- 
lucky marriages.  Very  frequently  sep- 
arations or  divorces.  In  House  VIII. — 
Threatened  fatal  ending  of  life  on  the 
water  or  near  the  water  on  account  of 
the  hatred  of  persons  of  the  opposite  sex. 
In  House  IX. — Extended  traveling  in 
foreign  countries,  often  exile  and  death 
away  from  home.  In  House  X. — Upsetting 
of  excellent  prospects  through  the  wayward 


PLANETS   IN   HOUSES  143 

or  wicked  conduct  of  the  subject.  The 
reputation  will  be  tarnished  and  the  life 
made  wretched  and  restless.  In  House 
XI. — Undesirable  associations  and  bad 
habits  ruining  the  chances  of  the  subject. 
In  House  XII. — The  worst  of  all  combina- 
tions. Applies  to  regular  malefactors,  wan- 
dering about  looking  for  crimes  to  commit, 
or  at  least  leading  a  life  of  dissipation 
amidst  the  lowest  surroundings. 


CHAPTER   XII 

CASTING  A  HOROSCOPE 

The  "Horoscope  of  Nativity"  forecasts 
the  entire  life  of  the  subject,  while  the 
"Horoscope  of  Revolution"  gives  informa- 
tion about  a  certain  day,  or  month,  or  year. 
The  difference  between  the  two  is  marked, 
and  we  will  state  the  points  in  which  the 
manner  of  casting  a  "Horoscope  of  Revolu- 
tion" varies  from  the  other,  in  a  footnote,* 
for  future  reference. 

At  present  we  will  proceed,  without  delay, 
to  cast  a  Horoscope  of  Nativity. 

In   our   system    now    presented    for    the 

*  HOROSCOPE  OF  REVOLUTION 

For  the  sumtnit  of  the  genethliac  scale  add  the  Fatidic 
number  to  the  year  in  question. 

In  consulting  the  Zodiacal  Calendar  and  the  cyclic  tables 
look  for  the  year  in  question. 

Orient  (locate)  the  Zodiac  according  to  instructions  on 
pages  129  and  130. 

For  locating  the  planets  consult  the  circle  of  the  Rose- 
Cross  (page  184),  disregarding  the  table  of  Arcanes,  page 
167. 

Otherwise  follow  closely  the  method  employed  in  this 
chapter. 

HOROSCOPES  145 

first  time  to  the  American  public,  one  of  the 
essential  elements  of  every  horoscope  con- 
sists of  the  name  of  the  person  of  whom  the 
horoscope  is  cast.  By  name  we  mean  "the 
given  name  and  the  family  name."  To  this 
must  be  added  the  exact  date  of  birth,  in- 
cluding hour,  date,  month  and  year.  Should 
the  subject  be  born  before  mid-day  then  he 
is  supposed,  astrologically,  to  be  born  on 
the  preceding  day  and  his  horoscope  is 
based  on  that  date  and  not  on  the  date 
which  he  generally  believes  to  be  that  of  his 
birth. 

Now,  to  make  our  instructions  in  the  mat- 
ter perfectly  simple  and  clear,  let  us  take 
an  example,  and  choose  the  Horoscope  of 
a  very  prominent  man,  so  that  the  reader 
may  judge  for  himself  whether  the  results 
of  this  horoscope  correspond  with  what  we 
know  of  that  man's  life. 

We  will  choose  for  the  erection  of  what  is 
called  technically  a  genethliac  figure, 
Victor  Hugo,  the  great  French  poet,  born 
before  mid-day  on  February  26,  1802. 

The  first  operation  consists  in  translating 
into  numbers  every  letter  found  in  the  name 
and  surname  of  the  illustrious  Frenchman. 
Here  is  the 


^46  ASTROLOGY 


TABLE  OF  NUMBERS  REPRESENTED  BY 
LETTERS 


A  =1. 

-  N 

=  5, 

or  50. 

B   =2. 

=  7, 

or  70. 

C   =2, 

or  20. 

P 

=  8, 

or  80. 

D  =4. 

Q 

=  I. 

or  100. 

E  =5. 

R 

=  2, 

or  200. 

F  =8, 

or  8o. 

S 

=  3. 

or  300. 

G  =3. 

T 

=  4. 

or  400. 

H  =8. 

TS 

=  9. 

or  90. 

TH  =  9. 

U 

=  6. 

I   =1, 

or  lo. 

V 

=  6. 

J   =1. 

or  lo. 

w 

=  6. 

K   =2, 

or  2o. 

X 

=  6, 

or  60. 

L  =3. 

or  30. 

Y 

=  ii 

or  10. 

M  =4, 

or  40. 

Z 

=  7. 

This  transformation  of  the  letters  of  the 
a.:habet  into  numbers  is  not  arbitrary,  but 
proceeds  from  the  books  of  the  Kabbala  and 
the  traditions  of  the  Rosicrucians.*  If  I 
were  to  introduce  here  the  Hebrew  alpha- 
bet, I  could  make  this  interesting  and  im- 
portant part  much  clearer  to  the  student. 
But  this  would  lead  too  far,  and  it  is 
sufficient  for  him  to  know  the  value  of  each 
letter  in  figures. 

Now  that  you  know  the  numerical  value 
of  the  letters  you  will  arrange  the  letters 
forming   the   given   name   in   one    column; 

*A  supposed  secret  society  "of  the  rose-cross,"  described 
in  a  book  published  in  1614. 


HOROSCOPES  U7 

icher.  beginning  at  the  bottom,  you  will  place 
t  opposite  the  lowest  letter,  2  opposite  the 
letter  above  and  so  on  until  you  reach  the 
top.  You  multiply  this  first  figure,  in  each 
case,  with  the  number  representing  the  let- 
ter and  you  add  the  products  of  all  these 
multiplications. 

As  an  example,  here  is  how  the  calcula- 
tion will  look  when  applied  to  the  name  of 
"Victor": 

V  — 6X6  =  36 
1—1X5=5 
C  —2  X4=  8 
T  — 4X3  =  12 
0  —  7X2  =  14 
R  — 2  X  1=    2 

Victor 77 

Let  us  repeat  the  same  operation  for  the 
family  name: 

H  — 8X4  =  32 
U  — 6X>=i8 
G  — 3X2=  6 
O  — 7X  1=   7 

Hugo 63 

No  attention  is  to  be  paid  to  any  name 
but  the  given  name  by  whi(;;iiiifhe  subject  was 
most  generally  known  "l^nce  infancy,  and  to 
the  family  name  that  he  or  she  inherited 
from  the  parents.  It  is  impossible,  to  base 
a  horoscope  on  pet  names  or  adopted  sur- 


148  ASTROLOGY 

names.  They  must  be  really  the  name  and 
surname  given  to  the  little  one  when  it  came 
into  this  world. 

Now  we  have  to  transform  the  date  of 
birth  into  the  proper  degree  of  the  sign  of 
the  Zodiac  under  which  the  subject  was 
born.  The  Zodiacal  Calender,  found  on  page 
117,  will  tell  us  that  the  26th  of  February 
corresponds  to  the  7th  degree  of  the  Con* 
stellation  of  "Pisces,"  which  is  the  12th  Sign 
of  the  Zodiac.  Now,  if  the  reader  refers  to 
our  chapter  on  Cycles  he  will  find  that  the 
year  1802  was  ruled  by  the  planet  "Mer- 
cury." (See  page  127.) 

Now  let  us  put  all  our  information  down 
in  a  line. 

77  —  63  —  12  —  7     Mercury. 

Of  course,  the  reader  remembers  that  the 
Zodiacal  sign  under  which  the  subject  was 
born  must  always* be  placed  in  House  I.  of 
the  Horoscope  and  all  the  other  signs  in- 
scribed in  their  regular  rotation  within  each 
of  the  Solar  Houses. 

We  now  come  to  the  building  up  of  the 
Genethliac  Scale^  by  writing  first  the  Year  of 
Nativity,  then  the  Number  of  the  Sign,  then 
the  Degree,  then  the  Total  given  by  the 
Name,  then  the  Total  given  by  the  Sur- 
name, finally  the  Number  called  "the  Sum- 


HOROSCOPES  149 

mit  of  the  Horoscope,"  which  is  obtained  as 
follows:  Add  all  the  digits  contained  in  the 
name,  surname,  degree  and  sign, 

7+7  +  6 +3 +  7  + 1+2  =  33 

This  number  (33)  is  called  xh^  fatidtc  num- 
ber. We  add  it  to  the  birthyear  to  get  the 
summit  of  the  horoscope: 

1802  +  33  =  1835 

Now,  1  +  8  +  3  +  5  =  17.  The  two  num- 
bers, 33  and  17,  refer  to  Arcanes  XXXIII 
and  XVII. 

This  first  calculation  gives  us: 

Year  of  Nativity 1802 

No.  of  the  Zodiacal  Sign 12 

Degree 7 

Name 77 

Surname 63 

Summit  of  the  Horoscope 1835 

Let  us  now  reverse  the  order  of  these 
figures,  making  it  read  as  follows: 

!  Summit 1835  —  X. 
Name 63  —  XI. 
Surname 77  — XII. 
Degree 7  —  1. 
Sign  of  the  Zodiac 12  —  II. 
Year  of  Nativity 1802  —  III. 

The  Roman  figures  at  the  right  hand  of 
the  above  figures  indicate  the  "Houses," 
over  which  the  planets  and  arcanes  exert 
an  influence,  which  we  shall  find  by  con- 
sulting   the    "Fatidic    Circles."     Thus    the 


150  ASTROLOGY 

four  indications  furnished  us  by  the  figure 
1835  will  influence  House  X.;  the  two  indi- 
cations furnished  us  by  the  number  63  will 
influence  House  XL,  and  so  on,  down  to 
House  IIL 

We  see  that  they  will  influence  these 
Houses,  ^ith^r  directly  by  being  placed  in  the 
space  reserved  for  each  House,  on  the  circle 
of  the  Horoscope,  or  indirectly  by  means  of 
a  Ray  from  the  House  where  they  will  be 
placed  to  the  House  which  they  are  to  influ- 
enceo  (See  cut,  page  153.) 

Now  that  the  Genethliac  Scale  has  been 
constructed  and  the  Fatidic  Circle  selected, 
we  proceed  as  follows: 

A  circle  being  a  figure  without  beginning 
or  end  there  must  be  a  rule  to  find  out 
where  to  start  it.  A  special  table  called 
"Table  of  Starting  Points"  (p.  168)  tells  us, 
according  to  the  decade  of  Nativity,  Avhere 
we  shall  find  the  first  indication  to  be  in- 
serted in  connection  with  House  X. 

We  will  continue  with  the  example  which 
we  have  been  using.  The  7th  degree  of  any 
sign  of  the  Zodiac  belongs  to  its  first  dec- 
ade, the  Table  in  question  shows  us  oppo- 
site the  first  decade  of  "Pisces"  the  Roman 
figure  LXXVIIL  This  is  our  starting 
point  and  if  we  look  in  the  Fatidic  Circle, 


HOROSCOPES  151 

No.  5,  (p.  179)  under  the  influence  of  Mer- 
cury, we  find  written  the  following: 

2(^io.  LXXVIII.  Saturn. 

Which  means  that  Saturn  has  to  be 
placed  in  House  X. 

Now,  the  Fatidic  Circles  contain  the  fol- 
lowing numbers: 

I,  2,  3,  4,  5,  6,  7,  8,  9,  10,  20,  30,  40,  50,  60, 
70,  80,  90,  100,  200,  300,  400. 

Therefore,  all  other  numbers  have  to  be 
decomposed  in  their  simple  elements,  thus: 

1,000,  2,000,  etc.,  become  respectively  10, 
20,  and  so  on. 

In  the  hundreds,  all  numbers  above  400 
are  changed  to  the  corresponding  numbers 
below  10.  Thus:  500,  600,  etc.,  become,  re- 
spectively, 5,  6,  etc. 

As  a  complete  example,  let  us  take  the 
Summit  of  the  Genethllac  Scale  we  have 
just  erected  for  the  Victor  Hugo  horoscope. 

This  Summit  is  1835;  it  is  thus  decom- 
posed: 1,000  becomes  10.  800  becomes  8. 
30  remains  30.     5  remains  5. 

Continuing  to  analyze  the  numbers  of  our 
Genethliac  Scale:  The  Name — 63,  gives  60 
and  3.  The  Surname — ^^j,  gives  70  and  7. 
The  Degree — 7,  remains  7.  The  Sign — 12, 
gives  10  and  2.  The  year  of  Nativity — 
1802,  gives  us  10,  8  and  2. 


152  ASTROLOGY 

We  have  now  all  the  various  elements 
needed  for  building  the  Figure  of  our  Horo- 
scope. We  take  a  compass  and  trace  "three 
concentric  circles"  about  the  size  of  our 
illustration.  We  orient  it  (fix  its  bearings) 
by  placing  outside  of  these  circles — which 
have  been  previously  divided  into  twelve 
equal  parts — the  Roman  figure  I  to  the 
East,  i.  e.,  where  Aries  was  placed  in  our 
first  illustration  in  the  Chapter  on  the  Signs 
of  the  Zodiac.  We  proceed  to  number  all 
the  divisions,  as  we  explained  it  in  the 
Chapter  on  the  Solar  Houses.  For,  as  you 
must  know  by  this  time,  the  positions  of  the 
Houses  never  change. 

Next,  we  inscribe  the  Signs  of  the  Zodiac, 
in  their  regular  order,  beginning  with 
"Pisces,"  which  is  the  Sign  of  Nativity  of 
the  subject  whose  Horoscope  we  are  now 
casting.  • 

Now  comes  the  task  of  placing  the 
Planets  and  the  Arcana  where  they  belong. 
We  do  it  as  follows: 

The  first  number  in  our  Genethllac  Scale 
refers,  as  always,  to  House  X.  and  will  read 
as  follows: 

1835— or  10,  8,  30,  5. 

We  know  that  our  Cycle  Is  that  of  Mer- 
cury   and    our    starting    point     LXXVIII. 


HOROSCOPEv^ 

We  find  that  this,  LXXVlil.,  just  cone- 
iiponds  to  lo,  (the  first  division  of  our  num- 
ber, 1835.)  and  that,  opposite,  Is    Inscribed 


^^Saturrir     We  therefore  Inscribe  the  •sym- 
bol of  Saturn  (h)  In  House  X. 

The  next  figure  Is  8;  to  find  what  it  cor- 
responds to,  we  go  to  the  Table  oj  the 
twenty-two     Majo?^    Arcanes     (which      has 


164  ASTROLOGY 

always  to  be  consulted  before  beginning  any 
of  the  Fatidic  Circles,  i  to  7,  Inclusive). 
We  find  that  8  corresponds  to  Major 
Arcane  VIII.  and  It  tells  us  to  place  the 
Symbol  of  Venus  In  the  Sign  of  Cancer. 
To  show,  however,  that  the  House  X  Is  the 
one  Influenced,  we  direct  a  Ray  from  Cancer 
to  House  X,  being  careful  to  mark  the 
starting  point  of  the  Ray  with  a  small  circle 
to  indicate  where  It  comes  from.  We  also 
inscribe  the  Roman  figure  belonging  to  the 
Arcane,  and  do  so  all  along  whenever  we 
meet  with  Major  Arcanes,  as  these  are  of 
such  capital  importance. 

The  next  figure  is  30,  which,  on  the 
Table  of  Major  Arcanes,  we  find  in  connec- 
tion with  Arcane  XII.  and  with  the  men- 
tion, "The  Moon  in  Libra."  We  place  the 
symbol  of  the  Moon  in  Libra  with  a  Ray  to 
House  X.,  and,  also  in  Libra  the  figure  XII. 

The  last  figure  of  the  first  number  is  5. 
We  follow  the  Table  of  Major  Arcanes  to 
the  end,  and  then  start  at  the  beginning  of 
Fatidic  Circle  No.  5,  devoted  to  Mercury, 
until  we  meet,  for  the  first  time,  figure  5. 
Opposite  we  read  "Mercury  in  Aries,"  and, 
therefore,  we  place  the  symbol  of  Mercury 
in  Aries  with  a  Ray  to  House  X.  We  will 
present  our  results  in  a  table,  as  follows: 


HOROSCOPES 

0- 


{i~ 


Cycle  :  Mercury.     Starting  Point :  LXXVm. 
10 — Saturn   [j^]   in  Sagittarius. 

for 
House  X.     i 


8 — Venus   ($1   in  Cancer,  with  Major  Arcane 
VIII.  and  a  Ray  to  Sagittarius. 

30— The  Moon   [)]   in  Libra,  with  Major  Ar- 
cane XII.  and  a  Ray  to  Sagittarius. 

5 — Mercury   [  ^  1   in  Aries,  and  a  Ray  to  Sagit- 
tarius. 

for 
House  XI. 


vj 


60— The  Sun   [  (2)  1   in  Sagittarius,  with  a  Ray 
to  Capricorn. 

3 — Venus   [  5 1   ^^  Capricorn. 

for 

House  XII. 


70 — Mercury   [  ^  1   in  Capricorn,  with  a  Ray  to 
Aquarius. 

7 — Mercury   [^1   in  Aquarius. 

for 
House  I, 


7 — ^The  Sun  [(^j   in  Gemini,  with  a  Ray  to 
Pisces,  and  with  Major  Arcane  VII. 

for 

House  II. 

T 


10 — Mercury  |^|   in  Virgo,  with  Major  Arcana 
X.  and  with  a  Ray  to  Aries. 

2 — The  Moon  f)l  in  Aries. 


10 — Jupiter  [  1^  1  in  Virgo,  with  a  Ray  to  T«urus. 

for 

House  III. 


8 — Jupiter  [IT]  in    Cancer,    with    a    Ray    to 
Taurus. 

2 — Mars  f  ^1   in  Libra,  with  a  Ray  to  Tkurus 


166  ASTROLOGY 

CONDENSED  INTERPRETATION 

OF  VICTOR  HUGO'S  COMPLETE  HOROSCOPE 

as  revealed  by  the  presence  of  the 
Zodiacal  Signs  and  Planets  in  each  of  the 
Solar  Houses  (Chaps.  III.,  IV.,  V.,  XL),  by 
the  Aspects  (Chap,  VIII.)  and  by  the 
Arcanes  (end  of  this  Chap.). 

House  I.  Fame  in  literature  through  un- 
remitting labors.  Dreamy,  poetical  tem- 
perament; restless  and  changeable  disposi- 
tion; refined  but  pleasure-loving  tastes. 
Wealth  and  honors.  Ripe  old  age.  (V. 
H.,  one  of  the  greatest  French  poets  and 
authors,  died  at  the  age  of  84.  See  Houses 
II.,  X.) 

House  II.  Marked  versatility;  lack  of 
stability.  High  position;  threatened  loss 
of  it.  Property  through  marriage.  (V.  H. 
was  created  viscount  and  life  member  of 
French  Senate,  but  was  extremely  change- 
able in  his  political  views.     See  House  VII.) 

House  III.  Family  troubles;  long  jour- 
neys in  consequence;  strife  and  contention 
between  relatives.  (V.  H.'s  father  and 
mother  separated,  father  taking  children.) 

House  IV.  Parents  of  excellent  family. 
Father  high   rank   in  army.      Subject  con- 


HOROSCOPES  157 

ceited;  fond  of  show  and  applause.  (V.  H.'s 
father  was  a  general  in  French  army.  V.  H. 
was  exceedingly  vain  and  craved  public 
applause.) 

House  V.  Honors  and  distinctions.  Pos- 
sible flirtations.  Happy  marriage.  Children 
affectionate — girl  causes  anxiety;  disaster 
threatened.  (V.  H.  married  for  love;  fairly 
worshiped  his  wife.     See  House  VIII.) 

House  VI.  Loss  of  eldest  child.  Troubles 
with  dependents.     (See  House  VIII.) 

House  VII.  Fateful  events;  loss  of  posi- 
tion; changeable  fortunes;  ultimate  triumph. 
Rich  marriage.  (V.  H.  elected  to  Academy, 
1841;  in  political  exile  from  1848  to  1870. 
See  House  II.) 

House  VIII.  Violent  and  probably  fatal 
accident  on  water;  threatened  ending  of 
child's  life;  warning  of  insanity  and  close 
connectioji  between  it  and  death.  (One  of  V. 
H.'s  daughters  and  her  husband  were 
drowned  in  a  boating  accident  and  another 
daughter  became  insane  in  consequence.) 

House  IX.  At  enmity  with  the  church. 
Lack  of  religious  feeling.  (Witness  his 
writings.) 

House  X.  Happiness,  save  sorrows 
through  children.  Mother's  influence  inim- 
ical.    Many  years  prisoner  or  exile.     Many 


158  ASTROLOGY 

friends.  Highest  governmental  honors.  (At 
his  funeral  France  conferred  highest  national 
honors  on  V.  H.     See  Houses  VII.,  VIII.) 

House  XI.  Early  vicissitudes;  change- 
able friendships;  risks  from  intrigue; 
brother  or  sister  unfriendly.  Final  tri- 
umph. (V.  H.'s  youth  was  marked  by  fre- 
quent changes  of  environment.  See  Houses 
III.,  VII.) 

House  XII.  Quarrels  with  friends.  Exile 
for  political  reasons .  Renown  in  liberal  arts. 
(See  Houses  VII.,  I.,  II.,  X.) 

(Note  especially  the  several  marked  indi- 
cations of  renowny  exile,  early  vicissitudes 
and  death  of  child.) 


For  further  practice  we  will  give  as  an- 
other sample  the  actual  horoscope  of  a  per- 
sonal friend.  (For  obvious  reasons,  the 
name  is  withheld.) 

First  name,  102;  Family  Name,  31;  Birth, 
December  7,  1847,  ^^  the  morning.     Result: 

102  -  31  -  15  -  9  Venus. 

14-04-2  +  3+1-1-1+5  +  9=22. 
1847  +  22  =  1869. 


Remember  that  middle  names  are  disregarded  in 
the  erection  of  a  horoscope. 


HOROSCOPES  169 

Information  from  the  above:  i,  the  fatidic 
number  22  refers  to  Arcane  XXII.,  fore- 
casting great  fatality.  2,  The  summit  of  the 
Horoscope  means  Arcane  XXIV.  (i  +8  +  6  + 
9  =24),  making  the  success  of  the  subject  de- 
pendent on  a  woman.  3,  The  second  decan 
of  Sagittarius  (see  Page  113)  corroborates 
Arcane  XXII.  and  makes  the  subject  of 
angry,  gloomy  temper,  scientifically  in- 
clined, frank  and  impressionable  4.  The 
Moon  reigning  over  the  second  decan  of 
Sagittarius  (see  Page  115)  indicates  that  the 
troubles  and  perils  arise  from  marriage.  5, 
The  15th  degree  of  Sagittarius  announces 
timidity. 

We  continue  the  erection  of  the  horo- 
scope: 


Genethliac  Scale 

of  N.  N. 


Summit 1869  —      X 

Name 31  —     XI 

Surname 102  —  XII 

Degree 15  —        I 

Sign  of  the  Zodiac 9  —      II 

Year  of  Nativity 1847  —     III 


Starting,  in  the  Fatidic  Circle  of  Venus 
(Page  182)  from  the  second  decan  of 
Sagittarius,  Arcane  LXXVIIL,  we  construct 
the  figure  shown  in  our  cut.  (The  student 
should  remember  that,  in  counting.  Arcane 
/.  (not  22)  follows  upon  Arcane  78.) 

lOOO 

ASTROLOGY 

House  X. — 1869. 

10 — Saturn — In  Virgo. 
8 — Arcane  VIII.  and  Venus  in  Can" 
cer,  and  ray  to  X. 


60 — Arcane  XV.  and  Saturn  In  Sagit- 
tarius, and  ray  to  X. 
9 — The  Royal  Star  of  Leo. 


HOROSCOPES  161 

House  XI. — 31. 

30 — ^Jupiter  in  Libra. 
I — Arcane  LV.  of  the  Rose-Cross: 
The  Sword. 

House  XII. — 102 

100 — Mars  in  Pisces,  and  ray  to  XII. 
2 — The  Sun  in  Libra  (with  Jupiter), 
and  ray  to  XII. 

House  I. — 15. 

10 — Saturn. 

5 — Arcane  5,  with    Mars    in    Aries 
(ray  to  I.). 

House  II. — 9. 

9 — Arcane  IX.  with  Jupiter  in  Lee 
(ray  to  IL) 

House  III. — 1847. 

9000  =    10 — Arcane  X.  with  Mercury  in  Virgo 

(ray  to  III.). 
800=      8 — The  Moon  in  Cancer  (ray  to  III.) 
40 — The  minor  Arcane  XLIII. 
7 — Mercury,  and  ray  from  X.  to  III. 

15^" If  by  accident  any  planet  is  not  located,  put  it  on  its 
diurnal  or  nocturnal  throne  (see  page  79),  according  to  the 
time  of  birth. 


162  .  ASTROLOGY 

The  meaning  of  the  Zodiacal  Sign  in- 
scribed in  each  House  is  easily  gathered 
from  Chapter  III.  by  consulting  Chapter 
v.;  but  the  student  will  welcome  the  detailed 
interpretation  of  the  Planets  (see  Chap.  XI.) 
and  of  their  Aspects  (see  Chap.  VIII.), 
which  follows: 

Saturn,  twice  in  House  I. — Poverty  and 
hard  work  in  youth;  independent  spirit, 
melancholy  temperament. 

Saturn  in  House  X. — Nocturnal  birth 
makes  settled  position  difficult  till  thirtieth 
year.  Endangers  married  happiness  and 
children. 

Saturn  in  Virgo. — Mysterious  fatalities, 
which  concern  position  because  of  Virgo 
being  in  House  X.  Loss  of  grown  children. 
Taste  for  science  and  public  life.  Two  mar- 
riages possible. 

Saturn  in  Sagittarius. — Slow  to  learn. 
Mind  hard  to  understand.  Sorrows  in  wed- 
lock. Good  morals.  High  promotion  late, 
if  ever. 

Saturn  with  Mercury  in  the  same  House 
(X.). — Concentration  of  character,  deliber- 
ate, grave,  discreet.  Weakness  in  the  tests 
of  life.     Serious  study. 

Saturn  with  the  Royal  Star  of  Leo  (which 
is  as  powerful  as  the  Sun). — Strong  reason- 


HOROSCOPES  163 

ing  power,  but  slowness  in  learning.  Dan- 
ger of  losing  position. 

Saturn  in  aspect  of  opposition  with  Mars. 
— Peaceful  mind,  poor  fighter.  Domestic 
enemies.     Serious  illness.     Great  disasters. 

Jupiter  in  House  XI. — Influential  friends. 
Fortunate  relations.  Success  in  enterprises. 
Promotion.  Early  marriage  and  first  child 
a  boy. 

Jupiter  in  Libra. — Justice,  good  conscience, 
good  morals.  Favor  of  the  great.  A 
happy  second  marriage. 

Jupiter  with  Sun. — Rise  above  the  station 
of  parents.     Honors,  riches,  fame. 

Jupiter  with  Arcane  of  Sword. — The  good 
things  foretold  will  not  be  obtained  except 
through  hard  fight. 

Jupiter  in  trine  aspect  with  Mercury. 
(Favorable;  see  Page  126). — Keen  judg- 
ment. Talent  for  science  and  arts.  In- 
genuity.    Wealth  and  honors. 

Jupiter  in  square  aspect  with  the  Moon. — 
Instability  of  wealth  and  position.  Friend- 
ship of  the  great.     Protection  from  enemies. 

Jupiter  in  opposition  to  Mars. — Friendship 
changing  to  enmity.  Marital  troubles. 
Separation  from  family  or  children. 

Mars  in  House  IV. — Misfortune  caused 
by  women.     Danger  of  wounds  by  steel  or 


164  ASTROLOGY 

fire.  Falls  from  high  places.  Brain 
disease,  headaches.  Troubles  with  par- 
ents or  parents-in-law. 

Mars  in  House  V. — Separation  from  chil- 
dren, harmful  to  them.  Danger  arising 
from  occupation.     Illegitimate  children. 

Mars  in  Aries. — Irritable  temper.  Wounds 
in  head.  Trouble  with  eyes  and  intes- 
tines. 

Mars  in  Pisces. — Great  struggles  for  a 
competency  or  a  fortune.  Persecution, 
slander.  Sorrow  in  love  affairs.  Separa- 
tion from  children.  Poverty  of  parents. 
Passionate  temper. 

Mars  in  trine  aspect  with  Venus. — Con- 
stant activity  with  good  results.  Pride. 
Inconsistency. 

Mars  in  trine  aspect  with  the  Moon. — 
Diseases,  vicissitudes  during  a  trip. 

Mars  in  opposition  with  Mercury. — Bad 
connections.    Danger  of  imprisonment. 

The  Sun  in  House  XI. — High,  useful  pro- 
tection. Taste  for  art.  Good  reputation. 
Old  age  happier  than  youth. 

The  Sun  in  Libra. — Great  moral  qualities. 
Reflective,  observing  mind.  Talent  for 
poetry  and  the  arts. 

The  Sun  together  with  the  Sword. — Late 
honor,  after  hard  fights. 


HOROSCOPES  165 

The  Sun  in  trine  aspect  with  Mercury. 
-—Fame  as  a  scientist  or  inventor. 

The  Sun  in  square  aspect  with  Venus. — 
Wealth  and  honors  due  to  a  woman.  Many 
friends. 

Venus  in  House  VIII. — Childless  mar- 
riage.    Early  end  of  married  life. 

Venus  in  Cancer. — Fickle  in  love.  Widow- 
hood or  separation.  Love  affair  on  a  jour- 
ney. 

Venus  together  with  the  Moon. — Unsettled 
marriage.  Two  love  affairs  at  the  same 
time. 

Mercury  in  House  III. — Inventive  and 
observative  mind.  Wide  information.  Fame 
in  science  or  literature. 

Mercury  in  House  X. — High  connections. 
Independent  spirit.  Talent  for  art  and 
mathematics. 

Mercury  in  Virgo. — Talent  for  science. 
Eloquence.  Philosophies.  Some  great  ad- 
versities. 

Mercury  in  Aquarius.  —  Serious,  deep 
study  in  occult  matters.  Good  observer 
and  quick  to  learn.  Road  to  a  fortune 
through  science  or  the  arts. 

Mercury  in  sextile  aspect  with  the  Moon. 
— Talent  for  the  arts  and  for  business. 

The  Moon  in  House  VIII. — Journeys  not 


166  ASTROLOGY 

profitable.  Dangerous  to  persons  of  the 
other  sex.  Weahh  through  pubHc  favor  or 
from  unexpected  quarter. 

The  Moon  in  Cancer. — Good  conscience. 
Sensitiveness.  Superior  nature.  Frequent 
journeys.  Honors  acquired  by  work.  Vivid 
imagination. 

The  general  result  to  be  gathered  from 
the  above  mass  of  information  would  be  as 
follows: 

"The  subject,  child  of  poor  parents,  was 
not  happy  in  his  youth;  his.talents  and  his 
power  of  accommodating  himself  to  circum- 
stances served  him  to  rise  in  spite  of  many 
serious  obstacles  and  dangerous  enemies; 
by  the  aid  of  powerful  friends  he  may  attain 
to  fame  in  the  arts  or  in  science." 

Practice  in  weighing  the  values  of  the 
various  items  of  information  will  enable  the 
student  to  arrive  at  more  precise  and  de- 
tailed results. 


HOROSCOPES 

^  00  to  )-^ 

Soooooc-305ai.t>.ooiOK-* 
oooooooooooo«ooo<^oicn^f».ocl^^^-' 


K^  K^  r^  r^  f'\  r^  /S  i>^  k'S  *^  r^  r^  |/s  k>i  ^  'S  ^-<  ^--i  ^  h^  hh 

I— tt-H  r'SI— II— ti-H  *-<!—,  hH 


n 


> 
o 

I 

o 


> 
o 


^  > 


O  CA)  C/2 

OJ     M     O 

o  q  o 

»  c 


a-' 


<  r  c  o  H  > 

—  •  ro   p    ft   p    «-! 

-  O    3    g    rr    -• 


ni  5  c 


3    J?^. 


2   rt-rt    S. 


o   «■ 


C/2  C/2 

SSr 


P    ft  -rt 


< 

n 

O    P 
O    -1 

*— 1 
T5 

38     I 

Ui 

3     1 

o  s 
►^  c  '^ 

>  3    2. 
3    Q.  3 

a'3-'^ 

H 

W 

W 
H 
> 
H 

O 

z 

C/5 

ASTROLOGY 


Table  op  the  Starting  Points  on  the 
Fatidic  Circles. 


1st   Decan  start  from  Arcane   XXX VT. 


ARIES ^ 

2nd 

3rd 

I 

^Ist 

TAURUS 

2nd 

3rd 

k 

'1st 

GEMINI 

2nd 

3rd 

'1st 

CANCER < 

2nd 

3rd 

k 

'1st 

LEO .  . 

2nd 

3rd 

ki 

'1st 

VIRGO 

2nd 

3rd 

((  ( ( 


(<  (( 


((  (« 


(<  << 


((  (« 


((  (( 


((  (( 


(t  .  it 


n  << 


<(  <( 


tt  <( 


<<  it 


it  a 


a  (( 


(<  <( 


((  (( 


((  <(  («  (( 


<( 

XXXVI. 

(( 

LXIV. 

(< 

LXIV. 

(( 

XXXVI. 

it 

XXXVI. 

it 

XXXVI. 

t( 

LXIV. 

it 

XXXVI. 

it 

XXXVI. 

*i 

XL. 

ti 

LXIV. 

a 

LXIV. 

a 

XXXVI. 

it 

XL. 

tt 

XL. 

ii 

LXIV. 

ti 

XXXVI. 

LIBRA 


SCORPIO     . 


SAGITTARIUS 


CAPRICORN  . 


AQUARIUS     . 


PISCES 


HOROSCOPES 


1st  Decan  start  from  Arcane  L. 

2nd     ♦♦  ♦«         •*         ♦♦ 

3rd      ♦*  *• 


2nd 


.   < 


3rd 


1st 


.   < 


1st 


2nd 


1st 

(( 

< 

2nd 

(( 

3rd 

(( 

LIV. 
"        •«        LXXVIII. 


1st      •«  '♦         "         «*         LXXVIII. 


(<  «(         ((         (( 


((  <(         t(         <( 


1st 

2nd     ♦•  **         ** 


<<  («         {(         (( 


((  ((         it 


2nd     '♦  «*         ♦*         ** 

3rd      " 


(( -        «< 


((  (« 


(<  ((  ((  (( 


L. 


3rd     '*  "        '*         ♦'        LXIV. 


LXIV. 

LXXVIIL 

L. 


L. 

LXXVIIL 
«*         LXXVIIL 


•'         LXXVIII. 
L. 


3rd      ♦«  '•         «•         ««         LXXVIII. 


LXXVIII. 
**  *«  "  LXXVIII. 
"        •*        "        L. 

ASTROLOGY 


I.  THE  FATIDIC  CIRCLE  OF  SATURN 


{Always  begin  with  the  22  Major  A r canes.) 

XXIII. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Leo. 
tection.     Celebrity.) 

(High  pro. 

XXIV. 

Saturn  in  Aries. 

XXV. 

Venus  in  Taurus. 

XXVI. 

Jupiter  in  Gemini, 

I 

XXVII. 

The    Arcane   of  the    Scepter.     (Suc- 

cessful      enterprises. 

Authority 

given  to  the  subject.) 

XXVIII. 

The  Moon. 

XXIX. 

Venus. 

XXX. 

Jupiter, 

XXXI. 

Jupiter  in  Aries. 

XXXII. 

Mercury  in  Taurus. 

XXXIII. 

The  Moon  in  Gemini. 

XXXIV. 

Mars  in  Cancer. 

XXXV. 

The  Moon  in  Leo. 

XXXVI. 

The  Sun  in  Virgo. 

XXXVII. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Taurus.     (Union. 
Marriage.     Protection  of  women.) 

XXXVIII. 

The  Sun  in  Cancer. 

XXXIX. 

Saturn  in  Leo. 

XL. 

Jupiter  in  Lirgo. 

20 —  I 

XLI. 

Mars. 

30 —  2 

XLII. 

Venus  in  Libra. 

40—  3 

XLIII. 

The    Arcane    of   the    Res 

iper.      (The 

50—  4     XLIV. 
60—  5    XLV. 


Emblem  of  failure  and  of  things 
that  never  come  to  any  satisfactory 
conclusion. ) 

Jupiter  in  Scorpio. 

Mercury  in  Sagittarius. 


FATIDIC    CIRCLES 

70— 

XLVI. 

80— 

XLVII. 

90— 

XLVIII 

100 — 

XLIX. 

200 — 

L. 

LI. 

LII. 

LIII. 

LIV. 

I 

LV. 

LVI. 

LVII. 

LVIII. 

LIX. 

LX. 

LXI. 

LXIL 

.9 

LXIIL 

LXIV. 

LXV. 

LXVI. 

LXVII. 

LXVIII. 

20 — 

I 

LXIX. 

30— 

LXX. 

40— 

LXXI. 

50—  4  LXXII. 

60-  5  LXXIII. 

70—  6  LXXIV. 

80—  7  LXXV. 

90—  8  LXXVI. 

100-  9  LXXVII. 

20—10  LXXVIIL 


The  Moon  in  Capricorn. 

Mercury. 

The  Sun  in  Aquarius. 

Saturn  in  Pisces. 

Saturn. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Aquarius.  (High 
situation  due  sometimes  to  a  mere 
accident. ) 

Mercury  in  Libra. 

Mars  in  Scorpio. 

The  Sun  in  Sagittarius. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Sword.  (Success 
in  spite  of  all  obstacles.) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

Mars  in  Aries. 

The  Sun  in  Taurus. 

Saturn  in  Gemini. 

Venus  in  Cancer. 

Mercury  in  Leo. 

Mars  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Scorpio.  (Dan- 
gers. Powerful  enemies.  Wounds.  7 

Saturn  in  Capricorn. 

Venus  in  Aquarius. ' 

Mercury  in  Pisces. 

Crowned  Mars.  (A  symbol  of  fortune. ) 

The  Moon  in  Libra. 

The  Symbol  of  the  Reaper.  (Danger 
for  one's  person  and  fortune.) 

Saturn  in  Scorpio. 

Venus  in  Sagittarius. 

Jupiter  in  Capricorn. 

Mercury. 

Mars  in  Aquarius. 

The  Moon  in  Pisces. 

Saturn. 

ASTROLOGY 


II,   THE  FATIDIC  CIRCLE  OF  JUPITER 
{^Always  begin  with  the  22  Major  Arcanes.) 


XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

I 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

8  . 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII 

XXXIX. 

XL. 

20 —  I 

XLI. 

30—  2 

XLIL 

40-  3    XLIII. 


50—  4    XLIV. 
60—  5     XLV. 
70—  6    XLVI. 


The  Royal  Star  of  Leo.  (High  pro- 
tection.    Celebrity. ) 

Jupiter  in  Aries. 

Mercury  in  Taurus. 

Mars  in  Gemini. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Scepter.  (Suc- 
cessful enterprises.  Authority 
given  to  the  subject.) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

Mars  in  Aries. 

The  Moon  in  Taurus. 

Saturn  in  Gemini. 

The  Sun  in  Cancer. 

Saturn  in  Leo. 

Venus  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Taurus.  (Union. 
Marriage.     Protection  of  women. ) 

Venus  in  Cancer. 

Jupiter  in  Leo. 

Mars  in  Virgo. 

Mars. 

Mercury  in  Libra. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Reaper.  (The 
Emblem  of  failure  and  of  things 
that  never  come  to  any  satisfactory 
conclusion. ) 

Mars  in  Scorpio. 

The  Moon  in  Sagittarius. 

Saturn  in  Capricorn. 


FATIDIC   CIRCLES 

80— 

•  7 

XLVII. 

90— 

XLVIII. 

100 — 

XLIX. 

200 — 

L. 

LI. 

LII. 

LIIL 

LIV. 

I 

LV. 

LVI. 

LVII. 

LVIII. 

LIX. 

LX. 

LXI. 

LXII. 

LXIII. 

LXIV. 

LXV. 

LXVI. 

LXVII. 

.00 

LXVIII 

20— 

I 

LXIX. 

30— 

•  2 

LXX. 

40— 

•  3 

LXXI. 

50—  4  LXXII. 

60—  5  LXXIII, 

70—  6  LXXIV. 

80—  7  LXXV. 

90—  8  LXXVI. 

100-9  LXXVII. 

20—10  LXXVIIL 


Mercury. 

Venus  in  Aquarius. 

Jupiter  in  Pisces. 

Saturn. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Aquarius.  (High 
situation  due  sometimes  to  mere 
accident. ) 

The  Moon  in  Libra. 

The  Sun  in  Scorpio. 

Mercury  in  Sagittarius. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Sword.  (Trium- 
phant success  in  spite  of  all  ob- 
stacles.) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

The  Sun  in  Aries. 

Venus  in  Taurus. 

Jupiter  in  Gemini. 

Mercury  in  Cancer. 

The  Moon  in  Leo. 

The  Sun  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Scorpio.  (Dan- 
gers. Powerful  enemies.  Wounds.) 

Jupiter  in  Capricorn. 

Mercury  in  Aquarius. 

The  Moon  in  Pisces. 

Crowned  Mars.  (A  symbol  of  fortune.) 

Saturn  in  Libra. 

The  Symbol  of  the  Reaper.  (Danger 
for  one's  person  and  fortune.) 

Jupiter  in  Scorpio. 

Mercury  in  Sagittarius. 

Mars  in  Capricorn. 

Mercury. 

The  Sun  in  Aquarius. 

Saturn  in  Pisces. 

Saturn. 

ASTROLOGY 


III.  THE  FATIDIC  CIRCLE  OF  MARS 


{Always  begin  with  the  22  Major  Arcanes.) 


XXIII. 

XXIV. 
XXV. 
XXVI. 
XXVII. 


XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 


8  XXXVIII. 

9  XXXIX. 
10  XL. 
20—  I  XLI. 
30-  2  XLII. 
40—  3  XLIII. 


50—  4    XLIV. 
60-  5    XLV. 
70—  6    XLVI. 


The  Royal  Star  of  Leo.  (High  pro- 
tection.    Celebrity.) 

Mars  in  Aries. 

The  Moon  in  Taurus. 

The  Sun  in  Gemini. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Scepter.  (Suc- 
cessful enterprises.  Authority 
given  to  the  subject.) 

The  Moon. 

Venus.  » 

Jupiter. 

The  Sun  in  Aries. 

Saturn  in  Taurus. 

Jupiter  in  Gemini. 

Venus  in  Cancer. 

Jupiter  in  Leo. 

Mercury  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Taurus.  (Union. 
Marriage.     Protection  of  women.) 

Mercury  in  Cancer. 

Mars  in  Leo. 

The  Sun  in  Virgo. 

Mars. 

The  Moon  in  Libra. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Reaper.  (The 
Emblem  of  failure  and  of  things 
that  never  come  to  any  satisfactory 
conclusion. ) 

The  Sun  in  Scorpio. 

Saturn  in  Sagittarius. 

Jupiter  in  Capricorn. 


FATIDIC    CIRCLES 

80— 

XLVII. 

90— 

XLVIII. 

100 — 

XLIX. 

200 — 

L. 

LI. 

LII. 

LIII. 

LIV. 

I 

LV. 

LVI. 

LVII. 

LVIII. 

LIX. 

LX. 

LXI. 

LXII. 

LXIII. 

LXIV. 

LXV. 

LXVI. 

LXVII. 

LXVIIL 

20 — 

I 

LXIX. 

30— 

LXX. 

40—  3 

LXXI. 

50—  4  LXXII. 

60—  5  LXXIII. 

70—  6  LXXIV. 

80^  7  LXXV. 

90—  8  LXXVI. 

100-  9  LXXVII. 

20—10  LXXVIII. 


Mercury. 

Mercury  in  Aquarius. 

Mars  in  Pisces. 

Saturn. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Aquarius.  ,  (High 
situation  due  sometimes  to  mere 
accident. ) 

Saturn  in  Libra. 

Venus  in  Scorpio. 

Mercury  in  Sagittarius. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Sword.  (Trium- 
phant success  in  spite  of  all  ob- 
stacles. ) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

Venus  in  Aries. 

Mercury  in  Taurus. 

Mars  in  Gemini. 

The  Moon  in  Cancer. 

Saturn  in  Leo. 

Venus  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Scorpio.  (Dan- 
gers. Powerful  enemies.  Wounds. ) 

Mars  in  Capricorn. 

The  Moon  in  Aquarius. 

Saturn  in  Pisces. 

Mars.  (A  symbol  of  fortune.) 

Jupiter  in  Libra. 

The  Symbol  of  the  Reaper.  (Danger 
for  one's  person  and  fortune.) 

Mars  in  Scorpio, 

The  Moon  in  Sagittarius. 

The  Sun  in  Capricorn. 

Mercury. 

Venus  in  Aquarius. 

Jupiter  in  Pisces. 

SattLx. 

ASTROLOGY 


IV.  THE  FATIDIC  CIRCLE  OF  THE  SUN 


{Always  begin  with  the  22  Major  Ar canes.) 


XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

I 

XXVII. 

a 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII, 

XXXIX. 

XL. 

20 —  I 

XLI. 

30—  2 

XLIL 

40—  3 

XLIII. 

50—  4    XLIV. 
60—  5    XLV. 
70—  6    XLVI. 


The  Royal  Star  of  Leo.  (Hig^h  pro« 
tection.     Celebrity. ) 

The  Sun  in  Aries. 

Saturn  in  Taurus. 

Venus  in  Gemini. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Scepter.  (Suc- 
cessful enterprises.  Authority 
g^ven  to  the  subject. ) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

Venus  in  Aries. 

Jupiter  in  Taurus. 

Mars  in  Gemini. 

Mercury  in  Cancer. 

Mars  in  Leo. 

The  Sun  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Taurus.  (Union. 
Marriage.     Protection  of  women.) 

The  Moon  in  Cancer. 

The  Sun  in  Leo. 

Venus  in  Virgo. 

Mars. 

Saturn  in  Libra. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Reaper.  (The 
Emblem  of  failure  and  of  things 
that  never  come  to  any  satisfactory 
conclusion. ) 

Venus  in  Scorpio. 

Jupiter  in  Sagittarius. 

Mars  in  Capricorn. 


FATIDIC   CIRCLES 


80— 

XLVII. 

90— 

XLVIII. 

100 — 

Q 

XLIX. 

200 — 

L. 

LI. 

LII. 

LIII. 

LIV. 

I 

LV. 

LVI. 

LVII. 

LVIII. 

LIX. 

LX. 

LXI. 

LXII. 

LXIII. 

LXIV. 

LXV. 

LXVI. 

LXVII. 

iOO 

LXVIII 

20— 

I 

LXIX. 

30— 

LXX. 

40—  3 

LXXI. 

50—  4  LXXII. 

60—  5  LXXIII. 

70—  6  LXXIV. 

80—  7  LXXV. 

90—  8  LXXVI. 

100-  9  LXXVII. 

20—10  LXXVIII. 


Mercury. 

The  Moon  in  Aquarius. 

The  Sun  in  Pisces. 

•Saturn. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Aquarius.  (High 
situation  due  sometimes  to  mere 
accident ) 

Jupiter  in  Libra. 

Mercury  in  Scorpio. 

The  Moon  in  Sagittarius. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Sword.     (Trium- 
phant success  in  spite  of  all  ob 
stacles, ) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

Mercury  in  Aries. 

The  Moon   in  Taurus. 

The  Sun  in  Gemini. 

Saturn  in  Cancer. 

Jupiter  in  Leo. 

Mercury  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Scorpio.  (Dan- 
gers. Powerful  enemies.  Wounds, ) 

The  Sun  in  Capricorn. 

Saturn  in  Aquarius. 

Jupiter  in  Pisces. 

Crowned  Mars.  (A  symbol  of  fortune.) 

Mars  in  Libra. 

The  Symbol  of  the  Reaper.  (Danger 
for  one's  person  and  fortune.) 

The  Sun  in  Scorpio. 

Saturn  in  Sagittarius. 

Venus  in  Capricorn. 

Mercury. 

Mercury  in  Aquarius. 

Mars  in  Pisces. 

Saturij. 

ASTROLOGY 


V.  THE  FATIDIC  CIRCLE  OF  MERCURY 


{Always  begin  with  the  22  Major  Arcanes.) 


XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

X 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII 

XXXIX. 

XL. 

20 —  I 

XLI. 

30—  2 

XLII. 

40-  3 

XLIII. 

50—  4    XLIV. 
60—  5     XLV. 
6    XLVI. 


The  Royal  Star  of  Leo.  (High  pro- 
tection.    Celebrity.) 

Mercury  in  Aries. 

Mars  in  Taurus. 

The  Moon  in  Gemini. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Scepter.  (Suc- 
cessful enterprises.  Authority 
given  to  the  subject. ) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

The  Moon  in  Aries. 

The  Sun  in  Taurus. 

Venus  in  Gemini. 

Saturn  in  Cancer. 

Venus  in  Leo. 

Jupiter  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Taurus.  (Union. 
Marriage.     Protection  of  women. ) 

Jupiter  in  Cancer. 

Mercury  in  Leo. 

The  Moon  in  Virgo. 

Mars. 

Mars  in  Libra. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Reaper.  (The 
Emblem  of  failure  and  of  things 
that  never  come  to  any  satisfactory 
conclusion. ) 

The  Moon  in  Scorpio. 

The  Sun  in  Sagittarius. 

Venus  in  Capricorn, 


FATIDIC   CIRCLES 

80— 

XLVIL 

90— 

XLVIII. 

100 — 

XLIX. 

200 — ] 

[O 

L. 

LI. 

LII. 

LIII. 

LIV. 

I 

LV. 

LVI. 

LVII. 

LVIII. 

LIX. 

I.X. 

LXI. 

LXII. 

LXIII. 

LXIV. 

LXV. 

LXVI. 

LXVII. 

LXVIII 

2(>— 

I 

LXIX. 

30— 

LXX, 

40— 

LXXI. 

50—  4  LXXII. 

60—  5  LXXIII. 

70—  6  LXXIV. 

80—  7  LXXV. 

90—  8  LXXVI. 

100—  9  LXXVII. 

ao— 10  LXXVIII. 


Mercury. 

Jupiter  in  Aquarius. 

Mercury  in  Pisces. 

Saturn. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Aquarius.  (High 
situation  due  sometimes  to  mere 
accident. ) 

The  Sun  in  Libra. 

Saturn  in  Scorpio. 

Jupiter  in  Sagittarius. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Sword.     (Trium 
phant  success  in  spite  of  all  ob- 
stacles. ) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

Saturn  in  Aries. 

Jupiter  in  Taurus. 

Mercury  in  Gemini. 

Mars  in  Cancer. 

The  Sun  in  Leo. 

Saturn  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Scorpio.  (Dan- 
gers.  Powerful  enemies.  Wounds.) 

Mercury  in  Capricorn. 

Mars  in  Aquarius. 

The  Sun  in  Pisces. 

Crowned  Mars.  (A  symbol  of  fortune.) 

Venus  in  Libra. 

The  Symbol  of  the  Reaper.  (Danger 
for  one's  person  and  fortune.) 

Mercury  in  Scorpio. 

Mars  in  Sagittarius. 

The  Moon  in  Capricorn. 

Mercury. 

Saturn  in  Aquarius. 

Venus  in  Pisces. 

Saturn. 

ASTROLOGY 


VI.  THE  FATIDIC  CIRCLE  OF  THE  MOON 


{Always  begin  with  the  22  Major  Ar canes.) 


xxni. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

I 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII, 

XXXIX. 

TO 

XL. 

20 —    I 

XLI. 

30 —    2 

XLIL 

40-3 

XLIII. 

50—  4    XLIV. 
60—  5    XLV. 
70—  6    XLVI. 


The  Royal  Star  of  Leo.  (High  pro- 
taction.     Celebrity.) 

The  Moon  in  Aries. 

The  Sun  in  Taurus. 

Saturn  in  Gemini. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Scepter.  (Suc- 
cessful enterprises.  Authority 
given  to  the  subject. ) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

Saturn  in  Aries. 

Venus  in  Taurus. 

Mercury  in  Gemini. 

Jupiter  in  Cancer. 

Mercury  in  Leo. 

Mars  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Taurus.  (Union. 
Marriage.     Protection  of  women. ) 

Mars  in  Cancer. 

The  Moon  in  Leo. 

Saturn  in  Virgo. 

Mars. 

The  Sun  in  Libra. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Reaper.  (The 
Emblem  of  failure  and  of  things 
that  never  come  to  any  satisfactory 
conclusion. ) 

Saturn  in  Scorpio. 

Venus  in  Sagittarius. 

Mercury  in  Capricorn. 


FATIDIC   CIRCLES 

80— 

XLVIL 

90— 

XLVIII. 

100 — 

XLIX. 

200 — : 

to 

L. 

LI. 

LII. 

LIII. 

LIV. 

I 

LV. 

LVI. 

LVII. 

LVIII. 

LIX. 

LX. 

LXI. 

LXII. 

LXIII. 

LXIV. 

LXV. 

LXVI. 

LXVII. 

LXVIII. 

20 — 

I 

LXIX. 

30— 

LXX. 

40— 

LXXI. 

50—  4  LXXII. 

60—  5  LXXIII. 

70—  6  LXXIV. 

80—  7  LXXV. 

90—  8  LXXVI. 

100-  9  LXXVII. 

20—10  LXXVIII. 


Mercury. 

Mars  in  Aquarius. 

The  Moon  in  Pisces. 

Saturn. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Aquarius.  (High 
situation  due  sometimes  to  mere 
accident. ) 

Venus  in  Libra. 

Jupiter  in  Scorpio. 

Mars  in  Sagittarius. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Sword.  (Trium- 
phant success  in  spite  of  all  ob- 
stacles. ) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

Jupiter  in  Aries. 

Mars  in  Taurus. 

The  Moon  in  Gemint, 

The  Sun  in  Cancer. 

Venus  in  Leo. 

Jupiter  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Scorpio.  (Dan- 
gers. Powerful  enemies.  Wounds.) 

The  Moon  in  Capricorn. 

The  Sun  in  Aquarius. 

Venus  in  Pisces. 

Crowned  Mars.  (A  symbol  of  fortune. ) 

Mercury  in  Libra. 

The  Symbol  of  the  Reaper.  (Danger 
for  one's  person  and  fortune.) 

The  Moon  in  Scorpio. 

The  Sun  in  Sagittarius. 

Saturn  in  Capricorn. 

Mercury. 

Jupiter  in  Aquarius. 

Mercury  in  Pisces. 

Saturn. 

ASTROLOGY 


VII.  THE  FATIDIC  CIRCLE  OF  VENUS 


{Always  begin  with  the  22  Major  Ar canes.) 


XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

I 

XXVII. 

a 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII. 

XXXVIII, 

XXXIX. 

XL. 

ao—  I 

XLI. 

|0—  2 

XLII. 

40—  3 

XLIII. 

50—  4     XLIV. 
60—  5     XLV. 
ro—  6    XLVI. 


The  Royal  Star  of  Leo.  (High  pro- 
tection.    Celebrity.) 

Venus  in  Aries. 

Jupiter  in  Taurus. 

Mercury  in  Gemini. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Scepter.  (Suc- 
cessful enterprises.  Authority 
given  to  the  subject.) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

Mercury  in  Aries. 

Mars  in  Taurus. 

The  Sun  in  Gemini. 

The  Moon  in  Cancer. 

The  Sun  in  Leo, 

Saturn  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Taurus.  (Union. 
Marriage.     Protection  of  women.) 

Saturn  in  Cancer. 

Venus  in  Leo. 

Mercury  in  Virgo. 

Mars. 

Jupiter  in  Libra. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Reaper.  (The 
Emblem  of  failure  and  of  things 
that  never  come  to  any  satisfactory 
conclusion. ) 

Mercury  in  Scorpio. 

Mars  in  Sagittarius. 

The  Sun  in  Capricorn. 


FATIDIC   CIRCLES 

go- 

XLVII. 

go— 

XLVIII. 

I  GO — 

XLIX. 

300 — ] 

[O 

L. 

LI. 

LII. 

LIII. 

LIV. 

I 

LV. 

LVI. 

LVII. 

LVIII. 

LIX. 

LX. 

LXI. 

LXII. 

LXIII. 

ID 

LXIV. 

LXV. 

LXVI. 

LXVII. 

LXVIII 

20 — 

I 

LXIX 

30— 

LXX. 

40— 

LXXI. 

50—  4  LXXII.. 

60—  5  LXXIII. 

70-  6  LXXIV. 

80—  7  LXXV. 

90—  8  LXXVI. 

100—  9  LXXVII. 

20— :o  LXXVIII. 


Mercury. 

Saturn  in  Aquarius. 

Venus  in  Pisces. 

Saturn. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Aquarius.  (High 
situation  due  sometimes  to  mere 
accident. ) 

Mars  in  Libra. 

The  Moon  in  Scorpio. 

Saturn  in  Sagittarius. 

The  Arcane  of  the  Sword.  (Trium- 
phant success  in  spite  of  all  ob- 
stacles. ) 

The  Moon. 

Venus. 

Jupiter. 

The  Moon  in  Aries. 

Saturn  in  Taurus. 

Venus  in  Gemini. 

Jupiter  in  Cancer. 

Mars  in  Leo. 

The  Moon  in  Virgo. 

The  Royal  Star  of  Scorpio.  (Dan- 
gers. Powerful  enemies.  Wounds.) 

Venus  in  Capricorn. 

Jupiter  in  Aquarius. 

Mars  in  Pisces. 

Crowned  Mars.  (A  symbol  of  fortune. ) 

The  Sun  in  Libra. 

The  Symbol  of  the  Reaper.  (Danger 
for  one's  person  and  fortune.) 

Venus  in  Scorpio. 

Jupiter  in  Sagittarius. 

Mercury  in  Capricorn. 

Mercury. 

The  Moon  in  Aquarius. 

The  Sun  in  Pisces. 

Saturn. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE  FATIDIC  CIRCLE  OF  THE  ROSE-CROSS 
(  The  Major  Arcane s  are  included  in  this  Circle.) 

The  Magus. 

Gate  of  Sanctuarjr.     The  Moon. 

Iris — Urania.     Venus. 

The  Cubic  Stone.     Jupiter. 

Master  of  Arcanes.     Mars  in  Aries. 

The  Two  Ways.  The  Moon  in  Taurus. 

Chariot  of  Osiris.     Sun  in  Gemini. 

Balance  and  Sword.  Venus  in  Cancer. 

The  Veiled  Lamp.     Jupiter  in  Leo. 

The  Sphinx.     Mercury  in  Virgo. 

The  Tamed  Lion.     Mars. 

The  Sacrifice.     The  Moon  in  Libra. 

The  Reaping  Skeleton. 

The  Two  Urns.     The  Sun  in  Scorpio. 

Typhon.     Saturn  in  Sagittarius. 

The  Thunder  Struck  Tower.    Jupiter 

in  Capricorn. 
The  Star  of  the  Magi.     Mercury. 
The  Twilight.     Venus  in  Aquarius. 
The  Dazzling  Light.  Jupiter  in  Pisces. 
The  Rising  of  the  Dead.     Saturn. 
The  Crown  of  the  Magi.     The  Sun. 
The  Crocodile. 

Master  of  Scepter.  Royal  Star  of  Leo. 
Mistress  of  the  Scepter.  Mars  in  Aries. 
The  Warrior  of  the  Scepter.    Mercury 

in  Taurus. 
Slave  of  Scepter.     Jupiter  in  Gemini. 
The  Scepter. 

The  Two  Scepters.     The  Moon. 
The  Three  Scepters.     Venus. 
The  Four  Scepters.     Jupiter. 
The  Five  Scepters.    The  Sun  in  Aries. 
The  Six  Scepters.    Moon  inTaurus. 
The  Seven  Scepters.    Mars  in  Gemini. 
The  Eight  Scepters.  Venus  in  Cancer. 
The  Nine  Scepters.     Saturn  in  Leo. 
The  Ten  Scepters.   The  Sun  in  Virgo. 
The  Master  of  the  Cups.     The  Royal 

Star  of  Taurus 
The  Mistress  of  the  Cups.     Mercury 

in  Cancer. 
Warrior  of  the  Cups.     Jupiter  in  Leo. 
Slave  of  the  Cup.     Venus  in  Virgo, 


I 

I. 

IL 

HL 

IV. 

V. 

VL 

vn. 

VIII. 

IX. 

lO 

X. 

XI. 

XII. 

XIIL 

XIV. 

XV. 

XVI. 

XVII. 

go 

XVIIL 

XIX. 

XX. 

XXI. 

XXII. 

XXIII. 

XXIV. 

XXV. 

XXVI. 

I 

XXVII. 

XXVIII. 

XXIX. 

XXX. 

XXXI. 

XXXII. 

XXXIII. 

XXXIV. 

XXXV. 

XXXVI. 

XXXVII 

XXXVII 

XXXIX. 

XL. 

FATIDIC  CIRCLES 

20 — 

I 

XLI. 

30— 

XLII. 

40— 

XLIII. 

50— 

XLIV. 

60— 

XLV. 

70— 

XLVI. 

Sa- 

XLVII. 

go— 

XLVIII 

100 — 

XLIX. 

200 — 10 

L. 

LI. 

LII. 

LIII. 

LIV. 

I 

LV. 

LVI. 

LVII. 

LVIII. 

LIX. 

LX. 

LXI. 

LXII. 

LXIII. 

LXIV. 

LXV. 

LXVI. 

LXVII. 

lOO 

LXVIII 

The  Moon  in  Libra. 


20—  I  LXIX. 

30—  2  LXX. 

40—  3  LXXI. 

50—  4  LXXII. 

60—  5  LXXIII. 

70—  6  LXXIV. 

80—  7  LXXV. 

90—  8  LXXVI. 

100—  9  LXXVII. 

200—10  LXXVin. 


The  Moon. 

Venus. 
Jupiter, 
Venus  in  Aries. 


The  Cup. 

The  Two  Cups. 

The  Three  Cups. 

The  Four  Cups.     Mars  in  Scorpio. 

Five  Cups.     Mercury  in   Sagittarius. 

The  Six  Cups.     Jupiter  in  Capricorn. 

The  Seven  Cups.     Mercury. 

The  Eight  Cups.   Venus  in  Aquarius. 

The  Nine  Cups.     Saturn  in  Pisces. 

The  Ten  Cups.     Saturn. 

The  Master  of  the  Sword.  The  Royal 
Star  of  Aquarius. 

Mistress  of  the  Sword.  Saturn  in  Libra. 

The  Warrior  of  the  Sword.  The  Sun 
in  Scorpio. 

The  Slave  of  the  Sword.  The  Moon 
in  Sagittarius. 

The  Sword. 

The  Two  Swords. 

The  Three  Swords. 

The  Four  Swoids. 

The  Five  Swords. 

The  Six  Swords.     Saturn  in  Taurus. 

The  Seven  Swords.  The  Sun  in 
Gemini. 

The  Eight  Swords.     Moon  in  Cancer. 

The  Nine  Swords.     Mars  in  Leo. 

The  Ten  Swords.     Mercury  in  Virgo. 

The  Master  of  the  Pentacle.  The 
Royal  Star  of  Scorpio. 

The  Mistress  of  the  Pentacle.  Mars 
in  Capricorn. 

The  Warrior  of  the  Pentacle.  Mer- 
cury in  Aquarius. 

The  Slave  of  the  Pentacle.  Jupiter 
in  Pisces. 

The  Crowned  Pentacle.     Mars. 

The  Two  Pentacles.    Jupiter  in  Libra. 

The  Three  Pentacles. 

The  Four  Pentacles.  Venus  in  Scorpio. 

The  Five  Pentacles.  Saturn  in  Sagit- 
tarius. 

The  Six  Pentacles.  Sun  in  Capricorn. 

The  Seven  Pentacles.     Mercury. 

The  Eight  P't'cl's.  Moon  in  Aquarius. 

The  Nine  Pentacles,     Mars  in  Pisces. 

The  Ten  Pentacles.     Saturn. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  187 

THE  22  MAJOR  ARCANES 

ARCANE  I.  (A  =  i.)THE  MAGUS 

The  Magus  (magician)  is  standing  in  the 
attitude  of  the  will-power  about  to  act;  he 
is  dressed  in  white,  the  emblem  of  purity, 
with  a  circle  of  gold  around  his  brow,  em- 
blem of  eternal  light;  he  holds  in  the  right 
hand  a  scepter  tipped  with  a  circle,  the  em- 
blem of  creative  intelligence.  He  raises 
this  scepter  toward  Heaven  to  indicate  his 
aspirations  to  wisdom,  science  and  moral 
force.  His  left  hand  points  towards  the 
earth  to  show  that  he  is  ready  to  dominate 
over  matter.  In  front  of  him,  upon  a  cube 
— the  image  of  absolute  solidity — are  found 
a  cup  full  of  human  passions,  a  sword,  the 
weapon  of  the  braves  who  fight  error, 
finally  a  golden  pentacle  (piece  of  money), 
the  emblem  of  the  reward  granted  to  volun- 
tary labor.  His  belt  is  a  snake  biting  its 
tail,  the  symbol  of  eternity.  The  Ibis  upon 
the  cube  typifies  vigilance. 

This  Arcane,  I.,  means:  A  firm  will  and 
confidence  in  yourself  guided  by  reason  and 
the  love  of  justice  shall  lead  you  to  the 
object  of  your  ambition  and  save  you  from 
the  dangers  on  the  way. 

ASTROLOGY 


^ 


THE    ARCANES  189 


ARCANE  II.  (B  =  2.)THE  GATE  OF  THE   SANC- 
TUARY 

Here  we  have  Occult  Science  represented 
by  a  stately  woman  seated  between  two 
columns  of  a  temple,  these  columns  repre- 
senting Good  and  Evil;  the  figure  is 
crowned  with  a  crescent  and  her  face  is 
veiled,  as  a  sign  that  Truth  is  not  visible  to 
the  profane;  she  has  upon  her  breast  the 
Solar  Cross,  emblematic  of  universal 
generation,  and,  in  her  lap,  a  papyrus  half 
covered  by  her  cloak,  indicating  that  the 
mysteries  of  the  sacred  science  are  unveiled 
only  to  the  Initiated.  The  tiara  upon  her 
head  is  the  emblem  of  the  power  of  intelli- 
gence lighted  up  by  wisdom  represented  by 
the  crescent;  the  figure  is  seated,  because 
science  united  to  wisdom  and  will-power  is 
immovable. 

This  Arcane,  II.,  tells  us  that  if  man  pos- 
sesses a  strong  will  he  cannot  fail  to  see  the 
true  light  and  to  obey  it  properly.  It  is 
essential,  however,  that  he  should  keep 
silent  as  to  his  opinions  and  projects,  as  it 
has  been  said  that  "the  world  belongs  to 
the  silent  ones." 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  191 


ARCANfi  III.  (G  =  3.)  IRIS-URANIA 

This  is  the  ancient  idea  of  Nature.  It  is 
represented  by  a  woman  seated  upon  a 
cube  covered  with  eyes,  the  emblem  of  the 
visions  of  the  famous  seer,  Hermes.  Her 
feet  rest  upon  a  crescent  of  the  moon,  the 
emblem  of  matter  subjected  to  mind.  She 
is  crowned  with  twelve  stars  representing 
the  twelve  months  and  the  Sun  serves  her 
as  a  Nimbus,  thus  symbolizing  the  creative 
power  of  intelligence.  In  one  hand  she 
holds  a  scepter  tipped  with  a  globe,  the  em- 
blem of  her  despotic  action  over  the  world; 
on  her  other  hand  is  posed  an  eagle,  its 
head  turned  towards  her;  this  signifies  the 
flight  of  the  human  soul  returning  to  its 
initial  principle:  God. 

This  Arcane,  III.,  means:  That  to  wish 
for  things  possible  is  equivalent  to  creating 
them.  To  wish  for  things  impossible  is  to 
prepare  one's  own  ruin. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  193 


ARCANE  IV.  (D  =  4.)  THE  CUBIC  STONE 

Here  is  a  man  bearing  on  his  head  a 
crowned  helmet,  the  emblem  of  conquest, 
as  the  cube  upon  which  he  is  sitting  is  the 
symbol  of  labor  that  has  reached  its  com- 
pletion. He  holds  the  scepter  of  the  Magi 
as  a  sign  of  the  moral  power  acquired 
through  sacred  studies.  His  left  hand, 
pointing  downward,  indicates  the  mastery 
over  matter,  while  the  dove  on  his  breast 
symbolizes  innocence,  and  his  crossed  legs 
signify  the  expansion  of  the  power  of  human 
mind  within  the  three  dimensions  of  the  In- 
finite: Height,  Width,  Depth.  The  cat 
upon  the  cube  symbolizes  the  thought  of 
the  Magi  who  is  able  to  see  through  the 
night  of  the  ancient  times. 

This  Arcane,  IV.,  means  that  nothing  re- 
sists a  firm  will-power  which  has  for  its 
lever  the  Knowledge  of  Truth  and  Justice. 
To  fight  for  both  is  more  than  a  right,  it  is 
a  duty.  Whoever  triumphs  in  this  struggle 
has  simply  accomplished  his  mission.  Who- 
ever fails,  in  spite  of  his  honest  efforts,  is 
entitled  to  immortality. 


194. 


ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  195 


ARCANE  V.  (E=5.)THE  MASTER  OF  THE 
ARCANES 

The  high  priest  of  Isis  Is  here  represented 
seated  between  the  columns  of  the  sanc- 
tuary, one  hand  on  a  long  cross  with  three 
crossbars,  symbolizing  the  penetration  of 
the  creative  genius  through  the  three  worlds. 
(Divine,  Intellectual  and  Physical.)  The 
two  columns  mean,  respectively,  the  Law 
and  the  Freedom  of  our  will-power  which 
may  obey  or  disobey.  The  other  hand 
makes  the  sign  of  meditation  and  silence. 
At  the  feet  of  the  high  priest,  two  men  are 
kneeling:  a  white  man,  personifying  Good 
and  a  black  man  personifying  Evil,  both 
submitted  to  the  Master  of  the  Arcanes. 

This  Arcane,  V.,  means  that  before  you 
may  tell  a  man  whether  he  Is  happy  or  un- 
happy, you  must  find  out  what  use  he  has 
made  of  his  will-power,  for  every  man   Is 
seated  to  the  Image  of  his  own  works. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  197 


ARCANE  VI.  (U  — V  =  6.)  THE  TWO  WAYS 

Here  the  Disciple  or  Neophyte  is  seen, 
hesitating  between  two  ways,  each  of  which  is 
pointed  out  to  him  by  a  woman  symboHzing, 
the  one  to  the  right,  Vice,  and  the  one  to 
the  left,  Virtue.  Above,  is  seen  a  Genius 
holding  a  bow  whose  arrow  is  pointed 
toward  Vice  as  a  warning  of  the  punish- 
ment that  awaits  the  man  who  has  pre- 
ferred the  easy  road  to  vice  to  the  hard 
road  to  virtue. 

This  Arcane,  VI.,  means  that  one  must 
watch  over  one's  self,  and  above  all  show 
no  indecision  in  the  crucial  moments  of  ex- 
istence. Nor  must  one  be  discouraged 
because  obstacles  seem  to  bar  the  road  to 
happiness.  A  strong  will-power  will  suffice 
to  overcome  them  all. 

ASTROLOGY 


l^^fr     ^7>  #r37y       <iQ 


THE   ARCANES  199 

ARCANE  VII.  (Z=7.)  THE  CHARIOT  OF  OSIRIS 

Here  we  have  a  warrior  riding  a  cubic 
chariot,  upon  which  four  columns  support  a 
starry  dais;  these  columns  symbolize  the 
four  elements,  while  the  cubic  chariot  signi- 
fies that  the  ambition  of  the  warrior  has 
been  realized  through  his  will  conquering 
every  obstacle.  The  warrior  himself  has  a 
golden  band  around  his  brow  as  a  sign  of 
the  eternal  light  he  is  endowed  with.  In 
one  hand,  he  holds  a  sword,  the  emblem  of 
victory,  and  in  his  other  hand,  a  scepter 
tipped  with  a  square  (Matter),  a  circle 
(Eternity),  and  a  triangle  (Divinity).  He 
wears  on  his  breast  a  Cuirass,  the  emblem 
of  strength:  it  is  adorned  with  three 
T-squares,  which  represent  Good  Judgment, 
Will-Power  and  Action.  A  winged  sphere, 
on  the  front  of  the  chariot,  speaks  of  the 
exultation  of  the  intellectual  power  in  the 
infinite  space  and  time.  Two  Sphinxes  are 
hitched  to  this  chariot  and  are  now  at  rest. 
The  black  one  represents  Evil,  the  white 
one  Good.  They  are  both  the  slaves  of  the 
Magus  when  he  has  come  out  victorious 
from  the  various  tests. 

This  Arcane,  VII.,  means  that  the  empire 
of  the  world  belongs  to  those  who  possess 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  201 

the  sovereignty  of  the  mind;  that  is  to  say 
the  Light  which  reveals  all  the  mysteries  of 
life. 

ARCANE  VIII.   (H=8.)  THE   BALANCE   AND  THE 

SWORD 

At  the  top  of  three  steps  which  represent 
the  three  worlds,  sits  a  woman,  her  brow 
encircled  with  a  crown  of  iron,  the  emblem 
of  inflexibility;  her  eyes  are  bandaged,  to 
indicate  that  she  holds  no  account  of  the 
social  positions  of  the  accused  ones.  A 
sword  in  one  hand  and  a  balance  in  the  other, 
she  judges  and  she  punishes.  The  lion  by 
her  side  symbolizes  Force  ruled  over  by 
Justice,  and  the  Sphinx  next  to  it,  the  eye  of 
God  who  looks  into  the  souls  of  the  wicked. 
The  winged  Turtle  above  symbolizes  Re- 
pentance which  may  obtain  forgiveness  in 
spite  of  the  greatness  of  the  crime.  Finally, 
a  divine  messenger  tells  us  that  the  justice 
of  God  will  be  the  final  judge  of  the  justice 
of  men. 

This  Arcane,  VIII.,  means  that  every- 
thing in  life  is  a  pretty  even  struggle 
between  Good  and  Bad,  and  that  every 
action  brings  in  its  wake  a  re-action,  thus 
forcing  us  to  be  most  cautious  in  our 
thoughts  and  undertakings. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  203 


ARCANE  IX.  (TH  =  9  ,  IHE  VEILED  LAMP 

An  old  man,  the  symbol  of  wisdom,  holds 
a  lighted  lamp  which  he  covers  with  his 
mantle  as  a  sign  of  discretion.  He  walks 
on,  leaning  on  a  stick,  the  symbol  of  strength 
acquired  through  experience. 

This  Arcane,  IX.,  means  that  Wisdom  has 
to  be  appealed  to  in  every  circumstance  of 
life.  It  teaches  one  also  to  be  discreet  and 
silent  in  all  critical  circumstances. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  205 

ARCANE  X.  (O  — J  — Y  =  io.)THE  SPHINX 

We  have  here  the  most  ancient  drawing  of 
the  Wheel  of  Destiny  turning  upon  its  axis. 
On  one  side  we  see  the  God  Kne-phta,  the 
Spirit  of  Good;  on  the  other  side,  Typhon, 
the  Spirit  of  Evil,  who  is  about  to  be  thrown 

off  from  the  wheel  while  the  Spirit  of  Good 
is  rising.  Over  the  whole  presides  a  full 
figure  of  a  winged  Sphinx  representing  the 
four  forces  of  human  nature:  to  Know,  to 
Dare,  to  Act,  to  Be  Silent.  The  Sphinx 
remains  in  perfect  equilibrium  as  if  the  con- 
stantly revolving  wheel  of  fortune  had  no 
influence  over  him.  He  thus  symbolizes 
the  mysterious  power  of  God  disposing  of 
human  destinies  according  to  the  good  or 
bad  actions  of  everyone.  In  his  claws,  the 
Sphinx  holds  a  javelin,  the  emblem  of 
supreme  justice.  At  the  foot  of  the  sup- 
porting beam  of  the  axis,  two  snakes  sym- 
bolize the  even  forces  that  balance  each 
other,  while  both  constantly  struggle  for 
supremacy. 

This  Arcane,  X.,  means  that  if  we  want 
only  what  is  true,  what  is  just,  what  is  within 
our  reach:  if  we  keep  silent  as  to  our  de- 
signs: if,  finally,  we  add  perseverance  to  the 
rest,  we  shall  find  ourselves  one  day  in  pos- 
session of  the  Key  to  Power. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE  ARCANES  207 


ARCANE  XI.  (C  — K  =  20.)  THE  TAMED  LION 

We  see  here  a  young  maiden  opening  and 
closing  without  effort  the  mouth  of  a  lion, 
an  emblem  of  the  power  over  one's  self 
acquired  through  the  education  of  the  will- 
power and  the  experience  of  life. 

This  Arcane,  XL,  means  that  if  we  are 
endowed  with  sufficient  faith  we  may  go 
ahead  fearlessly.  Obstacles  are  more 
imaginary  than  real.  Let  us  find  where  our 
duty  lies  and  accomplish  it  without  hesita- 
tion. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   Akv:ANES  209 


ARCANE  XII.  (L  =  3o.)  THE  SACRIFICE 

A  man  is  hanging  by  one  foot  from  a  gal- 
lows stretched  across  the  trunks  of  two  trees 
the  twelve  branches  of  which  have  been  cut 
off.  His  hands  are  bound  and  from  them 
drop  pentacles  or  gold  pieces.  One  of  his 
legs,  folded  down  and  forming  with  the 
other  a  reversed  triangle,  tells  us  that  he 
dies  the  victim  of  the  wicked  ones.  His 
bound  hands  from  which  drop  the  gold 
pieces,  mean  that  ideas  survive  those  who 
sacrificed  themselves  for  them  and  that  they 
will  come  forth  later.  The  twelve  branches 
that  have  been  cut  down  symbolize  the  signs 
of  the  Zodiac  who  return  regularly  year 
after  year. 

This  Arcane,  XII.,  means  that  one  must 
sacrifice  one's  self  for  others  without  await- 
ing anything  but  ingratitude  as  a  reward. 
Forgiveness  must  remain  our  most  precious 
gift,  as  it  causes  us  to  resemble  more  closely 
our  Divine  prototype. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  211 


ARCANE  XIII.  (M  =  40.)THE  REAPING  SKELETON 

A  skeleton  armed  with  a  scythe  sym- 
bolizes Death  mowing  down  human  beings 
whose  heads,  feet  and  hands  are  constantly 
born  again,  so  to  speak,  while  a  rainbow 
rises  in  the  horizon,  an  emblem  of  the  im- 
mortality of  the  soul. 

This  Arcane,  XIII.,  means  that  we  must 
raise  our  minds  above  earthly  things,  other- 
wise the  bitterness  of  our  disappointment 
will  shorten  our  days.  However,  if  Death 
should  come  to  us  early,  we  need  not  sor- 
row for  it,  since  a  new  life  and  a  better  one 
is  promised  us,  according  to  our  merits. 


S12 


ASTROLOGY 


THE  ARCANES  213 


ARCj^^K  XiV. /N  =  5o.)THE  two  URNS 

A  figure  representing  the  Sun  Is  transfer- 
ring from  a  goIJeD  vase  into  a  sliver  vase 
the  elemental  forces  of  nature,  a  symbol  of 
the  great  magic  agenl — the  Electric  and 
•Magnetic  Fluids  combined — the  image  of 
the  perpetual  fecundation  of  Nature  by 
means  of  Light  and  Heat,  whlcl*  are  also 
Movement  and  Life. 

This  Arcane,  XIV.,  means  thst  we  must 
so  husband  our  forces,  moral  and  ^h}^sical, 
as  to  wear  out  all  obstacles,  little  hy  '\^i]c 
as  a  drop  of  water  pierces  a  stone. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  215 


ARCANE  XV.  (X  =  6o.)TYPHON 

This  is  the  Spirit  of  Evil,  of  Fatality  and 
of  Chaos.  It  is  represented  by  a  hippo- 
potamus with  the  head  of  a  crocodile,  the 
feet  of  a  goat  and  the  characteristics  of  man 
and  woman.  A  snake  emerges  from  his 
body,  to  show  that  he  begets  nothing  but 
evil;  his  wings,  like  those  of_a  bat,  show  him 
to  be  the  Spirit  of  Darkness.  He  is  seen 
here  rising  from  ruins,  one  of  his  hands 
waving  the  torch  of  destruction  and  the 
other  holding  the  scepter  of  division  and 
hatred.  At  his  feet  are  two  men  with  goats' 
heads  and  chains  around  their  necks,  sym- 
bolizing those  beings  whom  vice  brings 
down  lower  than  the  beast.  The  horn  on 
the  figure's  nose  indicates  his  rebellion 
against  the  Divine  Spirit,  which  he  seems  to 
be  insulting. 

This  Arcane,  XV.,  means  that  fatality 
will  ruin  your  future  plans  if  your  passions 
are  not  kept  in  strong  control  by  your  will- 
power. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE  ARCANES  217 


ARCANE  XVI.  (0  =  7o.)  THE  THUNDER-STRUCK 

TOWER 

We  see  here  a  pyramid  whose  pinnacle  is 
crushed  down  by  a  stroke  of  lightning, 
throwing  down  two  men,  one  of  them  with 
a  crown  on  his  head.  This  symbolizes  the 
ruin  of  human  pride  and  false  science  by  the 
sudden  influx  of  the  Astral  fluid. 

This  Arcane,  XVI.,  means  that  you  are 
going  straight  to  your  ruin,  which  will  be 
due  to  your  exaggerated  pride,  your  foolish 
ventures  and  your  voluntary  mistakes. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  219 


ARCANE  XVII.  (F  — P  =  8o.)  THE  STAR  OF  THE 

MAGI 

This  represents  a  nude  young  girl  with 
one  foot  upon  the  Sea  and  one  foot  upon 
the  Earth;  she  represents  Truth  and  holds 
two  cups  from  which  flow  Kindness  and 
Charity,  the  balm  that  alleviates  human 
suffering.  The  Sea  represents  the  bitter- 
ness of  the  days  of  sorrow.  Over  the  young 
girl  shines  an  eight-pointed  star,  a  double 
symbol  of  the  Universe  and  of  the  divine 
Trinity;  at  its  center  is  found  a  white  pyra- 
mid united  to  another  pyramid,  a  black  one 
and  up-side-down.  This  is  the  emblem  of 
the  great  occult  law  which  is  worded  as  fol- 
lows: "That  which  is  above  is  like  that  which 
is  below."  Seven  smaller  stars  represent 
the  seven  Planets  of  Ancient  Astrology. 
Next  to  the  woman  there  is  a  flower  with 
three  blossoms  and  above  the  upper  one  a 
butterfly  opens  its  wings. 

This  Arcane,  XVII.,  means  that  if  you 
free  yourself  from  your  lower  passions  and 
your  inborn  errors,  and  steadfastly  study 
the  mysteries  of  the  true  science  you  will  be 
given  the  key  to  th^  *nysteries  of  life. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  2S1 


ARCANE  XVIII.  (TS  =  90.)THE  TWILIGHT 

Two  pyramids  stand  on  the  edge  of  a 
road;  in  front  of  them  two  dogs  howl  at  the 
moon;  below,  a  scorpion  is  seen.  One  of 
the  pyramids  is  white  and  is  the  emblem  of 
True  Science;  the  other  pyramid  is  black 
and  is  the  symbol  of  Error.  The  two  dogs 
represent  Good  and  Evil,  and  the  scorpion 
is  the  emblem  of  Perversity,  the  worst 
feature  of  vice. 

This  Arcane,  XVIII. ,  means  that  every- 
thing is  conspiring  against  you  and  you 
alone  are  kept  in  ignorance  of  the  real  situa- 
tion. Enemies  of  the  worst  kind  are  plot- 
ting against  you,  often  hiding  their  treachery 
under  the  garb  of  flattery 

ASTROLOGY 


/^#%5\ 


THE   ARCANES  223 


ARCANE  XIX.  (Q  =  ioo.)THE  DAZZLING  LIGHT 

Under  a  radiant  sun,  a  young  man  and  a 
young  girl  hold  each  other  by  the  hand 
withia  a  circle  of  flowers;  this  Arcane  sym- 
bolizes love,  which  brings  with  it  Happiness; 
the  sign  within  the  sun  above  the  couple  is 
the  symbol  of  universal  generation. 

This  Arcane,  XIX.,  means  that  you  will 
be  happy  and  no  one  shall  take  your  happi- 
ness from  you,  if  only  you  keep  it  within  the 
limits  of  the  home  and  the  sanctuary  of 
your  heart. 


9^ 


ASTROLOGY 


THE    ARCANES  225 


ARCANE  XX.  (R  =  200.)  THE  RISING  OF  THE  DEAD 

A  Genius  Is  blowing  a  trumpet  above  a 
Sarcophagus  out  of  which  emerge  a  family 
of  father,  mother  and  child.  This  not  only 
symbolizes  the  Last  Judgment  of  the  Dead, 
but  also  the  awakening  of  souls  that  have 
been  put  to  sleep  by  error  or  inaction. 

This  Arcane,  XX.,  means  that  you  must 
not  allow  yourself  to  sink  into  sloth  or  for- 
getfulness,  since  you  have  a  mission  to  fulfill 
and  Providence  is  ready  to  reveal  it  to  you 
as  soon  as  you  show  yourself  willing  to 
accept  the  message. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  227 


ARCANE  XXI.  (S  =  300.) THE  CROWN  OF  THE  MAGI 

We  have  before  us  a  wreath  made  out  of 
lotus  flowers.  At  each  of  the  four  angles 
is  found  a  head,  respectively  that  of  a  lion, 
of  a  man,  of  an  eagle  and  of  a  bull;  they 
symbolize  the  four  winds  of  the  spirit,  and 
in  the  center  is  found  the  primitive  "ling- 
ham,"  the  supreme  Arcane  of  the  universal 
generation  of  the  three  worlds,  the  absolute 
in  the  infinite,  and  the  conjunction  of  the 
sexes.  The  wreath  itself  is  the  emblem  of 
the  magic  chain  that  unites  all  beings,  all 
things  and  all  ideas.  Under  the  wreath  is 
a  kneeling  young  girl  representing  Religion 
and  playing  upon  a  harp  of  three  strings, 
the  image  of  the  triple  harmony  within 
man:  Soul,  Mind,  Body. 

This  Arcane,  XXL,  means  that  you  may 
reach  the  greatest  height  to  which  man  may 
aspire;  it  promises  you  that  your  most  am- 
bitious desires  will  be  realized  and  that  your 
final  success  will  only  be  limited  by  your 
wishes. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE  ARCANES  229 


ARCANE  XXII.  (T  ==400.)  THE  CROCODILE 

This  image,  which  has  often  been  called 
the  Atheist,  or  the  Fool,  represents  a  blind 
man  with  a  bag  on  either  side  of  his 
shoulder  and  a  stick  in  his  hand,  walking 
towards  a  broken  obelisk,  stretched  on  the 
ground  and  behind  which,  with  its  huge 
mouth  open,  a  crocodile  awaits  him.  It  is 
truly  the  picture  of  the  Atheist  who  sees  not 
the  divine  light  and  carries  the  weight  of 
his  mistakes  and  his  faults.  His  stick  can- 
not guide  him,  and  he  walks,  urged  on  by 
fatality  towards  his  ruin,  symbolized  by  the 
voracious  crocodile.  In  the  sky  above,  the 
sun  is  partially  eclipsed  by  a  dark  shadow, 
the  symbol  of  Doubt  destroying  Faith. 

This  Arcane,  XXII.,  means  that  a  num- 
ber of  misfortunes  are  threatening  you,  and 
that  your  only  hope  is  to  come  to  you  from 
Heaven  towards  which  your  prayers  must 
rise  constantly. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  231 

THE  56  MINOR  ARCANES 

ARCANE  XXIII.  (TH  =  9.)THE  MASTER  OF  THE 

SCEPTER 

A  King,  a  crown  on  his  head,  seated  on 
his  throne  and  pointing  a  scepter  towards 
the  Earth. 

This  Arcane,  XXIII.,  means:  Look  for  a 
powerful  protector  and  your  enterprises 
will  succeed. 

ARCANE  XXIV.  (E  =  5.)  THE  MISTRESS  OF  THE 

SCEPTER 

A  Queen,  a  crown  on  her  head,  seated  on 
her  throne,  with  a  scepter  in  hand. 

This  Arcane,  XXIV.,  means:  Your  future 
depends  on  a  woman;  except  you  find  her, 
you  will  not  succeed. 

ARCANE  XXV.  (U  — V==6.)  THE  WARRIOR  OF  THE 

SCEPTER 

A  man  on  horseback  fully  armed  and  with 
a  scepter  in  his  hand. 

This  Arcane,  XXV.,  means  that  success 
can  be  obtained  only  by  very  hard  work  and 
perseverance. 

ARCANE  XXVI.  (Z=7.)  THE  SLAVE  OF  THE 
SCEPTER 

A  poorly-dressed  man  is  planting  a  stick. 

This  Arcane,  XXVI.,  means:  All  your 
labor  will  prove  of  no  avail  unless  you 
abandon  the  foolish  projects  which  you  are 
entertaining  now. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  233 


ARCANE  XXVII.  (A  =  i.)  THE  SCEPTER 

A  Scepter  tipped  with  a  square,  a  triangle 
and  a  circle. 

This  Arcane,  XXVII.,  means:  Creative 
intelligence,  useful  labor  and  final  success. 

ARCANE  XXVIII.  (B  =  2.)  THE  TWO  SCEPTERS 

Two  Scepters  arranged  crosswise. 

This  Arcane,  XXVIII. ,  means  that  you 
will  meet  with  great  obstacles  and  will  have 
to  watch  your  interests  with  constant  vigi- 
lance; it  warns  you  against  a  partnership 
that  will  prove  disastrous. 

ARCANE  XXIX  (G  =  3.)THE  THREE  SCEPTERS 

Three  Scepters  arranged  in  a  triangle. 

This  Arcane,  XXIX.,  means  that  you  will 
be  endowed  with  inventive  genius  and  will 
succeed  in  life  on  that  account. 

ARCANE  XXX.  (D  =  4.)  THE  FOUR  SCEPTERS 

Four  Scepters  arranged  in  a  square. 

This  Arcane,  XXX.,  means  that  the 
enterprise  you  are  engaged  in  now,  will  be 
a  complete  success. 

ASTROLOGY 


f 

< 

% 

n 

/• 

v' 

^ 

THE   ARCANES  235 

ARCANE  XXXI.  (£  =  5)  THE  FIVE  SCEPTERS 

Five  Scepters  forming  a  star  of  five  rays. 

This  Arcane,  XXXI.,  means  that  a  num- 
ber of  favorable  chances  will  combine  to 
bring  about  the  success  of  your  enterprises, 
if  you  do  not  spoil  everything  by  extrava- 
gant pride  and  an  angry  disposition. 

ARCANE  XXXII.  (U  — V  =  6.)  THE  SIX  SCEPTERS 

Six  Scepters  arranged  in  two  triangles. 

This  Arcane,  XXXII. ,  means  that  numer- 
ous obstacles,  pitfalls  and  delays  will  surely 
cause  the  riiin  of  your  undertakings  unless 
your  will-power  shows  itself  strong  and 
persevering. 

ARCANE  XXXIII.  (Z  =  7.)  THE  SEVEN  SCEPTERS 

Seven  Scepters  arranged  in  a  triangle  and 
a  square,  the  former  above  the  latter. 

This  Arcane,  XXXIII.,  means  that  you 
have  in  your  possession  everything  needed 
for  success,  especially  a  brilliant  intelligence 
which  will  allow  you  to  conquer  all  diffi- 
culties. 

ARCANE  XXXI v.  (H  =  8.)  THE  EIGHT  SCEPTERS 

Eight  Scepters  arranged  in  a  star  of  eight 
rays. 

This  Arcane,  XXXIV.,  means  that  you 
will  meet  with  a  great  many  struggles,  dis- 
putes, law-suits  and  breaks  of  partnerships 
or  marriages. 

ASTROLOGY 


^\ 

Hi   '" 

^    W 

///^ 

ft^ 

/    ^ 

cj-n^j-j!^ 

•^  L  \l 

THE   ARCANES  237 

ARCANE  XXXV.  (TH  =  9.)THE  NINE  SCEPTERS 

Nine  Scepters  arranged  In  three  triangles. 

This  Arcane,  XXXV.,  means  that  you 
will  be  engaged  In  mysterious  or  deeply 
scientific  enterprises  whose  success  will 
depend  on  your  prudence  and  discretion. 

ARCANE  XXXVI.  (I_J_Y  =  io.)  THE  TEN 
SCEPTERS 

Ten  Scepters,  six  of  which  are  arranged 
in  two  triangles,  and  the  four  others  are 
placed  below  in  a  square. 

This  Arcane,  XXXVI.,  means  that  you 
will  have  to  undertake  a  number  of  journeys 
which  will  prove  generally  successful. 
Wealth  and  fame  will  come  to  you  through 
the  arts  or  the  sciences.  There  is  much  joy 
in  prospect  for  you. 

ARCANE    XXXVII.     (U— V=6.)    THE     MASTER    OF 

THE  CUP 

This  Arcane,  XXXVII.,  means  that  you 
will  enjoy  the  sincere  friendship  and  devo- 
tion of  a  person  in  a  high  position.  If  the 
questioner  is  a  woman  there  is  a  fine  mar- 
riage  In  prospect.  i 

ARCANE    XXXVIII.    (H=8.)     THE    MISTRESS     OF 

THE   CUP 

This  Arcane,  XXXVIII.,  means,  for  a 
man,  a  brilliant  marriage;  for  all  question- 
ers, the  good-will  of  ladles  of  high  rank. 

ASTROLOGY 


III*       J^^^ 

^ 

\[         I 

H)L ) 

VWV\*   — 

• 

/imnnr 

t 

^^^^ 

A 

y 

THE   ARCANES  239 


ARCANE  XXXIX.  (TH=9.)  THE  WARRIOR  OF  THE 

CUP 

This  Arcane,  XXXIX.,  means  that  a 
projected  marriage  will  not  take  place  and 
that  there  will  be  lots  of  troubles  of  all 
kinds  on  account  of  women. 


ARCANE  XL.  (I— J— Y=io.)  THE  SLAVE  OF  THE 

CUP 

This  Arcane,  XL.,  means,  especially  on 
account  of  the  fact  that  the  cup  carried  by 
the  slave  is  veiled,  that  you  will  suffer  from 
unfortunate  love  affairs  and  from  the 
treacherous  conduct  of  people  in  whom  you 
will  have  unwisely  placed  your  confidence. 

ARCANE  XLI.   (C— K=2o.)  THE  CUP 

This  Arcane,  XLI.,  means  that  a  passion 
stronger  than  your  reason  will  cause  your 
ruin. 

ARCANE  XLII.  (L=3o.)  THE  TWO  CUPS 

Two  Cups  within  a  circle. 

This  Arcane,  XLII.,  means  that  you  will 
enjoy  a  perfect  union  and  the  devotion  of 
reciprocated  love. 

ASTROLOGY 


A 

Qt  i 

^ 

T 

s»t 

% 

THE    ARCANES  241 

ARCANE  XLIII.  (M=40.)  THE  THREE  CUPS 

Three  Cups  arranged  in  a  triangle;  from 
the  one  at  the  summit  emerges  the  head  of 
a  young  girl. 

This  Arcane,  XLIII.,  means  the  awaken- 
ing of  innocent  affections  and  the  early 
realization  of  your  best  hopes. 

ARCANE  XLIV.   (N=5o.)  THE  FOUR  CUPS 

Four  Cups  arranged  in  a  square. 

This  Arcane,  XLIV.,  means  that  a  great 
joy  is  in  store  for  you.  You  will  meet  with 
strong  friendships  and  enduring  love.  There 
will  soon  be  an  increase  in  your  family. 

ARCANE  XLV.  (X=6o.)  THE  FIVE  CUPS 

Five  Cups,  of  which  four  are  placed  at  the 
angles  of  a  square,  the  fifth  in  the  middle. 

This  Arcane,  XLV.,  means  that  there  will 
be  quarrels  in  your  marriage  relations;  that 
your  love  affairs  will  be  of  a  dangerous 
nature  and  that  your  friends  will  prove 
treacherous. 

ARCANE  XLVI.     (0=7o.)  THE  SIX  CUPS 

Six  Cups  arranged  in  two  triangles. 

This  Arcane,  XLVI.,  means  that  there 
will  be  much  Indecision  in  your  love  affairs 
and  that  you  will  probably  make  a  poor 
choice  by  not  listening  to  the  voice  of  your 
heart  or  to  that  of  your  conscience;  there 
are  also  probabilities  of  divorce  or  of 
intrigues  outside  of  wedlock. 


^42 


ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  243 

ARCANE  XLVII.  (F— B=8o.)  THE  SEVEN  CUPS 

Seven  Cups,  three  forming  a  triangle 
above  the  others  arranged  in  a  square. 

This  Arcane,  XLVII.,  means  the  triumph 
of  or  through  a  woman.  You  will  conquer 
your  lower  passions  and  be  made  happy 
by  a  congenial  spouse. 

ARCANE  XLVIII.  (TS=9o.)  THE  EIGHT  CUPS 

Eight  Cups  arranged  upon  the  eight 
angles  of  a  cube. 

This  Arcane,  XLVIII, ,  means  scandals 
due  to  love  affairs,  or  unfortunate  choice 
of  husband  or  wife. 

ARCANE  XLIX.  (Q=ioo.)    THE   NINE   CUPS 

Nine  Cups,  arranged  in  three  triangles, 
which  are  all  pointing  downwards. 

This  Arcane,  XLIX.,  means  that  there 
will  be  a  marriage  with  an  elderly  person, 
but  it  advises  you  to  keep  away  from  mar- 
riage altogether. 

ARCANE    L.    (R=2o.)    THE   TEN   CUPS 

Ten  Cups,  nine  of  which  are  arranged  in 
a  circle  with  the  tenth  in  the  center. 

This  Arcane,  L.,  means  that  you  will  have 
a  happy  life  surrounded  with  affections. 
Your  family  will  be  numerou?-  and  your 
friends  many.  You  may  marry  your  first  love. 


9M 


ASTROLOGY 


THE    ARCANES  245 

ARCANE   LI.    (TS=9o.)     THE    MASTER     OF    THE 

SWORD 

This  Arcane,  LI.,  means  that  you  will 
make  your  career  in  the  army  or  some  high 
official  positions,  but  you  will  have  danger- 
ous enemies  and  envious  rivals. 

ARCANE    LII.    (L=3o.)    THE    MISTRESS    OF    THE 

SWORD 

This  Arcane,  LII.,  means  that  there  are 
great  struggles  in  prospect  for  you,  due  to 
some  jealousy  aroused  in  a  woman  or  com- 
ing through  her. 

ARCANE   LIII.    (N=5o.)    THE    WARRIOR    OF   THE 

SWORD 

The  Warrior  of  the  Sword  is  riding  full 
tilt  and  at  great  speed. 

This  Arcane,  LIII.,  means  that  you  will 
meet  with  serious  dangers  from  fire  arms 
or  other  weapons  in  the  hands  of  declared 
enemies.  You  will  die  at  an  early  age.  A 
hatred  will  follow  you  relentlessly. 

ARCANE  LIV.  (X=6o.)  THE  SLAVE  OF  THE  SWORD 

The  Slave  of  the  Sword  holds  in  one  hand 
a  sword  and  in  the  other  a  club,  besides 
having  a  dagger  in  his  belt. 

This  Arcane,  LIV.,  means  that  you  will 
be  the  object,  and  possibly  the  victim,  of 
constant  plotting.  Your  enemies  are  m^^an 
and  will  stop  at  nothing  to  harm  you. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  ^i 

ARCANE  LV.  (A=:i.)  THE  SWORD 

This  Arcane,  LV.,  is  a  protection  as  well 
as  a  threat.  Its  meaning  is  modified  ac- 
cording to  the  House  it  is  found  to  be  in. 
It  also  signifies  that  your  enterprises  will 
succeed  in  spite  of  great  obstacles. 

ARCANE  LVI.  (B=2.)  THE  TWO  SWORDS 

Two  Swords  arranged  crosswise. 

This  Arcane,  LVI.,  foretells  a  duel,  but  it 
also  says  that  the  results  will  not  be  fatal. 
Your  partnerships  will  not  go  smoothly; 
and  in  general  many  obstacles  will  be 
thrown  in  your  way. 

ARCA'nE  LVn.  (G=3.)  THE  THREE  SWORDS 

Three  Swords  arranged  in  a  triangle. 

This  Arcane,  LVIL,  means  that  you  have 
a  combative  disposition  and  are  fond  of 
strife,  law-suits,  etc.  It  is  a  favorable  omen 
for  all  people  who  make  a  profession  of 
fighting,  but  it  throws  shadows  over  all 
enterprises. 

ARCANE  LVni.  (D=4.)  THE]  FOUR  SWORDS 

Four  Swords  arranged  in  a  square  with 
the  points  inward. 

This  Arcane,  LVIII.,  announces  imminent 
dangers;  also  guilty  thoughts  and  actions, 
remorse  and  regrets. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE    ARCANES  249 

ARCANE  LIX.  (E=5.)  THE   FIVE  SWORDS 

Five  Swords  arranged  in  a  five-pointed 
star. 

This  Arcane,  LIX.,  means:  Tendency 
to  insanity;  angers  that  end  in  murder;  ter- 
rible revenge;  suicide;  and  great  danger  from 
following  first  impulses  blindly. 

ARCANE  LX.    (U— V=6.)  THE  SIX  SWORDS 

Six  Swords  arranged  in  two  triangles. 

This  Arcane,  LX.,  means  a  hard  struggle 
against  adversity;  also  wicked  temptations 
and  great  sorrows  due  to  lack  of  decision. 

ARCANE  LXI.   (Z=7.)  THE   SEVEN  SWORDS 

Seven  Swords  arranged,  four  of  them  in  a 
square,  and  three  underneath  in  a  triangle. 

This  Arcane,  LXL,  means  a  sudden  catas- 
trophy  that  may  affect  the  brain;  a  loss  of 
position;  ultimate  triumph. 

ARCANE  LXII.   (H=8.)  THE  EIGHT  SWORDS 

Eight  Swords,  pointing  outwards  and  ar- 
ranged in  an  eight-ray  star. 

This  Arcane,  LXII.,  means  that  you  are 
threatened  with  the  loss  of  a  law-suit;  that 
great  anxieties  are  in  store  for  you;  you 
may  even  be  sentenced  to  a  heavy  penalty, 
prison  or  death. 

ASTROLOGY 


<    1     ^ 

A 
f 

V^ 

/. 

*^ 

^>^ 

> 

fp 

^^ 

IK* 

THE   ARCANES  261 

ARCANE  LXIII.   (TH=9.)  THE  NINE  SWORDS 

Nine  Swords  arranged  in  three  triangles, 
points  downwards. 

This  Arcane,  LXIII.,  means  for  you  sor- 
rows, mysterious  struggles,  danger  of  death 
by  murder,  or  dangerous  wounds.  You  may 
triumph  if  you  are  prudent  and  discreet. 

ARCANE  LXIV.  (I— J— Y=io.)    THE  TEN    SWORDS 

Ten  Swords  arranged  in  a  circle  with  the 
points  alternately  turned  in  and  out. 
•  This  Arcane,  LXIV.,  means  a  succession 
of  gains  and  losses,  of  quiet  times  and   of 
struggles;  you  will  be  your  worst  enemy. 

ARCANE  LXV.  (N=5o.)  THE  MASTER  OF  THE 
PENTACLE  * 

This  Arcane,  LXV.,  means  a  rise  in  your 
fortune  through  the  protection  of  influential 
people,  generally  of  the  other  sex, 

ARCANE  LXVI.   (0=7o.)  THE   MISTRESS    OF  THE 

PENTACLE 

This  Arcane,  LXVI.,  announces  a  bril- 
liant marriage  or,  in  general,  the  influence 
of  one  in  high  position  willing  to  help  you. 

♦To  fully  explain  the  next  14  Arcanes  we  must  say  that 
the  "Pentacle"  seems  to  mean  a  coin  worn  as  a  charm;  in 
some  translations  it  is  called  a  "talisman"  or  "amulet,"  in 
others  simply  "money." 

ASTROLOGY 


/<^lllli,.yilllll 


THE    ARCANES  255 

ARCANE   LXVII.  (TS=90.)  THE  WARRIOR  OF  THE 

PENTACLE 

This  Arcane,  LXVII.,  means  that  there  is 
lots  of  good  luck  in  store  for  you,  after 
going  through  severe  tests.  There  will  be 
many  ups  and  downs  in  your  life. 

ARCANE  LXVni.  (Q=ioo.)  THE  SLAVE  OF  THE 

PENTACLE 

The  Slave  stretches  his  hands  towards  the 
Pentacle  which  he  does  not  seem  to  be  able 
to  grasp,  because  his  left  foot  is  chained  to 
a  ball  made  of  silver. 

This  Arcane,  LXVIII.,  especially  if  it  is 
united  to  Jupiter,  means  an  exaggerated  love 
of  money  and  heavy  losses  through  the  un- 
wise speculations  of  the  questioner.  The 
result  will  be  utter  poverty. 

ARCANE  LXIX.  (C— K=2o.)  THE    CROWNED    PEN- 
TACLE 

This  Arcane,  LXIX.,  is  also  called  "The 
Talisman  of  Fortune." 

It  means  that,  providing  the  questioner 
behaves  in  an  absolutely  correct  manner 
and  remains  both  wise  and  level-headed,  he 
shall  reach  the  highest  goal. 

ARCANE  LXX.  (L=3o.)  THE  TWO  PENTACLES 

Two  Pentacles  surrounded  by  a  circle. 

This  Arcane,  LXX.,  means  that  fortune 
will  prove  fickle  but  that  there  are  chances 
of  a  profitable  partnership  or  marriage. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  255 

ARCANE  LXXI.(M=40.)  THE  THREE   PENTACLES 

Three  Pentacles  arranged  in  a  triangle. 

This  Arcane,  LXXL,  foretells  that  you 
are  to  secure  wealth  through  enterprises 
which  will  be  conducted  by  you  wisely  and 
with  unremitting  activity. 

ARCANE  LXXn  (N=5o.)  THE  FOUR  PENTACLES 

Four  Pentacles  arranged  in  a  square. 
This   Arcane,  LXXIL,    means   amassing 
a  fortune  which  will  be  kept  to  the  end  of  life. 

ARCANE  LXXIII.  (X=6o.)  THE   FIVE  PENTACLES 

Five  Pentacles,  four  of  which  are  ar- 
ranged in  a  square,  the  fifth  one  in  the  mid- 
dle. 

This  Arcane,  LXXIII.,  means  that  you 
will  lead  a  dissipated  life  and  squander  your 
fortune  as  well  as  lose  all  chances  of  future 
prosperity.  If  any  money  comes  to  you  it 
will  be  ill-gotten  gain. 

ARCANE    LXXIV.    (0=7o.)   THE    SIX  PENTACLES 

Six  Pentacles  arranged  in  two  triangles. 

This  Arcane,  LXXIV.,  means  that  you 
will  be  suddenly  enriched,  but  this  money 
for  which  you  will  have  made  no  effort  and 
given  no  labor  will  not  profit  you  long, 
especially  on  account  of  the  undesirable 
friendships  which  you  will  form.  In  old 
age,  you  will  find  yourself  very  poor  indeed. 

ASTROLOGY 


THE   ARCANES  257 

ARCANE    LXXV.     (F— P=8o.)    THE    SEVEN    PEN- 

TACLES 

Seven  Pentacles,  arranged  three  in  a  tri- 
angle above  four  in  a  square. 

This  Arcane,  LXXV.,  means  that  there  is 
a  high  fortune  in  store  for  you,  due  to  your 
own  personal  efforts  unassisted  by  anyone. 

ARCANE      LXXVI.     (TS=oo.)     THE     EIGHT     PEN- 
TACLES 

Eight  Pentacles,  each  one  placed  on  one 
of  the  eight  angles  of  a  cube. 

This  Arcane,  LXXVI.,  means  that  you 
will  have  to  go  through  lengthy  litigations 
on  account  of  some  property,  probably  in- 
herited. You  may  become  rich  in  the  law 
profession.  You  may  acquire  money  by 
wrong  means,  but  it  will  not  profit  you  long. 

ARCANE  LXXVII    (Q=ioo.)  THE  NINE  PENTACLES 

Nine  Pentacles  arranged  in  three  columns. 

This  Arcane,  LXXVIL,  means  that  for- 
tune will  come  to  you  through  some  mys- 
terious means,  either  by  discoveries  or  by 
the  death  of  aged  relatives  in  far-off  coun- 
tries. You  are  recommended  to  be  very 
cautious  if  you  want  to  secure  that  fortune. 

ARCANE  LXXVIII.   (R=2oo.)  THE  TEN  PENTACLES 

Ten  Pentacles  arranged  in  a  circle. 

This  Arcane,  LXXVIII.,  means  that  you 
will  acquire  a  large  fortune  by  your  own 
efforts;   but  you  will  have  to  defend  it. 


PTOLEMY  (CLAUDIUS  PTOLEM/^US) 

A    CELEBRATED   ALEXANDRIAN   ASTRONOMER,    GEOGRAPHER   AND 

MATHEMATICIAN    OF  THE   FIRST   HALF   OF  THE 

SECOND   CENTURY   A.  D. 

His  mathematical  system  of  astronomy  and  geography  was  universally 

accepted,    until  replaced  by  the  Copernican  system.     Columbus  rehed 

on  Ptolemy's  too  low  figures  as  to  the  size  of  the  earth,  when  he  ventured 

to  reach  Asia  by  sailing  West. 


CHAPTER  XIII 

HISTORY   OF  ASTRONOMY 

Astrology  is  based  on  the  belief  that  the 
heavenly  bodies  exert  a  direct  influence  upon 
human  life  and  destiny,  and  it  proposes  to 
discover  what  this  influence  may  be  in  any 
given  case  and  thus  to  foretell  the  future. 

We  have  seen  that  astrology  was  the 
earliest  form  of  astronomy  and  the  strong- 
est impulse  for  the  study  of  the  sky.  We 
must  not  forget  that  the  firmament  vj^.s  to 
antiquity  (and  to  comparatively  modern 
times)  a  solid  crystal  vault,  in  which  the 
fixed  stars  were  set  as  jewels.  Only  the 
planets  were  wanderers,  and  were  believed 
to  be  set  each  in  a  separate  revolving 
crystal  sphere.  That  the  mysteries  of 
human  life,  the  inexplicable  differences 
between  people  and  their  fates  should  be 
connected  with  the  equally  inexplicable  but 
regular  movements  of  the  beautiful  orbs  in 
the  sky,  cannot  be  wondered  at.  Man 
believed  himself  the  center  of  the  world, 
everything  existed  for  him  only,  and  was 

260  HISTORY  OF 

valued  only  as  it  was  of  service  to  him. 
We  are  even  to-day  not  so  far  from  this 
point  of  view,  it  seems,  for  many  people  in- 
sist that  plants,  insects,  etc.,  must  have  been 
created  "for  a  purpose." 

Some  of  the  astrologers,  those  with  little 
power  of  imagination,  occupied  themselves 
less  with  the  "language  of  the  stars"  and 
more  w^ith  their  material  nature,  and  their 
paths  of  motion,  and  these  men  were 
astronomers  rather  than  astrologers. 

Astronomy  is  the  science  which  describes  the 
heavenly  bodies,  calculates  their  paths  and  the 
velocity  of  their  flight  through  space  and  ex- 
plains the  see?ning  irreg2tlarity  oj  their  motions 
and  appearance. 

The  Beginnings  of  astronomy  are  un- 
known to  us.  If  we  wish  to  form  an  idea  of 
them,  we  may  turn  to  the  savage  tribes  still 
in  existence,  the  more  intelligent  of  whom 
may  be  considered  to  have  the  same  notions 
which  our  most  remote  ancestors  had  about 
the  starry  heavens. 

It  is  probable  that  it  was  observed  at  an 
early  period  that  the  stars,  like  the  sun  and 
the  moon,  changed  their  positions  in  the 
sky,  some  rising  in  the  east  and  setting  in 
the  west,  while  others  in  a  certain  northern 
part  of  the  sky  moved  on  a  somewhat  cir- 


ASTRONOMY  261 

cular  track,  always  in  sight.  We  may  as- 
sume that  some  observers  learned  early  to 
tell  how  far  the  night  had  advanced  by 
looking  skyward. 

Greek  authors  claim  that  Egyptian 
priests,  living  thousands  of  years  before 
Christ,  had  considerable  astronomical 
knowledge,  which  claim  is  borne  out  by 
certain  peculiarities  in  the  construction  of 
the  pyramids,  plausibly  interpreted  as 
being  based  on  quite  accurate  astronomical 
observations.  The  Chinese  records,  the 
Indian  sacred  books,  and  the  observations 
by  the  Chaldean  priests  of  Babylon,  going 
back  twenty-five  centuries  before  Christ,  all 
show  remarkable  acquaintance  with  the 
stars,  although  the  theories  based  thereon 
were  mostly  erroneous.  The  earliest 
authentic  astronomical  observation  seems 
to  have  been  recorded  in  the  ninth  cen- 
tury, B.  C. 

The  Constellations.  —  The  sky-gazers 
must  have  been  tempted  at  any  early  day  to 
invent  names  for  the  varied  "groups"  of 
stars  seen  in  the  sky;  in  order  to  remember 
them  better  and  to  talk  about  them  intel- 
ligently. Some  of  the  groups  naturally 
suggest  by  their  arrangement  a  resemblance 
to  objects  known  to  man.     A  striking  ex- 


262  HISTORY  OF 

ample  is  the  Great  Bear  or  Wagon,  known 
to  us  as  the  Dipper.  But,  in  most  cases, 
the  grouping  is  so  extremely  arbitrary,  that 
Herschel  was  justified  in  saying:  "The  con- 
stellations seem  to  have  been  purposely 
named  and  delineated  to  cause  as  much 
confusion  and  inconvenience  as  possible. 
Innumerable  snakes  twine  through  large 
and  contorted  areas  of  the  heavens,  where 
no  memory  can  follow  them;  bears,  lions 
and  fishes,  large  and  small,  confuse  all 
nomenclature." 

It  is  always  a  difficult,  if  not  impossible, 
task  to  reform  old  habits.  Very  few 
changes  have  been  made  in  the  nomen- 
clature and  grouping  of  the  stars,  as  thej 
existed  in  the  days  of  early  Greek  astron- 
omy. The  names  to  this  day  are  either 
those  of  common  objects  or  animals  (as 
dog,  serpent,  lyre,  pitcher),  or  they  are  bor- 
rowed from  Greek  mythology  (as  Hercules, 
Orion,  etc.) 

The  same  is  true  of  the  twelve  "signs"  or 
constellations  of  the  Zodiac,  the  customary 
Latin  names  of  which  play  a  large  part  in 
the  first  portion  of  this  book.  The  English 
names  may  be  easily  remembered  by  the 
following  verses: 


AvSTRONOMY  263 

The  Ram,  the  Bull,  the  Heavenly  Twins, 
And  now  the  Crab,  the  Lion  shines, 

The  Virgin  and  the  Scales, 
The  Scorpion,  Archer,  and  He-Goat, 
The  Man  that  bears  the  Watering-pot, 

And  Fish  with  glittering  tails. 

The  Eclipses  of  the  sun  and  moon  could 
not  fail  to  make  a  most  powerful  impression 
on  the  human  mind,  whenever  they  oc- 
curred. The  untutored  mind  of  the  savage 
must  have  feared  at  such  a  moment  that 
the  great  light  was  being  extinguished  for 
good,  which,  in  the  case  of  the  sun,  meant 
eternal  darkness  and  cold,  the  end  of  all 
life.  The  terror  struck  into  his  heart  by 
this  reflection  he  could  not  forget,  and  his 
childish  fancy  wove  a  story  around  his  re- 
membrance of  the  awful  moment,  the  story 
of  "Little  Red  Riding  Hood,"  swallowed 
whole  by  the  black  wolf,  but  come  to  life 
again.  In  Oriental  lore  the  wolf  is  replaced 
by  a  dragon,  the  head  and  tail  of  which  are 
still  represented  in  the  nodes  of  the  signs 
for  eclipses,  t5^.  When  it  was  discovered 
that  it  was  the  moon  that  effaced  the  sun, 
we  do  not  know,  but  the  idea  that  it  might 
be  the  shadow  of  the  earth  that  eclipsed 
the  moon,  was  new  to  the  people  of  Athens 
in    the    fifth    century,    B.    C,   because,    as 


264  HISTORY  OF 

Anaxagoras  tells  us,  they  cried  out  against  it 
as  blasphemous. 

The  Chaldean  astronomers  discovered  the 
regularity  of  the  occurrence  of  eclipses, 
viz.,  after  a  period  of  eighteen  years  and 
ten  or  eleven  days.  How  they  arrived  at  this 
result,  we  do  not  know,  as  the  eclipses  are 
not  always  visible  in  Babylon,  or  in  any 
other  single  place. 

The  Planets. — The  fact  that  a  few  of 
the  stars  change  their  position,  relative  to 
the  other  stars,  was  discovered  in  prehis- 
toric times.  Five  of  these,  then  noticed — 
Mercury,  Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn 
— were  called  planets  or  wanderers,  while 
the  others  were  named  fixed  stars.  The 
sun  and  the  moon  were  included  in  the 
number  of  "planets"  until  very  recently. 
The  brilliancy  of  Venus  as  the  Evening  and 
Morning  Star  made  it  easily  noticeable;  the 
discovery  of  the  identity  of  the  Evening 
and  Morning  Stars  is  credited  to  Pythag- 
oras, who  flourished  in  the  Sixth  century, 
B.  C.  The  apparent  irregular  motions  of 
the  planets,  moving  eastward  and  westward 
and  at  varying  speed,  was  one  of  the  great 
puzzles  of  astronomy  and  probably  one  of 
the  greatest  incentives  to  study. 

The  Occultations,  i.  e.,  the  covering  up 


ASTRONOMY  265 

of  a  planet  or  fixed  star  by  the  moon  must 
have  suggested  to  the  most  ancient  astron- 
omers, that  the  moon  was  nearer  the  earth 
than  the  bodies  disappearing  behind  her, 
and  from  there  it  was  but  a  step  to  the  idea 
that  the  stars  might  all  be  at  different  dis- 
tances from  us. 

The  Sun  returns  to  the  same  position 
among  the  stars  in  one  year,  Mars  in  two 
years,  Mecury  in  eighty-eight  days,  Venus 
in  225  days,  Jupiter  in  12  years,  Saturn  in 
twenty-nine  and  one-half  years,  and  the 
Moon  in  twenty-seven  days.  These  cycles 
were  obvious  and  easily  noted. 

Measurements  of  Time. — The  Babylo- 
nians divided  the  day,  not  as  we  do,  but  by 
making  twelve  hours  of  the  day  and  twelve 
of  the  night,  varying  the  length  of  the  hour 
according  to  the  season.  Their  day-hour 
was  almost  twice  as  long  in  June  as  it  was  in 
December  and  the  night-hour  correspond- 
ingly short. 

The  "month"  was  taken  from  the  period 
during  which  the  Moon  goes  through  her 
phases,  so  conspicuous  and  marked,  that  we 
cannot  wonder  that  the  month  was  used  much 
earlier  for  noting  time  than  the  year.  In 
Egypt,  where  the  Nile  rises  and  falls  every 
year  with  nearly  clock-like  regularity,  where 


266  HISTORY  OF 

all  life  is  based  and  is  dependent  on  this 
peculiarity  of  the  river — in  Egypt  it  was, 
that  the  year  of  365  days  was  first  estab- 
lished as  the  largest  natural  unit  for  time 
measurements. 

The  "week"  has  a  more  arbitrary  origin. 
The  Astrologers  assigned  one  of  the  seven 
planets  (including  Sun  and  Moon)  as  a 
"ruler"  to  each  hour  of  the  day  and  named 
each  day  after  the  "ruler"  of  the  first  hour. 
The  order  was:  Saturn,  Sun,  Moon,  Mars, 
Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus.  For  the  last  four 
the  names  of  some  Teutonic  deities  were 
substituted  by  our  ancestors:  Tuis,  Wodan, 
Thor,  Frija,  which  accounts  for  the  English 
appellations  of  the  seven  days  of  the  week: 
Saturday  (Saturn),  Sunday  (Sun),  Monday 
(Moon),  Tuesday  (Tuis),  Wednesday  (Wo- 
dan), Thursday  (Thor),  Friday  (Frija).  The 
last  four  preserve  the  Latin  names  given 
above  in  the  French  language  to  this  day: 
Mardi  (Mars),  Mercredi  (Mercury),  Jeudi 
(Jupiter),  Vendredi  (Venus) 


ASTRONOMY  267 

THE     PIONEERS    OF    ASTRONOMY 

Pythagoras,  who  lived  in  the  first  part  of 
the  sixth  century,  B.  C,  is  credited  with 
having  been  the  first  to  advocate  the  idea 
that  the  earth  is  a  sphere,  or  round  ball; 
but,  of  course,  he  still  had  no  reason  to 
doubt  that  the  center  of  the  earth  was,  at 
the  same  time,  the  center  of  the  universe. 
He  also  deducted  from  the  phases  of  the 
moon  the  theory  that  the  moon  was  a 
sphere,  too,  and  from  this  he  concluded  that 
all  the  heavenly  bodies  were  globular  in 
shape.  He  believed  that  the  moon  shines 
by  reflecting  the  light  of  the  sun. 

Philolaus,  living  a  century  later,  was  the 
first  to  speak  of  a  motion  of  the  earth. 
(Galileo  was  persecuted  and  threatened  with 
death  for  maintaining  this  truth  2,100  years 
later.  Ignorance,  oh  how  powerful!)  Philo- 
laus represented  the  earth  as  revolving 
aroimd  its  own  axis,  and,  with  the  sun,  moon 
and  planets,  around  another  central  fiery 
body,  but  what  the  path  of  reasoning  was, 
by  which  he  arrived  at  his  conclusions,  we 
do  not  know. 

Aristotle,  the  great  Greek  philosopher 
(384  322,  B.  C.),  who  shaped  the  grooves  in 
which  human  logic  ran  for  yearly  two  thou- 


268  HISTORY  OF 

sand  years,  reasoned  very  cleverly  about  the 
shape  of  the  earth,  although  It  may  seem 
comical  to  us,  when  he  argues  that  the 
presence  of  elephants  in  easternmost  India 
and  in  westernmost  Africa  proves  that  these 
two  countries  must  be  close  to  each  other. 

Aristarchus  (of  Samos,  living  in  the 
third  century,  B.  C),  was  the  first  to  use 
mathematics  in  his  astronomical  studies, 
and  he  figured  the  distance  of  the  sun  from 
the  earth  to  be  about  twenty  times  that  of 
the  moon  (in  reality  it  is  about  four  hundred 

times  longer),  the  diameter  of  the  moon 
about  one-third  that  of  the  earth  (which  is 
nearly  correct),  and  the  size  of  the  sun  in 
proportion  to  these  figures,  assuming  that 
the  disc  of  the  moon  appeared  to  the  human 
eye  as  of  the  same  size  as  that  of  the  sun. 

Eratosthenes,  living  at  Alexandria  about 
200  B.  C,  calculated  the  size  of  the  earth 
for  the  first  time,  and  he  came  suprisingly 
near  the  truth.  He  made  his  reckoning 
from   the   difference   of    the    point   in   the 


ASTRONOMY  269 

heavens,  where  the  sun  seemed  to  stand  at 
the  time  of  the  summer  solstice  in  Alex- 
andria and  at  Syene,  which  latter  place  was 
known  to  him  as  bein^  on  the  line  of  the 
tropic  of  Cancer,  so  that  the  sun  there  was 
in  the  very  zenith  at  midday.  He  also 
measured  the  obliquity  of  the  ecliptic,  i.  e., 
the  inclination  of  the  ecliptic  to  the  equi- 
noctial, which  he  found  to  be  23°  35',  a  result 
which  differs  only  slightly  from  the  truth, 
the  mean  value  of  it  for  A.  D.  1900  being  23° 
2/  8". 

HiPPARCHUS,  of  Rhodus,  who  lived  about 
150  B.  C,  is  one  of  the  greatest  astronomers 
of  all  times.  He  invented  "trigonometry," 
without  which  astronomy  would  never  have 
become  a  science.  His  observations  were 
most  accurate  and  systematic.  He  dili- 
gently compared  old  records  of  former 
observation  with  his  own,  noted  the  differ- 
ences and  speculated  shrewdly  on  their  ex- 
planations. He  made  a  new  catalogue  cf 
the  stars,  giving  the  celestial  longitude  and 
latitude  of  each,  and  classified  them  accord- 
ing to  their  brightness  into  six  magnitudes. 
(This  catalogue  remained  the  standard  for 
over  fifteen  hundred  years.)  He  discov- 
ered the  precession  of  the  equinoxes,  or  the 
difference    of    the   tropical   year   from    the 


270  HISTORY  OF 

sidereal  year  (sun  year),  the  latter  being 
equal  to  twenty-six  thousand  tropical  (or 
common)  years.  He  fixed  the  time  length 
of  the  tropical  year  very  nearly  as  we  figure 
it  now,  at  365  days,  6  hours  and  10  minutes. 
He  made  great  improvements  in  the  rules 
for  calculating  eclipses,  so  that  after  him 
lunar  eclipses  could  be  predicted  within  one 
hour  or  two  by  any  astronomer,  while  the 
extent  of  the  disc  to  be  covered  could  not 
yet  be  asserted  with  much  accuracy. 

During  three  hundred  years  after  Hip- 
parchus,  no  great  name  appears  in  the 
science  of  astronomy.  Then  Ptolemy,  liv- 
ing at  Alexandria,  about  150  A.  D.,  ap- 
peared, who  revived  the  teachings  of 
Hipparchus  and  made  some  valuable  addi- 
tions of  his  own.  His  great  work  is  the 
Almagest,  an  astronomical  treatise,  in  which 
he  incorporated  the  sum  and  total  of  the 
astronomical  knowledge  of  his  time  and  the 
past.  He  corroborated  and  corrected  the 
views  of  his  great  teacher,  Hipparchus,  to 
whom  he  gives  due  credit  at  all  times. 

(See  portrait   of  Ptolemy,  on    page    258.) 
P iolemy's  most  valuable  and  original  con- 
tribution to  the  science  consists  in  his  theory 
of    the    motions   of   the  planets.      He   suc- 
ceeded in  constructing  a  set  of  circles  and 


ASTRONOMY  271 

lines  by  means  of  which  the  seeming  motion 
of  a  planet  could  be  reproduced,  and  this 
ingenious  system  was  to  be  demonstrated 
mathematically  to  be  correct  thirteen  hun- 
dred years  later  by  Kepler. 

Ptolemy's  principal  merit  is  the  preserva- 
tion of  the  old  records  and  observations, 
while  Hipparchus  shines  as  a  true  scientist, 
satisfied  in  many  cases  to  prepare  and  col- 
lect material  for  those  who  should  come 
after  him,  whenever  he  recognized  his  own 
inability  to  replace  erroneous  theories  by 
better  ones. 

Astronomy  made  no  progress  during  five 
nuiidred  years  after  Ptolemy,  but  the 
A  Imagest  was  ordered  to  be  translated  into 
Arabian  by  Harun  al  Rashid  (at  Bagdad, 
about  800  A.  D.),  of  Arabian  Nights'  fame, 
which  gave  a  mighty  stimulus  to  Arabian 
astronomers.  Observatories  were  built  and 
accurate  records  of  observations,  attested  by 
affidavits,  were  kept.  The  Arabs  were  ex- 
cellent mathematicians;  they  developed  the 
science  of  trigonometry,  devised  new  as- 
tronomical instruments  and  methods  of  cal- 
culation, the  most  important  of  which  is  the 
substitution  of  our  present  numerical  system 
for  the  clumsv  Roman  numerals.     In  order 


272  HISTORY  OF 

to  realize  the  vast  advantage  gained 
thereby,  let  the  reader  try  an  example  in 
multiplication  with  Roman  numbers,  e.  g.: 
MDCCXCXIV  X  PXLVIII.  The  influence 
of  the  Arabs  is  preserved  in  such  names  as 
Vega,  Zenith,  Nadir,  Almanac,  all  of 
Arabic  origin. 

The  Arabian  astronomers'  work,  carried 
on  in  Asia,  in  Africa  and  Spain,  was  the 
means  by  which  the  results  of  the  ancient 
toilers  and  devotees  were  preserved,  while 
the  Roman  Empire,  never  very  fruitful  in 
science  and  culture,  was  slowly  broken  to 
pieces  by  the  onslaught  of  the  Teutonic 
hordes  from  the  North,  just  then  emerging 
from  the  darkness  of  prehistoric  times  and 
appearing  as  half-savages  on  the  stage, 
where  to-day  they  play  a  leading  part  as 
civilizers  of  the  world.  There  is  not  one 
great  name  in  astronomy  among  all  the 
famous  Romans.  Even  Pliny  gave  little 
thought  to  this  branch  of  human  knowledge. 

In  the  far  East  the  Tartars,  the  Persians 
were  at  times  zealous  disciples  of  their 
Arabian  teachers,  but  we  do  not  know  of 
any  great  discoveries  due  to  thenk. 

It  was  through  these  Arabian  translations 
of  the  Almagest,  of  Aristotle's  works  and  of 
Others,  that  the  western  world  took  cogni- 


ASTRONOMY  273 

zance  again  of  the  scientific  achievements  of 
the  ancient  astronomers.  Emperor  Charle- 
magne, about  A.  D.  800,  the  learned  Pope 
Sylvester  II.,  about  A.  D.  1000,  and  Emperor 
Frederick  II.,  about  1220,  caused  these  prec- 
ious books  to  be  translated  and  studied 
very  widely,  and  in  the  thirteenth  century 
we  find  Roger  Bacon  (died  at  Oxford,  Eng- 
land, 1294),  who,  rebelling  against  the  su- 
preme authority  of  Aristotle,  urged  the  im- 
portance of  renewed  experiments  and  of 
mathematical  proofs.  He  also  tells  that 
Caesar  looked  at  the  British  coast  from 
Gaul  through  a  telescope,  from  which  it  is 
clear  that  at  Roger  Bacon's  time  the  tele- 
scope had  been  invented.  The  famous 
painter  and  sculptor,  Leonardo  da  Vinci 
(1452-15 19),  who  was  learned  in  all  branches 
of  science,  was  the  first  to  explain  the  dim 
light  on  the  dark  part  of  the  moon  as  a  re- 
sult of  the  reflection  of  the  sun's  light  from 
the  earth. 


NICOLAUS  COPERNICUS 

THE    FOUNDER    OF    MODERN    ASTRONOMY 

Born  at  Thorn,  Prussian  Poland,  Feb.  19,  1473;  died  at  Frauenberg 
Prussian  Poland.  May  24.  1543.  In  the  year  of  his  death  he  published  a 
treatise  in  Latin,  "De  Orbium  Coelestium  Revolutionibus,"  which  gave 
an  exposition  of  his  new  and  startling  system  of  astronomy,  known  since 
as  the  Copeinican  system. 


ASTRONOMY  275 

MODERN   ASTRONOMERS 

The  great  wave  of  new  life  that  swept 
over  Europe  in  the  fifteenth  century,  the 
quickening  of  intellects  and  broadening  of 
mind,  were  due  to  three  great  causes  prin- 
cipally, the  invention  of  printing,  the  flight 
of  Greek  scholars  from  Constantinople,  cap- 
tured by  the  Turks,  and  the  discovery  of 
America. 

In  religious  matters  the  result  was  reforma- 
tion, in  art  it  was  renaissance,  in  all  sci- 
ences it  was  revival  of  learning.  Astronomy, 
too,  stood  in  need  of  a  strong  mind  to 
extricate  it  from  the  tangle  of  differences 
between  the  views  of  Ptolemy  and  those  of 
Aristotle,  blindly  adhered  to  by  their  re- 
spective followers,  and  from  the  worse 
tangle  of  erroneous  translations  from  the 
Greek  and  from  the  Arabian. 

Copernicus,  a  German,  has  the  honor  of 
being  the  reformer  of  astronomy.  Born  on 
February  19th,  1473,  '^^  Thorn,  on  the  Vistula, 
he  spent  most  of  his  life  in  studying,  travel- 
ing in  his  youth  and  spending  the  re- 
mainder of  his  years  In  easy  circumstances. 
He  was  not  a  great  astronomical  observer. 
His  instruments  were  mostly  of  his  own 
construction  and  inferior  to  those  used  by 


276  HISTORY  OF 

the  Arabs  seven  hundred  years  earlier,  and 
inferior  to  those  he  might  have  bought  at 
Nuremberg,  and  he  is  not  very  exact  in  his 
calculations.  But  he  worked  all  his  life 
faithfully  on  his  great  book  "De  Revolu- 
tionibus,"  refusing  to  attempt  anything  for 
which  he  was  not  ready.  He  declared  him- 
self unable,  for  instance,  to  undertake  the 
rectification  of  the  calendar,  desired  by  the 
Pope.  However,  he  was  known  to  hold 
ideas  opposed  to  those  current  among  the 
common  people.  Luther  called  him  a  fool 
for  believing  that  the  earth  was  moving 
around  the  sun.  Copernicus  was  wise  not 
to  publish  his  views.  For  his  special 
friends,  he  wrote  a  short  account  of  his 
system  of  the  world,  but  this  manuscript 
was  lost  after  his  death  and  not  redis- 
covered until  1870.  His  great  book  was 
printed  and  published  just  before  his  death 
by  his  enthusiastic  admirer  and  pupil 
Rhettcus. 

In  this  book  Copernicus  developed  from 
definite  principles  mathematically  an  as- 
tronomical system  which  explained  the 
observed  motions  of  the  celestial  bodies, 
establishing,  for  the  first  time,  the  fact  that 
the  inferior  planets,  Mercury  and  Venus,  are 
nearer   the   sun  than  the  earth,  while  the 


ASTRONOMY  277 

superior  planets,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn, 
are  at  greater  distances.  He  fully  explained 
the  four  seasons  and  the  varying  length  of 
daylight. 

The  theories  of  Copernicus  were  the  sub- 
ject of  violent  attacks  and  spirited  defense 
for  many  years,  giving  rise  to  many  careful 
observations  at  different  universities,  the 
compiling  of  star  catalogues,  the  invention 
of  a  pendulum  clock  and  other  mechanical 
aids  extremely  useful  for  subsequent  investi- 
gations and  calculations. 

Tycho  Brake,  a  Dane,  born  in  1546,  in 
southern  Sweden,  was  the  son  of  a  noble- 
man. Extremely  bright,  he  went  to  the 
university  at  the  age  of  thirteen  to  prepare 
for  a  political  career.  He  was  much  inter- 
ested in  astrology,  and  an  eclipse,  which  he 
witnessed,  in  1560,  made  such  a  strong  im- 
pression on  him  that  he  decided  to  devote 
his  life  to  astronomy  and  astrology.  In 
1563,  in  Leipsic,  he  made  his  first  recorded 
observation.  He  spent  many  years  travel- 
ing from  university  to  university,  to  meet  all 
the  astronomers  of  his  time.  In  November 
1572  a  brilliant  new  star  appeared  in  Cassi- 
opeia and  vanished  sixteen  months  later. 
Tycho  wrote  a  learned  book  about  this  star, 
besides  making  the  remarkable  astrological 


TYCHO  BRAHE 

A   FAMOUS    DANISH   ASTRONOMER 

Born  at  Knudstrup,  South  Sweden,  Dec.  14th  1546.  Died  at  Prague, 
Bohemia,  Oct.  24th  1601.  Of  noble  family,  he  enjoyed  the  patronage  of 
King  Frederick  II  of  Denmark,  and  later  of  Emperor  Rudolph  II  of 
Germany.     He  was  a  great  observer,  but  rejected  the  Copernican  system. 


ASTRONOMY  S79 

prophecy  related  in  Chapter  I  of  thib  vol- 
ume. He  discovered  the  variation  of  the 
moon,  and  the  fourth  inequality  of  the  motion 
of  the  moon.  He  is  considered  never  to  have 
been  equalled  as  a  practical  astronomer, 
devising  many  most  serviceable  implements 
and  being  very  accurate  in  his  observations. 

His  fame  was  so  great  that  the  King  of 
Denmark  offered  to  build  an  observatory 
for  him.  Tycho  accepted,  and  soon  a  most 
beautiful,  palatial  and  luxuriously-equipped 
observatory  rose  on  the  island  of  Hven, 
Denmark,  which  was  called  Uraniborg, 
Urania  meaning  the  starry  sky.  The  mural 
quadrant,  shown  on  p.  8  of  this  book  was 
the  principal  feature  of  this  building  and 
one  of  the  most  remarkable  instruments 
ever  employed  in  the  service  of  astronomy. 
By  its  means  the  altitudes  of  the  heavenly 
bodies  could  be  observed  with  an  accuracy 
unthought  of  until  then. 

Tycho  was  rich  and  a  nobleman.  His 
independent  spirit  led  him  into  quarrels 
with  the  government  and  he  left  Denmark  to 
become  professor  of  astronomy  and  astrol- 
ogy in  Prague,  Bohemia,  where  he  died. 
He  was  a  true  scientist,  content  to  accumu- 
late in  his  accurate  and  carefully  recorded 
observations    the    material,    from    which    a 


GALILEO  GALILEI 

A    FAMOUS    ITALIAN    PHYSICIST 

Born  at  Pisa,  Italy,  in  Feb.  1564.  Died  at  Arcetri  near  Florence,  Jan.  8. 
1642.  Forced  by  the  Inquisition  to  abjure  his  belief  in  the  Copernican 
theory,  he  murmured  E  pur  si  muove=A.nd  yet  it  (the  earth)  moves. 


ASTRONOMY  28i 

greater  mathematician  than  he  mip^ht  de- 
duct the  truth  about  the  planets'  motions. 

Galileo  Galilei  is  the  martyr  among  the 
astronomers.  He  was  born  at  Pisa,  Italy, 
on  February  i8th,  1564.  He  was  early 
diverted  from  his  study  of  medicine  to  that 
of  geometry  and  shocked  his  teachers  by 
rebelling  against  the  authority  of  Aristotle. 
The  swinging  of  a  chandelier  in  the  Cathe- 
dral of  Pisa  gave  him  the  idea  of  regulating 
a  clockwork  by  means  of  a  pendulum.  His 
first  pendulum  clock  was  devised  to  aid  a 
physician  in  counting  the  pulse-beats  of  a 
patient. 

When  he  was  appointed,  at  the  age  of 
twenty-five  years,  professor  of  mathematics 
at  the  University  of  Pisa,  he  demonstrated 
to  his  colleagues  the  falseness  of  one  of 
Aristotle's  theories,  viz.:  that  the  velocity 
of  a  falling  body  depended  on  its  weight 
alone.  In  the  presence  of  a  large  crowd  a 
large,  heavy  object  and  a  small,  light  object 
were  dropped  simultaneously  from  the  top 
of  the  Leaning  Tower  of  Pisa  and  struck 
the  ground  at  the  same  moment.  His 
boldness  in  attacking  old-fogyism  made  him 
enemies,  however,  and  he  was  soon  glad  of 
a  call  to  Padua.  Here  he  invented  the 
thermometer,  using  alcohol,  and  constructed 


282  HISTORY  OF 

a  telescope,  after  having  heard  about  its  in- 
vention by  a  Dutchman.  When  he  turned 
his  telescope  skyward  he  was  amazed  to  find 
that  he  could  count  ten  times  as  many  stars 
as  with  his  naked  eye.  This  discovery  at 
once  disproved  the,  until  then,  undoubted 
theory  that  the  fixed  stars  were  all  set  in  a 
spherical  vault,  the  firmament. 

Next  he  discovered  the  satellites  of  Jupiter 
and  we  may  believe  that  he  did  not  trust  his 
own  eyes.  He  was  now  ready  to  accept  the 
theory  of  Copernicus  that  the  planets  with 
the  earth  were  circling  around  the  sun. 
His  fame  caused  the  Duke  of  Tuscany  to 
call  him  to  Florence,  where  his  telescope 
showed  him  the  rings  of  Saturn  as  lateral 
appendages  of  the  main  body.  He  also  dis- 
covered the  libration  of  the  moon,  viz.:  the 
fact  that  the  surface  of  the  moon  turned 
towards  us,  does  not  always  remain  exactly 
the  same,  but  varies  a  little  at  the  edges. 

But  his  great  discoveries  were  objection- 
able to  the  Church  of  Rome,  because  they 
ran  counter  to  what  the  priests  had  taught 
for  more  than  a  thousand  years.  He  was 
accused  of  heresy  and  was  only  able  to  save 
his  life  by  the  ardent  efforts  of  his  many 
influential  friends,  by  his  spotless  reputa- 
tion, and  by  a  solemn  abjuration  of  all  his 


ASTRONOMY  283 

teachings.  He  spent  the  remainder  of  his 
life  in  semi-captivity,  suffered  from  many 
infirmities  and  from  isolation,  became  blind 
and  died  on  January  8,  1643. 

John  Kepler  received  from  the  dying 
Tycho  Brahe  the  task  of  performing  the 
difficult  calculations,  which  were  necessary 
to  gain  the  proper  results  from  the  mass  of 
observations  so  diligently  collected  in  his 
life.  Kepler,  born  December  27,  1571,  in 
Weil,  Germany,  was  a  weakly  child,  whose 
eyesight  was  much  impaired  by  small-pox 
when  he  was  four  years  of  age.  He  was 
much  given  to  study,  however,  and  in  1594 
was  appointed  professor  of  astronomy  at 
the  University  of  Graetz.  The  duties  of 
this  position  comprehended  the  duty  of 
foretelling  the  great  events  of  the  year,  and 
the  destiny  and  fate  of  nations  and  of  great 
individuals.  At  Tycho  Brahe's  death  he 
was  called  to  replace  him  at  Prague.  The 
dying  request  of  Brahe  was  complied  wlt^ 
by  Kepler  In  the  most  enthusiastic  way,  an  i 
the  results  attained  by  him  were  among  th^ 
greatest  achievements  in  astronomy. 

He  discovered,  from  the  notes  of  Brahe, 
that  Mars  must  move,  not  In  a  circle,  nor  in 
a  combination  of  circles,  but  in  an  elliptic 
path,  and  that  the  sun  Is  situated  in  one  of 


JOHANN  KEPLER 

ONE    OF    THE    CHIEF    PIONEERS    OF    MODERN    ASTRONOMY 

Born  at  Weil,  Wuertemberg,  Germany,  Dec.  27th  1571.  Died  in  Ratis- 
bon,  Bavaria,  Germany,  Nov.  15th  1630.  His  name  is  especially  asso- 
ciated with  the  three  laws  of  planetary  motion.     (Kepler's  laws). 


ASTRONOMY  285 

the  foci  of  the  ellipse.  (The  first  of  Kepler's 
laws  extends  this  to  the  motions  of  all  the 
planets  and  their  satellites.).  He  saga- 
ciously imagined  the  law  governing  the 
velocity  of  a  planet  at  different  points  of  its 
path,  although  he  knew  of  no  physical  prin- 
ciple on  which  to  base  such  a  theory.  This, 
the  second  of  Kepler's  laws,  states  that  the 
areas  described  by  the  radii  vectores  of  the 
planet's  ellipse  in  equal  times,  are  equal.  He 
believed  that  the  tide  of  the  sea  must  be 
attributed  to  the  attraction  of  the  moon,  he 
had  an  idea  of  "gravitation,"  but  was  as  yet 
unable  to  grasp  the  full  meaning  of  this  law. 

When  Kepler  tried  to  find  a  connection 
between  the  distance  of  the  planets  from 
the  sun  and  the  time  required  for  a  revolu- 
tion around  the  sun,  he  had  to  make  a  vast 
number  of  calculations,  before,  to  his  inde- 
scribable joy,  he  found  that  the  square  of  the 
time  was  proportional  to  the  ctcbe  of  the  average 
distance. 

He  was  the  first  astronomer  to  foretell  a 
transit  of  Venus  and  Mercury  across  the  sun. 
He  announced  them  in  1629  for  specified 
days  in  163 1.  The  most  practical  work  of 
his  was  the  Rudolphine  Tables,  the  forerun- 
ner of  our  modern  nautical  almanacs,  by 
which  the  planets  were  located  easily. 


SIR  ISAAC  NEWTON 

THE   DISCOVERER    OF   THE   LAW    OF   GRAVITATION 

Born  at  Woolsthorpe,  England,  Dec.  25th  1642.  Died  at  Kensington, 
England,  March  20th  1727.  An  apple  falling  from  its  branch  suggested  to 
him,  when  a  boy,  what  by  1685  became,  in  his  mighty  intellect,  the  uni- 
versal law  ruling  earth  and  heaven. 


ASTRONOMY  287 

Sir  Isaac  Newton  was  born  on  Christmas 
day,  1642,  at  Woolsthorpe,  Lincoln  county, 
England.  Even  as  a  boy,  Newton  showed 
a  great  predilection  for  studying  physical 
laws.  He  made  water-wheels,  jumped  with 
and  against  a  violent  wind,  noting  the  differ- 
ence in  the  length  of  the  jump  and  made 
a  serviceable  water-clock,  and  a  sun-dial, 
still  preserved  by  the  Royal  Society. 

When  a  student  at  Trinity  College,  Cam- 
bridge, he  threw  himself  with  great  energy 
upon  mathematics,  making  some  most  im- 
portant discoveries,  and  then  directed  his 
zeal  to  astronomy.  Kepler  had  found  how 
the  planets  move,  Newton  wished  to  know 
why  they  move. 

Now,  Galilei,  in  his  days  of  imprisonment, 
had  written  a  work  on  motion  in  which  he 
had  suggested  the  following  three  laws,  un- 
known before: 

1.  A  body  in  motion  continues  to  move 
uniformly  in  a  straight  line  unless  acted 
upon  by  a  force. 

2.  If  force  acts  on  a  moving  body,  a 
change  of  motion  is  produced  proportional 
to  the  force  and  in  the  same  direction. 

3.  When  one  body  exerts  force  on  an- 
other, that  other  reacts  with  equal  force  on 
the  first. 


288  HISTORY  OF 

Newton  took  the  substance  of  these  laws 
from  Galilei's  work,  but  their  clear  state- 
ment is  entirely  due  to  him  and  so  is  their 
combination  with  Kepler's  three  laws,  re- 
sulting in  the  truth  that, 

The  whole  solar  system  depends  on  a  central 
force  emanating  from  the  sun  and  varying 
inversely  zvith  the  square  of  the  distance. 

But  what  was  this  force? 

Newton  discovered  this  force  in  "gravita- 
tion," the  mutual  attraction  between  two 
bodies,  as  familiar  to  us  as  light  and  heat, 
but  unknown  to  the  world  before  Newton's 
time.  '"Gravitation"  explained  the  ebb  and 
tide,  and  in  Newton's  gigantic  mind  it 
demonstrated,  also,  that  the  axis  of  the 
earth  is  tilted  because  of  the  attractive 
power  of  the  moon  working  upon  the  pro- 
tuberant mass  at  the  equatorial  region. 

In  recognition  of  his  splendid  achieve- 
ments, Newton  was  elected  president  of  the 
Royal  Society,  a  position  he  held  twenty- 
five  years,  to  his  death,  and  he  was  knighted 
in  1705.  He  was  buried  in  Westminster 
Abbey  on  March  28,  1727. 

William  Herschel  was  born  at  Han- 
over, on  November  13,  1737,  as  the  son  of  a 
learned  and  well-connected  musician.  At 
the  outbreak  of  the  Seven  Years'  War  the 


ASTRONOMY  289 

French  invaded  Hanover,  then  a  British 
dominion,  and  Herschel,  at  the  time  a 
member  of  a  regimental  band,  saw  actual 
war.  He  disliked  his  first  experience  so 
much  that  he  deserted  and  went  to  Eng- 
land. His  desertion  was  pardoned  when 
he  had  attained  to  fame.  In  England, 
Herschel  became  quite  a  leading  musician 
and  composer,  studying  meanwhile  mathe- 
matics as  a  pastime.  While  so  engaged  in 
Bath,  a  friend  lent  him  a  telescope.  He 
saw  at  once  that  he  must  have  one  of  much 
greater  power  to  make  the  observations  his 
thorough-going  mind  demanded  and  set  to 
work  to  construct  one,  an  arduous  task, 
which  he,  however,  accomplished  to  his 
entire  satisfaction. 

It  was  in  1774  that  he  first  looked  at  the 
stars  through  a  telescope  and  from  that 
year  starts  his  career  as  one  of  the  greatest 
astronomers  of  the  world.  He  kept  on  pro- 
ducing ever  better  and  larger  telescopes  and 
inventing  and  improving  other  astronom- 
ical instruments  until  in  March  1782, 
while  in  pursuit  of  a  systematic  investiga- 
tion of  every  bright  star,  he  discovered  in 
the  Constellation  of  Gemini  an  object  that, 
instead  of  showing  a  mere  point  of  light  like 
the  other  fixed  stars,  presented  a  disc  like 


SIR  WILLIAM  HERSCHEL 


THE   VIRTUAL    FOUNDER    OF    SIDEREAL    SCIENCE 
Born  at    Hannover,  Germany,  Nov   15th  1738.     Died  at  Slough,  near 
Windsor,  England.  Aug.  25th  1822.     Made  the  first  great  reflecting  teles- 
cope (40  feet  long)  in  1789.     As  an  explorer  of  the  heavens  he  has  had 
no  equal. 


ASTRONOMY  291 

the  planets.  And  later  observations  showed 
that  this  object  moved — therefore  it  was  a 
new  planet,  to  be  added  to  the  five,  which 
since  the  memory  of  man  had  been  known. 
It  was  named  Uranus, 

This  discovery  produced  an  unheard-of 
sensation  in  the  learned  world.  The  king, 
George  the  Third,  appointed  him  "His 
Majesty's  Own  Astronomer,"  and  enabled 
him  to  live  entirely  for  his  science  at  Wind- 
sor. For  thirty  years  he  continued  to 
enrich  human  knowledge  by  his  countless 
faithful  descriptions  of  double  stars,  nebulae 
and  clusters,  first  revealed  to  human  gaze 
by  this  indefatigable  worker. 

Herschel  was  greatly  assisted  by  Carqline 
Herschel,  his  sister,  who,  from  infancy, 
greatly  admired  her  talented  brother  and 
devoted  her  life  to  his  service,  keeping 
house  for  him,  noting  down  his  dictations, 
while  he  had  his  eye  at  the  telescope, 
sometimes  from  nightfall  to  dawn,  and 
working  out  the  mathematical  calculations, 
while  he  was  tending  to  his  duties  as  a 
musician. 

In  1778  the  astronomer  Bode  drew  atten- 
tion to  a  peculiarity  of  the  figures  represent- 


292  ASTRONOMY 

ing   the   distances   of    the   various    planets 
from  the  sun.     If  we  write  the  figures 

o,  3,  6,  12,  24,  48,  96, 
we  see  at  a  glance  that  the  third  figure  is 
the  double  of  the  second,  the  fourth  is  the 
double  of  the  third  and  so  on.     If  we  add  4 
to  each  figure,  we  have 

4,  7,  10,  16,  28,  52,  100, 
figures  which  represent  with  surprising  near- 
ness the  distances  above  referred  to.  The 
theoretical  foundation  of  this  law  has  not 
yet  been  discovered,  and  it  does  not  hold 
good  with  regard  to  the  seventh  planet, 
Neptune,  with  the  discovery  of  which  a  most 
peculiar  fact  is  connected: 

The  astronomer  Bouvard  found,  in  1821, 
that  the  calculated  positions  of  Uranus  did 
not  coincide  with  those  actually  observed. 
He  suggested  that  the  discrepancies  might 
be  due  to  the  attraction  of  an  unknown 
seventh  planet.  Then  Leverrier  in  France, 
and  Adams  in  England,  calculated  upon  the 
probable  position  of  this  unknown  body, 
and  on  the  night  of  September  23,  1846 
Galle,  in  Berlin,  found  this  planet  in  the 
place  indicated.  It  has  one  satellite  and 
was  called  Neptune. 


Dropped  from 
the  Fast  Express 

By  FRED  M.  WHITE 

A  Great  Sensational  Story  of 
Love,  Mystery  and  Adventure 


Illustrated 


The  heroine  is  the  daughter  of 
an  English  Noble,  whose  debts 
induce  her  to  consent  to  marry  a 
scoundrel  who  is  masquerading  as 
a  millionaire.  The  villain  has  his 
would-be  victim's  brother  in  his 
power,  and  the  sister's  magnificent 
effort  to  save  her  brother  is  most 
thrilling  reading.  The  plot  keeps 
one  guessing   from    first    to   last. 

Paper  Cover  in  Colors 25c 

Cloth 75c 


Philadelphia  Sunday  Dispatch  says : 

'•'Papa  will  like  it.  Mama  will  go  into  ecstacies  as  she 
feels  her  youth  revived.  Son  will  forego  a  baseball  game 
to  enjoy  its  pleasure,  and  daughter  will  thrill  with  its  love 
episodes.    Buy  it !  It  will  do  you  good ! " 

For  Sale  on  all  Railway  Trains,  by  Booksellers, 
Newsstands,  News  Companies,  or  direct  by 

UIRD  &  LEE,  1732  Michigan  Ave.,  CHICAGO 


TIH  E   WORLD'S 


lUC  Best  Comic  Books   lUC 


Raj^time  Rbymes.  A  Joyous 
Jumble  of  Jokes.  100  full-page  illus- 
trations. By  the  author  of  Coonah- 
town  Comedy  and  Camp  Stories. 
Lithographed  cover,  5  colors,  lOc 

Tbe   Popalar  Son^   Book. 

Words  and  music  for  "But  You 
Can't  Fool  Dad,"  "All  the  World  to 
Me,"  and  85  other  favorites.  In- 
structions for  Banjo,  Guitar  and 
Mandolin.  Lithographed  cover,  in 
five  colors,  10c. 
Camp  Stories  —  Witty  War 
Jingles.  By  G.  A.  Thompson.  An 
original  volume  of  drawings  and 
verses.  50  full-page  illustrations. 
Bright  and  humorous;  very  enter- 
taining. Litho.  cover,  5  colors,  10c. 

Coonahtown  Comedy.  By  "Un- 
cle Nic."  Pictures  and  verses,  show- 
ing the  follies  and  foibles  of  Coonah- 
town's  beaux  and  belles.  110  illus- 
trations. Cover  in  colors,  10c. 

The  Boss  Joke  Book.    114  new 

and  original  pictures,  drawn  by  J.  C. 
Gilbert.  Fresh,  funny  stories  and 
jokes.  113  pages  ofsolid  fun.  Attrac- 
tive cover  in  4  colors,  lOc. 
Tke  Dead  Man's  Secret.  A  tale 
of  love,  gold  and  treachery,  by  £. 
Strong.  Illust.  Cover  in  colors,  10c. 


Aunt  Dinah's  Fortune  Tel* 
ler.  The  Magic  Circle's  Mysterious 
Revelations  —  Fortune  Telling  by 
Cards,  First  Lesson  in  Palmistry, 
etc.    Lithographed  cover,  10c. 

The  Origrinal  Oypsy  .'Dream 
Book  and  I^ncky  Numbers. 

Full    meanings    of    dreams.    Litho- 
graphed cover,  lOC. 
Health  and   Beauty.    By  Eva 

Forde  Jelley.  A  book  of  Toilet 
Secrets  and  Health  Hints.  Litho- 
graphed cover,  10c. 

A  Barrel  of  Jokes.  128  pages  of 
new  and  clever  fun,  100  illustrations, 
lithographed  cover  in  colors,    lOc* 

Just  for  Fun.  Up-to-date  Jokes 
and  Wit.  Illustrated  throughout 
"Striking"  cover,  in  colors,  10c. 

Side  Splitters.  For  that  tired 
feeling.  Illust.  Cover  in  colors,  10c. 

Drummers'  Yarns.  Funny  sto- 
ries the  "Drummeis"  tell.  Illus- 
trated. Paper  cover,  in  colors,]10c. 

Hot  Shots.  From  the  Funny  Boys. 
Brand  new.  108  illustrations.  Cover 
in  colors,  10c. 

A   Bushel   of  liaug^hs.    A  new 

book  of  genuine  fun.  106  illustra- 
tions.   Cover  in  colors,  lOc. 


For  sale  everywhere,  or  sent  postpaid,  on  receipt  of  price,  by 

Laird  &  Lee,    1732  Michigan  Avenue,     Chicago 


PROBLEMS  OF  ELECTRICITY  SOLVED 

HENRY  &  HORA'S 

Modern  Electricity 


AN  encyclopedia  of  all  that 
the  electrical  engineer,  ap- 
prentice or  student  desires  to 
know  on  the  subject.  Simplified 
so  that  even  a  beginner  can 
master  the  fundamental  princi- 
ples. Processes  of  arriving  at 
results  are  mathematically  dem- 
onstrated. 

Electrical  devices,  apparatus 
and  machines  and  the  many 
applications  of  this  mysterious 
force  are  explained  and  illus- 
trated in  detail. 


ENDORSED  BY 

LEADING  ELECTRICAL 
==^  EXPERTS  = 

It  contains  latest  results  of  modern  research,  both  in  theory  and 
practice,  wireless  telegraphy,  X-rays  and  radium. 

The  practical  methods  and  estimates  for  erecting  power  plants, 
transmission,  distribution  and  lighting,  have  been  taken  from  actual 
practice  and  obtained  with  much  labor  and  at  a  great  expense. 

150    SPECIAL    ILLUSTRATIONS 

Contains  355  pages,  exhaustive  Cross-index  and  Appendix. 


Silk  cloth,  sprinkled  edges,  decorative   Ai   aa    Seal  leather  binding,  a<    rn 
cover,  ornamental  silver  stamping,  . ,    ipliUU        marbled  edges,   .  .  ^'•uU 


For  sale  everywhere,  or  sent  postpaid  on  receipt  of  price 

LAIRD  &  LEE,  Publishers,  CHICAQO,  U.  5.  A, 


Books  for  Boys  and  Girls 

The  Cream  o!  Juvenile  Literature 


Rex's  Adventures  Among  the  Olympics,  c^ep  "onl\iy  ^fln7*story 'of 

adventure  in  forests  and  mountains.     Extra  illustrated,  silk  cloth,     76c 

TfArn   rhitmc       ^^  Minerva  Thorpe.     A  fascinating  tale  of  an  orphan  boy 
IWO   untims.      and  his  faithful  dog,  who  are  cast  adrift  on  the  sea  of 
life.    Illustrated.    Beautifully  bound  In  cloth,        ....    75c 
TKo    Ha<»f«    nt   a    Rn        Edition  do  Luxe.      From   the  224th   edition  of 
ine    nean   OI   a   DOy.    Edmondo  de  Amlcis'.  Cuork.  illustrated  with  33 
full-page  half-tones,  besides  26   text  etchings.    Printed  on  fine  half- 
tone paper.     A  new,  aitistic  cover  design,  8vo,  cloth,  gilt  top,  .     S^\.25 
(Special  SCHOOL  EDITION,  silk  cloth,  75c) 

Air  Castle  Don ;  or  From  Dreamland  to  Sardpan.  aLi^  -. '  ^The 

adventures  of  a  plucky  boy  in  a  big  American  city.  Illustrr  c;d.  Linen 
cloth  cover,  handsome  design, 75c 

Dick  and  Jack's  Adventures  on  Sable  Island.  fey.^^Two  d'nrt?g 

youngsters  meet  many  adventures  and  misadventures  on  the  scene  of 
the  La  Bourgogne  disaster.    Uniform  with  Air  Castle  Don.        .     76c 

Tan  Pile  Jim;  or  A  Yankee  Wai!  Amung  the  Bluenoses. 

By  Rev.  B.  F.  Ashley.  The  first  of  Mr.  Ashley's  famous  books  for  "Boys 
and  Girls  from  7  to  70."  Used  in  many  public  schools,  as  supplemen- 
tary reading.    Uniform  with  Air  Castlb  Don,        .        .        .        .76c 

«.        .  «      R«**|    a       ^y  Annie  O.  Brown.     A  story  foi   girls.     Companion 

rireSlOe    Dailies,      ^ork  to  the  heart  of  a  Boy.     illustrated  by  J.  C. 

Leyendecker.    Edition  de  luxe.    8vo  cloth,  special  cover  in  five  colors 

(in  a  box), $1.36 

(  POPULAR  EDITION,  cloth,  illustrated,  75c.  ) 

I    nrfl     I  nrks      By  R.  H.  Garman.    Scenes  from  animal  life  in  the  jungles, 

ilUngie  LarKS.    imitating  human  conditions  in  a  nighly  amusing  vay. 

Pvinted  in  colors.  Crown  quarto.  Boards,  cloth  back,  .        ,        .    9|1.00 

MARRYAT'S     MASTERPIECES 

OF   NAVAL   LIFE   AND   ADVENTURES 
n    .        Q.        I        645  pages.    Large  l2mo,  cloth,  illustrated  and   special 

refer  Oimpie.    frontispiece  in  colors, «1.00 

M.  M:<lBk:«m««  7oe»     517  pages.     Large  12mo,  cloth,  special  frontis- 

Wr.  iniasnipman  C<asy.    piece  in  colors,  many  other  illustrations,  $1.00 

BOTH  in  ornamental  covei's,  stamped  in  colors. 

r»        n.*ij A —  ^  iL     »      i_      A  comprehensive  collection  of  poemc 

Our  Children  Among  the  roetS  thac  please  young  folks,  as  an  intro- 
duction to  American  and  English  literature  it  has  no  equal.  100  illus- 
trations. 289  pages.  Crown  4to,  cloth,  stamped  in  two  inks,  $1.00 
rii'Mfi  <1  riaa«l#«a  Edited  by  "Qncle  Charlie."  Nursery  rhymes,  fairy 
LniianOOO  l/iaSSlCS.  tales.  Mother  Goose  melodies  and  stories,  etc.  A 
book  that  will  delight  every  member  of  the  family.  Eight  splendid  full- 
page  illustrations  in  seven  colors  and  250  text  etchings.  214  pages, 
cloth,  ornamental  cover  design, $1.00 

Famous  Adventures  o!  the   Brownies,    tions'  oy  ^Paimer^cox' 

Cloth,  inlaid  cover  panel  in  4  colors, 76c 

H  For  sale  everywhere,  or  sent  postpaid  on  receipt  of  prici 

1^  LAIRD  4  LEE,     1732  Michigan  Avenue.     CHICAGO 


H^ill  appeal  to  all  who  enjoy  reading  a 

real  novel  based  upon  actual  scenes,     In^^nsely 

dramatic  from  start  to  finish 


THE 


Cameo  of  the  Empress 

By  SIGMUND  KRAUSZ 


THE  plot  is  handled  with  great  originality ; 
the  scene  is  laid  chiefly  in  Naples,  Pompeii 
and  Capri ;  the  principal  characters  are  Amer- 
ican pleasure  seekers  in  Italy.  A  beautiful  girl, 
full  of  sentiment,  an  earnest  young  archaeologist, 
a  lively  young  artist,  a  funny  porous-plaster  man- 
ufacturer, two  bachelor  girls  —  all  Americans  ;  an 
interesting  young  villain  and  a  charming  young 
artist's  model,  both  Italians,  with  some  minor 
actors,  are  the  principal  personages  that  furnish 
the  material  for  the  author.  The  story  carries  the 
reader  with  sustained  interest  from  the  first  page 
to  the  last  in  a  succession  of  unexpected  situations 
and  surprises,  and  the  entirely  novel  employment 
of  the  occult  in  the  final  development  of  the  story 
is  a  suggestion  that  will  attract  the  attention  of 
all  readers  of  high-cb^s  fiction. 


Illustrated  with  beautiful  halftones.  280  pages, 
i2nio  cloth.  Original,  unique,  ornamental  design 
$1.25  Net  

For  sale  by  all  booksellers,  book  supply  houses,  or  direct  by 

LAIRD  &  IvEE,       -       Publishers 

1732  Michigan  Avenue,       CHICAGO,  U.  S    A. 


THE  STANDARD  GUIDE 


FOR 


LOCOMOTIVE.    ENGINEERS 
AND  FIREMEN 


Also  Railway  Machinists 


r:^:..;^>^--^^^ 

!;   :!5.!i'v^59':i:iDf|  ' 

'ij      .'.'•■X  >k    I'VE 
:|       -.:n'iMrSi^Hiit,1£,v! 

:  f-' ■'"■'•';:■  H:^ 

i  ;;■#:-;;■  I 

!:■ 

1*^ 

1) 

By    ED.    TURNER 


A  COMPLETE  TREATISE  ON 

Westing-house  H  5  and  6  ET.  Equip- 
ment, Walschaert  Valve  Motion,  S  6 
Independent  Valve,  No.  6  Distribut- 
ing- Valve  and  Quick  Action  Cylinder 
Cap,  S.  F.  4  Governor,  B  6  Feed  Valve,  C  6  Reducing- 
Valve,  9j4  inch  Simple  Ail  Pump,  S/4  inch  Cross 
Compound  Air  Pumps,  New  York  Air  Brake  Equip- 
ment, Compound  Engines,  Injectors,  Lubricators, 
Standard  Rules  for  Eng-ineers  and  Firemen,  Sisfnals 
and  Definitions  of  Railroad  Terms. 

Map   "witli  Tables   showing   points   at   which   railroads 
running  East  and  West  change  from  one  time  to  another 

70   Specially  Dra\«rn   Illustrations 

Made  under  the  supervision  of  the  author. 


Leuther,  artistic  cover,  red  edges,  gold  and  blind  stamped.  75e 


For  sale  at  all  bookstores,  or  sent  postpaid  oa  receipt  of  price,  by 

LAIRD  &  LEE,  Publishers,  miohIg^avs.  CHICAGO 


LAIRD  &  LEE'S 

Modern  Penmanship 


AND  ITS   PRACTICAL  APPLICATION 


isvi 


A  New  and  Complete  Work  by 
C.  L.  RICKETTS,  Scribe. 


47  Full=page  Plates 

The  Origin  of  Writing — Penmanship, 
How  to  Learn;  How  to  Teach  — 
Materials  ;  Position  ;  Movement ; 
Exercises ;  the  Parts  of  a  Letter ; 
Ornamental  Card  Writing. 


ALPHABETS— VARIOUS  STYLES 

For  Writing,  Engrossing  or  General  Lettering 

Engrossing  Script,  Round  Hand,  Modified  Round  Hand, 
German  Text,  Old  English,  Modified  Old  English,  Compact 
Old  English,  Modified  and  Open  Old  English,  Old  English 
and  Script  combined  for  resolutions,  etc.,  Italics,  Marking 
Alphabet,  Roman  Capitals,  Mediaeval  caps,  small  letters 
and  numerals.  Fancy  capitals  and  small  letters,  Vertical 
and  Slant,  with  body  writing,  Business  Hand,  etc. 


Bound  in  board  covers,  cloth  back, 
Full  cloth,  gold  and  ink  stamped, 


60c 
-    $1.00 


For  sale  on  all  Trains,  at  all  Bookstores,  or  sent  direct  to  any  address  in 
the  wprld,  postpaid,  on  receipt  of  price,  by 

LAIRD   &    LEE,    Publishers,  MiohiB?aAvtiio«,  CHICAGO 


THE  VITAL  TOUCH 


A  STORY  OF   THE  POWER  OF  LOVE 


By  Frances  M.  Schnebly 

I  V  I  D  LY  and  correctly  portrays 
human  nature  at  its  best.  Full  of 
passion  and  pathos,  illustrating  the 
power  of  love  to  conquer  all  other 
human  emotions  and  become  the 
sole  guiding  principle  of  Ijfe.  Every 
page  is  of  absorbing  interest,  which 
holds  the  reader  spell-bound  from 
first  to  last.  The  characters  are 
most  skilfully  drawn,  and  thor- 
oughly likable.  Intensely  dramatic 
situations  adroitly  handled. 

ILLUSTRATED 


246    PAGES.     EXTRA  CLOTH,    ORNAMEN-      $1.00 
TAL    DESIGN     IN     GOLD     AND     INK,  j^gx 

For  sale  by  all  booksellers,  book  supply  houses,  or  direct  by 

LAIRD  &  LEE      -      Publishers      -       CHICAGO 


-^  THg ^^ 

Standard  Library  o!  Mystery 

PRACTICAL  ASTROLOGY 

By  CoMTE  C.  DE  Saint-Germain,  the  recognized  leading 
authority  on  all  occult  subjects.  A  plain,  practical  thorough 
work  on  this  all  absorbing  topic.    Over  100  illustrations. 

Cloth,  special  cover  in  colors, ^    75c 

Paper,  lithographed  cover  in  five  colors,  .       .       .     '    25c 

THE  STUDY  OF  PALMISTRY 

For  Professional  Purposes  and  Advanced  Pupils 
By  CoMTE  C-  DE  Saint-Germain.  The  highest,  authority  on 
Palmistry.  This  excellent  work  was  formerly  issued  in  two 
volumes  at  $7.50.  New  edition,  two  volumes  bound  in  oue 
superb  imperial  octavo  volume. 
Silk  cloth,  polished  top,  1200  illustrations,      .       .    $3.50 

PRACTICAL  PALMISTRY  a  new  edition  (65th  thousand) 

By  CoMTE  C.  DE  Saint-Germain,  author  of  that  standard 
authority,  The  Study  of  Palmistry.  Haud-reading  made 
easy  and  popular. 

Cloth,  71   illustrations,  among  them  16   hands  of 
celebrities,  unique  cover, 75c 

PRACTICAL  HYPNOTISM.    Theories.  Experiments,  Full  Instructions 

By  Comte  C.  db  Saint-Germain.    From  the  works  ot  the 
great  medical   authorities   on   the   subject.    Clear,  simple 
style  that  will  Interest  everybody.    How  to  produce  and  to 
stop  Hypnotic  Sleep.    How  to  cure  disease  by  its  use, 
Cloth,  cover  in  gold  and  ink  (47  illustrations),     .       .    75c 

HERRMANN  THE  GREAT;  The  Famous  Magician's  Tricks 

By  H.  J.  BuRLiNGAMB.   Illustrated.  Scores  of  explanations 
of  the  most  puzzling  tricks  of  the  greatest  of  all  conjurers, 
never  before  published     All  apparatus  described. 
Cloth,  special  cover  design  in  colors,       ....    75c 

THE  GREAT  DREAM    BOOK 

By  Madame  Carlotta   de   Barst.    With   a   New   List  of 

Lucky  Numbers.  Brilliant  explanations  of  all  possible  dreams. 

Cloth,  unique  cover,  extra  half-tone,       ....    75c 

TWENTIETH  CENTURY  FORTUNE  TELLER 

By   Madame  Carlotta  de   Barsy.     Strange  revelations, 
through  the  Magic  Circle.    Every  possible  event  foretold. 
Cloth,  extra  half-tone,  unique  cover,       ....    75c 

THE  SPIRIT  WORLD  UNMASKED 

By  H.  R.  Evans.    Tricks  and  frauds  of  clairvoyants,  mind 
readers,  slate  writers,  etc.,  fearlessly  exposed.     Life   and 
work  of  Madame  Blavatsky     Illustrated. 
12mo,  extra  cloth,  burnished  top, 75c 

For  sale  everywhere,  or  sent  postpaid  on  receipt  of  price,  by 

LAIRD  4  LEE,  CHICAGO.  U.  S.  A. 


3  1197  00413  8720 


DATE  DUE 


OCT  16  ibA^l  ZbZp 


¥^ 


^/^T 


'    -J  t  i^.^ 


0  .-. 


ittren^ 


HOVllIMB  /IPR  0  7 


■•ir 


lUTTZ 


|??L_OE*£BJLU9£2 


*(»|r 


^  »«!> 


GCT^ 


!£P18J1 


>i||fe^^^2«CT_^^ 


■"MQ 


i}ciii2ao 


m 


fcU6   06)£%' 


^»1«M 


^^ 


i 


oroT^^ 


J/IN  2  3  J985 

f-EB 


;^V 


'  i«N'Vfe  '^ 


JAN     2  19J7 


»Tt6  i 


APR 


2  6  2001 


■  ^' ;'!  y  0  i!udi 


DEMCO    38-297 


*t^ 


m 


liiiliiil 

■ill