nrs' ibd 

SEPHER YETZIRAH 


Translated from the Hebrew by 
William Wynn Westcott 




HTr -IM 


SEPHER YETZIRAH 

THE BOOK OF FORMATION 

WITH 

THE FIFTY GATES OF INTELLIGENCE 

& 

THE THIRTY-TWO PATHS OF WISDOM 
Translated from the Hebrew by 
William Wynn Westcott, M.B., J.P. 

SUPREME MAGUS OF THE ROSICRUCIAN SOCIETY OF ENGLAND 

Fourth Edition 


Edited and Revised, 

WITH NOTES AND BIBLIOGRAPHY, 
by Darcy Kuntz 



HOLMES PUBLISHING GROUP 


The Sepher Yetzirah: The Book of Formation. Copyright ® 1996 
by Darcy Kuntz. All rights reserved. No part of this book may 
be reproduced or utilized in any form or by any means, electronic 
or mechanical, including photocopying, recording or by any 
information storage and retrieval system, without permission 
in writing from Holmes Publishing Group except in the case of 
brief quotations embodied in critical articles and reviews. 

Golden Dawn Studies Series 3 


First Edition, 1887 
Second Revised Edition, 1893 
Third Revised Edition, 1911 
Fourth Revised Edition 
1st Printing, 1996 


ISBN 1-55818'333'7 


The front cover illustration ‘The Fall’ is by 
Austin Osman Spare which was published 
in Aleister Crowley’s The Equinox, 1909. 


For a Complete List of Publications, 
Please address: 

Holmes Publishing Group 
Postal Box 623 
Edmonds, WA. 98020 USA 



Contents 


Page 

Notes to the Fourth Edition 7 

Introduction to the Third Edition 9 

Preface to the Second Edition 16 

The Sepher Yetzirah 

i. The Sephiroth, Numbers, Letters 17 

i. The Twenty-two Letters 18 

ui.The Triad 19 

iv. The Heptad with Supplement 20 

v. The Dodecad with Supplement 20 

vi. Conclusion 21 

The Fifty Gates of Intelligence 23 

The Thirty-two Paths of Wisdom 25 

Notes to the Sepher Yetzirah 28 

Notes to the Thirty-two Paths 35 

The Hebrew Text of the Sepher Yetzirah 36 

Bibliography 54 

Illustrations 

Page 

I. The Snake and upside down “T” Half-title 

Based on the cover of W.W. Westcott’s, Numbers, 1890. 

II. The Ten Sephiroth and Twenty Two Paths 6 

From W.W. Westcott's, An Introduction to The Kabalah, 1910. 

III. Theli: The Celestial Dragon 32 

From Rabbi Eliezer Rokeach’s commentary on the Sepher Yetzirah, 
Mantua, 1562. 




THE TEN SEPHIROTH AND TWENTY TWO PATHS 






Notes to the Fourth Edition 


The three main books of the Kabbalistic esoteric philosophy are the Sepher 
Yet zirah (Book of Formation), the Sepher Zohar (Book of Splendour) and the 
Sepher Bahir (Book of Brilliance). Of these books the Sepher Yetzirah is considered 
to be the oldest treatise and is believed to be a bridge between orthodox and 
esoteric Kabbalah. The origins of the Sepher Yetzirah have been lost to the 
antiquity of time, but a number of modem author’s believe that the Sepher 
Yetzirah was created by an oral (Mishnah) and written tradition. In the oral 
tradition it is attributed to the Patriarch Abraham and it was written down by 
Rabbi Akiba Ben Joseph who lived circa A.D. 120. 

William Westcott wrote that the Sepher Yetzirah “explains a most curious 
philosophical scheme of Creation, drawing a parallel between the origin of 
the world, the sun, the planets, the elements, seasons, man and the twenty- 
two letters of the Flebrew alphabet; dividing them into a Triad, a Heptad, 
and a Dodecad; three mother letters, A [Aleph], M [Mem], Sh [Shin] are 
referred to primeval Air, Water and Fire; seven double letters are referred 
to the planets and the seven fold division of time, etc.: and the twelve 
simple letters are referred to the months, Zodiac signs and human organs. 
Modern criticism tends to the conclusion that the existing ancient versions 
were compiled about A.D. 200. The “Sepher Yetzirah” is mentioned in the 
Talmuds, both of Jerusalem and of Babylon; it was written in the Neo- 
Hebraic language, like the Mishna.” [An Introduction to the Kabalah, 1910. 
p . 2-3.] 

Westcott’s translation of the Sepher Yetzirah was originally part of a 
lecture he read before the Flermetic Society of London on 29 July 1886. 1 
The title of his paper was ‘The Sepher Yetzirah: A Rabbinical Treatise on 
Creation.’ This was the only paper Westcott read to the Society before it 
fell into abeyance in 1887 with the death of Anna Kingsford. 

The Hermetic Society was founded in 1885 by Anna Kingsford and 
Edward Maitland. Both Kingsford and Maitland were members of the 
Theosophical Society and become disenchanted by the Eastern aspects of 
its teachings. The Hermetic Society was styled as a new Esoteric Church 
based on Christian mysticism with the principal aim to study “The Greek 
Mysteries and the Hermetic Gnosis and its allied schools, the Kabalistic, 
Pythagorean, Platonic and Alexandrian.” 


7 



Westcott’s translation of the Sepher Yetzirah has been criticised as being 
“in reality a paraphrase and fulfils few of the conditions required by 
scholarship.” 2 Most commentaries of the Sepher Yetzirah tend to reveal more 
about the author’s own system than they do of the Sepher Yetzirah. As 
Westcott had stated in his Introduction his translation was prepared for 
members of the Theosophy Society, the Hermetic G.D. and the Rosicrucian 
Society of England. 

The first English edition of the Sepher Yetzirah was translated by Dr. 
Isidor Kalisch and printed with the Hebrew text in 1877. Westcott offered 
his edition in 1887 which was translated into English from the Latin versions 
of Pistorius and Postellus. His second edition (1893) and third edition (1911) 
were translated from the Hebrew and collated with the Latin versions of 
Rittangelius, Pistorius and Postellus. Westcott had corrected his English 
translation and expanded the Notes from answers which he gave (verbally 
and written) to members of the Theosophy Society and the Hermetic G.D. 
A.E. Waite falsely believed that the second edition of the Sepher Yetzirah 
was issued as part of the Collectanea Hermetica in 1893. 3 

The Sepher Yetzirah was a major Source Work for the Golden Dawn’s 
initiation ceremonies, diagrams and teachings. The ‘Thirty-two Paths of 
Wisdom’ was used by the Golden Dawn to explain the twenty-two Major 
Arcana and the twenty-two Paths (proper) connecting to the Sephiroth of 
the Tree of Life. 

This edition of the Sepher Yetzirah is primarily Westcott’s third edition 
and it has been collated with the second edition as footnotes. I have added 
the Hebrew text of the Sepher Yetzirah from Kalisch’s edition. His text has 
the vowel pointing or Dagesh, but the oldest editions of the Sepher Yetzirah 
did not have these vowel points. 


Darcy Kiintz 
( Frater D.E.U. ) 
Calgary, Canada, 1996. 

Notes: 

1 . S.L. MacGregor Mathers read two papers to the Society. The first paper was 
called ‘The Qabalah’ (3 June 1886) and the other was titled ‘The Physical or Lower 
Alchemy’ (8 July 1886). A brief abstract of Mathers first lecture was printed in the 
magazine Light (19 June 1886). 

2. A.E. Waite’s introduction to Knut Stenring's translation of The Book of Formation 
(David McKay Co., 1923). p. 6. 

3. Ibid. p. 6. Kaplan also repeated this error in his translation of the Sepher Yetzirah 
(Samuel Weiser, 1990). p. 335. 


8 



Introduction to the Third Edition 


The “Sepher Yetzirah,” or “Book of Formation,” is perhaps the oldest 
Rabbinical treatise of Kabalistic philosophy which is still extant. The great 
interest which has been evinced of late years in the Hebrew Kabalah, and 
the modes of thought and doctrine allied to it, has induced me to translate 
this tractate from the original Hebrew texts, and to collate with them the 
Latin versions of mediaeval authorities; and I have also published An 
Introduction to the Kabalah which may be found useful to students. 

Three important books of the “Zohar,” or “Book of Splendour,” which 
is a great storehouse of Kabalistic teaching, have been translated into English 
by S.L. MacGregor Mathers , 1 and the “Sepher Yetzirah” in an English 
translation is almost a necessary companion to these abstruse disquisitions: 
the two books indeed mutually explain each other. 

The “Sepher Yetzirah,” although this name means “The Book of 
Formation,” is not in any sense a narrative of Creation, or a substitute 
Genesis, but is an ancient and instructive philosophical treatise upon one 
aspect of the origin of the universe and mankind; an aspect at once archaic 
and essentially Hebrew. The grouping of the processes of origin into an 
arrangement, at once alphabetic and numeral, is one only to be found in 
Semitic authors. 

Attention must be called to the essential peculiarity of the Hebrew 
language, the inextricable and necessary association of numbers and letters; 
every letter suggesting a number, and every group of letters having a 
numerical signification, as vital as its literal meaning. 

The Kabalistic principles involved in the reversal of Hebrew letters, 
and their substitution by others, on definite schemes, should also be studied 
and borne in mind. 

It is exactly on these principles that the “ground-work idea” ‘of this 
disquisition rests; and these principles may be traced throughout the 
Kabalistic tractates which have succeeded it in point of time and 
development, many of which are associated together in one volume known 
as the “Zohar,” which is in the main concerned with the essential dignities 
of the God-head, with the Emanations which have sprung therefrom, with 
the doctrine of the Sephiroth, the ideals of Macroprosopus and 


9 



Microprosopus, and the doctrine of Re-incarnation. 

The “Sepher Yetzirah,” on the other hand, is mainly concerned with 
our universe and with the Microcosm. The opinions of Hebrew Kabalistic 
Rabbis and of modern mystics may be fitly introduced here. 

The following interesting quotation is from Rabbi Moses Botarel, who 
wrote his famous Commentary in 1409:— -“It was Abraham our Father - 
blessed be he - who wrote this book to condemn the doctrine of the sages 
of his time, who were incredulous of the supreme dogma of the Unity. At 
least, this was the opinion of Rabbi Saadiah - blessed be he - as written in 
the first chapter of his book The Philosopher’s Stone. These are his words: 
The sages of Babylon attacked Abraham on account of his faith; for they 
were all against him although themselves separable into three sects. The 
First thought that the Universe was subject to the control of two opposing 
forces, the one existing but to destroy the other, this is dualism; they held 
that there was nothing in common between the author of evil and the 
author of good. The Second sect admitted Three great Powers; two of them 
as in the first case, and a third Power whose function was to decide between 
the two others, a supreme arbitrator. The Third sect recognised no god 
beside the Sun, in which it recognised the sole principle of existence.” 

Rabbi Judah Ha Levi (who flourished about 1120), in his critical 
description of this treatise, wrote: “The Sepher Yetzirah teaches us the 
existence of a Single Divine Power by shewing us that in the bosom of 
variety and multiplicity there is a Unity and Harmony, and that such 
universal concord could only arise from the rule of a Supreme Unity.” 

According to Isaac Myer, in his Quabbalah (p. 159), the “Sepher Yetzirah” 
was referred to in the writings of Ibn Gebirol of Cordova, commonly called 
Avicebron, who died in a.d. 1070. 

Eliphas Levi, the famous French Occultist, thus wrote of the “Sepher 
Yetzirah,” in his Histoire de la Magie, p. 54: “The Zohar is a Genesis of 
illumination, the Sepher Jezirah is a ladder formed of truths. Therein are 
explained the thirty-two absolute signs of sounds, numbers and letters: each 
letter reproduces a number, an idea and a form; so that mathematics are capable 
of application to ideas and to forms not less rigorously than to numbers, by 
exact proportion and perfect correspondence. By the science of the Sepher 
Jezirah the human spirit is fixed to truth, and in reason, and is able to take 
account of the possible development of intelligence by the evolutions of 
numbers. The Zohar represents absolute truth, and the Sepher Jezirah provides 
the means by which we may seize, appropriate and make use of it.” 

Upon another page Eliphas Levi writes: “The Sepher Jezirah and the 
Apocalypse are the masterpieces of Occultism; they contain more wisdom 
than words; their expression is as figurative as poetry, and at the same time 
it is as exact as mathematics.” 


10 



In the volume entitled La Kabbah by the eminent French scholar, Adolphe 
Franck, there is a chapter on the “Sepher Yetzirah.” He writes as follows : — 

“The Book of Formation contains, I will not say system of physics, but 
of cosmology such as could be conceived at an age and in a country where 
the habit of explaining all phenomena by the immediate action of the First 
Cause, tended to check the spirit of observation, and where in consequence 
certain general and superficial relations perceived in the natural world passed 
for the science of Nature.” . . . “Its form is simple and grave; there is 
nothing like a demonstration nor an argument; but it consists rather of a 
series of aphorisms, regularly grouped, and which have all the conciseness 
of the most ancient oracles,” 

In his analysis of the “Sepher Yetzirah,” he adds:— “The Book of 
Formation, even if it be not very voluminous, and if it do not altogether 
raise us to very elevated regions of thought, yet offers us at least a composition 
which is very homogeneous and of a rare originality. The clouds which the 
imagination of commentators have gathered around it, will be dissipated, if 
we look for, in it, not mysteries of ineffable wisdom, but an attempt at a 
reasonable doctrine, made when reason arose, an effort to grasp the plan of 
the universe, and to secure the link which binds to one common principle, 
all the elements which are around us.” 

“The last word of this system is the substitution of the absolute divine 
Unity for every idea of Dualism, for that pagan philosophy which saw in 
matter an eternal substance whose laws were not in accord with Divine 
Will; and for the Biblical doctrine, which by its idea of Creation, postulates 
two things, the Universe and God, as two substances absolutely distinct 
one from the other.” 

“In fact, in the ‘Sepher Yetzirah,’ God considered as the Infinite and 
consequently the indefinable Being, extended throughout all things by his 
power and existence, is while above, yet not outside of numbers, sounds 
and letters— the principles and general laws which we recognise.” 

“Every element has its source from a higher form, and all things have 
their common origin from the Word (Logos), the Holy Spirit. ... So God is 
at once, in the highest sense, both the matter and the form of the universe. 
Yet He is not only that form; for nothing can or does exist outside of Himself; 
His substance is the foundation of all, and all things bear His imprint and 
are symbols of His intelligence.” 

Hebrew tradition assigns the doctrines of the oldest portions of the 
“Zohar” to a date antecedent to the building of the Second Temple, but 
Rabbi Simeon ben Jochai, who lived in the reign of the Emperor Titus, A. D. 
70-80, is considered to have been the first to commit these to writing, and 
Rabbi Moses de Leon, of Guadalaxara, in Spain, who died in 1305, certainly 
reproduced and published the “Zohar.” 


11 



Ginsburg, speaking of the Zoharic doctrines of the Ain Suph, says that 
they were unknown until the thirteenth century, but he does not deny the 
great antiquity of the “Sepher Yetzirah,” in which it will be noticed the 
“Ain Suph Aur” and “Ain Suph” are not mentioned. 

I suggest, however, that this omission is no proof that the doctrines of 
“Ain Suph Aur” and “Ain Suph” did not then exist, because it is a reasonable 
supposition that the “Sepher Yetzirah” was the volume assigned to the 
Yetziratic World, the third of the four Kabalistic Worlds of Emanation, 
while the “Asch Metzareph” is concerned with the Assiatic, fourth, or 
lowest World of Shells, and is on the face of it an alchemical treatise; and 
again the “Siphra Dtzenioutha” may be fittingly considered to be an Aziluthic 
work, treating of the Emanations of Deity alone; and there was doubtless a 
fourth work assigned to the World of Briah - the second type, but I have 
not been able to identify this treatise. 

Both the Babylonian and the Jerusalem Talmuds refer to the “Sepher 
Yetzirah.” Their treatise, named “Sanhedrin,” certainly mentions the “Book 
of Formation,” and another similar work; and Rashi in his commentary on 
the treatise “Erubin,” considers this a reliable historical notice. 

Other historical notices are those of Saadya Gaon, who died a.d. 940, 
and Judah Ha Levi, A.D. 1150; both these Hebrew classics speak of it as a 
very ancient work. 

Some modern critics have attributed the authorship to the Rabbi Akiba, 
who lived in the time of the Emperor Hadrian, a.d. 120, and lost his life in 
supporting the claims of Barchocheba, a false messiah: others suggest it was 
first written about a.d. 200. 

Graetz however assigns it to early Gnostic times, third or fourth century, 
and Zunz speaks of it as post Talmudical, and belonging to the Geonim 
period 700-800 A.D.; Rubinsohn, in the Bibliotheca Sacra, speaks of this 
latter idea as having no real basis. 

The Talmuds were first collected into a concrete whole, and printed in 
Venice, 1520 A.D. 

The “Zohar” was first printed in Mantua in 1558; again in Cremona, 
1560; and at Lublin, 1623; and a fourth edition by Knorr von Rosenroth, at 
Sulzbach in 1684. Some parts are not very ancient, because the Crusades 
are mentioned in one chapter. 

Six extant Hebrew editions of the “Sepher Yetzirah” were collected 
and printed at Lemberg in 1680. The oldest of these six recensions was that 
of Saadjah Gaon (by some critics called spurious). 

There are still extant three Latin versions, viz-, that of Gulielmus 
Postellus, 1552, Paris; one by Johann Pistorius, in his “Artis 
Gabalisticce. Tomus,” 1587, Basle; and a third by Joannes Stephanus 
Rittangelius, 1642, Amsterdam; this latter gives both Hebrew and Latin 


12 



versions, and also “The Thirty-Two Paths” as a supplement. 

There is a German translation, by Johann Friedrich von Meyer, dated 
1830; a version by Isidor Kalisch, in which he has reproduced many of the 
valuable annotations of Meyer; an edition in French by Papus, 1888; an 
edition in French by Mayer Lambert, 1891, with the Arabic Commentary 
of Saadya Gaon; and an English edition by Peter Davidson, 1896, to which 
are added “The Fifty Gates of Intelligence” and “The Thirty-Two Ways of 
Wisdom.” The edition which I now offer is fundamentally that of the ancient 
Hebrew codices translated into English, and collated with the Latin versions 
of Pistorius, Postellus, and Rittangelius, following the latter, rather than 
the former commentators. As to the authenticity of “The Sepher Yetzirah,” 
students may refer to the Bibliotheca magna Rabbinica of Bartoloccio de 
Cellerio, Rome, 1678-1692; to Basnage, History of the Jews, 1708; and to 
The Doctrine and Literature of the Kabalah, by A. E. Waite, 1902. 

The following copies of the “Sepher Yetzirah” in Hebrew, I have also 
examined, but only in a superficial manner:— 

1. A Version by Saadiah, Ab. ben David, and three others, Mantua, 
1562, 4to. 

2. A Version with the commentary of Rabbi Abraham F. Dior, 
Amsterdam, 1642, 4to. 

3. A Version with preface by M. ben J. Chagiz, Amsterdam, 1713, 
16mo. 

4. AVersion, Constantinople, 1719, 8vo. 

5. A Version, Zolkiew, 1745, 4to. 

6. A Version, by Moses ben Jacob, Zozec, 1779, 4to. 

7. A Version, Grodno, 1806, 4to. 

8. A Version, Dyhernfurth, 1812, 8vo. 

9. A Version, Salonica, 1831, 8vo. 

10. A MS. copy dated 1719, in the British Museum. 

I add here the full titles of the three Latin versions; they are all to be 
found in the British Museum Library. 

“A brahami Patriarchce Liber Jezirah sive Formationis Mundi, Patribus quidem 
Abrahami tempora prcecedentibus revelatus, sed ab ipso etiam Abrahamo expositus 
Isaaco, et per prophetarum manus posteritati conservatus, ipsis autem 72 Mosis 
auditoribus in secundo divince veritatis loco, hoc est in ratione, quae est posterior 
authoritate, habitus." Parisiis, 1552. Gulielmus Postellus. 

“Id est Liber Jezirah, qui Abrahamo, Patriarchce adscribitur, una cum 
Commentario Rabbi Abraham F.D. super 32 semitis Sapientice, a quibus Liber 
Jezirah incipit: Translatus et noth illustratus a Joanne Stephano Rittangelio, Ling. 
Orient, in Elect. Acad. Regiomontana Prof. Extraord,” Amstelodami, 1642. 


13 



In Tomas Primus of “Artis Cabalisticce hoc est reconditcc theologies et 
philosophies scriptomm. ” Basileee 1587, is found “Liber de Creatione Cabalistinis, 
Hebraice Sepher Jezira; Authore Abrahamo. Successive filiis ore traditus, Hine 
jam rebus Israel inclinatis ne deficeret per sapientes Hierusalem arcanis et 
profundissimis sensibus Uteris commendatus.” Johannes Pistorius. 

The “Sepher Yetzirah” consists of six chapters, having 33 paragraphs 
distributed among them, in this manner: the first has 12, then follow 5, 5, 
4, 3, and 4. Yet in some versions the paragraphs and subject-matter are 
found in a different arrangement. 

The oldest title has, as an addition, the words, “The Letters of our 
Father Abraham” or “ascribed to the patriarch Abraham,” and it is spoken 
of as such by many mediaeval authorities: but this origin is doubtless fabulous, 
although perhaps not more improbable than the supposed authorship of 
the “Book of Enoch,” mentioned by St. Jude, of which two MSS. copies in 
the Ethiopic language were rescued from the wilds of Abyssinia in 1773 by 
the great traveller James Bruce. 

In essence this work was, doubtless, the crystallisation of centuries of 
tradition, by one writer, and it has been added to from time to time, by 
later authors, who have also revised it. Some of the additions, which were 
rejected even by mediaeval students, 1 have not incorporated with the text 
at all, and I present in this volume only the undoubted kernel of this occult 
nut, upon which many great authorities, Hebrew, German, Jesuit and others, 
have written long Commentaries, and yet have failed to explain satisfactorily. 

I find Kalisch, speaking of these Commentaries, says, “they contain 
nothing but a medley of arbitrary explanations, and sophistical distortions 
of scriptural verses, astrological notions, Oriental superstitions, a 
metaphysical jargon, a poor knowledge of physics, and not a correct 
elucidation of this ancient book.” Kalisch, however, was not an occultist; 
these commentaries are, however, so extensive as to demand years of study, 
and I feel no hesitation in confessing that my researches into them have 
been but superficial. 

For convenience of study I have placed the Notes in a separate form at 
the end of the work, and I have made a short definition of the subject- 
matter of each chapter. 

The substance of this little volume was read as Lecture before “The 
Hermetic Society of London,” in the summer of 1886, Dr. Anna Kingsford, 
President, in the chair. Some of the Notes were the explanations given 
verbally, and subsequently in writing, to members of the Society who asked 
for information upon abstruse points in the “Sepher,” and for collateral 
doctrines; others, of later date, are answers which have been given to students 
of Theosophy and Hermetic philosophy, and to my pupils of the Study 
Groups of the Rosicrucian Society of England. 2 


14 



Notes 


1. In the Introduction to the second edition Westcott originally wrote, “Three 
important books of the “Zohar,” or “Splendour,” which is a great storehouse of 
Kabalistic teaching, have been for the first time translated into English by that 
skilful and erudite Kabalist, my fellow student in occult science, MacGregor Mathers,” 

2. In Westcott’s Introduction to the second edition he wrote, “others, of later date, 
are answers which have been given to enquiring Theosophists, and members of the 
Hermetic G.D. 

The late Madame Blavatsky, my esteemed teacher of Theosophy, and my personal 
friend, at whose suggestion a friendly alliance between the Hermetic Order of the 
G.D. and the Inner Group [i.e., Esoteric Section] of the Theosophic students was 
made, expressed to me her recognition of the value of the “Sepher Yetzirah” as a 
mystical treatise on cosmic origin, and her approval of my work in its translation, 
and my notes and explanations.” 

For a history of the “friendly alliance” between the Golden Dawn and the Esoteric 
Section see R.A. Gilbert’s, The Golden Dawn and the Esoteric Section. London: 
Theosophical History Centre, 1987. 


15 



Preface to the Second Edition 


It has been at the earnest wish of many students, members of the 
Theosophical Society, and of my Hermetic fratres of the Order of the G.D., 
that I have made a revised translation of the “Sepher Yetzirah.” In this 
edition I have followed most closely the Hebrew version of Joannes 
Stephanus Rittangelius, which was printed in 1642 at Amsterdam, and I 
have forsaken many of the Latinised renderings which had been adopted in 
the First Edition, from the works of Postellus and Pistorius. 

The Notes have been extended, and it is hoped that they explain and 
illustrate difficult passages, and render this abstruse treatise more 
comprehensible than it has been hitherto found. 

[“It is of considerable importance to a clear understanding of this Occult 
treatise that the whole work be read through before comment is made, so 
that the general idea of the several chapters may become in the mind one 
concrete whole. A separate consideration of the several parts should follow 
this general grasp of the subject, else much confusion may result.” From 
Westcott’s ‘Notes to the Sepher Yetzirah’.] 

W.W.W., F.[ellow of the] T.[heosophical] S.fociety] 


16 



Sepher Yetzirah 
The Book of Formation 

Chapter I 

The Sephiroth, Numbers, Letters 

1. In thirty-two 1 mysterious Paths of Wisdom did Jah, 2 the Jehovah of hosts, 3 
the God of Israel, 4 the Living Elohim, 5 the King of ages, the merciful and gracious 
God, 6 the Exalted One, the Dweller in eternity, most high and holy— engrave 
his name by the three Sepharim 7 — Numbers, Letters, and Sounds. 8 

2. Ten are the ineffable Sephiroth. 5 Twenty-two are the Letters, the Foundation 
of all things; there are Three Mothers, Seven Double and Twelve 10 Simple 
letters. 

3. The ineffable Sephiroth are Ten, as are the Numbers; and as there are in 
man five fingers over against five, so over them is established a covenant of 
strength, by word of mouth, and by the circumcision of the flesh. 11 

4. Ten is the number of the ineffable Sephiroth, ten and not nine, ten and not 
eleven. Understand this wisdom, and be wise by the perception. Search out 
concerning it, restore the Word to its creator, and replace Him who formed it 
upon his throne. 12 

5. The Ten ineffable Sephiroth have ten vast regions bound unto them; boundless 
in origin and having no ending; an abyss 13 of good and of ill; measureless height 
and depth; boundless to the East and the West; boundless to the North and 
South; 14 and the Lord the only God, 15 the Faithful King rules all these from his 
holy seat, 16 for ever and ever. 

6. The Ten ineffable Sephiroth have the appearance of the Lightning flash, 17 
their origin is unseen and no end is perceived. The Word is in them as they 
rush forth and as they return, they speak as from the whirl-wind, and returning 
fall prostrate in adoration before the Throne. 

7. The Ten ineffable Sephiroth, whose ending is even as their origin, are like as 
a flame arising from a burning coal. For God 18 is superlative in his Unity, there 
is none equal unto Him: what number canst thou place before One. 

8. Ten are the ineffable Sephiroth; seal up thy lips lest thou speak of them, and 
guard thy heart as thou considerest them; and if thy mind escape from thee 
bring it back to thy control; even as it was said, “running and returning” (the 
living creatures ran and returned) 19 and hence was the Covenant made. 

9. The ineffable Sephiroth give forth the Ten numbers. First; the Spirit of the 


17 



God of the living; 20 Blessed and more than blessed be the Living God 21 of ages. 
The Voice, the Spirit, and the Word, 22 these are the Holy Spirit. 

10. Second; from the Spirit He produced Air, and formed in it twenty-two 
sounds - the letters; three are mothers, seven are double, and twelve are simple; 
but the Spirit is first and above these. Third; from the Air He formed the 
Waters, and from the formless and void 23 made mire and clay, and designed 
surfaces upon them, and hewed recesses in them, and formed the strong material 
foundation. Fourth; from the Water He formed Fire 24 and made for Himself a 
Throne of Glory with Auphanim, Seraphim and Kerubim, 25 as his ministering 
angels; and with these three 26 he completed his dwelling, as it is written, “Who 
maketh his angels spirits and his ministers a flaming fire.” 27 

1 1 . He selected three letters from among the simple ones and sealed them and 
formed them into a Great Name, I H V, 28 and with this He sealed the universe 
in six directions. 

Fifth— He looked above, and sealed the Height with I H V. 

Sixth— He looked below, and sealed the Depth with I V H. 

Seventh— He looked forward, and sealed the East with HIV. 

Eighth— He looked backward, and sealed the West with H V I. 

Ninth— He looked to the right, and sealed the South with V 1 H. 

Tenth — He looked to the left, and sealed the North with V H I. 

12. Behold! From the Ten ineffable Sephiroth do, proceed— the One Spirit of 
the Gods of the living, Air, Water, Fire; and also Height, Depth, East, West, 
South and North. 29 


Chapter II 

The Twenty-two Letters 

1. The twenty-two sounds and letters are the Foundation of all things. Three 
mothers, seven doubles and twelve simples. The Three Mothers are Aleph, Mem 
and Shin, they are Air, Water and Fire. Water is silent, Fire is sibilant, and Air 
derived from the Spirit is as the tongue of a balance standing between these contraries 
which are in equilibrium, reconciling and mediating between them. 

2. He hath formed, weighed, and composed with these twenty-two letters every 
created thing, and the form of everything which shall hereafter be. 30 

3. These twenty-two sounds or letters are formed by the voice, impressed on the 
air, and audibly modified in five places; in the throat, in the mouth, by the 
tongue, through the teeth, and by the lips. 31 

4. These twenty-two letters, which are the foundation of all things, He arranged 
as upon a sphere with two hundred and thirty-one gates, and the sphere may be 
rotated forward or backward, whether for good or for evil; from the good comes 
true pleasure, from evil nought but torment. 

5. For He shewed the combination of these letters, each with the other; Aleph 


18 



with all, and all with Aleph; Beth with all, and all with Beth. Thus in combining 
all together in pairs are produced the two hundred and thirty-one gates of 
knowledge. 32 

6. And from the non-existent 33 He made Something; and all forms of speech and 
everything that has been produced; from the empty void He made the material 
world, and from the inert earth He brought forth everything that hath life. He 
hewed, as it were, vast columns out of the intangible air, and by the power of His 
Name made every creature and everything that is; and the production of all things from 
the twenty-two letters is the proof that they are all but parts of one living body. 34 


Chapter III 
The Triad 

1. The Foundation of all the other sounds and letters is provided by the Three 
Mothers, Aleph, Mem and Shin; they resemble a Balance, on the one hand the 
guilty, on the other hand the purified, and Aleph the Air is like the Tongue of 
a Balance standing between them. 35 

2. The Three Mothers, Aleph, Mem and Shin, are a great Mystery, very admirable 
and most recondite, and sealed as with six rings; and from them proceed Air, 
Fire, and Water, which divide into active and passive forces. The Three Mothers, 
Aleph, Mem and Shin, are the Foundation, from them spring three Fathers, 
and from these have proceeded all things that are in the world. 

3. The Three Mothers in the world are Aleph, Mem and Shin: the heavens 36 
were produced 37 from Fire; the earth from the Water; and the Air from the 
Spirit is as a reconciler between the Fire and the Water. 

4. The Three Mothers, Aleph, Mem and Shin, Fire, Water and Air, are shown 
in the Year: from the fire came heat, from the waters came cold, and from the 
air was produced the temperate state, again a mediator between them. The 
Three Mothers, Aleph, Mem and Shin, Fire, Water and Air, are found in Man: 
from the fire was formed the head; from the water the belly; and from the air 
was formed the chest, again placed as a mediator between the others. 

5. These Three Mothers did He produce and design, and combined them; and 
He sealed them as the three mothers in the Universe, in the Year and in Man — 
both male and female. He caused the letter Aleph to reign in Air and crowned 
it, and combining it with the others He sealed it, as Air in the World, as the 
temperate (climate) of the Year, and as the breath in the chest (the lungs for 
breathing air) in Man: the male with Aleph, Mem, Shin, the female with Shin, 
Mem, Aleph. He caused the letter Mem to reign in Water, crowned it, and 
combining it with the others formed the earth in the world, cold in the year, 
and the belly in man, male and female, the former with Mem, Aleph, Shin, the 
latter with Mem, Shin, Aleph. He caused Shin to reign in Fire, and crowned it, 
and combining it with the others sealed with it the heavens in the universe, 
heat in the year and the head in man, male and female. 38 


19 



Chapter IV 
The Heptad 


1. The Seven double letters, Beth, Gimel, Daleth, Kaph, Peh, Resh, and Tau 
have each two sounds associated with them. They are referred to Life, Peace, 
Wisdom, Riches, Grace, Fertility and Power. The two sounds of each letter are 
the hard and the soft— the aspirated and the softened. They are called Double, 
because each letter presents a contrast or permutation; thus Life and Death; 
Peace and War; Wisdom and Folly; Riches and Poverty; Grace and Indignation; 
Fertility and Solitude; Power and Servitude. 

2. These Seven Double Letters point out seven localities; Above, Below, East, 
West, North, South, and the Palace of Idoliness in the midst of them sustaining 
all things. 

3. These Seven Double Letters He designed, produced, and combined, and 
formed with them the Planets of this World, the Days of the Week, and the Gates 
of the soul (the orifices of perception) in Man. From these Seven He hath produced 
the Seven Heavens, the Seven Earths, the Seven Sabbaths: for this cause He has 
loved and blessed the number Seven more than all things under Heaven (His 
Throne). 

4- Two Letters produce two houses; three form six; four form twenty-four; five 
form one hundred and twenty; six form seven hundred and twenty; 39 seven 
form five thousand and forty; and beyond this their numbers increase so that 
the mouth can hardly utter them, nor the ear hear the number of them. So 
now, behold the Stars of our World, the Planets which are Seven; the Sun, 
Venus, Mercury, Moon, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars. 40 The Seven are also the 
Seven Days of Creation; and the Seven Gateways of the Soul of Man - the two 
eyes, the two ears, the mouth and the two nostrils. So with the Seven are 
formed the seven heavens, 41 the seven earths, and the seven periods of time; 
and so has He preferred the number Seven above all things under His Heaven. 42 


Chapter V 
The Dodecad 

1. The Twelve Simple Letters are Heh, Vau, Zain, Cheth, Teth, Yod, Lamed, 
Nun, Samech, Oin, Tzaddi and Qoph; 43 they are the foundations of these twelve 
properties: Sight, Hearing, Smell, Speech, Taste, Sexual Love, Work, 
Movement, Anger, Mirth, Imagination, 44 and Sleep. These Twelve are also 
allotted to the directions in space: North-east, South-east, the East above, the 
East below, the North above, the North below, the South-west, the North- 
west, the West above, the West below, the South above, and the South below; 
these diverge to infinity, and are as the arms of the Universe. 

2. These Twelve Simple Letters He designed, and combined, and formed with 
them the Twelve celestial constellations of the Zodiac, whose signs are Teth, 


20 



Shin, Tau, Samech, Aleph, Beth, Mem, Oin, Qoph, Gimel, Daleth, and 
Daleth. 45 The Twelve are also the Months of the Year: Nisan, 46 Yiar, Sivan, 
Tamuz, Ab, Elul, Tishri, Hesvan, Kislev, Tebet, Sabat and Adar. The Twelve 
are also the Twelve organs of living creatures: 47 the two hands, the two feet, the 
two kidneys, the spleen, the liver, the gall, private parts, stomach and intestines. 
He made these, as it were provinces, and arranged them as in order of battle for 
warfare. And also the Elohim 48 made one from the region of the other. 

Three Mothers and Three Fathers; and thence issue Fire, Air and Water. Three 
Mothers, Seven Doubles and Twelve Simple letters and sounds. 

3. Behold now these are the Twenty and Two Letters from which Jah, Jehovah 
Tzabaoth, the Living Elohim, the God of Israel, exalted and sublime, the Dweller 
in eternity, formed and established all things; High and Holy is His Name. 


Chapter VI 
Conclusion 

1 . Three Fathers and their generations, Seven conquerors and their armies, and 
Twelve bounds of the Universe. See now, of these words, the faithful witnesses are 
the Universe, the Year and Man. The dodecad, the heptad, and the triad with 
their provinces; above is the Celestial Dragon, T L I, 49 and below is the World, 
and lastly the heart of Man. The Three are Water, Air and Fire; Fire above, Water 
below, and Air conciliating between them; and the sign of these things is that the 
Fire sustains (volatilises) the waters; Mem is mute, Shin is sibilant, and Aleph is 
the Mediator and as it were a friend placed between them. 

2. The Celestial Dragon, T L I, is placed over the universe like a king upon the 
throne; the revolution of the year is as a king over his dominion; the heart of man 
is as a king in warfare. Moreover, He made all things one from the other; and the 
Elohim set good over against evil, and made good things ffom good, and evil 
things from evil: with the good tested He the evil, and with the evil did He try the 
good. Happiness 50 is reserved for the good, and misery 51 is kept for the wicked. 

3. The Three are One, and that One stands above. The Seven are divided; 
three are over against three, and one stands between the triads. The Twelve 
stand as in warfare; three are friends, three are enemies; three are life givers; 
three are destroyers. The three friends are the heart, the ears, and the mouth; 
the three enemies are the liver, the gall, and the tongue; 52 while God 53 the 
faithful king rules over all. One above Three, Three above Seven, and Seven 
above Twelve: and all are connected the one with the other. 54 

4. And after that our father Abraham had perceived and understood, and had 
taken down and engraved all these things, the Lord most high 55 revealed Himself, 
and called him His beloved, and made a Covenant with him and his seed; and 
Abraham believed on Him 56 and itjsas imputed unto him for righteousness. 
And He made this Covenant as between the ten toes of the feet— this is that of 
circumcision; and as between the ten fingers of the hands and this is that of the 


21 



tongue . 57 And He formed the twenty-two letters into speech 58 and shewed him 
all the mysteries of them . 59 He drew them through the Waters; He burned them 
in the Fire; He vibrated them in the Air; Seven planets in the heavens, and 
Twelve celestial constellations of the stars of the Zodiac. 


The End of “ The Book of Formation. 



The Fifty Gates of Intelligence 


Attached to some editions of the “Sepher Yetzirah” is found this scheme of 
Kabalistic classification of knowledge emanating from the Second Sephira Binah, 
Understanding, and descending by stages through the angels, heavens, human- 
ity, animal and vegetable and mineral kingdoms to Hyle and the chaos. The 
Kabalists said that one must enter and pass up through the Gates to attain to 
the Thirty-two Paths of Wisdom; and that even Moses only passed through the 
forty-ninth Gate, and never entered the fiftieth. See the C Edipus /Egyptiacus of 
Athanasius Kircher, vol. n. p. 319. 

First Order: Elementary. 

1. Chaos, Hyle, The first matter. 

2. Formless, void, lifeless. 

3. The Abyss. 

4. Origin of the Elements. 

5. Earth (no seed germs). 

6. Water. 

7. Air. 

8. Fire. 

9. Differentiation of qualities. 

10. Mixture and combination. 

Second Order: Decad of Evolution. 

1 1 . Minerals differentiate. 

12. Vegetable principles appear. 

13. Seeds germinate in moisture. 

14. Herbs and Trees. 

15. Fructification in vegetable life. 

16. Origin of low forms of animal life. 

17. Insects and Reptiles appear. 

18. Fishes, vertebrate life in the waters. 

19. Birds, vertebrate life in the air. 

20. Quadrupeds, vertebrate earth animals. 


23 



Third Order: Decad of Humanity. 

21. Appearance of Man. 

22. Material human body. 

23. Human Soul conferred. 

24. Mystery of Adam and Eve. 

25. Complete Man as the Microcosm. 

26. Gift of five human faces acting exteriorly. 

27. Gift of five powers to the soul. 

28. Adam Kadmon, the Heavenly Man. 

29. Angelic beings. 

30. Man in the image of God. 

Fourth Order: World of Spheres. 

3 1 . The Moon. 

32. Mercury. 

33. Venus. 

34. Sol. 

35. Mars. 

36. Jupiter. 

37. Saturn. 

38. The Firmament. 

39. The Primum Mobile. 

40. The Empyrean Heaven. 

Fifth Order: The Angelic World. 

4 1 . Ishim— Sons of Fire. 

42. Auphanim— Cherubim. 

43. Aralim— Thrones. 

44. Chashmalim— Dominions. 

45. Seraphim— Virtues. 

46. Malakim— Powers. 

47. Elohim— Principalities. 

48. Beni Elohim— Angels. 

49. Cherubim— Arch-angels. 

Sixth Order: The Archetype. 

50. God. Ain Suph. He Whom no mortal eye hath seen, and Who has 
been known to Jesus the Messiah alone. 

Note.— The Angels of the Fifth or Angelic World are arranged in very different 
order by various Kabalistic Rabbis. 


24 



The Thirty-Two Paths of wisdom 


Translated from the Hebrew Text of Joannes Stephanus 
Rittangelius, 1642: which is also to be found in the 
“CEdipus / Egyptiacus ” of Athanasius Kircher, 1653. 

(These paragraphs are very obscure in meaning, and the Hebrew text is probably very corrupt.) 

The First Path is called the Admirable or the Hidden Intelligence (the Highest 
Crown): for it is the Light giving the power of comprehension of that First 
Principle which has no beginning; and it is the Primal Glory, for no created 
being can attain to its essence. 

The Second Path is that of the Illuminating Intelligence: it is the Crown of 
Creation, the Splendour of the Unity, equalling it, and it is exalted above 
every head, and named by the Kabalists the Second Glory. 

The Third Path is the Sanctifying Intelligence, and is the foundation of 
Primordial Wisdom, which is called the Creator of Faith, and its roots are 
AMN; and it is the parent of Faith, from which doth Faith emanate. 

The Fourth Path is named the Cohesive or Receptacular Intelligence; and is so 
called because it contains all the holy powers, and from it emanate all the 
spiritual virtues with the most exalted essences: they emanate one from the 
other by the power of the Primordial Emanation. (The Highest Crown.) 1 

The Fifth Path is called the Radical Intelligence, because it resembles the Unity, 
uniting itself to the Binah, 2 or Intelligence which emanates from the Primordial 
depths of Wisdom or Chokmah. 3 

The Sixth Path is called the Mediating Intelligence, because in it are multiplied 
the influxes of the emanations, for it causes that influence to flow into all the 
reservoirs of the Blessings, with which these themselves are united. 

The Seventh Path is the Occult Intelligence, because it is the Refulgent 
Splendour of all the Intellectual virtues which are perceived by the eyes of 
intellect, and by the contemplation of faith. 

The Eighth Path is called the Absolute or Perfect Intelligence, because it is the 
means of the primordial, which has no root by which it can cleave, nor rest, 
except in the hidden places of G edulahf Magnificence, from which emanates 
its own proper essence. 


25 



The Ninth Path is the Pure Intelligence, so called because it purifies the 
Numerations, it proves and corrects the designing of their representation, and 
disposes their unity with which they are combined without diminution or 
division. 

The Tenth Path is the Resplendent Intelligence, because it is exalted above 
every head, and sits on the throne of Binah ( the Intelligence spoken of in the Third 
Path). It illuminates the splendour of all the lights, and causes an influence to 
emanate from the Prince of countenances. 5 

The Eleventh Path is the Scintillating Intelligence, because it is the essence of 
that curtain which is placed close to the order of the disposition, and this is a 
special dignity given to it that it may be able to stand before the Face of the 
Cause of Causes. 

The Twelfth Path is the Intelligence of Transparency, because it is that species 
of Magnificence called Chazchazit, 6 the place whence issues the vision of those 
seeing in apparitions. (That is the prophecies by seers in a vision.) 

The Thirteenth Path is named the Uniting Intelligence, and is so called because 
it is itself the Essence of Glory. It is the Consummation of the Truth of individual 
spiritual things. 

The Fourteenth Path is the Illuminating Intelligence and is so called because it 
is that Chashmal 7 which is the founder of the concealed and fundamental ideas 
of holiness and of their stages of preparation. 

The Fifteenth Path is the Constituting Intelligence, so called because it 
constitutes the substance of creation in pure darkness, and men have spoken of 
these contemplations; it is that darkness spoken of in Scripture, Job xxxvm. 9, 
“and thick darkness a swaddling band for it.” 

The Sixteenth Path is the Triumphal or Eternal Intelligence, so called because 
it is the pleasure of the Glory, beyond which is no other Glory like to it, and it 
is called also the Paradise prepared for the Righteous. 

The Seventeenth Path is the Disposing Intelligence, which provides Faith to 
the Righteous, and they are clothed with the Holy Spirit by it, and it is called 
the Foundation of Excellence in the state of higher things. 

The Eighteenth Path is called the Intelligence or House of Influence (by the 
greatness of whose abundance the influx of good things upon created beings is 
increased), and from its midst the arcana and hidden senses are drawn forth, 
which dwell in its shade and which cling to it, from the Cause of all causes. 

The Nineteenth Path is the Intelligence of the Secret of all the activities of the 
spiritual beings, and is so called because of the influence diffused by it from the 
most high and exalted sublime glory. 

The Twentieth Path is the Intelligence of Will, and is so called because it is the 
means of preparation of all and each created being, and by this intelligence the 
existence of the Primordial Wisdom becomes known. 


26 



The Twenty-first Path is the Intelligence of Conciliation and Reward, and is so 
called because it receives the divine influence which flows into it from its 
benediction upon all and each existence. 

The Twenty-second Path is the Faithful Intelligence, and is so called because 
by it spiritual virtues are increased, and all dwellers on earth are nearly under its 
shadow. 

The Twenty-third Path is the Stable Intelligence, and it is so called because it 
has the virtue of consistency among all numerations. 

The Twenty-fourth Path is the Imaginative Intelligence, and it is so called 
because it gives a likeness to all the similitudes which are created in like manner 
similar to its harmonious elegancies. 

The Twenty-fifth Path is the Intelligence of Probation, or Temptation, and is 
so called because it is the primary temptation, by which the Creator trieth all 
righteous persons. 

The Twenty-sixth Path is called the Renewing Intelligence, because the Holy 
God renews by it all the changing things which are renewed by the creation of 
the world. 

The Twenty-seventh Path is the Active or Exciting Intelligence, and it is so 
called because through it every existent being receives its spirit and motion. 

The Twenty-eighth Path is called the Natural Intelligence; by it is completed 
and perfected the nature of all that exists beneath the Sun. 

(This Path is omitted by Rittangelius: I presume by inadvertence.) 

The Twenty-ninth Path is the Corporeal Intelligence, so called because it forms 
every body which is formed in all the worlds, and the reproduction of them. 

The Thirtieth Path is the Collective Intelligence, and Astrologers deduce from 
it the judgment of the Stars and celestial signs, and perfect their science, 
according to the rules of the motions of the stars. 

The Thirty-first Path is the Perpetual Intelligence; but why is it so called? Because 
it regulates the motions of the Sun and Moon in their proper order, each in an 
orbit convenient for it. 

The Thirty-second Path is the Administrative Intelligence, and it is so called 
because it directs and associates the motions of the seven planets, directing all 
of them in their own proper courses. 


27 



Notes to the Sepher Yetzirah 


It is of considerable importance to a clear understanding of this Occult treatise that 
the whole work be read through before comment is made, so that the general idea of the 
several chapters may become in the mind one concrete whole. A separate consideration 
of the several parts should follow this general grasp of the subject, else much confusion 
may result. 

This book may be considered to be an Allegorical Parallel between the Idealism of 
Numbers and Letters and the various parts of the Universe, and it sheds much light on 
many mystic forms and ceremonies yet extant, notably upon Freemasonry, the Tarot, 
and the later Kabalah, and is a great aid to the comprehension of the Astro-Theosophic 
schemes of the Rosicrucians. To obtain the full value of this Treatise, it should be 
studied hand in hand with Hermetic attributions, the “Isiac Tablet,” and with a complete 
set of the designs, symbols and allocation of the Trump cards of the Tarot pack, for 
which see my translation of The Sanctum Regnum of the Tarot, by Eliphas Levi. 

Note that the oldest MSS. copies of the “Sepher Yetzirah" have no vowel points: 
the latest editions have them. The system of points in writing Hebrew was not perfected 
until the seventh century, and even then was not in constant use. Ginsburg asserts that 
the system of vowel pointing was invented by a Rabbi Mocha in Palestine about a.d. 
570, who designed it to assist his pupils. But Isaac Myer states that there are undoubted 
traces of pointing in Hebrew MSS. of the second century. According to A.E. Waite 
there is no extant Hebrew MSS. with the vowel points older than the tenth century. 

The words “Sepher Yetzirah” are written in Hebrew from right to left, SPR YTzYRH, 
Samech Peh Resh, Yod Tzaddi Yod Resh Heh; modes of transliteration vary with different 
authors. Yod is variously written in English letters as I, Y, or J, or sometimes Ie. Tzaddi 
is, property Tz; but some write Z only, which is misleading because the Hebrew has also 
a true Z, Zain. 


Chapter I 

The twelve sections of this chapter introduce this philosophic disquisition upon the 
Formation and Development of the Universe. Having specified the subdivision of the 
letters into three classes, the Triad, the Heptad, and the Dodecad, these are put aside for 
the time; and the Decad mainly considered as specially associated with the idea of 
Number, and as obviously composed of the Tetrad and the Hexad. 

1 . Thirty-two. This is the number of the Paths or Ways of Wisdom, which are added as a 
supplement. 32 is written in Hebrew by LB, Lamed and Beth, and these are the last and 
first letters of the Pentateuch. The number 32 is obtained thus — 2 x2x2x2x2 = 32. 
Laib, LB as a Hebrew word, means the Heart of Man. 

Paths. The word here is NTIBUT, netibuth; NTIB meant primarily a pathway, or foot- 
made track; but is here used symbolically in the same sense as the Christian uses the 


28 



word, way - the way of life: other meanings are — stage, power, form, effect; and later, 
a doctrinal formula, in Kabalistic writings. 

2. Jah. This divine name is found in Psalm LXVlll. 4; it is translated into Greek as kurios, 
and into Latin as dominus, and commonly into the English word, Lord: it is really the 
first half of the word IHVH or Jehovah, or the Yahveh of modern scholars. 

3. Jehovah Tzabaoth. This divine name is printed in English Bibles as Jehovah Sabaoth, 
or as “Lord of hosts” as in Psalm xxiv. 10. TzBA is an army. 

4. God of Israel. Here the word God is ALHI, which in unpointed Hebrew might be God, 
or Gods, or My God. 

5. The Elohim of the Living. The words are ALHIM ChIIM. Alhim, often written in 
English letters as Elohim, or by Godfrey Higgins as Aleim, seems to be a masculine 
plural of the feminine form Eloah, ALH, of the divine masculine name EL, AL; this is 
commonly translated God, and means strong, mighty, supreme. Chiim is the plural of 
Chi— living, or life. ChIH is a living animal, and so is CnlVA. ChII is also life. Frey in his 
dictionary gives ChIIM as the plural word lives, or vitte. The true adjective for living is 
ChIA. Elohim Chiim, then, apart from Jewish or Christian preconception, is “the living 
Gods,” or “the Gods of the lives, i.e., living ones.” Rittangelius gives Dii viventes, “The 
living Gods," both words in the plural. Pistorius omits both words. Postellus, the orthodox, 
gives Deus Vivus. The Elohim are the Seven Forces, proceeding from the One Divine, 
which control the “terra viventium,” the manifested world of life. 

6. God. In this case we have the simple form AL, EL. 

7. Sepharim. SPRIM, the plural masculine of SPR, commonly translated book or letter: the 
meaning here is plainly “forms of expression." 

8. Numbers, Letters and Sounds. The three Hebrew words here given are, in unpointed 
Hebrew, SPR, SPR and SIPUR. Some late editors, to cover the difficulty of this passage, 
have given SPR, SPUR, SIPR, pointing them to read Separ, Seepur, Saypar. [In Kaplan’s 
translation of the Sepher Yetzirah (Samuel Weiser, 1990) he gives the three Hebrew words as 
Sepher (text), Sephar (number) and Sippur (communication), p. 5.] 

The sense of the whole volume appears to need their translation as Numbers, Letters 
and Sounds. Pistorius gave “Scriptis, numeratis, pronunciatis.” Postellus gave “Numerans, 
numerus, numeratus,” thus losing the contrasted meanings; and so did Rittangelius, 
who gave “Numero, numerante, numerato.” 

9. The Ineffable Sephiroth. The words are SPIRUT BLIMH, Sephiruth Belimah. The 
simplest translation is “the voices from nothing. ” The Ten Sephiruth of the Kabalah are 
the “Ten Primary Emanations from the Divine Source," which are the primal forces 
leading to all manifestation upon every plane in succession. Buxtorf gives for Sephiruth— 
predicationes logicae. The word seems to me clearly allied to the Latin spiritus— spirit, 
soul, wind; and is used by Quintilian as a sound, or noise. The meaning of Belimah is 
more doubtful. Rittangelius always gives “praeter illud ineffabile.” Pistorius gives “praeter 
ineffabile.” Postellus evades the difficulty and simply puts the word Belimah into his 
Latin translation. In Frey's Hebrew Dictionary BLIMH is translated as nothing, without 
any other suggestion; BLI is “not,” MH is “anything.” In Kabalistic writings the Sephiruth, 
the Divine Voices and Powers, are called “ineffbilis,” not to be spoken of, from their 
sacred nature. 

10. The classification of the Hebrew letters into a Triad, Heptad and Dodecad, runs 
through the whole philosophy of the Kabalah. Many ancient authors added intentional 
blinds, such as forming the Triad of A.M.T., Ameth, truth; and of AMN, Amen. 

11. The Two Covenants, by the Word or Spirit, and by the Flesh, made by Jehovah 
with Abraham, Genesis xvil. The Covenant of Circumcision was to be an outward and 


29 



visible sign of the Divine promise made to Abraham and his offspring. The Hebrew 
word for circumcision is Mulah, MULH: note that MLH is also synonymous with DBR, 
dabar, — verbum or word. 

12. Rittangelius gives “replace the formative power upon his throne.” Postellus gives 
“restore the device to its place.” 

13. Abyss; the word is OUMQ for OMQ, a depth, vastness, or valley. 

14. My Hermetic [Golden Dawn] rituals explained this Yetziratic attribution. 

15. The Lord the only God. The words are ADUN IChID AL, or “Adonai (as commonly 
written) the only El.” 

16. Seat. The word is MOUN, dwelling, habitation, or throne. 

17. Lightning flash. In the early edition the words “like scintillating flame” are used: the 
Hebrew word is BRQ. Many Kabalists have shown how the Ten Sephiroth are symbolised 
by the zig-zag lightning flash. 

18. God; the Divine name here is Jehovah. 

19. The text gives only RTzUAV ShUB— “ currendo et redeundo,” but the commentators 
have generally considered this to be a quotation from Ezekiel t. 14, referred to H ChIVT, 
the living creatures, kerubic forms. 

20. The Spirit of the Gods of the Living. RUCh ALH1M ChIIM; or as Rittangelius gives it, 
“spiritus Deorum Viventium.” Orthodoxy would translate these words "The spirit of 
the living God." 

2 1 . AL ChI H OULMIM; “the Living God of Ages”; here the word God really is in the singular. 

22. The Voice, Spirit and Word are QUL, RUCh, DBR. A very notable Hebrew expression 
of Divinatory intuition was BATh QUL, the Daughter of the Voice. 

23. Formless and Void. THU and BHU; these two words occur in Genesis 1. 2, and are 
translated “waste and void.” 

24. Note the order in which the primordial elements were produced. First, Spirit (query 
Akasa, Ether); then Air, Vayu; then Water, Apas, which condenses into solid elementary 
Earth, Prithivi; and lastly from the Water He formed Fire. 

25. The first name is often written Ophanim, the letters are AUPNIM; in the Vision of 
Ezekiel I. 16, the word occurs and is translated “Wheels.” ShRPIM are the mysterious 
beings of Isaiah VI. 2; the word otherwise is translated Serpent, and in Numbers XXI. 6, as 
“fiery serpents”: also in verse 8 as “fiery serpent” when Jehovah said “Make thee a fiery 
serpent and set it upon a pole.” Kerubim. The Hebrew words are Cl-lIVTn H QDSh, 
holy animals: I have ventured to put Kerubim, as the title of the other Biblical form of 
Holy mysterious animal, as given in 1 Kings vi. 23 and Exodus xxv. 18, and indeed 
Genesis III. 24. Bible dictionaries generally give the word as Cherubim, but in Hebrew 
the initial letter is always K and not Ch. 

26. Three. In the first edition I overlooked this word three; and putting and for as, made 
four classes of serving beings. 

27. This is verse 4 of Psalm civ. 

28. Here follow the permutations of the name IHV, which is the Tetragrammaton — 
Jehovah, without the second or final Heh: IHV is a Tri-grammaton, and is more suitable 
to the third or Yetziratic plane. HVI is the imperative form of the verb to be, meaning be 
thou; HIV is the infinitive; and VIH is future. In IHV note that Yod corresponds to the 
Father; Heh to Binah, the Supernal Mother; and Vau to the Microprosopus - Son. [This 
section is referring to the formation of the Cube of Space which the description of the 
Altar in the Neophyte Ceremony is based on. — D.K.] 

29. Note the subdivision of the Decad into the Tetrad— four elements; and the Hexad — 
six dimensions of space. 


30 



Chapter II 


This chapter consists of philosophic remarks on the twenty-two sounds and letters 
of the Hebrew alphabet, and hence connected with the air by speech, and it points out 
the uses of those letters to form words - the signs of ideas, and the symbols of material 
substances. 

30. [In Westcott’s second edition he originally translated this section as “He hath formed, 
weighed, and composed with these twenty-two letters every soul, and the soul of 
everything, which shall hereafter be.” 30 ] Soul; the word is NPSh, which is commonly 
translated soul, meaning the living personality of man, animal or existing thing: it 
corresponds almost to the Theosophic Prana [Life-Pinciple; the breath of Life] plus the 
stimulus of Kama [desire or lust]. 

31. This is the modern classification of the letters into guttural, palatal, lingual, dental 
and labial sounds. 

32. The 231 Gates. The number 242 is obtained by adding together all the numbers from 
1 to 22. The Hebrew letters can be placed in pairs in 242 different positions: thus ab, ag, 
ad, up to at; then ba, bb, bg, bd, up to bt, and so on to ts, tt: this is in direct order only, 
without reversal. For the reason why eleven are deducted, and the number 231 specified, 
see the Table and Note 15 in the edition of Postellus. [Kaplan discusses The 231 Gates 
in great detail in his translation of the Sepher Yetzirah, see pp. 108-124.] 

33. Non-existent; the word is AIN, nothingness. Ain precedes Ain Suph, boundlessness; 
and Ain Suph Aur, Boundless Light. 

34. Body; the word is GUP, usually applied to the animal material body, but here means 
“one whole," 


Chapter III 

This chapter is especially concerned with the essence of the Triad, as represented by 
the Three Mothers, Aleph, Mem, and Shin. Their development in three directions is 
pointed out, namely in the Macrocosm or Universe; in the Year or in Time; and in the 
Microcosm or Man. 

35. The importance of equilibrium is constantly reiterated in the Kabalah. The “Siphra 
Dtzeniouta,” or “Book of Mystery,” opens with a reference to this Equilibrium as a 
fundamental necessity of stable existence. 

36. Heavens. The Hebrew word Heshamaim HShMIM, has in it the element of Aesh, 
fire, and Mim, water; and also Shem, name; The Name is IHVH, attributed to the 
elements. ShMA is in Chaldee a name for the Trinity (Parkhurst). ShMSh is the Sun, 
and Light, and a type of Christ, the Sun of Righteousness. Malachi IV. 2. 

37. Were produced. The Hebrew word BRA, is the root. Three Hebrew words are used in 
the Bible to represent the idea of making, producing or creating. 

BRIAH, Briah, giving shape, Genesis l. 1. 

OShIH, Ashiah, completing, Genesis 1. 31. 

ITzIRH, Yetzirah, forming, Genesis II. 7. 

To these the Kabalists add the word ATzLH, with the meaning of “producing something 
manifest from the unmanifested.” 


31 



38. These several formations then appear in a table thus: — 


Emanation. 

Macrocosm. 

Universe. 

Elements. 

Man. 

Year. 


Shin. 

Primal Fire. 
Heavens. 
Terrestrial Fire. 
Head. 

Heat. 


Aleph. 

Spirit. 

Atmosphere. 

Air. 

Chest. 

Temperate. 


Mem. 

Primal Water. 
The Earth. 
Water. 

Belly. 

Cold. 


Chapter IV 

This is the special chapter of the Heptad, the powers and properties of the Seven. 
Here again we have the threefold attribution of the numbers and letters to the Universe, 
to the Year, and to Man. The supplemental paragraphs have been printed in modern 
form by Kalisch; they identify the several letters of the Heptad more definitely with the 
planets, days of the week, human attributes and organs of the senses. [This chapter was 
partly covered in the description of the Seven-branched Candlestick in the Zelator 
Ceremony.— D.K.] 

39. These numbers have been a source of difference between the editors and copyists, 
hardly any two editors concurring. I have given the numbers arising from continual 
multiplication of the product by each succeeding unit from one to seven. 2x1 = 2, 2 x 
3 = 6, 6 x 4 = 24, 24 x 5 = 120, 120 x 6 = 720, 720 x 7 = 5040. 

40. In associating the particular letters to each planet the learned Jesuit Athanasius Kircher 
allots Beth to the Sun, Gimel to Venus, Daleth to Mercury, Kaph to Luna, Peh to Saturn, 
Resh to Jupiter, and T au to Mars. Kalisch in the supplementary paragraphs gives a different 
attribution; both are wrong, according to clairvoyant investigation. Consult the Tarot 
symbolism given by Court de Gebelin, Eliphas Levi, and my notes to the Isiac Tablet of 
Bembo. The true attribution is probably not anywhere printed. The planet names here 
given are Chaldee words. [In May 1910, the true attributions were printed in the Occult 
Review by V.[olo] N.[oscere. i.e., G.C. Jones] in the article ‘The Truth About the Tarot 
Trumps’. This article will appear in The Golden Dawn Tarot by A.E. Waite.] 

41. The Seven Heavens and the Seven Earths are printed with errors, and I believe 
intentional mistakes, in many occult ancient books. Some Hermetic [Golden Dawn] 
MSS. have the correct names and spelling. 

42. On the further attribution of these Seven letters, note that Postellus gives: Vita-mors, Pax- 
afiflictio, Sapientia-stultitia, Divitiae (Opus)-paupertas, Gratia-opprobrium, Proles-sterilitas, 
Imperium-servitus. Pistorius gives: Vita-mors, Pax-bellum, Scientia-ignorantia, Divitiae-paupertas, 
Gratia-abominatio, Semen (Proles)-sterilitas, Imperium (DominatioJ-servitus. 

Chapter V 

This chapter is specially concerned with the Dodecad; the number twelve is itself 
pointed out, and the characters of its component units, once more in the three zones of the 
universe, year and man; the last paragraph gives a recapitulation of the whole number of 
letters: the Supplement gives a form of allotment of the several letters. [This chapter was 
covered in the description of the Table of Shewbread in the Zelator Ceremony. — D.K.] 


32 



43. It is necessary to avoid confusion between these letters; different authors translate 
them in different manners. Heh or He, H, must not be confused with Cheth, or Heth, 
Ch. Teth, Th also must be kept distinct from the final letter Tau, T, which is one of the 
double letters; the semi-English pronunciation of these two letters is much confused, 
each is at times both t and th; Yod is either I, Y, or J; Samech is simple S, and must not 
be confused with Shin, Sh, one of the mother letters; Oin is often written in English 
Hebrew grammars as Ayin, and sometimes as Gnain; Tzaddi must not be confused with 
Zain, Z; and lastly Qoph, Q, is very often replaced by K, which is hardly defensible as 
there is a true K in addition. 

44. Postellus gives suspicion, and Pistorius, mind. 

45. These letters are the initials of the 12 Zodiacal signs in Hebrew nomenclature. They are: 


Teth 

Telah 

Aries 

Mem 

Maznim 

Libra 

Shin 

Shor 

Taurus 

Oin 

Oqereb 

Scorpio 

Tau 

Thaumim 

Gemini 

Qoph 

Qesheth 

Sagittarius 

Samech 

Sartan 

Cancer 

Gimel 

Gedi 

Capricornus 

Aleph 

Aryeh 

Leo 

Daleth 

Dali 

Aquarius 

Beth 

Bethuleh 

Virgo 

Daleth 

Dagim 

Pisces 


46. The month Nisan begins about March 29th. Yiar is also written Iyar, and Aiar: the 
Hebrew letters are A1IR. 

47. The list of organs varies. All agree in two hands, two feet, two kidneys, liver, gall and 
spleen. Postellus then gives, “intestina, vesica, arteriae,” the intestines, bladder, and arteries; 
Rittangelius gives the same. Pistorius gives, “colon, coagulum (spleen) et ventriculus,” 
colon — the large intestine, coagulum and stomach. The chief difficulty is with the Hebrew 
word MSS., which is allied to two different roots, one meaning private, concealed, hidden ; 
and the ocher meaning liquefied. 

48. The Elohim — Divine powers — not IHVH the Tetragrammaton. 

Chapter VI 

This chapter is a resume of the preceding five; it calls the universe and mankind to 
witness to the truth of the scheme of distribution of the powers of the numbers among 
created forms, and concludes with the narration that this philosophy was revealed by 
the Divine to Abraham, who received and faithfully accepted it, as a form of Wisdom 
under a Covenant. [This chapter was source of the Golden Dawn’s Enochian paper 
titled ‘The Book of the Concourse of the Forces.’— D.K.] 

49. The Celestial Dragon, TLI, Theli. The Hebrew letters amount in numeration to 440, 
that is 400, 30 and 10. The best opinion is that Tali or Theli refers to the 12 Zodiacal 
constellations along the great circle of the Ecliptic; where it ends there it begins again, 
and so the ancient occultists drew the Dragon with its tail in its mouth. Some have 
thought that Tali referred to the constellation Draco, which meanders across the Northern 
polar sky; others have referred it to the Milky Way; others to an imaginary line 
joining Caput to Cauda Draconis, the upper and lower nodes of the Moon. Adolphe 
Franck says that Theli is an Arabic word. [Theli in Arabic is A1 Jaz’her.j 


33 



pbu KIP 



Theli: The Celestial Dragon 


50. Happiness, or a good end, or simply good, TUBH. 

51. Misery, or an evil end, or simply evil, ROH. 

52. This Hebrew version omits the allotment of the remaining six. Mayer gives the 
paragraph thus:— The triad of amity is the heart and the two ears; the triad of enmity is 
the liver, gall, and the tongue; the three life-givers are the two nostrils and the spleen; 
the three death-dealing ones are the mouth and the two lower openings of the body. 

53. God. In this case the name is AL, EL. 

54. This last paragraph is generally considered to be less ancient than the remainder of 
the treatise, and by another author. 

55. The Lordmost high. OLIU ADUN. Adun or Adon, or Adonai, ADNI, are commonly 
translated Lord; Eliun, OLIUN, is the more usual form of “the most high one." 

56. Him. Rittangelius gives “credidit in Tetragrammaton,” but this word is not in the 
Hebrew. 

57. Tongue. The verbal covenant. 

58. Speech. The Hebrew has “upon his tongue.” 

59. The Hebrew version of Rabbi Judah Ha Levi concludes with the phrase, “and said of 
him, Before I formed thee in the belly, I knew thee.” Rabbi Luria gives the Hebrew 
version which I have translated. Postellus gives: “He drew him into the water, He rose 
up in spirit, He inflamed him in seven suitable forms with twelve signs.” Mayer gives: 
“Er zog sie mit Wasser, zundet sie an mit Feuer; erregte sie mit Geist; verbannte sie mit 
sieben, goss sie aus mit den zwolf Gestirnen.” “He drew them with water, He kindled 
them with fire, He moved them with spirit, distributed them with seven, and sent them 
forth with twelve.” 


34 



Notes to the Thirty-two Paths of Wisdom 


1 . The Highest Crown is Kether, the First Sephira, the first emanation from the Ain 
Suph Aur, the Limit-less Light. 

2. Binah, or Understanding, is the Third Sephira. 

3. Chokmah, Wisdom, is the Second Sephira. 

4. Gedulah is a synonym of Chesed, Mercy, the Fourth Sephira. 

5. Metatron, the Intelligence of the First Sephira, and the reputed guide of Moses. 

6. This word is from ChZCh, a seer, seership. Chazuth is a vision. 

7. This word means “scintillating flame.” 

The “Thirty-two Paths of Wisdom” refer to the Ten Sephiroth and the Twenty-two 
letters, each supplying a type of divine power and attributes. In my Introduction to the 
Kabalah will be found a diagram showing how the Paths from Eleven to Thirty-two 
connect the several Sephiroth, and are deemed to transmit the divine influence. 1 Some 
teachers of Occult Science also allot the Twenty-two Trumps of the Tarot Cards to the 
twenty-two Paths. 


1 . Westcott’s diagram has been reprinted on page 6 in this book. 


35 



The Hebrew Text of the Sepher Yetzirah 
From Dr. Isidor Kalisch’s, Sepher Yetzirah, 1877 


•rr 1 ’ 12 ’ isd 


♦pDKt p"ID 

1:1. ns® a 

ppn nasn mi^bs nimru D^nKfi D^bctfs 
obly nbai dti o\-ibK ni*aa nirr rp 

- - •• t I v v • - • v: t : t : t 

ioctf eflnjyi Dina ny pitf #m} on j^rn rann 
msDi noos* ansa ncybtfs iabiy &n:» 

• : t ; • • t : t : • t v tt 

crnctf-i ansyyi nn^s orrso ncyy :nDDi 

• 9V » 4 9 9 9 9 9 • ■ ■ 4 9 9 4 9# 99 4 

• • • • T ( • • « • « 

o^ntp'i nib 1 ©? ysi#} nia** vhv :niD? rvrniK 

• • • * T • 

:niD^D mt y 

» I* • »• 
• • • 

i:2. . n riittna 


rYiyu^K ncyy nsoas rtfreo ncyy 

t : v v v - : • : t * : • ; v v 

yaaso ruos -itp ctfan “ujs cyan 

■i • « * * ■ f • » ■» • t» * 

t • ■ • 4 % 4 4 » T 9 9 » • 

tniyan nbasi jictfbn nbas 


1:3. .3 

*6i ncyy ycyn tfbi ncyy na^bs niTDD ncyy 

• •• 9< . 99 9 9 9 9 9 * • * * tt 9* 

4*9 9 * * ■ * 9*4 

ons n ns nrss osm naans pn nncyy nn« 
n«v scsfim inis by nan naym ona nipni 

f • TT 4 « 4 I 9 

:i3isa-by 

i-VlBD} IBiDl 1BD3 .K"J* 


36 



.n *i * a * iso 




pfctf nfcty inno niTso ~\m 

V T I •• V V V ITT* T * : * ; V V 

pDisn ail to p»iy rvnrjK ppisn rPEtan po av ^io 
paisn nn?p pDiy mrin poisn on paly yn 
^bo h** -rr v jina oinn pDiyi ]iDy pois? ango 
:ng ny.ny ictfnp jiysp obaa btfia jd*u 


.n fij'osa 


pian n*n»a irv»B» rvyba mrrsD nfry 
aictfi j<hna jna nan rp tnb p« jrvbam 
innnntf d on i^oa ^sbi iBinn-> naioa inDKobi 


• i nittft 


jnbnpn jnbnna |did ywii np-ba ninao nfcw. 
pai in 1 jinNtf nbrua rrvitf p nanb^a Jalaa 

I *• j • t I tv v v - : t I: v v : - : I t : 

:naio no nn** •aabi ib 


i: 7 . .t n 3 w la 

nabi nanbn to caiba no^ba nfraD nra 

I : • : •• - j • I • : r • : • ; v v 

aitf nnnnb nabi nanb to vn dki nnnnbo 

••:■*: I : • : ■• -: I • It • : ■■:-:■ 

nan bsn aiafi Kian ninm no*o nab# oipob 

:nna nnpj n? 

mnr “ibd !?ya ana *>“n ny»sn -»bd 3 ana n nto "xn *ra-» (* 

t • : v *• *- - r r • ’ * - v •* ; - t 1 r - •• - 

:nbnja narwa 


37 



•n n * » * isd 


.n n 5 to >3 


rm orfe* nn nn** no^3 nrrBD n$yy 

• • «*« « M « ■» • • • • * • •• 

• » T • • « • 

nn bip mp^iyn ->n iotf rpjdpi tjna 
ppn nnp rrn OTittf itfnipn nn wrn nai] 
nis# tid , ‘ ni^niK Dneft anew to ayrn 

• T I * • - ; • ; v T — t ; 

nn« nm nico^s mfry □'•n^ nfaes yach 

■■ M w • • •• • • • •• • * ™ • • » 

■ • •• • » * • 

onto) pa aym ppn nno oto :?no 
pD3 ppn etoi di inai nn (rtvrtK D^nzft 
nanyo rna jzzddd noln poa *p^n runy 
bwb *>3 nDNjtf nsy nfcwi orr^y pyn) 

• * * * • » *• * . • • » * * P * 

to ayni ppn mao yan** :(vn« wn notf» 
Ehipn nvm o^Diw trsnfr naan kds 
many n»^:>cy faiyo no^ p^bcyDi m$n 
nvhu) nrra iamb vmtfn ninn vd*6d 

t : “ • •• t :t : t t : - 

HEfty# nrax vhv) ntoa nico^sn ?o nrniK 

v v: • t : : - I ■ 

:niiyp ana nnm ^ium intfa oyapi 

t I : - v t - t : t - : • t : I t: 


:}3vn :s«nnt< KnDU (* 
jjnn'p k"j tt 
:vbw ‘ijja nn onn :«rDin *5* (II 

T “X- ~ T • ” 


38 



•n -i ’ a ’ "i s d 


ino tonm nbyob nasi on onn Eton 

ITS T J T T aa T T 

rro ionm naab ruoi nnn onn 

: t : t - : tt - — — t •• 

rro ionm roob row mra onn yotf 

ITS TT S T T "J • ■ T " V 

,, mD ionm mn«b n:®i anyo nnn rutotf 

it: t-: “ : t t t — t t : 

mo ionm 1 mb n® orn onn ytfn 

ITS • • TT T "T * *• 

nna ionm ibtfofrb nasi lira onn ntyy 

: t : ; • t t » t - t v .v 

1:9. • & nitta 

ovtbtt rm nna wba mmso n$yy iba 

• • •• ■» ^ “ * • • a a » • «• 

• • T • • • • 

nnni 0=11 dtod nmp 075 m nn o^n 

:om lira znyai mra 

t: I T T-S- t: • 

pnc 

2 :1. H5® 3 

yaoh nls« tfbtf -iId-* nrnlK o-'ntfi onto 

— •< • • ♦ • • • ™ • • • •• 

« < * « • • • 

nlON #bstf rrtoitfD mfry orwft nib-iso 
■ • •« • <•» * *• ■ •• •• • • 

• • * • ■ * • • 

DT^a ynap pn jitf bi rain ppi no rp jmc^ 
tw k npmstf ‘ti noon o nteK 

ictus ynao nn 

• >M • • am a a mm mm 

w m 

2 : 2 . n3®D 

jsra {ran ]ppn TiD' 1 . nfcrfiK oryjfl onto? 


39 



.n n * a ♦ “> s> d 


b 3 nw -mm te opd nsn pm ibpttf 

T VI : ~ T V VT T i I T • ••; It); t 

i-mb *m yn 




jasn *?ip3 jjjpn ma nrnix ancft ontpy. 
yrm nmiN nioipo etona nea ?yap nna 
o^tfa vnotf t titc^a mten Tina p"D^ il-ua 

:oT©fe73 n"D)3 

• - r ; * it 


n n5»?a 


pp3 b£?s& jyaj? n\o] rvpniN anSpy. 
nin&n dob ubsban ntim onytf «6na noin 

T > • • • • * mm ata tt * « T * "V 

• T • • T* • T 

rnjna p«) oyp n*?ypf? rotaa p« m u m b jopi 

:yoo nfiDof? 


. n n a © >a 


k os? |*?pi ]bo os? n prorn. ]bpcp jony nsrg 
rritmui nb'bn ninrim 3 ay ?tei ay a 

t : • : t • t : ; • I t ••. ; I t ••. 

KsrP man b3) w bo ksdji onytf wVna 


r t : ■ : • r : 


:tik # o$o 

T V •• * 


. n ns»?3 


aarn tteh ns nfrsn irino ctfoo njr* . 

- t ; J V •• v T T : • T " " T 

ni« wo nn Doru Iwe? two o^na amoy 

J f • • •• y • •- • • • — • 


:ntrta k"j (• 


40 



.n “i ’ a ’ tdd 


b? hk nm ncra no ia k cy tei 6a oy k 

t v t t; - - v • It \: It \ 

norb id'di tik otf i3in bs mw -visrn 

t ts I t • : tv •• * - t v : : - 

: n toq D*> 3 f eh D^n^ □ mfew 

[ « a a< « a a • • «a 

I • • « « * 

♦’cr^tr pic 

3 : 1 . n 5 tt )2 

main ppj no? ^3 jnlD'i "»"$ nioK 
HD nioN ®6itf crus ynao pn rt®6i 
•won niysco estate oinm hoodi 560*10 brn 

:t: t — ** s t; t: t: t 

miara ni3« nVto ara efco era tw ono 

T * a * • a •• •• • a «• »*« •* •♦ 

• ♦ • » • 

:nv6in 

3:2. ,a nsts)a 

]bp& ?ona pan ippn tf"D"N nios^ uHv) 

It I: r it :t I t : t IItI:t v vs • t 

tibvh D^iys ohr# nioN csteetf ons nai rm 

t : t t v vs • t v t t : I t • •■ : 

tfD33 BhTK. rt OK e6oh TOOte $ - D"K HiOK 


t : t t : 


: nap3i -ot 

t|-: tt 


.5 H 5 ® >3 


d' i dc^ cskn era nbm #"D"k nt ok e6®j 

• - t •■ : * - •*“ t t v v: • t 

rmo TIKI DT3D PS*n33 V1K1 *l?*n33 

“ *» • «■ •« « I “ •• *• T • * 


:dtus ynDO 


nioK ropa -or D'p^nnoT D’ot b>n D-NVi’ uob* k'j (* 

• T t **i tt • : ■ : • • - — * : v • 

:$>an trua tjsdb> rriat* vtHj ihot nto’ b^d'k 

- T I • V • V T J w v •• 9 T I V V* 


41 



.n “> ’ S ’ *1 t D 


3 : 4 . * i n 5 © a 

Din nnm nipt Din nacya $"D"K niaN stfbstf 

T’ : I ; t t - v v: • t 

sphdd nna mm ra *oaj nip troi 


:orm 


♦ n n 5 to a 


team eaten napa nat saa ehy« ni»K tfb$ 

I v v t)-: tt vv: v v: • t 

rra d^dd *naa tcoai Etea tana eaten nna 

t * s .- . r: • Iv v •• “ t: * t* : 


: o^naa ynaa nna 


.i n 3 »a 


nna ib neatoi nna te nte rrbnn m #aa 

v v -It:-: ? • : • t t 

natf a nnn cbiya nw ona nat nta nt tonsn 

t t : t* : t t •— v t t : vt v It :t! 

:D*tc^«a napa eHrrwa nat etoja n*u 

t t : tJ-; v v:: tt vv: t*; 


.7 n 2 © a 


nna ib neatoi Dnaa 'a nix Tpban *a **na 
rutfa nipt obiya vn** ona nut nta nt tenm 

t t - I : t t I vv v t t : vt v It : t : 

:N"csr»a napa ’Eha"**: a nat tfan pat 

t -: t!-: v v:: tt vv: Ivv 


.n n 3 »a 


nna ib ntfpt eatea 'tf nte mban .j toa 
natfa Dim obiya ana ntn nn m tenst 

t t : : t t • - t v t t : vt v l t : t : 

inapa nat eateaa latent 

T |” 2 T T V V 2 2 


:B>"K"oa k“j (* 


42 



.nvs ! *■> s d 


♦^rm pi b 

4:1. .2* ri5W?3 

*>nctf3 nitranp nnp? "ra rib®? yatf 

* a «• • • • • 

rpiDn rvn m d-s 3"3 ti ra 3-3 niaie£> 

• • — * 

• • 

:^bm Haa ntfpn *ni 

T T s • T It; I - 

4:2. .3 H5tt» 

ntfisn riDDn HiD* 1 mso -ns ni^DS yatf 

: t : t l r : - : - - : : - v 

:im Dibtf rb&om rm yin 

I •■ : t t t : v • “ : -.•! 


4:3. .3 T\ 5X0)2 

mrarcn ira-a rriEb Taa nlb®3 yptf 
rrnon ^y istfy mon rfriN nosn mran 

•v • • «• •—■ • ••• • • x * T •* * 

• • ■ ■ • I « T • 

rfcetoo man mo o^n nmon yi? 

T T ; V - : VT •- "2 T T J -v 

i-viy-Q \n rmon nnrbo ubv) rroon nnay 

4:4. '1 f!31» ? 3 

phtd ncsDi n^yo mss Tas nfaiBs yatf 

t: • t - t : : - v 

ysjofca rpo Ehipn tern drm flea znyoi 

- : v : Its: v I - - •• : t: I t t 

:fe n« Nfcna wm 

It \ v •• : 


4:5. 


• n rtiisia 


ahn nyptf mp3 Tap nibisp yptf 

T * « T • • • • • 


43 



•n “i » a * TDD 


noyni ana nipm a na ?ina naiotf tfbi nyatf 
:iaiao by actfm inia by nan 

! : : - t t 

4 : 6 . .1 n5tt?3 

}Bpy p vn jppn tid^ nnso Taa nibiBa yatf 
Dbiya cotbEd nyatf ona iso pwi ?bp# 
"dt fctoaa any# nyatf natfa crap nyatf 

TT v V • *TJ 7 ; • TTJ *T TS * 

:n ?P ? 7 

4:7. .r n 5 »a 

non (thkq pna tg# abiya a^aaia nyatf 
nyatf nactf a dto* 1 nyatf naab aaia naa 

; t : • tts • t t : • tt: t - 

■>ntf rcm ibt Baa ony^ nyatf yocsJn 

•• : tJ- : t t v v : • t : t : • - t - 

:nem n**n *»apa ■>atf craw 'PM dot* 

v-: l-T "J: - •■ : — ;t •• : — •• 

4:8. . n n a w 7 d 

-ina ib natoi noana 'a nix Tpbon * k *aa 
ticsfen op abiya naab ana lai no m iBiai 

I • T T T T : V T T : VT V ) T IT! 

:napr ibt tfsaa ro 1 pyi natfa 

t 1- : t t v v : I •:!■•: tt : 

4:9. . & (15 ©a 

nna ib naten ictfiya 'a nW Tpbon *a *aa 

- It : v : } • : • t t 

'X0 oii Dbiya a^iao ana nsn nra nr 70150 

• •• t t • - v t t : vt v It : t : 

:nap:i -dt tfsaa w 71 V 0 natfa 

tT*: t t v v : I tt : 


44 



•PI “I * St * *> S3 D 


rj S tt 53 


nro ib -itfpi smra n ni« irbon *3 *02 
''tf'bv) oP obpo n»n oro nsn to tv reran \ 

• * i T T T - V T T : VT V | T : T : 

rnapa -dt 0032 w» -rra rate 

t j tt vv : I * : * : t t : 

4:ii. .**"*> nittia 

nro ib n 0 pi o^ro o niN Trbon n N 22 
'yvn dp DTto mi3 ora -im to n? 70-«i 

• • : T T - V T T : V T V I T S T : 

:ropji -07 0032 btfD0 rsn ru 02 

tJ-s tt vv: : I •■: tt : 

4:12. .Si"" 1 ns® >3 

■to lb n0pi nbetora '0 nix n^bon *n K 22 
ncftan dp abto 2212 oro nsn to dt iditd 
: rop:n -07 0032 b*fo0 77*0 ru02 

t|-j tt vv: : Jv : tt : 

4:13. .**» ns® » 

nro ib n0pi aib 02 n nl« Tpbon *7 *02 
■>00 dp obiy2 **n20 dto to no ht 7©to 

• • t t - : ~ v t t : v t v I t : t : 

iropjn P27 0032 b**O0 TTI37 H302 

t|”: tt vv; : • : tt : 

4:14. .*!*“’ n S ® >3 

nr o iS n0pi jra 'n rniK Trbon *7 *02 

v v - It : I •• : » • : • t t 


roe? dp Dbiy2 pna oro nyi nt2 m ?on»7 

T - t t J vv v t t : VT v It ; t : 

:H2P37 -07 0032 H07 H302 

tJ- : tt w: v tt ; 


45 



•n i * it » *1 b o 


4:15. 




rootf rppru tnatf mea-ns nl5®3 sntf 
nyatf nftn# nyatf wen nyatf nioViy 
*n ptf cm 1 nptf nro-® nsntf rffvu njntf 
ntel 1 ran# renx? nsnttf O’Jtf nine? nisotf 
:crDBfn bo rv-in nfanatfn n« Dan 

• T T - T ~ ~ • • J - V “ ' IT*; 

4:i6. .T"to ni»?3 

dd« o^na ■attf n iJia ca^aa# Tre? 

• t n t • t : • t — : •• : 

nyanfc niaia oudk yan# oto ncytf nijia 

TT r - T — s — : “ • T T * 

Dnfcrcn mn nttia etddk tston otq canfryi 

• • • * * • • * ••• 

Dnfcrcn ni«o yatf nijia oudk && otq 

• •••« •« « • • T •• • * 

• • • • * • • 

ctb^ neton m Urta CTm** ya# edto 

• t **: *.*••-: • t -; - v * t 

Dictfrn •rft’w ?sod dto D^ya-w (yantn) 

•• )•• •• : J — • • t • r : - ; 

i-fetr 7i«n rw nan 1 ? r&to’» men no 

T ; | V T I •• J •• “t T S V ** I •■ V 

: bide 6 


♦’EHXI p"ID 

5:1. n 3 © Ja 

p*ay crib 'non nn niewtf ? nnspy. ernp 


46 



.n *■> » a * iso 


nfryo nyotf rrcn Tpbn mmn nnt rnb^ 
:pinfr nepyb rain nrtf nn tfotfn 

5:2. *n nstta 

P"yy o w ab nan nn nicatf b mfry dtwc? 

* • • • • 

rvmjp boa jiDabK. 'bn - } nfry T do# j-riD'! 

nonn nrno boa noisa nmra boa non 

» • ■ • «• • • • • ♦ ^ « • • • 

» T» • • T, • 

boa nmo 1 noinn boa non noinn boa 

• • ^ t a a a a a a a • 

« *• * 4 « • 

Soa non rnonyo Soa nm non 

; * • f^r * - : - • : 

boa rrnnn non?!? Soa noinn rranyp 
noiss* boa nonyo miss boa non nolss 

• a T • • • • 

?n rm ny ny ny pabim ramnDi rrnnn 

:obiy niboa 

t : 

5:3. .3 

p"2*y D ,J ab nan nn nitons mfry 

I • « • • 

ana mn nom rbptf ran* pan rppn priD 
oohn nfry do# obiya nibo nnfry tmtf 
tnapar nar tfsaa □ otod nsyy ootf natfa 

tp*: tt w : • • : - t t •• s tt : 

5:4. .1 nittti 

□oiKn nitf nbca obiya nibo m#y do# 

• • v T T T T *“ ”T V " ; 


47 



•n "i * a * iso 


bn ■hs ncyp anpy o'owso nb^ro nnx pno 
rro n^K pM rotfa □’’ccnn nwy u*xf ion 
:nn** cntf nae> tea ntfn ntfn bb& dn nan 

T-: t : : * It : v * : v: t — 

EFT napj* IDT tfDJD DTHJD nOT U'ltf 

(pp-np) -jdd ppn rnp ni^p T«y nbp. 'Wp 

:bin& rap mn-t 

t t) - w :- 


. n n 5 © Ta 


ib ncypT nrrtEQ *n pin irbon ♦kpio'.k *aa 
P^t obiya nbo ona nsn nia ht lanai nna 

It*: t ; v t v t t : vt v It :t : 

:napai hdt ctteua per bm mtia 

t I** : tt v v : I • : v v: t t : 


.i n 5 w to 


■6 ncypi nrnna n niK Tpbon *wtd 'd taa 
tw obiya nic^ on a n^i nn rn pnsn nna 
:napji nDT cyao my «^bo mcsfa 

t I** : t t v v : • t : t: : t t : 


.t n 5 w » 


ib n^pi *rpbna n niK Tpbpn *anp vi naa 
IT’D! obiya o^Di«n ana nyi htd ht pun nna 
:napa nai.cyoa btfaty bm rutfa 

t I •• : t t v v : : v v: t t : 


48 



•n •) ’ S ' 1 D D 


. n n 5 xo 72 


ntfpi n*XTa r\ nix 'rrban .rro$n ?» x xaa 
ab iya tcotd ona Tm na ni Tsrsn nna ib 

t : I t ; - v t t : vt v I t : t : 

:napji tdt ctfsja m» tt mete ram 

tJ": tt vv : 1 • : tt : -: 


.tD ns® ?: 


nsraete mix irbon .mj^n to a xaa 

T * 2 " I • : • T • : “ I • TT 

obiya mrx ona Tin na ni TSTin nna ib Tcypi 
rnapji idt etea mbxoty x^bai mete dxt 

t r* • t t vv: • t : t: : tt : t : 


n 5 » ?3 


Ttfpi nfrypa ^ nix ’T'bpn .rratfn to t xaa 
abiya nbina ona Tm na nr Tonm nna ib 

t : t : v t r : vt v It :t : 

:rapj) tdt etea bx'ocy tt mete bibxi 

tJ-: tt vv: : -: tt : v:v 

5:11. .»"*> n 5 rs >a 

ePoelna 'b nix Trior .mchbeln to x xaa 

• : “ : I • : * t t 

dotx'o ora Tin na n? TDTin tod ib tott 

v t t : vt v it ;t : vv - It: 

:napa tdt etea rro mete meim obiya 

t|-: tt vv : tt tt : •: • : t : 

5:12. .a"*’ nswti 

Ttfpi rrna nix Trbon ♦mehbtfn to a xaa 
abiya anpy ana Tin na nT Tomn nno ib 

T : ti: - vt t: vt v It :t: vv 

:napji tdt t stem ppm mtfa Titfmoi 

t|- : tt v v : I J • -: tt : It: v t- 


49 



.n "1 ’ S » "I D D 


5:13. . a"-» n 5 XO 72 

a 'D nix *rr6on .mehbtfn to ** fr-taa 

t *• • ) • : * t t 

rf?iya nto ona nsn rra nr Tsnjn nna ntoi 

t : v Iv v t t : vt v I t : t : v v ~ It: 

:napa nai toaa napi njto tea] 

tJ-: t t v v : t !••: t t : •• : • ; 

5:14. . n 5 tt >2 

ttina *y mix Tpbon .rryann to x xaa 
oViya *na ona nyi nta nt Tensn nna i b ntoi 

t ; •: v t t : vt v i t :t : v v - It* 

:nap:n -dt to:a naai ruto nata 

t J- : — - • “ 


T T 


•* t i t t ; 


5:15. .-|"t3 m»)3 

nco^yba '» nix Titen ♦mnann to o xaa 

t • : • F * : • * • : t I • tt 

obiya te ona nai nta ni tehsti nna *6 ntoi 

t : • ; v t t s vt v i t : t : v v - It : 

:napai nat to^a mrcn (ppmpi) ruto coa&ft 

t|”: tt w: vv r; It): :) : tt : t : 


5:16. 


«T"tt n 5 125 X 5 

pinto p mix ^ten *rvypnn ]P u *9? 
rfnya crn ona nai nta nT Tonm nna i b ntoi 

t : ■ t v t t vt v It : t : v v - 1 ts 

ppa |xto napji nat toaa bintpi roto -nxi 
:nor6p {’•pa jany noin ppa p-rp *na*ny 


: nmo Ik nano k"j (* 


50 



•n v r iso 


DID 


fiioa 


n&btf um tfrrfc niDN uh& on 6 k 

T * %• •• • T! *«* y* * t •• •• 

rwfot) nffein ni iawsi 0*0 eras* mw Dm rvoK 

t : ; t •• •• * •— •• • t 

□rrnftasn caats nwtfi omni-fam rvtoK 

• • •• ••• • T * > < t •••• » 4 V 

• •• T T • • • •• T 

:jiDpb^ 'buz ~\m d^j#i 
6:2. . a n5»): 

tfoj rutf obisn 0 - 00*0 any nanf? rwi 

V V T T T T * T v:v * •• T T~ T “ 

'bro npoi nefoft rratfi pn nsyy dobA 

:ah b;fan 

6:3. .5 n5tt)2 *’ T " ! “ 

nbyvb am *rw &tf"D"K nioK vh& 

t -;- : M * ~ •• •— v v: * t 

o' FU3 ynoo pn nm two ntscfe cm 
npmtf noon *o crsn n« K^ia mr6 

:dtu 3 smoo pn nm mw k 

6:4. .1 rTDXD )2 

rbv3 n^D ^jfci ikdd by The o D^iya 6n 

iv v s t t : - : • - Jv v : t : * t 

: nontea t6dd bJbjs ab *nra 

t t ; • ; Jv v : v v : •• t • s * 

:n»in by k"J ( # 


51 



.m ’ » * ibd 


6:5. .n HSTDfc 

n ©yb 31 © dv 6 « nm nt nayb nr oa 

— •« • • <« • W • » « *. • >• It «M» 

3 ten no y-n 3 i©D 31© 31 © rvayb y-i sn 


T” 


roto 3ten n« proa yvn jrvi ns prqo 
:u'vrb mart rum nqnsb map 

XT T « T T. X • 

6:6. .i ni»)3 

irm rot© irf« -ioiy i-ob tik ba ntib& 

X %* * •• • j XV *• • • ^ •• ^ j • 

:dtu3 tuo "inw d-’tid 

• • T • • • 

6:7. „ T HStttt 

crnaa jttdd tiw ntfbtf bi© new nsatf 

• » « i •• » • ■" <r •• • «r • <r • w • i 

• i ( i i i • *# T » 

CTDniK nvbtf : nontea PToiy n&yy 

• 1 t : t t : - - J • : t t •• : 

:dtp©o ntfbtcft cm© nstfbtf o^jifr ntfbtf 

• •: t: t: • ; t » 

6:8. . n fiDttJa 

crtoifr n&b& miam dSh crante ntfbtf 

• : t: • — : t t : t; 

n**n ’’ddj ©tf d^tt© ntfbtf wbrn man -osn 

I - x ••!: • •• ; • - : x : I t • : tt - •• x — 

bm nsm crapan dtpo© ntib&i bin©m 

• 'T < • • * • • • 

ny *ny nv iehp ?iy©© obss bctfi© ?o*o *nbo 
ny3tf ny3tf ?aa by ntfbtf ntfbtf Taa by 

1 ; • t : • — - x : x : *— -tv 

:nn n? opm cbsi ifry *©3 by 

VT V J* — T \j T T M ; 


52 



♦n *■> ’ a ’ “» e d 


6:9 


• id n 3 xo n 
rm« ppn jnactf npni« □'•nefl onfcro on A 

□hd ntoi Driba rrirr fe niKaa nin? rr> 

v •• t t: • v: t j — v t : t : t 

□na nsn iobiy fe n« nno *nai onDD 

" - T T V V ” TT • T : T : 

:"Vj«b Tran fe n*o -mm fe 


V T T : 


T V 


6:io. n3tt)a 

aam ppm n*rn eram d»™ mnvte i 

■Dim fcnpi fen rh« rfe nfea ima nnfei 
rma m rr‘ niyasm 'i&v pa rma ib rroj 
nfepn nn? wrn vbp niyaaK nfr$? pa 5 ! jltffei 
•:^njrr paa ?n»K cnm rfe *npi 

I • Ivv- J :tv vv : t t tJt. 


rriD’ n« if> fcrie^a ni»niw D'n^i entry -\&p\ (• 

m try D'nefc una nyatfa nya nna t^jn ataa ipin ansa pttto 

~ •• ; * *TVSV T i • * 1 T“Sr - ; 't-jt •• t ' t; t 't; t 

:rribtt> 


: rms*' net) p^boi . tapna p^bs 


53 



Bibliography 


Akiba ben Joseph, Rabbi [?]. The Sepher Yetzirah or The Book of Formation. 

Vatican Manuscript (long version). Ms. 299, ff. 66a-71b. 1 Oth- 1 1th century. 

British Museum Manuscript (short version). Ms. 736, ff. 40a-43b. 13th century. 
British Museum Manuscript (long version). Ms. 752, fif. 79a-81a. 14th century. 
Manuscript of commentaries. (Ari [Rabbi Yitzchak Luria] - Gra [Rabbi Eliahu Gaon] 
version). Jewish Theological Seminary, MS Adler 1327, 16th Century. 

Gulielmus Postellus. (Latin). Abrahami Patriarchce Liber Jezirah swe Format ionis Mundi, 
P atribus quidem Abrahami tempora prcedentibus revalatus. Paris, 1552. 84 pp. 

Mantua edition. Raavad [Rabbi Abraham ben David], Ramban, Moses Botril, Saadiah 
Gaon, Eliezer Rokeach of Wormes. Mantua: Jacob ben Naftali Gazolo, 1562. 108 ff. 
Johannes Pistorius. (Latin). ‘Liber de Creations Cabalistinis, Nebraice Sepher Jezir a; Authore 
Abrahamo,’ in his Artis Cabalisdcee hoc est Reccmditae Theologiae et Philosophiae 
Scriporum. Basle, 1587. Vol. 1, pp. 869-872. 

Joannes Stephanus Rittangelius. (Latin and Hebrew). Liber Jezirah , qui Abrahamos 
Patriarchce Adscribitur, unacum Commentario Rabi Abraham F.D. super 32 semitis 
Sapientice, a quibus Liber Jezirah incipit. With commentary on ‘The Thrity-two Paths 
of Wisdom’ by Rabbi Abraham ben Dior. Amsterdam, 1642. 208 + [8] pp. 
Lemberg edition. Containing six versions of the text including Saadjah Gaon's. 
Lemberg, 1680. 

Introduction by Rabbi Moses ben Jacob. Also includes Zoharic Sifra DeTzeniuta. Chagiz, 
Amsterdam, 1713. 48 ff. 

Bricish Museum Manuscript (long version). Ms. 737, ff. 379b-387a. 16th century (1719). 
Constantinople edition. Includes abridged commentaries of Raavad, Ramban and the 
Ari. Constantinople: Yonah ben Jacob and Yeshiah Ashkenazi, 1719. 28 ff.; 
Constantinople, 1724- 

Includes the commentaries of the Mantua edition (1562) and the Ari (1719). Zolkiew, 
1745. 

Moses ben Jacob, (editor). Zozec [Koretz], 1779. 36 ff. 

Includes commentary by Rabbi Yitzchak Issac ben Yekutiel. Grodno, 1797. 
Menachem Mendel, (editor). Includes the commentaries of the Mantua edition (1562), 
the Ari (1719) and the Gra. Grodno, 1806. 86 ff. 

Dyhemfurth, 1812. 

Johann Friedrich von Meyer. (German and Hebrew). Das Buch Yezirah: die Alster 
Kabbalistischen Urunded der Hebraer. Leipzig, 1 830. 36 pp. 

Salonica, 1831. 

Isidor Kalisch. ‘Sepher Yezirah, a Book on Creation or the Jewish Metaphysics of 
Remote Antiquity.’ With preface, explanatory notes and glossary. In A Sketch of the 
Talmud. New York: L.H. Frank and Co., 1877. 57 pp.; Publisher’s Foreward by Joel 
Disher. San Jose, CA: AMORC, 1948. 61 pp.; Gillette, NJ: Heptangle Books, 1987. 
53 + [1] pp. 

Warsaw edition. With nine commentaries including the Mantua edition (1562). 
Warsaw, 1884. 106 ff. 

William Wynn Westcott. (English). The Sepher Yetzirah: A Rabbinical Treatise on Creadon. 
A lecture given to the Hermetic Society of London on 29 July 1886.; The Sepher Yetzirah. 
The Book of Formation and The Thirty-tuo Paths of Wisdom. Translated from the Hebrew. 


54 



Limited edition of 100 copies. Bath: Robert H. Fryar, 1887- 29 pp.; Second Revised 
edition. London: Theosophical Publishing Society, 1893. 43 pp.; Third Revised edition, 
re-titled— Tiie Sepher Yetzirah. The Book of Formation with The Fifty Gates of Intelligence 
and The Thirty-two Paths of Wisdom. London: J.M. Watkins, 1911. 50 pp.; New York: 
Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1980. 50 pp.; Revised and re-titled— Sepher Yetzirah err Book 
Formation and additional notes from H.P. Blavatsky’s Secret Doctrine. Notes to the Wizard 
Edition [by Richard Robb]. With a reprint of the ‘Kabbalah’ from Encyclopaedia 
Britannica. Secret Doctrine Reference Series. San Diego, CA: Wizards Bookshelf, 1990. 
[vi], 43 pp. 

Papus [Encausse, Gerard]. (French). Sefer Yetzira. Paris, 1888.; English translation in The 
Qabalah: Secret Tradition of the West. New York: Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1977. pp. 203- 
236. 

Mayer Lambert. (French). Commentaire sur le Sefer Yesirah: Our Lime Creation par le 
Gaon Saadjade Fayyoum. Paris, 1891. 

Lazarus (Eliezer) Goldschmidt. (German). Das Buch der Schopfung. Frankfort am Mein, 
1894. 92 pp. 

Peter Davidson. (English). With ‘The Fifty Gates of Intelligence’ and 'The Thirty-two 
Paths of Wisdom.’ 1896. 

Knut Stenring, (English). The Book of Formation: Sepher Yetzirah. Edited and Introduction 
by A.E. Waite. London: William Rider and Son, Ltd., 1923. 67 pp.; New York: Ktav 
Publishing House, 1970. 64 pp.; Philadelphia: David McKay Co., no date. 67 pp.; 
Without Waite’s Introduction. Edmonds, WA: Holmes Publishing Group, 1988. 52 

pp. 

Aryeh Kaplan. (English with Hebrew text). Sefer Yetzirah, The Book of Creation: In 
Theory and Practice. York Beach, ME: Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1990. xxvi, 388 pp. 

Basnage. History of the Jews, 1708. 

Cellerio, Bartoloccio de. Bibliotheca magna Rabbinica. Rome, 1768-1692. 

Franck, Adolphe. La Kabbale, ou la philosophic religieuse des Hebreux. Paris: L. Hachette, 
1843. 412 pp.; Translated as— The Kabbalah: The Religious Philosophy of the Hebrews 
by I. Sossnitz. New York, 1926; New translation. Introduction by John C. Wilson 
[Felix Morrow], New York: Bell Publishing Co., 1960. 224 pp. 

Gilbert, R.A. The Golden Dawn and the Esoteric Secton. London: Theosophical History 
Centre, 1987. 26 pp. 

Ginsburg, Christian D. The Kabbalah. London: Longmans, Green and Co., 1863.; London: 
Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1955. 241 pp. 

Kircher, Athanasius. Werke CEdipus Asgyptiacus. 3 vols. Rome, 1652-54. 

Levi, Eliphas [Alphonse Louis Constant]. Histoire de la Magie, avec une exposition claire et 
precise de sec procedes, de ses Rites et de ses Mysteres, avec 1 8 planches (90 figures). Paris: 
Germer Bailliere, 1860. xvi, 560 pp.; Paris: F. Alcan, 1892.; Translated as— The 
History of Magic: Including a Clear and Precise Exposition of its Procedure, its Rites and its 
Mysteries. Translated, with a preface and notes by A.E. Waite. London: William 
Rider and Son, Ltd., 1913. xxxvi, 536 pp.; New York: Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1971. 
384 pp. 

. The Magical Ritual of the Sanctum Regnum, interpreted by the Tarot Trumps. Translated 

from the MSS. of Eliphaz [sic] Levi and edited by W.W. Westcott, M.B., with 8 
finely coloured plates. London: Redway, 1896. x, 108 pp.; London: Crispin Press/ 
Thorsons Publishers Ltd., 1970.; Revised and edited by Joseph Bouleur. With three 
plates from the early Levi French editions. Edmonds, WA: Holmes Publishing Group, 
1992. 52 pp. 


55 



Mathers, S.L. MacGregor. The Qabalah. A lecture given to the Hermetic Society of 
London on 3 June 1886.; A brief abstract was printed in the magazine Light (19 June 
1886). 

. The Physical or Lower Alchemy. A lecture given to the Hermetic Society of London 

on 8 July 1886. 

Moses de Leon, Rabbi [?]. The Sepher Zohar or The Book of Splendour. 

Mantua, 1558; Cremona, 1560; Lublin, 1623. 

Knorr von Rosenroth. (Latin). Kabbala Denudata, seu, Doctrina Hebraeorum 
transcendentalis etmetaphysicaatque theologica. Opus antiquissimae philosophiae barbaricae 
variis speciminibus refertissimum. ... in quo ante ipsam translationem libri ... cui nomen 
Sohar tam veteris, quam recent is, ejusque Tikkunim ... praemittitur apparatus. Sulzbachi: 
Typis Abrahami Lichtenthaleri, 1677-84. 

S.L. MacGregor Mathers. (English). The Kabbalah Unveiled [ Kabbala Denudata }: 
Containing the following Books of the Zohar. The Book of Concealed Mystery, The Greater 
Holy Assembly and The Lesser Holy Assembly. Translated into English from the Latin 
version of Knorr von Rosenroth, and collated with the original Chaldee and Hebrew text. 
London: George Redway, 1887. viii, 360 + (16) pp.; Revised, with apreface by Mrs. 
Mo'ina Mathers. London: Routledge and Kegan Paul, 1926. xiv, 360 pp.; New York: 
Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1968. 

Nurho de Manhar [William Williams], (English). ‘Zohar (Bereshith - Genesis),' in The 
Word, edited by H.W. Percival. New York: Theosophical Publishing Co., 1900-14.; 
Complete revision with three hundred paragraphs of footnotes extracted from The 
Secret Doctrine, exordium, and copious notes assembled and compiled by John Drais 
and two articles appended to the text: ‘The Kabalah and the Kabalism’ and 
‘Tetragrammaton’ by H.P. Blavatsky. With a reprint of the ‘Kabbalah’ from 
Encyclopaedia Britannica. Secret Doctrine Reference Series. San Diego, CA: Wizards 
Bookshelf, 1985. [3] + vi, 424 + [1] pp. 

Myer, Isaac. Quabbalah: The Philosophical Writtings ofSoloman Ben Yehudah I bn Gebirol or 
Avicebron. Philadelphia: Privately printed, 1888. xxiv, 497 pp.; New Introduction 
by Sibyl F. New York: Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1970. xxiv, [4] + 500 pp. 

Nehunia ben haKana, Rabbi [?]. The Sepher Bahir or The Book of Brilliance. 

Manuscript: Province school of Kabbalists, 1176; Amsterdam, 1651. 12 pp.; Berlin, 
1706. 13 pp.; Sklav, 1784. 25 pp.; Lvov, 1865. 32 pp.; Vilna, 1883. 42 pp. 

William Wynn Westcott. (English). The Book of Brilliance. Privately printed, 1896. 
[Pat Zalewski refers to this book in Kabbalah of the Golden Dawn (p. 37). I have been 
unable to track down a copy of this book or any previous reference to this book.) 
Aryeh Kaplan. (English with Hebrew text). The Bahir: Illumination. Yorke Beach, ME: 
Samuel Weiser, Inc., 1979. xxvi, 244 pp. 

Waite, A.E.The Doctrine and Literature of the Kabalah. London: Theosophical Publishing 
Soviety, 1902. xx, 508 pp. 

Westcott, William Wynn. An Introduction to The Study of The Kabalah, with eight diagrams. 
London: J.M. Watkins, 1910. iv, 66 + [2] pp.; Second edition. London: J.M. Watkins, 
1926. iv, 72 pp.; New York: Allied Publications, no date. 

. Tabula Bembina sive Mensa Isiaca: The Isiac Tablet of Cardinal Bembo, Its History and 

Occult Significance. Bath: Robert Fryar, 1887. [viii], 19 4- [1] pp.; Re-titled— The Isiac 
Tablet or The Bembine Table of Isis. Enlarged with Introductory Preface by Manly P. 
Hall. Los Angeles, CA: Philosophical Research Society, 1976. [xiv], 19 + [1] pp. 
Zalewski, Pat. Kabbalahof the Golden Dawn. Foreword by Sr. M.A.A.E.M. St. Paul, MN: 
Llewellyn Publications, 1993. xvi, 223 + [1] pp. 




Darcy Kiintz — General Editor 

Volume 1 

Volume 13 

Complete Golden Dawn Cipher Manuscript 

The Elements of the Kabbalah 


Eliphas Levi 

Volume 2 


The Golden Dawn Source Book 

Volume 14 


The Battle of Blythe' Road: 

Volume 3 

A Golden Dawn Affair 

Sepher Yetzirah with Hebrew Text 

Volume 15 

Volume 4 

Golden Dawn American Source Book 

Golden Dawn Source Works: 

Darcy Kiintz 

A Bibliography 

Volume 16 

Volume 5 

The Kabbalah of the Golden Dawn 

The Golden Dawn Court Cards— 

W.W. Westcott 

As drawn by W.W. Westcott 

Volume 17 

Volume 6 

The Sacred Book of Henoch 

The Magic of a Symbol — Florence Farr 

Volume 18 

Volume 7 

Secret Knowledge of the Neophyte 

Enochian Experiments 

S.L. MacGregor- Mathers 

of the Golden Dawn 

Volume 19 

Volume 8 

Aspects of Occultism 

The Golden Dawn Tarot — A.E. Waite 

Edward Langford-Garstin 

Volume 9 

Volume 20 

The Serpent Myth — W.W. Westcott 

The Historic Structure of the 
Original Golden Dawn Temples 

Volume 10 

The Astrology of the Golden Dawn 

Volume 21 

Brodie-Innes 

The Hermetic Papers of 


the Golden Dawn 

Volume 1 1 

Percy Bullock 

The Chronology of the Golden Dawn 


Mary Greer & Darcy Kuntz 

Volume 22 
Baphomet&Son: 

\ . Volume 12 

An Little Known Chapter in the 

Fringe Masonry in England, 1870-1885 

Life of the Beast 666 

Elbe Howe 

R.A. Gilbert 

/ 3 ' 

V 

HOLMES PUBLISHING GROUP / 

\ ISBN 1-55818-333-7 



