ri-IE MANUAL OF 
ASTROLOGY 

IS FOUR noOKS 


ttr*Ttxo or Tift tAr<ovAor or Tttr Mt^vrsi 
TMi Kt&oihA or A ttototrorr. T>ir 
wtAttrr or ttur. axo or 
tiixnir AiriotooT 
tMCLCoet Tilt ixrtttNCt or rut 
riAxtr rtvto 

•r 

“StniARlAL** 


fvmt srr or tadlts 


THt STAXOAAD WOAK 


I) W 'lAUM’ORl.VAIA SONS A. (O PKU'ATi: I/rO 
Ttrttwt llouit of Jlooks 

Jio Dr. Diilabliai Nariroji Rond, I5<itnb i 



© igSs H'. FOULSHAM & CO. LTD., 

Teopil Road, Slough, Buehs., England 

CareJidtj redsed and republished igS2 

Cop)7ight 1970 in India, Pakistan, Burma and Ce}!on 
by P. B Taraporcvala Sons & Co. Private Ltd. 

First Indian Edition, igyo 



CONTENTS 

BOOK I.— THE LANGUAGE OF THE HEAVENS 

rAOB 

Chapter I.— The Divisions of the Zodiac —The Elements 
— The Constitutions — The Decanates — Lunar 
Mansions - 1 

Chapter II.— TheSi^tureaoftheZodiac — The Zodiac 

and the Human Body 4 

Chapter III.— The Planets— PAnwimy Temperamat: 
Flofours^ Forms, Colours, Notes, Metals, Parts in the 
Human Body, and Occupations: Planets os Signlfiea- 
tors: the Relations of Signs and Planets, Planetary 
Dignities: Planetary Dominions - - - - 8 

Chapter IV.— The Relation of Decanates and Planets: 

Aries, Taurus, Gemini, Cancer, Leo, Virgo, Libra, 

Scorpio, Sagittarius, Capricorn, Aquarius, Puces - 18 

Chapter V.— The Houses ------ 26 

Chapter VL— The Planets and Houses - - - 30 

Chapter VIL— The Aspects _____ 44 

Chapter VIII.— Calculation of the Horoscope - - 46 

Chapter IX.— Foreign Horoscopes _ _ - - 52 

Chapter X.— Summary 54 


appendix to book I 

Description of persons ------ - 56 

Terms of the Planets - -- -- -- 73 


MOTES TO BOOK 1 

On the Divisions of the Zodiac — On Ltlly *8 Descriptions - 74 



vi 


CONTENTS 


BOOK 11.— THE READING OF A HOROSCOPE 


rAOB 

Chapter I. — The Bodily Form — Defects and Acadents 

■ — Physical Peculiarities — Accidents - - - 77 

Chapter II. — The Physical Constitution _ - - 82 

Chapter III — Physical lohnnities — The Polarity of the 

Signs — Diseases of the Planets and Signs - - 84 

Chapter IV.— Mental Quahties and Infirmities - - 94 

Chapter V. — Financial Fortunes- - - - _ 98 

Chapter VI —The Rank or Position - - - - 101 

Chapter VII.— The Profession or Occupation -- - 104 

Chapter VIII.— Marriage —The Time of Marriage — 
Happiness or Sorrow — Description of Wife — 

Second Marriages — Female^oroscopes — Length 
of Marriage - - - - - 106 

Chapter IX— Children ------ 113 

Chapter X — Friends and Benefactors - « - - 115 

Chapter XL— Enemies ------ 117 

Chapter XII — Sympathy and Antipathy - - - 119 

Chapter XIII— TraveHmg and Voyages — Success or 

Loss by TraveDiog — Where to go — Residence - 121 

Chapter XIV.— The Kind of Death - - - - 126 

Chapter XV.— IDastrations — The Bodily Form — Acci- 
dents — Character — Wealth — Rank — Love and 
Marriage — Travelling — Kind of Death - - 12S 



CONTENTS 


VU 

BOOK III —THE MEASURE OF TIME 

?A01 

Chapter I —The Pre-natal Epoch of the Law of Sex — 

General Law of the Pre-natal Epoch — Theorcnu — 

To Find the Day and Hour of Epoch — Examples of 
Regular Epochs — Irregular Epochs — The Law of 


Sex — To Set a Figure without Tables - - - 135 

Chapter II — Directions — Primary Directions - - 150 

Chapter III — Scphanal s Method of Directmg — Primary 
Directions — Secondary Directions — Time-Measure 
— Transits — Method of Directmg — Primary 
Considerations ------- 153 

Chapter IV — Effects of Directions — Secondary Direc- 
tions --------159 

Chapter V— Other Time Measures — Lunations — 

Transits — Eclipses Proportional Arcs — 
Planetary Penods — Planetary Geocentnc Long] 
tudes Solar Revolutions — Lunar Mansions 166 


BOOK IV —HINDU ASTROLOGY 

The AyanSmsha — The Astensms — The Planets’ Penods — 
The Signs of the Zodiac — The Houses — Aspects — 
Illustration — The Sub-penods — Example of 
Planetary Subdivisions — Judgrrent by Planetary 
Position — Penods — Sub-penods — Inter penods — 
Rules to Judge of Planetary Penods — Locality — 
The Kalamntam — Effects ofPenodsand Sub-penods 


177 



VUl CONTSNTS 


APPENDIX 

?AOB 

Lunations - -- -- -- -- 213 
Proportional Loganthms ------- 214 

Table of British Summer Time - - - - 2J5, 216 
Table of Eclipses, 1856 to 1964 ----- 217 

Tables of Houses for Lat. 53“ 25' N. - - - 218,219 
Hmdu Planetary Periods ------ 220 

SUPPLEMENT TO REVISED EDITION 
The Progressive Horoscope ------ 221 

To Calculate the Progressed Horoscope - - - - 222 

The Lunar Equivalent ------- 224 

The Diurnal Horoscope ------ 226 

Note on the Planetary Penods ----- 227 



PREFA CE 


lo an experimental subject like Astrology there is always some* 
thiog fresh to be said, and much that needs to be told anew in the 
light of a more catholic experience than that enjoyed by astrological 
authors of the seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. The discovery 
of the planet Pluto in 1930 has enbrged the field of our researches, 
and much has been added to what is already known in regard to the 
nature and dominions of the planets. 

The present exposition of the predictive art will find more favour 
with students of Astrology than with the lay reader, though, in the 
choice of a guide to the celestial science, the present Manual may 
recommend itself to the lay reader, as contaiiuog the fullest possible 
informatioa under the several heads of our subject, and being, at 
the same time, devoid of those abstruse calculations and tecbmcahties 
which have beclouded some of tfae most learned and bnlhant 
expositions. The treatment of that portion of our subject which 
deals with prenatal influences, the mtra'Uterine penod, and the law 
of sex, has the merit of origiriahty. and truth. The section d ealing 
with Hindu Astrology, after Parasbara, is properly dissociated from 
the body of the Manual by the difference of zodiacal measurement 
observed in the East, as well as by the interpretation of planetary 
influences in relation to the conditions of Oriental hfe; yet it is 
deemed of sufficient interest and ment to introduce m these pages. 
In eSect, then, the characteristics of fullness and simplicity have 
been considered in the preparation of this work, and it is bebeved 
that the Manual will give the average student a better grip of the 
key to celestial science, and a wider view of the ground-plan of 
Astrology than has hitherto been afibrded The author desires to 
recognise to the fullest extent the merits of all former writers whose 
worlu have opened up and illustrated the subject of planetary 
influence to many thousands of inteUigent minds, Lilly, Coley, 
Sibley, Ashmand, Simmonite, whose works have been consult^ 
for the purpose of this Manual. 

The law of life is a law of progress, and we, who from our 
temporal standpoint take note of the passage of events, can, if we 



vi^. see therein the working out of this law by means of the cyclic 
recurrence of those events in successive ^nerations and ages. 

The astronomer realises in the return of the and 

comets in their orbits, and the succession of phenomena attaching 
thereto is found to be continually repeating itself, but always in 
relation to the experience of new and successive generations. Thus 
all humanity is taught the same lesson, and the same book is 
repeatedly studied by each succeeding age. The astronomer, by 
lus science, is able to predict the return of the comets, the coU' 
junctions, occupations, and other phenomena of the planets, 
together with the echpses of the Sun and Moon, centuries in advance 
of their occurrence. 

The astrologer, taking note of the cyclic repetition of events in 
conjunction with coacurrent celestial phenomena, is enabled, by 
similar methods, to predict when such and such events, shall occur 
again. There is not^g supernatural in this when once we come to 
know the laws of planetary influence, the Impressiblhty of Nature, 
and the power of man to read such impressions. 

Perhaps the reader will think that in saying this we go too far 
without appeal to common experien^, but as far as Astrology is 
cooccmed, we go no further than the reader himself can prove by 
an application of the rules contained in this Manual to his own 
life and that of othen. It is not to be supposed that a sdentifle 
structure, such as Astrology purports to be, can have been in 
buildmg through the ages upon the basis of a mere conceit of the 
imagination, or similar insecure foundation which could not stand 
the test of the plumb-line and level of sdence. On the contrary, 
we claim that the predictive art is set Simly in the immovable 
foundations of Nature, and that the whole plan and superstructure 
u but a presentation of certain weU-deGned laws operating in and 
from the archetypal world. Pythagoras held it as a truth that all 
things were formed after a type existing in the Universal Mind, 
and that all forms were but the expression of certain numbers or 
quantities existing in the soul of thingsT It is in the imperishable 
rock of numbers that the fadeless footpiiot of astral sdence was 
Crst set 

It is because of this mathematical basis in Astrology that the 
sdence ts rendered so easy of proof, in contradistinction to many 
other less sdentifie modes of dhdnation. 


SEPIIARIAL. 



THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 



BOOK I 

THE LANGUAGE OF THE HEAVENS 


CBAPTSR I 


THE DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC 


In Astrology the Ecliptic, or Sun*s path, is divided into 

twelve equd parts; and as the eotire circle consists of 360*, each 
twelfth part will contain 30*. These twelve divisions are called 
Signs of the Zodiac, They are named and symbolised thus:— 


Name Symbol 

1 Arie»-^Raai T 

2 Taunn — Bull y 

3 Oetein^Twios n 

4 Caacw— Crab a 

5 Leo~-Lioa A 

6 Virgo— Virgia 


Nome Symbol 

7 libn— BaUoce ^ 

8 Scorpio— Scorpion Rt 

9 Sapttamo— Archer t 

10 Chpncomus— Coat n 

11 Aipiarius— Watomas » 

12 Puces — Fishes H 


The Zodiac is a pictorial tustoiy of the evolution of the Universe, 
and a synthetic diagram of human progress through the ages. One 
cannot but pause to wonder and admire, when considering the 
wisdom of that man who first conceived the idea of writing this 
stupendous record of our race in the starry heavens. There the 
moth and dust of rime bad no advantage, nor could the busy band 
of man reach there to mar the sacred records with excisions and 
interpolations. A star that originally belonged to the head of the 
Dragon would remain his vulnerable point for ever, until the time 
shodd come when the record was fulfilled, and the wounded heel 
should bruise the serpent’s bead. Kristna might change to Hercules 
and to St. George, and each of the great heroes who are depicted 
as closing with the dragon or the serpent in the struggle for life, 
would find bis place in the history and mythology of the nations; 
but the stars would remain unchanged, and all the musings of 
the poet, the reasonings of the philosopher, and the calculations of 
the scarcer of the skies would not avail to move one star from the 



2 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


bright mosaic of the Zodiac. So the record was set there, and so It 
has remained to this day. Therefore the zodiacal signs form the 
ground plan of Astrology, and the specific nature and power of 
each sign have to be thoroughly known before the modifying 
infiuence exerted by the several planets can be estiinated with any 
degree of accoracy. 

Astrology attributes to each sign a certain infiuence over the 
physical and mental constitution of man, and chief attention is 
giron to that sign which is rising in the East at the moment of birth, 
such being termed the “ ruling sign ** of the horoscope. 

The signs are subject to a certain classification, due to their 
observed elemental and constitutional natures. 


THE ELEMENTS 


The four ** elements,'* as they are called, in use among astrologers, 
are— *1, Hre; 2, Air; 3, Water; 4, Earth. They correspond to 
the spirit, mind, soul, and body of man , and are symbolical of 
the spintual, mental, psychic; and physical processes in him. The 
signs are thus distributed;— 


A + 

Fire Earth 

1 Anes 2 Ttuna 

5 Leo 6 Virgo 

9 Saginuy 10 Ctpncoia 


Air 
3 Oemioi 
7 Libn 
11 Aquanus 


Water 
4 Cancer 
8 Scorpio 
12 PlKCS 


The practical significance of this division of the signs into element 
. will fully appear in subsequent chapters. Each group of thrw 
I ' signs is called a “ Triplicjty.” 


TUB CONSTITUTIONS 


The signs have a constitutional nature, and each sign is 

either volatile, fixed, or mutable. The ** volatile " signs are active 
^and forceful; the “fixed *’ are detennioed and masterful; while 
^the “ mutable " are passive and servfle. These three constitutions 
of the signs may again be regarded as acute, irare, and flexed. 
Their symbols and the signs that co rr espond to them are here set out 


Movable or Acute 

A 

1 Arid 
4 Oncer 
7 Ubn 
10 Cswtnsm 


Flted or Grave 

B 

2 Tsunn 
5 Leo 
8 5con4o 
It Aq/assoB 


Common or Flexed 


3 Crtmni 
6 Virgo 
9 Sapecxry 
12 Puect 



TBB DIVISIONS OF THE ZODIAC 3 

Certain other c]a$5iScaboas of the signs are u use among us» 
and necessary to be known These are 

The Sex of the Signs —Every odd sign, T, n, eta, is masculine 
every even sign, B , ce, etc , is femmme 
I Human Signs. — n, TiJ, «», and the last half of f , which are 

the only zodiacal signs depicted by human figures on the symbolic 
globe The sign is also called ** humane ” 

I Bestial Signs — v, B . SI, rt, and the first half of } , symbolised 

by the figures of animals whose names they bear 
f Violent Signs — T, n, HI, 1 ^ 

Double or Bicorporeal Signs — n, t » K t ts shown by a 
centaur, half man and half horse, n by two children, and K by 
two fishes bound together by a cord 

Cardinal Signs ~-T, an, Already named as “ movable or 

acute,” they are the angular pomts which mark the equinoxes and 
tropics—/ e , T and ^ are equinoctial, an and V^, tropical 

The Fivltful Signs are — B , HI. t* “d K ► the Sterile Signs 
wo— T, n,fl, and tij while and e» are mdifierentinUus 
respect 

The Mute Signs are— on, fil, and K 

The Signs of Voice are— H, ^ and sss 

THE DECANATES 

Each sign, consisting of 30®, is subdivided into three parts of 10* 
each callrf “ decanates or* decans’ These latter are symbolised 
by a senes of figures which are fully dcscnbed m the Brdiat Jataka 
of Varaha Mihira, wntten in the fifth century, and also m different 
form by Johannes Angelus, a sixteenth century wnter, reprinted by 
” Raphael ’ * 

Each decan is ruled over by one of the planets which confers 
upon its subject a certam character corresponding to the nature of 
the planet and the sign in which the decan is placed The planets 
ruling the decans are given in the chapter on ” The Relation of the 
Signs and the Planets ’ 

Many other subdivisions are m use among the astrologers of the 
East, who subdivide the sign into tenths of a degree, making 300 
parts to each sign « But as we have lost the signification of these 
minute subdivutons they have no practical value, and are only 
mentioned here as affording a possible field of research to diligent 
students 



4 


TBE MANUAL OP ASTftOLOOY 


LUNAR MANSIONS 


One subdivision, however, has been handed down to m from the 
Qialdeans, which has an unportant function in modem practwe. 
It consists of a division of the acle of the Zodiac into 28 equal parts 
of 124 degrees each. This 28th part is called a “ Mansion ” of the 
Moon, and is the space measured by the Moon in the Zodiac by 
her daily motion, inasmuch as she rttnros to any given degree of 
longitude on the 28th day of her course, A learned fnend of the 
present writer, unacquainted with this anaent division of the Zodiac, 
suggested a new sevenfold division of the Echptic mto seven arcs 
measuring SH degree each, and this he applied to the anomalies 
arising out of the taw of the Lunar Epoch, published by the author 
m 1890 But it is found that this sepdle aspect or arc of 51^ degrees, 
if measured from the four cardinal points, yields a senes of 28 points, 
exactly corresponding to the above Lunar ** Mansions.” Thus, 
rejecting the fracQons of de g rees produced by this division, the points 
of the Zodiac, counted from Ati« 0 degrees, arc as follows,— 
T 0, a 21, C3 13, IT 4. =0: 26. t 17, « 9 Those from Libra: 
«a 0, TI\ 21, rt 13, >< 4 «r’ 26, n 17, P Those from Cancer: 

21,^ 13, t 4,t^26,Kl7, tf 9. Those from Capncom; 
rt0,«21, T 13, n 4, ca 26, IT 17.111 9. If, tberefOTe, we arrange 
these in the order of their natural sequence, we have the be g i nnin gs 
of the twenty-eight Lunar Mansions 


f S3 iSs 

W fl. Dl = 
n n r K 


onKU-Raomf 

0- .. 13* .. 26* 

9* .. 2I' 

4‘ ir 


This table shows that the cardinal points, the l3th and 26th degrees 
of the Cardinal signs, the 9th and 21$t of the Fixed signs, and the 
4th and Hlh of the Common signs, are ” sensiUve " pomts of the 
Zodiac These degrees should be mnetnbered, as they enierla^ly 
into a later portion of this work, and are employed in the cotr^on 
of uncertain horoscopes, as well as in the prognostications drawn 
from the lunar motion. 


CNAPTEK 11 

THE SIGNATUKES OF THE ZODIAC 


Amis.— T he physical pecuKazOles of^tius sign are to be seen in the 
long neck, bony or angular face, broad temples, narrow chin. 



SIGNATURES OP THE ZODIAC 


5 


grey or grcyish*brown eyes, and crisp or wiry hair, sometimes 
sandy, sometimes very dark. Genei^y a dhtinctive mark on 
the face, such as a scar or mole. 

Mental qualities: Ambition, courage, impulse; desire for 
prominence; enterprise, ingenuity, audacity. 

Taurus. — Physical marka: Strong neck and shoulders, oftentimes a 
stoop; pensive brows, full bps and nostrils, curling or wavy 
hair, full forehead, dark eyes, heavy jaws. 

Mental qualities: Amorous, passionate, determined; 
laborious, patient; proud, obstinate. 

Gemini. — Physical qualities: Tall, slender, elegant; long fingers, 
straight nose, generally long; wide forehead, long face; often 
fine expressive eyes. 

Mental qualities: Artistic, learned, dexterous in the manual 
crafts, inventive; curious, subtle; eloquent in speech or 
writing; much occupied; humane. 

CmtssL— Physical marks: Broad foithtad, wide chest, rounded 
body; laborious walk, sometimes rolling or swaying; gr^ 
eyes, full face, fleshy body, with a tendency to pendulous cheeks 
and double ehin in mature years. The figure is often to^beavy; 
the hands and feet are small. 

Mental qualities: Changeful, rovmg disposition; ambiUous, 
inclined to public life; prudent, sympathetic; imaginaUve and 
romantic. 

Iso.— Physical marks: Strong, broad shoulders; upright walk, 
cheerful expression; fearless eyes, generally of a grey tint; 
wavy hair. 

Mental qualities: Faithful, proud, fearless; ambitious, 
generous, artistic; opposed to cliques and secrecy; oblivious 
to enmity; rich m life and feeling. 

Virgo. — Physical qualities’ Full forehead; haix generally swept 
back and falling about the ears, inclined to baldness on top of 
the head; grey or blue eyes, straight nose, wide shouldeis, 
active walk, quiet voice. 

Mental qualities: Learned, searching after knowledge, 
methodical; inclined to art and literature; benevolent; fond 
of the occult; .disposed to collecting in some form or other; 
very critical and precise. ^ 

tssM..— Physical marks: Tall, elej^t figure, gaining flesh towards 
the prime of life; blue eyes, fair skm, which becomes ruddy or 



6 THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

pimpled in mature yean; brown and fine hair, good tectb and 
finger nails. Frequently the hair of a man ruled by thr< sign is 
parted in the middle or nearer the centre than the side of the 
head. The nose is long and straight, Grecian type. 

Mental qualities: Gcoial, kind nature, happy disposition; 
fond of show and of approbation; just, persuasive, imitative; 
artistic, neat, and orderly; amorous but fickle. 

Scorpio. — Physical marks: Dark or dusky ramplexion; curling 
dark hair, sometimes crinkled or frizzy, and grossing on the 
temples more thickly than is common; oftentimes some defects 
in the feel or lower pans of the body; aqnibne feature, the 
eagle showing plainly in the profile; prominent brows and 
sharp facial angles. 

Mental qualities: Boldness, confidence in self; fond of 
contests and strifes, very daring when put to the touch; sarcastic, 
Wilful, impulsise. and determined; of fixed views, subtle mind; 
not easily imposed upon, but sometimes capable of imposidon; 
frequently a fondness for mystery, or some form of research, 
occult or chemical, shows Itself. 

SACrtTARY. — Physical marks: Tall, welhmade figure, somedmef 
stooping, however: rather long face; fine, rounded forehead; 
grey or blue eyes, sometimes brown, but always fine and 
expressive: good complexion; frequently bald about the 
temples; fond of athletic exercises. 

Mental qualities: Generous, good-tempered, just, frank, a 
firm fnend; inelmed to philosophy and relirion: eclectic; not 
much inclined to exact sdeocc; fond of travelling. 

Capricorn —PA ys/m/ marks: Prominent features; long nose, 
frequently bent inward at the point; firm bps; strong but 
narrow chin; thin neck; defiaent in the lobes of the ears; 
dark, thin hair; small beard, if any; sometimes affected at the 
knees. 

Mental qualities: Wilful, strong in purpose; very ambitious, 
desirous of government; teserved; capriaoos; quiet and 
reclusive, but forable in action; changefuL 

Aquarius.— /’Ayr/ffl/nwrJLr* T»U. full figure; fine,cIearcoinp!exion. 
blue e>«. brown or flaxen hai^ oval face; defects in teeth. 

Tbis sign, next to Libra, produce^ the finest types of beauty. 

Menial qualities: Kind, humane, retinng. patient; fond of 
bierature and sdence; frequently a good singer or mustdan; 



SIGNATURES OP THE ZODIAC 7 

quiet, happy disposition: love for humanising influences, 
surroundings, and pursuits, very fond of a few people, 
excellent friends. 

Pbces.— PA^ ricc/ marks Short stature, fully fleshed body, pale 
complexion, full but wate^f or wealc-looking eyes , small hands 
and feet, short limbs, dark, sometimes black hair, generally 
stoop at the shoulders 

Menial gualities Loquacious, gay, changeful, passionate, 
secretive in many things, difficult to know, generally disposed 
to a double life, quick to understanding, good judgment, 
versatile 

Note -~-These descriptions are only given as guides to the detection 
of peculiarities conferred by the ruling sign, not as complete portraits 
of any one of them. They are beautifled m a female gemture and 
softened by the sex influence, and m all cases largely controlled by 
the prevailing planetary influence The sign which nses at birth 
together with that occupied by its ruling planet, contnbutes largely 
to determme the personal appearance 

THE ZODIAC AND THE HUMAN BODY 

The signs of the Zoduc have dominion in the human body as 
follows — 


Ana 

The bead and face 

Taurus 

Neck, throat, and can 

Cemini 

Aims and shoulders 

Cancer 

Breasts and stomach 

Lea 

Back and heart 

Virgo 

, Belly and uterus 

Libra 

Kidneys and loins 

Scorpio 

Sm organs and anus 

Saginary 

Thighs and tups 

Capricorn 

The knees 

Aquarxta 

Calves and ankles 

Pisces 

^ The feet. 


The mtemal government of the signs is distributed thus — 

<T», CB, — Head, stomach, ovanes, rems, liver, and skin 

b, SI, ni. 53 — ^Throat, heart, gcncratiie system, kidneys and 
blood 

IT, PJ, ? , K — Lungs, bowels, nervous system, and matrix 
Thus, should ^ (Mars) be m n (Gemini) at the time of birth. 



» THB MANUAL OF ASTROtOOy 

the native would be liable to inflammatoiy action in the lun^s, and 
hurts to the arms. But as Gemini rules both arms and both lungs, 
the house in which Mars is found must be taken to determine which 
member is likely to be aSected. The odd signs and houses corres- 
pond to the left side of the body, and the even to the right side, 
a male horoscope. In a female horoscope, the reverse of this 
the case. 


CUAFTBR III 

THE PLANETS 

Astrology considers the Sim and Moon as “ planets ” in respect to 
their functions when taken in relation to the Earth as a centre of 
action, inasmuch as. in regard to ourselves, they are agents of the 
sidereal influence, quite apart from their generic status in intracosmic 
life. Consequently, the geocentric positions of the plantes — /.e., 
their longitudes in the Zodiac as seen from the Earth— are employed 
in all astrologie speculations and measurements. 

The ten bodies which may be considered as agents of celestial 
influences are thus named and symbolised: — 

^ Nepncie ^Jorwler 21 ^Vnna 

Uraaui ?? Man i Mercuiy S 

Saturn tj ^utt © . 'C-Mood 

Pluto e 

Other symbols are in use for the purpose of indicating certain points 
in the Zodiac or positions in the horoscope. Thus, the Moon's 
North, or Ascending Node, is denoted by ; its South, or Descend- 
ing Node, by the same symbol reversed, tJ. Tbese symbols are 
generally called the Dragon's Head ) and the Dragon's Tail (y)* 

The Pari of Fortune, a position we shall deal with later, is thus 
indicated @. It is an old Egyptian hieroglyph for ” land, property, 
or possession," and stands for the same in the astrologie art. 

The placets are classifled in the following manner:— 
hftOor 9, h.2l,^ 

Jlr»ur 9. 9.) 

Masvutme — 9, f|•2t, © 

A'ere— The planet Mercury (9). 1° this respect, as in ©then, to 
be particularised in due course, is dther male or femaie, according 


.3 .a 



THE PLANETS 9 

to the plaaet to which it is in closest aspect at the time of birth , or 
if no planet is m aspect at all, tbesign Mercury occupies will determine 
Its sex and influence It is the peculiar function of Mercury among 
the spheres to reflect the nature and influence of the other planets, 
and for this reason v,e find it referred to m mythology as “ the 
Winged Messenger of the Gods,” and the Interpreter,” for it 
translates the l^guage or influence of the planets into terms of 
human thought and feelmg upon this earth 
The BeneJIcs are Ti, $, ©, X and Q according to tradition 
The Malefics are B, 'Jt, , h. <J» and according to tradioon 
The positive or electric planets are 2^, S, © 

The negative or magnetic planets are h. ^ 

Uranus is of both natures, combining in itself the magnetic and 
electric influences, and thus produces cataclysmic and sudden effects 
The electric planets produce heat and expansion m the body of 
the earth and man, and conduce to a positive, forceful, and confident 
state of mmd corresponding to this warmth and expansion of the 
physical functions 

The magnetic planets render the mind and body negative and 
timorous, susceptible to external influences, and thus to a variety 
of affections 

Mercury and Uranus have a variable nature accordmg to their, 
position and relations in the horoscope 

Planetary Temperament 

The Speeijie Natures of the different planets art as follows — 

Pluto is changeful according to mood and desire Forceful hard, 
selfish and destructive yet can also express miUative, self 
sacrifice, willing to take nsks in service of others 
Neptune u nervous, susceptible, sstfaetic, neurotic, inconstant, 
warm, moist, and fruitful. 

Uranus is variable, spasmodic, impukive, eccentric, cold, and barren 
Saturn is nervous, secretive, defensive, bmding constant, cold, dry, 
bard, and barren 

Jupiter is generous, expansive, genial, temperate, vital, moderately 
hot, moist, and fruitfuL 

Mars IS electric, forceful, active, inffammatory, hot, dry and barren 
Sun IS clectnc, fearless, strong vital, fiery, mfiammatoiy, sanguine, 
hot, dry, and rather fruitful. 



10 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

yenuT is gentle, pacific, graceful, te m perate, passire, warm, moist, 
and fruitfuL 

Mercury is active, excitable, changeful, nervous, cold, moist, and 
moderately frmtful. 

Moon is lymphatic changefol, plastic, wandering, m rrmntie, 
magnetic, cold, moist, and finilfuL 

Planetary Flarours 

Pluto rules extremes. It ean give the odour of the <VnnV and the 
perfiime of the lily. 

Mare rules over hot adds, pungent odours, and burning astringents. 

•S’un is sweet and pungent 

Saturn is cold, astringent and sour. 

yerats: sweet and warm . 

Moon: insipid and odourless. 

Jupiter: sweet and fragrant 
Neptune: sweet subtile, and sedoctive. 

Mercury: mildly astringent and cold. 

Uroma: cold, astringent &Qd bracldsh. 

Plaietary Forms 

Phao gives squarish type of features and body, but pliable with 
capacity for contortion. 

Saturn pm hard, clear<ut ootlmes, straight short hnes, and 
cramped forms. 

/letter gives full, generous corves. 

Mars: sharp angles and baxbs, and pointed, fine, straight lines. 

Sun: regular drcles, full curves, and helical scrolls. 

Venus: curved lines and rfaythnuc scrolls. 

Mercury: short inassye lines and slender curves. 

Moon: irregular curves and crooked Tines. 

Urama: broken lines and mixed forms. 

Neptune: rhythcuc curves and curved lines, cebuloos and chaotic 
forms. 

Planetary Colours 

Pluto: Smoky dood formafion susc e p tible to sudden diange to 
almost any colour ac co rding to drcumstasce. 

Nepnme: mauve or lavender. 

Uranus: streaked and mixed colours. 

Saturn: black, dark brows, and indigo. 

Jupiter: purple, violet mixtures of red and indigo. 



THE PLAMETS 


n 


Mars: scarlet, red, and car min e. 

Svn: yellow-brown, orange, gold, and tbc deeper shades of ycUow. 
Venus: lemon yellow and pale blue, "art tints ” in general. 
Mercury: slate colour, spotted imxtures 
Moon: white, opal, pearl, green, and iridescent silvery hues. 
Planetary Notes 

The Notes of the Gamut corresponding to the several planets 
are as follows: — 

h“P. 4 = B, rfeO. ®=C, 9 = A, 5 = E.} = F. 

It is curiously significant that ^ and do not contribute to that 
** music of the spheres ’* which delighted the mmd of the great 
Pythagoras, while at the same time tbeir axial rotations are contrary 
to the order observed by the other planetary bodies, being from east 
to west. 

P too does not conform to the musical scale but is associated with 
a form of sound which can be likened to the boom of distant thunder. 

Ncle.^Tbe Ute Mr. Mark Kai$ht3. who met his death by upbyxiatioo, on 
the 20th March, 1897, has traced a tefereoce (o five of these planetary ootee la 
Shakespeare's Taming c/ike Shrew, fobo editioo, 1623. 

Planetary Metals 

Pluto governs plutonium. 

Neptune „ geranium and strontium. 

Uranus „ uranium. 

■S'afum „ lead. 

Jupiter „ tm. 

Mars „ iron. 

Sun „ gold. 

Venus „ copper. 

Mercury „ quicksilver. 

Moon „ silver. 

The atomic weights of the different metals ruled over by the planets 
bear a curious relationship to the order of the planets and the days 
of the week. Thus — 

^nilealroa.. .. .. aiocmcweisht Sd 

9 „ copper M 63 

) „ silver .. lOS 

21 „ UB „ 118 

© „ gold H 196 

9 » roercuiy .. .. . .. 200 

h „ lead „ 207 



12 THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

If these be arraaged aiound a oide, asd united by a teven-p>olnted 
star, it will be seen (I) that evety alternate planet around the circle 
falls in the order of the days of the week, if counts from right to 
left: h Saturday, © Sunday, )> Monday, ^Tuesday, ^Wednesday, 
2t Thursday, $ Friday; (2) that the seven-pointed star runs from 
one to another planet in the order of the Chaldean planetary system: 
hf2lt <J, ©, $, y,J. ThiscannotbetheresuItofeither“chance” 
or ** imagination,’* since the Chaldeans did not maV*? the atomic 
weights of the metals, though they nam ed the planets as their rulers. 

Planetary Parts in the Human Body 
Pluto governs tlit part of the head where the ** opening ’* in a child 
is situated, together with the umbilical cord and the nerve 
centres that connect the solar plexus with the sacral plexus 
and the top of the spinal column with the pineal gland. 

Heptme governs the telepathic and psychometric functions, the 
psycho-physical processes which induce to intuluve perception, 
etc. 

Uranus governs the magnetic and physical aura, and the nerve fluids. 
Saturn rules over bones and articulations, liver, spleen, left ear, the 
calves and knees ; the secretive system generally. 

Jupiter rules the thighs, hams, and feet, the right ear, and absorptive 
system. 

Mars governs the forehead, nose, sex organ, gall, kidneys, muscles, 
and sinews; the muscular system generally. 

The Sun rules over the heart, back, vital pnndple, the left eye in 
males and the right eye in females; the arterial system generally. 
Venus governs ike throat, euslachian tubes, aural ducts, reins, 
ovaries, chin, and cheeks; It governs the internal generative 
system, as Mars does the external; the veins generally. 

Mercury governs the nerves, brain, bowels, lungs, hands, arms, 
tongue, and the mouth; the nervous system generally. 

The Moon rules over the breast and stomach, the right eye in males 
and the left eye in females, the fluidic system, saliva, lymph, 
etc., and the glandular processo generally. 

Planetary Occupations 

Pluto rules nuclear saentists, aeronauts, and spacemen generally, 

TY eagiaeers and technicians, weather forecasters, aichaeolo- 



THE PLANETS 


13 


gists, all those who work m underground and subterranean 
spheres 

Neptune denotes ssthetic, artistic, and inspirational pursuits It 
has much mfluence m the expression of artistic and hterary 
gemus, and is astrologically responsible for many forms of the 
higher psychic and spmtual powers exhibited by phenomenal 
persons At the same time it is associated with the “ watery 
tnphcity,” and governs occupations m which the watery 
element is predoimnaot 

Uranus — I^urers, puhhc functionaries, government or civic 
officials, travellers, engineers, mveotors, patentees, and all who 
follow uncommon pursuits, such as astrologers, electricians, 
mesmerists, phrenologists, spirit mediums, metaphysicians, and 
psychologists, also those who deal in electrical apparatus, 
scientific mechamsm, etc. 

•S’aturTi — Land and property dealers, miners, coal merchants, dealers 
in lead and other Saturnine commodities, plumbers, jailen, 
sextons, grave-diggers, undertakers, watchmen, etc , such as 
follow laborious employments, and those that work at night or 
underground 

Jupiter — Senators, judges, counciUors, divines, clergymen, physicians, 
lawyers, bankers, collegians, clothiers, especially woollen 
merchants, and provision dealen generally 

Mars — Soldiers, surgeons, chemists, gunners, workers m iron and 
steel, dentists, butcben, smiths, barbers, cooks, and worken 
who use sharp instruments, iron and steel or fire 

The Sun — ^Persons m aulhonty, courtiers, nobJemen, kmgs, prmccs, 
emperors, and those who bold titled offices under the Crown, 
also jewellers, goldsmiths, gilders, and those who work with 
gold 

Kemu— Musicians, painters, smgcrs, poets, actors, artists of all 
kmds, makers of toQet accessones, and those who deal m 
scents, fiowen, and articles of ornament, silk mercers, em- 
broidcrcR, makers of gloves, bonnets, and women’s apparel, 
Imen-drapers, clothiers, fancy dealen, etc , also pastry-cooks, 
sweetmaken, confectioners, maid servants, and butlen 

Mercury — Literary men, writers, accountants, schoolmasters, pro- 
cepton, mterpreten, secretaries, registran, orators, messengers, 
pnnten, booksellers, clerks, postmen, earners, etc. 

The Afoon— Sailon, travellen, &hennen, those who manage public 



14 


THE HANUAL OF ASTROLOOY 


conveyances, dealers in public salesmen, nurses, mid- 

wives, water-carriers, female ofBcials, etc. 


Plaiiets as Si^ificators 

A planet is called the ** Significator ” of a person when holding 
the ascendant or other important position in the horoscope. The 
general signification of a planet may be applied to the person tinder 
its influence. In a general sense the Sun and Moon are called 
“ Significators,*’ but every planet is such in a particular sense, as our 
studies will show. Thus, when chief significator, 

Phito indicates an experiencing of extremes of good and bad. It 
Will give the inspiration ai^g the arresting of falling conditions 
of both a private and business nature, the turning of what seem 
to be lost causes into successful projects. 

On the other hand there will betimes in the life when objectives 
wiU seem to recede just when the point of realisation appears 
imminent, plans wifi be frustrated and brought to nought. 
Keptime denotes many changes; uncertam fortunes; rise or fall by 
the influence of women; artistic faculty; secrets in the life; 
intrigues and covert alliances. 

It renders the native, or person bom under its influence, 
restbetic, artistic, intuitive, unstable, sensiuve, mystical, imita- 
tive, highly emotional, self-deceptive, and enthusiastic. 

Uranus gives constructive and mecbanical ability, sudden changes, 
estrangements, sorrows, exiles, enmities, uncertain fortunes, 
and blind impulses. 

It makes its subject erratic, eccentric, impulsive, ingem’oas,and 
inventive, firm in opinion, critical, sarcastic, self-centred, 
romantic, heroic, and m many ways pccuh'ar. 

Saturn gives delays, impediments, defects, secrets, fatalities, falls 
from position, misfortunes, melancholy moods, chronic hurls, 
sorrows, disease, and hurts to women and children. 

It makes the native Independent, unhappy, secretive, cautious, 
jealous, miserly, and governed by habit. 

Jipiter confers fortune, happiness, plenty, success, honours, friends, 
protection, supremacy, and productiveness. 

It renders the subject jovial, generous, prudent, courtly, , 
ambitious, sympathetic, and humane. 

Jifars pves enmities, strifes, wounds by fire and steel, treasons. 



THE PLANETS 


15 


calumnies, theFts, sudden deaths, glory in battle, bomings and 
poisonings, enthusiasm and madness, sharp pains and fevers. 

It makes the native fearless, brave, easy to anger, demonstra* 
live, impulsive, cynical, expert, witty, independent, pven to 
reforms, and oilen to destructions. 

Sun gives honours, glory, elevation, high patronage, celebrity, 
public ofBces, health, and power. 

It renders its subjects honest, free, generous, noble, desirous 
of glory, clever in the arts, judicious, truthful, and of wise 
counsel. 

Vatus gives love affairs, attachments, amours, marriage, joy, 
pleasures, gaiety, favours of women, success, and wealth. 

It makes the native gentle, cultured, hopeful, bright, pleasant 
in manner, loving, poetical, and inclined to sensuous and mental 
beauty, the fine arts, etc. 

Mercury gives relations in family and commerce, industnes, journeys, 
letters, messages, anxieties, worries, many occupations and 
mental activity. 

It inclines to writing and oratory, to the study of science, 
intellectual conquests ; makes the native wary, subtle, talkative, 
busy, and restless. 

Moon gives changes, voyages, travellmg, afiections of the body 
according to the sign it is in, mystenes, romances, fancies, 
popularity, public life. 

It makes the subject inconstant, capricious, fanoful, unsettled ; 
capable of securing public bonouis, but in danger of reversals. 

The Relations of Signs and Planets 
By empirical art it has been determined that certain signs are 
ruled by certain planets, and the Ancients have delivered to us a 
full statement of the dominion of the planets in this respect. The 
planets Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury have each two 
houses or signs, over which they rule; the Sun and Moon having 
one each, as shown in the following diagram. Saturn rules 
Aquarius and Capricorn, Jupiter ndes Pisces and Sagjttanus, and 
BO wiflx the rest 

/fore.— A planet in the opporite sign to the one it rules is said to 
be in its detriment or ** debility.** It u then weak, and disposed 
toeviL 



16 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 
Homes of Planets 



The dominion of Uranus is mdeBnhc, for bt has vo bouse of his 
own, though be is moat successfully pbced when in the airy triplieity 
—n, sas, as. In this sense he is the ” prodigal son.** In mythology 
be ruled all the spheres, and was the father of Krooos (Saturn). 
It is worthy of comment that his period of eighty>four years is the 
product of the number of (be signs multiplied by the seven planets 
over which he rules, / e , 12 x 7 ■« 84. 

Neptune has aHinily with the watery triplieity— cn, HI, and K. 
It has also some association with the sign Sagittarius. It represents 
the ocean of space, and is analogous to the Vorwvj of the Hindus. 

It has been suggested that both Uranus and Neptune are the 
spiritual correspondents, or counterparts, of Mercury and Venus— 
i e., so far as their influence in human alTairs is concerned. This is 
quite in accord with astrological experience, and may be the reason 
that Uranus produces eccentrics in the mtellectual world, and 
Neptune eccentrics in thp artistic world. They probably are in 
touch with elements of thought and feeling that are whoUy incon- 
ceivable to the more mundane types of Venus and Mercury. 

Pluto is also a planet having no fixed rulership over any sign but 
as with Uranus and Neptune it has a spiritual affinity with Man, 
for whilst Mars is the planet of war and of partial and spasmodic 
desovca'oa, f^ifo cr tie plsaet of a aothdaiioa. te ias sa essaca- 
tjon with (he signs Aries and Scorpio and its influence is very much 
in accord with the deeper occult and spintoal significance of 
Scorpio. 



THE PLANETS 


17 


Planetary Dignities 

Certain signs are found to be in affinity with the natures of the 
vanous planets, and when a planet is found in such a sign it is said 
to be m Its exaltation,” and is found to be stronger for good, and 
less disposed to evil than when otherwise placed Thus— - 

Saturn is exalted in ^ 

Jupiter „ „ fls L r 

Man „ „ '' 

Sun „ M 

Venus „ „ H ^ 

Mercury „ , e» » ^ 

Moon „ , B 

When the planets are found to occupy the opposite signs 
to these, they are said to be in their ” fall ” 

The foregoing tables of Houses and Exaltations will show the 
planets have their fnendships and comiucs, as follows — 
h u opposed to O and ) 

21 ... 8 

in „ 

and It will be seen that the signs ruled by these are severally opposed 
to each other Similarly, those planets whose houses and exaltations 
are in the same sign, are fnendly Thus — 

fl u tfae fineod of ?, being exalted m its sign ^ 

% .. .. » 

g .... h. » „ n 

5 .. .. 21, „ K 

8 „ M h. .. .. 

Planetary Pommions 

The domimon held by the planets over the affairs of Ufe is due to 
their correspondence to certam pnnaples of the human constitution, 
governed by the signs of the Zodiac. Thus — 

^'^luto rules both the negation and the transforming of conditions 
It bnngs extremes of good and bad luck A voluntary re- 
linquishing of worldly interests m order to advance spiritual 
development A giving up of home, country and fortune to be 
with one’s mantal affinity 

JVeplune rules ambushes, deceptions, the secrets of the life, sudden 
death assassinations, wanderings, exiles, secret societies, 
impositions, frauds, and disguises 



*8 ^ THE UAKUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

Urojoa rules catastrophes, sudden events, changes, bereavementi, 
smddes, romances, tragedies, and public afTaiis. 

Saturn governs the father, disease, chronic affections, hindrances, 
falls and bruises, poverty, friendships, long ties, habits, darkness, 
and decay. 

JitpUer gowms religion, duties, legal afiairs, the clergy, good . 
fortune, the father's relatives, godfathers, guardians, long 
journeys, devotion, increase, and wealth. 

Mats governs fires, fevers, madness, quarrels, ambidocs, prowess, 
energy, adventures, poison, hurts by violence, passions, death, 
male relations. 

Sun rules over honour, fame, occupation, the king or ruler, nobles, 
advancement, father, constitution of the body, etc. 

Venus has dominion over money, adornments, jewels, coins, learning, 
marriage, pleasures, the arts, and female relations. 

Mercury governs the mind, memory, acquaintances, letters, writings, 
mother’s relations, sickness, ser\’ants, food, clothing, and 
journeys by land. 

Mo<m governs the mother, the home, place of residence, voyages, 
changes, females, maniage affairs, health, worldly condition, 
native place, the ocean, and the common people. 
f^ote.-^Ja general, the above may be taken as the things signified 
. and ruled by the several planets. But in each case the bouses ruled 

by these planets in the horoscope will determine their particular 

signification as regards any individuaL 



THE PLANETS AND DECANATES 


19 


Aries 

Istdccan, ruledbyJl/ofj. It confers a warlike and aggressive spirit, 
a taste for political and public work; disposes to injuries in the 
head and face; gives success through pioneer work or mihtaiy 
service, and renders the life changeful and remarkable in many 
ways. 

2nd decan, ruled by Sim. A proud and haughty nature, desiring 
to bear rule; ambitious and aspinog; lovmg the practical arts; 
extravagant and generous nature; impulsive, cntical, despising 
mean or underhand actions; free, but courteous in manner; 
gives success in govemmeotal positions and military life, and 
secures the favour of men. 

3rd decan, ruled by Venus. Givesstrongpassionsiloveofpleasures; 
bright and sparkling nature, love of art and poetry; renders the 
nature kind and lovmg, but very impulsive and over-ordenL 
The decan is not a very fortunate one, but it confers a generous, 
warm disposition which attracts friends. 

Taurus 

1st decan, ruled by Mercury It gives a highly-endowed mind, 
poetical and creative fancy, anuable disposition, steadfast 
aCTections, mtuitive faculty, fondness for the artistic and beauti- 
ful in form and colour; a sensuous love of life„riesirt for 
• comfort, ease, and luxury, but capable of sustained efforts of a 
mental nature. It gives success in drama, music, fine arts, and 
secures the patronage of women 

2nd decan, ruled by Moon. This decan gives a changeful and roman- 
tic disposiUon, strong imagmation, fine feelings, love of pleasure, 
fondness for dainty foods and good hvmg generally; it confers 
the favour of women of position, and renders the native 
successful m travelling, disposes to artistic and poetical 
punuits. It conduces to wealth and the acqmsmon of property. 

3rd decan, ruled by Saturn Dependence and servitude, poverty or 
extreme difficulty m the attainment of wealth are the frmts of 

' this decan It renders the nature sensitive and languishing; 
leads to disappomtment in love affairs; overthrou's the ambi- 
tions, and destroys the pleasures of domestio and married Ufe. 

It produces enemies, and renders the life generally very unfor- 
tunate. It gives, however, much depth of feeling and fidehty 
m attachments. 



20 THE MANUAl. OF ASTROLOGY 

Gemini 

1st decan, ruled by Jupiter Confers a bumane and generous 
disposition, but unfortunate. Makes a man fats own enemy, 
gives too much self-confidence, and leads to self hurt The 
subject of this decan becomes his own enemy m many ways 
He IS capable of nsing by his own merits The mind is generous 
and the mtellect strong, but the judgment is perverted, and 
imsfortunes through enemies are less to be feared than through 
the wrong use of one’s own faculties It gives oratoncal powers 
and taste for judicial and legal pursuits, as well as forhterature, 
but It IS not a fortunate decan 

2nd decan, ruled by Afars This decan gives a quarrelsome and 
violent nature, predisposed to acts of ingratitude and wanton 
ness The life is filled with useless strife and unprofitable 
discussion, and the interests am apt to be misplaced, and the 
faculties, which are very acute, misapplied It gives hurts and 
dangers m travellmg, confers favours from martial persons, 
and gives sickness and fevers through acts of indiscretion 

3rd decan, ruled by Sun It confen success m the study of literature 
and saence, gives brillance of intellect, fame, but small fortune: 
many journeys, helpful relations, an anxious, restless life, bul 
eventual success m literary or artistic pursuits 


Cancer 

1st decan, ruled by Verna A sociable and amiable disposition, 
generous character, kind and attractive nature, many fneads, 
supporters among women of position, good sooaJ standing, 
and success in the artistic world A fondness for pleasure and 
for personal decoration mark this decan of Cancer 

2nd decan, ruled by Afereury Gives a strong imaginative intellect, 
makes a clever wntcr, a lover of travel and learning, readers the 
native loquacious and sometimes a tattler, and confers wealth 
or fame by the use of the pen, but the nauve makes enemies by 
too free use of the tongue 

3rd decan ruled by Afoon Love of romance, travelling adventure, 
and mystical subjens Gives public recognition and a certain 
popularity, honourable or otherwise, according to the position 
of the Moon at birth, pres many sea voyages and constant 
changes in life, patronage of women, and acquisition of property 



THE PLANETS AND DECANATBS 21 

Leo 

1st decan, ruled by Saturn. Gives a strong, forcible nature, difficult 
to control; poverty and trouble in life; domestic infelicity, loss 
of children; hazardous speculations; lack of sympathy in the 
nature; atxstere character, spoiled by false pride. Self- 
imposition and deception will mar the life. The native is 
distrustful of others, and lacking m self-confidence also, but is 
apt to assert his independence at inopportune moments. 
Much sickness, and a wasting of the vital powers; a careful, 
watchful nature, seldom achieving any great work, but always ‘ 
laborious. 

2nd decan, ruled by Jupiter. A fortunate and profitable nature: 
kind, humane disposition; warm sympathies; fortunate 
speculations; dutiful family; plenty of confiance-en-soi; 
artistic faculty; inclination to form rather than colour; gain 
by legacy, and success through marriage. 

3rd decan, ruled by Mars. Strong, forcible nature, capable of, and 
desiring command; frank, open, and generous disposition; 
many journeys; success in foreign countries: inheritance and 
acquisition of property at the close of life; adventurous spint, 
inclined to exploits and hazardous feats The native bears 
rule with a high hand, and is successful over his enemies. 


Virgo 

it decan, ruled by Sun. A patient nature, Lkely to suffer affliction 
and privation, and sometimes restraint or impnsonment, it 
confers a long life, and disposes to the study of analytical and 
mecbamcal science, theoretical and practical. The nature is 
secretive, and the subject of this decan often lives a very retired 
life. 

:id dccan, ruled by Venus. An artistic and literary person is 
denoted, with a love for philosophy and belles-lettres, kind 
disposition, genial and vivacious nature, full of pleasant 
- allusions and bright dialogue; fortunate in the acquisition of 
property and artistic pursuits. Long voyages are shown; 
much familiarity with the stage or the artistic world; some 
falling-offi of family fortunes, and an inclination to domesuc 
disputes. 

rd decan, ruled by Mercury. The nature is quick and alert, apt m 



22 THE MAKUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

the sciences and dc:iteron* arts; iaclined to literature; loqua- 
cious and restless; a person of much business, and very versatde 
disposition; gains honours and position by his own merits, and 
acquires property; disposed to the study of medicine and 
' •hygiene; very' particular in the matters of diet and clothing; 
many changes of residence. 

Libra 

1st decan, ruled by Afoon. A genial but weak nature, easOy 
influenced by women, and disposed to extravagance and 
unsteady habits; clever in genera! business matters, frequently 
changing his pursuits or position; a changeful and restless 
mind, halting between two courses; gains honour and position 
by pubhc business, and has a chance of acquiring some property 
in land or houses. 

3nd decan. ruled by Saturn. Griefs and tronbles are shown, but 
suc^ss In the end of life. The native falls and rises in life from 
his own fault or merit Fondness for the home life and 
steadfastness in the afieetions are characteristics of this decan.. 
In most cases the native is poor, and has some trouble in the 
marriage state. 

3rd decan, ruled hy Jupiter. A generous, kind, and amiable nature, 
well-balanced and fruitful mind; happy marriage and mucb 
wealth; many journeys; faithful friend and generous enemy. 
The native is belo\ cd for his justice and probity. 

Scorpto 

Ist dccan, ruled by Mars. The nature is a strong, forceful, energetic 
one, capable of immense feats of prowess, of endurance and 
courage. In stnfe, the native is implacable and dauntless, 
scorning defeat and danger of reversal. The ambitions are high ; 
the spint of conquest strong; the will is not less exalted and 
powerful. Strange and impulsive lo\-c afTam, sickness, caused 
through indiscretion or excess, are the fruits of this decan; but 
the native has faithful servants, and is born, in most cases, to 
command. 

OnA decan. ruled by Sun. Honours and dignities asrait the natisx 
of this dccan. It is replete with masterful and governing 
qualities. Proud and haugh^ of spint, the native bean high 
rule, and may become lyrannicaL .The nature is capable of^ 


THB PLANETS AND DECANATBS 


23 


extreme cruelty, unless a strong guiding hand is over it when 
young Fame, or a less honourable reputation, is sure to fall 
to the native of this decan 

3rd decan, ruled by Venus The nature is prone to excess and folly 
in love affairs The passions need to be bridled 'Many 
enemies arise against the native, and secret enmity from females 
may be expected In marriage there will be trouble The 
passions are quick and volatile, and the nature is capable of 
great passional devotion, which, however, is liable to bring 
disastrous results 

SagtUarius 

1st dccan, ruled by Mercury This dccan gives much versatility and 
capacity for general work More particularly it gives a good 
judgment, a sober mind, a quick intellect, but powers ruonmg 
into profusion and disorder through nchness of intellect and 
lack of method Troubles and bickcnogs m mantal life may 
be looked for, many eneimes and many conquests The native 
rises m life through the exerase of bis faculties and favours the 
more humane studies, natural saence and philosophy 

2nd decan, ruled by Moon This decan confers much romance and 
strong imagmative faculty, love of travelling and life in foreign 
lands Not infrequently it conduces to high renown and gives 
wealth and good fortune Death in a foreign land is to be 
feared, and in some way the native is responsible for his own 
demise Inhentance or legacy falls to the native The pat* 
ronage of ladies in high life may assist in fonsarding the 
fortunes A certain restless activity of mind, together with a 
rich creative power, charactenscs the subject of this decan 

3rd decan, ruled by Saium The mind is of a philosophical and 
sober temperament, the passions aie strong, but well controlled 
Riches are difficult to acquire, but are yet certain to the naU\e 
of this decan Philosophical and literary punuits, a taste for 
lofty speculations and deep researehes, preferably of a sacntific 
nature, ate the chief charactcnsucs of those under this decan 
Success in literature is promised to those boro under it 
Fnendships are few, but very steadfast 
Capricorn 

1st decan, ruled hy Jupiter The mind is masterfil and ambitious, 
but often beset with doubts The sympathies are narrow, and 


24 THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 

the native is usually a strong sectarian, or disposed to jtJigious 
austerities, and at times to self'immolation. Sometimes a 
fatalist, or yet a believer in the occult, the native is ever fearful 
of his destiny, yet nevertheless carried onward by a prevailing 
self-confidence and high ambition. Relative assist, and again 
obstruct, the progress of the native. Some secret evil mars the 
life and threatens the fame of a fair destiny. The decan ^ves 
very strong religious feeling, capable of arousing a high and 
worthy ideal. 

2nd decan, ruled by Mars. The acme of forceful self-assertion, of 
intense ambition, and of red-hot enthusiasm is reached in this 
decan of Capricorn. The native may easily achieve high military 
honours, but is always in danger of overstepping the limits of 
prudence, and suffering a speedy downfall. Yet friends are 
numerous and powerful, and favours fall in full measure to the 
native. The nature is capable of extreme energy, and may 
become cruel and despotic unless tempered by prcvafling 
infiuences of a softer and more humane nature. There are 
many and constant nvals who threaten the fame and position 
of the native. With moderation and proper feeling, the native 
will secure very high bonoun and a wide fame. The keynote 
of the decaa is ccnquesU and again conquesL 

3rd decan, ruled by Sun. The disposition is proud, cold, reserved, 
and austere, wanting in sympathy and grace. The native suffers 
through his chQdren, end also runs risk of financial min by 
speculations. The spint is melancholy, and disposed to look 
gloomily upon life’s problems. Not infrequently there is 
danger of premature death. The struggle of life will be hard, 
because the nature is loo self-centred, and devoid of the wider 
sympathies. 


Aquarius 

1st decan, ruled by Venus. Bright, cheerful, artistic, and humane 
in disposition, the native of this decan gathers friends around 
him. He excels in the lighter sciences and the fine arts, and 
especially in decorative art and industrial science. He figures 
in reunions and social gatherings. He is sober and pladd in 
temperament, devoid of unruly passion or excess. He has ^ 
success in foreiga lands, and also in the pursuit of science and 



THE PLANETS AND DECANATES 25 

literature. He gains property, and has a taste for construction. 
His life is marked by an even and temperate course. 

2nd decan, ruled by Mercury. The mind is bent on sdentific and 
philosophical punuits. Great depth of thought and extreme 
patience are characteristics of this person. Inventive faculty 
applied to medicine and by^ene is productive of success. 
Mathematical sdence, astronomy, and occult research are 
indicated; independent spirit, penetrating mind, power of 
assimilation. A lover of sohtude and of learned society. 
Fortune by science or art. Slow but sure success. The native 
enjoys a fair name and good reputation. 

3rd decan, ruled by Moon. A melancholy individual, disposed to 
sohtude and nocturnal hfe. Changeful in fancy; inclined to 
the lugubrious, to strange terrors and weird experiences, 
visions, and hallucinations. Women are likely to cause evil in 
the hfe. The native wanders from place to place. Danger of 
feeble or afflicted vision: long voyages; peculiar and fantastic 
appetites. 


Pisces 

ht decan, ruled by 5otum. Loss of position; false friends; many 
secret enemies; morbid enthusiasm and corrupt sympathies; 
religious spirit, incUning to fanaticism; trouble through love 
afimrs and children; danger of drowning; quarrels and 
disputes with powerful enemies; early death or affliction of a 
parent 

2nd decan, ruled by Jupiter. High position and much success; 
two marriages, or inconstancy to the roamage state; eminent 
friends; certain elevation and honours; a kind, warm disposi'* 
tion and genial nature, very sympathetic, but lacking in con- 
stancy. The inherent ments of the native will rmse him to a 
good position, and will confer wealth by good fortune. 

3rd decan, ruled by Mars. Loss by strifes and enmities, and by 
unknown and secret means; success in foreign lands, but a 
menace of danger; troubles in the marriage state; separation 
from ■wife and cSuldTen; female iaflutnee atioag. but detri- 
mental; danger of severe reversals, but assistance from friends 
in high position. At times timid, and anon very audadous, the 
native is not reUable, and wiQ lose many an opportunity of 
advancement A certain reli^ous or fanatical enthusiasm 



26 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


inspires the mind from time to time, but it is not constant, and 
falls short of end. Passionate nature, infected with an utter 
disregard of the consequences of action. Fanciful projects 
make a plaything of the native, and lead him from one to another 
disappointment 

Note . — ^These readings of the <iccanates are frequently useful in 
determining the part of a sign under which a person is bom, thus 
considerably reducing the limits of error in the constroction of a 
horoscope. The chararterist/cs, and also the points of probable 
destiny, referred to under each decan^ are capable of considerable 
modification when the planetary influences so dispose. The decans 
designate a type of person, whereas the disposition of the planets 
bring out the indi\1dual characteristics and destiny. Thus Nature 
continually refines and specialises, from sign to decanate, from 
decanate to degree. The planets Pluto, Neptune and Uranus do 
not exercise spedfic rule over any of the decanates as they do not 
come within the normal septenary scale, but allowing for the octave 
expression of each planet, Pluto «ill accentuate the vibration of 
Mars ca the Best decsn cf Aties end the Brtt decea of Scorpio, 
Neptune will enhance the vibration of Venus in the fint decan of 
Cancer and the second decan of Virgo, while Uranus strengthens the 
vibration of Mercury in the first decan of Taurus and the second 
decan of Aquarius. 


CHAPTER V 

THE HOUSES 

THERE are twelve celestial ** Houses” in Astrology. They are 
derived from an equal division of the aide of observation into 
twelveparts. Whatisthiscirdcof observation? It is an imaginary 
line passing from the eastern boruon, through the point immedi- 
ately overhead, through the western ftoriron, the point immediately 
beneath our feet, round to the eastern horizon agairu In astronomy 
it is the *‘ vertical of latitude '* belonging to the place of birth. This 
israU«Ja vwsicaJ becsu^JtJsaJrays vertical to she nude nf 
horizon. One twelfth part of the drde of observation constitutes 
an astrological “ House.” The foDowiag diagram shows how the 
bouses are oumbered. 



THE HOUSES 


27 



28 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

The Temporal Houses are the se^nd, sixth, and tenth. The 
second, symbobsed by Taurus, governs the possessions or property 
of the man; the sixth, Virgo, denotes his comforts— food, dothing, 
servants, etc.— and his health; the tenth, Capneom. denotes the 
business, honour, credit, and position of the person. 

The Relati\e Houses are the third, seventh, and eleventh. The 
third, Gemini, shows consanguinity— the tics of blood relationship — 
brothers, sisters, and near relauves; the seventh, Libra, conjugality 
— the husband or wife of the person, partners and others in legal 
contract with the nati\e; the eleventh, Aquarius, shows the tie of 
friendship. It denotes the friends, advisers, associates, and socM 
relations of the native. 

The Terminal Houses are the fourth, eighth, and twelfth. The 
fourth, Cancer, denotes the end of man, his final condition, 
the grave, etc.; the eighth House, Scorpio, is that of Death; the 
twelfth, Pisces, that of bondage. 

The signs of the Zodiac corresponding to the twelve houses may 
be taken as having potentially the same meanings,, though they 
must not be confounded with the bouses The latter always remain 
in the same position, and bold the same meanings. The signs, on 
the contrary, are coniinually moving through the bouses* by their 
diurnal rising and setting, and hence the same sign wiU be successively 
m the twelfth, eleventb, tenth, and the other houses, tJI it comes to 
nse agam in the first house. 

The following significations are attached to the several houses. 

It is absolutely necessary, for the practice of Astrology, that they 
should be completely mastered;— 

The Pint House denotes the body of the native, his physical 
condition and appearance. 

Second House — Money; possessions of value; trade; gain or loss. 
Third House — Letters, papers, writings, journeys by land or short 
water journeys; all means of communication, vehicles, railways, 
etc.; brothers and sisters, near relations, neighbours. 

Fourth House— The residence, the place of birth: bouses, landed 
property, grounds, mines, places under the earth, the grave; 
the mother m a man’s horoscope, the father in a woman’s 
horoscope; the motber*m*law in a man’s horoscope, and the 
father-in-law in a woman’s. 

Fifth House — Pleasures, love afiairs/sex lies outside wedlock; chfld- , 
reo, theatres, schools and educational inSuence$:p!aces of amuse- 



THE HOUSES 


29 


ment, bathing, the bedroom, and all sensuous enjoyments 
Sulh House— Health, servants, food, clothing, physical comforts, 
persons employed, small animals and domestic creatures, 
climatic and other conditions bearing on health, the father’s 
brothers and sisters m a female horoscope, the mother’s 
brothers and sisters in a male horoscope 
Seventh House— The husband m a female horoscope, the wife in a 
male horoscope, partners, contracts, agreements, persons 
opposed to the native in contests, litigation, etc , open enemies, 
rivals, the grandparent — according to sex of horoscope (vide 
Fourth House) 

Eighth House— Death, dissolution, losses, the wife’s or husband's 
wealth and possessions, the partner’s property, legacies, 
bequests, the property of the dead, wills 
Nmth House — Religion and philosophy, publications, voyages, 
foreign countries, long distances from the birthplace, dreams, 
spintual occurrences, lawsuits, bwyers, the clergy, church 
aSairs , lega\ arbitrations, money m cbanceiy , TOamage rebtives 
Tenth House— The occupation, credit honour and rank, the father 
or mother— according to sex of horoscope, the employer, 
superior, master, business aflairs geDcrally, and the government 
of the country 

Eleventh House — Fnends, councillors, companions, associates, 
society m which the person will move, wishes and hopes, 
financial aOairs of employers and those in command over the 
native 

Twelfth House— Confinement, restraint, prison, bondage, exile, 
secret enemies ambushes, and plots, large ammals, hones, 
etc , the mother’s relatives m a female horoscope, and the 
father's relatives in a male horoscope 
These are the chief significations of each of the bouses If it 
should be asked whether a person would have any voyages, then the 
nmth house would be referred to as governing the subject m quesUon, 
and the sign and planets occupying that house, or ruling it, would 
determine whether voyages were likely, and whether they would be 
good or bad for the person to whom the horoscope refen 
The Cardinal Houses ate called ** the Angles *' They are the fint, 
fourth, tenth, and seventh The second, fifth, eighth, and eleventh 
are Succedent Houses The third, sixth, nmth, and twelfth are 
Cadent Houses 



30 


^ t«b manual of astrology 


The Angular Houses are the -strongest in the figure, and of these 
the first and tenth are the more important. Planets placed therein 
are said to have dignity, and they exert a powerful influence over 
the life and character of the native. 

The Cadent Houses arc tbc weahest, and many planets therein 
considerably lessen the force and tnasiery of the horoscope, so that 
not mfcequently the native imks into obscurity, even though it may 
be that of retired luxury Forceful and epoch making horoscopes 
have the majority of planets m cardinal signs and angular houses 


CHAPTER VI 

THE PLANETS AND HOUSES 

Where a planet occupies a certam house at the time of birth, it 
stamps Its own nature on the affairs of life governed by that house, 
as detailed m the previous chapter It is essential to notice whether 
a planet is m aspect to others or not, whether it is m a congenial 
sign or the reverse, and what dignities and debilities it may receive 
therefrom, for these considerations will determine what e^ect will 
result from the presence of that planet in any particular bouse 
The following results will follow from the position of the planets 
in the several houses, io either a male or female horoscope, providing 
always that tbc planets are unaspected For aa explanation of the 
aspects the reader is referred to the next chapter 

In the First House 

P/ufo— Will give a unique outlook upon life with an expressing of the 
pnnaple “ I ara a law unto myself” A sense of domination 
will be felt and the potcntiahtics ofaction, for good or lU w21 
be immense. The capacity to nsc in life will be marked and 
this can be brought about by the expressing of the power of 
attraction from the good standpomt or by ruthless action 
which bquidales competitors or opponents from the adverse 


PLANETS IN HOUSES 


31 

t^rcnuj— MaVes the native crrauc, wayward, stubborn Danger of 
falls, and hurts by machinery to the head and that part of the 
body ruled by the sign occupied by Uranus It causes estrange- 
ment from the parents and kindred 
.Sarum— Melancholy nund, solitary ^ablts, shy, nervous manners, 
subjects the native to colds, causes bruises to the head, an 
uphill struggle, patient disposition 
Jupiter— ‘Q qqA health, fortunate nature, generous disposition love 
of justice and equity It increases the chances of success m 
life, and brings the efforts of the native to successful issues 
Mars — Causes a mark or scar on the head or face gives danger 
of cuts bums, scalds and abrasions Makes the native bold, 
free and independent, fond of competition and strife, haughty, 
scormng defeat, and reckless of danger 
Sun — Gives honour and success A proud disposition, frank, 
outspoken generous, despising cliques and cotenes, indepen 
dent and firm It also gives a love of display and publicity, 
accompanied by high motives 

Kenur— Amiable and docile nature, fondness for poetry, musie, 
singing dancing the drama and fine arts with every kind of 
sparkle and glitter Jewels scents and personal ornamenta- 
tions are favoured by the native of Venus It confers a sociable 
spirit much inclined to bnlliant company pageants and 
festivities, and generally conduces to domestic and social 
success ■* 

Mercury — h restless spirit given to ceaseless inquiry and concern 
Many journeys, much wnting, quick nervous speech, taste 
for literature of some sort, an mquisiUve mind always on the 
alert for new luformatioc 

Moon — ^Inconstancy, timidity cbangefulness publicity, liability to 
many changes of residence and reversals of fortune, if m a 
movable sign constant changes m life and a roving disposition , 
tendency to sleep-walkmg at some time in life, fruitful 
imagination, sensiUve and mtuiUve nature 

In the Second House 

Phito— 'Money will be a focal pomt in the life There will be a 
passionate desire to have mon^ and the power of coacentratioa 
and magnetic attraction will be used to draw money to the 
person either through contact with people who have plenty of 



32 


THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


money or throogh contact vith finangia! activities which give 
scope for the extraction of personal financial benefit from them- 
It can however show a danger of fluctnations and imexpccted 
losses which occur just when financial hopes and wishes seem 
about to be realised. 

/fep/une— Loss by fraud; financial affairs much involved. • 

C/ramu— Sudden changes in fortune; many ups and downs in life; 
financial afiairs very uncertain. 

Saturn — ^Business losses; a thrifty nature; hard work for little gain; 
sometimes poverty. 

Jupiter-^Tht best position for wealth; increase of property; gain 
and general prosperity. 

Mars — Good earning powers, but extravagant nature. Money runs 
quickly through the hands, and the native seldom continues 
rich for any length of time. 

Sun — Gain by superiors and essodarion with persons of rank and 
title. The native is inclined to extravagance and luxnry. 
Gains by high offices and affairs of government 

KeTntr— Money comes readily, and is frequently gained by artistic 
pursuits or the drama. In a mao's horoscope, it denotes that 
much is spent on pleasure and the opposite sex; and in a 
woman’s horoscope, that a good deal goes in dress and finery. 
But in spite of everything, money is always ready at hand. 

Mercury — Gain by letters and writings, by help of clericals and 
professioaak, and by common industries. There will, however, 
be some chance of loss by theft or sharp practice. 

Afoon — Changeful fortunes. Gain or loss by ftmalcs, more particu- 
larly married women, and public affairs. The native gains by 
travelling in foreign lands, and by fulfilling some public function. 

In the Third House 

Pluto — Creates a condition of ** War in the mind,” and shows a 
fighting mental tendency with much ingenuity, penetration and 
forcefulness in the expressmg of views and opinions. Very 
■' good for studies to do with atomic interests and nuclear science 
and for play and scenario writing. In personal relationships 
and where near relatives are coocemol it can have a banishing 
infiuence in that relatives and neighbours move far away and 
are lost touch writh or the person themselves moves away and \ 



PLANETS IN HOUSES 


33 


Neptune — Occult sympathies; chaste of name by deed or alias; 
psychological faculties; curious beliefs; inventive mind, 
fruitful imagination; dangerous journeys, and imposition or 
fraud among relatives; power of astral projection, or spiritual 
' vision; high intuitive perceptions. 

l/romti— Wayward mind, curious and inventive ; estrangement from 
kindred; troubles in letters, and short journeys; many tele- 
grams; eccentric method of tra%%lliog; unpopular ideas, which, 
if published, only incur severe and adverse criticism. 

iSb/um— Troubles and losses through journeys and writings; the 
native does not agree with his relatives; letters are delayed and 
lost; publications fail; the native’s health is endangered by wet 
journeys and exposure in trawUing; the mind is melancholy 
and unfertile. 

Jupiter — Gain by all those things governed by the third house. 

Afars— Quarrels and losses through letter-writing; litigation; 
disputes with relatives; aeddents on short journeys. 

•S'ua~Po3sib!e fame by writings. Some honours fall to the relatives 
of the native. The name becomes famous in good or ill 
association. 

P<7»r-~Stroag inclinarion to the fine arts; pleasant travelling; 
success in letters and writings; peaceful relations among the 
members of the family; amiable disposition, and bright, 
fruitful intellect Poetry, music, singmg, and painting are 
among the pursuits of those under this influence. ' 

Mercury — ^Mueb aedvity; many short journeys; much writing; a 
busy mind, given to the pursuit of various knowledges, especially 
literature and science. 

Moon — Constant journeys; public!^ of some sort; many changes 
of pursuit and occupation; cunous and capricious fancies; 
unstable mind. 


In the Fourth House 

P/u/o— Often signifies condition of orphanage or shows a destruction 
of early home hfe through the parents parting or dying. Many 
peculiar incidents will occur in connection with domestic 
arrangements caus'mgloss and strain. It is not a good influence 
for matters to do with property showing a danger of distraint 
for debt or a loss of the property through the ruthless methods 
of other people. There will be lonelmess at the end of hfe. 



34 THE MANI/AL OF ASTROLOGY 

Airp/«n^— Afflicts the parent involved, threatens dange** to the 
native by plots in his own house, losses through deceitful 
landlords and by dealing in property The native ends his 
life m seclusion and frequently in an asylum 
Uranus — Unsettled residence, many changes of house, misfortune 
m the place of birth, trouble through the parents, danger of 
paralysis or other incurable infirmity in old age, a sudden 
end to life * ^ ^ 

5<3/urR — Losses and troubles in all matters connected with the 
fourth house The native is frequently tied down to a place to 
his great detrunent 

Jupiter — Gam by mhentance, and through all matters of the fourth 
house, favours from the parents, much success m the place 
and country of birth. 

Mars — Loss by fire and theft at the house of residence, quarrels 
* with parents, loss by speculation m property, buildings, mines, 
etc. 

Sm — Small chance of honours or dignities dll the very end of life, 
attachment to the father (or mother), pnde in house and 
property, mclined to secret and occult things 
Krimr-^Gam and prosperity m ^ fourth house affairs, a peaceful 
end to the life, love of home and country 
Mercury — Inconstancy m affairs generally, change of residence 
through matters connected with business The native seldom 
has a fixed residence but is ** here tixlay and gone to- 
morrow ’* 

jl/oon_UncertaiDty of position, some chance of mhentance, 
changes of residence are frequent, some populanty at the end 
of life, favours from women. 

In the fifth House 

P/uro— Signifies possibEities of abortion or the matemeot thereto 
if It falls m a male horoscope In a female horoscope it brmgs 
a liability to rape or to atta^ I7 a sex maniac if badly afflicted 
From a constructive standpomt shows capaaty for mvention, 
gives creative abQity m art, is very good for tbeatneal acting. 

Is hos^'oer very probfematical rega^mg speculation and Invest 
ment for although it can bring extraordinary benefits it can also 
nipe out fortunes through terrestrial, mdustnal or national 
calamity ^ 



PLANETS IN NOUSES 35 

Hljat amours, absorbiog love of pleasures of a sensuous 
nature Unless other indications modify tj^s position, the 
native will be disposed to chaotic and Unnatural acts, will 
have depraved desires, fantastic appetites, and licentious habits 
In either sex it is a dangerous position, and leads to trouble m 
love affairs and all the evils of erotic mama seduction etc. 

Ifranur— Troubles m domestic life, loss of first child, inconstancy 
m love affairs, crosses and annoyances* m youth, some 
romantic and impulsive attachments, danger m the pursuit of 
pleasure 

Saturn — ^Disappointment m early love affairs, grief, lossofachild, 
losses through speculations and games of chance, danger of 
heart affections and drowning 

Jupiter — Good successful anddutifulchildrtn, gam by speculations, 
■ttell regulated appetites and pleasures, chance of a nch 
inhentaoce 

JWori — Quarrels and strife in the home life, rash and impetuous 
love affairs, loss by speculation The native wastes his energies 
in pleasurC'Seekmg Danger of accident tC) the fint bom A 
woman with this position will have difBcult and dangerous 
child birth and some tenden^ to puerperal fever 

Sun — Generally good, givmg success in relation to children schools, 
and theatres all sorts of amusements and love affairs 

Venus — One of the best positions for this planet It gives success 
and gam through the drama opera or copiedy and generally 
through artistic pleasures and education good and successful 
children, domestic peace, much success m Jove affairs The 
first child will be endowed with some artistic faculty and will 
be of beautiful appearance 

Mercury — Many little worries and concerns with speculative affairs, 
mconstancy m love 

Moon — Public success m connection with theatres and places of 
amusement fnutful nature, happy disposition fond of plea- 
sures, much in the company of women or children An 
illustrious birth will proceed from this position of the Moon — 
a child will become famous 

In the Sixth Rouse 

Phito — Emphasises the Lability to mdustnal forms of sickness 
caused by the work that is earned out anej would make one 



36 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


very vulnerable to invisible rays and radiation. espeaaDy if 
connected with atomic work or nuclear processes. Can also 
show contact with industrial interests to do with mining, 
explosives, demohUon and also re budding If the work earned 
out does not appeal it can cause one to suddenly give up the 
work and to leave the job without saymg anythmg to anyone 

NepUme — Gives a^wastmg sickness, treachery among servants and 
employees, peculiar tastes in food and clothing, loss of 
physical comforts 

Uranus — Nervous diseases, losses and anxieties through servants, 
changes which interfere with health and comfort. 

S’afum— Illness through exposure and want of proper nourishment, 
general debility, frequently fastidions m tastes, deceitful 
servants, losses by their deception. 

Jupiter — Improves the health, gives many comforts and faithful 
servants The chief illnesses anse from excesses and over* 
indulgence m diet 

Afarj^>Quarrets and thefts among seivants, inflammatory com* 
pUmts m the bowels and the part ruled by the sign Mars u in, 
extravagance m food and dress 

Sun — Enfeebles the health, and gives some taste for the study of 
hygiene and medicme 

Verois — Faithful and good servants, love of fine dress, delicate 
appetite, very careful m diet, fondness for dainty and pretty 
adornments, improi'es the health after momage 

Mercury — Study of mediaoe, hygiene and kmdred subjects, many 
<ina!i vexations through servants, journeys on account of 
health, d>*spepUc action arising from excessive mental or 
nervous action. 

Moon — Many changes among servants, uncertain health, variable 
condiuon of life The native generally makes a good servant 
but a poor master Much sickness m infancy 


Jn the Serenth House 

Pluto — Signifies that mamag- can mean a leaving of famihar 
surroundings or even one’s own country in order to go with the 
mamape partner to his or her locality •vhich can often be at a 
very great distance from ones normal location. Does not 
necessarily mean an enhap;^ mamage but shows that the trend 



PLANETS IN HOUSES 


37 

of affain afler marriage can bring® complete altering of personal 
actividcs. If badly aspecled, show a dan^ of the dis- 
appearance of the marriage partner which could be either 
intentional or unintentional. 

Neptune — Causes illicit attachments afler marriage; ruins the 
marriage life by neglect of duties; causes jealousies and scandal. 
The native may outrage the laws of society, of suffer dishonour 
by immoral praedees with others of the same sex. It is an 
insidious and sure source of evil in any horoscope, and affects 
the married life. A wasting disease of a neurotic type afihets 
the marriage partner. 

Uranus — Impulsive attachments; hastymairiage, frequently followed 
by estrangement, separation, divorce, or death of the partner; 
many open enemies and public contests, caused by wUful and 
stubborn opposition on the part of the native. 

Saturn — Ruin by partnerships; death, or enduring coldness of the 
marriage partner, who will be of a saturnine disposition and 
habit: many treacherous enemies. 

Jup/ter— A faithful and well-disposed partner; happy associations; 
gain by marriage. Enemies become friends, or fnendships and 
benefits arise out of strifes. 

Mars — Quarrels and dangers in the married state. In a male 
horoscope, the wife is frequently a virago, bearing a high hand 
in domestic afiairs, industrious but dictatorial; m Cancer or 
Pisces, oftentimes a drunkard. In a female horoscope, sudden 
death of husband, or some serious accident to h»m. The native 
is constantly exciting opposition and strife. Violence often 
results. 

Sun — Honours through marriage; successful litigation; honourable 
opponents. 

Venus — A fehcitous position for this planet. It confers a happy 
marriage; gives successful partnerships, peaceful termination 
to all strifes, and success in pubhc relations. 

Mercury — Unsettled married life; troubles through writings and 
.hti^tion; many small strifes; numerous but msi@iificaot 
opponents; many worries and vexations. 

Jtfbon— Changeful relations with the opposite sex ; public opposition ; 
unpopularity; female enmity. Ita a woman’s horoscope it 
frequently shows that the husband will lead a roving and 
unsettled life. 


38 THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

In the mghth House 

Pluto — Usually shows an unnatural kind of death such as through 
being involved in a local or national disaster. Sufibcatioo 
through being trapped in a submarine, coalmine disaster or 
Similar occurrence, or by explosion or disaster where identifica- 
tion becomes impossible. It can also signify a personal 
disappearance either by choice oi through the actions of others 
where death occurs in strange ways with the body never being 
found and death having to be presumed. 

Neptune — Gives troubles in money matters after marriage— the 
partner is indifferent and careless and disposed to luxury: e 
curious, perhaps a lingering death. The native may fall into 
trances which simulate death, thereby incurring danger of 
, premature burial. 

Uranus — Difficulties In finanaal affairs after mamage — sudden 
losses through the panner; danger of sudden and extra- 
ordinary death from violence, or, if natural, Itom some 
nervous affitciion such as epilepsy or paralysis. 

Satum~-K poor partner, without shadow of a dowry or marriagr 
settlement; difficulues after mamage; lingering death; los! 
of legacy or other expectation arising from decease. 

Jupiter — Marriage brings prosperity — the partner is or will be rich; 
gain by legacy; a happy death. 

Mars — ^The marriage partner spends the substance of the native; 
strife concerning ^c property of deceased persons; danger of 
a violent death; losses by fire and theft. 

Sun — The partner becomes rich by the exercise of his or her talents; 
steady fortunes after mamage; chance of fame or honours at 
death. The skeleton may place the laurels on the native’s brow. 
Danger of death m middle life. 

Kenus— Gain by marriage; chance of favours from deceased women. 
The partner will be fond of pleasures, jewels, and pretty things, 
and will spend money tbercoo; but success in finance comes 
after mamage. 

Mercury — Inconstant fortunes; troubles of a minor character in 
Ssssa^nSSsussSieTssam^Se- 

Moon— Unsettled fortunes after mamage; gain to public affairs by 
the partner The death is more or less pubbe, and may take 
place in a pubhe resort or In the open streets, or through a voyage. 



PLAYLETS IN HOUSES 
In the Ninth House 


39 


Pluto — ^WiU give an interest in unonhodox forms of religion and a 
refusal to adhere to orthodoxy. In extreme cases when Pluto 
is afiiicted can show atheism. Will give a strong desire for 
trarel but much will depend upon individual circumstances. 
Sometimes shows conditions of exile from native land if part 
is taken in political and kindred aflairs, as a result of unwise 
personal action or through enmity of others. It is a position 
associated with space travel interests as well as space travel itself. 
Neptune — Gives clairvoyant or other psychic faculties — a visionary 
nature; strange dreams, curious forebodings; a highly im- 
pressionable and simulative nature; danger of mental troubles, 
legal suits, fraud by trustees or lawyers, difficulties in foreign 
lands; a chaotic religious mania. 

Clfffiiuj— Misadventure in foreign lands; troubles through marriage 
relatives: legal difficulties; taste for occult and eccentric 
knowledge; antiquarian punuits; prophetic faculty, 
fisfum— Taste fbr philosophy; reOgious spirit; troubles in foreign 
lands; dangerous voyages; loss through legal siuts; deceit 
I among relatives by marriage; studious and thoughtful nature. 
^Jupiter — Clencal honours; success in religious and philosophical 
punuits, legal matten, andfordgu affairs; gam in foreign lands. 
Afora— Freedom of religious beliefs, frequently atheistical, bigoted, 
or madly fanatical; many strifes; losses m legal suits; danger 
of violence in distant countries; strife among the partner’s 
relatives: turbulent fancies and distressful dreams. 
iS’un — Honours through clerical or legal affain; dignities of some 
, sort in foreign lands; constancy in rehgious beliefs; proud and 
confident mind, ambitious spirit; taste for fine arts and science. 
Venus — Love of music and the drama, the fine arts, and artistic 
pursuits. A patron of all that tends to beautify and enliven 
life; a supporter of peaceful measures and projects; a kind, 
gentle disposition and cultured intellect. 
iCvnuT} — *icui 'iciwret 'iTtwary •pursu/ts, •jfuL vwri 

form of knowledge, apart from its uses. A busy, active mind; 
sometime meddlesome. Danger of legal worries; a desire for 
life in foreign countries, and knowledge of distant places; a 
constant reader and note-maker; a person of many bebefs and 
opinions. 



40 


THE UANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


Voyages, life mforeigo lands, legal or clencal persuaaoas. 
The native frequently penetrates into unknown and distant 
lands, and may gain honours as an explorer in some domam or 
other The nund is romantic, fanciful, changeful, and ever in 
search ofnoselty 


In the Tenth Hotise 

Pluto — Shows msecunty of position. Trouble throng prejudice 
or jealousy of co-wotkcR or cmpIo>-ers- Better if possible to 
work on one’s own but even then to be alert for strange twists 
of circumstances A part will be played m pubhc and social 
life but it will not be easy to obtain favours or recogmtion and 
services rendered can be stiy qmckly forgotten. 

Neptune — Gives a strange and eventful career, chance of honours 
in some artistic field, a highly inspirational nature capable of 
attaining honours through some unique achievement The 
native does so, however, under cunous cucumstances, either 
using an assumed name or some covert means It endangers 
the life of one of the parents — accordmg to the sex of the 
horoscope 

C/ramir— Difficulties with employers, a strange and chequered 
career, many sudden changes of posiuon and credit Ongi 
oality will be a marked feature. The naUve favours ecccntnc 
pursuits Estrangement from parents and fcmdred, a romantic 
and changeful life, opposition from public functionaries and 
govemm'mtal bodies, change of occupation, if m Pisces, 
Sagittanus, or Gemini, two simultaneous occupations. 

Saturn — Rise m life, followed by a downfaD. Patience and firmness 
of purpose mark the Lfc of the native In business, Ena na a l 
nan is shown, in professional life, dishonour and failure, in 
government defeat A fatality bangs over the native from his 
birth, danger of the nun or loss of a parent in early Lfc, 
public affairs fail or bnng loss and discredit. 

/jipiifr— High honoun, wealth, and success The nauve nsee in his 
sphere of life and gams credit and emoluments It is one of 
the best augun^ of a prosperous and happy life. 

hfarj — In mihlary lu'e, success, in other fields of work, danger of 
discredit The natnr suffen from slander, and h.s Lfc is filled f 
with turmoil and stnfe Desire for conquest and a spint of 



PLANETS IN HOUSES 41 

fretdom spur the naUve to outstnp his powrs and exhaust his 
energies The native is often quarrelsome, but quite as often 
the subject of constant fault fio^og and cntiosm 
un — Honours and success in life, high patronage and success in 
governmental circles, embassies, etc The credit of the native 
IS fauly secure, his success steady and generally productive of 
honours m middle life A servant with this position will secure 
service m high circles 

'emu — Frequently confers a gt/t of prophecy and taste for divinatory 
arts, artistic pursuits, success in poetry, music, or the drama, 
high patronage among ladies, success m love affairs, and 
general prosperity A peaceful and secure position Honours 
according to the sphere of life occupied by the native 
(ercury — Many occupations, restless spirit, uncertam position, 
taste for hterature, success m Irading and in general agencies 
andcomrmssions, vexations and worries, hterary or scholastic 
profession 

foon^DesireforpubUcUfe, manychanges and voyages Women 
influence the position for good or evil Unstable position 
Changes m occupation, a nse in hfe, often followed by a 
reversal * Much occupied with public busmess, and generally 
in close association with women Popularity 


In the Eleventh House 

luto — Peculiar fnendships will be made but it will not be easy to 
make lasting fnendships Circumstances will again play a 
strange part, at tunes bringing unexpected beneht through 
fnends but at other times showmg that erstwhile fnends can 
become enemies Hence there will be penods of loneliness 
and this will be more noticeable when there has been a strong 
fnendship with someone of the opposite sex 
Teptune — Gives seductive fnends and alliances unreliable advisers, 
treachery among supposed fnends, losses and troubles thereby 
The wife or husband is liable to moral delmquency, sometimes 
making havoc among the native $ fnends Strange and 
unaccountable attractions and assoaations 
Iranus — Ecccntnc and unreliable fnends, danger of estrangements 
among them, impulsive attachments which end in hatred 
The partner is m danger of indulging m romantic love affairs 



40 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


Moon — Voyages, life m foreign lands, legal or dencaipcrsuasoss. 
The native frequently penetrates into unknown and distant 
lands, and may gam honours as an explorer in some domain or 
other The mmd is romantic, fanoful, changeful, and exTT in 
search of novelty 


In the Tenth House 

Pluto — Shows insecunty of posibon. Trouble throng prgndics 
or jealousy of co-workers or employers Better if possible to 
work on one’s own but even then to be alert for strange twists 
of circumstances A part will be pbyed in public and so<aal 
life but It will not be easy to obtam favours or rccogmtion and 
services rendered can be very qinckly forgotten. 

Neptune — Gives a strange and eventful career, chance of honours 
in some artistic field, a highly mspiraUonal nature capable of 
attaining honours through some umque achievement The 
native docs so, bonever, under cunous circumstances, other 
using an assumed name or some covert means It endangers 
the life of one of the parents — according to the sex of the 
horoscope 

C/ira/Tur— 'Difficulties with employers, a strange and cbequeret! 
career, many sudden changes of posiUon and credit Onn- 
nality wifi be a marked feature The native favours ec c e o tnc 
pursuits Estrangement from parents and kmdred a romantic 
and changeful life, opposition from public functionanes and 
governmental bodies, change of occupation, if ta Pisces, 
Sagittanus, or Gemini, two simultaneous occupauons 

5cium— Rise in life followed by a downfall PaUence and finnneaa 
of purpose mark the Lfe of the native. In boswess, Saoaaal 
nun is shown, in professional life, dishonour and failure, in 
government defeat A fatality hangs over the natiw from his 
hirth. rfanwr of the non or loti of a parent in earlv life 



PLANETS IN BOUSES 


43 


CfraTKit—Strange and unexpected enmities, danger of estrangement 
or ex2e from one’s km and country Eccentnc people perplex 
and harass the native by their underhand actions; danger of 
falls from horses, accidents causing detention m out'of'the'way 
places or foreign lands 

Saturn— Secret enemies, who work steadily for the native’s downfall, 
danger of contusions and bruises through animals The 
partner sufiers from some lingering illness A secluded life 
Jupiter — Secret enemies over which the nati\e proTuls Enemies 
become fnends, success with Urge ftmwialg and in remote 
places 

Mars — Danger of violence from enemies in ambush, effusion of 
blood caused by kicks or thrusts from animals, escape from 
bondage or restraint, pains m the extremities Sickness of an 
infla^^Qinatory nature occurs to the partner 
d'uTi— Danger of exile, or life apart from kindred, enmity of great 
men or those in ofhee above the native, life m far-off lands. 
The native vanquishes his enemies 
Kenttf— Secret love affairs, leading to enmity of women, jealousy, 
love of horses and Urge animals, peaceful seclusion to one’s 
own taste 

Afereury— Many small enmities, frequently caused by VfTitings and 
scandalous reports, the nund is self absorbed, and narrow m 
Its sympathies, taste for occult science and secret schemes, 
plots and intngues 

Moon — Female enemies, many secrets touching the native, danger 
of restraint or enforced retirement, love of mystery, fanoful 
fears, success in isolated positions and remote comers, 
voyages 

NJ — The above dclmeations are subject to wide modification by 
the aspects of any other planet to the significator Thus if Saturn 
should be m second house well aspected by Jupiter and other planets, 
wealth would be amassed at some tune in life, and old age would be 
comfortable and prosperous 

But the prognostics previonsly given are for the planets’ positions 
only, when not in aspect to any other, and irrespective of the signs 
occupied by them The Sun, Moon, and Mercury arc capable of a 
more exact interpretation when referred to the signs they occupy, 
and so in a less degree are the other bodies 



42 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


Saturn — False and deceitful friends. The native is frequently rained 
by them; hopes are deceived, ambitions frustrated. The death 
of a child is to be feared; danger of losing the children. The wife 
may be unfruitful, or the husband disposed to be an anchorite. 

Jupiter— Many benefits from friends; association with penons of 
noble birth. The native's hopes are brought to successful 
issues; the ambitions are attained. Success will be due to the 
instrumentality of friends. The wife will be fruitful, and will 
benefit by child-birth. In a male horoscope, success often 
comes with the birth of a child. 

Mars — Contentions among friends; unsatisfactory relations with 
others in sodal life. Friends lead the native into extravagance 
or some form of dissipation. Danger to the wife in child-birth. 
In a woman’s horoscope, the husband is often prolligate. 

^un — Constant and honourable friends; honours through them; 
association of men in good position; successful ambitions, 
well-regulated hopes. 

Venus — Gain and happiness through friends; fondness for society; 
favours from females: fruitful marriage; happy associations. 

Mereury—Maay acquaintances, but few constant friends; some 
association with literary or sdentific men. The associations 
of the native produce many bttle worries and anxieties. 

Moon — Unrebable friends; patronage of women; many acquain- 
tances, but few lasting attachments. If the Moon is in a 
fruitful sign. It shows the buth of several children. 


fn the Twelfth House 

Pluto — Has a very peculiar influence in that it can destroy enemies, 
and so prevent possible personal loss, unhappiness and strain. 
The banishing inflnence will operate very markedly when the 
actions of enemies or unfair competitors becomes too marked 
for in a very subtle manner circumstances will arise that will 
seem to banish the enemy or competitor from the person's 
environment and remove them to such a distance from the person 
that their power to do harm will be negatived. 

Ambushes, deceptions, frauds; many secret enemies, plots 
against the naove, and oefanous schemes. The nathe is beset 
with dangen, and lives in vague dread of tome unknown 
danger. 



THE ASPECTS 


45 


The aspects formed from the □ arc evil, aad produce results of an 
evil nature They are, the Q, □, and Z. 

The conjunction and parallel of good planets (21, $, ©) are good, 
and of cvU planets (B, T, h» <J). evU 

Mercury is variable in this respect, and always takes the nature 
of that planet to which it is m closest aspect at the birth, or, if m 
no aspect, then it takes the nature of the lord or ruler of the sign 
It occupies 

Good aspects are productive of benefits even from so-called 
“ evil ” planets, the fact being that no planet is wholly good or evil 
in Itself, but it becomes so by its aspect 

The ready measurement of zodiacal aspects is a matter of practical 
importance m Astrology, and the following rules may serve to 
facilitate the process 

1 Signs of the same element are m tnne (A) to one another 

2 Signs of the same constitution are in square (□) to one 
another, or in opposiuon ( S‘) 

Thus T> 51,, i , being of the same element (fire), are m tnne, 
while b and it are in square, both being fixed signs and, therefore, 
of the sane constitution So also, b and TT^, SI and es are m 
opposition for the same reason 

Planets are called * in aspect *’ to one another when, at birth, 
they are found to be within 5® of any of the distances indicated m 
the list of aspects The Parallel, however, is Lmited to a distance ofl ® 

The lesser of two planets that may be m aspect is said to apply 
to or separate from the other ** Application *' is when the aspect 
IS not exact, but afterwards becomes so by the motion of the swiAer 
body of the two gaming upon the other m its progress Thus if the 
Sun were m V 15®, and the Moon m t 10®, the Moon would be 
applying to the A aspect of the Sun, because the Moon is swifter 
in motion than the Sun, and would soon gain the 5° necessary to 
complete the exact A aspect 

“ Separation ” is when at birth or other epoch, the aspect has 
already been completed, m which case the swifter planet is said to 
separate from the other Thus, if the Sun ui ‘f 15® had the A 
aspect of the Moon m t 17®, the Moon would be separating from 
the A of the Sun 

N B — ^The larger and slower bodies may apply to the lesser and 
swifter by direction, but not by ephemeral motion (Sec Book m, 
chaps u and ui) 



44 


THE MAKUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


When, therefore, a planet, without aspect, is found in any house of 
the horoscope, the aboro int er p r etations will hold good; but 
consideration should be made of the sign that planet is in — ^whether 
a dignity or debility, a congenial or adverse sign, and whether it be 
movable, fixed, or common, and the clement which it signifies. 
Thus if Uranus were in the third house, it would show eccentric 
methods of travelling, eccentric and strange messa^ and means of 
communication, etc. If it occupied a eatery sign, such tbinp 
would occur in connection with the water, electrical launches, and 
such like in\'entions. If in an airy sign, flymg machines, motorcars, 
electric tramways, etc. 

Fixed signs do much to establish and preserve the good or evil 
signified, and to make it endure. 

Retrograde planets show a falling off of such persons, associations, 
and things as are signified by the house occupied by those placets. 

To give a detailed reading of planetary action in regard both to 
sign and house would require a large volume, and even then the 
efiects of mutual aspects ^tween the planets would be left out of 
consideration. 

The above readings apply to both sexes unless otherwise stated. 


CHAPTER Vn 


THE ASPECTS 

An “ aspect *’ in Astrology u a certain distance between any two 
planetary bodies or between any two zodiacal positions. The chief 
aspects arc- — 

•nwOrpOTUon .. .. /,6Bgi>5orJ^«r«rt 


The Sesqalquadnte 
TteTnae 
Tbe Squiire 
The SenEa . 
The Setnisqmre 
The CoBjuaction 


0.4} 
A. 4 
0.3 

A. a 
a 0 


» 135’ - 

» 120 “ .. 
50* „ 


TbePxTanelofDedinatioa (Par)ooairt when tvo planets bold tbe uine decree 
of deelinaiion. »beii« above or below the Eqraior. or oo oppoait sides of it, 
Le.. ooe above and ooe below 


The last two arc, more correctly speaking, posUtons, and not 
aspects. These aspects which are formed from the A good, 
and produce beaefic results, , A and and in a very minor 
degree, the V of 30*, called semisextHe 



CALCULA.T1QH OF HOROSCOPES 


47 


Tlie data required for the calculation arc as follows — 

1 Tbe year, month, date, and hour of birth It is important 
to have the time of birth very accurately noted, for a few minutes, 
one way or the other, may throw the horoscope out of all relation 
to the events of life It is advisable to make enquiry in all doubtful 
cases It will often assist the memory of the parents by askmg 
whether the birth took place at ** breakfast, lunch, tea or dinner 
time,‘* whether " before or after the church bells were rmgmg " and 
so forth By this means a fairly accurate estimate may be obtained, 
when a mere question of the ** exact time ‘ would yield no satisfac- 
tion A photograph of the native, if of mature years will also 
assist the student by referring it to the nsiog sign 

2 The latitude and longitude of the place of birth 

3 The sex of the native 

These facts having been duly noted, the calculation may proceed 

Take the following instance — Male bom lOih April 1940, at 
2 a m in latitude 52* 28 N , and longitude 2* W 

TheEpbemens it must be understood is calculated forGreenwich, 
so that a correction is due for all places east or west of that place 

Turmng to the Ephemens for the month of April 1940 the 
planets* places for each day at noon will be found tabulated The 
birth took place in the morning ten hours before noon of the 10th 
Therefore, the calculation is made from the previous noon In the 
column marked * Sidereal Tune the longitude of the Sun will be 
found expressed in hours mmutes, and seconds of time Then, to 
the sidereal time, 10th Apnl, 1940 add the tune elapsed since noon, 
VIZ fourteen hours and correction for fourteen hours at the rate 
of ten seconds per hour This wiU give the mendian of the horo- 
scope m hours, minutes and seconds of sidereal tune Thus — 


R H. S. 

Sidereal tune ncion 9tbApri! 1 10 19 

Add tune of birth since coon 14 0 0 

15 10 19 

Deduct for summer tune 10 0 

14 0 0 

Correction for 13 his. at 10 secs, per hour 0 2 10 

7* 2 i& 

Deduct for 2* West lonptude tt 4 mm. per degree 8 0 

13 54 JO 


Correction for 2* West longitude (add) 
Mid heaven at Urtb 


13 54 12 



46 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

Mutual application happens when two planets are forming an 
aspect, and the one applied to is retrograde in motion. Thus, if 
Jupiter were in 12% and Uranus in ^ 15% Jupiter would be apply" 
ing to the square (□) of Uranus. But if Uranus were retrograde 
(B), it would be progressing from sS: 15“ towards 12% and there- 
fore itself applying to the square of Jupiter. Therefore, 2i in yM2“ 
□ ^ in — 15“ B, would be a mutual application. 

Aspects, whether good or evil, are of two natures, dexter and 
sinister. 

Dexter aspects are those thrown to any point from a preceding 
sign. Tlius, if the mid-heaven were 5“ and Jupiter were in 
Il\, 5®, Jupiter would be in dexter sextile to the M.C. (medium calOi 
but in K 5® it would throw a smister sextile to the meridian. Again, 
with the Sun in / 10® and Saturn in 10% the Sun would be in 
sinister square to Saturn, and Saturn in dexter square to the Sun. 

Smister aspects to the Sun. Moon, mid-heaven, ascendant, or 
other important signiheator, are stronger for good or evil than the 
corresponding dexter aspects. 

The ^ and t5 only considered when in conjunction with any 
of the planets at birth. The 0 is considered when in aspect and 
conjunction. 

As already explained, the (Dragon’s Head) is considered to be 
good, and the y (Dragon’s Tall) evil, in conjunction with any of the 
significators. The © (Part of Fortune) has no quahties of its own, 
and is merely a significator of the personal property of the native, 
particularly land, bouses, and such like possessions. 


CRAPTCR VIII 

CALCULATION OF THE HOROSCOPE 

The requisites for the calculatioo of a horoscope, or figure of the 
heavens for the time of birth, are— <1) An Ephemeris for the year of 
birth, which gives the places of the planets for each day at noon, 
their dechnations, and other necessary material; and (2) a Table of 
Houres for the latitude of birth. 

These can be obtained of the almanac publishers. The cost of 
an Ephemens, and a Table of Houses for various latitudes can be 
ascertained from the publishers, Messn, W. Foulsham & Co. Ltd., 
Standbrook House, 2-5 Old Bond Street, London. W.l. 



CALCULXTIOH OF BOROSCOPES 


49 



It will be observed that the signs T, rt, and en are mterceptC' 
and are placed between the cusps of the bouses according to the 
positions in the Zodiac. On the equator, and m places near tl 
equator, the zodiacal and equatorial circles so nearly correspon 
that a sign is never intercepted, and the signs are almost evenly 
distributed through the houses As we proceed north and south, 
however, the circle of latitude becomes farther removed from the 
plane of the zodiacal circle^ and the distribution of the si^s in the 
houses becomes uneven 

The next process is to place the planets in the figure of the horo- 
scope These are calculated for the Greenwich Mean Time of birth 
Therefore it is essential that the tune of birth, which is invanably the 
clock time m force in the country or locality where the person is 



48 


THE KANHaL of ASTROLOGY 

^ Had the birth taken place at 2 pjn, instead of a.m., the sidereal 
time for the noon of the 10th would be the basis of the calculatiojv 
and two hours would have been added to it, together with twenty 
seconds for correction. Again, had the birthplace been 2* East, 
instead of West, the two seconds would have been subtracted. 

In Great Britain and Ireland the clock time now used is Greenwich 
Mean Time, therefore allowance must be made for the longitudinal' 
difference of time which is 4 miontes for one degree or four seconds 
for one minute of lon^tude. Ifthelongitudeis ITesr the longitudinal 
difference mart be subtracted (as shown in above calculation) but 
if it should be East, then the longitudinal difference must be added. 
This longitudinal difference of time must not be confused with the 
correction for longitudinal differences which is given in the para- 
graph headed iVbre. For foreign horoscopes there is again a 
difference of calculation but this is fully explained in Chapter DC. 

Note . — For every 3® West looptude two seconds must be added 
to the sidereal time of noon at Greenwich, and the same amount 
must be subtracted for East lon^tude. Thus, if the birtbpbee were 
15® east of Greenwich, ten seconds would be subtracted from the 
sidereal time at Greenwich at noon to get the true sidereal tints foi 
noon at the birthplace. 

Now. having obtained the meridian or mid-beaven of the Horo- 
scope of Birth, draw a cifcle to represent the earth (a small one will 
do), and one larger to represent the heavens as given in Book i, 
chap, iv, the circles being equally diWded into twelve parts, and 
joined by the cusps of the houses 

Turn to the Tables of Houses for the latitude of birthplace. In 
the column marked ** Sidereal 'lune ” the reader will find the 13 hrs. 

55 mins. 27 secs., very nearly as above. In the columns on a line 
with this sidereal time will be found the longitudes of the cusps of 
the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, first, second, and third houses respeo- 
tivcly, Wr., I, ni23, / 9, 7 252, 10, K 28. These longitudes 

must be plac^ in their respective ctisps, and the remaining six cusps 
wUl hold the equivalent lon^tcdcs in the opposite signs to them. 

The figure vrhen completed is thus shown— 



ALCULATION OP HOROSCOPES 


51 


Tbelongitudcs of Pluto, Neptune, Uranus,- Saturn, and Jupiter 
require only a mental calculation, as their motions are very slow, 
and frequently will not need to be altered from what is stated in the 
Ephemeris. 

The longitudes of the planets having been found for the time of 
birth, they need only to be placed in the 6guie together with the 
Part of Fortune and the Moon’s nodes, and the horoscope is 
finished, as shown in the following figure: — 


I3"54«I2S 



Asptets^O y — JdSAe— »y 

<J 42i*e — A3C.A ©□ 5 a 21 □'P — MC 

^ h oe. 

The aspects and parallels existing between the chief sigmficators — 
©, J>, Asc,, M.C., $, and 5 — set out in the space beneath the 
horoscope. A more coovemeot form is here shown. 



50 THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

bom should be converted to Greenwich Mean Time. In Great 
Britain and Ireland, Greenwich Mean Time is used, generally 
speaking, during the autumn and winter, but Summer Time, which is 
one hour in advance of Greenwich Mean Time, is used during the 
spring and summer. During some of the war years (1941 to 1945) 
Double Summer Time, i.e. 2 hours advance of Greenwich Mean Time 
was also in use during certmn parts of the spring and summer. The 
full table giving the dates of begianiag and ending of Summer Tiine 
for Great Britain and Ireland are given in the Appendix at the end 
of the book. Therefore if the birth occurred during a Summer Time 
period it would be necessary to subtract one—or two hours — 
according to the date of birth, from the time given so as to obtain 
the Greenwich Mean Time. 

With foreign births the clock time of birth is again the Zone or 
Standard Time of the particular country or locality in which the 
birth occurs and in these cases the Zone or Standard DifTerence of 
Time should be ascertained. If the place of birth is in West long!* 
tude it will be necessary to add the Zone or Standard Ddferenee to 
the clock time so as to obtain Greenwich Mean Time whilst if the 
place of birth is in East longitude then the Zone or Standard 
Difference must be subtracted from the clock time so as to obtain 
Greenwich Mean Time. This obtaining of Greenwich Mean Time 
is absolutely essential because the Planets* places in the Epbemeris 
are all calculated for Greenwich Mean Time. 

The longitudes for noon on the 9th and lOth of April being 
known, the motion in twenty-four hours is obtained by subtracting 
one from the other; then, by proportion the motion for 1 a,m. (time 
before noon on the iQch) can be known. 

Moon’i loBgltude lOcb 
Moon's loogittKte 
Mooa'i aotSoa la one d«y 

To ir jr-4o*iritIuB 
Add 11 hrf.— losaritta 

Motloa itqq lf ed— logadthm .. .. d32fi « 5* 36 

ITjIs, TObtMCted from tbe Moeo't feo^mSc Mt ooao oa the JOih, jy 
ksrm 14* ay, which fa Uw Moon'* leofifade ■( With. 

{Not* —The Oreemneh Mean Ttoe at With ia the ctap pte horoscope wm 
1 ftjn. which fa II boon oooa) 


293S 


19* 36' 
r 44* 
ir ir 



5^\lcvlatiox op horoscopes 


51 


ThnoSgitudes of Pluto, Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, and Jupiter 
require only a mental calculation as their motions arc very slow, 
and frequently will not need to be altered from what is stated m the 
Ephemens 

The longitudes of the planets having been found for the tune of 
birth, they need only to be placed m the figure together with the 
Fart of Fortune and the Moons nodes, and the horoscope u 
finished as shown m the following figure — 


13 “ 54 " 12 * 



AsptetS’^O y — »y 

? d S — Ase.60Q 9 nkTVD'F — MC. 

The aspects and parallels ewsUng between the chief sigmScators— 
©, > Asc., M C, $, and 5— are set out m the space beneath the 
horoscope A more convenient form is here shonn 



52 THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


PtANCT j 

PfTLfV 

ASPZCTS 


7*N 50' 

Par 2t. Y P, Z. P, 4 d. Y d 21, d y 

S 

13»N 58 

d 9 Ae 

Asc 

23* S 27 

Par P,ParE,Par d. A O. □ g, A21. 

MC 

11* s 2r 

Par h. d* h. O B 

5 

24* N 13 

Par Asc., Par e. d d, Z 21, sf: B 

S 

4*S 39 

Par Y 21. :|c e, cP^.*© 

e 

23*N 48* 

Pat. Asc, Par d. 9. * d 

'? 

3*N 43 

Par ? d* g. X 21. A 9. A © 

e 

irN 31 

Y O. d >. A g. Y 21. A T. A © 

Tj 

10* N ir 

Par Mcae 

21. 

r N 21' 


d 

22* N y 

Par Asc.. Par B. d g Z 21 


The decluutioQS of the planets are calculated for the time of birth 
from the Epbemens The aspects are calculated from the horoscope. 


CHAFTER IX 

FOREIGN HOROSCOPES 
East or U est Longitude 

These are of t»o kinds TTiey may be distant from Greenwich by 
lonptude or laUtude, or both Let os suppose a person bora at 
2 a-m., New York time, on the 10th April, 1940, in the aty of New 
YoriJ* longitude 74* ^\est. The calculaUon would then be as 
follows — 


























FOREIGN HOROSCOPES S3 

Convert 74* "West into tune at the rate of 4 iruns for every degree 
of longitude This amounts to 4 hrs 56 mms 

HUS 

M C noon (Gnenwicb) 9th April ~ 1 14 16 

Add for 74* West at 10 secs per hour . 0 0 SO 


M C Boon (New York) 9th April ^ 1 15 6 

Tune elapsed — • 13 0 0 

Add for 13 hours at 10 secs, per hour ~ 2 10 


Meat birth ~ 14 17 16 


This M C, or mid heaven, is referred to in the Tables of Houses 
for I-ahtude of New York, 40* 43 North, and the cusps of the 
houses are placed m the figure of the horoscope, as previously 
explained 

The next step is to place the planets in the figure This mvolves 
a correction, as Raphael s ’ Ephemens is made out for Greenwich 
The longitude of New York is 4 hrs 56 mins West When it is 
2am atNewYorkitispasilam at Greenwich by 4 brs S6mms 
Therefore add that amount to the tune of birth The result is the 
conesponding Greenwich time, viz 6 bis 56 nuns a m Calculate 
he planets’ places from the Ephemens for tbs tune and place them 
a the figure as before The horoscope is then complete 

fforth or South Latitude 

Let us now suppose that the birth took placeat 4 p m in Melbourne, 
ongitude 145* East, and latitude 37* 50 South 10th Apnl 1940 


[be calculation is as fo’Iows — 

Equation 145* » 9 tuv 40 DUOS H M s. 

CreeuwidiMC oooa lOth April 1940 1 14 16 

Lea for 9 hn 40 nuns at 10 secs per hour 0 1 37 


Melbourne M C noon lOtli April 1940 1 12 39 

Tune pJii. 4 0 0 

Cometioa for 4 bn at 10 tecs. 0 0 40 


Mid heaven at birth S 13 19 


We now have to remember that the latitude is South and not North 
IS in the cases preceding Take a table of houses for North latitude 
J7* 50 (or as near that as possible), and proceed as follows — 

Find the mid heaven corresponduig to 5 hn 13 mins 19 secs m 
Lhe table of houses and add six signs to it — 1 e , take the exactly 



54 


THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 
opposite sign and degree Tims we find the abo%‘e longitcde of the 
mendian to correspond to n 19“ 15' Therefore we turn to 
t 19* 15 in the tables for 37" North, and take out the cusps of the 
houses m a line svith it, but alnnys remembering to change the signs 
to the opposite ones This simple method saves a somewliac complei 
mathematical process, and also makes a single set of tables for 
North latitudes of umversal utility 
The planets’ places are calculated for Greenwich time, 620 a-CL. 
which corresponds to 4 p m at Melbourne The lonptude being 
East, the corresponding time is subtracted from the birth tune in 
order to get the Greenwich time In the case of New York it was 
added 

The horoscope having been properly calculated for time and place 
of birth. It IS fit to be judged The rules for this process will be found 
in subsequent chapters. 


CHAPTER X 

SUMMARY 

The foregouig chapters have dealt somewhat fully with the alphabet 
and language of the heavens If the simple natures of the planets, 
signs, and bouses arc thoroughly learned and understood, it will not 
be a dilhcult matter for the student to amve at their compounded 
natures, when sicn planet, and house are taken together, or when 
two or more planets shall mingle their influences by aspect or 
conjunction from any part of the heavens 
The sjTnbols of signs, planets, and aspects should be thoroughly 
learned, for they are the letters of the celestial book of secrets. 
Without a knowledge of them the language of the heavens cannot 
be properh mastered Afterwards it is necessary to acquire the 
meanines of those sj-mbols. and the significations attached to the 



SUUHARy 


55 


The method of calculating the horoscope has been given for a.iii. 
and p.m. time, for East and West longitudes, and for North and 
South latitudes. Nothing now remains save to judge the horoscope, 
and to indicate the limes v, ben events will take phce. The remaining 
sections of this work will be found to embody all that is requisite 
for a complete understanding and practice of the art of fore- 
knowledge and prediction. 



56 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

APPENDIX TO BOOK I 

Detection of Persont otcording as /At Signifeaior my befamdbt each ef/At 
Twtht Signs— Revued from Lilly /“* Astrology " 

The Reader Is referred to Notes ot the endoftku AppemSx 


PLVTO IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 

C in 

Shows B persoo sosoewbot shove atlddle height oval face but spare la bail 
Always ready to express new ideas inventive tendeccsea but will need to develi 
practicality If ideas are to be accepted by others and progress made Mm 
personal courage wouldtnakegoodbeadwaylacoanecuoQwitbmiZicary'iiutter 
E to ti 

Gives 8 beauhlul figure dunng first part of Ufe With womco, atoort a 
ethereal beauty with (he curves of (he body being most marked but in late 
Lfe there can be a loss of beauty if (he diet is not watched The artistic side o 
the nature is drawn out partkitUrly where music and singing are eoaceceed 
The tenor voice m men and soprano m women being acctntuaied 
e Jn 0 

SonKtioes ucreases (he height disproporuonately showing very uQ or even 
above very tall people yet size of body will be to ar^rd with height Thoughts 
and ideas mil be eta futuristic eaiure very subtle to tbetr unphcaliOBs much 
ass^cl3ted with spiritual aad evolutionary matters but averse to orthodox, 
religion. 

E In B3 

Gives 8 shorter, more thick-«t type ot body during second part of life sUn 
can become somewhat flabby Has « reaction upon the eyes causing myopia 
and sometimes cataract The emouooal infeosKy wifi react upon boiwe and 
family interests, causing unpleasantness at times that can either dnve other 
members of the family away or altetnattvejy ausc the penon to leave home 
without givfog warning or any indicatioo as to his future whembouts. 

B ta SI 

The artistic appearana wiU be accentuated the mannerisms and expression 
being after the style of the old Shakespearean actor with a fairly fuU build of 
body giving a courtly and dignified appearance with a partiafiy flond compfcxjon 
aad with men. the wearing of a moustache The temperament will be good 
oatured and there will be a partJeutar uoderliandmg of children , 

e la IT 

Tends to sLm the physical body pva a squarish type of shoulder darkish 
hair niih sideboards down the fsoe sametimes cxteoding into a Ihin beard 
round the face and chin but not extending down the throat Usually gives an 
exalted view of self importance and in certaia instances a bullying and cruel 
tendency with no hesitaiioo ia hurting people who disagree with the ptrsonai 
views and attitude towards life. 



APPENDIX TO BOOK I 57 

Sigufics a medium to taQ typ6 of pb^rwal body, blcmd hatf m women, fair 
hau and blue eyes in men. It accentuates the graceful poise and sense of balance 
and deportment The willingness to co-operate with others and to eaercise the 
function of arbitration u marked and they usually take a prominent part m 
public and social life so long as they have the support of the mamage partner 

e ta ni 

Gives a swarthy appearance Verysensuousnoseasdlipswhilsttbemuscular 
development in both men and women u very marked They are the strong 
people and with physical strength win go voluptnousnesa. Sometimes they will 
erprcss brutality but the women can be very gi^ at nursing and with childbirth 
whilst the men can exed In boung. 


Em / 

Shows a well proportioned body with inclination towards tallness, but 
considerable litbeness of movement The physical activity will be very marked 
during early and fint part of middle life but then tends to detenorate particularly 
U sportmg Interests have been prominent. A thinning of the hair becomes 
apparent from the early 30 $, but more partieularly m meg. A considerable 
uterest u philosophy u shown. 


ein n 

Represents a cadaverous type of feature and body with a scrawny neck. 
Lowers the height and thint the body The bony structure is weakened the 
knees and legs can be deformed or weak In some way They are often avanaous, 
sonKtimes miserly and with the latter can deny themselves proper food and 
sustenance. Can be bard and unscrupulous in business deals and a bard and 
tough employer At the other extreme a oinging employee. 

B ID t3 

Shows a rather Urge bead with fiowmg hair, turning grey or white before 
middle age. The eyea are also Urge, fairly wide apart with a roundish type of 
face but somewhat short neck. After age 40 they become breathless after a 
little exertion. Make very good fnends. always witting to proffer advwe which 
is invariably sound. They seldom cntiose or argue. 

eC in M 

Indicates a fleshy type of body with watery eyes. Limbs will be big but soft 
and in women the legs will often be very big. Yet the physical strength will 
not be great and there will be a suscepti^ty to divers anmeots, sometimes to 
drunkenness leading to impruonmenC 

MB — Btsvarubly has an iafluem over the size of the physical body increasisg 
or decreasing the height according to sign. Gemini and Sagittarius iocreasisg 
the height. Cancer. Scorpio and Pisces Increasing the width or guth, Leo and 
Scorpio gmog considerable physical strength. 



58 THE HAMtIAL OP ASTROLOGY 

NEPTUNE IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
^ fa T 

Ohes protrodiflg ejxs with a tciaOuh oo$e and «™nnh, pear type shape of 
face. Em sometimes seem to stand out sideways. The; have a decree of 
Canuhty, are purveyors of gossip, sometimes tosmuatiog tn their overtures to 
others and can be deadly m the ait of prtxzastination. 

H 

Shows a mixture between a round and squanth type of face, very thick and 
short neck, medium height of body, spare in early life, women can be extremely 
beautiful, but tucnmg to corpulency later in We. The ears win be very seeative 
to sound hence they make good stogets or musiaans, whilst the eyes are keen 
on form and they can make good artists and portrait painters. They are very 
good eaters and dnnken 

^ m n 

Signifies a thin type of physkal body but with considerable physical wlnness. 
They can be very nervy at tunes, very impressionable and responsive to the 
gouip and suggestioss of other people A rtsceptibihry to rcspira tory disordert 
u shown Carelessness to dress occurs but they are invariably courteons and 
well behaved Physical and mental restlessness very marked. 

^ in 63 

Indicates a lymphaue or bovine type of physical body Eyes csnaBy brown 
and somewhat liquid. Medium height and in women a very full bust. They 
make good parents, home and family We being very imporusL There is often 
an interest m psychic matters, they make very good mediums, are often bterested 
in magic and so can becotoe witches or wuards. 

SI 

Gives a fairly full buOd of physical body The physeaJ structure is strong 
and the health invariably good providing correct habia are m a i n tai n ed The 
cm are sometimes bulbous, never deep set but can be penetrating in their gue. 
Thu is another position gi^g extremely good artistic capaaty especially for 
the theatre 

^iD»r 

Signifies a kind Of foxy appearaoca. slims the body, gives Bexihte limbs but a 
nervy kind of walk. Fastidious regs^g dirt and food Incluied to endase 
and find fault, quick to percnve dishonesty Ingeaiota In Kivensg op personal 
faults and faihogs. Does not make fneods very easily although usually desirous 
of company and of being wnb other people 
tjr la c 

Shows a more refined type of pbysIcaJ body Pleasing feature*, a magoeu; 
blue eye. but friendly not cold. Urwlly fust above medium bei^t Wocoea 
have wavy *»«!> and a good deal of catnnl charm whilst men are courteous Is 
Ibeir approach. Both bow e w have a hearty dislike of anything of an codean 
nsmre and do not taka too fJadly to domestic fife. 



APPBNDrX TO BOOK I 


59 


Tends to coaneo the physical form SiKnetunes gives a gypsy appearance 
but wth women a capacity for fasonatioo as well The sensuous side of the 
nature is intensified and m certain types there will be a marked jealousy with a 
nasty temper In more developed types the psychic capacity is once more 
accentuated and there will be remarkable ability m divuung and in foretellug 
the future with cards and other pantpheinalia, 

^ m t 

Represents a person of more than middle height but not unduly tall Fresh 
complexion, sandy type of hair, rather prominent nose fairly long legs Will 
be a very good companion and very generous (Hit will not condone anything of 
a deceptive, tncky or unfair nature and will usually be able to discern these 
traits very quickly when anyone tnes to take an unfair advantage. Will be a 
very prolific trav^er 

^ m n 

Describes an lU proportioned form of physical body, the head tending to be 
smaller than normal the trunk somewhat more developed with the legs rather 
thin Sometimes the men sport a full beard ofien to cover up a weak cbm and 
pale complexion They can be somewhat avanctous not averse to making a 
sharp ded, and tn consequence find it difficult to make true fnends or a happy 
coamage 

V in » 

Gives a very broad forehead, large bead nose inelined to be flatter than normal 
eyes somewhat more deep-set, bluey grey orm women ofs green imge Musically 
inclmed with very good capaaty for piano or stnngrd insinimeDis especially 
the violin They coo make very good composen or conduaors and are usually 
very good company as they will always baveafundofanecdotes at their command 
Tto M 

Shows a full stature, fairly powerfully built but the full strength potential 
seldom developed with the result that from age 40 onwards a tendency to fatness 
occurs In some cases a tendency to dnnk or drugs wQl become marked and 
then the character will decenorate On the other hand rehgious tendencies can 
also become strong and then msny personal sacnfices will be made for cthen 
Neptune invariably has some inBoence over the eyes showing a sus 
ceptlbQity to weak eyes short sightedness cataract and other forms of eye 
disease. When m Taurus Scorpio Sapttanus can bring blindness 


URANUS IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
^ In T 

Indicates a very prominent forehead thinness of hair The walk wiH be of a 
somewhat jerky uneven nature, sotoemoes slow, sometimes quick as If in 
keepmg with the flow of thought that is taking pbce. They wHl be somewhat 
nervy, eccentric people, havuig unusual but also original Ideas. They can be 
athcr cranks or geniuses but win invariably do something uoprechctable. 



6C 


THE KANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


9 in » 

Denotes a somewhat ungainly type of body, very large and thick set with short 
legs but longer arms as if to compessatep Thick ccck and full throat with 
roundish type of bead. The impression gi\-en will be of very great strength. 
In some instances the men wQl be wiestkn. Temper win be somewhat uneven. 
It will not take much to provokn outbursts with accompanying belligerency 
With women the lower emotions will often be greatly iclensified. 

in n 

Signifies only medium height in apparent contradiction to the general Indies* 
tion of Cemini Hair wtQ be darker, in women sonsetimcs almost black. Eyes 
will be smaller, rather piercmg m appearance. They wQI be intellectuals with 
an obstmate mental trend, desirous of changing the enisling order of tbinp 
but not very practical or dear as to what should take the place of the existing 
order Will be (piarrelsome with relauvts and neighbours. 

9 in C3 

Shown shortness and broadness of stature, particularly with women. Hair 
be thick and curly, sometimes of a reddish hue. Feet will be large with a 
tendency towards flatfootedness. There wiD be an apprmatioo of home bfa 
but sudden breaks, ebangee and dtsappeannees can be made without any 
reasons beuig given. A somewhat difficult person to live with in the home as 
they will want to have everything their own way and wiE bea bwunco themseNea 

¥ to A 

UsnaSy shows normal bdght and body la reasonable proportion. Gives a 
dignified appearance, with a proud but not neccssarOy haughty bearing. The 
physical strength is again marked but if over-cxeTtion occurs then can be a 
reaction upon the heart. A considerable degree of ambmoo, with deb^t in 
acting and kmdred artistic matters as weQ as in education and snmcc In* 
varubly makes good Cneods and wiQ have a marked understanding of chUdrco. 



APPENDIX TO BOOK 1 


61 


9 m 

Represents aa tmiply individual, iwniihy complexion, broad m bodd, not 
one tall. sonKtimes very hairy. Can be slovenly lo dress and careless as to 
cleanlmess. Alternatively can go to the other extreme and be very fastidious 
whilst women can become very good models so long as they keep their figures 
neat Will have many strange love cxpeneoces but with no sense or appreciation 
of the orthodox m life. 

m f 

Gives considerable physical strength, increases the height very strong arms and 
hands and supple lower limbs They will be very good horsemen and horse* 
women, usually fond of hunting, racing and vinous outdoor sports In ccrtam 
instances whilst decreasing (he overall sue of body will still give considerable 
natural strength with, m men, capaaty for becoming a jockey In other 
directions have capaaty for missionary work and exploration 

9 m rt 

E>atk£as the complexion and skin, sometunes gives a kind of shamblmg gait 
as there can be a weakness of the knees. Hair will be 1^"^ and dark. Eyes 
brown and shghtly protruding. Sometunes gives a Semitic type of face and 
body They are very shrewd m business and can become prominent m political 
or mozuapal life but do not make friends very easily even though wiihm them- 
telves they may wish to do so 

^ In es) 

Shows a stoclQ^ kmd of body, rather promment eyebrows, fairly large eyes 
but there can be a weakness of the ankles As a rule they are very intuitive. 
Interested in the arts and saeoces, in astrology and phrenology Make very 
good psychiatrists but (here is a danger of sudden collapse through undue 
mental strain, 

9 u> M 

Indicates a degree of physical weakness, short stature, sometimes deformed 
feet, sickly complexion Nerve tension vay marked, in certam instances can 
signify a liability to epQepsy or petit UncoDventional m their habits they 
can do things which lead to restramt. hospital treatment or even impnsonment. 
Not a very easy person to live with 

N-B —Uranus generally shows a degree of nerve tenaon which will react 
very strongly upon (he part of (he body ruled by the sign in which it u placed. 

It brings a susceptibiLty to sudden collapse and in later years of life to a stroke. 

The three planets Pluto, Neptune and Uranus are not rulers of signs m the 
same way as the other planets and therefore are not no rmally classed as sigmfica* 
tots The Indicatioiis given will therefore be more apparent when the planet 
concerned is in a rising position and the sign in which it is placed is upon the 
Ascendant. 


SATURN IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
h m T 

Gives a ruddy complexion, a spare, raw-boned person, fill! faced, dark hair, 
not much beard, addiOed to boasting, resolute, exaubl^ and very petulant. 



62 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


fl u U 

Gives a penoa la no wise comely, but a heavy, lumpish, awkward appcaxaace, 
dark hair, middle stature, not weD made, rou^ m carnage, sordid, and of a 
worldly disposition. 

h 10 n 

Represents a person of rather taQ atatnre, darl^ sangume complexion, oral 
visage, dark brown or black hair, togcoious but unpolished, perverse, and 
frequently unfortunate in his undertakings. 

h in ca 

Denotes a person of middle statnre, rather short taQ. sickly and feeble, 
meagre face, dark hair, languid eyes, the body sometimes crooked, jealous, 
calculatmg, and suspiaous m his dealings 


h to A 

Giva a person of moderate large stature, broad, round shoulders, wide chest, 
lightish hair, large boned, surly aspect, ryea sunk, apt to stoop Qualities 
tolerably good, generous but passionate, not over valiant or courageous when 
put to the test. 

h m ^ 

Represents a person of a tall, spare body, swarthy, dark or black hair, and It 
plentihil, a long head, solid countenance, generally unfortunate, inclined to 
mcUncboly, retaining ange-. a projector of many curtoia matten to htl 
purpose, studious, subtle, reserved, lochned to semle and slnifBing habits 

h in 

Descnbes a penoo above 'tbe middle stature, comely brown hair, oval fee 
large nose and forehead, clear compiexioo, oneopmionated ofhimself prodig 
of expense They are given to debate and controversy, and seldom leave an 
wealth at tbetr death. 

h In n 

Represents a person of middle stature, squat, thick, trussed body, broai 
shoulders, black or dark hair, wfaicb b usually short and thick, quarrelsome 
adventurous, one who may pcr f o nD some violent and dangerous actions 
though to tus own detnment. 

h bt f 

Gives a large body, brown bair. good make, tolerable complexion; obCgisg 
dispostion. not covetous, moderately frugal, rarely profuse, but soraewtist 
cbolenc. Ooe who will not bear an affront yet wiUmg to do good to all, a 
lover of his friends, and mero/ul to aa enemy 



APPENDIX TO BOOK I 


63 


Tl in «=> 

Gives a ttasoaab\e foU bodied puson, a hrge bead and face, tatber mebned 
to corpulency, middle stature, sad brown hair, a clear complexion, a sober, 
graceful deportmeot Affable, couneous disposition, of an excellent, searching 
fancy, and generally very proficient in wbal be undertakes m arts or soences, a 
person of a pregnant genius, yet disposed to be conceited 
I] US H 

Desenbes a middlo-statured person, pale complexion, sad or dark black bair, 
alaigebead andfuUeye, sometimes tbe teeth are distorted A person not very 
comely Active in others’ affairs, and given to contention and dissimulatioru 
An uncertain fickle person in everything, though often presenting a good 
extenor, yet provmg unsatisfactory to the end They arc not loQu^ous but 
deliberative, and do all things orcumspeetty They are said to improve as they 
grow old 

N B — h always gives bad teeth, and m this sign they are generally discoloured 
and rotten 


JUPITER IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
^ m T 

Desenbes a middle stature, but not stout, rather lean than corpulent a quick 
and penetrating eye, a high nose, oval visage, with generally pimples or a peoiliar 
redness is the face They arc of a free, noble, and generous disposition, very 
obbgiog. polite, and complaisant, especMy to their fnends 
21 m » 

Gives a middle stature, stout, well set body, but though compact not hand 
tome, hair brown, rough, and curling. Ccmplexion swarthy, and frequently 
the skin looks shining or oily The disposition reasonably good judgment 
sound deportment good, behaviour free and chan,ab]e kind to women, and 
veiy humane and compassionate to the distressed 
21 m n 

Represents a well made, compact body plump, yet above the middle stature, 
sangume complexion, though rather dusky, brown hair, and full expressive 
eyes The deportment graceful affable, courteous gentle, nuld obliging, and 
good naturcd An admirer of the other sex. and a lover of learning. 

21 U C9 

Gives a person of middle stature, a pale. sicUy, and unwholesome complexion, 
oval face, hair, dark brown, body, rather plump, but disprcportioned A 
busy, loquaaous character, very confident, and apt to intermeddle with other 
people a concerns A friend of women Fond of the water, whereon be is 
usually fortunate. Unless S throw a good aspect to 21, be is not courageous. 
2i in ft 

Represents a strong and well proportioned tall body, the hair is a Lgbt or 
yellowish brown, and curlmg, compleucn. ruddy, eye, full and fiery, person, 
rather handsome. The disposition ia n''bIeHxunded. courageous, and tnagnanl- 
mous, but lofty, proud, and ambitious, one who delights lo warlike actions, is a 
terror to bis enemies, and who scorns to bend to them, food of cooteadiag for 
bonours, etc., and full of daring and eaterprise. 



64 


THE MANUAL OF ASTKOLOQY 


2Hn T7 

Oira a peisoa of a reuon&bljr fnB ttiture; veQ btdl^ tod viitat may bs teroed 
hasdsoms, sacMirown or blade hair, niddF con^kxtoo, bat sot or fair 
Oqs ^o is ebokne; asd too isipidshr, ifodioas, ytt wotMlf, snd by hh 
rtshoess ofteo ZDCctzos xnous losses, hs u cot eadly i fw p rwH or 
opon by aay person. 

21 in eife 

Reeders the body complete and elejafit, a fons, asd umtisg fxee, 

epnghl, taE stature, ratlMr slender, clear complaaoa. a foil eye, oral face, li^ 
brown hair sntyect to have pimples or a rash m the face. Disposition asd 
temper ould, behavmar. wmsisg asd obligmf to aE, p*rna! to exenase asd 
reoeatios, imidi esteemed asd honoured. 

2t In q 

Gives a cuddle stature, stoat, c o mpa ct body, twn- j flu^ y an/t fiifl 

lace, muddy. dnE complexion. Mansers, prood and bfiy, coe who is 
ambitions, and apt to be ov er fa ca rvifc resolute, confident, improvident, yet 
qmde to take an advantage, therefore to be very warily dealt with. 

Zin f 

Gives a fine, taE. opnght body, good form asd mate, oval face, nddy com* 
ptexioo. brown diesmot<olotired hair. haU beard, bat the hair falls off early 
m life, cspeoaEy aboot the templa a good eye, and omeb ei pressfoo in tbe face. 
Tbs tnind u jost asd coble dupositioo c ourte o us, fanmace, affable, asd agres* 
able, macaen. polite and aecomplubed. Ozxrfoedofborsaasdbostmc. 

21 in rt 

]>scribes a stataie, pale compleoon, this £ue. Cttle bead, cot mac 
beard, weakly person, dart; brown hair said to be darker than the beard. It 
mmd u insenious, but narrow wasting m sympathy, asd enctmg. 

21 ID « 

pgsonatq a middle statore, weQ set. brown hair, dear complexiofi, rathe 
oorp u fent. c ompa ct nabe and one of a dxerful, obitsaig disposition, h urtfu 
to oooe, weE conducted, and moderate in retreaCoss, Just and p ercd ul 
good-bsaoand, Indtattioas, commomcativT; inrlnwd to be sricfftffif, and bo 


little given to extravagance. 



65 


APPENDIX TO BOOK I 
MARS IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
^ m T 

Represeats a middle-statared person. mO set, laijs t>oaed, swartb:^ com- 
plexion, Iigbt hair, and curling, freqocntJy red, austere countenance, and if 
d be oneataLiuddy and smooth, bold smd undaunted, confident, ehokric, and 
proud, fond of war and dispute, one who often hy those 
d In B 

Gives a middle stature, well set, rather short; dusky complexion, <tarir or 
black hair, which is rough and coarse, broad face, wide mouth, will generally 
have some scar or other mask m the face, which u often fuddy, but never fab, 
disposed to self mdulgence, speculative, headstrong and inclined to selfish habits, 
generally unfortunate, but, if d be near (he Pleiades, temarkably so. 

d m R 

Gives a tall person, with black or dark brown hair (though if d be in the 
first seven degrees of c, (he terms of 9, it wiQ be light), sanguine complexion, 
and well proportioned body Restless and unsettled, but tngenioos, unfor- 
tunate in most things, living u a mean way. generally tluftmg here and there, 
Uamsdi^bts unpaid, andexocurngthewitsfotaUvelihood, may be a eherolfer 
iTlnJuatriet or mere swindler But good aspects of 0, 2(, or $ will tmo pia 
this evil tendency 

d m CO 

Describes a short figure and a bad eomplexioo, without much hair, and it 
btown. the body is generally til made and crooked The temper is uncettam; 
one who is given to unhealthy ways, a servDe, unfortunate creature, meetly 
employed m some low business, beiag ucapable of better 
d in A 

Shows a well proportioned body, rather tall, light brown hair, oval face, 
sanguine or sunburnt complexion, large eyes, stout limbs, and a bnsk, cheerful 
aspect. Food of robust sports, as faunttog ndisg, sbootmg. etc., and ready for 
warlike occupation at any time. A man dresses well, and is a favourite with 
women, but It is someumea to tus prQudice. 

d in IT 

Produces a middlo-sized body, and well made and proportioned, black hair 
or very dark brown, the first seven degrees give lighter than the rest of the 
sign, bong the terms of 9. the complexion u swarthy or darkish, and there is 
generally some scar, mark, or blemish in the face. A hasty, proud, passionate, 
and subtle nund, one who letams an injury, is hard to please, and gea g a fly 
very unfortunate in all undertakings. 

d«n«» 

Gives a neatly-made, rather tall person, Uie face oval, eomplexioo sanginne, 
and Lght brown and soP, but, if in the last two d eg ree s , his own term, it is 

more wiry and reddish. Tbe disposition fo bruk and ^Kerfol, but food of 
boasting and very haughty, one who u careful of dress. Mudi attached to 
(he otbCT sex, by whom be is also much beloved. 



66 


THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


tf la q 

Produces a well-set forni of ndddle stature, rather corpulent, swarthy ana- 
pIexioa,blaci; curling hair, broad and plain face Tlie temper u very unsociable 
and rash, they arc generally revengcAd, thoughtless, quarrelsome, and proud, 
yet of good gemus and ready appreheason, exceUmg m mediaoe, sorgety, naval, 
and martial occupations 

i m t 

Denotes a tall person, with a weO proportioned body, compact and wcD- 
made, sanguine complexion oval visage, a quick, penetrating eye. the mind 
IS cheerful, merry, and jovial, but disposition hasty and passionate, high 
minded and lofty, courageous, loquacious, and fond of applause, on the whole, 
a good character 

In 11 

J^epresents a mean or small stature, thin, lean body, little head thin face, 
bad complexion, being sallow and obscure, black, lank hair An mgenious 
mind witty, shrewd, and penetrating, generally fortunate, and succe^ul ia 
ondertakiogs 

^ in e» 

Gives a well-eoroposed body, rather corpulent, and inclined to be tall (ihou^ 
frequently not above the middle sue), tut or dear compleuon, sandy hair, a 
buoyant disposition, and addicted to coctroveny, etc., not very fortunate tn 
general 

<f in K 

Represents a middle stature, rather short and fleshy, a bad complexion. f< 
from handsome, a debihcaied look, light brown hair, of dull mmd. »d 
udulgcnt, idle, and careless, not fortunate 
NB — If d be IB d. □. or ^of fi, or with the dispoatioa u capnaou 
especially if they be in angles, wbeo the person be describes » very excitabli 
He IS the giver of courage and resolution, which, if be be weak and afllicted ar 
very defiaent If J be in fiery signs be is hasty and cholenc, and there i 
generally observed to be a falling ui of the cheeks, and a lightness of featun 
with an angry look, ineanhy signs, a niUco. dogged temper, in auy signs, mor 
free and obliging, in watery, more duQ. and stupid, unless he be well aspectei 
by 21 ©,or5 

THE SUN IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
© w V 

Desenbes a good stature, strong and well made, a good complexion, though 
not very clear, light hair, flaxen or ytllowtsh, and large eyes. Noble, valiant, 
and courageous, delighting in warlike actions and enterprise, gams victory, b 
famous and a terror to cnenues etc, 

O in tf 

Gives a short, well-sci rather ugly person, dusky complexion, brown hair. 

Urge broad face wide mouth, and great nose. Confident, proud. arJ bold, 
food of oppouuoo. proud of physical strength, and one who generally b 
vlctwious 



A7PBMD1X TO BOOK 1 


67 


© in n 

Represents a weD^fop oiti o u ed body, above tbe middle stature, tan £nW 
complexion, brown hair Afiabk, courteous, and bad, not very fortunate, 
because so meek and mSd tempered as to be controlled and imposed on by others. 

O in 03 

Gives a mean, 01 formed body, deformed m tbe face, with a very onbealtby 
aspect, the bait brown. A hannlcss. cbeeifid pcison. but mdoleut, and not 
fond of employment, one who spends time m sports and pastimes, danana, 
etc., and U mu^ addicted to rovmg. 

© m A 

Gives a strong weU-proporuoned body, and a very portly person, sanguine 
complexion, light brown or yellowish hair, a full face, and lai^ staring eyes, very 
pronuneot, there is generally a mark or scar on the face. Very iust, upnght, 
andhonounble,scormDgtodoanyffieattiicss, punctual faithful (o fnen^, and 
tnagnanimoiis even to enemies, in short, a nght royal disposition, very am- 
bitious withal, fond of rule and authority, and given to war and dominioo, 
conquest, etc 

© in rp 

Makes a per»a something tall of stature, and slender, but very well propor- 
tioned, gO(^ complexion, dark hair, and much of it, but not black, the mind 
ingenious, cheerful, and fond of honest recreations, epecaaOy agreeable convivial 
"varties. etc. 

© u 

Produces an uptight, tall tad steRder body full eyes, ova! face, ruddy com* 
ilexion, bght hair, and frequently a rash or pimples m the face. The mind is 
lonourable, and disposition good, but tbe party is unfortunate especially la 
11 matters of war or ambition, unless strong beneSc influences concur 

O m Bl 

Gives a remarkably square-buflt. full, fleshy penoo, broad face, cloudy 
omplexlOD, duo or suoburnt. brown bair Tbe mind ingenious, but tbe 
empcr rug^ and overbearing, maimers too brusque, disposuon ambitious, 
me who will not admit of an cquaL They are fortunate upon the seas, or as 
iurgeons, physiaass, etc 

© m y 

Makes a taQ. handsome, wcU-ptoporUoned body, oval face, sanguine com- 
ilexion, or rather obve-brown or sunburnt, light brown hair but in tbe £mt 
■ight degrees of (be sign il u darker, one who is very lofty and proud-spmted, 
umingatgrcatthio^, austere and severe, nad one who perforins some honour- 
ible exploits, and often beconses ennobled, or receives titles, honorary disuncuons, 
rtc. 

O in rt 

Represents a middle stature, lU-made, spare, thm body, oval face, tick^ 
xrmplexion. brown, soft hair, not aiding and, tf m tbe fim sox degrees of the 
ugn, it is bght brown, the party ts just and honourable in prmaples, has a 
lolerably fair temper, and pins love and fnendship by agreeable manaen, 
rety hasty at tunes. 



68 


TBB MANUAL OP ASTROLOOY 


O in *s» 

Describes t per s o n of middle stature, weQ^o&de, corpulent bodr. round 
ftiD face, dear comptexioo, and li^t brows hair (m the term of Tj it is dark 
browsX The dispostioo tolerably sood. the from pwf»p» or but yet 
vam. proud, desirous of beanng and ostentatjoua. 

e m K 

Gtres a stature rather short, body plump and Sesfay, t round full face, and 
bidideienl complexion, brows hair, m tbe first eight degrees of tbe sgs 
It Is Qaaen, and very soft, thepartyuectremdypartialtosooeQ'.veryiQoS'aisiTe, 
fosd of pleasures, etc„ and, thou^ bafTfJg« to others, may rum himself by 
extravagance. 

ffare — ^Tbe O nsisg at bmb geseralb' products a l ua b m st or bedded 
appearasce. It coufcra a degree ofpnde and a desire for fame. 

VENUS IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
? In V 

Describes a middle stature, rather tall and slender, light hair Gf b) the term of 
21, dark) good coopleiaon, a pensive aspect, and usuaQy a mark or scar in the 
face (often marked store or less mthsmaB-pox, according as $ may be affitcted 
or sot) They are genenlly unfortunate both to themselves and others, unless 
$bavea ifeor A of 21 

$ m b 

OnesabandsoiDeper»ii.(baaghtbestaniieisootgrest, tbe body is extreoei 
well made, plucq). but not gross and If 9 be aspected, they are va-. 
handsome. theccmptedonuruddy.biitDotlair, gtseraflyfanalesarehandscaa 
brunettes, and have much the face and figure of tbe laotxdeMttSeL The ban 
is gaxnlly brawn, and, if 9 be in berown term, it is very soft and Inxarust, 
if m the term of 21. tt is ji shtning black. Tbe eyes are geoai Hy black, and 
very expressive. Tbe is mild and wtomiig. tbe disposuion kmd, humane, 
obbgmg, etc. They genenOr gsm {soeb respect from chose wrth whom Cbey 
come into contact or deal, and are fortunate. 

9 in n 

Gives one above the middle height, slender, upright, tod weO-ande body 
The cotnpIcDon dear and fair, with soft brown hair, frequently b ro wn or baid 
eyes. They are good-humoured. lovmg. liberal, Just, and charitable, and 
rarely guilty of anything disbonounble. 

9 fas ea 

Repre s e n ts a short person, a fleshy body, r oun d, pek, and sickly face, with 
light hair and if the ) be with 9 . and they in the ascendant, tbe face be 
qmtswhiteasdwan,andthehaIrv«f7l)^tcoloured, butif 9 be in tbe term of 
£, the hair may be reddish, and a tmge of colour appear in the ebceki. They 
have genenlly smaQ grey or greenish eyes. The disposition is Idle and dnS. 
and the tense of duty weak, theyarefoode^tooetyandemyformofpkature, 
if It be a female, the ts caielen of her boms and other dutxa. At the sraest 
they are very fickle and thnid, ^ tbe best tide outwards, and teem to be fas 
earnest when they are not, ever mutable and lac opst aaL 



APFEKDIX TO BOOK 1 


?la A 

Givts a persoa reasonably taQ of stature, weI!-coniposed body, dear com* 
plexion, round face, fiiS eye, bedded and fair skin, bair reddub, or U tnay be 
flaxen. They are petulant and passionate, toon angiy, and soon pleased again; 
free, generous, sociable, and good-bumoured, but ratber proud, and freiiuently 
indisposed, though not serioi^. 

? in tij 

Shows a tall, well proportioned figure, oval face, dark hair, or, if in her own 
term, sad brown, and a dusky compkidoiL They are ingenious, eloquent, 
active, and dever; of an aspiring turn, but rarely successful in tbeir inirsuits; 
generally unfortunate. 

9 m ^ 

Descnbes an upright, tall, degant person, extremdy weD made, with a genteel 
carnage. The face is oval, and ratber beautiful, having pleasing smiles and 
beautiful dimples; but they are frequently freckled; the bair is brown and soft, 
but rather grows long thin plentifuL They are kind, aflectionate, and very 
obliging; and general well'beloved by all with whom they have any dealings. 
If 9 be in the ascendant, and there be no affiicuog aspects, but Ti cast a ^ from 
sa, the party, if a female. wOl be a perfect beauty. 

ShiBl 

Denotes a short, stout, weO*set, cocputeet body, broad face and dusky con>> 
plexioa, and dark ct black bdr, one wbo has nothing very pleasant is the 
countenaoee. They are often envious, unhealthy, and fooLsb; given to cod> 
tention, and. if $ be afflicted by h or to very ungracious actions; and if 
both I| and i afflict, and (here be no essistaace by & or 2|, they are possessed 
of hurtful prop e n dtles. 

$ in y 

R epr e sen ts a person rather tall than otherwise, well made; clear or angaine 
complexloa, fair, oval face, and brown hair. They are generous, tpmced, 
aiming at no Tn**n things, rather proud, passionate, yet, b general, good-t emp ere d , 
kind, and inolTen^ve. They delight in umocent tecre a uons, and are, b short, 
very obhgbg. fortunate persons. 

S in yv 

Describea a small-sued person, short stature, a pale face, thm and sickly; 
dark hair (but. If 9 be b bet own term, a sad-brown). They are eenerally 
perso ns of targe appetite, fond of enroynieot. not fortunate, subject to twfden 
changes b life and strange catastrophes. 

9 b e» 

Gives a handsome, well-forined person, clear complexion, rather corpulent 
or targe body, brown hair (If she be b her own term, flaxim). Agooddispostioo, 
qu^ affable, courteous, not at mil bclined to viaous actions, peaceable, 
obliging to aB, fortunate b affairs, and respected by friends and acquaintance 
b g en et a L 



70 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


9 in K 

PmoQ&tes a nuddle stature, a Sa!^, plmsp body, a roond full t 

dimple m tbe chin, good completion, b e tween pale and niddy. Good- 
humoiired, just, kind, mild and peaceable, ingenious, somewhat yet 

moderately fortunate in the world. 

MERCURY IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
V in T 

Gives a moderate stature, spare and thin body, oval face, light brown and 
curling hair, dull eoinpIexioiL A min d nther ni-disposed, addicted to dispute, 
smart business tricks, and unworthy aciioas; in short, a cunning person, 
p in b 

Gives a middle-sired, corpulent, thick penon, strong and well set, swarthy 
simbumt complexion, dark short and thick hair. Idle, slothful, one who loves 
ease and luxury, and who hurts himsdf by his associations. 

9 in n 

Shows a taQ, upright, straight body, svell formed, bro s v n bair, good complexion, 
and a very iocelligent look. An ingenious pregnant fancy, a good orator, a 
cunning lawyer, or clever bookseller; one wbo perfectly understands his own 
interests, and (if 9 be not afflicted) one wbo is subtle, net easily deluded iy 
the most cunning knave he may encounter. 

9 in s9 

Personates a low, sbon stature, or squat figure, an ID complexioe, a th! 
sharp face, small eyes, sharp nose, dark hair; one wbo Is fretful, mconstan 
disposed to idleness, yet quick to take advasuge, and not to be depended upon. 

9 in R 

Gives a fuD large body and good stature. duQ, swarthy, sunburnt complexloii 
light brown hair, lound face, fuQ eyes, a broad or high nose. A hasty, proud 
c o nc e ited, ambitious, boasting, contentious, and troublesome character. 

9lD 17 

Denotes a tall, slender, well-proportioned person, dark brown bair or (If t 
be to the terms of 21 or h) black hair.aot a clear complexion; aloogvistge, 
and austere countenance. A very witty, ingenioos, talented mind; and. If B 
be free from aflltction, a profound scbolar or linguist, and capable of any 
undertaking which requires great abOity. 

9 in ^ 

Personates a taD body, weS nude, but not thin; li^t brown, smocth hair, 
a ruddy or sanguine complexton. A just, virtuous, prudent person, a lover and 
promoter of learning, and having great lutural abOities and many acquired 
accomphshments. 

Ufa ^ 

Gives a short, mean suture. fuD and weO-<ei but ni-made body, broad tboulders, 
ewsrthy. dark complexion, brown cmibg hair. Not any way elegant or pleaslsg. 
yet ingenious and studious; very careful of their own interests, fond of the 
other sex, and ptttial to company tad merry-making. 


APPENDIX TO BOOK I 


71 


6 ia f 

Deootes % person of tiQ itatore, well fonaed, not corpniest. bnt rather laree- 
bofied and tpare. an oval face, a latse eose, and ruddy complexion Narty, 
but soon recoodled, rash la many things to ther own Iniury, yet well disposed, 
(tnvtng after honourable thmsa. but seldoin attaining them , set very fortunate, 
Sin 

Civea a mean, smaD atature, oAeo cronlced made and bow-kgged, a this 
f3ceandfigure,duskycomplexloo.andbrownfaair Averypee^, discontented 
dQCcted. sickly, feeble penoo, yet active, one who is unfortunate to Klf and 
disagreeable to others, o«TQg to a suspiaotnjoature and tU temper 
y in C3 

Shows a person of cuddle fadfiht, rather fieahy and corpulent, a good com* 
plexion and clear skin, with broMu hair and fdl face. An ingeaiocB, obliging 
charaaer. Inclined to study, fond of arts and tciencta, very {nventn-e, and 
remarkable for talent, as well as being a humane, kind, cbantable person 
9ia K 

Civa a short, squat, dumpy figure (though, if in his own term or that of ht 
rather thin), pale face, brown hair, sickly look, and very hairy body A veiy 
fretful, repining, foppish peraon, dispos^ to Aguiar habits, if a nun, very 
Insignificant and contemptible. 

THE MOON IN THE TWELVE SIGNS 
) in Y 

Desenbea a person of udcTerent stature ntber fleshy or plump, round face, 
tolerably good complexion, Lght brows or flaxen hair The mind js rash, angry, 
ambitious, and aspiring, oflen changing, and such undergo vanoos muistions 
in life, not often fortunaie 

) to tr 

Gives a strong oorpulent, well-set body, rather short, pretty good complexion, 
dark brown or black hair Geilfe, obliging kind sober, just, and honest 
OQS who esteem, is much respected, and attains prefennent according to 
the ntuauon in life. 

> U D 

Describes a tall, well formed, opngbi. comely person, brown hair good 
complexion, between pale and sang uine Tbe mind is usgeiuous, yet crafty and 
changeful, not of the best disposition nor very fortunaie, unless other good 
testifflomesby aspects of 21, O, or ffcoocur 
I m cn 

Represents a middle stature, weD proportio&ed, and fleshy person, a round 
full face, pale, dusky complexion, sad brown hair The mind is flexible, given 
\x> t!rcai5e, a rnerry, easy, y^itcccan itafKistc s / u , ftry kconAcss wib peactaVie 
fond of good company, one who is geoertJly well beloved, and fortunate in 
mostaflam, unsteady, butfree from passion ornshactioiis, a great traveller 
>in ft 

I Denotes a person above the middle siz^ well proportioned, strong and large- 
boned, sanguine complexion, light brown ban’, large and p r o m inent eyes and 



72 


THE MAKaAL OP ASTROLOGY 


fun face A lof^, proud, aspincg penon, very ambitious, aad desirous to bear 
rule, one who abhors senatuda or dependi T iW!, and m an mfnrtimttM 

penon. 

> la 17 

Describes a rather taQ person, dark brown or blad: hair, ova] face, rather 
ruddy, but tolerably clear compleuofi. An ingenious, reserved, covetous, 
melaicholy, unfortunate person , not in general very well disposed, and one who 
seldom perform? any very cornmendabte asuoca. 

) to 3^ 

Gives a taP, well-com p osed body, with smooth, Lght brown hair, bandsoise, 
and pleasant cheerful counteoanoe, fine red and white complexion. Tbqr 
m erry jocund, and pleasant, very food of amusement, and much admired 
the Opposite sex, if a woman, she snP be courted by numbers, but yet not 
fortunate unless $, the dispositor, be very strong and sveP aspected, etc. 

) m HI 

Denotes a thick, short, and iU-shaped person, a fleshy obscure complexioti. 
dark hair, often black. They are irregular, !mpulsi>'e, contentious, and caPons. 
and if It be a female, she u geoenPy Impulsive in her actions, and tf the ) be 
afflicted by the O or ^ of h or d, she wOI suffer the«by 

> 10 / 

Represents a handsome, weP-proponjosed, and rather tap persoa, oval face; 
aangutae complexion rather bronze^ and bright brown of shi^g cb o tt u t tafr 
The disposition is good, open and geD crotg, but hasty and passionate, ye) 
forgiviag, ooe who at greet things is forWnUe, and much respected to 
those with whom be assons t n, 

> fa n 

Gives a person of low stature, a thin, small, weak body, bad health, and feeble, 
especially about the k n ees the complexioa bad. black hair, ud tm^ features, 
one who is inactive, duU. not inseotous. pseraPy very selfish fa his cooduct, 
and held fa low esteem by fas associa t es. 

>fa« 

Represents a middle^lced persoa. weP made, and rather corpulent, browo 
hair, clear skis, and sanguine eomplexioo. They are Ingenious, adahlA 
courteous and faoffendve, a lover of cunous and sdeati&c studies having 
moth favention. and a persoo rarely guOly of unworthy actions. 

> fa H 

Describes a penon of a mean or low stature; but plump or fat, pale and 
bloated face Lght b r o wn hair, and sleepy eyes, one not fadined to actioo 
except for pkisore, nnfortunate both to self and others I ng^ f u tant 

ffj •>-tf ) be weO aspected. and fa a good bouse, the disposition is cmch 
improved. 

fThe sttidest is warned to apply these descriptions wilb caution, mofe partico- ^ 
lady fa regard to the chiractcr ascribed to ci^ — S ) 
















NOTES TO BOOK / 


ON THE DIVISIONS OP THE ZODIAC 

WHTTKBt the isflueaees sod t^mhoet of the sevmJ tigas were teveafed to laio, 
or were lead into them by empmcal sjt Id the course of bbcs, we caa lafely 
■ay that the influeooej are there, aad (bat, as ParaceUus says, “ Mao u related to 
the Stan by reason of his sider^ body.** which, by ncxlers astro-psychologists, 
u called ** the astral* PenooaHy wewouldoclioeiothebelierthattbecelestta] 
acroU, mtb aii jo images aod symbols; came as a complete rtreUuoa to the 
Ood-maa Adam, or such first of bumao hied as may uaderstood by that 
nam e, uto wbose Bostrib was breathed the nephesh eheyim, the ** breath of 
Uves ** — an Inspiration «s much spintual. meotal. and psyduc, as purely physical, 
that God c o v er ed Himself with the spangled vestment of heaven, ordered tbe 
lews of bumao (hou^^ sod drew, by (he celestial fires, mio'a rruod to thtogt 
(hatwereootofcartb ThcncamelberevebUcm.tndtbereadmgoftbeKrDU. 

Such IS the immortality of tradiuon, that tbe same signs and symbols stand for 
tbe aame things and cany (be same meanings, as in the days when, eocordiog to 
/osephus, Seth ** eograved them upon pillars of stone.** Some have imagioed 
theseptilsrsofstOBetobetitePrramtdsofEtypt, but however that may be, the 
Jewish historian says they were to be seen in his day Herein Josrphta voices a 
tradition whidi drarty ^,o«a (hat, as we have said on our first page, tbe busy 
of man could oot mar the sacred record At first an inspiration, a revela- 
tion. tbe celestial language became a tradiuonal knowledge, v^uch spread over 
the whole earth, permeated tbe daily bfe of the oatlaos, engaged tbe rniodi of 
pnnees aad rulers, and finally became established as a tamd sctence in the 
temples oflndia, Babylonia, Assyria. Egypt. Greece, aad Rome. As a tradition 
it was impensbable, for mankind can never be free from tradition. We are 
bom in it, w« breathe in it. and speak It from our infancy We fashion our 
thought upon it. it moulds our life: We speak of lunci^ eai Jotia} laea, of 
mEyla/mcoandreRereUrs wakingthercbylbecchoesofthatoIdtradiUonwhicb 
referred these oualiues to tbe dominion of tbe Moon, of Jupucr, Mars, and Venus. 

So, whilo nor means a hurt, the red planet wQl be caUed Mars and 
else, bcicatrse, pnmarily. the names of things eap r ais their Qualities. 



H0TE3 TO BOOK 1 


75 


Itbthe«3me{fl(tcudtot!Kti^ottbeZod^ Ourkaowltds«oftb«aU 
purtly tr&ditionaL If by daily expenmeot wt find that knowledge to be true. It 
b the greater trgunnit for prunary Iniptratioo, «s well aj for ths immortxltty of 
tradition. 

The signs of the Zodiac must not be confounded with the constellationi 
bearing the tanie nama The fixed or intellectual Zodiac is counted from tho 
Vernal Equinox, while the shifting or neturat Zodiac is counted from the begin* 
tung of the constellation Anes The two Zodiacs coincided m the year a d 498. 
as noticed by Varaba Mihira in his BrVtat Samfiltd already referred to, and 
confirmed by references to former authors. The precession of the equinoxes 
causes the constellations to retrograde through the signs of the ZocLac at the 
rate of about SO)* a yeu, so that at (he present time the divergence amounts to 
about 19* 34' 26', le^ the first point of the constellation Anes b now located 
b 10* 25' 34' of the sign Pisces, and b moving towards Aquanus. 


ON LILLY'S DESCRIPTIONS 

We have ventured to introduce tiUy'a descnption of penons b the Appendix 
to tha Book, because Lilly u a reputable antboi, wbose “ Christian Astrology ** 
is a standard work on the boroseopical saeoce. and much esteemed by modem 
votarws of Asuology 

For quite other raasoos, which the polite reader will appreciate on reference 
0 the ortginal m the Ashmolean MSS , we have thought fit to paraphrase, 
efine, and otherwbe temper the language cf UUy'i delineations The conditions 
if seventeenth century life, wherein the controlling infiuence of social and mental 
nfiture did not obtain so widely as in these days, no doubt would serve to brmg 
nto prominenoe many of the corrupt tendencies specified by our author u> the 
forcibla masfier of one who lUusintes by refereoce to extreme types At the 
lame time, it u proper to reflect that, although many of these illustrations are 
not likely to find their exact reflection in most modem Instances, yet the possi- 
bility of corruption b mbereot in human nature, and where the refining influences 
nf good parental care, of mental and moral education, are lacking otherwise 
venial faults and common faflings may easily descend to the worse einb depicted 
by ou author to the appropriate language of his day Quite apart from the 
indications of character derived from Asuology, however, the influences of 
beredity, environment, education, hygiene, food and climate, all play their 
part as factors in the development or suppression of inherent faculty, and 
must, therefore, be taken into considecatioD Yet those who have marked and 
thought upon the wide diflereoces of character existing in children bom of the 
same parents, fed at the same table, taught b the same school, and otherwise 
brought up under like conditions will be disposed to believe that, behind all 
'inwe’iifliuences'inirjeaen'Ego.oi'w&wxiseln.'Ve'nrgwtreti'iis'fHe'prohufttfl’inose 
influences, but which, on the contrary, is using them for the purposes of its owo 
evolution — pushing through them so to speak into a fuller and more perfect 
expression Those of our readers who bold the doctrine of reincarnation, or 
metempsychosis, will follow us more mtelligecUy than others 



BOOK n 

THE READING OF A HOROSCOPE 

CHAPTBR I 

THE BODILY FORM, DEFECTS AND ACCIDENTS 

Tim rising sign, the ruler of the ascendant and that of the sign 
intercepted in the tint house (if any), and the planets closely aspecUng 
the ascendant, considered with the signs they are in, will determine 
much concerning the bodily form to which the native wtU arrive at 
maturity. (See Book i, chap. it. and Appendix.) 

Primarily, the ruling sign, or that which bolds the eastern horizon, 
is the basis of the physical temperament, as set forth in the chapter 
on the *' Signatures of the Zodiac.** The modifying factors are the 
lord or ruler of the rising sign, and the planets in close aspect to the 
ascending degree, considered according to the signs they severally 
occupy. The peculiarities conferred by these signs will be found 
more or less reproduced in the body of the native. 

Pluto in the ascendant, as indicated in the Appendix to Book i, 
afi(icts the size of the body according to the sign which is rising 
Thus Cancer, Virgo and Capncom will shorten the height but 
Gemini, Sagittanus and Pisces, will increase the height. Taurus, 
Leo, Scorpio and Aquarius increase the width giving thickset bodies. 

Uranus in the ascendant, or in close aspect thereto, gives length 
of limb and a slender body. 

Mars gives a larger form than that indicated by the rising sign, 
if it be close to the horizon; and generally it contributes a ruddiness 
to the complexion, due to the presence of much iron m the system. 
If in exact conjunction or any aspect to the ascending degree, it 
operates to produce red hair and grey eyes, the ruddy colour and 
sted-grey bring peculiar to the god of war. When rising it frequently 
gives a mole, a mark, or scar in the face 

Any of the earthy signs ascending, and two or time planets in the 
ascendant, makes a dwarf, or one much under the usual stature, 
more especially if Saturn be one of such planets. 

Jupiter increases the vitality and gives bulk to the figure. 



78 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOQY 


Saturn makes the complexion paler or darker It was nsmg in 
Sagittanus m the horoscope of President Abraham Lincoln. His 
thm, pale, and somewhat melancholic face will no doubt be familiar 
to many o^ our readers from photographs and pictures of b»m- 
(Sce Book u, chap xv, “ Rank ’* ) 

Venus rising confers greater elegance on face and figure When 
closely aspecting the ascendant or its ruler, it gives some claim to 
good looks 

Neptune causes the face to become prematurely wrinkled, owing 
to a sapping or wasting away of the vital fluids 

Venus and Jupiter m conjunction or opposition from any pan of 
the figure gives blue eyes It has been frequently notic^ that 
when this position or aspect occurs, the native has very deep blue 
and almost violet eyes 

Leo, Sagittanus, Gemini and Aquanus produce tall persons. 

Anes, Libra, Virgo, and Scorpio ^ve a medium stature. 

Taurus, Capneorn, Cancer, and Pisces produce small persons 

But these observations are, of course, only general, they are 
subject to modifying influences 

The planets have each two complexions, the Sun and Moon only 
one each. They are as follows — 

F*Ir O — «E> > Dark 

„ ea l| *1 M 

. ? a K « 

„ *r „ 

- ^ 7 « w 

« ”1 n « 

The Sun rules the first half of the male signs, and the second half 
of female signs, while the Moon takes the rrmaimng halves of these 
signs. The Sun renders the complexion fairer, the Moon makes it 
darker, when ruling the half sign nsmg at bulb. 

FrVSICAL FECULlARITIES 

The Eyes — The Moon being with the Pleiades m b 29’, or la 
the Asselli, 6'', or with Antares in J 8*, or the Sun m these places, 
afflicted by Mars from an angle, the person bom may become blind. 

The same result follows from (be Moon in oppoution to the Son, 
or the Moon m conjunction with the Sun in any of these oebuloos 
parts of the Zodiac. 



THE fiODILY rORU 


79 


When either the Sun or Moon is in or near B 29*, SI 6*, or t 8\ 
and afiUcted by any planet, defective eyesight is the result, the cause 
differing according to the afOicting pl^et. 

The Sun in Aquarius, afflicted by Saturn, especially by the oppod* 
tion or conjunction, stone*bUndoes$ frequently re^ts. The sign 
Aquarius corresponds to the etheric vibrations, and therefore has 
affinity with the sense of sight. 

The Sun and Moon being in opposition from Aries and Libra 
gives weak sight, and sometifflcs sore eyes. The same if the Sun 
or Moon be in Aries and afflicted by Mars or Saturn. 

Pluto rising, squared by the Sun and Moon will also cause weak 
tight and accentuate the liability to blindness more especially if 
the signs Taurus, Leo or Aquarius axe involved. 

If a malefic planet occupy any of the nebulous parts of the Zodiac 
already referrrf to. and afflict the Sun or Moon by aspect, then 
danger of blindness will arise from an accident, more particularly 
if the malefic be elevated above the luminary. 

In this matter it is better to have the Moon afilicted than the 
Sun, for it ^ves greater hope of relief. 

The £arr.— Mercury ruling’ the twelfth house, and afflicted by 
the malefics, Uranus, Saturn, or Mata, or being m cosjunctron with 
the Sun, deafness ensues. The same happens when Mercury is At the 
twelfth house, and so afflicted by the inalefica or in conjunction with 
the Sun. Mercury, niUog the intellect, is thus held in bondage, as 
denoted by the signification of the twelAh house. 

The third sign of the Zodiac (n), which is ruled by Mercury, 
corresponds to the atmospheric vibrations, and therefore has 
afiinity with the sense of heating. 

The Tongue and Organs of Speech . — If Mercury, being ruler of 
the sixth house, is afflicted by Mars or Saturn, and posited in either 
of the watery signs — Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces— the native will 
have a perceptible stammer, Usp. or otber impediment 

Mercury anywhere in the figure in tbe watery signs, afflicted by 
Saturn, causes a stammer. If Mars add his influence by aspect 
then the native will talk very fast, lisp, or pronounce bis words badly. 

When Mercury holds any of the Cnt six degrees of Scorpio, and is 
in opposition to the Moon, the native will have a defect in his speech. 

Saturn ascending in any of the bestial signs— Aries, Taurus, 
Leo, or Capricorn— or in any of the “mute” signs— Cancer, 
Scorpio, or Pisces— causes an impediment of sp e ec h . 



80 THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

Mercury m the sixth hous^ in conjunction with the Sun or 
afflicted by Satuni or Mars, causes a defect m the speech. 

The second house (and the corresponding sign, Taurus) governs 
the vocal or^jis, and If a **sigQ of voice,” ie, either Gemini, 
Libra, or Aquarius (the airy sign), be found in the second house 
of the horoscope of birth, more especially if Venus or Mercuiy be 
therein and free from affliction, then eloquence or some vocal gift 
may be predicted 

The Hair — Mars exactly rising produces red hair The greater 
the amount of iron, the more ruddy is the hair Snlphur darkens 
the hair, and therefore Saturn nsing produces black hair The 
relative strength of Saturn and Mars m the horoscope, and their 
intimacy with the ascending degree, will dctemunc whether the hair 
IS naturally hght or dark at inatunty, considenuon being always 
made of the characteristic of the nsmg sign. 

Mars afflicting Venus, and elevated above Venus in the figure, 
causes*' the hair to fall off soon Mare m Aquarius Gemini, or 
Sagittarius afflicting Venus, the same effect is produced 

Jupiter being ruler of the ascendant, and ocadental, / e , between 
the firet and fourth, or the seventh and tenth cusps, produces 
premature baldness The same if Saturn be ruler of the ascendant, 
and ocadentaL 

The Limbs -^Tbe Son or Moon afflicted in the signs Capncom, 
Aquarius or Pisces often produces lameness, or, if any of these 
signs occupy the eastern horizon and the nstng degree be afflicted 
by the presence or evil aspect of the malefics, a similar defect is 
product, and always that part of the body is afflicted wberem the 
Sun or Moon is found to be situated at birth, if m evil aspect or 
coQjuncUon with the malefic planets. 

Pluto ruing lo Gcmim or Sagittanos afflicted by the Sun or 
Moon, together with Saturn brings a liabOity to partial or complete 
paralysu of either or both upper and lower limbs according to the 
seventy of the affliction 

Thus far we see bow certain defects in the body are brought 
about Besides thu, it ts necessary to observe whether the afibctisg 
planets are angular or out of their dignities for then they increase 
the evils denoted If however, Jupiter or Venus assist the afiheted 
planet by their beoefic aspects conjunction, or parallel, then the 
evils will be ameliorated, and assutaoce proceed from the 
quarter mdicated by the position of the benefic planeL 



ACCIDENTS 


81 


ACCIDENTS 

When a planet, even a bcnefic, is in the ascendant, and afflicted 
by the evil aspect or conjunction of Uranus, Saturn, or Mars, it 
denotes injuries to that part of the body indicated by the sign 
ascending, or that occupied by the afflicting planet, more particularly 
if cardinal signs are involved 

Pluto rising in the common signs, Gemini, Virgo, Sagittanus, or 
Pisces and in affliction with the Moon, Mars or Uranus increases 
the liability to accidents through trave] which break the hmbs and 
can cause amputations 

The Sun or Moon rising, and thus afflicted, indicates similar 
dangers Again, the Sun or Moon, being in the oriental quadrants, 
TI2 between the ascendant and mid heaven or the descendant and 
nadir, and afflicted by the square or opposition of Mars or Saturn, 
will produce hcadents 

The lummanes being afflicted by the malefics from Gemini, 
Aquanus, or Sagittanus denotes danger of gunshot or wounds if 
Mars be the afflicting planet, but Saturn disposes to produce falls 
and bruises, and hurts by falling things 

Mars or Saturn nsiog, and not lo aspect to the lummanes, still 
denotes acodeots at such tune as they may form their exact conjunc- 
Qon with the ascending degree by oblique ascension This calcula 
tion IS explamed in Book ui of this work 

If the malefics, Uranus and Mars, or Saturn and Man, are m 
conjunction or opposition, especially when in cardinal signs and 
angles, they denote senous physical hurt to the nauve 

The first decanate of Leo and Aquanus, and the last of Taurus and 
Scorpio, dispose to drowning as also the second decanate of Virgo 
when the lights are afflicted therein, or the malefics afflict the lights 
from those parts of the Zodiac 

In regard to the nature of the accidents thus foreshown Mars 
denotes cuts bums scalds, bites, etc, according to the sign it 
occupies, whether a fiery, airy, watery, or earthy sign a human or 
sign, ttc , taken togclbet with the bouse it is in 

Saturn in this respect denotes blows, contusions, falls and 
dislocations 

Uranus denotes strange and unexpected hurts, acadents by 
machinery, electnaty, etc The part of the body liable to aemdent 
may be known by the sign and house the malefic is m 

Observe that the odd houses — first, third, fifth, etc — denote the 



82 THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 

left side itt a male horoscope, the right side in a female horoscope. 
The even houses — second, fourth, etc. — denote the right side in a 
male and the left in a female. 

The first ten degrees of a sign show the upper part of that portion 
of the body ruled by it; the second decanate shows the middle part; 
and the last ten degrees show the lower part. 

Thus Mars in b 24^ afflicting the Moon shows hurt to the neck: 
the twenty-fourth degree of Taurus shows the loner part of neck; 
and, if Mars be in the third house, the left side in a male, the right 
in a female. Thus all affections of the b^y may be localised. 


CHAPTER II 

THE PHYSICAL CONSTITUTIOfI 

A PROCART consideration in the horoscope of a newly-born child 
is that of its coosU'tutioa and the hkelihood of its readiing mature 
yean; for. if hie is denied at (he outset, it will be manifestly absurd 
to pr^ct anything concemiog the fortunes, marriage, profession, 
and other incidents of adult age. 

Consider, then, die nature of the rising sign, its lord or ruler, 
the nature of the planets rising (if any), the condidoa of the Moon, 
and the lord of the eighth house. 

Pluto rising afflicted by the luminaries or by the lord of the risth 
or eighth shows difflculty in rearing on infant. There will be 
particular need for augmentation of natural feeding and for cars 
during the teething penod. 

Should Saturn, Uranus, or Mars be found near the rising degree, 
sdlhcted by the ruler of the eighth bouse, and the Moon at the same 
time afflicted by the Sun. the premature death of the infant may be 
expected. 

If the ruler of the ascendant be in the sixth house, afflicted by 
the ruler of the eighth, without assistance from Jupiter or Venus, 
then the child will be very sickly, and wdl die ^ore reaching 



THE PHYSICAL CONSTITUTION 83 

A male child bom at an eclipse of the Sun, or a female at an 
eclipse of the Moon, seldom draws breath, or is boro only to see 
>the hght and dir. This happened in the case of the Duchess of 
Fife’s first child, which was boro during an eclipse of the Sun ca 
Tuesday, 17th June, 1890, the eclipse falling on the cusp of the 
fifth house in the horoscope of the I^cess. 

When, however, the ruler of the ascendant is found in the sixth 
hou»e, assisted by the good aspects or conjunction of either Jupiter 
or Venus, or by planets in their dignities, even though afilicted by 
the ruler of the eighth bouse, the child, although sickly, will be reared. 

The strength of the constitution mainly depends on the nature 
of the sign rising, and the condition of the Sun. 

The signs are classified as follows: — 

Aries, Leo, Libra, and Sagittarius are strongly vital signs, capable 
of withstanding considerable strain in the form of sickness during 
early years. They pve much promise of continued life even in 
severely afflicted genitures. 

Taurus, Gemini, Vitgo, Scorpio, and Aquarius ate moderately 
vital, and, with agreeable aspects. wiU bring the native safely to 
mature hfe. 

Cancer, Capricorn, and Pisces are the weakest signs under which 
persons can be bora. When they are ruing, and the usual indications 
of weakness are shown, as explained above, then the child will be 
reared only with great difficulty, and may even die soon after buth. 

The wont signs of short life are present when the Sun and Moon 
are both afflicted; when the ruler of the ascendant is m the sixth or 
eighth bouse, and the ascendant b vitiated by the presence of the 
malefics, Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, or Mars, the nsmg sign being 
cither Cancer, Capneorn, or Pisces. 

When Taurus rues with Mars or Saturn therem, the child will be 
subject to fits during dentition, and if the Sun or Moon be afflicted 
in a fixed sign, the child will die in a paroxysm. 

It is important abo to notice what aspect was last formed between 
the Sun and Moon, and what planets the Moon separates from and 
applies to. For if, in a weak nativity, the Moon be separating from 
a benefic, and applying by evil aspect or conjunction to a malefic, 
the child Hi2J hardly attain more than four years. Oa the contrary, 
if the Moon be separating from a malefic, and applying to the good 
aspect or conjunction of a benefic, then the child will be reared, 
though the nativity be otherwue a weak one. 



84 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


la the horoscope of an adult, the duration of life may be jud^ 
the sign nsing, and the condition of the Sun, Moon, and ascen> 
danL The Sun tn a fieiy sign and the Moon m a ^'atety sign are 
mdicative of a well balanced temperament; and when the Sun or 
Moon is found in the first, tenth, eleventh, or second bouse, well 
aspected by Jupiter and Venus, a long life may be predicted. 

Mars, m any aspect to the Sun or Moon, gives vital heat and a 
good circulation, with the power to throw off diseases. But if m 
evil aspect, it disposes to accidents. 

When Saturn is using, and the Sun and Moon are in evil aspect 
to one another, or when Saturn is in the sixth house, or the Sim or 
Moon therem badly afflicted, the native suffers much ill b«ilth, and 
easily succumbs to evil directions If the rising sign be also a weak 
one, the life will be short 

When a malefic planet, afflicting the Sun or Moon, is elevated 
above the lunxcoaty, it is more cvfl than when the luminary is elevated 
above the malefic AndthishoIdsgoodinregardtoallbOFOScopical 
couidenbons The more elevated the planet may be which favours 
or afflicts the significaior of life or fortima, the more pownful u its 
actios. 


CHAPTER III 

PHYSICAL INFIRMITIES 

Is order to leam the vunous aifmests to which the native will t 
liable, attention must be paid to those planets which afflict the Su 
and Moon The afihction from a beaefic planet can only be b 
evil aspect, whereas in the case of a malefic the afflictjon may be b 
conjunction, parallel, or evil aspect. 

In this matter, observe that the Sun becomes the ngmficator of ih 
radical constitution, of inherent tendency and heiedilaty trans 
mission, while the Moon indicates acquired tendencies, and sucl 
affecuons as proceed from external causes, such as food, clothing 
climate habit, etc. Again, the Sun indicates chrome and lastinj 
altediems of tbs body, tbs hSooa dssotss a£i.ts sdmsats, and sttcl 
as anse from the acodents of life The Sun is organic, the Moon 
IS fimctionaL 

Therefore, observe, first of all, the nature of the planets afflicting 
the Sun. taking no‘e of the Bgns they occupy These will declare 



PHYSICAL INFIRMITIES 85 

certain hereditary and organic tendcnacs Next, the Moon, m a 
wmilar manner, will indicate by its evil aspects those ailments which 
will arise afier birth to the detruncnt of the native’s health 
Thus, if Saturn were in Leo, the heart and dorsal region would be 
affected, if Saturn afflicted the Moon, the heart would become 
affected by weakness, debihty, or gncf, but if Saturn afflicted the 
Sun, the heart would already be affected from birth by hereditary 
transmission, and orgamc disorder would soon manifest itself 
The places occupied by the malefics are always points of affection 
The planet's nature, considered with that of the sign it is in, wiU 
determine the character of the evil tendency and the part of the 
body likely to be affected 

When the malefics are m oneotal quarters of the figure, the illness 
Will be short, acute, and painful, but when ocadcotal, tedious and 
prolonged illnesses are shown 

The Sun or Moon afOwted in the seventh house or in the sixth, 
muen illness is shown Again, the luminanes afflicted m the oriental 
quarters show acute pains and acadeots In the occidental quarters 
the luminaries afflicted show diseases 
The Sun and Mercury, afflicted m the sign Pisces, in the sixth 
house, when Virgo is rising (as sometimes happens with those bom 
t soon after sunset between 19th February and 20th March), shows a 
strong tendency to consumption 

^Vhcn the Sun is afflicted by Saturn in square or opposition, and 
Saturn occupies the mendian of the horoscope, a wastmg disease or 
consumption is shown This ts particularly true if Saturn be in 
any of the common signs, Gemini, Virgo, Sagittarius, or Pisces 
The student is referred to Book i. chap, u, for the parts of the 
body ruled by the signs of the Zodiac As regards the planets 
Saturn denotes colds, contraction, ossification, obstructions, 
compression, constipation, weakness, and festering diseases, dull, 
heavy pains and aches 

Jupiter denotes apoplexy, pleonsy, and corrupted blood, diseases 
ansmg from too full a habit, excess, and surfeit 
Mars denotes heat, inflamma tion, swellings, ruptures, sorts, 
effusion of blood, fevers, and sharp pains 
Venus denotes such as are inndeot to the gcneratiie system, as also 
small pox,meas!es,sloughings,etc .ansingfrom weakness and poBon 
Mercury denotes nervous complaints, restlessness, mental worry, 

*- sleeplessness, irregulanlies in food, overworked brain, etc 



86 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


The Moon, when afSictmg the ascendant or Sun, denotes colds, 
humidity, dropsical swellinfs, weakness, and irregularities 
The Sun, when atHicting the ascendant or Moon, denotes fevers, 
sunstroke, and ills arising from excess of heat 
Pluto afflicting the ascendant or the lununanes brings disorders 
caused through the work earned out particularly in those industries 
where fumes, rays, radiation, etc , occur Those working m nuclear 
activities will be particularly susceptible 
Neptune m the ascendant, square to it or to the Moon will cause 
wasting diseases and ailments which have their ongm m drugs, 
bites of animals, stings of insects, and through drunkenness 
Uranus near the ascendant or in square to the Sun intensities the 
liability to heart trouble and to strokes 

In female horoscopes, the positions and affections of the Moon 
and Venus are of vital importance The supreme ftmcUoa of 
maternity, the r'-gulanty of the system, and the health after puberty 
depend almost wholly on the coadiUOD of these two bodies in the 
horoscope of birth 

If, therefore, the Moon should be in square or opposition to 
Venus in a female horoscope, the catamema may be profuse anf 
weaksuiflg, and if, at the same time, Saturn afflict Venus, they an 
likely to be painful and irregular, and may even be entire]] 
suppressed 

When Mars afSicts Venus, and the latter is is evil aspect to the 
Moon, there is a probability that the periods will be very painful, 
irntabfe, and profuse, and there is danger of a flooding haemorr 
hage 

When Venus ts aBhcted by both the Moon end Saturn, Venus 
being in the sign of Saturn and the Moon m tnat of Venus, it 
denote danger of the penods never occumng and la some cases 
indicates barrenness 

Eiicn when Venus does not afflict the Moon, but Saturn afflicts 
either Venus or the Moon, the penods may be irregular and liable 
to be suppressed 

Good health happens, in either sex, when the Moon is free from 
affljcuon and supported by the good aspects of Jupiter and Venus, 
and when the ascendant is free from the prejeoce of evil planets 
The health under these conditions, will be such that even a feeble 
eonsutution will outlast the wear and tear of hfc, and bnng the 
native to a mature old age 



PHYSICAL INFIRMITIES 


87 


The sixth house, the sign thereon, and its ruler, beiug free from 
the presence and evil aspects of the malefics, docs much to confirm 
good health and to establish the constitution of the native The 
conjunction of the rulen of the first and sixth, or the first and 
eighth houses, unless free from affliction, forewarns of continued 
sickness and early death 

TUB POLARITY OF TUB SIGNS 
It has been found, by repeated and universal observation, that 
the signs of the Zodiac have a direct infiuence upon the human 
organism from bead to foot But apart from the direct infiuence 
exerted by a particular sign on a certain part of the human organism, 
there is also a sympathetic infiuence, extending from any given 
region or zone m the body to certain other zones This is due to the 
polanty existing between opposite points of the zodiacal circle, and 
the diamagnetic currents instituted thereby between points at right 
angles ibereto Thus the polanty of Anes T is opposite to that of 
Libra 1*, the tine between these two points forming the magnetic 
axis of a sphere whose equator lies between Cancer I* and Capncom 
1* Similarly each degree of the Zodiac has its polanty 
There is thus a magnetic retaticnslup existing between all signs 
that are at nght angles to one another, or m opposition, and as 
each of these signs has a direct mflueoce upon a certain zone of the 
human body, it tviU be seen that each one of these zones exerts in 
Its turn a sympathetic infiuence upon three othen, vt; , those that 
are governed by the signs m square and opposiuon to its own. 

The following famdiar arrangement of the signs will show which 
are in sympathetic rapport with one another, and, therefore, what 
parts of the body exert a mutual and rcaprocal influence — 


a rm 


^ 

SSS Trp- 

-ij IT 

n i 

i t 


Thus Taurus governs the region of the neck, including the cerebellum, 
or arbor and the ears, together with the gustatory process and 
the salivary glands, etc. These are in rapport with the heart and the 
dorsal region ruled by Leo, the generative and excretory system 
ruled by Scorpio, and the legs, ct rather that part of them which is 
ruled by Aquarius, as also the blood, which is the hfe-fluid tent forth 



88 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


from Leo, as6 raJcd by Aqmnus, Jo ^racraj pfsctjct, bowcver, jt 
u suifiaent to know what parts are ruled by each sign, and then it 
will be appoint to those versed in the theory of directions that, if a 
malefic planet be in Taurus at birth, the Moon nih form a square or 
opposition to that radical position whenever it is directed to Scorpio, 
1^0, or Aquarius, and the efiect will then fall on the part signified by 
Taurus, and will be of the nature indicated by the planet m that sign 

DISEASES OF THE PLANETS AND SIGNS 
The following tabulation of the vanous aHments produced by the 
planets m the several signs when afihcting the Sun or hfoon in the 
horoscope, or by direction, is taken from “ Lill/s Astrology ’ where 
It is quoted as from the ancient Arabian writers Consequently, 
many of the terms used are not those now employed m medical 
practice But as ** Zadkiel ' remarks — " As the bumatt frame Is 
still the same, so are its diseases, though called by other names *’ 

Tbs Diseues eadi PLutet tumnlly dgnifies when it becoon the aJUictor tfid 
b posited fa) any of tbe Twelve Sign 

DUeattf efFlme 

BiaT desiSes a faifatfaty to farafai tumours, blood-elottmg tn the head teven 
due to vmdue exposure to the Sun or intense beat ud to tropical disorders toch 
as sleepios ockDeas. 

Bfa) Q deJotes p yot ib ea, goitre disorders of tbe thyroid glasd mastoidal ear 
disturbance of the pout of balance fai ibe noddle ear ihio^es and painful skin 
complsuis. 

e in D iodieaies famg troubles catarrba) comphicu, wasUng or paralysis of 
tbe aimt sohenfarg of tbe booe fomatioo of the arm. 

E la 0 shows abnormal conditions of the womb after chlldbinh. disorders 
of tbe mammary glands, ukoated stomach and vaned complaints. 

n In ft causes boks la tbe beart. bhie blood is bablo sportsman s beait, 
leukemia, difficulty in getting tbe blood lo dot, spinal disorders, curvature of the 
spine and damage to tbe spine by aeddeet 

E is ry signifies looseness of (be bowels, diarrhoea dysentery, blackwacer 
fever potsoniag by eauog of strange berries, roots or fungus, cramp in the 
wTuts and fingers. 

P in ex denotes floating kidney meiaia. black Jaundice, loss of faoeOoa of 
excretion in old tgs, or of pasting of urine. Affecis Uk suprarenal glands 

E: la indicates disorders of the tplecs and pancreas. through 

dnmke&ness or abuse of the aex funciSos hlnpinjg cf ^he anus /tSa a^ 
strangulated benua. 

e in y shows loss of t»e lo tbe lower liaibd, aeddest through or iphnies 
caused by animals, pamculady bones diseases of tbe axtenes and of tbe liver 
mtveldcbsrar. efpecegyhy**. 



PHYSICAL INFIRMITIES 89 

Emu signifies floating gout or rbeumatism of a very pamful nature, nckeu, 
ainess through exposure to cxiremc cold, wasting of the bone marrow and 
failure of the bones to knit should they be broken 

E m » denotes synovitis of the anUes. diseases of the eyes poisoning of the 
blood stream, varicose veins, elephantiasis, thrombosis 

E IB K shovfs odourous ftel. webbed toea, a danger of vcnertai 
tumours, warts on the feet, king s evtl, hallucinations and obsessions 

Dueates of heptune 

m v shows migraine, epilepsy, alopeca, encephalitis, atrophy of the 
mental processes, senile decay, comuoctivuis, cataract, myopia 

^ m b mdicates glandular swcUiogs in the neck, ouinsy, laryngitis, angina 
gangrena, scrofula, polypus in the nose, asthma, dermatitis, softening of the 
brain 

^ m n denotes pneumonia, pleurisy, phthisis, Su Vitus’s Dance, sickness 
through air travel, poisoning of the blood through radiation, nervous duorden, 
hallucinations 

^ IB 03 signifies gastric cacarrh. dropsy, petmaous anaemia cnrdise di»> 
orders dipsomania, food poisoning chlorosis, troubles in pregnancy, disorders 
through attempted abortion 

V tn n, represents palpitation, syneopc. varied forms of heart disease, spinal 
menuigitis locomotor ataxy, angina pectons aneurism thrombosis 

>T| indicates eoUe, enteric fever, neuralgia of the lotestme affections of the 
mtestinal digestion, pentonitis, erysipelas, abscess on the appendix 

^ in shows oephtttis. Gnat’s disease, neuralgia of the kidney, yellow 
aundice 

^ m TT^ denotes affections of the generative organs, the prostate gland, tbo 
hac regions or gcouis, the gall, rectum the hydrocele vein the vessels of the 
esticle, and the uterus 

^10 / signifies saauca, hip-jomt disease, dislocated due. cramp or panUysu 
if the lower limbs, artenal disease 

^ m rt denotes deformed knees skm diseases such as impetigo, eczema, 
eprosy, coal gas poisoning or poisoning through inhalation of fumes from motor 
ars. diesel engines, etc. 

^ in so shosvs dropsy, swollen ankles, excess of carbonic acid gas in the blood 
itream, loss of sight 

m H signifies mucous discharges, buraons deformities of toes and feet, 
eoftening of glandular tissues danger of drowning, or of poisoning through 
innking impure water 


Datasa ^ Uranus 

in Y signifies injunes to the head through blows, cuts, fracnires. nodding 
tiead spasms, tumbbsg noises in the head, apoplexy, migraine and servoui 
headaches loss of sleep 

^ In b shows exanthematous sore throat, tnembranous exudauoo in the 
throat, glandular swellings, mumps, steoosis or stricture in the throat, panlytk 
strokes, sudden loss of voice. 



90 


THE UANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


9 ta Z7 deaates croupous pofumoao, duturbazice ofcapUhij oxygsssdoa, 
bfcnchiil colds ots the cEkiC, spasmodteluat cough, ponmtocOTiom, paroxjimaf 
dyspnoea. 

9 ifl C9 indicales antipemtalus. cobc in stomach, stomach cramps, d y spep si a, 
hiccoughs, catamemal disorden, ean3rv>m«i, {nctcatd or broken 
to the breasts 

9 io r ep r e s ents diseases, aSectiocs and mjunes to the ba?* and s pi ne, 
trembling of the heart, sunstroke, yellow fever, disorders of the ptnstaiy body, 
TSTuIar lesions, convulsions. 

9 in n; shows digestive disorders due to nerve strain, bairesness, duodenal 
ulcers neurastbema, electnc shock, homosexuality, appendidicular colic. 

9 in — signifies inflammation of the kidneys and ineter, diseases of the 
rens. retention of unne, sugar diabetes, shootms pasu in the lumbar region, 
acadenu to the lumbar vertebrae of the spine. 

9 m denotes puerperal fever, inguinal bcmia, baemorrboids, renal stone, 
hydrocele infections, stricture of urethra, diseases of the ovanes, scurvy, spasm 
of bladder 

9 to 7 indicates baldness, over healed blood, endemic bites from 

animals, hurt through falls from horses, diseases in the buttocks fractures of 
the hips, thighs and femurs. 

9 IB ri shows dryness oftbe skin.arttcular rheumatism, cutaneous cotnplamcs, 
dislocaticns. hypochondria, injuries to the knees and kneecap, nettjo rub 
uiticana, parasitic diseases 

9 la ss signifies diseases through woridog under inereased air pressure 
disorders and hurts to the calves and the ankles, lapura blood, asUgmatua 
colour blindness glaucoma. 

9 in K denotes club feet, corns and bunions, delirium ti eni eos . tamcoess 
relaxation of ttssjes, scab es, phlegmatic dis e as es , suppurauve inflimmatior 
of areolar tissue, phobias. 

Dhfotes of Sotvn 

T] tn T signifies rheum, melancholy, vapours, cold la the head, obstructions, 
stoppage ui the stomach, paios la the teeth, dea f n en . etc. 

h in tt signifies swelling tn 'he neck and throat, khigs evil, soorvy. 
hoarseness, melancholy and chrome dotempen about the neck and throaL 
h in n signifies uifirmrties meWent to tbe anns and shoulders, cocsiu apoon. 
black >anr,dice and diseases proceeding from tad blood. 

b u es denotes phrhaif, uksrraboas a tbe longs, obstruetjoss sad brslsea 
in (he breas' ague scurvy, cancer, etc. 

h in fl signifies the bean a£ieied by grief or poison, co ns um ption of (he 
reins nr inward parts, vapours, weakness and pans in (he back, etc. 

h in ry shows the blood comi pted. obstnictxies in the bowels, cosdveocss, 
weakness m the thi^s. meoncholy gnptnp stooe, etc. 

h in ^ shows the blood coTTvpicd lock and kidneys distempered, ttnaguiy, 
consumptive pants tn the knees and (highs, scauca. gont, and hver complainC 
ti in Cl derotes twellinp or dut ejp e ii of the secret parts, tnelaocboly. pita. 
p«hy gout in the bands and feet. 

h m f signifies weakness in the hipa and (highs, old acbea and brutaa la 
those parts, and tcuuca or gotrt. 



physical infirmities 91 

I] b) H &ootc3 the tout ia the lower p&rts,pAins tod obstruction III the bead, 
■«ue,etc. 

h ia » ri gn i& n disorders ia the head aad teeth, defects m the ears, p&iai la 
the joints, bruises, iwdlmgs la the legs, and •ometiroes a sore throat. 

h ia K ^ves deSuxioos <jf rheuro, tang's evil, coosumptioa, tU dtslempen 
of the feet and toes, such M the gout, aod by colds. 

DUeases of Jupiter 

21 fa T produces distenpen in the bead, a ijuinsy or swefling la the throst, 
chleSy from Q] blood fa the veins of the bead, and causes straage dreams and 
imaemittons. 

21 fa y bnngs distempers fa the throat, Hiind fa the blood, gripfags fa the 
bo«x]s, aad goutish htimotzn fa the tad arms. 

2i fa n —A pleurisy, or some disorder of the reins. 

21 fa C3 gives the dropsy, the stomach offended, bad appetite, corrupt blood, 
scurvy, surfeits, etc. 

21 in A indicates a fever, pleurisy, tbe fttart !S affected. 

21 fa ny indicates a coosumptioa. obstnietioas of tbe lungs, tnelancholy, cold 
and dry hver 

21 fa shows tbe patient hath too much blood, whence aisse obstructions, 
corrupt blood, fever, pQes. tumours, faflaminabons, etc. 

21 fa n, ttgniSea the ctrasguty, pQes, tbe blood surcharged with walesy 
humours, whence ansa dropsy, etc. 

21 fa ^ denotes some chotenc distemper, ansmg from putrefaction of tbe 
blood, a fever, palas and twcfangs about the knees etc. 

21 m ~Tbe psueoi u aflhcted with melancholy, obstructions fa tbe throat, etc. 
21 fa si^Tbe blood abounds too much, whence li is corrupted, and many 
lis e asa aod flying pam* afflict the body It givts lumbago 
21 in H -^Tbe blood is too ihui and watensb, which breeds dropsy 
Dueoter of Man 

d m T sigmfles (he patient is ahnost distracted with a violent pain in his 
lead iheum in tbe eyes, want of rest, etc. 

d in b denotes extietne pain tn tbe throat and neck, fang's evi} weakness 
Q the loins, aod the gravel or stone 

d in n shows the blood is corrupted, itch, breakings out, surfeit, fever, 
lams fa the arms and shoulders disorders to the secret parts, strangury etc. 

d fa OB indicata pains in tbe breast and stomach, a dry cough, or a tumour 
n tbe thighs, accidents to tbe feet. 

d fa fl denota afflicuon at the heart, cbolenc humours, gravel in the kidneys, 
lain m the faiees, etc 

d in ny signifies cbolenc humours, obstnictjons in the bowels, bloo^ Air, 
vorms in children, humours m tbe legs 
d in eB produces diseases in tbe icms aod kdoeys. stone or gravel, unne hot, 
ua etc., as may be suspected. 

d fa ItV shows a suspiaon of some veoereal distemper, or ulcer in the secret 
parts, pains m tbe bladder, pains fa tbe bead, overfloning of courses, etc. 

d m I produces pain or ulcers in tbe bips and thighs by bumouis settled la 
hose parts, and an extreme heat in tbe mouth and throat. 



92 


THE manual of astrology 


^ la dtootss Ismeneu la the faiees, hacdj, or inns, ora Bymg goat. 

^ in S3 sismfies blood overheated, pains in the legs, surfeit or fever 
d u K giveslaineness in the feet by eomipt humours setUedlbere, sotnetinies 
the bean is affbeted, etc 


Daeasts cf the Sun 

® in T produces sore eyes, megnms. head disturbed, fevers, etc. 

®in d denotes tumoursmthekDecs.quinsyorsore throat. breakings outand 
sneHings m (hose parts 

0 in n — ^Blood inflamed pestQential fevers, breakings out in several parts 
of the body, scurvy pains and u-eakness tn the legs. 

® m en shows the measles or small pot. a disordered stomach, hoarseness, 
dropsy or swelling m the feet. 

® in 51, indicates violent pains to the head, madness stone, pains in the back, 
plague spotted fever 

® tn Ti; produces humours in the bowels, obstructions m the stomach, bloody 
flux, sore throat, or sweUmgs m the neck. ' 

© in — — Inflammation of the blood, pains in the arms and shoulders, stone 
and gravel the venereal distemper, etc. 

® in TTt, indicates distempers in the secret parts, sharpness ofunse, obstructions 
13 the stomach and female courses, also phUgTnatta deUns 

®io7 — ThethighsareaSietedbybotbumoun.aflstula feven.swuomngs etc. 
® in signifies lameness about (he knees bowels disordered, and a fever 
® in 89 >-The blood inflamed, breakings out, runs disordered, gravel, stone, 
strangury etc. 

© in K — The secret parts affljcted.strangury, and violent pains in those parts 
Stmases ef Venus 

T indicates the disease IS in the bead from abundance of most humours, 
lethargy reins afllicled. and head disordered by cold. 

$ in e signifies pain in the bead or secret parts sweUings in the neek from 
moist humours in (he head. 

$ u n denotes a corrupted blood kfog s emt dropsy, and a flux of rheum. 

? in 0 show-s the stomach is much ofleoded with cold, raw, undigested 
humours, many times with a surf*it. etc. 

? in 51 — some ill affection of the heart, love passion etc., pains in the lep, 
of bad consequence. 

$ in ny shows some distemper in (be bowels, a flux, or (be worms, mu c u s la 
(he bowels. 

9 tn ^ denotes a gonorrheea or distemper In the reins, or surfeit by too 
pleotiful eating or dnsAuig and windy disorders. 

$ in r\ produces some venereal disietnper utdpainiotbepnva(eparti.etc. 

9 m y —Hip gout surfeits, cold and moot hunourt 
9 in produces gout in the knees and thi^ts, and swellings in (hose parts. 

9 in cs — pirns and twellinp in (be legs or knees from a cold cause and tbe 
heart afflicted. 

9 In K indicates laraeness in tbe feet rwellisgs in the lep a flux, srlsdy 
cotspUints etc. 



PHYSICAL INFIRMITIES 


93 


Dlsfoset t>f MtTCury 

V in *r shows the disease liea in the bead ud bram. vertigo and spasms in 
the bead, and sometimes disorders of the womb 

tn b produces defects u the throat, awellmgs in the neck, hoarseness tad 
also pain m the feet. 

5 in n signifies wmdiness In the blood, gouty pains in the bead, arms, etc. 

9 in C9 produces a cold stomach, gnpmgs, wiodiness. distOlation of rheum, 
lameness in the legs and knea from colds, etc 

9 IQ fl mdicates tremblings, melancholy, pains in the back, occasioned by 
colds caught in the feet 

9 in tij imports much wind in the bowels, obscnictions, pains in tbe bead, 
short breath, and wind cholic. 

6 in ^ shows stoppage of unoe. obstructions, blood disordered, breast, 
hmgs, and reins alBictcd. 

9 m n\ denotes distempers la tbe secret parts, aflLctions of tbe bowels, 
numiag pains in the arms and shoulders 

9m/ shows distempers m the reins, weakness in the back, stoppage at the 
stomach, coughs, swellings in the tups and thighs 

9 m denotes stoppage of unoe. goulish humoun above the knees, pains 
in the back, melancholy, etc, 

9 m o Imports wind m the blood tunning puns in different parts of tbe 
body, ffuMs aad disntden m. the bowels. 

9 in H signifies pains m the head, weakness m tbe legs and feet, a gonorrheea 
or a disceaper m (he rems, etc 

Datoitt of the Moon 

9 in T signifies convulsions defiuxioos of rbeum from the bead lethargy, 
V'takness in the eyes, and pains m (he knees 
9 m b produces pains m (he legs and feet, swellmp, stoppage in and sore 
throat, etc. 

9 in n denotes a wandenng gout m (be legs, aims, hands, and feet, surfeits, 
and great obstructions 

9 m BD shows the stomseb much afflicted a surfeit, smaU pox, convulsions, 
fallmg sickness, tympany, or dropsy 
9 in A —The heart a^cted, sore throat, quinsy, king's evil, etc 
9 in njf signifies great pam and disorden m tbe bowels, melancholy blood, 
obstructions, weakness in the arms and shoulders 

9 in sb denotes tbe rems are distempered obstructionsm the stomach, weakness 
In the back, whites m women, surfeits, pkuiisy, etc. 

9 in ll\ shows tbe distemper u m the secrets, small pox, dropsy, poison, tbe 
heart afilieied, swoonmgs. etc. 

9m/ imports lameness or weakness In tbe thighs, distempers m the bosveli, 

9 m signifies the stone, weak back, gout lo tbe knees, whites m women, etc. 

9 in S3 — Hystencs swellings, and pains in legs and secret parts 
> in H shows cold taken in tbe feet, and body disordered thereby, swellmp 
in the lep. dropsies, and tbe body overcharged with mout humours 



94 THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOOr 

CHAPTER IV 

MENTAL QUALITIES AND INFIRMITIES 

Tiffi Sign ascending aad tho« wbema the Mooa and Mercary arc 
posited, have chief inhuence on the mental qualities. The nature 
of these signs, also, which contain /Ac majority of the planets, wiD 
determine the direction or bent of the nature Thus 

Cardmal signs indicate active, useful, energetic, ambitious, and 
persevering persons, — busy people, the workers of the world, the 
best busmess men and women, pioneers and organisers, such as are 
capable of cutting out a Ime m life for themselves, and of makmg 
headway against obstacles They are \-ery mdependen^ capncious, 
and averse to humble service 

Fixed signs denote plain, ngid. unbending natures. Disaplin* 
anans, obstmate and dogmatic people, very patient, steadfast, 
and tbrifty, but self absorbed and difficult to know They are 
thoughtful, philosophical, plodding mvenuve, austere, and reserved. 
They achieve results slowly, but surely, and effect by patient work 
what others do by a stroke of luck, or by well tuned action. They 
are reliable fneo^ and unrelenting enemies They ongnate, while 
others ofthecern'/mz/ type execute Theyhaveatendencytocootract 
habits of life and to get into a groove, always mdependent, self- 
reliant, and never servile. 

Common signs denote subtle, versatile, and changeful natures, 
oftentimes repining and regretful, inconstant and imitative, of no 
set purpose, much affected by their surroundings and those with 
whom they come in contact, capable of simulating qualities not 
inherent m them, dabbling, vobtHe, and superficial generally 
They have very acute feelings and sensiux natures, likely to go 
under when opposed They arc the natural servants of the world, 
waiting upon the intellect and industry of others Unless bom 
well off, they seldom make their way in life \Viih the majonty of 
the planets m common signs, a person is very sympathetic, but 
often of weak character 

These general icndenaes, however, arc modified by the aspects to 
the Moon and Mercury, and b> the signs containing the planets 
thus 13 aspect 

If the planets aspecting the Moon and Mercury are m the 6rst 
or tenth house, their influence is greatly increased Planets in the 
third and moth houses, even when not in aspect to the mental rulers. 



MENTAL QUALITIES 95 

Moon and Mercury, must nevertheless be taken into consideration, 
on account of the influence these houses have over the mind 
Pluto squaring the Moon or Mercury from the third or ninth 
houses Will bring mental mstabihty resultmg from too great a 
concentration upon or speculatmg regarding the problems of space, 
time and mfinity Fear of the uoknovm and the future will result 
and if persisted m can cause msanity 
Pluto m favourable aspects to the Moon and Mercury especially 
from the third or nmth houses will strengthen the mind, giving 
great powers of visualisation, of hterary, psychic and prophetic 
ability 

Thus, when so placed, or m aspect to the Moon or Mercury, 
Neptune confers a strong taste for asthetic and mystical subjects, 
a strong mutative faculty, capable of absorbmg the views of othen. 
and emulating charactenstics foreign to the native It gives 
mediumistic powers, readers the nature unreliable and chaotic, 
full of strange tastes and fancies, and highly neurotic The disposi- 
tion is dreamy, indolent, and self mdulgent, allowing the respoosi- 
bihties and duties of life to fall into neglect 
Uranus confers onginal and mvenuve faculty, a wayward, 
obstinate nature, love of romance, strange sights, eccentncities, 

^ cunous studies Indulging m revenes, the native is argumentative 
when aroused, very detennmed and headstrong, oAentimes aflected 
with Utopian ideas and unpopular projects 

Saturn gives a thoughtful, metaoebohe mind, oflentunes a desire 
for seclusion, bodily fears, anxious disposition, cautious in action, 
doubtful of others, timorous, secretive, taatum The native u 
much attached to the home and relatives It confers depth and 
steadfastness of character, makes the native a faithful fnend or 
persistent enemy It gives a profound and sincere nature, and pro- 
duces a tellable disposition 

Jupiter produces an open, free, generous, and frank mmd, 
truthful, despising all mean and underhand actions, gives a strong 
sense of justice, emag rather on the side of leniency and moderation, 
renders the native jovial, confident, humane, and consaentious It 
gives nobility of character, and does much to enneb the nature 
Mars produces a military spint, contentious, free and courageous, 
gives a desire for conquest, a proud spirit, warmth of f«hngs, ardent 
passions, an extravagant nature, impetuosity, want of foresight, a 
^ rash and ungovernable character, disposed to gam by force what 



96 


THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


cannot be obtained byothermeass Tbesenseoffreedom dominates 
the nature 

The Sun gives a proud nature with a love of display, ambitiom 
of honours, a thirst for renown, love of approbation, self-confidence, 
a profuse nature, and in most cases vpnght and noble, opposed 
to all underhand actions and covert de^s 
Venus produces a love of refinement, ease, and luxury, gives 
some artistic faculty, mchnes to poetrv, music, and the drama, 
refined and elegant tastes . fondness for scents, jewellery, and personal 
adornments, amorous, quiet, amiable, mchned to soaety, fond of 
children and pets, disposed to kiss and fondle It confers beauty 
and tenderness, and makes men and t\omen much beloved for their 
kmdness 

Mercury when nsmg, or aspecting the Moon, gives a desire for 
knowledge, inclmatioo for reading, writing, travelling and talking, 
quick intellect, adaptability to all kinds of mental work, cunning 
and alert, active, nimble, and excessively busy 
The Moon when rising, or aspecting Mercury, makes people fond 
of travelling constant change, and roanung about, it confers a 
strong unagmative faculty, love of romance, gives grace and 
elegance to the manners, renders the native loconscaot and uncertain 
m action and thought 

The elemental nature of the signs occupied by the majority of th^ 
planets must also be considered Thus, when the majority of the 
planets are found m either the Fiery, Airy, Earthy, or Watery 
signs, it modifies the expression of the mental qualities Thus 
Fiery signs are inspirational . Alrysisas, cogita tiveand intellectual , 
IFn/erysigns.psychicand emotional, £2r/Ay signs, worldly and hard 
The majority of planets in any of these tnpliaties will generally 
indicate the trend of the nature, or the sphere m which the life will 
chiefly find expression 

It must always be remembered that the good aspects of the planets 
produce good effects, and the bad aspects evil effects Therefore, 
the more laudable traits are the result of th*- favourable aspects 
of the planets to the Moon and Mercury Everything depends upon 
the aspect of a planet to the significators, whether m health, fortune, 
or character We must note, too whether a planet is esseatally 
dignified by being m its ow'd sign or a congeiual one, or debilitated 
by being to an adverse sign — all of which should enter into the 
consideration of the student. 



MENTAL QUALITIES 


97 


The larger planet always controls the action of a nunor one 
So Saturn can overrule Mars, being of a more ponderous nature, 
and of slower motion 

The mutual aspects existing between the planets Neptune, Uranus, 
Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, and Venus, also confer their influences on 
the native s character Thus 

Man afflictmg Jupiter causes boasting and extravagance Aiflict> 
ing Venus, he causes an ardent, passional nature, prone to waste its 
energies and substance on the opposite sex AfQictmg Saturn or 
Uranus, he gives an ungovernable temper, subject to sudden storms 
of passion, often accompamed by violence Afflicting Neptune, 
he causes some mama, generally of a oeuiouc character 
Saturn afflictmg Jupiter gives a doubtful and hesitatmg nature, 
often penunous and graspmg, harsh, and lackmg in sympathy 
Afflicting Venus, be causes secret vices, a sorrowful spmt, apt to 
shed tears very seasiuve, and liable to severe disappointments 
Uranus m aspect to Venus gives a strong attraction to the other 
sex, romantic attachments, liability to seductive influences 
When Venus or Mercury, badly afflicted by Mars Uranus, 
Neptune, or Jupiter, is found m watery signs, there will be a tendency 
to debauchery or druoketmess 

In female horoscopes, Saturn in conjunction with the Moos or 
in evil aspect thereto, with Mars also in bad aspect, the native is 
liable to be led astray The conjunction and bad aspects of Mars 
to the Moon always tend to produce unwomanly freedom 
If Saturn afflicts the Moon and Mars at the same time afflicts 
Mercury, the same evil is to be feared In cither case the evil is 
greater when the malefics are elevated above the Moon and Venus. 
Mars m any aspect to Venus disposes to flirtation and gives mtensity 
to the affections without conferring stabihty 
Venus afihcting the Moon makes the native untidy and slovenly, 
though outwardly inclined to preserve appearances It also makes 
the native squander money on fineries and fhvobties of vanous kinds 
With Neptune afliicting the Moon or Venus, chaotic sex relations 
are liable to ensue 

Mentof bifirmUtei 

are produced by the affliction of Mercury or the Moon, or both, m 
certam signs of the Zodiac 

When Mercury, the Moon and ascendant are m no aspect or 
famibanty (mutual disposition, conjunction or parallel) with one 


98 


THB MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


another, it is a* sign of danger to the mental faculties. If, at the 
same time. Mercury be afflicted by the presence or bad aspects of 
the maleSc planets, Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, or Mars, insanity 
may result The effects are more striking when the affliction is 
from the angles of the horoscope. 

In a day nativity, ie., when the Sun is above the horizon, Saturn 
afflicting Mercury indicates epilep^, but Mars denotes insam'ty. 

In a night nativity, Saturn shows insanity when afflicting Mercury, 
and Mars shoe's epilepsy. 

Mercury in Pisces, and angular (in the first, fourth, tenth, or 
seventh house), afflicted by Mars or the Sun, mate* a fanatic. The 
same if the Sun be angular in Capricorn and thus afilicted. hfars 
afflicting Jupiter gives religious enthusiasm, and with other 
testimonies it makes a rabid sectarian. 

Mercury afilictiag the Moon, and itself afflicted by the presence 
or aspect of the maleScs, indicates a tendency to mental disorder. 

When either the Sun or Mercury is in one of the common signs, 
Sagittarius, Pisces. Gemitd, or Virgo, and afilicted by Saturn, Uranus, 
Mars, or Neptune, there is strong disposition to insanity or mental 
disorder of some sort 

In all cases, the good aspects of Jupiter or Venus vnll assist for i 
while, and in some cucumstances may prevent the calamity fore 
shadoned. Affliction from angles or from planets out of then 
dignities makes the evil more certain. 

CHAPTER V 

FINANCIAL FORTUl^ES 

THE condiuon of the Moco in a male horoscope, and of the Sun 
in a female horoscope, dctennioes the fortunes to a very great 
degree The planets oocup>ing the second house, and the tenth, 
must also be considered in (his connecUon, together with the 
condition of the ruler of the second house. 

Remember always that good aspects, whether proceeding from 
Saturn or Jupiter, from Mars or Venus, or any other planet, denote 
good effects. 

For general good fortune, nothing is better than the good aspect 
of the Sun to the Moon, and (be benefic configuration of Jupiter 
and Venus, more espcaally when the latter are in elevation, or else 
in the ascendant. 



FINANCIAL FORTUNES 


99 


la a imIc nativity, look to the Moon and those planets 'which 
aspect It If the aspect be good, say good will result from such 
sources as are ruled by those signs and houses in which the planet 
is posited; also from thmgs and persons ruled by those houses over 
which It has dominion in the figure, as well as those indicated by the 
nature of the planet itself Thus, if Jupiter were in tnne aspect 
to the Moon from the sign Leo m the tenth bcuse, and ruling the 
fifth, and second house, it would show benefits to anse from high 
offices and business affairs generally (tenth house position), from 
theatres, speculations, etc. (Leo, fifth sign of the Zodiac), agam 
confirmed by its nilership of Pisces, the sign occupying the cusp 
of fifth house, and by financial transactions (ruled by second house, 
occupied by the sign Sagittanus), and generally by clencal and legal 
affairs (denoted by Jupiter itself) In a similar manner, judgment 
is made of the good aspects of other planets Of bad aspects, evil 
results may be predicted from corresponding sources A planet 
that has no aspect to the Moon must, m this respect, be judged 
from Its position and nilership to the horoscope, as given m Book i, 
chap vi 

Jupiter, though benefic, cannot do much good if badly placed 
and aspected, but its good aspect to the Moon, or ruler of the 
^^ts econd hous e, gives a fortimate life, and many chances of success 
Saturn, on the contrary, though a malefic, may effect many benefits 
if well placed and aspected, and especialJjr when in good aspect to 
the Moon. 

Saturn or Uranus m tnne or sexUle to Jupiter produces legacies, 
gifts, etc , especially if either be ruler of the eighth house, or placed 
therem If ruling the fourth, or placed therein, and thus m aspect 
to one another, they give gam by lohentance If either be ruler 
of the seventh, or Jupiter be therein, it shows gam by toarriage, 
or by any partnership whatsoever 

The second house must have attenUoo, because it rules over 
money matters, and the tenth, because of its influence over business 
matters 

Saturn or Mars therem is bad. and success cannot be expected 
unless Jupiter or Venus throws a tnne or sextile to them, or the 
lights receiv’c their good aspect 

If Mars, or Saturn, or Uranus in the second house afflicts the 
Moon, and no assistance is given, the life wQI be a contmual strug^e 
‘ against adversity 


100 THE MANUAL OP ASTKOLOQY 

Jupiter aShctmg the Mooq in any position makes the native 
improvident, and conduces to losses through indisc r eet actions and 
generous impulses. 

Mars in the second house, the native is too LTieral, When so 
placed, and affiicting the Moon, itshons loss by fire, the/t,andstiires. 

Neptune m the second house afflicting the Moon, TnaVf< the native 
the victim of a bubble company, or some big fraud. 

Jupiterinlhe eighth, money by mamage, the eighth house being 
that of partners, whether m mamage or business The condition of 
the native after mamage can generally be seen from the condition 
of the seventh and eighth bouses, their rulers, and the planets therein 

Pluto m the second house m good aspect to the Moon, Venus or 
Jupiter Will bring financial gam through personal skill and ingenuity 
If this combination occurs with Pluto in the fifth house, extra- 
ordinary gams by speculation, Jottenea, SHXcpstakes and football 
pools are denoted, and if Pluto is m the eighth bouse tbs combina- 
tion would bung unexpected gain through legacy Adversely 
aspeetsd m these houses the Pluto lofiuence would cause cnpplmi 
losses, bankruptcy, profligacy 

With the majonty of the planets in cadent bouses, espeaally la 
the sutb, the native makes LtUe beadway in the world When 
Uranus is the afilictiog planet, it shows great financiaJ danger 
In the second bouse, it shows many sudden changes, success and 
failure coimug m rapid succession If in good aspect to the Sun and 
Moon It denotes gam through things and persons governed by tt. 
(Book I, chap lu} 

Saturn or Uranus in evil aspect to Jupiter showa loss by bw, and 
dcaption of trustees and others having charge over the fi n an ci al 
affairs of the iiati>r The house wherein Saturn or Uranus is 
pbced will indicate more exactly the source whence the trouble will 
proceed If Mara adds his evil influence to these planets, then loss 
by speculation, betting, etc , is shown 

Saturn m the seventh house is bad for trade, and m evil aspect 
to the Moon it shows financial failure 

When Uranus is in the seventh, and badly aspected, the native is 
harassed by h» creditors He gels into difficulUes after mamage- 
if in good aspect to the Moon, the native will use above his difliculues, 

Uranus or Saturn in the sevTnth aflbcting the Moon, the native 
should be warned to keep out of partnership, and to avoid public 
•flairs ^^’hea the znalcfics are adding the hfooa, and elevated - 



TBB RANE OR POSITION 


101 

above it, financial failure is shown. If Saturn be in the tenth house, 
the native never recovers his fortune. 

Again, Jupiter or Venus lending their assistance, the native will 
overcome his difficulties; the source of help being shown by the 
position of Jupiter and Venus. 

Property is largely controlled by the position and aspects of the 
Part of Fortune. Its place in the horoscope is found by adding 
together the longitudes of the Moon and ascendant, and subtracting 
therefrom the longitude of the Sun. Thus: 

> in B 14* 20* S 1 14« 20' 

Asc. in f 25* 2* 8 25 2 


Sum. .. . . SIO 9* 22' 

® in T 20* 1' 0 20 I 


© inn S 9 19* 21' 

Some authors omit this symbol, but without sufficient reason for 
so doing. When in conjunction with Jupiter, Venus, or the Sun 
ot Mooa well aspected, ot itself well aspected by the planets, it 
^ves success in the accumulation of property. 

We confidently affirm that the “ imagmary nothing," the “ airy 
myth," called the Part of Fortune (@), is of immense consequence 
in practice; and its actual significance will be apparent to any who 
will take the trouble to notice the transits of Saturn, Uranus, Jupiter, 
and Mars over its place and aspects m the horoscope 
When misfortune is strongly indicated in a horoscope, it is better 
for the native not to go mto business for himself, but to link his 
fortunes with those of a person bom under more favourable 
influences, in a subsidiary funclioiL A well-paid servant is better 
than a bankrupt master But if the Sun and Moon are lo evil 
aspect to each other, it will be difficult even to get into service 
In female horoscopes, more attention is paid to the position of 
the Sun, as chief significator of the fortunes, but both Iiumoancs 
should always be considered in every horoscope 

CHAPTER VI 

THE RANK OR POSITION 

In order to know to what rank or position the native will attain m 
his sphere of life, look to the position of the planets and sec where 
the majority are situated. 



102 THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 

If the majonty of the planets, including the Sun and Moon, the 
ruler of the as^ndmg sign and mid heaven, are nsing between the 
mendian and the fourth house, the native will nse m life and become 
his own master If the majonty of the planets are in cardinal 
signs, and in the quadrant between the ascendant and znendian, the 
native will nse to a very good position m his sphere of hfe, and wiH 
outrun his compeers 

The majonty of planets in angles and cardinal signs make the 
native a prominent figure in his own walk m hfe Most of the 
planets being in the cardinal signs bnng the native mto prominence 
early m life In fixed signs success is slower, but more eodunng, 
m common signs it only comes by the assistance of others, or m 
the servic of others, and the native generally has “ too many irons 
m the fire," and goes from one pursuit to another, a "roUmg 
stone, gathermg no moss " 

The planets essentully and accidentally dignified, fe, m their 
own Signs and in angles, give much hope of success 

Jupiter or Venus in the mendiao always raises the native to high 
positions m his own sphere, and often far above that of birth 

When several planets are to square or opposition from cardin'* 
signs, the native strikes out some onginal and remarkable hoe i 
life, gaming thereby a certam renown, but hable to much oppositio 
and criticism 

Many planets well placed between the fourth and seventh cusp: 

IS a good augury of success after mamage, or in a horoscope wher 
mamage is denied, success in the latter part of life. 

Planets well aspected m the fourth house mdicate a successfu 
tenninatioo to the career 

Saturn in the tenth house, the native rises to a good position, bu 
suffers a downfall This position is exemplified in the horoscope 
of Napoleon Buonaparte 

Mars m the tenth, m a male horoscope, affects the native's credit. 

He Will be a comtant victim of cntiasm, chiefly owing to his own 
impatience and pugnaaous character He has many jealous and 
envious nvals who throw aspersions upon his character and honour 
In a female horoscope this pontion of Mars makes the native a cons* 
tant victim of slander and il! repute, whether it be warranted or 
ooL When the Moon is there with Mars, there are probably good 
grounds for suspicion and talk, however despicable such scandal may 
be. It frequently affects the credit and honour of the parent mvoh'cd 



THE RANK OR POSITION 


103 


The Sun m square or opposition to tbe Moon in a male horoscope, 
shows troubles with superiors, difficulty m re tainin g office, and, at 
least once m every seven yean, the native loses his appomtment and 
gets mto difficulties with his employers or those in office above him. 
In general, it shows fleeting honours, unstable reputation, and many 
difficulties The same or similar events happen in a female horo- 
scope under tbe configuration of the lummanes It nuns the 
energies of the nabve, and, if Satuni afflicts at the same time, the 
native may become an ambitionless and impotent loafer 
The Sun or Moon afflicted by the malefics from cardinal signs, 
the native attains a questionable fame, and sustains it only by 
outrS and unpopular actions The Sun in sextile or tnne to Uranus, 
gives success m governmental circles, public offices, and honours 
thereby It also gives a wide populanty 
If tbe majonty of the planets are setting between the tenth and 
seventh houses, or out of their dignities, and in adverse signs, or 
retrograde and afflicted, the native will not improve his position in 
life, the family fortunes will fall off, and his progeny will not enjo) 
the benefits of a good patnmony Indeed, tbe position of the 
native will decUoe with advanemg years 
Any planet m the tenth or first bouses, in its own sign or exaltation, 
and well aspected, denotes success and bonojn, especially if the 
planet be either Jupiter, Venus, Sun, Moon, or Mercury 
Chiefly, however, look to the fourth house for the condition of 
the native at tbe cIo<e ofUfe It planets dignified and well aspected, 
are found therem, particularly if these be the lights or benefics tbe 
end wul be successful happy, and contented Saturn there shoivs 
retirement or seclusion Uranus mdicates an eccentric existence, 
and disposes to miserlmess Neptune shows some enforced retire- 
ment, and tbe native usually ends his life m some asylum or other 
institution 

Pluto m the fourth house if badly aspected shows a breaking up 
or disintegrating of domestic and family life during the closing 
years of hie and sometimes shows the complete disappearance of 
the native with the nature of the death never being ascertained 
From another standing it can show that the end of the life will be 
passed either m exile or in uncongenial condiUons m a place far 
removed from the place of birth If, however, Pluto is well aspected, 
particularly by Venus or Jupiter then the end of life will bnng 
contcQiment and the material position vail be good 



J04 THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

The malefics m the fourth house, in uncongenial signs, show the 
end of life to be fraught with troubles and dangcR But if well 
aspected by Jupiter or Venus, and m their own signs or exaltations, 
then success is shown 


CHAPTER Vll 

THE PROFESSION OR OCCUPATION 
Judgment is made from the nature and condition of the planets 
occupying the angles of the horoscope, and from those also which 
aspect the Sun and Moon 

The planet which is in nearest conjunction with the Sun, rising 
either just before or after it. has much inQuence m this question, 
and the condition thereof, by aspect and position, will indicate the 
success attending the occupation. The planet m nearest aspect to the 
Sun has also great influence, and those also which aspect the mendian 
The signs occupied by the sigmficators of the profession generally 
deterzmne its nature 

The signification of each planet will be found under the head of 
“Planetary Occupations” in Book i, chap ul These must be 
considered m relation to the signs they occupy-^ for instance, 
Jupiter 10 Virgo would denote gardeners, dealers m garden stuSt, 
limber merchants, farmers, clothien, bootmakers, etc, owing to 
the lofiuence of Virgo upon food and clothing. Similarly, Venus in 
Virgo would denote makers of sweets, cakes, and other dehcaaes 
and artistic foods art fabric makers, vendors of dress and food 
luxunes, silk merchants etc Mars, on account ofits more practical 
nature, and its association with fire, steel implements, etc , would 
in the same sign denote builders carpenters, housc*rcpaircrs, and 
workers m sanitary structures Gemini, Pisces, Sagittanus, show 
double occupations and a multitude of interests, the native generally 
runs two lines of busmess at the same tune 
Therefore, in judging this question, which is perhaps the most 
difficult to define, consideration must be made of the planet or 
planets in the tenth house, those nearest the Sun, their natures, and 
the character of the signs they occupy The signs m this connection 
must always be referred to the nature of the bouses to which they 
correspond — as Gemim to the third house, Virgo to the sixth, 
Sagittanus to the ninth, and so on. The things over which those 
houses naturally ha%e dominion wni determine the sphere in which ) 
the iignificator will be employed 



THB PROFESSION 


105 


Thus, if the planet m the tenth house be Mercuiy, or that planet 
be nearest to the Sun. or rising next before it, it denotes the use of 
the pen If Mercury be m Pisces, then it is employed m twelfth 
house affairs, occult things, secrets, private conespondence, etc. 

Pluto in the tenth house, particularly m the earthy signs, Taurus, 
Virgo or Capncom gives capaoty for tradmg and commeraaJ 
activities but if m the fiery signs, Anes, Leo or Sagittarius would 
give more capacity for archtecture, building and demolition 
Neptune m the tenth house shows abihty for mterests to do with 
oil, motoring, aviation, especially if in the watery signs Cancer, 
Scorpio. Pisces, but denotes that there will be Quctuations and periods 
of uncertamty with a need for guardmg against fraud 
The nature of the signs wherein the majority of the planets are 
posited will show the line of greatest success and natural aptitude. 

The any signs show mtellectual pursuits, head work, hteraiy and 
artistic occupations 

The watery signs show occupations in which water is the motive 
power or chief element— dealers tn soft goods, textiles, and fabncs, 
pamters, sailors, brewers, chermsts, etc 
The fiery signs show those tn which fire, iron, and the metals 
generally are employed, soldiers, surgeons, etc 
The earthy signs show manual labour, all agricultural pursuits, 
com-dealeis, defers in the produce of the soil m whatever capacity 
or kind The places and signs occupied by planets m good aspect 
to the Sun or Moon, especially if such planets arc Jupiter or Venus, 
should be observed as potent sources of benefit 
Uranus in aspect to the Moon produces changes, and the Sun 
afflictmg the Moon is evil, and depletes the native powers, giving 
also disfavour of supenois 

Pluto or Neptune m the seventh house signify espeaal need for 
discrimination m matters to do with busmess partnership or any 
form of business co-operation owing to the liability of the partner 
either concealing certain of his activities or exerosmg a degree of 
deception or mtngue 

Uranus or Saturn in the seventh house, unless well aspected, 
shows opposition and loss in all pubbc affairs, and the native will 
do well to live quietly, and not come pronunently before the pubbc, 
and all business should be done through a third party or agent, or by 
correspondence 

For the degree of success the native will achieve in bis work. 



104 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


The malcfics m the fourth house, m uncongenial signs, show the 
end of life to be fraught with troubles and dangers But if weU 
aspected by Jupiter or Venus, and in their own signs or exaltations, 
then success is shown 


CHAPTER. VII 

THE PROFESSION OR OCCUPATION 
Judgment is made from the nature and condition of the planets 
occupying the angles of the horoscope, and from those also which 
aspect the Sun and Moon 

The planet which is m nearest conjunction with the Sun, nsmg 
either just before or after it, has much mdueoce in this question, 
and the condition thereof, by aspect and position, will indicate the 
success attending the occupation. The planet in nearest aspect to the 
Sun has also great induence, and those also which aspect the mendian 
The signs occupied by the significators of the profession generally 
determine its nature 

The signification of each planet will be found under the bead of 
“ Planetary Occupauons *' to Book i, chap m These must he 
considered m relation to the signs they occupy— as for instance 
Jupiter 10 Virgo would denote ganieners, dealers m garden stuffs 
Umber merchants, farmers, clothiers, bootmakers, etc., owing tc 
the mSuence of Virgo upon food and dothing. Similarly, Venus it 
Virgo would denote m^ers of sweets, cakes, and other delicacicj 
and artistic foods, art fabnc makers, vendors of dress and food 
luxuries, silk merchants, etc Mars, on account of its more practical 
nature, and its association with fire, steel implements, etc , would 
in the same sign denote builders, carpenters, house-repairers, and 
workers in sanitary structures Gemmi, Pisces, Sagittanus, show 
double occupations and a multitude of interests, the native generally 
runs two lines of business at the same time 
Therefore, m judging this question, which is perhaps the most 
diflicult to define, consideration must be made of the planet or 
planets m the tenth house, those nearest the Sun, their natures, and 
the character of the signs they occupy The signs m this connectioo 
must always be referred to the nature of the houses to which they 
correspond — as Gemmi to the third house, Virgo to the sixth, 
Sagittanus to the nmth, and so on The things over which those 
bouses naturally have dominion, will determme the sphere lo which 
the sigmficator will be employed 



THB PROFESSION 


105 


Thus, if the planet in the tenth house be Mercury, or that planet 
be nearest to the Sun, or rising next before it, it denotes the use of 
the pen If Mercury be m Pisces, then it is employed m twelfth 
house affairs, occult things, secrets, private correspondence, etc. 

Pluto m the tenth house, particularly m the earthy signs, Taoms, 
Virgo or Capncom gives capacity for trading and commeraal 
activities but if m the fiery signs, Anes, Leo or Sagittarius would 
give more capacity for architecture, buildmg and demolition 
Neptime m the tenth house shows abihty for interests to do with 
on, motoring, aviation, espeaally if m the watery signs Cancer, 
Scorpio, Pisces, but denotes that there will be fluctuations and penods 
of uncertainty with a need for guarding against fraud 
The nature of the signs whereto the majority of the planets are 
posited will show the line of greatest success and natural aptitude 
The airy signs show intellectual pursuits, bead work, literary and 
artistic occupations 

The watery signs show occupations in which water is the motive 
power or chief element — dealers m soft goods, textiles, and fabncs, 
painters^ sailors, brewers, chemists, etc 
The fiery signs show those in which fire, iron, and the metals 
generally are employed, soldiers, surgeons, etc 
The earthy signs show manual labour, all agricultural pursmts, 
com*deaIers, dealers in the produce of the soil in whatever capaaty 
or kmd The places and signs occupied by planets in good aspect 
to the Sun or Moon, especially if such planets are Jupiter or Venus, 
should be observed as potent sources of benefit. 

Uranus m aspect to the Mooa produces changes, and the Sun 
afliicting the Moon is evil, and depletes the native powers, giving 
also disfavour of superiors 

Pluto or Neptune in the seventh house signify cspeoal need for 
discnimnation in matters to do with business partnership or any 
form of busmess co-operation owing to the liabihty of the partner 
either cooceabng certain of his activities or exerasmg a degree of 
deception or intngue 

' Uranus or Saturn m the seventh house, unless well aspected, 
shows opposition and loss in all public affairs, and the native will 
do well to live quietly, and not come prominently before the public, 
and all busmess should be done through a third party or agent, or by 
correspondence 

For the degree of success the native will achieve in his work. 



106 THE MAHUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

judge by the rules ^vcn for the rank or position in the previous 
chapter. Unless the majority of the planets be rising, or above the 
earth, or the Sun well aspected in such position, the native will not 
be successful in business for himself, bat may be so in the service of 
others. 

CHAPTER VIII 

MARRIAGE 

The prormse or denial of manias depends largely upon the condi- 
tion and aspects of the Moon and Venus in a male horoscope, of 
the Sun and Mars in a female horoscope. With men the signs of 
maniage are: Mars in aspect to Venus, and the latter strong in the 
figure; the Moon strong in a fraitful sign; Venus similarly placed; 
Jupiter or Venus in the seventh house; the fruitful signs. Cancer, 
Pisces, Scorpio, on the seventh, or intercepted therein ; the Moon in 
a fruitful sign in the first, fifth, tenth, or eleventh; Venus similaily 
placed; the Moon and Venus unaspected by Saturn, and stronger 
than Saturn in the horoscope; the lords of the tint and seventh house 
in conjunction or good aspect 

Pluto or Neptune being in the seventh house although emphasising 
the idealistic conception of marriage again brings a liability toward 
unfaithfulness on the side of the marriage partner with a possibiiit; 
of experienong penooal temptations towards adultery which, i 
^ven way to, will break the mamage. 

AU these are indications of an ioclioation to marriage, and ol 
opportunities thereto. 

The indicatjons of maniage being denied are — 

When Pluto or Neptune square the Moon in a male horoscope 
or the Sun in a female horoscope there is a danger of the engasement 
being brokm and of marriage not being cossusunated. Pluto can 
cause the prospective partner to disappear before the wedding day 
whilst Neptune gives an hidicatioo of the possibility of bigamy. 

Saturn in evil aspect to the Moon and Venus, or the Moon alone 
aspected by Saturn, if Saturn be strong and Uiey weak in the figure. 

Tbe Mood or Venus in diber Capncom, Gemini, Leo, Virgo, or 
anv/ cadcat, asd iSktad by Satsm, iba etatriaffr k 
to achieve. 

The Moon in Scorpio in evil aspect to Saturn, or in the sigss of 
Saturn, conjohied to tbe Sun. and afSicted by Sseum. 

The Moon in the occidental qu»ten ofthe figure {n conjenction. 



MARRIAGE 


107 


square, or opposition to the Sun, nod also afflicted by Saturn. 

All these are indications of the marriage being wholly denied, or 
accomplished with great difficulty. 

In general, consult the condition of the seventh bouse, its ruler, 
the Moon and Venus. If you find them cadent or in barren signs, 
and afflicted by Uranus or Saturn, then judge that marriage will 
not take place. Otherwise, it goes without saying that the native 
will many at some time in life. 

Delay is shown when the Moon or Venus is afflicted by Uranus 
or Jupiter, the Moon bemg in an occidental quarter of the figure; 
or when the Moon and Venus are in evil aspect to one another. 
For these aspects show disappointment in early lose affairs, crosses, 
and delays. 

THE TIME OP StARRIAOB 

The Moon in a male horoscope, being in any of the fruitful 
signs in aspect to Saturn, disposes to a late marriage. 

The Moon oriental and unafflicted. Mars in aspect to Venus, 
Venus or Jupiter in the seventh, or the lord of the first going to an 
aspect with the ruler of the seventh— these dispose to an early 
mamage. 

The position of the Moon must chiefiy be considered in this respect. 
The Moon and Venus well placed in congenial or fruitful signs, and 
not in aspect to Saturn or Uranus, the native is leA free to marry. 
If the Moon is found oriental of the Sun, i.e., increasing in light, 
and in an oriental quarter of the figure, t e., between the fourth 
and seventh, or the first and tenth cusps, the native will marry 
early. But if the Moon be in an occidental quarter, and decreasing 
in light, marriage takes place later in life. 

When the Moon and Venus are in good positions, and not in 
aspect to Saturn or Uranus, but the Moon occidental and decreasing 
in light, marriage takes place at a moderate age, neither early 
nor late. 

The testlmomes must be weighed carefully, and judgment made 
accordingly. 

. HAPPINESS OR SORROW 

Jupiter or Venus in the seventh bouse, well placed and aspected, 
is the best sign of felicity in marriage. Even if well placed in the 
seventh, and afflicted, Jupiter or Venus will give happmess, but will 
denote some affliction to the partner. Agam, Mercury, Moon, or 



108 THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOOY 

Sun in tbe seventh, well nspected, shows happiness in wedlock. 

The Sun and Moon in good a s pect to one another is a sign of 
happiness. The reverse of this, if the aspect be eviL 

The malehcs in the seventh denote unhappiness, nnl^ very well 
aspected, or in good aspect to the Moon, in which case the wife 
dies early. 

Uranus in the seventh, badly aspected, estrangement or divorce 
follows. If Mars adds the weight of his influence by evil aspect, 
then violence occurs. 

Venus Of Jupiter in good aspect to tbe Moon, happiness is almost 
certain. 

The Moon afflicted by Saturn, Mars, or Uranus, a man is not 
fortunate in the choice of a wife, more especially if the afflicting 
planet be in the seventh boose. 

Good planets in the eighth house, or the Moon there, well aspected, 
denotes gain by marriage. 

Venus affl;cted by Uranus or Saturn, domestic troubles ensue. 
But if in good aspect to these planets, sincere attachment and well* 
ordered affections are shorvn. 

The Moon in opposition to Jupiter or Venus shows tronbles a^r 
marriage, or grief through bereavement 

If Mars be in tbe seventh or eighth, in bad aspect to Jupiter, the 
native is ruined by an e.vtravagaot wife. 

The Moon afflicted by Mars shows a wife who is difficult to 
control, if not altogether loose in her conduct If Mars be thus 
placed, and in Cancer, Pisces, or Scoipio, tbe wife may be addicted 
to drink. 

Mercury in the seventh, afflicted by Mars or Uranus, shows a 
wife of unsound min d, or suffering from a severe nervous disorder. 

Neptune there (in the seventh), badly placed or afflicted, or in 
evil aspect to the Moon, denotes a negligent and sclf-iadulgcnt wife. 

Uranus afflicting Venus in any part of the horoscope, shows 
intrigues with unmarried girls; but when aOUctaig the Moon, the 
attraction is to mamed women. If either Uranus or Moon or 
Venus be in the Srst. filth, or seventh house, it will lead to complica> 
tions- If Mars add his influence it win be much talked of. and may 
form the subject of a public scandat This is certain to be the case 
when the planets thus in aspect are to (he tenth house. But when 
Saturn gives his influence by aspect or conjunction, the matter is a 
secret one. Jupiter assisting brings the native safely through bis 



MARRIAGE 


109 

Iroublts Mercury is a great talker, and his influence is to be feared 
m this matter 

Neptune afflicting Moon or Venus disposes to illicit and unnatural 
appetites, chaotic relations, and lascivious habits The conjunction 
and opposition are most to be feared especially if no benefic aspects 
intervene to ward off the evil 

Pluto afflictmg the Moon or Sun shows that the marriage can 
turn “ sour ” as it were, as a result of frustrating or disappomting 
conditions occurring, with the possibility that one or other of the 
partners (the marriage partner sf Pluto is m the seventh) walkmg 
out and disappearing 

The good aspects of Jupiter or Satim to the Moon and Venus, 
do much to steady and regulate the expression of the sex feeling 
The evil aspect of Saturn, however, lends to produce morbid 
feelmg and unnatural restraint. Mars being in evil aspect or 
conjunction with Venus, or Venus in the signs of Mars, shmulates 
the sex feeling and disposes to freedom of expression Uranus, 
on the other hand, makes the native errauc m this respect, while 
Neptune conduces to chaotic and highly sensuous appetites 

Pluto m good aspect to the Moon or the Sun will bnog about 
happy conditions m the marriage, the naUve m many respects bemg 
able to “ lift ’* the prospective partner from out of unhappy or 
deplorable conditions as a result of marriage 

The planet wth which the Moon forms the fint aspect after 
birth must be taken mto account chiefly If this be a benefic, or 
the aspect be a benefic one, then the evils signified by evil planets 
m the seventh house will be overruled, but the wife will die before 
the native In such cases if Uranus be there, a sudden death is 
shown, and if Mars, a violent death Saturn, under such conditions, 
produces death by disease 

If, with the malcfics, or one of them, in the seventh house, the 
Moon, applying to Jupiter or Venus, is found to be in a fruitful 
sign — Cancer, Pisces or Scorpio — or in aspect to many planets 
from Gemini Sagittanus or ftsecs or the Moon therem heisclf, 
then the native roames again, and, making a bad dioicc, fulfib the 
destiny noted by the malefic in the seventh house 

If the Moon be applymg to Jupiter or Venus, the mamage will 
be happy, but if, at the same time, the malefics, or one of them, 
shall afflict the Moon or the wife’s significator, then the wife dies 
before the native 



108 THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

Sun in the seventh, well aspect, shows happiness in n-ed/ock. 

The Sun and Moon in good aspect to one another is a sign of 
happiness. The reverse of this, if the aspect be evil. 

The malefics in the seventh denote unhappiness, unless very well 
aspected, or in good aspect to the Moon, in which case the wife 
dies early. 

Uranus m the seventh, badly aspected, estrangement or divorce 
follows. If Mars adds the weight of his influence by evil aspect 
then violence occurs. 

Venus or Jupiter in good aspect to the Moon, happiness is almost 
certain. 

The Moon afflicted by Saturn, Mars, or Uranus, a man is not 
fortunate in the dioice of a twfe, nsore especially if the afflicting 
planet be in the seventh bouse. 

Good planets in the eighth house, or the Moon there, well aspected, 
denotes gam by marriage. 

Venus afflicted by Uranus or Saturn, domestic troubles ensue. 
But if in good aspect to these planets, sincere attachment and well* 
ordered affections are shown. 

The Moon in opposition to Jupiter or Venus shows troubles aAer 
marriage, or gnef through bereavement 

If Mars be in the seventh or eighth, in bad aspect to Jupiter, the 
native is ruined by an extravagant wife. 

The Moon afllicted by Mars shows a wife who is difficult to 
control, if not altogether loose in her conduct If Mars be thus 
placed, and in Cancer, Pisces, or Scorpio, the wife may be addicted 
to dnnk. 

Mercury in the seventh, afllicted by Mars or Uranus, shows a 
wife of unsound mind, or suffering from a severe nervous disorder. 

Neptune there (in the seventh), badly placed or afllicted, or in 
evil aspect to the Moon, denotes a negligent and selfindulgent wife. 

Uranus afflicting Venus in any part of the horoscope, shows 
intrigues with unmarried girls; but when afflicting the Moon, the 
attraction is to mamed women If either Uranus or Moon or 
Venus be in the first, fifth, or seventh house, it will lead to comphea* 
tions If Mars add his influence it wiU be much talked of, and may 
form the subject of a public scandal. Tlus is certain to be the case 
when the planets thus in aspect are m the tenth house. But when 
Saturn gives bis influence by aspect or conjunction, the matter is a 
secret one. Jupiter assisting bongs the native safely through bis 



UA.RRI^OC 


109 


troubles Mercury u a great talker, acd his influence is to be feared 
m this matter 

Neptune afflictmg Moon or Venus disposes to illicit and unnatural 
appetites, chaotic relations, and lasavious habits The conjunction 
and opposition are most to be feared, especially if no beneflc aspects 
intervene to ward oflT the evil 

Pluto afflictmg the Moon or Sun shows that the mamage can 
turn ” sour ” as it were, as a result of frustrating or disappointmg 
conditions occumng, with the pos^bility that one or other of the 
partners (the marriage partner if Pluto is m the seventh) walkmg 
out and disappearmg 

The good aspects of Jupiter or Sati.m to the Moon and Venus, 
do much to steady and regulate the expression of the sex feeUng 
The evil aspect of Saturn, however, tends to produce morbid 
fcelmg and unnatural restraint Mars being in evil aspect or 
conjunction with Venus, or Venus in the signs of Mars, stunulates 
the sex feehng, and disposes to freedom of expression Uranus, 
on the other hand, makes the native erratic m this respect, while 
Neptune conduces to chaotic and hi^ly sensuous appetites 

Pluto in good aspect to the Moon or the Sun will bnng about 
happy conditions in the mamage, the native in many respects being 
able to “lift” the prospective partner from out of unhappy or 
deplorable conditions as a result of mamage 

The planet with which the Moon forms the first aspect after 
birth must be taken mto account chiefly If this be a benefic, or 
the aspect be a benefic one, then the evils signified by evil planets 
m the seventh house will be overruled, but the wife will die before 
the native In such cases if Uranus be there, a sudden death is 
shown, and if Mars, a violent death Saturn, under such conditions, 
produces death by disease 

If, with the malefics, or one of them, m the seventh bouse, the 
Moon, applymg to Jupiter or Venus, is found to be m a fruitful 
sign — Cancer, Pisces, or Scorpio — or in aspect to many planets 
from Gemmi, Sagittanos, or Pisces, or the Moon therem henelf, 
then the native mames agam, and, makmg a bad choice, fulfils the 
watsd by tfe* tnalnfin la. the se-venlh. hnusa 

If the Moon be applying to Jupiter or Venus, the mamage will 
be happy, but if, at the same time, the malefics, or one of them, 
shall affli ct the Moon or the wife’s sigiuficator, then the wife dies 
' before the native 



no THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 

WTien, in the horoscopes of the native and his partner, Saturn, 
Uranus, or Mars in the one is found on the ascend^t of the other, 
then hurt will fall to that person whose ascendant it is. If Saturn 
m one shall be on the place of the Sun or Moon m the other, the 
person whose Sun or Moon is thus afflicted will suffer by the 
manu^ The same if Uranus be the afflicting planet Mars thus 
situated in regard to the Moon in the partner’s horoscope, shows 
trouble to the latter, and continual disagreement The Sun and 
Mars are in more affinity by nature, and their interchanges m the 
horoscopes of man and wife are rather fortunate than otherwise. 
But Mars in one m opposition to the Sun in the other horoscope 
IS evil 

On the contrary, if Juptter or Venus be thus situated m respect to 
ascendant, meridian. Sun, or Moon, in the parti/cr’s horoscope, 
good results will follow from the marmge 
The agree m ent or disagreement of the two contracting parties 
can be infallibly judged fay the mutual interchange of positions and 
aspects in thar horoscopes 

DESCRIPTION OP WIFE 

Take the planet to which the Moon first forms an aspect after 
birth, other by conjunction, sextile, square, tnne, or opposition, 
and this planet, together with the sign it is in, will desenbe the wife 
If, however, that planet is reirogradf, ngect it, it denotes an attach* 
ment which will be broken off But if it be the ruler of the seventh 
bouse. It must be taken as the sigmScator of the wife, who will 
die before the native The successive aspects formed by the Moon 
after birth will show the several attachments of the native, until 
the ruler of the seventh bouse is reached by the lunar aspect or 
conjunction Then, the sign occupied by the ruler of the seventh, 
together with the sign on the seventh cusp, describes the fint wife 
in legal bonds with the native Any other planet in the seventh 
house will desenbe the second wife, if more than one mamage is 
shown 

Therefore, unless the Moon comes fint to the aspect of the lord 
of the sevtsthy or a planet in ibe sevesjii, the vsnoas appiicatioaj 
of the Moon roust be regarded with caatioo, lest a lover be mHlalea 
for a wife The character of the wife roust be judged from the 
coQdiUon and aspects of the sigmficator 
The circumstaoces under which the native roeeti his wife are ' 





111 


jud^ from the house occupied by her significator; as, if in the 
eleventh, among friends; in the fourth, at his own home, or in his 
native town; in the third, among relatives, or on a short Journey; 
in the ninth, abroad, or on a voyage, or the partner may be a 
foreigner; and so of the rest 

SECOND mahriages 

The Moon in Cancer, Scorpio, Hsces, Gemini, or Sagittarius, 
and in aspect to many planets, shows a possibility of a second 
marriage, especially if a planet oot in aspect to the Moon, be 
found in the seventh. 

The Moon in aspect to two or three planets in double signs — 
Gemini, Pisces, Sa^ttarius— espedally if she be in one of these 
signs herself, shows plurality of wives. 

If the Moon be in aspect to no planet at ah, but two or more 
planets are in the seventh house, and the ruler of the seventh is in 
a double sign, or such a sign on the cusp of the seventh, these are 
indicaUoDs of more than one marriage. 

The ruler of the ascendant In & double sign In the seventh, 
associated with other planets similarly placed, denotes plurahty. 

The ruler of the ascendant in coojunctioo with ruler of seventh, 
in a double sign, denotes plurality. 

PEHALE HOROSCOPES 

are judged in all particulars like those of the male sex in regard to 
marriage, taking the Sun instead of the Moon, and Mars instead of 
Venus. The foUowiag observations apply particularly to female 
horoscopes: — 

Mars, being weak uTthe figure, and in no aspect to the Sun, has 
a tendency to prevent marriage. The same if Mars be in no aspect 
to the Sun, and afflicted by Saturn or Uranus. 

Mats in the fifth house delays marriages; and if, at the same 
time, Saturn afflicts the Sun, the native does not marry, 

Jupiter be in the seventh house, or two of the foregoing planets 
(Mars, Sun, Saturn) be in fruitful signs. 

Mars afflicting the Sun by parallel, conjunction, or otherwise, 
renders the married life unhappy, or the husband dies suddenly. 
If Mars be in Cancer, Scorpio, or Puces, and afflicting the Sun, the 
husband will drink, and be of a profiigate nature. 

Uranus afflicting the Sun del^ a woman’s marriage, and also 



112 


THE MAKITAL OF ASTROLOOV 


tends to produce an clop-meot or seduction. This latter calamity 
xs almost certain to follow if Uranus afflicts the bun, and Mars 
afflicts the Moon or Venus at the same tune. In all cases the 
evil aspect of Uranus to the Sun prodrces trouble m the married 
hfe 

Neptune afflictmg the Sun increases the Lability to deception 
before marriage and unfaithfulness a/ler marriage. It shows that 
the husband can develop traits of drunlreoness, drug taking and 
immorality Pluto afflicting the Sun shows that the mamage 
partner s business or private activities can take him far away from 
the mantal home causing absences of Jong duration that can disturb 
the mantal life, or alternatively can compel the wife to go with him 
and thus have no settled home hfe Sometimes circumstances or 
the dehberate design of the busband can cause him to disappear so 
that his whereabouts are unknown. In certain instances be can 
reappear without warning and expect to resume mantal life as if 
nothmg had happened. 

When the Sun first applies to the evil aspect of Saturn, the native 
mames a poor or worthless husband, without enterprise or aobihty 
of character, and if Saturn be in a watery sign he will be given to 
dnnk, m a sign of Venus, he is unfaithful, m a sign of Jupite 
unfortunate, m his own signs, miserly and 

Note — ^The Sun is said to “apply” ip that planet to which i 
forms the first complete aspect by its znobon after birth, ant 
generally the sextile, square, tunc and opposiuon are the onl; 
aspects which need be considered in this connection. We an 
disposed, hoi ever to thmtf that the Sun’s first aspect in the ephemeri 
after birth should be taken chief notice of and not its aspect b] 
direction, as former authors state. 

When the Sun is found in a barren ogn — Anes, G emi n i , Leo, 
Virgo, Capneora — and afflicted by Saturn, the native does not 
many If Saturn be in the seventh bouse, and the Sun in inne or 
sextne to It, the native mames a widower, and if, at the same time. 
Mars be in aspect to Saturn, she wU marry a widower with a family 
TTie same happens if Saturn be in the seventh m aspect to Man, 
and the Sun applvmg to some other planet in the figure 

If the Sun applies to Saturn m the seventh, and Saturn be in its 
own digaiues, libra or Capneorn. or m good aspect to Jupiter, 
then the nauve mames a widower who is wealthy, and by whom 
she will gam. 



MAKRIAGB 


113 

Hie position of Mars m a female horoscope is of great impor- 
tance For if It be found afBicted by Uranus or Saturn, and in a 
barren sign, it delays marriage or wholly prevents it Thus, m a 
lady's horoscope, I find the Sun oriental, and m a fruitful sign, 
Cancer, in tnne to Jupiter in Scorpio, Jupiter being ruler of Pisces 
on the cusp of the seventh bouse— all excellent signs of mamage 
But Mars is in the tenth house m Gemini, and in conjunction with 
the Moon, afflcted by Uranus from the seventh house, and in oppo- 
sition to Saturn, Mars at the same time bemg in no aspect to the 
Sun. At fifty-seven years of age she remains unmamed 

LENGTH OF MARRIAGE 

The years of married life are measured by the distance of the 
sigmficator of the wife or husband from the evil aspect of the malefie 
to which It is directed Thus, if Jupiter were the sigmficator lO 
Anes one degree, and the planet Saturn were in Cancer eleven 
degrees, then ten years of mamed life would be experienced, as the 
distance of Jupiter from square of Saturn is ten degrees Again, 
if Venus be sigmficator in Libra ten degrees, and Saturn in Libra 
eighteen degrees, then Venus to coqjuoction Saturn gives eight years 
of mamed life Or, if Uranus were the sigmficator, and the Sun 
were eight degrees distant from it, then Uranus to conjunction Sun 
would indicate the mamage years as extending over eight yean 
Thus the sigmficator to the conjunction or evil aspect of the malefics 
Will show the penod of mamed life 

CHAPTER IX 
CHILDREN 

The condition of the Moon is of importance m this enquiry, 
masmuch as it shows the inclination m the male, and the power in 
the female 

If the Moon be found m Cancer, Scorpio, Pisces, Gemim, 
Sagittanus it makes the nature fnutful In Taurus, Virgo, Libra, 
Aquarius, the nature is moderately fruitful In Anes, Leo, 
Capncom, the nature is disposed to barrenness 

The Moon angular m the first, tenth, or seventh bouse, the number 
of children is mcreased 

The Moon m Anes Leo, or Capncom, afflicted by Saturn, Man, 
Sun, or Uranus there is small chance of children being bom 



114 THE MANtTAL OF ASTaOLOCY 

The Moon m Cancer, Scorpio, or Pisces, m good aspect to 
Jupiter or Venus, a full family may be expected. 

The signs on the cusps of the fifth and eleventh houses and the 
planets in those houses must also be considered Thus, Cancer, 
Scorpio, Pisces, Taurus, or Virgo on the cusp of the fifth house 
promises a large family , xf the Moon be also well placed and 
aspected. 

'Tie malefics, or the Sun, in the fifth or eleventh are bad, and 
afflict the ofispnng. 

The benefics or th-^ Moon, m these hooses mcrease the strength 
end number of the progeny 

The malefics m fruitful signs m the fifth or eleventh, show that 
cluldren will be bom, but some of them will not live 

The benefics, or the Moon, in these houses, afflicted bv the 
malefics, show the same result. 

The malefics in the fifth or eleventh, and m good aspect to Jupiter 
or Venus, the children will be reared, but with difficulty 

The fifth bouse denoting the birth of cMIdreo and the eleventh 
house deuymg them, show's the death o'^ some m infaney The 
same if the eleventh promises and the fifth demes them 

The Sun in the fifth, or Leo on its cusp and the Sun afflicted b; 
any of the malefics, no progeny will hvt beyond childhood. 

The hfoon in the tenth or fourth, afihcted by the nulefics, show 
death among the progeny 

Pluto in tlu fifth house well aspected particularly by the Moon, 
Venus or Jupiter will give children of outstanding ment and gemtu 
which can be of an artistic, samtific or administrative nature, 
but if Pluto be afflicted it will show progeny whose subsequent 
actions and way of life will cause distress and m extreme instances 
bnng dishonour or disaster to the family 

Neptune m the fifth house favourably aspected shows duldrcn of 
musical, theatrical and diplomatic ability and m certam instances 
stresses capacity of a rehgjons and psychic nature. If badly 
aspected it gives a very marked warmng to guard cbSdren agamst 
the possibility of drowning to early life through such agenacs as 
ornamental ponds, etc., and shows a danger as well of bang 
kidnapped or, with girls of (hem being forced mto the white slave 
traffia 

The ruler of the fifth house, la conjunction with the ruler of 
eighth, or afflicted by the aaleficx. kins the childres. Saturn in an 



FRIENDS AND BENEFACTORS 


115 


angle, afflicting both Venus and Moon, is a sign of slenhty The 
same if Saturn be with Venus m the seventh house 
The flflh house in a male horoscope denotes the fint child, the 
seventh shows the second, the moth the third, and so on, taking 
every alternate house In a female horoscope the first child rs 
denoted by the fourth house, the second by the suth, and so on 
The planets ruhng each alternate house, and those posited therein. 
Will show the sex and condition of each child, by the sex of the signs 
they occupy and their own natures Thus, if Saturn, Uranus, or 
Mars be m any of the»e houses, badly placed, or the luounanes 
afflicted therein, then judge that child to which the house corresponds 
to be weak and ailing, and hkely to die For example, in a male 
horoscope, the sign Cancer on the fifth and Saturn therein, with the 
Moon m Taurus the first child would be a girl, and would be very 
sickly, and only reared with great difBculty 
The majority of the planets in male signs shows a predominance 
of male progeny, and vice versa if m female signs 
The fortunes of the progeny are, m a general way, judged from the 
condition and aspects of the sigmficators or rulers of the alternate 
houses 


CIIAPTER X 

FRIENDS AND BENEFACTORS 

The eleventh house, the ruler of the eleventh. Mercury, and the 
luminaries, are the chief significators 
If the lummanes, the bencfics, or Mercury, are found in the 
eleventh bouse, well placed and aspected the native will have many 
friends by whom he will benefit But if the bencfics be retrograde 
m the eleventh, or afflicted therein those who would befnend the 
native oftentimes cannot The same if the lummanes or planets, 
otherwise well placed, be afflicted in the eleventh 
The malefics in the eleventh, the native will suffer through his 
fnends and great care will be needed in the selection of them 
If a malefic planet be in the eleventh in its own sign or exaltation, 
then the injury denoted will not be the result of unfaithfulness, but 
some of the fnends will be the cause of unconscious wTong to the 
native But if the malefics be found in the eleventh, afflicting the 
Sun, Moon, or Mercury, then the fnends are false, desjgmng, and 
in every way harmful to the native 



116 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


Saturn therein causes deceit* Uranus, estrangernent and quarrels. 
Mars, all lands of extravagance and strife Neptune causes plots 
and deceptions, frauds and seductions 
Pluto brings the forming of strange friendships, on occasions 
through extraordmary happenings such as when disasters occur and 
if well aspected shows subsequent benefit. If adversely aspected 
the presence of Pluto m the eleventh house shows a loss of genome 
fnends through disasters, wars and such like conditions, and an 
encountering of abnormal difficulties through the treachery of those 
with whom fnendly assoaations have been made. 

If the malefies m the eleventh house be elevated above the luminary 
It afilicts — i e , nearer to the mendian — then the fnends will be the 
cause of the native’s rum. 

The Moon anywhere in the horoscope, afilicted by Saturn, show 
false fnends 

If the luminanes and Mercury be found powerful, and free from 
the affliction of the malefies, or m good aspect to Jupiier or Venus, 
or indeed to any planets, a quiet and successfiil life wQl be expeneoeed, 
with many smeere fnendships and happy assocsatioos 
Several planets in the same sign show many acquaintances, but 
few real fnends, unless these planets be in good aspect to the Si 
or Moon. / 

Mercury m good aspect to Jupiter or Venus gives many tn 
fnends The same if Mercury be lo good aspect to the luminanes. 

When a fixed sign occupies the cusp of the elomth bouse, as 
the lord of the eleventh is found in a fixed sign, the fnends of ti 
native will be faithful and reliable, if in common signs, doubtfi 
and inconstant, m cardinal sgns, ambitious and time-serving 
The ruler of the ascendant being m the twelfth bouse conduce 
to a reclusive Itfe 

The ruler of the ascendant m the eleventh house, or the ruler o 
the eleventh m the ascendant, or these rulers m conjunction aiK 
good aspect to one another, the native makes many fnends and t 
much benefited by them. 

ChieQy, however, regard the Sun, Moon, and Mercury, for ii 
these be well aspected or well placed and free from the afihction ol 
the malefies, the assoaations of the native will be bappyand fortunate 
The dates shown by the lonpiode of the bcnefic planets will 
indicate the birthdays of persons who will benefit the nauve, should 
they come into tus or her hfc, while the lonptude of the malefies 



BNEUIBS 


117 

will show the birthdays of persons who will work mischief therein 
Persons bom on the dates corttspondmg to the mid heaven and 
the ascendant, will be found to dominate the native’s fortunes to a 
Urge extent. The opposite points will give the birthdays of persons 
who may prove disastrous to the native, or such whose interests will 
be opposed to his 


CHAPTER Xt 

ENEMIES 

The rulers of the twelAh, eighth, seventh, and fourth houses must 
be taken into consideration, together with the planets therem 
These bouses arc opposed to the first, second, suth, and tenth, 
which denote the material welfare of the native 
In addition to these natural significators, the planets which may 
afflict the Sun or Moon or ascendant must also be taken, with the 
houses they occupy, as being indicative of probable sources of loss 
or trouble 

Thus, if evil planets be is the stveoth, they will oppose the ascen* 
dant, and will denote many strifes and open contests from persons 
whose avowed interests are contrary to those of the native 
Uranus in the seventh house •shows public rivals, Saturn shows 
deceitful opponents who wiU use fraudulent means to overcome the 
native, Mais denotes such as may use violence and do him bodily 
harm, the Sun therem denotes open and powerful rivals. Mercury 
indicates petty traducers and coaunercial nvals 
Neptune m the seventh produces ambushes plots and nefarious 
schemes designed to bnog the native into trouble 
Pluto m the seventh bouse if badly aspected shows an encountering 
of enmity m public life Enemies will seek to barm through 
attacking the mamage or business partner or attempting to involve 
the partner in something of a scandalous moral, social, financial 
or busmess nature 

The evil planets m the fourth bouse denote such as are opposed 
to the digmty, honour, and credit of the native, those m the twelfth 
snow enemies to bis personal comfort, secret foes, and those that he 
m ambush around bun 

The benefics m these bouses need not be considered as enemies, 
unless they afihet the Sun or Moon 
The malefics m these houses are very evil 



118 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


Any planet afflicting the Sun or Moon, from any part of tl» 
horoscope, may be taken as an enemy, and judgment is made 
according to its nature and the house it occupies 

The male&cs in any of the bouses cited, and in good aspect to 
the Sun or Moon, and having a good aspect from the benefics, 
denotes that there is httle or no danger of serious enmity. 

Similarly, if the malefic be in its own sign or exaltation, and in 
good aspect to the Sun and Moon, or in no aspect to them, but 
itself configurated with Jupiter or Venus, then the enmity will 
produce only good. 

The lord of the tenth house, afflicted by the lord of the sixti 
or a malefic in the sixth, the native will be in danger of hurt an 
reversal through his inferiors. 

An enemy to be feared is denoted by a malefic in the seveatl 
twelfth, fourth, or eighth houses in the sign of its detriment or fal 
and afflicting the Sun or Moon. Such conditions produce persisteo 
and mahaous enemies, who wiU injure the native continually ani 
effectually. Mercury badly aspccted m any part of the figure show 
enemies to abound. If afflict^ by hfars it produces scandal aa( 
slander; by Uranus it produces quarrels, leg^ disputes, and mud 
controversy; by Saturn it brings deceit and treachery; by Neptune 
plots and frauds. ' 

Pluto badly aspccted by Mercury shows that enemies will try to 
lower the prestige and reputation ^ hbeUous and lying statements 
which so distort the true facts that hUgatioo to prove the truth 
would be almost ruinous. 

The lord of the ascendant elevated, well placed, and well aspccted, 
denotes that the native wUl never fear his enemies; and if the lord 
of the horoscope be stronger than the ruler of the seventh house, 
and the ruler of the tenth stronger than the lord of the fourth, the 
native will nse above hxs enemies oud vanquish them enurcly- 
Otherwise, the reverse of this will happen. If good aspects arc 
the only source of strength to the lord of the horoscope, the nauve 
will rely on the assistance of others to overcome his enemies. Ifi 
however, it be itself essentially dignified and elevated above the rulef 
e/ rfv sewwlh Jmwjcv ih? nvff ofiAVfJsJf4>ye.V£aw hi* rivals 

and opponents. 

When, therefore, Jupiter is found in the ascendant or tenth 
bouse, and the ruler of the ascendant strong and well aspccted, the ^ 
native overcomes all bis enemies. 



SYMPATHY AND ANTIPATHY 


119 

The horoscopical causes of fnendshjp and emmty are explained 
m the succeeding chapter 

The longitude of the malefic planets in the horoscope should be 
noted and the dates corresponding thereto will indicate the birthdays 
of the persons who will oppose the native s fortunes 


CHAPTBR XII 

SYMPATHY AND ANTIPATHY 

Every observer of human Ufe will have been struck by the strange 
instinctive likes and dislikes which some people manifest towards 
others of their own or the opposite sex Two fnends will take oppo- 
site vi^ws regarding the same person at fint sight There is a 
cause for it and the science of horoscopy affords a useful and 
satisfactory explanauon 

Suppose a person to be bom under the sign Libra — e with 
Libra ruing at birth another is bom with Sagittanus using They 
are fnends Their ascendants are in sextile aspect Another 
person is bora under Anes He comes into the hves of these two 
people bom under Libra and Sagittanus He proves agreeable to 
the one bora under Sagittanus and disagreeable to the one born 
und-r Libra The reason is obvious Anes is in tnnc to Sagittanus 
and m opposition to Libra 

Had the person born under Anes been a female and the one under 
Libra a male there would have been an attraction mstead of a 
repulsion Persons of the same sex bora under opposing signs 
rarely effect a lasting fncndship but, on the contrary will be disposed 
to injure one another by diversity of interests The square aspect 
between ascendant signs is bad for both sexes 

In horoscopes of opposite sexes Mars in the one on the place of 
Venus m the other is a strong sex attraction The result of close 
association between the nvo persons would be dangerous unless 
mamage were in question or otherwue unless some modifying 
influence also existed in the two horoscopes The Sun in one 
horoscope in conjunction or parallel to the Moon m another is a 
strong fnendly tic and occurring in the horoscopes of opposite 
sexes It disposes to mamage Venus in one horoscope in the place 
of Sun or Moon va another of the opposite sex denotes strong 
attachment and affection 



120 


THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


Th.* strongest sign of friendship between two persons is when the 
Sun in one is in trine to the Moon in the other, and the Moon in 
similar relations with the Sun also. Thus: if one person had tie 
Sun in Pisces 20% and Moon in Sagittarius 10% the person who wouli 
best agree with him would be one whose Sun was in Aries 10% o 
Leo 10% and whose Moon was in Cancer 20% or Scorpio 20* 
The two luminaries would then be in mutual trine aspect It i 
the most felicitous augury when happening between the horoscope 
of friends of opposite sex. 

Bene&cs in one nativity on the ascendant Son, or Moon ol 
another, denote that good will result to that person whose beneScs 
are so placed. The person whose Sun, Moon, or ascendant it is, 
will be the came of good to the other. 

The opposite effect will be experienced when the malefics in one 
horoscope occupy the places, or afflict the places of the Sun, Moon, 
or ascendant in another. Satisfactory relations will not transpire 
between the persons whose phnets an thus mutually placed. ^ 

When such or similar relations as the foregoing are found to 
exist between the horoscopes of individuals, there Is radical sympathy 
or antipathy between them. Such radical dispositions of the planets 
are never overcome, though under certain circomstances they rosy 
be liable to mterruptioo. 

Temporary sympathy or antipatiiy is caused by the morion of 
planets in one nativity to the body or aspect of planets in another, 
affer birth. 

Thus, the planet Man in one horoscope passing over the place 
of Venus m another, will produce a temporary magnetic aitncrion. 
The same may occur if Venus in one be passing cner the place of 
Mars in the other. 

The Sun in one progressing to the place of the Moon in another, 
will produce a strong friendship. Dut this wiD not last unless 
there are radical mdicanons of fnendship between the parties 
coDCemed. 

The Moon progressing to the opposition or square of the Sun in 
another horoscope produces breaches and quarreh. These will pass 
away if the horoscope show radical points of s>'nipalby. The 
Moon progressing to the body of a malefic in another horoscope 
will cause trouble between the parties concerned, and be whose 
malefic it is will suffer injury according to the nature of the pbnet , 
and its signification in the horoscope. < 



TKA YELLING AND VOYAGES 121 

The Sun progressing to the place of Jupiter in another horoscope 
IS an exceedingly good sign of fnendslup, out of ■which benefits 
will arise 

If students will observe the progressive places of the Sun and 
Moon at the time of making the acquamtance of any person, and 
compare them with the places of the planets m the horoscope of 
that person, the truth of these observations will be at once apparent 
The progressive po'^don of Sun and Moon m that person’s horo* 
scope, compared with the radical posibons m the horoscope of the 
subject, will further pomt to the results of the acquamtance In 
ail cases, that person whose planet, Sun, or Moon, progresses to 
the radtea.' position of the other’s, will be the one who makes the 
overture or advance, or who causes the evil or commences the 
quarrel, as the case may be 

Thus, if Mars m a mans horoscope progresses to the radical 
place of Venus m a woman’s horoscope, the man will at that time 
make advances of an amorous nature The result of this would 
depend wholly on the radical sympathy or antipathy of the two 
horoscopes Reason similarly in regard to other relationships, 
whether good cr evil 

The method of computing the progressive positions of the planets 
'r Will be explained in Book tu 


CHAPTER XIII 

TRAVELUNG AND VOYAGES 
The third and mnth houses, fbeir rulers, and the planets therem, 
have chief influence in this question The Moon, Mercury, and 
Mars have also much influence in regard to journeys 
If the majority of these, nz , Moon, Mercury, Mars, and the 
rulers of the third and moth houses, be in movable or common 
signs, many journeys and changes will take place If the majonty 

of the third or ninth houses, voyages are denoted 
The moth house shows long journeys in foreign countries, and 
voyages The third house denotes r^way and inland journeys. 
The Moon signifies all kinds of changes, and Mercury the mclmation 



122 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


thereto So, if the majority of the planets arc found in Anes, 
Cancer, Libra, Capncom, Gemini, Virgo, Sagittanus, or Pisces, 
then judge that journey and changes will take place 
Many planets m watery signs show many voyages, especial*y 
if these signs occupy the mnth or third house 
Saturn strong and m the ascendant, gives a love of a locality, and 
counteracts the influences which tend tos^ard changes 
The Moon m any aspect to Uranus, either being m the first, third, 
fourth, seventh, moth, or tenth, produces sudden changes and 
frequent removals 

The Moon, Sun, or Mars cadent in the third, mnth, sixth or 
twelfth, denotes many journeys, and if m watery signs or lo 
Sagittanus, voyages and life m foreign countnes 
Pluto in the third or ninth bouse shows travel of an unusual 
nature or brought about by an ansiog of unusual circumstances 
connected with relatives family or mantal affairs If m the third 
house, these unusual circumstances will be connected with the 
native s relatives but if in the runth house will be connected with or 
caused by the mamage partner or the mamage partner t relatives 
Neptune in either of these bouses increases the indication of 
travel by sea and by air, the third house showing relatively short 
journeys but .he nmth house indicating long distance ircvel unless 
the sign Gemini is involved when it denotes conunental rather than 
long distance travel If Neptune should be badly aspecled there 
Will be liability to sickness or dao^r through storms at sea or 
through hazards affecting the airplane 

Planets m a watery sign in the twelflh, tenth, or first, denote a 
voyage early m life 

The more planets there are to cadent bouses and common signs, 
the greater u the tendency to lead a roaming life 
The Moon m Gemim or Sagittanus, rising or in the imd heaven 
produces long voyages and a taste for travelling and foreign life 
When Jupiter, Mercury Mars are aH ui either movable or 
common signs the same tendency is shown 
Mars in any aspect to Sun or Moon tends to produce changes 
and journeys 

If, however, fixtd signs arc fonnd m the third or ninth bouse 
and most of the planets la fixed bgcs then the native will not 
travel much. 



SUCCESS OR LOSS BY TRXVELLINO 


123 


The Sun or Moon m aspect to Saturn, and the latter strong m 
the figure, makes the native adverse to travelling 
Similarly, Mars, Uranus, or Mercury strong, and aspecting the 
Moon or Sun, produces a restless life 


SUCCESS OR LOSS BY TRAVELLING 
Success abroad is shown by the benefic planets Jupiter, Venus, 
or the luminanes «ell aspected, in t^e nmth house 
But the malefics in the runih house, or the luminanes therem, and 
badly aspected. show dangers and losses in foreign lands By a 
“ foreign land *’ is rneant one that is distant from the place of birth, 
no matter of what nationality the native may be 
The malefics in the ninth house, afihcting either luminary, show 
dangers accordmg to the signs they occupy 
If m atry signs, the voyages will be dangerous through hghtnmg, 
tempests, and falls from high places, in earthy signs, by foundctmg 
or nmniflg aground, by famine, falls, avalanches, and pnvauons * 
generally, id fiery signs, by fire, sunstroke, cuts, bums, stabs, kicks 
from animals, bites, and fevers, in H-arery signs, by drowning, 
floods, dampness, etc. 

In all cases, therefore, where the malefics occupy the third and 
ninth houses, or aObct the rulers of those bouses, or the Moon or 
Sun, the travels arc far from prosperous and m many cases arc fatal 
As to the advisability of Ira veiling, judgment is made as follows — 
If the bcnefics, or the Sun or Moon well aspected, occupy the first, 
tenth, ninth, or twelfth bouse, the native will do well abroad If 
such be m the third or fourth house, U would be the height of folly 
for the native to leave the country of his birth 
Therefore, if the third and fourth houses are more favoured than 
the mnth and tenth, the natiw 'ibould not leave the country of his 
birth. The benefics, or the l umin anes well aspected, m the ascen- 
dant, give the native free choice in the matter He may go abroad 
or stay at home with equal success 
On the contrary, evil ptanets »n the fourth house, or the Sun or 
Moon afflicted therein, are strong reasons for the native leaving his 
own country 

If by the foregoing rules it be found advisable for the native to 
go abroad, selection of the place or direction should be made as 
follows 



124 


THE MANUAL OP ASTKOLOOV 


WHERE TO GO 

Note the sign and house occupied by the bcnefics, Jupiter and 
Venus Regulate the distance by the house, and the direction by 
the sign. In this respect the third and first houses denote places 
near to the birthplace, the second aid sixth houses denote any place 
in the country of birth, the first and seventh denote adjoining 
countncs, the twelfth and eighth show distant countries, the 
eleventh and ninth any distance m the world, the tenth, the 
antipodes 

The direction 15 judged by the house occupied by the bcnefics, 
or the luminaries well aspected 

Thus the first house denotes the East, the tenth South, the seventh 
West, the fourth North, the quadrant between the first and tenth 
S E , that between the tenth and seventh S W , between the seventh 
and fourth N W , and between the fourth and first N E. 

Thus, if Jupiter were m the ninth or tenth house of a Loodoa 
horoscope and the horoscope fsyomtd goiog abroad, the Cap« 
■would be a good place to go to as that is in the nght directiot 
This would be especially good if Jupiter were in good aspect to th 
Suu or Moon 

But should Jupiter be afflicting the Sun or Moon, it would no 
be advisable to take that direction for it would be a significator 0 
loss to the native The place of Venus might then be taken anc 
if this were propitious, the direction its sign indicates shoulc 
determine the direction its bouse the distance 

If neither Jupiter nor Venus aflbrd good loSuences then take s 
planet which is in good aspect to the Sun or Moon and if it be 
strong and well placed take the judgment from its house. And 
this holds good even if that planet be Pluto Neptune, Uranus, 
Saturn or Mars because its good aspect to the lummanes is of more 
value than an evil aspect from the bcnefics Jupiter and Venus But 
always use these latter planets wbeneser possible 

If the fourth bouse u strongly favoured by the presence of the 
bcnefics or by the luminanes well aspected, the native should never 
leave the country in which he was bom whatever the indications of 
iravcUing may otherwise be By doing so be would infallibly leave 
behind him the best influences of his horoscope 

When a penon goes to a foreign country, his destiny therein wiU 
be seen by referring the horoscope to the longitude and latitude of 
that country This can readfly be done by adding the longitude 



RBSIDBNCe 


125 


of the coontjy to the mid-heaven of the horoscope if the place be 
east of the birthplace, or subtracting it if the place be west Then, 
with this new mid-heaveo, take out the cusps of the houses from the 
“ Table of Houses belonging to the latitude of the country. 
The planets will retain the same longitudes as at birth While the 
native resides in that country, the ** directions,” *' transits," and other 
influences, must be referred to this local horoscope In the author’s 
opinion, a person should travel to that place in which, by this 
method, the best influences of the natal horoscope are brought into 
prominence 

The old authors, however, have laid down rules as represented 
herein, and certainly we owe them much respect 


rbsidencb 

When it is deterouned, by the horoscope of birth, that a person 
shall remain in his native land, or that it is advisable so to do, it* 
becomes a matter of some importance as to where he should reside 

Astrology oS'ers some important information regarding the choice 
of a bouse, its aspect and locahty 

Attenhon must be directed to the sign occupying the fourth 
angle, or cusp of the fourth bouse If this be Anes, the house m 
which the native hvcs should face East, if Cancer, North, if 
labra, West, if Capncom, South Taurus and Gcrmiu, being 
between East and North, denote respectively N E by E ana N E 
by N , and so on Then as to the locahty If a cardinal sign be 
nsing, the house should be m a prominent position, on the top of 
a hill, or elevated above the sea level If a common sign be rising, 
the bouse should be situated at sea level, and not in a conspicuous 
place, but between others If a fUed sign asCend, then the residence 
should be in a valley By this choice of aspect and locality it is 
believed that the native is put into magnetic conditions agreeable 
to his nature The atmospheric conditions obtaining at the summit 
of a hill and at its foot ate very difierent, and must have a difienng 
effect upon the magnetic condition of the body The difference of 
atmosphenc pressure, saturation, etc , would alone cause a difference 
ID the nervous condition of a person, and, therefore, barmomous 
surroundings can only be regulated by choice of habitation m regard 
both to locality and aspect 


126 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


CHAPTER XIV 
THE KIND OF DEATH 

Mortality is of two kinds — r^turaJ, arising from disease or old 
age, and accidental, arising from a variety of causes 

A natural death may be judged to ensue when there are no signs 
m the horoscope to the contrary 

A violent or acadeotal death occurs when the Sun and Moon are 
afflicted by a male&c, and when no assistance is given by Jupiter or 
Venus 

Again, when the Sun is afflicted by one malehc, and the Moon by 
another, or when the Moon alone is afflicted by more than one 
malefic, or the Sun alone by more than one, providing always that no 
assistance be given by Jupiter or Venus, then a violent death ensues 

The afflicting planets being m the violent s*gns — Anes, Scorpio, 
Capncom — is an additional sign of violence, also if the Sun or 
Moon be in these signs 

The following aspects occurring to a horoscope, give warning of a 
violent death — 

1 Mars afflictmg Sun and Moon by conjunction or aspect, or 
afflicting one of the luminaries only, and elevated above it 

2. The Sun or Moca afflicted by the malefics in the fint, sixth, 
eighth, tenth, or fourth house 

3 A malefic in the first or eighth, or on the cusp of the seventh, 
if at the same time afflicting the lununanes, or one of them 

4 Malefics opposing one another from angles, particularly from 
violent signs or cardinal signs. 

5 Both the Sun and Moon afflicted by one or more of the malefics, 
if one of the lununanes and one of the afflicting planets be In a 
violent sign 

6 Both lununanes afflicted by a malefic, one of the lununanes 
being onentaL 

7 Two malefics attacking the same luminary 

8 Pluto and Neptune must both be considered as malefic planets 
if they are afflicted by adwne aspects, especially of the Sun, Moca, 
Mars or Saturn If Pluto is In the eighth this will give indtcatioo 
of rfeacA ecomniTg Chftrcfgh hemy nrf ofred m sonw pohhe cites*' 
tropbe connected with the work that u being earned out, such as 
explosion, budding collapse, or tf m one of the National ServiceJ , 
th^gh such things as mines, torpedoes, submanne crash. If in ' 



TRB KIND OF DEATH 


127 


pnvate life through such catastrophes as mine disasters, underground 
railway crashes Neptune m the eighth will bnng a danger of 
drowning, of poisoning or of death through wrong drugs being 
taken or administered or of overdoses of an anssthetic 
If, With these mdications, you hod Jupiter or Venus m tnne or 
scxtde to the afflicted light, then danger is averted by strange 
interventions, or hairbreadth escapes will be made 
When the afflicting planets are in human signs— Oemmi, Virgo, 
Sagittarius, Aquarius — the death will be by human means 
The eighth and fourth bouses have chief signification in this 
matter, and the planets m tbcm, together with their aspects, will 
indicate the nature of the death. Violent planets, such as Uranus 
and Mars, or Saturn and Neptune, when m violent signs, are tesU* 
monies of an untimely end 

When Neptune is the afflicting planet, be causes deaths by ambush 
and treachery, by drowmng and by strange spintual causes There 
1$ danger of trance or simulated death, which must be carefully 
watched 

With Uranus as the cause of evil, death results m some extrs' 
ordinary and remarkable manner It inclines to smade, espeaally 
if Mercury be found weak and badly afflicted, or Veous afflicted by 
Saturn or Uranus, and the luminaries also afflicted 
Saturn causes deaths by crushes, fractures, falls, drowmng, etc , 
according to its sign and bouse 

Mars causes death by burns, cuts, loss of blood, scalds, ruptures, 
frenzy, and m battle The exact nature is usually judged by the 
sign occupied by Mars, but the bouses occupied by Saturn and 
Umnus must also be considered, m addition to the signs they are 
ID 

The planet Man has spiecial significauon of the cause of death 
according to the sign it occupies, whether human, ammal airy, 
fiery, earthy, etc. Observe always whether the malefics afflicting 
the Sun or Moon are elevated above the lummary or the reverse, 
for when you find the malefics so afflicting, and m elevation above 
the lummary, it is a sure sign of a violent end 
The lord of the eighth house being afflicted by malefic planets 
is an additional sign of a violent death 
Do not judge a violent death wilt happen, unless the posiQocs 
are very striking and unmistakable 
When death is judged to ensue from natural causes, the sixth end 



128 THE UANUAL OF ASTROLOOr 

eighth houses axe taken into consideration, together with tl» signs 
m which the malefics may be p f ared 
Fixed signs show death by blood (Aquanus), disorders of the 
throat (Taurus), heart aflecnons (Lro), and generative system 
(Scorpio) 

Common signs show colds and aflections of the lungs (Gemini), 
bowels (Virgo), and nervous system (Sagittanus and Pisces) 
Movable signs denote death by alTections of the head brain 
fever, etc (Anes), stomach (Cancer), the kidneys, liver (Libra), also 
erysipelas and disorders of the skm (Capncom) 

If Saturn be in the eighth the death will be slow and tedious. 
Mars there, it will be quick and painful , Uranus, there, sudden and 
unexpected, Jupiter there, in comfort and order, Venus there, 
peaceful and without pang or throe of pam The Moon and 
Mercury are passive, and act according to the nature of the planet 
an nearest aspect, but the Moon has a signification of death in the 
public streets, or in the presence of strangers in public hospitals 
and other places of a public nature when other testimomes point 
that way Neptune m the eighth operates to produce trance, coma, 
and simulated death ending in syncope 

CHAPTER XV 

ILLUSTRATIONS 

The following examples will serve to illustrate the rules laid down 
m the prccedmg chapters 

THE BOOttV FORM 

Queen Victoria the great Queen of England was bom in London 
on 24tb May, 1819 at 4 15 ajs with Gemini ruing and the Sun 
and Moon in the Ascendant and Mercury ruler of the Ascendant, 
in the sign Taurus. The fair blonde complexion of the Queen 
was due to the Sun and Moon ruing and she owed her short 
stature to Mercury in Taurus 

Her son King Edward VII, was bom on 9th November 1841 
at 10 48 a m. m London Jupiter was nsing m Sagittanus and 
Saturn and Mars were intercepted in Capncom in the Ascendant 
King Edward $ full flond physical body was due to the influence 
of Jupiter, and hu fair complauoa inhentcd through hu mother 
the Queen was due to Sagittanus while Saturn ming in Capricorn 
accounted for hu shortness in height 



ILLUSTRATIONS 


129 


Man in Capricorn gave the militaiy regal bearing, and made 
him fond of pleasure and the company of the ladies of the day. 

ACCIDENTS 

H.R.H. Prince Leopold, Duke of Albany, bom 7th April, 1853, 
at 1.10 p m. Saturn in conjuncrion vdth Uranus in the mid-heaven; 
Moon in Aries, in conjunction with Mars, in the ninth house; five 
planets in a violent sign. Died from severe contusion of the head, 
the result of a fall. The truth of Astrology in general, and par- 
ticularly of the rules contained in this work, is here admirably 
illustrated. Mars in conjunction with Moon in Aries, which rules 
the head, in the ninth hoMse, foreign countries, and Saturn oriental, 
and in conjunction with Uranus, in the tenth bouse, in an earthy 
sign, show the fall, the cut on the bead, the effusion of blood, and 
the danger of acddents abroad. Venus, in conjunction with the 
Moon, would have saved him, but Venus was retrograde, and in the 
sign of her debility, Aries. 

The Duke, one of the sons of Queen Viaoria, bad inherited the 
full blooded way of Ufa through bis father Prwce Albert of 
Saxe-Coburg-Gotha (The Prince Consort), He was fond of hard 
riding and the story goes that be met with his death as the result 
of a fall from a horse. 

CHARACTER 

The perfect example of a mao of high character is shown in the 
horoscope of General Gordon of Khartoum, who was bom on 
28th January, 1833 at 9.50 a m Anes 13* nsing, Capncom 4* 
on mid-heaven, cardinal signs on angles; Mercury in tenth in 
Capricorn, sextile to Venus in Pisces; Moon m first in Taurus, 
square to Sun in Aquanus; Venus m conjuncuoa with Jupiter in 
Pisces, dignified, m sextile to Neptune and Mars, but opposition to 
Saturn; four planets m fixed signs 

The desenpUon of the hero of Khartoum is in agreement with 
the rising sign, with Moon in Taurus in ascendant, and Mars m 
Taurus. Slight m figure, with a fau- complexion ; very clear, fearless, 
grey eyes, light curling hair and round head. He was unmamed, 
and this was often a source of self-gratulaUon " You have wives 
and families,” he wrote in one of his despatches. ” I, thank God, 
have none: ... to carry myself is enough for me, 1 want no other 
baggage.” * But what concerns us at this moment is the man’s 



130 THE MANUAL OP ASTROLDOY 

character It has been xmconscaously sketched by the hero himself 
m the despatch already quoted from- ** Find me the man,” he 
wrote, “ and I will take him as my help, who utterly despises money, 
name, glory, honour, one who never wishes to see his home agam, 
one who looks to God as the source of good, and the controller of 
evil, one who has a healthy body and energetic spint, and one who 
looks on death as a release from misery And if you cannot find 
him, then leave me alone* ’ Alas! Gordons were not too plentiful. 
The man. as measured by this samt and hero, was not within his 
reach 

Hts disregard of money is shown by Mars in Taurus occupying 
the second house, m exact sextQe to Jupiter Mercury m sextfle 
to Venus in her exaltation, the near conjunction of the Sun to 
Uranus the presence of the Moon in the ascendant Mercury, 
Jupiter, and the Moon being (he strongest planets in the horoscope 
an these were signs of that inherent nobihty of charae'er, t^t 
” scorn of consequence ” and disregard for life which charactensed 
the mao, and ga/e him his extraordinary faith throughout a career 
of restless actiMty, innumerable dangers and severe pnvationL 
His honours were due to Mercury in mid heaven, in sextHe to Venus 
in Pisces, cardinal signs on angt<^ and the ruler of the horoscope in 
sextile to Jupiter, and tnne to Saturn 

WEALTH 

Another great character from hutory was the founder of Rhodesu, 
Cecil Rhodes who was bom oo 6th July, 1853 Time of birth 
unknown At noon the Moon was m Cancer. 14* 46, and the 
Sun m Cancer, 14* 14 , Venus in Cancer, 28* 47 , Uranus in 
Taurus. 11* 52 , Saturn in Taurus, 27* 54 , Mars in Gemini 
9* r, Jupiter in Sapttanus, 16* 32 retrograde, Meratiy m Leo 
6* 34 , and Neptune m 12th degree of Pisces, Here we find the 
Moon in its own sign with (he Sun and Venus, and m sextH^ to 
Uranus Venus sextile to Saturn, Sun and Moon tnne to Neptune^ 
all signs of success Mars sextile to Mercury, and m opposiuon 
to Jupiter, gives recklessness and enterprise, teen judgment and 
abibty to estimate the value of every opportumty which presents 
Itself ll 1$ well known that Cecil Rhodes used his mon-y m ro 
ruggardly spint It is believed that (he tune of birth was 3 ^ p ffl , 
which gives tb** 20ih degree of Scorpio rmog Jupi'cr on Ihs j 
cusp of second bouse, and Venus on cusp of mnth. 



ILLUSTRATIONS 


131 


Horoscope of K&iser 'Wilhelm II, bom 27th January, 1859, 
3 p m. at Berlin 



Here we find Saturn m the sign of its debihty opposing the Sun in 
its weakest sign, Man and Neptune conjoined in the meridian, 
and the Sun secusquare to both, the malefics — Neptune, Mars, 
and Uranus— elevat^, and the Moon in opposition to Uranus 
The Emperor had a most fateful horoscope, and during his 
reign the German Empire suffered reversals of which it mtherto had 
had no shadow of expenence The destiny of Kaiser Wilhelm 
was such that he lost the whole of his possessions He was never 
a popular monarch Mars, m the meridian caused him to engage 
m contmual quarrels, and the Sun m opposibon to Saturn denuded 
him of bis power among the nations He lost his royal spouse 
(the Moon in opposition to Uranus retrograde) suddenly Nothmg 
more adverse or less royal than this horoscope of the Kaiser, 
except, perhaps that of the Sultan of Turkey, was to be found 
among the rulers of Europe The Kaiser with his withered arm 



132 THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

lived to a great age and died suddenly from a heart attacV, as an 
outcast living in Doom, Holland. 

This horoscope is introduced to illustrate the rules in rtgard to 
the question of wealth and possessions. 

RANK 

Arthur Wellesley, Duke of Wellington, bom 1st May, 1769, at 
midnight. Jupiter holds the meridian in the martial sign, Scorpio, 
but is retrograde; the Moon is in the sign of Jupiter, Pisces, in the 
second house, trine to Jupiter in mid-heaven, in trine to Saturn and 
Mars in the seventh in Cancer, and sextlle to Sun and Uranus in 
the fourth angle. His rivals or open opponents arc signified by 
the seventh house, where we find Mars and Saturn in the sign of 
their debility. Cancer. Observe the end of life, how faithfully in 
agreement nith the astral portents: San in conjunction with Uranus 
on cusp of the fourth. Jupiter retrograde in mid-heaven. Note also 
the marriage portents: Mars in conjunction with Saturn in Cancer 
m the seventh: the Moon applying to Jupiter retrograde. The 
Part of Fortune on the mid-heaven, near Jupiter, trine to Moon, 
trine to Mars and Saturn, and in opposition to Uranus and Sun. 

Abraham Lincoln, President of U.5.A, bom at Washington, I2ti 
February, 1809, at 2 a.m. Seven planets rising, with Moon u 
sextile to Jupiter, and Sun in trine to Mars; Jupiter in the fourtl 
house in its own sign Pisces These are indications of much success 
in life and rising fortunes. He died by the band of on assassin. 
The maleScs arc all oriental, and Man in Libra, square to the Moon 
in Capricorn, and elevated above all the other planets. Safuni 
and Neptune m conjunction with ascendant, and Uranus on the cusp 
of the twelfth house. The President died in the height of h^ 
political gloo', when success and honours were wholly within his 
grasp, and Jupiter is found in the fourth bouse in seatile to the Moon 
in the second. 

LOVE AND MARRiAOE 

Lord Byron, the romantic poet, was bom on 22nd January. 1788 
at 1.18 a.m. (N.B.— The hour of birth is a matter of dispute, but 
this does not concern the author’s purpose to bringing the horoscope 
forward under this head.) Venus « found in Aquarius, conjoined 
with Saturn ; the Moon is with Man In Cancer, opposed to Mercury; 
ud the Sun in Aquanus is opposed by Uranus in Leo; four planets 



ILLUSTRATIONS 


133 

in fixed signs, and three in cardinal. The position of Venus, 
afliicted by Saturn, and the aflliction of the Moon by Mars and 
Mercury, very aptly show the disappointment and trouble to which 
the Hellenic hero was bom; the blighting of his love, the estrange- 
ment from his kindred and country, and the criticism to which 
he was subjected throughout Ws life, and even after his death, not 
' only among his natural enemies, but also by the pen of his own 
sister. 

King George VI was bom on 14th December, 1897. His 
horoscope prowdes the perfect example of a quiet, kindly type of 
ruler who made a perfect marriage and was very much in love 
with his charming Queen until the end of his days. He had the 
sign Libra rising, the outstanding zodiacal sign which rules love, 
companionship and marriage. Being the sign of the “ balance ” 
it indicated a character well fitted to preside over both marital and 
national destinies. Venus, the ruling planet, together with the 
Moon and Uranus were in the sign Scorpio denoting his strength 
of will and personal firmness, and the splendid trine from Jupiter 
in Leo to Mars In Sagittarius indicated his geniabty, natural charm 
of manner, good humour and generosity. The Sun and Mercury 
in Sagittarius rendered His Majesty democratic and philosophical 
and showed his great interest in ^ forms of soaal and philant^opic 
Work. He did his work quietly and unobtrusively but was never- 
theless thorough and efficient and in all these acUvities and interests 
he had the unstinted support of lus beautiful queen who, by her 
devotion both to him and in the carrying out of national duties 
has endeared herself to all his subjects. 

TRAVELLING 

Commander Peary, the world famous explorer, who reached the 
North Pole, was bom on 6tb May, 1856 with his Moon and Saturn 
in the sign Gemlm, and Jupiter and Neptune m the sign Pisces, 
both signs being very much connected with travel, and the combina- 
tion showing travel of an unusual, adventurous and yet arduous 
nature; ths Jattw being ciesiiy srga^ed by Saturn. JJe bad his 
Sun in the sign Taurus applying to a sextile of Neptune, whilst 
his Moon was separating from a tnue of Mars and applying to a 
^ square of Neptune, aspects showing travel that would stir the 
imagination and yet be associated with many strange vicissitudes 


134 THE UANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

of life Sun in conjunctjon with Uranus would also siow un* 
expected events and unexpected honours 

EIND OF DEATH 

President Garfield, bom m Amenca, I9lh November, 1831, el 
2 In this horoscope we find Saturn in the twelfth, denoting 
secret enemies ; Mars m Scorpio, opposing the Moon, and Uranus 
in the fifth in square to the Moon, the Moon bang m paraQe! to 
Mars. Mars rulmg the aghth is afflicted by Uranus and Jupiter 
from the fi/th house, which rules theatres He met his death while 
in a theatre Saturn ruling the filth is in the twelfth secret enania. 
He was shot m the bowels, and Saturn IS found m Virgo Tbesigu* 
of this assassination are, therefore Mars lord of aghth, in paralld 
end opposition to Moon tn the aghth, the Moon in square to 
Uranus and Jupiter, from fifth house, Saturn lord of fifth m twciftfi, 
ascendant sesquiquadrate to Uranus, Sun, Mars, and Mouury 
ruler of ascend^t, m Scorpio 

Adolf Hiller provides the perfect example of one who ibroogh 
his own stupidity met a viofcnt end Threwing away tie oppor- 
tumty of living and dying as one of the world s greatest charade 
in history, he came to a violent end in the ruins of Berlin. He 'at 
bom on 20lh April. 1889 and had the sign Libra miug with Venn 
his ruling planet in the sign Taurus m conjunction with hlan 
both wilhm the eighth house sphoc of influence, the house o 
death His Sun was also in Taurus and the aghth house Venu 
and Mars were m square to Saturn which was in Leo and cicvata 
in his map shonmg a nse to power and a tranendous fall frou 
power 

The student is advised to erect os many of the foregoing boi^ 
scopes as may be practicable, and to study then in the light of the 
rules given m this section of our work. The matbemaUcal and 
judicial aspects of the science of boroscopy will thereby be brought 
simultaneously to the knowledge of the student, progress bang 
always m direct ratio to the amount of exerase given to the facofocs 
emploj'ed 


END OF BOOR II 



BOOK III 

THE MEASURE OF TIME 

CltAPTBR 1 

THE PRE-NATAL EPOCH, AND 
THE LAW OF SEX 

Tin general law controlling the Pre-natal Epoch is based upon the 
known relationship existing between the Moon and the ascendant 
of the horoscope This relationship has been loosely formulated 
hv Qadbnry.and other wnters, indodingV/ilson, in his “ Dictionary 
of Astrology '—wherein the idea is badly conceived and erroneously 
illustrated — and is generally known as the Trutine of Hennes 
The theorem, however, is correctly stated by Coley Its primary 
use IS the correction of the time of birth, when the estimate time 
only IS given The Hmdus have a theory, which is to be found in 
their anaent astrological wntiogs. such as the Brihat Jdiaka and the 
Brihat SamhUd, that the World breath has definite and penodic 
pulsations, a systole and diastole action, whereby birth and death 
are controlled Hus theory involves the concept of penodiaty, 
which has been established by modem scientific research It 
further employs the idea that births can only take place in respect 
to any single locahty at mtervals, that these mtervals are in accor- 
dance With lunar motion, and that only every seventh impulse of the 
World breath permits of human births This theory, when referred 
to lunar action, a fact well withm our knowledge and scrutiny, 
assumes the proportions of a scientific statement from which the 
mteUigent mind will not turn in a spint of patronismg contempt 
The author has been fortunate in havmg the collaboration of a 
trained and veteran scientist in the work of establishing the pnmaiy 
law designated as the Pre-natal Epoch This law was first definitely 
formulated m June, 1886 It was published in 1890, and met with 
considerable comment and general approval But every statement 
of a general law, of an idea in its mapience, is open to modification. 



136 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


and is only properly defined in the light of elaborate tests, which 
bring into array the many exceptions to which any general law is 
subject Such tests have been made, and the variants have been 
reduced to a series of groups, all falling within the general statement 
of the law, capable of instant recognition and treatment 

If it can be shown, as we bold it can, that all births are brought 
about in exact harmony with lunar laws, that inira-uterine life is in 
direct relations with the sidereal world without, that the great fact of 
maternity is capable of purely astronomical measurement, we have 
good cause to claim the serious attention of all intelligeot women, 
and more particularly that of physiologists and obstetricians, to 
whom this enquiry is of the most vital interest. 

We may proceed, Chen, with a general statement of the law of the 
Pre-natal Epoch, as first formulated by the author. Afterwards 
it will be necessary to classify the exceptions to this law, and define 
their character. 


CBNERAL LAW OF TII6 PRE-NATAL EPOCH 

1. The general penod of intra-uterioe life is nine Solar, or 
Ltatar months. 

2. This period is subject to an increase or decrease, accord 
to the position of the Moon in regard to the Sun, and the horii 
of the place of birth. 

The law in regard to the period between the Pre-natal Epc 
and the Natal day is thus defined: 


THEOREM A 

I. When the Sloan at birth is increastno in light, and above t 
horison, the period is USS than ten Ismar monthr. 

n. fyhen the Moon at birth is decriasino in ilght, and tnxrw l 
horizon, the period is USS than fen tsmar months. 

III. tyhen the Sloon at birth is INCREASING in light, and BELOW h 
horizon, the period is more than ten lunar months. 

JV. iShen the Sloon at birth is DtCxCASXsa In light, andASO\t ti 
horison, the period is MORE than ten Lunar months. 

The next question towards the determination of the exact epod 
is as to hew much more or less than the average penod any cat 
may require. Therefore, note:— 



PRE*NATAL SPOCn AND LAW OP 3BX 


137 


THEOREM B 

(а) IKfien the Moon is below the horizon, the distance of the Moon 
from the eastern horizon is taken into account. 

(б) When the Moon Is above the horizon, the count is made from 
the Moon to the w i s isw horizon. 

(c) The number of degrees between the Moon end the horizon will 
yield so many days, at the rate of 12 degrees for each day. 

{d) These days, more or less than the Moon's tenth pre-natal 
reyolution, will yield the day of the Epoch. 

Note.^li will be obser^ that the discussion of this problem 
of the Pre-Natal Epoch proceeds inductively from the birth, the 
known fact, to its presumptive ante-natal cause, which has to be 
established in the present argument. When the law governing the 
relations between the birth and the ante-natal cause is determined, 
it should not be impossible to reverse the operation, and argue 
from the Epoch to the Birth. 

Theorems A and B contain the general statement of the law as 
to time. The following argument is advanced as a harmonious 
extension of what has been already stated 

THEOREM C 

1. When the Moon is increasino at birth, it will be found at the 
Epoch in the sign which is rising at birth, ix., on the eastern horizon. 

2. When the Moon is oeceeasino at birth, it will be found at the 
Epoch in the sign which is settino at birth. 

Note — Theorem A yields a general measure of the period. B and 
C determine it to an interval of two and a half days, the tune the 
Moon is passing through any one ugn. 

THEOREM D 

1. That day on which the Moon transits the EXACT degree of the 
ascendant at birth (or Us opposite}, is the day of the Pre-natal Epoch. 

2. If the Moon be increasing at birth. Its place will be Rismo at 
the Epoch. 

3. If the Moon be decreasing at birth, its place will be sbittno 
at the .^pocA. 

Note . — Theorem D bangs the argument for the general law to a 
close, inasmuch as it establishes the exact moment of the Pre-natal 
Epoch. Theorems A and B are in agreement with C and D, and 



158 


THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


mai:e the ascendant at the Epoch and the Moon's place at bntb 
interchangeable, either in direct or opposite terms, according to the 
Moon’s increase or decrease at birth. 

To snmmanse these theorems, and to formulate the general law 
m a succinct form, we say — 

L When the Moem at birth ts increasing m light, and above the 
earth, or decreasing, and below the earth, the period is less than ten 
lunar revolutions by one day for every 12 degrees of the Moons 
distance from the horizon to which it next comes ttfter birth. But, 
when the Moon at birth is increasing and below the earth, or decreasing 
and above the earth, the period is by the same measure more thsi 
ten lunar revolutions, counted backwards from the day of birth. 

n When the Moan as birth ts mereasing in light, its place will be 
the ascendant at the Epoch, and the Moon s place at the Epoch will be 
the ascenaant at birth But, when the Moon at birth is decreasing 
in light, then its place will be setting at the Epoch, end the Moon's 
place at the Bpoidi willbe the descendant at birth. 

To calculate the Pre-natal Epoch, taie out from the horoscope 
ofbirth — Thefooj3tude<l)of(&e5hn, (2)oftbeMooo, (t)ctOse 
asceodaut 

From these elements you will observe whether the Moon la abo^o 
or below the earth, and whether increasing or decreasing in light 
Then 

TO FIND THE DAY OP EPOCH 

count nine months backwards, from the date of birth, and mark 
the date on which the Moon is in the sign it held at birth. [If the 
birth took place eariier than Septe m b er , it will be necessary to procure 
an Ephemens for the >'car preceding that of birth.J Having fotmd 
the lunar place, count Ibrw'&rd or backward, as the case may require, 
until you come to the day when the bfoon is lo the sgn ascending 
or descending at birth, according to the rule. Take that day on 
which It transits the exact degree on the horuon at birth. Call 
this the Day of Epoch. 

TO PIKD THE HOUR OF EPOCH 

1 Ascertain where the mother of the native was rending on the 
day of Epoch, and refer lo the ** Tables of Houses ** for the Istitvde 
of that place, or. if none are avaflable, calculate as duected on . 
pages 4^-49 



PRE-NATAL EPOCH AND LAW OP SEX 139 

2. Bring the Moon’s longitude at birth to the ascendant or 
descendant, as the case requires, and note the sidereal tune, or nght 
ascension of the mendian, lo hours, nunutes, and seconds This 
will be the sidereal tune at Epoch 

3 Take out of the Ephemens the sidereal time at noon on the 
day of the Epoch The differeocc between the sidereal time at noon, 
end the sidereal tune at the Epoch will give the time before or after 
noon at which the Epoch occurred 

4 Fmd the Moon a longitude for this time on the day of Epoch, 
and this wilt give the ascendant or descendant at birth, as the case 
may be 

EXAMPLE 

Male, bom at Middlesbrough Yorks , 6tb June, 1892, at 
7 40 a m The time of birth was taken by the accoucheur from a 
chronometer timed to Greenwich The moment of birth, corrected 
to the longitude of birth is 7 35 a m 
Elements— Ti Moon in libra, 50 

2 Sun m Gemini 16* 

3 Ase 10 Leo, 5* 23 

The Moon is inereosm^ in li^t and below the earth The Epoch, 
therefore willmeasuretomofeihanienluDarrevoIutions (Theorem 
A ) The Moon being below the earth the count is made from the 
Moon to the eastern horuon / e from Libra 28* 50 to Leo 5* 23 
(Theorem B, section a) The distance from Leo 5* to Libra 29* 
Is 84®, which divided by 12 gives seven days aS the excess of the 
penod over ten lunar revoluuons (Theorem B section c) The 
measure of the mne solar or ten lunar months backwards from the 
day of birth measures to September 6th and by adding the seven 
days required by section c, we count to 30th August The date on 
which the Moon transits the degree nsing at birth is 31st August 
fTheorem D, 1 ) 

The Moon at birth u in Libra 28® 50 and this degree of the 
Zodiac must nse at the Epoch (Theorem D 2) 

Then to find the hour and minute at which this degree rises, 
refer to Tables of Houses for Middlesbrough With Libra 28® 50 , 
nsmg we find the sidereal time of the meridian to be 8 hr 50 min 
(mid heaven at Epoch) which we take from 10 hr 41 mm (mid 
heaven at noon) 31st August 189J Thisgivesjhr 51 mm as the 
tune before noon at which the Epoch occurred iQ local time, vis — 
10 09 a.m , or G M T 10 14 am 



140 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


Find the Moon’s longitude for this tune on the day of Epoch- 
IjCO, S’* 23't KUch was tht ascendant at bvik 
We have now to show that the case ^ven in illustration of the 
Law of the Fre^nata] Epoch is sot an isolated one. The folionong 
births took place on their several dates in Middlesbrough, Yorks^ 
the time bemg taken for the moment of thcjirst breath of the child, 
by the attendant physidan. 


EXAUFLES OP RBCULAR EPOCHS 


Svtks 

l^Female, llth Juos, 1S92, «1 
11^1 pm 
Aae.e3]i*3r 
)nrt TAr 
22Bd June, 199::, «t 
LASam 
A*c. n I9« 15' 

)la « TTAr 

S^Fecaje. 22D(] iooe. 1992. U 

6 UB. 

Aje.cs2r59' 

)nj » 29* <45' 

4^Feoale, 25nl June. 1992, at 
5J2 pan. 

Ajc. t 0*^ 

) m n 21* 24' 

S^Mak. lOtb Jab. 1992. at 
llJSpm 
Ajc. » 1*51' 

)in«s 0*16' 

e^J^anaJe, U± JOy, 2992. at 
11.25 pm 
Aac b 4* 5r 
) fa H 25* IT 

7^Mak. 16th Job. 1992. at 
9 44 pjn. 

A»c.K r29' 

)fa V 2r29' 

8.^M4k. 25fa Job. 1992. at 
9.20 pm 
AK.nll'Sr 

>fa n a-ir 


l^xxAt 

1. ^3Itt Aspst. 1991. at 1131 

pm 

)faft jrsr 

Aates r49' 

2. ^ntb Septenber, 1991. at 

013 pm 
)fa / 19* r 
AK.ia2r4y 

3v— 14th t k pt a nber, 1991, at 
032 pm 
)fa n 29*39' 
AJCEl29*4r 

4.~22Bd Septonber, 1991. at 
l^pm 
) fai B 29* 33* 

Asc. / 21*24' 

October. 1(91, at 11 10 
pm 

>feJR r26' 

Ak. ft 0*16* 

6^}th October, lS9t. at 4J0 

am 

>fall 5* 6* 
A*i.tT25* ir 

7.^^lh October. 1991, at 546 

am 

)fatl 3*10' 
Ajc.e:«2r29' 

9.— 9th Noweaber. 1991. at 11^7 
pm 

}b«> 11*30' 

Att ft 15' 



PRE'NATAL EPOCH AND LAW OP SEX 


141 


Births 

9.— Male, 24th July, 1892, at 
1,57 pjn. 

Aac 10* 53' 

)lnJl 9*29' 

la— Mak, 26th July. 1892, at 
1U5 pjn. 

Astn i*2r 

)lntiX 10*36' 

II.— Mile, 31it Auiust, 1892. 
at 4 IJpjn. 

Asc.n 4*2r 
) In J 21* 5' 

IL^IIth September, 1892, at 
8 40pjn. 

Aac. n 6* 33' 

) la b 77* iT 


Ifochs 

9^— Irt No v em b er, 1891, at 10.17 
pjn. 

)£aTH 10* 5r 
A3c.Il 9*29' 

10— 20th October. 1891, at 2.10 

am 

>inn 1* 7 
Asc. tiy 10* 36' 

11.— .!6ih December, 1891, at 
SIZam 
)toC8 4*22' 

Asc. i 21* 5' 

IL— lit December, 1891, at 7.1 

am 

>tn/ 6*33' 

Ajc. ni 2r 37' 


Cases of Regular Epochs — that is, such as conform In all particu* 
Ian voth the law as already defined— might be adduced udefiiutely. 
The above will, however, serve for examples of all the others. 

It will be observed that they are all within the limits of an error 
of observation, aod if referred to the latitude of birth, the apparent 
discrepancy of some minutes of space betHeen the longitude of the 
ascendant at birth and the Moon at Epoch, will be found to yield a 
diflference of time which is practically uconsiderable, owing to the 
oblique ascension of the signs in high North latitude. Thus, 
whereas on the equator the unifonn rising of the signs is about one 
in every two hours, in the latitude of Middlesbrough we find the 
whole of Aries and Taurus, and the fint five de gr e es of Ge mini 
rising in the same interval of time. The ** signs of short ascension ” 
m northern latitudes arc Capricorn, Aquarius, Pisces, Aries, Taurus, 
and Gemini; and hence the apparent disaepancy is likely to be 
greater when any one of these is the rising sign at birth, orits opposite. 

Note . — In regard to Case 12 in the series above, the conditions 
of birth were somewhat remarkable, but, nevertheless, not such as 
to overthrow the Law of the Pre-natal Epoch. The right foot was 
extruded at 8.10 p m., the left foot at 8.1S p m , the head and arm 
at p.ni. The child was asphyxiated. Its first breath was 
taken at 8.23 p m., the second at 8^5, the third at 8.27, etc. Regular 
breathing was established at 9 p.m. exactly. The mean between 
the first spasmodic breath and the establishing of regular breathing 



142 


THE MANlXAZe Of ASTROLOGY 

pves 8.41 p.in., and the Epoch, tahen for this time, woris out at 
8.40 p jn. for the time of birth, a difference of one minute only. 


IRREGULAR EPOCHS 

are those wherrin the Moon, although increasing at birth, is found 
at the epoch in the descending sfgn. or wherein the Moon, decrcssiBg 
at birth, is found at the epoch in the ascending sign, or wherein 
the Moon’s place at Inrth rises at the epoch, or sets, contrary to the 
roles laid down in the general statement of the law of the Pre-natal 
Epoch. 

In aE SQch cases, the coont from the Moon to the ascendant or 
descendant at birth (Theorem B, section c) wiQ not be in agreement 
with the other requirements of the law as set forth in Theorems A, 
C, and D, bot exactly contrary. Examples: 


SM 

2Jtt Map. 1193. at 

12!S4 CXEL, L^Ofl 
Asc. Bs 21* 55' 

)faiH ir53' 


lipaeA 

Septaaber, 1591, at 7 


pje. 

) io ft 21* 55’ 
Ajc.XI»*53' 


In this case the Moon is decreasing at birth, and is found at epoch 
in the ascending sign Leo, instead of Aquarius, as required by the 
regular rule. The Moon being also below the earth, requires less 
than ten lunar rrrolDtions, but not so much as ten days, being only 
twenty-seven degrees from the eastern horizon. But as the position 
of the Mood is reversed at the epoch, so most its count be as regards 
the horizon, and the Moon is found to be ten days* motion from the 
western horizon. 


lltb Johr, 1592. ■( 
7.1 9 btkUiesbroath 
A*c. ft 2S* 5* 

>la» 4*21' 


October. 1591, «t X52 
PJB. 

) fa ® 24* jr 
Ak. cs 4* 21' 


Here we find the Moon decnasing in light, and at epoch it is 
fotmd in the sign desceodiag at birth, according to rule; but instead 
of hi place at birth setting at the epoch, we find it risiag. The Moon 



PRB'NATAL EPOCH AND LAW OF 8BX 143 

being below the earth, the cotuli ihonld be made from the e^irtern 
horizon, instead of which we m«V e it from the western, idr.; 
Aquanus, 25* 5', and find thereby about two days by which the 
period is to be reduced, since the Moon is below the earth and 
decreasing in light 


BfrfA 

S^Female, 25th July, 16J2, at 
11.6 am. Mjddlesbrouah 
A»5.&I3* 3' 

) in A 21* 5* 


3.->30th Octnba, 1S91, at 2:t5 

PJD. 

>fa*s= 13* r 
Aac.o2r 3' 


This was a case of placenta prayta. The Moon is seen to be increas- 
ing at birth, and above the earth. It is found at epoch in the rising 
sign Libra, but instead of its place at birth rismg at epoch we make 
it set, and the count instead of being from the Moon to western 
horizon, is made in the contrary direction, as was found to be the 
case in Examples 1 and 2. This count gives vs a matter of five 
days by which the period is to be curtailed, which accordingly is 
effected. The result is an epoch which difiers from the birth by only 
one ssunute of space as regards the Moon’s place at epoch and the 
ascendant at birth. 


Birth 

Male. 1 St Septesiber, 1892. at 
3.11 Mlddlobroush 
Asc SI 17* 46' 

)fas t 26*41' 


&oeh 

4.— 6tb Decdsber. 1891, at 4 14 
pm. 

3 m es» ir 53' 

A«.n 26*41' 


This is a case of corrgiUie reversaS of the terms employed. 
Although the Moon is increasing and below the earth, the count is 
made from the Moon to the western horizon; it is then found in 
the descending sign of the birth, and its place at birth is settmg at the 
epoch. 



144 


THE HANUAL OF ASTROLOOV 


Here the Moon is found at epoch in the sign which was nsing at 
birth, but instead of its place rising at the epoch, it is found to be 
setting, and accordingly the coun^ instead of being from the eastern 
horizon, is made from the western, giving seven days m excess of 
the average period. 

SirtA £!pocA 

6— Female 19th April I8»7. at «.-.13th July 1886 at 9J2 
1U7 pjn., Loudon e-w 

Asa / 20*19' >in # 19*5r 

)laH22-3Cr AjaI!I22*30' 


The generative act to this case is stated to have been efiected on 
11th July, 1886, at 11 p m. We have the Moon at the epoch on 
the 13th, m the sign nsing at birth, and the Moon’s place at birth 
setting at the epoch This irregulwty makes the count from the 
western horizon instead of the eastern, the Moon being below the 
earth at biitL 

In 1892 93 our fnend and eohabonteur, E. S , to whom we have 
elsewhere referred as the discoverer of the septenary aspect (Book I 
page 4), endeavoured to fathom the cause of this reversal of th« 
terms in what we have called, for the sake of distiactien, ungaiai 
epochs On examining the senes of degrees generated from the 
septenary divuion of the Zodiac we found a wonderful harmony 
to exist ^ their several lotegen 

Prmanly, we have seven points answg out of this scptenaiy 
division of the 21odi3C. They are— *»* 0% y 21^*, ca 12f*, nj 44% 
=5 s254*, t 174", and ts3 To these we add the opposite degrees 
of the Zodiac, taken from ^ 0*, and again, djviding the Zodiac 
at seven points from the solstitial degrees a 0* and H 0*. we get 
twenty«eigbt degrees m all. 

It be observed that the unit in the integer of each degree is 
the tame as the unit of the fractional part muluphed by seven. 
Also, there are three whole degrees of even number, and tbiecof odd 
number, with zero from which they ere g-oetated. 

Jippiyiog this observation to the question of sex distioctioQ, we 
came to the condusion that these degrees might be expressed by 
two trtaes or tnangies. the vpngbt being the maJe the laverted the 
female and the four sets of degrees ge ner a ted from the four cardinal 
pdnts would then stand in fllostration as followt — > 



PRB'NATAL EPOCH AND LAW OF SEX 


145 



It wiU be observed that of the degrees generated from »y» 0“ and 
OB 0”, what are taken to be female degrees are attached to each of 
the reversed tnangles the male degrees being assoaated with the 
upnght tnangles, the reverse being the case in those generated 
from ^ 0” and 0” The fractional parts belongmg to each 
whole degree are placed in the adjacent angles of the figure Of 
the four cardmal points, V 0* and eb 0" are here held to be 
female, and their opposites tfs 0" and 0*, male 

The segmentation of the embryonic cell is after the manner of 
the primary division suggested above, viz, firstly, vertically, and 
secondly, horizontally, making a arclc and cross thus — @ 

The determination of sex in the fotal life was considered to take 
place after the following manner —The triangle of force represented 
by A B C, indicates the male-female potentiality, m which the Ime 
AB«maIe direction, and AC«-female, BC being the pUsmic 
^ substance on which these hnes of fort« are actmg 



146 


THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


A 



Potsntulity IS conT ert ed into ecbvc potency towards the £flh 
month after conception. The triangle; A B Q u then reflected la 
DBF, svbcre D F u the male potency, and E F the female. AB 
thti tato place wxthm the sphere of potentiaLty represented by the 
cmbiyomc cell, and here illastrated by the ctrcle whose quadrants, 
e o', are maJe, and b b ftmale 

M*^en the male potency, D F, o vei powcn the female, E F, the 
direction of the sex ta determined to the quadrant o', the line of forw 
being deflected to H m the male quadiuL But when the fema l e 
potency, E F, ove r p ower s the male, D F, then the result is a female 
birth at G in the qoadrant b 

And now we come to the statement of the Law of Sex In relaoon 
to the epoch, and m this connection the reader will please observe 
what has already been said regarding irrttidar Epodts, becanse it 
will be fonml that the Law of Sex u the controOing factor Many 
people have sent os epochs of a diEcalt nature, for which the general 
rules do not servn la as many cases as our ieunre wo Jd allow. 



PRB>KATAL BPOCB AMO LAW OF S6X 


147 


we have returned the commumcadon with a statement of the true 
epoch, but hitherto so statement of the cause of the liregulaiity 
has been pveiL The present publication will doubtless constitute 
sufficient opology for such denbl. 


TUB LAW OP SSX 

The epoch having been determined by the rules already laid down, 
the ascendant and the Moon's place in the epochal figure of the 
heavens must be observed. If the epoch be true, it will afibrd the 
following arguments:— 

(1) The ascendant will be in or near one of the degrees already 
enumerated, and known as ** critical ** degrees. 

(2) The Moon will be in or near one of such degrees. 

(3) Both the ascendant and the Moon will be in such degrees. 

(4) Neither the ascendant nor the Moon will be in or sear a 
nitical degree. 

(5) Ihc Moon will be In a mole or female quadrast, of which the 
and N.W. are male, and the S.W. and N.E. female. 

The a gr e em ent of the Law of Sex with the Law of the Pre-natal 
3poch is here established. For observe:— 

(1) If the ascendant of the epoch be in a male degree the sex of 
he birth will be male, and vice versa 

(2) If the Moon be in a ” critical ” degree, and the ascendant not 
n a critical degree at all, then the Moon's position controls the sex, 
iccordmg to whether its degree oflonptude is male or female. 

(3) When both the ascendant and Moon are in cntical degrees 
)f the same sex, the birth will be of that sex. 

(4) When neither the Moon nor ascendant is in a ** cntical " 
legree, then the quadrant the Moon occupies will detenmne the sex. 

(5) When the ascendant and the Moon are m " cntical ” degrees 
>f opposite sexes, the quadrant the Moon occupies will determine 
he sex. 

W.B.— The “ oib of influence” of a cntical degree is not as yet 
‘uUy determined, but to be at all powerful the position must be close, 
within three degrees. 

The following diagrammatic table of the critical degrees and the 
luadrants is given for ready reference. 



148 THE UANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


F 



fiadtr 


Irregular Epochs, therefore, may often be referred to the cootrolhog 
influeoce of sex. 

In practice, the safest way to find the epoch Is to foDow the ru les 
for the regular epoch, and tf these do not yield an epoch In igreemttt 
with the birth figure, then the count should be made in oppeuto 
direction to that suted In Theorem B, and an epoch tned for this 



PRE-NATAL EPOCH AND LAW OF SEX 149 

measure of time, with the reversal of the factors, as shown m the 
examples of Irregular Epockt 


TO SET A FIGDRE WITHOUT TABLES 

The following method is employed to the calculation of horo- 
scopical figures m latitudes for which no Tables of Houses exist 

To find the Ascending Degree 

The nght ascension of the mid heaven, taken in hours, minutes, 
and seconds, is converted into degrees, minutes, and seconds of 
space at the rate of fiAeen degrees for every hour, or one degree for 
every four mmutes of time Then proceed 

(1) Add 90* to the mid heaven This will give the oblique 
ascension of the ascendant 

(2) Find the distance in degrees, minutes, and seconds 
between the oblique ascension of the ascendant and the nearest 
equmoctial point 

(3) the cosine^ of this distance plus the cotangent of the 
latitude of birth will give the cotangent of the First Arc 

(4) If measured from Anes add 23* 28 , if measured from 
Libra subtract 23® 28 This will give the Second Arc 

(5) Add together the torment of the distance of ascendant 
from equmoctial pomt (rule 2) and the cosine of the first arc 
Subtract therefrom the cosine of the second arc 

(€) This will give the tangent of the longitude of the ascendant 
from the equmoctial pomt taken Then, with this ascendant 
and the Moon's longitude proceed 

To find the Epoch 

I When the Moon’s place at birth is nsmg at the epoch 

(a) The tangent of latitude of epoch (/ e , of the place where 
the mother of the native was residmg at the time) plus the 
tangent of the decimation of the Moon’s longitude, equals 
the sine of the ascensional diSeience of the Moon s place 

(6) If the Moon’s place faffs between Anes 0* and Virgo 50", 
the nght ascension of the Moon’s longitude minus this ascen- 
sional difference is equal to its oblique ascension 


' Consult Qtambers s Matbematical Tables 




150 


THE UANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

(c) This oblique ascension minus 90* is equal to the right 
ascension of the meridian. 

(cO This meridian taken from, or added to, the sidereal time 
at noon on the day of epoch, \rill give the time, before or alter 
noon, at which the epoch occurred. 

Wb/e.~-If the Moon’s place at birth falls between Libra 0* and 
Pisces 30®, then rule b is reversed, and its ascensional difference is 
added to its right ascension to get its oblique ascension. In other 
respects the procedure is the same as given above, 
n. When the Moon’s place at birth b setting at the epoch. 

Jiule. — ^Take the opposite point of the Zodiac to that In 
which the Moon b placed at birth, consider the Moon there, 
and proceed exactly as shown above. 


CffAFTSR II 

DIRECTIONS 

'The period at which the different events promised by the horoseof 
of birth are brought into effect b determined by the process calle 
Directing, wherein a day after birth, or a degree of the Zodht 
or again, a degree of the Equator equab one year of life. Th' 
system most in repute is that which regards the motions ofthe placet 
in the Zodiac, and the ruing and cuhninatiog of the planets afle 
birth. 

In thb system, the 

PRIMARY DIRECTIONS 
ere of two kiods^2^odi3cal and Mundane. 

Zodiacal Directions are those formed in the Zodiac by the motion 
of the mid'beavens, ascendant. Sun. and ^fooIl to the aspects of 
the planets. These directions may be divided into three classes, 
rfr.; Direct Directions, Converse Directions, and Zodiacal Paralleb. 
When the direction b made in the order of the signs, it b called a 
Direct Direction,' when made against ihe order of signs, it b called 
a Conrerse Direction. 

The Sun, Moon, mid*heavco, and ascendant are called " Signi- 
Ccators.” The planets to which they are directed are called 
" Promiitors.” But each of these significators becomes a promittor 
wbenanyoftheotbertignihcatorsaredlrectedtoiL (Seep. 161.) 



DIRBCTIOKS 


151 

The distance between any significator and the place where it 
forms its conjunction, parallel, or aspect with a promiltor, is called 
the Are of Direcilon, and is measured in degrees and minutes of the 
Equator, which degrees and minutes are turned into yean and 
months at the rate of one degree for every year of life, and five 
minutes for every month. 

The promittor, in each case, is supposed to stand still in the place 
it held at birth, while the significator is brought to its position or 
aspect 

Thus, in the specimen horoscope pven on page SI the lon^tude 
of the mid'beaven is Scorpio 1*, the right ascension of which is 
found to be 208* 33', while Neptune in Virgo 23* 27', has right 
ascension of 174* 5'. 

AJt.. M C - JOT 33' 

AJL, ^ = 174* 5' 

MC, •• 34* ZS* m rod. converse 

TUs arc of direction, turned into time, equals 34 years, 5 months 
and 18 days, at which age the indication would be of an overseas 
and long distance journey by sea or air. 
rA Again, in the same horoscope the mid>faeaven is directed to the 
trine of Mcrcmy by Direct Direction. 

AJL. » - 353*10' 

AJU, M C. - 208* 33' 

J44* 37' 

Deduct ia>* 120* O' 

MC, 8 - 24* sr in rod direct 

This arc of direction, turned into time, equals 24 years, 7 months 
and 12 days at which tune some form of promotion in connection 
With vocational interests, together with the passing of examinations 
or tests of proficiency successfully would be signified. 

The right ascension of a planet is its distance from Aries 0* 
measured on the Equator; and the latitude, or distance N. or S. 
of the eclipuc, that a planet has, is taken into account, 

Hute. — ^To find the right ascension of a planet, take its loogitudmal 
distance from the nearest cardinal poin^ Aries, Cancer, Libra, or 
^ Capricorn; take also the planet's latitude and decimation at birth 
from the Ephemeris, and then say: As the cosine of the planet’s 



152 THB MANUAL OF ASTROLOGV 

declination Is to the cosine of its longitudinal distance, so is the 
cosine of its latitude to the cosine of its right ascension. 

When taken without latitude it is merely required to add the 
cosine of the planet's longitudinal to the arithmetical 

complement of the cosine of its declination in order to find the 
right ascension. 

Note.— The arithmetical complement of a logarithm is what it 
lacks of 10-00000. 

Direct and converse zodiacal directions are thus very easily 
calculated. 

The Zodiacal Parallel has regard to the declination any planet 
may hold at the moment of a birth. 

To direct the Sun to a zodiacal parallel, find the declination of 
the planet to which the Sun is directed. Next look in the Ephemeiis 
for the day after birth on which the Sun attains that det^ation. 
Find the right ascension of the longitude of the Sun at the time, 
and subtract from it the Sun's right ascension at birth. The 
difference is the arc of direction. 

The count may be made backwards (conversely) to any day 
before birth on which the Sun has the same parallel of declinatlor 
as any planet at birth, and the space it has moved in the Zodiac 
from that time to the time of birth, measured by right ascemioDi 
is the are of direction for the zodiacal parallel by convene motion. 

The mid-heaven is moved or directed in the same way to the 
aspects and parallels of the planets, the Sun and Moon. 

The ascendant is directed by oblique ascension under the latitude 
of the birthplace. An inspection of the Tables of Houses at the end 
of this work will show that the passage of the Zodiac over the 
meridian, or tenth bouse ctisp, is uniform, while that over the ascen- 
dant, or cusp ofihefini house, is irregular. This oblique ascension 
of the Zodiac is due to the fact that the ecliptic and the circle of 
observation do not lie in the same plane. 

Therefore, to direct the ascendant to a conjunction or aspect of a 
promittor, it is necessary tobring the longitude of that body or aspect 
to the horizon.' This may be computed roughly from the Tables of 
Houses for the latitude of birth, but more accurately by trigonometry. 

1. To the tangent of the latitude of the birthplace add the ungeot 
of the declination of the required degree of the Zodiac, to find the 
sine of its ascensiona] difTerence. Add this ascenrional difference • 
to the right ascension of the said d eg r ee if the dedinatfon be south. 



DIRECTIONS 


153 


or subtract it if north. The result is the oblique ascension of the 
aspect or body to which direction is made. 

2, Add 90“ to the mid-heaven to find the oblique ascension of 
the ascendant 

3. The difference between the oblique ascension of the ascendant 
and that of the point directed to, will be the arc of direction. 

Mundane Directions have no relation to the Zodiac whatever, but 
are based solely upon the axial rotation of the earth in relation to 
the circle of observation, by means of which the planets are carried 
from east to west throu^ the several houses, forming thereby 
certain angular distances or aspects with the meridian, the horizon, 
and the radical positions of the Sun and Moon. Thus, if the 
Sun were on the cusp of the third house, it would be in mundane 
sextile to the ascendant, i.e., the space of two houses; and if a planet 
Were in the fourth house at birth, it would, alter passing the lower 
meridian, rise to the cusp of the third house, when it would be in 
mundane sextile to the ascendant, and. in mundane conjunction 
with the Sun. 

Mundane directions, like zodiacal, are of three classes: the 
direct, the converse, and the mundane paraUel. 

^ When the meridian is moved in the order of the signs in order to 
i form an aspect between a significator and promittor, the duection 
is called direct. When contrary to the order of the signs, the direo- 
don is called converse, 

A mundane parallel is formed when a significator and a promittor 
come to an equal distance on opposite sides of any of the four 
angles; or, in other words, when the middle distance between the 
two bodies comes to other the laid-heaven, ascendant, descendant. 
Or lower meridian. 


CHAPTER 111 

SEPHARIAL’S METHOD OF DIRECTING 


PRIMARY DIRECTIONS 


The Sun, by its diurnal motion in the Zodiac afterbirth, forms aspects 
. and conjunctions with the positions of the celestial bodies in the 
^horoscopie of births, and also with the ascendant and mid-heaven. 


154 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 
It also forms such with the placets* places in the ZMfa c aAer birth; 
and lastly* the planets in their motions after birth form aspects to 
the Sun, Moon, ascendant, and mid-heaven in the horoscope of 
birth. 

These aspects and conjunctions arc called Primary Directhra. 

SECONDARY DIRECTIONS 

are those formed by the Moon in its motion through the Zodiac 
after birth, either to the radical positions of the planets, i.e., their 
posidons at birth, or to their progressive places, ie^ the places 
they have attained at any ^ven age, at the rate of one day after 
birth for each year of hfe. 

Thus, the following table shows all the directions which can be 
fonned, both primary and secondary, between the signiheators and 
promittors. 

1. The Sim Radix and Planeu Progreiaive. 

2. The Moos tUdu and Planets Prosrtaaive. 

3. Ascendant Radix and Plaseta Pregrtsdve. 

4 Mid-beaven Radix and Planets P ropt ast va. 

5. The Sim Progressive and Planets Radix. 

6. The Sun Pr ogr e ssi ve and Planets P rogre ss va. 

Seeofularr 

1. The Moon Prograssive and Planets Radix. 

2. The Moon Progressive and Planets Progrrssve. 

3. The Moon Progressive and Ascendant Radix. 

4. The Moon Pro gr e ss ive and Mid-beaveo Radix. 

The constitution and first ptiociples of all mundane events are 
drawn from the Sun, and reedve their special form through the 
vegetative power of the Moon. So Ptolemy wntesi— The Sun 
is the source of the vital power, the Moon of the natural power ; 
which is true in regard to events in the pbenomaia} world quite as 
much as in regard to the generation of natural bodies. 

TIME-MEASURE 

Years are measured by pnmaiy directions, accounting one day 
after birth as a year of life. 

Months are measured by the secondary directions, accounting 
two hours, or ooc-twelflb of a day. as one month. 

Primary direcuons are slow u their formation, extending son» . 
times over many days, which wifi measure so many years of the ^ 



SBPHARIAL'S METHOD 


155 


lifetime. Hence it is only necessary to note on what day after birth 
the aspects are complete. But the more a direction comes towards 
completion, the more powerful will be its action in the life of the 
native. The causative influences thus held in latency by the primary 
directions are brought into effect at such times as the secondary 
directions agree with them in nature. 


TRANSITS 

Transits produce effects when in aspect with important signifi* 
cators, and they should be neither ignored nor over*estimated. 
To form a just idea of their influence, the student should examme 
a few critical moments in the lives of persons known privately, or 
of celebrities, and should also read the published views of astrologers 
on such moments; e^., death, accident, promotion or succession 
to honour, termination ofany matter whose begmuing was accurately 
noted. 


METHOD OF DIRECTING 


?3 


A 


The method of directing is extremely simple, and requires no 
more than a knowledge of the astrological aspects, and the use of 
simple proportion and addition. 

Prepare a sheet with a column of figures from 1 to 70, or more, 
representmg a scale of the yean of life, or days after birth. Take 
the solar directions first 

1. Note the Sun’s radical place. Run the eye down the columns 
marked Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and 
Mercury in the Epbemeris, one at a time, and note the number of 
days after birth that each of these planets forms a complete aspect 
with the Sun’s radical place. Set down the aspect in the scale 
of years ” opposite the ^y after birth on which it occurs. 

2. The planets’ aspects to the Moon’s radical place are taken 
out next, and set down in the same manner. The Sun's aspects 
to the Moon’s place at birth must be mcluded under this head. 

3. The aspects of the nine heavenly bodies to the ascendant and 
mid'heaven and the Fart of Fortune, are taken next m their order, 
and set down in the scale of years. 

4. Next, note the davs after birth when the Sun in its progressive 
motion comes to an aspect with any of the planets in the horoscope 
of birth, and with the ascendant and mid-heaven. Set them down 
in their proper place in the scale of years. 

5. Lastly, set down the aspects formed between the Sun in its 


*56 THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 

progress after bulb, with the placets Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, 
Jupiter, Mars, Venus, and Mercury in their progressive motions. 

— ^These are generally noted in the Epbemeris, but the 
student is warned that frequent omissions and printers' errors 
occur. It is therefore advisable to go through the process indepen- 
dently and with care. 

The scale of primary directions will now be complete. It should 
be observed that when the progressive places of the planets arc 
employed in the aspects noted, the letter P should be set against 
the symbol of the planet. The radical places, / e., those of the 
planets at birth, are denoted by the letter R against their respective 
symbols. 

It should further be noted what sign the aspecting planet is in, 
and also the bouse, and if the planet be retrograde, that also should 
be marked E. 

Example : — Suppose the Sun's radical place is attained by Venus 
thirty-three days ^er birth, the Sun being in Aquarius on the cusp 
of the eighth house. Against 33 in the scale of >ears we set down: 
0 R d $ P s 8. 

The primary directions afford a general survey of the periods c'' 
good and evil throughout the Ufe. A senes of good aspects indicat 
a penod of good fortune extending over the years embraced b 
them, and vice versa when evil aspects occur. When the influence 
are mixed, some good and some evil, the affairs of the native will b 
unsettled. The aspects falling out in any year of life arc stronger 
at that age, but owing to the slow formation and distribution o. 
the pnmary directions, the influence of any direction wU be fell 
from two to three years in advance of its exact formation, and foi 
an equal period afterwards, always coming into notable effect wbnj 
the current iunar or secondary directions agree with it to nature. 

It is DOW necessary to fill in the features of this general outline 
of the life, by calculating the secondary directions. These can be 
calculated for a single year or as many years in advance as the 
student may cboose. One year will serve an example for all 
otben. Proceed then as follows: — 

1. Subtract the year, month, and day of birth from the beginoiog 
of the year for which the secondary directions are required Set 
the results donv in years, moatbr, and days. 

2. Call the years days; tnuittply the months by two, and call 
them Aat/rs; the days by four, and call them mlnufes. 



SBPHARIAL'S METHOD 


157 


3. To this result add the hour and minute of birth- The result 
will be the time of direction for that year, and all others, on the 
1st January. 

4. Find the Moon*s lon^tude on the day, hour, and minute thus 
obtained. This will be the Moon** progressive place for the begin- 
ning of the year required, 

5. Find the Moon’s motion in twenty-four hours; divide this by 
twelve. This will give the Moon's motion for each succeeding 
month of the year. 

6. Add this monthly motion to the longitude of Moon for the 
1st January, and this will give its longitude for the Ist of each 
succeeding month. 

7. Now turn to the day after birth corresponding to the year of 
the direction, and note w^t aspects the Moon forms to the planets 
on that day. Set the aspects down opposite the month in which 
they are completed. 

8. Then refer to the nativity, and note the aspects the progressive 
Moon forms to the radical places of the planets, ascendant, and 
mid-heaven therein. Set these down opposite the month m which 
they are completed. 

R against the radical planets, and P against the progressive. 
Note also the sign and bouse in which the planets are situated in 
the radix or progress. 


Example'— ta the epcaraca horoscope (Booh i). male, bom 10th ApnU IWO, 
•t 1 ajn. o M,T. (2 am. BiT.) Retpiired. tbesecoDdaiy directions for 1972. 


(1) 


0 ) 


Year Mansh 

1972 .. 1 

1940 * 


Day 

0 B Ist January, 1972 
10 - 10th April. 1940 


* 20 » A*e OQ 1st January. 1972 

31 days 8 20 

Mulopty by 2 4 


16 his. SOmms. 
Add 1 0 aan. 


O) 


18 

Subtract 12 


20 

0 to convert to secular tune 


•j^ojeordiiccttoD 6 20 pan. 

(O Hi. Mom', lowtirf. .1 «J0 pm. oo U» 3W Mte- tilth, lit, Illh 
May 1940 - so 11* 2r - Moon'a projresave longitude In January, 1972. 


158 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

(5) The Mood s moueam the 12 honn from Neon to Midnight oo Ilth Miy, 
1940, u 6* 39', which diyjded hy £gjyB J* £L5 as tbff Moca's moBtWyprogra 
for the first six months of the ytai 

(6) The Moon’s motion in the 12 boors from Midnight on 11th Msy, 

to Noon on I2th May, 1940, is 6* 43 , which divided by 6 givw 1* 7 « the 
Moon’s monthly progression for the second snc fT>nnth^ of the year, plus rottra, 
iSt 1* 8 for the last month of the year 
(7, 8. 9} The Moons monthly motton u added soccessivcly to ca 11* 2T, 
the Moon’s longitude, 1st January, 1972, and the Moon’s aspects to the radical 
and progressive planets* places are set ont in order of formaitnn. Thus— 


1972 

January 

11* 

03 2r 



February 

12* 

33 



March 

13* 

40' If: 

Fourth Home 

April 

14* 

46 



May 

13* 

53 



June 

t6* 

59* 



July 

18* 

6* 

□ fli* 

Ninth House 

August 

19* 

13' 

S&Jt 

First Hotac 




aoJi 

Third House 

September 

20* 

20' 

oax 

Ninth House 




L 9X 

Smh House 




L ex 

Sixth Hotse 




*9X 

Fifth House 

October 

21* 

zr 

azx 

Third House 





Fifth House 





Fifth Mouse 

November 

2r 

34 

A 9X 

Third House 
Ninih House 

December 

23* 

42* 



As will be seen by the above table there are no lunar aspect 
formed dunog the months of January, February, April, May 
June and December When this occurs the lunar aspects m forw 
during the previous month, if any, will overbp as it were into tht 
following month 

It will usually be found bon-ever that even when no lunar aspects 
are in force, some part of the mootb will be affected by one or more 
transits (described in Chap iv, under the beading of Transits) or 
by the New Moon (Lunation) of the month. 

FRIMART CONSIDERATIONS 

The effects of directions arc to be judged according to the interpby 
of the primary and secondary forces The foUowing rules will 
serve to guide the judgment In this matter 



EFFECTS OP DIRECTIONS 


159 


I If the pnmary and secondary directions agree m nature, both 
bang ather good or evil, the secondary directions will 
produce marked results of the nature denoted by the planet 
to which the Moon is directed, considered with the sign, and 
particularly the house in which it is placed 
H When the primary and secondary disagree m nature, the effects 
denoted by the secondary will not be lasting, and the affam 
of the native generally will be unsettled at that penod 
NJ—Thc Mture of the direction is judged by the aspect, 
not by the planet A square is bad, whether from Jupiter 
or Saturn, from Uranus or Venus, and a tnne or sextile is 
always good, whatever may be the pJan*t throwing the aspect 
IIL When the pnmary directions are of a mixed nature, partly 
good and partly bad, then both the good and evil secondary 
directions w31 have force at that tune 

IV. When a penod of two or more years elapses between the 

formation of pnmary directions of an opposite nature, a 
critical epoch is formed midway between the two direcuons 
Until that pomt is reached, the secondary directions act m 
abeyance to the primary la^ formed, and dunog the eniieal 
year they are free to aa either for good or evil as they are 
hirmed 

V. When a penod of two or more years mtcrvenes between 

primary directions of the sasne nature, then the nhole interval 
will be good or bad, accordmg to the nature of the aspects 
In such paw the secondary directions will act in accord 
therewith 

These considerations will serve to indicate why, at certam times, 
good secondary directions fail to compass those benefits and 
emoluments which might be antiapated from them, and agam, why 
certam evil directions fortunately pass without leaving their scars 
upon the native 


CHAPTER XV 

EFFECTS OF DIRECTIONS 
Primary directions have a general signification extending over the 
penod of their operation Although their influence is brought to 
a climax whenever the secondary directions agree with them m 



160 


THB UANUAE. OP ASTROLOOy 

nature, yet they will be found to exercise a continuous influence for 
good or evil as long as thqr are in operation; when evil, sopprcssifl? 
the good effects of secondaries and increasing the evil ones, an^ 
when good, suppressing the evil and augmenting the good. 

Secondary direetioTts have a particular significance in regard to 
the exact time and nature of events. They operate in harmony 
with the primaries, as already stated. They always produce result* 
when complete, but in a variable degree of good or evil, according 
to the primaries which control them. 

The house and sign in which a planet is situated when directed 
to the Sun, Moon, ascendant, of mid-heaven, are the chief keys to 
interpretation of eflTects of directions. 

When a planet is within five degrees of the cusp of a house, it 
generally operates as if it were m that house, owing to its orb of 
influence. 

Mercury's nature is interchangeable, and always acts in the same 
maimer as the planet to which it is in nearest aspect, either in the 
progress or the radix, as the case may be, or if not in aspect to any 
planet, the sign it is m must be taken. 

Primary direcuons are judged in a general way, according to thi 
aspects and the planets forming them. 

Secondary directioas are judged more exactly by the house anc 
ngn occupied by the planet to which the Moon is directed and the 
nature of the aspect formed. 

The following general obscrvatioiis will prove of service: — 

1. Never lose sight of the radu and its potentialities. It is the 
root m earth from which the tree of hfc grows. 

Z Have regard to the environment of the native. What would 
be true prediction in regard to a person bom In fortunate a'rnim- 
stances, would not hold good to the same extent in the case of one 
bom under the very lash of tyranny and oppresrion. These are 
dispanUes which must be referred to ante-natal causes reaching 
back one cannot say how far. 

3. If the radix does not pronuse fortune, no directions will 
permanently secure it to the native. 

4. If the coosutution be a good one, do not conclude the first 
attacks made upon it will be fital. 

5. Consider first the promise of the ndiz, next thst of the pnmiries 
In operauon, and judge of the secondary directions in accord with 
these. 



EFFECTS or DlRCCTlONS 161 

6 Do not founder on the rock of fatalism Remember that 
Astrology supports the idea of contmual causation, and whereas 
the future is oiily the past unfolded, new causes are continually being 
evolved, and these will have their effects m all future years, and for 
all time 

The Sun, Moon, ascendant, mendian, and Pars Fortuna are 
called ** Sigmficators *’ The planets Pluto, Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, 
Jupiter, Wars, Venus, and Mercury (together with the Sim and 
Moon when these are directed to the ascendant, mid heaven, or 
Pars Fortuna) are called “Promittors” They have a general 
signification accordmg to their several natures, and a particular 
signification accordmg to the house and sign they are m, and those 
houses over which they rule in the nativity 

The Sun has signification of the life, constitution, and honour of 
the native, also the trade, profession, and credit of the native, and 
the male relatives 

The Moon governs the health, general changes in life, and the 
female relatives 

The Ascendant has relation to the body and person of the native, 
the health, life, and fortunes in a general sense 

The Mid-heaven has relation to honour, credit, busmess, and 
worldly standmg It is assoaated with the Sun m this respect, just 
as the Moon is with the Ascendant in others 

The Part of Fortune has relahon to the possessions of the 
native, his money and effects In general pracuce it u not directed 
but the progressive aspects of the planets to its position in the radical 
figure are taken as primary directions We would, however, advise 
the student to calculate its position for each month, taking the 
radical Ascendant, the progressive Moon, and progressiie Sun as 
the factors for the calculation the method being similar to that for 
the calculation of its place m the radix The reason for suggesting 
this method of dircctmg the Fart of Fortune is, that as the radical 
position has a signification m regard to the general possessions of 
the native, so the progress of the Sun and Moon m relation to the 
ascendant of the horoscope must throw the Part of Fortune con- 
tinually and successively from one point of the Zodiac to another, 
and Its aspects and coDjunchons with the progressive and radical 
planets must have a temporary signification of the same general 
nature We have repeatedly found this to be the case, and 
reco mm end independent research 



J62 THB MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

SECONDARY DIRECTIONS 

]) 6 Asc. or M.C produces changes, attended with honour or 
ill fame as tbe/jrimo/y influences may indicate. U in & tveiery sign 
it brings voyages. The period is restless and The J 6 

M.C. causes benefits and honours frtm women, or the reverse. Its 
conjunction with the ascendant oAen causes illaess of a cold or 
wratery natum afleedng the head and the part ruled by the sgn 
ascending. 

A Asa or M.C, benefits from women; advantageous 
changes; popularity and preferments; success with pubKc bodies, 
and general prosperity. 

O Q or ^ Asa or M.C. brings losses through women and 
public functionaries; loss of fame, troubles, annoyances, and a 
restless anxions tima It is an ill time to travel or m^e changes in 
home or business aflairs. 

^ A ^ produces benefits of a sudden and unexpected natore 
from such persons and chiags as are shown by the boose Ursnas Is 
in. It makes the mind curious and enquiring, yet fanciful and 
eccentric. The dispositioa bears strongly towards romance and 
adventure. The magnetic power is increased, and a man is ucimed 
to company and the friendship of women. It produces cAoTigar and 
troexp«ned ewnts generaDy. 

J> 6 AO eta denotes a critical time, when all the aflaxR go 
wrong unexpectedly. Accidents arc frequenL The native is liely 
to suiTer from public bodies and powerful enemies. He is criticised 
or slandered. It makes the mind hy p er cri tical, bitter, sarcastic, and 
stubborn. It brings disgrace, loss of office, and changes of an 
unpleasant nature. Travelling is dangerous. The society of the 
opposite sex should be avoided. TIk mind is troubled and anxious, 
and destructively or aggressively inclined. Its effects are siKJdea 
and extraordinary. 

$ A h indicates success in business, especially through aged 
persons and saturnine things. A steady, prosper o us tune. The 
mind is industrious, patient, eootempbtive, and soberly inclined. 

If the body is feverish, the health wiH improve under this direction. 

If Saturn is in good aspect to Jupiter at birth, it frennentiy brxnp 
kgacies under these dir^oni. 

> d Z. O eta Ti produces serious evils in the hfa Dishonour, 
failure in business, losses, grief, disappointmect, and beravement 
are among the effects of the eva dirtrt’on of Samra. Jbenuadis ‘ 



EFFECTS OF DIRECTIONS 


m 

melancholy and morbid; the health suffers from cold, want of tone, 
lingering diseases, and aches and pains, according to the sign 
Saturn is in. The disposition is cramped and constrained; the 
native is suspecting, nervous, and misantliropic. It is an ill time to 
be^ any new concern, and much care is needed in all the afDiirs 
of life. 

d ^ A 21. These are very good directions, and produce gain, 
prosp^ty, fame, and success in oU affairs. The mind is jovial, 
frank, generous, and free from all care. The body is healthy and 
In good tone. Jupiter acts chieBy on the arterial blood, which at 
this time is replenished and in a healthy condition. In business, 
^fihirs go Very successfully, and profits accumulate. Many advan- 
tages accrue from these directions, and honourable attachments and 
friendships are made. 

^ A □ etc. 2^.. This is a bad tim e for business affairs. Losses 
occur. There b trouble through the law or church. Speculations 
should be avoided, and thrift should be exercised. The disposition 
b free, extravagant, and profligate, and friends or associates impose 
upon the goodwill of the native at thb time. The blood b gross 
or corrupted, and the body afllicted with congestion, etc , in parts 
governed by the sign Jupiter b in. The period generally brings 
many expenses and few receipts, and leaves the native in an 
Impecunious condition. 

^ A ^ denotes a brisk, busy, and active time. Some new 
enterprise is generally begun. The affairs succeed through the 
industry of the native. Journeys and business activities are frequent. 
The mind b courageous, demonstrative, dauntless, and free, and 
the native b disposed to exercise and sports. Gain is shown by 
military men, doctors, surgeons, etc., as denoted by Mars. With 
females thb direction inclmes to mamage or courtship, but it b 
usually of an impulsive nature 

)> d A □ etc. 3- Danger of acadents and loss of blood. 
Feven are produced. The native suffers discredit, slander, and 
dishonour. He acts impulsively, and so falb into dangers. He b 
extravagant and reckless, and hb judgment is hasty, so that he loses 
money. In fiery signs there b danger of high fever, loss or hurt by 
fire; in airy signs, feven, accideots by gunshot, hurts by human 
hands; iniwrerysigns, scalds, danger of drowning, cvib from drink 
and excess; in earthy signs, fafls, hurts from animab, bites, etc. 
The native rarely escapes without loss of blood, if the primaries are 



THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 

evil, and especially if Mars be angular With women it prodcca 
dander and discredit, and mchnra to impulsive actions The 
opposite sex ought to be avoided at thw time, or entertamed with 
due discretion. 

J d © This IS productive of changu it brings honoun to 
men, and some success in public affairs and business, but it frequcnUy 
afflicts the health m a maimer somewhat after the nature of Mars 
to which planet the Sun closely corresponds Generally, v«7 
important changes m the affairs of life result from this direction 
It often produces mamage with both sexes. 

With women, the direction is not so good, and induces many 
anxieties upon the mind, affects the health, and produces feverish 
symptoms as the result of cold or chills. If the primary mfloencs* 
ere bad, it may cause death In all cases a change m life 
J A © This IS a good direction for both sexes, produong 
honoun, success, credit, and renown. The favour of dignified 
penons is conferred upon the native, new fneods are made, 
snecess with superiors and parents is expeneoced, the health is good, 
the mmd dignified. lofty, and ambitions of honour and esteem, 
which generally is attained to a large degree These mfiuesces 
fend strongly to a successful and happy mamage in both sexe 
J Z O etc, © Brings ill health loss of fame, digiuty, ax 
honour, troubles through the parents, and bereavement m man 
It IS an ill tune for all affairs. The mind is prone to b 
overbearing and haughty, and troubles through superiors arise 
loss of employment or office is to be feared, troubles from th 
opposite sex, and, in some cases, bcieavemenf It is a bad time fo 
all concerns. The native loses fneods and supporters 

>d if* A 9 This produces a happy, prosperous, and peaceful 
tune, with events of a domestic naitae which are pleasurable or 
advantageous It u a frequeoi testuaony of courtship or mamage 
The health is good, the mind temperate, but given to the pleasures 
of company, the disposition is peaceful happy, and joyous. 

J Z □ etc. 9 This brings doappiomtiaents gnef. losses, and 
b er e a vement, domestic affairs go badly The relations of the 
native with the opposte sex are not productive of happiness at this 
time It creates inte mp erate teodenoes and irregular habits The 
nattve is lochned to excesses of the nature denoted by the sign 
Venus IS in at the time of direction, troubles throu^ femalea, 
servants, and relatives are expeneneed. 



BrrBCTS OP DIKBCTIONS 


165 

J d ^ A J?. If Mercury at birth is dignified and wH aspected, 
It brings results attaching to the nature of the planet to which it is 
la closest relationship. [Tlxia must be a matter of judgment swth 
the student.] This rule applies chiefly to the conjunction, as the 
textile and trine are both good in their eflccls by whaiem planet 
the aspect Is thrown. 

The general nature of Mercury is to produce changes, journeys, 
aew business aflalrs; scholastic honours and success through 
writbgs, etc., when in good aspect. It renden the mind industrious, 
active and restless; but much attention must be paid to the nature 
of the sign and house Mercury is to at the time of direcihn. 

J d A □ etc. 5 . If Mercitiy is not well placed at birth, it will 
produce evil effects fay its conjunction. The mind is restless and 
Baxious, and a multitude of sm^l womes attend the native’s afiaire. 
The body is afllicted according to the nature of the sign Mercury is in 
at the time. Net%’ous disorders and brain affections are frequent under 
these directions. It is a bad time to sign any agreements or to frame 
Contracts ; and in business, generally, little success attends the efforts 
of the native; be is criticised, slandered, end meets with disgrace. 

d □ ^ etc. V* Produces senous complications in the affairs 
of the native. Ambushes and deceptions are expeneoced. The 
Bative IS the subject of plots and schemes designed to bring him into 
discredit. Secret enemies become active and dangerous. The 
mind is troubled and harassed with fcan; the health suffers from 
Wasting disease, or a depletion of the vital forces; lassitude and 
Indiffcrencs follow as a consequence. The native may give way 
to unhealthy desires. The influence of Neptune is seductive, and 
the moral nature suffers under its evil aspects. 

A Gain and credit accrue to the native from works of 
Bn arusuc or inspirational nature. He bas success with the opposite 
sex and in society. He gains by schemes and combinations, over* 
throws his enemies, and discovers evils existing around him. The 
mind is changeful 'and disposed to pleasures. 

^ A B. ^V^I1 give an excellent opportunity for the reviving or 
furthering of what bas appeared to be a lost cause, a fading romance, 
a receding business or financial opportunity. Personal initiative 
^ find new ways of bringing iaferests to fruition and compleUoa 
in all important avenues of life. The mental losptraUon will be 
enhanced, new ideas will be bom, activities wOl move ahead on a 
^ve of progress and many benefits will be derived. 


166 


THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


)> <5 □ ^ etc B Brings disappointments and setbacks Tbe 
objective that has been aimed at and worked for, probably for OMy 
months, will seem to recede just when it is anticipated that it will 
be achieved Friends, helpers and supporters will seem to be taken 
out of the life as a result of their circumstances changmg and in 
some mstances will never really come back into it again Diffi- 
culties of a business and financial nature will be experienced and 
there will be a disturbing of matters to do with the affections, with 
the marital or partnership sides of hfe if the latter apply 

ffote — ^These rules are necessarily only of a general nature To 
enumerate the vanous resaits &itacbing to tbe dtrecUoas of each 
planet when posited m the different signs and houses, would require 
a volume m itself, and even then certam considerations nccessaty 
to be made would have to be leA out But for general guidance 
the student should take the following pomts into consideration — 

1 The nature of the aspect, whether good or evil 

2 The strength of the aspect 

3 The radical power of the planet to which the Moon is directed 

4 The sign that planet is in at tbe bme of direcuon 

5 The house it is m at Che tioie 

6 The general nature of the planet 


CHAPTER V 

OTHER TIME MEASURES— LUNATIONS 
The New Moons falling on impomnt pbces in the horoscope, 
or progress such as the mid heaven ascendant. Sun, Moon, or the 
planets* places, have much signification of events happeiung withm 
the month following upon the conjuncUon of the Inminanes 
When no secondary mflaenocs are to operation, the New Moons 
wfil be found to have an equal infloeace m Ih* production of events 
iy ^eyeirtpSirDt of the pnmziy dircctioas 
A table of the places of New Moons will be found in the Appendix 
to this volume By meata of It, the past and future lunations can 
be examined in the light of the following general ru'ei. 

I A New Moon falling out coiaad*i5t with a secondary direction, - 



TIMG’MBASURES 


167 


and of the same general nature, will bring that direction into activity 
within fourteen days, and most frequently at the full of the Moon 

2 A New Moon falling out coincident with a secondary direction, 
and of opposite nature, will delay the effects of that direction, and 
will even nullify it, if the direction be weak, or contrary to the 
primaries m force at the time 

3 A succession (two or three) of New Moons falling on important 
places m the nativity or progress, will constitute an epoch of great 
good or evil, accordmg to the natures of the planets which the 
lunations excite to action 

4 A New Moon falling on a malefic will produce evil results, 
and the reverse of this when falttng on the place of good planets, 
or those which favour the horoscope by position at the nativity, or 
by aspect in direction 

5. New Moons produce good when in good aspect to the planets 
in the radix or progress The evenU will be of the nature indicated 
by the position of the planets in aspect to the New Moon Contrary 
results Will be manifest when the New Moon falls m evil aspect 
to any of the planets. Eclipses particularly should be noticed 

Examples —In the specimen horoscope (Book i) h to b 2* 
The New Moon of 23rd October, 1957, was a solar eclipse and fell 
m 0* of n\ (see Table of LunaUons m Appendix, under October 1957) 
This is within 2* of the opposition of Saturn which is in d 2* in the 
fourth house of the map and the signification of this opposition would 
be the danger of a severe illness affecting the bladder (ruled by n\) 
With a reaction upon the throat (ruled by b) 

The New Moon of 9th May, 1948. which was also a solar eebpse, 
fell m 18“ « , within 2* of Uranus which is in 20* « , near the cusp 
of the fifth house and this would indicate that mterests of an 
educaUonal and an artisUc nature would become very prominent 
and would increase both the capacity and the expressmg of ability 
in these directions 

Hie FuU Moon of 24th May 1956, which vras an ccUpse of the 
Moon feU m 3* f , within 2“ of the opposiUon to Venus and Mars 
which were both in 5“ of n, near to the cusp of the sixth house 
The eclipse feU m the twelfth house of the map and the dual indica- 
tion from the twelfth to the sixth bouses would signify a penod in 
hospital as a result of shock and a fevensh condition resulting from 
an accident, the twelfth house showing hospital treatment and the 
position of Venus and Mars in Q, showmg the accidenL 


168 


THE MAKUAL OP ASTROLOGY 

These examples will help to serve as illustrations of the worfafl^ 
powers of lunations (New Moon*s) and of Full Moon’s, particularly 
when a solar or lunar eclipse occurs, as an eclipse accentuates the 
power of the New or Full Moon. The power will naturally he 
enhanced should there be no monthly lunar aspect in force during 
that particular month. 

The Table of L/unaiions in the Appendix gives the approximate 
longitudes of the New Moons in e a c h month It should he 
remembered that the first of each month corresponds approximately 
to the Ilth degree of the sign beneath it m the same column, ‘Ihus 
Ist January corresponds to 1 1*, and any lunation falling mdeg«« 
before the 1 1th of Capncom would take place in December of the 
preceding year, and withm the last ten days thereof Its influeno^ 
however, would be felt at the full of the Moon, more particularly in 
the month of January following. 

TRAKSITS 

The transits of planets over the places of the Sun, Moon, asc^ 
dant, and mid heaven of the radix, or the progressive mid heaven, 
ascendant. Sun and Moon, have marked Influence In the aifairs of 
life The benefic planets produce good, and the maJefles evil A 
transit is the ephemeral passage of a planet over the place of a 
sigmficatorm the horoscope or the place to vtLicb it has progressed 
by direction after birth. The aspects of the planets have not the 
same influence The transits must be taken out of the ephemeris 
for the current year 

Raphael has published a book entilJed The Ceocentrie Longitudes 
of the Tlanets 1900 to 2001, wbch pvw the longitudes of the 
aupenor planets Neptune, Uranus, Saturn, Jupiter and Mars for the 
Ist of each month together with their Dedmauons for this period 

Observe that the transits are subsidiary to the lunations and 
secondary directions, and act freely only when these latter are in 
agreement or not in force at the tnne of a transit 

ECUFSES 

The eclipses, whether of the Sun or Moon, should be noticed in 
conjunction wiih the current directions. They arc very significant 
and will produce stnkbg events when in agreement with the direo* ^ 
tiooj, or when no directions ere in force at the time Tbdr ftill ^ 



170 


THE KAKUAL OF ASTROLOGY 
the influence of Venus would be felt, whenever a New hfooa fell 
thereon, or when the Moon by dir^oa came thereto. Also * 
transit over that point would act upon the Venus aflairs of the 
native as if the planet were actually there. 

As there are nine planets ftncludlng as such the Sun and Moon), 
the ascendant and mid-heaven, taken as centres of action, s'iD 
produce eighteen such points of influence by their proportional arcs. 
The Sun will produce eight, and the Mcon as many more; altogether 
thirty-four points in the Zodiac which hitherto have escaped 
attenUon among students of Astrology. 

The observation is entirely original, and was first made by the 
writer while endeavouring to fill in one of those ugly blanks which 
are within the experience of every practical astrologer; an event of 
great importance and no direction, either Ptolemaic, Fladdian, 
primary, or secondary, and a lunation that fell apparently nowheiel 
We say apparently,” because not only did the lunation fall on a 
proportional point, but the Moon by direction also fell upon a 
proportional point at the exact time of the event This and subse- 
quent investigations have fully established the Proportional Arcs 
is the author's consideration. 

By these proportional arcs, measured from the ascendant tni< 
heaven, the Sun and Moon to any planet, and thence to the sas 
distance on the opposite side of the sigmficator, each of the planei 
is thrown into four distinct points of the Zodiac, in addition to il 
actual longitude at birth. Thus the influence of a planet nay b 
strongly felt at a tune when do direction to that planet's radical o 
progressive longitude is in force, or when no lunation occur 
thereon. Then it will orten be found that a direction or lunau’or 
falls on a proportional point. 

In all cases where this occurs, the influence of the house in which 
the radical planet is actually situated will be brought into ecthity, 
together with the full influence of that planet according to its 
sigmCcation in the horoscope. 

PLANETARY EERIOOS 

Ptolemy has referred to the chronocraton, or tiine-meaiurtn, as 
produdng notable events in their periodic revolutions. Raphael, 
in his** Manual of Astrology,” has elaborated the system of planetary 
periods or ” periodic directions.” 



TIMB-UBASUXCS 


171 


In this connection, we would observe that the periods of the 
planets arc stated to bo— Moon, four years; Mercury, ten years; 
Venus, eight years; Sun, nineteen years; Man, fifteen yean; 
Jupiter, twelve yean; Saturn, thirty yean. In regard to these, it 
should be noted that the “ least years ’* of the planets are observed 
in most cases; but, to be uniform, the periods ascribed to Mercury 
and Moon should be altered to thdr shortest yean, viz , twenty and 
twenty-five yean respectively, as given by Lilly in his “ Chnstian 
Astrology.” Raphael makes the error of ascribing to Man the 
same period as the Sun, thus making Impossible any aspect between 
them after birth. With the above comments in view, the reader is 
referred to Raphael’s ” Manual of Astrology ’* for a statement of 
the system of periodic directions. 


PLANETARY GEOCENTRIC LONGITUDES 

The author has completed some important researches in the 
matter of planetary cycles, and beUeves that an eacerpt therefrom 
in regard to the longitudes of the planets, will be of assistance to 
the student A set of ephemendes for eighty-five yean, such as that 
. published by Raphael, is all that is required in order to obtain all 
' past or future positions of the planets. 

The Sun’s place in the Zodiac is approximately the same from 
year to year, owing to the equation of the calcndanc and solar year# 
by the leap-year addition and other adjustments It has a very 
close period of thirty-three yean, at the end of which it returns to 
the same minute of longitude on the same day of the year at noon. 

Neptune has a penod of nearly one hundred and swty-five yean, 
its yearly increment being about 2* 15' between each solar conjunc 
tion. 

Uranus has a period of eighty-four yean. It returns to the same 
longitude in the Zodiac at the end of eighty-four yean, but is 40 
further advanced. Tbus, on 4lh May. 1564. its longitude was 
J 7« 40’ R ; same date. 1648 (eigbty-four yean later), t 8" 20 E ; 
same date, 1732, / 9® E ; same date, 1816, J 9* 40' E ; same date, 
1900, J 10® 20' E. 

Saturn has a period of fifty-nine yean. It comes to the same 
longitude in the Zodiac on ibe same date every fifty-nine yean, but 
is about 1® 45' further advanced. 

< Jupiter’s period is exactly eighty-three yean. 


172 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

Mars and Mercury have both a penod of seventy-nine years, but 
Mars gams 1" in that f>enod. 

Venus has a penod of eight jiars nearly. 

The Moon forms its conjunction with the Sun on the same dsy 
every nineteen years. 

The Moon’s longitude can be approximately ascertained by 
reference to its place at the New Moon preceding the epoch required. 

By means of these periods the planetary places can be appron* 
mately ascertained for any day in any year from observations made 
durmg the present century. 


Note on Venus' Penod 
Venus has a mean penod of eight years, m which it returns to 
the same geocentnc longitude on the same day of the year. ^But this 
penod is inconstant, having a ptus and minus locrement of variable 
quantity Thus, takmg its position at the end of several penodi 
of eight years, we find a plus incremeDt of from 10' to 18’, which 
Is within 1” of the same toaptude 

( IrngiuA VtfrmtnJ 

r f jy .. — 

c’ jr . + 

«• 54' . + 17' 

r y + iJ' 

r 24' .. +15 

r 37* . + 13' 

T *r .. + 10' 

In forty-eight years the longitudinal plus increment amounts to 
r 28', which IS at the mean rate of 15' per cycle of eight yean. But 
this mean advance of Venus' longirude u not true for any other 
similar penod of tunc. Thus; 

9 Lofigitudt InertnenS 

24* n 6’ — 

24* 2r . +16' 

24* 40* +ir 

23* O' +20' 

23* 21' + 21* 

23* 41* + 2r 

2«* 6' . +23 


Epoch 

IttJunaiy, 1S40 
„ 1S<S 

. 1«56 

„ 1864 

„ 1872 

„ 1880 

. 1888 


E^foch 

lit Jtamiy, 1842 
„ 1830 

« 1858 

„ 1866 

„ 1874 

« 1852 

„ 1890 



TIMB'UBASURBS 


173 



20* 

t 18' 



ir 

14' 



14* 

22' 



11* 

51' 



9* 

3r 



r 

rr 



5* 

35' 



Increment 

— 3* 4' 

— 2* 5V 

— 2* 31* 

—2* ir 
— 2 * y 

— I* 52' 


Here wc find increase of longitude In forty-eight yean equal to 2*. 
Mean periodical increment equal to 20'. 

Taking another equal period we find a mimiT dilTcrence of lonp- 
tude, instead of pba as in the former cases. 

Epoch ^lonttmde 

1st Juu&ry. 1S43 
» 1851 

.. 1859 

. 1867 

1875 
.. 1883 

» 1891 

The difference in this instance is very great, amounting to 14* 43 
in a period of forty-eight years, the mean penodical deficit being 
2*27*. 

Yet the mean geocentric period of Venus is established by the 
foUowi]^ and other observations. 

2o<l October, 1842 
» 1850 

„ 1858 

» 1866 
.. 1874 

After which there i 
longitude thus:— > 

2oi5 October, 1882 
M 1890 

Again, 

17th February, 1867 
» 1875 

10th May, 1863 
1876 

Further research wiU probably show that afier a period which is 
a multiple of eight years, these irregulanties of Venus become 
constant and sequential 


V lonaitude 

25* n\ 26' 

.. 25* 33' 

25* ir 

25* 38' 

„ 

25* sr 

ae in the periodical difi'ereoce of 

$ longitude 

25* ri 32' . 

- 

25* 2r 

$lragitude 

11* n 44' 
n* 44' 

3* BO 27' 


S’ 27* 


SOLAR REVOLUTIONS 

The return of the Sun to its radical longitude is considered to be 
of importance in Astrology. From the aspects to the Sun, Moon, 
ascendant, and mid-heaven of the figure for the revolution of the 
Sun, much can be inferred in regard to the fortunes, etc., of the 

































LUNAR MANSIONS 


175 


native dunng the succeeding year It is further to be noted that 
transits made over the places of the planets at the solar return have 
important effects 

To this we would add that the dates when the Sun comes to the 
place of any of the planets m the solar figure are important dates, 
productive of events m accordance with the promise and potency 
of such planets m the horoscope of the solar return 

For the more ready calculation of the solar figure, the preceding 
table IS added (See previous page) In the column marked 
“ years,” the age at the birthday return will be found, and opposite 
this Will be found certam hours and minutes which must be added 
to the mendian of the radical or birth horoscope The result will 
be the meridian for the solar return. By referring this mid heaven 
to the sidereal tune at noon on the birthday anniversary, the time 
before or after noon, for which the figure is to be erected, will be 
readily known Calculate the planets’ places for this time, and 
set them in the figure of the solar horoscope 

The judgment is to be made in all points as for a nativity, only 
respect must be had to the age and condiuon of the native, and to 
the fact that the prognostic extends only to the following year of 
, the native’s life 

The planets, the bouses, and the signs retain, as ever, their pnmary 
significations 

Tb; positions of the planets in the solar figure as regards those at 
hirth are of importance, as, if the Moon in the solar figure were on 
Mars at birth, the year would be ominous of accidents, more 
particularly that date when the Sun comes to the place of Mars 
m the radix, and the Moon in the solar figure, or the opposition 
thereof 

The progressive solar revoluuon is of great unportance m pracUcal 
astrology It is found by addmg to the day of birth as many days 
as the native has attained in years Then with the longitude of the 
Sun on that date, reference is made to the Ephemens for the current 
year, and the positions, aspects, etc. of the planets calculated as 
shown above The transits, eclipses, and lunaUons occurring m 
important places of theprogrcssive revolution, have great significance. 

lunar mansions 

Hie cnucal degrees already referred to m connection mth the 
• law of sex arc the iniUaJ degrees of the twenty^ight lunar mansions 



176 THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

SO much m repute among the old Arabian astrologers It tf our 
mtention to introduce them here m a light not hitherto familiar to 
the modem astrologer 

It has been found by continual experience that whenever the 
Moon by progressive direction enters upon one of these degrees, 
whether in aspect to any planet or not, a cntical and unportaat 
epoch m the life is reached Events of a striking nature occur, and 
alwa)r8 agree with the sign the Moon is m by direction In this 
connection, the reason of the variety of events and relations attnbuted 
to each of the signs will become apparent. 

Thus, Libra does not only rule marriage, but also contracts of 
all sorts, and enemies or nvab, denoted by the seventh house, with 
which it is assoaated In the same way Gemini denotes not only 
relatives, such as brothers and sisters, but journeys and wntings. 
The pomts of demarcation are those coinadent with the ** critical ” 
degrees, or Lunar Mansions set forth in chapter i of this book. 

Thus, Libra, 0* to 13*, refers fo enemies, J3® to 36" to mamage, 
26" to 30* to contracts Similar divuions of other signs and their 
corresponding houses are made, according to the inf ueoce of tl 
mansions When the Moon coten the gate of a maonoo. li 
the “ cntical ** degree commencing it, the trend of affairs takes 
turn from events of one order to those of another, the good < 
evil results being shown by the Moon’s aspects. Bach mansi c 
comprises 12?% which practically may be takes as 13* 

Much research will be required in order to establish tbe exae 
domimon of the several mansions over the vanous alTaifs ofhfe, bu 
It may be taken as true that the Moon’s ingress by direction to an] 

** cntical ” degree will produce a change in the trend of events, ani 
the time will be a cntical one lo many wwys 
Tbe presence of planeu at birth m the “ cnUcal »* degrees brmgs 
such planets into prominence lO the life of the native, and a number 
of planets so placed produces a marked individuality, particularly U 
the ascendant and mid heaven also occupy such degrees 


END OP eoOK III 



BOOK IV 


HINDU ASTROLOGY 


AFTER PARASHARA 

The applicabflity of Hindu Astrology to European and Western 
condiuons of life has ever been a subject of great interest, and as 
the result of considerable research and cxpcncnce m the matter. 
We venture to bring the subject to the test in the following pa^ 
The fint point that presents itself to the student of Jyotisba (t^ 
name for Hindu Astrology), is one that has already ^ 
to some considerable extent, vte . the lelaUoo of tbe Hjndn Zodiac 

toonioira -tils question cornea op in relauon to the Digmura 

or the Planets. Ever since the days of Ptolemy, the wnter ^ the 
TeirMh,, the dignities of the planets have ^ 7 

Western astrologers exactly as given by him m that famous work 
But there ts every reason to beheve that Ptolemy r^ivrf his imtul 
instruction m the celesual saence from one of the ^exandnan 
teachers, and that primarily the teachmg was denved Bom Inia 
At all events, it is weU known that the smenre had attamed con- 
siderable excellence in that country many centunra poor ra to 
time of Ptolemy Now, m Ptolemy’s days 
consistmg of to constellaOons Anes, etc. Md to 
Zodiac, Lmmencing from the shiftmg Vernal ^umox so 

nearly idenUcal as to justify his statraent of to 
whether he referred them to one or 

xodiacs It IS cernm. however, that Hmdus referred them to to 
Natural Zodiac, and Varaha Mihira only perpetuates and oames on 
the teachings of his far mom anmenl predecessors m 
distinction between the two zodiacs, and tefemng all his astrological 



178 


THE IfANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 
observations to that which we have called the “ Natural" By 
reference to varzous Sansknt aod vernacular worl:s, ue fcaw 
deaded, in common with many competent Pandits that the two 
zodiacs exactly comaded m the year of the J^oli yiigo, 3600 And 
this agrees with the observatton of Mihira in his Samhita, where, 
commenting on the phenomenon of the Precession of the Equinoxes, 
he states that m his day the Summer Solstice coincided with the first 
degree of KStakam {ie. Cancer of the Hindu Zodiac), and tbs 
Winter Solstice with the first degree of Mekaram whereas at one 
lime, he observes, quotmg from his predecessors (Parashara and 
others), ** the Summer Solstice coincided vnih the middle of Aslaha " 
(Leo of the Hindu Zodiac) Hence we know that those from whom 
he quotes must have made their observation about 1,080 jesrs 
prewous to the tune of Mihira, which extended from A-d 416 to 572. 
Let us bring this into line with our own researches, which supply 
the date, K.Y 3600 The Xall Yuga began in February, b C, 3102 
Therefore, to obtain tie date of the comnduig of the zodiacs, ws? 
say, 3600 -3102»a.d 493. which falls well wUhin the limits of the 
penod ascribed to MQura, and thus supports his independent 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 179 

planeu fall In the last ten degrees of their respecthe exaltation signs 
in our Zodiac, 

mertAM zooiac 

DttApTntttref {TKUtTO. VAvtiO. UtSvU mJaaaXI AJtlrXS. qAa»2l.) 

t^Sna Intotb* j~" 1 -.i-.i .i 

tpolatef ( TApf tl H D Jux 12 . «3lii!7 14 nAB*.l4.J 

HINDU ZODIAC 

Ptolemy seems to have taken his astrological koouledge from 
the East, and applied it to the zodiac instituted by Hipparchus m 
the Second century b c. This was puiong old wine into new bottles, 
* perfectly safe but inadvisable proceeding Who can say how 
iBuch the wine may not have suffered m consequence? At all 
events, the two hypotheses presented above have been proved to the 
saUsfaction of all who have studied the Jyotisha ShAstras, or astro- 
logical wntings of the Hindus, and the conclusion is of some 
consequence to modem astrologers 
The distinction between the Natural (Hindu) Zodiac and the 
Intellectual (European) Zodiac being understood from the above 
comments, we may at once proceed to indicate the practical use of 
the AyanSmsha in the system of Hmdu Astrology we are about to 
place before European readers 


THE AY/NAMSHA 

Having the horoscope of birth in hand, made in the usual 
European manner, the first thing is to convert it into terms of the 
Hindu Zodiac This is done as follows — 

1 From the year of birth tubtrzet 498 Thu wiJJ gire the AyenOmsha 
period 

2. MiiliiplytheAyaaS/mfiapenoai^iOi' and reduce to degrees minutes 
and seconds of space 

3 Uniformly subtract thu number of degrees minutes and seconds from 

(a) The cusps of the houses us the European figure of birth, 
lb) The planeu places 

The figure thus obtamed is the figure of birth according to the 
Hindu system 

// S A senous error, which may not be at first apparent, will 

occur m the event of the student subtracting the Ayandmsha from 
the mid heaven only and then erecting the figure, with this new 



ISO 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

nud heaven, from the Tables of Honses, for the obhque asceoBOO 
of the signs and planets will be falsified. 

To avert this possibility, observe that if, in the original Eoropean 
figure, a planet holds a certain place, distant, say, 5* irom the cusp 
of the second house, it ought to bean the same relative posihoa n 
the Hindu figure derived by the above rules. The only difierence 
will be that the planet may have changed its sign, which is the case 
when the d eg r ees held by it in any ago are less (beAyan£msha. 

TRB ASTERfSMS 

The Astensms, or Nakshatrams — as they arc caDed in Samknt— 
are twenty-seven m number A twenty-eighth astemm, falliflg io 
Capricorn, is sometimes used m Hindu Astrology for the purpose 
of some branches of Prashna, or Horary Astrology, but with thi* 
we are not concerned Its name is Abhijlt 
The astensms count from the bcginnmg of the Hindu Zodiac 
for purposes of the present system, and are each exactly 13* 20' o 
extent Each astensm is divided into four parts, caDed Padams 
or quarters, but for suaphaty we may eaU them merely '* parts ” 

As there are 30* la each sign and 13* 20" m each astensm Jl 
follows that a sign contains just 2} astensms, / e , two w bole oslenscM 
and one “ part” The foUowmg table shows ibe astensms contained 

in each of the signs ascparaiecoliunnindjcaicslheplanetrulmgeacb 
astensm, and another, the penod through which it is said to role — 


T 

SI 

f 


4 Asbvlnl 

Mxsti* 

Moh 

U 7 

4 WSarani 

Pufvi Pbalfsai 

Purvaihadha 

9 20 

1 KntiTka 

Utun Phslsnal 

Uum SbaCha 

& 6 

n 

B| 

rt 


3 KninXa 

Uttira Ptilsnal 

Uttara Sha Jhi 

«So 

4 Rofami 

Ruta 

Shravasa 

> 10 

2 Mrf 

Chstra 1 

Dhajustha j 

d 7 

n 

A 

63 

1 

2 Miifutiinltt 

Chn 

Dbaasstha 

do 

4 AiOr* 

Swti 

Satabtm&a 

n tf 

3 Pisxrrws 

VbitaiM 

Ftsvabbaars 

a i« 



H 


1 PoBWtn 

VhbiXa 

PsTvabfcadra 

do. 

4 Pcabyt 

AfimC&a 

Unanbbadn 

h 19 

4 AsUa&s 

iresha 

RartU 

» 17 



HINDU ASTKOLOGY 


181 

If attention be paid to the following explanation, the table will 
soon be understood. In the first column we find Aries, and under- 
neath it four Asb'wni, four Bharani, one Krittika, which means that 
in the sign Aries there are four parts of Ashvini, four of Bharani, 
and one of Krittika. Under Taurus we find the remaining three 
parts of Krittika, the whole of Rohini, and half of Mrigashirsha. 
In the same line with Ashvini we find, in the second column, the 
astcrism Magha under Leo, and Mula in the third column under 
Sagittarius ; while still further in the same line we find the Dragon’s 
Tail (called Ketu by the Hindus) and the figure seven, which means 
that Ashvini, Magha, and Mula are all ruled by Ketu, and that 
Ketu’s period is seven years. 

In order to overcome the difficulty of introducing Sanskrit words 
into this dissertation upon Hindu Astrology, we propose to call the 
asterisms by their numbers, Ashvini being one, Bharani two, and 
so on to Rcvati, which is twenty-seven. The names of the planets in 
among us will be preserved, but for the purposes of reference, 
their Hindu equivalents are given in this place: The Sun is Stiryo; 
Se Moon, Cfiaiu&a: Mars, Kuja: Mercury, Bu&an; /upiter, Guru; 
V’enus, Shukra; Saturn, Shani; the Dragon’s Head, or Moon’s 
Ascending Kode, Rahu; the Dragon’s Tail, or Moon’s Descending 
>iode, Ketu. 


THE planets’ periods 

We have made very careful and prolonged enquines among the 
native Jyoshis of southern India, to find out upon what pnnaple 
the various periods are allotted to the several planets, but without 
success; and the books we have consulted are silent upon the matter. 
Upon study of the subject, however, it is seen that the total of the 
different periods is one hundred and twenty years, which the Hindus 
regard as the natural lifc-penod. This penod, thcrcrorc, in some 
way corresponds to the complete arele of Seo®. which is three 
times one hundred and twenty. The zodiacal circle we have found 
to be divided into twenty-seven astensms, each of 13* 20’. and the 
hfe-period of one hundred and twenty yean, when divided by nine, 
the number of the significators employed, gives thirteen years four 
months; so that there is a proportion of 1* for each year of life, 
as in our own systems. It will be r«dily seen, moreover, that the 
^ basis of the system lies in the Triad — 



182 


THE HAHUAL OP ASTROLOOV 


360 «> 3 uaa 120 
120 « 3 „ 40 

•«> “ 3 « m 

9-3 „ 3 

Let us grant, for the purpose of investigation, that the periods 
of the planets arc the result of experience, and at once the inlelligcot 
astrologer ^ould be prepared to find that there is some underlying 
numencal harmony, by which thK apparently arbitraiy division of 
the life period is brought into l»ne with all we know of the Astml 
saence, and although we are quite prepared to find it so, at the 
present tune vt are not m a position to state that the said bannoay 
actually exists Expenence is the great test, and had not expencncs 
proved to us the truth of the deductions of Hindu astrologers we 
should not deem this exposition worth wnting 


THE StQKS OF THE ZODIAC 

From what has already been said, it will be seen that the Hindu 
Zodiac IS similar to our own, having twehe divisions of equ^ 
degrees to one another The order of the signs is the same, and 
the naMres of both the signs and their rulers are, in all essentia 
the same as those obtaimng among Western astrologen 
These signs have no symbob among the Hindus^ who alwa. 
suppose Anes to be in the first bouse, and merely mark the oscenda 
(Lagnam) either by a Ime, or by the letter L In the north of lodt 
another system is m vogue, but all tends to the same end, m, I 
determine the rising sign From this as a starting point, the re: 
of the signs are equally and uoiTonnly distnbuted through th 
tsvelve bouses, though there arc no symbob to indicate the fad 
At the present day, there arc many astrologers in the north of lodu 
who use Tables of Houses, and indicate oblique ascension of signs 
but these are only copyists of the more mathemabcal systems of the 
West. In the famous and most ancient of all Nadis, the Brigh. 
Samhita numerous figures are given but m none of them is any 
attCQboo paid to oblique ascension. 

The names of the zodiacal signs corresponding to ours are — 


Ana hleAam 

Tauros VrLAabhart 
Cemiai M sKuha 

Cancer Kitaksm 

Leo 
SufO 


Ubn 

Sawpo 

SaptUnus 

Opricora 

Aquarfos 

Ptioe* 


triiMektia 

Dfuatsa 

kfai^an 

XurrMa 

A/Sv^ 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


183 


The meamngs of the Sansknt words are the same as imported 
hy the Latm names m use among ourselves 


THE HOUSES 

It IS at this pomt that the Hmdu system of Astrology really 
hecomes pcrplexmg to the European student The great vanety 
of seemingly unconnected things, attributed to the several houses 
by the Jyoshis, renders anything like a systematic statement of the 
rulership of the houses a matter of great difficulty 
It Will simplify matters if, in this place, we draw out mtoprominence 
some of the pomts of contradiction between the two systems 
Among the elements of the first house, then, we find, among 
other thmgs, the Memory is under its domimon This would 
probably fall, m the European system, to the third or math house, or 
perhaps the fourth or tenth, as being the second (wealth) of the 
third and ninth And truly, the things of the memory may be 
regarded as the acquired property of the mind just as the second 
house denotes the acquued property of the physical man 
The five physical senses (brtanendrt^as) are attributed to this, the 
first, house also But, observe, the eyes are ruled in the same 
system by the second bouse, the ears by the third house, and how 
the senses be dissociated from their respecUve organs, we 
know not! In the same way, the Rebgion is said to be ruled by the 
first house, while all that constitutes it, and from which it is built up, 
comes under the ninth house, e g , educaUon temples, rehgious 
instruction, the “ thread ceremony ’* (upadesha) the occult, or 
spintual powers (siddftis) etc 

From these illustrations it is quite evident that the modem 
wnten have disturbed the onpnal harmony and simphaty of the 
system, and we would therefore point out at once the remarkable 
and assuring fact that, with four exceptions the system of Garga, 
Parashara, and Bngbu— the more ancient Eastern astrologers— is 
idcnucal with that followed by ourselves These excepUons we 
shall now deal with 

The first excepUon of our system is the fourth house This aU 
Hmdu astrologers uniformly attnbute to the mother and not the 
father, as we do To our own mmd, there is every evidence of the 
corre^ess of this arrangement, for the fourth house is the * angle 
of the earth,” and the earth is the symbol of the rroiher lo all 



184 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

mythologies The connection of the gods with Gaia (earth) end 
the birth of the Heroes of the Greek Pantheon will recur to the 
reader m this connection Theo, again, the sign On c e r, identified 
with the fourth, is the sign of the Moon (Jono-Lucina, Hevah, 
Eve, and Parvati), the universal symbol of the mother principle in 
nature The fourth house is, fukher, associated with the night, 
over which the Moon is said to rule, and the Night, as contra 
distmguished from the Day, is feminine, e g , Dehlah (ruler of tte 
night) is the wife of Samson (the Sun) For these reasons, and other* 
which htU stfggwl rhe/zueiies to the studcai, the foaith house 
more naturally signifies the mother than the father, and the Hindo 
system m this instance appears to be more consonant with nature 
than our own, at least, as regards a male horoscope 
The second exception is the tenth house, which, while indicating 
honour, fame, the family titles, and the profession, also denotes W 
the Hindu system, the father. This latter conclusion naturally 
follows upon what has bw said concermng the fourth house, aod 
assuredly the tenth house, as identified with the soon-day and the 
mid heaven and with the Suo, the maker of the day, seems more 
naturafiy to signify the father than the mother, especialfy w&ra 
Jt IS remembered that the family titles— the Dherma (special occupa* 
tjon or magistery)— and the honour of the native, follow the ancestral 
hoe on the father's side, and that none of these come through the 
mother, whose name changes with mamage, and from whom no 
titles descend Moreover, the nud heaven is mythically identified 
With Ouranos. the First of all the Gods, and father of Saturn 
(Kronos) the sigmficator of Time itself Sorely, then, there « every 
reason to think that the Hindus, in giviDg the tenth house to Shlra 
and the fourth to his divine spouse Faryati, indicated once for all 
the mundane relations of tbae houses from ** tie pattern of things 
m the Heavens and nghtly denoted the father by the tenth house 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


185 

ing influence of a malefic in the seventh. When those whom we 
have drawn nearest to us come to be corrupted by the evil planet, 
then assuredly they are our worst enemies. Then, too, the seventh 
house denotes such as are capable of afflicting us physically, and 
hence hurts and injuries result from the affliction of the significators 
by planets in the seventh house. The argument for the seventh 
house being that rulmg “ open enemies,” would be: since the first 
house represents in a particular and special sense the personahty 
of the native, the seventh, v,hich is opposed to it, would denote his 
enemies. 

But on the same lines one might argue that all the houses have 
.their respective seventh, or opposition; and hence the ” relatives ” 
signified by the third would have their open enemies in the ninth, 
and so on all round the circle. But when we come to the sixth 
house, we have a position in which even good planets are debilitated, 
a house of disease and sickness, of servitude and obscurity. This 
i* far more fitting as a place of ” enemies ” than the seventh, which 
Utter satisfies the law of polarity in nature, and brings about 
hannonious alliances and unions. 

The next exception, and the last, is that of the twelAh house, 
which, in common with ourselves, the Hindus regard as an evi/ 

■ house; but they likewise give mone/ery /owes as ruled by this house, 
ia connection with other things, whereas we should judge both 
gain and loss from the second. We must leave these points to the 
iovestigaUoa of the student so far as they may apply to European 
systems of astrology, and merely state here that they must be Uken 
as principles of the Eastern system, and judgment must be made 
according to the statements above, viz , the fourth house for the 
mother, tenth for father, the sixth for enemies, and the twelAh for 
lc>sses. All other affaire may be safely taken as ruled by the same 
houses as ascribed to them m the standard European works on the 
subject. 


ftoie —The Hindu T>lmijrtl. or Deific Trinity, are astrolopcaUy denoted by 
the planets Saturn Jupiter, and Mar*. Brahma,rromlherootRriA“toe*pand.” 
fa the name for the Qeator. or Deity, in the act of mamfesUlioG Our words 
^ath. Breatht express the same idea, and the a« of mamfesUUon in the 
*>wine Impulse Is often referred lo as the Mahl^Swara. or Great Breath. 
Jupiter u called in Sanskrit BrOuupctl. or the “ Lord of Expansion " He It 
fa who brings all things to fruition, and perfects every work of man The wife 
of Brahma u Sanawetl. the goddess of arts and sciences, of knowledge and 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


187 


seventh, and tenth depend upon the planets occupymg them 
These aspects may be counted from any sigmficator, and must not 
be restneted to the houses bearing those numerals m the figure itself 
Example Ascendant, Aquarius, Saturn m the eighth house of 
figure in the sign Virgo, the Sun m Taurus m the fourth of the figure 
Here Saturn is evil in regard to the first house, but accidentally in 
good aspect to Sun, bemg m the filth from that luminary So that 
in judging of the things ruled by the fourth house, Saturn would be 
taken as favourable, but m relation to the things of the first house, 
unfavourable 

The planets Jupiter and Venus, Sun and Moon, in the fourth 
from a sigmficator are fnendly, unless in their neeeham or “ fall 
while Saturn and Mars, Rahu and Ketu, are evil, unless in their 
digmties 

It may be mentioned here that the sign Scorpio is identified with 
Rnhu, and Taurus with Ketu, in which signs they arc respectively 
strong 

The above remarks have reference to judgment from the radix 
only 

In judging the general effects of the combination of the planets 
by period and sub-penod (a measure of time which will presently 
be &ven), the general rule m regard to the planetary relauons is 
that of temporal position Thus aU planets in the tenth, eleventh, 
twelfth, second, third, and fourth houses from the sigmficator, and 
those also which (being Ibeinselves good) arc in the same sign as the 
sigmficator, are he/iejfc, all other are 01/ This is the simplest and 
surest rule that is known in all the books and, if due allowance be 
made for the accidental and essential strength of the planets a sure 
judgment can be given Yet the essenUal or natural sympathies and 
anupathies of the planets among themselves must not be lost sight 
of, for a temporal relaUonship cannot entirely prevail against a 
natural and inherent one that is contrary to it Nevertheless, 
expenence will show that the radical affeaions are often swayed 
into temporal service that is contrary to their free or unconditional 
nature, so that even Saturn may confer some benefits when 10 
temporal benefic relauons with lU natural enemy the Moon 

ILLUSTRATION 

In order to properly set out the system under noUee we shall 
have recourse to an example, which wx find ready to band in the 



J88 


THE KANl/AL OF ASTROLOOV 


horoscope of Her Majesty Queen Mctona. The Ayanims'a, or 
difference between the Veraal Equinox and the star Revali, i5 tins 
determined 1819—498 AD = 1^21 yean, x 50J' » 66,490' “ 
18* 28' 10' 

Hus amount must be subtracted from the ascendant and tfte 
planets* places, and the signs must be set m the figure without 
regard to obbque ascension, as fa the example giw below The 
subtraction of the Ayanams’a is not for the purpose of marking 
the exact degrees held by the planets m the Hmdu Zodiac, but to 
determine merely what change of sign, if any, is due to them by tlie 
conversion from One Zodiac to another And m the example gn'en, 
we find that the ascendant falls in Taurus (rmAaiAmn), the Sun 
and Moon are in the same sign of the Hindu Zodiac, Mercury 
passes into Anes, Jupiter into Capncom, and Mars mlo Pisces. 
Uranus, not being loduded in the system of Parashara and of the 
Hmdu writers generally, is left out of the figure, while the Moon’s 
Nodes, aod y, are included therein Thesigns.too.arediffcrcntly 
placed in regard to thehooses, being equally distnbuted throughout 
Shorn of all the elements whidi properly belong to the Europea" 
figure, and which are not required by the Hindu Jyoshi, the resu 
would be as follows — 


Saturn 

Man 

■ 

Jupiter 

■ 

Veouj 

Mqcuiy 

Dntoas 

Head 

EMPRESS 

or 

INDIA 

■ 

Taurus 

Sim 

Mooq 

Drafosi 

Tail 


■l 

■ 

■ 








HINDU ASTROLOGY 


189 

There are different methods of drawing the figures among the 
Dravidians in the south of India and the Aryans in the north; and 
the first house is placed indifferently in vanous parts of the figure 
by the several schools of astrologers; but all would agree in placing 
the planets and signs in the same relative positions as above. It will 
be remarked that the ascending sign only is given; the rest are under- 
stood as being identified with the several successive houses of the 
figure. Reading this figure we say: Taurus rising, with Sun and 
Moon; Dragon’s Tail in Libra in the sixth; Jupiter in Capricomus 
in the ninth; Saturn and Mars in Pisces in the eleventh; Venus, 
Mercury, and Dragon’s Head in Anes in the twelfth. A Southern 
Hindu would say: Vrishabha Lagnam, Surya and Chandra ; 
Ketu in sixth; Gum in ninth; S’ani, Kuja in eleventh; S'ukra, 
Budhan and Rahu in twelfth; and with these elements he would go 
to work, remarking that Chandra (Moon) is in “ Svocham " (its 
exaltation), and S’ukra in “ svaneecham ” (its debihty). 

The acddental relatioas of the planets are as follows:— Dragon’s 
Tail is an “ enemy ” to all the planets except Jupiter; Jupiter is 
friendly to Dragon’s Tail, Saturn, Mars, Venus, Mercury, and 
Dragon’s Head, and also to the Sun and Moon; Saturn, Mars, 
Venus, Mercury, and Dragon’s Head are friendly to all except the 
Dragon’s Tail; and the Sun and Moon are friendly to all except the 
Dragon's Tail. Now, to detennme the astensni of birth, observe 
the exact longitude of the Moon in the Hindu Zodiac. The 
longitude ^ven in the European figure of birth is n 3* 39', and that, 
beingreducedby the Ayanams’a I8*28',pves b 15*11'. Reference 
to the tabic on page 180 will show that in the sign b there are three 
parts of Krittika, four of Rohini, and two of Mngas’irsha. Each 
of these parts we know to be 3* 20' m extent, therefore, three of 
Knttika = 10*; and 15* IT -10* leaves 5* IT to be accounted for. 
These 5* IT form part oft the next astensm— Rohini. Therefore 
we say that at the Queen’s birth the Moon was in Rohini, having 
passed through 5* 11' of that astensm, and' being in the "second " 
part thereof. Looking at the table again, we see that Rohini is 
ruled by the Moon, whose period u ten years. We have therefore 
to find how much of the ten years is due to 5* 1 1' of Rohini, through 
which the Moon has passed up to the birth-tune. Each astensm 
being 13* 20' in extent, we say, m this case: If 13* 20' gives lea 
years, what will 5* 11' 

I3*20'(Kxy) : nr (310 rr 10 : 3 yens 10 months 19 day* 



190 THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOOY 

Thtn, with this expired portioa of the Moon's penod of tea 
years, we are able to detenmoe under what sui>*penod in the 
Moon's penod the Queen was bom. 


THE SUB-PERIODS 

The sub-penods are obtained by multiplying together the years 
due to the planet nilmg the penod and sub-penod, then, cutting 
off the last figure in the product, multiply it by 3, and call the result 
days, the fint figure m the product being so many months Thus, 
to find the sub-penod due to the Moon in its own penod —The 
penod of the Moon is ten years — 10 x 10 = 100 10 months 

There is a cipher for the last figure of the product, and therefore the 
sol>penod has no odd days Take another example — 

Find the sub-penod due to Mars in the penod of the Sun, the 
Sun’s penod being sw years, and that of Mars seven years 

7 X 6 42 B 4 months 6 days These sub-penods are called in 

Sansknt BuktM 

They are further divided into antaram penods The rule f< 
determining their duration is as follows — 

1 Dmdt the months of the Bukthi penod by 4 , this will give s 
many days, hours, etc 

2. Divide the days of the BukUu penod by 5, this will give ti 
many hours, minutes, etc 

3 The days, hours, and mmutes thus produced must be multipliei 
by the total penod (Das’a) of the planet whose antaram penod n 
required 

Exarnfle — ^Reeuirtd the (anrorom) ioler penod of Jupiter in the tub-period 
{BukthTf of Saturn, and tbe penod (Dor* d) of Drapoa i TiE iKciu) 

UPenod Tyean 
h Sub-penod •* 1 J (Dcotfas 9 da/i 
2» IsteT.penod, or Aitiarum T 

By Rule 1. 13 — 4 3 days 6 bem 

By Rule 2, 9 t- S 1 hour 4S nuauUs 

Total ■> 3 days 7 hours 48 mlna tca 

This penod, multiplied by 16, the total penod of Jupiter whore 
enioram, or Inter penod, is required — 1 month 25 days 9 bows 
43 minutes, which u Jupiter’s uter penod tn the sutvpenod of 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


191 


Saturn and the period of Dragon's Tail, or, as the Hindus would 
say, Ketu Doj’d, S'ani Buktht, Guru Antaram. 

It is stated that the anrieot Hindu astrologers sub-divided these 
periods into most minute fractions, and stayed only at the iSKcra, 
or breath, a period of a few seconds. Whether or not they were 
able to determine the phalam, or effects, due to these minute periods 
is a matter of question. For all practical purposes, the inter- 
periods of the planets will be found suffident. 

The order of the planets in the successive subdivisions of theperiods 
Is as follows: — 

In all cases the planet whose period is subdivided takes the first 
place, and the rest follow on in the order observed in the Table of 
Asterisms, viz., 

So, if the period belongs to J, then J will role the first sub-period, 
and the first inter-period of that sub-penod. Then follows the 
sub-period of Mars in the period of the Moon, and the first inter- 
period of the sub-period will likewise be ruled by Mars; 2i, h. 
eta., following in their order. 


EXAMPLE OP PLANETARY SUBDIVISIONS 


MoorCs Ptrlcd 


Sub-Period 

1. Moon . .. i 

2. Mars d 

3. Dragon’s Head .. 

4. Jupiter . • 21 

5. Saturn .. •• h 

6. Mercury .. . B 

7. Dragon’s Tall • • t5 

8. Venus • ? 

9. Sun ® 


lAler-Perlod 

n 21 h 8 « ? © 

21 b B U ? © } 

21 h B « ? © > d 

I, » u ? ® } n 

9 a ? © > 5 n 21 

«S®Ii rffI21b 
9®> jnZib B 
^n2ib By 
> ^n2ih By« 


The above example will, no doubt, make the preceding chapter 
intelligible to all. In subsequent chapters the letters P., S.P., and 
I.P. will stand for period, sub-penod, and mter-penod. 


The Birth-Period 

We have seen that, m the case of the Queen, the period in foiee 
at the time of birth was that of the Moon; but it was also seen that 



192 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 
of the ten years dae to the Moon as its full period, 3 years 10 months 
19 days had expired at the moment of birth. We need, therefore, 
to detenmne the sDb*penod which is operatmg at the time of birth, 
and to set oat the scale of penods and sub-penods for the whole 
term of life. 


MoorCs Period — 10 yean 


Moon’s tob^enod 
Man* „ 

Dragon’s Head’s snb-poiod 
Jupiter’s „ 

Saturn’s „ 

Meccryl* „ 

Dragon’s TalTs „ 

Venus’ „ 

Sun's M 


Yfonr Mott At Dart 
0 10 0 

0 7 0 

1 6 0 

1 4 0 

I 7 0 

15 0 

0 7 0 

1 8 0 

0 6 0 


Total 10 0 


0 


Of these rjb>penods, the whole of the Moon's, the whole o** 
Mars’, the whole of the Dragon’s Head's, and 11 months and li 
days of that of Jupiter, in all amounting to 3 yean 10 month 
19 days, hqd expued at the tune of birth, thus leavug 4 month; 
11 days of Jupiter’s sub-penod to be worked out 
The ages at which the s-anoos sub-penods of the Moon’s penod 
will expire can thus be set out in order 


Moon's Period 


Moon’s sub-penod . 
Man’ „ 

Dragon’s Head's subpenod 
Jupiter's m 


Ytm Manhs Dayt 
0 10 Oeipired 

0 7 0 » 

16 0. 

. 0 II 19 . 


Total 3 10 19 . 

UVarx MonAa Days 
0 4 11 

J IJ 11 

3 4 II 

3 11 n 

5 7 II 

6 1 11 


Jopttn't tubperiod er ptf cs at tbe tge of 
Siian’t . ... 

Mera]T7‘« . . . ■ 

Dragon's TalTs « ■ . 

Vetnsi* . ... 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


193 

It will thus be seen that the Queen’s age at the expuy of the 
Moon’s penod was 6 yean 1 month 1 1 days 

The next penod k that of Mars, which rules for seven years. 
Add ilus to the above age and weget 13 years 1 month 11 days, the 
age at expiry of Mars* penod After Mars comes the Dragon’s 
Head, which rules for eighteen years, bnngmg us to the age of 31 
years 1 month 1 1 days Then Jupiter, with a penod of sixteen years, 
reaching to the age of 47 years 1 month 11 days Next Saturn, 
wth luncteen years for its penod, rules to the age of 66 years 1 
month 11 days Next Mercury, whose penod is seventeen years, 
brings us up to the age of 83 years 1 month 11 days 

These penods can be set out according to the example given m 
the Moon’s penod, and the age progressively shown at the expiry 
of each sub-penod. 

It Will now be more or less clear to the student of Hindu Astrology 
upon what basis the Zodiac rests, how the Nakshatrams (or 
astensms) are counted, and what planets rule over each of them, 
together with the peno^ of their rule It will further be clear after 
what manner the penods, sub-penods, and inter penods (the 
Hindu method of computing the time of events, corresponding 
to our directions) are to be calculated To this part of the work a 
complete set of all necessary tables will be appended, so that it is 
only necessary here that the methods should be known in order 
for the student to use those tables mtelhgently 

A good deal of coctroveny has been raised m regard to this 
system by Hindus who ba/e received a European education and 
who consequently wish to appear lo all matters to be *' up to date , ’ 
such persons r-laiming for the East a common use of Tables of 
Houses the computation of horoscopes by oblique ascension under 
the labtude of birth, and a full knowledge of the Zodiac which 
begins with the cqumocbal pomt Despite the efforts of these 
gentlemen to improve their credit for intelhgence at the expense of 
their JyoUsh ShSstra, we Tnamtain that, although Mihira knew of 
the Precession of the Equmoxes and quoted Parashara and Garga 
to the same effect m his Brihat Samhild, he nevertheless used the 
Equinox begmmng from Revati, and referred all his rules and 
horoscopes to a fixed Zodiac, which is now (1898) IP” 34 26' East 
of the vernal equinox In proof of this, and to silence the contenUon 
that the system of Parashara was confined to the South of India, 
where it is yet in vogue, we refer cntics to the Bhrigu Samhiid, which 



trb manual op astrology 

isiatbc possession of Fandit Naodiis&or of Mcenit, N. W. Proviha. 
We have in our possession over a hundred horoscopes from that 
colossal work, and in none of them is there any observance of 
oblique ascension, while the planets' places are referred to the 
fixed Zodiac, and not to the Vernal Equinox. Can any further, 
more reliable, or more andeat authority be adduced to the contraiy? 


JUDGMENT BY PLANETARY POSITION 

In judgmg the effects due to the planets in the horoscope and 
their successive combimtloas in the P., SJ*., and IJ*. after birth, 
the following general dominion of the planets must be taken into 
account; — 

The Sun governs honour, fame, nobles, advancement, professloo, 
father, health. 

The Moon governs females, marriage, traveUing, change of 
residence, wealth, health, the mother, the house of resldeuce, and 
native place. 

Mars governs, fire, fever, madness, quarrels, ambitions, energy, 
prowess, courage, adventures, poison, hurts, passions, and health. 

Jupiter governs the religion {dhamta), religious duties, the law, 
the father's brolhen and sisters, teachers and precepton, jounie)rs 
to foreign lands, devotion, rcltpous ce r e m onies, good fortune, 
increase. 

Saturn governs the father, disease, wasting, chronic affections, ill 
health, poverty, condition of the family. 

Mercury governs the mmd, the memory, hearing, brothers and 
sisten, mother's relatives, sickness, servants, food. Journeys in one’s 
own country, pilgnmages. and messages of all kiods. 

Venus governs money, apparel, wealth in Idod or specie; trinkets, 
jewellery, articles of value; the speech, learning, the wife, marriage, 
alliances, pleasures, arts and saences 

Rdhu Ketu (Dragon’s Head and Tml) govern such things as 
are denoted by the bouses occupied by them at the time of birth. 

In general, it is necessary to take into consideration, when Judging 
the effects of a planet, (1) its natural nilcnhip in the order of the 
signs; (2) the house (iAdnr) occupied by it; (3) the bouse, or bouses, 
over which it exiles ut the harotcepe. 

Jihhu has afCiuty with the sign Scorpio where it is strong, tod 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


195 


Ketu with Taurus. These signs arc called their uchha, or 
exaltations. 

From these descriptions, it will be seen that judgment concerning 
any planet is derived from a consideration of its nilership in the 
signs and the houses occupied by those signs, in addition to the 
place of the planet itself, its general nature, and its sympathies 
and antipathies in the natural world and in man. 

For this reason, the Moon is strong in the second and fourth 
houses; the Sun in the fifth and first; Mars in the first and eighth; 
Saturn in the tenth and seventh, etc., irrespective of the signs in 
which they are found; for they have affinity with these several 
bouses by their affinities in the world-soul, the horoscope of which 
is Meshalagnam (Aries for rising sign), during the whole of Kail 
Yuga (the present age), the Dark, or Iron Age. 


PERIODS 

As the general phalam (effects) of the horoscope is derived from 
the configurations and conditions ofalllheplanets, taken as signifies* 
tors for the whole life, so, in judging of the effects of any period 
of the life, attention must be paid to the condition (by position and 
configuration) of the planet rulmg that penod as determined by 
the calculation called Kdlachakradashdphalakathna, i e., the dividing 
of time (the life-period) into its periodical effects This calculation 
was set forth in the chapter upon penods, sub-penods. and inter* 
periods. Its basis is the Moon's place at birth. According to 
the condition of the planets ruling the required penod, the life and 
fortunes of the native will be affected. 


SUn'PERIODS 

These are considered in relation to the general effects due to the 
planets governing the penod in which they fall, and they are $u^ 
sidiaiy to the fortunes promised by the penod planet. In this 
respect they may be considered in the same m a nn er as lunar and 
solar directions, which will, perhaps, simplify matters. 'Then, if 
the period planet shows good effects, it docs so from iU posiUon 
and aspects at birth, and an er// sub-period planet cannot counteract 
its effect whoUy, but some good wiU remain behind. The result 
is when. rmtaJis mutandis, the P. planet is evfl and the SP. 



thb manual of astrology 

IS in the possession of Pandit Nandkishor of Mecnit, N W Province 
We have m our possession over a hundred horoscopes from that 
colossal work, and in none of them is there any observance of 
obhque ascension, while the planets* plac« are referred to the 
fixed Zodiac, and not to the Vernal Equinox. Ca n any further, 
more reliable, or more ancient authority be adduced to the contrary? 


JUDGMENT BY PLANETARY POSITION 
In judging the effects due to the planets in the horoscope and 
their successive combinations m the P , SJ* , and IJ* after birth, 
the following general dominion of the planets most be taken into 
account — • 

The Sun governs honour, fame, nobles, advancement, profession, 
father, health. 

The Mooa governs females, mamage, traveUing. change of 
residence, wealth, health, the mother, the house of residence, and 
native place 

Man governs, fire, fever, madness, quarrels, ambiuotis, energy 
prowess, courage, adventures, poison, hurts, passions, and health 
Jupiter governs the religioo {dharTna) religious duties, the law, 
the father’s brothers and sisters, teachers and preceptors, journeys 
to foreign lands, devotion, rebpous cer em onies, good fortxme, 
increase. 

Saturn governs the father, disease, wasting, chronic affections, ill 
health, pioverty, condition of the family 
Mercury governs the mind, the memory, hearing, brothers and 
sisters, mother's relatives, sickness, servants, food, journeys in one s 
own country, pilgnmages, and messages of all lands 
Venus governs money, apparel, wealth in land or speae, trinkets, 
jewellery, articles of value , the speech, learning, the wife, marnage. 
alliances pleasures, arts and saeoces 
Rdhu and Ketu dragon's Head and Tail) govern such things as 
are denoted by the houses occupied by them at the Uac of birth. 

In general, it is necessary to take into consideration, when judging 
the effects of a planet, (I) its natural ruJership in the order of the 
signs, f2) the house (Mdw) occupied by Jt, P) the bouse, or houses, 
over which it rules m the horoscope 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


195 


Ketu with Taurus. These signs are called their uchha, or 
exaltations 

From these descriptions, it will be seen that judgment coocenung 
any planet is derived from a consideration of its rulership m the 
signs and the bouses occupied by those signs, in addition to the 
place of the planet itself, its general nature, and its sympathies 
and antipathies m the natural world and in man 

For t^ reason, the Moon is strong in the second and fourth 
houses, the Sun m the fifth and first. Mars in the first and eighth, 
Saturn m the tenth and seventh, etc , irrespective of the signs m 
which they are found; for they haw affinity with these several 
houses by their aflfimties in the world soul, the horoscope of which 
IS Meshalagnam (Anes for rising sign), during the whole of Kail 
Yuga (the present age), / e , the Dark, or Iron Age 


PERIODS 

As the general phalam (eflfccts) of the horoscope is derived from 
the configurations and conditions of all the planets, taken as sigmfica* 
tors for the whole life, so, in judgmg of the effects of any period 
of the life, attention must be paid to the condition (by position and 
configuration) of the planet ruling that period as determined by 
the calculation called Kdlachakradashdphalakathna, t e , the dividing 
of time (the life-penod) mto its penodical effects This calculation 
was set forth m the chapter upon penods, suSpenods, and mter- 
penods Its basis is the Moon’s place at birth According to 
the condition of the planets ruling the required penod, the life and 
fortunes of the native will be affected 


SUB'PERIODS 

These are considered m rrlaUon to the general effects due to the 
planets govemmg the period in which they fall, and they are sub- 
sidiary to the fortunes promised by the penod planet. In this 
respect they may be considered in the same m anner as lunar and 
solar directions, which will, perhaps, simplify matters 'Then, if 
the penod planet shows good effects, it does so from its posiUon 
and aspects at birth, and an evil sub-penod planet cannot counteract 
Its effect wholly, but some good wiU remam behind The result 
is when, mutatlJ mutandis, the P planet is evil and the S P. 



196 TBB MA.HUAL OP ASTROLOGY 

planet good But when both agree in nature and point to the same 
end, then the effects are ibreible and dedded, either for good or 
evil, as the case may be. " 


INTBR-PERtODS 

These are taken as subsidiaiy to the sub-periods in the same 
manner that transits or lunations are considered in mlation to lonsr 
or secondary directions in our European methods. The longest 
of these reaches over a period of 6 months 20 days, viz., the $ 
I.P. of the $ SJ*. in the $ P.; the shortest inter-period is that of 
the Sun in its own sub-period and period; it lasts only 5 days 
9 hours 36 minutes. The condition of the IJ*. planet must he 
taken into account, and its rations to the so^period phnet 
properly estimated. Its effects may then be accurately known. 

A few straightforward rules arc necessary in order to bring the 
above observadoos into systematic form. 


RULES TO WDCE OP PLAKETARY PERIODS 
1. Consider the positions and affections of the period 
planet, for even a good planet will not bear good fruil 
dtuing its period if ir be ill alTecred by sign or position, 
or adicted by the xnajotity of planets, 
ir. The sub-period placet must be considered in the same way 
as the period planet, but in addition thereto its rthiions 
with the period planet must be taken carefully into 
account; for though the planets have a natural enmity 
and friendship existing between them, and due to their 
respective natures, yet when the sub-period planet is 
in good aspect to the period planet it wHl prodoce 
good, even though these planets be natural enemies. 
Similarly, friendly and bcnefic planets will not produce 
good fruits if weak or afiUcted. or themselves alBictisg 
(by position) the period planet to which they arc rrlsted. 

IIL The effects of the ruling planets are {.itensified at such tine 
as the Sun may be passing through the signs ocenpted 
by them or the signs over which they rule. 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


197 


NB^Thc Sun docs not enter the Hindu signs until 
twenty days after its entry into the European signs 
bearing the same name 

IV, The inter*pcnod planets are considered m the same manner, 
m regard to the sutspenod planets to which they are 
related, as these latter are to the penod planets It 
thus happens that even when the penod is a good one, 
as shown by the position and affections of the penod 
planet, yet there are sub-penods, and again inter penods, 
when evils may naturally anse 

V The general effects of the planets thus related must be taken 

mto account, and their natural relations, as well as their 
temporary relations m the horoscope, must be well 
considered Thus, Saturn and Sun, although natural 
enemies by sign and exaltation, may be respectively in 
Libra and Leo, in which case they are in temporary 
good relations, occupying the third and eleventh signs 
respectively from one another Judgment is made 
accordingly, but it is to be understood that a temporary 
fneodship will not entirely overcome a radical and 
constitutional enmity 

VI The effects will further have relation to the nature of the 

house correspondmg to the sign occupied by the sub* 
planet, in the penod under consideration Thus if the 
penod be that of Sun, and the sub-penod be that of 
Venus, and Venus be m the sign Aquanus, the effects 
Will fall out in relation to the eleventh bouse affairs, 
if Venus be in Libra, then seventh house affairs will be 
affected 

Vn The sign, counted from the rising sign, will give a further 
element of loterpretatioD Thus if, m the sub-penod 
of any planet, that planet occupies I-co, and Scorpio 
be rising the effects will fall on the tenth bouse affairs 

^ The number of the signs counted from the penod to the 
sub-penod planet will pve the bouse correspondmg 
thereto over which the effects will hold sway Thus 
Sun m Virgo and Venus as sub-penod planet in Scorpio 
will show the third house affairs to be affected 

DC The houses in the horoscope ruled by the planet whose 



193 


THE UAHOAL op astrology 


penod, sub-penod, or inter penod is considered most 
also be regarded as afiectmg. 

N3 — Rahu and Ketn (Dragon’s Head and Tail) 
have no houses, but transmit the influence of the tigct 
they are in, and of the planets to \vhich they are coo* 
jomed The Dragon’s Head has aflhuty with the slga 
Scorpio, and the Dragon’s Tail with the sign Taurus. 


LOCALITY 

In judging of the dirccbon in which a penon will travel, when 
such 15 shown in the horoscope, or again in the P , S P., and I-P 
effects, the following rule is usually taken —The first hous^ with 
Its complementa twelfth and second, governs the South. Th 
tenth, with ninth and eleventh, governs the East The seventli 
With fifth and eighth, governs the FfVw, and the fourth, with thm 
and fifth governs the North 

So in the signs K T b • South, o 0 ft * North, itl 
ssa m «■ West, and J rt es East. 

Thertfore, Man roles the East, the Moon rules the North, 
Venus governs the West, and Saturn the South 

Judgment is chiefly to be made from the housa and next, but 
subservienUy, from the signs occupied by the planets 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


199 

of scholastic criticism which would only be concerned with a work 
of scholarly pretensions. The sense and import of the teat have 
Iwn chiefly considered, and the Ideas embodied have been put into 
simple English. Thus, instead of enumerating the “ gold, pearls, 
Sranaries, carnages, soft cushions, sunshades, rich cloths, and 
turbans" that certain periods and sub-periods will confer upon 
the native, it is quite English enou^ to state that his ** wealth and 
property will increase.” With these reservations, and bearing in 
tuind what has been said in regard to the radical relations of the 
different planets, the following may be accepted as the general. 


EFFECTS OF PERIODS AND SUB-PERIODS 
PERIOD OF SUN 

Sun's Sub-ptriod.—Then will be trouble among relatives, quaircUing 
and difficulties with superiors and those in office above the 
oative. Anxieties, headaches, pains in the ears, some tendency 
to urinary or kidney affections. Sickness is to be expected 
between I2ih April and 12th May (if included m this period) 
or again between 12th August and I2th September, U.. when 
the Sun is in Mesham (Ancs) or SMta (Leo). 

Moon's Suihperiod. Benefits from supenors or patrons, gam and 

success in busmess, new enterprises, troubles through women, 
pains m the eyes. (This will be augmented in the month of 
Katakam, 12th July to 12th August, and on those days when 
the Moon passes through Cancer.) 

Mars' Sub-pffr/od.— Rheumauc or other sharp pains, feverishness, 
quarrellmg, some danger of eotenc frver, dysentery, or other 
wastmg disease; troubles faU on the relaUves; the native 
wastes his money, or may lose it by theft or carelessness. 
Hts efforts will not be «ry sueccssfuL 
i>ragon's Head Sub-penod—A great many troubles and fears, 
crosses and changes, according to the condition and place of 
the Dragon’s Head. Enure break-up of the family. The 
naUv% will be away from his home at the time. 

Jupiter's Sub-period— Fneads will benefit him. He wm increase 
in knowledge and will give evidence of his powers in some 
form or other. Employment among people of good position ; 



200 TAB MANUAL OF ASTROLOCr 

assocutton with people of high rank. 'W21 overcome all 
obstacles, and, if maraed, may have the birth of a child. 

Saturn’s Sub-period — Sickness of children, much anxiety, trouble 
on account of the wife or children Enemies vkiU be made. 
Loss of property Bodily sickness, much unhappiness. He 
may leave his home or couotty Acadental or enforced 
cstrangen’cnL 

Mercury’s Sub^period — Even his cv,-n friends wiU be against hna, 
many will become his enemies, and there wiH be cause for 
grave anxiety and fear The health wiU be afflicted, childrea 
will cause trouble He will be invohed m disputes and troabls 
by a supenor, a ruler or a judge He will suffer some disgrace. 
Irregul^ meals and sleep Many short journeys wandenngSF 
etc., a predominance of mental and pbysicd patn m this 
sub-penod. 

Dragon’s Tail Sub-penotL—hitmory will decrease, the imad wi 
be afflicted with troubles, there wiU be faintmg or c^rvot 
ezbausQoo. and the nund w2I be fflled with doubts and zu 
gmngs. He will go to a distant couitiy or place. Owio 
to disputes b* will live is a different bouse Troubles aaoc. 
relatives and associates There wxU be no bece£ts m thi 
sub-penod unless Dragons Tail is well placed and in geoc 
aspeef to Che 5ua. 

Voms’ Sub-period— A possibility of msrmge Increase of pros- 
perity Some bodily sickness The eyes may be affected 
This win be cured. He wiU do good actioni in this period, 
and will reap tbew reward. 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 201 

danger of fire in the month from 12th April to 12th May 
Danger of disputes between husband and wife, or between 
lovers, or m regard to mantal affairs 
Dfogon's Head—\j)i% of money, danger of stirrmg up enemies. 
Sickness, accordmg to the sign the Dragon’s Head occupies 
Anxiety on account of friends, enmity of superiors or those 
in power Anxiety or trouble through the wife or lover 
J^lter —Property will increase, food and comforts will be plentiful, 
there will be piospcnty Benefits from persons in good 
position, masters, governors, the father, or the rulmg powers 
The native may beget a child at lime 
Safitfn —The partner (wife or lover) may die or be separated from 
the native Much mental trouble Loss of wealth, or a 
stale of impecumosity Dishonour or slander will be ex* 
penenced Loss of fncnds; some ill health 
«erei//y — Dispmgj cease The native will have pleasure 

thiough children or love affairs Wealth wiU increase All 
LDtenhoos wiU be ecoomphshed Jo the moath of Virgo, 
12th September to 12ih October, be will give evidence of some 
Intellectual achievements 

Oragon’i To// —There will be sickness of a fevemh nature, or hurt 
by fire The body will be subject to some eruptions or swellings 
The eyes may suffer The mind will be filled with cares, and the 
native will expencnce some trouble He may incur some 
public cnticum or displeasure, may meet with dishonour or 
be the means of his own undoing 
Vemu — According to the position of Venus in regard to the Moon 
ftnd rising sign, there will be sickness, pain, loss of property, 
enmity, and loss through enemies— or, the reverse of this, 

Sun —Biliousness and feverish complaints Some change in the 
bodily appearance Severe pain in the ejrs Success, or the 
reverse, according to the relative positions of the Sun and 
Moon 


mars’ feriod 
SulhPeriods 

Afars -Danger of hurts according to the sign held by Man la 
the month of Ancs or Scorpio (if included) he wiQ have tronble 



202 


THE HANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

wiih supcnon, and sozoe anxiety through strangers, foraigaers 
or people abroad, and through Man men generally. Ifl the 
month of Cancer, i.e., 12th July to J2th August, thee will bo 
danger of open violence. 

iJrt^on’j Head . — He unll snSer from polsonons cornplaints, 
according to the sign held by Dragon's Head. Lo» of relatives. 
Danger of scrofolous or slii affections. Change of residence. 
Some severe form of cutaneous disease. 

/191/rer.— Loss of property. Enmiiy of superiors. Enemies will 
be created in the place of residence and beyond it But the 
end of this suSperiod will be more fortunate; and favonn 
from superiors and persons in position may be looked for. 

Sffftirn.— Quarrels, disputes, litigation, loss of p r o pe rty, cutaneous 
affections: loss of office or position; much anxiety. 

ifereury.—He will be inclined to marry at this time, and if so wiU 
be fortunately wedded. Knowledge and the fruits of know- 
ledge will increase. Wealth will increase. Existing evils in 
body and mind will disappear. Bot in the month 0 / Cemtni 
or Virgo (if included) he will be subject to slander, or may 
be poisoned in his body by hurts from animals, or insects, or 
by abrasions. 

Dragon’s Tail . — Family dlspates; troubles with his own kinclred. 
Disease. Poisonous complaints threaten him; trouble through 
women. Many enenues. 

Ferntr.— He win acquire giroperty or gain money. Will have 
domestic happiness and successful Iwe affairs. He may fed 
more inclination to religious observances and festivities. His 
associations are beneficial. He is influenced by churchmen 
or sectaries. Skin eruptions, boils, or sloughings may be 
expected. Travelling will give him pleasure at this time. 

S'ltf*.— Anxieties. Fever or other inflammatory affection. Danger 
of fire. Troubles through persons in position. The wife is 
likely to be aSlicted with disease. He will have many 
enemies. 

^0on._Profit; gain of property, and the acquision of valuables. 
Ttert is likely to be ren o v atioo of the house or improvementJ 
therein. But in the end this sub-period there will be 

~ a decrease of aB these good effects. -r 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


203 


dragon’s rcad period 
Sub-Periods 

DrogorCs Head — ^Death of the inn g , supenors, senior partner, 
master, or the head of the family Mental anxiety Danger 
of blood poisoning Tlie wife u afflicted The native will have 
some removab All sorts of quarrels and scandals will take 
place m regard to him 

dupiter — Pleasure will mcrease Gam through nobles or persons 
of position Benefits and comforts through his supenors 
All his efforts wiU succeed He will be mamed, engaged, or 
if mamed will be re-umted to his wife 

•ShriuTt —Enemies will ansc There will be cause for mental 
anxiety Disease will appear Incessant disputes and contests 
Rheumatism, bihousness, etc , will attack his health Trouble 
will prevail 

Mercury —Of the thirty months ruled by this su^penod planet, 
the first eighteen wiU be very busy The native thrive well 
He will be senously inclined, and will gam money In the 
last twelve he will experience enmity through his own actions 

liragon's Tci/— Danger of physical hurts and poison 111 health 
to his children Some swelhogs m the b^y Troubles on 
account of the wife Danger from supenors 
^Acquisition of money and other advantages Friendly 
alhances wiU be formed The wife will be fortunate and a 
source of happiness Benefits from supenors or those m 
office above the native Some trouble will happen through 
deceit being pracUsed upon the naUve False fnends wOI 
come to hght in their true eoloun But all evUs will pass 
away 

Sun — Quarrels ou account of tbe family Benefits from persons 
m good position Fear and suspiaon will arise in connection 
Wlh the wife, children, and relatives. Changes of position or 
residence will occur ... 

dfoon— Loss of lelsuves. Loss of money through the wafe. 
Pains in the Umbs He will leave his native pUcc or his present 
lesidenee There will be danger of personal hurts. The 
health will be unstable 

Afnrs— Danger of fire. bums, and olber pbjmcal butts. Dangen 



w THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 

to the person through the malice of eneimes A tendency to 
lax or dissolute habits will show itself Danger of loss by 
theft Disputes and mental anxiety 


JUPITER'S PERIOD 
Stdy-Perlods 

Jt^tier — Much prosperity Fame, good position Property w3I 
increase Tliere will be domestic plenty and happiness. 
Benefits from the employment or occupation- Lawyers, 
priests (clergy) and superiors favour the native 
Saturn — ^Therc will be an mcrease of weaJih and property Altc 
this pams in the body will be expenenced, rheumatic pains u 
the limbs Troubles through the wife or partner A fallmi 
oiT of profit and credit u> (he place of abode But these 
troubles will pass away 

Mercury — Gam by knowledge m the fine arts Birth of a wtU* 
favoured child, in the case of mamed people. Wealth in* 
creases and advantages from supenors fall to the native 
Dragons Tail ^The partner, although strong will die The 
native will change his place of abode He will be separated 
from his relatives and fneods and he may leave his business 
or forsake his occupation because of all this. 
yenus—Tbexe will be a reunion in the family Good success 
in the profession or business. He will gam land in the month 
of Taurus or Libra (I e . when the Son is in these signs) Much 
enjojToent. Relatives are fnendly, and be Will live in peace 
Sun — Gam Good actions are performed or the fruits of past 
good action come to the native at this tune Loss of bodOy 
strength may be experien c ed Some disease wUl appear 
according to the sign held ty the Sun. But these evils will not 
endure 

Moon —Prosperity increase*. He gams honour and fame. Acquues 
property Benefits through cbildmo and happiness to them. 

All good efforts m the past wiQ collectively render tber fruits 
to the nau>x 

Af err —Annoyances and troubles of various kinds Danger of 
loss by theft Loss of a friend, elder brother, or parent 



HINDU ASTROLOOY 


205 


Some Inflammatory diseaae arises in the system He wiU 
move from his present place, and will fail to accomplish his 
engagements 

Dragon's Head — Relatives give trouble. Small quarrels are 
numerous There is some loss of property Troubles to the 
Wife or through her The native b^mes the object of dccejv 
tion, which occasions some toss or trouble 


SATURN*S PERIOD 


Sub-Periods 

Scfum —Disease appears, and the body languishes Loss of 
children and money is to be feared Senous enmities arise, 
relatives cause disputes Troubles come upon the native 
through his relatives 

Aferctoy —Knowledge m some particular direction will mcrease 
The native will be wise and discreet Children will prosper 
Relatives wiU meet mth success Tbe nauve mil prosper anil 
receive favours and approbation from superiors 
Dragon's Tm/— Rheumatism in the right leg Some biliousness, 
or sickness Danger of poisonous elements m the system 
Danger from the native’s own son Loss of money Conten- 
tions and quarrels A bad time generally 
>>ntty— Attentions and favours from others Gifts Profit in 
business Increase in the family circle by a birth or mamage 
Victory over enemies and the overcoming of obstocles 
Swi —Danger of blood poisomng Hemorrhage of the ^nerative 
system Chrome poisoning Intestinal swellings Affections 
of the eyes Even healthy children and wives come to the 
sick bed under this influence The body is full of pains and 
disorders Danger of death 

Woo, -Trouble uud sickuBs M "P™ Th'" ™ 

fuimly disputes Losses both of money uud property Tie 
native will be reduced to gteul need, and will sell or mortgage 
bis property, and wdl recover .t only alter a lapse of time. 

Wore -So™ isgrac wdl fall «P<-n 

enmity and slnfe wdl ensue Much blame wdl attach to the 
native He wdl go from one place to another, and wdl lead 



04 the makual of astrology 

to the person through the malice of enemies A tendency to 
lax or dissolute habits will show itself Danger of loss by 
theft Disputes and mental anxie^ 


JUPITER'S PERIOD 
Sid>-Per(ods 

Jupiter — Much prosperity Fame, good position Property wiD 
increase There will be domestic plenty and happiness 
Benefits from the employment or occupstioa Lawytrs, 
pnests (clergy), and supenois favour the native 
Satt^n —There will be an increase of wealth and property After 
this, pains in the body wilt be expenenced, rheumatic pains m 
the limbs Troubles through the wife or partner A falling 
oS of profit and credit m the place of abode. But these 
troubles will pass away 

Mercury —Gz\n by knowledge u the fine arts Birth of a wel 
favoured child, in the case of married people. Wealth u 
creases and advantages from superiors fall to the native 
Dragon's Tin/— The partner, aJtbough suoog wOl die Tti 
native will change his place of abode He will be separatee 
from his relatives and fheods, and he may leave his busioes 
or forsake his occupation because of all this 
Venus — ^Tbere will be a reunion lo the family Good success 
in the profession or business. He will gam land m the month 
of Taurus or Libra (/ e . when the Sun is in these signs) Much 
enjoyment Relatives are fncodly, and be will live in peace 

Sun —Gain Good actions are performed or the fruits of past 
good action come to the native at this tune Loss of bc^y 
strength may be experienced Some dis ea se will appear 
according to the sign held by the Sun But these evils will not 
endure 

/foort.— Prosperity increases. He gams honour and fame. Acquires 
property Benefits through children and happiness to them. 

All good cITerts in the past will collectively render their fruits 
to the native 

Mora —Annoyances and troubles of various kinds Danger of 
Joss by theft. 'Loss of a tneod, elder biother, or parrot 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


207 


Fear and danger through foreigners. Disputes concerning 
property, in which the native loses. Evil dreams, headaches, 
sicimcss, and loss of appetite. 

/t^j/Zer.— Will have a fair degree of happiness; some renown or 
esteem; good credit; advancement throu^ superiors. Birth 
of a child, or marriage (if not already married). Good fortune 
generally. 

Softon.— Bad fortune. He becomes a stranger to success and happi- 
ness. Severe reversal. Enmity is incurred. Some disease or 
pain in the part governed by Saturn. Relatives suffer a 
downfall or some disgrace. The native suffers in consequence. 
The mind is filled with gloomy forebodings and grief. 


dragon's tail pbriod 
Sub-Ptriods 

Dfagen's Tb//,— The native has some mental troubles. Will be 
separated from his relatives. Will be subject to some estrange- 
ment, restraint, or detention. 

Fenur.— A child may be boro to the native. Wealth increases. 
All his efforts are crowned with success In the end of this 
period, however, he will have sickness. His wife also will be 
ill. But these troubles will pass away. 

He will have a long journey, and will return. Some disease 
or sickness will disfigure the body. Anxiety on account of 
the partner in marriage. 

Afoon._™Dj5putg5 on account of the actions of the other tex. 
Trouble through the children or on account of them. Gain 
and financial success. All troubles will vaiush. 

Obstacles bar the path of progress. There is cause for 
fear and anxiety. Disputes and contests of different kinds. 
Enemies arise. Danger of destruction through one of the 
opposite sex. Danger of fire, fever, or an operation. 

dragon's /fead.— Danger of blood-poisoning will come and go. 
Females will suffer. The native is in danger of ruin. Loss 
of property, fame and honour is to be feared. 

dt^iler , — Profitable transactions. Association with people of good 
position. Danger of poison. The wife becomes the 'cause 



206 the manual op ASTROLOGY 

an unsettled life at this period. He will have many eoetaies; 
will be deprived of money fraud cr theft He wSJ leave his 
home and Idndred. 

Dragon's Heed . — Loss of mon^. Wll be in danger of physical 
hurts. Various physical troubles win ensue. Even foreignos 
wiU become his enemies. Troubles increase under this 
influence. 

JtqiUer , — He will find favour and refuge with good men or dergy. 
Will have some increase m his boddy comforts. Throu^ 
the aid of superion he will accomplish 1^ intentions. He will 
abide happily in one place, and have an increase of family. 


MERCURY*S PERIOD 
SuihPeriods 

Mercury.— The native gains a brother or sister, other by maniage 
or birth. An increase of the family is shown. He gains m 
business, and receives advancement JUaming will attraet his 
attention and engage his efforts. 

Dragon’s Tall— Tbe native leaves his place of abode. He ax 
perieoces some sickness, loss of prop er ty, misfortune to bh 
relatives, etc. He has some trouble through doctora, and 
danger m regard to his mediooe. Mental amuety. 

yemts.— The native has good children bom to him. Happiness 
in the mamed state. Relatives prosper. Trade tacreases. 
Knowledge is gamed. He returns from a long journey. If 
not already mamed, be will form an alliance at this time. 

i’uB.— Danger of fire. Anxieties. Sickness of the wife. Enemies 
pvc trouble. Many obstades in all bis aflairs. Troubles 
through superiors. 

Moon —Loss of health Some swellings or hurts in the limbs. 
Quarrels and troubles through females, hfany ddflculties will 
arise. Wtllhavetn?ubJc3throughwomen,andwillcoaseqQeniJy 
try to avoid them. 

Afarr.— Some danger of jaundice or bihoas fever. Aflections of 
the blood. Neuralgic pains and severe headaches. Neigh- 
bours cause troubles. Sickness due to trouble; wounds or 
burls. This period will end In quarrels. 

Draton's Head.— The native is remo^Wd from hts present position. 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


209 


cases it may have a more suister meanisg. In all cases, as 
entire change of surroundings may be expected to happen- 
Means of livelihood wU increase. Profit Ihrou^ the 
occupation. Many benefits through superiors or employers, or 
persons ruled by Jupiter. He will gain fame, but will experience 
some anxiety in the end. 

Afiections of the excretory system, piles, etc. Sciatica 
or rheumatic pains in the legs and hands. Disease in the 
system. Danger of the eyesight bemg affected at this time. 
Distaste for food, loss of appetite. The physical condition 
of the native will be in a very poor way. 

Afercury.— Pleasure through the wife and children. Increase of 
wealth. Gain of knowledge in the arts and sciences. 
Successful period. 

Drason'a ro//.— Troubles in love affairs or through the wife. 
Danger from quadrupeds The partner will be ill. Some* 
one in the bouse will come by an accident and may have 
blood*poisoning, but it will be cured. 

(End of Extract from ** /Td/imri/am.”) 


NOTE UPON THE ABOVE EXTRACT 
la going through the various effects of the penods and sub-penods in our 
hfe and othen, we have been not only convinced of the truth of the Hindu 
•ysietn of Dos'd bukiht phata, but actuaOy surprised at the literal exactness of tbe 
Wtthctions. If the Inter-penods of tbe different sub-penods be taken Into 
•«ount, the above “ effects ” vdll apply equally weU to those abo. by counting 
sub>penod planet as a ptrlod pUnet. and the inter-penod planet as a sub- 
Pfrted planet In this vray the prognostics serve for every period of life, from 
the greatest to the least, allowance being made for the relations of the significatora 
in Utt minor penods. In all cases the effects due to the " period " planet are 
nf pnor importance, tbe sub-penods and inler-penods following in subsidiary 
order. 



20a THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

of pleasure. If unmarried, his love affairs progress welL 
Wealth will iacrease considerably. 

Saturn . — AU properties will be in danger of ruin. The native wiS 
suffer heavy losses in different ways. He wfll change his place 
of abode. Some cutaneous disease is to be feared. Ai^cty 
owing to the sickness of the wife or partner. 

Mercury . — Changes will occur. Danger from relatives. Anxiety 
on account of children. His plans will not succeed. 


VENUS* PERIOD 
Sub-Periods 

Kemu.— Financial success. Good servants and the accessories of 
good fortune. Many pleasures. Money will be plentiful, 
but u the month of libra (I2th October to 12th November;^ 
there will be cause for sonow. 

Sm . — He will have cause for anxiety and fear. Prosperity wfli 
decline. This will be caused by superiors. There will be 
disputes with the wife or partner, with chUdreo and others. 
Family and domestic troubles. Evra in sacred places or in 
re^d to spiritual matters be will be invoh'ed in disputes and 
quarrels. 

Moon . — He will accomplish all his iotentions. There will be 
troubles through the wife, but they will pass away, and domestic 
happiness will ensue in full measure. 

Mars —Property will increase. Through the influence of women 
he will not perform his duues and will become lax in his cfforti, 
neglecting his duUes. Hts mind will be upon earthly things, 
bent upon pleasure and ne^ecring reUgioa. Some affection 
of the eyes and skin will appear and pass away. 

Dragon's Heed.— "Like a p^cct moml (one under a vow of 
slleiw*). he will perform Tapas (rehgious austenty). Fore- 
seeing quarrels among his people or relations, and between 
them and himself, by a very rare medicine be will withdnw 
from them, and become as distant as possible.** 
This is a diflicnU passage to render into astrologic parlance. 

It may mean that wiH retire (if he be wise) from his family 
or orde of acquaintances and seclude himself. In some 



HINDU ASTROLOGY 


209 


cases it may have a more sinister meaning. In all cases, an 
entire change of surroundings may be expected to happen. 

Means of hvehhood wll increase. Profit throu^ the 
occupation. Many benefits through supenors or employers, or 
persons ruled by Jupiter. He will gam fame, but will experience 
some anxiety in the end. 

5arum.~Affections of the excretory system, piles, etc. Saatica 
or rheumatic pains in the legs and hands. Disease in the 
system. Danger of the eyesight being affected at this lime. 
Distaste for food, loss of appetite. The physical condition 
of the native will be in a very poor way. 

Afercu/y— Pleasure through the wife and children Inaease of 
wealth Gain of knowledge m the arts and sciences. 
Successful period. 

Dragon's Tb//— Troubles in love affairs or through the wife 
Danger from quadrupeds. The partner will be ill Some- 
one in the house will come by an accident and may have 
blood-poisonmg, but it will be cured. 

{End of Extract from ** Kdt&mrttam ”) 


NOTE UPON THE ABOVE EXTRACT 



APPENDIX 


OOKTADCNO TABtZS O? LxnUUONS, PHOKJIlTlONAt Logavtuus, Nmt/Ni'i 
AmaxMxn LoNOnvoes, Ecurso Past akd Furow; Tabus of 
Houss FOB CkNTlUL EmSLAND. RC. 


LUNATIONS 



The yea« marked with aa aslerok (*) •» ^9 
No«— A lunation falling in one to ten degree of a 


o» n.o.a, » wh.ch 

In this ubfc But, u iB napracc "> “>« fo””™! 

ra>onrorthBi=i«.rtimrflbtob™» Wto 1*0 tabonj fill o<™ 

dsn they m put lopttbet tmte lint im «i tinte B . n. ra. fl, ml If . 



APPENDIX 


OoWTADCHQ Tasus ct Lvnatuni. Piio?c*tional LooAwnDo, Nettunei 
AmoxatAn LonoirvDtx Eama Past akd Future Tasuj oe 
Houses for Qentiul England etc. 



Note.— A hination faHmg m oae (o *ea degrees of a sign zcnaO}' takes 
place in the last ten days of tbe month preceding that to which it u refereed 
m this table. But, as its influence extends to the following month the 
reason for this departure win be obvious Where two lunations fall in one 
sign they are put together under that sign, as under u n ca and ti;^ 




214 


the manual of astrology 






APPENDIX 

TABLE OF BRITISH SUMMER TIMES 
(COUUtNCINO fROU 1916) 


215 


1916 May 21«, iO tjn OMT. to October Irt 30»ja.BST. 

1917 April 8th „ M « September I7th „ „ 

1918 March 24th ^ » n September 30th „ „ 

1919 March 30th „ mm October jth „ „ 

1920 March 28th, „ » m October 2Sth, „ 

1921 April 3rd, „ mm October 3rd, „ „ 

1922 March 26th, „ ., m October 6tb. „ „ 

1923 Apnl 28th, „ mm September 16th, „ „ 

1924 Apnl 13tb, „ mm September 21tl, „ » 

1925 April 19th „ mm October 4th, „ „ 

1926 Apnl 18th, „ m m October 3rd, „ „ 

1927 April 10th. mm October 2nd, „ „ 

1928 April 22nd, ,. mm October 7th 

1929 Apnl 2ht, h h » October 6th, „ „ 

1930 Apnl 13th, „ mm October 5th 

1931 AprQ 19th, „ mm October 4tb 

1932 April 17th, « mm October 2nd 

1933 April 9th, ., mm October 8ih 

1934 April 22nd, m mm October 7th, , „ 

1935 Apnl 14th, „ m t. O«ober 6tb 

1936 April 19th, « mm October 4th 

1937 Aprtl 18th, „ m m October 3rd 

1938 April 10th, „ mm October 2od 

1939 Apnl 16th, „ mm Nowmber 19th 

1940 February 25th, „ » m December 3 Jst, 

1941 January 1st, „ mm December 3Ist 

(But Double Summer Time, 2 fan advance from May 4th to August 10th) 

1942 January lst.20am GMT to December 31it, 30am BST 

(But Double Summer Time Apnl 5th to August 9th) 

1943 January lst.20ajn GMT to December 31st, 30ajn.BST 

mut Double Summer Time April 4ih to August 15th) 

1944 January lst.20am GMT to December 3Jst, 30am B^T 

(But Double Summer Time Apnl 2nd to September 17lh) 

1945 January 1st 20am G M T to December 3>st, 30am BST 

(But Double Summer Time Apnl 2nd to July 15ih) 

1946 Apnll4th,20am GMT to October 6th. 3 0 a m BST 

(Double Summer Time discontinued) 

1947 March 16th. 2 Oa-ra GMT to November 2nd. 3 0 a m BST 

(But Double Summer Time Apnl I3th to August 10th) 

1948 Marchl4th 20am GMT to October31tt. 30ajn.BST 

(Double Summer Tune discontmued) 



216 


THE KANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


TABLE OF BRITISH SUMMER TIMES (CeatinooS) 


1949 Apia 

3rd. 2.0 UD. O.M.T. to 

October 

30th, 3.0 !.». 

1950 April 

16th, 


M n 

October 

22d<1, 



1951 April 

15th. 


M n 

October 

21st. 



1952 April 

20lh. 


•• *• 

October 

26th, 

„ 


1953 April 

19th. 


» M 

October 

4th. 


n 

1954 April 

11th, 


M M 

October 

3rd. 

„ 

t. 

1955 April 

17th, 



October 

2Qd. 

„ 

N 

1956 April 

22nd, 


•> M 

October 

7lh, 



1957 April 

14th. 


•• M 

October 

6th, 

„ 


1958 April 

20th 


•> » 

October 

3ih. 



19S9 April 

19th. 

„ 

•» M 

October 

4th. 



1960 April 

10th. 



October 

2Bd. 



1961 April 

2Bd, 


M m 

October 

22od, 

„ 


1962 April 

ISth. 



October 

7th. 

- 



(For 19a labU to be oxteaded by Order fa Ccnmal) 



APPENDIX 


217 




THE MAKUAL OF ASTROLOGY 





APPENDIX 


219 



THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

HINDU PLANETARY PERIODS 






















SUPPLEMENT TO REVISED EDITION 


22 ! 


SUPPLEMENT TO REVISED EDITION 


THE VKOQRBSSIVB HOROSCOPE 


Undqi thw title it IS the autlior’s loteotion to add to tbe laformatioa already 
fiven in Chapter m on the system of Secondary Directions It really does 
not matter whether we <^11 these directions Secondary, Chaldean, Luni-Solar, 
or by any other name, providing we understand those diiectioiis i^hich are 
formed by the Sun, Moon, and Planets among themselves and to the radical 
or birth positions of the various bodies, by thar motions in the heavens after 
birth. It is however, that these directions should be properly 

calculated, and is what may be safely daimed has never before been done 
in any of the published expositions of the system. 

In order to support this statement, leference roust be made to the specimea 
horo sco pe given on page 51 of this work. This figure contains the radical 
poaiiota of the planets at the momeot of birth 

Now, directions of the Sun and Moon to these pesiuens wOl have the effect 
of bringing them into acuon for good or ill according to the nature of tbe 
Espect formed to them by direcuon, as taught in tbe *• Primary Considerauons 
on page 159 The nature of tbe event will be m hannoay with tbe nature of 
the planet to which direction is made, and the sphere of life affected will be 
controlled by the House In which that planet may be. 

But when we come to consider tbe practice of directing the Sun and M oon 
to the places of the planets in their progress after birth, it will be necessary to 
take into acojuot the natural motion of the heavens during the interval that 
has elapsed since the moment of birth up to the moment when the du^on is 
completed This has not received due consideiauon in any work wt^ has 
made - Progressive " or Sroodatj directtocs lbs ■” 

tbs pUcss of lbs sloirer iiiovmg bodres. such as Plulo, Nspbres, ^ 

Satirrn, as wsU as othais ahsn retrograde, are mini]/ aecounlM to be lbs 
tares both In the Eadjg and tba Piogrest. Tbia if “ 

Virr. 23* 27 jnst before tbs cusp of tbs nret^ouss “ “ ^ ” '1*' 

51. tbe dittsbon of tbs Moon to tbs conprection wilb lantb ^ 

efts, bnS^^^dreg to tbs Kntb jrere of Lfs) vo^d bo tbs as tbs 
Cotthinction to mrogsmao* placo. and In ptastxs tto ^d be nolb« 
to tbsiregresb tbs sBbmedMoon csrepnietron Nspltnre R. arf Moon soni^ 
lion iSS P. sress bolb are in Vopo.pnt brfOT 1^ stm 

In tbs case of Moon 10 tba asfoot of Orerere. ^tb tta “d 

postoons of that planet tang in lb™ on lbs sntp of lbs Bllb booso. Iba 
•"S -bf -s Tbspostbons^.y,^..^ 

The method bufoaowsw 



222 


THE manual of ASTROLOGT 


TO CALCULATE THE PROGRESSED HOROSCOPE 

I Count the number of days after birth corresponding to the number of 
yean completed 

2. To the Sidereal Time at noon os that day apply the hour of birth, as 
mstructed on page 47 This will give tbs Right Ascension of the Mid heaven 
m the progres s ed horoscope, and by the Tables of Houses the horoscope can 
be erected 

3 The planets' places for the hour of birth on the day of the progress mu* 
be set m this figure, and it wQl then be fottnd that a tree astroDonucal figure, 
representing the places of the planets in regard to the place of birth a certain 
exact number of days after birth, u obtained. 

AS the planets (except such as are retrograde) sviD have increased their 
longitudes by the ir own proper motions m their orbits But it will tlso be 
seen (hat nearly all the planets have changed tbeir Houses once Iher Ust 
conjunction with ihe Moon They have therefore changed ibcir significance, 
at an events in regard to their progressed poutions. 


tXAUHS 

In the rpeamen horoscope, page 51, we nay Incjuire etmetreiag the dawSioB 
of the 5lh and 32nd years of life FoBowing the rule — 

1 Four days coruplete reaches to the 14ib Apnl J940 at 1 a.m. O hLT 

2. This IS equivalcot 13th at 13 hounpaat noon. Therefore ' 

To lb« Sidml Tfaa* 11 M«e« 

AdS 

ConvetioofM 1 1 been 
riniiiij Msbi A Kwwfaw efM-C 
IMaO for Wm iMitfitd* r 

AaccMiaaefP>v*rweC 

With this RJ^ *e enter the Tables cl Houses lor laiitufie 52* 25" N., and 
under the sign of the lOih bouse we find r 30^ of the sign Scorpio Under 
lbesJgnoriheA*xadanlw«find(r3roftbesignQiprfcorn. Thuswehiva 
the progrrued Mid-hesvtn and the pro gres sed Ascendant. 

5 The t^inru pUca are then placed into the map for 1 am on the tnorebg 
of April I4th IMO and the figure for the pre>grt»s b eortpleled. 

Now at the outset it will be seen that the Mid-heavcn b sepirttog from a 
Ksqussquare of the raihca) pontioo of Saturn and that the progressed Ascendant 
b separatinf from a tes<pi,wptare of tiw radicai Uranus and arrlyhit tu * 
quincunx of the radical Phito The Moon by progrmioo b pasitag through 
the seventh bouse of the map and the sign ^necr Saturn b in the fourth 
bouse of the nap and Uranus b near the fifth cusp This combesanoa wouU 
rocs Trpr»n the eania^'etnotional axle of the chlld'a nature in eo far as a child 


H. M. A 

I 2 t a 
I) e 0 
0 2 10 


IS sa IS 

f 0 
IS 30 IS 



SUPPLEMENT TO REVISED EDITION 223 

of four yean couJd respond to such vibrations and could signify the expenenciag 
by the mother Saturn in the fourth house ruling the mother of conditions of 
a wofrymg nature ua connection with home and family affairs and m addition 
It could have shown a recent additioo to the family m the shape of a brother 
or sister Uranus being on the cusp of the fifth bouse ruling children and Pluto 
bang in the sign Leo which also rules chfldien. 

Now let us take the mdications for the 32nd year of life Thirty-one days 
after birth measures to the 11th May 1940 when the calculation is as follows — 


H. U. 1. 

Siilare4i Time at Noon ealOtb J 11 31 

AddttaMeUpiedtobosrofbiRh 13 0 0 

Coiracbonfor llbnnsl lOaecoodt parlioor 0 3 10 

16 14 4! 

Dodoct for 2* Wbi Loosioiaa 8 0 

lUslit Ajtaniion of P ru ai B aa e J Mid-fcaaron 16 6 41 


fha ILA. gives the Mid heaven between the 3rd and 4th degrees of Sagittanus 
and the Ascendant approximately 1* of Aquanus Tbe progressed Mercuiy 
IS found in the 8th de^ee of Taurus, having moved from near the cusp of the 
third house (its birth posinon) to about a thud way through the fourth house. 
Hie pr o gressed Venus u to the 3rd degree of Cbncer bavuig moved from near 
the cusp of tfie sixth house at buth to part way through the seventh house, 
*^tOst Man at 26* of Cenuni has moved through Cexnini imul just past the 
Descendant. 

Tbe progressed M C rs tpplrwg to a sesquisquare of the radical Sun and a 
semi-square to the radical Moons North Node sbowiog an expe n enemg of 
troubles and diQJcuIties in conaectioo with vocational interest and warning 
Against a poss ble loss of favour or support from those wbo are in higher pos tions 
connected with tbe actual work that is being done and with ihe social or public 
activities which are being earned out Tbeprogrtssed Ascet]dant.justseparaung 
from the opposition of (he rad cal Pluto would signify a de gr e e of financial 
difficulty and warn a gtimt the (akmg of ftiaocial or speculative risks. Mercury 
Amuld m sesquisquare to the radical Neptune denoUng a danger of encounter 

tng some form of intngue or tnckeiy cod warning agauut an abuse of personal 
confidence whilst it would signify (hat (be ensuing year would be unfavourable 
for long distance travel, for emigrauoo or for anythmg of an overseas and 
foreign character Venus makes no aspect by progression and therefore does 
not exercise any specific infloeoce dunog tbe year and tbe same signification 
applies to Mars wlucb also does not form any aspect by profession. Therefore 
the mam significations for tbe 32Dd year of life, covering tbe year as a whole 
would be taken from ibe progressed Aspects made by tbe Mid-beaven Ascendant 
and Mercury 

It win thaefore be seen that the infloeoce of a lunar or solar direction to 
the progressed planets will fall in a different spbeie of tbe native t life every 
time the same aspect is formed, while at the same time tbe lunar and solar 
directions to tbe radical places will have (be effects due to theu radical positions, 
as determined by their sign and House. Hoxe. alihou^ tbe major planets 
(and also tbe minor ones when retrograde) do not appreciably alter therr 



224 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

loQgitDdes m the course of a lunar revolution the diurnal pr o g re o of the 
heavens wiD bring them successively from one House to the next, conversely 
that IS to say from the ninth to the o^th and from the eighth to the seveoihi 
so that they will have successively different influences, and win affect differot 
spheres of the life. 

By the ordinary method of the fixed horoscope, the major planets whid> 
produce the greatest effects in the life wiS cootinoe in the same House all 
through the life— Neptune near the cusp of the ninth house Saturn in the 
fourth bouse, Uranus on the fifth cusp Jupiter m the third effects win happen 
at every successive good or evil aspect to these planets, every five years bnogiBg 
up the same influence of the same planet for good, and every seven yean 
bringiog up the same jifluenee of the same planet for evil Tlus u not the 
case m point of fact for the influence is gradoally ebangug from one House 
to another The Moon does not make a dean sweep of the possible influences 
of the major planets in a twenOroght year cycle (23 days) and then return 
to the same sequence of events. It certainly returns to the same sequence 
of aspects to th^ major planets but as they have afl changed their bouses 
by the progress the effects are altogether different. 

The aspects formed by the pr ogre sse d Ascendant and the progressed htC 
to the planets la the Radix and the Progre ss are to be actovoted primal; 
direcuons and their effects are of the greatest importaDCe. 

Also planets coming to the cusps of Houses by the same Progr ess are O' 
remarkable sgnifieance aocording to the nature of the aspects they thus fom 
in Muodo (see page I JJ Muidsru Dirtethns) 

The foregoing expositioo of the progressed horos co pe wiD tupplemeal 
and modify the statement of the system already made io this book in regard to 
Secondaiy Directloru contained in Chapter lU It wiQ not be necessaiy to 
erect a senes of figures for the mecesave yean of life, but it wiTl suflice for 
ordinary practice if the M d heaven and Ascendant in Ibe P i ogr e ss are set 
out ui the scale of Ftunary Duections referred to on page |54 By reference 
to the Tables of Houses for the tautudeofthe birthplace it wiH at once be seen 
in what bouses the progre ss e d positions of the planets will fall. 

The test of this system ti made by the directions to the progressed M C 
and Ascendant for if ll^re were no truth in it, directions to these points 
would have no influence at aH ocuher would the irani ts of the planets over 
points be in any way i gnitont, whereas the effects are of the roost 
appreciable nature and altogether convincing. 

THE LUNAR EQUIVALENT 

The 1^™^ Equivalent is an extension of the p ro gr e sse d horosc o pe, in 
terms of the natural motion of the heavens as seen from the plsee of birth. 

5Ve hive already shown thar caefi coapkxe <fry alter laarii a year of 
life and that dunng the rrvohitJon of the earth on its tab each day t)w San 
one degree (roughly), throwing the Mid-heaven forward at the taros 
rite, and bringinf the Aacndant by oboqoe asc ens ioa (o the hor ire o at a 
variable rata, as shown by the Tables of Houses. 



SUPPLEMENT TO REVISED EDITION 


225 

Bui ibere is yet another aspect of this subject which has not hitherto been 
esplaioed and which u of cocsiderable importance It is the Lunar 
Equivalent constituting a change m the progressed Mid heaven and progressed 
Ascendant corresponding to lunar motion As oqe day equals one year 
two hours will equal one month, and four minutes will equal one day Taking 
any progrtsstd horoscope set for the hour of birth we have a figure which 
represents an exact number of solar revolutions round the earth by apparent 
diurnal motion la the heavens Thus to the case already cited at thirty-one 
days after birth the Mid heaven b In R,A 16 hours 6 minutes 42 seconds 
At thirty two years complete it will be in ILA 1 6 hours 10 minutes 39 seconds 
But the Sun and Mid heaven do not make one degree of the Zodiac per sahum 
but gradually from hour to hour, as the Earth revolves upon its axis while 
the Sun is moving forward in the Zodiac 


CaoM^utatlr at St run I soathtiMMidaeavca will be m RA. IS S 42 
Flin 3 0 0 

lacmmi Tor 3 houn 30 


RA. efM C for 31 run t D«nth IS 7 3 


For each successive month a further two hours and the increment for equation 
Will be added to the progressed Mid heaven whd^ the Moon and planets 
are moving forward in the Zodiac Consequently at the end of ooe complete 
revolution of the Sun round the Earth the Mid heaves will have gamed 
twenty four houn plus the equation for twenty four houn (as deiermised 
by the Sun s motion in the Zodiac) amounting to about four minutes which 
give the progressed Mid heaven for tbe next birthday anmversaxy as 
experiment will show At the end of this tune the Moon wiU have progressed 
13 degrees 22 mmutes, that being its diunia] motion for one day between the 
nth and !2th May 1940 

By this method a further senes of pouUons will be obtamed for tbe 
pro g re sse d planets and tbe Moca ivt}] come mto aspect mth these planets 
at different points m their diurnal revolution round the Earth these points 
falling m different Houses 


ILLUSTRATION 

If we calculate the tune of the Moon to the conjunction with Saturn we 
ihait find that it meets it at 2.50 p m on tbe 26th day after birth v/r , on 6th 
May, 1940 Thus — 

SituniiloBHudeMBeoa Tiunu 5* » 

Moott*toa*ituS«ito*oo •• * 

DiffCTWe* 1* 3S los. I.2239 
Moos ) meiioB la 24 boon IS* IS 

Silunif motioo 18 34 boon 

12* 9 toe. 0 29S6 

Tlf8«pJLoflb*CoB}aBet>on2boor»S0imau« lof.092SJ 

This time IS 13 hours 50 minutes after the hour of birth, corresponding to 
the end of the seventh month after the lhlrn^fi^t birthday 



228 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 
tba logsitnd* of Man tor Jfth Jaasur 1905 
Ghta tlM tpbKDcni Tot ItOI 

79mn)~iM(lp(TM 
79 

"a 

EpeckItOl 

Man l<ntiCadal7(k5aaBaiTinSIaS«Ofr<9 Ml 
To vhicb add for 1 period 1 54 
Man loefiendel7lh5aoi»aiTJ905wfllbaSeofpto wT 
Any number of penods can be tbos dealt wjth, by *airmg any epoeli, l 
tiacting jt from the year required If the latter be afler the epoch, or takan 
T^uired from the epoch tf the former be before the epoch, then djvxl 
the pen^ of the planet info the remainder, w have a certain num 
of ^0^ and odd years The periods wfll he multipbed by the mean adva 
f^the planet in one period, and the yean when applied to the epoch wO I 
t^yc« in which the longitude of the planet u to be sought on the reps 
“ applied the inere m ent for the advance in the gn 
periods, and the approximate longitude of the planet u obtained fef I 
required dale, 

Nora.— To convert Old Style into New S^Je, for the purpore of this cdcnl 
tioQ, odd to the Old Style the following number of days — ' 


PerttMSMCMtBrr 13 din 

- «Wi „ ti ^ 

• >((h . It . 

- - II « 

« i«a « 10 . 

- I5ch . 9 . 

• uoi . a . 

- nih . 7 . 

- laa . 7 « 

« Itch . « 


Per tb» tOth Cnteiy 5 dir* 
. 9ta . 4 . 

. *ia . 4 •• 

. Tih _ 3 . 

. C<b . 3 . 

. 3ta » 1 . 

.. 4ia „ I . 

. 3rd . e . 

m 3nd«a|ptncs I « 

- W . I •• 



226 


THE MANUAL OP ASTROLOGY 


To (he RA of procrated Mid-fceivea 
Add tuDC tleptod 

CoTTCCDOa 

Deduct, u over 34 boon 

tim«f Cquirelest ia R A. of Mid-beeveo 


» 59 0 

34 0 0 


J 59 0 


Turning to the Tables of the Homes for latitude 52* 28 N,, we shall find 
that with this Mid heaven the conjunction will fall m the eighth bouse. This 
enables us to add point to the particular influences at work from the conjunction 
ofthe Moon with Saturn Sumlarljrwitballothercases. 'Therefore in prepanng 
the table of lunar aspects as on page 158. tt wiU be advisable to make a sefonis 
column of the progressed Mid heaven, and by leference to the Tables of 
Houses we can then at once see where the aspect actually falls in the beaiens 
at the time of its exact formation 


THE DIURNAL HOROSCOPE 

This horo scope u set for the time of birth on ev^ successive day of ih® 
year, and gives many valuable keys for exact prediction. It u based upon 
the apparent mouon of the Sun round the Earth from day to day. each day 
being completed when the Sun returns to the same distance from the menduo 
■s It held at birth. And tmce the Sidereal Time u controlled by the Suo** 
notion ui Its apparent orbit it follows that to erect a figure for each successive 
day of the year at the hour of the birth will be equivalent to taking a diunial 
revolution in nght ascension. 

By means of thu horoscope we are cHeo able to fix the exact date of an 
event which b only defined by tbe methods hitherto considered as likel/ to 
happen wnhtn a given month. 

By TseaRS of this diurnal horoscope knowing of the sickness of 
Viciona. the exact date of the demise was accurately predmed some time 
before the event. Also the date of King Edward's decumbirure on the 
of his coronation 

It will simphfy explanation if tbe lubve b considered to be ro-bora every 
day at tbe same moment of lime as at birth, and the horoscope set for this tune 
will be tbe diumil horoscope ruling that day of the life. 

As may be surmised from the nature of thu horoscope, the ephemeral positions 
of the planets pby an important part In the nature of the eveou predicied 



SUPPLEMENT TO REVISED EDITION 


227 


3 But the transits ofJupitcr and Venus when not aSLcted or the Sun^, Moon, 

and Mercury v,bea well aspccted (atber so the cphcmens or the radix), are 
tfflifonnV good . . 

4 The daily aspects formed by the Moon must be taken in regard to the 

Houses occupied by the planets aspected Thus if the Mmd forms a con 
junction wth Neptune in the second House of the diurnal horowpe it wiu 
indicate danger of bemg defrauded of money on that day At the same time 
the Moon may have a good aspect of Jupiter in the eleventh House and the 
advice of a fnend will be a corrective , .u j .^.t 

5 The chief effects are due to the transits over ^e ^gles of 
horoscope Next the conjunctions that are formed by the m^or p 

the Sun next to the mutual aspects and conjunctions of the planets and lastly 
to the aspects formed by the Moon to the planets m the cphcmens 

6 The place of the new Moon in the diunial horoscope ts “ 

It shows m what sphere of the life ehmges may lake place during the month, 
good or bad according to the aspects to the lominanes 

n., tou of dl oom,<l=niuon. mml bo Ihoso 

*re in force at the lime for the diumal horoscope acts in terms of ptw^ 
inQuences bringing them into operation at those dates w en 
indications are m harmony with the directions 

Sou on the flaneiory ftnodt 

la review of the information given on page 171, 
funber examine the mean penods of the planets and the following notes wiU 
doubtless be of service to the student ■< m rh« 

Taking the mean motion of each planet in its orbiL and apP^e »t to ^ 
Sun B mean motion for an equal penod w are a e ^ 

synodical penods of the vanous bodies or the Instead of the 

their conjm^ions with the Sun on the same day of the 
periods pven on page 171. the foUowmg are offered as more approximate 
to the truth— xa' 

Neptune 164 yean 280 days mean annual motion 2 lu o'* 

Uranus 84 years gives an advance m longitude 0140 only 

Saturn 59 years gives an advance of 1* 53 
Jupiter has a penod of exactly 83 yem 

Mars 79 years gives an advance of I* M , 

Venus. 8 years eves a mean advance of I 32 , but inconsUnt 

Mercury 79 years gives a mean advance of 1 27 but irregular 

To^e these penods tbc loUowmg general paradigm may be 

followed — ^ 

ibe of UrsnuJ forlb* Dlb Octob® 1672 (New Style) 

CivcaEphemerit roe 1903 " 


PIT— 230 divided 67 M sr«» 2 penod*. plu* 62 yeift. 

IMS mimi 62 yeen tivee ISM 4sd 2 penod* Auluplicd bf 40* cme 1^ 
Fran the loopliida of Uruo) of tbelSib October IB40,niee> 1709 


LoetiMde of Unua oo the I5lb Oeieber 1672 (N^) Puce* 



226 


THE MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 


TottcRA ef prosmicd Mid beives 1$ d ^ 

Add time clipted tJ 90 0 

ComcooD 2 It 

2? 59 0 

Deduct, u over 24 honri 24 0 0 

Lsnu E^waJeatu RJL «f Mel-baecs S 59 0 


■nirorng to the Tables of the Houses for latitude 52* 28 N.. vt ifcaU 6®^ 
that with thu Mid heaven the coDjunction will fall ta the eighth botse. *nus 
enables us to add point to the particular influences at work from the conjuactioo 
oftheMoonwithSatum Similarlywithallothercasei Therefore in prepanog 
the tableoflunar aspects as on page 158 it will be advisable to make a separate 
column of the progressed Mid heaven, and by trfetenc e to the Table of 
Houses we can then at once see where the aspect actually falls in the heavens 
at the time of its exact formation. 


THE DIURNAL HOROSCOPE 

This horoscope u set for the time of birth on every luccessjw day of 
year and gives many valuable keys for oact prediction It ts based vpoo 
the apparent motion of (be Sun round the Earth from day to day each day 
being completed when the Sun retotes to the tame distance from the jnendtta 
as It beld at birth. And since the Sidereal Time u contrelled by tbe Sun < 
notion in its apparent orbit it foOows that to erect a figure for cacb luccesuve 
day of the year at the hour of tbe birth wifl be equivalent to taking a diunal 
revolution m nght ascension. 

By means of tha ho r os cope we are often able to fix the exact dale of an 
event which ts only defined by the methods b therto considered as Vkdf to 
happen within a given month. 

By means of this diurnal h or o scop e knowing of ihe sickness of QiKen 
Victona, the exact date of the detiuse w« accurately predicted some 
before the event Also the date of King Edward's decumbimre on the 
of bis coronat on 

It will timpUfy explanation if tbe native is considered to be re-born every 
day at the tame moment of lime at at birth, and the h oroscope set for this U-rie 
wQ] be the d urnal horoscope ruling that day of the Lfe 

As may be surmised from the nature of this horoscope, tbe epbemeral pesitiom 
of the planets play an important cart (n tlx nature of (be events predicted 



SUPPLEMENT TO HBVISE© EDITION 227 

3 But the tranata of Jupiter and Verms, when not afflicted, or the Sun, Moon, 
and Mercury when well aspected (either in the ephcmcns or the radix), are 
unifom^ good 

4 The daily aspects formed by the Moon must be taken m regard to the 
Houses occupied by the planets aspected Thus, if the Moon forms a con- 
joncuon with Neptune m the second House of the diurnal horoscope, it will 
indicate danger of being defrauded of money on that day At the same time 
the Moon may have a good aspect of Jupiter in the eleventh House, and the 
advice of a fneod will be a corrective 

5 The chief effects are due to the iransiu over the angles of the diurnal 
horoscope Nest, the conjunctions that are formed by the major planets with 
the Sun, next to the mutual aspects and conjunctions of the planets and lastly 
to the aspects formed by the Moon to the planets m the ephemens 

6 The place of the new Moon in the diurnal horoscope is important, as 
It shows in what sphere of the life ehanget may take place dunng the month, 
good or bad according to the aspects to the luminanes 

The basis of all these considerations must always be those directions which 
are in force at the time, for the diumal horoscope acts m terms of the prevailmg 
influences, bnnging them mto operation at those data when (he Diurnal 
isdications are in hannony with the diiecuons 

Scu OR the fhntiay Periods 

In review of the information gtven on page 171, it has been possible to 
further examine the mean penods of ttie planets, and the following notes will 
doubtless be of service to the student 

Taking the mean motion of each planet in its orbit, and applying it to the 
Suns mean motion for an equal period, we are able to obtain the mean 
synodical penods of ihe various bo^ or the times in which they will form 
Ibeir conjunctions with the Sun on the same day of the year Instead of the 
penods given on page 171, the followiiig are offered as more approumate 
to the truth — 

Neptune. 164 yean 280 days mean annoal motion 2* 10* 54' 

Uranus, 84 years gives an advance m longitude of 40 only 
Saturn 59 years gives an advance of 1' 53 
Jupiter, has a penod of exactly 83 years. 

Man, 79 yean gtv« an advance of t* 34 ^ 

Venus, 8 yean gives a mean advance of 1* 32 , but inconstanc 
Mercury, 79 yean gives a mean advance of 1* 27 , but irreeular 
To make use of these oenods. 



228 


THB MANUAL OF ASTROLOGY 

Required the loBTCade of Man for 17th Jaanarr IMS 
Gma Iho tpbaaacTU for ISOI 

79ytart) IMftperiod 
79 
~25 
Epoch 1101 

Man loofmdaJ7(h1aaaa>7ltIdiaScer7to 1721 
To which add for ] period I'M 
Man loa^tuda ITihJaauanr IMS wiQ be Scorpio t*SS 
Aoy number of penotls can be thus dealt with, by taVtng any epodi, soS 
tracung it from the year required if the Utter be slier the epoch, or tahisf the 
required year from the epoch if the former be before the epoch, then divulffig 
the penod of the planet Into the remainder ve shall have a certain number 
of penods and odd years The periods sviQ be multiplied by the mean advance 
of the planet ta one penod and the years when applied to the epodi wQ] gne 
the year in which the longitude of the planet is to be sought on (he require:' 
date. To this u applied the increment for the mean advance in the gnet 
penods, and the approximate longitude of the planet is obtained for the 
required dale 

Not*.— T o convert Old Style into New Style, for the purpose of this ealcula 
tioa, ndd to the Old Style the following number of days — ' 




