N . V.  *]« 

^ ' M i 


■ 


x-4  7 


RYAN 


CELLAN  Y. 


BRIHAT  JATAKA 


VARAHA  MlHIRA. 

TRANSLATED  INTO  ENGLISH 


N.  Chidambaram  Iyer,  b.  a.,  f.  t.  b. 

FORTJSTDER 

OF  THE 

TIRUYADI  JOTISTANTRA  SABHA. 


[Registered  Copyright .] 


HI  at  t a s: 

v 

MilMtl)  AT  THE  FOSTER  IBEP8,  23  EL’KDAIL’k  ROAD,  Til  till, 

1885. 


(Z)  AJrt  ,Z$ 


® Library 
Eistory 
standing 
ijgiae 


TO 


J5 x a It  m » g x x x 

TANDALAI  seetarama  josier 

THE  MOST  CELEBRATED  ASTROLOGER 


OP 

SOUTHERN  INDIA 

THIS  WORK 

IS  MOST  RESPECTFULLY  DEDICATED 

AS  A TOKEN  OP  AFPECTION  AND  ESTEEM 

BY  HIS  HUMBLE  STUDENT 


THE  TRANSLATOR. 


' 


INTRODUCTION. 


There  is  probably  not  one^subject  which  is  so  ill  un- 
derstood, which  so  many  people  pretend  to  know,  and  on 
which  so  many  are  prepared  to  express  an  opinion,  as  the 
subject  of’ Astrology.  The  Indian  proverb  truly  says  that 
there  is  no  man  who  is  not  a bit  of  a physician  and  an 
astrologer;  and  it  is  equally  true  that  there  is  no  subject 
which  is  so  ill  understood  as  these  two.  The  fact  is  that 
the  broad  medical  and  astrological  principles  are  so  many 
that  everybody  of  necessity  learns  a few  of  these,  but 
experiences  a difficulty  in  mastering  all  of  them. 

It  would  be  interesting  to  note  the  various  subjects 
with  which  astrology  is  confounded.  Persons  with  well- 
developed  intuitions  are  often  found  to  make  correct  pre- 
dictions of  events.  The  Yogis  are  persons  cf  this  descrip- 
tion. Their  peculiar  knowledge  is  certainly  not  the 
result  of  any  study  of  astrological  works.  We  also  find 
another  class  of  men  who  imitate  these  men  and  also 
make  striking  statements.  Birmingham  gold  is  often  taken 
for  sterling  gold  ; German  silver  for  pure  silver ; and  we  have 
a variety  ot  inferior  stones,  white,  red  and  green  that  are 
often  mistaken  for  diamonds,  rubies  and  emeralds.  The 
world  is  full  of  this  dual  character  of  things.  Every  depart- 
ment of  true  knowledge  lias  its  inferior  counterpart ; and  so 
we  have  a number  of  men  who,  possessing  no  occult  powers, 
but  securing  the  help  of  a few  elemental  spirits,  practise 
imposition  on  the  ignorant  public.  But  the  world  is  not 
without  a touchstone  to  detect  the  hollowness  of  their  pre- 
tensions: these  men  will  give  you  a few  correct  particulars 
regarding  remote  past  events,  a great  deal  of  particulars  re~ 


INTRODUCTION. 


garding  present  events,  one  or  two  particulars  re- 
garding the  immediate  future,  and  no  particulars  at  all 
about  the  distant  future.  I have  known  these  men  and 
tested  the  truth  of  their  statements-  These  men  pretend  to 
he  astrologers.  Some  of  them  carry  no  hooks  at  all  and 
make  amazing  statements  touching  past  events  in  prose 
and  verse  in  an  extempore  sing-song  fashion  and  without 
the  least  effort,  even,  though  the  questioner  is  a perfect 
stranger;  while  others  show  you  some  huge  antique  cadjan 
book  and  pretend  to  read  from  its  pages.  This  was  exactly 
the  way  in  which  Col-  Olcott’s  questions  were  recently  an- 
swered by  the  Brahmin  astrologer  who  pretended  to  read 
from  the  pages  of  the  works  of  the  G-reat  Bheemakavi  (vide 
May,  1885,  issue  of  the  Theosophist).  I am  sure  that  nei- 
ther Col.  Olcott’nor  his  intelligent  friends  ever  had  a look 

CM  O 

into  the  hook  to  see  whether  what  was  read  out  was  really 
written  there,  and  if  so,  whether  the  writing  was  not  afresh 
one.  In  all  these  cases  the  astrologer,  if  he  is  one  at  all, 
doggedly  refuses  to  allow  others  to  look  into  his  book  ; for, 
he  says,  lie  is  not  permitted  by  the  hook  deity  to  do  so  ! 
There  is  a more  wonderful  man  in  Pondicherry  at  present. 
He  pretends  to  read  from  the  works  of  Naudikeswara. 
Such  astrologers  are  making  vast  sums  of  money.  The 
statements  they  make  are  really  puzzling  ones.  But  for 
these  and  the  way  in  which  they  are  made,  the  utter  want 
of  preparation  and  the  like,  I should  have  been  inclined  to 
discard  the  element  of  the  help  of  the  elemental  spirits. 
Let  those  who  would  object  to  this,  examine  the  matter  and 
then  pronounce  an  opinion. 

Nothing  can  be  more  funny  than  to  find  young  men 
especially,  taking'  up  astrology  as  their  first  subject  of 
attack  in  their  public  utterances.  It  is  a subject  to  which 
they  pay  little  or  no  attention  except  for  purposes  of  ridi- 
cule- To  all  your  questions,  how  do  you  prove  this  state- 


INTRODUCTION. 


s 


ment  and  how  do  you  prove  that : their  one  ready  reply  is 
that  their  common  sense  tells  them  so.  They  forget 
that  common  sense  is  a sense  which  changes  in  its  nature 
as  one  advances  in  his  study,  and  it  changes  so  much  that 
the  common  sense  of  one  age  is  different  from  the  common 
sense  of  another  age,  the  common  sense  of  oue  nation  or  of 
one  individual  is  different  from  the  common  sense  of  ano- 
ther nation  or  individual.  Where  proof  is  advanced  by  a 
few,  it  is  equally  interesting  to  examine  it.  The  proof  is 
that  such  and  such  astrologers  made  such  and  such  pre- 
dictions and  that  the  predictions  have  failed — and  ergo, 
astrology  is  no  science  ! It  is  evidently  taken  for  granted 
that  the  astrologer  was  really  learned  in  the  science,  and 
that  there  were  not  those  numerous  errors  of  data  to 
mislead  him. 

Another  objection  to  the  science  is  that  astrologically 
the  fortunes  of  two  persons  born  at  the  same  moment  of 
time  but  in  the  opposite  quarters  of  the  globe,  must  be  tlie 
Same,  but  that  they  cumot  be  and  are  not  the  same-  Here 
is  an  ignorance  betrayed  regarding  the  elementary  principles 
of  the  science.  It  is  true  that  the  planetary  positions  are 
nearly  the  same  except  for  the  small  matter  of  parallax.  But 
it  is  not  the  planets  alone  that  go  to  shape  one’s  fortunes. 
Time  of  birth,  which  is  represented  by  the  L igna  or  the 
rising  sign,  has  a great  deal  to  do  with  it.  Iu  other  words, 
because  the  local  times  of  the  two  places  are  different,  the 
Lagnas  must  be  different;  for  when  the  JOih  degree  of  Leo^ 
for  instance,  is  in  contact  with  the  horizon  here,  the  2Uth 
degtee  of  Aquaries  will  be  in  contact  with  the  horizon, 
of  our  just  antipodes  at  the  same  moment.  Our  rising  sigu 
is  their  setting  sign,  and  our  setting  sign  is  their  rising  sign; 
so  that  a difference  of  longitude  gives  a difference  of  local 
time  and  consequently  a difference  of  Lagna.  But  sup- 
pose the  places  to  have  the  same  longitude.  Take  two 


K 


INTRODUCTION. 


places  for  instance  on  the  same  meridian  and  therefore 
due  north  and  south,  of  each  other.  Now  the  question  is 
whether  the  Lagna  is  the  same  for  both  the  places.  No-  The 
Lagoa  is  a point  in  the  ecliptic  which  is  inclined  to  the 
equator.  The  planes  of  the  horizon  of  the  two  places  are 
different  aud  they  cut  different  parts  of  the  ecuptic.  It 
therefore  follows  that  a difference  of  latitude  gives  a differ- 
ence in  the  Lagna.  So  that  places  with  a difference  of  either 
Jongitude  or  latitude  or  with  both  cannot  have  the  same 
Lagna  at  the  same  time.  That  Lagna  or  mere  time  or  space, 
irrespective  of  the  planets,  has  a great  deal  to  do  with  shap- 
ing the  fortunes  of  a native  or  Jataki  will  be  a new  revela- 
tion to  most  people.  We  will  come  to  this  subject  pre- 
sently. A horoscopic  diagram  or  figure  of  the  heavens 
represents  both  local  time  or  Lagna  and  planetary  positions- 

What  then  is  Astrology  or  Horoscopy  ? What  is  its 
nature  and  what  its  bounds?  Here  is  the  author’s  definition 
of  horoscopy. 

Horoscopy  is  stated  to  be  the  science  of  Ahorcitri  or  the 
science  of  day  and  night — these  being  the  broadest  visible 
divisions  of  time — multiples  of  which  give  -weeks,  months, 
years,  &c.,  and  divisions  of  which  give  hours,  minutes, 
seconds,  &c.  The  first  letter  A,  and  the  last  letter  fn,  having 
been  dropped,  the  term  has  assumed  the  shape  ol  hora,  and 
the  author  says  that  horcc  Shastra  treats  of  the  effects  ol  the 
good  and  bad  deeds  of  an  individual  in  his  previous  birth  ; 
so  that  the  moment  a person  is  born,  it  becomes  his  lot  to 
enjoy  and  suffer  certain  pleasures  and  pains  for  his  past 
gQod  and  bad  deeds— seeds  cast  into  the  cosmic  region  iq 


INTRODUCTION. 


5 


one  birth,  begin  to  bear  sweet  and  sour  fruits  in  another 
birth  according  to  their  quality. 

In  this  connection  wo  may  say  a few  words  touching 
the  long  disputed  question  of  fatalism  versus  free-will. 
sons  of  the  former  school  hold  that  even  the  minutest  events 
of  one’s  life  are  pre-ordained,  and  that  m-m  is  completely  a 
puppet  iu  the  hands  of  certain  higher  agencies-  This  error 
has  evidently  been  the  result  of  the  observation  of  a number 
of  well  projected  efforts  in  particular  directions  having 
been  thoroughly  discomfited.  Again,  men  of  t lie  other  school 
hold  that  man  is  a free  agent,  and  that  there  is  nothing 
impracticable  for  him  if  only  proper  means  are  employed  for 
the  purpose.  This  error  again  has  been  the  result  of  the 
observation  of  even  ill  projected  efforts  in  particular  direc- 
tions, proving  highly-  successful — the  failures,  if  any,  being 
accounted  for  by  the  insufficiency  of  the  means  employed. 
In  the  one  case  man  becomes  an  irresponsible  agent;  and 
in  the  other  he  not  only  boolfcessly  grieves  over  his 
failures,  but  repeats  his  attempts,  thus  putting  himself  to 
trouble,  expense  and  vexation  only  to  fail  again.  Now, 
as  regards  the  former  position,  it  is  held  that  man’s  pre- 
sent deeds  are  all  the  effects  of  his  previous  deeds.  As 
free  agency  of  any  sort  is  discarded  from  the  question, 
it  would  follow  that  these  previous  deeds  are  the  effects  of 
deeds  still  more  previous,  and  so  on,  ad  infinitum,  or  till  we 
arc  brought  to  a state  of  cosmic  evolution  when  differences 
of  states  and  conditions  were  infused  into  human  souls  by 
the  Creator.  Such  a condition  of  irresponsibility  is  opposed 
to  reason,  opposed  to  progress,  and  equally  opposed  to  divine 
and  human  law.  It  is  a very  pernicious  doctrine  in  the 
extreme. 

As  regards  the  latter  view,  if  man  can  wholly  shape 
his  own  fortunes,  how  are  we  to  account  for  the  phenomena 
pf  suffering  virtue  and  the  enjoying  vice  in  certain  cases — 


(5 


INTRODUCTION. 


for  the  former  reaping  no  rewards  and  the  latter  escaping 
punishment.  A satisfactory  explanation  would  point  to  the 
former  as  being  the  effects  of  previous  karma,  and  the  latter 
as  deeds  for  which  man  will  both  suffer,  and  enjoy  in  his  next 
life.  Taking  entire  human  life  into  consideration,  our  own 
opinion  is  that  man  is  both  a slave  of  the  effects  of  his  past 
deeds  and  is  a free-agent  as  regards  fresh  independent  deeds 
— deeds  which  are  in  no  way  directed  to  thwart,  to  arrest,  to 
a'ter  or  in  any  way  to  modify  or  remould  the  effects  of  his  past 
karma.  Hut  if  he  wishes  to  move  along  with  the  current,  he 
may  do  so,  and  the  course  will  become  more  easy  and  more 
smooth.  This  view  will  account  for  three  things:  (1),  the  many 
apparently7  unaccountable  failures  of  attempts  even  when  the 
means  employed  have  been  good ; (2),  the  easy  success 
that,  lias  attended  many  an  effort  when  the  means  employed 
were  even  weak  ; (.'!),  the  success  which  in  certain  cases 
appears  proportionate  to  labor.  In  the  first  case,  the  altempt 
was  one  aimed  at  moving  against  the  current  of  fate  ; 
in  the  second  case  it  was  one  of  moving  down  with  the 
current,  and  in  the  third  case  it  was  motion  on  still  water, 
where  and  where  alone  free  human  agency  can  display 
itself. 

Having  premised  so  much,  we  may  now  proceed  a step 
further  and  state  that  where  the  current  is  a weak  one 
running  with  the  course  of  a Leena,  it  might  be  opposed, 
and  such  opposition  may  be  either  direct  or  oblique  accord- 
ing to  the  fitness  and  strength  of  the  means  employed,  and 
th  at  the  task  would  become  a difficult  one,  if  the 
course  to  be  resisted  should  flow  with  the  course  of 
a Tigris.  The  question  is  purely  a question  of 

karmic  dynamics — effects  of  past  karma  as  opposed 
to  present  karma.  To  oppose,  even  an  opposible  forco, 
one  must  first  possess  a knowledge  of  its  strength  and 
direction  of  action,  and  secondly,  a knowledge  of  the  proper 


INTRODUCTION. 


7 


means  to  be  employed  for  the  purpose.  The  former  know- 
ledge is  supplied  to  man  by  astrology,  and  the  latter  by 
such  works  as  the  Karmavipaka  Grandhn.  The  means 
prescribed  in  the  latter  consist  of  gifts,  of  Japa 
(psychic  training*  or  development.)  and  certain  fire  cere- 
monies having  an  occult  significance.  It  follows  where  the 
current  is  irresistible,  the  attempt  to  oppose  it  becomes  futile. 
How  can  a person  ever  hope  to  win  success  in  a field  w hen  he 
is  ignorant  of  the  direction  of  attack  as  well  as  the  strength 
of  his  enemy.  Astrology  not  only  points  out  to  him  his  ene- 
mies but  his  friends  as  well,  whose  help  lie  might  seek  and 
obtain.  By  pointing  out  fields  where  there  are  friends  and 
fields  where  there  are  foes,  astrology  indirectly  points  out 
to  him  neutral  fields  where  man’s  free  agency  has  its  full 
scope  of  action  and  where  success  is  proportionate  to  labor. 

The  next  important  question  for  consideration  is  the 
examination  of  the  connection,  if  any,  between  the  planets 
and  human  fortunes : where  man  suffers  and  enjoys  the  fruits 
of  his  past  karma,  the  question  asked  is  what  part  planets 
play  in  Such  human  suffering  and  enjoyment.  Here  again 
believers  in  astrology  as  a science  are  divided  into  two 
school'. The  one  admit  active  agency  for  tlio  planets,  and  the 
other,  denying  it,  state  that  the  planets  blindly  and  mechani- 
cally indicate  the  current  of  human  destinies.  In  support  of 
the  latter  view,  it  is  stated  that  if  human  suffering  and 
enjoyment  are  directly  traceable  to  man’s  previous  karma, 
then,  to  admit  active  agency  on  the  part  of  the  planets, 
becomes  not  only  superfluous,  but  inconsistent  : if  a man 
loses  his  son,  it  is  because,  they  say,  he  suffers  for  his 
karma,  which  might,  consist  in  his  having  caused  a similar 
affliction  to  a somebody  in  his  previous  birth,  and  not 
because  Mars  occupied  the  5th  house  from  the  ascendant 
or  Lagna  at  the  moment  of  birth,  and  that  therefore  the 
planetary  positions  only  indicate  and  do  not  bring  about 


INTRODUCTION. 


human  suffering  or  enjoyment.  These  people  from  a human 
point  of  view  cannot  conceive  the  possibility  of  more  causes 
than  one  for  an  event — each  cause  acting  independently 
and  with  full  force.  Hindu  literature  is  fulPof  events,  each 
of  which  is  the  immediate  effect  ofa'number  of  causes. 
This  peculiar  combination  of  causes,  quite  incomprehensi- 
ble to  us,  is  a feature  which  distinguishes  divine  deeds  from 
human  deeds.  We  will  quote  an  instance  or  two.  Ganga 
was  cursed  to  pass  through  a human  incarnation  ; the 
Ashta  (eight)  Yasus  brought  on  themselves  a similar 
curse — of  the  eight  Yasus  seven  were  allowed  to  return  to 
Swarga  immediately  after  birth  ; Raja  Saotanu  goes  out 
on  a hunting  excursion,  marries  Ganga,  whom  lie  finds  on 
the  banks  of  the  Ganges,  on  condition  of  her  being  allowed 
to  quit  him  the  moment  he  opposes  her  own  mode  of  dis- 
posing of  the  issue  of  their  union.  Eight  children  are  bom 
in  all.  The  mother  throws  the  first  seven  of  them  into  the 
Ganges  ; the  king  puts  up  with  this  for  the  love  of  the  lady. 
He  can  bear  no  more  inhuman  work  of  the  sort  and  so  lie 
resists  ; Ganga  quits  her  lord  leaving  the  babe — the  future 
Bheeslima  of  the  M diabliarat.  Again,  King  Dasar.-uha  goes 
out  to  hunt  and  enters  a dense  forest ; hearing  some  gur- 
gling sound  in  his  neighbourhood,  and  mistaking  it  to  ho 
that  of  a wild  elephant  in  the  act  of  drinking  water,  the 
kina’  discharges  his  arrow  in  its  direction  and  kills  a lad 
who  was  dipping  his  bowl  into  the  waters  of  n stream  to 
carry  it  to  his  aged  parents  at  some  distance.  The  cries  of 
the  dying  lad  brought,  home  to  the  king  his  error,  and  the 
next  moment  the  king  himself  proceeds  to  the  lad’s  father 
and  entreats  pardon.  This  venerable  old  man  expires  on 
the  spot  pronouncing  a curse  on  the  king — rather  reading 
the  king’s  fate  that  in  his  old  age  lie  shall  die  a similar 
death  from  grief  on  account  of  his  son's  separation.  In 
the  meanwhile  Vishuu  himself  draws  on  his  own  head  the 


INTRODUCTION. 


0 


curse  of  a human  incarnation,  attended  with  much  suffering 
from  separation  from  wife,  Horn  the  sage  Bhrigu,  whose 
wife  lie  killed  when  she  refused  to  deliver  up  to  his  wrath 
an  Asura  who  had  sought  her  protection.  The  Devas 
suffering  much  from  Ravana  and  his  giant  hosts  proceed 
to  Vishnu  and  entreat  relief.  As  Brahma  had  granted  to 
Ravana  the  boon  of  exemption  from  death  from  all  except 
from  men  and  monkeys,  and  as  Dasaratha  had  prayed  to 
Vishnu  for  the  blessing  of  a son,  Vishnu  enters  on  his 
human  incarnation  as  Rama,  the  son  of  Dasaratha-  From 
family  dissensions  he  quits  his  kingdom  and  enters  the 
forest  of  Dandaka  with  his  bride-  Grieved  at  his  son’s 
separation,  Dasaratha  dies.  Ravana  carries  away  Seet  a and 
Rama  is  grieved  at  her  separation.  He  proceeds  to  Lanka, 
slays  his  enemy  and  recovers  his  wife. 

Most  of  the  eminent  astronomers  of  the  East  and  West 
believed  in  a double  Sun,  a double  Moon,  Mars  and  other 
planets — the  one  is  the  Sthula  or  the  physical  one,  and  the 
other  is  the  Sukshma  or  the  astral  one.  The  difficulty  in 
conceiving  active  agency  as  possessed  by  the  planets  when 
viewed  in  the  light  of  huge  inert  balls,  will  be  removed  when 
we  suppose  that  each  planet  possesses  a soul.  Besides, 
there  is  nothing  repugnant  to  our  mind  in  the  idea  that  the 
planets  together  form  a body  of  executive  officers  charged 
with  the  duty  of  rewarding  and  punishing  humanity  for 
their  past  karma  by  the  command  of  the  Most  High,  who 
at  the  same  time  allows  each  man  the  chance  to  improve  his 
own  condition  by  making  him  a free  agent  in  many 
matters.  A man  is  whipped  for  theft  by  the  order  of  the 
Magistrate.  He  suffers  for  his  karma — the  deed  of  theft. 
But  the  whipping  officer  is  an  active  agent.  Take  another 
instance  : A man  does  a piece  of  valuable  service  to  the 
state  ; the  sovereign  commands  a local  officer  to  invest  the 
person  with  the  order  of  knighthood ; the  officer  obeys  ; 


10 


INTRODUCTION. 


tlie  officer  do  doubt  is  an  active  agent,  though  the  honor 
was  the  immediate  effect  of  the  person’s  services.  We  there- 
fore hold  that  planets  not  only  indicate  human  destinies,  but 
bring  about  such  destinies.  The  world  is  a mixed  field  of 
honor,  of  punishment  and  of  probation.  And  the  planets  are 
the  rewarding  aud  chastising  officers,  and  meddle  in  no  way 
when  man  exercises  his  free  will  within  its  own  sphere- 

The  same  idea  might  be  represented  in  another  way  : 
planetary  activity  is  the  total  activity  of  a number  of  forces, 
some  for  good  and  some  for  evil,  and  while  a man’s  karma 
leads  him  into  the  one  force  or  the  other,  there  are  other 
forces  by  a knowledge  of  which  man  may  benefit  himself, 
though  it  may  not  be  his  lot  to  be  drawn  into  any  of  them 
by  his  past  karma.  If  this  were  not  the  correct  view  of 
the  part  played  by  the  planets,  a large  portion  of  the  science 
of  astrology,  in  which  man  is  advised  to  avail  himself  of  such 
and  such  planetary  positions  for  particular  purposes,  would 
become  useless.  The  planets  therefore  can  be  made  to  do 
more  than  the  work  of  jailors  and  rewarding  officers.  For 
instance,  in  the  fourth  chapter  (Briliat  Jataka)  which  treats 
of  Nisheka  (conception),  a man  is  advised  to  avail  himself  of 
particular  planetary  positions  if  he  desires  an  excellent  issue  : 
Parasara,  who  was  a great  astronomer  and  astrologer,  finding 
that  such  an  hour  for  Nisheka  had  approached,  joined  a boat- 
man’s daughter  in  an  island  on  the  Jumna  and  the  issue  was 
the  great  Vedavyasa.  A Brahmin  astrologer  under  similar 
circumstances  joined  a potter’s  daughter,  and  the  issue  was 
the  great  Salivahana. 

That  man  is  not  altogether  a free  agent  is  an  idea 
caught  by  Shakespeare  in  one  of  his  well  known  passages 
iu  11  As  You  Like  It.” 

“ All  the  world  is  a stage, 

Aud  all  the  men  and  women  merely  players  ; 

They  have  their  exits  and  their  entrances. 

And  one  man  in  his  time  plays  many  parte, 

His  acts  being  seven  ages.” 


INTRODUCTION. 


11 


Again,  while  the  heavens  form  the  macrocosm,  man  is 
the  microcosm.  In  other  words,  each  man  is  a little  world 
exactly  representing  the  Universe.  While  all  seems  quiet 
without,  there  is  an  active  world  within.  Such  a world  is 
visible  to  the  inner  sight  of  a Yogi.  Occult  science  treating 
of  this  subject  says  : — 

iTT^^S^T  l 

* * * 

rT^XTTrlfgTrT^ 

If  the  Pranavayu  (vital  air)  can  be  taken  to  the  Sushra- 
nanadi,  eight  sorts  of  music  will  be  heard,  and  fire,  lightning* 
stars,  the  moon  and  the  sun  will  become  visible.  Again,  in 
Chapter  IY,  already  referred  to,  Varaha  Mihira  says  that 
menstrual  discharges  occur  in  women  when  Mars  and  the 
Moon  approach  each  other.  In  connection  with  this  sub- 
ject the  author  of  Savavali  says  as  follows : — 

n 

u The  Moon  is  water  and  Mars  is  fire ; bile  is  the  result 
of  a mixture  of  fire  and  water,  and  when  bile  mixes  with 
the  blood,  menses  appear  in  women.” 

So  that  with  the  change  that  is  going  on  without, 
there  is  a change  going  on  within,  and  every  element  or  bit 
of  man’s  physical  body  has  its  representative  in  the 


12 


INTRODUCTION. 


heavens-  Such  being  the  case,  there  is  a subtle  connec- 
tion, imperceptible  because  subtle,  between  the  conditions 
of  the  planets  and  the  stars  above  and  those  of  man  below- 

We  shall  now  say  a few  words  touching  the  causes  of 
failure  of  astrological  predictions : the  most  important  of 
these  we  will  take  up  first. 

Astrology  rests  on  astronomy.  The  latter  science  was 
probably  in  a good  condition  at  the  time  of  Vikramarka- 
The  tables  for  the  calculation  of  the  places  of  the  planets 
which  were  then  framed  or  then  in  use,  were  all  suited  to  the 
time.  Owing  probably  to  the  wear  and  tear  of  the  several 
working  parts  of  the  whole  machinery  of  the  Solar  system, 
the  tables  of  one  age  are  unsuited  to  another  age.  To  this 
truth  the  ancient  Hindu  astronomers  were  keenly  alive. 
They  have  accordingly  laid  down  this  broad  rule  for  the 
guidance  of  the  future  astronomers. 

II 

Since  error  in  calculation  is  as  sinful  as  the  murder  of 
a Brahmin,  the  correct  places  of  the  planets  shall  be  ascer- 
tained by  daily  meridian  observations. 

And  this  cannot  be  done  without  an  Observatory.  Ob- 
servatories of  some  sort  did  exist  iu  this  land  ; but  owing 
to  foreign  invasions  and  the  want  of  encouragement  on  the 
part  of  rulers,  the  science  has  ceased  to  progress,  and  the  for- 
mer tables  for  want  of  corrections  haro  become  useless.  The 
calendars  therefore  prepared  by  the  native  astrologers  do 


INTRODUCTION. 


IB 


not  give  tlie  true  places  of  the  planets.  The  error  has  been 
going  on  for  the  last  1000  years. 


The  nautical  almanacs  prepared  in  Europe  and  Ame- 
rica give  very  correct  positions  of  the  planets ; and  Messrs. 
Bapu  Deva  Sastry  of  Benares,  Lakshmana  Chatrai  of  Poona, 
Rao-hunatha  Chariar  of  Madras,  and  Vencateswara  Deekshi- 
tar  and  Sundareswara  Srouty  of  Combaconum  have  started 
almanacs  basing  their  calculation  on  the  correct  modern 
tables.  These  tables  enable  us  to  ascertain  correctly  the 
places  of  the  planets  from  the  Vernal  Equinox,  one  of  the 
two  points  where  the  ecliptic  cuts  the  equator.  This  point 
is  the  Western  first  point  of  Aries.  It  has  a retrograde 
motion  at  the  rate  of  about  507  a year.  But  the  Hindu 
first  point  of  Aries  is  the  fixed  star  Revati  (the  Yogatara 
of  the  group)  which  is  stated  to  be  on  the  ecliptic.  This 
star  is  at  present  about  20°  to  the  East  of  the  Vernal  Equi- 
nox. Planetary  places  from  this  star  are  known  as  the 
Nirayana  Splint  am,  and  places  from  the  Vernal  Equinox  are 
known  as  the  Sayana  Sphutam.  The  little  bit  of  increas- 
ing space  between  the  two  points  is  known  as  Ayanamsa. 
Now  Hindu  astrology  rests  on  the  Nirayana  Sphutam  of 
the  planets,  and  modern  tables  give  us  the  correct  Sayana 
Sphutam ; so  that  if  the  length  of  the  Ayanamsa  is  correctly 
known,  it  may  be  subtracted  from  the  Sayana  Sphutam,  and 
the  remainder  will  be  the  Nirayana  Sphutam  required. 
But  the  exact  length  of  the  Ayanamsa  is  not  known,  and  it 
cannot  be  ascertained  by  direct  observation,  because  the 
star  Revati  has  disappeared.  I have  treated  of  this  subject 
at  some  length  in  the  April  (1883)  issue  of  the  Tlieosophist - 
The  several  almanac  publishers  already  referred  to  have  arbi- 
trarily assumed  different  lengths  of  the  Ayanamsa,  evidently 
to  suit  their  own  convenience.  These  lengths  of  the  Aya- 
namsa on  the  1st  January  1883  are  : — 


14 


INTRODUCTION. 


Q 

✓ 

// 

(1)  Bombay 

Almanac 

18 

14 

20 

(2)  Madras 

(3)  Combaconum 

| do 

22 

2 

39 

(4)  Benares 

do 

21 

58 

29 

(5)  Vakhya 

do  ... 

22 

41 

44 

(6)  Siddhanta 

do  ... 

20 

46 

15 

I have  discovered 

the  true  length 

to 

range 

between 

20°  23'  8"  and  20°  25'  22"  on  the  1st  January  1883.  By 
adopting  the  mean,  namely,  20°  24'  15"  the  maximum 
amount  of  error  will  only  be  V 7"-  Now  the  difference 
between  the  correct  A3?anamsa  and  the  various  Ayanamsas 
above  giveu  will  be  seen  from  the  following  : — 


O 

/ 

// 

(1)  Bombay 

...  — 2 

9 

55 

(2)  Madras  1 

(3)  Combaconum  j 

...  + 1 

38 

24 

(4)  Benares 

...  4-  1 

34 

14 

(5)  Valcya 

...  + 2 

17 

29 

(6)  Siddhanta 

...  +0 

22 

0 

To  express  the  same 

in  other  words. 

The 

A}7anamsa 

error  as  it  affects  the  planetary  positions  in  point  of  time  in 
the  first  four  almanacs  will  be  found  to  be  as  follows: — 


Planets. 

Bombay 
(before ) 

Madras  and 
Combaconum 
(after^ 

Benares 
( after) 

day. 

hour. 

day. 

hour. 

day. 

hour. 

Sun  ... 

2 

5 

1 

16 

1 

14 

Moon... 

0 

4 

0 

3 

0 

3 

Mars  ... 

4 

3 

3 

3 

3 

0 

Mercury 

0 

13 

0 

10 

0 

Jupiter 

26 

0 

19 

17 

18 

21 

Venus 

1 

9 

1 

0 

0 

23 

Saturn 

64 

16 

4S 

23 

46 

20 

Moon’s  node... 

40 

21 

31 

0 

29 

16 

INTRODUCTION. 


15 


So  that  it  is  evident  that  horoscopes  constructed,  on 
the  planetary  positions  as  found  in  the  existing  almanacs 
are  wrong. 

Again,  in  the  construction  of  horoscopes,  the  following 
wrong  table  showing  the  Rasimana  or  time  of  oblique  ascen- 
sion of  the  Zodiacal  signs  above  the  horizon  is  adopted  nearly 
throughout  the  land  by  a great  majority  of  ignorant  astro- 
logers. 


Aries 

Ghatikas.  i 

Libra 

Ghatikas. 

5 

Taurus 

n 

Scorpio 

H 

Gemini 

5i 

Sagittary 

5* 

Cancer 

Capricorn 

H 

Leo 

Aquarius 

4f 

Virgo 

O 

1 5 

Pisces 

4i 

The  reader  is  referred  to  the  Appendix  for  a correct 
table  for  all  the  places  of  India- 


A third  cause  of  failure  is  au  ignorance  of  the  local 
time.  The  present  days  are  days  of  clocks  and  watches, 
and  these  are  luxuries  confined  to  our  towns  and  do  not 
extend  to  our  villages.  Besides,  these  clocks  and  watches 
are  rarely  made  to  show  the  local  time.  In  most  of  the 
places  of  Southern  India,  the  clock  shows  the  Madras  time> 
and  where  there  are  no  clocks  the  time  is  ascertained  by  a 
rough  calculation  applied  to  the  length  of  a man’s  shadow. 
The  corrections  due  to  the  latitude  of  the  place  and  to  the 
position  of  the  sun  on  the  ecliptic  are  omitted.  At  night, 
if  the  sky  should  happen  to  be  clear,  the  transit  of  parti- 
cular constellations  over  the  meridian  is  observed,  and  by 
the  application  of  a rough  table  beginning  with 

“ When  Sravaua  crosses  the  meridian,  Aries  has  risen 
by  2f  Ghatikas,”  an  attempt  is  made  to  ascertain  the  local 
time.  In  the  first  place  the  table  is  a rough  one,  and  in  the 


16 


INTRODUCTION. 


second  place  it  applies  to  the  time  when  the  Yogatara  or 
chief  star  of  the  group  crosses  the  meridian.  The  table  there- 
fore becomes  useless  for  times  lying  between  the  transit  of 
the  Yogatara  of  one  group  and  that  of  the  Yogatara  of  the 
next  group.  Besides,  most  men  are  ignorant  not  only  of  the 
Yogotara  but  of  the  exact  position  of  the  meridian ; and  turn- 
ing towards  the  star  which  might  be  to  the  cast  or  west  of 
the  meridian,  they  fancy  that  it  is  just  about  to  make  the 
transit.  If  the  night  happens  to  be  a cloud}1-  one,  the  time 
is  purely  one  of  guess  work.  So  many  errors  must  of  neces- 
sity lead  often  to  an  error  in  the  Lagna  ; and  when  this  oc- 
curs, it  upsets  the  whole  thing.  Add  to  this  the  errors  of  the 
calendar  relating  to  the  places  of  the  plauets.  Cent,  per  cent, 
of  the  horoscopes  of  the  present  day  are  therefore  wrong.  It 
is  a horoscope  of  this  type  that  is  put  into  the  hands  of  a 
person  who  calls  himself  an  astrologer.  In  a great  number 
of  cases?  Indian  astrologers  are  poor  men  who  have  betaken 
themselves  to  the  study  of  the  science  as  a means  of  liveli- 
hood. The  public  would  pay  them  only  if  they  would 
predict  some  good  fortune;  if  he  correctly  predicts  an  evil, 
he  is  not  only  not  paid  anything,  but  is  set  down  for  a 
sorcerer,  whom  it  would  not  be  safe  to  approach.  Thus  the 
astrologer  is  induced  to  conceal  any  unpleasant  truths  which 
he  might  happen  to  know,  and  after  this  the  complaint  is 
that  the  predictions  of  such  and  such  astrologers  have 
failed  ! For  want  of  encouragement  the  astrologer  pays  little 
attention  to  the  study  of  his  subject  and  often  has  recourse 
to  the  help  of  the  black  art  as  already  described. 

We  shall  now  say  a few  words  regarding  a particular 
branch  of  the  science  known  as  Prasna  or  Arudha  Shastra, 
horary  astrology.  This  differs  from  horoscopy  or  nativities 
in  this  respect,  viz.,  while  the  latter  rests  on  the  motions  of 
the  visible  planets  round  the  suij,  the  former  rests  mainly 
on  the  motions  of  certain  invisible  planets  which  are  sup- 


INTRODUCTION. 


17 


posed  to  move  round  the  horizon.  Their  laws  of  motion 
are  exceedingly  simple.  These  planets,  which  are  8 in  num- 
ber, move  in  the  following  order  : The  Sun,  Mars,  Jupiter, 

Mercury,  Venus,  Saturn,  the  Moon  and  Ealm,  at  the  distance 
of  a sign  and  a half,  or  45u  from  one  another  and  take  ono 
full  day  or  24  hours  to  go  round  the  horizon — the  Sun  being 
at  the  first  point  of  Aries  every  day  at  sunrise,  the  horizon 
being  their  ecliptic  and  divided  into  12  equal  parts,  each 
part  being  known  as  a sign,  and  Taurus,  Leo,  Scorpio  and 
Aquarius  being  respectively  the  due  eastern,  southern,  west- 
ern and  northern  signs.  The  remaining  8'signs  occupy  the 
four  corners,  two  for  each  corner,  one  on  each  side  of  the 
corner  point — Aries  being  situated  to  the  right  of  the  north- 
eastern point,  the  order  of  the  signs  remaining  the  same  as 
in  the  heavens  above.  The  astrologer  forms  as  it  were  the 
sun,  round  whom  the  planets  revolve.  The  direction  of 
(sign  occupied  by)  the  querent  is  noted  down  as  well  as 
the  position  of  the  invisible  planets  at  the  time.  We 
cannot  enter  into  the  details  of  the  process  of  calculation 
here.  The  astrologer  proceeds  to  discover  the  matter  ques- 
tion and  then  makes  his  predictions  with  the  help  of  his 
books.  In  this  he  is  assisted  by  another  department  of 
astrology  known  as  Angavidya  or  Cheshta  Shastra  which 
rests  on  the  motions  of  human  limbs,  casual  words  aud  the 
like.  Angavidya  rests  on  the  theory  that  an  All-pervading 
Intelligence  is  pointing  out  to  the  astrologer  (who  is 
otherwise  unable  to  know  it)  the  minute  events  of  life  in  a 
hundred  ways.  (Vide  chapter  51  of  Varaha  Mihira’e  Brihat 
Samhita). 

Horoscopy  differs  from  horary  astrology  in  another 
important  point : while  tho  former  enables  one  to  predict 
even  tho  distant  events  of  life,  the  latter  refers  only  to 
events  of  the  immediate  future,  aud  while  tho  one  deals  with 


18  INTRODUCTION. 

events  of  considerable  inportance,  the  latter  deals  mainly 
with  events  comparatively  insignificant,  such,  for  instance, 
as  the  sort  of  meal  which  one  would  take  in  the  course 
of  a day,  the  direction  of  his  seat  and  the  like- 
In  such  cases  the  astrologer  generally- writes  out  his  an- 
swers in  a bit  of  paper  and  folds  it  up  asking  the  questioner 
to  look  into  it  after  the  event,  for,  the  course  of  such  minor 
events  of  life  can  be  easily  altered^by  a'previous  knowledge. 
These  events  of  life  are  the  immediate  effects  of  aset  of 
circumstances  in  which  a person  has  just  placed  himself, 
the  natural  immediate  effects  of  which  form  matters  for 
the  consideration  of  horary  astrology,  and  do  not  come  within 
the  scope  of  horoscopy.  After  a person  has  begun  to  apply 
his  axe  to  a tree,  it  may  not  be  difficult  to  predict  the  direction 
of  its  fall,  but  not  before.  It  would  therefore  be  wrong  to 
conclude  from  these  minor  predictions  of  horary  astrology 
that  the  minutest  events  of  one’s  life  are  preordained  and 
that  man  has  no  control  over  them. 

It  only  remains  to  say  a few  words  about  certain  books 
known  as  Nadigrandhams.  These  purport  to  contain  a 
brief  account  of  the  lives  of  all  mankind.  It  would  appear 
on  a superficial  consideration  of  the  subject  that  such  books 
cannot  at  all  exist.  That  they  exist  is  a fact  and  the  ques- 
tion therefore  is  how  came  they  to  exist — how  were  they 
prepared. 

The  planets  occupy  particular  places  on  the  ecliptic  at 
particular  points  of  time.  Every  moment  their  positions  are 
changing.  The  question  then  is  in  what  period  of  time 
the  planets  return  to  their  former  positions.  This  is  a 
question  of  Arithmetic— a question  of  the  Least  Common 
Multiple  of  7 or  8 numbers.  These  numbers  are  the 


INTRODUCTION. 


19 


siderial  periods  of  Mercury, 
and  Saturn  and  of  the  Moon, 

Venus,  Earth, 
viz-, 

Mars, 

Mercury 

87-9693 

days 

Venus 

i224*7008 

Earth 

365-2564 

V 

Mars 

686-9795 

Jl 

Jupiter 

4332-5848 

Saturn 

10759-2200 

>> 

Moon 

27  ds.  7 hrs. 

45  m 

Now  the  L.  C.  M.  of  tho  above  numbers  is  the  Kalp 
of  the  Hindu  Astronomy  is  which.  4320000000  siderial  years. 
After  which  the  planets  all  return  to  the  first  point  of  Aries 
at  the  horizon  of  Lanka — a place  ou  the  equator  whoso 
longitude  is  7G0  E.  from  Greenwich.  A Kalpa  consists  of 
1000  Chaturyugas.  A Chaturyuga  consists  of  4320U00 
siderial  years,  of  which  Kaliyuga  consists  of  432000  siderial 
years- 


Dwapara  yuga 
Treta  yuga  ... 
Krita  yuga  ... 


432000  X 2 
432000  X 3 
432000  x 4 


864000  years. 
1296000 
1728000 


A Kalpa  forms  Brahma’s  day,  at  the  end  of  which 
the  Mahapralaya  commences.  Again,  the  number  of 
Rasi  Chakrams  or  the  Zodiacal  representations  of  the 
positions  of  the  planets  is  also  limited.  How  ? Suppose 
there  was  only  one  planet,  say,  the  Suu.  He  might 
occupy  any  one  of  the  12  houses  ; so  might  Mars  and 
each  of  the  other  planets.  The  12  places  of  the  Sun 
combined  with  the  12  places  of  Mars  will  give  us  122  or 
144  different  places  for  the  Sun  and  Mars.  These  combined 
with  the  12  places  of  Jupiter  will  g'vo  122X  12  or  12s  or 
1 728  places  for  the  three  planets,  the  Sun,  M irs  and  Jupiter. 
Similarly  4 planets  will  give  124  positions  and  5 planets 
will  give  12 r’  positions,  and  so  on.  Now  horoscopy  deals 


20 


INTRODUCTION. 


with  the  positions  of  the  five  planets  Mercury,  Venus, 
Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  ns  well  as  the  Sun,  the  Moon 
andRahu  (Moon’s  ascending  node).  * Of  these  8 planets,  all, 
excepting  the  inferior  planets,  Mercury  and  Venus,  will 
give  us  12G  positions.  Now  the  greatest  elongation  of 
Mercury  from  the  Sun  is  about  19°,  and  that  of  Venus  is 
about  47°  ; so  that  when  the  Sun  occupies  a particular  sign, 
Mercury  will  occupy  either  that  sign  or  the  sign  next  after 
it  or  next  before  it  ; similarly  Venus  will  be  either  in  the 
house  occupied  by  the  Sun  or  in  one  of  the  two  signs  next 
after  it  or  next  before  it.  In  other  words,  the  number 
already  obtained  will  have  to  be  increased  threefold  on 
account  of  Mercury  and  fivefold  on  account  of  Venus.  The 
number  then  is  12°  X 8 X 5.  Combine  with  this  the  12 
Lagnas.  The  total  number  of  Rasi  Chakrams  therefore 
is  126  xo  x 5 X 12= 12 7 X 15-537477120.  So  that  while 
the  limit  of  time  is  432,0000000  siderial  years,  the 
limit  of  Rasi  Chakrams  during  that  period  is  537477120. 
These  figures  have  been  stated  simply  with  the  object  of 
dispelling  certain  wrong  notions  that  the  number  of 
lioroscopic  Rasi  Chakrams  is  infinite  and  that  the  changes 
go  on  for  an  infinite  period  of  time.  On  the  other  hand,  it 
would  be  wrong  to  suppose  that  the  scope  of  a Nadigrun- 
dham  extends  to  the  period  of  a Kalpa  or  that  it  treats  of 
so  many  chakrams-  The  chakrams  themselves  cannot  be 
so  many  in  reality,  the  number  given  above  expresses  tbe 
possible  number  of  positions  in  which  the  planets  can  bo 
conceived  to  be  placed  in  the  12  signs  of  the  Zodiac  alge- 
braically. But  they  cannot  assume  all  these  positions,  for 
this  simple  reason,  that  they  have  motions  of  their  own 
and  can  only  come  to  particular  positions  subject  to  such 
motions.  Again,  of  537477120  lioroscopic  Rasi  Chakrams, 


* Uranus,  Neptune  and  other  telescopic  planets  are  not  supposed  to 
exercise  any  appreciable  influence  over  human  affair*. 


INTRODUCTION. 


21 


reduced,  us  just  pointed  out,  a very  large  number  refer  to 
animals  aud  plants,  (vide  Ch.  3 on  Animal  and  Vegetable 
horoscopy).  Again,  it  does  not  appear  that  the  Nadi- 
grandhams  treat  of  any  period  of  time  other  than  the  present 
Ka liyuga,  and  it  is  probable  that  those  human  cbakrams 
that  pointed  to  births  in  other  yugas  have  been  rejected. 
Now  a mumber  of  horoscopes,  though  agreeing  in  the  broad 
Zodiacal  divisions  of  the  planetary  places,  might  show  great 
differences  where  the  divisions  are  more  minute  ; as  the 
Navamsa,  Trimsamsa,  Ilora,  Drekkann,  Dvadasamsa  aud 
the  like  divisions,  and  it  might  be  asked  whether  the  Nadi- 
grandhams  recognize  these  divisions,  and  if  not,  on  what 
btfsis  these  grandhams  are  built. 

The  360  degrees  of  the  ecliptic  are  divided  into  12 
equal  parts  of  30  degrees  each,  and  each  division  is  known  as 
a sign  of  the  Zodiac.  Each  sign,  for  purposes  of  Nadi- 
grandhams  is  divided  into  150  parts  known  as  amsas,  and 
these  amsas  have  particular  names  assigned  to  them,  such 
as  Vasudha,  Vyshnavi,  BrahmJ , Kola  Kuta,  A Id,  Sanhari , 
and  so  forth.  A degree  of  the  ecliptic  contains  5 such  parts, 
and  each  part  is  divided  into  two  halves  known  ns 
Poorvabhaga  and  Uttarabhaga,  ?.  e.,  the  first  half  and  the 
second  half.  For  each  half  the  Nadigrandham  contains  a 
life,  and  this  half  represents  in  space  6 minutes,  and  in  time 
a Vighatika  or  24  seconds.  So  that  the  mumber  of  horos- 
copes treated  of  in  Nadigrandhams  as  regards  the  amsas  is 
3,600.  Now  the  first  volume  of  Dhruvanadi  gives  a brief 
account  of  the  lives  of  persons  for  the  many  amsas  already 
referred  to.  The  sketch  is  quite  independent  of  the  posi- 
tion of  the  planets  and  holds  true  with  some  slight  alterations 
from  planetary  influences.  The  points  treated  of  refer  to 
the  material  points  of  one’s  life.  Now  in  the  case  of  human 
horoscopy  there  is  a law  connecting  the  amsas  with  the 
positions  of  the  planets.  I long  suspected  that  such  a law 


22 


INTRODUCTION. 


of  connection  must  exist.  For  otherwise  it  would  not  be 
possible  to  describe  correctly  the  positions  of  the  planets 
several  thousand  years  hence  and  for  such  long  ages.  I 
examined  the  pages  of  the  volume  already  referred  to,  and 
lound  the  author  writing  in  one  place  as  follows  : — 

,£  We  shall  now  proceed  to  state  the  method  of  dis- 
covering the  places  of  the  planets  for  the  several  amsas  for 
human  births.”  A thrill  of  joy  ran  through  me  which 
was  soon  followed  by  bitter  disappointment.  For  the  next 
cadjan  leaf  which  ought  to  have  contained  the 
information  wanted  was  missing!  Some  person,  evidently 
seeing  the  importance  of  the  information,  must  have  carried 
away  the  leaf  of  the  book  I examined.  Our  readers  are 
requested  to  examiue  other  copies  of  the  1st  volume  of  the 
Dhruvauadi. 

The  author  of  a Nadigrandham  takes  up  an  amsam  and 
jots  down  the  positions  or  the  several  sets  of  positions  of  the 
planets,  taking  into  consideration  especially  their  Zodiacal 
divisions,  and  by  slightly  altering,  or  adding  to.  the  brief 
sketch  above  referred  to,  for  the  amsas,  finishes  his  account 
of  a life.  The  author  says  that  he  treats  only  of  about  30 
or  40  important  points  in  each  life.  Now  under  one  of 
these  accounts  a number  of  persons  will  fall  whose  lives  will 
show  differences  of  a more  minute  nature  which  the  Nadi- 
gramlham  does  not  take  into  account.  The  Nadigraud- 
hams  therefore  are  only  very  brief  sketches  of  human  lives. 
A really  learned  astrologer  can  write  out  an  account  of  a 

J CD 

man’s  life  10  or  20  times  the  length  of  the  sketch  in  a 
Nadigrandham. 

This  perhaps  is  the  proper  place  for  a few  words  regard- 
ing a common  complaint  on  the  part  of  persons  who  have 
consulted  the  Nadigrandhams,  that  these  books  are  under  a 
curse,  that  they  correctly  describe  the  past  events  of  a 


INTRODUCTION. 


ft  • 


person’s  life  and  err  regarding  the  future  events.  The  fault 
is  not  that  of  the  Grandham  ; it  certainly  would  not  be  pos- 
sible for  the  author  to  ascertain  before-liand  at  wliat  period 
of  one’s  life  the  book  would  be  consulted,  and  then  to  give  a 
correct  account  of  such  life  till  that  period  of  time,  and  then 
(for  such  an  able  astrologer;  purposely  to  err.  The  fact  13 
that,  as  already  explained,  the  position  of  the  planets  ms 
shewn  in  the  horoscopes  do  not  agree  with  any 
given  in  the  Nadigrandhams.  The  possessor  of  a Nadi- 
graudhan  examines  a number  of  horoscopes  in 
which  the  planetary  positions  very  nearly  approach 
those  shewn  by  the  horoscopes  presented  to  him.  The 
nearer  the  astrologer  approaches  the  correct  horoscope, 
the  more  numerous  will  be  the  points  of  agreement  between 
the  life  suspected  as  the  correct  life  and  the  actual  life  of 
the  person.  Now,  if  while  the  astrologer  reads  out  from 
his  book,  the  person  consulting  it  meets  with  any  past 
events  of  his  life  not  tallying  with  the  statements  of  the 
hook,  the  pages  are  set  aside  and  other  pages  examined.  But 
if  no  discrepancy  is  noticed,  the  person  comes  hastily  to  the 
conclusion  that  the  life  picked  out  is  his  and  goes  home 
satisfied,  with  a cop}7  of  it.  Iu  such  cases,  the  chances  of 
disappointment  are  more  numerous  than  those  of  success^ 
The  best  plan  would  be,  for  a person  who  wishes  to  con- 
sult the  Nadigrandhams,  to  have  his  horoscope  prepared 
with  the  help  of  the  correct  modern  tables  and  the  con'ect 
ayanamsa.* 

As  regards  the  first  astrological  work  taken  up  for 
translation,  viz.,  the  Brihat  Jataka  of  Varahi  Mihira,  it  is 

1 

♦This  work  can  be  done  at  this  office  for  any  person  who  wonld  let 
ns  know  the  time  and  place  of  his  birth  for  a fee  of  Rs.  3.  But  we  can- 
not undertake  to  refer  to  any  Nadigrandham  as  we  have  no  such 
work  with  n«. 


24 


INTRODUCTION. 


generally  considered  as  one  of  the  best  Works  on  the  science. 
The  author  himself  says  of  it  as  follows  : 

“ For  the  benefit  of  those  of  broken  attempts  to  cross 
tho  ocean  of  horoseopy,  I construct  this  little  boat  consist- 
ing of  a variety  of  metres  with  a multiplicity  of  meanings-” 
Most  of  the  stanzas  are  purposely  intended  to  convey 
several  meanings.  Four  commentaries  liave  accordingly 
sprung  up.  The  well  known  one  is  that  of  Bhatta  Utpala  ; 
another  is  known  as  Subodhini  ; both  of  these  are  now 
with  me;  a third  commentary  is  known  as  Mudraksari,  in 
which  it  is  said  that  most  of  the  stanzas  are  interpreted 
arithmetically — the  letters  all  standing  for  so  many  figures 
and  the  figures  representing  the  27  asterisms,  the  12  signs, 
the  9 planets,  and  so  forth.  The  fourth  commoutary  is 
known  as  Sreepateeyam. 

The  author  has  written  a smaller  work  on  astrology 
known  as  L;ighu  Jataka.  Hence  the  present  work  is  styled 
the  Briliat  Jataka.  Jataka  or  horoseopy  is  one  of  the  three 
sections  of  Jyotis-Sastra  ; and  the  author  has  treated  of  all 
the  three  branches.  The  other  two  branches  are  Samhita 
and  Astronomy.  Varaha  Mihira’s  work  on  the  former, 
known  as  tho  Brihat  Samhita,  is  now  being  translated  by 
me,  and  his  astronomical  work  is  known  as  Panchasiudhan- 
tika.  It  was  long  supposed  to  have  been  lost.  Fortu- 
nately two  copies  of  this  rare  work  were  recently  disco- 
vered, and  they  were  purchased  by  the  Bombay  Government. 
M.  Thibaut,  Phil.  Dr.  is  now  preparing  an  edition  and  an 
English  translation  of  tho  same,  assisted  by  Pundit  Suddha- 
kara-  Varaha  Mihira  has  also  written  a work  known  as 
Yogayatra.  A manuscript  copy  ot  this  work  is  with  Dr. 
Kerne,  now  iu  Leydon,  Holland. 


INTEODtfCTIOtf. 


OX 

— J 

1 have  deemed  it  advisable  to  explain  and  retain  the 
use  of  a number  ol  Sanscrit  terms  for  the  convenience  of  the 
natives  of  this  country,  who  must  be  more  familiar  with 
them  than  with  their  English  equivalents  where  such  exist. 
It  may  be  well  to  state  here  some  of  the  subjects  treated  of 
iu  the  work  now  taken  up  for  translation.  The  book  con- 
tains 28  chapters.  The  first  two  chapters  relate  to  defini- 
tions of  astrological  terms  and  to  elementary  principles, 
The  third  relates  to  animal  aud  vegetable  horoscopy.  The 
fourth  treats  of  the  determination!  of  the  nature  of  issue — - 
their  physical  peculiarities,  fortunes,  &c.,  from  the  planetary 
positions  at  the  time  of  conception.  A chapter  is  devoted  to 
the  determination  of  the  description  of  the  place  of  birth 
and  the  other  incidents  connected  with  the  time  of  birth  from 
planetary  positions  with  a view  to  the  correct  ascertainment 
of  the  Lagna.  The  next  chapter  treats  of  early  death — 
Balarishta  and  the  next  is  devoted  to  the  determination  of 

• v 

the  length  of  life  of  a native — Jataki.  A chapter  is  de- 
voted to  the  particular  avocations  of  men  and  to  their 
sources  of  wealth.  Then  follow  several  important  chapters 
on  Raja  and  other  Yogas.  The  chapter  on  Pravrijya  }Toga  de- 
termines under  what  planetary  aspects  a native  will  turn  out 
an  ascetic.  The  chapter  headed  Anisbtadhyaya  contains  a 
number  of  malevolent  planetary  positions,  each  connected 
with  some  evil  of  human  life.  A chapter  is  devoted  to  women. 
This  is  followed  by  a chapter  which  describes  the  particular 
manner  in  which  a person  meets  with  his  death  and  the 
nature  of  his  future  life.  In  the  next  chapter  the  author  la}'s 
down  rules  for  the  determination  of  the  horoscope  of  a per- 
son ignorant  of  his  time  of  birth.  The  above  is  not  a 
complete  list,  and  it  would  be  wrong  to  j.udge  of  the  inter- 
esting nature  of  the  contents  of  each  chapter  from  the  brief 
account  given  above. 

The  appendix  to  the  translation  will  contain  numerous 


INTRODUCTION. 


20 

tables  and  diagrams  relating  to  the  construction  of  horos- 
copes and  to  the  ascertainment  of  the  local  time  by  the 
sun-dial,  by  the  shadow,  and,  at  night,  by  tho  transit  of 
the  stars  over  the  meridian.  We  will  also  state  rules  for 
the  construction  of  tho  plaue  of  meridian  by  means  of  fine 
threads  for  purposes  of  observation.  The  appendix  will 
also  contain  a few  tables,  for  the  calculation  of  the  lengths 
of  the  Dasas  and  Bhukties. 

We  may  conclude  this  Introduction  with  the' words  of 
Zadkiel  and  “ advise  those  who  value  truth  to  spend  a few 
days  in  examining  the  principles  laid  down  in  this  work 
and  applying  them  to  their  own  individual  cases  before 
they  join  the  herd  of  the  learned  and  the  unlearned  in 
pledging  their  words  to  a false  assertion,  viz.,  that  Astrology 
is  an  unfounded  science.'5 

N.  C. 


Madura,  2nd  Juno  1885. 


I 


The  following  list  of  Astrological  terms  defined  in 
the  first  two  chapters  and  arranged  alphabetically  with 
the  stanzas  given  opposite  to  each  is  published  for  con- 
venience of  reference. 

Ch.  Stanza. 


A. 


Agjna  (10th  house) 

I 

16 

Akokera  (Greek  name  for  Makara,  Capricorn). 

I 

8 

Ambu  (4th  house) 

I 

18 

Angles  or  quadrants,  their  strength  ... 

I 

19 

Antyabha  (Sign  Meena,  Pisces) ... 

I 

8 

Apoklima  (the  3rd,  6th,  9th  and  12  houses 

from  the  ascendant) 

I 

18 

Aspects,  planetary, 

II 

13 

Astabhavana  (7th  house  or  setting  sign) 

I 

18 

Atimitragraha,  very  friendly  planets 

II 

19 

Atisatrugraba,  very  inimical  planets 

II 

19 

B. 

Benefie  planets  ... 

II 

5 

Benetic  signs  ...  ...  ... 

I 

11 

Biped  signs,  their  strength  ... 

I 

19 

C. 

Castes,  planetary  divisions  of  ...  ...  ... 

II 

7 

Centiped  signs,  their  strength... 

I 

19 

Chara  rasi,  movable  signs 

I 

11 

Chaturasra,  4th  and  8th  houses 

I 

16 

Cliatushpada  rasi,  quadruped  signs  ... 

I 

19 

Cheshtabala,  motional  strength  of  planets  ... 

II 

19 

Clothes,  planetary  divisions  of... 

11 

12 

Colors,  planetary  divisions  of... 

II 

4 &;  5 

Colors,  of  Zodiacal  signs 

I 

20 

Common  signs 

I 

11 

D. 

Dakshina  rasis,  Southern  signs 

I 

11 

Depression  signs  and  degrees  ... 

1 

13 

Devas,  planetary  divisions  of 

11 

•5 

ASTROLOGICAL  TERMS. 


Ch.  Stanza, 


Dhatus  or  elements  of  tlie  body,  planetary 
divisions  of...  ■>.. 

Dik  bain,  quarterly  strength,  of  planets 
Dik,  direction  of  planets 
Directions  of  planets 
Diurnal  signs  ... 

Drekkanas.  their  lords... 

Drishti,  planetary  sight  or  aspect 
Dnseliikya,  3rd  house  ... 


Dvvadasamsa,  division  of  a sign 
parts  ...  ... 

Dwelling  houses,  planetary  div 
parts  of 

Dwipada  rasis,  biped  signs 
Dyuna,  7th  house 


into  l1. 


..  II 

11 

. II 

19 

..  II 

5 

..  II 

5 

..  I 

10 

I 

11  & 12 

..  II 

13 

...  I 

19 

...  I 

15  & 1G 

...  I 

f 

G 

. II 

12 

...  I 

19 

...  I 

16 

E. 


Eastern  signs 

Elements,  dhatus,  of  the  body,  planetary 
divisions  of  ••• 

Elements,  planetary  divisions  of. 

Exaltation  signs  and  degrees  ... 

F. 


Female  planets  ... 

Female  signs 
Fixed  signs 
Flavor,  planetary 
Foot,  signs  that  rise  with  theii 
Forms  of  the  signs 
Forms  of  the  planets.  ... 
Friendly  planets.  ••• 

G- 


Garments,  planetery  divisions  of 
Greek  names  for  Zodiacal  signs. 
Guna,  temper,  planetary  divisions  of. 


II 

II 

I 


II 

I 

I 

II 
I 
I 

II 
II 


...  II 
...  I 
...  II 


u 

II 

6 

13 


6 

11 

11 

14 

10 

5 

8 to  11 
15  to  18 


12 

8 

7 


ASTROLOGICAL  TERMS. 


Ill 


H. 


Ch.  Stanza. 


Heads,  signs  that  rise  with  their 
Head  and  tail,  sign  that  rises  with  its 
Hermaphrodite  planets... 

Hibuka,  4th  house 
Hora 

Horas,  their  lords 
Honsesj  their  lords 

Hridroga.  Creek  name  for  Kumbha,  Aquarius 


I 

I 

II 

I 

I 

I 

I 

I 


10 

10 

0 

18 

9 

11  & 12 

6 

8 


I. 


Immovable  signs 

...  I 

11 

Inimical  planets 

...  II 

15  to  18 

J. 

Jamitra,  7th  house 

...  I 

18 

Jati,  Caste,  of  the  planets 

...  II 

7 

Jituma,  Greek  name  for  Mithuna,  Gemini 

...  I 

8 

Juka,  Greek  name  for  Tula,  Libra 

...  I 

8 

K. 


Kahn,  timo.  planetary  lengths  of 

II 

14 

Kala  bala,  periodical  strength  of  planets 

II 

19 

Kala  purusha,  planetary  divisions  of 

11 

1 

Kala  purusha,  Zodiacal  division  of 

I 

4 

Karmasthanam  10th  honse 

I 

18 

Kendra,  quadrants  or  angles,  their  strength 

1 

17  & 19 

Kourpya,  Greek  name  for  Yrischika,  Scorpio. 

I 

8 

Kria,  Greek  name  for  Mesha,  Aries  ... 

I 

8 

Kulira,  Kataka,  Cancer... 

I 

8 

L' 

Lagoa,  strength  of  

I 

18 

Leya,  Greek  name  for  Simha,  Leo  ... 

I 

8 

ASTROLOGICAL  TERMS. 


iV 


M. 


Ch.  Stanza. 


Male-planets 

Male  signs  

Malefic  planets  ... 

Malefic  signs  ... 

Measurement  of  the  Zodiacal  signs 
Meshoorana,  10th  house 
Metals,  planetary  divisions  of  ... 
Mitragraha,  friendly  planets  ... 
Moola  trikona,  signs  and  their  lords 
Motional  strength  of  planets 

Movable  signs  

Movable  and  immovable  signs  ... 


...  II  6 

...  I II 

...  II  5 

...  I 11 

...  I 19 

...  I IS 

...  II  12 

...  II  15  to  18 
...  I 

...  II 

...  I 


14 

19 

11 

11 


N. 


Naisargikabala,  natural,  relative  strength 

of  planets 

Names,  various,  for  planets 
Napumsaka  graha,  hermaphrodite  planets  ... 
Natural,  relative,  strength  of  plauets 
Navamsa,  division  of  sign  into  9 parts  and 
their  lords  ... 

Neecha,  depression  signs 
Neutral  planets 
Nocturnal  signs 

* 

P. 


Panaphara  signs,  2nd,  5th,  8th  & 11th  houses. 
Papagraha,  malefic  planets 
Paparasi,  malefic  signs 
Paschima  rasi,  Western  signs 
Pathona,  Greek  name  for  Kannjra,  Virgo  ... 
Periodical  strength  of  the  planets 
Political  divisions  of  the  planets  .r- 
Positional  strength  of  the  planets 


Prak  rasis,  Eastern  signs 
Prishtodaya  rasis,  signs  rising  with 
Purusha  graba,  male  planets  . . . 
Puruslia  rasis,  male  signs 


their  feet. 


II 

21 

II 

2 & 3 

11 

6 

11 

19 

I 

6 

I 

13 

11 

17  & 18 

I 

10 

I 

18 

II 

5 

I 

11 

I 

11 

I 

8 

II 

19 

II 

1 

II 

19 

I 

11 

I 

10 

II 

6 

I 

11 

• • • 


* • # 


ASTROLOGICAL  TERMS. 


r 


Q. 


Cl)-  Stanza. 


Quadranfs,  their  strength  

Quadruped  signs,  their  s rengtli 
Quarterly  strength  of  planets 

R. 

Rasis.  Signs,  names  of 
Rasis,  their  lords 
Rikshasandlii,  define!  ... 

Ritus,  planetary  divisioi  S of  ... 

Rupa,  shapes,  of  planets 
Rupa,  shapes,  of  signs 

S- 

Sanaa  graha,  neutral  planets... 

Satru  graka,  inimical  planets... 

Seasons,  planetary  divisions  of 
Skadvarga,  6 modes  of  the  division  of  the 
eel  ip  tic  ...  ...  ...  ... 

Shapes  of  the  signs 
Shapes  of  the  planets  ... 

Sights  or  aspects  of  the  planets 
Signs,  names  of 
Signs,  their  lords 

Significations,  oQthe  12  signs  of  Zodiac 
Siraprishtodaya  rasi,  sign  that  rises  with  its 
head  aDtl  tail  ...  ...  ...  ... 

Sirodaya  rasis,  signs  that  rise  with  their 
heads  ...  ... 

Southern  signs  ... 

Sthanabala,  positional  strength  of  planets  ... 
Sthira  rasis,  fixed  signs 
Streegraha,  female  planets  ^_... 

Stree  rasis,  female  signs 

Strength  of  Lagna  

Subhagraha,  benefic  planets  ... 

Sukha,  4th  house 
Sutabha,  5th  bouse 

Swaksketra  houses  ami  their  lords  


I 

17  & 19 

I 

19 

II 

19 

I 

4 

I 

6 

I 

7 

11 

12 

11 

8 to  .11 

I 

5 

II 

16,17 

It 

15  to  IS 

II 

12 

I 

9 

I 

5 

II 

8 to  11 

11 

13 

I 

4 

I 

6 

I 

15  & 1G 

I 

10 

I 

10 

I 

11 

II 

19 

I 

11 

11 

6 

I 

n 

1 

39 

II 

5 

I 

13 

I 

13 

I 

6 

VI 


ASTROLOGICAL  TEEMS. 


T. 


Ch.  Stanz. 


Tails,  signs  that  rise  with  their  ...  ...  I 

Tapas,  9fch  house  I 

Tavuri,  Greek  name  for  Vrishabha,  Taurus  ...  I 
Temper,  of  planets  ...  ...  ...  ...  II 

Toukshika,  Greek  name  for  Dhanus,  Sagittari.  I 

Triangular  signs  I 

Trikona,  5th  house  ...  ...  ...  ...  I 

Trikona  rasi,  triangular  signs  ...  ...  ...  I 

Trimsamsa,  division  of  sign  into  30  parts  ...  I 
Tritrikona,  9th  house  ...  ...  ..  ...  I 


U. 


Ubhaya  rasi,  movable  and  immovable  signs...  I 
Uccharasi,  signs  of  exaltation  with  degrees  ...  I 
Upachaya  or  improving  signs  ...  ...  I 

Uttara  rasi,  Northern  signs  I 

Y. 


Vargottama,  defined 
Yarn  a,  color  of  planets 
Varna,  color  of  Zodiacal  signs 
Vesi,  2nd  house  from  the  Sun. 
Yesma,  4th  house 


W. 


Western  signs  ... 


I 


10 

19 

8 

7 

8 

G 

18 

6 

7 

19 


11 

13 

15 

11 


14 
4 & 5 
20 
20 
18 


11 


THE 


BRIH  T J TAKA 

OF 

VAR  AH  A MlHIRA. 


CHAPTER  I. 

Definitions  and  Elementary  Principles 
(Zodiacal.) 

1.  May  the  Sun  give  us  speech,  who  by  his  light 
illumines  the  Moon, (a)  who  is  the  path  of  those  who  havo 
no  rebirth,  who  is  the  Atma  of  those  who  know  the  Atma, 
who  is  tho  Deva  worshipped  in  sacrificial  rites,  who  is  the 
Lord  of  the  Devas  and  of  the  Lights  of  the  sky,  who  is 
the  Author  of  the  origin,  growth  and  annihilation  of  the 
worlds,  who  is  sung  in  the  Vedas  in  various  ways,  who  is 
possessed  of  many  rays  and  who  forms  the  Lamp  of  the 
three  worlds. 

notes. 

(a)  In  connection  with  this  we  would  draw  the  atten- 
tion of  the  reader  to  what  the  author  says  on  the  subject 
of  the  Moon  receiving  light  from  the  Sun  in  Stanza  2 of 
Chapter  IV  of  his  Brihat  Sarahita,  which  runs  as  follows  ; 

“The  rays  of  the  Sun  falling  on  the  watery  Moon  re- 
move the  darkness  of  the  night  (on  Earth)  just  in  the  same 
way  as  light  reflected  from  a mirror  (placed  in  the  Sun)  re- 
moves the  darkness  (from)  within  a room.” 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


0 


[ CH . I- 


And  in  the  Vedas  we  find  tlae  (visible)  Moon  briefly 
defined  as  follows  : 


u Sur v a rasmischandramah.” 
rlhe  Moon  is  the  rays  of  the  Sun. 


2.  Though  various  well  written  works  on  Astrology  (a) 
the  productions  of  able  men— exist  for  the  enlighten- 
ment of  intelligent  students  (of  horoscope),  I begin 
to  constiuct  (this)  small  boat  (consisting)  of  stanzas 
(written)  in  various  metres  and  of  several  meanings  for 
(the  benefit  of)  persons  of  broken  attempts  to  cross  the 
vast  ocean  of  horoscopy. 

NOTES. 

(a)  Such  works  as  those  of  Parasara,  Garga^  Badara- 
yana,  Satyackarya  and  others. 


3.  According  to  some,  the  word  horn  is  a corruption 
of  the  word  Ahoratri,  the  first  and  last  letters  (syllables) 
being  dropped.  The  science  (of  horoscopy)  treats  of  the 
effects  of  the  good  and  bad  deeds  (karma)  of  men  in  their 
previous  births. 


4.  The  (twelve)  signs  of  the  Zodiac,  commencing  with 
the  first  point  of  Aries  and  of  (the  asterism  of)  Aswani, 
and  consisting,  each,  of  nine  stellar  quarters  and  forming 
a circle,  are  respectively  the  head,  face,  breast,  heart,  belly, 
navel,  abdomen,  genital  organ,  two  thighs,  two  knees, 
two  ankles  and  the  two  feet  of  Kalapurusha.  (The  terms) 
Basi,  Kshetra,  Gfraha,  Riksha,  Bham,  Bhavana;  are  synony- 
mous terms. 


CH.  I.] 


BEIHAT  JATAKA. 


O 

o 


NOTES. 

The  following  tablo_will  be  useful  for  purposes  of  ready 
reference : — 


Rasi . 

Sign. 

Part  of  body. 

Mesh  a 

...  Aries 

...  Head 

Vrishabha 

...  Taurus 

...  Face 

Mithuna 

...  Gemini 

...  Breast 

Kataka 

...  Cancer 

...  Heart 

Simha 

...  Leo 

...  Belly 

Kanya 

...  Virgo 

...  Navel 

Tnla 

...  Libra 

...  Abdomen 

Yrisch  ika 

...  Scorpio 

...  Genital  organ 

Dhanns 

...  Sagittari 

...  Two  thighs 

Makara 

...  Capricorn 

...  Two  knees 

Kumbha 

...  Aquarius 

...  Two  ankles 

Meena 

...  Pisces 

...  Two  feet 

The  twenty-seven  astei  i 

Aswini 

Bharatii 

Krittika 

Kohini 

Mrigasirsha 

Ardra 

Punnrvasu 

Pushya 

A«hlesha 

Magha 

P.  Phalgnni 

U.  Phalguni 

Hasta 

Chitra 

Swaii 

Yisnkha 

Armradha  ... 

Jyeslita 

Mnla 

P.  Ashadha 
TJ.  Ashadha 
Sravara 
Siavishta 
Staabhishak 
P.  Bhadrapada 
IJ.  Bhadrapada 
Jtevati 

Those  asterisms  or  lunr 


s are  : — 

...  j?  Arietis 

...  35  Arietis,  and  Musca 

...  g Tauri,  Alcyone 

...  « Tauri,  Aldebaran 

...  A Orionis 

...  a Orionis 

...  ft  Gemini  Pollux 

...  d Caneri 

...  s Hydrae 

...  « Leonis,  Eegulas 

...  8 Leonis 

...  Leonis 

...  8 Corvi 

...  « YirginisSpica 

...  « Bootis,  Arcturus 

...  t Librae 

...  8 Scorpionis 

...  a Scorpionis,  Aritares 

...  A Scorpionis 

...  8 Sagittarii 

...  Q Sagittarii 

...  it  Aquilae,  Atair 

...  Delphini 

...  A Aquarii 

...  u Pegasi 

...  y P gasi  and  Andremcdae 
...  'C,  Piscium 

mansions  are  divided  each 


into  four  equal  parts  known  as  Nakshatrapadas-  There 


4 


B Rill  AT  JATAKA-* 


CH.  i> 


are  therefore  108  such  parts  in  the  ecliptic,  and  each  sign 
contains  nine  such  parts  or  2\  stellar  divisions  The  first 
asterism,  Aswini,  commences  at  the  first  point  of  Aries, 
which  is  the  star  Itevati,  about  20°  to  the  east  of  the 
Vernal  Equinox — (Vide  Introduction),  so  that  the  second 
quarter  of  the  asterism  of  Krittika  commences  the  first 
point  of  Taurus.  The  third  quarter  of  the  asterism  of 
Mrigasirsha  commences  the  first  point  of  Gemini,  and  the 
fourth  quarter  of  the  asterism  of  Punarvasu  commences 
the  first  point  of  Cancer,  and  so  on. 

Each  of  the  terms  Rasi,  Ksliotra,  Grab  a,  &c.,  means  a 
sign  of  the  Zodiac,  which  is  a twelfth  part  of  the  heavens 
or  30°  of  the  ecliptic. 

5.  Sign  Pisces  is  of  the  shape  of(a)  two  fish  ; sign 
Aquarius  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  with  a (water)  pot  ; 
sign  Gemini  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  and  woman,  (the 
former)  with  a stick  and  (the  latter)  with  a lyre,  both  seat- 
ed in  one  seat  j sign  Sagittari  is  of  the  shape  of  a man 
who  in  his  lower  parts  is  a horse  5 sign  Capricorn  is  of 
the  shape  of  a crocodile  .with  the  face  of  a deer  ; sign 
Libra  is  of  the  shape  of  a person  with  scales  (in  his  hand) ; 
and  (sign  Virgo  is  of  the  shape  of)  a virgin  iu  a boat  with 
crops  (in  one  hand)  and  a light  (in  the  other).  The  other 
signs  resemble  iu  shape(6)  the  different  creatures  denot- 
ted  by  their  names.  The  dwelling  places  of  the  several 
signs  are  places  appropriate  to  the  several  creatures. 

NOTES. 

(a)  Sign  Pisces  is  of  the  shape  of  two  fish  lying  side 
by  side,  ^the  head  of  the  one  being  near  the  tail  of  the 
other. 

(b)  That  is,  Aries  (Mesha)  is  of  the  shape  of  a ram: 
Taurus  (Vrishabha),  of  the  shape  of  a bull ; Cancer  (Kata- 


L 


BR1HAT  JATAKA. 


D 


cn.  i.] 


ka),  of  the  shape  of  a crab  : Leo  (SimbaM  of  the  shape  of  a- 
lion;  and  Scorpio  (Vrischika),  of  the  shape  of  a scorpion. 

This  stanza  as  well  as  stanza  4 are  chiefly  useful  in 
questions  connected  with  horary  astrology — in  the  disco- 
very of  stolen  property  and  the  like. 


6.  Mars,  Venus,  Mercury,  the  Moon,  the  Sun,  Mer- 
cury, Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Saturn  and  Jupiter  are 
respectively  the  lords  of  the  Signs,  and  of  tlio  Navamsas 
and  Dwadasamsas  ; and  the  several  signs  (of  the  Zodiac 
beginning  from  Aries)  commence  respectively  with  the 
Navamsas  of  Mesha,  Makara,  Tula  and  Ivataka. 

NOTES. 

Six  modes  ol  division  of  the  ecliptic  (360o)  for  boroseopic  purposes 
known  as  the  Shadvarga  are  mentioned  (vide  stanza  9).  These  are  Basi 
(sign)  in  which  the  ecliptic  is  divided  into  12  equal  parts  of  30°  each; 
(vide  stanza  4).  Hora  in  which  each  sign  is  divided  into  two  equal  parts  of 
15°  each  ^vide  stanzas  9 and  11).  Drekkana  in  which  a sign  is  divided 
into  three  equal  parts  of  10°  each  (vide  stanzas  11  and  12) ; Navatnsa 
in  which  a sign  is  divided  into  nine  equal  parts  of  3o  20’  each  ; Dwada- 
samsa,  in  which  a sign  is  divided  into  twelve  equal  parts  of  2®  30’  each  ; 
and  Trimsamsa,  in  which  a sign  is  divided  into  thirty  equal  parts  of  a 
degree  each  (vide  stanza  7).  The  Navamsas  : each  sign  being  divided 
into  9 equal  parts  and  there  being  12  such  signs,  there  are  iu  all  12X9 
or  108  such  divisions  in  the  ecliptic.  We  have  already  (vide  stanza  4) 
seen  that  the  ecliptic  contains  27X4  or  108  stellar  quarters  or  Nak- 
shatrapadas  ; it  follows  therefore  that  a Navamsa  is  a Naksliatrapada, 
that  is  one-fourth  of  a lunar  mansion.  The  108  Navamsas  beginning 
from  the  first  point  of  Aries  bear  the  same  names  as  the  twelve  signs 
of  the  Zodiac  counted  over  and  over  again  : the  first  Navamsa  of  Mesha 
is  Mesha  itself ; that  of  Vrisbabha  is  Makara  ; that  of  Michuna  is  Tula  ; 
and  that  of  Kataka  is  Ivataka  itself.  The  same  order  holds  for  the  4 
signs  from  Simha  to  Vrischika  and  for  the  4 from  Dhanns  to  Meena. 
In  other  words  the  four  sets  of  Trikona  or  triangular  signs  begin  with 
the  same  Navamsas  : that  is  the  Trikona  signs  of 

Mesha,  Simha,  Dhanus  begin  with  the  Navamsa  of  Meslin. 

Vrishabha,  Ivannya,  Makara  begin  with  the  Navatnsa  of  Makara. 

Mithuua,  Tula,  Kumbha  begin  with  the  Navamsa  of  Tula;  and 

Karki,  Vrischika,  Meena  begiu  with  the  Nawansa  of  Kataka. 

Tho  Dwadasamsas  : The  twelve  parts  into  which  each  sign  is  divided 
bear  the  same  names  as  those  of  tho  signs  of  the  Zodiac.  The  name  of  tho 
first  Dwadasamsa  of  a particular  sign  is  tiie  name  of  the  sign  itself.  So 
that  the  12  Dwadasamsas  of  Mesha  are  Mesha,  Vrishabha,  Mi thunn,  &c., 
ending  with  Meena.  Those  of  Vrishabha  are  Vrishabha,  Mithnna,  Kataka, 
&c.,  ending  with  Mesha.  Those  of  Mithuua  are  Mithuua,  Kataka,  Simha, 
&c.,  ending  with  Vrishabha  and  so  on. 


G 


BRIIIAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  T. 


Tlio  lords  of  the  Navamsas  and  Dwadngamsas  arc  the  same  as  the 
Jords  or  the  Rasis  (signs).  These  are  mentioned  in  the  text  in  the  order 
o tie  signs.  It  will  be  found  that  the  Sun  and  Moon  have  each  a house, 
while  the  other  planets  have  each  two  houses.  These  houses  are  known 
as  Swakshetras  : Thus 

Mars  is  the  lord  of  Mesha  and  Vrischika. 

^ enns  is  the  lord  of  Vrishabha  and  Tula. 

Mercury  is  the  lord  of  Mithuna  and  Kannya. 

Jupiter  is  the  lord  of  Mcona  and  Dhanus. 

Saturn  is  the  lord  of  Kumbha  and  Makara. 

The  Moon  is  the  lord  of  Kataka,  and  tho  Sun  is  the  lord  of  Simha. 

There  are  several  modes  of  constructing  a figure  of  the  heavens.  Tho 
one  used  in  Southern  India  is  the  one  recommended  by  Jaimuni — the 
author  of  Astrological  Ahporisms.  It  is  given  below,  and  the  reader 
is  referred  to  the  appendix  for  diagrams  relating  to  the  several  modes  of 
division  of  tho  ecliptic  referred  to  above. 


Meena,  Jupiter. 

Mesha,  Mars. 

Vrishabha 

Venus. 

Mithuna 

Mercury. 

Kumbha,  Saturn 

RASI  CHAKRA. 

Kataka,  Moon. 

Makara,  Saturn. 

Simha,  Sun. 

Dhanus,  Jupiter. 

Vrischika, 

Mars. 

Tula,  Venus. 

Kanya, 

Mercury. 

7.  Five,  five,'  eight,  seven  nnd  five  parts  (degrees) 
are  respectively  those  of  Mars,  Saturn,  Jupiter,  Mercury, 
and  Venus,  in  the  odd  signs.  In  the  even  signs  their 
order  is  reversed.  The  ends  (last  Navamsas)  of  Kataka, 
Vrischika  and  Meena  are  known  as  Itiksha  sandhis. 

NOTES. 

This  stanza  defines  Trimsamsas,  and  their  lords.  As 
already  observed  Trimsamsais  division  of  each  sign  into 
thirty  equal  parts,  each,  pait  being  a degree.  The  odd 
signs  are  Mesha,  Mithuna,  Simha,  Tula,  Dhanus  and  Kum- 
bha, The  even  signs  are  Vrishabha,  Kataka,  Kannya, 
Vrischika,  Makara  and  Meena. 


CH.  1-1 


BUI  HAT  JATAKA. 


/ 

la  tlie  odd  .signs  the  first  five  degrees  are  tire  Trirn- 
samas  of  Mars  ; the  next  five  are  those  of  Saturn  ; the  next 
eight  are  those  of  Jupiter;  the  next  seven  are  those  of 
Mercury  ; and  the  last  five  are  those  of  Venus.  In  the 
even  sigus  the  first  five  are  those  of  Venus ; the  next  seyen 
are  those  of  Mercury  ; the  next  eight  are  those  of  Jupiter; 
the  next  five  are  those  of  Saturn  ; and  the  last  five  are 
those  of  Mars.  The  Trimsamsa  division  is  used  by  the 
author  in  his  Chapter  relating  to  the  horoscopy  of  women. 

S.  The  terms  Kriya,  Tavuri,  Jituma,  Kulira,  Leya, 
Fathona,  Juka,  Kourpi,  Toukshika,  Akokera,  Hridroga  and 
Antyabha  (are  other  names  for  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac). 

NOTES. 

All  the  above  names,  excepting  Kulira  and  Antyabha 
are  evidently  Greek  terms — a circumstance  clearly  indica- 
ting that  the  intercourse  between  the  learned  men  of  India 
and  Hellan  was  more  than  superficial. 

9.  A planet  is  said  to  be  in  its  Varga  if  it  be  in  its 
Drekana,  Hora,  Navamsa,  Trimsamsa,  Dwadasamsa  and 
Kshetra.  The  term  Hora  means  both  the  rising  sigu  and 
one  half  of  a sign  of  the  Zodiac. 

NOTES. 

These  terms  have  already  been  explained  (vide  stanza 
G). 

The  term  Kshetra  means  a house  or  a sisrn.  For  the 
Names  and  Lords  of  the  Hora  divisions  of  a sign  vide 
Stanza  11. 

10.  The  signs  Aries,  Taurus,  Gemini,  Cancer.  Sagittari 
and  Capricorn  are  known  as  the  night  signs  ;(a)  and,  with 
the  exception  of  Gemini,  they  rise  with  their  feet(6).  The 


8 


BIUHAT  J AT  AKA. 


[CH.  I. 


other  signs  rise  xvitli  their  heads(c)  and  are  powerful  by 
day(cZ).  The  two  fish  rise  by  both  (head  and  foot)(e). 

NOTES. 

(a)  Therefore  the  day  signs  are  Leo,  Virgo,  Libra, 
Scorpio,  Aquarius  and  Pisces. 

(b)  Signs  that  rise  by  their  feet  are  known  as  Prish- 
todaya  Rasis  and  these  are  Aries,  Taurus,  Cancer,  SagittarL 
and  Capricorn. 

(c)  Signs  that  rise  by  their  heads  are  known  as  Siro- 
daya  Rasis,  and  these  are  Gemini,  Leo,  Virgo.  Libra,  Scor- 
pio and -Aquarius. 

( d ) Therefore  the  Prishtodaya  signs  are  powerful  at 
nkdit. 

o 

(e)  Per  the  shape  of  the  sign  Pisces  vide  Stanza  5. 

11.  The  signs  (from  Aries)  are  (by  turns)  malefic  and 
benefic,  masculine  and  feminine  (a)  and  movable,  fixed  and 
both  (movable  and  fixed) (6).  The  signs  Aries,  Taurus, 
Gemini  and  Cancer  with  their  triangular  signs  denote  each 
respectively  the  East,  South,  West  and  iSorth(c).  The 
two  boras  of  the  odd  signs  are  respectively  the  Solar 
and  Lunar  boras,  and  the  two  of  the  even  signs  are 
respectivly  the  Lunar  and  Solar  h'oras.  The  lords  ot  the 
Drekkanas,(d)(of  a particular  sign)  are  respectively  the  lords 
of  that  sign,  the  5th  sign  and  the  9th  sign. 

NOTES. 

(a)  In  other  words  the  odd  signs  are  all  malefic  and 
masculine,  and  the  even  signs  are  all  benefic  and  feminine. 

(5)  Aries,  Cancer,  Libra  and  Capricorn  are  movable 
signs. 

Taurus,  Leo,  Scorpio  anh  Aquairus  are  fixed  signs. 

Gemini,  Virgo,  Sagittari  and  Pisces  are  both  (movable 
and  fixed)  and  are  also  known  as  common  signs. 


RRIUAT  JATAKA. 


9 


CH.  I.] 


(c)  The  signs  Aries,  Leo  and  Sagittari  are'known  as 
the  Eastern  signs. 

Tarns,  Virgo  and  Capricorn  are  Southern  signs. 

Gemini,  Libia  and  Aquarius  are  Western  signs. 

Cancer,  Scorpio  and  Pisces  are  Northern  signs. 

(d)  For  example  : The  lords  of  the  three  Drekkanas 
of  Leo  are  respectively  the  Sun  (lord  of  Leo),  Jupiter 
(lord  of  Sagittari  the  oth  house)  and  Mars  (lord  of  Aries 
the  Oth  house). 


12.  According  to  some(a)  the  lords  of  the  two  boras 
of  a sign  are  respectively  the  lords  of  the  sign  and  of  the 
1 1 tli  sign(^);  and  the  lords  of  the  three  Drekkanas  of  a 
sign  are  respectively  the  lords  of  the  sign,  the  1 2 tli  sign 
and  the  11  th  sign(c)  from  it. 

NOTES. 

(a)  That  is,  according  to  Garga  and  men  of  his 
school.  But  the  author’s  opinion  is  that  expressed  in 
stanza  11  in  which  he  is  supported  by  the  opinion  of  Satya- 
eharya. 

(b)  The  lords  of  the  two  boras  of  Sagittari,  for  in- 
stance,  are  respectively  Jupiter  (lord  of  Sagittari)  and  Te- 
rms (the  lord  of  Libra  the  1 1th  house 

(c)  The  lords  of  the  three  Drekkanas  of  Sagittari,  for 
instance,  are  respectively  Jupiter  (lord  of  sagittari),  Mars 
(lord  of  Scorpio  the  12th  house)  and  Venus  (lord  of  Libra 
the  1 1 tli  house). 


1-j.  The  Signs  A lies,  Taurus,  Capricorn,  Virgo, 
Cancer,  Pisces  and  Libra  are  respectively  the  Uccha 
(exaltation)  signs  of  the  Sun  and  other  planets.  The 
10th,  3rd,  2Sth,  loth,  5th,  27th,  and  20th  are  the  degrees 
ot  main  exaltation  of  the  several  planets.  The  7ih  or 


BRIHAT  jataka. 


10 


[cpr.  i. 


opposite  signs  are  the  Neecha  (depression)  signs  ; and  the 
degrees  of  main  depression  are  the  same  as  given  above. 

NOTES. 

A planet  in  his  exaltation  sign  is  considered  as  excee- 
dingly powerful  and  one  in  his  depression  si^n  as  excee- 
dingly  weak.  The  Sun  and^Moon  are  also  treated  as  pla- 
nets* 1 he  Hindu  Astrological  order  of  the  planets  is  the 
same  as  the  days  of  the  week.  The  following  table  is 
given  for  convenience  of  reference. 


Planets. 

Uccha  or  Exal- 
tation Signs . 

Neecha  or  de- 
pression Signs- 

Degree  of  main 
Exaltation  or 
Depression. 

Sun. 

Aries. 

Libra. 

10 

Moon. 

Taurus- 

Scorpio. 

3 

Mars. 

Capricorn. 

Cancer. 

28 

Mercurv 

%/ 

'.  Virgo- 

Pisces- 

15 

Jupiter. 

Cancer. 

Capricorn. 

5 

Venus. 

Pisces. 

Virgo. 

27 

Saturn. 

Libra. 

Aries. 

20 

14.  In  the  movable  and  other  signs  (a)  , the  first,  the 
central  and  the  last  Navamsas  are  known  as  Vargottama 
positions.  Planets  in  such  positions  will  produce  good 
effects.  The  signs  Leo,  Taurus,  Aries,  Virgo,  SagittarL 
Libia,  and  Aquarius  are  known  as  the  Moolatrikona  houses 
of  the  planets  respectively. (b) 

NOTES. 

(a)  The  Vargottama  places  are  : The  first  Navamsas 
of  the  4 movable  signs  Aries,  Cancer,  Libra,  and  Capri- 
corn. 

eTh  5th  Navamsas  of  the  four  fixed  signs,  Taurus,  Leo, 
Scorpio  and  Aquarius. 

The  9th  Navamsas  of  the  four  movable  and  fixed  signs 
Gemini,  Virgo,  Sagittari  and  Pisces. 


i 


BUIHAT  JATAKA. 


11 


CH.  I.] 


These  Navamsas  will  be  found  to  bear  the  same  names 
as  the  signs  themselves.  For  example  : the  first  Navamsa 
of  Aries  is  Aries;  the  first  of  Cancer  is  Cancer,  and  so 
forth. 

The  fifth  Navamsa  of  Taurus  is  Taurus  ; of  Leo  is  Leo 
and  so  forth. 

The  ninth  Navamsa  of  Gemini  is  Gemini,  of  A irgo  is 
Virgo,  and  so  forth- 

( b ) The  following  list  contains  the  Moola  Trikona, 
signs  of  the  planets  •’ 


Planets. 

Moola  Trikona  sl: 

Sun. 

Leo. 

Moon. 

Taurus, 

Mars. 

Aries. 

Mercury. 

Virgo. 

Jupiter. 

Sagittari. 

Venus, 

Libra. 

Saturn, 

Aquarius. 

15.  The  significations  of  the  12  houses  from  the  rising 
sign  (ascendant)  are  respectively  (a  native’s)  body,  family, 
brothers,  relations,  sons,  enemies,  wife,  death,  deed  of 
virtue,  avocation,  gain  and  loss  (a).  The  3rd,  Gth,  10th 
and  11th  houses  from  the  ascendant  are  known  as  the 
Upachaya  (improving)  signs,  but  not  so  according  to 
some,  (b) 

NOTES. 

(a)  The  following  is  a list  of  significations  of  the  seve- 
ral houses  of  the  Zodiac  from  the  ascendant. 

Ascendant  or 

1st  house. ...Body,  fame,  limbs- 

2nd  ,,  ...Family,  wealth,  eyes,  speech  truthfulness. 
3rd  „ ...Brothers,  bravery,  meals: 


12 

BUI EI AT  JATAKA. 

[eir.  i. 

4tli 

,,  ...  .Relations,  education,  mother,  cows, 

ling  place,,  carriage,  comfort. 

, dwel- 

5 th 

,,  ...Sons,. intelligence,  previous  karma. 

6 th 

,,  ...Enemies,  kinsmen,  diseases. 

7ih 

,,  . . . W ife,  generosity,  respect. 

8 th 

,,  ...Death,  duration  of  life- 

9 th 

„ ...Deeds  of  virtue,  father,  medicine. 

10  th 

„ ...Avocation,  knowledge,  clothes- 

Hth 

,,  ...Gain,  earning. 

12th 

...Loss,  bad  deeds,  travels. 

(&) 

Garga  and  astrologers  of  his  school  are  of 

opinion 

that  the 

3rd.  6th,  10th  and  1 ith  houses  ceaso  to  be  Upa- 

chaya  places  if  malefic  planets  or  planets  which  are  un- 


friendly to  the  lords  of  these  4 houses  should  either  occupy 
such  houses  or  aspect  the  same.  But  the  author  does  not 
agree  with  Garga  and  he  is  supported  in  his  views  by 
Satyacharya  and  by  Yavaneswara, 

16..  The  twelve  signs  of  the  Zodiac  beginning  from 
the  ascendaut  are  known  technically  as  the  signs  of  (l) 
Kalpa  (power),  (2)  Sva  (wealth),  (S)  Vikrama  (prowess),  (4) 
Graha  (dwelling  place),  (5)  Pratibka  (intelligence),  (6) 
Kshata  (wound),  (7)  Manmatha  (desire),  (8)  Eandhra,  (9) 
Guru  (father  or  preceptor),  (10)  Mana  (respectability),  (11) 
Bhava  (acquisition),  (12)  Vyaya  (loss).  The  4th  and  8th 
houses  are  known  as  Chaturasra  signs.  The  7th  house  is 
known  as  Dyuna  and  the  10th  house  is  known  as  Ajna. 

NOTES. 

A number  of  astrological  terms  are  defined  in  this 
stanza. 


17.  The  1st,  4th,  7th  and  16th  houses  are  known  as 
Kan  taka  or  Kendra  or  Chatushtaya  houses  (quadrants  or 


BRJIIAT  JATAKA. 


13 


CH-  I.] 


angles).  If  these  four  houses  should  happen  to  he  biped, 
aquatic,  ceutiped  aud  quadruped  respectively,  they  then 
possess  strength . 

NOTES. 

The  biped  signs  are:  Gemini,  Libra,  Virgo,  the  first 
half  of  Sagittari  and  Aquarius. 

The  aquatic  signs  are  : Cancer,  the  first  half  of  Capri 
corn  and  Pisces. 

The  only  centiped  sign  is  Scorpio. 

The  quadruped  signs  are  Aries,  Taurus,  Leo,  the  second 
half  of  Hagittari  aud  of  Capricorn. 


18.  The  houses  next  to  the  angles  are  known  as  Pana- 

phara  houses  and  those  next  to  them  are  known  as  Apok- 
lima houses.  The  4th  house  is  known  as  Hibuka,  Ambu, 

Snkha  and  Vesma.  The  7th  house  is  known  as  Jamitra. 
The  5th  house  is  known  as  Trikona.  The  10th  house  is 
known  as  Meskoorana  and  Karma. 

NOTES. 

Panapliara  and  Apoklima  are  Greek  terms. 

The  Pauaphara  houses  are  the  2nd,  5th,  8th  and  11th 
houses. 

The  Apoklima  houses  are  the  3rd,  6th,  9th  and  12th 
houses. 

19.  If  the  lord  of  the  ascendant  or  Jupiter  or  Mercury 
should  either  occupy  it  or  aspect  it,  the  ascendant  (Lagoa) 
would  become  powerful  and  not  by  other  planets.  The 
Kendra  signs  are  naturally  powerful  (a)  The  biped  signs 
are  powerful  during  the  day,  the  qua Iruped  signs  at  night, 
and  the  ceutiped  signs  at  sunrise  and  at  suuset.  The  Mana 
(measurement)  (b)  of  the  first  six  signs  from  Aries 
are  20,  24,  28;  32,  36,  and  40  respectively ; aud  those 


14 


13EIHAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  II. 


of  the  next  six  signs  are  40,  3G,  32,  28,  24,  and  20  respec- 
tively. The  3rd  house  is  known  as  Puschikya.  The  9th 
as  Tapas  and  Tritrikona. 

NOTES. 

(а)  Id  therefore  follows  that  Panaphara  houses  are 
less  powerful  than  the  Kendras,  and  Apokliina  houses  are 

the  weakest  houses  of  all. 

(б)  This  is  used  in  stanza  23,  Ch.  V. 

20.  The  twelve  signs  beginning  from  Aries  are  res- 
pectively (Aries)  red,  fTaurus)  white,  (Gemiui)of  the  color  of 
the  parrot,  (Cancer),  of  the  color  of  Patali  (trumpet  flower), 
(Leo)  black  white,  (Virgo)  variegated  in  color,  (Libra) 
black,  (Scorpio)  of  gold  color,  (Sagittari)  of  the  color  of  the 
husk  of  paddy,  (Capricorn)  white  red,  (Aquarius)  of  the  color 
of  Mongoose,  and  (Pisces)  of  the  color  of  fish.  The  signs 
are  known  as  Plava  (depressed)  in  the  direction  of  their 
lords.  The  2nd  house  to  that  occupied  by  the  Sun  is  known 
as  Vesi. 

NOTES. 

(a)  For  the  use  of  this  vide  stanza  21,  Ch.  V. 

CHAPTER  II. 

Definitions  and  Elementary  principles  continu- 
ed.— (Planetary) 

] . To  the  Kalapurusha,  tbe  Sun  is  the  soul,  the  Moon 
is  the  mind,  Mars  is  strength,  Mercury  is  speech,  Jupiter  is 
knowledge  and  health,  Venus  is  desire,  and  Saturn  is  sorrow. 
Of  the  planets  the  Sun  and  Moon  are  kings,  Mars  is  Gene- 
ral, Mercury  is  the  first  prince,  Jupiter  and  Venus  are 
un  sellors  and  Saturn  is  servant. 


CH.  II.  J 


BRIflAT  JATAKA. 


15 


2.  Hell  is  the  Sun  ; Seetharasmi  is  the  Moon  ; Ilcmna, 
Vit,  Gnn,  Bodhana  and  Indnputra  (Son  of  Moon)  are  the 
names  of  Mercury ; Ara,  Vakra,  Kruradrik,  Avaneya  (son 
of  Earth)  are  the  names  of  Mars;  Kona,  Manda,  Suryaputra 
(son  of  the  Sun)  and  Asita  (the  black  planet)  are  the  names 
of  Saturn. 

3.  Jeeva,  Angirasa,  Suraguru  (the  preceptor  of  the 
Devas),  Vachasampati,  Ijya  are  the  names  of  Jupiter;  Sukra, 
Bhrigu,  Bhrigusuta,  Sita  Uho  white  planet), Asphujifc,  are  the 
names  of  Yenus  ; Tama  (darkness),  Agu  and  Asura  are  the 
names  of  Rahu  (the  Moon’s  ascending  node) ; Sikhi  is  the 
name  of  Ketu  (the  Moon’s  descending  node).  Terms 
synonymous  with  the  above  should  also  be  accepted 
(as  the  names  of  the  several  planets). 

4.  The  Sun  is  of  a redaud  dark-brown  color;  the 
Moon  is  white  ; Mars  is  not  of  a tall  figure,  and  is  both  red 
and  white  ; Mercury  is  green  like  the  color  of  the  bent 
grass  ; Jupiter  is  yellow  like  molten  gold  ; Venus  is  neither 
very  white  nor  very  black,  and  Saturn  is  black. 

NOTES. 

The  color  of  a person  will  be  that  of  the  planet  most 
powerful  at  the  time  of  his  birth. 

5.  Tho  Sun  presides  over  copper  color;  tho  Moon 
over  white  color;  Mars  over  red  color;  Mercury  over  green 
color;  Jupiter  over  yellow  color;  Yenus  over  a mixture  of 
various  colors  ; and  Saturn  over  black  color,  (a) 

The  Sun  is  Agni  ; the  Moon  is  Varuna;  Mars  is 
Subbramania ; Mercury  is  Vishnu  ; Jupiter  is  Indra  ; Yenus 
is  Indrani  (Indra ’s  wife) ; and  Sa  turn  is  Brahma  ( b ) 

The  Sun  presides  over  east;  Yenus,  south-east  ; Mars 
south;  Rahu  south-west;  Saturn  west  ; the  Moon  north" 
west;  Mercury  north  ; Jupiter  north-east-  («) 


BBIHAT  Jataka. 


[CH.  II. 


1« 


The  waning  Moon,  the  Sun,  Mars,  Saturn  and  Mercury 
when  in  conjunction  with  any  of  these  are  malefic 
planets  (dr 

NOTES. 

(a)  These  are  useful  in  ascertaining  the  color  of  stolen 
articles  and  in  determining  the  color  of  thejflowers  to  be 
used  in  the  worship  of  the  planets. 

(b)  From  the  powerful  planet  at  the  time  of  one’s  birth* 
it  can  be  ascertained  which  particular  Deva  a person  would 
worship. 

(c)  These  are  useful  in  determining  the  position  of 
the  entrance  of  ihe  delivery  room  of  a woman  and  in  dis 
covering  the  oirection  of  escape  of  thieves. 

( d ) Jupiter,  Venus  and  Mercury  when  in  conjunction 
with  either  of  these,  are  benefic  plauets* 

6.  Mercury  and  Saturn  are  hermaphrodite  planets  (a); 
the  Moon  and  Venus  are  female  plauets,  and  the  rest  ( b ) 
are  male  planets.  Mars  is  fire;  Mercury  is  earth  ; Jupiter 
is  akas  (ether) ; Venus  is  water  ; and  Saturn  is  air.(c) 

NOTES. 

(a)  Mercury  is  female  hermaphrodite  and  Saturn  is 
male  hermaphrodite. 

(b)  That  is,  the  Sud,  Mars  and  Jupiter  are  male 
planets. 

(c)  Also  the  Sun  is  fire  and  the  Moon  water. 

7.  Venus  and  Jupiter  are  Brahmins  ; Mars  and  the 

Sun  are  Ksbatriyas  ; the  Moon  is  a Vysya  ; Mercury  is  a 
Sudra  ; and  Saturn  is  a Chandala. 

The  Moon,  the  Sun  and  Jupiter  are  of  Satwaguna 
(good  temper)  ; Mercury  and  Venus  are  of  Rajoguna  (pas- 
sionate temper)  : Mars  and  Saturn i areof  Tamoguna  (dark 
temper) 


I>  III  IIAT  JATAKA. 


17 


cii.  ii.] 


8.  The  Sun  has  somewhat  yellow  eyes,  is  of  the  height 
of  the  length  of  the  two  arms  stretched  out,  of  bilious 
nature  and  with  very  little  hair  on  his  head. 

The  Moon  has  a thin  and  a round  body,  is 
of  an  exceedingly  windy  and  phlegmatic  nature,  is 
learned  and  has  a soft  voice  and  beautiful  eyes. 

9.  Mars  has  sharp  and  cruel  eyes  and  a young  body, 
is  generous,  of  bilious  nature,  of  unsteady  mind,  and  has  a 
narrow  middle. 

Mercury  has  an  impediment  in  his  speech,  is  fond  or 
joke,  and  is  of  a bilious,  windy  and  phlegmatic  nature. 

10.  Jupiter  has  a big  body,  (a)  yellow  hairs  and  eyes3 
high  intellectual  powers,  and  a phlegmatic  nature. 

Venus  leads  a comfortable  life,  has  a beautiful  body,  fair 
eyes,  a windy  and  phlegmatic  nature,  and  black  curling 
hairs. 


NOTES. 

(a)  Jupiter  is  the  biggest  of  all  planets,  and  thej 
ancient  Hindus  were  aware  of  it  centuries  ago- 


11.  Saturn  is  lazy,  has  eye3  of  gold  color,  a thin  and 
tall  body,  large  teeth,  stiff  hair,  and  is  of  a windy  nature. 

Saturn  is  strong  iu  muscles,  the  Sun  in  bones,  the 
Moon  in  blood.  Mercury  in  skin,  Venus  in  semen,  Jupiter  iu 
flesh,  and  Mars  in  the  marrow  of  the  bones. 

12.  The  Sun  presides  over  the  place  of  worship  ; tho 
Moon  over  wells;  Mars  over  the  fire  place  5 Mercury  over 
play  grounds ; Jupiter  over  the  store  room;  Venus  over 
bed  room,  and  Saturn  over  places  where  sweepings  are 
gathered. 

The  garment  of  the  Sun  is  of  thick  thread;  that  of 
the  Moon  is  new;  that  of  Mars  is  partly  Jburnt;  that  of 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


13 


[CH-  II- 


Mercury  is  wet ; that  of  Jupiter  is  somewhat  used  that 
of  Venus  is  strong  ; and  that  of  Saturn  is  torn. 

The  Sun  presides  over  copper;  the  Moon  over  gems; 
Mars  over  gold;  Mercury  over  brass  ; Jupiter  over  silver  ;(a) 
Venus  over  penis;  and  Saturn  over  iron. 

When  either  Saturn  is  in  the  ascendant  or  when  his 
Drekkana  is  rising,  the  season  denoted  is  Sisira — January 
and  Februarv. 

When  either  Venus  is  in  the  ascendant,  or  when  his 
Drekkana  is  rising,  the  season  denoted  is  Vasantha  (Spring) 
— March  and  April. 

Similarly  in  the  case  of  the  Sun  or  Mars,  the  season 
denoted  is  Greeshma  (Summer) — May  and  June.  In  the 
case  of  the  Moon,  the  season  is  Varsha  (Winter) — Julj^,  and 
August.  In  the  case  of  Mercury  stheeason  is  Sarat — 
September  and  October.  And  in  the  case  of  Jupiter  the 
season  is  Hemanta — November  and  December. 

NOTES. 

(a)  When  Jupiter  is  in  his  house,  He  presides  over 

gold, 


13.  All  the  planets  aspect  the  3rd  and  10th  houses 
with  a quarter  sight,  the  5th  and  9th  houses  with  half  a 
sight,  the  4th  and  Sth  houses  with  three-quarters  of  a 
sight,  and  tlie  7tli  house  with  a full  sight;  but  Saturn  as- 
pects the  3rd  and  10th  houses  with  a full  sight ; Jupiter 
aspects  the  5th  and  9th  houses  with  a full  sight,  and  Mars 
aspects  the  4tli  and  Sth  houses  with  a full  sight. 

NOTES- 

Suppose  A to  be  a point  in  the  ecliptic  occupied  by  an 
aspecting  planet  ; divide  the  ecliptic  into  12  equal  parts  of 
30"  each,  beginning  from  A.  So  that  the  12  points  of  divi- 
sion will  be  those  respectively  marked  by  A,  30°,  60  , 90° 
120°,  1 50°,  180°,  210°,  240°,  270°,  300°,  and  330°,  and 


cn.  ii.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


19 


for  purposes  of  planetary  aspects,  these  points  are  respect- 
ively the  middle  points  of  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd.  4th,  &c.  to  12 
houses.  So  that  a planet  at  A aspects  with  a quarter  sight 
the  middle  points  of  the  3rd  and  1 Ooh  houses,  i.  e.,  the 
points  marked  60°  and  270°  respectively  ; similary  it  as- 
pects with  a half  sight  points  marked  120°  and  240° 
with  three-quarters  of  a sight  points  marked  90°  aud  210° ; 
and  with  a full  sight  point  marked  180°.  The  degree  of 
aspects  for  other  places  must  he  determined  by  proportion 
or  rule  of  three,  from  the  degree  of  aspects  of  the  next  points 
before  and  behind.  As  regards  the  special  aspects  of  Sa- 
turn, Jupiter  and  Mars,  a similar  course  should  be  adopted' 
But  if  one  planet  aspects  another  planet,  then  subtract  the 
longitude  of  the  former  from  that  of  the  latter,  i.  e.,  take 
the  distance  between  the  two  planets  in  degree  aud  calcu- 
late the  degree  of  aspect  as  stated  above. 

14.  The  Sun  indicates  six  months;  the  Moon  two 
Ghatikas  or  forty-eight  minutes  ; Mars  a day;  Mercury 
two  months  ; Jupiter  a month  ; Venus  a fortnight  ; aud  Sa- 
turn a year. 

The  Sun  presides  over  pungent  flavor ; the  Moon  over 
salt  flavor  ; Mars  over  acerbity  ; Mercury  over  mixed  fla- 
vor ; Jupiter  over  sweetness;  Venus  over  sourness  ; aud 
Saturn  over  bitterness. 

15.  According  to  some  Jupiter  is  the  friend  of  the 
Sun  ; Jupiter  and  Mercury  aro  the  friends  of  the  Moon  ; 
Venus  and  Mercury  are  the  friends  of  Mars.  The  Muon, 
Mars,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn  are  the  friends  of  Mer- 
cury. The  Sun,  the  Moon,  Mercury,  Venus  aud  Saturn, 
are  the  friends  of  Jupiter.  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and 
Saturn  are  the  friends  of  Venus.  Mercury,  Jupiter  and 
Venus  are  the  friends  of  Saturnfa).  But  according^  to 
Satyacharya  a planet’s  friends  are  the  lords  of  the  ‘hid 
12th,  rth,  9tb,  8th,  and  1th  houses  from  his  Moolatiikona 


i 


20 


BRIHAT  JATAKAf 


[cir.  ir, 


sign  as  well  as  the  lord  of  the  exaltation  sign  of  such 
planet,  provided  they  do  not  conflict  with  the  lords  of  the 
remaining  houses. (&) 

NOTES. 

(а)  The  other  planets  are  the  enemies. 

(б)  The  same  may  be  expressed  otherwise  : the  lords 
of  the  remaining  houses  are  the  foes  of  a planet,  provided 

they  do  not  conflict  with  the  lords’of  the  seven  houses  des- 
cribed above.  Patting  the  two  together  we  get  the  fol- 
lowing results : 

(1) .  Those  lords  of  the  seven  houses  who  may  not  at 
the  same  time  be  tbe  lords  of  the  remaining  houses  are  the 
friends  of  the  particular  planet. 

(2)  Those  lords  of  the  latter  houses  who  may  not  at 
the  same  time  be  the  lords  of  the  former  houses  are  the  foes 

to 

of  the  particular  planet. 

(3j  Aud  those  who  may  be  the  lords  of  both  are 
neither  the  friends  nor  the  foes  of  the  particular  planet. 

Following  the  above  rule,  the  author  himself  gives  for 
each  planet,  his  friends,  foes,  and  neutrals  in  the  following 
two  stanzas-  (Vide  note  at  the  end  of  stanza  17). 

16.  Saturn  and  Venus  are  the  enemies  of  the  Sun, 
Mercury  is  his  neutral,  and  the  rest  are  his  friends. 

The  Sun  and  Mercury  are  the  friends  of  the  Moon  and 
the  rest  are  her  neutrals. (a) 

The  Sun,  the  Moon,  and  Jupiter  are  the  friends  of 
Mars ,-  Mercury  is  his  enemy,  and  Venus  and  Satm’u  are  Jiis 
neutrals. 

The  Suu  and  Venus  are  the  friends  of  Mercury  ; the 
Moon  is  his  enemy,  and  the  rest  are  his  neutrals. 

17.  Mercury  and  Venus  are  the  enemies  of  Jupiter  ; 
Saturn  is  his  neutral;  and  the  rest  are  his  frieqds. 


BRIHAT  J AT  AKA. 


21 


CH.  IT  ] 


Mercury  and  Saturn  are  the  friends  of  Venus  ; Mars 
and  Jupiter  are  her  neutrals,  and  the  rest  are  her  enemies- 
Venus  and  Mercury  are  the  friends  of  Saturn  ; Jupiter 
is  his  neutral,  and  the  rest  are  his  enemies.(6) 

Thus  have  I stated  oyer  again  at  length  the  views  of 
Satyacharya  regarding  the  natural  or  permanent  frienship, 
enmity  and  neutrality  among  planets. 


NOTES. 

(а)  The  Moon  has  no  enemies. 

(б)  We  will  now  examine  how  the  author  arrived  at 
the  three  results  given  in  the  last  two  stanzas.  Take  the 
case  of  the  Sun-  His  Moolatrikona  house  is  Leo.  (Vide 
stanza  14.)  The  2nd.,  12th,  5th,  9th,  8th,  and  4th  houses 
from  Leo  are  respectively  Virgo,  Cancer,  Sagittari,  Aries, 
Pisces  and  Scorpio.  The  exaltation  houses  of  the  Sun  is 
Aries.  The  lords  of  all  these  houses  are  respectively  Mer- 
cury, the  Moon,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Mar  and  Mars 
or  dropping  the  repetitions,  we  get,  Mercury,  Moon  Jupiter 
and  Mars.  Of  the  7 houses  Aries  being  repeated,  we  have 
been  dealing  with  only  six  houses.  The  other  six  houses 
of  the  Zodiac  are  Leo,  Libra,  Capricorn,  Aquarius,  Taurus 
and  Gemini.  Their  lords  are  respectively  the  Sun,  Venus, 
Saturn,  Saturn.  Venus  and  Mercury,  or  dropping  the  repe- 
titions, and  also  the  Sun,  we  get  Venus,  Saturn  and  Mer- 
cury. We  will  compare  these  with  the  lords  of  the  former 
set  of  houses,  viz,  Mercury,  Moon,  Jupiter,  and  Mars.  We 
find  that  Mercury  is  the  only  planet  occuring  in  both  the 
lists.  It  is  therefore  the  Sun's  neutral.  Venus  and  Sa- 
turn are  his  enemies,  and  the  Moon,  Mars  and  Jupiter  are 
his  friends.  And  so  with  the  other  planets. 

18.  Planets  that  occupy  the  2nd,  12th,  11th,  3rd,  10th 
and  4th  houses  from  a particular  planet  are  the  friends  of 
that  planet  and  the  rest  are  his  enemies  for  the  time.  Ac- 
cording to  some,  the  planets  that  occupy  the  exaltation 


22 


brihat  jataka. 


[ce.  ie. 


sign  of  a particular  planet  are  also  the  friends  of  that  pla- 
net. Combining  together  tbo  three  natural  relations  (vide 
stanzas  lb  and  1<)  with  the  two  relations  jfW  the  time  now 
given^  we  may  determine  the  five  following  relations  exist- 
ing between  planets : Atimitra  (great  friend),  Mitra 

(friend),  Sarna  (neutral),  Satru  (enemy)  and  Atisatru, 
(great  enemy.) 

NOTES. 

Stanzas  IG  and  17  relate  to  the  three  relations  of  per- 
manent friendship,  neutrality  and  enmity.  Stanza  18  re- 
lates to  the  two  relations  of  temporary  friendship  and  en- 
mity. Combining  the  two  together  we  get  the  following 
results. 


Under  Stanzas 

Uuder  Stanza 

Result. 

16  & 17 

18. 

Mitra.  + 

Mitra.  = 

Atimitra. 

Satiu-  + 

Satru.  = 

Atisatru- 

$ 

Sam  a.  -p 

Mitra.  = 

Mitra. 

Satna.  -p 

Satru.  = 

Satru. 

Mitra-  + 

Satru.  = 

Sama. 

19.  A planet 

has  sthauabala  (local 

or  positional 

strength)  when  in  his  exaltation  sign, (a)  friendly  sign,(&) 

Drekkana,  c)  in  his  Navamsa,'^)  or  in  his  Kshetra,  house.(e) 
Mercury  and  Jupiter  are  powerful  wheu  in  theEast(/j  or 
Rising  sigu.  The  Sun  aud  Mars  are  powerful  when  ou  the 
south  or  tenth  sign.  Saturn  is  powerful  when  iu  the  West 
or  setting  sigu,  aud  the  Moon  and  Venus  are  powerful 
when  in  die  North  or  the  4th  sign  (Patala). 


NOTES, 


(a) 

vide 

I.  (13). 

(b) 

II.  16  to  18. 

(c) 

V 

I.  11  aud  12. 

(d) 

I.  G. 

00 

I.  G. 

BRHIA.T  JATAKA. 


23 


CH.  II.] 


(/)  that  is  : they  then  possess  Dikbala.  According 
to  some  commentators,  Mercury  and  Jupiter  are  powerful 
when  in  the  Eastern  triangular  signs  of  Aries,  Leo  and 
Sagittari.  The  Sun  and  Mars  are  powerful  when  in  the 
Southern  triangular  signs  of  Taurus,  Virgo  and  Capricorn. 
Saturn  is  powerful  when  in  the  Western  triangular  signs  of 
Germini,  Libra  and  Aquarius  ; and  the  Moon  and  , Venus 
are  powerful  when  in  the  Northern  triangular  signs  of  Can- 
cer, Scorpio  and  Pisces. 


20-  The  Sun  and  the  Moon  possess  Chesldabalcu 
(motional  strength)  when  in  any  of  the  six  signs  from 
Makava.  The  other  planets  possess  it  when  in  their  retro- 
grade motion  or  when  in  conjunction  with  the  Moon 
(Samagama)  or  when  in  their  greatest  brilliancy  or  when 
they  happen  to  be  the  northern  planets  in  planetary 
conjunction  (Yudha). 

21.  The  Moon,  Mars  and  Saturn  possess  Kalabala, 
(temporal  strength)  at  night ; Mercury  possesses  it  both 
day  and  night;  and  the  other  planets(a)  possess  it  by  day. 
The  malefic  planets  possess  it  during  the  waning  moon 
(Krishna  paksha)  and  the  benefic-  planets  during  the  wax- 
ing moon  (Sukla  paksha).  Also  each  planet  has  it  in  his 
year,  month,  day  and  hour. 

Saturn,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus  the  Moon  and 
the  Sun  are  each  naturally  stronger  than  the  immediately 
preceding  planet  in  the  order  stated. (6) 

NOTES. 

(а)  That’ is,  ths  Sun,  Jupiter, 

(б)  Such  strength  is  known  as  NaisargikabaJa. 

Before  applying  the  astrological  truths  contained  in 

the  subsequent  pages,  the  reader  must  consider  the  strength 
or  weakness  of  each  house,  of  its  Lord,  and  of  the  planets 


24 


BRIHAT  JATAKA* 


CH.  II. 


occupying  or  aspecting  such  house.  For  these  and  various 
other  purposes  it  will  not  do  to  have  a mere  Rasi  Chakra  or 
Navamsa  Chakra  to  represent  roughly  the  planetary  posi- 
tions- The  actual  longitudes  (sphuta)  of  the  planets  and 
of  Lagna  from  Revati  should  he  known. 


cn.  3.] 


BHIIIAT  JATAKA. 


CHAPTER  III. 


On  Animal  and  Vegetable  Horoscope, 
i.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth '-(a),  the  male  planets  (b) 
be  powerful  (c),  the  benefic  planets  ( d ) weak,  and  one  of  the 
hermaphrodite  planets  (e)  either  be  in  one  of  the  Kendras 
(angles)  (/)  or  aspect  the  Lagna  (ascendant)  ; the  creature 
born  will  be  that  indicated  by  the  particular  Dwadasamsa^) 
which  the  Moon  might  then  occupy  (h). 


Notes. 

(a)  Or  at  the  time  of  query,  adds  the  Commentator. 

(it)  For  the  masculine  planets,  vide  IT.  6. 

(c)  For  the  strength  of  the  planets,  vide  II.  19,20  & 21. 

(d)  For  the  benefic  planets,  vide  II.  5. 

(e)  For  the  liermaphrodita  planets,  vide  II.  G. 

(f)  For  the  Kendras  or  angles,  vide  I.  17. 

(g)  For  Dwadasamsa,  vide  I.  G. 

(It)  For  instance,  suppose  at  the  time  of  birth  the 
Moon  occupies  the  20°  of  Leo.  As  a Dwadasamsa  contains 
2 2 degrees,  the  21°  of  Leo  is  the  ninth  D wadasamsa  of  Leo. 
As  the  names  of  the  Dwadasamsas  of  Leo  begin  from  Leo, 
the  ninth  Dwadasamsa  is  that  of  Pisces.  The  creature  born 
will  therefore  be  a fish. 

Besides,  the  number  of  the  offspring  will  bo  that  repre- 
sented by  the  number  of  Dwadasamsas  passed  over  by  the 
Moon.  Of  these  the  number  of  odd  Dwadasamsa  will 
represent  the  male  issue, and  the  number  of  even  Dwada- 
samsas Avill  represent  the  female  issues;  the  number  that 
will  perish  immediately  after  birth  will  be  that  of  the  num- 
ber of  the  Dwadasamsas  that  might  bo  occupied  by  the 
malefic  planets  or  that  might  otherwise  become  weak. 

N.r>. — The  reader  will  in  future  kindly  refer  to  the 
table  of  reference  published  after  the  Introduction  fertile 
meaning  of  any  term.  4 


II 

24  brihat  jataka-  [oil  3. 

2.  If  the  malefic  planets  occupy  their  Navamsas  and 
he  powerful,  and  if  (at  the  same  time)  the  Lagna  (rising 
sign)  be  other  than  liuman(a);  the  birth  will  bo  that  of  a 
lower  animal  as  before(Z>). 

' u Notes. 

(a)  The  rising  should  bo  other  than  Gemini,  Yirgo, 
Libra,  the  second  half  ofSagittari  and  Aquarius- 

(b)  That  is,  the  creature  will  be  that  represented  by 
the  Dwadasamsa  which  the  Moon  might  then  occupy. 

S.  In  the  case  of  quadrupeds  Aries  is  the  head ; Taurus 
the  face  and  neck  ; Gemini,  the  forelegs  and  shoulders  ; 
Cancer,  the  back  ; Leo,  the  breast ; Yirgo,  the  sides  ; Libra, 
the  belly;  Scorpio,  the  anus;  Sagittari,  the  hind  legs; 
Capricorn,  the  penis  or  testicle  ; Aquarius,  the  buttocks 
and  Pisces,  the  tail. 

Notes. 

In  the  case  of  birds  the  wings  stand  for  the  forelegs. 
This  stanza  will  also  enable  us  to  ascertain  the  color  or 
wounds  of  particular  parts  of  the  creature’s  body. 

4.  If  there  be  any  planet  in  the  rising  sign,  the  color 
of  the  creature  will  be  that  of  the  planet  itself ; if  not  the 
color  will  be  that  of  the  planet  aspecting  the  rising  sign  ; 
and  if  no  planets  aspect  the  rising  sign  the  color  will  be 
that  of  the  rising  Navamsa.  The  number  and  variety  of 
colors  will  be  that  of  the  planets  occupying  or  aspecting 
the  rising  sign(a).  The  number  of  stripes  on  the  back  of 
the  creature  will  be  that  of  the  planets  occupying  tho 
seventh  house. 

Notes. 

(a)  The  color  of  the  powerful  planet  will  predominate' 


BBIIIAT  GATAKA. 


25 


GH.  3.] 


5.  Ifeitlier  a Pakshidrekkana  (a)  or  a Charanavamsa(&) 
or  a Navamsa  of  Mercury  (c)  should  rise  and  be  occupi- 
ed by  powerful  planets,  the  creature  born  would  be  a land 
bird  if  the  rising  Drekkana  or  Navamsa,  be  either  occupied 

or  aspected  by  Saturn  ; and  a water  bird  if  it  be  occupied  or 
aspected  by  the  Moon. 


Nt  e3 

(a)  These  are  the  second  Drekkana  or  degrees  from 
31  to  20  of  Gemini,  the  first  Drekkna  or  degrees  from  t to 
10  of  Leo,  the  second  Drekkana  of  Libra  and  the  first  Drok- 
kana  of  Aquarius. 

(b)  Chara  or  movable  Navamsas  go  by  the  same 
names  as  the  Chara  or  movable  signs. 

(c.)  The  Navamsas  of  Mercury  are  those  of  Gemini 
and  Virgo. 


0.  If  the  rising  sign,  the  Moon,  Jnpiter  and  the 
Sun  should  bo  weak,  they  indicate  the  birth  of  a tree  ,* 
such  tree  will  be  either  a land  tree  or  a water  tree  accord- 
ing as  the  rising  Navamsa  is  one  of  land  or  water  (a).  Tho 
number  of  trees  will  be  tho  number  of  signs  by  which 
the  lord  of  the  ascendant  Navamsa  has  receded  from  the 
rising  sign(i). 

Notes. 

(a)  The  wates  Navamsas  are  thoso  of  Cancer,  the 
second  half  of  the  Navamsa  of  Makara  aud  the  Navamsa  of 
Pisces.  The  other  Navamsas  are  those  of  land- 

( l ) For  instance  : suppose  the  10°  of  Leo  to  riso,  tho 
rising  Navamsa  is  that  of  Gemini  ; it  is  a land  Navamsa. 
Tho  treo  will  therefore  bo  one  growing  on  dry  land.  The 
lord  of  Gemini  is  Morcury.  Suppose  Mercury  to  occupy 


20  BRIUAT  JATAKA.  [CH.  4. 

Sagittari  at  the  time.  From  Leo  to  Sagittari  ia  5 signs. 
The  number  of  trees  will  therefore  be  5. 

Again,  if  the  lord  of  the  ascendant  Navamsa  should  be 
either  in  the  exaltation  sign  or  retrograde  in  his  motion, 
the  number  already  obtained  should  be  trebled  ; but  if  he 
should  be  in  his  Vargottamabhaga  or  in  his  own  Navamsa 
or  Sign  or  Drekkann,  such  number  should  be  doubled.  For 
instance  : in  tho  instance'  cited  above,  if  Mercury  should 
oither  be  retrograde  in  motion  and  occupy  his  exaltation 
sign,  namely,  Virgo,  the  number,  viz-,  two  from  Loo  should 
be  trebled-  This  will  give  us  six.  But  if  Mercury  should 
occupy  the  last  Na\  amsa  of  Libra,  (one  of  his  Navamsas) 
the  number  is  3 X 2=6.  If  he  should  occupy  Gemini  the  num- 
ber is  11  X2=22  ; and  if  he  should  occupy,  for  instance,  the 
second  Drekkana  of  sigh  Taurus,  the  number  is  2x10  = 20. 

7.  If  tho  lord  of  the  ascendant  Navamsa  be  the  Sun  (a), 
the  tree  will  be  one  strong  within  ; if  Saturn,  the  tre° 
will  be  an  ugly  one  ; if  the  Moon,  it  ‘will  be  a milky  tree  ; 
if  Mars,  a thorny  tree  ; if  Jupiter,  a fruit  tree  ; if  Mercury, 
a fruitless  tree  ; if  Venus,  a flower  tree  ; if  the  Moon 
again,  an  oily  tree  ; and  if  Mars,  a tree  of  sour  taste. 

Notes. 

(a)  The  conditions  given  in  the  last  stanza  remaining 
the  same- 

8.  If  the  lord  of^  the  ascendant  Navamsa  be  a bene- 
fic'planet  occupying  a malefic  sign(«),  the  tree  will  be  a 
superior  one  growing  on  a bad  ground  ; if  otherwise,  tho 
reverse  will  bo  tho  casc(&)  j the  number  of  trees  is  also 
the  number  of  Navamsas  by  which  the  lord  of  the  ascen- 
dant Navamsa  has  receded  from  his  Navamsa, 


cn-  4.] 


BRJIIAT  SAMH1TA. 


27 


Notes. 

(a).  The  Other  conditions  given  in  stanza  6 remaining 
the  same. 

(/>).  That  is,  if  the  lord  of  the  ascendant  Navamsa  be 
malelic  planet  occupying  a benefic  house,  the  treo  will  bo 
an  inferior  one  growing  on  a good  ground. 


CHAPTER  IV- 

On  Nisheka  Ivala  on  The  time  op  Conception. 

1.  The  menses  that  appear  monthly,  because  of  Mara 
and  the  Moon  (o)  (bring  about  conception)  when  the  Moon 
is  in  one  of  the  Anuupachaya  signs(/v).  If  the  Moon  bo  other- 
wise (<•)  and  be  aspected  by  a benefic  male  planet(d),  there 
will  be  sexual  union  between  a woman  and  her  husband. 

Notes. 

(a)  Menses  appear  iti  women  whenever  tho  Moon  is 
aspected  by  Mars,  that  is  especially  when  the  Moon  occu- 
pies the  4th,  7th  or  the  8th  house  from  Mars.  In  connec- 
tion with  this  subject  the  author  of  Saravali  says  : 

“The  Moon  is  water;  Mars  is  fire;  a mixture  of  water 
and  fire  is  bile  ; when  the  bile  mixes  withj  the  blood,  men- 
strual discharge  occurs.'” 

( b ) If,  when  aspected  by  Mars,  the  Moon  happens 
to  occupy  one  of  the  An upachaya  signs  in  the  horoscope  or 
nativity  of  the  woman,  at  the  time  of  the  appearance  of 
tho  menses,  conception  will  follow.  The  Upachaya  signs 
are  the  3rd,  Gth_,  10th  and  the  1 1th  houses  from  the  ascen- 
dant ; and  the  other  signs  are  known  as  Anupachaya  signs. 

(c) .  That  is  from  the  time  tho  woman  bathes  on  the 
4th  day,  when  the  Moon  reaches  one  of  the  Upachaya 
houses  in  the  horoscope  or  nativity  of  the  husband. 


28 


BRIIIAT  JATAKA. 


[cn  .8. 


(d).  There  will  be  sexual  union  between  the  husband 
and  wife  it  the  Moon  is  aspected  by  Jupiter  when  power- 
ful. The  Commentator  adds  as  follows  : 

“If  the  Moon  is  aspected  by  the  Sun,  the  woman  will 
have  sexual  union  with  an  officer  of  the  king  ; if  aspected 
by  Mars,  then  with  a voluptuary  ; if  aspected  by  Mercury, 
then  with  a person  of  fickle  mind  ; if  aspected  by  Venus, 
then  with  a beautiful  person  ; if  aspected  by  Saturn,  then 
with  a servant;  and  if  aspected  by  several  malefic  planets, 
the  woman  will  become  a harlot.” 

2.  If  at  the  time  of  sexual  union,  the  setting  sign 
be  either  occupied  or  aspected  by  malefic  planets,  such 
union  will  be  attended  with  anger,  and  if  by  benefic  planets, 
it  will  be  attended  with  play  and  laughter. 

Notes. 

Tho  Commentator  adds  that  if  the  setting  sign  bo 
occupied  or  aspected  by  both  malefic  and  benefic  planets, 
the  union  will  be  attended  with  both  joy  and  displeasure. 

3.  If,  at  the  time  of  sexual  union,  the  Sun,  tho  Moon, 
Venus  and  Mars  be  in  their  Navamsas(a),  or  if  Jupiter 
occupy  the  rising  sign  or  tho  5th  or  9th  sign  from  it,  such 
union  will  produce  a child.  To  persons  devoid  of  verility, 
the  above  Yoga  (planetary  positions)  will  bo  as  useless  as 
the  rays  of  the  Moon  to  the  blind. 

Notes. 

The  Commentator  adds  that  there  would  also  bo 
conception  when  these  four  planets  are  not  in  their  Navnm- 
sas,  if  the  Sun  and  Venus  should  occupy  tho  Upachaya 
signs  in  tho  horoscope  of  the  man  and  at  the  same  timo 
be  in  their  Navamsas,  or  if  Mars  and  the  Moon  should 


OR.  4.] 


BRIIIAT  J A TAKA. 


29 


occupy  the  Upachaya  signs  in  the  horoscope  of  the  woman 
and  at  the  same  time  be  in  their  Navamsas. 

4.  If  at  the  time  of  conception,  either  Mars  or  Saturn 
should  occupy  the  seventh  house  from  the  Sun  or  Moon  the 
man  and  his  wife  would  respectinely  fall  ill  (a)  ; but  if  cno 
of  the  two  planets,  Mars  and  Jupiter,  should  occupy  the 
twelfth  and  the  other  the  second  house  from  the  Sun  and 
Moon,  or  if  one  of  the  planets  should  be  in  cou junction 
with  the  Sun  or  Moon  and  the  other  should  aspect  either 
the  Sun  or  the  Moon,  the  man  and  his  wife  will  respectively 
meet  with  death  ( b ). 

Notes. 

(a)  In  the  Month  of  Mars  or  Saturn  as  the  case  may 
be  (vide  Stanza  1G). 

( l ).  In  the  month  of  cither  Saturn  or  Mars  whoever  is 
powerful. 

The  Comment  itor  adds  that  the  two  effects  described 
in  the  Stanza  will  occur  before  and  not  after  the  birth  of 
the  child. 

5.  In  the  case  of  conception  (a)  by  day,  the  Sun  and 
Venus  represent  respectively  the  father  and  the  mother; 
and  by  night,  Saturn  and  the  Moon  represent  respectively 
the  father  and  the  mother.  In  the  (former  case  Saturn  and 
the  Moon  represent  respectively  tho  paternal  uncle  and  the 
maternal  auut  ; and  in  the  latter  case  the  Sun  and  Venus 
represent  respectively  the  paternal  uncle  and  the  maternal 
aunt.  If  the  planets  representing  the  father  and  the 
paternal  uncle  should  occupy  the  odd  signs,  or  if  the  planets 
representing  the  mother  and  the  maternal  aunt  should  occu- 
py the  even  signs  at  the  time,  then  the  father  and  paternal 
unc  le  or  the  mother  and  the  maternal  aunt  would  be  happy 


so 


BEIHAT  JATAKA. 


[err-  4. 


Notes. 

(a)  Or  birth  according  to  the  Commentator. 

G.  If  at  the  time  of  conception  malefic  planets  occupy 
tli o twelfth  house  (a),  and  if  then  the  rising  sign  be  not 
aspected  by  benefic  planets,  or  if  Saturn  occupy  the  rising 
sign  and  be  aspected  by  the  waning  Moon  and  Mars 
(in  either  case)  the  pregnant  woman  will  die  ( b / 

Noto3. 

(a)  The  second  house  according  to  certain  Commen- 
tators. 

(b)  Before  deliver}7  time  according  to  Commentator. 

7.  If  (at  the  time)  either  the  rising  sign  or  the  Moon 
or  both  be  between  malefic  planets  (a)  and  at  the  same  time 
not  aspected  by  the  benefic  planets,  the  pregnant  woman 
will  die  ( b ). 

Notes. 

(a)  As  the  malefic  planets  in  the  present  case  can 
only  be  three,  viz.,  the  Sun,  Mars  and  Saturn,  both  the 
rising  sign  and  the  Moon  can  be  between  them  at  t lie  samo 
time  either  when  they  ai7e  together  or  occupy  two  alternate 
houses.  The  Commentator  adds  that  malefic  planets  might 
occupy  either  the  12th  and  the  2nd  houses  from  the  ascen- 
dant or  the  Moon  or  both,  or  they  might  occupy  the  Navani- 
sas  on  either  side- 

(h)  Before  delivery  and  in  the  month  of  the  powerful 
malefic  planet. 

8.  If  (at  tlio  time)  malefic  planets  occupy  the  fourth 
house  and  Mars  the  eighth  house  from  the  ascendant  or  th 


cii.  4] 


BRIIIAT  JATAKA, 


SL 

Moon,  or  again  if  Mara  occupy  the  fourth  liouse  and  the 
Sun  the  twelfth  house  from  the  ascendant,  the  pregnant 
woman  will  die. 

9-  If  (at  the  time)  Mars  occupy  the  Lagna  and  tho 
Sim  occupy  the  seventh  house,  the  pregnant  woman  will 
suffer  death  from  weapons-  If  the  lord  of  any  month  (a) 
be  afflicted,  the  pregnancy  will  miscarry  in  that  month. 

Notes' 

(a)  For  the  lords  of  the  several  months  of  pregnancy 
vide  Stanza  10- 

10.  If  the  benefic  planets(a)  be  with  the  Moon  or  in 
the  ascendant  (6),  or  if  they  occupy  the  second,  fourth,  fifth, 
seveutb,  ninth  and  the  tenth  houses  from  the  Moon  or  tho 
ascendant,  there  will  be  safe  delivery,  provided  malefic 
planets  occupy  the  third  or  eleventh  house  from  the  Moon 
or  the  ascendant,  and  the  Moon  or  the  ascendant,  is  at  the 
same  time  aspected  by  the  Sun.  ( c ) 

Notes. 

(a)  These  are  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus. 

( b ) Or  both  at  the  same  time. 

(c)  According  to  some  other  reading,  by  Jupiter. 
Cut  this  is  opposed  to  Saravali. 

H.  If  (^)  the  rising  sign,  the  Sun,  Jupiter  and  the 
Moon  bo  powerful  and  occupy  tho  odd  (male)  signs  and 
the  odd  Navamsas,  the  issue  will  be  a male  child  (6)  ; if 
they  occupy  the  even  (female)  signs  and  the  even  Navamsas, 
the  issue  will  be  a female  child  (c) ; if  again,  the  Sun  and 
Jupiterfc?)  occupy  the  odd  signs,  the  issue  will  be  a male 
child  ; and  if  the  Moon,  Venus  and  Mars(e)  occupy  the  even 
signs,  the  issue  will  be  a female  child.  Also,  if  tho  Sun  and 


jBRIIIAT  jataka. 


32 


[ch.  4. 


Jupiter  occupy  the  two  male  double  bodied  Navameas'/) 
and  be  aspcctcd  by  Mercury,  the  issue  will  be  male  twins; 
and  if  Venus  and  Mars  occupy  the  two  female  double 
bodied  Navamsas(gr)  and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  issue 
will  be  female  twins(A). 

Notes. 

(a)  At  the  time  of  conception  or  of  birth  or  of  query 
about  the  one  or  the  other  according  to  Commentator. 

(b  & c)  If  some  of  the  planets  be  iu  the  male  and  some 
in  the  fomale  signs  or  Navamsas,  then  the  sex  of  the  issue 
will  be  that  which  predominates- 

(d  8)-  c)  The  planets  should  be  powerful  also. 

(f)  These  are  the  Navamsas  of  Gemini  and  Sagittari. 
(y)  These  are  the  Navamsas  of  Virgo  and  Pisces. 

(h)  Tho  issue  will  be  male  twins  as  well  as  female 
twins,  if  all  the  four  double  bodied  Navamsas  be  so  occupied. 


12.  If  (at  the  time)(a)  Saturn  occupy  any  of  the  odd 
signs  from  the  rising  sign(b),  the  issue  will  be  a male  child. 

The  sex  of  the  issue  iu  all  the  above  cases  shall  be 
determined  by  the  position  of  the  most  powerful  planet. 

Notes. 

(o)  Of  conception  or  query  according  to  Commentator. 

[b)  This  Yoga  applies  only  iu  the  absence  of  the 
Yoga  mentioned  already. 

1ST.  B. — Yoga  is  a particular  position  of  one  or  more 
planets  either  relatively  to  one  another  or  absolutely  in  the 
ecliptic  or  both. 

13.  (If  at  the  time  of  conception),  the  Moon  and  the 
Sun,  occupying  respectively  any  of  the  even  and  odd  signs, 
aspect  each  other,  or  (2),  if  Saturn  and  Mercury  (occupying 


liltlilAT  JATAKA. 


3?, 


«u.  4.] 


respectively  any  of  tlie  even  and  odd  signs)  aspect  each 
other,  or  (3)  if  Mars  (in  an  odd  sign)  aspect  (or  be  aspected 
by)  the  Sun  in  an  even  sign,  or  (4)  if  the  Moon  and  Lagna 
in  odd  signs  be  aspected  by  Mars  (in  an  even  sign),  or  (5) 
if  Mars  aspect  the  Moon  and  Mercury  occupying  respec- 
tively even  aud  odd  signs,  or  (G)  if  Venus,  Lagna  and  the 
Moon  occupy  (male  signs  aud)  male  Navamsas,  the  issue 
will  be  a hermaphrodite- 

Notes- 

These  Napumsaka  Yogas  take  effect  only  in  the  absence 
of  male  and  fenialo  Yogas. 

14.  If,  when  the  Moon  and  Venus  are  in  even  signs, 
Mercury,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Lagna  bo  in  odd  signs,  or  if  a 
male  planet  aspect  Lagna  aud  the  Moon  in  the  even  signs, 
or  if  Mercury,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Lagna  bo  powerful  and 
occupy  even  signs,  the  issue  will  bo  a male  and  a female 
child.  Again,  if  Lagna  and  all  the  planets  occupy  the 
Ubhaya  (common)  Navamsas  and  bo  aspected  by  Mercury 
in  bis  Navamsa,  the  issue  will  be  three  children  : of  these, 
two  will  be  male  children  if  the  Navamsa  occupied  by  Mer- 
cury bo  that  of  Gemini,  and  two  will  be  female  children  if 
sucli_Navamsa  be  that  of  Virgo.  Again,  if,  when  Mercury 
occupies  the  Navamsa  of  Gemini,  the  other  planets  and 
Lagna  occupy  tho  Navamsas  of  Gemini  and  Sagittari,  all 
the  threo  will  be  male  children,1  aud  if,  when  Mercury  occu- 
pies the  Navamsa  of  Virgo,  the  other  planets  and  Lagna 
occupy  the  Navamsas  of  Virgo  and  Pisces,  all  the  threo 
will  bo  female  children. 


15.  If  the  last  Navamsa  of  sign  Sagittari  begin  to  rise, 
if  all  the  planets  occupy  the  Navamsa  of  Sagittari  and  bo 
powerful,  aud  if  the  rising  sign  be  aspected  by  powerful 
Mercury  and  Saturn,  tho  issue  will  be  more  than  three 
children(a) 


34 


Bill  HAT  JATAEA. 


[CH.  4f 


Notes. 

(a)  That  is  oor  7 or  10  according  to  Commentator, 

1G.  In  the  first  month  of  pregnaucy  the  embryo  is 
formed  ; in  the  second,  ic  becomes  flesh  ^ in  the  third,  tlie 
limbs  are  formed;  in  tire  fourth,  the  bones  are  formed; 
in  the  fifth,  the  skin  is  formed ; in  the  sixth,  the  hair  begins 
to  grow  ; in  the  seventh,  intelligence  is  infused  into  the 
child(a). 

The  lords  of  fcho  several  months  fr  ni  the  first^to  the 
seventh  are  Venus,  Mars,  Jupiter,  the  bun,  the  Moon, 
Saturn  and  Mercury  respectively. 

Notes. 

(a)  In  the  eighth  month,  the  child  begins  to  eat 
through  the  navel  cord.  In  the  ninth,  mouth,  the  child  is 
filled  with  cares,  and  in  the  teuth  month  the  child  is  born- 
The  lord  of  the  8th  month  is  the  lord  of  the  rising  sign  at 
the  time  of  conception.  The  lord  of  the  9th  month  is  the 
Moon,  and  the  lord  of  the  lOfcli  inoath  is  the  Su-nv  Accord- 
ing to  Yavaneswara,  the  lord  of  the  first  month  is  Mars 
and  that  of  the  second  mouth  is  Venus. 

There  will  be  miscarriage  of  pregnancy  in  that  month 
whose  lord  happens  to  be  afflicted  at  the  time  of  conception  ; 
but  if  any  of  the  planets  be  of  dim  appearance,  the  fetus 
will  simply  suffer  in  the  month  of  the  particular  planets. 
If  the  Sun  be  powerful  the  child  would  resemble  its  father, 
and  if  the  Moon  be  powerful,  the  child  would  resemble  its 
mother.  The  health  and  disposition  of  the  child  follow 
those  of  its  parents  at  the  time  of  conception. 


17.  If  Mercury  occupy  the  fifth  or  ninth  house  (a)  from 
tho  rising  sign,  and  if  at  the  same  time  the  other  planets  be 


iic«  4*] 


BRIH&T  JAT^KA. 


powerless,  the  face,  the  legs,  and  the  hands  of  the  child  will 
be  doubled.  If  the  Moou  occupy  sigu  Taurus  and  if  malefic 
planets  occupy  the  Ttiksha  Sandhies(6)>  the  issue  will  be  a 

mute  child  ; but  if  the  Moon  be  aspected  by  a benefic 
planer,  there  will  be  speech  after  a long  time(c). 

Notes. 

(a)  According  to  some  Commentators  the  word  Tri- 
kona  in  the  text  is  interpreted  as  Moola  trikona,  that  is 
sign  Virgo  here.  But  this  is  opposed  to  the  opinion  of 
Garga. 

(L)  That  is,  the  last  Navamsas  of  the  signs  Cancer, 
Scorpio  and  Pisces. 

(c)  But  if  malefic  planets  aspect  the  Moon,  the  child 
will  never  speak  ,•  if  both  malefic  and  benefic  planets 
aspect  the  Moon,  the  effects  will  follow  the  powerful  planets, 

18.  If  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy  either  the  signs  or 
the  Navamsas(a)  of  Mercury,  the  issue  will  be  a child  bom 
with  teeth.  If  Cancer  be  the  rising  sign  and  if  the  Moon 
occupy  it  and  be  aspected  bj’’  Saturn  snd  Mars,  the  child 
will  he  humpbacked  ; if  Pisces  he  the  rising  sign  and  if 
it  be  aspected  by  Saturn,  the  Moon  and  Mars,  the  child 
will  be  lame.  If  a malefic  planet  A)  and  the  Moon  he  in 
any  of  the  last  Navamsas  of  Cancer,  Scorpio  and  Pisces, 
the  child  will  be  born  deaf.  In  all  the  above  Yogas  the 
effects  described  will  occur  only  if  the  several  planets  are 
not  aspected  by  Jupiter(c). 

Notes. 

(a)  Or  both  the  signs  and  Navamsas  according  to 
some  Commentators. 

( l ) One  of  the  three  planets,  the  Sun,  Mars  and  Sa- 
turn. 


36 


brut  At  j at  aka.  [cir.  4. 

(c)  So  that  it  tho  planets  be  aspocted  by  Jupiter,  the 
effects  will  not  occur. 

19.  If  the  last  Navamsa  of  Makara  begin  to  rise  and 
if  it  be  aspected  by  Saturn,  the  Moon  and  the  Sun,  the 
issue  will  bo  a dwarf.  If  Mars  occupy  the  rising  Drek- 
kaua  of  the  fitih  house  or  of  tho  ninth  house(a),  the  issue 
will  bo  either  without  a head  or  without  arms  or  without 
legs  respectively,  if  Mars  bo  aspected  by  tho  Sun,  tho  Moon 
and  Saturn. 

Notes. 

(a)  Some  Commentators  interpret  this  part  of  tho 
text  as  follows  ; if  Mars  occupy  the  1st  or  the  2nd  or  tho 
3rd  Drekkana  of  a rising  sign,  &c-  But  this  is  opposed  to  tho 
opinion  of  Garga. 

20.  If  Leo  be  the  rising  sign  and  if  it  be  occupied  by 
tho  Sun  and  Moon  and  aspected  by  Mars  and  Saturn,  the 
issue  will  be  a blind  child;  (a)  if  in  the  above  case  bcnefic 
planets  aspect  the  rising  sign,  tho  child  will  be  born  with  a 
mote  in  its  eyes.  If  the  Moon  or  the  Snn  occupy  the  twelfth 
house  from  the  rising sign(Z>),  the  child  will  be  born  bliud, 
respectively,  of  the  left  or  the  right  eye(c). 

Tho  several  Yogas  mentioned  above(d)  will  not  wholly 
come  to  pass  if  tho  planets  of  each  Yoga  bo  aspected  by 
benefic  planets. 

Notes. 

(а)  According  to  Commentator  if  the  Sun  alone  occu- 
py sign  Leo,  and  if  it  bo  aspected  by  Mars  and  Saturn,  tho 
child  will  be  blind  of  the  right  eye  ; and  if  the  Moon  alone 
should  occupy  sign  Loo,  and  if  it  bo  aspected  by  Mars  and 
Saturn,  the  child  will  be  blind  of  the  left  eye. 

(б)  At  the  time  of  Nisheka  (conception)  or  of  birth. 


IBRIHAT  JATAKA. 


o7 


Oh.  5;] 


(c)  Provided  the  Sun  or  the  Moon  is  aspectcd  by 
Mars  aud  Saturn  according  to  Subodliini  Commentator. 

(d)  That  is  beginning  from  Stanza  17. 

21.  Find  out  the  number  of  the  particular  Dwnda- 
snmsa  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time(a)  in  any  Zodi- 
acal sign.  Note  the  Zodiacal  sign  whose  name  the  Dwa- 
dasamsa  bears.  Count  from  the  next  sign  a^  many  signs  as 
the  number  of  Dwadasamsas  by  which  the  Moon  may 
have  advanced  in  any  particular  sign.  When  the  Moon 
comes  to  such  last  sign  the  birth  of  the  child  will  occur. 

Again,  the  birth  will  occur  by  day  or  by  night  accord- 
ing as  the  rising  Navamsa  at  the  time  is  a day  ora  night 
Navamsa.  The  hour  of  birth  from  sun-rise  or  sun-set  may 
be  calculated  from  the  portion  of  the  rising  Navamsa  that 
may  have  risen  above  the  horizon. 

Notes. 

(a)  At  the  time  of  conception,  or  query  according  to 
Commentator. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  purposes  to  discover  the  time 
of  child-birth  from  the  time  of  conception  or  query.  Suppose 
the  Moon  to  occupy,  say,  the  8th  Dwadasamsa  of  sign  Aqua- 
rius at  the  time.  This  Dwadasamsa  is  known  as  the  Dwa- 
dasamsa of  Virgo  (Kannya).  The  sign  next  to  sign  Virgo  in 
the  Zodiac  is  sign  Libi  a (Tula).  As  the  Moon  occupies  the  8th 
Dwadasamsa  in  sign  Aquarius,  the  8th  sign  from  Libra  is 
sign  Taurus-  The  child  will  therefore  be  born  when  the 
Moon  passes  through  sign  Taurus. 

The  Commentator  adds  that  the  particular  star  which 
the  Moon  would  occupy  at  the  time  of  birth  might  be  dis- 
covered from  the  advance  made  by  her  in  the  particular 
Dwadasamsa  occupied  by  her.  For  instance,  suppose  the 
Moon  to  occupy  the  middle  of  the  8ih  Dwadasamsa  in  Aqua- 


38 


B Bin  AT  J AT  AKA* 


[cn.  4. 


rius.  Tlio  middle  of  sign  Taurus  is  tho  2nd  quarter  of  Star 
liohiui  ; so  that  at  tlio  time  of  birth  of  the  child  tho  Moon 
will  occupy  the  asterism  of  Rohini. 

Again  if  the  rising  Navamsa  for  instance  bo  that  of 
Sagittari,  anight  sign,  tho  birth  will  occur  at  night.  Tho 
time  of  birth  from  sun-set  should  be  calculated  by  propor- 
tion from  the  time  by  which  the  Navamsa  of  Sagittari  may 
iiave  risen  above  the  horizon — the  period  of  oblique  ascen- 
sion of  the  Navamsa  representing  tho  period  of  the  whole 
night. 

•O 

The  sex  of  tho  issue  can  be  determined  from  stanzas 
11  to  15. 

22.  If  at  the  time  of  conception,  the  Navamsa  of 
Saturn(a)  begin  to  rise  and  if  Saturn  occupy  the  seventh 
house  from  the  rising  sign,  there  will  he  delivery  after  three 
years;  and  iu  similar  case  of  the  AJ oon(5)  there  will  ho 
delivery  after  twelve  years. 

Which  of  the  several  Yogas  described  in  this  Chapter 
are  applicable  to  the  time  of  birth  also,  shall  be  determined 
Oil  tho  nature  of  such  Yogas  (c). 

Notes. 

(a)  That  is  the  Navamsa  of  Makar  or  Kumbha. 

(5)  It’  the  Navamsa  of  Cancer  should  begiu  to  riso 
and  if  the  Moon  should  occupy  the  seventh  houso  from  tho 
rising  sign. 

(c)  For  instance,  Yogas  relating  to  the  birth  of  chil- 
dren with  extra  or  defective  organs,  are  to  be  taken  to  refer 
as  much  to  the  time  of  birth  as  to  the  time  of  conception. 
As  regards  such  Yogas  as  those  relating  to  the  miscarriage 
of  pregnancy  and  tho  like,  they  are  to  be  taken  to  refer  to 
fcbo  time  of  conception  alone. 


cn.  5.] 


BEIHAT  JATAKA. 


39 


CHAPTER  V. 

Osr  Matters  connected  with  Birth  time. 

1.  If,  at  tlie  time  of  birth  of  a child  the  rising  sign  be 
not  aspected  by  tho  Moon,  the  father  will  not  be  near  when 
the  child  is  born— and  if  in  such  a case,  the  Sun  should 
occupy  the  9th  or  the  8th  house,  the  father  would  be  in  a 
foreign  country  if  the  house  bo  a movable  sign,  in  his  own 
country  if  tho  house  be  a fixed  sign,  and  would  be  return- 
ing to  his  country  if  the  house  be  a common  sign. 

2.  If,  .at  the  time  of  birth,  Saturn  be  in  the  rising 
sign  or  Mars  in  the  setting  sign,  or  the  Moon  between(a) 
Mercury  and  Venus,  the  father  will  not  be  near. 

Notes. 

(a).  Whether  Mercury  and  Venus  occupy  the  signs 
on  both  sides  of  tho  Moon  or  occupy  the  same  sign  as  tho 

Moon. 

3.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  be  in  the  Drek- 
kana  of  Mars(a)  and  if  benefic  planets  be  in  the  2nd  and  1 1 th 
houses  from  the  rising  sign,  the  issue  will  be  a sorpent.  If 
the  sign(fr)  of  a malefic  planet  bo  the  ascendant  sign,  and  if 
the  Drekkana  of  Mars  should  then  be  rising,  tho  issue  wil 
be  a child, born  with  a serpent  coiled  round  its  body. 

Notes. 

(a) .  These  Drekkanas  of  Mars  are — the  1st  Drekkana 
of  Aries,  the  2nd  of  Cancer,  the  3rd  of  Leo,  the  1st  of 
Scorpio,  tho  2nd  of  Sagittari,  and  tho  3rd  of  Pisces. 

( b ) •  Aries,  Cancer  when  it  is  waning  Moon,  Leo  and 
Scorpio. 

4.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Sun  be  in  a quadruped 

sign  and  the  other  planets  be  all  powerful  and  in  the  com 
ruon  signs,  the  issue  will  be  twins.  G 


40 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


£CH.  «.*• 


5.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth,  Aries,  Leo  or  Taurus  ba 
the  rising  sign,  and  if  Saturn  or  Mars  be  in  such  sign,  the 
issue  will  be  a child  born  with  the  umbilical  cord  twined 
round  the  part  of  body  indicated  by  the  rising  Navamsa(a), 

Notes. 

(a).  If  the  Navamsa  of  Aries  be  the  rising  Navamsa 
at  the  time,  then  round  the  bead  ; if  it  be  that  of  Taurus, 
then  round  tbe  face  and  so  on,  following  the  divisions  of 
the  body  referred  to  in  Stanza  4,  Chapter  I. 

6.  If  Jupiter  at  the  time  of  birth  fail  to  aspect  both 
the  ascendant  sign  and  the  Moon(a)  or  the  Moon  when  in 
conjunction  with  tho  Sun,  or  if  the  Moon  be  in  conjunction 
with  tbe  Sun  when  he  is  accompanied  by  a malefic  planet* 
tbe  issue  will  be  au  illegitimate  child. 

Notes. 

(a).  If  Jupiter  aspect  either  the  one  or  tbe  other  the 
child  will  not  be  legitimate. 

According  to  Yavaneswara,  if  either  the  ascendant 
Navamsa  or  the  Navamsa  occupied  by  the  Moon  be  that  of 
Jupiter,  tbe  child  will  not  be  illegitimate. 

According  to  Garga,  if  tbe  Moon  should  occupy  a sign 
of  Jupiter,  or  if  she  be  in  conjunction  Avith  Jupiter  in  any 
other  sign,  or  if  the  Moon  he  in  the  Drekkana  or  Navamsa 
of  Jupiter,  the  child  will  not  be  illegitimate. 

7.  If,  at  tbe  time  of  birth,  two  malefic  planets(a)  occupy 
one  of  the  malefic  sign(fr),  and  if  such  sign  be  the  5th,  7th 
or  9th  house  from  the  Sun,  tbe  father  of  the  child  will  be  in 
custody  at  the  time.  If  the  Sun  occupy  a movable  sign,  the 
father  will  be  so  in  foreign  lands;  if  he  occupy  a fixed  sign 
the  father  will  be  in  custody  in  bis  own  country,  and  if  ha 
occupy  a common  sign,  the  father  will  be  so  on  bis  way  to 
bis  native  country. 


CH.  5.] 


BElHAT  JATAKA. 


41 


Notes* 

(ci).  Mai4s  and  Saturn. 

(6)  A ries,  Leo,  Scorpio,  Capricorn,  Aquarius,  Cancer 
when  it  is  waning  Moon,  and  Gemini  and  Virgo  when 
Mercury  is  in  conjunction  with  malefic  planets. 

8.  If  the  Moon  be  full  and  in  Cancer,  if  Mercury  bo 
in  the  rising  sign  and  Jupiter  in  the  4th  house,  the  birth 
will  occur  in  a boat.  Again,  if  the  watery  signs  begin  to 
rise  and  if  the  Moon  be  in  the  7th  house,  then  too  the  birth 
will  occur  in  a boat. 

9.  If  a watery  sign  begin  to  rise,  the  birth  will  certain- 
ly occur  on  the  banks  of  waters,  if  (1)  the  Moon  be  also  in 
a watery  sign,  or  (2)  if  the  Moon  be  full  and  aspect  the  ris- 
ing sign,  or  (3)  if  the  Moon  be  in  the  10th  or  4th  house  or 
in  Lagna. 

10.  If  the  Moon  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  if  Saturn 
occupy  the  12th  house  and  be  aspected  by  a malefic  planet, 
the  birth  will  occur  in  a prison.  Again,  if  either  Scorpio  or 
Cancer  begin  to  rise  and  be  occupied  by  Saturn  and  aspected 
by  the  Moon,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a ditch. 

11.  If  a watery  sign  begin  to  rise  and  if  Saturn  occupy 
it  and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  Sun,  or  the  Moon,  the 
birth  will  occur  respectively  in  a pleasure  house,  a temple 
or  sterile  ground. 

12.  If  a biped  sign  be  rising,  and  if  Saturn  occupy  it 
and  be  aspected  by  Mars,  the  birth  will  be  in  cremation 
ground  ; if  aspected  by  Venus  and  the  Moon,  the  birth  will 
occur  in  some  beautiful  and  agreeable  spot ; if  aspected  by 
.Jupiter,  then  in  the  Agniliotra  Sala(a)  ; if  aspected  by  the 
Sun,  then  in  the  King’s  palace  or  a temple  or  a cow  shed 
and  if  aspected  by  Mercury  the  birth  will  occur  in  an  artist’s 
working  room. 


42 


BHIHAT  JATAKA’. 


[c 


h: 


Notes. 

(a).  A place  where  the  sacred  fire  is  kept  and 
worshipped. 

13.  The  birth  will  occur  in  placcs(a)  represented  by  the 
rising  sign  or  Navamsa,  whichever  is  powerful.  If  such  sign 
or  Navarusa  be  a movable  one,,  the  birth  wilt  occur  in  roads  ; 
f fixed,  then,  within  a building(  1>).  If  the  rising  Navamsa 
be  a Vargottama  one,  the  house  will  be  the  mother’s  own 
property. 

Notes. 

(a).  These  places  are  those  referred  to  in  StanzaS, 
Chapter  I.  We  will  give  here  the  several  places  appro- 
priate to  the  several  signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

Mesha  represents  the  abodes  ’(caves)  of  the  sheep, 
mountains,  the  residence  ^of  an  army,  a fire  place,  metal 
mines  and  mines  where  precious  stones  arc  found. 

Yirshbha  represents  forests,  bottom  of  hills,  places 
frequented  by  the  elephants  and  cattkqand  dwelling  places 
of  the  farmer. 

Mithuna  represents  places  frequented  by  women  learned 
in  music  and  painting  for'  purpose  of  either  play  or  to  carry 
love  messages  to  lovers. 

Kataka  represents  rice  fields,  tanks,  sand  banks  and 
places  frequented  by  the  nymphs. 

Simha  represents  forests,  inaccessible  places,  eaves., 
mountaius  covered  with  forests  and  places  frequented  by 
forestmen. 

Kanya  represents  places  overgrown  with  grass 
women’s  sleeping  apartments,  and  female  schools. 

Tula  represents  customs  houses,  middle  streets,  bazars, 


BRIEifr  JATAKA. 


43 


cn.  5.] 


roads  leading  to  towns,  market  places,  high  gr@und  and 
places  where  crops  grow. 

Vrischika  represents  caves,  fortified  towns,  ditches, 
places  where  there  are  poisonous  stones,  and  hills  and  snake 
holes  and  scorpion  holes. 

Dhanus  represents  good  and  even  places  where  there 
are  horses  or  cavalry  men  or  armed  men,  places  of  sacri- 
ficial fire  ceremonies  or  wliore  vehicles  are  kept. 

Makara  r A^esPnts  rivers,  gardens,  forests,  tanks,  water 
banks  and 

Ivumbha  represents  places  frequented  by  birds,  by 
women,  by  dealers  in  liquor  or  by  gamblers. 

Meena  represents  temples,  places  frequented  by  the 
Brahmins,  holy  waters,  rivers  and  seas. 

(b).  If  both  fixed  and  movable,  the  birth  would  occur 
in  the  outer  verandah  of  the  house. 


14.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth,  Mars  and  Saturn  occupy 
single  sign,  and  if  the  Sun  or  the  Moon  (a)  occupy  the  5th 
or  the  9th  house  from  them,  the  child  will  be  deserted  by 
its  mother ; but  if  tho  Sun  or  the  Moon  be  aspected  by 
Jupiter,  tho  child  though  abandoned  by  its  mother  will 
live  long  and  in  comfort. 

Notes. 

(a).  If  tho  Moon  occupy  the  setting  sign  according  to 
somo  other  reading. 

15.  If  a malefic  planet  ( a ) aspect  tho  Moon  in  the 
rising  sign.  Mars  occupying  the  7th  house,  or  if  Mars  and 
Saturn  occupy  the  11th  house  from  the  Moon  when  in  tho 
rising  sign,  the  child  deserted  by  its  mother  will  die.  If 
the  Moon  be  also  aspected  by  a powerful  benefic  planet(6)} 
the  deserted  child  will  fall  into  the  1 ands  of  the 
class  of  men  represented  by  tho  aspecting  bonefic  planet 


44 


brihat  Jataka. 


[cn.  & 


and  will  live.  If  tlie  aspecting  malefic  planet  be  powerful, 

the  deserted  child  will  fall  into  the  hands  of  others  and 
will  perish, 


Notes. 

(ci).  Saturn  or  Mar's. 

(I)).  If  Jupiter  aspect  the  Moon,  none  of  these  evils 
will  befall  the  child. 

16.  If  a paternal  planet  be  powerful,  the  birth  will  occur 
in  the  father’s  house  ; if  a maternal  planet  be  powerful,  the 
birth  will  occur  in  the  mother’s  house if  three  benefit; 
planets  be  powerful,  the  birth  will  occur  at  the  foot  of  walls 
or  trees;  and  if  three  planets  occupying  a single  sign  fail  to 
aspect  the  Lagna  and  the  Moon,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a 
forest. 

17.  If  the  Moon  occupy  the  Navamsa  of  Saturn  or 
the  4th  house  (a)  from  Lagna,  or  if  she  be  aspected  by 
Saturn,  or  if  she  occupy  a watery  Navamsa(S)  or  the  same 
house  as  Saturn,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a dark  spot(c).  If 
three  or  more  planets  be  in  their  Neecha  signs(d) , the  birth 
will  occur  on  the  bare  ground  (e).  The  birth  will  follow 
the  manner  in  which  the  rising  sign  reaches  the  horizon  (f). 
If  malefic  planets  occupy  the  4th  or  7th  house,  the  mother 
will  suffer  much  from  travail  (g). 

Notes. 

(a) .  Yavanachaviar  uses  the  word  Kendra , meaning 
the  1st,  4th,  7th  and  10th  houses- 

( b ) .  Water  Navamsas  are  those  of  Cancer  and  Pisces, 

(c) .  If  the  sun  he  powerful  and  be  aspected  by  Mars, 
there  will  be  no  dai’kness. 

(d) .  Saravali  has  the  word, “ Neeclia  Samsthe,  v that  is, 
if  the  Moon  be  in  her  Neecha  sign,  viz , Scorpio. 

(e) .  On  ground,  covered  with  straw  according  to 
Commentator- 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


45 


5.] 


if).  That  is,  if  the  sign  be  one  that  rises  with  its 
head,  then  the  head  of  the  child  will  appear  first ; if  the 
sign  be  one  that  rises  with  its  .tail,  the  leg  of  the  child 
will  appear  first : and  if  it  be  one  that  rises  with  both  its 
head  and  Leg  as  sign  Pisces,  the  hands  will  appear  first. 


According  to  certain  Commentators  this  part  of  the 
text  is  interpreted  as  follows  : If  the  lord  of  the  rising 

sign  be  in  his  direct  course,  the  birth  will  be  a natural 
one  and  if  in  his  retrogade  motion,  the  birth  will  be  an  ir- 
regular one.  This  meaning  has  the  support  of  Manittha, 

(g).  Or  if  malefic  planets  occupy  the  same  sign  as  the 
Moon,  the  mother  will  suffer  from  travail. 


18.  The  oil  shall  be  determined  from  the  Moou(a),the 
wick  from  the  rising  sign(//)  ; the  fixed  or  other  nature  of 
the  lamp  shall  be  determined  from  the  sign  occupied  by 
the  Sun(c).  The  entrance  to  the  room  will  be  in  the 

direction  of  the  powerful  planet  occupying  a Kendra(cZ)  or 
in  that  of  the  most  powerful  planet. 

Notes. 

(a).  That  is,  if  the, Moon  occupy  the  beginning  of  a 
sign,  the  oil  of  the  lamp  in  the  delivery  room  will  be  full; 
if  the  Moon  occupy  the  middle  sign,  the  oil  will  be  one-lialf, 
and  if  the  Moon  occupy  the  end  of  a sign,  there  will  be  no 
oil  in  the  lamp  ; in  other  words,  the  quantity  of  oil  varies 
with  the  position  of  the  Moon  in  the  sign  occupied  by  her. 

According  to  Saravali,  if  the  Moon  be  full  the  oil  will 
be  full  and  the  quantity  of  the  oil  varies  with  the  illumined 
portion  of  the  Moon’s  disc.  Batta  Uipala,  the  Commenta- 
tor, objects  to  this  view,  for  he  says  that  if  such  were  the 
case,  children  horn  on  new-moon  days  should  always  be 
born  in  the  dark — Lliis  cannot  be. 


4a 


BEIIIAT  JATAKA. 


[cn.  5. 


(h).  That  is,  if  the  beginning  of  a sign  begin  to  rise, 
the  wick  w ill  be  long  and  unburnt;  if  the  middle  of  the 
sign  begin  to  rise,  the  wick  will  be  half  burnt;  and  if  tho 
end  of  the  sign  begin  to  rise,  the  wick  will  be  nearly 
wholly  burnt.  In  other  words,  the  length  of  the  wick  varies 
with  the  position  of  the  point  of  the  rising  sign  in  contact 
with  the  horizon. 


Tho  wick  is  of  the  color  of  the  rising  sign. 

(c).  That  is,  if  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun  be  a fixed 
one,  the  lamp  wjll  be  fixed  in  some  place;  if  movable,  tho 
lamp  will  be  carried  by  some  body  in  the  hand;  and  if  both 
fixed  and  movable  the  lamp  will  be  a swinging  lamp.  The 
Commentator  adds  that  the  lamp  will  be  in  the  direction 
assigned  to  the  signs  occupied  by  the  Sun.  According  to 
some  the  lamp  will  be  in  the  direction  of  the  sign  (out  of 
12  equal  parts  into  which  the  room  may  be  divided)  occu- 
pied by  the  Sun.  This  latter  division  evidently  refers  to 
the  division  referred  to  in  the  Introduction  in  connection 
With  Horary  Astrology; 

According  to  others  again  dividing  the  24  hours  of  day 
and  night  into  8 equal  parts  of  3 hours  each,  beginning  from 
sun-rise,  the  lamp  will  be  in  the  East,  S.  East,  South,  &c. , 
according  as  the  time  of  birth  falls  in  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd,  &c., 
parts  of  the  division. 

(cl)  If  there  are  no  planets  in  the  Kendras,  the  en- 
trance will  be  in  the  direction  of  the  Lagua  according  to 
Svvalpa  J'ataka. 

19.  If  Saturn  be  powerful,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a 
house  which,  having  become  old,  has  been  rebuilt.  If  Mars 
be  powerful,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a house  parti)*  burnt; 
iftheMoonbe  powerful,  then,  in  a newly  built  house;  if 
the  Sun  be  powerful,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a house  built, 
qf  wood  but  weak;  if  Mercury  be  powerful  then  in  a house 


cit.  5.] 


BRIEF  AT  JATAKA. 


47 


built  by  several  builders;  it  Venus  bo  powetful, 
then  in  a beautiful  new  bouse  adorned  with  pictures;  and 
jf  Jupiter  be  powerful,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a strong 
house. 

Notes. 

According  to  Saravali,  if  the  Sun  occupy  the  sign  occu- 
pied by  the  most  powerful  planet  as  given  in  the  text,  the 
delivery  will  occur  in  the  room  set  apart  for  the  worship 
of  the  Devas  ; if  the  Moon  occupy  the  sign  occupied  by  the 
most  powerful  planet,  the  birth  will  cocur  in  the  bath  or 
water  room  ; if  Mars,  then  in  the  Jdtchen  or  the  Agnihotra 
Sala  ; if  Mercury,  in  the  bed  room  ; if  Jupiter,  in  the  trea- 
sure room;  if  Venus,  then  in  the  play  ground;  and  if 
Saturn,  the  birth  will  occur  in  the  place  where  sweepings 
are  deposited. 

The  Commentator  adds  if  there  he  three  or  more  planets 
in  the  three  signs  beginning  from  that  occupied  by  the  most 
powerful  planet,  there  will  be  houses  on  the  eastern  side  ; 
if  in  the  next  three  signs,  there  will  be  houses  on  the  south- 
ern side;  if  in  the  next  three,  there  will  be  houses  on  the 
western  side ; and  if  in  the  last  three,  there  will  be  houses 
on  the  northern  side. 

Again,  according  to  Laghu  Jataka,  if  Jupiter  at  the 
same  time  he  in  the  10th  house  from  the  ascendant  and  in  his 
exaltation  sign — having  passed  over  the  exaltation  degree, 
the  birth  will  occur  in  a two  storied  house  ; if  he  he  under 
the  exaltation  degree,  the  birth  will  occur  in  a three 
storied  house,  and  if  in  the  exaltation  degree,  then  in  a 
four  storied  house. 

Again,  if  Sign  Sagittari  he  powerful,  the  birth  will 
occur  in  a house  consisting  of  ?>  inner  verandahs  ; if  Jupi- 
ter occupy  the  10th  house  from  the  ascendant  or  one  of  the 


BRlHAT  JATAKA. 


48 


[err.  5- 


signs  Gemini,  Virgo  and  Pisces,  the  house  will  be  one  with 
two  inner  verandahs. 

20.  If  either  the  ascendant  sign,  or  the  ascendant 
Navamsa,  (whichever  is  powerful)  be  that  of  Aries,  Cancer, 
Libra,  Scorpio,  or  Aquarius,  the  delivery  room  will  be  in 
the  eastern  portion  of  the  house  ,*  if  it  be  that  of  Sagittai  i, 
Pisces,  Gemini  or  Virgo,  then  in  the  northern  portion  of  tho 
house  5 if  it.  be  that  of  Taurus,  then  in  the  western  portion  ; 
and  if  it  be  that  of  Capricorn  or  Leo,  the  delivery  room 
will  be  in  the  southern  portion  of  the  house. 

21.  If  the  rising  sign  be  Aries  or  Taurus,  the  bed  of 
the  woman  in  labor  will  be  in  the  eastern  portion  of  tho 
room  ; if  the  rising  sign  be  Gemini,  it  will  be  in  the  south- 
eastern portion  ,•  if  Cancer  or  Leo,  then  in  the  southern 
portion  ; and  if  Virgo,  then  in  the  south-western  portion- 
if  Libra  or  Scorpio,  then  in  the  western  portion  ,•  and  if 
Sagittari,  then  in  the  north-western  portion:  if  Capricorn 
or  Aquarius  be  the  rising  sign,  the  bed  will  be  in  the  porth; 
ern  portion  of  the  room,  and  if  Pisces  be  the  rising  sign,  it 
will  be  in  the  north-eastern  portion  of  the  room.  The 
samo  rule  applies  as  regards  the  place  in  the  bed  or  cot 
where  the  woman  plight  lie.  As  regards  the  cot,  again, 
its  two  front  Idgs  occupy  the  quarters  assigned  to  the 
12th  and  3rd  houses  from  the  ascendant  and  its  two  hind 
legs  occupy  the  quarters  assigned  to  the  Gth  and  9tli 
houses. (a). 

Notes. 

(a)  In  other  words  the  1 2th  and  3rd  houses  represent 
the  forelegs,*  the  9th  and  6th  houses  represent  the  hind 
legs;  the  3rd  and  Gth  houses  represent  the  two  right  legs, 
and  the  12th  and  9th  houses  represent  the  two  left  legs. 
Also  the  rising  sign  and  the  2nd  house  represent  the  head 
pf  tho  cot,  the  4th  and  5tli  houses  represent  the  right  sidp,  ; 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


49 


CH.  5-] 


the  7th  and  8th  houses  represent  the  part  between  the 
two  hind  legs,  and  the  10th  and  lltli  houses  represent  the 
left  side.  Now  whatever  portion  of  the  cot  may  be  repre- 
sented by  the  common  signs,  there  the  cot  will  be  bent 
clown  a little,  and  this  will  not  bo  the  case  it'  such  sign  is 
either  occupied  or  aspected  by  its  lord  or  by  a benefic 
planet.  Again,  there  will  be  defects  in  those  parts  of  the 
Cat  which  are  represented  by  signs  occupied  by  malefic 
planets,  and  this  wilt  not  bo  the  case  if  such  malefic  planets 
be  in  their  exaltation  signs,  in  their  Moola  Trikona  sigos, 
in  friendly  signs  or  in  their  own  houses. 

22.  The  number  of  midwives  will  be  the  number  of 
the  planets  between  the  rising  sign  and  the  Moon.  Of 
these  planets  the  number  of  those  in  the  visible  hemisphere 
will  be  the  number  of  midwives  outside  the  room,  and  the 
number  of  planets  in  the  invisible  hemisj)here  will  be  the 
number  of  midwives  inside  the  room.  According  to  some 
this  order  is  reversed, (a). 


Notes. 


(a)  That  is,  of  the  planets  between  the  Lagna  and  tho 
Moon,  tho  number  in  the  visiblo  hemisphere  is  the  number 
of  midwives  within  the  room,  and  the  number  of  planets  in 
the  invisible  hemisphere  will  be  the  number  of  mid  wives 
outside  the  room.  In  this  view  Varaha  Mihira  does  not 
concur,  for  it  is  opposed  to  his  Swalpa  Jataka. 

Again,  if  benefic  planets  occupy  the  signs  from 
Lagna  to  the  Moon,  the  midwives  will  all  be  beautiful 
women,  well  dressed  and  adorned  ; if  malefic  planets  occupy 
tho  signs,  the  women  will  be  dirty,  ugly  and  with  uo  orna- 
ments. 

Again,  if  any  of  the  planets  between  the  Lagna  and  tho 
Moon  be  in  their  exaltation  signs  or  retrograde  in  motion, 
tho  number  given  by  them  shall  be  trebled.  I3ut  if  they  be 


BEIHAT  JATAKA. 


50 


[cii.  5. 


in  their  own  signs,  Navamsas  or  Drekkanas,  &c.,  the  number 
given  by  the  several  planets  shall  be  doubled. 

23.  The  structure  and  other  peculiaritms(a)  of  the 
body  shall  be  determined  from  the  lord  of  the  rising  Navam- 
sa  or  from  the  most  powerful  planet  ; and  the  color(&)  of 
the  body  shall  be  determined  from  the  (Lord  of  the)  Navani- 
sa  occupied  by  the  Moon  ; and  the  size  of  the  several  parts 
of  the  body  will  follow  the  signs  representing  them,  begin  - 
ing  from  the  rising  sign  which  represents  the  liead.c). 

Notes. 

(a)  These  are  given  in  stanzas  from  3 to  11  in 
Chapter  II. 

The  Commentator  adds  that  if  the  sign  represented  by 
the  rising  Navamsa  be  powerful,  then  the  physical  peculiaii- 
ties  shall  be  determined  from  the  lord  of  such  Kavamsa  ; 
if  not  they  shall  be  determined  from  the  must  powerful 
planet. 

( b ) This  is  given  in  stanza  4,  Chapter  II.  According  to 
some,  the  color  must  be  determined  from  the  sign  occupied 
by  the  Moon,  vide  stanza  20,  Chapter  I.  To  this  the  Com- 
mentator objects.  For  he  says  that  there  are  no  people  of 
the  color  of  the  parrot.  In  determining  the  color,  the  couutry, 
the  climate,  occupation  and  the  like  shall  be  taken  into 
account. 

(c)  The  division  of  body  referred  to  here  is  the  same 
as  that  referred  to  in  Stanza  4,  Chapter  I,  with  this  differ- 
ence that  while  the  latter  begins  from  sign  Aries,  the  for- 
mer begins  from  the  rising  sign.  The  divisions  are  as  fol- 
lows : 

The  rising  sig-n  represents  the  head;  the  2nd  house 
represents  the  face  ; the  3rd,  the  breast ; the  4th,  the  heart  ; 
the  5th,  the  belly  ; the  Gtb,  the  hip  ; the  7th,  the  lower 
abdomen  ; the  8th,  the  genital  organ  ; the  9th,  the  two 
thighs  ; the  10th,  the  two  knees  ; the  11th,  the  two  shanks 


brihat  jataka. 


51 


on.  5.] 


And  the  l2tli,  the  two  feet.  Now  in 
I,  the  relative  magnitudes  of  theseve. 
are  driven  as  follows  : 


^o  feet.  Now  in  stanza  10  ot  Chapter 
itudes  of  the  several  signs  of  the  Zodiac 


f Aries 20— Pisces. 

< rty  A \ i 


Of  these  the  4 signs  referred  to  in  division  A are  known 
as  short  signs.  The  4 ot  division  .IS  are  known  as  signs  of 
middle  length  and  the  4 of  division  C are  known  as  long 
signs.  So  that  that  part  of  the  body  will  be  long  or  short 
according  as  the  sign  representing  it  is  long  or  short. 
If  the  lord  of  a short  sign  occupy  a long  sign,  or  if  the  lord 
of  a long  sign  occupy  a short  sign,  the  size  of  the  part  of 
body  represented  will  bo  of  middle  length-  If  several 
planets  occupy  a sign,  the  most  powerful  of  them  shall  be 
taken  into  account,  and  if  no  planets  occupy  a sign,  the  size 
of  the  part  of  body  will  simply  follow  that  of  the  sign. 

24.  The  three-fold  divisions  of  the  body  beginning 
from  the  head,  from  the  neck  and  from  the  lower  abdomen, 
according  as  the  rising  Drekkana  is  the  first,  the  second  or 
the  third,  are  as  follows: 


Part  of  body  represented  when  the  risiu 
Drekkana  is 


or 

CD 


The  twelve 
Houses. 


Neck.  Lower  abdomen. 


BRIHAT  J AT  AKA. 


i 


K'.» 

O'* 


[CH. 


0. 


2nd  house... 

Right  eye  ... 

Right  arm 

Genital  organ. 

12  th 

,, 

Left  eye 

Left  arm 

Anus. 

?rd 

Right  ear  ... 

Right  baud 

Right  testicle. 

11th 

>5 

Left  ear 

Left  hand 

Left  testicle' 

4th 

Right  nostril. 

Right  side 

Right  thigh. 

10th 

Lett  nostril... 

Left  side 

Lel't  thigh. 

5 th 

„ 

Right  temple. 

Right  breast  ... 

Right  knee. 

9rh 

3) 

Left  temple... 

Left  breast 

Left  knee. 

Gth 

Right  cheek... 

Right  belly 

Right  ankle. 

8th 

Left  cheek... 

Left  belly 

Left  ankle. 

7th 

(Mouth 

The  navel 

L'he  i’eet. 

25.  Wounds  will  occur  in  those  parts  of  body  the  sigus 
representing  which  are  occupied  by  malefic  planets;  but  if 
such  signs  be  occupied  or  aspected  by  benefic  planets,  moles 
will  appear  in  those  parts  ; if  such  malefic  or  benefic  planets 
be  in  their  own  signs  or  Navamsas  or  in  fixed  signs  or  fixed 
Navamsas,  the  wound  or  the  mole  will  exist  from  birth  ; 
otherwise  they  will  appear  at  a future  time(a).  As  regards 
wounds,  if  the  planet  causing  it  be  Saturn,  the  wound  will 
be  caused  by  a stone  or  by  the  wind ; if  Mars,  then  by  fire 
or  weapon  or  by  poison;  if  (malefic)  Mercury,  it  will  be 
caused  by  earth  ; if  the  Sun,  then  by  wood  or  by  quadru- 
peds; if  the  (waning)  Moon,  then  by  horned  animals  or  by 
water  animals.  There  will  be  no  wound  in  those  parts  of  the 
body  which  are  represented  by  signs  occupied  by  the  bene- 
fic planets(fr). 


Notes. 

(а)  That  is,  in  the  dasa  or  planetary  periods  of  the 
several  planets. 

(б)  By  Jupiter,  Venus,  (benefic)  Mercury  and  wax- 
ing Moon.  • 

For  the  purposes  of  this  stanza  the  division  of  body  is 
that  referred  to  in  stanza  24. 

20.  If  three  planets,  whether  malefic  or  benefic  occupy 


CH.  C-l 


BRIHAT  JATAIvA. 


53 


a single  sign,  a wound  ora  mole  will  appear  without  Tail  m 
the  parts  of  body  represented  by  the  sign. (a)  Again  in  the 
divisional  of  the  body  into  twelve  parts  beginning  from  the 
head  (which  the  Lagna  represents)  if  a malefic  planet  oc- 
cupy the  sixth  house  a wound  will  appear(c)  (in  the  hip)  ; 
but  if  the  malefic  planet  be  aspected  by  a benefic  planet, 
both  a dark  and  a white  mole  will  appear;  but  if  benefic 
planets  occupy  the  sixth  house,  there  will  only  appear  a 
crowded  growth  of  hair. 


NOTES. 

(a)  The  division  of  body  referred  to  is  that  given  in 
stanza  -4. 

( b ) The  division  referred  to  is  that  given  in  Note  (c) 
to  stanza  23. 

(c)  In  the  dasa  period  of  the  most  powerful  planet. 
Also,  if  the  planet  .occupying  the  6th  house  be  in  his  own 
sign,  or  Navainsa  or  in  a fixed  sign  or  Navainsa,  the  wound 
or  the  mole  will  exist  from  birth. 


CHAPTER  VI. 

On  Balarishta  ok  Eauly  Death. 

1.  If  the  birth  should  occur  in  the  Sandhyakala(a) 
(the  twilight  hours)  when  the  lunar  Hora  (h)should  be  rising 
and  when  malefic  planets  occupy  tiio  last  Navamsas  of 
signs,  the  child  would  die  soon  after  birth.  Again,  if  at 
the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  and  three  malefic  planets  occu- 
py the  four  Kendras,  one  in  each,  then  also  the  child  would 
die. 


Notes. 

(a).  Sandhyakaja  : This  is  defined  by  the  author  in 

Iris  Brihat  Samhita,  stanza  1,  eh.  30  : “ That  period  which 

precedes  the  moment  when  the  Sun  has  just  half  risen  and 


BR1HAT  JATAKA. 


[CH-  Or 


54 

that  which  succeeds  the  moment  when  the  Sun  lias  just 
half  set)  during  which  the  stars  are  invisible,  is  known  as 
Sandhyakala  or  twilight  period.” 

(/;)  In  the  odd  signs,  the  second  halves,  and  in  the 
even  signs  the  first  halves  are  known  as  lunar  Horas. 

2.  If  either  sign  Cancer  or  sign  Scorpio  should  rise  at 
the  time  of  birth  and  if  malefic  planets  occupy  the  east- 
ern half  of  the  Zodiac  while  the  benefic  planets  occupy 
the  western  half(a),  the  child  would  die  immediately  after 
birth.  Again,  if  malefic  planets  occupy  the  12th  and  2nd 
houses  <>’•  the  Gth  and  8th  houses  front  the  lising  sign,  the 
child  would  die. 


Notes. 

(a).  The  plane  of  meridian  divides  the  Zodiac  into 
two  equal  halves  known  as  the  Eastern  and  Western 
halves;  so  that  if  the  10°  of  Cancer,  for  instance,  should  bo 
rising  at  the  time,  the  Eastern  half  would  roughly  comprise 
the  portion  of  the  Zodiac  from  the  10°  of  Aries  to  the  10" 
of  Libra;  and  the  Western  half  would  comprise  the 
portion  of  the  Zodiac  .from  the  10°  of  Libra  to  the  10"  of 
Aries. 

( 'b )•  According  to  certain  Commentators,  the  two 
yogas  are  taken  together  and  made  to  form  a single  yoga. 
In  other  words,  the  child  would  die  under  the  first  yoga 
only  if  malefic  planets  occupy  the  2nd,  the  12th,  the  Gth 
and  the  8th  houses.  According  to  Garga  there  will  be 
death  in  each  of  the  following  four  yogas  : (1)  Malefic  planets 
occupying  the  8tli  and  the  12th  houses  ; (2)  the  8th  and  2nd 
houses ;(o)  the  12th  and  2nd  houses;  (4)  the  8th  and  Gth 
houses. 

3.  If  the  rising  sign,  the  setting  sign  and  the  sign 
occupied  by  the  Moon  he  each  occupied  by  a malefic  planet 


BRIHAT  JATAKA- 


55 


Cn.  6.] 


and  if  the  Moon  be  not  aspected  by  ben efio  planets,  the 
child  will  die  immediately  after  birth. 

4.  If  the  waning  Moon  occupy  the  12th  house  from 
the  ascendant,  if  the  malefic  planets  occupy  the  rising  sign 
and  the  8th  house,  and  if  benefic  planets  do  not  occupy  the 
Kendras,  the  child  will  die  immediately  after  birth. 

5.  If  the  Moon  attended  by  a malefic  planet  occupy 
the  rising  sign  or  the  7tli,  8th  or  12th  house,  and  if  benefic 
planets  do  not  occupy  the  Kendras,  the  child  will  dio  soon 
after  birth. 

G.  If,  when  the  Moon  occupies  the  6th  or  the  8th 
house  from  tho  ascendant-,  a malefic  planet  aspect  the  sarno 
the  child  will  die  soon  after  birth  ; if  a benefic  planet  alone 
aspect  it,  the  child  will  die  after  8 years  j and  if  both  a bo- 
nefic  and  a malefie  planet  aspect  the  Moon,  the  child  will 
die  4 years  after  birth(a) ; but  if  a benefic  planet  (occupy- 
ing tho  6th  or  the  8th  house)  be  aspected  by  powerful  male- 
fic planets(h),  or  if  the  lord  of  the  rising  sign  occupy  the  7th 
house  and  be  defeated  in  planetary  fight  (conjunction)  by 
a malefic  planet(c),  the  child  will  dio  a month  after  birth. 


Notes. 

(a) .  In  connection  with  this,  Yavaneswara  .says  : If 

the  6th  or  the  8th  house  occupiod  by  the  Moon  be  tho 
house  of  a benefic  planet,  or  if  the  Moon  be  accompanied 
by  a benefic  planet,  even  though  he  may  bo  in  a malefic  sign 
tho  child  will  not  die.  Mandavya  says  : If  the  birth, 

occur  by  day  in  the  dark  half  or  by  night  in  the  bright 
half  of  the  month,  there  will  be  no  deaths  even  if  tho  Moon 
occupy  the  6th  or  tho  8tli  house  and  be  aspected  by  both 
malefic  and  bcnofic  planets. 

( b ) •  In  the  absence  of  benefic  planets  aspecting  the 
Moon,  addsjhe  Commentator.  Swalpa  Jataka  has  the 
following : 


8 


56  brihat  jatAkA.  [ch.  6- 

f<  By  malefic  planets  or  by  planets  retrograde  in  their 
motion.” 

(c).  The  planet  that  generally  suffers  defeat  in  con- 
junction, is  the  southern  one,  one  of  forbidding  appear- 
ance, one  of  flickering  light,  one  retrograde  in  motion  or  of 
small  size,  or  in  conjunction  with  the  Sun,  or  which  is  of 
unusual  appearance  or  without  light  or  color. 

7.  If  the  waning  Moon  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  if 
malefic  planets  occupy  the  8th house  and  the  Kendras,  or  if 
the  Moon  occupy  the  4th,  7 tli  or  8th  house  and  be  between 
malefic  planets,  the  child  will  die.  Again,  if  the  Moon 
occupy  the  rising  sign  and  be  between  malefic  planets  and 
if  malefic  planets  occupy  the  7th  and  8th  houses  and 
powerful  benefic  planets  fail  to  aspect  the  Moon(a),  both  the 
mother  and  the  child  will  die. 

Notes. 

(a).  If  they  do  aspect  the  Moon,  the  mother  will 
escape  and  the  child  will  die. 

8.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Moon  occupy  the  last 
Navamsa  of  a sign  and  not  be  aspected  by  benefic  planets, 
or  if  malefic  planets  occupy  the  5th  aud  the  9th  houses  or 
if  the  Moon  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  malefic  planets 
occupy  the  7th  house,  the  child  will  die  soon  after  birth. 

9.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  eclipsed  Moon  occupy 
the  rising  sign  with  a malefic  planet(a)  wdiile  Mars  occupies 
the  8th  house,  both  the  mother  and  the  infaut  'will  die.  If 
instead  of  the  Moon,  the  Sun (h)  be  in  a similar  position, 
such  death  will  be  caused  by  ■weapons.  Again,  if  either  the 
Sun  or  the  Moon  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  if  malefic  pla- 
nets occupy  the  5th,  8th  and  9th  houses,  the  child  will  die, 
if  either  the  Sun  or  the  Moon  be  neither  aspected  nor  ac- 
companied by  powerful  benefic  planets. 


OH-  G-] 


BEIHAT  JATAKA. 


57 


Notes- 

(a).  That  is  Saturn. 

( [b ).  That  is,  if  tlio  eclipsed  Sun  occupy  the  rising 
sign  accompanied  by  a malefic  planet  (either  Mercury  or 
Saturn),  while  Mars  occupies  the  8th  house. 

10.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  Saturn,  the  Sun,  the 
Moon  and  Mars  occupy  respectively  the  12th,  9th,  1st  and 
the  8th  houses,  the  child  will  die  soon  after  birth  if  the 
planets  be  not  aspected  by  powerful  Jupiter. 

Notes. 

To  aspect  all  the  four  planets,  Jupiter  must  occupy 
the  5th  house.  If  Jupiter  should  aspect  only  some  of  the 
four  planets,  or  if  he  be  weak  though  he  might  aspect  all 
the  four  planets,  the  child  will  die-  So  that  the  child 
will  escape  death  only  if  powerful  Jupiter  aspect  all  the 
four  planets. 

11.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  (a)  accompanied 
by  a malefic  planet  occupy  the  nth,  7th,  9th,  12th,  1st  or 
8th  house,  and  if  she  be  neither  accompainied  nor  as- 
pected by  powerful  Venus,  Mercury  or  Jupiter,  tlie  child 
will  d,e  soou  after  birth. 


Notes. 

(a).  The  Moon  is  the  waning  Moon  according  to  Sa- 
ravali. 

12.  The  death  will  occur  when  the  Moon  comes  either 
to  the  sign  occupied  by  llie  powerful  planet  causing  such 
death,  or  to  the  sign  occupied  by  herself  at  the  time  of 
birth  or  to  the  rising  sign  at  tho  time,  provided  the  Moon 
is  botli  powerful  and  aspected  by  powerful  malefic  planets  ; 
aud  the  Munis  say  that  the  period  for  such  death  is  a 
year,  (a) 


5S 


BRIHAT  JATAKAi 


[CK.  C. 


Notes. 

(a).  The  M oon  makes  about  13  revolutions  in  the' 
course  of  a year.  Whenever  the  Moon  in  the  course  of 
motion  becomes  powerful  and  is  aspected  b}5 * 7, 8  powerful 
malefic  planets  on  reaching  one  of  the  three  placos  men- 
tioned in  the  text.,  the  death  will  occur. 

Notes: — The  Commentator  now  proceeds  to  describe  a 
number  of  yogas  which  counteract  the  several  Balarishta 
yogas  givon  in  the  text.  They  aro  given  below. 

1.  If  powerful  Jupiter  occupy  the  rising  sign, 
there  will  be  no  early  death. 

2.  If  the  lord  of  the  rising  sign  be  powerful,  be  not 
aspected  by  malefic  planets  and  be  aspected  by  benefic  pla- 
nets occupying  the  Kendras,  the  child  will  live  long. 

3.  Even  though  the  Moon  should  occupy  the  6th 
house,  if  she  should,  at  the  same  time,  occupy  the  Drek- 
kana  of  Jupiter,  Mercury  or  Venus,  there  will  be  no  early 
death. 

4.  If  the  Moon  be  full,  if  she  should  occupy  benefic 
signs,  be  between  benefic  plauets  and  bo  aspected  by  Ve- 
nus, there  will  bo  no  early  death. 

5.  If  either  Mercury,  Venus  or  Jupiter  be  powerful  aud 
occupy  a Kendra,  there  will  be  no  early  death  even  if  he  be 
accompanied  by  a malefic  plant. 

G.  Though  the  Moon  occupy  the  6th  house  there  will 
be  no  early  death  if  she  occupy  the  Drekkana  of  Jupiter, 
AVnusor  Mercury. 

7.  If  the  Moon  be  full  and  be  between  benefic  planets, 
^here  will  bo  no  early  death. 

8.  If  the  Moon  befall  or  if  the  birth  occur  during 
the  day  wheu  it  is  waning  Moon,  or  during  the  night  when 


CJH.  7-1 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


59 


it  is  waxing*  Moon,  there  will  be  no  early  death  even  it  the 
Moon  occupy  the  Gth  or  the  Sth  Jiousc. 

9.  If  the  Moon  be  full  andbo  aspected  by  Jupiter 
occupying  a Kendra,  thei’e  will  be  no  early  death. 

10.  If  Jupiter,  the  Moon,  Yenus  and  Mercury  occupy 
he  houses,  the  Navamsas  or  the  Drokkunas  ofbenefic  pla- 
nets, there  will  be  no  early  death. 

Jl.  If  either  the  lord  of  the  house  occupied  by  the 
Moon  or  if  a benefic  palnet  occupy  a Kendra,  there  will  be 
no  early  death. 

12-  If  malefic  planets  occupy  benefic  Vargas  (divi- 
sion,) and  be  aspected  by  benefic  planets,  occupying  benefic 
Vargas,  there  will  be  no  early  death. 

13*  If  Itahu  occupy  the  3rd,  Gth  or  11th  house  and  be 
aspected  by  benefic  planets,  there  will  be  no  early  death. 

11.  If  all  the  planets  occupy  the  Sirodaya  signs,  there 
will  be  no  eardy  death. 

15.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  a benefic  planet  successful 
in  planetary  fight  (conjunction)  be  aspected  by  another 
benefic  planet,  there  will  be  no  early  death. 

1G.  If  tho  full  Moon  bo  aspected  by  all  the  planets, 
there  will  be  no  early  death. 


CHAPTER  VII. 

On  Ayurdaya  or  The  Determination  of  the  Length  op  Life 

1.  According  to  Maya,  Yayanacharya,  Mauittlia  and 
Parasara,  the  maximum  number  of  tho  years  of  the  Sun 
tho  Moon  and  planets  aro  respectively  19,  25,  15,  12,  15,  21 
and  20  when  the  planets  are  in  their  exaltation  degrees. 

Notes. 

In  this  chapter  arc  given  several  methods  for  deter- 


CO 


ERIETAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  7. 


mining  the  length  of  human  and  other  animal  life  from  the 
planetary  positions  at  tho  time  of  birth.  The  author  first 
proceeds  to  state  what  is  known  as  Pindayurdaya. 

The  years  given  by  the  Sun  when  in  his  exaltation 


degi 

*ee  is 

19. 

» 

>> 

Moon 

>> 

; > 

25 

>) 

Mars 

’> 

)) 

15 

}) 

>) 

M ercury 

>■> 

12 

)) 

}) 

Jupiter 

>) 

>) 

>) 

15 

•)) 

» 

Venus 

)> 

)> 

21 

» 

V 

Saturn 

}•> 

20 

The  exaltation  signs  with  the  exaltatiou  degrees  of  the 
several  planets  are  given  in  stanza  13,  Ch  I. 

Before  the  length  of  life  can  bo  ascertained,  the  years 
given  above  have  to  be  subjected  to  various  reductions. 

2.  If  the  planets  are  in  their  depression  degrees,  their 
years  will  be  one-half  of  those  stated  above  ; if  in  any  other 
places,  the  years  shall  be  obtained  by  proportion(a).  Tho 
number  of  years  given  by  Laguais  tho  same  as  the  number 
of  Navamsas  of  the  rising  sign  that  may  have  risen  above 
the  liorizou(6).  According  to  some(c)  the  number  of 
years  given  by  Lagna  is  the  number  of  signs  between  the 
first  point  of  Aries  and  the  Lagna(d).  Again,  if  a planet 
be  in  an  inimical  sign,  he  loses  a third  of  his  period (e) ; if 
lie  be  an  Astangata(/J  planet,  be  loses  one-half ; but  no 
reduction  need  be  made  in  the  case  of  Mars  (y)  occupying  an 
inimical  sign,  or  in  the  case  of  Saturn  and  Venus  being  As- 
ian gata  planets. 


Notes. 

(a).  Suppose,  for  instance,  tho  Sun  to  occupy  the  2 1st 
degree  of  Sagittari*  Required  his  years.  Tho  exaltation  de- 
gree of  the  Sun  is  the  10th  degree  of  Aries  and  his  depress- 
sion  degree  is  the  10th  degree  of  Libra  When  in  tho 
latter  degree  the  number  of  years  of  the  Sun  will  be  one 


Cff.  7.]  BRIITA.T  JATAKA.  Gl 

half  of  what  it  is  in  the  former  degree,  i.e-}  one-half  of  19  or  9£ 
years.  From  the  10th  degree  of  Libra  to  the  10th  degree 
of  Aries  is  180  degrees.  So  that  every  degree  gives  us  9^ 

i T<> 

years.  Now  from  the  10th  degree  of  Libra  to  the  2Lst 
degree  of  Sagittariis2  signs  and  11  degrees  i-e.,  60 -f  11  or  71 
degrees.  71  degrees  give  us  7lX  94  years  = 3 years,  Hr''. 

TVS 

months  and  29  days.  Adding  this  to  9^  years,  we  get  13 
years,  5 months  and  29  days.  The  years  of  the  other  pla- 
nets may  be  similarly'’  ascertained.  These  yrears  are  subject 
to  certain  reductions  as  will  be  seen  further  on. 

(b) .  The  author  gives  here  what  is  known  as  Lagna- 
yurdaya,  that  is,  the  rising  sign  gives  a number  of  y’ears  in 
the  same  wTay  as  the  planets  do.  A sign  of  Zodiac  consist- 
ing of  nine  Navamsas  gives  us  9 year's.  So  that  if  the  1 0 1 li 
degree  of  Leo  be  rising,  the  number  of  years  given  by 
Lagna  9 years  = 3 years. 

(c) .  Some  : Manittha  and  men  of  his  school. 

(d) .  In  other  words  each  sign  of  the  Zodiac  gives  a 
year  ; so  that  if  the  10th  degree  of  Leo,  the  5th  sign  from 
Aries,  be  rising,  the  numberof  years  given  by  Lagna  = 4 -f  £0- 
years  = 4 years,  4 months.  The  Commentator  adds  that 
in  the  case  of  Lagnayurdaya,  the  rule  given  in  note(&) 
should  be  followed,  if  the  lord  of  the  rising  N&vamsa  be 
powerful,  and  that  given  in  this  note  should  be  followed  if 
the  lord  of  the  rising  sign  bo  powerful. 

(e) .  Planetary  period  ascertained  as  per  note(a). 

(/).  A planet  is' said  to  be  an  Astangata  one  when 

he  disappears  within  a particular  limit  from  the  Sun, 
his  light  being  then  obscured  by7  the  light  of  the  Sun.  This 
limit  varies  with  different  planets.  In  direct  course,  dis- 
appearance and  re-appearance  take  place  as  follows  : 


02 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[Gif.  7. 


^ars  when  within  17  degrees  from 

the  Sun. 

(Mercury 

14 

>> 

>> 

\But  when  retrograde 

12 

, , 

Jupiter  

31 

}> 

•)> 

(Venus  

10 

» 

>> 

t But  when  retrograde 

8 

>> 

V 

Saturn 

15 

>> 

5> 

>•) 

The  Moon 

12 

> i 

•>> 

this  is 

(p).  The  word  used  in 

the  text 

is 

Valera ; 

nterpreted  to  mean  Mars  by  some  and  into  “ a planet  of 

retrograde  motion”  by  others.  So  that,  according  to  the 
latter, no  reduction  for  being  in  an  inimical  sign  need  be  made 
from  his  years  if  the  planet  be  retrograde  in  motion.  In 
this  view  Varaha  Mihira  concurs.  But  the  other  view  has 
tho  support  of  Badarayana. 

3.  If  malefic  planets  occupy  the  12th,  11th,  10th,  9th, 
8th,  or  7th  house  from  the  rising  sign,  a reduction  in  full, 
one  of  ono-half,  one-third,/^one-fifth  and  one-sixth  shall  be 
made  respectively  in  the  years  obtained.  IE  the  planets 
occupying  the  said  houses  be  bencfic  ones,  the  reduction 
will  only  be  one-half  (a)  of  what  was  stated  for  each 
But  if  several  planets  occupy  a single  sign,  the  reduction 
shall  be  made  for  the  most  powerful  one.  This  is  according 
to  S uty  achary a.  (5) 

Notes. 

(a).  Where  the  amount  of  reduction  was'stated  to  ho 
full  in  tho  case  of  a malefic  planet,  it  is  only  one-half  in  the 
case  of  a benefic  planet ; where  it  was  stated  to  he  one-half 
in  tho  former  case,  it  is  only  one-fourth  iu  the  latter  case, 
and  so  forth. 

(&).  In  this  view  Varaha  Mihira  concurs. 

4.  If  a malefic  planet  occupy  the  rising  sign,  then 
multiply  the  total  number  of  years  already  obtained  by  tho 


BRIHAT  J AT A KA- 


OS 


CH-  7.] 


number  of  Navamsas  between  the  first  point  of  Aries  and 
the  Lagna  of  the  rising  Navamsa  and  divide  the  product 
by  108.  The  quotient  will  be  the  number  of  years  to  be 
subtracted  (a)  from  the  total  number  of  years  already  ob- 
tained^). But  if  the  malefic  planet  be  aspected  by  a bene- 
fic  one,  the  amount  of  reduction  will  ouly  be  oue-half 
of  what  was  stated  above- 


Notes. 

(a) .  The  reduction  is  known  as  Krui’odayaharana. 

( b ) .  According  to  some  the  number  of  years  of  reduc- 
tion is  obtained  by  multiplying  the  total  number  of  years 
already  obtained  by  the  number  of  Navamsas  of  the  rising 
sign  that  have  risen  above  the  horizon  and  dividing  the 
product  by  108,  the  total  numbor  of  Navamsas  of  the 
Zodiac. 

I „ «,  . ‘ i ' I , J • a „ 4 

5.  The  maximum  length  of  life  of  man  and  the  ele- 
phant is  120  years  and  5 days,  that  of  the  horse  is  32  yrnars, 
that  of  the  ass  and  the  camel  is  25  years,  that  of  the  buffalo 
and  the  ox  is  24  years,  that  of  the  dog  (a)  is 

/ 2 years,  and  that  of  the  goat  and  the  like(i)  is  16  years!! 

Notes. 

To  find  out  the  length  of  life  of  an  animal.  Make  the  calcu- 
lation as  for  a man  and  multiply  the  result  by  the  maximum 
period  of  life  of  the  particular  animal  and  divide  the  pro- 
duct by  120  years  and  5 days.  The  I’esult  will  be  the  length 
of  life  of  the  animal  required- 

fa).  Dog  and  animals  with  claws- 

(5).  Goat,  the  deer  and  the  like. 

6.  The  length  of  life  of  a person  born  when  the  last 
Navamsa  of  Pisces  is  rising,  when  Mercury  has  just  passed 
25  minutes  in  sign  Taurus  and  when  all  the  other  planets 
occupy  their  exaltation  sigus  is  the  maximum  period  of  120 
years  and  5 days 


0 


Cl 


ERIHAT  JATAKA. 


[cn.  7. 


Notes. 

The  horoscope  referred  to  in  the  text  is  given  below. 


Venus. 

Lagna. 

Sun. 

Moon. 

Mercury. 

Rasi  Chakra. 

Jupiter. 

Mars. 

— 

Saturn. 

As  all  planets  oxceptingMercury  are  in  their  exaltation 
signs  (and  in  their  exaltation  degrees  as  supposed  by  the 
Commentator)  the  years  given  by  such  planets  are  the  maxi- 
mum years  assigned  to  them.  The  maximum  number  of 
years  of'Mercury  when  in  his  exaltation  degree,  viz.,  the  15th 
degree  of  Virgo  is  12,  and  when  in  his  depression 
degree,  viz.,  the  15th  degree  of  Pisces,  is  6.  The  re- 
maining 15  degrees  of  Pisces  give  us  6 months.  Sign  Aries 
gives  us  a year.  Now  the  first  degree  of  Taurus  gives  12 
days  and  therefore  25  minutes  of  the  1st  degree  give  us 
25  = 5 days.  So  that  the  years  of  Mercury  = G years  + 0 
months  + 1 year  + 5 daj^s  — 7 years,  G months  and  5 days. 


Again,  as  the  end  of  sign  Pisces  was  rising,  according 
to  the  Commentator  the  nine  Navamsas  of  sign  Pisces  give 
us  9 years ; so  that  we  have  the  following : 


The  Sun  ..19  yrs. 

The  Moon..25„ 

Mars  ...15 

Mercury  ...7  yrs,G  ms.  5 ds. 


Jupiter  ...  15  yrs. 

Venus  ...  21  ,, 

Saturn  ...  20  „ 

Lagna  ...  9 „ 


Now  a reduction  known  as  Chakrapataharana  is  to  be 
made  from  the  years  of  Mars  and  Saturn,  these  two  being 


CH.  7.] 


BRIIIAT  JATAKA. 


05 


malefic  planets,  the  former  occupying  the  11th  house  and 
the  latter  the  8th  house  from  the  rising  sign.  The  amount 
of  reduction  therefore  is  one-half  in  the  case  of  Mars  and 
one-fifth  in  the  case  of  Saturn.  Accordingly  after  making 
the  reduction,  the  years  of  Mars  will  be  and  those  of 
Saturn  will  be  16.  Reductions  known  as  Satrukshetra- 
liarana,  Astangata  harana  and  Krurodaya  harana  have  not  to 
be  made  in  this  case.  The  resalting  years  therefore  are — 

Years.  Months.  Days. 

The  Sun 
The  Moon 
Mars 
Mercury 
Jupiter 
Venus 
Saturn 
Lagna 

Total  leugth  of  life  ...  2 20  ...  5 

7.  This  Pindayurdaya  method  has  also  been  treated 
of  by  Vishnugupta  (a),  Devaswami  and  Siddhasena.  Reject- 
ing the  ago  of  8,  the  period  of  Balarishta  or  early  death  (b), 
the  main  fault  in  this  Pindayurdaya  is  that  in  no  case  it 
gives  us  years  less  than  20  (c). 


25 

7 6 

7 6 5 

15 

21 

**  L • • • • 

16 
Q 

• • • m • < 


Notes. 

(a) .  Vishnugupta  is  otherwise  known  as  Chanakya. 

( b ) .  To  which  none  of  the  Ayurdaya  rules  apply. 

(c) .  The  Commentator  considers  that  this  stanza  is  not 
the  author’s;  the  objection  to  Pindayurdaya  raised  in  it  ho 
meets  as  follows  by  proving  that  Pindayurdaya  docs  give 
years  below  20.  He  takes  the  following  horoscope.  Tho 
first  Navamsa  of  Aquarius  is  the  Lagrta.  The  Sun.  the  Moon 
and  Venus  occupy  their  exaltation  dcgiees  ; Mercury,  Jupiter* 


G6 


ERIHAT  J AT AKA. 


*7 

i . 


[CE. 


and  Saturn  occupy  their  depression  degrees;  and  Mars  occu- 
pies the  28tli  degree  of  sign  Aquarius. 


Verms 

Mercury. 

Sun. 

Saturn. 

Moon. 

Mars. 

Lagna. 

Itasi  Chakra. 

Jupiter. 

Now  as  the  Sun,  the  Moon  and  Venus  are  in  their  exal- 
tation degrees,  their  years  are  respectively  19,  25  and  21  ; 
and  as  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn  occupy  their  depression 
degrees,  their  years  are  one-half  of  their  maximum  years, 
that  is  one-half  of  12,  15  and  20  or  6, and  10  respectively. 
Now  the  28th  degree  of  Capricorn  is  the  exaltation  degree 
of  Mars,  and  as  he  occupies  the  28tli  degree  of  Aquarius,  he 
is  removed  from  the  exaltation  degree  by  exactly  30  degrees. 
His  maximum  number  of  years  when  in  the  28th  degree 
of  Capricorn  beiug  15  ; 30  degrees  or  a sign  gives  us  or 
year  and  3 months.  Subtracting  this  from  15  years  we 
get  13  years  and  9 months  as  the  years  of  Mars.  As  sign 
Aquarius  was  just  rising  Lagna  gives  us  no  j-ears;  so  that 
at  this  stage  the  planetary  years  stand  as  follows  : 


The  Sun  19  years. 
The  Moon  25  „ 

Venus  21 


Mercury  0 years. 
Jupiter  7 years  G ms. 
Saturn  10  ,, 


and  Mars  1 3 years  9 months.  N ow  as  Jupiter,  a bonefio  planet 
occupies  the  12th  house  from  the  rising  sign,  his  years 
S ffer  a reduction  of  one-half  of  their  length  ; so  that,  after 


BI'JHAT  JATAKA- 


G7 


CH.  7.] 


the  reduction,  ho  gives  us  only  3 years  and  9 months. 
Again,  as  all  the  planets  occupy  friendly  signs,  no  Satru- 
Kshetraharana  need  be  made.  Saturn  beiner  within  10 
degrees  from  the  Sun  is  an  Astangata  planet  and  therefore 
his  years  suffer  a.  reduction  of  on»  half.  So  that  after  the 
reduction  he  gives  us  5 years.  Thus  we  have  the  follow- 
ing. 


The  Sun  ]q  years- 

The  Moon  25  ... 

Venus  21  ... 


Mercury  years. 

Jupiter  3 ys.  9 
Saturn  years, 


ms. 


Mars  13  years  9 months. 

Total  9§f  years  G months. 

how  as  Mars,  a malefic  planet,  occupies  the  rising  sign, 
the  total  number  of  93  years  and  6 months  have  to  be  sub- 
jected to  a reduction  known  as  Ivrurodaya  harana.  In 
other  words  the  10S  Navamsas  of  the  ecliptic  represent  the 
total  number  of  years.  Now  there  are  10  X 9 = 90  Na- 


vamsas  between  the  first  point  of  Aries  and  the  first  point 
of  Aquaris.  The  quantity  of  reduction  therefore  is  T?y°3-  X 9$ 
years  and  G months.  Therefore  the  years  remaining 
after  the  reduction  = TVV  x 9^years  and  6 months  = 16 
years  and  ^/months,  the  length  of  life  required.  This  of 
coui'se  is  less  than  20  years. 

8-  To  the  very  yoga  to  which  the  maximum  length  of 
life  has  been  assigned,  certain  astrologers  (a)  have  ascribed 
the  life  of  a king.  There  is  an  evident  error  in  this. 
Another  error  is  that  persons  (born  under  tho  yoga  of  a 
sovereign)  are  often  found  to  live  long  and  poor. 


Notes. 

(a.)  Such  as  Badarayana  and  Yavaneswara. 

The  objection  amounts  to  this  : 

That  the  very  yoga  which,  according  to  Pindayurdaya 
is  said  to  give  a person  the  maximum  length  of  life  is  consi- 


- 


63  briiiat  jataka.  [ch.  7. 

dered  by  certain  astrologers  as  Raja  Yoga.  In  cither 
case  several  planets  cccupy  their  exaltation  signs  (vide 
stanza  1,  Chapter  XT.)  The  Commentator  considers  this 
stanza  too,  not  as  the  author’s,  the  objection  raised  being 
an  absurd  one.  For,  it  is  wrong  to  suppose  that  a particular 
yoga  cannot  be  both  a yoga  for  long  life  and  one  for  the 
life  of  a sovereign.  The  other  objection  raised  in  the  text  is 
evident]}7’  a frivolous  one  and  ought  to  be  proved  before  it 
cau  be  met. 

9.  According  to  Jeevasarma  the  maximum  number  of 
years  for  each  planet  when  in  his  exaltation  sign  and  degree 
is  one-seventh  of  the  maximum  length  of  human  life — 120 
years  and  5 days; — which  is  17  years,  1 month,  22  days,  and 
o4  ghatikas.  (a)  In  this  view  Jeevasarma  stands  alone  and 
is  not  supported  by  other  authorities.  According  to  Satya- 
charya,  the  planetary  years  are  the  same  as  the  number  of 
Navamsas  passed  over  by  each  planet(5>  This  view  has  the 
support  of  many  authorities. 

Notes. 

(a.)  J ust  as  in  Pindayurdaya,  the  several  reductions  are  to 
be  made  and  then  the  resulting  length  of  life  ascertained. 

(/;).  Counting  from  the  Navamsa  of  Aries  immediately 
preceding  ; so  that  no  planet  can  give  more  than  ]2  years. 

]().  According  to  Satyacharya,  convert  the  Sphuta  or 
longitude  of  t he  planet  into  minutes  divide  the  number  cf 
minutes  by  200  ; the  quotient  will  represent  the  number  of 
Navamsas  passed  over  by  the  planet  from  the  first  point  of 
Aries.  Divide  this  by  i2,  the  remainder  will  give  the  number 
of  Navamsas  from  the  Navamsa  of  Aries  the  number  is 
also  the  number  of  years  and  fraction  of  a year  for 
the  planet. 

Notes. 

Suppose  the  longitude  of  the  Sun  to  be  115  degrees  l£ 


G9 


CB.  7.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA. 

minutes.  This  converted  into  minutes  gives  6,913  minutes, 
Now  as  a Navamsa  contains  200  minutes  the  num 
ber  of  Navamsas  passed  over  by  the  Sun  from  the 
first  point  of  Aries  = = 34^  Dividing  this 

by  12,  we  get  as  remainder  lOg^  Navamsas  from  the  next 
preceding  Navamsa  of  Aries.  This  then  represents  the 
years  of  the  Sun  which  will  be  found  to  be  10  years. 
G months  23  days  and  24  ghatikas  ; and  so  on  for  each 
planet. 

11.  Again,  if  any  planet  occupies  its  exaltation 
sign  or  is  retrograde  in  its  motion,  the  years  assigned 
to  it,  shall  be  trebled  ; and  if  the  planet  be  in  its  Var- 
srottama  or  Navamsa  or  Swakshetra  or  Drekkana,  its 
years  shall  be  doubled.  The  above  is  a special  feature 
in  Satyacharyar’s  Ayurdaya.  In  other  respects,  it  resembles 
the  Pindayurdaya — the  several  reductions(a)  already  refer- 
red to  apply  to  the  present  case. 

Notes. 

(a).  The  reduction  known  as  Krurodaya  harana 
does  not  apply  to  Satyacharyar’s  method.  (Vide  stanza  12), 

12.  According  to  Satj^acharya  the  years,  months,  &c. 
for  the  Lagna,  the  rising  degree,aro  the  same  as  the  number 
of  Navamsas  passed  over  (a)  (as  in  the  case  of  the  planets); 
but  if  the  rising  sign  be  powerful(Z)),  then,  the  number  of 
signs  passod  over  represents  the  years,  months,  &c.  The 
reduction  known  as  Krurodayaharana  does  not  apply  to 
Satyacharyar’s  method.  In  the  case  of  the  other  reductions 
tho  years  given  in  the  first  stanza  ought  not  to  be  employ- 
ed(c). 


Notes. 

(a).  Beginning  from  the  next  preceding  Navamsa  of 
Aries. 


70  13RTIIAT  JATAKA.  [ch.  7. 

(b) .  As  stated  in  stanza  19,  Ch  I. 

(c) .  That  is  the  special  years  of  each  planet  according 
to  Satyacharya’s  method  ought  to  be  subjected  to  the  several 
reductions. 

13.  Tn  the  matter  of  Ayurdaya,  the  method  of  Satya- 
Charya  is  the  best.  Objection  is  made  to  it  on  the  ground 
that  the  plan atery  years  have  to  bo  multiplied  several  times(a) 
This  is  wrong ; where  any  period  has  to  be  multipled 
by  several  numbers,  it  will  be  sufficient  if  the  period  is 
multiplied  by  the  largest  number(^). 

Notes. 

(a) .  Suppose  Mercury  to  occupy  sign  Virgo  which  is 
his  exaltation  sign  as  well  as  his  house. 

It  would  seem  that  under  stanza  11,  Mercury’s  years 
should  first  be  trebled  and  then  doubled.  Is  this  to  be 
done  ? Again,  suppose  Mercmy  to  occupy  the  last  Navamsa 
of  sign  'Virgo  which  is  his  Vargotama  position.  His  years, 
it  would  appear,  have  to  be  doubled  on  that  account-Already 
we  found  that  for  being  in  his  house,  his  years  had  to 
be  doubled.  The  question  is  whether  the  years  of  Mercury 
have  to  be  doubled  twice.  Again,  suppose  Mercury  while 
occupying  Virgo,  his  exaltation  sign,  is  also  retrograde  in 
his  motion  for  which  his  years  have  to  be  trebled.  Are  his 
years  then  to  be  trebled  twice.  No. 

(b) .  If  auy  period  has  to  be  doubled  twice  or  thrice, 
,t  will  be  enough  if  it  be  doubled  but  once,  and  where  the 
period  has  to  be  trebled  twice  or  thrice,  it  will  be  enough  if  it 
be  trebled  but  once.  Again,  if  any  period  has  to  be  both 
doubled  and  trebled,  it  will  be  enough  if  it  be  only  trebled 

14.  The  life  of  a person  born  when  sign  Cancer  is  ris- 
ing, when  Jupiter  and  the  Moon  occupy  such  rising  sign, 
when  Mercury  and  Venus  occupy  the  Kendras  and  the  other 


CH.  7.] 


BRIHAT  JATAkA. 


71 


planets  occupy  the  llth,6th  and  3rd  houses  is  not  subject  to 
ordinary  calculation,  but  far  exceeds  the  maximum  period 
of  normal  human  existence(c)- 

Notes. 

(a).  In  other  words,  the  ordinary  A yurdaya  rules  for 
ascertaining  the  length  of  a man’s  life  do  not  apply  to  the 
horoscope  mentioned  in  the  text.  For  further  particulars 
vide  Chapter  IX-  Notes. 

Notes: — It  may  be  interesting  to  quote  here  a few  horos- 
copes of  the  nature  of  the  one  referred  to  in  the  last  stanza 
to  which  the  ordinary  Ayurdaya  rules  do  not  apply.  These 
are  mainly  the  horoscopes  of  eminent  sages  who  are  suppos- 
ed to  live  for  several  centuries. 

(1) .  The  rising  sign  is  Leo  and  Jupiter  occupies  it, 
Venus  occupies  Cancer,  Mercury  the  2nd  house  Virgo,  and 
the  malefic  planets  occupy  the  Upacliaya  places,  viz.,  the 
3rd,  6th,  10th,  and  11th  houses.  A person  bom  in  the 
above  yoga  will  live  for  1,000  years. 

(2) .  The  Suu  and  Mars  occupy  the  4th  house  from  the 
ascendant ; Saturn  occupies  the  rising  sign,  Raliu  the  I2ih 
house  and  the  other  planets  the  8th  house.  A person  born 
in  the  above  Yoga  will  live  for  2,000  years. 

(3) .  The  rising  sign  is  Aries,  and  the  Sun  occupies  it. 
Saturn  occupies  the  4th  or  the  9th  house.  Mars  the  7th 
house,  and  powerful  Moon  the  12th  house.  A person  born 
in  the  above  yoga  will  live  for  2,000  years  b}^  the  power  of 
drugs. 

(4) .  The  rising  sign  is  Sagittari  or  Pisces,  and  Jupi- 
ter occupies  it ; sign  Gemini  is  unoccupied  and  Venus  occu- 
pies one  of  the  Kendra  houses.  A person  born  in  the  above 
yoga  will  live  for  a great  number  of  years  by  the  power  of 
drugs  and  will  attain  the  position  of  Indra. 

10 


■ 


72 


BR1HAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  7. 


(5).  If  all  tho  planets  occupy  either  a single  sign  or- 
the  Trikona  or  the  Kendra  houses,  a person  born  in  the 
yoga  will  either  die  immediately  after  birth  or  live  for  a 
yoga  by  the  power  of  mantras. 

(>.  If  malefic  planets  do  not  occupy  the  Trikona  houses, 
benefic  planets  do  not  occupy  the  Kendra  houses,  and  if  the 
8th  house  be  not  occupied  by  a malefic  planet,  a person 
born  in  the  yoga  will  become  a Deva. 

7.  The  rising  sign  is  Taurus  and  Venus  occupies  it. 
Jupiter  occupies  one  of  the  Kendra  houses  and  the  other- 
planets  occupy  the  3rd,  6th  and  11th  houses.  A person 
born  under  the  yoga  will  become  a Deva  after  living  for  a 
great  number  of  years  by  the  power  of  drugs  and  mantras. 

8.  The  rising  sign  is  Cancer;,  Saturn  occupies  sign 
Libra  ; Jupiter  occupies  Capricorn  ; and  the  Moon  occupies 
Taurus.  A person  horn  under  the  yoga  attains  the  position 
of  Brahma  after  living  a great  many  years  by  the  strength 
of  drugs  and  mantras. 

9.  The  rising  sign  is  Cancer  and  Cancer  is  also  tho 

o o 

rising  Navamsa ; Jupiter  occupies  one  of  the  Kendra  houses  • 
Mars  the  7th  house  ; and  Venus  is  in  Simhasanarnsa(a). 
A person  born  in  the  above  yoga  will  live  long  by  the  power 
of  drugs. 

10.  The  rising  Navamsa  is  the  last  Navamsa  of  sign 
Virgo  and  Mercury  occupies  it  ; Jupiter  occupies  the  7th 
house  and  is  in  Gopuramsa  or  Saturn  is  in  Mridvamsa. 
A person  born  under  the  above  yoga  will  live  for  an  infi- 
nite number  of  years- 

11.  Venus  is  in  Devalokamsa;  Mars  iu  one  of  the 
Kendra  houses  and  Jupiter  is  also  iu  one  of  the  Kendra 
houses  and  is  in  Simhasanamsa,  A person  born  in  the 
above  yoga  will  live  for  a countless  numbor  of  years. 

(a).  For  an  explanation  of  these  Amsas  or  planetary 
positions,  vide  the  note  at  the  end. 


CH.  ?*] 


BRIHAT  J AT  AKA. 


73 


12.  Venus  occupies  one  of  the  Kendra  houses  and  is 
inVargottama  position  and  in  Paravatamsa;  Jupiter  occu- 
pies one  of  the  Kendra  houses  and  is  in  Swargalokatnsa. 
A person  born  in  the  above  yoga  will  live  for  a countless 
number  of  years  by  the  powor  of  drugs. 

13.  Jupiter  occupies  one  of  the  Kendra  houses,  and  is 
in  Gopuramsa  ; Venus  occupies  one  of  the  Trikona  houses 
and  is  in  Paravatamsa  and  the  rising  sign  is  Cancer ; a 
person  born  in  the  above  yoga  will  live  for  a yoga. 

14-.  The  rising  sign  is  Cancer  and  Jupiter  occupies  it 
and  is  in  the  Navamsa  of  Sagittari  and  2 or  3 planets 
occupy  the  Kendras.  A person  born  in  the  above  yoga 
will  live  long  and  attain  the  position  of  Brahma. 

15.  Venns  occupies  the  3rd  or  11th  house  and  is  in 
Gopura  or  other  Amsas,  and  the  rising  Navamsa  is  Taurus 
of  sign  Taurus.  A person  born  in  the  above  yoga  will  live 
long  and  attain  the  position  of  Brahma. 

16.  Venus  occupies  the  rising  sign  ; Jupiter  the  7th 
house;  the  Moon,  sign  Virgo,  and  the  rising  Navamsa  is 
Aries  of  sign  Sagittari.  A person  born  in  the  above  yoga 
will  obtain  salvation. 

17.  Mercury  occupies  the  5th  house  and  is  in  Gopura 
or  other  amsas ; the  rising  sign  is  Aquarius  and  Jupiter 

occupies  it.  A person  horn  in  the  above  yoga  will  attain 
the  position  of  Brahma. 

]8.  Jupiter  occupies  one  of  the  Kendra  houses.  Saturn 
occupies  the  11th  house.  The  Sun  occupies  the  2nd  house 
Guhka  (the  higher  apsis  of  a planet’s  course)  occupies  the 
7th  house  and  Mars  occupies  the  9th  house.  A person  Lorn 
iu  the  above  yoga  will  live  for  a yoga. 

19.  Jupiter  and  Mercury  are  in  the  Trikona  houses,- 


74 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  7 


tlie  rising  sign  is  Taurus  and  Mars  occupies  it  and  tlie 
Moou  is  in  Gopuramsa.  A person  born  in  the  above  yoga 
will  live  for  2,000  years. 

20.  Jupiter  occupies  one  of  the  Kendra  houses  ; the 
rising  sign  is  Cancer,  Mars  occupies  the  7th  house  and 
Saturn  the  4th  house;  the  time  of  birth  is  the  light  half 
of  the  month.  If  the  birth  of  a person  occurs  in  the  above 
yoga  and  by  day  he  will  live  for  10,000  years. 

21.  Jupiter,  Saturn,  Mars  and  Venus  occupy  the  Ken- 
dras and  are  mutually  in  Kendra  positions  to  one  another, 
or  they  all  occupy  the  Trikona  houses.  A person  born  in 
either  of  the  above  yogas  will  live  for  10,000  years. 

22.  Benefic  planets  occupy  the  Kendras  ; Malefic  pla- 
nets occupy  the  3rd,  6th,  and  11th  houses;  the  rising  sign 
is  Leo  and  Jupiter  occupies  it.  A person  born  in  the 
above  yoga  will  live  for  60,000  years. 

23.  The  rising  sign  is  Capricorn  and  planets  from 
Mars  to  the  Sun  occupy  it  excepting  Jupiter  who  occupies 

the  3rd  house.  A person  born  in  the  above  yoga  will  live 

for  a Kalpa. 

24.  The  last  Navamsa  of  sign  Aries  is  the  rising  Na- 
vamsa  and  Jupiter  or  Venus  occupies  it ; the  Moon  occu- 
pies the  5th  Navamsa  of  Taurus  or  Sagittari  or  Mars  is  in 
Simhasanamsa.  A person  born  in  the  above  yoga  will 
live  for  a couutless  number  of  years. 

25.  The  Suu  and  Mercury  occupy  fixed  signs  ; the 
Moon  occupies  sign  Taurus,  and  Venus  sign  Gemiui ; the 
rising  sign  is  Cancer  and  Jupiter  occupies  it,  or  the  rising 
sign  is  Libra  and  Saturn  occupies  it.  A person  born  in  the 
above  yoga  will  become  a Muni  or  a Kishi- 

23.  The  Moon  is  in  Devalokamsa  ; Mars  is  in  Paravat- 
amsa  ; the  Sun  is  in  the  rising  sign  and  in  Simhasauamsa 
A person  born  in  the  above  yoga  will  become  a Muni  or  a 
Kishi. 


'OH.  7] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA- 


7 J 

-7.  The  Sun  occupies  sign  Aries  ; Jupiter  either  the 
9th  house  or  sign  Cancer  and  the  malefic  planets  occupy 
the  3rd,  6th,  and  3 1 th  houses.  A person  born  iu  the  above 
yoga  will  become  a Muni. 


Avis  as  explained . 

Iu  Chapter  I we  have  referred  to  the  six  modes  of  di- 
vision of  the  Ecliptic  known  as  Shadvarga • Certain  writers 
have  four  more  divisions  known  as  Sajrtamamsa,  Dasamsa > 
Shodasamsa  and  Shashtyamsa . These  ten  divisions  of  the 
ecliptic  are  knowu  as  Dasavarga. 

Saptamamsa  is  division  of  a sign  of  the  Zodiac  into  7 
equal  parts.  The  lords  of  the  7 parts  of  the  odd  signs  are 
respectively  the  lords  of  the  7 signs  of  the  Zodiac  commen- 
cing from  the  odd  sign  ; and  the  lords  of  the  7 parts  of  the 
even  signs  ai-e  respectively  the  lords  of  the  7 signs  of  the 
Zodiac  beginning  from  the  7th  sign  from  the  even  sign. 

Dasamsa  is  division  of  a sign  of  the  Zodiac  into  10 

equal  parts.  The  lords  of  the  10  parts  of  the  odd  signs  are 
respectively  the  lords  of  the  10  signs  of  the  Zodiac  com- 
mencing from  the  odd  sign,  and  the  loids  of  the  10  parts  of 
the  even  signs  are  respectively  the  lords  of  the  10  signs 
commencing  from  the  10th  sign  from  the  even  sign. 

Shodasamsa  is  division  of  a sign  of  the  ecliptic  into  16 
equal  parts.  The  lords  of  the  16  parts  of  the  odd  signs 
are  the  lords  of  the  111  signs  commercing  from  the  odd  siom 
together  with  Brahma,  Vishnu,  Rudra  and  Surya;  the 
lords  of  the  16  parts  of  the  even  signs  are  the  lords  of  the 
12  signs  commencing  from  the  even  signs  together  with 
Surya,  Rudra,  Vishnu  and  Brahma. 

Shashtyamsa  is  division  of  a sign  of  the  ecliptic  into  CO 
equal  parts.  The  GO  parts  of  the  odd  signs  are  those  of 


76 


13E1HAT  Pataka. 


[cii.  8 


1.  Ghora.  21. 

2.  Rokshasa.  22. 

3.  Devil.  23. 

4.  Kubera.  2 1. 

5-  Rakshogana.  25. 

6-  Kinnara.  2G. 

7.  Bhrashta.  27- 

8.  Kulaghna.  28. 

9.  Garala.  29. 

10.  Agni.  30. 

11.  Maya.  31- 

12.  Pretapureesa.32. 

13.  Apampati.  33. 

14.  Devaganesa.  34. 

In.  Kala.  35. 

16.  Ahi.  36. 

17-  Amritamsa.  37- 
18.  Chandra.  38. 


Pa  dm  a. 

Lakshrni. 

Yageesa. 

Digambara. 

Deva. 

Avdra. 

Kalinasa. 

Kshitiswara. 

Kamalakara. 

Mandatmaja. 

Mrityu. 

Kala. 

Davagni. 

Ghora. 

Amaya. 

Kan  taka. 
Sudlia. 
Amrita. 


41.  Kalinasa. 

42.  Mukhya. 

43.  Yamsaksliaya. 
41.  Utpataka. 

45.  Kula-rupa. 

46.  Soumya. 

47.  Mridu. 

48-  Snsitala. 

49.  Dumshtrakarala. 
50-  Indumukha. 

51.  Pravina. 

52.  Kalagni. 

53.  Dandayudha. 

64.  Nirmala. 

55.  Subha. 

56.  Asublia. 

57.  Atisitala. 

58.  Sudlia. 


19  Mridu-  39.  Poornacbandra.  59.  Payodhibliramana* 

20.  Koniala.  40.  Vishapi’adigdha.  60.  Iudurekha. 

And  the  60  parts  of  the  even  signs  are  the  above  in 
the  inverse  order,  that  is>  beginning  from  Indureklia  and 


ending  in  Ghora. 

Now  a planet  which  occupies  his  particular  house,  Na- 
vamsa,  Dwadasamsa,  Trimsamsa,  &c.,  is  said  to  be  iu  his 
Yarga.  A planet  occupying  two  Yargas  is  said  to  be  iu 
Parijatamsa  ; if  he  occupies  three  Yargas,  he  is  said  to  be  in 
Uttamamsa  j if  four  vargasj  in  Gopuramsa  ; if  five  vargas 
in  Simhanamsa  j if  six,  iu  Paravatamsa  j if  seven  or  eight, 
in  Duval okamsa ; if  nine,  in  Airavatatm  a ; and  if  ten,  in 
Yaiseskikamsa. 


CH.  8] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


t i 


CHAPTER  VIII. 

On  Planetary  Divisions  and  Sub-Divisions  of  Life 

Known  as  Dasas  and  Antardasas. 

1.  Determine  first  wbicli  of  the  following  three  is 

powerful — the  Rising  Sign,  the  Sun  and  the  Moon.  His  pe- 
riod comes  first.  Then  follow  the  periods  of  tha  planets 
occupying  the  Kendra  houses,  from  such  powerful  rising 
sign  or  the  Sun  or  the  Moon-  Then  come  the  periods  of 
the  planets  ocoupying  the  Pa.naphn.ra  houses  from  the  same, 
and  lastly  come  the  periods  of  planets  occupying  the  Apok- 
lima  house s(a)«  If  there  be  no  planets  in  the  Kendra  oi 
Panaphara  or  Apoklima  houses,  then  the  periods  ot  the 
other  planets  come  in  the  order  stated. 

Notes. 

(a).  The  order  in  which  come  the  periods  of  the 
several  planets  occupying  the  Kendra  or  the  Panaphara  or 
the  Apoklina  houses  is  given  in  the  following  stanza. 

2.  The  lengths  of  the  several  planetary  periods  known 
as  dasas  are  the  same  as  those  of  the  planets  as  found  in 
the  last  chapter.  Again,  of  the  several  planets  occupying 
the  Kendra  or  Panaphara  or  Apoklina  houses,  the  dasa 
period  of  the  most  powerful  planet  comes  first,  then  comes 
that  of  the  planet  next  in  power  and  so  on  ; but  if  the 
planets  be  of  equal  power,  the  dasa  period  of  the  planet 
whose  period  is  the  longest  comes  first;  and  if  the  planets  be 
of  equal  power  and  period,  then  the  period  of  the  planet 
which  rises  firstfa)  comes  first. 

Notes. 

(a-)  That  is,  reappears  after  its  conjunction  with  tho 
Sun  according  to  Commentator.  Taking  stanzas  l and  2 
together,  we  line!  that  the  dasa  period  of  either  Lagna  or  the 
Sun  or  the  Moon,  whichever  is  powerful,  comes  first-  Then 
come  the  periods  of  the  planets  occupying  the  Kendra  house  , 
in  the  order  stated.  Then  the  periods  of  the  planets  occupy- 
ing the  Panaphara  houses  in  the  same  order,  and  lasts 


78 


BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [eH.  8 

those  of  the  planets  occupying  the  Apoklina  houses  in  the 
same  order. 

3.  The  period  of  the  Antardasa(a)  (sub-division  of 
planetary  period)  of  the  planot(6)  occupying  the  same 
house  as  the  lord  of  the  dasa  period,  is  one-half  of  the 
antardasa  period  ot  such  lord.  The  antardasa  period  of 
the  planet  occupying  the  5th,  or  the  9th  house  from  the  lord 
of  the  dasa  period,  is  one-third, that  of  the  planet  occupying 
the  7th  house  from  the  lord  is  one-seventh,  and  that  of  the 
planet  occupying  the  4-th  or  the  8th  house  from  the  lord 
is  one-fourth  of  the  antardasa  period  of  the  lord.  The 
antardasa  periods  of  the  Lngna-dasa  shall  be  determined  in 
the  same  way. 

Notes. 

(a).  Planetary  divisions  of  life  are  known  as  dasa 
periods  and  planetary  sub-divisions  of  life  are  known  as  the 
antardasa  periods. 

(b.)  The  antardasa  periods  of  a particular  dasa  period 
of  a planet  come  in  the  order  stated  in  the  text,  namely 
first  comes  the  antardasa  period  of  the  planet  itself,  then 
that  of  the  planet  occupying  the  same  house  as  the  lord  of 
the  dasa  period,  then  that  of  the  planet  occupying  the  5th  or 
9th  house  from  the  lord,  then  that  of  the  planet  occupying 
the  7th  house  from  the  lord,  and  lastly  that  of  the  planet 
occupying  the  4th  or  the  8th  house  from  such  lord.  If 
several  planets  occupy  the  same  house  as  the  lord  of  the 
dasa  period,  the  lord  of  the  antardasa  is  the  most  powerful 
of  them.  Similarly,  if  several  planets  occupy  the  5th  and  the 
9 oh  houses  or  the  7th  house  or  the  4th  and  8th  houses  from 
the  sign  occupied  by  the  lord  of  the  dasa,  the  lord  of  the 
antardasa  in  each  of  the  three  cases  is  the  most  powerful 
planet ; so  that  the  several  antardasa  periods  are  in  the 
proportion  of  1 : i : 7 1 7 | (vide  stanza  4.)  If  there  ha 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


79 


CH  .8] 


no  planets  in  any  of  these  places,  the  antardasa  periods  of 

the  other  planets  alone  should  be  taken. 

4.  The  fractions(a)  should  all  be  made  to  have  a 
common  denominator  with  different  numerators.  The 
dasa  period  should  be  divided  by  the  sum  of  the  numera 
tors  and  the  quotient  when  multiplied  by  the  several 
numerators  will  give  the  periods  of  the  several  antar- 


dasa s. 


Notes. 

(a).  That  is  j,  x2,  x,  ] and 

Suppose  for  instance  there  are  planets  m the  several 
places  referred  to  in  tho  last  stanza  excepting  say,  the  7th 
house  from  the  signs  occupied  by  the  lord  of  the  dasa. 
The  periods  of  the  four  antardasas — those  of  (1)  the 
lord  of  the  dasa  ; (2)  the  planet  with  it  ; (3)  the  planet 
occupying  the  5th  or  the  9th  house  from  it  and  (4)  the 
planet  occupying  the  4th  or  tho  Sth  house  from  it — are  in 
the  proportion  of  \ i : 3 : Reducing  these  to  fractious 

with  a common  denominator!  we  get  *f  : , 1|and  ; in 

other  words  the  antardasa  periods  are  in  the  proportion  of 
22:0:4:3.  The  sum  of  these  numbers  is  25  ; if  therefore 
^.he  dasa  period  be  divided  by  25  and  the  quotient  multi- 
plied by  12,  6,  4 and  3,  we  shall  obtain  the  periods  of  the 
lour  antardasas. 

5.  The  dasa  period(a)  of  tho  most  powerful  planet 
0cupying  the  exaltation  degree  of  its  exaltation  sigu  is  known 
as  Sampoorna.(b ) The  dasa  period  of  a weak  planet  occupy- 
ing the  depression  degree  of  its  depression  sign  is  known  as 
Rikta(c).  The  dasa  period  of  a planet  occupyng  an 
inimical  Navamsa  and  also  the  depression  degree  of  its 
depression  sign  is  knowns  Anishta. 

Notes. 


(a).  As  well  as  tho  antardasa  period  in  this  and  in  the 
next  two  cases  meutiouel  in  the  text. 


11 


so 


13  Rill  AT  JATAKA. 


[CIT.  S 


( b ).  The  dasa  period  of  a planet  occuupying  simply  its 
exaltation  sign  and  not  very  powerful  is  known  as  Puma. 

(c.)  The  dasa  period  of  a weak  planet  occupying  simply 
its  depression  sign  is  also  known  as  Bikta  (a,) 

G.  The  dasa’period  of  a planet  which  quitting  the  ex- 
altation degree  moves  towards  the  depression  sign  is  known  as 
Avarohini  ; while  so  moving,  if  the  planet  occupy  a 
friendly  or  an  exaltation  Navamsa  (&)  his  dasa  period  is 
known  as  Madhyama.  Again  the  dasa  period  of  a planet 
which  quitting  the  depression  degree  moves  towards  its 
exaltation  sign  is  known  as  Arohini  ; while  so  moving,  if 
the  planet  occupy  an  imimical  or  a depression  Navamsa, 
his  dasa  period  is  known  as  Adhama. 

(a)-  As  well  as  the  antardasa  period  according  to  the 
Commentator. 

&).  Or  his  own  Navamsa  according  to  the  Commenta- 
tor. Exaltation  Navamsa  is  one  which  bears  the  name  of 
the  exaltation  sign. 

7.  The  dasa  period  (a)  of  a planet  which  occupies  a 
depression  or  an  inimical  Navamsa,  when  in  a good  posi- 
tion^) is  known  as  Misraphala(c).  The  several  names  of 
the  dasas  indicate  by  their  meaning  the  nature  of  the  dasa 
periods 00 • We  shall  describe  (in  the  course  of  this  chap- 
ter)(e)  the  effects  of  the  several  planetry  dasas. 

Notes. 

(a).  As  well  as  the  antardasa  period  according  to 
Commentator. 

(&.)  That  is,  wheu  the  planet  occupies  liis  own  house, 
a friendly  house  or  his  Moolatrikona  or  exaltation  house 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


81 


cn.  8.] 


(c) .  Similarly  the  dasa  period  of  a planet  which  occu- 
pies an  inimical  or  depression  sign  and  is  in  his  own  Na 
vamasa,  in  a friendly  Navamsa  or  a Moolatrikona  or  exalta 
tion  Navamsa,  or  if  he  occupies  a Vargotama  place,  is  also 
known  as  Misraphala. 

(d) .  E.  g.  The  name  Sampurna  indicates  vast  pros- 
perity- Poorna  indicates  prosperity.  Adhama  indicates 
misery  or  destruction  and  ver}7  little  pro  spent}7.  Kikta 
indicates  misery  and  poverty.  And  Misraphala  indicates  a 
mixture  of  both  good  and  evil. 

(e) .  From  stanza  12  of  this  chapter. 

8.  According  as  the  rising  Drekkana  is  the  first,  se- 
cond or  third,  the  Lagna  dasa  is  known  as  Adhama,  Mad- 
liyama  or  Uttama  if  the  idsingsign  be  a common  sign  ; Utta- 
ma,  Madhyama  or  Adhama  if  the  rising  sign  be  a movable 
sign  ; and  Adhama,  Uttama  or  Madhyama  if  the  rising  sign 
be  a fixed  sign. 

Notes. 

In  other  words,  if  the  rising  sign  be  one  of  the  common 
signs,  Gemini,  Yirgo,  Sagittari  and  Pisces,  the  Lagna  dasa 
is  known  as  Adhama,  if  the  rising  Drekkana  be  the  1st, 
Madhyama  if  it  be  the  2nd,  and  Uttama  or  Poojita  if  it  bo 
the  3rd.  Again,  if  the  rising  sign  be  one  of  the  movable 
signs,  Aries,  Cancer,  Libra,  and  Capricorn,  the  Lagna  dasa 
is  known  as  Uttama  if  the  rising  Drekkana  be  the  1st,  Mad- 
hyama if  it  be  the  2nd,  and  Adhama  if  it  be  the  3rd.  Lastly, 
if  the  rising  sign  be  one  of  the  fixed  signs,  Taurus,  Leo, 
Scorpio,  and  Aquarius,  the  Lagna  dasa  is  known  as  Adhama 
or  Asubha  if  the  rising  Drekkana  be  the  first,  Uttama  or 
Ishta  if  it  be  the  2nd,  and  Madhyama  or  Samaif  it  be  the 
3rd.  These  names  indicate,  as  already  stated,  the  nature  of 
the  dasa  period.  E.  g.  Adhama  indicates  misery,  Madhy- 
ama a mixture  of  both  good  and  evil,  and  Uttama  indicates 
prosperity. 


82 


BRIHAT  JATAKA- 


[CH.  8* 


9.  The  Naisargika  ( natural ) dasas  in  the  case  of  alb 
creatures  are  those  of  the  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury,  Venus; 
Jupiter,  the  Sun  and  the  Saturn  in  the  order  stated,  and 
their  periods  are  respectively  1,  2,  9,  20,  18,  20  & 50  years(a)* 
It  the  Naisargika  dasa  period  and  the  ordinary  pla- 
netary dasa  period  happen  to  run  together,  such  period  (bp 
will  be  a prosperous  one.  According  to  Yavaneswara,  the 
closing  period(c)  is  the  Naisargika  Lagna  dasa  and  pro- 
duces prosperity.  This  is  objected  to  by  some. 


Notes. 

(a).  In  all  120  }^ears. 

(&).  A similar  remark  applies  to  the  Antardasa  periods 

(c).  The  period  of  life  after  120  years. 

1 0.  If  the  lord  of  the  dasa  period  or  one  of  his  friend- 
ly planets  occupy  the  Lagna(a),  or  if  the  Lagna  belong  to 
the  Varga  (division)(6)  of  the  lord  of  the  dasa  period,  or  if 
a benefic  planet  occupy  the  Lagna,  or  if  the  lord  of  the  dasa 
period  occupy  the  3rd,  6th,  10th  or  11th  house  from  the 
Lagna,  such  dasa  period(c)  will  be  a prosperous  one  (d)' 

Again,  if  the  Moon  that  occupies  (e)  a sign  friendly  (/) 
to  the  lord  of  the  dasa(<?)  or  the  exaltation  sign  of  the 
lord  of  the  dasa  or  the  3rd,  6th,  10th,  Hth,  5th,  9th  or  the 
7th  house  (Ji)  from  the  sign  occupied  by  the  lord  of  the  dasa 
period,  she  will  bring  on  prosperity  ; otherwise(i),  she  will- 
produce  misery. 

Notes. 

(a).  Lagna  : This  is  interpreted  to  mean  the  rising 
sio-n  at  the  moment  of  the  commencement  of  the  dasa 
period;  so  that  the  hour  of  commencement  of  a dasa  period 
must  first  be  ascertained  and  a figure  of  the  heavens  drawn 
up  for^tho  hour. 


CH.  8] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


83 


(' b ).  Varga:  If,  for  instance,  theLagnabethe  sign,  Ilora, 
Drekana,  Navamsa,  Dwadasamsa  or  Triinsamsa  of  the* 
lord  of  dasa  period. 

(c) .  Or  Antardasa  period  according  to  Commentator. 

(d) .  If  either  the  friendly  planet  or  the  benefic  planet 
occupying  the  Lagua  be  an  Atimitra  planet  to  the  lord  of 
the’dasa  period,  such  period  will  be  a very  prosperous  one  ; 
if  such  benefic  planet  be  an  Atisatrujplanet,  the  period  will 
not  be  a prosperous  one ; but  if  the  planet  be  a neutral  one, 
just  the  effects  of  the  dasa  period  will  occur. 

(e) .  According  to  the  Commentator,  the  Moon  causes 
prosperity  while  it  passes  through  the  several  places  men- 
tioned in  the  text.'  These  places  are  with  reference  to  the 
signs  occupied  by  the  lords  of  the  dasa  and  antardasa  pe 
riods  in  the  course  of  their  motions  in  the  ecliptic. 

(/)•  Friendly  for  the  time  being. 

(g) .  Or  antavdasas  according  to  Commentator. 

(h) .  Vide  note  (e). 

(i) .  That  is  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  other 
places. 

11.  If,  at  the  time  of  commencement  of  the  dasa  pe- 
riod of  a planet,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Cancer,  the  native 
will  become  rich,  live  in  comfort  and  become  a man  of 
note ; if,  at  the  time,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Aries  or  sign 
Scorpio,  his ,wife  will  become  unchaste ; if  the  Moon  occu- 
py either  sign  Gemini  or  sign  Virgo,  the  person  will  be- 
come more  learned,  got  more  friends  and  become  rich  ; if 
the  Moon  occupy  sign  Leo,  the  person  will  live  in  dense 
and  impenetrable  forests  ; if  the  Moon  'occupy  sign  Taurus 
or  sign  Libra,  he  will  eat  sumptuous  meals ; if  she  occupy 
sign  Capricorn  or  sign  Aquarius,  he  will  get  a bad  woman, 
and  if  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Sagittari  or  sign  Pisces,  the 
p ersonwill  becomo  rich,  happy  and  respected. 


84 


brihat  jataka. 


[ch,  8 


12.  In  the  benefic(a)  dasa  period(&)  of  the  Sun,  a 
person  will  acquire  wealth  by  dealing  in  perfumes,  nails, 
tusks  of  elephants  and  the  like  animals,  in  tiger  skin  and 
the  like,  in  gold,  by  means  of  roads,  by  the  king  and 
by  battle.  He  will  become  cruel,  courageous,  persevering, 
renowned  and  valorous.  In  the  malefic  dasa  period  of  the 
Sun,  lie  will  get  into  trouble  through  his  wife,  son,  money, 
enemy,  weapons,  fire  or  the  king,  and  he  will  become  liberal 
in  gifts  and  addicted  to  sinful  deeds;  he  will  quarrel  with 
his  s’ervants  and  will  become  afflicted  in  mind  and  suffer 
from  chest  pain  and  the  like  diseases. 


Notes. 


(а) .  The  technical  names,  such  as  Sampurna,  Adhama, 
&c.,  given  to  the  planets  indicate  the  benefic  or  the  malefic 
character  of  their  dasa  period,  vide  note(ci)  to  stanza  7. 

If  the  dasa  period  be  both  benefic  and  malefic,  the  na- 
ture of  the  events  will  be  both  good  and  bad. 

(б) .  Or  antardasa  period  according  to  Commentator. 

18.  In  the  benefic  dasa  period  of  the  Moon,  the  per- 
son will  derive  benefits  by  dealing  in  or  by  means  of  the 
mantras , the  Brahmins,  the  productions  of  sugar-cane,  milk, 
ghee,  and  the  like,  cloth,  flower,  play,  sesamum  seed,  and 
food ; he  will  respect  virtuous  Brahmins  and  the  Devas  ; he 
will  get  daughters  and  will  acquire  an  increase  of  wisdom, 
wealth  and  renown. 

In  the  malefic  dasa  period  of  the  Moon,  the  person 
will  indulge  in  sleep  and  idleness,  will  lose  his  wisdom, 
wealth  and  renown  and  will  quarrel  with  po'werful  men  and 
with  kinsmen. 

14.  In  the  benefic  dasa  period  of  Mars  the  person  will 
fight  with  his  enemies,  will  acquire  wealth  through  his 
brother,  the  king,  lands,  woollen  goods  and  goats. 


brlhAt  jataka. 


85 


CH.  8 ] 


Iu  the  malefic  dasa  period  of  Mars,  the  person  will 
hate  liis  sons,  friends,  wife,  brothers,  learned  men  aud  pre- 
ceptors ; he  will  suffer  from  diseases  caused  by  or  connect- 
ed with  thirst,  blood,  fever,  bile,  loss  of  limbs  or  sexual  in- 
tercourse with  other  women.  He  will  associate  with  men 
doing  wicked  deeds;  ho  will  become  vicious,  harsh  in 
speech  and  cruel. 

15.  In  the  benefic  dasa  period  of  Mercury  the  person 
will  acquire  wealth  by  doing  acts  of  message  and  through 
friends,  preceptors  and  Brahmins.  He  will  attain  renown 
among  learned  men.  Ho  will  become  famous  and  will  get 
brass  and  tho  like  mixed  metals,  gold,  horus,  lands,  popu- 
larity, comfort  and  ease.  IIo  will  ridicule  others  aud  will 
servo  under  other  mon.  He  will  get  an  iucrease  of  wisdom 
and  successfully  do  deeds  of  virtue. 

In  tho  malefic  dasa  period  of  Mercury  the  person  will 
become  harsh  in  his  speech  and  will  suffer  from  grief,  im 
prisonment, pain  of  mind  and  diseases  arising  from  an  aflec- 
tion  of  tho  thi’ee  dhatus — vata  (the  air),  pitta  (bile),  and 
sleshma  (phlegm.) 

16.  In  tho  benefic  dasa  period  of  Jupiter,  the  person 
will  acquire  wealth  by  acts  of  worship,  by  his  learning,  valor, 
ingenuity,  bright  personal  appearance,  military  fame,  man- 
tras, the  king  and  the  Vedas.  He  will  have  an  iucrease  of 
gold,  horses,  precious  stones  and  elephants  and  will  acquire 
the  friendship  of  good  kings. 

In  the  malefic  dasa  period  of  Jupiter,  the  person  will 
learn  things  requiring  much  ingenuity,  will  suffer  from  foot 
journey  and  paiu  in  tho  ear  and  will  quarrel  with  wicked 
men. 

17.  In  the  benefic  dasa  period  of  Venus,  the  person 
will  enjoy  sweet  music,  various  pleasures,  perfumes,  sump- 
tuous meals,  alcohol,  flue  cloths,  womeiij  and  precious 


86 


eriiiAt  jatAka. 


[ch.  8. 


stones.  Ho  will  be  of  fine  appearance,  valorous,  and  will 
enjoy  every  substance,  provoking  sexual  passion,  will  be- 
come learned  in  the  Sastras,  will  obtain  the  object  of  his 
desire,  will  acquire  friends,  will  become  skilled  in  trade  and 
in  agriculture,  and  will  got  hidden  Measures  and  wealth. 

In  the  malefic  dasa  period  of  Venus,  the  persou  will 
quarrel  with  crowds  of  people,  with  the  king,  hunters  and 
wicked  men  and  he  will  suffer  much  from  his  own  friends. 

18.  Iu  the  bonefic  dasa  period  of  Saturn  the  person 
will  get  asses,  camels,  birds,  buffaloes  and  old  women,  will 
rule  over  hamlets,  villages  or  towns,  and  will  thereby  become 
renowned  and  will  get  grain  of  inferior  quality. 

In  the  malefic  dasa  period  of  Saturn  the  person  will 
suffer  from  phlegmatic  and  windy  complaints  ; will  be 
jealous,  angry,  distracted  in  mind,  dirty,  exposed  to  danger, 
idle,  suffer  from  grief,  and  be  much  troubled.  His  servants, 
sons,  daughters  and  wife  will  exercise  authority  over  him 
and  he  will  suffer  from  defective  organs. 

ID.  If  the  dasa  period  bo  a benefic  one,  the  effects 
will  be  good  ; if  it  be  a malefic  one,  the  effects  will  be  bad, 
If  it  be  of  a mixed  nature,  the  effects  will  be  both  good  aud 
bad ; the  effects  for  the  Lagna  dasa  are  the  same  as  the 
effects  for  the  dasa  period  of  the  lord  of  the  rising  sign. 


Notes. 

As  stated  already,  the  character,  whether  benefic  or 
malefic  of  a dasa  period  is  to  be  determined  from  the  tech- 
nical names  given  to  the  lord  of  the  period.  A ide  stanzas 
6 and  7.  Again,  if,  at  the  time  of  birth,  any  of  the  planets 
occupy  the  Upachaya  houses,  be  of  bright  discs  and  of 
distinct  motion,  the  effects  will  be  good  in  their  dasa  pe- 
riods. But  if  the  planets  suffer  defeat  in  conjunction, 


BRIHA.T  JAtAKA. 


b7 


Ch.  8] 


of  disagreeable  appearance  or  of  sin;  1 discs,  the  efiects  will 
be  bad  in  their  dasa  periods.  The  planets,  which,  at  the 
time  of  commencement  cf  thee  .sa  periods,  might 

be  aspected  by  beriefic  planets  or  occupy  the  Vargas  (divi- 
sions) of  benefic  or  atimitra  (very  friendly)  planets  are  power- 
ful and  will  not  cause  death  ; if  they  be  situated  otherwise 
they  will  cause  death. 

20.  In  the  benefic  dasa  periods  of  the  planets  a person 
will  acquire  the  several  metals  assigned  to  the  planets  (vido 
Chapter  II.  12)  and  in  the  malefic  dasa  periods  of  the 
planets  he  will  lose  them.  Again,  in  the  antardasa  period 
of  a planet  a person’s  occupation  will  be  that  mentioned 
for  the  planet  (vide  Chapter  X.)  The  effects  described  for 
the  12  houses  from  the  ascendant,  for  the  J2  signs  from 
Aries,  for  planetary  aspects  and  for  all  yogas  excepting 
Nabhasa  yogas  (Ch.  12)  will  occur  in  the  dasa  period  of  the 
planet  which  is  most  powerful  among  the  yoga  planets. 

21.  In  the  dasa  period  of  a particular  planet,  the 
person’s  complexion  will  be  that  duo  to  the  elementary 
principle  presided  over  by  the  planet  and  the  complexion 
will  be  accompanied  by  certain  other  qualities  due  to  the 
same  elementary  principles  and  discernible  by  their  res- 
pective organs  of  sense. 


Notes. 

Physical  man  is  a composition  of  the  five  elementary 
principles— earth,  water,  fire,  air  and  akas  (ether)  : Mercury 
presides  over  earth;  Venus  and  the  Moon  over  water  ; 
Mars  and  the  Sun  over  fire  ; Saturn  over  air  ; and  Jupiter 
over  Akas.  In  the  dasa  period  of  a particular  planet  his 
elementary  principle  will  predominate  and  the  complexion 
of  the  person  during  such  period  v i,l  be  that  due  to  the 

12 


88 


BKITIAT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  8 


particular  elementary  principle.  Varaha  Mihira  in  Chapter 
(58  of  his  Brihnt  Samhita  (Stanzas  90  to  93)  lias  thus 
stated  in  detail  tlie  complexion  due  to  each  of  the  seven 
planets  : 

“ The  complexion  discernible  in  shining  teeth,  skin, 
nails  and  hairs  of  the  body  and  of  the  head  will  be  attend- 
ed with  prosperity  ; it  is  caused  by  the  element  of  earth  ; 
it  makes  the  person  happy,  rich  and  virtuous.” 

“ The  complexion  which  is  glossy,  white,  clear,  green 
and  agreeable  to  look  at  is  caused  by  the  element  of  water; 
it  will  make  all  creatures  possessing  it  happy  and  successful 
in  all  their  attempts  and  will  produce  wealth,  comfort, 
luxury  and  prosperity.” 

The  complexion  which  is  fearful,  unbearable,  of  the 
color  of  the  lotus,  gold  or  fire,  and  indicating  strength,  power 
and  valor,  is  caused  by  the  element  of  fire,  and  it  brings 

success  to  a person  and  enables  him  to  gain  his  desired 
object.” 

u The  complexion  which  is  dirty,  not  glossy”,  black  and 
of  bad  scent,  is  caused  by  the  element  of  air  ; it  will  cause 

to  the  person  death  or  imprisonment,  disease,  ruin  and  loss 
of  wealth.” 

u The  complexion  which  is  of  the  color  of  crystal, 
noble,  clear  and  indicating  wealth  and  generosity,  is  caused 
by  the  element  of  ether  ; it  gives  a person  all  that  he 
desires.” 

Now  suppose  the  dasa  period  to  be  that  of  Mars,  his 
element  is  fire  ; the  complexion  caused  by  the  elementary 
principle  of  fire  described  above,  will  be  the  complexion  of  a 
person  in  the  dasa  period  of  Mars  and  so  for  the  other 

planets. 

Again,  the  property  of  earth  is  smell,  discernible  by 
the  nose  ; that  of  water  is  taste,  discernible  by  the  tongue 
that  of  fire  or  light  is  shape  or  appearance,  discernible  by7 


CH.  8] 


BRJIIAT  J AT  AKA. 


89 


the  evo  ; that  of  air  is  touchy  discernible  by  the  body  ; and 
that  of  Akas  is  sound,  discernible  by  the  ear.  Suppose  tho 
dasa  period  to  be  that  of  Venus,  his  element  is  water  ; the 
quality  belonging-  to  water  is  taste,  discernible  by  the 
tongue.  Therefore  in  the  dasa  period  of  Venus,  the  person 
will  eat  juicy  meals  according  to  his  desire.  In  the  dasa 
period  of  Jupiter  (Akas — sound),  the  person’s  speech  will  be 
sweet  aud  agreeable  to  the  ear;  in  the  period  of  Mercury 
(earth — smell),  tho  person’s  body  will  be  with  an  agreeable 
odor  ; in  that  of  Mars  (fire — shape)  he  will  be  of  agreeable 
appearance;  and  in  that  of  Saturn  (air — touch,  he  will  be  of 
soft  body.  From  a careful  observation  of  these  qualities 
the  particular  dasa  period  of  a person  may  also  bo  deter 
mined. 

22.  In  the  benefic  dasa  period  of  a planet  the  good 
effects  are  caused  immediately  by  the  Divine  Soul  living 
within  the  body  and  assuming  for  the  time  being  a benefic 
character. (a)  When  a person  is  found  to  enjoy  the  good 
effects  described  for  a planetary  dasa  period,  it  may  be 
concluded  that  such  dasa  period  is  going  on  at  the  time.  As 
regards  the  effects  described  for  planets  which  might  bo 
powerless,  these  are  experienced  by  a person  either  in  his 
dream  or  in  mental  reveries. 

Notes. 

(а) .  It  tho  dasa  period  be  a malefic  one,  the  divine  soul 
assumes  a malefic  character  for  the  time>  and  if  the  period 
be  of  a mixed  nature,  the  divine  soul  assumes  a correspond- 
ing character. 

(б) .  A wild  train  of  thought  in  which  a person  enjoys 
or  suffers  according  to  his  hopes  or  fears. 

23.  It  the  character  of  the  lord  of  a dasa  period  be 
found  to  bobeuefic  under  one  yoga  aud  malefic  under  another 
yoga>  neither  of  the  effects  will  occur  ; if  two  yogas  give  a 


90 


BKIHAT  JATKA. 


[ch.  8 


character  and  one  another  character,  the  former  will  take 
effect.  Bat  if  to  two  distinct  planets  conflicting  effects 
have  boon  assigned,  both  will  come  to  pass. 

Notes. — The  division  of  life  into  dasas  as  given  by  the 
anthor  is  hardly  studied  by  Indian  astrologers,  evidently 
from  the  difficulties  attending  its  application.  These  astrolo- 
g i'S,  as  a class,  employ  the  exceedingly  simple  division  of 
lifeinto  what  i3  known  asUdu  or  Nakshatra dasas.  According 
to  this  the  maximum  period  of  human  life  is  divided  into  9 
parts  presided  over  by  the  seven  planets  and  by  liahu  and 
Ketu — the  two  nodes  of  the  Moon.  They  come  in  the  fol- 
lowing order  and  their  years  arc  also  given  below  : 

(1)  The  Sun,  6 years.  (5)  Jupiter,  ]6  years. 

(2)  The  kloou,  10  ,,  (6)  Saturn,  9 ,, 

(S)  Mars,  7 ,,  (7)  Mercury,  17  „ 

(4)  Rahu,  18  „ (8)  Ketu,  7 „ 

(9)  Venus,  20  years. 

The  lord  of  the  dasa  period  at  the  time  of  birth  is  ascer- 
tained from  the  nsterism  which  the  Moon  occupies  at  the 
time — the  nine  triangular  asterisms  represent  the  nine 
dasas:  if  therefore  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy 
one  of  the  triangular  asterisms  of 

Krittika,U.  Phalguni  aud  U.  Ashadha,  the  dasa  period 
is  that  of  the  Sun. 

Rohini,  Hasta  and  Sravana  ...  Moon. 

Mrigasirsha,  Cliitraand  Sravishta  ...  Mars. 

Ardra,  Swati  and  Satabhishak  ...  Rahu. 

Punarvasu,  Visakha  and  P.  Bhadrapada  ...  Jupiter. 

Pushya,  Anuradha  and  U.  Bhadrapada  ...  Saturn. 

Aslesha,  Jyeshta  and  Revati  ...  Mercury. 

Aswini,  Magha  and  Mala  ...  Ketu. 

Bharani,  P.  Phalguni  and  P.  Ashadha  ...  Venus. 


BUIU  AT  J A TAKA. 


91 


CH.  8] 


How  much  of  the  period  of  a particular  dasa  has  elapsed 
and  how  much  remains  at  the  time  of  birth  must  be  ascer- 
tained from  the  portion  of  the  asterism  passed  over  by  the 
Moon  and  the  portion  remaining  at  the  time.  This  may  be 
roughly  ascertained  from  the  time  taken  by  the  Moon  to  go 
over  the  portion  of  the  asterism — the  whole  time  in  which 
the  Moon  passes  through  a particular  asterism  (us  given  in 
the  Calendar)  representing  the  full  period  of  a dasa  ; e.g- 
suppose  the  Moon  to  take  64  ghatikas  and  42  vighatikas 
to  go  over  the  asterism  of  Krittika,  and  suppose  that  at  the 
time  of  birth,  the  Moon  has  gone  over  a portion  of  asterism 
covered  by  24  ghatikas  and  16  vighatikas.  Required  the 
number  of  years  remaining  at  the  time  of  birth  in  the  dasa 
period  of  the  Sun.  Now  the  time  in  which  the  Moon  will 
go  over  the  remaining  portion  of  the  asterism  of  Krittika= 
6-1-  gh.  42.  vigh — 24  gh.  16  vigh.  =40  gh.  26  vigh.  Now  64 
gh.  and  42  vigh.  represent  the  whole  period  of  6 years  of  the 
Sun.  Therefore  time  required 
6 years 

= X 40  gh.  26  vigh. 

61  gh.  42  vigh. 

CD  C"» 

6 

= X 40  X 60  +26. 

64  X 60  + 42 

6 6 

= X 2426  years  = + 1213  years 

3862  1941 

7278 

= years  = 3 years,  8 months,  29  days, 

1941  J 

ol  ghatikas,  39  vighatikas. 

do  this  must  be  added  in  the  order  stated  the  dasa 
periods  of  the  Moon,  Mars,  Raliu,  &c.,  till  we  come  to  the 
present  age  of  the  person. 

Again,  the  nine  dasa  periods  are  each  divided  into  9 
anb-divisons  known  as  nntardasas — the  lord  of  the  first 


92 


BltJHAT  JATAKA. 


[cii.  9 


antardasa  being  the  lord  of  the  dasa  period,  and  those 
of  the  antardasas  which  follow  are  the  same  as  the  lords 
of  the  dasa  periods  which,  follow  ; so  that  the  antardasas, 
of  the  dasa  period;  of  Jupiter  for  instance  are  those  of  Jupiter 
Saturn,  Mercery,  Ketu,  Venus,  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  Mars  and 
Kahu.  The  length  of  the  antardasa  periods  bear  the  same 
proportion  to  each  other  as  the  lengths  of  the  dasa  periods. 
For  instance,  required  the  length  of  the  antardasa  period 
of  Venus  in  the  dasa  period  of  Jupiter.  The  dasa  period  of 
Jupiter  is  16  years,  that  of  Venus  is  20  years,  that  of  all  the 
planets  is  120  years  ; therefore  the  length  of  the  antardasa 

1 6 years  8 

period  required  = — -f  20  years  = - years =2  years 

120  years  3 

and  8 months. 

Again,  each  of  the  antardasa  period  is  further  sub- 
divided into  9 parts  in  the  same  proportion,  known  as 
Sukslima  periods.  The  appendix  will  contain  tables  for  the 
periods  of  the  dasa,  antardasa  and  sakshma  periods — 
also  for  readily  ascertaining  by  mere  inspection  the 
period  from  one  dasa  period  to  another  and  from  one  antar- 
dasa period  to  another  antardasa  period. 


CHAPTER  IX. 

ON  AsiiTAKAYAKGAs(a). 

1.  The  benefic  places  of  the  Sun  are  the  1st,  2nd, 
4th,  7th,  8th,  9th  lOili  and  lltli  houses  from  himself  3 the 
same  places  from  Mars  and  Saturn  ; the  6th,  7th  ,and  12th 
houses  from  Venus;  the  5th,  6th,  9th  and  11th  houses 
from  Jupiter  ; the  3rd,  6th,  10th  and  lltli  houses  from 
the  Moon ; the  3rd,  5th,  6th,  9th,  10th,  11th,  and  12th 
houses  from  Mercury,  and  the  3rd,  4th,  Gih,  10th,  11th  and 
12  th  houses  from  Lagna. 


CH.  9] 


nmuAT  jatakA. 


93 


(a).  This  means  the  benefic  and  malefic  places  of  a 
planet  with  reference  to  eight  places — the  places  occupied 
by  tlie  seven  planets  and  the  Lagna  at  the  time  of  birth. 

2.  The  benefic  places  of  the  Moon  are  the  3rd,  6th, 
10th  and  11th  houses  from  Lagna  ; the  2nd,  3rd,  5th,  Oth, 

9th,  10th,  and  1 1th  houses  from  Mars  ; the  1st,  3rd,  Oth, 

7th,  10th  and  11th  houses  from  herself  (Moon)  ; the  3rd, 
5th,  7th,  8th,  10th  and  11th  houses  from  the  Sun  ; the  3rdi 
5th,  0th  and  11th  houses  from  Saturn  ; the  1st,  3rd,  4th, 

5th,  7th,  8th,  10th  and  11th  houses  from  Mercury  ; the  1st, 
4th,  7th,  8th,  10th,  1 1th  and  12th  houses  from  Jupiter;  and 
the  3rd,  4th,  5th,  7th,  9th,  10th  and  1 Ith  houses  from 
Venus. 

3.  The  benefic  places  of  Mars  are  the  3rd,  5th,  Oth 
10th  and  11th  houses  from  the  Sun  ; the  1st,  3rd,  0th  10th 
and  1 1th  houses  from  Lagna  ; the  3rd,  6th,  and  1 1th  house55 
from  the  Moon  ; the  1st,  2nd,  4th,  7th,  8th,  10th,  and  llth 
houses  from  himself  (Mars';  the  1st,  4th,  7th,  8th,  Oth,  10th 
and  11th  houses  from  Saturn  ;the  3rd,  5th,  6th  and  11th 
houses  from  Mercury,  the  6th,  8th,  11th  and  12th  houses 
from  Venus;  and  the  0th,  10th,  11th  and  12th  houses  from 
Jupiter. 

4.  The  benefic  places  of  Mercury  are  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd, 

4th,  5th,  8th,  Oth  and  11th  houses  from  Venus  ; the  st, 

2nd,  4th,  7th,  8th,  Oth,  10th  and  11th  houses  from  Saturn 
and  Mars;  the  6th,  8th,  11th  and  12th  houses  from  Jupiter  ; 
the  5th,  6th,  9th,  llth  and  12th  houses  from  the  Sun  ; the 
1st,  3rd,  5th,  6th,  &th,  1 0th.  and  llth  (houses  from  himself  ;/’V' 
the  2nd,  4th,  6th  }f  1 Oth  and  llth  houses  from  the  Moon; 
and  tho  1st,  2nd,  4th,  6th,  8th,  10th,  and  llth  houses  from 
Lagna. 

5.  Tho  benefic  places  of  Jupiter  are  the  1st,  2nd,  4th- 
7th,  8th,  lOoli  and  llth  houses  from  Mars  ; the  1st, 2nd,  3rd 


94 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  9 


4 th,  7 th,  8th,  lOthand  11th  houses  from  himself, ‘the  1st,  2nd 
3rd,  4th,  Tth,  8th,  9th,  10th  and  11th  houses  from  the  Sun  3 
the  2nd,  5th,  6th,  9th  10th  and  llth  houses  from  Venus; 
the  2nd,  5th,  7th,  9th  and  llth  houses  from  the  Moon  ; the 
3rd,  5th, 6th  and  12th  houses  from  Saturn;  the  1st,  2nd, 4th, 
5th,  6th,  9th,  10th,  and  llth  houses  from  Mercury,  and  the 
1st,  2nd,  4tli,  5th,  6th,  7th,  9th,  10th  and  llth  houses  from 
Lagna. 


6.  The  bcnefic  places  of  Yenus  are  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd, 
4th,  5th,  8th,  9th  and  llth  houses  from  Lagna;  the  1st,  2nd, 
3rd,  4th,  5th  llth  and  12th  houses  from  the  Moon  ; the  1st, 
2nd,  3rd,  4th,  5th,  8th,  9th,  10th  and  Nth  houses  from  him- 
self ; the  3rd,  4th,  5th,  8th,  9th,  10th  and  llth  houses  from 
Saturn;  the  8th,  llth  and  12th  houses  from  the  Sun  ; the 
5th,  8th,  9th,  10th  and  llth  houses  from  Jupiter;  the  3rd, 
5th,  6th,  9th  and  llth  houses  from  Mercury  ; and  the  3rd, 
5th,  6tb,  9th,  llth  and  12th houses  from  Mars. 

7.  The  bcnefic  places  of  Saturn  are  the  3rd,  5th,  6th 
and  llth  houses  from  himself;  the  3rd,  5th,  6th,  lOth,  llth 
and  12th  houses  from  Mars;  the  1st,  2nd,  4th,  7th,  Sth,  10th 
and  llth  houses  from  the  Sun;  tho  1st, 3rd,  4th,  6th,  10th 
and  llth  houses  from  Lagna  ; the  6th,  8th,  9th,  10th,  llth 
and  12th  houses  from  Mercury  ; the  3rd,  6 th,  and  llth  houses 
from  the  Moon  ; the  6th,  l lth  and  the  12th  houses  fromVeuus  ; 
and  the  5th,  6 ch,  Llth  and  i 2th.  houses  from  Jupiter. 

8.  Thus  have  been  described  the  beuefic  places  of 
the  planets  ; tho  other  places  are  malefic. (a)  A place  will 
produce  benefic  or  malefic  effects  if  it  be  more  beuefic  for 
the  planet  than  malefic  or  vice  versa(5). 

These  places  are  all  with  reference  to  the  places  occupi- 
ed by  the  planets  at  the  time  of  birth.  The  planets  whilo 
passing  through  places  which  happen  to  be  tbe  Upachaya 
houses  or  which  might  bo  their  own  houses  or  their  friendly 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


95 


CH.  9] 


or  exaltation  signs,  produce  benefic  effects  fully  if  such 
houses  or  signs  are  more  beuefic  for  the  planets  than 
malefic  ; and  planets  while  passing  through  places  which 
happen  to  be  Apachaya  houses  or  which  might  be  their 
inimical  or  depression  signs,  produce  malefic  effects  fully  if 
such  houses  or  signs  be  more  malefic  for  the  planets  than 
benefic. 


Notes. 

(a).  For  instance,  the  3rd,  5th,  6th  and  ] 2th  houses 
from  himself  are  malefic  places  for  the  Sun.  The  1st,  2nd, 
4th,  5th,  7th,  8th,  9th,  and  12th  houses  from  Lagna  are 
malefic  places  for  the  Moon,  and  so  forth- 

(5).  In  preparing  tables  of  Ashtakavarga,  it  is  usual 
to  mark  the  benefic  places  with  dots  and  the  malefic  places 
with  lines.  We  will  put  down  the  Ashtakavarga  table  for 
Mars  in  the  following  horoscope  : — 


Lagna 

Venus. 

Sun. 

Moon. 

Mercury. 

llasi  Chakra. 

•Jupiter. 

Mars. 

i 

Saturn. 

Mark  the  benofic  places" of  iMars  with  dots  and  tho 
malefic  places  with  lines.  The  result  will  be  found  to  be 
as  follows* 


13 


9 0 


Dili  HAT  J AT  AKA* 


Lch.  9 


000  = 3 
11111  = 5 

000  = 3 
ii  in  = 5 

000  = 3 

uni  = 5 

000  = 3 
mil  = 5 

oo)  = a 
mu  = 5 

Ashtaka  Varga  of  Mars. 

0000  = 4 
1111  — 4 

00000  = 5 
111  = 3 

00000  = 5 
111  = 3 

00  = 2 
min  = o 

0 = 1 
1111111  = 7 

00000  = 5 
ill  =3 

00  - 2 
111111=  6 

The  table  means  that  while  Mars  moves  through  sign 
Aries  for  instance,  the  benefic  effects  will  be  f-  and  the 
malefic  effects  will  be  In  other  words  he  produces 
malefic  effects  to  the  extent  of  £ — £ or  £■  of  his  power. 
Similar  remarks  apply  to  the  other  places. 

Notes. — The  Ashatakavarga  tables  are  generally  pre- 
pared with  the  number  of  benefic  dots  alone  marked  iu  them 
• — the  number  representing  the  malefic  lines  being  the 
difference  between  number  8 and  the  number  of  dots.  The 
above  table  will  then  stand  as  follows- ; — 


All  these  numbers  represent  the  benefic  dots. 


BRIHAT  jAtAkA- 


97 


cn.  9] 


The  A.V.  tables  are  useful  in  tho  prediction  of  most 
of  the  important  events  of  life.  Regular  treatises  exist  on 
this  branch  of  horoscopy,  which  must  be  consulted  for 
full  particulars.  We  shall  give  here  some  of  the  uses  of 
the  A.  V.  tables. 

The  tables  prepared,  as  stated  above,  with  figures  re- 
presenting benefic  dots  are  subjected  to  two  reductions  or 
eliminations,  known  as  Trikona  and  Ekadhipattya  reduc- 
tions— that  is,  of  the  figures  in  the  triangular  signs,  and  of 
the  figures  in  the  several  pairs  of  signs  forming  the  houses 
of  the  planets  from  Mars  to  Saturn. 

I. 

Trikona  or  Triangular  Reductions. 

Tho  Triangular  signs  are  given  in  the  notes  to  Stanza 
G of  Chapter  I.  The  reduction  rules  are  : — 

].  If  the  figures  in  the  triangular  signs  be  not  all  aliko 
subtract  from  each  the  leastof  the  three  figures,  keeping 
the  remainders. 

2.  If  there  be  no  figure  in  one  of  the  three  signs,  no 
reduction  need  be  made. 

3.  If  there  be  no  figure  in  two  of  the  three  signs 
remove  the  figure  ih  the  third. 

4.  If  the  figures  in  the  three  signs  bo  equal,  remove 
them  all. 

II. 


Ekadhipattya  Reductions. 

The  Ekadhipattya  signs  are  given  in  the  notes  to 
Stanza  G of  Chapter  I.  The  reduction  rules  are  : — 

1.  If  there  be  planets  in  both  the  houses  of  a planet 
no  reduction  need  be  made. 

2.  Of  the  two  houses  of  a planet,  one  of  which  is 
occupied  and  the  other  not,  (1)  if  the  figure  in  tho  former 


98 


BKI  OAT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  9 


be  smaller  than  the  figure  in  the  latter,  make  the  latter 
equal  to  the  former,  (2)  if  the  figure  in  the  former  bo 
greater  than  the  figure  in  the  latter,  remove  the  latter,  (3), 
if  the  figures  in  both  be  equal,  remove  the  figure  in 
the  latter. 

3-  Of  the  two  houses  of  a planet,  bothfof  which  are 
not  occupied,  (a),  if  the  figures  in  the  two  houses  be  equal 
remove  both  ; ( b ),  if  the  figures  be  unequal,  make  the  larger 
figure  equal  to  the  smaller  one. 

4.  If  there  be  no  figure  in  one  of  the  two  houses  no 
reduction  need  be  made. 

5.  The  figures  in'the  signs  Cancer ’an  d tLeo,  which  are 
respectively  the  houses  of  the  Moon  and  the  Sun,  are  not 
subject  to  the  Ekadhipattya  reduction. 

Illustration. 

We  will  apply  these  rules  to  the  A.  V.  table  of  Mars 
given  already. 


Reduction  I. 

The  figures  in  the  Triangular  signs  of  Aries,  Leo  and 
Saggittari  are  respectively  3,  5,  2.  Under  rule  (1)  subtract 
2 from  each,  and  the  resulting  figures  are  1,  3,  0.  The 

figures  in  the  triangular  signs  of  Taurus,  Virgo  and  Capri- 
corn, are  respectively  3,  2,  5.  Applying  rule  (1)  we  get 
3,  0,  3.  The  figures  in  the  triangular  signs  of  Gemini, 
Libra  and  Aquaries  are  3,  5,  3.  Applying  rule  (1)  we  get 
0,  2,  0.  The  figures  in  the  triangular  signs  of  Cancer,  Scor- 
pio and  Pisces  are  4,  1,  3.  Applying  rule  (1)  we  get  3,  0,'  2. 
So  that  the  AW,  of  Mars  after  the  first  reduction  stands  as 
follow9’ 


Ch.  9.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


99 


2 

1 

1 

0 

0 

A.  V-  of  liars  after  Reduction 
No.  I. 

3 

3 

3 

0 

0 

2 

0 

Reduction.  No.  IL 

This  reduction  should  be  made  only  to  the  figures  re- 
sulting from  Reduction  No.  I. 

Of  Aries  and  Scorpio,  the  two  houses  of  Mars,  Aries 
is  occupied  and  Scorpio  is  unoccupied*  The  figures  in  them 
are  1,  and  o,  respectively.  Under  rule  (4)  no  reduction  need 
be  made.  Taurus  and  Libra,  the  two  houses  of  Yenus,  are 
both  occupied;  under  rule  (1)  no  reduction  need  be  mada. 
Gemini  and  Virgo,  the  two  houses  of  Mercury  are  both 
unoccupied,  the  figures  in  them  are,  o and  o-Rule  (4)  applies 
and  there  is  no  necessity  for  reduction*  Of  Pisces  and 
Sagittari,  the  two  houses  of  Jupiter,  the  former  alone 
is  occupied  and  the  figures  in  them  are  2 and  o.  Under 
rule  (4)  no  reduction  need  be  made.  Of  Aquarius  and  Cap- 
ricorn the  two  houses  of  Saturn  the  latter  alone  is  occu- 
pied and  the  figures  in  them  are  o,  and  3.  Applying  rule 
4 no  reduction  need  be  made.  The  figures  in  Cancer  and 
Leo,  which  are  respectively  the  houses  of  the  Moonandthe 
Sun,  are  not  subject  to  reduction  Vide  rule  5-  These  figures 
are  3 and  3. 

So  that  after  Reduction  No.  II  th°  ‘ . V.  table  of  Mars 
will  stand  thus 


100  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [CU.  0. 


2 

1 

1 

0 

0 

A-  V.  fable  of  Mars  after  Keduc- 

3 

3 

tions.  X and  11. 

3 

0 

0 

2 

0 

The  total  of  figures  after  the  2 reductions  is  1 5. 

Similarly  the  A.  V.  tables  of  the  Sun,  the  Moon, 
Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn  may  be  reduced. 

We  will  now  give  some  of  the  uses  of  these  tables. 

A.  V.  of  the  Sun. 

In  the  case  of  A.  V.  of  the  Sun, (a)  multiply  the  total 
of  the  figures  alter  reductions  by  the  figure  in  the  9th  house 
from  the  Sun  in  the  A.  V.  Divide  the  product  by  27  and 
take  the  remainder.  Mark  the  asterism,  counting  the  re- 
mainder from  A swini.  When  Saturn  passes  through  such 
asterism  or  through  its  triangular  asterisms  either  a person’s 
father  or  paternal  uncle  will  die  or  suffer  miseries  if  the 
planetary  dasa  period  at  the  time  be  a malefic  one. 

No  work  shall  be  commenced  when  the  Sun  passes 
through  signs  where  there  are  no  figures  in  A.V . of  the  Sun- 

During  such  periods  a person  suffers  from  diseases, 
misery  and  quarrel. 

Multiply  the  total  of  reduced  figures  by  the  figures 
in  the  8th  house  from  the  Sun  in  the  A.  V.  of  the 
Sun.  Divide  the  product  by  12.  The  remainder  represents 
the  sign  (month)  from  Aries,  through  which  or  through  one 
of  its  triangular  signs  when  the  Sun  passes  a person  dies  (in 
the  year  of  his  death). 

( a ) A.  V.  of  a planet  is  tho  Ashtaka  Varga  of  a planet  beforo  reduction. 


cn.  0.] 


B1UHAT  JATAKA. 


101 


Add  together  the  three  figures  in  each  of  the  4 sets  of 
the  triangular  signs  Aries, Leo,  Sagittari,  &c.  Find  out  which 
of  these  totals  is  the  largest.  Find  out  the  Dik  or  quarter, 
for  the  particular  set  of  triangular  signs  giving  the  total. 
(Yido  note  if)  to  stanza  19  Chapter  II).  The  place  of  wor- 
ship in  the  house  of  a person  will  be  in  such  direction. 

A.  Y.  of  the  Moon. 

Multiply  the  total  of  the  reduced  figures  by  the  figure 
in  the  4th  house  from  the  Moon  in  A.  V of  the  Moon  ; divide 
the  product  by  27,  take  the  remainder  and  for  it  find  out  the 
asterism  from  Aswici  as  before.  When  Saturn  passes 
'through  such  asterism  or  through  its  triangular  asterisms 
a person’s  mother  dies  or  suffers  miseries  if  the  planetary 
dasa  period  at  the  time  be  a malefic  one. 

Multiply  the  total  of  reduced  figures  by  the  figure  in 
the  8th  house  from  the  Moon  in  the  A.  Ar.  of  the  Moon. 
Divide  the  product  by  27.  Take  the  remainder;  and  for  it 
find  out  the  asterism  from  Aswini  as  befoi*e.  When  the 
Moon  passes  through  it  or  through  its  triangular  asterisms 
there  will  he  quarrel,  anger  and  grief. 

No  work  shall  be  commenced  when  the  Moon  passes 
through  signs  in  which  there  are  no  figures  in  the  A.  Y.  of 
the  Moon. 

Find  outlthe  Dik  or  quarter  as  before  and  it  will  givG 
the  position  of  the  bath-room  in  the  house  of  a persou. 

A.  V.  of  Mars. 

When  Saturn  passes  through  signs  in  which  there  are 
no  figures  iu  the  A.V.  of  Mars,  the  person  will  suffer  from 
diseases,  if  Mars  ho  powerful,  aud  will  dio  if  Mars  be  weak 
and  if  he  be  not  the  lord  of  the  ascendant. 


102 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[cu.  9 


Find  out  the  Dik  or  quarter  as  before. 

It  will  give  the  position  of  the  kitchen  in  a person’s 
house. 

A.  Y.  of  Mercury. 

When  Saturn  passes  through  signs  in  which  there  are  no 
figures  in  the  A.Y.  of  Mercury  the  person’s  son  or  friends 
will  die. 

Find  out  the  Dik  or  quarter  as  before. 

It  will  give  the  position  of  the  play-ground  in  the 
house  of  a person. 

A.  Y.  of  Jupiter. 

The  figure  in  the  5th  house  from  Jupiter  in  the  A.Y.  of 
Jupiter  will  give  the  number  of  sons  of  a person.  The  num- 
ber of  those  meeting  with  early  death  will  be  the  number  of 
planets  occupying  inimical  or  depression  signs. 

The  Dik  or  quarter  ascertained  as  before  will  give  the 
position  of  the  Treasury  or  store-room. 

A.  Y.  of  Yenus. 

A person  will  get  a wife,  lands  and  wealth  when  Yenus 
passes  through  signs  containing  the  largest  figure  in  the  A. 
Y.  of  Yenus  after  reduction. 

The  Dik  or  quarter  ascertained  as  before  will  give  the 
position  of  the  bed  room. 

A.  Y.  of  Saturn. 

In  the  A.  Y.  of  Saturn  add  together  the  figures  in  the 
signs  from  the  ascendant  to  the  house  occupied  by  Saturn 
and  also  figures  in  the  signs  from  Saturn  to  the  ascendant. 
The  two  totals  will  give  the  years  in  which  a person  will 
suffer  from  diseases  and  from  grief.  Add  the  two  totals  the 
sum  will  give  the  year  in  which  a person’s  lifo  will  be  in 
clanger. 

A similar  remark  applies  to  the  A.  Y.  of  Mars. 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


103 


CH.  9-j 


When  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  pass  through  signs  in 
which  the  figures  are  least  in  the  A.  V.  of  Saturn,  a person 
dies  (in  his  year  of  death). 

The  Dik  or  quarter  ascertained  as  beforo  gives  the 
position  of  the  spot  where  the  sweepings  are  gathered. 


Sarvashtnlca  Varga 

The  Ashtaka  vargas  of  the  Sun  and  other  planets  con- 
sidered separately  are  known  as  Bhinnashtaka  vargas  and 
their  sum  forms  what  is  known  as  Saiwashtaka  varga.  In 
the  latter,  the  figure  in  sign  Aries  is  the  sum  of  the  figures 
in  sign  Aries  in  the  several  Bhinnashtaka  vargas  ; similarly 
tli o figure  in  sign  Taurus  of  R.  A.  V.  is,the  sum  of  the 
figures  in  sign  Taurus,  of  the  B-  A.  Ys.  and  the  figures 
of  the  other  signs  may  be  similarly  obtained.  The  total  of 
these  figures  will  always  be  337 — this  being  the  sum  of  the 
totals  of  the  figures  of  the  seven  B,  A.  Ys,  The  latter  figures 
are  48,  49,  39,  54,  5G,  52  and  39  from  Sun  to  Saturn. 

Now  various  events  of  life  are  predicted  by  means  of  the 
figures  of  the  S.  A.Y.  table. 

(1) .  If  the  figure  in  a particular  sign  exceed  30  then 
planets  passing  through  it  will  produce  benefic  effects  ; if  it 
be  between  25  and  30,  such  effects  will  be  neither  good  uor 
bad  and  if  the  figure  be  less  than  25  the  effects  will  be  bad. 

Again,  all  good  works  shall  be  commenced  when  the 
rising  sign  is  one  whose  figure  is  largest  in  the  S.  A.  V. 
table  and  marriages  and.  other  connections  shall  be  formed 
with  persons  whose  star  is  one  of  the  stars  of  such  sign. 

(2) .  As  the  ]0th  house  represents  labour,  the  11th 
house  gain  and  the  12th  loss,  if  the  figure  in  tbo  1 1 tli  house 
be  greater  than  the  figure  in  the  10th  house  and  if  the  figure 
in  the  12th  house  he  smaller  than  the  figure  in  the  11th  house 
and  if  the  figure  in  the  ascendant  be  greater  than  the  figure 

14 


104 


BRIHAT  JX TAKA. 


[CB. 


iu  the  12th  house  the  person  will  be  happy  and  prosperous — 
the  meaning  is  clear,  the  labor  being  slight,  gain  much  and 
loss  comparatively  small.  If  the  figures  be  otherwise  the 
person  will  be  unhappy. 

(3).  Excepting  the  6th,  8th  and  1 2th  houses,  of  the 
remaining  9 houses  the  significations  of  those  where  the 
figures  are  large  will  be  in  a condition  of  prosperity  (Vide 
note  (a)  to  Sranzi  1-5,  Chapter  I.) 

(1.)  Add  together  the  figures  of  rhe  four  signs  from 
Pisces, — Pisces,  Aries,  Taurus  and  Gemini.  Add  also  the 
figures  of  the  four  signs  from  Cancer  and  of  the  four  signs 
from  Scorpio.  These  three  totals  represent  the  three 
sections  of  a man’s  life.  Whichever  total  is  the  largest, 
the  corresponding  division  of  life  will  be  happy  and  pros- 
perous. If  three  or  more  malefic  planets  occupy  the  four 
signs  from  Pisces  a person  will  suffer  miseries  in  the  1st 
section  of  life  ; if  they  occupy  the  four  signs  from  Cancer 
the  miseries  will  occur  in  the  2nd  section,  and  if  they 
occupy  the  four  sigus  from  Scorpio,  then,  in  the  3rd  section 
of  life.  If  the  planets  in  the  several  sections  be  benefic  the 
person  will  be  happy  ; and  if  both  malefic  and  benefic  pla- 
nets occupy  the  several  sections  the  effects  will  be  both 
good  and  bad. 

5.  Add  together  the  figures  in  the  houses  occupied  by 
Saturn,  Lagua  and  Mars.  The  sum  will  give  the  year  in 
which  a person  will  suffer  from  diseases  and  other  miseries. 

6-  Add  together  the  figures  of  houses  occupied  by 
E-ahu,  Mars  and  Saturn.  The  sum  will  give  the  year  i u 
which  a person  will  suffer  from  poison,  weapons  and 
wounds. 

7.  Add  together  the  figures  of  the  signs  occupied  by 
benefic  planets.  The  sum  will  give  the  year  in  whiefc  a 
]>ors>a  will  got  a soil,  wealth  an  1 the  iihe. 


BRIflAT  JATAKA. 


105 


CH.  9.] 


8.  Multiply  the  total  of  the  figures  of  A.  V.  of  tho 
placet  who  is  (he  lord  of  the  8 h house  from  the  ascendant 
by  the  fig. i re  <>f  the  8th  house  in  S.  A.  V.  table.  Divide 
the  product  by  12  ; the  remainder  will  give  (he  Month  from 
Aries  in  which  a person  dies  (in  the  year  of  his  death.) 

In  the  same  way  the  month  of  death  of  a person’s 
father  may  bo  ascertained  by  a similar  calculation  with 
reference  to  the  9th  house  and  that  of  the  mother  with 
reference  to  the  4th  house. 

9-  Find  out  from  the  S.  A.  V.  table  the  powerful  Dik 
or  quarter.  Cow  sheds,  l ice  Reids,  agricultural  operations 
shall  be  cnductod  in  such  dik  or  quarter  and  the  weak  dik 
or  quarter  shall  be  rejected  for  all  purposes. 

Again,  Paras ara  in  his  Hora  Sastra,  a very  volu- 
minous work,  has  treated  of  32  distinct,  processes  for  ascer- 
taining the  length  of  human  life.  They  are  : 


I.  Pindayurdaya  12 

II.  Dhruvayurdaya  ...  ...  ...  4 

III.  Rasmikayuruaya  ...  ...  ...  4 

IV-.  Arnsakayurdaya  ...  ...  ...  4 

V.  Ashtakavargayurdaya  ...  ...  4 

IV.  Vishayayurdaya  ...  2 


Vlt.  Nakshatramsakayurdaya  ...  ...  2 

Total  52 

7.  P indayurdaya. 

This  is  divided  into  3 schools,  (1)  that  of  Yavanacharya 
(vide  Stanza  1 Ch.  7),  (2)  that  of  Joevasarma  (vide  stanza 
9 Ch.  7),  (o)  that  ot  Bad  a raj' an  a according  to  which  tue 
maximum  years  ot  each  planet  when  in  his  exaltation  sign 
is  one-seventh  of  100  years. 

E >ch  Oi  these  three  schools  has  4 sub-divisions (a) 
The  Xeechardhharana  process  according  to  which  tho 


] 06 


Bill  HAT  JATAKA. 


[ [OH-  9. 


maximum  peiiod  is  one-half  at  depression.  ( b ) The  Neecha- 
hhava  process  according  to  which  the  period  vanishes 
at  depression,  (c)  The  Krita  harana  process  according  to 
which  tho  periods  suffer  reductions.  ( d ) The  Akrita  harana 
process  according  to  which  the  periods  suffer  no  reductions. 

Thus  Pindayurdaya  is  of  12  sorts. 

II.  Dkruvayurdaya . 

This  is  otherwise  known  as  Nysargikayurdaya.  (vide 
Stanza  9 Ch.  8).  As  stated  above  there  are  4 kinds  of  this 
depending  on  the  4 divisions  mentioned  above — (a),  ( [b ),  (c) 
and  (d) . 

III.  Rasmihayurdaya. 

According  to  this  the  yeai’s  of  tho  planets  from  the 
Sun  to  Saturn  are  respectively  16,  20,  9,  8,  9,  25,  and  26. 
There  are  4 kinds  of  this  as  stated  above. 

IV  A m sajcayurda ya. 

This  is  Satyacharyar’s  method  referred  to  at  the  end 
of  stanza  9 Ch.  7.  This  process,  in  certain  cases  has  to  be 
varied  into  what  is  known  as  Prakramanugata  method. 
The  two  processes  again  divide,  each,  into  two  parts  kuown 
as  Kritavridhika  and  Akritavridhika — i.  c.  the  years  are  to 
be  increased  according  to  some  and  not  to  be  increased 
according  to  others.  Vide  Purasara’s  Hora  Sasfra.  Thus 
we  get  4 kinds  of  Amsakayurdaya. 

F.  -1 shtaJcavargccyurdccya ■ 

This  process  as  stated  above  has  to  be  varied  into 
what  is  known  as  Prakramanugata  method.  The  two  pro- 
cesses agaiu  divide,  each,  ini,o  two  parts  known  as  Krita- 
vridhi  and  Akritavridhi  as  stated  above.  Vide  Parasara 
Hora.  Thus  we  get  4 kinds  of  Ashtakavurgayurdaya.  One 
pf  these  4 methods  is  given  at  the  end  of  these  notes. 


en.  9.] 


BRJHAT  J AT  AKA. 


107 


VI.  V-ishayayurdaya , 

This  consists  of  two  kinds — the  one  according  to  Pn ra- 
sa r a and  the  other  as  mentioned  in  a work  named  Prakrit 
vamala,  These  partake  of  the  nature  of  the  Ashtakuvarga 
process. 

- VII.  Nakshatramsalcayurdaya- 

This  is  of  two  kinds — the  one  is  known  as  the  Kala" 
chakra  process  and  the  other  as  the  Makshtradasa. 

Thus  82  processes  are  mentioned  by  Purasara  who  at 
the  same  time  states  the  particular  cases  to  which  each 
process  is  applicable.  Of  these  32  processes,  Varaha  Hihira 
has  mentioned  the  most  important  ones  in  chapter  7.  For 
further  particulars  in  Ayurdaya  the  reader  is  referred  to 
the  works  of  Purasara  and  other  writers. 

We  shall  here  state  the  details  of  the  Ashtatavarga 
process.  The  following  tables  are  employed  in  the  process. 

Basi  Gunakara  or  Zodiacal  factors. 


Aries 

...  7 

Libra 

7 

Taurus 

...  .10 

Scorpio 

8 

Gemini 

...  8 

Sagifctari 

9 

Cancer 

4 

Capricorn 

5 

Leo 

...  10 

Aquarius 

11 

Virgo 

...  5 

Pisces 

13 

Graha  Gunakara  or  Planetary  factors 

The  Sun 

5 

Mercury 

5 

The  Muon 

...  5 

Jupiter 

10 

Mars 

...  8 

Venus 

7 

SATURN.  5. 

Multiply  the  several  figures  in  the  signs  from  Aries  in 
the  Ashtakavarga  of  the  Sun  by  the  figures  of  the  Basi 
Gunakara  table  respectively  and  add  the  products- 

Again  multiply  the  several  figures  in  the  signs  occur 
pied  by  the  Sun  and  other  planets  by  the  figures  of  the 


103 


EIMHAT  JATAKA. 


[on.  9. 


Grab  a Gunakara  table  respectively  and  add  the  products. 
Add  tint  two  totals.  Multiply  the  sum  lv\  7;  divide  the 
jioduct  by  27.  The  quotient  will  give  the  years  of  tlte  Sun. 
Mul  ■ii’lx  the  remainder  hv  12  arid  >iivide  the  product  by  27 
the  quotient  will  give  the  months;  multiply  the  remainder 
hy  hO  slid  divide  the  product  by  27  ; the  quotient  will  give 
the  days,  and  similarly  find  tlte  Ghatikas  and  Vighatikas. 
Thus  we  have  obtained  the  A.  V years  of  the  Sun. 

Similarly  those  of  the  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter, 
Venus  and  Saturn  may  be  obtained  from  the  A.  V.  tables. 

Now  these  periods  are  subject  to  the  following  reduc- 
tions. 

M.)  If  a planet  is  accompanied  by  another  planet  in 
a sign  the  amount  of  reduction  is  one-half  of  the  period 
obtained. 

(2 ) If  a planet  occupy  his  depression  sign,  tho 
amount  of  reduction  is  one-half. 

(3.)  If  he  be  an  Astangata  planet,  the  amount  of  re- 
duction is  also  one-half. 

(4.)  If  ho  occupy  an  inimical  sign,  the  amount  is  one- 
third. 

(5.)  If  he  occupy  the  visible  hemisphere  the  amount 
is  One-half. 

((h)  If  he  suffer  defeat  in  conjunction  the  amount  is 
one-third. 

(7  ) In  the  case  of  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  again,  if 
these  be  of  unusual  appearance  the  amount  is  one-third. 

.N  B.  Where  several  reductions  have  to  be  applied  to 
the  period  of  a planet  it  will  be  enough  if  the  largest  of  them 
be  alone  made. 


BltlHiT  JATAKi. 


10$ 


Cc.  9.] 


After  making  tliesevenrl  reductions  add  up  the  result- 
ing  years  of  the  planets,  multiply  the  Mini  l>y  3 4 and  divide 
the  product  by  30 j - The  quotient  will  give  the  length  ol  a 
person’s  life  in  years,  months,  days,  Ac. 

Agaiti,  in  the  A-  V.  of  Saturn  as  before,  multiply  the 
figures  of  the  several  signs  from  Aries  by  the  Zodiacal  fac- 
tors and  add  up  the  products.  Multi  >ly  the  figures  in  the 
several  signs  occupied  by  the  Sun  and  other  planets  by  the 
several  planetary  factors  and  add  up  the  products.  Add 
together  the  two  totals.  To  the  sum  add  the  sum  of  the 
figures  resulting  after  making  the  Tritcona  and  Bknahi- 
patya  reductions  to  the  figures  of  rite  A.  Y.  of  Saturn. 
Multiply  the  sum  bv  the  figure  in  the  8th  house  from  the 
ascendant  in  the  A.  V.  of  Saturn  ; divide  the  product  by  27  ; 
the  quotient  will  also  give  the  length  of  a person’s  life,  pro- 
vided such  length  is  otherwise  found  to  range  between  34 
and  60  years  ; the  length  of  life  will  be  27  years  less  than 
the  period  obtained  if  the  person’s  age  is  otherwise  found 
to  range  from  1 to  33  years  and  27  years  mor  e than  tlie 
period  obtained  it  such  length  be  f uud  to  range  between 
G7  and  100  years  and  death  will  occur  if  the  dasa  period  be 
a malefic  one.  There  are  brief  processes  for  ascertaining 
by  inspection  whether  the  length  of  life  of  a person  falls  in 
the  first,  or  the  second  or  the  third  section  of  the  maxi- 
mum period  of  100  years  Vide,  the  Astrological  Aphorisms 
of  Jaimuni. 

Hitherto  we  have  been  dealing  with  the  tables  of 
the  B.  A.  Y.  and  S A Y.  prepared  with  the  figures  re- 
presenting the  benefic  planetary  places.  Tables  can  also  be 
prepared  with  figures  representing  the  male  tic  places  of  the 
planets.  (V  ide  note  b,  to  stanza  8).  Special  rules  exist 
relating  to  the  prediction  of  events  of  life  with  the  help 
of  the  figures  of  these  tables.  The  reader  is  referred  to 
the  works  of  Parasara. 


no 


BRI11AT  JATAKA. 


[ell.  lo.- 


CHPTER  X- 

On  Avocation. 

1.  A person  gets  wealth  from  his  father,  mother, 
enemy,  friend,  brother,  wife  or  servant  according  as  the 
planet  which  occupies  the  lOtli  house  from  the  Lagna  or 
from  the  Moon  is  tho  Sun,  or  the  Moon,  or  Mars  or 
Mercury,  or  Jupiter  or  Venus  or  Saturn  respectively  (a). 
If  there  be  no  such  planet,  the  avocation  of  a persou  will 
be  that  stated  for  tho  planets  (&)  which  might  be  the 
lords  of  the  Navamsas  occupied  by  the  lords  of  the  lOth 
houses  from  Lagna,  the  Moon  and  the  Sun  (c). 

Notes. 

(a).  If  the  lOth  house  from  the  ascendant  and  tho 
10th  house  from  the  Moon  bo  both  occupied  by  planets,  a 
person  will  acquire  wealth  from  both  sources,  and  if  several 
planets  occupy  the  10th  house  there  will  he  several  sources- 
of  wealth. 

(&).  Vide  stanzas  - and  3. 

(c)  Suppose  sign  Cancer  is  the  Lagna  ; the  10th  house 
from  Cancer  is  Aries  ; the  lord  of  Aries  is  Mars  •,  suppose 
Mars  to  occupy  the  Navarasa  of  Sagittari  ; the  lord  of 
Sagittari  is  Jupiter  and  the  avocation  stated  for  Jupiter 
(vide  3rd  stanza)  will  bo  the  avocation  of  a person.  It 
also  follows  that  a person’s  avocation  will  be  all  the  three 
stated  for  tho  lords  of  the  Navamsas  occupied  by  the 
lords  of  tbe  10 bh  bouses  from  Lagna,  the  Moon  and  the 
Sun. 

2.  If  the  lord  of  the  Navamsa  (a)  be  the  Sun,  a 
person  will  deal  in  perfumes,  gold,  woollen  fabric,  medecine, 

and  the  like.  If  the  lord  be  the  Moon,  he  will  till  lands 
or  deaj  in  the  productions  of  water  (b)  or  get  money 

through  women.-  (c)  If  he  be  Mars,  the  person  will  deal 


ill 


CH.  10.]  BR1HAT  JATAKA. 

in  metals  or  minerals*  fire  ( d ) or  weapons  and  will  also  ac- 
quire wealth  by  acts  of  boldness;  if  he  be  Mercury,  the 
person  will  be  a writer,  an  accountant,  and  the  like  (e)  and 
Will  also  acquire  wealth  by  various  handicraft  (/> 

Notes. 

(a) .  That  is  the  lord  of  the  Navarnsa  occupied  by  the 
lord  of  the  10th  house  from  Lagna,  the  Moon  and  the  Sun. 

(b) .  Such  as  pearls,  conch  shells,  whale-bones  and 
the  like. 

(c) .  By  serving  under  or  otherwise  following  them. 

(d) .  Fire:  he  may  be  the  driver  of  a fire  engine  or 
a dealer  in  matches  and  the  like. 

( e ) .  By  writing  commentaries  on  the  works  of  writers 
and  the  like. 

(/).  Such  as  painting,  book-binding,  arrow-making 
or  the  making  of  flower- wreaths,  sandal  paste,  perfumes 
and  the  like. 

3.  If  the  lord  of  the  Navatnsa  be  Jupiter,  a person 
will  get  wealth  through  Brahmins,  the  Devas  or  learned 
men,  through  mines  (a)  and  the  like  (b)  and  through  acts 
of  virtue  (c)  ; if  he  be  Venus,  the  pex*son  will  [deal  in  getns,(d) 
silver  and  other  metals,  in  cows  and  buffaloes  ; and  if 
the  lord  be  Saturn,  the  person'will  acquire  wealth  by  means 
of  hard  labour,  ( e ) by  acts  of  torture,  (/)  by  carrying  bur- 
dens and  by  low  deeds  unsuited  to  his  rank.  Thus  persons 
acquire  wealth  by  avocation  stated1  for  the  lords  of 
Navamsas  occupied  by  the  lords  of  the  10th  house,  (g). 

(а) .  The  word  in  the  text  is  Akara  which* includes 
gold  and  silver  mines,  places  where  salt  is  produced  or 
where  elephants  are  found. 

(б) .  Such  as  contract  work. 


15 


112  13R1ITAT  JATAKA.  [CH.  'll 

(r).  Such  as  sacrificial  rites,  gifts,  acts  of  charity* 
pilgrimage,  service  under  Guru  or  preceptor. 

(d) .  Such  as  diamonds,  rubies,  and  the  like. 

(e) .  Such  as  walking  and  the  like. 

( /.)  Either  by  self  torture  or  torturing  other  creatures* 

(<7 ) From  Lagna,  the  Moon  and  the  Sun. 

4.  If  such  yoga  planet  (a)  occupy  (fr)  a friendly  sign* 
a person  will  acquire  wealth  (in  the  dasa  or  antardasa  period 
of  such  planet)  through  a friend.  If  such  yoga  planet 
occupy  an  inimical  sign,  the  person  will  get  wealth  through 
his  enemy  ; and  if  such  planet  occupy  his  own  house,  the 
person  will  get  wealth  by  means  of  his  house-  If,  when 
the  Sun  happens  to  be  the  yoga  planet,  he  occupy  lbs  exal- 
tation sign,  the  person  will  acquire  wealth  by  his  own 
powers.  If  (at  the  time  of  birth)  powerful  benefic  planets 
occupy  the  lltli  house,  the  Lagna  or  the  2nd  house,  the 
person  will  acquire  wealth  in  various  ways  (c). 

Notes. 

(a) .  That  is  either  the  planet  which  occupies  the 
]0th  house  from  the  ascendant  or  the  Moon  or  the  planet 
which  is  the  lord  of  the  Navamsa  occupied  by  the  lord  of 
the  10th  house  from  Lagna,  the  Moon  and  the  Sun. 

(b) .  At  the  time  of  birth . 

(c) .  In  other  words  he  will  prosper  well  whatever 
may  be  the  avocation  he  may  choose  to  follow. 


CHAPTER  XI. 

On  Raja  yoga  on  tub  Birth  ot  Kinos- 

1 , A ccording  to  the  Yavanas  a person  born  when  three 
or  more  malefic  planets  are  in  their  exaltation  sigus 


CH.  11.] 


EBlHAT  JATAKA. 


113 


becomes  a tyrannical  king  (a\  According  to  Jeevasurma  it' 
such  planets  be  malefic  a person  will  never  become  a 
king  (b). 

Notes- 

(a) ,  if  three  or  more  planets  occupying  their  exal- 
tation signs  be  benefic,  the  person  becomes  a good  king; 
if  boih  benefic  and  malefic  ho  will  become  both  a 'good  and 
a bad  king. 

(b) .  According  to  Jeevasarma,  such  a person  becomes 
rich  and  powerful  but  not  a king.  Varba  Mihira  is  of  the 
opinion  of  the  Yavanas. 

2.  Of  the  four  planets,  Mars,  Saturn,  the  Sun,  and  Jupi- 
ter, by  all  the  four  or  any  three  of  them  occupying  exalta. 
tion  signs  while  each  of  the^planets  occupies  the  Lagna,  the 
number  of  Rajayogas  is  16-  Again,  of  the  same  four  pla- 
nets by  any  two  or  by  any  one  occupying  exaltation  signs 
and  in  each  case’  by  each  of  the  planets  occupying  the 
Lagna  while  the  Moon  occupies  sign  Cancer,  the  number 
of  Rajayogas  is  also  16. 

Notes. 

32  Rajayogas  are  mentioned  in  this  stanza.  A per- 
son born  under  any  one  of  them  becomes  a king  : suppose 
all  the  1.  planets — Mars,  Saturn,  the  Suu  and  Jupiter — to 
occupy  their  exaltation  signs  at  the  same  time;  by  an)’  one 
of  such  signs  being  the  ascendant  the  number  of  Rajayogas 
obtained  is  4.  Again,  of  tbo  same  4 planets  there  are  4 
groups,  each  of  three  planets : thus  (1)  Mars,  Saturn  and 
the  Sun,  (2)  Mars,  Saturn  and  Jupiter,  (3)  Mars,  the  Sun 
and  Jupiter,  (4)  Saturn,  the  Sun  and  Jupiter.  In  the  case 
of  each  group,  by  all  t/ie  three  planets  occupying  their  exal- 
tation signs  and  by  each  of  such  signs  being  the  rising 
sign,  the  number  of  Rajayogas  obtained  is  3 ; there  being  4 


114 


brihat  j at aka. 


[gh.  11. 


.such  groups  the  number  of  Rajayogns  obtained  from  them 
all  is  4X3  or  12.  Adding  this  to  the  4 yogas~already  ob- 
tained we  get  the  first  lfi  yogas  mentioned  in  the  text. 

Again,  of  the  same  4 planets,  there  are  G 'groups  each 
ot  2 planets  as  follows  (1)  Mars  and  Saturn,  (2)  Mars  and 
the  Sun,  (3)  Mars  and  Jupitor,  (4)  Saturn  and  the  Sun,  (5,)} 
Saturn  and  Jupiter  and  (6)  the  Sun  and  Jupiter.  In  the 
case  of  each  group  by  both  the  planets  occup}’ing  their 
exp.ltation  signs  and  by  each  of  such  signs  being  the  rising 
sign,  the  number  of  Rajayogas  obtained  is  2.  There  being. 
6 such  groups,  the  number  of  yogas  obtained  from  them.,  all 
is  GX2  or  12.  In  each  of  these  12  cases,  the  Moon  occupies 
sign  Cancer.  Again,  of  the  same  + planets,  by  their  seve- 
ral^ being  in  their  exaltation  signs,  while  such  sign  is  also 
the  rising  sign,  the  number  of  Rajayogas  obtained  is  4.  In 
each  of  these  4 cases,  the  Moon  occupies  sign  Cancer.  Add- 
ing these  4 yogas  to  the  12  yogas  already  obtained  we  get 
the  second  1G  yogas  mentioned  in  the  text. 

3.  The  Lagna  or  the  Moon  being  in  Vargottama  posi- 
tions, of  all  the  planets,  excepting  the  Moon,  by  the  several, 
groups  of  four,  five  and  six  planets  aspecting  the  Lagna  or 
the  Moon,  the  number  of  yogas  obtained  is  22. 

Notes- 

The  six  planets  are,  the  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury  Jupiter, 
Venus  and  Saturn.  Of  these  there  are  15  groups  each  of 
4 planets  as  follows  : 


(1) 

The  Sun, 

Mars, 

Mercury,  Jupiter 

(2) 

•» 

» 

„ Venus. 

(3) 

V 

V 

.,  Saturn. 

(*) 

t J 

y i 

Jupiter,  Venus. 

<70 

;> 

>> 

„ Saturn. 

(6) 

V 

Venus, 

CH.  11  ] 


BRIIIAT  JATAKA. 


115. 


(7)  Tiie  Sun,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus-. 

(8)  „ „ v Saturn. 

(9)  „ » Venus,  „ 

(10)  „ Jupiter,  „ 

(11)  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus. 

(12)  „ „ « Saturn. 

(1?)  „ ,,  Venus,  „ 

(14)  ,,  Jupiter  „ „ 

(15)  Mercury,  ,,  ,,  » 

Again,  of  the  same  G planets  there  are  six  groups  eaoh 

of  five  planets  as  follows  : 


(1), 

The  Sun, 

Mars; 

, Mercury, 

Jupiter 

, Venus* 

(2) 

o 

>> 

3) 

Saturn. 

(3) 

>> 

Venus 

y y 

(4) 

>.v 

Jupiter 

y 5 

(5) 

„ Mercur 

y » 

y) 

(6) 

M ars , 

5J 

y> 

yy 

All  the  G planets  form  again  into  one  group.  Thus 
there  are  22  groups.  B}^  the  planets  of  each  group  aspec- 
ting  the  rising  sign  in  its  Vargothama  position,  the  number 
of  yogas  obtained  is  22  ; and  by  their  aspecting  the  Moon  in 
its  Varguthama  position,  the  number  of  yogas  obtained  is 
agaiu  22.  According  to  Mandavya,  by  each  of  the  12  signs 
from  Aries  being  either  the  rising  sign  or  tho  sign  occupied 
by  the  Moon  in  the  case  of  each  yoga,  the  number  of  yo- 
gas obtained  is  4-4x  12  or  528- 

4.  When  Saturn  occupies  sign  Aquarius,  the  Sun 
sign  Aries,  the  Moon  sign  Taurus,  Mercury  sign  Gemini, 
Jupiter  sign  Leo,  and  Mars  sign  Scorpio,  a person  born 
becomes  a king  when  the  rising  sign  is  Aquarius  or  when 
it  is  Aries  or  when  it  is  Taurus. 

Again,  when  Saturn  occupies  sign  Libra,  the  Moon, 
sign  Taurus*  the  Sun  and  Mercury  sign  Virgo,  Venus  sign 


116 


DR  HI  AT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  9* 


Libra,  Mars  sign  Aries,  and  Jupiter  sign  Cancer,  a person 
lioi'ii  becomes  a king  when  the  rising  sign  is  Libra  or  when 
i t is  Taurus. 


5 When  Mara  occupies  sign  Capricorn,  the  Sun  and 
the  Moon  sign  Sngittari,  Saturn  sign  Capricorn  and  when 
the  rising  sign  is  also  Capricorn,  a person  born  becomes  a 
king. 

Again  when  the  rising  sign  is.  Capricorn  and  when  Mars 
and  the  Moon  occupy  it,  and  when  the  Sun  occupies  sign 
Sngittari,  a person  born  becomes  a king. 

Again  when  Aries  is  the  rising  sign  and  when  the  Sun 
occupies  it,  when  Saturn  and  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Libra 
and  Jupiter  occupies  sign  Sngittari, a person  becomes  a king. 

0.  When  the  rising  sign  is  Taurus  and  the  Moon  occu- 
pies it,  when  the  Sun  occupies.sign  Leo,  Jupiter  sign  Scropio 
and  Saturn  sign  Aquarius  a person  born  becomes  a kiug. 

Again,  when  the  rising  sign  is  Capricorn,  and  when 
Saturn  occupies  it,  and  when  the  Moon  occupies  the  3rd 
house,  Mars  the  6th  house,  Mercury  the  9th  house,  and  Ju- 
piter the  1 2 tlr  house,  a person  born  becomes  a virtuous  and 
famous  king. 

Cj 

7.  When  the  Moon  and,  Jupiter  occupy  sign  Sagittari, 
and  when  Mars  occupies  the  first  half  of  Capricorn,  a person 
bron  becomes  a king  when  Pieces  is  the  rising  sign  and  Venus 
occupies  it  or  when  Virgo  is  rising  sign  and  Mercury  occu- 
pies it. 

Again,  when  the  rising  sign  is  Virgo  and  when  Mercury 
ccupies  it,  when  Mars  and  Saturn  occupy  the  5th  house, 
when  the  Moon,  Jupiter  and  Venus  occupy  the  4th  house,  a 
person  born  becomes  a king. 

8.  When  Pisces  is  the  rising  sign,  and  the  Moon  occu- 
pies it,  and  when  Aquarius,  Capricorn  and  Leo  are  respcc- 


MU  BAT  JATAKA.. 


117 


CH.  11.] 


tively  occupied  by  Saturn,  Mars,  and  the  Sun,  a person  born 
becomes  a kiug. 

Again,  when  Mars  occupies  sign  Aries  and  Jupiter 
sign  Cancer,  a person  born  becomes  a king  when  Aries  is 
the  rising  sign,  also  when  Cancer  is  the  rising  sign. 

9.  When  Cancer  is  the  rising  sign  and  Jupiter  occu- 
pies it,  and  when  the  .Moon,  Venus  and  Mercury  occupy  sign 
Taurus  and  the  Sun  sign  Aries,  a person  born  becomes  a 
powerful  king. 

10  When  Capricorn  is  the  vising  sign  and  Saturn 
pies  it,  when  the  signs  Aries.  Cancer  and  Leo  are  occu- 
pied by  their  lords  and  when  Gemini  and  Libra  are  respec- 
tively occupied  by  Mercury  and  Venus,  a person  born  be- 
comes a famous  king. 

1 1.  When  Virgo  is  the  rising  sign,  and  Mercury  occu- 
pies it,  when  Venus  occupies  sign  Gemini,  the  Moon  aud 
Jupiter  occupy  sigu  Pisces,  and  Mars  and  saturn  occupy 
sigUjCapricorn,  a person  born  becomes  a King. 

12.  Persons  born  under  the  various  yogas  described 
above,  though  they  may  bo  born  in  low  families  will  be- 
come kings.  If  such  persons  are  born  in  a king’s  family- 
they  will  doubtless  become  kings.  We  shall  now  proceed 
to  describe  certain  }rogas,  persons  born  under  which  will 
become  kings  if  they  belong  to  a king’s  family  and  will 
become  rich  if  otherwise. 


13*  When  three  or  more  planets  are  powerful  and 
occupy  either  their  houses  or  exaltation  signs  or  their 
Moolatrikona  signs,  a person  born  becomes  a kiug  if  be 
belongs  to  a king’s  family- 

Again,  when  five  or  more  planets  are  powerful  and 
occupy  their  houses  or  exaltatiou  signs  or  their  Moolatri- 
kona signs  a person  born  becomes  a king  even  if  he  be  bom 


ii8 


BKIHAT  JATAKA. 


[tH-  11. 


in  a low-family.  If  in  either  case,  the  number  of  powerful 
planets  be  less  than  three  or  five,  the  persons  described 
above  will  not  become  kings  but  will  become  only  rich. 

14.  When  Aries  is  the  rising  sign  and  the  Sun  and 
Moon  occupy  it,  when  Mars  occupies  sign  Capricorn. 
Saturn  sign  Aquarius,  and  Jupiter  sign  Sagittari,  a person 
born  becomes  a king,  if  he  belong  to  a king’s  family,  and 
will  become  only  rich  if  otherwise. 

Notes. 

According  to  another  reading,  the  Sun  is  made  to 
occupy  sign  Leo  and  the  yoga  remains  the  same  in  'other 
respects. 

15.  When  Venus  occupies  the  4th  house,  and  when 
such  house  is  his  own,  when  the  Moon  occupies  the  9th 
house,  and  when  the  other  planets  occupy  the  3rd,  1st  and 
11th  houses,  a person  born  becomes  a king,  if  he  belong  to 
a king’s  family  and  only  rich  if  otherwise. 

Notes. 

As  Venus  is  said  to  be  in  his  Swakshetra  he  might  be 
either  is  sign  Taurus  or  in  sign  Libra.  The  Lagn  a must 
therefore  be  either  sign  Aquarius  or  sign  Cancer  respec- 
tively. As  the  Moon  is  said  to  be  in  the  9th  house,  lie  occu- 
pies sign  Libra  iu  the  former  case,  and  sigu  Pisces  in  the 
latter,  and  as  the  other  plants  are  said  to  occupy  the  3rd, 
1st  and  11th  houses  from  Lagna,  these  houses  are  signs 
Aries,  Aquarius  and  Sagittari  in  the  one  case,  and  Virgo, 
Cancer,  and  Taurus  in  the  other.  Thus  2 yogas  are  referred 
to  in  this  stanza. 

16.  When  Mercury  is  powerful  and  occupies  the 
rising  sign, (a)  when  a beuefic  planet  (&)  occupies  the  9th 
house(c)  and  when  the  other  planets(d)occupy  the  9th,  2nd, 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


119 


CH.  11.] 


3rd,  6th , 10th,  and  11th  houses  (e),  a person  born  becomes  a 
virtuous  king  if  he  belong  to  a king’s  family  and  only  rich 
if  otherwise. 

Notes. 

(a).  This  may  be  any  one  of  the  12  signs* 

(&)*  This  is  either  Jupiter  or  Venus. 

(c) .  The  4th  house  according  to  a different  reading. 

( d ) .  When  one  or  more  of  the  other  planets  according 
to  commentator. 

( e ) .  One  of  these  houses  according  to  commentator. 

17.  When  Taurus  is  the  rising  sign,  and  the  Moon 

occupies  it,  when  Jupiter  occupies  the  2nd  house,  Saturn  the 
6th  house,  and  the  other  planets  the  11th  house,  a person 
born  becomes  a king  if  he  belong  to  a king’s  family,  and 
only  rich  if  otherwise. 

Again,  when  Jupiter  occupies  the  4th  house,  the  Sun 
and  the  Moon  occupy  the  10th  house,  when  Saturn  occupies 
the  Lagna  (a)  and  when  the  other  planets  occupy  the  11th 
house,  a person  born  becomes  a king  if  he  be  born  in  a 
king’s  family,  and  only  rich  if  otherwise- 

Notes. 


(a.)  This  may  be  any  one  of  the  12  signs  according  to 
commentator. 

18.  When  the  Moon  occupies  the  10th  house,  Saturn 
the  11th  house.  Jupiter  the  rising  sign,  Mercury  and  Mars 
the  2nd  house,  and  the  Sun  and  Venus  occupy  the  4th  house, 
a person  born  becomes  a king  if  he  belong  to  a king’s  fa" 
rniiy,  and  only  rich  if  otherwise. 

Again,  when  Mars  and  Saturn  occupy  the  rising  sign, 
when  the  Moon  occupies  the  4th  house,  Jupiter  the  7th 
house,  Venus  the  9th  house,  the  Sun  the  10th  house,  and 

15 


120 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  I1‘ 


Mercury  the  11th  house,  a person' bora  becomes  a king  if 
he  belong  to  a king’s  family,  and  only  rich  if  otherwise. 

19.  Of  the  planets  producing  a Rajayoga  either  in  the 
Antardasa  periods  of  those  which  occupy  the  10th  house  or 
the  Lagua  (a)  or  in  that  of  the  most  powerful  planet  ( b ),  a 
person  obtains  kingdom  and  he  loses  it  and  courts  the 
friendship  of  another  king  in  the  Antardasa  periods  of  the 
planets  occupying  inimical  or  depression  signs  (c). 

Notes. 

(а) .  If  there  be  planets  both  in  the  Lagna  and  in  the 
lOth  house  or  if  there  be  several  planets  in  either,  then  in 
the  Antardasa  period  of  the  most  powerful  of  them. 

(б) .  If  there  be  no  planets  both  in  Lagna  and  in  the 
10th  house. 

(c).  If  such  planets  be  powerful  the  king  will  lose  his 
kingdom  permanently,  and  if  they  be  not  powerful,  he  will 
recover  it  by  the  help  of  his  allies. 

20.  When  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Mercury  occupy  the 
rising  sign,  (a)  when  Saturn  occupies  the  7th  house  and  the 
Sun  the  10th  house,  a person  born  will  live  in  great  comfort 
and  luxury.  (&) 

Again,  when  powerful  benefic  signs  form  the  Kendras 
and  malefic  planets  occupy  malefic  signs,  a person  born  be- 
comes rich  and  the  chief  of  hunters  aud  robbers. 

Notes. 

(a).  The  rising  sign  is  Aries  according  to  com- 
mentator. The  interpretation  given  of  this  portion  of  the 
text  is  objected  to  by  some  on  the  ground  that  when  Venus 
and  Mercury  (the  inferior  planets)  occupy  the  rising  sign  the 
Sun  canuot  occupy  the  10th  house — a place  more  than  (i0 
degrees  removed  from  them.  For  the  greatest  elongations 
of  the  two  planets  from  the  Sun  are  respectively  47  aud  29 


BP.IHAT  JATAKA. 


121 


CH.  12-] 


degrees.  Accordingly  the  following  interpretation  is  pro- 
posed : — 

“ If  the  rising  sign  be  the  house  of  Jupiter,  Venus  or  Mercury 

Bhatta  Utpala,  the  commentator,  while'  granting  the 
validity  of  the  objection,  says,  that  the  interpretation  objec- 
ted to  has  the  support  of  Garga  whom  he  quotes.  A similar 
remark  applies  to  the  Vajra  and  other  yogas  described  in 
stanza  5 of  the  next  Chapter,  and  in  stanza  6 of  the  same, 
Varaha  Mihira  while  admitting  the  impossibility  ot  the 
yoga,  says  that  his  task  is  simply  to  state  the  views  of  the 
ancient  writers  and  nothing  more.  Vide  notes  to  stanza 
6,  Chapter  XII- 

( b ) .  Though  he  may  be  poor. 

(c) .  This  portion  of  the  text  is  interpreted  by  some 
as  follows  : 


“ When  powerful  benefic  planets  occupy  the  Kendras” 

But  this  interpretation  is  opposed  to  Garga  whom  the 
commentator  quotes- 


CHAPTER  XII. 

1.  Om  Nabhasa  Yogas. 

1.  Nine,  ten  and  eight,  multiplied' respectively  by 
three,  three  and  four  give  the  sums  of  the  numbers  of  the 
first  two,  the  firs't  three,  and  all  the  four  groups  of  Nabhasa 
yogas  fa).  The  Yavanas  treat  extensively  of  one  thousand 
and  eight  hundred  of  such  yogas  ( b ).  We  shall  here  sum- 
marize them. 

Notes. 

fa).  Curiously  enough  the  author  adopts  a rather 
circuitous  method  of  stating  the  numbers  of  the  several 
groups  of  Nabhasa  yogas.  The  statement  amounts  to  au 
Algebraical  problem  : find  4 numbers  such  that  the  lst  + the 


122 


BUI  HAT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  12. 


2nd=9x3=27.  Ist  + 2nd  + 3rd=i0x3=30.1st+2nd+3rd  + 
4th=3  X 4—32.  It  is  clear  that  the  number  of  the  last  group 
=32 — 30=2.  The  number  of  the  3rd  group=30 — 27=3. 
The  number  of  the  first  and  second  group  is  given  as  27. 
According  to  the  commentator,  the  1st  group  consists  of 
20  yogas  and  the  2nd  of  7.  In  other  words  what  the  author 
wants  to  say  is  briefly  this — The  Nabhasa  yogas  consist  of 
4 groups  as  follows  : 

Akriti  yogas  20  ; Sankhya  yogas  7 ; Asraya  yogas  3 ; 
and  Dala  yogas  2. 

( b ) .  Vide  note  at  the  end  of  the  Chapter  for  the 
particulars  of  the  1800  Nabhasa  yogas. 

(c) .  The  author  says  that  his  32  yogas  contain  the 
1800  yogas  of  the  Yavanas. 

2.  According'to  Satyachariyar  if  all  the  planets  occupy 
(a)  the  movable,  fixed  or  common  signs,  the  yogas  are 
respectively  known  as  Eajju,  Musala,  and  Nala  and  these 
three  form  the  group  of  Asraya  yogas.  Again  according  to 
Parasara,  if  the  benefic  planets  (b)  occupy  the  Kendras  \c)> 
the  yoga  is  known  as  Srikor  Mala;  and  if  malefic  planets 
{d)  occupy  the  Kendras  [e)  the  yoga  is  known  as  Sarpa- 
These  two  form  the  group  of  Dala  yogas- 

Notes. 

(а) .  One  or  two  or  three  or  all  the  four  of  the  signs. 
According  to  some  the  planets  ought  to  occupy  all  the  four 
signs.  This  is  opposed  to  Garga. 

(б) .  Viz.,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus  according  to 
Garga. 

(c) .  Three  of  the  Kendras,  while  there  are  no  malefic 
planets  in  any  of  the  kendra  houses  according  to  Bada- 
rayana. 

(d) -  Viz  : — Tile  Suu,  Mars  and  Saturn  according  to 
Garga. 


CH.  12.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


123 


(e).  Three  of  the  kendras,  while  there  are  no  benefic 
planets  in  any  of  the  kendra  houses  according  to  Bada- 
ravana. 

3.  Other  Astrologers  say  that  the  Asraya  yogas  are 
identical  with  the  Yava  (a),  Abja  ( b),  Vajra  (c),  Andaja  (d), 
Gola  (e),  and  the  like  yogas  (f),  and  that  when  the  effects  of 
planets  occupying  the  kendras  are  described  the  effects  ot 
Dala  yogas  are  also  described  aud  they  produce  no  separate 
effects  (g). 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  explains  the  reason  why 
certain  Astrologers  have  failed  to  treat  of  the  Asraya  aud 
Dala  yogas  in  their  works. 

(a);  (b\  (c).  Vide  stanza  5- 

( d ) .  Vide  stanza  4. 

(e) .  Vide  stanza  10. 

(/).  The  like  yogas : such  as  Sakata  (stanza  4), 
Kedara,  Sula  and  yuga  (all  stanza  10). 

The  Asraya  yogas  may  be  these  aud  may  not  be  these; 
hence  the  author  has  deemed  it  advisable  to  treat  them 
separately.  For  instance,  if  all  planets  occupy  signs  Gemini 
and  Sagittari — 2 of  the  common  signs — when  one  of  these 
is  also  the  rising  sign,  the  yoga  is  known  both  as  Vajra  aud 
Nala;  but  if  any  other  sign  be  the  rising  sign,  it  is  not  a 
Vajra  yoga  but  only  a Nala  yoga. 

(p).  As  regards  the  Dala  yogas,  it  is  said  that  other 
writers  have  described  the  effects  of  benefic  and  of  malefic 
planets  occupying  the  Kendras  and  as  these  are  also  the 
effects  of  the  two  Dala  yogas  they  have  omitted  to  treat  of 
them  separately  ; the  author  treats  of  these  separately  in 
order  to  make  it  known  that  the  two  are  Nabhasa  yogas 
and  as  such  their  effects  are  felt  throughout  life  (vide 
Stanza  19). 


124 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


l_CH.  12. 


4.  If  all  the  planets  occupy  any  two  adjacent  Kendras, 
the  yoga  is  known  as  Gada  (a).  If  they  all  occupy  the 
ascendant  and  the  7th  house,  the  yoga  is  known  as  Sakata. 
If  all  the  planets  occupy  the  4th  and  the  10th  house  the 
yoga  is  known  as  Vihaga.  If  all  the  planets  occupy  the 
ascendant,  the  -r>th  and  9th  houses,  the  yoga  is  known  as 
Sringataka  and  if  all  the  planets  occupy  other  triangular 
houses  the  yoga  is  known  as  Hala  (b)- 

Notes. 

The  author  now  proceeds  to  describe  the  20  Akrit1 
yogas.  5 of  them  are  described  in  this  stanza. 

(a) .  This  may  be  in  4 ways  : All  the  four  planets  may 
occupy  (1),  the  1st  and  the  4th  houses,  (2),  the  4th  and  7th 
houses  (3),  the  7th  and  the  10th  houses  and  (4),  the  10th  and 
the  1st  house.  The  Yavanas  consider  these  4 as  four  dis- 
tinct yogas  and  call  them  respectively  as  Gada,  Sankha, 
Vibhuka  and  Dwaja.  ( Vide  note  at  the  end  of  the  Chapter.) 

(b) .  This  may  be  in  three  ways  : all  the  planets  may 
occupy,  (1),  the  2nd,  6th  and  10th  houses,  (2),  the  od,  7th 
and  11th  houses,  (3)  the  4th,  8th  and  12th  houses. 

•5.  If  the  benefic  planets  occupy  the  ascendant  and 
the  7th  house  while  the  malefic  planets  occupy  the  4th  and 
1 0th  houses  the  Yoga  is  known  as  Vajra  ; and  if  the  reverse 
be  the  case  (a)  the  yoga  is  known  as  Yava.  Again,  if  all  the 
planets  occupy  the  four  Kendras  the  yoga  is  known  as 
Kamala,  and  if  they  occupy  the  four  Panaphara  (6)  or 
the  four  Apoklima  (c)  houses,  the  yoga  is  known  asVapi. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza,  4 more  Akriti  yogas  are  described. 

(a) .  That  is  if  the  malefic  planets  occupy  the  ascen- 
dant and  the  7th  house  while  the  benefic  planets  occupy 
the  4th  and  10th  houses. 

(b) .  That  is  the  2nd,  5th,  8th  and  1 1th  houses. 

(c) .  That  is  the  3rd,  6th,  9th  and  12th  houses. 


BRIHAT  JATAKA- 


125 


€H.  12.] 


6.  I have  described  the  Vajra  and  other  (a)  yogas 
adopting  the  view  ot  former  writers  (5).  How  can  Mercury 
and  Venus  occupy  the  4th  sign  from  the  Sun  (c)? 

Notes. 

(a) .  That  is  the  Yava  yoga  and  the  yoga  mentioned 
in  the  beginning  of  stanza  20,  of  the  Chapter  on  Rajayoga. 

(b) .  Maya,  Yavana,  Garga  and  others. 

(c) .  According  to  Mr.  Sundareswara  Srouty  of  Trivadi, 
the  Vajra  and  Yava  yogas  refer  to  the  positions  of  the  pla- 
nets in  the  Bhava  Chakra  and  not  to  their  positions  in  their 
Rasi  Chakra  as  supposed  by  Varaha  Mihira.  He  is  there- 
fore of  opinion  that  Garga  and  other  writers  have  not  erred 
in  treating  of  these  yogas  as  possible  ones.  This  we  shall 
now  explain  : 

Varaha  Mihira  says  u How  can  Mercury  and  Venus 
occupy  the  4th  sign  from  the  Sun  ” The  word  used  in  the 
text  is  Bhavana  which  means  a sign  of  the  Zodiac  {vide 
stanza  4,  Chapter  I).  If  the  Vajra  and  Yava  yogas  refer  to 
the  positions  of  the  planets  in  tire  Rasi  Chakra  then  Varaha 
Mihira  is  right  in  declaring  that  the  ancient  writers  have 
erred,  but  not  if  the  yogas  refer  to  the  positions  of  the 
planets  in  the  Bhava  Chakra.  Indeed  in  all  yogas  where 
the  positions  of  the  planets  are  stated  with  reference  to 
particular  Bhavas  or  houses  from  the  ascendant,  they  refer  to 
Bhava  Chakra.  As  it  is  somewhat  tedious  to  construct  this 
Chakra  (table),  most  of  the  astrologers  confound  it  with  the 
other  Chakra  and  wrongly  apply  all  yogas  to  the  Rasi 
Chakra.  This  is  one  of  fruitful  sources  of  error  in  astrologi- 
cal predictions ; we  shall  now  explain  what  is  meant  by 
Bhava  Chakra.  For  the  process  of  constructing  it,  the 
reader  is  referred  to  the  Appendix  at  the  end  of  the  Book. 

Both  Rasi  and  Bhava  Chakras  are  divisions  of  the  eclip- 
tic ; the  former  is  division  into  1 2 equal  parts  and  the  latter 


BRIHA.T  JA.TAKA. 


12G 


division  into  12  unequal  parts  depending  upon  the  lati- 
tude of  the  place* 

Bhaskara  Charyar  defines  Bhava  Chakra  as  follows  in 
liis  Gola  Adhyaya  : 


east  is  known  as  eastern  or  rising  Lagna,  and  in  the  west  as 
the  western  or  setting  Lagna,  and  the  points  where  the 
meridian  of  the  place  cuts  the  ecliptic  are  known  as 
Madhya  or  middle  Lignas. — The  10th  and  4th  Lagnas.” 
These  4 points  are  respectively  the  middle  points  of  the 
1st,  7th,  10th  and  4th  Bhavas.  The  two  points  of  trisec- 
tion of  the  distance  between  the  middle  points  of  the  1st 
and  4th  Bhavas  are  respectively  the  middle  points  of  the 
2nd  and  3rd  Bhavas-  The  two  points  of  trisection  of  the 
distance  between  the  middle  points  of  the  4th  and  7th 
Bhavas  are  respectively  the  middle  points  of  the  5th  and 
Gth  Bhavas-  The  two  points  of  trisection  of  the  distance 
between  middle  points  of  the  7th  and  10th  Bhavas  are  the 
middle  points  of  the  8tli  and  9th  Bhavas.  And  the  two 
points  of  trisectiou  of  the  distance  between  the  middle 
points  of  the  10th  and  1st  Bhavas  are  the  middle  points  of 
the  11th  and  12th  Bhavas.  Thus  we  have  obtained  the 
middle  points  of  the  12  Bhavas.  Now  if  we  bisect  these 
twelve  divisions  of  the  ecliptic,  the  space  between  the  two 
points  of  bisection  immediately  on  both  sides  of  the  middle 
point  of  each  Bhava  will  form  a Bhava. 


vj 


“ The  point  where  the  ecliptic  cuts  the  horizon  in  the 


ERIHAT  JATAKA. 


127 


cn.  12.]  

Now  as  the  ecliptic  is  inclined  to  the  equator  by  about 
23  degrees,  the  pole  of  the  ecliptic  will  always  be;  removed 
from  the  pole  of  ihe  equator  by  about  23  degrees  and  will 
describe  round  it  a circle  in  the  course  of  each  day.  So 
that  every  day  the  plane  of  the  eeliptic  meridian  will 
coincide  with  the  plane  of  the  meridian  ot  the  place  twice. 
Now  the  point  where  the  ecliptic  meridian  bisects  the  eclip- 
tic is  known  in  Astronomy  as  the  nona-gesiinal  point-  Call 
this  point  N.  Call  the  point  where  the  meridian  cuts  the 
ecliptic  M and  the  points  where  the  horizon  cuts  the  eclip- 
tic in  the  east  and  west  as  E and  W respectively. 

W E 

M N 


So  that  N E N W = 90  degrees  = 3 signs,  and 
M E is  always  3 bhavas  and  M W is  also  3 bhavas,  M being 
the  middle  point  of  the  10th  Bhava. 

Now  when  the  plane  of  the  ecliptic  meridian  coincides 
with  the  plane  of  the  meridian  of  tne  place,  N coincides 
with  M and  therefore  N M vanishes  and  the  Rasi  and 
Bhava  Chakras  coincide.  Tnis  will  occur  twice  a day. 
At  other  times  they  will  differ.  Now  in  the  higher  lati- 
tude- the  angle  between  the  two  meridian  lines  in'ci  eases. 
V [ide  Spherical  trigonometry).  Therefore  the  distance 
N M also  increases  and  M W accordingly  diminishes  and  it 
may  even  become  less  than  47  and  27  degrees,  and  it,  never- 
theless contains  3 bhavas.  So  that  it  is  possible  for  Mer- 
cury and  Venus  to  occupy  M (the  10th  bhava)  while  the 
Sun  occupies  W (the  7>n  bnava),  i.  e.,  Venus  and  Mercury 
may  occupy  the  4th  bhava  from  the  Sun.  So  that  Garga 
and  oi h<T  writers  have  not  erred  if  the  Vajra  and  Ya.a 
yogas  refer  to  the  positions  of  the  planets  in  the  Bhava 
Cuakra. 


7.  If  all  the  planets  occupy  the  four  signs  (a)  from 
the  ascendant,  the  yoga  is  known  as  Yupa;  if  they 

1G 


128 


BR1HAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  12. 


occupy  the  four  signs  ( b ) from  the  fourth  house,  the  yoga 
is  known  as  Ishu  or  Bana  ; if  they  occupy  the  four  signs  (c) 
from  the  seventh  house,  the  yoga  is  known  as  S'tkti  ; and 
if  they  occupy  the  four  signs  from  the  10th  house  the  yoga 
is  known  as  Danda. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  describes  four  more  Akriti 
yogas. 

(a) .  That  is  the  ascendant  and  the  2nd,  3rd  and  4th 
houses. 

( b ) .  That  is  the  4th,  5th,  Gth  and  7th  houses. 

(c) .  That  is  the  7th,  8th,  9th  and  10th  houses. 

(d) .  That  is  the  10th,  11th  and  12th  houses  and  the 
ascendant. 

8*  If,  as  before,  all  the  planets  occupy  the  seven 
signs  fa)  from  the  ascendant  the  yoga  is  known  as  Nan  ; 
if  they  occupy  the  seven  signs  (b)  from  the  fourth  house, 
the  yoga  is  kn  >wn  as  Kuta  ; if  they  occupy  the  seven 
signs  (c)  from  the  seventh  house,  the  yoga  is  known  as 
Chhutra  ; and  if  they  occupy  the  seven  signs  (rZ)  from  the 
tenth  house  the  yoga  is  known  as  Chapa.  Again  if  all  the 
plauets  occupy  the  seven  houses  beginning  from  a Pau- 
phara  or  Apoklima  house,  the  yoga  is  known  as  Ardha- 
Chandra  (ej. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza,  the  author  describes  5 more  Akriti 
yogas. 

(a) .  That  is,  the  1st,  2nd,  3rd,  4th,  5th,  6th  and  7th 
houses. 

(b) .  That  is  from  the  4th  to  the  l()th  house. 

(c) .  That  is  from  the  7th  to  the  12th  house  and  the 
ascendant. 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


129 


ch.  12.] 


( d ).  That  is  from  the  10th  to  the  12th  house  and 
from  the  ascendant  to  the  4th  house. 


(e)  As  there  are  1 Panaphara  and  4 Apoklima  houses 
the  Ardha-Chnndra  yogas  are  of  8 k.uds  : viz.,  all  the 
planets  may  occupy  (l)from  the  2nd  to  the  8th  house,  (2), 
from  the  3rd  to  the  9th  house,  (3),  from  the  5th  to  the  11th 
house,  (4k  from  the  6ih  to  the  3 2 Lh  house,  (5),  from  the  8th 
to  the'  2nd  house,  (6)  from  the  9th  to  the  3rd  house,  (7), 
from  the  11th  to  the  5th  [house,  (.8;,  from  the  12th  to  the 
6th  house- 


9-  If  the  planets  fa)  occupy  the  six  alternate  signs  (6  ) 
beginning  from  the  2nd  house  the  yoga  is  known  as  Samu- 
dra,  and  if  they  occupy  the  six  alternate  signs  ( c ) begin- 
ning from  ascendant  the  yoga  is  known  as  Chakra.  Thus 
the  Akrita  yogas  have  been  described  briefly. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  describes  the  remaining  2 
(out  of  20)  Akriti  yogas- 

(a).  All  the  seven  planets. 

(5).  That  is,  the  2nd,  4th,  6th,  8th,  10th  and  12th 
houses- 


(c)  That»is  the  1st,  3rd,  5th,  7th,  9th  and  1 1th  houses- 

10.  If  all  the  planets  occupy  any  seven  signs  the  yoga 
is  known  as  Vallaki  ; if  they  occupy  any  six  signs,  the  yoga 
is  known  as  Damini  ; if  they  occupy  auy  five  signs  it  is 
known  as  Pasa;  if  any  four  signs,  it  is  known  as  Kedara  ; 
if  any  three  signs  it  is  known  as  Sula  ,•  if  any  two  signs,  it 
is  known  as  yuga  ; ;md  if  they  occupy  a single  sign,  the  yoga 
is  known  as  Gola.  When  anv  of  the.'O  Sankhva  yogas  are 
at  the  same  time  any  other  Nablasa  yogas,  they  are  to  be 
treated  as  belonging  to  the  latter  class  (a). 


130 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[CH-  12. 


Notes. 

(a).  For  instance  the  Gada,  Sakata  and  Vihaga  yogas 
described  in  stanza  4 are  to  be  treated  only  as  such  and  not 
as  Yuga  yogas  described  in  this  stanza ; the  Sringataka  and 
Hala  yogas  described  in  sranza  4 are  to  be  treated  only  as 
sucli  and  not  as  Sula  yogas  described  in  this  stanza.  Again, 
the  Vajra,  Yava,  Kainala  and  Vapi  yogas  described  iu 
stanza  5 as  well  as  the  Yupa,  Ishu,  Sakti  and  Danda  3rogas 
described  in  stanza  7 shall  not  be  confounded  with  the 
Kadara  yogas  described  in  this  stanza.  And  so  on. 

11.  A person  born  under  a Rijju  yoga  will  be  jealous 
of  the  wealth  of  others,  will  proceed  to  foreign  lands  and 
will  be  fond  of  travelling;  a person  bora  under  a Musala 
yoga  will  be  respectable,  rich,  and  will  engage  in  various 
undertakings  ; and  a person  bom  under  a Nala  yoga  will 
be  of  defective  organs,  settled  views,  rich  and  skilled  in 
work.  Again,  a person  born  under  a Srik  yoga  will  live  in 
comfort  and  luxury,  and  one  born  under  a Sarpa  yoga,  will 
be  miserable  in  many  ways. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza,  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  the 
three  Asraya  yogas  and  of  the  two  Dala  yogas. 

12.  If  the  Asraya  yogas  partake  at  the  same  time  of 
the  character  of  other  yogas  they  should  be  treated  as  the 
latter;  otherwise  they  produce  the  effects  described  for 
them. 

Notes. 

This  subject  has  already  been  discussed  in  stanza  3. 
For  instance,  if  a Rajju  yogi  or  a Musala  yoga  or  a Nala 
yoga  partake  of  the  nature  of  a Karnala  yoga  (stanza  5)  it 
should  be  treated  as  the  latter. 

13.  A person  born  under  a Gada  yoga  will  perform 
sacrificial  rites,  will  be  rich,  and  will  ever  be  engaged  in  the 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


133 


CH. 


12.] 


acquisition  of  wealth;  a person  born  under  a Sakata  3’Oga 
will  live  by  means  of  carts,  will  be  afflicted  with  diseases, 
and  will  have  a mean  wife;  a person  born  under  a Vihaga 
yoga  will  live  by  carrying  messages,  will  be  fond  of  travels, 
and  will  cause  quarrels  ; a person  born  under  a Sringataka 
yoga  will  be  happy  in  the  latter  end  of  life  (a)  and  a person 
born  under  a Hala  yoga  will  till  lands. 


Notes. 


In  this  stanza  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  5 
Akriti  yogas. 

(a).  The  word  in  the  text  is  a Chira  Sukhi.”  This  is 
interpreted  b}’’  some  to  mean  “ happy  for  a long  time.” 
This  interpretation  is  opposed  to  Gfarga. 

14.  A person  born  under  a Vajra  yoga  will  be  happy 
both  at  the  beginning  and  end  of  life,  will  be  a general 
favorite  and  will  be  bold  in  fight.  A persou  born  in  a Yava 
yoga  will  be  powerful,  aud  will  be  happy  at  the  middle  of 
ife.  A person  born  under  a Padma  (Karnala)  yoga  will  be 
of  great  renown,  will  be  greatly  happy  and  possessed  of 
many  attainments.  A person  born  under  a Vapi  yoga  will 
live  in  poor  comfort  for  a long  time,  will  bury  his  wealth 
under  ground  and  will  be  a miser. 


Notes. 

In  this  stanza,  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  4 
more  Akriti  yogas. 

15.  A person  born  under  a Yupayoga  will  be  liberal  in 
gift  and  will  perform  high  sacrificial  rights.  A person 
bo  n under  a Bana  (Isliu)  yoga  will  indulge  in  torture,  will 
be  a jailor  and  will  make  arrows.  A person  born  under  a 
Sikti  yoga  will  engage  in  deeds  disgraceful  to  his  rank  in 
life,  will  not  be  skilled  in  work,  and  will  be  without  money 
and  comfort.  A person  born  under  a Danda  yoga  will  be 


1"2 


BIvIHAT  JATAKA- 


[CH.  12. 


separated  from  persons  of  It  is  affection  (a)  and  will  earn  his 
livelihood  by  the  lowest  of  means,  viz.,  servitude. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  4 
more  Akriti  yogas. 

(a).  Sons  aod  the  like. 

10.  A person  born  under  a Nau  yoga  will  be  of  wide- 
spread fame,  happy  only  now  and  then,  and  will  be  a miser. 
A person  born  under  a Kura  yoga  will  indulge  in  lies,  and 
will  be  a jailor.  A person  born  under  a Chhatra  yoga  will 
make  his  people  happy  and  will  live  in  comfort  in  the  latter 
end  of  life  A person  born  under  a Chapa  yoga  will  delight 
in  fight  aud  will  live  in  comfort  both  at  the  beginning  and 
end  of  life. 

Notes, 

The  effects  of  4 more  Akriti  yogas  are  described  in  this 
stanza. 

17-  A person  bora  under  an  Ardha-Chandra  yoga  will 
be  a general  favorite,  of  agreeable  person  and  be  respected 
by  all.  A person  born  under  a Samudra  yoga  will  be  as 
prosperous  as  a king  and  will  live  in  comfort.  A person 
bora  under  a Chakra  yoga  will  have  his  feet  illumined  by 
the  lustre  of  the  gems  in  the  crowns  of  kings  falling  pros, 
trate  before  him  by  way  of  respect  and  submission  (a).  A 
person  born  in  a Yallaki  yoga  will  be  skilled  in  work  and 
will  delight  in  music  and  dance. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  the 
three  Akriti  yogas  and  of  the  first  Sankhya  yoga. 

(a).  In  other  words  he  will  become  an  emperor  or 
king  of  kings. 

18.  A person  bora  under  a Domini  yoga  will  be  liberal 
in  gift,  will  delight  in  helping  others  and  will  possess  many 
cows.  A person  boru  in  a Pasa  yoga  will,  with  his  servants 


133 


CH.  12.]  ERIHAT  JATAKA. 

and  kinsmen,  earn  wealth  hy  proper  means.  A person  born 
under  a Kedara  yoga  will  till  lands,  and  by  doing  good  deeds, 
will  be  useful  to  others.  A person  born  under  a Sula  yoga 
will  be  bold  in  fight,  will  receive  blows  and  will  be  fond  of 
mouey  (a)  but  will  be  poor. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  author  describes  the  effects  of  t more 
Sankhya  yogas. 

(a).  Will  bo  fond  of  torture  ” according  to  some 
other  reading. 

19.  A person  born  under  a Yuga  yoga  will  be  poor  and 
will  act  in  contravention  of  Vedic  rules.  A person  born 
under  a Gola  yoga  will  be  poor,  dirty,  ignorant,  addicted  to 
low  deeds,  unskilled  in  work,  and  will  ever  be  wandering 
from  place  to  place  (a).  Thus  have  been  been  described 
the  several  Nabbasa  yogas  with  their  effects.  These  effects 
are  felt  throughout  a man’s  life. 

Notes. 

In  this  stanza  the  effects  of  the  remaining  two  Sankhya 
yogas  are  described. 

(a) .  For  bare  subsistence  according  to  commentator. 

( b ) .  Except  in  the  case  of  Vajra  and  other  yogas  (vide 
stanza  14)  whose  effects  will  be  felt,  as  stated,  in  particular 
periods  of  a person’s  life.  So  that  wherever  no  periods 
are  mentioned  the  effects  will  be  felt  throughout  life. 


Notes: — Dala  Yogas  will  coincide  neither  with  Asraya 
yogas  nor  with  Akriti  yogas.  They  might  coincide  with 
Sankhyayogas — with  the  Vailaki,  the  Dimini,  the  Pasa,  or 
the  Kedara  yogas,  in  which  case  the  yogas  are  to  be  treited 
as  only  Dala  yogas  and  not  as  S mkhya  yogas.  (Fide 
stanza  10).  Again,  according  to  stanza  12  if  the  Astaya 
yogas  coincide  with  other  yogas,  they  cease  to  be  Asraya 


134 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  12. 


yogas  and  according  to  stanza  10  if  the  Sankhya  yogas 
coincide  with  other  yogas,  they  cease  to  be  Sankhya  yogas. 
Now  suppose  Asraya  and  Sankhya  yogas  to  coincide  with 
ench  other.  Are  they  to  be  treated  ns  the  former  or  as  the 
Latter?  The  comnientaror  says  that  if  the  coincidence 
refers  to  the  Kedara,  Sula,  and  Yuga  yogas  the  yogas  are 
to  be  treated  as  Asraya  yogas  only;  but  if  it  refer  to  the 
Gol  i yoga,  it  is  to  be  treated  as  such  and  not  as  an  Asrya 
yoga — otherwise  there  will  be  no  room  for  Gola  yoga  at  all* 

We  shall  now  explain  bow  the  Yavanas  obtain  1&00 
Nabhasa  yogas.  As  stated  in  stanza  3,  the  Yavanas  do  not 
treat  of  the  three  Asraya  yogas  and  the  two  Dala  yogas. 
They  treat  of  23  Akriti  jTogas  and  127  Sankhya  yogas  or 
l'O  yogas  in  all  for  a Lagoa  ; there  being  12  Lagnas,  the 
number  of  Nabhasa  yogas  treated  of  by  the  Yavanas  is 
12X  150  = 1800. 


We  shall  explain  these  more  fully.  As  explained  in 
note  (a)  to  stanza  4,  the  Gada  yoga  of  the  author  is  treated 
of  as  4 distinct  yogas  by  the  Havanas.  Adding  these  to  the 
remaining  19  Akriti  yogas,  we  get  23  Akriti  yogas  as 
treated  of  by  the- Yavanas- 

Again,  the  seven  Sankhya  yogas  of  the  author  are  split 
into  127  Sankhya  yogas  (for  a L <gna)  by  the  Yavanas  as 
follows  : The  first  Sankhya  yoga  treated  of  by  Yaraha 

Mihira  is  known  as  Vallaki  yoga  according  to  wnich  the 
7 planets  might  occupy  any  seven  signs.  This  may  be 
in  many  ways  ; but  the  Yavanas  select  only  a few  : as  each 
of  the  seven  planets  might  occupy  the  Lagna  the  number 
of  yogas  under  this  division  is  7.  Again  the  2nd  Sankhya 
yoga  treated  of  by  the  author  is  one  according  to  which 
the  7 planets  are  said  to  occupy  any  six  signs.  This  may  he 
in  many  ways;  but  the  Y ivanas  select  the  following  few  ; 
of  the  7 planets  5 may  occupy  5 houses  and  two  more  may 


CH.  13.] 


BRIHAT  J AT  AKA. 


Jo5 

occupy  the  Lagna.  These  two  may  be  any  two  of  the 
seven  planets.  The  number  of  yogas  under  this  head  will 
be  the  number  of  combinations  of  7 things  taken 
together  =]  X-|=21. 

Again,  the  3rd  Sankhya  yoga  is  one  in  which  the  seven 
planets  occupy  5 houses.  This  may  be  in  many  ways  3 but. 
the  following  are  selected : — 4 planets  occupying  4 houses 
and  3 more  occupying  the  Lagna.  These  three  may  be 
any  three  out  of  the  7 planets-  The  number  of  cases 
under  this  head  is  the  number  of  combinations  of  7 things 
taken  3 together  =’ x£xa=35. 

The  next  Sankhya  yoga  of  Varaha  Mihira  is  similarly 
split  by  the  Yavanas  into  r X|-X£X  |-=35,  and  the  next  into 

X^x|x^=  21,  and  the  next  into  ^X|X^X|-X  j-X|-=7, 
and  the  last  i n to  {-  x £x~x£ X|x|Xy=l.  So  that  the  seven 
Sankhya  yogas  are  split  into  7 + 21  -f35  + 35+ 21  + 7+ 1 = 
127.  These  added  to  23  Akriti  yogas  give  us  150  yogas 
for  a Lagna  or  1800  yogas  for  the  12  Lagnas. 

To  find  the  number  of  combinations  of  n things  taken 
r at  a time,  the  reader  is  referred  to  the  Lilavati  of  Bhas- 
kara  Cbaryav  or  to  the  Chhandas  Sutra  of  Pingala  or  to 
Chapter  77,  stanza  22  (notes)  of  the  English  Translation  of 
Brihat  Samhita  or  to  the  notes  to  stanza  4 of  the  next 
Chapter  of  this  Book. 


CHAPTER  Xlir. 

On  Chandra  (Lunar)  Yogas. 

1.  The  conduct,  wealth,  knowledge,  intelligence  an  d 
skill  of  a person  will  be  poor,  moderate  or  excellent  accord- 
ing as  the  Moon  occupies  the  Kendra,  the  Panaphara  or 
the  Apoklima  houses  from  the  Sun  (a),  and  a person  will  be 
rich  and  will  live  in  comfort  if  the  Moon  occupy  his  own 
Navamsa  or  an  Atimitra  Navauisa  (6),  provided  she  is 

17 


136  BRIHA.T  JATAKA.  [CfT.  13. 

aspected  by  Jupiter  if  the  birth  occur  by  day,  and  by 
Venus  if  the  birth  occur  by  night. 

Notes- 

(a).  At  the  time  of  birth.  In  other  words,  a person 
wilt  have  very  little  of  these  qualities  if  the  Moon  occupy 
either  the  sigu  occupied  by  the  Sun  or  the  4th,  7th  or  10th 
sign  from  it.  He  will  have  these  qualities  in  a moderate 
degree  if  the  Moon  occupy  the  2nd,  nth,  8th  or  11th  sign 
from  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun  ; and  he  will  have  these 
qualities  in  a large  measure,  if  the  Moon  occupy  the  3rd, 
0th,  9th  or  l2th  sign  from  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun. 

(&).  An  Atimitra  Navamsa  is  a Navamsa  of  an 
Atimitra  or  a very  friendly  planet. 

2.  If  the  benefic  planets  fa)  occupy  the  6th,  7th  and 
8th  houses  from  the  Moon,  the  yoga  is  known  as  Adhi- 
yoga  (h).  A person  born  in  the  yoga  will  become  a gene- 
ral, a minister  or  a king  (c)  and  will  be  in  the  enjoyment  of 
great  pleasures  and  wealth  with  subdued  enemies  and  long 
life  and  free  from  diseases  and  fear. 

(a) .  These,  are  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus. 

(b) .  The  yoga  is  of  7 sorts  according  as  the  benefic 
planets  occupy  one  or  more  of  the  three  houses  : (1),  They 
might  occupy  all  the  three  houses;  (2),  or  the  6th  and  7th 
houses  ; (3)  or  the  6th  and  8th;  (*)  the  7th  and  8th,  (5), 
the  6th  ; (6)  the  7th  ; (7),  the  8th  houses  from  the  Moon. 

( c ) .  According  as  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus  are 
weak,  of  moderate  power,  or  of  very  great  power  according 
to  Badarayana. 

In  the  Astrological  work  known  as  Saravali,  the  Adhi 
yoga  is  classed  with  Raja  yoga  wheu  the  planets  Mercury, 
Jupiter  and  Venus  are  not  Astangata  planets,  nor  aspected 
by  malefic  planets  Alaudavya  is  of  the  same  opinion. 


CH.  13.] 


BB1HAT  JATAKA. 


137 


3-  Excepting  the  Sun  if  the  other  planets  occupy  tho 
2nd,  the  12th,  or  both  the  2nd  and  the  12th  houses  from 
the  Moon,  the  yoga  is  respectively  known  as  Sunapha, 
Annpha  or  Durudhura  ; otherwise  («),  the  yoga  is  known 
as  Kemadruma  by  numerous  writers.  According  to  some(&), 
if  the  Moon  occupy  the  Kendra  house  from  the  ascen- 
dant or  if  the  Moon  be  accompanied  by  a planet,  the  yoga 
ceases  to  be  a Kemadruma  yoga.  According  to  others  (c) 
the  three  yogas,  Sunapha,  Annpha  and  Durudhura  are  re- 
ferred to  the  Kendra  houses  from  the  Moon  ( d )>  while  again 
some  others  (e)  refer  the  three  yogas  to  the  houses  on  both 
sides  of  the  sign  the  Navamsa  of  which  the  Moon  occu- 
pies  (f).  But  these  views  are  not  considered  as  authori- 
tative. 

Notes. 

» t 

(а) .  Otherwise  : i.  e.,  if  the  2nd,  the  12th,  or  both  the 
2nd  and  the  12th  houses  from  the  Moon  be  not  occupied  by 
planets — the  Snn  excepted. 

(б) .  Garga  and  Parasara. 

(c) .  Srutakeerti  and  others. 

(d) .  That  is,  if  the  planets  excepting  the  Sun  occupy 
the  4th  house  from  the  Moon,  the  yoga  is  known  as  Suua- 
pha ; if  they  occupy  the  10th  house  from  the  Moon,  the 
yoga  is  known  as  Anapha,  and  if  they  occupy  both  the  4th 
and  the  10th  house  from  the  Moon,  it  is  known  as  Duru- 
dhura and  if  the  4th  and  10th  houses  from  the  Moon  be  not 
occupied  by  planets,  the  yoga  is  known  an  Kemadruma. 

(e  . Jeevasarma. 

if).  Suppose  the  Moon  to  occupy  the  Navamsa  of 
Sagittari  in  sign  Aries.  Now  if  the  planets,  excepting 
the  Sun  and  the  Moon  occupy  the  2nd,  or  the  12th  or  both 
the  2nd  and  the  J 2th  houses  from  sign  Sagittari  the  yoga 
is  respectively  known  as  Sunapha,  Anapha  and  Durudhura. 


BR1HAT  JATAKA. 


138 


[CE.  13. 


but  if  these  two  houses  be  not  so  occupied  the  yoga  is 
known  as  Kemadruma. 

4.  The  Sunapha  and  the  Anapka  yogas  are  each  of 
thirty-one  sorts,  and  the  Durudhura  yogas  are  of  one  hun- 
dred and  eighty  sorts,  as  will  be  found  to  be  the  case  by 
lorming  series  as  described  in  the  rule  for  finding  the  num- 
ber of  combinations  of  a given  number  of  things. 

Notes. 

The  rule  for  finding  the  number  of  combinations  of  a 
given  number  of  things  is  only  hinted  at  in  the  text,  but 
not  fully  given.  It  is  quoted  in  stanza  22  of  Chapter  70  of 
the  Brihat  Samhitta-  The  rule  is  : — 

“ Beginning  from  unity,  form  a series  by  adding  to- 
gether the  first  figure  with  the  next  and  the  sum  with  the 
next  figure  and  so  on  omitting  only  the  last.  From  the 
series  thus  formed,  form  a fresh  series  similarly,  beginning 
from  unity,  and  so  on.  The  last  terms  of  the  several  series 
will  give  the  number  of  combinations  required.” 

Suppose  there  to  be  7 substances.  The  figures  1,  2,  S} 
4,  5,  G,  7,  will  form  the  first  series.  Obtain  the  2nd  series 
as  follows:  T -f-  2 = 3 ; 3+3  = 6 ; 6 + 4=10;  10+5=15; 
15  +6=21.  The  2nd  series  therefore  is  1,  3,  6,  10,  15,  21- 
Obtain  the  3rd  series  as  follows:  1 + 3=4;  4 + 6=10; 
10+10=20;  20  + 15—35.  The  3rd  series  therefore  is  1,4.10, 

20,  35.  Obtain  the  4th  series  as  follows  : 1+4=5;  5 + 10 

= 15;  15+20=35.  The  4th  series  therefore  is  1,5,15, 
35.  Obtain  the  5th  series  as  follows:  1+5=6.  6 + 15= 

21.  The  5th  series  therefore  is  1,  6,  21.  Obtain  the  6th 
series  as  follows  : 1+6=7-  The  Cth  series  therefore  is  1 , 
7-  The  seventh  series  is  1.  The  last  terms  of  the  seven 
series  are,  7,  21,  35,  35,  21,  7}  1.  These  are  respectively 
the  number  of  combinations  of  seven  things  taken  1,  2,  3, 
4,  5,  6 and  7 at  a time.  Bhaskara  Chariar  gives  a simpler 
process  in  his  Lilavati — a work  on  Arithmetic.  He  says' 


en.  13.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


139 


Form  fractions  with  the  numbers  beginning  from  the 
last  number  to  unity  for  numerators  ami  with  the  numbers 
beginning  from  unity  to  the  last  number  for  denominators 
respectively.  The  number  of  combinations  taken  1,  9, 
3,  4,  &c.,  at  a time  will  respectively  be  the  first  fraction, 
the  product  of  1st  two  fractions,  of  the  first  three  fractions 
or  of  the  1st  four  fractions,  &c.  Suppose,  for  instance,  the 
number  of  things  to  be  7 • Then  the  fractions  ars  T,  -j,  -j, 
± a 2 i The  number  of  combinations  of  7 things  taken 
one  at  a time=J-— 7 ; Taken  two  at  a time=1-X  ^=21,  taken 
3 at  a time= y X *X]X  =35  ; taken  4 at  a time=xX|  X ^ 4 

=35;  taken  5 at  a time={ x£x|,x|x£=2l  ; taken  G at  a 
time  =|xf  x|x£x£x§=7  ; and  taken  7 at  a time 
= rX|X|xfX  f x|Xy  = ]. 

Now  in  the  Sunapha  or  Anapha  yogas  the  2nd  or  the 
12th  house  from  the  Moon  may  be  occupied  by  the  five 
planets  from  Mars  either  singly  or  two  at  a time  or  three  or 
four  or  all  at  a time.  The  number  required  is  the  number 
of  combinations  of  five  things  taken  1,  2,  3,  4 and  5 together 
at  a time.  This  is  to  be  deduced  from  the  following  : |, 

The  number  will  be  found  to  be  5+10  + 10+5+1 

=31. 

Take  the  casein  which  the  2nd  house  from  the  Moon 
is  occupied  by  a single  planet ; while  it  does  so,  the 
remaining  four  planets  may  occupy  the  12th  house  from  the 

1 

Moon  1,  2,  3 and  4 at  a time.  The  number  of  these  will  be 
the  sum  of  the  number  of  combinations  of  four  things 
taken  1,  2,  3 and  4 together.  This  will  be  found  to  be  4-rG 
+ 4-f  1 = 15.  So  that  for  one  of  the  five  Sunapha  yogas  we 
get  15  Dnrudhura  yogas.  The  five  Sunapha  yogas  of  one 
planet  will  therefore  give  us  5x15=75  Durudhura  yogas. 
Take  one  of  the  10  Sunapha  yogas  of  two  planets  from 
Mars  to  Saturn  ; the  remaining  3 planets  mny  occupy  the 
12th  house  from  the  Moon,  1,  2 and  3 at  a time.  The  num- 


no 


BRJIIAT  JaTAKA. 


fen.  13. 


her  required  is  the  sum  of  the  number  of  combinations  of 
three  things  taken  1,  2 and  3 at  a time.  This  will  be  found 
to  be  3 -f  3 -(-1=7.  Combining  these  with  the  10  Sunapha 
yogas  of  2 planets  we  shall  get  10 X 7 = 70  Durudhura  yogas. 
Similarly  the  10  Sunapha  yogas  of  three  planets  will  give 
10x3=30  Durudhura  yogas;  and  the  five  Sunapha  yogas 
of  4 planets  will  give  us  5x1=5  Durudhara  yogas.  So 
that  the  number  of  possible  Durudhura  yogas=75470  4-rO 
4-5  = 180. 

5.  A person  born  in  a Sunapha  yoga  will  be  possessed 
of  self-acquired  property,  will  be  a king  or  will  resemble 
a king,  and  will  be  a man  of  intelligence,  wealth  and 
renown. 

A person  born  in  an  Anapha  yoga  will  be  a man  of 
influence  and  authority,  will  be  free  from  diseases,  will 
have  a,  coutrol  over  bis  passions,  will  be  of  great  renown* 
will  be  in  the  enjoymeut  of  all  manner  of  pleasures, i will 
wear  neat  dress  and  will  be  free  from  grief. 

6.  A person  born  in  a Durudhura  yoga  will  be  in 
the  enjoyment  of  all  manner  of  pleasures,  will  be  possessed 
of  wealth  and  chariot,  will  be  liberal  in  his  gift  and  will 
have  good  servants. 

A person  brum  in  a Kemadruma  yogi,  though  he  may 
belong  tea  king’s  family,  will  be  dirty,  afflicted  with  grief, 
will  do  deeds  not  suited  to  his  rank  in  life,  will  be  poor, 
will  serve  under  others  and  will  be  wicked. 

7.  If  the  yoga  planet  be  Mars,  the  person  will  be 
active,  fond  of  fight,  and  wealthy,  and  will  engage  in 
deeds  without  thought.  If  the  yoga  planet  be  Mercury,  the 
person  will  be  skilled  iu  work,  will  be  of  good  speech  and 
learned  in  the  arts  (a).  If  the  yoga  planet  be  Jupiter,  a 

person  wdl  be  wealthy  and  virtuous,  will  live  for  ever  in 
comfort  and  will  he  respected  by  the  king.  If  the  yoga 


CH.  13.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  l4i 

planet  be  Venus,  a person  will  be  afflicted  with  sexual  pas- 
sion, will  be  very  wealthy  and  in  the  enjoyment  of  all  man- 
ner of  pleasures. 

Notes. 

(a).  In  music,  dance,  painting?  &c. 

8.  If  the  yoga  planet  be  Saturn,  a person  will  enjoy 
the  wealth,  property  and  servants  of  others,  will  engage  in 
various  deeds  and  will  be  the  chief  of  parties  of  men  (a). 
It  the  birth  occur  by  day,  the  Moon  will  bring  on  misery 
if  she  occupy  the  visible  hemisphere,  and  will  bring  on. 
prosperity  if  she  occupy  the  invisible  hemisphere;  if  other- 
wise, the  results  will  be  the  reverse  of  these  (6). 

Notes. 

(а) .  If  two  or  more  planets  be  yoga  planets  the 
effects  described  for  them  all  will  come  to  pass. 

(б) .  That  is,  if  the  birth  occur  by  night,  the  Moon 
will  bring  on  misery  if  she  occupy  the  invisible  hemisphere 
and  prosperity  if  she  occupy  the  visible  hemisphere. 

9.  If  all  the  benefio  planets  (a)  occupy  the  Upachaya 
places  (6)  from  the  ascendant  at  the  time  of  birth,  a person 
will  be  very  rich  and  if  they  occupy  the  Upachaya  places 
from  the  Moon,  he  will  be  moderately  rich.  If  two  of  the 
planets  occupy  the  Upachaya  places  a person  will  be 
moderately  wealthy  and  if  one  of  them  occupy  such  places 
he  will  possess  small  wealth  (c).  Even  if  the  person  be 
born  in  other  malefic  Yogas  ( d ) the  present  yoga  will  take 
effect  to  their  exclusion  (e). 

Notes. 

(a) .  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus. 

( b ) .  The  *jrd,  6th,  iOlli  aud  11th  houses  from  the 
ascendant. 

(c) .  Or  poor.  If  benefic  planets  occupy  the  Upachaya 
places  both  from  the  ascendant  and  from  the  Moou  a person 
will  be  exceedingly  rich. 


142 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[ch  14. 


(d) .  Such  as  Kemadruma  yoga. 

(e) .  That  is,  suppose  a person  to  be  born  in  a*Kema- 
druma  }roga  and  suppose  the  benetic  planets  to  occupy  the 
Upachaya  places  from  the  ascendant  or  the  Moon  or  both, 
the  person  will  become  rich  and  not  poor. 

CHAPTER  XIV. 

On  Double  Planetary  Yogas. 

1.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Sun  and  the  Moon  occu- 
py together  a sign  of  the  Zodiac,  the  person  born  will  be  a 
maker  of  lire  engines  ( a ) and  will  work  in  stones;  if  the 
Sun  and  Mars  occupy  a sign  together,  the  person  will  be 
addicted  to  sinful  deeds;  if  the  Sun  and  Mercury  occupy  a 
sign  together,  the  person  will  be  skilled  in  work,  will  bo 
intelligent  and  famous,  and  will  live  in  comfort;  if  the  Sun 
and  Jupiter  occupy  a sign  together,  the  person  will  be 
cruel  and  will  work  for  other  men  ; if  the  Sun  and  .Venus  oc- 
cupy a sign  together  the  person  will  gain  money  by 
engaging  in  public  sports  and  by  the  use  of  weapons,  and  if 
the  Sun  and  Saturn  occupy  a sign  together,  the  person 
will  be  skilled  in  metal  work  and  in  earthen-ware. 

Notes. 

(a).  Engines  of  destruction  according  to  Commentator. 

‘2.  If  the  double  planets  occupying  together  a sign  of 
the  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be  the  Moon  and  Mars  the 
person  will  earn  money  by  the  sale  of  works  of  art,  of 
women,  of  liquor,  and  of  pots  and  will  give  trouble  to  his 
mother;  if  they  be  the  Moon  and  Mercury,  the  person  will 
be  of  sweet  speech,  skilled  in  literary  interpretation  and 
will  become  popular  and  famous  ; if  they  be  the  Moon  and 
Jupiter,  the  person  will  defeat  his  enemies,  will  be  an  im- 
portant person  in  his  family,  will  not  be  of  firm  views  and 
will  be  greatly  rich;  if  they  be  the  Moon  and^ Venus,  the 


BRUT  AT  JATAKA. 


€51.  l4] 


14  3 


person  will  be  skilled  in  cloth  work  (a)  ; if  they  be  the  Moon 
and  Saturn,  the  person  will  be  the  son  of  a re-married 
woman  (6). 

Notes 

(a).  In  weaving,  stitching,  dyeing,  buying  and  sellirtg 
cloths. 


( b ).  The  Sanscrit  term  for  the  woman  is  Punarbhu. 
She  is  said  to  be  a woman,  who,  out  of  sexual  passion, 
quits  her  husband  and  marries  a person  of  her  owh  caste 
whether  or  not  she  may  have  joined  in  sexual  union. 

3.  If  tho  double  planets  occupying  together  a sign  of 
the  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be  Mars  and  Mercury,  the 
person  will  deal  in  roots  and  the  like,  in  oil,  in  works  of  art 
and  will  be  skilled  in  duels  ; if  they  be  Mars  and  Jupiter, 
the  person  will  be  the  ehief  of  a town  or  a king,  will 
acquire  money  or  will  be  a Brahmin  ; if  they  be  Mars  and 
Venus,  the  person  will  protect  cows,  will  engage  in  duels, 
will  be  skilled  in  work,  will  indulge  in  sexual  union  with 
the  wives  of  other  men  and  will  be  a gambler  ; if  they  be 
Mars  and  Saturn,  the  person  will  be  afflicted  with  grief, 
will  be  a liar,  and  will  be  despised  by  others. 

4.  If  the  d ouble  planets  occupying  together  a sign  of 
the  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be  Mercury  and  Jupiter,  the 
person  will  be  skilled  in  duels,  will  be  fond  of  music  and 
learned  in  dance  ; if  they  be  Mercury  and  Venus  the  person 
will  be  one  of  good  speech,  and  will  be  a ruler  over  countries 
and  over  men  ; if  they  be  Mercury  and  Saturn,  the  person 
will  be  skilled  in  deceiving  others,  and  will  reject  the 
advice  of  his  preceptor  ; if  they  be  Jupiter  and  Venus,  the 
person  will  be  learned  in  some  respectable  department  of 
knowledge,  will  possess  wealth,  a wife  and  various  virtues  ; 
if  they  be  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  the  person  will  be  a barber, 
a potman  or  a cook. 


19 


BUI  HAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  14. 


144 


5.  If  the  double  planets  occupying  together  a sign  of 
the  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be  Venus  and  Saturn,  the 
person  will  be  short-sighted,  will  have  an  increase  of  wealth 
through  the  friendship  of  a young  woman,  and  \y  ill  be  skilled 
in  writing  and  painting.  In  the  case  of  other  planetary 
yogas,  (a)  the  effects  described  shall  be  determined  and 
applied. 

Notes. 

fa).  That  is,  if  three  or  more  planets  occupy  together 
a sign  of  the  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  yoga  shall 
first  be  split  into  a number  of  double  planetary  yogas  and 
the  effects  described  in  this  Chapter  shall  then  be  applied. 
e.g.  Suppose  the  four  planets,  the  Sun,  Moon,  Mars  and 
Mercury  to  occupy  together  a single  sign.  This  yoga  can 
be  split  into  six  double  planetary  yogas  as  follows  : ( 1),  The 
Sun  and  the  Moon,  (2),  the  Sun  and  Mars,  (3),  the  Sun  and 
Mercury,  (4),  the  Moou  and  Mars,  (5),  the  Moon  and 
Mercury,  (G),  Mars  and  Mercury.  The  effects  described  for 
each  shall  be  determined  and  applied. 

Notes. — The  following  yogas  referring  to  the  several 
groups  of  2,  3,  4,  5 and  G planets  occupying  together  a 
single  sign  of  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  are  taken  with 
their  effects  from  a work  known  as  Jataka  Parijala. 

I — Of  two  Planets. 

If  the  yoga  planets  occupying  a single  sign  be 

(1) .  The  Sun  and  the  Moon,  the  person  will  be  subject 
to  the  influence  of  women,  will  be  skilled  in  work,  and  will 
be  of  bright  appearance. 

(2) .  The  Sun  and  Mars,  he  will  he  a strong  man,  a 
liar  aad  a sinuer. 

(3) .  The  Sun  and  Mercury,  he  will  he  learned,  beau- 
tiful^ strong  and  of  fixed  views- 


BRIEAT  J AT  AKA. 


145 


[on.  14 


(4) .  The  Sun  and  Jupiter,  ho  will  be  earnest  in  work, 
will  be  a favorite  with  the  king  and  rich. 

(5) .  The  Sun  and  Venus,  he  will  acquire  wealth 
through  women,  will  have  kinsmen  and  enemies  and  will  be 
intelligent. 

(0).  The  Sun  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  of  dull  under- 
standing and  subject  to  his  enemies. 

(7) .  Moon  and  Mars,  he  will  be  bold  and  born  of  a 
high  family  j will  be  virtuous,  wealthy  and  possessed  of 
good  qualities. 

(8) .  Moon  and  Mercury,  he  will  bo  charitable,  learned 
in  sciences,  and  possessed  of  excellent  qualities. 

(9) .  Moon  and  Jupiter,  he  will  protect  good  and  pious 
men  and  will  be  very  intelligent. 

(10) .  Moon  and  Venus,  he  will  be  a sinner  and  a 
Merchant. 


(11) .  Moon  and  Saturn,  he  will  possess  a bad  wife, 
will  ill-treat  his  father  and  will  be  poor. 

(12) .  Mars  ond  Mercury,  he  will  be  of  good  speech 
and  learned  in  medicine,  arts  and  sciences. 

(13) .  Mars  and  Jupiter,  he  will  be  of  strong  sexual 
passion,  will  possess  excellent  qualities  and  will  be  a mathe- 
matician. 


(14).  Mars  and  Venus,  he  will  be  fond  of  fight  and  of 
the  world,  and  will  be  deceitful. 


(15) ,  Mars  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  litigious,  fond  of 
music  and  of  a dull  understanding. 

(16) .  Mercury  and  Jupiter,  he  will  be  of  good  speech, 
beautiful  and  very  rich. 

(17) .  Mercury  and  Venus,  he  will  be  a ruler  over 
countries  aud  over  men. 


I4G  BPJ11AT  JATAKA.  [C0.  l4. 

(18) .  Mercury  and  Saturn,  lie  will  be  deceitful,  and 
will  not  be  open  to  the  advice  of  his  preceptor- 

(19) .  Jupiter  and  Venus,  he  will  he  of  bright  appear- 
ance, a favorite  with  the  king,  will  be  very  intelligent  and 
skilled  in  work. 

(20\  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  a sculptor  and 
will  protect  cows- 

(21)<  Venus  and  Saturn,  will  be  skilled  in  duels. 


II.— OP  THltEE  PLANETS. 

Again,  if  the  Yoga  planets  occupying  a single  sign  be 

(1) .  The  Sun,  tho  Moon  and  Mars — the  person  will 
destroy  the  family  of  his  enem}’,  will  be  rich  and  just. 

(2) .  The  Sun,  the  Moon  and  Mercury,  he  will  resemble 
a king  and  will  be  learned  and  famous. 

(3) .  The  Sun,  Moon  and  Jupiter,  he  will  be  possessed 
of  many  good  qualities  and  will  be  learned. 

(4) .  The  Sun,  Moon  and  Venus,  he  will  commit 
ad  ultenq  will  be  cruel,  will  be  subject  to  fear  from  his  enemy 
and  will  be  rich. 

(5) .  The  Sun,  Moon  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  a man 
of  wrong  views,  will  be  deceitful  and  will  travel  to  foreign 
lands. 

(6) .  The  Sun,  Mars  and  Mercury — lie  will  be  without 
enjoyment  of  any  kind  and  will  have  sons,  wealth  and  wife. 

(7) .  The  Sun,  Mars  and  Jupiter,  he  will  he  fond  of 
sexual  enjoyment,  will  be  considerate,  will  be  a commander 
of  armies  or  a magistrate. 

(8) .  The  Sun,  Mars  and  Venus,  he  will  be  afflicted 
with  diseases  of  the  eye,  will  live  in  comfort  and  bora  in  a 
good  family. 


CU.  14.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA- 

(9) .  The  Sun,  Mars  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  separated 
from  his  kinsmen,  will  be  dumb,  will  suffer  from  diseases 
and  will  be  rich- 

(10) .  The  Sun,  Mercury  and  Jupiter,  he  will  be  of 
sound  views,  will  be  learned,  wealthy  and  famous. 

(11) .  The  Sun,  Mercury  and  Venus,  he  will  be  of 
soft  body,  will  be  learned  and  famous  and  will  live  in 

J a 

comfort. 

(12) .  The  Sun,  Mercury  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  with- 
out kinsmen  and  poor ; will  hate  mankind  and  will  be  of 
vicious  habits. 

(13) .  The  Sun,  Jupiter  and  Venus,  he  will  possess  a 
good  wife  and  children,  will  be  very  intelligent,  will  suffer 
from  diseases  of  the  eye  and  will  be  rich. 

(14) .  The  Sun,  Jupiter  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  fearless, 
will  be  liked  by  the  king  and  will  bo  of  quiet  and  excellent 
disposition. 

(15) .  The  Sun,  Venus  and  Saturn,  he  will  be  of  bad 
reputation  and  will  be  haughty  and  insolent. 

(16) .  The  Moon,  Mars  and  Mercury,  he  will  be  glut- 
tonous, will  be  addicted  to  wicked  deeds  aud  will  abuse 
other  people. 

(17) -  The  Moon,  Mars  and  Jupiter,  he  will  he  of 
angry  speech,  will  bo  of  strong  sexual  passion  and  will  be 
beautiful. 

(IS).  The  Moon,  Mars  and  Venus,  be  will  be  of  bad 
conduct,  Avill  have  no  sons  and  will  be  fond  of  travels. 

(19) .  The  Moon,  Mars  and  Saturn,  be  wil1  bo  virtuous 
and  wealthy,  will  have  a bad  wife  and  will  be  litigious. 

(20) .  The  Moon,  Mercury  and  Jupiter — be  will  be 
charitable  and  learned  in  sciences,  will  protect  good  :aud 
pious  men  and  will  be  of  good  speech. 


143 


BBIHAT  JATAKA. 


[ch  14. 


(2^).  The  Moon,  Mercury  and  Yenus— will  be  learned, 
will  be  addicted  to  low  deeds  and  will  have  numerous  ser- 
vants. 

(22) .  The  Moon,  Mercury  andSaturn — will  be  liberal  in 
gift,  will  be  respected  by  the  king  and  will  be  possessed  of 
good  qualities. 

(23) .  The  Moon,  Jupiter  and  Venus-will  be  intelligent, 
will  have  good  sons  and  will  be  skilled  in  works  of  art. 

(24) .  The  Moon,  Jupiter  and  Saturn — will  be  learned 
in  sciences,  will  be  fond  of  old  women  and  will  be  as  happy 
as  a king. 

(25) .  The  Moon,  Yenusand  Saturn — will  be  learned  in 
the  Yedas,  will  be  the  king’s  chaplain  and  will  be  liked  by 
all  people. 

(26) .  Mars, Mercury  and  Jupiter — will  be  fond  of  music, 
of  Yedas,  of  literature  and  of  drama. 

(27) .  Mars,  Mercury  and  Yenus — will  be  of  dofective 
organs,  will  be  born  of  a bad  family  and  will  be  of  settled 
views. 

(23).  Mars,  Mercury  and  Saturn— will  serve  under 
other  men,  will  suffer  from  diseases  of  the  eye  and  will  be 
fond  of  travels. 

(29) .  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will  be  liked  by  the 
king,  will  have  good  sons,  and  will  live  in  comfort. 

(30) .  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn — will  be  of  thin  body, 
without  comfort,  respectable  and  given  up  to  a vicious 
course  of  life. 

(31.)  Mars,  Yenus  and  Saturn-will  have  bad  sons  and 
will  ever  be  of  pure  mind, 

32.  Mercury,  -Jupiter  and  Venus — will  conquer  over 
his  enemies  and  will  be  of  wide-spread  fame. 


BRII1AT  JATAKA. 


149 


CH.  14.] 


33.  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn — will  live  in  great 
comfort,  will  be  wealth)  an  1 will  be  attached  to  his  wife- 

34.  Mercury,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  tell  lies. 

35.  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — wall  be  of  clear 
understanding  and  will  be  happy  and  famous. 


III— OF  FOUR  PLANETS. 

Again,  if  the  yoga  planets  occupying  together  a sign 
of  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be 

(1) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars  and  Mercury — the  person 
will  be  deceitful,  skilled  iu  the  art  of  writing  and  will  suffer 
from  diseases. 

(2) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars  and  Jupiter — will  be  rich, 
famous,  intelligent  and  liked  by  the  king  and  w;iil  be  free 
from  diseases  and  from  grief. 

(3) .  The  Sun,  the  Moon,  Mars  and  Venus — will  have 
a wife  and  children,  will  be  learned,  a moderate  eater, 
happy,  skilled  in  work  aud  merciful. 

(4) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars  and  Saturn — will  suffer 
from  diseases  of  the  eye,  will  be  fond  of  travels  aud  of 
prostitutes  and  will  be  poor. 

(5) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mercury  and  Jupiter — will  have 
eight  sons,  will  be  rich  and  possessed  of  good  qualities  ; 
will  be  famous,  powerful  and  liberal  in  gift. 

(6) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mercury  and  Venus — w ill  be  of 
defective  organs  aud  of  good  speech. 

(7) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mercury  and  Saturn — will  be 
poor  and  ungrateful- 

(8) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Jupiter  and  Venus — -will  be 
possessed  of  many  good  qualities,  will  commit  adu'tery 
with  other  women,  will  be  intelligent  and  will  suffer  from 
diseases  of  the  eye. 


150 


13  HI  IT  AT  JATAKAi 


[Cif.  14, 


(9) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Jupiter  and  Saturn — will  be 
foml  of  travels*  will  be  rich,  intelligent  autl  attached  to 
prostitutes. 

(10) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be  of 
defective  limbs,  will  be  timid,  will  follow  girls  and  will  bo 
fond  of  wealth  aud  meals. 

(11) .  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Jupiter — will  be 
strong,  will  get  into  difficulties,  will  be  married  and  rich, 
will  suffer  from  diseases  of  the  eye  and  will  be  fond  of 
travels. 

(12) .  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Venus — will  be 
fond  of  the  wives  of  other  men,  will  be  of  fearful  eyes  and 
appearance,  will  be  addicted  to  thieving  and  will  be  weak. 

(13) .  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Saturn — will  he  a 
commander  of  armies  or  a miuister,  will  he  addicted  to  low 
deeds  and  will  be  in  the  enjoyment  of  numerous  pleasures. 

(14) .  The  Sun,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will  be  as 
famous  as  the  kiug,  will  be  respected  everywhere  and  will 
be  rich. 

(15) .  The  Sun,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn — will  be 
blind,  will  be  a wanderer  and  will  have  friends  and  kins- 
men. 

(1G).  The  Sun,  Mars,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  suffer 
disgrace,  will  be  slothful  and  possessed  of  good  qualities. 

(17) .  The  Sun,  Mercury,  Jupiter  aud  Venus — will  be 
very  rich  and  famous. 

(18) .  The  Sun,  Mercury,  Jupiter  aud  Saturn — will 
bring  about  quarrels,  will  be  respectable  and  of  vicious 
habits. 

(19) .  The  Sun,  Mercury,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be 
of  good  speech,  will  be  truthful,  will  be  a man  of  principle 
and  will  be  of  good  conduct. 


CH.  1 4.  ] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


1 51 

(20) .  The  Sun,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be 
learned  in  arts,  will  be  the  chief  of  low  people  and  will  bo 
obstinate. 

(21) .  The  Moco,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Jupiter — will  be 
liked  by  the  king,  will  bo  a minister  or  an  eminent  poet. 

(22) .  The  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Venus — will 
have  a good  wife  and  sons,  will  bo  intelligent,  will  be  ugly 
and  deformed  and  will  live  in  comfort. 

(2.5).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Saturn — will 
have  double  parents,  will  be  bold  and  will  have  several 
wives  and  childreu. 

(24) .  The  Moon,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will  do 
sinful  deeds  will  indulge  in  sleep  and  will  be  fond  of  money. 

(25) -  The  Moon,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Saturn— will  be 
of  firm  views,  bold,  happy  and  learned. 

(2G).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be  of 
bad  conduct,  will  have  no  sons,  will  be  learned  in  the 
Vedas  or  will  be  the  king’s  priest. 

(27) .  The  Moon,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will 
be  very  rich.,  attached  to  his  kinsmen  ar.d  virtuous. 

(28) .  The  Moon,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn — will 
be  liberal  in  gifts,  will  be  respected  by  the  king  will  live  iu 
great  comfort,  will  be  wealthy  and  attached  to  his  wife. 

(29) .  The  Moon,  Mercury,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be 
hated  by  the  people  and  will  be  fond  of  the  wives  of  other 

men. 


(30) .  The  Moon,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be 
without  sons,  will  not  be  earnest  iu  work  and  will  be 
without  mercy. 

(31) .  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will  be  rich 
and  despised  by  the  people 

20 


152  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  [cH.  14 

(32) .  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn — will  suffer 
from  diseases  and  will  be  poor. 

(33) -  Mars,  Mercun7,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be  of 
defective  1 i in bs^  will  serve  under  other  men,  will  tell  lies 
and  will  liave  bad  sons. 

(34) .  Mars,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — will  be  liked 
by  the  king,  will  be  of  thin  body,  will  have  bad  sons  and 
will  be  of  clear  understanding. 

(35) .  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn— will  be 
very  rich,  learned,  and  of  good  conduct. 


IV.  OF  FIVE  PLANETS. 

Again,  if  the  yoga  planets  occupying  together  a sign 
of  Zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth  be 

(1) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Jupiter — the 
person  will  engage  in  fight,  will  be  deceitful  aud  skilled  in 
work. 

(2) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Venus — will 
be  devoid  cf  charity,  will  be  earnest  in  work,  will  be  with- 
out kinsmen  and  will  work  for  other  men. 

(3) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury  and  Saturn — will 
be  of  short  life,  will  be  fond  of  earning  money  and  without 
wife  and  children. 

(4) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  Venus — will 
delight  in  annoying  other  men,  will  be  rejected  by  bis 
parents  aub  kinsmen  and  will  be  of  defective  eyes. 

(5) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Jupiter  and  gaturn  — will 
be  avaricious  and  will  be  afflicted  with  grief  owing  to  sepa- 
ration from  his  wife. 

(6) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mars,  Venus  aud  Saturn — will 
be  wealthy,  powerful,  able  and  dirty  and  will  covet  the 
wives  of  other  men. 


cn.  14.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA- 


153 


(7>  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mercuiy,  Jupiter  and  Venus — 
will  be  a minister,  will  be  rich,  successful,  famous  and 
powerful  and  will  also  be  a magistrate. 

(8) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn — 
will  depend  on  other  men  for  meals,  will  be  timid,  will 
commit  sius  and  will  engage  in  fearful  deeds. 

(9) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Mercuiy,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
will  be  poor,  tall,  without  sous  and  sickly. 

(10) .  The  Sun,  Moon,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
will  be  without  a wife,  of  good  speech,  will  have  enemies 
will  be  fearless  and  learned  in  jugglery. 

(11) .  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus — 
will  be  without  grief,  a good  friend  and  master  of  horses 
and  covet  the  wives  of  other  men. 

(12) .  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Saturn — 
will  beg  his  meals,  will  be  dirty  and  dressed  in  ragged 
clothes. 

(13) .  The  Sun,  Mars,  Mercury,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
will  be  an  important  person  aud  will  be  afflicted  with  grief, 
fear,  disease  and  hunger. 

(14) .  The  Sun,  Mars,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
will  be  respected  everywhere,  will  be  rich,  will  be  blind 
and  will  have  friends  and  kinsmen. 

(15) .  The  Sun,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn— 
will  possess  a knowledge  of  Atma,  will  do  deeds  acceptable 
to  Devas  aud  to  his  preceptors  aud  will  be  learned  in 
sciences. 

(1G).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  and  Venus 

— will  be  of  a mild  disposition,  happy,  rich,  powerful  and 
learned. 

(17).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter  aud  Saturn 
— will  be  skilled  in  engineering,  will  be  of  strong  physiqu 
and  will  be  famous  for  his  skill  in  work. 


134 


Bin IIAT  JATAKA. 


[_CH.  14 


(18).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Mercury,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
tv i 11  have  a good  wife  and  sons,  will  be  intelligent  and  will 
live  in  comfort. 

('ll).  The  Moon,  Mars,  Junite  r,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
will  work  lor  other  men,  will  be  poor,  of  dirty  appearance, 
ignorant  and  addicted  to  thieving. 

(20) .  The  Moon,  Mercury,  Ju  piter,  Venus  and  Saturn 
" will  be  respected  in  all  lands,  will  be  of  defective  limbs, 
will  be  a minister  and  will  resemble  a king. 

(21) .  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter,  Venus  and  Saturn — 
will  be  respected  everywhere,  will  be  skilled  in  work,  will 
suffer  from  torture,  imprisonment  and  disease. 


V.-OE  SIX  PLANETS. 

Lastly,  if  the  yoga  planets  occupying  a single  sign  of 
Zodiac  at  the  lime  of  birth  be  the  several  planets  except 

(1) .  Saturn — the  person  will  be  a writer  of  scientific 
works,  will  dwell  in  woods  and  mountains  and  will  be 
possessed  of  a wife,  sons  and  wealth. 

(2) .  Except  Venus — will  be  addicted  to  thieving,  will 
covet  other  women,  will  be  despised  by  his  kinsmen,  will 
be  without  sous,  will  bo  a fool  and  will  travel  to  foi’eign 
lands. 

(3) .  Except  Jupiter — will  be  a man  of  low  birth,  will 
work  for  other  men,  will  suffer  from  consumption  and  will 
be  despised  by  the  people. 

(4) .  Except  Mercury — will  be  a minister,  will  be 
possessed  of  a wife,  sons,  wealth  and  comfort  and  will  have 
a control  over  his  passions. 

(5) .  Except  Mars — will  suffer  from  headache,  will  be 
mad,  will  live  in  places  uuf’requented  by  man  and  will 
travel  to  foreign  lands. 


cn.  15-] 


BRIHAT  J.VTAKA. 


155 


(6) .  Except  tlie  Moon — will  be  an  energetic  traveller 
and  intelligent. 

(7) .  Except  the  Sun — will  visit  holy  places,  and  will 
be  rich. 


CHAPTER  XV. 

On  Ascetic  Yogas. 

1-  A person  born  when  four  or  more  (a)  powerful  (5) 
planets  occupy  a single  sign  of  the  Zodiac  becomes  an 
ascetic  of  the  Sakya,  Ajivika,  Bhikshuka,  Vridhasravaka, 
Chakra,  Nirgrandha  or  Vanya sana  class  according  as  the 
most  powerful  planet  of  the  group  is  Mars,  Mercury,  Jupiter, 
the  Moon,  Venus,  Saturn  or  the  Sun.  (c)  If  such  powerful 
planet  be  one  that  has  suffered  defeat  in  conjunction  at  the 
time  of  birth,  the  ascetic  will,  after  a time  revert  to  his 
previous  condition  of  life. 

Notes. 

(а) .  That  is  5,6  or  7 planets. 

(б) .  If  no  plauet  be  powerful  there  will  be  no  Pravri- 
jia  (ascetic  yoga). 

(c).  The  ascetic  life  of  the  most  powerful  planet  will 
be  embraced  by  the  person  first,  then  that  of  the  planet  next 
in  power  and  so  on.  The  lirst  change  of  life  will  occur  in  the 
Dasaand  Antardasa  period  of  the  most  powerful  planet ; tho 
succeeding  changes  will  occur  in  the  Antardasa  periods  of 
the  respective  planets.  If  the  y oga  planet  be  a single  power- 
ful planet  which  does  not  suffer  defeat,  in  conjunction,  the 
ascetic  life  assumed  will  coutiuue  till  death.  We  shall  now 
explain  the  terms  referring  to  the  several  classes  of  ascetics. 

(1) .  Sikya: — A Buuhisfc  ascetic  dressed  in  red  robes. 

(2) .  Ajivika  A Jain  ascetic;  the  term  includes 
Vaishuava  ascetics  as  well. 


156  Bill  HAT  JATAKA-  [cH.  ]5. 

(8).  Bhikshu  : — A Brahman  ascetic  who  abandons  his 
house  and  family  and  subsists  entirely  on  alms. 

(4) .  Vridhasravka  : — known  as  kapalika,  a follower 
of  Siva. 

(5) .  Chakra  : — known  as  Chakradhara,  is  an  ascetic 
who  wears  a discus. 

(6) .  Nirgrandha  : — a naked  ascetic. 

(7) .  Vanyasana  : — an  ascetic  who  subsists  on  the  roots 
of  the  forest  and  is  engaged  in  Divine  meditation. 

2.  If  the  most  powerful  yoga  planet  be  an  Astangafa 
planet,  (a)  a person  will  not  become  aDeekshita  (&)  but  will 
be  attached  to  persons  who  are  such.  Again,  if  the  power- 
ful planet  which  suffers  defeat  in  conjunction  be  aspected 
by  other  planets,  a person  will  not  become  a Deekshita  (c) 
but  will  possess  a strong  desire  to  become  one. 

Notes. 

(aj.  This  has  already  been  explained. 

(b) .  That,  is,  one  of  the  holy  order  of  men. 

(c) .  If  not  aspected,  he  will  become  one,  and  after  a 
time  revert  to  his  former  condition  of  life  as  stated  in  the 
last  stanza. 

3.  If  the  lord  of1  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  as- 
pects Saturn  and  be  not  aspected  by  any  other  planet,  (a) 
or  if  Saturn  aspect  the  lord  of  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon 
when  such  lord  is  not  powerful,  (&)  a person  will  become  an 
ascetic.  Again,  if  the  Moon  occupy  the  Drekkana  of  Saturn 
and  the  Navamsa  of'Saturn  or  Mars  and  be  aspected  by 
S aturn,  (c)  a person  will  become  an  ascetic  (cZ). 

Notes. 

(a).  The  Pravrijia  will  be  that  of  such  lord  or  Saturn 
whichever  is  powerful. 


CH.  1G.] 


BRIHAT  J AT  AKA. 


157 


(b) .  The  Pravrijia  will  be  that  of  Saturn. 

(c) -  And  not  aspected  by  any  other  planet. 

(cl)-  The  ascetic  life  will  be  that  described  for  Saturn. 

4.  A person  born  when  Jupiter,  the  Moon  and  the 
rising  sign  are  aspected  by  Saturn,  when  Jupiter  occupies 
the  9th  house  from  the  ascendant  and  under  one  of  the 
Raja  yogas  becomes  a scientific  author,  (a)..  Again,  a 
person  born  when  Saturn  occupies  the  9th  house  from  the 
ascendant  and  is  not  aspected  by  other  planets  and  under  a 
Raja  yoga  will  become  both  a king  and  an  ascetic.  (. b ). 

Notes. 

(а) .  If  the  horoscope  contain  a Raja  }7oga  and  an 
ascetic  yoga,  the  former  will  not  take  effect,  but  the  latter 
will;  such  for  instance  as  the  lives  of  Yaraha  Mill  it  a,  Kanada, 
Bud  ha,  Panchasikha,  Brahma  Gupta  and  others.  If  the  horos- 
cope contain  two  Raja  yogas  and  an  ascetic  yoga,  the  person 
will  become  a king — such  as  Janaka,  Ivasiraj  i,  Sucliid  hwaja 
and  others. 

(б) .  If  the  horoscope  contain  no  Raja  j’ogas  but  only 
the  ascetic  yoga  described  in  the  test,  the  person  will  be- 
come  an  ascetic. 


CHAPTER  XVI. 

On  The  Nakshatras. 
or 

The  Moon  In  The  Asterisms. 

1.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Aswini  will  be  fond  of  ornaments,  will  be  of 
fine  appearance,  will  be  popular;  skilled  in  work  and  intelli- 
gent. 


158 


BR1HAT  J AT  AKA. 


[cir.  1G. 


A person  bom  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Bharani  will  be  successful  at  work,  truthful,  free 
from  diseases,  able  and  free  from  grief. 

2.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Krittika  will  be  a glutton,  fond  of  the  wives  of 
other  men,  of  bright  appearance  and  of  wide-spread  fame. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  Roll  ini  will  be  truthful,  will  not  covet  the  property 
of  other  men,  will  be  of  cleanly  habits,  of  sweet  speech,  of 
firm  views,  and  of  fine  appearance. 

8-  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the- 
asterism  of  Mrigasirsha  will  he  of  no  firm  principles,  will 
be  able,  timid,  of  good  speech,  of  active  habits,  rich  and 
will  indulge  in  sexual  pleasures. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Ardra  will  be  insincere,  of  irascible  tempeig 
ungrateful,  troublesome  and  addicted  to  wicked  deeds. 

4.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Punarvasu  will  be  devout  and  of  patient  habits, 
will  live  in  comfort,  will  be  good-natured,  quiet,  of  wrong 
views,  sickly,  thirsty  and  pleased  with  trifles. 

5.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Pushya  will  have  a control  over  his  desires,  will 
be  generally  liked,  learned  in  the  Sastras,  rich  and  will  be 
found  of  acts  of  charity. 

j 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Aslesha  will  not  be  attentive  to  the  work  of 
other  men,  will  be  a promiscuous  eater,  will  be  sinful,  un- 
grateful and  skilled  in  cheating  other  men. 

6.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  posses  through  the 
asterism  of  Magha  will  have  numerous  servants,  will  wor- 
ship the  Devas  and  Pitris  and  will  be  engaged  in  important 
works- 


cn.  iG  ] 


BRIITAT  JATAKA. 


J 59 

A person  born  when  the  'Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism  of  P.  Plmlguni  will  be  of  sweet  speech,  will  be  liberal 
in  his  gifts,  of  wandering  habits  and  will  serve  under  kings- 

7.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  U.  Phalguni  will  be  generally  liked,  will  earn 
money  by  his  learning  and  will  live  in  comfort. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  Hasta  will  be  of  active  habits,  full  of  resources, 
shameless,  merciless  and  a thief  and  a diunkard. 

8.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Chittra  will  wear  cloths  aud  flowers  of  various 
colors  and  will  have  beautiful  eyes  and  limbs. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Swati  will  be  of  a mild  and  quiet  nature,  will 
control  his  passion,  will  be  skilled  in  trade,  will  be  merci- 
ful, unable  to  bear  thirst,  of  sweet  speech  aud  disposed  to 
do  acts  of  charity. 

9.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Visakha  will  be  jealous  of  another’s  prosperity, 
will  be  a nigp-ard,  of  bright  appearance,  of  distinct  speech, 
skilled  in  earning  money  and  disposed  to  bring  about  quar- 
rels among  men. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  Anuradha  will  be  rich,  will  live  in  foreign  lands, 
will  be  unable  to  bear  hunger  and  disposed  to  wander  from 
place  to  place- 

10.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Jyeshta  will  have  few  friends,  will  he  very 
cheerful,  virtuous,  and  of  irascible  temper. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  Moola  will  be  haughty,  rich,  happy,  not  disposed 
' to  injure  other  men,  of  firm  views  aud  will  live  in  luxury. 

21 


1G0  BR1IIAT  JATAKA.  [ell-  16. 

11.  A person  born  wbon  the  Moon  posses  through  the 
asterism  of  1*.  Ash  a cilia  will  have  an  agreeable  wife,  will  be 
proud  and  attached  to  friends. 

A person  born  -when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  U.  Ashadha  will  be  obedient,  w.ll  be  learned  in 
the  rules  of  vir  u >,  will  posses  many  friends,  will  lie  giato- 
ful  and  return  favors  received  and  will  be  generally  liked. 

]2.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through 
Ihe  nstorism  of  Sravaua  will  bo  prosperous  and  learned, 
will  have  a liberal-minded  wife,  will  be  rich  and  of  wide- 
spread fame. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  Dhanishta  will  be  liberal  in  gifts,  rich,  valient, 
fond  of  music  and  will  be  a niggard. 

1?.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the 
asterism  of  Satabhishak  will  be  harsh  in  his  speech,  will  be 
truthful  will  suffer  grief  will  conquer  his  enemies,  will 
thoughtlessly  engage  in  work  and  will  be  of  independent 
ways. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  P.  Bhadrapada  will  suffer  from  grief,  will  place 
his  wealth  at  the  disposal  of  his  wife,  will  be  of  distinct 
speech,  will  be  skilled  in  earning  money  and  will  be  a 
niggard. 

O O X- 

14.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through 
the  asterism  of  U-  Bhadrapada  will  be  an  able  speaker,  will 
be  happy,  will  possess  children  and  grand-children  will  con- 
quer his  enemies  and  will  be  virtuous. 

A person  born  when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  as- 
terism of  Revati  will  possess  perfect  limbs,  will  be  liked  by 
all  the  people,  will  be  deeply-  learned,  will  uever  covet  the 
property  of  other  men  and  will  be  rich* 


cn.  17.] 


BRIUAT  JATAKA. 


Xotes. 

The  effects  described  above  vrill  fully  come  to  pass 
only  if  the  Moon  be  powerful. 


CHAPTER  XV If. 

Ox  Tut:  Moon  In  The  Several  Signs  of 
This  Zodiac. 

1.  A person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Aries  will 
have  round  red-eyes,  will  be  fond  of  vegetable  food  and 
will  eat  hot  meals  but  in  a moderate  degree  ; will  be  of  a 
quickly  relenting  nature,  will  be  fond  of  travels  and  of 
sexual  union;  will  be  of  strong  knees;  will  possess  no 
permanent  weallb;  will  be  fond  of  light  and  of  women; 
will  be  skilled  in  befriending  other  men  ; will  have  dis- 
figured nails  and  a wounded  head  ; will  be  haughty,  will  be 
the  eldest  of  his  brothers ; will  have  lines  in  his  hand  of 
the  shape  of  the  weapon  known  as  Sakti ; will  be  fickle-min- 
ded and  will  be  afraid  of  water. 

2.  A person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Taurus  will 
be  of  fine  appearance  and  of  beautiful  gait;  will  possess 
large  thighs  and  face  ; will  possess  marks  on  his  hack,  face 
and  sides,  will  be  liberal  in  bis  gifts  ; will  bear  misfortunes; 
will  possess  great  influence  and  authority  ; will  have  a 
large  hump  on  the  neck  ; will  have  daughters;  will  suffer 
from  phlegmatic  affections,  will  bo  separated  from  bis 
kinsmen,  wealth  and  sons;  will  be  of  agreeable  manners 
and  of  patient  nature;  will  be  a great  eater;  will  be  foml 
of  women;  will  be  attached  to  his  friends  and  will  be  hap- 
py both  when  young  and  old. 

3-  person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Gemini  will  be 
fond  of  women,  will  be  skilled  in  sexual  union  ;will  possess 


i*’n 


BKIHAT  JATAKA. 


[cu.  17. 

red  eyes;  will  be  learned  in  the  Sastras;  will  carry  messages; 
will  possess  curling  hairs  and  a sharp  intellect;  will  be  skill- 
ed iu  wit,  in  discovering  the  thoughts  of  other  men  and  in 
game;  will  possess  beautiful  features;  will  be  of  sweet  speech; 
will  be  a great  eater;  will  be  fond  of  music,  and  skilled  in 
the  rules  of  dance;  will  join  in  sexual  union  with  herma- 
phrodites; and  will  possess  an  elevated  nose. 

4.  A person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Cancer  will 
possess  a bent  body ; will  walk  fast  ; will  have  a high  hip  ; 
will  be  subject  to  the  influence  if  women  ; will  have  an 
excellent  friend  ; will  be  learned  in  Astrology  ; will  have 
numerous  houses,  will  have  a wealth  which  will  increase 
and  decrease  as  the  Moon;  will  be  short ; will  possess  a 
thick  neck  ; will  be  capable  of  being  won  over  by  kind 
words,  will  be  attached  to  his  friends  and  will  be  fond  of 
water  and  forests. 

5.  A person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Leo  will  be 
of  irascible  temper,  of  large  cheeks,  broad  face  and  brown 
eyes;  will  have  very  few  sons  ; will  hate  women;  will  be 
fond  of  animal  food,  forests  and  hills  ; will  continue  angry 
at  trifles  for  a long  time  ; will  be  afflicted  with  pains  caused 
by  hunger,  thirst,  belly-ache,  tooth-ache  as  well  as  purely 
mental  anxieties;  will  be  liberal  in  his  gifts;  will  be  bold 
in  fight ; will  be  of  fixed  principles;  will  be  haughty  and 
attached  to  his  mother. 

0.  A person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Virgo  will, out 
of  modesty,  be  of  mild  and  beautiful  eyes  and  gait;  will  have 
his  shoulders  and  arms  sunk  or  depressed;  will  live  in  com- 
fort, will  be  of  soft  body  ; will  be  truthful,  will  be  skilled  in 
dance,  music  and  painting;  will  be  learned  in  the  Sastras; 
will  be  virtuous  and  intelligent,  will  be  fond  of  sexual  union; 
will  enjoy  the  house  and  property  ot  other  men;  will  live 
in  foreign  lands;  will  be  of  sweet  speech;  and  will  have 
daughters  and  very  few  sons. 


BRIHAT  JATAkA* 


103 


cn.  17.] 


7.  A person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Libra  will  res- 
pect the  Dovas,  Brahmins,  and  holy  men  ; will  be  intelligent, 
will  never  covet  the  property  of  other  men;  will  lead  a reli- 
gious life;  will  be  subject  to  the  influence  of  women  ; will  be 
tall  ; will  have  a raised  nose  ; will  be  of  thin  and  defective 
^irnbs  and  loud  of  travels;  will  be  rich;  will  be  a trader; 
will  bear  the  name  of  a Deva  coupled  with  an  excellent  sur- 
name granted  by  a body  of  learned  men  ; will  be  sickly  ; 
will  protect  bis  family  and  will  be  disgraced  and  rejected 
by  his  kinsmen. 


8.  A person  born  wiih  the  Moon  in  sign  Scorpio  will 
have  broad  eyes,  a broad  breast  and  round  slianks,  thighs 
and  knees;  will  be  separated  from  liis  parents  and  preceptors; 
will  be  afflicted  with  diseases  when  young;  will  be  respected 
by  kings,  will  of  brown  color ; will  not  be  of  a straight- 
forward nature  ; will  have  lines  in  his  hand  and  feet  of  the 
shape  of  the  fish,  the  Yujrayudha  or  a bird  ; and  will  end- 
eavor to  conceal  his  sins. 


9.  A person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Sagittari 
will  have  a long  face  and  neck  ; will  inherit  his  father’s 
property;  will  be  liberal  in  bis  gift;  will  be  a literary 
author  ; will  be  powerful  and  skilled  in  speech  ; will  have 
large  teeth,  ears,  lips  and  nose,  will  engage  in  numerous 
works;  will  bo  skilled  in  sculpture;  will  have  indistinct 
shoulders,  disfigured  miils  and  large  bauds;  will  be  ol  a 
deep  and  inventive  intellect,  will  be  a man  of  right  under- 
standing ; will  bate  bis  kinsmen  ; will  never  yield  to  compul- 
sion but  only  to  kind  treatment. 

10.  A person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Capricorn 
will  be  ever  attached  to  bis  wife  and  children  ; will  do 
deeds  of  virtue;  will  have  thin  lower  limbs,  good  eyes  and 
a thin  waist;  will  bo  open  to  advice;  will  be  of  amiable 
maauers  and  slow  at  work  ; will  not  bear  cold  ; will  be  of  a 


164 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[CFT.  17 


wandering  nature,  powerful  and  a literary  author;  will  be  a 
niggard  and  will  be  attached  to  old  women  of  low  caste  ; 
will  be  shameless  and  merciless. 

11.  A person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Aquarius 
will  have  a neck  like  that  of  the  Camel,  a body  covered  with 
muscles,  rough  and  covered  with  hair ; will  be  tall;  will 
have  large  legs,  thighs,  back,  buttocks,  face,  and  lower 
belly;  will  be  deaf  ; will  be  attached  to  the  wives  of  other 
men  and  interested  in  the  w’cked  deeds  of  other  people  ; 
will  rise  and  fall  by  turns  ; will  de  fond  of  flowers  and  per- 
fumes ; and  will  be  attached  to  friends  aud  will  walk  with- 
out fealinor  tired. 

12.  A person  born  with  the  Moon  in  sign  Pisces  will 
be  a dealer  in  the  produce  of  the  sea  and  a trader  in  general  ; 
will  be  fond  of  his  wife  and  clothes  ; will  have  perfect 
limbs,  a bright  body,  long  nose  and  large  head,  will  put  his 
enemies  into  disgrace,  will  be  subject  to  the  influence  of 
women,  will  have  beautiful  eyes,  aud  will  be  fair,  rich,  happy 
and  learned. 

13.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  Moon,  the 
sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  and  the  lord  of  such  sign  be  all 
powerful  the  effects  described  in  this  chapter  will  fully  come 
to  pass  (a)  ; the  same  remark  applies  to  planets  other  thau 
the  Moon  (6). 

Notes. 

(a) .  If  two  of  the  three  be  powerful,  the  effects  will 
come  to  pass  imperfectly  ; if  only  one  of  the  three  be  power- 
ful, they  will  come  to  pass  still  more  imperfectly  and  if 
none  of  the  three  be  powerful,  the  effects  will  fail. 

(b) .  This  refers  to  the  next  chapter  in  which  the 
author  describes  the  effects  of  the  various  planets  occupy- 
ing the  several  signs  of  zodiac  at  the  time  of  birth. 


cn.  ^8-] 


BRIHAT  jataka. 


1G5 


CHAPTER  XVI I T. 

On  The  Sun,  Mars  And  Other} Planets 
In  the  Several  Signs  of  Zodiac. 

1.  A person  born  with  the  Sim  in  Aries  but  not  in  its 
exaltation  degree  (a)  will  be  of  wide-spread  fame,  able,  of 
wandering  habits,  possessed  of  small  wealth  and  will  carry 
weapons. 

A person  born  with  the  Sun  in  .sign  Taurus  will  deal 
in  cloths,  perfumes  anil  other  articles,  will  hate  women  and 
will  be  skilled  in  music. 

Notes. 

(a).  A person  born  with  the  Sun  in  the  exaltation 
degree  will  be  very  rich,  will  remain  for  ever  in  a place,  will 
have  servants  carrying  arms,  will  be  of  great  fame  and  able. 

2.  A person  born  with  the  Sun,  in  sign  Gemini  will 
be  learned  in  grammar,  will  be  an  Astrologer  and  will  be 
rich. 

A person  born  with  the  Sun  in  Cancer  will  be  independ- 
ent, fierce,  poor,  will  do  the  work  of  other  people  and  will 
suffer  from  the  fatigue  of  foot-journey. 

A person  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Leo  will  be  fond 
of  living  in  forests,  mountains  and  cow-sheds,  will  bo 
powerful  and  will  be  a fool. 

A person  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Virgo  will  be  skill- 
ed in  writing,  painting,  in  literary  productions  and  in  mathe- 
matics, and  will  possess  a body  resembling  that  of  a woman. 

3.  A person  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Libra  will  be 
fond  of  liquor  or  will  manufacture  it  , will  be  of  a wandering 
nature,  will  be  an  alchemist  and  will  do  wicked  deeds. 

A person  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Scorpio  will  be  of 
a fierce  nature,  will  thoughtlessly  engage  in  work,  will  earn 
money  by  acts  connected  with  poison  and  will  be  vastly 
learned  in  the  use  of  arms. 


1GG 


BUI  FIAT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  13. 


A pel  son  born  witli  the  Sun  in  Sagifcari  will  be  respec- 
tod  by  sages,  will  be  rich  and  independent  and  will  be 
learned  in  medicine  and  sculpture. 

A person  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Capricorn  will 
engage  in  deeds  unsuited  to  his  rank  in  life,  will  be  igno- 
rant, will  deal  in  mean  articles,  will  possess  small  wealth, 
will  he  avaricious  and  will  enjoy  the  property  of  other  men’ 

A person  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Aquarius  will 
engage  in  deeds  unsuited  to  his  rank  in  life,  will  be  poor 
and  will  have  no  sons. 


A persn  born  with  the  Sun  in  sign  Pisces  will  become 
rich  by  dealing  in  the  produce  of  water,  will  be  respected 
by  women,  will  possess  a mole  or  other  marks  in  the  part 
of  body  corresponding  to  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Sun  and 
Moon  together. 


5.  A person  born  witho  Mars  in  sign  Aries  or  Scorpio 
will  be  respected  by  the  king, will  be  of  a wandering  nature* 
will  be  a commander  of  armies  or  a trader,  will  be  rich,  will 
have  a body  marked  with  wounds,  will  be  a thief  and  will 
be  in  the  enjoyment  of  the  pleasures  of  the  senses. 

A person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Taurus  or  Libra  will 
be  subject  to  the  influence  of  women,  will  not  be  open  to 
the  advice  of  friends,  will  be  fond  of  the  wives  of  other  men, 
Avill  be  learned  in  the  games  of  magic,  will  adorn  his  per- 
son, will  be  of  a timid  nature  and  will  have  a rough  body. 

6.  A person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Gemini  or  Virgo 
will  be  of  bright  appearance,  will  have  sons  and  no  friends, 
will  help  others,  will  be  skilled  in  music  aud  tight,  will  be 
a niggard,  and  will  be  fearless  and  of  a begging  nature. 

A person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Cancer  will  be  rich, 
will  cross  seas  and  earn  wealth,  will  bo  of  defective  limbs 
and  will  be  wicked- 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


167 


CH.  18.] 


7.  A person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Leo*will  be  poor, 
will  patiently  bear  afflictions,  will  wander  in  the  forests, 
will  be  fearless  and  will  have  few  wives  and  children. 

A person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Sagittari  or  Pisces 
will  have  many  enemies,  will  be  thedcing’s  minister,  will  bo 
of  wide-spread  fame,  will  be  fearless  and  will  have  very  few 
children. 

A person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Aquarius  will  ever 
suffer  grief,  will  be  poor,  will  wander  from  place  to  place, 
will  be  a liar,  will  be  independent  and  wicked. 

A person  born  with  Mars  in  sign  Capricorn  will  be 
very  rich,  will  have  many  sous  and  will  be  a king  or  will 
resemble  a king. 

8.  A person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Aries  or 
Scorpio  will  be  fond  of  gambling,  of  running  into  debt  and 
of  liquor;  will  be  an  atheist,  will  argue  against  the  spirit 
of  the  S istras,  will  be  a thief,  will  be  poor,  will  have  a 
mean  wife,  will  be  deceitful,  will  be  a liar  and  will  swerve 
from  the  path  of  rectitude. 

A person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Taurus  or  Libra 
will  be  a preacher,  will  have  many  sons  and  wives,  will 
ever  be  engaged  in  earning  money,  will  be  liberal  in  gift 
aud  will  respect  his  preceptor- 

9-  A person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Gemini  will 
be  talkative,  will  bo  a liar  will  bo  learned  in  the  sciences, 
in  music,  in  dance  and  in  painting;  will  be  of  sweet  speech 
and  will  live  in  comfort. 

A person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Cancer  will  earn 
money  by  works  connected  with  water  and  will  be  disliked 
by  his  kinsmen. 

10.  A person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Leo  will  be 
disliked  by  women,  will  be  poor,  will  have  neither  comfort 
nor  sons,  will  wander  from  place  to  place,  will  he  ignorant, 
will  be  fond  of  women  and  will  suffer  disgrace. 


22 


168 


BimiAT  JATAKA- 


[ch.  18. 


A person  born  with  Mercury  in  sigu  Virgo  will  be 
liberal  in  gift,  will  be  learned,  will  possess  many  virtue?, 
will  live  in  comfort,  will  be  of  a patient  nature,  will  be 
ingenious  and  fearless. 

11.  A person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Capricorn 
or  Aquarius  will  work  ior  other  men,  will  be  poor,  will  be 
a sculptor,  will  run  into  debts  and  will  work  for  no  fees. 


A person  born  with  Mercury  in  sigh  Sagittari  will  be 
respected  by  kings,  will  be  learned  in  sciences  aud  in  laws. 

A person  born  with  Mercury  in  sign  Pisces  will  be 
skilled  in  befriending  other  men,  will  readily  discover  the 
views  of  other  people,  and  will  be  learned  in  the  handicraft 
of  men  of  low  castes. 

12.  A person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Aries  or 
Scorpio  will  be  a commander  of  armies,  will  be  very  rich, 
will  have  many  wives  and  children,  will  be  liberal  in  gift, 
will  have  good  servants,  will  be  of  a patient  nature,  and  of 
bright  appearance,  will  be  happy  with  his  wife  and  will  be 
of  great,  fame. 

A person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Taurus  or  Libra 
will  be  free  from  diseases,  will  live  in  comfort,  will  be  rich, 
will  have  friends  and  sons,  will  be  liberal  in  gift  and  will 
be  liked  by  all. 

A person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Gemini  or  Virgo 
will  have  many  clothes,  houses,  servants,  sons  and  friends, 
will  be  a minister  and  will  live  in  comfort. 


18.  A person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Cancer  will  be 
possessed  of  gems,  sons,  wealth,  wives,  influence,  intelligence 
and  comfort. 

A person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Leo  will  be  all  that 
has  been  said  in  the  case  of  a person  born  with  Jupiter  in 
Cancer  and  will  besides  be  a commander  of  armies. 


on.  18.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


169 


A person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Sagit.tarior  Pisc«s 
will  be  the  ruler  of  a province  or  a minister  under  a king 
or  the  commander  of  armies  or  will  be  very  rich. 

A person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Aquarius  will  be  all 
that  has  been  said  in  the  case  of  a person  born  with  the 
Moon  in  sign  Cancer. 

A person  born  with  Jupiter  in  sign  Capricorn  will  do 
deeds  disgraceful  to  his  rank  in  life,  will  possess  very  little 
wealth  and  will  be  afflicted  with  grief. 

14.  A person  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Aries  or 
Scorpio  will  be  fond  of  the  wives  of  other  men,  will  lose  his 
property  through  their  influeuce  and  will  bring  disgrace  on 
his  family. 

A person  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Taurus  or  Libra  will 
acquire  wealth  by  his  own  powers,  will  be  liked  by  the 
king,  will  be  an  important  person  among  his  kinsmen,  will 
be  a man  of  fame  and  will  be  fearless. 

15.  Aperson  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Gemini  will  do 
the  work  of  a king,  will  be  rich  and  learned  in  music- 

A person  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Virgo,  will  engage 
in  hard  work. 

A person  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Capricorn  or  Aqu- 
rius  will  be  liked  by  all,  will  be  subject  to  the  influence  of 
women  and  will  be  fond  of  bad  women. 

16.  A person  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Cancer  will  have 
two  wives,  will  be  a beggar,  will  bo  timid  and  haughty  and 
will  suffer  grief 

A person  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Leo  will  acquire 
money  through  women,  will  have  an  excellent  wife  and  very 
few  sons. 

A person  born  with  Venus  in  sign  Sagittari  will  be 
possessed  of  excellent  qualities  and  will  be  rich. 


170 


BRIHAT  jatAka. 


[ch.  18. 


A person  born  with  Yenus  in  sign  Pisces  will  be  learn- 
ed, will  be  a man  of  authority,  will  be  rich,  will  be  respect- 
ed by  the  king  and  will  be  liked  by  all. 

17.  A person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Aries  will  be 
a fool,  will  wander  from  place  to  place,  will  be  a fop  and 
will  be  separated  from  his  friends. 

A person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Scorpio  will  suffer  im 
prisonment,  will  receive  blows,  will  be  indifferent  to  work 
and  will  be  merciless. 

A person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Gemini  or  Virgo 
will  be  shameless,  will  suffer  grief,  will  be  poor,  will  have  no 
sous,  will  be  a bad  paiuter,  will  be  a constable  and  will  be 
a chief  officer. 

18.  A person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Taurus  will  be 
fond  of  women  of  low  caste,  will  possess  small  wealth  and 
will  have  several  wives- 

A person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Libra,  will  be  the 
chief  of  a party  of  men  in  a town  or  in  an  army  or  in  a 
village  and  will  be  rich. 

A person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Cancer  will  be 
poor,  will  have  very  few  teeth,  will  be  separated  from  his 
mother  and  will  have  no  sons. 

A person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Leo  will  not  be 
deserving  of  respect,  will  suffer  grief,  will  have  no  sons  and 
will  carry  burdens- 

19-  A person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Sagittari  or 
Pisces  will  die  an  excellent  death,  will  be  a faithful  officer 
in  the  king’s  palace,  will  have  good  sons  and  a good  wife, 
will  be  wealthy,  will  be  the  chief  man  in  a town,  in  an  army 
or  in  a village. 

A person  born  with  Saturn  in  sign  Capricorn  or  Aqu- 
arius will  enjoy  the  wives  and  property  of  other  men,  will 
be  the  head  of  a town,  a village  or  an  army,  will  have  weak 


CH.  18.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


171 


eyes,  will  be  dirty,  will  be  indifferent  to  bathing,  will  have 
a permanent  wealth  and  authority  and  will  enjoy  the  porperty 
acquired  by  him- 

Notes. 

To  determine  the  effects  of  the  planetary  places  the 
reader  is  referred  to  Stanza  13  and  Note  (6)  to  it  of  the  last 
Chapter. 

20.  The  effects  described  for  the  several  signs  of  the 
zodiac  when  the  Moon  occupies  them  or  when  they  are  as- 
pected  by  planets  also  apply  to  the  rising  sign,-  nay  — more 
effects  are  due  to  the  risuig  sign  and  to  the  2nd,  3rd,  and 
other  bhavas  (houses).  If  the  houses  be  powerful  and  if  their 
lords  be  also  powerful,  these  effects  will  come  to  pass 
fully. 

Notes- 

If  the  rising  sign  and  its  lord  be  powerful,  a person 
born  will  be  of  strong  physique  ; if  the  2nd  house  and  its 
lord  be  powerful,  the  person  will  be  rich.  Similar  remarks 
apply  to  the  other  bhavas. 

The  following  have  been  extracted  from  Satyachariar’s 
work  on  Horscopy- 

1.  A person  born  when  Aries  is  the  rising  sigu  will 
have  disfigured  fingers,  will  be  of  irascible  tempr,  will 
bring  on  quarrels,  will  act  inconsistently  with  his  views, 
will  be  of  bilious  and  windy  temperament,  will  be  a nig- 
gard, will  suffer  grief,  will  when  A’oung,  be  separated  from 
his  parents  and  from  his  preceptor,  will  have  very  few  sons 
will  assist  hi3  brothers  and  kinsmen,  will  be  virtuous,  will 
travel  to  foreign  lands,  will  engage  in  useless  work,  will 
marry  either  a woman  of  low  caste  or  a deceitful  woman  or 
a woman  of  defective  limbs  or  one  who  was  already  married, 
will  obtain  as  relations  persons  of  a friendly  nature  and  will 
meet  his  death  either  by  weapons  or  by  poison  or  by 
bilious  complaints  or  by  the  people  about  him  or  by  fire, 
by  rain,  by  being  shut  up  in  a prison  or  by  fall. 


172 


BRIHA.T  JATAKA. 


[CH.  18 


2.  A person  born  when  Taurus  is  the  rising  sign  will 
have  large  lips,  cheek,  nose  and  forehead,  will  be  of  phleg- 
matic and  windy  temperament, will  be  liberal  in  gift,  will  be  a 
spendthrift,  will  have  daughters  and  very  few  sons,  will 
ill-treat  his  parents,  will  be  fond  of  work,  will  do  wicked 
deeds,  will  earn  much  wealth,  will  ever  be  fond  of  his  wife 
and  will  sutler  lrom  weapons.  He  will  meet  his  death  by 
weapons,  ropes  or  animals,  in  foreign  lands  or  will  die 
through  over  work  or  by  water  or  by  a spear  or  through 
want  of  exercise  or  by  quadrupeds. 

3.  A person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Gemini  will 
bo  either  of  defective  limbs  or  will  possess  extra  limbs,  will 
be  of  sweet  speech,  will  engage  in  excellent  works,  will  be 
of  a mixed  temperament,  will  be  of  small  understanding 
and  of  small  body,  will  be  liked  by  his  preceptor  and  by 
sages,  will  have  very  few  younger  brothers,  will  not  be  of 
very  active  habits,  will  put  other  men  to  disgrace,  will 
possess  good  qualities,  will  be  anxious  to  engage  in  a 
number  of  works,  will  be  virtuous  and  not  wicked,  will 
earn  and  spend  much,  will  possess  several  wives  and  will  be 
free  from  serious  diseases.  He  will  meet  his  death  by 
snake-bite,  poison,  animals  or  by  water. 


4.  A person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Cancer  will 
be  a man  of  no  fixed  principles,  will  suffer  diseases  of 
genital  organs,  will  be  of  a timid  nature,  will  be  grateful, 
will  be  of  phlegmatic  and  windy  temperament,  will  readily 
understand  things,  will  follow  his  enemies,  will  spend  the 
property  of  other  men  also,  will  bo  haughty  among  his 
people,  will  be  put  to  disgrace  by  bis  kinsmen,  will  lose 
bis  children,  will  engage  in  important  works  in  foreign 
lands,  will  be  of  imperfect  speech,  will  be  a master  over 
other  men,  will  have  an  unequal  wife,  will  suffer  disgrace 
from  his  enemies  and  will  be  respected  by  many  persons. 
Ho  will  meet  his  death  by  means  of  a neck  ornament  or  a 


BRIHAT  J AT  AKA. 


173 


CH.  18.] 


rope,  by  phlegmatic  complaints,  by  the  fracture  of  bones,  by 
sword  cut,  or  by  dropsy. 

5.  A person  bom  when  the  rising  sign  is  Leo  will 
be  severe,  fond  of  animal  food  and  of  bilious  temperament, 
will  conceal  himself,  will  support  his  family  by  engaging 
in  various  works,  will  be  a niggard,  will  like  the  people, 
will  be  a man  of  renown  and  of  resignation  ; will  annoy  his 
kinsmen,  will  be  able,  and  energetic,  will  be  of  a sinful 
nature,  will  possess  several  wives  and  will  have  a diseased 
waist,  knees  and  teeth.  He  will  meet  his  death  by  w ea- 
pons,  hurtful  animals,  by  poison,  by  wood,  by  diseases,  by 
the  creatures  of  water  or  by  starvation. 

G.  A person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Virgo,  will 
be  of  sweet  speech,  of  bright  personal  appearance,  long 
legs  and  arms,  will  be  of  a mixed  temperament,  will  be  of 
excellent  beauty,  will  receive  wounds,  will  be  rich,  will  be 
a niggard,  will  be  attached  to  his  kinsmen,  will  have  many 
daughters,  will  be  in  bad  terms  with  his  brothers  and 
sisters,  will  be  inclined  to  deeds  of  virtue,  will  not  earn 
much,  and  will  be  skilled  in  work.  He  will  meet  his  death 
by  means  of  quadrupeds,  weapons,  bilious  attacks,  grief, 
fire  or  rope. 

7-  A person  born  when  Libra  is  the  rising  sign  will 
be  of  a rough  body,  a harsh  nature  and  a phlegmatic  and 
windy  temperament,  will  thoughtlessly  begin  a work,  will 
be  of  short  neck,  will  be  grateful,  will  acquire  much  wealth, 
will  become  famous  by  his  acts  of  liberality,  will  serve 
under  his  preceptor,  will  be  respected  by  his  father,  brothers 
and  others,  will  be  fond  of  walking,  will  be  virtuous,  will 
conceal  himself  to  escape  troubles  from  his  kinsmen,  will 
lose  his  wife,  will  be  fond  of  fight  and  will  suffer  from 
grief.  He  will  meet  his  death  by  a famous  man,  by  his 
kinsmen,  by  mild  quadrupeds,  by  perspiration,  by  sepa- 
ration from  an  object  of  desire  and  by  the  fatigue  of 
journey. 


174 


B HI  HAT  JATAKA. 


[ch  13 

8.  A person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Scorpio  wil 
have  a broad  face  and  a long  belly,  will  be  of  a harsh 
nature  and  of  a bilious  temperament,  will  have  brown  eyes, 
will  be  slow  and  of  quick  pace,  will  be  a master  over  others, 
will  protect  a large  family,  will  be  hated  by  his  kinsmen, 
will  spend  much,  will  have  many  children,  will  not  lire  in 
comfort,  will  have  no  enemies,  will  lose  his  virtues,  will 
protect  oxen,  will  fall  into  bad  temper  on  account  of  his 
wife,  will  yield  nothing  to  his  enemies,  will  have  his  own 
men  for  his  enemies,  will  suffer  from  numerous  diseases 
and  will  surrender  himself  to  his^foe  out  of  fear  of  sword- 
cut.  He  will  meet  his  death  by  imprisonment,  blows, 
sword-cut,  bad  diseases  or  by  fire. 

9.  A person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Sagittari 
will  have  large  lips,  teeth  and  nose,  will  be  of  phlegmatic 
and  windy  temperament,  will  have  a fleshy  genital  organ, 
thighs  and  arms,  will  be  of  defective  nails,  will  be  skilled 
in  work,  will  be  bold  in  fight,  will  serve  under  men  of  low 
caste,  will  be  deprived  of  his  property  by  thieves,  by  fire 
or  by  the  king,  will  be  learned  in  laws,  will  be  respected 
by  many  people,  will  give  trouble  to  ‘his  brothers,  wdll 
work  in  foreign  lands,  will  be  liked  by  the  king,  will  be 
indifferent  to  deeds  of  virtue,  will  quarrel  wit.h  his  wives 
and  will  have  a diseased  face.  He  will  meet  his  death  by 
quadrupeds,  snakes,  the  king  or  by  imprisonment. 

10.  A person  born  when  the  risingfsign  is  Capricorn 
will  have  a small  nose,  long  face,  arms  and  legs  ; will  be  of 
windy  temperament,  of  a timid  nature,  will  thoughtlessly 
engage  in  work,  will  suffer  imprisonment,  will  have  a small 
family,  and  small  wealth,  will  be  a niggard,  will  have 
daughters,  will  have  no  kinsmeu,  will  live  in  plenty,  will 
acquire  wealth  by  his  valor,  through  the  king  and  by  forest 
will  observe  fasting,  will  have  a wife  of  low  caste,  and  will 
be  attached  to  her,  will  have  a large  body,  few  hairs  and 


CH.  19.]  BRIHAT  JATAKA.  175 

weak  knees  and  will  suffer  fron  diseases.  He  will  meet  his 
death  by  children,  by  the  wind,  by  weapons,  by  the  king,  by 
poison,  by  fall,  by  an  elephant,  by  an  increase  of  bile  or  by 
dyspepsia. 

11.  A person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Aquarius, 
will  bo  of  inactive  habits  aud  of  harsh  nature,  will  be  the 
eldest  in  the  family,  will  be  of  bilious  and  windy  temper- 
ament, will  have  a nose  shaped  like  the  flower  of  the 
sesamum  plant,  will  waste  his  wealth,  will  have  many 
servants,  will  be  hated  by  his  kinsmen,  preceptors,  enemies 
and  friends  ; will  be  fond  of  deeds  of  wickedness,  will  acquire 
much  property,  will  never  spend  money  on  charity,  will 
assume  a show  of  virtue,  will  worship  the  Devas  and  will 
suffer  from  phlegmatic  attacks  affecting  the  chest.  He  will 
meet  his  death  from  pains  in  the  belly  by  vomition  and  by 
drugs  administered  by  women. 

12.  A person  born  when  the  rising  sign  is  Pisces  will 
have  thick  lips,  fish-like  eye  and  large  nose,  will  be  of 
phlegmatic  and  windy  temperament,  will  be  a sage,  will  be 
of  disfigured  skins  and  of  active  habits,  will  be  remarkable 
for  his  gain  and  loss,  will  have  good  servants  and  kinsmen, 
will  be  disposed  to  deeds  of  virtue,  will  have  a good  wife, 
will  help  his  father,  will  join  a woman  of  low  deeds  and  will 
have  bad  enemies.  He  will  meet  his  death  by  disease, 
corruption  of  the  blood,  snake-bite,  attack  of  a lion,  by  the 
chiefs  of  parties  of  men,  by  venereal  diseases,  by  drugs,  by 
fasting  or  by  the  fatigues  of  journey- 


CHAPTER.  XIX 
On  Planetary  Aspects. 

1.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Aries 
and  be  aspected  by  Mars,  the  person  will  become  a king;  if 
she  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  learned ; if 

23 


r 


176  BKIHAT  JATAKA.  [CH.  19- 

by  Jupiter,  he  will  resemble  a king1;  if  by  Venus,  he  will  be 
a man  of  good  conduct;  if  by  the  Saturn,  he  will  be  a thief 
and  it  by  the  Sun,  he  will  be  poor. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Taurus 
and  be  aspected  by  Mars,  the  person  will  be  poor ; if  she  be 
aspected  by  Mercury,  he  will  be  a thief;  if  by  Jupiter,  he 
will  be  respected  by  the  people;  if  by  Venus  he  will  be 
a king;  if  by  Saturn,  he  will  be  rich  and  if  by  the  Sun  he 
will  be  a Servant. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Gemini 
and  be  aspected  by  Mars,  the  person  will  sell  weapons ; if 
she  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  he  will  become  a king  ; if  by 
Jupiter,  be  will  be  learned  ; if  by  Venus,  he  will  be  fearful; 
if  by  Saturn,  he  will  be  a weaver  and  if  by  the  Sun,  he 
will  be  poor. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Cancer 
and  be  aspected  by  Mars,  the  peison  will  be  a valiant  sol- 
dier ; if  she  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  be  will  be  a literary 
author  ; if  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  learned  ; if  by  Venus,  lie 
will  be  a king  ; if  by  Saturn,  be  will  live  by7  weapons  and  if 
by  the  Sun,  he  will  suffer  from  diseases  of  the  eye. 

2.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Leo 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  an  Astrologer; 
if  aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  rich  ; if  by  Venus,  be  will 
be  a king  ;.  if  by  Saturn,  he  will  be  a barber  ; if  by  the  Sun, 
he  will  be  a king  and  if  by  Mars,  be  will  also  be  a king. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Virgo 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  a king  ; if 
aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a commander  of  armies  ; if 
by  Venus,  he  will  be  vigilent  aud  if  by  Saturn,  the  Sun  or 
Mars,  ho  will  live  by  serving  under  women. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Libra 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  a king ; if 


on.  19] 


BEIHAT  JATAKA- 


177 


aspected  by  jupiter,  be  will  work  in  gold  ; if  by,  Venus,  he 
will  be  a trader  ; and  if  by  Saturn,  the  Sun  or  Mars,  he  will 
be  a chief  and  will  work  mischief. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Scorpio 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury*  the  person  will  get  twins;  if 
aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  obedient  •,  if  by  Vernus,  he 
will  be  a washerman  ,*  if  by  Saturn,  he  will  be  of  defective 
limbs;  if  by  the  Sun,  he  wdl  be  poor  and  if  by  Mars  he  will 
be  a king. 

3.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  theMoon  occupy  sign  Sagit- 
tal! and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  protect 
his  kinsmen;  if  aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  wi!  be  a king; 
if  by  Venus,  he  will  protect  many  men;  and  if  by  Saturn, 
the  Sun  or  Mars  he  will  be  a fop,  will  put  on  a show  of 
virtue  and  will  not  attend  to  the  work  of  other  persons. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Capricorn 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  the  king  of 
kings  ; if  aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a king  ; if  by 
Venus,  he  will  be  learned;  if  by  Saturn,  be  will  be  rich;  if  by 
the  Sun,  he  will  be  poor  and  if  by  Mars,  lie  will  be  a king. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Aquarius 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  bon  king;  if 
aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  resemble  a King  ; if  by  Venus 
or  Saturn  or  the  Sun  or  Mars  he  will  bo  foud  of  the  wrives 
of  other  men. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  sign  Pisces 
and  be  aspected  by  Mercury,  the  person  will  be  witty  ; if 
aspected  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a king;  if  by  Venu3,  lie 
will  be  learned  and  if  by  Saturn,  the  Sun  or  Mars,  he  will 
do  wicked  deeds. 

Notes. 

As  stated  in  the  last  Stanza  of  the  last  chapter,  all  that 
has  been  said  of  the  Moon  applies  also  to  the  rising  sign. 


178 


BRIHAT  JATAh'A. 


[CH.  19. 


TIiq  Moon  by  aspecting  the  several  signs  of  the  Zodiac 
except  sign  Cancer  produces  malefic  effects  when  such  signs 
are  rising  signs. 

4.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  the  solar 
or  lunar  hora  of  a sign,  she  will  produce  benefic  effects  if 
tShe  be  aspected  by  planets  occupying  respectively  the  solar 
and  lunar  horas.  (a)  If  the  Moon  be  aspected  by  the  lord 
of  the  Drekkana  occupied  by  her  or  by  planets  occupying 
friendly  signs  she  will  produce  benfic  effects.  (&).  The  effects 
described  for  the  Moon  occupying  the  several  signs  and  as- 
pected by  the  several  planets  apply  to  her  when  she  occu- 
pies the  several  Dwadasamsas  aud  is  aspected  by  the  seve- 
ral planets-  (c.)  If  the  Moon  occupy  particular  Navamsas 
and  be  aspected  by  the  several  planets,  the  effects  will  be 
those  stated  as  follows. 

Notes. 

(a) .  If  the  Moon  be  aspected  by  planets  occupying 
horas  whose  lords  are  different  from  the  lords  of  the  horas 
occupied  by  her  the  effects  will  be  malefic.  The  same  re- 
marks apply  to  the  rising  hora. 

( b ) .  The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  rising  Drekkana. 

(c) .  The  same  remark  holds  with  reference  to  the 
rising  Dvvadasamsa.  If  the  rising  Dwadasamsa  be  other 
than  that  of  Cancer,  and  if  the  rising  sign  be  aspected  by 
the  Moon  the  effects  will  be  malefic  ; if  the  rising  Dwada- 
samsa be  that  of  Cancer,  and  if  the  rising  sign  be  aspected 
by  the  Moon,  the  effects  will  be  benefic. 

5.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Moon  occupy  the 
Navamsa  of  Mars  and  be  aspected  by  the  Sun,  the  person  will 
be  the  protector  of  a city  ; if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will  bo 
fond  of  torture  ; if  aspected  by  Mercury  ho  will  be  skilled 
in  duel  fight ; if  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a king  ; if  by  Ve- 
nus he  will  bo  rich  and  if  by  Saturn,  he  will  bring  on  quar- 
rels. 


cfi;  10.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


179 


If  afc  the  time  of  birth  _,theMoon  occupy  the  Navamsa  of 
Venus  and  be  aspected  by  the  Sun,  the  person  will  be  a 
fool;  if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will  be  foud  of  the  wives  of 
other  men;  if  by  Mercury  or  Jupiter  he  will  be  produce 
good  literary  works;  if  by  Venus,  he  will  be  fond  of  com- 
forts ; if  by  Saturn,  he  will  unite  with  the  wives  of  other 
men. 


6.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  the 
Navatnsa  of  Mercury  and  be  aspected  by  the  Suu,  the 
person  will  bo  a duellist  or  a dancer;  if  aspected  by  Mars 
he  will  be  a thief;  if  by  Mercury  be  will  be  a great  poet ; 
if  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a minister;  if  by  Venus,  he  will  be 
skilled  in  music  and  if  by  Saturn,  he  will  be  skilled  in 
mechanical  arts- 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  the  Navamsa 
of  Caocer  and  be  aspected  by  the  Sun,  the  person  will  be 
of  small  body  ; if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will  be  a niggard 
and  will  possess  small  wealth  ; if  by  Mercury  be  will  prac- 
tise austerities;  if  by  Jupiter,  he  will  be  a chief,  if  by  Venus, 
be  will  thrive  by  women  and  if  by  Saturn,  he  will  be  fond 
of  work. 

7.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  the  Navamsa 
of  Leo  and  be  aspected  by  the  Sun,  the  person  will  be  a 
mau  of  angry  temper;  if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will  be  liked 
by  the  king;  if  by  Mercury,  he  will  become  rich  by  the 
discovery  of  hidden  treasure;  if  by  Jupiter,  be  will  cairy 
his  orders  into  effect;  if  by  Venus,  he  will  have  no  sous  and 
if  by  Saturn  he  will  do  wicked  deeds. 

If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  the  Navamsa 
of  Jupiter  and  be  aspected  by  the  Sun,  the  person  will  be 
a man  of  well-known  powers;  if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will 
be  learned  in  the  rules  of  fight ; if  by  Mercury,  he  will  be 
skilled  in  ridicule;  if  by  Jupiter,  lie  will  bo  a minister;  if 


I3RIHAT  JATAKA. 


ISO 


[err.  10. 


by  Venus,  lie  will  be  a man  of  no  virility  and  if  by 
Saturn,  be  will  be  charitably  disposed. 

8.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Moon  occupy  the 
Navamsa  of  Saturn  and  be  aspected  by  the  Sun/ the  person 
wili  have  very  few  children  ; if  aspected  by  Mars,  he  will  be 
unhappy  though  rich  ; it  by  Mercury,  he  will  be  haughty  ,k  if 
by  Jupiter,  he  will  do  deeds  unsuited  to  his  station  in  life  ,• 
if  by  Venus,  he  will  be  fond  of  bad  women  aud  if  b}7  Saturn, 
he  will  be  a niggard  (a).  All  that  has  been  said  for  the 
Moon  occupying  particular  Navamsas  and  aspected  by  the 
several  planets  applies  also  to  the  Sun — with  this  exception 
that  where  solar  aspect  has  been  referred  to,  it  shall  be  read 
as  lunar  aspect. 

Notes. 

(a).  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  rising  Navam- 
sa as  to  the  Moon — but  if  the  Moon  aspect  the  rising 
sigu  when  the  rising  N&vamsa  is  other  than  that  of  Cancer 
the  effects  will  be  malefic. 

9.  If  the  Moon  occupy  a Vavgottama  position,  her 
own  Navamsa,  or  other  Navamsas  and  be  aspected  by 
benefic  planets,  the  effects  will  respectively  he  full,  imper- 
fect and  small.  But  if  she  be  aspected  by  malefic  planets, 
the  effects  will  respectively  be  small,  imperfect  and  full 
(a).  If  the  lord  of  the  Navamsa  be  powerful,  the  effects 
described  for  planetary  aspects  in  the  case  of  signs  and 
Navamsas  ( b ) will  alone  come  to  pass  (c.) 

Notes. 

(a).  The  same  remark  applies  to  the  rising  sign  and 
to  the  Sun. 

(fc).  Navamsas  occupied  by  the  Sun  or  the  Moon  or  the 
rising  Navamsa. 

(c).  And  those  described  for  planetary  aspects  in  the 
case  of  boras,  Drekkanas  and  Dwadasamsas. 


cu.  20.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


181 


CHAPTER  XX. 

On  the  Planets  in  the  Bhavas. 

1.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  sun  oc- 
cupy the  ascendant,  the  person  will  be  fond  of  fight, 
slow  at  work,  without  sight  and  without  mercy  ; but  if 
Aries  be  the  rising  sign  and  the  Sun  occupy  it  the  person 
will  be  rich  and  afflicted  with  diseases  of  the  eye  ; if  Leo  be 
the  rising  sign  and  the  Sun  occupy  it,  he  will  be  blind  at 
night ; if  Libra  be  the  rising  sign  aud  the  sun  occupy  it,  the 
person  will  be  blind  and  poor  ; if  Cancer  be  the  rising  sign 
and  the  Sun  occupy  it,  he  will  have  a mote  in  his  eye.  If 
the  Sun  occupy  the  2nd  house  from  the  ascendant,  the 
person  will  be  greatly  rich,  will  have  his  wealth  carried 
away  by  the  king  and  will  suffer  from  diseases  in  the 
face- 

2.  If  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Sun  occupy  the  3rd 
house  from  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  be  intelligent  and 
powerful  ; if  be  occupy  the  4th  house,  the  person  will  bo 
afflicted  with  grief  and  mental  sufferings  ,'  if  he  occupy  the 
5th  house,  he  will  have  no  sous  and  will  be  poor  and  if  he 
occupy  the  6th  house,  the  person  will  be  powerful  and  he 
subjugated  by  his  enemy  (a). 

Notes. 

(a).  According  to  another  reading,  if  the  Sun  occupy 
the  6th  house  from  the  ascendant  the  person’s  enemies,  will 
meet  with  ruin  According  to  Satyachariar  such  a person  will 
be  free  from  enemies,  diseases  aud  grief  ; but  the  text  has 
the  support  of  Yavanachariar  and  Suckidhwaja. 

3.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person  the  Sun  occupy 
the  7th  house  from  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  suffer 
digrace  at  the  hauds  of  women  ; if  he  occupy  the  8th 
house,  the  person  will  have  very  few  sons  aud  will  become 
bliud  J if  he  occupy  the  9th  house,  the  person  will  have  sons 


182 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  20. 


wealth  and  comfort  (a).  ; if  he  occupy  the  10th  house,  the 
person  will  live  in  comfort  and  will  be  powerful ; if  he  occu- 
py the  11th  house  the  person  will  be  very  rich  and  if  he 
occupy  the  12th  house  he  will  become  an  apostate. 

Notes. 

(a).  According  to  another  reading  a person  born  with 
the  Sun  in  the  9th  house  will  have  neither  sons  nor  wealth. 
Accordingly  Satyacbariar  says  that  such  a person  will  do 
wicked  deeds,  will  be  afflicted  with  diseases  and  will  attain 
an  humble  position  in  life, 

4.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person  the  Moon  occu- 
py the  ascendant  such  person  will  become  dumb  or  mad  or 
an  idiot  or  blind  or  deaf  ; he  will  do  mean  deeds  or  will 
become  a slave  ; if  the  rising  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  be 
Cancer,  Aries  or  Taurus  the  person  will  be  rich,  will  have 
many  sons  and  will  be  wealthy  respectively.  If  the  Moon 
occuppy  the  2ud  house  from  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  be 
a man  of  a large  family.  If  she  occupy  the  3rd  house,  he 
will  delight  in  torturing  animals-  If  she  occupy  the  4th 
or  the  5th  house,  he  will  bo  in  the  full  enjoyment  of  what 
the  houses  signify  (a).  If  she  occupy  the  Otli  house,  the 
person  from  will  be  of  soft  body,  will  have  a dull  appetite 
will  be  sparing  in  sexual  union,  will  be  cruel  aud  will  be 
slow  at  work. 

Notes. 

(a)-  That  is,  if  the  Moon  occupy  the  4th  house  from  the 
ascendant,  the  person  will  be  happy, will  have  kinsmen  and 
houses,  and  will  be  learned;  and  if  she  occupy  the  5th  house, 
the  person  will  possess  intelligence,  sons  and  the  like. 

(5.)  If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Moon  occupy  the  7th 
bouse  from  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  bejealous  of  the 
prosperity  of  other  men  and  will  be  lustful.  If  she  occupy 
the  8th  house,  the  person  will  be  fiickleminded  and  will  bo 
afflicted  with  diseases.  If  she  occupy  the  9th  house  the 


BPJHAT  JJlTAKA." 


183 


cn.  20.] 


person  will  be  liked  by  all  and  will  have  sons,  kinsmen  and 
wealth.  If  she  occupy  the  lOth  house,  be  will  be  successful 
in  all  places,  will  be  virtuons,  wealthy,  intelligent  and 
valorous.  If  she  occupy  the  11th  house,  the  person  will  be 
famous  and  will  gain  wealth  and  the  like  and  if  she  occupy 
the  L 2th  house  from  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  be 

wicked  and  of  defective  limbs. 


6.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person  Mars  occupy  the 
ascendant,  such  person  will  possess  a wounded  body  ; if  he 
occupy  the  2nd  house,  the  person  will  eat  low  meals  ; if  he 
occupy  the  9th  house,  the  person  will  be  a sinner  and  if  he 
occupy  the  remaining  houses  (a)  he  will  produce  the  same 
effects  as  the  Sun  in  those  places. 

Again,  if  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person  Mercury  occu- 
py the  ascendant  such  person  will  be  learned.  If  ho  occupy 
the  2nd  house,  the  person  will  be  wealthy.  If  he  occupy 
the  3rd  house  the  person  will  be  wicked.  If  he  occupy  the 
4th  house,  the  person  will  be  learned.  If  he  occupy  the  5tn 
house,  he  will  be  a minister  under  a king  ; if  he  occupy  the 
6th  house,  be  will  have  no  enemies.  If  he  occupy  the  7th 
house,  he  will  possess  a knowledge  of  law.  If  he  occupy 
the  8th  house,  tho  person  will  be  renowned  for  his  virtues. 
If  he  occupy  the  9th,  10th,  1 Ith  and  12th  houses  he  will  pro- 
duce the  same  effects  as  the  Suu  in  those  places. 

Notes. 


(a).  That  is  the  3rd  4th,  5th,  6th,  7th,  8th,  10th. 
11th,  and  12th  houses. 

7.  If  at  tho  time  of  birth  of  a person  Jupiter  occupy 
the  12  signs  from  the  ascendant,  such  person  w ill  respec- 
tively he  learned,  of  good  speech,  a niggard,  will  live  in 
comfort,  will  be  intelligent,  will  have  no  enemies,  will 
possess  qualities  superior  to  those  of  his  father,  will  do  deeds 

24 


3S-4 


jWlTTlT  JATAXA. 


[CH.  20. 


■unsuited  to  Ids  rnnlc  in  1 ife_,  -will  be  a devotee,  "will  be  pos- 
sessed of  wealth,  will  be  full  of  gain  and  will  do  fearful 
deeds. 


8.  If  at  the  time  of  birtli  of  a person  Venus  occupy 
the  ascendant,  such  person  will  be  skilled  in  acts  of  love 
and  will  live  in  great  comfort;  if  Venus  occupy  the  7th 
house,  the  person  will  be  fond  of  quarrels  and  of  sexual 
union  ; if  Venus  occupy  the  oth  house  the  person  will  live 
in  comfort  and  if  lie  occupy  the  remainiug  houses  (a)  the 
effects  will  be  the  same  as  those  of  Jupiter  in  those  places; 
but  if  Venus  occupy  sign  Pisces  at  the  time  of  birth  the 
person  will  become  rich. 

Notes. 

(a).  That  is  the  2nd,  3rd,  4th,  6th,  8th,  9th,  10th, 
1 1 tli  and  12th  houses. 

9.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person  Saturn  occup)'  the 
ascendant,  such  person  will  he  poor,  null  be  afflicted  with 
diseases  and  sexual  passion,  will  bo  dirty  will  suffer  much 
from  diseases  while  young, and  will  be  of  indinstinct  speech. 
But  if  the  ascendant,  occupied  by  Saturn,  be  Libra,  Sagittari, 
Capricoru,  Aquarius  or  Pisces,  the  person  will  be  as  happy 
ns  a king,  will  rule  over  a village  or  a town,  will  be  learned 
and  will  possess  fine  limbs.  But  if  Saturn  occupy  any  of  the 
other  houses  (from  the  2nd  to  the  12th)  the  effects  will  be 
the  same  as  those  of  the  Sun  in  the  same  places. 

10.  In  determining  the  effects  of  the  planets  in  the 
several  houses  from  the  ascendant  the  nature  of  such  houses 
shall  be  taken  into  account,  that  is,  whether  the  houses 
occupied  by  the  several  planets  are  their  friendly  signs  or 
inimical  or  neutral  signs  or  their  own  Louses  or  their  exal- 
tation signs  and  the  like  (a).  Again,  according  to  Satya- 
chariar,  benefic  planets  promote  the  bhavas  while  malefic 
ones  reduce  them  ; but  in  the  cases  of  the  6th,  8th  and  12th 
houses  the  reverse  is  the  case  (&) 


Ch.  20.] 


ERlIIAT  JATAEA. 


185 


Notes. 

(а) -  That  is  if  the  houses  occupied  by  the  planers  bo 
their  exaltation  sigus>  their  friendly  signs  or  their  own 
houses  the  effects  described  will  fully  come  to  pass;  if  such 
houses  be  their  inimical  signs  the  effects  will  fail  and  if  the 
houses  be  neutral  signs,  neither  more  nor  less  of  the  effects 
described  will  come  to  pass.  All  this  is  according  to  G'arga. 

(б) .  According  to  Satyachariar,  if  a benefic  planet 
occupy  the  6th  house  the  enemies  will  meet  with  ruin  and 
if  a malefic  planet  occupy  it,  the  enemies  will  increase. 
Again,  if  a benefic  planet  occupy  the  8rh  house,  a person 
will  be  freed  from  dangers  to  life  aud  if  a malefic  planet 
occupy  it,  danger  to  life  will  increase.  Lastly  if  a benefic 
plauet  occupy  the  12th  house  there  will  be  no  loss  to  the 
person  and  if  a malefic  planet  occupy  it  there  will  bo  an 
increase  of  loss. 

31.  If  the  planets  to  which  good  effects  have  been 
assigned  occupy  their  exaltation  signs  such  effects  will  fully 
come  to  pass.  If  they  occupy  their  Muolatrikona  signs 
only  three-fourths  of  such  effects  will  come  to  pass  ; if  they 
occupy  their  own  houses  one-half’  of  such  effects  will  come 
to  pass;  it  they  occupy  their  friendly  signs  one-quarter  0£ 
such  effects  will  come  to  pass;  if  they  occupy  their  inimical 
signs  less  than  one-quarter  of  such  effects  will  come  to  pass 
and  if  the  planets  occupy  their  depression  signs  or  if  they 
happen  to  be  Astangata  planets  the  good  effects  described 
will  wholly  fail. 

Notes. 

If  the  effects  be  bad,  theu  if  the  planets  occupy  their 
depression  signs  or  if  they  he  Astangata  planets,  the  evil 
effects  will  fully  come  to  pass.  If  they  occupy  their  inirni- 
cal  signs,  then  three- fourths,  if  they  occupy  their  friendly 
signs,  then  one-half,  if  they  occupy  their  own  signs  theu  one- 
quarter,  if  they  occupy  their  Muola  Ti ikona  signs,  then  less 


186 


BttlUAT  J A TAKA. 


[CH.  21 


tlian  a quarter  of  the  evil  effects  will  come  to  pass.  But  i f 
they  occupy  their  exaltation  signs.,  the  evil  effects  will  fail 


CHAPTER  XX 1. 

On  the  Pianets  in  tTIe  Several  Vargas. 

1.  If  a single  planet  occupy  its  own  house  at  the  time 
of  birth  of  a person  such  person  will  possess  the  average 
dignity  of  the  member.siof  his  family;  if  two  planets  occupy 
their  own  houses  the  person  will  be  an  important  member  of 
liisfamily;  if  three  planets  occupy  their  own  houses,  the  person 
will  be  respected  by  his  kinsmen ; if  four  planets  occupy 
their  own  houses,  the  person  will  be  rich;  if  five  planets  d0 
so  he  will  live  in  comfort;  if  six,  he  will  live  in  luxurious 
ease  and  as  happy  as  a king  and  if  seven  planets  occupy 
their  own  houses  the  person  will  become  a king. 

Again  if  one  of  the  planets  occupy  a friendly  sign,  the 
person  will  lead  a dependent  life;  if  two  planets  do  so  he 
will  be  protected  by  his  friends;  if  three,  by  his  kinsmen  ; 
if  four,  by  his  brothers  and  cousins  , if  five,  the  person  will 
boa  master  over  many  people;  if  six,  he  will  become  a com- 
mander of  an  army  and  if  seven,  he  will  become  a king. 

2.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  a single  planet 
occupy  its  exaltation  sign  and  be  aspected  by  a friendly 
planet  such  person  will  become  a king;  ifatt.be  time  of 
birth  one  of  the  planets  occupy  its  exaltation  sign  and  be 
accompanied  bv  a friendly  planet,  the  person  will  become 
very  rich  and  will  bo  universally  respected  ; if  at  the  time 
of  birth  one  of  the  planets  occupy  either  an  inimical  or  a 
depression  sign,  the  person  will  become  poor  ; if  two  planets 
occupy  their  inimical  or  depression  sigus,  the  person  will 
become  afflicted  with  grief.  If  three  planets  occupy  their 
inimical  or  depression  sigus,  the  person  will  become  a fool. 

If  four  pianola  do  so,  the  person  will  become  afflicted  with 


err.  21.] 


URI  HAT  J AT  AKA. 


167 


diseases.  If  five  planets  do  so  the  person  will  suffer  im- 
prisonment; if  six  planets, ^the  per>on  will  be  a victim  to 
much  grief  and  if  seven  planets  do  so,  lie  will  subject  to 
torture  persons  who  ought  not  to  be  tortured. 

Notes. 

Mercury  and  the  Sun%  cannot  at  the  same  time  occupy 
their  depression  signs  viz.  Pisces  and  Libra  respective- 
ly* Seven  planets  cannot  therefore  occupy  their  depression 
signs  at  the  same  time*  In  this  as  in  certain  other  cases 
ready  stated,  the  author  has  simply  quoted  the  views  of  for- 
mer writers. 

3.  According  to  Satyachariar  a person  born  when 
Aquarius  is  the  rising  sign  will  uot  be  happy  ; but  accord- 
ing to  Yavauas,  a person'  born  when  Aquarius  is  the  rising 
Duadasamsa  will  not  be  happy.  This  latter  view  is  objec- 
ted to  by  Vishnugupta  on  the  ground  that  each  sign  of  the 
Zodiac  contains  the  Dwadasamsa  of  Aquarius  and  that  bene _ 
fivial  effects  have  been  ascribed  to  several  signs. 

4*  A person  born  when  malefic  planets  occupy  the 
solar  horas  of  odd  signs  will  be  of  wide-spread  fame,  will  do 
important  deeds,  will  be  powerful,  healthy  and  of  bright 
appearance.  A person  born  when  benefic  planets  occupy 
the  lunar  horas  of  even  signs  will  be  of  gentle  manners 
and  of  bright  appearance;  will  live  in  comfort,  will  be  liked 
by  all;  will  be  intelligent  and  will  be  of  sweet  speech. 

5*  If  the  horas  occupied  by  the  malefic  and  benefic 
planets  be  the  same  as  stated  above  while  the  signs  are  dif~ 
erent,  (a)  the  person  will  be  all  that  has  been  stated  above 
for  the  two  yogas  in  a moderate  degree  ; but  if  both  the 
horas  aud  signs  be  different  ( b ) the  effects  will  fail. 

Notes. 

(a).  That  is  if  the  malefic  planets  occupy  the'solar 
horas  in  aven  sigus  or  the  beneliic  planets  occupy  the  lunar 
horas  iu  odd  signs. 


383 


ERIIIAT  J ATARI. 


[CH.  21. 


(/;)  That  is  if  the  malefic  planets  occupy  the  lunar 
horas  of  the  even  s’gus  or  the  beuefic  planets  occupy  the 
solar  boras  of  odd  signs. 

N.  B.  both  the  author  aud  commentator  have  failed 
to  notice  the  case  of  a person  born  when  the  malefic 
planets  occupy  the  lunar  horas  of  odd  signs  or  the  benefic 
planets  occupy  the  solar  horas  of  even  signs.  Evidently  a 
person  born  under  these  yogas  wll  be  all  that  has  been  stated 
in  the  4th  stanza  in  a moderate  degree. 

6.  A person  born  when  the  Moon  occupies  either  her 
own  Drekkana  or  a friendly  (a)  Drekkana  will  be  of  very 
fine  beauty  and  of  well-known  virtues;  but  if  the  Moon 
occupy  other  Drekkanas  the  person  will  be  what  has  been 
stated  above  agreeably  to  the  character  of  the  lord  of  such 
l)rekkana.(6). 

If  at  the  time  of  birth  the  Moon  occupy  a Sarpa 
(serpent)  Drekkana  (c)  the  person  will  be  wicked  ; if  she 
occupy  an  Ayudha  (weapon)  Drekkana  ( d ) the  person  will  do 
deeds  ot  torture  ; if  she  occupy  a Chatushpad  (quadruped) 
Drekkana  («)  the  person  will  cohabit  with  his  pi'eceptor’3 
wife,  and  if  she  occupy  a Pakshi  (bird)  Drekkna  (f)  the 
person  will  be  of  wandering  habits. 

Notes. 

(a) .  Friendly  at  the  time  of  birth.  Vide  chapter.  II 
stau  za  1 • 

( b ) .  That  is  if  such  lord  be  netural  (at  the  time  ot 
birth)  to  the  Moon,  the  person  will  be  what  has  been  stated 
ia  a moderate  degree  j but  if  he  be  inimical  to  the  Mood,  the 
effects  will  fail. 

(c) .  Sarpa  Vyala  Drekkanas  : These  are  the  2nd  Drek 
k ana  of  Cancer,  the  1st  of  Vrischika  and  the  3rd  of  Pisces 

(cZ).  Ayudha  Drekkanas  i These  are  the  1st  and  3rd 
Drekkanas  of  Aries,  the  2nd  of  Gemini,  the  1st  of  Leo,  the 
2nd  of  Libra  aud  the  1st  of  Aquarius 


BRIIIAT  JATAKA* 


189 


C!H.  21.] 


( e ).  Chatushpad  Drekkanas  : These  are  the  2nd  Drek- 
kana  of  Aries, the  2nd  and  3rd  of  Taurus,  the  1st  of  Cancer, 
the  3rd  of  Libra,  the  3rd  of  Scorpio  and  the  1st  of 
Sagittari. 

if).  Pakshi  Drekkanas  : These  are  2nd  Drekkana  of 
Aries,  the  2nd  of  Gemini,  the  1st  of  Leo  and  the  2nd  of 
Libra. 


If  the  Drekkanas  occupied  by  the  Moon  be  of  more  than 
one  character,  the  person  will  be  all  that  has  been  stated  for 
each  character. 

7.  A person  born  when  the  rising  Navamsa  (a)  is  that 
of  Aries  will  be  a thief;  when  it  is  that  of  Taurus,  he  will 
enjoy  away  his  earnings  ;when  it  is  that  of  Gemini,  the  per- 
son will  be  learned  ; when  it  is  that  of  Cancer  he  will  be 
wealthy  ; when  it  is  that  of  Leo,  he  will  he  a king  ; when  it  is 
that  of  Virgo,  he  will  be  hermaphrodite  ; when  it  is  that  of 
Libra,  he  will  bo  bold  in  fight  ; when  it  is  that  of  Scorpio 
lie  will  earn  his  livellihood  by  carrying  loads;  when 
it  is  that  of  Sagitari  he  will  become  a slave  , when  it  is  that 
of  Capricorn  he  will  he  a sinner  ; when  it  is  that  of  Aqu- 
arius, he  will  be  wicked  and  when  it  is  that  of  Pisces  he 
be  fearless. 

But  if  the  rising  Navamsa  be  at  the  same  time  a 
Vargottma  Navamsa  (b)  the  person  born  will  be  the  chief 
of  the  respective  classes  of  persons  mentioned  (c). 

The  rising  Dwadasamsas  produce  the  same  effects  as 
the  rising  signs. 

Notes. 

(a)-  These  Navamsas  of  Aries,  Taurus,  Gemini  &c., 
are  Navamsas  other  than  those  of  the  respective  signs  Aries, 
Taurus,  Gemini  See- 

(b) .  That  is  Navamsas  excluded  in  note  (a). 

(c) .  For  instance,  the  person  will  bo  a chief  of 
thieves  Ac. 


190 


BRinAT  JATAkA. 


[ca.  21, 


8.  A person  born  when  Mars  occupies  his  own  Trim 
samsa  will  be  a married  man,  will  be  powerful,  will  wear 
ornaments,  will  be  generous,  will  be  of  bright  appearance 
and,  will  thoughtlessly  engage  in  work. 

A person  horn  when  S iturn  occupies  his  own  Trimsamsa 
will  be  afflicted  with  diseases  ; his  wife  will  die  before  him,  he 
will  be  wicked,  will. covet  the  w ives  of  other  men,  will  bo 
afflicted  with  grief,  will  have  a house,  clothes,  attendants 
and  the  like  and  will  be  dirty. 

9.  A person  born  when  Jupiter  occupies  his  owu 
Trimsamsa  will  be  rich,  famous,  happy,  intelligent,  of  bright 
appearance,  universally  respected,  1’ree  from  diseases,  of 
active  habits  and  will  live  in  luxury. 

A person  born  when  Mercury  occupies  his  own  Trim- 
samsa will  be  intelligent  and  learned  in  the  fine  aits;  will  be 
a fop,  a literary  author,  of  distinct  speech,  will  be  skilled  in 
carpentry  and  the  like,  will  tollow  the  rules  of  life  laid 
down  hv  sages,  will  commence  bold  projects  and  wilt  ha 
much  respected. 

K).  A person  born  when  Venus  occupies  his  own  Trim- 
samsa will  have  many  sons,  will  live  in  comfort, will  he  free 
from  diseases,  will  love  mankind,  will  be  rich,  beautiful,  wick- 
ed, of  fair  body  and  will  enjoy  many  women. 

A person  born  when  the  Trimsamsa  of  Mars  is  occu- 
pied by  the  Sun,  will  he  bold  in  fight  and  when  it  is  occu. 
pied  by  the  Moon  he  will  be  slow  at  work. 

A person  born  when  the  Trimsamsa  of  Saturn  is  occu„ 
pied  by  the  Sun  will  be  wicked  and  when  it  is  occupied  by 
the  Moon,  he  will  iudttlge  in  acts  of  torture. 

A person  born  when  the  Trimsamsa  of  Jupiter  is  occu- 
pied by  the  Sun  will  be  of  good  disposition  and  when  it  is 
occupied  by  the  Moon,  the  person  will  become  rich. 


ch.  22.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA- 


191 


A person  born  when  the  Trimsamsa'of  Mercury  is  occu- 
pied by  the  Suu  will  live  in  comfort  and  when  it  is  occu- 
pied by  the  Moon  ihe  person  will  be  learned. 

A person  born  when  the  Trirnsamsa  of  Venus  is  occu- 
pied by  the  Sun,  will  possess  a fine  body  and  when  it  is 
occupied  by  the  Moon  he  will  be  liked  by  the  people. 


CHAPTER  XX I J. 

On  Miscellaneous  Yogas. 

1.  Planets  occupying  their  own  signs  or  their  exal. 
tation  or  Moolatrikona  signs  are  said  to  be  Karaka  planets 
to  one  another,  if,  at  the  same  time  they  occupy  the  Ken- 
dras from  the  ascendant.  In  the  above  case  a planet  occu- 
pying the  10th  house  from  auother  planet  is  said  to  be  the 
special  Karaka  of  that  planet. 

Notes. 

In  this  and  in  the  next  two  stanzas  the  term  ‘‘  Karaka 
(helping)  planets  ” is  defined. 

— i * Accordingly  , if  the  rising  sign  be  Cancer  and  the 
Moon  occupy  it  and  if  Mars,  Saturn,  the  Sun  and  Jupiter 
occupy  their  exalt  ition  signs,  these  four  planets  are  known 
as  Karaka  planets  to  one-another  (a).  Again,  to  a planet 
occupying  ihe  rising  sign  all  planets  {b)  occupying  the  1 Oth 
or  the  4th  house  are  Karaka  planets  (c). 

Notes 

(a).  In  other  words  Jupiter  occupies  sign  Cancer 
which  is  at  the  same  time  the  rising  sign,  Saturn  occupies 
the  4i  h house  Libra,  Mars  the  / th  house  Capricorn  and  the 
Sun  the  10th  house  Aries.  The  commentator  infers  from 
tins  stanza  that  planets  occupying  their  Swakshetr  i,  Ucha 
aud  Mulati ikor.a  signs  are  also  mutually  Karaka  planets, 
if  they  occupy  Kendra  signs  from  one  another  though  not 
the  Kendra  signs  from  the  ascendant. 


A 


192 


Ulil  [I AT  JATAKA. 


[cm  22. 


(hy  Ml  the  planets  whether  they  occupy  their  own 
signs.,  their  exaltation  signs  or  their  Mnlatrikona  si»ns 
or  not,  according  to  the  commentator. 

(c'.  1 hat  is  the  reverse  does  not  hold.  In  other  words 

the  planet  occupying  the  ascendant  is  not  a Kanaka  planet 
of  those  occupying  the  4th  or  the  10th  house. 

3.  A planet  occupying  its  Mnlatrikona  and  exaltation 
sign  (a)  is  also  said  to  be  a Karaka  planet  to  one  that  occupies 
the  10th  house  ( b ) from  such  sign,  and  to  the  latter  his 
Atimitra  planet  is  also  said  to  be  a Karaka  planet. 

botes. 

(<k).  But  not  occupying  the  Kendra  houses  from  the 
ascendant. 

( b ).  This  latter  planet  must  be  in  his  Swnkshetra, 
Mnlatrikona  or  exaltation  house.  The  effects  of  the  Karaka 
planets  are  described  in  Varaha  Mihira’s  work  on  Yoga  Yatra 
in  which  it  is  stated  that  when  a prince  loses  his  kingdom, 
he  recovers  it  in  the  Antardasa  period  of  a Karaka  planet; 
again  it  is  said  that  a man  enjoys  com  fort,  wealth  and  success 
when  the  Moon  passes  through  the  house  of  a Karaka  planet, 
or  through  the  2nd  house  from  that  occupied  by  the  Sun. 
Also,  that  the  journey  may  be  a successful  one  it  shall  be 
commenced  when  the  Moon  occupies  either  of  the  two  places 
mentioned  above — otherwise  the  traveller  will  receive  blows 
ou  his  way. 

4.  A person  born  when  the  rising  Navamsa  is  a 
Vargottama  one  or  when  the  Moon  occupies  a Vargottama 
position  will  be  happy  and  prosperous.  The  same  remark 
applies  to  a persou  at  the  time  of  whose  birth  the  2nd  house 
from  the  Sun  may  be  occupied  by  benefic  planets  or  the 
Kendra  houses  may  happen  to  be  occupied  by  planets  at  all 
(a).  Also,  a person  at  the  time  of  whose  birth  there  are 
Karaka  planets  occupying  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  will  be 
happy  and  prosperous. 


cu.  2;\] 


BRIHAT  J AT  AKA. 


193 


Notes. 

(a).  If  one  of  the  Kendras  be  occupied  the  person  will 
be  happy  j if  two  or  more  be  occupied  he  wid  be  happier 
still  and  if  the  planets  be  benefic  the  person  will  be  exceed- 
ingly happy  and  prosperous. 

o-  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person  Jupiter,  the 
lord  of  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon,  or  the  lord  of  the 
ascendant  occupy  a Kendra  house,  such  person  will  be  hap- 
py when  in  his  manhood.  Again,  if  at  the  time  of  com- 
mencement of  a dusa  period  the  lord  of  such  period  happen 
to  occupy  a Prishtodaya  sign,  he  will  produce  his  effects 
at  the  end  of  the  period.  If  such  lord  occupy  a Sirodaya 
sign  he'  will  produce  his  effects  at  the  commencement  of 
the  period  and  if  he  occupy  a Sira-Prishtodaya  sign,  the 
elfects  will  be  felt  in  the  middle  of  the  period. 

Notes. 

The  Dasa  period  is  to  be  divided  into  three  equal  parts 
and  the  Sirodaya,  Prishtodaya  and  Sira  prishtodaya  signs 
are  defined  in  stanza  10  of  Chapter  I. 

0.  The  Sun  and  Mars  produce  their  effects  immedi- 
ately after  entering  a sign  3 Jupiter  and  Venus  when  pass- 
ing through  the  middle  of  a sign  ; Saturn  and  the  Moon 
before  quitting  a sign  and  Mercury  throughout  his  course. 

Notes. 

The  sign  must  be  supposed  to  be  divided  into  three 
equal  parts  of  10  degrees  each. 


CHAPTER  XXIII. 

On  Malefic  Yo<?hs. 

1.  If  at  tli e time  of  birth  of  a person  the  5th  and  7th 
houses  from  the  ascendant  or  from  the  Moon  be  either 
occupied  or  a^pected  by  benefic  planets  or  by  their  lords, 

such  person  will  have  respectively  sous  (a)  and  a wife 

otherwise,  (b)  he  will  not  have  either  the  one  or  the  other. 


Bill  HAT  JATAKA. 


1 04 


[c  h-523. 


If  Virgo  be  the  rising  sign  and  if  the  Sun  occupy  it,  the 
person  will  lose  his  wife  provided  Saturn  occupies  sign 
Pieces  at  the  same  time  and  will  lose  his  sons  if  Mars 
occupy  sign  Capricorn  at  the  same  time. 

Notes. 

(a.)  One  of  12  sorts  of  sons  (1)  Oarasa,  (2)  Kshetraja,  (3) 
l)atta,  (4)  Rrittrima  (5)  Gudhotpanna,  (G)  Apavidha,  v7) 
Kaneena,  (8)  Sahodha,  ^9)  Kreeta,  (10)  Pounarbhava,  (11) 
Swnyamdatta  and  (12)  Adharnaprabhava. 

(Zi.)  That.  '9  if  the  5t.h  and  7th  houses  from  the  ascendant 
or  the  Moon  bo  not  occupied  or  aspected  by  beuefic  planets  or  by 
the  lords  of  the  houses, 

If  the  Moon  and  Saturn  occupy  the  7th  house  a person’s 
wife  will  quit  hiui  and  marry  another. 

If  the  7th  house  be  aspected  by  the  Moon  and  Saturn  the 
number  of  wives  of  a person  will  be  the  number  represented  by 
the  Navamsa  occupied  by  the  lord  of  the  7th  house  counting 
from  the  Navamsa  of  Aries. 

If  Jupiter  or  the  Moon  and  Venus  occupy  the  7ih  house 
and  the  Navamsa  of  the  Sun  or  Mars,  the  person  will  have  a 
single  wife;  but  if  the  7th  house  be  aspected  by  the  Moou  and 
Venus,  the  person  will  have  several  wives. 

2.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  malefic  planets 
occupy  the  4th  and  8th  houses  from  Venus  or  if  malefic 
planets  be  ou  both  sides  of  Venus  or  if  Venus  be  not  ac- 
companied or  aspected  by  benefic  planets  the  person’s  wife 
will  die  by  fire,  by  fall  or  by  ropes  respectivel}*. 

Notes. 

Provided,  in  the  first  Toga,  Venus  at  the  same  time  occupies 
an  Agni  (fiery)  Drekkaua,  in  the  second  a Nipata  (falling)  Drek- 
kana  and  in  the  third  a Pasa  (rope)  Drekkaua.  (Vide  Chapter 
27  on  the  Drekkanas.) 

3.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  one  of  the  two 
houses,  the  12th  and  the  dth,  from  the  ascendant  be  oscu- 


ch.  23.1 


B RIEL  AT  J AT  AKA. 


195 

pied  by  the  Sun  and  the  other  by  the  Moon,  the  person 
and  his  wife  will  each  have  a single  eye.  Again,  if  Venus 
and  the  Sun  (a)  occupy  one  of  the  three  houses  the  Toll,  the 
9th  and  the  5th  from  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  be  oi 
defective  limbs. 

Notes. 

(a.)  Venus  or  the  Moon  according  to  some.  This  13 
opposed  to  Garga  whom  the  commentator  quotes. 

4.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  Saturn  occupy 
the  rising  sign  (a)  and  if  Venus  occ  my  the  Chakra-sandhi 
Navamsas  and  the  7ch  house,  the  person’s  wile  will  be 
barren  ( b'),  provided  the  5th  house  is  not  occupied  by  benefic 
planets.  Again,  if  the  malefic  planets  occupy  the  12th  and 
the  7th  houses  and  the  ascendant  and  the  waning  Moon 
occupy  the  5th  house,  the  person  will  have  neither  wife 
nor  sons. 

Notes. 

(u.)  It  is  clear  that  tho  rising  sign  must  be  Taurus  or 
Virgo  or  CaDricom  in  which  case  the  7th  houses  will  respectively 
bo  Scorpio,  Pisces  and  Cancer  aud  the  last.  Navamsas  of  these 
three  honses  are  known  as  Ohakrasandhies  or  Rikshasandhies 
(Vide  stanza  7 Ch.  I.) 

(5.)  If  the  person  will  marry  again,  he  may  get  sons  ac- 
cording to  some. 

5.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  Venus  occupy 
the  7th  house  from  the  ascendant  and  be  in  the  varga 
(division)  of  Saturn  or  Mars  and  be  aspected  by  Saturn  or 
Mars,  the  person  will  commit  adultery.  Again,  if  when 
Arenus  occupies  the  varga  of  Saturn  or  Mars  and  is  aspected 
by  Saturn  or  Mars,  the  Moon,  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy  the 
7th  house  from  the  ascendant,  both  the  man  and  his  wife 
will  commit  adultery.  Again,  if  when  Venus  and  the 
Moon  occupy  a sign,  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy  the  7th 
house  from  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  have  neither  wife 


BRJHAT  JATASA. 


23- 


i9«; 


[CH. 


nor  sous.  Again,  if,  when  male  and  female  planets  occupy 
a sign,  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy  tho  7th.  house  from  tlie 
ascendant  and  be  aspected  by  benefic  planets,  the  personas 
wife  will  be  of  advanced  age  and  the  man  will  marry  late 
in  life. 

6.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person  the  Moon  occupy 
the  10th  house,  Venus  the?  th  house  and  the  malefic  planets 
the  4th  house,  such  a person  will  destroy  his  family,  (a)  If, 
at  the  time  of  birth,  Saturn  occupy  a Kendra  house  and 
aspect  a sign  the  Drekkana  of  whose  lord  may  be  occupied 
by  Mercury,  the  person  will  become  a painter.  If,  at  the 
time  of  birth,  Venus  occupy  the  12 th  house  from  the  ascen- 
dant  and  the  Navamsci  of  Saturn,  the  person  will  bo  the 
son  of  a serving  woman;  and  if  at  the  time  of  birth  the 
Sun  and  the  Moon  occupy  the  7th  house  and  be  aspected 
by  Saturn,  the  person  will  do  deeds  unsuited  to  his  rank  in 
life. 

Notes- 

(a.)  The  family  will  become  extinct  with  him. 

7.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  Venus  and 
Mars  occupy  the  7th  house  front  the  ascendant  and  be 
aspected  by  malefic  planets  such  person  will  be  afflicted  with 
swelling  illness  (a).  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person, 
the  Moon  occupy  the  Navamsa  of  Cancer  or  Scorpio  and  be 
accompanied  by  malefic  planets  the  person  will  be  afflicted 
with  diseases  of  the  genital  organ.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth, 
the  Moon  occupy  the  ascendant,  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy 
the  12th  and  2nd  houses  and  the  Sun  the  7th  house,  the 
person  will  be  afflicted  with  white  leprosy.  If,  at  the  time 
of  birth  of  a person,  the  Moon  occupy  the  1 0th  house  from 
the  ascendant,  Mars  the  7r.h  house  and  Saturn  the  2nd 
house  from  the  Sun,  such  person  will  be  of  detective  limbs* 

Notes. 

(a.)  Such  as  elephantiasis  and  the  like. 


ce.  23. ] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


197 


8.  If,  at  tli g time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  Moon 
occupy  a place  between  Saturn  and  Mars  and  the  Sun 
occupy  sign  Capricorn,  such  person  will  be  afflicted  with 
asthma,  consumntion,  and  the  diseases  of  the  spleen  ; and 
if  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Sun  occupy  the  sigti  or  the 
Navaansa  of  tin-  Moon,  the  person  will  be  afflicted  with 
plumonary  consumption,  and  if  the  Sun  and  the  Moon 
occupy  together  either  Cancer  or  Leo,  the  poison  will  be 
reduced  to  a skeleton. 

9-  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person;  the  Moon 
occupy  the  5rh  Navamsa  of  Sagittari  (a)  or  the  Navamsa 
of  i'isces,  Cancer,  Capricorn,  or  Aries  b),  and  be  either 
accompanied  or  aspected  by  Saturn  and  Mars,  such  person 
will  be  afflicted  with  leprosy  c).  Again,  if  the  5th  or  the 
9th  house  from  the  ascendant  be  sign  Scorpio,  Cancer, 
Taurus,  or  Capricorn  and  be  either  occupied  or  aspected  by- 
Saturn  and  Mars,  the  person  will  also  be  afflicted  with 
leprosy. 

Notes. 

(a.)  That  is  the  Navamsa  of  Leo  in  sign  Sagittari. 

(5.)  These  may  be  Navarnsns  of  any  sign. 

(c.)  According  to  Yavanacharyn,  if  the  Moon  be  aspected 
by  bent  tie  planets  also  at  rhe  same  tune,  the  person  will  be  of 
disfigured  bony  resulting  from  scratching. 

iO.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  Sun,  the 
Moon,  Mars  and  Saturn  occupy  the  8th,  6th,  2nd  and  12th 
houses  in  any  way,  such  person  will  become  b 1 i n < I by  causes 
pertaining  to  the  most  powerful  of  the  four  planets  (a). 

Notes. 

(a.)  If  the  powerful  planet  be  the  Moon,  blindness  will  be 
caused  by  phlegmatic  affections.  If  such  planet  be  Mars,  it  will 
be  caused  by  bilious  affections  ; if  it  be  the  Sun,  then  bv  heat  or 
wood  ; and  it  it  be  Saturn,  it  will  be  caused  by  windy  affections, 
bv  stones  and  like. 


198 


13 K I HAT  JATAKA- 


[cu.  23. 


11.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  malefic 
planets  (a)  occupy  the  9th,  nth,  3rd  and  5th  houses  and 
be  not  aspected  by  benetic  planets,  such  person  will  become 
deaf  by  causes  pertaining  to  the  most  powerful  planet  ,*  if 
such  malefic  planets  {h)  occupy  the  7th  house  from  the 
ascendant,  the  person  will  be  of  deformed  teeth. 

Notes. 

(a.)  The  Sun,  the  Moon,  Mars  and  Saturn. 

(b.)  That  is,  while  occupying  the  9th,  11th,  3rd  and  5th 
houses  and  not  aspected  by  benefic  planets. 

12.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person  the  eclipsed 
Moon,  occupy  the  rising  sign  and  if  Saturn  and  Mars 
occupy  the  5th  and  9th  houses  from  the  ascendant  such 
person  will  be  subject  to  the  influence  of  ghosts.  Again, 
if,  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  eclipsed  Sun  occupy  the  rising 
sign  and  if  Saturn  and  Mars  occupy  the  5th  and  9th 
houses  from  the  ascendant,  the  person  will  lose  his  eyes. 

13.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  Saturn  occupy 
the  7th  house  and  Jupiter  the  ascendant,  such  person  will  be 
afflicted  with  windy  complaints  ; if,  at  the  time  of  birth* 
Mars  occupy  the  7th  house  and  Jupiter  the  ascendant,  the 
person  will  become  insane.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth,  Saturn 
occupy  the  ascendant  arid  Mars  occupy  the  5th,  7th  or  9th 
house,  the  person  will  become  an  idiot.  Also,  if,  at  the 
time  of  birth,  the  waning  Muon  and  Saturn  occupy  the  12th 
house,  the  person  will  also  become  an  idiot. 

ll.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  one  of  the 
four  planets — the  lord  of  the  Navamsa  occupied  by  the 
Moon,  the  Sun,  the  Moon,  and  Jupiter — occupy  the  Navamsa 
of  the  lord  of  his  depression  sign  or  au  inimical  Navamsa, 
such  person  will  serve  under  other  men  for  his  livelihood  ; 
if  two  of  the  four  planets  occupy  either  the  one  Navamsa 
or  the  other,  he  will  become  a slave  ; aud  if  three  of  the 


GH.  23.] 


BIIIHAT  JATAKA. 


199 


planets  or  all  the  four  occupy  the  one  Navamsa  or  the 
other,  the  person  will  be  the  son  of  a slave. 

16.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  rising 
sign  be  Taurus,  Aries  or  Sagittari  and  if  malefic  planets 
aspect  it,  such  person  will  have  ugly  teeth  ; if,  at  the  time 
of  birth,  one  of  the  malefic  ^sigos  fa)  or  sign  Sagittari  or 
sign  Taurus  be  the  rising  sign  and  if  such  sign  be  aspected 
by  malefic  planets,  the  person  will  be  bald-headed  ; if  the 
Sun  occupy  the  9th  or  the  5th  house  from  the  ascendant  and  if 
he  be  aspected  by  malefic  planets  the  person  will  be  of 
weak  sight  ; if,  at  the  time  of  birth,  Saturn  occupy  the  5th 
or  the  9th  house  and  be  aspected  by  malefic  planets,  the  per- 
son will  be  afflicted  with  various  diseases  ; and  if  at  the  time 
of  birth,  Mars  occupy  the  5th  or  the  9th  house  and  be  aspect- 
ed by  malefic  planets,  the  person  will  be  of  defective  limbs. 

Notes. 

(a.)  Tbe.se  aro  the  signs  of  Aries,  Leo,  Scorpio,  Capricorn 
and  Aquarius. 

1G.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  malefic 
planets  occupy  the  12th,  5th  2nd,  and  9th  houses  in  any 
way,  such  person  will  suffer  imprisonment  and  restraint  of 
the  nature  of  the  rising  sign  (a)-  Again,  if,  at  the  time  of 
birth,  the  rising  Drekkana  be  either  a Sarpa  ( b ) (snake) 
Drekkana  or  a Pasa  (c)  (rope)  Drekkana  and  if  the  sign  (d) 
of  its  lord  be  aspected  by  malefic  planets  the  person  will 
also  suffer  imprisonment  of  the  nature  of  such  sign. 

Notes. 

(n.)  If  the  rising  sign  be  Aries,  Taurus  or  Sagittari,  the 
persou  will  be  bound  with  ropes.  If  the  rising  sign  be  Gemini’ 
ALrgo,  Libi  a or  Aquarius,  he  will  be  loaded  with  fetters.  If  the 
rising  sign  be  Cancer,  Capricorn  or  Pisces  the  person  will  be 
shut  up  in  a fortress  but  will  be  taken  care  of.  If  the  rising 
fcigu  be  scorpio,  tho  person  will  be  kept  in  a subfcerrancau  cellar. 


200 


ERIHAT  J AT AKA. 


feu.  24. 


(6.)  The  Sarpa  Drekkanaa  : These  are  tlie  first  Drekkaua 

of  Cancer,  the  1st  and  2nd  of  Scropio,  and  the  3rd  of  Pisces. 

(c  ) Ihe  Pasa  Drekkaua  : This  is  the  1st  Drekkaua  of 

Capricorn. 

(cl.)  That  is,  if  the  rising  Drekkana  be  the  first  Drekkana 
of  Cancer  for  instance,  the  lord  of  such  Drekkana  is  the  Moon 
■whose  sign  agaiu  is  Cancer.  If  the  rising  Drekkaua  be  the  2nd 
Drekkana  of  Cancer,  its  lord  is  Mars  whose  sign  is  Scorpio  and 
if  it  be  the  3rd  Drekkana  of  Cancer,  the  lord  of  such  Drekkaua 
is  Jupiter  whose  sign  is  Pisces. 

17.  If,  at  the  time  of  birtli  of  a person,  the  Moon  bo 
accompanied  by  Saturn,  aspected  by  Mars  and  be  surround- 
ed by  a balo,  such  person  will  be  a man  of  harsh  speech, 
will  be  afflicted  with  epilepsy  and  with  consumption  (a). 

If,  at  the  time  of  birth,  the  Sun,  Saturn  and  Mars 
occupy  the  10th  house  from  the  ascendant  and  if  they  be 
not  aspected  by  benefic  planets,  the  person  will  be  a servant 
of  varying  rank — dignified,  of  moderate  rank  and  of  a low 
rank  (b). 

Notes. 

(a.)  If  the  Moon  be  subject  to  the  first  of  the  three  malefic 
Yogas,  the  persou  will  be  a mau  of  harsh  speech  ; if  she  be  sub- 
ject to  the  2tid  Yoga,  the  persou  will  be  afflicted  with  epilepsy  ; 
and  if  to  the  3rd  Yoga,  the  person  will  be  afflicted  with  consump- 
tion, 

(fc.)  If  one  of  the  three  planets  occupy  the  10th  house  the 
person  will  be  a dignified  servant.  If  two  planets  occupy  the 
10th  house  he  will  be  a servant  of  middle  rank  and  if  three 
occupy  the  10th  house  he  will  be  a servant  of  low  rank. 


CHAPTER  XXIV. 

On  the  noROscopy  of  Women. 

1.  The  same  remarks  apply  to  the  horscopy  of  women 
ns  to  tho  horoscopy  of  men  ; but  the  effects  which  arc  su  table 


201 


CH.  24.]  BUI  HAT  JATAKA. 

will  alone  affect  women  and  the  rest  will  affect  their  hus- 
bands. According  to  some  all  the  effects  (a)  will  affect  the 
husband.  The  death  of  the  husband  shall  be  determined 
from  the  8th  house  (from  the  ascendant)  in  the  horoscope 
of  a woman.  Matters  connected  with  the  physique  of  a 
woman  shall  be  determined  from  the  rising  sign  and  the 
sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  and  matters  connected  with  her 
fortuuo  and  her  husband  shall  be  determined  from  the  7th 
house. 

Notes. 

(a.)  ESVcts  which  can  be  enjoyed  by  both  will  affect  both. 
Such  effects  as  high  appointments  in  the  state  will  affect  the 
husband  and  matters  connected  with  the  body  will  affect  the 
woman  only.  Hence  the  advisability  of  a man  marrying  a girl 
born  under  excellent  planetary  Yogas. 

2.  If  the  rising  sign  and  the  sign  occupied  by  the 
Moon  be  even  signs  the  woman  will  be  of  a true  feminine 
character  and  if  such  signs  be  aspected  by  benefic  planets 
she  will  be  virtuous  and  modest  and  will  wear  ornaments, 
(a).  But  if  such  signs  be  odd  the  woman  will  possess  a 
masculine  shape  and  will  bo  of  masculine  character;  and  if 
they  be  either  occupied  or  aspected  by  malefic  pluuets  she 
will  be  wicked  and  possess  few  virtues  (ft). 

Notes. 

(a) .  According  to  some,  virtues  will  bo  her  ornaments. 

( b ) .  It  either  the  rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  tie 
Moon  bn  odd  or  even  while  the  other  sign  is  even  or  odd,  the 
woman  will  uartake  of  the  character  or  a male  and  a female. 

A Similar  remark  applies  when  one  of  the  signs  is  occunied  or 
aspected  by  a malefic  ora  benefic  planet  and  the  other  by  a 
benefic  ora  maletic  planet. 

o.  When  the  rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the 
Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman  is  either  Aries  or 
Scorpio,  if  tho  rising  Trimsauisa  or  the  Trimsaum  occu- 


202 


BKITIAT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  2-4. 


pied  by  the  Moon  be  that  of  Mars,  she  will  become,  un- 
chaste before  marriage  ■ if  it  be  that  of  Saturn,  she  will 
lead  a life  of  servitude.  If  it  be  that  of  Jupiter,  she  will  be 
chaste,-  if  it  be  that  of  Mercury  she  will  be  deceitful  and 
it  it  be  that  of  Venus,  she  will  be  of  bad  conduct- 

4.  When  the  rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the 
Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman  is  either  Taurus  or 
Libra,  if  the  rising  Trimsarasa  or  the  Trimsamsa  occupied 
by  the  Moon  be  that  of  Mars,  she  will  be  of  bad  conduct  ; 
if  it  be  that  of  Saturn,  she  will  Marry  a second  time;  if  it 
be  that  of  Jupiter  she  will  possess  good  qualities;  if  it  be 
that  of  Mercury,  she  will  be  skilled  in  music  and  dance 
and  if  it  be  that  of  Venus,  she  will  possess  all  good  quali- 
ties and  will  be  of  wide-spread  fame.  Again,  when  the 
rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of 
"birth  of  a woman  is  either  Gemini  or  Virgo,  if  the  rising 
Trimsamsa  or  the  Trimsamsa  occupied  by  the  Moon  be  that 
of  Mars  she  will  be  deceitful;  if  it  be  that  of  Saturn  she- 
will  partake  of  the  nature  of  a hermaphrodite  ; if  it  be  that 
of  Jupiter  she  will  be  chaste  ; if  it  be  that  of  Mercury  she 
will  possess  many  good  qualities  and  if  it  be  that  of  Venus, 
she  will,  out  of  lust,  commit  adultery. 

5.  When  the  rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupiedby  the 
Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman  is  Cancer,  if  the  rising 
Trimsamsa  or  the  Trimsamsa  occupied  by  the  Moon  lie  that 
of  Mars  she  will  be  of  an  independent  nature;  if  it  be  that 
of  Saturn  she  will  murder  her  husband ; if  if  be  that  of 
Jupiter,  she  will  possess  many  good  qualities;  if  it  be  that 
of  Mercury  she  will  be  skilled  in  works  ot  art  and  it  it  be 
that  of  Venus  she  will  be  of  bad  conduct. 

When  the  rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon 
at’the  time  of  birth  of  a woman  is  Leo,  if  the  rising  Trims- 
amsa  or  the  Trimsamsa  occupied  by  the  Moon  be  that  ot 
Mars,  she  will  be  of  a masculine  nature.  If  it  be  that  ol 


BUI  LI  AT  JATAKA. 


203 


CH. 


:4.] 


Saturn  she  will  commit  adultery  ; if  it  be  that  of  Jupiter 
she  will  be  the  wife  of  a king  ; il  it  be  that  ot  Mercury,  she 
will  be  of  masculine  nature  and  il  it  be  that  of  \ enus  she 
will  commit  adultery  with  a person  of  low  caste. 

When  the  rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon 
nt  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman  is  either  Sagittiiri  or  Pisces 
if  the  rising Trimsamsa  or  the  Trimsamsa  occupied  by  the 
Moon  be  that  of  Mars,  she  will  possess  many  good  qualities  ; 
if  it  be  that  of  Saturn,  she  will  not  indulge  much  in  sexual 
union;  if  it  be  that  of  Jupiter  she  will  possess  many  good 
qualities;  if  it  be  that  of  Meicury  she  will  be  a woman  of 
knowledge  and  if  it  be  that  of  Venus  she  will  not  be  chaste. 

When  the  rising  sign  or  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moou 
at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman  is  oither  Capricorn  or  Aqua- 
rius, if  the  rising  Trimsamsa  or  the  Trimsamsa  occupied 
by  the  Moon  be  that  of  Mars  she  will  load  a life  of  servi- 
tude; if  it  be  that  of  Saturn  she  will  join  a person  of  low 
caste;  if  it  be  that  of  Jupiter  she  will  be  chaste  ; if  it  be 
that  of  Mercury  she  will  be  of  bad  conduct  and  if i t be 
that  of  Venus  she  will  be  barren. 


G,  The  effects  described  tor  the  rising  Trimsamsa  or 
those  described  for  the  Trimsamsa  occupied  by  the  Moon 
will  come  to  pass  accordiug  as  the  one  Trimsamsa  or  the 
other  is  the  more  powerful. 

7.  If,  at  the  time,  of  birth  of  a woman,  Saturn  and 
Venus  occupy  each  other’s  Navainsa  and  aspect  each  other 
or,  if  the  rising  sign  be  either  Taurus  or  Libra  and  the  rising 
Navainsa  he  that  of  Aquarius,  the  woman  will  quench  the 
poisonous  fire  ot  her  strong  lustful  desires  by  means  of 
other  women  assuming  a masculine  character. 

8.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman,  the  7th  house 
from  the  rising  sign  or  from  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon 
bo  not  occupied  by  planets,  and  if  such  house  be  weak  and 


201- 


BUI IIAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  2 l. 


nol:  aspected  by  benefic  planets,  the  husband  of  the  woman 
will  be  wicked  ; it  such  7th  house  be  occupied  by  Mercury 
the  husband  will  be  a hermaphrodite  ; if  such  7th  house  be 
a movable  sign,  the  husband  will  be  travelling  in  foreign 
lauds  {a) ; if  such  7th  house  be  occupied  by  the  Sun,  the 
woman  will  be  rejected  by  her  husband > if  it  be  occupied 
by  Mars  aspected  by  malefic  planets,  she  will  become  a 
widow  while  young  , and  if  it  be  occupied  by  Saturn  aspec- 
ted by  male  lie  planets  she  will  remain  unmarried  to  an  old 
age. 

Notes. 

(a).  1 f it  bo  a. fixed  sign  the  husband  will  remain  in  his 

place  and  if  it  be  a common  sign,  lie  will  travel  to  foreign  lands 
but  will  be  returning  to  his  place  every  now  and  then 

9.  If  the  7th  house,  from  the  rising  sign  or  from  the 
sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman, 
be  occupied  by  several  malefic  p'anets,  the  woman  will  be- 
come a widow;  if  such  7th  house  be  occupied  by  several 
benefic  and  malefic  planets  she  will  quit  her  husband  and 
marry  another  person  and  if  such  7th  house  be  occupied  by 
a malefic  planet  (a),  be  weak,  aud  be  aspected  by  a benelic 
planet  ( b ) the  woman  will  be  rejected  by  her  husband. 

IE  Venus  and  Mars  occupy  each  other’s  Navamsa  the 
woman  will  commit  adultery  ; and  if  the  7th  house  from 
the  rising  sign  be  occupied  by  the  Moon,  Venus  and  Mars, 
she  will  commit  adultery  with  the  premission  of  her  hus" 
band. 

Notes. 

(a).  Either  the  Sun  or  Mars  or  Saturn. 

[1),  Ei  her  Mercury  or  J upiter  or  Venus. 

10.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman,  the  rising  sign 

be  that  of  Saturn  (a)  or  Mars  {b)  and  if  it  bo  occupied  by 
the  Moon  and  V euus  aud  aspected  by  malefic  planets,  the 


Cfl.  24-.] 


BRIIIAT  JATAK. 


205 


woman  and  her  mother  will  c wnmit  adultery  ; if  the  setting 
Navamsa' be  that  of  Mars  and  if  the  setting  sign  be  aspec- 
ted  by  Saturn,  the  woman  will  possess  a diseased  genital 
organ  ; and  if  the  setting  Navamsa  be  that  of  a benefic 
planet  the  woman  will  possess  a Hue  genital  organ  and  will 
become  an  agreeable  wife. 

Note3. 

(a) .  Caprioorn  Or  Aquarius. 

(b) .  Aries  or  Scorpio. 

11.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman,  the  setting 
sign  or  the  setting  Navamsa  he  that  of  Saturn,  the  husband 
of  the  woman  will  be  an  old  man  and  a fool  ; if  such  sign 
or  Navamsa  be  that  of  Mars,  the  husband  will  be  of 
irascible  temper  bnt  will  be  attached  to  his  wife.  II  such 
sign  or  Navamsa  be  that  of  Venus,  the  husband  will  be 
beautiful  and  fond  of  his  wife;  if  such  sign  or  Navamsa  be 
that  of  Mercury,  the  husband  will  be  learned  and  intelli- 
gent. 

12.  If  the  setting  sign  or  the  setting  Navamsa  at 
the  time  of  birth  of  a woman  be  that  of  the  Moon,  the  hus- 
band will  be  full  of  lustful  desires  and  of  a quiet  nature. 
If  such  sign  or  Navamsa  be  that  of  Jupiter,  the  husband 
will  possess  courage  and  other  virtues  and  will  have  a con- 
trol over  his  passions  and  desires;  if  such  sign  or  Navamsa 
be  that  of  the  Sun,  the  husband  will  be  of  very  soft  nature 
and  will  engage  in  many  works  (a). 

Notes. 

fa).  According  to  some  the  reading  of  this  portion  of  the 
text  is  Ratilearma  instead  of  Atil-xrma,  in  which  case  the  meaning 
is  that  the  husband  will  indulge  much  in  sexual  union.  Asrain  if 
the  setting  sign  be  that  of  one  plauet  and  the  setting  Navamsa 
be  that  of  another  planet,  then,  the  effects  described  for  such 
sigu  or  Navamsa,  whichever  is  powerful,  will  come  to  pass. 


206 


BimiAT  JATAKA.  [CH.  24. 

13.  If,  at  tlie  time  of  birth  of  a woman,  the  rising1 
sign  lje  occupied  by  the  Moon  and  Venus  the  woman 
will  beenvious  of  the  prosperity  of  other  persons  and  will  be 
greatly  mindful  of  her  comforts;  if  the  rising  sign  be  occu- 
pied by  the  Moon  and  Mercury  the  woman  will  be  learned 
in  the  line  arts, “will  be  in  the  enjoyment  of  comfort  and  will 
possess  many  good  qualities;  if  the  rising  sign  be  occupied 
by  Venus  and  Mercury  the  woman  will  be  beautiful,  much 
liked  by  her  husband  and  learned  in  music,  vocal  and  in- 
strumental ; if  the  rising  sign  be  occupied  by  the  Moon, 
Mercury  and  Veuus,  the  woman  will  bo  in  the  enjoyment  of 
immense  wealth  and  comfort  and  possessed  of  many  good 
qualities.  If  the  rising  sign  be  occupied  by  Mercury,  Jupi- 
ter aud  Venus,  the  same  remarks  apply. 

14.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman,  the  8th  house 
from  the  ascendant  be  occupied  by  a malefic  planet,  the  wo- 
man will  become  a widow  and  the  widowhood  will  occur 
in  the  Antardasa  period  of  the  planet  whose  Navamsais  oc- 
cupied b}7  the  lord  of  such  8th  house.  If  the  8th  house  be 
occupied  by  a malefic  planet  aud  if  the  2nd  house  be  oc- 
cupied by  a benefic  planet  the  woman  will  die  before  her 
husband  and  if  the  Moon  occupy  sigu  Virgo,  Scorpio,  Tau- 
rus or  Leo,  she  will  have  very  few  sons. 

15.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman  Saturn  be 
neither  powerful  nor  weak,  the  Moon,  Venus  and  Mercury 
be  weak,  and  the  Sun,  Mars  and  Jupiter  be  powerful  and 
if  the  rising  sign  be  odd,  the  woman  will  be  of  a masculine 
character  (a). 

If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman,  Jupiter,  Mars,  Ve- 
nus and  Mercury  be  powerful  and  if  the  rising  sigu  bean 
even  Sign,  the  woman  will  be  of  wide  spread  fame,  will  be 
vastly  learned  aud  learned  also  in  the  Sceince  of  Divinity. 


CH.  2o.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


2$  7 


Notes. 

(a).  According  to  sgrae  the  woman  'will  enjoy  many  men 

16.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a woman,  the  7th 
house  f.iom  the  rising  sign  be  occupied  by  a malefic  planet 
while  the  9th  house  is  occupied  by  some  planet,  the  woman 
will  without  doubt  become  an  ascetic  of  the  class  belonging 
to  the  planet  occupying  snch  9th  house  (a). 

All  that  has  been  said  in  this  chapter  apply  to  the  posi- 
tions of  the  planets  at  the  time  of  promise  of  gift  of  girl  in 
marriage,  of  such  gift  and  of  marriage  (Z>),  also  at  the  time 
of  query. 

Notes. 

(a) .  And  the  other  eflects  already  described  will  fail. 

(b)  . Provided  snch  effects  do  not  clash  against  th<3  effects 
described  in  the  chapters  on  Marriage,  (vide  Chapters  ICO  and 
103  of  Brihat  Samhira). 


CHAPTER  XXV. 

On  Death 

1.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  8th  house 
from  the  rising  sign  be  unoccupied  and  be  aspected  by  a 
powerful  planet,  the  person  will  die  of  an  excess  of  the  hu- 
mour belonging  to  such  powerful  planet  (a). The  part  of  the 
body  attacked  will  bo  the  part  which  such  8th  house  repre- 
sents in  the  body  of  the  Kalapurusha  (b).  If  several  pla- 
nets aspect  the  8th  house  the  part  of  tho  body  will  be 
subject  to  several  attacks  resulting  from  an  excess  of  the 
various  humors  belonging  to  such  powerful  planets  and  death 
will  ensue.  But,  if  the  8th  house  be  occupied  by  the  Sun, 
the  death  of  tho  person  will  be  caused  by  fire  ; if  it  be 
occupied  by7  the  Moon  the  death  will  be  caused  by  water  ; 
if  by  Mars  death  will  be  caused  by  weapons;  if  by  Mercury 
it  will  be  caused  by  fever;  if  by  Jupiter  it  will  be  caused 

C 


SOS 


BRIHAT  JATAKAi 


[Cil.  25“ 


l\y  some  unknown  disease;  i £ Venus,  it  will  be  caused  by 
thirst;  and  if  it  bo  occupied  by  Saturn  death  will  be  caused 
by  starvation  (c).  Again,  if  the  8th  house  be  a movable  sign 
the  person  will  die  in  foreign  lands;  if  it  be  a fixed  sign 
lie  will  die  iu  his  own  couutry ; and  if  it  be  a common  sign 
be  will  die  on  his  way. 


Notes 


(a).  Placets...  Humor 

The  Sun Pile 

The  Moon Wind  & 

phlegm 

Mars-...,. T3i  phi  enu. 

Mercury ......  Ale 

three  humors. 


Planets Humor 

Jupiter.  Phlegm 

Venus Wind  & 

phlegm. 

Saturn Wind 


(l)  Vide’stanza  4 chapter  1. 

(c).  If  the  planet  be  powerful  there  will  bo  death  while- 
the  person  is  engaged  iu  a good  work  ; if  the  planet,  be  weak 
death  will  ensue  while  the  person  is  engaged  in  a bad  work  and 
if  the  planet,  be  neither  powerful  nor  weak  tbe  person  will  die 
while  engaged  in  a work  of  indifferent  character. 


2.  If  at  tbe  time  of  birth  of  a person  the  Sun  and 
Mars  occupy  the  4th  or  the  10th  house  from  the  rising  sign 
the  person  will  die  being  struck  with  stones.  If 
the  4 tli,  7th  and  10t>li  bouses  be  respectively  occupied  by  Sa- 
turn, the  Moon  and  Mars,  the  person  will  die  by  falling  in- 
to a well.  If  tbe  Sun  and  Moon  occupy  sign  Virgo  and  if 
they  be  aspected  by  a malefic  planet  there  will  be  death 
caused  by  the  person’s  kiusmon.  If  tbe  rising  sign  be  a 
common  sign  and  if  it  be  occupied  by  the  Sun  and  the 
Moon  there  will  be  death  b}T  drowning. 


3.  If,  at  the  time  birth  of  a person,  Saturn  occupy  sign 
Cancer  and  the  Moon  sign  capricorn  the  person  will 
die  from  an  attack  of  dropsy.  If  the  Moon  occup}7'  sign 
Aries  or  Scorpio  and  be  between  malefic  planets,  death  will 
lie  caused  by  weapons  or  by  fire.  If  the  Moon  occupy  sign 
Virgo  and  be  botween  malefic  planets  death  will  be  caused 


oh.  25  ] 


B EI  HAT  JATAKA. 


209 


by  a corruption  of  tlie  blood  or  by  want  of  blood.  If  the 
Moon  occupy  sign  Capricorn  or  Aquarius  and  be  between 

malefic  planets,  there  will  be  death  by  hanging,  by  fire  or 
by  fall. 

4.  If  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  5th  or  the 
9th  house  be  occupied  by  two  malefic  planets  and  if  such 
planets  be  uot  aspected  by  benefic  planets  the  person  will 
meet  his  death  by  being  shut  up  in  a prison  or  by  other 
restraint.  If  the  8th  house  from  the  rising  sign  contain  a 
Sarpa  or  Nigula  Drekkana  (a)  death  will  also  result  from 
imprisonment  or  other  restraint.  If  Virgo  bo  the  7th  house 
from  the  ascendant  and  if  it  be  occupied  by  the  Moon 
accompanied  by  a benefic  planet,  if  Venus  occupy  sigu  Aries 
and  the  Sun  the  rising  sign,  the  person  will  die  in  his  own 
house  and  such  death  will  be  caused  by  a woman. 

Notes. 

(a.)  Vide  notes  to  stanza  1G  of  Chapter  XXIIL 

5.  It,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  (1)  the  4tlt 
house  from  the  ascendant  be  occupied  by  Mars  or  the  Sun 
and  if  the  lOih  house  be  occupied  by  Saturn  or,  (2)  if  the 
Sun,  Mars,  Saturn  and  the  waning  Moon  occupy  the  ascend- 
ant, the  5th  house  and  the  9th  house  or,  (3)  if  the  Su11 
occupy  the  4th  house  and  if  Mars  which  cempies  the  10th 
house  be  aspected  by  the  waning  Moon,  the  person  will  die 
in  each  case  being  stabbed  with  a spear.  Again,  if  the  Snn 
occupy  the  4th  house  and  if  Mars,  which  occupies  the  10th, 
house,  be  aspected  h}'  Saturn,  the  person  will  die  being 
struck  with  a piece  of  wood. 

6-  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  t-hoSth,  1 Otli, 
1st,  and  4th  houses  bo  occupied  respectively  by  the  waning 
Moon,  Mars,  Saturn  and  tho  Sun,  the  person  will  die  being 
struck  with  a club  or  stick.  If  the  10th,  Vdh,  1st  and  5th 
houses  bo  occupied  respectively  by  the  waning  Moou  Mars, 


2 TO  EKIHAT  JATAKA.  [CH.  25. 

Saturn  and  the  Sun,  the  death  of  the  person  will  he  caused 
by  smoke,  by  fire,  by  imprisomneut  or  by  blows. 

7.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  4tli,  7tband 
iOth  houses  be  respectively  occupied  by  Mars,  the  Sun  and 
Saturn,  the  person  will  die  by  weapons,  by  fire  or  by  the 
king.  If  i he  2nd,  4th  and  10th  houses  be  respectively 
occupied  by  Saturn,  the  Moon  and  Mars,  the  person  will 
uie  of  sores  and  worms. 

8.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  Sun  occupy 
the  10th  house  and  Mars  occupy  the  4th  house,  the  persou 
will  die  in  consequence  of  a fall  from  a vehicle  or  convey- 
ance. It  Mars  occupy  the  7th  house  and  the  Sun,  Moon 
and  Saturn  occupy  the  rising  sign,  the  persou  will  uie  being 
caught  in  a machine-.  If  (1)  sign  Libra  be  occupied  by 
Mars,  sign  Aries  by  Saturn  and  sign  Capricorn  or  Aquarius 
by  the  Moon  or  (2)  if  the  10th,  7th  and  4th  houses  be 
respectively  occupied  by  the  waning  Moon,  by  the  Sun  and 
by  Mars  the  person  will  die  in  the  middle  of  excrement. 

9.  If  the  waning  Moon  be  aspected  by  powerful  Mars 
and  if  Saturn  occupy  the  8th  house,  the  person  will  die  of 
diseases  affecting  the  privities  (a)— the  part  affected  will  be 
either  eateu  through  by  wonas  or  cut  with  the  lancet  or 
burnt  or  blistered. 

Notes. 

(a.)  Such  as  piles  and  fistula  iu  the  Pudendum  Muliebre. 

10.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  Sun  and 
Mars  occupy  the  7th  house,  Saturn  occupy  the  6th  house  aud 
the  waning  Moou  occupy  the  4th  house,  the  death  of  the 
person  will  be  caused  by  birds.  If  the  1st,  5th,  8th  and  9th 
houses  be  occupied  respectively  by  the  Sun,  Mars,  Saturn 
aud  the  Moon,  the  person’s  death  will  be  caused  by  a fall 
from  mountain  top,  by  an  attack  of  lightning  or  by  the  lull 
of  a wall. 


cir.  25.] 


BRIHAT  JTAK. 


211 


11.  The  cause  of  death  of  a person  whose  horoscope 
does  not  contain  any  of  the  Yogas  enumerated  above  shall  be 
determined  fiom  the  2'2ud  Drekkana  counted  from  therisiug 
Drekkana  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person  ; and  death  will 
be  caused  by  the  lord  of  such  (22nd)  Drekkana  or  by  the  lord 
of  the  sign  of  which  the  Drekkana  is  a division,  whichever 
is  powerful,  by  water,  lire  or  other  means  belonging  to  such 
lord  (a). 

Notes. 

(a.)  Vide  stanza  1 of  this  chapter. 

12.  The  place  of  death  of  a person  will  be  that  of  the 
sign  occupied  by  the  Lord  of  the  rising  Navamsa  (a)  or  it 
will  bo  the  place  of  the  sign  of  the  planet  which  occupies 
the  same  sign  as  that  occupied  by  the  lord  of  the  rising 
Navatnsa  or  it  will  be  the  place  of  the  sign  of  the  planet 
aspecting  the  lord  of  the  rising  Navamsa  or  it  will  be  the 
place  of  the  sign  of  the  lord  of  the  Navamsa  occupied  by 
the  lord  of  t.he  rising  Navamsa  (b).  The  actual  place  of 
deal h shall  be  determined  by  a careful  examination  of  the 
several  points.  The  period  for  which  a person  will  remain 
insensible  before  death  will  be  the  time  of  oblique  ascension 
of  the  portion  of  the  rising  sign  below  the  horizon.  If  the 
rising  sign  be  aspected  by  his  lord,  such  period  will  be 
twice,  and  if  it  be  aspected  by  benefio  planets,  it  will  be 
three  times,  the  time  of  such  oblique  ascension  (c). 

Notes. 

(a)  Aries — place  frequented  by  sheep;  Taurus — place 
frequented  by  oxen  ; Gemini — a house  ; Cancer — a well ; Leo— 
a forest;  \ irgo — water-bank  ; Libra — bazaar  or  store — bouse  > 
Scorpio — a bole  ; sagittari — place  frequented  by  horses  ; Capri- 
corn— watery  fcraots  ; Aquarius — a house;  Pisces — watery  places. 

The  above  is  general.  If  a distinct  place  of  death  bo 
mentioned  in  connection  with  a Yoga  relating  to  death,  the  death 
will  occur  only  in  such  a place. 


212 


JRIHAT  JATAICA. 


[c 


m.  25. 


( i •)  diflerent  places  of  death  are  pointed  out  by  different 
planets,  the  place  belonging  to  the  sign  of  the  most  powerful 
planet  will  be  the  place  of  death.  Again,  of  the  two  signs  of  a 
planet,  the  place  of  the  MoolatrikOna  sign  will  be  the  place  ofc 
death.  According  to  some,  the  place  of  death  is  the  particular 
portion  of  tlie  house  belonging  to  the  most  powerful  plauet  — 
such  as  the  place  of  worship,  the  bath — room,  the  kitchen  &c* 
(vide  stanza  12  of  Chapter  II.) 

(c.)  If  the  lisiug  sign  be  aspectod  by  its  lord  and  by  a 
benefio  planet  the  period  of  insensibility  will  be  G times  as  long. 

13.  If,  at  the  time  of  birth  of  a person,  the  22nd 
Drekkana  from  the  rising  Drekkana  be  a fiery  Drekkana  (a) 
the  body  of  tho  person  after  death  will  be  burnt  and  redu- 
ced to  ashes.  If  the  2-nd  Drekkana  be  a watery  Drekkana 
(b)  the  body  will  be  thrown  into  water;  if  such  Drekkana 
be  a Misra  Drekkana  (c)  the  body  will  be  neither  burnt  nor 
thrown  into  water  but  allowed  to  dry  up.  If  the  8th  house 
contain  a Sarpa  Drekkana  ( d ) the  body  will  bo  devoured  by 
dogs,  jackals,  crows  and  the  like.  Thus  has  been  described 
the  change  of  tho  body  after  death-  For  a knowledge  of 
the  past  and  future  life  of  a person  and  of  the  nature  of 
such  life  tho  reader  is  referred  to  higher  works  ou  lioroscopy. 

Notes. 


(a.')  A Fiery  Drekkana  is  the  Drekkana  of  a malefic  planet. 

( b .)  A watery  Drekkana  is  the  Drekkana  of  a benefic  planet. 

(c-)  A Misra  Drekkana  is  the  Drekkana  of  a benefia  planet 
occupied  by  a malefic  planet  as  well  as  the  Drekkana  of  a malefic 
planet  occupied  by  a beuefic  planet. 

(d  ) Sarpa  Drekkanas  \ — These  are  the  1st  and  2nd  Drek* 
kanas  of  Cancer,  the  1st  and  2nd  Drekkanas  of  Scorpio  and  the 
3rd  Drekkana  of  Pisces.  According  to  Subhodhini,  tho  terras 
“ Vyabi  varga”  is  interpreted  into  the  Drekkanas  of  Vyala 
Sarpn),  Grudkra  (vulture),  Kola  (hog)  aud  the  like, 


ea.  25.] 


BRiHAT  JATAKA. 


213 


14.  If  the  lord  of  the  Drekkana  occupied  by  the  Sun 
or  the  Moon,  whichever  is  powerful,  be  Jupiter,  the  person 
lias  come  from  Devaloka  •,  if  such  lord  be  either  the 
Moon  or  Venus,  the  person  lias  come  from  Pitriloka  ;if  such 
lord  be  the  Sun  or  Mars,  the  person  lias  come  from  the 
world  of  lower  animals  ; and  if  such  lord  be  either  Saturn 
or  Mercury,  the  person  lias  come  from  the  region  of  hell. 

If  the  lord  of  the  Drekkana  occupied  by  the  Sun  or  the 
Moon,  whichever  is  powerful,  be  in  his  exaltation  sign  such 
last  life  of  the  person  will  he  of  an  exalted  character  ; if 
such  lord  occupy  a place  between  the  exaltation  and  de- 
pression signs  the  last  life  will  be  one  of  middle  importance  j 
and  if  such  lord  occupy  his  depression  sign  the  last  life  of 
the  person  will  be  one  of  a low  character. 

15.  If  the  6th  and  the  8th  houses  be  unoccupied,  the 
person  will,  after  death,  go  to  the  world  cf  the  planet  most 
powerful  of  the  lords  of  the  Drekkanas  of  such  (ith  and  8th 
houses  (a)  ; or  the  person  will  go  to  the  world  of  the  planet 
occupying  the  6th,  7th  or  the  8th  house  (5),  Again,  if 
Jupiter  occupy  the  6th  house  or  one  of  l he  Kendra  houses 
or  the  8th  house  and  be  at  the  same  time  in  his  exaltation 
sign  or  if  the  rising  sign  be  Pisces  and  Jupiter  occupy  it 
and  be  in  the  Navatnsa  of  a benefic  planet  while  the  other 
planets  are  weak,  the  person  will  obtain  Salvation  after 
death,  (c) 

Notes. 

(a).  For  the  worlds  of  the  several  planets,  vide  last  stanza. 

(6.)  If  two  or  more  planets  occupy  the  6th,  7th  and  8th 

houses,  the  person  will  go  to  the  world  of  the  most  powerful 
of  them. 

(c).  The  next  world  may  also  be  determined  from  the 
position  of  the  planets  at  tbo  Lima  ©f  death  a3  at  the  lime  of 
birth  of  a person. 


214 


Eft  1 HAT  JA.TAKA* 


[CH.  2G. 


C AFTER  XX  VTL 
On  Lost  Horoscopes. 

!•  "W  too  a person  is  ignoiant  of  tho  time  of  his  concep- 
tion or  birth,  the  time  of  birth  shall,  when  duly  question- 
ed about,  be  determined  from  the  Prasna  Ligna  (a)  If 
the  1st  hall  of  the  rising  sign  be  cut  by  the  horizon,  the 
month  of  birth  will  bo  iu  the  Uttarayima  (b)  and  if  the  2nd 
half  be  cut  by  the  horizon  the  month  will  bo  in  the  Dekshi- 
n ay ana  (c). 

Notes. 

(a) .  Prasna  Lagria  : the  rising  sign  at  the  time  of  query. 

(b) .  TJttarayana  ; the  6 months  from  Capricorn  !o  Gemini. 

(c.),  Dekshinayana  : the  G months  from  Cancer  to  Sagit- 

fnri. 

2.  If  at  the  time  of  query  the  first  Drekkana  of  a sign 
begin  to  rise,  the  sign  occupied  by  Jupiter  at  the  time  birth 
will  be  tho  Prasna  Lagna  itself.  If  the  2nd  Drekkana  of  a 
sign  begin  to  rise  at  the  time  of  query,  the  sign  occupied 
by  Jupiter  at  the  time  birth  will  be  the  oth  sign  from  the 
Prasna  Lagna;  if  the  3rd  Drekkana  of  a sign  begin  to  rise  at 
the  time  of  query,  the  sign  occupied  by  Jupiter  at  !he  time 
of  birth  will  be  the  btli  sign  from  thePrasana  Lagna  {a  . The 
year  of  birth  shall  then  bo  determined  from  the  appearance 
of  the  person  ( [b ).  If  the  Sun  occupy  the  Prasana  Lagna  or 
if  tho  Drekkana  of  the  Sun  rise  at  the  time  of  query,  tho 
Ritu(a  period  of  2 months)  of  birth  will  beGreeshma(when  the 
Sun  passes  through  Gemini  and  Cancer)  ; aud  in  the  case  of 
other  planets  their  Ritus  have  been  mentioned  elsewhere 

(c).  If  the  Ritn  thus  determined  do  not  happen  to  be  tho 
Ritu  of  the  Ayana  already  determined,  the  correct  liitu 
shall  be  determined  as  explained  in  the  next  stanza  ( d ). 

Notes. 

a . In  other  words,  if  the  rising  Dwadasamsa  at  the  time 
of  query  be  the  first,  the  sign  occupied  by  Juptier  at  the  time 
of  birth  will  be  the  Prasana  Lagna  itself;  ii  the  rising  Dwada- 


BRIIIAT  JATAKA. 


215 


ch.  2G-] 


samsa  be  the  2nd,  the  sign  occupied  by  Jupiter  fit  the  time  of 
biith  will  be  the  2nd  sign  from  the  Prasna  Lagna  aud  so  on. 

I,  As  Jupiter  takes  12  years  to  go  round  the  heavens,  if 
the  number  of  circuits  passed  through  by  Jupiter  from  the  time  of 
birth  be  known,  the  age  of  the  person  can  be  at  once  determined. 
For  instance  suppose  Jupiter  to  occupy  sign  Scorpio  at  the  timo 
of  query  and  sign  Taurus  at  the  timo  of  birth,  aud  suppose  him 
to  bo  in  his  4th  circuit.  The  age  of  the  person  will  be  3 X 12 
+ G or  42  years.  The  cycle  of  Jupiter  can  be  determined  from 
the  appearance  of  the  person — from  a rough  estimato  of 
his  age.  In  the  instance  cited  above  the  age  of  the  person  ia 
either  6,  or  12  + G=18  or  24  + G=30  or  3G-J-  6=  42  and  so 
on.  If  however  the  cycle  of  Jupiter  cannot  be  easily  ascertained 
from  the  appearance  of  the  person,  the  number  of  the  cycle 
shall  be  determined  from  the  part  of  body  touched  by  a person  at 
the  time.  Iu  stanza  24  of  chapter  70  of  the  Criliat  Samhita,  the 
human  body  is  divided  into  ten  parts,  oach  part  corresponding 
to  a Dasa  period  of  12  years, 

(1) .  Feet  and  ankles. 

(2) .  Shanks  and  kuees. 

(3) .  The  thighs  and  genital  organ. 

(4) .  The  loius  and  the  navel. 

(5) .  The  belly. 

(G).  The  breast  and  the  bosoms. 

(7).  The  shoulders. 

(S).  The  neck  and  lips. 

(9) .  The  eyes  and  brows. 

(10) .  The  forehead  and  the  bead.  So  that  if  the  belley  bo 
touched,  it  may  be  determined  that  at  the  time  of  query  Jupiter  is 
in  his  5th  round.  So  that  the  age  of  the  person  will  be  4 X12 
or  48  years,  plus  the  number  of  years  taken  by  Jupiter  to  move 
from  the  fugn  occupied  by  him  at  the  timo  of  birth  to  the  sign 
occupied  by  him  at  the  time  of  query. 

(c).  So  that  if  tho  Sun  occupy  the  Prasna  Lagna  or  if  the 
Drekkana  of  lha  Sun  rise  at  the  time  of  query,  the  Ilitu  is 
Grceshruo, 

* 


£1 6 


BR1HAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  26 


If  Verms  occnpy  the  Prasna  Lagna  or  if  the  Drekkana 
of  Venus  rise  afc  the  time  of  query,  the  llitu  is  Vasauta  (when 
the  Suu  passes  through  Aries  aud  Taurus).  In  the  case  of 
Mars  aud  Ids  Drekkana  the  Ritu  is  Greeshma  (Gemiui  and 
Cancer).  In  the  case  of  the  Moon  and  her  Drekkana,  the 
Ritu  is  Varsha  (Leo  and  Virgo).  In  the  case  of  Mercury  and  his 
Drekkana,  the  Ritu  is  Surat  (Libra  and  Scorpio).  In  the  case  of 
Jupiter  and  his  Drekkuna,  the  Ritu  is  Hemanta  (Sagittari  aud 
Capricorn)  In  the  case  of  Saturn  and  his  Drekkana  the  Rita  is 
Sisira  (Aquarius  and  Pisces).  If  two  or  more  planets  occupy  tho 
Prasna  Lagna,  the  Ritu  of  the  most  powerful  planet  will  be  the 
Ritu  of  birth. 

(cl).  Suppose  the  Ayana  determined  from  stanza  1 to  be 
the  Uttarayana  so  that  the  month  of  birth  is  one  betweeu  Capri- 
com  and  Gemini.  Suppose  the  Prasna  Lagna  to  be  occupied  by 
the  Moon  whose  Ritu  is  Varsha  (Leo  aud  Virgo);  in  such  a case, 
the  Ritu  of  Venus,  the  alternative  planet  of  the  Moon  viz  the 
Vasauta  (Aries  and  Taurus)  shall  be  determined  as  the  Ritu 
of  birth  as  explained  in  the  3rd  stanza. 

3.  If  the  Ritu  do  not  agree  with  the  Ayana  then  the 
Ritu  of  the  alternative  planet  shall  be  determined  as  the  Ritu 
of  birth  of  a person  (a).  The  Moon  and  Venus  are  alternative 
planets.  So  are  Mercury  and  Mars  (6),  and  so  Jupiter  and 
Saturn.  If  the  first  half  of  the  rising  Drekkana  should 
rise  at  the  time  of  query,  the  month  of  birth  will  be  the 
first  of  the  two  months  of  the  Ritu  and  if  the  secoud  half 
slionld  rise  then  the  2nd  month  of  the  Ritu  will  be  the 
month  of  birth.  The  date  of  birth  shall  be  determined  from 
the  portion  of  the  half  Drekkana  that  has  risen  above  the 
horizon,  (c) 

Notes. 


(a) .  This  point  has  been  already  explained,  vide  note  ( d ) to 
the  last  stanza. 

( b ) .  According  to  tho  commentator  Mercury,  Mars  and  the 
Sun  are  alternative  planets. 


BRinAT  JAtAkA> 


217 


cn.  2G-] 


(c).  As  the  halftDrekkana  which  may  be  rising  at  the  time 
of  query  represents  all  the  30  days  of  a month,  if  just  one  halt 
of  it  should  have  risen  above  the  horizon,  the  birth  must  have 
occurred  just  after  15  days  of  the  month.  In  other  words,  the 
date  of  birth  may  be  determined  fx’om  the  portion  of  the  half 
sign  that  has  risen  above  the  horizon  by  proportion.  A Drek- 
kana  is  10  degrees;  half  a Drekkana  is  5 degrees  and  a thirtieth 
part  of  it  is  10  minutes,  so  that  every  lOmiuutes  of  the  rising  halt’ 
Drekkana  represents  a day.  It  will  be  convenient  if  the  Lagna 
sphuta  i.  e.  the  exact  longitude  in  signs,  degrees  and  minutes  of 
the  point  of  the  ecliptic  cut  by  the  horizon  be  determined  in  the 
fust  instance  (vide  Appendix). 


4.  The  Learned  Brahmins  in  the  Science  of  horoscopy 
say  that  the  number  of  degrees  passed  over  by  the  Sun  in 
any  particular  sign  represents  the  lunar  day  at  the  time  of 
birth  (a).  If  the  Prasna  Lagna  be  a day-sign  the  birth 
will  have  occurred  at  night  and  if  it  be  a night-sign , the  birth 
will  have  occurred  by  day ; the  ghatika  of  birth  shall  bo 
determined  from  the  portion  of  the  rising  sign  that  has 
risen  above  the  horizon  ( h ). 

Notes. 


(a).  Beginning  from  the  first  lunar  day  in  the  Moon’s  in- 
crease. Suppose  the  Sun  to  occupy  the  24th  degree  of  Sagittari 
at  the  time  of  birth.  The  lunar  day  or  Tithi  at  the  time  of  birth 
is  the  24ih  day  from  the  first  day  in  the  Moon’s  increase  or 
24-15  or  the  0th  day  iu  her  wane. 


(&).  The  length  of  the  day  or  night  of  birth  Icing  known 
it  is  represented  by  the  rising  sign  and  the  Lagna  Sphuta  will 
give  us  the  exact  proportion  of  the  Sign  that  has  risen  above 
the  horizon.  By  the  Rule  of  Three  we  can  arrive  at  the  exact 
time  of  birth  from  Sun-rise  or  Sun  set.  When  this  is  known  the 
horoscope  may  be  cast  with  the  help  of  the  astronomical  tables 
or  the  Almanac.  The  fiist  four  stanzas  therefore  give  us  a 
ompleto  process  for  the  discovery  of  the  time  of  birth  of  <t 
erson  from  theFrasna  Lagna. 


213 


BLIHAT  jATAKA. 


[on  2(5. 


5.  According  to  some  the  lunar  month  of  birth  shall 
"be  determined  from  the  Navamsa  occupied  by  the  Moon  at 
the  time  of  query  (a)*  Again,  the  sign  occupied  by  the 
Moon  at  the  time  of  birth  will  be  either  the  Prasna  Lagna 
or  the  5th  house  or  Oth  house  from  it  whichever  is  most 
powerful.  If  it  be  difficult  to  determine  which  of  the  three 
signs  is  most  powerful,  the  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  will 
be  the  sign  represented  by  the  part  of  body  of  Kalapurusha 
that  may  happen  to  be  touched  by  a person  at  the  time  of 
query  or  the  sign  may  be  determined  from  the  like  indica- 
tions occurring  at  the  time  of  query  (6). 

Notes. 


(a).  The  rulo  stated  in  the  Text  is  very  vague.  Wbat  the 
author  means  is  thus  explained  by  the  commentator. 

Suppose  each  Navamsa  to  be  divided  into  9 equal  parts  ; 
then,  if  at  the  time  of  query  the  place  occupied  by  the  Moon  bo 

XJeyond  the  And  within  the  The  lunar 

month  will  bo 

(1) .  8th  part  of  the  > 7th  part  of  the  Na-  C Kart;kam. 
Navamsa  of  Aries.  ...  S vamsa  of  Taurus  •••  (. 

(2) .  7th  part  of  the > 6th  part  of  the  Na-  ( Margflsira 
Navamsa  of  Taurus  •••  5 vamsa  of  Gemini  ...  t 

(8).  6th  part  of  the  > 5th  part  of  the  Na-  < pouslia> 
Navamsa  of  Gemini  ...  $ vamsa  of  Cancer  •••  £ 

(4) .  5th  part  of  the ^ 4tli  part  of  the  Na-  $ Magba< 

Navamsa  of  Cancer  •*•  5 vamsa  of  Leo  •••  i 

(5) .  4th  part  of  the  > 7th  part  of  the  Na- $ ph  j fli 
Navamsa  of  Leo  ...  > vamsa  of  Virgo  ...  1 S 

(6) .  7th  part  of  tho  > 6th  part  of  the  Na-  f Cliaitra> 

Navamsa  of  Virgo  ...  § vamsa  of  Libra  •••  ^ 

(7) .  Oth  part  of  the  ) 5th  part  of  tho  Na-  ( ya;Mkh>i 

Navamsa  of  Libra  •••  5 vamsa  of  bcoipio  ...  ^ 

(8) .  5th  part  of  tho  > 4tli  part  of  thoNa-Cj 
Navamsa  of  Scorpio  •••  § vamsa  of  Sagittari 


CH.  26.] 


BRIDAT  JATAKA. 


210 


(9).  <lth  part  of  iho)  3rd  part  of  the  Na-  C ^sl,adh». 
Navamsa  ofJSagittari...  $ vamsa  of  Capricorn  \ 

(10). '3rd  part  of  the  > 2nd  part  of  the  Na-CgraVftna 
N.  of  Capricorn.  ...  y vamsa  of  Aquarius  ...  ? 


(11) .  2nd  partyof  the  > 5th  part  of  the  N a-<  Bhadrapeda 
savamsa  of  Aquarius...  5 vamsa  ot  Pisces  • ••  £ 

(12) .  5ch  part  of  the?  8th  part  of  the  Na’5Aswavnia 

lavamsa  of  Pisces  ...  y vamsa  of  Aries.  ...?  ^ ^ * 


(6).  Forjnstance,  if,  at  the  time,  oreatares  representing  any 
of  the  signs  of  the  Zodiac  bo  seen  or  their  sounds  heard,  the 
Moon  will  occupy  such  sign  at  the  time  of  birth. 


6.  The  sign  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth 
of  a person  will  bo  as  many  signs  removed  from  the  sign 
©ccupiod^by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  query  as  the  Moon  is 
removed  from  tho  rising  sign  at  the  time  of  query  (a). 
But  if  the  rising  sign  be  Pisces,  then  Pisces  will  be  the  sign 
occupied  by  the  Moon  at  the  time  of  birth.  (In  case  of 
doubt), 'the  sign  shall  be  determined  by  any  articles  of  food 
that  may  be  brought,  any  figures  that  may  appear  or  by  any 
sounds  that  may  bo  heard  at  the  timo  (6). 


Notes. 

fa).  For  instance,  suppose  Scorpio  is  the  rising  sign  and 
Pisces  the  ^sigu  occupied  by  the  Moon  at  tho  time  of  query. 
From  Scorpio  to  Pisces  is  5 signs  ; tho  5th  sign  from  Pisces  is 
Cancer.  Cancer  will  therefore  bo  tho  sign  occupied  by  tho  Moon 
at  the  timo  of  birth  of  a person. 


(b).  From  articles  having  tho  shape  of,  or  in  any  way 
connected  with  the  creatures  representing  the  signs  of  tho 
Zodiac  and  from  the  sounds  of  the  like  creature, the  sign  occupied 
by  tho  Moon  may  bo  determined.  In  all  these  cases,  it  is  ossum. 
ed,  that  an  all-pervading  Intelligent  Being  helps  an  astrologer 
by  various  signs  and  suggestions. 

7.  Tho  rising  sign  at  tho  time  of  birth  will  bo  tho 
sign  of  tho  lord  of  the  rising  Navamsa  at  the  timo  of  query 
(a).  Or,  the  rising  sign  at  the  time  of  birth  will  be  as 


220 


BPail AT  JATAKA. 


[on*  20. 


many  signs  removed  from  Prasna  Lagna  as  tlie  Drekkana 
occupied  by  the  Suu  is  removed  from  the  rising  Drekkana 
at  the  time  of  query  ( h ). 

Notes. 

(a).  Supposing  tbo  rising  Navamsa  at  the  time  of  query  to 
be  that  of  Sagittari,  the  rising  sign  at  the  time  of  birth  is  Sagit- 
tari. 

(&).  Suppose  the  rising  Diekkana  at  the  time  of  query  to 
bo  the  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Gemini  and  the  Drekkana  occupied 
by  the  Sun  at  the  same  time  to  be  the  3rd  Drekkana  of  Sagittari. 
The  number  of  Drekkanas  from  the  one  to  the  other  is  20. 
Therefore  the  rising  sign  at  the  time  of  birth  is  the  20th  sigu 
from  Gemini;  subtracting  12  from  20  it  is  the  8th  sign  from 
Gemini  i.  e.,  sign  Capricorn, 

8.  Or,  multiply  the  Sphuta  (Longitude)  of  the  planet 
or  of  the  most  powerful  planet  occupying  the  rising  sigu 
by  the  number  of  inches  in  the  length  of  the  shadow  of  a 
twelve  inch  Sanku  (a  straight  rod)  placed  vertically  on  a 
horizontal  surface  and  in  the  sun  ; divide  the  product  by 
12.  The  remainder  will  give  the  rising  sign  at  the  time  of 
birth  (a).  According  to  others,  if  the  querent  be  sealed  at 
the  time  of  query,  the  7th  house  from  the  rising  sign  at  the 
time  will  be  the  Lagna  at  the  time  of  birth  ; if  the  querent 
bo  lying  at  the  time,  the  4th  house  from  the  rising  sign  will 
be  the  Lagna  at  the  time  of  birth  ; if  the  querent  be  stan- 
ding at  the  time,  then,  the  lOfch  house  will  be  the  L igna 
and  if  he  be  rising  from  his  seat,  then  the  rising  sign  itself 
will  bo  the  Lagua  at  the  time  of  birth  ( b ). 

Notes. 

(a.)  Suppose'the  longitude  of  the  planet,  or,  (where  there 
are  several  planets)  of  the  most  powerful  planet  occupying  the 
rising  sigu  to  be  4 signs  10  degrees  and  20  minutes  aud  suppose 
the  length  of  the  shadow  to  be  4|  inches,  the  product  of  the  two 
numbers  is  19  sigus  10  degrees  and  30  minutes,  Ibis  divided 


Cfi.  26  ] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


221 


by  12  gives  as  remainder  7 signs,  1G  dpgrees  and  30  minutes*- 
The  Lao-na  at  the  time  of  birth  is  therefore  the  8th  sign  from 

O u 

Aries,  which  is  sign  Scorpio. 

(6.)  According  to  Subhodhinf,  the  7th,  4th,  10th  and  1st 
bouses  are  not  with  reference  to  the  Prasna  Lagna  as  explained 
by  Bhatta  Utpala  but  with  reference  to  the  Lagna  obtained  from 
the  process  given  in  the  first  half  of  the  text,  that  is,  from  sigu 
Scorpio  in  the  instance  quoted  in  note  (a). 

9.  If  the  rising  sign  at  the  time  of  query  be  Taurus 
or  Leo,  multiply  the  Ligna  Sphuta  (the  longitude  of  the 
ascendant)  by  10  ; if  it  bo  Gemini  or  Scorpio,  then,  multi- 
ply the  sphuta  by  8 ; if  Aries  or  Libra,  then  by  7 ; if  Virgo 
or  Capricorn,  then,  by  5 j and  if  it  be  any  of  the  remaining 
signs,  then  by  the  number  of  such  sign  from  Aries  (a). 
Again,  if  the  planet  occupying  the  risiug  sign  be  Jupiter 
multiply  the  Lagna  spliuta  by  10;  if  it  be  Mars,  by  H ; if 
Venus  by  7 ; if  any  of  the  remaining  planets  by  5 ; if  several 
planets  occupy  the  rising  sign,  then  multiply  the  Lagna 
Sphuta  by  the  factor  for  each  of  such  plauets.  Add  up  the 
several  products  aud  find  the  sum  (b). 

Notes. 

In  this  and  in  the  next  stanza  the  author  slates  a process 
for  discovering  the  Nakshatra  (aaterism  occupied  by  the  Moou) 
of  the  querent,  his  wife,  brother,  sou  aud  enemy.  Tne  figures 
given  in  the  text  are  known  as  those  of  Rasi  Gunakara  and 
Graha  Guuakara — Zodiacal  aud  Planetary  factors,  referred  to  iu 
the  chapter  on  Ashtakavarga. 

(a.)  For  instance,  if  Cancer  he  the  sign,  it  being  the  4-th 
sign  from  Aries,  the  factor  for  Caucer  is  4.  The  factor  for 
Sagittariis  9;  that  for  Aquarius  is  11  aud  that  for  Pisces  is  12. 

(b.)  Suppose  the  Lagna  sphuta  to  bo  5s  10°  20'  aud  sup- 
pose  Jupiter  and  Venus  to  occupy  the  rising  sign.  Now,  from  the 
Langa  Sphuta  it  is  cvideut  that  the  rising  sigu  is  Virgo.  The 
factor  for  Virgo  is  5,  multiplying  6‘  108  20,  by  f>,  we  get  2G 


222 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[CH.  26 

21°  40'  Dividing  this  by  12  we  get  as  remainder  2s  21°  40/  (R.) 
Again,  the  factor  for  Jupiter  is  10  and  that  for  Venus  is  7. 
Multiplying  5s  10°  20'  by  10  wo  get  53s  13°  20'  Dividing  by  12 
we  get  as  remainder  5s  13°  20'.  Again,  multiplying  5s  10°  20'  by 
7 we  get  373  12°  20'.  Dividing  by  12  we  get  Is  12°  20'.  Adding 
this  to  5s  13°  20'  we  get  Gs  25°  40'  (Gr).  Adding  together  R and 
G we  get  9s  17°  20, 

10.  Multiply  this  sum  by  7,  add  9 to  the  product  if 
the  rising  sign  be  a moveable  sign  ; or  substract  9 from  tho 
product  if  the  rising  sign  be  a common  ono  or  leave  the 
product  as  it  is  if  the  rising  sign  be  a fixed  one  (a).  Divide 
the  sum  or  the  difference  or  tho  product  as  the  case  may  bo 
by  27.  The  remainder  will  represent  the  Nakshatra  of  the 
querent  at  the  time  of  birth.  By  a similar  process  applied 
to  the  Sphuta  of  the  3rd,  5th,  6th  and  7th  houses  ( b ),  wo 
shall  get  theNakshatras  of  the  querent’s  brother,  son,  euoiny 
and  wife. 

Notes. 

(a,)  According  to  Bhatla  Utpala,  if  the  rising  Drekkana 
bo  the  first  Drekkana  of  the  sign,  9 is  to  be  added  ; if  it  be  the 
2nd,  9 need  neither  be  added  to  nor  subtracted  from  the  products 
and  if  it  be  the  3rd,  9 is  to  be  subtracted  from  the  product. 

(h.  If  you  add  2 signs  to  the  Lagna  sphuta,  yon  get  the 
sphuta  of  the  3rd  house  which  represents  a person’s  brother  ; if 
you  add  4 signs  to  the  Lagna  sphuta,  yon  get  the  sphuta  of  tho 
5th  house  which  represents  a person’s  son;  if  you  add  5 signs  to 
the  Ligna  sphuta  you  get  the  sphuta  of  the  Gth  house  which 
represents  a person’s  enemy  aud  if  you  add  6 signs  to  the  Lagna 
sphuta,  you  get  tho  sphuta  of  the  7th  house  which  represents  a 
person's  wife.  Multiply  the  several  sphutas  by  the  Zodiacal 
factors  of  tbe  several  houses  and  by  the  factors  of  tho  plauets; 
occupying  such  houses,  add  the  products,  multiply  the  sum 
by  7,  add  or  subtract  9 if  necessary,  divide  the  sum  or  remainder 
by  27,  the  remainder  will  givo  you  the  Nakshatra  of  the 
several  persons. 


ch.  26.] 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


223 


11.  Multiply  the  same  sum  (a)  by  10,  8,  7,  5;  add  or 
substract  9 if  necessary,  as  stated  above ; divide  the  result 
by  their  appropriate  numbers  (6)  you  will  obtain  the  year, 
Ritu,  Month,  Lunar  day,  day  or  night, Nakshatra, the  ghatika^ 
the  rising  sign  and  the  rising  Navamsa  at  the  time  of  birth. 

Notes. 

In  this  and  in  the  following  three  stanzas,  the  author  states 
another  process  for  discovering  the  year,  month  &c.  of  the  birth 
of  a person. 

(«’)  The  sum  obtained  at  the  end  of  stanza  9. 

(&.)  These  and  the  process  of  division  will  bo  found  ex- 
plained in  the  next  three  stanzas. 

12.  From  tho  product  of  the  sura  by  10  shall  be  deter- 
mined the  year  (age),  Ricu  and  month  of  birth  (a) ; and  from 
the  product  of  the  sum  by  8 shall  be  determined  the  Paksha 
(fortnight)  and  Tithi  (lunar  day)  (6). 

Notes. 

(a.)  This  product  is  the  first  of  the  four  products  referred 
to  in  the  last  stanza  with  9 added  to  or  subtracted  from  it  if 
necessary.  Divide  tho  quantity  by  120,  the  remainder  will  give 
the  age  of  the  person.  Divide  the  same  quantity  by  G,  the 
remainder  will  give  the  Rita  of  birth  from  Sisira.  Divide  the 
same  quantity  by  2,  the  remainder  will  give  the  first  or  the 
second  month  of  the  Ritu. 

(6.)  This  product  is  the  second  of  the  four  products  referred 
to  in  the  last  stanza  with  9 added  or  subtracted  if  necessary. 
Divide  this  quantity  by  two,  the  remainder  will  give  the  fortnight 
of  birth.  Divide  the  same  quantity  by  15,  the  remainder  will 
give  the  lunar-day. 

13.  From  the  product  of  the  sum  by  7 shall  be  deter- 
mined whether  the  birth  occurred  Ity  day  or  by  night  and 
also  the  Nakshatra. 


E 


224 


BRIHAT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  26. 


Notes. 

This  product  is  the  3rd  of  the  four  products  mentioned  in 
the  11th  stanza  with  9 added  or  subtracted  if  necessary.  Divide 
the  quantity  by  2,  the  birth  will  have  occurred  by  day  or  night 
according  as  the  remainder  is  one  or  more  than  one.  Divide  the 
same  quantity  by  27,  the  remainder  will  give  the  Nakshatra  from 
Aswini. 

14.  Prom  the  product  of  the  Sum  by  5 shall  be  deter- 
mined the  Ghatika,  the  rising  sign,  the  Hora  and  the  rising 
Navamsa  at  the  time  of  birth. 

Notes. 

This  produet  is  the  last  of  the  four  products  mentioned  in 
stanza  11  with  9 added  or  substracted  if  necessary.  Divide  the 
quantity  by  the  number  of  Ghatikas  in  the  day  or  night  of  birth 
as  the  case  may  be,  the  remainder  will  give  the  Ghatika  from 
Sun-rise  or  Sun-set  at  the  time  of  birth.  Divido  the  same 
quantity  by  12,  the  remainder  will  give  the  risiug  sign  from 
Aries-  Divide  the  quantity  by  two,  the  hora  of  birth  will  be  the 
1st  or  2nd  according  as  the  remainder  is  1 or  more  than  1 . Divide 
the  quantity  by  9,  the  remainder  will  give  the  uumber  of 
the  rising  Navamsa  from  the  first  Navamsa  of  the  rising  sigu. 

Similarly  divide  the  quantity  by  12,  the  remainder  will  give 
the  number  of  the  rising  Dwadasamsa  ; divide  the  quantity  by 
3,  the  remainder  will  give  the  rising  Drekkana. 

27.  B. — Iu  all  the  above  cases,  it  is  evident  that  the  remain- 
der will  be  in  the  shape  of  signs,  degrees  and  minutes.  The 
number  representing  the  signs,  is  the  number  representing  the 
particular  Nakshatra,  year,  month,  Paksha,  Tithi,  Ghatika  &o 
at  the  time  of  birth — the  degrees  and  minutes  only  go  to  increase 
the  number  by  unity. 

15.  Multiply  by  two  the  number  of  Matras  in  a 
person’s  name  ; add  the  length  of  shadow  to  it  ) divide  the 
sum  by  27  ,•  the  remainder  will  give  the  Nakshatra,  at  the 
time  of  birth,  from  Dhauishta. 


€h.  27.] 


13RIHAT  JATAKA. 


225 


Notes. 

The  name  is  the  name  given  to  a person  at  the  Namakarana 
ceremony.  A short  vowel  sound  is  counted  as  one  Matra  and. a 
long  vowel  sound  is  counted  as  two,  and  a consonent  is  counted 
as  half  a Matra.  The  length  of  the  shadow  of  a twelve  iuch 
Sauku  shall  be  added  in  inches. 

1<\  The  Dik  numbers  are  : 


East 

2 

S.  East 

n 

O 

South 

14 

S.  West 

10 

West  15 

N.  West  2 1 

North  9 

N.  East  8 


Multiply  by  15  the  number  for  the  Dik  or  direction  which 
the  querent  faces  , add  to  the  product  the  number  cf  persons 
facing  the  same  dik,  divide  the  sum  by  27  The  remainder 
will  give  the  Nakshatra  of  the  person  from  Dkanishta. 


Notes. 

This  stanza  contains  another  process  again  to  discover  the 
Nakshatra. 

17-  Thus  has  been  stated  by  me  various  processes  for 
the  construction  of  a lost  horoscope.  Intelligent  pupils  shall 
study  them  carefully  aud  use  them. 


CHAPTER  XXVII. 

On  The  Drekkanas. 

1.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Aries  is  a man  with  a 
white  cloth  tied  round  his  loins,  black,  facing  a person  as  if 
able  to  protect  him,  of  fearful  appearance  and  of  red  eyes 
and  holding  an  axe  in  his  hand. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  and  is  armed. 
Mars  is  its  lord. 


22G 


MIITIAT  JATAKA- 


[ch.  27. 


2.  According  to  Yavanachariar  the  2nd  Drekkana  of 
sign  Aries  is  a woman  fond  of  ornaments  and  sweetmeats  ; 

with  a pot-like  belly,  of  the  face  of  a horse,  thirsty,  and 
single-legged. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a woman  and  of  a quadru- 
ped 5 the  face  resembles  that  of  a bird  also.  The  Sun  is  its  lord  . 

3.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  Aries  is  a man  of  a wicked 
nature,  learned  in  the  arts,  of  a brown  color,  fond  of  work, 
failing  in  his  attempts  to  carry  out  a work,  holding  up  a 
stick  in  his  hand,  dressed  in  a red  garment  and  angry. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  and  is  armed 
Jupiter  is  its  lord. 

4-  The  1st  Drekkana  of  Sign  Taurus  is  a woman 
with  hairs  cut  and  growing  in  curls,  with  a pot-like  belly, 
dressed  in  a burnt  garment,  thirsty,  and  fond  of  food  and 
ornaments; 


Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a woman  and  carries  fire. 
Venus  is  its  lord. 

5.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Taurus  is  a man  skilled 
in  works  connected  with  agriculture,  grain,  house,  cows, 
music,  dance,  painting,  writing  and  the  like,  skilled  at  the 
plough  and  in  works  connected  with  a conveyance,  with  a 
neck  bent  like  that  of  the  bullock,  thirsty,  with  a face  like 
that  of  the  ram  and  dressed  in  dirty  garments. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  both  a man  aud  a quadru- 
ped. Mercury  is  its  lord. 

fi.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Taurus  is  a man  with  a 
body  resembling  that  of  an  elephant,  with  large  teeth,  with 


ch.  27.] 


BRIHAT  JATAK. 


227 


feet  resembling  those  of  the  camel,  of  a brown  color,  attached 
to  the  ram  aod  to  the  animals  of  the  forest. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  both  of  human  aud  quadruped  shape.  Saturn 
is  its  lord. 

7-  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Gemini  is  a woman  fond  of 
needle  work,  beautiful,  fond  of  decoration,  without  children, 
with  raised  hands,  having  attained  puberty  and  full  of  lust- 
ful thoughts. 

Notes- 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a woman.  Mercury  is  its 

lord. 

8.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Gemini  is  a man  resid- 
ing in  a flower  garden,  wearing  a mail  coat,  holding  a bow  in 
bis  hand,  fond  of  fight,  carrying  arrows,  his  face  like  that  of 
a Garuda  (Brahmani  kite),  his  thoughts  directed  to  play, 
children,  ornaments  and  wealth. 

Notes 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  aud  is  armed.  It  is 
also  of  the  shape  of  a bird.  Venus  is  its  lord. 

9.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Gemini  is  a man  wearing 
ornaments,  possesing  many  gems,  wearing  a mail  coat  and  tar- 
get, carrying  a bow  in  his  hand,  learned  in  all  the  arts  and 
a literary  writer. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  and  is  armed. 
Saturn  is  its  lord. 

10*  The  1st  Drekkana  of  Cancer  carries  leaves,  roots 
and  fruits,  has  a body  resembling  that  of  the  elephant  ; 
lives  in  a foi'est  near  sandal  trees,  has  feet  as  large  as  that  of 
the  camel,  has  a face  like  that  of  the  hog  and  a neck  like 
that  of  a horse. 


228 


BKIIIAT  JATAKA. 


[Cfl.27. 


Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a quadruped.  The  Moon 
is  its  lord. 

11.  The  2nd  Drekkaua  of  sign  Cancer  is  a woman 
wearing  iu  her  head  lotus  flowers,  carrying  a snake,  hard- 
hearted, young,  crying  in  a forest  and  holding  a branch  of 
the  Palasa  tree  in  her  hand. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkaua  is  of  the  shape  of  a woman.  Mars  is  its  lord. 

12.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Cancer  is  a man  sur- 
rounded by  a snake,  sailing  in  a boat  in  the  sea  on  account 
of  procuring  ornaments  for  his  wife,  wearing  ornaments 
made  of  gold  and  with  a flat  face- 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  one  of  the  6hape  °f  a man  and  a snake. 
Jnpiterisits  lord. 

13.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Leo  is  of  the  shape  of  a 
vulture  and  a jackal,  seated  on  the  top  of  Salmali  tree,  resem- 
bling a dog  in  appearance  and  is  also  of  the  shape  of  a man 
dressed  in  dirty  garments  and  separted  from  his  parents 
and  crying  aloud. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkaua  is  of  the  shape  of  a man,  a quadruped  and  a 
bird.  The  Sun  is  its  lord. 

14*  The  2ndtDrekkana  of  sign  Leo  is  a man  of  the  shape 
of  a horse,  wearing  a slightly  white  garland  of  flowers 
in  the  head  and  covered  with  deer-skin  and  flannel,  unapproa- 
chable like  the  lion  holding  a bow  in  his  hand  and  with  a 
a bent  nose. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  and  is  armed.  Jupiter 
is  its  lord . 


ERIHAT  JATAKA. 


229 


CH.  27.] 


15.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  Leo  is  a man  with  the  face 
of  a bear,  the  pranks  of  a monkey,  with  a club  in  his  hand 
carrying  fruits  and  meats,  with  a long  beard  and  whiskers 
and  with  curling  hairs- 


Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  and  a quadruped 
and  is  armed.  Mars  is  its  lord. 


16.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Virgo  is  a virgin  girl 
carrying  a pot  filled  with  flowers,  dressed  in  dirty  garments 
and  fond  of  cloths  and  wealth  and  proceeding  to  the  house 
of  her  preceptor. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a woman-  Mercury  is 
its  lord, 


17.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Virgo  is  a man  holding 
a pen  in  his  hand,  black,  with  a cloth  tied  round  his  head, 
examining  items  of  receipt  and  expenditure,  with  a large 
bow  in  his  hand  and  covered  with  hairs  all  overihis  body. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  and  is  armed.  Sa- 
turn is  its  lord, 

18.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Virgo  is  a woman  of 
jTellow  color,  dressed  in  white  silk  carrying  a pot  and  ladle 
in  her  hands,  pure  and  proceeding  to  a temple. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a woman.  Venus  is  its  lord. 

19.  The  1st  Drokkaua  of  sign  Libra  is  a man  hold- 
ing a balance  in  one  band,  skilled  in  weighing  and  measur- 
ing, with  articles  in  his  hand  to  be  weighed  or  measured  and 
with  his  thoughts  directed  to  the  determination  of  the 
price  of  such  articles. 


230 


B BIHAT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  27- 


Notes- 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a man.  Venus  is  its  lord. 

20.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Libra  is  a man  with  the 
face  of  a vulture,  holding  a pot  in  his  hand,  wishing  to  fall 
down,,  suffering  from  hunger  and  thirst  and  with  his 
thoughts  directed  to  his  wife  and  children. 

Notes- 

This  Drekkaua  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  and  a bird.  Saturn  is 
its  lord. 

21.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Libra  is  a man  with  the 
face  of  a horse  adorned  with  gems,  scaring  animals  in  the 
woods  carrying  a golden  quiver  and  wearing  a mail  coat, 
carrying  fruits  and  meat,  monkey-like  in  appearence  and 
holding  a bow  in  his  hand. 

Notes- 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of^a  man  and  a quadruped.  Mer- 
cury is  its  lord. 

22.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Scorpio  is  a beautiful 
woman,  naked  and  without  ornaments,  quitting  her  place, 
lauding  after  a long  sea  voyage  and  with  a snake  coiled 
round  her  legs. 

Notes- 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a woman  and  a serpent. 
Mars  is  its  lord. 

23.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  Scorpio  is  a woman  with  a 
body  like  that  of  a turtle  or  pot,  desiring  the  comfort  of  her 
place  and  with  a serpent  coiled  round  her  body  on  account 
other  husband. 

Notes- 

This  Drekkua  is  of  the  shape  of  a woman  and  a serpent, 
Jupiter  is  its  lord. 


BRIHAT  J AT AKA. 


23) 


CH. 


27.] 


24.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Scorpio  is  a lion  with  a 
broad  and  a flat  face  like  that  of  a turtle,  scaring  dogs, 
deer,  jackals  and  hogs  in  the  woods  and  lording  over  a coun- 
try abounding  in  sandal  trees. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a quadruped.  The  Moon  is 
its  lord. 

25.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Sagittari  is  a man  with 
the  body  of  ahorse,  with  a long  bow  in  his  hand,  stopping 
in  his  hermitage  and  watching  over  the  several  articles  re- 
quired for  Sacrificial  rites. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkaua  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  and  a quadruped  and 
is  armed.  Jupiter  is  its  lord. 

26.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Sagittari  is  a beautiful 
woman,  bright  as  gold  and  the  Champaka  flower,  seated  on 
a throne  of  middle  size,  and  picking  up  the  gems  of  the 
Sea. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  .a  woman.  Mars  is  its  lord. 

27.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  Sagittari  is  a man  with  a 
long  beard  and  whiskers,  of  the  color  of  gold  and  the  cham- 
paka  flower,  seated  on  a throne  with  a club  in  his  hand  and 
dressed  in  white  silk  and  dear  skin’ 

Notes. 

This  Drekkauna  is  of  tho  shape  of  a man  and  is  armed,  The 
Sun  is  its  lord. 

28.  The  first  Drekkana  of  sign  Capricorn  is  a man 
coverd  with  hairs,  strong  as  the  sea  monster,  with  a body 
like  that  of  a hog,  wearing  a nose  string  and  fetters  and 
with  a deformed  face. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a man  loaded  wi  n fetters. 
Saturn  is  its  lord- 

F 


BUI  I [AT  JATAK'A. 


[ch.  27- 


0O£> 

Li 


‘-9.  I lie  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Capricorn  is  a woman 
skilled  in  the  arts,  with  eyes  like  the  petals  of  the  lotus, 
black,  hankering  after  various  things  and  wearing  ear- 
ornaments  made  of  iron- 

Notes. 

this  Drekkua  is  of  the  shape  of  a woman.  Venus  is  its  lord. 

30.  Tne  3rd  Drekka  na  of  sign  Capricorn  is  of  the  shape 
ot  a Kinnara  (acelestial  being)  covered  with  flannel,  with  a 
a quiver,  a bow  and  a mail  coat  and  carrying  on  his  should- 
ers a put  set  with  precious  stones. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  armed.  Mercury  is  its  lord. 

31.  The  1st  Drekkana  of  sign  Aqnaiius  is  a man  with 
the  face  of  a vulture,  with  his  thoughts  directed  towards  the 
gain  of  oil,  liquor,  water,  and  meals  and  dressed  in  flanuel, 
silk  and  deer  skin' 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a man.  Saturn  is  its  lord. 

32.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Aquarius  is  a womau  in 
a car  burnt  with  the  wood  of  Saltnali  in  it  and  collecting 
iron,  living  in  a forest  and  dressed  in  dirty  garments. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a woman  who  carries  fire. 
Mercury  is  its  lord. 

S3.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Aquarius  is  a black  man, 
with  hairs  in  his  ear,  wearing  a crown  and  carrying  bark, 
leaves,  the  oil  of  bdellium,  iron  and  pots  from  one  nlace  to 
another. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a man.  Ve  nus  is  its  lord 

31,  The  1st  Drekkana  of  Sign  Pisces  is  a man  with 
the  vessels  of  sacrificial  rites,  pots,  pearls,  gems  and  conch 


cii.  28.1 


BRIPIAT  J AT  AKA. 


233 


shells  in  his  hands,  carrying  ornamentes  and  sailing  in  a ',on^ 

in  the  sea  for  the  purpose  of  decorating  his  wife. 

Notes. 

Jupiter  is  the  lord  of  this  Drekkana. 

?5.  The  2nd  Drekkana  of  sign  Pisces  is  a woman  with 
a long  flag- staff  and  banner,  sailing  in  a boat  to  the  other 
shore  of  the  sea  accompanied  by  her  friends  and  with  a face 
bright  as  the  Champaka  flower. 

Notes. 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a woman.  The  Moon  is  its 

lord- 

36.  The  3rd  Drekkana  of  sign  Pisces  is  a man  with 
a snake  coiled  round  him,  standing  naked  on  the  brink  of 
a pit  in  a forest,  suffering  from  thieves,  from  fii’e  and  from 
hunger  and  weeping. 

Notes, 

This  Drekkana  is  of  the  shape  of  a snake.  Mars  is  its  lord - 


Notes. — The  author  has  stated  the  use  of  these  descriptions 
of  the  Drekkanas  in  his  Yatra.  If  the  Drekkana  be  of  agreeable 
appearance,  carrying  fruits,  flowers,  gems  and  pots  and  aspected 
by  benefic  planets,  there  will  be  success.  If  they  be  of  hideous 
appearance,  armed  and  aspected  by  malefic  planets,  there  will  be 
disgrace  and  failure  ; if  they  carry  serpents  or  fetters  there  will  be 
delirium  and  imprisonment.  The  Drekkana  description  is  also  of 
use  in  tracing  out  theives  accordiug  to  Prithuyasas,  son  of 
Varaha  Mihira,  iu  his  Sbadpanchasika,  a work  on  Horary  As- 
trology. 


CHAPTER  XXVI II. 

Conclusion. 

1,2  & 3.  In  my  work  on  Jataka  I have  treated  of  the 
following. 


2:34 


I! HI  HAT  JATAKA. 


[ch.  27. 


1.  Definitions  and  Elementary  principles' (Zodiacal) 

-D°  Do  Do  (Planetary) 

®l]  Animal  and  Vegetable  Horoscopy. 

4.  On  Nisheka  kala  or  the  time  of  conception  . 
o.  On  Matters  connected  with  birth  time. 

0,  On  Balarishta  or  Early  death. 

On  Ayurdaya  or  the  determination  of  length  of  li fo. 

8.  On^Planetaay  divisions  and  sub-divisions  of  life  known 
as  Dasas  and  Autardasas. 

9.  On  Ashtakavargas. 

10.  On  Avocation. 

11.  On  Raja  yoga  or  the  birth  of  kings. 

12.  On  Nabhasa  yogas. 

13.  On  Chandra  or  lunar  Yogas. 

14.  On  Double  planetary  Yogas. 

15*  On  Ascetic  Yogas. 

16-  On  the  Naksliatras  or  the  Moon  in  the  asterisms. 

1 7.  On  the  Moon  in  the  several  signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

15.  On  the  Sun,  Mars  and  other  planets  in  the  severa 

signs  of  the  Zodiac. 

19.  On  planetary  aspects- 

20.  On  the  planets  in  the  Bhavas. 

21.  On  the  planets  in  their  several  Vargas. 

22.  On  Miscellaneous  Yogas- 

23.  On  Malefic  Yogas. 

24.  On  the  Horscopy  of  women. 

25  On  Death- 

2fi.  On  the  Discovery  of  a lost  Horoscope- 
27.  On  the  Drekkauas. 

I shall  now  give  a summary  of  the  subjects  treated  of 
in  my  work  on  Yatra. 

4,  5 & 6. 

Ch  1.  Prasna  Prabheda. 

2.  Titbibala. 

3.  Nakshatrabhidhana- 


cir.  28.] 


brihAt  j at  aka. 


235 


4.  Varapbala. 

5.  Muhurta  Nirdesa. 

G.  Chandra  Bala. 

7-  Lagua  Niscbaya, 

8.  Lagna  Bheda. 

9.  Grahasudlii. 

10-  Apavada- 

11.  Misraka- 

12.  Tanuvepana. 

13-  Guliyakapuja- 

.14.  Swapnadbyaya.  (Dreams) 

15-  Snanavidbi.  (batb) 

1G.  Grabayajna. 

17.  Prayana.  (Travels) 

18.  Sakunaruta. 

19.  Yivabakala- 

20.  Grahakarana.  (on  tbe  planets) 

The  last  of  the  above  subjects  has  been  separately 
treated  of  by  me  in  my  Astronomical  work  known  as  Pancha- 
Bindhauta.  Thus  the  three  branches  of  the  Jyotisha  Sastra 
viz  Astronomy,  Horoscopy  and  Samhita  have  been  treated 
of  by  me  for  the  benefit  of  intelligent  students. 

7.  These  brief  works  have  been  written  by  me  on  a 
full  study  and  examination  of  the  elaborate  works  of  the  an- 
cient writers.  If  any  important  points  bo  found  omitted 
I crave  the  forbearance  of  the  learned  critics. 

S.  If  any  portion  of  the  text  be  fouud  omitted  by  the 
writer  who  copied  or  the  teacher  who  taught,  the  learned 
will  kindly  supply  the  omission,  setting  aside  all  feelings  of 
jealousy-  Again,  if  there  be  found  in  the  text  errors,  im- 
perfections or  omissions,  the  learned  will  kindly  make  the 
necessary  corrections  and  supply  what  is  wanted. 

9.  Varalia  Mihira,  the  son'of  the  Brahmin  Aditya- 
dasa  from  whom  he  received  his  education,  obtained  the 
boon  of  knowledge  from  the  Suu  in  the  village  of  Kapitha, 


230 


BRIHAT  JATVKA. 


[ch.  28. 


spent  his  days  in  the  court  of  Ujjayaui  in  the  province  of 
Avanti  and  has  written  this  neat  work  on  horoscopy  after 
a careful  examination  of  the  works  of  the  ancient  sages  on 
the  subject. 

10.  I have  been  enabled  to  write  the  present  work  by 
the  the  grace  of  the  Sun,  of  Vasishtha,  and  of  Adityadasa, 
worshipped  by  me.  Salutation  to  the  ancient  writers  of 
horoscopy. 


END. 


^IFIP'ETN'IDIX:- 


:o:— 


Required  the  Lagna  Splmtam,  that  is,  the  Longitude 
of  the  Ascendant  at  39  gh.  30c  gh.  from  Sunrise on  t .may 
the  28th  May  1886,  for  a place  whose.Latitude  i*  11 

From  the  Almanac  we  find  that  the  Sun  enter  e.d  lau- 
vnq  r,f  56  ^h-  40v.  gh.  on  the  12th  May,  and  quits  the  sign 
It  12  gh  27 r.  gh.  on  the  18th  June.  Therefore  time  taken 
by  the  Sun  to  move  through  sign  Taurus 

— 3 gh.  20v.  gh.  + 81  days  + 12  gh.27v.  gh. 

- 31  days  15  gh.  47v.  gh-  = l,l2,500v.  ghs. 

Time  from  Suu-rise  on  the  28th  May  to  the  end  ol  the 

Sun’s  course  through  Taurus  = 10ds  12  gh.  -7v.  g i. 

— r8.S9.7v.  ohs. 


Time  of  oblique  ascension  of>  =5  gh.  6v-  gh. 

Taurus  for  Latitude  11°  J=  306v.gh. 

Therefore  time  of  oblique  ascension  of  the  portion  ct 
Taurus  to  be  passed  over  by  the  Suu  on  the  morning  of  the 
306X58,327 

28th  = ■ = 2gh.  39v.  gh. 


1,12,500 

Subtracting  this  from  39gh.  30 v.  gh*  we  get  time  of 
oblique  ascension  of  signs  from  Gemini  = 39  gh.  oOv.  gh 
—2  gh.  39v.  gh  = 36  gh.  olv.  gh. 

From  Table  B we  find  that  time  of  oblique  ascension 
of  signs  for  Gemini  to  Scorpio  = 31  gh.  86v.  gli. 

Therefore  time  of  oblique  ascension  of  portion  Sagit- 
tari  that  has  risen  above  the  horizon. 


= 36  gh.  51v,  gh. — 31  gh.  36v.  gh. 

= 5 gh.  15v.  gh.  = 315v.  gh. 

Time  of  oblique  ascension  of  the  30  degrees  of  sagit- 
tari  for  Latitude  IT',  is  5 gh.  21v.  gh.  (Vide  Table  A) 
= 321  v.  gh. 

Therefore  portion  of  Sagittari  that  [.has  risen  above  the 
30x315 

horizon  = — 29°  261.  Sagittari  being  the  9th  sign 

321 

from  Aries, 


Lagna  Sphutam  required  is  8s  29°  261. 

The  Bhavasphutam  process  is  too  complicated  to  be  given 
here.  The  Reader  is  referred  to  Baskaracharya’s  work  cn 
Astronomy. 


TABLE  A:  Shewing  the  time  of  oblique  ascension  of  each  sign  of  Zodiac  for  places  situated 


tO 

CCS 

rC-c 


<55 

~S? 


s; 

<=> 

to 

to 

to 


M- 

CN 

II 


to 

53 


C3 

~c<: 


C3 

-^c 


C3 

03 


.^0 


to 

CO 

CO 

Co 

~C3 


~C3 

Sc 

C3 


co 

CO 


=s 


CN  § 

*0  ~~ 


co  ^ 

-t~-  CNj 


II 


O C3 


tb 

-O 


£ *=5 

to  ~Sc 


-Cr 

Is 


.-2  ^ 


^ Cq 


co 

cu 

o 


CM 


£ CO 

Er.2 

<1  '-< 


g*s 

6 ° 


1° 

a? 


a* 

u 

o 

o 

rn 


c3 


o 

to 

u 


o 

<D 

h! 


u 

CD 

o 

a 

c3 

o 


<D 

O 


m 

P 


a 

c3 

H 


U 


•'J'Bq 


II 


©r-i®qCO'44MOOC'.CO>CbO 


HNM^lOONXlOi 


£ci2S2:3?0,t'ira<:o— laNMNoooto^HaN 

WMWMWfjMiNMrtr-irlHH  Mb  MO 


-fr  Tji 


T?  rjl  CO  CO 


2l5SiSi2£2i®t^‘';)co  — oNisnoooO'# 

'^^WMCCWOSNNNciMHHrtHH 


-4<  -44 


tCcCMHCJNCOlOCOClOGNCDlOCOHOOOCO 
XO  MbMbMbMOMbMb4444'44Tf4'4'4444COCO 


cj  mo  ms  mo  mo  -4<  44 


WO»)i'fTji^wcOMc)MHHriOOR<S»'fl 

(MNNNNNNNiMONNNNiMINHHhH 


NCCfflOHC)CO-«in(CN05a>OH3qcorfiol> 

H-H(M(Ncl<NMONNIM<NCOCQconmMCO 


wwi'CooN^ocoaHojist'OHci^ooo 

lO  IS  coco  r-4  1-4  rM  r-l  r-4  <M  C4  (V»  <M  !M 


-4*  -44  "44  ^?U30 


t'0)HM16N®HWioSO«cfeOCIOMinN 

CSC5^'^'^'C''^‘-OOiolO  r-lr-lr-ir-l 


■4*  -44 


■# 


WWl>®HCOlONfflHCOiaj>®HMCSoriOIM 

■4*4444"44MbMbMbMOlO  r-4  r-4  i— l rt  (N  C » 


■44  -44 


■44  -44  MO  VO 


MOC-OOCb-JCO-44‘t5t>QOOi— I 00  44  MO  N®  O CM-* 
H.Hr-tHHr-iC4CJOJNC4C4WCCCOf5 


IDIOOCTOONNMlOCOCJOOOO-HiMiN 

C4NNN(N«NHMNNN(MNnWWWnn 


J>ffiiS4WNHOOCCI>tCin4»(MHO®N 
HririrlHrirtH  Mb  MO 


CU 


Mb  10 


M5  MO  -44  -44 


«HfflOOCC4(MC'«)t'»OMHffiN>nTfNOCO 
M5i0  4':44'44'44'44'44COCOCOCOCO<NS<l(OJ«gCNc<lr-4 


■44  4< 


OHC'lCQr)4lOOt'00®OHiMM4VOCBt>®® 


Ill 


asaasasRaaasaaaasRaasssswssassss 


^«0iN>sgOi>3N®®^Hr^HXOH00T!| 


CO  CO 


lO  LO  O ^ ’T  CO  W W w (M  n H 

CO  CO  N N <M  oi 


WON^ClONWWOlNWNCiOcOONjHGO^HNCOg^O^OlOO^ 

oIbi0>U0*0^^,,tf''T|tf3C0C0Cl04<M<N»-ir",T"'‘  lOiO^^^COCO(MCM 


^ CO  CO 


CO  CO  O 1 Ol 


(M  01 


rtM^O®®^MO*^^nO»lOWO«W«2NjrtN^Ot>CO®MCO 
MMMWNNMt)<NHHHnH  lOlSlO^Tf^TfSJCOWCqWrHr-l 


■*?  CO  00 


CO  CO 


M'NOtD010ID’Cl'JnCONCi|HHOOEOtOI'>OlS'?'^COMO®®^® 


loiaioio 

vo  vo  -<c<  *t  •«? 


S « § 5!  ^ ” ^fl  ® ^ % VO  MO  MO  MO  US  MO  US  rtHHHHW!M«05«C0 


MO  MO  CO  cd 


CD  CD 


QiMTft'OHCOlONO(MWI'OWl!5  00'-lT}II>OMNH10  0gP’-lOOC3rt 

COCOCOWW^'I'^'C'WlOvaiO  HHnClNNCOCOW^TitlOLO  v— ! 


VO  MO  CD  CD 


©DM>  N 


oisnot.ffl»^NONiooBO«cDoeo<oai»cDO^NHioQT((a«oo«oo 

NNNNftCOnM'il'Cl^^lOUSiO  r-v  i— idC'ItMCOCOTjH^C’T^MOMO 


MO  MO  CD  CD 


CD  CO  t—  1> 


Tf.ND-i^oaHMcDOH'fi'OcoOfflcnoriMvoocot.gtpHCOHOH 

CJdlMCOC5C0C10^,’^’'fl^^^0^  HHrHdCIClCOCO'^^UO^O 


MO  MO  CD  CD 


DCDONO 


VCNOiON'S®®OOMCDOOONU3l>OCI'OMHMCDfflWCOO»C'ClNC'l 
COcOM'^l'>JlTpTt''^MOMOMOVOtfO  Hi-inrtC)IMNClMCO'#'?^U«lO 


VO  MO  CD  CD 


CD  CD 


C0C003-^^^10M0CDC01>NCf)rQaOOH'-IC105'?>OCDCDN»O-,(MC5^ 

COCOCOCOCOOOC<OCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCO'3’''^'*?''JI^t5'^?''C<''C,'^''S’''J<‘OMOMOMOVD 

MO  VO 


COVO'rlOO(Mi-IO«Nffi'#MHOOOl'W^<MOI»CD'TllMOCOVOCJDCOCOOCD 
WvOlOXOVOin^'}lrfTjliil'^'^Tj(«MMCOCO«NNIN(MCIrtrtrt  VO 


-vf*  ■*}<  CO 


CD^«fflt'MJOH®CO'JHffiCD«HOOioNDD«DMOHt«'?0>IOHCOO® 
r— < < — I i — I MOMOMOMO-Ot'C'-'T'^COCOCOOllNOl— I r-l  i— I MO  MS  Tp  T CO 


•v?  ^ CO  CO 


« CO  C)  Cl  M Cl  Cl 


O-lClM^lOCOt'QOClOHClCO'fvOONOOOlOHClCO-^lOcONOOOO’-1 

(McMDJC'lCMa'lCNCCIcMcMCOfOCOCOCOCOCOCOCOCO'O'TpTj'TP'TVtp-vprjlTj'ToMOMO 


IV. 


£; 

.^0 

on 

s. 

Co 

-S; 


<53 


s: 

to 

CO 

&: 

CO 

C3 


.to 

Co 

~C3 

53 


5 513 

CO 
to 
CO 
~S; 


s; 

• 2 
'o 
s: 
co 
co 
co 
C3 

CO 

=s 

,C3~ 

'CO 

CO 


co 

CO 

CO 

_C3 

-<?o 

CO 

,C3 


~C3 
CO  J=> 

§ N 

CO  ° 
-SC 


b0 

.s; 


CO 

-s: 

CO 


03 

Uj 
— I 
03 

£ 


**3 

CO 

5^ 

CO 

-^o 

CO 

S, 

CO 

~co 

Sc 

CO 

CO 

co 

-S5 

-CO 

k! 

JO 


Co 


to 

o 

> 

°£r1M(*jr^'sci>c*  *$!■<* 

CM  CM  VO  CO  CM  CM  w cc  H 

CO 

s 

d 

OUSO^OS-fOJ-SQOCOQO'^1 

SUSO^MMNNHH 

Aqua- 

rius. 

> 

d 

tDC0  3>COi>(M(N03^0  — 'O 
T?r1  WHHHiOBHD) 

lOHtooaooa  ■"^os'^o 

IOW-}.^03WIUHH  CD 

Capri- 

corn. 

s> 

d 

WNfflt'®HH00ODOD 
SNlO-^IrHlDlDlDCOrHTj.  CO 

HOHOOKSOOO^Ovfl 
W^'JKCOMWr-im  CO  io 

•e 

a 

-m 

> 

dconoonwwdhOho 

00  W N Tt<  CM  rH  VO 

to 

03 

U1 

d 

ON0HOHCOWOW5O 
‘^^COCOWNHH  O lO  io 

6 

• rH 

Q> 

VO  CM  sO  t>  CO  H H 00  O Ol  O 0^ 
rHTfiCO  tji  CM  CO  IQ  CM 

o 

o 

U1 

d 

no-ucoaom 

05  C<5  N M r-  H CD  US  -S'  "<? 

C& 

N 

I>^XC5QOCOWONH(NH 
TT  rH  CO  r-1  H H CO  rH  CM 

d 

lOH^niOOOOHJJ’HO 
CO  CO  CM  CM  ft  rH  CC  Ifl  ^ ^ 

6 

> 

t?HiCCO\OOONO)XS5CO 
CO  VO  CM  H O ^ 

To 

u 

> 

d 

0©0  0 0i8  0'#01f50'l 
CO  IM  <N  — ( i — l CD  US  'Cj1  CO  CO 

6 

<D 

> 

^rUOOlOOONDODOOO 
CO  ID  <M  Tjr  r-i  US 

d 

lOHlOOiOOiOQHGO^C) 
CM  CM  rH  rH  CO  vo  ^ ^ CO  CO  CM 

© 

o 

CiCD©.HOU5>O<NH<c0''i,e0 
IM  « U5  (N  XDlD-^r-IlD  ^ 

a 

a 

o 

d 

OWOWOn'D'SiDCOD'ni 
(N  — rH  tCCS^rjciSCiJCJM 

Gemini. 

OOVOOOO^^HBNMCI 
con  coescoNmWTjiM 

d 

ooisorjOHaMoocco 

HH  ®K5rf'jl03CClMNlH 

W 

d 

u 

> 

03COO— 'OVOiOCMtHcO-^CO 
CO  CO  i-h  VO  CM  rH  VO 

o3 

H 

d 

CiOO^C5^C5COCCCOQOCO 

CDWH'H'COCONCMnH 

CQ 

CD 

?>* 

CO  O^vO^^Oi^00C)l>0CI^ 
CO  VO  CM  VC  lO  ^ ^ Tt1 

U 

< 

d 

^O^C5«H<OOCOCOCOt>COQO 
COVO^Tf'COCOCMCM'— in 

From. 

Aries. 

Taurus. 

Gemini. 

Cancer. 

Leo. 

Virgo. 

Libra. 

Scorpio.  ... 
Sagittari.  ... 
Capricorn.... 
Aquarius,  ... 
Pisces. 

Table  C ■ Shewing  the  Antardasa  periods  of  the  Various  Nakshatra  Dasas • 


V. 


J 

rll  .1 


VI 


TO  FIND  OUT  THE  CORRECT  LOCAL  TIME. 


I EY  DAY. 


Draw  a pretty-large  semi-circle  on  each  side  of  a well- 
planed  and  smooth  oblongular  plank.  Place  its  edge  along 
a straight  line  drawn  east  to  west  on  a smooth  level  ground, 
the  plank  being  inclined  at  an  angle  with  the  plane  of  the 
horizon,  equal  to  the  complement  of  the  latitude  of  the 
place,  so  that  a straight  needle  fixed  at  the  centre  of  the 
semi-circle  and  at  right  angles  to  the  plane  of  the  plank 
will  point  to  the  Pole  and  the  plane  of  the  plank  will  be 
parallel  to  the  plane  of  the  equator.  The  edge  of  an  ob- 
longular piece  of  wood  placed  at  the  centre  will  serve  as 
well  as  a needle.  Now  divide  the  semi-circle  into  12  equal 
parts,  marking  the  points  of  division  with  the  figures  from. 
G down  to  12  and  from  12  up  to  6.  The  divisions  repre- 
sent the  hours.  If  the  diameter  be  about  a cubit  in  lengih 
each  division  may  further  be  divided  into  30  or  60  equal 
parts,  so  that  the  position  of  the  shadow  of  the  needle  will 
give  the  time  within  a minute.  Now  apply  the  equation 
of  time  and  the  result  will  be  the  local  clock  time  or  the 
mean  solar  time  required.  This  can  be  converted  into 
Ghatikas  and  Vighitikas  from  sun  rise  from  the  table 
shewing  the  time  of  sun  rise  for  eich  day. 

Notes: — {l).  The  latitude  of  the  place  may  be  found 
from  a pretty  good  Atlas  or  it  may  be  ascertained  by  noting 
the  altitude  of  the  pole-star  both  at  the  time  of  its  culmi- 
n ition  and  the  time  of  its  depression  and  taking  the  mean* 

(2) ,  The  complement  of  the  angle  of  latitude  may  be 
marked  on  a piece  of  solid  wood  and  the  portion  may  be 
cut  out  in  the  shape  of  a fine  wedge  and  made  to  support 
the  plank  of  the  inclined  dial. 

(3)  The  east  and  west  line  may  be  marked  pretty 
cerrectly  with  the  help  of  a mariner’s  compass  or  it  may  be 
found  by  marking  the  two  points  of  contact  of  the  end  o: 
the  shadow  of  a straight  rod  fixed  vertically  at  the  centre 
of  a circle  drawn  on  a smooth,  horizontal  surface,  with  the 
circumference  of  the  circle  both  before  and  after  mid-day 

the  line  joining  the  two  points  being  due  east  and 

west. 

(4j.  A level,  horizontal  ground  may  be  prepared  with 
the  help  of  a spirit-level. 


Table  Shewing  the  Equation  of  Time,  for  India. 


VII. 


O 

P 

ft 


> 

O 


O 

H 

O 

O 


W 

w 


EQUATION  OF  TIME. 


_ ._if(ON«)0>»OOOOOOOOOoaffl®MC^ 

TTHlOM  N n Tjl  rl  in  N n}  M >S  n CO  CO  CO  CO  (M  O (M  »0  01  CO 


ta'Ot^COOiTftOOOQCOCJ-.  -. — ~ ^ — 

TP  H U5  o MrT-jlr-HON««lOWlO«  CO  CO  CO  CO 

SOO(J)O05M0(H>l>COir.  o^tjiCJMWmmHmOCOH 

<-H  r—i 

I I + 


h H (M  (N  « CC 


Of  o O C5  t ? H IN  (M  1C  00  H eo  W n C5  w X « N O 

n (M  n H ^ r->  H U7  T?  CO  O'!  H TT  CO  VO  CO  (N 

P C O C CO  r CD  O CD  c 10  lO  to  »c  »o  LO  lO  ^ cc  W W CQ  <M 

'“'r— 'rHr—ir— ipHrHr—fr— irHr-irHr— irHr— ir— ir-HrHrHrHr-»|-Hf— if— >rHrH«—ir— i 


IO  C w 

rj<  (M  ^ <M 


a-CCiflTpwOXtONQO^Oi^OOOlWt^asOHHHOOOONCOCOOOW^^ 

Ol  H (N  ^ O H CO  ^ r— v CO  Tf*  h M W O h (N  W C3  ^ W O »—»•—>  r-H 

gOOHHHHNMNWWWM’+’t^’?^>CiOOlO‘C»CO>OCO'pCOO 
rH  r-i  rH  r- I H H r i rH  — • pi  i— if— If— i rH  r—  i— f r-i  r-i  r-H  r-<  f— i r-i  r— i i-h  rH  r- 

I 


00  00  t> 


OjCOfMfM-'^H'^iMCOCO^iOCNcoa'.  OWC^^VOC^t^NCC, - 

'nCOlQHCOiO»H«OHCCVO«WiQH^  <M  ^ CM  <M  V <M  ^ 

£ OOOHr-.H^(MNCOCO«rr^TpOiOCCOO^M^OO  X CO  C C 05  o 

f—l 


o 

p 

< 


mC005^C5CONO(MCO^»OOO^MHQOM5(MOOrtOOW^HTfU>ON^«0 
tO  iO  tt  ^ CC  .*0  (M  H lO  h*i  CC  Ol  i-i  T*  CO  Ol  tO  CO  <M  lO  CO  ri 

g CC  tO  tO  iO  O iO  lo  to  5.0  i.0  ^ t?  rfi  ^ h$<  CO  CO  CO  CO  01  03  <M  W rH  n H rl  O O © 

+ 


o 

fj 


ss 

Z 

P 


QOON^OiOTflCONO^ 


^OtTNcOCOGOOONCOCOCN^O  ON  N H lO 

CO  tO  rH  Cl  CO  '’7*  tO  rH  f ] C'J  CO  TT1  ^T1  tO  tO  ? — i i — ■ i — i r—  • — > r— « ■ — • ? — i »— i 

gCOCOW^^^^-^^OtOiOiCUiiOtOOiO'vCO^O^COCCOCOCO 

+ 


jjlOtCOtcoinT?ft)HO®fflMHlMW®HT((t>0»S)0!'MTiiNOHn 
W H UO  Tjl  CO  OI  I— | U3  CO  CJ  rt  I-,  N CC  lO  i— i CO  t?  KO  <M  CO  tP  ri  N 

g(M!MNl-lr-l>-lr-(r-irHOOOOOOOOO'-l'--lr-lrHr-Pl»(N<M4'100CO« 

I 1 + 


| jJ  W O Cr  CO  ce  CC  00  -n.C  N 31  H C1  (M  M h O M is  Cl  ® TP  o tS  r C)  O « O Cl  •» 

j ■HrtiMiMCCeC'^TjiTii^iCnOioi.OiOiOTiiTCiTiimcCNCIrtH  IOUOT?CO 

£s5o5foeocococoeoooeoeoeocococoeo8ocococoeocococococoeoiM(MN(j» 


fi 


-•  LjClTi'COCOOCCIOC'OlOfflCCNCKCoOlMtCOCH'ClCCtClOOOCCOt'W 

y | cc  co  I-,  m Tf  n ^ ec  i-  if,  Tj,  ci  if  ifco'c'mHN'.c^iinHciwcci'i.c 

p_  gnfflCCNSNlMifHHOoOO  OO  OOOHHHHrlNNOCININ 

* J + +1 


X 

o 

M 


a 

a 


; 03DiaNOO«l®TfcClWt>OTjil>OlMI0  1>©rfMUCI>®0'f»lOCD®0 
I f’  mco  H Tfioi  ^1  M H in  M If  fj»  04  T?  04  rf 


co  rf  u>  cc  o " m « cq 

HrTHHOOOOfflfflOOOCXaM>C.COffl»®iOlO>O^TjiTil 

rH  rH  r— I — . ( r— 4 — . r— l 


£ <M  CQ  <M 

nHn 

+ 


WQ0W00N»ONQ0O5O500^^Hl>waNCDC5H<MCO'^'^W<N 
IQ  H H Cl  (M  IM  (M  (M  (M  Cl  Cl  r-1  r-  l«  ^ H?  CO  (N  rH  to  rft 

gC0C0'^T?rJ<r?^'»?T^Tf<^TpTT<-^Tfr?^f'^T^^C0C0C0C0C0C0C0OlOl 

rH  rH  rH  i—i  r-H  r-H  rH  t—f  r-H  rH  rH  r— i H rH  rH  pH  rH  rH  rH  ri  fH  rH  r—i  rH  rH  — i— t H rH 

-L 


>< 

P 

/ 

hJ 


H 

E-* 

Hi 

Q 


'MnC5^^HtsCOxCONH^COCOOiOOO>l>0  5qOOwN--^Cl>a)00 
CO  CM  to  <M  to  H H CO  to  Ol  H oa  ^ rH  CO  Hji  rH  (M  CO 


C0^^^\OWc*v0^1>I>X00a0505OCOHrHr.HNC'l(N(M«e0C0C0 


+ 


HJICC^lS-ONXOOifClOC'JlSOMBClOHlMM^lOONJSaOH 

rtHHffiHfrtHHMCCONOCItqiMlNINCOft 


VIII. 


II.  AT  NIGHT. 

Attach  equal  weights  to  the  ends  of  a long  fine  string 
and  throw  the  string  over  two  fine  metallic  wires  each  about 
a foot  in  length  fixed  regidly  between  supports  and  at  the 
height  of  about  5 or  6 feet  from  the  ground,  running  east 
to  west,  and  about  5 or  6 feet  apart  from  each  other.  Now 
the  two  plumblines  are  certainly  vertical, and  the  plane  pass- 
ing through  them  will  be  a vertical  plane.  This  plane  may 
be  made  to  pass  through  the  Pole  star  about  the  time  of  its 
culmination  or  depression  by  slightly  moving  the  string 
over  one  of  the  wires  to  the  east  or  west  till  the  two  plum- 
lines hide  the  Pole  star  to  an  observer  stationed  2 or  3 
feet  to  the  South  of  the  southern  plumbline  and  looking 
with  one  eye,  the  other  eye  being  closed.  We  have  thus 
secured  the  plane  of  the  meridian.  Now  attach  the  ends 
of  a slightly  tight  string  to  the  two  plumblines  about  their 
middle  points.  The  observer  may  now  lie  down  below,  with 
his  face  turned  up,  the  head  supported  by  a pillow  and  one 
eye  placed  exactly  under  the  two  strings  running  north  and 
south  so  that  the  upper  string  is  wholly  concealed  by  the 
lower  and  observe  the  transit  of  stars  across  the  strings- 
The  Almanac  gives  the  time  of  culmination  of  the  Vernal 
equinox  for  each  day  of  the  year  and  also  the  times  at 
which  particular  stars  culminate  after  the  culmination 
of  the  vernal  equinox.  If  the  two  times  be  added,  we  get 
the  time  of  culmination  of  a particular  star  from  12  noon 
that  day.  But  if  the  sum  exceed  24  hours  then  subtract 
from  it  23  hours  and  5G  minutes,  the  remainder  will  be  the 
time  of  culmination  of  the  Star  from  12  noon  that  day. 


IX. 


TABLE  E.  Shelving  the  time  of  culmination  of  the  Sun  and  the 

Vernal  Equinox. 


Month.  Date. 

Sun’s  1 
culmina- 
tion. 

Culmina- 
tion of  V. 
equinox. 

Month.  Date. 

Sun’s  Culmina- 
culmina-  tion  of  Y. 
tion.  'equinox. 

h.  m 

h.  m 

h.  ■ to. 

h.  to. 

January  1 

12  4 

5 17 

July  6 

12  4 

17  5 

7 

6 

4 53 

12 

5 

16  41 

13 

9 

4 30 

18 

6 

16  17 

19 

11 

4 6 

24 

6 

15  54 

25 

1* 

3 42 

30 

6 

15  30 

31 

14 

3 19 

August  5 

6 

15  7 

February  6 

14 

2 55 

11 

5 

14  43 

12 

14 

2 32 

17 

4 

14  19 

IS 

14 

2 8 

23 

3 

13  56 

24 

13 

1 44 

29 

12  1 

13  32 

March  2 

12 

1 21 

September  4 

11  59 

13  9 

8 

11 

0 57 

10 

57 

12  45 

14 

9 

0 34 

16 

55 

12  21 

20 

8 

0 10 

22 

53 

11  58 

26 

6 

23  43 

28 

51 

11  34 

April  1 

4 

23  19 

October  4 

49 

11  11 

7 

4> 

U 

22  55 

10 

47 

10  47 

13 

12  1 

22  32 

16 

46 

10  23 

19 

11  59 

22  11 

22 

45 

10  0 

25 

58 

21  47 

28 

4j'A 

9 36 

May  1 

57 

21  24 

November  3 

44 

9 13 

7 

56 

21  0 

9 

44 

8 49 

13 

56 

20  37 

15 

45 

8 26 

19 

56 

20  13 

21 

46 

8 2 

25 

57 

19  50 

27 

47 

7 38 

31 

57 

19  26 

December  3 

50 

7 15 

June  6 

58 

19  2 

9 

52 

6 51 

12 

11  59 

18  39 

15 

55 

6 28 

18 

12  1 

18  15 

21 

11  58 

6 4 

24 

2 

17  52 

27 

12  1 

5 40 

30 

3 

17  28 

X 


TABLE  F:  Showing  the  times  at  which  the  several  stars  culminate 
after  the  culmination  of  the  Vernal  Equinox. 


Stars. 

Times. 

Stars. 

Times. 

h. 

m. 

h. 

m. 

Aswini 

1 

4S 

Augiras 

12 

47 

Sharani 

2 

8G 

Apar 

12 

48 

Krittika 

3 

40 

Apamvat 

13 

2 

Rohini 

4 

28 

Chitra 

13 

17 

Agni 

5 

18 

Vasishtta 

13 

17 

Mrigasirsha  ... 

5 

27 

Marichi 

13 

41 

Ardra 

5 

4 8 

Swati 

14 

8 

Prajapati 

6 

40 

Visakha 

14 

42 

Agastya 

G 

20 

Anuradha 

15 

56 

Mrigavyasa 

G 

39 

Jyeshta 

16 

20 

Pnnarvasu 

7 

37 

Moola 

17 

20 

Pushya 

8 

36 

P.  Ashadha 

18 

10 

Aslesha 

8 

39 

Abhijit 

18 

30 

Magha 

10 

0 

U,  Ashadha 

18 

35 

Pulaha 

10 

53 

Sravana 

19 

42 

Kratu 

10 

55 

Sravishta 

20 

31 

P.  Phalguni 

11 

6 

Sataya 

22 

43 

IJ.  Phalgnni  ... 

11 

41 

P.  Bhadradada... 

22 

5o 

Pulastya 

11 

46 

U Bhadrapada... 

0 

2 

Atri 

12 

7 

Revati 

1 

7 

Hasta 

12 

26 

Dhruva  (Pole  Stai’) 

1 

16 

Note  : As  the  Venial  Equinox  is  subject  to  a retrograde  motion  of  over 
50  seconds  a year,  tables  E.  and  F.  will  have  to  be  prepared  from  the 
Almanac  for  the  year. 


* 


